D K.A  K.  I 

of  the: 

U N I VE.R.S  ITY 
Of  I LLI  N O I S 


973. 74 


ser. 


v.  9 


NOTICE:  Return  or  renew  all  Library  Materialsl  The  Minimum  Fee  for 
each  Lost  Book  is  $50.00. 

The  person  charging  this  material  is  responsible  for 
its  return  to  the  library  from  which  it  was  withdrawn 
on  or  before  the  Latest  Date  stamped  below. 


age 


Theft,  mutilation,  and  underlining  of  books  are  reasons  for  discipli- 
nary action  and  may  result  in  dismissal  from  the  University. 

To  renew  call  Telephone  Center,  333-8400 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
University  of  Illinois  Urbana-Champaign 


https://archive.org/details/warofrebellion09unit 


THE 


WAR  OF  THE 


A COMPILATION  OF  THE 

OFFICIAL  RECORDS 


OF  THE 


UNION  AND  CONFEDERATE  ARMIES. 


PREPARED  UNDER  THE  DIRECTION  OF  THE  SECRETARY  OF  WAR,  BY  BYT.  LIEUT. 
COL.  ROBERT  N.  SCOTT,  THIRD  U.  S.  ARTILLERY, 

AND 

PUBLISHED  PURSUANT  TO  ACT  OE  CONGRESS  APPROVED  JUNE  16,  1880. 
OKIO-A-QO^ 

rtek-  - 

SERIES  I— VOLUME  IX. 


WASHINGTON: 

GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE. 

1883. 


r 


<->m>  •'it 

Jte/L.  'I 

V » ^ 

PREFACE. 


By  an  act  approved  June  23,  1874,  Congress  made  an  appropriation 
“ to  enable  the  Secretary  of  War  to  begin  the  publication  of  the  Official 
Records  of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  both  of  the  TJnion  and  Confed- 
erate Armies,”  and  directed  him  “to  have  copied  for  the  Public  Printer 
all  reports,  letters,  telegrams,  and  general  orders  not  heretofore  copied 
or  printed,  and  properly  arranged  in  chronological  order.” 

Appropriations  for  continuing  such  preparation  have  been  made  from 
time  to  time,  and  the  act  approved  June  16,  1880,  has  provided  “for 
the  printing  and  binding,  under  direction  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  of 

10.000  copies  of  a compilation  of  the  Official  Records  (Union  and  Con- 
federate) of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion,  so  far  as  the  same  may  be  ready 
for  publication,  during  the  fiscal  year”;  and  that  “of  said  number, 

7.000  copies  shall  be  for  the  use  of  the  House  of  Representatives,  2,000 
copies  for  the  use  of  the  Senate,  and  1,000  copies  for  the  use  of  the 
Executive  Departments.”* 

This  compilation  will  be  the  first  general  publication  of  the  military 
records  of  the  war,  and  will  embrace  all  official  documents  that  can  be 
obtained  by  the  compiler,  and  that  appear  to  be  of  any  historical  value. 

* Volume  I to  V distributed  under  act  approved  June  16,  1880.  The  act  approved 
August  7,  1882,  provides  that — 

“ The  volumes  of  the  official  records  of  the  war  of  the  rebellion  shall  be  distributed 
as  follows : One  thousand  copies  to  the  executive  departments,  as  now  provided  by- 
law. One  thousand  copies  for  distribution  by  the  Secretary  of  War  among  officers  of 
the  Army  and  contributors  to  the  work.  Eight  thousand  three  hundred  copies  shall 
be  sent  by  the  Secretary  of  War  to  such  libraries,  organizations,  and  individuals  as 
may  be  designated  by  the  Senators,  Representatives,  and  Delegates  of  the  Forty- 
seventh  Congress.  Each  Senator  shall  designate  not  exceeding  twenty-six,  and  each 
Representative  and  Delegate  not  exceeding  twenty-one  of  such  addresses,  and  the 
volumes  shall  be  sent  thereto  from  time  to  time  as  they  are  published,  until  the  pub- 
lication is  completed.  Senators,  Representatives,  and  Delegates  shall  inform  the 
Secretary  of  War  in  each  case  how  many  volumes  of  those  heretofore  published  they 
have  forwarded  to  such  addresses.  The  remaining  copies  of  the  eleven  thousand  to 
be  published,  and  all  sets  that  may  not  be  ordered  to  be  distributed  as  provided 
herein,  shall  be  sold  by  the  Secretary  of  War  for  cost  of  publication  with  ten  per 
cent,  added  thereto,  and  the  proceeds  of  such  sale  shall  be  covered  into  the  Treasury. 
If  two  or  more  sets  of  said  volumes  are  ordered  to  the  same  address  the  Secretary  of 
War  shall  inform  the  Senators,  Representatives  or  Delegates,  who  have  designated 
the  same,  who  thereupon  may  designate  other  libraries,  organizations,  or  individuals. 
The  Secretary  of  War  shall  report  to  the  first  session  of  the  Forty-eighth  Congress 
what  volumes  of  the  series  heretofore  published  have  not  been  furnished  to  such 
libraries,  organizations,  and  individuals.  He  shall  also  inform  distributees  at  whose 
instance  the  volumes  are  sent.” 

WAf) 


IV 


PREFACE. 


The  publication,  will  present  the  records  in  the  following  order  of 
arrangement: 

The  1st  Series  will  embrace  the  formal  reports,  both  Union  and  Con- 
federate, of  the  first  seizures  of  United  States  property  in  the  Southern 
States,  and  of  all  military  operations  in  the  field,  with  the  correspond- 
ence, orders,  and  returns  relating  specially  thereto,  and,  as  proposed, 
is  to  be  accompanied  by  an  Atlas. 

In  this  series  the  reports  will  be  arranged  according  to  the  campaigns 
and  several  theaters  of  operations  (in  the  chronological  order  of  the 
events),  and  the  Union  reports  of  any  event  will,  as  a rule,  be  imme- 
diately followed  by  the  Confederate  accounts.  The  correspondence,  &c., 
not  embraced  in  the  “ reports  n proper  will  follow  (first  Union  and  next 
Confederate)  in  chronological  order. 

The  2d  Series  will  contain  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns,  Union  and  Confederate,  relating  to  prisoners  of  war,  and  (so 
far  as  the  military  authorities  were  concerned)  to  State  or  political 
prisoners. 

The  3d  Series  will  contain  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns  of  the  Union  authorities  (embracing  their  correspondence  with 
the  Confederate  officials)  not  relating  specially  to  the  subjects  of  the 
first  and  second  series.  It  will  set  forth  the  annual  and  special  reports 
of  the  Secretary  of  War,  of  the  General-in  Chief,  and  of  the  chiefs  of 
the  several  staff  corps  and  departments ; the  calls  for  troops,  and  the 
correspondence  between  the  National  and  the  several  State  authorities. 

The  4th  Series  will  exhibit  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
returns  of  the  Confederate  authorities,  similar  to  that  indicated  for  the 
Union  officials,  as  of  the  third  series,  but  excluding  the  correspondence 
between  the  Union  and  Confederate  authorities  given  in  that  series. 

ROBERT  N.  SCOTT, 

Major , Third  Art .,  and  Bvt.  Lieut.  Col , 

War  Department,  August  23, 1880. 

Approved : 


ALEX.  RAMSEY, 

Secretary  of  War, 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

Page. 

Operations  in  Southeastern  Virginia.  January  11-March  17, 1862 1-71 

CHAPTER  XX. 

Operations  in  North  Carolina.  January  11- August  20,  1862 72-480 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

Operations  in  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona.  February  1-September  20, 

1862  481-736 


(V) 


CONTENTS  OF  PRECEDING  VOLUMES. 


VOLUME  I. 


CHAPTER  I.  Page. 

Operations  in  Charleston  Harbor,  South 
Carolina.  December  20, 1860- April  14, 

*861 1-317 

CHAPTER  II. 

The  secession  of  Georgia.  January  3-26, 

1861 318-325 

CHAPTER  m. 

The  secession  of  Alabama  and  Mississippi. 

January  4-20, 1861 326-330 

CHAPTER  IY. 

Operations  in  Florida.  January  6- August 
31,  1861 331-473 


CHAPTER  V.  Page. 

The  secession  of  North  Carolina.  Janu- 
ary 9-May  20, 1861 474-488 

CHAPTER  VI. 

The  secession  of  Louisiana.  January  10- 

February  19,  1861 489-501 

CHAPTER  YH. 

Operations  in  Texas  and  New  Mexico. 

February  1-June  11,  1861 502-636 

CHAPTER  YIH. 

Operations  in  Arkansas,  the  Indian  Terri- 
tory, and  Missouri.  February  7-May  9, 

!861  637-691 


VOLUME  II. 


CHAPTER  IX.  page< 

Operations  in  Maryland,  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia.  April  16-July  31, 1861.  1-1012 

VOLUME  III. 

CHAPTER  X.  Page. 

Operations  in  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Kansas,  and  Indian  Territory.  May  10-November  19,  1861.  1-749 


VOLUME  IV. 


CHAPTER  XI.  Page. 

Operations  in  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and 
Arizona.  June  11 , 1861-February  1, 1862.  1-174 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Operations  in  Kentucky  and  Tennessee. 

July  1-November  19,  1861  175-565 


CHAPTER  XIII.  Page. 

Operations  in  North  Carolina  and  South- 
eastern Virginia.  August  1,  1861-Jan- 
uaryll,  1862 506-721 


VOLUME  V. 

CHAPTER  XIV.  Page. 

Operations  in  Maryland,  Northern  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia.  August  1, 1861-March  17, 1862.  1-1106 

VOLUME  VI. 

CHAPTER  XV.  Page.  I CHAPTER  XVI.  Page. 

Operations  on  the  coasts  of  South  Carolina,  Operations  in  West  Florida,  Southern  Al- 

Georgia,  and  Middle  and  East  Florida.  i abama,  Southern  Mississippi,  and  Lou- 

August  21, 1861-April  11,  1862 1-435  | isiana.  September  1,  1861-May  12,1862.  436-894 

VOLUME  VII. 


CHAPTER  XVII.  Page. 

Operations  in  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  N.  Alabama,  and  S.  W.  Virginia.  Nov.  19, 1861-Mar.  4, 1862.  1-946 

VOLUME  VIII. 


CHAPTER  XVin. 

Operations  in  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Kansas,  and  Indian  Territory. 
(VI) 


Page. 

Nov.  19, 1861-April  10, 1862.  1-834 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


January  11-March  17,  1862. 


, SUMMARY  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  EVENTS. 

Jan.  11,  1862. — The  Burnside  Expedition  sails  from  Hampton  Eoads  for  the  North 
Carolina  coast. 

Mar.  8-  9,  1862. — Naval  engagement  in  Hampton  Roads,  Va.,  and  destruction  of  the 
U.  S.  frigate  Congress  and  sloop-of-war  Cumberland  by  the  Confed- 
erate iron-clad  Virginia  (formerly  the  Merrimac). 

17,  1862. — Embarkation  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  for  the  Peninsula  com- 
menced at  Alexandria. 

MARCH  8-9,  1862. — Naval  engagement  in  Hampton  Roads,  Va.,  and  de- 
struction of  the  U.  S.  frigate  Congress  and  sloop-of-war  Cumberland  by  the 
Confederate  iron-clad  Virginia  (formerly  the  Merrimac). 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Extract  from  Annual  Report,  December  1,  1862,  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy. 
No.  2. — Maj.  Gen.  John  E.  Wool,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  Virginia. 
No.  3. — Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  K.  F.  Mansfield,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  brigade. 

No.  4. — Col.  David  W.  Wardrop,  Ninety-ninth  New  York  Infantry. 

No.  5. — Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  Huger,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  Norfolk. 
No.  6. — Confederate  Secretary  of  the  Navy. 

No.  7. — Flag-Officer  Franklin  Buchanan,  C.  S.  Navy. 

No.  8. — Maj.  Gen.  John  B.  Magruder,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  the 
Peninsula,  of  his  co-operation  with  naval  attack. 

No.  1. 

Extract  from  Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy. 

December  1,  1862. 

******* 

It  was  the  intention  and  constant  effort  of  the  Department  and  con- 
tractors that  the  Monitor  should  be  completed  in  the  month  of  January, 
but  there  was  delay  in  consequence  of  difficulties  incident  to  an  under- 
taking of  such  novelty  and  magnitude,  and  there  were  also  some  slight 
defects,  which  were,  however,  promptly  remedied,  and  she  left  New  York 
early  in  March,  reaching  Hampton  Roads  on  the  night  of  the  8th. 

1 R r — VOL  IX 


2 OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA.  [CiiAr.  XIX.  j 

Her  arrival,  though  not  as  soon  as  anticipated,  was  most  opportune 
and  important.  For  some  time  the  Department  had  heard  with  great 
solicitude  of  the  progress  which  the  insurgents  had  made  in  armoring 
and  equipping  the  large  war-steaiher  Merrimac,  which  had  fallen  into 
their  hands  when  Norfolk  was  abandoned.  On  the  afternoon  of  the  8th 
of  March  this  formidable  vessel,  heavily  armored  and  armed  and  fully 
prepared  to  operate  both  as  a ram  and  a war  steamer,  came  down  the 
Elizabeth  Eiver,  accompanied  by  several  smaller  steamers,  two  of  them 
partially  armored,  to  attack  the  vessels  of  the  blockading  squadron 
that  were  in  and  about,Hampton  Eoads.  When  the  Merrimac  and  her 
attendants  made  their  appearance  the  Congress  and  the  Cumberland, 
two  sailing  vessels,*  were  anchored  off  Newport  News,  and  the  remain- 
ing vessels  were  in  the  vicinity  of  Fortress  Monroe,  some  6 miles  dis- 
tant. The  Minnesota,  the  Eoanoke,  and  the  St.  Lawrence  got  imme- 
diately under  way  and  proceeded  toward  the  scene  of  action. 

The  Congress,  being  nearest  to  the  Merrimac,  was  the  first  to  receive 
her  fire,  which  was  promptly  returned  by ‘a  full  broadside,  the  shots 
falling  apparently  harmlessly  off  from  the  armored  side  of  the  assail- 
ant. Passing  by  the  Congress,  the  Merrimac  dashed  upon  the  Cum- 
berland, and  was  received  by  her  with  a heavy,  well-directed,  and 
vigorous  fire,  which,  like  that  of  the  Congress,  produced  unfortunately 
but  little  effect.  A contest  so  unequal  could  not  be  of  long  continuance, 
and  it  was  closed  when  the  Merrimac,  availing  herself  of  her  power  as 
a steam  ram,  ran  furiously  against  the  Cumberland,  laying  open  her 
wooden  hull,  and  causing  her  almost  immediately  to  sink.  As  her  guns 
approached  the  water’s  edge  her  young  commander,  Lieutenant  Mor- 
ris, and  the  gallant  crew  stood  firm  at  their  posts,  delivered  a parting 
fire,  and  the  good  ship  went  down  heroically,  with  her  colors  flying. 
Having  thus  destroyed  the  Cumberland,  the  Merrimac  turned  again 
upon  the  Congress,  which  had,  in  the  mean  time,  been  engaged  with 
the  smaller  rebel  steamers,  and  after  a heavy  loss,  in  order  to  guard 
against  such  a fate  as  that  which  had  befallen  the  Cumberland,  had 
been  run  aground.  The  Merrimac  now  selected  a raking  position  astern 
of  the  Congress,  while  one  of  the  smaller  steamers  poured  in  a constant 
fire  on  her  starboard  quarter.  Two  other  steamers  of  the  enemy  also 
approached  from  James  Eiver,  firing  upon  the  unfortunate  frigate  with 
precision  and  severe  effect.  The  guns  of  the  Congress  were  almost 
entirely  disabled,  and  her  gallant  commanding  officer,  Lieut.  Joseph 
B.  Smith,  had  fallen  at  his  post.  Her  decks  were  strewn  with  the 
dead  and  dying,  the  ship  was  on  fire  in  several  places,  and  not  a gun 
could  be  brought  to  bear  upon  the  assailants.  In  this  state  of  things, 
and  with  no  effectual  relief  at  hand,  the  senior  surviving  officer,  Lieu- 
tenant Pendergrast,  felt  it  his  duty  to  save  further  useless  destruction 
of  life  by  hauling  down  his  colors.  This  was  done  about  4 o’clock 
p.  m.  The  Congress  continued  to  burn  till  about  8 in  the  evening  and 
then  blew  up. 

From  the  Congress  the  Merrimac  turned  her  attention  to  the  remain- 
ing vessels  of  the  squadron.  The  Eoanoke  had  grounded  on  her  way 
to  the  scene  of  the  conflict ; and  although  she  succeeded  in  getting  off, 
her  condition  was  such,  her  propeller  being  useless,  that  she  took  no 
part  in  the  action.  The  St.  Lawrence  also  grounded  near  the  Min- 
nesota and  had  a short  engagement  with  the  Merrimac,  but  suffered 
no  serious  injury,  and  on  getting  afloat  was  ordered  back  to  Fortress 
Monroe. 

The  Minnesota,  which  had  also  got  aground  in  the  shallow  waters  of 
the  channel,  became  the  special  object  of  attack,  and  the  Merrimac, 


3 


Chap.  XIX.]  NAVAL  ENGAGEMENT  IN  HAMPTON  ROADS,  VA. 

with  the  Yorktown  and  Jamestown,  bore  down  upon  her..  The  Merri- 
mac  drew  too  much  water  to  approach  very  near;  her  fire  was  not 
therefore  particularly  effective.  The  other  steamers  selected  their  po- 
sition, fired  with  much  accuracy,  and  caused  considerable  damage  to 
the  Minnesota.  She  soon,  however,  succeeded  in  getting  a gun  to  bear 
On  the  two  smaller  steamers  and  drove  them  away — one  apparently  in 
a crippled  condition.  About  7 p.  m.  the  Merrimac  also  hauled  off,  and 
the  three  stood  toward  Norfolk. 

All  efforts  to  get  the  Minnesota  afloat  during  the  night  and  into  a 
safe  position  were  totally  unavailing.  The  morning  was  looked  for 
with  deep  anxiety,  as  it' would  in  all  probability  bring  a renewed  attack 
from  the  formidable  assailant.  At  this  critical  and  anxious  moment 
the  Monitor,-  one  -of  the  newly -finished  armored  vessels,  came  into 
Hampton  Eoads,  from  New  York,  under  command  of  Lieut.  John  L. 
Worden,  and  a little  after  midnight  anchored  alongside  the  Minnesota. 
At  6 o’clock  the  next  morning  the  Merrimac,  as  anticipated,  again  made 
her  appearance,  and  opened  her  fire  upon  the  Minnesota.  Promptly 
obeying  the  signal  to  attack,  the  Monitor  ran  down  past  the  Minnesota 
and  laid  herself  close  alongside  the  Merrimac,  between  that  formidable 
vessel  and  the  Minnesota.  The  fierce  conflict  between  these  two  iron- 
clads lasted  for  several  hours.  It  was  in  appearance  an  unequal  con- 
flict, for  the  Merrimac  was  a large  and  noble  structure,  and  the  Monitor 
was  in  comparison  almost  diminutive.  But  the  Monitor  was  strong 
in  her  armor,  in  the  ingenious  novelty  of  her  construction,  in  the  large 
caliber  of  her  two  guns,  and  the  valor  and  skill  with  which  she  was 
handled.  After  several  hours’  fighting  the  Merrimac  found  herself 
overmatched,  and,  leaving  the  Monitor,  sought  to  renew  the  attack  on 
the  Minnesota ; but  the  Monitor  again  placed  herself  between  the  two 
vessels  and  reopened  her  fire  upon  her  adversary.  At  noon  the  Mer- 
rimac, seriously  damaged,  abandoned  the  contest  and,  with  her  com- 
panions, retreated  toward  Norfolk. 

Thus  terminated  the  most  remarkable  naval  combat  of  modern  times, 
perhaps  of  any  age.  The  fiercest  and  most  formidable  naval  assault 
upon  the  power  of  the  Union  which  has  ever  been  made  by  the  insur- 
gents was  heroically  repelled,  and  a new  era  was  opened  in  the  history 
of  maritime  warfare. 

******* 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  E.  Wool , U.  8.  Army , commanding  Depart- 
ment of  Virginia. 

Headquarters  Department  of  Virginia, 

Fort  Monroe , Fa.,  March  9,  1862. 

General:  Two  hours  after  I sent  my  hurried  dispatch  to  the  Secre- 
tary of  War  last  evening  the  Monitor  arrived,  and  saved  the  Minnesota 
and  the  St.  Lawrence,  which  were  both  aground  when  she  arrived. 

I The  Merrimac,  supported  by  the  Yorktown  and  Jamestown,  com- 
menced an  attack  on  the  Minnesota  (still  aground)  early  this  morning, 
and  after  a contest  of  five  hours  was  driven  off  in  a sinking  condition 
by  the  Monitor,  aided  by  the  Minnesota,  and  towed  by  the  Jamestown 
and  Yorktown  toward  Norfolk,  for  the  purpose,  no  doubt,  of  getting 
her,  if  possible,  in  the  dry-dock  for  repairs. 


4 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XIX. 


It  is  reported  that  Magruder  is  approaching  Newport  News  with  a 
large  force  of  infantry.  I have  re-enforced  that  post  with,  three  regi- 
ments, a light  battery  of  six  pieces,  and  a company  of  dragoons.  Tbe 
command  will  consist  altogether  of  over  or  about  8,000  men.  My  com- 
mand consists  altogether  of  10,000  effective  men. 

The  Cumberland  was  sunk,  and  we  lost  more  than  one-half  of  her 
crew.  The  Congress  surrendered,  but  the  crew  was  released  and  the 
officers  taken  as  prisoners.  The  Minnesota  has  got  off,  but  it  is  re- 
ported she  is  in  a sinking  condition. 

It  is  to  be  hoped  that  1 will  be  largely  re-enforced,  including  two 
additional  light  batteries.  The  Monitor  is  far  superior  to  the  Merri- 
mac.  The  first  has  only  two  guns,  while  the  Merrimac  has  eight. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  E.  WOOL, 

Major-  General. 

Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan, 

Commanding  the  Army , Washington , D.  C. 


[Similar  report  to  Secretary  of  War.] 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  K.  F.  Mansfield , U.  S.  Army , commanding 

brigade. 

Hdqrs.  First  Brig.,  First  Div.,  Dept,  of  Virginia, 

Neuport  News,  7a.,  March  10,  18G2. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  the  forenoon  of  Saturday,  the 
8th  instant,  the  commanders  of  the  Congress  and  Cumberland,  at  anchor 
in  the  stream,  notified  me  that  the  iron-clad  Merrimac  steamer  of  the 
enemy  was  approaching  from  Norfolk  to  attack  them,  and  I immedi- 
ately telegraphed  you  to  that  effect.  At  about  2 o’clock  p.  m.  she  ap- 
proached very  near  these  vessels  slowly,  engaged  first  the  Congress 
and  passed  on  to  the  Cumberland  and  ran  into  her,  and  all  within  a 
mile  of  our  batteries.  I immediately  ordered  Lieut.  Col.  G.  Naumany 
chief  of  artillery,  to  open  our  batteries  of  four  columbaids  and  one  42- 
pounder  James  gun  to  fire  on  her.  It  was  done  with  alacrity,  and  kept 
up  continuously  with  spirit  as  long  as  she  was  in  range,  and  although 
our  shot  often  struck  her,  they  made  no  impression  on  her  at  all.  1 also 
ordered  three  of  our  8-inch  siege  howitzers  from  the  land  batteries 
hauled  by  hand  and  brought  to  bear  on  her  from  the  bank  of  the  river 
and  two  of  Howard’s  light  battery  rifled  gpns,  but  no  visible  serious 
damage  to  her  from  our  guns  was  done,  such  was  the  strength  of  her 

mail.  _ , . 

As  soon  as  the  Cumberland  was  sunk  three  steamers,  supposed  to  bo 
the  Yorktown,  Jamestown,  and  a tug,  came  down  the  river  from  Day’s 
Point  under  full  head  of  steam.  Our  guns  were  then  turned  on  them, 
but  they  kept  at  a distance  and  moved  rapidly  past,  and  received  but 
little  damage  from  us. 

During  the  sinking  of  tbe  Cumberland  the  Congress  slipped  ner 
cable  and  hoisted  sail  and  ran  ashore  just  above  Signal  Point,  where 
many  of  her  men  escaped  to  the  shore,  and  was  there  followed  by  the 
Merrimac,  and  after  two  raking  shots  she  hauled  down  her  flag  and 


Chap.  XIX.]  NAVAL  ENGAGEMENT  IN  HAMPTON  ROADS,  VA. 


5 


hoisted  a white  flag  and  ceased  action.  The  enemy  then  sent  two 
steamers  with  Confederate  flags  flying  and  made  fast  on  either  side  of 
her,  with  a view  to  haul  her  off  or  burn  her.  As  soon  as  I saw  this  I 
ordered  Colonel  Brown,  of  the  Twentieth  Indiana  Begiment,  then  close 
at  hand,  to  send  two  rifle  companies  (A  and  K)  to  the  beach.  The  two 
rifled  guns,  under  Captain  Howard,  and  a rifled  Dahlgren  howitzer, 
manned  by  Master  Stuyvesant  and  14  sailors  of  the  Cumberland,  went 
into  action  from  a raking  position  on  the  beach,  covered  by  sand  banks 
and  trees,  against  these  steamers. 

We  here  had  them  at  about  800  yards  to  advantage,  and  immediately 
they  let  go  their  hold  on  the  Congress  and  moved  out  of  range  with 
much  loss.  They  endeavored  to  approach  her  again  with  a steamer 
and  row-boat,  but  were  beaten  off  with  loss,  till  Anally  the  Merrimac, 
finding  her  prize  retaken,  approached  and  fired  three  shots  into  her 
and  set  her  on  fire.  The  remaining  men  escaped  from  the  Congress 
over  the  bows  of  the  ship  to  the  shore,  assisted  by  our  boats,  and  the 
wounded  were  removed  by  dark. 

Thus  closed  the  tragedy  of  the  day.  The  enemy  retired  at  dark 
toward  the  opposite  shore,  and  the  Congress  illuminated  the  heavens 
and  varied  the  scene  by  the  firing  of  her  own  guns  and  the  flight  of 
her  balls  through  the  air  till  about  2 o’clock  in  the  morning,  when  her 
magazine  exploded  and  a column  of  burning  matter  appeared  high  in 
the  air,  to  be  followed  by  the  stillness  of  death.  Through  the  whole 
day  our  troops  were  under  arms,  and  the  officers  and  men  engaged  at 
the  batteries  and  as  riflemen  on  the  beach  performed  their  duty  well, 
and  the  enemy  were  beaten  off  wherever  we  could  penetrate  them.  All 
was  done  that  it  was  possible  to  do  under  the  circumstances  to  save 
these  ships  from  the  enemy.  Some  officers  and  men  from  the  Cumber- 
land, as  they  escaped  to  the  shore,  came  forward  and  volunteered  their 
services  at  our  guns  and  afforded  aid.  Toward  the  close  of  the  day 
the  enemy  must  have  experienced  considerable  loss.  There  were  none 
killed  of  my  command,  and  but  one  man,  private  of  the  Seventh  New 
York  Volunteers,  severely  wounded  by  a shell  from  the  Merrimac,  re- 
sulting in  the  loss  of  his  leg. 

The  loss  on  the  part  of  our  Navy  must  have  been  great  by  the  burst- 
ing of  shells  and  the  drowning  by  the  sinking  of  the  Cumberland, 
although  our  best  efforts  were  made  to  save  them.  Our  ships  w#re 
perfectly  helpless  against  the  Merrimac,  as  their  broadsides  produced 
no  material  effect  on  her. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

JOS.  K.  F,  MANSFIELD, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  E.  Wool, 

Commanding  Department  of  Virginia. 


No.  4. 


Report  of  Col.  David  W.  Wardrop , Ninety -ninth  New  York  Infantry . 

Hdqes.  Union  Coast  Guard,  99th  Begt.,  N.  Y.  V., 

Camp  Hamilton , Va.,  March  20,  1862. 
Sir  : I have  this  morning  received  the  official  report  of  Capt.  Will- 
iam J.  Mclntire,  commanding  Company  D,  of  this  regiment,  who  have 


6 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XIX. 


been  doing  duty  on  board  of  the  U.  S.  frigate  Congress  from  January 
13  until  March  8,  when  they  were  attacked  by  the  rebel  iron -clad  gun- 
boat Merrimac,  or  Virginia,  and  forced  to  surrender  after  the  ship  was 
ashore  and  helpless.  Captain  Mclntire  reports  9 killed,  10  wounded, 
7 missing.* 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  W.  WARDROP, 

Colonel , Commanding  Ninety -ninth  Regiment , N.  Y.  V. 

Lieutenant  Charles  Lorch, 

Post-Adjutant , Camp  Hamilton. 


' No.  5. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  Huger , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Depart- 
ment of  Norfolk.  * 

Headquarters  Department  oe  Norfolk, 

Norfolk , Va.,  March  10,  1862. 

Sir  : I telegraphed  yesterday  to  the  Secretary  of  War  the  fact  of 
the  naval  engagement  on  the  8th  and  9th  instant.  As  the  battle  was 
fought  by  the  Navy,  Flag-Officer  Forrest  will  no  doubt  report  to  the 
Navy  Department  the  result  of  the  engagement. 

The  batteries  at  SewelFs  Point  opened  fire  on  the  steamers  Min- 
nesota and  Roanoke,  which  attempted  on  the  8th  to  pass  to  Newport 
News  to  the  assistance  of  the  frigates  attacked  by  the  Virginia.  The 
Minnesota  ran  aground  before  reaching  there.  The  Roanoke  was 
struck  several  times,  and  for  some  cause  turned  around  and  went  back 
to  Old  Point. 

The  two  sailing  vessels  (Cumberland  and  Congress)  were  destroyed — 
the  first  sank  and  the  other  burned  by  the  Virginia — and  on  the  9th 
the  Minnesota,  still  aground,  would  probably  have  been  destroyed  but 
for  the  iron-clad  battery  of  the  enemy  called,  1 think,  the  Monitor. 
The  Virginia  and  this  battery  were  in  actual  contact,  without  inflicting 
serious  injury  on  either. 

At  2 p.  m.  on  yesterday,  the  9th,  all  our  vessels  came  up  to  the  navy- 
yacd  for  repairs.  The  Virginia,  I understand,  has  gone  into  dock  for 
repairs,  which  will  be  made  at  once.  This  action  shows  the  power  and 
endurance  of  iron-clad  vessels ; cannon-shot  do  not  harm  them,  and 
they  can  pass  batteries  or  destroy  large  ships.  A vessel  like  the  Vir- 
ginia or  the  Monitor,  with  her  two  guns,  can  pass  any  of  our  batteries 
with  impunity.  The  only  means  of  stopping  them  is  by  vessels  of  the 
same  kind.  The  Virginia,  being  the  most  powerful,  can  stop  the  Moni- 
tor ; but  a more  powerful  one  would  run  her  down  or  ashore.  As  the 
enemy  can  build  such  boats  faster  than  we,  they  could,  when  so  pre- 
pared, overcome  any  place  accessible  by  water.  How  these  powerful 
machines  are  to  be  stopped  is  a problem  I cannot  solve.  At  jiresent,  in 
the  Virginia,  we  have  the  advantage ; but  we  cannot  tell  how  long  this 
may  last. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGER, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Captain  Mclntire’s  report  not  found. 


Chap.  XIX.]  NAVAL  ENGAGEMENT  IN  HAMPTON  ROADS,  VA.  7 

No.  0. 

Report  of  Confederate  Secretary  of  the  Wavy. 

Executive  Department, 

April  10,  1862. 

To  the  Senate  and  Souse  of  Representatives  of  the  Confederate  States  : 

I herewith  transmit  to  Congress  a communication  from  the  Secretary 
of  the  Navy,  covering  a detailed  report  of  Flag-Officer  Buchanan  of 
the  brilliant  triumph  "of  his  squadron  over  the  vastly  superior  forces 
of  the  enemy  in  Hampton  Boads,  March  8 and  9 last. 

JEFFEESON  DAYIS. 

Navy  Department, 
Richmond , Va .,  April  7,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  herewith  [a]  copy  of  the  detailed 
report  [No.  7]  of  Flag-Officer  Buchanan  of  the  brilliant  triumph  of  his 
squadron  over  the  vastly  superior  forces  of  the  enemy  in  Hampton 
Boads,  on  March  8 and  9 last,  a brief  report  by  Lieutenant  Jones  of  the 
battle  of  the  8th  having  been  previously  made. 

The  conduct  of  the  officers  and  men  of  the  squadron  in  this  contest 
reflects  unfading  honor  upon  themselves  and  upon  the  Navy.  The 
report  will  be  read  with  deep  interest,  and  its  details  will  not  fail  to 
arouse  the  ardor  and  nerve  the  arms  of  our  gallant  seamen. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  the  Virginia  was  a novelty  in  naval 
architectuie,  wholly  unlike  any  ship  that  ever  floated ; that  her  heavi- 
est guns  were  equal  novelties  in  ordnance;  that  her  motive  power  and 
her  obedience  to  her  helm  were  untried,  and  her  officers  and  crew 
strangers  comparatively  to  the  ship  and  to  each  other,  and  yet,  under 
all  these  disadvantages,  the  dashing  courage  and  consummate  profes- 
sional ability  of  Flag-Officer  Buchanan  and  his  associates  achieved  the 
most  remarkable  victory  which  naval  annals  record. 

When  the  flag-officer  was  disabled  the  command  of  the  Virginia 
devolved  upon  her  executive  and  ordnance  officer,  Lieut.  Catesby  Ap 
B.  Jones,  and  the  cool  and  masterly  manner  in  which  he  fought  the 
ship  in  her  encounter  with  the  iron-clad  Monitor  justified  the  high  esti- 
mate which  the  country  places  upon  his  professional  merit.  To  his 
experience,  skill,  and  untiring  industry  as  her  ordnance  and  executive 
officer  the  terrible  effect  of  her  fire  was  greatly  due.  Her  battery  was 
determined  in  accordance  with  his  suggestions,  and  in  all  investigations 
and  tests  which  resulted  in  its  thorough  efficiency  he  was  zealously 
engaged. 

The  terms  of  commendation  used  by  the  flag-officer  in  characterizing 
the  conduct  of  his  officers  and  men  meet  the  cordial  indorsement  of  the 
Department,  and  the  concurrent  testimony  of  thousands  who  witnessed 
the  engagement  places  his  own  conduct  above  all  jiraise. 

With  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  B.  MALLOBY, 

Secretary  of  the  Wavy. 


To  the  President. 


8 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[CiiAr.  XIX. 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Flag-Officer  Franklin  Buchanan , C.  8.  Navy. 

Naval  Hospital, 
Norfolk , Va .,  March  27,  1862. 

Sik  : Having  been  confined  to  my  bed  in  this  building  since  the  Oth 
instant,  in  consequence  of  a wound  received  in  the  action  of  the  pre- 
vious day,  I have  not  had  it  in  my  power  at  an  earlier  date  to  prepare 
the  official  report,  which  I now  have  the  honor  to  submit,  of  the  pro- 
ceedings on  the  8th  and  9th  instant  of  the  James  River  squadron, 
under  my  command,  composed  of  the  following-named  vessels : Steamer 
Virginia,  flag-ship,  ten  guns;  steamer  Patrick  Henry,  Commander  John 
R.  Tucker,  twelve  guns;  steamer  Jamestown,  Lieut.  Commanding  J. 
N.  Barney,  two  guns ; and  gunboats  Teazer,  Lieut.  Commanding  W. 
A.  Webb;  Beaufort,  Lieut.  Commanding W.  H.  Parker;  and  Raleigh, 
Lieut.  Commanding  J.  W.  Alexander,  each  one  gun.  Total,  twenty- 
seven  guns. 

On  the  8th  instant,  at  11  a.  m.,  the  Virginia  left  the  navy-yard  (Nor- 
folk), accompanied  by  the  Raleigh  and  Beaufort,  and  proceeded  t© 
Newport  News,  to  engage  the  enemy’s  frigates  Cumberland  and  Con- 
gress, gunboats,  and  shore  batteries.  When  within  less  than  a mile 
of  the  Cumberland  the  Virginia  commenced  the  engagement  with  that 
ship  with  her  bow  gun,  and  the  action  soon  became  general,  the  Cum- 
berland, Congress,  gunboats,  and  shore  batteries  concentrating  upon 
us  their  heavy  fire,  which  was  returned  with  great  spirit  and  deter- 
mination. The  Virginia  stood  rapidly  on  toward  the  Cumberland, 
which  ship  I had  determined  to  sink  with  our  prow  if  possible.  In 
about  fifteen  minutes  after  the  action  commenced  we  ran  into  her  on 
her  starboard  bow.  The  crash  below  the  water  was  distinctly  heard, 
and  she  commenced  sinking,  gallantly  fighting  her  guns  as  long  as 
they  were  above  water.  She  went  down  with  her  colors  flying. 

During  this  time  the  shore  batteries,  Congress,  and  gunboats  kept 
up  their  heavy  concentrated  fire  upon  us,  doing  us  some  injury.  Our 
guns,  however,  were  not  idle ; their  fire  was  very  destructive  to  the 
shore  batteries  and  vessels,  and  we  were  gallantly  sustained  by  the 
rest  of  the  squadron.  f 

Just  after  the  Cumberland  sunk  that  gallant  officer  Commander 
John  R.  Tucker  was  seen  standing  down  James  River  under  full 
steam,  accompanied  by  the  Jamestown  and  Teazer.  They  all  came 
nobly  into  action  and  were  soon  exposed  to  the  heavy  fire  of  shore 
batteries.  Their  escape  was  miraculous,  as  they  were  under  a galling 
fire  of  solid  shot,  shell,  grape,  and  canister,  a number  of  which  passed 
through  the  vessels  without  doing  any  serious  injury,  except  to  the 
Patrick  Henry,  through  whose  boiler  a shot  passed,  scalding  to  death 
four  persons  and  wounding  others.  Lieutenant-Commanding  Barney 
promptly  obeyed  a signal  to  tow  her  out  of  the  action.  As  soon  as 
damages  were  repaired  the  Patrick  Henry  returned  to  her  station  and 
continued  to  perform  good  service  during  the  remainder  of  that  day 
and  the  following. 

Having  sunk  t he  Cumberland,  I turned  our  attention  to  the  Congress. 
We  were  some  time  in  getting  our  proper  position  in  consequence  of 
the  shoalness  of  the  water  and  the  great  difficulty  of  managing  the 
ship  when  in  or  near  the  mud.  To  succeed  in  my  object  I was  obliged 
to  run  the  ship  a short  distance  above  the  batteries  on  James  River 


£nAr.  XIX.]  NAVAL  ENGAGEMENT  IN  HAMPTON  ROADS,  VA. 


9 


in  order  to  wind  her.  During  all  the  time  her  keel  was  in  the  mud ; of 
■course  she  moved  but  slowly.  Thus  we  were  subjected  twice  to  the 
heavy  guns  of  all  the  batteries  in  passing  up  and  down  the  river,  but 
it  could  not  be  avoided.  We  silenced  several  of  the  batteries  and  did 
much  injury  on  shore.  A large  transport  steamer  alongside  the  wharf 
was  blown  up,  one  schooner  sunk,  and  another  captured  and  sent  to 
^Norfolk.  The  loss  of  life  on  shore  we  have  no  means  of  ascertaining. 

While  the  Virginia  was  thus  engaged  in  getting  her  position  for 
attacking  the  Congress  the  prisoners  state  it  was  believed  on  board 
that  ship  that  we  had  hauled  off.  The  men  left  their  guns  and  gave 
three  cheers.  They  were  soon  sadly  undeceived,  for  a few  minutes 
after  we  opened  upon  her  again,  she  having  run  on  shore  in  shoal  water. 
The  carnage,  havoc,  and  dismay  caused  by  our  lire  compelled  them  to 
haul  down  their  colors  and  to  hoist  a white  flag  at  their  gaff  and  half- 
mast  and  another  at  the  main.  The  crew  instantly  took  to  their  boats 
and  landed.  Our  lire  immediately  ceased,  and  a signal  was  made  for 
the  Beaufort  to  come  within  hail . I then  ordered  Lieutenant- Command- 
ing Parker  to  take  possession  of  the  Congress,  secure  the  officers  as 
prisoners,  allow  the  crew  to  land,  and  burn  the  ship.  He  ran  along- 
side, received  her  flag  and  surrender  from  Commander  William  Smith 
and  Lieutenant  Pendergrast,  with  the  side-arms  of  those  officers.  They 
delivered  themselves  as  prisoners  of  war  on  board  the  Beaufort,  and 
afterward  were  permitted  at  their  own  request  to  return  to  the  Con- 
gress to  assist  in  removing  the  wounded  to  the  Beaufort.  They  never 
returned,  and  I submit  to  the  decision  of  the  Department  whether 
they  are  not  our  prisoners.  While  the  Beaufort  and  Baleigh  were 
alongside  the  Congress,  and  the  surrender  of  that  vessel  had  been  re- 
ceived from  the  commander,  she  having  two  white  flags  flying,  hoisted 
by  our  own  people,  a heavy  fire  was  opened  upon  them  from  the  shore 
and  from  the  Congress,  killing  some  valuable  officers  and  men.  Under 
this  fire  the  steamers  left  the  Congress,  but  as  I was  not  informed  that 
any  injury  had  been  sustained  by  those  vessels  at  that  time,  Lieuten- 
ant-Commanding Parker  having  failed  to  report  to  me,  I took  it  for 
granted  that  my  order  to  him  to  burn  her  had  been  executed,  and 
waited  some  minutes  to  see  the  smoke  ascending  from  her  hatches. 
During  this  delay  we  were  still  subject  to  the  heavy  lire  from  the  bat- 
teries, which  was  always  promptly  returned. 

The  steam  frigates  Minnesota  and  Boanoke  and  the  sailing  frigate 
St.  Lawrence  had  previously  been  reported  as  coming  from  Old  Point, 
but  as  I was  determined  that  the  Congress  should  not  again  fall  into 
the  hands  of  the  enemy,  I remarked  to  that  gallant  young  officer  Flag- 
Lieutenant  Minor,  “That  ship  must  be  burned.”  He  promptly  volun- 
teered to  take  a boat  and  burn  her,  and  the  Teazer,  Lieutenant-Com- 
manding Webb,  was  ordered  to  cover  the  boat.  Lieutenant  Minor  had 
scarcely  reached  within  50  yards  of  the  Congress  when  a deadly  fire 
was  opened  upon  him,  wounding  him  severely  and  several  of  his  men. 
On  witnessing  this  vile  treachery  I instantly  recalled  the  boat  and  or- 
dered the  Congress  destroyed  by  hot  shot  and  incendiary  shell.  About 
this  period  I was  disabled,  and  transferred  the  command  of  the  ship  to 
that  gallant,  intelligent  officer  Lieut.  Catesby  Jones,  with  orders  to 
fight  her  as  long  as  the  men  could  stand  to  their  guns. 

The  ships  from  Old  Point  opened  their  fire  upon  us.  The  Minnesota 
grounded  in  the  north  channel,  where,  unfortunately,  the  shoalness  of 
the  channel  prevented  our  near  approach.  We  continued,  however,  to 
fire  upon  her  until  the  pilots  declared  it  was  no  longer  safe  to  remain 
in  that  position,  and  we  accordingly  returned  by  the  south  channel 


10 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XIX. 


(the  middle  ground  being  necessarily  between  the  Virginia  and  Min- 
nesota, and  St.  Lawrence  and  the  Koanoke  having  retreated  under  the 
guns  of  Old  Point),  and  again  had  an  opportunity  of  opening  upon  the 
Minnesota,  receiving  her  heavy  fire  in  return,  and  shortly  afterward 
upon  the  St.  Lawrence,  from  which  vessel  was  received  several  broad- 
sides.  It  had  by  this  time  become  dark  and  we  soon  after  anchored  off 
SewelPs  Point.  The  rest  of  the  squadron  followed  our  movements,  with 
the  exception  of  the  Beaufort,  Lieutenant-Commanding  Parker,  who 
proceeded  to  Norfolk  with  the  wounded  and  prisoners  as  soon  as  he 
had  left  the  Congress,  without  reporting  to  me.  The  Congress,  having 
been  set  on  fire  by  our  hot  shot  and  incendiary  shell,  continued  to  burn, 
her  loaded  guns  being  successively  discharged  as  the  flames  reached 
them,  until  a few  minutes  past  midnight,  when  her  magazine  exploded 
with  a tremendous  report. 

The  facts  above  stated  as  having  occurred  after  I had  placed  the  ship 
in  charge  of  Lieutenant  Jones  were  reported  to  me  by  that  officer. 

At  an  early  hour  next  morning  (the  9th),  upon  the  urgent  solicita- 
tions of  the  surgeons,  Lieutenant  Minor  and  myself  were  very  reluct- 
antly taken  on  shore.  The  accommodations  for  the  proper  treatment 
of  wounded  persons  on  board  the  Virginia  are  exceedingly  limited, 
Lieutenant  Minor  and  myself  occupying  the  only  space  that  could  be 
used  for  that  purpose,  which  was  in  my  cabin.  I therefore  consented 
to  our  being  landed  on  SewelPs  Point,  thinking  that  the  room  on  board 
vacated  by  us  could  be  used  for  those  who  might  be  wounded  in  the 
renewal  of  the  action.  In  the  course  of  the  day  Lieutenant  Minor  and 
myself  were  sent  in  a steamer  to  the  hospital  at  Norfolk. 

The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  report  of  Lieutenant  Jones  of 
the  proceedings  of  the  Virginia  on  the  9th: 

At  daylight  on  the  9th  we  saw  that  the  Minnesota  was  still  ashore,  and  that  there 
was  an  iron  battery  near  her.  At  8 [o’clock]  we  ran  down  to  engage  them  (having 
previously  sent  the  killed  and  wounded  out  of  the  ship),  tiring  at  the  Minnesota  and  j 
occasionally  at  the  iron  battery.  The  pilots  did  not  place  ns  as  near  as  they  expected. 
The  great  length  and  draught  of  the  ship  rendered  it  exceedingly  difficult  to  work  her. 
We  ran  ashore  about  a mile  from  the  frigate,  and  were  backing  fifteen  minutes 
before  we  got  off.  We  continued  to  fire  at  the  Minnesota,  and  blew  up  a steamer 
alongside  of  her,  and  we  also  engaged  the  Monitor,  and  sometimes  at  very  close  quar- 
ters. We  once  succeeded  in  running  into  her,  and  twice  silenced  her  fire.  The  pilots 
declaring  that  we  could  get  no  nearer  the  Minnesota,  and  believing  her  to  be  entirely 
disabled,  and  the  Monitor  having  run  into  shoal  water,  which  prevented  our  doing  her 
any  further  injury,  we  ceased  firing  at  12  [o’clock]  and  proceeded  to  Norfolk. 

Our  loss  is  2 killed  and  19  wounded.  The  stem  is  tAvisted  and  the  ship  leaks.  We 
have  lost  the  prow,  starboard  anchor,  and  all  the  boats.  The  armor  is  somewhat 
damaged ; the  steam-pipe  and  smoke-stack  both  riddled ; the  muzzles  of  two  of  the 
guns  shot  away.  It  was  not  easy  to  keep  a flag  flying.  The  flag-staffs  were  re- 
peatedly shot  away.  The  colors  were  hoisted  to  the  smoke-stack  and  several  times 
cut  down  from  it. 

The  bearing  of  the  men  was  all  that  could  be  desired ; the  enthusiasm  could  scarcely 
be  restrained.  During  the  action  they  cheered  again  and  agaiu.  Their  coolness  and 
skill  were  the  more  remarkable  from  the  fact  that  the  great  majority  of  them  were  un- 
der fire  for  the  first  time.  They  were  strangers  to  each  other  and  to  the  officers,  and 
had  but  a few  days’  instruction  in  the  management  of  the  great  guns.  To  the  skill  and 
example  of  the  officers  is  this  result  in  no  small  degree  attributable. 

Having  thus  given  a full  report  of  the  actions  on  the  8th  and  9th,  I 
feel  it  due  to  the  gallant  officers  who  so  nobly  sustained  the  honor  of 
the  flag  and  country  on  those  days  to  express  my  appreciation  of  their 
conduct. 

To  that  brave  and  intelligent  officer  Lieut.  Catesby  Jones,  the 
executive  and  ordnance  officer  of  the  Virginia,  I am  greatly  indebted 
for  the  success  achieved.  His  constant  attention  to  his  duties  in  the 
equipment  of  the  ship;  his  intelligence  in  the  instruction  of  ordnance 


Chap.  XlX.j  NAVAL  ENGAGEMENT  IN  HAMPTON  ROADS,  VA. 


11 


to  the  crew,  as  proved  by  the  accuracy  and  effect  of  their  fire,  some  of 
the  guns  having  been  personally  directed  by  him ; his  tact  and  manage- 
ment in  the  government  of  raw  recruits ; his  general  knowledge  of  the 
executive  duties  of  a man-of-war,  together  with  his  high-toned  bearing, 
were  all  eminently  conspicuous,  and  had  their  fruits  in  the  admirable 
efficiency  of  the  Virginia.  If  conduct  such  as  his  (and  I do  not  know 
that  I have  used  adequate  language  in  describing  it)  entitles  an  officer 
to  promotion,  I see  in  the  case  of  Lieutenant  Jones  one  in  all  respects 
worthy  of  it.  As  flag-officer  I am  entitled  to  some  one  to  perform  the 
duties  of  flag-captain,  and  I should  be  proud  to  have  Lieutenant  Jones 
ordered  to  the  Virginia  as  lieutenant-commandant;  if  it  be  not  the  in- 
tention of  the  Department  to  bestow  upon  him  a higher  rank. 

Lieutenant  Simms  fully  sustained  his  well-earned  reputation.  He 
fired  the  first  gun,  and  when  the  command  devolved  upon  Lieutenant 
Jones,  in  consequence  of  my  disability,  he  was  ordered  to  perform  the 
duties  of  executive  officer.  Lieutenant  Jones  has  expressed  to  me  his 
satisfaction  in  having  had  the  services  of  so  experienced,  energetic,  and 
zealous  an  officer. 

Lieutenant  Davidson  fought  his  guns  with  great  precision.  The 
muzzle  of  one  of  them  was  soon  shot  away.  He  continued,  however, 
to  fire  it,  though  the  wood  work  around  the  port  became  ignited  at 
each  discharge.  His  buoyant  and  cheerful  bearing  and  voice  were  con- 
tagious and  inspiring. 

Lieutenant  Wood  handled  his  pivot  gun  admirably,  and  the  executive 
officer  testifies  to  his  valuable  suggestions  during  the  action.  His  zeal 
and  industry  in  drilling  the  crew  contributed  materially  to  our  success. 

Lieutenant  Eggleston  served  his  hot  shot  and  shell  with  judgment 
and  effect,  and  his  bearing  was  deliberate,  and  exerted  a happy  influ- 
ence on  his  division. 

Lieutenant  Butt  fought  his  gun  with  activity  and  during  the  action 
was  gay  and  smiling. 

The  Marine  Corps  was  well  represented  by  Captain  Thom,  whose 
tranquil  mien  gave  evidence  that  the  hottest  fire  was  no  novelty  to  him. 
One  of  his  guns  was  served  effectively  and  creditably  by  a detachment 
of  the  United  Artillery  of  Norfolk,  under  the  command  of  Captain 
Kevill.  The  muzzle  of  their  gun  was  struck  by  a shell  from  the  enemy, 
which  broke  off  a piece  of  the  gun,  but  they  continued  to  fire  as  if  it 
was  uninjured. 

Midshipmen  Foute,  Marmaduke,  Littlepage,  Craig,  and  Long  ren- 
dered valuable  services.  Their  conduct  would  have  been  creditable  to 
older  heads,  and  gave  great  promise  of  future  usefulness.  Midshipman 
Marmaduke,  though  receiving  several  painful  wounds  early  in  the 
action,  manfully  fought  his  gun  until  the  close.  He  is  now  at  the  hos- 
pital. 

Paymaster  Semple  volunteered  for  any  service,  and  was  assigned  to 
the  command  of  the  powder  division,  an  important  and  complicated 
duty,  which  could  not  have  been  better  performed. 

Surgeon  Phillips  and  Assistant  Surgeon  Garnett  were  prompt  and 
attentive  in  the  discharge  of  their  duties.  Their  kind  and  considerate 
care  of  the  wounded  and  the  skill  and  ability’  displayed  in  the  treat- 
ment won  for  them  the  esteem  and  gratitude  of  all  who  came  undei 
their  charge,  and  justly  entitled  them  to  the  confidence  of  officers  and 
crew.  I beg  leave  to  call  the  attention  of  the  Department  to  the  case 
of  Dr.  Garnett.  He  stands  deservedly  high  in  his  profession,  is  at  the 
head  of  the  list  of  assistant  surgeons,  and  there  being  a vacancy  in  con- 


12 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[CHAr.  XIX 


sequence  of  the  recent  death  of  Surgeon  Blacknall,  I should  be  mucl 
gratified  if  Dr.  Garnett  could  be  promoted  to  it. 

The  engines  and  machinery,  upon  which  so  much  depended,  per! 
formed  much  better  than  was  expected.  This  is  due  to  the  intelligence! 
experience,  and  coolness  of  Acting  Chief  Engineer  Ramsey . His  effort? 
were  ably  seconded  by  his  assistants,  Tynan,  Campbell,  Herring,  Jack 
and  White.  As  Mr.  Ramsey  is  only  acting  chief  engineer,  I respect- 
fully recommend  his  promotion  to  the  rank  of  chief ; and  would  also 
ask  that  Second  Assistant  Engineer  Campbell  may  be  promoted  to  firsl 
assistant,  he  having  performed  the  duties  of  that  grade  during  the 
engagement. 

The  forward  officers — Boatswain  Hasker,  Gunner  Oliver,  and  Car 
penter  Lindsey— discharged  well  all  the  duties  required  of  them.  Tin 
boatswain  had  charge  of  .a  gun  and  fought  it  well.  The  gunner  wa? 
indefatigable  in  his  efforts.  His  experience  and  exertions  as  a gunnei 
have  contributed  very  materially  to  the  efficiency  of  the  battery. 

Acting  Master  Parrish  was  assisted  in  piloting  the  ship  by  Pilot? 
Wright,  Williams,  Clark,  and  Cunningham.  They  were  necessarily 
much  exposed. 

It  is  now  due  that  I should  mention  my  personal  staff.  To  that  gal 
lant  young  officer  Flag-Lieutenant  Minor  I am  much  indebted  for  hi? 
promptness  in  the  execution  of  signals;  for  renewing  the  flag-staffs  wheij 
shot  away,  being  thereby  greatly  exposed ; for  his  watchfulness  in 
keeping  the  Confederate  flag  up ; his  alacrity  in  conveying  my  order? 
to  the  different  divisions,  and  for  his  general  cool  and  gallant  bearing 

My  aide,  Acting  Midshipman  Rootes,  of  the  Navy ; Lieutenant  For 
rest,  of  the  Army,  who  served  as  a volunteer  aide,  and  my  clerk,  Mr. 
Arthur  St.  Clair,  jr.,  are  entitled  to  my  thanks  for  the  activity  witl) 
which  my  orders  were  conveyed  to  the  different  parts  of  the  ship, 
During  the  hottest  of  the  fight  they  were  always  at  their  posts,  giving 
evidence  of  their  coolness. 

Having  referred  to  the  good  conduct  of  the  officers  in  the  flag-ship 
immediately  under  my  notice,  I come  now  to  a no  less  pleasing  task  when 
I attempt  to  mark  my  approbation  of  the  bearing  of  those  serving  in 
the  other  vessels  of  the  squadron. 

Commander  John  R.  Tucker,  of  the  Patrick  Henry,  and  Lieuts.  Com 
manding  J.  FT.  Barney,  of  the  Jamestown,  and  W.  A.  Webb,  of  the 
Teazer,  deserve  great  praise  for  their  gallant  conduct  throughout  the 
engagement.  Their  judgment  in  selecting  their  positions  for  attack 
ing  the  enemy  was  good;  their  constant  fire  was  destructive,  and  con- 
tributed much  to  the  success  of  the  day.  The  general  order  under 
which  the  squadron  went  into  action  required  that,  in  the  absence  ol 
all  signals,  each  commanding  officer  was  to  exercise  his  own  judgment 
and  discretion  in  doing  all  the  damage  he  could  to  the  enemy  and  to 
sink  before  surrendering.  From  the  bearing  of  those  officers  on  the 
8th  I am  fully  satisfied  that  that  order  would  have  been  carried  out. 

Commander  Tucker  speaks  highly  of  all  under  him,  and  desires  par 
ticularly  to  notice  that  Lieutenant-Colonel  Cadwallader  St.  George 
Noland,  commanding  the  post  at  Mulberry  Island,  on  hearing  of  the 
deficiency  in  the  complement  of  the  Patrick  Henry,  promptly  offered 
the  services  of  10  of  his  men  as  volunteers  for  the  occasion,  one  of  whom, 
George  E.  Webb,  of  the  Greenville  Guards,  Commander  Tucker  regrets 
to  say,  was  killed. 

Lieutenant-Commanding.  Barney  reports  every  officer  and  man  on 
board  of  the  ship  performed  his  whole  duty,  evincing  a courage  and 
fearlessness  worthy  of  the  cause  for  which  we  are  fighting. 


3HAP.  XIX  ] NAVAL  ENGAGEMENT  IN  HAMPTON  ROADS,  VA. 


1$ 


Lieutenant-Commanding  Webb  specially  notices  the  coolness  dis- 
played by  Acting  Master  Face  and  Third  Assistant  Engineer  Quinn 
when  facing  the  heavy  fire  of  artillery  and  musketry  from  the  shore- 
while  the  Teazer  was  standing  in  to  cover  the  boat  in  which,  as  pre- 
viously stated,  Lieutenant  Minor  had  gone  to  burn  the  Congress.  Sev- 
eral of  his  men  were  badly  wounded.  * __  _ _ . . 

The  Raleigh,  early  in  the  action,  had  her  gun-carriage  disabled,  which 
compelled  her  to  withdraw.  As  soon  as  he  had  repaired  damages  as 
well  as  he  could  Lieutenant-Commanding  Alexander  resumed  his  posi- 
tion in  the  line.  He  sustained  himself  gallantly  during  the  remainder 
of  the  day  and  speaks  highly  of  all  under  his  command.  That  even- 
ing he  was  ordered  to  Norfolk  for  repairs. 

The  Beaufort,  Lieutenant-Commanding  Parker,  was  in  close  contact 
with  the  enemy  frequently  during  the  day 5 and  all  on  board  behaved 
gallantly.  Lieutenant-Commanding  Parker  expresses  his  warmest 
thanks  to  his  officers  and  men  for  their  coolness.  Acting  Midshipman 
Foreman,  who  accompanied  him  as  volunteer  aide : Midshipman  Mal- 
lory and  Newton  5 captain’s  clerk  Bain,  and  Mr.  Gray,  pilot,  are  all 
specially  mentioned  by  him. 

On  the  21st  instant  I forwarded  to  the  Department  correct  lists  ot 
the  casualties  on  board  all  the  vessels  of  the  squadron  on  the  8th  5 none, 
it  appears,  occurred  on  the  9th. 

While  in  the  act  of  closing  this  report  I received  the  communication 
of  the  Department,  dated  22d  instant,  relieving  me  temporarily  of  the 
command  of  the  squadron  for  the  naval  defense  of  James  River.  I 
feel  honored  in  being  relieved  by  the  gallant  Flag-Officer  Tatnall. 

I much  regret  that  I am  not  now  in  a condition  to  resume  my  com- 
mand, but  trust  that  I shall  soon  be  restored  to  health,  when  1 shall  be* 
ready  for  any  duty  that  may  be  assigned  me. 

Very  respectfully, 

FRANKLIN  BUCHANAN, 

Flag-Officer. 


Hon.  S.  R. 


Mallory, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy. 


No.  8. 

Report  of  May.  Gen.  John  B.  Magruder , G.  S.  Army , commanding  Depart- 
( ment  of  the  Peninsula,  of  his  co-operation  with  naval  attach. 

1 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Peninsula, 

Young’s  Farm , Ya.,  March  10,  1862. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt,  at  9 p.  m.  on  the 
8th  instant,  of  your  telegram  announcing  the  glorious  achievement  of' 
the  Confederate  States  war-steamer  Virginia,  and  to  report  that  before 
daylight  I had  troops  on  the  way  to  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Newport 
News,  and  proceeded  in  person  to  join  them. 

1 On  my  arrival  I found  my  advance  guard,  of  one  regiment  of  in- 
fantry, Colonel  Camming,  Tenth  Georgia,  and  some  300  cavalry  (of 
ours)  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  within  1 mile  of  Newport  News  and  GOG 
yards  of  the  enemy’s  pickets  of  infantry  and  cavalry. 

As  I obtained  from  all  quarters  reliable  information  of  the  enemy’s- 
great  strength,  which  was  verified  by  our  observation  of  the  fort  and 


14 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XIX. 


vicinity,  amounting:  to  at  least  12,000  infantry  at  Newport  News  alone 
which  at  any  moment  could  be  increased  to  18,000  from  Fort  Monroe’ 

I saY  that  it  was  utterly  impossible  to  do  anything  toward  attacking 
the  tort.  My  own  troops,  which  are  obliged  to  be  divided  to  defend 
the  two  roads,  Yorktown  and  Warwick,  being  when  united  only  al*out 
4,000  infantry,  450  cavalry,  and  a few  pieces  of  light  artillery,  the 
larger  number  being  too  heavy  to  bring  over  the  roads,  which  are  re- 
cently worse  than  ever. 

Finding,  as  I anticipated,  that  the  naval  attack  produced  no  effect  ! 
upon  the  fort  except  to  increase  its  garrison,  I contented  myself  with 
occupying  the  most  advanced  posts,  Bethel  and  Young’s  Mill  where 
the  troops  are  now. 

I believe  the  enemy’s  plan  was  to  ascend  James  River  by  land  and 
water,  to  attack  and  capture,  if  possible,  Jamestown  Island,  which 
would  cause  the  fall  of  Yorktown,  and  then  to  occupy  Suffolk,  James- 
town, and  West  Point,  and  leaving  Norfolk  to  fall  with  the  fall  of  Rich- 
mond, if  that  could  be  accomplished,  and  to  direct  all  his  energies 
against  the  latter  place.  For  the  present  his  plans  must  be  somewhat 
frustrated;  but  I consider  that  the  Patrick  Henry,  Jamestown,  and 
Teazer  having  gone  to  Norfolk,  and  the  Virginia  into  the  dock  for  re- 
pairs, affords  the  enemy  an  admirable  opportunity  of  fully  retrieving 
his  losses  by  placing  the  Ericsson  battery  at  the  mouth  of  James  River 
and  ascending  at  once  the  left  bank  of  that  river,  attacking,  supported 
by  the  Ericsson  battery,  the  works  of  Harden’s  Bluff  and  Mulberry 
Island  Point,  which  are  weak,  and  thus  forcing  my  troops  to  fall  back 
to  protect  Jamestown  and  Williamsburg  and  isolating  and  reducing 
Yorktown.  I therefore  hope  that  the  steamers  Patrick  Henry,  James- 
town, and  Teazer  may  without  delay  ascend  the  James  River,  and 
should  they  require  repairs,  have  them  done  at  Richmond.  When  the 
Virginia  is  repaired  they  could  join  her  at  any  moment,  as  she  would 
be  the  mistress  of  the  Roads. 

I have  not  had  time  to  report  that  the  troops  ordered  to  Suffolk  were 
embarked  from  King’s  Mill  wharf  immediately  after  the  reception  of 
the  orders,  as  I am  informed.  A considerable  number  of  the  regiments 
sent  were  on  furlough,  and  I therefore  sent  a somewhat  larger  number 
than  that  called  for,  estimating  the  number  by  the  aggregate  present 
and  absent.  I presume  those  absent  will  join  at  once.  I sent  also  two 
batteries,  that  of  Cobb’s  Legion  and  the  First  Company  of  Howitzers 
the  latter  being  asked  for  by  General  Randolph.  I have  sent  350  cav- 
alry, that  number  being  embraced  in  Cobb’s  Legion. 

I beg  leave  respectfully  to  invite  the  attention  of  the  Secretary  of 
War  to  my  remarks  in  relation  to  the  location  of  the  three  steamers. 

I have  at  length  assembled  many  negroes,  and  the  defensive  works 
begin  again  to  progress  satisfactorily. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major- General , Commanding. 

General  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


:hap.  xix.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


15 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ORDERS,  AND  RETURNS  RELATING 
SPECIALLY  TO  OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIR- 
GINIA FROM  JANUARY  11  TO  MARCH  17,  1862. 

TJlS'IOIISr  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. 


Abstract  from  return  of  tlie  Department  of  Virginia,  Maj.  Gen.  John  E.  Wool , XL  S.  Army , 
commanding,  for  January , 1862. 


Commands. 


Department  staff. 

Fort  Monroe 

Camp  Hamilton . . 

Camp  Butler 

Fort  Calhoun 

Total 


1 

Present  for 
duty. 

P 

© 

m 

® 

o 

la 

6® 

% 

tl, 

bC 

<1 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Pieces  of 
artillery. 

i 3 
t 1 

E 

o 

a 

o 

s 

£ 

o 

M 

s 

[3 

K 

16 

48 

164 

150 

7 

16 
1,  534 
5, 159 
4, 134 
165 

17 
1,  614 
5,  941 
4,  376 
184 

1,  280 
4,  365 
3,  301 
150 

223 

23 

385 

9,  096 

11,  003 

12, 132 

223 

23 

Organizations  in  the  Department  of  Virginia , January  31,  1862. 


Fort  Monroe. 

Maj  Joseph  Roberts,  4th  U.  S.  Artillery. 

10th  New  York. 

99th  New  York  (1  company). 

6th  Massachusetts  Battery. 

4th  U.  S.  Artillery,  Batteries  D and  L. 
Wisconsin  Light  Artillery. 

Mounted  Rifles  (2  companies). 

Camp  Butler.* 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  K.  F.  Mansfield. 

29th  Massachusetts. 

1st  New  York. 

2d  New  York. 

7th  New  York. 

11th  New  York. 


Camp  Hamilton! 

Col.  Max  Weber,  20th  New  York. 

1st  Delaware. 

20th  Indiana. 

16th  Massachusetts. 

20th  New  York. 

99th  New  York  (6  companies). 

11th  Pennsylvania  Cavalry. 

Mounted  Rifles  (4  companies). 

Fort  Calhoun  t 

Lieut.  Col.  G.  B.  Helleday,  99th  New 
York. 

99th  New  York  (2  companies). 


Washington,  D.  C.,  February  21,  1862 — 4 p.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  John  E.  Wool,  Fort  Monroe: 

The  iron-clad  steam  Monitor  and  a large  frigate  will  be  at  Hampton 
Roads  within  the  time  you  specify.  Do  you  need  troops  to  replace 
those  intended  for  General  Butler;  if  so,  how  many?  With  the  co- 
operation of  the  Navy,  how  many  additional  troops  do  you  need  to  take 
Yorktown,  and  how  many  by  a subsequent  operation  to  take  Norfolk? 
Send  me  your  best  map  of  Norfolk  and  vicinity.  Please  communicate 

* Newport  News. 

t Across  Mill  Creek,  near  Fort  MoDroe. 
t Rip  Raps ; name  changed  to  Fort  Wool. 


16  OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA.  IChai\  XIX. 

fully.  Let  me  hear  from  you  every  day.  Can  you  take  the  Sewell’s 
Point  Battery?  If  .so,  do  it  and  spike  the  guns. 

GEO.  B.  McCLELLAN, 
Major-General,  Commanding  U.  S.  A. 


War  Department, 

Washington  City , D.  (?.,  February  22,  18G2. 
Maj.  Gen.  John  E.  Wool, 

Commanding  at  Fortress  Monroe: 

General  : Your  dispatch  of  the  20th, # in  relation  to  the  expected 
attack  on  Newport  News,  has  been  received  and  communicated  to  the 
Secretary  of  the  Navy  and  the  General  Commanding. 

Accept  my  thanks  for  your  prompt  and  vigilant  attention.  It  will 
be  the  aim  of  this  Department  to  support  you  in  every  particular  you 
may  deem  essential  to  the  good  of  the  service.  You  have  its  perfect 
confidence  and  respect. 

Yours,  truly, 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War . 


Headquarters  Department  of  Virginia, 

Fort  Monroe , Va .,  February  23,  1862. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : * * * Yesterday  I had  the  honor  to  receive  your  telegram., 
by  which  I am  informed  that  an  iron-clad  steamer  and  a large  frigate 
would  be  in  Hampton  Roads  within  five  days,  the  time  stated  when 
the  Merrimac,  Yorktown,  and  Jamestown  would  attack  Newport 
News. 

On  land  I will  be  prepared  for  them,  and  if  the  steamer  and  frigate 
arrive  we  will  be  well  prepared  for  them  on  the  water. 

I have  not  time  before  the  mail  leaves  to  give  you  all  the  informa- 
tion you  desire.  I have  only  time  to  say,  give  me* 20,000  men,  includ- 
ing one  regiment  of  regulars,  in  addition  to  those  I now  have,  with' 
two  companies  of  artillery,  and  four  field  batteries  in  addition  to  the 
two  I now  have,  which  are  nearly  complete,  wanting  only  a few  horses  I 
and  harness,  with  boats  sufficient  to  transport  several  thousand  men,, 
and  I will,  with  Burnside’s  co-operation,  take  Norfolk,  provided  I can 
have  aid  from  the  Navy  and  can  be  furnished  with  land  transporta- 
tion.  All  the  boats  we  had  at  the  post  were  given  to  the  Hatteras 
expedition;  consequently  I have  none  that  will  answer  for  landing  of 
troops. 

I have  a plan  which  will  be  presented  to  you  by  Colonel  Cram,  with 
a map,  who  will  also  be  able  to  explain  it  to  you  in  detail,  and  if  I can  | 
be  furnished  with  the  means  necessary  and  the  co-operation  of  General 
Burnside  I have  no  doubt  of  success  against  Norfolk,  and,  with  aid  j 
from  the  Navy,  against  Yorktown.  If  we  were  prepared  now  it  would 
be  more  readily  accomplished  than  at  a future  day.  I prefer  to  haver  I 
my  plan  explained  by  the  colonel,  because  it  is  less  likely  to  become* 
public. 


‘ Not  found. 


Chap.  XIX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— UNION.  17 

Colonel  Cram  lias  a similar  dispatch  for  Major-General  McClellan, 
which  is  in  accordance  with  his  telegram. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  E.  WOOL, 

Major- General . 


Headquarters  Department  of  Virginia, 

Fort  Monroe , Fa.,  February  23,  1862. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War: 

Dear  Sir  : Colonel  Cram,  my  senior  aide-de-camp,  will  present  you 
with  a dispatch  and  a most  excellent  map,  by  which  he  will  explain  in 
detail  my  plans  for  taking* Norfolk,  Yorktown,  and  Richmond. 

There  has  been  no  time  in  the  last  three  months  until  recently  that 
Richmond  could  not  have  been  taken  with  50,000  men,  and  even  with 
a less  force.  At  all  events  50,000  men  menacing  Richmond  would  not 
have  failed  to  have  relieved  Washington.  Fifty  thousand  men  menac- 
ing the  enemy  in  the  rear  and  150,000  advancing  in  front,  the  rebel 
army  would  have  been  destroyed. 

In  conclusion,  I would  commend  to  your  special  attention  Col.  T.  J. 
Cram.  I am  in  want  of  another  brigadier-general,  having  but  one, 
who  is  at  Newport  News.  Colonel  Cram  would  make  as  efficient  a 
brigadier-general  as  any  other  in  service. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfullv,  youi*  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  E.  WOOL, 

Major-General. 

P.  S. — A steamer  has  this  moment  arrived,  bringing  372  returned 
prisoners  from  the  South,  of  whom  345  are  non-commissioned  officers, 
privates,  sailors,  and  citizens;  also  10  negroes  and  17  commissioned 
officers,  7 of  whom  were  held  as  hostages,  ranking  as  follows,  viz : Col- 
onels Lee,  Cogswell,  and  Wood;  Major  Revere;  Captains  Bowman, 
Rockwood,  and  Keffer,  all  of  whom  go  forward  this  evening  by  boat  to 
Baltimore.  v 


Navy  Department,  March  6,  1862 — 4.10  p.  m. 
Commodore  Paulding-,  Comdg.  Navy-  Yard , New  Yorlc : 

Let  the  Monitor  come  direct  to  Washington,  anchoring  below  Alex- 
andria. 

GIDEON  WELLES, 

Secretary  Navy. 

[Indorsement.] 


I never  received  the  above  telegram. 

JOHN  L.  WORDEN, 
Rear  Admiral , U.  S.  N. 

i * - 


War  Department, 
Washington  City,  JJ.  (7.,  March  7,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  John  E.  Wool,  Comdg.  Fortress  Monroe : 

Sir  : Your  request  to  be  furnished  with  two  gunboats  has  been  re- 
ferred to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  who  informs  me  that — 

Flag-Officer  Goldsborough  has  withdrawn  the  class  of  vessels  desired  by  Major- 
2 R R — VOL  IX 


18 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XIX. 


General  Wool  for  operations  in  tlie  Nortli  Carolina  waters.  It  is  presumed  lie  will 
soon  return  with  most  of  them.  Until  that  period  arrives  this  Department  has  nc 
other  force  to  place  at  Hampton  Roads. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Navy  Department, 

March  7,  1862 — 10  p.  m. 

Oapt.  John  Marston, 

Senior  Naval  Officer , Hampton  Roads  ( via  boat) : 

Send  the  St.  Lawrence,  Congress,  and  Cumberland  immediately  into 
the  Potomac  Biver. 

Let  the  disposition  of  the  remainder  of  the  vessels  at  Hampton  Boads 
be  made  according  to  your  best  judgment,  after  consultation  with  Gen 
eral  Wool.  Use  steam  to  tow  them  up. 

I will  also  try  and  send  a couple  of  steamers  from  Baltimore  to  assist, 
Let  there  be  no  delay. 

GIDEON  WELLES, 

Secretary  Navy. 


Navy  Department, 

4 March  8,  18&2. 

Capt.  John  Marston, 

Senior  Naval  Officer , Hampton  Roads: 

The  Assistant  Secretary  will  be  at  Old  Point  by  the  Baltimore  boat 
of  this  evening.  Do  not  move  the  ships  until  further  orders,  which  lid 
will  carry. 


GIDEON  WELLES, 

Secretary  Navy. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Virginia, 

Fort  Monroe , Va .,  March  8,  1862 — 9 p.  in. 

Hon.  Gideon  Welles, 

Secretary  Navy , W ashington , JD.  G. : 

Consulting  with  General  Wool,  I have  ordered  the  frigates  out  of  tin) 
Koads — the  St.  Lawrence  to  the  Potomac,  Boanoke  and  Minnesota  td 
New  York,  the  latter  being  disabled.  The  Monitor,  of  course,  remains 
If  there  are  any  of  those  11 -inch  gunboats  (I  think  there  are  two  in  I 
Boston)  please  send  them  at  once  to  this  place.  They  can  keep  cleail 
of  the  Merrimac  and  be  of  great  assistance. 

Nearly  all  here  are  of  the  opinion  that  the  Merrimac  is  disabled,  ll 
was  the  nearest  person  to  her,  outside  of  the  Monitor,  and  I am  oil 
opinion  she  is  not  seriously  injured.  I have  sent  a steamer  for  Com  in  o I 
dore  Goldsborough.  I cannot  see  that  anything  more  can  be  done  by  I 
the  Navy. 

G.  V.  FOX.  ; 


War  Department, 

March  9,  1862. 

Henry  B.  Benwick,  Esq., 

21  Fifth  Avenue , corner  Ninth  street , New  York  : 

The  Merrimac,  an  armor-clad  vessel  belonging  to  the  rebels,  issued 
from  Norfolk  yesterday,  and  captured  several  of  the  United  Stated 


Chai\  XIX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


19 


blockading  vessels,  and  threatens  to  sweep  our  whole  flotilla  from 
Chesapeake  Bay.  Under  these  circumstances  it  is  of  the  last  impor- 
tance to  capture  or  destroy  the  Merrimac,  and  the  whole  wealth  and 
power  of  the  United  States  will  be  at  command  for  that  purpose.  As 
this  movement  was  anticipated  and  the  subject  of  discussion  between 
•you  and  myself  last  December,  you  have  no  doubt  thought  of  various 
modes  by  which  it  could  be  met  and  overcome  most  promptly.  The 
Secretary  of  War  desires  you  quietly  to  call  a meeting  of  from  three 
to  nine  persons,  at  your  discretion,  of  the  best  judgment  in  naval 
engineering  and  warfare,  to  meet  immediately  at  your  father’s  house  or 
some  other  convenient  and  suitable  place,  and  to  sit  as  a committee  to 
devise  the  best  plan  of  speedily  accomplishing  the  capture  or  destruc- 
tion of  the  Merrimac.  I would  suggest  the  name  of  Abram  S.  Hewitt 
as  a member  of  the  committee.  You  will  bear  in  mind  that  every 
hour’s  delay  to  destroy  the  Merrimac  may  result  in  incalculable  damage 
to  the  United  States,  and  that  the  plan  or  plans  for  her  destruction 
should  be  submitted  at  the  earliest  hour  practicable  for  the  approval 
of  this  Department,  to  the  end  that  their  execution  may  not  be  unneces- 
sarily delayed  a moment.  To  enable  you  to  communicate  hourly  with 
this  Department,  the  telegraphic  company  is  directed  to  transmit  all 
messages  from  you  at  the  expense  of  the  Government. 

Acknowledge  this  dispatch  £he  moment  you  receive  it.  Spare  no 
pains  or  expense  to  get  the  committee  together  immediately.  Act 
with  the  utmost  energy.  You  and  each  member* of  the  committee  will 
consider  this  whole  matter  confidential. 

P.  H.  WATSON, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

Washington , March  9,  1862. 

Commanding-  Officers  Fort  Delaware ; Fort  Mifflin ; Fete  York  Har- 
bor, A.  Y Newport,  R.  I.;  Fort  Trumbull , New  London;  Boston 
Harbor  ; Portland , Me. : 

The  rebel  iron-clad  steamer  Merrimac  has  destroyed  two  of  our 
frigates  near  Fort  Monroe  and  finally  retired  last  night  to  Craney 
Island.  She  may  succeed  in  passing  the  batteries  and  go  to  sea.  1 1 
is  necessary  that  you  at  once  place  your  post  in  the  best  possible  con- 
dition for  defense,  and  do  your  best  to  stop  her  should  she  endeavor 
to  run  by.  Anything  that  can  be  effected  in  the  way  of  temporary 
batteries  should  be  done  at  once. 

geo.  b.  McClellan, 

Major-General , U.  S.  A. 


Headquarters, 
Baltimore , March  9,  1862. 

Col.  Gouverneur  K.  Warren,  # 

Commanding  Fort  Federal  Hill : 

Colonel  : The  Merrimac  has  come  down  from  Norfolk  and  destroyed 
the  Cumberland  and  the  Congress.  She  may  pass  Fort  Monroe  and 
come  here.  You  will  have  Forts  Federal  Hill  and  Marshall  prepared 
for  action,  and  take  every  precaution  for  their  security  against  attack. 
This  is  especially  necessary  in  regard  to  the  latter,  which  has  a very 
small  garrison. 


20 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XIX 


You  will  make  the  same  arrangements  which  would  be  necessary  if 
we  were  in  the  presence  of  an  enemy. 

Very  respectfully,  yours, 


JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major- General. 


War  Department, 

Washington , March  9,  1862. 

To  the  Governor  of  New  York,  Albany;  Massachusetts,  Boston; 

Maine,  Portland : 

The  opinion  of  the  naval  commanders  here  is  that  the  Merrimac 
will  not  venture  to  sea,  but  they  advise  that  immediate  preparations 
be  made  to  guard  against  the  danger  to  our  ports  by  large  timber 
rafts,  protected  by  batteries.  They  regard  timber  rafts,  guarded  by 
batteries,  as  the  best  protection  for  temporary  purposes. 

General  Totten  says  do  not  neglect  the  batteries. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department, 

* March  9,  1862. 

nis  Excellency  E.  D.  Morgan, 

Governor  of  New  YorJc,  Albany , N.  Y. : 

The  Merrimac  was  beaten  back  by  the  Monitor  to-day  after  a five 
hours’  contest,  and  is  reported  to  be  disabled. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Navy- Yard, 

Washington , D.  0.,  March  9,  1862 — 2 p.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  Hooker,  Commanding: 

Please  have  the  following  communicated  to  Captain  Wyman  as  soon 
as  possible: 

The  Merrimac  has  got  out  of  harbor,  and  had  pretty  much  used  up  our  ships  at 
Hampton  Roads. 

It  is  impossible  to  say  what  she  may  attempt,  but  as  a proper  precaution  it  is  pro- 
posed to  be  ready  to  block  the  channel  of  this  river  in  the  event  of  an  attempt  to 
enter  it. 

By  direction  of  the  President  it  has  been  agreed  on  by  General  McClellan,  General 
Meigs,  and  myself,  the  Secretary  of  War  present,  to  till  some  canal-boats  and  other 
craft  and  tow  them  down  near  the  place  where  it  would  be  advisable  to  sink  them.  I 
wish  you  therefore  to  send  up  some  of  the  steamers  to  tow  down. 

You  have  no  doubt  received  my  dispatch  to  send  a fast  vessel  to  observe  the  mouth 
of  the  Potomac.  Let  this  duty  be  well  looked  to. 

Will  General  Hooker  please  to  inform  me  of  this  reaching  Captain 
Wyman. 

# JNO.  A.  DAHLGREN, 

Commandant , Navy-  Yard. 


Washington  Navy-Yard, 

March  9,  1862 — 3 p.  m. 

His  Excellency  the  President  of  the  United  States: 

I beg  leave  to  inform  you  that  upon  consultation  with  such  pilots  as 
I have  in  the  yard,  I find  them  to  be  of  opinion  that  a vessel  draw- 


Chat.  XIX.) 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


21 


ing  22  feet  water  can  pass  up  tlie  Potomac  within  a hundred  yards  of 
the  Arsenal.  As  far  as  the  light-house  on  Blackistone  Island,  some  30 
miles,  there  is  abundant  water  for  any  ship.  About  5 miles  higher  up 
is  the  first  obstacle— the  Kettle  Bottoms.  The  channel  passes  among 
these  shoals  for  5 miles,  and  the  pilot  says  24  feet  can  be  had,  which  I 
doubt.  The  narrowest  part  about  300  yards  wide.  From  this  the  chan- 
nel continues  good  until  just  below  Aquia,  where  it  shoals,  so  that  23  feet 
is  considered  the  best  water  at  common  high  tide.  Having  passed  this, 
the  water  deepens  passing  the  batteries  and  shoals  about  Mattawoman 
Creek,  where  the  depth  at  common  high  tide  is  22  feet.  This  obstruc- 
tion is  less  than  a mile  in  extent,  after  which  the  channel  deepens  sev- 
eral feet ; though  it  narrows,  it  runs  nearly  to  the  Arsenal,  and  perhaps 
some  3 miles  from  the  Capitol. 

The  actual  blocking  of  the  river  is  only  to  be  resorted  to  when  the 
exigency  arises,  the  means  being  at  hand.  There  are  three  points 
where  it  can  be  done— the  Kettle  Bottoms,  below  Smith’s  Point,  and 
at  Mattawoman.  I would  advise  that  some  heavy  ordnance  be  got 
ready  for  placing  at  the  Arsenal,  at  Giesborough  Point,  and  at  Buzzard 
Point.  Fort  Washington  should  also  have  suitable  cannon.  I have 
telegraphed  to  the  flotilla  for  some  steamers  to  tow  down  the  blocking 
vessels  as  soon  as  General  Meigs  has  them  ready.  It  happens  unfor- 
tunately that  the  only  two  good  steamers  belonging  to  the  yard  are  at 
Fortress  Monroe. 

JNO.  A.  DAHLGBEN,  Commandant. 


March  9,  1862 — 3.40  p.  m. 

General  McClellan,  Commander : 

I am  making  arrangements  to  place  an  11-inch  gun  and  some  10-inch 
mortars  on  Giesborough  Point,  which  will  command  at  short  range  the 
nearest  point  that  a vessel  drawing  22  feet  can  approach  the  Capitol. 
The  channel  passes  within  50  yards  of  this  position. 

As  I have  but  a handful  of  men,  it  might  be  convenient  to  have  some 
assistance  from  the  neighboring  regiments.  If  so,  please  authorize  it. 

JNO.  A.  DAHLGBEN. 


War  Department,  March  9,  1862 — 5.30  p.  m. 
Captain  Dahlgren: 

The  steamer  Sophia  will  leave  G-street  wharf  in  ten  minutes,  having 
in  tow  eight  canal-boats  loaded  with  sufficient  stone  to  sink  them. 
Another  steamer,  with  eight  more,  will  leave  in  the  course  of  the  night. 
The  captain  of  the  Sophia  bears  a letter  to  the  officer  in  command  of  the 
flotilla,  stating  “that  the  boats  are  to  be  sunk  if  necessary.”  This 
telegram  is  sent  for  your  information. 

By  order  of  General  Meigs,  Quartermaster-General : 

D.  H.  BUCKEE, 
Quartermaster  and  Colonel. 


Fortress  Monroe,  March  9,  1862 — 6.45  p.  m. 
Hon.  Gideon  Welles,  Secretary  of  the  Navy : 

The  Monitor  arrived  at  10  p.  m.  last  night  and  went  immediately  to 
the  protection  of  the  Minnesota,  lying  aground  just  below  Newport 
News.  At  7 a.  m.  to-day  the  Merrimac,  accompanied  by  two  wooden 
steamers  and  several  tugs,  stood  out  toward  the  Minnesota  and  opened 


22  OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA.  [Chat.  XIX. 

fire.  The  Monitor  met  them  at  once  and  opened  her  fire,  when  all  the 
enemy’s  vessels  retired  excepting  the  Merrimac.  These  two  ironclads 
fought,  part  of  the  time  touching  each  other,  from  8 a.  m.  to  noon,  when 
the  Merrimac  retired.  Whether  she  is  injured  or  not  it  is  imimssiblt 
to  say.  Lieut.  J.  L.  Worden,  who  commanded  the  Monitor,  handled 
her  with  great  skill,  and  was  assisted  by  Chief  Engineer  Stimers, 
Lieutenant  Worden  was  iujured  by  the  cement  from  the  pilot-house 
being  driven  into  his  eyes,  but  I trust  not  seriously.  The  Minnesota 
kept  up  a continuous  fire,  and  is  herself  somewhat  injured.  She  wa s 
moved  considerably  to-day,  and  will  probably  be  off  to-night.  The 
Monitor  is  uninjured  and  ready  at  any  moment  to  repel  another  attack. 

G.  Y.  FOX, 
Assistant  Secretary. 


Washington  Navy- Yard,  March  9,  1802—9  p.  m. 
Hon.  Gideon  Welles,  Secretary  of  the  Navy : 

The  proposed  measures  for  guarding  the  Potomac  are  in  progress! 
I am  informed  from  the  Quartermaster’s  Department  that  eight  canal 
boats,  loaded  with  stone,  were  about  to  leave,  and  eight  more  would 
leave  during  the  night.  I have  sent  instructions  to  the  commandant; 
of  the  flotilla  as  to  their  disposition  and  use  at  the  three  places  where 
the  channel  has  the  least  depth  of  water. 

The  only  11-inch  gun  and  50-pounder  which  I have  will  be  landed  on 
Giesborough  Point  before  midnight.  The  platforms  will  be  laid  and  the 
guns  in  position  to-morrow  morning.  The  mortars  will  also  be  placed. 
Shot  are  being  cast  for  all  of  them,  and  a full  supply  will  be  ready  to 
morrow. 

The  Secretary  of  War  has  visited  the  defensive  points  and  given  me 
authority  to  draw  on  any  of  the  regiments  or  forts  for  men,  guns,  oi 
munitions.  He  has  also  authorizeel  me  to  take  for  the  while  the  private 
steamers  plying  on  the  river  for  present  use  of  the  Government,  and  I 
have  sent  around  for  them.  If  there  should  be  any  use  at  all  for  a bat- 
tery on  Giesborough,  there  ought  to  be  twenty  of  the  heaviest  cannon. 
Shot  of  170  pounds  at  50  or  100  yards  will  be  apt  to  do  something.  A 
smart  steamer  has  been  dispatched  to  the  mouth  of  the  Potomac  to 
observe  it. 

JNO.  A.  DAHLGREN,  Commandant. 


Budd’s  Ferry,  MarcJi  9,  1862 — 9.15  p.  m. 

Captain  Dahlgren: 

I was  absent  when  your  telegram  for  Captain  Wyman  reached  this 
office;  it  was,  however,  duly  communicated. 

Captain  Wyman  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  Merrimac  cannot  ascend 
the  Potomac. 

HOOKER,  Brigadier- General. 


Executive  Mansion,  Washington , March  9,  1862. 
Colonel  Ingalls,  Quartermaster , Annapolis  : 

Should  the  Merrimac,  which  did  so  much  damage  at  Newport  News, 
attempt  anything  at  Annapolis,  it  is  believed  that  the  best  defense 
would  be  an  attack  by  a number  of  swift  steamers,  full  of  men,  who 


Chap.  XIX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


23 


should  board  her  by  a sudden  rush,  fire  down  through  her  hatches  or 
grated  deck,  and  throw  cartridges,  grenades,  or  shells  down  her  smoke- 
pipes  ; sacrifice  the  steamers  in  order  to  take  the  Merrimac. 

If  an  overwhelming  force  can  be  thus  thrown  on  board  there  will  be 
little  loss  of  life,  though  the  steam  transports  may  be  destroyed.  Of 
course  the  steamers  should  be  provided  with  ladders,  planks,  grap- 
plers,  and  other  means  to  board  with.  The  Merrimac  has  iron  sides, 
sloping  above  water  to  a deck  about  9 feet  wide.  Said  to  be  an  iron- 
grated  deck. 

Promotion,  ample  reward,  awaits  whoever  takes  or  destroys  her. 

Bv  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

J M.  0.  MEIGS, 

Quartermaster- General. 

You,  of  course,  have  a swift  steamer  outside  on  the  look  out. 


Washington,  D.  0., 

March  9,  1862—1  p.  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  E.  Wool,  Fort  Monroe: 

If  the  rebels  obtain  full  command  of  the  water  it  would  be  impossi- 
ble for  you  to  hold  Newport  News.  You  are  therefore  authorized  to 
evacuate  that  place,  drawing  the  garrison  in  upon  Fort  Monroe,  which 
I need  not  say  to  so  brave  an  officer  is  to  be  held  at  all  hazards  as  I 
will  risk  everything  to  sustain  you  should  you  be  attacked  by  superior 
force. 

From  indications  here  I suspect  an  intention  of  the  enemy  to  fall 
back  nearer  to  Richmond,  that  they  may  better  concentrate  their  forces. 
An  attack  upon  you  is  not  improbable. 

If  the  15-inch  gun  is  at  Newport  News  I would  suggest  its  immedi- 
ate removal  to  either  Fort  Monroe  or  Fort  Calhoun,  unless  it  will  enable 
you  to  retain  possession  of  Newport  News.  By  authorizing  you  to  with- 
draw from  Newport  News  I ’do  not  mean  to  give  you  the  order  to  do 
so,  but  to  relieve  you  from  that  grave  sense  of  responsibility  which 
every  good  officer  feels  in  such  a case.  I would  only  evacuate  New- 
port News  when  it  became  clear  that  the  rebels  would  certainly  obtain 
complete  control  of  the  water  and  render  it  untenable.  Do  not  run 
the  risk  of  placing  its  garrison  under  the  necessity  of  surrendering. 

You  will  also  please  inform  me  fully  of  your  views  and  wishes,  the 
practicability  and  necessity  of  re-enforcing  you,  &c.  The  performances 
of  the  Merrimac  place  a new  aspect  upon  everything,  and  may  proba- 
blv  change  my  old  plan  of  campaign  just  on  the  eve  of  execution. 

geo.  b.  mcolellan, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

March  9,  1862—10.45  p.  m. 

Major-General  McClellan,  Washington,  D.  C.: 

Your  telegram  to  Major-General  Wool  received.  The  performance 
of  the  Monitor  to-day  against  the  Merrimac  shows  a slight  superiority 
in  favor  of  the  Monitor,  as  the  Merrimac  was  forced  to  retreat  to  Nor- 
folk after  a four  hour’s  engagement,  at  times  the  vessels  touching  each 
other.  The  damage  to  the  Merrimac  cannot  be  ascertained.  She  re- 
treated under  steam  without  assistance. 

The  Monitor  is  all  ready  for  her  to-morrow,  but  I think  the  Merri- 
mac  may  be  obliged  to  lay  up  for  a few  days.  She  is  an  ugly  customer, 


24 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XIX, 


and  it  is  too  good  luck  to  believe  we  are  yet  clear  of  her.  Our  hopes 
are  upon  the  Monitor,  and  this  days’  work  shows  that  the  Merrimac 
must  attend  to  her  alone.  Have  ordered  the  large  frigates  to  leave. 

G.  y.  FOX, 
Assistant  Secretary . 


Xavy  Department, 

March  9,  1862. 

Capt.  Hiram  Paulding, 

Commandant  Navy  Yard , New  York  : 

If  the  Oneida  can  go  to  sea,  send  her  to  Hampton  Eoads  instantly. 
Send  any  vessels  you  have.  Don’t  delay  a moment. 

GIDEOX  WELLES. 


Henry  B.  Benwick,  Esq.,  New  York : 


War  Department, 

March  10,  1862. 


Your  dispatch  of  this  morning  received.*  Why  not  take,  say,  three! 
large  and  swift  steamers,  drawing  not  more  than  16  feet  of  water  when 
loaded,  fill  their  bows,  and  strengthen  them  generally,  and  protect  their 
machinery  with  timber?  Could  not  three  such  vessels  be  fitted  up 
and  made  ready  for  sea  in  three  or  four  days,  and  would  they  not  be 
sufficient  for  the  destruction  of  the  Merrimac  by  running  her  down,  if 
managed  by  volunteer  commanders  and  crews  ? Telegraph  immedi- 
ately for  Carryall  to  return. 

P.  H.  WATSOX, 

Assistant  Secretary  of  War . 


Governor  Andrew,  Boston: 


War  Department, 

March  10,  1862. 


The  Merrimac  is  reported  by  General  Wool  as  having  returned  to 
Xorfolk  in  a sinking  condition,  but  Assistant  Secretary  Fox,  who  is 
also  at  Fort  Monroe,  reports  that  it  is  not  known  whether  she  is  dis- 
abled or  not. 


My  telegram  to  you  respecting  your  defenses  was  sent  before  it  was 
known  that  the  Monitor  had  reached  Fort  Monroe,  and  it  was  unknown 
what  further  mischief  might  be  doue  by  the  Merrimac.  All  the  infor- 
mation possessed  by  the  War  Department  respecting  affairs  at  Fort 
Monroe  is  allowed  to  pass  by  the  telegraph  for  public  information.  An  y 
special  information  important  to  public  safety  will  be  communicatecf  to 
you. 

EDWIX  M.  STAXTOX, 

Secretary  of  War. 

Above  dispatch  sent  to — 

Gov.  E.  D.  Morgan,  Albany,  X.  Y. 

Gov.  John  A.  Andrew,  Boston,  Mass. 

Gov.  Israel  Washburn,  jr.,  Augusta,  Me. 


* Not  found. 


Chap.  XIX.  1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


25 


Headquarters  Army  Potomac, 

March  10,  1862 — 1 a.  m. 

Capt.  John.  A.  Dahlgren: 

You  will  suspend  operations  for  the  present  for  sinking  boats  or 
placing  obstructions  in  the  Potomac.  GIDEON  WELLES. 


Navy  Department, 
March  10,  1862—10.27  a,  m. 

Capt.  G.  V.  Fox, 

Assistant  Secretary  of  Navy , Fort  Monroe: 

It  is  directed  by  the  President  that  the  Monitor  be  not  too  much 
exposed,  and  that  in  no  event  shall  any  attempt  be  made  to  proceed 
with  her  unattended  to  Norfolk.  If  vessels  can  be  procured  and  loaded 
with  stone  and  sunk  in  the  channel  it  is  important  that  it  should  be 
done  The  San  Jacinto  and  Dacotah  have  sailed  from  Boston  for  Hamp- 
ton Roads,  and  the  Sabine  in  tow  of  Baltic,  and  a tug  from  New  York. 
Gunboats  will  be  ordered  forthwith.  Would  it  not  be  well  to  detain 
the  Minnesota  until  other  vessels  arrive  1 GIDEON  WELLES. 


• Navy  Department, 

March  10,  1862 — 3 p.  m. 

Capt.  William  L.  Hudson, 

Commandant  Navy  Yard , Boston: 

Send  the  Wachusett  to  Hampton  Roads.  Have  the  work  on  the 
other  gunboats  carried  on  day  and  night  with  all  the  force  possible  to 
put  on  them,  and  when  ready  send  them  to  Hampton  Roads. 

GIDEON  WELLES, 
Secretary  of  the  Navy . 


Quartermaster-General’s  Office, 
Washington  City , March  10,  1862 — 3.50  p.  m. 
Major  Belger,  Quartermaster , Baltimore : 

Hold  the  steamer  Commodore,  which  was  sent  to  Baltimore  from 
Annapolis  yesterday,  ready  to  carry  a messenger  with  dispatches  to 
General  Burnside,  who  will  be  found  in  Pamlico  or  Albemarle  Sound. 

The  messenger  accredited  from  the  Secretary  of  W ar  or  Adjutant- 
General  will  leave  this  place  on  the  5 o’clock  train.  Have  a carriage 
and  conveyance  ready  to  put  him  on  board  the  Commodore. 

Acknowledge  receipt  of  this  and  report  progress.  If  the  Commodore 
is  unfit  for  the  service,  consult,  by  telegraph,  Colonel  Ingalls,  Annapolis, 
who  reports  her  as  swift  and  drawing  only  6 feet  of  water,  as  to  a ves- 
sel for  this  service. 

{M.  C.  MEIGS, 

Quartermaster-  General . 


m. 


Navy  Department, 

March  10,  1862—9.45  p. 

Capt.  William  L.  Hudson, 

Commandant  Navy  Yard , Boston : 

If  Chocura  and  Penobscot  have  not  sailed,  send  them  to  Hampton 


26 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XIX. 


Roads  as  soon  as  steam  can  be  gotten  np  $ also  the  Marblehead  or  am 
other  gunboat  ready.  J 

Answer. 

GIDEON  WELLES. 


Brigadier-General  Meigs  : 


March  11,  1862—9  a.  m. 


I am  now  ready  to  send  the  only  11-inch  gun  here  to  its  position  on 
Giesborough  Point.  It  is  probably  the  only  heavy  gun  in  this  vicinity. 

It  blew  so  freshly  yesterday  that  there  was  danger  of  the  scow  found- 
ering on  the  way  if  sent.  Is  it  still  considered  necessary  to  mount  it  ? 

Captain  Wyman  considers  more  barges  necessary  than  those  to  be 
sent.  He  wrote  me  that  none  of  them  had  reached  him  at  midnight 
but  they  were  met  going  down. 

JNO.  A.  DAHLGREN. 


Quartermaster-General’s  Ofpice, 
Washington  City , March  11,  1862—12.27  p.  m. 
Capt.  John  A.  Dahlgren, 

Commanding  Washington  Navy  Yard : 

I take  it  for  granted  that  all  measures  of  precaution  ordered  are  to 
be  carried  out,  having  no  orders  to  the  contrary. 

How  many  more  canal-boats  should  be  sent  down  ? I will  order 
eight  more  made  ready  and  sent  as  soon  as  possible,  and  as  many  more 
as  you  desire. 

M.  C.  MEIGS, 
Quartermaster. 


War  Department, 

March  11,  1862. 

General  John  E.  Wool , Fort  Monroe,  Va.: 

Let  the  name  of  the  gun  heretofore  known  as  the  u Floyd”  be  changed 
and  hereafter  be  called  the  u Lincoln.”  What  are  you  now  doing  with 
the  two  big  guns  ? Can  they  be  mounted  on  the  beach  so  as  to  be 
available  for  defense  ? Do  you  want  any  aid  in  mounting  them  ? If 
there  is  a carriage  for  the  12-inch  gun,  mount  the  15-inch  gun  in  that 
carriage,  and  let  another  carriage  be  prepared  for  the  12-inch  gun. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 

. 4 


Fortress  Monroe, 

__  ; March  11,  1862. 

Major-General  McClellan  : 

Nothing  of  importance  has  occurred  to-day.  The  enemy,  under  the 
command  ot  Magruder,  in  some  force  about  8 miles  from  Newport  News, 
expecting,  no  doubt,  that  the  Merrimac,  called  the  Virginia,  will  again 
make  her  appearance. 


The  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania  Regiment  arrived  this  morning.  The 
First  Michigan  is  expected  this  evening. 

I sent  this  day  a flag  of  truce  to  Craney  Island.  No  information  was 
attained  in  regard  to  the  injury  sustained  by  the  Merrimac.  She  reached 
Norfolk  on  Sunday  evening. 


JOHN  E.  WOOL, 

Major-General. 


Chap.  XIX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. 


■UNIOS. 


27 


March  12,  1862—10.45  a.  m. 

Brigadier- General  Meigs, 

Quartermaster- General : 

Captain  Wyman  informs  me  that  the  barges  sent  down  have  no 
arrangement  for  sinking  them,  and  have  so  little  stone  in  them  that  he 
thinks  thev  would  not  be  very  efficient  in  blocking  the  channel. 

JNO.  A.  DAHLGREN. 


Fairfax  Court-House, 

March  12,  1862. 


Capt.  G.  Y.  Fox,  Fort  Monroe  : 

Can  I rely  on  the  Monitor  to  keep  the  Merrimac  in  check,  so  that 
can  make  Fort  Monroe  a base  of  operations.  Please  answer  at  once. 

geo.  b.  McClellan, 

Major-General. 


I 


Fairfax  Court-House, 

March  12,  1862. 

G.  Y.  Fox,  Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Navy  : 

The  possibility  of  the  Merrimac  appearing  again  paralyzes  the  move- 
ments of  this  army  by  whatever  route  is  adopted.  How  long  a time 
would  it  require  to  complete  the  vessel  built  at  Mystic  River,  working 
night  and  day  ? How  long  would  Stevens  require  to  finish  his  vessel, 
so  far  as  to  enable  her  to  contend  with  the  Merrimac  ’ If  she  is  un- 
injured, of  course  no  precaution  would  avail,  and  the  Monitor  must  be 
the  sole  reliance.  But  if  injured  so  as  to  require  considerable  repairs, 
these  things  are  important  to  be  considered.  The  General  would  desire 
any  suggestion  of  your  own  on  this  subject. 

Bv  order  ofc  Major-General  McClellan  : 

J.  G.  BARNARD, 

Chief  Engineer. 


Navy  Department,  March  13,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan, 

Fairfax  Court-House : 

The  Monitor  is  more  than  a match  for  the  Merrimac,  but  she  might 
be  disabled  in  the  next  encounter.  I cannot  advise  so  great  dependence 
upon  her.  Burnside  and  Goldsborough  are  very  strong  for  the  Chowan 
River  route  to  Norfolk,  and  I brought  up  maps,  explanations,  &c.,  to 
show  you.  It  turns  everything,  and  is  only  27  miles  to  Norfolk  by  two 
good  roads.  Burnside  will  have  New  Berne  this  week.  The  Monitor 
may,  and  I think  will,  destroy  the  Merrimac  in  the  next  fight;  but  this 
is  hope,  not  certainty.  The  Merrimac  must  dock  for  repairs. 

G.  Y.  FOX. 


Captain  Daiilgren: 

On  Sunday  I sent  down  fifteen  boats. 


War  Department, 

March  13,  1862. 

On  Tuesday  eight  more,  mak- 


28 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XIX. 


ing  twenty-three  in  all.  Do  you  want  more"?  If  so,  notify  Colonel 
Rucker  by  telegraph  and  also  me. 

M.  0.  MEIGS, 
Quartermaster - General . 


Captain  Dahlgren  : 


War  Department, 

March  13,  1862 — 5.20  p.  m. 


I ordered  yesterday  nine  barges,  and  some  men  to  load  them,  sent 
down.  Does  Captain  Wyman  need  more  yet "?  I believe  in  precau- 
tion. I would  not  trust  this  city  and  the  fleet  you  see  coming  into 
the  river  to  the  strength  of  a single  screw-bolt  in  the  Monitors  new 
machinery.  If  one  breaks,  the  Merrimac  beats  her.  The  Merrimac, 
too,  is  reported  able  to  outrun,  neglect  her,  and  pass  her. 

M.  C.  MEIGS, 

Qu  arterm  aster- Genera  l. 


t March  13,  1862 — 6 p.  m. 

Brigadier- General  Meigs, 

Quartermaster-  General : 

I have  your  two  telegrams.  Captain  Wyman  writes  me  that  he  has 
placed  eight  barges  on  the  Kettle  Bottoms,  eight  off  Smith’s  Point, 
and  seven  off  Mattawoman.  He  thinks  there  should  be  four  or  six  more 
on  Mattawoman,  and  asks  for  them,  with  their  anchors. 

If  it  is  desired  to  put  the  matter  beyond  doubt,  then  it  will  be  better 
to  let  the  two  frigates  at  the  mouth  of  the  Potomac  enter  and  proceed 
to  the  Kettle  Bottoms  or  Smith’s  Point,  anchor,  and  prepare  to  sink 
them  as  soon  as  the  Merrimac  reaches  the  Potomac.  She  cannot  get 
by  them.  The  telegraph  at  Fort  Monroe  should  give  twelve  hours’ 
notice ; and  it  would  be  well  to  send  a fast  vessel,  like  the  Metamora, 
to  the  mouth  of  the  Potomac  to  observe  and  to  convey  intelligence. 

JNO.  A.  DAHLGREN. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac, 
Fairfax  Court-House , March  13,  1862.  (Received  9.40  p.  m.) 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War: 

I would  respectfully  suggest  that  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  be  re- 
quested to  order  to  Fort  Monroe  whatever  force  DuPont  can  now 
spare,  as  well  as  any  available  force  that  Goldsborough  can  send  up, 
as  soon  as  his  present  operations  are  completed. 

geo.  b.  McClellan, 

Major- General. 


Navy  Department,  March  13,  1862. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  suggest  that  this  Department  can  easily 
obstruct  the  channel  to  Norfolk  so  as  to  prevent  the  exit  of  the  Merri- 
mac, provided  the  Army  will  carry  the  Sewell’s  Point  Batteries,  in  which 
duty  the  Navy  will  give  great  assistance. 

Very  respectfully, 


GIDEON  WELLES. 


€hai\  XIX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


29 


Adjutant -General’s  Office, 

Washington , March  13,  1862.’ 

Hon.  Gideon  Welles,  Secretary  of  the  Navy: 

Sir  * I am  directed  by  the  Secretary  of  W ar  to  say  that  he  places  at 
your  disposal  any  transports  or  coal  vessels  at  Fort  Monroe  for  the  pur- 
pose of  closing  the  channel  of  the  Elizabeth  River  to  prevent  the  Mer- 
riinac  again  coming  out. 

I have  the  honor,  &c.,  L THOMAS, 

A djutant-  General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 
March  13,  1862—2  a.  m. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War: 

I have  just  sent  the  following  to  Major-General  McClellan  : 


Major-General  McClellan,  Fairfax  Court-House : 

I have  just  received  dispatch  from  the  President,  informing  me  that  you  are  no  longer 
General-in-Chief  of  the  Army*  Yon  command  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  My  orders 
are  hereafter  to  be  received  from  the  Secretary  of  War.  I have  urged  for  months 
Port  Monroe  as  a base  of  operations  against  the  army  of  the  rebels  at  Manassas  and 

the  Seuth.  JOHN  E.  WOOL, 

Major-  General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

March  13,  1862 — 2 a.  m. 

» 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War: 

1 received  last  evening  a dispatch  from  the  President  that  Major- 
General  McClellan  was  no  longer  General-in-Chief  of  the  Army,  and 
that  he  was  assigned  to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  The  Army  of  the 
Potomac  is  not  included  in  my  department — the  Department  of  South- 
eastern Virginia.  Since  the  above  telegram  1 have  received  the  fol- 
lowing telegram  from  Maj or- General  McClellan,  viz  : 

Can  I rely  on  the  Monitor  to  keep  the  Merrimac  in  check  so  that  I can  make  Fort 
Monroe  a base  of  operations  ? Please  answer  at  once. 

I have  answered  that  lie  could  rely  on  tbe  Monitor ; but  if  he  makes 
Fort  Monroe  the  base  of  operations — which  should  have  been  done 
months  ago — I will  rank  him,  and  must  command,  for  I am  now  in 
command  by  the  President  according  to  my  brevet  rank.  Please  to 
answer. 

JOHN  E.  WOOL, 

Major- General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

March  13,  1862 — 3.5  p.  m. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War : 

In  reply  to  Major-General  McClellan’s  desire  to  know  what  I wanted 
for  defense  of  my  position,  I replied,  for  immediate  defense,  as  follows, 
viz : Two  thousand  regular  infantry  and  8,000  volunteer  infantry ; five 
batteries  of  light  artillery  (regulars,  if  possible) ; 1,100  horses  for  the  five 
batteries,  to  complete  the  batteries  I have  here  and  to  mount  Dodge’s 


30 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XIX. 


cavalry.  I have  received  only  three  regiments:  First  Michigan,  Fifth 
Maryland,  and  Fifty-eighth  Pennsylvania.  I require  several  companies 
of  regular  artillery  in  Fort  Monroe.  I have  only  about  110  regulars  for 
Fort  Monroe  and  Newport  News.  Fort  Monroe  is  too  important  a posi- 
tion to  be  neglected.  I have  never  failed  to  so  represent,  and  ask  for 
troops  and  other  means  of  defense. 

JOHN  E.  WOOL, 

Major-General. 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  March  13,  1802. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War: 

Major-General  McClellan  desires  by  telegraph  to  know  if  the  channel 
between  Sewell’s  Point  and  Craney  Island  could  be  blockaded.  I reply 
that  it  would  be  impracticable  without  first  taking  the  battery  of  thirty- 
guns  on  Sewell’s  Point  and  then  sink  twenty  boats  loaded  with  stone 
exposed,  however,  to  a fire  of  thirty  guns  on  Craney  Island.  Flag- 
Officer  Goldsborough  agrees  with  me  in  this  opinion.  To  take  the  bat- 
teries it  would  require  the  Monitor.  Neither  of  us  think  it  would  do  to 
use  the  Monitor  for  that  service,  lest  she  should  become  crippled.  She 
is  our  only  hope  against  the  Merrimac. 

JOHN  . E.*  WOOL, 

Major-General. 


Major-General  McClellan: 


Washington,  D.  C., 

March  13,  1862—9.15  p.  m. 


I have  seen  Fox.  He  says  the  Merrimac  is  not  able  to  come  into  the 
Chesapeake,  and  is  slower  than  the  Monitor.  The  latter  fought  under 
very  disadvantageous  circumstances,  is  uninjured,  and  is  capable  of 
mastering  her  adversary.  He  seems  to  regard  the  operations  of  the 
Merrimac  as  confined  to  Hampton  Roads  above  the  fort.  The  Secretary 
has  telegraphed  concerning  Burnside  and  Wool.*  No  troops  ordered  to 
Fremont  from  this  army. 


iryin  mcdowell. 

Brigadier-  General. 


Washington  City,  D.  C., 

March  14,  1862—8.45  a.  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  E.  Wool, 

Commanding  at  Fortress  Monroe : 

The  following  dispatch  from  General  McClellan  has  been  received  by 
this  Department : 

Fairfax  Court-House,  March  13—11  20  p.  m. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War: 

I would  be  glad  to  have  instructions  given  to  General  Wool  that  the  troops  and 
stores  now  being  sent  down  to  Fort  Monroe  are  of  my  command  and  not  to  be  appro- 
priated by  him. 

geo.  b.  McClellan, 

Major-  Genera  l . 


* See  Series  I,  Vol.  V,  p.  750. 


Chap.  XIX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


31 


The  request  of  General  McClellan  is  approved,  and  you  are  instructed 
to  act  in  accordance  with  it,  and  to  acknowledge  tbe  receipt  of  this 
communication. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department, 
Washington,  March  14,  1862 — 10.10  a.  m. 

Major-General  Wool  : 

It  is  represented  that  a large  number  of  visitors  for  pleasure,  dealers 
in  trade,  and  other  persons  not  in  the  public  service  are  now  congre- 
gating at  Fort  Monroe,  whose  presence  may  embarrass  the  grave  naval 
and  military  operations  now  in  progress  or  in  contemplation  there. 
You  are  authorized,  in  your  discretion,  to  require  the  immediate  depart- 
ure of  all  persons  not  in  the  service  of  the  United  States  whose  presence 
may  incommode  operations,  and  to  exclude  all  unauthorized  persons 
from  stopping  or  remaining  there,  until  further  orders.  You  will,  from 
and  after  this  date,  exercise  the  most  rigid  discipline  and  police  within 
the  territory  under  your  command. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Wtar  Department — 12  m., 

(Received  March  14,  1862.) 

Captain  Dahlgren: 

Your  telegram  relative  to  barges  received.  I have  ordered  eight 
more  sent  down.  I have  seen  nothing  yet  to  satisfy  me  that  in  the 
next  engagement  the  Monitor  will  not  be  sunk. 

M.  C.  MEIGS, 
Quartermaster- General. 


. Fort  Monroe,  Va., 

(Received  March  14,  1862 — 11.20  a.  m.) 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War : 

I beg  you  will  send  me  more  troops.  The  Merrimac  is  preparing  and 
they  are  strengthening  her  weak  points.  It  is  thought  she  will  be  pre- 
pared to  come  out  in  a very  few  days.  If  she  should  overcome  the 
Monitor  we  would  lose  Newport  News — an  important  position — unless 
I have  troops  enough  to  meet  and  repel  the  rebels  before  they  can  reach 
Newport  News. 

JOHN  E.  WOOL, 

Major-General, ► 


War  Department, 

March  15,  1862. 

C.  Vanderbilt,  Esq.,  New  York: 

The  Secretary  of  War  directs  me  to  asx  you  for  what  sum  you  will 
contract  to  destroy  the  Merrimac  or  prevent  her  from  coming  out  from 
Norfolk — you  to  sink  or  destroy  her  if  she  gets  out? 

Answer  by  telegraph,  as  there  is  no  time  to  be  lost. 

JOI*N  TUCKER, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA.  [Chap  XIX. 

New  York  City,  March  15,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton  : 

Mr.  Vanderbilt  desires  me  to  say  he  can  make  no  satisfactory  reply 
to  the  inquiry  made  of  him,  but  will  be  in  Washington  on  Monday  next 
to  confer  with  the  Department. 

W.  B.  DINSMORE. 


Washington,  March  15,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan,  Seminary : 

Iii  reply  to  your  dispatch  to  this  Department  of  yesterday  fl3thl, 
which  was  transmitted  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  he  replies  as 
follows : 7 * 


Navy  Department,  March  14,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War : 

^i^+:ol0TvlnClT?Sillg,tlie  ^spatch  of  Major-General  McClellan,  suggesting  that  the 
Secretary  of  the  Navy  be  requested  “to  order  to  Fort  Monroe  whatever  force  DuPont 
can  now  spare,  as  well  as  any  available  force  that  Goldsborough  can  send  up  as  soon 
as  his  present  operations  are  completed,”  has  been  received.  If  a movement  is  to  be 
made  upon  Norfolk-always  a favorite  measure  of  this  Department-instant  measures 
wiU  be  taken  to  advise  and  strengthen  Flag-Officer  Goldsborough,  but  unless  such  be 
tne  caae,  I should  be  extremely  reluctant  to  take  any  measure  that  would  even  tempo- 

If  l nffi611  th£  evCTJ  21th?  Wockade>  especially  at  the  points  under  the  command 
of  Flag-Officer  DuPont.  The  importance  of  capturing  Norfolk  is,  I know,  deemed 
almost  indispensable  by  Flag-Officer  Goldsborough,  who  will  be  happy  to  co-operate 
^r^m.ovEm®nt  m that  direction,  and  will,  I need  not  assure  you,  have  the  active  and 
his  disposal^8  °f  ^ Department  to  aid  kim  with  all  the  force  that  can  be  placed  at 
I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GIDEON  WELLES. 


The  foregoing  letter  was  received  late  last  night. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


CONFEDERATE  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. 


Yorktown,  January  10,  1862. 

His  Excellency  the  President  of  the  Confederate  States  : 

Dear  Sir  : I understand  that  my  lines  of  defense  are  under  discus- 
sion at  Richmond.  1 know  I can  expect  from  you  the  justice  to  post- 
pone any  decision  until  I can  report  at  length/ which  will  be  in  a few 
days.  In  the  mean  time  I will  venture  the  remark  that  I have  taken 
not  only  the  best  but  the  only  way  of  successfully  defending  this  Penin- 
sula with  the  means  at  my  disposal,  and  that  its  defense  will  be  success- 
ral.  I did  not  call  out  the  militia,  though  at  one  time  I had  determined 
to  do  so,  but  merely  requested  to  be  furnished  with  the  strength  of  cer- 
tain regiments,  to  prepare  arms  for  them,  which  arms  I could  procure 
from  the  colonels  of  regiments  belonging,  as  they  informed  me,  to  their 
otates.  I only  desired  to  prepare  for  the  emergency  of  a landing  in 
this  Peninsula  or  on  the  Rappahannock,  which  I now  think  more  prob- 
able, or  for  an  attadk  on  J ames  River.  These  arrangements  required 
time.  I therefore  anticipated  the  emergency.  Colonel  Randolph  in- 


Chap.  XIX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


33 


formed  me  that  I was  authorized  by  you  to  do  this ; that  is,  to  call  out 


all  the  militia  I could  arm. 
Very  respectfully, 


J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major- General , Commanding, 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  13.  f Richmond , January  16,  1862. 

******* 

Y.  Authority  is  granted  Major-General  Magruder  to  call  upon  the 
commanding  officers  of  all  regiments,  battalions,  and  companies,  at- 
tached to  the  Army  of  the  Peninsula,  for  the  names  of  all  ship  carpen- 
ters and  joiners  in  their  respective  commands,  and  to  grant  furloughs 
to  such  mechanics,  for  the  purpose  of  working  on  gunboats  in  such 
numbers  and  at  such  times  as  the  public  safety  may  permit.  All  men 
so  furloughed  will  be  directed  to  report  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy. 
******* 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General, 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Peninsula, 

Yorhtown , January  23,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant- General  C.  S.  Army , Richmond: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  last  night  of  a 
letter  from  the  Secretary  of  War,  expressing  his  disapprobation  of  my 
having  impressed  the  slaves  of  Chesterfield  County,  and  directing  me 
to  countermand  it. 

In  answer  I have  to  state  that  before  the  reception  of  this  letter  my 
agent,  Mr.  Junius  Lamb,  through  whom  I communicated  my  wishes  to 
the  people  of  Chesterfield,  had  informed  me  that  nine-tenths  of  that 
community  were  willing  to  send  their  slaves  to  work  on  the  public  for- 
tifications in  this  Peninsula,  but  that  some  four  or  five  citizens  objected* 
and  employed  counsel  to  proceed  to  Richmond  to  lay  the  case  before 
the  Secretary  of  War  and  President;  that  the  counsel  had  returned* 
and  stated  that  the  President  would  issue  a proclamation  condemning 
this  course  and  forbidding  it  for  the  future.  I immediately  wrote  to 
you  that  this  last  call  on  Chesterfield  and  the  neighboring  counties  was 
made  to  meet  the  requisitions  of  the  engineers  under  my  command 
until  the  negroes  who  were  being  hired  by  authority  of  the  Govern- 
ment, which  I found  to  be  a slow  operation,  should  arrive. 

The  Government  had  granted  me  authority  to  hire  negroes,  but  I 
found  it  occupied  more  time  and  was  attended  with  more  difficulty 
than  had  been  represented  to  me.  The  unsafe  condition  of  the  de- 
fenses on  James  River  had  been  represented  to  the  Department,  in  a 
report  of  the  Chief  of  Artillery,  Col.  G.  W.  Randolph,  and  the  engineer 
here  in  charge,  Mr.  St.  John,  which  report  was  strongly  indorsed  by 
myself. 

The  work  at  Gloucester  Point,  ordered  by  the  Engineer  Department 
at  Richmond,  was  not  half  finished.  The  works  at  Yorktown,  though 
3 R R — VOL  IX 


34 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XIX. 


trebled  in  strength  in  the  last  two  months,  were  then  and  still  are  un- 
finished, both  as  regards  the  protection  of  the  men  against  the  enemy’s 
shell,  guns,  and  mortars  by  sea,  as  well  as  his  attacks  by  land.  As  the 
War  Department  had  sanctioned,  during  the  administration  of  Mr. 
Walker,  my  calling  on  the  people  for  slave  labor  to  work  on  the  forti- 
fications in  my  charge,  and  as  my  instructions  were  to  push  these  for- 
tifications to  completion,  I considered  it  proper  in  itself  and  neces- 
sary to  the  faithful  obedience  of  my  orders  to  continue  using,  as  before, 
this  labor  until  the  exercise  of  the  authority  granted  me  by  the  Gov- 
ernment to  hire  slaves  should  be  successful"  in  procuring  the  requisite 
labor.  It  was  intended  to  be  my  last  call. 

The  counties  of  the  Peninsula  and  neighborhood  having  furnished 
negroes  frequently,  I thought  it  prudent  to  call  upon  the  counties  of 
Chesterfield  and  Dinwiddie  for  this  last  supply,  and  I believe  I have 
exercised  the  power  (recognized  by  the  War  Department)  with  discre- 
tion. Nevertheless,  I immediately  directed  Mr.  Lamb  not  to  take  any 
further  steps  with  reference  to  the  county  of  Chesterfield,  and  as  he 
informed  me  that  he  had  an  appointment  to  meet  the  negroes  from 
Dinwiddie  at  Petersburg,  I instructed  him  to  keep  it,  but  not  to  bring 
any  whose  masters  objected  in  the  least  to  their  coming.  This  course, 
pursued  before  the  reception  of  your  letter,  I presume  meets  with  the 
approbation  of  the  War  Department  and  the  President.  I received  a 
letter  last  night  from  Captain  Eives,  temporarily  in  charge  of  the  En- 
gineer Department  at  Eichmond,  stating  in  effect  that  he  was  not  pre- 
pared to  undertake  the  hiring  of  negroes  for  the  works  here  or  their 
control. 

All  the  negroes  are  discharged  from  Yorktown  with  the  exception  of 
100,  about  130  of  these  being  procured  from  the  county  of  Green- 
ville by  calling  upon  the  inhabitants  to  furnish  the  labor  ,•  it  is  re- 
ported to  me  that  they  furnished  these  men  with  pleasure.  The  num- 
ber required  by  the  works  here  is  about  400.  At'  Mulberry  Island,  on 
James  Eiver,  there  are  about  30;  *200  are  required  there,  and  at  least 
200  at  Gloucester  Point,  where  there  are,  I think,  not  more  than  50, 
though  I have  not  inquired  within  the  last  week. 

Under  these  circumstances  I beg  that  I may  be  furnished  without 
delay  with  precise  instructions  which  the  War  Department,  I hope,  is 
well  assured  will  be  executed  with  promptness  to  the  letter  and  spirit. 

I beg  that  this  communication  may  be  laid  before  the  President 
through  the  Secretary  of  War.  Inclosed  are  copies  of  two  letters  from 
General  Lee.  That  containing  his  original  instructions  to  ’frhicli  allu- 
sion is  made  in  one  of  the  inclosed  is  mislaid,  but  doubtless  will  soon 
be  found  among  the  papers  in  the  office. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  repectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGEUDEE, 

Major-General , Commanding . 

P.  S. — You  will  also  receive  a copy  of  a communication  from  the  War 
Department  fully  approving  my  course  in  impressing  slaves. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Headquarters  of  the  Virginia  Forces, 

Richmond , Fa.,  May  25,  1861. 

Col.  J.  B.  Magruder, 

Commanding , &c.,  Yorlctown  : 

Colonel  : Two  12-pounder  brass  pieces  have  been  directed  to  be  j 
sent  you  at  Yorktown,  which  maybe  applied  to  the  land  defenses  either 


Chap.  XIX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  35 

below  Yorktown  or  Williamsburg,  as  you  may  deem  best.  Two  8-inch 
columbiads  are  also  sent  to  you  at  Yorktown,  and  if  not  wanted  for 
the  water  defense  they  had  better  be  applied  to  the  land,  either  there 
or  at  Williamsburg. 

I again  urge  upon  you  the  necessity  of  the  line  of  defenses  between 
the  heads  of  Queen  and  College  Creeks,  about  which  Colonel  Ewell  has 
already  received  instructions.  Colonel  Ewell  had  better  be  directed 
to  apply  all  the  force  he  can  procure  to  the  erection  of  those  lines. 
Captain  Rives  and  Meade,  of  the  Engineer  Corps,  are  on  duty  in  the 
Peninsula,  and  subject  to  your  orders.  Should  the  lines  below  Will- 
iamsburg not  have  been  surveyed  and  laid  out,  they  had  better  be  put 
at  it  directly. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  &c., 

R.  E.  LEE, 

Major- General , Commanding. 

[In closure  No.  2.] 

Headquarters  of  the  Virginia  Forces, 

Richmond , June  10,  1861. 

Col.  J.  B.  Magruder, 

Commanding , the.,  Yorktown , Ya. : 

Colonel  : In  answer  to  your  letter  of  the  9th  instant,  just  received, 
I take  pleasure  in  expressing  my  gratification  at  the  movements  and 
dispositions  that  you  have  made,  and  hope  that  you  may  be  able  to  re- 
strict the  advances  of  the  enemy  and  securely  maintain  your  own  posi- 
tion. 

On  the  day  after  my  return  to  Richmond  forty-two  wagons  were 
ordered  to  be  sent  you.  Twelve  were  sent  day  before  yesterday,  twelve 
on  yesterday,  twelve  more  will  be  sent  to-morrow,  and  the  others  as 
soon  as  possible. 

As  you  are  aware  that  it  is  probable  when  an  effort  is  made  to  attack 
you  it  will  be  both  by  land  and  water,  I take  this  occasion  of  urging 
upon  you  the  importance  of  pressing  the  construction  of  the  batteries 
for  water  and  land  defenses. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General , Commanding . 


[Inclosure  No.  3.] 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , September  24,  1861. 

Col.  J.  B.  Magruder,  Williamsburg , Ya. : 

Sir  : In  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  20th  instant,  referred  by  the  Ad- 
jutant-General to  this  Department,  I am  directed  by  the  Secretary  of 
War  to  say  that  your  course  in  impressing  labor  for  work  upon  fortifi- 
cations in  cases  of  absolute  necessity  and.  for  a fair  price  is  fully  ap- 
proved. 

Respectfully, 

A.  T.  BLEDSOE, 

Chief  Bureau  of  War, 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


36 


[CHAi*.  XIX. 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 
Richmond , Fa.,  January  27,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder,  TorJctown , Fa.  : 

Sir  : In  response  to  your  letter  of  the  23d  instant,  on  the  subject  of 
the  impressment  of  slaves  in  the  counties  of  Chesterfield  and  Dinwiddie, 
I beg  to  say  that  you  misapprehend  the  point  on  which  the  interference 
of  this  Department  was  invoked.  There  is  no  desire  or  intention  of 
interfering  with  your  discretion  in  impressing  whatever  may  be  nec- 
essary for  the  public  defense  within  your  department  whenever  your 
wants  cannot  be  supplied  by  contract,  although,  of  course,  this  power  of 
impressment  should  be  exercised  as  sparingly  as  possible.  The  point 
of  difficulty  was  that  you  went  out  of  your  district  into  the  district  of 
another  general.  You  will  see  at  a glance  that  if  a general  goes  out 
of  his  district  to  exercise  such  a power  he  must  necessarily  come  in 
conflict  with  the  orders  of  the  neighboring  commander,  and  that  the  in- 
habitants might  have  two  or  more  sets  of  officers  all  at  the  same  time 
exercising  this  very  harsh  and  necessarily  odious  power.  I trust,  there- 
fore, that  in  future  you  will  confine  your  action,  when  outside  of  your 
district,  to  contracts,  and  confine  the  exercise  of  the  power  of  impress- 
ment to  the  geographical  limits  of  your  own  command. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMINT, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Abstract  from  return  of  the  Department  of  the  Peninsula , Maj.  Gen.  John  B.  Magruder  com- 
manding, for  January,  1862. 


Commands. 


Brig.  Gen.  G.  J.  Rains’ : 

Yorktown  and  vicinity  and  Ship  Point 

Brig.  Gen.  L.  McLaws’ : 

x oung’s,  Harrod’s,  and  Lee’s  Mills,  Mulberry  Point, 
Land’s  End,  &c. 

Col.  B.  S.  Ewell’s : 

Williamsburg  and  vicinity > 

Colonel  Crump’s : 

Gloucester  Point 

Col.  Hill  Carter’s : 

Jamestown 

Col.  Robt.  Johnston’s : 

Lebanon  Church  and  vicinity 

Colonel  Bohannan’s : 

Matthews  County  (militia)  


Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent. 

Pieces  of 
artillery. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Heavy. 

S 

£ 

253 

3,  728 

5,555 

6,  965 

48 

29 

226 

4,  816 

6, 137 

7, 478 

41 

588 

792 

928 

71 

966 

1,  379 

1,  846 

18 

6 

14 

265 

323 

400 

20 



15 

262 

314 

463 

31 

350 

391 

544 

4 

651 

10, 975 

14,  891 

18,  624 

80 

39 

. ..  ^ 

Total 


Chap.  XIX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  37 


Organization  of  the  troops  in  the  Department  of  the  Peninsula , commanded 
by  Maj.  Gen.  J.  Bankhead  Magnifier,  G.  S.  Army , January  31,  1862. 


Yorlctown,  vicinity,  and  Ship  Point. 
FIRST  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  G.  J.  Rains,  commanding. 

13tli  Alabama. 

2d  Florida. 

6tli  Georgia. 

23d  Georgia. 

14th  Louisiana. 

Louisiana  Zouave  Battalion. 

2d  Mississippi. 

15th  North  Carolina. 

32d  Virginia  (2  companies). 

53d  Virginia  (8  companies). 

115th  Virginia  Militia. 

Maurin’s  Louisiana  Battery. 

Nelson’s  battery. 

1st  Virginia  (3  companies)  Artillery. 
Bouton’s  independent  com-' 
pany. 

De  Gournay’s  independent 
company. 

Duke’s  independent  com-  gerving  as 

Ellett’s  independent  com-  ' tiUerv  ^ 
pany. 

Peyton’s  independent  com- 
pany. 

Preston’s  independent  com- 
pany. 

Mulberry  Point  Battery,  Land End,  tfc. 
SECOND  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  La  Fayette  McLaws,  com- 
manding. 

8th  Alabama. 

Cobb’s  Legion. 

10th  Georgia. 

16th  Georgia. 

Greenville  Guards. 

2d  Louisiana. 

5th  Louisiana. 

10th  Louisiana. 

14th  Virginia. 

15th  Virginia. 

32d  Virginia  (2  companies). 

53d  Virginia  (1  company). 

3d  Virginia  (4  companies)  Cavalry. 

1st  Virginia  (5  companies)  Artillery. 


Gloucester  Point. 

Col.  C.  A.  CrumR,  commanding. 

26th  Virginia. 

9th  Virginia  Militia. 

21st  Virginia  Militia. 

87th  Virginia  Militia. 

3d  Virginia  (1  company)  Cavalry. 

1st  Virginia  (1  company)  Artillery. 
Bagby’s  company  Virginia' 
volunteers. 

Jordan’s  company  Virginia 
volunteers. 

Montague’s  company  Vir- 
ginia volunteers. 

Otey’s  company  Virginia 
volunteers. 

Williamsburg  and  Spratley’s. 

Col.  B.  S.  Ewell,  commanding. 

1st  Louisiana  Battalion. 

32d  Virginia  (2  companies). 

53d  Virginia  (1  company). 

Matthews  County. 

Col.  J.  G.  Bohannan,  commanding. 
61st  Virginia  Militia. 

Captain  Todd’s  company  Virginia  Cav- 
alry. 

Lebanon  Church  and  cavalry  camps  near 
Yorlctown. 

Col.  R.  Johnston,  commanding. 

3d  Virginia  (6  companies)  Cavalry. 

Jamestown  Island. 

Col.  Hill  Carter,  commanding. 

52d  Virginia  Militia. 

1st  Virginia  (1  company)  Artillery. 
Jordan’s  independent  company  Virginia 
Artillery. 

Rambant’s  independent  company  Vir- 
ginia Artillery. 


Serving  as 
> heavy  artil- 
lery. 


38 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[CHAr.  XIX. 


Abstract  from  return  of  the  Department  of  Norfolk,  Maj.  6m.  Benjamin  Huger,  command. 

ing,  for  January,  1862. 


Stations. 


Smithfield ; 

Norfolk 

Portsmouth 

Craney  Island 

Suffolk 

Fort  Nelson 

Fort  Norfolk 

Pinner’s  Point... 
Tanner’s  Point .. 
Lambert’s  Point. 
Navy -yard 


Troops. 


First  (Colston’s)  Brigade 

Second  (Mahone’s)  Brigade. . 
Third  (Blanchard’s)  Brigade. 


•Garrisons. 


Saunders’  artillery  battalion. 
Young  Guard 


Total 


* 24  pieces  field  and  192  pieces  heavy  artillery, 


Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Officers. 

Men. 

147 

2,752 

3, 329 

3,  637 

231 

3, 715 

4, 756 

5,  224 

227 

3,  810 

4,776 

5,177 

34 

525 

687 

747 

40 

632 

850 

903 

8 

140 

154 

184 

4 

82 

94 

94 

4 

108 

123 

152 

3 

52 

61 

68 

7 

93 

119 

135 

15 

240 

278 

300 

3 

31 

45 

47 

4 

76 

80 

93 

727 

12, 256 

15, 352 

16,  761 

*216 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Peninsula, 

YorJctown , 7h.,  February  1,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  been  so  constantly  occupied  since  my  arrival  on  this 
Peninsula  that  I have  not  had  time  to  make  to  the  War  Department 
the  reports  necessary,  perhaps,  to  a clear  understanding  of  my  opera- 
tions. When  I took  command  there  were  «no  works  on  the  James 
Piver  below  Jamestown,  no  fortifications  at  Williamsburg,  Yorktown, 
or  Gloucester  Point,  with  the  exception  of  one  gun  at  Yorktown  and 
perhaps  two  at  Gloucester  Point.  I had  to  defend  a Peninsula  90  miles 
m length  and  some  10  miles  in  width,  inclosed  between  two  navigable 
rivers,  terminated  by  fortresses  impregnable  as  long  as  the  enemy  com- 
manded the  waters.  My  force  was  less  than  3,000  men,  the  enemy  never 
•less  than  12,000  and  sometimes  as  high  as  25,000,  and  always  within 
a day  s march  of  us.  I had  neither  adjutant,  quartermaster,  commis- 
sary, nor  any  staff  officer  whatever,  and  an  army  unfamiliar  with  the 
simplest  military  duties. 

I devoted  a day  or  two  to  necessary  arrangements  for  subsisting  the 
army,  and,  calling  on  the  sheriff  of  the  county  as  a guide,  made  a tour 
on  horseback  of  the  lower  part  of  the  Peninsula,  in  order  to  get  some 
knowledge  of  the  country.  Seeing  at  a glance  that  three  broad  rivers 
could  not  be  defended  without  fortifications,  and  that  these  never  could 
be  built  if  the  enemy  knew  our  weakness  and  want  of  preparation,  I 
determined  to  display  a portion  of  my  small  force  in  his  immediate 
presence,  and  upon  this  forthwith  selected  Bethel  as  a place  at  which 
a small  force  could  best  give  him  battle  should  he  advance. 

Returning  to  Yorktown,  I called  upon  Mr.  R.  D.  Lee,  who  had  mills 
on  that  stream,  to  show  me  the  line  of  Warwick  River,  which  rises  near 
Yorktown,  flows  across  the  county,  and  enters  James  River  a little  below 
Mulberry  Point,  where  there  is  now  a fort.  Having  made  this  explora- 
tion? I determined  to  adopt  this  line  to  Mulberry  Point  as  the  true  line 
of  defense  whenever  its  right  flank,  on  James  River,  could  be  protected 
by  water  batteries. 


Chap.  XIX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  39 

Tlie  road  to  Richmond  was  open  by  the  York  or  James  Rivers,  land- 
ing in  the  latter  case  below  Jamestown.  It  was  therefore  necessary  to 
erect  defensive  works  in  front  of  Williamsburg  and  at  Yorktown  to 
oppose  an  immediate  advance.  J amestown  Island,  having  been  fortified 
when  I took  command,  would  constitute  the  right  flank;  the  works  at 
Williamsburg  the  center,  and  York  River  and  Yorktown  the  left  flank; 
but  Yorktown  being  12  miles  farther  down  the  river  than  Williamsburg 
or  Jamestown,  the  enemy  could  land  at  any  time  on  James  River  below 
Williamsburg,  march  across  to  York  River  above  Yorktown,  and  cut  it 
off  entirely  from  its  supplies,  thus  reducing  it  in  a very  short  time  eveu 
if  it  were  fortified.  Hence  it  became  necessary  to  erect  works  as  soon 
as  possible  at  some  point  on  James  River  below  or  opposite  Yorktown, 
so  that  a line  across  the  Peninsula  perpendicular  to  its  axis  should 
have  both  its  flanks  resting  upon  water  defenses  impassable  by  ships. 
These  two  are  the  lowest  points  which  can  be  defended  against  the 
passage  of  fleets.  To  erect  these  several  works,  however,  and  fortify 
the  lines  here  indicated  would  obviously  be  a work  of  immense  labor, 
requiring,  when  prosecuted  with  the  most  determined  energy,  seven  or 
eight  months  to  complete  them. 

The  chances  were  extremely  remote  for  success  in  such  an  under- 
taking, and  there  was  but  one  way  that  furnished  the  remotest  hope 
that  the  Peninsula  could  be  defended  at  all  with  the  means  then  at  the 
disposal  of  our  Republic,  and  that  was  by  active  and  threatening  oper- 
ations in  front,  to  make  the  enemy  fear  for  himself,  while  the  positions 
were  being  most  vigorously  fortified  in  rear.  This  plan  was  adopted 
by  me,  and  the  enemy  on  his  first  advance,  with  a force  of  five  to  one 
against  us,  having  been  repulsed  and  severely  punished,  the  works 
were  pushed  forward  with  great  vigor. 

The  operations  below  (in  front  of)  the  enemy  were,  however,  always 
carried  on  with  the  liability  of  having  a large  force  of  the  enemy 
thrown  in  the  rear  of  our  forces  by  the  Back  or  Poquosin  Rivers,  the 
former  having  10,  the  latter  18,  feet  of  water.  I could  not,  therefore, 
hold  my  position  in  front  without  building  such  works  on  the  most 
navigable  of  these  rivers  as  would  defend  its  entrance  against  the  en- 
emy’s vessels.  Hence  the  work  at  Ship  Point  was  built  (by  the  labor 
of  the  troops  and  by  my  order),  and  completely  commands  the  entrance 
to  that  river.  I also  felt  the  great  disadvantage,  when  skirmishing  with 
the  enemy  so  near  his  fortress,  that  his  re-enforcements  were  at  hand, 
while  mine  were  at  so  great  a distance.  I therefore  availed  myself  of 
the  near  approach  of  the  Poquosin  River  and  Deep  Creek,  on  James 
River,  for  the  establishment  of  a convenient  base  of  operations  from 
which  I could  draw  re-enforcements  and  supplies  when  needed  below, 
and  which  I could  defend  with  success  if  attacked  by  superior  numbers 
by  land. 

For  these  reasons,  and  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  occupying  this 
strong  position  himself,  I fortified  the  lines  of  Harrod’s  and  Young’s 
Mills,  the  flanks  resting,  as  I before  said,  upon  Poquosin  River  and 
Deep  Creek,  entering  the  York  and  James  Rivers  respectively.  I 
also  fortified  the  mouth  of  Deep  Creek  and  Warwick  River,  sinking 
thirty  canal-boats  across  the  channel.  This  line  could  still  be  turned 
by  the  enemy  landing  between  Yorktown  and  Poquosin  River,  but  I 
hoped  to  be  able  to  defend  a landing  between  these  points  by  erecting 
fortifications  there  before  the  enemy  made  the  attempt. 

In  the  mean  time  winter  approached  and  it  was  necessary  to  decide 
where  the  troops  should  build  winter  quarters.  I directed  them  to  build 
on  the  front  line.  While  this  was  being  done  intelligence  arrived  of 


40 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XIX 

Burnside’s  preparations  for  an  attack.  Indications  from  tlie  most 
authentic  sources  pointed  to  this  region  as  that  on  which  the  attack 
would  be  made,  and  the  question  arose,  Should  the  army  receive  the 
attack  on  the  first  or  second  lines  The  engineers  were  in  favor  of 
the  second  line  as  the  safest,  the  front  line  being  liable  to  be  turned  by 
the  landing  of  the  enemy  on  York  Eiver,  on  our  left  flank.  Fully 
appreciating  the  reasons  for  this  advice,  and  concurring  in  the  opinion 
as  to  the  many  physical  advantages  offered  by  the  second  line,  I never- 
theless was  satisfied  that  it  would  injure  the  morale  of  the  army  to  fall 
back  from  its  position  at  Young’s  and  Harrod’s  Mills,  where  winter 
quarters  had  been  built  for  some  of  the  regiments.  I therefore  directed 
that  the  heavy  baggage  and  sick  be  sent  to  the  rear,  and  that  the  troops 
on  the  front  line  who  had  not  built  their  winter  quarters  should  build 
them,  and  all  on  that  line  should  fight  where  they  were,  while  the  rest 
of  the  troops  who  had  not  built  winter  quarters  should  build  them  on 
the  flanks  of  the  second  line,  and  that  good  roads,  of  easy  communica- 
tion, should  be  made  from  the  nrst  to  the  second  line.  By  this  means 
if  the  enemy  attacked  in  front  alone,  the  troops  on  the  first  line  could 
be  supported  by  those  from  the  flanks  of  the  second  line,  if  attacked 
in  front  and  both  flanks. 

Our  troops  in  front  had  as  strong  a central  position  on  that  line  as 
they  would  have  had  on  the  second,  and  a greater  certainty  of  victory,  as 
they  would  fight  on  better  ground  for  us,  and  the  flanks  of  the  second 
line,  resting  on  the  river,  would  be  stronger  to  resist  a naval  attack. 
This  disposition  was  also  made  to  defend  the  left  exposed  flank  be- 
tween Yorktown  and  the  Poquosin  Eiver,  so  that  if  the  enemy  did  land 
there  he  would  be  held  in  check  sufficiently  long  to  give  time  to  our 
troops  on  the  first  line  to  fall  back  with  deliberation  and  safety  to  the 
second  line.  Thus  all  would  be  accomplished  in  the  end  that  the  advo- 
cates of  this  measure  desired  and  without  unnecessary  loss  of  morale . 

This  decision  carried  with  it  the  additional  recommendation,  that  if 
the  attack  were  delayed  for  any  considerable  time  the  advance  of  the 
enemy,  should  he  land  on  the  left  flank,  below  Yorktown,  might  not 
only  be  checked,  but  such  works  erected  as  would  prevent  a landing 
altogether,  and  thus  secure  both  lines,  and  make  the  investment  of 
Yorktown  by  land  highly  improbable. 

I have  the  satisfaction  to  state  that  this  has  been  the  result,  and  that 
this  position,  the  left  flank,  to  defend  which  made  it  necessary  for  me 
to  ask  for  re-enforcemeuts  of  several  thousand  men  five  weeks  ago,  is 
now  considered  one  of  the  strongest  of  my  lines,  and  can,  I think,  be 
successfully  defended  by  the  troops  which  are  now  there,  as  I reported 
to  you,  before  the  sailing  of  Burnside’s  fleet,  would  be  the  case  in  a 
few  days. 

You  will  perceive  by  this  statement  that  there  are  no  troops  in  winter 
quarters  at  Bethel,  which  is  held  only  by  a strong  picket.  It  has  never 
been  occupied  at  any  time  but  for  a few  days  at  a time,  being  a con- 
venient stopping  place  for  the  troops  in  their  operations  below  it, 

I beg  leave  to  report  what  remains  to  be  done  : 

First.  The  lower  defenses  on  James  Eiver  are  exceedingly  weak, 
and  ought  to  be  strengthened  without  delay  by  building  another  bat- 
tery at  Mulberry  Point  and  placing  guns  in  the  embrasures  of  the 
battery  already  prepared  at  Harden’s  Bluff,  opposite.  Harden’s  Bluff 
and  Mulberry  Point  should  then  be  made  impregnable  on  the  land  side, 
which  can  easily  be  done. 

Second.  The  number  of  guns  at  Yorktown  has  not  yet  reached  the 
minimum  stated  by  the  engineers  to  be  necessary  for  the  successful 


Chap.  XIX.  1 CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE  41 

defense  of  tlie  place,  and  while  I differ  with  them,  and  think  it  is 
strong  enough  to  resist  what  the  United  States  can  bring  against  them 
at  present,  as  I lately  stated  in  an  order  to  the  troops,  yet  such  for- 
midable preparations  are  being  made  a*t  the  North — of  steel-clad  ships 
and  floating  mortar  batteries — that  no  time  should  be  lost  in  preparing 
adequate  means  to  resist  such  an  attack.  For  this  purpose  the  64- 
pounder  8-inch  guns,  firing  solid  shot,  of  the  pattern  of  one  on  board 
the  Patrick  Henry,  placed  in  casemates  at  the  narrowest  part  of  the 
river,  would  be  most  effective  in  breaking  to  pieces  the  steel-clad  ships. 
Six  of  them  would  answer  the  purpose.  In  addition  to  these,  there 
should  be  at  least  six  of  the  heaviest  mortars  cast  for  this  place  and 
six  for  Harden’s  Bluff,  by  means  of  which  the  enemy’s  bomb  ships  may 
be  reached. 

Galleries  cut  into  the  side  of  the  ravines  leading  down  to  the  water 
are  necessary  for  the  protection  of  the  stores  and  of  the  troops  when 
asleep  or  not  on  duty  during  a bombardment  or  siege.  These  gal- 
leries and  the  casemated  batteries  for  six  guns  I have  directed  to  be 
made,  and  they  are  now  being  built ; and  if  the  guns  asked  for,  like 
that  on  the  Patrick  Henry,  cannot  be  procured,  the  ordinary  8-inch 
columbiad  would  be  the  next  best,  or  heavy  rifled  guns. 

The  works  on  the  land  side  at  Yorktown  are  still  incomplete,  two 
redoubts  being  required  to  command  dangerous  ravines,  and  a portion 
of  the  river  lines  are  to  be  completed.  The  works  at  Gloucester  Point, 
ordered  by  the  engineers  from  Richmond,  are  but  half  finished,  and 
until  finished  that  post  will  remain  in  great  danger.  If  the  Govern- 
ment cannot  furnish  guns  at  Yorktown  and  the  lower  forts  on  James 
River,  I request  that  I may  be  allowed  to  take  without  delay  the  heavy 
guns  from  Jamestown  Island  and  mount  them  at  Harden’s  Bluff  and 
Mulberry  Point,  and  that  the  command  of  Harden’s  Bluff  be  trans- 
ferred to  me,  as  it  is  exclusively  a defense  of  James  River  and  not  of 
Norfolk.  The  narrow  channel  of  the  river  at  Jamestown  Island  does 
not  require  guns  of  such  heavy  caliber  as  the  channel  below,  at  Har- 
den’s Bluff. 

In  connection  with  this  subject  permit  me  to  say,  that  should  the  ex- 
pedition of  Burnside  fail  to  accomplish  the  evident  purpose  of  General 
McClellan,  to  weaken  our  army  in  his  front  by  forcing  re- enforcements 
from  it  to  other  points,  a landing  in  force  on  the  Rappahannock  might 
be  resorted  to  by  him  for  the  same  purpose  and  might  embarrass  us 
greatly.  As  the  York  River  is  broad  and  difficult  to  cross  between 
here  and  West  Point  inclusive,  I do  not  think  it  necessary  to  make 
any  further  defenses  at  the  latter  place,  but  think  that  the  formation  of 
an  intrenched  camp  between  the  Mattapony  and  Pamunkey  Rivers, 
commanding  the  main  roads  leading  from  Urbana  and  Tappahannock 
to  Richmond  for  the  reception  of  troops,  should  Richmond  be  threatened 
in  that  way,  would  be  highly  important.  A few  thousand  troops  from 
this  and  a few  thousand  from  General  Holmes’  command  could  be 
thrown  on  the  enemy’s  flanks  and  embarrass  greatly  his  operations.  I 
might  cross  over  to  Gloucester,  say  with  5,000  men,  and  march  against 
the  left  flank  of  his  25,000  or  30,000  men.  He  would  probably  turn 
aside  to  crush  me,  but  I should  retreat,  skirmishing  to  Gloucester  Point, 
and  if  that  work  were  finished,  he  would  be  obliged  to  retrace  his  steps 
or  lay  siege  to  it.  If  lie  disregarded  my  approach  and  marched  forward 
to  Richmond,  General  Holmes  and  myself  would  unite  in  his  rear  and 
cut  him  off  from  his  base  while  our  troops  were  being  assembled  in  the 
intrenched  camp  in  his  front.  He  would  thus  be  defeated. 

Should  Burnside’s  expedition  march  from  Edenton  to  Suffolk,  after 


42  OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XIX 

taking  Roanoke  Island,  to  meet  Casey’s  division  from  Fort  Monroe,  I 
might  cross  the  James  River  with  a small  portion  of  my  force  and 
assist  in  preventing  a junction  of  their  troops ; but  the  propriety  of 
making  either  of  these  movements  depends  entirely  upon  the  comple- 
tion of  the  works  on  this  Peninsula,  for  if  I leave  them  in  their  present 
state,  defended  with  few  troops,  the  enemy  will  advance  from  Fort 
Monroe  and  carry  them ; hence  my  desire  to  procure  negro  labor  to 
complete  them.  I have  impressed  the  negroes  of  the  counties  compos- 
ing my  department  so  often,  that  it  would  be  oppressive  and  unjust  in 
the  extreme  to  call  upon  them  again  to  do  the  work  in  which  all  are 
interested.  I therefore  called  upon  some  of  the  counties  out  of  my 
department  which  never  had  furnished  any  labor,  and  a very  large 
majority  would  have  furnished  it  with  pleasure,  but  a few  persons  em- 
ployed a lawyer  to  raise  objections  at  the  War  Department,  and  my 
orders  were  disapproved  and  countermanded;  the  works  are  therefore 
making  but  little  progress.  The  quantity  of  labor  necessary  in  this 
department  is  greater,  perhaps,  than  that  required  in  all  the  depart- 
ments in  Virginia  put  together,  and  I beg  that  I may  be  allowed  to 
repeat  my  call  on  the  counties  in  question  out  of  my  department  in 
order  to  save  time,  which  is  so  precious. 

The  works  on  the  lower  James  River  being  very  weak,  I desired  to 
have  some  troops  in  the  fortifications  in  front  of  Williamsburg,  as  the 
enemy,  should  he  succeed  in  passing  up  James  River,  might  occupy 
those  fortifications,  now  almost  without  a man,  and  a great  disaster 
might  happen.  As  my  troops  were  necessary  below,  I asked  for  au- 
thority to  call  out  the  militia  of  certain  counties  to  man  these  works, 
should  it  become  necessary.  I procured  arms  for  them  from  officers 
who  had  control  of  these  arms,  but  were  willing  to  lend  them  for  that 
purpose.  I obtained  the  authority  through  Colonel  Randolph  from  the 
President  and  Governor  Letcher  to  call  out  the  militia,  but  did  not  use 
it.  I desired  only  that  their  colonels  would  send  to  me  an  account  of 
the  number  of  men  in  each  regiment  and  the  number  of  shot-guns 
which  could  be  procured. 

This  course  seems  not  to  have  been  acceptable  to  the  War  Depart- 
ment, which  I regret. 

I beg  that  this  communication  may  be  laid  before  the  Secretary  of 
War  and  the  President,  and  I respectfully  invite  their  attention  to 
what  remains  to  be  done  in  the  department  under  my  command. 

I have  to  state,  also,  that  two  light  batteries,  with  re-enforcements 
of  infantry  to  the  number  of  4,000,  are  said  to  have  arrived  at  Fort 
Monroe  as  part  of  the  permanent  force  there,  and  that  on  sending  a flag 
of  truce  to  Hampton,  a few  days  since,  it  was  discovered  by  our  officers 
that  soldiers’  quarters  were  being  erected  in  Hampton,  showing  that 
more  troops  were  expected,  and  that  they  would  remain  there  some 
time,  winter  quarters  for  the  troops  already  there  having  been  pre- 
viously built. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

j’.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major-  General , Commanding, 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant- General  C.  S.  Army , Richmond , Va. 


Williamsburg,  February  7,  1862. 
Professor  Joynes,  War  Department : 

Dear  Sir  : The  opportunity  of  putting  the  Peninsula  in  a state  of 


jhap.  XIX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  43 

comparative  security,  by  completing  the  defensive,  works  begun  and  in 
part  finished,  before  the  spring  campaign  opens,  has  not,  I regret  to 
say,  been  improved  as  it  ought  to  have  been.  The  value  of  these 
works  in  protecting  the  James  and  York  Bivers,  and  with  the  former 
the  Norfolk  and  Petersburg  Kailroad  (so  accessible  from  many  points 
on  the  James),  whether  we  look  at  what  may  be  required  or  at  what 
they  have  already  accomplished,  cannot  well  be  estimated  in  dollars 
and  cents.  As  a citizen  you  are  directly  interested,  and  you  will,  by 
giving  your  aid,  be  doing  good,  individual  and  general.  Not  less  than 
1,000  or  1,500  negroes  ought  to  be  at  work,  and  in  six  weeks,  with  this 
force,  would  the  defenses  be  finished  and  rendered  well-nigh  impregna- 
ble. The  counties  south  and  west  of  Bichmond  can  well  afford  to  fur- 
nish this  labor.  General  Magruder  has  so  frequently  impressed  the 
local  labor,  that  he  is  not  willing  to  make  another  call  without  an  order 
from  the  War  Department  to  this  effect,  and  thus  the  works  are  com- 
paratively at  a stand  still.  He  has  done  all  in  his  power.  So  impor- 
tant do  I consider  this,  I would  at  once  write  to  the  Secretary  did  not 
my  position  forbid  it. 

Yours,  sincerely, 

BENJ.  S.  EWELL, 
Colonel , Virginia  Volunteers . 


Bichmond,  Va.,  February  15, 1862. 
Colonel  Ewell,  Commanding , Williamsburg : 

Sir  : You  will  immediately  organize,  on  paper,  all  the  nurses,  em- 
ployes of  the  Government  of  every  department,  to  be  ready  at  a mo- 
ment’s notice  to  defend  the  works  in  front  of  Williamsburg,  and  lay 
aside  arms  and  ammunition  for  the  same. 

You  will  also  prepare  arms  for  any  citizens,  of  whatever  age,  who  are 
willing  to  turn  out  and  assist  in  holding  the  works  in  front  of  Williams- 
burg should  the  lower  defenses  at  Jamestown  be  passed. 

The  most  important  points  to  be  defended  are  Tetter’s  Neck  and  Fort 
Magruder.  You  will  place  the  negroes  at  the  service  of  Mr.  Derrick, 
the  engineer,  for  the  purpose,  1st,  of  preparing  without  the  slightest 
delay  the  forts  already  constructed  for  the  recejition  of  guns;  and,  2d, 
of  completing  such  works  as  may  be  unfinished.  Infantry  must  be 
put  on  the  right  of  Tetter’s  Neck  to  prevent  its  being  turned,  and  what 
you  may  have  must  be  put  at  once  in  position.  Have  men  assigned  to 
it  and  drilled,  ammunition  prepared,  and  the  pieces  fired  by  the  men 
several  times. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGBUDEB. 

Captain  Lee’s  company  and  the  One  hundred  and  fifteenth  Begiment 
Militia  are  ordered  to  report  to  you;  you  will  dispose  of  them  in  the  best 
manner  possible. 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGBUDEB, 

Major-General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

February  24,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : I have  reliable  information  that  the  enemy  are  sending  strong 
re-enforcements  to  Old  Point  as  well  as  to  Tennessee,  and  I hear,  for 


44 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XEX. 

this  purpose,  are  withdrawing  large  numbers  from  Manassas.  Within 
the  last  week  several  thousand  men  have  been  sent  up  to  Newport 
News  and  more  are  to  go.  General  Burnside  is  also  being  re-enforced 
and  the  numbers  collected  on  both  sides  of  this  place  are  becoming 
powerful  armies.  They  threaten  such  long  lines  it  is  difficult  for  me 
to  tell  where  to  concentrate  my  forces,  and,  until  I know  more  than  at 
present,  have  to  keep  my  forces  near  the  lines  of  railroad. 

The  Bricsson  (iron-clad)  battery  has  arrived  in  the  Roads,  and  will 
probably  get  one  of  our  batteries  to  test  her  resisting  qualities.  I hear 
she  carries  two  11-inch  guns. 

I write  this  to  call  the  attention  of  the  Government  to  the  probabil- 
ity of  this  place  being  severely  threatened  by  powerful  forces,  and  a 
general  attack  may  be  expected  in  a week  or  more.  From  the  same 
source  I hear  the  mortar  fleet,  as  it  is  termed,  is  destined  for  New 
Orleans. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGER, 

Major-General , Commanding  Department . 


Yorktown,  Va.,  February  24,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond:  * 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  state  that  on  the  21st  I received  a dispatch 
from  General  Huger,  stating  that  four  transports,  loaded  with  troops, 
had  been  sent  to  Newport  News,  and  another  dispatch  from  Captain 
Norris,  my  signal  officer  at  Norfolk,  that  three  regiments  had  been 
landed  at  Fort  Monroe. 

I beg  leave  further  to  state  I reported  on  the  20th  instant  that  the 
roads  here  were  in  extremely  bad  order.  They  are  so  much  worse  that 
it  is  very  doubtful  if  artillery  can  be  carried  down  the  country,  and  it 
will  be  positively  necessary  to  diminish  the  usual  amount  of  ammuni- 
tion by  one-half  if  carried. 

I am  also  satisfied  that  no  one  ship  can  produce  such  an  impression 
upon  the  troops  at  Newport  News  as  to  cause  them  to  evacuate  the 
fort.  The  demoralization  to  our  troops  under  similar  circumstances 
has  been  produced  by  a concentration  of  fire  from  many  ships  at  differ- 
ent points.  No  important  advantages  can  be  obtained  by  the  Merri- 
mac  further  than  to  demonstrate  her  power,  which,  as  she  is  liable  to 
be  injured  by  a chance  shot  at  this  critical  time,  had  better  be  reserved 
to  defeat  the  enemy’s  serious  efforts  against  Norfolk  and  James  River. 

I have  the  honor  to  request  that  this  communication  be  laid  before 
the  President  through  the  Secretary  of  War. 

I have  failed  in  my  efforts  to  get  the  substance  of  the  above  through 
by  telegraph. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  1 Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  45.  ) Richmond , February  25,  1862. 

******* 
XVIII.  Major-General  Magruder  will  so  dispose  of  the  forces  under 


Chap.  XIX.] 


45 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

his  command  and  make  necessary  preparations  as  to  be  able  to  move 
across  the  James  River  all  forces  that  can  be  spared  from  his  batteries 
and  intrenchmenU  to  co-operate  in  the  repulse  of  the  enemy  from  any 
threatened  attack  on  Suffolk  or  other  approaches  to  Norfolk.  He  will 
have  his  forces  in  readiness  to  cross  the  river  on  receiving  further 
orders. 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Richmond,  Va.,  February  26,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Norfolk , Va.: 

My  Dear  General  : I sent  Colonel  Lee,  my  aide-de-camp,  to  con- 
verse with  you  freely  and  confidentially  and  to  bring  to  me  full  and 
exact  information  as  to  your  condition  and  views. 

This  morning  it  has  been  stated  to  me  that  you  feel  restrained  by 
the  want  of  an  assurance  that  the  Government  has  left  your  action  to 
the  guidance  of  your  own  judgment.  In  that  regard  I have  to  say 
that  my  rule  has  been  to  seek  for  the  ablest  commanders  who  could  be 
obtained,  and  to  rely  on  them  to  execute  the  purposes  of  the  Govern- 
ment by  suchplatis  as  they  should  devise  and  with  such  means  as  could 
be  made  available. 

You  certainly  have  not  been  an  exception  to  that  rule.  My  purpose 
in  your  case  was  the  defense  of  Norfolk,  and  my  confidence  in  you  has 
been  to  me  a constant  source  of  hope.  You  will  accept  assurances  of 
my  readiness  to  sustain  you  to  the  full  extent  of  my  power,  and  the 
expression  of  the  desire  that  you  would  look  to  success  as  the  only 
directrix  of  your  course  in  the  discharge  of  your  official  duties. 

Very  truly,  your  friend, 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Richmond,  Va.,  February  27,  1862. 
General  B.  Huger,  Norfolk , Va. : 

You  will  place  the  towns  of  Norfolk  and  Portsmouth  and  their  de- 
pendencies under  martial  law.  Preparation  should  be  ,made  for  the 
removal  of  that  part  of  the  population  who  could  only  embarrass  the 
defense  in  the  event  of  a siege. 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Richmond,  Va.,  February  27,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Winder  : 

Sir  : I have  just  finished  an  examination  of  the  field  works  erected 
and  planned  around  the  city  for  its  defense,  and  respectfully  submit  a 
brief  report  of  their  condition  for  your  information. 

These  batteries,  numbering  eighteen,  and  seven  outworks,  are  placed 
in  a circle  of  about  12  miles  around  the  city.  I think  their  location  and 
design  good.  The  magazines  of  those  on  the  north  side  of  the  river  are 
not  in  a fit  condition  to  receive  ammunition.  All  of  them  are  more  or 


46 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA.  [Chap,  xix. 


less  damp  and  some  of  them  have  2 or  3 feet  of  water  in  them.  I would 
^|gest  that  they  be  built  above  the  surface  of  the  ground. 

I here  are  eleven  long  32-pounders  mounted  on  barbette  carriages 
and  nine  guns  of  the  same  class  in  the  batteries  on  the  north  side  of  the 

Sof  17°  +?atteri®f  H and  12  011  the  nort]l  si<*e,  and 

menced  °n  S0Uttl  Slde  of  tlie  river?  have  not  been  com- 

I would  respectfully  suggest  that  these  last  mentioned  be  completed 
and  armed,  as  I think  that  we  are  most  likely  to  be  attacked  from  that 
quarter  first. 

I do  not  deem  it  necessary  to  give  a more  detailed  statement  at  pres- 
ent.  1 submit  these  facts  to  you  in  the  hope  that  you  will  bring  the 
matter  before  the  Engineer  and  Ordnance  Departments. 

The  accompanying  sketch  of  the  works  will  give  you  a better  idea  of 
them  than  anything  I have  written  or  could  write.* 

If  these  works  were  completed  and  well  armed  they  would  indeed  be 
ormidable ; yet  it  seems  to  me  doubtful  whether  we  could  supply  an 
army  with  provisions  that  would  be  necessary  to  defend  the  city  against 
the  force  the  enemy  would  likely  bring  against  us.  We  might  possibly 
be  made  to  experience  the  fate  of  General  Mack  at  Ulm.  But  these 
are  matters  for  the  Government  to  decide.  With  these  facts  and  re- 
marks  I leave  the  subject  in  your  hands. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

„ 7 7 „ E*  tansill, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Second  Regiment  Virginia  Artillery. 

P.  S.—I  should  have  before  observed  that  it  will  require  218  guns  to 
fully  arm  the  batteries.  6 

_ _ . R.  TANSILL, 

Colonel , Commanding  Second  Virginia  Artillery . 


PROCLAMATION. 

[February  27,  1862.] 

• Whereas  the  Congress  of  the  Confederate  States  has  by  law  vested 
m the  I resident  the  power  to  suspend  the  writ  of  habeas  corpus  in 
cities  m danger  of  attack  by  the  enemy  : 

Now  therefore  I,  J efferson  Davis,  President  of  the  Confederate  States 
o Amenca,  do  hereby  proclaim  that  martial  law  is  extended  over  the 
cities  of  Norfolk  and  Portsmouth  and  the  surrounding  country  to  the 
distance  of  10  miles  from  said  cities,  and  all  civil  jurisdiction  and  the 
privilege  of  the  writ  of  habeas  corpus  are  hereby  declared  to  be  sus- 
pended within  the  limits  aforesaid. 

This  proclamation  will  remain  in  force  until  otherwise  ordered. 

In  faith  whereof  I have  hereunto  set  my  hand  and  seal,  at  the  city  of 
Kicnmond,  on  this  twenty-seventh  day  of  February,  in  the  year  of  our 
Lord  one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  sixty-two. 

JEFFERSON  DAYIS, 

~ . . _ February  28,  1862. 

Colonel  Kemper,  7 

Speaker  House  of  Delegates , State  of  Virginia  : 

Dear  Sir:  I inclose  my  report  on  the  condition  of  the  defenses  of 
Kjchmond,  as  called  for  by  a resolution. 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XIX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


47 


Permit  me  to  call  your  attention  to  its  purport,  the  better  to  determine 
if  or  not  it  should  be  read  in  open  session. 

Most  respectfully,  yours, 

0.  DIMMOCK, 
Colonel  Ordnance  of  Virginia. 


[Inclosure.] 

Hon.  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Delegates  of  Virginia: 

In  compliance  with  the  resolution  passed  by  the  House  of  Delegates, 
“requesting  Col.  Charles  Dimmock  to  make  a careful  and  thorough  ex- 
amination of  the  fortifications  and  defenses  of  this  city  and  to  report 
the  condition  thereof  to  this  House,”  I respectfully  report  that  I have 
visited  the  works  referred  to,  and  find  that  on  the  north  side  of  James 
River,  commencing  on  the  river  below  the  city  and  running  around  to 
the  river  above  the  city,  there  are  seventeen  separate  batteries  and 
that  there  are  two  more  about  to  be  thrown  up.  On  the  south  side  of 
the  river,  inclosing  the  town  of  Manchester,  commencing  on  the  river 
below  and  running  around  to  the  river  above  the  town  of  Manchester, 
there  are  four  separate  batteries,  besides  two  more  about  to  be  thrown 
up. 

The  length  of  line  of  works  on  the  north  side  of  the  river  is  7J  miles 
and  on  the  south  side  4J  miles — in  all  about  12  miles. 

If  I am  to  express  my  opinion,  I take  the  occasion  to  say  that  these 
lines  of  defense  are  too  near  the  city,  placing  it  in  close  siege,  if  the 
enemy  is  to  be  suffered  to  approach  within  reach  of  the  batteries  ; so 
near  can  the  enemy  come  that  the  city  can  be  shelled  and  burned  before 
our  works  are  captured,  and  so  near  that  all  intercourse  with  the  country 
will  be  cut  off,  and  for  the  want  of  subsistence  the  city  would  soon  be 
compelled  to  capitulate  without  any  serious  attack  by  the  enemy.  The 
line  of  defense  should  be  near  the  banks  of  the  Chickahominy  and  its 
tributaries  as  far  as  they  extend  westwardly  and  thence  by  a line  to 
James  River ; and  on  the  Manchester  side  the  works  should  be  thrown 
out  some  2 miles  in  advance.  But  as  the  present  batteries  are  nearly 
complete,  they  may  be  used  in  the  last  resort.  Yet  advanced  works 
should  be  thrown  up  as  soon  as  possible  upon  the  lines  indicated. 

The  present  works  (except  their  being  too  near)  are  well  located  and 
of  approved  ground  plan,  and  when  they  are  completed  will  make  a 
good  defense. 

There  are  several  ravines  running  in  between  some  of  the  works 
which  are  not  commanded  by  their  guns.  Doubtless  it  is  in  contem- 
plation to  throw  up  other  small  batteries  to  protect  these  depressions. 

All  the  batteries  are  in  barbette  (without  embrasures)  and  are  ob- 
jectionable, because  both  the  guns  and  the  men  who  serve  them  are 
too  much  exposed.  The  guns  will  be  liable  to  be  dismounted  and  the 
men  disabled. 

I think  at  least  some  of  the  most  important  and  assailable  ones 
should  be  embrasured,  and  there  should  be  some  bomb-proofs  within 
which  the  men  not  serving  at  the  guns  may  find  security.  There  are 
several  lesser  defects  general  to  all  the  works,  which  I presume  the 
engineer  will  remedy. 

These  batteries  are  from  one-half  to  three-fourths  of  a mile  from  each 
other,  between  which  I think  there  should  be  breastworks  thrown  up, 
behind  which  infantry  can  be  posted  to  prevent  any  attempt  of  the  en- 
emy to  force  through  and  take  the  batteries  in  rear,  where  they  are 
quite  open  and  defenseless. 


48 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[Chav.  XIX. 


In  each  battery  there  is  one  or  more  magazines.  With  few  excep- 
tions these  are  pits  sunk  under  ground,  covered  with  timber  and  earth. 
These  I found  all  very  wet  and  most  of  them  filled  with  water.  These 
should  be  made  dry  by  being  bricked  up  or  raised  above  the  surface  of 
the  ground  and  drained. 

Immediately  around  some  of  the  works  thick  forests  stand,  which 
should  be  cut  down. 

Of  cannon  I found  on  the  north  side  but  eleven  mounted  in  all  the 
works,  and  dismounted,  lying  upon  the  ground  without  carriages,  there 
were  twelve  more,  in  all  within  the  batteries  twenty-three,  when  the 
number  required  is  one  hundred  and  forty- three 5 and  on  the  south  or 
Manchester  side  I found  two  mounted  (none  upon  the  ground),  when 
the  number  required  is  seventy-four. 

I could  not  learn  that  any,  either  of  guns  or  carriages,  were  ready;  if 
they  are  not,  they  cannot  be  obtained  and  put  in  place  in  less  time 
than  three  months  if  they  are  commenced  at  once. 

Of  the  batteries  along  James  River  below  the  city  I only  know  from 
report.  To  remove  all  fear  from  the  enemy’s  gunboats,  with  their  almost 
impenetrable  sides  and  their  heavy  shells,  I suggest  that  obstructions 
be  gotten  ready  and  floated  down  about  4 miles  below  the  city,  ready 
to  be  sunk  on  the  signal  of  the  approach  of  the  enemy. 

From  what  I have  said  above  and  especially  from  the  small  number 
of  guns  (twenty-five  of  the  two  hundred  and  eighteen  required)  that 
are  ready  mounted  and  dismounted  (about  two  to  the  mile),  I report 
that  Richmond,  as  far  as  any  reliance  is  to  be  placed  upon  these  bat- 
teries, is  in  no  state  of  defense  against  an  enemy  likely  to  approach. 
The  danger  from  such  attack  from  the  north  side  of  the  river  is  greatly 
lessened  by  the  positions  of  our  armies  on  the  Potomac  and  on  the  Pen- 
insula, but  I regard  an  attack  from  the  south  side  imminent. 

Burnside  has  obtained  a permanent  landing  on  the  North  Carolina 
coast,  at  which  he  is  getting  re-enforcements.  With  15,000  or  20,000 
men  he  can  ascend  the  Roanoke,  march  to  Petersburg,  thence  to  Man- 
chester, and  from  the  commanding  hills  there  shell  this  city  without 
crossing  the  river.  This  he  can  do  in  ten  days  after  he  is  ready. 

If  to  meet  this  force  the  assistance  of  our  armies  on  the  Potomac 
and  on  the  Peninsula  are  called  upon,  the  answer  will  be  from  General 
Johnston  and  Magruder,  u McClellan  and  Wool  are  threatening  us  (by 
concert  with  Burnside)  and  we  can  spare  no  assistance.” 

If  I am  right,  immediate  action  should  be  had  toward  completing  the 
batteries  now  projected  on  the  Manchester  side  and  fully  arming  them. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

C.  DIMMOCK, 

Colonel  Ordnance  of  Virginia. 


Chap.  XIX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


49 


Abstract  from  return  of  the  Department  of  the  Peninsula , Maj.  Gen.  John  B.  Magruder, 
commanding , for  February , 1862. 


Present  for 
duty. 

43 

i 

<D 

43 

0 

<D 

OQ  . 

© +3 

Officers. 

Men. 

Pi 

1 

bfl 

© 

jjo 

<1 

Aggregate  pi 

and  absen 

; 158 

2, 498 

3,578 

4, 553 

58 

1,410 

1,  692 

64 

1,  016 

1,  254 

1, 579 

27 

461 

615 

683 

33 

607 

789 

866 

33 

313 

482 

665 

37 

623 

895 

1,  018 

37 

686 

856 

997 

116 

1,  089 

1,  561 

2, 175 

22 

160 

231 

404 

4 

76 

90 

105 

7 

147 

169 

184 

2 

65 

78 

83 

37 

692 

886 

1,  000 

32 

363 

543 

705 

36 

555 

648 

704 

25 

431 

595 

711 

23 

616 

762 

945 

19 

328 

458 

532 

770 

11, 580 

15,  900 

19,  601 

Commands. 


Pieces  of 
artillery. 


Yorktown 

"Wynn’s  Mill 

Young’s  Mill 

Lee’s  Mill 

Harrod’s  Mill 

Port  Grafton 

Camp  Dudley 

Ship  Point 

Gloucester  Point  and  Matthews  County 

Williamsburg 

Jamestown 

Jamestown  Island 

Mulberry  Point 

Camp  Marion 

Warwick  Court-House 

Land’s  End 

Deep  Creek 

Wall’s  Farm 

Spratley’s  Farm 


14 


Total 


59 


Headquarters, 

Lee’s  Mill , March  1,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General: 

Sir  : I received  your  letter*  directing  me  so  to  arrange  my  forces  as 
to  send  re-enforcements,  when  I received  orders,  to  Suffolk.  You  do 
not  state  what  re-enforcements  you  intend  to  send ; hence  it  is  impossi- 
ble to  know  what  arrangements  to  make.  I immediately,  however, 
gave  preliminary  orders.  I can  send  but  one  regiment  and  one  field 
battery,  and  that  with  great  risk  here.  The  reason  why  I cannot  do 
more  is  that,  notwithstanding  all  my  efforts  to  procure  negroes,  I have 
received  but  11  from  the  counties  in  my  district,  the  presiding  magis- 
trate referring  the  call  in  some  cases  to  the  district  attorney,  who  de- 
cides that  it  is  illegal;  and  in  other  cases  no  response  is  made.  Two 
months  fully  have  already  been  lost  in  consequence  of  the  War  De- 
partment disapproving  of  my  arrangements  and  countermanding  my 
orders. 

I fear  that  it  will  be  a fortnight  before  the  evil  following  from  these 
causes  will  have  ceased,  if  ever.  The  people  have  got  an  idea  that  the 
influence  of  the  Government  will  be  cast  against  my  efforts.  Whilst  I 
was  in  Richmond  135  slaves  from  the  county  of  Greenville  were  dis- 
charged, I am  informed,  by  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  and  without 
ny  knowledge.  I had  expected  to  have  employed  these  negroes  and 
others — some  800  ready  in  Henry — in  fortifying  the  second  line  of  my 
position  whilst  my  troops  were  occupying  and  fortifying  the  front  line, 
where  I prefer  to  fight,  but  may  be  forced  to  leave,  as  the  flanks  may 


•Not  found,  but  see  Special  Orders,  No.  45,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 
£ ebruary  25,  p.  44. 

4 R R — VOL  IX 


50 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XIX. 


be  turned  by  tbe  operations  of  ships  of  the  enemy.  I supposed  that 
by  this  time  I would  have  had  negroes  enough  to  have  fortified  my 
positions  sufficiently  to  have  enabled  me  to  spare  temporarily  and  for 
a short  distance  2,000  men.  As  I have  not  had  the  negroes  I cannot 
spare  more  troops  than  I have  stated,  and  for  them  militia  ought  at 
once  to  be  substituted. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 

P.  S. — I have  to  request  that  this  communication  be  laid,  through  the 
Secretary  of  W ar,  before  the  President. 


Headquarters  Department  Peninsula, 

Yorldown , March  2,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond: 

Sir  : The  telegraph  not  being  at  work,  1 have  the  honor  to  state  for 
General  Magruder,  who  is  in  the  field,  in  forwarding  to  you  the  above 
[following]  copy  of  telegram,  that  he  recommends  that  the  (Merrimac) 
Virginia  be  stationed  a little  above  Newport  News,  to  prevent  the  gun- 
boats coming  up  the  swash  channel  leading  into  Warwick  River  and 
turning  the  right  flank  of  his  line  of  defense. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  BRYAN, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[In  closure.] 

Norfolk,  February  27,  1862. 

General  J.  B.  Magruder: 

One  regiment  of  infantry  landed  at  Newport  News  yesterday  and  to- 
day six  companies  of  a Massachusetts  regiment  of  light  artillery  from 
the  Baltimore  boat ; their  horses  arrived  in  transport.  I have  reliable 
information  that  30,000  men  will  be  landed  at  Old  Point  and  Newport 
News  before  the  5th  of  March.  No  arrival  or  departure  of  importance 
to-day. 

* WM.  NORRIS. 


Headquarters  Army  of  Peninsula, 

Yorhtown , March  3,  1862. 

Captain  Buchanan,  C.  S.  N., 

C.  S.  Steamer  Merrimac,  Gosport  Navy -Yard,  Va.  : 

Captain  : It  is  too  late  to  co-operate  with  my  army  in  any  manner 
below  with  the  Merrimac,  even  if  the  roads  will  admit  it,  which  they 
will  not,  for  the  enemy  is  very  heavily  re-enforced  both  at  Newport  News 
and  Fort  Monroe  with  infantry  and  six  batteries  of  light  artillery. 

It  would  have  been  glorious  if  you  could  have  run  into  these  as  they 
were  being  landed  from  a Baltimore  boat  and  a commercial  transport. 

In  addition  to  the  above  I have  been  ordered  to  make  such  disposi- 
tion of  my  troops  as  will  enable  me,  in  case  of  necessity,  to  send  re-en- 


Chap.  XIX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  51 

forcements  to  Suffolk,  obliging  me  to  fall  baclj  to  my  second  line,  which 
I have  done. 

Any  dependence,  therefore,  upon  me,  so  far  as  Newport  News  is  con- 
cerned, is  at  an  end. 

Wishing  you  every  success,  I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your 
obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGBUDEB, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


Bichmond,  March  4,  1862. 

Major-General  Magruder,  Yorhtown: 

Get  5,000  men  and  two  batteries  ready  to  be  thrown  across  the  river 
as  soon  as  possible.  By  order  of  the  President.  I write  to-day. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Department  Peninsula, 

Yorhtown , March  4,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lafayette  McLaws, 

Custis>  Farm : 

Sir  : I am  instructed  by  the  commanding  general  to  inform  you  that 
he  received  a dispatch  from  the  Secretary  of  War  this  morning,  direct- 
ing him  to  send  forthwith  5,000  troops  to  Suffolk,  and  that  he  has 
already  given  verbal  orders  for  the  movement  on  Thursday  to  King’s 
Mill  of  Cobb’s  Legion,  Sixteenth  Georgia,  and  Fifty-third  Virginia,  and 
the  Second  Louisiana  and  Fifteenth  North  Carolina  on  Friday.  You 
will  give  orders  to  Colonel  Hodges,  Fourteenth  Virginia,  to  move  early 
on  Friday  to  King’s  Mill  wharf  with  all  his  regiment  except  the  com- 
pany in  charge  of  the  four  pieces  of  artillery.  He  will  take  with  him 
his  tents,  five  days’  rations,  as  few  cooking  utensils  as  possible,  his 
ammunition,  and  20  spades,  and  axes,  turning  over  the  remainder  of  the 
same,  besides  whatever  picks  and  shovels  he  may  have,  to  the  acting 
J quartermaster  of  the  Fifth  Louisiana  Volunteers,  and  taking  receipt 
for  the  same. 

You  will  direct  Moseley’s  battery  to  proceed  also  on  Thursday  early 
to  King’s  Mill  and  embark  for  Suffolk,  Va.,  by  way  of  City  Point. 

The  commanding  general  desires  that  these  orders  be  given  verbally 
and  kept  as  secret  as  possible. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENBY  BBYAN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Peninsula, 

Yorhtown,  March  4,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  C.  8.  Amy , Richmond,  Ya.: 
General:  If  5,000  men  are  taken  from  this  Peninsula  and  the  ene- 
my should  advance  in  force  I fear  I will  be  compelled  to  leave  York- 
town  to  defend  itself  with  a small  garrison,  the  covering  work  at  Mul- 
berry Island  with  one  regiment  to  defend  it,  and  that  with  the  rest  of 


52  OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XIX. 

the  troops  I shall  be  forced  back  to  Williamsburg,  as  there  would  be 
three  roads  to  guard  with  a force  of  not  more  than  4,000  men,  after  de- 
ducting the  above-named  garrisons.  I will  do  my  very  best  with  these 
against  all  odds.  I have  withdrawn  the  troops  from  Young’s  and  Har- 
rod’s  Mills,  leaving  the  cavalry  and  one  regiment  of  infantry  at  each 
of  these  places,  and  have  nearly  completed  the  concentration  of  my 
force  on  the  second  line  preparatory  to  this  call. 

The  Quartermaster- General  informs  me  that  the  Northampton  will 
be  ready  from  Thursday  to  Saturday,  and  that  a tug  and  four  lighters 
will  be  ready  on  Monday. 

The  superintendent  of  the  Southside  Railroad  writes  that  the  most 
expeditious  way  to  convey  troops  to  Suffolk  is  to  take  them  from 
Jamestown  by  steamer  to  City  Point,  thence  to  Petersburg,  and  by  the 
Norfolk  and  Petersburg  Railroad  to  Suffolk.  I think  this  is  the  best 
and  will  also  be  the  most  secret,  as  the  troops  will  have  to  march  as 
high  up  as  King’s  Mill  at  all  events  and  then  go  down  the  river  to  a 
landing  in  sight  of  the  enemy,  and  then  have  a march  of  30  or  40  miles. 
I shall  therefore  send  them  this  way. 

I have  this  moment  received  the  Secretary’s  dispatch  and  answer  by 
the  boat. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  yorft*  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 

P.  S. — Not  having  been  previously  informed  what  number  of  troops 
would  be  required  to  be  transported,  I could  do  nothing  more  than 
make  inquiries  and  notify  the  Quartermaster- General  of  my  probable 
wants  in  the  way  of  transportation. 

J.  B.  MAGRUDER. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond , Fa.,  March  4,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  B'.  Magruder, 

Yorhtown , Va.  : 

Sir  : Your  letter  of  March  1 has  been  submitted  to  the  President,  as 
you  desired.  The  complaints  made  of  the  action  of  this  Department 
in  relation  to  the  impressment  of  negroes  were  without  just  foundation. 
The  Department  has  simply  requested  that  you  confine  yourself  to  the 
impressment  of  such  negroes  as  are  within  your  command,  and  has 
pointed  out  the  utter  impossibility  of  permitting  the  generals  who  com- 
mand in  different  districts  to  cross  their  own  lines  and  encroach  on  the 
commands  of  their  neighbors.  The  slaves  from  Greenville  County  were 
in  no  sense  under  your  control  or  authority,  and  the  Secretary  was 
forced,  on  appeal,  to  decide  that  you  had  no  right  to  retain  them. 

I regret  that  the  people  should  have  “got  an  idea  that  the  influence 
of  the  Government  will  be  cast  against  your  efforts.”  I assure  you 
that  such  an  idea  is  utterly  unfounded.  It  has  been  my  desire,  and  it 
is  still  my  most  earnest  wish,  to  strengthen  your  hands  and  aid  your 
efforts  in  every  possible  way,  and  no  one  does  fuller  justice  to  your  zeal, 
activity,  and  high  soldierly  qualities.  I pray  you  to  dismiss  all  such 
thoughts  from  your  mind  as  unworthy  of  us  both.  In  times  like  these 
miserable  scandal-mongers  and  panic-breeders  ply  their  vocation  of 
sowing  the  seeds  of  mischief  among  men  in  office ; but  we  can  both 


CHAP.  XIX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


53 


afford  to  scorn  sucli  attempts  to  create  distrust  between  us,  and  apply 
ourselves  to  tlie  sole  task  of  defending  our  country  at  this  moment  of 
her  great  need. 

I sent  you  a dispatch  to-day,  by  order  of  the  President,  to  hold  5,000 
men  and  two  batteries  ready  for  crossing  the  river. 

The  President  says  that  when  in  town,  a week  ago,  you  proposed 
yourself  to  cross  aUd  aid,  with  part  of  your  army,  in  defense  of  Suffolk. 
We  do  not  believe  that  you  are  in  the  slightest  danger  of  an  attack  at 
present,  either  in  front  or  by  being  outflanked  by  naval  forces.  All 
our  intelligence  tends  to  one  point.  Suffolk  is  the  aim  of  the  enemy. 
Norfolk  is  to  be  cut  off,  if  they  can  accomplish  their  purpose.  If  they 
succeed  in  this,  then,  indeed,  your  entire  flank  would  be  thrown  open, 
and  you  would  be  forced  to  fall  back  rapidly,  for  they  would  get  pos- 
session of  all  the  defenses  on  the  south  side  of  the  James  Eiver  and 
cross  at  pleasure  at  any  point  they  might  select.  It  is  for  your  own 
defense,  as  well  as  that  of  Norfolk,  therefore,  that  the  President  desires 
you  to  be  ready,  at  a moment’s  warning,  to  re-enforce  the  army  defend- 
ing Suffolk  with  at  least  5,000  men  and  two  batteries.  It  is  not  intended 
to  order  you  to  cross  in  person  or  to  leave  your  command,  but  to  send 
these  troops  under  such  general  of  your  command  as  you  may  select. 

I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War . 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Peninsula, 

Yorhtown , March  4,  1862. 

To  the  Army  of  the  Peninsula : 

Comrades  : The  time  of  service  for  which  many  of  you  enlisted  is 
about  to  expire.  Your  country,  invaded  by  an  insolent  foe,  again 
demands  your  help.  Your  homes  are  violated,  your  firesides  polluted 
by  the  presence  of  a mercenary  enemy  or  silent  in  their  desolation; 
many  of  your  friends  in  captivity  or  in  exile ; our  people  slain,  and  the 
very  altars  of  our  religion  desolated  and  profaned.  The  ruthless  tyrants 
who  have  dared  to  invade  us  have  vowed  our  conquest  or  our  destruction. 

It  is  for  you  to  rise  and  avenge  our  slaughtered  countrymen  or  nobly 
share  their  fate.  Of  what  worth  is  life  without  liberty,  peace  at  the 
expense  of  honor,  the  world  without  a home  ? 

When  our  fathers  periled  life,  fortune,  and  sacred  honor  to  our  first 
war  of  Independence,  was  it  an  empty  boast,  or  was  it  the  stern  resolve 
of  freemen,  who  knew  their  rights  and  dared  to  defend  them?  The 
long  war  of  the  Revolution  culminated  at  length  in  victorious  triumph 
on  these  very  plains  of  Yorktown.  These  frowning  battlements  on 
the  heights  of  York  are  turned  in  this  second  war  of  liberty  against  the 
enemies  of  our  country.  You  breathe  the  air  and  tread  the  soil  conse- 
crated by  the  presence  and  heroism  of  our  patriotic  sires.  Shall  we, 
their  sons,  imitate  their  example,  or  basely  bow  the  neck  to  the  yoke  of 
the  oppressor?  I know  your  answer.  You  remember  your  wrongs, 
and  you  are  resolved  to  avenge  them.  True  to  the  instincts  of  patriotic 
devotion,  you  will  not  fill  a coward’s  grave.  You  spring  with  alacrity 
to  the  death -grapple  with  the  foe,  nor  relinquish  the  strife  till  victory 
crowns  our  arms.  Cowards  die  a thousand  deaths;  brave  men  die  but 
once,  and  conquer  though  they  die.  It  is  therefore  without  surprise 
that  your  commanding  general  has  learned  of  your  purpose  to  re-enlist 
in  this  holy  struggle,  and  that  you  bear  with  a cheerfulness  and  con- 


54 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


IChap.  XIX. 


stancy  worthy  of  his  highest  admiration  the  disappointment  of  with- 
drawing from  you  the  furloughs  to  visit  your  homes  which  the  Gov- 
ernment promised  you,  and  which  the  present  dangers  of  our  beloved 
country  alone  forbids  it  to  grant. 

When  the  war  is  ended,  in  that  hour  of  triumph  you  will  be  proud 
to  remember  that  by  your  sufferings  and  sacrifices,  no  less  than  by 
your  valor,  you  conquered. 

Soldiers!  though  reverses  and  disasters  have  recently  befallen  us, 
let  us  remember  that  trust  is  eternal  and  that  God  is  just.  His  arm 
is  our  trust,  and  the  Great  Euler  of  nations  and  of  men  will  protect  the 
right  and  crown  with  victory  the  noble  and  the  brave.  Let  us  take 
courage,  then.  Our  enemy,  dead  to  the  spirit  of  liberty,  can  only  fight 
while  their  coffers  are  unexhausted.  Commerce  is  their  king.  Their 
god  is  gold.  They  glory  in  their  shame.  The  war  which  intensifies 
our  devotion  and  concentrates  our  resources  scatters  theirs.  The  day 
of  retribution  will  come.  The  struggle  will  not  always  be  defensive  on 
our  part.  We  will  yet  strike  down  our  ruthless  invaders  amid  smoking 
ruins  of  their  cities,  and  with  arms  in  our  hands  dictate  terms  of  peace 
on  their  own  soil. 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGBUDEK, 

Major-  General , Commanding . 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk:, 

Norfolk , Va.j  March  5,  1862. 
Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I send  inclosed  a report  made  to  me  by  Lieutenant  Talcott,  on 
engineer  duty,  who  had  been  sent  by  me  to  Eoanoke  Island,  and  who 
assisted  in  the  service  of  the  guns  at  the  Pork  Point  Battery. 

This  is  the  only  report  I have  received  from  any  one.  General  Wise, 
as  I telegraphed  yesterday,  has  made  no  official  report  to  me.  I had 
a letter  from  him  on  his  arrival  at  Poplar  Spring,  in  Currituck  County, 
informing  me  of  the  capture  of  the  island,  his  information  being  re- 
ceived from  a Sergeant  Metzler,  who  left  the  island  at  5 p.  m.  on  the 
8th  February,  which  information  I reported  at  once  to  the  Department. 
I remain,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGEE, 
Major-General , Commanding . 

[Inclosure.  J 

Eoanoke  Island,  February  9,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger, 

Commanding  Department  of  Norfolk: 

General  : In  obedience  to  your  order  of  the  1st  instant  I visited 
Eoanoke  Island,  and,  arriving  there  on  the  4th,  commenced  the  dis- 
charge of  the  duties  imposed. 

After  paying  off  all  the  duly -certified  claims  against  the  Engineer 
Department  that  were  presented  I made  an  inspection  of  the  batteries 
and  a general  reconnaissance  of  the  position. 

On  Thursday,  the  6th  instant,  I had  taken  passage  for  Elizabeth  City, 
on  my  return  to  Norfolk,  when  the  enemy’s  fleet  hove  in  sight.  Be- 
lieving that  very  strenuous  efforts  would  be  necessary  to  resist  success- 
fully an  attack  for  which  the  island  was  still  unprepared,  I deemed  it 
my  duty  to  return. 


Chap  XIX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE. 


55 


On  landing  I offered  my  services  to  Colonel  Shaw,  the  commanding 
officer  of  the  post,  and  during  the  attack  which  followed  rendered  such 

S6The  details  of  the  actions  of  the  7th  and  8th  will  no  doubt  be  re- 
ported by  the  commanding  officer.  I merely  desire  in  this  to  note  the 
facts  which  may  prove  important  to  the  department  with  which  I was 

The  three  guns  which  were  alone  brought  fully  into  action  at  Poik 
Point  were  all  en  barbette , and  although  the  fire  of  from  sixty  to  seventy 
guns  was  concentrated  for  six  hours  on  these  three,  which  were  mounted 
close  together,  without  either  bomb-proof  shelters  or  traverses  between 
them,  no  serious  damage  was  sustained  and  the  loss  ot  life  was  very 
slight 

Although  two  of  the  three  guns  used  were  a 41-cwt.  and  47-cwt.  32- 
pounders  of  short  range,  considerable  damage  was  done  to  the  enemy  s 
gunboats.  One  gun  in  embrasure  was  used  during  the  early  part  oi 
the  action  of  the  7th  with  great  effect,  but  the  sod  revetment  of  the 
cheeks  of  the  embrasure  suffered  somewhat.  These  facts  should  tend 
to  give  increased  confidence  in  open  batteries  and  barbette  guns.  It  is 
also  worthy  of  remark  that  our  force  engaged  at  the  causeway,  not 
exceeding  350  men,  was  enabled,  under  the  partial  cover  of  a breast- 
work 44  feet  high  and  less  than  100  feet  long,  to  resist  for  hve  hours 
an  attack  by  upwards  of  10,000  of  the  enemy’s  land  forces,  aided  by 

artillery  at  least  equal  to  our  own.  , 

Although  our  arms  have  been  defeated  by  overwhelming  numbers  ana 
an  important  position  has  been  lost  to  us,  I cannot  see  that  we  have 
any  reason  to  be  disheartened.  The  enemy  himself  confessed  to  a dear- 
bought  victory  and  the  repulse  of  his  Navy. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  M.  R.  TALCOll, 

First  Lieutenant , Artillery , G.  S.  Army. 


War  Department,  O.  S.  A., 
Richmond,  Va.,  March  5,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Norfolk , Va.: 

Sir:  I have  your  dispatch  stating  that  General  Wise  had  made  no 
report  of  the  capture  of  Roanoke  Island.  Cougress  insists  on  receiv- 
ing reports  on  the  subject,  and  General  Wise  has  sent  me  copies  of  his 
letters  of  the  10th  and  11th  ultimo,  which  he  evidently  considered  as 

hlSI  ’im!' 'informed  by  Colonel  Shaw  that  he  gave  General  Wise  his  re- 
port last  week.  You  are  therefore  instructed  to  request  from  General 
Wise  the  report  of  Colonel  Shaw,  and  to  make  up  such  report  as  you 
can  from  the  material  in  your  possession,  whether  letters,  reports,  or 
other  documents,  that  I may  transmit  the  report  to  Congress. 

We  are  using  every  effort  to  strengthen  your  command.  It  seems 
evident  that  a great  effort  is  to  be  made  to  capture  Norfolk,  and  its 
defense  must  be  as  vigorous  as  the  whole  power  of  the  Confederacy 
can  make  it.  We  shall  use  all  our  means  of  concentrating  troops  for 
the  defense  of  Suffolk.  In  the  mean  time  I would  be  glad  to  be  advised 
as  promptly  as  possible  of  your  plans  of  defense.  I beg  that  in ^de- 
termining on  this  matter  you  will  consider  whether  it  Mould  not  be 
advisable  to  withdraw  to  your  inner  line,  or  perhaps  send  to  Suffolk 


56 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap,  xtx 


such  portions  of  your  force  as  have  been  heretofore  posted  on  the 
coast  in  the  neighborhood  of  Lynn  Haven  Bay. 

The  transports  recently  sent  to  sea  by  the  enemy  are  in  all  proba- 
bility destined  to  re-enforce  General  Burnside  and  to  attack  your  rear 
This  is  only  a suggestion,  and  is  by  no  means  intended  to  interfere  with 
your  own  dispositions  of  your  troops. 

I trust  that,  with  the  aid  of  Generals  Loring  and  Randolph,  recently 
sent  to  you,  and  of  General  Ransom,  who  will  be  at  once  ordered  to 
join  you,  you  will  be  enabled  to  infuse  such  vigor  and  activity  in  your 
command  as  to  inspire  them  with  confidence  in  a successful  defense. 
General  Ransom  has  just  been  nominated,  and  his  regiment  of  cavalry* 
which  is  one  of  the  very  finest  in  any  service,  is  ordered  to  re-enforce 
you. 

We  have  also  ordered  about  2,000  men  to  aid  you  from  Washington 
1ST.  0.,  and  General  Magruder  will  hold  in  readiness  on  James  River 
5,000  men,  with  the  necessary  means  of  throwing  them  across  to  your 
support  the  instant  the  movements  of  the  enemy  render  certain  what 
is  now  deemed  very  probable— an  attack  on  Suffolk.  Several  batteries 
of  field  artillery  will  also  be  sent  to  you. 

Your  obedient  servant, 


J.  P.  BENJxlMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department,  O.  S.  A., 
Richmond , Va.,  March  5,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Norfolk , Va. : 

Sir  : Martial  law  having  been  declared  in  Norfolk  under  the  Presi- 
dent’s proclamation,  he  desires  me  to  call  your  attention  to  the  various 
measures  which  he  hopes  will  at  once  be  vigorously  executed : 

1st.  Some  leading  and  reliable  citizen  to  be  appointed  provost-mar- 
shal in  Norfolk  and  another  in  Portsmouth.  In  the  former  city  he 
suggests  the  mayor,  said  to  be  a zealous  friend  of  our  cause. 

2d.  All  arms  to  be  required  to  be  given  up  by  the  citizens  $ private 
arms  to  be  paid  for. 

3d.  The  whole  male  population  to  be  enrolled  for  military  service  $ 
all  stores  and  shops  to  be  closed  at  12  or  1 o’clock,  and  the  whole  of  the 
citizens  forced  to  drill  and  undergo  instructions'. 

4th.  The  citizens  so  enrolled  to  be  armed  with  the  arms  given  up 
and  with  those  of  infantry  now  in  service  at  batteries. 

5th.  Send  away  as  rapidly  as  can  be  done,  without  exciting  panic, 
all  women  and  children,  and  reduce  your  population  to  such  as  can  aid 
in  defense. 

6th.  Give  notice  that  all  merchandise,  cotton,  tobacco,  &c.,  not 
wanted  for  military  use,  be  sent  away  within  ‘the  given  time,  or  it  will 
be  destroyed. 

7th.  Imprison  all  persons  against  whom  there  is  well-grounded  sus- 
picion of  disloyalty. 

8th.  Purchase  all  supplies  in  the  district  that  can  be  made  useful  for 
your  army,  allowing  none  to  be  carried  away  that  you  might  want  in 
the  event  that  the  city  is  beleagued. 

In  executing  these  orders  you  will  of  course  use  your  own  discre- 
tion, so  to  act  as  to  avoid  creating  panic  as  far  as  possible. 

Your  obedient  servant, 


J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 


Secretary  of  War . 


Chap.  XIX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


57 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Peninsula, 

Yorktown , Pa.,  March  6,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  C.  S.  Army: 

Sir  : The  telegram,  informing  me  that  the  Baltic,  with  three  regiments 
on  board,  had  left  Newport  News,  has  just  been  received. 

Mr.  William  Norris,  my  signal  officer  at  Sewell’s,  had  reported  the 
arrival  at  Newport  News  of  troops  within  the  last  week  in  large  num- 
bers, estimated  by  me  at  six  regiments,  in  addition  to  six  companies  of 
light  artillery,  with  their  horses. 

In  pursuance  of  the  orders  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  to  so  dispose 
my  forces  as  to  throw  re-enforcements  across  to  Suffolk,  I withdrew  the 
troops  from  Harrod’s  and  Young’s  Mills,  except  the  cavalry  and  one 
regiment  of  infantry  at  each  place.  It  was  almost  impossible  to  with- 
draw the  artillery  on  account  of  the  state  of  the  roads.  I have  arranged 
the  remaining  troops  not  in  garrisons*  about  4,000  men,  on  the  second 
line,  and  informed  Captain  Buchanan  that  for  the  above  reasons  I 
would  not  be  able  to  have  my  troops  down  in  the  neighborhood  of  Fort 
Monroe  and  Newport  News  should  he  attack  the  two  frigates  at  the 
latter  place.  It  of  course  could  not  have  been  supposed  that  I could 
do  so,  when  the  department  ordered  away  from  me  more  than  one-half 
of  my  force  disposable  for  the  field,  even  if  the  state  of  the  roads  per- 
mitted it.  The  shorter  line,  which  I now  occupy,  will  be  defended  with 
a force  totally  inadequate  for  that  purpose. 

The  Merrimac  will  make  no  impression  on  Newport  News,  in  my 
opinion,  and  if  she  succeeds  in  sinking  the  ships  lying  there  it  would 
do  us  little  or  no  good,  but  if  she  had  attacked  the  Baltic  and  other 
transports  filled  with  troops  in  those  waters  her  success  would  have 
been  certain  and  of  incalculable  advantage  to  us.  Please  ask  the  Sec- 
retary of  War  to  impress  these  views  on  the  Navy  Department. 

To  make  up  the  5,000  men  ordered  to  Suffolk  I have  been  compelled 
to  send  the  following  regiments  and  corps,  which  are  now  marching  to 
King’s  Mill,  to  proceed  via  City  Point  and  Petersburg,  viz : Cobb’s 
Legion,  Sixteenth  Georgia  Kegiment,  Second  Louisiana  Eegiment, 
Fifteenth  North  Carolina,  and  Fifty-third  Virginia  Kegiments.  In 
Cobb’s  Legion  is  included  one  field  battery  and  about  350  cavalry,  and 
I have  sent  an  additional  field  battery. 

You  will  perceive  that  nothing  can  be  done  by  me  in  the  way  of  an 
attack  after  having  parted  with  so  large  a portion  of  my  army.  Indeed, 
unless  some  important  object  could  be  attained,  the  policy  of  merely 
being  present  near*  Fort  Monroe  and  Newport  News  when  the  latter  is 
bombarded  is  exceedingly  doubtful,  as  it  would  incur  a risk  of  disaster 
without  any  corresponding  advantage,  and  especially  as  the  number  of 
troops  at  both  places  is  increased,  notwithstanding  the  recent  depart- 
ures, while  my  own  is  diminished  by  more  than  one-half  disposable  for 
field  service.  In  any  event  I could  render  no  assistance  to  the  Merrimac 
merely  by  my  presence.  These  are  my  views,  and  I think  they  are 
those  of  every  officer  under  my  command.  I will  execute  however  with 
alacrity  any  orders  which  may  be  given. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major- General , Commanding . 

P.  S. — The  negroes  are  coming  in  pretty  rapidly. 


58 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  xty. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Peninsula, 

Yorlctown , March  6,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va.: 


Sir  : I stated  in  a conversation  when  in  Richmond  that  I could  spare 
for  a limited  period  5,000  men  to  operate  near  me,  but  that  their  places 
should  be  supplied  by  5,000  militia. 

This  statement  was  made  to  Mr.  R.  M.  T.  Hunter,  and  the  next  morn- 
ing I wrote  him  that  upon  reflection  I did  not  think  that  more  than 
2,000  men  could  leave  this  department  with  safety,  subject  to  the  above 
conditions,  and  requested  him,  I think,  to  lay  the  statement  before  the 
President.  I do  not  complain,  but  will  abide  with  cheerfulness  by  any 
arrangement  made  by  the  Department,  knowing  the  pressure  every- 
where. 


I respond  cordially  to  the  friendly  assurances  of  the  Secretary  of  War, 
and  will  send  him  all  the  support  in  my  power,  but  fear  being  misunder- 
stood ; hence  my  explanations  of  to-day. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


* General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant- General  C.  S.  Army: 


Yorktown,  March  6,  1862. 


The  troops  intended  for  Suffolk  will  embark  at  King’s  Mill,  near 
Williamsburg,  and  proceed  by  steamers  to  City  Point  and  thence  via 
Petersburg  Railroad  to  Suffolk.  This  is  rendered  necessary  by  the 
want  of  wharf  facilities  at  any  other  point,  and  will  save  time  as  well 
as  a land  march  of  more  than  20  miles.  The  troops  will  be  in  readiness 
to  cross  to-morrow,  5,000  men  and  two  batteries.  When  shall  they 
cross  Please  answer. 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major- General , Commanding . 


Yorktown,  March  6,  1862, 
(Received  Richmond,  March  6,  1862.) 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General: 

No  answer  has  been  received  in  reply  to  my  telegram  of  to-day  say- 
ing the  troops  will  be  ready  to  embark  to-morrow  at  King’s  Mill.  The 
horses  will  be  sent  by  land  from  the  south  side,  except  a few  for  the 
officers.  The  rolling  stock  of  the  City  Point  and  Petersburg  Railroad 
will  be  in  place  for  the  transportation  of  the  troops  to-day,  awaiting 
the  movement. 

Detention  will  be  attended  with  a heavy  expense  and  inconvenience 
perhaps  to  the  road. 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


!hap.  XIX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


59 


Richmond,  March  7,  1862. 
General  J.  B.  Magruder,  Yorktown , Ya.: 

Your  dispatch  received.  The  command  will  cross  the  river  and  pro- 
ved to  its  destination  as  soon  as  you  are  in  possession  of  the  means  of 
xansportation,  which  it  is  understood  you  have. 

General  Gobb  is  here.  Shall  he  report  to  you  in  person  or  proceed 
X)  Suffolk  % 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General . 


■ 

Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk , Va .,  March  8,  1862. 

Eon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War : 

Sir:  I received  yesterday  your  letter  of  the  5th  instant.  I have 
written  to  General  Wise,  and  directed  him  to  send  me  the  report  of 
Dolonel  Shaw  of  the  capture  of  Roanoke  Island  and  any  others  he  may 
iiave  to  submit. 

As  regards  “advising  you  of  my  plans  and  purposes  and  contem- 
plated mode  of  defense,”  I have  heretofore  had  to  be  only  prepared  for 
i front  attack.  I am  now  threatened  both  in  front  and  rear,  as  the 
memy  can  approach  me  from  James  River  on  my  front  and  Albe- 
marle Sound  and  the  Chowan  River  in  the  rear.  The  principal  obstacles 
to  the  front  attack  are  the  batteries.  On  the  direct  approach  up  the 
Elizabeth  River  these  batteries  are  strong  and,  with  the  obstructions  in 
the  channel,  sufficient  to  prevent  their  passage.  Other  points  are 
weaker,  but  the  enemy  would  be  compelled  to  land  and  march  through 
a wooded  country,  intersected  with  creeks  and  marshes.  He  can  land 
at  different  points  at  the  south,  but  from  any  point  of  landing  he  must 
march  from  30  to  50  miles  before  reaching  any  vitally-important  point. 
My  plan  is  to  attack  him  the  moment  he  attempts  to  advance  on  any 
line,  and,  if  possible,  to  throw  on  his  flanks  and  cut  his  line. 

I have  thought  it  necessary  to  hold  Sewell’s  Point.  This  battery 
covers  the  obstructions  in  the" channel  opposite  to  it.  While  this  bar- 
rier remains  large  vessels  cannot  approach  Craney  Island.  If  the  enemy 
is  allowed  to  remove  it,  Craney  Island  could  be  approached  and  could 
be  damaged  by  shells,  which  can  do  little  injury  at  Sewell’s.  I have  to 
keep  two  regiments  and  a light  battery  at  Sewell’s  Point,  and  a small 
regiment  and  some  field  guns  beyond  them,  to  protect  them  from  any 
landing  near  Ocean  View. 

The  Third  Alabama  Regiment  and  a battery  of  artillery,  which  was 
farther  east,  toward  Lynn  Haven  Bay,  I have  withdrawn,  and  moved 
across  the  Elizabeth  River.  I have  kept  this  regiment  on  the  railroad 
near  Portsmouth  ready  to  proceed  to  Suffolk  or  elsewhere  as  required. 
Means  of  transportation  for  the  regiments,  wagons,  and  mules  are  what 
I will  most  require,  and  I have  urged  the  Quartermaster’s  Department 
■ to  provide  a sufficient  supply  as  promptly  as  possible. 

Where  the  move  will  be  must  depend  upon  the  enemy,  but  I see  no 
other  plan  than  to  attack  him  as  soon  as  possible  after  he  attempts  to 
march. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient,  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGER. 
Major-General , Commanding . 


60 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XD 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  the  Peninsula 
No.  657.  f Yorhtown,  March  9,  1862 — 3 a.m. 

Colonel  Winston  and  Major  Phillips  win  proceed  at  daylight  in  th 
neighborhood  of  New  Market  Bridge,  sending  a party  of  observatio 
m the  neighborhood  of  New  Bridge.  It  is  desirable  to  approach  Ne^ 
Market  Bridge  through  the  woods,  as  the  enemy  is  in  great  force  i: 
the  neighborhood  of  Newport  News.  Colonel  Winston  is  informed  tha 
our  cavalry  under  Lieutenant- Colonel  Goode  and  a regiment  of  infantr 
under  Colonel  Cumming  will  make  a demonstration  on  the  Warwici 
road  on  Newport  News  early  this  morning,  and  that  the  troops  am 
artillery  at  Ship  Point  will  march  at  daylight,  and  also  that  all  th 
other  troops  of  the  Peninsula,  except  the  necessary  guards,  will  tak 
post  at  Young’s  and  Harrod’s  Mills. 

Colonel  Winston  will  endeavor  to  surprise  any  party  of  the  enem 
that  he  may  find  about  New  Market  Bridge.  He  will  ascertain  whethe 
the  enemy  are  on  the  Scondam  road  or  not,  and  if  not,  he  will  send  hi 
dragoons  by  that  road  to  communicate  with  Colonel  Cumming,  wh< 
will  thereupon  advance  toward  Newport  News,  displaying  his  force  t< 
the  best  advantage,  but  will  not  engage  the  enemy  if  he  advances,  ex 
cept  that  our  cavalry  will  charge  their  cavalry  or  their  artillery  if  th< 
occasion  offers. 

Colonel  Winston  will  keep  his  troops  in  ambush,  securing  for  himsel 
a safe  retreat ; and  should  the  enemy  advance  he  will  permit  their  head; 
of  columns  to  pass  him  and  fall  upon  their  flanks,  and  thus  annoy  hin 
all  the  way  in  his  advance. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Magruder: 


Headquarters, 

Young’s  Mill , Va.,  March  10,  1862. 
Commodore  Buchanan,  C.  S.  N.: 

Commodore  : It  is  with  the  most  cordial  satisfaction  that  I tendei 
you  my  most  hearty  congratulations  on  the  glorious  and  brilliant 
victory  you  achieved  over  the  enemy  on  Saturday  and  Sunday  last, 
I consider  it  the  greatest  achievement  of  the  age,  and  am  delighted 
beyond  expression  that  it  was  accomplished  under  your  auspices  and 
that  of  my  friend  Lieut.  Catesby  Ap  R.  Jones. 

I went  down  in  person  as  soon  as  I heard  of  the  attack,  and  had 
given  some  orders  for  the  movement  of  troops  and  one  of  my  regi- 
ments, with  250  cavalry,  and  remained  in  front  of  the  works  within  a 
mile  and  a half  for  some  two  hours  yesterday  without  artillery,  but 
though  very  strong— I think  at  least  15,000— they  did  not  come  out  to 
attack  us. 

I regret  to  hear  that  you  are-wounded,  but  hope  your  wound  will  not 
prove  serious. 

I sen<^  you  this  hasty  expression  of  my  extreme  satisfaction  by  Ser- 
geant Tabb,  whose  departure  I cannot  delay. 

With  the  highest  respect,  I remain,  commodore,  very  sincerely, 
yours, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major-General , Commanding . 


}HAP.  XIX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


61 


Engineer  Bureau, 
Richmond , March  12,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War : 

aTTj . The  following  report  is  respectfully  submitted  as  a partial  reply 
to  the  resolutions  of  Congress  of  the  24th  February,  calling  for  infor- 
mation, surveys,  and  reports  connected  with  the  defenses  of  Richmond. 
In  ascending  the  James  River  the  defenses  consist  ol— - 
1st.  Fort  Boykin , Hay's  Neck.— Mounting  ten  guns ; 42-pounders  and 

32-oounders,  hot  shot,  &c.  . n , 

2d.  Fort  Huger , Harden's  Bluff.— Mounting  thirteen  guns  5 one  10-rnch 
columbiad,  pattern  rifled,  en  barbette , four  9-mch  Dahlgrens  en  barbette , 
two  8-inch  columbiads  en  barbette , six  hot-shot  32-pounders  on  ship 

:Ca3d ^Mulberry  Island  Point  Battery. — Five  42-pounder  guns  en  bar- 
bette two  8-inch  columbiads  en  route , fifteen  casemates  building  rap- 
idly,’ and  large  covering  work  nearly  completed. 

4th.  Jamestown  Island  Batteries.— Thirteen  guns  5 four  9-mch  Dahl- 
grens,  four  8-inch  columbiads  and  two  more  en  route,  five  hot-shot 

i 10  5th Tl>rewry's  Bluff  Battery,  coupled  with  obstructions  in  the  river, 
is  being  rapidly  constructed,  under  the  direction  of  Lieutenant  Mason, 

of  the  Provisional  Engineer  Corps.  , ,,  , , _ . 

1 The  first  is  completed,  while  the  second  and  third  are  being  rapidly 
and  intelligently  improved  with  bomb-proofs,  &c.,  by  Captain  Clarke, 
of  the  Provisional  Engineer  Corps,  who  has  a force  of  at  least  1,00(> 

^From  20  to  30  miles  below  City  Point  there  are  two  positions — Fort 
Powhatan  and  Kennon’s  marshes — which  have  been  thoroughly  exam- 
ined by  the  ablest  officers  at  the  disposition  of  the  department,  and  re- 
ported'’ to  be  good  locations  for  batteries.  If  they  are  placed  at  either 
of  the  above  points  obstacles  should  be  constructed  m connection  with 
them  The  final  and  intelligent  selection  of  a site  can  consequently 
not  be  determined  except  by  a thorough  hydrographic  survey. 

In  regard  to  the  Richmond  defenses,  it  was  the  opinion  of  General 
Leadbetter  that  the  works  around  the  city  were  rather  near  but  so 
much  had  been  done  at  the  time  he  took  charge  of  them,  that  he  directed 
me  on  leaving  for  Tennessee,  to  carry  out  the  plans  adopted  by  the 
Engineer  Department  of  Virginia.  This  I have  sought  to  do  with  the 
means  at  my  disposition,  and  a large  proportion  of  the  leading  worka 
are  completed.  Intermediate  secondary  breastworks  could  be  thrown 
up  with  sufficient  rapidity  by  the  troops  who  are  to  defend  the  mam 
works  when  there  is  occasion.  Labor  in  that  direction  at  present 
would  seem  to  be  injudicious.  Most  of  the  works  are  closed,  and  those 
which  are  not  so  can  be  rapidly  protected.  Directions  have  been  given 
to  drain  the  magazines  thoroughly,  and  if  necessary  to  construct  new 

OI10‘S 

There  are  but  few  guns  mounted  on  the  works.  A full  armament 
for  them  would  be  exceedingly  difficult  to  procure,  and  the  propriety 
of  concentrating  so  many  pieces  on  a contracted  local  defense  would 
seem  at  least  doubtful. 

The  batteries  on  the  Manchester  hills  are  very  nearly,  if  not  entirely, 
constructed,  and  a force  has  been  called  out  to  repair  and  complete 
them  Drewry’s  Bluff,  a most  commanding  point  where  the  James 
River  is  narrowest,  about  7 miles  below  Richmond,  has  been  selected 
as  the  best  point  for  a battery  coupled  with  obstructions.  In  its  1m- 


62 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XIX 


mediate  vicinity  also  is  a strong  commanding  ridge  on  the  line  of 
approach  from  Petersburg  to  Richmond. 

In  legard  to  the  line  of  the  Chickahominy,  X can  as  yet  make  no  def- 
inite report,  although  an  officer  is  on  duty  in  its  examination.  The 
recent  calls  for  engineers  by  General  Johnston  and  others  have  left  me 
but  limited  professional  resources.  I have  heard,  however,  that  Colonel 
Talcott,  Chief  of  the  Virginia  Engineer  Corps,  examined  thisline,  but  did 
not  think  very  favorably  of  it.  It  may,  however,  be  possible  to  erect, 
in  a reasonable  time,  a series  of  dams,  with  properly-constructed  cov- 
ering works,  which  would  add  greatly  to  the  strength  of  the  Richmond 
defenses  on  the  north.  As  soon  as  the  surveys  are  completed  a full 
report  will  be  promptly  made. 

The  James  River  defenses,  which  are  rapidly  improving,  afford 
already  a good  protection  against  wooden  fleets,  but  not  against  iron- 
clad vessels.  From  recent  developments  it  is  evident  that  nothing  but 
the  very  heaviest  ordnance,  and  that  in  connection  with  obstructions 
and  perhaps  torpedoes,  can  contend  successfully  with  this  latter  class. 
It  is  to  such  means  we  are  resorting  on  the  James  River.  In  positions 
similar  to  those  of  Fort  Huger,  Yorktown,  and  Mulberry  Island  Point 
the  only  course  left  to  pursue  seems  to  be  to  mount  the  guns  on  the 
bluffs,  where  they  are  not  liable  to  be  struck,  or  in  well-constructed 
casemates,  to  contend  with  wooden  ships,  keeping  sand  bags  ready 
filled  to  protect  them  against  iron-clad  vessels.  This  class  is  so  excess- 
ively expensive  and  confined  as  to  be  ill-adapted  to  the  transportation 
of  troops  in  large  numbers.  The  effect,  however,  of  passing  our  lower 
batteries  by  preventing  the  safe  navigation  of  our  rivers  above  them 
will  probably  be  to  force  us  at  no  distant  day  to  rely  in  great  measure 
on  land  transportation. 

A mistaken  impression  on  my  part  that  this  report  was  called  for  on 
the  termination  of  the  surveys  has  led  to  this  delay,  for  which  it  is 
the  only  excuse. 

With  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALFRED  L.  RIVES, 

Acting  Chief  Engineer  Bureau. 


Engineer  Bureau, 
Richmond , March  12,  1862. 

General  J.  Bankhead  Magruder, 

Commanding  Army  of  the  Peninsula : 

General  : Colonel  Carter,  who  will  hand  you  this,  submitted  to  me 
Captain  Dimmock’s  report,  approved  by  himself  and  addressed  to  you. 
From  the  experience  derived  in  the  recent  contest  between  the  Virginia 
and  Monitor  it  is  evident  to  me  that  water  batteries  in  the  immediate 
vicinity  of  deep  water  should  be  abandoned  at  once — those  at  both 
Yorktown  and  Gloucester  Point.  I unhesitatingly  recommend  such  a 
step,  only  leaving  a masked  battery  of  the  smallest  pieces  to  protect 
the  beach  and  communicating  with  the  works  on  the  bluffs  by  a covered 
way. 


Chap.  XIX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  63 


The  sketch  below  gives  the  idea  roughly : 


I will  send  plans  promptly,  but  in  case  my  occupations,  which  are 
now  very  heavy,  should  prevent,  I feel  assured  the  engineers  in  your 
command  can  arrange  the  details.  By  keeping  sand  bags  filled,  on 
hand,  your  guns  can  in  a few  minutes  be  protected  against  iron-clad 
boats.  These  bags  could  be  thrown  oft  rapidly  should  a wooden  fleet 
attempt  to  pass  with  troops,  and  I believe  in  that  case  the  bluff  bat- 
teries fully  equal  to  the  water  batteries. 

You  will  readily  infer  from  what  I have  written  that  I think  your 
water  communication  with  West  Point  in  great  danger.  I shall  exert 
; myself  to  have  the  Gloucester  Point  guns  mounted  promptly  and 
properly. 

Colonel  Carter  can  communicate  more  fully  the  result  we  have  arrived 
at. 

With  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALFRED  L.  RIVES, ' 
Acting  Chief  Engineer  Bureau . 


Headquarters, 
Young’s  Mill , March  12,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I sent  Sergeant  Tabb,  a most 
intelligent  man,  who  is  on  signal  service  in  this  department  and  was  a 
volunteer  on  board  of  the  Virginia  in  the  late  action,  to  reconnoiter 
Newport  News  in  a boat  yesterday  afternoon,  and  he  has  just  returned, 
stating  that  whilst  in  front  of  Newport  News  the  Ericsson  came  up  from 
Fort  Monroe  with  some  troops  on  board  and  landed  thern  at  Newport 
News ; that  a very  large  force  was  at  that  place  and  increasing.  Their 
pickets  have  advanced  some  mile  and  a half  up  the  river,  and  I am  satis- 
fied that  they  mean  to  march  up  on  the  left  bank  of  James  River,  send- 
ing the  Ericsson  to  silence  the  guns  in  the  river  batteries,  and  thus  free- 
ing the  river  for  the  passage  of  transports  with  other  troops  and  forc- 
ing us  to  fall  back  by  ascending  the  river.  It  may  require  some  little 
time  to  do  this,  but  they  will  succeed  in  the  end,  unless  the  Virginia  can 
leave  the  dock  and  prevent  the  Ericsson  from  coming  up.  The  latter 
vessel  draws,  I am  informed,  much  less  water  than  the  Virginia,  and  if 
she  once  gets  up  the  Virginia  could  not  follow  her,  as  there  is  a bar 
below  Day’s  Neck,  I am  told  by  James  River  pilots,  on  which  there  is 
not  more  than  18  feet  water,  and  the  Virginia  draws  22  feet. 


64  OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XIX 

I deem  it  of  the  utmost  importance  to  make  this  statement  to  you  for 
the  information  of  the  War  and  Navy  Departments  and  the  President* 
although  the  information  may  already  be  in  their  possession. 

My  cavalry  drove  in  the  enemy’s  pickets  last  evening,  but  the  advance 
of  their  pickets  and  their  increasing  force  admonishes  me  of  the  neces- 
sity of  arranging  my  troops  on  the  second  line  for  defense,  from  which 
I have  advanced  them  after  the  naval  action,  to  be  ready  to  take  ad- 
vantage of  the  effect  of  that  achievement,  and  at  the  same  time  to  cover* 
if  possible,  the  movement  of  troops  from  here  to  Suffolk.  They  will  re- 
sume their  places  to-day,  presenting,  however,  the  same  line  of  pickets 
to  the  enemy  and  holding  the  front  line  by  cavalry  and  light  infantry, 
with  orders  to  fall  back  on  the  second  line  in  case  of  an  advance. 

I would  recommend  that  not  a moment  be  lost  in  again  bringing  out 
the  Virginia,  as  I learn  from  my  spies  that  their  officers  say  the  Vir- 
ginia is  much  injured  and  that  they  have  no  apprehension  from  her  for 
the  present.  I presume  that  they  will  advance  as  soon  as  possible  in 
the  hope  that  she  will  not  be  ready,  and  the  Ericsson  once  up  the  river, 
she  cannot  follow.  Should  the  Ericsson  attack  our  batteries  on  James 
Eiver,  the  guns  on  ship  carriages  will  be  withdrawn  from  the  effects  of 
the  fire  and  all  the  other  guns  and  men  will  be  protected  as  much  as 
possible. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDEB, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


Richmond,  Va.,  March  13,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder, 

Commanding , ffic.,  Yorktown , Va.: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  your  letter  of  the  12th 
instant,  reporting  the  result  of  a reconnaissance  made  by  your  orders 
of  the  condition  of  the  enemy  at  Newport  News  and  your  proposed 
movements  in  the  event  of  an  advance  by  him  up  the  left  bank  of  the 
river.  As  regards  the  steamer  Virginia,  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  in- 
forms me  that  she  went  into  the  dock  upon  her  arrival  at  Norfolk,  with 
orders  that  neither  labor  nor  expense  should  be  spared  upon  her  repair. 
It  is  hoped  that  she  will  be  out  at  an  early  day. 

I am,  &c., 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General , Commanding. 


Yorktown,  March  13,  1862, 

(Received  March  14,  1862.) 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General: 

To-day  the  enemy  drove  in  our  pickets  4 miles  below  Young’s  Mill. 
Troops  are  being  again  landed  at  Newport  News  from  the  Baltimore 
boat.  Please  order  at  once  to  Williamsburg  by  the  James  River  boats 
the  regiment  which  the  Secretary  of  War  said  he  would  send.  When 
will  the  Virginia  be  out?  The  disposition  of  my  troops  and  the  nature 
of  my  operations  depend  upon  the  answer  to  this  question.  Answer  by 
telegraph. 


J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Chap.  XIX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  65 

[Indorsement.] 

March  14, 1862. 

The  unarmed  regiment  promised  by  Secretary  of  War,  to  be  armed 
by  you  with  the  surplus  arms  in  your  command,  is  expected  here  soon. 
It  will  thereafter  be  immediately  sent  to  you.  It  is  impossible  to  say 
when  the  Virginia  will  be  in  position : it  is  supposed  in  a day  or  two. 

S.  COOPER. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

March  13,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : I have  expressed  to  you  my  conviction  that  iron-clad  vessels 
can  pass  all  our  batteries  with  impunity.  In  barricading  the  approach 
to  Norfolk  it  was  necessary  to  leave  a narrow  passage  for  our  vessels  to 
go  out.  The  Virginia  passed  through  it  to  get  into  the  Roads  the  other 
day. 

The  question  now  is,  Should  not  this  passage  be  stopped  ? If  done, 
it  should  be  with  the  concurrence  of  the  Navy  Department. 

I think  the  channel  should  be  stopped,  and  our  vessels  kept  inside  for 
the  protection  of  the  town.  I beg  the  subject  may  be  considered,  and 
if  the  work  is  done,  it  should  be  by  order  of  War  and  Navy  Depart- 
ments. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGER, 

Major- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Army  of  the  Peninsula, 

No.  159.  j Bartlett’s  Banche , March  13,  1862. 

All  the  arrangements  having  been  made  for  the  defense  of  this  Pen- 
insula, and  the  commanding  general,  as  the  troops  are  stationed  at  differ- 
ent places,  not  having  it  in  his  power  to  be  at  the  same  time  with  each 
' body  of  troops,  the  following  directions  are  given  for  the  government 
of  all,  viz : 

When  any  body  of  our  troops,  large  or  small,  meets  with  any  body  of 
the  enemy’s  troops,  however  ^irge,  the  commanding  officer  of  our  troops 
will  cause  the  enemy  to  be  immediately  attacked,  and  the  men  will 
attack  at  once  and  furiously.  This  is  an  order  easily  understood  by 
officers  and  men  and  will  doubtless  be  obeyed  with  alacrity  by  both. 

The  above  instructions  are  not  intended  for  those  who  have  special 
orders  under  certain  named  circumstances  not  to  fight. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Magruder: 

JOHN  DONNELL  SMITH, 

Acting  Aide-de-Camp. 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Peninsula, 

At  Bartlett’s , near  Bethel , March  14,  1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee, 

Commanding  General  of  the  Confederate  Armies , at  Richmond  : 
General  : I do  not  know  your  adjutant- general,  and  therefore  ad- 
dress you  personally. 

5 r r — vol  IX 


66  OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA.  [Chap.  XIX 

First,  allow  me  to  congratulate  yon  upon  tlie  high  position  to  which 
you  have  been  advanced  of  being  Commander-in-Ohief  of  the  Confed 
erate  forces,  and  to  predict  for  you,  however  long  our  triumph  may  be 
delayed,  a career  of  usefulness  to  the  country  and  great  honor  to  your 
self. 

I come  again  under  your  command  with  pleasure,  and  will  execute 
your  orders  with  alacrity  and  zeal.  I have  not  time  now  to  write  a lon£ 
letter  nor  have  you  perhaps  the  time  to  read  one,  but  it  is  necessary 
that  you  should  know  the  state  of  affairs  here  at  once;  and  I therefore 
inform  you  that  the  number  of  my  troops  is  far  too  small  in  comparison 
with  the  magnitude  of  the  forces  in  front  of  me  as  well  as  that  of  the 
great  interests  which  I have  to  defend.  When  in  Bicliinond  last  the 
Secretary  of  War  asked  me  the  strength  of  the  garrison  at  Newport 
News,  and  I answered  “about  4,000  or  5,000.”  He  desired  me,  in  con 
junction  with  Captain  Buchanan,  of  the  Navy,  to  capture  them  if  possi 
ble.  I readily  assented,  and  proceeded  to  make  the  necessary  arrange 
ments.  These  were  based,  of  course,  upon  the  presumption  that  the 
garrison  would  remain  as  it  was.  Subsequently,  in  a conversation  with 
Mr.  Hunter,  I was  asked  what  troops  I could  spare.  I answered  that  I 
supposed  about  5,000.  The  next  morning,  after  reflection,  I wrote  a 
communication  to  Mr.  Hunter,  stating  that  I found  upon  calculation  1 
could  spare  but  2,000,  and  them  only  to  operate  for  a short  time  and 
within  convenient  distance,  and  also  upon  condition  that  their  places 
would  be  supplied  by  militia,  from  whom  I could  substitute  in  some 
of  my  works  for  better-drilled  troops. 

Soon  after  my  return  and  before  the  Virginia  was  ready  troops  began 
to  assemble  at  Newport  News,  and  they  have  been  steadily  increasing 
in  numbers  ever  since,  so  that  now  they  cannot  fall  much  short  of  20,000 
men.  In  consequence  of  this  increase  of  troops  and  of  the  roads  being 
impracticable  for  artillery  I advised  the  Government  against  the  co- 
operation. The  threatening  attitude  of  Burnside  caused  them  to  send 
about  5,000  troops  from  my  command,  which  leaves  me  some  4,500 
infantry  disposable  for  the  field  and  about  500  cavalry.  With  this 
number  there  is  no  line  across  the  Peninsula  which  I could  hope  to 
defend  with  success.  The  enemy  is  fully  aware  of  my  having  sent 
troops  across  the  river,  though  on  Sunday  last  I sent  troops  in  the  imme- 
diate vicinity  of  Newport  News,  and  have  been  operating  since  with 
the  hope  of  deceiving  him. 

A telegraphic  communication  has  been  established  between  Fort 
Monroe  and  Washington.  All  the  enemy’s  ships  of  war  have  been 
sent  out  of  the  Eoads  except  the  Monitor  Ericsson,  and  I expect  an 
advance  on  James  Iiiver  every  moment,  supported  by  the  Monitor, 
while  the  Virginia  is  in  dock.  No  militia  can  be  expected  from  the 
counties  assigned  to  my  district,  as  almost  all  of  them  have  volunteered, 
the  few  remaining  having  been  called  out  long  since,  not  more  than  a 
few  hundred  in  all. 

I see  by  the  papers  that  Burnside  has  landed  his  troops  before  New 
Berne.  Under  these  circumstances  is  it  not  absolutely  necessary  to 
order  back  the  troops  which  I sent  to  Suffolk?  I certainly  think  so, 
and  request  that,  in  view  of  the  above  and  of  the  heavy  force  at  New- 
port News,  which  threatens  the  Peninsula,  and  the  changed  aspect  of 
affairs  at  Suffolk,  it  may  be  done  with  the  least  possible  delay.  The 
infantry  should  come  to  City  Point  and  by  steamboats  to  King’s  Mill, 
and  the  cavalry,  artillery,  wagons,  and  ambulances  should  march  to 
Carter’s  wharf  and  cross  over  to  Jamestown  Island.  Should  the  enemy 
advance  I should  be  compelled  to  withdraw  at  once  the  few  troops 


Chap.  XIX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  67 

l have  in  front  to  my  main  line  of  defense  behind  Warwick  Biver, 
the  left  resting  on  Yorktown  and  the  right  on  Mulberry  Island.  That 
%line  is  too  long  for  the  few  troops  I have,  being  over  8 miles  to  the 
mouth  of  the  Peninsula,  known  as  Mulberry  Island,  and  about  14  miles 
from  Yorktown  to  Mulberry  Island  Point,  which  is  the  corresponding 
work  on  James  Biver. 

The  enemy  has  at  least  sixteen  companies  of  good  cavalry  and  about 
forty  pieces  of  good  light  artillery.  I have  about  500  cavalry,  all  told, 
and  about  the  same  number  of  light  pieces  with  [as]  the  enemy,  badly 
mounted  and  equipped,  disposable  for  the  field,  the  rest  being  required 
in  the  various  garrisons.  I made  requisitions  for  50  artillery  horses, 
but  have  not  got  them.  I have  the  artillery  harness  ready. 

To  meet  the  enemy’s  great  superiority  in  cavalry  I suggest  that  the 
Lunenburg  Cavalry,  from  Fredericksburg,  which  is  armed,  and  one  or 
two  companies  from  there,  if  they  can  be  spared,  and  Capt.  B.  F. 
Winfield’s  company,  of  Sussex,  now  at  Bichmond,  armed,  be  sent  to  me, 
also  a troop  of  horse  in  Petersburg  and  one  in  Mecklenburg,  neither 
I armed,  be  ordered  to  me,  and  be  armed  with  shot-guns  and  lances.  I 
think  also  that  there  has  been  an  unequal  distribution  of  counties  from 
which  militia  is  to  be  drawn.  The  call  for  the  militia  will  not  strengthen 
me  at  all,  whilst  the  confiict  between  the  laws  of  the  State  of  Virginia 
and  the  Confederate  States  and  the  canvassing  for  the  elections  of 
officers  that  are  to  take  place  is  disorganizing  and  demoralizing  to  a 
deplorable  extent  the  twelve-months’  regiments  and  companies  with  me 
in  this  department. 

i To  produce  something  like  order  out  of  this  chaos,  if  possible,  I 
desire  to  publish  an  order  to  the  following  effect,  if  it  meet  with  the 
1 views  of  yourself  and  the  War  Department: 

> First.  That  none  shall  enlist  out  of  this  department  in  another, 
i Second.  That  men  who  re-enlist  shall  do  so  in  the  same  arm  of  the 
service  to  Avhich  they  now  belong. 

1 Third.  That  the  artillery,  light  and  heavy,  shall  be  given  only  to  the 
artillery  officers,  or  those  who  have  served  with  artillery  who  have 
1 already  proved  themselves  worthy  of  having  them. 

Fourth.  That  all  men  who  have  re-enlisted  under  the  idea  that  they 
can  choose  their  arm  of  service  shall  organize  as  infantry,  unless  they 
I aref already  artillery  or  cavalry,  and  shall  afterward  be  exchanged  by 
the  commanding  officer  of  the  department,  in  accordance  with  their 
wishes,  whenever  it  can  be  done  without  injury  to  the  public  service. 

I sent  a list  of  artillery  officers,  according  to  merit,  at  the  request  of 
i the  Secretary  of  War,  for  the  information  of  the  President.  Since  then 
some  exchanges  have  occurred.  Colonel  Bandolph  has  been  made  a 
general,  and  I would  like  to  place  the  name  of  [ J.]  Thompson  Brown  as 
colonel  instead  of  Lewis  Brown.  The  latter  I recommend  to  be  lieu- 
tenant-colonel. 

Should  the  troops  sent  to  Suffolk  be  wanted  there  again  they  could 
be  sent  there  in  time,  but  unless  sent  at  once  here  they  will  not  be  in 
time,  I think.  There  is  no  indication  of  a possibility  of  troops  crossing 
over  to  Suffolk  from  Newpoi  i Yews  except  up  James  Biver. 

I am,  General,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.*  BANKHEAD  MAGBUDEB, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 

We  have  no  more  paper  here. 

/ 


68 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XIX. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond , Va .,  March  15,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Norfolk , Va. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  of  acknowledging  the  receipt  of  your  letter 
of  the  13th  instant.  The  question  of  closing  the  harbor  of  Norfolk, 
suggested  by  you,  is  decided  against  your  views.  None  of  us  are  of 
opinion  that  it  would  be  proper  to  lose  the  vast  advantages  resulting 
from  the  enemy’s  fright  at  the  bare  idea  of  the  Virginia  reappearing 
among  the  wooden  ships.  The  fact  of  her  presence  guarantees  you 
against  any  attempt  to  blockade  the  river.  It  is,  however,  necessary 
to  keep  the  necessary  means  of  closing  the  Elizabeth  River  ready  at 
hand  for  use  at  a moment’s  warning  in  case  the  Monitor  should  attempt 
an  entrance.  The  Nansemond  River  ought  to  be  obstructed  without 
delay. 

I inclose  you  a letter,  to  be  forwarded  to  General  Wise  after  perusal 
by  you.  It  explains  itself.  I also  send  herewith  a voluminous  report, 
143  pages,  sent  to  me  by  General  Wise,  for  your  remarks.  You  will 
find  at  pages  109  and  116  copies  of  his  letters  to  you  of  February  10 
and  11,  which  he  evidently  regards  as  his  report,  and  which  I asked 
you  to  send  me,  but  which  you  seem  not  to  have  received.  Congress 
has  made  a call  for  this  report  ; but  it  cannot  be  sent  in,  if  at  all, 
without  your  comments,  as  it  should  regularly  have  been  forwarded 
through  you. 

1 am,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Richmond,  Va.,  March  15,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder, 

Commanding , <fic.,  Yorktown , Va.  : 

General  : As  far  as  I can  judge  at  this  distance  the  plan  of  con- 
structing a defensive  line  between  Yorktown  and  Mulberry  Island  by 
damming  and  defending  the  Warwick  River  promises  the  happiest 
results.  I would  therefore  recommend  to  you,  should  you  concur  in 
this  opinion,  to  apply  as  great  a force  on  the  work  as  possible.  Y^ith 
your  left  resting  on  the  batteries  on  York  River  and  your  right  de- 
fended by  the  batteries  on  James  River,  with  the  aid  of  the  Virginia 
and  other  steamers,  I think  you  may  defy  the  advance  of  the  enemy  up 
the  Peninsula,  supported  as  this  line  would  be  by  your  second#  system 
of  defenses. 

I am,  &c., 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Army  op  the  Peninsula, 

At  Bartlett1  s , near  Bethel , March  16,  1862. 

Gen.  R.  E.  Lee, 

Commanding  Armies  of  the  Confederate  States : 

General  : The  enemy  again  drove  in  the  pickets  to-day  on  the  War- 
wick road  after  exchanging  fire.  He  appears  to  be  operating  with  a 
considerable  advance  guard,  supported  by  heavier  bodies,  between  it 
and  Newport  News,  so  that  it  is  difficult  to  cut  off  the  advanced  troops 


Chap.  XIX.] 


C ORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. C ONFEDERATE. 


69 


without  entangling  my  handful  of  men  with  very  superior  forces  lying 
in  wait.  The  country  is  open  from  the  wood  to  James  River,  ascending 
with  heavy  wood  on  the  right  of  it  all  the  way.  He  generally  advances 
a column  on  the  road  and  one  on  the  beach  under  the  bank,  and  he  oc- 
] cupies  the  wood  in  force.  A party  sent  out  by  me  this  morning  fell 
in  with  what  was  represented  to  be  a large  body  of  skirmishers  in  this 
woods,  fired  upon  them,  and  one  of  the  enemy  fell.  Our  party  con- 
sisted of  five  men,  who  retired  to  report  the  result  of  their  observations. 

I immediately  sent  out  about  1,000  men,  all  I had  down  here,  to  sup- 
port the  pickets,  but  the  enemy  had  withdrawn.  I presume  this  will 
be  repeated  daily  until  he  either  gains  ground  or  keeps  my  forces  from 
Yorktown  and  Mulberry  Island,  with  a view  of  attacking  a more  vital 
point.  I cannot  keep  my  troops  so  far  down  as  this  without  incurring 
great  risk  of  losing  the  vital  positions  in  my  rear.  So,  if  the  enemy 
persevere,  I shall  be  compelled  in  a very  short  time  to  withdraw  the 
four  regiments  which  are  now  in  front  to  the  second  line,  viz,  from 
Yorktown  to  Mulberry  Island.  Upon  the  successful  defense  of  this 
and  its  water  flanks  that  of  the  whole  Peninsula  entirely  depends. 

I inclose  you  a communication  from  Colonel  Cabell  in  relation  to 
Harden’s  Bluff.  I applied  more  than  three  months  ago  to  have  this 
work  transferred  to  my  department,  and  sent  Colonel  Randolph  and 
Mr.  St.  John,  the  engineer  then  in  charge  of  the  works  of  this  Penin- 
sula, to  Richmond  to  press  this  subject  upon  the  consideration  of  the 
War  Department,  but  could  get  no  answer.  It  is  too  late  now  proba- 
bly to  effect  anything,  but  I am  willing  to  do  what  can  be  done.  The 
battery  has  been  a naval  battery,  and  is  now  commanded  by  Captain 
De  Lagnel  (late  of  the  Navy,  but  now  temporarily  a captain  in  the 
Confederate  Army).  I recommend  that  the  whole  be  placed  under  the 
command  of  the  commanding  officer,  whoever  he  may  be — at  present 
Colonel  Archer — while  the  guns  and  the  men  who  serve  them  should  be 
under  the  immediate  command  of  Captain  De  Lagnel,  who,  however, 
I believe,  is  junior  to  the  captains  of  artillery  serving  the  guns 5 and, 
if  so,  ought  to  be  made  a major,  as  lias  been  done  in  many  similar  cases, 
and  as  his  services  at  this  time  cannot  be  spared. 

I recommend  that  General  Colston,  who  commands  that  portion  of 
General  Huger’s  department,  be  ordered  to  call  out  forthwith  all  the 
, negroes,  with  their  axes,  spades,  &c.,  for  the  purpose  of  executing  with- 
out delay  any  work  which  Captain  Rives,  in  charge  of  the  Engineer 
Bureau  at  Richmond,  or  Captain  Clark,  the  engineer  in  immediate 
charge  of  the  work,  may  require  to  be  done.  The  decision  as  respects 
( the  rank,  relative  positions,  and  responsibilities  of  the  officers  at  Har- 
den’s Bluff  I think  had  better  come  from  yourself  or  the  War  Depart- 
ment, as  I understand  there  is  some  feeling  among  them  on  this  subject. 

Has  anything  been  heard  at  headquarters  of  Porter’s  mortar  fleet  ? I 
presume  that  now  Yorktown  will  be  the  object  of  attack  by  the  Monitor 
and  that  fleet,  and  I am  doing  my  best  to  provide  against  this  new 
danger. 

I am,  General,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BANKHEAD  MAGRUDER, 

Major- General , Commanding. 

[Inclosure.] 

Curtis’  Farm,  March  13,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lafayette  McLaws  : 

Sir:  As  directed  by  Major-General  Magruder,  I proceeded  to-day  to 
Harden’s  Bluff.  Seven  of  the  largest  guns  have  been  placed  en  barbette , 


70 


OPERATIONS  IN  SOUTHEASTERN  VIRGINIA. 


[Chap.  XIX. 


having  been  previously  placed  in  embrasure.  There  are  six  other  gnus 
to  be  placed  en  barbette.  The  position  I think  singularly  strong,  if  fur- 
ther assisted  by  art.  The  guns  should  be  immediately  placed  in  posi- 
tion. Traverses  should  be  immediately  thrown  up.  The  fort  is  small, 
and  this  could  be  completed  in  a very  short  time.  The  woods  come  up 
immediately  to  the  fort  and  surround  it  on  all  sides,  except  on  the 
river  front.  They  afford  perfect  shelter  for  an  attacking  force.  The 
forest  should  be  cleared  with  the  utmost  possible  dispatch.  In  the 
woods  a very  short  distance  from  the  fort  is  a marsh,  which  nearly 
surrounds  the  fort.  Over  this  marsh  a road  passes  leading  to  the 
camp  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Archer.  The  road  can  be  completely  com- 
manded by  the  fort,  but  the  guns  for  this  purpose  are  not  yet  in  posi- 
tion. There  are  several  wooden  buildings  recently  erected  inside  the 
fort.  I think  they  should  be  removed  at  once,  with  the  exception, 
perhaps,  of  the  one  for  commissary  stores.  Of  this  last  I am  doubtful. 
This  should  be  removed  as  soon  as  a store  house  can  be  erected  in 
another  position.  The  two  artillery  companies  should  be  placed  under 
tbe  immediate  command  of  the  commander  of  the  fort,  and  required  to 
occupy  their  position  either  in  the  fort  or  immediately  adjacent  thereto. 
They  should  be  drilled  immediately  at  their  pieces.  The  drill  for  some 
time  lias  been  suspended,  I was  informed,  partly  because  some  of  the 
guns  were  being  removed  en  barbette  from  the  embrasures. 

I do  not  wish  to  be  understood  as  interfering  in  any  question  exist- 
ing as  to  the  command  between  the  officers,  but  the  exigencies  of  the 
service,  the  importance  of  that  position  as  bearing  on  the  defenses  of 
James  River,  and  particularly  Mulberry  Island  batteries,  and  the  bat- 
teries on  the  north  side  of  James  River  generally  justify  my  allusion 
to  the  necessity  of  its  being  immediately  put  in  proper  state  of  defense, 
and  that  the  authority  and  respective  rights  and  commands  of  the 
officers  be  distinctly  defined. 

I also  recommend  that  bomb-proofs  be  erected  and  the  batteries  case- 
mated  with  the  utmost  possible  dispatch. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  COULTER  CABELL, 
Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Chief  of  Artillery,  P.  A.  C.  S. 

[Indorsement.] 

March  14,  1862. 

Harden’s  Bluff  batteries  bear  such  a close  relation  to  Mulberry  Point 
Battery — the  right  flank  of  this  department,  for  if  that  battery  is  taken 
the  right  flank  may  be  considered  as  turned — that  I feel  authorized  in 
calling  the  attention  of  the  commanding  general  to  the  remarks  of 
Colonel  Cabell,  within,  in  relation  to  the  condition  of  that  battery, 
especially  as  to  the  drill,  the  command,  and  its  rear  defenses. 

L.  McLAWS, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 


Richmond,  Va.,  March  17,  1862. 

General  J.  B.  Magruder, 

Commanding  Army  of  Peninsula  : 

General  : I have  had  the  honor  to  receive  your  letter  of  the  14th 
instant,  and  regret  very  much  to  learn  the  smallness  of  the  number  of 
your  troops.  I will  endeavor  to  re-enfoi^e  you  as  soon  as  possible,  but 


JHAP.  XIX.] 


71 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


it  tlii«  time  I see  no  immediate  prospect.  The.  pressure  of  affairs  in 
North  Carolina  renders  it  necessary  to  send  there  all  available  forces, 
3ven  at  the  risk  of  hazarding  the  safety  of  other  points,  inasmuch  as 
if  the  line  of  railroad  through  the  State  is  possessed  by  the  enemy  it 
will  cause  us  serious  injury. 

The  object  of  sending  a portion  of  your  command  to  Suit  oik  was  to 
prevent  the  seizure  of  that  point  by  the  combined  forces  of  Generals 
Wool  and  Burnside.  The  latter  is  now  at  New  Berne,  but  can  easily 
transfer  his  troops  back  to  Albemarle  Sound,  and,  unless  a change  in 
the  supposed  original  plan  of  the  enemy  is  more  apparent,  I think  it 
unnecessary  to  cross  your  troops  back  to  the  left  bank  of  James 
River  yet  awhile.  I hardly  think  he  will  risk  an  attack  upon  you  un- 
supported by  his  columns  in  other  directions.  I know,  however,  you 
will  be  vigilant  in  watching  his  movements,  and  should  you  ascertain 
that  to  be  his  intention,  your  troops  will  be  immediately  ordered  back 


by  the  route  you  designate. 

The  Quartermaster-General  will  be  informed  that  the  artillery  horses 
you  require  have  not  reached  you,  and  be  desired  to  send  them  as  soon 
as  possible.  I had  hoped  that  you  had  sufficient  cavalry  for  your  pur- 
poses. I have  no  knowledge  of  the  service  on  which  the  companies 
named  by  you  are  placed,  but  will  inquire. 

As  regards  the  militia,  it  is  the  object  of  the  State  to  fill  up  from 
those  enrolled  by  volunteer  or  draft  its  companies  and  regiments. 

The  disorganization  of  the  regiments,  &c.,  from  the  cause  you  mention 
is  apparent,  and  some  days  ago  the  Military  Committee  of  Congress 
were  appealed  to  to  draft  a bill  to  accomplish  what  you  desire.  It  is 
hoped  some  measure  of  relief  will  be  passed. 

I am,  &c., 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General , Commanding. 


General  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Army  of  the  Peninsula, 

No.  161.  ( ' Yorktown , Va .,  March  17,  186 A 

In  going  into  battle  commanding  officers  of  companies  will  call  the 
roll  of  their  companies  and  in  coming  out  of  action  the  rolls  will  be 
called.  Any  member  of  the  company  absent  at  the  latter  roll  call, 
unless  killed  or  wounded,  will  be  considered  as  having  been  derelict 
j to  the  highest  duty,  and  will  be  punished  accordingly.  The  excuse 
sometimes  given  that  men  have  left  the  field  to  carry  off  the  wounded 
lis  inadmissible,  as  no  man  will  be  permitted  to  leave  the  ranks  for 
such  purpose,  but  when  men  are  killed  or  wounded  in  the  ranks  their 
. places  will  be  filled  by  their  comrades  touching  elbows  towrard  the 
guide. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Magruder: 

HENRY  BRYAN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


CHAPTER  XX. 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


January  11-August  20,  1862. 


SUMMARY  OIF  THE  PRINCIPAL  EYE! NTTS.* 

Jan.  11,  1862.— The  Burnside  Expedition  sails  from  Fort  Monroe,  Va. 

13,  1862. — Expedition  arrives  at  Hatteras  Inlet. 

Brig.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside,  U.  S.  Army,  assumes  command 
of  the  Department  of  North  Carolina.t 
22,  1862.— Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise,  C.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  command  at 
Roanoke  Island. 

Feb.  8,  1862.— Battle  of  Roanoke  Island. 

10,  1862. — Action  at  Elizabeth  City. 

18— 20,  1862.  Expedition  to  Winton,  and  skirmish  February  19. 

19— 20,  1862. — Expedition  into  Currituck  Sound. 

Mar.  14,  1862. — Battle  of  New  Berne. 

19,  1862. — Brig.  Gen.  J.  R.  Anderson  supersedes  Brig.  Gen.  R.  C.  Gatlin  in 
command  of  the  Confederate  Department  of  North  Carolina.t 

20— 21,  1862. — Expedition  to  Washington. 

23-April  26,  1862. — Siege  of  Fort  Macon. 

24,  1862.  Maj.  Gen.  Th.  H.  Holmes,  C.  S.  Army,  supersedes  Brig.  Gen.  J.  R. 
Anderson. 

31,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Deep  Gully. 

April  7,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Foy’s  Plantation. 

Skirmish  near  Newport. 

7-  8,  1862.— Expedition  to  Elizabeth  City. 

13,  1862.— Skirmish  at  Gillette  Farm,  Pebbly  Run. 

19,  1862. — Engagement  at  South  Mills,  Camden  County. 

Skirmish  on  the  Trent  Road. 

27,  1862.— Skirmish  near  Haughton’s  Mill,  Pollocksville  Road. 

29,  1862. — Skirmish  near  Batchelder’s  Creek. 

May  2,  1862.— Skirmish  near  Deep  Gully,  Trenton  Road. 

7-  8,  1862.— Expedition  from  Roanoke  Islaud  toward  Gatesville. 

15-16,  1862.— Skirmishes  near  Trenton  Bridge,  at  Young’s  Cross-Roads,  and  Pol-" 
locksville. 

22,  1862.— Skirmish  at  the  Trenton  and  Pollocksville  Cross-Roads. 

30,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Tranter’s  Creek. 

June  2,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Tranter’s  Creek. 

Of  some  of  the  minor  conflicts  mentioned  in  this  u Summary  ” no  circumstantial  re- 
ports are  on  file. 

tThis  department,  to  consist  of  the  State  of  North  Carolina,  had  been  created  Janu- 
ary 7,  1862,  by  General  Orders,  No.  2,  Headquarters  of  the  Army,  of  that  date. 

J For  General  Gatlin’s  report  of  operations  in  his  department  from  August  20,  1861, 
to  March  19,  1862,  see  Series  I,  Vol.  IY,  pp.  573-579. 

72 


Chap.  XX.]  BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C.  73 

June  3,  1862.— North  Carolina,  west  of  the  Blue  Ridge,  embraced  in  tho  Confed- 
erate Department  of  East  Tennessee. 

5,  1862. — Action  at  Tranter’s  Creek.- 

21,  1862.— Confederate  Department  of  North  Carolina  extended  to  the  south 
bank  of  the  James  River. 

24, 1862. — Reconnaissance  from  Washington  to  Tranter’s  Creek. 

July  6,  1862. — Major-General  Burnside  sails  with  re-enforcements  for  the  Army  of 

the  Potomac,  leaving  Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster  in  command  of 
the  Department  of  North  Carolina. 

9,  1862. — Capture  of  Hamilton. 

17,  1862. — Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  C.  S.  Army,  assigned  to  command  of  the  De- 
partment of  North  Carolina. 

24-28,  1862. — Expeditions  from  New  Berne  to  Trenton  and  Pollocksville,  &c. 

26r  1862. — Skirmish  at  Mill  Creek,  near  Pollocksville. 

26-29,  1862. — Reconnaissance  from  Newport  to  Young’s  Cross-Roads,  and  skir- 
mish 27  th. 

28,  1862. — Expedition  from  Batchelder’s  Creek,  on  Neuse  River  Road. 

Aug.  14-15,  1862. — Reconnaissance  from  Newport  to  Swansborough. 

FEBRUARY  8,  1862. — Battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  C. 

t 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside,  U.  S.  Army,  with  congratulatory  orders. 
No.  2. — Lieut.  Daniel  W.  Flagler,  U.  S.  Ordnance  Department. 

No.  3. — Surgeon  .William  H.  Church,  U.  S.  Army,  Acting  Medical  Director. 

No.  4. — Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Brigade,  with  sketch. 
No.  5. — Capt.  Daniel  Messinger,  Acting  Aide-de-Camp. 

No.  6. — Lieut.  C.  Cushing  Eyre,  First  New  York  Marine  Artillery. 

No.  7. — Lieut.  James  H.  Strong,  Aide-de-Camp. 

No.  8.— Lieut.  James  A.  Hedden,  First  New  York  Marine  Artillery. 

No.  9. — Lieut.  James  M.  Pendleton,  Aide-de-Camp. 

No.  10. — Lieut.  Col.  Albert  W.  Drake,  Tenth  Connecticut  Infantry. 

No.  11. — Col.  John  Kurtz,  Twenty-third  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  12. — Col.  Thomas  G.  Stevenson,  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  13. — Col.  Edwin  Upton,  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  14. — Col.  Horace  C.  Lee,  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  15. — Brig.  Gen.  Jesse  L.  Reno,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Brigade. 

No.  16. — Capt.  Montgomery  Ritchie,  Aide-de-Camp. 

No.  17. — Lieut.  Col.  Alberto  C.  Maggi,  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  18. — Lieut.  Col.  Charles  A.  Heckman,  Ninth  New  Jersey  Infantry. 

No.  19. — Col.  Edward  Ferrero,  Fifty-first  New  York  Infantry. 

No.  20. — Col.  John  F.  Hartranft,  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

No.  21. — Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Parke,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Brigade. 

No.  22. — Col.  Isaac  P.  Rodman,  Fourth  Rhode  Island  Infantry. 

No.  23.— Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  Huger,  C.  S.  Army,  with  correspondence. 

No.  24. — Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise,  C.  S.  Army,  with  correspondence. 

No.  25. — Col.  H.  M.  Shaw,  Eighth  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  26.— Capt.  James  M.  Whitson,  Eighth  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  27. — Col.  John  Y.  Jordan,  Thirty-first  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  28. — Lieut.  Col.  Wharton  J.  Green,  Second  North  Carolina  Battalion. 

No.  29.— Maj.  H.  W.  Fry,  Forty-sixth  Virginia  Infantry. 

No.  30. — Lieut.  Col.  Frank  P.  Anderson,  Fifty-ninth  Virginia  Infantry. 

No.  31. — Maj.  G.  H.  Hill,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Fort  Bartow. 

No.  32. — Capt.  John  S.  Taylor,  C.  S.  Army,  in  charge  of  heavy  artillery. 

No.  33. — Report  of  Investigating  Committee  Confederate  H#ise  of  Representatives. 


74 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 
No.  1. 


[Chap.  XX. 


Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside,  V.  S.  Army,  with  congrat- 

ulatory  orders. 

Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

Roanoke  Island , N.  C.,  * February  10,  1862. 

General  : 1 liave  the  honor  to  report  that  a combined  attack  upon 
this  island  was  commenced  on  the  morning  of  the  7th  by  the  naval 
and  military  forces  of  this  expedition,  which  has  resulted  in  the  cap- 
ture of  six  forts,  forty  guns,  over  2,000  prisoners,  and  upward  of  3 000 
small-arms.  Among  the  prisoners  are  Colonel  Shaw,  commander  of 
the  island,  and  O.  Jennings  Wise,  commander  of  the  Wise  Legion 
The  latter  was  mortally  wounded  and  has  since  died.  The  whole  work 
was  finished  on  the  afternoon  of  the  8th  instant,  after  a hard  day’s 
fighting,  by  a brilliant  charge  on  the  battery  in  the  center  of  the  island 
and  a rapid  pursuit  of  the  enemy  to  the  north  end  of  the  island,  result- 
ing in  the  capture  of  the  prisoners  mentioned  above.  We  have  had 
no  time  to  count  them,  but  the  number  is  estimated  at  near  3 000. 

Our  men  fought  bravely,  and  have  endured  most  manfully  the  hard- 
ships incident  to  fighting  through  swamps  and  dense  thickets. 

It  is  impossible  to  give  the  details  of  the  engagement  or  to  mention 
meritorious  officers  and  men  in  the  short  time  allowed  for  writing  this 
report.  The  naval  vessel  carrying  it  starts  immediately  for  Hampton 
Loads,  and  the  reports  of  the  brigadier-generals  have  not  yet  been 
handed  in.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  the  officers  and  men  of  both  arms 
of  the  service  have  fought  gallantly  and  the  plans  agreed  upon  before 
leaving  Hatteras  were  carried  out. 

I will  be  excused  for  saying  in  reference  to  the  action  that  I owe 
everything  to  Generals  Foster,  Reno,  and  Pgrke,  as  more  full  details 
will  show. 

I am  sorry  to  report  the  loss  of  about  35  killed  and  about  200 
wounded,  10  of  them  probably  mortally.*  Among  the  killed  are  Col- 
onel Russell,  of  the  Tenth  Connecticut  Regiment,  and  Lieut.  Col 
Joseph  A.  Yiguer  De  Monteil,  of  the  D’Epineuil  Zouaves,  both  of 
whom  fought  most  gallantly. 

I regret  exceedingly  not  being  able  to  send  a full  report  of  the  killed 
and  wounded,  but  will  send  a dispatch-boat  in  a day  or  two  with  full 
returns. 

I beg  leave  to  inclose  a copy  of  a general  order  issued  by  me  on  the 
9tli  instant.  - 

I am  most  happy  to  say  that  I have  just  received  a message  from 
Commodore  Goldsborough,  stating  that  the  expedition  of  the  gunboats 
against  Elizabeth  City  and  the  rebel  fleet  has  been  entirely  successful. 
He  will  of  course  send  his  returns  to  his  Department. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  General,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina. 

Maj.  Gen.  Georgke  B.  McClellan, 

Commanding  U.  8.  Army , Washington , D.  C. 


*But  see  revised  statement,  p.  85. 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


75 


HAP.  XX.] 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

;No.  7.  J Roanoke  Island , N.  0.,  February  9,  1862. 

The  general  commanding  congratulates  his  troops,  on  their  brilliant 
aid  successful  occupation  of  Roanoke  Island.  The  courage  and  stead- 
ness  they  have  shown  under  fire  is  what  he  expected  from  them,  and 
te  accepts  it  as  a token  of  future  victory.  Each  regiment  on  the 
sland  will  inscribe  on  its  banner,  “ Roanoke  Island,  February  8, 1862.” 

The  highest  praise  is  due  to  Brigadier-Generals  Foster,  Reno,  and 
?arke,  who  so  bravely  and  energetically  carried  out  the  movement  that 
las  resulted  in  the  complete  success  of  the  Union  arms. 

By  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  A.  E.  Burnside : 

LEWIS  RICHMOND, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

Roanoke,  February  14,  1862. 


General  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  a more  detailed  report  of 
he  events  that  have  transpired  in  this  command  since  my  last  dispatch 
o the  General-in-Chief,  on  the  4th  instant,  from  Hatteras  Inlet,  stating 
hat  I was  about  ready  to  move  upon  Roanoke  Island  with  a portion 
if  this  command — of  about  twelve  regiments  and  a half- — the  hasty  dis- 
patch of  the  10th  instant  only  giving  the  general  result  of  the  move- 
ment spoken  of  above. 

The  difficulty  of  watering,  coaling,  and  provisioning  our  vessels  in 
Tie  midst  of  the  gale,  after  they  had  crossed  the  swash,  was  scarcely 
less  than  that  of  getting  our  vessels  into  the  sound,  owing  to  the 
aecessity  of  having  to  lighten  every  supply  vessel  over  the  bulkhead. 

On  the  evening  of  the  4th  instant  I reported  to  Commodore  Golds- 
borough  my  readiness  to  start  on  the  following  morning,  and  accord- 
ingly we  weighed  anchor  (the  naval  fleet  leading)  at  7 o’clock  on  the 
morning  of  the  5th  instant,  and  arrived  without  accident  oft'  Stumpy 
Point,  some  6 miles  from  the  entrance  to  Croatan  Sound,  at  5.80  p.  m., 
when  the  signal  to  anchor  was  given.  On  the  following  morning  (the 
Gth)  we  again  weighed  anchor  at  6.30  a.  m.,  but  could  proceed  no  farther 
than  to  the  entrance  of  the  sound  in  consequence  of  a thick  fog  which 
had  set  in.  The  fleet  of  the  enemy,  anchored  in  line  of  battle,  was 
discovered  off  Pork  Point  before  the  fog  came  on,  which  convinced  us 
that  the  first  battery  was  probably  at  that  point.  The  remaining  part 
of  that  day  was  used  in  consultation  and  arranging  the  vessels  for  a 
general  movement  on  the  following  day.  Five  of  my  armed  propellers 
were  lightened  of  their  troops  to  one  company  each,  and  were  sent 
forward  with  the  Picket  to  anchor  in  line  of  battle  with  the  naval  fleet, 
under  the  direction  of  Oapt.  S.  F.  Hazard,  of  the  Navy.  The  remain- 
ing two  propellers  I ordered  General  Parke  to  anchor  some  half  mile 
below,  as  a rear  guard  to  the  transport  fleet,  which  consisted  of  armed 
and  unarmed  steamers  and  sailing  vessels. 

We  weighed  anchor  early  next  morning  and  passed  through  the 
narrow  channel  at  the  entrance  to  Croatan  Sound  in  single  file,  the 
head  of  the  naval  fleet  arriving  off  Pork  Point  Battery  at  five  minutes 
past  9 o’clock  a.  m.,  when  the  first  gun  was  fired.  By  10.30  o’clock  the 
action  became  general,  the  attack  continuing  in  most  gallant  style 
until  6.30  p.  m.  One  of  the  two  propellers  forming  the  rear  guard, 
having  on  board  three  companies  of  troops,  moved  forward  and  joined 
Captain  Hazard’s  division. 


76 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX 


At  1 o’clock  p.  m.,  after  ordering  preparations  to  be  made  for  landing 
and  sending  a small  boat  with  Lieutenant  Andrews,  of  the  Nintli  Reg 
linen t lew  York  Volunteers,  and  six  of  the  Rhode  Island ‘Battalion 
into  Ashby’s,  to  make  soundings  and  examine  the  landings,  I proceeds 
to  the  naval  fleet,  and  after  consulting  with  Commodore  Goldsborou«I 
I determined  to  attempt  a landing  before  night.  After  visiting  m i 
armed  propellers  and  finding  them  doing  good  service,  on  my  return  t< 
the  troops’  fleet  I received  Lieutenant  Andrews’  report,  which  satisfiei 
me  that  the  decision  to  land  at  Ashby’s  Harbor  was  correct.  In  leav 
mg  the  landing  Lieutenant  Andrews  and  crew  were  fired  upon  by  th< 
enemy,  wounding  one  of  the  crew,  Charles  Viall,  of  Company  E Fiftl 
Rhode  Island  Battalion,  in  the  jaw.  The  reconnaissance  of  Lieutenan 
Andrews  was  such  as  reflects  great  credit  upon  him  as  an  officer, 
accordingly  ordered  General  Foster,  who  was  ready  with  his  first  detach 
ment,  to  attempt  a landing  at  some  point  in  the  harbor.  I had  before 
ordered  General  Reno,  who  was  also  ready  with  his  first  detachment 
to  halt  until  the  naval-boat  howitzers,  under  Midshipman  Porter,  couh 
be  brought  up  and  placed  in  position.  They  were  soon  taken  in  tov 
by  General  Reno,  and  in  a very  few  minutes  General  Foster’s  boat  am 
his  had  reached  the  shore,  and  were  soon  after  joined  by  the  boat* 
carrying  the  first  detachment  of  General  Parke’s  brigade.  I had  befort 
ordered  the  Picket  down  to  the  mouth  of  the  harbor  to  cover  the  landinc 
of  the  troops,  and  Captain  Rowan  had  also  brought  his  flag-ship  the 
Delaware,  under  command  of  Captain  Quackenbush,  down  for  the  saint 
purpose.  The  immediate  point  of  landing  at  Ashby’s  Harbor  in  the 
original  plan  was  Ashby’s  Landing,  but  on  approaching  it  General  Fostei 
discovered  an  armed  force  in  the  woods  in  the  rear  of  the  landing  and 
very  wisely  directed  his  leading  vessel  to  another  point  in  the  harbor, 
opposite  Hammond’s  house.  This  armed  force  was  soon  dispersed  by 
a few  shell  from  the  Delaware  and  Picket.  In  less  than  twenty  mim 
utes  from  the  time  the  boats  reached  the  shore  4,000  of  our  men  were 
passing  over  the  marshes  at  a double-quick  and  forming  in  most  perfect 
order  on  the  dry  land  near  the  house ; and  I beg  leave  to  say  that  I 
never  witnessed  a more  beautiful  sight  than  that  presented  by  the 
approach  ot  these  vessels  to  the  shore  and,  the  landing  and  forming  of 
the  troops.  Each  brigadier-general  had  a light-draught  steamer,  to 
which  were  attached  some  20  surf-boats  in  a long  line  in  the  rear.  Both 
steamers  and  boats  were  densely  filled  with  soldiers,  and  each  boat 
bearing  tfie  national  flag. 

As  the  steamers  approached  the  shore  at  a rapid  speed  each  surf- 
boat  was  “let  go,”  and  with  their  acquired  velocity  and  by  direction  of 
the  steersman  reached  the  shore  in  line.  Capt.  Lewis  Richmond,  as-i 
sistant  adjutant-general,  with  Mr.  W.  H.  French,  one  of  my  secre- 
taries, landed  with  the  Fourth  Rhode  Island,  and  Lieut.  D.  A.  Pell 
my  aide-de-camp,  with  the  Fifty-first  New  York,  Colonel  Ferrero.  I 
then  went  on  shore,  where  I met  General  Parke,  and  received  from  him 
his  report  of  the  disposition  of  the  forces  for  the  protection  of  the  land- 
ing of  the  remainder  of  the  division,  which  disposition  I entirely  ap- 
proved of.  Soon  after  I met  General  Reno,  whom  I left  in  command, 
General  Foster  having  returned  to  his  vessel  to  bring  up  his  second 
detachment. 

A position  on  land  having  thus  been  secured,  I went  on  board  the 
commodore’s  vessel  to  consult  with  him  in  reference  to  the  work  of  the 
next  day,  leaving  Captain  Richmond,  Lieutenant  Pell,  and  Mr.  French 
on  shore.  The  battery  at  Pork  Point  was  very  formidable,  and  had 
not  been  entirely  silenced  j but  when  I informed  him  that  the  entire 


Ohap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


77 


brce  would  probably  be  landed  that  night,  and  that  we  proposed  to 
idhere  to  the  original  plan  of  making  an  advance  early  in  the  morning 
ipon  the  inland  fort  in  the  center  of  the  island,  taking  it,  if  possible, 
uid  proceeding  rapidly  up  the  main  road,  thus  getting  in  the  rear  of 
ill  the  shore  batteries,  he  remarked  that  it  would  be  ?dangerous  to  our- 
selves for  him  to  renew  his  attack  on  the  next  morning,  as  his  people 
night  fire  into  our  own  troops,  and  I left  him  with  the  understanding 
:hat  the  attack  would  not  be  renewed  without  a signal  from  me. 

1 By  12  o’clock  that  night  the  entire  division  (except  the  Twenty-fourth 
Massachusetts,  Colonel  Stevenson,  detained  below  by  the  grounding  of 
:he  steamer),  together  with  Porter’s  battery  of  Dalilgren  howitzers,  had 
t>een  landed.  During  the  night  a careful  reconnaissance  was  made  by 
my  three  brigade  generals  and  their  troops  most  judiciously  posted,  the 
leading  regiment,  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Maggi,  occupying  a position  at  the  forks  of  the  road  above  Hammond’s 
house. 

Early  the  next  morning,  in  pursuance  of  the  plan  of  action,  General 
Foster  ordered  an  advance.  I arrived  on  the  ground  after  the  first 
three  regiments  of  the  brigade  had  filed  through  the  woods,  the  other 
regiment^  being  in  line  ready  to  move  forward  as  room  was  made  for 
them.  General  Reno’s  and  Parke’s  brigades  were  also  in  readiness  for 
a forward  movement. 

' On  reaching  a point  some  mile  and  a half  by  the  road  from  Ham- 
mond’s house,  General  Foster  came  upon  the  battery  across  the  road 
which,  from  information  received,  we  had  been  led  to  suppose  was  there, 
and  immediately  commenced  the  disposition  of  his  forces  for  his  attack; 
and  I here  beg  leave  to  say  that  I must  refer  you  almost  entirely  to  the 
reports  of  my  brigadier-generals  for  an  accurate  knowledge  of  their 
movements  during  the  day,  as  the  face  of  the  island  precluded  the 
! possibility  of  any  general  oversight  of  operations  on  the  field.  The 
road  from  the  opening  in  front  of  Hammond’s  house  to  the  battery, 
some  mile  and  a halfi  was  very  narrow  and  winding,  leading  through  a 
[deep  marsh,  covered  with  small  pines  and  thick  undergrowth,  present- 
ing the  appearance  of  being  impenetrable.  The  battery  is  not  visible 
until  a point  some  600  yards  from  it  is  reached,  when  the  road  takes  a 
turn  to  the  left,  and  the  timber  in  front  is  cleared  away,  that  the  guns 
may  have  full  sweep.  For  more  accurate  information  I beg  leave  to 
refer  you  to  the  accompanying  map  of  the  road.* 

Soon  after  the  attack  was  commenced  I ordered  General  Parke  to 
place  a regiment  in  the  woods  to  the  north  of  Hammond’s  house  and 
extending  up  to  the  main  road,  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  the  enemy’s 
turning  our  left.  The  Eighth  Connecticut,  Colonel  Harland,  was  de- 
tailed for  this  service.  The  Fifth  Rhode  Island  Battalion,  Maj or  W right, 
had  been  ordered  to  occupy  Ashby’s  house.  1 then  ordered  Captain 
D’Wolf,  with  a boat’s  crew  kindly  loaned  me  by  the  Delaware,  which 
way  lying  off  the  shore,  to  move  down  and  land,  and  carefully  reconnoiter 
the  ground  south  and  east  of  Ashby’s,  thus  ascertaining  that  there  was 
no  force  in  the  rear  or  on  our  right  flank.  Soon  after  this  the  firing 
indicated  that  General  Foster  was  very  warmly  engaged  with  the 
enemy.  General  Reno’s  brigade  was  forcing  its  way  up  to  his  relief 
and  General  Parke’s  brigade  was  ready  to  follow.  I had  ordered  Gen- 
eral Parke  to  have  the  Ninth  New  York,  Colonel  Hawkins,  land  their 
Dahlgren  howitzers  from  their  floating  battery  on  the  shore,  but  as  the 
marshy  ground  would  have  made  it  a half-daj’s  work,  I counter  - 

f 


* Not  found. 


78 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


mantled  the  order,  which  was  most  fortunate,  as  the  regiment  moved 
forward  in  time  to  take  a most  important  part  in  the  action. 

General  Foster  commenced  the  attack  by  putting  six  Dahlgren  how- 
itzers in  position  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  battery,  supporting  it  with  the 
Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts,  Colonel  Upton.  This  regiment  was  sup- 
ported by  the  Twenty-third  Massachusetts,  Colonel  Kurtz,  also  in  line. 
After  the  Tenth  Connecticut,  Colonel  Bussell,  came  up,  General  Foster 
ordered  the  Twenty-third  Massachusetts  and  Twenty-seventh  Massa-i 
chusetts,  Colonel  Lee,  to  pass  into  the  swamp  on  the  right,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  getting  on  the  left  flank  of  the  enemy.  Soon  after  this  the 
Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  exhausted  its  ammunition,  and  the  Tenth 
Connecticut  advanced  to  its  position.  All  these  movements  were  per- 
formed by  the  regiments  under  lead  of  their  respective  commanders 
with  the  most  commendable  efficiency.  The  skill  with  which  the  Dahl- 
gren howitzers  were  handled  by  Midshipman  Benjamin  Porter  and 
Acting  Master  J.  B.  Hammond  is  deserving  the  highest  praise,  and  I 
take  great  pleasure  in  recommending  them  to  the  favorable  notice  of 
the  Navy  Department.  At  this  time  the  number  of  wounded  arriving 
on  litters  indicated  that  the  engagement  was  serious,  and  two  hospitals 
were  established  by  my  brigade  surgeon,  Dr.  W.  H.  Church,  one  ati 
Hammond’s  house  and  the  other  at  Ashby’s,  where  the  wounded  were 
well  cared  for. 

In  the  mean  time,  General  Reno,  coming  up,  sent  word  to  General 
Foster  that  he  would  try  to  penetrate  the  dense  wood  to  the  left  and 
thus  turn  their  right  flank,  which  movement  was  approved  by  General 
Foster  and  was  carried  out  by  General  Reno,  the  Twenty-first  Massa- 
chusetts, Lieutenant-Colonel  Maggi,  leading,  followed  by  the  Fifty-first 
Kew  York,  Colonel  Ferrero;  Ninth  New  Jersey,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Heckman,  and  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania,  Colonel  Hartranft,  each  most 
gallantly  led  by  their  respective  commanders,  and  resulting  in  a com- 
plete success.  When  it  is  remembered  that  in  addition  to  the  obstacles 
of  thicket  and  underbrush  the  men  were  more  than  knee-deep  in  mud 
and  water,  it  seems  a most  wonderful  feat.  Immediately  after  Gen- 
eral Reno’s  brigade  had  cleared  the  road  General  Parke  came  up  with  I 
his  brigade,  and  was  ordered  by  General  Foster  to  support  the  Twenty- 
third  Massachusetts  and  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  Regiments, 
which  had  by  direction  of  General  Foster  most  gallantly  initiated  under 
their  colonels  a movement  to  turn  the  left  flank  of  the  enemy,  when  he 
at  once  turned  his  brigade  to  the  right,  the  Fourth  Rhode  Island  in  ad- 
vance, gallantly  led  by  its  colonel  and  Capt.  Lewis  Richmond,  my  as- 
sistant adjutant-general,  meeting  with  obstacles  equal  to  those  on  the 
left. 

Just  as  the  Ninth  New  York  was  entering  the  woods  to  follow  the 
Fourth  Rhode  Island  Generals  Foster  and  Parke,  discovering  that  the 
appearance  of  General  Reno  on  the  enemy’s  right  had  staggered  him, 
they  decided  to  order  the  Ninth  New  York  to  charge  the  battery  in 
front,  which  was  instantly  done,  and  at  once  the  road  was  filled  with  a 
sea  of  red  caps,  the  air  resounding  with  their  cheers.  The  charge  of 
General  Reno’s  leading  regiment,  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts,  and 
Fifty-first  New  York  was  simultaneous  with  the  charge  of  the  Ninth 
New  York,  when  the  enemy  broke  and  ran  in  the  greatest  possible  con- 
fusion, while  the  cheers  of  our  men  indicated  to  every  one  on  the  island 
that  we  had  carried  the  battery.  The  merit  of  first  entering  the  fort  is 
claimed  by  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  and  Fifty-first  New  York,  a 
few  men  from  each  regiment  entering  at  the  same  time,  one  regiment 
hoisting  the  regimental  flag  and  the  other  the  national  flag  on  the 
parapet. 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


79 


* 

Just  before  the  charge  the  steamer  Union  arrived  with  the  Twenty- 
fourth  Massachusetts,  which  I hastened  forward,  with  the  exception  of 
three  companies,  detailed  to  carry  up  ammunition.  It  must  be  remem- 
bered that  up  to  this  time  there  had  not  been  a single  horse  landed, 
owing  to  the  impossibility  of  getting  them  through  the  marsh  on  the 
shore.  All  the  ammunition  and  stores  had  to  be  transferred  by  oui; 
soldiers,  and  the  general  and  field  officers  had  to  perform  their  duties 
on  foot.  On  moving  up  the  road  toward  the  battery  I met  my  aide- 
de-camp,  Lieutenant  Fearing,  whom  I had  sent  to  the  front  to'report 
progress,  when  he  informed  me  that  an  advance  was  made  by  General 
Reno’s  brigade  immediately  after  the  battery  was  taken,  thus  antici- 
pating my  order  sent  by  Lieutenant  Anderson.  I had  learned  from  an 
officer  of  the  Richmond  Blues,  taken  prisoner  and  brought  to  me  by 
Capt.  William  Cutting  and  Lieut.  I).  A.  Pell,  that  there  w ere  no  more 
batteries  on  the  road. 

The  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts,  Colonel  Stevenson,  coming  up  fresh, 
General  Foster  pushed  on,  followed  by  General  Parke.  On  arriving  at 
the  road  leading  to  Pork  Point  Battery  I detailed  the  Fourth  Rhode 
Island  and  the  Tenth  Connecticut  from  General  Foster’s  brigade,  send- 
ing them  under  General  Parke  down  this  road  to  take  the  battery  in  the 
rear,  but  on  their  arrival  it  was  found  to  have  been  just  evacuated. 
The  pursuit  was  continued  by  Generals  Foster  and  Reno  to  the  head  of 
the  island  in  rear  of  Weir’s  Point  Battery,  where  the  entire  force  on  the 
island  had  concentrated  in  two  camps.  A slight  engagement  ensued, 
in  which  the  enemy  lost  four  men  killed,  after  wTkich  they  surrendered 
to  Generals  Foster  and  Reno  at  discretion.  The  entire  force  of  the 
enemy  on  the  island,  in  the  batteries,  and  stationed  -as  sharpshooters 
was  about  4,000.  Gov.  H.  A.  Wise  had  a force  in  reserve  at  Nag’s 
Head,  with  which  he  left  as  soon  as  he  heard  of  our  victory.  Their 
troops  were  well  posted  for  defense  and  their  inland  battery  well 
masked,  so  that  our  men  were  really  fighting  against  an  enemy  almost 
entirely  concealed.  The  force  that  surrendered  to  Generals  Foster  and 
Reno  consisted  of  150  officers  and  over  2,500  men.  Among  these  are 
two  colonels,  two  lieutenant-colonels,  and  three  majors. 

I omitted  to  mention  that  the  Ninth  New  York*  was  diverted  to  the 
right  of  the  main  road  by  General  Reno,  where  they  captured  some  00 
prisoners  in  their  attempt  to  escape  through  Shallow  Bag  Bay.  Among 
these  prisoners  was  Capt.  O.  Jennings  Wise,  avIio  wns  severely  wounded 
and  has  since  died.  The  loss  of  the  enemy  is  unknown,  as  many  had 
been  removed,  but  it  will  not  exceed  150  killed  and  wounded. 

By  this  victory  we  have  gained  complete  possession  of  this  island, 
with  five  forts,  mounting  thirty-two  guns,  winter  quarters  for  some 
4,000  troops,  and  3,000  stand  of  arms,  large  hospital  buildings,  with  a 
large  amount  of  lumber,  wheelbarrows,  scows,  pile-drivers,  a mud 
dredge,  ladders,  and  other  appurtenances  for  military  service,  of  which 
a careful  inventory  will  be  made  and  sent  on,  with  an  accurate  list  of 
prisoners,  by  our  next  dispatches. 

Fort  Forrest,  on  the  main  land,  opposite  Weir’s  Point,  was  burned  by 
the  rebels  on  the  evening  of  the  8th  instant.  It  contained  eight  guns, 
thus  making  their  loss  forty  guns  in  all.  The  Navy  has  recovered 
nearly  all  from  this  fort  in  good  condition. 

When  it  is  remembered  that  for  one  month  our  officers  and  men  had 
been  confined  on  crowded  ships  during  a period  of  unusual  prevalence 
of  severe  storms,  some  of  them  having  to  be  removed  from  stranded 
vessels,  others  in  vessels  thumping  for  days  on  sand  banks  and  under 
constant  apprehension  of  collision,  then  landing  without  blankets  or 


80 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


tents  on  a marsliy  shore,  wading  knee-deep  in  mud  and  water  to  a per- 
manent landing,  exposed  all  night  to  a cold  rain,  then  fighting  for  four 
hours,  pursuing  the  enemy  some  8 miles,  bivouacking  in  the  rain, 
many  of  them  without  tents  or  covering,  for  two  or  three  nights,  it 
seems  wonderful  that  not  one  murmur  or  complaint  has  been  heard 
from  them.  They  have  endured  all  these  hardships  with  the  utmost 
"fortitude,  and  have  exhibited  on  the  battle-field  a coolness,  courage, 
and  perseverance  worthy  of  veteran  soldiers.  The  companies  left  on 
board  the  armed  propellers  during  the  naval  engagement  rendered 
most  efficient  service,  and  are  highly  spoken  of  by  the  different  brigade 
commanders.  There  had  been  placed  on  these  propellers,  by  the  brig- 
adier-generals, aides-de-camp,  who  rendered  marked  service  during 
the  action,  as  did  also  the  officers  and  men  of  the  Marine  Artillery  in 
charge  of  the  guns,  headed  by  Col.  William  A.  Howard. 

I desire  to  tender  my  thanks  to  Capt.  S.  F.  Hazard,  IT.  S.  Navy, 
commanding  division  of  armed  vessels,  for  his  efficient  management; 
of  the  division.  The  vessels  comprising  this  division  were  the  Picket, 
Capt.  T.  P.  Ives;  Yedette,  Captain  Foster;  Hussar,  Captain  Crocker; 
Lancer,  Captain  Morley;  Ranger,  Captain  Emerson;  Chasseur,  Cap- 
tain West;  Pioneer,  Captain  Baker.  The  Picket  was  particularly 
serviceable  in  covering  the  landing  of  the  troops. 

I must  express  to  Commodore  Goldsborough  and  the  officers  of  his 
fleet  my  high  appreciation  and  admiration  of  their  gallantry,  and  my 
thanks  for  the  kind  assistance  rendered  us  from  time  to  time  in  our 
joint  labors. 

I have  to  thank  my  personal  staff  for  their  efficient  aid  in  the  work 
through  which  we  have  passed.  . They  are  as  follows : 

Dr.  W.  H.  Church,  brigade  surgeon;  Capt.  Lewis  Richmond,  assist- 
ant adjutant-general;  Capt.  William  Cutting,  assistant  quartermaster; 
Capt.  James  F.  D’Wolf,  assistant  commissary;  Lieut.  D.  W.  Flagler, 
ordnance  officer;  Lieut.  D.  A.  Pell,  aide-de-camp;  Lieut.  G.  R.  Fear- 
ing, aide-de-camp ; Lieutenant  Andrews,  topographical  officer.  All  of 
these  officers  have  rendered  most  efficient  service  in  their  several 
capacities. 

Mr.  D.  R.  Larned,  my  private  secretary,  accompanied  me  to  thei 
shore,  and,  with  Mr.  W.  H.  French,  my  other  secretary,  were  very 
serviceable  in  communicating  with  the  vessels  and  forces,  doing  the 
duty  of  volunteer  aides.  I beg  leave  to  refer  you  to  the  report  of  Dr. 
W.  H.  Church,  brigade  surgeon,  for  list  of  casualties,  which  amount  to 
41  killed  and  181  wounded.*  Among  the  killed  I regret  to  record  the 
following  officers : Col.  Charles  L.  Russell,  Tenth  Connecticut;  Lieut. 
Col.  Yiguer  De  Monteil,  of  Fifty -third  New  York ; Second  Lieut.  John 
H.  Goodwin,  jr.,  Company  B,  Twenty-third  Massachusetts;  Lieuten- 
ant Stillman,  Tenth  Connecticut ; Capt.  Joseph  J.  Henry,  Ninth  New 
Jersey.  I refrain  from  mentioning  special  cases  of  heroism  in  the 
brigades,  as  it  would  be  wrong  to  make  distinctions  where  all  behaved 
so  gallantly. 

In  closing  this  report  I beg  leave  again  to  call  your  attention  to 
Brigadier-Generals  Foster,  Reno,  and  Parke,  who  throughout  the 
action  showed  the  greatest  gallantry  and  directed  the  movements  of 
the  troops  with  skill  and  energy.  From  the  moment  they  joined  me  I 
have  given  them  large  discretionary  powers,  and  the  sequel  has  shown 
that  I have  acted  wisely.  I especially  recommend  them  to  the  favor 
of  the  Department. 

* But  see  revised  statement,  p.  85. 


81 


Chap.  XX.]  BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 


A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding  Department  North  Carolina. 
f Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  U.  S.  Army , Washington , D.  C . 




No.  2. 

* 

Report  of  Lieut.  Daniel  W.  Flagler , U.  S.  Ordnance  Department. 


Headquarters  Department  North  Carolina, 

Roanolce  Island , February  20,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  for  your  information  the  fol- 
: lowing  report  of  the  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  captured  on  Roa- 
noke Island  during  the  engagement  of  the  8th  instant : 

The  total  number  of  cannon  captured  was  forty- two.  In  the  inland 
battery  were  three,  all  mounted  on  field  carriages  and  covered  by  an 
? earthwork  with  embrasures.  One  of  these  is  a heavy  24-pounder  boat 
howitzer;  one  a 6-pounder  brass  field  gun,  model  1846,  and  the  other  an 
1 18-pounder  brass  field  gun — probably  a Mexican  trophy.  There  were 
no  caissons  with  these  pieces,  but  the  implements  and  equipments  of 
the  pieces  were  uninjured,  and  a quantity  of  ammunition  in  the  ammu- 
nition-chest of  each  of  the  limbers.  In  Fort  Foster,  at  Pork  Point, 
were  nine  guns.  Eight  of  these  are  heavy  32-pounder  navy  smooth- 
bore guns  and  one  a banded  rifled  gun — this  last  peculiarly  rifled, 
and  has  been  manufactured  by  the  enemy  since  the  beginning  of  the 
war.  It  has  seven  grooves,  the  bottom  of  the  groove  being  cylindrical 
in  form,  intersecting  at  one  edge  with  the  surface  of  the  bore..  At  the 
other  edge  the  groove  is  eleven-hundredths  of  an  inch  deep.  It  has 
thus  but  one  shoulder,  which  is  at  the  right  edge  of  the  groove,  as  the 
twist  is  to  the  left.  The  grooves  and  bands  are  of  equal  width,  and 
have  a uniform  twist  of  one  turn  in  32  feet.  The  gun  is  manufactured 
from  a 32-pounder  navy  gun  of  61-cwt.  A portion  at  the  breech  was 
turned  down  to  a perfect  cylinder,  and  then  wrought-iron  cylinders 
shrunk  around  the  breech,  similarly  to  the  Parrott  gun.  The  cylinder, 
when  complete,  is  24J  inches  long  and  1£  inches  thick.  The  few  experi- 
ments I have  been  able  to  make  with  the  gun  show  that  it  will  com- 
pare not  unfavorably  in  range  and  accuracy  c/f  hre  with  the  Parrott 
gun.  The  only  projectiles  found  for  it  were  shells,  ready  filled  and 
fused  with  the  navy  fuse.  It  is  mounted  en  barbette , with  the  French 
navy  carriage,  on  a chassis  traversing  a semicircle.  Two  of  the  other 
guns  at  the  left  flank  of  the  battery  are  mounted  en  barbette , traversing 
the  entire  circle.  All  the  remaining  guns  have  embrasures,  and  are 
mounted  on  the  French  navy  carriage,  with  platform.  The  fort  has 
two  small  magazines.  In  them  and  in  the  fort  were  found  828  32- 
pounder  round  shot,  84  stand  of  grape,  a few  shells,  and  110  cartridges 
for  the  32-pounder  guns.  There  was  also  a small  quantity  of  musket 
ammunition  and  ammunition  for  12-pounder  boat  howitzers  stored  in 
the  magazines. 

In  Fort  Parke  were  found  four  32-pounder  navy  guns  mounted  en 
6 r r — yol  IX 


82 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


barbette  on  the  army  32-pounder  barbette  carriages,  and  one  spare 
carriage  without  the  chassis.  It  had  also  440  32-pounder  round  shot, 
but  all  the  ammunition  had  been  taken  from  the  magazine  and  de- 
stroyed. The  implements  belonging  to  the  guns  in  this  fort  were  not 
much  injured. 

In  Fort  Reno  were  twelve  guns.  Of  these  the  two  upon  the  left 
flank  of  the  battery  are  rifled  guns  like  the  one  in  Fort  Foster  which  I 
have  already  described,  and  mounted  upon  the  same  carriage  en  bar- 
bette. All  the  others  are  smooth-bore  32-pounder  navy  guns  of  57  and 
61  cwt.  The  two  upon  the  right  flank  are  mounted  en  barbette  and 
the  remaining  eight  on  the  navy  carriage  at  embrasures.  In  the  fort 
and  magazines  were  2,144  32-pounder  round  shot,  110  shells  for  the 
rifle  guns,  and  42  32-pounder  shells.  All  the  ammunition  had  also 
been  taken  from  this  magazine  and  destroyed.  I found  in  the  water 
near  the  shore  just  outside  this  fort  a 32-pounder  gun,  which  the  enemy 
had  apparently  let  fall  in  trying  to  land  it.  I have  hauled  it  out,  and  it 
necessary  it  can  be  mounted  on  a ‘spare  carriage.  The  remaining  two 
guns  arein  Fort  Ellis,  opposite  Nag’s  Head. 

All  of  the  guns  excepting  the  three  held  pieces  in  the  inland  battery 
I found  had  been  spiked  and  other  ineffectual  attempts  made  to  render 
them  unserviceable.  Six  of  them  were  spiked  with  rat- tail  files  $ the 
remainder  with  wrought-iron  spikes  and  nails.  They  were  all  loaded, 
some  with  several  shot  wedged,  and  others  with  charged  shells  unfused 
and  inverted,  so  arranged  as  to  explode  in  the  gun  if  fired.  All  ol 
these  have  been  removed  without  accident,  and  the  guns  are  now  ready 
for  service. 

In  Forts  Reno  and  Foster  considerable  injury  was  done  to  the  car- 
riages, implements,  and  equipments.  The  guns  being  mounted  on  navy 
carriages,  the  breechings  and  tackle-ropes  were  in  most  cases  cut. 
With  some  of  the  carriages,  however,  the  breechings  and  tackle  were 
unnecessary,  so  that  with  some  repairs,  using  the  spare  parts  and  im 
piemen ts  that  were  found,  the  injuries  have  been  so  far  repaired  that 
the  guns  can  now  be  maneuvered  and  fired  without  danger.  I have 
made  some  400  cartridges  for  the  32-ponnder  guns,  and  so  distributee! 
the  ammunition  found  in  these  two  forts  as  to  render  them  as  defensi 
ble  as  possible  until  larger  supplies  can  be  obtained. 

The  implements  and  equipments  in  Fort  Parke  sustained  much  les^ 
injury.  These  have  all  been  repaired,  but  as  the  magazine  of  the  fori 
is  very  damp,  and  vou  told  me  you  intended  to  change  the  position  o 
the  battery,  I have  "done  nothing  to  supply  the  guns  with  ammunition 

The  small-arms  captured  were  generally  of  an  inferior  quality.  O 
those  that  have  been  preserved  there  are  about  1,500.  They  are  prin 
cipally  smooth-bore  muskets  (caliber  .69)  made  at  Harper’s  Ferry,  ii 
1832,  and  have  either  flint-locks  or  have  been  altered  to  percussion 
Some  of  the  enemy’s  troops  were  armed  with  fowling-pieces,  sport-in* 
rifles,  and  a motley  collection  of  arms  nearly  useless  for  military  pur 
poses.  These  were  all  carried  away  by  our  soldiers  and  people  fron 
the  transports.  The  iron  parts  found  among  the  ruins  of  the  cam] 
near  Fort  Foster  indicate  that  some  200  or  300  muskets  must  have  beei 
destroyed  by  fire  on  the  day  of  the  bombardment.  I am  also  satisfiec 
that  a quantity  of  arms  and  ammunition  has  been  buried  or  hidden  oi 
the  island,  although  we  have  as  yet  been  unable  to  find  it.  Several  mus 
kets  have  been  sent  as  trophies  to  naval  officers  of  the  fleet  in  accord 
ance  with  your  orders.  This  must  account  for  the  large  discrepancy 
between  the  number  of  prisoners  and  small-arms  captured.  There  an 
also  1,600  sets  of  infantry  equipments,  many  of  them  incomplete.  Sue! 


83 


Chap.  XX.]  BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 

of  these  and  of  the  muskets  as  will  not  he  required  for  service  in  this 
department  I have  had  boxed,  preparatory  to  any  disposition  of  them 
the  Ordnance  Bureau  may  direct.  The  greater  part  of  the  amrmlnition 
found  in  the  cartridge-boxes  of  the  prisoners  was  so  much  injured  by 
exposure  to  the  weather  that  I do  not  think  it  worth  preserving.  In 
the  magazine  at  Fort  Foster  were  found  in  good  order  40,000  musket 
i cartridges  (caliber  .69),  2,200  cartridges  for  Minie  rifles  (caliber  .54), 
and  134  rounds  fixed  ammunition  for  the  24-pounder  boat  howitzer. 
The  magazines  in  the  forts  are  generally  not  well  constructed,  affording 
insufficient  protection  for  the  ammunition  against  dampness.  They  are 
bomb-proofs,  and  built  of  such  light  soil  that  in  falling  weather  the 
dampness  easily  penetrates  to  the  magazines.  If  they  are  to  contain 
) considerable  stores  or  ammunition  for  any  length  of  time  I would 
[ respectfully  recommend  that  they  be  reconstructed  or  replaced  by  new 
ones. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  serv- 
ant, 

D.  W.  FLAGLER, 

Lieutenant , Ordnance  Officer  Department  North  Carolina . 

General  Ambrose  E.  Burnside, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina. 



i 

Bo.  3. 

Report  of  Surg.  William  H.  Church , TJ.  8.  Army , Acting  Medical 

Director. 

Headquarters  Department  of  Borth  Carolina, 

Roanohe  Island , February  12,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
killed  and  wounded  of  your  command  consequent  upon  the  attack  upon 
Roanoke  Island : - , 

February  7 a small  boat,  having  been  ordered  on  shore  to  recon- 
- noiter,  was  attacked  by  the  enemy,  when  Charles  Viall,  a private  in 
Company  E,  of  the  Fifth  Rhode  Island  Battalion,  received  a wound  in 
the  lower  jaw,  causing  a compound  comminuted  fracture,  from  which 
he  will  probably  recover. 

i February  8,  upon  the  advance  of  General  Foster  the  houses  and  out- 
houses at  the  landing  were  at  once  prepared  for  the  reception  of  the 
wounded,  and  placed  in  charge  of  Surgeon  Storrs,  of  the  Eighth  Regi- 
ment Connecticut  Volunteers,  his  regiment  having  been  ordered  there 
to  protect  the  landing  of  our  forces  and  hold  the  position.  Brigade 
Surgeon  Thompson  now  advanced  with  the  troops  to  take  charge  of 
the  wounded  on  the  field  of  battle,  where  he  remained  until  the  bat- 
tery was  taken,  assisting  in  the  care  of  the  wounded,  and  sending  them 
with  the  least  possible  delay  to  the  hospital.  Through  the  energy  of 
Dr.  Thompson  much  suffering  has  been  avoided. 

Finding  that  there  was  not  sufficient  room  in  these  buildings  to 
. receive  the  wounded,  we  immediately  took  possession  of  Ashby’s  house, 
a short  distance  from  the  first  and  quite  as  convenient  to  the  field  of 
action.  The  Fifth  Rhode  Island  Battalion  having  been  ordered  to 
guard  this  point,  Asst.  Surg.  A.  Potter  took  charge  of  it  until  further 
i assistance  could  be  procured.  Surgeon  Minis,  of  the  Forty-eighth  Regi- 


84 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX, 


ment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  (owing  to  the  death  of  Surgeon  Weller, 
by  drowning,  at  Hatteras  Inlet,  he  was  detailed  to  serve  with  the  Ninth 
New  Jersey  Volunteers),  was  very  soon  placed  in  charge  of  this  tem- 
porary hospital,  where  there  was  sufficient  room  to  receive  the  wounded 
not  provided  for.  During  the  action  of  this  day  32  were  killed  and  174 
wounded.*  Col.  Charles  L.  Russell,  of  the  Tenth  Connecticut  Volun- 
teers, was  shot  through  the  lung,  and  died  almost  immediately.  Lieut. 
Col.  Viguer  De  Monteil,  of  the  Fifty-third  Regiment  New  York  Volun- 
teers, was  also  killed  by  a ball  passing  through  his  brain. 

Accompanying  this  please  find  a list  of  the  killed  and  wounded  of 
each  regiment  that  participated  in  the  engagement.! 

The  surgical  portion  of  your  command  has  performed  its  duties  faith- 
fully and  fearlessly,  Surg.  J.  Marcus  Rice,  of  the  Twenty-fifth  Regiment 
Massachusetts  Volunteers,  having  been  wounded  in  the  midst  of  his 
very  arduous  duties.  The  ball  grazed  his  side,  fortunately  without 
inflicting  a severe  wound. 

We  have  found  three  unusually  large,  commodious,  and  well- venti- 
lated buildings  erected  upon  the  island  for  hospital  purposes,  which 
will  afford  ample  accommodation  for  our  sick  and  wounded.  The 
largest  hospital  at  the  north  end  of  the  island  I have  placed  in  the 
charge  of  Surg.  S.  A.  Green,  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Regiment  Massachu- 
setts Volunteers,  and  Surg.  George  A.  Otis  has  the  management  of  the 
two  hospitals  near  the  fort  at  the  center  of  the  island. 

I would  respectfully  ask  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  wounded 
of  the  enemy  have  received  the  same  care  and  attention  from  the  sur- 
geons as  our  own  wounded.  Permit  me  to  take  advantage  of  this  op- 
portunity to  express  our  gratitude  to  the  officers  of  the  United  States 
gunboat  Delaware,  the  surgeon  having  dressed  a large  number  of  our 
wounded. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant  and  friend, 

WM.  HENRY  CHURCH, 
Brigade  Surgeon  and  Acting  Medical  Director . 


* But  see  revised  statement,  p.  85. 

t The  revised  statement  on  p.  85  is  substituted  for  that  submitted  by  Dr.  Church. 


Chap.  XX.'J 

# 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C.  85 

Return  of  casualties  in  the  Department  of  North  Carolina,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  Ambrose 
E.  Burnside,  at  the  battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  A.  C.,  February  8,  1862. 

[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.] 


Killed. 

Wounded.  I 

Captured 
or  missing. 

Commands. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men . 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Aggregate. 

First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster. 

23d  Massachusetts -* 

1 

2 

8 

11 

6 

3 

41 

4 

1 

11 





16 

2 

4 

2 

47 

55 

Total  First  Brigade 

3 

16 

6 

107 

132 

Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Jesse  L.  Reno. 

5 

2 

37 

44 

3 

11 

9 

23 

l 

6 

28 

2 

37 

1 

2 

3 

Total  Second  Brigade 

1 

14 

2 

77 

13 

107 

Third  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Parke. 

2 

15 

Total  Third  Brigade 

2 

15 



...... 

17 

Unassigned  Troops. 

j st  JN6W  X otk  marine  -a-rcmeiy,  A/eiatuuiciii  ......... 

noth  “KT/\Ttr  Vat»1t  Pnmn otut  P _ 

2 

5 

7 

yy in  in e w iuik,  v/uui paoy 

"TV  r* rJ f A f "NT Aftll  FoTollTI  P. 

t5 

32 

204 

IT 

264 

(jrrana  total  uepannient  ox  an ui  to  -------- 

1 

t SludeaTieutCol.  Joseph  A.  Viguer  De  Monteil,  whose  regiment,  Fifty-third  New  York,  was  not 
engaged. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First 

Brigade , ivith  sketch . * 

Headquarters  First  Brigade, 

Roanoke  Island , February  9,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  obedience  to  the  orders  of 
the  commanding  general  and  in  pursuance  of  the  plan  of  observations 
previously  agreed  upon  in  a council  ordered  by  him,  I proceeded  to 
land  my  brigade  on  Itoanoke  Island  on  the  evening  of  the  /th  instant, 

* The  sketch  is  taken  from  his  report  to  the  Committee  on  the  Conduct  of  the  War. 


86  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA.  [Chap.  XX. 

♦ 

while  the  engagement  between  the  fleet  and  the  enemy’s  battery  on 
Pork  Point  was  still  in  progress.  I embarked  500  of  the  Twenty -fifth 
Massachusetts  Regiment  on  the  Pilot  Boy,  and  towing  all  the  boats 
from  the  vessels  of  my  brigade  loaded  with  detachments  from  the  dif- 
ferent regiments  composing  it,  in  all  1,400  men,  I headed  for  Ashby’s 
Harbor,  which  had  been  agreed  upon  as  the  landing  point.  As  I ap- 
proached closely  1 detected  with  the  glass  the  presence  of  an  ambus- 
caded force  of  infantry  and  artillery,  and  in  consequence  immediately 
headed  the  boat  for  the  point  just  above  the  harbor,  in  front  of  Ham- 
mond’s house,  where  the  force  landed  without  molestation.  General 
Reno,  with  the  Union  and  Patuxent,  and  General  Parke,  in  the  Phoenix, 
landed  immediately  after  my  detachment,  making  in  all  over  4,000  men 
landed  in  twenty  minutes. 

As  soon  as  the  force  at  Ashby’s  Harbor  saw  us  land  at  the  point  above 
they  commenced  a hasty  retreat,  in  order  not  to  be  cut  oft*  by  road  from 
Hammond’s  house,  which  intersects  the  main  road  through  the  island 
above  its  intersection  with  the  road  from  Ashby’s.  During  the  landing 
Captain  Rowan,  U.  S.  Navy,  commanding  the  first  division  of  the  fleet, 
ordered  the  Delaware,  Captain  Quackenbusli,  U.  S.  Navy,  and  Captain 
Hazard,  U.  S.  Navy,  ordered  the  Picket,  Capt.  T.  P.  Ives,  to  run  in 
and  cover  the  landing  with  their  guns.  This  was  handsomely  done, 
although  it  required  but  a few  shells  to  accelerate  the  retreat  of  the  force 
from  Ashby’s. 

I returned  and  brought  on  shore  a second  load,  and  then  landed, 
leaving  Captain  Potter,  assistant  commissary  of  subsistence  of  my 
brigade,  on  board  the  steamer  to  continue  the  debarkation.  Binding 
that  the  general  commanding  had  returned  to  the  fleet,  I assumed  com- 
mand as  senior  officer  present.  During  the  night  my  entire  brigade 
(with  the  exception  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts,  on  board  the 
Guide  and  aground)  were  landed,  as  also  the  brigades  of  Generals  Reno 
and  Parke.  The  night  was  rainy,  and  the  men,  wet  from  their  march 
from  the  landing,  were  obliged  to  bivouac  around  their  fires,  but  kept 
in  excellent  spirits.  I made  a reconnaissance  in  the  evening  with  Gen- 
erals Reno  and  Parke,  to  ascertain  the  position  of  the  enemy,  the  roads, 
&c.,  and  made  all  the  proper  dispositions  for  the  night. 

At  daybreak  of  the  8th  I advanced  my  brigade  across  the  creek  in 
accordance  with  the  plan  of  operations  above  referred  to,  the  Twenty- 
fifth  Massachusetts  being  in  the  advance.  On  reaching  a clearing  I 
met  the  enemy’s  pickets,  and  was  fired  upon  by  them.  They  then  fell 
back  on  a run,  followed  by  our  skirmishers.  We  advanced  to  the  main 
road,  and  then  upon  that  road  until,  when  near  the  middle  of  the  island, 
we  came  upon  the  enemy  in  a strong  position  prepared  for  battle.  The 
road  at  this  point  was  a causeway,  flanked  on  each  side  by  an  almost 
impassable  marsh,  with  thick  underbrush  on  either  side.  In  front  of 
the  battery  the  trees  were  cut  down,  so  as  to  give  a clear  sweep  of  their 
guns  for  a distance  of  700  yards  in  front,  for  the  whole  of  which  dis- 
tance the  advance  in  front  was  fully  exposed  to  the  fire  of  three  pieces 
in  embrasure,  supported  by  a force  of  about  2,000  men.  Of  the  seven 
light  pieces  from  the  ships’  launches,  six  were  placed  on  the  road  so 
that  two  could  be  used  at  a time,  flanked  by  the  Twenty-fifth  Massachu- 
setts Volunteers  in  line.  This  regiment  was  supported  by  the  Twenty- 
third  Massachusetts  Regiment,  also  in  line.  We  then  advanced  to  the 
attack.  As  soon  as  the  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  and  the  Tenth 
Connecticut  Volunteers  came  up  I ordered  the  Twenty-third  Massachu- 
setts, supported  by  the  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts,  to  advance 
through  the  morass  on  our  right  and  endeavor  to  turn  the  enemy’s  left. 


Chap.  XX.]  BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C.  87 

The  Tenth  Connecticut  was  brought  up  to  support  the  Twenty-fifth 

Massachusetts.  , , . , ~ , 

General  Eeno  then  came  up  with  his  whole  brigade,  and  proceeded 
to  turn  the  right  of  the  enemy’s  position  through  the  swamp  on  that 
side  General  Parke  next  came  up  with  his  brigade,  and  I directed 
him  to  push  forward  to  the  right,  following  the  Twenty-third  and 
Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  in  the  attempt  to  turn  the  enemy’s  left 
through  the  marsh  and  swamp  on  that  side. 

In  the  mean  time  the  engagement  was  warm  in  front.  The  light  pieces 
having  fired  all  but  ten  rounds,  I ordered  their  fire  to  cease,  and  these 
rounds  to  be  preserved  for  an  emergency,  keeping  the  pieces  in  position. 
The  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  had  expended  its  ammunition  and  suf- 
fered considerable  loss.  I therefore  advanced  the  Tenth  Connecticut 
in  front  of  the  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Regiment,  and  held  the  lat- 
ter in  reserve. 

After  the  engagement  (which  commenced  at  8 o’clock)  had  lasted 
three  and  a half  hours,  the  Ninth  New  York  (the  last  of  General  Parke’s 
regiments)  coming  on  the  field,  followed  by  the  Twenty-fourth  Massa- 
chusetts, I directed  General  Parke  to  order  it  to  charge.  The  order 
was  given,  and  the  regiment  charged  at  a run  with  yells,  cheered  by 
the  other  troo'ps,  right  up  the  road  at  the  battery.  Major  Kimball,  of 
this  regiment,  exhibited  marked  gallantry,  leading  the  charge  by  sev- 
eral rods.  The  enemy  left  the  battery.  Their  retreat  was,  however,  a 
necessity  from  other  causes,  for  General  Reno  had  at  this  time  turned 
the  enemy’s  right  and  was  firing  into  the  rear  of  their  battery  and 
charging  at  the  same  time  into  them,  and  the  Twenty-third  Massachu- 
setts, at  the  head  of  General  Parke’s  column,  sent  to  turn  the  enemy’s 
left,  had  also  made  its  appearance  on  the  other  flank.  The  enemy  re- 
treated in  precipitation,  leaving  three  guns  unspiked,  their  caissons, 
and  the  dead  and  some  wounded  in  the  battery.  General  Reno  im- 
mediately pushed  on  in  pursuit,  and  I sent  to  report  to  the  commanding 
general  the  result  of  the  battle  and  the  anticipation  of  another  one  at 
the  upper  batteries.  I then  followed  General  Reno  with  my  brigade, 
the  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts,  which  was  fresh,  being  in  front.  I 
soon  overtook  and  passed  General  Reno,  who  was  busy  in  securing 
the  fugitives  attempting  to  escape  in  boats  across  to  Nag’s  Head,  and 
pushed  forward  toward  the  upper  end  of  the  island  to  overtake  the  re- 
treating regiments  of  the  enemy.  > 

Just  before  reaching  the  fort  on  the  upper  extremity  of  the  island  I 
was  met  by  a flag  of  truce,  borne  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Fowle,  of  the 
Thirty-first  North  Carolina  Volunteers,  who  came  from  Col.  H.  M.« 
Shaw,  of  the  Eighth  North  Carolina  Volunteers,  commanding  the  en- 
emy’s forces  on  the  island,  to  ask  what  terms  of  surrender  would  be 
granted.  I replied,  none  but  those  of  unconditional  surrender.  He 
asked  what  time  would  be  allowed  for  consultation.  I replied,  just  as 
long  as  it  will  take  to  get  to  Colonel  Shaw  and  return,  and  sent  Major 
Stevenson,  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts,  to  bring  back  the  an- 
swer. Becoming  impatient,  I advanced  with  the  Twenty-fourth  Mas- 
sachusetts, but  when  near  their  camp  was  met  by  the  flag  of  truce 
returning  to  say  that  my  terms  were  accepted.  I then  marched  into 
the  main  camp  and  received  the  surrender  of  Colonel  Shaw  as  com- 
mander of  the  enemy’s  forces  on  the  island,  with  all  his  forces.  I im- 
mediately ordered  Colonel  Kurtz,  with  the  Twenty-third  Massachusetts, 
to  advance  and  secure  the  camp  of  the  Thirty-first  North  Carolina 
Volunteers,  near  by,  but  his  arrival  was  anticipated  by  General  Reno, 
who  had  already  secured  their  camp,  with  the  regiment  it  contained. 


88 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


The  camps  consisted  of  well-built  quarters,  store-houses,  and  hospitals 
all  newly  built.  The  forces  surrendered  numbered  in  all  about  3,000.  ’ 

The  two  forts  on  the  island  above  the  one  on  Pork  Point  are  well 
constructed,  and  mount  in  all  sixteen  guns  of  heavy  caliber,  with  well- 
stocked  magazines. 

After  securing  the  prisoners  and  arms  I went  to  report  the  result  to 
the  general  commanding,  and  found  him  in  the  Pork  Point  Battery 
upon  which  he  had  advanced  with  General  Parke,  supported  by  the 
Tenth  Connecticut  (one  of  my  brigade). 

I have  only  time  in  this  hasty  report  to  notice  in  general  terms  the 
conduct  of  the  troops,  and  to  say  that  I never  saw  men  stand  up  more 
gallantly  under  a hot  fire  than  (lid  the  regiments  of  my  brigade,  espe- 
cially the  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  and  Tenth  Connecticut  Kegi- 
ments,  both  of  which  suffered  quite  severely.  Colonel  Bussell,  of  the 
Tenth  Connecticut,  fell  gallantly  at  the  head  of  his  regiment,  and  after 
his  fall  the  regiment  was  commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Drake.  I 
would  notice  here  the  gallant  conduct  of  Midshipman  Benjamin  Porter 
and  Acting  Master  J.  B.  Hammond,  of  the  Bavy,  who  commanded  the 
light  guns  from  the  ships’  launches  and  were  constantly  under  fire. 
They  both  deserve  commissions  for  their  admirable  conduct  on  this 
occasion.  % 

The  reports  of  the  several  regimental  commanders  of  my  Brigade 
which  are  herewith  inclosed,  will  show  in  detail  the  names  of  those 
officers  and  men  who  distinguished  themselves  by  their  gallant  con- 
duct. They  all  behaved  admirably,  both  officers  and  men. . 

With  the  exception  of  Captain  Hoffman  and  Lieutenant  Anderson, 
who  were  on  the  field  with  me,  and  Captains  Potter  and  Hudson,  who 
were  engaged  in  bringing  up  ammunition  and  provisions,  my  aides 
were  on  the  gunboats  Banger,  Hussar,  and  Vedette— -Captain  Mes- 
singer  and  Lieut,  Ed.  K.  Strong  on  the  Banger,  Lieut.  James  M.  Pen- 
dleton on  the  Vedette,  and  James  H.  Strong  on  the  Hussar.  Lieuten- 
ants Van  Buren  and  Gordon,  of  the  Signal  Corps,  volunteered  as  aides 
at  the  time  and  were  of  great  service  in  carrying  orders. 

I would  mention  that  Viguer  De  Monteil,  lieutenant-colonel  of  the 
Pifty -third  Begiment,  came  up  during  the  action  and  asked  permission 
to  fight  as  a private.  This  I granted,  and  he  passed  on  in  front  to  the 
position  of  the  Tenth  Connecticut,  where  he  stood  coolly  aiming  and 
firing  his  rifle  and  exhibiting  the  most  marked  bravery.  He  fell  shot 
dead  toward  the  close  of  the  engagement. 

The  colonels  of  the  different  regiments  of  my  brigade  exhibited 
marked  ability,  coolness,  and  daring. 

The  Twenty-fifth  Begiment  was  commanded  by  Colonel  Upton,  the 
Twenty-seventh  by  Colonel  Lee,  the  Twenty-third  by  Colonel  Kurtz, 
the  Twenty-fourth  by  Colonel  Stevenson,  the  Tenth  Connecticut  bv 
Colonel  Bussell. 

I am,  sir,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  EOSTEB, 
Brigadier -General,  U . 8.  Army. 

Capt.  Lewis  Bichmond, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


2!hap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


89 


Notes- 

TortTTugen I? guns  and  hat  dwtiatnacc, 

Fort  Mcmchiud.  .A  g uns 

Fort  Bartow. 8 guns 

BdllastPLBaxV. . . 2 guns 
J\. . handing  Plaxe 
BaJUle  wnsfinxghL 
H , Hebda  swraidauL 


SKETCH 

OF 

ROANOKE  ISLAND, N,  C. 


No.  5. 


Report  of  Capt.  Daniel  Messinger , Acting  Aide-de-Camp. 

Headquarters  General  Foster’s  Brigade, 

On  Board  Pilot  Boy , off  Roanoke  Island , February  9,  1862. 

Captain:  1 have  the  honor  to*report  that  by  order  of  Brigadier- 
General  Foster,  on  the  afternoon  of  February  6,  Lieut.  E.  N.  Strong, 
aide-de-camp,  and  myself  went  on  board  the  gunboat  Banger  to  carry 
out  his  instructions.  Tbe  troops  on  board  the  Banger  (the  Twenty- 
seventh  Massachusetts  Volunteers),  with  the  exception  of  one  company 
retained  as  a guard  for  the  boat,  and  a detail  from  Company  E to  serve 
as  gunners,  were  placed  on  the  steamer  New  York  and  schooner  Be- 


90 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


emit.  We  then,  at  2 o’clock  p.  m.,  reported  as  ready  for  action  to 
Captain  Hazard,  IT.  S.  Navy,  on  steamer  Picket. 

At  9.30  the  next  morning  a signal  from  the  commodore  was  repeated 
to  us  from  the  Picket  to  get  under  way  and  follow  the  fleet  into  action, 
At  12.30  we  opened  fire  with  one  30-pounder  Parrott  gun  on  the  battery 
at  Pork  Point,  and  lodged  our  first  shell  within  the  battery.  We  con- 
tinued our  fire  with  the  Parrott  gun  and  two  12-pounder  Wiard  guns 
whenever  opportunity  was  afforded  us  by  the  position  of  the  fleet  until 
the  order  came  from  the  commodore  to  cease  firing  at  6.30  p.  m.  Wt 
then  had  thrown  121  shells,  many  with  effect. 

In  our  endeavor  to  get  within  shorter  range  we  ran  aground,  and 
thereby  lost  an  hour.  Although  many  of  the  enemy’s  shells  exploded 
near  us,  our  vessel  was  not  struck. 

On  the  following  day,  just  after  we  were  ordered  ifto  action,  we  were 
signaled  that  the  attack  had  been  commenced  by  our  land  forces,  and 
we  were  thus  prevented  from  reopening  our  fire. 

I respectfully  call  to  your  notice  the  zeal  and  efficiency  of  Lieutenant 
Eyre,  of  the  Naval  Brigade,  under  whose  immediate  direction  the  Par- 
rott and  Wiard  guns  were  served  on  the  gun-deck,  and  of  Lieutenant 
Dennison,  of  the  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  who  had 
command  of  the  12-pounder  Wiard  boat  howitzer  on  the  upper  deck.  I 
append  the  report  of  Lieutenant  Eyre,  with  interesting  memoranda  as 
to  the  service  of  the  guns,  and  remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
s 01*  V clU  t 

DANIEL  MESSINGER, 

Acting  Aide-de-  Camp. 

Capt.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  A djutant-  Genera  l. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Lieut.  C.  Cushing  Eyre , First  New  York  Marine  Artillery. 

Roanoke  Island,  February  8, 1862. 

I have  the  honor  to  report  the  working  of  the  battery  of  the  Ran- 
ger during  the  action  at  Pork  Point  Battery  on  February  7 and  8 : 

Commenced  firing  at  12.30  at  the  distance  of  3 miles.  As  the  vessel 
worked  ahead  we  were  several  times  obliged  to  wear  ship,  each  time 
running  nearer  to  the  battery.  During  the  afternoon  the  firing  was 
more  effective,  owing  to  the  vessel  having  been  brought  closer  to  the 
enemy’s  position.  During  the  latter  part  of  the  engagement  the  shell 
were  thrown  into  the  Point  battery  with  accuracy. 

Expended  during  the  action,  3 Parrott  shell,  elevation  17 J°,  dis- 
tance about  3 miles ; 6 Parrott  shell,  elevation  15°,  distance  about  2.J  j 
miles  ; 3 Parrott  shell,  elevation  16°,  distance  about  2|  to  3 miles ; 12 
Parrott  shell,  elevation  12°,  distance  about  2J  miles ; 2 Parrott  shell, 
elevation  13J°,  distance  about  2J°  miles. 

From  Wiard’s  12-pounder,  expended  20  shell  and  shot  at  an  eleva- 
tion of  15°  to  17°,  distance  2|  miles ; 38  shell  and  shot  at  an  elevation 
of  8°  to  12°,  distance  2 J miles. 

About  3.30  p.  in.,  being  within  range  for  the  12-pounder  boat  how- 
itzer, commenced  firing  with  it,  and  expended  45  shot  and  shell,  very 


91 


IAP.  xx. 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


of  them  falling  short.  This  gun  was  in  charge  of  Lieutenant  Den 
ison  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  Volunteers. 

t Respectfully,  0_  0USHING  EYEE, 

: First  Lieutenant  Marine  Artillery. 

Capt.  Daniel  Messinger,  Gunboat  Banger. 


No.  7. 


Report  of  Lieut.  James  H.  Strong , Aide-de-Camp . 

Headquarters  General  Foster’s  Brigade, 

Pilot  Boy , February  10,  1862. 

1 captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  obedience  to  General 
Foster’s  orders,  on  the  afternoon  of  February  6 1 went  on  board  the 
•unboat  Hussar  to  carry  out  his  instructions.  The  troops  on  the  Hus- 
ar  were  distributed  on  board  the  Highlander,  Skirmisher,  and  New 
Brunswick,  with  the  exception  of  one  company,  detained  on  board  as  a 
uard  for  the  ship  and  18  men  detailed  for  working  the  guns.  At  7 
I.  m.  we  reported,  as  directed,  to  Captain  Hazard,  U.  S.  Navy,  onboard 

he  Picket.  w . , , , , 

At  7 a.  m.,  8th  instant,  Captain  Hazard  came  alongside  and  ordered 
ls  to  follow  the  Pioneer  on  signal  from  Picket.  This  signal  we  re- 
vived at  10  o’clock  a.  m.,  and  as  soon  as  the  Pioneer  got  under  way 
re  followed  closely.  At  11  o’clock  a.  m.  we  received  signal,  “ Prepare 
or  action,”  and  shortly  after,  “Attack.”  We  made  all  ready;  as  soon 
bS  we  were  within  range  commenced  firing  at  the  battery  at  Pork  Point 
Gth  one  30-pounder  Parrott  and  sometimes  at  the  gunboats  of  the 
>nemy  when  they  ventured  within  range  of  our  G-pounder  Wiard,  until 
i signal  from  the  commodore,  “Cease  firing,”  at  6.30  p.  m.,  when  we 
mchored  out  of  range  of  the  battery. 

The  guns  were  served  with  coolness  and  accuracy  by  Lieutenant 
Tedden,  of  the  Marine  Artillery,  but  owing  to  our  draught  of  water 
9 feet  8 inches)  we  were  unable  to  get  as  near  the  enemy  as  we 

wished.  __ 

1 Captain  Alexander,  of  the  Twenty- third  Massachusetts  Volunteers, 

, md  Mr.  Ward,  first  officer  of  the  Hussar,  rendered  very  material  as- 
sistance in  serving  the  guns  during  the  action. 

I annex  report  of  Lieutenant  Hedden,  which  I requested  him  to 
bend,  in  regard  to  the  working  of  the  guns,  as  it  contains  some  inter- 
. isting  details. 

1 1 remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ JAMES  H.  STRONG, 

Aide-de-Camp. 

I 

Capt  Southard  Hoffman,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  8. 


Report  of  Lieut.  James  A.  Hedden , First  Few  York  Marine  Artillery. 

•Gunboat  Hussar, 

r-  Roanoke  Lsland , February  10,  1862. 

Sir  : In  answer  to  your  request  this  morning  I herewith  inclose  you 
a statement  of  the  working  of  guns  on  board  the  gunboat  Hussar  at 


92 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


the  bombardment  of  Pork  Point,  Friday,  February  7,  1862:  102  cap 
shell  from  two  30-pounder  Parrotts;  82  percussion  shell  from  two 
30-pounder  Parrotts ; 52  shot  from  one  6-pounder  Wiard ; 6 percussion 
shell  from  one  6-pounder  Wiard  (fell  short).  The  former  had  an  eleva- 
tion  of  from  8°  to  10°  at  a distance  of  from  2J  to  1J  miles.  A portion 
of  the  firing  was  directed  to  a rebel  steamer  which  came  under  cover  ol 
battery  but  retired  soon,  evidently  having  a few  shot  through  her. 
The  Wiard  gun  (6-pounder)  shot  with  great  accuracy  at  a distance  of 
2 miles  with  as  much  elevation  as  we  could  give  her,  suppose  about 
11°.  The  first  shot  was  fired  from  the  Hussar  at  11.45  a.  m.,  and  con- 
tinued firing  until  a signal  from  the  commodore,  “ Cease  firing,”  at  6.30 
p.  m.,  when  we  came  to  anchor  out  of  range  of  their  batteries. 

JAMES  A.  HEDDEN, 

Lieutenant . 

Lieut.  James  H.  Strong. 


:No.  9. 

Report  of  Lieut.  James  M.  Pendleton , Aide-de-Camp. 

Headquarters  General  Foster’s  Brigade, 

Roanoke  Lsland , February  10,  1862. 

I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  Thursday,  6th  instant,  in  obedi- 
ence to  orders  from  General  Foster,  I went  on  board  the  steamer  Vedette, 
to  carry  out  his  instructions.  I found  the  vessel  armed  with  one  30- 
pounder  Parrott  gun  and  one  12-pounder  Wiard  gun,  with  ammunition, 
and  three  companies  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  Volunteers, 
Colonel  Stevenson.  I transferred  two  companies  to  the  steamer  Guide, 
Company  F,  Captain  Pratt,  remaining  on  board,  and  reported  to  Cap- 
tain Hazard  at  1.30  p.  m.  The  next  morning  (Friday),  at  7 o’clock  a.  m., 
Captain  Hazard,  U.  S.  Navy,  gave  orders  to  follow  the  propeller  Banger 
at  a signal  from  the  Picket.  At  10  a.  m.  the  signal  to  start  was  given, 
when  we  followed  in  the  wake  of  the  Banger.  At  11.30  prepared  for 
action,  and  followed  the  fleet  to  within  about  2 miles  of  Pork  Point 
Battery.  At  12  m.  opened  fire  from  the  30-pounder  Parrott  gun  upon 
the  enemy’s  gunboats.  On  their  retiring  and  our  coming  within  easy 
range  of  Pork  Point  Battery  we  fired  also  from  the  12-pounder  Wiard 
gun  with  accuracy. 

By  continual  sounding  we  approached  the  batteries  as  near  as  the 
draught  of  the  vessel  would  allow,  and  kept  up  the  fire  as  often  as 
good  aim  could  be  obtained. 

At  6.20  p.  m.  the  signal,  “ Cease  fire,”  was  given  Bom  the  Southfield, 
when  we  anchored  beyond  the  reach  of  the  enemy’s  guns,  disappointed 
at  not  being  able  to  run  nearer  the  fort.  The  30-pounder  Parrott  gun 
was  well  served  by  Lieutenant  Baxter,  of  the  Marine  Artillery,  not 
firing  except  with  good  aim.  The  12-pounder  Wiard  was  faithfully 
served  by  Corporal  Gilford,  of  the . 

Accompanying  I have  the  honor  to  forward  some  details  of  the  work- 
ing of  the  30-pounder  Parrott  gun,  drawn  up  at  my  request  bv  Lieu- 
tenant Baxter.* 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  M.  PENHLETONT, 

Aide-de-Camp 

Capt.  Southard  Hoffman,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Omitted  as  of  no  present  importance. 


ihap.  XX. j BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C.  93 

No.  10. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Albert  W.  Brake , Tenth  Connecticut  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Tenth  Begiment  Connecticut  Vols., 

U.  S.  Steamer  New  Brunswick , February  11,  1862. 

Sir:  In  obedience  to  orders  of  Brigadier-General  Foster  I beg  leave 
;o  report  the  part  taken  by  the  Tenth  Begiment  Connecticut  Volun- 
eers  in  the  action  of  Boanoke  Island,  February  8,  1862  : 

The  regiment  was  landed  in  three  detachments  during  the  afternoon, 
tnd  bivouacked  that  night  near  Hammond’s  house.  The  next  morning 
it  about  7 o’clock  the  regiment  was  ordered  to  fall  in,  and  shortly  after 
noved  with  thd  remainder  of  the  First  Brigade  up  the  island.  We 
iad  marched  but  a short  distance  before  the  sound  of  sharp  firing  in 
idvance  told  us  that  the  action  had  commenced.  Arriving  on  the  field 
he  regiment  was  ordered  to  form  line  and  commence  firing  on  the  en- 
imy,  but  owing  to  the  dense  bushes  on  our  right  and  the  exceedingly 
jwarnpy  nature  of  the  ground  there  was  room  only  for  the  right  wing  to 
nove  forward  into  position.  The  left  wing  was  held  in  reserve  a short 
listance  in  their  rear.  Firing  was  immediately  commenced  by  the 
Ight  wing  and  was  maintained  with  much  steadiness  and  constancy. 

Near  the  close  of  the  action  Colonel  Bussell  was  killed.  I imme- 
liately  assumed  command,  and  after  the  enemy  had  left  the  battery 
ormed  the  regiment,  and  taking  our  position  on  the  left  of  the  brigade 
followed  in  pursuit.  After  proceeding  up  the  road  some  4 miles  I was 
ordered  by  General  Burnside  to  march  the  regiment  in  rear  of  the 
Fourth  Bhode  Island  Volunteers  to  Pork  Point  Battery,  where  we  ar- 
rived late  in  the  afternoon  and  found  it  abandoned.  I bivouacked  the 
regiment  near  the  fort  until  the  morning  of  the  10th,  when,  in  obedience 
'bo  orders  from  General  Foster,  I marched  the  regiment  to  the  upper  end 
)f  the  island,  whence  it  was  transferred  to  its  old  quarters  on  board 
the  steamer  New  Brunswick. 

Before  closing  this  report  I feel  it  my  duty  to  say  a word  in  com- 
mendation of  the  behavior  of  the  officers  and  men  of  the  regiment 
luring  the  action  and  to  speak  of  the  noble  manner  in  which  they  all 
performed  their  duty.  Captains  Pardee,  Coit,  Leggett,  and  Jepson, 
Kriio  were  in  the  right  wiog  and  hottest  of  the  fire,  with  their  lieuten- 
ants, showed  great  coolness  and  courage,  and  merit  the  highest  com- 
mendation. Captains  Leggett  and  Jepson  were  wounded. 

Appended  is  a list  of  our  killed  and  wounded.* 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

ALBEBT  W.  DBAKE, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Tenth  Regt.  Conn.  Vols. 

Capt.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  First  Brigade,  Bept.  North  Carolina. 

ii  


No.  11. 

Report  of  Col.  John  Kurtz,  Twenty-third  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-third  Massachusetts  Volunteers, 

Camp  Foster , Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.,  February  9,  1862. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  obedience  to  General  Foster’s 
orders,  my  regiment,  at  daybreak  on  the  morning  of  Saturday  last,  fol- 


^Embodied  in  statement  on  p.  85. 


94 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


lowed  the  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  from  the  ground  upon  which  we 
bivouacked  the  night  before  up  the  main  road  of  this  island.  At  8.15 
o’clock  we  arrived  at  a crotch  of  the  road,  and  found  General  Foster,! 
with  the  Twenty -fifth  Massachusetts,  already  engaged  with  the  rebels! 
at  a breastwork  which  they  had  thrown  across  the  road  in  a well-chosen 
position.  I was  ordered  and  formed  my  regiment  in  column  by  division! 
in  rear  of  the  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts.  I subsequently  received  ant 
order  to  march  by  a flank  across  the  fire  of  the  enemy  and  through  an 
almost  impenetrable  swamp  and  turn  his  flank,  and  after  an  effort  of 
two  and  a half  hours  of  the  most  fatiguing  and  laborious  exertion  I 
succeeded  in  getting  four  companies  into  position  to  rake  the  left  flank 
of  the  enemy’s  lines  behind  his  work.  My  men  introduced  themselves 
to  his  notice  by  opening  a brisk  fusillade,  which  he  did4  not  condescend 
to  return,  but  immediately  commenced  to  retreat,  when  the  whole  line 
of  our  troops  made  a charge  which  made  him  accelerate  his  pace  toward 
his  other  strongholds,  and  we  took  possession  of  the  work. 

I cannot  speak  with  too  much  praise  of  the  conduct  of  the  officers 
and  men  of  my  command  for  their  indomitable  perseverance  in  forcing 
through  the  swamp.  The  undergrowth  was  a thick  bush,  entwined  by 
a strong  brier,  which  caused  it  to  close  immediately  upon  the  disap- 
pearance of  a man  through  it.  The  water  and  mud  all  the  way  was 
above  the  knees  of  the  men,  several  of  whom  I saw  waist-deep  in  the 
mire,  and  taking  into  consideration  the  fact  that  this  was  the  first  time 
nearly  all  of  them  had  been  under  fire,  I cannot  speak  two  highly  of 
their  conduct,  individually  and  collectively. 

After  a rest  of  about  half  an  hour  we  were  ordered  to  follow  the 
Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts,  which  had  just  arrived,  and  pursue  the 
retreating  rebels,  and  after  a march  of  5 or  6 miles  we  entered  the 
encampment  or  winter  quarters  of  the  rebels,  and  found  they  had  sur- 
rendered to  General  Foster,  and  we  were  ordered  to  take  up  our  quar- 
ters there  with  the  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  and  disarm  and  guard 
the  prisoners,  some  1,900  officers  and  men,  with  their  arms,  equipments, 
ammunition,  and  ordnance,  quartermaster  and  commissary  stores. 

Y ery  respectfully, 

JOHN  KURTZ, 

Colonel , Commanding  Twenty -third  Massachusetts . 

Captain  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  First  Brigade,  Coast  Division. 


Ko.  12. 

Report  of  Col.  Thomas  G.  Stevenson,  Tic enty -fourth  Massachusetts  In-\ 

fantry. 

The  steamer  Admiral,  with  the  Twenty -fourth  Regiment  onboard, 
having  got  aground  on  the  afternoon  of  7th  February,  the  regiment 
was  not  landed  until  the  morning  of  the  8tli.  At  7 o’clock  in  the  morn- 
ing the  steamers  Union  and  Eagle  came  alongside  the  Admiral  and 
took  the  troops  on  board.  Two  companies — A,  Captain  Redding,  and 
E,  Captain  Hooper — were  put  on  board  the  Eagle,  under  command  of 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Osborn,  and  seven  companies  on  the  Union,  under 
command  of  myself.  Company  C,  Captain  Pratt,  had  been  detailed  for 
service  on  board  the  gunboat  Vedette,  where  it  remained  during  the 
action.  The  Union  landed  the  troops  on  board  at  the  same  place  that 


Uiiai*.  XX.]  BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C.  95 

troops  had  been  landed  the  night  previous,  and  about  2 miles  below 
where  the  action  was  taking  place.  After  landing  I was  ordered  by 
General  Burnside  to  advance  as  rapidly  as  possible.  I accordingly 
marched  the  regiment  forward,  but  unfortunately  arrived  after  the 
battery  had  been  carried.  On  arriving  at  the  captured  fort  I reported 
to  General  Foster,  who  ordered  us  to  the  front  to  follow  up  the  enemy. 

After  marching  some  distance  we  met  the  Fifty-first  New  York  and 
continued  with  them  until  we  were  halted  at  the  sand  hills.  From  this 
point  we  were  ordered  forward  alone  to  take  what  prisoners  we  could, 
as  many  were  reported  to  be  leaving  in  small  boats.  We  were  accom- 
panied by  General  Foster.  After  marching  about  3 miles  we  were  met 
by  a flag  of  truce  from  the  enemy,  proposing  a suspension  of  hostilities 
until  the  following  morning.  The  reply  was  given  by  General  Foster, 
“ Unconditional  surrender,”  and  time  enough  given  to  return  to  their 
camp  and  send  back  an  answer.  Major  Stevenson,  of  the  Twenty- 
fourth,  was  ordered  to  return  with  the  flag  and  bring  back  the  reply. 
After  some  time  he  returned  with  the  answer  that  they  surrendered. 
I was  then  ordered  by  General  Foster  to  advance  and  take  possession 
of  their  camp.  On  the  way  Company  H,  Captain  Daland,  and  Com- 
pany B,  Captain  Austin,  were  detached  and  ordered  to  proceed  along 
the  shore  and  stop  any  boats  that  might  be  leaving  with  rebels,  the 
remaining  five  companies  numbering  about  300  men,  and  entered  their 
camp,  where  Colonel  Shaw,  commanding,  delivered  up  his  sword  to 
General  Foster,  who  ordered  me  to  take  command*  I then  ordered  the 
prisoners  to  be  mustered  and  their  arms  to  be  taken  possession  of.  All 
the  muskets  were  then  placed  in  the  quartermaster’s  building  and  a 
guard  put  over  them.  While  this  was  being  done  Private  Sanborn, 
Company  K,  was  wounded  in  the  arm  by  the  accidental  discharge  of 
one  of  the  muskets.  The  officers  were  allowed  to  retain  their  side- 
arms  by  order  of  General  Foster.  The  prisoners  were  then  placed  in 
quarters  and  a large  guard  placed  over  them. 

Company  B returned  from  their  scouting,  having  fired  upon  and 
brought  to  a boat  containing  10  rebels,  including  3 officers.  Company 
H also  returned,  having  captured  two  boats  containing  9 men  and  2 
officers.  They  also  brought  in  about  150  prisoners  captured  in  the 
woods  and  on  the  shore.  The  regiment  was  joined  during  the  evening 
by  the  two  companies  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Osborn.  They  had 
been  employed  in  bringing  ammunition  forward  from  the  landing. 

THOS.  G.  STEVENSON, 

Colonel  Twenty-fourth  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers . 

Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  First  Brigade. 


No.  13. 

Report  of  Col.  Edwin  TJpton , Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Eegiment, 

Camp  on  Roanohe  Island , February  10,  1862. 
Sir  : At  about  daybreak  on  the  morning  of  Saturday,  the  8th  instant, 
by  order  of  Brigadier-General  Foster,  my  regiment  left  the  bivouac  it 
had  occupied  the  night  previous  at  Hammond’s  house,  and  advanced, 
[ accompanied  by  General  Foster,  in  its  position  on  the  right  of  his  bri- 


96 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


gade.  Arriving  at  the  ford  about  one-lialf  mile  from  Hammond’s  house, 
the  advance  was  fired  upon  by  the  enemy’s  pickets.  1 was  imme- 
diately ordered  by  General  Foster  to  throw  forward  skirmishers,  and 
ordered  Company  A,  Capt.  Josiah  Pickett,  to  deploy,  supported  by 
Company  E,  Capt.  Thomas  O’Neil.  The  enemy’s  fire  was  returned,  and 
his  pickets  retired  rapidly  to  and  down  the  main  road,  followed  by  the 
skirmishers.  Advancing  to  about  a mile  from  the  ford,  they  reported 
having  discovered  the  enemy  in  position,  apparently  about  2,000  strong. 
General  Foster  at  once  ordered  me  to  form  the  regiment  in  line  of  bat- 
tle across  the  road,  the  right  resting  on  a clearing  commanded  by  the 
guns  of  the  enemy,  the  left  extending  into  the  woods  and  thicket.  Fire 
was  opened  by  both  parties,  our-  artillery  shortly  after  getting  into  posi- 
tion, supported  by  the  right  wing  of  my  regiment.  I was  ordered  to 
and  did  press  steadily  forward,  bringing  oar  line  within  about  300 
yards  of  the  enemy’s  battery.  Fire  was  kept  up  by  us  without  inter- 
mission for  about  three  hours  until  about  10.30  o’clock  a.  m.,  when,  our 
ammunition  being  exhausted,  I was  ordered  to  form  in  column  by  com- 
pany in  rear  of  our  right,  which  was  done  in  good  order.  Thb  men 
rested  on  their  arms,  waiting  for  a fresh  supply  of  ammunition  until, 
the  enemy  having  left  his  work,  I was  ordered  to  advance  in  company 
with  the  remainder  of  General  Foster’s  brigade.  Arriving  at  the  upper 
end  of  the  island,  I was  ordered  by  General  Foster  to  quarter  in  this 
camp,  then  in  possession  of  the  Twenty-third  and  Twenty-fourth  Massa- 
chusetts Eegiments. 

Appended  is  a list  of  killed  and  wounded,  amounting  to  6 killed  and 
42  wounded.*  I would  express  my  great  satisfaction  with  the  conduct 
of  the  regiment,  both  officers  and  men.  It  was  throughout  the  en- 
gagement of  the  bravest  kind,  standing  as  they  did  for  hours  in  water 
to  their  knees  and  waists,  exposed  to  an  incessant  fire  of  musketry, 
grape,  and  shell,  with  no  disposition  on  the  part  of  any  man  to  waver. 
The  skirmishing  of  Company  A,  Capt.  Josiah  Pickett,  was  performed 
m a manner  that  would  have  done  credit  to  regulars.  I can  but  ex- 
press my  particular  satisfaction  with  the  manner  in  which  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Sprague,  Major  McCafferty,  and  Adjutant  Harkness  performed 
the  duties  devolving  upon  them  and  the  support  rendered  me  by  them 
throughout  the  engagement. 

I am,  sir,  yours,  very  respectfully, 

EDWIN  UPTON, 

Colonel , Commanding  Twenty -fifth  Regiment  Mass.  Vols. 

Capt.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General , First  Brigade. 


No.  14. 

Report  of  Col.  Horace  C.  Lee , Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-seventh  Regiment  Mass.  Vols., 

In  Camp  at  DougWs  Farm , February  10,  1862. 
Sir:  I would  respectfully  report  the  movements  of  the  regiment 
under  my  command  at  the  engagement  February  8 : 

We  had  but  nine  companies  engaged,  Company  D having  been  de- 


* But  see  revised  statement  on  p.  85. 


OHAr*.  XX. 1 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


97 


tailed  to  serve  on  board  the  Ranger.  Three  of  my  captains  were  sick 
and  left  on  the  Recruit.  Upon  arriving  ajb  the  scene  of  action  we  im- 
mediately, by  order,  filed  to  the  right  of  the  road  into  the  swamp,  and 
formed  in  line  in  rear  of  the  Twenty -third.  We  soon  commenced  mov- 
•ino’  to  the  front  and  across  to  the  left,  firing  as  we  could  get  an  oppor- 
tunity. As  soon  as  we  were  uncovered  by  the  Twenty-third,  or  par- 
tially so,  being  then  directly  in  front  of  the  enemy,  we  commenced  firing. 
We  here  met  with  all  the  loss  sustained.  Upon  reaching  the  cover  of 
the  woods,  finding  that  we  could  only  fire  by  company  on  account  ot 
the  Twenty-third  being  partly  in  front  and  the  Tenth  Connecticut  par- 
tially covering  our  rear  and  firing,  we  formed  in  that  manner,  marching 
out  in  succession,  firing  deliberately,  then  retiring.  We  were  in  this 
manner  evidently  doing  good  execution,  when  orders  were  received  to 
push  on  and  flank  the  enemy  upon  their  left.  This,  on  account  of  the 
dense  undergrowth  of  vines  and  bushes,  the  water  and  mud  being  also 
much  deeper,  was  extremely  difficult,  and  our  progress  consequently 
slow.  Before  we  could  possibly  get  through  we  heard  the  cheering,  and 
i goon  learned  that  the  rebels  had  retreated.  After  the  engagement  we,  as 
ordered,  followed  up  the  road  as  rapidly  as  possible  to  the  rebel  encamp- 
ment. Finding  that  they  had  surrendered  and  were  under  guard,  we 
encamped  on  Dough’s  farm,  near  there,  and  now  await  further  orders. 

I cannot  speak  in  too  strong  terms  of  the  good  conduct  of  both  offi- 
cers and  men.  With  scarcely  an  exception  they  behaved  with  the 
utmost  coolness  and  bravery.  Lieutenant  Fowler  had  his  sword  and 
sheath  deeply  indented  by  a grape  shot.  Lieutenant  Goodale  had  his 
sword  knocked  from  his  hands  and  bent  nearly  double  by  a ball. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

TT . G.  LEE, 

Colonel , Comdg . Twenty -seventh  Regiment  Mass.  Vols. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster. 


No.  15. 

i Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Jesse  JL.  Reno , TJ.  S.  A.rmy , commanding  Second 

Brigade. 

Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

Late  Camp  31st  N.  0.  Begt.,  now  Camp  Burnside, 

February  10,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  compliance  with  orders 
from  General  Burnside  I embarked  the  Twenty -first  Massachusetts  Reg- 
iment and  eight  companies  of  the  Fifty-first  Regiment  New  York  Vol- 
unteers upon  light-draught  steamboats  and  proceeded  toward  Ashby’s 
Harbor.  General  Burnside  coming  up,  ordered  me  to  wait  until  the 
boat  howitzers,  then  being  rowed  towards  my  vessels,  should  arrive. 
While  waiting,  General  Foster,  with  a portion  of  his  command,  passed 
ahead.  As  soon  as  the  howitzers  arrived  they  were  taken  in  tow,  pre- 
ceded by  the  gunboats  Picket  and  Delaware,  and  under  cover  of  their 
fire  we  effected  a landing,  no  resistance  being  offered.  General  Foster 
first  reached  the  shore,  then  my  command,  followed  immediately  by 
J General  Parke’s,  and  within  twenty  minutes  over  4,000  men  were 
landed.  I immediately  dispatched  Captain  Neill,  assistant  adjutant- 
general,  to  land  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  qnd  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania,  all 
of  whom  were  landed  before  9 o’clock  p.  m.  The  general  commanding 
7 R R — YOL  IX 


98 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX 


passed  me  as  I was  landing,  and  having  given  direction  to  secure  and 
hold  the  position,  returned  to  the  fleet,  leaving  me  in  command,  Gen 
eral  Foster  having  returned  to  bring  up  the  rest  of  his  brigade.  I sem 
the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  Volunteers  to  occupy  the  road  ant 
woods  in  front,  General  Parke  having  previously  sent  out  skirmishers 
to  hold  the  woods  on  the  right  and  left. 

General  Foster  having  returned,  he,  General  Parke,  and  myself  pro 
eeeded  to  the  front  of  our  lines  and  made  as  careful  a reconnaissance  as 
circumstances  would  allow.  In  accordance  with  the  plan  previously 
adopted  in  council  and  ordered  by  the  general  commanding,  Genera" 
Foster  proceeded  at  daylight  with  his  brigade,  and  about  8 o’clock  met 
and  engaged  the  enemy.  I followed  with  my  brigade  in  the  followiue 
order:  The  Twenty-first  Massachusetts,  Fifty-first  Hew  York,  Hinth 
Hew  Jersey,  and  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania.  As  the  road  was  very  nar- 
row and  the  woods  and  swamp  on  each  side  almost  impenetrable,  we 
proceeded  but  slowly,  General  Foster’s  brigade  occupying  the  road 
Finding  it  impossible  to  proceed  directly  to  the  front,  I sent  Lieutenant 
Morris,  my  aide,  to  inform  General  Foster  that  I would  endeavor  to 
penetrate  the  woods  and  swamp,  and  thus  turn  their  right.  General 
Foster  having  approved  the  plan,  I proceeded  at  the  head  of  the  Twenty- 
first  Massachusetts  Volunteers  toward  the  enemy’s  right.  We  were 
soon  hotly  engaged,  but  without  stopping  I kept  moving  my  flank 
toward  the  left,  but  owing  to  the  depth  of  water  and  dense  under- 
brush we  could  make  only  slow  progress.  Finally,  after  the  lapse  of 
about  two  hours,  we  succeeded  in  turning  their  right.  I then  ordered 
a charge,  which  was  most  gallantly  executed  by  the  Twenty-first  Massa- 
chusetts, Fifty-first  Hew  York,  and  Hinth  Hew  Jersey.  The  Fifty-first 
Pennsylvania,  owing  to  their  position  in  the  rear,  could  not  get  up  in 
time  to  participate,  but  they  would  have  been  in  position  in  a very  short 
time.  Fortunately  our  charge  was  successful  and  the  enemy  fled  pre- 
cipitately. The  honor  of  first  entering  the  fort  is  divided  between  the 
Fifty-first  Hew  York  and  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts,  but  all  charged 
gallantly,  and  it  was  owing  only  to  their  position  being  nearer  the  fort 
that  enabled  them  to  reach  it  first.  During  the  engagement,  which 
lasted  about  four  hours,  General  Foster’s  brigade  most  gallantly  attacked 
them  in  the  front,  and  General  Parke  was  in  the  act  of  turning  their 
left  when  my  brigade  charged  and  carried  the  battery. 

During  the  engagement  I proceeded  to  General  Foster’s  position  in  front 
of  his  brigade,  and  meeting  General  Parke,  the  final  plan  of  the  assault 
was  made.  From  the  beginning  of  the  attack  until  the  battery  was 
taken  not  a regiment  or  company  retired  or  faltered,  but  advanced  as 
rapidly  as  water  waist  deep  and  the  thick  and  almost  impenetrable  under- 
brush would  permit.  W ithin  fifteen  minutes  after  the  assault  I formed  my 
brigade  and  started  in  pursuit,  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  being  in 
advance,  followed  by  the  Fifty-first  Hew  York,  Hinth  Hew  Jersev,  and 
Fifty-first  Pennsylvania.  Colonel  Hawkins’  regiment  (Hinth  Hew  York) 
for  some  distance  accompanied  the  head  of  my  column,  occupying  the 
right.  On  coming  to  a road  that  led  to  the  right  I sent  my  aide,  Lieu- 
tenant Beno,  to  direct  the  Hinth  Hew  York  to  follow  it  and  endeavor  to 
capture  those  of  the  enemy  that  were  attempting  to  escape  in  small 
boats.  Some  24  wounded  prisoners  were  thus  captured,  and  among 
others  Capt.  O.  Jennings  Wise,  who  had  been  mortally  wounded.  By 
advancing  rapidly  we  captured  a large  number  of  stragglers. 

Upon  arriving  within  about  a mile  of  their  advanced  position  I 
learned  from  the  prisoners  that  there  were  some  2,500  of  the  enemy  in 
advance,  and  as  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  was  some  distance  in 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  KOANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


99 


advance  I halted  them  and  sent  back  one  of  my  aides  to  hasten  up  the 
rest  of  my  brigade.  While  awaiting  their  arrival  General  Foster  came 
up  and  passed  on  with  the  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts,  my  brigade 
following  immediately.  Captain  Bradford,  commanding  Company  E, 
Twenty-first  Massachusetts,  being  in  advance,  came  upon  a large  body 
of  troops,  whom  he  immediately  ordered  to  lay  down  their  arms,  but  they 
opened  fire  upon  him,  which  he  returned,  killing  4 of  them.  The  rest 
then  fled  precipitately.  Immediately  after  a flag  of  truce  was  sent  up, 
and  General  Foster  being  in  advance,  Lieutenant  Hovey  accompanied 
it,  and  an  unconditional  surrender  was  made  to  him.  In  the  mean  time 
fcame  up,  and  proceeded  immediately  to  the  barracks  of  the  Thirty-first 
Horth  Carolina  Begiment,  commanded  by  Colonel  Jordan,  who  sur- 
rendered his  entire  command.  Their  arms  having  been  secured,  I as- 
signed the  prisoners  to  a portion  of  the  barracks  and  occupied  the 
remainder  with  my  brigade. 

As  the  command  behaved  with  distinguished  gallantry  I cannot  in 
justice  to  the  others  particularize  individuals,  but  I beg  leave  to  refer 
i you  to  the  accompanying  reports  of  the  regimental  commanders  for  the 
particulars,  all  of  which  I most  heartily  indorse.  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Maggi  commanded  and  led  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts,  Colonel 
i Ferrero  the  Fifty-first  Few  York,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Heckman  the 
, Ninth  Few  Jersey,  and  Colonel  Hartranft  the  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Maggfs  regiment  captured  the  flag  of  the  fort  and 
raised  the  first  colors  (the  regimental  flag).  The  Fifty-first  Few  York 
raised  the  national  flag  on  the  parapet.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Potter,  of 
the  Fifty-first  Few  York,  led  the  three  companies  of  his  regiment  that 
first  entered  the  fort  and  was  one  of  the  first  in.  Captain  Feill,  assist- 
ant adjutant-general,  Lieutenant  Eeno  and  Lieutenant  Morris,  my  aides, 
and  Lieutenant  Marsh,  of  the  Signal  Corps,  rendered  me  valuable  as- 
sistance in  carrying  orders  through  the  thickest  of  the  fight  and  in 
) directing  the  various  regiments  to  their  positions.  In  my  brigade  the 
total  number  killed  was  16  and  64  wounded*  The  regimental  reports 
give  the  full  particulars  concerning  the  killed  and  wounded.  Captain 
Henry,  Company  H,  Finth  Few  Jersey,  was  killed  whilst  gallantly 
[ leading  his  company.  Captain  Foster,  Company  D,  Twenty-first  Massa- 
chusetts,  was  severely  but  not  dangerously  wounded,  and  Lieutenant 
Stearns,  adjutant  of  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts,  was  hit  twice  in 
the  head  and  neck,  but  fortunately  the  wounds  were  slight,  and  he 
i remained,  his  face  covered  with  blood,  with  his  colonel  at  the  head  of 
the  regiment  during  the  whole  day.  Captain  Pitchie,  assistant  commis- 
sary of  the  brigade,  was  detailed  by  me  on  the  7th  instant  to  go  on 
board  the  Pioneer  and  join  the  naval  attack.  He  gallantly  directed 
the  vessel  to  the  thickest  of  the  fight.  I beg  leave  to  refer  to  his  report 
for  the  particulars.  Captain  Fichols,  of  the  Faval  Brigade,  took  direc- 
i tion  of  the  Lancer,  the  other  gunboat  belonging  to  the  brigade,  and 
participated  in  the  naval  attack.  Two  companies  of  the  Fifty-first  Few 
York  were  on  board  the  gunboats.  I have  had  no  report  from  them, 
but  I have  heard  that  no  casualties  occurred. 

Inclosed  I send  a list  of  the  prisoners  now  in  my  camp.t  The  list  is  not 
complete,  but  it  is  all  that  I have  had  time  to  obtain.  The  names  of  30 
- officers  and  493  men  are  given. 

h I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  L.  RENO, 

Brigadier- General,  Second  Brigade , Burnside’s  Division. 

Capt.  Lewis  Richmond,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


But  see  revised  statement,  p.  85. 


t Omitted. 


100 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chai\  XX. 


No.  16. 

Report  of  Capt.  Montgomery  Ritchie s Aide-de-Camp. 

On  Board  Propeller  Gunboat  Pioneer, 

February  7,  1862. 

Sir  : On  the  6th  instant,  in  obedience  to  the  orders  of  General  Reno, 
1 proceeded  on  board  and  took  command  of  this  vessel.  At  8.30  a.  in. 
this  day  got  under  way  and  cleared  the  ship  for  action.  The  action 
became  general  at  12.30  p.  m.  between  the  rebel  gunboats,  their  redoubt 
on  the  central  part  of  Roanoke,  and  the  fleet.  Opened  fire  from  our 
30-pounder  Parrott  at  25  minutes  to  1 p.  m.,  and  from  the  Wiard  gun 
at  10  minutes  to  1 o’clock.  Owing  to  her  draught  of  water,  though  we  j 
ran  her  aground,  it  was  impracticable  to  approach  as  near  as  desirable,  j 
We  maintained  fire  during  the  day  until  after  5 p.  m.,  expending  95 
rounds  of  ammunition.  Captain  Baker,  of  the  Pioneer,  placed  his  ves- 
sel skillfully  in  position.  The  Parrott  gun,  under  command  of  Lieut. 
F.  W.  Tryon,  Fifty-first  New  York  Volunteers,  and  the  Wiard  gun  (12- 
pounder),  under  Mr.  Griffith,  first  mate,  deserve  honorable  mention  for 
the  manner  in  which  their  guns  were  handled. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  RITCHIE, 

Captain , Aide  of  General  Reno. 

Capt.  E.  M.  Neill, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General , Second  Brigade. 


No.  17. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Alberto  C.  Maggi , Twenty-first  Massachusetts  In- 
fantry. 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-first  Regiment  Mass.  Vols., 

Roanoke  Island , February  9,  1862. 

General  : Friday,  the  7th,  at  5 p.  m.,  my  regiment  disembarked.  I 
formed  the  line  rapidly  and  in  good  order.  Then  General  Parke  came 
in  your  name  and  asked  from  my  regiment  a company  of  skirmishers, 
in  order  to  go  in  advance  to  explore  the  road  which  from  the  place  of 
disembarkation  was  crossing  the  woods  toward  our  right  side.  I gave 
to  him  Company  D,  90  men  strong,  commanded  by  Capt.  T.  8.  Foster. 
Afterward  you  came  and  gave  me  the  order  to  go  to  the  cross-road 
and  take  possession  of  all  that  ground,  placing  my  pickets  for  the  night 
in  order  to  cover  the  main  body.  I did  so,  placing  a section  of  artillery 
at  the  cross-road,  supported  by  Company  C,  and  throwing  to  right  and 
left  from  water  to  water  two  other  companies  in  small  pickets,  covered 
by  sentries  at  a distance  of  15  paces  each,  and  placing  the  rest  of  the 
regiment  at  the  end  of  the  wood  as  supports. 

During  this  march  the  head  of  the  advance  guard  was  fired  upon  by 
the  advance  pickets  of  the  enemy  and  one  of  our  men  wounded.  We 
brought  him  back.  It  now  being  quite  dark,  the  advance  guard  was 
called  in  and  one  man  was  found  missing.  He  returned  the  following 
day.  I had  already  detailed  two  sections  as  a scouting  party,  who 
would  have  relieved  each  other  during  the  night,  in  order  to  explore 
the  ground  in  front  of  the  pickets  and  advance  as  far  as  possible  with- 
out giving  the  alarm,  in  order  to  discover  the  position  of  the  enemy, 


Chap.  XX.]  BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C.  101 

but  at  that  time  you,  general,  and  General  Foster,  came  and  gave  me 
the  order  to  change  the  position  of  the  pickets,  concentrating  them  on 
the  road  and  place  them  to  the  front.  I did  so.  Six  companies  were 
in  front,  with  two  pieces  of  artillery,  with  a prolongation  of  picket  in 
the  two  roads  which  opened  through  the  woods  at  an  angle  of  about 
50°.  The  other  four  companies,  with  the  three  pieces  of  artillery,  were 
to  the  rear  precisely  at  the  other  cross-road,  which  lay  500  yards  behind 
the  first.  Those  companies  had  pickets  right  and  left,  but  with  the 
order  to  do  no  firing  to  the  front  and  in  case  of  an  attack  to  act  as  sup- 
port, we  stood  all  night  without  fire,  it  raining  all  the  time.  None  of 
the  men  slept,  and  every  half  hour  I made  the  companies  fall  in  in  the 
greatest  silence.  All  officers  and  men  of  the  regiment,  without  excep^ tion, 
comported  themselves  with  remarkable  patience  and  endurance  during 
the  twelve  hours  of  darkness  and  raining.  Not  a word  of  grumbling, 
not  an  expression  of  weariness. 

At  6.30,  after  a small  scouting  party  which  I sent  a little  beyond 
my  pickets  returned,  I permitted  my  men  to  light  fires,  in  order  to  dry 
themselves  as  much  as  possible.  At  7 o’clock  an  aide  of  General  Fos- 
ter came  and  ordered  me  to  allow  the  First  Brigade  to  pass  through 
my  line  of  pickets.  The  brigade  came  half  an  hour  after,  headed  by  * 
the  general  himself,  in  the  following  order:  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts,  • 
Twenty-third  Massachusetts,  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts,  Fifth 
Battalion  Rhode  Island,  and  Tenth  Connecticut.  My  regiment  was  in 
line,  and  immediately  upon  your  arrival  we  followed  them.  We  arrived 
n time.  Following  your  order  to  defile  through  swamp  and  water  to 
the  rear  and  left  of  the  Twenty-fifth  and  then  halting,  I took  the  two 
lank  companies,  D and  G,  armed  with  Harper’s  Ferry  rifles  and  saber 
jayonets,  and  having  assured  myself  of  the  position  of  the  battery  of 
:he  enemy  and  by  the  different  shot  of  their  guns  of  the  extension  of 
:he  ground  which  they  could  ‘sweep  toward  our  left  (their  right),  I 
)rdered  the  two  companies  to  jump  into  a deep  swamp,  and  commanded 
:hem  to  open  fire  by  file,  marching  slowly  front  and  toward  the  left.  I 
brbade  those  two  companies  to  waste  any  ammunition,  but  to  aim  and 
ire  only  when  they  were  perfectly  sure  of  their  aim. 

We  had  soon  in  front  the  infantry  of  the  enemy,  which  supported 
he  right  flank  of  the  battery.  It  was  then  that  the  fire  began  to  be 
:eally  hot,  and  I had  many  men  put  hors  de  combat.  Among  those,  I 
regret  to  say,  Capt.  T.  S.  Foster  was  shot  by  a bullet  through  the  left 
eg.  But  we  steadily  kept  up  the  firing  for  more  than  two  hours,  ad- 
vancing toward  the  front  and  left  at  the  same  time.  At  such  a moment, 
he  Twenty-fifth  Regiment  having  changed  their  position,  two  of  my 
lompanies  joined  my  line,  and  a few  minutes  after  all  the  rest  of  the 
battalion  proceeded  by  my  order,  guided  by  Major  Clark.  I was  at 
hat  moment  at  the  edge  of  the  swamp,  and  in  front  of  me  was  an  ex- 
>osed  ground  of  100  yards. 

The  regiment  once  in  line,  I commanded  a general  fire.  After  the 
iharge  for  all  that  distance  the  men  lay  down  and  loaded,  covered  by 
i small  natural  elevation.  During  that  march  we  suffered  four  or  five 
ninutes  a very  thick  fire  and  lost  15  men,  but  it  was  the  last  of  the 
*nemy.  The  battery  was  already  flanked.  You  came  and  said  to  me, 

‘ Charge  and  take  it.”  We  did  so.  At  our  left  flank  were  three  com- 
panies of  the  Fifty-first  New  York.  Our  State  color  was  the  first  on 
he  battery;  afterward  the  flag  of  the  Fifty-first  New  York;  then, 
mmediately  after,  our  regimental  flag.  One  of  our  men  captured  a 
'ebel  flag  with  the  motto,  uAut  vmcere  aut  mori.v  After  a few  moments 
>f  joy,  by*  your  order  I put  again  the  regiment  in  line  in  the  road  be- 


102 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX 


liind  the  battery,  and  first  led  by  you  we  proceeded  toward  Camp 
Georgia. 

Company  E,  of  my  regiment,  which  was  in  advance,  found  the  enemy 
retreating.  They  turned  and  fired,  but  soon  were  repulsed  with  loss  of 
3 dead  and  some  wounded.  They  sent  a flag  of  truce  and  surrendered, 

I am  glad  to  say  that  I never  saw  better  behavior  by  any  soldiers, 
young  or  veterans,  and  I do  not  believe  it  was  possible  in  such  a 
groundr— if  a continual  swamp  and  ponds  of  water  can  be  so  called — 
that  any  one  could  have  surpassed  the  brilliant  and  gallant  conduct  of 
all  my  command.  I would  mention  the  names  of  those  officers  who 
have  distinguished  themselves,  but  I would  be  obliged  to  send  you  the 
names  of  all,  from  the  major  to  the  last  second  lieutenant,  as  every  one 
of  them  deserves  it.  Nevertheless,  I shall  name  two,  not  because  they 
have  been  braver  than  the  others,  but  because  both  by  force  of  circum- 
stances have  been  obliged  to  stand  a longer  time  in  the  most  dangerous 
position  than  any  other.  They  are  Capt.  T.  S.  Foster,  who  followed 
me,  leading  his  company,  and  my  adjutant,  F.  A.  Stearns,  who  has 
been  during  all  the  fight  cool  and  bravely  at  my  side  from  the  begin- 
ning to  the  end.  And  also  I would  call  your  attention  to  the  faithful 
.services  of  Surgeons  Cutter  and  Warren  and  the  chaplain,  who  bravely 
followed  the  troops  through  the  fight  to  bear  back  the  dead  and  wounded. 
All  our  wounded  were  conveyed  at  once  to  the  hospital  and  our  dead 
immediately  buried.  Both  Capt.  T.  S.  Foster  and  Adjt.  F.  A.  Stearns 
have  been  wounded,  the  first,  as  I said,  by  a bullet  in  the  left  leg,  and 
the  second  slightly  in  the  right  temple  and  in  the  neck.  I send  you 
annexed  the  list  of  killed  and  wounded.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  subordinate, 

A.  C.  MAGGI, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel , Commanding. 

Brigadier-General  Beno, 

Commanding  Second  Brigade , Burnside’s  Division. 


No.  18. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Charles  A.  Heckman,  Ninth  New  Jersey  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Ninth  Begiment  New  Jersey  Vols., 

February  9,  1862. 

I hereby  respectfully  report  that  the  regiment  which  I command 
took  its  position  in  the  brigade  about  7 a.  m.  When  we  had  approached 
near  the  field  of  action  we  passed,  by  order  of  Lieutenant  Beno,  the 
Fifty-first  Begiment  New  York  Volunteers,  and  when  we  had  arrived  on 
their  right  we  were  met  by  General  Foster,  and  were  ordered  by  him 
to  enter  the  swamp  to  the  left  by  company  front.  However,  finding 
that  our  fire  would  be  more  effective,  I formed  them  by  division.  At 
9.30  a.  m.  the  first  division  commenced  an  oblique  fire  upon  the  bat- 
tery, and  the  fire  was  continued  until  11.15  a.  m.  by  the  successive 
divisions,  when,  the  fire  of  the  enemy  slackening,  I ordered  the  regi-i 
ment  to  charge,  and  in  company  with  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts 
Volunteers  we  entered  the  battery. 

The  officers  and  men  of  the  regiment  conducted  themselves  with 
courage  and  coolness,  and  I am  perfectly  satisfied  with  them.  The 

* Embodied  in  statement  on  p.  85. 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


103 


hap.  XX.] 


round  was  very  swampy,  and  for  most  of  the  time  the  men  were  up 
o their  waists  in  water,  though,  notwithstanding  these  discouraging 
ircumstances,  they  behaved  themselves  admirably. 

There  are  35  men  missing  from  the  regiment. 

C.  A.  HECKMAN, 
Lieutenant-  Co  lonely  Commanding. 

Oapt.  E.  M.  Neill, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Second  Brigade , Dept,  of  North  Carolina. 

P.  S. — All  the  missing  have  returned  except  14,  most  of  whom  prob- 
bly  will. 


No.  19. 

Report  of  Col.  Edward  Ferrero , Fifty -first  New  York  Infantry. 

, I beg  leave  to  submit  the  following  as  the  report  of  the  Fifty-first 
tegiment  New  York  Yolunteers  at  the  battle  of  the  8th  of  February, 
862,  on  Eoanoke  Island,  N.  C. : 

j I received  an  order  from  General  Eeno  on  the  morning  of  Saturday, 
he  8th  of  February,  1862,  at  about  7.30  o’clock  a.  m.,  to  form  line  on 
he  right  of  the  Second  Brigade.  T^e  regiment  started  about  8 a.  m. 
a rear  of  the  First  Brigade.  After  having  marched  a distance  of 
bout  half  a mile  we  met  three  companies  of  the  Twenty-first  Massa- 
husetts  Eegiment.  I halted  my  column  and  allowed  them  to  take 
heir  position.  Following  them  on  the  main  road  up  the  island  and 
aarching  a distance  of  about  half  a mile,  I received  an  order  from  Gen- 
eral Eeno  to  force  our  way  through  a dense  jungle  in  the  direction  of 
he  fighting.  On  arriving  near  the  rear  of  the  Twenty-first  Massa- 
chusetts received  an  order  to  advance  and  take  position  on  their  left, 
binding  the  swamp  almost  impassable,  owing  to  the  dense  growth  of 
mderbrush  on  the  right  of  my  line,  I ordered  the  four  companies  of 
he  right  wing,  viz,  A,  G,  D,'andJ,  to  push  forward  toward  the  left, 
tnder  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Potter.  Said  companies  ad- 
vanced and  entered  the  fire  on  the  left  of  the  Twenty-first  Massachu- 
etts.  During  the  engagement  of  the  above  companies  in  said  position 
he  firing  was  very  galling,  but  the  men  and  officers  replied  to  it  with 
jreat  vigor.  I ordered  the  companies  of  the  left  whig  to  push  forward 
oward  the  right.  Finding  it  impossible  to  engage  the  enemy  on 
Account  of  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  being  in  front,  I ordered 
he  men  to  lie  down  to  avoid  the  shower  of  bullets  from  our  own  troops 
i.s  well  as  those  from  the  enemy. 

The  enemy,  finding  that  they  were  outflanked,  commenced  to  retreat, 
vhen  the  order  was  given  by  General  Eeno  to  charge.  The  right  wing 
. Charged,  under  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Potter,  while  I led  the 
eft  wing.  Having  advanced  a few  paces  in  front  of  the  Ninth  New 
ersey  and  the  Ninth  New  York,  I feared  that  their  fire  would  be 
tirected  into  our  ranks,  so  I halted  my  men  and  ordered  the  signal  for 
ease  firing  to  be  sounded  by  our  bugler,  which  was  understood  by  all 
he  troops  in  the  vicinity.  At  that  moment  the  cry  came  to  charge, 
rhen  all  charged  together,  my  right  wing  arriving  at  the  fort  first. 
Japtain  Wright,  of  Company  A,  color  company,  arrived  first  with  his 
ompany,  and  planted  the  American  flag  upon  the  ramparts  in  advance 
•f  any  other  regiment.  Captain  Sims,  of  Company  G,  and  Captain 


104 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


Johnson,  of  Company  I,  took  possession  of  the  guns  of  the  fort.  I led 
the  left  wing  down  the  main  road,  followed  by  the  Ninth  New  York, 
crossed  the  moat,  and  halted  inside  of  the  fort.  On  arriving  inside  of 
the  fort  Lieutenant  Springweiler,  of  Company  K,  brought  me  a wounded 
officer,  who  was  a lieutenant  in  the  Wise  Legion  of  Virginia,  who  was 
found  lying  a short  distance  offi 

After  remaining  in  the  fort  about  fifteen  minutes  I rallied  the  men, 
formed  line,  and  started  up  the  main  road  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy. 
On  arriving  at  the  end  of  the  island  I found  that  two  boat  loads  of  the! 
enemy  had  escaped,  but  one  had  been  captured,  containing  O.  Jennings 
Wise,  severely  wounded,  and  four  others,  who  were  all  in  charge  of  the 
Ninth  New  York.  The  four  prisoners  were  transferred  to  my  charge,; 
and  I left  them  in  a house  which  was  guarded  by  our  troops.  Ascer- 
taining that  General  Eeno  had  advanced  across  the  island  to  the  left  I 
immediately  followed,  and  arrived  in  time  to  receive  an  order  from  him 
to  place  a chain  of  sentinels  to  encircle  the  grounds  and  barracks  of 
the  captured  enemy,  which  was  executed,  and  remained  upon  duty 
until  relieved  by  the  Ninth  New  Jersey. 

The  men  and  officers  under  my  command  behaved  with  a coolness 
that  was  really  surprising  for  men  who  were  under  fire  for  their  first 
time.  On  Sunday  morning,  the  9th,  I received  an  order  to  detail  a 
company  to  plant  the  American  flag  on  one  of  the  captured  forts  on 
the  sea-shore.  # 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  vour  obedient  servant, 

EDW.  FEKBERO, 

Colonel  Fifty -first  Regiment  New  York  Volunteers . 


No.  *20. 

Report  of  Col.  John  F.  Hartrmft , Fifty  first  Pennsylvania  Infantry . 

Hdqrs.  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania  Volunteers, 

Camp  Jordan , Roanoke  Island , N.  <7.,  February  9,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  accordance  with  orders  I 
yesterday  marched  my  regiment  onto  the  field  in  rear  of  the  Ninth 
New  Jersey  Volunteers.  I was  ordered  by  Lieutenant  Morris  to  take 
my  regiment  to  the  extreme  left,  about  200  yards  beyond  the  tem- 
porary hospital.  On  arriving  at  the  proper  place  I filed  them  to  the 
left  through  the  swamp.  On  account  of  the  depth  of  water  and  the 
extreme  thickness  of  the  underbrush  I was  obliged  to  conduct  them  in 
single  file.  When  two  companies  had  entered,  finding  it  impossible 
to  advance,  I returned  in  person  to  the  road,  and  I was  there  ordered 
to  leave  two  companies  already  in  the  morass  where  they  were,  under 
the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Bell,  with  orders  to  hold  the  posi- 
tion he  was  then  in  until  further  orders.  I proceeded  with  the  eight 
companies  to  the  right.  I was  ordered  to  follow  in  rear  of  the  Twen- 
ty-seventh Massachusetts  Volunteers.  In  passing  to  the  right  Ave  were 
all  very  much  impeded  by  the  underbrush  and  water,  that  reached 
to  our  middle.  By  taking  a shorter  route  I succeeded  in  coming  up 
side  by  side  Avith  the  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  Volunteers.  Be- 
fore any  of  us  succeeded  in  reaching  to  cleared  ground  the  battery 
was  taken. 

Soon  after  leaving  my  first  position  Colonel  Bell  received  an  order 
to  bring  his  companies  toward  the  main  road.  Receiving  no  orders,, 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


105 


lie  inarched  his  companies  to  the  front  and  joined  the  companies  I was 
bringing  out  of  the  morass.  As  soon  as  I could  get  five  of  my  com- 
panies together  I moved  them  forward,  leaving  orders  for  the  remain- 
der to  follow  under  command  of  the  major.  The  five  companies  that 
were  thus  left  behind  were  ordered  to  garrison  the  battery  and  are 

still  there.  . ^ ^ o 

As  far  as  I have  learned,  but  one  man,  a private  of  Company  B,  nas 

been  wounded.  . _ , , 

I have  every  reason  to  be  most  pleased  with  the  coolness  and  bravery 
of  all  my  officers,  and  with  the  patience,  bravery,  and  ready  obedience 
upon  the  part  of  my  men. 

I have  two  men  missing. 

I have  the  honor,  general,  to  be,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

J.  F.  HARTRANFT, 

Colonel , Comdg.  Fifty-first  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  L.  Reno. 


I No.  21. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Parke,  U.  S.  Army , commanding  Third 

Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  Third  Brigade,  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

Pork  Point  Battery,  Roanoke  Island,  February  9,  1862. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
operations  of  the  Third  Brigade  during  the  7th  and  8th  instant  from 

the  moment  the  signal  for  landing  was  displayed: 

The  brigade  is  composed  of  the  Fourth  Rhode  Island,  Ninth  New 
York,  and  Eighth  Connecticut  Regiments,  and  a battalion  of  the  Fifth 
Rhode  Island  Regiment.  On  the  signal  being  given  one  wing  of  the 
Fourth  Rhode  Island  Regiment  was  transferred  to  the  light-draught 
steamer  Phoenix,  and  all  the  surf-boats,  life-boats,  and  ships7  boats 
belonging  to  the  transports  of  my  brigade  filled  with  men  from  the 
Eighth  Connecticut  and  Fifth  Rhode  Island  Regiments,  and  attached 
in  tow  of  the  steamer.  We  then  proceeded  toward  the  shore  as  rapidly 
' as  safety  to  the  small  boats  would  permit.  The  steamer  was  run  into 
1 the  marsh  between  the  steamers  of  Generals  Foster  and  Reno,  and 
J the  men  immediately  sprang  into  the  marsh  and  were  led  by  their 
' respective  commanders  out  to  the  firm  ground,  and  there  formed  in  line 
in  the  field  to  the  left  of  Hammond’s  house.  Capt.  John  N.  King,  bri- 
gade quartermaster,  and  Lieut.  M.  A.  Hill,  aide-de-camp,  returned  to 
the  transports  to  superintend  the  landing  of  the  balance  of  the  brigade. 

Orders  were  then  given  to  the  colonels  of  the  Fourth  Rhode  Island 
and  the  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  and  Tenth  Connecticut  Regiments 
of  the  First  Brigade  to  send  out  a force  to  occupy  the  woods  surround- 
ing the  landing  place  with  a continuous  line  of  skirmishers.  The  com- 
manning  general  soon  appeared  on  the  field,  and  I reported  in  person 
the  disposition  I had  made  of  the  force  then  on  the  ground.  Brig- 
1 adier-General  Reno  came  up  immediately  after  and  assumed  command 
of  the  portions  of  the  three  brigades  then  landed.  My  entire  brigade 
[ was  landed  before  11  o’clock  p.  m.  The  men  bivouacked  on  their  arms. 

Soon  after  daylight  on  the  8th  instant  I received  orders  from  General 
f Foster  to  have  my  command  ready  to  support  his  and  General  Reno’s 


106 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


brigades  and  follow  along  the  road  leading  through  the  middle  of  the 
island,  and  to  send  four  companies  to  occupy  Ashby’s  house,  below  our 
<camp  and  on  the  right  of  the  road.  The  First  Battalion  Fifth  Ehode 
Island  Regiment  was  detailed  for  this  latter  duty.  Firing  was  heard 
in  our  front,  and  it  was  soon  evident  that  General  Foster  had  engaged 
the  enemy.  Before  my  brigade  could  advance  on  the  road,  it  being 
still  occupied  by  General  Reno  I received  orders  from  the  general  com- 
manding to  detach  a regiment  and  hold  the  landing  and  bivouac  grounds, 
and  prevent  the  enemy  from  turning  our  position  by  coming  through 
the  timber  down  the  beach.  The  Eighth  Connecticut  Regiment  was 
detailed  for  this  duty.  Before  leaving  the  bivouac  the  major  command- 
ing the  First  Battalion  Fifth  Rhode  Island  Regiment  reported  Ashby’s 
house  and  premises  occupied  by  the  enemy.  I ordered  him  to  throw 
out  skirmishers  and  hold  his  position,  and  if  attacked  he  would  be 
supported.  As  soon  as  the  last  of  General  Reno’s  brigade  were  under 
way  I followed  with  the  Fourth  Rhode  Island  and  Ninth  New  York 
Regiments. 

On  reaching  the  battle-field  I found  General  Foster  occupying  the 
road  on  the  edge  of  the  clearing  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  battery,  and 
General  Reno,  with  his  brigade  on  the  left,  endeavoring  to  turn  the 
enemy’s  right.  The  troops  of  both  brigades  were  exposed  to  a steady 
fire  from  the  battery  and  musketry,  but  were  nevertheless  hotly  engag- 
ing the  enemy  and  gradually  gaining  upon  his  flanks.  General  Foster 
ordered  me  to  support  a portion  of  his  force  on  his  right  who  were 
endeavoring  to  turn  the  enemy’s  battery. 

The  Fourth  Rhode  Island  Regiment,  on  reaching  the  boat  howitzers, 
which  were  in  position  in  the  road  in  the  edge  of  the  clearing,  bore  off 
slightly  to  the  right,  and,  exposed  to  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s  battery  and 
a continuous  fire  of  musketry,  were  gallantly  led  by  the  colonel  com- 
manding, I.  P.  Rodpian,  and  yourself  through  the  clearing,  and  closing 
upon  the  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  Regiment,  they  encountered 
an  almost  impenetrable  cypress  swamp,  through  which  they  worked 
their  way  with  great  difficulty.  The  Ninth  New  York  Regiment,  arriv- 
ing on  the  ground,  was  ordered  to  follow  the  Fohrth  Rhode  Island  Regi- 
ment and  turn  the  left  flank  of  the  battery.  The  regiment,  under  lead 
of  the  colonel,  Rush  C.  Hawkins,  entered  the  clearing  with  great  spirit. 

It  being  now  ascertained  that  the  natural  obstacles  on  this  line  were 
of  so  serious  a character,  and  that  the  delay  in  the  progress  of  the 
troops  through  the  swamps  was  so  great,  it  was  decided  to  change  the 
course  of  the  Ninth  New  York  Regiment,  and  the  order  was  sent  to 
the  colonel  to  turn  to  the  left  and  charge  the  battery  directly  up  the 
road,  and  the  regiment,  with  a hearty  yell  and  cheer,  struck  into  the 
road  and  made  for  the  battery  on  the  run.  uThe  order  was  given  to 
charge  the  enemy  with  fixed  bayonets.  This  was  done  in  gallant  style, 
Major  Kimball  taking  the  lead.”  The  major  was  very  conspicuous 
during  the  movement,  and  I take  great  pleasure  in  commending  him  to 
your  favorable  notice.  Before  reaching  the  intrenchment  the  enemy 
retreated  through  the  timber  in  great  confusion,  abandoning  their  guns, 
ammunition,  and  private  property. 

General  Reno  started  immediately  in  pursuit,  and  as  soon  as  the  Ninth 
New  York  Regiment  were  reformed  they  were  ordered  forward  and  suc- 
ceeded in  taking  u some  40  prisoners.  Among  them  were  several  of  the 
officers  and  men  of  the  Richmond  Blues,  with  O.  Jennings  Wise  at  their 
head,  who  was  badly  wounded  and  trying  to  make  his  escape  in  a boat 
across  to  Nag’s  Head.” 

As  soon  as  the  Fourth  Rhode  Island  Regiment  was  reformed  I pro- 


hap.  XX.]  BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C.  107 

•ceded  witli  it  up  to  the  support  of  General  Eeno  until  he  sent  me 
vord  that  he  required  no  more  regiments.  The  commanding  general 
hen  ordered  me  to  proceed  with  the  Fourth  Ehode  Island  and  Tenth 
Connecticut  Eegiments,  with  a boat  howitzer,  to  take  Pork  Point  Bat- 
ery.  A guide  being  furnished  me,  we  left  the  main  road , and  following 
ilong  a narrow  cross-road  about  a mile,  we  entered  the  battery  and 
ound  that  it  had  been  but  a short  time  evacuated,  the  garrison  having 
■etreated  up  the  beach  to  the  northern  end  of  the  island.  The  arma- 
nent  consisted  of  eight  32-pounder  smooth-bore  and  one  32-pounder 
♦ifled  gun.  They  were  all  spiked  and  the  carriages  seriously  damaged. 

From  papers  found  in  the  quarters  the  battery  is  called  Fort  Bartow, 
tnd  commanded  by  Maj.  G.  H.  Hill,  formerly  a lieutenant  in  the  United 
States  Artillery.  A flag-staff,  with  the  national  colors  made  fast,  was 
mmediately  raised,  and  the  men  had  scarcely  finished  cheering  when 
General  Foster  rode  in  to  announce  to  the  general  commanding  that  the 
memy  had  surrendered. 

At  the  taking  of  the  masked  battery  the  officers  and  men,  not  only  of 
he  Fourth  Ehode  Island  and  Ninth  Hew  York  Eegiments,  but  of  other 
regiments  that  came  under  my  observation,  behaved  with  great  gallantry, 

* coolness,  and  bravery.  All  seemed  imbued  with  determination  to  carry 
he  day.  Considering  the  length  of  time  that  they  have  been  on  board 
ship,  that  they  bivouacked  in  the  rain  on  the  night  of  the  7th,  and 
considering  the  great  natural  obstacles  in  front  of  the  battery— a broad 
swamp  surrounded  by  a dense  tangle  and  thick  growth  of  cypress, 
dirough  which  but  a single  narrow  roadway  or  trail  passed,  and  that 
completely  raked  by  the  battery— considering  all  this,  it  would  seem 
that  all  engaged  are  worthy  of  much  praise. 

I would  respectfully  beg  to  call  your  attention  to  the  adjutant  of  the 
Fourth  Ehode  Island  Eegiment,  Lieutenant  Curtis.  He  was  very  con- 
spicuous in  conducting  and  cheering  on  the  men  of  his  regiment  while 
passing  through  the  clearing. 

I also  wish  to  pay  a just  tribute  to  the  officers  of  my  staff  for  their 
great  gallantry  throughout  the  battle  and  untiring  zeal  through  the 
whole  day.  The  staff  is  composed  of  the  following  officers:  Capt. 
Charles  T.  Gardner,  assistant  adjutant-general;  Capt.  John  N.  King, 
brigade  quartermaster  and  acting  commissary;  Lieuts.  M.  Asbury  Hill 
and  Philip  M.  Lydig,  aides-de-camp.  Lieut.  L.  Bradley,  of  the  Signal 
Corps,  was  with  me,  and  acted  as  aide.  All  of  these,  including  Capt. 
J.  N.  King,  who  volunteered  his  services  as  aide  early  in  the  morning, 
were  constantly  occupied  carrying  orders,  bringing  up  and  conducting 
the  troops  into  position,  and  were  necessarily  greatly  exposed.  Lieuts. 
J.  W.  Hopkins  and  Anthony  Lang,  of  the  Signal  Corps,  were  also  act- 
ively engaged  bringing  up  the  men  during  the  fight.  On  the  morning 
of  the  9th  a company  of  the  Fourth  Ehode  Island  Eegiment  took  pos- 
session of  Fort  Blanchard,  a small  work  mounting  four  32-pounders. 
The  guns  were  spiked  and  the  carriages  damaged. 

A detachment  from  the  Ninth  Hew  York  Eegiment  took  possession 
of  a two-gun  battery  on  the  east  side  of  the  island.  They  found  the 
guns  spiked  and  pointed  inland.  The  battery  is  surrounded  by  a marsh 
. and  swamp,  the  only  approach  to  it  being  by  a causeway  from  the  water 
| side.  One  prisoner  was  taken  in  this  work,  he  having  been  left  by  his 
! comrades  when  they  evacuated  the  place. 

I regret  to  have  to  record  the  death  of  Lieut.  Col.  Yiguer  He  Monteil, 
1 of  the  Fifty-third  Hew  York  Eegiment  (D’Epineuil  Zouaves).  The 
i colonel  of  the  Hinth  Hew  York  Eegiment  reports  that  “ he  was  killed 
I instantly,  while  urging  my  men  to  the  charge.  He  dies  greatly  la- 


108 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


mented  by  all  my  officers  and  men  who  came  in  contact  with  him. 
His  bravery  was  as  great  as  his  patriotism  was  sincere,  and  I cannot 
but  feel  that  had  he  lived  he  would  have  proved  a most  valuable  officer.’7 

The  casualties  in  the  Ninth  New  York  Regiment  are  2 lieutenants 
and  15  privates  wounded — none  likely  to  prove  fatal. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

- JNO.  G.  PARKE, 

Brigadier -General  Volunteers,  Commanding  Third  Brigade . 

Capt.  Lewis  Richmond, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  22. 

Report  of  Col.  Isaac  P.  Rodman , Fourth  Rhode  Island  Infantry. 

Fort  Bartow, 

Roanoke  Island , N.  C .,  February  10,  1862. 

Dear  Sir:  I had  the  honor  to  write  you  last  from  Camp  California, 
Va.  Since  then  the  Fourth  Rhode  Island  has  been  detached  from  How-  i 
ard’s  brigade  and  assigned  to  that  of  General  John  G.  Parke,  Third  | 
Brigade,  Burnside’s  division,  and  reported  for  duty  at  Annapolis,  Md., 
on  the  3d  of  July  [January].  Embarked  on  the  steamer  Eastern  Queen 
for  Fort  Monroe;  sailed  [January]  9tli;  arrived  the  10th,  and  sailed  for 
Hatteras  Inlet  the  11th ; arrived  the  12th  and  entered  the  inlet  the  13tli, 
where  we  were  obliged  to  lay  until  the  28th  before  all  the  fleet  had 
passed  over  the  Bulkhead.  The  Pocahontas,  on  which  our  horses 
were  embarked,  was  lost  on  the  cape,  and  all  the  horses,  except  19, 
perished.  I am  happy  to  say  that  none  of  the  teamsters  that  were  with 
them  were  lost,  but  all  succeeded  in  getting  on  shore  and  joining  the 
regiment. 

On  July  [February]  5 the  fleet  sailed  for  Roanoke  and  arrived  in  sight  j 
the  same  evening. 

The  gunboats,  having  completed  their  preparations,  commenced  the  i 
bombardment  of  Forts  Bartow,  Huger,  and  Blanchard  (mounting  eight  j 
32s  and  one  7-inch  rifled  Parrott  on  Bartow;  six  32s  and  three  7-inch  I 
Parrotts  on  Huger,  and  one  7-inch  rifled  Parrott  on  Blanchard)  on 
Friday  morning  at  11.30  a.  in.,  and  continued  through  the  day.  The 
troops  from  different  transports  were  landed  the  same  evening  without 
opposition,  with  the  exception  of  a small  party  firing  on  the  sounding 
party  of  the  Fifth  Battalion  Rhode  Island  Volunteers,  wounding  2 
slightly;  the  gunboats  of  the  enemy  not  approaching  near  enough  to 
do  us  any  damage,  of  which  there  were  ten  in  all,  with  from  two  to 
three  guns  each. 

On  the  morning  of  the  8th  the  First  Brigade  (General  Foster’s)  was 
put  in  motion,  followed  by  General  Reno’s  (the  second),  ours  (the  third, 
General  Parke)  remaining  for  a short  time  in  reserve.  The  Fifth  Rhode 
Island  Battalion  having  been  deployed  on  our  right  and  the  Eighth 
Connecticut  held  in  reserve  on  our  left  to  prevent  flank  movements,  w e 
(that  is,  the  Fourth  Rhode  Island  and  Ninth  New  York)  were  ordered 
forward.  When  the  head  of  General  Foster’s  column  had  proceeded 
about  1 mile  on  the  road  they  were  suddenly  met  by  a sharp  volley  of 
musketry  and  the  contents  of  a Dahlgren  (12-pounder  brass  field  piece) 
from  behind  a masked  battery,  called  by  the  enemy  Fort  Defiance, 
across  and  commanding  the  only  road  for  400  yards,  on  each  side  of 


Jhap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


109 


vhicli  was  a hitherto-impassable  cypress  swamp.  The  First  Brigade 
idvancing  was  supported  by  Eeno,  who  threw  two  regiments  on  their 
•ight  flank.  The  Fourth  Bhode  Island  was  ordered  to  follow  part  of 
Foster’s  brigade  in  turning  their  left  flank,  Parke  holding  the  Ninth 
Slew  York  in  reserve.  Our  men  at  once  plunged  into  the  swamp,  nearly 
waste-deep  with  mud  and  water,  and  after  almost  incredible  exertions 
succeeded  in  forcing  our  way  through  briers,  cypress,  and  a dense 
nass  of  .birch,  &c.  When  we  had  nearly  succeeded  in  turning  their 
lank  on  the  left  and  right  General  Parke  ordered  the  Ninth  New  York 

charge  in  front,  when  the  enemy,  finding  that  they  were  flanked,  fled 
ip  the  island,  followed  by  regiments  of  Foster  and  Eeno  in  pursuit, 
General  Parke  ordering  the  Ninth  New  York  to  cut  off  their  retreat  by 
he  Nag’s  Head,  which  they  did,  taking  O.  Jennings  Wise  prisoner,  and 
capturing  the  battery  at  that  point,  with  three  heavy  columbiads.  The 
merny  retreated  to  Weir’s  Point,  where  they  did  not  make  any  fight,  but 
surrendered  to  Generals  Foster  and  Eeno,  about  3,000  all  told . 

General  Burnside  ordered  the  Fourth  Bhode  Island  to  proceed  to  Pork 
Point  and  take  possession  of  Fort  Bartow,  giving  us  the  Tenth  Connec- 
icut  for  our  support.  We  immediately  marched  for  the  point  and  took 
possession  of  the  place,  planting  the  banner  of  the  Fourth  Bhode  Island 
m the  ramparts.  The  Eighth  North  Carolina  was  within  about  half  a 
nile  of  us,  advancing  to  take  possession  of  it,  the  battalion  of  Seven- 
eenth  North  Carolina  having  evacuated  it  about  two  hours  before  we 
:ook  possession.  When  they  saw  our  flag  on  the  fort  they  fell  back  and 
surrendered  to  General  Eeno.  The  larger  fort  on  the  main  land  was 
bred  about  ten  minutes  after  our  arrival  and  consumed. 

We  have  taken  thirty-five  to  forty  pieces  of  artillery,  about  4,000 
stand  of  arms,  and 'camp  equipage  and  stores  of  four  regiments  of 
(infantry. 

The  gunboats  of  the  enemy  have  escaped  up  the  sound.  Four  hun- 
Ired  to  500  of  the  enemy  got  off  the  island,  and  a regiment  from  Nor- 
folk that  were  coming  to  re-enforce  the  rebels  did  not  land,  but  got 
away.  The  enemy  had  sunk  hulks  and  driven  piles  into  the  channel, 
which,  with  their  masked  batteries~and  natural  advantage  of  the  island, 
they  supposed  had  made  their  position  impregnable  to  any  force  we  could 
bring  against  them.  How  we  ever  got  through  that  swamp  I can  hardly 
conceive  of  now;  as  it  was,  we  were  full  two  hours  in  it.  Half  the  time 
the  regiment  was  under  fire,  but  the  distance — 300  to  400  yards  off  the 
battery — and  the  enemy  being  obliged  to  take  uncertain  aim  from  the 
constant  firing  of  Foster’s  advance,  preserved  us  from  loss. 

I don’t  think  we  have  lost  a man,  all  but  one  (Corporal  Perkins) 
having  joined  the  regiment,  and.  I think  he  will  be  found.  A number 
3f  our  men  in  the  Fourth  had  balls  through  their  coats  and  blankets. 
Our  flag  being  half  rolled  up,  did  not  present  much  surface  to  the  fire, 
and  we  only  got  one  bullet-hole  through  it ; shall  do  better  when  we 
have  a chance.  The  Fourth  was  cool  and  did  well.  All  our  force  be- 
haved well  and  gave  satisfaction  to  the  commanding  officer  of  the 
[division. 

I must  now  close  this  hasty  and  imperfect  sketch,  hoping  it  will  give 
-you  some  idea  of  the  battle  of  Eoanoke.  Our  regiment  is  again  em- 
barked on  board  the  Eastern  Queen,  and  is  to  proceed  to , I sup- 

pose. The  blank  I am  unable  to  fill, 

And  remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

I.  P.  EODMAN, 
Colonel  Fourth  Rhode  Island. 

Gov.  William  Sprague. 


110 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


No.  23. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  Huger,  G.  S.  Army , commanding  Depart- 
ment of  Norfolk,  with  correspondence. 

Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk,  Va.,  February  102  1862. 

Sir  : I telegraphed  last  night  that  a steamer  had  arrived  from  Nag’s 
Head  and  brought  the  news  that  Roanoke  Island  was  captured.  Men 
who  escaped  across  Roanoke  Sound  brought  them  this  information. 
Lieutenant  Pearse  brought  up  his  ammunition  by  this  opportunity,  but 
had  no  communication  with  Roanoke  Island,  and  got  his  information 
from  runaways.  Such  information  is  not  usually  correct,  but  from  his 
statements  I had  to  treat  it  as  true  as  regards  the  fact  of  the  capture 
of  all  the  forces  on  the  island. 

I have  ordered — 

1st.  The  Sixth  Virginia  Regiment,  some  six  companies,  under  Col- 1 
onel  Corprew,  to  proceed  to  the  Currituck  Bridge,  near  outlet  of  Ches- 
apeake and  Albemarle  Canal,  to  block  that  avenue  to  Norfolk.  There 
is  a battery  of  three  32-pounders  at  Currituck  Bridge. 

2d.  Five  companies  of  the  Third  Georgia  Regiment,  under  Major  Lee,  I 
to  South  Mills,  the  outlet  of  Dismal  Swamp  Canal,  to  protect  that 
approach,  and  I have  sent  orders  to  Colonel  Henningsen,  who  is  at 
Elizabeth  City,  to  fall  back  to  South  Mills  and  co-operate  with  Major 
Lee. 

3d.  Colonel  Hamilton,  at  Suffolk,  is  ordered  to  throw  some  companies 
to  the  Black  Water  and  protect  the  approach  to  the  railroad  bridge  on 
the  Black  Water,  and  to  obstruct  the  river. 

4th.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Williams,  First  North  Carolina  Battalion,  to 
proceed  down  the  Black  Water  and  Chowan  to  near  Winton,  to  obstruct 
the  passage  of  the  Meherrin  and  Chowan,  and  I have  ordered  Captain 
Nicholas  light  battery  to  join  him  and  assist  in  preventing  a landing 
and  stopping  their  boats. 

As  soon  as  the  enemy  hears  the  news  (if  true)  I expect  he  will  make 
demonstration  in  my  front,  and  you  will  perceive  this  force  can  only 
perform  outpost  duty. 

I will  advise  you  of  facts  as  soon  as  I can  get  them,  and  if  the  enemy 
are  in  strong  force  on  the  south  of  me  I must  be  re-enforced. 

I need  say  nothing  now  'of  Roanoke  Island.  I send  you  a copy  of  my 
instructions  to  General  Wise  as  soon  as  he  reported  to  me,  dated  Jan- 
uary 13.  These  orders  have  never  , been  carried  out.  I cannot  but 
regret  that  Commander  Lynch  did  not  come  into  the  Albemarle  Canal. 
We  could  have  supplied  him  with  ammunition  and  had  the  use  of  his 
boats.  I had  loaded  up  a boat  with  ammunition  for  him  and  the  island 
and  dispatched  it  last  evening.  Soon  after  it  left  it  met  the  steamer 
from  Nag’s  Head  with  the  news  of  the  disaster  and  returned.  These 
two  boats  are  all  I have  to  forward  troops  and  supplies.  Now  Com- 
mander Lynch  is  shut  up  in  Elizabeth  City  I fear  he  will  lose  all  his 
boats. 

Persons  from  the  south  of  this  report  firing  in  direction  of  Elizabeth 
City.  Nothing  official  to  11.30  a.  m. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGEB, 

Major-General. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


Ill 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk , Va.,  February  11,  1862. 

Sir:  I telegraphed  to  you  this  morning  that  I had  a letter  from 
General  Wise,  dated  9 a.  m.  yesterday  at  Poplar  Branch,  Currituck 
County,  North  Carolina.  He  would  move  on  to  the  Canal  Bridge  and 
collect  all  his  troops  there.  I have  before  reported  to  you  I sent  Colonel 
Corprew,  Sixth  Virginia  Volunteers,  to  the  same  point.  They  left  via 
canal  early  yesterday  morning.  I have  not  yet  heard  of  their  arrival. 
General  Wise’s  account  of  the  capture  of  Boanoke  Island  is  from 
the  report  of  a sergeant — Metzer,  McCullough  Rangers — who  left  the 
island  at  5 p.  m.  on  the  8th  instant.  He  reports  that  Lieutenant  Selden, 
in  charge  of  a howitzer,  which  did  great  execution,  was  killed.  Capt. 
0.  J.  Wise  was  wounded  thrice  and  carried  to  the  hospital,  where  it 
is  reported  he  died,  and  Captain  Coales  was  killed.  All  this  is  only 
report. 

As  I heard  that  Colonel  Henningsen  had  retreated  from  Elizabeth 
City  toward  Edenton,  I sent  three  pieces  of  Captain  Girardey’s  com- 
pany (Louisiana  Guard)  and  the  Second  Battalion  of  the  Third  Georgia 
toward  South  Mills. 

I just  have  the  following  report  from  Sewell’s  Point : “ Three  steamers 
have  left  the  Roads  seaward  bound.  Seventeen  schooners  are  getting 
under  way.” 

1 The  enemy  seem  re-enforcing  their  forces  in  Albemarle  Sound.  I 
cannot  detach  further.  Re-enforcements  must  be  sent  to  guard  the 
railroad  beyond  Meherrin.  I have  telegraphed  General  Gatlin  he  must 
take  care  of  the  Roanoke  River  and  Weldon. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGER, 

Major-General . 

• General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


War  Department, 
Richmond,  Va.,  February  23,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Norfolk , Va.: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  copy  of  a letter  addressed 
by  General  Wise  to  the  President,  with  copy  of  the  indorsement  by 
Dhe  President.  You  are  respectfully  requested  to  make  such  remarks 
thereon  as  the  nature  of  the  case  may  in  your  opinion  require,  and 
report  the  same. 

Your  obedient  servant, 


J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


[Inclosure.] 


Canal  Bridge,  Currituck  County,  N.  C., 

February  13,  1862. 

a.is  Excellency  Jefferson  Davis,  President , Ac.: 

^ou  ai>3  aware  already,  doubtless,  of  my  defeat  and  disasters, 
i ^ my  best  to  prepare  for  the  unequal  conflict.  Unequal  it  was.  In 
rain  I appealed  for  re-enforcements ; the  reply  was  an  order  to  my  post, 
ind  that  “ supplies,  hard  work,  and  coolness,  not  men,”  were  all  that 


112 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


was  needed.  After  this  there  was  no  election  for  me  but  to  fight.  Thej 
lack  of  time  and  the  storms  prevented  me  from  working,  and  no  work 
had  been  done.  The  North  Carolina  troops  had  not  been  paid,  clothed, 
or  drilled,  and  they  had  no  teams  or  tools  or  materials  for  constructing 
works  of  defense,  and  they  were  badly  commanded  and  led,  and,  except 
a few  companies,  they  did  not  fight. 

About  600  of  my  Legion  withstood  the  enemy  for  half  a day  on  tliej 
Sth  without  field  artillery,  except  a 24-pounder  and  18-pounder  with 
12-pounder  ammunition,  and  a 6-pounder  brass  howitzer,  which  did 
terrible  execution  among  the  enemy.  Twice  the  enemy,  at  least  8,000 
strong,  were  repulsed  with  slaughter,  and  it  was  not  until  they  passed 
a dense,  deep  swamp,  thought  to  be  impassable,  and  outflanked  us  on 
the  right — and  until  Lieutenant  Selden  was  killed  at  his  gun  sighting 
the  aim  of  his  last  round  of  ammunition,  and  until  the  enemy  advanced 
under  a white  flag,  firing  at  our  men  as  they  cheered  a supposed  sur- 
render— that  our  artillery  pieces  were  captured  and  the  Legion  gave 
way,  but  never  surrendered. 

They  fought  on  all  the  8th  and  continued  the  fight  on  the  9th.  Never 
did  men  do  and  dare  more  nobly,  but  they  were  unsupported,  except 
by  two  or  three  companies  of  the  Eighth  North  Carolina  Regiment. 
The  Thirty-first  was  hardly  in  the  action  at  all,  and  had  leave  of  their 
colonel  (Jordan)  to  take  care  of  themselves,  and  some  60  or  70  of  them 
escaped. 

The  forts  on  the  island  were  all  out  of  place ; they  ought  to  have 
been  at  the  south  end,  and  they  were  at  the  north,  leaving  several  oi 
the  landing  points  on  the  south  end  without  any  defenses  against  the 
shot  and  shell  of  the  heavy  steamers,  which  came  quite  up  and  covered 
the  landing  of  their  troops,  horses,  artillery,  and  everything  required 
for  land  forces.  We  had  but  four  indifferent  mules  for  our  pieces  and 
they  were  killed. 

Such  were  the  odds  and  the  deficiencies  of  our  defenses,  yet  my  men 
fought  firmly,  coolly,  and  stubbornly  up  to  the  muzzle,  to  wounds, 
death,  and  captivity.  Providence  sharply  prohibited  my  commanding 
in  person.  For  nine  days  I was  prostrated  at  Nag’s  Head  with  high 
fever  and  a severe  attack  of  pleurisy;  but  this  enabled  me  to  save 
about  200  of  my  men.  Here  we  are,  a remnant  of  infantry,  a corps  oi 
artillery — in  all  six  companies,  besides  fragments  of  about  40,  who 
escaped,  of  the  Legion. 

I desire  your  favor  now  to  recruit  it.  My  Third  Regiment  was, 
unjustly  to  me  and  my  men,  taken  from  me  and  sent  to  South  Caro- 
lina. I ask  for  its  return  to  my  command.  I ask  for  the  four  field 
pieces  taken  from  me  by  General  Floyd  or  their  equivalent.  I ask  foi 
the  transfer  of  such  troops  as  seek  to  join  my  command  and  for  all 
facilities  to  move  it  under  the  circumstances.  Having  obtained  my 
Legion  by  your  good  pleasure,  having  spent  it  at  every  risk  and  sacri- 
fice with  honor  in  the  service,  I ask  your  interposition  in  behalf  of  its 
full  restoration. 

With  the  highest  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier- General. 

[Indorsement.] 

Referred  to  Secretary  of  War,  whose  attention  is  called  to  the  repre- 
sentation of  [General  Wise]  and  especially  to  the  order  marhed  by 
quotation.  A copy  of  the  letter  will  be  furnished  to  General  Huger 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


113 


for  report.  Authority  and  all  due  assistance  will  be  given  to  recruit 
and  reorganize  General  Wise’s  Legion.  My  anxiety  for  the  construc- 
tion of  a work  on  the  south  end  of  the  island  was  freely  expressed  to 
General  Wise,  and  its  importance  appears  to  have  been  even  greater 
than  I supposed,  as  the  north  had  been  reported  to  me  impracticable 
for  the  movement  of  troops.  The  Third  Regiment  was  not  considered 
a part  of  the  Legion,  and  it  was  only  the  Legion  proper  which  it  was 
designed  to  remove,  with  General  Wise,  to  the  coast  of  Virginia  and 
North  Carolina. 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk , Fh.,  March  5,  1862. 

Sir  : I beg  to  submit  the  following  report  of  facts  in  regard  to 
Roanoke  Island : 

1.  On  hearing  of  the  capture  of  Fort  Hatteras,  on  August  29  last,  I 
sent  troops  to  hold  Roanoke  Island  and  throw  up  some  fortifications 
as  promptly  as  possible.  Roanoke  Island  being  outside  the  limits  of 
my  command  I reported  my  action  to  the  Department,  and  was  notified 
that  my  course  was  approved  by  the  President, 
i 2.  The  Third  Georgia  Regiment  continued  to  garrison  the  island  and 
the  engineer  officers  I sent  there  to  fortify  it.  As  the  place  was  so 
, distant  and  out  of  my  military  district,  and  other  troops  were  sent 
, there  from  North  Carolina,  I requested,  by  letter  (dated  November  14, 
1861),  that  Roanoke  Island  be  placed  entirely  under  my  control  and 
i sufficient  troops  sent  me  to  garrison  it,  or  that  I be  relieved  of  the 
i charge  of  it.  An  order  dated  November  26,  1861,  placed  the  island 
in  the  command  of  Brigadier-General  Gatlin.  General  D.  H.  Hill  had 
immediate  command.  About  December  1 Colonel  Wright’s  Third 
( Georgia  Regiment  was  relieved  and  ordered  to  return  to  this  depart- 
. ment.  The  Thirty-first  Regiment  of  North  Carolina  Volunteers  re- 
placed them. 

i 3.  From  the  time  the  command  was  given  to  Generals  Gatlin  and 
Hill  until  the  date  of  Special  Orders,  No.  272,  December  21,  1861, 
forming  a brigade,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  H.  A.  Wise,  I had  no 
control  over  the  position,  and  when  Orders,  No.  272,  were  issued  I was 
not  certain  that  it  included  Roanoke  Island,  but  wrote  to  inquire  on 
, January  2.  Answer  received  January  4.  General  Wise  reported  to 
me  early  in  January,  and  I urged  his  immediate  inspection  and  exam- 
, ination  of  the  position.  He  did  visit  it,  and  returned  and  reported  to 
me.  I addressed  him  my  instructions  in  a letter  of  January  13  (copy 
inclosed).  General  Wise  went  a few  days  after  this  to  Richmond. 
While  he  was  there  an  order  for  him  to  proceed  at  once  to  Roanoke 
Island  was  issued,  and  on  or  about  January  29  General  Wise  arrived 
at  Nag’s  Head.  On  February  7 and  8 the  place  was  attacked  and  cap- 
tured by  the  enemy. 

4.  The  orders  of  the  War  Department  will  show  that  I had  not  the 
control  or  management  of  Roanoke  Island  from  the  time  it  was  assigned 
to  General  Gatlin’s  command  until  General  Wise  was  assigned  to  the 
command. 

My  opinion  concerning  the  defenses  is  expressed  in  my  letter  of 
January  13.  I did  write  to  General  Wise  that  batteries  should  be  so 
placed  as  to  repel  a fleet  of  gunboats,  and  that  supplies,  hard  work, 
and  coolness  were  what  was  wanted. 

8 r r — VOL  IX 


114  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA.  [Chap.  XX.  J 

I send  copies  of  my  letters  of  January  9 and  13,  to  which  I ask  your 
attention. 

I regret  that  General  Wise  addressed  you  directly  instead  of  through 
me,  as  it  prevented  me  from  sending  the  above  explanations  with  his 
letter  of  February  13. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGER, 

Major-General. 

His  Excellency  Jefferson  Davis, 

President  of  the  Confederate  States. 


[Inclosures.] 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk , Va.j  January  9,  1862. 

General:  I have  your  letter  of  the  7th  (received  last  night),  and 
have  seen  persons  who  have  left  you  since.  The  gunboats  that  have 
gone  to  Hatteras  are  not  those  which  were  here.  A large  number  of 
small  vessels  and  barges  are  still  in  the  Mill  Creek  Channel,  near  Old 
Point.  No  number  of  vessels,  but  schooners,  have  left  Old  Point 
lately. 

I send  the  steamer  Currituck  to-day,  with  Capt.  J.  S.  Taylor  and 
Lieutenant  Loyall,  to  take  charge  of  the  batteries  at  Roanoke  Island. 
I have  directed  all  the  supplies  asked  for  by  Major  Williamson,  except 
the  large  quantity  of  shot  for  which  there  was  no  powder  sent. 

I have  got  from  Richmond  to-day  an  order  for  a small  quantity  of 
powder  at  Raleigh,  and  send  for  it  at  once.  I will  send  the  chief 
quartermaster  with  a good  pilot  down  to-morrow.  Major  Johnston, 
the  quartermaster,  will  give  all  instructions  necessary  in  his  depart- 
ment. He  must  have  boats  and  barges  enough  to  get  up  supplies  both 
for  your  brigade  and  the  rest  of  the  army.  You  will  find  him  fully 
capable  to  manage  the  business.  The  pilot  I send,  Captain  Taylor, 
informs  me  that  it  would  be  easier  to  obstruct  the  channel  inside ; that 
is,  to  the  northward  and  westward  of  the  marshes.  He  says  the  water 
is  too  deep  between  some  of  the  marsh  islands  to, block  them  there ; but 
as  soon  as  you  get  through,  the  water  shoals  and  the  channel  could  be 
obstructed  by  sinking  vessels  in  some  12  feet  of  water.  I send  him, 
that  he  may  sound  out  the  positions  and  assist  in  obstructing  them,  if 
you  desire  it. 

Let  Major  Johnston  send  back  all  such  boats  as  you  can  spare,  that 
we  may  use  them  in  supplying  you  with  more  articles  you  want.  I 
think  you  want  supplies,  hard  work,  and  coolness  among  the  troops 
you  have,  instead  of  more  men.  If  men  can  help  you,  you  shall  have 
them,  if  we  have  boats  here  to  take  them.  I am  most  anxious  to  do 
all  I can  to  strengthen  you.  I only  want  to  know  how. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BE NJ.  HUCER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise, 

Commanding  Fourth  Brigade. 

Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk , Va.j  January  13,  1862. 

Sir  : Your  requisition  for  means  to  carry  on  all  necessary  work  at 


115 


CHAP.  XX.]  BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 

Roanoke  Island  will  be  approved.  To  secure  this  important  pass,  the 
key  of  Albemarle  Sound,  I direct  that  all  efforts  be  made — 

First,  to  establish  batteries  at  the  marshes  oft  south  end  of  the  island, 
one  of  your  own  propositions  after  your  personal  reconnaissance.  If 
guns  at  these  marshes  can  prevent  the  enemy’s  gunboats  from  passing 
they  will  also  prevent  any  landing,  and  it  will  be  impossible  for  them 
to  take  the  island. 

The  more  permanent  battery,  as  proposed  by  you,  for  the  marshes 
may  be  postponed  for  the  present,  and  two  or  more  guns  mounted  on 
barges  or  vessels,  and  placed  in  position  on  the  different  marshes  to  pro- 
tect the  approaches  to  the  island  $ this  to  be  the  first  work  done.  If  it 
will  expedite  the  work,  you  are  authorized  to  move  one  or  both  of  the 
barges  with  guns  on  them  now  at  Redstone  Point  to  the  marshes. 

Second,  one  or  more  wharves  appear  to  be  necessary  for  landing,  &c., 
and  should  be  erected  as  soon  as  possible. 

i I do  not  consider  large  forces  necessary  for  the  defense  of  this  island. 
If  the  batteries  can  keep  off  gunboats  and  transports  the  infantry  will 
; have  little  opportunity  to  act. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 

BENJ.  HUGER, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise,  Commanding  Fourth  Brigade . 

— 

[March  5, 1862. — Huger  to  Benjamin,  inclosing  Talcott’s  report,* see 
jP-  54. J 

Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk , Fa.,  March  11,  1862. 
Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : I transmit  inclosed  a copy  of  a letter  received  from  Brig.  Gen. 
H.  A.  Wise  in  reply  to  mine  of  8th  instant,  requiring,  as  directed  by 
you,  his  report  of  the  battle  at  Roanoke  Island. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 
ij  BENJ.  HUGER, 

Major- General. 

[In  closure.] 

Rolliston,  near  Norfolk,  March  8, 1862. 
'Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Commanding , &c.: 

Sir  : In  reply  to  yours  of  this  day,  I have  to  inform  you  that  I did 
not  receive  the  report  of  Colonel  Shaw  of  the  battle  on  Roanoke  Island 
on  the  7th  and  8th  February  until  Monday,  the  3d  instant.  It  inclosed 
the  reports  of  Colonels  Anderson,  Jordan,  and  Green,  Majors  Hill 
and  Fry,  and  Capt.  J.  S.  Taylor,  and  is  dated  February  24.  ‘ As  soon 
as  copied,  with  its  accompanying  reports,  it  was  sent  to  the  Secretary 
of  War,  Wednesday,  the  5th  instant,  the  day  of  the  date  of  the  letter 
of  the  Secretary  of  War  to  you.  Before  this  he  has  received  the  re- 
port of  Colonel  Shaw  to  me  and  of  mine  to  him.  I retain  the  origi- 
nals, and  if  you  desire  copies  will  furnish  them  to  you. 

At  the  same  time  I request  to  be  furnished  with  copies  of  all  official 
letters  or  papers  which  you  have  sent  to  the  War  Department,  and  of 
all  letters  sent  or  orders  issued  by  your  subordinates  commanding  de- 
partments or  other  forces  in  the  district  assigned  to  my  command  in 


116 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX 


North  Carolina  touching  or  relating  to  my  late  command  in  that  die 
trict,  and  especially  any  of  those  sent  to  Colonel  Wright  at  Elizabetl 
City  or  elsewhere.  I make  this  request  in  order  to  aid  the  inquirj 
which  I have  demanded  respecting  my  command  and  to  subserve  th 
justice  due  to  you  as  well  as  to  myself  in  respect  to  the  defenses  ci 
Roanoke  Island  and  their  conduct  by  you  and  by  myself  and  others  am 
in  respect  to  my  retreat  to  Great  Bridge. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk,  March  17,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : I received  yesterday  by  special  messenger  your  letter  of  th 
15th  instant,*  inclosing  a letter  to  be  forwarded  to  General  Wise.j 
Also  a voluminous  report  (143  pages)  sent  to  you  by  General  Wise,  am 
forwarded  to  me  for  my  remarks.! 

The  letter  to  General  Wise  was  sent  to  him  at  once.  I have  devote< 
the  night  to  looking  over  the  voluminous  report,  which  I find  is  not 
report  of  the  battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  but  a collection  of  all  Genera 
Wise’s  correspondence,  with  his  explanatory  remarks,  giving  his  view 
of  the  conduct  of  the  War  Department,  myself,  and  others.  As  yoj 
remark,  no  such  report  should  be  sent,  unless  forwarded  through  me. 

It  will  take  much  time  to  examine  so  voluminous  a document  care 
fully,  which  at  this  moment  I can  illy  spare  from  more  importan 
duties. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGER, 
Major-General)  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk)  Va.)  March  18,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : I send  herewith  a letter  received  from  General  Wise,  dated  16t] 
instant,  covering  a copy  of  his  report  to  you  of  the  capture  of  Roanokj 
Island  and  the  original  reports  of  his  subordinates  on  the  subject,  viz 
The  report  of  Col.  H.  M.  Shaw  and  the  reports  to  him  of  Colonel  Jordaij 
Lieutenant-Colonels  Green  and  Anderson,  Majors  Hill  and  Fry,  am 
Capt.  J.  S.  Taylor.  Having  no  personal  knowledge  of  the  positions 
and  uninformed,  except  by  these  reports,  of  the  occurrences  there, 
have  no  remark  to  make  upon  them. 

As  I occupied  this  island  the  end  of  August  last  on  my  own  resporj 
sibility,  it  being  without  the  limits  of  my  command,  there  seems  to  b 
a general  impression  that  I had  had  entire  control  of  it,  which  is  a: 
error.  I did  partially  fortify  and  garrison  it  last  summer.  I was  aftei 
ward  relieved  from  all  charge  of  it,  and  the  troops  I had  sent  ther 
were  withdrawn  and  returned  to  this  command.  It  was,  by  order  c 


* See  p.  68.  tOf  March  14,  see  p.  168.  X No.  24,  p.  122. 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


117 


the  War  Department,  the  latter  part  of  December,  assigned  to  the  im- 
mediate command  of  Brigadier-General  Wise  and  attached  to  this  de- 
partment, and  it  is  only  since  then  I have  had  any  charge  of  it. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGER, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


[Inclosure.] 


Near  Norfolk,  Va.,  March  16,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Commanding , &c. : 

Sir  : On  the  5th  instant  I sent  to  the  Secretary  of  War  the  report  of 
the  surrender  of  Roanoke  Island,  of  which  the  inclosed  is  a copy.*  At 
the  same  time  I sent  to  him  copies  of  the  reports  of  Cols.  H.  M.  Shaw 
and  Jordan,  and  Lieutenant-Oolonels  Anderson  and  Green,  and  of 
Majors  Hill  and  Fry,  and  Captain  Taylor. 

By  a letter  dated  March  14,  just  received  by  me,  he  corrects  my 
error  of  sending  copies  and  not  the  originals  and  of  reporting  directly 
to  the  Department  instead  of  through  you.  I deeply  regret  these  errors 
in  form,  and  now  send  my  report  through  you,  accompanied  by  the  origi- 
nals. 

I respectfully  assure  you,  and  through  you  the  Secretary  of  War, 
that  these  informalities"  were  entirely  unintentional,  as  the  Secretary 
does  me  the  justice  to  suppose.  I supposed  the  originals,  addressed  to 
me,  were  mine,  and  that  I,  being  changed  from  your  department,  was 
no  longer  required  to  report  to  you.  I beg  that  you  will  forward  this 
( report  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  and  believe  me,  respectfully,  your  obe- 
dient servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

i Brigadier- General. 


Richmond,  Va.,  April  2,  1862. 


Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Norfolk , Fa.  : 

Sir  : The  committee  appointed  by  the  House  of  Representatives  to 
inquire  and  report  the  causes  and  circumstances  of  the  capitulation  of 
Roanoke  Island  have  instructed  me  to  inclose  you  the  within  copy  of 
the  comments  filed  by  Brigadier-General  Wise  with  the  committee 
upon  the  remarks  made  by  yourself  upon  his  report  of  the  battle  of 
Roanoke  Island.  The  committee  have  thought  that  you  might  like  to 
reply  to  the  remarks  of  General  Wise.  The  committee  are  delayed  in 
their  investigation  for  the  want  of  the  report  of  Brigadier-General 
Wise,  made  on  February  21  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  in  relation  to  the 
surrender  of  Roanoke  Island,  and  which  was  sent  by  the  Secretary  of 
■ War  to  yourself,  and  which  has  not  been  returned  by  you  to  the  War 
Department.  The  committee  will  be  greatly  obliged  if  you  will  return 
the  report  to  the  War  Department,  so  that  they  can  obtain  a copy. 

I have  the  honor  to  be, 

B.  S.  GAITHER, 

Chairman. 


[Indorsement.] 


Respectfully  referred  to  the  Secretary  of  War. 

BENJ.  HUG  ER, 

Major  General. 


* See  No.  24,  p.  122. 


118 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


[In  closure.] 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  March  28,  1862. 
Hon.  Mr.  Gaither,  Chairman , &c. : 

Sir  : By  permission  of  a portion  of  tlie  committee  over  which  you 
preside  I obtained  yesterday  a copy  of  General  Huger’s  remarks  upon 
my  communication  of  Colonel  Shaw’s  report  of  the  battle  of  Eoanoke 
Island. 

I beg  leave  most  respectfully  to  submit  some  remarks  upon  the  re- 
marks of  General  Huger. 

First.  He  says  that  my  statement  that  the  artillery  of  my  Legion  did 
not  reach  me  owing  to  his  interruption  of  my  orders  to  Colonel  Hen- 
ningsen  seems  to  convey  the  insinuation  that  the  officious  interruption 
of  General  Huger  was  the  cause  of  the  artillery  not  arriving,  and  that 
his  intention  was  to  expedite  its  arrival,  not  prevent  it,  as  his  paragraph 
seems  to  imply.  If  General  Huger,  in  this  paragraph,  had  left  out  the 
word  insinuation,  and  for  the  word  officious  had  substituted  ignorant — 
had  stated  that  I meant  to  convey  the  idea  that  the  ignorant  interrup- 
tion of  General  Huger  was  the  cause  of  my  artillery  not  arriving — he 
would  have  been  nearly  correct  in  his  inference,  and  he  would  have 
been  relieved  of  the  necessity  for  any  averment  of  his  intention  to  ex-  I 
pedite  the  arrival  of  my  artillery. 

I ordered  Colonel  Henningsen,  commanding  a light  artillery  corps 
of  three  companies,  six  pieces  and  213  horses,  to  have  the  horses  led 
from  Norfolk  across  what  is  called  the  Sand  Bridge  down  the  sea-beacli 
to  Nag’s  Head,  and  to  have  the  field  pieces,  caissons,  and  ammunition 
towed  by  steam-tugs  through  the  Albemarle  and  Chesapeake  Canal  to 
Eoanoke  Island.  After  I left  Norfolk  he  countermanded  this  order,  and 
commanded  Colonel  Henningsen  to  mount  the  artillery  and  haul  it  by 
horses  on  land  to  the  nearest  point.  The  nearest  point  was  Powell’s 
Point,  about  15  or  20  miles  from  the  island,  across  the  Albemarle  Sound, 
where  there  was  no  means  of  water  transportation,  except  in  a small 
lighter  ferry  at  Gallop’s,  from  the  beach  to  the  point. 

Colonel  Henningsen  went  to  Elizabeth  City,  45  miles  off,  and  thence 
to  the  island.  There  was  no  transportation.  Had  he  been  allowed  to 
obey  my  orders  he  could  have  reached  me  easily  in  three  days,  and 
would  have  arrived  from  three  to  five  days  before  the  fight  on  Feb- 
ruary 8,  leaving  Norfolk,  as  General  Huger  admits,  on  the  29th  or  30th 
of  January. 

On  February  8,  during  the  battle,  I wrote  to  General  Huger  for  a 
boat,  and  expressed  my  regret  that  his  change  of  the  route  of  my  artil- 
lery prevented  its  arrival. 

On  the  9tli  he  replied  by  note,  saying,  “ You  are  in  error  when  you 
say  L Colonel  Henningsen  was  diverted  from  following  the  route  you 
ordered  him  to  take  by  me.’  I gave  him  no  order,  but  not  to  send  one 
company  by  the  beach,  as  you  ordered.  In  all  other  respects  he  was  to  | 
obey  your  orders.”  Thus  he  in  effect  denied  making  the  change  in  | 
my  orders  except  as  to  one  company,  and  now  he  pleads  justification 
of  the  change  of  my  orders  admitted  to  have  been  made  by  him.  I 
required  reports  of  Colonel  Henningsen  and  of  my  ordnance  officer, 
Lieut.  J.  H.  Pearce.  Both  officially  reported  that  General  Huger  had 
changed  my  orders,  and  assigned  as  reasons  for  changing  the  route 
designated  by  me  that  it  was  impracticable  to  lead  the  horses  down 
the  beach,  owing  to  the  tide,  estuaries,  inlets,  creeks,  and  deep  sands. 
That  was  his  reason  then  for  doing  what  he  had  written  he  had  not 
done. 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


119 


Again,  when  I met  him  at  Great  Bridge,  February  16,  he  corrected 
verbally  what  he  had  written  to  me,  alleging  error  in  the  statement 
that  he  had  changed  my  orders,  admitted  that  he  had  changed  the  route 
of  my  artillery  as  ordered  by  me  and  assigned  the  same  reasons  for 
so  doing  that  he  had  given  to  Colonel  Henningsen  and  Lieutenant 
Pearce,  to  wit,  “ the  impracticability  of  the  beach  route,”  &c.  I as- 
sured him  that  I knew  it  to  be  not  only  practicable,  but  the  best  route 
in  either  Virginia  or  North  Carolina,  and  referred  him  to  my  son,  Lieut. 
B.  A.  Wise,  who  had  but  lately  then  pursued  the  route  most  of  the  way 
in  a tilt-wagon  with  a pair  of  mules,  and  to  Lieut.  J . C.  Gallop,  who  had 
described  the  route  fully  to  Colonel  Henningsen  and  Lieutenant  Pearce 
at  Norfolk  in  my  presence,  and  who  resided  at  Gallop’s  Ferry.  He  still 
insisted  that  the  route  was  impracticable,  and  said  he  would  order  a 
survey.  That,  unfortunately,  was  impracticable,  as  the  beach  then  was 
in  possession  of  the  enemy,  and  I so  replied.  But  then  I aver  he  was 
ignorant  of  the  route.  There  are  no  inlets,  no  estuaries,  no  creeks  to 
obstruct  horsemen  from  Cape  Henry  to  Oregon  Inlet,  nearly  100  miles, 
and  the  deep  sands  of  the  hills  are  easily  avoided  by  taking  the  ocean 
shore  at  almost  any  tide.  But  now  he  changes  his  grounds  for  changing 
the  route.  In  reply  to  Colonel  Henningsen’s  statement,  he  says  that 
every  tug,  barge,  and  vessel  that  could  be  procured  was  engaged  to 
transport  troops,  &c.,  to  Boanoke  Island.  Unfortunately  for  General 
Huger  this  excuse  is  as  groundless  as  the  former.  I aver  that  not  only 
every  tug,  barge,  and  vessel  that  could  be  procured  was  not  engaged 
to  transport  troops,  &c.,  to  Boanoke  Island,  but  that  every  one,  of  e\  er^ 
description,  was  most  inopportunely  ordered  away  from  Boanoke  Island, 
and  imperatively  put  under  orders  of  General  Huger’s  quartermaster  for 
the  transportation  of  forage  to  Norfolk.  The  only  steam-tug  I had  for 
transportation  was  the  tug  Boanoke  and  two  barges,  and  these  ordered 
away  after  the  arrival  of  the  enemy  at  Boanoke  Island,  as  the  order,  of 
which  the  following,  delivered  to  me  during  the  battle,  is  a copy,  will 
show : 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk , Va.,  February  3,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise, 

Commanding  Fourth  Brigade,  Boanoke  Island: 

Sir  : The  steamer  Roanoke  towed  down  two  barges,  which  were  ordered  by  the 
quartermaster  to  proceed  to  Scuppernong  and  bring  back  corn  to  this  place.  If  the 
Roanoke  has  been  taken  for  other  service,  you  will,  on  receipt  of  this,  send  her  and 
the  baro-es  to  carry  out  the  orders  of  the  quartermaster.  I have  to  charter  vessels  to 
bring  forage  here,  and  will  give  vessels  so  employed  by  the  Quartermaster’s  Depart- 
ment certificates  that  they  are  employed  by  me,  and  such  vessels  are  not  to  be  inter- 
fered with  by  any  one.  You  will  direct  the  captains  of  all  steamboats  coming  here 
from  your  command  to  report  to  the  chief  quartermaster  and  any  officer  coming  up 
to  report  to  headquarters.  These  orders  are  imperative. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BLJNJ.  HubrJhK, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Why  General  Huger  says  that  “if  these  tnen  and  horses  are  sepa- 
rated from  their  guns  they  would  probably  never  meet  again”  I cannot 
conceive.  This  blunder  may  account  for  his  “one”  company  error  in 
his  note  to  me.  The  men  were  not  to  be  separated  from  their  guns  nor 
from  their  horses.  One  company  was  to  be  detailed  to  lead  the  horses 
down  to  the  beach  to  Nag’s  Head,  and  the  other  two  companies,  with 
their  guns,  &c.,  were  to  be  towed  to  the  island  through  the  canal,  the 
two  ways  converging  to  the  same  point — the  island.  But  grant  what 
he  says,  “ that  every  tug,  barge,  and  vessel  that  could  be  procured  was 


120 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


engaged  to  transport  troops  to  Roanoke  Island,  and  therefore  none 
could  be  got  to  transport  the  artillery  pieces,  caissons,”  &c.,  and  there- 
fore he  sent  them  by  land  route.  What  land  route  ? NTot  the  beach 
route,  for  he  had  ordered  them  away  from  that  route,  and  that  was  the 
only  route  by  which  Roanoke  Island  could  be  approximated  by  land. 
That  route  even  had  to  cross  Roanoke  Sound  from  Nag’s  Head.  Any 
other  land  route  had  to  cross  from  15  to  45  miles  of  the  boisterous  and 
broad  Albemarle  Sound.  Then  tugs,  barges,  and  vessels  would  be 
needed  by  the  route  he  sent  them ; and  he  says  there  were  no  tugs, 
barges,  or  vessels  to  be  procured  for  them.  Did  he  know  this,  and  yet 
did  he  send  them  by  a route  for  which  there  was  no  water  transport  ? 
He  did ; and  yet  I believe  General  Huger’s  intention  was  to  expedite 
them  ; that  his  object,  as  he  says,  was  to  get  them  there,  not  to  detain 
them.  His  intention  and  object  were  ever  so  good,  but  he  was  grossly 
ignorant  of  the  routes  and  careless  in  organizing  his  means  of  trans- 
portation. 

For  information  of  the  means  of  transportation  and  how  it  was  ordered 
and  disposed  and  how  and  when  it  could  be  procured  I refer  the  com- 
mittee to  Marshall  Parks,  president  of  the  Albemarle  and  Chesapeake 
Canal,  and  to  Mr.  Lindsay,  of  Norfolk.  They  have  furnished  most  of 
the  tugs,  &c.,  and  can  tell  how  many  lighters,  vessels,  and  barges  could 
have  been  procured ; if  not  at  Norfolk,  in  any  of  the  waters  of  North 
Carolina  nearer  to  the  island  than  Norfolk.  I refer  also  to  Dr.  Thomas 
Warren,  of  Eden  ton,  N.  C. 

Second.  He  says  that  my  remark  upon  Major  HilPs  and  Captain 
Taylor’s  reports  about  the  only  three  guns  brought  to  bear  on  the  enemy 
is  u disingenuous.”  This  is  an  offensive  term  ; it  means  to  say  that  I 
was  not  in  this  remark  u frank,  free,  open,  sincere,  plain;”  but  my 
respect  for  the  military  service  and  for  the  committee  admonishes  me 
to  deal  with  it  mildly  and  forbearingly.  I trust,  then,  it  is  not  unbe- 
coming in  me  to  say  that  General  Huger’s  reply,  showing  his  reason  for 
using  the  term,  is  so  naive , so  innocent,  as  to  render  it  innocuous.  I 
stated  the  fact  on  the  authority  of  Major  Hill.  Other  guns  were  fired 
on  the  enemy,  but  because  they  could  not  be  brought  to  bear  on  them 
ceased  firing.  But  what  says  General  Huger  ? u The  enemy  selected 
a position  in  which  only  three  guns  bore  on  them.”  Ah,  and  were  the 
five  batteries  so  located  that  an  enemy’s  fleet  of  thirty-seven  sail  in 
attack  could  select  a position  in  which  only  three  guns  bore  on  them? 
So  says  General  Huger,  and  that  is  all  any  fair,  intelligent  mind  could 
have  understood  me  to  say.  The  worst  constructed  forts  in  any  locality 
with  more  than  thirty  guns  could  perhaps  bring  more  than  three  guns 
to  bear  if  the  enemy  would  let  General  Huger  select  his  position  for  him. 
But  in  this  instance  the  enemy  selected  his  own  position.  Where?  In 
the  open  Croatan  Sound.  How  far  off  from  Pork  Point  Battery  ? One 
thousand  yards.  Did  no  guns  but  three  of  that  battery  bear  ? None. 
Did  the  guns  of  no  other  battery  bear  ? None.  So  that  General  Huger 
is  certainly  naive , and  I not  u disingenuous.”  His  reasoning  is  like  his 
command,  and  my  statement  is  in  effect  admitted  by  him  to  be  “ fair.” 
As  far  as  permitted  by  the  rules  of  propriety  and  position  I repel  liis 
imputation  on  my  sincerity.  The  committee  will  maintain  decorum 
and  I will  observe  military  discipline. 

General  Huger’s  averment  that  u those  three  guns  did  repel  their 
whole  fleet  ” is  just  simply  ridiculous.  They  did  no  damage  to  the 
enemy’s  fleet  that  ever  I have  been  informed  of,  and  why  the  enemy’s 
fleet  did  not  pass  the  three  batteries — as  they  could  have  done  in  thirty 
minutes — is  not  to  be  accounted  for,  except  upon  their  supposition  that 


Uiiap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


121 


due  preparations  had  been  made  at  the  north  end  of  the  island,  as  they 
found  none  at  the  south  end.  They  accordingly  ceased  firing  at  insig- 
nificant batteries.  General  Huger’s  concluding  remark  under  this  head 
forgets  his  reasoning  for  the  word  “ disingenuous.”  There  he  says  but 
three  guns  were  brought  to  bear,  because  the  enemy  selected  a position 
in  which  only  three  guns  did  bear  on  them.  Here  he  says  that  from 
that  position  the  battery  “ was  exposed  to  a heavy  fire.”  Then  the 
enemy  did  fire  a heavy  fire  upon  the  battery  from  a position  on  which 
but  three  or  four  guns  could  be  brought  to  bear.  Material  injury  was 
done  to  the  earthworks  of  the  battery.  It  was  materially  knocked 
down  by  the  first  day’s  bombardment,  and  the  night  of  that  day  (the 
7th)  it  had  to  be  rebuilt.  For  proof  of  this  1 refer  you  to  Lieutenants 
Bagwell  and  Bolton,  who  are  now  in  this  city. 

Third.  General  Huger  supposes  I meant  him  and  the  War  Depart- 
ment by  the  words  “ my  superiors.”  I meant  and  mean  every  superior 
of  every  grade  and  position  at  all  responsible  for  the  lack  of  defenses 
at  Koanoke  Island.  I did  all  I could  with  the  means  and  facilities 
allowed  to  me  by  them.  He  coupled  himself  swimmingly  with  the 
War  Department!  I separate  them  for  the  purpose  of  my  remarks  on 
his  remarks.  He  says  “we  could  not  control  time,  weather,  or  sick- 
ness.” I say  emphatically  that  he  could  have  taken  time  by  the  fore- 
lock, which  he  never  did.  That  he  might  have  worked  while  the  sun 
shined  and  not  have  left  everything  to  be  done  and  undone,  too,  in  the 
winter’s  weather  of  Hatteras  ; and  if  he  had  promptly  aided  me,  as  lie 
ought  to  have  done,  with  men  and  munitions  of  war,  I could,  while 
in  good  health,  have  been  preparing  at  Koanoke  Island,  and  might 
have  saved  my  command,  if  it  had  not  been  grossly  neglected  up  to  the 
time  I was  prostrated  by  a severe  illness  and  up  to  the  arrival  of  the 
enemy.  Thus,  in  a very  rational  sense  correlatively  with  his  own  use 
of  terms,  he  might  have  controlled  “ time,  weather,  and  sickness.”  I 
could  not  control  my  command  even  under  his  orders.  He  says  that 
he  does  not  know  what  available  preparation  asked  for  by  me  could 
have  been  made  by  my  superiors.  He  does  know.  He  has,  I believe, 
nowin  his  hands  my  letter  to  the  Secretary  of  War  reporting  the 
causes  of  the  disaster  at  Koanoke  Island.  It  was  delivered  here  by 
. William  B.  Stanard  on  March  1 instant,  and  the  original  was  for- 


warded by  the  Department  to  him  “ for  his  remarks.” 

That  will  fully  inform  the  committee  of  what  was  asked  and  what 
was  not  allowed.  I intend  to  “ accuse”  General  Huger  of  nothing  ! 
nothing ! ! nothing ! ! ! That  was  the  disease  which  brought  disaster  at 
Roanoke  Island.  " My  purpose  is  only  to  fully  reply  to  the  committee’s 
inquiries  and  to  his  imputations. 

Respectfully, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

April  5,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

Sir:  I return  to  the  Secretary  of  War  “a  voluminous  document 
(143  pages),  which  he  sent  me  for  my  examination  and  remarks,  stating 
“Brigadier-General  Wise  had  forwarded  this  as  a report  from  him  di- 
rect to  the  Secretary,  instead  of  sending  it  through  me;  that  this  report 


122 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


had  been  called  for  by  Congress,  but  it  could  not  be  sent  in,  if  at  all, 
before  being  submitted  to  me.”  This  report — as  it  is  called — is,  I find, 
copies  of  such  official  letters  as  General  Wise  has  pleased  to  select, 
connected  with  his  remarks,  to  give  his  view  of  the  case.  I have  other 
employment,  and  can  find  no  time  to  examine  this  voluminous  docu- 
ment further.  I consider  it  an  improper  report,  and  ought  not  to  be 
published  without  other  official  correspondence,  which  may  not  sustain 
the  views  here  desired  to  be  made  history.  I return  it  to  the  Secretary 
of  War,  to  be  disposed  of  as  he  thinks  proper.  I received  on  the  3d 
instant  the  inclosed  reply,*  which  a committee  of  Congress  received 
from  General  Wise,  criticising  the  few  remarks  I thought  proper  to 
make  on  his  report  of  the  capture  of  Eoanoke  Island.  I considered 
those  remarks  proper  and  just,  and  regret  they  do  not  coincide  with 
General  Wise’s  opinion $ but  I have  no  time  to  discuss  the  subject  with 
him,  and  I send  his  paper  to  the  Secretary  of  War. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HTJGER, 

Major-General , Commanding  Department  of  Norfolk. 


No.  24. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise , C.  8 . Army , with  correspondence. 

Great  Bridge,  Norfolk  County,  Virginia, 

February  21,  1862. 

Sir  : I beg  leave  to  make  a full  report  of  my  command  in  the  Dis- 
trict of  North  Carolina,  attached  to  the  Department  of  Norfolk,  under 
general  orders  from  Major-General  Huger. 

Upon  my  return  to  Richmond  from  Western  Virginia,  under  orders 
transferring  my  command  to  Brigadier-General  Eloyd,  I was  immedi- 
ately, on  September  30  last,  stricken  down  by  a severe  and  protracted 
illness. 

November  18  last  I reported  for  duty  to  the  Secretary  of  War  by 
letter  of  which  the  following  is  a copy : 

Rolliston,  Near  Norfolk,  Va.,  November  18,  1861. 
Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I take  the  earliest  opportunity  of  returning  health  to  report  myself  officially 
ad  ready  for  duty. 

I earnestly  request  that  the  forces  composing  my  Legion  may  without  delay  be 
ordered  to  the  point  at  which  the  President  intends  to  employ  my  services.  Even  the 
promptest  movement  on  their  part  will  now  scarcely  enable  them  to  prepare  their 
arrangements  for  winter  before  the  winter  shall  be  upon  them. 

In  General  Lee’s  absence  from  Richmond  I take  the  liberty  to  remind  the  President 
and  yourself  of  the  disposition  which  he  thought  advisable  in  connection  with  the 
Legion,  viz  : that  each  western  company  should  decide  for  itself  whether  to  remain 
with  the  Legion  or  on  service  in  the  west ; that  a certain  proportion  of  the  pieces  of; 
artillery  in  possession  of  the  Legion  should  be  retained  in  the  west ; and,  finally,  that 
all  the  eastern  companies  and  such  of  the  western  companies  as  shall  so  elect,  with  at 
least  one  battery  of  field  pieces,  should  be  ordered,  with  the  least  practicable  delay,,  to 
the  new  field  of  operations  where  it  is  intended  to  employ  them. 

In  the  mean  time  I also  request  permission  to  detail  a party  to  explore  the  channels 
of  Albemarle  and  Pamlico  Sounds,  if  ifc  is  intended  to  employ  me  on  the  North  Caro- 
lina coast. 

I will  await  at  this  place  the  orders  of  the  President. 

My  post-office  is  at  Norfolk  City. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 

* See  Gaither  to  Huger,  April  2,  p.  117. 


Uhaf.XX.]  BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C.  123 


Iii  reply  I received  from  the  Secretary  of  War  a letter  of  which  the 
following  is  a copy: 

Confederate  States  of  America, 

1 War  Department , Richmond,  Va.,  November  23,  1861. 

Brig,  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise, 
k Rolliston,  near  Norfolk,  Va. : 

I Sir  : I liave  tlie  honor  to. acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of  the  18th  instant, 
and  am  happy  to  learn  that  you  have  been  restored  to  health. 

' As  soon  as  we  are  informed  of  the  movements  of  the  enemy  consequent  upon  Gen- 
eral Floyd’s  withdrawal  from  Cotton  Hill  orders  will  he  issued  in  regard  to  your  Legion. 
Until  then,  however,  it  will  he  impossible  to  decide. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 

On  December  4,  1861,  the  following  Special  Orders,  No.  254,  extract 
IV,  was  issued : 


Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

Richmond,  Va.,  December  4,  1861. 


Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise, 

( Through  General  Henningsen : ) 


Special  Orders, 

254. 


IV.  The  Wise  Legion,  under  the  command  of  Col.  J.  Lucius  Davis,  will  repair  to 
Richmond,  Va.,  by  the  nearest  railroad  route,  and  report  to  Brigadier-General  Winder, 
commanding  Department  of  Henrico. 


By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 


JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General . 


By  Special  Orders,  No.  272,  dated  December  21,  1861,  from  the  Ad- 
jutant and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  I was  assigned  to  the  command 
of  the  military  district  composed  of  that  part  of  North  Carolina  east 
of  the  Chowan  River,  together  with  the  counties  of  Washington  and 
Tyrrel,  designated  as  the  Fourth  Brigade,  Department  of  Norfolk.  I 
immediately,  from  Richmond,  ordered  Col.  J.  L.  Davis,  who  was  in 
command  of  my  Legion  in  Western  Virginia,  to  move  with  all  the 
forces,  arms,  ammunition,  and  equipments  of  the  Legion  under  his 
orders  to  Richmond  and  report  to  me. 

I then  returned  home,  to  prepare  for  assuming  the  command  assigned 
me.  Again,  on  January  1 last,  I addressed  to  Col.  J.  Lucius  Davis  a 
letter  of  which  the  following  is  a copy : 


Rolliston,  near  Norfolk,  Va., 

January  1,  1862. 

Col.  J.  Lucius  Davis,  Commanding,  <fc. : 

Sir  : General  Huger  thinks  it  important  that  the  Legion  should  reach  its  place  of 
operation  and  of  quarters  as  early  as  convenient  and  practicable ; that  the  troops 
should  come  on  to  Norfolk,  and  that  the  quartermaster  and  commissary  of  my  brigade 
should  precede  the  troops  to  Norfolk,  in  order  to  arrange  quarters  and  rations  before- 
hand with  the  quartermaster  aud  commissary  of  his  division.  To  these  ends,  then, 
you  will  issue  the  following  orders : 

That  Quartermaster  Cleary  and  Commissary  Thomas  will  proceed  to  Norfolk  im- 
mediately, and  report  either  to  General  Huger  or  to  myself,  in  order  to  arrange  for 
quarters  and  rations  with  the  quartermaster  and  commissary  of  the  division ; that 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Richardson  will  proceed,  as  early  as  practicable,  with  the  Eight- 
eenth Regiment  of  Infantry,  to  Norfolk,  procure  transportation  from  the  Quarter- 
master-General, and  report  either  to  me,  or,  if  absent,  to  General  Huger;  that  Colonel 
Henningsen  will,  as  early  as  practicable  after  the  Eighteenth  Regiment  of  Infantry 


124 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


lias  reached  Norfolk,  proceed  with  the  Second  Regiment  of  Infantry  and  Captaii 
Wallace’s  company  of  the  Third  and  the  corps  of  artillery  to  join  the  command  al 
Norfolk,  and  Major  Gibbes  will  regard  this  as  an  order  to  him  to  proceed  nndei 
the  command  of  Colonel  Henningsen  (Colonel  Henningsen  will  procure  transporta-i 
tion  from  the  Quartermaster-General),  and  that  Col.  J.  Lucius  Davis  will  proceed  t( 
Norfolk  at  the  earliest  practicable  moment  with  all  the  cavalry  of  the  Legion  and 
with  the  two  companies  of  infantry  under  Colonel  Tyler,  who  will  regard  this  as  an 
order  to  him  to  proceed  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Davis.  He  will  transfer  Cap  ! 
tain  Wallace’s  company  of  infantry  to  the  Second  Regiment,  under  Colonel  Hen- 
ningsen, to  supply  the  place  of  the  company  of  Captain  Crane,  disbanded.  Colonel 
Davis  will  procure  transportation  from  the  Quartermaster-General.  In  case  any  of  th< 
Legion  are  still  in  the  west  they  will  be  ordered  to  Norfolk  directly,  and  transporta- 
tion will  be  furnished  accordingly.  Separate  orders  will  be  issued  to  Colonel  Green 
at  Wilmington,  N.  C.,  by  myself. 

Very  respectfully, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  Gen  eral. 


On  January  2 I proceeded  to  Norfolk  on  my  way  to  Roanoke  Island, 
and  Major-General  Huger  referred  to  me  the  letters  of  which  the  fol 
lowing  are  copies : 

C1-] 

Fort  Bartow,  Roanoke  Island, 

December  29,  1861. 

Col.  H.  M.  Shaw, 

Commanding  Forces  BoanoJce  Island , Camp  Raleigh,  N.  C. : 

Colonel  : I feel  it  my  duty  to  the  cause  in  which  we  are  engaged  to  make  the  fol- 
lowing report  in  relation  to  the  condition  of  my  fort : In  the  first  place,  I have  only 
one  gun  which  can  possibly  bear  upon  an  enemy  on  the  south  side  of  the  fort,  and  an 
enemy  can  keep  out  of  the  range  of  that  gun,  and,  with  good  guns  on  their  vessels, 
shell  us  in  such  a manner  as  to  drive  us  from  our  guns  without  our  being  able  tc 
return  her  fire,  except  from  this  one  gun,  which  is  mounted  upon  a common  ship’* 
carriage,  and  this  placed  upon  a chassis  of  a columbiad  carriage.  It  is  almost  impos-; 
sible  to  work  this  chassis  so  as  to  traverse  the  gun,  and  in  its  present  condition  it  it 
my  opinion  that  after  firing  a few  rounds  it  will  become  perfectly  useless,  and  in  it* 
exposed  condition  it  can  be  very  easily  dismounted  by  the  enemy’s  shot.  In  the 
second  place,  all  my  other  guns  are  mounted  on  small  ship’s  carriages  and  in  embra- 
sures, and  their  field  of  fire  is  so  limited  in  extent  that  I am  almost  certain  if  an  enemy 
were  to  come  with  a large  force,  say  eighteen  or  twenty  gunboats  at  a time,  they 
would  by  a general  pressure  of  steam  pass  our  battery  without  receiving  any  per- 
ceptible injury.  The  battery  is  placed  in  such  a position  as  to  render  very  little  pro-! 
tection  to  the  men  and  guns  from  an  enfilading  fire  from  the  enemy’s  vessels.  My 
opinion  of  the  battery  in  its  present  position  is  that  it  affords  no  protection  to  tin 
defense  of  the  sound : for  if  the  enemy  attempt  to  pass,  I firmly  believe  they  can  dc 
so  despite  all  I can  do  to  prevent  it.  I therefore  earnestly  recommend  that  something 
be  done  at  once  to  render  the  fort  more  efficient. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  H.  HILL, 

Major,  State  Provisional  Army,  Commanding  Fort  Bartow. 

[2.] 


Headquarters  Forces  Roanoke  Island, 

Camp  Raleigh,  December  30,  1861. 
General  Huger,  Commanding  Department  of  Norfolk : 

General  : Not  knowing  where  to  address  Brigadier-General  Wise,  who,  as  I have 
learned  unofficially,  is  now  in  command  of  this  district,  I take  the  liberty  of  forwarding 
to  you  directly  the  accompauying  report  of  Maj.  G.  H.  Hill,  of  the  Seventeenth  Regi- 
ment North  Carolina  troops,  commanding  battery  at  Pork  Point,  and  of  submitting 
at  the  same  time  some  remarks  in  reference  to  the  defenses  of  these  waters.  I am 
clearly  of  the  opinion  that  the  defensive  works  on  this  island  are  altogether  insuf- 
ficient, as  at  present  an  enemy  could  pass  the  above-named  battery  without  comiDg 
within  range  of  its  guns  at  all,  and  the  others  could  be  passed  without  much  liability 
to  danger.  Impressed  with  this  belief,  immediately  upon  assuming  command  of  the 
forces  on  this  island  I urged  upon  General  Gatlin,  commanding  Department  of  North 
Carolina,  the  necessity  of  strengthening  the  lower  battery  (Pork  Point)  by  the  addition 


JHAP.XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


125 


)f  two  rifled  32-pounders,  so  mounted  as  to  give  a wide  command,  and  to  so  obstruct 
he  two  channels  of  the  sound  as  to  compel  the  enemy,  should  he  attempt  to  pass,  to 
mme  within  easy  range  of  all  the  guns.  (By  reference  to  the  map  you  will  see  that 
his  battery  is  not  in  connection  with  the  others,  and  can  receive  no  support  from 
kther  of  them.)  I also  thought,  and  still  think,  that  it  was  necessary  to  obstruct 
Khe  sound  on  a line  between  Weir’s  Point  Battery  (Fort  Huger)  and  the  floating  bat- 
tery. To  that  end  I directed  an  agent  in  Norfolk  to  call  on  Commodore  Forrest  and 
aro-e  him  to  send  out  a steam  pile-driver.  He  agreed  to  send  it,  and  it  was  to  have 
been  here  some  time  since,  but  up  to  this  time  it  has  not  arrived.  I have  been  very 
much  surprised  to  hear  it  has  been  delayed,  because  the  men  desire  to  have  their  Christ- 
mas holidays.  If  the  plan  of  obstructing  the  sound  shall  meet  your  approval,  I hope  you 
will  have  the  pile-driver  in  question,  and  another,  if  to  be  obtained,  sent  out  without 
the  least  delay.  Had  this  work  been  undertaken  early  in  the  fall  it  would  have  been 
comparatively  light,  but  at  this  season  of  the  year  more  than  three  working  days  m 
the  week  on  an  average  cannot  safely  be  counted  on. 

I beg  leave  respectfully  to  suggest  that  a competent  engineer  officer  be  sent  here 
to  examine  the  works,  with  a view  to  such  alterations  and  additions  as  may  be  found 


necessary.  , . , ,, 

I would  also  request  that  a naval  officer  of  intelligence  and  experience  be  sent  here 
to  give  instructions  at  the  several  batteries  in  artillery  practice. 

The  steamboat  Wilson,  employed  for  the  use  of  this  station,  is  now,  by  reason  of 
the  carelessness  of  the  captain,  ashore  here,  without  any  immediate  assurance  of  her 
beino-  gotten  afloat.  She  will  be  greatly  needed  as  a tender  to  the  pile-drivers.  Per- 
mit me  to  request  that  you  call  upon  the  owner  to  dismiss  the  captain  and  put  a more 
competent  man  in  his  place.  . _ . _ x.  -n 

The  supply  of  ammunition  at  this  post  is  altogether  insufficient.  I hope  you  will 
authorize  the  requisition  I have  sent  by  Major  Williamson  to  be  filled  at  once.  Major 
Williamson  is  an  officer  of  intelligence  and  high  character,  and  will  give  you  any  fur- 
ther information  you  may  desire  in  regard  to  this  post. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Jll.  1VJL.  oJtlA  W j 

Colonel,  Commanding  the  Forces  on  Eoanoke  Island. 


[3.] 

J Headquarters  Forces  on  Roanoke  Island, 

Camp  Ealeigh,  December  30,  1861. 

» General  Huger, 

Commanding  Department  of  Norfolk : 

f General  : I have  to  request  that  you  will  cause  to  be  returned  to  this  post  two 
6-pounder  boat  howitzers,  lately  taken  away  by  Col.  A.  R.  Wright,  formerly  com- 
mandino-  on  Roanoke  Island.  I deem  it  very  necessary  that  we  should  have  those 
pieces  or  others  of  a similar  character,' and  I earnestly  hope  they  will  be  promptly 
rcturnccl 

I have  to  report  to  you,  moreover,  that  one  large  flat,  one  two-mast  flat-boat,  and 
some  five  canoes  were  carried  away  by  Colonel  Wright.  These  flats  and  canoes  were 
taken  in  the  expedition  to  Chicamacomico ; were  of  considerable  value,  and  would  be 
of  great  service  at  this  post.  I beg  leave  to  call  your  attention  to  the  matter,  hoping 
they  will  be  restored. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  M.  SHAW, 

Colonel,  Commanding  on  Eoanolce  Island . 


[4.] 

Headquarters  of  the  Forces  on  Roanoke  Island, 

Camp  Ealeigh,  December  30,  1861. 

General  Huger, 

Commanding  Department  of  Norfolk : 

General  : I beg  leave  to  represent  to  you  the  necessity  of  having  this  post  con- 
stantly supplied  with  at  least  four  weeks’  rations  for  the  entire  command  of  about 
1 800  men.  Should  the  enemy  unfortunately  destroy  our  little  navy  and  get  above  the 
batteries,  they  might,  by  cutting  off  our  supplies,  force  us  to  yield  the  place  without 
having  had  the  ability  to  strike  a single  blow.  .. 

This  command  is  now  being  supplied  by  a commissary  officer  (Map  S.  1.  Sawyer) 
stationed,  by  order  of  General  Gatlin,  at  Elizabeth  City,  but  the  supplies  come  m very 
small  quantities. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ gHAW 

Colonel,  Commanding  Eoanoke  Island. 


126 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[ClTAP.  XX 


On  tlie  same  day  (January  2)  Major  Williamson,  under  orders  fror 


Colonel  Shaw,  in  command  of  Roanoke  Island,  called  on  me  an< 


showed  to  me  several  requisitions  of  nearly  all  kinds  of  supplies  for  th 
dexense  of  the  island,  which  had  been  largely  curtailed  by  Genera 
Huger  I immediately  (the  same  day)  addressed  to  General  Huger  tin 
letter  of  which  the  following  is  a copy : 


Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger:  Norfolk,  Va„  January  2,  1862. 

1 reiturn  the  in(dosed  papers,  which  found  me  this  morning  in  this  city  on  m 
reconnaissances  of  Roanoke  Island  and  other  places  in  my  command 
They  show  the  sad  condition  of  that  post,  which  I regard  as  the  very  key  of  th?rea 
defenses  of  Norfoik  and  the  navy-yard.  Norfolk  and  the  navy-yard  may  well  th« 

mond^nd  the^^onth?^  “ to  ®aVe  themselves  or  their  connection  with  Rich 

I beg,  then,  that  yon,  sir,  will  not  scale  the  requisitions  of  Colonel  Shaw  so  low  a 
two  12°nou^^re  ^ n18  .fOTnmS\j  Major  Williamson.  I have  already  attended  to  th 
t u +P  n ? howitzers.  They  were  navy  boat  howitzers,  loaned  by  Cantab 
Lynch  to  Colonel  Wright;  were  returned  by  the  latter  to  the  navy-yard ^ncU  an 
allowed  by  the  authorities  of  the  yard,  with  the  consent  of  Captain  Lynch  to  tak< 
one  of  them,  while  that  officer  takes  the  other.  y ’ taJ* 

aptkorities  of  the  yard  have  also  consented  for  me  to  have  two  12-pounder  iroi 
guns.  These  pieces  need  boats  and  carriages.  I beg  that  I may  have  assigned  to  ms 

fi+f  !frSt  *"“.*»*  °f,at  lea8t  fourteen  or  sixteen  oars  each,  with  howitzmS 
or  guns,  fitted  for  both  land  and  water  service.  As  to  the  batteries,  I will  have  then 
surveyed  and  reported  upon  immediately.  ’ err 

My  Legion  is  ordered  to  move  as  early  as  practicable  to  Norfolk  on  their  way  to  loir 
my  command,  and  some  of  its  officers  are  good  artillerists.  In  the  mean  time  Asl 
mfanoi  c®“Pe*ePt  officer  to  command  batteries  may  he  temporarily  assigned  tc 
Roanoke  Island,  m conformity  to  Colonel  Shaw’s  request. 

thft+a  com^ssary  and  quartermaster— hoth-he  appointed  at  once  foi 
^ a !8ranu ’ + ° act,  '\ntl1  brigade  quartermaster  and  commissary  can  arrive 

f°r  dut/>  and  that  provisions  and  all  supplies  be  sent  directly  from  Norfolk 
to  the  island,  and  not  by  way  of  Elizabeth  City.  Thirty  days’  provisions  for  2 'SOd 
men,  at  least,  ought  to  be  stored  on  the  island  at  once.  ’ 

ventured^to^kThe  Secretary  W^ftwtlire^  more"  ^°r  R“  and  I have 

Croat?  atVoTnSe  ChaDeSeTshateVer  y°“  C<“  *°  f°rWard  the  ™rk  °f  obstructing 

If  the  captain  of  the  steamer  Wilson  is  not  discharged  by  the  owner,  when  I get  to 
the  island  I will  discharge  him  myself,  and  put  in  his%lac£  a substitute  g 

allied  ““hare0  fo"fadt  ~ *q"i"d  be  g0t  at  the  nav^ard-  1 ask  *>  »e 

1 “wlththe’lSghestrefptif’  & f“e  a“ple  8npply  am— >»• 

henry  a.  wise, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Ta?ltoA?e  flay, January  2,  General  Huger,  through  Lieutenan 
Talcott,  Acting  Chief  of  Engineers,  furnished  me  with  the  appendec 
chart  of  Roanoke  Island  and  its  defenses  (marked  I),  which  chart  ] 
found  afterwards  to  be  wholly  inaccurate  and  incomplete.*  It  was  noi 
made  by  the  officer  himself,  but  copied,  in  part  probably,  from  the  Coasi 
Survey,  not  laying  down  the  marshes  correctly,  nor  the  islands  o: 
marshes  at  the  south  end  of  Roanoke  Island  at  all. 

I proceeded  immediately  to  Eoanoke  Island,  stopping  on  the  way  tc 
examine  the  narrows  at  Knott’s  and  Crow  Islands,  and  the  temporary 
works  constructed  at  Currituck  Canal  Bridge.  There  1 found  foui 
heavy  32-pounders  placed  in  battery  out  of  range  of  either  end  of  the 
canal,  one  sweeping  down  the  canal  toward  North  River  and  three 
covering  the  road  leading  up  from  Powell’s  Point.  The  battery  and 
position  of  the  guns  were  alike  futile.  They  were  mounted  on  navv 
carriages,  were  not  manned  or  guarded,  and -could  easily  be  flanked  or 
enfiladed  on  either  hand.  J 


Not  found, 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


127 


Chap.  XX.] 

I 


On  January  7 I assumed  command,  in  accordance  with  the  order  of 
the  War  Department,  of  the  district  assigned  me,  just  thirty  days  be- 
fore the  enemy  arrived  at  Eoanoke  Island.  I arrived  at  the  island,  I 
think,  late  on  January  6. 

On  January  7 I addressed  to  Colonel  Shaw  the  letter  of  which  the 
following  is  a copy : 


General  Orders,  ) ' Headquarters  Roanoke  Island, 

No.  1.  $ North  Carolina , January  7,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise  having  been  ordered  to  the  command  of  the  district  lying 
east  of  the  Chowan  River,  with  the  counties  of  Washington  and  Tyrrel  in  addition,  in 
North  Carolina,  he  now  announces  that  he  takes  command,  in  accordance  with  the 
orders  of  the  War  Department  of  the  Confederate  States. 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  Gen  eral. 

Col.  H.  M.  Shaw, 

Commanding , <fc.,  Roanolce  Island : 

Sir  : Upon  conference  with  you,  immediately  on  my  arrival  at  Roanoke  Island,  I 
have  issued  the  foregoing  general  order.  Under  this  special  order  you  will  con- 
tinue in  command  of  this  island  until  further  orders.  You  will  endeavor  to  have  the 
1 two  guns-  lying  near  Weir’s  Point  placed  in  battery  at  Roberts’  Fishery  ; assist  by 
every  means  in  your  power  the  driving  of  piles  across  the  Croatan  Sound ; construct 
a permanent  wharf  at  the  most  eligible  landing  near  Weir’s  Point  or  Northwest  Point, 
on  the  island ; report  generally  upon  the  defenses  at  this  point,  the  number  and  cali- 
ber of  guns,  and  amount  of  ammunition  and  provisions,  and  the  location  of  batteries, 
and  in  all  respects  prepare  all  the  means  in  your  power  against  any  attack  of.  the 
enemy  by  sea  or  land. 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier- General. 


On  January  8,  1862,  Colonel  Sliaw  made  tlie  report  of  which  the 
following  is  a copy: 

) Headquarters  Forces  on  Roanoke  Island, 

Camp  Raleigh,  N.  C.,  January  8,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise, 

Commanding  District  of  Albemarle : 

General  : In  compliance  with  your  special  order  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the 
following  report  of  the  defenses  of  this  island,  quantity  of  provisions  and  ammunition 
on  hand,  the  strength  of  this  command,  &c. 

The  defenses  at  Croatan  Sound  consist  of  four  batteries,  mounting  in  the  aggregate 
thirty  guns,  all  32-pounders,  as  follows:  At  Weir’s  Point  (Fort  Huger),  ten  smooth-bore 
and  two  rifled  guns;  at  Fort  Blanchard,  four  smooth-bore  guns;  at  Pork  Point 
(Fort  Bartow),  six  smooth-bore  and  one  rifled  gun,  and  at  Redstone  Point  (Fort 
Forrest),  seven  smooth-bore  guns.  There  is  another  battery  on  the  Tyrrel  side  of 
Croatan  Sound,  at  Roberts’  Fishery,  already  completed,  but  no  guns  have  been 
mounted,  General  Hill  having  ordered  a discontinuance  of  the  work.  Its  capacity  is 
. six  barbette  guns.  The  two  32-pounders  now  lying  on  the  beach  at  Weir’s  Point  will, 

; agreeably  to  your  orders,  be  mounted  as  soon  as  possible.  Upon  Roanoke  Sound  there 
1 is  a small  battery  of  two  smooth-bore  32-pounders,  at  Midgett’s  Hommock.  The  bat- 
’ tery  at  Pork  Point  ought  by  all  means  to  be  strengthened  by  the  addition  of  two  pivot- 
mounted  guns.  Orders  have  been  given  for  the  construction  of  bomb-proof  quarters 
, tor  the  detachment  at  Fort  Blanchard ; but  up  to  this  time  lumber  ordered  for  that 
J purpose  has  not  been  received.  Quarters  should  be  constructed  in  the  immediate 
1 vicinity  of  Fort  Huger  for  the  accommoda'ion  of  at  least  one  of  the  companies  by 
which  the  guns  at  that  battery  are  manned.  There  ought  also  to  be  built  at  Fort 
Forrest  quarters  not  only  for  the  company  already  there,  but  for  another  company 
necessary  at  that  fort.  Most  of  the  guns  require  sights;  nearly  all  of  them  have 
nothing  but  the  dispart  sight,  which  I believe  is  very  Unreliable,  especially  in  the 
hands  of  inexperienced  gunners.  I submit  that  it  is  very  necessary  that  the  most  im- 
proved sights  be  obtained  at  once,  and,  if  needful,  an  expert  artisan  sent  at  once  to 
P adjust  them. 

Of  light  artillery  there  are  three  pieces  at  this  post — one  24-ponnder  howitzer,  one 
' 18-pounder  Mexican  piece,  and  one  6-pounder;  the  latter  brought  to  this  place  from 
Elizabeth  City,  N.  C.  These  pieces  are  all  mounted  on  carriages,  with  limbers,  but 
no  caissons.  For  operations  upon  this  island  I am  not  sure  that  caissons  are  necessary. 

Ammunition  on  hand.—. 387  charges  for  32-pounder  guns ; 1,300  round  shot ; 250  rifle 


128 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chav.  XX. 


shells;  300  match  primers;  83  rounds  fixed  ammunition  (24-pounder  howitzer)  ; 1 box 
percussion  wafers ; 150  port-fires;  98  rounds  6-pounder  shot;  1,000  rounds  6-poundei 
shot,  from  Elizabeth  City,  N.  C. ; 250  pounds  of  powder ; 315  stand  grape  (32-pounder) ; 
2,000  friction  primers;  500  percussion  primers;  150  junk  wads;  400  grommet  wads: 
98  canister  (A  powder) ; 38  spherical-case  shot;  [and]  10  slow  matches. 

Ammunition  for  small-arms . — 52,159  ball-cartridges  for  percussion ; 3,320  balls;  16,57  b 
ball-cartridges  for  percussion  (issued  one  hundred  and  fifty  pounds  of  lead) ; 17,18; 
ball-cartridges  for  flint  and  steel;  [and]  55,000  percussion  caps. 

Quantity  of  provisions  on  hand. — 13,682  pounds  of  bacon  and  pork;  3,420  pounds  oi 
beef;  20  barrels  of  beef;  2,158  pounds  of  hard  bread;  598  pounds  of  lard;  265  barrels 
of  flour;  3,692  pounds  of  rice;  649  pounds  of  coffee;  10,554  pounds  of  meal ; 54£  bushels 
of  pease  and  beans;  3,082  pounds  of  sugar;  460  gallons  of  vinegar;  1,570  pounds  oi 
candles;  1,348  pounds  of  soap;  12|  bushels  of  salt;  1 barrel  of  fish;  58  gallons  oi 
whisky  ; [and]  5 boxes  of  yeast  powder. 

Aggregate  number  of  entire  command . . 1,82$ 

Four  cooks  allowed  to  each  company 9$ 


Total  to  be  subsisted 1, 9L 

Effective  force,  officers  included,  absent  and  sick  being  deducted 1, 43f 


A call  has  been  made  for  250  free  negroes,  for  service  in  the  engineer’s  department 
These  will  have  to  be  subsisted,  as  will  also  the  gang  of  8 men  on  the  pile-driver. 

Horses , mules , and  oxen  in  charge  of  quartermaster's  department. — 9 officers’  horses, 
6 yoke  of  oxen  (hired  by  quartermaster),  2 pairs  of  mules  (of  Eighth  and  Thirty-firsi 
Regiments,  property  of  Government). 

The  mules  and  oxen  are  used  for  general  purposes  of  land  transportation. 

Amount  of  forage  on  hand. — 725  pounds  of  fodder;  2£  bushels  of  corn ; 1£  bushels  oi 
oats. 

Orders  have  been  given  for  the  construction  of  a magazine.  No  regular  ordnance 
officer  has  been  appointed. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 


H.  M.  SHAW, 
Colonel , Commanding,  <fc. 


On  January  8 also  I addressed  the  following  orders  to  Lieutenant 
Selden  and  to  Colonel  Shaw : 

Steamer  Sea  Bird,  January  8,  1862. 

William  B.  Selden, 

First-Lieutenant,  Artillery,  on  Engineer  Duty,  <fc. : 

Sir:  You  will  commence  piling  from  Pork  Point,  on  the  eastern  shore  of  the  channe’ 
of  Croatan  Sound,  passing  that  jrnint  to  the  western  edge  of  that  channel  or  Fulker’t 
Shoal.  Place  the  piles  8 feet  apart;  wedge  with  poles  24  feet,  alternating  from  pile 
to  pile  or  wattling  the  piles  therewith,  and  then  above  the  poles  wattling  in  the  chaii 
the  reverse  of  the  poles,  thus : * 

* * * * * # * 


Please  see  Colonel  Shaw  and  call  for  all  his  available  force  in  assisting  at  the  piling 
Very  respectfully, 


HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-General. 


Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.,  January  8,  1862. 

Colonel  Shaw,  Commanding,  <fc. : 

Sir:  Lieutenant  Selden  will  call  for  all  your  available  force  to  assist  in  piling  the 
Croatan  Channels,  which  you  will  order,  reserving  whatever  force  may  be  necessary 
for  equally  necessary  work — of  which  you  must  judge — such  as  mounting  guns,  build 
ing  quarters,  &c.  You  will  reserve  force  enough  especially  for  building  wharf.  Mr. 
Selden  reports  the  want  of  civil  laborers.  You  will  please  address  the  Governor  oJ 
North  Carolina  on  the  subject  of  procuring  free  black  laborers  under  the  laws  of  th( 
State,  and  you  will  take  the  necessary  steps  to  obtain  about  250  common  laborers  oi 
the  works  of  this  island. 

Respectfully, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Diagram  omitted. 


3hap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


129 


I landed  on  the  island,  and  in  company  with  Colonel  Shaw  and  Major 
Duffield  made  a personal  reconnaissance  to  its  extreme  south  end.  I 
loted  three  successive  hommocks  of  high  land  between;  the  breastwork 
for  light  battery  and  the  south  end,  each  nearly  surrounded  by  marshes 
md  swamps ; that  the  dangerous  points  were  the  Hommock  Landing 
it  the  south  end,  Pugh’s  Landing  on  the  southwestern  shore,  and  at 
Ashby’s  Landing  just  on  the  south  side  of  the  swamp  south  of  Pork 
Point.  That  swamp  on  the  right  and  the  marshes  on  the  left  of  Suple’s 
Bill  were  reported  to  me  by  Colonel  Shaw  to  be  impassable.  They  ap- 
peared to  be  so,  but  I ordered  them  to  be  explored  and  the  earthworks 
it  Suple’s  Hill  to  be  extended  as  far  as  possible  on  the  right  and  left 
flanks.  The  water  at  Hommock  Landing  I ascertained  to  be  about  4£ 
feet.  Water  at  high  tide  at  Pugh’s  to  be  from  6 to  9 feet,  the  channel 
running  between  the  main  and  first  island  of  marsh,  until  it  passes 
Fulker’s  Island,  inside  of  the  sound,  and  then  widening  out  a mile  until 
opposite  Ashby’s  Landing,  up  to  which  a vessel  drawing  6 feet  of  water 
may  ran  close  in  to  the  shore,  as  a large  steamer  of  the  enemy  with 
transports  did. 

I saw  that  the  enemy  might  land  at  Pugh’s  or  Ashby’s  a portion  of 
their  force,  pass  the  batteries  with  all  ease,  round  the  north  end  of  the 
island,  and  land  another  portion  of  their  forces,  and  gain  the  rear  of  all 
the  batteries  without  exchanging  a shot  with  them,  or  the  least  dangers 
of  damage.  Not  a fort  was  in  the  right  position.  They  should  hate 
been  located  on  the  islands  of  marshes  at  the  south  end,  with  battetfes 
at  Hommock  and  Pugh’s  Landings.  <i  — 

By  the  courtesy  of  Flag-Captain  Lynch  I passed  in  the  Sea  Bird 
through  the  channel  by  the  light-house  and  returned  through  the 
channel  by  the  Tyrrel  shore.  If  the  five  batteries  had  been  placed  on 
those  islands  of  marsh  and  on  the  opposite  shores  every  chgnpej  would 
have  been  guarded  and  the  enemy  would  have  been  cut  off  from"  land- 
ing. As  it  was,  they  could  have  taken  the  island  in  tyro  hours  easier 
than  they  did  in  two  days,  if  they  had  landed  (as  they  could  easily  have 
done)  in  front  of  the  breastworks  at  Suple’s  Hill  and  in  rear  of  all  the 
batteries  on  the  north  end  of  the  island. 

I found  no  teams  for  light  artillery  or  for  transportation,  and  no  tools, 
axes,  spades,  shovels,  or  hoes  for  constructing  breastworks. 

There  were  two  North  Carolina  regiments,  the  Eighth  and  Thirty-first, 
and  a battalion  of  three  companies  of  the  Seventeenth,  all  under  Col- 
onel Shaw.  Their  entire  effective  force  was  less  than  1,500  men,  and 
several  companies  of  these  were  taken  from  the  infantry  to  man  the 
heavy  guns  of  the  batteries  and  part  to  man  the  gunboats  of  Captain 
Lynch. 

The  infantry  were  undrilled,  unpaid,  not  sufficiently  clothed  and 
quartered,  and  were  miserably  armed  with  old  flint  muskets  in  bad 
order.  In  a word,  the  defenses  were  a sad  farce  of  ignorance  and  neg- 
lect combined,  inexcusable  in  any  or  all  who  were  responsible  for 

them. 

Captain  Lynch  was  energetic,  zealous,  and  active,  but  he  gave  too 
much  consequence  entirely  to  Iris* fleet  of  gunboats,  which  hindered 
transportation  of  pile95Vl]ffMib($^v-fiWtt^■{,  all  kinds,  and  of 

troops,  by  t akin  g aW(hy  the  steam  - Digs  and;'  convert  in  g them  into  per- 
fectly imbecile  gunboats.  He  reported  to  me  the  indefensible  condition 
of  what  he  called  the  floating  battery  at  Bedstone,  on  the  Tyrrel  side 
of  Croatan  Sound.  I , accorded  with  his  request  by  the  letter ! of  which 
the  following  is  a copy : 

• 9 R R — VOL  IX  , • 


130 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


Steamer  Sea  Bird,  January  9,  1862. 

Capt.  W.  F.  Lynch,  Flag-Officer,  $c. : 

Sir  : I received  yours  of  this  morning,  and  regret  to  he  informed  of  the  indefensible 
condition  of  the  floating  battery  at  Redstone  Point,  on  Croatan  Sound.  I need  not  ] 
inform  you  that  I have  just  arrived,  and  am  yet  to  visit  various  points  of  defense  at 
the  Roanoke  Island.  On  conference  with  Colonel  Shaw  I find  that  the  report  of  Mid- 
shipman Gardner  was  made  December  28  last,  and  immediately  Colonel  Shaw  (De- 
cember 29)  issued  the  accompanying  order,  in  which  he  states  that  “ Midshipman 
Gardner,  having  been  detailed  by  Flag-Officer  Lynch  to  instruct  and  drill  Captain  J 
White’s  company,  stationed  in  the  naval  battery,  Captain  White  will  see  that  strict 
obedience  is  given  to  all  orders  given  by  him  while  in  the  discharge  of  that  duty.  Cap-  ! 
tain  White  retains  the  entire  command  of  his  company,  except  during  such  hours  each 
day  as  the  men  may  be  under  drill  by  Midshipman  Gardner,”  &c.  This  order  would 
seem  to  cover  sufficiently  all  the  purposes  of  Midshipman  Gardner’s  services.  But 
this  order  to  Captain  White,  you  inform  me,  has  been  violated  by  him  in  not  enforcing 
the  obedience  of  his  men  under  the  command  of  Midshipman  Gardner,  as  verbally 
reported. by  the  latter  to  you.  My  desire  and  purposes  are  to  co-operate  with  you  in 
the  way  to  insure  the  most  efficient  military  and  naval  service.  To  that  end  I have 
issued  the  accompanying  order,  which  I trust  will  be  satisfactory. 

If  you  claim  the  command  of  this  battery  as  a naval  battery,  I yield  it  at  once.  If 
it  is  a military  battery,  it  must  be  under  military  command.  But  in  either  case,  when 
naval  and  military  officers  co-operate  in  service,  the  command  must  depend  upon  the 
laws  and  regulations  of  rank.  In  this  case  I presume  that  Captain  White  will  com- 
mand and  rank  Midshipman  Gardner;  yet  you  will  observe  that  under  my  orders  to 
Captain  White,  Midshipman  Gardner  will  have  ample  authority  to  command  the  men 
for  drill  and  instruction  in  working  and  fighting  the  guns  and  to  control  the  maga-  j 
zine  for  artillery  purposes. 

The  men  need  instruction,  and  I trust  Midshipman  Gardner  will  not  be  taken  away 
from  the  battery.  If  you  choose  to  regard  this  battery  under  my  military  command, 
the  accompanying  order,  if  duly  enforced  by  Colonel  Shaw  in  my  absence,  will  effect 
our  mutual  desires  and  efforts  to  make  the  battery  efficient. 

With  the  greatest  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 

And  I issued  the  following  special  orders : 

Special  Orders,  \ Camp  Raleigh,  Roanoke  Island,  N.  C., 

No.  2.  ) January  9,  1862. 

In  constructing  the  wharf  heretofore  ordered,  the  commandant  at  this  post  will  see 
that  it  is  a permanent  structure,  of  good,  solid  materials,  capable  of  bearing  the  arti- 
cles of  transportation  and  landing  for  the  army  and  navy.  It  should  have  an  outer 
pier  or  platform  large  enough  to  bear  upon  it  a four- horse  wagon,  and  to  accommodate  | 
at  least  one  large  steamer,  with  a causeway  connecting  it  from  seven  feet  of  water 
with  the  dry  land.  It  should  be  placed  where  the  causeway  will  be  the  shortest  dis- 
tance between  the  requisite  depth  of  water  and  the  dry  land.  The  steam  pile-driver 
will  be  detained  for  the  wharf. 

******* 

III.  The  commandant  will  cause  a full  and  detailed  report  to  be  made  of  all  ord- 
nance and  ordnance  stores,  embracing  arms  and  ammunition  issued  and  not  issued. 
He  will  also  report  the  amount  of  provisions  and  the  whole  number  of  persons  in  camp 
to  be  supplied  with  provisions ; also  the  number  of  teams  of  horses,  mules,  or  oxen 
now  in  charge  of  the  quartermaster,  and  the  purposes  for  which  they  are  used, 
and  the  amount  of  forage  on  hand.  Also  whether  there  be  a proper  magazine  and 
ordnance  officer  in  charge,  and  if  not,  he  will  cause  temporary  magazines  to  be  con- 
structed of  logs  and  earth,  as  fire-proof  as  practicable,  and  detail  a proper  ordnance 
officer  to  take  charge  thereof,  who  will  receive  from  the  quartermaster  all  ordnance  [ 
and  ordnance  stores  and  receipt  to  him^for  the  same,  and  issue  the  same  upon  proper  [ 
vouchers  to  the  troops.  If  there  are  no  horses  for  field  artillery,  he  will  make  requi- 
sition for  a sufficient  number  to  serve  four  pieces  and  their  caissons,  and  procure  cais- 
sons for  the  same — say  four  caissons  and  thirty-two  horses. 

IV.  No  firing  or  discharge  of  pieces  will  be  allowed  in  camp,  for  the  purpose  of 
cleaning  guns  or  for  practice,  without  special  permission  or  order  of  the  commandant. 
The  ammunition  will  be  carefully  economized. 

V.  No  ardent  spirits  or  wine  or  beer  shall  be  allowed  in  camp  without  special  or- 
der or  permission  of  the  commandant,  and  men  or  messengers  will  not  be  permitted  to 
go  to  Nag’s  Head  unless  under  orders.  No  persons  will  be  allowed  to  pass  to  and  from 
the  sea-beach  and  the  island  without  special  permission.  And  to  prevent  intercourse 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


ldl 


with  the  enemy  the  boats  and  arms  of  all  suspected  persons  must  be  seized,  so  as  to 
prevent  their  use  by  such  persons. 

y J HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier- General. 


Special  Orders,  \ Camp  Raleigh,  Roanoke  Island,  N.  C., 

No.  6.  ( January  9,  1862. 

L Captain  White,  Seventeenth  Regiment  North  Carolina  troops,  stationed  at  the  float- 
ing battery  at  Redstone  Point,  on  Croatan  Sound,  will  observe  the  order  of  December 
29,  issued  by  Col.  H.  M.  Shaw,  commanding,  &c.,  in  respect  to  the  duties  and  powers 
assigned  to  Midshipman  Gardner,  detailed  by  Flag-Officer  Lynch  to  instruct  and  drill 
tbe  men  at  said  battery.  Captain  White  will  place  his  men  under  the  command  of 
Midshipman  Gardner  for  the  purposes  of  drill  and  instruction  in  working  and  fighting 
the  artillery  pieces;  and  Midshipman. Gardner,  for  such  purposes,  will  order  the  men 
on  duty  as  the  service  of  drill  and  instruction  may  require,  and  Captain  White  will 
afford  him  every  facility  in  the  discharge  of  this  duty,  making  him  ordnance  officer 
of  the  artillery" and  giving  him  charge  of  the  magazine  for  artillery  stores.  In  all 
otber  respects  Captain  White  will  command  his  company,  and  he  and  Midshipman 
Gardner  (while  the  latter  is  on  military  duty)  will  report  to  Colonel  Shaw,  command- 
ing, &c.,  at  Roanoke  Island. 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 

I 

On  January  9 General  Huger  addressed  to  me  the  following  letter,* 
which  I did  not  receive  for  some  time  after  it  was  written. 


* # # * * * # 

It  was  not  until  January  10  that  my  Legion  was  ordered  to  report  to 
me,  and  then  it  was  ordered  to  proceed  to  Edenton,  N.  C.,  and  at  my 
request  the  orders  were  changed  to  report  to  me  at  Portsmouth,  as 
appears  by  the  following  orders  and  memoranda  thereon  made  by  Gen- 
eral Huger: 


Special  Orders, 
No.  8. 


Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

Bichmond,  Va.,  January  10,  1862. 


* # # * # * * 

XXVII.  All  the  officers  and  men  of  the  Wise  Legion  in  this  city  will  immediately 
, proceed  to  Edenton,  N.  C.,  and  report  for  duty  to  Brig.  Gen.  H.  A.  Wise,  commanding. 
By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  WaP: 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

[Memorandum.] 


January  11,  1862. 

I By  request  of  General  Wise  send  the  men  to  Portsmouth,  Va.,  for  Roanoke  Island. 

5 B.  H. 


It  was  not  until  January  11,  twenty-one  days  after  the  order  was 
dated  at  Richmond  assigning  me  to  the  command  of  the  Chowan  Dis- 
trict on  December  21, 1861,  that  Special  Orders,  No.  8,  were  issued  from 
the  headquarters  of  the  Department  of  Norfolk,  announcing  my  com- 
mand, as  appears  by  the  following  order: 


Special  Orders, 
No.  8. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk , Va.,  January  11,  1862. 


II.  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise,  having  reported  at  these  headquarters,  is,  inobedience 
to  Special  Orders,  No.  272,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  Richmond,  De- 

* Printed  in  General  Huger’s  report,  p.  114. 


132 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX 


cember  21,  1861,  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  military  district  composed  of  that 
part  of  North  Carolina  east  of  the  Chowan  River,  together  with  the  counties  of 
Washington  and  Tyrrel,  which  will  be  designated  as  the  Fourth  Brigade,  Department 
of  Norfolk.  General  Wise  will  establish  his  headquarters  (subject  to  the  approval  of 
the  major-general  commanding  the  department)  at  the  most  central  and  accessible 
point  to  the  forces  of  his  brigade. 

* * # *>  # * # 


By  command  of  Major-Gendral  Huger  : 


S.  S.  ANDERSON, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General . 


When  I went  to  Eoanoke  Island  on  the  6th  the  pile-driver  from  the 
navy-yard  reached  there  about  the  same  time,  and  on  January  2 I wrote 
to  the  Secretary  of  War  for  authority  to  procure  several  others.  I re- 
ceived a reply  of  which  the  following  is  a cppy : 

Confederate  States  of  America,  War  Department, 

t Richmond,  Fa.,  January  12,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise,  Norfolk,  Va. : 

Sir:  I have  your  favor  of  the  2d  instant.  On  inquiry  I find  that  but  one  steam  pile- 
driver  can  be  procured,  viz,  one  at  the  navy -yard  in  Norfolk,  and  if  that  is  the  one 
you  have,  it  is  the  only  one  to  be  obtained.  I am  told,  however,  that  one  other  exists 
that  is  accessible,  and  was  tendered  for  the  service  you  are  now  supervising  by  the 
owners  at  Morehead,  in  North  Carolina.  The  Secretary  of  the  Navy  tells  me  that 
these  two  pile-drivers  are  the  only  ones  that  exist  in  the  "waters  in  our  neighborhood, 
and  it  must  be  one  of  the  two  that  is  now  in  your  possession. 

I have  not  yet  seen  your  requisition  for  munitions,  but  think  there  can  be  no  diffi- 
culty in  sending  you  from  here  a moderate  supply  of  fixed  ammunition  for  field  pieces; 
but  our  supply  of  cannon  powder  is  very  limited.  At  the  first  indication,  however, 
of  an  attack  on  Roanoke  Island  a supply  will  be  sent  you.  With  the  number  of  bat- 
teries now  requiring  a supply  we  have  a very  small  reserve,  that  we  can  only  part 
with  to  the  point  that  may  be  actually  attacked.  I am  in  daily  hope  of  the  receipt  of 
a handsome  importation  of  powder  from  abroad,  and  the  instant  it  arrives  you  shall  be 
supplied. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


While  the  Secretaries  of  War  and  of  the  Navy  were  thus  uninformed 
of  any  but  two  pile-drivers,  three  within  reach  were  offered  to  my  com- 
mand by  Messrs.  Parks  and  Culpeper,  of  Norfolk,  and  by  Dr.  Warren, 
of  Edenton. 

I had  hurried  back  to  Norfolk  from  Eoanoke  Island,  and  made  in 
person  the  strongest  verbal  representations  of  the  defenseless  condition 
of  the  post  to  General  Huger  and  left  a memorandum  of  the  necessary 
requisitions.  I particularly  impressed  upon  him  the  necessity  of  mak- 
ing the  defenses  at  the  marshes  at  the  south  end  of  the  island.  On 
January  13  he  gave  me  the  instructions  of  which  the  following  is  a 
copy.  * 

# # # # # # * 
These  were  the  first  instructions,  on  January  13,  which  I received 
from  General  Huger;  he  adopted  my  own  proposition  to  establish  bat- 
teries on  the  marshes;  he  postponed  my  proposition  for  several  perma- 
nent batteries,  probably  for  want  of  time,  but  he  did  not  consider  that 
the  enemy  might  probably  come  before  the  two-gun  batteries  he  pro- 
posed could  be  begun.  The  wharves  were  to  be  constructed,  too,  labor- 
ers, tools,  and  machines  had  to  be  gotten,  and  materials  transported;  he 
did  not  seem  to  calculate  upon  an  early  approach  of  the  enemy ; he  did 
not  appreciate  the  shortness  of  time,  the  want  of  men  and  means  to  do 


* Printed  in  General  Huger’s  report,  p.  114. 


Chap.  XX  I 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


133 


and  undo  all  this  work,  nor  the  stormy  and  inclement  season  of  winter 
on  a Hatteras  coast,  which  cut  oft*  more  than  half  of  the  remaining  short 
time;  he  wholly  overlooked  the  very  contingency  which  happened,  of 
the  enemy’s  arrival  before  these  batteries  at  the  marshes  could  be  begun, 
much  less  completed;  nor  did  he  estimate  that  the  enemy  might  land 
on  the  beach  north  of  Oregon  Inlet  and  cross  over  to  the  island  by 
wading,  as  they  could  the  Roanoke  Channel,  or  by  barges  out  of  reach 
of  the  battery  on  that  sound.  In  a word,  he  formed  his  conclusion  that 
large  forces  were  not  required,  not  from  the  state  of  things  which  did 
but  from  that  which  did  not  exist,  and  probably  could  not  exist  from 
shortness  of  time,  stormy  winter  weather,  and  want  of  men  and  means. 
The  change  of  defense  of  batteries  on  the  marshe's,  instead  of  at  the 
places  where  they  were  put,  was  all  essential — so  absolutely  necessary 
that  steps  ought  to  have  been  taken  by  all  means  to  effect  it,  in  order 
to  make  any  force  effectual,  and  to  reduce  the  force  necessary  for  de- 
fense; but  in  any  event  a large  force  was  necessary,  and  if  the  change 
could  not  be  effected,  the  largest  of  forces  was  necessary.  What  if  the 
enemy  came  while  we  were  in  the  act  of  the  change?  This  they  did, 
and  this  General  Huger  did  not  take  into  his  calculations.  Who  is 
responsible  for  the  location  of  the  batteries  on  the  island  and  their 
malconstruction  and  efficiency,  I am  not  informed. 

On  the  same  day  I addressed  to  him  a letter  of  which  the  following 
is  a copy: 

Norfolk,  Ya.,  January  13,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Commanding , $c.: 

Sir:  I have  left  in  your  office  a memorandum  of  requisitions  for  additional  pile- 
drivers,  for  a steam  dredging-machine,  for  steam-tugs  and  barges  for  transporting 
forces,  formore  ammunition,  and  for  an  additionalnumber  of  large  artillery  pieces,  &c. 
The  items  were  specified,  but  will  be  more  formally  prepared  if  necessary  or  required. 
Under  your  orders  to  make  all  efforts  to  carry  on  all  necessary  work  at  Roanoke  Island 
I will  proceed  at  once  to  employ  or  procure  the  laborers  necessary,  such  as  free  blacks 
and  slaves,  under  the  laws  of  North  Carolina,  and  to  do  whatever  is  necessary  without 
further  authority.  At  the  same  time,  sir,  I will  refer  to  you  at  all  times  for  your 
orders,  advice,  aud  permission,  whenever  it  is  practicable  to  do  so.  Indeed,  I report 
j that  Roanoke  Island  is  now  in  a defenseless  condition  and  in  presence  of  a very 
formidable  enemy’s  force.  My  Legion  is  ordered  to  report  here  or  at  Portsmouth,  but 
has  not  arrived.  I beg  you  to  urge  on  their  movement  and  have  them  forwarded  as 
’ soon  as  possible. 

The  Burnside  expedition  is  reported  as  having  sailed.  Independent  of  that,  the 
force  now  at  Hatteras  Inlet  can  pass  or  take  Roanoke  Island,  and  pardon  me  for  saying 
that  I respectfully  differ  from  the  opinion  you  expressod  in  your  orders  to-day,  that 
to  prevent  the  enemy’s  gunboats  from  passing  the  marshes  at  the  south  end  will  also 
prevent  any  landing.  Batteries  at  the  marshes  are  vitally  essential  to  prevent  the 
gunboats  from  passing  into  Croatan  Sound,  but  they  will  not  prevent  the  landing  on 
the  south  or  east  end  of  the  island.  At  least  3,000  infantry  are  needed  on  the  island, 
and  a considerable  force,  say  1,500  more,  are  needed  on  the  beaches,  and  if  the  enemy 
pass  Roanoke,  5,000  at  least  are  necessary  to  fight  them  on  the  tongues  of  land  on  the 
north  side  of  Albemarle  Sound.  We  need  on  the  beach  and  on  the  island  at  least 
eight  field  pieces  and  the  carriages  and  caissons  necessary.  We  require  thirty-two 
j horses  for  the  artillery.  The  guns  at  Redstone  are  necessary  where  they  are.  We 
need  at  least  six  heavy  pieces  at  the  south-end  marshes  and  two  at  least  at  Fleet- 
wood  Point.  The  wharves  necessary  I will  proceed  at  once  to  have  constructed.  A 
large  amount  of  lumber  is  needed  for  quarters.  You  will  please  bear  in  mind  that  as 
yet  the  infantry  have  to  man  the  batteries.  There  are  no  trained  artillery  companies 
at  the  island  now;  therefore  it  is  that  I ask  for  the  transfer  to  my  command  of  Cap- 
tain Grandy’s  company  of  artillery,  now  at  Sewell’s  Point. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  G erieral . 


134 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


And  on  the  same  day,  January  13,  I addressed  to  the  Secretary  of 
War  a letter  of  which  the  following  is  an  extract: 


Norfolk,  Va.,  January  13,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War,  <fc. : 

• Sir  : It  is  very  important  that  my  Legion  should  he  forwarded  as  speedily  and  in  as 
large  a force  as  possible.  The  defense  of  Roanoke  Island,  which  is  the  key  of  all  the 
rear  defenses  of  Norfolk  and  its  canals  and  railroads,  is  committed  to  my  charge,  and 
I have  just  returned  from  a reconnaissance  of  that  point.  It  is  now  utterly  defense- 
less. No  preparations  have  been  made  there  at  all  adequate.  General  Huger  has 
given  me  a large  authority  to  do  whatever  is  necessary  and  has  advised  what  he 
deems  proper  in  my  command;  but  we  have  very  limited  means,  and  not  half  time 
enough  to  prepare  to  meet  an  enemy  who  is  now  almost  in  our  immediate  presence  in 
very  formidable  force.  Twice  the  number  of  my  Legion  is  necessary,  and  I beg  that 
the  place  of  my  Third  Regiment  may  be  speedily  filled  or  that  it  may  be  restored.  If 
that  cannot  be  done,  or  whether  that  can  be  done  or  not,  I ask  that  the  officers  of  the 
forces  left  me  may  be  duly  commissioned  from  the  time  they  were  nominated  by  me 
and  that  they  have  served.  The  incomplete  report  of  the  organization  of  my  Legion, 
dated  August  13  last,  is  in  your  office.  On  it,  indorsed  in  pencil,  I found  your  order 
for  the  commissions  to  be  issued  according  to  the  report.  They  were  not  issued,  and 
I found  that  the  report  was  not  indexed  or  recorded.  The  only  excuse  given  me  was 
that  the  report  was  not  signed  by  me.  It  was  signed  by  Assistant  Adjutant-General 
Tabb  by  my  order,  and  it  was  recognized  by  you  in  your  order.  That  order  has  not 
been  obeyed,  and  I ask  that  the  commissions  then  ordered  be  issued,  not  to  take  effect 
from  their,  respective  dates  of  nomination  and  service. 

Again,  on  January  14,  I addressed  to  General  Huger  a letter  of  which 
the  following  is  a copy : 


Rolliston,  near  Norfolk,  Va., 

January  15,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Commanding,  $c. : 

Sir:  Yours  of  January  11,  1862,  assigning  me  to  the  command  of  my  appointed 
military  district,  designated  as  the  Fourth  Brigade,  Department  of  Norfolk,  was- 
received  late  last  evening. 

As  reported  verbally  to  you  I have  already  visited  the  district,  assumed  command, 
and  issued  such  orders  as  I was  proud  to  find  met  with  your  approbation.  You  were 
also  informed  by  memorandum,  and  since  in  writing,  of  the  requisition  for  my  com- 
mand. I am  now  awaiting  the  arrival  of  a portion  of  my  Legion.  As  soon  as  it  is 
moved  to  Roanoke  Island  I desire  to  visit  the  War  Department,  to  look  after  that 
portion  of  the  Legion  on  its  way  and  to  attend  to  the  issuing  of  commissions  for 
certain  of  my  officers.  I am  ordered  to  establish  my  headquarters,  subject  to  your 
approval,  at  the  most  central  and  accessible  point  to  the  forces  of  my  brigade.  Permit 
me  to  call  your  attention,  sir,  to  the  fact  that  the  most  central  are  not  the  most 
accessible  points  in  my  command.  Elizabeth  City  is  most  central  and  accessible  by 
land  from  Norfolk;  by  water  from  Roanoke  Island  45  miles  either  way;  but  there 
are  times  in  foggy  weather  when  the  sound  is  impassable,  and  in  stormy  weather 
when  it  is  unsafe.  Currituck  Court-House  (called  Crawford)  is  on  the  line  of  the 
Albemarle  and  Chesapeake  Bay  Canal  and  more  accessible,  but  still  remote  from  the 
main  body  of  forces  at  Roanoke  Island,  and  the  Albemarle  Sound  has  to  be  passed  to- 
and  from  the  island.  Hertford,  Nixonton,  or  Edenton  are  still  more  remote,  with 
the  same  objection  of  delay  and  danger  by  water  navigation.  The  key  of  the  whole 
command  is  Roanoke  Island,  and  the  only  quarters  yet  erected  near  it  are  at  Nag’s 
Head.  With  your  approval  I propose  to  adopt  the  latter  as  my  headquarters,  to  be 
changed,  of  course,  as  necessity  or  experience  may  dictate. 

I found  a long  wooden  building  erected  at  Roanoke  Island  for  a hospital.  The 
island  is  unsafe  as  a medical  depot  and  hospital,  and  the  spot  selected  is  near  a marsh 
and  swamp,  which  must  be,  and  is  reported  to  be,  unhealthy  and  beset  in  summer  by 
mosquitoes.  On  consultation  with  Surgeon-General  De  Leon  I have  ordered  Surgeon 
Lyons  to  proceed  at  once  to  Currituck  Court-House  and  examine  that  place  for  a hos- 
pital site.  It  is  both  healthy  and  safe,  and  accessible  to  the  forces  at  Roanoke  Island 
and  to  medical  supplies  at  Norfolk.  * 

As  soon  as  my  forces  arrive  and  I can  make  the  selection  I will  detail  a suitable  offi- 
cer from  my  brigade  to  report  to  your  headquarters  as  acting  assistant  inspector-gen- 
eral. 

I will  also  examine  whether  the  provision  returns  of  the  respective  regiments  and 
posts  of  my  brigade  correspond  with  their  morning  reports,  and  I will  see  that  the 
hospital  and  commissary  returns  do  not  exceed  the  whole  force.  This,  though,  can 
only  be  done  when  my  forces  shall  have  arrived  and  been  posted. 


Chap.  XX.} 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


135 


General  Orders,  No.  50,  shall  be  strictly  observed.  General  Orders,  No.  65,  calls 
mv  attention  to  General  Orders,  No.  46,  dated  August  1, 1861,  of  which  I have  no  copy 
and  am  not  informed.  I ask  a copy,  in  order  that  it  may  be  promptly  obeyed.  Are 
these  orders  explained  by  the  letter  of  the  Assistant  Adjutant-General  of  January  9 
instant  ? 

Very  respectfully,  &c.,  HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


On  tlie  15th  I again  addressed  to  General  Huger  a letter  of  which 
the  following  is  a copy : * 


Near  Norfolk,  Va.,  January  15,  1862. 


Major-General  Huger,  Commanding , #c.: 

' Sir  • I ordered  Lieutenant  Bagwell  to  procure  a boat,  with  oars,  from  the  navy-yard 
fit  for ’sounding  the  channels  of  Croatan  Sound.  He  made  the  within  request  inform- 
ally on  his  friend  Captain  Lee  to  save  time,  expecting  to  observe  official  forms  after- 
ward. It  is  absolutely  necessary  to  have  a boat  belonging  to  the  army,  -to  be  imme- 
diately and  constantly  in  the  sounding  service  for  weeks.  It  may  be  sent  with  the 
First  Regiment  of  my  Legion  (just  arrived).  I beg,  therefore,  thatyou  will  approve 
of  my  request  to  Flag-Officer  F.  Forrest,  to  order  a proper  boat,  oars,  &c.,  to  be  trans- 
ferred to  the  army  for  my  command.  „ ^ , , . , 

There  are  two  brass  boat  howitzers,  mounted  as  field  pieces,  at  the  navy-yard,  which 
•Captains  Lee  and  Fairfax  (in  the  absence  of  Flag-Officer  Forrest,  with  the  consent  of 
Captain  Lynch)  said  might  be  allowed  to  the  commands  of  Captains  Lynch  and  my- 
self. Captain  Lynch  agreed  that  I might  have  one  of  them,  and  the  two  carriages, 
harness,  &c.,  for  my  command,  while  he  would  take  the  other  for  his  boats.  They 
are  the  guns  returned  to  the  navy-yard  by  Colonel  Wright  from  Roanoke  Island ; and 
there  are  also  two  12-pounder  guns,  which  Captains  Lee  and  Fairfax  said  could  be 
spared  to  the  army,  and  which  can  be  mounted  soon  in  the  yard.  Will  you  please  ap- 
prove of  my  requisition  on  the  flag-officer  for  these  three  guns,  carriages,  &c.,  and 
apprise  him  thereof.  The  brass  howitzers  and  two  carriages  are  ready  now,  and  I 
ask  that  they  may  be  obtained  in  time  to  be  sent  down  with  my  First  Regiment  ot 


Infantry. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your 


obedient  servant, 


HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


On  the  same  day  I ordered  Col.  W.  J.  Green  as^ follows: 

Norfolk,  Va.,  January  15,  1862, 

Col.  Wharton  J.  Green,  Commanding , <fc. : 

Sir:  You  will  as  early  as  practicable  move  your  whole  force  from  Wilmington,  N. 
C.  to  Norfolk,  Va.,  and  there  report  to  General  Huger  for  transportation  to  Roanoke 
Island.  Bring  with  your  men  all  the  outfit  which  you  can  procure  at  Wilmington,  and 
make  requisitions  at  Norfolk  for  deficiencies.  Prompt  movement  is  necessary,  as  the 

enemy  are  near  in  large  force.  HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


I returned  from  Roanoke  Island  to  Norfolk  on  January  11,  and  on 
the  15th  addressed  to  the  Secretary  of  War  a letter  of  which  the  fol- 
lowing is  a copy: 

Near  Norfolk,  Va.,  January  15,  1862. 
Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War,  <fc. : 

Yours  of  the  12th,  in  reply  to  mine  of  the  2d  instant,  is  just  received.  I am  sure 
you  will  not  adjudge  me  importunate  when  I inform  you  that  I returned  from  Roan- 
oke Island  to  Norfolk  last* Saturday.  I hastened  back,  after  a short  reconnaissance, 
to  apprise  headquarters  and  the  Department  that  there  are  no  defenses  there ; no 
adequate  preparations  whatever  to  meet  the  enemy,  and  to  forward  all  the  means  m 
my  reach  as  speedily  as  possible  to  make  the  key  of  all  the  rear  of  Norfolk,  with  ita 
canals  and  railroads,  safe.  Inside  of  Hatteras  Inlet  I found  twenty-four  vessels  of 
light  draught,  eight  of  which,  at  least,  are  steamers,  said  to  carry  four  guns  each. 
They  are,  at  farthest,  but  30  miles  from  Roanoke  Island,  and  can  reach  there  in  tour 
hours  or  less,  to  attack  five  small  gunboats  under  Captain  Lynch  and  four  small 


136 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


land  batteries  wholly  inefficient.  Any  boat  drawing  7 feet  of  water  or  less  can  pass 
the  Croatan  Sound  as  far  off  as  1£  miles  from  any  battery,  and. the  enemy’s  guns  can 
silence  our  batteries  there  in  a very  short  time.  Neither  battery  is  casemated?  and  our 
men  now  there  are  untrained  to  heavy  pieces  mounted  on  navy  carriages.  The  moment  ! 
the  enemy  passes  Croatan  Channel  the  North  Landing  River,  North  River,  Pasquotank 
Chowan,  and  Roanoke,  Alligator,  and  Scuppernong  Rivers,  and  the  Dismal  Swamp 
and  Albemarle  and  Chesapeake  Canals  will  be  blockaded  effectually,  and  Norfolk  and 
Portsmouth  will  be  cut  off  from  supplies  of  corn,  pork,  and  forage.  The  force  at  Hat- 
teras  is  independent  of  the  Burnside  expedition.  No  matter  where  the  latter  is,  the 
former  is  amply  sufficient  to  capture  or  pass  Roanoke  Island  in  any  twelve  hours.  ’ Let 
me  say,  then,  sir,  that  if  we  are  to  wait  for  powder  from  Richmond  until  we  are 
attacked  at  that  island,  that  attack  will  be  capture,  and  our  defeat  will  precede  our 
supply  of  ammunition.  The  ease  is  too  urgent  for  me  to  delay  speaking  thus  out 
plainly  at  once.  ® 

We  have  the  navy-yard  pile-driver.  I took  it  down  and  put  it  to  work.  It  can 
drive  about  twenty  piles  per  diem,  and  can  work,  perhaps,  not  three  days  in  the  week- 
drives  its  piles  8 feet  apart,  and  lias  at  least  3 miles  to  pile.  You  can  see,  tlien  liow  > 
slowly  we  can  obstruct  the  channels  with  but  one  pile-driver.  I can  procure  three 
others — one  in  a day  or  two  and  two  in  a week  or  two. 

We  want  also  a steam  dredging-machine,  to  fix  our  floating  batteries  in  the  marshes. 
That  I can  procure  here.  We  want  a number  of  decked  lighters  and  barges,  on  which 
to  transport  and  mount  heavy  guns  in  the  marshes  and  to  use  as  “ camels”  for  the 
pile-drivers.  We  want  also  large  transport  boats  and  steam-tugs,  to  throw  infantry 
and  artillery  across  wide  channels  from  the  island  to  the  beaches  on  the  main.  We 
want  ammunition  and  men.  In  a word,  almost  every  preparation  has  to  be  made.  To 
make  them  and  to  do  the  least  that  is  necessary  I ask,  in  the  emergency,  for  plenary 
power,  to  order  what  is  necessary  and  to  procure  what  I can  get  without  the  delay 
of  observing  forms  and  without  making  special  requisitions  for  every  want.  Delay  is 
defeat  now  at  Roanoke  Island,  and  with  present  means  Captain  Lynch  and  I combined 
cannot  guarantee  successful  defense  for  a day.  I beg,  sir,  that  you  will  urge  this  upon 
the  Navy  Department,  and  believe  that  I am  not  superserviceable  in  this  urgency. 

With  the  highest  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 

At  this  time  the  First  Regiment  of  Infantry  of  my  Legion  arrived  in 
Norfolk,  numbering  nine  companies,  averaging  about  45  men,  making  a 
total  of  about  405  privates  ; and  on  the  16th  I issued  to  Colonel  Richard- 
son, of  that  regiment,  the  special  order  of  which  the  following  is  a copy: 

Special  Orders,  £ Norfolk,  Va., 

N°-  16.  S January  16,  1862. 

Colonel  Richardson,  of  the  First  Regiment  of  Infantry,  Wise  Legion,  having  reported 
the  arrival  of  his  regiment  in  Norfolk,  he  will  proceed,  as  early  as  practicable,  by  the 
way  of  the  Albemarle  and  Chesapeake  Canal,  to  transport  his  troops  to  Roanoke 
Island,  N.  C.  To  that  end,  before  moving,  he  will  see  that  thirty  days’  rations  for  at  least 
1,000  men  are  forwarded  for  the  Legion  and  placed  in  charge  of  A.  Kinney,  acting  com- 
missary, in  the  place  of  Maj.  William  H.  Thomas,  during  the  absence  of  the  latter ; he 
will  see  that  no  provisions  are  drawn  from  the  commissary  of  the  Legion  for  more  than 
his  actual  force,  as  reported  by  the  morning  and  hospital  returns;  he  will  see  the  ord- 
nance officer  at  Norfolk,  and  ascertain  the  amount  of  ammunition  and  ordnance  stores 
in  depot  there  or  at  Portsmouth  for  the  Legion,  and  he  will  detail  some  one  competent 
officer  to  take  charge  thereof,  as  acting  ordnance  officer  of  the  Legion,  who  will  act 
until  further  orders,  and  have  the  same  conveyed  to  the  post  at  Roanoke  Island  under 
guard  of  Colonel  Richardson’s  command,  on  its  way  there,  and  there  put  it  in  a maga- 
zine ; he  will  also  see  the  quartermaster  at  Norfolk,  and  ascertain  whether  the  means 
of  transportation  have  been  provided,  seeking  information  from  Marshall  Parks,  the 
president  of  the  Albemarle  and  Chesapeake  Canal,  as  to  the  capacity  and  comfort  of  ! 
his  steam-tugs  and  barges  for  transportation,  and  seeing  that  they  are  sufficiently 
heated  and  ventilated,  and  when  he  arrives  at  Roanoke  Island  he  will  report  to  Col.  | 
Hill  Shaw,  commanding,  &c. ; and  if  sufficient  quarters  are  not  in  readiness  on  the  I 
island  for  his  troops,  he  will  land  his  men  at  the  wharf  of  Nag’s  Head,  on  the  beach  ! 
opposite  the  north  end  of  the  island,  and  take  quarters  in  the  cabins  and  cottages  there  I 
erected,  occupying  such  as  may  be  pointed  out  by  the  proprietor,  Mr.  Happer  ; he  will  j 
take  command  there  until  further  orders  as  of  a separate  post  for  the  Legton,  and  as  the  I 
east  and  central  portions  of  the  beach  can  be  shelled  by  the  enemy  from'  the  sea-side,  ii 
he  will,  as  far  as  practicable,  occupy  the  west  side  of  the  beach  next  the  Roanoke  Chan- 
nel or  Sound ; he  will  at  once  establish  the  strictest  discipline  of  drill,  guard,  and 
vedette  duty,  keeping  a vigilant  lookout  as  far  down  as  Oregon  Inlet,  and  as  high  up 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


137 


as  Gallop’s,  opposite  Powell’s  Point  on  the  main,  and  keeping  up  a regular  and  ample 
ferry  across  the  Roanoke  Channel  to  the  part  of  the  island  opposite  ; he  will  observe 
the  accompanying  orders  from  headquarters,  and  allow  of  no  tiring  or  ardent  spirits  in 
his  camp,  except  what  may  be  allowed  by  his  own  special  permission,  Owing  to  the 
scarcity  of  powder  the  order  as  to  firing  must  be  rigidly  adhered  to,  and  strong  and  in- 
toxicating drinks  must  be  issued  by  the  sutlers  under  the  strictest  regulations,  enforc- 
ing moderation  and  sobriety.  . , , 

The  enemy  are  near,  within  a few  hours’  steaming ; attack  is  hourly  expected,  and 
the  camp  must  be  in  constant  order  and  readiness ; and  to  prevent  attracting  the 
enemy’s  steamers  the  men  must  not  be  allowed  to  appear  in  any  bodies  by  daylight, 
and  no  fires  must  be  kindled  day  or  night  on  the  sea-side.  Fuel  must  be  regularly  sup- 
plied on  the  sound  side,  and  covered  ways  of  logs  and  sand  provided  against  the 
enemy’s  shells  behind  the  sand  hills  on  that  side.  If  the  enemy  attempts  to  land  on 
either  side  of  the  beach  north  of  Oregon  Inlet  within  reach,  he  must  be  attacked  by 
all  means,  and  if  our  forces  are  obliged  to  retreat  before  superior  numbers,  they  will 
either  cross  in  the  ferry  to  the  forts  on  Roanoke  Island  or  move  northward  on  the 
western  shore  of  the  beach  up  to  Gallop’s,  and  there  cross  in  the  ferry  over  Currituck 
Sound  to  Powell’s  Point  on  the  main.  They  will  never  retreat  unless  compelled,  and 
then  in  good  order,  saving  all  stores  and  equipage. 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 

I then  hurried  to  Richmond  to  forward  the  remaining  corps  of  my 
Legion  and  to  urge  upon  the  War  Department  the  necessity  of  expedit- 
ing the  defenses  of  Roanoke  Island.  I was  allowed  hut  a short  and 
cursory  interview  with  the  Secretary  of  War,  hut  pressed  upon  him  the 
necessity  of  supplies  and  re-enforcements  and  of  forwarding  the  whole 
force  of  my  Legion  5 and  on  January  18  I ordered  Colonel  Henningsen 
to  visit  the  Governor  of  North  Carolina  in  person,  with  instructions  and 
a letter  t>f  which  the  following  are  copies : 

Richmond,  Va.,  January  18,  1862. 

Col.  C.  F.  Henningsen,  Commanding,  fyc.: 

Sir  : You  will  take  charge  of  the  inclosed  letter  to  His  Excellency  the  Governor  of 
North  Carolina.  You  will  confer  with  him  on  the  defenses  of  that  part  of  his  State 
confided  to  my  command.  You  will  inform  him  fully  of  all  the  lack  of  preparations 
for  defense,  especially  at  Roanoke  Island.  Yon  will  impress  upon  him  the  importance 
of  those  defenses  as  objects  for  the  enemy  to  attack.  Their  main  aim  is  to  shut  up  the 
rear  of  Norfolk  and  the  forces  there ; attack  on  Wilmington  is  minor,  but  the  forces 
of  the  enemy  at  Hatteras  and  with  Burnside  are  ample  for  invading  both  Pamlico  and 
Albemarle  Sounds.  You  will  urge  upon  him  the  necessity  to  obtain  permanent  re- 
cruits for  my  Legion,  and  arms  and  ammunition,  barges,  lighters,  dredging-machines, 
pile-drivers,  steam  tug-boats,  negro  laborers,  &c. 

You  will  look  at  the  within  and  note  its  purport  as  to  his  executive  circular  respect- 
ing corps  formed  from  the  North  Carolina  Militia,  and  as  to  the  regret  of  Colonel 
Martin,  of  North  Carolina,  who,  with  his  men  (late  prisoners  at  Hatteras),  are  now 
discharged  from  their  paroles,  &c.  You  will,  in  a word,  obtain  all  the  aid  you  can  in 
any  and  every  form  from  Governor  Clark,  and  then  as  early  as  practicable  report  to 
me  at  Roanoke  Island. 

In  the  mean  time  you  will  turn  over  the  command  of  the  Second  Regiment  of  the 
infantry  of  the  Legion  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Anderson,  and  issue  orders  to  him  to 
have  the  Second  Regiment  in  readiness  to  proceed  to  Norfolk’ on  Tuesday  next,  Jan- 
uary 28  instant,  and  toproceed  on  that  day  and  there  report  to  Maj.  Gen.  Ben.  Huger, 
commanding,  &c.,  not  using  his  quartermaster  and  commissary  for  subsistence  and 
transportation  to  Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.  If  he  arrives  there  prior  to  my  return  to 
the  island  he  will  report  to  Colonel  Shaw,  commanding,  &c.,  at  the  post,  and  take 
quarters,  as  they  can  best  be  provided,  either  on  Roanoke  Island  or  at  Nag’s  Head,  on 
the  sea-beach.  He  will  apply  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Richardson,  of  the  First  Regiment, 
for  copies  of  the  general  orders  of  the  Legion  at  Nag’s  Head. 

"Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J ‘ HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier- General,  Fourth  Brigade,  Department  of  Norfolk. 

Richmond,  Va.;  January  18,  1862. 
To  His  Excellency  Governor  Clark,  North  Carolina : 

Sir:  I have  made  but  a brief  reconnaissance  of  the  defenses  of  the  counties  of  your 
Commonwealth  under  my  command;  but,  brief  as  it  was,  it  startled  me  with  the  con- 


138 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


viction  that  the  large  fleet  of  vessels  and  steamers  inside  of  Hatteras  Inlet  can  pass 
Roanoke  Island  at  any  hour  and  blockade  all  the  waters  of  Albemarle  and  Currituck 
Sounds,  shutting  up  the  Dismal  Swamp  and  Albemarle  and  Chesapeake  Canals,  cutting 
Norfolk  and  Portsmouth  off  from  supplies,  and  North  Carolina  off  from  trade,  and 
threatening  the  Seaboard  and  Roanoke  and  the  Petersburg  and  Norfolk  Railroads. 

Roanoke  Island  is  the  key  of  all  these  defenses,  and  is  wholly  unprepared,  in  every 
respect,  to  repulse  an  enemy  as  formidable  as  that  inside  of  Hatteras  Inlet,  The  fleet 
there  is  independent  of  the  Burnside  expedition.  Eight  of  the  ships  are  steamers  and 
sixteen  sailing  vessels,  unless  those  masted  have  steam  propellers  als6.  We  want  every- 
thing in  the  way  both  of  personnel  and  materiel — men,  laborers,  organization,  drill,  am- 
munition, piles,  pile-drivers,  dredging-machines,  barges,  boats,  steam-tugs,  &c.  I am 
here  urging  and  hastening  preparations.  I appeal  to  you  for  aid,  and  with  that  view 
send  General  C.  F.  Heuningsen,  colonel  of  the  Second  Regiment  of  the  infantry  of  my 
Legion  and  commander  of  my  corps  of  artillery,  to  confer  with  you  in  person. 

The  Burnside  expedition  and  the  fleet  at  Hatteras  may  threaten  Wilmington,  it  is 
true,  but  my  opinion  is  that  the  enemy’s  two  fleets  are  ample  to  endanger  both  Albemarle 
and  Pamlico  Sounds  alike,  and  as  the  objects  of  attack  upon  the  rear  defenses  of  Nor- 
folk and  Portsmouth  are  the  more  important  and  vital,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose 
that  the  enemy  will  pursue  the  larger  game  with  the  larger  force,  and  the  lesser  is 
ample  to  pass  and  capture  all  the  present  defenses  of  Albemarle  Sound. 

By  circular,  under  your  orders,  I am  informed  that  you  gave  power  to  call  out  the 
militia  of  certain  counties,  including  those  in  my  command,  taking  one-third  of  each 
regiment  either  by  enlistment  or  allotment.  Will  you  please  say  how  I may  make  requisi- 
tions ? How  the  men  are  to  be  called  out  and  report  for  duty  ? And  may  I suggest, 
sir,  that  unwilling  men — not  volunteering  really — are  not  reliable,  and  will  you  permit 
me  and  aid  me  in  inducing  companies,  battalions,  or  regiments  to  enlist  in  my  Legion 
for  the  war  and  to  jofh  the  Confederate  service  under  the  liberal  regulations  of  the 
late  law  of  Congress?  Permit  me  also  to  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  there 
are  three  companies  belonging  to  the  regiment  lately  under  Colonel  Martin,  fragments 
of  the  North  Carolina  regiment  captured  at  Hatteras.  Colonel  Martin  and  the  pris- 
oners of  his  regiment  are  now  released  from  their  parole  as  prisoners  and  may  reform 
their  regiment.  I saw  Colonel  Martin  at  Elizabeth  City  lately,  and  I ask  that  you 
will,  with  his  consent,  assign  him  to  my  command,  and  assent  that  his  regiment  may 
be  incorporated  in  my  Legion. 

General  Henningsen  will  present  you  with  his  views  of  the  defense  of  North  Caro- 
lina and  with  other  of  my  views  also,  and  I beg  you  to  believe  that,  however  much  I 
may  lack  the  ability,  I will  devote  to  your  defense  all  my  energy,  faithfulness,  and 
care. 

With  great  respect,  sir,  I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-General,  Fourth  Brigade , Department  of  Norfolk  and  North  Carolina. 

Thq  Secretary  of  War  replied  verbally  to  my  urgent  appeals  for  re- 
enforcements  that  he  had  not  the  men  to  be  spared  for  my  command. 
I asked  for  the  restoration  of  my  Third  Regiment,  which  had  been 
taken  from  me,  for  the  reason  that  they  had  been  raised  to  defend 
Western  Virginia  and  then  had  been  sent  to  South  Carolina.  This  was 
not  granted.  I then  urged  that  General  Huger  had  about  15,000  men 
in  the  front  of  Norfolk,  lying  idle  in  camp  for  eight  months,  and  that  a 
considerable  portion  of  them  could  be  spared  for  the  defense  of  the  rear 
of  Norfolk,  and  especially  as  my  district  supplied  Norfolk  and  his  army 
with  nearly  or  quite  all  of  its  corn,  pork,  and  forage ; that  re-enforce- 
ments at  Roanoke  Island  were  as  absolutely  necessary  to  the  defense 
of  Norfolk  as  forces  in  its  front,  and  that  particular  or  special  posts 
should  not  be  allowed  to  monopolize  nearly  all  the  men,  powder,  and 
supplies.  Failing  to  obtain  any  definite  reply  to  this  appeal,  I then 
resorted  to  an  attempt  to  procure  the  addition  to  my  forces  of  a few 
men  (about  150)  at  Norfolk,  who  had  escaped  from  the  Eastern  Shore 
of  Virginia,  and  addressed  to  the  Secretary  of  War  a letter  of  January 
19,  of  which  the  following  is  a copy : 

Richmond,  Va.,  January  19,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : The  regiment  raised  for  service  on  the  Eastern  Shore  of  Virginia,  Accomack, 
and  Northampton  Counties,  commanded  by  Col.  Charles  Smith,  has  been  dispersed, 
as  you  know,  by  the  weakness  of  its  local  position  and  the  orders  of  its  commander. 


1 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


139 


Ihap.  XX.]  

L portion  of  that  regiment  escaped  to  York  River  and  Norfolk  posts.  The  number  of 
aen  would  form  two,  perhaps  three,  good  companies,  but  they  consist  of  fragments 
i companies,  under  different  company  officers,  who  cannot  or  will  not  unite  so  as  to 
brm  full  companies,  and  it  is  certain  that  their  regiment  cannot  be  reconstructed  or 
eformed.  Most,  if  not  all,  of  these  men  are  assigned  to  the  department  of  Major- 
Jeneral  Huger,  in  which  mine  is  the  Fourth  Brigade.  Now,  these  men  are  natives- of 
oy  native  peninsula,  are  known  to  me,  and  I have  a special  regard  for  them,  as  I have 
eason  to  believe  they  have  for  me  personally.  I ask,  by  way  of  repairing  the  dam- 
ige  done  to  my  Legion  by  taking  from  it  fourteen  companies,  disbanding  one,  and 
learly  destroying  two,  in  all  seventeen  companies,  of  which  I have  been  deprived, 
hat  these  companies  may  be  transferred  to  my  command.  I will  reorganize  them 
nto  two  or  more  companies,  with  the  aid  of  some  recruits,  and  then  I propose  that 
hey  may  be  discharged  from  their  former  service,  on  condition  that  they  will  elect 
heir  own  company  officers  and  enlist  for  the  war  under  the  late  law  of  Congress. 
This,  I am  authorized  to  say,  meets  the  approbation  of  General  Huger,  who  will  rec- 
nnmend  the  transfer,  and  I trust  the  whole  proposition  will  be  at  once  adopted  by  you. 

Most  respectfully, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-General. 

Instead  of  complying  with  this  request  to  first  transfer  them  to  my 
command  and  then  to  allow  them  to  be  mustered  out  of  service  on 
condition  that  they  would  re-enlist,  the  Department  ordered  that  they 
;hould  first  be  mustered  out  of  service,  and  then  left  it  to  their  option 
;o  join  my  command  or  not.  The  consequence  was,  they  were  mus- 
tered out  of  service  anil  were  entirely  disbanded  and  scattered. 

From  January  19  to  the  22d,  at  Eichmond,  I was  actively  and  con- 
stantly employed  in  issuing  orders  and  in  urging  the  forwarding  of  my 
irtillery  and  other  remaining  corps  of  the  Legion. 

Dr.  Thomas  D.  Warren,  of  Edenton,  FT.  C.,  an  active  and  efficient 
patriot,  having  tendered  to  nie  his  services  as  a volunteer  aide,  on 
lanuary  21  I addressed  to  him  a letter  'of  which  the  following  is  a 
3opy : 

Richmond,  Va.,  January  21,  1862. 

Dr.  Thomas  D.  Warren  : 

Dear  Sir  : Yours  of  the  17th  instant  is  just  received  here.  You  are  ordered  to  be 
mnounced  as  one  of  my  volunteer  aides.  You  will  order  Colonel  Shaw,  from  me,  to 
lave  the  piles  sent  for  as  early  and  as  fast  as  possible.  You  can  always  get  a vessel 
it  Elizabeth  City.  If  the  piles  cannot  be  driven  fast  enough  he  will  sink  vessels.  If 
;he  price  is  too  high  (the  demanded  price),  he  will  have  them  appraised,  and  at  all 
jvents  will  sink  enough  to  obstruct  the  channels  at  material  points  next  the  piling, 
making  all  he  can  get  for  that  purpose  ; and  if  all  are  not  necessary  to  be  used,  he  will 
ise  first  the  lowest  price  vessels.  You  will  see  to  this,  taking  post  at  Edenton  and 
mperintending  transportation  and  supplies. 

Hastily,  yours, 

. HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  Genera  l. 

Previously  I had  sent  Captain  Bolton  and  Lieutenant  Bagwell  to 
Roanoke  Island,  to  superintend  the  pile-driving  and  to  sound  the  chan- 
aals  of  Croatan  and  Eoanoke  Sounds.  They  were  ordered  on  this  duty 
lanuary  15. 

On  January  22,  in  reply  to  all  my  urgent  appeals  for  the  means  of 
lefense,  I received  the  order  of  which  the  following  is  a copy  : 


Special  Orders, 
No.  17. 


Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

j Richmond,  Va.,  January  22,  1862. 
* # # * # 


XXXII.  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise,  Provisional  Army,  will  immediately  proceed 
to  Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.,  and  assume  command  of  the  Confederate  States  troops  at 
that  place. 


By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 


JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


140 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


I immediately  replied  by  letter,  of  which  the  following  is  a copy : 


in-  T _ _ Richmond.  Vam  January  22.  1862 

Hon.  J . P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War : 

Sir : Your  order  of  to  day,  to  ‘‘immediately  proceed  to  Roanoke  Island,  N C and 
assume  command  of  the  Confederate  States  troops  at  that  place,”  is  received  I will 
proceed  immediateiy,  as  commanded  ; hut  it  is  just  to  myself  to  say  that  I had  pro- 
ceeded heretofore  to  Roanoke  Island  and  assumed  command,  but  finding  no  adequate 
preparations  whatever  to  meet  an  enemy  at  that  place  I hastened  on  to  Richmond  to 
forward  that  portion  Of  my  Legion  remaining  here  and  to  obtain  necessarv  authoritv 
to  procure  the  means  of  defense.  J 

l am  without  an  ordnance  officer  or  an  assistant  inspector-general,  and  various  req- 
uisitions are  delayed  here,  so  that  my  artillery  cannot  be  forwarded. 

I beg  respectfully  that  the  Department  will  expedite  the  forwarding  of  mv  troons 
-and  furnish  them  with  the  actual  necessities  of  the  service.  J * 

With  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


The  next  day  (January  23)  I returned  to  Norfolk,  and  hastened 
home  to  prepare  to  execute  the  order  of  the  22d,  which  was  peremp- 
tory, and  left  me  no  election  but  to  go  to  Eoanoke  Island,  assume  com- 
mand of  that  post,  and  defend  it  as  best  I could  with  or  without  men 
or  means. 

In  reply  to  my  order  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Green  to  report  to  me 
as  early  as  practicable,  he  informed  me  that  he  had  been  detained  by 
Brig.  Gen.  J.  E.  Anderson  at  Wilmington  until  he  could  get  informa- 
tion from  the  Secretary  of  War  whether  to  obey  my  order  or  not.  I 
immediately,  on  January  25,  sent  him  an  order  of  which  the  following 
is  a copy : 


W.  J.  Green,  Lieutenant- Colonel,  tfc.: 


Rolliston,  near  Norfolk,  Va., 

January  25,  1862. 


Sir  : I did  not,  of  course,  issue  orders  to  you  without  conferring  with  the  Secretary 
•of  War  before  you  were  sent  to  Wilmington  as  part  of  my  Legion  to  recruit,  and  since 
when  I was  ordered  to  North  Carolina.  In  both  instances  you  were  acknowledged  as 
part  of  my  Legion,  subject  to  my  orders.  I therefore  report  to  you  the  order  to  at  once 
move  from  Wilmington  to  Norfolk,  and  thence  to  Roanoke  Island,  where  vou  will 
report  to  me  in  person. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


I also  the  same  day  addressed  a letter  to  the  Secretary  of  War  of 
which  the  following  is  a copy : • 

Near  Norfolk,  Va.,  January  25,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I am  detained  here  by  stress  of  weather  and  want  of  transportation  to  Roa- 
noke Island.  To-morrow,  probably,  or  next  day,  I depart  for  that  post.  To-day 
Lieut.  Col.  Wharton  J.  Green  reports  from  Wilmington,  N.  C.,  that  on  reporting  to 
Oeneral  Anderson  my  orders  to  Colonel  Green  to  move  to  Roanoke  Island,  General 
Anderson,  commanding  the  Cape  Fear  District,  objected,  until  he  could  communicate 
with  the  Secretary  of  War.  I beg  that  you  will  at  once  inform  General  Anderson  I 
that  Colonel  Green’s  command  was  sent  to  Wilmington  simply  to  winter  and  to  re- 
cruit ; that  they  belong  to  my  brigade  (the  Legion),  and  that  they  are  essential  to  the 
defense  of  Roanoke  Island;  a more  important  point  than  Wilmington.  This  hinder- 
ance  at  this  time  is  annoying  and  might  prove  fatal.  Colonel  Green  reports  to  me 
eeven  companies,  and  the  probable  completion  of  his  regiment  in  a week  from  the  23d 
instant,  I have  repeated  my  orders  to  him  to  move  to  Roanoke  Island  via  Norfolk. 

I hope  you  will  promptly  sustain  me  in  this. 

With  the  highest  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


141 


The  Department  ordered  Colonel  Green  on,  but  his  arrival  at  Roa- 
noke Island  was  on  the  morning  of  February  8,  while  the  action  was 
raging,  in  which  his  battalion  of  five  companies,  about  450  men,  were 
not  engaged  at  all,  but  they  arrived  quite  in  time  to  be  captured.  Thus 
by  this  interruption  I was  deprived  of  this  re-enforcement.  My  Sec- 
ond Regiment,  but  eight  companies  (about  350  men),  was  not  forwarded 
from  Norfolk  until  the  evening  of  January  25,  and  arrived  at  Nag’s 
Head  on  January  27. 

On  January  26,  at  home,  I received  from  the  Secretary  of  War  a let- 
ter, dated  January  23,  of  which  the  following  is  a copy  : 


Confederate  States  of  America,  War  Department, 

Eichmond,  Va.,  January  23,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise,  Norfolk,  Va.  : 

Sir  : I have  your  letter  of  yesterday,  giving  me  information  of  your  intended  im- 
mediate departure  for  Roanoke  Island.  The  terms  of  your  letter  imply  the  idea  that 
you  coasider  the  order  as  being  in  some  way  a reflection  on  your  absence  from  that 
post  at  this  time.  I write  therefore  to  say,  as  due  to  you,  that  nothing  was  further 
from  my  thoughts.  I knew  you  to  be  here  on  useful  public  service  connected  with 
your  command,  and  my  order  was  only  issued  because  of  receipt  of  information  that 
an  immediate  attack  was  threatened  on  your  post ; and  I well  knew  that  in  such  case 
you  would  feel  grateful  for  being  allowed  the  opportunity  of  assuming  your  command 
and  would  be  much  mortified  if  accidentally  absent.  I will  take  pleasure  in  attending 
to  your  requests  and  help  you  to  the  best  of  my  ability. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War . 


I immediately  replied  by  letter  of  which  the  following  is  a copy : 

Rolliston,  near  Norfolk, 

January  26,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I express  to  you  gratefully  my  acknowledgments  for  yours  of  the  23d  instant. 
Your  order  to  be  at  my  post  in  the  hour  of  apprehended  danger  was  very  proper,  yet 
it  relieves  my  absence  from  reproach  to  have  it  said  that  I hastened  away  from  it 
only  to  return  as  speedily  as  possible  with  the  means  of  its  defense.  The  weather 
has  delayed  here  the  transportation  of  my  Second  Regiment  of  Infantry.  They  started 
yesterday  for  Roanoke  Island,  and  I depart  to-morrow,  if  a steam  tug,  through  the 
canal,  can  be  found.  You,  I am  certain,  would  have  me  succeed  triumphantly  in  my 
duties,  and  will  excuse  even  eager,  as  well  as  anxious,  appeals  for  the  means  of  vic- 
tory. 

Wherever  the  Burnside  expedition  may  be,  the  forces  of  the  enemy  already  in  the 
Hatteras  Inlet  are  sufficient  to  overwhelm  the  present  forces  and  means  of  defense. 

I avail  myself  of  your  kindness  in  attending  to  my  requests  and  helping  me  to  the 
best  of  your  ability,  by  asking  that  you  will  order  commissions  to  be  issued  to  the  fol- 
lowing officers:  Maj.  C.  B.  Duffield,  of  cavalry;  Ordnance  Officer  James  H.  Pearce;. 
Assist.  Inspector-General  H.  Dugan;  Adjutant  (of  the  First  Regiment  of  Infantry) 
Henry  A.  Wise,  jr.,  and  Second  Lieuts.  (in  the  Engineer  Corps,  Artillery)  T.  C.  Kin- 
ney, C.  Ellis  Munford,  and  R.  A.  Wise,  &c. 

Please  order  the  forces  of  my  Legion  under  Colonel  Green,  at  Wilmington,  N.  C., 
and  the  two  companies  at  Staunton,  assigned  to  the  command  of  Col.  N.  Tyler,  to  be 
forwarded  to  me,  and  order  my  artillery  corps  at  Richmond  to  be  furnished  with  guns, 
carriages,  and  caissons,  and  forwarded.  I beg  you  also  to  order  back  to  me  the  Third 
Regiment  of  Infantry  taken  from  my  command. 

With  the  highest  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-General. 


j On  January  28  I addressed  to  the  Secretary  of  War  a letter  inform- 
f ing  him  that  at  last  I had  procured  transportation  to  Roanoke  Island ; 

I that  I would  leave  that  evening  at  4 p.  m.,  and  begging  him  to  forward 
my  artillery  corps  and  pieces. 

* I had  gone  to  Norfolk  on  Monday  (the  27th)  to  start  for  the  island. 


142 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chav.  XX. 


The  steam- tug  could  uot  promise  to  start  before  Tuesday  evening,  the 
28th.  At  1.30  p.  m.  we  started,  and  the  tug  broke  down  before  getting 
to  Portsmouth,  and  had  herself  to  be  towed  back  to  Norfolk  by  the 
ferry-boat.  We  were  detained  until  the  evening  of  the  next  day  (the 
29th)  for  repairs  to  the  tug. 

On  January  28  I issued  various  orders  in  Norfolk  to  expedite  prep- 
arations at  the  island,  among  others  those  of  which  the  following  are 
copies : 


Norfolk,  Va.,  January  28,  1862. 
Lieut.  James  H.  Pearce,  Ordnance  Officer,  $c. : 

Sir  : You  will  report  to  Major-General  Huger  as  the  ordnance  officer  of  my  Legion. 
You  will  ask  him  tor  orders  to  take  a gun-carriage  and  limber,  or  12-pounder,  or 
9-pounder,  now  at  Kempsville.  It  is  one  of  three  artillery  pieces,  mounted  at  the 
navy-yard,  and  allowed,  with  carriages,  &c.,  to  be  issued  to  me  in  the  spring  of  1861 
for  the  defense  of  Lynn  Haven  shore.  Two  of  the  pieces,  I am  informed,  were  taken 
away  from  Kempsville,  under  orders  from  General  Huger.  The  other  is  there  under 
no  command  that  I know  of,  and  I desire  it  to  be  restored  to  me.  I am  personally 
responsible  for  all  three  pieces,  as  they  were  issued  to  me  by  Flag-Officer  Forrest  before 
I was  commissioned  or  had  a command,  and  were  taken  in  my  absence  at  the  West.  I 
desire  to  have  all  three  returned  to  me'  and  you  will  so  request  of  General  Huger ; but 
you  will  especially  request  to  be  allowed  horses  by  the  quartermaster  here  to  bring 
the  gun  from  Kempsville  to  Norfolk,  in  order  that  it  may  be  taken  to  Roanoke  Island. 

You  will  also  call  upon  Flag-Officer  Forrest,  at  the  navy-yard,  and  ask  for  one  brass 
howitzer,  allowed  to  be  taken  by  me,  with  the  consent  of  Captain  Lynch,  to  whose 
command  it  belonged.  It  is  one  of  two  pieces  loaned  by  Captain  Lynch  to  Colonel 
Wright,  and  returned  by  the  latter  to  the  navy-yard.  Now,  Captain  Lynch  consents 
that  I shall  have  one  of  the  pieces,  with  both  carriages,  caissons,  harness,  &c. 

You  will  also  apply  at  the  navy-yard  for  two  iron  12-pounder  pieces,  their  carriages, 
caissons,  &c.  As  fast  as  obtained  you  will  forward  these  four  pieces,  &c.,  to  me  at 
Roanoke  Island.  To  this  end  you  will  remain  here  not  more  than  eight  days,  and 
within  that  time  proceed  to  Roanoke  Island  as  early  as  you  can ; and  while  here  you 
will  consider  yourself  detailed  to  look  after  and  arrest  deserters  and  stragglers  from 
my  command.  I am  informed  that  some  of  my  men  are  now  on  board  the  Merrimac. 
You  will  take  orders  and  proper  steps  to  arrest  them  and  send  them  on  to  Roanoke 
Island. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 


HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Norfolk,  Va.,  January  28,  1862. 

Maj.  F.  D.  Cleary,  Quartermaster,  c . : 

Sir  : You  will  proceed  as  early  as  practicable  to  procure  for  the  service  at  Roanoke 
Island,  its  marshes,  &c.,  at  Nag’s  Head,  che  following  implements  and  materials: 

Pile-drivers. — Three  can  be  obtained : one  from  Capt.  M.  Parks,  and  one  from  Mr. 
Culpeper,  at  Norfolk,  Va.,  and  one  from  Dr.  Thomas  Warren,  Edenton,  N.  C.  Each 
will  require  a crew  of  six  men. 

Dredging-machine. — One ; to  be  procured  from  the  Albemarle  and  Chesapeake  Canal 
Company,  of  Capt.  M.  Parks.  They  require  a double  crew  of  24  men. 

Lighters.  Eight ; 50  or  60  feet  long,  3^-  or  4 feet  deep,  and  12  or  15  feet  wide,  well 
calked  and  made  water-tight. 

Lumber. — Twenty  thousand  feet  of  1-inch  plank  (sorted),  from  12  to  20  feet  long: 
17,000  superficial,  or  42,500  board  measure ; decking-plank,  2£  inches  thick.  Scant- 
ling,  6 by  4 inches,  16  feet  long ; in  all  12,000  feet  long.  Plank  for  wharves,  12  feet 
long,  2 inches  thick;  in  all  26,000  feet,  board  measure.  Piles,  1,500,  14  feet  long; 
1,000,  18  feet  long;  500,  22  feet  long;  1,500,  20  feet  long. 

Nails. — Whatever  is  necessary. 

The  piles,  plank,  and  scantling  you  will  get  best,  probably,  through  Dr.  Warren,  of 
Edenton,  N.  C.,  and  the  lighters  from  the  Dismal  Swamp  Canal. 

You  will  also  procure  such  number  of  cooking  and  warming  stoves  as  you  may  deem 
necessary  for  the  Legion ; and  also  such  an  assortment  of  axes,  hoes,  spades,  shovels, 
and  other  implements  as  are  necessary  for  constructing  the  works  at  Roanoke  Island, 
and  forward  the  same  as  early  as  possible  to  that  post. 

Very  respectfully, 


HENRY  A.  WISE) 

Brigadier-  General. 


Chap.  XX  ] BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C.  143 

On  the  night  of  January  28  Colonel  Henningsen  arrived  in  Norfolk 
with  fragments  of  three  companies  of  my  artillery. 

On  the  29tli,  as  I was  departing  from  the  wharf  at  Norfolk,  I ordered 
him  to  send  his  men  and  horses  by  land  over  the  sand  bridge  to  the 
sea-side  beach  and  thence  by  the  shore  to  Nag’s  Head — all  except  mej 
enough  to  guard  his  guns,  carriages,  caissons,  and  ordnance  stores— 
and  these  would  be  shipped  on  the  barges  and  towed  down  to  the 
lower  section  of  the  canal  at  Currituck  Canal  Bridge,  where  they  would 
be  met  by  tugs  and  barges  from  the  island.  This  order  could  have 
been  executed  in  two  or  three  days  at  most,  and  the  artillery  could 
have  reached  me  by  February  1 or  2.  I had  previously  sent  my  own 
private  wagon  the  same  route  to  the  point  opposite  Knott’s  and  Crow 
Islands,  and  the  beach  road  the  whole  way  to  Nag’s  Head  is  not  only 
practicable;  but  the  very  best  and  firmest  road  in  all  this  section. 

I found  Lieutenant  Gallop,  of  the  Eighth  North  Carolina  Regiment 
(son  of  Mr.  Gallop,  who  keeps  the  ferry  between  the  beach  and  Pow- 
ell’s Point),  on  Roanoke  Island,  and  from  him  got  a minute  description 
of  the  whole  route,  and  gave  a memorandum  of  the  way  to  Lieutenant 
Pearce  and  Quartermaster  Webb,  of  the  artillery,  for  Colonel  Hen- 
ningsen, whom  I saw  at  the  wharf,  and  to  whom  I gave  the  order  and 
description  of  the  route. 

By  the  reports  of  Colonel  Henningsen  and  Lieutenant  Pearce,  of 
which  the  following  are  copies,  it  seems  that  General  Huger  thought 
differently  of  the  beach  route;  changed  my  order  to  Colonel  Henning- 
sen, and  attempted  to  send  the  artillery  by  land  to  Powell’s  Point,  and 
the  fatal  consequence  was  that  Colonel  Henningsen,  with  more  than 
100  men  and  six  field  pieces,  well  mounted,  did  not  reach  me  at  all 
before  the  island  was  captured,  and  joined  me  not  at  all  until  after  I 
fell  back  to  Currituck  Court-House,  eight  days  after  the  action  : 

Extract  from  Colonel  Henningsen’ s report. 

On  Tuesday,  January  28,  about  12  p.  m.,  reached  Norfolk  by  rail,  with  Batteries  B, 
C,  and  D,  of  artillery,  of  Wise  Legion,  with  all  the  horses,  five  pieces,  and  five  cais- 
sons. Horses  fed  in  the  cars  that  nightrbecause  too  dark  to  remove  them. 

On  Wednesday  morning,  January  29,  reported  to  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise,  and 
received  orders  from  him  to  march,  with  the  men  and  horses  of  artillery,  by  a route 
indicated  by  him  to  Lieutenant  Pearce,  who  furnished  a copy  of  these  route  orders  to 
Captain  Webb,  quartermaster  of  artillery  of  Wise  Legion.  The  guns,  caissons,  and 
wagons  I was  ordered  by  General  Wise  to  leave  in  Norfolk,  to  be  transported  by  water. 

I gave  marching  orders  for  January  30,  the  condition  of  the  horses,  much  injured 
by  the  cars,  rendering  it  advisable  to  rest  them  twenty-four  hours. 

On  Thursday  (30th)  was  informed  by  Major  Bradford  that  General  Huger  could  not 
furnish  water  transportation  for  guns,  caissons,  or  wagons,  and  that  I must  take  them 
by  land.  There  were  now  unexpectedly  six  guns  (a  sixth  iron  6-pounder  without 
caissons  having  been  received  at  Norfolk),  five  caissons,  and  fourteen  wagons  to  be 
transported  by  land,  with  only  six  horses  that  had  been  worked  in  harness,  and  be- 
tween thirty  and  forty  horses  and  mules  which  had  never  been  broken  to  harness. 
Through  consequent  accidents  occurring  it  took  forty-eight  hours  before  we  could 
move  from  Norfolk.  I ordered  a march,  however,  for  next  morning,  and  after  receiv- 
ing General  Huger’s  orders,  through  Major  Bradford,  reported  to  General  Huger. 
General  Huger  confirmed  these  orders  and  also  ordered  me  to  change  the  route  laid 
down  by  General  Wise ; that  is  to  say,  he  ordered  me  to  proceed  by  the  main-land 
road  to  Powell’s  Point,  instead  of  by  the  beach,  he  (General  Huger)  giving  as  a reason 
that  guns  and  wagons  could  not  be  dragged  along  the  beach,  and  that,  in  the  then 
state  of  the  weather,  the  road  would  be  washed  over  by  the  sea.  This  view,  which  I 
have  since  found  to  be  erroneous,  was  confirmed  by  several  of  General  Huger’s  officers 
and  by  others  who  professed  to  be  acquainted  with  the  locality. 

On  Friday,  the  31st,  attempted  to  march,  but  had  much  trouble  and  several  acci- 
dents with  the  teams.  One  team  ran  away  and  damaged  the  forge  wagon,  breaking 
the  pole  Though  the  forge  wagon  was  new,  being  drawn  just  before  leaving  Rich- 
mond, the  wood  of  the  pole  when  broken  was  rotten  half  through.  At  2 p.  m,,  when 


144 


OPERATIONS  IN  NOBTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


ready  to  start,  found  that,  on  account  of  the  prevailing  wind  and  high  tide,  the  bridge 
over  the  East  Branch  was  covered  by  two  feet  of  water  and  deep  holes  reported  on 
the  other  side.  Low  water  not  occurring  till  after  dark,  suspended  march  till  next 
morning,  Saturday,  February  1.  Fresh  accidents  with  teams — one  gun-carriage  dam- 
aged, and  harness  so  insecure,  though  drawn  new  in  Richmond,  that  we  were 
obliged  to  procure  bolt-rope.  This  and  waiting  for  repairs  delayed  us  till  12  m.,  when 
•#e  marched  from  Norfolk  City. 

C.  F.  HENNINGSEN, 

Colonel  Fifty-ninth  Begiment  Virginia  Volunteers , 
Commanding  Batteries  B,  C,  and  D,  Artillery,  Wise  Legion . 

Nag’s  Head,  N.  C.,  February  6,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  obedience  to  your  commands,  I read 
to  Colonel  Henningsen,  in  Norfolk,  your  orders  that  all  the  artillery  horses  and  men 
were  to  go  by  the  beach  route  to  this  place,  except  such  of  the  latter  as  were  neces- 
sary for  the  protection  of  the  field  pieces,  &c.,  which,  with  their  carriages  and  cais- 
sons, were  to  go  in  tow  of  a steam-tug  to  the  lower  section  of  the  canal.  Capt.  L. 
N.  Webb,  assistant  quartermaster  of  artillery  corps,  wrote  down,  in  Colonel  Henning- 
sen’s  presence,  the  prescribed  route,  with  all  the  material,  as  enumerated  by  Mr. 
Gallop  and  embodied  in  your  orders  to  me.  I saw  Major  Johnson,  assistant  quar- 
termaster of  this  department,  in  order  to  procure  the  water  transportation  for  the 
pieces,  caissons,  &c.  He  informed  me  they  were  not  to  go  that  way.  I reported  that 
fact  to  Colonel  Henningsen,  and  he  and  I went  to  General  Huger,  who  ordered  Colonel 
Henningsen  to  take  the  horses,  pieces,  caissons,  &c.,  by  the  inland  route,  as  the  beach 
was  impracticable  from  inlets,  high  tides,  and  the  probabilities  of  being  shelled  by  the 
enemy’s  gunboats. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  H.  PEARCE, 
Lieutenant  and  Ordnance  Officer. 

When  General  Huger  met  me  here  on  the  19th  instant  he  was  still 
incredulous  about  the  route.  I had  ordered  and  promised  to  order  a 
survey  of  it.  Unfortunately  the  enemy  are  now  in  possession  of  Nag’s 
Head  and  the  beach ; how  far  up  it  is  not  known.  I was  myself  driven 
in  a two-horse  wagon  on  the  evening  and  night  of  the  8th  as  high  up 
from  Nag’s  Head  as  Gallop’s  Ferry,  and  was  assured  by  all  who  knew 
that  it  was  the  only  bad  part  of  the  beach  route  up  to  Cape  Henry. 
The  Currituck  and  other  inlets  have  filled  up  long  ago,  and  there  is 
not  a foot  of  the  way  not  passable  by  horses,  footmen,  carts,  and  wagons. 

On  the  evening  of  January  29  I left  Norfolk,  and  reached  Nag’s  Head 
the  night  of  the  30th.  I immediately  issued  Special  Orders,  Nos.  12 
and  13,  of  which  the  following  are  copies  : 

Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Fourth  Brigade,  Department  of  Norfolk, 

No.  12.  5 Nag’s  Head,  N.  C.,  January  30,  1862. 

The  quartermaster,  or  his  brigade  agent,  for  the  post  at  Roanoke  Island  and  Nag’s 
Head  will  immediately  procure  twenty  lighters,  as  near  60  feet  long,  or  longer,  and  12 
feet  wide,  as  he  can  get  them,  and  have  them  well  calked  and  water-tight,  for  the 
service  of  ferries  and  transportation  across  the  Roanoke  Sound ; to  and  from  the 
island  and  the  beach  and  across  Currituck  Sound  ; to  and  from  Gallop’s  on  the  beach 
and  the  shore  opposite  Powell’s  Point  and  across  to  Croatan  Sound  ; to  and  from  tho 
island  and  marshes  and  Tyrrel  shore  opposite.  And  to  this  end  he  will  at  once  dis- 
patch the  steam  tug-boat  Currituck,  Capt.  C.  Bonton,  to  such  places  on  the  waters  of 
the  Albemarle  Sound  as  such  lighters  can  be  obtained  at,  with  orders  to  return  as 
speedily  as  possible  with  as  many  as  she  can  tow  to  the  wharf  at  Nag’s  Head ; and 
Sergt.  J.  C.  Gallop,  of  Company  B,  of  the  Eighth  North  Carolina  Regiment,  is  detailed 
for  the  duty  of  accompanying  Captain  Bonton  as  pilot  and  to  assist  in  obtaining  the 
lighters.  He  will  examine  them,  and  those  fit  for  service  he  will  take  at  a fair  valu- 
ation ; and  if  he  and  the  owner  or  owners  cannot  agree  on  the  prices  he  will  cause 
them  to  be  valued  by  arbitrators,  one  to  be  chosen  by  him  and  one  by  the  owner,  and 
if  they  cannot  agree,  the  two  to  call  in  an  umpire.  Upon  the  return  of  the  steamer  and 
the  lighters  to  Nag’s  Head  he  will  report  to  me,  or  in  my  absence  to  the  officer  of  the 
post  there  as  to  the  lighters,  and  also  to  his  commanding  officer  at  Roanoke  Island, 


. 

Jhap.XX.]  BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C.  145 

iccounting  for  Ms  absence  by  these  orders,  and  Captain  Bonton,  of  the  Currituck,  will 
>,wait  there  for  further  orders. 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Special  Orders,  ? Hdqrs.  Fourth  Brigade,  Department  of  Norfolk, 

No.  13.  5 Nag’ 8 Head,  N.  C.,  January  30,  1862. 

The  steam  tug-boat  Roanoke,  Captain  Hobbs,  will  proceed  as  early  as  practicable 
;o  the  great  bridge  over  the  northern  section  of  the  Albemarle  and  Chesapeake  Canal, 
tnd  there  apply  to  Mr.  Parks,  the  president  of  the  canal  company  or  his  agent  at 
hat  place,  for  a steam  pile-driver  and  a steam  dredging-machine,  with  their  crews, 
io  be  employed  on  the  defenses  of  Croatan  and  Roanoke  Sounds.  As  soon  as  he  can 
>btain  them  he  will  tow  them  to  Roanoke  Island,  and  report  to  me  at  Pork  Point  Bat- 
ery  for  further  orders.  The  brigade  commissary,  or  his  agent,  will  furnish  the  crews 
>f  the  pile-driver  and  dredging-machine  with  rations  for  ten  days ; and  if  Captain 
lobbs  finds  that  either  the  pile-driver  or  the  machine  is  ready  and  the  other  is  not, 
md  cannot  be  ready  for  two  days  or  more,  he  will  return  immediately  with  the  one 
vhich  is  ready,  and  report  to  me  for  further  orders. 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 

The  next  morning  (January  31)  I visited  Roanoke  Island,  saw  Col- 
>nel  Shaw,  and  gave  him  special  orders.  The  same  day  I returned  to 
^ag’s  Head  and  fixed  my  quarters. 

On  the  morning  of  February  1,  early,  I issued  and  distributed  vari- 
>us  orders  of  my  own  and  of  headquarters,  when,  about  9 a.  m.  of  that 
lay,  I was  seized  with  a violent  and  acute  attack  of  pleurisy,  with  high 
ever  and  spitting  of  blood,  threatening  pneumonia,  from  the  bed  of 
yhich  I was  taken  and  placed  prostrate  in  a wagon  late  on  the  evening 
>f  the  8th  instant,  after  the  island  was  captured.  I continued,  how- 
ever, to  dictate  all  orders.  The  weather  was  one  continual  cold  rain 
md  high  wind,  and  no  work  of  consequence  could  be  accomplished.  I 
nade,  however,  every  disposition  in  my  power. 

I could  not  send  to  Colonel  Shaw,  as  he  requested,  any  field  pieces 
>f  artillery,  for  mine  had  not  arrived ; but  on  the  4th  I detailed  Cap- 
ain  Schermerhorn  and  Lieutenant  Kinney  to  report  for  duty  to  Colonel 
3haw,  for  drilling  and  instructing  in  light  artiUery  practice.  Colonel 
Shaw  had  reported  to  me  three  field  pieces  of  artillery — a 24-pounder, 
in  18-pounder  Mexican  piece,  and  a 12-pounder.  I sent  him  from 
Norfolk  a 5-pounder  brass  howitzer ; but  when  I arrived  there  were 
>ut  three  pieces — the  24-pounder,  the  18-pounder,  and  the  6-pounder, 
t is  not  yet  explained  to  me  how  it  came  that  there  were  but  three 
>ieces.  For  the  24-pounder  and  the  18-pounder  there  were  no  other 
tmmunition  than  that  for  a 12-pounder. 

On  February  3 the  Secretary  of  War  addressed  to  me  a letter,  in 
eply  to  my  appeals,  of  which  the  foHowing  is  a copy : 

Confederate  States  of  America,  War  Department, 

BicJimond,  Va.,  February  3,  1862. 
frig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise,  Roanoke  Island,  N.  C., 

( Care  of  General  Huger,  Norfolk,  Va.) 

Sir:  In  response  to  your  several  letters,  which  it  has  not  been  in  my  power  to  an- 
, wer  separately,  I now  inform  yon  that — 

First.  The  North  Carolina  Battalion  was  ordered  by  me  to  report  to  you,  and  I sup- 
ose  it  is  now  with  you. 

Second.  I ordered  Captain  Clement  to  muster  into  service  his  own  company  of  cav- 
lry  and  to  join  your  command. 

Third.  • In  relation  to  the  several  commissions  asked  for  your  Legion,  I beg  leave  to 
tate  what  I have  done  and  can  do,  as  follows,  viz : 

10  R R — VOL  IX 


146 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


1st.  Charles  B.  Duffield  has  been  nominated  for  major,  and  his  commission  will  be 
sent  as  soon  as  he  is  confirmed  by  Congress. 

2d.  Henry  A.  Wise,  jr.,  has  been  confirmed  as  first  lieutenant  and  adjutant,  and  his 
commission  has  been  forwarded. 

3d.  J.  H.  Richardson  will  be  promoted  to  colonel  of  the  Eirst  Regiment  of  Infantrv 
of  your  Legion  as  soon  as  the  regiment  of  cavalry  is  filled  up  to  ten  companies  in 
order  to  justify  the  transfer  to  it  of  Col.  J.  Lucius  Davis.  1 

4th.  M.  Dimmock  will  be  appointed  adjutant  of  the  cavalry  regiment  as  soon  as  the 
ten  companies  are  mustered  in.  The  law  does  not  allow  an  additional  officer  as  adju- 
tant to  a battalion.  J 


5th.  You  have  a right  to  assign  Lieut.  J.  H.  Pearce  to  duty  as  ordnance  officer  if 
you  choose.  There  is  no  such  office  provided  by  law  as  ordnance  officer,  and  there 
can  be  no  appointment.  It  is  a mere  assignment  to  duty. 

6tli.  You  cannot  have,  by  law,  more  than  one  adjutant-general,  who  must  also  act 
as  inspector-general.  I cannot,  therefore,  appoint  Hammond  Dugan,  as  you  desire  * 
but  you  have  no  quartermaster  for  your  cavalry,  and  you  might  confer  that  post  on 
him  if  you  desire. 

7th.  I will  present  the  name  of  T.  C.  Kinney  for  a second  lieutenancy  in  the  Pro- 
visional Engineer  Corps.  This  corps  is  too  limited  in  number  for  me  to  be  able  to 
yield  to  your  wish  for  any  further  nominations  in  it. 

Fourth.  I will  send  your  cannon  as  promptly  .as  possible.  I would  have  had  it 
ready  for  you  before,  but  I was  compelled  to  direct  all  my  resources  in  light  artillery 
to  aid  our  army  after  its  recent  disaster  at  Somerset,  in  Kentucky,  where  we  lost  all 
our  artillery. 

Your  obedient  servant, 


J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


February  3 General  Huger  sent  to  me  an  order  of  which  the  follow- 
ing is  a copy : 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk,  Va.,  February  3,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise, 

Commanding  Fourth  Brigade,  Boanoke  Island : 


Sir  : The  steamer  Roanoke  towed  down  two  barges,  which  were  ordered  by  the 
quartermaster  to  proceed  to  Scuppernong  and  bring  back  corn  to  this  place.  If  the 
Roanoke  has  been  taken  for  other  service,  you  will,  on  receipt  of  this,  send  her  and 
the  barges  to  carry  out  the  orders  of  the  quartermaster.  I have  to  charter  vessels  to 
bring  forage  here,  and  will  give  vessels  so  employed  by  the  quartermaster’s  depart- 
ment certificates  that  they  are  employed  by  me,  and  such  vessels  are  not  to  be  inter- 
fered with  by  any  one.  You  will  direct  the  captains  of  all  steamboats  coming  here 
from  your  command  to  report  to  the  chief  quartermaster  and  any  officers  coming 
up  to  report  to  headquarters.  These  orders  are  imperative. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGER, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


Had  I complied  with  this  order  I would  have  had  no  means  of  trans- 
portation whatever.  The  steam-tug  Currituck  had  been  sent  for  lighters 
and  never  returned  to  Hag’s  Head. 

February  3 General  Huger  inclosed  to  me  a letter  of  the  Secretary 
of  War  to  him,  inclosing  a letter  of  Captain  Lynch  to  the  Secretary 
of  the  Havy : 

Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk,  Va.,  February  3,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise, 

Commanding  Fourth  Brigade,  Boanoke  Island : 

Sir  : I inclose  herewith  copies  of  a letter,  dated  January  22,  from  Commodore 
Lynch  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  and  a copy  of  a letter  of  the  Secretary  of  War 
addressed  to  me,  dated  January  31.  I am  sure  you  will  with  pleasure  aid  the  naval 
officers  as  far  as  may  be  in  your  power.  Without  adopting  the  plans  of  Commodore 
Lynch  for  the  defenses  of  Roanoke  Island,  I count  upon  your  promptness  and  energy 
in  rendering  the  defenses  as  formidable  as  possible. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGER, 

Major-General. 


Ohap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


147 


Confederate  States  of  America,  War  Department, 

Richmond , Va.,  January  31,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Norfolk , Va. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  of  inclosing  for  your  information  a copy  of  a letter  from  Cap- 
tain Lynch  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy.  This  letter  has  excited  the  deepest  solici- 
tude of  the  President  and  myself,  and  you  are  requested  to  take  the  most  prompt  and 
mergetic  measures  in  your  power  to  remedy  the  deficiencies  in  the  defenses  at  Roa- 
noke Island  suggested  by  Captain  Lynch,  as  well  as  to  furnish  him  men  to  man  his 
gunboats,  even  if  necessary  to  detach  temporarily  some  of  the  soldiers  under  your 
command. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 

! 

Confederate  States  Steamer  Sea  Bird,  » 
Off  Roanoke  Island,  January  22,  1862. 

3.  R.  Mallory,  Secretary  of  the  Navy : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  20th  instant,  with  this  steamer  and  the 
Raleigh,  I started  on  a cruise  in  Pamlico  Sound  and  for  a reconnaissance  of  Hatteras. 
Yesterday  afternoon  we  looked  into  the  inlet  and  there  saw  a large  fleet  of  steamers 
ind  transports.  We  counted  twenty-one  of  the  former  all  inside  the  spit : a fo«-  bank 
;oncealed  those  outside.  Two  large  steamers  were  outside  the  bulkhead  and  one  was 
oeing  lightened  over  by  two  schooners.  They  are  evidently  prepared  for  a general 
novement. 

The  commanding  officer  at  Middletown,  in  Hyde  County,  learned  through  a deserter 
;hat  the  enemy’s  force  consists  of  twenty-four  gunboats,  seven  large  steamers,  and 
sixteen  transports.  To  meet  these  I have  two  old  side-wheel  steamers  and  six  pro- 
pellers, the  former  possessing  some  speed,  the  latter  slow  in  their  movements,  and  one 
)f  them  frequently  displacing  its  shaft ; but  my  greatest  difficulty  is  in  the  want  of 
men.  So  great  has  been  the  exposure  of  our  crews  that  a number  have  been  necessa- 
ry invalided ; consequently  the  complements  are  very  much  reduced,  some  of  them 
me-half.  I have  sent  to  Washington,  Plymouth,  Edenton,  and  Elizabeth  City  for 
•ecruits  without  success,  and  an  earnest  appeal  to  Commodore  Forrest  brought  me 
>nly  four  from  Norfolk.  To  meet  the  enemy  I have  not  more  than  a sufficient  number 
: >f  men  to  fight  half  the  guns. 

In  a former  communication  I have  informed  you  of  my  appeal  to  Colonel  Shaw 
commanding  the  military  forces  here,  for  some  of  the  North  Carolina  Volunteers  who 
lad  been  sailors  and  wished  to  enlist  in  the  naval  service  and  of  my  limited  success 
. nclosed  I send  a letter  addressed  this  day  to  him,  asking  for  50  men,  and  detailing 
neuteuant-Commander  Parker  to  personally  urge  compliance.  I request  the  letters 
o be  placed  on  file,  to  be  referred  to  in  the  event  of  calamity. 

5 My  opinion  is  that  the  North  Carolina  Volunteers  will  not  stand  to  their  guns.  Men 
o devoid  of  energy  are  incapable  of  determined  and  long-continued  resistance.’ 

General  Wise  has  sent  troops  to  Nag’s  Head,  upon  the  sea-beach,  where  they  can  be 
Iriven  from  their  position  by  a single  gunboat,  and  is  selecting  points  of  defense  in 
mrntuck  which  can  scarcely  be  reached  in  row-boats,  owing  to  the  shallowness  of 
he  water.  Here  is  the  great  thoroughfare  from  Albemarle  Sound  and  its  tributaries 
aid  if  the  enemy  obtain  lodgments  or  succeed  in  passing  here  he  will  cut  off  a very 
ich  country  from  Norfolk  market.  His  next  aim,  I presume,  will  be  to  obtain  posses- 
sion of  the  Seaboard  and  Roanoke  Railroad.  F 

Since  the  preceding  page  was  written  I have  received  a note  from  Colonel  Shaw 
wherein  he  promises,  to  let  me  have  some  men  temporarily,  but  declines  increasing  the 
garrison  at  the  floating  batteries.  Those  two  batteries  mounted  together  seven  guns 
canned  by  70  men  ; on  my  last  inspection  only  three  and  a half  guns’  crews  could  be 
Qustered.  Thirty-two-pounders  of  500  weight  require  13  men  each  to  work  them 
nd  when  the  sick  and  casualties  are  taken  into  consideration,  it  will  be  seen  how 
ery  inefficiently  those  batteries  are  manned. 

I mention  these  things  to  protect  in  a very  probable  event  the  reputation  of  the 
|avy.  Ihe  Army  now  has  the  batteries  in  charge,  as  General  Wise  refused  to  allow 
he  volunteers  to  remain  unless  the  control  was  assigned  to  him.  Not  having  any 
wen  to  send  I was  constrained  to  comply,  but  have  placed  an  officer  there  to  train  the 

Should  General  Wise  be  in  Richmond  you  cannot  exert  your  great  influence  more 
atriotically  than  by  urgmg  him  to  come  here  at  once  or  at  least  to  send  some  ener- 
etic  officer  of  rank  to  take  command. 

I have  this  moment  received  your  communication  of  the  17th  instant.  General  Huger 
5 misinformed.  When  the  propeller  Powhatan  was  offered  to  me,  Mr.  Parks  told  me 
hJi  pa* y had  °ff®red  bira  $10,000  for  her,  but  that  he  would  not  take  less 

nan  fi^,UU0.  Understanding  him  to  mean  a private  person,  I told  him  I would  tele- 


148 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


graph  to  you,  and  that  the  desire  of  individuals  to  purchase  should  not  conflict  with 
the  wants  of  the  Government.  He  did  not  undeceive  me.  I did  telegraph  to  you; 
next  day  received  your  authority,  and  immediately  sent  my  secretary,  with  a note  to 
Mr.  Parks,  closing  the  purchase.  Mr.  Parks  was  not  in  his  office,  hut  my  note  was 
delivered  to  his  brother,  who  transacts  business  for  him.  In  the  meantime  the  Pow- 
hatan had  left  for  this  island,  and  I overtook  her  in  the  Currituck  Canal  with  Mr. 
Parks  on  board.  I then  told  him  of  my  note  and  claimed  the  Powhatan.  He  informed 
me  that  Major  Johnson,  quartermaster  at  Norfolk,  was  the  one  who  had  offered  him 
$10,000,  but  that  the  offer  was  a conditional  one,  based  upon  the  approval  at  Rich- 
mond of  his  application  for  authority  to  make  the  purchase.  As  Mr.  Parks  had  told 
me  that  $12,000  was  his  very  lowest  price,  and  as  the  quartermaster’s  offer,  if  sanc- 
tioned, would  not  be  accepted  (supposing  Mr.  Parks  to  be  truthful),  I felt  justified  (as 
there  was  a large  force  at  Hatteras)  in  taking  possession  of  the  Powhatan. 

If  the  enemy  is  coming  this  way,  and  there  is  every  indication  that  such  is  his  in- 
tention, his  visit  has  only  been  delayed  by  the  inclemency  of  the  weather,  and  I sub- 
mit to  you  whether  I would  not  have  been  derelict  to  my  duty  if  under  the  circum- 
stances I had  not  availed  myself  of  an  auxiliary  means  of  defense.  The  crisis  will 
soon  be  over,  and  desirable  as  it  is  to  keep  the  Powhatan  until  some  of  the  new  gun- 
boats are  ready,  I have  no  wish  to  detain  her  unjustly.  I do  not  think  the  claim  of 
the  Army  as  good  as  our  own;  yet,  although  we  were  treated  unkindly  in  the  matter 
of  the  Kahukee,  I feel  no  disposition  to  retaliate. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  F.  LYNCH, 

Flag-Officer. 

No  notice  was  given  to  me  by  the  Secretary  of  War  of  this  letter, 
but  I presume  it  accounts  in  part  for  the  order  to  me  of  January  22. 
As  soon  as  I could  write,  and  had  time  and  opportunity,  I replied  to 
this  letter  of  Captain  Lynch  by  addressing  General  Huger  a letter  of 
which  the  following  is  a copy : 

Great  Bridge,  Norfolk  County,  Va., 

February  17,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Commanding,  fyc. : 

Sir  : It  has  been  utterly  out  of  my  power  heretofore  to  reply  to  yours  of  the  3d  in- 
stant, inclosing  to  me  a copy  of  a letter  from  the  Secretary  of  War,  dated  January  31 
ultimo,  addressing  to  you  a copy  of  a letter  from  Capt.  William  F.  Lynch,  which  ex- 
cited, the  Secretary  says,  the  deepest  solicitude  of  the  President  himself.  Justice  to 
myself  demands  that  I should  put  upon  the  record  a reply  to  this  unwarrantable  letter 
of  Captain  Lynch. 

His  report  of  the  enemy’s  force  was  wholly  inaccurate,  and  he  Was  not  timely  ap- 
prised of  the  enemy’s  approach  when  they  came.  They  were  nearly  up  to  the  marshes, 
at  the  south  end  of  the  island,  before  his  fleet  were  aware  of  it,  as  I have  every  reason 
to  believe.  Captain  Lynch  took  his  position  opposite  or  between  the  batteries,  instead 
of  keeping  a lookout  at  the  marshes  or  even  far  below  them. 

His  information,  from  the  first,  I found  very  inaccurate  in  respect  to  the  waters  of 
the  Croatan  Sound.  His  difficulty  in  the  want  of  men  took  away  forces  from  the 
island  twice  the  number  of  which  were  wanted  there,  and  he  hindered  operations 
of  the  army  materially.  He  was  furnished  by  Colonel  Shaw  with  more  men  than 
ought  to  have  been  spared  from  the  infantry,  with  which  or  at  the  batteries  they 
would  have  been  far  more  useful  than  with  Captain  Lynch’s  useless  and  'worthless 
gunboat  fleet.  The  North  Carolina  Volunteers  at  the  batteries  did  stand  at  their  guns, 
and  were  able  to  do  so  much  more  firmly  than  did  or  could  Captain  Lynch’s  fleet  before 
the  force  of  the  enemy. 

His  letter  was  dated  January  22,  two  days  after  I had  sent  my  first  regiment  of 
infantry  to  Nag’s  Head.  My  troops  were  not  upon  the  sea,  but  upon  the  sound  beach, 
where  the  men  could  not  be  shelled  from  their  position  by  a force  much  superior  to  a 
single  gunboat,  or  to  even  Captain  Lynch’s  fleet,  from  the  sea.  My  men  were  sent 
there  for  three  princial  reasons  : 

1st.  There  were  no  quarters  for  my  men  on  the  island  and  there  were  ample  quar- 
ters for  them  at  Nag’s  Head,  and  it  was  a comparatively  safe  place  for  ordnance  and 
other  stores ; whence,  indeed,  nearly  all  were  saved  in  the  disaster  which  came,  while 
none  were  saved  on  the  island. 

2d.  It  was  a necessary  position  for  part  of  the  forces,  in  order  to  prevent  the  enemy 
from  landing  on  the  Roanoke  Sound  beach  and  crossing  that  sound,  which  they  easily 
could  to  the  island,  unless  the  sound  beach  was  guarded. 

3d.  It  was  the  only  position  which  could  cover  a retreat  from  the  island  and  from 
which  to  construct  a floating  bridge  or  ferry  of  lighters,  while  it  was  convenient  to 
re-enforce  the  island. 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C* 


149 


It  was  unauthorized  intermeddling  in  Captain  Lynch  to  criticise  military  positions 
without  better  information  than  he  had,  and  it  would  have  been  well  for  the  service 
to  have  employed  his  boats  as  tugs  for  transports,  instead  of  vainly  trying  to  turn 
-tugs  into  gunboats  to  encounter  a Burnside  fleet  of  sixty  vessels,  any  one  large 
steamer  of  which  could  easily  have  taken  his  seven  boats. 

He  asserts  further  that  I was  selecting  points  of  defense  in  Currituck  which  could 
Bcarce  be  reached  in  row-boats,  owing  to  the  shallowness  of  the  water.  This  state- 
ment is  wholly  untrue  and  without  a shadow  of  foundation.  I selected  no  place 
whatever  for  defense  in  Currituck  except  the  landings  of  Pugh  and  Ashby,  on  the 
island,  and  at  the  latter  the  enemy  did  land  under  cover  of  the  shot  and  shell  of  a 
heavy  steamer,  which  ran  in  with  her  train  of  transports  quite  up  to  the  landing. 
Captain  Lynch’s  fleet  afforded  not  the  least  protection  to  any  landing.  He  was 
far  above  them  all.  He  could  not  have  known  where  my  points  of  defense  were 
except  from  some  idle  rumor.  My  defenses  were  wholly  on  the  island,  and,  weak 
as  they  were,  for  want  of  men,  were  incomparably  beyond  any  Captain  Lynch’s 
fleet  could  possibly  render.  While  Captain  Lynch  was  so  jealous  of  the  reputation  of 
the  Navy  he  should  have  been  a little  careful  not  to  assail  that  of  the  Army.  The  ti^ith 
is  that  the  greatest  assault  upon  the  reputation  of  the  Navy  was  the  want  of  judg 
ment  and  skill  in  getting  up  a tug-boat  fleet  of  seven  to  meet  a Burnside  expedition 
: of  sixty  vessels. 

Captain  Lynch  does  not  precisely  or  accurately  state  the  facts  correctly  when  he 
says,  “ General  Wise  refused  to  allow  the  volunteers  to  remain  unless  the  control  was 
assigned  to  him.”  This  statement  applies  to  all  the  batteries.  It  is  not  exactly  cor- 
rect as  to  one  of  them  only.  The  Redstone  Battery,  on  the  Tyrrel  side,  was  con- 
structed of  two  vessels  or  barges,  embanked  in  the  mud  of  the  marshes.  There  Cap 
tain  White,  of  the  North  Carolina  Volunteers,  was  posted  with  his  company.  A 
midshipman,  Mr.  Gardner,  had  been  sent  to  drill  the  men  at  the  guns  of  the  battery. 
Captain  Lynch  chose  to  call  this  a floating  battery,  and  claimed  to  command  it  as 
1 part  of  the  naval  armament,  and  that  Midshipman  Gardner  should  command  the 
1 company  of  Captain  White. 

Colonel  Shaw  issued  what  I deemed  a very  proper  order  in  the  case.  This  he  and 
Captain  Lynch  submitted  to  me,  the  latter  claiming  for  the  midshipman  the  entire 
command  of  the  battery  and  the  men.  I declined  to  subject  a captain  of  the  Army 
to  the  orders  of  a midshipman  of  the  Navy,  but  ordered  Captain  White,  the  officer  in 
command,  to  submit  his  men  to  the  drill  of  Midshipman  Gardner  and  to  put  him  in 
charge  of  the  keys  of  the  magazine.  With  this  Captain  Lynch  professed  to  be  satis- 
fied. When  he  threatened  to  take  his  drill-officer  away  unless  he  could  command  a 
captain  of  infantry  and  his  company,  I offered  to  give  the  battery  up  to  him  wholly, 
but  said  I must  remove  the  company  of  infantry  from  the  battery  rather  than  have  a 
midshipman  of  the  Navy  put  in  command  of  a captain  of  the  Army,  on  the  land  at 
: least.  My  record  of  orders  and  correspondence  will  sustain  this  correction  of  Captain 
Lynch’s  statement.  There  was  no  controversy  about  any  other  battery.  Captain 
Lynch,  it  seems,  called  for  me  to  be  sent  at  once  from  Richmond  to  Roanoke  Island. 
t This,  I suppose,  accounts  for  the  sudden  order  which  I received  from  the  War  Depart- 
^ ment  to  repair  to  the  island.  I was  on  duty  in  Richmond,  urging  my  Legion  to  be 
sent ; urging  for  supplies  of  ammunition  and  re-enforcements.  It  was  extraordinary 
meddling  with  my  movements  in  this  instance  also  for  Captain  Lynch,  of  the  Navy, 
to  be  asking  for  my  orders  from  the  War  Department. 

The  truth  is,  I had  just  left  Captain  Lynch  in  Croatan  Sound  to  go  to  Norfolk  and 
' to  Richmond  and  apprise  our  superiors  of  the  lamentable  deficiency  of  defenses  at  the 
-island.  I was  not  more  zealous  in  the  mission  than  Captain  Lynch  was  in  urging 
7 me  to  go  on  to  hasten  supplies  and  re-enforcements.  He  was  urgent  that  I should  do 
so.  I had  gone  down  in  the  large  and  comfortable  tug  Powhatan,  to  the  surprise  of 
her  owner  (Mr.  Parks),  who  had  already  bargained  to  sell  her  conditionally  to  the 
Qunrtermaster  of  the  Army.  Captain  Lynch,  immediately  on  her  arrival,  sent  an 
officer  or  agent  on  board  of  her  to  take  an  inventory  of  everything  belonging  to  her, 

1 and  he  claimed  to  have  purchased  her  for  $12,000,  when  the  Army  had  purchased  her 
for  $10,000.  By  his  own  statement  he  had  not  bargained,  but  said  he  had  been  so 
badly  treated  by  Quartermaster  Johnson  in  respect  to  another  steamer  (the  Kahukee) 
that  he  was  determined  to  have  the  Powhatan  whether  the  bargain  by  him  for  her 
was  legally  binding  or  not.  The  Powhatan  was  given  up  to  him,  and  I returned  in 
the  little  Roanoke  to  Elizabeth  City,  and  thence  by  land  to  Norfolk. 

The  truth  undoubtedly  is,  that  if  Captain  Lynch  had  never  attempted  to  make  the 
futile  fleet  he  did  make  out  of  the  Canal  Company’s  tugs,  we  could  have  had  them  for 
the  purpose  of  transportation.  The  piles  could  have  been  brought,  perhaps,  in  suffi- 
cient number  to  obstruct  the  channels ; the  wharves  could  have  had  timber  brought 
for  their  construction  and  repairs,  and  the  transportation  of  the  troops  and  tools 
would  have  been  in  time.  All  this  was  a want  of  judgment  only  on  the  part  of  Captain 
Lynch.  A braver,  more  earnest,  and  active  officer  is  not  to  be  found  in  either  Army 
or  Navy,  but  he  was  too  vainglorious  of  the  fleet  that  got  the  name  of  the  Mosquito 


150  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA.  [Chap.  XX 

Fleet,  and  really  the  enemy  did  not  take  time  to  brush  it  away  while  he  was  bombard- 
ing the  batteries.  It  fought  bravely  and  well  for  its  size  and  construction,  but  had 
to  run  into  a trap,  where,  when  pursued,  it  was  nearly  destroyed.  My  only  complaint 
of  Captain  Lynch  is  that  he  was  superserviceable  and  overzealous ; grasped  at  too 
much  command  and  meddled  too  much  with  mine.  But  this  complaint  would  never 
have  been  made  by  me  against  so  gallant  and  patriotic  an  officer  except  in  response 
to  what  I deem  his  injustice  to  me.  I beg  that  you,  sir,  will  forward  this  letter,  or  a 
copy,  to  the  Secretary  of  War  and  President  of  the  Confederate  States.  As  Captain 
Lynch  gave  me  no  notice  of  his  letter,  but  sent  it  to  his  Department,  I follow  his  ex- 
ample by  sending  this  to  my  Department  without  notice  to  him. 

With  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier- General. 

On  February  5 1 ordered  requisition  to  be  made  for  free  negro  laborers^ 
under  the  laws  of  North  Carolina,  and  I required  report  from  Colonel 
Shaw  of  the  number  of  men  stationed  at  each  of  the  batteries  on  Eoanoke 
Island  and  on  the  Tyrrel  shore,  &c.  He  reported  to  me  on  the  7th  but 
803  men  left  for  infantry  duty. 

On  the  5th  I ordered  Colonel  Henningsen  to  send  my  artillery  horses 
to  Gallop’s  Ferry,  and  to  transport  them  thence  by  the  beach  to  Nag’s 
Head.  The  guns  were  to  be  left  at  Elizabeth  City,  whither  he  had  gone,, 
until  I could  tow  them  to  Eoanoke  Island. 

On  February  6,  at  4 p.  in.,  I dispatched  Lieut.  E.  A.  Wise  to  General 
Huger  with  my  letter  of  that  date,  of  which  the  following  is  a copy  : 

Headquarters  Fourth  Brigade,  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Camp  at  Nag’s  Head,  February  6,  1862. 

Major-General  Huger, 

Commanding  Department  of  Norfolk : 

Sir:  A messenger  from  Col.  H.  M.  Shaw,  commanding  at  Roanoke  Island,  has  just 
arrived  (10  p.  m.),  bearing  a dispatch,  of  which  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  you  a copy, 
by  order  of  General  Wise.  The  officer  who  brought  the  dispatch  reports  that  he  saw 
four  steamers,  about  9 am.  this  day,  which  had  passed  the  marshes,  going  up  Croatan 
Bound.  He  likewise  brings  information  that  Captain  Cook,  C.  S.  Navy,  reported 
jeven  steamers  in  sight  about  the  same  hour.  The  general  directs  me  to  request  that 
jteam-tugs,  with  lighters  suited  for  the  transportation  of  troops  between  the  island 
tnd  the  beach,  may  be  forwarded  as  early  as  practicable. 

General  Wise  has  been  very  sick  since  Friday  last,  from  a violent  attack  of  pneu- 
monia. He  is  better  to-day,  but  finable  to  leave  his  bed.  Ho  is,  however,  issuing 
orders,  and  will  do  everything  in  his  power,  with  the  means  at  his  command,  to  repel 
the  advance  of  the  enemy.  It  is  very  much  to  be  regretted  that  the  means  of  commu- 
nication between  the  island  and  beach  are  so  limited  and  insufficient  at  this  time. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  B.  DUFFIELD, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

On  February  6,  also,  I dictated  an  order  to  Colonel  Shaw,  of  which 
the  following  is  a copy : 

Headquarters  Fourth  Brigade,  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Camp  at  Nag’s  Head,  February  6,  1862. 

Col.  H.  M.  Shaw,  Commanding,  <fc.,  Roanoke  Island: 

Colonel:  Your  dispatch  dated  2.30  o’clock,  inclosing  report  of  Lieutenant  Loyall, 
has  been  delivered  by  Lieutenant  Simmons.  I am  directed  by  the  general  to  say  in  j 
reply  that  you  will  obtain  reports  from  the  pickets  at  Pugh’s  and  Ashby’s  Landings. 
You  will  move  all  your  field  pieces  to  the  points  commanding  these  two  landings  and 
divide  them  between  the  two  at  your  discretion.  The  general,  however,  recommends 
that  you  place  two  at  Ashby’s  and  the  like  number  at  Pugh’s.  You  will  move  the 
whole  of  your  infantry,  except  what  is  ample  for  the  batteries,  stationing  one-third 
at  Pogh’s,  one  third  at  Ashby’s,  and  the  remaining  third  at  the  breastworks  called 
Suple’s  Hill.  If  the  enemy  attempt  to  land  at  Pugh’s  the  force  at  Ashby’s  will  re-en- 
force that  at  Pugh’s,  and  light  every  inch  of  ground  at  the  water’s  edge  as  long  as 
prudence  will  permit.  Under  no  circumstances  fail  to  save  your  field  pieces,  retiring, 
them  first  always  and  covering  their  withdrawal  with  the  infantry. 


Chap.  XX. J 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


151 


You  will  fall  back  to  the  first  eligible  position  and  fight  again  as  long  as  prudence 
will  allow.  Then,  if  compelled  to,  retreat  to  the  breastworks,  and  there  make  a final 
stand.  If  the  enemy  do  not  laud  at  Pugh’s,  but  pass  the  marshes,  the  force  at  Pugh’s 
will  join  the  force  at  Ashby’s,  and  there  they  will,  if  possible,  prevent  the  landing  of 
the  enemy.  There  is  a point  just  in  the  rear  of  Ashby’s  house,  on  the  road,  where 
the  field  pieces  may  be  masked  and  the  enemy  may  be  ambuscaded.  If  driven  from 
that  point,  you  will  fall  back  to  the  breastworks  and  there  make  your  first  stand.  If 
the  enemy  pass  the  sound  without  attempting  to  land,  your  aim  then  will  be  to  with- 
draw the  forces  to  such  point  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  island  as  will  be  most  practi- 
cable for  ferrying  them  across  the  Roanoke  Sound  to  the  beach.  The  steamer  Curri- 
tuck is  hourly  expected;  but  if  she  fails  to  arrive,  all  the  means  at  our  command  will 
be  used  to  prevent  their  being  cut  off.  There  is  but  one  tug  now  here  to  do  the  entire 
service  for  the  army,  and  she  (the  Roanoke)  must  be  kept  for  the  purpose  of  towing 
the  barges  and  ferry-boats. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  B.  DUFFIELD, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

At  the  earliest  moment  on  February  7 I sent  to  the  island  ten  com- 
panies— two  of  the  First  and  eight  of  the  Second  Regiments — and 
additional  orders  to  Colonel  Shaw,  of  which  the  following  is  a copy: 

Headquarters  Fourth  Brigade,  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Camp  at  Nag’s  Head , N.  C.,  February  7,  1862. 
Col.  H.  M.  Shaw,  Commanding  Roanoke  Island: 

Colonel:  I send  you,  as  promptly  as  possible,  ten  small  but  efficient  companies, 
under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Anderson,  who  will  hand  you  this  and  show  to  you  his 
instructions,  which  you  will  consider,  as  far  as  they  are  pertinent,  additions  to  those 
sent  you  yesterday*  He  is  a brave  officer,  has  trained  and  seasoned  men,  and  you 
may  rely  on  him  implicitly.  While  you  will  send  a portion  of  your  most  efficient  men 
to  the  south  end,  who  may  be  relied  on  to  fall  back  with  order  and  precision,  you  will 
be  particular  in  reserving  an  equally  good  portion  of  your  best  men  to  maintain  the 
post  at  Suple’s  Hill.  They  must  be  such  picked  men  as  will  not  fire  on  our  own  forces 
when  retreating  to  that  post.  At  Suple’s  Hill  you  will  make  your  breastworks  for  the 
infantry  right  and  left  by  felling  trees  and  brush  and  covering  with  earth  as  sufficiently 
as  time  will  permit.  You  will  detail  a proper  reliable  officer  with  a small  detachment 
to  mark  the  best  and  most  solid  road  over  the  marsh  to  the  battery  on  Roanoke  Sound, 
and  he  will  there  mark  on  that  sound  the  narrowest  portion  of  it  convenient  to  the 
fort  at  the  Hommock  where  a ferry  of  lighters  may  be  placed  across  to  the  beach.  He 
will  on  the  island  side  place  a signal  of  the  narrowest  part  of  the  channel  where  the 
ferry  ought  to  terminate  on  that  side.  If  the  enemy’s  gunboats  pass  the  batteries  on 
the  Croatan  they  may  easily  prevent  our  steam-tugs  from  towing  off  our  troops  from 
Weir’s  Point  or  the  north  end  of  the  island.  Your  only  retreat  may  be  by  the  ferry 
of  lighters.  To  establish  that  ferry  you  will  collect  all  the  lighters  and  barges  you 
have  to  spare  at  Weir’s  Point  and  notify  me  when  to  send  for  them.  The  Currituck 
is  expected  to-day  with  a sufficiency,  but  may  not  arrive.  Report  to  me  all  you  know 
of  the  enemy  this  morning  and  everything  new  as  soon  as  it  occurs.  I dispatched  to 
Norfolk  yesterday  a messenger  announcing  the  approach  of  the  enemy.  The  road 
across  the  marshes  and  the  ferry  across  the  Roanoke  Sound  are  all  important.  Incul- 
cate upon  your  men  deliberate  coolness,  and  make  them  work  night  and  day,  to  hold  on 
until  we  can  re-enforce  them  or  withdraw  them  in  safety.  Furnish  Colonel  Anderson 
with  all  needed  requisitions.  I am  still  confined  to  my  bed. 

Verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  Gen  eral. 


On  the  same  day,  the  7 th ; I gave  the  following  instructions  to  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Anderson: 

i 

Headquarters  Fourth  Brigade,  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Camp  at  Nag’s  Head.  N.  C.,  February  7,  1862. 

Colonel  Anderson  : 

Sir:  On  yesterday  orders  were  sent  to  Colonel  Shaw,  commanding  at  Roanoke,  as 
to  the  disposition  of  his  forces  and  guns  to  repel  the  enemy,  who  are  now  in  sight  of 
the  island  in  strong  force,  to  which  you  will  refer  for  your  instructions.  Have  a small 
but  efficient  guard  at  Hommock  Landing,  at  the  extreme  south  end  of  the  island,  as 
the  enemy  can  approach  there  in  the  lightest-draught  gunboats.  The  guard  must  be 


152 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX.) 


directed  to  give  the  earliest  notice  of  the  approach  of  the  enemy  at  that  point  to  the 
force  at  Pugh’s  Landing.  If  no  enemy  is  approaching  Pugh’s  for  a landing  at  the! 
same  time,  the  force  at  Pugh’s  will  re-enforce  the  guard  at  the  Hommock.  If  not,  the 
guard  at  the  Hommock  will  act  as  vedettes  and  prevent  the  enemy  from  falling  in  the 
rear  of  Pugh’s. 

Of  the  artillery,  you  will  leave  the  heaviest  pieces  at  the  breastworks  and  at  Ashby’s, 
and  take  the  lighter  pieces  to  Pugh’s  and  the  Hommock,  as  you  wi»I  have  no  artillery) 
horses.  Under  every  emergency  save  your  field  pieces,  in  order  to  fall  back,  if  com  ) 
polled,  to  the  breastworks.  They  will  be  the  only  pieces  you  will  have  for  the  defense! 
at  Suple’s  Hill,  where  the  breastworks  are.  If  any  fights  at  the  landings,  let  them  be 
sharp,  close,  and  hot,  but  not  continued  too  long  against  great  odds.  Fall  back 
timely,  slowly,  and  continue  to  fight  and  fall  back  till  all  the  forces  at  the  landings 
are  concentrated  at  Suple’s  Hill.  There  will  be  in  all  about  1,350  effective  infantry 
to  repel  the  landing  of  the  enemy  and  to  maintain  the  post  at  Suple’s  Hill.  One-third 
of  that  force  will  be  posted  in  reserve  at  Suple’s  Hill.  That  force  will  at  once  be  em- 
• ployed  in  constructing  right  and  left  flank  breastworks  at  Suple’s  Hill  Battery.  Tc 
do  that  work,  take  with  you  all  the  available  spades,  shovels,  and  axes,  and  apply  to! 
Shaw  for  all  that  he  can  furnish.  You  will  let  the  senior  captain  of  the  Forty-sixth) 
Regiment  take  command  of  the  companies  from  that  regiment  as  a battalion,  subject,) 
however,  to  your  command.  You  will  ask  Colonel  Shaw  for  the  loan  of  all  the  spartj 
tents  and  cooking  and  other  utensils  of  which  you  have  not  sufficient.  You  will  make 
requisitions  upon  the  quartermaster  and  commissary  at  the  island  for  whatever  you 
may  need.  You  will  report  these  instructions  immediately  on  your  arrival  to  Colonel 
Shaw,  and  be  subject  to  his  orders  as  commandant. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 

On  February  7 1 also  sent  to  General  Huger  and  to  Colonel  Shaw  thei 
following  letters : 

Headquarters  Fourth  Brigade,  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Camp  at  Nag’s  Head , N.  C.,  February  7,  1862. 
Major-General  Huger,  Commanding,  $c. : 

Sir:  I send  you,  by  direction  of  General  Wise,  copies  of  the  dispatch  of  Lieutenant 
Loyall  to  Colonel  Shaw,  with  the  colonel’s  note  forwarding  the  same  to  these  head- 
quarters, and  of  the  dispatch  of  Colonel  Shaw,  received  about  daybreak  this  morning. 
The  officer  who  brought  the  dispatch  first-above  mentioned  reports  that  of  the  enemy’s 
fleet  twenty-eight  are  gunboats,  seven  are  towing  steamers,  and  the  rest  are  transports. 
A re-enforcement  of  ten  companies  was  sent  from  this  place  this  forenoon  to  Roanoke 
Island,  leaving  about  300  men  here  to  cover  the  retreat  of  our  forces  to  the  beach, 
should  they  be  compelled  to  withdraw  from  the  island.  Owing  to  continued  sickness 
the  general  was  unable  to  accompany  the  troops  sent  to  Roanoke.  He  is  very  much 
prostrated  from  the  illness  which  still  confines  him  to  his  bed,  and  which,  in  all  prob- 
ability, will  compel  him  to  keep  his  room  for  some  days  to  come.  At  10.20  a.  m.  a 
single  gun  was  heard,  which  the  general  supposed  to  be  the  signal-gun  of  Flag-Officer 
Lynch. 

At  ll.l&J-  a.  m.  of  this  day  firing  in  the  Croatan  Sound  commenced,  and  from  that 
time  till  the  period  of  closing  this  dispatch  from  two  hundred  and  fifty  to  three  hun- 
dred guns  have  been  heard,  showing  a furious  battle  to  be  raging  between  our  forces 
and  the  enemy.  It  is  now  12.25  p.  m.,  and  the  firing  is  very  rapid  and  heavy. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  B.  DUFFIELD, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 

P . S. — 1 p.  m.  The  firing  still  continues  most  furious.  A cannon  is  heard  every 
second. 

Headquarters  Fourth  Brigade,  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Camp  at  Nag’s  Head,  N.  C.,  February  7,  1862. 

Col.  H.  M.  Shaw,  Commanding,  fyc.  : 

Sir:  Your  brief  dispatch,  announcing  that  the  enemy  have  landed  on  the  island,  has 
been  delivered  by  Captain  Robinson.  I am  directed  by  the  general  to  say  that  he 
very  deeply  regrets  that  the  enemy  were  allowed  to  land  without  resistance.  The 
orders  heretofore  given  you  required  that  the  enemy  should  be  attacked  while  attempt- 
ing to  land  ; that  you  should  fight  every  inch  of  ground  at  the  water’s  edge  as  long 
as  prudence  would  permit,  and,  if  compelled  to  fall  back,  to  do  so  fighting,  and  make 
a final  stand  at  the  breastworks. 

Captain  Robinson  reports  that  you  expected  to  be  attacked  at  the  breastworks  in 


3HAP.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


153 


he  morning  The  general  directs  that  you  will  fight  until  retreat  becomes  a neces- 
sity that  cannot  be  resisted.  The  very  great  importance  of  preventing  the  enemy 
Prom  o-etting  possession  of  the  island  requires  that  the  most  desperate  and  determined 
resistance  be  made,  and  that  you  continue  to  fight  as  long  as  there  is  a possibility  of 
repelling  them.  If  you  are  compelled  to  retreat,  you  will  do  so  m .good  order,  goard- 
i Jr  your  rear  by  a sufficient  number  of  your  coolest  and  most  reliable  men,  detailed 
for  that  purpose.  You  will  also  feel  the  enemy  at  Ashby’s,  and  if  they  are  not  too 

strong  you  will  attack  them.  . . , , . , 

The  general  further  directs  that  you  will  have  provisions  conveyed  to  some  point 
near  the  breastworks  in  the  morning,  and  direct  that  they  be  cooked,  so  that  the  men 
mav  refresh  themselves  during  the  progress  of  the  anticipated  fight. 

Lighters  will  be  sent  to  the  battery  on  Roanoke  Sound  to  facilitate  the  withdrawal 
of  the  troops  from  the  island  should  the  necessity  therefor  arise.  . . 

A re-enforcement  of  four  companies  will  be  sent  you  in  the  morning.  Keep  a vigi- 
lant watch  on  your  flanks,  and  strengthen  the  breastworks  as  much  as  you  can. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ R DUFFIELD 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Headquarters 


Fourth  Brigade,  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Camp  at  Nag’s  Head,  N.  C.,  February  8,  1862. 


Major-General  Huger,  Commanding,  Sfc. : 

Sir:  The  dispatch  sent  you  yesterday  afternoon  announced  that  a fight  was  in 
progress  between  the  enemy’s  fleet  and  our  batteries  at  the  Croatan  Sound.  A brief 
pencil  note  from  Colonel  Shaw,  dated  7.15  p.  m.,  received  during  the  night,  states 
that  the  fight  commenced  at  Pork  Point  Battery,  no  other  batteries  being  engaged; 
that  at  no  time  could  more  than  four  guns  of  that  battery  be  brought  to  bear  upon 
the  enemy,  and  that  when  he  left,  at  4 p.  m.,  two  of  the  guns  there  had  been  disabled. 
The  firing  commenced,  as  announced  in  my  previous  dispatch,  at  11.16^  o clock,  and 
ceased  only  with  the  approach  of  night,  having  continued  six  hours  and  thirty-eight 
minutes,  rapidly  and  unremittingly,  from  guns  of  heavy  caliber.  It  is  estimated  that 
about  three  thousand  discharges  from  cannon  took  place  during  the  time  mentioned, 
yet  our  loss  at  the  batteries,  so  far  as  ascertained,  is  only  two  killed.  Nothing  is 
known  of  the  damage  sustained  by  the  enemy.  , , , 

Certain  information  has  been  received  at  these  headquarters  that  the  enemy  landed 
I on  Roanoke  Island  yesterday  afternoon.  Colonel  Shaw  reports  that  they  landed 
, above  Ashby’s,  up  a small  creek,  and  it  is  expected  that  they  will  get  their  field 
artillery  on  shore  during  the  night.  Orders  were  given  to  Colonel  Shaw  to  resist 
1 their  landing ; to  fight  at  the  water’s  edge  every  inch  of  ground  as  long  as  prudence 
would  permit,  and,  if  compelled,  to  fall  back  fighting  to  Suple’s  Hill,  and  there  make 
a stand  Why  the  enemy  were  allowed  to  land  without  resistance  has  not  been  satis- 
factorily explained  by  Colonel  Shaw.  Our  forces  are  now  posted  at  the  breastworks 
at  Suple’s  Hill  to  receive  the  attack  of  the  enemy,  and  orders  have  been  sent  to  Col- 
, onel  Shaw  to  make  a most  determined  and  desperate  resistance. 

, There  are  now  about  1,350  infantry  on  the  island  to  protect  the  batteries  and  meet 
■ the  enemy  at  the  breastworks,  who  will  in  all  probability  advance  with  from  3,000 
to  5 000  men  and  field  artillery  likewise.  This  number  of  infantry  is  so  entirely 
i insufficient  for  these  purposes  that  four  other  companies  have  been  sent  to  the  island, 

, leaving  only  three  small  companies  at  this  post,  comprising  in  all  about  130  men  to 
„ guard  the  commissary  stores  and  construct  a ferry  for  our  forces  on  which  to  retreat 
from  the  island  should  that  necessity  occur.  Lighters  have  been  collected  and  will 
be  sent  to  the  redoubt  on  Roanoke  Island  this  morning  to  transport  our  troops  across 
should  we  be  beaten  and  compelled  to  retreat.  Arrangements  have  been  made  to 
remove  to  some  place  of  security  as  much  of  the  stores  and  equipage  as  there  is  trans- 
portation for.  It  is  confidently  anticipated  our  men  will  fight  most  bravely ; yet  the 
P verv  great  disparity  of  numbers  renders  the  result  exceedingly  doubtful. 

The  loss  of  the  island,  or  the  passage  by  the  enemy  of  the  Croatan  Sound,  will 
enable  them  to  ravage  the  whole  of  the  Albemarle  country,  and  subject  the  people 

there  residing  to  the  most  terrible  of  disasters. 

' The  general  further  directs  me  to  say  that  a very  large  additional  force  is  necessary 
for  the  successful  defense  of  the  district  assigned  to  him.  Prostrated  by  disease,  and 
[.  issuing  orders  from  his  sick  bed,  he  is  striving  with  the  very  limited  means  at  his 
command  to  arrest  the  advance  of  the  enemy.  The  fleet  of  Flag-Officer  Lynch,  doing 
all  that  it  can,  can  be  of  no  use  to  us  in  the  expected  conflict.  Should  the  enemy, 
L landing  above  our  breastworks  at  Suple’s  Hill  take  our  batteries  m the  rear,  it  would 
prove  a most  lamentable  want  of  men  for  the  defense  of  the  island.  If  they  defeat  us 
in  the  anticipated  fight  at  Suple’s  Hill,  or  pass  the  island  unless  very  speedily  or 
strongly  re-enforced,  he  can  do  but  }ittle  toward  giving  protection  to  the  people  of  the 
. counties  on  the  Albemarle  Sound  and  its  tributaries. 


154 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  X! 


On  yesterday  our  men  fought  with  deliberate  coolness.  All  the  work  that  could  b 
has  been  performed  in  the  time  allowed  us.  The  commissary  reports  that  laro-e  sup 
plies  are  on  the  way.  The  only  want  to  enable  us  to  drive  back  the  enemy  and  hob 
the  island  is  that  of  more  men. 

Since  the  above  was  written  the  fighting  has  recommenced.  The  enemy’s  bombard 
me^nC??11^^nCfd  ^is  morninS  at  a47  o’clock  with  apparent  vigor  and  continue, 
until  9.15 . o clock.  Contemporaneously,  and  since  the  cessation  of  the  cannonading! 
volleys  of  musketry,  with  the  discharges  of  field  artillery,  have  been  distinctly  heari 
from  the  island.  The  smoke  and  firing  receding  toward  the  south  end  of  the  island 
accompanied  by  cheers,  supposed  to  be  from  our  men,  seem  to  indicate  that^he  enenr 
are  being  driven  back  in  that  direction. 

A steamer  is  reported  as  having  arrived  at  the  island  during  the  night  with  troops 
supposed  to  be  Colonel  Green’s  regiment ; if  so,  this  will  furnish,  in  addition  to  th< 
lour  companies  sent  from  this  post  this  day,  a re-enforcement  of  eleven  companie 
since  my  last  dispatch.  ^ 

The  generai  further  instructs  me  to  say  that  he  very  deeply  regrets  that  the  chang. 
made  by  you  of  the  orders  given  by  him  for  the  transportation  of  his  artillery  hai 
entirely  deprived  him  on  this  occasion  of  that  arm  of  service. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

* C.  B.  DUFFIELD, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

On  February  8 General  Huger  addressed  to  me  a letter  of  whicl 
the  following  is  a copy  : 

Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk , Va.,  February  8,  1862—11  a.  m. 
Brigadier-General  Wise,  or  Commanding  Officer: 

Lieutenant  Smith  has  just  arrived  with  your  dispatch  of  yesterday,  reporting  the 
attack  of  the  enemy.  He  reports  that  firing  continued  till  dark, 
k The  Arrow  is  just  going  oft,  and  I write  a line.  I have  no  time  to  send  anything  b^? 

As  the  firing  was  stopped  by  dark,  I count  the  enemy  did  no  damage  to  signify. 
Long  shot  will  not  destroy  batteries.  If  we  keep  cool  and  serve  the  guns  well,  light 
gunboats  will  get  hurt.  Stand  to  the  guns.  I may  communicate  later  by  land. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGER, 

Major-General. 

On  February  9 General  Huger  addressed  to  me  the  following : 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk,  Va.,  February  9,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Wise, 

Commanding  Fourth  Brigade : 

General  : I have  your  letter  of  the  8th.  I have  ordered  the  only  boat  left  here  to 
be  got  ready  at  once.  I will  have  ammunition  ready  to  go  on  board,  and  consult  Com- 
modore Forrest  as  to  what  he  can  send.  I hope  to  hear  soon  what  more  I can  do  I 
consider  every  hour  you  hold  out  as  most  favorable  to  us. 

I send  Lieutenant  Smith  back,  and  have  placed  a company  of  cavalry  along  the  route 
to  Powell’s  Point  to  carry  dispatches.  « 

You  are  in  error  when  you  say  ColoneiHenningsen  was  diverted  from  following  the 
route  you  ordered  him  to  take  by  me.  I gave  him  no  order,  but  not  to  send  one  com- 
pany by  the  beach,  as  you  ordered.  In  all  other  respects  he  was  to  obey  your  orders. 
Your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGER, 

Major-General. 


P.  S. — I much  regret  to  hear  of  your  sickness.  It  is  really  unfortunate. 

In  correcting  my  error  General  Huger  admits  that  he  did  change  nrs 
orders  to  Colonel  Henningsen,  and  that  change  did  divert  him  from  his 
true  course,  and  prevented  my  artillery  from  arriving  at  all  at  Eoanoke 
Island. 

On  the  9th  also  the  following  orders  were  addressed  to  me : 


!hap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C 


155 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

| Norfolk , Va.,  February  9,  1862. 

'o  the  Senior  Officer, 

Commanding  any  Troops  at  Currituck  Bridge  or  Neighborhood : 

Sir:  I will  dispatch  a regiment  to  Currituck  Bridge  and  the  mouth  of  the  canal  as 
oon  as  possible.  Obstruct  the  canal  by  any  means  in  your  power,  and  get  the  guns 
,t  the  battery  at  the  bridge  in  order.  Powder  will  be  sent  with  the  troops  for  these 
runs.  Order  out  the  militia,  and  order  all  the  citizens  to  protect  the  canal  with  shot- 
;uns  or  what  they  can  get. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGER, 


Major-General , Commanding* 


Send  back  the  steamer  Roanoke,  with  the  four  barges,  at  once. 

By  order  of  General  Huger : 

FRANK  HUGER, 
Captain,  Aide-de-Camp * 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk,  Va.,  February  9,  1862. 

To  the  Senior  Officer 

At  Currituck  Bridge  or  Neighborhood : 

Sir:  I am  directed  by  the  major-general  commanding  to  give  you  the  following  in- 
fractions : 

1.  He  will  dispatch  a regiment  to  Currituck  Bridge  and  the  mouth  of  the  canal  as 
ioon  as  possible. 

2.  Obstruct  the  canal  by  any  means  in  your  power.  Get  the  guns  at  the  battery 
tnd  at  the  bridge  in  order.  Powder  will  be  sent  with  the  troops  for  these  guns. 

3.  Order  out  the  militia,  and  get  all  the  citizens  to  protect  the  canal  with  shot-guns 
>r  what  they  can  get. 

4.  Send  back  the  steamer  Roanoke,  with  the  four  barges. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

S.  S.  ANDERSON, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

On  the  10th  I addressed  to  General  Huger  a report  in  full,  of  which 
:he  following  is  a copy : 


Poplar  Branch,  Currituck,  N.  C., 

February  10,  1862 — 9 a.  m. 


Vlaj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Commanding,  fyc. : 

Sir  : I was  delayed  in  Norfolk  for  want  of  transportation  until  Wednesday,  Jauuary 
19,  and  arrived  at  Nag’s  Head  on  the  night  of  Thursday  (30th).  My  two  legiments 
The  First  and  Second  of  the  Legion,  numbering  seventeen  companies  and  less  than 
300  men)  had  preceded  my  arrival,  and  for  want  of  quarters  on  Roanoke  Island  occu- 
pied Nag’s  Head.  It  was  absolutely  necessary  to  maintain  some  sufficient  force  there 
x>  make  and  protect  a ferry  across  the  Roanoke  Sound  to  the  island  to  secure  a com- 
paratively safe  depot  for  provisions,  stores,  &c.,  and  to  guard  the  beach  against  the 
anding  of  the  enemy  north  of  Oregon  Inlet.  We  commenced  immediately  to  procure 
lighters  for  the  ferry,  to  repair  the  bridge,  and  to  make  a magazine.  Early  on  Friday 
[ visited  Roanoke  Island,  meeting  Colonel  Shaw  at  Weir’s  Point.  I gave  him  the 
accessary  orders  to  forward  the  pile-driving,  to  construct  breastworks  at  Suple’s  Hill, 
ind  to  keep  strong  guards  at  Hommock,  Pugh’s,  and  Ashby’s  Landings,  on  the  south 
and  of  the  island.  I returned  then  to  Nag’s  Head  on  Friday,  and  ordered  every 
preparation  there.  At  neither  post  were  any  Tools  to  work  with.  No  axes,  shovels, 
spades,  nails,  &c.,  and  requisitions  had  been  made  in  vain  for  them  both  at  Rich- 
mond and  in  Norfolk.  Neither  place  had  any  teams,  except  two  pairs  of  broken-down 
mules  at  the  island  and  some  weak  and  insufficient  ox-carts.  The  consequence  was 
that  men  had  to  carry  everything  on  their  shoulders,  and  no  work  could  be  accom- 
plished, and  in  the  evening  of  Friday  a cold,  hard  rain  and  storm  set  in,  which  lasted 
until  the  evening  of  the  5th  instant. 

On  the  morning  of  Saturday,  the  1st  instant,  I was  seized  (while  attending  to  duty) 
with  a high  fever,  resulting  in  an  acute  attack  of  pleurisy,  threatening  pneumonia, 
from  which  I was  unable  to  rise  until  late  on  the  evening  of  the  8th  instant,  but  from 
bed  continued  to  issue  orders  and  to  dispatch  preparations  for  the  enemy,  and  on  the 
morning  of  the  6th  the  enemy  appeared  off  the  southern  end  of  the  island.  I imme- 
diately ordered  ten  companies  (eight  companies  of  the  Second  Regiment  and  two 


156 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX 


companies  of  the  First  Regiment),  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Anderson,  to  re-enforce 
Colonei  Shaw  s force.  We  had  hut  one  tug  and  two  barges  for  transports.  They  were 
landed  early  on  Friday  morning.  Colonel  Shaw  was  ordered  to  divide  his  forces  into 
three  divisions.  He  had  for  infantry  duty,  independent  of  the  detachments  for  the 

ten  companies  added  made  1,250  effective  infantry. 


xx  T * v r.L  . ’ Jr  „ , tei1  companies  aaaea  made  1,250  effective  infantry 

He  had  but  three  pieces  of  field  artillery— a 24-pounder,  an  18-pounder,  and  a small 
6 pounder  brass  howitzer— with  no  teams  for  the  guns,  and  with  12-pounder  ammuni 
tion  only  for  the  24  and  18-pounders.  I sent  Captain  Schermerhorn  and  Lieutenanl 
Kinney  to  assist  Lieutenant  Selden  in  commanding  these,  but  there  was  no  artillery 
company  to  work  them.  The  artillery  of  the  Legion,  under  Colonel  Henningsen,  had 
not  arrived.  Colonel  Shaw  was  ordered  to  leave  one-third  of  his  force  at  Suple’s  Hill 
»nd  to  post  one-third  at  Ashby’s  and  one-third  at  Pugh’s  Landing,  to  concentrate  his 
forces  wherever  the  enemvmip-ht,  ln.nH  n.nrl  fSo-Uf  tVinm  t _ 


- - — “““ — ““  ° v/uD-muu  a u^ii  a juauuiug,  to  concentrate  in 

forces  wherever  the  enemy  might  land,  and  to  fight  them  at  the  water’s  edge  as  long  ai 
all  means  to  save  his  field  pieces,  with  which  to  fall  back  upon  Sunle’l 


prudent,  and  by  all , 

Hill,  and  there  to  make  his  final  stand.  Colonel  Jordan  was  stationed  at  Ashby’s! 

On  the  morning  of  the  7th,  about  9 a.  m.,  the  signal  was  given  of  the  approach  o 
the  enemy,  and  exactly  at  11.16}  a.  m.  the  enemy  opened  upon  our  batteries.  Th< 
fire  at  first  was  slow,  but  rapidly  increased  to  a continued  roar  of  the  heaviest  artil 
lery,  which  continued  exactly  six  hours  and  thirty-eight  minutes  and  until  after  sun 
i little  damage  was  done  to  any  of  the  works  except  those  at  Pork  Poini 
(T  ort  Bartow).  Its  walls  were  dilapidated  much,  but  no  guns  disabled:  1 man  killec 
and  6 wounded.  It  was  repaired  by  the  next  morning.  About  3.30  p.  m.  of  the  7tl 
the  enemy  ran  up  to  Ashby’s  Landing  a three-masted  heavy  steamer,  and  covered  the 
landing  of  their  troops  with  mounted  artillery  from  a long  train  of  transports,  anc 

Colonei  Jordan  retired  before  them  without  a struggle  to  Suple’s  Hill. 

The  next  morning  I got  over  four  more  companies  of  the  First  Regiment,  aboul 
180  men,  under  Major  Fry,  and  the  battalion  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Green  arrived  bul 
neither  were  m the  action ; why,  is  not  explained.  But  the  enemy  early,  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  8th,  advanced  on  Suple’s  Hill,  and  were  met  by  about  1,250  men  only.  The’? 
brought  up  a 24-pounder  and  two  12-pounder  howitzers,  at  least,  well  mounted  and 
worked  The  fight  began  m earnest  between  7 and  8 a.m.,  and  continued  uninter, 
mittingly  until  about  1 p.  m.;  about  10,000  against  1,250.  Twice  the  enemy  were 
repelled  with  great  slaughter,  but  they  fell  back  and  took  to  the  marshes  and  swamps 
on  either  hand,  and  by  wading  through  mud  and  water  to  their  knees  outflanked  us. 
I he  fight  on  the  flanks  was  hot  and  close,  the  Richmond  Blues,  under  Captain  Wise 
leading  the  left  skirmishers,  and  Lieutenant  Haslett  leading  the  Ben.  McCulloch 
Rangers  on  the  right.  As  soon  as  the  flanks  were  thus  attacked  the  enemy  rallied  a 
third  time,  charged,  and  took  the  three  field  pieces.  Colonel  Shaw  then  ordered  a 
retreat,  and  the  Eighth  North  Carolina  Regiment  broke,  but  the  other  forces  fought 
on,  and  the  fighting  continued  irregularly  until  night.  5 

I ordered  Colonel  Richardson,  with  his  three  companies,  to  rally  and  rescue  those 
who  escaped.  The  enemy  had  cut  them  off  from  crossing  the  Roanoke,  and  advanced 
°?  tlie  redoub1t  at  Midgett’s  Hommock.  Its  commandant  spiked  its  guns,  and 
with  his  force  escaped  to  Nag’s  Beach ; a number  of  others  escaped  by  boats— m all, 
thus  far,  about  150.  With  these  we  came  to  Gallop’s  Ferry,  15  miles  above  Nag’s 
Head,  the  night  of  the  8th  having  sent  all  the  heavy  baggage,  stores.  &c.,  we  could 
by  the  tugs  Roanoke  and  White  m safety  (we  now  know)  to  the  canal  bridge  This 
morning  the  remnant  of  my  forces  will  reach  there,  where  I shall  await  your  orders. 

It  is  impossible  to  state  the  loss  of  killed  and  wounded  on  either  side,  but  the  num- 
J31er  But  few  of  the  casualties  are  yet  reported.  Sergeant  Metzler,  of 

the  McCulloch  Rangers,  escaped  about  5 p.  m.  on  the  8th,  and  has  just  reported  to  me  that 
the  swamp  to  our  right  at  Suple’s  Hill,  which  Colonel  Shaw  and  all  had  reported  to  be 
impassable  to  infantry,  was  easily  passed  by  the  en’emy  in  quick-time ; that  Lieutenant 
Selden,  m command  of  the  6-pounder  brass  howitzer,  behaved  with  exemplary  coolness 
and  courage,  and  three  times  mowed  a lane  through  the  ranks  of  the  enemy,  killing, 
he  thinks,  at  least  200  in  the  three  fires,  and  was  killed  himself  as  he  was  sighting  his 
last  charge;  that  CaptaiffWise,  on  the  night  of  the  7th,  was  in  command 

• i 4.°t  . Biues  and  10  of  the  Rangers  on  picket  duty;  that  upon  returning  from 

picket  he  joined  the  guard  to  the  company  of  Rangers  and  drove  in  the  enemy’s 
picKet.  Inis  was  the  commencement  of  the  action.  On  returning  from  this  duty  he 
was  ordered  m command  of  his  own  company  of  the  Blues  to  prevent  the  enemy  from 
turning  our  left  flank,  Colonel  Shaw  saying  that  if  the  left  could  be  guarded  the 
right  was  protected  by  the  swamp.  Early  in  the  action  he  was  wounded  severely,  and 
while  wrapped  in  his  blanket,  being  taken  off  the  field,  was  struck  twice  again ; was 
carried  to  the  hospital,  and  is  there  reported  to  have  died;  that  Captain  Coles,  of  the 
Albemarle  Rangers,  was  killed  fighting  firmly  and  bravely;  that  all  the  men  of  the 
"V  ?i°n’AT  * i50’  1in  the  action  were  cool  and  firm  and  fought  to  the  last ; that  most 
ot  the  North  Carolina  regiments  were  kept  in  reserve,  and  finally  fell  back  under 
orders  of  Colonel  Jordan ; that  the  artillery  exhausted  its  ammunition  before  it  was 
taken,  and  the  24-pounder  and  18-pounder  were  not  so  efficient  as  the  6-pounder, 


3 HAP.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


157 


>wing  to  having  ammunition  for  12-pounders  only.  The  Pork  Point  Battery  is  said  to 
lave  discharged  every  round  of  ammunition  but  one.  Twenty  of  the  enemy’s  steamers 
ire  said  to  have  passed  up  the  sound  yesterday  evening,  and  this  morning  we  hear 
leavy  firing  toward  Elizabeth  City,  where  it  is  feared  Captain  Lynch’s  fleet  retired. 

I regret  to  say  that  the  vessels,  with  our  provisions  on  hoard  for  thirty  days,  which 
scaped  in  safety  from  Roanoke  Island,  went  to  Elizabeth  City,  and  will  there,  I 
ear,  be  taken,  unless  they  can  escape  by  the  Dismal  Swamp  Canal.  I am  now  here 
vith  three  companies  of  my  First  Regiment  and  about  150  men  who  escaped  and 
ibout  200  militia  without  arms  or  ammunition.  I have  called  in  all  their  spades, 
ihovels,  and  tools  of  all  sorts  for  obstructing  the  canal.  My  ordnance  officer,  Lieu- 
enant  Pearce,  passed  on  to  Norfolk  with  many  of  my  ordnance  stores,  which  I hop© 
rou  will  have  returned  to  me  and  order  him  to  return  with  them.  I await  anxiously 
ill  the  re-enforcements  you  can  send  me,  and  beg  you  will  furnish  provisions  for,  say, 
100  men. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-General. 

On  February  11  General  Huger  addressed  to  me  the  following : 

« 

Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk , Fa.,  February  11,  1862. 

General  Henry  A.  Wise,  Currituck  Bridge: 

General  : I received  this  morning  your  letter  from  Poplar  Springs  yesterday.  I 
lope  you  met  Colonel  Corprew,  with  the  Sixth  Regiment  Virginia  Volunteers,  at 
Currituck  Bridge.  I regret  you  had  suffered  from  so  severe  an  attack  of  illness. 
vould  recommend  you  as  soon  as  you  have  organized  your  forces  to  place  them  under 
sommand  of  Colonel  Corprew,  and  return  home  and  get  your  health  re-established. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGER, 

Major-General. 


February  11,  1862 — 11  a.  m. 

No  further  news  from  Elizabeth  City  or  South  Mills.  I have  sent  a battery  of  artil- 
ery  and  re-enforcements  down  there. 


B.  H. 


On  the  same  day  I replied  as  follows  : 

Canal  Bridge,  N.  C.,  February  11,  1862. 

ffaj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Commanding,  <fc. : 

Sir  : I wrote  my  report  under  such  inconvenient  circumstances  that  I omitted  to  add 
;hat,  on  the  second  day  of  the  bombardment,  the  enemy,  on  the  8th  instant,  opened 
. ibout  9 a.  m. ; fired  irregularly  for  an  hour  and  ceased.  They  opened  again  about  12 
2i.,  and  fired  for  about  half  an  hour  and  ceased. 

The  fight  with  small-arms  was  continued  by  the  men  of  my  Legion  all  the  day  of  the 
Ifch,  and  they  renewed  the  fight  again  on  the  9th.  I am  now  convinced  that  the  de- 
fense would  have  been  made  better  if  the  troops  which  had  been  posted  there  had 
leen  removed  out  of  the  way  entirely.  Colonel  Shaw  ordered  retreat  before  he  was 
ustified  in  doing  so,  and  Colonel  Jordan’s  Thirty-first  Regiment  was  hardly  in  the 
ight  at  all,  and  he  demoralized  them  by  ordering  them  to  take  care  of  themselves 
vhile  they  were  in  reserve,  and  they  were  never  led  into  the  action  at  all.  He  is  said 
:o  have  escaped,  to  be  in  Norfolk  or  Portsmouth,  and,  if  so,  I ask  for  his  arrest.  Col- 
mel  Shaw  is  a prisoner.  Colonel  Corprew  arrived  this  evening  between  3 and  4 o’clock 
' vith  five  companies. 

I have  obstructed  the  canal  by  sinking  one  old  barge  across  the  North  River  end  of 
t,  and  will  add  more  obstructions,  as  the  enemy  now  have  the  dredging-machine  which 
vas  taken  to  Roanoke  Island,  and  may  remove  easily  any  ordinary  obstructions.  I 
(hall  try  to  obstruct  the  channels  at  the  Narrows  of  the  Currituck  Sound,  also  at  Pop- 
ar  Spring.  The  militia  have  been  called  out,  but  they  have  but  few  indifferent  arms 
rad  no  ammunition.  I will  feed  those  who  will  work  efficiently,  and  send  the  rest 
lome.  They  are,  in  fact,  in  the  way. 

Yesterday  I sent  my  official  aide,  Captain  Bacon,  and  a volunteer,  Captain  Doland, 
io  Elizabeth  City.  They  were  there  last  night  and  have  just  returned,  reporting  that 
i ibout  two-thirds  of  the  town  is  burned,  and  fourteen  heavy  war  steamers  are  lying  off 
Dobb’s  Point.  The  inhabitants  have  all  left  and  burned  the  town  themselves.  Several 
schooners,  with  the  provisions  sent  to  Roanoke  Island,  a large  supply,  are  lying  up 
Sawyer’s  Creek,  about  8 miles  above  the  floating  bridge.  Captain  Bacon  stationed  a 


158 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


picket  at  the  latter,  and  ordered  that,  upon  the  appearance  of  the  enemy,  the  bridge 
ehould  be  let  down,  and  a schooner  all  ready  to  be  sunk,  so  as  to  obstruct  the  creek 
upward. 

To-morrow  morning  I will  dispatch  him  with  a detachment  of  cavalry  to  procure 
teams,  and  have  our  stores  hauled  to  a place  of  safety.  If  the  enemy  approach  to 
seize  them,  orders  were  given  to  destroy  them.  This  morning,  upon  her  arrival  from 
below,  I dispatched  the  tug  Currituck  with  a flag  of  truce,  in  charge  of  Major  Duffield 
and  Captain  Robinson,  to  Roanoke  Island,  to  inquire  for  killed  and’ wounded ; to  take 
olothing  and  other  comforts  to  the  latter,  and,  if  possible,  to  obtain  the  bodies  of 
Captains  Wise  and  Coles  and  Lieutenant  Selden,  and  get  all  the  information  they 
could.  I expect  the  tug  back  to-morrow  evening. 

It  is  reported  that  Colonel  Henningsen,  with  my  artillery,  has  moved  toward  Eden 
ton.  I shall  order  him  back.  He  is  needed  both  at  South  Mills  and  here.  I beg  you 
to  order  him  to  join  me  at  Currituck  Court-House  or  Indiantown.  I trust  also  that 
you  will  urge  the  forwarding  of  my  cavalry — they  are  very  much  needed  to  head  these 
streams — with  dispatch,  and  there  is  a vast  amount  of  forage  to  supply  them  which 
oannot  be  got  to  market  and  is  in  danger  of  being  taken  by  the  enemy.  My  artillery 
and  cavalry  are  needed  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  landing  and  from  reaching  Cur- 
rituck Court-House  from  Elizabeth  City  or  South  Mills  and  from  cutting  us  off.  In- 
deed, the  cavalry  is  indispensable  on  these  peninsulas* 

I thank  you,  sir,  gratefully  for  the  leave,  after  organizing  my  forces,  to  return  home 
for  the  sake  of  my  health.  Providence  sharply  prohibited  me  from  sharing  the  fate 
of  my  brave,  devoted  troops,  but  I can  sit  in  iuv  saddle  now.  I am  happier  at  the 
post  of  duty  than  I could  be  at  a home  now  wailing  for  its  best  scion,  cut  down  in  its 
. full  vigor ; and,  God  willing,  I never  mean  to  leave  the  remnant  of  my  men  again 
#mtil  I see  them  recruited  again  and  proudly  reanimated.  I humbly  think  that  now 
I may  ask  your  co-operation  in  building  up  a corps  which  more  than  attempted  to 
obey  your  orders  to  be  cool,  to  work,  and  to  fight  hard.  They  have  done  so  nobly  and 
devotedly  up  to  the  muzzle,  to  wounds,  captivity,  and  death,  against  such  odds  only 
as  were  irresistible  by  their  numbers. 

With  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier- General . 


On  February  11 1 detailed  William  G.  Wilson,  esq.,  of  Indian  Ridge, 
Currituck,  with  a sufficient  force  of  laborers  to  cut  trees  across  the  In- 
diantown Creek  and  otherwise  obstruct  it  by  all  the  means  in  his  power 
4 miles  below  the  creek  bridge.  On  the  11th  also  I sent  a flag  of  truce 
to  the  enemy,  to  obtain  the  bodies  of  officers  killed  in  action  and  tc 
ascertain  the  number  of  killed  and  wounded  and  to  take  comforts  tc 
the  latter.  Our  killed  and  wounded  were  10  of  the  former  and  30  oJ 
the  latter ; the  enemy’s  loss  was  from  300  to  500  killed  and  wounded : 
the  former  number  they  admitted. 

On  the  12th  I received  orders  from  the  War  Department  showing 
that  my  cavalry  was  sent  to  Garysburg.  Not  a company  of  mine  has 
joined  my  command  in  this  district. 

February  13  General  Huger  addressed  to  me  the  following : 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

February  11,  1862. 

Brigadier- General  Wise: 

I have  received  your  letter  of  the  11th.  I am  glad  to  hear  you  are  recovering.  1] 
will  inform  you  further  what  I can  do  on  the  several  subjects  you  mention  when  I get 
a little  more  certain  information.  Captain  Tabb  reported  to  me  a few  days  ago,  anc 
not  being  able  at  this  time  to  forward  him  to^  you,  I ordered  him  to  collect  all  th( 
stragglers  of  your  Legion,  officers  and  men,  and  require  transportation  and  forwarc 
them  to  you.  Every  one  who  can  is  escaping  to  this  town,  and  I desire  to  get  then 
back  to  their  duty  as  soon  as  possible.  Shall  I continue  Captain  Tabb  on  this  service 1 
At  this  time  I have  no  report  from  any  company  of  cavalry  of  your  command,  and  I d< 
not  know  exactly  where  Colonel  Henningsen  is.  I hear  he  is  moving  toward  Soutl 
Mills.  This  separation  of  your  troops  was  one  reason  why  I thought  you  might  assisi 
in  collecting  and  reorganizing  them,  and  I leave  it  to  your  judgment  at  what  poini 
you  can  be  most  usefully  employed.  Provisions  for  ten  days  for  300  men  have  beer 
sent  to-day. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  H. 


Dhat.  XX.l 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


159 


, ' Currituck  Bridge,  N.  C., 

February  13,  1862 — 12  noon. 

I have  received  a message  from  Edenton  by  a Mr.  Haughton,  who  left  there  yester- 
lay.  He  states  that  the  enemy  landed  at  Edenton  yesterday  morning,  estimated 
3,000.  I have  many  stragglers  of  your  Legion  here.  All  effective  men  should  move 
toward  Suffolk,  and  non-effective  west  of  Suffolk,  to  come  back  when  ready.  By  this 
novement  up  the  river  they  are  passing  around  your  position.  The  report  of  the 
anding  at  Edenton  is  fully  confirmed.  I send  this  by  my  messenger  in  haste. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGER, 

Major-General. 

P*  S. — I hope  to  hear  from  your  flag  of  truce  this  evening  or  to-morrow. 

This  gave  me  full  discretion  to  select  whatever  position  I could 
iccupy  most  usefully,  and  intimated  that  there  was  apprehension  the 
memy  would,  by  moving  up  the  river,  pass  around  my  position.  I 
mmediately  replied  as  follows : 

Currituck  Court-House,  N.  C., 

L . _ _ TT  February  13,  1862. 

vlaj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Commanding , fyc. : 

Sir:  Seeing  the  position  at  the  Canal  Bridge  utterly  indefensible  by  my  force  with- 
>ut  field  artillery,  and  that  the  men  had  no  quarters  and  the  heavy  artillery  exposed 
i*>  capture,  I this  morning  shipped  them  in  a schooner,  and  have  ordered  them  to  the 
Great  Bridge,  on  the  Virginia  section  of  this  canal,  with  all  my  extra  ordnance  and 
commissary  stores.  I have  ordered  the  unarmed  escaped  men  of  the  North  Carolina 
•egiments  to  Norfolk.  They  are  unfit  for  service.  Just  as  we  were  moving  from  the 
-anal  bridge  three  of  the  enemy’s  steamers  appeared  at  the  North  River  end  of  the 
■anal  and  opened  with  a few  round  shot  and  shell,  which  all  fell  short.  We  moved 
•lowly  away  while  they  were  landing  at  the  mouth  of  the  canal.  We  by  land  and 
he  transports  by  water  have  all  arrived  here  safely.  Colonel  Henningsen  is  reported 
is  not  far  off — some  5 miles — with  his  artillery.  This  will  give  me  eleven  companies 
>f  infantry  and  artillery  and  one  of  cavalry.  I have  ordered  vedettes  down  to  the 
)ridge  and  westward  near  to  Sawyer’s  Creek.  I shall  be  governed  by  the  movements 
i»f  the  enemy.  I sank  a barge  at  the  mouth  of  the  canal  and  a steam  dredging- 
nachine  higher  up,  so  as  effectually  to  delay  for  a day  or  two,  if  not  to  effectually 
,.«rest,  the  entrance  or  passage  of  the  canal.  I beg  that  Captain  Tabb  may  detail 
mother  officer  to  collect  and  send  to  me  the  stragglers  of  the  Legiou.  I do  not  want 
my  of  the  Eighth  and  Thirty-first  Regiments  of  North  Carolina.  Captain  Tabb’s 
• ervices  as  my  assistant  adjutant-general  are  needed  very  much.  Please  send  the 
( jegion  men  to  me,  not  to  Suffolk.  The  enemy  cannot  get  around  my  position  by 
tassmg  up  the  sound  and  rivers.  I fear  they  mean  to  move  on  the  Great  Bridge, 
laptain  Robinson  has  taken  full  report  of  the  flag  of  truce. 

Very  respectfully, 

( HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier- General. 

On  the  same  day  I also  addressed  to  him  the  following : 

Canal  Bridge,  Currituck  County,  N.  C., 

r - n i TT  ^ „ February  13,  1862. 

lajor-General  Huger,  Commanding , $c. : 

, Sir  : The  Currituck,  with  flag  of  truce,  has  just  returned.  She  brings  the  bodies  of 
,aptams  Wise  and  Coles  and  of  Lieutenant  Selden,  and  a copy  of  Major  Duffield’s 
eport  is  herein  inclosed.  Captain  Robinson  bears  to  you  the  letter  of  General  Burn- 
ide.  I send  also  the  copy  of  his  to  me.  I beg  most  earnestly  that  his  proposition  be 
t once  accepted  and  my  men  released*on  parole.  The  messenger  must  return  imme- 
lately  to  Elizabeth  City.  Send  Captain  Robinson,  if  you  please,  back  with  a favor- 
ble  answer.  The  enemy  have  about  15,000  men;  they  landed  about  10,000;  had 
,000  m the  action  ; 5,000  in  reserve.  We  had  not  over  500  in  action.  Our  killed 
bout  15 ; the  enemy’s,  about  400.  ’ 

Edenton  has  fallen.  This  place  is  wholly  indefensible  by  the  force  under  my  com- 
[ 1 have  determined  to  move  the  guns  to  Currituck  Court-House,  and, 

tter  getting  quarters  there,  to  advance  toward  Elizabeth  City  and  join  my  forces  on 
between  Edenton  and  Currituck.  We  are  to-day  throwing  more  obstructions 
Qto  the  canal  and  will  block  it  effectually. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


160 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


On  February  15  I addressed  to  General  Huger  the  following : 


Near  Northwest  Bridge,  Ya., 

February  15,  1862; 

Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Commanding,  fyc.: 

Sir:  I have  forwarded  all  extra  baggage  and  stores  (saving  just  what  is  necessary 
of  commissary  stores)  to  the  Great  Bridge.  Had  determined  to  take  post  a while  at 
the  Northwest  River,  but  finding  no  quarters,  and  the  weather  being  very  bad  in 
which  to  expose  my  men,  I concluded  it  best  to  fall  back  to  Great  Bridge,  there  to 
erect  quarters,  intrench  myself,  and  thence  move  upon  the  enemy  in  case  he  attempts 
to  penetrate  the  country  and  seize  on  the  little  canal  leading  from  Northwest  Rivei 
to  the  Dismal  Swamp  Canal.  I shall  try  to  obstruct  Northwest  River  and  Tull  Creek, 
and  will  fight  the  enemy  at  both  points.  If  he  passes  or  crosses  south  of  me  before  1 
can  obstruct  him,  I will  block  the  streams  and  canals  behind  him  and  harass  his  rear. 

I beg  you  to  order  Col.  J.  Lucius  Davis,  at  Garysburg,  to  send  three,  if  he  can  (two 
at  all  events'),  of  his  companies  of  cavalry,  by  the  shortest  route,  via  South  Mills  oi 
Sawyer’s  Creek,  to  me  at  North  West  River  Bridge.  With  his  remaining  companies 
(six,  if  he  has  them,  or  as  many  as  he  has)  he  will  take  the  most  eligible  position 
northeast  of  Edenton,  as  near  that  place  as  prudent,  so  as  to  communicate  both  witb 
South  Mills  or  Colonel  Wright’s  command  and  mine. 

Captain  Belsches’ company  is  overtaxed  in  vedette  service  from  Currituck  Court 
House  to  Norfolk  and  to  Elizabeth  City  and  South  Mills.  I ask  that  you  will  ordei 
Colonel  Davis  to  scout  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  said  to  be  150,  landed  at  Edenton,  to  theii 
saddle-girths.  He  must  not  let  them  penetrate  the  country  beyond  cannon  range. 

The  enemy  has  left  the  Currituck  Canal  Bridge  and  Elizabeth  City.  No  report  o 
them  to-day.  They  said  at  the  bridge  their  purpose  was  to  attack  the  rear  of  Norfolk 
from  several  points  simultaneously. 

I will  arrange  the  defenses  of  Great  Bridge.  Send  Colonel  Henningsen  on  there  to 
day.  He  joined  me  yesterday.  I follow  with  a rear  guard  of  infantry,  in  charge  o 
baggage  and  stores,  to-morrow  morning. 

My  march  is  necessarily  scattered  to  get  quarters.  As  soon  as  I make  matters  safe 
and  systematic  at  Great  Bridge  I will  return  and  establish  a post  at  Northwest  ant 
Falls  Bridges,  obstruct  wiese  streams,  and  endeavor  to  join  Colonel  Davis.  Cavalry  i 
our  only  means  of  communication  now. 

I inclose  orders  to  Colonel  Davis,  which  I hope  you  will  approve. 

I received  your  acceptance  of  General  Burnside’s  proposition,  and  forwarded  it  tc 
Elizabeth  City  immediately,  in  charge  of  Captain  Belsches,  having  no  steam-tugs  tc 
convey  it  to  the  island. 

With  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier- General 


P.  S. — From  personal  inspection  and  all  reliable  information  it  is  certain  there  i: 
an  abundance  of  forage  and  provisions  in  the  country  between  this  and  Edenton. 

Meeting  General  Huger  here  at  the  Great  Bridge  on  the  19th,  he 
expressed  his  surprise  that  I should  have  fallen  back  to  this  point,  aftei 
having  left  me  full  discretion  to  select  whatever  position  I could  occupy 
most  usefully ; after  warning  me  that  the  enemy  might  pass  arounc 
my  position  at  Currituck  Canal  Bridge  5 after  being  regularly  informec 
of  my  intention  to  fall  back,  and  after  knowing  that  the  enemy  hac 
already  appeared  at  the  North  Biver  end  of  the  Currituck  section  0: 
the  canal,  might  remove  the  obstructions  there,  and  by  passing  up  Cur 
rituck  Sound  cut  me  off  sure  enough,  or  might  attack  the  North 
west  or  Little  Canal  and  gain  the  Dismal  Swamp  Canal,  or  land  ai 
North  Landing  and  seize  this  section  of  the  Albemarle  and  Chesapeake 
Canal  and  seriously  threaten  the  rear  of  Norfolk,  and  after  beim 
informed  that  there  were  no  quarters  for  my  men  at  a very  bad  season 
and  no  defensible  position  by  a small  force  between  this  and  Currituck 
Canal  Bridge! 

The  same  day  (19th)  I received  an  order  from  the  War  Department 
to  which  I replied  as  follows : 


'I 

}hap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


161 


Great  Bridge,  Norfolk  County,  Va., 

, . _ TT  February  19,  1862—5  p.  m. 

daj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Commanding,  $c.: 

Sir:  I was  within  the  current  hour  surprised  by  the  following  order : 


( Special  Orders, 
“No.  40. 

* * 


“Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

il  Richmond,  Va.,  February  18,  1862. 

* * * * * 


XVIII.  Brigadier-General  Wise,  with  the  Legion  under  his  present  command,  ex- 
lusive  of  the  eight  battery  companies,  will  proceed,  with  the  least  practicable  delay, 
o Manassas,  and  report  to  General  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  commanding  the  Department 
f Northern  Virginia. 

******* 

“By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

“ JNO.  WITHERS, 

“ Assistant  Adjutant- General .” 

It  is  not  for  me  to  murmur  at  any  military  order  commanding  my  prompt  obedience, 
am  bound  to  regard  it  as  not  meant  to  do  me  any  injustice  and  to  obey  it  implicitly* 
ut  I trust  that  under  the  circumstances  of  my  case  and  my  command  I may  be 
llowed  a little  reasonable  time  to  make  arrangements  and  inquiries  necessary  to  be 
lade  under  so  sudden  and  unexpected  an  order. 

1st.  My  men  cannot  properly  be  moved  to  Manassas  until  they  are  provided  with 
iothes,  blankets,  and  outfits  generally,  of  which  many  were  wholly  deprived  by  the 
ite  disaster  at  Roanoke  Island.  J 

2d.  I require  some  short  time  to  prepare  a full  report  of  my  command  in  the  district 
ssigned  to  me  in  North  Carolina  attached  to  your  department. 

3d.  I desire  a few  days  of  time  to  attend  to  my  private  family  affairs. 

4th.  I beg  time  to  inquire  of  the  War  Department  its  purpose  in  respect  to  my 
legion,  and  respectfully  to  protest  against  detaching  the  companies  of  the  light  bat- 
3ri.es-  . e remnant  of  the  Legion,  without  these  companies,  is  so  small,  that  it  will 
: 6 inefficient  as  a distinct  force.  I wish  also  to  inquire  whether  by  present  command 
le  Department  means  to  include  the  men  only  whom  I have  with  me  here  at  the 
reat  Bridge,  excluding  my  men  to  be  exchanged  as  prisoners  and  my  cavalry. 

5th.  I wish  respectfully  to  inquire  whether  this  order,  weakening  your  defenses  in 
le  rear  of  Norfolk,  meets  with  your  approbation,  or  has  been  issued  at  your  instance 
r with  your  cognizance,  and  to  inquire  of  the  Department  whether  any  censure  upon 
ly  command  here  is  intended  by  this  order. 

With  great  labor  and  sacrifice  I raised  the  Legion  to  2,850  men,  and  left  2,400  effi- 
ent  men  at  Camp  Defiance  when  my  command  in  the  West  was  transferred  to  Gen- 
•al  I loyd.  I had  the  repeated  promises  of  the  President  and  of  the  Secretary  of  War 
» have  my  Legion  restored  to  me,  all  except  the  companies  raised  in  Western  Vir- 
ima,  whmh  were  desirous  of  remaining  to  defend  their  homes ; but  four  companies 
ected  to  remain  in  the  West.  Six  were  ordered  to  be  left  there  and  ten  were  taken 
om  both  the  Leg-ion  and  from  the  West,  where  they  were  wanting,  and  sent  to  South 
arolma.  Less  than  900  men,  750  infantry  and  100  artillery,  have  been  forwarded  to 
e.  My  cavaBy  has  been  sent  to  Garysburg,  N.  C.,  and  has  just  been  ordered  by  me 
> this  district.  Several  of  my  companies  have  been  left  in  the  West  and  not  fur- 
ished  with  transportation,  and  nineteen  of  my  companies  have  been  captured  and 
■e  now  prisoners  of  war.  I left  nine  pieces  of  light  artillery  in  the  West.  Four  were 
jken  irom  me,  with  the  express  promise  of  General  Lee  and  the  Department  that 
'ey  or  their  equivalent  should  be  restored  to  me  in  the  East,  and  now,  if  it  be  the 
ssign  ot  this  order  to  take  from  me  all  my  companies  and  pieces  of  artillery,  I desire 
» be  so  informed  distinctly,  in  order  that  I may  understandingly  determine  upon  the 

>urse  which  self-respect  demands  of  me  to  pursue. 

With  the  request  that  you  will  forward  this  communication  to  the  War  Department, 
am,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  f 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-General. 

Great  Bridge,  Norfolk  County,  Va., 

. February  19,  1862. 

is  Excellency  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

[i  Secretary  of  War: 

]®^er,  addressed  to  General  Huger,  touching  your  Special  Or- 
tLNw40nExtrict  XVIII,18th  instant,  I have,  as  you  see,  requested  time  to  forward 
ar  Department  for  information  upon  certain  points  and  for  answers  to  certain 

Hr  r — vol  ix 


162 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX 


inquiries  which  concern  my  personal  rights  and  self-respect.  I protest  that  my  mo- 
tives are  founded  upon  the  most  anxious  desire  to  serve  my  country  ou  terms  con- 
sistent with  a sense  of  honor  and  of  justice  to  myself  and  to  the  brave  and  faithful 
officers  and  men  who  have  joined  my  command.  They  have  served  arduously  and  : 
faithfully  from  one  extremity  of  the  State  to  another,  and  at  last  have  been  compelled  i 
to  fight  against  all  odds  without  support  of  re-enforcements  and  without  adequate  ; 
means  of  defense,  and  have  fought  well,  firmly,  and  nobly.  They  have  never  yet  been  j 
provided  with  winter  quarters;  were  removed  from  the  western  part  of  Virginia, 
where  their  services  were  urgently  required,  at  a very  inclement  season,  without  a 
proper  allowance  of  transportation,  and  now  ordered  in  the  depth  of  winter  again  to 
change  quarters  to  Northern  Virginia,  while  their  services  are  again  urgently  required 
here. 


Very  respectfully, 


HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


To  these  I have  as  yet  received  no  reply  from  either  General  Huger  j 
or  the  Secretary  of  War.  But  yesterday,  the  21st,  I received  the  fol-  j 
lowing  papers,  one  of  which  is  not  signed : 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk , Fa.,  February  21,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise, 

Provisional  Army  Confederate  States: 

General  : Major-General  Huger  directs  me  to  say  to  $ou  that  Extract  XVIII  of 
Special  Orders,  No.  40,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General's  Office,  Richmond,  February 
18,  1862,  renders  it  necessary  that  he  should  make  a different  arrangement  of  the 
brigade  in  this  department.  I therefore,  by  his  directions,  inclose  you  an  extract  of  | 
General  Orders,  No.  14,  from  these  headquarters,  for  your  information  and  guidance.  ! 
I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

■ ) 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Inclosure.  J 

“General  Orders,  ? “Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

“No.  14.  £ “ Norfolk , Fa.,  February  20,  1862. 

“Until  further  orders  the  following  will  be  the  arrangement  and  designation  of  the 
brigades  in  this  department : 

#*##*** 

“II.  The  Second  Brigade,  the  country  east  of  the  Elizabeth  River  (South  Branch), 
and  extending  southeast  of  the  Dismal  Swamp,  in  Virginia  and  North  Carolina ; head- 
quarters Norfolk,  Brig.  Gen.  William  Mahone  commanding. 

“By  command  of  Brigadier-General  Huger: 

* . “S.  S.  ANDERSON, 

(<Assistan  t Adjutant-  General 


To  these  I have  to-day  (the  22d)  replied  as  follows  : 

Great  Bridge,  Norfolk  County,  Va., 

February  22,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Commanding,  $c. : 

Sir  : Yesterday  evening  late  I received  the  inclosed  papers,  purporting  to  come  from 
the  headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk.  As  the  letter  professing  to  communicate 
General  Orders,  No.  14,  is  not  signed,  non  constat  that  the  order  was  intended  to  be 
issued.  But,  if  it  was  so  intended,  I respectfully  submit  that  this  has  been  ordered  to 
be  issued  before  you  have  replied  to  mine  of  February  19,  and  before  a reasonable  time 
has  been  allowed  to  receive  an  answer  from  the  War  Department  to  the  same. 

I respectfully  ask  whether  I may  expect  an  answer  from  you  to  the  inquiries  of  that 
letter?  If  not,  I will  immediately  demand  a court  of  inquiry  upon  my  defense  of 
Roanoke  Island  and  upon  the  previous  preparation  for  its  defense.  At  our  last  per- 
sonal interview  at  this  place  you  said  verbally  that  you  would  order  a survey  of  the 
sea-beach  on  the  coast  of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina,  to  ascertain  whether  horses 
moving  from  Norfolk  could  be  led  down  that  beach  to  Nag’s  Head.  In  case  of  such  a 
survey  I beg  to  have  notice;  and  in  case  of  a court  of  inquiry  I claim  the  justice  of 
not  being  separated  from  my  artillery  corps. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

* P HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-Genial. 


!hap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


163 


I am  thus  (after  obeying  all  orders  to  the  letter  and,  without  men  or 
aeans  being  furnished  at  all  adequate  to  meet  an  ordinary  superior 
brce,  fighting  for  two  days  one  of  the  most  formidable  expeditions 
wer  fitted  out  on  this  continent,  and  giving  my  men,  and  more  than 
ny  men,  as  martyrs  to  military  law  and  obedience,  and  suffering,  by 
ickness,  care,  and  grief  more  pangs  than  bullets  could  inflict)  left  in 
n anomalous  state  of  doubt  whether  I am  censured  or  superseded  or 
lot,  or  am  a commander  without  a command  or  not. 

February  23,  1862. 

To-day  I received  the  following  letter  and  order: 

Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

February  23,  1862. 

frig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise: 

Sir:  The  general  commanding  has  received  your  letter,  addressed  to  him,  acknowl- 
dging  the  receipt  of  special  order,  dated  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 
Richmond,  February  18,  1862,  (paragraph  XVill).  As  requested  by  you,  it  was  im- 
lediately  forwarded  to  the  War  Department. 

The  general  has  no  reply  to  make  to  your  letter.  The  order  is  imperative,  and, 
eing  sent  through  him,  it  is  his  duty  to  see  that  you  obey  it,  and  he  directs,  if  you 
' ave  not  already  made  the  necessary  arrangements,  that  you  call  at  once  on  the  proper 
epartments  to  provide  transportation,  &c.,  and  give  the  necessary  orders  to  move 
our  troops  to  the  point  indicated. 

The  pieces  of  light  artiliery  and  the  company  or  detachment  serving  them  will 
3main  at  its  present  position,  unless  otherwise  ordered  by  the  War  Department. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  S.  ANDERSON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


eneral  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

No.  14.  $ Norfolk , Va.,  February  20,  1862. 

Until  further  orders  the  following  will  be  the  arrangement  and  designation  of  the 
rigades  of  this  department : 

******* 

II.  The  Second  Brigade,  the  country  east  of  the  Elizabeth  River  (South  Branch), 
ud  extending  southeast  of  the  Dismal  Swamp,  in  Virginia  and  North  Carolina; 
eadquarters  Norfolk,  Brigadier-General  Mahone  commanding. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Huger: 

S.  S.  ANDERSON, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

In  reply  I addressed  to  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.  S.  S.  Anderson  a letter  of 
’Inch  the  following  is  a copy: 

Great  Bridge,  Va.,  February  23,  1862—1  p.  m. 

. S.  Anderson,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

I have  just  received  yours  of  this  day.  Please  say  to  the  general  commanding  that 
have  drawn  from  his  silence  in  declining  to  reply  to  my  letter  the  only  inferences 
hich  seem  to  me  fair  and  logical,  and  I shall  immediately  demand  a court  of  inquiry 
pon  the  defenses  of  Roanoke  Island  and  his  conduct  of  them  as  well  as  mine.* 

I have  obeyed  the  imperative  order  of  the  War  Department,  and  turned  the  com- 
and  of  this  post  and  that  of  the  light  battery  of  my.Legion  over  to  Brig.  Gen.  William 
roafcone. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


* This  was  forwarded  by  Major-General  Huger  with  the  following  indorsement : 
“Respectfully  forwarded  for  the  information  of  the  Secretary  of  War.  Brigadier- 
eneral  Wise  has  the  right  to  ask  a court  of  inquiry  on  himself,  but  I am  not  aware 
his  right  to  ask  the  favor  for  me.” 


164 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Ciiap.  XX. 


February  28,  1802. 

Having  forwarded  my  remaining  troops  to  Norfolk  for  transportation 
to  Manassas  I arrived  at  home  the  26th  instant  and  yesterday  received 
from  the  Secretary  of  War  the  following: 


Confederate  States  of  America,  War  Department, 

Richmond,  Va.,  February  23,  1862.  i 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise,  Norfolk , Va. : 

Sir:  I am  in  receipt  of  your  letter  of  the  19th  instant,  forwarded  by  General  Huger 
as  well  as  of  a duplicate  sent  directly  to  this  Department.  I have  no  objection  t( 
answering  your  inquiries  in  relation  to  Special  Orders,  No.  40. 

The  recent  disaster  at  Roanoke  Island,  having  completely  broken  up  the  organiza- 
tion of  your  Legion,  left  you  without  a command  sufficient  to  justify  your  retaining 
the  office  of  brigadier-general,  the  act  of  Congress  having  provided  that  the  office] 
should  hold  his  rank  only  while  his  brigade  is  in  service.  (Section  6,  Act  of  March  6 
1861.) 

General  Huger  notified  the  Department  that  in  the  organization  of  the  brigades  o: 
his  department  you  were  supernumerary.  General  Joseph  E.  Johnston  was  urgeni 
with  the  President  to  send  him  additional  general  officers.  Your  Legion  was  reducec 
to  a few  companies  of  infantry,  two  companies  of  artillery,  and  an  incomplete  rpgi 
ment  of  cavalry,  not  sufficient  for  an  independent  command.  Under  these  circum 
stances  the  President  deemed  it  advisable  that  the  remainder  of  your  Legion  shoulc 
be  sent  to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  in  order  to  replace  a regiment  of  North  Carolim 
Cavalry,  under  Colonel  Ransom,  which  it  was  thought  proper  to  send  into  Nortl 
Carolina,  and  to  order  you  to  the  same  army,  in  order  that  General  Johnston  rnighl 
assign  to  you  the  command  of  a brigade,  thus  enabling  the  President  to  retain  you  ir 
the  service  without  loss  of  rank  in  the  only  manner  allowed  by  law. 

In  regard  to  your  application  for  a short  leave  of  absence,  on  the  grounds  stated  ir 
your  letter,  the  Department  willingly  accords  you  a leave  of  twenty  days,  as  it  is  nol 
believed  that  during  the  interval  any  active  operations  will  occur  in  the  Army  of  the 


Potomac. 

I am,  your  obedient  servant, 


J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


In  reply  to  the  foregoing  letter,  permit  me  to  say  that  by  the  recenl 
disaster  at  Eoanoke  Island  the  organization  of  my  Legion  was  not  com 
pletely  broken  up.  It  was  reduced  to  three  companies  of  the  Firsl 
Eegiment  of  Infantry,  under  Colonel  Eichardson,  two  under  Colone' 
Tyler,  two  under  Lieutenant- Colonel  Green  (not  captured),  Cap  tail 
Lowry’s  company,  which  had  been  attached  to  the  artillery  (now  a fill, 
company),  and  to  the  fragments  of  companies — men  who  escaped  fron 
Eoanoke  Island,  about  70  men,  now  organized- — making  in  all  the  equiva 
lent  of  nine  companies  of  infantry ; to  two  companies  of  artillery,  with 
five  pieces;  and  to  nine  companies  of  cavalry;  in  all,  twenty  companies 
numbering  at  least  1,000  men.  Besides  these  there  are  two  companies 
of  infantry  still  at  Lewisburg  belonging  to  ray  Second  Eegiment;  nine 
teen  companies  captured  at  Eoanoke  Island,  soon  to  be  exchanged,  1 
hope,  and  my  Third  Eegiment  of  Infantry,  ten  companies,  which  I stil. 
claim  to  be  restored  to  me  from  South  Carolina. 

With  this  force,  which  can  easily  be  put  at  once,  or  soon,  under  mj 
command,  I cannot  consent  that  my  Legion  is  completely  disorganized 
and  especially  I insist  upon  this,  when  I refer  to  my  first  appoiutmenl 
to  a brigade.  I was  commissioned  after  the  act  of  March  6 was  passed 
and  then  had  not  a single  company  of  the  Legion  mustered  into  service 
But  it  may  be  said  that  I was  assigned  to  the  command  of  a district 
True,  but  the  entire  number  of  volunteers  under  Colonel  Tompkins  did 
not  then  exceed  600  men,  and  for  months  my  entire  brigade  did  noi 
number  1,000,  the  force  I now  have.  If,  then,  my  brigade  might  exisl 
at  first,  before  a sufficient  number  was  raised  for  an  independent  com 
mand,  I cannot  see  why  it  may  not  continue  now,  with  many  more 
forces  than  I had  at  first,  and  when,  too,  the  Department  may  speedilj 


!hap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


165 


Restore  the  Legion,  as  it  was  promised  me,  to  its  full  force.  Instead  of 
his  I respectfully  complain  that  the  two  companies  and  five  pieces  of 
irtillery  have  been  ordered  to  be  detached  from  my  Legion  and  to  be 
•etained  in  this  department  under  General  Huger.  I earnestly  insist 
hat  I may  be  allowed  to  take  all  my  Legion  to  the  command  of  General 
folmston. 

I had  been  assigned  to  the  Chowan  District,  North  Carolina,  as  an 
ndependent  command,  attached  to  the  department  of  General  Huger, 
lis  notification,  then,  to  the  Department,  that  in  the  organization  of 
he  brigades  of  his  department  I was  supernumerary,  was  without  any 
neaning,  except  that  he  desired  a new  organization  and  to  exclude  my 
command  from  his  department.  He  might  have  taken  a more  direct 
tnd  ingenuous  way  of  getting  clear  of  me,  and  I would  have  heartily 
,10-operated  with  him.  Nothing  could  be  more  agreeable  to  me  than  to 
>e  removed  from  his  command  to  that  of  General  Johnston.  Please, 
hen,  express  to  the  President  my  grateful  acknowledgment  for  his 
>rder  for  the  change  of  my  command  to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac;  and 
vhen  you  tell  me  that  the  motive  of  this  order  is  that  General  John- 
ston may  assign  to  me  the  command  of  a brigade,  thus  enabling  the 
^resident  to  retain  me  in  the  service  without  loss  of  rank  in  the  only 
nanner  allowed  by  law,  it  relieves  me  from  much  oppression  of  feeling 
ind  from  all  apprehension  of  his  censure  for  my  part  in  the  defense  of 
Roanoke  Island,  and  I will  with  alacrity  obey  his  orders  and  report 
cheerfully  to  General  Johnston.  Indeed,  had  it  been  otherwise,  and  if 

had  been  driven  from  both  rank  and  command,  I would  have  volun- 
teered in  the  ranks  rather  than  have  been  driven  from  the  service;  but 
‘ deem  it  my  imperative  duty  to  the  country,  in  justice  to  the  Presi- 
lent,  the  War  Department,  General  Huger,  and  myself  to  demand  a 
court  of  inquiry,  which  I do,  as  to  the  defenses  of  Roanoke  Island,  in- 
: solving  the  conduct  thereby  of  all  who  are  accountable  for  their  con- 
duct, or  at  least  my  own  responsibility.  By  the  President’s  late  mes- 
sage to  Congress  I see  that  he  is  awaiting  official  information  respect- 
ng  the  humiliating  surrender  of  Eoanoke  Island.  I now,  as  early  as  I 
could,  send  to  you  ample  official  information,  and  beg  you  to  lay  it  be- 
fore him,  with  my  request  to  give  it  his  critical  attention.  If  I have 
)een  lagging  or  lacking  in  duty  let  me  be  condignly  punished.  I leave 
udgment  upon  the  conduct  of  all  others  to  the  proper  authorities  and 
ribunals.  I ask  only  for  stern  justice — court  of  inquiry — and  am 
eady  to  make  any  more  sacrifices  which  may  be  required  of  me  for  the 
oublic  defense. 

For  your  kind  leave  of  absence  for  twenty  days  please  accept  my 
hanks.  I wish  only  a few  days  to  protect  my  family  and  property 
rom  approaching  danger,  and  will  at  the  earliest  moment  within  twenty 
lays  report  to  you  in  person. 

Very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General . 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War. 

[Indorsement:] 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

August  23,  1862. 

f Respectfully  forwarded  to  the  Secretary  of  War  for  the  information 
>f  Congress. 

JASPER  S.  WHITING, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


166 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chai\  XX, 


Near  Norfolk,  Va.,  March  5, 1862. 

Sir  : The  inclosed  report  of  Col.  H.  M.  Shaw  [No.  25]  was  lately 
received,  and  as  soon  as  copied  is  forwarded.  I beg  leave  to  commenl 
upon  all  the  reports  so  far  only  as  is  necessary  for  explanation  and  cor 
rection. 

The  first  re-enforcements  sent  by  me  on  the  7th  were  ten  companies 
numbering  about  450  men.  They  landed  on  the  north  end  of  the  islanc 
by  beaching  the  barges  and  wading  the  men  ashore.  They  did  not  stoj 
to  take  their  baggage  out  of  the  barges. 

My  artillery  of  the  Legion  not  having  reached  me,  owing  to  the  inter 
ruption  of  my  orders  to  Colonel  Henningsen  by  General  Huger,  I sem 
to  Colonel  Shaw  the  two  best  artillery  officers  I had  at  Nag’s  Head 
Captain  Schermerhorn  and  Lieutenant  Kinney,  who,  notwithstanding 
the  modest  disclaimer  by  the  former  of  “ any  particular  knowledge  oi 
the  subject”  of  artillery  drill,  worked  their  guns  in  battle  with  skill 
courage,  and  great  effect. 

* Colonel  Shaw  says : “Among  these  (the  prisoners)  are  the  battalions 
of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Green  and  Major  Fry,  who  reached  the  island  tot 
late  to  participate  in  the  battle.”  I regret  to  be  obliged  to  correct  this 
part  of  Colonel  Shaw’s  report  . Both  battalions  reached  Boanoke  Islanc 
in  ample  time  to  have  participated  for  hours  in  the  battle.  Colone 
Green  did  not  report  to  me  at  Nag’s  Head,  but  had  orders  to  go,  as  In 
did,  directly  to  the  island.  Had  he  obeyed  my  first  order  to  move  fron 
Wilmington  he  would  have  been  at  the  island  more  than  a week  befort 
the  battle.  Had  he  not  stopped  his  command  on  the  7 th  to  go  and  returi 
20  miles  and  back  before  advancing,  he  would  have  been  at  the  islanc 
before  7 o’clock  on  the  8th,  and  after  reaching  the  island,  about  9 o’clock 
I think  he  could  have  reached  the  battle  ground  by  10  or  11  a.  m.  ai 
furthest,  if  he  had  not  stopped  for  several  hours  at  the  north  end  o 
the  island  to  unload  his  baggage  before  advancing.  He  did  not  read 
the  island  too  late,  but  advanced  too  late  to  participate  in  the  battle. 

Major  Fry,  with  his  battalion,  was  sent  over  very  early  in  the  morn 
ing  of  the  8th,  and  reached  the  island,  I am  confident,  by  8 or  8.3( 
o’clock.  Instead  of  beaching  his  barges  and  wading  to  the  land,  as 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Anderson  did,  he  waited  several  hours,  certainly 
more  than  two  hours,  for  lighters  and  boats  to  land  his  men,  and  thus 
failed  to  get  into  action. 

Most  of  the  men  who  were  missing  escaped,  and  were  of  the  Eight! 
and  Thirty-first  North  Carolina  Kegiments,  chiefly  of  the  latter,  and 
they  escaped  early  in  the  evening  of  the  8th. 

Col.  J.  Y.  Jordan  did  not  obey  his  orders  to  fight  the  enemy  at  the 
water’s  edge  and  to  repel  their  landing,  if  possible,  and  his  excuse  is 
not  satisfactory,  except  so  far  as  that  he  had  no  teams  for  his  artillery 
pieces,  and  he  was  ordered  to  save  them.  In  his  whole  regiment  there 
were  but  2 (privates)  killed  and  none  wounded.  The  70  who  were  miss 
ing  escaped  to  me  at  Nag’s  Head  and  Currituck  Bridge,  and  were  for 
warded  by  my  orders  to  Norfolk. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Anderson’s  report  is  confused  and  inaccurate  ii: 
that  part  in  which  he  says : “ I immediately  deployed  Captain  Wise’s 
company  (A,  Forty -sixth  Begiment) ; Captain  Coles’  company  (Forty 
sixth  Begiment);  and  Lieutenant  Hazlett’s  company  (A,  Fifty-ninth 
Begiment),  on  our  left,  in  the  swamp.”  What  he  should  have  said  is 
I immediately  deployed  Captain  Wise’s  company  (A,  Forty-sixth  Beg 
iment) ; Captain  Coles’  company  (Forty-sixth  Begiment),  to  our  left, 
in  the  marsh,  and  Lieutenant  Hazlett’s  company  (A,  Fifty-ninth  Begi- 
ment), on  our  right,  in  the  swamp,  &c. 


3 HAP.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  O. 


1G7 


Major  Fry’s  report  was  written  in  pencil  and  underscored  as  copied. 
He  does  not  report  when  he  reached  the  island  nor  how  long  it  took 
aim  to  land  nor  when  he  reported  to  Colonel  Shaw.  His  aggregate 
^as  more  than  150;  he  had  four  companies,  which  averaged  at  least  45 
men  each,  making  his  aggregate  180.  He  took  several  hours  to  land, 
md  reached  the  island  in  full  time  to  re-enforce  our  troops  had  he  ad- 
vanced at  once.  We  had  then  but  one  tug  and  two  barges,  and  he  kept 
them  waiting  at  least  two  and  a half  hours  to  land  in  lighters  and 
boats,  instead  of  beaching  his  barges  and  wading  his  men  ashore.  He, 
too,  did  not  advance  in  time,  but  arrived  at  the  island  in  full  time  to  be 
in  the  battle  and  at  a favorable  moment. 

Major  Hill’s  and  Captain  Taylor’s  reports  are  clear  and  intelligible, 
and  show  that  but  three  guns  of  all  the  batteries  located  on  the  island 
or  its  sounds  could  be  brought  to  bear  on  the  enemy.  These  reports 
embrace  the  full  official  accounts  of  the  surrender  of  Koanoke  Island. 
Of  the  causes  of  our  defeat  I have  heretofore  sent  to  the  Department 
,delailed  official  vouchers. 

It  is  but  just  to  about  400  or  500  of  our  infantry  forces,  and  to  the 
.officers  and  men  in  three  of  the  batteries,  particularly  those  at  Pork 
Point,  to  say  that  they  fought  firmly,  coolly,  efficiently,  and  as  long  as 
^humanity  would  allow,  without  a sufficiency  of  means  of  any  kind;  to 
Colonel  Shaw  to  say  that  he  acted  bravely,  and  to  myself  to  say  that 
Providence  did  not  permit  me  to  share  the  fate  of  my  men.  I did  all 
that  time,  weather,  sickness,  and  my  superiors  would  permit  in  the  way 
of  preparations,  and  none  whatever  available  were  made.  The  conse- 
quence was  a defeat,  which  I had  again  and  again  foretold  in  vain,  and 
which  grieves,  but  does  not  humiliate  or  subdue,  me. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War . 


[Indorsement.] 


There  are  some  remarks  on  the  report  of  Brigadier-General  Wise, 
dated  March  5,  which  require  explanation  from  me: 

First.  “My  artillery  of  the  Legion  not  having  reached  me,  owing  to 
the  int  erruption  of  my  orders  to  Colonel  Henningsen  by  General  Huger,” 
seems  to  convey  the  insinuation  that  the  officious  interruption  of  Gen- 
eral H.  was  the  cause  of  the  artillery  not  arriving.  My  intention  was 
f to  expedite  its  arrival,  not  to  prevent  it,  as  his  paragraph  seems  to 
imply.  Colonel  Henningsen  states  that  he  was  ordered  by  General 
Wise  to  march  with  the  men  and  horses  of  the  artillery  by  a route  in- 
dicated by  him  (the  sea-beach  to  Nag’s  Head).  “ The  guns,  caissons, 
and  wagons  I am  ordered  by  General  Wise  to  leave  in  Norfolk,  to  be 
'transported  by  water.”  Now,  every  tug,  barge,  and  vessel  that  could 
be  procured  was  engaged  to  transport  troops,  &c.,  to  Roanoke  Island, 
I and  if  the  men  and  horses  were  separated  from  their  guns  they  would 
probably  never  meet  again.  I therefore  ordered  Colonel  Henningsen 
, to  carry  liis  artillery  with  him  to  the  nearest  point  to  Roanoke  Island, 
jj  My  object  was  to  get  it  there ; not  to  detain  it.  This  was  on  the  29th 
, and  30th  of  January. 

Second.  The  remark  that  Major  Hill’s  and  Captain  Taylors  reports 
show  that  only  three  guns  of  all  the  batteries  located  on  the  island  or 
L its  sounds  could  be  brought  to  bear  on  the  enemy  is  disingenuous.  The 
enemy  selected  a position  in  which  only  three  guns  bore  on  them,  and 


168 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


these  reports  show  that  these  three  gains  did  repel  their  whole  fleet,  and, 
though  the  battery  was  exposed  to  a heavy  fire,  no  material  injury  was 
done  to  the  battery. 

Third.  The  closing  remark,  “ I did  all  that  time,  weather,  sickness  j 
and  my  superiors  would  permit  in  the  way  of  preparations,  and  none 
whatever  available  were  made.”  The  War  Department  and  myself] 
must  be  the  superiors  alluded  to.  We  could  not  control  time,  weather, 
or  sickness,  but  what  available  preparations  asked  for  by  General  Wise 
that  could  be  made  by  his  superiors  and  refused  him  I do  not  know 
and  they  are  not  stated  by  him.  I intended  and  endeavored  to  do  all 
in  my  power  to  aid  and  assist  him,  and  am  not  aware  in  what  particular 
he  intends  to  accuse  me  of  thwarting  him. 

Bespectfully  submitted. 

BENJ.  HUGEB, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 
Richmond , Va.,  March  14,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise,  Norfolk , Va. : 

Sir  : I received  on  the  7th  instant  your  letter  covering  copies  of  the 
reports  of  your  subordinate  officers  of  the  affair  at  Boanoke  Island  and 
immediately  called  on  General  Huger  for  the  report,  which  ought  reg- 
ularly to  come  through  him  to  this  Department. 

In  return,  I learn  from  General  Huger  that  you  have  made  no  report 
through  him,  and  from  your  letter  to  him  it  seems  that  you  propose  to 
furnish  him  also  copies  of  the  reports  of  your  subordinates.  1 am  much 
disappointed  at  the  delay  which  has  occurred.  Congress  is  impatient 
for  these  reports,  and  the  delay  is  occasioned  by  the  informality  of  your 
proceedings,  doubtless  entirely  unintentional.  Under  the  regulations 
it  is  necessary  that  you  should  make  to  General  Huger  your  report  of 
the  affair  at  Boanoke  Island,  inclosing  the  original  of  the  reports  of 
your  subordinates.  You  may  indorse  on  these  originals  or  annex  to 
them  any  remarks  you  please.  General  Huger  will  then  forward  to 
me  all  the  originals,  including  your  report,  and  will  indorse  on  it  what- 
ever remarks  he  thinks  proper,  and  thus  the  Department  will  be  able 
to  communicate  to  Congress  complete  information  of  what  is  said  by 
all  the  officers.  The  originals  of  all  reports  belong  to  the  archives  of 
this  office,  and  when  you  sent  me  copies  I supposed  it  was  a mere  measure 
of  precaution  after  sending  the  originals  through  General  Huger.  Your 
letter  to  him,  of  which  a copy  has  been  forwarded  to  me,  discloses  the 
fact  that  you  retain  the  originals,  and  that  he  has  never  seen  either 
originals  or  copies.  I beg  your  most  prompt  attention  to  the  forward- 
ing now  of  all  these  reports  iu  proper  form.  I have  received  two  calls 
for  them  from  Congress,  and  could  not,  till  I received  the  last  letter  of 
General  Huger,  comprehend  the  cause  of  the  delay. 

Your  communication  of  February  21  was  also' received  by  me,  but 
its  very  great  length  has  prevented  my  reply.  I find,  however,  that  it 
contains  a great  deal  which  ought  to  have  passed  through  General 
Huger  for  his  remarks,  and  have  therefore  sent  it  to  him. 

Permit  me,  however,  to  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  it  is  not 
necessary  in  an  official  report  to  copy  into  its  text  documents  and  let- 
ters. They  may  be  appended,  if  necessary.  The  vast  length  of  your 
report  of  the  21st  is  mainly  due  to  this  fact,  and  the  brief  moments 


Chap.  XX.]  BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C.  169 

allowed  for  reading  reports  while  the  war  is  pressing  on  ns  renders  it 
peculiarly  necessary  to  adhere  to  the  rule  that  a military  report  is  to  be 
a succinct  statement  of  facts.  All  copies  of  letters,  orders,  documents, 
&c.,  supposed  to  be  necessary  for  rendering  it  intelligible,  may  be  pre- 
sented in  a separate  paper  or  papers  as  inclosures. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

I Secretary  of  War, 

Bolliston,  near  Norfolk,  Va., 

March  17,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : Yours  of  the  14th  instant  was  received  late  last  night.  I imme- 
diately addressed  to  General  Huger  a report,  and  requested  him  to  for- 
ward it  to  you,  with  the  original  reports  of  the  surrender  of  Boanoke 
Island.  I had  made  reports  previously  to  him,  but  they  preceded  the 
reports  of  -Colonel  Shaw  to  me.  These  he  may  not  have  regarded  as 
full,  and  copies  have  been  sent  to  the  Department  in  mine  of  the  21st 
ultimo,  sending  a detailed  report  of  the  causes  of  the  disaster  at  Boan- 
oke Island.  I regret  the  errors  on  my  part  of  sending  copies  instead 
of  originals,  and  of  reporting  directly  to  the  Department  instead  of 
through  General  Huger.  They  were  unintentional,  as  you  do  me  the 
justice  to  suppose.  I thought  the  originals  addressed  to  me  were  mine, 
and  that  as  I had  been  ordered  from  the  department  of  General  Huger 
I was  no  longer  required  to  report  to  him.  I meant  no  disrespect  to 
him,  and  especially  regret  that  what  I intended  as  dispatch  should  have 
i caused  delay  from  mere  informality.  I trust  my  report  now  will  con- 
form to  your  instructions.  I forwarded  my  report  to  General  Huger 
, last  night  immediately  on  reception  of  your  orders. 

, In  my  communication  of  21st  February  I intended  to  give  a de- 
tailed account  of  the  causes  of  the  surrender  of  Boanoke  Island.  I 
‘ endeavored  to  do  so  in  the  shortest  way  and  in  a way  to  insure  the 
reading  of  the  report.  To  have  given  a history  first  and  to  have  ap- 
pended the  vouchers,  for  the  statements,  would  have  increased  the  vol- 
ume of  the  communication.  1 beg  you  to  remember  that  I am  demand- 
iug  a court  of  inquiry,  and  that  I could  do  no  less  than  state  the 
reasons,  and  the  shortest  and  fairest  possible  mode  was  to  state  them 
t;  in  the  language  and  order  of  official  correspondence.  Besides  this, 
'Congress  is  calling  upon  all  for  information,  and  I deemed  it  my 
duty  to  furnish  the  fullest  in  my  possession.  The  mere  delay  of  read- 
ing1 the  reports  of  facts  could  not  excuse  the  delay  or  the  denial  of 
justice  to  officials  involved  in  a question  of  doubt  as  to  their  dis- 
charge of  important  duties.  The  committee  of  the  House  of  Bepre- 
, sentatives  has  called  on  me  for  answers  to  certain  interrogatories, 
and  I have  requested  them  to  call  for  this  report  of  the  21st  February 
and  that  of  the  5th  March  to  the  Department.  You  say  that  you  have 
r sent  that  of  the  21st  ultimo  to  General  Huger  u for  his  remarks.”  In 
case  he  makes  any  remarks  upon  it,  I beg  to  be  furnished  with  a copy 
of  them. 

In  yours  to  me  of  the  23d  February  you  say  u General  Huger  notified 
the  Department  that  in  the  organization  of  the  brigades  of  his  depart- 
ment you  were  supernumerary,”  &c.  I ask  for  a copy  of  that  notifica- 
tion by  General  Huger.  I ask  also  that  you  will  order  him  to  furnish 
‘ me  with  copies  of  his  orders  to  Colonel  Wright  and  others  of  his  sub- 
ordinates touching  my  command  of  the  district  assigned  to  me  east  of 


170 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


the  Chowan  River  in  North  Carolina.  I have  respectfully  applied  to 
General  Huger  for  these  copies  in  vain,  and  they  involve  issues  of  fact 
and  of  responsibility  which  are  important  to  the  public  service,  to  him, 
and  to  myself. 

The  leave  of  absence  given  me  expires  in  a day  or  two,  and  to-morrow 
or  the  next  day  I will  report  to  you  in  person  at  Richmond.  I would 
have  reported  earlier  but  for  the  illness  of  my  wife. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

• HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier-General. 


No.  25. 

Report  of  Col.  H.  M.  Shaw , Eighth  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

Currituck  County,  N.  C., 

February  24,  1862. 

General  : I submit  the  following  report  of  the  battles  on  Roanoke 
Island  on  the  7th  and  8th  instant  between  the  Confederate  forces,  under 
my  command,  and  those  of  the  United  States,  commanded  by  General 
Burnside  and  Commodore  Goldsborough.  I also  transmit  herewith 
the  reports  of  Colonels  Anderson,  Jordan,  and  Green,  and  Majors  Hill 
and  Fry,  and  Capt.  J.  S.  Taylor,  who  was  on  detached  service  at  the 
batteries  : 

On  the  morning  of  the  6th  instant  the  enemy  made  his  appearance, 
reconnoitering  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  marshes.  Four  or  five 
steamers  could  be  seen,  but  the  atmosphere  was  so  heavy  the  exact 
number  could  not  be  made  out  with  certainty.  I immediately  pushed 
down  two  more  companies  to  Ashby’s  Landing,  to  support  the  two 
pieces  of  artillery  which  had  been  placed  at  that  point  some  time  be- 
fore ; sent  oft  a dispatch  to  you,  informing  you  of  the  enemy’s  move- 
ment, and  then  repaired  to  the  lower  part  of  the  island  to  obtain  more 
definite  information.  Reaching  Ashby’s  Landing,  I discovered  a large 
fleet  of  the  enemy  apparently  at  anchor  below  the  marshes,  and  at  a 
distance  of  about  8 or  10  miles  from  Ashby’s.  With  the  aid  of  a glass 
about  sixty  steam  and  sail  vessels  could  be  counted.  Returning  to 
camp,  preparations  were  made  to  move  the  entire  effective  force  to  the 
southern  part  of  the  island,  in  compliance  with  your  orders  received 
in  the  evening.  Having  detailed  a sufficient  number  of  men  to  guard 
my  camp  and  that  of  Colonel  Jordan,  the  balance  was  marched  down. 
A part  bivouacked  near  Ashby’s  and  the  rest  on  the  lower  end  of  the 
island,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Pugh’s  Landing.  Taking  Maj. 
George  Williamson  and  a strong  picket  guard  I repaired  at  once  to 
Pugh’s  Landing,  where  1 learned  from  Captain  Pugh  that  the  fleet  of 
the  enemy,  numbering  about  seventy  vessels,  gunboats  and  transports, 
was  anchored  in  the  sound,  about  4 miles  from  his  landing. 

The  fog  being  very  heavy,  it  was  9 o’clock  in  the  morning  before  the 
fleet  could  be  seen  with  any  sort  of  distinctness.  At  about  10  o’clock 
the  movement  of  the  fleet  commenced.  I remained  at  Pugh’s  until 
several  of  the  steamers  had  passed  through  the  marshes  at  the  main 
pass,  and  as  there  was  no  indication  of  an  intention  on  the  part  of  the 
enemy  to  effect  a landing  at  that  place,  I directed  Major  Williamson 
to  remain  with  the  picket  guard  to  watch  the  movements  of  the  enemy, 
and  if  he  should  find  that  no  landing  would  be  attempted  at  that  place 
to  return  to  Ashby’s,  taking  with  him  the  troops  and  the  field  ifiece, 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


171 


and  then,  accompanied  by  Lieutenant  Talcott,  Provisional  Army  Con- 
federate States,  who  had  kindly  volunteered  his  services  to  me,  I re- 
paired to  Ashby’s  Landing,  and  having  remained  there  until  it  had  be- 
come apparent  to  my  mind  that  the  enemy  designed  the  reduction  of 
Pork  Point  Battery  before  attempting  to  land  his  troops,  and  having 
repeated  to  Colonel  Jordan  the  order  to  fight  the  enemy  at  the  water 
should  he  attempt  to  land,  but  to  fall  back  to  the  redoubt  should  such 
a movement  become  necessary  to  save  the  field  pieces,  I proceeded  with 
Lieutenant  Talcott  to  Pork  Point  Battery,  which  we  reached  at  12  m. 

Soon  after  the  battle  had  begun  Major  Hill,  who  was  in  immediate 
command  at  that  fort,  having  given  a detailed  account  of  the  battle 
of  that  day  as  well  as  that  of  the  succeeding  day  at  that  fort,  in  his 
report,  herewith  submitted,  it  is  not  my  purpose  to  add  to  it  further 
than  to  indorse  all  that  he  has  said  in  praise  of  the  coolness,  courage, 
and  persevering  efforts  of  the  officers  and  men  of  his  command,  who 
seemed  to  be  inspired  by  the  noble  example  set  them  by  Major  Hill, 
as  well  also  by  that  of  Captain  Taylor  and  Lieutenants  Talcott  and 
Loyall,  who  were  present  at  both  battles  at  that  place,  having  been 
sent  to  the  island  a short  time  before  by  General  Huger  on  temporary 
detached  service. 

At  4.15  o’clock,  having  observed  some  indications  which  induced  a 
belief  on  my  part  that  the  enemy  designed  landing  some  troops  below 
the  battery  for  the  purpose  of  making  a flank  movement  upon  it  by 
land,  and  the  small-arms  of  the  two  companies  in  the  battery  having 
been  lost  by  the  destruction  of  their  quarters,  I left  the  battery  to 
rejoin  the  infantry  and  send  re-enforcements  to  the  battery.  Having 
met  Major  Williamson,  who  was  hastening  to  communicate  with  me, 
I ordered  him  to  return  and  move  two  companies  to  Pork  Point,  to  be 
at  hand  if  needed.  He  did  so,  taking  up  Company  A,  Captain  Hinton, 
and  Company  G,  Captain  Yellowley,  both  of  the  Eighth  Begiment 
North  Carolina  troops.  Soon  after  I fell  in  with  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Anderson,  having  with  him  portions  of  the  Forty-sixth  and  Fifty-ninth 
Virginia  Volunteers — about  400  re-enforcements  sent  over  by  you. 
Beaching  the  redoubt  across  the  main  road,  I found,  what  Major 
Williamson  had  already  apprised  me  of,  that  Colonel  Jordan  had 
withdrawn  the  artillery  from  Ashby’s  without  resisting  the  landing  of 
the  enemy  and  had  taken  position  at  the  redoubt.  He  informed  me 
that  the  enemy  had  effected  a landing  above  Ahsby’s  and  beyond  the 
reach  of  the  pieces.  In  his  own  report  you  will  find  his  reasons  for 
thus  falling  back  fully  set  forth. 

By  this  time  it  was  night,  and  nothing  remained  but  to  make  a stand 
at  the  redoubt.  Pickets  were  put  out  and  the  troops  bivouacked  on 
the  low  and  wet  ground  adjacent  to  the  breastwork,  where  they  passed 
the  tedious  hours  of  a cold  and  rainy  night  without  a single  murmur  or 
complaint.  About  day  reconnoitering  party  was  sent  out  and  informa- 
tion obtained  of  the  approach  of  the  enemy  in  large  force. 

I then  ordered  Colonel  Anderson  to  put  out  a part  of  his  command 
on  the  left  of  the  breastwork,  and  Captain  Wise  being  in  command  of 
the  companies  selected  for  that  service,  I instructed  him  to  take  posi- 
tion under  cover  of  a small  piece  of  swamp  on  that  flank,  and  to  assail 
the  advance  guard  of  the  enemy,  directing  his  fire  to  the  artillery, 
should  the  enemy  attempt  to  plant  any  within  reach.  Soon  after  I 
received  a message  from  that  officer  saying  that  a position  could  not 
be  obtained  at  the  point  indicated,  and  I then  directed  him  to  take  the 
most  favorable  position  he  could. 

At  7 a.  m.  the  battle  commenced,  and  as  soon  as  the  enemy  gathered 


172 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Ciiai*.  XX. 


in  force,  which  was  in  a very  few  minutes  thereafter,  our  battery  opened 
fire.  This  battery  was  composed  of  three  pieces — one  24-pounder  how- 
itzer, one  18-pounder  field  piece,  and  one  6-pounder.  Tor  the  18- 
pounder  the  only  ammunition  we  had  was  12-pounder  ammunition. 
The  artillery  detachments  may  be  said  to  have  been  almost  totally 
uninstructed.  Having  in  my  command  no  officers  acquainted  with 
that  practice  save  Major  Hill,  whose  duties  confined  him  to  Pork  Point 
Battery,  I applied#to  Colonel  Richardson,  upon  his  arrival  at  Nag’s 
Head,  for  some  officers  to  instruct  the  men.  He  had  none.  Upon  your 
reaching  that  place  I made  a like  application  to  you.  Captain  Scher- 
merhorn  and  Lieutenant  Kinney  were  sent.  The  former  disclaimed  any 
particular  knowledge  upon  the  subject.  They  were  immediately  sent 
to  Ashby’s;  but  the  enemy  made  his  appearance  so  soon,  little  time  was 
allowed  them  to  drill  the  men. 

Captain  Schermerhorn  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  18-pounder,  Lieu- 
tenant Kinney  of  the  24-pounder,  and  Lieut.  W.  B.  Selden,  Engineer  De- 
partment, who  had  patriotically  volunteered  his  services  in  the  line,  was 
assigned  to  the  6-pounder,  and,  notwithstanding  the  men  had  received 
so  little  instruction,  these  pieces  were  handled  in  such  a way  as  to  pro- 
duce immense  havoc  in  the  enemy’s  ranks ; especially  that  of  Lieuten- 
ant Selden,  whose  conduct  elicited  the  unbounded  admiration  of  all 
who  witnessed  it.  Unhappily  at  about  11  o’clock  that  gallant  officer 
received  a rifle-ball  in  his  head,  and  he  fell  without  a groan,  a willing 
sacrifice  to  a cause  which  he  had  espoused  with  all  the  ardor  of  his 
generous  nature. 

In  the  mean  time  the  fire  of  the  musketry  had  been  kept  up  from  the 
commencement  of  the  action  with  unabated  vigor  by  the  following  com- 
panies under  cover  of  the  breastwork  : Company  B,  Captain  Whitson, 
Eighth  Regiment  North  Carolina  State  troops ; Company  B,  Captain 
Liles,  and  Company  F,  Captain  Knight,  Thirty -first  Regiment  North 
Carolina  troops ; Company  E,  Captain  Dickinson,  and  Company  K, 
Lieutenant  Roy,  Fifty-ninth  Virginia  Volunteers;  and  Company  E, 
Lieut.  J . R.  Murchison,  Eighth  Regiment  North  Carolina  State  troops, 
whose  second  lieutenant,  N.  G.  Munro,  a promising  young  officer,  fell 
on  his  approach  near  the  redoubt. 

By  the  gallant  officers  and  brave  men  of  the  above-named  companies 
an  unceasing  and  effective  fire  was  kept  up  from  7 a.  m.  until  12.20,  when, 
our  artillery  ammunition  having  been  exhausted  and  our  right  flank 
having  been  turned  by  an  overwhelming  force  of  the  enemy,  I was  com- 
pelled to  yield  the  place. 

The  entire  available  force  of  my  command,  exclusive  of  the  companies 
on  duty  at  the  several  batteries,  amounted  to  1,434,  rank  and  file.  Of 
these  568  were  of  the  Eighth  North  Carolina  State  troops,  456  of  the 
Thirty-first  North  Carolina  troops,  and  the  balance  of  the  Forty-sixth 
and  Fifty-ninth  Virginia  Volunteers,  commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Anderson,  who,  together  with  Major  Lawson,  was  at  the  redoubt  during 
the  most  part  of  the  action,  and  rendered  efficient  sendee.  The  enemy’s 
force  amounted  to  15,000  men,  with  several  pieces  of  artillery.  With 
the  very  great  disparity  of  forces,  the  moment  the  redoubt  was  flanked 
I considered  the  island  lost.  The  struggle  could  have  been  protracted, 
and  the  small  body  of  brave  men  which  had  been  held  in  reserve  might 
have  been  brought  up  into  the  open  space  to  receive  the  fire  of  the  over- 
whelming force  on  our  flank,  which  was  under  cover  of  trees ; but  they 
would  have  been  sacrificed  without  the  smallest  hope  of  a successful 
result. 

The  mules  and  horses  attached  to  the  artillery  had  been  killed  during 


Crap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  G. 


173 


the  action ; the  pieces  had  to  be  abandoned,  and  believing  it  utterly 
impossible  to  make  a successful  stand  against  such  an  overwhelming 
force,  I deemed  it  my  duty  to  surrender. 

A verified  roll  of  the  prisoners  has  gone  to  General  Huger,  through 
Major  Allston,  Provisional  Army  Confederate  States.  The  number,  I 
believe,  is  about  2,500.  Among  these  are  the  battalions  of  Colonel 
Green  and  Major  Fry,  who  reached  the  island  too  late  to  participate  in 
the  battle.  Colonel  Green,  however,  had  a skirmish  with  the  enemy, 
an  account  of  which  is  given  in  his  report. 

The  loss  on  our  side  in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing,  is  as  follows : 
Killed,  23 ; wounded,  58 ; and  missing,  62.  The  loss  of  the  Forty-sixth 
and  Fifty-ninth  Virginia  Volunteers  is  6 killed,  28  wounded,  and  19 
missing ; that  of  the  Eighth,  Thirty-first,  and  Second  North  Carolina 
troops  is  16  killed,  30  wounded,  and  43  missing;  of  the  Engineer  De- 
partment, Lieutenant  Selden  was  killed. 

Twto  companies  at  Fort  Forrest  are  reported  to  have  blown  up  the 
fort  and  made  their  escape.  A detachment  of  17  men,  under  Lieuten- 
ant Pulley,  of  the  Thirty-first  North  Carolina  troops,  stationed  at  the 
battery  at  Midge  tt’s  Hommock,  also  escaped. 

In  addition  to  the  officers  killed,  whose  names  have  already  been 
mentioned,  the  country  will  deplore  the  loss  of  Capt.  O.  J.  Wise,  of 
the  Forty-sixth  Virginia  Volunteers,  who  fell  bravely  fighting  at  the 
head  of  his  company,  and  whose  last  utterances  asJae  was  borne  from 
the  field  were  words  of  encouragement  to  his  fellov^oldiers.  Captain 
Coles,  of  the  same  regiment,  also  proved  himself  a gallant  soldier,  and 
was  killed  upon  the  field. 

While  I bear  testimony  to  the  bravery  and  good  conduct  of  the  offi- 
cers and  men  generally  who  were  under  my  immediate  observation 
during  the  long  protracted  action,  it  is  my  duty  to  express  the  decided 
belief  that,  had  an  opportunity  offered,  the  officers  and  men  so  long 
held  in  reserve  under  the  most  trying  circumstances  would  have  shown 
themselves  worthy  the  confidence  of  the  country.  The  loss  of  the 
enemy  in  killed  and  wounded  was  very  great. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  giving  expression  to  the  deep  grief 
which  I feel  on  account  of  the  disaster  which  has  befallen  us,  and  at 
the  same  time  expressing  the  earnest  hope  that  the  Great  Being  who 
holds  the  destinies  of  nations  in  the  hollow  of  His  hand  will  soon  ena- 
ble us  to  retrieve  the  losses  we  have  sustained. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  M.  SHAW, 

Colonel  Eighth  North  Carolina  State  Troops. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise, 

Commanding  Fourth  Brigade , Department  of  Norfolk. 


No.  26. 

Report  of  Capt.  James  M.  Whitson , Eighth  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

February  6, 1862—8  p.  m. 

Received  orders  to-night  to  muster  all  the  available  strength  of  my 
company,  with  one  day’s  ration,  and  march  to  Pugh’s  Landing,  distant 
9 miles  from  the  camp. 

At  2 o’clock  on  the  following  morning  we  arrived  at  the  church  near 


174 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


(Char  XX. 


the  entrance  of  the  road  leading  to  and  half  a mile  from  the  intended 
destination  of  our  troops.  Here  we  were  halted  and  ordered  to  remain 
till  further  orders. 

At  the  dawn  of  day  orders  reached  us  to  resume  our  march  for  the 
landing.  Immediately  our  forces  were  under  arms  and  wading  through 
the  ponds  of  water  that  intercepted  our  march  ; but  we  had  not  pro- 
ceeded far  when  another  order  from  the  commanding  officer  met  us. 
directing  us  to  fall  back  again  to  the  spot  that  we  had  just  left,  where 
we  remained  till  1 p.  m. 

At  12  o'clock  the  enemy’s  fleet  engaged  our  fort  on  the  shore,  and 
one  hour  after  the  cannonading  commenced  our  forces  were  ordered  to 
gain  Ashby’s  Landing  with  all  possible  speed,  3 miles  in  our  rear  $ but 
before  we  reached  the  landing  we  were  again  halted.  It  was  now  about 
4 o’clock,  when  we  saw  two  or  three  companies  retreating  from  the 
landing  last  mentioned  in  double-quick  time,  with  two  or  three  field 
pieces,  which  I supposed  had  been  previously  planted  at  the  landing  to 
prevent  the  landing  of  the  enemy’s  troops.  Again  we  were  ordered  to 
reform  and  retire  to  the  little  intrenchment  at  Suple’s  Hill,  a point  still 
farther  to  our  rear. 

By  the  time  Ave  reached  this  last  point,  after  the  reception  of  a few 
shot  and  shell  from  the  epemy’s  fleet,  the  day  had  nearly  reached  its 
close.  While  darkness  was  gathering  OA^er  us  the  firmament  was  becom- 
ing thickly  conde^ed  with  cloud,  threatening  us  Avith  storms  of  rain, 
which  fell  incessantly  before  day.  At  the  battery,  while  Colonel  Shaw, 
of  the  Eighth  North  Carolina  State  troops,  and  Colonel  Jordan,  of  the 
Thirty-first  North  Carolina  Volunteers,  were  probably  concerting  their 
plans  for  the  defense  of  the  works,  our  troops  were  waiting  for  the  next 
order,  and  apparently  in  eager  expectation  of  the  arrival  of  the  enemy. 
At  length  the  conclusion  came,  when  Colonel  Jordan,  of  the  aforesaid 
volunteers,  was  left  in  command  at  the  battery.  My  company  having 
been  detached  from  its  regiment  by  order  of  Colonel  Shaw,  to  remain 
with  the  forces  under  Colonel  Jordan  at  the  battery,  was  ordered  by 
the  latter  (Colonel  Jordan)  to  take  position  on  the  right  of  the  battery 
and  to  defend  it,  whereupon  I immediately  moved  my  men  in  position, 
ordering  them  to  stack  their  arms  for  the  purpose  of  executing  another 
order  from  Colonel  Jordan  to  me  relative  to  overlaying  the  battery 
with  pine  bushes,  which  was  soon  accomplished  in  good  order  5 but 
finding  the  length  of  the  breastwork  from  the  gun  and  embrasure  on 
the  left  of  my  company  to  the  extreme  right  totally  insufficient  to 
admit  my  company  in  two  ranks,  I applied  to  Colonel  Jordan  for 
spades,  that  I might  both  lengthen  and  turn  the  battery  to  the  rear  so 
as  to  facilitate  a disposition  against  a flank  movement  of  the  enemy 
should  they  attempt  it,  but  unfortunately  the  spades  could  not  be  had. 
The  night  passed,  and  a dark  night  it  was. 

The  morning  came,  February  8,  and  we  were  all  wet  with  the  rain 
of  the  pre\fious  night,  and  soon  our  pickets  were  driven  in  and  reported 
they  were  coming.  Scarcely  fifteen  minutes  had  elapsed  before  the  balls 
were  whistling  thick  and  fast  about  our  ranks  from  the  long-range  rifles 
of  the  invaders.  A vast  number  of  shots  were  fired  at  us.  taking  but 
little  effect  in  our  lines,  before  we  answered  or  returned  tne  fire,  with 
the  exception  of  what  firing  was  done  by  a few  of  our  skirmishers  de- 
ployed against  them. 

At  length  an  attempt  was  made  by  the  enemy  as  if  to  charge  our 
battery,  but  it  was  at  this  crisis  of  the  action  that  we  poured  a deadly 
fire  into  them,  repulsing  them,  as  we  supposed,  Avith  considerable  loss, 
as  we  did  on  several  other  subsequent  occasions.  Finding  it  impossible 


Chap.  XX.]  BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C.  175 

to  carry  onr  works  by  means  of  charging  them  in  front,  the  enemy  next 
determined,  if  possible,  to  gain  the  right  and  left  flanks  of  our  line, 
which  they  succeeded  in  doing  after  a five  hours7  struggle,  having  to 
ford  a deep,  boggy  swamp,  which  compelled  them  to  move  very  cau- 
tiously and  very  "slowly.  During  the  movement  through  the  swamp  to 
our  right  Colonels  Shaw  and  Jordan,  both  being  in  the  latter,  urged 
me  to  watch  the  movement,  which  I did  with  the  utmost  precaution, 
causing  my  men  to  fire  on  the  enemy  at  every  opportunity. 

Half  an  "hour  before  the  retreat  took  place,  seeing  that  my  company 
on  the  right  was  occupying  a critical  position,  becoming  more  and  more 
exposed  to  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  I passed  quickly  from  my  position 
to  Colonel  Jordan,  informing  him  of  the  enemy’s  movements,  and  hav- 
ing done  this,  1 passed  quickly  back  to  my  company.  Up  to  this  time 
I had  lost  2 of  my  men  killed  and  4 or  5 others  wounded. 

The  fire  was  now  becoming  intense,  the  right  flank  of  my  company 
being  the  most  hotly  attacked.  Believing  that  a change  of  position 
was  really  necessary,  and  that  in  a few  moments  more  we  should  be 
swept  with  an  overraking  fire,  I threw  the  right  wing  of  company  to 
the  rear,  in  order  to  diminish  its  front.  I again  went  to  Colonel  Shaw 
and  informed  him  of  the. position  gained  against  us. 

About  this  time  a retreat  had  been  determined,  Colonel  Shaw  having 
informed  me  that  we  should  have  to  evacuate  the  works.  A few  min- 
utes more  and  all  our  forces  were  retreating  in  the  direction  of  the  camp. 
I had  not  left  the  battery  but  a few  paces  when  I received  a slight 
wound  from  a ball  which  passed  through  the  leg  of  my  pants,  cutting 
my  leg,  but  very  shallow,  though  it  prohibited  me  from  walking  for 
several  days. 

Many  of  my  command,  being  near  their  homes  and  thoroughly  ac- 
quainted and  familiar  with  the  vicinity  of  the  island  and  the  region  of 
country  around,  succeeded  in  making  their  escape  from  the  island  after 
the  action  was  over,  and  some  after  the  surrender  was  made,  before 
they  could  be  taken  prisoners — some  leaving  their  baggage  and  others 
carrying  both  baggage  and  guns  with  them.  These  men,  about  35  or 
40  in  number,  are  liable  to  do  service,  and  I have  instructed  several  of 
them  that  I have  seen  to  report  to  those  officers  of  my  company  who 
were  not  taken  prisoners  for  duty.  Enoch  F.  Baxter,  brevet  lieuten- 
ant, Sergts.  Lewis  N.  Simmons  and  Caleb  Toler,  and  four  corporals 
made  their  escape.  The  other  commissioned  officers  and  sergeants 
were  made  prisoners  and  paroled. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JAMES  M.  WHITSON, 

Captain  Company  B1  Eighth  Regiment  N.  C.  State  Troops . 


No.  27. 

■ Report  of  Col . John  V.  Jordan , Thirty-first  North  Carolina  Infantry . 

Steamer  Spaulding,  February  17,  1862. 

Sir  : I herewith  submit  to  you  a report  of  the  part  taken  by  my 
regiment  in  the  late  engagement  on  Roanoke  Island  between  the  forces 
of  the  Confederate  States  and  those  of  the  United  States. 

The  first  appearance  of  the  enemy  was  on  the  morning  of  the  6th 
instant,  about  8 o’clock,  as  seen  from  Ashby’s  Landing  by  the  forces 
stationed  there,  consisting  of  two  companies  (B  and  F,  infantry)  of 


176 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX 


my  regiment,  under  command  of  Captains  Liles  and  Kniglifc,  with  two 
pieces  of  artillery,  one  24-pounder  navy  howitzer,  and  one  18-pounder 
held  gun,  the  whole  force,  including  the  artillery,  under  Captain  Liles, 
he  being  the  senior  officer  present.  Under  an  order  from  you  to  pro- 
ceed to  Ashby’s  Landing  I arrived  there  at  12  m.  on  the  6th,  and  dis- 
covered by  aid  of  a glass  a large  number  of  the  enemy’s  fleet,  consist- 
ing of  steam  and  sail  vessels,  then  apparently  lying  at  anchor  at  a point 
10  miles  below  the  southern  point  of  the  island.  1 left  Ashby’s  at  2 p. 
m.  and  met  you,  in  company  with  Captain  Taylor,  of  the  Navy,  and  re- 
ported the  information  1 had  received. 

Uj)on  your  return  to  the  camp  I received  an  order  from  you  to  pre- 
pare one  day’s  rations  for  all  the  available  forces  under  my  command, 
with  the  exception  ol  one  company,  which  was  to  be  left  in  charge  of 
the  camp,  and  that  portion  of  Captain  Godwin’s  company  which  was 
then  in  quarters  and  which  you  ordered  to  be  sent  to  the  western  side 
of  the  sound,  at  a point  called  Fort  Forrest,  then  in  charge  <.  f Captain 
Whitty,  with  instructions  to  Captain  Godwin  to  support  Captain  Wliitty 
in  protecting  that  point.  The  remaining  portion  of  my  available  forces, 
with  one  day’s  provisions,  was  ordered  to  take  up  the  line  of  march  to 
Ashby’s  Landing  or  that  vicinity.  On  arriving  at  Suple’s  Hill,  about 
a mile  and  a hall  above  this  landing,  the  forces  were  ordered  to  bivouac 
for  the  night. 

At  a very  early  hour  on  the  morning  of  the  7th  myself,  in  com- 
pany with  Major  Yeates,  proceeded  to  the  landing,  leaving  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Fowle  in  charge  of  the  forces  at  Suple’s  Hill,  with  a view  of 
making  further  preparation  to  meet  the  enemy  should  a landing  be 
attempted  at  that  point. 

About  10  a.  m.  I perceived  that  the  enemy’s  fleet  was  in  motion,  ad- 
vancing up  the  sound,  and  at  about  11.45  o’clock  the  leading  steamer 
opened  fire  upon  Fort  Bartow.  About  3 p.  m.  the  engagement  became 
general  upon  the  part  of  the  enemy’s  vessels  against  Fort  Bartow.  At 
about  4 p.  m.  a small  boat,  containing  about  15  men,  left  one  of  the  trans- 
ports of  the  enemy,  apparently  with  a view  of  taking  soundings  at  Ham- 
mond’s Landing,  about  half  a mile  above  Ashby’s.  As  the  boat  ap- 
proached the  land  I detailed  a force  of  25,  under  command  of  Captain 
Liles,  to  intercept  it.  The  party  in  the  boat  had  effected  a landing, 
when  Captain  Liles  ordered  the  men  under  his  command  to  fire  upon 
them,  by  which  fire  it  has  since  been  ascertained  that  3 of  the  enemy 
were  killed  and  1 wounded.  The  remainder  immediately  retreated  to 
the  vessel  in  the  sound.  About  5 o’clock  a large  steamer  and  a num- 
ber of  smaller  boats,  carrying  a force  estimated  at  8,000  or  10,000 
men,  with  several  pieces  of  artillery,  and  under  cover  of  the  gunboats 
in  the  sound,  was  seen  approaching  Hammond’s  Landing,  between  which 
and  the  point  occupied  by  my  forces  lay  a large  marsh  impassable  by 
artillery.  Having  no  horses  for  our  artillery,  fearing  that  we  might  be 
cut  off,  or  at  least  that  the  shells  from  the  enemy’s  guns  in  the  sound 
might  confuse  and  disconcert  the  men  under  my  command  and  cause 
the  eventual  loss  of  the  field  pieces,  which  you  enjoined  upon  me  at  all 
hazards  to  save,  I considered  it  judicious  to  order  a retreat.  The 
infantry,  under  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Fowle,  was  placed  in 
rear  of  the  artillery  to  protect  it,  and  all  the  forces  retired  in  good 
order  to  a redoubt  thrown  across  the  main  road  one  mile  and  a quarter 
above  Ashby’s,  where  the  guns  were  placed  in  battery,  the  18-pounder 
on  the  left  and  the  howitzer  on  the  right,  under  command  of  Cap- 
tain Schermerhorn  and  Lieutenant  Kinney,  and  a 6-pounder  occupying 
the  center,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Selden.  The  gun  detach- 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


177 


/HAI\  XX.] 


nents  were  immediately  ordered  to  take  position  at  their  pieces.  A 
picket  guard  was  thrown  out  and  a detail  ordered  from  each  company 
present,  to  mask  the  battery  as  effectually  as  the  short  time  rendered 
practicable.  Soon  afterward  you  arrived  and  took  command. 

At  about  12  o’clock  at  night  I proceeded  to  obey  your  order  to  march 
ill  my  forces,  except  those  detailed  for  the  support  of  the  battery,  in 
connection  with  those  of  Colonel  Anderson,  to  Fort  Bartow;  but  while 
i waiting  at  Suple’s  Hill  the  arrival  of  Colonel  Anderson  I received  an 
irder,  through  Major  Yeates,  revoking  your  former  order,  and  remained 
there  during  the  rest  of  the  night,  awaiting  further  orders,  with  the 
following  companies  of  my  regiment:  Company  C,  Captain  Betts; 
Company  D,  Captain  Manly;  Company  G,  Captain  Picot;  Company 
El,  Captain  Jones;  Company  I,  Captain  McKay;  Company  K,  Captain 
Whitty. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  8th  I received  orders  from  you  to  report 
myself  to  you  in  person  at  the  battery  then  under  your  command, 
svhich  I did,  leaving  the  companies  above  named  to  act  as  a reserve, 
mder  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  [Daniel  G.]  Fowle  and  Major 
Jesse  J.]  Yeates.  As  yon  are  entirely  familiar  with  the  part  taken 
oy  me  and  those  under  my  command  during  tbe  action  of  the  8th,  I 
leem  a further  report  from  me  unnecessary.  Appended  you  will  find 
i statement  of  the  number  of  men  of  my  regiment  engaged,  killed, 
vounded,  &c.# 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  especially  mentioning  the  acts  of 
poolness  and  manifest  bravery  of  Captains  Liles  and  Knight,  with  the 
>fficers  and  men  under  their  command,  who  were  in  the  fight  at  the 
pattery.  Lieutenant  Pipkin,  of  Company  G,  was  in  charge  of  Fort 
Blanchard,  and,  with  all  of  his  command,  evinced  a spirit  to  faithfully 
md  nobly  discharge  his  duty  had  an  opportunity  offered.  Lieutenant 
Pulley,  Company  H,  in  charge  of  Fort  , at  Midgett’s,  is  sup- 

posed to  have  escaped  with  his  command,  not  having  been  heard  from 
since  our  defeat.  I doubt  not  but  he  remained  faithfully  at  his  post, 
ready  to  do  his  duty,  till  he  learned  that  our  battery  was  flanked  by 
:he  enemy  and  a retreat  ordered. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

J.  Y.  JORDAK, 
Colonel  Thirty -first  Regiment. 

Col.  H.  M.  Shaw, 

Commanding  Forces  Roanohe  Island. 


Ko.  28. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Wharton  J . Green , Second  Forth  Carolina  Battalion. 

On  Board  Steamer  S.  R.  Spauldino, 

Off  Roanohe  Island , N.  6Y.,  February  18,  1862. 
Sir:  I herewith  submit  a report  of  the  skirmish  in  which  my  bat- 
talion (Second  Korth  Carolina)  was  engaged  on  Saturday,  the  8th 
nstant: 

In  obedience  to  orders  from  Adjutant-General  Cooper,  received  on 
he  evening  of  January  30, 1 struck  camp  in  the  vicinity  of  Wilmington 

* List  sliows  475  men  in  action;  2 killed,  8 wounded,  and  76  missing. 


178 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  X: 


on  the  morning  of  the  1st  instant  and  proceeded  hither  with  all  possib 
dispatch.  Owing  to  the  want  of  transports  we  were  detained  two  da.3 
and  upward  in  Norfolk,  leaving  that  place  on  Wednesday,  the  5t 
instant,  in  tow  of  the  canal  tug-boat  White. 

On  Friday,  when  about  30  miles  distant  from  the  island,  continue 
discharges  of  artillery  informed  ns  of  the  progress  of  a fight  betwee 
the  Federal  fleet  and  Confederate  batteries.  Being  entirely  ignorai 
of  the  topography  of  the  island,  and  not  knowing  where  or  to  whom  1 
report,  I left  our  transports  about  20  miles  hence  and  came  on  in  tl 
steamer  for  information.  Having  obtained  which,  I returned  to  m 
men  and  crowded  them  on  the  smallest  number  of  transports  tin 
would  contain  them  and  then  started.  The  night  was  very  dark  an 
stormy,  with  the  wind  against  us,  consequently  our  progress  was  slo\ 

After  beating  about  until  midnight  our  pilot  declared  that  he  Ini 
lost  his  reckoning,  and  as  we  had  only  a fathom  and  a half  of  wate 
thought  it  safer  to  wait  for  daylight. 

About  2 a.  m.  Saturday  a number  of  Confederate  gunboats  passed  1 
from  the  direction  of  the  island,  one  of  them  running  into  the  schoorn 
Beauregard  (one  of  our  transports)  and  seriously  injuring  her.  I 
reply  to  our  challenge  and  statement  of  our  condition,  all  the  answ< 
we  could  get  was  that  one  of  the  boats  was  the  Beaufort,  the  oth< 

the . Had  they  stopped  in  their  flight  long  enough  to  exchan^ 

pilots  with  us,  or  even  to  give  ours  the  necessary  instruction  as  to  h 
course,  my  battalion  would  have  reached  the  island  in  time  to  ha^ 
participated  in  the  entire  action. 

Failing  to  do  so,  it  was  10  a.  m.  when  we  reached  the  island,  and  ] 
o'clock  before  the  men,  arms,  and  ammunition  could  be  got  on  shor 
owing  to  their  having  to  be  taken  on  lighters.  Having  distributed  a 
of  my  ammunition  I started  for  the  scene  of  action,  but  soon  met  score 
of  stragglers,  who  reported  everything  lost  and  the  Confederate  force 
entirely  dispersed. 

Notwithstanding  these  discouraging  reports,  my  men  kept  in  goo 
spirits  and  pressed  on  with  animation.  On  reaching  your  camp,  an 
having  the  worst  reports  confirmed,  1 called  upon  you  for  orders,  an 
was  told  to  proceed  to  a point  some  mile  or  two  distant,  under  tl 
guidance  of  Major ‘Williamson,  and  take  position. 

After  proceeding  about  half  a mile  we  came  suddenly  upon  a Feder; 
regiment,  which  I have  since  learned  was  the  Twenty-first  Massachi 
setts.  The  two  advanced  companies  of  the  respective  commands  we] 
about  75  paces  apart,  I being  some  20  paces  in  advance  of  mine, 
gave  the  command  “By  company  into  line,”  when  the  officer  in  con 
mand  of  the  Federal  regiment  threw  up  his  hand  and  cried  out,  “ Stoj 
stop,  colonel;  don’t  fire;  you  are  mistaken!”  Believing  it  to  be 
trick,  I repeated  my  command.  Thereupon  the  Federal  officer  ga\j 
the  command,  “Fire.”  My  advanced  companies  returned  the  fire,  firiii 
at  will  after  the  first  volley.  Finding  that  there  was  some  confusioi 
and  not  knowing  the  ground,  I soon  became  satisfied  that  I could  m 
form  my  men  in  line  of  battle  to  any  advantage  on  the  ground  that  the 
then  occupied,  so  I ordered  them  to  fall  back  a short  distance  an 
form  behind  the  log  houses  occupied  by  Colonel  Jordan’s  regiment  i 
quarters.  This  they  did  in  good  order.  The  Federate  fell  back  imrn 
diately  after.  Immediately  after  forming  behind  the  houses  Lieutei 
ant-Colonel  Fowle,  of  the  Thirty-first  North  Carolina,  passed  by  with 
white  flag,  and  stated  that  a surrender  had  been  determined  upon. 

My  loss  was  3 men  killed  and  5 wounded,  2 of  whom  have  since  die< 
I am  happy  to  be  able  to  report  favorably  of  the  action  of  both  office] 


179 


iae.  XX.]  BATTLE  OF  EOANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 

ad  men.  The  enemy’s  loss,  as  I learned  from  themselves,  was  be- 
veen  20  and  30. 

I marched  my  entire  command,  with  very  few  exceptions,  in  good 
rder  back  to  your  camp. 

I am,  sir,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WHAKTON  J.  GKEEN, 

tf  Lieutenant- Colonel,  Second  North  Carolina  Battalion. 


Col.  H.  M.  Shaw. 


No.  29. 

Report  of  Maj.  II.  W.  Fry , Forty-sixth  Virginia  Infantry . 

Steamship  S.  B.  Spaulding, 

Off  Roanoke  Island , N.  (7.,  February  18,  1862. 

■ In  obedience  to  instructions  received  from  Col.  J.  H.  Bichardson, 
ommanding  forces  at  Nag’s  Head,  I proceeded  with  my  command 
Companies  B,  D,  G,  and  K,  aggregate  150)  to  Boanoke  Island,  landed, 
nd  with  my  command  reported  to  Col.  H.  M.  Shaw,  who  ordered  me 
o countermarch  my  command  and  save  them  if  possible;  but  on 
r riving  at  the  point  where  we  had  landed  there  was  no  transporta- 
ion,  the  tug  and  barge  that  brought  us  over  having  left  for  Nag’s 
lead. 

r Bespectfullv  submitted. 

H.  W.  FBY, 

Commanding  Companies  B , I),  G,  and  K,  4 6th  Va.  Regt. 

Col.  H.  M.  Shaw. 


It  No.  30. 

leport  of  Lieut.  Col.  Frank  P.  Anderson , Fifty-ninth  Virginia  Infantry. 

i 

On  Board  Steamer  S.  B.  Spaulding, 

February  15,  1862. 

Sir  : I herewith  inclose  you  a report  of  the  part  taken  by  the  Fifty - 
iinth  Begiment  Virginia  Volunteers  in  the  engagement  of  the  8th 
ustant. 

In  obedience  to  orders  from  General  H.  A.  Wise  I left  Nag’s  Head 
>n  the  morning  of  the  7th,  and  not  being  able  to  effect  a landing  at  the 
rharf,  I beached  the  boats  at  the  north  end  of  the  island  and  there 
fleeted  a landing,  leaving  the  baggage  and  most  of  the  ammunition  on 
>oard  the  transports.  My  force — consisting  of  two  companies  of  the 
^orty-sixth  Begiment  Virginia  Volunteers  and  eight  companies  of  the 
^ifty-ninth  Begiment  Virginia  Volunteers,  amounting  in  all  to  about 
1 50  men,  officers  included — then  proceeded  to  the  earthwork,  across  the 
Win  road,  where  we  arrived  about  6 p.  m.,  and  found  that  the  enemy 
Lad  effected  a landing  in  force  at  Ashby’s  Landing. 

^ Colonel  Jordan,  having  fallen  back  from  that  point  (bringing  the 
irtillery  back  to  the  earthwork),  I immediately  sent  scouts  to  discover 
he  position  and  force  of  the  enemy.  The  scouts  returned  in  fifteen 


180 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX 


minutes,  having  shot  one  of  their  advance  pickets  within  500  yards  o 
the  earthwork,  and  bringinghis  gun.  I immediately  sent  out  a strom 
picket— 10  Rangers,  Company  A,  Fifty-ninth  Regiment,  and  10  Rich 
mond  Light  Infantry  Blues,  Company  A,  Forty-sixth  Regiment,  Capt 
O.  Jennings  Wise  in  command.  Nothing  occurred  during  the  night. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  8th  I ordered  Company  A,  Fifty-nintl 
Regiment,  Lieutenant  Hazlett  commanding,  to  proceed  in  the  directioi 
of  the  enemy,  to  relieve  Captain  Wise  and  his  pickets.  In  about  fifteei 
minutes  they  returned,  reporting  the  advance  of  the  enemy  in  force, 
immediately  deployed  Captain  Wise’s  company  (A,  Forty-sixth  Regi 
ment),  Captain  Coles’  company  (Forty-sixth  Regiment),  and  Lieutenan 
Hazlett’s  company  (A,  Fifty-ninth  Regiment)  on  our  left,  in  the  swamp 
I having  been  informed  by  you  that  our  right  was  impassable,  fron 
reports  which  you  had  received.  The  earthwork  not  being  capable  o 
sheltering  more  than  200  men,  I then  marched  the  rest  of  my  commanc 
about  250  yards  to  the  rear,  there  to  be  held  in  reserve. 

After  getting  the  reserve  placed  in  position  I dispatched  scouts  t< 
the  right  for  the  purpose  of  discovering,  if  possible,  a road  by  whicl 
we  might  flank  the  enemy  or  be  flanked  by  them.  They  soon  returned 
reporting  a passage  impracticable.  I then  sent  them  farther  to  the 
right,  when  a messenger  arrived  from  you  requesting  me  to  come  to  the 
earthwork.  Arriving  at  the  earthwork,  I dispatched  10  more  men  tc 
watch  and  skirmish  on  our  right  flank. 

About  9.30  a.  m.,  the  firing  being  very  heavy,  I dispatched  a mes 
senger  to  Major  Lawson  to  bring  three  companies  to  the  earthwork  tc 
relieve  those  already  engaged.  He  arrived  with  Company  E,  Captain 
Dickinson,  and  Company  K,  Lieutenant  Roy,  of  the  Fifty-ninth  Regi 
ment,  and  Company  — , Captain  Murchison,  Eighth  Regiment  North 
Carolina  State  troops.  They  arrived  under  a shower  of  bullets,  Lieu 
tenants  Miller,  Pottier,  and  Walker  receiving  wounds.  The  engage 
ment  lasted  until  12  o’clock,  when,  our  ammunition  being  expended 
and  our  right  flank  (which  had  been  reported  impassable)  being  turned. 
T was  obliged  to  leave  the  earthwork.  My  regiment  retreated  in  good 
order. 

After  arriving  at  your  quarters,  and  while  in  conversation  with  your- 
self, Colonel  Green  engaged  the  advance  of  the  enemy.  I immediately 
marched  my  regiment  to  the  woods  near  the  beach,  and  there  placed 
them  in  position  to  receive  the  enemy.  While  in  this  position  the 
report  reached  me  that  the  white  flag  had  been  sent  by  you  to  the 
enemy,  and  that  you  had  surrendered  the  forces  on  the  island.  I sent 
an  officer  to  you  to  inquire  into  the  truth  of  this  report ; he  returned, 
informing  me  that  the  report  was  correct.  I then  countermarched  my 
regiment  to  your  encampment  and  there  surrendered  them. 

The  following  is  the  list  of  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  from  my 
command : Killed,  2 captains  and  4 privates ; wounded,  4 lieutenants 
and  24  privates  ; missing,  19  privates.  Those  missing  are  supposed  to 
have  escaped  from  the  island. 

The  officers  and  privates  under  my  command  behaved  gallantly 
against  great  odds. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANK  P.  ANDERSON, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel,  Fifty -ninth  Regiment  Virginia  Volunteers. 

Col.  H.  M.  Shaw, 

Commanding  Roanoke  Island. 


iAP.XX.]  BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C.  • 181 

No.  31. 

i 

Report  of  Maj.  G.  H.  Hill , G.  8.  Army , Commanding  Fort  Bartow. 

n 

Steamer  S.  E.  Spaulding, 
Croatan  Sound , AT.  0.,  February  14.  1862. 
Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
igagement  between  the  enemy’s  fleet  and  Fort  Bartow  on  the  7th  and 
h instant : 

On  the  morning  of  the  7th,  while  the  men  under  my  command  were 
’)  drill  in  the  fort,  we  saw  that  the  fleet  of  the  enemy  was  coming  up 
'ie  sound.  1 immediately  cleared  the  fort  for  action  and  made  every 
reparation  in  my  power  to  give  them  a warm  reception. 

About  11.30  o’clock  their  fleet,  consisting  of  about  thirty  gunboats, 
ivanced  within  range  of  the  four  guns  on  the  left  flank  of  my  battery 
onsisting  of  No.  6,  a 57-cwt.  32-pounder,  on  a navy  carriage  in  em- 
./asure;  No.  7,  a rifled  32-pounder,  on  navy  barbette  carriage,  and 
os.  8 and  9,  41  and  47  cwt.  32-pounders,  on  columbiad  carriages), 
id  opened  fire  from  about  sixty  guns,  throwing  9, 10,  and  11  inch  shell, 
1th  shrapnel,  a few  round  shot,  and  every  variety  of  rifle  projectiles. 
re  answered  cautiously  and  slowly  with  the  four  guns  that  could  be 
ought  to  bear  upon  them,  and  they  soon  fell  back  so  as  to  mask  gun 
a.  6,  concentrating  the  fire  on  the  three  barbette  guns,  which  now 
one  bore  on  them.  We  fired  in  all  but  fourteen  shots  from  gun  No. 
this  day. 

Early  in  the  action  a shell  exploded  on  the  platform  of  the  rifled 
m,  destroying  a portion  of  the  traverse  circle,  diminishing  its  traverse, 
that  it  could  be  traversed  only  on  those  vessels  of  the  fleet  that  were 
Ivanced  farthest  to  the  northward.  The  enemy  maintained  an  unin- 
rrupted  fire  for  more  than  six  hours,  withdrawing  at  dark.  We  fired 
'e  last  shot.  The  works,  however,  sustained  but  little  damage.  We 
ed  30  rounds  from  the  rifle  gun  and  161  rounds  from  Nos.  8 and  9, 
iking,  with  the  14  rounds  from  No.  6,  a total  of  205  rounds  expended, 
ie  projectiles  used  by  me  were  principally  round  shot. 

Early  in  the  action  the  quarters  were  fired  by  the  enemy’s  shells, 
d,  notwithstanding  the  strenuous  efforts  of  Lieutenant  Gilliam,  of 
bmpany  I,  who  was  sent  with  a detachment  to  rescue  the  property 
ntained  in  them,  nearly  the  whole  of  it,  including  the  small-arms  of 
’>■  battalion,  was  destroyed. 

While  in  this  service  Private  Bagley,  of  Company  I,  was  severely 
bunded  by  the  explosion  of  a shell.  Private  Wilson,  of  Company  L, 
is  killed  at  the  battery  early  in  the  action,  and  Private  Baily,  of  same 
mpany,  was  mortally  wounded.  Sergeant  Graves  and  Private  Green, 
Company  L,  were  severely  wounded  at  their  guns,  making  the  total 
P casualties  1 killed  and  4 wounded. 

The  damage  sustained  by  the  work  was  repaired  during  the  night  by 
e negro  laborers,  under  the  direction  of  Lieutenant  Talcott,  who  vol- 
teered  his  services. 

An  additional  supply  of  ammunition  was  sent  to  us  from  Fort  Huger 
Captain  Taylor,  which  gave  us,  including  amount  on  hand,  42  rounds 
* the  rifled  gun  and  155  rounds  for  smooth-bore  32-pounders. 

On  Saturday,  the  8th,  my  men  were  at  their  post  by  5.30  a.  m.  in 
e spirits,  expecting  a renewal  of  the  attack. 

AT  9 a.  m.  the  enemy’s  fleet  attempted  an  advance  up  Croatan  Sound, 
th  the  apparent  intent  of  cutting  off  our  re-enforcements  landing  on 
< 3 north  end  of  the  island.  I opened  fire  on  them  with  the  rifled  gun 


182 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


and  gun  No.  6,  checking  their  advance  and  bringing  on  a desultory  en- 
gagement, which  continued  at  intervals  until  12.30  o’clock,  when,  re- 
ceiving the  intelligence  that  our  land  defenses  had  been  forced  and  my 
position  consequently  turned,  I abandoned  Fort  Bartow,  destroying! 
the  ammunition  and  disabling  the  guns.  During  the  morning  we  fired 
about  20  rounds  of  rifle  charges  and  20  more  from  smooth-bore  32- 
pounders. 

In  closing,  I desire  to  state  that  both  the  officers  and  men  under  my 
command  did  their  duty  manfully  and  with  skill  and  courage.  Special 
commendation  is  due  to  Captain  Fearing  and  Lieutenants  Elliott  and 
Hinton  of  Company  L,  and  Lieutenant  Gilliam  of  Company  I ; also 
to  Sergeant  Graves,  Privates  Black  and  Dawson  of  Company  L,  and 
Sergeant  Barrow  and  Privates  Jacocks  and  Stokes  of  Company  I. 

I here  desire  also  to  acknowledge  the  great  service  rendered  by  Cap- 
tain Taylor,  of  the  artillery ; Lieutenant  Loyall,  of  the  Navy,  and  Lieu- 
tenant Talcott,  also  of  the  artillery.  They  did  great  service — cool, 
calm,  and  assisting  in  every  way.  Their  conduct  cannot  be  too  highly 
commended. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  H.  HILL, 

Major , C.  8.  Provisional  Army , Commanding  Fort. 

Col.  H.  M.  Shaw, 

Eighth  Regt.  N~.  C.  Troops , Comdg.  Forces  Roanohe  Island. 


No.  32. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  8.  Taylor , C.  8.  Army , in  charge  of  Heavy  Artillery. J 

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C., 

February  9,  1862. 

Sir  : On  Friday,  the  7th  instant,  at  about  noon,  the  enemy’s  fleet 
opened  fire  on  our  squadron  and  Fort  Bartow.  In  obedience  to  your 
orders  I took  charge  of  Forts  Huger  and  Blanchard,  and  awaited  the 
approach  of  the  enemy ; but  as  they  did  not  come  within  range  of  our 
rifled  guns  (which  I fired  eight  times)  and  seemed  to  concentrate  their 
fire  on  the  left  flank  of  Fort  Bartow,  I immediately  rode  to  that  battery, 
where  I remained  until  the  enemy  ceased  firing,  assisting  Major  Hill, 
the  commanding  officer  of  that  post. 

On  the  morning  of  the  8th,  about  10  a.  m.,  Fort  Bartow  fired  a shot 
at  the  enemy’s  ships,  to  prevent  what  seemed  to  be  ap  attempt  to  cut 
off  re-enforcements  approaching  the  island  from  the  northward  (the 
other  batteries  being  manned  to  drive  back  the  enemy  should  the 
attempt  be  persevered  in),  'when  their  fleet  commenced  a desultory  fire 
-upon  Fort  Bartow.  I immediately  repaired  to  that  post,  where  I re- 
mained until  the  battery  was  evacuated,  in  consequence  of  our  land 
defenses  having  been  forced  by  the  enemy’s  troops. 

I then  returned  to  Fort  Blanchard,  thinking  the  fleet  would  attempt 
to  pass  through  Croatan  Sound,  which,  however,  they  did  not.  Leaving 
orders  to  fire  upon  them  should  they  attempt  to  pass  or  come  within 
range,  I went  to  Fort  Huger,  where  I soon  received  your  order  to  spike 
the  guns  and  send  the  men  to  your  encampment.  This  was  done, 
the  powder  destroyed,  and  the  gun-carriages  somewhat  injured,  about 
2.30  p.  m. 


;hap.  xx.] 


BATTLE  OE  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  0. 


183 


I should  have  entirely  dismantled  the  batteries  at  Forts  Huger  and 
31anchard  but  for  two  reasons  : First,  because,  in  doing  so,  the  enemy 
vould  have  been  made  aware  of  it,  and  would,  no  doubt,  have  sent 
heir  ships  up  to  take  your  position  in  the  rear ; and,  second,  because 
[had  not  time:  for  while  we  were  throwing  shells  into  the  water  a 
sharp  conflict  was  heard  in  the  direction  of  the  encampment  ot  the 
Thirty-first  Regiment;  so  I immediately  dispatched  the  companies  to 
>•0  by  the  beach  and  through  the  woods  to  your  support. 

5 While  on  my  way  to  your  headquarters  I heard  that  a flag  ot  truce 
lad  been  sent  out,  and  received  orders  not  to  spike  the  guns ; but  it 

w^as  too  late.  . , , , . , , , , 

I do  not  hesitate  to  say,  from  the  service  done  by  the  three  barbette 
o-uns  at  Fort  Bartow  (the  only  guns  brought  fully  into  action),  and  the 
Tittle  damage  sustained  by  that  battery,  notwithstanding  the  incessant 
and  terrible  fire  kept  up  against  it  for  more  than  six  hours  by  per- 
haps sixty  guns,  that  if  all  our  batteries  had  been  brought  into  action 
the  enemy’s  fleet  would  have  been  destroyed  or  beaten  back. 

I desire  to  say  that  the  officers  and  men  brought  under  fire  behaved 
in  a highly  creditable  manner,  and  that  they  seemed  to  be  m better 
condition  the  second  day,  notwithstanding  their  fatigue  and  loss  of  rest, 
than  they  were  during  the  first.  I would  also  say  that  the  officers  and 
men  at  the  batteries  not  engaged  evinced  a fine  spirit;  and  I have  to 
regret  for  them,  for  myself,  and  for  our  cause,  that  they  had  not  an 
opportunity  to  illustrate  their  skill  and  patriotism  against  the  gunboats 

of  the  enemy.  „ _ , « , . 

I understand  that  the  loss  in  the  enemy’s  fleet  was  about  five  times 
as  great  as  ours  in  the  battery.  Ours  was  1 killed  and  3 wounded. 
Major  Hill  will  no  doubt  pay  a just  tribute  to  the  services  of  Lieutenant 
Loyall,  of  the  Navy,  and  Lieutenant  Talcott,  of  the  artillery,  which 
cannot  be  too  highly  commended. 

Allow  me  to  join  in  the  regret  and  mortification  which  I know  you 
feel  that  our  cause  should  have  sustained  a defeat  while  in  our  hands. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ' 

J JOHN  S.  TAYLOR, 

Captain , C.  S.  Army , in  charge  Heavy  Artillery. 

1 Col.  H.  M.  Shaw,  _ _ _ _ 

Eighth  Regt.  N.  C.  State  Troops , Comdg.  Forces  Roanoke  Island. 


No.  33. 

Report  of  the  Investigating  Committee  Confederate  House  of  Representa- 
tives. 

The  committee,  to  whom  was  referred  a resolution  of  the  House  of 
Representatives,  instructing  them  to  “ inquire  and  report  the  caiises 
and  circumstances  of  the  capitulation  of  Roanoke  Island,”  have  had 
the  same  under  consideration,  and  have  given  all  the  facts  and  cir- 
cumstances connected  with  the  defenses  of  the  said  island  and  its  ad- 
jacent waters  and  of  the  capitulation  on  February  8,  a most  elaborate 

investigation.  . ~ , 

The  committee  find  that  on  August  21,  1861,  Brigadier- General  Gat- 
lin was  ordered  to  the  command  of  the  Department  of  North  Carolina 
and  the  coast  defenses  of  that  State.  On  September  29  Brig.  Gen.  D. 
H.  Hill  was  assigned  to  duty  in  North  Carolina,  and  charged  with  the 


184 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


defenses  of  that  portion  of  said  State  lying  between  Albemarle  Sound 
and  the  Neuse  River  and  Pamlico  Sound,  including  those  waters  and 
was  directed  to  report  to  Brigadier-General  Gatlin.  On  November  1G 
Brig.  Gen.  L.  O’B.  Branch  was  directed  to  relieve  Brigadier-General 
Hill  m command  of  his  district  in  North  Carolina.  On  December  21 
that  part  of  North  Carolina  east  of  the  Chowan  River,  together  with 
the  counties  of  Washington  and  Tyrrel,  was,  at  the  request  of  the 
proper  authorities  of  North  Carolina,  separated  from  the  remainder  and 
constituted  into  a military  district,  under  Brig.  Gen.  H.  A.  Wise  and 
attached  to  the  command  of  Major-General  Huger,  commanding  the 
Depai  tment  of  Norfolk.  At  the  time,  therefore,  of  the  surrender  of 
Roanoke  Island,  on  February  8, 1862,  it  was  within  the  military  district 
of  Brigadier-General  Wise,  and  attached  to  the  command  of  Maior- 
General  Huger. 

The  military  defenses  of  Roanoke  Island  and  its  adjacent  waters,  on 
the  said  February  8,  1862,  consisted  of  Fort  Bartow,  the  most  south- 
ern of  the  defenses  on  the  west  side  of  the  island— a sand  fort,  well 
covered  with  turf,  having  six  long  32-pounder  guns  in  embrasure  and 
three  32-pouuders  en  barbette.  The  next  is  Fort  Blanchard,  on  the  same 
side  of  the  island,  about  2J  miles  from  Fort  Bartow — a semicircular 
sand  fort,  turfed,  and  mounting  four  32-pounders  en  barbette.  Next  on 
the  same  side  and  about  1,200  yards  from  Fort  Blanchard,  is  Fort  Hu^er. 
This  is  a turfed  sand  fort,  running  along  the  line  of  the  beach,  and 
closed  m the  rear  by  a low  breastwork,  with  a banquette  for  infantry. 
It  contained  eight  32-pounder  guns  in  embrasure,  two  rifled  32-pounders 
en  barbette , and  two  small  32  pounders  en  barbette  on  the  right 

About  3 miles  below  Fort  Bartow,  on  the  east  side  of  the  island,  was 
a battery  of  two  32-pounder  guns  en  barbette,  at  a point  known  as  Mid- 
ges Hommock.  In  the  center  of  the  island,  about  2 miles  from  Fort 
Bartow  and  a mile  from  Midgett’s  Hommock,  was  a redoubt,  or  breast- 
work, thrown  across  the  road,  about  70  or  80  feet  long,  with  embrasures 
for  three  guns,  on  the  right  of  which  was  a swamp,  on  the  left  a marsh, 
the  redoubt  reaching  nearly  between  them  and  facing  to  the  south.  On 
the  Tyrrel  side,  on  the  main  land,  nearly  opposite  to  Fort  Huger,  was 
Fort  Forrest,  mounting  seven  32-pounders. 

In  addition  to  these  defenses  on  the  shore  and  on  the  island  there 
was  a barrier  of  piles,  extending  from  the  east  side  of  Fulker  Shoals 
toward  the  island.  Its  object  was  to  compel  vessels  passing  on  the 
west  of  the  island  to  approach  within  reach  of  the  shore  batteries,  but 
up  to  February  8 there  was  a span  of  1,700  yards  open  opposite  to  Fort 
Bartow.  Some  vessels  had  been  sunk  and  piles  driven  on  the  west 
side  of  Fulker  Shoals,  to  obstruct  the  channel  between  that  shoal  and 
the  main-land,  which  comprise  all  the  defenses  either  upon  the  land  or 
in  the  waters  adjacent. 

The  entire  military  force  stationed  upon  the  island  prior  to  and  at 
the  time  of  the  late  engagement  consisted  of  the  Eighth  Regiment  of 
North  Carolina  State  troops,  under  the  command  of  Col.  H.  M.  Shaw ; 
the  Thirty-first  Regiment  of  North  Carolina  Volunteers,  under  the 
command  of  Col.  J.  V.  Jordan,  and  three  companies  of  the  Seventeenth 
North  Carolina  troops,  under  the  command  of  Maj.  G.  H.  Hill.  After 
manning  the  several  forts  on  February  7 there  were  but  1,024  men  left, 
and  200  of  them  were  upon  the  sick  list. 

On  the  evening  of  February  7 Brigadier-General  Wise  sent  from 
Nag’s  Head,  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Anderson,  a 
re-enforcement  numbering  some  450  men.  This  does  not  include  the 
commands  of  Lieutenant- Colonel  Green  and  Major  Fry,  both  of  whom 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


185 


Chap.  XX.} 


inarched  to  the  scene  of  action  after  the  battle  was  closed.  The  com- 
mittee do  not  think  there  was  any  intentional  delay  in  the  landing  of 
the  commands  of  Colonel  Green  and  Major  Fry.  The  former  (Colonel 
Green)  exhibited  great  anxiety  to  get  into  the  fight  when  he  did  land, 
and  acted  with  great  gallantry  in  the  skirmish  he  did  have  with  the 
enemy  in  the  vicinity  of  the  camp — the  whole  under  the  command 
of  Brigadier-General  Wise,  who,  upon  February  7 and  8,  was  at  Nag’s 
Head,  4 miles  distant  from  the  island,  confined  to  a sick  bed,  and  en- 
tirely disabled  from  participating  in  the  action  in  person.  The  imme- 
diate command,  therefore,  devolved  upon  Col.  H.  M.  Shaw,  the  senior 
officer  present. 

On  February  6 it  was  discovered  by  the  companies  on  picket  duty 
on  the  south  end  of  the  island  that  the  enemy’s  fleet  was  in  Pamlico 
Sound,  south  of  Roanoke  Island,  and  apparently  intending  to  attack 
the  forces  upon  the  island.  Colonel  Shaw  immediately  communicated 
the  fact  to  Brigadier-General  Wise,  and  issued  orders  for  the  disposi- 
tion of  his  troops  preparatory  to  an  engagement.  The  points  at  which 
* it  was  supposed  the  enemy  would  attempt  to  land  troops  were  Ashby’s 
and  Pugh’s  Landings.  Ashby’s  is  situated  on  the  west  side  of  the 
island,  about  2 miles  south  of  Fort  Bartow;  and  Pugh’s  on  the  same 
side,  about  2 miles  south  of  Ashby’s. 

On  the  night  of  the  6th,  or  early  in  the  morning  of  the  7th,  a detach- 
ment, with  one  piece  of  artillery,  was  sent  to  Pugh’s  Landing,  and  one 
with  two  pieces  of  artillery  was  sent  to  Ashby’s,  and  the  remainder  of 
the  forces  were  stationed  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Ashby’s. 

On  the  morning  of  the  7th  the  enemy’s  fleet  passed  by  both  of  tbe 
landings  and  proceeded  toward  Fort  Bartow,  and  the  detachment  of 
infantry  stationed  at  Pugh’s  immediately  fell  back  to  the  vicinity  of 
Ashby’s  Landing  and  joined  the  detachments  there,  all  under  com- 
mand of  Col.  J.  Y.  Jordan. 

In  the  sound,  between  Roanoke  Island  and  the  main-land,  upon  the 
Tyrrel  side,  Commodore  Lynch,  with  his  squadron  of  seven  vessels, 
bad  taken  position,  and  at  11  o’clock  the  enemy’s  fleet,  consisting  of 
about  thirty  gunboats  and  schooners,  advanced  in  two  divisions,  the 
rear  one  having  the  schooners  and  transports  in  tow.  The  advance 
and  attacking  divisions  again  subdivided,  one  assailing  the  squadron 
and  the  other  firing  upon  the  fort  with  9-inch,  10-inch,  and  11-inch 
shell,  spherical  case,  a few  round  shot,  and  every  variety  of  rifled  pro- 
jectiles. The  fort  replied  with  but  four  guns  (which  were  all  that  could 
be  brought  to  bear),  and  after  striking  the  foremost  vessel  several  times 
the  fleet  fell  back  so  as  to  mask  one  of  the  guns  of  the  fort,  leaving 
but  three  to  reply  to  the  fire  of  the  whole  fleet.  Tbe  bombardment 
was  continued  through  the  day,  and  the  enemy  retired  at  dark.  The 
! squadron  under  the  command  of  Commodore  Lynch  sustained  their 
position  most  gallantly,  and  only  retired  after  exhausting  all  their 
ammunition  and  having  lost  the  steamer  Curlew  and  the  Forrest 
disabled.  Fort  Bartow  sustained  considerable  damage  from  the  fire 
of  the  day,  but  the  injuries  were  partially  repaired  by  the  next  morn- 
! ing  and  the  fort  put  in  a state  of  defense. 

About  3.30  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  7th  the  enemy  sent 
off  from  his  transports  about  25  men  in  a launch,  apparently  to 
( take  soundings,  who  were  fired  upon  and  retreated;  whereupon  two 
i large  steamers,  having  in  tow  each  thirty  boats  filled  with  troops, 
approached  the  island,  under  the  protection  of  their  gunboats,  at  a 
point  north  of  Ashby’s  Landing,  known  as  Hammond’s,  and  did  effect 
a landing.  The  point  selected  was  out  of  the  reach  of  the  field  pieces 


186 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


at  Ashby’s,  and  defended  by  a swamp  from  the  advance  of  our  infantry 
and  protected  by  the  shot  and  shell  from  their  gunboats.  Our  whole 
force,  therefore,  withdrew  from  Ashby’s  and  took  position  at  the  redoubt, 
or  breastwork,  and  placed  in  battery  their  field  pieces,  with  necessary 
artillerymen,  under  the  respective  commands  of  Captain  Schermerhorn, 
Lieutenants  Kinney  and  Selden.  Two  companies  of  the  Eighth  and 
two  of  the  Thirty-first  were  placed  at  the  redoubt  to  support  the  artil- 
lery. Three  companies  of  the  Wise  Legion  deployed  to  the  right  and 
left  as  skirmishers ; the  remainder  of  the  infantry  in  position  300  yards 
in  the  rear  of  the  redoubt  as  a reserve. 

The  enemy  landed  some  15,000  men,  with  artillery,  and  at  7 a.  m. 
of  the  8th  opened  fire  upon  the  redoubt,  which  was  replied  to  imme- 
diately with  great  spirit,  and  the  action  soon  became  general,  and  was 
continued  without  intermission  for  more  than  five  hours,  when  the 
enemy  succeeded  in  deploying  a large  force  on  either  side  of  our  line, 
flanking  each  wing.  The  order  was  then  given  by  Colonel  Shaw  to 
spike  the  guns  in  the  battery  and  to  retreat  to  the  northern  end  of  the 
island.  The  guns  were  spiked  and  the  whole  force  fell  back  to  the 
camps. 

During  the  engagement  at  the  redoubt  the  enemy’s  fleet  attempted 
to  advance  up  Croatan  Sound,  which  brought  on  a desultory  engage- 
ment between  Fort  Bartow  and  the  fleet,  which  continued  up  to  12.30 
o’clock,  when  the  commanding  officer  was  informed  that  the  land  de- 
fenses had  been  forced  and  the  position  of  the  fort  turned.  He  there- 
fore ordered  the  guns  to  be  disabled  and  the  ammunition  destroyed, 
which  was  done,  and  the  fort  abandoned.  The  same  thing  was  done  at 
Forts  Blanchard  and  Huger,  and  the  forces  from  all  the  forts  were 
marched  in  good  order  to  the  camps.  The  enemy  took  possession  of  the 
redoubt  and  forts  immediately,  and  proceeded  in  pursuit  with  great 
caution  toward  the  northern  end  of  the  island  in  force,  deploying  so 
as  to  surround  our  forces  at  the  camps.  Colonel  Shaw,  having  ar- 
rived with  his  whole  force  at  his  camp  in  time  to  have  saved  his  whole 
command  if  transports  had  been  furnished,  but  none  being  there,  and 
finding  himself  surrounded  by  a greatly  superior  force  upon  the  open 
island,  with  no  field  works  to  protect  him,  and  having  lost  his  only 
three  field  pieces  at  the  redoubt,  had  either  to  make  an  idle  display  of 
courage  in  fighting  the  foe  at  such  immense  disadvantage,  to  the  sacri- 
fice of  his  command,  or  to  capitulate  and  surrender  as  prisoners  of  war. 
He  wisely  determined  upon  the  latter  alternative. 

The  loss  on  our  side  in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  is  as  follows : 
Killed,  23 ; wounded,  58  ; missing,  62.  The  loss  of  the  Forty-sixth  and 
Fifty-ninth  Virginia  Volunteers  is,  killed,  6 ; wounded,  28 ; missing,  19. 
That  of  the  Eighth,  Thirty-first,  and  Second  North  Carolina  State  troops 
is,  killed,  16 ; wounded,  30 ; missing,  43. 

Of  the  engineer’s  department,  Lieutenant  Selden  (killed),  who  had 
patriotically  volunteered  his  services  in  the  line,  was  assigned  to  the 
command  of  the  6-pounder,  which  he  handled  with  so  much  skill  as  to 
produce  immense  havoc  in  the  enemy’s  ranks  and  to  elicit  the  un- 
bounded admiration  of  all  who  witnessed  it.  Unhappily,  however, 
that  gallant  officer  received  a rifle-ball  in  the  head  and  he  fell  without 
a groan. 

The  loss  of  the  enemy  was  in  killed  and  wounded  at  least  900,  and 
the  probability  is  a much  larger  number. 

The  foregoing  is  a brief  and  concise  view  of  the  defenses  of  Roanoke 
Island  and  of  the  adjacent  waters,  the  number  of  our  troops  engaged 
on  February  7 and  8,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  capitulation  thereof 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C. 


187 


on  February  8.  The  committee  are  satisfied  that  Colonel  Shaw  held 
the  possession  of  that  post  as  long  as  he  could  have  done  without  a 
useless  sacrifice  of  human  life;  that  on  the  7th  and  8th  the  officers 
and  men  in  Fort  Bartow  displayed  great  coolness  and  courage  and 
persevering  effort  to  sustain  their  position  and  drive  back  the  enemy  s 
fleet. 

In  the  battle  of  February  8 at  the  redoubt  the  officers  and  men 
exhibited  a cool  and  deliberate  courage  worthy  of  veterans  m the 
service,  and  sustained  their  position  under  an  uninterrupted  and 
deadly  fire  for  more  than  five  hours,  repulsing  the  enemy  m three 
separate  and  distinct  charges,  and  only  withdrew  from  the  deadly 
conflict  after  exhausting  their  ammunition  for  the  artillery  and  being 
surrounded  and  flanked  by  more  than  ten  times  their  number.  In- 
stead of  the  result  being  u deeply  humiliating”  it  was  one  of  the  most 
brilliant  and  gallant  actions  of  the  war,  and  in  the  language  of  their 
absent  commanding  general,  “both  officers  and  men  fought  firmly, 
coolly,  efficiently,  and  as  long  as  humanity  would  allow.” 

The  committee  are  satisfied  that  the  whole  command  did  their  duty, 
and  they  do  not  feel  at  liberty  to  designate  any  particular  acts  of  com- 
panies or  individuals.  Butin  simple  justice  to  Colonel  Shaw — upon 
whom  devolved  the  command  by  reason  of  the  extreme  illness  of  his 
superior,  General  Wise,  and  who  has  been  censured  for  the  result— 
the  committee  take  pleasure  in  stating  that  there  is  no  foundation  for 
any  just  reflection  upon  him.  He,  upon  February  7,  after  disposing  of 
his  infantry  force  and  finding  that  the  enemy  did  not  intend  landing, 
repaired  immediately  in  person  to  Fort  Bartow,  where  the  bombard- 
ment was  progressing,  and  made  his  way  into  the  fort  amid  the  most 
imminent  danger  from  shot  and  shell,  and  there  remained,  encouraging 
the  men  and  assisting,  as  far  as  he  was  able,  until  he  discovered  the 
‘enemy  intended  to  effect  a landing  below,  when  he  left  the  fort  under 
the  same  dangerous  circumstances  of  the  morning,  to  take  command 
of  the  infantry  in  person,  and  upon  the  8th,  at  the  redoubt,  he  com- 
manded in  person,  sharing  the  dangers  of  his  men  for  more  than  five 
hours  with  a firmness,  coolness,  and  bravery  worthy  of  the  position  he 
occupied. 

Immediately  upon  the  secession  of  the  State  of  North  Carolina  from 
the  Government  of  the  United  States  and  the  adoption  of  the  Consti- 
tution of  the  Confederate  States  of  America,  the  authorities  of  that. 
State  commenced  the  construction  of  fortifications  at  Hatteras  and 
Oregon  Inlet  and  other  points  upon  her  coast,  which  were  not  com- 
pleted when  the  State  transferred  her  forts,  arsenals,  army,  navy,  and 
coast  defenses  to  the  Confederate  Government.  Shortly  thereafter  the 
attack  was  made  upon  Forts  Hatteras  and  Clark,  and  they  were  taken, 
and  the  fortifications  at  Oregon  Inlet  were  abandoned,  and  the  arma- 
ment, stores,  and  ammunition  were  removed  to  Boanoke  Island.  The 
enemy  immediately  appeared  in  force  in  Pamlico  Sound,  the  waters  of 
which  are  connected  with  Albemarle  and  Currituck  Sounds  by  means 
of  the  two  smaller  sounds  of  Croatan  and  Iioanoke.  The  island  of 
Boanoke  being  situated  between  these  two  latter  sounds,  commanding 
the  channels  of  either,  became,  upon  the  fall  of  Hatteras  and  the  aban- 
donment of  Oregon  Inlet,  only  second  in  importance  to  Fort  Monroe. 
That  island  then  became  the  key  which  unlocked  all  Northeastern 
North  Carolina  to  the  enemy,  and  exposed  Portsmouth  and  Norfolk  to 
a rear  approach  of  the  most  imminent  danger. 

In  the  language  of  Brigadier- General  Wise — 


188 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


r iTh?  +wV8  th/i  imP°rtance  and  value,  in  a military  point  of  view  of  Roanoke 
Island,  that it i ought to  have  been  defended  by  all  the  means  in  the  power  of  the  Govern! 
ment.  It  was  the  key  to  all  the  rear  defenses  of  Norfolk.  It  unlocked  two  sounds 

I ttCe^n  aD  g ?Ck);  ?igS-  riverS  (tbe  Nortlb  West>  Pasquotank,  Perquimans 
Little,  Chowan,  Roanoke,  and  Alligator)  j four  canals  (the  Albemarle  and  ChesaDeake 

foirfndTCse^threSt^aSd  Su?°\k)  \aud  two  railroads  (the  Petersburg  andNor- 
fo  ^a"d^lSerab°ard  aJ\d  Eo1a?oke)-  Jt  guarded  more  than  four-fifths  of  all  Nor- 

from  all  of  its  +and  foTap*’.  and  1*  cnt  the  command  of  General  Huger  off 

^ effidont  transportation.  It  endangers  the  subsistance  of  his  whole 
f ne  navy‘yard  at  Gosport,  and  to  cut  off  Norfolk  from  Richmond,  and 
both  from  railroad  communication  with  the  South.  It  lodges  the  enemv  in  a safe 
harbor  from  the  storms  ot  Hatteras,  gives  them  a rendezvous,  and  large,  rich  rano-e  of 
supplies,  and  the  command  of  the  seaboard  from  Oregon  Inlet  to  Cape  Henry0  It 
dollar  been  defended  at  tke  expense  of  20,000  men  and  of  many  millions  of 


The  committee  are  of  the  opinion  that  the  island  of  Eoanoke  was  a 
military  post  of  great  importance;  that  it  might  have  been  placed  in 
a state  ot  defense  against  any  reasonable  force  with  the  expenditure  of 
money  and  labor  supposed  to  be  within  the  means  of  the  Government  • 
that  the  same  was  not  done,  and  the  defenses  constructed  were  wholly 
inadequate  for  its  protection  from  an  attack  either  bv  land  or  water. 
And  the  committee  have  no  difficulty  in  assigning,  as  the  cause  of  our 
disaster  and  defeat  on  February  8,  the  want  of  the  necessary  defenses 
UiP°mtlie  islancL  and  the  adjacent  waters  and  upon  the  main-land  upon 
the  Tyrrel  side;  the  want  of  the  necessary  field  artillery,  armament 
and  ammunition,  and  the  great  and  unpardonable  deficiency  of  men’ 
together  with  the  entire  want  of  transportation,  by  which  the  whole 
command  might  have  been  conveyed  from  the  island  after  the  defeat 
at  the  battery. 

But  the  committee  have  had  much  difficulty  in  locating  the  respon- 
sibility for  the  neglect  of  this  exceedingly  important  point,  owing  to 
the  fact  that  the  command  of  that  island  has  been  transferred  so  fre- 
quently from  one  military  commander  to  another  between  the  time  that  ‘ 
the  Confederate  Government  became  responsible  for  the  coast  defenses 
of  North  Carolina  and  the  attack  upon  the  island  on  February  7 1862. 
That  island,  upon  the  fall  of  Hatteras,  was  taken  possession  of  by  Col- 
onel Wright,  under  the  instruction  from  General  Huger,  and  the  prin- 
cipal defenses  constructed  under  the  authority  and  directions  of  General 
Huger,  who  assumed  jurisdiction  over  the  island,  although  it  was  within 
the  military  command  of  General  Gatlin.  Afterward  Brig.  Gen.  1).  H. 
Hill  was  assigned  for  a short  time  to  the  immediate  command  of  that 
post,  who  immediately  entered  upon  his  duty,  made  an  examination  of 
the  defenses  in  person,  and  was  making  active  preparations  for  putting 
the  island  in  a state  of  defense,  when  he  was  suddenly  superseded,  and 
Brigadier-General  Branch  given  the  command.  It  does  not  appear  in 
evidence  that  General  Branch  ever  visited  the  island  or  made  any  move 
toward  its  defense.  He,  however,  was  superseded  by  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Wise,  about  January  1,  1862,  who  immediately  proceeded  to  the 
island  in  person  about  January  6,  spent  several  days  in  a reconnais- 
sance of  the  island  and  its  defenses  and  in  examining  the  adjacent 
waters,  with  a view  of  constructing  obstructions  in  Croatan  Sound  and 
to  prevent  the  passage  of  a hostile  fleet,  and  from  that  moment  up  to 
February  7 the  committee  are  satisfied  that  General  WTse  has  devoted 
his  whole  time  in  a zealous,  energetic,  and  indefatigable  effort  to  place 
that  island  in  a state  of  defense,  and  has  done  all  and  everything  in  his 
power,  with  the  means  he  had  at  his  command,  to  effect  this  important 
object. 

At  Norfolk,  on  January  2,  upon  his  way  to  Eoanoke  Island,  he  met 


Chap.  XX.]  BATTLE  OF  ROANOKE  ISLAND,  N.  C.  189 

an  express  from  Colonel  Shaw  (who  was  then  in  the  immediate  tempo- 
rary command  of  the  island)  to  General  Huger,  informing  him  of  the 
defenseless  state  of  the  island,  and  urging  the  necessity  of  strengthen- 
ing Fort  Bartow,  by  mounting  other  guns,  obstructing  Croatan  Sound, 
and  making  requisitions  for  ammunition,  pile-driver,  and  other  things 
necessary.  General  Wise  indorsed  and  approved  of  the  requisition 
and  seconded  the  demands  of  Colonel  Shaw.  General  Wise  arrived  at 
Roanoke  Island  upon  the  6th  and  assumed  the  command  at  that  post 
upon  January  7.  After  making  a reconnaissance  of  the  island  and  its 
defenses  General  Wise,  on  January  13,  informed  General  Huger — 

that  Roanoke  Island  was  in  a defenseless  condition  and  in  presence  of  a very  formi- 
dable enemy’s  force.  The  Burnside  expedition  is  reported  to  have  sailed.  Independ- 
ent of  that,  the  force  now  at  Hatteras  Inlet  can  pass  or  take  Roanoke  Island,  and 
pardon  me  for  saying  that  I respectfully  differ  from  the  opinion  you  expressed  iu  your 
orders  to-day,  that  to  prevent  the  enemy’s  gunboats  from  passing  the  marshes  at  the 
south  end  will  also  prevent  any  landing.  Batteries  at  the  marshes  are  vitally  essential 
to  prevent  the  gunboats  from  passing  into  Croaton  Sound,  but  they  will  not  prevent 
the  landing  on  the  south  or  east  end  of  the  island.  At  least  3,000  infantry  are  needed 
on  the  island,  and  a considerable  force,  say  1,500  men,  are  needed  on  the  beaches,  and 
if  the  enemy  pass  Roanoke,  5,000  at  least  are  necessary  to  fight  them  on  the  tongue  of 
land  on  the  north  side  of  Albemarle  Sound.  We  need  on  the  beach  and  on  the  island 
at  least  eight  field  pieces  and  the  carriages  and  caissons  necessary.  We  require  thirty- 
two  horses  for  the  artillery.  We  need  at  least  six  heavy  pieces  at  the  south  end 
marshes  and  two  at  least  at  Fleetwood  Point. 

On  the  same  day  General  Wise  addressed  the  Secretary  of  War,  in 
which  he  says  that — 

it  is  very  important  that  my  Legion  should  be  forwarded  as  speedily  as  possible.  The 
defense  of  Roanoke  Island  (which  is  the  key  of  all  the  rear  defenses  of  Norfolk  and 
its  canals  and  railroads)  is  committed  to  my  charge,  and  I have  just  returned  from  a 
reconnaissance  of  that  point.  It  is  now  utterly  defenseless.  No  preparations  have 
been  made  there  at  all  adequate.  General  Huger  has  given  me  a large  authority  to 
do  whatever  is  necessary,  and  has  advised  what  he  deems  proper  in  my  command ; 
but  we  have  very  limited  means,  and  not  half  time  enough  to  prepare  to  meet  an 
enemy,  who  is  now  in  almost  immediate  presence  in  very  formidable  force.  Twice  the 
number  of  my  Legion  is  necessary,  and  I beg  that  the  place  of  my  Third  Regiment  may 
speedily  be  filled  or  that  it  may  be  restored. 

On  January  15,  1862,  General  Wise  writes  to  the  Secretary  of  War: 

I am  sure  you  will  not  adjudge  me  importunate  when  I inform  you  that  I returned 
from  Roanoke  Island  to  Norfolk  last  Saturday.  I hasten  back  after  a short  recon- 
naissance to  apprise  headquarters  and  the  Department  that  there  are  no  defenses 
there ; no  adequate  preparations  whatever  to  meet  the  enemy,  and  to  forward  all  the 
means  in  my  reach  as  speedily  as  possible,  to  make  the  key  of  all  the  rear  of  Norfolk, 
i with  its  canals  and  railroads,  safe.  Inside  of  Hatteras  Inlet  I found  twenty-four 
vessels  of  light  draught,  eight  of  which  are  steamers,  said  to  carry  four  guns  each. 
They  are  at  .farthest  but  30  miles  from  Roanoke  Island,  and  can  reach  there  any  four 
hours  or  less,  to  attack  five  small  gunboats,  under  Captain  Lynch,  and  four  small 
land  batteries,  wholly  inefficient.  Any  boat  drawing  7 feet  water  or  less  can  pass  the 
Croatan  Sound  as  far  off  as  1£  miles  from  any  battery,  and  the  enemy’s  guns  can 
silence  our  batteries  there  in  a very  short  time.  Neither  battery  is  casemated,  and 
our  meu  uow  there  are  untrained  to  heavy  pieces  mounted  on  navy  carriages.  The 
moment  the  enemy  passes  Croatan  Channel,  the  North  Landing  River,  North  River, 
Pasquotank,  Chowan,  Roanoke,  Alligator,  and  Scuppernong  Rivers,  and  the  Dismal 
Swamp,  and  Albemarle,  and  Chesapeake  Canals  will  be  blockaded  effectually,  and 
' Norfolk  and  Portsmouth  will  be  cut  off  from  supplies  of  corn,  pork,  and  forage.  The 
force  at  Hatteras  is  independent  of  the  Burnside  expedition.  No  matter  where  the 
latter  is,  the  former  is  amply  sufficient  to  capture  or  pass  Roanoke  Island  in  any  twelve 
hours.  Let  me  say,  then,  sir,  that  if  we  are  to  wait  for  powder  from  Richmond  until 
we  are  attacked  at  that  island,  that  attack  will  be  capture  and  our  defeat  will  pre- 
cede our  supply  of  ammunition.  The  case  is  too  urgent  for  me  to  delay  speaking  this 
out  plainly  at  once. 

And  in  another  part  of  the  same  letter  he  says  : 

We  want  ammunition  and  men.  In  a word,  altuost  every  preparation  has  to  be 
made.  Delay  is  defeat  now  at  Roanoke  Island,  and  with  present  means  Captain  Lynch 


190 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


and  I combined  can’t  guarantee  successful  defense  for  a day.  I beg,  sir,  that  you  will 
urge  this  upon  the  Navy  Department,  and  believe  that  I am  not  superserviceable  in 
this  urgency. 

General  Wise,  finding'  that  his  written  appeals  for  aid  in  the  defenses 
of  the  island  to  headquarters  at  Norfolk  and  to  the  Department  at 
Richmond  were  neglected  and  treated  with  indifference,  repaired  in 
person  to  Richmond  and  called  upon  the  Secretary  of  War,  and  urged 
in  the  most  importunate  manner  the  absolute  necessity  of  strengthen- 
ing the  defenses  upon  that  island  with  additional  men,  armament,  and 
ammunition.  The  Secretary  of  War  replied  verbally  to  his  appeals 
for  re-enforcements  that  he  had  not  the  men  to  spare  for  his  command. 
General  Wise  urged  upon  the  Secretary  that  General  Huger  had  about 
15,000  men  in  front  of  Norfolk  lying  idle  in  camp  for  eight  months, 
and  that  a considerable  portion  of  them  could  be  spared  for  the  defense 
of  the  rear  of  Norfolk,  and  especially  as  his  (General  Wise’s)  district 
supplied  Norfolk  and  his  army  with  nearly  or  quite  all  of  his  corn, 
pork,  and  forage  5 that  re-enforcements  at  Roanoke  Island  were  as 
absolutely  necessary  to  the  defense  of  Norfolk  as  forces  in  its  front,  and 
that  particular  or  special  posts  should  not  be  allowed  to  monopolize 
nearly  all  the  men,  powder,  and  supplies. 

In  reply  to  all  his  urgent  appeals  for  the  means  of  defense  General 
Wise,  on  January  22,  received  the  following  military  order,  No.  17  : 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise,  Provisional  Army,  will  immediately  proceed  to  Roanoke 
Island,  North  Carolina,  and  assume  command  of  the  Confederate  States  troops  at  that 
place. 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

It  is  apparent  to  the  committee  from  [that]  the  correspondence  on  file 
of  General  Wise  with  the  Secretary  of  War,  General  Huger,  his  superior 
officer,  the  Governor  of  North  Carolina,  and  others,  proves  that  he  was 
fully  alive  to  the  importance  of  Roanoke  Island,  and  has  devoted  his 
whole  time  and  energies  and  means  to  the  defense  of  that  position,  and 
that  he  is  in  no  way  responsible  for  the  unfortunate  disaster  which  be- 
fell our  forces  upon  that  island  on  February  7 and  8. 

But  the  committee  cannot  say  the  same  in  reference  to  the  efforts  of 
the  Secretary  of  War  and  the  commanding  officer  at  Norfolk,  General 
Huger.  It  is  apparent  that  the  island  of  Roanoke  is  important  for 
the  defense  of  Norfolk,  and  that  General  Huger  had  under  his  com- 
mand at  that  point  upward  of  15,000  men,  a large  supply  of  armament 
and  ammunition,  and  could  have  thrown  in  a few  hours  a large  re-en- 
forcement  upon  Roanoke  Island,  and  that  himself  and  the  Secretary 
of  War  had  timely  notice  of  the  entire  inadequacy  of  the  defenses,  the 
want  of  men  and  munitions  of  war,  and  the  threatening  attitude  of  the 
enemy.  But  General  Huger  and  the  Secretary  of  War  paid  no  prac- 
tical attention  to  those  urgent  appeals  of  General  Wise,  sent  forward 
none  of  his  important  requisitions,  and  permitted  General  Wise  and 
his  inconsiderable  force  to  remain  to  meet  at  least  15,000  men,  well- 
armed  and  equipped.  If  the  Secretary  of  War  and  the  commanding 
general  at  Norfolk  had  not  the  means  to  re-enforce  General  Wise  why 
was  he  not  ordered  to  abandon  his  position  and  save  his  command  f 
But,  upon  the  contrary,  he  was  required  to  remain  and  sacrifice  his 
command,  with  no  means  in  his  insulated  position  to  make  his  escape 
in  case  of  defeat. 

The  committee,  from  the  testimony,  are  therefore  constrained  to  re- 
port, that  whatever  of  blame  and  responsibility  is  justly  attributable 


Chap.  XX.] 


ACTION  AT  ELIZABETH  CITY,  N.  C. 


191 


to  any  one  for  the  defeat  of  our  troops  at  Roanoke  Island  on  February 
8, 1862,  should  attach  to  Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger  and  the  late  Secretary  of 
War,  J.  P.  Benjamin. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

B.  S.  GAITHEB, 

Chairman. 


FEBRUARY  10,  1862. — Action  at  Elizabeth  City,  N.  C. 

Report  of  Col.  C.  F.  Henning  sen , Fifty -ninth  Virginia  Infantry. 

Winton,  B.  0.,  February  12,  1862 — 12  p.  m. 

General  : Finding  at  Currituck  Court-House  that  provision  and 
forage  could  not  be  obtained  to  proceed  to  Powell’s  Point,  or  even  to 
remain  at  the  Albemarle  and  Chesapeake  Canal  any  nearer  than  Eliza- 
beth City,  fwe]  marched  there  on  the  3d  with  artillery  of  Wise’s  Legion 
and  remained  there  till  [the]  7th,  breaking  horses  to  fire  and  harness 
while  waiting  orders  from  General  Wise.  Received  on  February  7 one 
order  from  General  Wise  to  leave  guns  and  wagons  at  Albemarle  and 
Chesapeake  Canal  and  proceed  with  horses  and  men  to  Powell’s  Point. 
Sent  quartermaster  to  make  arrangements.  Same  evening  received 
second  dispatch  from  Brig.  Gen.  H.  A.  Wise,  dated  from  Bag’s  Head, 
informing  me  that  the  Federal  squadron  in  great  force  was  advancing 
up  the  sound,  and  ordering  me  to  remain  and  do  the  best  I could  for 
the  defense  of  Elizabeth  City. 

I found  a battery  (about  2 miles  by  water  and  about  3 by  land)  with 
four  32-pounders  and  28  rounds  of  ammunition;  battery  defective 
(magazine  dangerous,  if  there  had  been  any  ammunition  to  put  in  it). 
General  Mann  promised  to  call  out  the  militia,  and  Colonel  Starke  en- 
deavored to  do  so,  but  it  seems  they  would  not  come.  I tried  to  obtain 
150  negroes  to  throw  up  traverse  (three  of  the  guns  being  enfiladed) 
and  otherwise  improve  [the]  battery,  but  could  only,  by  2 a.  m.  on  the 
9th,  obtain  30  hands,  whom  I impressed. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  8th  Commodore  Lynch,  with  six  steamers, 
arrived ; had  fought  the  day  before,  exhausting  all  his  ammunition. 
Proposed  to  man  the  battery  with  crew  of  the  lost  steamer  Curlew; 
to  place  therein  additional  guns,  and  moor  schooner  with  two  guns 
alongside  battery.  Colonel  Martin  received  200  pounds  powder  from 
| Bor  folk  and  100  pounds  blasting  powder  was  found  and  made  up  into 
cartridges. 

On  the  morning  [of  the]  9th,  Commodore  Lynch,  having  found  a few 
rounds,  steamed  out  with  two  steamers  to  reconnoiter  enemy.  Re- 
turned, chased  by  enemy’s  steamers,  and  determined  to  land  crews  and 
fight  battery,  expecting  Captain  Hunter  with  ammunition.  It  appeared 
that  the  militia  would  not  come  out  without  requisition  from  seven 
magistrates.  This  was  obtained  on  the  9th.  The  naval  officers  were 
of  opinion  that  the  enemy  would  not  attempt  to  pass  battery  until 
silenced.  I undertook,  with  promise  of  a regiment  of  militia  and  ex- 
pectation of  a few  companies,  to  prevent  its  being  turned  for  some 
l time. 

On  the  evening  of  the  9th  I moved  out  four,  pieces  to  rear  of  the 
battery  for  that  purpose,  leaving  two  pieces  and  wagons  in  Elizabeth 
i City  ready  to  move. 


192 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


Early  on  the  morning  of  the  10th  the  enemy’s  squadron  hove  in  sight, 
and  opened  fire  on  battery,  schooner,  and  steamers,  and,  as  if  aware  of 
the  helpless  condition  of  all,  steamed,  after  a few  minutes,  past  the 
battery  right  up  to  the  city. 

Commodore  Lynch  told  me  in  the  battery  that  he  was  informed  that 
the  enemy  had  landed  below,  and  a naval  officer,  gallopingup,reported, 
after  I left  the  battery,  that  the  enemy  in  large  force  had  landed  and 
formed  about  a mile  below.  There  were  no  militia,  no  one  whatever  to 
support  the  artillery,  who  have  neither  fire-locks  of  any  kind  nor  side- 
arms.  Two  pieces  were  placed  to  keep  the  enemy  as  long  as  possible 
at  bay,  but  in  a few  minutes  the  Federal  steamers  were  perceived  rap- 
idly advancing  past  the  battery  toward  the  city,  which  they  reached 
before  the  artillery  (now  ordered  back)  had  got  half  way. 

As  the  enemy,  after  reaching  the  wharf,  had  the  town  at  their  mercy, 

1 detached  Sergeant  Scroggs,  of  Captain  McComas’  company,  with  a 
detail,  to  aid  the  citizens  in  destroying  the  place  by  fire,  as  I had  been 
requested  to  do  by  some  of  the  most  prominent  of  them.  They  only 
partially  succeeded,  two  blocks  only  having  been  burned  and  a few 
isolated  houses  in  the  suburbs.  I retreated  with  the  artillery  by  the  old 
Edenton  road,  and  halted  on  the  night  of  the  10th  at  Newby’s  Bridge, 

2 miles  from  Hertford,  accompanied  and  guarded  by  General  Mann,  of 
the  militia.  I opened  communication  with  Edenton  and  Hertford  and 
sent  for  some  of  the  transportation  of  the  Fifty-ninth  Virginia  Volun- 
teers, which  was  unprotected  at  the  former  place.  The  militia  had  not 
been  embodied  at  either  place,  though  the  next  day  I received  a dis- 
patch from  Colonel  Moore,  of  Edenton,  stating  that  on  the  requisition 
of  any  Confederate  general  he  was  ordered  to  call  out  his  regiment, 
and  could  assemble  200  men,  armed  with  muskets  and  shot- [guns]  and 
with  10  rounds  of  ammunition  each.  In  this  region  the  militia  will  not 
assemble  until  the  enemy  is  dangerously  near.  Then  it  becomes  im- 
possible to  assemble  them  until  they  have  attended  to  the  moving  of 
family  and  property.  After  that  they  show  a disposition  to  come  out 
if  there  is  any  force  to  su  pport  them. 

Generally  the  population  appear  to  be  very  true;  there  are,  of  course, 
some  traitors,  but  far  less  disloyalty  than  in  Western  Virginia.  A 
painful  instance  of  the  latter  occurred  a few  miles  from  Elizabeth  City 
on  our  march  to  Newby’s  Bridge.  A man  by  the  name  of  Lester  delib- 
erately shot  a private  who  rode  into  his  yard,  and  then  barricaded  him- 
self in  the  upper  rooms  of  his  house,  refusing  to  surrender.  Captain 
Webb,  quartermaster  of  artillery,  went  up  to  him  unarmed  and  pledged 
himself  to  protect  him  from  violence  if  he  came  out.  After  appearing 
to  consent  he  suddenly  and  treacherously  attempted  to  fire  at  the  cap- 
tain, and  did  fire  afterward  several  times  at  the  men.  I ordered  the 
house  to  be  fired.  He  was  driven  by  the  smoke  to  the  window  and 
shot  by  one  of  the  artillery.  The  man  shot,  Private  Bransford,  is  in  a 
very  critical  condition.  Lester,  it  appears,  was  a very  violent  Union 
man,  and  had  been  waited  on  a month  previous  by  a vigilance  committee. 

On  the  morning  of  the  11th  I received  a communication  from  Colonel 
Wright,  of  the  Third  Georgia  Begiment,  stating  that  he  was  5 miles 
from  Elizabeth  City,  with  400  of  his  regiment  at  South  Mills,  that  500 
more  were  expected,  and  that  he  would  wait  to  hear  from  me. 

I marched  on  the  11th  by  what  is  called  the  Desert  Boad  to  this  place 
with  the  artillery  and  a company  of  the  Seventeenth  North  Carolina 
Volunteers,  which  (40’strong),  under  Lieutenant  Lyons,  reported  to  me 
the  preceding  night,  being  part  of  the  force  escaped  from  the  naval  bat- 
tery opposite  Boanoke  Island. 


Chap.  XX.] 


EXPEDITION  TO  WINTON,  N.  C. 


193 


On  reaching  Winton  I found  that  Colonel  Wright  had  left  for  Nor- 
folk. This  day  I remained  here,  taking  up  positions  and  opening  com- 
munication with  Elizabeth  City..  . . 

The  remainder  of  Colonel  Weight’s  regiment  arrived  last  night,  and 
this  afternoon  a battery  of  artillery.  * I had  ordered  four  companies  of 
Colonel  Wright’s  regiment,  with  one  gun,  and  was  about  to  make  a 
night  reconnaissance  of  Elizabeth  City,  when  I received  the  order  from 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  A.  Wise  to  join  him  at  the  Albemarle  and  Chesapeake 
Canal,  whither  I proceeded  with  the ‘artillery  in  the  morning. 

At  10  p.  m.  I received  a note  from  Colonel  Wright,  informing  me  that 
he  had  arrived  at  South  Mills,  and  desiring  that  his  companies  should 
not  proceed  to-night.  In  consequence  of  not  knowing  whether  he  ranked 
me  or  had  any  special  orders  from  you  I have  abandoned  the  reconnais- 
sance, but  send  a small  party  of  artillery  soldiers,  with  teams,  to  bring 
off  if  possible,  a wagon  and  caisson  which  had  stalled  in  Elizabeth  City, 
but  had  been  dragged  off  and  concealed  about  a mile  on  this  side. 

I would  beg,  respectfully,  to  call  your  attention  to  the  case  of  Ser- 
geant Scroggs.  According  to  the  report  of  the  citizens  Scroggs  was 
double-ironed  on  board  a Federal  vessel  in  the  river,  and  the  Federal 
officers  talked  of  trying  and  hanging  him  as  an  incendiary.  Sergeant 
Scroggs,  son  of  a Virginia  senator,  is  a gentleman  and  a soldier,  and 
was  acting  in  obedience  to  orders  from  me,  of  which  I am  willing  to 
assume  the  responsibility.  I should  have  sent  a flag  of  truce  to-morrow 
to  the  enemy  but  for  the  fact  of  having  to  march.  I leave  his  case, 
general,  in  your  hands. 

Very  respectfully,  0.  F.  HENNINGSEN, 

Colonel  Fifty-ninth  Regiment  Virginia  Volunteers , 

Commanding  Artillery  of  Wise  Legion. 

General  Huger,  Commanding. 

P g. February  13,  1862 — 6 a.  m. 

The  artillery  detail  has  returned,  bringing  back  the  wagon,  with  bag- 
gage. They  report  onty  six  Federal  steamers  in  the  river.  The  guns  in 


the  battery  spiked  and  carriages  burned. 


ro.  F.  H. 


FEBRUARY  18-21,  1862.— Expedition  to  Winton,  N.  C.,  and  Skirmish 

February  19. 


REPORTS. 


No.  1.— Brig.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside,  U.  S.  Army. 

No72.— Col.  Rush  C.  Hawkins,  Ninth  New  York  Infantry.  J 


V 


No.  1. 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Ambrose  F.  Burnside , TJ.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 
Roanohe  Island , N.  (7.,  February  23,  1862. 
General  : Since  my  dispatch  of  the  20th,  of  which  I inclose  a dupli- 
cate,* the  expedition  up  the  Chowan  has  returned,  having  reached  as 

* See  “ Correspondence,  etc. — Union,”  post. 

13  R R— VOL  IX 


194 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


far  as  Wmton.  On  the  approach  of  the  gunboat  Delaware  to  the 
town  a negro  wrnman  was  discovered  on  the  shore  motioning  the  boat 
to  approach.  On  arriving  within  300.  yards  of  the  landing  a large 
ambush  of  from  600  to  1,000  men  was  discovered,  and  before  the  boat 
could  be  stopped  she  was  within  easy  musket  range  of  the  men,  when 
they  poured  a volley  into  her,  literally  riddling  the  wheel-house  and 
the  upper  joiner  work,  but  fortunately  no  one  was  killed ; nearly  all 
the  men  were  below.  Several  of  those  on  deck  had  ball-holes  through 
their  clothes.  Captain  Eowan,  who  was  on  deck,  and  Colonel  Haw- 
kins, in  the  rigging,  made  most  miraculous  escapes.  The  gunboats  in 
the  rear  immediately  hurried  up,  and  by  the  use  of  a few  shells  dis- 
persed the  force,  when  the  Ninth  New  York,  under  Colonel  Hawkins, 
was  landed.  It  was  ascertained,  after  landing,  that  this  negro  woman 
had  been  sent  down  by  her  master,  one  of  the  captains,  for  the  purpose 
of  deceiving  the  boats,  which  was  readily  done,  as  it  had  been  reported 
to  the  flag-officer  and  myself  that  but  a few  days  before  500  loyal 
people  at  that  place  had  raised  the  American  flag.  It  was  determined 
by  Captain  Eowan  and  Colonel  Hawkins  to  burn  all  the  military  stores 
that  could  not  be  removed,  with  the  store-houses  and  the  quarters  occu- 
pied by  the  troops,  which  constituted  almost  the  entire  town,  there  not 
being  over  twenty  houses  in  the  place.  In  one  of  the  store  houses 
there  was  a large  quantity  of  bacon,  that  could  not  be  taken  away  by 
our  people  and  it  was  also  burned,  together  with  all  the  heavy  camp 
equipage,  and,  in  fact,  everything  that  could  not  be  transported  by  our 
gunboats.  The  winds  shifting  after  the  fire  was  started  caused  the 
destruction  of  some  few  houses  not  occupied  by  the  soldiers.  It  was 
ascertained  during  the  stay  at  Winton  that  the  Black  water-,  the  river 
up  which  the  expedition  was  destined  for  the  purpose  of  destroying 
the  railroad  bridge,  had  been  effectually  blockaded  by  the  falling  of 
t rees  across  it  at  its  narrowest  parts,  thus  rendering  it  almost  impass- 
able. The  expedition,  therefore,  returned,  leaving  some  gunboats  at 
Elizabeth  City  and  at  the  mouth  of  the  Chowan. 

I have  two  expeditions  organized  in  connection  with  the  Navy  to 
move  upon  Plymouth,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Eoanoke,  and  Middletown, 
the  outlet  of  Mattamuskeet  Lake,  the  former  commanded  by  Brigadier- 
General  Foster  and  the  latter  by  Brigadier-General  Parke.  They  were 
to  have  started  yesterday  morning,  but  the  dense  fog  that  prevails  here 
a greater  part  of  the  time  prevented  the  possibility  of  the  vessels  mov- 
ing in  the  sound.  In  my  next  I will  send  you  duplicates  of  instruc- 
tions given  to  these  two  generals.  The  enemy  is,  I learn,  very  much 
distracted  by  these  frequent  dashes  on  their  coast,  and  seem  to  have 
but  little  idea  where  the  next  blow  will  be  aimed.  Before  the  end  of 
the  present  week  I hope  to  report  to  you  some  important  movements, 
which  are  dependent  upon  the  arrival  of  the  naval  ammunition,  which 
has  been  hourly  expected  for  several  days.  The  health  of  the  com- 
mand continues  excellent,  and  the  drill  and  discipline  is  being  per- 
fected by  the  commanders  of  brigades. 

Our  supplies,  particularly  coal,  are  not  arriving  as  rapidly  as  I could 
desire.  Clothing  sent  to  us  from  Philadelphia  is  now  being  issued, 
and  we  shall  need  an  additional  supply  of  fully  the  amount  originally 
sent.  The  drawers  and  shirts  are  said  to  be  very  poor. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  BUENSIDE, 

Brigadier- General , Comdg.  Department  of  North  Carolina. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant-General , Washington , />.  C. 


195 


3hap.  XX  ] EXPEDITION  TO  WINTON,  N.  C. 

No.  2. 

Beport  of  Col.  Bush  C.  HaicMns , Ninth  New  York  Infantry. 

Steamer  Virginia, 

Off  BoanoJce  Island , N.  C .,  February  21,  1862. 

Sir  : Agreebly  to  your  orders  of  the  17th  instant  I called  upon  Cap- 
bain  Rowan,  and  made  arrangements  to  embark  my  regiment  on  board 
of  some  of  the  gunboats  of  his  division  for  the  purpose  of  proceeding 
tip  the  Blackwater  and  Nottoway  Rivers  and  destroying  the  bridges  of 
the  Seaboard  and  Roanoke  Railroad. 

At  12  m.  of  the  18th  instant  the  regiment  embarked  and  the  expe- 
dition got  under  way,  and  that  night  anchored  off  the  mouth  of  the 
Roanoke  River,  where  it  remained  until  10  a.  m.  of  the  19th  instant, 
and  then  commenced  its  journey  up  the  Chowan  River.  Nothing  of 
importance  occurred  until  about  3.30  p.  m.  The  flag-steamer  Dela- 
ware was  about  1 mile  ahead  of  any  of  the  other  boats.  I was  on  the 
eross-trees  of  the  mainmast,  where  I had  been  on  the  lookout  for 
about  two  hours.  The  steamer  was  within  350  yards  of  the  wharf  at 
Winton  when  I discovered  the  high  bank,  which  we  were  nearing  very 
rapidly,  was  covered  with  Confederate  soldiers.  I immediately  gave 
the  alarm,  btit  not  in  time  to  change  our  course  until  the  steamer  had 
got  within  100  yards  of  the  shore,  when  we  received  the  whole  fire  of 
about  700  infantry  or  more,  which  continued  until  we  had  passed  out 
of  range  up  the  river,  where  we  turned  around  and  commenced  shell- 
ing the  town,  the  enemy  returning  the  fire  with  four  pieces  of  artillery 
from  the  shore. 

In  the  mean  time  the  gunboat  Perry,  having  come  within  range,  com- 
menced firing  from  below.  Soon  after  the  enemy  was  dislodged  and 
retired,  when  the  Delaware  returned  down  the  river,  receiving  four 
shots  as  she  passed  the  wharf.  The  whole  fleet  came  to  an  anchor 
about  7 miles  below  Winton.  A consultation  was  held,  and  it  was 
agreed  to  return  the  next  morning  and  burn  the  town  if  found  to  be 
occupied  by  the  rebels. 

About  11.30  a.  m.  of  the  20th  instant  our  gunboats  arrived  and  took 
their  positions,  some  above,  some  below,  and  others  opposite  to  the 
town,  when  our  guns  commenced  firing,  and  in  twenty  minutes  after 
my  regiment  landed,  accompanied  by  three  boat  guns,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Lieutenant  Plusser,  of  the  gunboat  Perry.  The  guns  were 
! placed  in  positions  so  as  to  command  the  approaches  to  the  town;  the 
regiment  drawn  up  in  line  awaiting  the  attack  of  the  enemy.  In  the 
mean  time  parties  of  observation  were  sent  out  in  all  directions.  It 
was  soon  ascertained  that  the  enemy  had  retreated  as  soon  as  our  force 
appeared  in  sight  that  morning,  leaving  every  thing  behind  except  their 
arms  and  accouterments.  Six  companies  of  my  regiment  took  posses- 
sion of  the  main  approach  to  the  town,  and  I commenced  making  a 
personal  inspection  of  all  the  buildings.  I found  that  nearly  all  of 
them  had  been  taken  possession  of  and  had  been  occupied  by  the  Con- 
federate troops  as  quarters  and  store-houses  (see  Exhibits  A and  B).* 
I then  ordered  that  every  building  containing  stores  for  the  enemy 
and  occupied  by  them  as  quarters  should  be  fired,  and  placed  guards 
in  the  others  to  see  that  they  were  not  disturbed  or  destroyed.  The 
property  destroyed  belonging  to  the  Confederate  forces  consisted  of 
bacon,  corn-meal,  flour,  sugar,  powder,  mess-pans,  camp-kettles,  knap- 


Omitted  as  unimportant. 


196 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


sacks,  haversacks,  canteens,  &c.,  the  whole  worth  not  less  than 

$10,000. 

This,  I believe,  is  the  first  instance  during  the  war  on  our  side  where 
fire  has  accompanied  the  sword.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  such  severe 
measures  have  to  be  adopted ; they  can  only  be  justified  upon  two 
grounds — first,  retaliation  for  trying  to  decoy  us  into  a trap  at  the  time 
of  the  firing  into  the  Delaware.  Evidence  of  this  is  that  a negress,  the 
property  of  one  of  the  Confederate  officers,  was  sent  down  to  the  wharf 
by  her  master  to  beckon  the  boat  in  to  the  wharf,  when  we  were  all  to 
be  slaughtered,  or  in  the  words  of  the  negress,  “Dey  said  dat  dey  wan’t 
goin’  to  let  anybody  lib  at  all,  but  was  goin7  to  kill  ebery  one  of  ’em.’7 
I infer  from  this  that  we  were  to  receive  no  quarter.  Second,  the  build- 
ings fired  had  been  taken  possession  of  by  and  were  in  the  use  of  the 
rebel  forces  as  store  houses  and  quarters,  which  forces  had  been  raised, 
supported,  and  used  by  the  States  in  rebellion  for  the  purpose  of  sub- 
verting the  Constitution  and  the  laws  of  the  United  States. 

From  information  obtained  at  Winton  we  came  to  the  conclusion 
that  it  would  be  impossible  for  us  to  accomplish  the  original  object  and 
aim  of  the  expedition,  so  it  had  to  be  abandoned. 

The  forces  at  Winton,  as  near  as  I could  ascertain,  consisted  of  the 
First  Battalion  North  Carolina  Volunteers  (six  companies),  under  the 
command  of  Lieut.  Col.  William  T.  Williams;  one  battery  of  light  artil- 
lery ; one  company  of  the  Southampton  cavalry,  and  one  or  two  com 
panies  of  the  North  Carolina  Militia,  the  whole  under  the  command  of 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Williams. 

I am  happy  to  inform  you  that  none  of  our  forces  were  injured.  The 
enemy  sustained  some  loss  from  the  fire  of  our  gunboats  on  the  19th, 
but  I am  not  able  to  state  how  many  were  either  killed  or  wounded. 

The  troops  under  my  command  and  the  officers  and  sailors  on  board 
of  the  gunboats  behaved  exceedingly  well,  and  performed  all  of  their 
various  duties  with  great  promptness  and  alacrity. 

I feel  greatly  indebted  to  Commodore  S.  C.  Rowan  and  the  lieutan- 
ants  of  the  U.  S.  Navy,  in  command  of  the  gunboats,  for  their  kind  care 
and  attention  to  the  comforts  and  wants  of  my  regiment,  and  also  for 
their  hearty  co-operation  in  trying  to  carry  out  the  object  of  the  expe- 
dition. 

I am,  most  faithfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

RUSH  C.  HAWKINS, 
Colonel  Ninth  Regiment  New  YorJc  Volunteers . 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  G.  Parke. 


MARCH  14,  1862. — Battle  of  New  Berne,  N.  C. 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside,  U.  S.  Army,  with  congratulatory  order  and 
communication  from  the  Secretary  of  W ar. 

No.  2. — Capt.  Robert  S.  Wilfiamson,  U.  S.  Topographical  Engineers. 

No.  3. — Surg.  William  H.  Church,  U.  S.  Army,  Medical  Director. 

No.  4. — Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Brigade. 

No.  5. — Lieut.  Col.  Albert  W.  Drake,  Tenth  Connecticut  Infantry. 

No.  6. — Col.  John  Kurtz,  Twenty-third  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  7. — Col.  Thomas  G.  Stevenson,  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  8. — Col.  Edwin  Upton,  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


197 


Chav.  XX. 


] 


No.  9, Qol.  Horace  C.  Lee,  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  10.— Brig.  Gen.  Jesse  L.  Reno,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Brigade. 

No.  11.— Lieut.  Col.  William  S.  Clark,  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  12.— Lieut.  Col.  Charles  A.  Heckman,  Ninth  New  Jersey  Infantry. 

No.  13.— Col.  Edward  Ferrero,  Fifty-first  New  York  Infantry. 

No.  14.— Col.  John  F.  Hartranft,  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

No.  15.— Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Parke,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Brigade. 

No.  16.— Col.  Edwar<|  Harland,  Eighth  Connecticut  Infantry. 

No.  17. — Lieut.  Col.  Charles  Mathewson,  Eleventh  Connecticut  Infantry. 

No.  18.— Col.  Isaac  P.  Rodman,  Fourth  Rhode  Island  Infantry. 

No.  19.— Maj.  John  Wright,  Fifth  Rhode  Island  Infantry. 

No.  20.— Brig.  Gen.  L.  O’B.  Branch,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  21.— Col.  Reuben  P.  Campbell,  Seventh  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  22.— Lt.  Col.  Edw.  Graham  Haywood,  Seventh  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  23. — Col.  S.  B.  Spruill,  Nineteenth  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  24. — Col.  Zebulon  B.  Yance,  Twenty-sixth  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  25. — Maj.  John  A.  Gilmer,  jr.,  Twenty- seventh  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  26.— Lieut.  Col.  Robert  F.  Hoke,  Thirty-third  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

No.  27.— Col.  James  Sinclair,  Thirty-fifth  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

' No.  28. — Col.  Charles  C.  Lee,  Thirty-seventh  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

' No.  29.— Lieut.  Col.  William  M.  Barbour,  Thirty -seventh  North  Carolina  Infantry. 
No.  30.— Col.  H.  J.  B.  Clark,  Special  Battalion  North  Carolina  Militia. 

No.  31.— Lieut.  J.  L.  Haughton,  Macon  Mounted  Guards. 


Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Ambrose  JE.  Burnside , U.  S.  Army , icith  congrat- 
, ulatory  order  and  communication  from  the  Secretary  of  War. 

Headquarters  Department  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , March  16,  L862. 

) General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  after  embarking  the  troops 

: with  which  I intended  to  attack  New  Berne,  in  conjunction  with  the 
naval  force,  on  the  morning  of  the  11th,  a rendezvous  was  made  at 
i Hatteras  Inlet.  Flag-Officer  Goldsborough  having  been  ordered  to 
Hampton  Boads,  the  naval  fleet  was  left  in  command  of  Commodore 
Rowan.  Early  on  the  morning  of  the  12th  the  entire  force  started  for 
New  Berne,  and  that  night  anchored  off  the  mouth  of  Slocum’s  Creek, 
some  18  miles  from  New  Berne,  where  I had  decided  to  make  a landing. 
The  landing  commenced  by  7 o’clock  the  next  morning  under  cover  of 
the  naval  fleet,  and  was  effected  with  the  greatest  enthusiasm  by  the 
troops.  Many,  too  impatient  for  the  boats,  leaped  into  the  water  and 
waded  waist-deep  to  the  shore,  and  then,  after  a toilsome  march  through 
j the  mud  the  head  of  the  column  arrived  within  a mile  and  a half  of 
the  enemy’s  stronghold  at  8 p.  m.,  a distance  of  12  miles  from  the  point 
of  landing,  where  we  bivouacked  for  the  night,  the  rear  of  the  column 
coming  up  with  the  boat  howitzers  about  3 o’clock  next  morning,  the 
detention  being  caused  by  the  shocking  condition  of  the  roads,  conse- 
quent upon  the  heavy  rain  that  had  fallen  during  that  day  and  the 
whole  of  that  night,  the  men  often  wading  knee-deep  in  mud,  and  re- 
quiring a whole  regiment  to  drag  the  eight  pieces  which  had  been 
landed  from  the  Navy  and  our  own  vessels. 

By  signals  agreed  upon,  the  naval  vessels,  with  the  armed  vessels 
of  my  force,  were  informed  of  our  progress,  and  were  thereby  enabled 
to  assist  us  much  in  our  march  by  shelling  the  road  in  advance. 


198 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Ciiai*.  XX 


At  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  14jth  I ordered  an  advance  of  the 
entire  division,  which  will  be  understood  by  the  inclosed  pencil  sketch.* 
General  Foster’s  brigade  was  ordered  up  the  main  county  road  to 
attack  the  enemy’s  left,  General  Reno  up  the  railroad  to  attack  their 
right  and  General  Parke  to  follow  General  Foster  and  attack  the 
enemy  in  front,  with  instructions  to  support  either  or  both  brigades. 

I must  defer  for  want  of  time  a detailed  account  of  the  action.  It  is 
enough  to  say  that  after  an  engagement  of  four  hours  we  succeeded  in 
carrying  a continuous  line  of  field  work  of  over  a mile  in  length,  pro 
tected  on  the  river  flank  by  a battery  of  thirteen  heavy  guns  and  on 
the  opposite  flank  by  a line  of  redoubts  of  over  a half  a mile  in  length 
for  riflemen  and  field  pieces,  in  the  midst  of  swamps  and  dense  forests,, 
which  line  of  works  was  defended  by  eight  regiments  of  infantry,  500 
cavalry,  and  three  batteries  of  field  artillery  of  six  guns  each.  The 
position  was  finally  carried  by  a most  gallant  charge  of  our  men, 
which  enabled  us  to  gain  the  rear  of  all  the  batteries  between  this 
point  and  New  Berne,  which  was  done  by  a rapid  advance  of  the 
entire  force  up  the  main  road  and  railroad,  the  naval  fleet  meantime 
pushing  its  way  up  the  river,  throwing  their  shots  into  the  forts  and 
in  front  of  us. 

The  enemy,  after  retreating  in  great  confusion  (throwing  away 
blankets,  knapsacks,  arms,  &c.)  across  the  railroad  bridge  and  county 
road  bridge,  burned  the  former  and  destroyed  the  draw  of  the  latter, 
thus  preventing  further  pursuit,  and  causing  the  detention  in  occupy- 
ing the  town  by  our  military  force,  but  the  naval  force  had  arrived  at 
the  wharves  and  commanded  it  by  their  guns.  I at  once  advanced 
General  Foster’s  brigade  to  take  possession  of  the  town  by  means  of 
the  naval  vessels,  which  Commodore  Rowan  had  kindly  volunteered 
for  the  purpose.  The  city  was  set  on  fire  by  the  retreating  rebels  in 
many  places,  but  owing  to  the  exertions  of  the  naval  officers  the 
remaining  citizens  were  induced  to  aid  in  extinguishing  the  flames, 
so  that  but  little  harm  has  been  done.  Many  of  the  citizens  are  now 
returning,  and  we  are  now  in  quiet  possession  of  the  city.  We  have 
captured  the  printing  press,  and  shall  at  once  issue  a daily  sheet. 

By  this  victory  our  combined  force  have  captured  eight  batteries 
containing  forty-six  heavy  guns,  three  batteries  of  light  artillery  of 
six  guns  each,  making  in  all  sixty-four  guns ; two  steamboats  and  a 
number  of  sailing  vessels,  wagons,  horses,  a large  quantity  of  ammu- 
nition, commissary  and  quartermaster  stores,  forage,  and  the  entire 
camp  equipage  of  the  rebel  troops,  a large  quantity  of  rosin,  turpen- 
tine, cotton,  &c.,  and  over  200  prisoners. 

Our  loss  thus  far  ascertained  will  amount  to  91  killed  and  466 
wounded,  many  of  them  mortally.f  Among  these  are  some  of  our  most 
gallant  officers  and  men.  The  rebel  loss  is  severe,  but  not  so  great  as 
our  own,  being  effectually  covered  by  their  works. 

Too  much  praise  cannot  be  awarded  to  the  officers  and  men  for  their 
untiring  exertion  and  unceasing  patience  in  accomplishing  this  work. 
The  effecting  of  the  landing  and  the  approach  to  within  a mile  and  a 
half  of  the  enemy’s  work  on  the  13th  I consider  as  great  a victory  as 
the  engagement  of  the  14th,  Owing  to  the  difficult  nature  of  the  land- 
ing our  men  were  forced  to  wade  ashore  waist-deep  march  through 
mud  to  a point  12  miles  distant,  bivouac  in  low,  marshy  ground  in  a 
rain-storm  for  the  night,  engage  the  enemy  at  daylight  in  the  morn- 
ing, fighting  them  for  four  hours  amid  a dense  fog,  that  prevented  them 


* Not  found. 


tBut  see  revised  statement,  p.  211. 


UilAP.  X.X.] 


battle;  of  new  berne,  n.  c. 


199 


from  seeing  the  position  of  the  enemy,  'and  finally  advancing  rapidly 
aver  bad  roads  upon  the  city.  In  the  midst  of  all  this  not  a complaint 
was  heard  ; the  men  were  only  eager  to  accomplish  their  work.  Every 
brigade,  and  in  fact  every  regiment,  and  I can  almost  say  every  offi- 
ser  and  man  of  the  force  landed  was  in  the  engagement.  The  men  are 
all  in  good  spirits,  and  under  the  circumstances  are  in  good  health. 
E beg  to  say  to  the  General  Commanding  that  I have  under  my  command 
i division  that  can  be  relied  upon  in  any  emergency.  A more  detailed 
report  will  be  forwarded  as  soon  as  I receive  the  brigade  returns.  The 
brigadier-generals;  having  been  in  the  midst  of  their  regiments  whilst 
under  fire,  will  be  able  to  give  me  minute  accounts. 

I beg  to  say  to  the  General  Commanding  the  Army  that  I have  en- 
deavored to  carry  out  the  very  minute  instructions  given  me  by  him 
before  leaving  Annapolis,  and  thus  far  events  have  been  singularly 
coincident  with  his  anticipations.  I only  hope  that  we  may  in  future 
be  able  to  carry  out  in  detail  the  remaining  plans  of  the  campaign. 
The 'only  thing  I have  to  regret  is  the  delay  caused  by  the  elements. 

I desire  again  to  bear  testimony  to  the  gallantry  of  our  naval  fleet, 
and  to  express  my  thanks  to  Commodore  Rowan  and  the  officers  under 
him  for  their  hearty  and  cheerful  co-operation  in  this  movement. 
Their  assistance  was  timely  and  of  great  service  in  the  accomplish- 
ment of  bur  undertaking. 

I omitted  to  mention  that  there  was  a large  arrival  of  re- enforcements 
af  the  enemy  in  New  Berne  during  the  engagement,  which  retreated 
with  the  remainder  of  the  army  by  the  cars  and  the  country  roads. 

I have  the  honor,  general,  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding  Department  North  Carolina. 

General  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  U.  S.  Army. 


Headquarters  Department  North  Carolina, 

| New  Berne , March  21,  1862. 

I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  movements  in  my  depart- 
ment since  my  hurried  report  of  the  16th  instant.  The  detailed  report 
of  the  engagement  on  the  14th  is  not  yet  finished,  but  I hope  will  be 
ready  to  send  by  the  next  mail : 

As  I reported,  our  forces  occupied  this  city  and  succeeded  in  restoring 
it  to  comparative  quietness  by  midnight  on  the  14th,  and  it  is  now  as 
luiet  as  a New  England  village.  I appointed  General  Foster  military 
I governor  of  the  city  and  its  vicinity,  and  he  has  established  a most 
perfect  system  of  guard  and  police."  Nine-tenths  of  the  depredations 
on  the  14th,  after  the  enemy  and  citizens  fled  from  the  town,  were  com- 
mitted by  the  negroes  before  our  troops  reached  the  city.  They  seemed 
to  be  wild  with  excitement  and  delight.  They  are  now  a source  of  very 
great  anxiety  to  us.  The  city  is  being  overrun  with  fugitives  from  the 
surrounding  towns  and  plantations.  Two  have  reported  themselves  who 
fiave  been  in  the  swamps  for  five  years.  It  would  be  utterly  impossible, 
if  we  were  so  disposed,  to  keep  them  outside  of  our  lines,  as  they  find 
their  way  to  us  through  woods  and  swamps  from  every  side.  By  my 
next  dispatch  I hope  to  report  to  you  a definite  policy  in  reference  to 
I this  matter,  and  in  the  mean  time  shall  be  glad  to  receive  any  instrue- 
j tions  upon  the  subject  which  you  may  be  disposed  to  give. 


200 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


General  Foster’s  brigade  is  still  occupying  the  city  and  its  suburbs, 
having  pushed  his  advanced  pickets  on  all  the  roads  leading  to  Kinston 
between  the  Reuse  and  the  Trent,  some  9 miles  out.  I have  also  sent 
one  regiment  of  his  brigade,  in  conjunction  with  a naval  force  sent  by 
Commodore  Rowan,  to  make  a temporary  occupation  of  Washington. 
Scouting  parties  from  his  brigade  have  visited  the  country  to  the  north 
of  the  Reuse  and  found  everything  quiet.  Much  Union  feeling  has 
been  expressed,  but  the  people  are  slow  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance, 
evidently  from  a fear  that  we  will  not  be  able  to  maintain  our  position 
here,  in  which  case  they  would  be  driven  from  their  homes.  Confidence 
is  being  restored,  however,  to  a certain  extent,  and  the  people  of  the 
city  are  returning  to  their  homes. 

I have  taken  the  responsibility,  as  I did  at  Roanoke,  of  issuing  pro- 
visions to  the  poor,  who  were  and  have  been  for  some  time  suffering 
for  food.  In  fact,  I have  had  to  order  issues  made  in  some  cases  to 
persons  who  have  but  lately  been  in  affluent  circumstances,  but  who 
now  have  nothing  but  Confederate  notes,  city  shin-plasters,  worthless 
notes  of  hand,  unproductive  real  estate,  and  negroes  who  refuse  to 
acknowledge  any  debt  of  servitude.  The  suffering  and  anxiety  is  far 
beyond  anything  I had  anticipated.  It  seems  strange  to  me  that  these 
people  will  not  perceive  that  this  state  of  things  has  been,  brought 
about  by  their  own  injudicious  and  disloyal  conduct. 

General  Reno’s  brigade  occupy  the  -south  side  of  the  Trent,  his 
advanced  pickets  extending  down  the  railroad  as  far  as  Croatan  out 
to  the  edge  of  the  swamps  and  up  the  Trent  some  4 miles  to  the  first 
bridge  above  the  railroad  bridge,  the  draw  of  which  was  destroyed  by 
the  rebels,  but  hag  since  been  repaired  by  our  men,  thus  opening  com- 
munication with  the  city  to  our  supply  trains  and  artillery.  I have 
also  established  a steam  ferry,  which  runs  every  fifteen  minutes,  com- 
municating with  his  headquarters.  One  of  his  regiments  has  been  sent 
up  the  south  side  of  the  Trent,  to  burn  all  the  bridges  on  the  stream  for 
30  miles  above  the  one  held  by  us. 

I have  sent  General  Parke’s  brigade  to  invest  and,  if  necessary, 
besiege  Fort  Macon.  A personal  reconnaissance  of  Slocum’s  Creek 
demonstrated  that  the  railroad  could  be  reached  by  our  light-draught 
steamers  at  Havelock  Station,  thus  saving  more  than  one-half  the 
march  to  Morehead  City.  The  small  hand  cars  brought  with  the  expe- 
dition have  been  of  great  service  in  transporting  his  baggage,  stores, 
&c.  He  has  reached  Morehead  City  by  this  time,  and  I shall  go  down 
to-morrow,  and  hope  by  the  next  mail  to  report  considerable  progress. 
His  instructions  are,  first,  to  demand  an  unconditional  surrender  of  the 
place,  and  in  case  of  refusal  to  begin  his  work  at  once  and  reduce  it  in 
the  shortest  possible  time.  He  has,  I think,  ample  force  and  means  to 
accomplish  it,  the  General  Commanding  the  Army  having  instructed  me 
to  prepare  for  it  before  leaving  New  York. 

And  I now  beg  to  say  that,  in  order  to  move  upon  the  interior  of  the 
State,  I will  require  considerable  re-enforcements — a regiment  of  cav- 
alry, two  more  batteries  of  artillery,  and  enough  regiments  of  infantry 
to  make  a division  out  of  each  one  of  my  brigades.  I sincerely  hope 
that  the  Department  may  deem  it  for  the  interest  of  the  jjublic  service 
to  promote  each  of  my  three  brigadier-generals  to  either  the  actual  or 
brevet  rank  of  major-general  and  place  them  in  command  of  the  divis- 
ions. They  are  eminently  qualified  for  the  position,  and  have,  by  their 
untiring  industry,  their  great  skill,  and  conspicuous  gallantry  under 
most  trying  circumstances,  earned  the  right  to  promotion. 

You  can  scarcely  imagine,  Mr.  Secretary,  the  amount  of  patient  labor 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


201 


i Chap.  XX.] 

that  has  been  expended  in  bringing  this  little  command  up  to  this 
point  If  we  can  have  the  regiments  to  make  the  divisions,  we  have 
the  material  here  in  the  commanders  of  our  regiments  to  command  the 

b,  LSsee'bv  a recent  act  of  Congress  that  commanders  of  departments 
are  allowed  an  increase  of  staff.  I inclose  herewith  some  nominations 

for  your  consideration.  , 

I have  the  honor  to  he,  sir,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  EUKJNfelUiii, 

Brigadier-General , Commanding  Department  North  Carolina. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington. 

P.  S— We  shall  want  with  the  re-enforcements  the  usual  amount  of 
wagons,  horses,  clothing,  &c. 


Headquarters  Department  of.  North  c4ae?7l^a;  0 

New  Berne , April  10,  1862. 

I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  detailed  report  of  the  battle 
of  New  Berne,  as  promised  in  my  hurried  report  of  the  16th  ultimo: 

After  embarking  my  command,  consisting  of  the  brigades  of  Generals 
Foster,  Reno,  and  Parke,  at  Roanoke  Island  on  the  morning  of  the 
11th,  the  transport  fleet,  in  conjunction  with  the  naval  fleet,  arrived 
without  accident  off  the  mouth  of  Slocum’s  Creek,  m the  Neuse  River, 
some  16  miles  from  New  Berne,  on  the  evening  of  the  12th,  where 
we  anchored  for  the  night.  Soon  after  anchoring  I called  the  three 
general  officers  in  council,  and  after  consultation  with  Commodore 
Rowan  we  decided  to  land  at  the  mouth  of  Slocum’s  Creek  on  the  fol- 
lowing morning  under  cover  of  the  naval  guns,  and  proceed  up  the 
direct  road  to  New  Berne,  our  advance  to  be  designated  by  signaL 
rockets  from  the  head  of  the  column,  thus  enabling  the  Navy  and  our 
armed  transport  vessels  to  shell  the  road  in  advance  of  us. 

At  6.30  the  following  morning  I hoisted  the  preparatory  signal.  lhe 
naval  vessels,  with  the  gunboat  Picket,  moved  in  toward  the  mouth  ot 
the  creek  and  shelled  the  woods  some  distance  m advance  ot  us.  A 
reconnaissance  was  made  to  ascertain  the  depth  of  w^er  by  ^e  gun- 
boat Delaware,  Captain  Quackenbush,  and  by  Mr.  H.  H.  Helper,  with 
the  boat’s  crew  of  the  Alice  Price,  After  receiving  their  reports  the 
signal  for  landing  was  hoisted,  the  light-draught  steamers  and  surl- 
boats  having  been  previously  filled  with  our  men,  and  m twenty  min- 
utes some  three  regiments  were  on  shore.  The  steamers  having 
grounded,  the  men  on  them  leaped  overboard  and  waded  to  the  shore, 
holding  their  cartridge-boxes  out  of  the  water.  The  enthusiasm  with 
which  this  work  was  accomplished  cannot  be  excelled.  As  the  colors 
of  each  regiment  were  planted  on  the  shore  the  men  rallied  to  them, 
and  their  proper  formations  were  soon  made.  The  steamers  and  boats 
returned  to  the  fleet  for  more  troops,  and  the  landing  was  continued, 
under  the  direction  of  my  chief  quartermaster,  Capt.  Herman  Biggs, 
until  the  whole  force  detailed  for  the  attack  had  reached  the  shore 
except  the  field  artillery  and  some  of  the  infantry  that  had  not  arrived 

from  Hatteras  Inlet.  , . ^ ~ ^ a 

In  the  mean  time  I had  landed  my  staff,  and  detailed  Capt.  K. 
Williamson,  Topographical  Engineer,  to  move  on  in  advance  ot  the 


202 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chav.  XX. 


column  for  the  purpose  of  reeonnoitering  the  positions  of  the  enemy. 
I detailed  my  aides  Lieutenants  Pell  and  Fearing  to  accompany  him 
and  requested  him  to  call  on  General  Foster  for  two  of  his  aides  ami 

7^eil-an^S  ^rong  and  Pendleton  were  detailed  to  accompany  him. 

The  six  nayal  boat  howitzers,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  McCook 
haying  landed,  I ordered  a detail  of  a regiment  from  General  Bono's 
brigade  to  assist  in  hauling  them  over  the  road,  which  was  so  bad 
that  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  be  dragged  by  the  gunners.  The 
Fifty-first  Pennsylvania  was  detailed  for  this  service.  I then  moved 
on  to  the  head  of  the  column,  and  found  it  had  reached  the  first 
mtrenchment  at  Otter  Creek,  some  6 miles  up,  which  had  been  deserted 
by  the  enemy.  Captain  Williamson,  having  discovered  this  fact  and 
previously  reported  it  to  General  Foster,  proceeded  on  with  his  party 
to  make  a further  reconnaissance.  After  obstructing  the  railroad  at 
this  point,  I ordered  General  Foster  to  move  up  the  main  county  road 
with  his  brigade  and  General  Eeno  to  move  his  brigade  up  the  rail 
road,  leaving  orders  for  General  Parke  to  follow  with  his  brigade  up 
the  county  road.  Soon  after  starting  the  columns  Captain  Williamson 
reported  to  me  that  a line  of  breastworks,  broken  by  a redan  for  field 
pieces,  along  the  bank  of  the  river  a mile  in  advance,  had  also  been 
deserted  by  the  enemy.  I visited  this  work,  accompanied  by  Generals 
Foster  and  Eeno,  where  we  communicated  with  the  fleet. 

Overtaking  the  head  of  the  column,  the  march  was  continued  until 
my  own  staff  officers  and  those  of  the  different  brigades  who  were  act- 
ing as  escort  to  Captain  Williamson  came  in  contact  with  the  enemy’s 
pickets.  It  then  being  nearly  8 o’clock,  I ordered  a halt,  and  directed 
General  Foster  to  bivouac  on  the  right  and  left  of  the  county  road  in 
a line  at  right  angles  to  it,  ordering  one  regiment  to  occupy  the  road 
leading  down  to  the  fortifications  on  the  river.  General  Eeno’s  bri- 
gade occupied  a corresponding  advanced  position  across  the  railroad  a 
half  mile  to  the  left  and  General  Parke  occupied  a position  immedi- 
ately in  rear  of  and  parallel  with  General  Foster.  It  rained  all  night 
as  it  had  done  during  the  day,  so  that  our  men  passed  a most  cheerless 
night.  The  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania,  with  the  naval  boat  howitzers, 
under  Lieutenant  McCook,  together  with  two  guns  landed  from  the 
Cossack  and  Highlander,  under  Captains  Bennett  and  Dayton,  did  not 
reach  my  headquarters  till  3 o’clock  in  the  morning.  Too  much  praise 
cannot  be  awarded  to  the  officers  and  men  who  performed  this  very 
arduous  service,  as  these  eight  pieces  constituted  our  entire  artillery 
force  during  the  engagement  of  the  next  day. 

Soon  after  leaving  the  landing  I determined  not  to  land  the  light 
batteries  of  Captains  Belger  and  Morris  and  our  wagons  at  Slocum’s 
Creek,  and  sent  an  order  to  Captain  Biggs  to  move  up  the  river  and 
land  them  at  the  deserted  intrenchment  above  the  mouth  of  Otter 
Creek,  but  the  dense  fog  that  prevailed  during  the  afternoon  and  night 
made  it  impossible  to  land  anything,  and  it  was  equally  impossible  to 
communicate  from  shore  with  the  fleet  by  signals,  as  agreed  upon. 

On  the  following  morning  I ordered  Captain  Williamson  to  move 
forward  and  reconnoiter  the  position  of  the  enemy,  which  was  known 
to  be  not  far  in  advance  of  our  pickets,  from  information  obtained  dur- 
ing the  night  from  negroes  and  others,  to  the  effect  that  they  were 
posted  behind  a long  line  of  intrenchments  leading  from  the  river 
across  the  county  road  to  the  railroad.  The  brigades  were  formed  and 
ordered  to  advance  as  follows : General  Foster  to  move  up  the  county 
road  and  attack  the  enemy’s  front  and  left,  General  Eeno  to  move  up 
the  railroad  and,  if  possible,  turn  the  enemy’s  right,  and  General  Parke 


hap.  XX. J BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C.  203 

o move  up  the  county  road  as  a reserve.  I also  ordered  General 
3arke  to  detail  the  Eleventh  Connecticut  to  relieve  the  Fifty-first 
I Pennsylvania  in  dragging  up  the  boat  howitzers,  and  their  work  was 
lone  in  an  efficient  and  prompt  manner.  The  head  of  the  columns 
rery  soon  came  within  range  of  the  enemy’s  artillery,  and  the  following 
I lispositions  were  made:  General  Foster  placed  the  Twenty-fifth  Mas 
I jachusetts,  Colonel  Upton,  and  the  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts, 
Colonel  Stevenson,  in  line  of  battle  on  the  right  of  the  county  road 
| parallel  with  the  enemy’s  intrenchments;  the  six  navy  boat  howitzers, 
mder  Lieutenant  McCook,  with  the  howitzers  of  Captains  Dayton  and 
Bennett,  across  the  road,  and  the  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts, 
Jolonel  Lee,  and  the  Twenty-third  Massachusetts,  Colonel  Kurtz,  in 
ine  of  battle  on  the  left  of  the  road. 

The  enemy  then  opened  fire,  both  musketry  and  artillery,  upon 
General  Foster’s  lines.  General  Reno  then,  moving  briskly  forward 
?rith  his  brigade  along  the  railroad,  ordered  a charge  of  the  right  wing 
)f  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Clark,  on  the 
Dhe  brick-kiln  Just  in  the  rear  of  the  main  line  of  intrenchments,  which 
was  entirely  successful.  He  at  the  same  time  ordered  the  left  wing  of 
the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts,  Major  Rice ; the  Fifty-first  New  York, 

| Colonel  Ferrero  ; the  Ninth  New  Jersey,  Colonel  Heckman,  into  line  of 
battle  on  the  left  of  the  railroad,  with  a view  of  supporting  the  Twenty- 
first  Massachusetts,  holding  the  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania,  Colonel  Hart- 
ranft,  in  reserve ; but  he  soon  found  that  instead  of  the  enemy’s  right 
i being  on  the  railroad  it  extended  to  a point  some  three-quarters  of 
a mile  beyond,  and  they  were  posted  along  the  whole  line  in  a series 
of  redans  separated  from  him  by  fallen  trees  and  an  almost  impassable 
swamp.  He  soon  found  himself  engaged  along  the  whole  line,  and  was 
unable  to  support  Colonel  Clark,  who  was  soon  after  compelled  to  re- 
turn from  the  brick-kiln  from  the  attack  of  an  overwhelming  force. 
General  Foster  ordered  the  Tenth  Connecticut,  Colonel  Drake,  to  inter 
line  on  the  left  of  the  Twenty-third  Massachusetts.  I then  ordered 
General  Parke’s  brigade  to  take  a position  in  the  intermediate  space 
between  General  Foster  and  General  Reno,  and  to  support  whichever 
brigade  needed  it.  His  brigade  was  formed  in  the  following  order,  be- 
ginning at  the  left : The  Fourth  Rhode  Island,  Colonel  Rodman  ; the 
Eighth  Connecticut,  Colonel  Harland  ; the  Fifth  Rhode  Island,  Major 
Wright.  The  Eleventh  Connecticut,  which  had  brought  up  the  boat 
howitzers,  I held  as  reserve.  Soon  after  this,  learning  from  General 
Foster  that  the  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  had  exhausted  its  am- 
munition, I ordered  the  Eleventh  Connecticut,  Colonel  Mathew son,  to 
report  to  General  Foster  for  their  support. 

The  engagement  was  now  general  all  along  the  whole  line.  It  had  been 
previously  ascertained,  by  the  reconnaissance  of  Captain  Williamson, 
that  the  enemy  had  many  pieces  of  field  artillery  behind  their  intrench 
ments,  and  on  their  left  fianks  there  was  a river  battery  with  four  32 
pounders,  pivot  guns,  which  enfiladed  our  lines.  Having  ordered  to 
General  Foster  the  last  of  my  reserve,  I sent  word  to  General  Parke  to 
push  on  through  the  timber  and  pass  the  enemy’s  right.  I then  pro- 
i;  ceeded  to  the  left  of  our  lines  to  communicate  with  General  Reno, 
where  I found  his  brigade  very  hotly  engaged  with  the  enemy. 

In  the  mean  time  Colonel  Rodman,  of  the  Fourth  Rhode  Island,  had 
met  Colonel  Clark,  of  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts,  who  informed 
him  that  he  could  get  in  rear  of  the  enemy’s  intrenchments  by  charg- 
I ing  down  the  railroad  directly  upon  the  brick-kiln,  which  he  at  once 
did,  under  a galling  fire  from  the  rifle  pits  in  front  of  General  Reno. 


204 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  IX. 


and  was  supported  by  the  remainder  of  the  brigade,  by  order  of  Gen- 
eral Parke,  planting  their  colors  upon  the  parapet. 

The  brigade  then  moved  rapidly  down  the  line  of  intrenchments,  the 
Fourth  Ehode  Island  leading,  clearing  it  of  the  enemy  as  they  advanced 
and  capturing  their  guns.  General  Foster,  seeing  our  forces  inside  of 
the  enemy’s  lines,  immediately  ordered  his  brigade  to  charge,  when  the 
whole  line  of  breastwork  between  the  railroad  and  the  river  were  by 
this  combined  movement  of  the  two  brigades  most  gallantly  carried, 
the  enemy  retreating  in  the  greatest  possible  confusion.  After  the 
cheers  of  our  men  had  subsided  it  was  discovered  from  the  sharp  firing 
on  our  left  that  General  Eeno  was  still  engaged  with  the  enemy,  upon 
which  General  Parke  moved  back,  with  a view,  if  possible,  of  getting 
in  the  rear  of  the  enemy’s  forces  in  the  intrenchments  to  the  left  of  the 
railroad.  General  Foster  also  moved  foward  with  one  of  his  regiments 
farther  to  the  right,  with  a view  to  getting  in  their  rear.  General  Parke, 
having  reached  an  advantageous  position  to  the  right  of  the  brick-kiln 
and  in  rear  of  the  redans,  by  a heavy  fire  very  much  staggered  the 
enemy,  when  General  Eeno  ordered  the  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania,  Col- 
onel Hartranft,  to  charge  the  enemy’s  line,  which  charge  was  supported 
by  the  remainder  of  his  brigade,  causing  the  enemy  to  desert  his  works 
in  great  confusion. 

At  this  juncture  General  Foster  appeared  in  their  rear  with  one  of 
his  regiments,  thus  cutting  off  their  retreat,  and  received  from  Colonel 
Avery  an  unconditional  surrender  of  himself  and  over  200  men.  The 
Twenty-first  Massachusetts  was  left  in  charge  of  the  prisoners.  The 
remaining  force  at  that  point  moved  along  the  railroad  directly  for 
Eew  Berne.  In  the  mean  time  I had  conducted  the  four  regiments  of 
General  Foster’s  brigade  on  the  county  road  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy, 
and  at  the  crossing  of  the  county  road  and  railroad  the  column  came 
together,  General  Foster’s  brigade  consolidated  and  moved  on,  General 
Eeno’s  brigade  following.  I ordered  General  Parke’s  brigade  to  fol- 
low the  county  road,  and  if  possible  save  the  bridge  over  the  Trent 
from  destruction.  I then  joined  the  head  of  General  Foster’s  brigade, 
and  soon  after  discovered  that  the  railroad  bridge  and  part  of  the  city 
were  on  fire.  Upon  arriving  at  the  head  of  the  bridge  I halted  the 
brigades,  and  after  visiting  the  city,  in  company  with  Generals  Foster 
and  Eeno  and  consulting  with  Commodore  Eowan,  I ordered  General 
Foster  to  move  across  to  the  city  and  occupy  it.  Having  discovered 
that  the  draw  of  the  county  bridge  had  been  destroyed,  I sent  an  order 
to  General  Parke  to  proceed  no  farther,  but  to  bivouac  for  the  night. 

Of  what  has  happened  since  that  time  I have  already  sent  you 
detailed  accounts.  For  a more  perfect  understanding  of  the  exact 
movements  of  the  different  brigades  I beg  to  refer  you  to  the  very 
accurate  reports  of  my  brigadier-generals.  I also  beg  to  refer  you  to 
the  report  of  Captain  Williamson  and  to  the  accompanying  sketch*  for 
a more  accurate  knowledge  of  the  nature  and  position  of  the  enemy’s  | 
intrenchments  as  well  as  our  own  position  in  the  battle.  The  endur-  i 
ance  and  courage  displayed  by  our  officers  and  men  from  the  moment  ! 
they  landed  at  Slocum’s  Creek  until  they  reached  Hew  Berne  was  be- 
yond  anything  I could  have  expected.  The  road  from  the  landing  to 
Croatan,  a distance  of  6 miles,  was  newly  cut,  and  consequently  almost 
impassable,  and  continually  rendered  worse  by  the  rain,  the  march  of 
the  troops,  and  the  wheels  of  the  artillery. 

I have  before  mentioned  that  the  rear  of  the  column,  with  the  artil- 


Not  found. 


Chaf.  XX.]  BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C.  205 

( 

lery,  did  not  reach  our  position  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  until  3 o’clock 
in  the  morning.  Both  officers  and  men  bivouacked  in  the  open  fields 
and  swamps  in  order  of  battle,  catching  such  rest  as  they  could,  the 
rain  falling  constantly  during  the  night.  At  daylight  the  next  morn- 
ing the  regiments  were  in  line,  and  soon  the  brigades  commenced  filing 
off  to  take  their  positions  closer  to  the  enemy’s  works.  When  I started 
from  my  headquarters  for  the  head  of  the  column  I felt  that  we  were 
going  to  the  fight  under  most  unfavorable  circumstances,  and  expected 
to  find  the  men  fagged  and  leg- weary,  but  as  I passed  regiment  after 
regiment  their  hearty  cheers  and  firm  step  convinced  me  that  I had 
underestimated  them. 

On  reaching  the  turn  in  the  road  where  they  first  came  under  fire  of 
the  enemy’s  cannon  the  only  change  I could  perceive  in  their  demeanor 
was  an  over-anxiety  to  keep  their  ranks  well  closed,  and  they  filed  to 
their  positions,  under  the  direction  of  their  brigadier-generals,  with  all 
the  regularity  and  steadiness  of  veteran  soldiers.  For  more  than  three 
hours  the  contest  continued,  the  fog  being  so  dense  at  times  that  the 
position  of  the  enemy  could  only  be  ascertained  by  the  rattle  of  their 
musketry  and  the  roar  of  artillery.  The  result  has  proved  what  work 
they  can  do  under  such  trying  circumstances.  In  the  midst  of  all  the 
privations  since  we  left  Fortress  Monroe  the  most  marked  feature  that 
has  been  demonstrated  in  the  character  of  these  men  is  their  extreme 
patience.  With  men  of  less  patience  and  subordination  the  work 
could  not  have  been  accomplished. 

I cannot  mention  personal  instances  of  gallantry  where  all  have 
behaved  so  nobly.  To  the  reports  of  Generals  Foster,  Reno,  and 
Parke,  who  were  always  with  their  brigades  in  the  thickest  of  the 
fight,  as  well  as  to  the  reports  of  the  colonels  of  the  regiments,  who 
commanded  by  example  as  well  as  authority,  I beg  to  refer  you  for 
details.  To  them  and  their  brave  officers  and  men  the  country  owes 
every  success  which  has  been  obtained  during  the  campaign,  and  I am 
sure  their  services  are  appreciated. 

By  the  inclosed  report  of  Brigade  Surg.  W.  H.  Church,  our  medical 
director,  it  will  be  seen  that  our  loss  was  overestimated  in  my  hasty 
report  the  day  after  the  battle.  The  accompanying  lists  show  8& 
killed  and  352  wounded.*  Among  these  names  are  some  of  our  most 
valuable  officers  and  men.  They  are  sad  losses  to  us  and  to  their 
relatives  and  friends.  They  nobly  gave  up  their  fives  in  defense  of 
their  country,  and  a debt  of  gratitude  is  due  from  every  American 
citizen  to  the  wives,  mothers,  and  fathers  who  have  laid  such  sacrifices 
on  the  altar  of  their  country.  They  have  my  heartfelt  sympathy,  and 
I constantly  pray  that  but  few  more  such  sacrifices  will  be  required 
for  the  breaking  up  of  this  unholy  rebellion.  The  memories  of  the 
brave  dead  will  ever  be  green  in  the  hearts  of  their  countrymen  and 
the  scars  of  the  wounded  will  be  honorable  passports  for  them  through 
| fife. 

As  indicated  in  the  beginning  of  my  report,  the  plan  of  attack  con- 
templated the  co-operation  of  the  Navy,  which  was  most  successfully 
f carried  out.  As  we  moved  along  the  road  their  shells  fell  in  advance 
of  us,  and  as  we  approached  the  rear  of  each  rebel  fortification  their 
r shells  dropped  inside  the  parapets,  and  by  this  combined  movement 
the  enemy  was  forced  to  fly  in  the  greatest  confusion.  In  this  instance 
as  well  as  in  every  other  where  it  has  been  needed  the  most  perfect 
understanding  and  co-operation  have  existed  between  the  two  arms  of 


But  see  revised  statement,  p.  211. 


206 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 

the  service  since  we  joined  the  naval  fleet  at  Hatteras  Inlet.  I need 
hardly  say  that  these  brave  officers  and  sailors  are  bound  to  us  bv  the 
strongest  ties  of  friendship  and  companionship  in  arms. 

The  armed  transports  of  the  fleet  in  this  instance,  as  in  every  other, 
have  shown  that  they  have  been  most  efficiently  managed,  and  in  speak- 

ofgthP  fwfr  Th68  this  commandl  always  include  111  the  transports 
of  the  fleet.  The  gunboat  Picket,  Capt.  T.  P.  Ives,  rendered  marked 

e^Cein^hlS  e“gageiIlent  as  well  as  at  Roanoke  and  elsewhere. 

I he  duties  of  the  officers  and  attendants  of  the  medical  staff  have 
been  “J08t  ar^J°^s  both  during  and  since  the  battle  and  most  nobly 
have  they  fulfilled  their  mission,  displaying  in  all  instances  both  skill 
and  courage. 

Some  of  the  results  of  this  battle  may  be  enumerated  as  follows: 
The  capture  of  nine  forts,  with  forty-one  heavy  guns;  two  miles  of 
intrenchments,  with  nineteen  field  pieces;  six  32-pounders  not  in  posi- 
tion; over  300  prisoners;  over  1,000  stand  of  small-arms;  tents  and 
barracks  for  10,000  troops;  a large  amount  of  ammunition  and  army 
supplies ; an  immense  amount  of  naval  stores,  for  which  I refer  vou  to 
Commodore  Rowan’s  report ; the  second  commercial  city  in  the  State 
ot  -North  Carolina;  the  entire  command  of  the  Albemarle  and  Pamlico 
Sounds ; the  capture  of  Beaufort,  Carolina,  and  Morehead  Cities,  and 
the  complete  investment  of  Fort  Macon,  which  we  hope  soon  to  reduce 
The  prisoners  belonging  to  this  city  I have  released  on  their  parole 
together  with  the  sick  and  wounded.  The  remainder,  some  160, 1 have 
sent  to  New  York  I hope  my  course  in  releasing  the  sick  and  wounded 
and  the  citizens  of  this  place  will  meet  the  approval  of  the  Department 

i °,u  d have  been  *lad  t0  have  released  them  all  had  the  enemy 
fulfilled  their  engagement  made  with  me  when  I released  the  Roanoke 
prisoners. 

* ®a“n”t  clos„e  this  roport  without  paying  a just  tribute  of  praise  to 
the  members  of  my  staff,  who  have  so  nobly  aided  me  in  every  effort  in 
the  accomplishment  of  this  work.  Dr.  Church,  after  designating  the 
positions  for  hospitals  and  performing  other  duties  devolving  upon  him 
as  medical  director,  rendered  me  most  efficient  service  in  directing 
troops  and  carrying  orders.  Captain  Richmond,  my  assistant  adju- 
tant-general, and  Lieutenants  Pell  and  Fearing  accompanied  me  on  the 
held,  where  they  displayed  great  gallantry  and  skill. 

Capt,  Herman  Biggs,  my  chief  quartermaster,  rendered  most  impor- 
tant service  m directing  the  debarkation  of  troops  and  the  movement 
ot  our  supply  transports.  From  the  organization  of  this  expedition  in 
JNe7,1Y°1ik  , September  his  work  has  been  arduous  and  unremitting- 
and  the  fact  that  no  call  for  anything  which  appertains  to  his  depart- 
ment  has  been  unsatisfied  is  sufficient  evidence  of  the  efficiencv  with 
which  he  has  performed  his  work.  He  has  been  and  was  in  this  instance 
most  nobly  seconded  by  Captains  Cutting  and  Coring.  Capt.  R.  S.  Will- 
iamson, chief  topographical  engineer,  made  some  most  daring  recon- 
naissances, and  by  his  skill  and  courage  has  commanded  the  respect  of 
and  endeared  himself  to  the  whole  command.  Capt,  E.  R.  Goodrich 
my  chief  commissary,  and  Captain  D’Wolf,  in  this  instance  as  in  all 
others,  have  shown  marked  efficiency  in  the  discharge  of  the  duties  of 
their  department  under  the  most  trying  circumstances.  Lieutenant 
h lagler,  my  chief  ordnance  officer,  has  constantly  managed  his  depart- 
ment with  great  skill,  and  rendered  most  important  aid  in  this  instance. 
My  private  secretaries,  Messrs.  Larned  and  French,  here  as  at  Roanoke, 
accompanied  the  army  on  the  field,  ever  readv  to  perform  the  duties 
required  of  them. 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


207 


I mentioned  in  my  first  dispatch  that  the  loss  of  the  enemy  was  less 
than  our  own,  but  subsequent  information  has  convinced  me  that  it 
was  much  greater ; that  a large  number  of  their  killed  and  wounded 
were  carried  off  in  the  ears  there  is  no  doubt,  but  in  the  absence  of 
accurate  information  I refrain  from  making  an  estimate.  It  is  never  a 
source  of  pleasure  to  me  to  exaggerate  the  loss  on  either  side,  and  could 
the  same  results  have  been  obtained  without  the  loss  of  a man  it  would 
have  been  a source  of  great  gratification.  Happily  I have  the  oppor- 
tunity of  decreasing  my  former  estimate  of  our  own  loss. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  BUBNSIDE, 

Major-General , Commanding  Department  North  Carolina . 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War,  Washington. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

No.  17.  ) New  Berne , March  15,  1862. 

The  general  commanding  congratulates  his  troops  on  their  brilliant 
and  hard- won  victory  of  the  14th.  Their  courage,  their  patience,  their 
endurance  of  fatigue,  exposure,  and  toil  cannot  be  too  highly  praised. 
After  a tedious  march,  dragging  their  howitzers  by  hand  through 
swamps  and  thickets  j after  a sleepless  night,  passed  in  a drenching 
rain,  they  met  the  enemy  in  his  chosen  position,  found  him  protected  by 
strong  earthworks,  mounting  many  and  heavy  guns,  and  although  in 
an  open  field  themselves,  they  conquered.  With  such  soldiers  advance 
is  victory. 

The  general  commanding  directs  with  peculiar  pride  that,  as  a well- 
deserved  tribute  to  valor  in  this  second  victory  of  the  expedition,  each 
regiment  engaged  shall  inscribe  on  its  banner  the  memorable  name, 
u New  Berne.” 

By  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  A.  E.  Burnside: 

LEWIS  BICHMOND, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

War  Department, 
Washington , D.  <7.,  March  22,  1862. 

Major-General  Burnside  : 

^ General  : The  report  of  the  late  brilliant  success  of  the  United 
States  forces  under  your  command  at  New  Berne  has  afforded  the  high- 
est satisfaction  to  the  President  and  to  this  Department  and  to  the 
*7hole  nation,  and  thanks  for  distinguished  service  are  again  tendered 
o you  and  to  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  your  command. 

Inclosed  I have  the  pleasure  to  transmit  your  commission  as  a major- 
general,  so  gallantly  won. 

Be-enlorcements  have  been  ordered,  and  it  will  be  the  pleasure  of  the 
lepartment  to  strengthen  and  support  you  to  the  utmost  extent  within 
ts  power.  If  anything  more  than  you  have  be  needed  for  the  safety  of 
-our  command,  the  success  of  its  operations,  or  the  care,  comfort,  and 
itten dance  of  the  sick  and  wounded,  you  will  please  communicate  to 
I his  Department,  in  order  that  it  may  be  supplied. 

The  Adjutant-General  has  been  instructed  to  communicate  with  you 
ally  upon  other  subjects. 

Bespectfully,  yours,  &c.,  ' 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 

\ 


208 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  Robert  S,  Williamson , U.  S.  Topographical  Engineers - 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  19,  1862. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  instructions  from  the  general  commanding  the 
Department  of  North  Carolina  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  follow- 
ing report  of  the  reconnaissances  made  previohs  to  the  battle  of  March 
14,  near  New  Berne,  together  with  a sketch  of  the  defenses  of  that 
town : * 

The  fleet  arrived  near  the  mouth  of  Slocum’s  Creek,  about  16  miles 
below  New  Berne,  on  the  evening  of  the  12th  instant,  and  the  troops 
landed  the  next  day  on  the  northern  bank  of  the  creek.  At  2 p.  m.  the 
whole  force  was  on  shore,  and  I was  then  directed  to  go  in  advance,  to 
ascertain  the  position  of  the  enemy.  No  cavalry  had  landed,  but  I was 
furnished  with  a horse,  and  Lieutenants  Pell  and  Fearing,  aides  to 
General  Burnside,  being  also  mounted,  were  directed  to  accompany  me. 
Taking  a northwesterly  direction,  we  soon  came  to  the  county  road, 
which  leads  to  the  town,  and  followed  it  for  five  or  six  miles,  when  we 
reached  the  first  of  the  enemy’s  works,  consisting  of  a long  breastwork 
at  right  angles  to  the  road.  This  we  found  to  be  deserted.  Passing 
on,  we  found  at  the  distance  of  a quarter  of  a mile  a well-traveled  cross 
road  leading  to  the*  river,  about  a half  a mile  distant.  This  we  ex- 
amined, and  found  it  to  terminate  at  a house  near  the  river  bank,  on 
which  was  a line  of  breastworks  broken  by  a redan  for  field  pieces. 
This  was  also  deserted,  but  according  to  the  statement  of  a negro  at 
the  house  it  had  been  occupied  by  the  rebel  troops  with  field  artillery 
during  the  night  previous.  I then  returned  to  the  head  of  the  advanc- 
ing column,  where  I found  General  Foster,  to  whom  I reported,  after 
which  I again  advanced  on  the  road. 

At  various  times  I was  joined  by  some  of  the  staff  officers  of  the 
different  brigades,  among  whom  were  Lieutenants  Pell  and  Fearing,  of 
General  Burnside’s  staff;  Captain  Potter,  Lieut.  Ed.  N.  Strong,  Lieut. 
James  H.  Strong,  and  Lieut.  James  M.  Pendleton,  of  General  Foster’s 
staff,  and  Lieutenant  Beno  and  Lieutenant  Morris,  of  General  Eeno’s  staff. 
There  may  have  been  others  whose  names  I have  inadvertently  omitted^ 
but  having  been  but  ten  days  in  this  department  I have  not  yet  learned 
the  names  of  all  the  staff  officers.  Those  whom  I have  mentioned 
cheerfully  assisted  in  the  reconnaissances.  At  one  time,  a little  before 
sunset,  Lieutenant  Beno  and  myself  rode  at  a gallop  a couple  of  miles 
in  advance,  when  suddenly,  at  a turn  of  the  road,  we  came  within  50 
yards  of  a column  of  rebels  in  retreat,  upon  which  we  again  returned 
and  reported.  Finally,  when  some  distance  in  advance  and  accompa- 
nied by  several  staff  officers,  we  came  upon  a small  rebel  advance  guard 
of  3 or  4 mounted  men,  who  hailed  us.  when  we  again  returned  to  the 
head  of  the  column.  It  being  then  alter  dark,  the  order  was  given  to 
bivouac  for  the  night.  During  the  whole  day  it  was  cloudy,  with  rain 
at  frequent  intervals.  The  country  traversed  was  in  open  pine  timber. 

In  the  morning  there  was  a dense  fog.  Shortly  after  daylight  I 
again  went  in  advance  to  reconnoiter,  accompanied  by  several  stall 
officers.  After  going  for  a short  distance  through  the  pine  woods  we 
came  to  an  open  place,  where  the  trees  had  been  felled,  which  gave  us 
a view  of  the  enemy  in  force.  They  were  in  line  behind  an  intrencli- 
ment  perpendicular  to  the  road,  and  extended  as  far  as  I could  see  on 
either  hand — that  is  to  say,  about  a half  mile  to  the  left  and  a quarter 


*Not  found. 


Chav.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


209 


of  a mile  to  the  light.  The  distance  from  them,  as  shown  by  a subse- 
quent  measurement,  was  350  yards.  I dismounted  and  examined  them 
with  a glass,  hut  the  fog  was  so  dense  it  was  difficult  to  determine  the 
number  of  guns  in  sight,  but  one  brass  field  piece  was  plainly  to  be 
seen  immediately  in  front,  which  commanded  the  road  The ^number 
of  infantry  in  sight  I estimated  to  be  from  3,000  to  4,000.  We  there- 
fore turned  back,  but  very  soon  met  General  Foster,  at  the  head  of  the 
advancing  column.  In  a few  minutes  General  Burnside  was  on  the 
spot,  and  immediately  arranged  for  the  attack.  The  firing  commenced 
at  about  8 o’clock  and  continued  until  about  1 p.  m.,  when  the  lntrench- 
ments  were  in  our  possession.  During  the  battle  I acted  as  aide  to  the 
generals— particularly  to  General  Burnside. 

After  the  capture  of  this  line  of  works  the  enemy  was  no  longer  to 
be  seen,  and  in  the  afternoon  our  brigade  occupied  New  Berne.  Sub- 
sequently I rode  with  my  assistants,  Mr.  H.  0.  Fillebrown  and  Mr.  E. 
S.  Walters,  over  the  principal  portion  of  the  captured  works,  and  pre- 
pared the  accompanying  hasty  sketch  of  the  defenses. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  S.  WILLIAMSON, 
Captain , U.  S.  Topographical  Engineers. 

Capt.  Lewis  Richmond,  A.  A.  6r.,  Dept . of  North  Carolina. 


Reports  of  Surg.  William  H.  Church , TJ.  S.  Army , Medical  Director. 

Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , N.  <7.,  March  16,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
killed  and  wounded  during  the  action  of  March  14,  1862 : 

I arrived  at  the  rear  of  the  field  of  action  about  8 o’clock  a.  m.,  and 
had  iust  located  the  hospitals  when  the  wounded  made  their  appear- 
ance. Brigade  Surg.  J.  H.  Thompson  located  his  hospital  in  the 
wood  at  the  rear  of  the  First  Brigade,  Actg.  Brigade  Surg.  C.  Cutter, 
of  the  Second  Brigade,  his  on  the  left  of  our  line,  and  Actg.  Brigade 
Surg.  H.  W.  Rivers,  of  the  Third  Brigade,  established  his  m an  open, 
well-sheltered  wood,  just  to  the  right  of  the  First  Brigade.  From  the 
list  of  casualties  you  can  well  understand  that  the  labor  of  the  medical 
corps  has  been  very  severe,  especially  after  the  long  inarch  and  com- 
fortless night  before  the  day  of  action.  The  conduct  of  Surg.  George 
Derby  and  Asst,  Surg.  S.  E.  Stone,  of  the  Twenty-third  Massachu- 
setts Volunteers,  is  deserving  of  special  mention.  Before  the  action 
opened  I located  them  at  a point  which  proved  to  be  immediately  m the 
range  of  the  enemy’s  fire.  They  must  have  remained  there  two  hours 
before  I thought  of  their  position,  when  I found  them  quietly  perform- 
ing their  operations  with  the  balls  falling  thick  and  last.  I immedi- 
ately ordered  Dr.  D.  to  remove  his  wounded  to  a house  in  a more  pro- 
tected position,  where  he  still  remains,  in  charge  of  his  own  and  many 

other  wounded.  , , , . 

I submit  a full  list  of  each  regimental  surgeon’s  report  to  their  re- 
spective brigade  surgeons.  ... 

Of  the  various  staff  officers  I do  not  hear  of  any  serious  injury , 
although  your  aide,  Lieutenant  Fearing,  had  a narrow  escape i from  a 
round  shot  which  struck  the  earth  between  his  horse’s  feet,  filling  his 

14  R R— VOL  IX 


210 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


eyes  and  face  with  sand  and  gravel.  Lieut.  J.  M.  Pendleton,  of  Gen- 
eral Foster’s  staff,  also  had  a narrow  escape  from  a hall  which  passed 
through  the  sleeve  of  his  coat.  The  wounded  will  be  immediately 
removed  to  two  comfortable  hospitals  in  the  city  of  New  Berne.  Sur- 
geons Upham,  Kneeland,  Batchelder,  and  Clarke,  from  Massachusetts, 
joined  us  at  Hatteras  Inlet,  and  have  been  of  great  assistance  both  in 
the  field  and  hospital. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  HENRY  CHURCH, 
Brigade  Surgeon  and  Medical  Director. 


Headquarters  Department  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , April  9,  1862. 

General  : I herewith  submit  a revised  and  correct  list  of  the  killed 
and  wounded  at  the  battle  of  New  Berne,  on  the  14th  of  March,  1862, 
compiled  from  the  reports  of  the  various  brigade  and  regimental  sur- 
geons. Although  the  casualties  are  only  reduced  to  88,  I am  happ^  to 
find  that  the  number  wounded  is  much  smaller  than  was  at  first  sup- 
posed.* A large  number  of  the  wounded  as  they  improve  have  been 
sent  home,  and  those  remaining  are  comfortably  cared  for  in  the  Craver- 
street  Hospital,  under  the  charge  of  Brigade  Surg.  J.  Bryan,  and  in  the 
Academy  Green  Hospital,  placed  in  charge  of  Surg.  George  Derby,  of 
the  Twenty-third  Massachusetts  Regiment  Volunteers.  The  wounds 
were  unusually  severe,  and  there  have  been  several  remarkable  re- 
coveries. The  labor  of  the  medical  corps  has  been  so  great  that  I 
would  once  more  respectfully  urge  upon  you  the  absolute  necessity  for 
an  increase  of  our  surgical  force,  as,  in  addition  to  the  sick  of  the  trans- 
ports, they  are  obliged  to  attend  the  sick  of  the  town  and  negroes.  The 
latter  are  now  so  numerous  that  it  is  necessary  to  open  a hospital  for 
their  reception. 

I am,  general,  very  resjiectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  HENRY  CHURCH, 
Brigade  Surgeon  and  Medical  Director. 


[Inclosure.] 


* * * * * * 

# 

RECAPITULATION. 

Regiment. 

Killed. 

j Wounded. 

J Aggregate. 

Stli  Connecticut - 

2 

4 

6 

7 

17 

24 

Utli  Connecticut . ...... .......... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... .... .... 

6 

21 

27 

16 

40 

56 

7 

24 

31 

30 

43 

53 

4 

16 

20 

9 

43 

52 

3 

46 

49 

11  < 

60 

71 

9 

9 

11 

21 

32 

2 

8 

10 

Total - - - 

88 

352 

440 

* But  see  revised  statement,  p.  211. 


Chap.  XX.] 


211 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 

\ Addenda.  ] 

Return  of  casualties  in  the  Department  of  North  Carolina,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  Am 
brose  E.  Burnside , at  the  battle  of  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  14,  1862. 

[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.J 


/ 


Command. 


First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster. 


| Killed. 


Wounded. 


Captured  i 
or  missing. : 


a 


a a ® 


23d  Massachusetts 
24th  Massachusetts . 
25th  Massachusetts 
27th  Massachusetts. 
10th  Connecticut . . . 


21 

41 

15 

41 

15 


31 

55 

20 

52 

24 


Total  First  Brigade 

Second  Brigade. 


2 35 


12 


133 


182 


Brig.  Gen.  Jesse  L.  Beno. 


21st  Massachusetts. 

51st  New  York 

9th  New  Jersey  — 
51st  Pennsylvania.. 


1 14  2 

1 10  6 

13  4 


40 

54 

54 

9 


62 

9 


Total  Second  Brigade 


Third  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Parke. 

4th  Rhode  Island 

5th  Rhode  Island,  1st  Battalion 

8th  Connecticut 

11th  Connecticut 

Total  Third  Brigade 

Unassigned  Troops. 


27 


18 


12 


157 


55 


199 


1st  New  York  Marine  Artillery,  detachment 1 

99th  New  York,  Company  B 2 1 6 

Total  unassigned  troops 2 17 


Total  Department  of  North  Carolina, 


82 


28 


352 


1 

JP 

11 

471 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster , U.  8.  Army , commanding  First 

Brigade. 

Headquarters  General  Foster’s  Brigade, 

Department  of  North  Carolina , New  Berne , March  20,  1862. 

1 have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  pursuance  of  the  orders  of  Gen- 
eral Burnside  and  in  accordance  with  the  plan  of  operations  agreed 
upon,  1 proceeded  to  land  my  brigade  on  the  13th  instant  at  Slocum’s 
Creek.  1 took  on  board  the  Pilot  Boy  about  500  men  of  the  Twenty- 
fourth  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  and  towing  the  boats  of 
my  brigade,  carrying  about  600  more,  reached  the  mouth  of  the  creek 


212 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


and  landed  without  molestation.  I landed  with  the  first  detachment, 
and  instructed  Captain  Messinger  to  remain  on  the  Pilot  Boy  and  land 
the  balance  of  my  brigade.  I had  sent  orders  to  form  the  Twenty  - 
fourth  and  advance  a short  distance  on  the  main  road,  and  on  landing 
l took  command  and  moved  on,  giving  the  advance  to  the  Twenty-first 
Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  of  General  Reno’s  brigade,  by 
order  of  General  Burnside,  assigning  the  advance  to  General  Reno.  I 
left  an  aide  to  form  the  regiments  as  they  landed  and  to  order  them  to 
follow. 

I advanced  on  the  main  road,  throwing  out  skirmishers  and  an  ad- 
vance guard  of  the  Twenty-first  Regiment  Massachusetts,  and  at  a 
distance  of  6 miles  I heard  from  Captain  Williamson,  of  the  Topo- 
graphical Engineers,  the  result  of  a daring  reconnaissance  made  by 
him,  accompanied  by  Lieutenants  Pell  and  Fearing,  of  General  Burn- 
side’s staff,  and  by  Lieutenants  Strong,  Pendleton,  and  Strong,  of  mine, 
discovering  an  abandoned  breastwork.  I then  pushed  on  and  entered 
the  wrork,  accompanied  by  General  Reno,  who  had  shortly  before  come 
up  and  assumed  command  of  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts.  The 
’work  was  found  to  be  a breastwork,  well  constructed,  and  running  in 
a straight  line  froin  the  railroad  to  the  river,  a distance  of  about  1 
mile,  having  a flank  facing  the  railroad  and  a fort  on  the  river  flank. 
There  were  four  flanking  bastions  for  guns,  and  the  fort  was  prepared 
tor  four  guns.  None  were  mounted,  however.  The  troops  were  halted 
inside  the  fort  to  rest  and  eat.  General  Burnside  then  coming  up,  I, 
agreeably  to  his  orders,  advanced  my  brigade  about  3 o’clock  on  the 
county  road,  General  Reno  being  ordered  to  take  the  railroad  track, 
which  ran  off  to  the  left  of  the  county  road.  We  marched  about  4 
miles,  halted,  and  bivouacked  for  the  night  near  the  enemy’s  position. 

At  daylight  on  the  next  morning  (the  14th  instant)  I advanced  my 
brigade,  by  order  of  General  Burnside,  until  I came  upon  the  enemy’s 
position.  General  Parke  was  ordered  to  the  left  by  General  Burnside, 
and  I made  the  following  dispositions : The  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts 
was  thrown  to  the  extreme  right,  followed  in  order  by  the  Twenty- 
fourth  Massachusetts  in  line  of  battle,  their  left  resting  on  the  county 
road,  just  on  the  left  of  which  I jdaced  the  howitzer  from  the  High- 
lander, under  command  of  Captain  Dayton,  supported  in  line  of  battle 
on  the  left  by  the  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts,  and  opened  fire.  On 
the  arrival  of  the  navy  boat  howitzers,  under  command  of  Lieutenant 
McCook,  they  were  placed  in  line  on  the  left  of  Captain  Dayton’s  gun, 
and  the  Twenty- third  was  ordered  to  the  left  of  the  Twenty-seventh. 
The  firing  was  incessant  and  very  severe  from  the  breastwork  and 
within  a very  short  range. 

General  Burnside  arriving,  I communicated  to  him  the  dispositions 
1 had  made,  which  he  approved,  sending  over  to  General  Parke  to 
push  on  to  the  enemy’s  right,  and  leaving  me  to  hold  the  point,  he  rode 
off  to  reach  General  Reno’s  position. 

The  Tenth  Regiment  Connecticut  Volunteers,  having  arrived,  were 
ordered  to  the  left  of  the  Twenty-third,  and  to  support  them,  if  ren- 
dered necessary  by  want  of  ammunition.  This  being  the  case,  they 
formed  on  and  to  the  left  of  the  position  of  the  Twenty-third  and 
opened  fire.  Hearing  from  the  Twenty-seventh  that  they  were  very 
short  of  ammunition,  I ordered  the  Eleventh  Connecticut,'  of  General 
Parke’s  brigade,  which  had  just  come  up,  by  order  of  General  Burn- 
side, to  their  support,  and  sent  one  of  my  aides  to  conduct  them  to 
their  position.  The  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  then  retired  in 
good  order,  with  orders  to  lie  in  a hollow,  out  of  the  fire,  with  fixed  bay- 
onets, and  wait  further  orders. 


rjHAP.  XX.  J 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


213 


The  ammunition  of  the  navy  howitzers  being  nearly  exhausted  and 
one  piece  disabled,  the  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  were  ordered  to 
march  by  the  flank  and  form  so  as  to  support  the  guns,  leaving  the 
Twenty-fourth  on  the  extreme  right.  About  twenty-five  minutes  from 
this  time  the  head  of  General  Parke’s  column,  the  Fourth  Ehode 
Island,  had  reached  the  breastwork  at  the  railroad  crossing,  and  after 
a brisk  fire  pushed  on  and  entered  the  breastwork  in  an  opening  left 
for  the  railroad  track,  and  where  the  enemy’s  fire  had  much  slackened 
in  consequence  of  the  steady  and  constant  fire  of  the  Twenty-third 
Massachusetts  and  Tenth  Connecticut.  This  position  of  affairs  being 
discovered,  I ordered  an  advance  along  the  line,  which  was  promptly 
obeyed,  the  enemy  retreating  with  great  precipitation. 

On  entering  the  breastworks  sharp  firing  was  still  heard  to  the  right 
of  the  enemy’s  position,  and  hearing  from  General  Parke  that  he  was 
engaged  with  the  enemy’s  forces  in  their  works  to  the  right  of  the  rail- 
road, I led  the  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  to  his  support,  and  received 
the  surrender  of  Colonel  Avery  and  150  men. 

The  breastwork  we  had  entered  was  similar  in  construction  to  the 
abandoned  one,  running  from  Fort  Thompson  at  the  river  to  the  rail- 
road track,  a distance  of  1|-  miles,  and  from  the  railroad  track  rifle  pits 
and  detached  intrenchments  in  the  form  of  lunettes  and  redans  fol- 
lowed each  other  for  the  distance  of  1J  miles  and  terminated  by  a two- 
gun  battery. 

Fort  Thompson,  a flanking  bastion,  mounted  thirteen  guns,  all  32- 
pounders  (two  rifled),  four  of  which  were  turned  so  as  to  bear  upon  our 
line.  The  breastwork  was  mounted  by  two  complete  field  batteries, 
besides  several  pieces  of  heavy  artillery,  and  manned  by  about  6,000 
men.  The  force  in  men  and  artillery  of  the  other  defenses  I am  unable 
to  give,  they  not  coming  under  my  observation. 

Pressing  forward  then  with  my  brigade,  I reached  the  railroad  bridge 
at  New  Berne,  which  being  burned  to  prevent  our  following  up  the 
flying  enemy,  I rested  the  men  on  a field  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Trent. 
By  order  of  General  Burnside,  who  had  continued  up  with  me,  I shortly 
after  crossed  with  my  brigade  over  the  river  and  encamped  the  regi- 
ments, with  the  exception  of  the  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts,  in  the 
camp  of  the  enemy  (at  the  Fair  Ground),  the  enemy  having  left  all  his 
camp  equipage,  and  from  appearances  must  have  fled  very  precipitately  , 
the  Twenty-fifth  being  quartered  in  the  town  for  police  duty. 

The  fatigues  and  hardships  of  the  march  from  Slocum’s  Greek  I need 
not  mention;  the  horrible  state  of  the  roads,  the  wearing  labor  it  cost 
to  drag  for  12  miles  the  howitzers,  the  severity  of  the  storm,  and  the 
wet  ground  of  the  soldiers’  bivouac  for  the  night,  you  well  know. 

I must  mention  in  my  brigade,  where  all  behaved  bravely,  with  par- 
ticular praise  the  Twenty-fourth  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers 
and  the  Tenth  Connecticut  Volunteers.  The  former,  under  a severe 
fire  from  musketry  in  the  front  and  exposed  to  a flanking  fire  of  grape 
and  canister  from  Fort  Thompson,  unprotected  by  the  trees,  behaved 
with  marked  coolness  and  steadiness.  The  latter  advanced  close  under 
the  enemy’s  fire  in  line  of  battle,  fired  with  the  most  remarkable  steadi- 
ness, and  stood  steadily  up,  giving  and  taking  the  most  severe  fire. 

The  naval  howitzers,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  McCook,  Acting 
Masters  Daniels  and  Hammond,  Captain’s  Clerk  Meeker,  Captain 
Rowan’s  Clerk  Gabaudan,  Lieutenant  Tillotson,  Union  Coast  Guard, 
and  Lieutenant  Hughes,  Union  Coast  Guard,  were  most  admirably 
served  during  the  day,  and  when  the  ammunition  was  exhausted  they 
laid  down  by  their  pieces  rather  than  to  withdraw  from  their  position. 


214 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


Captain  Dayton  volunteered  again  to  land  and  command  the  gun  from 
the  Highlander.  His  gun  was  first  in  position,  and  he  served  it,  as 
before,  with  steadiness  and  efficiency/  Lieutenant  Tillotson,  whose  gun 
was  disabled,  rushed  ahead  after  the  action  in  pursuit  with  such  speed 
as  to  be  captured  by  the  enemy. 

From  the  joy  of  victory  I must  turn  to  mourn  the  price  it  cost  in  the 
soldier’s  death  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Merritt,  of  the  Twenty-third  Mas- 
sachusetts, who  fell  early  in  the  action  whilst  urging  and  cheering  the 
men  on  bravely  and  gallantly,  and  of  Lieut.  J.  W.  Lawton,  of  the 
Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts,  shot  dead  on  the  field.  Maj.  Eobert 
H.  Stevenson,  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts,  was  wounded  in 
the  leg,  but  stood  up  encouraging  his  men  till  forced  to  leave  the  field. 
Adjt.  W.  L.  Horton,  of  the  same  regiment,  was  severely  wounded  by  a 
grape  shot  in  the  shoulder  whilst  in  the  active  performance  of  his 
duties,  and  Lieuts.  Daniel  Sargent  and  James  B.  Nichols  were  each 
slightly  wounded.  Capt.  Y.  P.  Parkhurst,  of  the  Twenty-fifth  Massa- 
chusetts, had  his  leg  fractured.  Lieuts.  J.  S.  Aitchison  and  J.  W. 
Trafton,  of  the  Twenty- seventh,  were  slightly  wounded.  Capt.  E.  K. 
Swift  also  slightly  wounded,  and  Lieut.  George  Warner  had  a foot  shot 
off.  Capt.  Wesley  C.  Sawyer  and  William  B.  Alexander,  of  the  Twenty- 
third  Massachusetts,  were  both  wounded,  the  former  severely  in  the 
leg,  rendering  amputation  necessary,  and  the  latter  in  the  hand.  Lieut. 
T.  W.  B.  Hughes,  of  the  Union  Coast  Guard,  was  also  wounded.  In- 
closed I send  you  a list  of  the  killed  and  wounded,  showing  a total  of 
30  killed  and  153  wounded.* 

It  is  with  much  pleasure  that  I can  report  all  of  my  staff  as  unin- 
jured. They  consisted  during  the  day  of  Brigade  Surg.  J.  LI.  Thomp- 
son, who  volunteered  in  the  early  part  of  the  fight  to  carry  any  order 
for  me,  and  did  so,  till  called  elsewhere  by  his  duties,  under  the  hottest 
fire;  of  Capt.  Southard  Hoffman,  assistant  adjutant- general;  Capt.  E. 
E.  Potter,  acting  commissary  of  subsistence;  Lieut.  J.  F.  Anderson, 
aide-de-camp;  Lieut.  J.  M.  Pendleton,  aide-de-camp;  Lieut.  James  H. 
Strong,  aide-de-camp;  Lieut.  Edw.  N.  Strong,  aide-de-camp;  and 
Lieuts.  J.  L.  Yan  Bureu  and  E.  T.  Gordon,  of  the  Signal  Corps,  who 
were  used  by  me  as  aides.  I most  cordially  bear  my  testimony  to  the 
conduct  of  the  above-named  gentlemen  during  the  day  as  most  worthy 
a gallant  set  of  gentlemen.  They  were  indefatigable  in  carrying  orders, 
urging  on  men,  and  in  placing  the  regiments,  coolly  and  correctly 
obeying  every  order,  and  always  under  the  heaviest  fire.  Without 
drawing  any  distinctions  in  the  staff,  I would  take  advantage  of  this 
opportunity  to  mention  the  names  of  Lieuts.  James  M.  Pendleton  and 
James  H.  and  Edw.  N.  Strong  as  being  volunteers  who,  without  com- 
mission or  enrollment,  have  acted  during  the  entire  campaign  as  aides, 
and  performed  every  duty  zealously  and  satisfactorily,  and  whose  con- 
duct during  the  day  I have  already  spoken  of,  and  to  suggest  that, 
under  these  circumstances,  their  services  deserve  a recognition,  if  not 
award,  from  the  Government. 

I also  desire  to  return  my  thanks  to  the  colonels  of  my  brigade  for 
the  able  assistance  they  rendered  me  during  the  day  in  promptly  and 
correctly  obeying,  with  the  regiments  under  their  command,  my  orders 
during  the  day.  They  were  Col.  Edwin  Upton,  Twenty-fifth  Massa- 
chusetts Yolunteers ; Col.  Thomas  G.  Stevenson,  Twenty-fourth  Mas- 
sachusetts Yolunteers;  Col.  Horace  C.  Lee,  Twenty-seventh  Massa- 
chusetts Yolunteers;  Col.  John  Kurtz,  Twenty-third  Massachusetts 
Yolunteers;  Lieut.  Col.  Albert  W.  Drake,  Tenth  Connecticut  Yolun- 


But  see  revised  statement,  p.  211. 


Chaf.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


215 


teers;  Lieut.  Col.  Charles  Mathewson,  Eleventh  Connecticut  Volun- 
teers, and  their  reports  are  herewith  inclosed. 

I am,  general,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 
Brigadier- General,  U.  8.  Army. 
Capt.  Lewis  Richmond,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  5.  » 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Albert  W.  Drake,  Tenth  Connecticut  Infantry . 

Hdqks.  Tenth  Regiment  Connecticut  Vols., 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  15,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  part  taken  by  the  Tenth  Regi- 
ment Connecticut  Volunteers  in  the  battle  near  New  Berne  of  March 
14,  1862. 

At  about  7.30  o’clock  a.  m.  on  the  morning  of  that  day  we  left  our 
bivouac  and  advanced  up  the  road  leading  to  the  city  of  New  Berne. 
Although  the  men  were  chilled  and  wet  from  lying  in  the  rain  on  the 
wet,  cold  ground  during  the  previous  night,  and  were  much  worn-down 
with  fatigue  from  their  march  of  the  previous  day,  they  advanced  with 
alacrity.  Arriving  within  about  one  half  a mile  from  the  enemy’s 
intrenchments,  we  encountered  a severe  fire  from  their  batteries.  I 
immediately  filed  the  regiment  through  the  woods  toward  the  left,  and 
arriving  at  a spot  of  low  ground  halted  and  waited  orders.  After 
some  time  had  elapsed  I received  orders  to  form  a line  of  battle  and 
advance  and  open  fire  on  the  enemy.  I immediately  formed  the  regi- 
ment in  line  of  battle,  and  advanced  up  the  rising  ground  directly  in 
front  of  their  intrenchments,  and,  halting  a little  less  than  300  yards, 
opened  fire.  For  a short  time  we  received  in  return  a brisk  fire  from 
their  artillery  and  infantry,  but  it  was  soon  silenced.  The  men’s 
ammunition  getting  short  and  the  fire  of  the  enemy  having  nearly 
ceased,  we  ceased  firing  and  remained  in  our  position. 

Shortly  after  the  enemy  left  their  works.  I followed  on  with  the 
remainder  of  the  brigade,  and  without  further  difficulty  reached  the 
Trent  River  at  about  2.30  p.  m.  That  evening  the  regiment  was  trans- 
ported across  the  river  and  quartered  in  a deserted  camp  of  the  enemy 
near  the  city. 

1 have  to  say  that  all  of  the  officers  and  men  of  the  regiment  did 
their  whole  duty  during  the  engagement.  Appended  is  a list  of  our 
killed  and  wounded  during  the  action.* 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

ALBERT  W.  DRAKE, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Comdg.  Tenth  Regt.  Conn.  Vols. 

Capt.  Southard  Hoffman,  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Col.  John  Kurtz,  Twenty -third  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Twenty-Third  Mass.  Vols., 

New  Berne,  March  15,  1862. 

Dear  Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  at  8 o’clock  in  the  morn- 
ing of  the  13th  instant  I received  the  order  to  disembark  my  regiment 


Embodied  in  statement  on  p.  211. 


216 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


and  land  upon  the  shore,  16  miles  below  this  post.  Having  but  five 
small  boats,  and  one  of  my  vessels  being  3 or  more  miles  from  shore,  it 
was  not  completed  until  near  3 o’clock  in  the  afternoon.  My  regiment 
marched  forward  with  a 12-pounder  howitzer  as  soon  as  possible  after 
landing,  and  arrived  at  the  bivouac  of  this  brigade  at  8 o’clock  in  the 
evening,  where  we  slept  as  comfortably  as  possible  during  a night  of 
drenching  rain.  At  7 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  14th  I was  ordered 
by  General  Foster  to  take  up  the  line  of  march  and  follow  him.  In 
the  coursa^of  half  an  hour  I received  an  order  from  him  to  file  into  the 
woods  an (i  form  my  regiment  in  line  upon  the  left  of  the  Twenty-seventh 
Massachusetts,  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  breastwork,  and  immediately 
open  fire  upon  him.  The  order  was  promptly  executed.  The  fire  was 
incessant  for  one  and  a half  hours  within  150  yards  of  the  enemy’s 
work,  &c.  My  ammunition  (40  rounds)  was  expended.  I immediately 
sent  word  to  the  general  of  my  position  and  condition,  and  was  assured 
that  a regiment  would  be  sent  to  my  relief.  Accordingly  in  a few  mo- 
ments the  Eleventh  Connecticut  reported  to  me.  I immediately  ordered 
them  to  form  in  front  of  my  line,  and  I fell  back  ten  paces  in  good  order, 
fixed  bayonets,  and  lay  down  ready  to  support  the  line  in  front  of  me. 
After  remaining  in  this  position  about  thirty  minutes  a general  charge 
was  made  along  the  whole  front,  and  we  had  carried  the  work  and  our 
glorious  old  flag  floated  over  it,  and  we  gave  nine  rousing  cheers. 

I was  immediately  ordered  by  the  general  to  send  forward  one  com- 
pany as  an  advance  guard,  and  to  follow  with  my  regiment  and  feel 
my  way  toward  the  enemy,  now  in  full  retreat,  and  to  capture  all 
belligerents  or  enemies.  We  examined  the  woods,  houses,  and  forts. 
We  took  Dr.  West,  who  reports  himself  a native  of  Hew  Rochelle, 
Hew  York  State,  and  a surgeon  in  the  Confederate  Army.  I sent  him 
to  headquarters.  In  the  course  of  an  hour  we  joined  General  Foster 
with  the  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  at  the  railroad,  about  2 miles  from 
this  post,  and  marched  along  the  road  until  we  arrived  at  the  bridge 
across  the  Trent,  which  was  on  fire  and  entirely  destroyed.  After  a 
rest  of  an  hour  we  embarked,  crossed  the  river,  and  at  5 o’clock  occu- 
pied the  camp  of  the  “chivalry,”  which  appeared  to  have  been  left  very 
hastily,  and  which  was  being  plundered  by  the  negroes.  I stopped  the 
plundering,  took  possession,  and  made  myself  as  comfortable  as  pos- 
sible tor  the  night.  The  officers  and  men  of  my  regiment  behaved  in 
the  most  gallant  manner,  and  I take  great  pleasure  in  saying  that 
Captains  Brewster,  Martin,  Center,  Howland,  Whipple,  Raymond,  Saw- 
yer, with  their  officers  and  men,  particularly  so  Capt.  E.  G.  Dayton,  of 
the  schooner  Highlander,  volunteered  to  command  the  12-pounder  how- 
itzer, and  the  persevering  manner  in  which  he  and  his  men  drew  the 
gun  through  the  mud,  in  many  places  knee-deep,  and  the  very  gallant 
manner  in  which  they  served  it  within  a hundred  yards  of  the  enemy’s 
line,  met  my  warmest  approbation.  They  made  every  shot  tell,  and  had 
nearly  or  quite  fired  their  last  charge  before  they  received  any  support. 
My  adjutant,  Lieut.  John  G.  Chambers,  rendered  me  the  most  efficient 
aid  by  the  prompt  and  gallant  manner  in  which  he  carried  and  executed 
my  orders,  as  well  as  by  the  alacrity  in  which  he  urged  the  men  at  the 
most  necessary  points  of  the  line.  He  comprehends  without  profuse 
explanation  my  commands,  and  is  a very  efficient  and  gallant  officer. 

It  is  with  the  most  sincere  regret  that  I have  to  report  the  death  of 
Lieutenant- Colonel  Merritt,  who  was  killed  early  in  the  engagement 
while  urging  his  men  into  the  line  in  the  most  brave  and  gallant  manner. 
His  loss  will  be  severely  felt  by  the  regiment.  He  was  the  kindest- 
hearted  man  I ever  met  with,  and  I am  sensibly  affected  at  his  loss. 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


217 


Captain  Sawyer,  of  Company  H,  had  his  left  leg  taken  off  by  a round 
shot.  Major  Elwell  behaved  in  the  most  gallant  manned,  and  is  a most 
capital  and  efficient  officer,  and  performs  his  duty  without  ostentation, 
and  can  be  depended  upon. 

Annexed  please  find  a list  of  my  killed  and  wounded* 

Very  respectfully,  JOHN  KURTZ, 

Colonel , Commanding  Twenty -Third  Massachusetts . 

Capt.  Southard  Hoffman,  A.  A.  G .,  First  Brig .,  Coast  Division . 


No.  7. 

Deport  of  Col.  Thomas  G.  Stevenson , Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  In- 
fantry. 

Camp  near  New  Berne,  March  16, 1862. 

Sir  : I beg  leave  to  report  that  on  the  morning  of  the  13th  instant 
mv  regiment  was  on  board  the  transports  Guide  and  Yedette,  which 
were  at  anchor  in  Neuse  River,  off  the  mouth  of  Slocum’s  Creek.  Early 
in  the  morning  I received  the  signal  to  prepare  to  land,  and  in  accord- 
ance with  the  order  of  General  Foster  filled  the  boats  belonging  to  my 
transports  with  a part  of  my  men  and  fastened  them  to  the  stern  of  the 
steamer  Pilot  Boy,  which  came  alongside  the  Guide  and  took  the  com- 
panies that  remained  on  her.  There  was  no  opposition  to  our  landing, 
and  as  soon  as  the  men  reached  the  shore  I formed  them  in  line  of  bat- 
tle. By  order  of  General  Foster  I then  advanced  my  regiment  in  rear 
of  the  Massachusetts  Twenty-first  as  far  as  the  railroad,  when  I took 
the  advance  on  the  county  road,  sending  Company  E forward  as  an 
advance  guard.  I pushed  forward  as  rapidly  as  the  condition  of  the 
road  would  permit  until  night-fall,  when,  in  accordance  with  General 
Foster’s  orders,  I filed  my  regiment  into  the  woods  on  the  right  of  the 
road  and  bivouacked  for  the  night.  The  men  were  somewhat  worn-out 
by  their  exhausting  march,  but  made  themselves  as  comfortable  for  the 
night  as  circumstances  would  permit.  I sent  forward  Companies  A, 
E,  K,  and  F as  a picket  guard,  and  we  remained  undisturbed  during 

the  night.  , 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  14th  instant  a small  party  of  the  enemy's 
cavalry  appeared  within  sight  of  our  pickets  and  was  fired  upon,  where- 
upon I immediately  ordered  my  regiment  to  fall  in.  By  order  of  Gen- 
eral Foster  I then  advanced  up  the  main  road,  with  Company  E as  an 
advance  guard,  until  within  sight  of  the  enemy’s  intrenchments,  and 
then  filed  off  to  the  right  of  the  road,  where  I formed  my  regiment  in 
line  of  battle  and  advanced  forward  to  within  about  50  paces  of  the 
edge  of  the  woods,  where  I halted  until  my  advance  guard  returned 
from  the  road.  It  was  at  this  time  the  enemy  opened  fire,  wounding  2 
of  my  men.  I immediately  advanced  my  regiment  out  of  the  woods, 
where  I ordered  them  to  lie  down  and  open  fire.  The  men  behaved 
very  well  in  this  position,  keeping  up  incessant  and  well-directed  fire 
on  the  enemy  for  over  two  hours. 

Owing  to  the  rain  and  wet  to  which  the  guns  had  been  exposed  many 
of  my  men  experienced  great  difficulty  in  firing  them,  and  in  many 
cases  had  to  draw  the  charges  before  their  guns  were  of  any  use.  Fort 
Thompson,  on  our  right,  which  I supposed  to  have  no  guns  on  the  land 
side,  opened  on  us  with  grape  and  canister  from  their  guns  as  soon  as 


* Embodied  in  statement  on  p.  211. 


218 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


we  got  into  position.  We  afterward  found  that  they  attempted  to 
bring  one  of  the  guns  on  the  water  side  of  the  battery  to  bear  on  our 
lme  but  failed,  probably  from  want  of  time.  Finally  I noticed  the  fire 
of  the  enemy’s  right  slackened,  as  I supposed  from  the  success  and  ad- 
vance of  our  left.  I immediately  ordered  my  own  regiment  forward 
and  we  had  advanced  but  a short  distance  when  the  enemy  turned! 
stopping  only  to  give  us  one  volley  of  musketrv  and  a round  of  grape 
The  enemy  retreated  very  precipitately  from  Fort  Thompson  as  we 
entered,  and  I only  succeeded  in  capturing  six  of  them.  I immediately 
raised  the  American  flag  on  the  parapet,  to  apprise  the  gunboats  of  our 
position. 

By  order  of  General  Foster  I left  one  company  in  the  fort,  selecting 
for  that  purpose  Company  B,  and  then  marched  my  regiment  forward 
on  the  county  road  to  the  railroad  and  up  the  railroad  to  the  Trent 
River,  where  X halted  them  in  a large  field  on  the  left.  After  remain- 
ing there  a short  time  General  Foster  ordered  my  regiment  to  cross  the 
river  in  the  gunboat  Delaware  and  other  boats  that  he  was  using  for 
that  purpose,  and  to  take  possession  of  therebel  camp  in  the  Fair  Ground 
outside  of  New  Berne.  On  reaching  camp  I found  my  men  much  ex- 
hausted by  their  severe  labors  since  they  had  landed,  but  was  pleased 
to  find  that  there  were  comparatively  few  stragglers. 

It  pains  me  to  close  my  report  by  informing  you  that  my  regiment 
lost  55  men  in  killed  and  wounded  during  the  action,  a list  of  whom  I 
herewith  transmit.* 

THOS.  G.  STEVENSON, 

Colonel  Twenty-fourth  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers. 

Capt.  Southard  Hoffman,  Assistant  Adjutant- General . 


No.  8. 

Report  of  Col.  Edwin  Upton , Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-fifth  Regiment  Mass.  Vols., 

New  Berne , N.  C.<  March  17,  1862. 

^ Sir  : At  about  6 a.  in,  of  Friday,  the  14th  instant,  I was  ordered  by 
General  Foster  to  move  from  the  bivouac  occupied  by  my  regiments 
during  the  night  previous,  and  did  so,  following  the  Twenty-fourth 
Massachusetts  Regiment.  Proceeding  along  the  main  road  about  a mile 
I was  ordered  by  General  Foster  to  file  to  the  right  of  the  road,  take 
position  on  the  right  of  the  24th,  and  advance.  The  entire  regiment 
had  not  cleared  the  road  when  the  enemy  opened  fire  from  his  artillery. 
I passed  on  to  the  position  assigned  me  and  advanced  to  the  front  some 
distance.  Being  desirous  of  ascertaining,  if  possible,  the  exact  posi- 
tion of  the  enemy,  I dispatched  scouts  to  the  right  and  front.  They 
soon  returned,  reporting  the  enemy’s  earthworks  in  front,  with  what 
appeared  to  be  a three-gun  battery  directly  on  our  right.  The  enemy 
discovering  our  position  and  opening  fire,  we  were  exposed  to  a fire 
from  the  front  and  right,  and  at  the  same  time  a fire  of  shell  was 
opened  on  us  from  the  rear,  which  I supposed  came  from  our  own 
artillery  or  gunboats.  We  were  thus  in  danger  of  being  badlv  cut 
up,  with  no  opportunity  to  retaliate.  The  fact  being  reported,  I was 
ordered  by  General  Foster  to  move  to  the  support  of  the  Twenty-sev- 
enth Massachusetts  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  road.  Moving  in  that 

* Embodied  in  statement  on  p.  21 1 . 


Chav.  XX.l 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


219 


direction  we  arrived  at  the  road,  and  were  then  ordered  by  General 
Foster  to  support  our  battery  stationed  on  the  road.  Taking  our  posi- 
tion in  column  by  division,  we  remained  there  until  ordered  by  General 
Foster  to  deploy  and  charge  on  the  enemy’s  works.  This  was  done, 
General  Foster  leading  the  charge,  the  enemy  leaving  at  our  approach. 
Passing  into  the  works,  the  regiment  was  formed  in  line  of  battle,  and 
I was  ordered  to  move  along  the  road  in  position  for  street  tiring. 
Having  passed  the  enemy’s  camp,  we  filed  to  the  left  of  the  road,  flank- 
ing. I was  ordered  to  advance  in  line  cautiously,  as  General  Parke’s 
brigade  was  expected  to  be  on  our  left  and  front  and  General  Beno  to 
be  turning  the  enemy’s  right.  We  advanced  slowly,  receiving  a fire  of 
musketry,  which  was  at  first  supposed  to  come  from  the  other  brigades. 
Deploying  two  companies  as  skirmishers,  with  orders  to  proceed  with 
caution,  they  soon  discovered  a body  of  the  enemy  and  opened  fire  upon 
them.  The  skirmishers  having  assembled,  the  regiment  advanced,  and 
the  enemy,  to  the  number  of  about  150,  surrendered  to  General  Foster. 
The  general  ordered  them  placed  in  chargeof  Company  H,  Captain  Moul-  • 
ton,  and  then  ordered  me  to  proceed  down  the  railroad,  which  I did,  arriv- 
ing in  New  Berne  at  about  5 p.  m.  Herewith  is  a list  of  the  casualties, 
showing  4 killed  and  16  wounded.* 

In  consequence  of  illness  and  exhaustion  consequent  upon  the  very 
fatiguing  march  of  the  previous  day  and  the  night  exposure  in  the 
drenching  rain  I was  deprived  of  the  assistance  of  Major  McCafferty 
and  Adjutant  Harkness,  the  former  of  whom  was  obliged  to  fall  behind 
just  before  the  close  of  the  action,  the  latter  being  left  by  the  road  side 
during  the  march  before  the  enemy  was  discovered. 

I would  again  in  the  highest  terms  of  praise  mention  the  efficiency 
and  bravery  of  Lieut.  Col.  A.  B.  B.  Sprague  as  fully  sustaining  his 
former  high  reputation. 

Verv  frespeetfullv,  yours, 

EDWIN  UPTON, 


Twenty-fifth  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers. 
Capt.  Southard  Hoffman,  A.  A.  G.,  General  Foster's  Brigade. 


No.  9. 

Report  of  Col.  Horace  C.  Lee,  Twenty -seventh  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

IIdqrs.  Twenty-seventh  Begiment  Mass.  Yols., 

In  Camp  at  New  Berne , March  15,  1862. 

I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report : 

On  Thursday,  March  13,  at  the  stated  signal,  we  commenced  landing 
troops,  one  company  at  a time  (which  was  all  the  boat  would  accom- 
modate), from  each  vessel — the  Recruit  and  Banger.  Major  Bartholo- 
mew was  sent  forward  with  the  first  company,  and  at  11  o’clock,  four 
companies  having  landed,  I went  on  shore  and  took  command,  leaving 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Lyman  to  come  forward  with  the  balance.  We 
marched  up  the  road  until  night  and  then  bivouacked  as  ordered  and 
threw  out  pickets  on  our  left  flank,  rear  and  right  flank  being  protected 
by  other  regiments  of  the  brigade.  Our  companies  continued  to  arrive 
until  midnight,  when  we  had  about  600  men.  At  daylight  on  Friday 
morning,  hearing  a rapid  firing  of  musketry  in  front,  I called  in  the  pick- 
ets, ordered  the  men  to  fall  in,  and  soon  after,  by  order  from  General 
Poster,  took  up  the  line  of  march  by  flank  in  rear  of  the  25th.  The 

* Embodied  in  statement  on  p.  *211. 


220 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


first  intimation  we  had  that  we  were  near  the  enemy  was  from  a shell 
thrown  directly  up  the  road,  but  which  passed  without  injury  to  the 
right  of  us.  We  immediately,  by  General  Foster’s  orders,  formed  col- 
umn by  companies  and  forward  into  line,  and  advanced  through  the 
woods  on  the  left  of  the  road  until  we  came  in  sight  of  the  enemy,, 
strongly  intrenched  directly  in  front.  As  soon  as  near  enough  to  get 
a good  range  I gave  the  order  to  fire  by  wing  and  then  by  file,  and  con- 
tinued in  this  manner,  constantly  cautioning  the  men  to  take  deliberate 
aim  before  firing,  until  from  the  small  amount  , of  ammunition  left  I 
thought  it  best,  not  wishing  to  slacken  the  fire  at  all,  to  send  to  Gen- 
eral Foster  either  for  more  ammunition  or  to  be  relieved.  This  I did 
by  Gap  tain  Pendleton,  of  your  staff,  who  had  been  with  me  from  the 
first  fire,  and  who  rendered  me  good  service  in  keeping  the  line  un- 
broken. Not  hearing  from  you,  I sent  Adjutant  Bartlett,  as  we  were 
then  reduced  to  an  average  of  4 or  5 rounds,  many  of  the  men  being 
out  entirely.  He  returned  with  orders  that  we  were  to  be  relieved  by 
the  Eleventh  Connecticut  and  were  then  to  fall  back  to  the  rear.  As 
soon  as  the  Eleventh  Connecticut  came  up  and  were  in  position  I 
ordered  the  men  to  cease  firing  and  lie  down.  We  soon  after  marched 
in  good  order  to  the  rear,  and  had  been  there  but  a few  moments  when 
we  heard  cheering,  and  having  formed  again  to  advance,  were  met  by 
an  aide  with  orders  to  form  in  the  fort,  the  enemy  having  retreated. 
My  intention  had  been  not  to  fall  back,  though  the  word  came  to  me 
that  we  were  to  do  so,  but  to  merely  continue  lying  ready  for  a charge, 
if  necessary ; but  at  the  solicitation  of  several  of  my  officers  I did  so. 
Having  come  up  to  the  fort,  we  were  at  once  ordered  to  follow  the  Twenty- 
third,  which  we  did  until  we  arrived  at  the  burning  bridge  at  New 
Berne.  We  were  soon  after  taken  across  the  river  in  boats  and  estab- 
lished in  the  camp  just  vacated  by  the  Seventh  North  Carolina  Begi- 
ment.  From  the  position  we  occupied  our  loss  in  wounded  is  quite 
large,  though  fortunately  but  5 men  killed,  which  I Attribute  to  the  fact 
that  the  shot  from  the  rifles  and  cannon  of  the  enemy  passed  over  our 
heads;  two-thirds  of  the  wounds,  so  far  as  I can  learn,  being  caused  by 
balls  from  smooth-bore  muskets.  I have  not  received  the  surgeon’s 
report,  and  cannot  say  for  certain  that  this  is  so,  but  think  it  must  be. 

I might  mention  individual  cases,  as  well  among  men  as  officers,  who 
displayed  unusual  bravery  and  coolness,  but  where  all  did  so  well  it  is 
almost  impossible,  and  perhaps  impolitic,  to  do  it.  I can  only  say  that 
with  very  few  exceptions  I was  perfectly  satisfied  with  the  manner  in 
which  they  obeyed  my  orders  and  stood  up  without  shrinking  to  the 
most  terrific  fire. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  C.  LEE, 

Colonel , Commanding  Twenty-seventh  Regiment  Mass.  Vols . 

Capt.  Southard  Hoffman,  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


No.  10. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Jesse  L.  Reno , TI.  S.  Army , commanding  Second 

Brigade. 

Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

New  Berne , March  16,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  obedience  to  the  orders 
of  General  Burnside  I landed  my  brigade  at  the  mouth  of  Slocum’s 


Chat.  XI.j 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


221 


Creek,  some  16  miles  from  New  Berne,  and  proceeded  at  once  to  ad- 
vance toward  the  railroad,  where  we  expected  first  to  meet  the  rebels. 
After  a march  of  about  4 miles  we  arrived  at  a long  line  of  deserted 
intrenchments,  the  rebels  having  abandoned  them  shortly  before. 
Here  I met  General  Foster,  and,  agreeably  to  the  general  command- 
ing’s orders,  we  awaited  the  arrival  of  the  rest  of  the  division.  The 
general,  soon  coming  up,  ordered  me  to  follow  the  railroad  toward  New 
Berne.  The  advance  was  continued  until  about  8 p.  in.,  when  the  troops 
were  ordered  to  bivouac.  I was  ordered  by  the  general  commanding 
to  advance  at  daylight  and  attack  the  right  of  the  rebel  lines,  but 
owing  to  the  severe  rain  of  the  previous  night  I found  that  many  of 
the  muskets  would  not  fire,  so  I ordered  that  all  should  discharge  their 
load,  drawing  such  as  would  not  fife.  After  this  my  brigade  moved  forward 
along  the  railroad  in  the  following  order : Twenty -first  Massachusetts, 
Fifty-first  New  York,  Ninth  New  Jersey,  and  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania. 
At  about  a quarter  before  8 a.  m.  I heard  General  Foster’s  brigade  hotly 
engaged,  and  in  a few  miuutes  I saw  a large  number  of  the  enemy  ap- 
parently engaged  in  getting  a gun  to  bear  on  the  railroad.  I ordered 
the  skirmishers  to  fire  upon  them,  at  the  same  time  ordering  the  Twen- 
ty-first Massachusetts  forward  into  line.  The  enemy  now  opened  a 
brisk  fire  upon  us  from  near  the  railroad,  the  skirmishers  in  advance 
replying  briskly,  and  as  soon  as  the  right  wing  of  the  Twenty-first 
Massachusetts  got  into  line  I ordered  Lieutenant-Colonel  Clark  to 
charge  and  take  the  brick-kiln,  which  was  gallantly  executed. 

In  the  mean  time  I ordered  my  aides  to  bring  up  the  balance  of  my 
brigade  and  form  in  line  to  the  left  of  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts, 
placing  the  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania  in  reserve,  supporting  the  extreme 
left  of  my  line.  Owing  to  the  thick- fog  it  was  almost  impossible  to  see 
the  rebels,  and  not  knowing  that  their  line  extended  beyond  the  rail- 
road, after  having  ordered  Lieutenant-Colonel  Clark  to  advance  along 
the  inside  of  the  enemy’s  intrenchments,  I returned  across  the  railroad 
to  bring  up  the  rest  of  my  brigade  to  his  support,  but  finding  the  left 
wing  of  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  and  the  Fifty-first  New  York 
hotly  engaged  in  front  and  the  enemy’s  lines  extending  far  beyond  my 
extreme  left,  1 found  it  necessary  to  attack  them  in  front,  and  as  the 
ground  was  quite  uneven  I directed  the  regiments  to  advance  as  near 
as  possible  under  cover  of  the  ridges  and  pick  off  the  enemy  whenever 
their  heads  appeared  above  their  line  of  intrenchments. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  also  came  into  line  and  opened 
a well-directed  fire  upon  a two-gun  battery  only  s<^pe  200  yards  in  front 
of  them,  and  so  accurate  was  their  fire  that  the  enemy  could  only  oc- 
casionally fire  their  guns.  The  battle  now  became  general  along  our 
whole  line,  and  raged  fiercely  for  about  three  and  a half  hours.  The  Fifty- 
first  Pennsylvania  was  held  in  reserve  during  this  time,  and  although 
exposed  to  a severe  fire,  Colonel  Hartranft  did  not  allow  a single  shot 
to  be  fired,  but  directed  the  men  to  lie  down,  and  thus  saved  them  from 
much  loss. 

It  having  been  reported  to  me  that  the  regiments  engaged  had  ex- 
pended nearly  all  their  ammunition,  I ordered  Colonel  Hartranft  to 
send  one  wing  of  his  regiment  to  relieve  the  Fifty-first  New  York,  which 
had  suffered  very  severely.  As  soon  as  they  arrived  I ordered  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Bell  to  pass  the  Fifty-first  New  York,  deliver  one  volley, 
and  then  charge  upon  the  enemy’s  intrenchments.  At  the  same  time  I 
sent  orders  to  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  and  the  remainder  of  the  Fifty- 
first  Pennsylvania  to  charge.  All  this  was  gallantly  executed,  and  the 
rebels  fled  precipitately  from  all  their  intrenchments.  Some  50  pris- 


222 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


oners  were  captured  in  these  works,  many  severely  wounded.  Upon 
reaching  the  rebel  intrench  men ts  I was  rejoiced  to  see  our  flag  waving* 
along  the  entire  line  of  the  enemy’s  works,  General  Parke’s  brigade 
having  previously  stormed  and  captured  their  center  batteries  and 
General  Foster’s  their  left. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  action  I left  Lieutenant-Colonel  Clark 
with  his  right  wing  inside  of  the  enemy’s  intrenchments,  ordering  him 
to  proceed  along  their  lines  toward  their  left,  where  General  Foster’s 
brigade  was  engaged,  intending  to  support  him  immediately,  but  owing 
to  circumstances  previously  mentioned  was  unable  to  do  so.  I was, 
however,  confident  that  he  would  be  able  to  extricate  his  command 
should  he  meet  overwhelming  forces,  and  most  gallantly  did  he  do  so; 
for  coming  unexpectedly  upon  a light  battery  of  six  pieces  he  charged 
and  captured  the  entire  battery,  but  was  driven  out  by  an  overwhelm- 
ing force  of  rebel  infantry.  I beg  leave  to  refer  the  general  command- 
ing to  his  report  of  this  most  daring  charge. 

In  this  severely-contested  battle  both  officers  and  soldiers  behaved 
with  distinguished  gallantry  and  nobly  sustained  the  honor  of  their 
respective  regiments.  It  would  make  my  report  entirely  too  long  to 
particularize  the  gallant  conduct  even  of  those  officers  and  men  who 
came  under  my  own  observation,  but  I desire  that  the  reports  and  com- 
mendations of  the  regimental  commanders  be  considered  as  part  of  my 
own. 

It  is  with  the  deepest  regret  that  I have  to  announce  the  death  of 
First  Lieutenant  Stearns,  acting  adjutant  of  the  Twenty-first  Massa- 
chusetts, one  of  the  most  accomplished  and  gallant  officers  in  the  Army ; 
of  Chaplain  Benton,  of  the  Fifty-first  Hew  York,  who  was  killed  while 
nobly  encouraging  the  men  to  do  their  duty,  and  of  First  Lieutenant 
Allen,  of  the  same  regiment,  who  was  shot  dead  at  the  head  of  his  com- 
pany. Also  Captain  Johnson,  mortally  wounded,  and  Lieutenant 
Walker,  of  the  Ninth  New  Jersey,  who  was  killed  in  front  of  his  com- 
pany. Captain  Frazer  was  wounded  and  captured  in  the  battery  taken 
by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Clark,  but  after  it  was  retaken  by  the  Fourth 
Rhode  Island,  and  the  rebels  were  retreating  with  him,  he  managed  to 
keep  in  the  rear,  apd  drawing  his  revolver  captured  the  three  men  left 
to  guard  him.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Potter,  of  the  Fifty -first  New  York, 
was  wounded  early  in  the  action,  but  he  most  gallantly  continued  with 
the  regiment  during  the  entire  battle  and  rendered  very  important 
service.  Major  Le  Gendre,  of  the  same  regiment,  displayed  most  con- 
spicuous courage  until  he  fell  severely  wounded.  Lieutenants  Tryon, 
McKee,  and  Coddington,  of  the  Fifty-first  New  York,  also  displayed 
conspicuous  courage,  and  were  all  wounded,  but  not  fatally.  Of  the 
Ninth  New  Jersey  the  following  gallant  officers  were  wounded,  viz: 
Captains  Middleton,  McOliesney,  and  Hufty. 

I inclose  herewith  a complete  list  of  the  killed  and  wounded.*  In  the 
early  part  of  the  battle  Lieutenant  Reno,  one  of  my  aides,  made  a most 
daring  reconnaissance  of  the  enemy’s  right,  and  first  informed  me  of 
the  extent  of  their  lines.  They  had  thirteen  finished  redans  and  five 
guns  bearing  on  my  brigade,  and  an  almost  impassable  morass  filled 
with  fallen  timber  had  to  be  passed  over  before  reaching  them.  Cap- 
tain Neill,  assistant  adjutant- general,  was  always  with  me  when  not 
carrying  orders,  and  displayed  conspicuous  courage  and  coolness. 
Lieutenants  Reno  and  Morris,  aides,  rendered  highly  important  service 
and  behaved  most  gallantly.  Lieutenants  Reed  and  Marsh,  of  the 
Signal  Corps,  acted  as  aides  and  did  their  duty  well.  Captain  Ritchie, 


Embodied  in  statement  on  p.  211. 


Jhap.  XX] 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


223 


ictiug  commissary  of  subsistence,  and  Lieutenant  Hall,  acting  brigade 
quartermaster,  were  present  in  the  battle  and  behaved  gallantly.  The 
jnrgeons  and  chaplains  of  the  different  regiments  did  their  duty  nobly 
m the  field  of  battle.  I desire  to  return  my  thanks  to  Lieutenant-Col- 
>nel  Clark,  commanding  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts ; to  Colonel 
^errero,  commanding  Fifty-first  New  York;  to  Colonel  Heckman,  com- 
nanding  Ninth  New  Jersey,  and  to  Colonel  Hartranft,  commanding 
^fifty-first  Pennsylvania,  for  the  admirable  manner  in  which  they 
nought  their  regiments  into  line  and  for  their  gallantry  on  the  field. 
Sight  companies  of  the  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania,  commanded  by  Lieu- 
;enant-Colonel  Bell,  were  detailed  to  drag  up  six  guns  furnished  by  the 
Savy,  and  commanded  by  Lieutenant  McCook,  and  one  from  the  Cos- 
jack,  commanded  by  Captain  Bennett,  who  gallantly  volunteered  to 
nan  it.  They  succeeded  in  bringing  up  the  guns,  arriving  in  camp 
ibout  2 a.  m.  on  the  14th  instant.  After  almost  incredible  labor  the 
pins  were  all  brought  into  action  and  most  gallantly  served,  but  from 
ihe  nature  of  the  ground  they  were  unable  to  join  my  brigade,  but 
jerved  with  General  Foster,  who  no  doubt  will  do  full  justice  to  their 
gallantry.  The  total  loss  in  my  brigade  was  36  killed,  5 mortally 
.vounded,  and  160  more  or  less  severely  wounded.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  L.  BENO, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Second  Brigade. 
Capt.  Lewis  Bichmond, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  11. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  William  S.  Clark,  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  In- 
fantry. 

Headquarters  Twenty-First  Mass.  Vols., 
Camp  Reno,  New  Berne,  JOT.  C.,  March  16,  1862. 

Captain  : About  9 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  13th  instant  the 
Twenty-first  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  743  strong,  landed  at  the  mouth 
)f  Slocum’s  Creek,  and  by  order  of  General  Beno  advanced  about  2 miles 
:hrougli  the  pine  woods  along  the  south  bank  of  the  river  Neuse  toward 
tfew  Berne.  Arriving  out  upon  a large  open  field,  the  regiment  stacked 
irms,  to  await  the  arrival  of  the  general  with  the  #est  of  the  brigade. 
Dompauy  G,  under  Lieutenant  Taylor,  formed  the  advance  guard,  and 
iiscovered  a short  distance  into  the  woods  beyond  the  cleared  space  a 
large  number  of  wooden  barracks,  which  had  been  evacuated  about 
two  hours  before  by  the  rebel  cavalry,  whose  equanimity  had  been  dis- 
turbed by  shells  from  the  gunboats.  An  advance  of  4 miles  brought 
the  regiment  to  Croatan,  where  we  found  a very  extensive  eartlrwork 
running  at  right  angles  to  the  highway. 

This  being  unoccupied  by  the  enemy,  the  colors  of  the  Twenty-first 
were  placed  upon  the  parapet  and  heartly  cheered  by  officers  and  men. 
Near  this  work  a halt  of  an  hour  was  made  for  dinner,  during  which 
the  pioneers  tore  up  the  track  of  the  railroad  connecting  New  Berne 
with  Beaufort.  From  this  point  the  regiment  was  ordered  to  move  for- 
ward upon  the  railroad  track,  and  Company  D,  under  Lieutenant  Bar- 
ker, was  sent  forward  as  advance  guard.  About  a mile  of  advance 
brought  the  regiment  to  a place  where  the  highway  crosses  the  rail- 


But  see  revised  statement,  p.  211. 


224  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA.  [Chap.  XX. 

road,  and  a half  a mile  to  the  right  of  the  latter,  on  the  river  Neuse,  a 
deserted  earthwork  was  discovered  by  Lieutenant  Eeno,  aide-de-camp 
to  the  general.  Company  H,  under  Captain  Frazer,  with  the  colors, 
was  detached  from  the  regiment,  and  under  charge  of  General  Eeno 
visited  the  work,  and  waving  the  Star-Spangled  Banner,  hearing  the 
honorable  inscription  “Boanoke,  February  8,  1862,”  and  the  spotless 
white  colors  of  Massachusetts,  with  the  noble  motto,  u Ense  petit  placi- 
dam  sub  libertate  quietem”  gave  three  hearty  cheers  and  hastily  rejoined 
the  advancing  regiment.  Proceeding  along  the  railroad  about  a mile 
farther,  the  advance  guard  came  upon  a building  containing  several 
tents,  a complete  set  of  artillery  harness,  and  a few  boxes  of  ammuni- 
tion for  6 and  12  pounder  guns.  Lieutenant  Barker,  with  Adjutant 
Stearns,  then  made  a reconnaissance  to  the  right  of  the  railroad,  and 
found  an  extensive  encampment,  also  recently  evacuated  by  rebel  cav- 
alry, where  were  large  quantities  of  clothing,  commissary  stores,  and 
hospital  stores,  over  which  a guard  was  placed.  One  mile  farther  on 
the  regiment  bivouacked  for  the  night,  throwing  out  a picket  guard  of 
two  companies  on  the  front  and  left,  the  right  being  guarded  by  the 
Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  Volunteers  and  the  rear  by  the  Fifty- 
first  New  York  Volunteers.  The  rain,  which  commenced  to  fall  about 
10  o’clock  of  the  13th  instant,  continued  in  showers  through  the  night, 
and  on  the  morning  of  the  14th  mist  and  fog  enveloped  everything. 
Notwithstanding  every  precaution  on  the  part  of  both  officers  and 
men  very  many  of  the  rifles  were  rendered  quite  unserviceable  by  the 
moisture.  In  some  the  powder  became  too  wet  to  ignite,  and  in  very 
many  of  the  Enfield  rifled  muskets  the  rammers  were  almost  immovable 
from  the  swelling  of  the  stocks.  It  is  a great  defect  in  this  weapon 
that  the  friction  of  the  wood  along  the  whole  length  of  the  rammer  is 
relied  upon  to  keep  it  in  place,  since  it  is  quite  impossible  that  the  ram- 
mers be  well  secured  when  the  musket  is  dry  and  sufficiently  loose  for 
service  when  wet.  It  is  a noteworthy  evidence  of  discipline  and  courage 
on  the  part  of  the  men  that  more  than  50  went  into  the  battle  having 
only  their  bayonets  to  work  with,  and  it  was  very  hard  to  hear  them, 
in  the  thickest  of  the  fight,  while  standing  helpless  in  their  places,  beg 
their  officers  to  give  them  a serviceable  musket,  and  to  see  them  eagerly 
seize  the  weapons  of  their  comrades  as  fast  as  they  fell  beneath  the 
leaden  storm  from  the  enemy’s  earthworks.  Private  Sheehan,  of  Com 
pany  E,  left  his  company  to  secure  the  musket  of  a man  whom  he  saw 
killed  in  Company  JI,  and  when  asked  by  Major  Eice  why  he  did  not 
take  the  gun  of  one  who  had  been  shot  in  his  own  company  replied  that 
it  was  like  his  own,  good  for  nothing. 

About  7 o’clock  a.  m.  General  Eeno  ordered  his  brigade  forward,  the 
Twenty-first  Massachusetts  in  the  van.  The  advance  guard,  consisting 
of  Company  G,  was  led  by  Corporal  Stratton,  who  deserves  much 
credit  for  his  coolness  and  intrepidity  in  pushing  on  through  swamps 
and  thickets  and  along  the  track  of  the  railroad  both  on  the  13th  and 
14th  instant,  every  moment  exposed  to  be  fired  upon  by  a concealed 
foe.  Adjutant  Stearns  directed  the  movement  of  the  first  two  squads 
of  the  advance  guard  in  the  most  admirable  manner  during  the  entire 
march  from  the  place  of  landing  to  the  field  of  battle.  As  it  was 
known  that  the  defenses  of  the  enemy  were  thrown  across  the  high 
way  to  the  right  of  the  railroad,  the  regiment  proceeded  cautiously 
through  the  woods  on  the  left  of  the  railroad  and  parallel  with  it. 
After  advancing  about  half  a mile  a locomotive  was  seen  coming  down 
the  road,  and  General  Eeno  at  once  ordered  us  to  file  to  the  left  and 
advance  into  the  forest,  which  was  no  longer  a level,  open  pine  wood 


OllAP.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


225 


but  the  ground  was  broken  into  hills  separated  by  deep  ravines,  and 
the  timber  was  of  oak,  “white  wood,”  and  other  deciduous  trees,  and 
of  the  largest  description.  The  First  Brigade,  under  General  Foster, 
having  advanced  on  the  highway,  came  first  upon  the  enemy,  and  the 
battle  was  now  raging  fiercely  upon  our  right  along  the  whole  line  of 
the  earthworks  from  the  river  to  the  railroad.  The  smoke  from  the 
rapid  firing  of  more  than  thirty  cannon  and  several  thousand  muskets 
was  driven  down  upon  us  by  the  wind,  and  mingling  with  the  dense 
fog,  so  completely  shut  out  the  light  of  day  (never  more  anxiously 
longed  for)  that  it  was  impossible  to  derive  any  information  respecting 
the  position  of  the  rebels  except  where  it  was  indicated  by  the  noise  of 
battle. 

Our  skirmishers  now  reported  that  we  were  opposite  the  right  flank 
of  a battery  resting  at  this  point  on  a deep  cut  in  the  railroad,  and 
upon  several  buildings  and  brick  walls  in  Wood’s  brick-yard,  which 
was  across  thl  road  from  our  position  a few  hundred  yards  distant. 
The  regiment  was  at  once  formed  in  line  of  battle  facing  the  railroad, 
and  Company  C,  Capt.  J.  M.  Kichardson,  was  ordered  forward  to 
reconnoiter.  As  rapidly  as  the  difficult  nature  of  the  ground  would 
allow  the  other  companies  formed  on  the  right  by  file  into  line,  and  as 
soon  as  the  remaining  companies  of  the  right  wing  were  ready  I moved 
forward  with  the  colors  to  the  support  of  Company  C,  who  were  already 
engaging  the  rebel  riflemen  in  the  trench  upon  the  opposite  side  of  the 
deep  cut  on  the  railroad. 

At  the  moment  of  their  arrival  at  the  cut  the  enemy  were  busily 
engaged  in  removing  ammunition  from  the  cars,  which  had  just  come 
in  from  New  Berne  with  re-enforcements.  At  the  first  volley  from 
Company  C the  enemy,  in  great  astonishment,  fled  from  the  road  and 
the  trench  to  a ravine  in  the  rear  of  the  brick  yard.  General  Beno 
now  ordered  the  color-bearer,  Sergeant  Bates,  to  plant  his  flag  upon 
the  roof  of  a building  within  the  enemy’s  intrenchments.  He  immedi- 
ately rushed  forward  several  rods  in  advance  of  his  company,  and, 
amid  a perfect  shower  of  Minie  balls  clambered  to  the  roof  and  waved 
the  Star-Spangled  Banner  presented  to  the  regiment  by  the  ladies  of 
Worcester. 

At  this  moment  the  noblest  of  us  all,  my  brave,  efficient,  faithful 
adjutant,  First  Lieut.  F.  A.  Stearns,  Company  I,  fell  mortally  wounded, 
the  first  among  the  25  patriotic  volunteers  of  the  Twenty -first  who  laid 
down  their  lives  for  their  country  at  the  battle  of  New  Berne.  As  he 
was  cheering  on  his  men  to  charge  upon  the  enemy  across  the  railroad 
he  was  struck  by  a ball  from  an  Enfield  rifle  fired  from  a redan  on  the 
right  and  rear  of  the  central  breastwork,  on  which  we  were  advancing. 
The  fatal  missile  entered  his  left  side,  and  passing  through  his  lungs 
went  out  just  below  the  collar-bone  on  the  right  breast.  Corporal 
Welch,  of  * Company  C,  noticing  his  fall,  returned  and  remained  with 
him  during  the  battle.  He  lived  about  two  and  a half  hours,  nearly 
unconscious  from  the  loss  of  blood,  and  died  without  a struggle  a little 
before  noon. 

General  Reno,  with  Companies  C,  A,  B,  and  H,  of  the  right  wing, 
dashed  across  the  railroad,  up  the  steep  bank,  and  over  the  rifle  trench 
on  the  top  into  the  brick-yard.  Here  we  were  subjected  to  a most 
destructive  cross-fire  from  the  enemy  on  both  sides  of  the  railroad,  and 
i lost  a large  number  of  men  in  a very  few  minutes.  The  general,  sup- 
posing we  had  completely  flanked  the  enemy’s  works,  returned  across 
15  R r — VOL  IX 


226  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA.  [Chai\  XX. 

the  road  to  bring  np  the  rest  of  his  brigade,  but  just  at  this  time  a 
tremendous  fire  of  musketry  and  artillery  was  opened  from  the  redans, 
hitherto  unseen,  and  which  were  nine  in  number,  extending  from  the 
railroad  more  than  a mile  to  the  right  into  the  forest. 

The  general,  being  now  obliged  to  devote  his  attention  to  the  enemy 
in  front  of  his  brigade,  ordered  the  left  wing  of  the  Twenty-first,  under 
command  of  Major  Eice,  not  to  cross  the  railroad,  but  to  continue  firing 
upon  the  rebel  infantry  in  the  first  two  redans,  with  whom  they  were 
already  engaged.  These  consisted  of  the  Thirty-third  North  Carolina 
and  the  Sixteenth  North  Carolina  Eegiments,  and  were  the  best-armed 
and  fought  the  most  gallantly  of  any  of  the  enemy’s  forces.  Their 
position  was  almost  impregnable  so  long  as  their  left  flank,  resting  on 
the  railroad,  was  defended,  and  they  kept  up  an  incessant  fire  for  three 
hours,  until  their  ammunition  was  exhausted  and  the  remainder  of  the 
rebel  forces  had  retreated  from  that  portion  of  their  works  lying  be- 
tween the  river  and  the  railroad.  f 

Having  been  ordered  into  the  brick-yard  and  left  there  with  my 
colors  and  the  four  companies  above  named,  and  finding  it  impossible 
to  remain  there  without  being  cut  to  pieces,  I was  compelled  either  to 
charge  upon  Captain  Brein’s  battery  of  flying  artillery  or  to  retreat 
without  having  accomplished  anything  to  compensate  for  the  terri- 
ble loss  sustained  in  reaching  this  point.  Accordingly  I formed  my 
handful  of  men,  about  200  in  number,  in  line,  the  right  resting  on  the 
breastwork  of  the  enemy,  and  commenced  firing  upon  the  men  and 
horses  of  the  first  piece.  Three  men  and  two  horses  having  fallen, 
and  the  other  gunners  showing  signs  of  uneasiness,  I gave  the  com- 
mand, u Charge  bayonets,”  and  went  in  to  the  first  gun.  Eeaching  it 
I had  the  pleasure  of  mounting  upon  the  first  of  the  New  Berne  guns 
surrendered  to  the  u Yankees.”  It  was  a 6-pounder  field  piece,  brought 
from  Fort  Macon,  and  marked  U.  S.  Leaving  this  in  the  hands  of 
Captain  Walcott  and  Private  John  Dunn,  of  Company  B,  who  cut 
away  the  horses  and  attempted  to  load  and  turn  it  upon  the  enemy, 
I proceeded  to  the  second  gun,  some  300  paces  from  the  brick-yard. 

By  this  time  the  three  regiments  of  rebel  infantry,  who  had  retreated 
from  the  breastwork  to  a ravine  in  the  rear  when  we  entered  the  brick- 
yard, seeing  that  we  were  so  few  and  received  no  support,  rallied  and 
advanced  upon  us.  The  Thirty-fifth  and  Thirty-seventh  North  Caro- 
lina Eegiments,  supported  by  the  Seventh  North  Carolina,  came  up 
from  the  ravine  in  splendid  style  with  their  muskets  on  the  right 
shoulder  and  halted.  Most  fortunately,  or  rather  providentially,  for 
us,  they  remained  undecided  for  a minute  or  two,  and  then  resolved  on 
a movement  which  saved  us  from  destruction.  Instead  of  giving  us  a 
volley  at  once,  they  first  hesitated  and  then  charged  upon  us  without 
firing.  I instantly  commanded  my  men  to  spring  over  the  parapet  and 
ditch  in  front  and  retreat  to  the  railroad,  keeping  as  close  as  possible  to 
the  ditch.  As  the  enemy  could  not  fire  upon  us  to  any  advantage  until 
they  reached  the  parapet,  nearly  all  of  those  who  obeyed  my  order 
escaped  unharmed,. though  thousands  of  bullets  whistled  over  us.  On 
the  railroad  I found  Colonel  Eodman,  with  the  Fourth  Ehode  Island, 

* waiting  for  orders,  and  informed  him  of  the  situation  of  things  in  the 
intrenchments  of  the  enemy,  and  urged  him  to  advance  at  once  and 
charge  upon  their  flank,  as  I had  done.  Soon  after  Colonel  Harland, 
with  the  Eighth  Connecticut,  came  up,  and  then  the  two  regiments 
advanced  along  the  railroad  to  the  brick -yard  and  charged  by  wing. 
As  soon  as  the  enemy  saw  them  within  their  lines  they  instantly 
retired  again  to  the  ravine  without  firing  a gun.  It  is  some  satisfac- 


Chap.  X£.] 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


227 


tion  to  those  who  were  obliged  to  retreat  from  the  battery  after  once 
driving  the  enemy  from  it  that  no  one  of  the  five  brass  pieces  stationed 
in  this  part  of  their  works  was  ever  fired  by  them  after  our  charge. 

Among  the  incidents  of  the  day  perhaps  the  following  may  not  be 
out  of  place  here:  Oapt.  J.  D.  Frazer,  of  Company  IT,  was  wounded 
in  the  right  arm  just  before  charging,  and  dropped  his  sword.  He, 
however,  instantly  picked  it  up  with  his  left  hand  and  led  on  his  men 
with  the  colors.  At  the  time  of  the  retreat  from  the  battery  he  was 
unable  to  clear  the  ditch,  and  fell  into  the  water.  As  soon  as  the  rebels 
discovered  him  they  ordered  him  to  get  up,  took  him  back  over  the 
parapet,  and  removing  his  sword,  placed  a guard  of  three  men  over 
him.  When  his  captors  in  their  turn  retreated  again  he  was  unable 
or  unwilling  to  move  as  rapidly  as  they,  and  when  he  had  detained  his 
guard  sufficiently  long  to  permit  him  to  attempt  it,  he  drew  his  revolver 
and  declared  he  would  shoot  the  first  one  who  stirred.  They  surren- 
dered to  hirh.  and  were  delivered  over  to  the  Fourth  Rhode  Island  as 
prisoners  of  war.  The  lieutenant  to  whom  Captain  Frazer  gave  his 
sword  was  also  captured  and  the  sword  returned  to  its  rightful  owner. 
Captain  Frazer,  before  the  close  of  the  fight,  was  again  in  command  of 
his  company.  Private  J.  A.  Miller,  of  Company  A,  in  clambering  over 
the  parapet  in  the  retreat,  dropped  his  rifle  into  the  ditch,  and  rather 
than  leave  his  pet  remained  searching  for  it  until  captured.  He  was 
ordered  to  the  rear  of  the  enemy  with  a guard,  and  as  the  bullets  were 
rather  numerous  in  the  air,  he  laid  himself  down  between  two  logs  and 
forgot  to  get  up  when  his  captors  retreated. 

Sergt.  A.  J.  Weatherby,  of  Company  B,  was  ordered  by  me  to  take 
care  of  a prisoner  captured  in  the  charge,  and  when  obliged  to  retreat 
he  did  not  forsake  the  rebel,  but  dragging  him  by  the  coTlar'over  the 
parapet  and  through  the  ditch,  compelled  him  to  double-quick  with  the 
“ Yankees,”  and  after  the  battle  delivered  him  over  to  me  in  good  con- 
dition. As  soon  as  my  men  could  be  collected  and  the  charges  drawn 
from  the  rifles  which  had  been  wet  in  the  ditch  I returned  along  the 
railroad  to  rejoin  the  left  wing  of  my  regiment,  which,  after  fighting 
with  great  steadiness  and  effect  for  three  hours  in  front  of  the  first  two 
redans,  were  just  rushing  over  the  fallen  timber  of  the  almost  impass- 
able swamp  intervening  between  them  and  the  retreating  enemy. 

The  conduct  of  my  entire  command,  so  far  as  I can  learn,  during 
both  the  march  and  the  engagement,  was  worthy  of  great  commenda- 
tion, and  has  received  it  in  the  assurance  of  our  brigadier  that  he  is 
satisfied  with  us. 

Having  been  ordered  to  occupy  the  captured  works  of  the  enemy, 
my  regiment  has  been  diligently  engaged  in  collecting  the  arms,  ammu- 
nition, equipments,  clothing,  tents,  and  commissary  stores  abandoned 
by  them  in  their  precipitate  retreat.  The  prisoners  taken  by  the  dif- 
ferent regiments  have  been  placed  on  board  the  propeller  Albany, 
under  charge  of  Company  E,  Captain  Bradford.  There  are  about  260 
of  the  well  prisoners,  including  12  officers,  and  about  40  wounded 
rebels,  who  are  cared  for  by  their  own  surgeons  and  nurses.  The  dead 
have  been  carefully  collected  and  buried  under  the  direction  of  Act- 
ing Brigade  Quartermaster  Hall.  The  killed  and  mortally  Avounded 
of  my  regiment  number  25  and  the  other  casualties  31,  besides  many 
cases  of  slight  injuries  and  narrow  escapes.  The  corrected  list  is  here- 
with inclosed.* 

During  the  engagement  the  killed  and  wounded  were  rapidly  carried 
to  the  rear  by  the  members  of  the  band,  under  direction  of  Acting 

* Embodied  in  statement  on  p.  211. 


228 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


Brigade  Surgeon  Cutter.  The  men  deserve  great  credit  for  their  atten- 
tion to  duty  while  their  comrades  were  falling  around  them,  no  one 
attempting  to  leave  the  ranks  to  assist  the  wounded.  This  order  they 
obeyed  the  more  cheerfully,  because  they  were  certain  that  Surgeon 
Cutter,  with  his  hospital  corps,  was  attending  to  this  duty  in  their  very 
midst.  Assistant  Surgeon  Warren  and  Hospital  Steward  Davis  have 
labored  with  unceasing  zeal  to  render  the  wounded  comfortable  since 
the  battle,  and  their  kind  care  and  skillful  treatment  will  never  be  for- 
gotten by  the  regiment. 

Hoping  this  report  of  the  part  performed  by  the  Twenty-first  Massa- 
chusetts Volunteers  at  the  memorable  battle  of  Hew  Berne  may  be  sat- 
isfactory, I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

W.  S.  CLARK, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Twenty-first  Mass.  Vols. 

Capt.  Edward  M.  Heill, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Second  Brigade. 


Ho.  12. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Charles  A.  Heckman,  Ninth  New  Jersey  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Hints  Regiment  Hew  Jersey  Vols., 

Camp  Reno,  March  15,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  position  and  part  taken  by  the 
Hinth  Hew  Jersey  Volunteers  in  the  action  near  Hew  Berne,  the  14th 
instant : 

At  7 a.  m.  I received  orders  from  you  to  form  line  on  the  left  of  the 
Fifty-first  Hew  York  Volunteers  and  follow  them  up  the  railroad  track 
toward  Hew  Berne.  Having  arrived  within  about  a mile  of  the  enemy’s 
works  we  were  ordered  to  file  to  the  left  into  the  timber  and  approach 
them  under  cover,  and  by  the  right  flank  we  proceeded  until  within 
about  800  yards  of  their  batteries,  when  on  order  I formed  the  regi 
ment  into  line ; but  not  being  able,  as  I believed,  to  see  the  whole 
of  the  Fifty-first  Hew  York  Volunteers,  and  knowing  them  to  be  in 
the  advance,  I threw  two  companies  from  right  to  rear  in  order  to 
avoid  firing  into  their  ranks.  With  the  four  remaining  companies  of 
the  right  wing  I advanced  to  within  about  500  yards  and  opened  a 
brisk  fire  on  the  redan  immediately  in  front,  and  on  another  obliquely 
to  the  right,  adjoining  the  railroad  track.  On  discovering  a third  redan 
obliquely  to  the  left,  supported  by  rifle  pits  on  its  right  flank,  I threw 
the  left  to  rear,  the  right  of  that  wing  resting  on  the  colors,  to 
avoid  a flank  attack.  I then  ordered  the  advance  and  to  take  ground 
to  the  left,  and  on  gaining  sufficient  ground  brought  the  two  right  com- 
panies into  line.  The  whole  line  advanced,  firing  until  within  about 
200  yards  of  the  works,  pouring  a rapid  fire  into  them,  the  extreme 
left  gaining  ground  until  upon  a direct  line.  Having  been  firing  a long 
time  (about  three  hours),  I examined  several  boxes  and  found  the  am- 
munition was  getting  low.  I sent  a lieutenant,  informing  you  of  the 
fact,  and  received  an  order  to  charge.  We  charged,  and  under  diffi- 
culties (without  securing  a shot)  planted  our  colors  on  two  redans,  cap- 
turing two  officers  and  several  privates,  and  a rebel  flag  with  this  in- 
scription, u Beaufort  Plow  Boys.”  It  is  in  a good  state  of  preserva- 
tion, and  will  be  kept  so  by  the  Hinth,  if  agreeable  to  you. 

All  of  the  officers  and  men  having  performed  their  duty  it  is  hard 


Chav.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


229 


for  me  to  particularize.  I regret  the  necessity  to  add  that  Lieut.  Will- 
iam L.  Walker,  of  Company  H,  was  killed  while  faithfully  discharging 
his  duties  as  an  officer,  and  also  the  loss  of  the  services,  which  I hope 
is  only  for  a time,  of  Captains  Middleton,  McChesney,  and  Hufty,  who 
were  wounded  whilst  gallantly  cheering  their  men  on  to  victory. 

In  addition  to  the  above  I report  the  loss  of  3 privates  killed  and  55 
wounded,  making  in  all  4 killed  in  action,  58  wounded $ making  an 
aggregate  of  62. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  A.  HECKMAN, 

Lieutenant  Colonel , Comdg.  Ninth  Regt.  New  Jersey  Vols. 
General  J.  L.  Keno, 

Commanding  Second  Brigade , Department  of  North  Carolina. 


No.  13. 

Report  of  Col.  Edward  Ferrero , Fifty-first  New  York  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Shepard  Eiples,  Fifty-First  Begt.  Y.  Y.  Vols., 
Near  New  Berne , N.  0.,  March  17,  1862. 

General  : The  regiment  under  my  command  landed  from  the  steamers 
Lancer  and  Pioneer  on  the  13th  instant  about  14  miles  below  New  Berne, 
Y.  C.  Great  difficulty  was  experienced  in  landing,  on  account  of  the 
enemy’s  obstructions  by  driving  spiles,  &c.,  and  having  finally  effected 
it  (my  color-bearer  being  the  first  to  plant  the  Union  colors  on  the  shore) 
I formed  the  regiment  and  took  up  otfr  line  of  march,  when,  having  pro- 
ceeded some  8 miles  and  night  coming  on,  I ordered  the  regiment  to 
bivouac  in  the  woods  on  the  line  of  the  railroad  leading  to  Yew  Berne. 
The  night  was  very  stormy.  Most  all  of  my  command,  being  exposed, 
were  saturated  by  the  rain.  At  6 a.  m.  the  following  morning  (14th)  I 
took  my  line  of  march  up  the  railroad  until  within  300  yards  of  a col- 
lection of  brick-kilns,  where  Lieutenant  Ben o brought  me  an  order  from 
you  to  turn  off  in  the  woods  to  the  left  and  form  in  rear  of  the  Twenty- 
first  Massachusetts  Begiment.  Upon  arriving  at  this  point  1 halted 
my  regiment  and  threw  out  Company  D as  skirmishers.  Finding  that 
we  could  not  engage  the  enemy  in  this  position  the  lieutenant-colonel 
and  myself  proceeded  to  make  a reconnaissance  in  advance,  parallel 
with  the  railroad,  a distance  of  some  hundred  yards.  The  ground  here 
was  undulating,  forming  a number  of  deep  ratines.  We  discovered  the 
enemy’s  batteries  and  rifle  pits  extending  a distance  of  a mile  and  a 
half,  in  front  of  which  were  deep  ravines  obstructed  by  an  almost  im- 
passable abatis. 

Immediately  upon  the  enemy  discovering  us  as  we  were  surveying 
their  works  on  the  brow  of  the  hill  they  opened  a heavy  fire  upon  us, 
wounding  Lieutenant-Colonel  Potter.  Immediately  returned  to  the 
position  occupied  by  my  regiment  and  ordered  them  forward  to  the 
summit  of  the  hill,  which  position  we  took,  firing  and  lying  down  in 
ravine  to  reload.  A continuous  fire  was  then  kept  up  on  the  enemy, 
which  they  returned  with  great  vigor,  making  sad  havoc  in  our  ranks. 
My  loss  at  this  point  was  very  severe,  owing  to  the  exposed  position  of 
the  troops  when  advancing  to  fire.  The  action  continued  for  about 
three  hours,  when,  we  having  expended  nearly  all  of  our  ammunition, 
I applied  for  re-enforcements,  when  the  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania  Begi- 


230 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[CiiAr.  XI. 


inent  was  ordered  to  our  support.  They  having  discharged  one  voiley 
I was  ordered  to  charge,  which  the  men  executed  gallantly,  planting 
the  colors  on  the  ramparts.  The  enemy  tied  in  great  confusion  toward 
New  Berne. 

The  unflinching  courage  displayed  by  all  of  my  command  cannot  be 
too  highly  praised,  each  one  vieing  with  the  other  to  make  our  victory 
sure  and  complete.  To  particularize  those  who  behaved  with  gallantry 
would  be  unjust  where  all  did  so  well.  The  following  officers,  however, 
I cannot  avoid  noticing  : Lieut.  Gol.  B.  B.  Potter,  who  was  wounded  in 
the  early  part  of  the  action,  behaved  with  great  gallantry  and  coolness. 
Maj.  C.  W.  Le  Gen  dr  e,  who  was  dangerously  wounded,  is  deserving  of 
especial  notice  for  his  gallantry,  contributing  no  little  to  our  success. 
Capt.  David  B.  Johnson,  of  Company  I,  who  was  severely  wounded, 
displayed  great  bravery.  Lieutenants  Try  on  and  McKee,  of  Companies 
B and  C,  who  were  wounded,  are  also  deserving  of  especial  notice. 

The  bearers  of  my  colors  (Sergeants  Poppe  and  Howard)  I must  also 
mention,  their  actions  proving  them  to  be  possessed  of  great  courage, 
holding  aloft  the  colors  under  a very  hot  tire. 

Among  the  dead  I cannot  overlook  the  noble  conduct  of  the  Bev.  O. 
N.  Benton,  my  chaplain.  In  him  we  have  to  mourn  the  loss  of  a most 
useful  man,  one  who  encouraged  my  men  by  word  and  deed  on  all  occa- 
sions, and  who  did  not  regard  his  own  life  while  serving  his  country. 
Lieut.  George  D.  Allen,  of  Company  I,  who  was  instantly  killed,  also 
conducted  himself  with  great  gallantry. 

I received  an  order  to  march  my  regiment  to  the  right  of  the  enemy’s 
battery  for  rest.  After  remaining  there  some  twenty  minutes  Lieuten- 
ant McCook,  of  the  Marine  Artillery,  having  charge  of  six  howitzers 
(three  of  them  captured  from  the  enemy),  with  ammunition,  which  were 
to  be  sent  to  New  Berne,  I sent  the  regiment  a distance  of  a quarter  of 
a mile  below  to  bring  up  cars  for  their  transportation.  Having  placed 
them  upon  the  cars  they  drew  them  to  the  bridge,  which  upon  their 
arrival  was  found  to  have  been  burned  by  the  enemy  after  fleeing  across, 
as  well  as  a portion  of  the  city,  which  was  still  burning.  Here  I received 
an  order  to  bivouac  in  a corn  field  to  the  right  of  the  railroad,  where  I 
made  my  men  as  comfortable  as  the  circumstances  would  allow. 

I herewith  transmit  a list  of  killed  and  wounded  and  missing.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

EDWABD  FEBBEBO, 
Colonel  Fifty-first  New  York  Volunteers. 

General  J.  L.  Beno, 

Commanding  Second  Brigade , Department  of  North  Carolina. 


No.  14. 

Report  of  Col.  John  F.  Hartranft , Fifty-first  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Fifty-first  Begt.  Pennsylvania  Volunteers, 

In  Cantonment  near  New  Berne , N.  <7.,  March  16,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  for  the  information  of  the  general 
commanding  the  brigade  that  after  landing  three  companies  of  my 
regiment  at  Slocum’s  Landing  on  the  13th  instant  I was  ordered  to 
follow  the  Ninth  New  Jersey.  Leaving  Lieut.  Col.  Thomas  S.  Bell  at 

* Embodied  in  statement  on  p.  211. 


Chap.  XX.]  BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C.  231 

the  place  of  disembarkation  to  bring  forward  the  remainder  of  the 
regiment  as  soon  as  landed,  I moved  forward,  attcr  the  Ninth  up  the 
beach.  Finding  Captain  Bennett’s  gun  (from  the  steamer  Cossack) 
manned  by  an  insufficient  force,  I made  a detail  of  my  men,  who 
dragged  it  to  the  point  where  we  left  the  river  and  there  left  it,  with 
directions  to  Captain  Bennett  to  apply  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Bell  for 
assistance  when  he  came  up.  I soon  after  overtook  Lieutenant  McCook, 
U.  S.  Navy,  with  his  six-gun  howitzer  battery  from  the  gunboats,  and 
being  so  ordered  by  General  Burnside  detailed  a company  to  assist  in 
brin ging  it  forward.  I then  pushed  on  with  the  brigade,  and  bivouacked 
with  it  on  the  railroad  about  6 p.  m.  As  soon  as  the  remaining  seven 
companies  were  disembarked  they  were  marched  forward  by  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Bell.  On  reaching  Captain  Bennett’s  gun  lie  made  the  neces- 
sary detail  to  bring  it  on.  He  soon  after  overtook  Lieutenant  McCook’s 
battery,  whose  men  were  very  much  exhausted,  and  receiving  an  order 
there  from  General  Beno  through  you  to  render  every  assistance  in 
bringing  them  to  the  front,  took  charge  of  the  guns  with  his  seven 
companies  and  the  one  I had  left  with  them. 

The  ground,  before  reaching  the  county  road,  being  very  miry,  and 
after  reaching  it  exceedingly  heavy,  the  labor  was  necessarily  very 
severe  and  their  progress  slow.  He  proceeded  with  the  battery  and 
Bennett’s  gun,  which  had  overtaken  him,  until  9.30  o’clock  p.  m.,  when 
an  orderly  that  he  had  sent  on  to  General  Burnside  returned  with  a 
message  that  he  might  bivouac  if  he  thought  best,  but  to  have  the  guns 
up  early  in  the  morning.  As  the  men  seemed  utterly  unable  to  pro- 
ceed without  some  rest,  they  bivouacked  until  1 and  2 o’clock  a.  m. 
He  then  moved  them  forward  and  reported  his  arrival  with  all  the 
guns  to  Generals  Burnside  and  Beno  at  their  headquarters  at  4 a.  m. 
The  companies  were  again  bivouacked  until  between  6 and  7 a.  m., 
when,  in  accordance  with  General  Beno’s  order,  they  united  with  me 
on  the  railroad.  The  movement  on  the  enemy  commenced  almost 
immediately  afterward,  and  in  my  position  I proceeded  up  the  rail- 
road, and  when  near  the  enemy’s  works  filed  to  the  left  into  the  woods 
with  the  brigade.  I received  the  order  to  proceed  to  the  extreme  left 
and  support  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  and  resist  any  attack  of  the 
enemy  from  their  works  on  the  left.  The  Ninth  was  soon  engaged,  and 
under  a very  heavy  fire  I brought  my  regiment  into  line,  supporting 
the  Ninth  with  my  right  wing  and  with  my  left  covering  the  approaches 
from  that  quarter.  My  regiment  remained  in  this  position  for  some 
time,  and  at  this  point  several  of  my  men  w ere  wmunded,  though  I 
sheltered  them  as  much  as  possible  by  causing  them  to  lie  down.  I 
sent  my  skirmishers  to  my  immediate  left,  with  orders  not  to  fire,  but 
merely  to  reconnoiter.  They  reported  to  me  that  the  works  of  the 
enemy,  of  the  same  character  as  those  in  our  front,  extended  as  far  as 
they  could  see.  The  Ninth  moving  farther  to  the  front,  I moved  my 
regiment  forward  and  farther  to  the  left,  so  as  to  maintain  the  interval 
of  about  100  feet  between  my  regiment  and  the  Ninth. 

I desire  to  mention  here  that  Lieutenant-Colonel  Heckman,  com- 
manding the  Ninth,  was  most  persevering  and  energetic  in  the  man- 
agement of  his  regiment  throughout  the  engagement.  While  in  this 
position  I received  the  order  from  General  Beno  to  send  my  left  wing 
to  the  assistance  of  the  Fifty-first  New  York  (engaged  near  me  on  the 
right),  whose  ammunition  was  running  short.  The  left  wing,  under  com- 
mand of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Bell,  immediately  marched  on  the  double- 
quick  to  where  the  Fifty-first  New  York  was  engaged,  and  was  formed 
in  line  on  the  crest  of  the  small  hill  about  125  yards  from  the  enemy, 


232 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


who  were  firing  from  behind  their  breastworks.  After  delivering  a 
round,  which  had  the  effect  of  causing  a slacking  of  the  enemy’s  fire, 
General  Reno  ordered  the  firing  to  cease,  and  directed  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Bell  to  charge  with  his  companies  on  the  works  of  the  enemy. 
This  was  immediately  done  with  loud  cheers,  and  struggling  through 
the  abatis  and  marsh  that  obstructed  the  approach  through  the  ravine 
soon  reached  the  battery  and  planted  their  colors  inside.  The  enemy 
retreated  while  the  charge  was  being  made,  leaving  the  two  guns  in 
the  battery  still  loaded.  The  right  wing  immediately  advanced  and 
joined  the  left  in  the  battery.  The  regiment  was  then  formed  and 
marched  with  the  brigade  up  the  railroad  and  bivouacked  for  the 
night. 

During  the  engagement  9 of  my  men  were  wounded. 

It  is  with  pleasure  that  I am  able  to  make  particular  mention  of 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Bell,  who  so  gallantly  led  the  charge  of  the  left 
wing  on  the  enemy’s  works.  I also  mention  with  pleasure  the  services 
rendered  by  Lieutenants  Fair,  Beaver,  and  Carman,  who  were  very 
acti  ve  from  the  time  of  landing,  and  especially  during  the  engagement. 
They  had  been  previously  detailed  to  act  as  aides  to  me."  Lieuten- 
ant Bible,  my  adjutant,  was  also  very  active  and  efficient.  All  my 
officers  throughout  the  trying  labors  of  the  day  of  landing  and  during 
the  engagement  were  most  efficient,  and  by  their  patience,  coolness, 
and  gallantry  inspired  their  men  with  confidence.  The  conduct  of  the 
men  in  forming  and  maintaining  their  line  of  battle  under  a heavy  cross- 
fire and  their  gallantry  in  unhesitatingly  charging  the  works  of  the 
enemy  over  obstacles  deemed  to  be  impassable  are  worthy  of  all  praise. 
The  band  of  my  regiment,  which  was  acting  as  an  ambulance  corps, 
were  very  efficient  in  removing  my  wounded  as  well  as  a number  of 
the  wounded  of  the  Fifty-first  Flew*  York  and  Ninth  New  Jersey.  In 
conclusion  I may  say  that  I have  every  reason  to  be  fully  satisfied 
with  the  conduct  and  discipline  of  my  regiment. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfullv,  vours, 

J.  F.  HARTRANFT, 

Colonel , Comdg.  Fifty-first  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers. 

Capt.  Edward  M.  Neill, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.  Second  Brigade , Coast  Division. 


No.  15. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Parhe , U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third 

Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  Third  Brig.,  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

Carolina  City , March  22,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  respectfully  to  submit  the  following 
report  of  the  operations  of  the  troops  under  my  command  from  the 
moment  the  signal  for  landing  was  displayed  on  the  steamer  of  the 
commanding  general  on  the  morning  of  the  13th  instant  to  the  evening 
of  the  14th,  when  New  Berne  was  taken  : 

My  brigade  is  made  up  of  the  following  regiments : Fourth  Rhode 
Island,  colonel  commanding  I.  P.  Rodman ; Eighth  Connecticut,  colo- 
nel commanding  Edward  Harland ; Fifth  Rhode  Island  Battalion, 
major  commanding  John  Wright ; Eleventh  Connecticut,  lieutenant- 


Chap.  XX.]  BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N%C.  233 

colonel  commanding  Charles  Mathewson.  At  the  signal  the  light- 
draught  steamer  Union,  with  the  Fourth  Ehode  Island  Eegiment  on 
board,  and  the  tug-boat  Alert,  with  about  twenty  small  boats  in  tow 
with  detachments  from  the  other  regiments,  steamed  for  the  shore  at 
the  mouth  of  Slocum’s  Creek  to  make  a landing  at  the  point  indicated 
by  the  general  commanding  in  person.  Finding  obstructions  in  the 
mouth  of  the  creek  the  steamer  was  unable  to  reach  the  bank,  and  the 
men  were  landed  in  small  boats ; an  operation  consuming  much  time. 
The  men  were  immediately  formed  on  their  respective  colors,  and  as 
the  several  regiments  were  landed  they  took  up  their  line  of  march, 
following  for  some  distance  up  the  right  bank  of  the  Neuse  Eiver  to  a 
point  where  a company  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  had  been  posted  on 
advance-guard  duty.  Here  the  road  leaves  the  river,  and  after  passing 
one  or  two  farm-houses  in  the  pine  woods  it  strikes  the  main  county 
road  leading  from  Beaufort  to  New  Berne.  This  we  followed  for  a 
short  distance,  and  soon  came  to  an  extensive  line  of  intrenchments 
crossing  the  road  and  extending  to  the  railroad.  This  was  entirely 
abandoned  by  the  enemy.  Here  the  railroad  crosses  the  county  road 
at  an  acute  angle,  and  as  the  two  roads  continue  on  to  New  Berne  in 
close  proximity,  the  main  command  was  divided.  My  brigade,  by  the 
order  of  the  general  commanding,  followed  General  Foster  on  the 
county  road,  while  General  Eeno  marched  up  the  railroad.  Near  night- 
fall we  reached  the  second  crossing  of  these  roads,  and  as  the  com- 
mand continued  on  in  the  same  order,  General  Eeno’s  brigade  occupied 
the  left.  The  march  was  kept  up  until  after  dark,  when  orders  were 
received  to  halt  and  bivouac  for  the  night.  The  regiments  were  then 
placed  in  position  on  the  road-side.  The  roads  generally  were  in  bad 
order,  and  the  men  marched  in  many  localities  through  water  and  mud. 
In  addition,  heavy  showers  fell  at  intervals  during  the  day  and  night, 
and  although  the"  men  had  their  overcoats  and  blankets  the  bivouac 
was  extremely  trying. 

On  the  following  morning,  the  14th,  the  brigade  was  under  arms  and 
ready  for  the  march  soon  after  daylight.  Before  starting  I detailed,  by 
order  of  the  general  commanding,  the  Eleventh  Connecticut  Eegiment 
to  relieve  one  of  General  Eeno’s  regiments  in  bringing  up  the  boat 
howitzers  and  guns  which  had  arrived  during  the  night.  Soon  the 
whole  command  was  in  motion,  my  brigade  following  the  guns,  which 
were  directly  behind  General  Foster,  while  General  Eeno  moved  up 
the  railroad.  It  was  not  long  before  the  advance  had  engaged  the 
enemy,  and  it  was  soon  found  that  in  the  attack  we  would  be  exposed 
to  a flank  fire  frdrn  heavy  artillery  as  well  as  from  field  artillery  and 
musketry  in  our  front.  The  country  is  generally  level  and  smooth  and 
covered  with  a growth  of  pine  and  occasional  clumps  of  undergrowth, 
the  whole  being  styled  aopen  piney  woods.”  On  the  field  in  front 
of  the  enemy  this  character  of  ground  extends  from  the  river  to  the 
vicinity  of  the  railroad,  where  it  becomes  broken  into  shallow  hollows 
and  drains,  crossing  the  railroad  and  running  off  to  the  left.  Owing 
to  the  dense  fog  that  prevailed  but  little  could  be  seen,  although  the 
timber  in  front  of  the  enemy  had  all  been  felled. 

As  before  stated,  my  brigade  followed  General  Foster’s  up  the  county 
road  directly  in  rear  of  the  howitzers.  When  the  head  of  the  column 
had  nearly  reached  the  edge  of  the  woods,  and  General  Foster’s  brigade 
was  being  placed  in  position  and  engaging  the  enemy,  the  general  com- 
manding directed  me  to  file  to  the  left  and  take  up  a position  from 
which  I could  supx>ort  either  General  Foster  or  General  Eeno  when  the 
occasion  required.  I directed  the  brigade  through  the  timber,  and 


234 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA 


[CrfAr.  XX. 


guided  by  the  fire  of  the  enemy  kept  a course  nearly  parallel  to  his 
lines. 

After  passing  General  Foster’s  left  and  when  the  head  of  the  column 
had  approached  within  a short  distance  of  the  railroad  I halted  the 
brigade,  and  being  exposed  to  a fire  of  both  artillery  and  musketry,  the 
regiments  were  placed  in  the  hollow  under  as  good  cover  as  the  ground 
furnished,  and  skirmishers  were  deployed  just  on  the  edge  of  the  plateau 
to  observe  the  enemy.  An  aide  was  then  sent  to  the  general  command- 
ing informing  him  of  my  position  and  that  the  ground  ahead  appeared 
very  difficult.  The  drains  spread  into  a swamp  and  the  timber  was 
felled,  making  the  ground  almost  impassable. 

Before  \ received  a reply  from  the  general  commanding  the  colonel 
of  the  Fourth  Rhode  Island  Regiment,  finding  his  regiment  too  much 
exposed,  moved  it  over  to  the  railroad,  the  embankment  affording  good 
cover.  While  in  this  position  I found  that  the  fire  in  our  front  wTas  in- 
creasing in  intensity,  and  soon  discovered  some  of  our  men,  a portion 
of  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts,  of  General  Reno’s  brigade,  were 
forced  to  abandon  a position  they  had  attained  inside  the  enemy’s  in- 
trenchments.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Clark,  commanding  the  Twenty-first 
Massachusetts,  meeting  Colonel  Rodman,  of  the  Fourth  Rhode  Island, 
informed  him  that  he  had  been  in  the  work,  and  assured  him  of  the 
feasibility  of  again  taking  the  intrenchments.  Lieutenant  Lydig,  one 
of  my  aides,  then  made  an  examination  of  the  entrance  to  the  intrench- 
ments by  the  w^ay  of  the  railroad,  and  finding  it  quite  practicable,  so 
reported  it  to  Colonel  Rodman,  who  assumed  the  responsibility  and 
at  once  prepared  for  the  charge.  Lieutenant  Hill,  my  other  aide,  re- 
ported immediately  the  state  of  affairs.  Beiug  thus  in  position  to  turn 
the  flank  of  the  intrenchments  resting  on  the  railroad  and  brick-yard, 
and  having  just  received  orders  from  the  general  commanding  that 
u we  must  flank  the  battery  ahead,”  I approved  the  course  of  Colonel 
Rodman,  and  at  once  ordered  the  Eighth  Connecticut  and  Fifth  Rhode 
Island  Regiments  to  his  support.  Colonel  Rodman  reports : 

I then  gave  the  order  to  charge.  Passing  quickly  by  the  rifle  pits  (redoubts  on 
our  left  flank),  which  opened  on  us  with  little  injury,  we  entered  in  rear  of  tbeir 
intrenchments,  and  the  regiment  in  a gallant  manner  carried  gun  after  gun,  until  the 
whole  nine  brass  field  pieces  of  their  front  were  in  our  possession,  with  carriages, 
caissons,  horses,  &.c.,  the  enemy  sullenly  retiring,  firing  only  three  guns  from  the 
front  and  three  others  frcin  the  fort  (Thompson)  on  their  left,  which  happily  passed 
over  our  heads. 

TChe  Eighth  Connecticut  and  Fifth  Rhode  Island  followed  immediately 
in  the  rear  and  in  support  of  the  Fourth  Rhode  Island.  We  thus  broke 
the  enemy’s  center  and  drove  him  from  his  intrenched  position  between 
the  railroad  and  the  river.  These  regiments  were  immediately  formed 
in  line,  and  were  soon  joined  by  the  Eleventh  Connecticut,  the  remain- 
ing regiment  of  the  brigade.  This  regiment,  being  engaged  in  bringing 
up  the  naval  howitzers  and  guns,  became  detached  from  the  brigade, 
and  by  the  order  of  the  general  commanding  was  assigned  temporarily 
to  the  command  of  Brigadier-General  Foster,  commanding  the  First 
Brigade,  and  I respectfully  refer  you  to  his  report  of  their  operations 
as  well  as  to  that  of  the  lieutenant-colonel  commanding. 

Although  now  in  possession  of  the  entire  work  of  the  enemy  between 
the  railroad  and  river,  the  heavy  firing  on  our  left  and  beyond  the  rail- 
road proved  that  General  Reno’s  brigade  was  still  hotly  engaging  the 
enemy.  Much  of  the  enemy’s  fire  was  directed  upon  us.  I ordered  the 
Fifth  Rhode  Island  Battalion  and  Eighth  Connecticut  Regiment  to  ad- 
vance cautiously  and  ascertain  by  skirmishers  the  ground  still  occupied 


AP.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


235 


the  enemy.  The  brigade  quartermaster  and  commissary,  Capt.  J.  N. 
tno*  then  reported  to  me  that  the  enemy  still  occupied  rifle  pits  along- 
de  the  railroad  and  back  of  the  brick-yard  and  a series  of  redoubts 
[tending  beyond  the  railroad  and  in  General  Beno’s  tront.  I then 
id  the  Fourth  Bhode  Island  Begiment  brought  up,  and  ordered  the 
, Ion  el  to  drive  the  enemy  from  his  position.  This  order  was  executed 
a most  gallant  manner.  Although  exposed  to  a heavy  and  severe 
?e,  killing  and  wounding  most  valuable  officers  and  men,  the  regiment 
larged  the  enemy  in  flank,  "while  a simultaneous  charge  was  made  by 
eneral  Beno  in  front,  thus  driving  the  enemy  from  his  last  stronghold. 
The  brigade  then  marched  directly  up  the  railroad  toward  New  Berne. 

! s we  approached  it  was  Soon  evident,  from  the  dense  columns  of  smoke, 
lat  the  bridge  over  the  Trent  and  the  city  had  been  fired.  By  direc- 
lon  of  the  commanding  general  I left  the  railroad  at  the  county-road 
rossing,  and  continued  up  the  county  road,  to  secure,  if  possible,  that 
i ridge  over  the  Trent.  Before  reaching  the  bridge  I received  an  order 
> halt  the  brigade  and  select  ground  for  a bivouac.  In  our  immediate 
icinity  I found  three  encampments  just  abandoned  by  the  enemy, 
hey  attempted  to  burn  their  tents,  quarters,  and  stores,  but  owing  to 
ieir  hasty  retreat  they  only  partially  succeeded.  The  fire  was  soon 
necked,  and  I secured  "good  quarters,  tents,  and  shelter  tor  the  entire 
rigade.  Property  of  different  kinds— arms,  horses,  camp  equipage, 
orse  equipments,  and  one  caisson — were  here  captured.  I directed  the 
igimental  quartermasters  to  make  an  inventory  of  the  property  arid 
land  it  to  the  brigade  quartermaster. 

In  concluding  this  report  I take  great  pleasure  in  expressing  my 
hanks  to  every  officer  and  soldier  in  the  brigade.  During  the  hard 
nd  fatiguing  march  of  the  13th  and  the  trying  bivouac  of  that  night 
ot  a murmur  was  heard.  On  the  morning  of  the  14th  all  seemed  as 
jcesh  and  as  ready  as  if  they  had  just  left  the  most  comfortable  encamp- 
ment. All  were  lyider  fire,  and  the  officers  seemed  proud  of  the  men 
hey  were  leading  and  the  men  showed  they  had  full  confidence  in 
heir  officers. 

For  the  details  of  the  movements  of  the  regiments  I have  respectfully 
o refer  you  to  the  reports  of  the  regimental  commanders,  to  which  are 
ppended  lists  of  the  killed  and  wounded.  I mourn  the  loss  of  the  gal- 
mt  dead  and  the  wounded  have  my  heart  felt  sympathy. 

My  personal  staff,  Capt.  Charles  T.  Gardner,  assistant  adjutant-gen- 
ral • Capt.  John  N.  King,  brigade  quartermaster  and  commissary;  and 
dents.  M.  Asbury  Hill  and  Philip  M.  Lydig,  jr.,  volunteer  aides,  were 
iidefatigable  in  their  exertions  and  rendered  most  valuable  aid  and 
assistance.  They  conveyed  orders,  brought  timely  reports,  and  made 
eoonnaissances  of  the  enemy,  and  although  at  times  greatly  exposed,  I 
in  happy  to  report  they  all  escaped  untouched.  Acting  Brigade  Sur- 
geon Bivers  entered  upon  his  duties  immediately  on  the  commencement 
»f  the  action  and  remained  on  the  field  throughout  the  day  and  night 
nd  was  unremitting  in  his  care  of  the  wounded. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  G.  PABKE, 
Brigadier- General  Volunteers. 

Capt.  Lewis  Bichmond,* 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Department  of  North  Carolina. 


236 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 
No.  16. 


[Chap.  X 


Report  of  Col.  Edward  Harland , Eighth  Connecticut  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Eighth  Connecticut  Regiment. 

Captain  : I herewith  submit  a report  of  the  movements  of  the  Eigh 
Regiment  of  Connecticut  Volunteers  during  the  engagement  with  tl 
forces  of  the  enemy  near  New  Berne  on  the  14th  of  March,  1862. 

At  about  7 a.  m.  the  regiment  left  the  woods  where  they  had  bivo 
acked  the  night  before.  In  accordance  with  orders  from  General  Pari 
I conducted  the  regiment  along  the  road  in  the  direction  of  the  reb 
battery,  following  the  Fourth  Rhode  Islan’d  Regiment.  After  pr 
ceeding  for  about  a mile  in  this  direction  we  turned  to  the  left  ar 
approached  through  the  woods  the  right  of  the  principal  battery.  C 
approaching  the  edge  of  the  woods  in  front  of  the  intrenchments 
the  enemy  I received  orders  from  General  Parke  to  remain  there  wil 
the  regiment  until  further  orders.  Afterward,  being  ordered  to  enga< 
the  enemy,  I threw  forward  skirmishers  preparatory  to  advancing 
line.  Our  skirmishers  being  driven  in  and  it  being  impossible  i 
advance  in  this  direction,  I joined  the  Fourth  Rhode  Island,  who  we; 
then  on  the  railroad,  and  endeavored,  if  possible,  to  turn  the  enemy 
right.  We  entered  the  battery  in  the  rear  of  the  brick-yard  and  four 
that  the  enemy  had  just  abandoned  it.  I formed  the  regiment  in  lii 
between  the  rebel  breastworks  and  the  woods  and  sent  skirmishei 
into  the  woods.  Finding  that  a direct  advance  in  that  direction  woul 
bring  the  regiment  in  contact  with  portions  of  General  Foster’s  brigad 
•I  so  reported  to  General  Parke,  who  ordered  me  to  move  more  to  tl 
left,  to  the  assistance  of  the  Fifth  Rhode  Island.  I filed  through  tl 
woods,  and  when  we  arrived  at  the  railroad  the  enemy  were  in  full  r 
treat  in  the  direction  of  New  Berne.  The  regiment  then  moved  towai 
New  Berne  and  occupied  barracks  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Trent.  Coi 
siderable  property  was  taken  that  had  been  abandoned  by  the  enenr 
though  an  attempt,  partially  successful,  had  been  made  to  destroy  i 
Lieutenant  Alexander,  regimental  quartermaster,  has  furnished  Caj 
tain  King,  brigade  quartermaster,  with  an  inventorv  of  all  the  proper! 
found. 

Throughout  the  day  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  regiment,  thoug 
most  of  them  were  there  under  fire  for  the  first  time,  behaved  with  con 
mendable  coolness  and  bravery.* 

. EDWARD  HARLAND, 
Colonel , Comdg.  Eighth  Regiment  Conn.  Vols . 

Oapt.  Charles  T.  Gardner, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen .,  Third  Brigade , Dept,  of  North  Carolina. 


No.  17. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Charles  Mathewson , Eleventh  Connecticut  Infantvi 

Eleventh  Regiment  Connecticut  Volunteers. 
Sir  : On  the  morning  of  the  13th  the  Eleventh  Regiment  Connect 
cut  A olunteers  landed  in  small  boats  from  the  steamer  Louisiana,  tli 

* Nominal  list  of  casualties  reports  2 men  killed  and  1 officer  (Capt.  Charles  I 
Upham)  and  3 men  wounded. 


HA1’.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


237 


chooner  Eva  Bell,*  and  the  barges  Shrapnel  and  Grapeshot,  and  im- 
mediately began  the  march  toward  New  Berne,  following  the  troops 
^ho  had  preceded  them.  They  bivouacked  at  night,  and  upon  the 
lorning  of  the  14th,  according  to  order,  continued  the  march,  drag- 
ing the  guns  of  the  Marine  Artillery.  Owing  to  the  narrowness  and 
he  bad  condition  of  the  road  the  progress  was  slow,  and  the  immense 
umber  of  troops  obstructing  the  passage  caused  the  companies  to 
ecome  somewhat  separated.  Upon  arriving  before  the  enemy  the 
owitzers  were  brought  into  battery  by  the  companies  having  them  in 
harge.  In  the  absence  of  orders  each  company,  as  it  left  the  guns, 
3ll  to  the  rear  and  reformed,  but  owing  to  a delay  of  fifteen  or  twenty 
linutes  in  bringing  up  the  last  guns  the  companies  arriving  first  fell  back 
nd  to  the  left  and  formed  line  of  battle.  Company  C coming  up  last, 
nd  unable  after  leaving  their  guns  to  find  the  regiment,  took  position 
0 the  right  of  the  Marine  Artillery  and  on  the  left  of  the  Massachu- 
etts  Twenty-fourth.  (The  denomination  of  the  Massachusetts  regi- 
aent  may  be  incorrect.) 

When  the  engagement  was  somewhat  advanced  the  Eleventh  Con- 
ecticut  was  ordered  to  relieve  the  Massachusetts  Twenty- seventh, 
'hey  formed  line  of  battle  30  paces  in  advance  of  them  and  retained 
he  position  until  the  charge  which  carried  the  work  was  made,  when 
hey  pushed  forward,  passed  the  breastworks,  and  formed  in  rear  of 
he  Connecticut  Eighth.  Meanwhile  Company  C,  which  had  not  re- 
oined  the  regiment,  charged  with  the  Massachusetts  troops  and  placed 
he  colors  second  upon  the  battery.  The  regiment  resumed  the  march 
pon  the  left  of  the  Rhode  Island  Fifth,  passed  up  the  railroad,  and 
Fere  assigned  quarters  in  the  old  rebel  cavalry  quarters  upon  the  right 
f the  Connecticut  Eighth. 

Respectfully, 

. CHARLES  MATHEWSON, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Comdg.  Eleventh  Connecticut  Regiment. 


No.  18. 

Report  of  Col.  Isaac.  P.  Rodman,  Fourth  Rhode  Island  Infantry . 

Headquarters  Fourth  Rhode  Island  Regiment, 

Camp  near  New  Berne,  March  17,  1862. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the 
►art  taken  by.the  Fourth  Rhode  Island  in  the  battle  of  New  Berne, 
March  14,  1862 : 

Landed  from  the  steamer  Eastern  Queen,  by  the  aid  of  the  stern- 
vdieeler  Union,  at  a point  some  16  miles  below  this  place,  on  the  south- 
111  bank  of  the  River  Neuse,  at  10.30  o’clock  a.  m.  Thursday,  the  13th 
ns  taut,  and  found  the  regiment  on  the  marsh  and  woody  land.  By 
our  orders  took  uj>  line  of  march  in  rear  of  the  Fifty-first  Pennsyl- 
rania,  continued  on  through  the  day,  nothing  of  importance  occurring. 
vVe  bivouacked  for  the  night,  which  was  wet  and  stormy.  The  men, 
>eing  well  supplied  with  blankets  and  provisions,  did  not  suffer  from 
he  exposure.  On  the  morning  of  the  14th,  at  6.30  a.  in.,  we  were  again 
eady  for  a start,  when  you  ordered  me  to  follow  the  rear  of  General 
Foster’s  brigade,  which  I did,  moving  off  on  the  right  of  our  brigade. 
Che  road  being  very  heavy,  our  marching  was  slow,  when  at  about  8 
►’clock  a.  m.  heavy  firing  was  heard  ahead  and  on  our  left,  General 


238 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chat.  XX. 


Foster  being  engaged  with  the  batteries  in  front,  General  Eeno  having 
engaged  the  right  of  the  enemy. 

Following  you  by  the  front  of  the  enemy’s  lines  we  filed  to  the  lefl 
through  the  Wood  for  some  distance  nearly  to  the  railroad,  when  b> 
your  orders  the  regiment  halted  while  you  ascertained  where  we  were 
most  needed.  Standing  in  this  position,  a few  minutes  Captain  Ken 
von’S  company,  D,  was  deployed  to  the  front  as  skirmishers,  and  oui 
position  being  rather  exposed,  moved  the  regiment  to  the  railroad  and 
waited  for  further  orders.  While  here  part  of  the  Twenty-first  Massa 
chusetts,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Clark,  was  driven  back  from  the  battery 
in  a charge  they  had  made  before  we  came  up.  Colonel  Clark  assuring 
me  of  the  feasibility  of  charging  the  works  from  my  position,  and  Mr. 
Lydig,  an  aide  on  your  staff,  urging  me  to  take  the  responsibility,  I tolc 
him  if  Mr.  Hill,  your  other  aide,  would  inform  you,  I would  go  on 
Mr.  Lydig  then  promptly  started  to  bring  up  the  Eighth  Connecticui 
to  support  me.  I formed  the  regiment #in  a partially-protected  hollow 
the  right  wing  in  front,  supported  by  my  left  wing,  the  space  and  posi 
tion  rendering  this,  as  I judged,  the  best  plan.  I then  gave  the  ordei 
to  charge.  Passing  quickly  by  the  rifle  pits,  which  opened  on  us  wit! 
little  injury,  we  entered  in  rear  of  their  intrenchments,  and  the  regi 
ment  in  a gallant  manner  carried  gun  after  gun,  until  the  whole  nine 
brass  field  pieces  of  their  front  were  in  our  possession,  with  carriages 
caissons,  horses,  &c.,  the  enemy  suddenly  retiring,  firing  only  three 
guns  from  the  front  and  three  at  us  from  the  fort  on  their  left,  whicl 
happily  passed  over  our  heads.  The  enemy  forming  in  the  woods — 
should  judge  about  the  strength  of  two  regiments — I did  not  think  i 
prudent  to  attack  them.  The  national  flag  of  the  Fourth  Ehode  Islam 
was  planted  on  the  parapet,  and  the  enemy  retired  from  the  whole 
length  of  their  lines  on  their  left  flank.  I formed  the  regiment,  afte: 
resting  a few  minutes,  in  rear  of  the  Eighth  and  Eleventh  Connection 
and  Fifth  Ehode  Island. 

In  about  ten  minutes,  by  your  orders,  I prepared  to  attack  the  rifle 
pits  on  the  right  of  General  Eeno’s  force,  where  the  firing  had  beei 
and  still  continued  heavy.  Countermarched  by  the  right  flank  am 
entered  the  woods  near  the  brick-works,  when  the  enemy  opened  01 
us  with  a severe  fire,  killing  and  wounding  some  of  my  best  officer! 
and  men.  Seeing  this  would  not  do,  I ordered  the  regiment  to  charge 
the  pits  and  railroad  embankment,  which  they  did  in  a ijne  manner 
carrying  them  in  about  fifteen  minutes.  At  about  the  same  tinn 
General  Eeno’s  brigade  drove  the  enemy  from  their  front. 

Collecting  the  wounded  under  the  care  of  my  surgeons  I preparet 
to  move  on,  when  in  a short  time  by  your  orders  we  moved  forward  01 
the  railroad  toward  New  Berne.  On  arriving  at  the  county  roac 
turned  off  and  sent  my  right  company  forward  as  skirmishers 
Marched  on  without  opposition,  arriving  near  New  Berrie,  when  yoi 
ordered  me  to  take  possession  of  the  deserted  camp  by  the  road,  lateb 
occupied  by  Colonel  Lee’s  regiment.  This  I proceeded  to  do,  and  tool 
possession  of  the  camp,  stores,  &c.,  where  my  regiment  has  sinct 
remained.  The  regimental  quartermaster,  Lieut.  C.  S.  Smith,  wTil 
render  an  account  of  the  property  found  when  he  lias  made  the  in 
ventory. 

For  the  brave  men  who  so  gloriously  fell  I could  not  say  enough 
They  fell  gallantly  at  their  posts — Captain  [diaries]  Tillinghast  at  tin 
head  of  his  company  5 Captain  [William  S.]  Chase,  severely  wounded 
leading  on  his ; Lieutenant  Curtis  also  wmunded  at  his  post.  Of  tin 
living  it  would  be  invidious  in  me  to  name  one  officer  above  anothe: 


jIIAP.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


239 


when  all  did  so  well.  Every  wish  and  measure  was  promptly  responded 
:o  by  the  officers  of  field,  staff,  and  line,  and  this  example  the  men 
were  proud  to  follow.  Surgeons  Rivers,  Millar,  and  Mi.  Elanders,  the 
chaplain,  were  indefatigable  in  their  exertions  for  the  comfort  of  the 

men.  * * * * 

******* 


All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted* 
Your  obedient  servant, 


I.  P.  RODMAN, 


Colonel , Fourth  Rhode  Island  Volunteers. 


No.  19. 

Report  of  Maj.  John  Wright , Fifth  Rhode  Island  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Fifth  Regiment  Rhode  Island  Volunteers, 

Camp  Fierce , New  Feme , N.  (7.,  March  18,  1862. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  to  you  the  following  report  of  the 
operations  of  the  First  Battalion  of  the  Fifth  Regiment  Rhode  Island 
Volunteers  in  the  battle  of  the  14th  instant: 

At  the  signal  given  from  the  brigade  flag-ship,  on  the  morning  of  the 
13th  of  March,  1862,  the  boats  of  the  steam-transports  Curlew  and 
Eagle,  in  which  the  battalion  was  quartered,  were  cleared  away,  filled 
with  men,  and  dispatched  to  the  steamer  Eastern  Queen  at  about  8 
o’clock  That  forenoon  I landed  with  three  companies  and  a half,  and 
with  these  took  my  position  in  line,  according  to  orders,  on  the  left  of 
the  Eighth  Connecticut.  I continued  the  march  until  I received  orders 
to  halt  and  bivouac  for  the  night.  About  2 the  next  morning  the  ad- 
jutant brought  the  two  remaining  companies  into  camp.  At  daybreak 
the  14th  I formed  the  battalion  in  line,  awaiting  orders,  which  soon 
came,  and  were  to  continue  to  follow  on  the  left  of  the  Eighth  Connecti- 
cut, The  column  moved  about  6.30  o’clock  a.  m.  and  passed  slowly 
along  the  route  followed  the  day  before.  Not  long  after  the  firing  com- 
menced in  front,  and  the  orders  came  to  keep  well  closed  up.  Soon 
after  Captain  D’Wolf  came  down  the  line  and  ordered  us  to  close  up, 
and  we  commenced  the  double-quick. 

After  following  the  main  road  a short  distance  farther  we  turned  off 
to  the  left  and  entered  the  woods.  Just  after  we  turned  a cannon  ball 
passed  over  our  heads,  which  showed  that  we  were  approaching  the 
battery,  and  caused  us  to  press  forward  more  eagerly  to  support  the 
attack.  After  passing  through  a swampy  place  wre  came  to  a halt  on 
the  brow  of  a bluff,  where  we  awaited  further  orders  and  the  further 
movements  of  the  Eighth  Connecticut,  As  the  bullets  flew  very  thick 
over  our  heads  we  were  ordered  to  lie  down.  When  the  Twenty- first 
Massachusetts  was  driven  from  the  battery  and  the  enemy  made  a sally 
the  orders  came  to  fix  bayonets  and  prepare  to  receive  a charge.  We 
formed  in  line  of  battle,  left  in  front,  but  as  they  were  driven  back  be- 
fore we  saw  them,  we  continued  as  we  were  before  that.  Our  orders 
were  still  to  continue  on  the  left  of  the  Eighth  Connecticut.  At  last 
the  orders  came  to  turn  the  right  flank  of  the  enemy.  We  passed 
down  into  the  hollow,  filed  off  still  farther  to  the  left,  and  passed  over 

* A nominal  list  of  casualties  omitted  above  reports  1 officer  and  10  men  killed 
and  2 officers  and  23  men  wounded — total  36. 


240  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA.  [Chap.  XX. 

another  elevation,  when  we  came  to  the  railroad,  just  below  the  brick- 
yard. Then,  with  General  Parke  at  our  head,  we  pushed  on,  passed  in 
rear  of  the  breastworks  of  the  enemy,  and  as  we  came  upou  the  high 
open  ground  behind  it  we  came  under  a raking  fire  from  the  rifle  pits 
across  the  railroad  and  the  brick-yard,  where  the  enemy  lay  in  large 
force. 

We  pushed  on  at  the  double-quick  until  we  came  under  cover  of  the 
trees,  where  we  formed  in  line  of  battle  and  prepared  to  charge  on  the 
enemy  in  the  battery.  As  they  had  retired,  I was  ordered  first  to  send 
one  company  and  afterward  the  whole  battalion,  and  to  proceed  cau- 
tiously and  find  out  what  the  firing  was  on  our  left.  I sent  the  adjutant 
ahead  to  find  out  the  direction  we  should  take.  As  it  was  pointed  out 
by  the  general’s  aide,  Lieutenant  Lydig,  we  passed  down  into  a hollow 
and  ascended  the  left-hand  side  cautiously  until  we  reached  the  brow 
of  the  elevation,  when  we  came  in  view  of  the  enemy  and  immediately 
opened  upon  them  a brisk  fire,  which  immediately  had  an  effect,  for 
their  fire  slackened  and  stopped  when  we  ceased  firing.  We  opened 
upon  them  two  or  three  times  afterward  until  we  were  afraid  of  firing 
upon  the  Fourth  Rhode  Island,  who  were  advancing  upon  them  on  our 
right.  When  the  Fourth  charged  upon  them  we  ceased  firing  and 
awaited  orders. 

It  was  on  this  hill  that  we  met  with  the  greater  part  of  our  loss.  As 
we  had  no  colors,  I was  ordered  to  follow  in  the  rear  of  the  Eighth 
Connecticut,  and  leaving  a few  to  take  care  of  the  killed  and  wounded 
we  passed  down  to  the  railroad,  and  at  11  o’clock  took  up  our  line  of 
march  for  the  city  of  Hew  Berne.  When  we  reached  the  main  road, 
which  crossed  the  railroad,  we  turned  to  the  left,  and  continued  our 
march  until  we  received  orders  to  halt  and  take  possession  of  a rebel 
camp  off  to  the  right  from  the  road  which  had  been  occupied  by  the 
rebel  artillery.*  * 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHH  WRIGHT, 

Major , Comdg.  First  Bat.  Fifth  Begt.  Rhode  Island  Vols. 

Charles  T.  Gardner, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Ho.  20. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  L.  OF.  Branch , G.  8.  Army. 

Headquarters  Department  of  Pamlico, 

March  15,  1862. 

General:  On  Wednesday  (12th)  at  4 p.  m.  it  was  made  known  to 
me  that  the  enemy  were  ascending  Heuse  River  in  force.  Under  cover 
of  their  gunboats  they  effected  a landing  of  troops  in  the  rear  of  the 
Groatan  breastwork  Thursday  morning,  they  compelling  me  to  evac- 
uate that  position.  I instantly  threw  behind  the  Fort  Thompson  breast- 
work every  available  man  under  my  command  and  prepared  to  wait 
there  the  enemy’s  farther  advance. 

On  Friday  morning,  at  about  7 o’clock,  I was  assailed  by  overwlielm- 

* Nominal  list  of  casualties  shows  1 officer  (Lieut.  Henry  R.  Pierce)  and  1 man 
killed  and  8 men  wounded. 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


241 


ing  forces  and  compelled  t©  yield  the  breastwork.  The  evacuation  of 
the  river  batteries,  thus  taken  in  reverse,  of  course,  followed  and  the 
enemy  is  now  in  possession  of  New  Berne. 

From  the  nature  of  the  position  my  troops  were  much  scattered  in 
the  retreat,  and  I am  rapidly  concentrating*  them  at  this  place. 

I have  given  orders  to  my  chief  engineer,  aided  by  Captain  Meade, 
to  make  an  examination  into  the  best  means  of  defending  some  point 
which  will  check  the  advance  of  the  enemy  to  the  railroad  at  Golds- 
borough.  1 am  satisfied  that  it  cannot  be  done  without  a large  increase 
of  force. 

My  command  is  entirely  destitute  of  camp  equipage  of  every  de- 
scription, and  can  on  that  account  be  kept  together  only  with  great 
difficulty. 

At  an  early  day  I will  report  more  in  detail  the  operations  of  the 
two  days. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

L.  O’B.  BRANCH, 
Brigadier- General,  G.  S.  Army. 


Headquarters  First  Division, 

In  the  Field,  March  26,  1862. 

General  : My  report  of  the  battle  of  the  14th  below  New  Berne 
has  been  withheld  until  I could  get  a report  from  Col.  R.  P.  Campbell, 
who  commanded  my  right  wing  on  that  day.  It  is  now  submitted,  with 
reports  from  the  commanders  of  all  the  regiments  on  the  field. 

A brief  description  of  the  artificial  defenses  of  New  Berne,  together 
with  the  inclosed  sketch,  will  enable  you  to  comprehend  the  move- 
ments of  the  day,  which  were  few  and  simple. 

The  defensive  works  were  located  and  constructed  before  I assumed 
command.  The  troops  under  my  command  had  performed  a large 
amount  of  work,  but  it  was  mainly  on  the  river  defenses,  which  were 
not  assailed  by  the  enemy.  They  had  been  originally  planned  for  a 
force  much  larger  than  any  ever  placed  at  my  disposal,  and  I was  for 
six  weeks  engaged  in  making  the  necessary  changes  to  contract  them, 
but  the  failure  of  all  my  efforts  to  obtain  implements  and  tools  with 
which  the  troops  could  carry  on  the  work  prevented  me  from  making 
satisfactory  progress.  I had  circulated  handbills  over  the  State,  calling 
on  the  citizens  generally  to  assist  me,  and  received  from  two  counties 
a small  party  of  free  negroes  without  implements.  I then  inserted  in 
the  newspaper  an  advertisement  calling  on  the  slave  owners  to  hire  their 
slaves,  with  implements,  for  a few  days,  and  I got  but  a single  negro. 

During  all  this  time  I continued  the  troops  at  work,  and  when  the 
enemy  came  into  the  river  500  per  day  were  being  detailed  to  construct 
breastworks,  with  less  than  half  that  number  of  worn  and  broken 
shovels  and  axes,  without  picks  or  grubbing-hoes.  If  the  fate  of  New 
Berne  shall  prevent  a similar  supineness  on  the  part  of  citizens,  and 
especially  slave  owners,  elsewhere,  it  will  be  fortunate  for  the  country. 
Ten  miles  below  New  Berne,  on  the  south  side  of  the  Neuse,  is  the  mouth 
of  Otter  Creek.  From  this  creek,  1 mile  above  its  mouth,  the  Croatan 
breastwork  runs  across  to  an  impracticable  swamp  about  three-fourths 
of  a mile.  This  is  a well-planned  and  well-constructed  work,  which 
2,000  men  and  two  field  batteries  could  hold  against  a very  large  force. 
But  from  the  mouth  of  Otter  Creek  to  Fort  Thompson,  the  lowest  of 
16  r r — VOL  IX 


242 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


the  river  batteries,  is  a distance  of  6 miles  of  river  shore,  on  any  part 
of  which  the  enemy  could  land  and.  take  the  Croatan  work  in  reverse. 
It  is  obvious  that  the  breastwork  was  useless  if  I had  not  sufficient 
force  to  hold  it  and  at  the  same  time  guard  6 miles  of  river  shore.  I 
have  at  no  time  been  able  to  place  4,000  men  in  the  field  at  New  Berne, 
and  at  the  time  of  the  battle  had  been  seriously  weakened  by  the  re- 
enlistment furloughs. 

Coming  up  the  river  from  the  Croatan  work  you  reach  the  Fort 
Thompson  breastwork.  This  had  been  constructed  from  Fort  Thomp- 
son to  the  railroad,  about  1 mile,  before  I assumed  command.  Finding 
that,  from  inadequate  force,  the  Croatan  work  might  be  of  no  avail  to 
me,  I determined  to  extend  the  Fort  Thompson  work  about  one  mile 
and  a fourth  and  rest  its  right  on  a swamp.  This  is  the  work  I was 
engaged  on  when  the  enemy  appeared.  In  order  to  make  the  line  as 
short  as  possible  and  to  avail  of  a small  branch  by  throwing  it  in  front 
the  line  was  thrown  back  about  150  yards  on  the  railroad,  and  thence 
a series  of  small  breastworks,  conforming  to  the  features  of  the  ground, 
ran  off  in  the  direction  of  the  swamp,  making  an  obtuse  angle  with  the 
older  portion  of  the  line  on  the  other  side  of  the  railroad.  To  guard 
this  gap  I directed  that  the  old  brick-kiln  on  the  railroad  should  be 
loop-holed,  and  the  evening  before  the  battle  had  ordered  two  24- 
pounder  guns  to  be  brought  from  New  Berne  and  placed  in  battery 
there.  The  enemy’s  skirmishers  drove  the  laborers  from  the  battery 
when  an  hour  more  would  have  enabled  them  to  get  the  guns  in  posi- 
tion. Of  course  I lost  all  the  benefit  I expected  from  it.  The  line  of 
small  breastworks  from  the  railroad  to  the  swamp  was  partially  finished 
for  about  half  the  distance. 

Running  parallel  to  the  river  and  to  each  other,  and  crossing  the  line 
at  right-angles  are,  first,  after  leaving  the  river,  the  old  Beaufort  road 
and  then  the  railroad  ; still  farther  on  and  near  the  swamp  the  Weath- 
ersby  Road.  The  railroad  and  the  Beaufort  road  intersect  about  2 
miles  behind  the  breastwork,  the  former  crossing  the  river  on  a bridge 
1,840  feet  long  at  the  toWn  of  New  Berne  and  the  latter  at  an  indiffer- 
ent private  bridge  about  one  mile  and  a half  above  New  Berne.  Both 
these  bridges  are  accessible  to  gunboats,  so  that  when  we  stood  at  the 
Fort  Thompson  breastwork,  fronting  the  enemy,  we  had  Neuse  River 
on  our  left,  Bryce  Creek  (an  impassable  stream)  on  our  right,  and  the 
Neuse  and  Trent  in  our  rear,  the  only  possible  mode  of  escape  in  case 
of  defeat  being  across  the  two  bridges  I have  described,  5 miles  in  our 
rear. 

I hope  this  description,  with  the  aid  of  the  map  inclosed,-  will  put 
you  in  possession  of  our  situation  at  the  opening  of  the  battle. 

I omitted  to  state  that  the  timber  had  been  felled  in  front  of  the 
breastwork  for  about  350  yards,  and  the  space  was  swept  by  ten  field 
pieces,  besides  three  navy  32-pounders,  discharging  grape  and  canister 
from  the  rear  face  of  Fort  Thompson. 

It  is  useless  to  describe  the  river  defenses,  on  which  the  largest 
amount  of  labor  had  been  bestowed,  as  the  enemy  prudently  refrained 
from  attacking  the  batteries  in  front  and  the  gunboats  did  not  come 
within  range  of  their  guns  until  they  had  been  silenced  from  the  rear. 

I now  proceed  to  detail  the  incidents  of  the  battle. 

On  Wednesday,  the  12th,  at  4 p.  m.,  the  approach  of  the  enemy’s 
fleet  was  reported  to  me,  and  at  dark  I learned  that  twelve  vessels  had 
anchored  below  the  mouth  of  Otter  Creek  and  about  forty-five  were 
ascending  the  river  in  their  rear. 

Orders  were  issued  to  Colonel  Sinclair,  Thirty-fifth  Regiment,  to 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


243 


proceed  immediately  vith  his  regiment  to  Fisher’s  Landing,  which  is 
just  above  the  mouth  of  Otter  Creek,  and  to  resist  any  attempt  of  the 
enemy  to  land  there.  Colonel  Avery,  Thirty-third  Eegiment,  and 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Haywood,  Seventh  Eegiment,  constituting  the  re- 
serve, were  ordered  to  proceed  across  the  river,  so  as  to  be  in  position 
at  the  intersection  of  the  Beaufort  road  and  the  railroad  at  daybreak 
in  the  morning.  Col.  E.  P.  Campbell,  commanding  my  right  wing,  was 
instructed  to  guard  the  river  shore  from  the  mouth  of  Otter  Creek  to 
Fort  Thompson,  while  Col.  C.  C.  Lee,  who  commanded  my  left  wing, 
was  to  guard  the  remainder  of  the  shore,  support  the  river  batteries, 
and  re-enforce  Colonel  Campbell  in  case  he  should  be  hard  pressed. 
Colonel  Campbell  was  instructed  to  establish  his  headquarters  at  the 
intersection  of  the  Beaufort  road  and  the  breastwork,  and  to  collect 
his  troops  around  him  by  daybreak.  Both  commanders  were  instructed 
that,  in  case  it  should  be  necessary  to  fall  back  from  the  river  shore  to 
the  breastwork,  Colonel  Campbell  should  hold  that  part  to  the  right 
of  the  Beaufort  road  and  Colonel  Lee  that  part  to  the  left  of  it. 

These  orders  having  been  dispatched  by  9 p.  m.,  the  night  was  spent 
by  the  troops  in  getting  into  position  and  other  preparations  for  the 
contest. 

Having  given  all  the  necessary  directions  to  staff  officers  and  all 
others  before  3 o’clock  Thursday  morning,  and  seen  all  the  men  and 
material  forwarded  from  the  camp  .and  depot  in  New  Berne,  I pro- 
ceeded to  Colonel  Campbell’s  headquarters.  On  the  road  I met  dis- 
patches from  Colonel  Sinclair  and  Capt.  P.  G.  Evans,  commanding  the 
pickets,  informing  me  that  the  enemy  were  landing  troops  below  the 
mouth  of  Otter  Creek,  and  Colonel  Vance  was  directed  to  send  his 
regiment  to  Croatan  breastwork  to  occupy  it.  Eailroad  trains  were  on 
fche  spot  to  carry  down  re-enforcements  or  to  draw  off  Colonels  Vance’s 
and  Sinclair’s  regiments  and  Brem’s  battery,  as  the  case  might  require. 

Intelligence  was  soon  brought  to  me  that  the  enemy’s  gunboats, 
having  driven  Colonel  Sinclair’s  regiment  from  Fisher’s  Landing,  were 
rapidly  landing  troops  at  that  place,  and  that  Colonel  Campbell,  seeing 
bhat  the  Croatan  breastwork  was  turned,  had  ordered  Vance,  Sinclair, 
ind  Brem  to  fall  back  to  the  Fort  Thompson  breastwork. 

My  force  was  wholly  inadequate  to  guard  the  6 miles  of  river  shore 
Detween  the  mouth  of  Otter  Creek  and  Fort  Thompson.  The  result 
^as  therefore  not  wholly  unexpected  but  I had  hoped  that  a line  of 
rifle  pits  I had  caused  to  be  made  for  a mile  along  the  bluffs  at  and 
)n  both  sides  of  Fisher’s  Landing  would  have  enabled  me  to  hold  the 
Bnemy  in  check  and  to  inflict  on  him  serious  loss  at  the  first  moment 
)f  his  placing  his  foot  on  our  soil.  I was  therefore  surprised  when 
he  position  was  yielded  with  a loss  of  only  1.  killed  and  2 wounded,  all 
Free  of  which  casualties  occurred  in  the  retreat. 

After  the  abandonment  of  Fisher’s  Landing  to  the  enemy  the  prompt 
withdrawal  of  Vance  and  Brem  could  alone  save  them  from  being  cut 
)ff,  and  the  enemy  thus  came  into  possession  of  my  strongest  work 
without  having  received  a single  shot  from  us. 

The  Fort  Thompson  breastwork  now  became  my  sole  reliance  for 
'esisting  his  advance,  and  throughout  the  remainder  of  the  day  and 
light  of  Thursday  the  most  active  efforts  were  made  to  strengthen 
■hat  unfinished  work.  Both  officers  and  men  executed  my  orders  with 
inflagging  energy. 

I was  particularly  indebted  to  Major  Thompson  and  Captain  Meade, 
>f  the  Engineers,  to  whom  [ assigned  the  duty  of  disposing  of  the  artil- 
ery  in  the  most  advantageous  manner. 


244 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[C.H  AP.  XX. 


Iii  the  afternoon  tlie  gunboats  shelled  the  breastworks  heavily  from 
a position  they  had  taken  out  of  reach  of  the  guns  of  our  batteries. 

The  composure  with  which  all  classes  of  my  troops  received  this 
attack  from  an  unseen  foe  strengthened  the  confidence  I felt  in  their 
standing  under  fire. 

No  damage  was  inflicted  on  us  by  the  shells,  but  the  accuracy  with 
which  they  were  thrown  over  a thick,  intervening  woodland  convinced 
me  of  the  necessity  of  driving  traitors  and  enemies  in  disguise  from  all 
towns  and  neighborhoods  of  which  we  desire  to  hold  military  posses- 
sion. 

During  the  day  on  Thursday  the  troops  were  posted  behind  the  in- 
trenchments,  and  it  was  painfully  apparent  that  my  force  was  not 
sufficient  to  man  them  even  with  a thin  line  for  the  finished  portions 
of  them.  I was  compelled  to  withdraw  Lieutenant-Colonel  Haywood 
of  the  Seventh  Eegiment  from  the  reserve  and  place  him  on  the  line. 

The  regiments  were  posted  as  follows,  commencing  on  the  left : 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Barbour,  Thirty-seventh  Eegiment,  and  Major 
Gilmer,  Twenty-seventh  Eegiment,  between  Tort  Thompson  and  the 
Beaufort  County  road.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Haywood,  Seventh,  Colonel 
Sinclair,  Thirty-fifth,  and  Colonel  Clark  (Militia),  between  the  Beaufort 
road  and  the  railroad.  Colonel  Vance,  Twenty -sixth  Eegiment,  to  the 
right  of  the  railroad . A few  unattached  companies  were  placed  between 
the  regiments.  My  headquarters  were  about  200  yards  in  rear  of  the 
intrenchment  at  the  railroad  and*  the  reserve  was  about  200  yards  in 
my  rear;  the  cavalry  regiment  about  half  a mile  to  the  rear.  In  this 
order  the  troops  slept  on  their  arms. 

At  11  o’clock  Thursday  night  Colonel  Lee  brought  me  intelligence 
that  signal  rockets  had  just  been  seen  on  our  extreme  right,  from  which 
I inferred  that  the  enemy,  having  found  the  Weathersby  road,  were  in! 
front  of  that  portion  of  my  line. 

Orders  were  sent  to  Colonel  Vance  to  extend  his  regiment  so  that 
its  right  might  rest  on  the  Weathersby  road,  and  in  an  hour  a section 
of  Brem’s  battery  was  moving  by  a circuitous  route  to  a position  on 
that  road. 

On  taking  my  position  Friday  morning  the  center  appeared  so  weak 
that  I dispatched  my  aide-de-camp  to  Colonel  Campbell  to  say  to  him 
that  it  must  be  re-enforced  if  possible. 

At  about  7.30  o’clock  Friday  morning  the  fire  opened  along  the  lint 
from  the  railroad  to  the  river.  I soon  received  a message  from  Colone 
Lee  that  the  enemy  were  attempting  to  turn  our  left.  This  proved  t( 
be  a feint,  as  I replied  to  him  that  I thought  it  would. 

The  next  incident  of  the  battle  was  the  appearance  of  the  enemy’s 
skirmishers  in  front  of  Vance,  and  consequently  on  the  prolongation  o 
the  line  held  by  the  Militia.  It  was  to  drive  the  enemy  from  that  posi 
tion  that  I had  directed  the  24-pounder  battery  to  be  placed  there,  am 
supposing  it  was  ready  for  service,  I sent  Captain  Eodman,  with  his 
company,  to  man  it,  but  they  found  the  guns  not  mounted,  and  wer« 
ordered  into  position  to  act  as  infantry.  The  skirmishers  of  the  enemy 
finding  themselves  on  the  flank  of  the  Militia,  fired  at  them  a few  shots 
from  their  flank  files,  which  caused  a portion  of  them  to  flee  in  grea 
disorder. 

I instantly  ordered  Colonel  Avery  to  send  five  companies  to  dislodge 
them.  He  sent  them  instantly,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hoke;  bu 
before  Colonel  Hoke  had  fully  got  into  position,  though  he  move< 
with  the  greatest  promptness  and  celerity,  I received  a message  fron 
Colonel  Clark,  of  the  Militia,  informing  me  that  the  enemy  were  in  lim 


CJhap.  XX.]  BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C.  245 

of  battle  in  great  force  on  Ms  right.  I instantly  ordered  up  the  re- 
maining five  companies  of  Colonel  Avery’s  regiment,  and  the  whole  ten 
opened  a terrific  fire  from  their  Enfield  rifles.  The  whole  Militia,  how- 
ever, had  now  abandoned  their  positions,  and  the  utmost  exertions  of 
myself  and  my  staff  could  not  rally  them.  Colonel  Sinclair’s  regiment 
very  quickly  followed  their  example,  retreating  in  the  utmost  disorder. 

This  laid  open  Haywood’s  right  and  a large  portion  of  the  breastwork 
was  left  vacant.  I had  not  a man  with  whom  to  re-occupy  it,  and  the 
enemy  soon  poured  in  a column  along  the  railroad  and  through  a por- 
tion of  the  cut- down  ground  in  front,  which  marched  up  behind  the 
breastwork  to  attack  what  remained  of  Campbell’s  command. 

The  brave  Seventh  met  them  with  the  bayonet  and  drove  them  head- 
long over  the  parapet,  inflicting  heavy  loss  upon  them  as  they  fled; 
but  soon  returning  with  heavy  re-enforcements,  not  less  than  five  or 
six  regiments,  the  Seventh  was  obliged  to  yield,  falling  back  slowly 
and  in  order.  Seeing  the  enemy  behind  the  breastwork,  without  a 
single  man  to  place  in  the  gap  through  which  he  was  entering  and 
finding  the  day  lost,  my  next  care  was  to  secure  the  retreat.  This 
was  a critical  operation,  as  the  enemy,  having  pierced  our  center,  had 
possession  of  the  two  shortest  roads  to  the  bridges,  and  besides  could 
approach  them  at  pleasure  with  their  gunboats. 

Having  dispatched  two  couriers  to  Colonel  Avery  and  two  to  Colonel 
Vance  with  orders  for  them  to  fall  back  to  the  bridges,  I moved  to  the 
intersection  of  the  Beaufort  road  and  railroad  to  rally  the  troops  and 
cover  the  retreat  across  the  bridges.  Here  I found  a train  of  cars  with 
the  Twenty- eighth  Begiment,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lowe,  who  had  arrived 
too  late  to  reach  the  battle-field,  and  formed  them  to  hold  the  enemy  in 
check  until  all  should  pass.  Colonel  Lee  was  directed  to  proceed  to 
New  Berne  and  form  all  the  men  he  could  collect  in  the  upper  part  of 
town.  The  Seventh  Begiment,  arriving  in  two  different  parties,  was 
directed  to  proceed  to  the  Trent  Bridge  and  hold  it,  while  I remained 
with  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lowe  at  the  intersection  to  hold  the  enemy  in 
check  and  cover  the  retreat. 

Bemaining  until  there  were  no  more  stragglers  in  sight  on  either  road, 
I directed  Colonel  Lowe  to  fall  back  to  the  Trent  Bridge,  which  he  did, 
the  enemy  showing  themselves  on  the  road  as  his  rear  guard  moved  off. 
Proceeding  to  the  Trent  Bridge,  I placed  Colonel  Campbell  in  command 
of  all  the  forces  there,  with  instructions  to  hold  the  bridge  as  long  as 
possible  for  the  passage  of  Avery  and  Vance,  and  then  to  move  up  the 
Trent  road  or  join  me  in  town,  as  I might  direct  after  reaching  the  town, 
leaving  with  him  to  conduct  him  that  gallant  gentleman  and  soldier 
Capt.  Peter  G.  Evans,  whom  I had  not  allowed  to  leave  my  person  for 
two  days  except  to  bear  orders.  The  railroad  bridge  was  in  flames 
before  I left  the  intersection. 

Arriving  in  town,  I found  it  in  flames  in  many  places  and  evacuated. 
Orders  written  in  the  street  under  the  lurid  glare  of  the  flames  were 
dispatched  in  every  direction  through  the  town  to  search  for  Colonel 
Lee.  At  Bailroad  street  I learned  that  a gunboat  had  already  landed 
at  one  of  the  lower  wharves.  Going  up  Bailroad  street  to  see  whether 
Colonel  Lee  was  at  the  Fair  Grounds,  I found,  on  reaching  the  depot, 
that  the  gunboats  were  already  there  and  the  enemy  in  the  Fair  Grounds. 
Colonel  Lee,  finding  himself  in  no  condition  to  make  resistance,  had 
properly  drawn  off  and  marched  up  the  Kinston  Boad.  Following  on, 
and  directing  all  the  officers  I could  overtake  to  conduct  their  men  to 
Tuscarora,  the  nearest  railroad  depot,  I proceeded  to  that  place,  and, 
having  made  arrangements  for  the  transportation  of  the  troops  to 


246 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


Kinston  by  railroad  and  seen  most  of  them  off,  reached  that  place 
myself  at  11  o’clock  on  Saturday. 

My  loss  was  64  killed,  101  wounded,  and  413  missing;* about  200  are 
prisoners  and  the  remainder  at  home;  The  inclosed  tabular  statement 
will  show  you  on  which  regiments  and  companies  the  loss  fell. 

The  horses  of  Latham’s  battery  and  those  of  four  pieces  of  Brem’s 
battery  were  killed,  and  we  lost,  in  consequence,  ten  pieces  of  field 
artillery.  There  were  other  pieces  at  the  breastwork,  but  they  were 
condemned  guns  from  Fort  Macon  belonging  to  no  company. 

The  ammunition  and  ordnance  stores  at  New  Berne  were  saved,  and 
the  camp  equipage  and  baggage  of  the  regiments  would  have  been 
saved  but  we  had  not  the  field  transportation  with  which  to  haul  it  to 
the  railroad. 

In  five  days  after  the  battle  I had  my  brigade  in  camp  in  advance  oi 
Kinston  ready  for  action  and  but  little  demoralized. 

I had  at  an  early  day  placed  Cols.  R.  P.  Campbell,  Seventh  Regi 
ment,  and  C.  C.  Lee,  Thirty- seventh  Regiment,  in  command  of  the  two 
wings  of  my  brigade.  All  the  troops,  except  the  Thirty -third  Reg 
iment  and  the  cavalry  regiment,  which  were  in  reserve,  fought  undei 
their  immediate  command.  I could  have  taken  no  better  security 
against  any  errors  and  oversights  I might  commit  than  I did  in  placing 
those  two  trained  and  experienced  officers  in  immediate  command  oi 
the  troops. 

I refer  to  their  reports  herewith  and  the  reports  of  commanders  oi 
regiments  for  particulars  as  to  the  conduct  of  individuals  under  theii 
command. 

As  the  Thirty-third  Regiment  was  under  my  own  command  it  is 
proper  for  me  to  say  that  its  conduct  was  all  I could  desire.  It  moved 
into  action  with  as  much  promptness  and  steadiness  as  I ever  saw  in 
its  ranks  on  dress  parade  and  its  fire  was  terrific.  It  was  engaged 
within  100  yards  of  my  position,  and  Colonel  Avery,  Lieutenant-Colo 
nel  Hoke,  and  Major  Lewis  did  their  duty  fully  against  an  overwhelm 
ing  force.  Its  gallant  colonel  was  captured  at  his  post ; two  different 
couriers,  whom  I sent  to  him  with  orders  to  withdraw,  having  failed  to 
reach  him. 

With  the  exceptions  noted  in  a former  part  of  the  report  all  the  reg 
iments  behaved  well.  The  Seventh  and  Thirty-third  are  specially 
named,  because  on  the  former  fell  the  brunt  of  the  battle  after  its  flank 
was  exposed  by  the  retreat  of  the  militia  and  the  Thirty-fifth,  and  the 
latter  had  no  other  commander  except  myself  through  whom  its  con 
duct  could  be  made  known  to  you.  No  troops  could  have  behaved 
better  than  the  Twenty-sixth,  Twenty-seventh,  and  Thirty- seventh. 

Latham’s  battery  was  new  and  was  only  partially  equipped.  The 
horses  had  not  been  attached  to  the  guns  a week  before  the  battle.  It> 
gallantry  and  devotion  on  that  occasion  show  it  to  be  worthy  of  a new 
outfit. 

My  regular  staff,  consisting  of  my  aide-de-camp,  Mr.  W.  E.  Cannady, 
and  assistant  adjutant-general,  Lieut.  Col.  W.  G.  Robinson,  rendered 
me  all  the  assistance  I desired.  My  aide-de-camp  in  particular  bore 
my  orders  through  the  hottest  of  the  fire  with  unflinching  courage  and 
composure. 

To  Captain  Meade,  of  the  Engineers,  and  Lieutenant  Burwell,  C.  S. 
Army,  and  Mr.  Francis  T.  Hawks,  who  tendered  their  services  for  the 
occasion  and  were  placed  on  my  staff,  I was  greatly  indebted,  not  only 
for  services  in  bearing  orders  and  rallying  troops,  but  to  the  first  in  an 


3haf.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


247 


especial  manner  for  counsel  and  advice.  They  remained  with  me 
throughout  the  battle  and  subsequent  retreat. 

The  panic  alluded  to  in  some  of  the  reports  occurred  after  the  troops 
had  left  New  Berne.  It  was  in  advance  of  me  and  I did  not  witness  it, 
but  the  names  of  officers  who  contributed  to  it  or  participated  in  it  will 
be  reported  to  you  if  they  can  be  discovered.  It  was  soon  counteracted 
by  the  steadiness  of  Colonel  Lee  and  some  other  officers. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

’ L.  O’B.  BRANCH, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina. 

[Addenda.] 

Return  of  casualties  in  the  Confederate  forces  at  the  battle  of  New  Berne , N.  C.,  March  14, 

1862. 


Command. 


7th  North  Carolina. 
19th  North  Carolina. 
-26th  North  Carolina. 
27th  North  Carolina. 
28th  North  Carolina. 
33d  North  Carolina. 

35th  North  Carolina 
37  th  North  Carolina 

Brem’s  battery 

Latham’s  battery  . . 
Independent  compa- 
nies. • 


Total  ' . 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing  and 
prisoners. 

1 

Remarks  by  compiler. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Total. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Total. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Total. 

Aggregate 

6 

6 

1 

14 

15 

*“ 

30 

30 

51 

No  losses  reported. 

2 

3 

5 

1 

9 

10 

4 i 

68 

72 

87 

4 1 

4 

8 

8 

42 

42 

54 

6 

6 

6 

32 

28 

144 

204 

Officers  and  men  not 

separately  reported. 

1 

4 

5 

11 

11 

9 

9 

25 

1 

3 

8 

12 

Do. 

1 

8 

7 

16 

Do. 

10 

10 

1 

10 

11 

2 

20 

22 

43 

7 

73 

80 

Do. 

3 

27 

64 

3 

52 

101 

6 

175 

413 

578 

* For  reasons  stated  in  remarks  the  totals  of  columns  headed  “Officers”  and  “Men”  do  not  prove 
the  “Total”  columns. 


248 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


(Chap.  XX. 


[Inclosure.] 


. . yn&Jfar-jety  vfftvo  CfFtgf.i 

©not 

. .-^fcatiuxmZeJlattiay 
^.--Hr/wnsJlfattery. 
&arr/zjT£x£M£esy 


Headquarters,  March  28,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  request  that  the  inclosed  copies  of  letters 
may  be  filed  with  my  official  report  of  the  battle  of  the  14th. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

L.  O’B.  BRAYCH, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 
General  T.  H.  Holmes,  Commanding , &c. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Headquarters  District  of  Pamlico, 

New  Berne , N.  <7.,  March  12,  1862— 8.30  p.  m. 
Col.  Charles  C.  Lee: 

Colonel:  The  following  troops  have  been  ordered  to  report  to  you, 
and  I presume  are  in  readiness  to  obey  your  orders,  to  wit : The  Thirty* 


249 


CHAP.  XX.]  BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 

seventh  North  Carolina  troops;  Sloan’s  regiment;  ;Brem’s,  Edelin’s, 
Whitford’s,  Mayo’s,  Herring’s,  Leecraft’s,  and  Sutton  s companies. 

Colonel  Campbell  is  instructed  to  guard  the  river  shore,  and  if  he 
should  be  hard  pressed  you  will  send  him  such  re  enforcements  as  you 
can  spare.  I will  have  two  regiments  in  reserve.  My  headquarters 
will  be  on  the  Beaufort  road,  in  the  rear  of  the  batteries.  Have  all  your 
troops  in  position  by  daybreak.  If  compelled  to  fall  back  from  the 
river  shore  and  occupy  Fort  Thompson  breastwork,  you  will  hold  so 
much  of  it  as  extends  from  the  old  Beaufort  road  to  the  river. 

Very  respectfully,  


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Headquarters  District  of  Pamlico, 

March  12,  1862—8.30  p.  m. 

Col.  B.  P.  Campbell,  Commanding : 

It  is  presumed  that  the  following  troops  have  reported  to  you,  to  wit: 
Colonels  Vance’s  and  Sinclair’s  regiments ; Captains  Latham  s,  McBae  s, 
Harding’s,  and  Mallett’s  companies,  and  Colonel  Spruill  s cavalry,  kenci 
off  couriers  to-night,  if  you  have  not  already  done  so,  and  give  them 
orders.  Colonel  Sinclair’s  regiment  is  already  at  Fisher  s Landing. 
That  is  the  only  body  of  troops  that  I have  moved.  Colonel  Avery  and 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Haywood  constitute  the  reserve,  and  will  receive 

their  orders  directly  from  me.  _ , , . T- 

You  had  better  gather  your  force  near  you  before  daybreak.  It  the 
enemy  attempt  a landing,  as  he  probably  will  m the  morning,  resist 
him  with  all  the  force  you  can  bring  to  bear.  If  compelled  to  fall  back, 
occupy  so  much  of  the  Fort  Thompson  breastwork  as  extends  from  the 
Beaufort  road  to  an  impassable  swamp  on  the  extreme  Tight,  Guard 
well  the  Beaufort  road  where  it  crosses  the  breastwork.  If  the  enemy 
attempt  to  land  at  Fisher’s  Landing,  Sinclair  will  need  strong  re-enforce- 
ment. Exj)Iain  to  your  officers  that  when  they  fall  back  they  are  to 
rally  behind  the  Fort  Thompson  breastwork.  . 

I have  just  directed  that  a cavalry  company  be  sent  to  you  immedi- 
ately, so  that  you  may  have  abundant  couriers  by  whom  to  send  your 
orders. 

P.  s. My  headquarters  will  be  on  the  Beaufort  road,  in  the  rear  of 

the  batteries. 


f Inclosure  No.  3.] 

Headquarters  First  Division, 

March  30,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina  : 

General  : I omitted,  through  inadvertence,  to  state  in  my  official 
report  of  the  battle  of  the  14th  a very  important  movement.  When, 
as  stated  in  my  report,  an  officer  came  to  me  from  Colonel  Clark,  ot  the 
Militia,  and  informed  me  that  the  enemy  were  in  line  of  battle  m force 
on  his  right,  I directed  him  to  proceed  immediately  to  Colonel  Camp- 
bell with  the  information,  and  also  sent  one  of  my  own  couriers  to  guard 

against  a miscarriage.  , T 

As  soon  as  the  Militia  fled  my  aide-de-camp  was  sent  to  Colonel  Lee, 
on  the  left,  with  orders  to  send  his  own  regiment  (the  Thirty-seventh), 


250 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


if  he  could  possibly  spare  it,  and  in  any  event  to  send  half  of  it,  to  the 
menaced  point.  Colonel  Lee — calling  the  attention  of  my  aide  to  the 
strong  body  of  the  enemy  along  his  front  with  whom  he  was  then 
engaged,  to  show  how  impossible  it  was  for  him  to  send  all— promptly 
disengaged  five  companies  of  the  Thirty-seventh  and  ordered  them  to 
the  right.  When  they  reached  there  Sinclair’s  regiment  had  fled,  and 
they  could  not  retrieve  the  disaster.  I respectfully  request  that  this 
may  be  made  part  of  my  official  report. 

Tours,  very  respectfully, 

L.  O’B.  BRANCH, 
Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 


No.  21. 

Report  of  Col.  Reuben  P.  Campbell , Seventh  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Seventh  Reht.  North  Carolina  Troops, 

March  25,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  very  respectfully  to  make  the  follow- 
ing report  of  the  late  engagement,  14th  instant,  at  Fort  Thompson : 

My  command,  consisting  of  the  Seventh  Regiment  North  Carolina 
troops,  commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Haywood*  Thirty-fifth  Reg- 
iment North  Carolina  troops,  commanded  by  Colonel  Sinclair : Captain 
Whitehurst’s  independent  company ; some  Militia,  under  Colonel  Clark 
Captain  Latham’s  battery,  and  two  sections  of  Captain  Brem’s  bat- 
tery, were  posted  along  the  breastworks  from  the  county  road  to  the 
railroad.  The  Seventh  Regiment  was  posted  immediately  on  the  right 
of  the  county  road;  Colonel  Sinclair’s  regiment  was  posted  on  its 
right,  and  Captain  Whitehurst  and  Colonel  Clark  on  his  right,  extend- 
ing near  the  railroad.  The  batteries  were  placed  at  convenient  dis- 
tances along  the  line. 

The  battle  was  commenced  by  the  firing  of  a Parrott  gun  belonging 
to  Captain  Latham’s  battery,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Wheeler. 
This  shot  dispersed  a squad  of  horsemen,  who  seemed  to  be  recon- 
noitering  under  cover  of  the  woods. 

Immediately  after  this,  about  7.20  o’clock,  the  firing  became  general 
from  the  enemy  along  the  whole  of  my  command.  It  was  replied  to 
by  both  the  batteries  and  small-arms.  Shortly  after  the  firing  began 
the  Militia  under  Colonel  Clark  gave  way  and  left  the  field  in  a panic. 

About  one  hour  after  the  firing  commenced  Colonel  Sinclair  came  to 
me,  and  in  much  excitement  said  that  the  enemy  had  flanked  him  and 
was  coming  up  the  trenches  which  had  been  vacated  by  the  Militia. 
I ordered  him  to  leave  the  trenches  for  the  purpose  of  charging  bayo- 
nets upon  the  advancing  columns ; but  he  failed  to  form  his  men  and 
left  the  field  in  confusion.  This  left  the  entire  space  occupied  by  my 
command  to  be  defended  by  the  batteries  and  by  the  Seventh  Regiment 
North  Carolina  troops.  One  section  of  Brem’s  battery,  left  without 
support  by  Colonel  Sinclair,  was  taken  possession  of  by  the  enemy, 
who  had  continued  his  advance  on  the  right.  I ordered  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Haywood  to  have  his  men  leave  the  breastwork  and  charge 
bayonets  upon  the  enemy,  who  was  advancing  in  column.  The  charge 
was  made,  and  the  enemy  driven  over  the  breastworks  with  great 
slaughter,  leaving  a number  of  guns  and  other  things  in  his  retreat, 
which  fell  into  our  hands.  We  also  retook  the  section  of  Brem’s  bab 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


251 


tery  which  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  With  the  aidrnf 
the  Seventh  Eegiment  and  the  batteries  I then  held  the  works  until 
the  enemy  again  appeared  on  our  right  with  a greatly  increased  force, 
some  six  or  eight  regiments.  The  batteries,  with  the  exception  of  one 
section,  under  Captain  Latham,  had  been  silenced,  so  that  I had  only 
it  and  the  Seventh  Regiment  at  my  command.  I ordered  the  troops  to 
fall  back,  which  they  did  under  a very  heavy  fire,  and  formed  immedi- 
ately in  rear  of  Colonel  Vance’s  encampment.  After  waiting  a short 
time,  and  seeing  no  hope  of  defeating  the  enemy  or  offering  further 
resistance  to  his  approach  or  advancing  our  cause  by  meeting,  I retired 


from  the  field.  , _ „ . . , 

The  officers  and  men  of  the  Seventh  Regiment  North  Carolina  troops 
and  Captains  Latham’s  and  Brem’s  batteries  behaved  with  coolness 
and  bravery.  I cannot  speak  of  the  other  troops  under  my  command, 
as  they  left  the  field  too  early  in  the  action  for  me  to  say  anything 

about  them.  _ , . . „ 

From  the  report  of  the  officers  under  my  command  the  following  are 
the  casualties : 13  privates  and  1 officer  killed,  34  privates  and  1 officer 
wounded,  and  34  privates  missing  * r p CAMpBELL; 

Colonel  Seventh  Regiment  North  Carolina  Troops. 


General  L.  O’B.  Branch,  Kinston , N.  C. 


No.  22. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Ed.  Graham  Haywood , Seventh  North  Carolina 

Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Seventh  Rest.  North  Carolina  Troops, 

March  25,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  very  respectfully  to  report  that  my 
command,  the  Seventh  Regiment  North  Carolina  troops,  behaved  well 
in  the  late  engagement  at  Fort  Thompson.  The  command,  with  the 
exception  of  Company  F,  Captain  Turner,  was  posted  on  the  right  of 
the  county  road,  behind  the  breastworks,  and  ordered  to  defend  them 
and  support  the  artillery.  Company  F was  posted  on  the  left  of  the 
road.  They  held  their  positions  until  flanked  on  the  right  by  the 
enemy.  They  were  then  ordered  to  leave  the  trenches  and  charge 
bayonets  upon  the  enemy,  which  they  did,  driving  him  beyond  the 
breastworks  with  great  slaughter  and  retaking  a section  of  Brem’s 
battery  which  had  fallen  into  the  enemy’s  hands.  I then  held  the 
breastworks  until  flanked  again  by  the  same  direction  with  a greatly 
increased  force,  some  six  or  eight  regiments,  when  I fell  back  into  the 
woods  in  rear  of  Colonel  Vance’s  camp  and  there  formed.  Seeing  no 
hope  of  defeating  the  enemy,  I then,  with  the  command,  retired  from 
the  field.  Major  Hall,  with  three  companies,  preceded  me. 

The  casualties  were  6 men  killed,  15  wounded,  and  30  missing ; 
among  the  wounded  Capt.  W.  H.  Sanford,  regimental  commissary. 

ED.  GRAHAM  HAYWOOD, 

Lieut.  Col.,  Comdg.  Seventh  Regt.  North  Carolina  Troops. 

General  L.  O’B.  Branch. 


* But  see  addenda  to  Branch’s  report,  p.  247. 


252 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


No.  23. 

Report  of  Col.  S.  B.  Spruill , Nineteenth  North  Carolina  Infantry . 

Hdqrs.  Nineteenth  Regiment  N.  C.  State  Troops, 

Kinston , W.  (7.,  March  — , 1862. 

On  Wednesday  evening,  the  12th  instant,  1 received  information  that 
the  enemy  had  made  their  appearance  in  the  river  and  to  hold  my  com- 
mand in  readiness  to  march  at  a moment’s  warning. 

On  Thursday  morning,  13th,  I received  an  order  from  General  Branch 
to  report  with  my  command  immediately  to  the  general  commanding 
at  the  crossing  of  the  Beaufort  road  and  railroad,  which  was  promptly 
obeyed.  My  command,  consisting  of  Companies  D,  E,  F,  H,  and  K, 
proceeded  down  as  far  as  Colonel  Vance’s  encampment,  near  the  in- 
trenchments,  and  reported  myself  for  duty.  I then  received  orders  to 
fall  back  to  a convenient  position,  which  I occupied,  between  the  Beau- 
fort road  and  railroad. 

About  2 p.  m.  I received  a verbal  order  to  dismount  two  of  my  com- 
panies that  were  best  armed,  leaving  a sufficient  number  of  men  to 
guard  the  horses,  and  for  them  to  report  to  Colonel  Vance,  then  on  the 
extreme  right,  which  I obeyed,  by  ordering  Company  A,  commanded  by 
Captain  Hays,  and  Company  K,  commanded  by  Lieut.  William  A. 
Graham,  jr.,  these  companies  being  armed  with  rifles  and  carbines. 
The  other  companies  remained  in  their  same  position  until  about  3 p. 
m.,  at  which  time  the  enemy  were  throwing  their  shells  very  near  us, 
and  I ordered  them  to  move  nearer  the  railroad,  and  we  continued  to 
move  until  we  went  a short  distance  beyond  the  railroad.  There  we 
remained  until  night,  when  the  firing  ceased. 

During  the  time  I received  an  order  to  send  two  companies  to  report 
to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Robinson,  to  act  as  vedettes  for  the  night,  which 
I obeyed,  by  detailing  Company  D,  commanded  by  Captain  Strange, 
and  Company  H,  Captain  Randolph.  These  companies  were  under  the 
command  of  Major  J.  W.  Woodfin. 

I then  ordered  Lieutenant  Haughton,  of  Captain  Evans’  company, 
which  had  a short  time  before  joined  us,  to  report  to  Colonel  Camp- 
bell, whose  immediate  command  I was  then  under,  and  ask  of  him  per- 
mission to  take  my  command  back  to  camp  for  the  purpose  of  feeding 
my  horses.  I received  in  reply  to  exercise  my  own  discretion.  As  I 
had  permission  to  do  so,  between  9 and  10  o’clock  I ordered  the  re- 
mainder of  my  command,  consisting  of  two  companies,  and  Captain 
Evans’  company,  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Evans,  taking  the  horses 
of  the  dismounted  companies  back  to  camp. 

Next  morning  about  4 o’clock  I ordered  the  two  companies  to  mount, 
and  take  with  them  the  horses  of  the  dismounted  companies  and  hold 
themselves  in  readiness  to  march. 

Before  day  I sent  Captain  Cole’s  company  to  relieve  the  two  com- 
panies that  had  been  on  duty  during  the  night  as  vedettes.  The  two 
companies  relieved  returned  to  camp  about  4 a.  m.  I ordered  the 
commanders  of  these  two  companies,  together  with  Company  0,  com- 
manded by  Lieutenant  Wynn,  which  had  arrived  from  Washington 
about  2 o’clock  at  night,  having  made  the  march  during  the  day  and 
part  of  the  night,  a distance  of  40  miles,  to  feed  and  rest  until  they 
were  ordered  by  me  to  report  for  duty  on  the  field. 

When  I arrived  near  the  intrenchments  on  the  Beaufort  road  I 
ordered  a halt.  I then  reported  myself  to  Colonel  Campbell,  with  my 
command,  for  duty.  He  ordered  me  to  remain  ready  for  duty.  I imme- 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


253 


Chap.  XX.] 

diatelv  returned  to  my  command,  soon  after  which  the  enemy’s  vessels 

onened  a heavy  fire,  at  which  time  I received  orders  to  dismount  the 

remainder  of  my  command  and  send  them  to  the  right  and  report  to 
Colonel  Vance.  I immediately  ordered  Captain  Cole,  Company  r, 
■uid  Captain  Thomas,  Company  E,  to  dismount,  and  Captain  Thomas 
to  take  command  of  the  two  companies,  which  he  did,  and  marched 
off  Soon  after  Major  Woodfin  arrived,  and  I ordered  him  to  proceed 
• nil  take  charge  of  the  two  companies  then  marching  to  the  intrencli- 
ments  .which  he  promptly  obeyed.  I immediately  dispatched  a courier 
to  order  the  three  companies  then  in  camp  to  report  to  me  at  a point 
on  the  railroad  for  duty;  but  before  reporting  to  me  I was  informed 
that  they  were  ordered  to  retreat  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Bobmson. 

While  waiting  I perceived  that  the  Militia  were  giving  way  and  re- 
treating. 1 immediately  rode  back  where  the  horses  of  my  dismounted 
me  were  held,  and  found  many  of  them  mounted  and  being  mounted 
lw  the  infantry.  Captain  Cole,  most  of  his  command,  and  a portion  of 
Captain  Thomas’  command,  succeeded  in  getting  their  horses,  but  Lieu- 
tenant Graham’s  command  was  left  on  foot,  except  those  that  had  charge 
of  his  horses;  also  a portion  of  Captain  Thomas  command,  which  re- 
treated in  company  with  Colonel  V ance’s  command.  I remained  a short 
t me  expecting  Lieutenant  Graham  and  Captain  Thomas  to  come  up,  so 
as  toinform  them  what  had  become  of  their  horses;  but  they  not  arriving 
and  seeing  the  infantry  retreating  from  the  left  of  our  works,  I rode  oft 
and  overtook  my  command  at  Colonel  Lee’s  camp.  I immediately  pro- 
ceeded to  the  head  of  my  command  in  order  to  make  them  march  over  the 
bridge  by  file,  fearing  that  it  might  break  down,  which  1 succeeded  in 
doing  in  good  order,  some  having  however  passed  over  before  I arrived 

at  After  remaining  on  the  east  side  of  the  bridge  until  about  half  of  my 
command  had  passed  over  I ordered  Major  Woodfin  to  remain  until 
thevwere  all  over.  I then  passed  over  the  bridge  for  the  purpose  of 
forming  my  battalion  on  the  other  side.  After  passing  to  the  othei 
side  I found  Lieutenant  Baker,  who  I ordered  to  assist  me  m forming 
it.  He  then  informed  me  that  Lieutenant-Colonel  Bobmson  was  there 
attending  to  the  formation  of  the  battalion.  „ , . 

After  the  whole  of  mv  command  had  passed  over,  excepting  Captam 
Havs  Company  A,  I ordered  Surgeon  Smith  to  direct  Lieutenant  Col- 
onel Bobinson  to  march  the  battalion  on  the  Kinston  road  a short  dis- 
tance beyond  New  Berne,  and  there  halt  it,  and  permit  the  wagons  to 
o-o  on  toward  Kinston  under  the  directions  of  the  general  m command, 
when  a board  of  officers,  composed  of  the  colonels  of  different  regiments 
was  called,  directing  us  that  if  we  were  driven  from  the  intrench  ments 
to  fall  back  on  New  Berne,  which  was  the  only  order  to  retreat  I ever 

received  up  to  that  time.  _ . -it- 

While  at  the  bridge,  in  company  with  Captain  Strange  and  Lieu- 
tenant Baker,  of  Company  D,  Major  Barringer  rode  up,  and  informed 
me  that  he  was  ordered  by  the  commanding  general  to  direct  me  to 
recross  the  bridge  and  form  my  battalion  to  cover  the  retreat  of  the  m 
fantrv.  I told  him  that  1 had  ordered  it  to  New  Berne,  but  informed 
him  that  I would  obey  the  order,  and  immediately  rode  rapidly  oft  m 

company  with  Major  Barringer  to  do  so.  ,iaW 

On  arriving  at  New  Berne  I found  my  battalion  formed  and  halted 
on  the  Kinston  road  and  found  Major  Woodfin  in  command.  I squired 
of  him  where  Lieutenant-Colonel  Bobinson  was,  and  he  informed  me 
that  he  had  rode  into  New  Berne,  upon  which  information  we  b nth  r. otte 
to  the  railroad.  Upon  arriving  there  Major  Gilmer  gave  the  older  tor 
all  the  troops  to  rally  around  the  depot.  Major  Boone  then  ordered  me 


254 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


to  have  all  the  cotton  and  naval  stores  in  New  Berne  burned.  I asked 
him  by  what  authority  he  gave  the  order.  His  reply  was  that  it  came 
from  headquarters.  I then  told  h'im  it  should  be  executed,  and  ordered 
Major  Woodfin  to  make  a detail  of  men  to  do  so,  which  he  promptly 
did,  and  left  my  command  for  the  purpose  of  executing  the  same. 

I remained  with  my  command  halted  until  the  cars  left  the  depot 
and  the  enemy  were  shelling  the  town,  several  shells  falling  near  my 
battalion.  I then  ordered  a retreat,  which  was  continued  until  some  one 
in  the  rear  gave  the  order  to  “Gallop,  march.”  The  men  then  fecame 
somewhat  excited.  I sent  back  to  ascertain  who  gave  the  order,  but 
could  not  find  out  who  gave  it,  but  immediately  heard  that  the  enemy 
were  pursuing  us  with  700  cavalry.  Captain  Randolph  rode  up  to  me 
and  informed  me  that  he  had  heard  that  we  were  pursued  with  cav- 
alry, and  asked  me  if  I did  not  intend  making  a stand.  I replied  that 
I did  intend  doing  so,  and  sent  him  on  ahead  for  the  purpose  of  select- 
ing a suitable  place.  I was  informed  there  was  a bridge  some  2 miles 
ahead,  at  which  place  we  halted  with  the  intention  of  giving  them 
battle.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Robinson  then  rode  up  where  I was,  and  I 
directed  him  to  take  his  position  in  the  battalion  and  assist  me,  as  I 
intended  making  a stand  to  resist  the  700  cavalry  that  I understood 
was  in  pursuit.  He  replied  that  he  did  not  believe  that  there  was  any 
cavalry  in  pursuit,  and  that  he  was  ordered  to  Goldsborough,  or  had 
to  go  to  Goldsborough  to  see  General  Gatlin.  I then  told  him  if  he  had 
to  go,  to  go  along.  He  then  said  to  me  that  I had  better  form  a rear 
guard  to  cover  the  retreat  and  take  command  of  it  myself,  and  that 
he  should  report  to  General  Gatlin  that  I had  done  so.  He  then  left. 
I then  ordered  20  men  to  the  bridge  and  rode  along  the  line  and  cau- 
tioned my  men  to  be  cool. 

During  our  halt  at  the  bridge  Captain  Hays  came  up  with  his  com- 
mand, and  I invited  the  captains  and  lieutenants  in  command  of  the 
companies,  with  Colonel  Crossan,  to  hold  a consultation,  and  their 
conclusion  was  that  it  would  be  better  for  us  to  proceed  on  to  Kinston 
that  night,  for  fear  of  the  enemy  coming  up  the  river  and  burning  the 
bridge  at  Kinston,  thereby  cutting  off  our  retreat.  I then  ordered 
Captain  Hays  to  take  command  of  the  rear  guard  and  I took  command 
of  the  front  myself.  We  continued  our  retreat  to  Kinston,  arriving 
there  between  11  and  12  o’clock  at  night. 

All  the  officers  under  my  command,  so  far  as  I could  discover,  obeyed 
my  orders  promptly  and  acted  with  coolness. 

I have  submitted  one  report  showing  the  loss  of  my  horses  and  bag- 
gage. Since  that  time  I succeeded  in  recovering  several  of  my  horses 
that  were  missing. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

S.  B.  SPRUILL, 

Colonel  Nineteenth  Regiment  North  Carolina  State  Troops. 

Brig.  Gen.  L.  O’B.  Branch,  Kinston , N.  C. 


No.  24. 

Report  of  Col.  Zebulon  B.  Vance , Twenty-sixth  North  Carolina  Infantry . 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-sixth  Regt.  North  Carolina  Vols., 

Kinston , N.  C .,  March  17,  1862. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report,  in  accordance  with  military 
usage,  the  share  of  my  command  in  the  operations  of  last  Friday. 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


255 


While  in  temporary  command  of  the  post  of  New  Berne,  on  Thursday, 
my  regiment  was  ordered  to  Croatan  works,  under  command  of  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Burgwyn,  to  assist  Colonel  Sinclair’s  regiment  should 
the  enemy  land  below  those  works. 

Learning  soon  after  that  Colonel  Campbell  was  at  his  post,  I instantly 
transferred  to  him  my  temporary  command  and  proceeded  to  Croatan 
to  assume  command  of  my  regiment.  When  near  there  I met  Colonel 
Sinclair  retreating,  who  informed  me  that  the  enemy  were  landing  in 
force  at  Fisher’s  Landing,  and  nearer  still  to  the  works  I met  Colonel 
Campbell,  who  had  just  ordered  my  regiment  to  take  the  cars  and  re- 
turn to  Fort  Thompson.  Before  my  return  they  had  been  posted  by 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Burgwyn  in  the  series  of  redans  constructed  by  me, 
on  the  right  of  the  railroad,  in  the  rear  of  Bullen’s  Branch,  extendiug 
from  the  railroad  to  the  swamp,  about  500  yards  from  the  road,  by 
Weathersby’s. 

At  this  road,  as  you  will  remember,  I had  constructed  the  night  be- 
fore a breastwork  commanding  the  passage  of  the  swamp,  with  the 

assistance  of  Mr. Hawks,  a gentleman  whose  skill  in  engineering, 

untiring  energy,  and  zeal  I take  pleasure  in  noticing  favorably $ and 
there  was  placed  a section  of  Captain  Brem’s  artillery,  lieutenant  Will- 
iams commanding,  and  Captain  McRae’s  company  of  infantry,  with  a 
portion  of  the  companies  of  Captains  Hays  and  Thomas,  Second  North 
Carolina  Cavalry,  dismounted. 

About  2 o’clock  Friday  morning,  in  compliance  with  orders  received, 
I pushed  companies  B,  E,  and  K of  my  right  wing  across  the  small 
swamp  alluded  to,  so  as  to  make  my  extreme  right  rest  on  the  battery 
at  the  Weathersby  road. 

This  was  our  position  on  Friday  morning,  which  remained  unchanged 
during  the  day,  except  that  two  companies  of  the  Thirty-third  Regi- 
ment, under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hoke,  came  to  my  assistance  about  9 
o’clock,  which  were  placed  in  the  redans  vacated  by  my  right  com- 
panies which  were  thrown  beyond  the  swamp.  You  will  perceive  that 
my  forces  covered  almost  as  much  ground  as  all  the  rest  of  our  troops 
together.  Taking  my  own  position  near  the  center,  a little  nearer  to 
the  right,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Burgwyn,  about  whose  position  I 
was  considerably  uneasy,  owing  to  the  unfinished  state  of  our  works  there, 
I placed  the  left  under  the  command  of  Major  Carmichael  and  awaited 
the  engagement.  It  began  on  my  left  wing  about  7.50  o’clock,  extend- 
ing toward  my  right  by  degrees  until  about  8.30  o’clock,  when  all  the 
troops  in  my  command  were  engaged  so  far  as  the  swamp  referred  to. 
The  severest  fighting  was  on  my  extreme  left,  the  enemy  advancing 
under  shelter  of  the  woods  to  within  easy  range  of  our  lines.  When- 
ever they  left  the  woods  and  entered  among  the  fallen  timber  of  the 
swamp  in  our  front  they  were  driven  back  in  confusion  by  the  most 
deadly  and  well-directed  fire  from  our  lines  who,  with  the  greatest  cool- 
ness, watched  for  their  appearance. 

The  fight  was  kept  up  until  about  12  o’clock,  when  information  was 
brought  to  me  by  Capt.  J.  T.  Young,  my  quartermaster,  who  Jbarely 
escaped  with  life  in  getting  to  me,  that  the  enemy  in  great  force  had 
turned  my  left  by  the  railroad  track  at  Wood’s  brick-yard,  had  pil- 
laged my  camp,  were  firing  in  reverse  on  my  left  wing,  and  were 
several  hundred  yards  up  the  railroad  between  me  and  New  Berne ; 
also  that  all  the  troops  on  the  field  were  in  full  retreat,  except  my  com- 
mand. This  being  so,  there  was  no  alternative  left  me  but  to  order  an 
immediate  retreat  or  be  completely  surrounded  by  an  overwhelming 
force.  Without  hesitation  I gave  the  order.  My  men  jumped  out  of 


256 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


the  trenches,  rallied,  and  formed  in  the  woods  without  panic  or  confu- 
sion, and,  having  first  sent  a messenger  with  an  order  to  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Burgwyn  to  follow  with  the  forces  on  the  right,  Ave  struck 
across  the  Weathersby  road  for  Bryce’s  Creek,  with  the  intention  of 
getting  into  the  Pollocksville  road.  On  arriving  at  the  creek  we  found 
only  one  small  boat,  capable  of  carrying  only  three  men,  in  which  to 
pass  over.  The  creek  here  is  too  deep  to  ford  and  about  75  yards 
wide.  Some  plunged  in  and  swam  over,  and,  swimming  over  myself,  I 
rode  down  to  Captain  Whitford’s  house,  on  the  Trent,  and  through  the 
kindness  of  Mr.  Kit  Foy,  a citizen,  procured  three  more  small  boats, 
carrying  one  on  our  shoulders  from  the  Trent,  with  which  we  hurried 
up  to  the  crossing.  In  the  mean  time  Lieutenant-Colonel  Burgwyn 
arrived  with  the  forces  of  the  right  wing  in  excellent  condition,  and 
assisted  me  with  the  greatest  coolness  and  efficiency  in  getting  the 
troops  across,  which  after  four  hours  of  hard  labor  and  the  greatest 
anxiety  we  succeeded  in  doing.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Burgwyn  saw  the 
last  man  over  before  he  entered  the  boat.  I regret  to  say  that  three 
men  were  drowned  in  crossing. 

I must  here  mention  favorably  the  good  conduct  of  the  troops  under 
these  trying  circumstances,  a large  Yankee  force  being  drawn  up  in 
ATiew  of  our  scouts  about  1 mile  away  and  their  skirmishers  appearing 
just  as  the  rear  got  over. 

Musician  B.  F.  Johnson,  Company  B,  deserves  particular  mention 
for  his  exertions,  having  ferried  over  the  greater  portion  of  the  troops 
himself,  assisted  by  a negro  boy. 

Once  over,  we  were  joined  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hoke,  Thirty-third 
Regiment,  with  a large  portion  of  his  command,  and  took  the  road  for 
Trenton.  We  marched  night  and  day  stopping  at  no  time  for  rest  or 
sleep  more  than  four  hours. 

We  arrived  at  this  place  safely  at  noon  on  the  16th.  The  loyalty 
and  hospitality  of  the  citizens  greatly  facilitated  our  march,  furnishing 
us  cheerfully  with  provisions,  wagons,  shelter,  and  guides. 

I regret  to  say  that  many  of  our  men,  despairing  of  the  boats  at  the 
creek  and  determined  not  to  be  taken,  threw  away  their  guns  to  swim 
OATer ; a serious  loss  to  our  Government,  but  scarcely  blamable  under 
the  circumstances. 

This  concludes  the  narration  of  the  principal  matters  connected  with 
my  command  during  the  engagement  and  retreat.  The  number  of  my 
killed  and  wounded  has  not  yet  been  ascertained.  Our  baggage,  of 
course,  was  lost,  but  our  sick  were  safely  brought  away. 

It  remains  for  me  to  speak  of  the  noble  dead  we  left  upon  the  field. 
Maj.  A.  B.  Carmichael  fell  about  11  a.  m.,  by  a shot  through  the  head, 
while  gallantly  holding  his  post  on  the  left  under  a most  galling  fire. 
A braver,  nobler  soldier  never  fell  on  field  of  battle.  Generous  and 
open-hearted  as  he  was  brave  and  chivalrous,  he  was  endeared  to  the 
whole  regiment.  Honored  be  his  memory.  Soon  after  Capt.  W.  P. 
Martin,  of  Company  H,  also  fell  near  the  regimental  colors.  Highly 
respected  as  a man,  braATe  and  determined  as  a soldier,  he  was  equally 
regretted  by  his  command  and  all  who  knew  him.  The  Twenty-sixth 
Regiment  are  justly  proud  of  their  glorious  fall.  The  fate  of  Captain 
Rand,  of  Company  D,  is  yet  unknown.  When  last  seen  he  was  almost 
surrounded  by  a large  force ; but,  disdaining  to  fly  or  surrender,  he  was 
fighting  desperately  with  Lieutenant  Yinson  and  a large  portion  of  his 
company,  who  refused  to  leave  him.  Lieutenant  Porter,  of  Company 
A,  was  also  left  behind  wounded.  Capt.  A.  H.  McMillan  was  badly 
wounded,  but  got  away  safely. 


^HAP.XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


257 


In  regard  to  the  behavior  of  my  regiment  generally,  I am  scarcely 
willing  to  mention  particular  instances  of  gallantry  where  all  did  their 
duty.  Observing  a large  portion  of  the  regiment  myself,  and  making 
diligent  inquiry  as  to  the  rest,  I could  learn  of  but  one  man  in  all  my 
command  who  remembered  that  he  had  legs  until  after  the  command 
co  retreat  was  given.  They  were  the  last  of  our  troops  to  leave  the 
field. 

I cannot  conclude  this  report  without  mentioning  in  terms  of  the 
highest  praise  the  spirit  of  determination  and  power  of  endurance 
evinced  by  the  troops  during  the  hardships  and  sufferings  of  our 
march.  Drenched  with  rain,  blistered  feet,  without  sleep,  many  sick 
and  wounded,  and  almost  naked,  they  toiled  on  through  the  day  and 
all  the  weary  watches  of  the  night  without  murmuring,  cheerfully  and 
with  subordination,  evincing  most  thoroughly  those  high  qualities  in 
adversity  which  military  men  learn  to  value  still  more  than  courage 
upon  the  field. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Z.  B.  VANCE, 

Colonel , Commanding  Twenty-sixth  North  Carolina  Vols. 

General  L.  O’B.  Branch, 

Commanding  District  of  Pamlico. 


No.  25. 

Report  of  Maj.  John  A.  Gilmer , jr .,  Twenty -seventh  North  Carolina 

Infantry. 

Kinston,  N.  C.,  March  16,  1862. 

Sir:  I most  respectfully  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
borne  in  the  engagement  of  the  14th  instant  at  the  breastworks  adjoin- 
ing Eort  Thompson,  N.  C.,  by  the  Twenty-seventh  Regiment  North 
Carolina  troops,  then  under  my  command : 

On  the  morning  of  the  13th,  pursuant  to  orders  from  your  headquar- 
ters, I marched  the  Twenty-seventh  Regiment  to  the  river  bank,  about 
100  yards  above  Eort  Thompson,  arriving  about  an  hour  before  day- 
break. Forming  the  regiment  in  line  of  battle  at  that  point  I awaited 
orders. 

About  7 o’clock  I received  orders  to  retire  a short  distance  toward 
the  river,  to  avoid  any  shot  and  shell  that  might  be  thrown  in  the 
direction  of  Eort  Thompson.  The  regiment  was  immediately  moved  a 
short  distance  to  the  left  and  rear. 

While  in  this  position  I received  orders  to  march  the  regiment  to 
the  breastworks  and  line  the  same  on  the  left  near  Fort  Thompson, 
which  was  immediately  done.  The  regiment  remained  (covering  the 
breastworks,  principally  in  one  rank,  for  the  distance  of  300  or  400 
yards  from  Fort  Thompson)  all  the  day  and  night  of  the  13th $ were 
aroused  and  placed  in  position  at  the  works  twice  during  the  night. 
Numbers  of  shell  and  shot  were  thrown  from  the  gunboats  of  the 
enemy  during  the  evening  of  the  13th,  most  of  which,  however,  passed 
beyond  the  works. 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th  the  regiment  was  again  placed  in  position 
to  await  the  approach  of  the  enemy,  whom  I supposed  to  be  in  force  in 
the  woods  in  front  of  the  works.  I was  informed  by  Captain  Barden, 
whose  company  had  been  sent  out  the  evening  before  as  a portion  of 
17  R r — VOL  IX 


258 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


the  picket  guard,  that  the  enemy  was  advancing  on  the  county  roac 
to  our  right. 

About  6.30  or  7 a.  m.  the  fire  of  the  enemy  began  beyond  our  righ 
and  continued  vigorously  during  the  entire  engagement.  The  fire  was 
immediately  returned  by  the  artillery  stationed  beyond  the  right  o 
the  Twenty- seventh  and  continued  unabated.  I commanded  the  regi 
ment  to  retain  their  fire  until  ordered  to  fire  by  me. 

A short  time  after  the  firing  began  on  the  right  the  bombardmen 
again  began  from  the  gunboats  of  the  enemy,  directed  principally  to 
ward  Fort  Thompson  and  the  portion  of  the  breastworks  behinc 
which  the  Twenty-seventh  was  stationed.  Thus  situated,  the  regimen 
manfully  and  cheerfully  sustained  the  shower  of  shell  and  shot  fron 
the  gunboats  for  two  and  a half  hours,  during  which  but  1 man  wai 
killed  and  3 stunned. 

Between  10  and  11  a.  m.  I discovered  that  the  troops  stationed  im 
mediately  on  the  right  of  the  Twenty-seventh  were  falling  back,  whicl 
movement  I discovered  was  being  followed  by  two  or  three  companies 
of  the  Twenty-seventh,  on  the  right.  I immediately  hastened  to  m} 
right  and  ordered  the  two  retreating  companies  back  to  the  trenches 
I then  gave  my  entire  command  the  order  to  fire  by  file,  designating  a 
the  same  time  the  direction  in  which  I perceived  the  enemy  advancing 
in  great  numbers. 

I then  hastened  to  meet  you,  whom  I perceived  advancing  along  thi 
lines  to  the  left.  You  informed  me  that  our  right  had  been  turned  am 
I must  fall  back.  I then  ordered  the  regiment  to  retire,  which  was  dom 
in  tolerable  order  by  most  of  the  companies  on  the  left.  I orderet 
those  companies  which  were  together  to  march  through  Camp  Gatlii 
to  the  railroad  bridge,  where  the  greater  part  of  the  right  assembled 
and  halted.  I hastened  then  to  the  left,  beyond  Camp  Fisher,  to  fin< 
out  what  were  the  plans  of  our  troops,  supposing  that  a stand  was  t< 
be  made  at  that  point.  Finding  our  forces  retreating,  I returned  t< 
the  right  and  passed  with  them  over  the  bridge  to  the  railroad  depot 
where  the  companies  were  again  formed,  agreeably  to  orders  I had 
received  from  the  assistant  adjutant-general. 

At  the  depot  we  were  ordered  to  fall  back  still  farther,  when  I placet 
the  regiment  on  the  march  toward  Kinston,  under  command  of  my  senio 
captain.  I joined  the  regiment  again  where  the  railroad  is  crossed  b; 
the  county  road  above  New  Berne,  and  a^ain  joined  them  at  Tuscarora 
whence  I proceeded  with  them  to  Kinston,  partly  on  foot  and  partb 
by  means  of  the  cars  which  were  sent  back  to  take  us  up. 

From  the  reports  of  the  captains  of  my  command  I obtained  the  fol 
lowing  particulars.  There  were  in — 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing 

Company  A _ _ __  __ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

2 

Companj7  B 

Company  C 

Company  D 

<N  CO 

Company  E 

1 

Company  E,  all  present 

Company  G- 

. ^ 

t 

Company  H 

Total 

4 

8 

5 

* Slightly  injured.  t Reported. 

Company  I.— The  majority  of  this  company  followed  the  captain  to  Jones  County. 

Company  K. — Two  commanding  officers  and  all  the  company  hut  30  supposed  to  be  in  Goldsborough. 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


259 


The  promptness  and  cheerfulness  with  which  the  officers  under  my 
command  obeyed  every  order  and  the  courage  with  which  they  took 
and  maintained  every  position  assigned  them  I cannot  too  favorably 
notice.  In  the  retreat  I discovered  that  a few  men  in  each  company 
had  either  lost  or  abandoned  their  guns  and  cartridge  boxes. 

Very  respectfully,  j A GILMEK,  ,,R„ 

Major , Comdg.  Twenty-seventh  Regt.  North  Carolina  Troops. 


Col.  Charles  C.  Lee, 
Commanding 


Brigade , North  Carolina  Troops. 


P(  g, It  is,  perhaps,  proper  for  me  to  add  that  about  30  of  the 

Twenty-seventh  were  detailed  to  operate  Latham’s  battery  in  conjunc- 
tion with  Captain  Latham’s  company.  These  30  men  were  m the 
hottest  of  the  engagement,  and  several  of  them  seriously  injured  but 
none  killed. 


No.  26. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Robert  F.  Rohe , Thirty-third  North  Carolina 

Infantry. 

Hdors.  Thirty-third  North  Carolina  Regtment, 

Kinston , N.  <7.,  March  18,  1862. 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  your  orders  I respectfully  submit  the  fol- 
lowing report  concerning  our  orders  received  from  you  and  the  hction 
of  our  regiment  afterward: 

After  arriving  near  the  breastworks  opposite  Fort  Thompson  and 
taking  up  camp  on  Thursday  evening  (13th)  we  were  ordered  by  you 
to  remain  in  that  position  for  further  orders. 

At  daylight  on  the  following  morning  you  in  person  ordered  Colonel 
Avery  to  take  position  in  a line  of  battle  about  400  yards  to  the  rear 
of  the  brick-yards,  with  our  right  wing  resting  upon  the  railroad,  and 
were  to  remain  in  that  position  for  further  orders,  we  constituting  the 
reserve;  and  soon  after  we  had  formed  our  regiment  and  had  them  to 
take  off  their  knapsacks,  in  order  to  be  ready  to  move  with  quickness 
to  any  point  we  might  be  ordered,  we  were  ordered  to  move  forward 
about  100  yards  immediately  to  the  rear  of  your  position,  which  in 
the  opinion  of  the  field  officers  of  our  regiment  was  a very  exposed 
one  and  one  well  selected,  as  from  that  point  the  movements  of  the 
enemy  could  best  be  seen.  Shortly  after  we  reached  that  point  an 
order  was  received  from  you,  through  Colonel  Robinson  to  Colonel 
Avery,  to  send  his  right  wing,  in  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Hoke,  composing  five  companies,  to  occupy  the  intrenchments  on  the 
right  of  the  railroad.  I immediately  faced  the  right  wing  to  the  right 
and  moved  off  at  a double-quick,  going  through  the  woods  and  down 
the  ravines,  in  order  to  protect  the  men  as  much  as  possible,  as  a for- 
ward movement  down  the  railroad  would  have  greatly  exposed  the 
command. 

I halted  them  in  a ravine,  ordered  four  companies  to  lie  down,  and 
intended  to  place  them  in  the  works  by  company,  as  I could  in  that 
way  save  the  lives  of  many,  as  the  firing  was  very  hot  at  that  point. 
After  placing  Company  A (Captain  Cowan)  in  position,  and  having 
returned  and  was  placing  Captain  Parks’  company  in  position,  I 


260 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


received  an  order  from  you  to  return  with  the  command.  I imme- 
diately faced  Captain  Parks’  company  about,  and  was  returning  with 
the  four  companies,  when  I was  met  by  Colonel  Avery  and  Major 
Lewis  with  the  remaining  five  companies,  which  composed  the  left 
wing,  coming  up  in  line  of  battle  and  in  fine  order,  and  was  ordered 
by  Colonel  Avery  to  face  about  and  join  him.  I did  so,  and  the  regi- 
ment moved  up  to  the  scene  of  action  in  fine  style,  Colonel  Avery  in 
command  of  the  center,  I of  the  right  wing,  and  Major  Lewis  of  the  left. 

Colonel  Avery  gave  the  command  to  fire  before  we  reached  the  in- 
trenchments,  as  the  enemy  were  firing  upon  us  and  were  in  full  force 
upon  the  top  of  the  hill  immediately  across  the  swamp.  Our  fire 
seemed  to  have  great  effect,  as  the  enemy  scampered.  Major  Lewis 
then  moved  immediately  to  the  right  of  the  railroad  with  several  com- 
panies and  engaged  the  enemy  from  that  time  until  after  12  o’clock. 
He  behaved  most  gallantly;  was  in  the  hottest  part  of  the  whole 
battle-field.  He  repulsed  the  enemy  time  and  again,  and  twice  charged 
them  with  detachments  of  companies,  and  each  time  made  them  flee. 

Our  loss  was  greater  at  that  point  than  any  other,  as  he  had  to  fight 
to  his  front,  right,  and  left,  but  still  maintained  his  position,  fighting 
them  against  greater  numbers.  No  one  could  have  behaved  with  more 
coolness,  bravery,  and  determination  than  he,  and  he  deserves  the 
praise  of  every  true  countryman  for  his  actions.  He  reports  his  men 
as  having  done  their  duty  in  every  manner. 

Colonel  Avery  was  in  command  of  the  center,  on  top  of  the  second 
hill  from  the  railroad,  encouraging  his  men  both  by  actions  and  words. 
He  was  perfectly  cool,  and  never  did  man  act  better  upon  the  battle- 
field than  he.  His  fire  was  very  destructive,  and  remarked  that  if  he 
had -his  regiment  together  he  would  charge  the  rascals  over  the  fallen 
timber.  He  received  a shot  through  the  top  of  his  cap,  and  coolly 
remarked,  “Boys,  they  liked  to  have  gotten  me,”  but  heeded  it  not, 
and  went  on  cheering  his  men. 

I was  immediately  at  his  right,  and  finding  the  enemy  were  getting 
in  strong  force  upon  our  right  and  were  going  to  turn  our  right  flank,  as 
there  were  no  troops  between  our  regiment  and  the  left  of  Colonel 
Yance’s  companies  upon  the  right  flank  of  the  whole  troops,  a distance 
of  a quarter  of  a mile,  I moved  quickly  with  Captain  Parks’  company, 
which  I had  thrown  in  the  woods  in  a ravine  a,s  a reserve  to  our  regi- 
ment, with  Lieutenant  Poteat  adjutant,  who  ‘displayed  great  coolness 
during  the  action,  and  finding  the  enemy  in  great  force  did  not  expose 
my  weakness  by  firing,  but  sent  a messenger  to  Colonel  Avery  for 
another  company.  He  immediately  sent  me  Captain  Kesler’s  company. 
I ordered  the  whole  to  fire,  which  did  great  execution,  as  the  enemy 
fell  and  fled,  but  soon  appeared  again,  and  again  we  drove  them  back,  but 
soon  they  again  appeared  in  strong  force  and  engaged  us,  which  con- 
tinued until  12.30  o’clock.  At  12.15  o’clock  I saw  the  United  States 
flag  flying  upon  one  of  our  works,  but  saw  Colonel  Avery  still  fighting, 
and  I,  being  very  busily  engaged  with  the  enemy,  did  not  know  that 
Colonel  Avery  and  Major  Lewis  had  fallen  back  until  I saw  the  enemy 
upon  my  left  with  several  regiments  (which  force  caused  Colonel  Avery 
and  Major  Lewis  to  fall  back,  as  their  left  was  completely  turned  and 
the  enemy  was  getting  to  their  rear),  and  about  50  yards  to  the  rear  of 
the  position  Colonel  Avery  had  occupied.  I then  saw  for  the  first  time 
we  were  driven  back,  and  ordered  the  men  under  my  command  to  fall 
back,  but  to  do  so  in  order.  We  were  hotly  fired  at  when  we  fell  back. 
I fell  back  some  distance  and  intended  to  unite  with  Colonel  Avery  and 
Major  Lewis,  but  found  the  troops  had  continued  to  fall  back,  so  kept 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C. 


261 


on  and  intended  to  join  my  regiment  at  the  bridge,  but  found  it  on  fire, 
so  had  to  cross  Bryce’s  Creek ; and  on  gettingover  learned  our  troops  had 
made  no  stand  at  1ST ew  Berne ; continued  the  retreat  to  Trenton,  in  con- 
nection with  Colonel  Yance,  who  crossed  the  creek  with  me,  and  learn- 
ing at  Trenton  our  troops  were  making  a stand  at  Kinston,  made  a 
forced  march,  and  reached  that  point  on  Sunday  morning  about  10 
o’clock,  which  made  a march  of  50  miles  in  about  thirty-six  hours. 

Captain  Engelhard,  quartermaster,  Captain  Gibson,  commissary,  and 
our  surgeons,  Drs.  Baker  and  Shoffner,  all  did  their  duty  very  well  in- 
deed. Dr.  Shaffner  was  of  great  assistance  to  me  on  the  march. 

We  entered  the  field  with  614  men,  but  lost  in  killed,  wounded,  and 
missing  196.  Among  this  number  we  have  reason  to  believe  our  loss 
in  killed  and  wounded  is  greater  than  the  number  taken  as  prisoners. 
Our  brave  colonel  is  a prisoner. 

Captain  Cowan,  Company  A,  was  first  ordered  into  the  fight  and  sus- 
tained a very  heavy  loss.  His  officers  acted  most  bravely,  and  Private 
David  Phifer  is  highly  spoken  of  for  his  bravery  before  he  was  killed. 
He  was  killed  while  carrying  a message  from  Major  Lewis  to  Colonel 
Avery.  Private  Dolchite  is  also  spoken  of  in  the  captain’s  report  for 
having  thrown  away  his  clothing  in  order  to  swim  the  creek  and  save 
his  gun.  He  is  a boy  of  sixteen  years  of  age. 

Captain  Jenkins,  Company  B,  is  reported,  as  also  His  officers  and 
men,  for  having  acted  well  in  every  particular. 

Captain  Kesler,  Company  C,  and  Lieutenant  Corzine  and  men,  acted 
well.  Lieutenant  Patterson  displayed  fear.  All  the  officers  and  men 
behaved  well  except  Captain  Parker,  who  left  the  scene  of  action  too 


soon. 

Captain  McIntyre,  in  the  retreat,  ordered  his  men  to  go  home,  and 
Lieutenant  Rayle  did  not  report  himself  at  all  the  morning  the  regi- 
ment left  for  the  engagement.  Sergeant  Babb  and  Private  Daniel 
Webb  are  spoken  of  by  Lieutenant  Gatling  as  having  acted  well. 

Very  respectfully,  yours, 

E.  F.  HOKE, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel . 


General  L.  O’B.  Branch. 


Ho.  27. 

Report  of  Col  James  Sinclair , Thirty-fifth  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Thirty-fifth  Regt.  North  Carolina  Troops, 

Kinston , W.  (7.,  March  19,  1862. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  on  Wednesday,  the 
12th  instant,  at  4 p.  m.,  I received  orders  to  march  down  to  Fisher’s 
Landing,  to  oppose  the  landing  of  the  enemy  at  that  place,  reported  to 
be  in  force  with  his  fleet  down  the  river. 

I left  Hew  Berne,  according  to  orders,  at  6.30  p.  m.,  with  my  command, 
by  railroad,  and  arrived  at  the  point  designated  at  8 o’clock  that  night 
about  9 miles  below  the  town.  At  the  time  I arrived  there  was  suffi- 
cient moonlight  to  enable  me  to  see  that  the  enemy  in  heavy  force  was 
not  far  distant.  I could  distinctly  hear  the  music  of  his  bands  and 
even  the  singing  of  his  men  on  the  fleet.  Making  Fisher’s  Landing  my 
center,  I posted  pickets  on  each  side  of  the  landing,  extending  3 miles 


262 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


from  my  center.  I posted  the  balance  of  my  regiment  along  the  rifle 
pits  and  breastworks  guarding  the  landing,  holding  one  company  in  re- 
serve at  the  landing  proper.  During  the  night  a heavy  rain  set  in, 
thoroughly  drenching  my  men,  who  were  without  cover  or  shelter. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  13th  the  enemy  commenced  landing  in 
heavy  force  some  2 or  3 miles  below  my  pickets.  A company  of  cav- 
alry and  a regiment  which  I was  promised  would  support  me  did  not 
make  their  appearance;  consequently,  having  had  orders  to  oppose  the 
debarkation  of  the  enemy  at  Fisher’s  Landing,  I was  unable  to  prevent 
him  below.  By  this  means  the  Croatan  breastworks  fell  into  his  hands. 
During  the  landing  of  the  enemy  his  gunboats  continued  shelling  the 
woods. 

At  10  a.  m.  he  approached  Fisher’s  Landing  with  his  boats,  throw- 
ing shell  and  canister  as  he  came,  steaming  sufficiently  nigh  to  hear  the 
conversation  of  his  men  on  board.  About  this  time  Colonel  Campbell, 
of  the  Seventh  Begiment,  my  senior  officer,  made  his  appearance  on  the 
ground  (not  with  his  regiment,  however),  and,  having  carefully  sur- 
veyed my  position  and  the  force  of  the  enemy,  ordered  me  to  fall  back 
into  the  woods  beyond  reach  of  the  enemy’s  fire,  which  I did,  with  my 
command  in  good  order,  by  way  of  Fisher’s  avenue.  In  retiring  I had 
3 of  my  men  wounded  by  the  enemy’s  shells,  one  of  whom  has  since 
been  reported  dead. 

After  forming  in  the  woods  near  the  railroad  Colonel  Campbell  or- 
dered me  to  fall  back  on  the  Fort  Thompson  intrenchments,  where  I was 
ordered  to  take  position  on  the  right  of  the  Seventh  Begiment  North 
Carolina  troops.  Here,  under  a heavy  rain,  we  remained  all  night  of 
the  13th  instant,  without  food,  after  having  been  all  the  night  previous 
exposed  to  a continuous  rain,  nearly  three  hours  of  the  day  exposed  to 
the  enemy’s  fire,  besides  marching  for  several  hours,  having  tasted  no 
food  from  the  evening  we  left  New  Berne.  Posted  on  my  right  was  the 
Militia,  resting  on  the  railroad  by  the  brick-yard,  where  the  enemy 
afterward  made  his  strongest  demonstration. 

According  to  the  disposition  made  on  the  morning  of  the  14th  instant 
before  the  engagement  took  place,  my  command  was  divided  by  a sec- 
tion of  Brem’s  battery  and  Captain  Whitehurst’s  independent  company 
separating  my  right  wing  from  my  center  and  left  wing.  On  my  right 
a space  of  about  40  yards  intervening  [between]  the  Militia  and  the 
railroad  was  still  left  vacant ; besides,  a trench  that  ran  parallel  with 
the  railroad  of  about  60  or  80  yards  was  unoccupied  by  our  troops. 

In  this  condition  of  affairs  the  battle  opened  about  7.30  a.  m.  by  the 
firing  of  a gun  from  the  enemy’s  field  batteries  planted  in  front  of  the 
old  county  road,  which  fire  was  replied  to  by  Brem’s  and  Latham’s 
batteries.  Immediately  the  enemy  opened  with  musketry  from  the 
county  road  above  referred  to,  which  was  replied  to  by  my  regiment, 
with  others  to  the  left.  The  enemy  advanced  twice  upon  the  breast- 
works occupied  by  me,  which  advances  were  repelled  each  time. 

At  10  a.  m.  he  appeared  in  force  on  the  railroad  and  on  the  right  of 
my  position,  and,  the  Militia  having  retired  and  the  trench  above  re- 
ferred to  being  occupied  by  him  in  force,  as  also  were  the  buildings  in 
the  brick-yard,  I found  my  command  completely  flanked. 

At  this  time,  however,  my  second  in  command,  without  consulting 
me,  ordered  four  of  my  companies  on  the  right  wing  to  fall  back,  which 
I rallied  and  ordered  back  to  their  post,  which  they  immediately  did, 
and  held  it  for  some  time.  The  fire  of  the  enemy  becoming  more  gall- 
ing on  my  right  flank,  they  again  retired,  by  command  of  my  lieuten- 


XX.l 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE, 


N.  C. 


263 


mt-colonel,  who,  with  one  company  and  portions  of  other  companies 
*tmy  command,  formed  w .rear  ^ Colonel  Campbell,  my 

■^si^Trs^rk^  s ssr&tfs 

and  the  section  of 

» bS^Si  «. &»%$*>», 

erafof^my  me^'vrere^^iiltol^d^®®^1®^^1^®^' 

Whfn°Vlf vard^’butsoon  my  men  rallied°and  retired  in  perfect  order 

^ColonelTane’s  regiment,  having  arrived  at  this  time,  relieved  me, 
i t oni  hapir  nnnn  New  Berne  by  the  railroad  bndgo. 

and  I lell  back  upon  JNew  x>eiu  j denot  waiting  for  orders, 

charge  some  fragments- of  his  * , This  ^ did  in  perfect  order, 

3 £»“fb,S  wer.  retiring  J>»?  “« ’SSg’jS* 

Krissssl^l 

ducted  my  regimet  Regiments  and  fragments  from 

•nSrS:.*  ,«»rg.nh.  14th  inatan.,  and  b»k 

“SSSSStTbSS^ «»  exception  above » 

“i  s“h»“  «x"r..?’iS «™ » o“d  Adj,. 

"SS&S3&.  battle  , One  .»« lie—  Bale,  and  4p,„.«, 

Tb»^.«SS&,sSg^ 

Colonel,  Commanding. 


No.  28. 


Report  of  Col.  Charles  C.  Lee,  Thirty-seventh  North  Carolina  Infantry. 

March  36,  1862. 

General  : In  compliance  with  your  orders  I herewith  submit  respect- 


264  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA.  [Chap.  XX 

fully  to  you  a report  of  the  left  wing  at  the  battle  at  Johnston’s  Cross- 
Roads  : 

On  Wednesday  afternoon,  at  about  5 o’clock,  I received  from  you 
notice  that  the  enemy  were  advancing  up  the  river,  and  later  the  same 
information  was  received  by  Captain  Herring.  I rode  down  to  the 
batteries  and  ordered  everything  in  readiness. 

At  10  p.  m.  I got  notice  from  you  of  my  command,  and  immediately 
issued  orders  to  all  to  be  in  readiness  and  gave  them  appropriate  in- 
structions. Under  these  Captain  Brem  packed  up  his  baggage  and  it 
has  been  saved.  Captain  Brem  was  afterward  transferred  to  Colonel 
Campbell’s  command,  and  will  report  through  him. 

Thursday  the  enemy  spent  the  day  in  shelling  the  woods  below,  and 
toward  evening  some  of  the  men  built  fires  (which  were  immediately  ex- 
tinguished), when  our  lines  were  shelled  for  about  one  and  a half  hours 
without  injury  to  any  one. 

About  8 p.  m.  notice  was  sent  you  of  signals  on  our  right  flank. 

About  7.30  a.  m.  on  the  14th  we  fired  a 12-pounder  gun  at  the  enemy 
and  a few  minutes  afterward  the  battle  commenced  in  earnest.  A warm 
attack  was  made  at  the  Beaufort  road $ but  Captain  Latham’s  artillery 
was  fired  with  such  precision  that  they  made  no  advance,  though  they 
kept  up  a constant  fire  here  during  the  whole  engagement.  The  piece  on 
the  left  hand  of  the  Beaufort  road  was  commanded  by  Captain  Latham 
in  person,  and  after  all  his  men  except  3 were  either  killed  ordangerouslv 
wounded  and  rendered  unfit  for  service,  the  piece  was  served  effect- 
ively for  some  twenty  minutes,  until  the  day  was  lost,  when  he  barely 
escaped.  After  the  attempt  on  the  Beaufort  road  the  foe  flanked  to  the 
right  and  moved  in  heavy  column  toward  our  left  flank ; but  having 
given  notice  to  Colonel  Crossan  of  their  approach,  he  opened  on  them 
with  grape  from  three  32-pounders  with  such  terrible  effect  that  after 
about  six  shots  they  fell  back ; and  though  they  kept  up  a constant 
and  warm  fire,  they  made  no  advance  toward  the  work. 

Some  time  after  this  the  firing  became  hotter,  when  I received  from 
fou  an  order  to  send  some  re-enforcements  to  Colonel  Campbell.  I 
ordered  the  left  wing  of  my  regiment  to  his  support  and  made  further 
arrangements  to  cover  my  own  flank.  The  men  of  the  Twenty-seventh 
and  Thirty- seventh  Regiments  did  not  fire  a shot  except  a few  who  were 
armed  with  long-range  rifles,  and  this  ominous  silence  was  properly 
appreciated.  The  men  of  these  regiments,  and  also  of  Fort  Thompson, 
appeared  always  cool  and  deliberate.  While  the  left  wing  of  the 
Thirty-seventh  moved  over  to  the  right  they  were  subjected  to  a galling 
fire  and  suffered  to  some  extent.  (See  inclosed  report  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Barbour.)  Major  Gilmer,  of  the  Twenty-seventh,  and  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Barbour,  of  the  Thirty-seventh,  moved  from  place  to  place 
within  the  limits  of  their  respective  commands,  and  by  their  presence 

and  example  encouraged  tlieir  commands  very  much.  One  piece the 

right  piece— in  Fort  Thompson,  which  bears  on  the  land,  was  dismounted, 
but  mounted  again  by  Captain  Herring  and  the  carriage  properly  re- 
paired. Five  men  in  the  tort  were  wounded  : none,  I believe,  danger- 
ously. 

Shortly  after  the  left  wing  of  the  Thirty-seventh  was  sent  to  Colonel 
Campbell’s  aid,  I observed  his  regiment  moving  rapidly  to  the  rear 
through  Colonel  Vance’s  camp.  I galloped  over  and  demanded  where 
they  were  going,  when  I was  informed  that  they  were  in  full  retreat.  I 
hastened  back  and  saw  the  enemy  advancing  upon  our  works.  Feel- 
ing assured  that  the  regiments  which  were  retreating  could  not  be  rallied, 

I ordered  my  command  to  fall  back,  and  passed  on  to  the  batteries  to 


Chap.  XX.] 


BATTLE  OF  NEW  BEENE,  N.  C. 


265 


look  after  them.  While  in  Fort  Thompson  (two  and  a half  minutes)  five 
shots  struck  the  upper  portion  of  the  right  flank  of  the  works  and  two 
shells  fell  within  the  works,  without  effect.  The  guns  were  all  spiked, 
hut  the  enemy  pressed  so  closely  that  there  was  not  time  to  blow  up 
the  magazine,  being  within  about  30  or  40  yards  when  we  had  spiked 
the  guns.  I then  went  to  the  other  batteries  and  had  the  guns  dis- 
mounted and  the  magazines  blown  up. 

In  blowing  up  the  magazine  at  Fort  Ellis,  Captain  Mayo  was  seri- 
ously (I  fear  dangerously)  wounded,  and  one  other  man.  All  the  men 
of  the  left  wing  were  saved,  and  retreated  over  to  New  Berne  in  tolera- 
ble order.  One  man  of  Colonel  Sloan’s  Twenty-seventh  Regiment  was 
killed. 

When  I crossed  over  to  New  Berne  I found  some  of  the  regiments 
had  passed  beyond,  and  I was  thus  prevented  from  carrying  out  your 
order  to  form  in  the  upper  part  of  the  town.  As  I advanced  up  the 
Trent  road  to  Kinston  I overtook  Colonel  Sinclair’s  regiment,  and  a 
foolish  report  having  got  afloat  that  the  enemy  had  landed  cavalry, 
which  were  in  pursuit,  I requested  and  obtained  from  Colonel  Sinclair 
a rear  guard,  which  I formed,  and  we  then  moved  on  to  the  railroad 
crossing,  where  it  was  merged  with  the  regiment,  and  proceeded  up  to 
Tuscarora. 

Lieut.  C.  H.  Brown,  of  Captain  Latham’s  battery,  was  on  several 
occasions  on  the  left  wing,  and  acted  with  great  coolness ; indeed, 
almost  with  foolhardiness.  Lieutenant  Nicholson,  my  adjutant,  and 
Mr.  Noble,  who  was  acting  as  my  aide,  also  displayed  coolness ; but  no 
occasion  for  gallantry  presented  itself  to  any  one  in  the  left  wing. 

I am,  general,  respectfully, 

CHARLES  C.  LEE, 

Col.  37 th  Regt.  North  Carolina  Troops , Comdg.  Left  Wing. 


No.  29. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  William  M.  Barbour , Thirty -seventh  North  Carolina 

Lnfantry. 


, , 1862. 

I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken  by 
the  Thirty-seventh  Regiment  in  the  recent  engagement  near  New 
Berne : 

Pursuant  to  orders  from  Brigadier-General  Branch  I moved  with  my 
command  at  3 o’clock  Thursday  morning  and  occupied  that  portion  of 
our  line  on  the  left  of  the  old  Beaufort  road.  During  the  day  shells 
were  thrown  frequently  from  the  enemy’s  gunboats  at  our  position 
without  any  damage  to  us. 

On  Friday  morning  about  daylight  the  enemy  appeared  in  full  force 
in  front  of  our  lines,  partially  concealed  by  the  woods,  and  immediately 
opened  a heavy  fire  of  artillery  and  inusketry  upon  us.  The  fire  was 
promptly  returned  by  Captain  Latham’s  battery,  stationed  in  and  near 
the  Beaufort  road,  with  great  effect.  Immediately  the  enemy  attempted 
a flank  movement  on  our  left,  for  the  purpose  of  storming  Fort  Thomp- 
son. This  movement  was  at  once  defeated  by  a destructive  fire  from 
the  laud  batteries  of  Fort  Thompson.  During  the  remaining  portion  of 
the  action  the  enemy  kept  up  an  incessant  fire  on  the  position  occupied 
by  my  command. 


266 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


A short  time  before  12  o’clock  I was  ordered  to  send  five  companies 
of  my  regiment  to  the  support  of  Colonel  Campbell’s  brigade,  which 
was  at  that  time  hard  pressed.  I immediately  moved  the  following 
companies  to  the  designated  point : Company  D,  under  Captain  Ash- 
craft $ Company  B,  under  Lieutenant  Cook  ; Company  E,  under  Lieu- 
tenant Farthing ; Company  C,  under  Lieutenant  Gillespie,  and  Com- 
pany K,  under  Captain  Rosse.  Great  credit  is  due  to  these  companies 
for  the  promptness  and  bravery  with  which  they  moved  under  a very 
heavy  fire  of  artillery  and  infantry  f&r  some  400  yards.  A short  time 
after  they  marched  to  the  designated  point  our  center  near  the  rail- 
road had  given  away.  After  a short  and  spirited  contest  these  com- 
panies were  ordered  by  Colonel  Campbell  to  retire,  which  was  done  in 
good  order. 

About  this  time  I observed  the  forces  toward  our  center  retreating, 
but  I considered  it  my  duty  to  hold  my  position  until  I was  ordered  to 
retreat.  Colonel  Lee  rode  toward  the  center  to  ascertain  the  meaning 
of  these  movements,  and  on  his  return  informed  me  that  the  center  was 
in  full  retreat,  and  directed  me  at  once  to  fall  back.  I at  once  pro- 
ceeded with  my  remaining  five  companies  toward  the  railroad  bridge, 
and  at  the  point  where  the  Beaufort  road  crosses  the  railroad  I found 
the  five  companies  which  had  been  sent  to  the  right  drawn  up  in  line 
of  battle  and  awaiting  the  arrival  of  the  remaining  five  companies.  I 
inquired  of  General  Branch  what  I should  do  with  my  regiment,  and 
was  directed  to  cross  the  railroad  bridge  and  form  in  New  Berne  across 
the  track.  As  soon  as  I reached  that  point  I found  this  impracticable, 
for  the  reason  that  the  houses  in  that  part  of  the  town  were  built  to  the 
water’s  edge,  and  I could  only  have  formed  a line  of  battle  some  15 
feet  in  length  ; I therefore  moved  my  regiment  to  the  depot  and  halted 
it.  I soon  afterward  saw  Colonel  Bobinson,  General  Branch’s  acting 
assistant  adjutant-general,  and  inquired  where  he  desired  me  to  move 
my  regiment.  He  directed  me  to  move  toward  Kinston.  I therefore 
marched  my  regiment  in  good  order  out  of  New  Berne  toward  Kinston. 
When  we  reached  the  point  where  the  Kinston  road  intersects  the  rail- 
road an  alarm  was  raised  by  some  of  the  cavalry  that  the  enemy’s  cav- 
alry were  in  pursuit.  Finding  a number  of  men  (not  in  my  command) 
throwing  away  their  guns,  1 rode  to  the  rear  and  informed  them  that  it 
was  a false  alarm,  and  begged  them  to  keep  the  road  and  act  like  men. 
I remained  at  that  point  until  near  sundown,  when  I proceeded  to  Tus- 
carora  Depot,  8 miles  from  New  Berne.  During  the  night  the  troops 
were  brought  by  railroad  to  Kinston. 

The  men  under  my  command  behaved  with  great  coolness  and  de- 
liberation during  the  entire  day,  retreated  in  good  order,  and  brought 
with  them  all  their  guns  and  ammunition.  We  could  easily  have  saved 
our  baggage  if  we  had  had  wagons,  but  having  only  two  small  vehicles, 
I knew  it  was  useless  to  attempt  it.  It  was,  however,  all  burned,  to 
prevent  it  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

When  our  regiment  was  ordered  to  retreat  the  enemy  had  crossed 
the  breastworks  in  the  center  and  in  three  minutes  would  have  had  us 
completely  cut  off. 

Most  of  the  missing  have  since  been  heard  from  and  will  rejoin  the 
regiment. # 

Bespectfuiiv,  yours, 

WILL.  M.  BARBOUR, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Thirty-seventh  Regiment,  A.  C.  Troops. 

* Nominal  list  of  casualties  omitted  ; embodied  in  tabular  statement,  p.  247. 


^P.  XX.]  BATTLE  OF  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C.  267 

No.  30. 

iport  of  Col.  H.  J.  B.  Clark,  Special  Battalion  North  Carolina  Militia . 

Hdqrs.  North  Carolina  Militia,  Special  Battalion, 

Kinston , N.  C.,  March  17,  1862. 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  your  instructions,  received  at  New  Berne 
).  m.  March  13,  to  report  to  Colonel  Campbell  at  his  headquarters, 
Fort  Thompson  breastworks,  I respectfully  report  that  I repaired 
rthwith  to  that  place,  accompanied  by  Maj.  Joseph  N.  Jones,  but  did 
t find  Colonel  Campbell. 

Major  Jones  called  at  Colonel  Vance’s  encampment  and  was  informed 
ere  that  Colonel  Campbell  had  gone  in  the  direction  of  New  Berne, 
•oceeding  thence  to  New  Berne,  by  way  of  Colonel  Lee’s  encampment, 
jnt  to  Colonel  Campbell’s  encampment,  and  reported,  in  his  absence, 
Lieut.  Col.  E.  G.  Haywood,  who  directed  me  to  report  for  duty  at 
e depot  of  the  Atlantic  and  North  Carolina  Bailroad  in  New  Berne 
the  following  day,  5 a.  m.  The  company  was  promptly  reported 
d left  New  Berne  at  8 a.  m.,  and  arriving  at  the  breastworks  was 
signed  position. 

On  the  following  morning,  March  14,  my  command  was  placed  inline 
battle,  numbering  264,  20  having  been  detailed  for  hospital  duty  and 
to  aid  Lieutenant  Hawks  in  mounting  cannon  on  the  right  of  the 
•eastworks.  These  last  were  forced  from  the  works  by  the  enemy’s 
iarpshooters  and  came  to  the  ranks  after  the  action  commenced. 

As  soon  as  the  firing  commenced  the  ground  in  front  of  me  was  so 
>scured  by  smoke  that  I could  see  but  a short  distance,  and  as  firing 
id  commenced  on  my  left  with  guns  of  longer  range,  as  soon  as  I 
lought  the  enemy  within  reach  of  my  guns  commenced  the  fire  by  file, 
hich  order  was  promptly  obeyed  with  coolness  and  determination, 
fter  firing  three  rounds  I commanded  the  fire  to  cease.  Soon  after 
ie  smoke  cleared  away  and  the  enemy  were  plainly  seen  drawn  up  in 
rce  on  our  right,  and  a company  of  sharpshooters  commenced  pouring 
fire  into  our  rear,  doing  considerable  execution  and  causing  confusion 
my  ranks,  but  an  order  to  rally  and  take  position  was  promptly 
)eyed,  and  calmness  restored  by  the  assurance  that  you  would  soon 
•nd  re-enforcements;  but  the  fire  was  continued  on  us  and  with 
doubled  energy,  while  they  (the  enemy)  crossed  the  railroad,  took 
issession  of  the  rifle  pits  on  our  right  and  rear,  and  planted  the  Stars 
id  Stripes. 

Previous  to  this,  however,  they  had  fired  upon  a reconnoitering  party 
sent  in  that  direction  and  upon  the  quartermaster  and  teamsters  I 
ad  sent  to  recover  the  ammunition. 

I at  one  time  intended  to  leave  the  breastworks  and  charge  upon  the 
lemy,  and  for  this  purpose  caused  bayonets  to  be  fixed ; but  when  I 
iw  the  sharpshooters  were  supported  by  so  large  a force  of  the  enemy, 
mcluded  that  such  attempt  would  result  in  great  loss  of  life  to  my 
)mmand  without  being  able  to  effect  corresponding  good  to  our  cause, 
id  that  a failure  might  have  an  evil  effect  on  others.  At  this  moment, 
id  just  as  Colonel  Vance  poured  his  first  fire  into  the  enemy,  a panic 
iized  my  command  and  part  of  them  broke  ranks. 

Believing  it  impossible  to  reform  under  the  fire  of  these  sharpshoot- 
?s  at  this  moment  of  confusion  I commanded  a retreat  in  order,  which 
as  succeeded  by  a stampede  of  most  of  the  command.  As  soon  as 
ley  had  reached  a small  brush- wood,  perhaps  60  yards  distant,  I 


268 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  X 


3 


ordered  a rally  and  reformation  of  the  line,  in  which  I was  prompt! 
aided  by  every  officer  present  to  my  view  and  for  the  moment  thougl 
I should  succeed,  but  the  cry  was  made  that  the  regulars  had  retreatec 
the  panic  was  renewed  and  increased  and  my  influence  as  a commands 
gone. 

A few,  perhaps  20  in  all,  with  their  officers,  rallied  and  volunteered  t 
return  and  obey  my  orders  ; but  believing  it  would  involve  a sacrific 
of  life  to  them,  being  untutored,  as  we  were,  in  the  arts  of  war,  I d 
dined  to  do  so,  and  in  my  efforts  to  rally  others  to  join  them  becam 
separated  from  these. 

In  the  retreat  I joined  you  at  the  railroad  crossing,  when  you  pr< 
posed  to  rally  and  cover  the  retreat.  There  I rallied  a squad  of  tb 
Athens  Guards  and  Cow  Creek  Volunteers,  with  most  of  their  officers 
but  soon  the  retreating  column  came  on  and  this  joined  with  them. 

Leaving  you  there  I went,  together  with  Adjutant  Roberts  and  Liex 
tenant  Mitchell,  to  burn  the  tents  at  Colonel  Lee’s  encampment.  Fro] 
this  point  we  went  to  Trent  (Clairmont)  Bridge  and  found  Major  Ha 
making  an  effort  to  reform  a regiment,  and  at  his  request  took  positio 
on  the  bridge,  to  prevent  soldiers  passing,  and  remained  there  until  a 
officer,  said  to  be  Lieutenant  Burrows,  took  charge.  At  the  close  < 
the  day  I parted  with  you  at  Tuscarora,  having  received  orders  to  rail 
my  command  and  report  at  this  place. 

I have  made  as  accurate  report  to  Colonel  Campbell  of  the  numb( 
of  my  command  in  action,  of  the  number  killed,  wounded,  and  missirn 
as  I could  gather  from  the  commanders  of  companies.  It  is  believe 
there  were  certainly  4 killed  and  15  wounded,  and  there  are  man 
missing. 

Respectfully, 


Brig.  Gen.  L.  O’B.  Branch, 

District  of  Pamlico . 


H.  J.  B.  CLARK, 
Colonel , Commanding . 


Ko.  31. 

Report  of  Lieut.  J.  L.  Raughton , Macon  Mounted  Guards. 

Kinston,  K C.,  March  16,  1862. 

According  to  orders  from  Brigadier-General  Branch  I left  the  Thom] 
son  breastworks  at  8.30  p.  m.  on  the  13th  instant  with  10  of  my  mei 
and  proceeded  to  Evans’  Mill  to  establish  a picket  guard,  which  I die 
but  did  not  see  anything  worth  reporting. 

The  next  morning  a little  before  day  I,  with  my  men,  proceeded  t 
the  bridge  on  the  road  leading  from  Captain  Evans’  to  Croatan  Battery 
At  light  we  commenced  cutting  it  away,  and  after  clearing  it  I the 
sent  my  men  some  300  yards  in  a bottom.  I then  set  fire  to  the  abu 
ment  of  the  bridge  and  all  the  plank  that  would  have  been  of  service  t 
the  enemy. 

All  the  while  I was  cutting  and  burning  their  pickets  were  firin 
upon  us  at  a great  rate.  I encouraged  my  men  all  I could,  so  the 
stood  until  I sent  them  off.  After  seeing  the  last  of  the  bridge  I the 
made  an  attempt  to  rejoin  my  company,  but  was  cut  off  by  their  pickei 
I attempted  the  second  time  by  a new  route,  but  met  with  like  fate, 
then  made  a third  trial,  and  after  going  for  more  than  a mile  I earn 


•dAP.  XX.] 


EXPEDITION  TO  WASHINGTON,  N.  C. 


269 


cross  a negro,  belonging  to  Dr.  Curtis,  of  New  Berne,  who  was  trying 
> make  his  escape  from  the  enemy,  as  he  was  tired  of  living  with  them, 
stopped  to  ask  him  some  questions,  and  he  told  me  not  to  go  any 
irther  or  else  I should  be  taken.  I then  countermarched  my  men,  and 
s they  turned  balls  fell  around  us  as  fast  as  hailstones.  We  retired 
i perfect  order.  I had  not  gone  far  before  we  found  ourselves  sur- 
ouuded.  My  only  chance  then  was  to  charge  upon  their  pickets.  It 
appened  just  at  that  time  the  firing  had  ceased  at  the  battery,  and  the 
,icket  supposing  that  we  were  cavalry  in  pursuit  of  them,  so  they  ran 
rom  us  faster  than  we  from  them.  I then  made  my  escape  through 
Benton,  reaching  Kinston  at  sunup  Sunday  morning  completely  ex- 
austecl,  both  men  and  horses. 

Very  respectfully  submitted. 

* J.  L.  HAUGHTON, 

Second  Lieutenant  Macon  Mounted * Guards. 

Oapt,  P.  G.  Evans,  Kinston , N.  C. 


MARCH  20-21,  1862.— Expedition  to  Washington,  N.  C. 

Report  of  Col.  Thomas  G.  Stevenson , Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  In- 
fantry. 

New  Berne,  March  23,  1862. 

Agreeably  to  orders  received  from  General  Foster  I embarked  the 
Cwenty-fourtk  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers  on  the  19th  instant 
>n  board  the  steamer  Guide,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  20th,  at  7 o’clock, 
yot  under  way  for  Washington.  Followed  the  gunboats  Delaware,  Lou- 
siana,  and  Commodore  Barney.  At  7 o’clock  same  evening  came  to 
mckor  off  the  mouth  of  the  Pamlico  River.  The  next  morning  at  day- 
ight  we  again  got  under  way,  and  at  10  o’clock  arrived  at  within  about 
> miles  of  Washington,  when  we  discovered  their  deserted  batteries 
.vitkout  guns,  two  on  the  south  bank  of  the  river  and  the  other  one 
in  the  north.  We  also  discovered  here  a barricade,  consisting  of  piles 
iut  off  about  3 feet  below  the  surface.  As  I found  it  would  be  impos- 
sible to  carry  the  steamer  Guide  up  to  the  city  even  if  the  barrier  was 
removed,  on  account  of  her  drawing  too  much  water,  I went  on  board 
:he  steamer  Delaware  and  conferred  with  Captain  Quackenbush,  w ho 
dndly  offered  to  take  two  companies  up  in  his  steamer;  and  as  the 
mayor,  who  had  come  down  to  meet  us,  assured  us  that  there  were  no 
troops  in  the  city  and  as  all  signs  confirmed  this  statement,  I placed 
Companies  I and  G on  board  the  Delaware  and  steamed  up  to  the  citj , 
where  we  found  a large  number  of  persons  on  the  wharves.  I landed 
the  two  companies  and  marched  to  the  court-house,  where  we  nailed  the 
Stars  and  Stripes  to  a flag-pole  which  we  found  in  front  of  the  court- 
house. The  band  played  national  airs  and  the  men  cheered.  We  then 
marched  through  some  of  the  principal  streets  and  returned  to  the 
boat.  While  in  the  city  not  a man  left  the  ranks  or  behaved  otherwise 
than  as  if  on  drill. 

I was  glad  to  notice  considerable  Union  sentiment  expressed  by  the 
inhabitants.  From  quite  a number  of  houses  we  were  saluted  by  wav- 
ing handkerchiefs,  and  from  one  the  national  flag,  with  the  motto,  uThe 
Union  and  the  Constitution,”  was  displayed.  A large  number  of  the 
'inhabitants  expressed  a wish  that  sufficient  force  could  be  sent  there 
to  protect  them  against  the  rebels. 


270  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA.  [Chap.  X 

On  returning  to  the  steamer  Guide  we  found  that  Professor  Mall 
fert  had  blown  up  the  barrier,  so  as  to  clear  a channel  some  60  fe 
wide.  At  6 o’clock  same  evening  weighed  anchor  and  started  for  Ne 
Berne,  where  we  arrived  on  the  afternoon  of  the  following  day  (21 
instant). 

Your  obedient  servant, 

THOS.  G.  STEVENSON, 

Colonel  Twenty-fourth  Regiment  Massachusetts  Volunteers. 

Gapt.  Southard  Hoffman, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


MARCH  23-APRIL  26,  1862.— Siege  of  Fort  Macon,  N.  C. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Parke,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  3. — Lieut.  Daniel  W.  Flagler,  U.  S.  Ordnance  Department. 

No.  4. — Lieut.  Merrick  F.  Prouty,  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  5. — Capt.  Lewis  O. , Morris,  First  U.  S.  Artillery. 

No.  6. — Col.  Isaac  P.  Rodman,  Fourth  Rhode  Island  Infantry. 

No.  7. — Lieut.  William  J.  Andrews,  Ninth  New  York  Infantry,  Acting  Signal  Offic< 

No.  8. — Col.  Moses  J.  White,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside , JJ.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , N.  <7.,  April  17,  1862. 

I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  movements  in  this  depai 
ment  since  my  last  dispatch: 

Owing  to  the  absence  of  engines  and  cars  on  the  railroad  and  tl 
burning  of  the  bridges  by  the  enemy  the  work  of  General  Parke 
Fort  Macon  has  proved  to  be  exceedingly  difficult.  The  rebuilding 
the  bridges  was  necessarily  done  under  the  protection  of  a large  guar 
and  the  enemy’s  cavalry  made  frequent  visits  to  the  road,  and  I lia^ 
no  cavalry  to  compete  with  them.  Our  losses  have  been  but  sligi 
during  the  work,  amounting  in  all  to  some  10  or  12  pickets. 

On  the  7th  instant  Colonel  Egloffstein,  One  hundred  and  third  Ne 
York,  was  ordered  to  make  a reconnaissance  up  the  Trent  in  the  dire 
tion  of  Onslow  County,  and  I afterward  ordered  him  to  continue  h 
reconnaissance  down  the  road  leading  from  Trenton  to  Gore  Sound, 
the  mouth  of  White  Oak  River,  and  then  to  proceed  up  the  shore 
Gore  Sound  and  communicate  with  General  Parke  at  Morehead  Git 
This  I did  with  a hope  that  we  might  be  able  to  catch  a portion  of  tl 
enemy’s  cavalry,  the  headquarters  of  which  were  at  Swansboroug 
from  whence  they  sent  detachments  over  to  the  railroad,  thus  makir 
the  duty  of  guarding  the  36  miles  of  railroad  from  this  place  to  Car 
lina  City  very  onerous.  The  colonel  started  with  200  picked  men,  t^ 
days’  rations,  and  no  transportation,  with  instructions  to  ration  h 
men  from  supplies  found  on  the  route.  He  yesterday  reached  Gei 
eral  Parke’s  headquarters,  having  had  several  skirmishes  with  tl 


Chap.  XX.] 


SIEGE  OF  FORT  MACON,  N.  C. 


271 


enemy,  in  which  he  captured  some  23  prisoners,  80  horses,  and  quite  a 
quantity  of  pistols,  sabers,  &c.  Among  the  prisoners  captured  was 
Colonel  Robinson,  formerly  of  our  Army,  and  son-in-law  of  Captain 
Macrae. 

1 have  been  thus  minute  in  these  details  to  show  you  how  necessary 
a regiment  of  cavalry  is  to  me  at  this  point,  and  I sincerely  hope  there 
will  not  be  a moment’s  delay  in  sending  me  a well-organized  regiment 

General  Parke  has  now  succeeded  in  getting  on  the  banks  in  rear  of 
Fort  Macon  with  th ,e  main  body  of  his  command  and  two  mortar  bat- 
teries and  one  30-pounder  Parrott  gun.  The  enemy’s  pickets  have  been 
driven  in  and  all  communication  with  the  garrison  from  the  outside 
cut  off.  The  enemy’s  shots  thus  far  have  done  us  but  little  harm, 
wounding  only  2 men.  There  are  three  naval  vessels  outside  co- 
operating with  us,  and  I hope  to  reduce  the  fort  within  ten  days. 

The  re-enforcements  spoken  of  have  arrived,  and  1 have  formed  the 
brigades  of  Generals  Foster  and  Eeno  into  divisions,  which  now  occupy 
this  place  and  its  suburbs.  I am  building  just  in  rear  of  the  town  an 
inclosed  bastioned  field  work  capable  of  holding  1,000  men  and  mount- 
ing thirty  guns,  which  work  will  be  finished  in  a few  days,  after  which 
I propose  to  build  another  small  four-gun  work  for  two  companies  to 
the  right  of  this  first  work' and  near  the  Neuse.  These  forts  com- 
pletely command  the  town,  and  will  enable  me  to  leave  it  with  a small 
force  when  I move  up  the  country.  My  advance  now  on  the  railroad 
is  at  Batch  elder’s  Greek,  where  we  are  rebuilding  the  railroad  bridge 
burned  by  the  enemv,  and  I have  made  corresponding  advances  m the 
direction  of  Kinston,  on  the  Neuse  and  Trent  Bivers,  which  positions 
have  been  maintained,  with  occasional  disturbances  in  the  way  of  picket 

^On  'the  morning  of  the  7th  some  600  of  our  men  from  Roanoke  Island 
were  sent  to  Elizabeth  City  and  succeeded  in  capturing  all  the  pickets 
in  the  neighborhood  of  that  place,  amounting  to  74  men  and  100  stand 
of  arms.  Since  then  the  enemy’s  force  has  been  increased  at  that  point 
to  two  regiments  and  a field  battery  of  four  guns.  I have  organized, 
in  conjunction  with  Commodore  Rowan,  an  expedition  against  that 
place,  and  if  we  succeed  in  capturing  or  driving  the  enemy  back  we 
shall  move  up  to  South  Mills  and  blow  up  the  lock  of  the  canal,  and 
then  proceed  up  to  the  head  of  the  Currituck  Canal  and  blow  in  its 
banks,  thus  rendering  it  impossible  for  the  gunboats,  which  are  said  to 
be  building  at  Norfolk,  to  come  into  these  waters.  I hope  the  expedi- 
tion will  be  successful. 

The  regiments  of  my  original  command  are  much  decreased  by  sick- 
ness and  casualties  in  battle,  and  the  recruiting  service  having  been 
stopped,  I shall  not  be  able  to  fill  them  up.  My  command  now  consists 
of  twenty  regiments,  one  battalion,  and  a battery,  making  an  aggregate 
of  about  15,000,  distributed  as  follows:  Three  regiments  at  Roanoke, 
a half  regiment  at  Hatteras  Inlet,  three  regiments  and  a battalion  with 
General  Parke  and  on  the  road,  and  thirteen  and  a half  regiments  with 
the  battery  at  this  place. 

The  engines  and  cars  for  which  we  made  requisition  immediately 
after  the  battle  have  not  yet  arrived,  and  as  the  re-entorcements  sent 
me  brought  no  wagons  with  them  we  are  absolutely  crippled  for  want 
of  transportation. 

I sincerely  hope  there  will  be  no  delay  in  forwarding  me  the  regi- 
ment of  cavalry  and  two  batteries  of  artillery,  together  with  the  engines, 
cars,  and  wagons  already  required  for. 


272 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


The  enemy  continues  in  force  at  Kinston,  hut  I feel  quite  sure  I 
can  dislodge  them  after  the  fall  of  Fort  Macon. 

I have  made  the  above  statement  in  reference  to  my  forces  in  order 
that  the  Department  may  know  what  I have  to  work  with,  and  if  in 
what  I may  have  to  do  more  re-enforcements  are  necessary  they  may  be 
sent  at  once. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Major-  General , Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , N.  0.,  April  20,  1862. 

I have  the  honor  to  state  that  since  my  last  report  I have  visited 
General  Parke’s  force  investing  Fort  Macon  and  found  the  work  pro- 
gressing very  rapidly,  considering  the  obstructions  that  have  to  be 
overcome.  After  transporting  all  the  batteries, , ammunition,  supplies, 
&c.,  36  miles  by  hand  cars,  they  have  to  be  transported  by  water  some 
three  miles  and  a half  through  a tortuous  channel,  with  only  2 feet 
water  at  high  tide.  Flats  loaded  with  supplies  are  sometimes  a day 
and  a half  making  this  short  trip.  These  supplies  then  have  to  be 
loaded  on  wagons  and  transported  near  4 miles  through  deep  sand  to 
where  the  trenches  are  established.  The  farthest  of  our  batteries, 
which  consists  of  four  10-inch  mortars,  is  but  1,200  yards  from  the  fort. 
The  battery  of  30-pounder  Parrott  guns  and  the  8-inch  mortar  battery 
are  still  farther  in  advance,  so  that  these  supplies  have  all  to  be 
transported  at  night,  as  the  train  for  a half  mile  or  more  would  be,  if 
visible,  under  the  direct  fire  of  the  fort.  The  working  parties  and 
teams  are  kept  busy  every  night,  and  the  general  has  been  able  to 
keep  some  small  parties  at  work  during  the  day  under  cover  of  the 
guard  of  the  trenches,  but  has  had  to  exercise  great  care  in  protecting 
his  men,  in  which  thus  far  he  has  been  very  successful,  losing  in  his 
whole  force — killed,  wounded,  and  missing — but  9 men,  and  1 captain 
wounded  (Sheffield,  of  Fourth  Rhode  Island*).  Some  ninety  cannon- 
shot  from  the  fort  and  considerable  musketry  fire,  which  occurred  on 
one  morning,  wounded  but  2 of  our  men,  while  we  killed  and  wounded 
with  our  rifles  8 of  theirs  and  drove  their  pickets  inside  the  fort. 

On  my  visit  yesterday  to  the  trenches  with  my  staff  the  ambulance 
in  which  we  traveled  to  within  a mile  of  the  fort  attracted  the  atten- 
tion of  their  lookout  on  the  flag-staff,  which  caused  a battery  to  open 
upon  us  as  we  passed  to  and  from  the  batteries,  of  which  I was  after- 
ward very  glad,  as  it  demonstrated  to  me  that  their  firing  is  very 
wild. 

Our  batteries,  guns,  &c.,  are  now  about  completed  and  the  pieces  in 
position.  The  work  has  been  most  skillfully  conducted  under  the 
direction  of  Captain  Williamson,  topographical  engineer,  and  Lieu- 
tenant Flagler,  of  the  Ordnance  Corps. 

I came  up  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  down  through  Core  Sound 
two  of  our  floating  batteries,  with  four  30-pounder  rifled  Parrott  guns 
mounted  thereon,  which  I propose  to  anchor,  together  with  the  gun- 
boat Ellis,  with  an  80-pounder  rifled  gun,  just  in  front  of  the  forty 
opposite  the  town  of  Beaufort.  The  Navy  co-operates  from  the  out- 


Properly,  Eighth  Connecticut. 


:rxt.  xx.] 


SIEGE  OF  FORT  MACON,  N.  C. 


273 


side  with  three  steamers  and  a sailing  vessel.  I have  ordered  General 
Parke  to  advance  some  400  of  his  best  marksmen  in  front  of  the  land 
batteries  to  within  some  500  or  600  yards  of  the  fort,  to  annoy  their 
cannoneers.  The  reduction  of  the  fort  is,  1 think,  only  a question  of 

Isent  General  Reno  up  beyond  Elizabeth  City^o  destroy  the  locks 
in  the  Dismal  Swamp  Canal,  and  to  use  his  discretion  as  to  other 
operations  in  the  direction  of  Norfolk,  and  with  a view  to  creating  a 
diversion  in  favor  of  McClellan,  and  I hope  to  hear  of  the  successful 
termination  of  his  expedition  within  two  days. 

General  Foster,  who  is  in  immediate  command  here,  is  pushing  his 
outposts  in  the  direction  of  Kinston  as  rapidly  as  the  present  force 
here  will  admit.  He  has  also,  besides  building  the  railroad  bridges 
across  the  Trent  and  Batclielder’s  Creek,  fortified  this  city  in  the  rear, 
so  that  it  can  be  held  by  a small  force  when  we  advance  up  the  country 


or  down  the  coast.  _ „ , , „ 

Our  sick  list  is  not  decreasing.  I hope  the  Governors  of  States  from 
which  my  regiments  have  been  drawn  may  be  authorized  to  fill  them 
up  to  the  maximum  number  of  1,000  men  each.  With  the  present 
strength  of  the  regimerfts  our  men  are  worked  very  hard. 

I would  again  urgently  but  respectfully  request  of  the  Department 
one  good  regiment  of  cavalry,  two  light  batteries  of  artillery,  and  the 
transportation  required  by  my  chief  quartermaster.  The  engines,  cars, 
and  wagons  are  absolutely  necessary  to  us  here. 

Captain  Cutting,  one  of  my  quartermasters,  will  bear  this  to  you, 
and  explain  to  you  our  wants  more  fully  than  I can  write  in  this  hur- 
ried way.  , 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Major-General , Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina . 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War , Washington , D.  C. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , April  29, 1862. 

Sir  • I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  hasty  report  of  the  fall 
of  Fort  Macon,  on  Saturday,  the  26th  instant.  The  detailed  report  of 
the  siege  will  be  made  in  due  time  by  Brigadier-General  Parke,  who 

conducted  it : „ _ ^ ’ 

I arrived  at  the  straits  leading  into  Beaufort  Harbor  on  the  afternoon 
of  the  23d  instant,  and  immediately  after  sent  the  inclosed  demand  for 
the  surrender  of  the  fort  to  Colonel  White,  the  answer  to  which  is  In- 
closed herewith.  . , . _ _ , i ^ 

On  the  morning  of  the  24th  I communicated  with  General  Parke, 
and  ascertained  that  a few  more  preparations  remained  to  be  made  in 
the  trenches  before  the  firing  commenced.  The  armament  m the 
trenches  consisted  of  four  batteries,  as  follows : Prouty’s  battery,  1,200 
yards  from  the  fort,  consisting  of  four  8-inch  mortars ; Morris’  battery, 
1,300  yards  from  the  fort,  consisting  of  three  30-pounder  rifled  Parrott 
guns ; Flagler’s  battery,  1,600  yards  from  the  fort,  consisting  of  tour 
10-inch  mortars ; Caswell’s  battery,  1,200  yards  from  the  fort,  consist- 
ing of  one  12-pounder  Dahlgren  rifled  boat  howitzer. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  24th  I sent  an  order  to  General  Parke  to 
open  fire  as  soon  as  possible,  which  he  did  at  5 o’clock  on  the  morning 

18  R R — YOL  IX 


274 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chai\  XX 


of  the  25th  instant  and  kept  it  up  until  4 o’clock  p.  m.,  throwing  1 10( 
shot  and  shell,  of  which  560  struck  the  fort,  dismounting  17  guns  kill 
ing  8 men,  and  wounding  26  others. 

About  7.30  in  the  morning  the  naval  vessels  came  into  action,  anc 
continued  their  fire  until  the  high  winds  made  it  so  rough  outside  tin 
bar  they  were  compelled  to  withdraw.  1 beg  to  refer  you  to  the  repori 
of  the  commander  of  the  fleet  for  more  definite  information,  but  I wil 
add  that  their  fire  was  well  directed  and  was  of  material  aid  in  the 
reduction  of  the  fort.  The  intrepidity  with  which  the  vessels  were 
brought  within  close  range  of  the  fort  in  a sea  rolling  to  a fearful  extenl 
commanded  the  admiration  of  all  who  witnessed  the  sight. 

In  the  mean  time  the  officers  and  men  who  accompanied  me,  aided 
by  Lieutenant  Franklin  and  Midshipman  Porter,  of  the  Navy  were 
getting  Nichols’  and  Baxter’s  two  floating  batteries,  with  four* rifled 
Parrott  30-pounder  guns  and  one  Wiarcl  12-pounder  gun  into  posi 
tion,  but  only  one  of  them  was  able  to  participate  in  the  conflict  in 
consequence  of  the  high  winds. 

At  4 o’clock  p.  m.  a flag  of  truce  was  hoisted  on  the  parapets,  when 
our  batteries  ceased  firing,  and  a party  coming  from  the  fort  bearing 
a white  flag  was  met  by  a party  from  the  treftches,  wffien  it  was  ascer 
tamed  that  Colonel  White  had  sent  the  flag  for  the  purpose  of  know 
ing  upon  what-  terms  he  could  surrender  the  fort.  General  Parke  was 
sent  for,  and  upon  coming  up  he  informed  the  bearer  of  the  flag  that 
the  surrender  must  be  unconditional.  They  informed  him  of  the  terms 
I had  offered  to  Colonel  White  before  the  fire  had  opened  and  requested 
a cessation  of  hostilities  until  I could  be  communicated  with,  which 
was  granted  by  General  Parke  $ and  he  sent  a message  to  me  stating 
that  Colonel  White  desired  to  know  on  what  conditions  he  could  sur- 
render the  fort,  and  without  knowing  the  answer  given  by  him  I sent 
a reply  allowing  the  same  conditions  I had  offered  before  the  firjm" 
commenced.  There  was  a very  great  delay  in  sending  this  answer^ 
owing  to  the  fact  that  it  had  to  be  borne  part  of  the  way  by  water 
while  the  wind  and  tide  were  so  strong  that  it  was  almost  impossible 
to  move  a boat  against  them. 

In  the  mean  time  General  Parke  started  for  my  boat,  reaching  there 
at  4 a.  m.  on  the  26th.  He  had  met  my  answer  on  the  way,  but  de- 
ferred communicating  it  to  Colonel  White  until  he  had  seen  me.  Upon 
consultation  we  agreed  that  if  an  unconditional  surrender  was  demanded 
the  enemy  would  in  all  probability  stand  one  day’s  more  bombardment, 
thereby  occasioning  an  additional  destruction  of  property  in  the  fort, 
and  inasmuch  as  I have  always  intended  to  release  them  on  their  parole 
if  they  surrendered,  as  I did  the  prisoners  taken  on  Boanoke  Island, 
we  did  not  think  it  wise  to  allow  a technicality  in  negotiating  to  pre- 
vent us  from  accomplishing  the  same  result  in  a less  time,  and  thereby 
prevent  an  additional  destruction  of  life  and  property.  The  answer 
was  communicated  to  Colonel  White  early  on  the  morning  of  the  26th, 
soon  after  which  he  came  on  board  my  boat,  where  he  and  General 
Parke  arranged  the  inclosed  terms  of  capitulation. 

We  immediately  landed  at  the  fort,  went  up  to  the  trenches,  brought 
the  guard  that  was  in  them  to  the  fort,  and  placed  them  as  a guard  on 
the  glacis.  The  garrison  of  the  fort  marched  out  as  prisoners  of  war 
and  stacked  their  arms  on  the  glacis,  after  which  Colonel  White  low- 
ered the  rebel  flag,  which  was  taken  possession  of  by  General  Parke, 
who  hoisted  in  its  stead  an  American  flag  which  was  found  in  the  fort. 
The  prisoners  then  signed  their  paroles  and  were  embarked  on  vessels 
with  their  private  property,  such  as  clothing,  bedding,  &c.,  and  have 


Jhap.XX.]  SIEGE  OF  FORT  MACON,  N.  C. 


275 


>een  transported — some  to  Wilmington,  others  to  Beaufort,  and  the 
-emainder  to  this  place. 

By  this  surrender  we  come  into  possession  of  the  fort  and  its  arma- 
ment of  54  guns,  400  prisoners,  a large  amount  of  ammunition,  com- 
missary, and  quartermaster’s  stores,  some  40  horses  with  their  equip- 
ments, 500  stand  of  rifles  and  muskets  with  full  equipments,  and  a 
3onsiderable  amount  of  implements  incident  to  the  complete  equipment 
if  a fort,  besides  opening  one  of  the  best  harbors  on  the  Southern  coast. 

Of  the  skill,  courage,  and  endurance  displayed  in  this  siege  I will 
allow  General  Parke  to  speak  in  his  detailed  report.  The  result  proves 
that  the  work  was  conducted  by  the  right  man.  I inclose  my  con- 
gratulatory order. 

1 beg  to  make  a further  explanation  of  my  reasons  for  determining 
to  release  these  prisoners  whenever  the  fort  should  be  taken.  I am 
becoming  daily  more  convinced  that  the  release  of  our  prisoners  at 
Roanoke  Island  was  of  material  advantage  to  us ; and  as  a large  ma- 
jority of  the  men  in  the  fort  were  from  the  counties  bordering  on  the 
sound,  which  are  more  strongly  Union  than  any  other  counties  in  this 
State,  many  of  them  being  Union  men  themselves  and  nearly  all  of 
them  anxious  to  get  to  their  homes,  I felt  sure  that  it  would  create  a 
much  better  impression  in  this  community,  and  thereby  strengthen  our 
cause,  by  releasing  them  on  parole  than  by  sending  them  to  the  North. 
Another  important  reason  for  coming  to  this  decision  was,  the  sending 
them  North  would  deprive  me  of  considerable  transportation,  which  is 
very  valuable  to  me  here  now. 

During  the  siege  and  bombardment  I have  been  aided  in  communi- 
cating with  General  Parke  not  only  by  my  own  staff,  but  by  almost 
every  member  of  the  staff  of  Generals  Foster,  Eeno,  and  Parke. 

I am  sorry  to  record  the  loss  of  1 man  killed  and  2 wounded  from 
our  side  on  the  day  of  the  bombardment.  The  names  will  be  given  by 
General  Parke  in  his  detailed  report. 

T have  the  honor  to  be,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

, . A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Major-General , Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina . 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War. 

[Inclosures.] 


Hdqrs.  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

Core  Sound , April  23,  1862. 

! Col.  Moses  J.  White,  Commanding  Fort  Macon : 

Colonel  : I have  arrived  here  with  additional  means  of  attacking 
your  position.  General  Parke  is  now  ready,  but  by  my  orders  there 
, has  not  been  a single  shot  fired  at  the  fort  by  the  army.  I deem  it  my 
duty  to  again  summon  you  to  surrender  the  place  in  its  present  condi- 
tion, in  which  case  you  and  your  garrison  will  be  allowed  to  return  to 
[ your  homes  on  parole. 

This  proposition  is  made  with  a view  to  saving  human- life.  Should 
you  not  accept  these  terms,  the  consequences  of  an  attack  and  an 
i assault  must  rest  upon  you. 

i Capt.  Herman  Biggs,  my  chief  quartermaster,  bears  this,  and  will 
return  with  an  answer.  Lieut.  E.  N.  Strong  accompanies  him. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 


servant, 

l 


A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 
Major- General  Commanding. 


276 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX 


Headquarters,  Fort  Macon , April  23 , 1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside,  U.  S.  A. : 

Sir  : Your  letter  per  flag  of  truce  is  received,  demanding  surrende 
of  Fort  Macon.  In  reply  I have  to  say  I decline  the  surrender. 

Lieut.  Daniel  Oogdell  will  bear  this  note  to  you. 

By  order  of  Col.  M.  J.  White  : 

ROBT.  E.  WALKER, 

Acting  Adjutant. 

Terms  of  Capitulation. 

The  following  are  the  terms  of  capitulation  agreed  upon  for  the  sur 
render  to  the  forces  of  the  United  States  of  Fort  Macon,  Bogue  Banks 
K.  C. : 

Article  1.  The  fort,  armament,  and  garrison  to  be  surrendered  t< 
the  forces  of  the  United  States. 

Article  2.  The  officers  and  men  of  the  garrison  to  be  released  oi 
their  parole  of  honor  not  to  take  up  arms  against  the  United  States  o 
America  until  properly  exchanged,  and  to  return  to  their  homes 
taking  with  them  all  their  private  effects,  such  as  clothing,  bedding 
books,  &c. 

M.  J.  WHITE, 

Colonel , C.  S.  Army , Commanding  Fort  Macon. 

SAML.  LOCKWOOD, 
Commanding  TJ.  S.  Navy , and  Senior  Officer. 

JNTO.  G.  PARKE, 

Brig.  Gen.  Vols .,  Commanding  Third  Division , Dept.  N.  C. 

Fort  Macon,  N\  C.,  April  26,  1862. 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

No.  29.  j * Beaufort  Harbor,  April  26,  1862. 

The  general  commanding  takes  peculiar  pleasure  in  expressing  kb 
thankfulness  to  General  Parke  and  his  brave  command  for  the  patienl 
labor,  fortitude,  and  courage  displayed  in  the  investment  and  reductioi 
of  Fort  Macon. 

Every  patriot  heart  will  be  filled  with  gratitude  to  God  for  having 
given  to  our  beloved  country  such  soldiers. 

The  regiments  and  artillery  companies  engaged  have  fairly  earned 
the  right  to  wear  upon  their  colors  and  guidons  the  words,  “ Fort  Ma 
con,  April  26,  1862.” 

By  command  of  Major-General  Burnside  : 

LEWIS  RICHMOND, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Parke , TJ.  S.  Army. 

Hdqrs.  Third  Brigade,  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

Carolina  City , March  23,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  I reached  this  point  last 
eveniug  after  a severe  march  from  the  landing  on  Slocum’s  Creek  with 
a portion  of  my  command. 


Chap.  XX.l 


SIEGE  OF  FORT  MACON,  N.  C. 


277 


Hearing  that  the  enemy  had  burned  the  railroad  bridge  over  New- 
port River  I hurried  off,  in  order  to  save  the  county  road  bridge.  This 
we  succeeded  in  doing.  We  also  secured  some  log  quarters  made  for 
the  Seventh  Regiment  North  Carolina  troops. 

This  morning  I dispatched  Captain  Gardner  and  Lieutenant  Flagler 
with  a flag  of  truce  to  Fort  Macon  with  a demand  to  surrender ; a copy 
of  my  letter,  together  with  the  reply  of  the  commanding  officer,  I here- 
with inclose. 

We  have  now  but  one  course  to  pursue,  and  that  is  to  invest  the 
place ; but  with  the  Newport  Bridge  destroyed  this  will  be  a slow 
operation.  I have  ordered  Major  Wright  down  to  that  point  to  re- 
build the  bridge.  This  will  have  to  be  done  before  we  can  bring  down 
the  guns.  Our  supplies  can  be  brought  by  rail  to  this  point  and  thence 
in  wagons  over  a fair  road. 

The  county  road  from  Slocunfls  to  Newport  is  in  one  place  very  bad  j 
will  soon  be  impassable  for  heavily-loaded  wagons. 

I have  with  me  about  700  men  ; the  remainder  of  the  Fourth  and 
Eighth  are,  I presume,  now  on  the  way  down. 

I* have  sent  two  companies  to  Morehead  City  to  prevent  any  com- 
munication with  the  fort. 

At  present  I have  not  strength  enough  to  send  a force  to  Beaufort. 
I believe  they  communicate  with  the  fort  every  night. 

As  far  as  I can  learn  the  garrison  of  the  fort  has  but  little  sympathy, 
or  rather  the  commanding  officer  has  but  little,  in  either  Beaufort  or 
Morehead. 

If  possible  I would  like  some  of  the  Navy  to  come  around  through 
Core  Sound  to  interrupt  communication  between  Beaufort  and  Fort 
Macon. 

1 have  just  learned  that  the  officers  of  the  fort  communicate  with  the 
outer  world  by  running  down  the  beach.  My  force  at  present  is  not 
sufficient  nor  have  I the  means  to  cut  off  this  communication. 

I have  just  taken  a flat-boat,  with  a mail  and  a lot  of  corn,  on  the  way 
from  the  fort  to  Swansborough.  I will  detain  the  captain. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  G.  PARKE, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 

General  Ambrose  E.  Burnside. 


[Inclosurea.] 


Hdqrs.  Third  Brigade,  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

March  23,  1862. 

To  the  Commander  of  the  Garrison  of  Fort  Macon : 

Sir  : In  order  to  save  the  unnecessary  effusion  of  blood  I have  the 
honor  to  demand  the  evacuation  of  the  fort  and  surrender  of  the  forces 
under  your  command. 

Having  an  intimate  knowledge  of  the  entire  work  and  an  overwhelm- 
ing force  at  our  command  with  the  means  for  reducing  the  work,  its  fall 
is  inevitable. 

On  condition  that  no  damage  is  done  to  the  fortification  or  armament 
your  command  will  be  released  as  prisoners  of  war  on  their  parole. 
Very  respectfullv,  yours,  &c., 

JNO.  G.  PARKE, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding . 


278 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chai\  XX. 


Headquarters,  Fort  Macon , March  23, 1862. 
General  J.  G.  Parke, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding  Morehead  City , AT.  C. : 

Sir  : Your  request  is  received,  and  I have  the  honor  to  decline  evac- 
uating Fort  Macon. 

Very  respectfully,  yours,  &c., 

M.  J.  WHITE, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Third  Brigade,  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

Carolina  City , March  24,  1862 — 11  p.  m. 

My  Hear  General:  Pell  has  just  arrived.  I will  detain  him  until 
morning,  as  I have  now  a move  on  foot  which  is  of  so  great  importance 
that  I wish  you  to  be  apprised  of  the  result. 

Since  my  communication  of  yesterday’s  date  I have  been  steadily 
occupied  in  cutting  off  all  communication  with  the  fort.  I have  two 
companies  posted  in  Morehead  City,  under  Major  Allen,  with  orders  to 
cut  off  all  communication  with  the  fort  and  Beaufort. 

To-day  I sent  to  Beaufort  for  the  town  authorities.  Captain  Gardner 
met  them,  and  informed  them  that  I required  them  to  stop  all  communi- 
cation with  the  fort.  They  all  have  a great  horror  of  Colonel  White, 
and  fear  that  if  they  communicate  with  us  he  will  shell  their  town. 
However  they  have  determined  to  hold  a town  meeting,  and  I will  get 
their  reply  to-morrow. 

At  first  I had  not  the  means  nor  provisions  to  occupy  it.  My  wagon 
train  has  now  made  two  trips  to  Slocum’s  Creek  Landing,  and  I have 
now  supplies  until  Saturday  morning $ and  if  the  reply  is  not  satis- 
factory I will  send  one  company  over  there.  The  destruction  of  the 
Newport  Kiver  Bridge  is  a bad  business.  I hope  Field  will  soon  have  it 
in  order,  and  Flagler  and  Morris  will  soon  have  their  guns  here. 

I presume  Flagler  will  inform  you  of  the  burning  of  the  hotel  at  this 
place,  also  of  the  barracks  just  below  here. 

Last  night  Colonel  White  burnt  the  prize  bark  lying  under  the  fort. 

There  are  two  ships  at  Morehead,  one  at  the  wharf  and  the  other  in 
the  stream,  purporting  to  be  English,  and  loaded  now  with  turpentine, 
cotton,  &c.  They  came  in  last  August,  and  have  not  been  able  to 
escape.  I presume  the  fact  of  their  flying  English  colors  has  secured 
them  against  Colonel  White’s  torch. 

My  work  for  to-night  is  to  send  two  companies  over  to  the  Banks  under 
a good  pilot.  I send  a boat;  to  be  carried  across  the  sand  hills  to  the  sea, 
with  a letter  to  the  commanding  officer  of  the  fleet  informing  him  of  my 
move  and  requesting  his  co-operation. 

My  transportation  is  only  sufficient  to  carry  over  two  companies,  but 
it  is  so  very  important  to  occupy  the  Banks. 

We  have  made  two  captures,  one  a schooner  load  of  corn  going  from 
the  fort  to  Swansborough,  the  other  a bearer  of  dispatches  from  the 
captain  of  a picket  company  on  Queen’s  Creek,  beyond  Swansborough, 
to  Colonel  White.  I have  the  captain  of  the  schooner  and  the  dispatch 
bearer  now  confined,  and  will  send  them  to  you  by  the  first  opportunity. 

0 for  some  of  [the]  Navy  people.  Can’t  you  send  one  or  two  boat 
howitzers  and  ammunition  down  by  rail  so  that  I can  send  them  over 
to  the  Banks'?  One  could  be  mounted  on  our  schooner  with  all  ease. 

1 am  informed  that  the  Union  could  come  through  Core  Sound  with 
some  ship’s  launches  in  tow.  These  could  cut  off  Beaufort  and  the  fort. 


HAP.  XX.  | 


SIEGE  OF  FORT  MACON,  N.  C. 


279 


Tell  the  Navy  people  of  these  two  big  ships  and  cargo. 

On  this  county  road  there  are  two  points  where  main  roads  come  in 
rom  the  Swansborough  side,  and  at  these  I will  establish  a guard  to 
>rotect  my  wagon  train  until  the  railroad  is  in  running  order.  The 
:nemy  may  send  some  cavalry  in  from  that  side,  but  I don’t  think  there 
s much  danger. 


March  25—12.45. 

Colonel  Harland  has  just  reported  to  me  that  it  is  out  of  the  question 
o get  our  boats  up  from  Morehead  owing  to  the  interference  of  our 
>ld  friends  the  wind,  tide,  and  shoals.  I have  therefore  postponed 
ny  trip  to  the  Banks,  and  it  must  be  all  for  the  best. 

Now  I will  wait  for  the  boat  howitzers  and  their  crews  and  make  a 
odgment  by  daylight.  Please  send  them  forthwith  by  rail. 

In  addition  to  the  schooner  I can  raise  four  large  boats,  but  only 
line  oars.  Send  some  extra  ones. 

Pell  will  tell  you  the  condition  of  the  bridge,  &c. 

As  I have  not  taken  steps  toward  seizing  these  ships,  let  Commodore 
Rowan  send  an  officer  down  at  once  to  act  in  the  matter.  I will  fur- 
lish  him  men,  and  let  the  howitzers  follow  as  soon  as  possible. 

Let  Flagler  and  Morris  .have  a lot  of  contrabands,  with  some  teams 
io  carry  their  ordnance  to  the  railroad,  so  that  it  can  be  run  down  here 
m the  completion  of  the  bridge. 

The  people  here  are  all  frightened.  What  shall  I do  about  the  oath 
if  allegiance  and  neutrality  ? 

Please  send  me  the  forms  and  instructions  about  administering 
them.  I have  administered  but  two  oaths  of  neutrality.  Please  send 
some  blank  passes. 

There  are  some  rabid  secessionists  about  here,  but  they  don’t  make 
their  appearance. 

My  command  is  in  good  health  and  spirits,  excepting  the  two  com- 
panies in  Morehead ; they  are  bivouacking,  but  have  good  shelter. 

We  expect  to  supply  ourselves  with  fish,  &c. 

Very  faithfully,  yours, 

JNO.  G.  PABKE. 

[General  Ambrose  E.  Burnside.] 


P.  S. — I send  the  prisoner  by  Pell,  together  with  the  papers  found 

&n  him. 


Headquarters  Third  Brigade, 

Carolina  City , March  26,  1862. 

General  : Yesterday  morning  I received  a visit  from  Mr.  Burnley 
and  Mr.  Chadwick  on  “ behalf  of  the.  citizens  of  Beaufort.”  They  ex- 
pressed the  thanks  of  the  citizens  for  the  courtesy  and  consideration 
shown  them,  but  were  forced  to  acknowledge  that  they  were  powerless 
in  reference  to  cutting  off  communication  with  the  fort.  They  told  me 
that  they  had  communicated  with  White  in  reference  to  my  proposi- 
tion, and  he  replied  that  he  would  not  permit  us  to  land  in  Beaufort ; 
he  would  shell  the  town,  &c.  This  of  course  disgusted  the  citizens  of 
Beaufort,  and  I think  they  express  the  sentiments  of  the  Beaufort  por- 
tion of  the  garrison — about  one  company. 

At  the  close  of  the  interview  Mr.  Burnley  asked  me  what  course  I 
Intended  to  pursue.  I replied  that  my  mind  was  made  up,  and  that 


280 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chai\  XX. 


they  would  soon  hear  from  me.  He  informed  me  that  there  were  no 
supplies  for  troops  in  the  town ; that  they  had  not  more  than  three 
months,  for  themselves,  and,  as  all  communication  with  Hyde  County 
was  cut  otf,  they  were  in  a sorry  plight. 

Last  night  I sent  Major  Allen,  with  two  companies,  over  to  Beaufort, 
but  as  yet  I have  no  report  from  him,  nor  have  we  any  reports  from  the 
fort. 

I ordered  him  to  seize  all  boats,  and,  if  possible,  surprise  any  parties 
that  might  be  there  from  the  fort.  I ordered  that  no  passes  be  granted 
unless  the  parties  take  the  oath  of  allegiance,  excepting  passes  to  come 
and  see  me. 

I look  to-day  for  some  of  our  Navy  people  and  a boat  howitzer. 

My  two  old  pilots  returned  last  night  from  up  the  Banks.  They  re 
port  a rough  sea  outside.  We  can  see  the  enemy’s  outposts  on  the 
Banks  opposite  in  small  squads. 

I can’t  learn  whether  or  not  they  have  any  small  pieces  mounted  at 
the  salt-works.  As  that  is  a good  landing  I think  it  possible,  and 
therefore  would  rather  postpone  a landing  until  we  can  bring  at  least, 
one  howitzer  to  bear  upon  them  and  feel  them  before  we  expose  too 
many  men. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  G.  PARKE, 
Brigadier- General  Volunteers. 

General  Burnside. 


« Hdqrs.  Third  Brigade,  Dept.  North  Carolina, 

Carolina  City , March  31,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  complete  investment  of 
Fort  Macon. 

Three  companies  are  stationed  in  Beaufort  and  two  in  Morehead 
City,  with  instructions  to  cut  off  all  communications  between  those 
points  and  the  fort.  The  commanding  officers  at  these  posts  have 
seized  all  the  boats. 

On  the  29th  I sent  a reconnoitering  party  over  to  the  Banks,  consist- 
ing of  20  men,  with  a commissioned  officer.  Meeting  no  resistance,  the 
party  remained  through  the  night. 

During  yesterday  I sent  the  remainder  of  the  company  over,  and  to- 
night I will  send  over  another  company. 

As  soon  as  the  signal  officers  arrive  I will  detail  an  officer  for  thati 
station  and  send  another  to  the  fleet. 

Captain  Morris  has  just  arrived  with  the  Parrott  guns.  The  New- 
port Bridge  being  finished,  they  were  brought  through  by  rail. 

As  soon  as  the  boats  come  over  from  Beaufort  I will  send  this  bat- 
tery over  to  the  Banks  and  commence  operations. 

, In  my  opinion  these  guns  and  mortars  will  be  required  ultimately, 
and  will  do  more  service  on  the  Banks  than  they  could  at  Morehead. 

The  railroad  embankment  at  Morehead  will  serve  us  a good  purpose] 
in  mounting  and  serving  the  100-pounder  rifle. 

I have  now  in  confinement  Mr.  Josiah  F.  Bell,  the  collector  of  Beau- 
fort. I will  send  him  up  to  you,  together  with  papers,  &c.,  and  a re- 
port. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  G.  PARKE, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

General  Burnside. 


Chap.  XX.] 


SIEGE  OF  FORT  MACON,  N.  C. 


281 


Carolina  City,  April  8,  1862— noon. 
General:  I sent  a dispatch  to  you  yesterday  evening,  and  as  the 
sergeant  has  not  yet  returned  I fear  he  may  have  been  intercepted  by 
the  rebel  cavalry  between  Havelock  and  New  Berne. 

In  the  dispatch  I inclose  Colonel  Wilson’s  report*  of  an  attack  upon 
his  outside  pickets  by  the  rebel  cavalry,  wounding  1 man  and  probably 

taking  1 prisoner.  , . . ,,  , , 

This  morning  he  reports  that  not  only  1 but  8 are  missing;  that  he 
increased  the  picket  last  night,  but  nothing  further  occurred.  To-day 
he  sends  out  four  companies  to  burn  the  county-road  bridges. 

This  second  dispatch  I sent  you  this  morning,  and  fearing  that  the 
bearer  may  be  waylaid  beyond  Bsavelock,  I will  send  this  by  Slocum  s 


Creek. 

I am  informed  that  Captain  King  some  two  or  three  days  ago,  heard 
some  cavalry,  I believe  two,  on  a cross-road  near  the  deserted  battery, 
Croatan,  and  shortly  after  he  saw  a rocket.  Now  this  may  be  mere 
rumor.  Still  it  behooves  us  to  look  out.  I will  write  King  to  make  a 
report  to  you  of  the  circumstances. 

We  sent  quite  a large  mail  this  morning.  I sincerely  hope  it.  has  not 
been  picked  up  by  the  enemy. 

The  balance  of  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  should  be  sent  down  to  New- 
port at  once,  and  I think  it  advisable  to  have  strong  pickets  posted 
throughout  the  railroad ; but  it  is  out  of  the  question  for  me  to  attend 
to  it  from  this  point. 

The  stern-wheeler  cannot  reach  the  Banks,  and  taking  advantage  ot 
the  tides  is  a slow  progress.  . 

Morris’  company  goes  over  this  evening,  the  Eighth  Connecticut  dur- 
ing the  night,  and  then  I will  send  all  the  Fourth  Bhode  Island,  except- 
ing two  companies,  which  I will  leave  here.  The  two  launches  with 
howitzers  are  here;  these  can  protect  the  retreat  of  the  two  companies 
to  the  stern- wheeler  if  forced  to  retire ; this  is  hardly  to  be  expected. 

I wish  I had  some  cavalry  down  here  to  drive  these  rebels  out  of  the 
country.  I do  not  believe  there  are  more  than  two  companies  of  them. 

In  haste,  yours,  faithfully, 

7J  7 7 JNO.  G.  PABKE. 


General  Burnside. 


Hdqrs.  Third  Division,  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

Beaufort , A.  O.,  May  9,  1862. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  respectfully  to  submit  the  following 
report  of  the  movements  and  operations  of  the  troops  under  my  com- 
mand from  the  date  of  their  embarking  at  New  Berne,  March  19,  up 
to  the  reduction  of  Fort  Macon,  April  26 : 

On  the  19th  the  Fourth  Bhode  Island  Begiment,  Col.  I.  P.  Bodman 
commanding,  and  the  Eighth  Connecticut  Begiment,  Col.  Edward 
Harland  commanding,  were  embarked,  and  on  the  20th  we  steamed 
down  the  Neuse  to  Slocum’s  Creek,  and,  preceded  by  the  gunboat 
Picket,  followed  up  this  latter  stream  to  the  landing  place  previously 
determined  on  by  the  commanding  general. 

The  Fifth  Bhode  Island  Battalion,  Maj.  John  Wright  commanding, 
marched  from  New  Berne  down  the  railroad,  and  joined  us  at  Have- 
lock Station,  a mile  and  one-half  distant  from  Slocum’s  Creek  Landing. 


* See  p.  295. 


282 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


Capt,  Lewis  O.  Morris,  First  United  States  Artillery,  being  assigned 
to  duty  with  the  brigade,  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  three  30-pounder 
Parrott  guns,  and  Lieut.  D.  W.  Flagler,  of  the  Ordnance,  had  charge 
of  the  two  mortar  batteries. 

From  Slocum’s  Creek  it  was  intended  to  haul  the  siege  train  over 
to  the  railroad,  and  thence  transport  it  on  cars  with  horse-power  to 
Carolina  City.  Immediately  on  landing  at  Slocum’s  Creek  I was  in- 
formed that  the  enemy  had  burned  the  railroad  bridge  over  Newport 
Eiver,  and  fearing  that  a similar  attempt  would  be  made  on  the  county- 
road  bridge,  I dispatched  a company  to  guard  it,  and  followed  with 
the  available  force  that  had  landed.  We  thus  secured  this  bridge 
and  had  an  unobstructed  route  by  the  common  road  to  Carolina  City* 
which  point  we  reached  on  the  22d. 

The  Fifth  [Rhode  Island  .Battalion  was  ordered  to  the  crossing  of 
Newport  [River,  and  to  the  major  commanding  was  intrusted  the  re- 
building of  the  railroad  bridge.  This  was  accomplished  in  a few  days. 

On  the  23d  a demand  was  made  for  the  surrender  of  the  fort  and 
garrison.  This  being  refused,  steps  were  at  once  taken  to  completely 
invest  the  work  and  preparations  made  for  besieging  the  place. 

Two  companies  were  sent  to  Morehead  City,  the  terminus  of  the 
railway,  and  three  companies  to  Beaufort,  with  instructions  to  the 
commanding  officers  at  both  points  to  seize  all  the  boats  and  cut  off 
all  supplies  for  the  garrison  and  stop  all  communication  with  the  fort. 
A gunboat  served  to  blockade  Core  Sound,  and  by  the  aid  of  one  or 
two  small  boats  at  Carolina  City  we  were  enabled  to  cut  off  all  com- 
munication through  Bogue  Sound.  From  Beaufort  a communication 
was  opened  ydth  the  blockading  fleet,  a party  crossing  to  Shackelford 
Banks,  and  thence  in  a fisherman’s  boat  to  the  fleet. 

Having  received  a ship’s  launch  and  howitzer  from  New  Berne  by 
the  way  of  Clubfoot  Canal,  a small  party  on  the  29th  of  March,  under 
cover  of  this  gun,  effected  a landing  on  the  Banks  directly  opposite 
Carolina  City,  thus  completely  investing  the  work. 

The  enemy  now  seemed  to  be  very  active  in  and  about  the  fort. 
The  bark  Glen,  lying  under  the  guns  of  the  fort,  was  burned ; also  the 
Eliason  House.  The  light-house  tower  and  beacon  were  overturned, 
and  all  the  outbuildings  were  destroyed.  All  parties  of  our  men  cross- 
ing from  Morehead  to  Beaufort,  or  anywhere  within  range  of  the  guns 
of  the  fort,  were  continually  fired  upon. 

Fort  Macon  is  situated  upon  the  eastern  extremity  of  Bogue  Banks, 
a narrow  sand  island  stretching  off  to  the  westward  a distance  of 
about  25  miles,  and  separated  from  the  main-land  by  Bogue  Sound, 
in  which  the  depth  of  the  water  is  so  slight  as  to  permit  no  navigation 
other  than  that  of  the  lightest-draught  flats  and  small  boats.  From  a 
point  on  the  island  opposite  Carolina  City  to  the  fort,  a distance  of 
about  5 miles,  the  surface  of  the  island  is  broken,  commencing  a short 
distance  from  the  beach,  into  irregular  knolls  of  sand,  varying  in 
height  and  extent.  Toward  the  sound  these  knolls  decrease  in  size 
until  they  approach  an  extensive  salt-marsh,  through  which  run  nu- 
merous creeks.  Near  the  head  of  one  of  these  creeks,  Hoop  Pole,  our 
permanent  camp  and  depot  was  located,  and  to  this  point  it  was 
necessary  to  transport  all  the  troops,  supplies,  siege  guns,  ammuni- 
tion, &c.,  in  scows  and  small  boats.  On  account  of  the  intricacy  of 
the  channel  and  the  slight  depth  of  the  water,  even  with  the  boats 
which  we  obtained,  no  supplies  could  be  transported  excepting  upon 
full  tide. 

Finding  that  a large  force  was  necessary  to  guard  the  Newport 


Chap.  XX.] 


SIEGE  OF  FORT  MACON,  N.  C. 


283 


Railroad  Bridge,  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  Regiment,  having  reported  for 
duty  with  the  brigade,  was  assigned  to  that  post,  with  instructions  to 
picket  the  line  of  railroad  and  protect  it  from  encroachments  of  the 
enemy  from  the  direction  of  Swansborough.  The  Fifth  Rhode  Island 
Battalion,  being  thus  relieved,  joined  me  on  tile  4th  of  April  at  Caro- 

^Onthe  29th  of  March  the  first  troops  were  crossed  to  the  Banks,  and 
from  that  time  to  April  10  every  available  hour  of  night  and  day  was 
spent  in  transporting  men,  siege  train,  and  supplies. 

During  this  period  of  thirteen  days  I crossed  eight  companies  ol  the 
Fourth  Rhode  Island  Regiment;  seven  companies  of  the  Eighth  Con- 
necticut Regiment:  the  Fifth  Rhode  Island  Battalion;  Company  O, 
First  United  States  Artillery;  Company  I,  Third  Rew  York  Artillery, 
Captain  Ammon  commanding,  who  reported  for  duty  at  Carolina  City, 

and  the  siege  train.  • ^ , 

Communication  was  immediately  established  with  the  fleet,  a signal 
officer  being  placed  aboard  the  vessel  of  the  commanding  officer. 

On  the  11th,  aided  by  Captain  Williamson,  of  the  Topographical 
Engineers,  Captain  Morris,  of  the  Artillery,  and  Lieutenant  Flagler 
of  the  Ordnance,  I made  a reconnaissance  in  force  in  the  direction  ot 
the  fort.  Meeting  the  enemy’s  pickets,  they  were  driven  m after  a 
slight  skirmish,  and  we  advanced  to  within  a mile  of  the  work,  when 
the  guns  of  the  fort  opened  upon  us  with  shot  and  shell.  The  men 
were  placed  under  cover  of  the  sand  hills,  while  Captains  Williamson 
and  Morris  and  Lieutenant  Flagler  made  a careful  examination  of  the 
ground  in  our  front,  and  selected  sites  for  our  batteries  ranging  from 
1,300  to  1,700  yards  from  the  fort.  The  force  was  then  withdrawn,  no 
casualtieshaving  occurred  from  the  fire  of  the  enemy.  In  the  recon- 
naissance we  received  great  assistance  from  the  blockading  fleet,  Capt. 
S.  S.  Prentiss  commanding.  The  gunboats  engaged  the  fort  and  shelled 
the  beach  in  our  front.  For  this  and  other  timely  aid  rendered  us  I 
desire  to  express  my  acknowledgments  and  thanks. 

On  the  12th  a permanent  advance  guard  of  five  companies  was  organ- 
ized and  work  on  the  approaches  was  commenced.  During  this  day  a 
skirmish  occurred  with  the  enemy,  in  which  Captain  Sheffield  and  a 
private  of  the  Eighth  Connecticut  Regiment  were  wounded,  Ike 
enemy  were  driven  back,  and  although  more  than  seventy  shot  and 
shell  were  fired  on  our  advance  guard  and  fatigue  parties,  not  a man 
was  injured  by  them.  From  this  date  the  regular  work  on  the  ap- 
proaches, trenches,  batteries,  and  rifle  pits  was  vigorously  pushed 
forward  by  all  our  available  force  both  night  and  day,  m spite  ot  the 
desultory  fire  kept  up  by  the  enemy. 

The  road  along  the  beach  being  in  full  view  ot  the  lookout  on  tne 
flag-staff  of  the  fort,  it  became  necessary  to  transport  our  guns,  mortars, 
and  ammunition  to  the  batteries  and  magazines  under  cover  ot  the 
night.  The  enemy  made  two  ineffectual  attempts  at  night  to  dislodge 
us  from  our  advanced  position,  in  one  of  which  Lieutenant  Landers  and 
a private  of  the  Fifth  Rhode  Island  Battalion  were  slightly  wounded, 
and  in  the  other  Major  Appleman  and  a private  of  the  Eighth  Con- 
necticut Regiment  received  severe  contusions  from  a discharge  of  grape 
while  digging  rifle  pits  within  750  yards  of  the  fort. 

On  the  morning  of  the  24th  the  two  mortar  batteries  were  prepared 
to  open  fire,  and  the  Parrott-gun  battery  was  ready,  with  the  exception 
of  the  opening  of  the  embrasures,  which  was  delayed  until  the  moment 
of  opening  fire  was  arranged,  so  that  the  enemy  might  not  discover  our 
position. 


284 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


In  selecting  sites  for  our  batteries  advantage  was  taken  of  the  sand 
hills  previously  spoken  of.  By  cutting  down  the  natural  slopes  of 
these  hills  to  a sufficient  depth  to  lay  the  platforms  for  our  guns  and 
mortars  and  revetting  the  interior  faces  with  sand  bags  excellent 
epaulements  were  formed.  Embrasures  for  the  Parrott  guns  were  cut 
directly  through  the  sand  hills,  and  revetted  with  sods  taken  from  the 
salt-marsh  close  at  hand.  During  the  night  of  the  24th  the  embra- 
sures of  the  Parrott-gun  battery  were  opened,  and  at  5.40  o’clock  on 
the  morning  of  the  25th  the  first  shot  was  fired  upon  the  fort.  Imme- 
diately all  three  of  our  batteries  opened,  and  our  fire  was  vigorously 
answered. 

Owing  to  the  high  wind  and  rough  sea  it  was  impracticable  to  com- 
municate with  the  blockading  fleet  our  intention  of  opening  fire  on  the 
morning  of  the  25th.  As  soon,  however,  as  the  commanding  officer, 
Capt.  Samuel  Lockwood,  discovered  our  movements  he  brought  all  his 
vessels  into  action,  and  for  a time  attracted  the  enemy’s  attention  to 
such  an  extent  as  to  greatly  facilitate  the  officers  in  charge  of  the  mor- 
tar batteries  in  correcting  their  range  and  length  of  fuse,  but  owing  to 
the  extreme  roughness  of  the  s^a  the  fleet  was  compelled  to  withdraw. 
At  4.30  in  the  afternoon  a white  flag  was  displayed  upon  the  ramparts 
of  the  fort  and  the  firing  ceased  upon  both  sides.  After  communicating 
with  the  general  commanding  during  the  night  of  the  25th,  on  the 
morning  of  the  26th,  at  9.30  o’clock,  I received  the  surrender  of  the 
fort  and  garrison. 

A copy  of  the  terms  of  capitulation  is  herewith  transmitted* 

For  the  detailed  operation  of  the  three  batteries  I have  to  refer  you 
to  the  very  interesting  reports  of  Captain  Morris  and  Lieutenant  Flagler. 

The  fort  and  armament  bear  evidence  not  only  of  the  great  skill  with 
which  these  batteries  were  served,  but  also  of  the  wonderful  effects 
produced  by  the  introduction  of  rifled  guns  into  our  siege  trains.  The 
number  of  guns  disabled  and  the  effect  produced  upon  the  scarp-wall, 
although  hot  exposed  to  view  from  our  position,  are  sufficient  proof  of 
the  great  value  of  the  30-pounder  Parrott  as  a siege  gun. 

In  truth,  the  result  of  the  ten  and  a half  hours’  firing  from  our  three 
batteries  exceeded  my  most  sanguine  expectations,  and  they  reflect  the 
highest  credit  upon  the  officers  and  men  engaged  in  their  location  and 
construction,  as  well  as  the  working  of  the  mortars  and  guns. 

To  Capt.  R.  S.  Williamson,  of  the  Topographical  Engineers,  I am 
under  lasting  obligations.  His  bold  and  daring  reconnaissances  to 
within  800  yards  of  the  fort  gave  us  full  and  complete  knowledge  of  the 
ground  up  to  the  very  foot  of  the  glacis.  He  so  located  the  batteries 
that  the  sand  hills  themselves  served  as  epaulements,  rendering  but 
little  work  necessary  to  prepare  them  for  the  guns  and  mortars  and 
the  construction  of  the  magazines. 

Captain  Morris  and  Lieutenant  Flagler  were  untiring  in  their  zeal  and 
energy  in  superintending  the  construction  of  the  batteries.  The  work 
was  carried  on  both  by  day  and  night  under  their  supervision  by  the 
men  of  Company  C,  First  United  States  Artillery,  and  Company  I, 
Third  Hew  York  Artillery,  and  such  details  as  could  be  spared  from 
the  infantry  force. 

The  Parrott-gun  battery  was  commanded  by  Captain  Morris,  First 
United  States  Artillery,  assisted  by  Lieutenant  Gowan,  Forty-eighth 
Penn syTl vania  Regiment,  and  Lieutenant  Pollock,  First  United  States 
Artillery. 


See  p.  276. 


Chap.  XX.] 


SIEGE  OF  FORT  MACON,  N.  C. 


285 


The  10-incli  mortar  battery  was  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Flagler, 
of  the  Ordnance,  assisted  by  Captain  Ammon,  Third  New  York  Artil- 
lery, and  Captain  Pell,  aide-de-camp  to  the  general  commanding,  who 
volunteered  his  services.  The  8-inch  mortar  battery  was  commanded 
by  Lieutenant  Prouty,  of  the  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Eegiment, 
assisted  by  Lieutenants  Thomas  and  Kelsey,  of  the  Third  New  York 
Artillery.  The  result  shows  the  efficiency  with  which  the  batteries 
were  worked,  and  I take  great  pleasure  in  acknowledging  my  thanks 
to  these  officers. 

From  the  time  of  our  first  occupying  the  ground  immediately  in  front 
of  the  fort  very  severe  and  onerous  duty  was  performed  by  the  officers 
and  men  of  the  Fourth  Ehode  Island,  Eighth  Connecticut,  and  Fifth 
Ehode  Island  Battalion.  Owing  to  companies  being  detached  from  the 
first  two  regiments  and  their  otherwise  weak  condition  the  tour  of  duty 
in  the  trenches  and  on  advance  picket  guard  returned  every  third  day. 
This,  in  connection  with  a march  of  3J  miles  through  heavy  sand  to  and 
from  camp  and  occasional  fatigue  duty,  was  beginning  to  tell  fearfully 
on  both  officers  and  men ; still  they  bore  it  all  without  complaint,  and 
it  gives  me  pleasure  to  commend  them  as  soldiers  of  true  grit. 

The  Ninth  New  Jersey  Eegiment  guarded  our  route  of  supplies,  and 
rendered  most  efficient  service  in  completely  protecting  our  line  of  com- 
munication from  raids  of  the  rebel  cavalry,  who  were  constantly  prowl- 
ing about  the  country. 

During  the  investment  of  the  work  and  active  operations  of  the  siege 

1 kept  up  constant  communication  with  my  force  by  means  of  the  officers 
of  the  Signal  Corps.  From  favorable  positions  previously  determined 
upon  these  officers  were  enabled  to  report  to  the  commanding  officers 
of  the  batteries  the  effect  of  their  shot  and  shell. 

During  the  action  I have  to  report  the  following  loss : 1 killed  and 

2 wounded.  Killed,  Private  William  E.  Dart,  Company  I,  Third  New 
York  Artillery.  He  fell,  struck  by  a round  shot,  while  in  the  perform- 
ance of  his  duty  resetting  a pointing  stake  on  the  parapet  of  the  10- 
inch  mortar  battery.  Wounded,  Sergeant  Hynes  and  Private  Bonnet, 
of  Company  C,  First  United  States  Artillery. 

The  reported  killed  and  wounded  in  the  fort  is  as  follows : Killed,  8 j 
wounded,  20. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  G.  PAEKE, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Third  Division . 

Capt.  Lewis  Eichmond, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Daniel  W.  Flagler , TJ.  8.  Ordnance  Department. 

Fort  Macon,  N.  C.,  April  29,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  for  your  information  the  following 
report  of  the  disposition  made  of  the  siege  batteries  used  in  the  attack 
upon  Fort  Macon : 

I was  detailed  for  duty  with  the  Third  Division  in  the  Department  of 
North  Carolina  on  the  19th  of  March,  and,  in  accordance  with  an  order 
from  General  Parke,  turned  over  a Parrott-gun  battery  of  three  rifled 


286 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


30-pounders  to  Captain  Morris,  of  the  First  Artillery,  and  also  loaded  a 
battery  of  four  10-inch  siege  mortars  upon  a bark,  holding  them  in 
readiness  to  proceed  with  the  division  whenever  it  should  move.  When 
the  division  arrived  at  Slocum’s  Creek,  as  it  was  not  sure  there  would 
be  occasion  to  use  these  batteries,  they  were  left  on  board  the  vessels 
at  that  point. 

I came  on  with  the  division  to  Carolina  City,  and  after  the  general 
had  communicated  with  the  commanding  officer  of  the  fort  I received 
an  order  from  him  (General  Parke)  to  return  immediately  and  attend 
to  the  transportation  of  the  batteries.  Fearing  we  had  not  artillery 
enough  I went  to  New  Berne  and  loaded  another  battery  of  four  8-inch 
mortars  upon  a barge,  and  Lieut.  M.  F.  Prouty,  of  the  Twenty-fifth 
Massachusetts  Begiment,  having  reported  to  me  for  artillery  duty,  I 
left  him  to  bring  this  battery  to  Slocum’s  Creek.  From  the  head  of 
this  creek  to  Carolina  City  the  artillery  had  to  be  transported  by  land. 

The  quartermaster  could  furnish  very  little  transportation,  as  nearly 
all  that  could  be  procured  was  engaged  in  bringing  down  baggage  and 
stores  for  the  troops. 

There  were  no  men  with  the  batteries  to  unload  and  move  them,  and 
the  labor  had  to  be  performed  by  negroes,  whom  I obtained  from  Cap- 
tain King,  the  division  quartermaster.  The  batteries  were  hauled  to 
Havelock  Station  in  quartermasters’  wagons  and  there  loaded  on  cars, 
and  hauled  to  Carolina  City  with  horses  and  mules.  The  large  quan- 
tity of  heavy  shell  necessary  for  the  mortar  batteries,  and  the  lack  of 
men,  wagons,  and  cars  to  transport  them,  must  account  for  the  delay 
of  these  batteries  in  reaching  Carolina  City. 

At  the  latter  point  only  one  scow  could  be  obtained  suitable  for  car- 
rying purposes  across  Bogue  Sound  to  the  Banks,  and  owing  to  tides 
and  the  difficulties  of  a shallow,  intricate  channel  not  more  than  one 
trip  could  be  made  daily. 

A magazine  was  established  in  a deserted  building  at  the  point  of 
landing,  and  again  all  the  materials  had  to  be  hauled  a distance  of  4J 
miles  along  a sandy  beach. 

On  the  12th  instant,  the  day  after  the  enemy’s  pickets  were  driven 
into  the  fort,  I went  with  Captain  Williamson,  Corps  of  Topographical 
Engineers,  and  selected  positions  for  the  batteries.  The  first  of  these, 
the  10-inch  mortar  battery,  was  at  a distance  of  1,080  yards  from  the 
fort,  and  behind  a natural  sand  hill,  which  was  sufficiently  high  to  pro- 
tect it  from  the  direct  fire  of  the  enemy’s  cannon.  It  was  near  the 
marsh,  on  the  left  side  of  the  island. 

Captain  Morris’  battery  of  Parrott  guns  was  placed  about  200  yards 
in  advance  of  this  and  a little  to  the  right.  The  position  of  the  sand 
hills  was  such  and  the  strip  of  available  land  so  narrow  that  the  latter 
had  to  be  put  more  nearly  in  front  of  the  mortars  than  was  desirable 
in  order  to  distract  the  enemy’s  fire.  The  8-inch  mortars  were  placed 
still  200  yards  farther  in  advance,  and  on  the  right,  near  the  sea-shore. 

The  work  of  moving  the  ordnance,  building  the  mortar  batteries, 
constructing  roads,  &c.,  was  all  performed  by  details  from  the  regiments 
of  infantry  of  the  division  and  from  Captain  Ammon’s  company  of  the 
Third  New  York  Artillery.  The  men  were  often  at  work  before  they 
were  rested  from  the  fatigue  of  twenty-four  hours’  picket  duty,  the 
pickets  themselves  often  volunteering  to  assist,  and  always  with  a 
cheerfulness  which  evinced  their  determination  to  accomplish  the  end 
we  had  in  view.  While  at  work  the  men  were  often  annoyed  by 
artillery  firing  from  the  fort,  but  no  one  in  the  batteries  was  even  hurt, 
the  sand  hills  affording  good  protection.  On  the  evening  of  the  23d 


Chap.  XX. J SIEGE  OF  FORT  MACON,  N.  C.  287 

instant  the  batteries,  magazines,  and  roads  leading  to  them  were  all 
completed.  Wagons  had  been  engaged  for  several  nights  previous 
hauling  shells  to  the  mortar  batteries,  and  on  the  night  of  the  23d  I 
had  the  magazines  filled  with  ammunition  and  reported  to  General 
Parke  that  we  were  ready  to  open  fire. 

The  following  day  at  2 o’clock  I received  orders  from  him  to  com- 
mence firing  that  afternoon,  if  possible.  I obtained  details  of  men  for 
the  mortar  batteries  from  Captain  Ammon’s  company  of  the  Third 
New  York  Artillery.  The  men,  having  a march  of  4 miles  to  the  bat- 
teries, did  not  arrive  there  till  late  in  the  afternoon.  Captain  Morris 
reported  that  lie  Would  not  be  able  to  open  fire  till  the  next  morning, 
as  he  had  still  some  work  to  do  upon  the  embrasures.  As  I was  con- 
fident that  the  enemy  was  ignorant  of  the  nature  and  position  of  our 
batteries  and  as  we  would  be  able  to  fire  only  a few  shells  before  dark, 
while  obtaining  our  ranges,  I thought  it  better  to  wait  till  morning, 
keeping  the  enemy  in  ignorance  till  we  were  ready  to  open  fire  upon 
all  the  batteries  simultaneously  and  to  continue  it.  The  men  slept  in  the 
batteries  that  night,  and  all  commenced  fire  shortly  after  sunrise  in  the 
morning. 

Lieutenant  Prouty  commanded  the  8-inch  mortar  battery,  and  I took 
charge  of  the  10-inch,  and  was  assisted  by  Captain  Ammon,  and  by 
Captain  Pell,  aide-de-camp  to  General  Burnside.  The  first  few  dis- 
charges were  from  the  Parrott  guns,  which  were  followed  soon  by  the 
mortars,  and  the  fire  was  continued  without  interruption  till  5 p.  m. 
It  was  returned  from  the  fort  with  twenty-one  guns,  among  which  were 
one  8-inch  and  two  10-inch  columbiads  and  six  32-pounders  mounted 
as  mortars.  At  first  the  enemy’s  fire  was  very  rapid,  principally  shells 
and  shrapnel,  and  the  fort  was  so  enveloped  in  smoke  that  it  was  diffi- 
cult to  tell  whether  our  shells  were  falling  within  or  beyond  them.  At 
9 o’clock  I received  a dispatch  from  the  signal  officer  at  Beaufort,  say- 
ing the  mortars  were  u firing  too  far.”  The  error  was  corrected  imme- 
diately, and  shortly  after  the  enemy’s  fire  was  somewhat  slackened. 

The  smoke  cleared  away,  and  I could  observe  the  effect  of  every 
shell  distinctly.  The  bolsters  of  the  10-inch  and  one  of  the  8-inch 
mortar-beds  were  split  during  the  day.  The  platforms  of  the  10-inch 
mortars  were  badly  injured,  as  the  soil  was  too  light  to  afford  a firm 
foundation.  These  were  all  repaired,  stopping  fire  from  one  piece  at  a 
time  for  that  purpose.  During  the  afternoon  we  fired  very  carefully, 
but  slowly,  as  I wished  to  reserve  ammunition  enough  for  night  firing 
if  necessary. 

After  11  o’clock  more  than  five-eighths  of  the  shells  fell  within  the 
fort.  The  epaulement  of  the  10-inch  battery  was  considerably  injured 
by  round  shot  and  the  explosion  of  a few  10-inch  columbiad  shells 
from  the  fort.  The  pointing  stakes  were  several  times  displaced.  At 
about  5 o’clock  the  enemy  hoisted  a white  flag  and  we  ceased  firing. 
During  the  night  the  batteries  were  completely  repaired  and  the  maga- 
zines replenished.  The  men  slept  in  the  batteries,  that  they  might  open 
fire  again  if  necessary. 

But  one  man  was  killed  in  my  battery  and  none  wounded.  I re- 
ceived most  valuable  assistance  from  Captains  Pell  and  Ammon,  and 
I cannot  speak  in  too  high  terms  of  the  men.  The  detachments  from 
Captain  Ammon’s  company  were  without  previous  knowledge  of  mor- 
tar practice  except  what  they  had  gained  from  a drill  the  preceding  day, 
yet  they  served  the  pieces  efficiently  and  without  accident  throughout 
the  day.  The  gunners  detailed  from  Captain  Morris’  company,  Privates 
Carlin,  McKinstry,  Reising,  and  McKenna  were  invaluable. 


288 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  IX. 


I take  particular  pleasure  iu  calling  your  attention  to  the  manage- 
ment of  the  8-inch  mortar  battery.  It  was  under  tbe  charge  of  Lieu- 
tenant Prouty,  who,  as  a volunteer  officer  of  infantry,  has  had  no  prac- 
tical experience  in  artillery  practice  and  no  knowledge  on  the  subject 
except  what  he  has  gained  since  he  reported  to  me.  His  success  is  the 
result  of  his  own  industry  and  energy.  I inclose  his  report.  I have 
since  examined  the  fort,  and  find  that  of  the  1,150  shots  fired  from  our 
three  batteries  about  500  took  effect  within  the  works  of  the  enemy, 
not  counting  the  shells  that  were  exploded  over  the  fort.  The  fire  of 
the  Parrott  guns  was  most  destructive,  these  three  pieces  having  dis- 
abled nineteen  of  the  enemy’s  guns.  Only  about  3 feet  in  width  along 
the  tops  of  the  scarp-wall  of  the  western  face  could  be  reached  by  their 
fire,  yet  in  this  narrow  portion  41  shots  had  taken  effect,  some  of  them 
penetrating  the  brick  masonry  to  a depth  of  2 feet.  Comparing  the 
angle  at  which  the  guns  were  fired  with  the  angle  of  fall  necessary  for 
the  shot  to  reach  this  wall,  I am  confident  they  could  not  have  reached 
it  without  having  been  partially  spent  by  passing  through  the  crest  of 
the  glacis. 

Barricades  for  the  casemates  have  been  formed  within  the  fort  by 
standing  bars  of  railroad  iron  up  against  the  casemate  inside  walls. 
Several  traverse  circles  were  blown  up  by  mortar  shell,  but  they  did 
not  seem  in  any  other  way  to  have  disabled  guns.  Forty-eight  of  the 
same  shell  exploded  in  the  bottom  of  the  ditch  and  a large  number  on 
the  parade.  One  of  the  latter  broke  through  into  the  drain  of  the  fort. 

The  choice  of  the  kind  and  caliber  of  the  artillery  used  in  the  attack 
upon  Fort  Macon  was  certainly  a good  one.  The  object  to  be  effected 
with  the  siege  mortars  was,  at  first,  by  exploding  the  shells  at  short 
distance  above  the  fort,  to  drive  the  cannoneers  from  the  guns  or  pre- 
vent them  from  being  efficiently  served $ afterward,  by  exploding  the 
shells  at  or  after  striking,  to  disable  guns.  In  both  respects  they  were 
successful.  The  destructive  and  accurate  fire  of  the  30-pounder  Par- 
rott guns  has  shown  that  the  work  of  dismounting  or  disabling  guns 
with  them  is  not  a matter  of  chance,  but  of  certainty.  There  was  no 
exposed  wall  on  which  to  try  their  breaching  pow^r. 

During  the  enemy’s  fire  since  the  first  commencement  of  operations 
I have  often  had  occasion  to  observe  the  want  of  effect  in  the  explosion 
of  their  shells.  I have  examined  a few  of  those  left  in  the  fort  and  find 
them  filled  with  cannon  powder. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  W.  FLAGLER, 

First  Lieutenant  of  Ordnance . 

Gapt.  Charles  T.  Gardner, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Ko.  4. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Merrick  F.  Prouty,  Twenty-fifth  Massachusetts  Lnfantry . 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  Thursday,  April  24,  1862, 
at  1 p.  m.,  I was  ordered  by  you  to  move  to  the  8-inch  mortar  battery 
of  four  pieces,  which  was  planted  1,280  yards  from  Fort  Macon,  and 
open  fire  on  the  fort. 

Lieutenants  Thomas  and  Kelsey  and  15  men  of  the  Third  Kew  York 
Artillery  and  5 men  of  Captain  Morris’  battery  were  detailed  to  man 


HAP.  XX.] 


SIEGE  OF  FORT  MACON,  N.  C. 


289 


be  mortars,  but  owing  to  the  distance  of  the  camp  from  the  battery 
nd  hard  walking  in  the  loose  sand  we  did  not  reach  there  till  3.30 
, m and  before  we  could  open  fire  I was  ordered  by  you  to  await 
lirther  orders  before  doing  so.  The  men  remained  in  the  battery  dur- 
ug  the  night,  and  I opened  fire,  as  you  ordered,  about  5.30  a.  m.  The 
Lrst  shells  falling  short,  the  charges  were  increased  and  a good  range 
fas  obtained  in  a short  time.  A steady  and  effective  fire  was  kept  up 
rom  each  piece  until  11  a.  m.,  when  the  bolster  of  No.  4 was  broken 
>y  the  recoil,  and  that  was  not  worked  until  about  1 p.  m.,  when, 
laving  been  repaired,  it  was  again  opened.  At  3 p.  m.  I received  an 
»rder  from  you  that  a reserve  of  ammunition  should  be  kept  for  con- 
ingencies  during  the  night,  and  from  3.20  p.  m.  to  5 but  two  pieces 
?ere  used.  At  that  time  firing  was  suspended,  the  enemy  showing  a 
vhite  flag.  The  firing  during  the  afternoon  was  very  fine,  nearly  every 
.hell  bursting  within  or  over  the  fort.  During  the  night  of  the  25th 
hell  and  ammunition  were  brought,  and  at  daylight  of  the  26th  the 
nen  were  at  their  posts,  and  everything  in  good  order  to  open  fire,  had 

t been  necessary.  , , , 

Very  efficient  service  was  rendered  me  by  Lieutenants  Ihomas  and 
lelsey,  and  the  conduct  of  the  men  was  beyond  praise. 

I am  happy  to  report  that  no  casualties  occurred;  but  two  of  the 
memy’s  shell" bursting  in  or  over  the  battery. 

Yery  respectfully, 

J * ’ M.  F.  PBOUTY, 

Lieut.  Co.  C , 2 5th  Mass.  Vols .,  Comdg.  8-inch  Mortar  Battery. 

Lieut.  D.  W.  Flagler. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Capt.  Lewis  0.  Morris , First  TJ.  8.  Artillery. 

Fort  Macon,  N.  C.,  April  28,  1862. 

Sir  • I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  opera- 
tions of  Company  C,  First  Artillery,  during  the  siege  and  reduction  of 
Fort  Macon: 

As  you  are  aware,  I was  ordered  to  leave  my  light  battery  at  New 
Berne  and  report  to  you  with  three  Parrott  30-pounder  guns  as  part  of 
the  siege  train  for  the  reduction  of  Fort  Macon,  and  that  they  did  their 
work  well  the  sequel  has  proved. 

After  the  investment  of  the  fort  and  a careful  reconnaissance  it  was 
decided  to  place  my  battery  at  a distance  of  1,500  yards  from  the  fort, 
the  10-inch  mortar  battery  about  200  yards  in  rear,  and  the  8-inch 
mortar  battery  about  200  yards  to  the  right  and  front.  As  these  bat- 
teries were  constructed  under  fire,  much  of  the  work  was  done  at  night, 
which,  added  to  the  fact  that  guns,  ammunition,  and  materials  were 
transported  through  deep  sand  some  3^  miles,  will  prove  that  it  was 
no  light  labor  which  the  men  performed  so  cheerfully  and  so  well. 

The  company,  having  worked  all  night,  completed  the  battery  on 
the  morning  of  the  25th  of  April,  and  at  5.30  I opened  fire  on  the  fort, 
the  first  sb ot  strikin g the  parapet.  The  mortar  batteries  followed  imme- 
diately, and  shot  and  shell  were  poured  rapidly  into  the  fort,  which 
, returned  the  fire  with  spirit.  For  several  hours  the  fire  from  the  fort 

19  R R— VOL  IX 


li 


290 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX 


was  rapid  and  well  sustained,  and  8 and  10  inch  shell  and  shot  32 
pounder  shot  and  shell,  24-pounder  shot  and  rifled  projectiles  wer< 
ploughing  the  ground  in  furrows  before  the  battery,  striking  the  para 

pet  or  exploding  in  front  and  rear.  After  that  time  they  served  a les 
number  of  guns.  ‘ v 

Six  32-pounder  shot  passed  through  my  embrasures,  one  of  whicl 
struck  the  Parrott  gun  on  the  left  of  the  battery,  but  fortunately  die 
not  disable  it.  The  piece  was  struck  on  the  chase  and  wrouakt-iroi 
band  carrying  away  the  breech  sight.  About  the  same  time  a 10-incl 
shell  fell  upon  the  wheel  of  a limber  and  shattered  it.  This  was  al 
the  damage  to  my  battery  by  the  enemy’s  fire. 

About  9 o’clock  in  the  morning  the  blockading  fleet  engaged  the 
fort  and  withdrew  after  an  hour’s  firing.  During  the  afternoon  the  fire 
Irom  the  batteries  was  rapid  and  effective,  so  much  so  that  about  5 
o clock  a white  flag  was  displayed  from  the  fort  and  a proposition  to 
surrender  was  made.  The  following  morning  the  flag  of  the  Union 
was  floating  over  another  rebel  fortification.  There  was  fired  during 
the  day  from  my  three  guns  450  shot  and  shell,  and  the  effects  of  these 
projectiles  are  seen  everywhere  in  disabled  guns  and  broken  walls 
One  shot  disabled  two  guns,  8 and  10  inch  columbiads  : another  passed 
through  a bar  of  railroad  iron  and  buried  itself  in  the  wall.  The  scarp- 
wall  was  protected  by  the  glacis,  but  occasionally  a shot  would  strike 
this  wall  and  penetrate  over  2 feet.  Had  this  wall  been  exposed  to  a 
direct  fire  from  these  guns  it  could  have  been  breached  in  a few  hours 
Nineteen  guns  were  disabled  by  my  fire.  From  rapid  and  continued 
firing  the  vents  of  all  my  guns  were  enlarged,  one  of  them  so  much  so 
as  to  render  the  gun  unserviceable. 

To  the  officers  and  men  of  my  command  I am  indebted  for  the  cool- 
ness  and  skill  with  which  they  served  the  pieces.  First  Lieut  G W 
Gowan,  Forty-eighth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  attached  to  my  Com- 
pany, and  Second  Lieut.  W.  K.  Pollock,  First  Artillery,  each  had  charge 
of  a piece,  which  they  pointed  themselves  during  most  of  the  dav  ami 
disabled  many  of  the  enemy’s  guns.  Sergeant  Reynolds  and  Corporal 
Leahy  rendered  efficient  service  as  gunners  and  made  some  fine  shots. 
Sergeant  Thompson  did  good  service  in  the  magazine,  filling  and 
iusmg  shell  and  serving  out  ammunition.  Nine  of  my  men  were  de- 
tailed to  serve  as  gunners  in  the  two  mortar  batteries,  which  service 
they  performed  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  commanders  of  these  batteries. 
These  men  were  replaced  by  nine  men  from  Captain  Ammon’s  com- 
pany, I,  Third  Regiment  New  York  Volunteer  Artillery,  who  did  their 
duty  well.  It  gives  me  pleasure  to  report  that  during  the  day  only 
two  men,  Sergeant  Hynes  and  Private  Bonnet,  were  slightly  wounded. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LEWIS  O.  MORRIS, 

Captain , First  Artillery , Commanding  Company  C. 

Capt.  Charles  T.  Gardner,  A.  A.  £.,  Third  Division . 


* No.  G. 

Deport  of  Col.  Isaac  P.  Rodman , Fourth  Rhode  Island  Infantry . 


Hdqrs.  Fourth  Regiment  Rhode  Island  Vols., 
Department  of  North  Carolina, 
Beaufort , V.  O.,  May  1,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  action  of  the  Fourth  Rhode 


291 


Chap.  XX.  j SIEGE  OF  FORT  MACON,  N.  C. 

Island  in  the  reduction  of  Fort  Macon,  which  surrendered  to  our  forces 
on  the  26th  ultimo : 

After  a march,  which  was  necessarily  a forced  one,  the  Third  Brigade 
of  this  department,  or  a portion  of  it,  arrived  and  invested  Fort  Macon 
on  March  26.  The  Fourth  Bhode  Island  had  two  companies  in  Beau- 
fort, one  in  Carolina  City,  and  seven  on  the  Banks.  The  labor  of  those 
on  the  Banks  was  very  arduous,  as  much  so  as  we  could  well  endure, 
which  was  cheerfully  performed  without  flinching.  Five  companies 
of  the  Fourth  alternately  relieved  the  Eighth  Connecticut  and  Fifth 
Rhode  Island  Battalion  in  the  trenches  for  fifteen  days,  exposed  through 
the  day  to  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  during  which  time  our  siege  batteries 
were  planted.  Rot  a day  passed  that  the  enemy  did  not  open  on  us, 
firing  from  30  to  50  shells,  none  of  which,  I am  happy  to  say,  injured 
any  of  my  regiment. 

The  exposure  and  fatigue  incident  to  our  duty  has  largely  increased 
our  sick  list,  and  we  have  lost  6 men  by  death  since  we  arrived.  Their 
names  will  appear  in  the  adjutant’s  report  to  General  Mauran,  which 
we  have  at  last  completed. 

Our  batteries  opened  on  the  morning  of  the  26th,  and  in  two  or  three 
hours  told  with  fearful  effect  on  the  enemy’s  works.  They  held  out 
for  about  ten  hours,  when  by  a flag  of  truce  they  requested  a cessation 
of  hostilities  preparatory  to  a surrender.  General  Burnside  granted 
this,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  27th  Fort  Macon  was  ours.  The  Fifth 
Rhode  Island  Battalion,  being  on  duty  in  the  trenches,  received  their 
arms,  and  five  companies  of  my  regiment  relieved  Major  Wright, 
guarding  the  prisoners  until  they  were  shipped  off.  The  fort  is  much 
damaged  by  our  fire  and  some  twenty-six  guns  were  rendered  unfit  for 
service.  The  flag  that  was  flying  on  the  fort  General  Parke  has  re- 
quested General  Burnside  to  send  to  you. 

Nine  companies  of  the  Fourth  are  now  quartered  here,  and  we  have  a 
fine  building  for  a hospital,  where,  I do  not  doubt,  our  men  will  rap- 
idly improve.  Dr.  Millar  assures  me  that  they  are  better  already.  I 
hope  soon  to  have  the  most  of  them  able  for  duty. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  your  obedient  servant, 

I.  P.  RODMAN, 

Colonel  Fourth  Rhode  Island  Volunteers. 

Gov.  William  Sprague,  Providence , R.  I. 

) 

No.  7. 

Report  of  Lieut.  William  S.  Andrews.  Ninth  New  Yorh  Infantry , Acting 

Signal  Officer. 

Beaufort,  N.  C.,  May  1, 1862. 

Major:  Fort  Macon  fell  on  the  25th  of  April.  I believe  that  never 
in  the  history  of  warfare  have  signals  been  used  with  more  complete 
success  or  to  greater  advantage  than  during  the  siege  of  that  place. 
When  operations  were  commenced  against  Fort  Macon,  between  four 
and  five  weeks  ago,  I was  ordered  to  open  a station  at  this  place  to 
communicate  wii  h General  Parke’s  headquarters  via  Morehead  City  and 
with  the  blockading  squadron.  From  that  time  until  the  25th  instant 
all  orders  were  sent  and  received  by  signals.  At  times  no  other  com- 
munication was  had  with  headquarters,  it  being  unsafe  for  boats  to 


292 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Ciiav.  XX. 


cross  tlie  harbor  except  under  cover  of  the  night.  From  my  station 
(less  than  2 miles  distant  from  the  fort)  I could  with  the  aid  of  glasses 
observe  distinctly  the  movements  of  the  enemy,  as,  for  instance,  should 
a force  go  out  to  attack  our  troops  at  work  on  the  siege  batteries  or 
any  alteration  be  made  in  the  position  or  bearing  of  guns  or  any 
movement  made  important  to  be  immediately  known  at  headquarters, 
and  of  which  our  men  could  have  no  knowledge  from  their  position. 
On  my  representing  this  fact  to  General  Parke  he  ordered  a station  to 
be  open  by  day  on  Bogue  Banks,  near  our  batteries,  to  receive  official 
messages  only,  having  reference  to  observations  made  from  my  station 
(this  station  was  at  different  times  worked  by  Lieutenants  Marsh,  Lyon, 
and  Palmer,  and  was  several  times  fired  upon  by  the  enemy).  By  this 
arrangement  the  enemy  were  held  under  a complete  surveillance  dur- 
ing daylight.  I wds  the  only  officer  on  the  Beaufort  station  until  the 
21st  instant,  when  Lieut.  Marvin  Wait  reported  for  duty. 

On  the  night  preceding  the  bombardment  a number  of  important 
official  messages  were  sent  and  received  in  communication  between 
General  Burnside’s  headquarters  on  board  the  steamer  Alice  Price 
(lying  in  Core  Sound  back  of  Beaufort)  and  General  Parke. 

The  bombardment  commenced  on  the  25th  instant  at  6 a.  m.  I had 
expected  to  receive  special  instructions  to  watch  and  report  the  accu- 
racy of  fire;  but  not  receiving  them,  I determined  to  act  upon  my  own 
responsibility.  My  station  was  at  very  nearly  a right  angle  with  the 
line  of  fire,  so  that  I was  enabled  to  judge  with  accuracy  the  distance 
over  or  short  that  the  shot  fell.  The  10-inch  shell  were  falling  almost 
without  exception  more  than  300  yards  beyond  the  fort.  Lieutenant 
Wait  and  myself  continued  to  signal  to  the  officer  in  charge  until  the 
correct  range  was  obtained.  The  8-inch  shell  were  falling  short;  we 
signaled  to  the  officer  in  charge  of  that  battery  with  the  same  effect. 
The  same  was  the  case  with  the  battery  of  Parrott  guns,  which  were 
much  elevated.  From  the  position  of  our  batteries  it  was  impossible 
for  the  officers  in  charge  of  them  to  see  how  their  shot  fell;  but  owing 
[to]  the  observations  made  by  Lieutenant  Wait  and  myself  and  sig 
naled1  to  them  from  time  to  time,  an  accurate  range  was  obtained  by 
all  the  batteries,  and  was  not  lost  during  the  day.  After  12  m.  every 
shot  fired  from  our  batteries  fell  in  or  on  the  fort.  The  accuracy  of  fire 
astonished  ourselves  equally  with  the  enemy.  From  that  time  until  4 
p.  m.,  when  a white  flag  appeared  upon  the  fort  and  the  firing  ceased, 
a greater  amount  of  execution  was  done  than  could  have  occurred  in 
twenty-four  hours  further  bombardment  without  the  aid  of  signals. 

The  proposition  to  surrender  and  the  reply,  with  terms  of  capitula- 
tion, were  sent  to  and  from  General  Burnside  through  this  station  by 
Lieutenant  Wait  and  myself.  I saw  General  Parke  immediately  after 
the  occupation  of  Fort  Macon  by  our  forces.  He  spoke  in  the  highest 
terms  of  praise  of  the  system  of  signals  used,  and  extended  his  thanks  to 
the  signal  officers  for  the  services  they  had  rendered. 

Constant  signaling  during  a period  of  over  four  weeks  across  a sheet 
of  glaring  water  has  injured  my  eyes  somewhat.* 

Very  respectfully, 


W.  S.  ANDREWS, 

Second  Lieutenant , Ninth  N.  Y.  Vols .,  Acting  Signal  Officer. 


Maj.  Albert  J.  Myer, 

Signal  Officer , XI.  S.  Army. 


Some  personal  matter  omitted. 


Chap.  XX.] 


SIEGE  OF  FORT  MACON,  N.  C. 
No.  8. 


293 


Report  of  Col.  Moses  J.  White , C.  S.  Army. 

Goldsborough,  N.  0.,  May  4,  1862. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
defense  of  Fort  Macon,  which  you  will  find  to  be  imperfect.  As  my 
adjutant  has  mysteriously  disappeared  with  his  papers,  I have  no  means 
of  giving  you  a full  report : 

A demand  was  made  for  the  surrender  of  Fort  Macon  on  March  23 
last  by  Brigadier-General  Parke,  IT.  S.  Army,  which  demand  was  re- 
fused. General  Parke  then,  having  collected  a large  force  at  Carolina 
City,  took  possession  of  Beaufort  and  Shackelford  Banks,  thus  cutting 
us  oft*  from  any  communication  without  the  range  of  our  guns. 

Having  established  his  camp  8 miles  from  the  fort,  on  Bogue  Banks, 
the  enemy  drove  in  our  pickets  on  April  10,  and  established  themselves 
just  without  the  range  of  our  guns  and  their  pickets  within  1 mile  of 
the  fort.  In  retiring  before  them  our  pickets  showed  great  coolness, 
and  forced  the  enemy  to  advance  with  caution,  although  flanked  by  a 
fire  from  the  sea.  The  enemy,  after  fully  establishing  themselves,  com- 
menced their  advance  on  the  fort  by  means  of  ditches,  using  the  sand 
hills  as  a covering  for  their  working  parties. 

With  their  larger  force  (being  well  protected  by  the  sand  hills)  they 
were  able  by  April  22  to  establish  their  batteries  within  1,400  yards  of 
Fort  Macon. 

Only  one  sortie  was  made  during  their  advance,  which  consisted  of 
an  attempt  made  with  two  comx>anies  to  drive  in-  their  working  parties 
and  pickets  on  April  11,  but,  they  being  largely  re-enforced  from  their 
camp,  our  companies  were  forced  to  retire.  Occasional  firing  took 
place  between  our  pickets  and  those  of  the  enemy  at  night,  but  with- 
out any  casualties  on  our  side.  We  could  only  annoy  the  enemy  by  the 
fire  of  our  artillery,  which,  fired  horizontally,  could  do  them  no  damage 
and  only  force  them  to  keep  behind  the  sand  hills.  Not  having  a mor- 
tar in  the  fort,  we  mounted  six  old  32-pounder  carronades,  which  had 
been  placed  in  the  fort  for  defending  the  ditch,  with  40°  elevation,  and 
used  them  for  throwing  shell  behind  the  enemy’s  coverings.  Two  10- 
inch  guns  were  also  used  for  the  same  purpose.  They  were,  howuver, 
so  completely  concealed  that  we  could  seldom!  ascertain  the  position  of 
their  working  parties,  and  when  driven  from  them  we  could  not  see 
when  they  returned,  and  from  scarcity  of  shell  could  not  keep  up  a con- 
tinued fire.  Had  the  fort  been  built  and  armed  for  defense  from  a land 
attack  the  siege  might  have  lasted  longer ; but  as  neither  was  the  case, 
the  enemy  were  able  to  complete  their  batteries,  completely  masked, 
in  a shorter  time  than  I had  hoped  for.  During  the  siege  some  discon- 
tent arose  among  the  garrison,  which  ended  in  several  desertions.  The 
men  complained  of  their  fare,  although  furnished  with  full  rations,  and 
seemed  to  be  dissatisfied  with  being  shut  up  in  such  a small  place,  so 
near  their  relations  and  friends,  but  unable  to  communicate  with  them. 
I am  sorry  to  say  that  the  officers  did  not  act  in  a proper  manner  to 
suppress  the  difficulty.  The  health  of  the  troops  did  not  seem  to  be 
good,  although  we  lost  but  one  man  by  sickness.  Nearly  one-third 
were  generally  on  the  sick  list. 

On  April  22  General  Burnside  arrived  with  several  boats  and  anch- 
ored about  4 miles  down  the  sound,  but  was  forced  by  the  fire  of  a rifled 
gun  to  retire  and  take  up  a position  near  Harker’s  Island. 


294 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


Oil  the  23d  a demand  was  made  by  General  Burnside  for  the  sur- 
rfn  Fort  Macon,  which  being*  refused,  a request  was  made  that  I 
should  meet  him  in  person  the  next  day  on  Shackelford  Banks  on  verv 
important  business. 

At  8 a.  m.  on  the  24th  I met  General  Burnside,  as  he  requested. 
He  then  attempted  by  persuasion  to  produce  a change  in  my  deter- 
mination,  but  was  told  that  the  fort  would  be  defended  as  lone  as 
possible. 

At  6 a.  m.  on  the  25th  the  enemy’s  land  batteries  opened  upon  the 
tort,  and  at  6.30  a.  m.  their  vessels,  consisting  of  three  war  steamers 
and  one  sailing  vessel,  commenced  a cross-fire  with  rifle  and  11-inch 
shell.  The  fire  from  both  directions  was  immediately  returned,  and  at 
7 a.  m.  the  ships  retired — one  disabled  and  two  others  in  a damaged 
condition.  The  attack  from  land  was  kept  up  with  great  vigor  the 
enemy  having  immense  advantage  from  their  superior  force,  being  able 
to  relieve  their  men  at  the  guns,  while  our  morning  reports  showed 
only  263  men  for  duty.  Our  guns  were  well  managed,  but  being  able 
to  do  little  damage  to  water  batteries  and  siege  guns,  firing  through 
very  narrow  embrasures.  The  enemy  kept  up  a very  vigorous  and  ac- 
curate fire  from  both  rifles  and  mortars,  dismounting  guns,  disabling 
men,  and  tearing  the  parade,  parapet,  and  walls  of  the  fort. 

At  6.30  p.  m.,  finding  that  our  loss  had  been  very  great,  and  from 
the  fatigue  of  our  men  being  unable  to  keep  up  the  fire  with  but  two 
guns,  a proposition  was  made  to  General  Parke  for  the  surrender  of 
Fort  Macon.  General  Parke  demanded  an  unconditional  surrender 
which  was  refused,  and  the  general  informed  that  the  firing  would  be 
renewed  immediately.  He  then  requested  that  the  firing  should  cease 
until  the  next  morning  in  order  that  he  might  consult  with  General 
Burnside,  and  that  the  general  should  meet  me  the  next  morning  at 
Shackelford  Banks.  This  proposition  was  accepted. 

On  the  26th,  at  7 a.  m.,  I met  General  Burnside,  as  proposed,  and  a 
surrender  was  agreed  to  on  terms  shown  in  the  inclosed  paper.*  The 
Southern  flag  was  hauled  down  at  12  m.  and  the  men  left  the  fort  as 
soon  as  means  could  be  furnished.  A portion  crossed  to  Beaufort. 

Captain  Guion’s  company  started  for  New  Berne  on  the  27th,  and  on 
the  same  day  150  men,  consisting  of  parts  of  several  companies,  started 
for  Wilmington  on  the  United  States  gunboat  Chippewa,  arriving  at 
Fort  Caswell  at  7 p.  m.  on  the  28th. 

Our  loss  during  the  fight  was  7 killed  and  18  wounded — 2 danger- 
ously. Privates  Langston  and  Jewel  I was  forced  to  leave  in  the  fort. 
All  other  of  the  wounded  were  brought  off.  A nurse  was  left  with  the 
two  men.  The  fort  was  very  much  damaged  and  fifteen  guns  disabled. 
Twq^  days  more  of  such  firing  would  have  reduced  the  whole  to  a mere 
mass  of  ruins. 

Respectfully  submitted. 


Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes, 

Commanding  Forces  North  Carolina. 


M.  J.  WHITE, 

Colonel , C.  S.  Army. 


* Seo  inclosures  to  Burnside's  report,  p.  276. 


Chap.  XX.]  SKIRMISH  NEAR  NEWPORT,  N.  C.  295 

APRIL  7,  1862.— Skirmish  near  Newport,  N.  C. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Lieut.  Col.  James  Wilson,  Ninth  New  Jersey  Infantry. 

No.  2.— Capt.  John  Bootlie,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  James  Wilson , Ninth  New  Jersey  Infantry. 

Newport  Barracks,  N.  0., 

April  7,  1862 — 2.30  p.  m. 

General:  I have  to  inform  you  that  our  outside  pickets  on  the 
Cedar  Point  road  were  attacked  this  noon  at  about  1 o’clock  by  a force 
of  about  40  cavalry  mounted  and  about  20  on  foot,  who  made  a sudden 
dash  upon  our  post. 

In  skirmishing  we  had  1 man  shot,  wounded,  and  are  fearful  1 made 
prisoner.  This  information  I have  from  courier  sent  in. 

Our  men  stood  the  attack  and  returned  the  fire,  killing  one  horse, 
but  are  unable  to  learn  any  other  damage,  as  the  enemy  retreated  at 
a rapid  rate,  but  suppose  they  must  have  killed  or  wounded  some. 

I have  sent  forward  another  company  to  strengthen  this  post,  who 
arrived  there  soon  after  the  attack. 

Awaiting  your  orders,*  I remain  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  WILSON, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Comdg.  Ninth  Regiment  New  Jersey  Vols. 
Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Parke. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  Boothe , C.  S.  Army. 

Jones  County,  N.  C.,  April  8,  1862. 

Sir:  According  to  your  instructions  I make  the  following  report  of 
my  progress  since  Saturday  last: 

I took  my  march  toward  Carteret  County  on  Saturday,  and  reached 
Mr.  Foscue’s,  on  the  Beaufort  road,  20  miles  below  Trenton. 

Sunday  I was  joined  by  Captain  Hill  and  50  of  his  men  and  pro- 
ceeded toward  Beaufort.  At  sunset  I halted,  and  sent  forward  to 
ascertain  the  number  and  position  of  the  enemy’s  advance  reported  to 
be  ahead.  At  1 o’clock  in  the  night  my  scouts  came  in,  not  able  to 
find  anything,  and  I proceeded  to  Eli  Saunders’  and  fed  my  horses 
and  men. 

Monday  morning  I was  joined  by  Lieutenant  Humphreys  with  about 
30  men.  By  agreement  with  Captain  Hill  and  Lieutenant  Humphreys 
I divided  the  whole  force  into  four  platoons  of  about  30  men  each, 
placing  the  men  with  the  best  arms  in  the  first  platoon.  This  platoon 
I placed  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Eure  and  sent  it  forward  as  an 
advance  down  the  road  from  Saunders’  toward  Newport.  I followed 
with  the  other  three  platoons  and  their  commanders  a short  distance 
behind  the  advance.  After  going  within  5 miles  of  Newport  the 

* See  Parke  to  Burnside,  Aprils,  in  “Correspondence,  etc  ” post. 


296 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


n™iTrraW  o ®f  ® ®f  the  enemy  and  charged  them,  capturing 

3 and  killing  2.  About  200  yards  in  advance  of  the  first  squad  there 

ralliednh^olatr!oad  °/  P’  W beiDg  discovered.  Lieutenant  Eure 
rallied  his  platoon  and  charged  them,  killing  1 and  capturing  6.  Most 

of  the  enemy  fired  their  muskets  without  injuring  ahorse  or  man  on 
our  side.  In  five  minutes  after  the  firing  ceased  two  companies  of  the 
enemy  came  in  sight  and  fired  upon  us  and  fell  into  the  marsh.  By 
their  fire  the  only  damage  done  was  the  killing  of  my  horse  under  me 
I ordered  the  men  to  retire  down  the  hill,  as  there  Vas  no  chance  to 
charge  them  from  a miry  causeway.  With  our  9 prisoners  I retraced 
m^  steps  to  this  place  last  night. 

As  the  first  platoon  did  the  principal  work,  I deem  it  sheer  iustice  tn 
say  that  they  behaved  with  great  bravery.  J 

Hill  ,f^,nitf‘aIlt+v.HuraP1,1'eys  take  cbar8'°  of  3 prisoners,  Captain 
Ransom  d 1 d 4116  remainder  to  you  aud  through  you  to  General 

lam  very  anxious  that  you  should  recall  me  forthwith,  as  my  horses 
and  men  are  completely  exhausted  and  tired  out. 

took  twoS61ld  7 muskets  caPtured  the  enemy  and  Captain  Hill 

from  +!he  ?emy  at  Newport  and  stationed  at  intervals 

+v  t Tp0I't  ^0  the  place  we  encountered  them  is  about  600  or  700 
from  the  best  information.  At  and  about  Morehead  City  one  regiment. 

thfiU^a  V hiU6}°  Lleutena?t  Eure  and  Orderly  Jordan,  who  led 
the  charge  of  the  advance  guard. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  BOOTHE, 

Col.  W.  G.  Robinson.  Captain,  Commanding. 


Hano.u^lmTiWriti?g  t?}°  above  one  of  my  Pickets  has  come  in  fron 
Haughtons,  about  4 miles  from  Pollocks ville,  toward  Wilmington 

saying  the  enemy  had  fired  upon  him  and  killed’ or  taken  the  2 pickets 
that  were  with  him,  and  that  there  was  500  or  600  of  the  enemy. 


APRIL  7-8,  1862. — Expedition  to  Elizabeth  City,  N.  C. 

Report  of  Col . Rush  G.  Hawkins,  Ninth  New  York  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Roanoke  Island,  NT.  C., 

April  11,  1862. 

, °n  morning  of  the  7th  instant  a detachment  of  600  men 

left  here  on  board  of  the  steamers  Virginia,  Putnam,  Ceres,  and  Eagle 
f^?ll^]:)StllxTClty’  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Griffin, 
ot  the  Sixth  New  Hampshire  Volunteers.  At  4 o’clock  a.  m.  of  the  8th 
instant  they  landed  two  companies  of  the  New  York  Ninth  at  the  citv 
aad  companies  of  the  New  Hampshire  Sixth  6 miles  above  the 
C1?J-  -Lhey  surprised  two  companies  of  the  enemy’s  forces,  who  ran 
firm?  a sh,ot  °ur  forces  Pursued  and  succeeded  in  capturing 
the  rebels,  belonging  to  the  First  Brigade  of  North  Carolina 
Militia,  who  are  now  here  and  await  your  orders.  Unless  I hear  from 
you  to  the  contrary  I shall  release  them  on  their  parole  and  send  then* 

Our  forces  killed  a noted  rebel  scout  by  the  name  of  Tim.  Gregory 


Chap.  XX.]  SKIRMISH  AT  GILLETTES  FARM,  N.  C.  297 

and  wounded  a rebel  vedette.  These  were  the  only  2 killed  or  wounded 
on  either  side. 

Fifty  stand  of  arms,  2 drums,  4 horses  and  saddles,  and  1,000  rounds 
of  cartridges  were  captured  and  brought  away. 

Trusting  that  this  little  transaction  will  meet  with  your  approval,  I 
am,  most  faithfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ , EUSH  C.  HAWKINS, 

Colonel , Commanding  Fourth  Brigade  and  Post. 

Maj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  Forth  Carolina , New  Berne , N.  C. 

P.  S. — I have  just  heard  that  the  enemy  are  building  flats  in  a creek 
about  4 miles  above  Currituck  Court-House.  If  I can  get  the  Navy  to 
co-operate  and  you  will  send  me  the  Picket,  I will  organize  a party  to 
break  up  the  rebel  forces  at  the  Court-House  and  at  the  creek.  This 
can  be  done  without  running  any  great  risk.  I wish  you  would  let  me 
have  the  Picket.  She  would  be  of  very  great  use  here  in  running 
about  in  these  shallow  waters. 


APRIL  13,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Gillett’s  Farm,  Pebbly  Run,  N.  C. 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

No.  1.— Baron  Egloffstein,  Colonel  One  hundred  and  third  New  York  Infantry. 

No.  2.— Brig.  Gen.  Robert  Ransom,  jr.,  C.  S.  Army,  with  letter  from  General  Robert 


Reports  of  Baron  Egloffstein , Colonel  Ofle  hundred  and  third  New  York 

Infantry . 

Hdqrs.  Seward  Infantry,  103d  Eegt.  N.  Y.  S.  V., 

Hdqrs.  9th  N.  J.  Regt.,  near  Newport , April  15,  1862. 

Sir  : With  this  I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  the  partial  success 
of  my  expedition  against  the  Second  Regiment  North  Carolina  Volun- 
teers. 

I brought  all  the  available  forces  of  that  regiment  to  battle  last 
night  at  Th.  Gillettfs  farm.  The  regiment  was  commanded  by  its 
colonel,  William  G.  Eobinson,  formerly  of  the  Regular  Army,  an  old 
Indian  fighter,  like  myself.  I made  him  prisoner.  I could  not  recap- 
ture the  Ninth  New  Jersey  boys,  they  having  been  transported  to  Kin- 
ston before  I reached  Young’s.  Th.  Gillett’s  farm,  the  battle  ground 
is  situated  6 miles  south,  of  Young’s,  at  the  fork  of  the  Onslow  and 
Carolina  City  roads.  I made  many  prisoners.  The  wounded  enemies 
number  considerable. 

I will  have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  in  full  on  my  arrival  at  New 
Berne. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BARON  EGLOFFSTEIN, 
Colonel , Seward  Infantry , 103d  Regt.  N.  Y.  S.  V. 

Maj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina. 

P.  S. — Most  of  my  men  are  mounted  on  the  horses  captured  from 
the  enemy  and  beg  to  serve  as  cavalry  on  similar  expeditions.  The 
regiment  of  Col.  William  G.  Robinson  was  perfectly  routed,  but  owing 


298 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


to  the  absence  of  cavalry  on  my  part  I could  not  reap  the  full  advan- 
tages of  the  victory  gained  in  pursuing  the  rebels. 


Hdqrs.  Seward  Infantry,  103d  Regt.  N.  Y.  S.  V., 

Camp  Burnside , Nqw  Berne , N.  <7.,  April  19,  1862. 

April  5.— In  obedience  to  Special  Orders  of  Headquarters  Second 
Division,  Department  of  North  Carolina,  No.  66,  a detachment  of  141 
men  left  April  5 in  order  to  occupy  Evans’  Mill;  distance,  6 miles; 
course  south. 

April  6.— The  party,  being  re-enforced,  left  Evans’  Mill  at  midnight, 
under  command  of  Colonel  Baron  Egloffstein,  leaving  a small  garrison 
to  protect  both  the  grist  and  the  lumber  mill. 

April  7. — Breakfasted  at  Tippe’s  plantation.  Reached  Noah  Jack- 
son’s  plantation,  where  we  were  informed  of  the  presence  of  pickets, 
stationed  1 mile  farther  west,  on  Christopher  Foj^’s  farm,  the  owner  of 
which  had  been  instrumental  in  carrying  away  N.  Jackson  the  day  be- 
fore and  burning  several  thousand  bales  of  cotton.  Arriving  on  Chris- 
topher Foy’s  plantation,  the  colonel  was  fired  at  by  the  pickets,  Foy 
being  reported  as  taking  part  in  the  skirmish.  I retaliated  by  driving 
the  pickets  ofi'  the  ground  and  securing  50  head  of  cattle  for  the  use  of 
the  Government.  We  captured.  3 horses  on  the  premises,  and  com- 
menced mounting  our  infantry,  encamped  on  Foy’s  plantation.  The 
next  morning  a detachment  of  25  men,  commanded  by  Captain  Schuck- 
hart,  was  sent  to  Camp  Burnside  in  charge  of  the  cattle.  Left  late  in 
the  evening  for  Haughton’s  Mill.  When  near  Mill  Creek  arrested  a 
lone  traveler  on  horseback,  who  was  returning  in  the  direction  from 
Kinston.  Through  his  instrumentality  we  made  the  first  rebel  pris- 
oner at  Haughton’s  Mill.  Msjjor  Quentin,  with  a small  detachment, 
acted  as  a surprise  party  with  great  promptitude. 

^ April  8.— Encamped  at  Haughton’s  residence  at  1 o’clock  at  night. 
Sent  out  another  surprise  party  to  Crooked  Run.  Two  rebels  crossing 
the  run  at  9 o’clock  in  the  morning,  one  of  them  was  made  prisoner ; 
the  other,  having  been  shot  at,  escaped  through  the  woods  in  a south- 
erly direction.  From  Evans’  Mill  we  traveled  1 mile  south  to  the  fork 
of  the  Trenton  and  Beaufort  road;  took  the  Trenton  road  running  west 
for  10  miles;  changed  course  2J  miles  south  to  Haughton’s  Mill. 
Later  in  the  afternoon  6 men  (pickets)  ran  in  our  trap  on  Crooked  Run, 
but  returned  post-haste  on  the  road  they  came,  owing  to  one  of  the  in- 
experienced soldiers  firing  too  soon.  Left  the  mill  at  10  o’clock  p.  m., 
having  sent  the  prisoners  back  to  New  Berne  with  a strong  escort  of 
cavalry. 

April  9. — After  a severe  march  in  rain  and  storm  we  arrived  at 
Mr.  E.  Foy’s  farm  before  daybreak — course,  west  3 miles,  south  2J 
miles.  Captain  Schuekhart  rejoined  us  here,  bringing  orders  for  the 
colonel  to  return  to  New  Berne  for  further  instructions,  Major  Quentin 
remaining  in  command  under*  instructions  to  return  on  the  road  Ave 
came,  but  securing  his  position  and  retreat  by  scouting  parties  to  the 
plantations  of  Cummings,  William  and  Henry  McDaniel,  by  means  of 
which  Ave  Avere  informed  that  9 prisoners  of  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  Reg- 
iment, under  an  escort  amounting  nearly  to  100  men  of  cavalry,  had 
passed  on  their  way  to  Kinston. 

April  11. — Colonel  Baron  Egloffstein  returned  from  New  Berne  the 
next  evening.  The  column  moAred  on  to  Cummings’  farm  during  the 
night,  reaching  Jones’  Mill,  Avhere  a picket  of  11  rebels  was  posted. 

April  12. — The  column  was  halted,  and  Major  Quentin  marched 


Jhap.XX.]  SKIRMISH  AT  GILLETTES  FARM,  N.  C.  299 

fiealtliily  with  a small  body  of  men  through  the  swamps  surrounding 
he  enemy,  who,  on  discovering  our  men,  sought  their  safety  in  flight, 
taking  the  Onslow  road.  The  major  made  1 rebel  prisoner  in  person. 
WTe  proceeded  to  the  Jones’  estate,  superintended  by  Thomas  Garrock  ; 
30urse  south,  7 miles.  I ordered  the  major  to  conduct  the  infantry 
through  the  swamps  and  across  White  Oak  River,  guided  by  an  expe- 
rienced negro,  to  Thomas  Gillett’s  farm,  on  Pebbly  Run.  With  a view 
to  mislead  the  enemy  I marched  the  cavalry  back  to  Cummings’  planta- 
tion, the  fork  of  the  Onslow  and  Hadnot  road,  marked  Young’s  on 
old  geographical  maps. 

April  13. — To  draw  the  attention  of  the  enemy  to  the  movement  of 
the  cavalry  I made  a number  of  secessionists  prisoners  on  this  road 
during  the  night.  Marched  6 miles  on  the  Hadnot  road,  course  south- 
east, to  Thomas  Gillett’s  farm,  where  we  joined  the  infantry  in  the 
afternoon.  Poske’s  and  Bell’s  farms  were  occupied  by  our  own  pickets 
south  of  Pebbly  Run,  and  a strong  picket  posted  north  of  Gillett’s 
plantation  to  apprise  us  of  the  approach  of  the  enemy.  The  whole 
cavalry  was  sent  on  picket  duty  in  the  immediate  neighborhood. 

At  il  o’clock  p.  m.  our  northern  picket  was  driven  in  by  the  advance 
guard  of  the  Second  Regiment  of  Cavalry  (Nineteenth  Regiment  North 
Carolina  Volunteers),  led  by  their  colonel,  William  G.  Robinson.  Rapid 
firing  on  the  part  of  the  advancing  enemy,  chiefly  directed  to  the  win- 
dows of  the  room  occupied  by  Colonel  Baron  Egloff stein,  roused  our 
men  to  prompt  action.  The  inclosures  of  Gillett’s  farm  were  simulta- 
neously attacked  by  300  men — well-mounted  cavalry.  Gallant  conduct 
was  shown  on  the  part  of  our  officers  and  men.  Three  charges  were 
repulsed  with  the  greatest  firmness,  after  which  the  enemy  fled  in  con- 
fusion and  disorder  in  all  directions,  leaving  1 dead,  their  colonel,  and 
2 privates  as  prisoners  in  our  hands.  Twelve  horses  of  the  enemy  w e 
found  dead  on  the  battle-field  and  5 mor e*hors  de  combat. 

Col.  William  G.  Robinson  exhibited  much  boldness,  and  deserving 
of  being  better  sustained  by  his  followers.  He  was  wounded  in  the 
thigh  heading  the  third  attack  in  person.  Two  of  our  elites , Captain 
Langner,  Prussian  artillery,  and  Lieutenant  Martinez,  adjutant  to 
General  Garibaldi,  wrested  the  colonel  from  his  command. 

Our  loss  was  Sergt.  Adolph  Grossmann,  of  Company  F ; Capt.  Th. 
Schuckhart,  shot  through  the  heart ; Sergt.  Henry  Bopp,  Company  B, 
Captain  Muller;  Privates  Morgenstern,  same  company,  and  Muhsam, 
Company  F,  wounded,  and  since  recovering. 

In  the  morning  pistols,  sabers,  and  guns  were  found  lying  about  the 
fields #and  along  the  road  to  Cummings’  and  several  stray  horses  were 
captured. 

The  elite  Geiger  was  promoted  to  an  honorary  lieutenancy  on  the 
battle-field.  Lieut.  Arthur  von  Brand  rendered  valuable  services. 
Capt.  Th.  Schuckhart  proved  an  efficient  officer.  Drs.  John  Kraeuter 
and  Marc  Boecking  deserve  credit  for  giving  prompt  medical  attention 
to  the  wounded.  First  Sergt.  Niemetz  von  Rottenberg,  Company  K, 
defended  the  entrance  to  the  inclosure  with  much  energy  and  coolness 
and  is  deserving  of  promotion.  He  was  well  seconded  by  Corp. 
Franz  Ebner,  same  company.  Sergeant  Krauth,  of  Company  E,  acted 
promptly.  Sergeant  Wettstein  and  Corporal  Schrag,  Company  F, 
behaved  bravely.  Private  Durr,  of  Company  K,  was  bold  and  cool. 
Private  Polguere,  of  Company  K,  remained  on  guard  during  the  whole 
engagement  like  an  old  soldier.  Sergt.  Martin  Hacker,  of  Company  K, 
acted  well.  Elites  Bernhard  von  Schmidt  and  Louis  von  Waldeck 
acted  well.  Sergt.  Valentine  Horst  was  instrumental  in  securing  the 


300 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


gates  against  the  boldest  cavalrists,  and  prevented  the  disaster  which 
might  have  followed  an  early  success  on  the  part  of  the  enemy.  Pri 
vates  Muhsam,  Ghnesorg,  Rieke,  Glyckherr,  and  Nagel,  of  Company  F, 
fought  bravely  at  the  same  post.  Sergeant  Leither,  same  company, 
exhibited  much  courage  and  electrified  our  men  when  most  needed. 
Sergeants  Zimmermann  and  Baumann  were  active  in  resisting  the  main 
charge  directed  to  the  rear  of  the  premises. 

April  14. — For  the  purpose  of  delivering  Col.  William  G.  Robinson 
to  headquarters  without  running  the  risk  of  another  engagement  the 
colonel  determined  to  march  without  delay  to  the  encampment  of  the 
Ninth  New  Jersey  Regiment  at  Newport.  This  was  accomplished  by 
marching  27  miles  our  fatigued  and  brave  men.  We  destroyed  the 
bridge  at  Jones’  Mill  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  following  close  to  our 
heels.  We  reached  Carolina  City  and  reported  to  General  J.  G.  Parke, 
meeting  Capt.  D.  A.  Pell,  aide  to  General  Burnside,  who  directed  the 
immediate  delivery  of  the  prisoner  colonel  to  New  Berne,  where  Mrs. 
William  G.  Robinson  had  arrived  with  a flag  of  truce  to  welcome  him. 

April  18. — By  means  of  railroad  and  steamer  we  reached  Camp 
Burnside  without  further  incidents. 

BARON  EGLOFFSTEIN, 
Colonel  103d  Regt.  N.  Y.  S.  F.,  Seward  Infantry. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Robert  Ransom , Jr.,  C.  S.  Army , with  letter  from 

General  Robert  JEJ.  Lee. 

Hdqrs.  First  Brig.,  Army  [District]  of  the  Pamlico, 

April  20,  1862. 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  instructions  from  General  Holmes  I have 
the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  circumstances  attending 
in  attack  made  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Robinson,  with  a part  of  the  Sec- 
and  North  Carolina  Cavalry  (Nineteenth  North  Carolina  Volunteers), 
upon  a detachment  of  the  enemy’s  infantry,  near  White  Oak  Run,  on 
the  night  of  the  13th  instant : 

Colonel  Robinson’s  command  was  composed  as  follows : Company  D, 
Captain  Strange,  Lieutenants  Baker  and  Williams,  54  men  ; Company 
I,  Captain  Bryan,  Lieutenant  Blasingame,  45  men;  Company  K,  Cap- 
tain Turner,  Lieutenants  Graham,  Lockhart,  and  Moore,  45  men ; Com- 
pany B,  Lieutenant  Allison,  14  men,  Company  F,  Lieutenant  *King, 
about  15  men ; Company  E,  25  men ; Company  A,  4 men.  Total,  1 
lieutenant-colonel,  3 captains,  8 lieutenants,  and  202  men. 

About  2 - miles  before  reaching  the  house  in  which  the  enemy  was 
known  to  be  Colonel  Robinson  called  the  three  captains  together  and 
consulted  about  a plan  of  attack.  At  first  it  was  agreed  to  dismount 
two  companies,  who  were  to  attack  in  flank  and  rear  while  the  rest 
were  to  charge  in  front.  This  mode  was,  for  some  unexplained  cause, 
abandoned,  and  it  was  determined  to  charge  the  premises  mounted, 
and  the  following  arrangement  was  made : 

Captain  Bryan,  with  his  company,  and  the  detached  portions  of  An- 
drews’, Thomas’,  and  Cole’s  (B,  E,  and  F)  companies,  was  to  charge 
down  the  lane  to  the  front  of  the  house.  Strange,  with  his  company, 
was  to  throw  down  the  fence  on  the*  left,  and  Turner,  with  his  com- 
pany, was  to  do  the  same  on  the  light,  and  each  to  charge  on  the  flanks 
and  rear. 

The  moon  was  at  the  full  and  the  night  cloudless.  A negro  belong- 


301 


;3hap.XX.J  SKIRMISH  AT  GILLETT’s  FARM,  N.  C. 

rt£  to  the  premises  was  taken,  and  from  him  and  Lieutenant  Nether- 
iiitt  of  the  Twenty-seventh  North  Carolina  Volunteers,  the  exact  local- 
ly of  the  premises  was  ascertained  and  information  minute  in  detail 
mllected.  Before  getting  close  an  advanced  party  of  6 privates  (4  from 
Company  A and  2 from  Company  D)  was  thrown  forward  to  draw  oft 
my  guard  protecting  the  front.  It  was  concerted  that  when  this  party 
fired  the  whole  command  was  to  move  in  the  direction  indicated,  each 
! party  taking  the  route  previously  determined.  Near  the  mouth  of  the 
lane  a small  guard  was  found  and  the  sentinel  shot  by  the  advance 
party.  The  lane  is  about  100  yards  long.  Immediately  upon  hearing 
the  shot  Colonel  Robinson  ordered  the  charge.  The  advanced  party 
and  Captain  Bryan  and  Lieutenant  Blasingame,  with  a small  portion 
of  Bryan’s  company,  obeyed,  and  reached  the  yard  fence  while  many  of 
the  enemy  were  yet  lying  down.  Being  feebly  sustained,  they,  after 
discharging  their  pieces,  fell  back  near  the  mouth  of  the  lane,  where 
by  far  the  greater  portion  of  all  had  halted  and  were  wildly  and  waste- 
full  v throwing  away  their  fire.  No  effort  up  to  this  time  had  been 
unade  by  either  Captains  Turner  or  Strange  to  reach  the  flanks  and 
rear  of  the  house. 

By  some  means  or  other  a second  charge  was  made  up  to  the  yard 
gate  (which  was  only  about  20  feet  from  the  house),  and  Captain  Bryan 
and  several  men  state  that  an  officer  came  out  of  the  house  and  begged 
to  have  the  firing  cease,  offered  to  surrender,  and  Captain  Bryan  gave 
the  order  to  cease,  and  for  an  instant  it  was  obeyed ; but  some  person 
cried  out,  “ Shoot  the  d d rascal!”  and  at  once  the  firing  recom- 

menced on  each  side. 

By  this  time  2 or  3 of  the  men  had  been  wounded  and  1 or  2 killed, 
and  again  the  party  fell  back.  Colonel  Robinson  was  all  this  time  try- 
ing to  urge  the  men  up  to  their  work,  but  in  vain.  A large  number 
took  to  the  woods ; nearly  all  hesitated  and  refused  to  charge.  By  dint 
1 of  personal  effort  and  the  assistance  of  a few  others  Colonel  Robinson 
threw  down  the  fence  on  the  left,  and  with  about  20  or  30  men  (among 
whom  was  Captain  Strange)  charged  to  the  left  and  rear.  Captain 
Bryan  says  he  joined  the  party.  WJhen  nearly  in  rear  of  the  house  the 
men  fell  off  behind  a low  hill  and  left  Colonel  Robinson  almost  alone 
close  to  the  paling.  Here  he  was  wounded  and  fell  off  his  horse. 

' Captain  Bryan  says  he  saw  and  recognized  the  horse  and  tried  to  catch 
him. 

The  whole  party  that  had  gone  into  the  field  toward  the  rear  now  gal- 
loped entirely  around  and  passed  into  the  road  some  200  or  300  yards 
in  rear  of  the  mouth  of  the  lane.  Lieutenant  Allison  says  he  was  not 
1 close  to  the  house,  as  his  horse  run  away  with  him.  About  the  time 
that  the  second  charge  was  made  up  the  lane  Captain  Turner’s  horse 
was  seen  to  turn  back  and  move  off  with  him.  When  Colonel  Robinson 
1 took  the  field  to  the  left  Lieutenants  Graham  and  Moore  say  that  they 
pulled  down  the  fence  on  the  right,  rode  into  the  field,  and  tried  to  get 
their  men  to  follow,  but  all  effort  was  futile.  The  whole,  except  the 
small  party  who  had  gone  with  Colonel  Robinson,  either  remained  in 
the  road,  took  to  the  woods,  or  retired  by  the  way  they  had  come. 
When  those  who  had  pretended  to  follow  Colonel  Robinson  reached  the 
road  all  seemed  to  have  become  confused  and  perfect  disorder  prevailed 
for  15  miles.  Lieutenant  Baker  says  he  remained  with  a small  number 
near  the  mouth  of  the  lane  for  more  than  an  hour  after  the  rest  had 
gone.  At  any  rate  some  reached  camp  two  or  three  hours  sooner  than 
others.  No  effort  was  made  by  any  one  after  Colonel  Robinson  was 
wounded  to  rally  the  men  and  renew  the  fight.  It  is  apparent  that  a 


302 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


fosTby  folly  and  cowardfce!1  ^ “ WOn  and  aft*-™<' 

Captain  Turner  was  found  about  200  yards  from  the  mouth  of  the 
' wounded  and  stunned  in  the  road.  Some  suppose  that  lie 
was  wounded  in  the  head  and  thrown  by  his  horse.  As  l examhied 

lbs  horse.*1 1 am  satlsfied  aU  Lls  lnjuries  were  caused  by  the  fall  from 
The  casualties  are  Colonel  Robinson  and  Captain  Turner  wounded  • 
wounded?8  ’ W°UDded’  aM  5 taken  Pris0Tlers — probably  all 

no1? is j1mP,0S®ibl?  to  express  too  harsh  terms  toward  the  men  for  their 
dastardly  behavior,  and  we  can  hardly  justly  [sic]  apply  his  severe  dis- 
approbation  to  office  who  could  permit  their  commander  to  fall  into 
i'i,-!lai'<1S  ° the  enemy  without  an  effort  to  rescue  him,  and  who  ex- 
mand*1  SCarCely  the  flrst  q ualit-v  wWch  ouffht  to  entitle  them  to  com- 

It  is  but  right  to  remark  that  the  enemy’s  numbers  have  been  vari- 
ously estimated  at  from  50  to  200.  I cannot  determine  the  real  strength 
but  suppose  a mean  between  the  two  numbers  would  be  iust  ’ 

To  keep  such  troops  in  the  presence  of  the  enemy  would  be  useless 
[and]  criminal,  and  I respectfully  suggest  that  the  officers  and  men  who 
>;a\f  ??,two  occasions  covered  themselves  with  shame  and  our  arms 
Thih  mSh°'10r, be  ^barred  the  privilege  of  combatting  for  our  liberties 
The  officers  should  be  reduced, never  to  hold  commissions-  the  men 
should  be  dismounted  and  disarmed  and  placed  at  hard  labor  during 
*¥  Tar’.  an,d  th®  second  in  command  should  be  made  an  especial  exaim 
pie  tor  the  benefit  of  our  country  and  its  cause.  It  may,  perhaps  an 
pear  severe  that  the  few  who  seemed  willing  to  do  their  duty  should  suffer 
with  the  multitude  of  those  who  failed  in  all  that  becomes  the  officer 

wnnl’  wvi  JUt  th.ey  are  so  Inextricably  mingled  that  human  ingenuity 
would  fail  to  make  the  just  discrimination.  y 

I respectfully  recommend  that  all  but  one  squadron  of  the  regiment 
be  transferred  to  the  rear  and  there  be  placed  in  a school  of  instruc- 
tion  under  competent  officers.  Ignorance,  idleness,  and  incapacity  so 
strongly  characterize  a large  number  of  the  officers  that  a thorough 
purging  is  required.  * 

1 am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  RANSOM,  Jr., 

Maj.  Archer  Anderson,  Brigadier  General . 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  North  Garolina . 


P.  S.— I inclose  a rough  map,  which  will  explain  the  report. 


[Indorsements.] 

Headquarters, 

Goldshorough , N.  C .,  April  21,  1862. 
This  report  is  respectfully  referred  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  with  a 
recommendation  that  General  Ransom’s  suggestion  be  complied  with 

TH.  H.  HOLMES, 

Major-General . 


April  23,  1862. 

Respectfully  referred  to  General  Lee. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Chap.  XX.] 


SKIRMISH  AT  GILLETTES  FARM,  N.  C.  303 

[Inclosure] 


1.  Route  which  Strange  ought  to  have  taken  at  first  and  which  was  taken  by  Col- 
onel Robinson. 

2.  Route  which  Turner  ought  to  have  taken  but  did  not. 

3.  Low  hill  behind  which  the  men  skulked. 

4.  Route  taken  by  Strange  and  party. 

5.  Robinson  wounded. 

6.  Bryan’s  retreat  and  pursuit  of  Robinson’s  horse. 

7.  Turner’s  fall  from  his  horse. 

8.  Road  going  and  returning. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Fa.,  April  25,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes, 

Commanding , &c.,  Department , ffic.,  Goldshorough , JST.  C.  : 

General  : The  report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Ransom  of  the  circumstances 
attending  an  attack  by  Colonel  Robinson’s  command  upon  the  enemy’s 
infantry,  with  your  indorsement  recommending  that  the  suggestions  of 
General  Ransom  be  complied  with  as  regards  the  men  and  officers  who 
have  on  two  occasions  covered  themselves  with  shame  and  our  arms 
with  dishonor,  has  been  referred  by  the  Department  for  my  action. 

While  deeply  mortified  at  the  conduct  of  the  men,  as  reported  by 
General  R.,  I4  cannot  see  how  his  suggestions  to  reduce  the  officers  and 
disarm  the  men  and  condemn  them  to  hard  labor  can  be  carried  out,  unless 
charges  be  properly  preferred  and  the  matter  submitted  for  investigation 
to  a court-martial^  when  it  could  be  ascertained  how  far  they  were  culpa- 
ble and  what  punishment  is  merited.  If  in  your  judgment  it  is  deemed 
advisable,  the  whole  companies  might  be  disbanded  and  their  arms 
given  to  others.  But  it  would  appear  from  the  report  of  the  detach- 
ments engaged  that  but  a few  men  from  some  of  the  companies  were 
present.  For  the  bad  behavior  of  a few  it  would  not  appear  just  to 
punish  the  whole.  I would  suggest  that  these  men  be  stationed  at 
some  point,  if  possible,  where  their  drill  could  be  perfected,  as  it  would 
seem  that  their  unfortunate  behavior  was  attributable  in  a great  meas- 
ure to  lack  of  drill  and  discipline. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE,  General. 


304 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


APRIL  19,  1862. — Engagement  at  South  Mills,  Camden  County,  N.  C. 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2.— Brig.  Gen.  Jesse  L.  Reno,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  3. — Col.  William  A.  Howard,  First  New  York  Marine  Artillery. 

No.  4. — Col.  Rush  C.  Hawkins,  Ninth  New  York  Infantry,  commanding  Fourth  Bri- 
gade, with  resulting  correspondence. 

No.  5. — Lieut.  Col.  Thomas  S.  Bell,  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania  Infantry,  commanding 
Second  Brigade. 

No.  6. — Lieut.  Col.  William  S.  Clark,  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  7. — Maj.  Edwin  Schall,  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

No.  8. — Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  Huger,  C.  S.  Army,  with  communications  from  General 
R.  E.  Lee. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside , U.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , April  29,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  General  Reno’s  report  of  the  move- 
ment made  by  him,  in  accordance  with  my  order,  for  the  purpose  of 
accomplishing  certain  objects  already  indicated  in  a former  dispatch, 
the  main  one  of  which  was  most  succesfully  accomplished.  General 
Reno’s  report  gives  a detailed  account  of  the  movement,  and  I need 
only  add  that  I feel  an  increased  confidence  in  the  brave  officers  and 
soldiers  who  accomplished  so  much  in  so  short  a time. 

Our  loss  in  the  engagement  was  14  killed  and  96  wounded  and  2 
taken  prisoners.*  The  enemy’s  loss  must  have  been  much  greater,  as 
the  chaplain  of  the  Ninth  New  York,  left  in  charge  of  the  wounded, 
reports  having  seen  on  the  field  30  killed,  besides  several  wounded, 
the  main  body  of  the  wounded  having  been  taken  from  the  field  when 
they  retreated. 

Our  forces  drove  the  enemy  from  .the  field  in  a most  gallant  style, 
buried  our  dead,  bivouacked  on  the  field  for  seven  hours,  transported 
all  the  wounded,  except  14  so  severely  wounded  that  they  could  not  be 
moved,  but  were  comfortably  provided  for  and  left  in  charge  of  a sur- 
geon and  chaplain. 

General  Reno  then,  in  obedience  to  orders,  returned  to  his  fleet  and 
embarked  his  men.  He  felt  less  reluctance  in  leaving  behind  these 
14  wounded  with  the  surgeon  and  chaplain  from  the  fact  that  I had 
but  a few  days  before  released  some  80  wounded,  with  the  surgeons, 
who  were  left  by  the  enemy  in  New  Berne,  and  the  commanding  officer 
in  that  neighborhood  would  be  less  than  human  were  he  to  refuse  to 
release  these  wounded  as  soon  as  they  can  be  transported  safely. 

I beg  to  inclose  my  congratulatory  order  with  the  report  of  General 
Reno ; also  the  correspondence  between  the  general  and  the  command- 
ing officer  at  South  Mills. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Major- General , Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War , Washington. 


But  see  revised  statement,  p.  307. 


Chap.  XX.] 


engagement  at  south  mills,  n.  c. 

No.  2. 


305 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Jesse  L.  Reno,  XI.  S.  Army,  with  congratulatory 
r order. 

Headquarters  Second  Division, 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  April  22,  1S62. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  obedience  to  the  order 
of  Major-General  Burnside,  I proceeded  from  New  Berne  with  the 
Twenty-first  Massachusetts  and  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania  Regiments  to 
Roanoke,  and  was  there  joined  by  part  of  the  Ninth  and  Eighty-ninth 
New  York  and  Sixth  New  Hampshire.  , , . 

We  proceeded  directly  to  Elizabeth  City  and  commenced  disem- 
barking on  the  19th  instant  at  midnight,  at  a point  about  3 miles  below, 
on  the  east  side.  By  3 p.  m.  Colonel  Hawkins’  brigade,  consisting  of 
the  Ninth  and  Eighty-ninth  New  York  and  the  Sixth  New  Hampshire, 
were  landed  and  ready  to  move.  I ordered  Colonel  Hawkins  to  pro- 
ceed at  once  with  his  brigade  toward  South  Mills  for  the  purpose  of 
making  a demonstration  on  Norfolk.  I remained  to  bring  up  the 
other  two  regiments,  they  having  been  delayed  by  their  vessels  getting 
aground  at  the  mouth  of  the  river.  They  came  up  at  daylight  and 
were  landed  by  7 a.  in.  I proceeded  directly  toward  South  Mills,  and 
about  12  miles  out  met  Colonel  Hawkins’  brigade,  who,  it  seems,  lost 
his  wav,  either  by  the  treachery  or  incompetency  of  his  guide,  he  hav- 
ing marched  some  10  miles  out  of  his  way.  As  his  men  were  very 
much  jaded  by  their  long  march,  I ordered  them  to  follow  the  Second 

Hpl  p'O  /I  A 

Proceeding  about  4 miles  farther,  to  within  a mile  and  a half  of  South 
Mills,  the  rebels  opened  upon  us  with  artillery  before  my  advance 
guard  discovered  them.  I immediately  reconnoitered  their  position, 
and  found  tbat  they  were  posted  in  an  advantageous  position  in  a . line 
perpendicular  to  the  road— their  infantry  in  ditches  and  their  artillery 
commanding  all  the  direct  approaches,  their  rear  protected  by  a dense 
forest.  I ordered  the  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania  immediately  to  file  to 
♦the  right  and  pass  over  to  the  edge  of  the  woods  to  turn  their  leit.  1 
also  ordered  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  to  pursue  the  same  course, 
and  when  Colonel  Hawkins  came  up  with  his  brigade  I sent  him  with 
the  Ninth  and  Eighty-ninth  New  York  to  their  support.  The  Sixth 
New  Hampshire  were  formed  in  line  to  the  left  of  the  road  and  ordered 
to  support  our  four  pieces  of  artillery.  n _ , , . 

Owing  to  the  excessive  fatigue  of  the  men  they  could  not  reach  their 
position  for  some  time.  In  the  mean  time  the  enemy  kept  up  a brisk 
artillery  fire,  which  was  gallantly  responded  to  by  our  small  pieces 
under  charge  of  Colonel  Howard,  of  the  Coast  Guard,  who  during  the 
entire  engagement  displayed  most  conspicuous  gallantry  and  rendered 
very  efficient  service  both  during  the  action  and  upon  the  return,  he 
bringing  up  the  rear.  As  soon  as  the  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania  and 
Twenty-first  Massachusetts  had  succeeded  in  turning  their  left  they 
opened  a brisk  musketry  fire,  and  about  the  same  time  the  Ninth  New 
York,  also  coming  in  range  and  being  too  eager  to  engage,  unfortunately 
charged  upon  the  enemy’s  artillery.  It  was  a most  gallant  charge,  but 
they  were  exposed  to  a most  deadly  fire  of  canister,  grape,  and  mus- 
ketry, and  were  forced  to  retire,  but  rallied  immediately  upon  the 
Eighty-ninth  New  York.  I then  ordered  both  regiments  to  form  a 
junction  with  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts.  In  the  mean  time  the 

20  R R— VOL  IX 


306 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chaf.  XX. 


Fifty-first  Pennsylvania  and  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  kept  up  an 
incessant  fire  upon  the  rebels,  who  now  had  withdrawn  their  artillery 
and  had  commenced  to  retire  in  good  order.  The  Sixth  New  Hampshire 
had  steadily  advanced  in  line  to  the  left  of  the  road,  and  when  within 
about  200  yards  poured  in  a most  deadly  volley,  which  completely  de- 
moralized the  enemy  and  finished  the  battle.  Our  men  were  so  com- 
pletely fagged  out  by  the  intense  heat  and  their  long  march  that  we 
could  not  pursue  them.  The  men  rested  under  arms  in  line  of  battle 
until  about  10  o’clock  p.  m.,  when  I ordered  a return  to  our  boats,  hav- 
ing accomplished  the  principal  object  of  the  expedition,  conveying  the 
idea  that  the  entire  Burnside  expedition  was  marching  upon  Norfolk. 

Owing  to  the  want  of  transportation  I was  compelled  to  leave  some 
16  of  our  most  severely  wounded  men.  Assistant  Surgeon  Warren,  o£ 
the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts,  was  left  with  the  men.  I sent  a flag 
of  truce  the  next  day  to  ask  that  they  might  be  returned  to  us,  Com- 
modore Rowan  kindly  volunteering  to  attend  to  it.  We  took  only  a 
few  prisoners,  some  10  or  15,  most  of  whom  belonged  to  the  Third 
Georgia  Regiment. 

The  Ninth  New  York  suffered  most  severely,  owing  to  their  prema- 
ture charge,  our  total  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  being  about  90,  some 
60  belonging  to  that  regiment.* 

The  officers  and  men  of  the  several  regiments  all  behaved  with  their 
usual  gallantry  and  many  are  worthy  of  particular  mention,  and  I pre- 
sume the  brigade  and  regimental  commanders  will  do  justice  to  their 
respective  commands.  I will  forward  their  reports  as  soon  as  received. 

The  return  march  was  made  in  perfect  order,  and  few  if  any  strag- 
glers were  left  behind.  Considering  that  during  the  advance  the  weather 
was  intensely  hot  and  that  on  the  return  a severe  rain  rendered  the  roads 
very  muddy,  and  that  a portion  of  the  command  had  to  march  45  miles 
and  the  other  35  and  fight  a battle  in  the  mean  time,  and  that  all  this 
was  accomplished  in  less  than  twenty -four  hours,  I think  that  the  com- 
manding general  has  every  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  his  command. 

I desire  to  return  my  thanks  to  Commodore  Rowan  and  the  officers 
and  men  under  him  for  their  untiring  energy  in  disembarking  and 
re-embarking  my  command,  and  also  to  Lieutenant  Flusser  for  the  gal- 
lant manner  in  which  he  assisted  us  by  proceeding  up  the  river  and 
driving  the  enemy  out  of  the  woods  along  the  banks.  Colonel  Haw- 
kins, commanding  the  First  [Fourth]  Brigade,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Bell,  commanding  Second,  both  displayed  conspicuous  courage,  as  did 
also  the  regimental  commanders.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Clark  commanded 
the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts,  Major  Schall  the  Fifty-first  Pennsyl- 
vania, Lieutenant-Colonel  Kimball  the  Ninth  New  York,  Colonel  Fair- 
child  the  Eighty-ninth  New  York,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Griffin  the 
Sixth  New  Hampshire.  Captain  Fearing,  aide-de-camp  to  General 
Burnside,  accompanied  me  as  volunteer  aide,  and  rendered  efficient  and 
gallant  service ; also  Captain  Ritchie,  commissary  of  subsistence,  and 
Lieutenants  Gordon  and  Breed,  of  the  Signal  Corps.  My  own  aides, 
Lieutenants  Reno  and  Morris,  behaved  with  their  usual  gallantry.  As 
soon  as  the  brigade  and  regimental  reports  are  furnished  I will  forward 
them,  together  with  a complete  list  of  killed  and  wounded. 

The  enemy’s  loss  was  considerable,  but  they  succeeded  in  carrying 
off  most  of  their  wounded.  Several,  however,  were  left  on  the  field, 
one  of  whom  was  a captain  of  the  Third  Georgia  Regiment.  The  color- 
bearer  of  the  Third  Georgia  Regiment  was  shot  down  by  the  Twenty- 

* But  see  Addenda  following. 


CHAr.  XX  ] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SOUTH  MILLS,  N.  C. 


307 


first  Massachusetts  while  waving  defiantly  his  traitorous  flag.  The 
enemy  had  from  six  to  ten  pieces  of  artillery  and  from  1,800  to  2,000 
men.  We  approached  to  within  30  miles  of  Norfolk,  and  undoubtedly 
the  defeat  of  one  of  their  best  regiments,  the  Third  Georgia,  produced 
considerable  panic  at  Norfolk. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  L.  BENO, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Second  Division . 

Oapt.  Lewis  Bichmond,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Addenda.] 


Return  of  casualties  in  the  United  States  troops  in  the  engagement  at  South  Mills , N.  C., 

April  19,  1862. 

[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.] 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

No.  30.  J April  26,  1862. 

'The  general  commanding  desires  to  express  his  high  appreciation  of 
the  excellent  conduct  of  the  forces  under  command  of  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Beno  in  the  late  demonstration  upon  Norfolk.  He  congratulates 
them  as  well  upon  the  manly  fortitude  with  which  they  endured  exces- 
sive heat  and  extraordinary  fatigue  on  a forced  march  of  40  miles  in 
twenty-four  hours  as  upon  the  indomitable  courage  with  which,  not- 
withstanding their  exhaustion,  they  attacked  a large  body  of  the 
enemy’s  best  artillery,  infantry,  and  cavalry  in  their  own  chosen  posi- 
tion, "achieving  a complete  victory.  It  is  therefore  ordered,  as  a 
deserved  tribute  to  the  perseverance,  discipline,  and  bravery  exhibited 
by  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts,  Fifty- 
first  Pennsylvania,  Ninth  New  York,  Eighty-ninth  New  York,  and 
Sixth  New  Hampshire,  on  the  19th  of  April— a day  already  memorable 
in  the  history  of  our  country — that  the  above  regiments  inscribe  upon 
their  respective  colors  the  name,  u Camden,  April  19.” 

The  general  commanding  desires  to  express  his  approbation  of  Gen- 
eral Beno’s  strict  observance  of  orders  when  the  temptation  to  follow 
the  retreating  enemy  was  so  great. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  A.  E.  Burnside: 

LEWIS  BICHMOND, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


308 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


Chap.  XX. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Col.  William  A.  Howard , First  New  York  Marine  Artillery . 

Headquarters  Marine  Artillery, 

On  Board  Steamer  Virginia , Croatan  Sound , April  20, 1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  accordance  with  your 
instructions  of  the  morning  of  the  18th  instant  I took  the  schooner 
Edward  Slade*  with  Professor  Maillefert  and  corps  in  her,  and  pro- 
ceeded to  the  mouth  of  the  Pasquotank  River  and  anchored.  On  the 
arrival  of  the  gunboats  and  troop  ships  I proceeded  up  the  river  and 
anchored  with  the  fleet.  Two  launches,  with  boat  howitzers  and  crews, 
under  command  of  Lieutenants  Gerard  and  Avery,  of  Marine  Artillery- 
men, landed,  and  joined  the  advancing  column,  under  command  of  Col- 
onel Hawkins,  Ninih  (Zouaves)  New  York  Volunteers.  The  launches 
were  employed  landing  troops.  The  steamers  Northerner  and  Guide, 
with  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  and  Fifty -first  Pennsylvania,  not 
appearing,  I dispatched  by  your  orders  the  steamers  Virginia,  Ocean 
Wave,  Massasoit,  and  Phoenix  down  the  river  to  bring  up  the  troops, 
which  was  done  about  daylight.  The  troops  were  landed,  also  two 
howitzers  (one  smooth,  one  rifled)  belonging  to  the  Ninth  New  York 
Volunteers,  and  were  attached  to  the  column  under  your  immediate 
command,  Lieutenant  Herbert,  with  a detachment  of  the  Ninth,  in  charge* 
By  your  orders  I assumed  command  of  the  advance  guard  and  guides 
and  moved  into  the  interior.  Having  marched  several  miles,  it  was 
observed  that  a picket  of  8 horsemen  were  watching  our  movements, 
giving  us,  however,  only  one  opportunity  of  firing  upon  them.  We  had 
marched  about  14  miles  when  dense  black  smoke  was  seen  to  arise  from 
burning  buildings,  and  sweeping  across  the  road  concealed  the  enemy 
from  our  sight.  On  arriving  at  the  line  of  smoke  the  advance  was  ar- 
rested by  the  unmasking  of  a battery  of  12-pounders,  which  opened  fire 
with  shell  and  grape.  Having  examined  their  position  as  far  as  possible 
I reported  to  you,  and  was  directed  to  bring  up  the  howitzers,  which 
was  done.  You  had  previously,  however,  directed  a flanking  move- 
ment made  by  your  column.  The  column  of  advance,  under  Colonel 
Hawkins,  not  having  made  its  appearance,  it  was  evident  we  had  been 
misled  by  his  guide.  It  became  necessary,  therefore,  to  keep  the  enemy 
in  play  until  its  arrival.  In  forty-five  minutes  or  thereabouts  that  bri- 
gade appeared.  The  two  howitzers  and  men  belonging  to  the  Marine 
Artillery  reported  and  asked  for  orders $ also  Lieutenant  Morris,  with 
15  men  of  the  Ninth  New  York,  to  serve  with  the  guns,  which  were  im- 
mediately run  into  position,  the  range  and  direction  given  them,  when 
a very  hot  fire  was  opened  and  continued  until  the  enemy  withdrew  his 
pieces,  which  I reported  to  you. 

On  the  near  approach,  however,  of  the  Ninth  New  York  and  Eighty- 
ninth  New  York  on  their  left 'flank  their  guns  were  again  run  into  posi- 
tion, and  severe  fire  of  grape  and  canister  opened  upon  the  charging 
troops.  Our  battery  was  immediately  advanced  and  opened  with  grape 
and  shell  and  continued  until  their  final  retreat.  Our  forces,  having 
quiet  possession  of  the  field,  rested.  A reconnaissance  made  by  your 
instructions  showed  the  object  of  the  movement  had  been  accomplished. 

Having  given  the  men  sufficient  rest  and  food,  at  10  o’clock  we  com- 
menced our  return.  By  your  direction  I assumed  command  of  the  rear 
guard  with  two  pieces,  supported  by  the  Twenty -first  Massachusetts 
and  one  company  of  the  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania.  The  rain  in  the  even- 
ing having  made  the  roads  very  bad,  our  progress  was  somewhat  retarded,. 


Chap.  XX.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SOUTH  MILLS,  N.  C. 


309 


but  on  arriving  at  our  place  of  landing  at  6 o’clock,  finding  our  boats 
ready  to  receive  us,  we  embarked  on  board  our  proper  transports,  pro- 
ceeded to  this  anchorage,  landing  the  detachment  belonging  to  Roanoke, 
and  those  destined  for  New  Berne  proceeded  to  their  stations. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  bearing  testimony  to  the  gallant 
officers  and  men  under  my  command.  Lieutenants  Gerard  and  Avery, 
Marine  Artillery:  Lieutenants  Morris  and  Herbert,  Ninth  (Zouaves) 
New  York  Volunteers,  deserve  all  I can  say  for  their  coolness  and 
courage.  Mr.  Albert  E.  Hand,  formerly  clerk  of  this  vessel,  attached 
himself  to  my  command,  and  behaved  in  the  most  gallant  manner.  Gap- 
tain  Ohild,  temporarily  on  duty  in  this  vessel,  S.  C.  H.,  and  Mr.  Moore, 
pilot,  were  indefatigable  in  landing  the  troops,  piloting  the  vessel,  &c. 
When  it  is  considered  that  our  men  marched  nearly  all  night,  fought  a 
hard  battle  of  three  hours’  duration,  and  marched  the  same  distance 
the  second  night  without  sleep  through  deep  mud  cheerfully,  without  a 
murmur,  too  much  praise  cannot  be  awarded  them. 

Bespectfully  submitted.  w A HOWABD, 

Colonel  Marine  Artillery. 

Brigadier- General  Reno,  U.  S.  A., 

New  Berne , Department  North  Carolina. 


No.  4. 


Reports  of  Col.  Bush  C.  Hawkins,  Ninth  New  York  Infantry , com- 
manding Fourth  Brigade , with  resulting  correspondence. 


I 

i 


* 

l 


Headquarters, 

Boanoke  Island , N.  C .,  April  21,  1862. 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  orders  from  department  headquarters  I,  on 
the  18th,  at  about  11  a.  m.,  embarked  on  board  of  the  transports  about 
2,000  men  of  my  brigade  from  the  following  regiments : Ninth  New 
York  Volunteers,  727;  Eighty-ninth  New  York  Volunteers,  625,  and 
Sixth  New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  600.  In  this  force  was  included  two 
boat  guns  belonging  to  Company  K,  Ninth  New  York  Volunteers. 

About  11  o’clock  the  same  evening  my  brigade  commenced  landing 
at  a place  opposite  Cobb’s  Point,  about  4 miles  below  Elizabeth  City, 
on  the  Pasquotank  River. 

By  2.30  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  19th  the  landing  of  my  brigade 
had  been  completed,  including  two  field  pieces  from  the  steamer  Vir- 
ginia ; this  through  the  water  where  it  was  more  than  knee-deep,  which 
the  men  were  compelled  to  wade. 

At  3 a.  m.  the  whole  brigade  was  on  the  march,  and  continued  for  the 
next  twelve  hours  on  its  weary  way  through  a long,  circuitous  route 
of  32  miles,  beneath  the  terrible  heat  of  the  sun,  amid  the  constantly- 

rising  dust.  # . 

At  about  3 p.  m.  I succeeded  in  arriving  in  sight  of  the  enemy’s  posi- 
tion with  about  one-half  of  the  men  who  had  commenced  the  march, 
when  we  were  immediately  ordered  into  action,  the  Sixth  New  Hamp- 
shire Volunteers  going  to  the  left  of  the  enemy’s  position,  the  Ninth  and 
Eighty-ninth  New  York  going  to  the  right  through  the  woods  to  out- 
flank the  enemy  on  each  side.  Up  to  this  time  the  part  of  a battery 
from  the  Ninth  New  York,  worked  by  Lieutenant  Herbert,  assisted  by 


310 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


5 men  (the  rest  having  been  worn  out  by  fatigue),  received  and  sus- 
tained the  whole  fire  of  the  enemy’s  battery. 

After  marching  about  2 miles  through  a swamp  covered  with  thick 
nndergrowth  I arrived  within  about  three-eighths  of  a mile  of  the 
enemy’s  position,  where  they  were  concealed  in  the  woods.  After  a 
short  tour  of  observation  I came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  would  be  im- 
possible to  outflank  them  on  the  right  the  undergrowth  and  swamp 
being  almost  impenetrable.  A charge  through  an  open  field  directly 
in  front  of  the  enemy’s  position  was  thought  to  be  the  only  way  in  which 
they  could  be  dislodged.  I then  returned  to  where  I had  left  the  Ninth 
New  York  and  found  them  lying  on  the  ground  completely  exhausted. 
I stated  to  the  regiment  what  I proposed  to  do,  and  asked  the  men  if 
they  felt  equal  to  the  task.  Their  answer  was,  aWe  will  try,  colonel, 
and  follow  wherever  you  may  lead  us.”  Immediately  the  command, 
u Forward!”  was  given,  the  Ninth  New  York  taking  the  lead,  followed 
by  the  Eighty-ninth  New  York.  We  had  proceeded  to  within  about  200 
yards  of  the  enemy’s  concealed  position  when  the  Ninth  New  York 
received  the  full  and  direct  fire  from  the  enemy’s  infantry  and  batteries. 
This  completely  staggered  the  men,  who  were  before  completely  ex- 
hausted, and  the  order  was  given  for  the  regiment  to  turn  to  the  right, 
where  it  would  be  partly  sheltered  from  the  fire.  This  order  was  exe- 
cuted, but  slowly.  Soon  after  the  Eighty-ninth  New  York  commenced 
to  move  forward,  supported  by  the  Ninth  New  York,  when  the  enemy 
retreated.  When  this  commenced  the  Sixth  New  Hampshire  poured  a 
volley  into  the  right  wing  of  the  Third  Regiment  Georgia  Volunteers, 
which  completely  cut  them  to  pieces.  The  troops  then  bivouacked  on 
the  field,  where  they  remained  until  10  p.  m.,  when  they  were  ordered 
to  fall  in  and  return  to  their  transports. 

It  is  seldom,  if  ever,  that  men  have  been  called  upon  to  perform  so 
much  in  so  short  a time  as  those  were  who  composed  the  Fourth  Bri- 
gade under  my  command.  Marching  50  miles  and  fighting  a battle  all 
in  twenty-six  hours  you  will  admit  is  no  small  undertaking,  and  yet  this 
was  done  without  a murmur  or  a complaint. 

In  the  charge  of  the  Ninth  New  York  that  regiment  lost  9 killed  and 
56  wounded.  Among  the  former  was  Lieut.  Charles  A.  Gadsden,  ad- 
jutant, who  fell  at  the  head  of  his  regiment.  He  was  a kind,  consid- 
erate man  and  a most  excellent  soldier,  and  dies  greatly  lamented  by 
all  of  his  companions. 

Colonel  Howard,  of  the  steamer  Virginia,  who  was  in  command  of 
the  artillery,  has  not  yet  made  his  report,  consequently  I am  unable  to 
give  any  particulars  concerning  his  part  in  the  engagement,  but  believe 
that  he  behaved  with  great  coolness  and  bravery,  as  well  as  all  of  the 
men  and  officers  under  him. 

Soon  after  the  troops  had  returned  to  Roanoke  Island  the  Rev.  T.  W. 
Conway,  chaplain  of  the  Ninth  New  York  Volunteers,  returned,  bring- 
ing with  him  about  50  stragglers  and  some  of  the  wounded  left  behind 
on  the  field  of  battle.  He  remained  to  bury  the  dead  and  to  assist  the 
wounded.  On  the  morning  of  the  20th  he  started  out  to  find  the  rebel 
pickets,  and  after  going  some  distance  he  was  informed  that  the  rebels 
had  left  the  night  before — re-enforcements  which  they  had  only  a few 
moments  before  received  included — for  Suffolk,  thinking  that  our  forces 
were  by  a flank  movement  getting  in  their  rear  to  cut  them  off;  re- 
turned to  the  hospital  by  the  way  of  the  battle-field,  where  he  counted 
30  of  the  enemy’s  dead.  After  the  dead  were  buried  and  the  wounded 
who  could  not  be  brought  away  cared  for,  all  the  stragglers  who  could 


Chap.  XX.] 


ENGAGE 


jUnt  at  south  mills,  n. 


c. 


311 


be  found  armed  themselves  and  started  for  the  place  of  debarkation 
and  arrived  here  in  safety  the  next  morning.  . 

In  this  enterprise  you  have  received  another  evidence  of  the  courage 
and  enterprise  of  the  troops  under  your  command.  Although  the  re- 
sults of  this  expedition  may  seem  disastrous  on  account  of  the  loss  of 
life,  still  the  reconnaissance  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great  value  to  you  when 
connected  with  future  operations.  , , . 

In  justice  to  other  regiments  I cannot  say  what  I should  like  to  about 
the  officers  and  men  of  my  own,  consequently  would  only  say  that  all 
alike  did  their  duty  faithfully  and  well. 

I regret  to  add  that,  owing  to  our  limited  transportation,  we  were 
compelled  to  leave  behind  14  of  our  wounded  in  care  of  Dr.  Warren,  of 
the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts,  2 or  3 of  which  were  brought  away  by 
the  chaplain  of  the  Ninth.  I have  to-day  sent  a flag  of  truce  by  Major 
Jardine,  who  was  accompanied  by  the  surgeon,  chaplain,  and  10  pri- 
vates, of  the  Ninth  New  York,  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  back  the 
wounded  and  the  bodies  of  Lieutenant  Gadsden  and  our  dead  who  were 

buried  on  the  field.  , , , 

Herewith  you  will  find  a complete  list  of  the  killed,  wounded,  and 
missing  of  the  Fourth  Brigade  in  the  action  of  the  19th  * 

[Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P * RTJSH  C.  HAWKINS, 

Colonel , Commanding  Fourth  Brigade  and  Post . 

Maj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside, 

Comdg.  Dept,  of  Forth  Carolina , New  Berne , N.  C. 

[Indorsement  No.  1.] 


Headquarters, 

New  Berne , N.  0.,  May  1,  1862. 

Respectfully  referred  to  General  Reno,  to  whom  it  should  have  orig- 
inally been  addressed. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Burnside : 

J LEWIS  RICHMOND, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Indorsement  No.  2.] 


Headquarters  Second  Division, 

May  2,  1862. 

I beg  to  inclose  the  following  indorsement. 

J.  L.  RENO, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Second  Divison. 

[Indorsement  No.  3.] 


Hdqrs.  Second  Division,  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , N.  0.,  May  1,  1862. 

Capt.  Lewis  Richmond, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  indorse  upon  the  report  of  Colonel  R. 
C.  Hawkins,  Ninth  New  York  Volunteers,  which  you  this  day  caused 
to  be  referred  to  me,  the  following  remarks  and  statements,  viz : 

In  the  first  place  I beg  leave  to  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that 
this  report  was  rendered  by  Colonel  Hawkins  directly  to  you  instead 


* Embodied  in  statement  on  p.  307. 


312 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


of  to  me,  his  immediate  commanding  officer,  which  is  in  violation  of  the 
Army  Regulations  and  Rules  of  Service,  as  also  that  the  spirit  of  the 
report  indicates  a disposition  to  ignore  me,  the  commanding  officer  of 
the  expedition,  as  well  as  the  rest  of  my  command  not  embraced  in 
Colonel  Hawkins’  brigade.  No  mention^  made  by  Colonel  Hawkins 
in  his  report  of  the  orders  received  on  the  march  and  during  the  en- 
gagement from  me  personally  and  through  my  aides.  He  gives  no 
explanation  of  the  way  in  which  my  orders  were  carried  out,  nor  why 
some  of  the  orders  given  him  were  not  obeyed.  To  be  more  explicit, 
I will  state  in  detail  that  the  whole  force  under  my  command,  consist- 
ing of  the  Sixth  New  Hampshire,  Ninth  and  Eighty-ninth  New  York 
Volunteers  (which  three  regiments  composed  the  brigade  of  Colonel 
Hawkins),  the  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania,  and  Twenty-first  Massachu- 
setts, set  sail  from  Roanoke  Island  by  my  orders,  and  debarked  near 
Elizabeth  City  by  my  order  and  under  my  personal  direction,  and  that 
the  march  toward  South  Mills  was  executed  by  though  not  according 
to  my  express  orders,  as  Colonel  Hawkins  took  his  brigade  by  a most 
circuitous  route.  The  orders  I gave  Colonel  Hawkins  on  landing  were 
to  proceed  directly  to  the  bridge  across  the  Pasquotank,  about  a mile 
this  side  of  South  Mills,  and  to  occupy  it.  This  order  he  did  not  obey 
promptly,  and  I sent  two  aides  in  succession  to  order  him  to  proceed, 
and  finally  was  obliged  to  go  in  person  to  force  obedience  to  my  order. 
Four  hours  after  this  I landed  with  the  remaining  two  regiments,  which 
had  been  delayed  in  disembarking  by  the  steamers  Northerner  and 
Guide  getting  aground  at  the  mouth  of  the  river.  We  passed  Colonel 
Hawkins’  brigade  about  12  miles  out  and  before  he  had  got  upon  the 
direct  road,  he  having  marched  some  10  or  12  miles  out  of  the  way. 
The  road  to  South  Mills  was  open,  plain,  and  perfectly  direct,  known 
to  every  resident  in  the  country,  and  nothing  but  design  or  negligence 
could  have  caused  him  to  miss  the  road.  With  respect  to  the  statement 
in  Colonel  Hawkins’  report  to  you  that  “at  about  3 p.  m.  I succeeded 
in  arriving  in  sight  of  the  enemy’s  position  with  about  one-half  of  the 
men  who  had  commenced  the  march,  when  we  were  immediately  ordered 
into  action,  the  Sixth  New  Hampshire  Volunteers  going  to  the  left  of 
the  enemy’s  position,  the  Ninth  and  Eighty-ninth  New  York  Volunteers 
going  to  the  right  through  the  woods  to  outflank  the  enemy  on  each  side,” 
I have  to  state  that  at  about  1 o’clock  I arrived  with  my  whole  com- 
mand in  front  of  the  enemy’s  position,  the  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania  Vol- 
unteers, followed  by  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  with 
Colonel  Howard’s  artillery,  being  in  advance,  the  brigade  under  Colonel 
Hawkins  following.  I immediately  sent  the  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania 
Volunteers  and  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  Volunteers  to  the  right  with 
orders  to  turn  the  enemy’s  left,  and  at  once  sent  orders  to  Colonel 
Hawkins  to  move  forward  with  his  whole  brigade.  This  order  not 
being  promptly  obeyed,  I went  back  and  found  that  he  had  halted  his 
command  and  had  not  prepared  to  move.  I immediately  ordered  him 
forward,  with  directions  to  follow  (with  two  regiments)  the  Twenty- 
first  Massachusetts  Volunteers  and  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania  Volunteers, 
to  aid  in  turning  the  enemy’s  left.  I then  went  forward  and  placed  the 
two  latter  regiments  in  proper  position,  and,  returning,  met  Colonel 
Hawkins,  and  again  giving  the  orders  above  named,  I pointed  out  to  him 
the  position  of  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  and  Fifty-first  Pennsyl- 
vania Volunteers.  The  way  was  through  an  open  pine  wood,  which 
had  already  been  passed  over  by  the  above-named  regiments.  It  is 
thus  shown  that  the  time  at  which  the  engagement  commenced  was 
before  the  time  which  the  said  report  would  lead  one  to  suppose,  and 


Chap.  XX.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SOUTH  MILLS,  N.  C. 


313 


that  the  time  consumed  by  Colonel  Hawkins  in  coming  under  fire  was 
due  to  unnecessary  delay  on  his  part,  and  that  the  studious  avoidance 
of  the  mention  of 'orders  received  by  him  from  me  was  calculated  to 
cover  this  delay  and  convey  the  impression  that  he  acted  by  his  own 
authoritv. 

With  respect  to  the  statement  that  “after  marching  about  2 miles 
through  a swamp  covered  by  thick  undergrowth  I arrived  within  about 
three-eighths  of  a mile  of  the  enemy’s  position,  where  they  were  con- 
cealed in  the  woods,  I came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  would  be  impos- 
sible to  outflank  them  on  the  right,  the  undergrowth  and  swamp  being 
almost  impenetrable,”  I have  to  state  that  the  route  pursued  by  the 
command  of  Colonel  Hawkins  did  not  lead  through  a swamp  or  almost 
impenetrable  undergrowth,  as  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  two  regiments 
(the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  and  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania)  had 
already  passed  over  this  ground,  and  that  I had  been  over  the  ground 
myself  and  found  it  dry  and  perfectly  practicable  for  passage. 

As  to  the  statement  that  “a  charge  through  an  open  field  directly  in 
front  of  the  enemy’s  position  was  thought  to  be  the  only  way  in  which 
they  could  be  dislodged,”  I have  to  state  that  if  the  intention  be  to 
convey  the  idea  that  I,  the  commanding  officer,  thought  so,  it  is  untrue, 
as  it  was  directly  contrary  to  my  opinion.  If  the  intention  be  to  con- 
vey the  idea  that  he  or  other  officers  thought  so  and  that  he  acted 
upon  that  conclusion,  it  was  an  act  of  insubordination,  as  it  was  con- 
trary to  my  orders. 

As  to  the  statement  that  “soon  after  the  Eig;hty-nmth  New  York 
commenced  to  move  forward,  supported  by  the  Ninth  New  York,  when 
the  enemy  retreated,”  &c.,  I have  to  state  that  it  is  calculated  to  give 
the  false  impression  that  this  movement  caused  the  retreat  of  the 
enemy,  when  in  reality  it  was  caused  by  the  enemy’s  flank  being  turned 
by  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  and  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania  Volun- 
teers. . 

In  conclusion,  I have  to  state  that  Col.  E.  C.  Hawkins,  m making 
his  report  directly  to  you  instead  of  his  commanding  officer,  has  been 
guilty  of  a breach  of  military  usage  and  discipline,  and  that  the  spirit; 
of  said  report  is  calculated  to  ignore  my  presence  as  commanding  offi- 
cer, to  ignore  orders  received  from  me,  as  well  as  to  ignore  the  presence 
of  those  regiments  which  principally  fought  the  engagement,  and  that 
the  report  tends  to  convey  a false  impression  of  the  circumstances  aris- 
ing during  the  engagement  and  of  the  part  which  he  played  in  it,  and 
that  it  contains  a perversion  of  truth  in  the  statements  concerning  the 
obstacles  to  his  progress  in  moving  to  turn  the  enemy’s  left.  I beg 
leave  also  to  state  that  the  principal  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  is  due 
to  the  unauthorized  and  unnecessary  charge  made  by  the  Ninth  New 
York,  under  the  immediate  command  of  Colonel  Hawkins. 

I have  the  honor  to  be.  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  L.  EENO, 

Brigadier - General , Commanding  Second  Division. 


Headquarters, 

Roanoke  Island , N.  G\,  April  21,  1862. 

Sir:  In  accordance  with  orders  from  the  department  headquarters, 
and  under  your  immediate  orders  I,  on  the  18th,  at  about  11  a.  m., 
embarked  on  board  of  the  transport  about  2,000  men  of  my  brigade 
from  the  following  regiments:  Ninth  New  York  Volunteers,  727 j 


314 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


Eighty-ninth  New  York  Volunteers,  625,  and  Sixth  New  Hampshire 
Volunteers,  600.  In  this  force  was  included  two  boat  guns  belonging 
to  Company  K,  Ninth  New  York  Volunteers. 

About  11  p.  m.  the  same  evening  my  brigade  commenced  landing 
at  a place  opposite  Cobb’s  Point,  about  4 miles  below  Elizabeth  City, 
on  the  Pasquotank  River. 

By  2.30  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  19th  the  landing  of  my  bri- 
gade had  been  completed,  including  two  field  pieces  from  the  steamer 
Virginia;  this  through  the  water  where  it  was  more  than  knee-deep, 
which  the  men  were  compelled  to  wade. 

At  3 a.  m.  the  whole  brigade  was  on  the  march,  and  continued  for 
the  next  twelve  hours  on  its  weary  way  through  a long,  circuitous 
route  of  32  miles,  beneath  the  terrible  heat  of  the  sun,  amid  the  con- 
stantly-rising dust. 

At  about  3 p.  m.  I succeeded  in  arriving  in  sight  of  the  enemy’s 
position  with  about  one-half  of  the  men  who  had  commenced  the 
march,  when  we  were  immediately  ordered  by  yourself  into  action, 
the  Sixth  New  Hampshire  Volunteers  going  to  the  left  of  the  enemy’s 
position,  the  Ninth  and  Eighty-ninth  New  York  going  to  the  right 
through  the  woods  to  outflank  the  etfemy  on  each  side.  IJp  to  this 
time  the  part  of  a battery  from  the  Ninth  New  York,  worked  by  Lieu- 
tenant Herbert,  assisted  by  5 men  (the  rest  having  been  worn  out  by 
fatigue),  received  and  sustained  the  whole  fire  of  the  enemy’s  battery. 

After  marching  about  2 miles  through  a swamp  covered  with  thick 
undergrowth  I arrived  within  about  three- eighths  of  a mile  of  the 
enemy’s  position  where  they  were  concealed  in  the  woods.  After  a 
short  tour  of  observation  I came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  would  be 
impossible  to  outflank  them  on  the  right,  the  undergrowth  and  swamp 
being  almost  impenetrable.  A charge  through  an  open  field  in  front 
of  the  enemy’s  position  was  thought  to  be  the  only  way  in  which  they 
could  be  dislodged.  I then  returned  to  where  I had  left  the  Ninth 
New  York,  and  found  them  lying  on  the  ground  completely  exhausted. 
I stated  to  the  regiment  what  I proposed  to  do,  and  asked  the  men  if 
they  felt  equal  to  the  task.  Their  answer  was,  “ We  will  try,  colonel, 
and  follow  wherever  you  may  lead  us.”  Immediately  the  command 
forward  was  given,  the  Ninth  New  York  taking  the  lead,  followed  by 
the  Eighty-ninth  New  York.  We  had  proceeded  to  within  about  200 
yards  of  the  enemy’s  concealed  position  when  the  Ninth  New  York 
received  the  full,  direct,  right-oblique,  and  left-oblique  fires  from  the 
enemy’s  infantry  and  batteries.  This  completely  staggered  the  men, 
who  were  before  quite  exhausted.  The  order  was  then  given  for  the 
regiment  to  turn  to  the  right,  where  it  would  be  partly  sheltered  from 
the  fire.  This  order  was  executed,  but  slowly.  Soon  after  the  Eighty- 
ninth  New  York  commenced  to  move  forward,  supported  by  the  Ninth 
New  York,  when  the  enemy  retreated.  When  this  commenced  the 
the  Sixth  New  Hampshire  poured  a volley  into  the  right  wing  of  the 
Third  Georgia  Volunteer  Regiment,  which  completely  cut  them  into 
pieces.  The  troops  then  bivouacked  on  the  field,  where  they  remained 
until  10  p.  m.,  when  they  were  ordered  to  fall  in  and  return  to  their 
transports. 

It  is  seldom,  if  ever,  that  men  have  been  called  upon  to  perform  so 
much  in  so  short  a time  as  those  were  who  composed  the  Fourth  Bri- 
gade, under  my  command.  Marching  50  miles  and  fighting  a battle  all 
in  twenty- six  hours  you  will  admit  is  no  small  undertaking,  and  yet 
this  was  done  without  a murmur  or  complaint. 

In  the  charge  of  the  Ninth  New  York  that  regiment  lost  9 killed  and 


Chap.  XX.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SOUTH  MILLS,  N.  C. 


315 


CO  wounded.  Among  the  former  was  Lieut.  Charles  A.  Gadsden,  adju- 
tant, who  fell  at  the  head  of  his  regiment.  He  was  a kind,  consid- 
erate man  and  a most  excellent  soldier,  and  dies  greatly  lamented  by 
all  of  his  companions. 

Colonel  Howard,  of  the  steamer  Virginia,  who  was  in  command  of 
the  artillery,  has  not  yet  made  his  report,  consequently  I am  unable 
to  give  any  particulars  concerning  his  part  in  the  engagement,  but  be- 
lieve that  he  behaved  with  coolness  and  bravery,  as  well  as  all  of  the 
men  and  officers  under  him. 

Soon  after  the  troops  had  returned  to  Roanoke  Island  the  Rev.  T. 
W.  Conway,  chaplain  of  the  Ninth  New  York  Volunteers,  returned, 
bringing  with  him  about  50  stragglers  and  some  of  the  wounded  left 
behind  on  the  field  of  battle.  He  remained  behind  to  bury  the  dead 
and  to  assist  the  wounded.  On  the  morning  of  the  20th  he  started  out 
to  find  the  rebel  pickets,  and  after  going  some  distance  he  was  informed 
that  the  rebels  had  left  the  night  before— re-enforcements  which  they 
had  only  a few  moments  before  received  included — for  Suffolk,  thinking 
that  our  forces  were  by  a flank  movement  getting  in  their  rear  to  cut 
them  off.  He  returned  to  the  hospital  by  the  way  of  the  battle-field, 
where  he  counted  30  of  the  enemy’s  dead.  After  the  dead  were  buried 
and  the  wounded  who  could  not  be  brought  away  cared  for,  all  the 
stragglers  who  could  be  found  armed  themselves  and  started  for  the 
place  of  debarkation,  and  arrived  here  in  safety  the  next  morning. 

In  this  enterprise  the  commanding  general  has  received  another  evi- 
dence of  the  courage  and  enterprise  of  the  troops  under  his  command. 
Although  the  results  of  this  expedition  may  seem  disastrous  on  account 
of  the  loss  of  life,  still  the  reconnaissance  cannot  fail  to  be  of  great 
value  to  him  when  connected  with  future  operations. 

In  justice  to  other  regiments  I cannot  say  what  I should  like  to  about 
the  officers  and  men  of  my  own,  consequently  would  only  say  that  all 
alike  did  their  duty  faithfully  and  well. 

I regret  to  add  that  owing  to  our  limited  transportation  we  were  com- 
pelled to  leave  behind  14  of  our  wounded  in  care  of  Dr.  Warren,  of 
the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts,  2 or  3 of  which  were  brought  away  by 
the  chaplain  of  the  Ninth  New  York.  I have  to-day  sent  a flag  of  truce 
by  Major  Jardine,  who  was  accompanied  by  the  surgeon,  chaplain,  and 
10  privates  of  the  Ninth  New  York,  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  back 
the  wounded  and  the  bodies  of  Lieutenant  Gadsden  and  our  dead  who 
were  buried  on  the  field. 

Herewith  you  will  find  a complete  list  of  the  killed,  wounded,  and 
missing  of  the  Fourth  Brigade  in  the  action  of  the  19th.* 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

RUSH  0.  HAWKINS, 

Colonel  Ninth  New  York  Volunteers , Comdg.  Fourth  Brigade » 

Brig.  Gen.  Jesse  L.  Reno, 

Comdg.  Second  Div .,  Dept,  of  North  Carolina , New  Berne ^ N.  C. 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Second  Div.,  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , N.  C.,  May  15, 1862. 

This  amended  report  of  Colonel  Hawkins,  made  to  me  in  obedience 
to  your  express  orders,  exhibiting  the  same  inconsistencies  and  mis- 
statements as  the  first  or  original  report,  is  not  deemed  satisfactory,  and 

* Embodied  in  statement  on  p.  307. 


316 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


I can  see  no  reason  for  altering  or  suppressing  my  original  remarks  or 
indorsement.  I therefore  recommend  that  his  original  report,  with  my 
indorsement,  be  forwarded. 

J.  L.  BENO, 
Brigadier-  General. 

Headquarters, 

Roanoke  Island , N.  0.,  April  23,  1862. 

Sir  : Doubtless  the  unfortunate  occurrence  of  the  19th  has  been 
brought  fully  to  your  notice.  No  one  can  regret  the  result  more  than 
myself.  First,  because  of  the  loss  of  life;  second,  the  object  of  the 
expedition  not  being  accomplished  after  all  the  obstacles  in  our  way 
had  been  removed.  It  seems  that  both  parties  were  badly  frightened. 
The  enemy  ran  like  quarter-horses  toward  Norfolk,  and  we  as  fast  as 
our  weary  legs  would  carry  us  toward  Boanoke,  leaving  quite  a num- 
ber of  our  wounded  and  destroying  the  bridges  behind  us.  In  this 
connection  I will  only  add  our  retirement  was  discretion,  our  valor 
having  been  wholly  spent  on  the  field  of  battle.  There  is  one  satis- 
faction, that  we  whipped  them  in  their  own  well- chosen  position  like 
the  devil.  They  acknowledged  to  have  had  three  companies  of  the 
Georgia  Third  completely  cut  to  pieces,  and  from  this  acknowledgment 
it  is  but  fair  to  infer  their  loss  was  much  greater.  Their  force,  as  near 
as  I can  ascertain,  was  the  Georgia  Third,  1,165  strong ; a battery  of 
Henningsen’s  artillery  of  four  pieces,  and  some  North  Carolina  Militia, 
number  not  known,  and  a full  squadron  of  Suffolk  and  Southamp- 
ton cavalry.  This  statement  of  the  enemy’s  forces  I believe  to  be  very 
nearly  correct. 

I most  cordially  join  in  the  recommendations  of  the  surgeons  that 
the  wounded  be  removed  North  as  soon  as  possible,  and  that  a steamer, 
made  comfortable  by  the  necessary  beds,  &c.,  be  sent  here  for  that 
purpose  at  the  earliest  moment.  They  can  be  of  no  service  here  and 
will  recover  much  more  rapidly  at  the  North,  besides  relieving  our 
surgeons,  who  are  already  worn-out  by  their  arduous  labors.  Owing 
to  the  little  wound  received  in  my  left  arm  in  the  affair  of  the  19th  I 
am  compelled,  by  the  advice  of  surgeons,  to  lay  up  in  ordinary  for 
repairs,  much  against  my  desire  or  inclination.  They  say  it  will  be 
eight  weeks  before  I am  fit  for  service.  Under  such  circumstances, 
being  forbidden  to  perform  any  labor,  I would  ask  for  leave  of  absence 
until  such  time  as  I am  able  to  return  to  duty,  which  will  be  at  the 
earliest  possible  moment.  But  still,  if  you  cannot  spare  me,  I will  re- 
main and  render  such  service  as  I am  able  to  perform  lying  on  my 
back.  I know  and  can  dictate  what  ought  to  be  done. 

I should  be  very  happy  to  see  you  here,  as  I have  much  to  say  to 
you  that  I cannot  write. 

Most  faithfully,  your  friend  and  servant, 

BUSH  C.  HAWKINS, 

Commanding  Post. 

Maj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina. 


New  Berne,  N.  C.,  April  24,  1862. 
My  Dear  General  : Foster  showed  me  the  letter  of  that  infernal 
scoundrel  Hawkins,  and  he  and  other  rascals  have  been  circulating 


Chat.  XX.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SOUTH  MILLS,  N.  C. 


317 


reports  concerning  my  conduct  and  the  command  at  the  recent  battle 
of  Camden  which  are  calculated  to  do  me  and  the  gallant  men  with 
me  great  injustice.  You  remember  that  my  orders  were  not  to  risk 
any  disaster,  and  that  I did  not  go  prepared  to  remain  absent  more 
than  two  days.  After  ascertaining  that  the  Navy  could  not  make  a 
junction  with  me  at  the  bridge,  and  hearing  from  a variety  of  sources 
that  I considered  reliable  that  re-enforcements  were  on  the  way,  I 
deemed  it  for  the  best  to  retire,  and  Mo  man  more  highly  approved 
that  course  than  the  rascal  Hawkins.  In  fact,  it  was  his  bad  conduct 
in  placing  his  regiment  in  a position  to  get  whipped  and  demoralized 
that  principally  induced  me  to  change  my  lirst  intention,  which  was  to 
remain  on  the  field  and  proceed  to  South  Mills  in  the  morning.  The 
commanding  officers  of  both  the  Twenty-first  and  Fifty-first  came  to 
me  to  urge  that  course,  stating  that  they  had  not  sufficient  ammunition 
to  risk  another  battle.  The  doctors  also  stated  that  the  wounded  could 
be  moved  more  easily  then  than  at  any  other  time,  and  not  being  able 
to  divine  the  future  or  imagine  that  they  would  abandon  a 32-pounder 
battery,  which  I knew  they  had  at  South  Mills,  I believed  I was  carry- 
ing out  your  wishes  in  returning.  If  such  was  the  fact,  I think  that 
out  of  justice  to  me  and  the  command  you  should  publish  an  order  to 
that  effect.  You  have  no  idea  how  industriously  some  scoundrel  has 
been  spreading  reports  that  we  were  badly  whipx>ed,  and  how  dissatis- 
fied the  officers  and  men  of  the  Twenty-first  and  Fifty -first  are  that  no 
official  contradiction  of  such  lying  reports  has  been  made. 

All  well  here.  We  will  keep  up  a sharp  lookout  for  our  secesh 
friends.  I think  that  I will  send  the  One  hundred  and  third  New  York 
to  Parke.  My  love  to  him,  yourself,  and  others. 

Yours,  truly,  _ 

f§t  J.  L.  BENO. 

General  Ambrose  E.  Burnside. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Thomas  8.  Bell , Fifty -first  Pennsylvania  Infantry , 
commanding  Second  Brigade. 

Camp  Fifty-first  Begiment  Pennsylvania  Vols., 

New  Berne , N.  0.,  April  23,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  general 
commanding  the  division,  that  on  the  landing  of  the  Fifty-first  Begi- 
ment Pennsylvania  Volunteers  and  Twenty-first  Begiment  Massachu- 
setts Volunteers  at  the  point  on  the  Pasquotank  Biver  about  3 miles 
below  Elizabeth  City,  between  the  hours  of  6 and  7 a.  m.  on  the  19th 
instant,  I by  his  order  took  command  of  the  two  regiments  and  formed 
them  in  line  in  the  open  field.  Sending  forward  Company  A,  of  the 
Fifty-first  Pennsylvania,  as  an  advance  guard  to  the  column,  the 
wagons  hauling  the  cannon  and  loaded  with  the  ammunition,  &c., 
were  next  put  in  line.  These  were  followed  by  the  Fifty-first  Pennsyl- 
vania Volunteers  and  Twenty-first  Massachusetts.  Everything  being 
in  readiness,  the  march  was  commenced  about  7.30  o’clock. 

Colonel  Hawkins  (Ninth  New  York),  commanding  the  First  [Fourth] 
Brigade,  composed  of  the  Ninth  New  York,  Eighty -ninth  New  York,  and 
Sixth  New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  had  marched  from  the  point  of  land- 
ing between  the  hours  of  2 and  3 a.  m.,  and  was  supposed  to  be  in  posses- 


318 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX 


sion  of  the  bridge  near  South  Mills  at  the  time  of  our  marching.  The 
road  was  in  most  excellent  marching  condition,  and  the  men  pushed 
forward  as  rapidly  as  could  be  desired.  The  extreme  heat  of  the  sun 
though,  soon  began  to  exhaust  them  very  much.  After  having  marched 
a distance  of  about  10  miles  we  were  unexpectedly  joined  from  the 
right  by  Colonel  Hawkins’  command,  who,  through  an  unfortunate 
mistake  upon  the  part  of  his  guide,  had  taken  the  wrong  road  and 
been  misled  some  10  miles  from  his  course.  His  brigade  fell  in  rear 
of  the  column,  and  as  rapidly  as  possible  we  moved  forward. 

Company  F,  of  the  Fifty-first,  was  now  sent  forward  to  strengthen 
the  advance  guard.  The  heat  of  the  sun  was  most  oppressive,  the 
road  dusty,  the  men  hungry.  About  noon  General  Reno,  who  was  in 
advance,  was  just  about  to  call  a halt,  in  order  that  the  men  might 
dine  and  rest  themselves,  when,  most  unexpectedly,  the  enemy  opened 
upon  us  with  cannon,  the  position  of  which  was  well  masked  by  a 
burning  house  and  some  cedar  trees.  They  kept  up  from  the  first  dis- 
charge a vigorous  fire.  By  order  from  General  Reno  I directed  the 
Fifty-first  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  to  move  by  the  right  flank  across 
the  field  to  the  woods  on  the  enemy’s  left,  in  order  to  flank  the  battery 
and  troops  supporting  it.  The  Twenty-first  Massachusetts,  having 
halted  to  rest  before  the  enemy  opened,  was  some  distance  in  rear 
The  enemy  kept  up  an  incessant  fire  at  the  Fifty-first  Regiment  as  it 
crossed  the  field  toward  the  woods,  but  the  range  being  too  great  for 
canister  they  were  obliged  to  confine  themselves  to  solid  shot,  and 
these  did  no  damage.  After  reaching  the  woods  they  were  moved 
toward  the  enemy’s  position.  On  account  of  the  extreme  exhaustion 
of  the  men  and  the  thickness  of  the  underbrush  their  advance  was 
necessarily  slow  and  tedious.  The  enemy  followed  the  movement  with 
his  cannon,  but  not  until  we  had  approached  sufficiently  near  for  him 
to  use  canister  did  he  do  any  injury.  By  the  canister  1 man  was  killed 
and  several  wounded. 

I ordered  Major  Scliall,  commanding  the  Fifty-first,  to  put  out  his 
skirmishers  and  advance  on  the  enemy’s  left  to  where  the  Third  Georgia 
Volunteers  were  posted  in  the  woods  and  engage  them  and  sent  back 
to  bring  up  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts.  On  their  arrival  I con- 
ducted them,  by  order  of  General  Reno,  along  the  edge  of  the  woods  in 
the  course  taken  by  the  Fifty-first.  On  coming  up  with  the  Fifty-first 
the  skirmishers  of  the  enemy  showed  themselves  in  the  field  and  woods, 
and  fire  was  immediately  opened  upon  them  by  Company  B,  of  the 
Fifty -first.  That  regiment,  by  my  order,  immediately  advanced  to  the 
fence  on  the  edge  of  the  open  field  and  opened  an  enfilading  fire  on  the 
Third  Georgia  and  other  troops  of  the  enemy,  who  were  drawn  up  in 
the  woods  skirting  the  open  field  at  right  angles  to  our  position.  Our 
fire  was  warmly  responded  to.  I ordered  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts 
farther  to  the  right,  in  order  to  guard  against  any  attack  on  our  flank 
or  rear.  They  were  immediately  engaged  with  the  enemy. 

Soon  after  we  had  opened  fire  the  Ninth  New  York' (Hawkins’  Zou- 
aves) started  to  charge  the  position  of  the  enemy  across  the  open  field 
in  front,  but  by  heavy  discharges  of  canister  they  were  repulsed  with 
considerable  loss.  Many  of  the  men  of  the  regiment  joined  us  in  our 
position.  After  the  firing  had  been  vigorously  kept  up  from  half  to 
three-quarters  of  an  hour  I ordered  a charge  across  the  field  on  their 
position.  This  was  most  gallantly  done  by  the  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania 
and  Twenty-first  Massachusetts,  the  Sixth  New  Hampshire  advancing 
up  the  left  of  the  road  and  the  Eighty -ninth  and  Ninth  New  York  from 
the  woods.  The  enemy  broke  and  fled  from  the  field  precipitately,  leav. 


Chap.  XX.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SOUTH  MILLS,  N.  C. 


319 


ing  us  in  undisputed  possession  of  it.  Our  troops  being  too  much 
fatigued  from  the  long  march  and  the  battle  to  pursue  the  enemy  farther, 
they  were,  by  order  of  the  general  commanding,  bivouacked  in  the 

woods.  , , _ 

On  account  of  the  ease  with  which  the  enemy  could  be  re-enforced 
from  Norfolk,  distant  only  about  28  miles,  and  the  probability  that  he 
had  already  been  largely  re-enforced,  thus  accomplishing  the  chief  ob- 
ject of  the  reconnaissance,  and  because  of  the  smallness  of  our  force,  the 
lack  of  ammunition  and  provisions,  it  was  deemed  prudent  by  the  gen- 
eral commanding  and  all  the  officers  consulted  by  him  to  retire  to  our 
vessels.  Accordingly,  between  9 and  10  o’clock  p.  m.,  large  camp-fires 
having  been  built,  the  column  moved  off.  The  Twenty-first  Massa- 
chusetts brought  up  the  rear,  Company  D,  under  Lieutenant  Barker, 
and  two  guns,  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Howard,  of  the  Marine 
Artillery,  and  the  Pioneer  Corps  of  the  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania,  under 
Lieutenant  Ortlip  (to  destroy  the  bridge),  acting  as  our  guard. 

On  account  of  a heavy  rain  which  had  fallen  the  roads  were  in  a 
miserable  condition,  but  the  arduous  march  to  the  landing  was  accom- 
plished by  between  6 and  7 o’clock  a.  m.  on  the  20th. 

On  account  of  the  lack  of  transportation  and  the  severity  of  their 
wounds  the  medical  director  of  the  column,  Dr.  Humphreys,  of  the 
Ninth  New  York,  was  obliged  to  leave  about  20  of  the  wounded  in 
charge  of  Dr.  Warren,  assistant  surgeon  of  the  Twenty-first  Massa- 
chusetts, in  the  hospital  established  in  the  houses  about  the  field. 
Some  few  from  exhaustion  failed  to  reach  the  place  of  landing  in  time 
to  embark  in  the  transports,  but  it  is  confidently  expected  that  they 
have  all  been  taken  on  board  the  gunboat  sent  up  to  the  creek  above 
Camden  Court-House,  and  will  soon  rejoin  their  regiments.  On  arriv- 
ing at  the  landing  the  troops  were  placed  on  board  the  transports  and 
soon  sailed.  The  Twenty-first  and  Fifty-first  arrived  at  New  Berne 
about  12  o’clock  on  Tuesday,  the  22d  instant. 

I transmit  herewith  the  reports  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Clark,  com- 
manding Twenty -first  Massachusetts,  and  Major  Schall,  commanding 
the  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania,  with  their  list  of  casualties.  Though  both 
regiments  were  almost  utterly  exhausted  before  the  commencement  of 
the  action,  both  attacked  the  enemy  with  great  vigor,  and  by  their  gal- 
lant charge  completely  routed  them. 

I desire  to  mention  particularly  the  assistance  rendered  me  during 
the  march  and  on  the  field  by  my  acting  aides,  Lieutenant  Harlow, 
quartermaster  of  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts,  and  Lieutenants 
Beaver  and  Fair,  of  the  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania. 

I am,  captain,  verv  respectfully,  yours, 

THOMAS  S.  BELL, 

Lieut.  Col.,  51  st  Pa.  Vols.,  Comdg.  Brig.,  Beconnoitering  Expedition. 

Capt.  Edward  M.  Neill,  A.  A.  G .,  Second  Division. 


No.  6. 


Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Williafn  S.  Clark,  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  In- 
fantry. 

Headquarters  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  Yols., 
Steamer  Northerner,  Pamlico  Sound,  April  21,  1862. 
Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  accordance  with  orders 
from  Acting  Major-General  Reno,  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  Vol- 


320 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap,  XX. 


unteers  embarked  on  board  the  transport-steamer  Northerner  at  5 o’clock 
p.  m.  on  the  17th  instant,  and  proceeded  to  the  mouth  of  the  Pasquo- 
tank Biver,  in  Albemarle  Sound,  where  we  arrived  about  sunrise  on 
the  19th. 

The  regiment  was  here  transferred  to  thelight-draughtsteamersOcean 
Wave  and  Massasoit,  and  afterward  to  small  row-boats  and  launches,, 
which  were  run  in  as  near  shore  as  possible  at  a point  on  the  north 
bank  of  the  river  about  3 miles  below  Elizabeth  City.  Officers  and 
men  now  cheerfully  sprang  into  the  water  and  waded  to  land,  where 
the  line  was  immediately  formed  and  muskets  loaded.  We  numbered 
500  picked  men,  and  were  furnished  with  two  days’  rations  and  GO 
rounds  of  ammunition. 

Three  regiments,  the  Ninth  and  Eighty-ninth  New  York  Volunteers 
and  the  Sixth  New  Hampshire  Volunteers,  had  been  landed  about  2 
o’clock  a.  m.  and  sent  forward,  under  command  of  Colonel  Hawkins,  to 
take  possession  of  a bridge  near  South  Mills,  where  are  extensive  stone 
locks  on  the  Dismal  Swamp  Canal. 

A little  before  7 o’clock  General  Beno  followed  with  the  Eifty-first 
Pennsylvania  Volunteers  and  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  Volun- 
teers, which  regiments  bad  been  delayed  about  four  hours  by  the  want 
of  suitable  pilots  to  bring  up  the  transports.  The  column  advanced 
rapidly  along  an  excellent  road  through  a level  and  fertile  district,  halt- 
ing a few  minutes  occasionally  for  water  and  rest.  About  10  o’clock,, 
as  Ave  were  lying  by  the  road-side,  we  were  astonished  to  see  a large 
body  of  troops  coming  down  upon  our  left  flank.  u Attention”  was  im- 
mediately sounded  by  the  bugle  and  the  general  rode  out  to  recon- 
noiter.  fie  was  not  a little  chagrined  to  find  that  Colonel  Hawkins, 
with  his  command,  having  been  misled  by  his  guide,  had  marched  10 
miles  farther  than  was  necessary  to  reach  this  point,  and  instead  of 
having  surprised  the  enemy  by  an  early  arrival  at  the  bridge  had  nearly 
exhausted  his  men  by  a wearisome  march.  The  weather  was  now  very 
oppressive,  and  the  men  began  to  suffer  greatly  from  the  heat  and  the 
want  of  wrater,  as  their  canteens  were  emptied  early  in  the  day  and 
there  had  been  no  opportunity  of  refilling  them.  As  no  halt  had  been 
made  for  breakfast,  and  hard  bread  and  salt  beef  could  not  well  be 
eaten  without  water,  they  were  also  faint  from  the  want  of  food. 

Before  noon  large  numbers  had  fallen  out  from  all  the  regiments r 
utterly  unable  to  proceed,  and  General  Beno,  who  was  now  in  advance, 
with  the  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania  and  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts,, 
was  just  about  to  order  a*  halt  for  dinner,  when  most  unexpectedly  a 
brisk  fire  of  round  shot  and  canister  was  opened  upon  us. 

The  battery  of  the  rebels  was  skillfully  masked  by  the  smoke  from 
a dwelling-house  and  outbuildings  on  the  highway,  which  had  been  set 
on  fire  for  this  purpose,  and  our  advance  guard  was  close  upon  it  when 
the  cannonade  commenced.  General  Beno  at  once  ordered  the  k ifty- 
first  Pennsylvania  to  take  shelter  in  the  woods  on  the  left  of  the  enemy  s 
position,  and  sent  back  for  the  remaining  regiments  and  the  four  how- 
itzers which  were  under  command  of  Colonel  Howard  of  the  Marine 
Artillery. 

In  consequence  of  the  extreme  exhaustion  of  the  men  considerable 
time  elapsed  before  they  could  be  brought  into  position  for  the  attack, 
and  the  artillery  of  the  rebels  continued  for  more  than  an  hour  with- 
out interruption  from  us  and  without  doing  us  much  damage,  as  they 
had  no  shells  and  the  range  was  too  great  for  canister.  Many  trees 
and  a few  men  were  injured  by  their  round  shot,  which  were  thrown 
with  considerable  accuracy. 


Chav.  XX.J 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SOUTH  MILLS,  N.  C. 


321 


The  rebels  had  one  light  battery  stationed  on  the  main  road  behind 
the  burning  buildings,  and  another  one  about  50  yards  to  the  right  of 
the  first,  upon  a road  running  in  that  direction.  The  batteries  were 
supported  by  two  regiments  of  infantry,  numbering  about  1,800  men, 
and  200  cavalry.  The  Third  Georgia  Volunteers  was  formed  in  line  of 
battle  in  a grove  of  young  pines  some  300  yards  behind  and  to  the  left 
of  the  burning  buildings,  and  their  skirmishers  were  thrown  far  into 
the  swampy  forest  on  their  left  to  prevent  us  from  getting  in  their 

16By  command  of  General  Eeno  I advanced  with  my  regiment  as  rapidly 
as  the  greenbrier  and  tangled  underbrush  would  permit,  marching  by 
the  flank  toward  the  line  of  the  Third  Georgia  until  fired  upon  by  their 
skirmishers.  Two  companies  were  then  ordered  into  line  and  to  fire 
several  voileys  into  the  swamp  from  which  the  bullets  came,  when  the 
rebels  retired.  My  regiment  was  now  entirely  in  the  rear  of  the  bat- 
teries and  very  near  the  Third  Georgia,  whose  traitorous  flag  was  dis- 
tinctly seen  through  the  pines. 

Company  K,  under  Captain  Davis,  was  sent  forward  into  the  swamp 
to  foll'ow  up  the  rebel  skirmishers  and  prevent  any  attack  upon  our 
rear.  Company  G,  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Wheeler,  was  then  ordered 
to  advance  to  the  fence  between  the  woods  and  the  cleared  field  and 
open  fire  upon  the  Georgians.  This  difficult  task  was  performed  in  the 
most  admirable  manner  amid  a perfect  storm  of  bullets,  and  the  com- 
pany gallantly  formed  along  the  fence  and  drove  out  the  skirmishers  of 
the  enemy,  some  of  whom  fired  upon  them  from  a distance  of  not  more 
than  20  yards.  The  entire  regiment  was  now  ordered  to  form  in  line 
behind  the  fence  and  commenced  firing  as  rapidly  as  possible,  and  the 

battle  was  fairly  opened.  . 

The  position  of  my  regiment  was  all  that  could  be  desired,  as  we  were 
well  protected  by  the  fence  and  bushes  were  in  the  rear  of  the  batteries 
and  immediately  upon  the  left  of  the  Georgians,  our  line  being  at  right 
angles  to  theirs,  so  that  our  fire  was  constantly  right-oblique.  Upon 
our  left  was  the  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania,  then  the  Ninth  New  York,  and 
then  the  Eighty-ninth  New  York.  About  half  an  hour  after  the  firing 
commenced  the  Ninth  New  York  (Hawkins’  Zouaves)  charged  across 
the  open  field  toward  the  enemy,  but  were  repelled  by  a destructive 
volley  from  the  Third  Georgia  Volunteers.  The  Twenty-first  Massa- 
chusetts, being  thus  temporarily  relieved  from  their  fire,  immediately 
sprang  over  the  fence  into  the  open  field  and  killed  the  color  sergeant, 
who  was  defiantly  waving  his  rebel  flag  several  yards  in  front  of  his 
regiment. 

Our  entire  line  now  advanced  from  the^  woods  and  charged  with 
shouts  and  cheers  across  the  cleared  ground,  while  the  Sixth  New 
Hampshire,  which  had  supported  our  howitzers  in  front  of  the  enemy’s 
position,  poured  in  a tremendous  volley  by  command  of  General  Reno, 
who  happened  to  be  with  them  at  the  moment.  The  rebels  fled  pre- 
cipitately to  the  woods  and  were  seen  no  more. 

As  it  was  now  nearly  night  and  our  forces  were  quite  exhausted 
and  as  we  had  im  cavalry,  it  was  impossible  to  pursue  them.  The 
Twenty-first  was  at  once  formed  in  line,  and  having  stacked  arms,  sat 
down  upon  the  battle  ground  to  rest.  Squads  were  now  sent  out  from 
each  company  to  pick  up  the  killed  and  wounded  and  their  weapons. 
Our  hospital  was  established  in  a house  near  by,  and  the  regiment  pre- 
pared to  bivouac  on  the  very  spot  in  the  forest  which  they  had  occupied 


21  R R— VOL  IX 


322 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


during  tlie  fight,  the  fence  which  had  served  so  well  as  a protection  by 
day  furnishing  excellent  fuel  for  camp-fires  at  night. 

In  consequence  of  the  unfortunate  delay  referred  to  in  the  first  part 
of  the  report  it  was  impossible  to  carry  out  the  original  plan  of  the 
expedition.  Accordingly,  as  we  had  neither  provisions  nor  ammuni- 
tion enough  to  do  another  day’s  work,  the  general  reluctantly  decided 
to  return  to  his  vessels,  and,  considering  that  the  night  was  rainy  and 
the  men  without  tents  or  blankets  and  that  the  enemy  might  receive 
re-enforcements  before  daylight  from  Norfolk,  which  was  only  30  miles 
distant,  and  harass  us  on  our  return  with  their  cavalry  and  flying 
artillery,  he  resolved  to  make  the  march  by  night.  Orders  were  there- 
fore issued  to  build  large  fires  around  the  battle-field  and  to  provide 
transportation  for  such  of  the  wounded  as  were  able  to  be  moved. 
About  30  of  them  were  unavoidably  left  behind,  in  charge  of  Dr.  O. 
Warren,  assistant  surgeon  of  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts,  who 
cheerfully  remained,  subject  to  the  tender  mercies  of  the  rebels.  The 
choice  of  surgeon  for  this  duty  was  made  by  lot.  Chaplain  Ball  labored 
as  usual  most  assiduously  to  promote  the  comfort  of  the  wounded  both 
on  the  field  and  at  the  hospital,  and  especially  on  the  return  to  the 
transports  and  on  the  voyage  to  New  Berne,  when,  in  the  absence  of 
any  surgeon,  he  kindly  dressed  their  wounds  and  administered  such 
remedies  as  their  circumstances  required. 

At  9 o’clock  Lieutenant  Beno,  aide-de-camp,  started  with  the  Ninth 
New  York  Volunteers  to  take  possession  of  a draw-bridge  near  Camden 
Court-House  and  prevent  its  destruction  in  case  the  enemy  should 
attempt  it.  The  other  regiments  silently  left  their  places  in  the  woods 
and  moved  along  the  road  past  the  hospitals ; the  wagons,  with  their 
• wounded,  took  their  position  in  the  center  of  the  column,  and  the 
general  followed  with  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  as  the  rear 
guard. 

Company  D,  under  Lieutenant  Barker,  performed  in  the  most  effi- 
cient manner  the  very  arduous  and  unpleasant  duty  of  rear  guard  to  the 
regiment.  Not  only  were  they  obliged  to  be  constantly  on  the  lookout 
for  the  enemy,  but  they  were  compelled  to  labor  incessantly  to  urge 
and  assist  forward  the  numerous  stragglers  who  fell  out  from  the  vari- 
ous regiments.  Between  Company  D and  the  rest  of  the  Twenty-first 
Colonel  Howard  was  placed  with  two  howitzers. 

A more  wearisome  march  has  been  seldom  made  by  any  troops.  The 
night  was  dark,  the  soft,  clayey  mud  from  3 to  12  inches  in  depth,  and 
the  men  worn  out  by  the  labors  of  the  day,  having  marched  16  miles 
and  most  of  them  26,  besides  passing  through  the  excitement  and 
fatigue  of  the  battle.  Nevertheless  the  greater  part  of  them  bore  up 
manfully,  and  though  terribly  exhausted  moved  steadily  to  the  land- 
ing, where  the  head  of  the  column  arrived  about  5 o’clock  in  the 
morning. 

I am  happy  to  report  that  while  the  Twenty-first  was  unable  to  do 
much  damage  to  the  enemy  they  suffered  a comparatively  slight  loss. 
Not  a man  was  injured  by  artillery  and  but  15  by  infantry,  owing  to 
our  excellent  position.  Only  two  others  failed  to^come  up  with  the 
regiment,  although  the  Twenty-first  constituted  the  rear  guard  on  the 
return  march,  and  these  both  fell  out  before  the  battle.  Notwith- 
standing the  difficulties  of  the  march  every  rifle  taken  from  the  camp 
was  returned  to  it  in  good  condition,  including  those  of  the  killed  and 
wounded,  except  one  thrown  away  by  an  exhausted  man  and  the  two 
in  the  hands  of  the  missing  men. 

On  the  whole  I think  I may  safely  say  that  nearly  every  officer,  non- 


Chap.  XX.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SOUTH  MILLS,  N.  C.  323 

commissioned  officer,  and  private  did  his  duty  to  the  extent  of  his 
ability.  The  members  of  the  Twenty-first  will  remember  with  peculiar 
pride" that  on  the  19th  of  April,  1862,  just  one  year  after  the  blood  of 
Massachusetts  men  was  first  shed  by  the  rebels  of  Baltimore,  we  con- 
quered them  at  the  battle  of  Camden,  and  we  shall  be  no  less  proud  of 
this  name  inscribed  upon  our  war-worn  banner  than  that  of  “ Roanoke” 
and  “New  Berne.” 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  CLARK, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Comdg.  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  Vols. 

Capt.  Edward  M.  Neill, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


No.  7. 

Beport  of  Maj.  Edwin  Scholl , Fifty  first  Pennsylvania  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Fifty-first  Begiment  Pennsylvania  Vols., 

New  Berne , N.  C .,  April  22,  1862. 

Sir:  For  the  information  of  the  colonel  commanding  the  Second 
Brigade  I submit  the  following  report: 

After  the  landing  of  the  regiment  below  Elizabeth  City,  on  the  19th 
instant,  I immediately  formed  it,  and  by  your  orders  detailed  Company 
A as  an  advance  guard.  When  we  got  some  distance  into  the  enemy’s 
country  Company  F was  sent  forward  to  the  support  of  Company  A. 
While  moving  forward  along  the  main  road  the  enemy  suddenly  opened 
fire  upon  us,  their  position  being  masked  by  the  dense  smoke  arising 
from  burning  buildings.  I immediately  filed  to  the  right  with  the 
regiment  and  formed  in  an  open  field.  In  compliance  with  your 
orders  I conducted  the  regiment  into  the  woods  and  moved  forward 
to  get  on  the  left  of  the  enemy.  While  advancing  through  the  woods 
I received  orders  from  you  to  send  forward  a body  of  skirmishers.  I 
at  once  ordered  Company  D forward,  which  after  some  delay  returned 
and  reported  to  me  the  position  of  the  enemy  and  his  battery.  I then 
ordered  the  regiment  forward  with  the  intention  of  coming  on  his  left 
and  rear;  but  the  thicket  being  so  dense  and  orders  having  just  been 
received  from  you  to  make  no  delay  in  getting  into  position,  I ordered 
a halt,  and  determined  to  move  forward,  left  in  front.  Going  to  the 
left,  I ordered  Company  B to  reconnoiter  immediately  to  our  front 
and  right. 

Having  definitely  learned  the  position  of  the  enemy  by  reports  and 
personal  observations  I ordered  Company  B to  advance  to  the  right 
along  the  edge  of  the  woods,  taking  position  behind  the  fence.  The 
remaining  companies  of  the  regiment  followed  and  got  into  position. 
After  being  exposed  to  a heavy  fire  for  some  time  you  in  person  ordered 
a charge,  the  men  with  cheers  responding  as  they  advanced  across  the 
field  in  face  of  a hot  fire,  driving  the  enemy  before  them  and  obtaining 
full  possession  of  the  ground  occupied  by  them.  After  this  successful 
charge  and  termination  of  the  battle  I formed  the  regiment  in  the  open 
field,  and  by  your  orders  marched  the  regiment  to  the  w^oods  occupied 
by  us  during  the  engagement,  and  threw  out  as  pickets  Company  B. 
A detail  also  was  made  to  bury  the  killed  during  the  battle. 

Early  in  the  evening  I received  orders  from  you  to  hold  the  regiment 


324 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


in  readiness  to  retire  from  tlie  field.  Shortly  after  9 o’clock  I had  the 
soldiers  noiselessly  awakened  and  formed  the  regiment  as  quietly  as 
it  was  possible  to  do.  The  pickets  were  called  in,  and  the  Pioneer 
Corps,  under  command  of  Lieut.  Abraham  L.  Ortlip,  sent  to  the  rear  to 
destroy  the  bridge  as  we  retired. 

We  moved  off  between  10  and  11  o’clock,  and  reached  the  place  of 
disembarkation  the  day  previous  at  6 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  20th 
instant.  The  march  was  long  and  the  rain  and  mud  were  well  calcu- 
lated to  exhaust  the  men.  Few,  however,  were  left  behind,  as  the 
stronger  very  generously  assisted  the  weaker  comrades.  After  some 
delay  the  men  were  re-embarked  on  steamer  Guide. 

It  is  with  pain  I announce  that  Lieut.  Lewis  Hallman,  in  command 
of  Company  E,  fell  wounded  on  the  field  while  gallantly  leading  on  his 
men  and  is  now  a prisoner  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  it  being  impos- 
sible, in  consequence  of  his  weakness,  to  bring  him  with  us.  With  him 
are  5 more  of  our  men,  who  by  reason  of  their  wounds  and  the  lack  of 
transportation  we  were  compelled  to  leave  behind.  As  already  stated, 
the  number  killed  is  3;  19  are  wounded  and  3 are  missing.  Of  the 
wounded  4 are  supposed  to  be  mortally,  while  the  remainder  have  re- 
ceived but  slight  injuries.  The  missing,  it  is  believed,  will  yet  make 
their  appearance. 

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  mention  the  excellent  services  rendered  me 
by  Actg.  Adjt.  Lieut.  George  Shorkley  on  the  19th  and  20th  instant. 
For  his  activity  and  courage  during  the  engagement  he  deserves  and 
has  my  warmest  thanks.  I also  feel  indebted  to  the  quartermaster, 
Lieut.  J ohn  J . Freedley,  for  conveying  orders,  and  he  deserves  well  for 
the  prompt  and  faithful  manner  in  which  he  had  the  wounded  cared  for. 
Surgeon  Hosack  was  untiring  in  his  attendance  upon  the  wounded, 
whose  wounds  he  carefully  dressed  and  administered  to  their  every  want 
up  to  the  hour  of  our  departure.  Nor  can  I forget  to  mention  Sergeant- 
Major  Iredell,  who  was  constantly  by  my  side  during  the  engagement, 
carrying  orders  and  giving  me  valuable  information  by  his  gallant 
reconnoitering. 

The  officers  and  men  all,  I may  say,  behaved  well  and  acquitted 
themselves  in  a creditable  manner.  Too  much  praise  cannot  be  awarded 
them  for  the  manner  in  which  they  bore  up  under  the  fatigue  of  the  long 
and  dusty  march.  It  was  well  calculated  to  weary  them,  yet  all  behaved 
most  gallantly. 

In  conclusion,  I can  only  say  I endeavored,  as  far  as  possible,  to  carry 
out  all  your  orders  on  the  19th  and  20th  instant. 

I am,  very  truly,  yours, 


EDWIN  SCHALL, 

Major , Commanding  Fifty -first  Pennsylvania  Volunteers. 
Thomas  S.  Bell, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Second  Brigade. 


No.  8. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Benjamin  Huger , C.  S.  Army , with  communication 
from  General  B.  E.  Lee. 

Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk , Va.,  April  21,  1862. 

I informed  you  by  telegraph  yesterday  that  the  enemy  had  on  the 
19th  instant  attacked  Colonel  Wright  in  his  position  near  South  Mills, 


Chap.  XX.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SOUTH  MILLS,  N.  C. 


325 


N.  0.  He  reports  they  advanced  on  him  in  strong  force  (estimated  by 
him  at  5,000)  and  commenced  the  attack  at  11.45  a.  m.  • He  had  in  a 
strong  position,  with  an  open  space  in  front  of  some  600  yards  over 
which  they  had  to  advance,  some  400  men  and  four  pieces  of  artillery. 
The  enemy  were  held  in  check  till  5 p.  m. 

At  4 p.  m.  Captain  McComas,  who  commanded  the  battery,  was 
killed.  Colonel  Wright  speaks  of  his  gallantry  and  good  conduct  in 
high  terms. 

The  ammunition  in  the  limber-boxes  was  exhausted  and  the  caissons 
not  at  hand.  There  was  some  confusion  and  the  pieces  went  after  the 
caissons,  and  at  5 p.  m.  Colonel  Wright  retired  a mile  or  so. 

Early  yesterday  morning  he  moved  all  his  forces  back  to  Northwest 
Lock  (about  half  way  on  the  Dismal  Swamp  Canal),  at  which  point 
Brigadier-General  Blanchard  joined  him  yesterday  with  the  Thirty- 
second  North  Carolina  and  First  Louisiana  Kegiments. 

Lieutenant  Sloan,  aide-de-camp,  returned  from  Northwest  Lock  last 
night.  Up  to  3 p.  m.  they  had  heard  of  no  movement  of  the  enemy. 

Colonel  Wright  reports  his  total  loss  of  killed,  wounded,  and  missing 
at  73.  He  does  not  give  other  numbers.  I make  out  from  the  wounded 
who  have  arrived  at  the  hospital  that  the  number  killed  was  7 or  8; 
wounded,  20;  only  10  severely  enough  to  be  sent  to  the  hospital.  Col- 
onel Wright  mentions  that  he  fears  Lieutenant  Wilson  is  killed.  He 
was  wounded  and  is  missing. 

Whether  the  enemy  intend  to  occupy  Elizabeth  City  and  neighbor- 
hood or  whether  this  was  only  an  expedition  to  capture  the  troops 
there,  I cannot  yet  tell. 

Colonel  Wright  estimates  the  killed  and  wounded  of  the  enemy  as 
very  large.  At  all  events,  he  did  not  pursue  our  troops  at  all. 

Since  writing  the  above  I have  received  the  inclosed  letter  from  Gen- 
eral Blanchard,  covering  copy  of  one  from  Brigadier-General  Beno,  from 
which  it  appears  it  was  Beno’s  brigade,  of  Burnside’s  army,  which  made 
the  attack,  and  they  were  evidently  severely  handled  and  defeated. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGEB, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 

General  B.  E.  Lee,  Commanding  General. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

South  Mills,  N.  C.,  April  20, 1862. 

General  : I inclose  a copy  of  a letter  from  General  Beno,  U.  S.  Army, 
relative  to  wounded  men,  by  which  you  will  see  that  he  recognizes  a 
defeat.  It  appears  that  the  enemy  were  entirely  defeated,  and  if  our 
forces  could  have  pursued  them  we  could  have  made  many  prisoners. 
Two  are  sent  with  this  dispatch.  Our  people  are  gathering  many  guns, 
&c.,  left  on  the  field  by  the  fleeing  foe.  A return  will  be  made  of  the 
property  captured. 

I am  in  doubt  what  answer  to  make  about  the  wounded  enemy  (about- 
14),  now  in  hospital,  under  charge  of  their  surgeon.  Please  advise  me 
without  delay,  as  I am  not  sure  it  is  not  a plan  to  find  out  where  we 
are.  I shall  send  troops  down  the  country  toward  Elizabeth  City 
early  to  morrow. 

Bespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  G.  BLANCHABD, 

Brig.  Gen.,  Prov.  Army  C.  $.,  Commanding  Third  Brigade . 

General  B.  Huger,  Commanding  Department. 


326 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Hdqrs.  Second  Brio.,  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

April  20,  1862. 

Sir:  In  the  recent  engagement  near  South  Mills,  owing  to  a lack  of 
transportation,  I was  compelled  to  leave  a few  of  my  wounded  under 
the  charge  of  one  of  our  surgeons.  As  it  has  been  invariably  our  prac- 
tice to  release  the  wounded  on  parole,  I confidently  anticipate,  that  you 
will  pursue  the  same  course,  in  which  case  you  will  please  inform  Com- 
modore Rowan  at  what  time  and  place  they  can  be  received.  I also 
request  permission  to  remove  the  body  of  Lieutenant  Gadsden,  of  the 
Ninth  New  York.  The  surgeon  will  point  out  the  place  of  his  inter- 
ment. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  L.  RENO, 

Brigadier- General,  XI.  S.  Army . 

To  the  Commanding  Officer 

At  Elizabeth  City  or  at  South  Mills , N.  C. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

April  22,  1862. 

General  : I have  heard  but  little  from  South  Mills  and  Elizabeth 
City  since  my  letter  of  yesterday.  I have  a dispatch  from  General 
Blanchard,  from  South  Mills,  dated  yesterday.  The  enemy  had  re- 
turned to  their  boats  and  destroyed  the  bridges  behind  them  on  their 
retreat. 

A small  steamer  came  in  last  night  and  brought  1,100  pounds  of 
powder,  and  I am  informed  we  have  collected  a good  many  muskets 
and  tools. 

A diary  and  letter  to  his  wife  from  one  of  the  band  were  picked  up 
on  the  field  of  battle.  He  belonged  to  a Massachusetts  regiment,  and 
left  New  Berne  under  orders  for  a short  expedition,  embarked  on  board 
the  steamer  Northerner,  and  was  told  by  Colonel  Clark  they  were  to 
go  via  Roanoke  Island  to  Elizabeth  City  and  thence  to  blow  up  the 
locks  to  a canal  from  Norfolk,  to  prevent  the  rebels  from  coming  down 
with  their  iron-clad  steamers  to  destroy  our  fleet  at  New  Berne.  He 
said  the  rebels  had  two  regiments  and  four  cannon  to  guard  the  canal, 
and  we  would  have  five  regiments  and  eight  cannon  to  fight  them,  if 
they  should  fight.  * * * We  have  been  lying  here  near  Roanoke 

Island  pretty  much  all  day,  and  the  report  is  after  dark  we  have  got  to 
land  and  march  from  12  to  20  miles.  Dated  April  18. 

The  captured  powder,  other  reports,  and  this  letter  confirm  the  opin- 
ion that  their  intention  was  to  capture  the  forces  at  South  Mills  and 
destroy  the  locks  of  the  canal  to  prevent  our  use  of  it.  When  they 
retire  I will  withdraw  our  troops,  keeping  only  a guard  at  South  Mills, 
and  make  Deep  Creek  the  position  for  the  main  body  to  re-enforce  them. 

[BENJ.  HUGER.] 

General  R.  E.  Lee,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk , Va.j  April  28,  1862. 

General  : I have  received  through  Brigadier-General  Blanchard, 
commanding  Third  Brigade,  the  reports  of  Cols.  A.  R,  Wright  and 


Chap.  XX.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SOUTH  MILLS,  N.  C. 


327 


Ferebee,  commanding  the  drafted  North  Carolina  Militia,  and  Lieut. 
D.  A.  French,  who  succeeded  to  the  command  of  the  battery  of  artil- 
lery after  the  death  of  its  gallant  captain,  McComas. 

i would  forward  these  reports  to  you  at  once,  but  there  are  some  dis- 
crepancies and  omissions  in  them  which  I desire  first  to  have  corrected, 
and  will  therefore  try  to  make  a brief  statement  from  these  reports,  to 
give  you  and  the  War  Department  information  concerning  this  severe 
and  well-fought  action,  which  was  successful,  inasmuch  as  the  enemy 
failed  to  accomplish  his  object  and  was  obliged  to  retire  to  his  vessels 
with  great  loss. 

I send  herewith  a sketch  of  the  country  between  South  Mills  and 
^Elizabeth  City,  showing  the  position  of  the  battle. 

All  the  forces  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Wright  were  the  Third 
Eegiment  Georgia  Volunteers,  some  drafted  militia,  under  Colonel  Fer- 
ebee, of  North  Carolina  (Colonel  F.  omits  to  state  in  his  report  how 
many  he  had  on  duty),  McComas’  battery  of  artillery  (one  rifled  piece 
and  three  bronze  6-pounders),  and  one  company  of  cavalry,  Captain 
Gillett’s  Southampton  company. 

On  Friday,  the  18th,  I had  ordered  forward  the  Thirty-second  North 
Carolina  Eegiment  (Colonel  Brabble’s)  and  the  First  Louisiana  Eegi- 
ment (Colonel  Vincent’s ),  but  they  did  not  arrive  until  after  the  battle. 

On  Friday,  the  18th,  Colonel  Wright  occupied  South  Mills  with  three 
companies  of  his  regiment  (160  strong)  and  the  drafted  North  Carolina 
Militia,  two  companies  at  the  intrenchments  at  Eichardson’s  Mills  (125 
effectives)  and  five  companies  (about  300  men)  and  McComas’  battery 
of  artillery  at  Elizabeth  City. 

On  Friday  evening,  anticipating  the  enemy’s  advance  and  in  com- 
pliance with  my  instructions  to  concentrate  his  forces  at  or  near  South 
Mills,  he  ordered  the  companies  at  Elizabeth  City  to  retire  9 miles  to 
Eichardson’s  Mills.  From  some  cause  not  yet  explained  these  com- 
panies did  not  leave  Elizabeth  City  until  after  daylight  on  Saturday 
morning. 

The  cavalry  company  from  Camden  Court-House  reported  at  8.30 
o’clock. 

On  the  19th,  the  enemy  approaching,  having  then  passed  the  Court- 
House,  Colonel  Wright  moved  forward  with  his  three  companies,  and 
at  9.30  o’clock  was  met  by  Colonel  McComas  with  his  battery.  After 
advancing  3 miles  from  South  Mills  the  road  emerged  from  the  woods, 
and  the  field  on  the  right  and  left  extended  160  to  180  yards  to  thick 
woods  and  swamp.  On  the  edge  of  the  woods,  on  both  sides  of  the 
road  and  perpendicular  to  it,  was  a small  ditch,  the  earth  from  which 
was  thrown  up  on  the  south  side  in  a ridge,  upon  which  was  a heavy 
rail  fence.  From  this  point  the  road  led  through  a narrow  lane  (Saw- 
yer’s) for  1 mile,  with  cleared  land  on  both  sides  of  it.  Here  he  deter- 
mined to  make  his  stand. 

About  300  yards  from  the  woods  ran  a deep,  wide  ditch  parallel  with 
the  one  first  mentioned  and  extending  to  the  woods  on  either  side  of 
the  road,  and  a short  distance  beyond  it  were  dwellings  and  outhouses 
which  would  give  cover  for  the  enemy.  Colonel  Wright  therefore 
ordered  them  burned.  The  large  ditch  in  his  front  he  filled  with  fence 
rails  and  set  them  on  fire,  his  object  being  to  have  this  ditch  so  hot  by 
the  time  the  enemy  came  up  they  could  not  occupy  it.  (This  ditch  is 
marked  on  sketch  as  “Eoasted  Ditch.”) 

Two  pieces  of  artillery  (the  road  was  too  narrow  for  more)  were  placed 
in  the  road  just  where  it  emerged  from  the  woods,  which  commanded 
the  road — the  range  of  the  guns.  He  also  threw  down  the  fences  for 


I 


328  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA.  [Chap.  XX. 

300  yards  on  each  side  of  the  road  for  300  yards  in  front  of  the  guns, 
and  tossed  the  rails  into  the  road  to  destroy  the  effect  of  the  enemy’s 
ricochet  firing  and  to  deprive  him  of  the  cover  of  the  fences.  The  fences 
on  the  sides  of  the  woods  were  taken  down  and  laid  in  heaps  on  the 
embankment  in  front  of  his  men. 

All  these  arrangements  were  made,  and  it  was  11  o’clock  before  he 
was  joined  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Reid  and  the  seven  companies  from 
below.  Two  of  these,  under  Major  Lee,  were  placed  at  River  Bridge, 
with  one  piece  of  McComas’  artillery,  with  directions,  to  destroy  it  and 
stop  the  enemy  there  if  he  should  attempt  to  get  into  our  rear  by  com- 
ing up  the  west  side  of  the  river.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Reid  and  three 
companies  of  the  Third  Georgia  (and  by  Colonel  Ferebee’s  report  the? 
North  Carolina  Militia)  were  placed  about  a mile  in  the  rear  at  the 
meeting  of  an  old  road,  to  protect  that  passage  and  serve  as  a reserve. 
The  remaining  five  companies  were  deployed  in  open  order  across  the 
road  on  the  right  and  left  of  the  artillery,  protected  by  the  ditch  and 
fence  rails  on  the  banks. 

The  smoke  from  the  burning  buildings  and  fences  was  rolled  toward 
the  enemy,  thus  masking  the  position.  At  11.45  a.  m.  the  front  of  a heavy 
column  of  the  enemy  was  seen  passing  through  the  smoke  and  Cap- 
tain McComas  opened  a destructive  fire  upon  it,  which  cheeked  its 
advance  for  half  an  hour,  when  it  again  approached  under  the  fire 
of  a 12-pounder,  but  soon  retired  entirely  out  of  sight  in  considerable 
confusion.  Up  to  3 o’clock  thrice  had  the  heavy  columns  of  the  enemy 
been  beaten  back  by  the  heavy  fire  of  Captain  McComas’  artillery,  and 
our  only  casualties  were  one  man  wounded  and  one  wheel  injured. 

At  3.15  p.  m.  the  enemy  again  advanced  and  deployed  two  regiments 
to  their  right,  our  left.  These  regiments,  after  advancing  toward  us, 
were  driven  back  by  the  well-directed  fire  of  Captain  McComas’  artil- 
lery and  Captains  Nesbet’s,  and  Musgrove’s  companies.  Captain  Mc- 
Whorter’s fire  also  caused  the  Zouaves  on  our  right  to  retire,  and  this 
attack  ceased  by  3.35  p.  m.  Our  loss  up  to  this  time  was  very  slight, 
while  that  of  the  enemy  was  very  severe,  as  we  could  plainly  see  them 
fall,  and  they  had  raised  the  hospital  flag  on  a building  in  rear  of  their 
line. 

They  soon  advanced  again,  two  regiments  skirting  the  woods  on  our 
left,  and  approached  near  enough  to  engage  the  skirmishers.  One 
company  from  the  right  was  moved  over  and  Colonel  Reid  ordered  to 
send  one  company  from  the  reserve.  The  enemy  deployed  in  the  open 
field  and  bore  down  rapidly,  but  the  heavy  fire  of  musketry  caused 
them  to  waver,  and  they  fell  back  to  the  fence.  Three  regiments  and  a 
field  j^icce  were  in  the  center  and  the  Ninth  New  York  Regiment  on 
the  right.  The  fire  was  now  brisk  from  one  end  of  the  line  to  the  other, 
and  the  enemy  were  held  in  check,  when  just  at  this  moment  Captain 
McComas  was  killed  by  a Minie  ball,  and  his  men,  who  for  four  hours 
had  fought  with  most  indomitable  courage,  became  panic  stricken  and 
left  the  field,  taking  their  pieces  with  them.  Colonel  Wright  succeeded 
in  rallying  them  and  getting  two  pieces  and  a few  men  in  position,  and 
the  enemy  had  advanced  so  close  that  canister  was  fired  on  them  with 
effect  and  they  again  fell  back.  The  ammunition  in  the  limber-boxes 
was  exhausted,  and  during  the  temporary  absence  of  Colonel  Wright 
the  artillery  left  the  field. 

The  enemy  made  a charge  upon  our  line,  but  the  steady  fire  at  close 
distance  (Colonel  Wright  estimates  it  at  50  yards)  caused  them  to 
break  in  confusion  and  they  fell  back.  Taking  advantage  of  their 
confusion  Colonel  Wright  now  fell  back  in  good  order  to  the  intrench- 


Chap.  XX.] 


329 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SOUTH  MILLS,  N.  C. 


ments  on  Joy’s  Creek,  about  2 miles  in  bis  rear,  and  called  in  Lieu 
tenant-Colonel  Reid’s  and  Major  Lee’s  commands,  and  there  awaited 
the  enemy-,  who  it  appears  were  so  badly  injured  that  they  made  no 
advance,  but  at  about  8 p.  m.  began  to  retreat  to  their  boats.  At  this 
time  I am  informed  that  several  companies  of  the  Thirty-second  North 
Carolina  Regiment  joined  Colonel  Wright,  who  during  the  night  re- 
tired from  this  position  to  the  Northwest  Lock. 

Colonel  Wright  states  his  loss  at  6 killed,  19  wounded,  and  3 taken 
prisoners.  The  enemy’s  loss  he  estimates  as  very  large,  as  high  as  300. 
Colonel  Wright  states  that  the  regiments  opposed  to  him  were  the 
Ninth,  Twenty-first,  and  Eighty-ninth  New  York,  and  the  Twenty-first 
•Massachusetts,  Sixth  New  Hampshire,  and  Fifty-first  Pennsylvania 
Regiments  (we  have  prisoners  or  wounded  of  five  of  these  regiments), 
the  whole  commanded  by  Brigadier-General  Reno.  Among  the  killed 
he  is  grieved  to  announce  the  loss  of  Captain  McComas,  an  estimable 
gentleman  and  brave  and  skillful  officer,  whose  conduct  throughout  the 
action  elicited  the  highest  praise. 

All  the  command  engaged  behaved  in  the  most  gallant  manner,  stand- 
ing firmly  against  overwhelming  odds  until  ordered  to  fall  back  to  our 
intrenchments.  They  maintained  their  position  over  five  hours,  and 
killed  and  disabled  more  of  the  enemy  than  we  had  in  action. 

On  returning  to  the  field  next  day  we  recovered  1,100  pounds  of 
powder,  and  the  arms,  accouterments,  tools,  &c.,  left  by  the  enemy.  I 
have  already  reported  his  leaving  such  wounded  as  he  could  not  remove, 
and  I have  sent  them  to  Fort  Monroe  on  parole.  Some  10  or  12  strag- 
glers were  taken  on  the  20th  and  held  as  prisoners  of  war.  I will  forward 
the  original  reports  as  soon  as  they  are  corrected,  and  meanwhile  submit 


this  as  a summary. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J BEN J.  HUGER, 

Major- General,  Commanding . 


General  R.  E.  Lee,  Commanding , &c. 


330 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA.  [Chap.  XX. 

[Inclosure.] 


Chap.  XX.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  SOUTH  MILLS,  N.  C. 


331 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Fa,  April  20,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Comdg.  Dept,  Norfolk , Va. : 

General  : I have  received  this  morning  your  telegram  of  the  19th 
instant,  reporting  the  landing  of  the  enemy  at  Elizabeth  City  and  his 
attack  upon  the  Third  Georgia  Regiment  near  South  Mills.  It  is  pre- 
sumed this  is  but  a feint  or  predatory  excursion  made  from  his  reserve 
at  Roanoke  Island.  Not  knowing  the  advantages  of  the  position  at 
South  Mills,  it  seems  to  me  to  be  too  far  removed  from  your  line  of 
operations  and  calculated  to  invite  an  attack  of  the  enemy,  inasmuch 
as  the  strength  of  your  party  would  be  reported  by  the  disaffected, 
and  they  would  reasonably  hope  to  cut  it  off.  A corps  of  observation 
would  seem  only  to  be  necessary  for  such  an  advanced  point,  and  your 
force  should  be  stationed  nearer  to  you,  at  some  strong  point  behind 
the  Dismal  Swamp,  which  could  be  more  readily  re-enforced.  By  pur- 
suing this  system  on  other  points  your  troops  could  be  more  rapidly 
concentrated  to  strike  a blow  whenever  the  enemy  showed  himself 
within  your  reach. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 

Headquarters, 
Richmond , Va.,  April  22,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Comdg.,  Ac.,  Norfolk,  Va. : 

General  : I am  directed  by  General  Lee  to  acknowledge  the  receipt 
of  your  letter  of  the  21st,  with  its  inclosures,  reporting  the  result  of  the 
attack  by  the  enemy  at  South  Mills  and  his  subsequent  action  con- 
cerning his  captured  wounded,  and  to  say  in  reply  that  he  is  much 
gratified  at  the  determined  resistance  made  by  Colonel  Wright  to  so 
largely  superior  force,  but  regrets  the  loss  of  Captain  McComas,  whom 
he  knew  to  be  a gallant  officer.  As  regards  the  wounded  prisoners  of 
the  enemy,  he  is  under  the  impression  that  General  Burnside  has  gen- 
erally pursued  the  course*  indicated  in  the  letter  of  Brigadier-General 
Reno,  and  sees  no  objection  to  releasing  the  woupded  prisoners  on  their 
parole  as  an  offset  to  some  of  our  men  liberated  under  similar  circum- 
stances. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  TAYLOR, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

Headquarters, 
Richmond , Va,  April  24,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes,  Comdg.,  Ac.,  Goldshorougli,  N.  C. : 

General  : General  Huger  reports  that  Colonel  Wright,  with  400 
men  and  four  pieces  of  artillery,  was  attacked  near  South  Mills  by  the 
enemy  on  the  19th  instant.  Colonel  Wright  estimates  the  enemy’s 
force  at  about  5,000  men,  and  it  appears  from  a letter  received  by 
Colonel  Wright  from  Brigadier-General  Reno,  IT.  S.  Army,  asking  per- 
mission to  remove  the  body  of  an  officer  and  that  his  wounded  might 
be  released  on  parole,  that  the  attacking  force  was  composed  of  the 
Second  Brigade.  A letter  and  diary  written  by  a soldier,  which  were 
picked  up  on  the  field,  show  that  his  force  consisted  of  five  regiments 
and  eight  pieces  of  artillery,  and  that  it  left  New  Berne  on  a short  ex- 


332 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


pedition  to  destroy  the  locks  of  the  canal.  A quantity  of  powder  and 
some  tools  captured  by  our  forces  seemed  to  confirm  this  account.  The 
enemy  were  repulsed  by  Colonel  Wright  with  considerable  loss  and  re- 
tired  to  their  boats,  burning  the  bridges  behind  them  in  their  retreat. 
This  is  probably  the  force  reported  by  you  as  having  left  New  Berne 
on  the  16th  and  18th  instant. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General, 


Hf.  adquarters, 
Richmond , Va.,  April  29,  1862. 

j.  G.en.  B.  Huger, 

Commanding , &c.,  Yorhtown , Va. : 


General:  General  Lee  directs  me  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of 
your  letter  of  the  28th  instant,  together  with  the  report  of  the  brilliant 
affair  at  South  Mills,  which  he  has  read  with  much  interest  and  pleas- 
ure, and  which  reflects  so  creditably  upon  the  officers  and  men  engaged 
'As  regards  your  request  that  additional  troops  be  sent  to  Suffolk, 
which  you  represent  as  being  particularly  weak,  he  instructs  me  to  say 
that  the  call  for  troops  from  every  department  is  urgent,  and  it  is  im- 
possible to  re-enforce  points  more  seriously  threatened  than  Suffolk. 
He  wishes  it  was  in  his  power  to  meet  your  requisition,  but  had  hoped 
that  with  the  addition  of  the  Militia  (2,000  or  3,000  of  which  have  been 
reported  to  him  to  be  inactive  and  unassigned  in  your  department) 
your  command  would  be  materially  strengthened  and  the  approaches 
to  your  rear  rendered  more  secure,  inasmuch  as  this  acquisition  to  your 
force  would  enable  you  to  increase  the  number  of  troops  protecting 
Suffolk  and  vicinity. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  TAYLOR. 


Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


APRIL  27, 1862.— Skirmish  near  Haughton’s  Mill,  Pollocksville  Road,  N.  C. 

Report  of  Baron  Egloff stein,  Colonel  One  hundred  and  third  New  York 

Infantry . 

Hdqrs.  Seward  Infantry,  103d  Regt.,  N.  Y.  S.  V., 
Helen’s  Plantation,  3 miles  south  of  Pollocksville, 

April  27,  1862. 

Sir  : Agreeably  to  orders  from  General  J.  L.  Eeno,  a detachment  of  40 
men  (cavalry)  and  three  officers  left  New  Berne  for  Pollocksville  on  the 
26th  instant,  in  the  evening.  Passed  through  Evans’  Mill  at  midnight. 
To  secure  the  line  of  communication  to  Pollocksville  70  men  of  infantry 
followed  in  the  rear.  Passed  Haughton’s  Mill  to  cross  Mill  Creek  2 
miles  south  of  Pollocksville  road,  the  bridge  on  the  Pollocksville  road 
being  destroyed.  About  3 o’clock  in  the  afternoon  the  first  rebel  picket 
was  seen  on  the  Onslow  and  Pollocksville  road.  Major  Quentin  and 
myself  chased  the  advance  guard  of  the  enemy  on  an  open  plain  a 
quarter  of  a mile  to  Helen’s  mansion,  gradually  followed  by  our  cav- 
alry. I gave  the  order  for  immediate  firing  to  prevent  the  enemy  from 


Cuai*.  XX.]  SKIRMISH  NEAR  BATCHELDER’s  CREEK,  N.  C.  333 

running  ;away.  They  were  30  men  strong,  located  in  and  around  a 
frame  house.  We  wounded  and  killed  several  by  means  of  revolvers 
and  rifles,  our  cavalry  having  dismounted  with  a view  to  cut  off  the 
retreat  of  the  enemy  from  the  premises  at  as  small  a loss  on  our  side 
as  possible.  When  the  infantry  came  up  we  charged  bayonets  and 
made  ourselves  masters  of  the  position.  The  enemy,  having  a more 
perfect  knowledge  of  the  premises,  succeeded  in  taking  away  some  of 
their  wounded,  killed,  and  horses  in  the  direction  of  Kinston  during 
the  hottest  fight. 

The  loss  of  the  enemy  was  2 men  killed  by  bullets,  1 by  bayonet,  8 
wounded,  9 horses,  3 prisoners— N.  W.  Collins,  James  H.  Kelly,  and  G. 
Battle,  privates  of  Company  C,  Second  Regiment  of  Cavalry  North 
Carolina  Volunteers.  A number  of  arms  captured — carbines,  sabers, 
pistols,  double-barreled  shot-guns— and  5 fine  horses,  with  equipments. 

Our  loss  was  Private  Sanders  killed  and  Lieutenants  Von  Seldeneck 
and  Von  Vogt,  of  the  cavalry,  wounded— since  recovering;  4 more 
slightly  wounded— flesh  wounds.  Col.  Baron  V.  Egloflstein  was  wounded 
in  the  leg  in  dismounting,  his  horse  having  been  killed  under  him.  Be- 
sides, 2 of  our  cavalry  horses  killed. 

Our  cavalry  distinguished  themselves  in  their  first  fight  by  rapid 
action  and  good  firing.  Had  we  prepared  a slow  attack  on  the  cavalry 
they  would  have  fled  from  us  as  on  former  occasions.  The  wound  of 
the  colonel  being  of  a more  serious  character  than  first  imagined,  we 
halted  and  reconnoitered  the  surrounding  country  by  means  of  cavalry 
patrols.  Several  encampments  in  the  direction  of  Trenton  were  dis- 
covered. I determined  to  return  after  tins  successful  reconnaissance, 
drawing  in  the  boards  at  Haughton’s  Mill  for  the  purpose  of  securing 
said  mill  for  the  Government. 

I beg  to  propose  to  station  several  hundred  men  at  once  at  Haugh- 
ton’s Mill  as  an  advance  guard,  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  occupying 
this  valuable  military  position  situated  within  2 miles  of  Pollocksville. 

I will  have  the  honor,  general,  to  report  the  details  on  my  arrival  at 
New  Berne. 

Remaining,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BARON  EGLOFFSTEIN, 

• Colonel  of  Seward  Infantry . 

Brig.  Gen.  Jesse  L.  Reno, 

Commanding  Second  Division , Department  of  North  Carolina. 


APRIL  29,  1862. — Skirmish  near  Batchelder’s  Creek,  N.  C. 

Report  of  Map  Andrew  Elwell , Tic enty -third  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-third  Regiment  Mass.  Vols., 
Railroad  Bridge , Batchelder’s  Creek , April  30,  1862. 

The  picket  established  by  Special  Brigade  Order,  No.  7,  was  attacked 
yesterday.  They  were  posted  in  accordance  with  the  above-named 
order  one-half  mile  in  advance  of  the  bridge,  deployed  on  either  side 
of  the  railroad  to  the  distance  of  one-fourth  of  a mile.  About  12  o’clock 
m.  a body  of  rebel  cavalry  emerged  from  the  woods  and  attacked  the 
extreme  right  flank,  passing  between  the  right  group  and  the  rest  of 
the  picket,  thus  cutting  them  off.  As  far  as  can  be  ascertained  the 
enemy  numbered  about  70.  The  picket  opened  fire  upon  those  of  the 


334 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


enemy  who  were  in  the  advance,  while  the  enemy  returned  the  fire  with 
a volley  of  some  20  or  30  shots,  killing  1 man,  three  shots  penetrating 
his  body.  The  remainder  of  the  picket  instantly  rallied  to  the  spot, 
but  the  enemy  had  fled,  taking  with  them  probably  the  other  3 belong- 
ing to  the  group,  as  they  are  missing. 

Upon  hearing  the  report  in  camp  sufficient  force  was  immediately 
sent  to  the  assistance  of  the  picket.  This  re-enforcement  made  an 
advance  some  2 miles  through  the  woods,  but  nothing  could  be  heard 
from  our  missing  men  or  the  enemy.  The  affair  has  given  rise  to  exag- 
gerated stories,  but  it  was  not  deemed  of  sufficient  importance  to  give 
any  alarm  or  call  for  any  assistance.  The  picket  force  has  been  increased 
to  treble  its  former  numbers,  and  everything  has  been  quiet  since  the 
attack. 

The  names  of  the  killed  and  wounded  are  Edward  B.  Braley,  private 
Company  E,  killed ; Corp.  Hiram  J.  Lauman,  Privates  Edward  Smith 
and  John  Taylor,  of  the  same  company,  missing. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

A.  ELWELL, 

Major , Commanding  Twenty-third  Massachusetts . 

Lieut.  E.  T.  Parkinson, 

A.  A.  A.  G.,  First  Brigade  First  Division. 


MAY  2,  1862. — Skirmish  near  Deep  Gully,  Trenton  Road,  N.  C. 

Report  of  Lieut,  Charles  H.  Pope , First  Rhode  Island  Light  Artillery. 

Hdqrs.  Battery  F,  Rhode  Island  Artillery, 

New  Berne , N.  C .,  May  2,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  our  pickets,  stationed  on 
the  Trenton  road,  about  1 mile  from  the  Deep  Gully,  were  attacked  by 
a body  of  rebel  infantry,  supposed  to  be  about  40  in  number.  They 
came  into  the  Trenton  road  by  the  cross  road  from  the  Red  House,  fir- 
ing upon  our  pickets,  instantly  killing  Corporal  Martindale  and  severely 
wounding  Private  Yincent,  who  has  not  been  found  yet. 

C/H.  POPE, 

First  Lieutenant  First  R.  I.  Art.,  Comdg.  Battery  F. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster, 

Commanding  First  Division. 


MAY  7-8,  1862. — Expedition  from  Roanoke  Island  toward  Gatesville,  N.  C 

Report  of  Col,  Rush  C.  Hawkins,  U.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters, 

Roanoke  Lsland,  N.  C.,  May  10,  1862. 

Sir  : Having  ascertained  that  the  rebels  had  a large  amount  of  stores, 
consisting  of  bacon,  corn,  salt,  flour,  &c.,  at  a place  about  8 miles  south 
of  Gatesville,  on  the  7th  instant  I sent  Captain  Parisen’s  company  (C, 
Mntli  Hew  York  Volunteers),  onboard  of  the  gunboat  Shawsheen,  for 
the  purpose  of  destroying  these  stores. 

This  force  landed  about  1 a.  m.  on  the  morning  of  the  8th  instant  2 
miles  up  Catherine’s  Creek,  which  empties  into  the  Chowan  River  oppo- 


Chap.  XX.]  SKIRMISHES  NEAR  TRENTON  BRIDGE,  N.  C.,  ETC.  335 

site  to  Holliday’s  Island.  After  marching  about  8 miles  they  came  to 
the  place  where  the  stores  were,  set  fire  to  the  building  in  which  they 
were  contained,  and  destroyed  the  whole.  The  estimated  value  of  the 
stores  (so  the  officers  in  charge  of  the  forces  was  informed)  was  $50,000. 

On  the  return  of  the  force  to  the  gunboat  the  rear  guard  was  attacked 
by  a small  body  of  cavalry  which  had  been  concealed  in  the  woods. 
They  (the  cavalry)  were  repulsed  with  a loss  of  one  of  their  number, 
who  was  shot  through  the  breast. 

Captain  Parisen,  in  charge  of  his  company,  and  Captain  Woodward, 
of  the  gunboat  Shawsheen,  both  deserve  great  praise  for  the  manner  in 
which  they  carried  out  their  instructions  and  the  dispatch  with  which 
the  work  was  performed. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  most  faithful  servant, 

RUSH  C.  HAWKINS, 
Colonel , Commanding  Fourth  Brigade  and  Post . 

Maj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina , New  Berne , N.  C. 


MAY  15-16,  1862.— Skirmishes  near  Trenton  Bridge,  at  Young’s  Cross- 
Roads,  and  Pollocksville,  N.  C. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Col.  Thomas  J.  C.  Amory,  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  2.— Lieut.  Col.  J.  Eugene  Dury<$e,  Second  Maryland  Infantry. 

No.  3. — Col.  Simon  H.  Mix,  Third  New  York  Cavalry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  Thomas  J.  C.  Amory , Seventeenth  Massachusetts  Infantry 

Hdqrs.  First  Brigade,  First  Division, 

New  Berne , N.  (7.,  May  15,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  accordance  with  the 
instructions  of  General  Foster  I proceeded  this  morning  at  2.30  o’clock 
on  a reconnaissance  in  the  direction  of  Trenton.  My  command,  con- 
sisting of  the  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  the  Seventeenth,  and  Twenty- 
fifth  Regiments  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  and  two  pieces  of  artillery, 
was  attacked  5 miles  this  side  of  Trenton.  Not  having  as  yet  received 
the  official  reports  of  regimental  commanders,  I can  state  generally 
from  my  personal  knowledge  that  our  loss  consists  in  the  wounding  of 
3 privates  and  1 officer  (Major  Fitzsimmons),  of  the  Third  New  York 
Cavalry,  Lieutenant  Mayes  and  1 man,  of  the  same  regiment,  missing. 
Six  of  the  enemy  found  dead  on  the  field  and  2 prisoners— 1 mortally 
wounded.  I consider  the  original  plan  and  purpose  of  this  movement 
frustrated  by  the  late  arrival  of  the  cavalry  last  night,  owing  to  the 
storm. 

To  surprise  the  enemy  at  Trenton  being  under  those  circumstances 
impossible,  and  having  but  limited  transportation  for  my  wounded,  with 
only  twenty-four  hours’  rations,  I deemed  it  advisable  to  return. 

I am,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOS.  J.  C.  AMORY, 

Colonel  Mass.  Vols .,  Comdg.  First  Brig.,  First  Div. 

Captain  Hoffman, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen .,  First  Div.,  Dept.  North  Carolina. 


336 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Lieut . Col.  J.  Eugene  Burgee,  Second  Maryland  Infantry. 

Camp  op  the  Second  Maryland  Regiment, 

Near  New  Berne , N.  G.,  May  18,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report: 

On  Wednesday,  the  14th,  about  noon,  I received  from  Lieutenant 
Morris  Brigadier-General  Reno’s  order  to  move  my  regiment  at  5 o’clock 
that  afternoon,  with  two  days’  rations.  In  obedience  to  his  directions 
I at  once  reported  to  Brigadier-General  Foster  and  Colonel  Amory  for 
instructions.  I was  ordered  by  them  to  rnarqh  at  5 o’clock  in  the  after- 
noon to  occupy  Pollocksville,  the  bridge  across  the  Trent,  and  Young’s 
Cross-Roads,  5 miles  from  Pollocksville,  and  hold  these  points  until  I 
received  further  orders  from  Colonel  Amory.  Between  4 and  5 o’clock 
I started  with  the  regiment  in  the  midst  of  a violent  thunder-storm, 
which  turned  into  a steady  rain,  making  the  roads  almost  impassable. 

I reached  Haugh ton’s  Mill  about  5 o’clock  on  Thursday  morning 
[15th],  when  for  the  first  time  we  encountered  the  pickets  of  the  enemy. 
When  fired  upon  by  two  of  the  advance  guard  they  galloped  away  at  full 
speed,  part  in  the  direction  of  Pollocksville  and  part  toward  Young’s 
Cross-Roads.  Immediately  after  rapid  firing  was  heard  in  the  woods 
in  the  direction  of  Young’s  Cross-Roads,  probably  to  give  notice  of  our 
arrival.  I immediately  sent  three  companies  (D,  F,  and  K),  under  the 
command  of  Capt.  M.  Wilson,  to  Young’s  Cross-Roads,  and  with  the 
rest  of  the  regiment  marched  to  Pollocksville.  I found  the  bridge 
across  the  Trent  had  been  burned,  but  nevertheless  stationed  sentinels 
there.  During  the  remainder  of  the  day  (Thursday)  everything  re- 
mained quiet  at  Pollocksville,  but  at  Young’s  Cross-Roads,  where  I had 
stationed  Captain  Wilson,  with  three  companies,  a body  of  cavalry  made 
their  appearance  about  1 p.  m.  They  approached  by  the  road  leading 
from  Onslow  Court-House.  When  within  about  200  yards  our  men 
fired  upon  them.  One  officer  was  badly  wounded,  but  his  comrades 
managed  to  keep  him  in  his  saddle  and  escaped  with  him.  The  citizens 
in  the  neighborhood  say  that  the  name  of  the  officer  was  Col.  William 
Cotton,  and  that  he  was  dangerously  wounded.  About  11  o’clock  that 
night  the  enemy  began  to  annoy  our  pickets,  driving  them  in  twice, 
and  during  the  remainder  of  the  night  Captain  Wilson  kept  his  whole 
command  under  arms.  Lieutenant  Fleckenstein,  of  Company  K,  made 
a reconnaissance  for  about  2 miles  beyond  our  lines  and  returned  in 
three  hours,  having  ascertained  that  the  enemy  had  retreated  over 
White  Oak  River  Bridge,  on  the  road  leading  to  Onslow  Court-House. 

About  2 o’clock  next  morning  the  report  of  a musket  was  heard 
near  my  headquarters  at  Pollocksville.  The  long  roll  was  sounded 
and  the  regiment  immediately  turned  out  under  arms.  From  the  state- 
ments of  the  prisoners  whom  we  captured  on  Friday  afternoon  I am 
satisfied  that  the  enemy  was  moving  forward  to  surprise  us  under  cover 
of  the  darkness,  but  on  hearing  the  long  roll  beat,  and  perceiving  the 
promptness  with  which  the  regiment  turned  out,  they  concluded  to  defer 
the  attack  until  the  next  day. 

About  12  o’clock  on  Friday  [16th]  our  pickets  were  driven  in  and 
there  was  quite  a smart  skirmish  at  two  of  our  outposts.  Two  or  three 
of  the  enemy  were  killed,  a number  wounded,  and  two  prisoners  were 
captured.  I was  every  moment  expecting  an  attack  in  force,  which  I 
had  made  every  preparation  to  receive.  From  the  circumstances  I 
supposed  that  the  enemy  were  in  full  retreat  from  Colonel  Amory’s 


Chap.  XX.]  SKIRMISHES  NEAR  TRENTON  BRIDGE,  N.  C.,  ETC.  337 

attack,  and  were  attempting  to  escape  by  the  roads  I was  guarding.  I 
felt  perfectly  confident  of  my  ability  to  stop  their  retreat  and  hold 
them  in  check  until  Colonel  Amory  should  overtake  them. 

Things  remained  in  this  condition  until  between  2 and  3 p.  m.,  when 
Lieutenant  Morris  arrived  with  a squadron  of  cavalry,  with  orders  that 
we  should  return  immediately.  I at  once  sent  two  companies,  under 
command  of  Captain  Bigelow,  and  a detachment  of  cavalry  to  Young’s 
Cross-Koads,  with  orders  to  Captain  Wilson  to  join  the  regiment  imme- 
diately with  the  three  companies  under  his  command. 

By  about  8 p.  m.  they  arrived,  and  the  regiment  at  once  commenced 
its  march  homeward.  The  incessant  rain  of  the  previous  forty-eight 
thours  had  rendered  the  roads  still  worse  than  during  the  advance,  and 
Mill  Creek,  which  we  reached  about  9 o’clock,  was  swollen  to  such  a 
degree  that  the  mounted  officers  had  to  swim  their  horses  to  cross  it. 
Although  the  men  had  but  partially  recovered  from  the  fatigues  of  their 
previous  march,  yet  they  plunged  in  without  a moment’s  hesitation  at 
the  word  of  command  and  crossed  the  stream.  They  bore  this  and 
all  the  other  hardships  and  exposures  of  their  march  through  the  mud 
and  rain  like  veterans. 

Between  1 and  2 o’clock  on  Saturday  morning  I destroyed  the  bridge 
at  Haughton’s  Mill,  having  heard  from  our  pickets  in  the  rear  that  they 
had  encountered  the  pickets  of  the  enemy  on  this  side  of  Mill  Creek. 

About  11  o’clock  I reached  Evans’  Mill,  where,  through  the  kind- 
ness of  the  Twenty-first  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  we  were  supplied 
with  rations  and  hot  coffee,  which  supply  was  very  gratefully  received, 
as,  having  been  ordered  by  Colonel  Amory  to  take  only  two  days’  ra- 
tions, we  had  been  without  food  for  many  hours.  I reached  camp  about 
4 p.  m. 

From  a reconnaissance  made  by  Captain  Bigelow,  who  approached 
within' 400  yards  of  the  enemy’s  camp,  I learned  there  was  between 
800  and  900  cavalry  in  our  immediate  vicinity.  I also  received  infor- 
mation that  there  is  no  regular  encampment  between  that  at  Wamble- 
ton’s  Bridge,  which  is  8 miles  from  Young’s  Cross-Boads,  and  Kinston; 
that  some  days  there  would  be  in  Trenton  and  vicinity  1,000  or  1,500 
troops  and  other  days  not  more  than  500  or  600.  I was  also  informed 
that  they  came  from  Kinston  into  the  neighborhood  of  Trenton  forag- 
ing and  pressing  horses  and  men  into  their  service ; also  to  watch  and 
obtain  information  of  the  movements  of  our  troops. 

I have  lost  several  men  who  strayed  beyond  our  lines  contrary  to 
orders  how  many  I am  unable  at  present  to  say,  as  5 whom  1 have 
already  reported  as  prisoners  have  just  returned,  and  perhaps  what 
few  others  are  missing  may  return  to  camp.  There  are  now  but  three 
men  missing. 

In  addition  to  the  officers  already  spoken  of  I wish  also  to  mention 
the  names  of  Captain  Brunner  and  Lieutenants  Martin,  Dougherty,  and 
Gault  as  worthy  of  special  commendation.  But  where  all  the  officers 
did  their  duty  so  nobly  it  seems  invidious  to  single  out  any  as  specially 
deserving. 

In  conclusion,  I have  only  to  say  that  my  orders  from  General  Foster 
and  Colonel  Amory  were  to  hold  the  points  assigned  to  me  till  I re- 
ceived further  instructions  from  Colonel  Amory,  and  although  the 
two  days’  rations  I was  instructed  to  take  had  been  entirely  consumed 
(much  of  it  having  been  spoiled  by  the  rain  during  our  night’s  march), 
I was  determined  not  to  quit  my  post  until  I was  ordered  to  do  so. 
I had  commenced  to  collect  what  few  cattle,  swine,  and  fowls  had  es- 

22  R R— vol  IX 


338 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


caped  the  rebel  foraging  parties,  and  had  already  obtained  a sufficient 
quantity  to  supply  the  regiment  with  meat  (such  luxuries  as  coffee, 
bread,  and  salt  being  altogether  too  extravagant  for  soldiers)  for  at 
least  a week.  My  men,  though  weary  and  foot-sore  from  their  long 
march  over  most  horrible  roads  were  nevertheless  in  the  best  possible 
spirits,  eager  for  the  fray,  and  burning  with  anxiety  to  vindicate  the 
ancient  glory  of  Maryland. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully, 

J.  EUGENE  DURY^E, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Second  Maryland  Regiment. 

Capt.  Edward  M.  Neill, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Indorsement. j 

Headquarters  Second  Division, 

New  Berne , N.  C .,  May  20,  1862. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  I am  happy  to  state  that  Lieutenant-Col- 
onel Duryde  executed  his  part  of  the  plan  in  a gallant  and  skillful 
manner. 

J.  L.  RENO, 

Brigadier- General)  Commanding  Second  Division. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Col.  Simon  H.  Mix , Third  New  York  Cavalry. 

Hdqrs.  Third  New  York  Volunteer  Cavalry, 

New  Berne,  N.  0.,  May  19,  1862. 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  obedience  to  your 
order  dated  May  14,  I marched  this  regiment  at  10  p.  m.  of  that  day, 
taking  the  Trent  road  in  the  direction  of  Trenton.  Having  arrived  at 
your  headquarters  I halted  by  your  order  about  two  hours. 

At  2 a.  m.  May  15  I took  up  the  line  of  march  from  that  point. 
After  proceeding  along  the  direct  road  about  8 miles  I sent  the  First 
Squadron  of  my  regiment,  under  command  of  Lieut.  Col.  John  Mix,  by 
a by-road,  in  order  to  cut  off  a party  of  the  enemy  supposed  to  be 
quartered  at  what  is  called  Merritt’s  house.  The  remainder  of  the 
regiment  proceeded  on  the  direct  road,  which  passed  by  the  aforesaid 
house.  The  instructions  given  to  Lieutenant- Colonel  Mix  were  to  pro- 
ceed along  the  by-road  to  its  intersection  with  the  main  road,  a dis- 
tance of  about  4 miles,  and  by  a countermarch  rejoin  the  regiment  at 
Merritt’s  house. 

These  instructions  were  strictly  complied  with.  On  reaching  Mer- 
ritt’s house  I found  it  evacuated,  no  trace  of  the  enemy  being  discovered. 
1 then  pushed  on,  sending  in  advance  the  Fourth  Squadron  of  my  regi- 
ment (Companies  C and  F),  under  command  of  Maj.  Charles  Fitzsim 
mons.  One  mile  and  a half  beyond  Merritt’s  house  4 mounted  ve 
dettes  of  the  enemy  were  discovered,  one  of  whom  was  captured  by 
Captain  McNamara  (Company  F).  The  advance  guard,  composed  of  18 
men,  under  command  of  Lieut.  John  Mayes  (Company  C),  was  ordered 
to  pursue  the  remainder.  Major  Fitzsimmons,  seeing  that  the  advance 
guard  were  getting  too  far  from  his  squadron,  rode  forward  to  check  it. 
He,  however,  did  not  reach  it  until  it  was  at  least  a third  of  a mile 


3HAP.XX.]  SKIRMISH  AT  TRANTER’S  CREEK,  N.  C.  339 

ahead  of  the  squadron.  He  here  halted  and  sent  an  order  to  Captain 
Stearns,  commanding  the  squadron,  to  close  up  at  a gallop.  Before 
the  order  was  executed  a mounted  party  of  the  enemy,  in  number 
about  60,  came  into  the  main  road  from  a by-path  on  the  left  between 
our  advance  guard  and  the  squadron.  They  immediately  opened  fire 
on  the  squadron,  causing  it  to  halt.  The  advance  guard  now  charged 
them  from  the  rear  and  gallantly  cut  their  way  through  the  enemy  and 
rejoined  the  squadron.  I had  in  the  mean  time  dismounted  50  of  my 
men,  armed  with  carbines  and  Belgian  rifles,  and  deployed  them  in  the 
woods  to  the  right  and  left  as  skirmishers.  The  enemy,  however,  on 
seeing  our  force,  retreated  in  confusion  and  scattered  through  the 
woods,  leaving  their  dead  and  wounded,  10  in  number,  on  the  field. 
My  skirmishers,  having  been  relieved  by  infantry,  were  called  in,  and 
by  your  order  my  regiment  countermarched  and  returned  to  New 
Berne,  reaching  here  at  4 p.  m.  May  15. 

My  command  behaved  most  gallantly  throughout  the  affair.  Major 
Fitzsimmons  was  wounded  by  a rifle-ball  in  the  left  shoulder  at  the 
outset  of  the  engagement,  which  had  the  effect  to  dislodge  him  from 
his  saddle.  His  horse  was  subsequently  shot.  While  dismounted  he 
received  a slight  wound  from  a rifle-ball  on  the  back  of  his  head, 
which  stunned  and  threw  him  to  the  ground,  when  he  was  made  a 
prisoner.  He  shortly  recovered  and  made  his  escape,  but  was  soon 
retaken.  While  being  taken  away  by  a rebel  soldier  he  was  struck  on 
the  forehead  by  the  breech  of  a rifle  in  the  hands  of  a rebel  who 
rushed  out  of  the  woods,  which  was  observed  by  a private  in  Company 
K (Thomas  Maine),  who  rode  forward  and  shot  the  assailant,  thereby 
releasing  Major  Fitzsimmons. 

The  following  is  a list  of  the  casualties  in  my  regiment:  Wounded— 
Maj.  Charles  Fitzsimmons  slightly;  Private  William  Bellows,  Com- 
pany C,  seriously,  left  arm  amputated ; and  Private  Robert  Craig, 
Company  C,  slightly.  Missing— Lieut.  John  Mayes  and  Privates 
Matthews  Sullivan,  Joseph  Carson,  Benjamin  Corsout,  and  William 
Hithree,  all  of  Company  C. 

. I am,  colonel,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

SIMON  H.  MIX, 

Colonel , Commanding  Third  New  York  Volunteer  Cavalry. 

Col.  Thomas  J.  C.  Amory, 

Seventeenth  Mass.  Vols .,  Comdg.  First  Brig.,  First  Div. 


MAY  30,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Tranter’s  Creek,  N.  C. 

Report  of  Capt.  George  F.  Joeknick , Third  New  York  Cavalry. 

Washington,  N.  C.,  May  31,  1862. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  to  you  the  following  report  of  the 
fight  which  occurred  yesterday  between  a mounted  patrol  of  my  com- 
pany and  a body  of  rebel  troops  laid  in  ambush : 

In  accordance  with  our  daily  routine  of  duties  Second  Lieutenant 
Allis  started  early  in  the  morning  with  a detail  of  15  men  to  reconnoiter 
the  Greenville  road  as  far  as  Tranter’s  Creek,  about  8 miles  from  here. 
Having  received  information  that  only  a small  body  of  rebel  troops, 
invariably  estimated  at  from  12  to  15  men,  were  in  advance,  Lieutenant 
Alli§  deemed  it  expedient  to  cross  the  bridge  over  the  said  creek,  leav- 


340 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


ing  a few  men  to  secure  his  retreat,  but  had  only  proceeded  a short 
distance  when  he  was  attacked  by  about  a dozen  men,  mounted  and 
on  foot.  After  discharging  their  fire-arms  and  receiving  our  fire  in 
return  they  fled  to  the  woods,  closely  followed  by  Lieutenant  Allis  and 
his  men,  who  succeeded  in  taking  two  prisoners.  These  prisoners  he 
was  subsequently  compelled  to  let  go  after  having  secured  their  arms. 
Finding  himself  surrounded  by  a large  body  of  infantry  concealed  in 
the  woods  Lieutenant  Allis  gallantly  cut  his  way  through  the  crowd, 
and  returned  here  with  his  command  about  noon,  with  only  one  man — 
Private  Ogden  Harrison — badly  wounded  and  2 horses  killed.  The 
enemy  had  3 men  killed  besides  those  wounded,  supposed  to  have  been 
5 or  6.  A fine  horse,  valued  at  $200,  fell  in  our  hands,  which  will 
partly  make  up  for  the  two  lost. 

Lieutenant  Allis  speaks  in  the  highest  terms  of  the  bravery  and 
coolness  displayed  by  our  men,  and  I am  happy  to  say  that  this  little 
affair  has  reflected  much  credit  on  all  concerned. 

The  wounded  man  has  good  medical  attendance  and  is  doing  well. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  F.  JOCKNICK, 

Captain  Company  I , Third  New  York  Cavalry . 

Col.  E.  E.  Potter,  Commanding. 


JUNE  5,  1862.— Action  at  Tranter’s  Creek,  N.  C. 

Report  of  Lieut . Col.  Francis  A.  Osborn , Twenty -fourth  Massachusetts 

Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-fourth  Regiment  Mass.  Vols., 

Washington , N.  0.,  June  6,  1862. 

Captain  : In  obedience  to  orders  received  from  Colonel  Stevenson 
in  person  I embarked  three  companies  of  the  regiment  under  my  com- 
mand on  board  the  steamer  Pilot  Boy,  bound  for  this  place,  at  11.30 
p.  m.  of  the  3d  instant,  and  left  instructions  with  Captain  Maker  to 
follow  with  the  four  companies  on  board  the  Lancer  as  soon  as  possible. 
Lieut.  W.  B.  Avery  came  on  board  with  a battery  of  three  pieces  and 
reported  to  me  for  orders. 

The  Pilot  Boy  got  under  way  early  on  the  morning  of  the  4th  (Wed- 
nesday), and  arrived  at  this  place  at  6 p.  m.  In  the  course  of  the 
evening  Colonel  Potter  informed  me  that  the  enemy’s  force  under 
Colonel  Singeltary  was  between  this  place  and  Pactolus,  a village 
about  12  miles  distant,  on  the  Greenville  road,  and  suggested  the  pro- 
priety of  attacking  them  at  once  before  they  should  hear  of  the  arrival 
of  re-enforcements.  I therefore  determined  to  take  eight  companies  of 
the  Twenty-fourth  Regiment,  after  the  arrival  of  the  four  companies 
left  at  New  Berne,  two  pieces  of  artillery,  and  the  company  of  the 
Third  New  York  Cavalry  stationed  here,  under  command  of  Captain 
Jocknick,  and  to  march  as  early  as  possible  the  next  morning  toward 
Pactolus.  Colonel  Potter  gave  orders  to  Captain  Nichols,  of  the  gun- 
boat Picket,  to  go  up  Tar  River  to  the  same  place,  throwing  shells  into 
the  woods  between  the  river  and  the  road  as  he  proceeded.  He  also 
ordered  him  to  take  two  scows  in  tow  in  which  to  bring  down  the 
troops  in  case  they  should  reach  Pactolus.  This  arrangement  would 
leave  two  companies  of  infantry,  one  12-pounder  howitzer,  and  one 


Chap.  XX.]  ACTION  AT  TRANTER’S  CREEK,  N.  C.  341 

mountain  howitzer  for  the  defense  of  the  town,  besides  the  usual  pickets 
and  provost  guard. 

As  the  four  companies  under  Captain  Maker  did  not  arrive  until  6 
a.  m.  Thursday  the  expedition  was  not  able  to  take  up  the  line  of  march 
until  9.15  a.  m.  I got  information  from  contrabands  as  we  proceeded 
that  the  enemy  was  posted  at  two  bridges  which  crossed  Tranter’s 
Creek,  one  being  on  the  road  which  we  were  pursuing  and  the  other 
about  half  a mile  distant  from  the  first  to  the  right  of  the  course  we 
were  following.  I further  learned  that  the  first  had  been  rendered 
impassable,  but  that  the  second,  though  only  a slight  bridge,  running 
through  a mill,  was  probably  in  order  or  could  easily  be  made  so.  I 
therefore  turned  off  to  the  right  a mile  this  side  of  Tranter’s  Creek,  and 
after  marching  2 miles  came  in  sight  of  the  mill.  There  were  three 
buildings,  about*  30  feet  apart,  open  in  the  lower  story,  through  which 
the  bridge  ran.  Our  advance,  on  approaching  the  first  of  these  around 
a turn  in  the  road,  found  that  the  floor  of  the  third  had  been  torn  up 
and  made  into  a barricade  on  the  opposite  side,  behind  TYhich  was 
placed  the  advance  of  the  enemy.  Our  men  on  seeing  them  immedi- 
ately fired  upon  them  and  received  a volley  in  return,  which  caused 
them  to  fall  back  and  which  wounded  Lieut.  H.  D.  Jarvis,  who  was  in 
command  of  the  advance.  I then  ordered  up  the  artillery,  which  took 
up  its  position  near  the  entrance  of  the  first  building  and  commenced 
firing  in  the  direction  in  which  the  enemy  was  supposed  to  be,  ther* 
advance  having  retired.  This  was  at  2.45  p.  m. 

Company  A,  Captain  Bedding,  was  disposed  on  the  left  of  the  artil 
lery,  under  cover  of  the  logs  and  beams  of  the  mill,  and  Cojnpany  F 
Captain  Clark,  was  ordered  to  advance  to  the  support  of  the  artillery; 
but  owing  to  a misconception  of  the  order  the  whole  regiment  ap 
proached  much  nearer  than  I had  intended,  inasmuch  as  from  the  con- 
formation of  the  ground,  which  ran  to  a point  at  the  mill,  only  about  50 
or  60  men  could  be  placed  to  fire  with  effect.  I accordingly  ordered  all 
to  lie  down  and  await  orders.  The  cavalry  retired  to  the  rear  to  guard 
against  the  possibility  of  an  attack  in  that  direction. 

The  firing  of  the  enemy  was  at  this  time  very  rapid  and  well  directed, 
and  we  discovered  from  the  .flash  of  their  guns  that  they  were  distant 
not  more  than  50  paces  from  us.  This  placed  our  artillery  at  a great 
disadvantage,  for  at  so  short  a range  it  could  not  do  its  best  execution. 
It  was,  however,  admirably  managed  by  Lieutenant  Avery,  and  as  it 
seemed  still  to  be  doing  good  service  I felt  unwilling  to  change  its  posi- 
tion. 

During  the  first  fifteen  minutes  the  enemy’s  fire  continued  steady,  and 
j most  of  the  wounds  on  our  side  were  inflicted  at  that  time.  After  that 
ttime  it  began  to  slacken,  and  when  we  had  discovered  a large  number 
of  men  in  trees  just  on  the  opposite  bank  and  had  poured  a few  rounds 
of  canister  into  them  it  wholly  ceased.  At  this  time  we  could  see  a 
large  number  of  men  running  along  the  opposite  bank  at  some  distance 
from  us,  and  were  satisfied  that  they  were  totally  routed. 

The  leading  companies  then  advanced  to  the  third  building  and  relaid 
the  floor,  which  could  not  have  been  done  until  the  enemy  had  been 
driven  from  their  position,  as  any  one  attempting  it  would  have  pre- 
vented our  own  fire  while  within  30  paces  of  that  of  the  enemy. 

The  bridge  being  repaired  sufficiently  for  foot  passengers,  the  infant- 
ry, excepting  Company  K,  Captain  Maker,  which  was  left  for  the  sup- 
port of  the  artillery,  crossed,  and  marched  about  100  paces  beyond  the 
position  which  the  enemy  had  occupied,  forming  line  of  battle  there. 
Having  remained  there  a short  time  and  examined  the  position,  after 


342 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


consultation  with  Colonel  Potter  I deemed  the  object  of  the  expedition 
had  been  gained  in  giving  the  enemy  a severe  lesson,  and  that  it  would 
be  better  to  return  to  Washington  rather  than  to  go  on  to  Pactolus, 
particularly  as  it  would  take  some  hours  to  make  the  bridges  strong 
enough  for  the  passage  of  the  cavalry  and  artillery.  I therefore  ordered 
the  infantry  to  recross,  and  returned  to  Washington,  bringing  the  dead 
and  wounded. 

The  battle  lasted  forty-five  minutes,  and  the  troops  arrived  at  Wash- 
ington at  8.30  p.  m.,  having  made  a march  of  18  miles  in  the  heat  of  the 
day.  During  the  march  we  constantly  heard  the  Picket  throwing  shells 
a long  way  on  our  left. 

Our  force  consisted  of  eight  companies  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Massa- 
chusetts Eegiment  (Company  D,  Captain  Prince,  and  Company  C,  Lieu- 
tenant Bell  commanding,  having  been  left  at  Washington),  numbering 
about  430  men;  two  12-pounder  howitzers  of  the  Marine  Artillery,  Lieut. 
W.  B.  Avery,  manned  by  12  men  each,  and  Company  I,  of  the  Third 
Hew  York  Cavalry,  Captain  Jocknick,  numbering  40  men. 

The  enemy’s  force  must  have  been  quite  equal  to  our  own  to  judge 
from  the  firing.  From  what  information  I could  gain  I estimated  it  at 
450  infantry  and  70  cavalry,  under  command  of  Colonel  Singeltary  ? of 
the  Forty-fourth  Horth  Carolina  Volunteers,  now  acting  brigadier- 
general. 

We  have  learned  that  information  of  our  approach  was  conveyed  to 
Colonel  Singeltary  by  a man  living  on  the  road,  so  that  he  was  able  to 
concentrate  all  of  his  force  upon  us.  His  position  was  a very  superior 
one,  which  could  easily  have  been  defended  against  us  by  a small  body 
had  we  not  had  artillery. 

Our  loss,  considering  the  length  of  the  action  and  the  small  number 
engaged,  was  severe,  there  having  been  in  the  Twenty-fourth  Mas- 
sachusetts 3 men  killed,  3 mortally  wounded,  who  have  since  died,  1 
lieutenant  and  1 man  severely  wounded,  1 captain  and  3 men  slightly 
wounded.  In  the  Marine  Artillery  there  was  1 man  killed,  1 severely 
and  1 slightly  wounded.  The  cavalry  suffered  no  loss,  as  they  were  not 
able  from  the  nature  of  the  ground  to  be  brought  into  action. 

The  enemy’s  loss  must  have  been  heavy,  as  we  found  5 dead  bodies 
and  saw  a large  quantity  of  blood  in  every  direction.  Since  the  action 
I have  heard  rumors  of  a very  large  loss  on  their  side,  including  the 
death  of  Colonel  Singeltary,  but  I cannot  trace  them  to  any  reliable 
source. 

I regret  to  say  that  the  wound  of  Lieut.  Horatio  D.  Jarvis,  of  Com- 
pany A,  is  quite  severe.  He  had  been  skillfully  conducting  the  advance 
during  the  day,  and  I felt  heavily  the  loss  of  so  capable  and  energetic 
an  officer.  In  the  beginning  of  the  affair  Capt.  William  F.  Bedding,  of 
Company  A,  received  a buck-shot  in  his  right  wrist,  but  without  leav- 
ing the  field  continued  attending  to  his  duties  with  his  usual  prompti- 
tude. 

I desire  to  mention  with  the  highest  commendation  the  conduct  of 
Lieut.  William  B.  Avery,  of  the  Marine  Artillery,  Colonel  Howard. 
Placed  in  the  midst  of  the  hottest  of  the  fire,  he  managed  his  battery 
with  the  greatest  coolness  and  skill  and  contributed  much  to  the  suc- 
cess of  the  day.  As  I have  said  above,  I think  that  but  for  his  battery 
and  the  determination  with  which  it  was  worked  the  enemy  with  a 
moderate  amount  of  courage  could  have  maintained  their  position.  His 
men  also  deserve  high  praise  for  their  courage  and  zeal.  Of  my  own 
officers  I am  proud  to  say  that  they  displayed  the  same  coolness  and 
courage  that  have  distinguished  them  heretofore. 4 


Chap.  XX.]  RECONNAISSANCE  FROM  WASHINGTON,  N.  C.  343 

Oapt.  B.  F.  Clark,  Company  F,  was  particularly  noticed  by  me  as 
being  in  the  advance  with  the  foremost  of  the  men,  directing  their  fire 
and  animating  them  by  his  example.  Capt,  C.  H.  Hooper,  acting  lieu- 
tenant-colonel  5 Lieut.  Albert  Ordway,  acting  adjutant ; Capt.  W.  F. 
Bedding,  Company  A;  Lieut.  J.  C.  Jones,  Company  F;  Capt.  John 
Daland  and  Lieut.  Charles  G.  Ward,  of  Company  H ; Capt.  E.  C.  Bich- 
ardson  and  Lieut.  J.  M.  Barnard,  Company  G,  being  near  the  head  of 
the  battalion,  and  their  companies  being  at  various  times  engaged  m 
firing,  were  conspicuous  for  their  coolness  and  prompt  attention  to  their 
duties.  The  officers  of  the  companies  in  rear  of  these  proved  by  their 
bearing  an  equal  degree  of  courage  and  determination,  but  were  de- 
barred from  the  opportunity  [of  doing]  anything  but  remaining  passive 
with  their  companies  under  fire  which  they  could  not  return. 

While,  under  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  the  case,  it  may  seem 
invidious  to  mention  the  names  of  some  officers  to  the  exclusion  of  the 
rest,  I cannot  but  feel  that  justice  demanded  that  they  should  receive 
the  credit  of  what  they  actually  did,  though  I believe  that  the  others 
in  their  position  would  have  done  equally  well,  and  I know  from  their 
urgent  request  to  be  allowed  to  do  something  that  they  were  equally 
desirous  of  being  in  the  front.  My  men  behaved  remarkably  well, 
situated  as  they  were  in  the  hardest  position  that  a soldier  can  be  called 
upon  to  remain  in — that  of  not  being  allowed  to  do  anything. 

Col.  Edward  E.  Potter,  of  First  Eegiment  North  Carolina  Volunteers, 
[Union]  military  governor  of  this  city,  and  Lieut.  J.  M.  Pendleton,  of 
his  staff,  accompanied  me,  and  I have  to  thank  them  for  valuable  assist- 
ance and  advice. 

As  I stated  above,  the  conception  of  the  plan  of  the  expedition  was 
due  to  Colonel  Potter,  and  to  his  energy  was  it  greatly  indebted  for 
being  so  efficiently  carried  out. 

Bespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  A.  OSBOEN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Comdg.  Twenty -fourth  Regt.  Mass . Vols. 

Capt.  William  Pratt,  „ _ 

Act.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Second  Brig.,  First  Div.,  Dept,  of  N.  C. 


JUNE  24, 1862. — Reconnaissance  from  Washington  to  Tranter’s  Creek,  N.  C. 

Report  of  Capt.  George  F.  Jocknick , Third  New  York  Cavalry. 

Washington,  N.  C.,  June  25,  1862. 

Sir  : Having  within  the  last  few  days  received  a number  of  reports 
from  various  sources  in  regard  to  certain  fly-trap  contrivances  made 
by  the  rebels  on  the  Greenville  road  for  the  purpose  of  catching  my 
mounted  patrols  whenever  they  should  venture  beyond  their  usual  lim- 
its of  4 miles,  I made  yesterday  a reconnaissance  with  my  company  to 
Tranter’s  Creek,  a distance  of  8 miles,  where  they  were  said  to  have  a 
large  force  on  each  side  of  the  stream.  I advanced  cautiously,  with  my 
advance  guard  dismounted  and  acting  as  skirmishers,  but  could  discover 
no  signs  of  the  presence  of  an  enemy  until  we  struck  the  bridge  where 
our  late  engagement  took  place.  Here,  within  reach  of  our  rifles  and 
partially  concealed  behind  the  trees,  we  could  just  discover  in  the  bend 
of  the  road  on  the  other  side  of  the  stream  two  mounted  pickets,  whom 
my  men  were  exceedingly  anxious  to  relieve  from  all  further  troubles  in 


344 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


the  world,  but  as  I did  not  want  to  make  any  noise  until  the  object  of 
my  reconnaissance  was  accomplished  their  lives  were  spared.  I found 
the  bridge  partially  destroyed,  the  mill  where  they  made  their  last  stand 
entirely  deserted,  and  no  traces  whatever  of  the  presence  of  a large 
force. 

In  the  direct  road  to  Greenville,  about  a mile  from  this  point,  is 
another  bridge,  which  Lieutenant  Allis  crossed  at  the  time  of  his  en- 
gagement 5 but  although  I made  a careful  reconnaissance  of  that  locality, 
no  rebel  pickets  could  be  seen.  About  12  feet  of  the  center  of  this 
bridge  has  been  sawed  off  and  a breastwork  of  logs  and  lumber  erected 
on  the  other  side,  but,  as  I said  before,  no  indications  of  the  presence 
of  rebel  troops  could  be  found. 

I mention  these  little  particulars  merely  to  show  that  our  late  battle 
at  Tranter’s  Creek  has  h&d  a very  salutary  effect  on  the  enemy,  and 
that  we  shall  probably  not  be  molested  here  for  some  time  to  come. 
Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  F.  JOCKNICK, 

Captain,  Commanding  Company  I , Third  New  York  Cav. 

First  Lieut.  B.  M.  Hall, 

Adjutant  Third  New  York  Cavalry , New  Berne , N.  C. 

P.  S. — I hand  you  inclosed  requisitions  for  ordnance  and  stationery 
and  extra  return  for  salt,  which  after  being  approved  by  the  colonel 
commanding  please  hand  to  the  quartermaster,  with  my  request  to  have 
the  articles  forwarded  to  me  per  next  steamer.  I also  hand  you  a letter 
to  the  Adjutant-General  United  States  Army  and  a private  letter,  both 
to  be  mailed  at  your  post-office. 


JULY  24-28,  1862. — Expeditions  from  New  Berne  to  Trenton  and  Pollocks- 

ville,  N.  C.,  etc. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Col.  Horace  C.  Lee,  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

No.  3.— Second-Lieutenant  Byron  W.  Gates,  Third  New  York  Cavalry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster , U.  S.  Army. 

Hdqrs.  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

Neio  Berne , N.  C.,  July  28,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  everything  is  going  on  well  ip 
this  department.  I sent  on  Friday  last  four  reconnaissances,  with  the 
object  of  ascertaining  the  force  of  the  enemy  near  this  town,  taking 
prisoners  for  the  purpose  of  acquiring  information  and  to  acquire  a 
more  thorough  knowledge  of  the  topography  of  the  neighboring  coun- 
ties. I am  happy  to  say  that  the  three  parties  heard  from  were  per- 
fectly successful  and  with  very  little  loss.  One  detachment  made  a 
circuit  of  50  miles  by  way  of  Trenton  and  Pollocksville.  Another  pro- 
ceeded to  Pollocksville  by  another  road.  A third  went  some  18  miles 
up  the  Neuse  road  and  broke  up  the  main  post  of  the  pickets  on  that 


Chap.  XX.)  EXPEDITIONS  FROM  NEW  BERNE,  N.  C.,  ETC. 


345 


road  The  fourth,  not  yet  reported,  were  to  occupy  Young's  Cross- 
Roads  situated  about  14  miles  distant  from  and  at  right  angles  with 
the  Atlantic  and  North  Carolina  Railroad,  half  way  between  Beaufort 
and  this  place.  We  have  taken  several  horses  and  prisoners  and 

learned  much  concerning  the  enemy’s  force.  ,.  , 

A more  detailed  report  I shall  have  the  honor  of  sending  by  the 
fttpifl/m p,r  hence  on  the  30th.  proximo.*1  . < , 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  ^ 

Brigadier-General,  U.  8.  Army,  Commanding  Department. . 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War , Washington , D.  G. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Col  Horace  C.  Lee , Twenty -seventh  Massachusetts  Infantry . 

Hdqrs.  First  Brigade,  First  Division, 

Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  July  28,  1862. 

Dear  Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  movements  of  a reeon- 
noitering  body  of  troops  under  my  command,  consisting  of  six  com- 
panies of  the  Seventeenth  Massachusetts,  Lieutenant-Colonel  YeHows 
nfne  companies  of  theTwenty-fifth,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sprague^;  seven 
companies  of  the  Twenty -seventh,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lyman,  five 
companies  of  cavalry,  Major  Lewis,  and  one  battery  ol  artillery,  Lieu- 

teWetleftNew  Berne  at  5 p.  m.  of  the  24th  instant,  the  six  companies 
of  the  Seventeenth  and  one  company  of  cavalry  going  up  on  the  south 
side  of  the  Trent  River  toward  Pollocksville,  the  balance  up  the  north 
side  toward  Trenton.  We  encamped  that  night  at  Deep  Gully,  Grow- 
ing our  pickets  forward  to  the  right  toward  the  Red  House  and  on  the 

left  down  to  the  creek.  ,, 

We  moved  at  daylight  the  next  morning,  two  companies  of  cavalry 
acting  as  advance  guard.  When  within  3 or  4 miles  of  the  forks  <of  the 
Kinston  and  Trenton  road  two  companies  of  the  Twenty-fifth  Massa- 
chusetts were  sent  in  advance  and  deployed  as  skirmishers.  Rebel 
vedettes  were  from  time  to  time  in  sight  about  1 mile  in  advance. 
When  within  1£  miles  of  the  forks  I ordered  Major  Lewis  to  dash  on 
with  the  cavalry  and  clear  the  road.  He  did  so,  and  drove  6 or  8 ot 
the  enemv  up  the  Kinston  road,  firing  upon  them  and  killing,  as 
reported,  1 man.  The  fire  was  returned,  but  without  injury  to  us. 

Arriving  at  the  forks,  we  left  two  companies  of  the  Twenty-fifth,  two 
companies  of  the  Twenty-seventh,  one  section  of  battery,  and  20 'cav- 
alry, under  command  of  Captain  Moulton ; then  pushed  on  rapidly  for 
Trenton.  The  cavalry,  being  in  the  advance,  discovered  a small  num- 
ber of  the  enemy  firing  the  bridge  across  Trent  River.  They  fired 
upon  and  dispersed  them,  and  extinguished  the  fire,  saving  tbe  bndge. 
The  whole  force  were  soon  up  and  halted,  and,  it  being  12  o clock,  the 
men  had  their  dinner  and  horses  were  fed.  The  bridge  was  soon  re- 
paired and  a guard  stationed  to  prevent  the  men  from  crossing  m 

^The  force  left  at  the  forks  was  ordered  back,  and  at  3.30  o’clock,  the 


* Not  found. 


346 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


cavalry  having  rode  up  two  or  three  of  the  roads  leading  from  Trenton 
without  discovering  an  enemy,  we  marched  through  the  village  and  on 
toward  Pollocksville,  halting  at  8 o’clock  and  spending  the  night  at  a 
plantation  belonging  to  Mr.  McDaniel,  who  we  learn  left  it  in  March 
last.  It  was  now  the  headquarters  of  the  rebel  cavalry  scouts  or 
pickets.  The  artillery  and  baggage  train  found  some  difficulty  in 
fording  a small  creek  near  this  place,  but  all  got  safely  through  in  the 
course  of  the  evening.  It  rained  very  hard  most  of  the  night,  but  the 
men  were  well  sheltered  in  the  large  bams  and  sheds,  the  officers  occupy- 
ing the  house.  Picket  guards  were  thrown  out,  the  guns  of  the  battery 
stationed  so  as  to  command  the  different  roads,  and  the  baggage  train 
well  secured  within  the  yard.  Just  previous  to  arriving  here  four 
prisoners  were  taken,  who  reported  themselves  as  conscripts  from 
Swansborough  on  their  way  to  Trenton  to  join  their  company. 

As  we  were  about  to  move  the  next  morning  I discovered  that  a large 
grist-mill  by  the  side  of  the  road,  below  the  house,  was  in  a blaze,  having 
been  fired  by  some  one  or  more  of  the  men.  It  was  completely  de- 
stroyed. The  house  was  also  set  on  fire  in  the  attic,  together  with  a small 
house  in  the  rear.  By  my  orders  a party  of  the  Twenty-fifth,  headed 
by  Adjutant  Harkness,  succeeded  in  stopping  the  flames  and  saving  the 
house.  Although  I should  not  have  given  my  consent  to  the  burning  of 
the  mill  and  should  have  prevented  it  had  I supposed  it  in  danger,  I 
think  it  may,  perhaps,  have  been  well  to  have  had  it  destroyed,  as 
it  must  have  been  extensively  used  by  the  enemy  and  contained  quite 
a quantity  of  grain,  which  could  not  be  brought  away.  A guard  was 
left  to  prevent  any  more  burning,  and  we  proceeded  on  to  Pollocks- 
ville,  being  obliged  to  build  a small  bridge  on  the  way  for  the  artillery 
and  baggage.  Arriving  at  10.30,  we  found  there  the  six  companies  of 
the  Seventeenth  and  Captain  Cole’s  company  of  cavalry,  who  had  ar- 
rived the  day  before.  They  had  lost  4 men  of  the  cavalry ; six  of  them 
on  a foraging  tour  having  been  fired  upon  by  a party  of  guerrillas  in 
ambush,  2 were  killed,  and  2 wounded  and  taken  prisoners.  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Fellows  immediately  sent  out  three  companies  of  infantry, 
but  did  not  succeed  in  discovering  the  rascals.  Two  prisoners  were 
taken  the  morning  we  arrived,  who  were  suspected  of  being  concerned 
in  the  affair.  We  were  delayed  until  nearly  3 o’clock  on  account  of  the 
bridge  built  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Fellows’  command  across  Mill  Creek 
not  proving  strong  enough  for  the  artillery.  It  was  strengthened.  The 
artillery  and  baggage  train  got  safely  across,  and  we  arrived  in  Hew 
Berne  at  10  p.  m. 

Although  we  did  not  meet  with  as  many  of  the  enemy  as  we  should 
have  been  g;lad  to,  I feel  very  well  satisfied  with  the  result.  From  in- 
formation given  us  by  citizens  on  the  road  and  at  Trenton  I am  satisfied 
that  there  is  no  force  this  side  of  Kinston,  with  the  exception  of  about 
100  rebel  cavalry  and  parties  of  citizens  acting  as  guerrillas.  These 
are  divided  into  small  squads  and  scour  the  country  from  Deep  Gully 
to  Pollocksville. 

The  troops  behaved  extremely  well  throughout  the  entire  march,  and 
notwithstanding  the  heat  of  the  weather  and  the  many  streams  to  be 
forded,  some  of  them  3 and  4 feet  in  depth,  there  was  no  murmuring 
and  but  few  stragglers. 

The  heavy  rain  had  made  the  roads  in  many  places  very  bad  for  artil- 
lery, but  they  came  safely  through,  Lieutenant  Fope  managing  them 
with  much  skill  and  with  little  bluster. 

I am  greatly  indebted  to  Captain  Hoffman,  of  General  Foster’s  staff, 
who  accompanied  me,  and  by  his  advice  did  much  to  make  the  recon- 


RECONNAISSANCE  FROM  NEWPORT,  N.  C. 


347 


Chap.  XX.] 

naissance  successful;  also  to  Lieutenant  Dennison,  of  the  Twenty- 

seventh,  who  acted  as  aide.  , , 

The  bridge  built  at  Mill  Creek  was  not  destroyed  as  directed,  because 
it  would  have  delayed  us  so  long  that  we  could  not  have  arrived  at 
New  Berne  that  night,  and  because  I considered  it  of  very  little  if  any 
benefit  to  the  enemy. 

Very  respectfully,  H.  0.  LEE, 

Colonel , Commanding  First  Brigade. 
Lieut.  J.  F.  Anderson,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  3. 


Report  of  Second  Lieut.  Byron  W.  Gates , Third  New  York  Cavalry . 

Camp  Beno,  near  New  Berne , N.  (7.,  July  29,  1862. 
Sir:  In  compliance  with  your  request  I have  the  honor  to  report  the 
movements  of  my  company,  as  follows:  . . _ 

In  obedience  to  orders  received  from  General  Foster  I joined  my  com- 
pany with  the  Seventeenth  Massachusetts.  Marched  July  26  toward 
Pollocksville,  taking  the  road  leading  past  the  University.  Soon  alter 
reaching  Mill  Creek  the  work  of  bridging  was  commenced,  when  the 
commanding  officer  ordered  me  to  have  vedettes  stationed  along  the 
road  leading  to  Haughton’s  Mill.  I ordered  a sergeant  to  take  5 men— 
went  myself  and  posted  the  first,  then  directed  him  to  station  the  next 
in  sight  of  the  first,  that  they  might  communicate  with  eaeh  other 
readily,'  and  to  observe  the  same  order  in  posting  the  rest.  They  had 
proceeded  about  400  yards,  after  stationing  the  second  vedette,  when 
they  were  fired  upon  by  a party  in  ambush.  I think  there  were  50  shots 
discharged.  Two  or  three  companies  of  infantry  moved  immediately  to 
the  spot,  where  they  found  the  sergeant  and  1 of  [the]  men  killed,  the 
other  2 missing.  Skirmishers  were  deployed ; the  enemy  s trail  followed 
into  the  woods ; how  far  I don’t  know.  They  soon  returned,  however. 

As  soon  as  the  bridge  was  completed  we  moved  on  to  Pollocksville, 
where  we  remained  overnight,  returning  to  camp  next  day.  On  our 
return  I dismounted  a portion  of  my  men  and  searched  the  woods  lor 
the  two  missing  men.  I took  the  trail,  which  led  directly  to  the  creek, 
where  there  was  a log  lying  across,  which  bore  the  appearance  of  hav- 
ing been  used  a long  time  by  footmen  to  cross.  I then  returned  to  the 
regiment. 

Very  respectfully,  yours,  BYRON  W.  GATES, 

Second  Lieutenant,  Commanding  Company  K. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Mix. 


JULY  26-29,  1862. — Reconnaissance  from  Newport  to  Young’s  Cross-Roads, 

N.  C.,  and  skirmish  27th. 

Report  of  Col.  Charles  A.  Heckman , Ninth  New  Jersey  Volunteers . 

Hdqrs.  Ninth  Regiment  New  Jersey  Yols., 

Newport  Barracks , July  31,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  as  the  result  of  a 
reconnaissance  made  in  force  from  this  point  to  Young’s  Cross-Roads  : 


348 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


The  expedition  consisted  of  six  companies  of  the  Ninth  New  Jersey 
Volunteers,  under  Major  Zabriskie ; three  companies  of  the  Third  New 
York  Cavalry,  under  Captain  Stearns,  and  one  section  of  the  Rocket 
Battalion,  under  Lieutenant  Graham.  We  started  from  this  point  on 
Saturday,  the  26th  instant,  at  4 a.  m.,  and  after  building  two  bridges 
proceeded  as  far  as  Davis’  Mill,  26  miles  distant,  where  we  bivouacked 
for  the  night. 

At  daylight  on  Sunday,  27th,  we  started  for  the  Cross-Roads,  where 
we  arrived  at  10  a.  m.  At  1 p.  m.  I started  one  company  of  cavalry 
toward  Pollocksville  and  one  toward  Trenton  for  the  purpose  of  com- 
municating with  the  expedition  from  New  Berne.  With  one  company 
of  cavalry  I started  on  a reconnaissance  toward  Onslow.  We  had  pro- 
ceeded about  1 J miles  when  we  came  to  a sharp  curve  in  the  road.  As 
soon  as  the  advance  had  made  the  turn  a volley  of  musketry  was  poured 
into  us  from  the  opposite  side  of  the  creek,  the  bridge  over  which  had 
been  destroyed.  I immediately  ordered  a halt,  and  those  of  the  cav- 
alry who  were  armed  with  rifles  to  dismount  and  deploy  as  skirmishers 
and  sent  back  for  re-enforcements.  The  re-enforcements  arriving 
promptly,  I deployed  them  as  skirmishers,  and  a brisk  fire  was  opened 
upon  the  enemy.  I also  had  a piece  of  artillery  placed  in  position,  and 
opened  on  them  with  grape  and  canister.  Under  cover  of  our  fire  I 
had  the  bridge  rebuilt  and  crossed  after  them,  but  they  had  been  com- 
pletely routed,  leaving  behind  several  sabers,  shot-guns,  &c.,  taking 
with  them,  however,  all  their  killed  and  wounded,  the  exact  number  of 
which  I could  not  ascertain.  Our  loss  was  6 wounded,  1 seriously 
The  rebels  numbered  about  300,  under  Captains  Ward,  Humphreys 
and  Perkins.  I brought  in  3 prisoners,  2 of  whom  belonged  to  rebel 
cavalry  and  were  home  on  furlough. 

My  orders  being  to  proceed  to  Young’s  Cross-Roads  and  if  possible 
communicate  with  the  expedition  from  New  Berne,  on  Monday,  28th  I 
started,  with  one  company  of  cavalry  for  Pollocksville,  where  I found 
the  expedition  had  been,  and  left  on  Sunday  afternoon.  The  distance 
being  less  from  the  Cross-Roads  to  New  Berne  than  to  Newport,  and  the 
roads  I h^d  passed  over  being  almost  impassable,  I concluded  to  go  on 
to  N ew  Berne  and  obtain  transportation  from  there  to  Newport.  We 
left  the  Cross-Roads  on  Monday  at  3 p.  m.,  and  at  night  bivouacked  at 
the  Seminary,  near  Pollocksville.  Tuesday  morning  at  daylight  we 
started,  and  arrived  at  New  Berne  at  noon  and  at  Newport  the  same 
evening. 

1 am  deeply  indebted  to  Captain  Stearns,  of  the  cavalry,  and  Lieu- 
tenant Graham,  of  the  artillery,  for  valuable  services  rendered,  and  the 
prompt  and  energetic  manner  with  which  they  executed  every  order, 
lhe  officers  and  men  of  the  infantry  performed  their  duties  nobly,  and 
where  all  did  their  duty  it  is  impossible  to  particularize. 
o ^ the  necessity  of  reporting  the  burning  of  Mr.  Foy’s  property, 

B miles  from  the  Cross-Roads.  The  column  had  passed  the  house,  when 
7r?euCeiV  • s210^e  ascending  in  that  direction.  I returned  and  found 
the  house  m flames.  I have  been  unable  to  find  out  the  cause  of  the 
lire  or  by  whom  it  was  done. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  A.  HECKMAN, 

Colonel , Commanding . 

Brigadier-General  Stevenson, 

Commanding  Second  Brigade , First  Division , 

Department  of  North  Carolina. 


CHAP.  XX.]  expedition  from  batchelder’s  creek,  n.  c.  349 
JULY  28, 1862— Expedition  from  Batchelder’s  Creek,  on  Neuse  Eoad,  N.  C. 
Report  of  Capt.  Charles  B.  Sanford,  Twelfth  Massachusetts  Infantry. 

, 1862. 

a™  . T have  the  honor  to  report  that,  having  received  orders  from 
General  Foster  to  make  a reconnaissance  on  the  Neuse  road  and  if 
possible  break  up  a company  of  guerriUas  stationed  there  l left  Bate  - 
elder’s  Creek  with  the  following  force^  at  2.45  a.  m.  July  28 . ^ 

Company  H,  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  Infantry ""  3g 

florrmanv  d!  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  Infantry 2 

Company  G,  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts  Infantry - u 

Company  C,  Third  New  York  Artillery 10 

Company  G,  Third  New  York  Cavalry 

105 

Total 

Reaching  the  Neuse  road  and  passing  through  Jumping  Run  Swamp 
fa  small  brook  running  through  a dense  swamp  and  crossed  by  a small 
L brideel  supposed  to  be  a guerrilla  rendezvous,  we  reached  the 
house  of  White,  when  we  were  met  by  the  outer  guard  of  the  enemy, 

. o+tATYiT^tprl  to  tire  but  missed,  and  immediately  ran  into  the  woods. 
Amile^fSther  ancf  we  reac?edS Keith’s,  at  the  forks  of  two  roads,  where 
some  15  or  20  were  charged  on,  but  escaped  through  t e , * 

The  house  was  searched  and  a few  cartridges  only  found.  The  roads 
were  carefully  watched  meanwhile  by  infantry  and  cavalry  m every 
direction  Ascertaining  from  the  residents  that  French  s,  a notorious 
rebelnest  was  only  a mile  and  a half  farther  on,  I immediately  moved  for- 
ward and  came  on  the  house  very  suddenly,  it  being  almost  entire  y 
concealed  bv  trees.  Sending  Company  D to  the  right  and  the  cavalry 
forward  we  nearly  surrounded  the  house.  We  expected  to  meet  the 
entire  S force  fn  that  section  there,  and  I therefore  ordered  a charge 
and  a fire  while  charging  (before  Company  D came  within  range  of  our 
ffuns  on  the  right),  considering  it  the  shortest  manner  of  ending  t e 
afihir.  The  whole  was  well  executed  and  promptly  by  the  men.  They 
fired  a volley  through  the  windows  and  yard,  the  volley  being  the  to 
intimation  the  rebel!  had  of  our  presence . They 

4 cscaned  1 of  them  being  wounded  in  the  leg.  lhe  prisoners  we  e 
brought  m from  the  swamp  and  placed  under  guard  and  the  house 
searched.  Nothing  was  found  of  any  value  but  a few  sabers,  the  nfles 
and  pistols  being  mostly  worthless  and  condemned.  Some  20  good 
horse!  were  capfured,  oily  4 escaping.  The  wounded  otohe  enemy 
were  placed  in  a wagon  and  sent  under  charge  of  the  cav.a^y  to  the 
railroad.  Everything  having  been  cleared  out  of  the  house,  it,  toother 
with  most  of  the  outbuildings,  were  fired,  and  were  burning  fine  y 

W Welook  10  prisoners,  1 dead  man  being  unintentionally  leto 
nnburied  and  1 dying  (Corp.  Grier  Black,  of  Mecklenburg  County,  North 
Carolina')’ oa  the  return  home.  One  with  his  arms  shattered  was  lmme- 
dhdely  sent  to  the  hospital;  the  remainder,  by  General  order 

being  sent  to  the  provost-marshal.  The  prisoners  belonged  to  Comr i y 
G,  Second  North  Carolina  Cavalry,  and  had  been  at  French  s some  three 

reached  Batchelder’s  Creek  at  9.15  a.  m.,  having  been  absent  ^ 
hours  and  a half.  When  we  surprised  the  enemy  at  French  s the  sun 

had  but  just  risen.  

No  wounds  or  injuries  were  received  by  any  of  our  men. 


350 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX 


Lieutenant  Randolph,  of  the  Third  New  York  Artillery ; Lieutenant 
Skinner,  commanding  Company  D ; Lieutenant  Joslyn  and  Sergeant 
McKay,  of  Company  H,  rendered  valuable  aid  in  searching  the  houses, 
scouting  the  woods,  &c. 

I desire  especially  to  mention  Sergeant  Safford,  of  the  Third  New 
York  Cavalry,  Company  G,  for  his  brave  conduct  under  all  circum- 
stances. He  was  especially  cool  and  daring,  leading  off  in  two  charges 
in  a most  gallant  manner. 

I am,  sir,  yours,  very  truly, 

CHARLES  D.  SANFORD, 
Captain , Commanding  Guard  at  Batchelder’s  Creek , A.  C. 

Col.  Horace  C.  Lee, 

Commanding  First  Brigade. 


AUGUST  14-15, 1862. — Reconnaissance  from  Newport  to  Swansborough,  N.  C. 

Report  of  Col.  Charles  A.  Heckman , Ninth  New  Jersey  Infantry. 

Hdqes.  Ninth  Regiment  New  Jersey  Vols., 

Newport  Barracks , N.  O.,  August  16,  1862. 

Generax.  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  accordance  with  your 
order  I left  camp  on  the  evening  of  the  14th  at  7 p.  m.  with  one  squad- 
ron of  cavalry  and  100  infantry  on  a reconnaissance.  I took  the  White 
Oak  road,  crossed  the  bridge  over  Pettigrew’s  Creek,  and  continued  on 
this  road  until  we  arrived  within  2 miles  of  Peletier’s  Mill,  where  I found 
a good  road  leading  to  the  mouth  of  Pettiford’s  Creek,  at  which  point  I ex- 
pected to  find  means  of  transportation  across  the  White  Oak  River, 
which  would  bring  me  in  the  tear  of  Swansborough,  and  enable  me  to 
capture  at  least  the  pickets  of  the  enemy.  But  1 was  sadly  disap- 
pointed, the  boats  having  been  destroyed  the  week  previous,  as  I was 
informed  by  a person  whose  slumber  I was  compelled  to  disturb  for 
the  night.  I could  not  find  anything  in  the  shape  of  a boat  and  again 
took  up  the  march  for  Cedar  Point. 

I took  possession  of  Mr.  E.  Hill’s  plantation,  opposite  Swansborough, 
at  4 a.  m.  Hill’s  place  is  on  high  ground,  separated  from  the  village 
by  White  Oak  River,  about  2 miles  wide,  and  having  over  5 feet  water 
in  the  channel.  The  only  transportation  that  1 found  here  was  one 
yawl  and  a canoe,  capable  of  carrying  16  persons.  I dispatched  Cap- 
tain McChesney,  with  12  men,  in  the  yawl,  followed  by  4 men  in  the 
canoe,  armed  with  rifles  and  Colt’s  navies,  with  orders  to  reconnoiter 
and  secure  two  flats,  but  not  to  attempt  a landing. 

On  his  return  he  reported  that  on  his  getting  within  a half  mile  of 
the  shore  a gun  was  discharged,  and  instantly  a body  of  armed  men, 
numbering  from  250  to  300,  made  their  appearance  from  the  heavy  tim- 
ber in  the  rear  of  the  village.  They  started  three  boats  to  capture  him, 
but  altered  their  minds  on  receiving  a volley  from  his  little  party,  and 
skedaddled  for  the  timber.  Not  deeming  it  prudent  to  run  in  nearer  the 
shore  with  so  small  a force,  the  captain  returned. 

Having  done  all  that  was  possible  with  our  limited  transportation,  I 
took  up  the  return  march  by  another  route.  When  about  8 miles  from 
the  Point,  a sailor  with  a fowling-piece,  was  picked  up,  who  informed 
me  that  two  steamers  (stern-wheelers)  were  aground  in  the  sound,  and 


Chap.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


351 


had  been  there  since  early  morning.  By  him  I sent  information  as 
to  matters  in  and  about  Swansborough.  Knowing  that  I could  not 
assist  them  in  their  difficulty,  I continued  my  march,  arriving  in  camp 
at  10  p.  m.  of  the  15th  in  a drenching  rain.  , . 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  with  high  regards,  your  obedient 

servant,  0 A HECKMAN, 

Colonel , Commanding . 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster,  Comdg.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina . 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ORDERS,  AND  RETURNS  RELATING  TO 
OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA  FROM  JANUARY  11 
TO  AUGUST  20,  1862. 


UNION  CORRESPONDEN CE,  ETC.* 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Coast  Division, 

N0<  14.  f Annapolis , January  3,  1862. 

The  vessels  for  the  transportation  of  this  division  are  assigned  to  the 
different  brigades,  as  follows : . 

To  the  First  Brigade  (Brig.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster),  New  Brunswick, 
steamer;  Vedette,  propeller;  New  York,  steamer;  Zouave,  propeller; 
Guide,  steamer ; Guerrilla,  bark ; Ranger,  propeller ; Highlander, 
schooner ; Hussar,  propeller ; Recruit,  schooner. 

To  the  Second  Brigade  (Brig.  Gen.  J.  L.  Reno),  Northerner,  steamer; 
Kitty  Stimpson,  ship;  Cossack,  steamer;  Ann  E.  Thompson,  ship; 
Lancer,  propeller;  Dragoon,  brig ; Pioneer,  propeller;  Scout,  schooner. 

To  the  Third  Brigade  (Brig.  Gen.  J.  G.  Parke),  Eastern  Queen, 
steamer;  Arrican,  ship;  Sentinel,  propeller ; H.  D.  Brookman,  bark; 
Chasseur,  propeller ; Voltigeur,  bark;  John  Trucks,  ship ; Skirmisher, 
schooner. 

The  troops  will  have  three  days’  cooked  rations  on  hand,  and  be  pre- 
pared to  embark  at  twelve  hours’  notice.  Orders  for  the  details  of 
embarkation  and  quarters  will  be  issued  by  the  brigade  commanders. 
Bv  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  A.  E.  Burnside : 

J LEWIS  RICHMOND, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Coast  Division, 

^o.  15.  f Annapolis , January  4,  1862. 

1.  General  Foster  will  embark  at  the  city  wharf  to-day  and  to  mor- 
row the  horses  and  teams  of  his  brigade.  The  troops  will  be  marched 
on  board  on  Monday  from  the  upper  wharf  at  the  Naval  School  yard. 

2.  General  Reno  will  embark  at  the  city  wharf  to-day  and  to-morrow 
the  horses  and  teams  of  his  brigade.  The  troops  will  be  marched  on 
board  on  Monday  from  the  lower  wharf  at  the  Naval  School  yard. 

3.  General  Parke  will  embark  at  the  city  wharf  to-day  and  to-morrow 
the  horses  and  teams  of  his  brigade.  The  troops  will  be  marched  on 

* Some  correspondence  had  in  1861,  relating  to  the  preparation  of  this  Burnside  Ex- 
pedition, will  be  found  in  Series  III,  Vol.  I. 


352 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


board  on  Monday  from  the  small  wharf  north  of  the  hospital  at  the 
Naval  School  yard. 

By  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  A.  E.  Burnside : 

LEWIS  RICHMOND, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

Washington , January  7,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside, 

Commanding  Expedition : 

General  : In  accordance  with  verbal  instructions  heretofore  given 
you,  you  will,  after  uniting  with  Flag-Officer  Goldsborough  at  Fort 
Monroe,  proceed  under  his  convoy  to  Hatteras  Inlet,  when  you  will  in 
connection  with  him  take  the  most  prompt  measures  for  crossing  the 
fleet  into  the  “ Bulkhead”  into  the  waters  of  the  sound.  Under  the 
accompanying  general  order,  constituting  the  Department  of  North 
Carolina,  you  will  assume  the  command  of  the  garrison  at  Hatteras 
Inlet,  and  make  such  dispositions  in  regard  to  that  place  as  your  ulte- 
rior operations  may  render  necessary,  always  being  careful  to  provide 
for  the  safety  of  that  very  important  station  in  any  contingency. 

Your  first  point  of  attack  will  be  Roanoke  Island  and  its  depend- 
encies. It  is  presumed  that  the  Navy  can  reduce  the  batteries  on  the 
marshes  and  cover  the  landing  of  your  troops  on  the  main  island,  by 
which,  in  connection  with  a rapid  movement  of  the  gunboats  to  the 
northern  extremity  as  soon  as  the  marsh  battery  is  reduced,  it  may  be 
hoped  to  capture  the  entire  garrison  of  the  place. 

Having  occupied  the  island  and  its  dependencies  you  will  at  once 
proceed  to  the  erection  of  the  batteries  and  defenses  necessary  to  hold 
the  position  with  a small  force.  Should  the  flag-officer  require  any  as- 
sistance in  seizing  or  holding  the  debouches  of  the  canals  from  Norfolk, 
you  will  please  afford  it  to  him. 

The  commodore  and  yourself  having  completed  your  arrangements 
in  regard  to  Roanoke  Island  and  the  waters  north  of  it  you  will  please 
at  once  make  a descent  upon  New  Berne,  having  gained  possession  of 
which  and  the  railroad  passing  through  it  you  will  at  once  throw  a 
sufficient  force  upon  Beaufort,  and  take  the  steps  necessary  to  reduce 
Fort  Macon  and  open  that  port.  WThen  you  seize  New  Berne  you  will 
endeavor  to  seize  the  railroad  as  far  west  as  Goldsborough,  should  cir- 
cumstances favor  such  a movement.  The  temper  of  the  people,  the 
rebel  force  at  hand,  &c.,  will  go  far  toward  determining  the  question 
as  to  how  far  west  the  railroad  can  be  safely  occupied  and  held.  Should 
circumstances  render'  it  advisable  to  seize  and  hold  Raleigh,  the  main 
north  and  south  line  of  railroad  passing  through  Goldsborough  should 
be  so  effectually  destroyed  for  considerable  distances  north  and  south 
of  that  point  as  to  render  it  .impossible  for  the  rebels  to  use  it  to  your 
disadvantage.  A great  point  would  be  gained  in  any  event  by  the 
effectual  destruction  of  the  Wilmington  and  Weldon  Railroad. 

I would  advise  great  caution  in  moving  so  far  into  the  interior  as 
upon  Raleigh.  Having  accomplished  the  objects  mentioned  the  next 
point  of  interest  would  probably  be  Wilmington,  the  reduction  of  which 
may  require  that  additional  means  shall  be  afforded  you.  I would  urge 
great  caution  in  regard  to  proclamation.  In  no  case  would  I go  beyond 
a moderate  joint  proclamation  with  the  naval  commander,  which  should 


Chap.  XX.] 


353 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


say  as  little  as  possible  about  politics  or  the  negro.  Merely  state  that 
the  true  issue  for  which  we  are  fighting  is  the  preservation  of  the  Union 
and  upholding  the  laws  of  the  General  Government,  and  stating  that 
all  who  conduct  themselves  properly  will  as  far  as  possible  be  pro- 
tected in  their  persons  and  property.  . , 

You  will  please  report  your  operations  as  often  as  an  opportunity 

offers  itself.  _ p 

With  my  best  wishes  for  your  success,  1 am,  <&c., 

J geo.  b.  McClellan, 

Major- General , Commanding -in- Chief , 


p g# Any  prisoners  you  take  should  be  sent  to  the  most  convenient 

Northern  post.  You  can,  however,  exchange  any  of  them  for  any  of 
your  own  men  who  may  be  taken. 


General  Orders,  t Hdqrs.  of  the  Army,  A.  G.  O,, 

2.  j Washington , January  7,  1862. 

The  State  of  North  Carolina  will  hereafter  constitute  a separate  mili- 
tary command,  known  as  the  Department  of  North  Carolina,  under  the 
command  of  Brigadier-General  Burnside. 

By  command  of  Major-General  McClellan  : ^ pjjOMA^ 

Adjutant-  General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

]sj0.  i.  f Hatter  as  Inlet , January  13,  1862. 

In  accordance  with  General  Orders,  No.  2,  from  the  Headquarters  of 
the  Army  I hereby  assume  command  of  the  Department  of  North 


Carolina. 


A.  E.  BUENSIDE, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Navy  Department, 

January  18,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan, 

Commanding -in-  Chief : 

Sir  : I inclose  herewith  copy  of  letter  received  from  Commander 
Glisson,  and  by  him  from  Lieutenant  Braine,  in  relation  to  affairs  at 
Wilmington,  N.  C. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

G.  Y.  FOX, 

. Assistant  Secretary. 

[Incloaure.  ] 

U.  S.  Steamer  Monticello, 

Off  Wilmington , W.  0.,  January  5,  1862. 

Commander  Oliver  S.  Glisson, 

Senior  Officer  of  Wilmington  Blockade , TJ.  S.  S.  Mount  Vernon: 
Sir  : On  December  30,  1861,  two  contrabands  came  off  from  the  bat- 
23  R R — VOL  IX 


354 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chai*.  XX. 


teries  at  New  Inlet  and  they  gave  me  the  following  information  as  re- 
gards the  state  of  affairs  here  and  up  at  Wilmington,  N.  0. : 

At  New  Inlet  in  and  about  the  fortifications  (which  consist  of  one 
battery  of  twelve  guns,  one  earth  casemate  of  six  guns,  one  small 
battery  of  three  guns,  and  one  battery  on  Zeeke’s  Island  of  four  guns) 
there  are  stationed  about  one  regiment  and  a half  (1,400  men)  also  four 
field  pieces,  horse  artillery.  All  the  guns  in  these  batteries  are  short  32- 
pounders.  One  of  these  contrabands,  named  Kent  Newton,  lias  worked 
for  several  years  on  the  ferry-boats  that  cross  the  river  at  Wilmington 
He  says  that  on  Friday,  the  27th  day  of  December,  1861,  the  steamer 
Gordon  or  Theodore  arrived  at  Wilmington  from  Cuba  with  a cargo 
of  coffee  and  fruit,  and  that  she  was  partially  disabled,  having  been 
struck  by  a shot,  passing  through  the  wheel-house. 

The  crew  of  the  Gordon  or  Theodore  left  on  the  28th  instant  for 
Charleston,  S.  0.,  by  land;  he,  Kent  Newton,  ferried  them  across  the 
river.  While  crossing  they  told  him  that  they  left  their  guns  at  Char- 
leston, S.  C.,  before  going  to  the  West  Indies,  and  that  they  sailed 
under  the  English  flag. 

There  are  very  few  soldiers  at  Wilmington.  About  the  25th  of  De- 
cember, 1861,  three  regiments  arrived  from  Manassas  Junction  per 
railroad.  He  also  states  about  the  middle  of  December  the  rebels 
towed  down  by  steamer  Uncle  Ben  four  large  heavy  wooden  cribs 
diamond  shape,  about  40  or  50  feet  wide  and  12  feet  deep,  which  they 
moved  on  the  shoal  and  in  the  channel- way  close  together  at  the  north- 
western end  of  Zeeke’s  Island,  and  filling  three  of  them,  as  he  saw,  with 
rocks,  sunk  them,  and  completely  blocked  the  channel  of  New  Inlet  at 
that  point,  and  the  fourth  one  they  said  was  to  be  sunk  alongside. 

This  man’s  statement  appears  to  be  very  correct.  I have  questioned 
him  closely,  given  him  the  map  to  look  at,  and  had  him  mark  exactly 
where  these  cribs  were  sunk,  and  admitting  his  statement  is  true  (and 
he  appears  to  be  a very  intelligent,  active  “ nigger”),  New  Inlet  is  at 
least  for  the  present  effectively  blockaded,  as  you  will  see  by  referring 
to  a harbor  chart  of  that  place.  During  the  month  of  November  that 
we  blockaded  this  place  we  frequently  saw  a small  steam-tug  come 
past  Zeeke  s Island  out  in  the  channel-way  to  the  [eastward  I toward 
the  outer  bar,  where  she  would  lay  under  the  cover  of  the  batteries. 

During  this  period  of  our  blockade  in  the  months  of  December  and 
January,  covering  a period  of  over  three  weeks,  although  we  have  seen 
the  same  steamer  repeatedly  in  Wilmington  Biver  and  on  the  western 
side  ot  Zeeke  s Island,  she  has  never  come  to  the  eastward  of  Zeeke’s 
Island  or  m the  outer  channel-way,  as  she  did  during  the  month  of  No- 
\ ember.  This  fact  has  been  the  subject  of  comment  among  the  oflicers, 
and  now  that  we  are  aware  of  the  fact  that  these  cribs  have  been  sunk 
in  the  channel  at  Zeeke’s  Island,  I know  that  it  is  an  impossibility  for 
her  to  pass  or  any  other  vessel  drawing  9 feet  of  water.  I make  this 
statement  for  your  information. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  L.  BRAINE, 

Lieutenant , Commanding  U.  S.  3.  Monticello. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

Hatteras  Inlet , January  26,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  Georoe  B.  McClellan, 

Commanding  U.  3.  Army , Washington j 
General  : I beg  leave  to  give  you  herewith  a report  of  our  progress 


Chap.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


355 


thus  far.  We  left  our  anchorage  at  Annapolis  on  Thursday,  the  9th 
instant,  and  after  a protracted  passage,  owing  to  dense  fogs,  arrived  at 
Fort  Monroe  Friday  night  at  12  o’clock. 

Leaving  Fort  Monroe  on  Saturday  at  10  p.  m.  we  proceeded  at  once 
to  sea,  but  owing  to  fogs  on  Sunday  and  Sunday  night  our  progress 

was  very  slow.  , ■ , _ . , 

Monday,  the  13th,  the  weather  cleared ; but  a very  heavy  wind  and 
rough  sea  caused  many  of  our  vessels  to  labor  very  heavily,  and  some 
.were  obliged  to  cut  loose  from  the  vessels  they  were  towing.  Most  ol 
them,  however,  came  over  the  bar  and  anchored  inside  the  harbor  about 
12  in.’  on  the  13th,  just  in  time  to  escape  the  severe  gale  of  Monday  night 

and  Tuesday.  , , 

The  propeller  City  of  Kew  York  ran  onto  the  bar  at  the  entrance  to 
the  harbor,  and  owing  to  the  severe  weather  and  want  of  small  boats  we 
could  render  her  no  assistance.  She  was  laden  with  supplies  and  ord- 
nance stores,  and  both  vessel  and  cargo  have  proved  a total  loss. 

I had  been  led  to  suppose,  from  conversation  with  Colonel  Hawkins, 
that  we  should  find  pilots  here  whose  experience  in  navigating  the 
harbor  would  be  of  great  service,  but  I find  great  difficulty  in  accom- 
plishing my  work  for  want  of  proper  accommodations.  The  harbor 
with  our  fleet  at  anchor  is  so  much  crowded  that  we  have  suffered 
much  from  collision  and  running  aground,  and  the  want  of  tow-boats  ol 
light  draught  has  been  and  still  is  one  of  our  most  serious  hinderances. 
The  boats  chartered  in  Baltimore  have  none  of  them  arrived.  The 
reason  of  this  delay  I am  utterly  at  a loss  to  comprehend.  The  channel 
to  the  sound  is  very  crooked  and  shallow,  there  being  on  the  bar  at  full 
tide  only  8 feet,  while  many  of  our  vessels  are  drawing  from  8 to  10 
when  not  loaded.  I confess  to  having  been  deceived  as  to  the  depth  of 
water  in  the  channel  and  on  the  bar,  and  had  supposed  that  any  vessel 
in  the  fleet  could  easily  pass  over,  but,  on  the  contrary,  it  has  taken 
every  vessel  that  has  gone  over  from  one  to  two  days  to  cross,  and  some 
it  will  be  entirely  impossible  to  get  over.  It  is  positively  necessary  that 
we  have  sent  us  at  once  powerful  tug-boats,  drawing  not  over  6 or  6J 
feet.  The  strength  of  the  tide  and  the  heavy  winds  that  prevail  here 
incessantly  render  it  impossible  to  accomplish  anything  without  these 
boats.  All  our  transport  vessels  have  to  be  lightened  of  their  troops 
before  crossing,  and  many  of  the  gunboats  are  also  obliged  to  be  relieved 
of  every  possible  weight.  In  order  to  do  this  we  need  the  tugs,  and  it 
is  necessary  that  they  be  of  such  draught  as  to  be  able  to  run  in  any 
part  of  the  harbor. 

I took  the  precaution  to  arrange  for  a supply  of  water  to  be  forwarded 
from  Baltimore  before  I left,  ordering  one  schooner  to  leave  each  day 
till  further  orders,  but  not  one  has  yet  arrived.  Our  supply  of  water 
is  nearly  out,  and  unless  we  can  receive  additional  supplies  our  troops 
must  slitter.  I have  made  requisition  on  Col.  A.  B.  Eaton  lor  addi- 
tional rations  for  my  command  and,  on  Colonel  Tompkins  for  transpor- 
tation. I shall  to-day  commence  to  build  a wharf  for  the  landing  of 
supplies,  &c.  This  lias  been  considered  impracticable,  but  the  neces- 
sity of  the  case  leads  me  to  the  effort,  though  I am  by  no  means  sure 
of  success.  Here,  too,  we  find  the  necessity  of  having  the  tug-boats  of 
light  draught.  In  landing  our  troops  from  transport  vessels  much  time 
is  necessarily  consumed  for  want  of  these  boats  that  can  come  alongside 
the  vessel.  The  numerous  shoals  and  bars  render  it  impossible  for 
la  rger  vessels  to  move  from  their  anchorage  without  danger  of  grounding. 
With  the  greatest  exertion,  and  amid  obstacles  that  have  seemed  in- 
surmountable, we  have  succeeded  in  getting  into  the  sound  six  of  our 


356 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


armed  vessels  and  three  of  the  transports.  These  vessels  will  carry 
some  4,000  to  5,000  men.  Several  of  the  other  vessels  are  now  hard 
aground,  and  it  is  impossible  to  see  how  they  are  to  be  got  off  without 
the  aid  of  more  powerful  tug-boats  than  we  now  have  at  our  command. 
The  enemy  have  full  knowledge  of  our  present  position,  and  have  already 
been  down  with  one  or  two  vessels  on  a reeonnoitering  expedition,  but 
our  boats  soon  gave  chase  and  drove  them  back.  I shall  not  feel  war- 
ranted in  making  any  advance  upon  the  enemy  till  I have  from  7,000  to 
8,000  men  in  full  position  for  battle. 

It  is  not  possible  for  any  one  not  on  the  spot  to  conceive  the  difficul- 
ties I have  to  encounter  in  accomplishing  the  duties  assigned  me.  The 
utter  barrenness  of  the  shore,  there  being  only  a sand  spit,  which  the 
high  tides  often  cover,  prevent  any  permanent  landing.  There  is  no 
timber  to  be  had  even  for  fuel,  and  the  great  difficulty  in  transporting 
men  and  baggage  to  and  from  the  shore  causes  great  delay.  Notwith- 
standing all  these  difficulties  our  men  are  cheerful  and  patient,  and  if 
we  soon  receive  the  necessary  aid  in  the  way  of  tug  boats  and  supplies 
of  water  I shall  proceed  with  much  confidence.  Let  me  urge  the  imme- 
diate necessity  of  having  these  tug  boats  forwarded  with  all  possible 
haste.  I send  these  dispatches  by  Mr.  F.  Shelden,  who  has  been  with 
us  from  the  first,  and  who  is  entitled  to  my  entire  confidence.  He 
will  give  you  in  detail  any  additional  information  you  may  require. 

I also  send  Quartermaster  Loring  to  Baltimore  by  the  same  boat  for 
the  purpose  of  forwarding  with  all  possible  speed  the  boats  and  water 
schooners  from  there.  I trust  you  will  instruct  your  chief  quarter- 
master to  grant  him  every  facility  in  aid  of  his  duties. 

I am,  general,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  BITENSIDE, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

• Hatter  as  Inlet , January  29,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan, 

Commanding  U.  8.  Army , Washington: 

General  : Since  my  last  report  on  the  26th  instant  we  have  been 
incessantly  engaged  in  getting  our  vessels  over  the  bar  into  the  sound. 
They  have  all  had  to  be  lightened  of  their  cargo  in  order  to  bring  them 
to  the  necessary  draught  for  crossing.  This  has  necessarily  consumed 
much  time,  owing  to  the  limited  means  for  towing  and  discharging.  We 
have,  however,  at  anchor  in  the  sound  this  morning  transportation  for 
twelve  regiments. 

All  the  necessary  arrangements  for  a considerable  movement  having 
been  made,  1 shall,  in  conjunction  with  Commodore  Goldsborougli,  at 
once  make  an  advance  upon  Boanoke  Island.  These  arrangements  have 
all  been  made  in  the  best  spirit  and  we  have  received  much  valuable 
assistance  from  the  commodore’s  vessel.  Of  the  eight  tug  boats  ordered 
from  Baltimore  only  one  has  arrived ; the  other  seven  are  still  at  Old 
Point  Comfort,  afraid  to  go  out  to  sea.  The  want  of  these  boats  has 
been  a most  serious  hinderance  to  our  progress.  I have  never  under- 
taken a work  that  has  presented  so  many  obstacles. 

Since  our  last  dispatch  four  water  schooners  have  come  in,  affording 
us  much  relief.  We  look  for  others  daily.  The  inclosed  list  of  vessels 
will  show  you  our  strength  now  at  anchor  in  the  sound. 

The  health  of  the  troops  has  been  and  still  is  very  good,  considering 
their  long  confinement  on  shipboard,  and  the  men  are  all  eager  for  a 


Chap.  XX.] 


357 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

forward  movement.  I have  landed  at  this  point,  and  shall  leave  in 
charge  of  General  Williams  the  Eighty -jjinth  New  York,  Sixth  New 
Hampshire,  Eleventh  Connecticut  Regiments,  with  the  Rhode  Island 
Battery.  I find  I cannot  use  so  many  men  to  advantage  upon  the 
island,  and  these  regiments,  under  the  care  of  General  Williams,  will  be 
ready  and  accessible  at  all  times. 

In  my  last  I made  mention  of  Colonel  Hawkins  in  a way  that  may 
convey" to  you  a wrong  impression.  . _ . , . , 

The  pilots  were  engaged  for  service  in  the  harbor  and  m the  sound, 
but  failed  to  fulfill  their  contract,  either  from  unwillingness  or  incom- 
petency, and  we  have  suffered  much  for  want  of  experienced  men  m 
towing  the  vessels. 

I neglected  to  mention  in  my  last  dispatch  a painful  occurrence  that 
happened  on  the  15th  during  a heavy  blow.  A boat  containing  Colonel 
Allen  and  Burgeon  Weller,  of  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  Regiment,  with  a 
boat’s  crew,  was  upset  in  the  breakers  while  returning  from  this  ship  to 
his  own  vessel,  he  having  come  on  board  to  report  the  arrival  of  his 
command.  The  colonel  and  surgeon  were  both  drowned.  Their  bodies 
were  recovered  and  will  be  sent  home  by  the  Suwanee  to-day. 

The  bark  John  Trucks,  with  Fifty-third  Regiment  New  York  V olun- 
teers  Col.  L.  J.  D’Epineuil,  arrived  here  after  a long  passage,  but  owing 
to  the  great  draught  of  the  vessel  and  the  consequent  impossibility 
to  bring  her  over  the  bar  and  the  difficulty  of  landing  her  troops  she 
was  ordered  back  to  Fort  Monroe  on  the  26th  to  report  to  General 

^The  brigadier-generals  have  all  been  incessant  in  their  labors,  and 
the  best  of  feeling  pervades  the  whole  command,  both  among  officers 
and  men.  The  weather  for  the  last  two  or  three  days  has  been  bright 
and  clear,  and  everything  evinces  a much  more  cheerful  aspect  than  at 
the  time  of  my  last  dispatch. 

Friday,  January  31. 

Yesterday  afternoon  five  of  the  tug-boats  from  Baltimore  came  in 
and  anchored  inside  the  bar.  We  immediately  put  them  to  work 
in  towing  over  the  remainder  of  the  vessels,  and  with  their  assistance 
we  now  have  at  anchor  in  deep  water  all  the  vessels  we  intend  to 
take  up  the  sound.  Having  had  to  lighten  these  vessels  of  their 
troops  and  of  everything  that  could  be  taken  from  them,  some 
time  will  be  required  to  re-embark  the  troops  and  reload  them.  We 
are  busily  engaged  now  in  this  work  and  in  supplying  them  with 
water  and  provisions,  ready  fof  a forward  movement,  and  hope  very 
soon  to  be  under  way.  The  Eastern  State  returned  from  Fort  Monroe 
last  evening,  bringing*  a large  mail.  Owing  to  her  drawing  so  much 
water  we  shall  not  attempt  to  take  her  over  the  bulkhead,  but  leave 
her  for  other  purposes  in  the  harbor. 

Early  this  morning  a sail  was  seen  approaching  as  from  the  opposite 
side  of  the  sound.  One  of  the  picket  gunboats  was  sent  out  to  meet  her 
and  soon  brought  her  in.  She  proved  to  be  a small  schooner  from  Mid- 
dletown, a point  nearly  opposite  where  we  are  now  lying.  She  was 
laden  with  pine  wood  and  had  on  board  5 men,  deserters  from  the  camp 
at  Middletown.  They  Report  about  600  men  at  Middletown  under  arms. 
These  are  all  poorly  equipped  and  armed  with  smooth-bore  flint-lock 
muskets,  and  not  at  all  inclined  to  resist  the  landing  of  the  Federal 
forces.  The  men  have  been  detained  and  are  now  on  board  this  vessel. 

I have  the  honor,  General,  to  be  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Brigadier- General, 


358 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


Abstract  from  return  of  the  Department  of  North  Carolina  for  the  month  of  January,  1862. 


* 

Troops. 

Present  for  duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Infantry. 

Artillery. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Officers. 

Men. 

1st  (Foster’s)  Brigade 

168 

14  L 
116 
66 

3,  973 
3,  364 

2 613 

4,  363 
3,  697 
2, 867 
1,  902 

2d  (Reno’s)  Brigade 

3d  (Parke’s)  Brigade 

Williams’  brigade 

lj  603 

6 

165 

Total 

491  11,553 

6 

165 

12,  829 

Organization  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  North  Carolina , January 

31.  1862. 


Brig.  Gen.  Ambrose  E. 
First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster. 

10th  Connecticut,  Col.  Charles  L.  Russell. 
23d  Massachusetts,  Col.  John  Kurtz. 

24th  Massachusetts,  Col.  Thomas  G.  Ste- 
venson. 

25th  Massachusetts,  Col.  Edwin  Upton. 
27th  Massachusetts,  Col.  Horace  C.  Lee. 

Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Jesse  L.  Reno. 

21st  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  Alberto  C. 
Maggi. 

9th  New  Jersey,  Lieut.  Col.  Charles  A. 
Heckman. 

51st  New  York,  Col.  Edward  Ferrero. 
51st  Pennsylvania,  Col.  John  F.  Hart- 
ranft. 


Burnside  commanding. 

Third  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Parke. 

8th  Connecticut,  Col.  Edward  Harland. 
9th  New  York,  Col.  Rush  C.  Hawkins. 
53d  New  York/  Col.  L.  J.  D’Epineuil. 
4th  Rhode  Island,  Col.  I.  P.  Rodman. 
5th  Rhode  Island  (battalion),  Maj.  John 
Wright. 

Williams 1 Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Williams. 

11th  Connecticut,  Lieut.  Col.  C.  Mathew- 
son. 

6th  New  Hampshire,  Col.  Nelson  Con- 
verse. 

89th  New  York,  Col.  H.  S.  Fairchild. 

48th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  James  Nagle. 

1st  Rhode  Island  Artillery,  Battery  F, 
Capt.  James  Belger. 

1st  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  C,  Capt. 
f Lewis  O.  Morris. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

Pamlico  Sound,  February  3,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan,  Comdg.  U.  S.  Army,  Washington: 

General  : Owing  to  the  many  difficulties  I have  met  with  in  the 
transportation  of  troops  and  supplies  into  the  sound,  together  with  the 
want  of  more  vessels  that  could  be  of  service  in  shallow  water,  I have 
felt  compelled  to  avail  myself  of  all  the  resources  within  my  reach 
to  forward  my  command4  as  speedily  as  possible.  I have  therefore 
detained  for  service  here  the  steamer  S.  B.  Spaulding,  having  been 
assured  that  she  was  well  suited  to  the  navigation  of  the  waters  of  this 
sound.  The  result  has  proved  the  correctness  of  this  statement,  as 


Absent. 


3IIAR.  XX. J 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


359 


she  has  been  brought  over  the  Bulkhead  with  less  difficulty  than  any 

of  mv  transport  vessels.  , , 

1 feel  confident  that  this  step  will  meet  with  your  approval,  when 
you  are  fully  informed  as  to  the  emergencies  of  the  case.  As  soon  as 
I can  make  a permanent  landing  of  a portion  ot  my  forces  I shall  re- 
turn the  Spaulding  to  Fort  Monroe.  . , ,, 

For  the  same  reasons  as  in  the  above  case  I have  also  detained  the 
propeller  Virginia,  being  confident  that  the  necessities  ot  the  case  and 
the  good  of  the  public  service  warranted  me  m so  doing.  She  will  be 
returned  to  Old  Point  as  soon  as  I can  possibly  dispense  with  her  serv 

ICThe  weather  for  the  last  two  or  three  days  has  beeu  such  as  to  retard 
our  progress  very  considerably.  The  winds  have  been  so  fresh  and  the 
sea  so  rough  that  it  has  been  with  the  greatest  difficulty  that  we  could, 
even  with  the  assistance  of  the  tugs,  pass  from  one  vessel  to  another; 
we  have,  however,  been  constantly  at  work,  and  the  preparations  for 
an  advance  are  now  rapidly  drawing  to  a close,  The  vessels  that  hate 
suffered  from  collisions  and  other  causes  we  are  endeavoring  to  repair, 
and  with  one  or  two  exceptions  have  succeeded  in  rendering  them  again 
serviceable.  Having  understood  that  a force  of  some  5,000  ot  the  en- 
emy were  at  Nag’s  Head,  opposite  Roanoke  Island,  orders  were  issued 
bv  Commodore  Goldsborough  for  the  Chippewa,  now  <jjf  the  blockad- 
ing force  off  Wilmington,  to  proceed  at  once  to  Nag  s Head  for  active 
service.  These  orders  were  forwarded  by  the  Eastern  State  on  Satur- 
day, the  1st  of  February,  and  the  return  of  the  vessel  is  now  hourly 

The  storm  has  considerably  abated,  and  we  are  now  in  hopes  to  be 
underway  by  to-morrow  or  at  farthest  the  day  after.  Our  vessels  are 
nearly  ready,  and  nothing  but  violent  weather  will  now  prevent  our 
getting  off. 

I am,  General,  your  very  obedient  servant,  Bn)Ej 

Brigadier- General. 


List  of  vessels  now  at  anchor  in  Pamlico  Sound. 

TRANSPORTS.  GUNBOATS. 

Men. 


S.  R.  Spaulding 

Guide 

Cossack 

Geo.  Peabody.. 

Northerner 

New  Brunswick 

New  York 

Virginia 

Eastern  Queen 
Brig  Dragoon . . 


400 

700 

700 

800 

1,000 

700 

700 

500 

875 

300 


Picket . . . 
Vedette  . 
Lancer  .. 
Pioneer  . 
Ranger.. 
Hussar  .. 
Chasseur 
Sentinel . 


Men. 


300 

450 

400 

450 

400 

400 

450 


General  Orders, 
No 


o. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

Pamlico  Sound , February  3,  1862. 

This  expedition  being  about  to  land  on  the  soil  of  North  Carolmay 
the  general  commanding  desires  his  soldiers  to  remember  that  they  are 
here  to  support  the  Constitution  and  the  laws,  to  put  down  rebellion, 
and  to  protect  the  persons  and  property  of  the  loyal  and  peaceable 


360 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


citizens  of  the  State.  In  the  inarch  of  the  army  all  unnecessary  injury 
to  houses,  barns,  fences,  and  other  property  will  be  carefully  avoided 
and  in  ail  cases  the  laws  of  civilized  warfare  will  be  strictly  observed! 

Wounded  soldiers  will  be  treated  with  every  care  and  attention,  and 
neither  they  nor  prisoners  must  be  insulted  or  annoyed  by  word  or  act. 
With  the  fullest  confidence  in  the  valor  and  character  of  his  troops  the 
commanding  general  looks  forward  to  a speedy  and  successful  termina- 
tion of  the  campaign. 

By  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  A.  E.  Burnside : 

LEWIS  RICHMOND, 

Assistant  A djutant-  Gen eral. 


Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

February  10,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina: 

General  : Major-General  McClellan  directs  me  to  acknowledge  the 
receipt  of  your  letters  of  January  29  and  February  3,  and  to  say  in  re- 
ply that  he  deeply  regrets  that  you  have  had  so  many  difficulties  to 
contend  with  ; he  is  glad,  however  to  learn  that  you  have  overcome 
them.  You  have  succeeded  much  better  than  he  could  expect  and  he 
is  perfectly  satisfied.  He  has  heard  to-day  several  rumors  of  an  action 
at  Roanoke  Island,  and  is  confident  that  iie  will  hear  to-morrow  or  the 
next  day  of  your  complete  success. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  Y.  COLBURN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Washington,  D.  C.,  February  10,  1862. 
General  Ambrose  E.  Burnside  : 


My  Dear  Old  Burn.:  Your  dispatches  of  29th  January  and  3d 
February  received  yesterday,  together  with  your  private  notes.  I feel 
for  you  in  your  troubles,  but  you  have  borne  yourself  nobly  in  difficul- 
ties more  trying  than  any  that  remain  to  you  to  encounter,  and  the  same 
energy  and  pluck  that  has  carried  you  through  up  to  the  present  will 
take  you  through  to  the  end. 

We  hear  various  rumors  to-day  about  firing  at  Roanoke  Island.  I 
hope  to  hear  to-morrow  that  you  have  taken  it.  In  any  event  I shall 
feel  sure  that  you  have  done  all  that  a gallant  and  skillful  soldier  can 
accomplish.  We  are  in  statu  quo  here;  have  gained  a great  point  in 
Tennessee  by  the  capture  of  Fort  Henry,  which  opens  the  road  to  us 
into  Tennessee. 

Everything  is  bright  except  the  roads.* 

****### 

God  bless  you,  old  fellow,  and  give  you  success. 

Ever  yours, 


geo.  b.  McClellan. 


Some  personal  matter  omitted. 


Chai\  XX  ] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


361 


General  Orders,  \ Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Carolina, 

^-0  j Boanolce  Island , February  10,  1862. 

The  names  of  the  forts  and  batteries  captured  on  this  island  in  the 
action  of  the  8th  of  February  are  hereby  changed  as  follows : 

I.  Fort  Huger,  at  the  head  of  the  Island,  to  Fort  Reno. 

II.  Fort  Blanchard  to  Fort  Parke. 

III.  Fort  Bartow  to  Fort  Foster. 

IV  The  inland  battery  is  named  and  will  be  called  Battery  Russell. 
Y*  The  battery  on  Shallow  Bag  Bay  is  named  and  will  be  called 
Battery  De  Monteil. 

By  — J Of  Brig.  <M.  A.  E.  tagj*  MCHMOND> 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Annapolis,  February  11,  1862. 

General  [J.  P.]  Hatch,  Commanding  Post : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  my  statement  of  my  unavoida- 
ble delay  on  board  the  John  Trucks  and  of  the  events  which  took  place 

during  that  time.  „ rT  ± 

When  General  Burnside’s  expedition  was  about  to  sail  lor  Hampton 
Roads  our  general  determined  on  placing  my  whole  command  on  board 
the  John  Trucks— sailing  bark  of  about  800  tons,  commanded  by  Cap- 
tain Collins.  The  men  would  be  crowded,  but  as  they  were  (according 
to  General  Burnside’s  own  statement)  only  to  remain  on  board  for  five 
or  six  days  at  most,  I made  no  objection,  but  simply  obeyed,  embarking 
my  men  on  the  5th  January,  1862. 

On  the  9th  of  the  above  month  we  left  Annapolis,  towed  by  the  gun- 
boat Sentinel,  Captain  Conellard,  and  then  began  the  series  of  misfor- 
tunes which  have  pursued  us  ever  since. 

On  the  10th  of  January,  during  a thick  fog,  we  went  ashore  at  Cove 
Point,  and  did  not  reach  Fort  Monroe  until  the  13th,  just  one  day  after 
the  departure  of  our  expedition  to  Hatteras  Inlet. 

We  were  detained  until  the  weather  cleared,  and  were  for  ten  days 
endeavoring,  but  in  vain,  to  reach  Hatteras,  where  we  arrived  at  last 
in  a pitiable  condition,  after  ten  days  spent  at  sea  battling  against  the 
elements,  in  an  overcrowded  vessel  with  700  men  on  board. 

We  were  barely  anchored  at  about  6 miles  from  shore  and  in  sight  of 
the  fleet  when  a furious  storm  of  northwest  wind  arose  and  blew  for 
ten  days,  after  which  I at  last  got  to  shore  and  reported  to  Generals 
Parke  and  Burnside. 

The  fleet  was  then  inside  the  inlet  as  ready  for  action  as  it  was  pos- 
sible to  be  after  a fortnight  of  storms  and  gales  which  had  dispersed 
or  at  least  delayed  eleven  vessels,  of  which  we  were,  after  all,  the  first 
that  arrived  safely.  The  water  schooners  were  not  yet  in  sight,  nor 
had  the  tug-boats,  so  indispensable  to  the  speedy  communication  of 
orders,  arrived. 

General  Burnside  had  no  lightening  vessels  at  his  disposal  on  board 
of  which  to  place  us,  and  as  the  John  Trucks  drew  too  much  water  to 
pass  the  bar,  he  found  it  impossible  for  my  men  to  be  put  on  shore,  and 
consequently  ordered  us  back  to  Fort  Monroe,  pledging  me  his  word 
and  honor  that  he  would  send  us  a steamer  to  fetch  us  thence  and 
enable  us  to  join  the  expedition. 

In  accordance  with  the  above  order  we  sailed  and  reached 


362 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chav.  XX. 


six  days  after,  but  my  men  being-  in  great  need  of  landing,  and 

there  being  no  ground  fit  for  them  to  do  so,  we  again  sailed,  and  reached 
Annapolis  on  the  evening  of  Wednesday,  6th  February,  1862. 

By  remaining  for  thirty-four  days,  700  on  board,  which  if  intended  to 
sail  is  only  calculated  to  carry  300,  and  which  was  consequently  over- 
crowded by  double  the  number,  the  Fifty- third  Begiment  New  York 
Volunteers  has  undergone  fatigue  and  miseries  a thousand  times  harder 
to  bear  than  ten  battles,  and  more  demoralizing  than  ten  battles  or 
even  a defeat.  Let  us  call  to  mind  the  English  pontoon,  between  the 
decks  of  which  an  enormous  number  of  prisoners,  deprived  of  all  means 
of  cleaning  themselves  or  the  ship,  were  gathered  and  overcrowded;  let 
us  remember  that  besides  this  we  were,  if  not  exactly  short  of  rations, 
at  least  compelled  to  the  strictest  economy  in  order  to  avoid  becoming 
so;  that  besides  we  had  not  soft  water  enough  even  to  dream  of  giving 
any  to  the  men  for  the  purposes  of  corporeal  cleanliness;  let  us  con- 
sider all,  and  I think  that  we  shall  still  have  a very  inadequate  idea  of 
what  the  sufferings  of  my  poor  men  have  been. 

I should  be  completely  misunderstood  if  it  was  thought  that  I in  any 
way  meant  to  complain . No ; we  have  been  the  victims  of  circumstances, 
hard,  undoubtedly,  but  unavoidable,  and  in  our  misery  we  ought  to 
thank  God  for  not  having  sent  to  destroy  us  some  of  those  fearful  con- 
tagious diseases  which  are  the  natural  consequences  of  men  being,  as 
we  were,  overcrowded  in  a small  place. 

In  making  the  above  picture  of  our  misfortunes  I have  only  in  view 
to  state  the  fact  that  my  men,  although  submitted  to  the  hard  disci- 
pline, which  is  so  needed  in  such  cases,  behaved  in  the  most  admirable 
manner;  that  they  were  ever  obedient,  calm,  and  resigned  to  their  fate. 
Like  faithful  soldiers,  which  they  are,  they  have  strictly  obeyed  the 
orders  of  our  general,  and  are  worthy  of  the  highest  consideration. 

I shall  perhaps  have  to  bear  the  blame  of  public  opinion  for  not  hav- 
ing protested  here  or  there;  for  not  having  done  this  or  that,  and  many 
will  perhaps  think  that  the  colonel  could  have  avoided  much  suffering  by 
acting  in  such  or  such  a way.  Let  them  think  so.  Let  even  my  men  be 
dissatisfied  with  me  now.  Time  will  clear  up  all  those  clouds,  and  if  the 
Fifty-third  Begiment  has  not  been  yet  of  any  utility  to  the  country,  the 
admirable  patience  and  abnegation  displayed  by  the  officers  and  men 
during  their  long  sojourn  on  board  has  at  least  shown  what  may  be 
expected  from  their  bearing  when  they  are  at  last  able  to  go  into  the 
field. 


Very  respectfully,  &c 


L.  J.  D’EPINEUIL, 
Colonel  Fifty -third  Flew  Yorlc  Volunteers . 


Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

Washington , February  12,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina: 

General:  We  are  all  rejoiced  to  hear,  through  rebel  sources,  the 
gallant  capture  of  Boanoke  Island  and  the  rebel  gunboats.  I hope  to 
receive  your  account  of  it  in  a day  or  two,  and  take  it  for  granted  that 
your  success  has  been  at  least  as  decisive  and  brilliant  as  indicated  by 
rebel  accounts. 

I am  glad  to  see  that  Commodore  Goldsborough  and  yourself  have 


'HAP.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


363 


mshed  the  enemy  so  rapidly  and  so  far.  I hope  that  the  effect  has 
*een  produced  of  drawing  the  attention  of  the  rebels  toward  Norfolk, 
fcc.,  so  that,  after  having  fully  secured  what  you  have  gained,  you  will, 
>v  a rapid  counter-movement  be  enabled  to  make  the  second  attack 
,vith  every  chance  of  success.  I still  hope  that  you  will  be  able  to  seize 
md  hold  Goldsborough,  as  well  as  gaining  possession  of  the  seaport  m 

You  will  have  heard  of  our  marked  success  in  Tennessee — the  capture 
>f  Fort  Henry — and  the  trip  of  our  gunboats  into  Alabama. 

Everything  goes  well  with  us,  but  your  success  seems  to  be  the  most 
orilliant  yet.  I expect  still  more  from  you.  While  in  the  sound,  please 
min  all  possible  information  as  to  the  possibility  of  attacking  Norfo  k 
?rom  the  south;  that  may  prove  to  be  the  best  blow  to  be  struck. 
Although,  as  I am  not  yet  quite  prepared  to  secure  it  as  it  should  be, 
t may  be  our  best  policy  to  defer  that  until  you  have  accomplished  all 
the  original  objects  of  the  expedition,  when  with  suitable  re-enforce- 
ments  you  may  attack  Norfolk  to  great  advantage. 

I regret  that  the  special  messenger  is  waiting  and  that  1 must  close 

this. 

Very  truly,  yours,  GE(J  B McCLELLAN, 

Major-General,  Commanding  TJ.  S.  Army . 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Carolina, 

^0.  s.  ] Roanoke  Island , February  15,  1802. 

1 In  this  department,  whenever  possible,  Divine  service  will  be  held 
by  the  chaplains  on  Sunday,  and  on  that  day  all  work  will  cease  ex- 
cepting such  as  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the  public  service.  The 
great  trials  and  labors  which  have  lately  prevented  the  proper  observ- 
ance of  this  day  being  over,  it  is  hoped  that,  in  thankfulness  for  our 
preservation  through  the  storms  and  the  dangers  we  have  passed  and 
for  the  great  victory  granted  us,  all  will  join  in  the  endeavor  to  keep 
it  sacred 

2.  In  order  to  preserve  the  health  of  the  command  the  brigade  com- 
manders will  direct  their  troops  to  avoid  as  much  as  possible  the 
swampv  parts  of  the  island,  not  to  bathe  in  the  sound  before  9 o’clock 
in  the  morning  or  later  than  3 in  the  afternoon,  and  not  bathe  or  wash 
their  clothes  in  swamp  water,  this  practice  engendering  chills  and  fever. 

Bv  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  A.  E.  Burnside: 

* « LEWIS  RICHMOND, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General . 


Proclamation  made  to  the  People  of  North  Carolina. 

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.,  February  16,  1862. 

The  mission  of  our  joint  expedition  is  not  to  invade  any  of  your 
rights,  but  to  assert  the  authority  of  the  United  States,  and  thus  to 
close  with  you  the  desolating  war  brought  upon  your  State  by  com- 
paratively a few  bad  men  in  your  mhjst. 

Influenced  infinitely  more  by  the  worst  passions  of  human  nature 
than  by  any  show  of  elevated  reason,  they  are  still  urging  you  astray 
to  gratify  their  unholy  purposes. 


364 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chav.  XX. 


They  impose  upon  your  credulity  by  telling  you  of  wicked  and  ever 
diabolical  intentions  on  our  part;  of  our  desire  to  destroy  your  freedom 
demolish  your  property,  liberate  your  slaves,  injure  your  women,  and 
such  like  enormities,  all  of  which,  we  assure  you,  is  not  only  ridiculous, 
but  utterly  and  willfully  false. 

We  are  Christians  as  well  as  yourselves,  and  we  profess  to  know  full 
well  and  to  feel  profoundly  the  sacred  obligations  of  the  character. 

No  apprehensions  need  be  entertained  that  the  demands  of  humanity 
or  justice  will  be  disregarded. 

We  shall  inflict  no  injury  unless  forced  to  do  so  by  your  own  acts, 
and  upon  this  you  may  confidently  rely. 

Those  men  are  your  worst  enemies.  They  in  truth  have  drawn  you 
into  your  present  condition,  and  are  the  real  disturbers  of  your  peace 
and  the  happiness  of  your  firesides. 

We  invite  you  in  the  name  of  the  Constitution  and  in  that  of  virtu 
ous  loyalty  and  civilization  to  separate  yourselves  at  once  from  theii 
malign  influence,  to  return  to  your  allegiance,  and  not  compel  us  tc 
resort  further  to  the  force  under  our  control. 

The  Government  asks  only  that  its  authority  may  be  recognized, 
and,  we  repeat,  in  no  manner  or  way  does  it  desire  to  interfere  with 
your  laws  constitutionally  established,  your  institutions  of  any  kind 
whatever,  your  property  of  any  sort,  or  your  usages  in  any  respect.* 

A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Department  N.  C. 

S.  C.  ROWAN, 

Commanding  Naval  Forces  in  Albemarle  and  Pamlico  Sounds . 


Washington,  February  20,  1862. 

General  Ambrose  E.  Burnside: 

General  : I have  only  time  to  write  a few  hasty  words.  Every- 
thing from  the  West  is  thus  far  satisfactory,  and  your  victory  has 
created  a profound  impression.  I still  hope  that  you  will  be  able  to 
seize  Goldsborough,  though,  in  the  uncertainty  that  exists  in  regard  to 
the  force  of  the  enemy  in  front  of  you,  I do  not  feel  able  to  give  you 
definite  instructions.  I feel  sure  that  you  will  gain  Beaufort.  We 
have  from  rebel  sources  a rumor,  yet  unconfirmed,  to  the  effect  that 
[T.  W.]  Sherman  has  taken  Savannah. 

In  great  haste,  very  truly,  yours, 

geo.  b.  McClellan, 

Major-General , Commanding  U.  S.  Army. 


Headquarters  Department  North  Carolina, 
Roanoke  Island , February  20,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  present  the  following  statement  of 
events  that  have  transpired  in  my  department  since  my  last  dispatch 
on  the  12th  instant : f 

After  the  occupation  of  this  island  by  our  troops  a few  irregularities 
occurred  in  the  way  of  destruction  of  property,  such  as  burning  of 

* Other  copies  of  this  proclamation  appear  to  have  been  signed  by  Flag-Officer  L. 
M.  Goldsborough  and  Brigadier-General  Burnside. 

tNot  found.  Reference  is  probably  to  bis  report  of  February  14,  see  p.  75. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


365 


JHAP.  XX.] 

'cnees,  taking  furniture  and  food  from  bouses,  killing  stock,  &c.  but 
n no  case  has  personal  violence  or  indignities  been  offered.  1 have 
ordered  an  investigation  to  be  made,  and  hnd  the  amount  of  damage 
lone  will  not  exceed  $2,000,  and  this  includes  the  stock  killed  for  food, 
which  seemed  to  be  almost  a necessity,  as  many  of  the  troops  were 
“ntirelv  out  of  rations  after  the  battle  and  it  was  impossible  to  land 
subsistence  stores  that  night  in  consequence  of  the  storm.  In  every 
instance  these  irregularities  were  committed  on  places  that  had  been 
temporarily  deserted,  the  occupants  having  fled  to  distant  parts  of  the 
island.  I have  ordered  payment  for  these  damages  to  be  made  to  those 
who  seem  well  disposed  to  our  Government  and  have  taken  the  oath  ot 
allegiance.  These  islanders  as  a body  are  ignorant  and  inoffensive, 
and  I am  quite  sure  have  not  aided  in  this  rebellion  more  than  they 
' were  forced  to  do  by  the  forces  that  were  quartered  upon  them,  and 
which  has  left  them  in  a very  destitute  condition,  impressing  their 
horses  and  cattle,  eating  their  provisions,  giving  them  in  return  worth- 
less shin-plasters.  They  have  also  been  prevented  from  Ashing,  which 
constitutes  their  chief  source  of  living,  from  fear  of  their  visiting  our 
port  at  Hatteras  Inlet  with  information  of  the  strength  and  movements 
of  the  enemy  at  this  place.  I have  given  them  protection  and  granted 
them  permission  to  pursue  their  work  unmolested.  They  seem  to  he 
delighted  at  the  arrival  of  our  troops,  and  nearly  every  man  on  the 
island  has  taken  the  oath  of  allegiance,  as  well  as  large  numbers  from 
the  neighborhood  of  Nag’s  Head,  Powell’s  Point,  and  many  from  the 
main  land.  In  cases  of  absolute  want  of  food  among  the  women  and 
children  subsistence  stores  have  been  issued.  This,  I trust,  will  meet 

the  approval  of  the  General  Commanding.  , , 

Our  troops  are  fast  improving  the  roads  on  the  island,  and  have 
materially  improved  in  point  of  cleanliness  and  comfort  the  winter 
barracks,  camp  grounds,  and  hospitals.  A wharf  some  500  feet  long 
has  been  built  at  Pork  Point  Battery  out  to  8-foot  water,  on  which  we 
can  readily  embark  our  troops  and  land  our  stores,  &o.  All  the  guns- 
of  the  forts,  with  two  exceptions,  have  been  unspiked  and  their  car- 
riages repaired.  Cartridges  have  been  made,  and  the  forts  are  now  m 
good  condition.  All  of  this  work  has  been  superintended  by  Lieut.  IX 
W.  Flagler  who  has  proved  himself  a most  competent  ordnance  officer* 
Small-arms  and  equipments  have  been  boxed  and  stored,  an  inventory 
of  which  will  be  forwarded  with  this  report.  Advantage  lias  been 
taken  of  the  few  days’  rest  here  to  repair  several  of  our  vessels  and  to 
clean  out  their  boilers,  &c.  The  health  of  the  command  is  excellent. 
The  wounded  are  all  doing  well  under  the  unwearied  attention  of  the 
medical  staff,  which  has  proved  itself  all  that  could  be  desired.  The 
troops  are  encamped  by  brigades,  the  commanders  of  which  are  per- 

fectiug  them  in  brigade  drill.  t „ T ...  , „ 

On  the  10th  instant  I sent  the  Picket,  Capt.  T.  P.  Ives,  with  two 
companies  of  the  Ninth  Regiment  New  York,  Col.  It.  C.  Hawkins,  to 
make  a reconnaissance  in  the  neighborhood  of  Nag  s Head.  They 
found  that  General  Wise  left  there  with  the  remnant  of  his  troops  on 
the  day  of  the  battle,  burning  the  large  hotel,  to  prevent  its  use  by  our 
troops'  and  destroying  a considerable  amount  of  public  property  that 
could  not  be  removed.  We,  however,  secured  a large  steam  mud-scow, 
a blacksmith  forge,  and  some  open  boats  and  flat-boats  loaded  witli 
wood . 

On  the  12th  I again  sent  a smaller  party,  under  my  aide-de-camp, 
Lieutenant  Pell,  which  succeeded  in  bringing  back  several  Sibley  tents 
and  a large  box  of  medical  stores.  Frequent  scouting  parties  have 


366 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


been  sent  over  the  island,  bringing  in  a considerable  quantity  of  mili- 
tary stores  concealed  by  the  rebels. 

On  the  18th  I joined  Flag-Officer  Goldsborough  in  ordering  an  expe- 
dition up  the  Chowan  River,  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  the  bridge 
over  the  Norfolk  and  Weldon  Railroad,  detailing  for  this  service  the 
Ninth  New  York,  Colonel  Hawkins,  who  were  transported  by  the  gun- 
boats of  Captain  Rowan,  detailed  by  the  flag-officer  for  this  purpose. 
1 hope  to  hear  from  them  by  to  morrow. 

On  the  19th  we  dispatched  a joint  expedition,  consisting  of  the 
Fifth  Rhode  Island  Battalion,  on  the  steamer  Union  and  three  naval 
launches,  under  the  immediate  direction  of  Captain  Jeffers,  of  the  Navy, 
up  Currituck  Sound,  for  the  purpose  of  reconnoitering  the  shores  and 
destroying  some  salt-works  that  were  reported  in  operation  on  the 
coast.  The  expedition  returned  this  evening,  and  report  that  the  im- 
portance of  the  works  was  very  much  exaggerated ; in  fact,  there  is 
no  organized  establishment  there.  A few  iron  kettles,  owned  by  differ- 
ent individuals,  have  been  used  from  time  to  time  to  boil  down  the 
sea-water  to  obtain  a supply  for  immediate  or  local  use.  They  found 
the  inhabitants  very  much  alarmed,  but  after  assuring  them  that  our 
purpose  was  not  to  harm  them  they  became  more  communicative,  and 
were  free  in  the  expression  of  their  opinion  that  they  had  been  deceived 
as  to  our  intentions. 

I have  ordered  General  Williams’  brigade,  with  the  exception  of  the 
Forty-eighth  Pennnsylvania  and  Captain  Morris’  company,  First  Artil- 
lery, to  this  place,  and  shall  as  soon  as  the  expedition  from  the  Chowan 
River  returns  make  some  rapid  movements  in  the  direction  indicated  in 
my  instructions.  I am  satisfied  that  our  best  policy  is  to  dismantle  the 
small  fortifications  at  different  points  on  the  sound  and  destroy  the 
means  of  transportation,  immediately  after  which  I.  shall  try  to  do  the 
more  important  work  which  I know  is  expected  of  me.  But  I beg 
here  to  say  that,  in  order  to  be  perfectly  secure  in  my  movements,  it 
would  be  well  to  have  my  force  increased  to  double  its  present  strength. 
I shall  not,  however,  hesitate  in  going  forward,  and  will  leave  the  matter 
of  re-enforcements  to  your  better  judgment.  But  one  of  the  light- 
draught  steamers  sent  for  some  time  since  has  arrived,  but  we  are  ex- 
pecting more  daily,  when  I shall  establish  a line  from  here  to  Old  Point 
Comfort,  byway  of  Oregon  Inlet,  in  the  following  manner:  By  steamers 
of  from  3£  to  4 feet  draught  from  here  to  the  inlet,  and  by  sea-going  pro- 
pellers of  from  6 to  7 feet  draught  from  there  to  Old  Point  Comfort.  I 
hope  the  Quartermaster’s  Department  will  hasten  to  send  me  at  once 
five  of  the  former  and  six  of  the  latter.  By  this  route  we  shall  avoid 
the  passage  of  Cape  Hatteras,  and  thus  save  over  100  miles,  which  is 
of  the  greatest  importance. 

Roanoke  Island  must  continue  to  be  the  central  point  from  which  all 
naval  and  military  movements  in  these  sounds  must  be  made. 

I have  issued  an  order  changing  the  names  of  the  forts  on  the  island 
as  follows:  Fort  Bartow,  at  Pork  Point,  to  Fort  Foster;  Fort  Huger,, 
at  Weir’s  Point,  to  Fort  Reno;  Fort  Blanchard,  the  intermediate  fort, 
to  Fort  Parke;  the  fort  on  south  point  of  Shallow  Bag  Bay  to  Fort  De 
Monteil,  and  the  battery  in  the  center  of  the  island  to  Battery  Russell. 
I propose  to  remove  the  guns  from  Fort  Parke  to  a fort  of  the  same 
name  to  be  built  at  North  Point,  and  the  guns  from  Battery  Russell 
to  a battery  of  same  name  to  be  built  on  Dolby’s  Point,  on  the  north 
point  of  Shallow  Bag  Bay.  I also  propose  to  build  a battery  either  at 
Broad  Creek  Point  or  Indian  Shells  Bank.  For  this  purpose  I have 
ordered  up  Lieutenant  Farquhar,  of  the  Engineers,  from  Fort  Hatteras. 


Chap.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


367 


We  shall  need  a supply  of  ammunition  for  these  guns;  at  least  300 
rounds  to  a piece.  I inclose  herewith  requisition  of  Lieutenant  Flagler 
for  the  same. 

Our  supplies  of  commissary  stores  have  been  ample,  and  with  what 
is  now  on  hand  and  ordered  we  have  enough  for  sixty  days.  I am  not 
so  sure  of  forage  and  coal.  It  has  been  ordered,  but  does  not  arrive  as 
promptly  as  I had  hoped  for.  The  steamer  S.  B.  Spaulding,  of  which  I 
wrote  to  you,  will  be  returned  to  Old  Point  Comfort  in  two  days. 

I beg  to  inclose  the  correspondence  with  General  Huger  in  reference 
to  exchange  of  prisoners,*  which  will  explain  itself,  and  I hope  my 
course  will  meet  with  the  approval  of  the  General-in-Chief.  I was  in- 
duced to  pursue  this  course  for  the  reason  that  the  sending  of  these 
prisoners  to  the  North  would  have  deprived  me  of  transportation  for 
at  least  three  regiments,  and  also  of  a considerable  force,  which  would 
have  been  necessary  to  guard  them  on  their  way  thither  ; besides,  if 
they  had  been  sent  North  there  would  have  been  a delay  in  the  ex- 
change of  some  days,  thus  prolonging  the  confinement  of  our  prisoners 
in  the  hands  of  the  rebels,  who  it  will  be  seen  by  the  terms  of  exchange 
are  to  be  released  at  once. 

Although  this  is  not  in  obedience  to  the  letter  of  my  instructions,  I 
am  sure  the  General-in-Chief  will  feel  that  I am  observing  the  spirit  of 
them.  Inclosed  please  find  an  accurate  list  of  the  prisoners,  with  a 
recapitulation.  The  original  parole  I still  hold,  but  will  forward  it  by 
the  next  mail.  The  prisoners  were  all  embarked  for  Elizabeth  City, 
under  the  direction  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Osborn,  Twenty-fourth  Massa- 
chusetts Begiment,  at  1 o’clock  p.  m.  to-day,  and  are  by  this  time  handed 
over  to  Major  Allston,  who  represents  General  Huger. 

The  flag-officer  has  kept  his  fleet  constantly  engaged  upon  the  most 
important  and  effective  service,  the  details  of  which  I do  not  mention, 
for  I know  he  will  keep  his  Department  thoroughly  informed  of  his 
movements. 

I beg  to  close  by  assuring  you  that  my  command  is  in  most  excellent 
discipline  and  spirits  and  anxious  for  another  forward  movement. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

A.  E.  BUBNSIDE, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Department  N.  C. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General , TJ.  S.  Army , Washington , D.  0. 


U.  S.  Flag-Steamer  Philadelphia, 

Croatan  Sound , A.  0.,  February  24,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina : 

1S1R : I am  directed  by  the  flag-officer  to  forward  to  you  the  inclosed, 
which  is  a copy  of  a dispatch  received  by  him  this  day  from  the  Secre- 
tary of  the  Navy. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENBY  YAN  BBUNT, 
Secretary  to  the  Flag-  Officer. 


* To  appear  in  Series  II.  Burnside’s  action  was  approved  by  dispatch  of  February 
22,  from  McClellan. 


368 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


[Inclosure.] 

Navy  Department,  February  14,  1862. 
Flag-Officer  L.  M.  Goldsborough, 

Commanding  North  Atlantic  Blockading  Squadron  : 

Sir:  Your  dispatches  of  the  9th  and  lOtli  instant,  by  the  bands  of 
your  private  secretary,  communicating  the  great  success  that  has  thus 
far  attended  the  expedition  into  the  waters  of  North  Carolina,  were  re- 
ceived this  morning,  and  I hasten,  in  the  name  of  the  President,  to 
thank  you  for  the  service  you  and  the  brave  men  connected  with  you 
have  rendered  the  country.  These  successful  achievements  of  our  Navy 
and  Army  in  North  Carolina  come  to  swell  the  current  of  cheering 
tidings  that  reach  us  from  the  West,  where  the  gallant  Foote,  with  his 
flotilla,  has  co-operated  with  the  Army  in  a successful  demonstration 
against  the  rebel  forces  in  Tennessee. 

Our  brave  and  patriotic  men  on  the  coast  and  in  the  interior  are  earn- 
ing a debt  of  gratitude  from  their  country. 

The  hearts  and  best  wishes  of  the  nation  have  been  with  you  through 
the  long  trials  you  have  endured,  and  most  sincerely  do  we  rejoice  with 
you  in  the  success  which  you  have  obtained. 

In  congratulating  you  and  the  officers  and  men  of  your  command 
the  Department  would  also  extend  congratulations  to  General  Burnside 
and  the  Army. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GIDEON  WELLES. 


Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

Washington , March  4,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside,  IJ.  S.  A. : 

General  : The  General-in-Chief  has  read  your  dispatches  of  the 
14th,  20th,  and  23d  February.  Your  course  merits  his  full  approval, 
and  he  desires  me  to  say  your  wants  shall  be  at  once  attended  to.  The 
subject  of  re-enforcements  will  meet  with  immediate  attention. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  THOMAS, 

Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

Boanolce  Island , March  5,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General,  Washington , I).  C.  : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  for  the  information  of  the 
General  Commanding  that  I have  now  embarked,  preparatory  to* a 
movement  designated  by  his  instructions,  the  whole  of  General  Beno’s 
brigade  and  half  of  each  of  the  brigades  of  Generals  Foster  and  Parke. 
I had  hoped  to  have  finished  the  entire  embarkation  of  the  three  bri- 
gades to-day,  but  the  severe  gale  now  prevailing  will  prevent.  It  is 
impossible  to  calculate  upon  the  time  necessary  to  make  movements  on 
this  coast.  At  this  season  of  the  year  there  are  either  gales  or  fogs 
five  or  six  days  in  a week. 

The  necessary  delay  here  has  probably  done  us  no  material  harm,  as 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


369 


Chap.  XX.] 

w have  been  making  a few  minor  movements,  which  have  served  to 
distract  the  enemy.  Colonel  Hawkins,  of  the  Ninth  New  York,  with 
h s redment!  together  with  the  Eighty-ninth  New  York  and  the  Sixth 
New  Hampshire,  will  he  left  to  garrison  the  island.  I have  some  move 
ments  on  foot  with  a view  to  breaking  up  the  communications  of  the 
enemy  the  result  of  which  I had  hoped  to  report  to  you,  but  the  severe 
weather  doubtless  delayed  the  return  of  the  expeditions.  It  possible  I 
shall  leave  here  with  three  brigades  to  morrow  night  and  make  a hasty 
descent  upon  New  Berne,  the  result  of  which  will  be  reported  to  you 

atI°sendbtoaNe1w>YorkSbyPthe  vessel  carrying  this  dispatch  all  the  sick 
and  wounded  that  will  not  be  fit  for  duty  in  sixty  days.  The  command 
generally  is  in  good  health.  I have  moved  since  my  last  dispatch  from 
Hatteras  Inlet  the  three  regiments  and  Belger’s  battery  of  light  ai  tillery , 
leaving  there  the  Forty-eighth  Pennsylvania  and  Captain  Morris  com- 
nanv  of  First  Artillery.  I propose  to  take  with  me  a poition  of  this 
company,  which  has  been  used  to  man  two  32-pounder  field  howitzers, 
for  which  horses  and  harness  were  issued  a month  since,  and  it  is  now 
a very  efficient  section  ot  artillery.  , , , T u „ 

The  order  relieving  General  Williams  from  this  department  has been 

received,  and  he  will  leave  Hatteras  Inlet  for  his  new  field  of  duty  by 

the  first  opportunity.  , * 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  your  very^b^ent^rvaiffi^ 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding  Department  A.  C. 


Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

Washington , March  10,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside,  U.  S.  A. : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  5th  instant  has  been  received.  I am 
instructed  to  inform  you  that  in  consequence  of 

ceived  that  the  enemy  is  abandoning  his  position  at  Centerville  and 
toward  Manassas,  and  that  he  has  retreated  from  his  batteries  near 
Aquia  Creek,  a forward  movement  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  has 
been  ordered  this  day,  to  seize  upon  any  advantage  that  may  oiler. 
You  can  make  your  arrangements  accordingly. 

1 am’  &C'?  L.  THOMAS, 

Adjutant-  General. 


General  Orders, 


) Hdqrs.  Boanoke  Island,  N.  C., 

-^0  2 ) March  12,  1862. 

The  contrabands  at  this  post  will  hereafter  be  placed  in  the  employ 
of  the  Government  upon  the  following  terms,  viz  : 

1.  Men  will  receive  $10  per  month,  one  ration,  and  soldier  s allowance 

°^2.1(Wonfen  will  receive  $4  per  month,  one  ration,  and  allowance  in 
money  equal  to  and  in  lieu  of  soldier’s  allowance  of  clothing. 

3.  Boys  between  the  ages  of  twelve  and  sixteen  will  receive  $4  per 

month,  one  ration,  and  soldier’s  allowance  of  clothing. 

4.  All  children  under ,the  age  of  twelve  will  receive  one  ration  and 
remain  with  their  parents. 

24  R R— VOL  IX 


370 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


5.  The  above  regulations  apply  only  to  contrabands  in  the  public 
service.  When  in  the  employ  of  officers  or  any  other  persons,  as  serv- 
ants or  in  any  other  capacity,  they  will  be  paid  by  the  person  in  whose 
employ  they  are  an  amount  in  money  equal  to  the  sum  total  of  the 
clothing  allowance,  rations,  and  money  expressed  in  the  above  regula- 
tions. 

All  persons  at  this  post  having  contrabands  in  their  employ  or  under 
their  control  will  report  in  writing  to  these  headquarters  their  names, 
ages,  sex ; where  they  come  from 5 the  names  of  their  owners,  and  how 
long  and  by  whom  they  have  been  employed. 

In  all  cases  they  wili  be  treated  with  great  care  and  humanity.  It  is 
to  be  hoped  that  their  helpless  and  dependent  condition  will  protect 
them  against  injustice  and  imposition. 

By  order  of  Col.  B.  0.  Hawkins,  commanding  the  post: 

JOHN  E.  SHEPARD, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


War  Department, 
Washington  City , D.  0.,  March  13,  1862. 
Major-General  Burnside,  Roanoke  Island  : 

General  : Dispatches  to  inform  you  of  the  state  of  military  opera- 
tions on  the  Potomac  will  be  sent  you  by  this  steamer. 

It  may  chance  that  it  will  be  important  for  you  to  co-operate  with 
contemplated  movements  of  Major-General  McClellan,  and,  if  so,  you 
will  place  your  - command  under  his  direction  and  obey  his  instruc- 
tions. 


By  the  return  of  this  steamer,  or  earlier,  if  possible,  you  will  make 
full  report  to  this,  Department;  1st,  of  the  state  of  your  command ; 2d,' 
the  operations  you  are  carrying  on  or  contemplate:  3d,  your  wants,  if 
there  be  any. 

Nothing  will  be  spared  that  can  be  furnished  by  this  Department 
that  may  contribute  to  the  safety  and  success  of  your  operations. 

Accompanying  this  you  will  find  a communication  by  General  Mc- 
Clellan respecting  your  operations,  to  which  you  will  conform  according 
to  your  circumstances  and  judgment. 

Yours,  truly, 


EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


[Inclosure.  1 


Adjutant -General  Thomas  : 


Fairfax  Court-House, 

March  13,  1862. 


In  doubtful  uncertainty  as  to  General  Burnside’s  position  and  how 
far  he  may  now  be  engaged  in  his  final  operations,  it  is  difficult  to  give 
him  very  precise  orders  at  present.  I think  it  would  be  well  that  he 
should  not  engage  himself  farther  inland  than  at  New  Berne,  and  should 
at  once  reduce  Beaufort,  leaving  there  a sufficient  garrison  in  Fort 
Macon.  He  should  at  once  return  to  Roanoke  Island,  ready  to  co- 
operate with  all  his  available  force  either  by  way  of  Winton  or  by  way 
of  Fort  Monroe,  as  circumstances  may  render  necessary.  I advise  this 
on  the  supposition  that  Captain  Fox  is  correct  in  his  opinion  that  Burn- 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


UHAP.  XX.] 


371 


side  will  have  New  Berne  this  week.  If  he  has  become  fairly  engaged 
in  the  movement  I would  not  stop  him. 

geo.  b.  McClellan, 

Major-General. 


War  Department,  Adjutant-General’s  Office, 

Washington , March  15,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside, 

TJ.  B.  Volunteers , Comdg .,  ffic.,  Roanohe  Island , A.  C. : 

Sir  : On  Sunday  last  the  iron-clad  steamer  Merrimac,  called  by  the 
rebels  the  Virginia,  ran  out  from  Norfolk,  attacked  our  blockading 
squadron,  destroyed  two  frigates  and  two  gunboats.  She  was  subse- 
quently beaten  back  in  a severe  battle  with  our  steamer  Monitor,  and 
has  not  since  attempted  to  come  out. 

The  rebel  army  has  retreated  from  Winchester  and  Manassas,  and 
retired,  without  fighting  a battle,  beyond  the  Rappahannock.  The  bat- 
teries on  the  Potomac  have  also  been  abandoned.  These  movements 
were  made  evidently  in  great  haste,  as  they  left  behind  pieces  of  artil- 
lery and  other  stores  which  they  had  not  time  to  destroy. 

The  President’s  Order,  No.  3,  herewith  inclosed,*  relieves  Major-Gen- 
eral McClellan  from  the  command  of  the  Army,  and  confines  him  to  the 
Army  of  the  Potomac.  The  Secretary  of  War  directs  that  you  make 
your  reports  and  returns  to  him.  He  also  directs  that  you  forward  dis- 
patches to  him  on  the  return  of  the  dispatch  vessel,  and  permit  no 
officer  to  detain  her  on  any  pretext  whatever. 

I inclose  herewith  a copy  of  a dispatch  from  Major-General  McClellan, 
dated  the  13th  instant.t 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  THOMAS, 

Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  District  of  Pamlico, 

March  15,  1862. 

Officer  Commanding  IT.  S.  Forces  at  New  Berne: 

Sir:  Lieutenant-Colonel  Crossan,  who  bears  this  flag  of  truce,  is  in- 
structed to  propose  to  you  on  my  behalf  a cessation  of  hostilities,  so 
far  as  he  and  the  men  under  his  command  are  concerned,  for  such  length 
of  time  as  may  be  necessary  to  enable  him  to  have  interred  the  bodies 
of  those  of  my  command  who  were  killed  in  the  action  of  yesterday.  J 
Verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  O’B.  BRANCH, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

{ 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

No.  51.  1 New  Berne , March  15,  1862. 

# # * # * # # 

4.  Brig.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster  is  hereby  appointed  military  governor  of 


* See  Series  I,  Vol.  V,  p.  54. 

t See  inclosure  to  Stanton  to  Burnside,  Marcli  13,  1862,  p.  370. 
t Answer,  if  any,  not  found. 


372 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


New  Berne  and  its  suburbs,  and  will  be  obeyed  and  respected  accord- 
ingly. 

5,  Brig.  Gen.  J.  G.  Foster,  military  governor  of  New  Berne,  will  direct 
that  the  churches  be  opened  at  a suitable  hour  to-morrow,  in  order  that 
the  chaplains  of  the  different  regiments  may  hold  Divine  service  in  them. 
The  bells  will  be  rung  as  usual. 

By  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  A.  E.  Burnside : 

LEWIS  RICHMOND, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

No.  19.  | Neio  Berne , March  19,  1862. 

1.  The  brigade  commanders  will  direct  that  their  men  have  40  rounds 
of  ball  cartridges  in  their  cartridge-boxes  at  all  times,  ready  for  imme- 
diate use. 

The  post  will  be  guarded  as  follows  : 

General  Foster  will  guard  the  approaches  to  the  town,  throwing  his 
pickets  out  some  4 or  5 miles,  with  strict  instructions  to  them  to  care- 
fully watch  every  way  of  entrance.  General  Reno  will  guard  the  line  of 
the  Trent  and  railroad  as  far  as  the  brick-yard,  throwing  out  his  pickets 
in  the  same  manner.  General  Parke  will  guard  from  Croatan  down  his 
line,  throwing  out  his  pickets  in  the  same  way. 

2.  No  officer  or  soldier  will,  except  on  duty,  be  allowed  outside  the 
lines  under  any  pretext  whatever. 

The  pickets  must  be  watchful,  strong,  well  pushed  out,  and  thor- 
oughly instructed  as  to  their  duty. 

By  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  A.  E.  Burnside : 

LEWIS  RICHMOND, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Special  Orders,  ^ Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

No.  56.  J New  Berne , March  20,  1862. 

1.  General  Foster  will  move  five  companies  toward  Kinston  up  the 
main  road  bordering  the  railroad  till  they  come  to  the  fork  of  the  road 
between  the  railroad  and  the  river  Neuse.  They  will  then  divide,  and 
move  up  both  roads  till  they  come  to  Batchelder’s  Creek,  and  will  burn 
both  bridges  over  the  creek.  The  force  will  then  retire  and  occupy  the 
fork  of  the  roads  and  a point  on  the  railroad  immediately  opposite,  the 
pickets  in  communication  with  each  other  visiting  occasionally  with 
sufficient  force  the  bridges  and  the  bridge  previously  burned  by  the 
enemy.  It  may  be  well  to  have  a patrol  occupy  the  fork  of  the  road, 
visiting  occasionally  the  river  Neuse.  General  Foster  will  also  detail 
four  companies  of  the  same  regiment  to  move  up  wbat  is  called  the 
Trent  road  to  the  line  dividing  Craven  and  Jones  Counties  and  occupy 
that  position,  keeping  a constant  patrol  from  the  swamp  on  the  right 
to  the  Trent  River  on  the  left,  distance  probably  2 miles.  He  is  author- 
ized to  direct  his  quartermaster  to  employ  such  labor  as  he  may  require 
to  throw  up  field  works.  The  remaining  company  will  remain  in  camp 
as  a camp  guard.  The  regiments  in  this  service  will  be  changed  as 
often  as  the  general  thinks  necessary. 

2.  General  Reno  will  order  a regiment  up  the  road  on  the  south  of 
the  Trent  River,  with  instructions  to  burn  the  bridge  10  miles  above 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


373 


CHAP.  XX.] 

this  place,  which  leads  to  Pollocksville.  The  force  will  then  Proceed 
to  the  town  of  Trenton,  and  burn  the  bridge  across  the  river  at  that 
place,  and  then  proceed  to  a point  5 miles  above,  and  burn  the  bridge  at 
that  place.  The  regiment  will  then  return  to  its  camp,  instructing  the 
people  that  all  communication  with  New  Berne  must  be  by  the  road  on 
the  south  side  of  the  Trent  and  over  the  ferry  and  bridge  at  the  city. 

The  intention  of  this  order  is  to  destroy  all  the  bridges  over  the  Trent 
except  the  one  near  the  city,  where  a strong  guard  must  be kept.  Per- 
gonal instruction  will  be  given  to  the  brigadier-generals  as  to  the  orders 
to  be  given  to  the  pickets. 

By  "■>  <*■>■*«•  E-  bS‘?I’eichmosd, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquabtebs  Depabtment  of  Nobth  Carolina, 

New  Berne , March  27,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington: 

I have  the  honor  to  state  that  since  my  dispatch  of  the  21st  instant 
we  have  been  organizing  and  sending  to  General  Parke  batteries  and 
ammunition  for  the  siege  of  Port  Macon.  He  now  occupies  with  his 
brigade  Morehead  City  and  Beaufort.  Considerable  delay  has  occur- 
red from  the  weather  and  the  burning  of  bridges  over  the  railroad  by 
the  rebels  immediately  after  the  taking  of  New  Berne.  The  bridge  over 
Newport  Kiver  has  required  a great  deal  of  labor  to  reconstruct  it.  It 
will  be  finished,  I think,  by  Saturday  night,  when  we  shall  be  able  to 
forward  things  with  much  greater  facility.  The  roads  are  very  bad, 
and  it  requires  an  immense  amount  of  labor  to  haul  the  heavy  articles 
from  the  head  of  Slocum’s  Creek  to  the  railroad.  Yesterday  I made  a 
visit  to  G eneral  Parke’s  brigade,  and  gave  him  some  more  definite  instruc- 
tions as  to  his  mode  of  proceeding.  I hope  when  the  enemy  sees  the 
ample  means  we  have  for  the  reduction  of  the  fort  he  will  conclude  to 
surrender 

The  expedition  to  Washington,  mentioned  in  my  last,  was  entirely 
successful,  and  productive,  I think,  of  most  excellent  results.  The 
enemy  deserted  the  batteries,  but  the  obstructions  were  still  m the 
river.’  A passage-way  for  our  steamers  was,  however,  very  soon  made 
by  our  submarine  engineers.  The  mayor  of  the  city  and  some  of  the  most 
respectable  citizens  met  the  vessels  some  distance  below  the  town  and 
conducted  them  up.  The  troops  landed,  under  the  command  of  Colo- 
nel Stevenson,  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  Begiment,  marched 
through  the  streets  of  the  city,  then  re-embarked,  after  hoisting  the 
Stars  and  Stripes  on  the  court-house,  and  then  returned  to  this  city. 
One  or  two  naval  vessels  were  left  there  for  a short  time.  The  light 
belonging  to  the  Hatteras  light-house,  which  had  been  m Washington 
for  some  time,  was  removed  up  the  Tar  Biver  in  a very  light-draught 
steamer,  owned  by  one  of  the  citizens,  who  was  a large  property-owner 
there.  Notice  has  been  given  him  that  he  must  return  the  bght  or  his 

property  will  be  seized  or  destroyed. 

The  negroes  continue  to  come  in,  and  I am  employing  them  to  the 
best  possible  advantage;  a principal  part  of  them  on  some  earth  torti- 
fications  in  the  rear  of  the  city,  which  will  enable  us  to  hold  it  with  a 
small  force  when  it  becomes  necessary  to  move  with  the  main  body. 
The  enemy  have  been  remarkably  quiet ; in  fact,  we  have  had  but  one 
meeting  of  the  outposts,  when  we  drove  their  pickets  from  their  position. 


374 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


There  is  nothing  now  of  which  we  stand  in  so  much  need  as  cavalry. 
I have  had  to  take  the  pieces  from  Captain  Belger’s  battery  and  organize 
it  into  a cavalry  company  in  order  to  keep  up  communication  with  my 
outer  line  of  pickets,  as  it  was  impossible  to  do  it  with  infantry. 

In  my  last  I gave  an  estimate  of  the  number  of  troops  necessary  to 
make  a rapid  move  into  the  interior,  and  I hope  the  Department  will 
find  it  convenient  to  send  among  the  first  of  his  troops  a good  regiment 
of  cavalry.  1 believe  I mentioned  in  my  last  that  these  regiments  should 
bring  with  them  a requisite  number  of  horses  and  wagons,  clothing 
and  ammunition,  at  least  100  rounds  per  man. 

. to  thank  the  Department  for  the  kind  and  too  liberal  apprecia- 
tion of  my  services  by  recommending  me  for  promotion. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 
^ „ A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

-Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina 


Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

Steamer  Commodore , April  2,  1802. 
Maj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina: 

General:  I expect  to  reach  Port  Monroe  to-day,  to  take  control  of 
active  operations  from  that  point.  The  line  of  operations  will  be  up 
the  Peninsula,  resting  our  line  on  the  York  River  and  making  Rich- 
mond the  objective  point.  In  the  course  of  events  it  may  become 
necessary  for  us  to  cross  the  James  below  Richmond  and  move  on 
if  y iir^  ^ ^as  now  become  of  the  first  importance  that  there 
shouid  be  frequent  communication  between  us,  and  that  I should  be 
informed  of  the  exact  state  of  things  with  you  and  in  your  front. 
I our  additional  regiments  should  have  reached  you  by  this  time. 

l am  entirely  in  the  dark  as  to  the  condition  of  your  operations 
against  Beaufort,  the  force  of  the  enemy  there  and  at  Goldsborough. 
Will  you  please  at  once  inform  me  fully,  stating  how  soon  you  expect 
to  be  m possession  of  Fort  Macon,  what  available  troops  you  will  then 
l.2*Ve,  opiating  on  Goldsborough,  what  can,  in  your  opinion,  be 
enected  there  m the  way  of  taking  possession  of  it,  of  neutralizing  a 
strong  force  of  the  enemy  there,  and  of  doing  something  toward  pre- 
venting the  enemy’s  retreat  from  Richmond.  On  the  other  hand, 
please  inform  me  what  you  can  do  in  the  way  of  a demonstration  at 
Wmton  on  Suffolk. 

You  will  readily  understand  that  if  I succeed  in  driving  the  enemy 
out  ot  Richmond  I will  at  once  throw  a strong  force  on  Raleigh  and 
open  the  communication  with  you  via  Goldsborough:  after  which  I 
nope  to  confi<f e to  you  no  unimportant  part  of  subsequent  operations. 

lalnng  ail  thmgs  into  consideration,  it  appears  probable  that  a move- 
ment m the  direction  of  Goldsborough  would  be  the  best  thing  for  you 
to  undertake,  as  you  can  make  it  in  larger  force  than  that  on  Winton, 
tor  as  soon  as  you  have  possession  of  Port  Macon  nearly  all  your  force 
will  be  available.  Great  caution  will,  however,  be  necessary,  as  the 
enemy  might  throw  large  forces  in  that  direction.  The  main  object  of 
the  movement  would  be  to  accomplish  that,  but  it  would  not  do 'for 
5 ou  to  be  caught.  AV  e cannot  afford  any  reverse  at  present.  I wish 
your  opinion  m regard  to  the  whole  affair. 

Very  truly,  yours, 


geo.  b.  McClellan. 


Chat.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


375 


General  Orders, 


) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

23.  ] New  Berne , April  2,  1862. 

1 The  corps  d’armee  now  in  occupation  of  this  department  will  at 
once  be  organized  into  three  divisions,  to  be  commanded,  according  to 
seniority  of  rank,  as  follows,  viz: 

First  Division  bv  Acting  Major-General  Foster. 

Second  Division  by  Acting  Major-General  Beno. 

Third  Division  by  Acting  Major-General  Parke. 

2 The  commanding  general  takes  great  pride  m presenting  to  his 
soldiers  extracts  of  letters  received  from  distinguished  sources,  which 
express  the  anxiety  with  which  their  motions  are  watched  by  the  Gov- 
ernment and  the  nation,  the  appreciation  of  the  suffering  they  have 
endured,  and  a grateful  acknowledgment  of  the  brilliant  victories 

tl*The^ General"  Assembly  of  the  State  of  Ohio  have  forwarded  resolu- 
tions  passed  by  them : 

Proffering  their  heartfelt  thanks  and  hearty  congratulations  on  ■ the  ^ih^nUvic- 
tories  in  North  Carolina,  which  they  regard  as  the  beginning  of  what  all  patriots  hope 
may  he  the  speedy  end  of  the  great  rebellion. 

General  Thomas,  Adjutant- General  United  States  Army,  writes: 

The  President  and  Secretary  of  War  have  specially  instructed  m< e^to  ^>ress  1 their 
hioti  appreciation  of  the  bravery  and  skill  displayed  by  the  nr,PA 

the  Department  of  North  Carolina  and  his  troops  m achieving  snccesses  at  once 
brilliant  and  fruitful.  They  have  not  failed  to  notice  also  a sure  sign  of  high  disci 
plineinthe  cheerful  spirit ‘with  which  obstacles  briefly  alluded  to  m reports  have 
been  overcome  in  the  field. 

Hon.  Edwin  M.  Stantou,  Secretary  of  War,  writes: 

The  report  of  the  late  brilliant  successes  of  the  United  States  forces  ™der  your 
command  at  New  Berne  has  afforded  the  highest  satisfaction  to  the  President  and 
to  this  Department  and  to  the  whole  nation,  and  thanks  *>r  distinguished  service 
are  again  tendered  to  you  and  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  your  commau  . 

It,  will  be  the  pleasure  of  the  Department  to  strengthen  and  support  you  to  the  utmost 
extent  within  its  power. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  A.  EfBurusitte:  BIOHMOHD> 

Assistant  Adjutant- General 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , April  3, 1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

* Secretary  of  War , Washington , 1).  0.  : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  thank  the  President  and  yourself  for  the 
very  complimentary  way  in  which  you  have  chosen  to 
services  of  my  command.  I have  had  your  kind  letter  published  to 
every  regiment  as  a general  order,  and  I am  sure  it  is  as  gratifying  to 
every  officer  and  soldier  in  my  command  as  it  is  to  myself.  1 must 
apologize  for  making  this  dispatch  very  short,  as  some  requisitions  from 
mv  chief  quartermaster  for  transportation,  &c.,  render 
a vessel  should  be  dispatched  at  once  for  Hatteras  Inlet  to  communi- 
cate with  a vessel  bound  North  from  that  place.  , 

To-morrow  I shall  dispatch  the  E.  S.  Terry  direct  to  3Sew  York  with 
the  convalescent  wounded,  and  will  send  by  her  a more  full  account  ot 

our  movements  since  our  last.  , ,,  m,  . A nrtp 

Four  regiments  of  re-enforcements  have  arrived,  the  Thud  and  One 


376 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


hundred  and  third  New  York,  Seventeenth  Massachusetts,  and  Second 
Maryland.  I have  assigned  them  to  the  different  brigades.  Their 
arrival  was  very  opportune,  as  the  enemy  are  concentrating  a very 
large  force  at  and  near  Kinston.  All  deserters  that  have  come  within 
our  lines  report  the  intention  of  the  enemy  to  move  upon  this  place. 
We  are  as  well  prepared  for  them  as  we  can  be  with  our  present  force, 
and  as  soon  as  sufficient  re-enforcements  and  transportation  arrive  I 
shall  move  upon  them,  unless  I receive  instructions  from  you  to.  make 
the  attack  on  Weldon  and  Gaston  instead  of  Goldsborough  and  Raleigh. 
You  will  remember  I mentioned  this  subject  in  one  of  my  dispatches 
from  Roanoke  Island. 

We  suffer  very  much  for  want  of  cavalry,  and  I hope  the  Department 
will  send  me  a good  regiment  at  once.  It  is  very  difficult  with  our 
present  means  to  keep  ourselves  posted  as  to  the  movements  of  the 
enemy,  and  in  the  absence  of  accurate  information  we  are  constantly 
receiving  most  fabulous  reports  of  their  great  strength  and  rapid  move- 
ments. That  they  are  concentrating  in  large  numbers  at  and  near 
Kinston  there  is  no  doubt.  My  force  here,  as  you  know,  is  weakened 
by  the  absence  of  General  Parke’s  brigade  and  the  necessity  of  guard- 
ing the  36  miles  of  railway  between  here  and  Beaufort.  Our  lists  of 
wounded  and  sick  are  very  large,  but  I hope  it  will  decrease  under  the 
constant  skillful  care  of  our  surgeons.  I beg  here  to  say  that  we  are 
much  in  need  of  more  surgeons,  which  you  were  kind  enough  to  say 
would  be  forwarded  if  required.  I hope  the  Surgeon-General’s  Depart- 
ment will  find  it  for  the  interest  of  the  public  service  to  see  that  any 
brigade  surgeons  that  may  be  sent  are  junior  to  Brigade  Surg.  W.  H. 
Church,  as  he  is  my  medical  director,  and  it  would  be  a very  serious 
disappointment  to  have  to  give  another  surgeon  his  position. 

General  Parke  is  progressing  but  slowly  with  the  siege  of  Fort 
Macon.  We  find  it  very  difficult,  with  the  limited  means  of  transpor- 
tation, to  transport  the  heavy  siege  batteries  and  supplies,  but  I hope 
to  report  good  progress  within  a week. 

I hope  the  Quartermaster’s  Department  will  not  fail  to  send  at  once 
the  transportation  required  by  mf  chief  quartermaster.  The  horses 
and  wagons  can  be  sent  on  light-draught  schooners,  such  as  we  used 
when  we  moved  from  Annapolis. 

We  have  suffered  very  much  for  want  of  fresh  meat,  which  was  to 
have  been  sent  from  Baltimore,  but  not  a single  head  lias  arrived. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Brigadier -General*  Gomdg.  Department  of  North  Carolina. 


Headquarters  Department  oe  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , April  7,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington , D.  C. : 

I have  the  honor  to  report  that  a well-authenticated  rumor  has 
reached  the  commander  of  the  naval  fleet  here  to  the  effect  that  the 
rebel  authorities  at  Norfolk  are  fitting  out  two  small  iron-clad  gunboats 
for  these  waters.  The  exact  state  of  progress  is  not  known.  It  is  said 
by  some  persons  recently  from  that  neighborhood  that  they  will  be 
finished  within  ten  or  twelve  days,  but  I cannot  believe  but  that  this  is 
an  exaggeration. 

The  preparation  to  meet  these  boats  is  a duty  devolving  upon  the 


Chap.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


377 


Navy  Department,  tjut  as  I cannot  learn  of  any  important  steps  being 
taken  in  that  direction  I deem  it  my  duty  to  make  the  statement  of  the 
case  to  you,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  we  have  so  large  a number  of  army 
vessels  in  these  waters.  The  naval  commander  here  will  doubtless  use 
all  the  means  at  his  disposal  to  prevent  any  disaster,  but  the  vessels  of 
this  fleet  are  but  trail  things  at  best,  and  have  been  much  shaken  up 
by  constant  service  for  three  stormy  months.  I do  not  feel  any  serious 
apprehension  in  reference  to  this  matter,  but  we  certainly  need  two  or 
three*  gunboats  of  a better  class  to  make  us  perfectly  secure.  Tbe 
armed  vessels  in  my  fleet  will  be  put  in  the  best  possible  condition  to 
meet  such  an  emergency,  and  I shall  very  soon  try  to  land  a force  at 
the  head  of  North  River  and  try  to  permanently  obstruct  Currituck 
and  Albemarle  Canal.  The  locks  of  the  canal  leading  from  Elizabeth 
City  are  said  to  be  too  narrow  to  admit  of  a passage  for  these  vessels, 
which  I hope  is  true. 

I have  received  nothing  from  General  Parke  this  morning,  but  hope 
to  report  his  progress  by  next  mail.  The  commander  of  the  fort  seems 
disposed  to  make  an  obstinate  resistance,  but  we  have  the  means  at 
hand  to  effect  its  reduction,  but  an  Engineer  officer,  with  a corps  of 
Sappers  and  Miners,  would  be  of  great  service. 

The  enemy  in  our  front  still  continue  in  force,  but  we  do  not  hear  of 
them  making  any  important  advances  in  this  direction.  The  outposts 
occasionally  meet,  but  thus  far  there  has  been  no  important  results 
from  their  meeting.  We  have  lost  but  one  man  during  the  week,  he. 
being  taken  prisoner,  and  have  killed  one  and  wounded  another  of  the 
enemy. 

There  is  nothing  of  which  we  stand  so  much  in  need  now  as  a regi- 
ment of  cavalry,  and  I hope  the  Department  will  find  it  convenient  to 
send  one  at  once. 

I hope  you  will  excuse  me  for  suggesting  that  the  Van  Alen  Cavalry 
be  sent,  if,  as  I understand,  it  is  in  Washington. 

Our  sick  lists  are  increasing  slightly,  but  I hope  to  report  a decrease 
very  soon,  as  our  beef  cattle  begin  to  arrive  and  they  will  have  a 
change  of  diet. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Major-General , Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , April  17,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan, 

Commanding  the  Army : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  state  the  following  movements  in 
this  department  since  the  battle  of  New  Berne : 

Immediately  after  the  battle  I started  General  Parke,  with  a portion 
of  his  brigade,  to  take  possession  of  Morehead  City,  Carolina  City,  and 
Beaufort,  and  to  invest  Fort  Macon. 

This  work  has  proved  to  be  exceedingly  difficult,  owing  to  the 
absence  of  engines  and  cars  on  the  railroad  and  the  burning  of  the 
bridges  by  the  enemy.  The  latter  work  was  necessarily  done  under 
the  protection  of  a large  guard,  and  the  enemy’s  cavalry  made  frequent 
visits  to  the  road,  and  I had  no  cavalry  to  compete  with  them. 

Our  losses  have  been  but  slight  during  the  work,  amounting  in  all 
to  some  10  or  12  pickets.  On  the  7th  instant  Colonel  Egloffstein,  of 


378 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


the  One  hundred  and  third  New  York,  was  ordered  to  make  a recon- 
naissance up  the  Trent  in  the  direction  of  Onslow  County,  and  1 
afterward  ordered  him  to  continue  his  reconnaissance  down  the  road 
leading  from  Trenton  to  Core  Sound,  at  the  mouth  of  White  Oak 
River,  and  then  to  proceed  up  the  shore  of  Core  Sound  and  communi- 
cate with  General  Parke  at  Morehead  City.  This  I did  with  a hope 
that  we  might  be  able  to  catch  a portion  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  the 
headquarters  of  which  were  at  Swansborough,  from  whence  they  sent 
detachments  over  to  the  railroad,  thus  making  the  duty  of  guarding 
the  36  miles  of  road  from  this  place  to  Carolina  City  very  onerous.  b 

The  colonel  started  with  200  picked  men,  two  days’  rations,  and  no 
transportation,  with  instructions  to  ration  his  men  from  supplies  found 
on  the  route.  He  yesterday  reached  General  Parke’s  headquarters, 
having  had  several  skirmishes  with  the  enemy,  in  which  he  captured 
some  23  prisoners,  80  horses,  quite  a quantity  of  pistols,  sabers,  &c. 
Among  the  prisoners  captured  was  Colonel  Robinson,  formerly  of  our 
Army,  son-in-law  of  Captain  McCrae. 

I have  been  thus  minute  in  these  details  to  show  you  how  neces- 
sary a regiment  of  cavalry  is  to  me  at  this  point,  and  I sincerely  hope 
there  will  not  be  a moment’s  delay  in  sending  me  a well-organized  reg- 
iment. 

^ General  Parke  has  now  succeeded  in  getting  on  the  banks  in  rear  of 
hort  Macon  with  the  main  body  of  his  command,  with  two  mortar 
- batteries  and  one  30-pounder  Parrott  gun.  The  enemy’s  pickets  have 
been  driven  in  and  all  communication  with  the  garrison  from  the  out- 
side cut  off.  The  enemy’s  shots  thus  far  have  done  us  but  little  harm, 
wounding  only  2 men.  There  are  three  naval  vessels  outside  co- 
operating with  us,  and  I hope  within  ten  days  to  reduce  the  fort. 

The  re-enforcements  you  spoke  of  in  your'  letter  have  arrived,  and  I 
have  formed  the  brigades  of  Generals  Foster  and  Reno  into  divisions, 
which  now  occupy  this  place  and  its  suburbs.  I am  building  just  in 
rear  of  the  town  an  inclosed  bastioned  field  work  capable  of  holding 
1,000  men  and  mounting  thirty  guns,  which  work  will  be  finished  in  a 
few  days.  After  which  I propose  to  build  another  small  four-gun  work, 
with  two  companies,  to  the  right  of  this  first  work  and  near  the  Neuse. 
These  forts  completely  command  the  town,  and  will  enable  me  to  leave 
it  with  a small  force  when  I move  up  the  country.  My  advance  now 
on  the  railroad  is  at  Batchelder’s  Creek,  where  we  are  rebuilding  the 
railroad  bridge  burnt  by  the  enemy,  and  I have  made  corresponding 
advances  in  the  direction  of  Kinston,  on  the  Reuse  and  Trent  Roads, 
which  positions  have  been  maintained  with  occasional  disturbances  in 
way  of  picket  firing. 

Some  days  ago  I sent,  in  conjunction  with  the  Navy,  a regiment  to 
Washington,  to  temporarily  occupy  that  place,  destroy  the  batteries, 
and  remove  the  obstacles  in  the  river,  which  was  successfully  accom- 
plished, and  the  troops  have  returned. 

Some  600  of  our  men  from  Roanoke  Island  were  sent  to  Elizabeth 
City  last  week,  and  captured  all  the  pickets  in  the  neighborhood  of 
that  place,  amounting  to  74  men  and  100  stand  of  arms.  Since  then 
the  enemy’s  force  has  been  increased  at  that  point  to  two  regiments 
and  a field  battery  of  four  guns. 

^ I have  organized  an  expedition,  in  conjunction  with  Commodore 
Rowan,  against  that  place,  and  if  we  succeed  in  capturing  or  driving 
the  enemy  back,  we  shall  move  up  to  South  Mills  and  blow  up  the 
lock  of  the  canal  at  that  place,  . and  then  proceed  to  the  head  of  the 
Currituck  Canal  and  blow  in  its  banks,  thus  rendering  it  impossible 


Chap.  XX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  379 

for  the  gunboats  which  are  said  to  be  building  at  Norfolk  to  come  into 
these  waters.  I hope  the  expedition  will  be  successful. 

The  regiments  of  my  original  command  are  much  decreased  by  sick- 
ness and  casualties  in  battle,  and  the  recruiting  service  having  been 
stopped,  I shall  not  be  able  to  fill  them  up.  My  command  now  consists 
of  twenty  regiments,  one  battalion,  and  a battery,  making  an  aggre- 
gate of  about  15,000  men,  distributed  as  follows : Three  regiments  at 
Eoanoke,  one-half  of  a regiment  at  Hatteras  Inlet,  three  regiments 
and  a battalion  with  General  Parke  and  on  the  road,  and  thirteen  and 
one-half  regiments  with  the  battery  at  this  place.  The  engines  and 
cars,  for  which  we  made  requisition  immediately  after  the  battle,  have 
not  yet  arrived,  and  as  the  re-enforcements  sent  me  brought  no  wagons 
with  them,  we  are  absolutely  crippled  for  want  of  transportation.  I 
sincerely  hope  there  will  be  no  delay  in  forwarding  me  the  regiment 
of  cavalry  and  two  batteries  of  artillery,  together  with  the  engines, 
cars,  and  wagons  already  required  for. 

The  enemy  continues  in  force  at  Kinston,  but  I feel  quite  sure  I can 
dislodge  them  after  the  fall  of  Fort  Macon. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  General,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Major-General , Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina. 


Headquarters  Army  oe  the  Potomac, 

Near  Yorldown , April  20,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina  : 

General  : I have  information,  which  I regard  as  entirely  reliable, 
that  on  the  25th  of  March  a movement  of  troops  commenced  from 
Richmond  for  North  Carolina  to  operate  against  your  command. 
These  regiments  came  from  Fredericksburg  and  Gordonsville,  having 
formed  part  of  the  Army  of  Manassas.  They  are  Fourth,  Tenth,  and 
Fourteenth  Alabama  regiments,  two  Virginia  regiments,  two  North 
Carolina  regiments,  Sixth  and  Sixteenth  Mississippi,  Eighth  Geor- 
gia, two  other  Georgia  regiments,  one  or  two  Louisiana  regiments, 
Thomas’  artillery  (four  batteries),  Ransom’s  regiment  of  North  Caro- 
lina cavalry,  the  heavy  guns  formerly  at  Leesburg,  said  to  be  from 
twenty  to  twenty- five  in  number,  and  generally  large  rifled  guns.  I 
think  the  number  and  caliber  of  these  guns  exaggerated ; there  were 
probably  ten  to  twelve.  The  total  being  thirteen  or  fourteen  regiments 
of  infantry,  one  regiment  of  cavalry,  and  four  light  batteries. 

The  railways  in  the  South  are  represented  to  be  in  miserable  con- 
dition, both  as  regards  tracks  and  rolling  stock,  so  the  progress  of 
these  troops  was  probably  slow. 

It  is  represented  that  the  energetic  steps  taken  by  the  rebel  Govern- 
ment in  reference  to  the  conscription  have  filled  their  regiments. 

1 learn  to-day  that  General  R.  E.  Lee  commands  in  front  of  me, 
having  Johnston  under  him,  Lee  being  now  Commander-in-Ghief  of  the 
rebels,  and  that  their  force  in  and  around  Yorktown  numbers  more 
than  80,000  men. 

I would  recommend  to  you  to  make  no  offensive  movement  beyond 
New  Berne  until  you  have  secured  Fort  Macon;  also  to  be  well  on  the 
alert  against  an  attempt  to  turn  your  left  flank. 


i 


380 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


I hope  the  Department  may  be  able  to  let  you  have  some  of  the 
heavy  guns  used  in  the  siege  of  Fort  Pulaski. 

geo.  b.  McClellan, 

Major-General. 


War  Department, 
Washington  City,  D.  C.,  April  25,  1862. 

Major-General  Burnside: 

General  : Tour  dispatches  by  Major  Sherman  and  by  Captain  Cut- 
ting have  been  received,  and  you  will  please  accept  my  thanks  for  your 
very  full  and  satisfactory  report  of  the  operations  under  your  command. 

The  Yan  Alen  Cavalry  [Third  New  York]  are  under  orders  to  join 
you.  Two  batteries  are  embarking  here  to-day.  These  comprise  all 
the  re-enforcements  you  asked  for. 

The  President  as  well  as  the  country  at  large  feels  great  interest  in 
everything  concerning  the  safety  and  success  of  your  expedition,  and 
no  effort  of  the  Department  will  be  spared  in  supporting  you. 

Appointments  of  your  staff  were  ordered,  as  you  desired,  immediately 
upon  the  receipt  of  your  letter  naming  the  persons  you  desired  appointed. 
We  hope  soon  to  hear  that  Fort  Macon  is  in  your  possession.  The  oper- 
ations at  Torktown  and  Corinth  are  now  the  subjects  of  great  interest. 
No  doubt  is  entertained  that  Generals  McClellan  and  Halleck  will  be 
entirely  successful.  Your  limited  force  and  the  inability  to  increase 
its  numbers  at  present  will  necessarily  prevent  your  engaging  in  active 
operations  to  any  great  extent  until  the  issue  is  determined  at  York 
town.  From  your  communications  we  are  led  to  believe  that  you  feel 
yourself  entirely  secure  in  your  present  position. 

I shall  be  glad  to  hear  from  you  as  often  as  it  is  possible  for  you  to 
report,  and  with  sincere  regard  remain,  truly,  yours, 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

No.  28.  j New  Berne , April  28,  1862. 

Whoever,  after  the  issue  of  this  order,  shall,  within  the  limits  to  which 
the  Union  arms  may  extend  in  this  department,  utter  one  word  against 
the  Government  of  these  United  States,  will  be  at  oncb  arrested  and 
closely  confined.  It  must  be  distinctly  understood  that  this  depart- 
ment is  under  martial  law,  and  treason,  expressed  or  implied,  will  meet 
with  a speedy  punishment. 

The  military  governor  of  New  Berne  is  charged  with  a strict  execu- 
tion of  this  order  within  the  bounds  of  his  control. 

By  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  A.  E.  Burnside: 

LEWIS  RICHMOND, 

Assistant  A djutant-  General. 


Chap.  XX.] 


381 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


Abstract  from  return  of  the  Department  of  North  Carolina  Maj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E. 
side  commanding , for  April,  1od2. 


Burn- 


Troops. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  pres- 

ent. 

Aggregate  pres- 

ent and  ab- 
sent. 

CO 

U 

<£ 

50 

1 

2 

184 

152 

83 

80 

4,836 

4,  381 

2, 210 

2, 128 

6, 010 
5, 335 
2,649 
2,  534 

7.  08® 
6,  099 
3,  259 
2,701 

499 

13,555 

16,  528 

19, 147 

Organization  of  troops  in  the  Department  of  North  Carolina  April  30, 1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside,  commanding. 


FIRST  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster. 


First  Brigade. 

17th  Massachusetts,  Col.  T.  J.  C.  Amory. 
23d  Massachusetts,  Maj.  A.  Elwell. 

25th  Massachusetts,  Col.  Edwin  Upton. 


Second  Brigade. 

10th  Connecticut,  Lieut.  Col.  I.  W.  Petti- 
bone. 

24th  Massachusetts,  Col.  T.  G.  Stevenson. 
27th  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  L.  Lyman, 


ARTILLERY. 

3d  New  York,  Col.  J.  H.  Ledlie. 

1st  Rhode  Island,  Battery  F,  Lieut.  C.  H.  Pope. 

SECOND  DIVISION. 


Brig.  Gen.  Jesse  L.  Reno. 


First  Brigade. 


Second  Brigade. 


2d  Maryland,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  E.  Dury^e. 
103d  New  York,  Col.  F.  W.  Egloffstein. 
48th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  James  Nagle. 


/ 


11th  Connecticut,  Lieut.  Col.  Charles 
Mathewson. 

21st  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  W . S, 
Cltirk. 

51st  New  York,  Col.  Edward  Ferrero. 

51st  Pennsylania,  Col.  J.  F.  Hartranft, 


THIRD  DIVISION. 


Brig.  Gen.  John  G.  Parke. 


8th  Connecticut,  Col.  Edward  Harland. 
9th  New  Jersey,  Col.  Charles  A.  Heckman. 
4th  Rhode  Island,  Col.  I.  P.  Rodman. 


5th  Rhode  Island  (battalion),  Maj.  John 
Wright. 

1st  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  C,  Capt.  L.  O. 
Morris. 


FOURTH  BRIGADE. 

Col.  Rush  C.  Hawkins. 

6th  New  Hampshire,  Lieut.  Col.  S.  G.  I 9th  New  York,  Lieut.  Col.  E.  A.  Kimball, 
Griffin.  I 89th  New  York,  Col.  H.  S.  Fairchild. 


382 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


IChap.  XX. 


U.  S.  Steamer  State  of  Georgia, 

May  1,  1862. 

General  Ambrose  E.  Burnside, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina , New  Berne : 
General:  I am  now  having  four  companies  Eighth  Connecticut 
placed  on  board  the  Highland  Light,  and  expect  to  have  him  start 
for  New  Berne  this  p.  m.  The  other  companies  have  not  yet  reached 
Morehead  City. 

The  Union  has  not  yet  arrived.  As  soon  as  she  does  I will  start  the 
balance  of  the  regiment. 

The  Fourth  Bhode  Island  is  now  quartered  in  Beaufort. 

I have  made  Colonel  Bodman  military  governor  of  the  Beaufort  dis- 
trict, and  Major  Allen  provost-marshal. 

Captain  Morris’  and  Captain  Ammon’s  companies  are  now  in  the 
fort. 


The  guns  and  mortars  from  our  batteries  have  been  brought  to  the 
fort. 


Our  camp  on  the  Banks  is  by  degrees  being  broken  up.  I am  having 
everything  there  brought  down  to  the  fort  and  everything  at  Caro- 
lina City  brought  down  to  Morehead. 

I keep  the  two  launches  on  picket  duty  up  Bogue  Sound  toward 
Swansborough. 

I am  informed  that  the  rebel  cavalry  are  still  in  that  vicinity,  and 
I would  particularly  request  that  a gunboat  be  sent  through  Bogue 
Inlet  into  White  Oak  Biver,  and  directed  to  keep  a lookout  for  the 
rebels  in  that  quarter. 

The  Chippewa  has  returned,  having  delivered  her  prisoners  to  a rebel 
steamer  near  Fort  Caswell.  While  there  Captain  Bryson  learned  that 
the  Nashville  had  run  into  New  Inlet  on  the  26th.  On  the  24th  she 
started  in  and  ran  aground,  and  for  some  unaccountable  reason  she 
was  permitted  to  remain  there  until  sufficiently  lightened  to  pass  inside 
the  bar.  She  is  reported  to  have  16,000  stand  of  arms  and  a tremen- 
dous quantity  of  gunpowder.  Awful,  is  it  not  ? 

A ell,  can’t  we  take  Fort  Caswell  and  the  adjacent  batteries  ? I be- 
lieve we  can. 

Captain  Bryson,  of  the  Chippewa,  has  furnished  me  with  a copy  of  the 
statement  of  two  deserters  from  Fort  Caswell.  I inclose  copy. 

1 U m*~ -The  Union  ha*  just  arrived,  with  the  cattle  and  potatoes. 
I he  Highland  Light  has  not  got  under  way  as  yet.  There  is  much  trou- 
bie  m bringing  the  troops  and  baggage  over  from  the  Banks  to  More- 
head City.  I will  start  her  off  as  soon  as  she  gets  four  companies  on 
board. 

To-morrow  the  Chippewa  goes  to  Cape  Fear  Biver.  The  State  of 
Georgia  follows  in  a day  or  two  and  the  bark  Gemsbok  goes  to  Hamp- 
ton Boads.  This  will  leave  only  one  vessel  here,  the  Daylight,  Cap- 
tain Lockwood.  Now,  I sincerely  hope  Commodore  Bowan  will  send 
i k*?  vessels  to  the  White  Oak  and  Swansborough  district.  It 
will  be  of  immense  service  all  around. 

The  citizens  of  Beaufort  are  after  me  on  the  negro  question.  They 
want  me  to  prevent  the  slaves  from  coming  within  our  lines.  I teil 
them  I can  use  no  force  to  aid  them  in  recovering  their  negroes  j at  the 
same  time,  it  they  can  prevail  on  the  negroes  to  go  home,  I am  per- 
fectly willing  and  satisfied.  I can  furnish  them  no  aid  or  assistance, 
and  at  the  same  time  will  not  permit  any  disturbance  in  camp. 

Yours,  faithfully, 


JNO.  G.  PABKE. 


Chaf.  XX.  1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


383 


P.  S. — Tiie  Chippewa  and  State  of  Georgia  both  go  to  Cape  Fear, 
■and  the  Gemsbok  goes  North.  This  will  leave  only  one  steamer  here. 
The  gunboats  will  take  all  the  coal  now  here. 

Please  have  another  schooner  sent. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , N.  (7.,  May  3,  1862. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington , D.  G. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  only  thing  of  moment  that 
has  occurred  since  the  fall  of  Fort  Macon  was  a skirmish  that  occurred 
between  three  or  four  companies  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  and  30  or  40 
of  our  men,  temporarily  mounted,  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Eg- 
loffstein,  of  the  One  hundred  and  third  New  York,  which  resulted  in  a 
loss  on  our  side  of  1 private  killed  and  Colonel  Egloffstein  and  2 pri- 
vates wounded.  The  colonel  was  shot  in  the  leg  just  below  the  knee, 
making  a painful  wound,  which  will  probably  disable  him  from  service 
for  some  three  months.  The  rebels  were  dispersed,  with  a loss  of  3 
killed,  8 wounded,  and  3 taken  prisoners.  We  captured  5 horses  with 
full  cavalry  equipments.  Our  pickets  are  constantly  annoyed  by  the 
enemy’s  cavalry,  and  we  have  this  week  lost  2 killed  and  3 prisoners. 
Our  losses  in  these  little  renconters  are  more  than  compensated  for  by 
the  losses  of  the  enemy.  Our  infantry  pickets  compete  remarkably 
well  with  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  and  had  we  one  cavalry  regiment  here 
I feel  sure  that  we  could  keep  the  two  cavalry  regiments  of  the  enemy 
which  are  now  in  our  front  at  a respectful  distance,  and  at  the  proper 
time  would  drive  in  every  one  of  their  outposts.  We  look  with  great 
anxiety  for  the  arrival  of  the  cavalry  and  light  artillery  ordered  here. 
All  the  troops  destined  for  this  department  can  be  transported  to  Beau- 
fort Harbor  in  large  vessels  and  landed  at  the  wharf  at  Morehead 
City,  where  there  is  some  17  or  18  feet  of  water.  We  are  repairing 
Fort  Macon  as  rapidly  as  possible,  and  I am  gradually  withdrawing 
General  Parke’s  (First)  brigade  to  this  place,  with  a view  to  leaving 
some  five  companies  in  Fort  Macon  and  five  in  the  town  of  Beaufort 
and  Morehead  City  as  guards.  The  main  fort  on  the  outskirts  of  this 
town  is  now  about  finished,  and  the  smaller  fort,  which  will  complete 
the  line  of  fortifications,  is  commenced.  These  forts  are  built  not  only 
with  a view  to  hold  the  place  with  a small  force,  but  to  give  occupa- 
tion to  the  hundreds  of  negroes  that  are  flocking  to  us.  They  will 
make  our  base  more  secure,  and  thereby  add  greatly  to  our  strength  in 
an  advanced  movement  into  the  interior. 


By  the  next  mail  I hope  to  forward  you  the  detailed  report  of  Gen- 
eral Parke  of  the  siege  of  Fort  Macon,  and  at  the  same  time  I will 
forward  to  the  Department  a more  intelligible  statement  of  our  condi- 
tion, strength,  and  resources. 

The  three  definite  objects  of  my  expedition  have  been  accomplished, 
ind  the  remaining  ones  were  necessarily  left  to  a certain  extent  to  my 
liscretion,  as  it  was  impossible  to  predict  all  the  changes  that  might 
>ccur  in  the  mean  time.  Of  course  I do  not  consider  my  work  as  finished, 
aid  shall  be  glad  to  receive  more  definite  instructions,  if  the  interests 
)f  t lie  service  require  it.  My  own  view  is,  that  a movement  upon  Golds- 
Jorough  and  Raleigh  in  force  is  the  proper  one,  and  I am  quite  sure 
.hat  General  McClellan  is  of  the  same  opinion.  With  these  two  places 


384 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


in  our  possession,  Wilmington  and  Fort  Caswell  will  surely  be  taken  in 
time ; but  I will  speak  of  this  matter  more  fully  in  my  next. 

The  health  of  the  cohnnand  is  improving,  but  our  ranks  are  still  slim, 
and  I hope  the  Department  will  deem  it  for  the  interest  of  the  service 
to  request  the  Governors  of  the  States  of  New  Hampshire,  Massachu- 
setts, Connecticut,  New  York,  New  Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  Maryland, 
and  Rhode  Island  to  send  us  recruits  enough  to  fill  our  regiments  to 
the  maximum  standard. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Major-General , Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne ,*  May  5,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington , D.  C.  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  since  my  last  dispatch  one  of 
General  Parke’s  regiments,  the  Eighth  Connecticut,  has  been  trans- 
ferred to  this  place  from  Beaufort,  and  I shall  at  once  order  up  the 
Fourth  Rhode  Island,  leaving  the  Fifth  Rhode  Island  Battalion  at 
Beaufort  and  Fort  Macon  as  garrison. 

From  information  obtained  through  our  spies  I am  satisfied  that  the 
force  in  the  neighborhood  of  Kinston  and  Goldsborough  is  diminishing 
rather  than  increasing,  and  had  we  to-day  a cavalry  regiment  and  two 
batteries  of  artillery,  and  the  locomotives,  cars,  and  wagons  required  for, 
I should  initiate  a movement  in  that  direction.  We  are  expecting  them 
hburly,  and  are  convinced  that  nothing  but  the  heavy  requisitions  upon 
the  different  Departments  has  necessarily  delayed  their  arrival. 

General  Ransom,  formerly  of  the  United  States  Cavalry,  is  posted  6 
miles  this  side  of  Kinston  with  two  regiments  of  infantry,  two  of  cav- 
alry, and  one  or  two  batteries  of  artillery  of  six  pieces  each,  with  no 
intrenchments  other  than  abatis.  General  Branch  is  posted  at  Kins- 
ton and  its  neighborhood  with  four  regiments  of  infantry  and  one  or 
two  batteries  of  artillery;  he  and  Ransom  together  having  just  three 
batteries  of  artillery,  but  we  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  positively 
which  has  the  two  batteries. 

General  Holmes,  late  of  the  U.  S.  Army,  commands  the  department, 
and  has  his  headquarters  at  Goldsborough.  The  force  in  that  neigh- 
borhood is  variously  estimated  at  from  5,000  to  15,000.  I am  satisfied 
that  the  lower  number  is  the  nearest  to  the  absolute  fact. 

The  possession  of  Beaufort  Harbor  renders  the  transportation  of 
troops  to  this  department  very  easy,  and  if  a movement  in  force  into 
the  interior,  with  a view  to  occupying  Goldsborough  and  Raleigh  and 
thereby  cutting  off  the  retreat  of  the  rebels,  who  will  in  all  probability 
be  dispersed  by  General  McClellan,  be  desirable,  the  necessary  force 
can  easily  be  brought  to  this  point,  and  I am  not  sure  that  the  object 
cannot  be  accomplished  with  the  re-enforcements  of  cavalry  and  artil- 
lery already  ordered  to  this  point;  but  I shall  make  no  hazardous  move- 
ment until  I hear  more  definitely  from  the  Department  or  of  the  result 
of  the  movement  before  York  town. 

Your  kind  letter  of  the  25th  ultimo  warrants  me  in  remaining  on  the 
defensive  until  such  time  as  I think  that  my  force  here  can  be  used  as 
an  auxiliary  or  a diversion.  In  the  mean  time  I would  be  glad  to  receive 
any  re- enforcements  that  it  may  be  found  for  the  interests  of  the  serv- 


385 


CHAP.  XX. J CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


ice  to  send  me,  in  order  that  I may  carry  out  more  active  field  opera- 
tions. I am  becoming  more  convinced  every  day  of  the  importance  of 
occupying  Goldsborough  and  Baleigh;  yon  will  readily  see  the  reason 
for  this  conviction;  but  I would  not,  if  I could,  disturb  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  forces  of  the  different  columns  now  moving  upon  the  enemy, 
unless  it  was  for  the  interest  of  the  public  service. 

In  the  first  part  of  my  dispatch  I stated  that  I believed  that  the  iorce 
in  front  of  us  was  diminishing  rather  than  increasing.  My  reason  for 
coming  to  this  conclusion  is  that  one  of  our  spies  informed  me  this 
evening  that  General  Branch  was  to  leave  with  a considerable  portion 
of  his  brigade  for  Virginia.  If  this  statement  should  be  confirmed  and 
the  cavalry  and  artillery  should  arrive  I may  make  a movement  in  that 
direction,  and  I hope  that  whatever  the  result  may  be  the  Department 
will  not  consider  that  I am  transcending  my  orders. 

Another  mail  will  leave  here  to-morrow,  by  which  I will  send  a dis- 


! 


1 


f. 

i 


1 

9 


Udltt'U*  m -j  

We  are  very  much  in  need  of  the  locomotives,  cars,  and  wagons 
required  for,  all  of  which  can  now  be  sent  to  Beaufort  Harbor  in  heavy- 

draught  vessels.  J x x,  . , . 

Should  it  be  deemed  advisable  to  send  re-enforcements  to  this  depart- 
ment I hope  it  will  be  done  with  a view  to  leaving  Generals  Foster, 
Beno,  and  Parke  in  command  of  divisions.  By  their  untiring  industry 
and  gallantry  they  deserve  to  remain  as  permanent  commanders  m this 
department;  without  them  the  work  that  has  been  done  here  could  not 
have  been  accomplished.  I have  already  recommended  them  to  the 
Department  for  promotion,  and  hope  it  may  be  found  for  the  interest  oi 
the  public  service  to  grant  the  request.  • 

I have  authorized  the  organization  of  the  First  North  Carolina  Union 
Volunteers.  The  movement  was  initiated  by  the  Union  men  in  and 
about  Washington,  and  I have  encouraged  it  to  the  extent  of  feeding, 
clothing,  and  arming  the vicinity,  and  have  promised  to  recom- 

mend to  the  Department  that  they  be  mustered  and  paid.  Captain 
Potter,  General  Foster’s  chief  commissary,  has  been  appointed  colonel, 
and  Mr.  Kespess,  whose  father  was  mayor  of  Washington  and  is  now 
in  prison  in  Bichmond,  has  been  appointed  lieutenant-colonel.  I hope 
that  the  regiment  will  be  filled  up  within  a very  short  time,  but  would 
not  for  a moment  try  to  impress  the  Department  with  the  idea  that  it 
will  be  done.  I shall  do  all  in  my  power  to  accomplish  it,  and  trust  my 
action  will  meet  with  the  approval  of  the  Government. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  BUBNSIDE, 

Major-General , Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina . 


Beaufort,  May  5 — 9.30  p.  m. 

[General  Ambrose  E.  Burnside:] 

My  Dear  General  : The  adjutant  of  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  has 
just  come  in  with  a man  from  near  Newport  Bridge,  who  brings  in  the 
1 report  that  the  enemy  is  crossing  the  White  Oak  Creek  in  force  from 
Swansborough. 

I wrote  you  by  the  adjutant,  who  has  started  on  his  return  to  .New- 
port, and  directed  him  to  forward  the  letter  to  you. 

As  the  Allison  did  not  get  off  to-day,  as  was  expected,  I will  dis- 
patch her  early  to-morrow  morning  with  this. 

25  R R— VOL  IX 


386 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


The  man  who  brings  the  report  is  a Union  man,  named  Gainer,  and 
he  gets  his  information  from  a paroled  prisoner  by  the  name  of  Jones, 
who  lives  about  6 miles  to  the  westward  of  Newport  Bridge. 

Jones  says:  “We  will  see  hot  work  about  Newport  Bridge  before 
Saturday  night;  that  10,000  troops  are  crossing  from  Swansborough. ” 

Now  I can’t  believe  any  such  story,  but  I should  like  to  feel  sure  that 
it  is  all  false.  I have  requested  the  colonel  of  the  Ninth  New  Jersey 
to  send  out  a scout  and  inform  you  directly  of  the  result. 

I will  see  Commander  Lockwood  and  request  him  to  keep  his  steamer 
near  Morehead  City,  and  I told  the  Ninth  New  Jersey  that  if  they  were 
too  hotly  pressed  to  fall  back  on  Morehead. 

It  may  be  that  the  rebels  at  Wilmington  have  armed  the  militia  and 
drafted  men  with  the  arms  brought  in  by  the  Nashville,  and  are  march- 
ing there  in  hopes  of  again  destroying  the  Newport  Bridge. 

I will  send  the  Little  Union  up  the  Sound  to-morrow.  A gunboat  in 
White  Oak  Creek  would  fix  this  whole  business  and  make  me  feel 
perfectly  easy,  and  a squadron  of  cavalry  would  now  be  of  infinite 
service. 

A paroled  officer  applied  to  me  to-day  for  permission  to  go  with  his 
wife  to  Swansborough.  In  course  of  conversation  he  said  that  he 
expected  to  be  exchanged  in  a week.  It  may  be  that  this  fellow  has 
heard  of  a probable  advance  from  Swansborough. 

Faithfully,  yours, 


JNO.  G.  PARKE. 


Fort  Monroe,  Ya.,  May  11,  1862. 

Major-General  Burnside  : 

Dear  Sir:  You  will  be  pleased  to  learn  that  yesterday  General 
Wool  advanced  with  5,000  men  on  Norfolk.  The  city  surrendered, 
General  Huger  having  withdrawn  his  force.  We  are  now  in  possession 
of  Norfolk  and  Portsmouth.  This  morning  the  rebels  set  fire  to  the 
Merrimac  and  blew  her  up.  General  Wool  will  throw  an  additional 
force  of  2,000  men  into  Norfolk  without  delay. 

I send  you  a copy  of  the  last  dispatch  received — at  5 o’clock  last 
evening — from  General  McClellan.  We  have  been  aware  for  some 
days  that  the  enemy  were  contemplating  the  abandonment  of  Norfolk. 
General  Huger  continued  there  until  yesterday  with  5,000  men.  Three 
days  ago  Commander  Rodgers,  with  the  Galena  and  two  other  gunboats, 
were  sent  up  the  James  River  toward  Richmond  to  co-operate  with 
McClellan.  When  last  heard  from  yesterday  they  were  “ picking  their 
way  slowly  up.”  The  Monitor  and  Stevens  will  be  sent  up  to-day. 

General  Wool  proposes  without  delay  to  move  on  to  Suffolk,  and 
would  be  glad  to  co-operate  with  you  by  your  advancing,  if  you  deem 
it  prudent,  to  Weldon,  and  seizing  the  railroad  there. 

We  have  no  certain  intelligence  in  respect  to  the  movements  of  the  reb- 
els southward.  A large  force  is  no  doubt  in  front  of  General  McClellan. 
Whether  they  will  give  him  battle  at  or  in  front  of  Richmond  you  can 
as  well  judge  as  any  one  else.  The  co-operation  of  yourself  and  Gen- 
eral Wool  must  undoubtedly  produce  favorable  results,  and  communi- 
cation between  you  and  him  should  be  established  at  the  earliest  pos- 
sible moment. 

My  last  advices  from  Corinth  were  three  days  ago,  at  which  time  a 
severe  battle  between  the  forces  of  Beauregard  and  Halleck  was  im- 
pending. It  has  no  doubt  taken  place  by  this  time.  Such,  at  least,  is 
my  impression. 


t 


HAP.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


387 


Captain  Richmond  informs  me  that  the  cavalry  you  sent  for  were 
rriving,  and  that  you  need  more  infantry.  I regret  to  say  that  the 
rovernment  has  not  at  this  moment  any  troops  that  can  be  sent  you. 
3-enerals  McClellan  and  Halleck  are  both  urgent  for  re-enforcements, 
rhich  cannot  be  given.  When  your  cavalry  and  artillery  arrive  noth- 
ag  further  can  be  sent  until  the  recruits  are  raised. 

The  co-operation  of  yourself  and  General  Wool  and  the  operations 
o be  conducted  by  you  are  left  to  your  discretion  under  the  circum- 
tances  in  which  you  may  be  placed.  Frequent  advices  are  desired. 
?he  President,  Secretary  Chase,  and  I have  been  here  five  days,  and 
xpect  to  return  to-day. 

Yours,  truly, 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


[Inclosure.] 


Camp  19  miles  from  Williamsburg, 

May  10,  1862. 


Ion.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War  : 

I have  fully  established  my  connection  with  the  troops  near  West 
Point,  and  the  dangerous  movement  has  passed.  The  West  Point 
Railway  is  not  very  much  injured;  materials  for  repairs,  such  as  rails 
fee.,  cars,  and  engines  may  now  be  sent  to  me.  Should  Norfolk  be 
;aken  and  the  Merrimac  destroyed  I can  change  my  line  to  the  James 
River  and  dispense  with  the  railroad.  I shall  probably  occupy  New 
ffeent  in  force  to-morrow  and  then  make  my  first  preparations  for  battle. 
,\.s  it  is,  my  troops  are  in  advance  of  their  supplies.  I must  so  arrange 
ny  depot  that  we  can  follow  up  success.  When  at  New  Kent  I will 
ie  in  position  to  make  a thorough  examination  of  the  country,  so  as 
:o  act  understandingly.  General  Johnston  cannot  well  be  in  front  of 
Fremont  for  two  reasons:  First,  he  has  no  business  there;  Second,  I 
imow  that  I fought  him  on  Monday,  and  that  he  is  now  on  the  Chick- 
ihominy.  I have  used  his  vacated  headquarters  from  day  to  day.  He 
is  certaiuly  in  command  here  with  all  the  troops  he  can  gather.  Two 
ir  three  more  of  the  cavalry  regiments  1 left  on  the  Potomac  would  be 
very  acceptable.  I am  overworking  what  I have. 

geo.  b.  McClellan, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , May  16,  1862. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington , 2>.  G. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  yours  of  the 
11th  instant  by  the  hand  of  Captain  Richmond. 

After  dispatchiug  him  to  Old  Point  Comfort  from  Oregon  Inlet  I 
visited  Elizabeth  City,  and  sent  other  spies  up  through  the  country, 
from  whom  I learned  that  Norfolk  had  been  evacuated  and  occupied 
by  General  Wool,  and  upon  the  receipt  of  your  dispatch  I immediately 
returned  to  this  place  with  a view  to  making  arrangements  for  a move 
upon  Weldon  by  way  of  Winton.  I expected  to  find  the  horses  and 
wagons  for  which  I had  required  at  this  place,  but  as  yet  none  have 
arrived.  They  are  absolutely  necessary  to  me  in  order  to  move  into  the 


388 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


interior  either  from  Win  ton  or  from  here.  From  the  loss  of  horses  dur- 
the  storms  at  Hatteras  our  means  of  transportation  were  much  reduced, 
and  we  could  not  move  now  with  more  than  20  to  25  wagons  after  the 
different  posts  occupied  by  me  have  been  supplied.  You  will  readily 
see  that  this  would  be  entirely  inadequate,  as  it  would  not  carry  the 
ammunition  necessary,  to  say  nothing  of  the  cooking  utensils,  commis- 
sary supplies,  and  forage.  I should  not  wait  for  means  of  transporting 
tents,  baggage,  &c.,  as  at  this  season  of  the  year  they  could  easily  be 
dispensed  with.  Had  we  the  cars  and  engines  that  have  been  required 
for,  a movement  might  be  initiated  in  the  direction  of  Goldsborough 
and  Raleigh.  None  of  the  re-enforcements  sent  to  me  brought  any  means 
of  transportation.  You  will  remember  these  requisitions  were"  sent  in 
immediately  after  our  arrival  in  New  Berne. 

I beg  you  will  not  think  these  remarks  are  made  in  a complaining 
spirit,  for  I am  fully  conscious  of  the  heavy  draughts  that  have  been 
made  on  the  different  bureaus  in  your  Department,  and  often  wonder 
how  you  have  accomplished  so  much. 

Forces  like  mine,  which  are  occupying  position  to  hold  the  enemy  in 
check  or  to  create  diversions,  should  be  entirely  subservient  of  course 
to  the  great  armies  in  the  East  and  West  that  are  now  in  front  of  the 
enemy,  and  I again  beg  that  you  will  not  feel  that  my  frequent  requisi- 
tions for  re-enforcements  and  transportation  are  made  in  any  other 
spirit  than  that  of  a desire  to  be  useful. 

I am  on  the  eve  of  ordering  some  small  movements,  in  conjunction 
with  the  Navy,  up  the  Chowan  River,  thus  threatening  the  enemy’s  com- 
munications, and  have  already  ordered  a reconnaissance  through  the 
Dismal  Swamp  Canal  with  a view  to  opening  communication  with 
General  Wool  through  that  channel.  There  are  no  troops  along  it,  ex- 
cept a few  militia  pickets,  but  it  is  understood  that  the  banks  have 
been  cut  and  the  water  let  out  between  some  of  the  locks.  As  it  has 
turned  out,  it  is  very  fortunate  that  the  locks  were  not  destroyed  by  Gen- 
eral Reno,  as  they  will  prove  useful  to  us  now  in  communicating  with 
Norfolk. 

I shall  write  General  Wool  by  this  mail,  and  if  upon  hearing  from 
him  it  may  be  deemed  advisable  for  us  to  make  a junction  or  co-operate 
with  each  other  I will  act  accordingly.  Everything  depends,  however, 
upon  the  position  occupied  by  General  McClellan’s  forces.  If,  as  I believe, 
he  is  in  Richmond,  and  the  enemy  in  full  retreat  southward — the  trans- 
portation necessary  for  a movement  into  the  interior  will  not  be  so  great, 
as  a junction  will  very  soon  be  formed  with  the  main  body,  unless  the 
enemy  should  retreat  in  such  force  as  to  drive  us  back.  We  are  anx- 
iously waiting  dispatches  from  Old  Point  Comfort. 

Day  before  yesterday  I sent  out  two  parties  in  the  direction  of  Tren- 
ton and  Kinston — one  on  the  north  and  one  on  the  south  side  of  the 
Trent  River — for  the  purpose  of  driving  in  the  enemy’s  pickets  and  out- 
posts and  ascertaining  their  strength.  A brisk  skirmish-ensued  on  the 
north  side,  upon  which  we  killed  1 lieutenant  and  9 privates  and  took 
2 prisoners.  Our  loss  was  1 lieutenant  and  4 privates  taken  prisoners 
and  1 officer  wounded — Major  Fitzsimmons,  of  the  Third  New  York  Cav- 
alry. Their  outposts  were  driven  in,  and  quarters,  stables,  &c.,  de- 
stroyed. The  party  on  the  south  side  of  the  river  met  with  a large  force 
of  cavalry,  and  a skirmish,  ensued  in  which  we  killed  1 rebel  captain 
and  wounded  several  of  their  men,  without  sustaining  any  loss  on  our 
side.  The  force  is  just  returning  to  its  camp,  but  I have  not  yet  learned 
the  exact  result  of  the  reconnaissance. 

In  my  next  I will  give  you  the  details  of  this  reconnaissance.  I have 


Chap.  XX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  389 

not  been  well  for  a few  days  past,  otherwise  would  have  sent  this  mail 
off  before.  To-morrow  I hope  to  be  out  as  usual. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Major-General,  Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina. 
— 

Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , May  17,  1862. 

General  George  B.  McClellan, 

Commanding  the  Army  of  the  Potomac : 

General:  I heard  of  your  victories  at  Williamsburg  and  West 
Point,  the  evacuation  of  Norfolk,  and  the  destruction  of  the  Merrimac 
while  I was  on  a visit  to  Roanoke  Island  and  Elizabeth  City,  and  I 
immediately  returned  to  this  place  with  the  hope  of  finding  the  engines 
tcars,  and  wagons  required  for  immediately  after  the  battle  of  New 
Berne,  but  none  have  yet  arrived. 

I am  very  much  crippled  for  want  of  land  transportation.  I could 
not  to-day  muster  a train  of  25  wagons,  which  you  know  would  not  be 
sufficient  to  carry  my  ammunition,  and,  as  you  see,  it  would  be  almost 
fatal  for  me  to  make  a move  into  the  interior  befoiie  they  arrive. 

, I am  anxiously  awaiting  dispatches  from  you  before  attempting 
another  move.  Everything  is  quiet  in  this  vicinity,  and  I think  the 
rebel  force  at  Kinston,  Raleigh,  and  Goldsborough  are  about  the  same 
as  when  I last  wrote.  The  health  of  the  command  is  improving. 

Capt.  Thomas  P.  Ives  will  bear  this  dispatch  to  you. 

Most  heartily  congratulating  you  on  your  brilliant  success,  I remain, 
general,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Major-General , Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina. 

i 

Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , May  19,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

, Secretary  of  War , Washington , D.  C. : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  since  the  sending  of  my  last 
dispatch  I have  received  accurate  reports  from  the  commanders  of  the 
reconnoitering  parties  in  the  direction  of  Kinston.  Our  exact  loss  was 
2 wounded  and  7 prisoners.  That  of  the  enemy  was  11  killed  and  15 
or  20  wounded  and  4 prisoners. 

It  was  ascertained  by  this  reconnaissance  that  the  enemy  had  on  the 
south  side  of  the  Trent  River,  in  the  neighborhood  of  Trenton,  about 
1,500  cavalry.  The  road  from  that  place  to  Kinston  is  very  heavily 
picketed,  the  main  body  being  in  and  beyond  Kinston,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Ransom. 

The  force  at  Kinston  and  Goldsborough  will  probably  concentrate, 
in  case  we  advance  up  the  country,  at  Falling  Creek,  about  7 miles 
above  Kinston,  on  the  railroad,  at  which  point  they  are  building  some 
light  breastworks,  but  are  putting  no  heavy  guns  in  position.  Golds- 
borough is  not  being  fortified  at  all,  but  we  learn  that  Raleigh  has  been. 
The  force  on  this  line  at  this  time,  as  near  as  we  can  learn,  is  two  regi- 
ments of  cavalry,  four  light  batteries,  and  some  fifteen  regiments  of 


390 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


infantry.  This  does  not  include  any  of  the  force  along  the  Weldon  and 
Wilmington  Railroad,  which  just  now  is  very  considerable,  all  the 
bridges  being  very  heavily  guarded. 

Our  engines,  cars,  &c.,  have  not  yet  arrived.  A portion  of  the 
wagons  have  come  in,  but  none  of  the  horses  or  harness. 

I have  heard  nothing  from  Roanoke  Island  or  that  neighborhood  for 
two  or  three  days. 

My  medical  director  is  establishing  a general  hospital  at  Beaufort, 
to  which  point  all  the  serious  cases  will  be  transported  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible. The  location  is  much  more  healthy  than  this,  and  by  concen- 
trating the  sick  in  one  general  hospital  there  it  will  require  fewer 
surgeons  to  attend  them.  A large  hotel  there  has  been  appropriated 
to  that  purpose.  Could  I have  known  that  the  delay  here  in  the  arrival 
of  transportation  would  have  been  so  great,  I think  I would  have  made 
a demonstration  against  Fort  Caswell  which  might  have  resulted  in  its 
fall.  However,  both  Wilmington  and  Fort  Caswell  can  easily  be  taken 
if  we  once  get  possession  of  Goldsborough  and  Raleigh. 

I have  been  on  the  eve  several  times  of  expressing  the  opinion  to 
you,  which  if  correct  is  of  great  importance,  but  have  hesitated  to  do 
it,  fearing  that  I may  not  be  correct.  It  is  this : The  Convention  in 
this  State  is  divided  in  opinion  as  to  the  present  mode  of  action  to  such 
an  extent  that  it  failed  to  take  any  action  at  all  when  it  last  met,  pre- 
ferring to  await  the®  issue  of  the  great  events  that  are  now  transpir- 
ing. I am  satisfied  that,  if  the  rebel  army  in  Virginia  is  either  cap- 
tured or  dispersed  or  forced  to  retreat  beyond  the  lines  of  this  State, 
the  State  will  at  once  return  to  its  allegiance  through  its  Convention 
by  a considerable  majority.  There  is  much  true  loyalty  here,  and  all 
the  people  are  heartily  sick  of  the  war,  and  are  very  much  exercised 
lest  their  own  State  should  be  made  the  next  battle  ground.  They 
have  been  taught  that  the  institution  of  slavery,  which  their  leaders 
have  made  them  believe  is  a great  element  of  strength,  is  in  fact  an 
element  of  weakness.  Wherever  the  Union  arms  have  made  a lodg- 
ment they  have  lost  the  entire  control  of  their  slaves,  and  they  are 
quite  convinced  that,  if  the  slave  States  formed  a recognized  govern- 
ment independent  of  the  Forth,  we  would  not  make  war  upon  them 
with  the  same  leniency  that  we  do  now,  but  would  use  this  element 
against  them  with  very  great  success. 

t The  arrival  of  Governor  Stanley  will,  I hope,  do  a great  deal  of  good. 
You  are  looking  at  this  subject  of  course  in  all  its  bearings  upon  the 
different  sections  of  the  country,  and  will  give  to  these  opinions  only 
the  weight  they  deserve. 

In  the  absence  of  definite  instructions  upon  the  subject  of  fugitive 
slaves  I have  adopted  the  following  policy: 

First.  To  allow  all  slaves  who  come  to  my  lines  to  enter. 

Second.  To  organize  them  and  enroll  them,  taking  their  names,  the 
names  of  their  masters,  and  their  place  of  residence. 

Third.  To  give  them  employment  as  far  as  possible,  and  to  exercise 
toward  old  and  young  a judicious  charity. 

Fourth.  To  deliver  none  to  their  owners  under  any  circumstances, 
and  allow  none  of  them  to  leave  this  department  until  I receive  your 
definite  instructions. 

To-morrow  I shall  go  to  Beaufort  and  Fort  Macon,  if  I am  well 
enough,  and  from  thence  to  Roanoke  and  the  Chowan  River,  unless  I 
should  hear  something  definite  from  Fortress  Monroe  which  requires 
my  immediate  attention  here. 

I was  not  as  well  when  I last  wrote  you  as  I thought,  and  have  con- 


391 


Chav.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


sequently  had  to  remain  indoors,  hut  I feel  now  that  I am  quite  recov- 
ered. 

I have  the  honor  to  he,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E,  BURNSIDE, 

Major-General , Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina. 


Headquarters  First  Brigade, 

Pamlico , May  19,  1862. 

General  Ambrose  E.  Burnside, 

Commanding  U.  S.  Troops , New  Berne , N.  C. : 

General:  In  reply  to  your  letter  of  yesterday  (but  dated  17th 
instant  *)  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  your  request  shall  at  once  be 
communicated  to  the  General  Commanding  our  troops,  and,  if  acceded 
to,  the  parties  desiring  to  return  to  New  Berne  will  be  speedily  for- 
warded by  flag  of  truce.  Permit  me  to  state  that  I have  no  doubt 
that  every  act  consistent  with  public  safety  will  be  reciprocated  on 

our  jiart.  „ ^ , 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  RANSOM,  Jr., 
Brigadier-General , C.  8,  Army . 


War  Department, 
Washington  City , D.  (7.,  May  20,  1862. 

Major-General  Burnside,  Commanding , &c. : 

General:  I have  the  pleasure  of  presenting  to  you  the  Hon.  Ed- 
ward Stanley,  who  has  been'appointed  Military  Governor  of  the  State 

' of  North  Carolina.  , , ^ 

The  nature  and  extent  of  Governor  Stanley’s  authority  and  jurisdic- 
tion are  expressed  in  his  commission,  which  will  be  exhibited  to  you. 
Between  him  and  yourself  the  President  expects  cordial  co-operation 
for  the  restoration  of  the  authority  of  the  Federal  Government.  The 
province  of  Governor  Stanley  is  to  establish  and  maintain,  under  mili- 
tary form,  the  functions  of  civil  government  until  the  loyal  inhabitants 
of  North  Carolina  shall  be  able  to  assert  their  constitutional  rights  and 


Prin  order  to  maintain  peace  and  enforce  respect  the  Governor  must 
be  supported  by  a sufficient  military  force,  to  be  detailed  by  you  from 
your  command,  and  report  to  him  and  act  under  his  direction. 

You  will  please  detail  such  force  as  may  be  adequate  for  this  pur- 
pose, to  be  designated  as  a Governor’s  Guard,  and  to  be  commanded  by 
a competent  officer.  You  will  also,  at  all  times,  upon  the  Governor’s 
requisition,  support  his  authority  and  enforce  his  orders  by  a military 
force  competent  for  the  occasion. 

The  well-known  patriotism  and  discretion  for  which  the  Governor 
and  yourself  are  distinguished  render  it  superfluous  to  give  any  further 
general  instructions.  The  President  expects  from  your  harmonious 
and  intelligent  action  the  most  favorable  results. 

With  great  respect,  I am,  yours,  &c., 

6 EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


* Not  found. 


392 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX 


Headquarters  of  the  Army, 
TunstalVs  Station , May  21,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina  : 

My  Hear  Burn.  : Your  dispatch  and  kind  letter  received.  I have 
instructed  Seth  to  reply  to  the  official  letter  and  now  acknowledge 
the  kind  private  note.  It  always  does  me  good,  in  the  midst  of  my 
cares  and  perplexities,  to  see  your  wretched  old  scrawling.  I have 
terrible  troubles  to  contend  with,  but  have  met  them  with  a good 
heart,  like  your  good  old  self,  and  have  thus  far  struggled  through 
successfully.  Our  progress  has  been  slow,  but  that  is  due  to  igno- 
rance of  the  country  (we  have  to  feel  our  way  everywhere;  the  maps 
are  worthless),  the  narrowness,  small  number,  and  condition  of  the 
roads,  which  become  impassable  for  trains  after  a day’s  rain,  of  which  we 
have  had  a great  deal. 

I feel  very  proud  of  Yorktown ; it  and  Manassas  will  be  my  brightest 
chaplets  in  history;  for  I know  that  I accomplished  everything  in  both 
places  by  pure  military  skill.  I am  very  proud  and  grateful  to  God 
that  he  allowed  me  to  purchase  such  great  success  at  so  trifling  a loss 
of  life.  We  came  near  being  badly  beaten  at  Williamsburg.  I arrived 
on  the  field  at  5 p.  m.  and  found  that  all  thought  we  were  whipped 
and  in  for  a disaster.  You  would  have  been  glad  to  see,  old  fellow 
how  the  men  cheered  and  brightened  up  when  they  saw  me.  In  five 
minutes  after  I reached  the  ground  a possible  defeat  was  changed  into 
certain  victory.  The  greatest  moral  courage  I ever  exercised  was  that 
night,  when,  in  the  face  of  urgent  demands  from  almost  all  quarters 
for  re- enforcements  to  hold  our  own,  I quietly  sent  hacJc  the  troops  I 
had  ordered  up  before  I reached  the  field.  I was  sure  that  Johnston 
would  ieave  during  the  night  if  he  understood  his  business,  or  that  I 
could  be  able  to  thrash  him  in  the  morning  by  a proper  use  of  the  force 
I had.  It  turned  out  that  Jo.  left ! Hancock  conducted  himself  mag- 
nificently ; his  charge  was  elegant ! 

I expect  to  fight  a desperate  battle  in  front  of  Bichmond,  and  against 
superior  numbers,  somewhat  intrenched.  The  Government  have  delib- 
erately placed  me  in  this  position.  If  I win,  the  greater  the  glory.  If 
I lose,  they  will  be  damned  forever,  both  by  God  and  men. 

WeH,  I have  bored  you  long  enough,  old  fellow.  I will  merely  add 
that  my  light  troops  have  crossed  the  Chickahominy  at  Bottom’s  Bridge 
this  morning,  10  miles  from  Bichmond,  and  that  the  advanced  guard, 
under  Stoneman,  has  driven  in  everything  upon  New  Bridge  (on  my 
right),  6 miles  from  Bichmond.  The  crisis  cannot  long  be  deferred.  I 
pray  for  God’s  blessing  on  our  arms,  and  rely  far  more  on  his  goodness 
than  I do  on  my  own  poor  intellect.  I sometimes  think  now  that  I can 
almost  realize  that  Mahomet  was  sincere.  When  I see  the  hand  of  God 
guarding  one  so  weak  as  myself,  I can  almost  think  myself  a chosen 
instrument  to  carry  out  his  schemes.  Would  that  a better  man  had 
been  selected.* 

* * * * * * * 

^ese  “Is  we  will  soon  be  in  direct  communication, 
and  1 shall  then  wish  to  give  you  a command  from  this  army  to  add  to 
the  noble  men  you  now  have. 

Good-by,  and  God  bless  you,  Burn.  With  the  sincere  hope  that  we 
may  soon  shake  hands,  I am,  as  ever,  your  sincere  friend, 

McCLELLAK 


*Some  personal  matter  omitted. 


Chap.  XX.] 


393 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

Headquarters  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

Camp  near  TunstalVs  Station , Va .,  May  21,  1862. 

Mai.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina , New  Berne : 

General  : By  direction  of  the  general  commanding  I have  the  honor 
to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  dispatch  of  the  l/th  instant  and 
to  communicate  the  following  in  reply : 

Assuming  your  force  to  be  about  15,000,  m the  event  of  a movement 
on  Winton,  &c.,  you  would  probably  have  to  leave  at  least  5,000  m 
New  Berne,  1,000  as  a railway  guard,  1,000  at  Beaufort  and  Fort  Macon, 
500  at  Hatteras  Inlet,  and  1,000  at  Boanoke,  making  8,500  m all,  and 
leaving  not  more  than  6,000  to  6,500  men  for  active  operations,  a force 
too  small  to  do  much  good ; but  by  operating  on  Goldsborough,  you 
would  have  to  leave  only,  say,  1,000  at  Boanoke,  500  at  Beaufort,  and 
1,000  at  New  Berne,  giving  you  12,500  available  in  the  field.  Ihe  gen- 
eral, therefore,  thinks  that  a cautious  yet  bold  advance  on  Goldsborough 
as  soon  as  the  necessary  transportation  arrives  would  produce  a better 
effect,  and  would  neutralize  a larger  portion  of  the  enemy’s  force  than 
any  other  movement  you  could  make. 

We  are  moving  on  steadily  and  as  rapidly  as  the  state  of  the  roads 
hitherto,  supplies,  and  the  necessity  for  extended  reconnaissances  have 
allowed.  Our  light  troops  crossed  the  Ohickahominy  early  this  morning 
at  Bottom’s  Bridge  and  the  railway  bridge  (both  of  which  had  been 
burnt)  without  meeting  the  enemy,  but  we  have  as  yet  no  reliable  intel- 
ligence of  his  position  or  movements.  A heavy  force  will  be  thrown 

across  without  delay.  ^ 

Evervthing  goes  to  show  that  the  enemy  is  before  us  in  superior 
force,  perhaps  double  our  own  available  strength  at  present,  and  the 
general  is  still  of  the  opinion  that  they  will  make  a decided  stand  this 
side  of  Bichmond,  as  is  evidently  their  best  policy.  But  even  should 
they  abandon  Bichmond,  it  may  well  be  to  offer  battle  at  some  point 
farther  South  in  Virginia  and  off  the  navigable  streams. 

We  command  the  navigation  of  the  James  Biver  up  to  Wall’s  Bluff, 
on  the  other  bank,  about  8 miles  below  Bichmond,  where  the  gunboats 
were  repulsed  on  the  15th. 

You  are  probably  informed  that  General  McDowell  was  ordered  on 
the  17th  to  move  on  Bichmond  by  the  line  of  the  Fredericksburg  Bailway 
and  to  effect  a junction  with  this  army  on  our  right,  keeping  his  forces 
always  so  as  to  cover  the  line  of  approach  to  Washington.  McDowell 
will  bring  from  35,000  to  40,000  men  with  him. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J 1 ’ S.  WILLIAMS, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , Map  28,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  Governor  Stanley  arrived  at 
this  port  night  before  last,  and  is  fast  making  his  arrangements  to  as- 
sume the  duties  assigned  to  him.  He  handed  me  your  letter  of  instruc- 
tions to  me,  which  I will  most  cheerfully  obey  to  the  best  of  my  ability. 
I have  consulted  fully  with  the  Governor,  and  find  that  our  views  in 


394 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


reference  to  the  course  that  should  he  adopted  in  this  State  by  the  Gen- 
eral Government  are  remarkably  coincident,  and  you  may  be  sure  that 
I will  grant  him  every  facility  in  my  power  to  carry  out  these  views. 
His  arrival  here  is  a source  of  very  great  relief  to  me,  as  there  are  many 
civil  cases  here  that  require  early  attention.  In  a few  days  I will  be 
able  to  report  to  you  more  definitely  the  arrangements  made  to  carry 
out  the  instructions  to  the  Governor  and  myself. 

You  will  have  seen  in  the  papers  that  his  brother  was  arrested  by  my 
forces  a few  days  ago.  Upon  investigation  of  the  charges  upon  which 
he  was  arrested  I was  very  glad  to  find  they  were  not  of  a sufficiently 
serious  nature  to  require  his  detention,  and  I therefore  released  him  the 
day  before  the  Governor’s  arrival.  The  prisoners  brought  by  him  from 
Washington  City  have  been  sent  to  their  homes  under  a flag  of  truce. 
We  are  now  receiving  our  prisoners  from  Salisbury,  N.  C.,  at  the  rate 
of  200  per  day.  They  will  be  forwarded  to  New  York  with  the  least 
possible  delay.  There  will  be  some  1,300  non-commissioned  officers  and 
privates  in  all.  General  Holmes,  the  rebel  commander  in  this  State, 
has  no  authority  to  release  the  commissioned  officers  confined  in  Salis- 
bury, among  whom  are  Colonels  Corcoran  and  Willcox.  I shall  con- 
tinue my  efforts  in  their  behalf,  and  do  not  despair  of  obtaining  for  them 
an  early  release. 

I shall  send  by  the  steamer  carrying  the  prisoners  duplicate  rolls,  one 
to  yourself,  the  other  to  Colonel  Tompkins,  chief  quartermaster,  New 
York  City.  Would  it  not  be  well  to  send  from  your  office  by  telegraph 
instructions  to  Colonel  Tompkins  to  furnish  these  men  with  immediate 
transportation  to  their  homes  ? 

Nothing  of  importance  has  occurred  in  a military  way  in  this  depart- 
ment since  my  last  dispatch.  We  are  anxiously  waiting  the  result  of 
General  McClellan’s  movement  before  Eichmond. 

None  of  our  trains  or  locomotives  have  yet  arrived. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Major-General , Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , May  30,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington , D.  C. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  during  the  last  wTeek  the  naval 
force  in  these  waters  has  been  reduced  by  sending  two  vessels  (the 
Underwriter  and  the  Valley  City)  North  for  repairs,  and  by  ordering 
two  (the  Delaware  and  Southfield)  to  join  Flag-Officer  Goldsborough  on 
the  James  River. 

I am  not  disposed  to  question  the  wisdom  of  these  orders,  but  I deem 
it  my  duty  to  remind  you  that  we  hold,  by  means  of  the  military  and 
naval  force  here,  all  the  towns  in  these  waters,  and  if  the  number  of 
naval  vessels  is  to  be  diminished,  it  will  be  necessary  to  vacate  some 
of  the  places.  In  every  place  that  has  been  visited  by  either  the 
Army  or  Navy  some  Union  feeling  has  been  displayed,  and  in  some 
of  the  places  the  American  flag  has  been  hoisted  upon  the  public 
buildings  by  citizens  of  their  own  volition,  and  it  would  be  manifest 
injustice  to  leave  these  people  without  a protecting  force  to  the  op- 
pression of  the  rebel  Government. 

Without  wishing  to  complain  of  the  Navy  Department,  which  has 


Chai*.  XX.] 


395 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

done  so  mucli  for  our  cause  in  these  waters,  I beg  that  you  will  remind 
the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  of  these  facts,  and  request  that,  as  far  as 
the  interest  of  the  public  service  will  allow,  the  naval  force  under  Com- 
modore Rowan  be  strengthened  rather  than  weakened. 

In  my  previous  communication  I rather  exceeded  my  province  by 
stating  that  Governor  Stanley’s  views  and  my  own,  as  to  the  policy 
the  Government  wished  to  adopt  in  this  State,  awere  remarkably  co- 
incident.” It  would  have  been  quite  enough  for  me  to  have  said  that 
Governor  Stanley,  being  the  representative  of  the  Government  here,  will 
be  sustained  bv  all  the  force  under  my  control.  You  will  readily  see 
that  the  civil  policy  to  be  adopted  by  him  will  cover  a very  wide  range, 
and  may  in  many  cases  not  be  in  accordance  with  the  views  of  a major- 
ity of  the  people  under  my  command  $ but  we  are  here  to  sustain  the 
Government,  and  as  long  as  Governor  Stanley  is  its  representative  his 
wishes  shall  be  carried  out  at  any  cost. 

I avail  myself  of  the  departure  of  one  of  the  naval  vessels  to  send 
you  this  hasty  dispatch,  and  I beg  that  you  will  not  understand  by  it 
that  any  disagreement  has  occurred  between  the  Governor  and  myself, 
for  I simply  want  to  avoid  the  trouble  that  may  arise  from  an  uncalled- 
for  indorsement  of  future  events,  of  which  I necessarily  know  so  little. 

I am  sorry  again  to  report  that  none  of  our  engines,  cars,  &c.,  have 
arrived. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Major-General. 


Washington,  June  3, 1862. 

Major-General  Burnside, 

Care  of  General  Dix , New  Berne  via  Fort  Monroe : 

Your  dispatches  of  May  19,  23,  and  30  have  been  received.  A copy 
of  the  last-mentioned  dispatch  has  been  communicated  to  the  Secretary 
of  the  Navy  and  also  to  the  President.  The  Quartermaster-General  in- 
forms me  that  the  locomotives  and  cars,  to  wit,  four  locomotives  and 
fifty  cars,  have  been  shipped  to  you  from  Baltimore  on  fifteen  schooners. 
General  Wool  has  been  transferred  to  Baltimore.  General  Dix  takes 
his  place.  The  troops  at  Old  Point  are  probably  taken  by  General 
McClellan.  You  will  please  place  yourself  in  communication  with  Gen- 
eral Dix.  I will  communicate  more  fully  by  mail. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department, 
Washington  City , June  3,  1862. 

Hon.  Edward  Stanley, 

Military  Governor  of  North  Carolina , New  Berne , N.  C.: 

Sir  : The  House  of  Representatives  of  the  United  States  on  the  2d 
instant  adopted  a resolution  of  which  the  following  is  a copy : 

Resolved,  That  the  President  of  the  United  States  be  requested  to  communicate  to- 

^First U What  powers  have  been  conferred  upon  Hon.  Edward  Stanley,  as  Military 
Governor  of  North  Carolina,  or  as  the  agent  of  the  Government  in  said  State,  under 
the  appointmeut  of  the  President. 

Second.  Whether  the  said  Edward  Stanley  has  interfered  to  prevent  the  education 
of  children,  white  or  black,  in  said  State ; and  if  so,  by  what  authority,  if  any  ! 


396 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


Third.  If  the  said  Edward  Stanley  has  been  instructed  by  the  Government  to  prevent 
such  education,  to  what  extent  and  for  what  purpose  were  such  instructions  given. 

The  President  has  referred  the  resolution  to  this  Department  for 
reply,  but  as  it  has  no  information  touching  the  matter  covered  by  the 
second  of  the  above  inquiries,  you  are  hereby  requested  to  furnish  the 
Department  with  a full  and  immediate  answer  to  the  same. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 

Navy  Department, 

tt  "ci  •»«-  ci  rv  June  4,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War : 

S1®, : ? have  tlie  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of 
gie  2d  instant,  inclosing  copy  of  a part  of  a dispatch  from  General 
.Burnside,  commanding  the  Department  of  North  Carolina. 

It  is  not  known  at  this  Department  what  places  in  North  Carolina  are 
occupied  by  General  Burnside  and  therefore  liable  to  be  vacated  bv 
him  upon  the  withdrawal  of  part  of  the  naval  force,  but  it  is  believed 
that  the  enemy’s  force  both  naval  and  military  in  those  waters  is  dis- 
persed  and  destroyed,  and  the  large  number  of  steamers  used  to  accom- 
plish this  cannot  now  all  be  required  there,  more  especially  as  an 
has  been  made  upon  this  Department  for  an  increase  of  force 
m the  Yirgmia  waters.  There  remain  in  the  North  Carolina  waters, 
after  the  withdrawal  complained  of  by  General  Burnside,  seventeen 
naval  vessels.  ’ 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GIDEON  WELLES. 


The  President  : 


War  Department, 
Washington  City , D.  C .,  June  4, 1862. 


Sffi : answer  to  a resolution  of  the  House  of  Representatives, 

dated  on  the  2d  of  June,  in  relation  to  the  power  conferred  on  the  Mili- 
tary Governor  of  North  Carolina,  I have  the  honor  to  state : 

1.  That  a copy  of  the  letter  of  appointment  and  instructions  to  Gov- 
ernor Stanley  are  hereto  annexed. 

2.  That  Governor  Stanley  has  not  been  instructed  by  the  Govern- 
e^North^Carolina^16  educatlonof  children,  white  or  black,  in  the  State 

3.  That  this  Department  has  no  official  information  that  Governor 
Stanley  has  interfered  to  prevent  the  education  of  white  or  black  chil- 
dren  in  said  State,  but  that  a copy  of  the  resolution  of  the  House  has 

wh1phtrwilamitted-  t0,i  report  uP°n  his  action  on  the  subject, 

which,  when  received,  will  be  communicated  to  vou.  9 

Your  obedient  servant, 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 
rT  . Secretary  of  War . 

[Inclosure  No.  1.]  a J 

War  Department, 

Hon.  Edward  Stanley,  &c.,  &c.,  &c.,  May  19’  1862‘ 

Washington , D.  G. : 

North  rTroHn^re3rtebytifP^0ilited  Military  Governor  of  the  State  of 
North  Carolina,  with  authority  to  exercise  and  perform,  within  the  lim- 


Chap.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


397 


its  of  that  State,  all  and  singular  the  powers,  duties,  and  functions 
pertaihing  to  the  office  of  Military  Governor  (including  the  power  to 
establish  all  necessary  offices  and  tribunals  and  suspend  the  writ  of 
habeas  corpus)  during  the  pleasure  of  the  President  or  until  the  loyal 
inhabitants  of  that  State  shall  organize  a civil  government  in  conform- 
itv  with  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 


War  Department, 
Washington  City , D.  0.,  May  20, 1862. 

Hon.  Edward  Stanley, 

Military  Governor  of  North  Carolina  : 

Sir  : The  commission  you  have  received  expresses  on  its  face  the 
nature  and  extent  of  the  duties  and  power  devolved  on  you  by  the  ap- 
pointment [as]  Military  Governor  of  North  Carolina. 

Instructions  have  been  given  to  Major-General  Burnside  to  aid  you 
in  the  performance  of  your  duty  and  the  extent  of  your  authority.  He 
has  also  been  instructed  to  detail  an  adequate  military  force  for  the 
special  purpose  of  a governor’s  guard  and  to  act  under  your  directions. 

It  is  obvious  to  you  that  the  great  purpose  of  your  appointment  is  to 
re-establish  the  authority  of  the  Federal  Government  in  the  State  of 
North  Carolina  and  provide  the  means  of  maintaining  peace  and  secur- 
ity to  the  loyal  inhabitants  of  that  State  until  they  shall  be  able  to 
establish  a civil  government.  4 

Upon  your  wisdom  and  energetic  action  much  will  depend  in  accom- 
plishing the  result.  It  is  not  deemed  necessary  to  give  any  specific 
instructions,  but  rather  to  confide  in  your  sound  discretion  to  adopt 
such  measures  as  circumstances  may  demand.  Specific  instructions 
will  be  given  when  requested. 

You  may  rely  upon  the  perfect  confidence  and  full  support  of  the 
Department  in  the  performance  of  your  duties. 

With  respect,  I am.  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Fort  Monroe,  June  9, 1862 — 1.30  a.  m. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War: 

I learn  here  that  Commodore  Goldsborough  has  ordered  two  more 
gunboats  out  of  our  department,  the  Hunchback  and  Commodere  Perry, 
two  of  our  best  vessels.  When  the  other  boats  were  taken  away  it 
created  much  alarm  among  the  Union  people  who  had  made  demon- 
stration in  our  favor  in  the  towns  occupied  by  these  boats.  It  will  be 
disastrous  to  the  Union  cause  in  North  Carolina  if  this  policy  is  carried 
out.  We  should  have  more  gunboats  instead  of  less,  but  will  be  satis- 
fied with  what  we  have.  Seven  have  already  left  us.  I hope  the 
President  will  deem  it  proper  to  direct  by  telegraph  that  this  order  be 
revoked ; if  sent  here  to  me  I will  transmit  it.  I am  sorry  to  learn 
that  there  is  much  feeling  against  Governor  Stanley,  but  I hope  the 
Government  will  await  further  developments  before  condemning  him. 
He  is  doing  much  good.  I wish  I could  communicate  with  you  per- 
sonally, and  would,  but  for  going  so  far  from  my  department.  Gen- 


398 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


eral  Dix  has  not  troops  enough  now  to  co-operate  with  me  against 
Weldon. 

BURNSIDE. 


Fort  Monroe,  June  9,  1862 — 8.05  a.  m. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War: 

In  accordance  with  your  dispatch,  requesting  me  to  communicate  with 
General  Dix,  I thought  it  best  to  see  him  in  person.  Left  my  depart- 
ment at  5 p.  m.  yesterday  and  came  through  canal.  Shall  leave  in  two 
hours  unless  I get  other  orders  from  you.  I meet  General  Dix  in  a 
few  minutes  and  will  telegraph  result  of  conference.  In  the  mean  time 
will  be  glad  to  hear  from  you,  and  will  give  any  information  you  may 
desire. 

All  quiet  in  my  department.  We  had  a Small  fight  at  Washington 
on  Friday  last,  in  which  we  were  victorious. 

A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Major-General. 


Washington,  June  9,  1862. 
Major-General  Burnside,  Fort  Monroe: 

The  President  is  now  with  me  in  the  Department.  We  have  nothing 
to  communicate,  but  leave  it  to  you  and  General  Dix  to  make  such 
military  arrangements  as  you  may  deem  expedient.  We  would  be 
glad  to  be  informed  of  the  result  of  your  conference.  I wish  also  to 
know  whether  there  is  anything  you  desire  that  can  be  furnished  by 
this  Department.  Have  the  cars  and  locomotives  reached  you?  I 
would  like  to  know  confidentially  from  you  by  letter  of  Governor 
Stanley’s  operations  and  your  opinion  of  them  and  what  the  facts 
really  are. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Fort  Monroe,  June  9,  1862—1  p.  m. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton: 

Your  telegram  received.  I have  already  telegraphed  in  reference  to 
the  co-operation  of  General  Dix  and  myself.  I also  referred  to  Gov- 
ernor Stanley’s  policy.  It  is  evidently  misunderstood  by  the  Northern 
people.  Mr.  Colyer  has  misrepresented  the  matter,  if  newspapers  are 
correct.  Governor  Stanley  is  as  sound  on  the  Union  question  as  you 
or  I.  In  answer  to  a dispatch  from  me  to  General  McClellan,  stating 
that  I was  here,  he  says  : u Can  you  not  come  up  to  see  me  in  a special 
boat  ? ” Shall  I go  ? 

A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Major- General. 


Washington,  June  9,  1862. 

Major-General  Burnside  : 

I think  it  would  be  desirable  for  you  to  see  and  confer  with  General 
McClellan,  and  you  have  the  permission  of  the  Department  to  do  so  if 
your  own  command  does  not  require  your  presence.  You  will  advise 
me  before  leaving  Fort  Monroe  for  New  Berne,  if  convenient  to  do  so. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Chap.  XX.] 


399 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

Washington,  June  9,  1862. 

Major-General  Burnside, 

Fort  Monroe : 

Your  dispatch  in  relation  to  the  gunboats  has  been  laid  before  the  Presi- 
dent. He  has  directed  the  Hunchback  and  Perry  to  remain  where  they 
are,  and  that  Goldsborough’s  order  for  their  removal  be  countermanded. 
This  I understand  to  be  satisfactory  to  you.  I should  be  glad  to  have 
a detailed  statement  of  your  force  and  to  potion. 

Secretary  of  War . 


* Fort  Monroe,  June  9,  1862 — 5 p.  m. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Three  regiments  on  Roanoke  Island,  one  at  Washington,  one  at 
Newport  on  railroad,  and  one  and  a half  at  Beaufort  and  Fort  Macon; 
fourteen  at  New  Berne.  One  regiment  artillery  and  one  regiment  cav- 
alry and  three  batteries  divided  along  the  different  commands.  A 
large  portion  of  the  force  at  New  Berne  is  on  picket  duty.  Regiments 
average  600  effective  men.  I leave  for  McClellan’s  at  once.  Will  tele- 
graph you  before  I return  to  New  Berne. 

* p J BURNSIDE. 


Fort  Monroe,  June  11,  1862 — 10.30  a.  m. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

I have  just  returned  from  McClellan’s  headquarters,  where  I passed 
about  six  hours.  It  stormed  very  hard  all  day.  The  roads  are  in  the 
most  wretched  condition.  I was  four  and  a half  hours  traveling  9 
miles.  It  is  impossible  to  move  artillery  whilst  they  are  so  bad.  But 
for  the  railroad,  the  army  could  not  be  subsisted  and  foraged.  The 
general  health  was  improving.  The  officers  and  men  are  in  good  spir- 
its. I will  write  you  fully  of  our  consultation  about  co-operating.  I 
would  very  much  like  a personal  interview,  but  feel  that  I cannot  re- 
main away  from  my  department  any  longer  unless  you  desire  it.  I 
would  be  glad  to  get  any  instructions  you  may  have  by  telegraph. 

BURNSIDE. 

P.  S.— Since  writing  the  foregoing  I have  just  heard  from  my  de- 
partment by  a boat  which  left  Roanoke  at  7 o’clock  last  evening. 
Everything  quiet. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , June  12, 1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War: 

Sir:  Your  letter  of  the  3d  instant  has  not  received  the  immediate 
answer  you  requested,  because  I was  absent  in  Beaufort  when  it  arrived. 
You  send  me  a copy  of  the  resolution  adopted  by  the  House  of  Rep- 


400 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX, 


resentatives  on  the  2d  instant,  and  desire  I should  furnish  the  Depart- 
ment with  a full  and  immediate  answer  to  the  following  part  of  said 
resolution : 

Second.  Whether  the  said  Edward  Stanley  has  interfered  to  prevent  the  education 
of  children,  white  or  black,  in  said  State;  and,  if  so,  by  what  authority,  if  any. 

On  the  31st  day  of  May  last  I addressed  you  a letter,  which  I pre- 
sume had  not  been  received  when  you  wrote  on  the  3d  instant.  In 
that  letter  of  the  31st,  in  reference  to  matters  here,  I made  the  follow- 
ing observations : 

The  perplexing  question  of  what  is  to  be  done  with  the  negroes  is  constantly  pre- 
senting itself.  I have  thus  far  managed  it  with  discretion.  Upon  all  occasions  I say 
I have  no  hope  of  affording  redress  to  the  enemies  of  our  country;  that  the  Union  is 
to  he  restored,  cost  what  it  may  in  blood  and  treasure,  and  this  is  a matter  not  to  he 
argued.  ♦ 

One  person  came  to  me  yesterday  who  had  four  slaves  taken  from  him,  and  told 
they  were  free  by  a rude  soldier,  who  cursed  his  wife.  I suggested,  first,  he  must 
take  the  oath  of  allegiance;  this  he  agreed  to  do.  Then  I gave  him  authority  to  look 
for  his  property,  advising  him  to  use  mildness  and  persuasion.  He  did  so,  and  one 
servant  voluntarily  returned  to  the  home  of  a kind  master.  This  has  already  excited 
some  evil-disposed  persons  and  will  he  misrepresented. 

Almost  all  the  inhabitants  have  gone  away  and  the  belief  still  exists  that  it  is 
dangerous  for  them  to  return. 

The  Confederates  refuse  to  allow  any  persons  to  come  to  this  place,  keeping  away 
even  women  and  children.  Unless  I can  give  them  some  assurance  that  this  is  a war 
of  restoration  and  not  of  abolition  and  destruction,  no  peace  can  be  restored  here  for 
many  years  to  come.  I am  making  efforts  to  induce  Union  men  to  come  and  talk  with 
me.  I feel  confident  I shall  be  successful  in  a few  weeks. 

One  person  ventured  to  give  me  advice.  I gave  him  at  once  permission  to  goto 
New  York.  The  person  whose  impertinent  meddling  I rebuked  is  Mr.  H.  H.  Helper. 

A gentleman  of  good  Samaritan  inclinations  and  acts  had  established  a school  for 
negro  children.  He  called  and  informed  me  what  he  was  doing,  and  asked  my  opin- 
i°n*  I 1 approved  all  he  had  done  in  feeding  and  clothing  the  destitute  white  and 
black,  but  told  him  I had  been  sent  to  restore  the  old  order  of  things.  I thought  his 
negro  school,  if  approved  by  me,  would  do  harm  to  the  Union  cause.  In  a few  months 
we  shall  know  the  result  of  the  war.  If  by  Southern  folly  emancipation  comes,  their 
spiritual  welfare  would  not  suffer  by  the  delay,  for  I desired  he  would  give  such  oral 
instructions  in  religious  matters  as  he  thought  best. 

Another  reason  I urged  was,  that  by  one  of  the  cruel  necessities  of  slavery  the  laws 
of  North  Carolina  forbade  slaves  to  be  taught  to  read  and  write,  and  I would  be  most 
unsuccessful  in  my  efforts  if  I encouraged  the  violation  of  her  laws.  He  acquiesced,  I 
thought,  cheerfully.  If  the  old  residents  ever  return,  those  negroes  tvho  have  been 
taught  to  read  and  write  would  be  suspected  and  not  benefited  by  it. 

You  have  no  idea  how  happy  the  influence  has  been  on  the  minds  of  the  excellent 
and  severely-punished  people  of  this  lonely  town.  This  school  affair  has  already  been 
much  misrepresented. 

This  extract  might  be  sufficient  to  answer  the  resolution,  but  as  you 
request  not  only  an  immediate  u but  a full”  answer,  it  may  be  proper 
to  add  something  more. 

To  the  extent  mentioned  I did  interfere,  and  would  most  assuredly 
do  so  again  under  the  same  circumstances. 

My  authority  for  so  doing  was  the  only  instruction  given  me  in  your 
communication  of  May  20,  1862,  in  the  following  words : 

^ is  obvious  to  you  that  the  great  purpose  of  your  appointment  is  to  re-establish 
the  authority  ot  the  Federal  Government  in  the  State  of  North  Carolina  and  to  pro- 
vide the  means  of  maintaining  peace  and  security  to  the  loyal  inhabitants  of  that 
State. 

I had  these  instructions  in  view  when  I made  the  suggestion  relative 
to  the  negro  school. 

And  in  your  letter  to  General  Burnside,  of  date  20th  of  May,  to 
which  you  referred  me,  you  state : 

The  province  of  Governor  Stanley  is  to  re-establish  and  maintain,  under  military 
form,  the  functions  of  civil  government,  until  the  loyal  inhabitants  of  North  Carolina 
shall  be  able  to  assert  their  constitutional  rights  and  privileges. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


401 


Chap.  XX.] 

I ask  to  be  instructed  what  u civil  government”  is  here  meant,  and 
what  are  the  “ constitutional  rights  and  privileges”  of  the  loyal  in- 
habitants of  this  State?  If  their  property  is  destroyed  or  removed 
before  peace  is  restored,  what  “ rights  and  privileges”  are  they  to 

GXDCCi) 

In  the  interview  with  the  manager  of  the  schools  I made  use  of  no 
threats,  used  no  discourteous  language,,  and  treated  the  gentleman 
referred  to  with  all  kindness.  He  called  the  next  morning  and  informed 
me  he  had  suspended  teaching  the  negro  children.  I approved  what 
he  had  done,  but  nothing  approaching  unpleasantness  occurred  during 
the  interview,  nor  did  the  thought  enter  my  mind  I had  given  him 
offense.  Not  a word  was  said,  nor  any  intimation  given,  of  any  inten- 
tion to  “ enforce”  the  laws  of  this  State.  No  such  thought  was  m my 

mind  nor  ever  can  be.  j ^ a , , 

I do  not  intend  to  be  guilty  of  disrespect  to  the  Secretary  nor  to 
betray  too  much  sensitiveness,  and  will  not  therefore  comment  upon 
what  seems  to  me  to  be  unusual  language  in  requesting  an  imme- 
diate” answer.  . 

My  position  is  one  of  great  responsibility.  I am  ready  to  meet  it. 
I hope  it  is  an  honorable  one.  It  certainly  can  bring  no  profit  and  is 
not  unaccompanied  with  peril.  I have  great  difficulties  to  overcome— 
greater  than  you  suppose — and  am  entitled  to  all  the  confidence  and 
support  which  I was  assured  I should  have. 

I believe  the  President  to  be  sincere  in  his  various  public  declara- 
tions, and  wish  to  make  the  people  of  North  Carolina  believe  him  to 

be  sincere  and  patriotic.  . 

But  I am  grieved  to  say  that  some  of  the  most  eminent  and  in- 
fluential of  our  citizens,  from  listening  to  oft-repeated  slanders,  have 
been  persuaded  and  charge  the  Southern  country  is  invaded  by  an 
enemy  who  come  to  rob  us,  to  murder  our  people,  to  emancipate  our 
slaves,  and  who  is  now  preparing  to  add  a new  element  to  this  most 
atrocious  aggression,  and  involve  us  in  the  direful  horrors  of  a servile 
war.  He  proposes  nothing  less  than  our  entire  destruction,  the  total 
desolation  of  our  country — universal  emancipation ; to  crush  us,  to 
wipe  out  the  South,  to  involve  us  in  irredeemable  misery  and  hopeless 
ruin  ” 

Though  I know  all  this  is  the  effect  of  long-continued  excitement, 
and  not  words  of  truth  and  soberness,  but  of  passion  and  altogether 
incorrect  in  every  particular,  still  they  are  the  words  of  sincerity,  from 
men  of  irreproachable  lives,  who  denounced  secession  as  treason  down 
to  the  day  when  the  North  Carolina  Convention  passed  the  ordinance 

of  secession.  ^ „ 

If  this  idea,  so  monstrously  incorrect,  be  m the  minds  ot  men  ot 
standing  and  influence,  how  must  the  large  body  of  the  people  regard 
the  action  of  the  General  Government? 

In  view  of  this  most  deplorable  condition,  I avail  myself  ot  the  priv- 
ilege I understood  from  you  I should  have  of  asking  instructions  upon 
the  following  points  : 

1.  When  slaves  are  taken  from  the  possession  of  their  loyal  masters 
by  violence  offered  by  armed  men  and  negroes,  what  redress  shall  be 
afforded  to  the  owners  and  what  protection  for  the  future  ? 

2.  When  persons  connected  with  the  Army  prevail  on  negroes  to 
leave  their  masters,  shall  the  loyal  master  or  mistress  have  permission 
to  prevail  on  them  to  return  and  be  protected  while  so  doing  ? 

3.  When  steamers  and  vessels  are  almost  daily  leaving  this  State, 

26  B R— VOL  IX 


402 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


and  negroes,  the  property  of  loyal  citizens,  are  taken  on  board  without 
the  consent  of  their  owners,  who  are  sometimes  widows  and  orphans, 
will  authority  be  given  to  prevent  their  being  removed  ? 

4.  In  cases  where  aged  and  infirm  people,  who  have  been  always  loyal 
inhabitants  and  treated  with  cruelty  by  secession  soldiers  because  of 
their  loyalty,  have  had  their  able-bodied  slaves  taken  away,  their  barns 
robbed  and  fences  destroyed,  themselves  unable  from  age  and  infirmity 
to  labor,  shall  any  effort  be  made,  either  by  persuasion,  by  the  civil 
authority,  or  otherwise,  to  have  them  delivered  up  ? 

5.  If  the  Military  Governor  shall  interfere  with  any  action  which  it 
is  known  will  violate  the  long-established  law  of  North  Carolina,  and 
a person  connected  with  the  Army  on  the  Sunday  following  shall  make 
inflammatory  appeals  to  a crowd  of  several  hundred  negroes,  exhort- 
ing them  to  resort  to  violence  and  bloodshed,  what  action  shall  be 
taken  by  the  Governor,  if  any,  to  prevent  the  recurrence  of  such  con- 
duct f 

6.  When  the  slaves  of  loyal  citizens,  who  have  never  given  aid  and 
comfort  to  the  rebellion  and  sometimes  suffered  because  they  did  not, 
are  employed  by  the  authorities  of  the  United  States  in  various  kinds 
of  labor,  can  any  steps  be  taken  to  secure  a portion  of  what  is  due  for 
their  labor  to  their  owners'? 

These  are  not  cases  of  imagination ; they  have  occurred  and  are 
most  of  them  coming  before  me  for  action  daily.  I will  not  weary  or 
distress  you  by  the  details. 

I hope  I am  not  exceeding  the  duties  of  my  place  while  I urgently, 
but  most  respectfully,  request  an  answer  to  these  questions. 

When  I receive  that  answer  I shall  be  able,  without  delay,  to 
inform  the  Department  how  far  I can  be  relied  upon  to  carry  out  its 
wishes. 

Every  day’s  experience  impresses  more  forcibly  on  my  mind  the 
conviction,  felt  by  abler  and  better  men  than  myself^  that  some  course 
of  policy  must  be  adopted  as  to  the  disposition  of  slaves  within  our 
lines. 

If  the  Army  advances,  and  their  numbers,  already  large,  shall  be  in- 
creased, what  is  to  be  done  with  them  <?  Who  will  support  them  or 
their  owners,  often  loyal  and  true  men,  already  reduced  to  want  by 
the  rebellion,  who  can  make  no  crops  without  their  aid  ? 

The  expense  of  feeding  the  negroes  will  be  enormous.  It  is  esti- 
mated that  each  negro  man  employed  by  Government  will  require  in 
wages  and  subsistence  $40  per  month  to  support  himself  and  family, 
who  generally  accompany  him. 

It  is  my  heartfelt  desire  to  restore  to  my  native  State  the  countless 
blessings  conferred  by  the  Union.  1 am  ready  to  make  any  sacrifice 
a gentleman  and  patriot  can  make  to  do  so.  But  if  I cannot  rely  upon 
the  “ perfect  confidence  and  full  support  of  the  War  Department,” 
which  was  promised  me,  I desire  to  know  it. 

The  loss  of  my  humble  abilities  will  not  be  felt  by  this  great  country. 

If  I am  to  act  without  instructions  and  not  to  be  supported  when  I 
pursue  the  deliberate  dictates  of  my  judgment  and  conscience,  then  I 
ask — the  only  favor  I ever  asked  for  my  personal  benefit  of  any  admin- 
istration— to  be  allowed  to  tender  my  u immediate”  resignation,  and  to 
be  restored  as  early  as  possible  to  the  honor  of  a private  station. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  STANLEY, 
Military  Governor  of  North  Carolina. 


3HAP.  XX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  403 

Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne,  June  .24,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington , D.  C. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  Governor  Stanley  arrived  at 
this  place  yesterday,  after  having  made  an  extended  visit  to  Washing- 
ton, N.  C.,  which  has,  in  my  opinion,  resulted  in  very  great  good  to  the 
Onion  cause.  He  has  no  doubt  given  you  a detailed  account  of  his 
visit.  I had  a lengthy  conversation  with  him  last  evening,  in  which  I 
gave  him  as  accurate  a statement  as  I could  of  the  interview  which  I 
had  the  pleasure  of  having  with  the  President,  yourself,  and  other 
distinguished  gentlemen,  and  he  expressed  himself  highly  pleased 
with  the  result  of  the  interview. 

He  very  frankly  said  to  me  that  he  was  much  annoyed  by  the  course 
that  had  been  pursued  by  a portion  of  the  Northern  press  and  the 
criticisms  of  some  distinguished  Senators,  all  of  which  were  caused  by 
the  statement  of  a very  insignificant  person,  who  had  seized  upon  an 
accidental  expression  of  his  opinion,  and  taken  decided  action  on  the 
ever-agitated  negro  question,  and  then  ran  off  to  the  North  for  the  pur- 
pose of  creating  an  excitement  and  thereby  gaining  a little  temporary 
notoriety,  without  thinking  of  the  embarrassment  it  would  cause  the 
Government.  Like  all  men  who  are  working  for  the  restoration  of  the 
Union,  he  has  ceased  to  think  of  the  matter,  and  when  Mr.  Colyer  re- 
turned to  the  department  this  morning  he  received  him  as  kindly  as  if 
nothing  had  happened;  in  fact,  the  mild  course  which  he  pursued  to- 
ward a man  who  had  done  all  he  could  to  injure  him  had  the  effect  to 
cause  me  to  change  my  determination  to  dismiss  Mr.  Colyer  if  he  again 
came  into  the  department.  We  both  of  us  feel  that  we  had  rather  be 
annoyed  by  an  over-officious  person  than  to  do  any  act  to  embarrass 
the  Government  by  causing  discord  among  the  members  of  Congress  at 
a time  when  harmony  should  prevail  and  all  should  unite  in  sustaining 
the  policy  of  the  Government  at  any  sacrifice  of  opinion,  comfort,  or 
means. 

I sincerely  hope  that  you  will  find  it  for  the  interest  of  the  public  serv- 
ice to  sustain  the  Governor. 

The  military  affairs  of  this  department  are  in  a fair  condition,  the 
health  of  the  command  is  improving,  and  we  now  have  near  15,00Q  men 
for  duty.  The  infantry  regiments  are  in  fine  spirits  and  discipline, 
have  excellent  arms  and  plenty  of  ammunition,  a good  supply  of  cloth- 
ing and  camp  equipage,  and  are  abundantly  and  well  provided  for  by 
the  Commissary  Department.  The  cavalry  regiment  is  also  in  fine  con- 
dition, and  are  equally  well  supplied,  their  only  want  being  hair  sad- 
dle blankets,  which  are  very  necessary  in  this  climate,  and  which  have 
already  been  required  for.  I hope  the  Quartermaster’s  Department  will 
forward  1,000  of  the  same  at  once. 

You  will  remember  that  this  regiment  was  only  armed  with  sabers 
and  pistols,  which  I am  convinced  is  a most  excellent  general  rule  to 
adopt  in  any  cavalry,  but  in  this  thickly-wooded  country  a great  por- 
tion of  the  skirmishing  has  to  be  done  on  foot,  which  renders  carbines 
very  necessary,  and  I would  be  very  glad  if  you  would  authorize  Gen- 
eral Ripley  to  issue  1 ,000  good  carbines,  with  the  cartridge-boxes  and 
slings,  and  a good  supply  of  ammunition. 

You  will,  I am  sure,  pardon  a very  natural  prejudice  when  I say  that 
I would  prefer  what  is  called  the  “Burnside  carbine,”  if  the  Ordnance 
Department  have  them,  but  I would  much  prefer  “Sharp’s”  or  any 
good  carbine  rather  than  delay  the  shipment  even  for  one  week. 


404 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


Our  field  artillery  force  is  also  in  good  condition,  having  been  in- 
creased by  the  fitting  up  of  new  batteries  of  captured  pieces  to  over 
thirty  guns  now  ready  for  the  field,  only  fourteen  of  which  belong  to 
the  regularly-organized  batteries  of  the  command.  A few  more  horses 
and  a small  supply  of  harness  would  be  of  service  to  us,  and  Colonel 
Sibley  has  gone  North  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  them,  but  they  are 
now,  as  I before  stated,  in  a fair  condition  to  move. 

You  are  so  perfectly  conversant  with  the  length  of  line  and  number 
of  places  that  we  have  to  hold  in  these  watery  that  I will  not  enter  into 
details  as  to  the  garrisons  that  it  will  be  necessary  to  leave  behind  in 
case -we  receive  an  order  to  move,  but  will  simply  give  you  the  answer 
which  I gave  in  reply  to  a dispatch  from  General  McClellan,  and  am 
expecting  an  answer  from  him  to-morrow  night: 

I can  place  7,000  infantry  in  Norfolk  ready  for  transportation  to  White  House  in 
five  days,  but  with  no  wagons,  camp  equipage,  artillery*  or  cavalry,  or  I can  place  at 
a point  on  the  Chowan  River,  with  a view  of  co-operating  in  an  attack  on  Petersburg, 
7,000  infantry,  twelve  pieces  of  artillery,  three  companies  of  cavalry,  and  wagons 
enough  for  the  ammunition,  and  five  days’  subsistence,  at  five  days’  notice.  (Of  course 
I can  move  on  Weldon  with  the  same  force),  or  I can  move  on  Goldsborough  at  sixty 
hours’  notice  with  10,000  infantry,  twenty  pieces  of  artillery,  and  five  companies  of 
cavalry. 

Either  one  of  these  moves  can  be  made,  and  at  the  same  time  leave 
the  places  which  we  now  hold  tolerably  secure.  Several  miles  of  railroad 
between  here  and  Goldsborough  have  been  torn  up  and  many  of  the 
bridges  and  culverts  destroyed,  but  I am  convinced  that  we  can  take 
the  place,  but  would  not  like  to  guarantee  that  it  can  be  held  with  this 
small  force.  If,  however,  it  should  be  deemed  advisable,  after  hearing 
from  General  McClellan,  to  make  either  one  of  these  moves,  I shall 
avail  myself  of  the  very  great  confidence  which  you  have  placed  in  me 
by  allowing  me  the  discretion  of  co-operating  with  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac  without  waiting  for  special  instructions  from  the  Department. 

Of  the  four  engines  started  to  us  two  were  lost  at  Hatteras  Inlet  in 
a gale,  and  two  are  now  running  on  the  road  between  here  and  Fort 
Macon.  The  cars,  wagons,  and  horses  are  arriving  rapidly,  and  are 
being  put  in  movable  condition.  I heard  of  the  loss  of  the  two  engines 
while  at  Fort  Monroe,  and  Mr.  Tucker,  your  Assistant  Secretary,  prom- 
ised  to  send  us  two  more  at  onoe. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Major-General , Commanding  Department  North  Carolina . 


General  Burnside: 


Washington,  June  28,  1862. 


I think  you  had  better  go,  with  any  re-enforcements  you  can  spare, 
to  General  McClellan. 


A.  LINCOLN. 


War  Department,  June  28, 1862. 
Major-General  Burnside,  Nete  Berne: 

We  have  intelligence  that.  General  McClellan  has  been  attacked  in 
large  force  and  compelled  to  fall  back  toward  the  James  River.  We 
are  not  advised  of  his  exact  condition,  but  the  President  directs  that 
you  shall  send  him  all  the  re-enforcements  from  your  command  to  the 


Chap.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


405 


James  Eiver  that  you  can  safely  do  without  abandoning  your  own 
position.  Let  it  be  infantry  entirely,  as  he  said  yesterday  that  he  had 

cavalry  enough.  EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Fort  Monroe,  June  28, 1862. 


If  it  decides  the 


Eckert : 

The  following  was  sent  to  Burnside  on  the  25th. 

President  not  to  send  his  of  this  date  telegraph  me  to  Norfolk.  I will 
be  there  in  an  hour  and  half : 

Headquarters,  June  25, . 

Maj.  Gen.  Ambrose  E.  Burnside: 

Reports  from,  contrabands  and  deserters  to-day  make  it  probable  that  Jackson’s 
forces  are  coming  to  Richmond,  and  that  a part  of  Beauregard’s  force  have  arrived  at 
Richmond.  You  will  please  advance  on  Goldsborough  with  all  your  available  forces 
at  the  earliest  practicable  moment.  I wish  yon  to  understand  that  every  minute  in 
this  crisis  is  of  great  importance.  You  will  therefore  reach  Goldsborough  as  soon  as 
i possible,  destroying  all  the  railroad  communications  in  the  direction  of  Richmond  in 
your  power. 

If  possible,  destroy  some  of  the  bridges  oh  the  Raleigh  and  Gaston  Railroads  and 
‘ threaten  Raleigh.  _ 

geo.  b.  McClellan. 


SHELDON. 


War  Department, 

i June  28,  1862 — 6 p.  m. 

Major-General  Burnside,  New  Berne : 

Since  the  dispatches  of  the  President  and  myself  to  you  of  to-day  we 
have  seen  a copy  of  one  sent  to  you  by  General  McClellan  on  the  25th, 
of  which  we  were  not  aware.*  Our  directions  were  not  designed  to 
1 interfere  with  any  instructions  given  you  by  General  McClellan,  but 
onlv  to  authorize  you  to  render  him  any  aid  in  your  power, 
i*  EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

• Secretary  of  War. 


On  Board  the  Alice  Price, 

Pamlico  Sound , June  — , 1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan: 

We  can  put  7,000  infantry  in  Norfolk  in  five  days,  but  no  artillery, 
cavalry,  or  wagons,  and  will  require  transportation  from  Norfolk.  We 
can  land  at  a point  on  the  Chowan  to  attack  Petersburg  with  7,000, 
twelve  pieces  of  artillery,  240  cavalry,  and  enough  wagons  for  ammu- 
nition, and  four  days7  provisions  in  five  days.  We  can  move  on  Golds- 
borough at  sixty  hours’  notice  with  10,000  infantry,  twenty  pieces  of 
artillery,  and  five  companies  of  cavalry. 

From  my  present  information  I think  that  we  can  take  Goldsbo- 
rough and  hold  it  for  the  present,  although  13  miles  of  railroad  between 
here  and  Kinston  have  been  destroyed.  At  all  events  we  can  go  to 
Kinston  and  repair  the  railroad  and  bridges  between  here  and  there. 
We  have  already  built  the  bridges  over  the  Trent  and  Batchelder’s  Creek, 

* See  Sbeldon  to  Eckert,  immediately  preceding. 


406 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


and  will  probably  have  to  build  one  more  bridge  of  80  feet  at  Cane 
Creek  and  one  of  400  feet  at  Kinston,  although  the  latter  is  not  yet 
destroyed  and  we  may  save  it. 

BURNSIDE. 


Abstract  from  return  of  the  Department  of  North  Carolina,  Maj.  Gen.  Ambrose*  E.  Burn- 
side commanding,  for  June,  1862. 


Station. 


New  Berne. 


Roanoke  Island . . . 
Newport  Barracks 


Troops. 


Present  for 
duty. 


2 ^ 

<1  © 


ro-g 
§ A 
© 

£ 


First  (Foster’s)  Division : 

Infantry 

Artillery 

Cavalry •_ 

Second  (Reno’s)  Division: 

Infantry 

Artillery 

Third  (Parke’s)  Division : 

Infantry 

Artillery 

Hawkins’ brigade  (infantry). 
Garrison  (infantry) 


168 

49 

33 


4,  469 
1,024 
534 


5, 109 
1,  265 
629 


6, 343 
3,532 
760 


148 

4 


3,  549 
61 


4, 169 
76 


4,938 

79 


95 

2 

56 

25 


2,  033 
44 
1,  407 
670 


2, 127 
55 
1,  603 
749 


2, 784 
57 
1,750 
1,091 


Total 


580 


13,  791 


15,  782 


19,  334 


39 


34 


Headquarters  Department  oe  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , July  3,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  George  B.  McClellan: 

General  : I embarked  7,000  infantry  and  was  on  my  way  to  join 
you,  at  the  suggestion  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  when  I met  a messen- 
ger, informing  me  of  your  important  success  before  Richmond,  which,  if 
true,  rendered  it  unnecessary  for  me  to  join  you.  I accordingly  brought 
my  fleet  to  an  anchor,  and  have  sent  a steamer  through  to  Norfolk  to 
ascertain  the  exact  state  of  affairs,  and  shall  hold  myself  in  readiness 
to  move  in  any  direction. 

The  movement  up  the  country  in  the  direction  of  Goldsborough  will 
be  pushed  as  rapidly  as  possible.  The  railroad  bridges  and  culverts,  as 
you  know,  are  all  destroyed,  but  we  are  rapidly  repairing  them,  and  to- 
morrow we  will  make  an  advance  of  some  10  or  12  miles  beyond  our 
present  outposts.  I had  already  commenced  a movement  with  my  entire 
force,  when  I received  a dispatch  from  the  President  and  Secretary  of 
War  requesting  me  to  do  anything  in  my  poWer  to  assist  you  before 
Richmond. 


I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  serv- 
ant, 


A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Major-General . 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , July  3,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  the  suggestion  of  your  dispatch,  I embarked 
7,000  infantry,  and  was  iiroceeding  to  the  point  designated  by  youy 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


407 


Chap.  XX.] 

when  I met  a dispatch  from  Colonel  Hawkins,  commanding  at  Roanoke 
Island,  stating  that  there  was  information  from  Fort  Monroe  of  some 
very  important  successes  to  our  arms  in  front  of  Richmond,  which,  it 
true  renders  our  proceeding  further  unnecessary  $ in  fact,  renders  it 
almost  necessary  that  the  original  suggestions  of  General  McClellan  to 
me  should  be  carried  out.  I accordingly  ordered  my  fleet  to  come  to 
anchor,  and  sent  a messenger  to  Norfolk  to  ascertain  the  exact  state  ot 
affairs,  and  shall  hold  myself  in  readiness  to  proceed  in  either  direc- 

tl0I  have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Major- General . 

I hope  this  action  will  meet  with  your  approval. 


Fort  Monroe,  July  3,  1862—3  p.  m. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War: 

I have  just  received  the  following  dispatch  from  Colonel  Hawkins. 
I do  not  quite  understand  why  General  Burnside  should  not  have  sent 
it  in  his  own  name,  if  it  comes  from  or  is  authorized  by  him.  The  offi- 
cer who  brought  it  says  Colonel  Hawkins  sent  it,  with  the  assurance 
that  General  Burnside  would  approve  it : 

Headquarters,  Roanoke  Island , July  2—6  p.  m. 

General  Dix: 

I wish  you  would  telegraph  immediately  to  President  Lincoln  if  he  has  any  orders 
other  than  the  last  sent  some  three  days  ago  for  General  Burnside.  We  are  almost 
ready  to  move  in  obedience  to  that  order.  If  Richmond  he  taken,  the  President  may 
wish  to  change  his  instructions.  Please  give  me  General  McClellan  s position  when 
last  heard  from.  Please  return  the  dispatch  boat  immediately,  as  the  news  which  it 
brings  will,  I think,  govern  the  operations  in  this  department. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  RUSH  Q HAWKINS, 

Colonel , Commanding  Fourth  Brigade  and  Post. 

p.  s.— We  shall  be  ready  to  move  in  twenty-four  hours. 

JOHN  A.  DIX, 

Major-General. 


War  Department,  July  3,  1862. 

Colonel  Hawkins, 

Commanding  at  Roanoke  Island : 

Your  telegram  of  July  2 to  General  Dix  bas  just  been  received. 
Richmond  is  not  taken.  General  McClellan  has  been  compelled  to  fall 
back  to  Harrison’s  Bar,  on  the  James  River.  It  is -the  opinion  of  the 
President,  and  he  so  directs,  that  General  Burnside  in  person,  with  all 
the  infantry  force  he  can  spare,  move  by  way  of  Hampton  Roads  and 
the  James  River  to  General  McClellan’s  headquarters,  to  re-enforce  him 

immediately.  EDWm  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Fort  Monroe,  July  3,  1862. 

The  President  i 

Soon  after  sending  you  Colonel  Hawkins’  dispatch  I received  from 
General  McClellan  an  order  to  General  Burnside  to  bring  on  all  the 


408 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


troops  he  could  spare.  I sent  it  off  immediately,  with  a letter  from 
myself,  describing  to  General  Burnside  the  position  of  General  McClel- 
lan’s army.  The  steamer  having  gone,  I cannot  send  your  dispatch  to 
Colonel  Hawkins  until  morning.  I will  do  so  then,  if  you  desire  it. 

JOHN  A.  HIX, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , July  5,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  dispatch  boat  which  I sent 
through  the  canal  to  Norfolk  for  information  and  instructions  has  not 
yet  returned.  In  the  mean  time  we  hear  most  startling  rumors  of  dis- 
asters to  General  McClellan’s  army,  which  are  in  sad  contrast  to  the 
dispatch  from  Colonel  Hawkins,  on  Roanoke  Island,  on  the  night  of 
the  2d  instant.  We  have  Richmond  papers  giving  information,  or 
rather  their  version  of  the  events,  up  to  10  o’clock  of  the  night  of  the 
1st.  After  making  due  allowance  for  the  exaggerations,  we  are  led  to 
hope  that  General  McClellan  has  made  a successful  retreat  to  some 
point  on  the  James  River  nearly  opposite  City  Point,  thereby  securing 
a new  and  better  base  of  operations ; in  which  case  he  can,  I imagine, 
after  resting  his  army  and  receiving  proper  re-enforcements,  work  his 
way  up  the  James  River  to  Richmond.  In  view  of  the  great  uncer- 
tainty of  the  actual  state  of  affairs  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  I beg 
to  make  the  following  statement : 

First.  We  can  move  with  7,000  infantry  (which  were  started  the  other 
day  for  the  James  River)  at  once,  at  the  same  time  holding  with  toler- 
able security  all  the  points  now  in  our  possession,  together  with  the 
railroads  from  this  place  to  Beaufort. 

Second.  Or  we  can  send  8,000  infantry  and  hold  all  these  points,  but 
cannot  protect  either  the  railroad  or  Beaufort.  The  latter,  however, 
can  be  protected  by  the  Navy,  while  we  hold  Fort  Macon.  This  move- 
ment will  require  two  days’  notice. 

Third.  Or  we  can  move  from  here  with  from  three  to  five  days’  notice 
with  the  entire  command,  except  the  garrisons  for  Hatteras  Inlet,  Fort 
Macon,  and  Roanoke  Island,  placing  our  sick  at  the  latter  place,  leav- 
ing this  place  to  be  protected  by  the  Navy,  as  Elizabeth  City  and  other 
places  on  the  Albemarle  Sound,  are  held.  This  will  involve  the  dis- 
mantling of  the  two  very  strong  forts  on  the  outskirts  of  the  city,  which 
have  been  erected  with  great  care  and  labor  with  a view  to  holding  the 
place  as  a base  of  operations.  This  movement  can  be  made  without 
exciting  the  suspicions  of  the  enemy  in  this  neighborhood,  and  we  can 
thus  add  to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  a force  of  11,500  infantry,  one 
regiment  of  cavalry,  twenty  pieces  of  light  artillery,  and,  if  necessary, 
100  wagons  and  a supply  of  ambulances ; all  in  good  condition. 

All  these  propositions  presuppose  that  the  rebel  army  are  still  occu- 
pied in  Richmond  by  the  establishment  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  at 
some  point  on  James  River  near  City  Point. 

If  such  is  the  case,  General  McClellan  would,  I imagine,  cut  off  their 
communication  with  North  Carolina  by  taking  Petersburg,  thus  render- 
ing it  unnecessary  for  the  present  to  cut  the  two  lines  in  the  interior  of 
this  State. 

If,  as  the  rebel  papers  assert,  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  is  demoralized 
and  broken  to  pieces,  which  we  do  not  credit,  the  rebel  army  in  front  of 


Chai\  XX.] 


409 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

Richmond  will  be  relieved,  and  this  place  will  be  liable  to  an  attack  by 
a very  large  force ; but  I think,  with  the  aid  of  the  forts  and  gunboats, 
we  can  hold  it,  and  we  will  remain  subject  to  your  orders.  . 

I omitted  to  state  that  the  execution  of  this  last  proposition  might 
create  some  suffering  among  a few  Union  people  in  this  city,  but  the 
other  towns  in  these  waters  would  not  be  affected  so  long  as  the  naval 
forces  here  remain  undiminished.  The  proposition  contemplates  leav- 
ing garrisons  at  Hatteras  Inlet,  Fort  Macon,  and  Roanoke  Island  large 
enough  to  furnish  as  much  protection  to  these  other  towns  as  they  now 
receive,  and  as  the  Union  sentiment  in  this  place  is  remarkably  limited, 
it  should  not  be  taken  into  consideration  in  devising  plans  for  the  pub- 

llCWe°hope  and  pray  that  the  condition  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  is 
not  as  has  been  represented  by  the  rebel  accounts,  but  in  any  eve^  we 
hold  ourselves  in  readiness  to  stand  by  the  Government,  and  perform 
any  duties  that  may  devolve  upon  us  to  the  best  of  our  abilities. 

The  adoption  of  the  third  proposition  will  involve  the  necessity  ot 
sending  to  Beaufort  from  the  North  transportation  for  six  regiments  of 
infantry,  one  regiment  of  cavalry,  four  batteries  of  light  artillery,  and 
also  for  200  wagons  and  ambulances,  with  teams,  if  they  are  required  ; 
if  not,  they  can  be  left  in  the  depot  at  Morehead  City,  near  Beaufort, 
with  the  engines  and  cars. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  yourob^dimrfc  > 

Major-General , Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina . 


War  Department,  July  5,  1862. 
Major-General  Burnside,  via  Fortress  Monroe  : 

The  Department  has  no  further  orders  to  give,  but  hope  you  will  with 
all  sneed  reach  General  McClellan  with  as  large  a force  as  possible. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War . 


Fort  Monroe,  July  7,  1862 — 4.40  p.  m. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War: 

Arrived  here  safely  with  the  advance  of  my  command.  I bring  near 
8,000  good  men.  Please  give  me  any  instructions  you  may  have.  I 
shall  leave  as  soon  as  the  bulk  of  the  command  arrives.  It  takes  some 
time  for  all  the  vessels  to  pass  the  swash.  If  necessary  I will  go  right 

UP‘  A.  E.  BURNSIDE, 

Major-General . 


War  Department,  July  7,  1862. 
Major-General  Burnside,  Fort  Monroe : 

The  President  is  on  the  way  to  meet  you  at  Fort  Monroe.  Please 
remain,  and  do  not  send  your  troops  forward  until  you  see  him. 

7 EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War . 


410 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


. [Chap.  XX. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , July  8,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I have  tlie  honor  to  report  that  General  A.  E.  Burnside  left 
this  department  on  the  morning  of  the  6th  day  of  July  with  the  Second 
and  Third  Divisions  of  this  corps  d’arm^eto  join  the  Army  of  the  Poto- 
mac under  General  McClellan,  leaving  me  in  command  of  this  depart- 
ment. 

My  force,  comprising  the  First  Division,  consists  of  seven  regiments 
and  one  battalion  of  infantry,  one  regiment  of  cavalry,  one  of  artillery, 
and  the  Marine  Artillery. 

One  regiment  of  infantry  guards  the  railroad  from  here  to  Beaufort, 
one  battalion  at  Beaufort,  and  one-half  of  the  Marine  Artillery  as  garri- 
son on  Roanoke  Island.  The  balance  of  the  forces  are  stationed  at  this 
point,  under  my  immediate  command. 

I am  at  present  engaged  in  strengthening  and  fortifying  the  place  at 
every  possible  point  of  attack,  and  consider  myself  abundantly  able  to 
hqld  the  position  against  almost  any  force  that  may  be  brought  against  it. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 
Commanding  Department . 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , N.  O.,  July  15,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington , D.  C.  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  everything  has  remained  quiet 
in  this  department  since  the  date  of  my  last  letter,  July  12  [8th  ?].  Iam 
progressing  quite  well  in  strengthening  the  field  works  around  the 
city,  and  am  also  erecting  block-houses  at  all  the  exposed  points,  such 
as  bridges,  stations,  &c.,  on  the  line  of  the  railroad,  so  as  tc  enable  a 
comparatively  small  force  to  hold  the  road  with  tolerable  security.  A 
fortified  car,  arranged  to  carry  two  guns,  with  loop-holes  for  musketry, 
and  manned  with  a crew  from  the  Marine  Artillery,  is  run  with  every 
train  between  this  city  and  Beaufort. 

The  city  is  quite  healthy  at  this  time,  and  I find  by  a personal  ex- 
amination of  the  hospitals  that  most  of  the  patients  are  convalescing. 

I go  to  Beaufort  to-day  to  inspect  the  hospital «th ere  and  to  arrange 
for  placing  it  under  the  efficient  care  of  some  Sisters  of  Charity  who 
are  expected  from  New  York. 

Commodore  Rowan  left  here  at  night  on  the  12th,  in  obedience  to  his 
orders.  I had  the  honor  to  write  in  relation  to  him  in  my  letter  of  that 
date. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 

Brigadier- General,  U . S.  Army , Commanding  Department, 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina. 

New  Berne , July  21, 1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington , D.  C.  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  all  has  been  quiet  in  this  de- 
partment since  the  date  of  my  last  report,  July  15. 


Chap.  XX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  411 

The  work  on  tlie  defenses  of  this  town  is  progressing  very  favorably, 
and  before  long  I expect  the  town  to  be  sufficiently  fortified  to  be  held 
by  a small  force. 

The  construction  of  the  works  for  the  defense  of  Washington  is  rapidly 
approaching  completion. 

The  work  on  block-houses  on  the  line  of  the  Atlantic  and  North  Car- 
olina Eailroad  is  going  on  with  proper  dispatch. 

There  are  now  three  light  batteries,  of  four  guns  each,  organized  and 
mounted,  taken  from  the  Third  Eegiment  New  York  Volunteer  Artil- 
lery. They  are  being  drilled  assiduously,  and  will  soon  reach  that 
state  of  proficiency  that  will  enable  them  to  be  most  useful  in  attack 
or  in  defense. 

There  is  from  the  same  regiment  another  battery  of  six  guns  organ- 
ized, which  will  be  mounted  from  the  horses  arrived  by  the  Cakawba 
(100  in  number,).  I look  forward  to  having  a comparatively  large  and 
efficient  corps  of  light  artillery. 

The  health  of  the  department,  I am  very  happy  to  say,  is  improving, 
the  new  cases  being  mostly  of  milder  form  than  before,  but  I have 
deemed  best  to  establish  a general  hospital  at  Portsmouth,  so  as  to 
remove  as  much  as  practicable  the  sick  from  the  hospital  in  this  town 
to  the  sea-breezes  and  purer  air  of  Portsmouth.  I have  used  the  Marine 
Hospital  built  by  the  United  States  Government  for  the  purpose. 

I have  to  report  that,  at  the  request  of  Major-General  Burnside,  nine 
Sisters  of  Mercy  have  arrived  from  New  York,  to  take  charge  of  the 
hospital  at  Beaufort,  and  under  their  kind  and  educated  care  I hope 
for  a rapid  improvement  in  the  health  of  the  patients.  The  Bev.  Mr. 
Bruehl,  their  priest,  accompanied  them,  and,  in  consideration  of  the 
worthiness  of  this  gentleman  and  of  the  large  number  of  Catholics  in 
the  New  York  regiment  attached  to  my  command,  I most  earnestly 
recommend  that  he  be  appointed  chaplain  of  the  United  States  hospital 
at  Beaufort,  N.  C. 

Chaplain  James  Means  has  arrived  at  this  place,  and  having  pre- 
sented his  appointment  as  chaplain  for  the  United  States  hospital  at 
New  Berne,  has  been  assigned  to  duty  accordingly. 

1 am,  sir,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTEE, 

Brigadier- General,  TJ.  8.  Army , Commanding  Department. 


Headquarters  Department  oe  North  Carolina, 

New  Berne , N.  0.,  July  29,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington , D.  C. : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  all  is  well  in  this  department. 

The  work  on  the  fortifications  at  this  point  and  at  Washington  is 
progressing  well.  At  the  latter  place  the  fort  is  ready  to  receive  its 
guns.  This  work,  with  the  block-houses  being  erected  and  with  the 
gunboat  in  the  river,  will  make  the  place  secure  against  any  small 
force.  The  block-houses  on  the  line  of  the  Atlantic  and  North  Caro- 
lina Eailroad,  between  here  and  Beaufort,  are  going  on  well.  The 
health  of  the  troops  continue  about  as  last  reported. 

The  condition  of  the  hospital  at  Beaufort  is  improving,  and  the 
comforts  of  the  men  are  being  admirably  looked  after  by  the  Sisters 
of  Mercy,  recently  arrived  from  New  York. 


412 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


The  hospital  at  Portsmouth  is  being  prepared  for  the  reception  of 
patients,  and  I expect  to  send  there  on  Thursday  next  the  requisite 
number  to  fill  it.  The  diseases  incident  to  this  climate  are  of  such  a 
debilitating  nature  that  all  cases  require  the  tonic  of  salt  air  to  recu- 
perate. I had  the  honor  to  send  you,  under  date  the  28th  instant  a 
brief  report  of  several  reconnaissances  ordered  by  me. 

The  first,  under  command  of  Colonel  Tee,  of  the  Twenty-seventh 
Massachusetts  Volunteers,  and  in  command,  temporarily,  of  the  First 
Brigade  of  my  division,  consisted  of  nine  companies  of  the  Twenty- 
fifth  Massachusetts,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sprague 5 seven  com- 
panies of  the  Twenty-seventh  Massachusetts,  under  Lieutenant-Col- 
onel Lyman;  four  companies  of  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  under  Major 
Lewis,  and  Belger’s  Khode  Island  Battery,  under  Lieutenant  Pope. 
They  left  Deep  Gully,  the  limit  of  our  pickets,  at  daylight  of  Saturday, 
and  marched  up  the  Trent  JRoad,  driving  in  the  enemy’s  pickets  as  they 
advanced.  Arriving  at  the  fork  of  the  roads  (one  fork  leading  to  Kins- 
ton and  one  to  Trenton)  we  came  upon  the  picket  station  and  surprised 
them,  but  were  unable  to  catch  them,  as  they  took  to  their  horses,  leav- 
ing everything  behind,  and  started  for  Kinston. 

At  this  point  a force  of  four  companies  infantry,  a section  of  artillery 
and  a platoon  of  cavalry  were  left,  the  remaining  force  pushing  on  for 
Trenton. 

On  reaching  the  bridge  over  the  Trent  at  this  place  it  was  found  on 
fire  and  a small  force  of  the  enemy  on  the  other  side.  A dash  of  our 
cavalry  and  a volley  forced  them  to  leave;  the  fire  was  extinguished, 
the  bridge  replanked,  and  the  force  entered  the  town  without  opposi- 
tion. ^ 

After  a halt  the  column  was  started  for  Pollocksville,  marched  till 
night,  camped  for  the  night  at  a deserted  plantation,  and  started  for 
Pollocksville  the  next  a.  m.  This  place  was  reached  at  10  a.  m.  and 
there  met  the  second  reconnaissance,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Fel- 
lows, and  consisting  of  six  companies  Seventeenth  Massachusetts  and 
one  company  Third  Cavalry.  This  detachment  started  from  their  camp 
the  other  side  of  the  Trent  Biver  Saturday  morning  at  daylight,  with 
orders  to  march  to  Pollocksville,  building  all  the  necessary  bridges  on 
the  line  of  their  march,  take  and  hold  Pollocksville  until  communi- 
cated with  by  Colonel  Lee.  This  they  did  without  opposition,  though 
as  the  command  neared  Mill  Creek,  which  it  was  necessary  to  cross  to 
reach  Pollocksville,  the  cavalry  vedettes,  4 in  number,  were  fired  upon 
from  the  bushes,  2 killed  and  2 wounded  and  taken  prisoners.  Infantry 
skirmishers  were  immediately  thrown  forward  to  the  right  and  left  of 
the  road  by  Colonel  Fellows,  who  was  at  the  head  of  the  column  some 
500  paces  in  rear.  The  skirmishers  deployed  through  the  swamp  and 
wood  on  either  side  of  the  road,  but  were  unsuccessful  in  their  efforts 
to  find  the  firing  party.  The  perfect  knowledge  of  all  the  by-paths, 
serpentine  roads,  &c.,  possessed  by  these  small  parties  of  the  enemy, 
renders  pursuit  almost  hopeless.  Colonel  Fellows,  crossing  the  creek, 
occupied  the  town  till  met,  as  before  said,  by  Colonel  Lee,  when  both 
commands  uniting,  under  command  of  Colonel  Lee,  started  for  Ne w 
Berne,  and  arrived  at  10  o’clock  Sunday  night.  The  circuit  made  by 
Colonel  Lee  was  about  50  miles  in  circumference. 

The  third  detachment,  under  Colonel  Heckman,  of  the  Ninth  New 
Jersey  Volunteers,  consisted  of  five  companies  of  that  regiment,  two 
companies  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  and  Battery  B of  the  New  York 
Bocket  Battalion,  consisting  of  three  pieces.  This  command  started 
from  Newport,  the  headquarters  of  this  regiment,  on  picket  duty  on  the 


Chap.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


413 


railroad  on  Saturday  morning,  and  marched  for  Young  s Cross-Roads, 
a point  25  miles  distant  (about),  and  on  the  direct  road  from  Pollocks- 
ville'to  Wilmington,  and  distant  8 miles  from  the  former  place.  On 
arriving  at  a creek  just  between  them  and  the  Cross-Roads  the  bridge 
was  found  taken  up  and  the  enemy  showed  themselves  by  firing  a vol- 
lev  from  the  other  side,  which  wounded  3 of  onr  men,  1 mortally.  The 
fire  was  replied  to  and  one  piece  of  artillery  brought  up  and  opened 
fire  on  them  with  canister,  and  when  they  retreated  they  were  followed 
up  by  shell.  The  people  in  the  neighborhood  represent  that  they  car- 
ried off  two  wagon  loads  of  killed  and  wounded.  The  bridge  was  then 
rebuilt  and  the  command  bivouacked  there  for  the  night,  and  the  next 
morning  started  for  New  Berne,  via  Pollocksville,  reaching  here  with- 

°UTh<?fourth  detachment  consisted  of  two  companies  Twenty-seventh 
Massachusetts,  10  cavalry,  and  20  Third  New  York  Artillery,  with  mus- 
kets under  command  of  Captain  Sanford,  of  Twenty-seventh.  Started 

Sunday  a.  m.  up  the  railroad  to  break  up  the  picket  headquarters  on 
the  Nduse  road.  They  moved  up  with  great  expedition  for  about  5 
miles  from  Batchelder’s  Creek,  our  picket  limits  on  that  road,  and  then 
branched  off  toward  the  Neuse  road,  off  of  which  was  the  headquar- 
ters Thev  drove  in  the  vedettes  and  moved  on  with  such  speed  as  pre- 
vented the  alarm  being  given.  They  reached  the  hou^  and  partially 
surrounded  it,  announcing  their  presence  by  a volley,  wounding  3 and 
killing  1,  and  succeeded  in  capturing  10  soldiers  of  the  Second  North 
Carolina  Cavalry  and  about  20  horses.  The  party  then  returned,  having 
destroyed  the  house,  to  New  Berne  in  safety.  , - 

Bv  the  foregoing  we  have  learned  much  of  the  topography  of  the 
surrounding  country  and  ascertained  somewhat  the  force  and  position 
of  the  enemy.  They  have  a very  small  force  this  side  of  Kinston.  Only 
some  two  companies  of  cavalry  and  perhaps  three  companies i of  mditi^- 
guerrilla  bands  or  roving  rangers,  as  they  are  called.  At  Kinston  there 
is  about  one  small  brigade,  supported  by  a 

Black  water,  some  8 miles  beyond  Kinston,  on  the  road  to  Goldsbor- 
ough.  The  Wilmington  road  is  picketed  by  about  5°°  men. 

Cant.  E.  E.  Potter,  of  my  staff,  acting  colonel  of  the  First  North  Car- 
olina1 Union  Volunteers,  started  from  Washington,  his  headquarters* 
with  a company  of  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  and  rode  across  to  Ply- 
mouth, a distance  of  36  miles,  meeting  with  no  opposition,  and  hearing 
of  no  rebel  force  this  side  of  Jamesville,  at  which  place  he  estimates  the 
force  at  some  400  or  500  men,  more  for  defense  than  offense.  At  Hali- 
fax there  are  several  regiments,  probably  two  or  three. 

Col.  William  A.  Howard,  of  the  Marine  Artillery,  m command  of  the 
post  of  Boanoke  Island,  has  succeeded  in  destroying  the  salt-works  on 
Currituck  and  so  breaking  up  that  source  of  supply.  I shall  hope  soon 
to  advise  the  breaking  up  two  others  on  the  peninsula,  about  20  miles 
above  Roanoke  Island.  Colonel  Howard  is  now  endeavoring  to  break 
up  some  of  the  trade  with  Richmond,  carried  on  by  way  of  the  Per- 
quimans and  Chowan  Rivers.  This  trade  is  represented  as  being  carried 
on  to  a considerable  extent,  and,  if  so,  a blow  struck  in  that  way  might 

be  severely  felt.  _ . , 

I am,  sir,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  s^r™^TER 

Brigadier- General,  U.  8.  Army,  Commanding  Department. 


414 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX, 


Abstract  from  return  of  the  Department  of  North  Carolina , Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Foster 
commanding,  for  month  of  July,  1862. 


Stations. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Officers. 

i 

% 

Beaufort 

12 

285 

369 

383 

Fort  Macon 

1 

41 

52 

56 

Hatteras  Inlet 

New  Berne 

190 

4, 985 

6,  494 

7,  804 

Newport  Barracks. 

36 

799 

955 

1, 102 

Plymouth 

64 

76 

89 

Total 

239 

6, 174 

7,  946 

9,434 

5th  Rhode  Island. 

1st  U.  S.  Artillery,  Battery  C. 

Three  companies  103d  New  York.  No  report. 
10th  Connecticut;  17th,  23d,  24th,  25th,  and  27th 
Massachusetts;  3d  New  York  Artillery;  New 
York  Rocket  Battery  A ; 3d  New  York  Cavalry ; 
and  Battery  F,  1st  Rhode  Island  Artillery. 

9th  New  Jersey,  and  New  York  Rocket  Battery  B. 
Company  F,  9th  New  York. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

_ _ „ ^ New  Berne.  August  7,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington , D.  G.  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  everything  in  this  department 
is  progressing  favorably.  The  fortifications  are  approaching  comple- 
tion and  the  block-houses  on  the  Atlantic  and  North  Carolina  Railroad 
are  nearly  finished. 

The  health  of  the  troops  is  as  good  as  reported  in  my  last.  The 
hospital  at  Portsmouth  is  ready  to  receive  patients,  and  some  invalids 
are  at  present  being  removed  there,  and  in  a short  time  I expect  to 
have  the  greater  portion  of  my  sick  at  the  general  hospitals  at  Beau- 
fort and  Portsmouth  on  the  seaboard. 


Since  my  last  report  I have  made  three  more  reconnaissances  in  force, 
the  first  by  the  Marine  Artillery,  on  the  transport  steamer  Massasoit, 
armed  for  the  occasion  with  guns.  The  boat  proceeded  up  the  Neuse 
as  far  as  Swift  Creek,  when,  seeing  a party  of  the  enemy,  they  fired 
a few  shells  and  landed,  capturing  2 prisoners,  with  their  horses  and 
equipments  complete.  They  then  proceeded  about  14  miles  up  the 
Neuse  River,  when,  in  consequence  of  orders  to  be  at  New  Berne  the 
same  night,  they  returned. 

The  second  consisted  of  the  same  boat,  accompanied  by  the  Pilot 
Boy  and  the  Navy  gunboat  Ellis,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Por- 
ter, and  proceeded  up  the  same  ri  ver  to  within  7 miles  of  Kinston, 
meeting  with  few,  if  any,  obstructions  on  the  way,  but  at  this  point 
the  obstructions  were  more  serious,  consisting  of  sunken  piles,  which 
were  indicated  by  ripples  on  the  surface  of  the  water : also  a four-gun 
battery  on  the  left  bank  of  the  river.  The  officers  of  the  expedition 
landed  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river  and  reconnoitered  the  place 
thoroughly.  The  boats  also  threw  a few  shells  into  the  battery,  with 
what  result  is  not  known.  The  battery,  however,  did  not  return  the  fire 
of  the  boats.  The  object  of  the  reconnaissance  being  accomplished, 
the  expedition  returned  to  New  Berne. 


The  third  expedition  was  started  in  conjunction  with  the  second. 
This  proceeded  by  land  up  the  Trent  road,  under  command  of  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Mix,  of  the  Third  New  York  Cavalry,  and  consisted  of  nine 


Chap.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


415 


companies  of  cavalry,  six  companies  of  infantry  in  wagons,  under  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Pardee,  of  the  Tenth  Connecticut  Volunteers,  and  two 
sections  of  artillery,  under  Lieutenant  Pope,  of  the  Rhode  Island  Artil- 
lery. On  reaching  the  forks  of  the  Trenton  and  Kinston  road,  after 
driving  in  the  enemy’s  pickets,  they  turned  toward  Trenton,  where, 
after  a skirmish  with  a company  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  routing  them 
and  capturing  several  of  their  number,  they  burned  the  bridge  over 
the  Trent.  The  force  then  countermarched  to  the  forks  of  the  road 
and  advanced  about  5 miles  in  the  direction  of  Kinston,  capturing  on 
the  way  about  15  of  the  enemy’s  pickets,  when,  upon  signals  received 
from  the  boats  that  the  river  expedition  was  on  the  return  to  Kew 
Berne,  this  force  also  returned. 

The  expeditions  having  returned  only  a few  hours  ago,  this  report  is 
necessarily  without  particulars  and  brief;  in  my  next  I shall  be  able  to 
give  a more  complete  account  of  the  same. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  FTorth  Carolina, 

New  Berne , August  10, 1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Washington)  D.  C. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  since  my  report  of  the 
7th  instant  the  health  of  the  command  has  continued  to  improve,  not' 
withstanding  the  great  heat  of  the  weather. 

A brief  mention  was  made  of  the  three  last  reconnaissances  in  my 
last  communication.  The  subsequent  and  full  reports  have  demonstrated 
that  the  reconnaissances,  both  by  land  and  water,  were  complete,  ob- 
taining full  and  correct  information  of  the  position  of  the  enemy  with- 
out the  loss  of  a single  man.  These  reconnaissances  have  had  the  effect 
of  causing  the  enemy  to  withdraw  their  pickets  to  within  5 miles  of 
Kinston,  thereby  putting  an  end  to  the  harassing  practice  of  picket 
firing. 

Owing  to  the  heat  of  the  weather  it  will  be  impossible  for  the  next 
month  or  six  weeks  to  make  any  more  expeditions  except  by  means  of 
night  marches  and  by  water.  These  expeditions  I shall  keep  up  con- 
tinually in  order  to  draw  as  much  as  possible  from  the  forces  at  Rich- 
mond, as  it  is  of  importance  for  them  to  preserve  their  security  in  this 
State. 

I am  now  organizing  two  expeditions,  one,  to  be  composed  of  a party 
of  horsemen,  aided  by  the  gunboats,  to  go  into  Hyde  County,  to  arrest 
some  violent  secessionists,  who  have  been  persecuting  the  Union  citi- 
zens ; the  other,  to  be  composed  of  light-draught  gunboats  and  trans- 
ports, to  go  through  Bogue  Sound  and  to  White  Oak  River,  to  scour 
those  waters  and  to  break  up  all  the  salt-works  which  are  at  present 
known  to  be  in  active  operation  there.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 
Major-General)  Commanding. 


Some  matters  of  detail  omitted. 


416 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

August  17,  1862. 

General  H.  W.  Halle  ck, 

Commander -in- Chief  U.  8.  Army , Washington , D.  C.: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  generally  everything  is 
quiet  in  this  department.  The  reconnaissance  now  out  in  the  direction 
of  Wilmington,  with  orders  to  destroy  the  salt-works  on  the  coast,  has 
been  much  delayed  in  its  operations  by  the  northerly  winds  that  have 
prevailed  since  Friday  last.  I have  no  fears  for  its  safety  or  the  suc- 
cess of  its  operations. 

Recruits  are  arriving  rapidly  for  the  regiments  now  here  (seven  and 
one-half  of  infantry,  one  of  artillery,  one  of  marine  artillery,  and  one  of 
cavalry).  I have  organized  and  horsed  four  field  batteries  from  the 
artillery  regiment  (the  Third  New  York  Artillery),  and  these,  with  those 
previously  here,  make  seven  field  batteries  (two  of  six  pieces  each, 
three  of  four  pieces  each,  and  two  of  three  pieces  each).  I am  drilling 
these  batteries  constantly  to  make  them  efficient,  with  the  view  of 
making  an  artillery  fight  in  case  it  becomes  necessary  to  advance  up 
the  country  with  a small  force  of  infantry.  I am  aware  of  the  infantry 
force  between  here  and  Goldsborough  (eight  regiments  of  infantry) 
and  of  the  light  artillery  force  (three  field  batteries),  and  am  confident 
that  I can  advance  at  any  time  that  the  General-in-Chief  commands 
and  whip  these  two  arms  of  the  rebel  force.  I will  also  venture  to 
advance  and  destroy  the  railroad  as  near  Raleigh  as  I can  go  with  my 
force. 

In  any  case  of  an  advance  I shall  not  expect  to  occupy  the  places  that 
I capture  up  the  country,  but  rather  to  have  for  an  object  to  destroy 
the  railroad  bridges,  &c.,  so  as  to  cut  off  the  communication  of  the 
army  at  Richmond  with  the  South. 

At  most  the  force  that  I could  take  with  me  and  leave  everything 
safe  at  New  Berne  would  be  5,000  men.  If  it  be  desired  by  the  General 
Commanding  that  an  attack  be  made  on  the  works  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Cape  Fear  River,  and  those  works  taken,  I shall  require  that  my  force 
be  increased  by  seven  regiments  of  infantry. 

I beg  leave  respectfully  to  ask  that  this  be  done  at  any  rate,  because 
I am  confident  that  I can  employ  my  division  to  so  good  purpose  as  to 
keep  employed  much  more  than  an  equal  number  of  the  enemy. 

Captain  Williamson,  of  the  Topographical  Engineers,  and  Lieutenant 
Flagler,  of  the  Ordnance  Corps,  having  been  relieved  from  duty  here 
to  report  at  General  Burnside’s  headquarters,  I am  left  without  any 
regular  officers  in  those  departments.  I would  respectfully  ask  that 
officers  from  both  those  corps  or  from  the  Engineers  be  sent  to  replace 
them. 

Although  the  sickly  season  will  continue  for  a month,  and  thus  dis- 
able many  otherwise  effective  men,  I shall  staud  ready  at  any  moment 
to  make  any  movement  or  diversion  that  the  Commander-in-Chief  may 
order  or  consider  necessary  to  divert  attention  from  the  more  important 
operations  against  the  army  in  front  of  Richmond. 

I have  the  honor  to  Re,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  FOSTER, 
Major-General , Volunteers . 


Chap.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


417 


Headquarters  Department  of  IJoeth  Carolina, 

New  Berne , N.  <7.,  August  20,  1802. 

Mai.  Gen.  H.  "W.  Halleck,  ^ n 

J Gomdg.  Armies  of  the  United  States , Washington , I).  C. : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  all  is  well  within  this  de- 

^TluThealth  of  the  men  is  remarkably  good,  considering  the  unhealth- 
fulness  of  this  climate  at  this  season.  The  convalescents  are  rapidly 
brought  up  by  a short  stay  at  the  general  hospital  at  Beautort. 

I started  a reconnaissance  on  the  16th  instant  toward  Wilmington  for 
the  purpose  of  destroying  some  salt-works  known  to  be  in  operation 
at  or  near  Bogue  Inlet,  and  to  ascertain  the  force  of  the  enemy  in  that 
section,  the  character  of  the  country,  depth  of  water  m the  sounds,  in- 
lets, and  rivers,  &c.  I have  now  the  honor  to  report  their  return  and 
the  successful  accomplishment  of  their  object  and  without  resistaiice 
One  man  was  slightly  wounded  by  a guerrilla’s  shot  and  we  took  one 

* The  reconnaissance  was  under  command  of  Colonel  Stevenson,  com- 
manding the  Second  Brigade  of  my  division,  aud  consisted  of  seven 
companies  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Massachusetts  Volunteers,  Biggs  bat- 
teryThird  New  York  Artillery,  and  a large  detachment  of  the  Marine 
Artillery,  Colonel  Howard.  The  force  was  embarked  on  seven  light- 
draught  steamers,  five  of  which  proceeded  to  Bogue  Inlet  from  Beau- 
fort outside,  and  two  through  Bogue  Sound  to  the  same  point.  The 
vessels  rendezvoused  at  the  mouth  of  White  Oak  River,  Swansborough, 
landed,  and  took  possession  of  the  town.  The  next  day  the  two  lightest- 
draught  steamers  started  up  Stumpy  Sound,  and,  having  proceeded  2 
miles,  landed  a detachment  of  troops,  who,  marching  down  the  banks 
of  the  sound,  found  and  destroyed  the  salt-works  of  a Mr.  Hawkins, 
with  a store-house  partially  filled.  These  works  were  quite  extensive 
and  well  filled  up,  and  had  a capacity  of  about  7,000  bushels  per  an- 
num.  The  force  then  proceeded  to  the  works  of  Colonel  Saunders  (ca- 
pacity about  2,500  bushels  per  annum),  which  they  destroyed,  and  hear- 
ing of  no  other  works  of  any  consequence,  the  detachment  returned  to 

tlicir  vcssbIs 

During  their  absence  Lieutenant  Porter,  commanding  the  naval  gun- 
boat Ellis,  kindly  furnished  me  by  Lieutenant  Colhoun,  the  senior  offi- 
cer at  this  station,  found  and  destroyed  two  small  works  on  Queen  Creek. 

Having  destroyed  all  the  known  works  in  this  part  of  the  country 
and  obtained  much  information  the  forces  started  tor  their  return,  first 
destroying  a well-constructed  unarmed  fort  built  to  protect  the  en- 
trance to  Bogue  Inlet,  the  guns  of  which  had  been  taken  (six  m num- 
ber) to  New  Berne  to  aid  in  the  defense  of  that  point  and  were  there 
captured  by  us,  and  had  not  since  been  replaced.  ^ ,, 

Before  closing  this  report  I must  make  my  acknowledgments  ot  the 
promptness,  willingness,  and  efficiency  of  Lieutenant  Colhoun,  of  the 
Navy.  His  cordial  and  ever-ready  co-operation  with  me  m any  move  I 
may  make,  ioined  with  his  high  character  as  an  officer  and  a gentleman, 
convinces  me  that  he  is  one  of  the  most  worthy  and  deserving  of  those 
ex-officers  of  the  Navy  who  at  the  call  of  their  country  re-entered  the 
service,  hoping  and  wishing  to  be  reinstated  in  the  Regular  Navy  ot  the 
United  States.  Than  Lieutenant  Colhoun  none  are  more  worthy. 

I am,  General,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  TObJ-LK, 
Major-General , Commanding . 


27  R R— VOL  IX 


418 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chai\  XX. 


CONFEDERATE  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. 

Headquarters  Forces  on  Koanoke  Island, 

Camp  Raleigh , January  8,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise, 

Commanding  District  of  the  Albemarle : 

General:  In  compliance  with  your  special  order,  I have  the  honor 
to  submit  the  following  report  upon  the  defenses  of  this  island,  quan- 
tity of  provisions  and  ammunition  on  hand,  strength  of  this  command, 
&c. 

The  defenses  of  Croatan  Sound  consist  of  four  batteries,  mounting  in 
the  aggregate  thirty  guns,  all  32-pounders,  as  follows:  At  Weir’s  Point 
(Fort  Huger),  ten  smooth-bore  and  two  rifled  guns;  at  Fort  Blanchard, 
four  smooth-bore  guns;  at  Pork  Point  (Fort  Bartow),  six  smooth-bore 
and  one  rifled  gun;  at  Bed  Stone  Point  (Fort  Forrest),  seven  smooth- 
bore guns.  There  is  another  battery  on  the  Tyrrel  side  of  Croatan 
Sound,  at  Roberts’  Fishery,  already  completed,  but  no  guns  have  been 
mounted,  General  Hill  having  ordered  a discontinuation  of  the  work. 
Its  capacity  is  six  barbette  guns.  The  two  32-pounders  now  lying  on 
the  beach  at  Weir’s  Point  will,  agreeably  to  your  orders,  be  mounted  as 
soon  as  possible.  Upon  Roanoke  Sound  there  is  a small  battery  of  two 
smooth-bore  32-pounders  at  Midgett’s  Hommock.  The  battery  at  Pork 
Point  ought  by  all  means  to  be  strengthened  by  the  addition  of  two 
pivot  mounted  guns. 

Orders  have  been  given  for  the  construction  of  bomb-proof  quarters 
for  the  detachment  at  Fort  Blanchard,  but  up  to  this  time  lumber  or- 
dered for  that  purpose  has  not  been  received.  Quarters  should  be  con- 
structed in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Fort  Huger  for  the  accommoda- 
tion of  at  least  one  of  the  companies  by  which  the  guns  at  that  battery 
are  manned.  There  ought  also  to  be  built  at  Fort  Forrest  quarters  not 
only  for  the  company  already  there,  but  for  another  company  necessary 
at  that  fort.  Most  of  the  guns  require  sights ; nearly  all  of  them  have 
nothing  but  the  dispart  sights,  which  I believe  is  very  unreliable,  es- 
pecially in  the  hands  of  inexperienced  gunners.  I submit  that  it  is  very 
necessary  that  the  most  improved  sights  be  obtained  at  once,  and,  if 
needful,  an  expert  artisan  sent  at  once  to  adjust  them. 

Of  light  artillery  there  are  three  pieces  at  this  post,  one  24-pounder 
howitzer,  one  18-pounder  Mexican  piece,  and  one  6-pounder;  the  latter 
brought  to  this  place  from  Elizabeth  City,  R".  0.  These  pieces  are  all 
mounted  on  carriages,  with  limbers,  but  no  caissons.  For  operations 
upon  this  island  I am  not  sure  that  caissons  are  necessary. 

Ammunition  on  hand. — Three  hundred  and  eighty-seven  charges  for 
32-pounder  guns,  1,300  rounds  shot,  250  rifle  shell,  300  match  primers, 
83  rounds  fixed  ammunition  (24-pounder  howitzers),  1 box  percussion 
wafers,  150  port-fires,  98  rounds  6-pounder  shot  (1,000  rounds  obtained 
from  Elizabeth  City,  U.  C.),  250  pounds  powder,  315  stand  grape  (32), 
2,000  friction  primers,  500  percussion  primers,  150  junk  wads,  400 
gromet  wads,  98  canister  (6-pounder),  28  spherical-case  shot,  10  slow 
matches. 

Ammunition  for  small-arms. — Fifty-two  thousand  one  hundred  and 
fifty-seven  ball  cartridges  for  percussion  (16,578  ball  cartridges  issued), 
17,183  ball  cartridges  for  flint  and  steel,  3,320  balls,  150  pounds  lead, 
5,500  (about)  percussion  caps. 

Quantity  of  provisions  on  hand. — Thirteen  thousand  six  hundred  and 
eighty-two  pounds  bacon  and  pork,  3,420  pounds  beef,  598  pounds  lard, 
3,692  pounds  rice,  649  pounds  coffee,  1,570  pounds  candles,  12J  bushels 


Chap.  XX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  419 

salt,  1 barrel  fish,  20  barrels  and  2,158  pounds  bard  bread,  265  barrels 
flour,  10,554  pounds  meal,  54J  bushels  pease  and  beans,  3,082  pounds 
sugar,  460  gallons  vinegar,  1,348  pounds  soap,  58  gallons  whisky,  5 
bushels  yapon  [a  kind  of  wild  tea]. 


Aggregate  number  of  entire  command 1, 822 

Four  cooks  allowed  to  each  company 92 

To  be  subsisted 1, 914 


Effective  force,  officers  included,  absent  and  sick  being  deducted, 
1,435. 

A call  has  been  made  for  250  free  negroes  for  service  in  the  engineer 
department.  These  will  have  to  be  subsisted,  as  will  also  the  gang  of 
8 men  on  the  pile-driver. 

Horses , mules , and  oxen  in  charge  of  quartermaster’s  department. — Nine 
officers’  horses,  6 yoke  of  oxen  hired  by  quartermasters  of  Eighth  and 
Thirty-first  Regiments,  2 pair  mules,  property  of  the  Government. 
The  mules  and  oxen  are  used  for  general  purposes  of  land  transporta- 
tion. 

Amount  of  forage  on  hand. — Seven  hundred  and  twenty-five  pounds 
fodder,  2£  bushels  corn,  1J  barrels  oats. 

Orders  have  been  given  for  the  construction  of  a magazine.  No  reg- 
ular ordnance  officer  has  been  appointed. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  M.  SHAW, 
Colonel , Commanding. 


Richmond,  January  12,  1862. 

Gov.  Henry  T.  Clark,  Raleigh : 

Please  order  at  once  two  of  your  regiments  now  at  Raleigh  to  ren- 
dezvous at  Goldsborough.  Give  them  what  arms  you  can,  and  we  will 
complete  their  armament. 

It  seems  probable  that  the  expedition  is  against  your  coast,  but  1 do 
not  yet  rely  on  the  information  hitherto  received.  Act  as  promptly  as 
possible. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.,  January  15, 1862. 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  your  orders,  Lieutenant  Loyall  and  myself 
have  reported  at  this  place  for  duty  connected  with  the  heavy  batteries, 
and*  up  to  this  time  have  inspected  and  frequently  exercised  them, 
with  the  exception  of  Fort  Forrest,  on  the  other  side  of  the  sound. 
This  we  have  not  visited,  in  consequence  of  the  weather,  which  has  not 
been  favorable  for  the  past  few  days.  We  find  the  batteries  well  con- 
structed and  arranged,  except  that  at  Pork  Point,  which  requires  a 
flank  to  the  southward,  to  prevent  its  being  enfiladed.  This  has  been 
recommended  to  Colonel  Shaw,  and  orders  have  probably  been  given 
to  have  the  work  done.  The  equipment  of  the  guns  is  incomplete, 
only  one  gun  on  the  island  being  sighted,  and  the  rifled  guns  (three  in 
number)  are  mounted  on  navy  barbette  carriages,  which  are  very  un- 
wieldy. The  instruction  is  indifferent,  but  the  officers  and  men  evince 
such  a good  disposition  to  learn,  that  we  hope,  with  the  facilities 
offered  us,  to  be  able  in  a short  time  to  report  very  favorably  of  their 


420 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chai*.  XX. 


proficiency.  I would  liere  state  that  I found  Major  Hill  in  command 
at  Pork  Point  Battery.  He  was  an  old  Army  officer,  and  is  no  doubt 
a better  artillerist  than  I am  ; and,  as  I did  not  desire  to  supersede  a 
superior  and  could  not  suppose  that  you  wished  it,  I placed  myself 
under  his  command,  and  offered  my  services  to  him  to  assist  in  instruct- 
ing his  men,  and  detailed  Mr.  Loyall  for  that  particular  duty.  None 
of  the  guns  have  locks,  nor  are  any  of  them  drilled  for  either  locks  or 
sights  5 but  this  could  be  very  easily  done  here  if  locks  and  sights 
should  be  furnished.  I presume  they  know  at  the  navy-yard  exactly 
what  guns  are  here,  and  could  make  sights  for  them  without  the 
measures  of  the  guns  being  sent.  We  have  no  shells  for  any  but  the 
rifled  guns,  and  there  is  no  shot  furnace  fit  for  use.  The  engineer 
officer  assures  me  that  the  furnace  at  Fort  Huger  (the  only  one  con- 
structed) is  worthless,  and  that  he  tried  it  for  five  hours  without  any 
other  effect  than  to  burst  it.  He  recommends  one  for  each  battery 
here,  after  the  pattern  of  Mr.  Singleton’s,  of  the  engineer’s  office  at 
Norfolk.  The  amount  of  ammunition  on  hand  is  not  more  than  twenty 
rounds  for  each  gun. 

Yerv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  S.  TAYLOR, 

Captain , C.  IS.  Army . 

General  Huger, 

Commanding  Department  of  Norfolk , Va. 


Richmond,  January  16,  1862. 


General  Gatlin,  Goldsborough , N.  C.: 

Huger  telegraphs  nine  transports,  with  troops  aboard,  headed  for 
the  capes  this  morning. 


S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General . 


Goldsborough,  January  20,  1862. 
General  L.  O’B.  Branch,  New  Berne  : 

My  Dear  General  : I would  come  down  to-night,  but  I hardly 
think  they  would  dare  to  leave  Roanoke  Island  in  their  rear ; so  in 
my  opinion  you  can  proceed  with  deliberation,  though  zealously,  in 
your  defenses. 

I am  fearful  that  our  northeastern  counties  are  lost.  It  is  sad  to 
think  how  obstinate  the  authorities  at  Richmond  have  been  in  regard 
to  the  destination  of  the  fleet. 

Your  friend, 

R.  C.  GATLIN. 


Richmond,  January  21,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger,  Norfolk : 

The  President  would  approve  of  your  taking  or  sending  from  Norfolk 
into  North  Carolina  all  the  forces  you  can  spare  without  endangering 
the  safety  of  your  command.  ' 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Ciiai*.  XX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  421 

Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  17.  f Richmond , January  22,  1862. 

******* 
XXXII.  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A.  Wise,  Provisional  Army,  will  immedi- 
ately proceed  to  Roanoke  Island,  X.  0.,  and  assume  command  of  the 

Confederate  States  troops  at  that  place. 

******* 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

JXO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Xorth  Carolina, 

Goldsborough , January  24,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  a storm  of  great  violence 
has  been  prevailing  upon  our  coast  since  early  on  the  night  of  the  22d 
instant;  it  has  doubtless  damaged  the  enemy  at  Hatteras,  and  it  may 
be  will  derange  his  plans  for  some  days. 

As  there  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  the  Burnside  expedition  is  in- 
tended to  operate  in  our  sounds,  it  becomes  a matter  of  vital  importance 
to  us  to  consider  the  means  in  our  power  to  resist  his  advance  upon 
the  main-lands,  and  if  the  force  now  in  the  State  is  insufficient,  to  try  to 
provide  for  the  deficiency  and  that  speedily. 

The  principal  points  in  my  department  accessible  from  the  sound  are 
New  Berne,  Washington,  aird  Hyde  County. 

Xew  Berne  being  the  most  important,  I have  concentrated  in  that 
neighborhood  all  the  available  force  at  my  disposal,  save  a new  regi- 
ment held  in  reserve  at  this  point.  In  consequence  of  the  great  amount 
of  sickness,  prevailing  principally  among  the  new  regiments,  that  force 
does  not  exceed  4,000  effective  men. 

For  the  defense  of  Hyde  County  the  effective  force  does  not  exceed 
700  men,  and  for  the  defense  of  Washington  1,200  men.  The  militia 
called  into  service  are  not  taken  into  consideration,  as  I have  no  reports 
of  the  number  that  may  be  expected  from  the  adjacent' counties. 

Satisfied  that  the  expedition  is  of  such  a magnitude  that  to  resist  it 
successfully  we  ought  to  have  a large  increase  to  our  present  force,  I am 
constrained  to  renew  my  application  of  the  3d  instant,  viz,  that  a large 
reserve,  with  an  experienced  commander,  be  at  once  sent  to  this  point 
and  placed  at  my  disposal. 

Hoping  that  the  War  Department  will  take  speedy  action  in  the 
matter,  I remain,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  O.  GATLIN, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Cape  Fear, 

Wilmington , W.  0.,  January  24,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  extracts  from  the  report  of  Captain 
Ward,  in  command  of  the  Coast  Guard  in  the  northwestern  part  of  this 
district. 


422 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


You  have  already  been  advised  of  the  stranding  of  the  British  ship 
York  on  our  coast  near  Bogue  Inlet.  It  now  appears  that  she  lias 
been  burnt  by  the  enemy’s  blockading  squadron. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  R.  ANDERSON, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Gatlin  Dragoons, 

Swansborough , N.  0.,  January  17,  1862. 

Roscoe  B.  Heath, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Dear  Sir:  On  yesterday  morning  about  9 o’clock  my  pickets  re- 
ported two  blockaders  off  this  place,  one  a steamer,  supposed  to  be  the 
Albatross ; the  other  a bark.  After  reconnoitering  off  and  on  until 
about  2 o’clock  they  came  to  anchor  about  one-fourth  of  a mile  from  the 
wreck  of  ship  York  (before  reported) ; lowered  six  boats,  containing 
each  about  15  men.  Three  of  the  boats  came  close  alongside  of  the 
wreck  and  threw  over  into  it  some  combustible  matter,  which  soon  had 
the  wreck  in  flames. 

This  morning  early  I took  a detachment  of  20  men  and  went  over  to 
the  wreck  and  found  it  still  burning — no  vessel  in  sight.  The  enemy 
did  not  land  at  all.  We  had  succeeded  in  securing  only  one  flat  load 
of  rigging ; the  balance  was  ready  on  deck  flo  be  taken  off  as  soon  as 
the  weather  would  permit  the  wreckers  to  go  alongside.  The  captain 
of  the  wrecked  ship,  before  leaving  here,  made  an  assignment  of  every- 
thing pertaining  or  belonging  to  the  wreck,  by  power  of  attorney,  to 
parties  here,  for  the  benefit  of  the  underwriters.  There  are  a great 
many  tons  of  wrought  iron  about  her,  but  will  now  be  hard  to  save,  if 
at  all.  I am  now  [convinced],  and  have  been  ever  since  seeing  the 
crew  and  papers,  that  the  wrecked  ship  York  was  a genuine  British 
ship; 


Very  respectfully, 


EDW’D  W.  WARD, 
Captain , Commanding. 


Richmond,  Va.,  January  [March]  25,  1862. 
Hon.  George  W.  Randolph,  Secretary  of  War : ' 

..  Sl®:,  Yesterday  I addressed  a letter  to  Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  dated 
tne  Ad  instant,  calling  for  the  copy  of  a report!  to  the  Department  from 
General  Huger,  stating  that  my  brigade  was  “ supernumerary”  in  his 
department,  and  giving  a succinct  history  of  my  Legion  from  its  first 
organization  to  its  present  state,  and  putting  certain  questions,  which 
I respectfuliy  asked  for  information.  I beg  to  call  your  attention  to 
tnat  letter  and  ask  its  early  consideration.  1 have  now  under  mv 
orders  five  companies  of  infantry  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Richard- 
son,  two  under  Col.  N.  Tyler,  and  nine  companies  of  cavalry  under 
L°i.  J.  L.  Davis,  in  all  sixteen  companies,  numbering,  I suppose,  1,100 
men.  The  two  companies  of  the  Second  Regiment  of  Infantry  at 
Lewis  burg  have  been  ordered  to  remain  there  for  the  present,  under 
General  iletli.  But  my  two  companies  of  artillery,  with  five  field 


1 See  Series  IV. 


tSee  p.  434. 


CHAr.  XX.J  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  423 

pieces,  which  by  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War  were  left  at  Great 
Bridge,  under  command  of  Brigadier-General  Mahone,  in  General 
Huger’s  department,  I ask  may  be  restored  to  my  command,  which,  if 
done,  will  increase  the  Legion  to  about  1,300  men. 

With  this  force,  ordered  to  join  me  here,  I can  easily  recruit  the 
Legion  to  its  original  number,  and  if  my  third  regiment  be  restored  to 
me,  now  under  Colonel  Starke,  at  Goldsborough,  NT.  C.,  it  will  have  its 
complement  of  men  of  over  2,000  at  once. 

I ask,  then,  that  my  Legion  may  be  preserved  as  a distinctive  and 
independent  force,  under  General  Lee’s  definition  of  its  character 
whilst  under  his  command  gin  the  West ; that  my  third  regiment  and 
corps  of  artillery  may  be  restored  to  my  command,  and  that  I may  be 
allowed  to  recruit  and  organize  new  companies  for  my  Legion. 

I am  now  awaiting  a reply  to  my  call  for  a court  of  inquiry ; for  the 
arrival  of  my  command,  when  relieved  from  special  orders  here  and 
at  Murfreesborough,  N.  C.;  for  further  orders  from  the  Department 
since  the  last  to  report  to  General  J.  E.  Johnston  at  Manassas ; and 
for  the  call  of  a committee  of  the  House  of  Eepresentatives  of  the  Con- 
federate Congress. 

I am,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  A.  WISE, 

Brigadier- General . 


Coosawhatchie,  S.  C.,  January  28,  1862. 

General  Joseph  R.  Anderson, 

Commanding  District  of  Cape  Fear , Wilmington , N.  C. : 

General  : I have  had  the  honor  to  receive  your  letter  of  the  24th 
instant*  and  can  sympathize  in  your  anxiety  to  make  a successful  re- 
sistance to  the  landing  of  the  enemy  on  the  coast  of  North  Carolina. 
You  may  be  assured  that  nothing  will  be  wanting  on  my  part  to  give 
you  all  the  aid  in  my  power,  and  I should  be  pleased  to  be  able  to  send 
you  my  whole  force  if  required,  but  I beg  that  you  will  not  rely  upon 
it,  but  endeavor  to  organize  a sufficient  force  for  your  purpose  independ- 
ent of  any  re-enforcement  from  this  department.  The  enemy  is  in  great 
strength  on  this  coast;  has  command  of  all  the  communications  by 
water,  and  by  means  of  his  immense  fleet  and  the  net-work  of  sounds, 
rivers,  and  creeks  spread  over  the  Carolina  and  Georgia  coast,  a dis- 
embarkation of  a large  force  can  be  made  under  cover  of  his  floating 
batteries  at  any  time.  Scarcely  a day  passes  that  a demonstration  is 
not  made  on  some  point,  which  obliges  us  to  keep  troops  always  ready 
to  oppose  him.  You  will  see,  therefore,  how  impossible  it  may  be  for 
me  to  send  you  succors  at  the  time  you  may  most  need  them,  as  it  may 
be  expected  that  when  an  attack  is  made  on  a part  of  the  coast  the  ad- 
jacent country  will  be  imposingly  threatened. 

As  regards  the  two  North  Carolina  regiments  and  light  battery,  I 
understood  they  were  to  form  a permanent  part  of  the  troops  assigned 
to  this  department,  and  would  be  replaced  in  your  district  by  [receiv- 
ing ?]  other  regiments  from  the  State  into  the  service.  This  I had  hoped 
had  been  done,  as  it  is  necessary  to  be  prepared  along  the  whole  line. 
The  want  of  arms  has  prevented  my  receiving  troops  that  have  offered 
their  services  from  beyond  the  limits  of  the  department,  and  has  also 
prevented  troops  from  the  State  coming  into  the  service.  I am  sorry 


Not  found. 


424 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


to  say  that  I am  not  in  a condition  to  spare  any  troops,  but  am  using 
every  means  in  my  power  to  organize  additional  force  for  service  in  the 
department. 

I am,  &c., 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General , Commanding. 


Abstract  from  return  of  District  of  the  Cape  Fear,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  Ra 

Anderson,  for  January,  1862. 


Troops. 


Wilmington,  X.  C 

Camp  Grant 

Camp  Davis 

Camp  Heatli 

Camp  Wyatt 

Fort  Fisher 

Zeeke’s  Island  . . . 

Fort  Johnston 

Fort  Caswell 

Camp  Hopkins. . . 

Swansborongh 

Huggins’  Island. . 

Total 


t 

Present  for 
duty. 

| Total  enlisted  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Pieces  of 
artillery. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Heavy. 

Field. 

45 

677 

943 

1,  042 

4 

69 

78 

84 

4 

64 

76 

102 

e 

4 

77 

85 

91 

43 

637 

746 

891 

15 

232 

310 

356 

25 

4 

2 

73 

91 

99 

3 

41 

593 

711 

194 

14 

217 

312 

348 

34 

I 

4 

70 

74 

79 

3 

64 

75 

102 

. .. 

4 

64 

64 

68 

183 

2,837 

3,  565 

4,  056 

62 

| 11 

Abstract  from  return  of  the  District  of  Pamlico,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  L.  O’B.  Branch , 

for  January,  1862. 


Troops. 

Present  for 
duty. 

Total  enlisted  present. 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent. 

Pieces  of 
artillery. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Heavy. 

Field. 

Fort  Macon,  Shell  Point,  and  Harker’s  Island 

32 

434 

660 

749 

Camp  Vance 

42 

766 

905 

976 

Camp  Graham 

29 

497 

592 

684 

Camp  Fisher 

26  I 

470 

595 

705 

Hew  Berne 

62 

705 

992 

1,315 

Post  of  Washington 

64 

1,  034 

1 , 305 

1,  457 

Hyde  County 

27 

464 

584 

651 

Post  of  the  Heuse 

97 

1,585 

1,883 

2,  137 

Total 

379 

5,  955 

7,  516 

8,  674 

District  of  the  Cape  Fear  brought  forward 

183 

2,  837 

3,  5C5 

4,  056 

"62 

ii 

Goldsborough,  H.  C.,  34th  Kegiment  Horth  Carolina 

troops 

37 

709 

792 

910 

Grand  total 

599 

9,  501 

11,  873 

13,  640 

62 

11 

Chap.  XX 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.— CONFEDERATE. 


425 


Abstract  from  post  return  of  Fort  Bartow ,*  Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.,  commanded  by  Maj.  G. 

H.  Hill,  for  January,  1862. 


Troops.  • 

Present  for 
duty. 

Total  present. 

Aggregate  present. 

Total  present  and 

absent. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

1 

Officers. 

Men. 

Field  and  staff 

3 

2 

2 

5 

2 

6* 

17th  North  Carolina  troops : 

Company  E 

3 

67 

70 

73 

77 

81 

Company  I 

3 

52 

76 

79 

82 

m 

Company  L 

3 

57 

74 

77 

8? 

87 

Total 

12 

178 

| 222 

234 

244 

260 

State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

Raleigh , February  1,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War : 

Sir:  The  various  and  conflicting  rumors  about  the  destination  of 
the  Burnside  expedition  is  now  settled  by  its  rendezvous  at  Hatteras. 
It  has  no  doubt  suffered  from  the  late  storm,  but  not  enough  to  divert 
its  object  or  its  means  of  successful  assault.  If  you  will  glance  at  the 
map  you  will  readily  perceive  the  extent  of  injury  both  to  North  Caro- 
lina and  the  Confederacy  by  an  expedition  into  the  interior  from  any 
part  of  Albemarle  or  Pamlico  Sound.  And  I regret  again  to  allude  to 
our  inability  to  check  so  formidable  an  expedition,  whatever  route  it 
may  select,  and  I have  refrained  as  long  as  I could  from  alluding  to 
re-enforcements.  I am  aware  of  the  zeal  you  devote  to  the  immense 
labors  before  you,  and  of  the  great  strain' pressing  on  you  from  every 
quarter,  and  that  you  would  send  re  enforcements  unasked  if  you  had 
them  to  spare. 

But  I will  respectfully  tender  a suggestion,  and  be  gratified  if  it 
coincides  with  your  views ; that  is,  to  spare  us  two  or  three  regiments 
from  the  Peninsula,  particularly  the  Fifth  North  Carolina  Volunteers. 
I make  the  suggestion  on  the  ground  that  General  Magruder  has  had 
every  facility  in  men  and  good,  skillful  officers  for  seven  months  to 
fortify  the  Peninsula;  that  it  has  been  successfully  done;  that  his  in- 
trenchments,  fortifications,  and  guns  have  been  so  successfully,  and 

(extensively  done  [sic]  that  they  can  now  be  defended  with  one-half  of 
the  men  required  some  months  ago;  that  the  place  will  only  allow  a 
defensive  warfare,  and  he  is  prepared  for  that,  and  he  can  now  sparer 
some  of  his  force.  A commanding  general  always  asks  for  more,  and 
never  consents  to  give  up  a single  company.  Upon  these  grounds  I 
refer  you  to  this  position,  where  I hope  you  can  spare  at  least  our  own 
regiment. 

I thank  you  for  aid  of  General  Wise’s  Legion  to  the  Albemarle  coun- 
try, but  I regret  to  say  that  Roanoke,  not  having  the  benefit  of  engi- 
neers and  skillful  officers,  is  not  much  benefited  by  the  last  four  months’" 
occupancy  of  [it]  by  the  Confederate  Government.  General  Wise 
writes  to  me  that  it  needs  everything,  whereas  it  should  have  been  an 
impregnable  barrier  to  the  Yankees  and  a protection  for  a great 
extent  of  North  Carolina  and  Virginia.  There  has  been  culpable  neg- 


*Fort  Bartow  and  Fort  Forrest  were  one  command, 
were  in  the  first  and  seven  in  the  latter. 


Nine  heavy  pieces  of  artillery 


426 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


ligence  or  inefficiency  at  this  place.  I hope  Colonel  Clarke’s  (Twenty- 
fourth  Regiment  North  Carolina  Volunteers)  regiment,  now  stationed 
at  Petersburg,  will  have  sufficiently  recruited  to  be  serviceable. 

I have  now  to  rely  on  an  unarmed  and  undrilled  militia  for  protec- 
tion, and  a draft  which  has  been  made  for  one-third  of  them  has,  I 
regret  to  say,  developed  or  occasioned  much  dissatisfaction. 

I tender  these  suggestions  to  you  most  respectfully.  Should  they 
fail  in  enlisting  your  favor,  I shall  regret  to  believe  that  there  are  other 
places  besides  our  coast  which  claim  your  protection  from  overwhelm- 
ing forces  and  need  more  help  than  we  do,  for  I feel  assured  of  your 
assistance  if  it  could  be  spared.  . 

Very  respectfully,  yours, 

HENRY  T.  CLARK. 


[February  2,  1862. — The  Confederate  authorities  make  requisition 
upon  the  State  of  North  Carolina  for  twenty-six  regiments  “for  the 
war.”  For  requisition  and  the  Governor’s  response,  of  Februarv  11,  see 
Series  IV,  Vol.  I.]  ’ 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond , Va,,  February  3,  1862. 
Gov.  Henry  T.  Clark,  Raleigh , V.  G. : 

Sir  : I have  received  your  favor  of  the  1st  instant,  and  assure  you 
that  you  but  do  me  justice  in  confiding  in  my  earnest  desire  to  do 
everything  in  my  power  to  aid  in  the  defense  of  your  coast.  Most  for- 
tunately the  enemy’s  fleet  has  been  crippled  much  more  seriously  than 
you  seem  to  be  aware,  and  we  are  thus  allowed  some  time  for  prepara- 
tion beyond  what  we  could  otherwise  have  hoped. 

In  regard  to  re-enforcements,  my  thoughts  had  already  been  turned 
on  the  Peninsula,  but  there  is  a serious  difficulty  in  the  way  there  of 
which  you  are  not  aware.  Four  or  five  of  the  regiments  on  the  Penin- 
sula are  twelve-months’  men,  whose  term  of  service  is  on  the  eve  of  ex- 
piring; others  will  expire  a little  later,  and  nothing  can  induce  the  men 
to  re-enlist  unless  they  have  a furlough.  But  for  this  I could  withdraw 
a few  regiments  from  the  Peninsula.  We  are  reaping  the  bitter  fruits 
of  the  blind  folly  of  short  enlistments,  against  which  I have  struggled 
with  unremitting  energy  from  the  day  the  first  shot  was  fired  at  Fort 
Sumter. 

However  all  is  not  as  bad  as  you  supposed.  I have  just  ordered  two 
batteries  of  artillery  to  your  aid,  and  have  instructed  General  Huger 
to  see  in  person  to  tlie  defenses  at  Roanoke.  He  will  also  send  2,000 
or  3,000  men,  perhaps  more,  that  can  be  spared  from  Norfolk.  I have 
ordered  a detail  of  men  to  give  full  efficiency  to  the  gunboats  under 
Commodore  Lynch  and  to  the  floating  battery.  The  regiment  at  Peters- 
burg  ought  now  to  be  able  to  move,  and  I will  order  it  at  once  to  report 
to  General  Gatlin. 

I am  sure  1 could  organize  the  defenses  of  our  country,  wherever  at- 
tacked, if  I only  had  munitions ; but,  in  addition  to  the  heavy  superi- 
ority in  numbers  of  the  enemy,  we  have  to  struggle  on  with  a very 
inadequate  supply  of  materials  of  war.  Your  people  may  suffer  some- 
what at  points  where  the  enemy’s  superior  water  forces  enable  them  to 
ravage  the  country  within  reach  of  their  guns,  but  I do  not  fear,  and 


Chap.  XX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  427 

am  sure  you  need  not,  that  they  can  do  more  than  this ; and  even  this 
shall  not  be  done  if  every  possible  precaution  in  our  power  can  suffice 
| to  prevent  it. 

I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 

p.  s. — I was  compelled  by  stress  of  occasion  to  send  1,000  flint- 
locks to  your  last  two  regiments,  but  will  immediately  replace  them  by 
better  arms. 


Confederate  States  of  America, 

Navy  Department, 
Richmond , February  3,  1862. 

Hod.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War: 

Sir:  In  compliance  with  your  indorsement  upon  the  letter  of  Maj.  J. 
A.  Johnston,  quartermaster,  in  relation  to  Albemarle  and  Chesapeake 
Canal,  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  Mr.  Parks  has  not  yet  submitted 
his  bills  for  tolls  against  this  Department,  but  from  data  before  me  I 
infer  that  since  the  North  Carolina  vessels  were  transferred  these  tolls 
amount  to  about  $700  per  month. 

I know  nothing  of  the  condition  of  the  canal  or  of  the  work  necessary 
to  keep  it  in  order,  but  I regard  it  of  vital  importance  to  the  defenses 
of  North  Carolina.  I would  suggest  that  a reliable  officer  be  sent  to 
examine  the  canal  and  to  report  the  probable  expense  of  maintaining 
it  in  navigable  condition,  which  will  have  to  be  done  by  the  Confed- 
erate States  if  the  canal  company  and  the  State  of  North  Carolina  will 
; not  do  it,  and  I think  that  the  sooner  the  subject  is  acted  upon  the 
i better. 

I presume  that  with  twenty-five  gunboats  in  the  waters  of  North 
Carolina  the  tolls  would  not  exceed  $2,000  per  month,  but  I think  that 
the  work  should  be  kept  up  without  regard  to  this  consideration.  The 
papers  are  herewith  returned.* 

With  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  R.  MALLORY, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy. 

[Indorsement.] 

| Assistant  Secretary  : 

Have  copy  made  of  this  entire  correspondence,  to  be  forwarded  to 
General  Huger,  with  request  that  he  will  send  a reliable  officer  to  ex- 
amine and  report  on  the  whole  subject. 

— 

Hdqrs.  Fourth  Brigade,  Department  Norfolk, 
Gamy  at  Nag's  Head , February  7,  1862. 
Major-General  Huger,  Commanding , &c. : 

Sir  : I send  you,  by  direction  of  General  Wise,  copies  of  the  dispatch 
<*l  Lieutenant  Loyall  to  Colonel  Shaw,  with  the  colonel’s  note  forward- 
ing the  same  to  these  headquarters,  and  of  the  dispatch  of  Colonel 


Not  found. 


428 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chai\  XX, 


Shaw,  received  about  daybreak  this  morning.  The  officer  who  brought 
the  dispatch  first  above  mentioned  reports  that  of  the  enemy’s  fieet 
twenty-eight  are  gunboats,  seven  are  towing  steamers,  and  the  rest 
transports. 

A re-enforcement  of  ten  companies  was  sent  from  this  place  this  fore- 
noon to  Roanoke  Island,  leaving  about  300  men  to  cover  the  retreat  of 
our  forces  to  the  beach,  should  they  be  compelled  to  withdraw  from 
the  island. 

Owing  to  continual  sickness  the  general  was  unable  to  accompany 
the  troops  sent  to  Roanoke.  He  is  very  much  prostrated  from  the 
illness  which  still  confines  him  to  his  bed,  and  which  will  in  all  proba- 
bility compel  him  to  keep  his  bed  for  some  days  to  come. 

At  20  minutes  past  10  a single  gun  was  heard,  which  the  general 
supposed  to  be  the  signal  gun  of  Flag-Officer  Lynch.  At  16J  minutes 
past  II  o’clock  of  this  day  firing  on  Croatan  Sound  commenced,  and 
from  that  time  to  the  period  of  closing  this  dispatch  from  250  to  300 
guns  have  been  heard,  showing  a furious  battle  to  be  raging  between 
our  forces  and  the  enemy.  It  is  now  25  minutes  past  12  o’clock,  and  the 
firing  is  very  rapid  and  heavy. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

O.  B.  DUFFIELD, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

P.  S. — 1 o'clock  p.  m. — The  firing  still  continues  most  furious.  A 
cannon  is  heard  ever  second. 

O.  B.  DUFFIELD, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Pork  Point,  February  6—1  p.  m. 

Colonel  : The  fog  has  cleared  away  from  below,  and  I can  distinctly 
see  that  the  enemy  is  about  8 miles  from  us,  in  full  force.  I can  make  out 
more  than  fifty  vessels,  either  at  anchor  or  under  way  in  tow  of  steamers. 
I believe  that  they  are  at  anchor.  I am  of  opinion  that  they  have 
stopped  to  consider,  but  it  requires  a bright  lookout  to  keep  the  run  of 
them. 

Yery  respectfully, 

B.  P.  LOYALL, 

Lieutenant , C.  8.  Navy. 

[Indorsement.] 

General  : This  was  received  at  half  past  2 o’clock.  I am  now  leav- 
ing for  the  lower  end,  having  ordered  four  companies  down. 

H.  M.  SHAW, 
Colonel , Commanding. 

Brigadier-General  Wise. 


[In closure  No.  2.] 

Headquarters  Roanoke  Island, 

February  6,  1862 — 8 p.  m. 

Brig.  Gen.  Henry  A..  Wise, 

Commanding  Fourth  Brigade , Department  of  Norfolk  : 

General  : Your  dispatch  by  Lieutenant  Simmons  has  been  received, 
and  I hasten  to  report  that  I myself  have  been  to  Ashby’s.  The  enemy 


Chap.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


429 


is  in  full  view  and  about  7 or  8 miles  below  that  point.  Tlie  atmos- 
phere is  so  thick  that  I could  not  positively  determine  tbeir  number ; 
between  fifty  and  sixty,  of  which  the  larger  part  I think  are  sailing 
vessels.  Two  of  the  pieces  of  artillery  are  already  at  Ashby’s,  where 
it  has  been  for  several  days ; the  6-pounder  was  moved  down  to  another 
point  this  afternoon,  and  four  companies  of  infantry  under  a field 

officer.  , . , 

The  orders  contained  in  your  dispatch  will  of  course  be  carried  out. 
I have  to  report  to  you  that  the  available  force  at  my  command,  exclusive 
of  the  detachments  on  duty  at  the  batteries,  is  only  about  800 — 808  by 
last  report.  The  enemy  numbers  10,000  men  probably.  I ask  you  to 
send  re-enforcements.  I forgot  to  say  you  are  mistaken  in  supposing 
I have  four  pieces  of  light  artillery.  The  number  here  is  three. 

I send  this  by  Lieutenant  Cooper. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J H.  M.  SHAW, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

February  8,  1862. 

Colonel  Shaw, 

Eighth  Regiment  North  Carolina  Troops  : 

Sir:  Lieut.  A.  D.  Smith,  Company  G,  First  Regiment  Wise  Legion, 
arrived  10.30  a.  m.,  crossed  at  12.30  from  Nag’s  Head  by  Gallop’s  to 
Powell’s  Point,  and  rode  all  night.  He  heard  the  same  heavy  firing- 
all  day.  It  ceased  at  night. 

Respectfully,  yours,  BENJ.  HUGER, 

Major- General. 


. Norfolk,  February  9,  1862. 

President  Jefferson  Davis: 

Ammunition  was  dispatched  to  Commodore  Lynch,  who  is  at  Eliza- 
beth City.  On  the  afternoon  of  the  9th,  on  meeting  the  boat  stating 
Roanoke  Island  was  captured,  the  steamer  returned.  Commodore 
Forrest  will  try  and  send  it  by  Dismal  Swamp  Canal,  the  lower  end  of 
which  is  broken. 

I have  no  news  of  the  enemy.  I have  ordered  troops  to  move  at  once 
and  protect  the  different  approaches.  Should  the  enemy  attack  in 
front  I must  be  re-enforced. 

BENJ.  HUGER. 


Richmond,  February  10,  1862. 

Major-General  Huger,  Norfolk  : 

Take  measures  for  destroying  all  supplies  at  Elizabeth  City  as  soon 
as  satisfied  that  they  cannot  be  saved  from  seizure  by  enemy. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Richmond,  February  10,  1862. 
Brigadier-General  Gatlin,  Goldsborough : 

I am  informed  there  are  about  15,000  bales  of  cotton  ready  for  ship- 


430 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX 


ment  at  Roanoke  River.  Give  orders  to  burn  all  that  is  not  immedi- 
ately moved  into  the  interior  out  of  enemy’s  reach. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

Goldsborough , February  10,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War , Richmond,  Va.  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  dispatch 
of  this  date,  directing  all  the  cotton  on  the  Roanoke  River  not  removed 
to  a safe  distance  into  the  interior  to  be  burned.  The  dispatch  has 
been  replied  to  by  telegraph. 

The  only  troops  at  my  disposal,  a regiment  of  infantry,  will  be  sent 
up  to  Halifax  to-night,  with  instructions  to  march  down  the  Roanoke  as 
far  as  Jamesville.  I will  place  another  regiment  on  that  river,  should 
it  be  placed  at  my  disposal  by  Governor  Clark.  In  my  dispatch  I begged 
that  a light  battery  be  sent  to  Halifax  to  join  the  infantry.  This 
force  might  answer  to  check  the  advance  of  the  enemy  should  he  under- 
take the  ascent  of  the  Roanoke  in  force,  but  is  not  sufficient  to  do  more 
than  retard  his  progress.  I would  therefore  respectfully  suggest  that 
large  re-enforcements  be  sent  into  that  section  of  the  country. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  C.  GATLIN, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 


Raleigh,  February  10,  1862. 

J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War : 

Roanoke  Island  has  fallen  ; its  garrison  captured.  We  must  organize 
another  army  for  that  section.  I have  only  two  regiments,  which  will 
go  down  forthwith  to  Weldon.  Avenues  to  our  railroads  must  be 
guarded.  Send  what  assistance  you  can. 

HENRY  T.  CLARK. 


Richmond,  February  11,  1862. 

Gov.  Henry  T.  Clark,  Raleigh: 

Your  dispatch  received.  I am  glad  to  hear  of  your  two  regiments 
ordered  to  Weldon.  We  are  making  every  possible  effort  for  your  de- 
fense, and  feel  confident  we  can  prevent  access  to  the  railroad. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 
No.*35.  1 Richmond , February  12,  1862. 

**###** 

II.  Brig.  Gen.  R.  H.  Anderson,  Provisional  Army,  will  proceed  to 
Manassas,  Va.,  and  report  to  General  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  command- 
ing, for  assignment  to  the  command  of  the  South  Carolina  Brigade, 


Chap.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE 


431 


now  under  Brig.  Gen.  D.  K.  Jones,  the  latter  to  be  assigned  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  Georgia  Brigade  lately  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  S.  Jones. 
#####** 

IV.  Col.  J.  L.  Davis,  Wise  Legion,  will  proceed  without  delay  to 
Garysburg,  near  Weldon,  NT.  C.,  with  the  following  companies  of  the 
Legion,  to  act  as  circumstances  may  require,  under  the  direction  of  the 
commanding  officer:  Captains  Z.  S.  Magruder’s,  Caskie’s,  Rosser’s,, 
Timberlake’s,  and  Phelps’. 

######* 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War  : 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

No.  29.  1 Goldsborough , February  12,  1862. 

##*#### 

III.  Col.  William  J.  Hoke,  Thirty-eighth  Regiment  North  Carolina 
troops,  will  proceed  with  his  regiment  to  Weldon,  N.  C.,  and  take  such 
measures  as  the  force  at  his  command  will  permit  for  the  defense  of  the 
bridge  at  that  place. 

He  will  consider  himself  still  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Leven- 
thorpe,  Thirty-fourth  Regiment  of  North  Carolina  troops. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Gatlin  : 

R.  H.  RIDDICK, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Norfolk,  February  13,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper  . 

I have  ordered  1,000  men,  Third  Alabama,  to  Suffolk.  This  weakensr 
front  very  much  indeed.  I must  have  more  troops. 

BENJ.  HUGER, 

Major-  General. 


Richmond,  February  13,  1862. 

General  Huger,  Norfolk , Va. : 

Col.  W.  J.  Clarke’s  North  Carolina  regiment  is  ordered  to  Garysburg,. 
N.  C.,  from  Petersburg,  subject  to  your  orders  for  disposition  of  the 
regiment  on  the  line  of  the  Weldon  and  Portsmouth  Railroad  wherever 
deemed  best.  He  has  been  so  advised  and  ordered  to  report. 

S.  COOPEB, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Headquarters  District  of  the  Cape  Fear, 

Wilmington , N.  C.,  February  13,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va.  : 

General  : In  my  letter  of  24th  September  last*  I gave  you  an  esti- 
mate of  the  least  amount  of  force  I regarded  requisite  to  hold  this  place 


See  Series  I,  Vol.  IV,  p.  656. 


432 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  A A.. 


and  the  railroads  terminating  here.  I beg  leave  respectfully  to  ask  your 
attention  to  that  letter,  and  to  say  that  1 now  deem  a very  considerable 
increase  of  force  here  indispensable  to  the  safety  of  this  command  if  it 
should  be  attacked  by  a large  force  by  land,  as  it  probably  will  be,  if 
attacked  at  all. 

This  is  the  only  point  of  importance  on  our  Atlantic  coast  not  hitherto 
threatened  by  the  enemy,  and  it  is  reasonable  to  expect,  in  view  of  other 
expeditions,  now  fitting  out  by  the  enemy  at  the  North,  that  an  effort 
against  this  place  will  not  be  much  longer  postponed.  That  you  may 
exactly  appreciate  the  wants  of  this  command  I desire  to  call  your 
attention  to  the  disposition  of  the  forces  now  here. 

My  attention  has  been  directed  principally  to  the  defense  of  the  ap- 
proaches by  water.  In  the  works  erected  for  this  purpose  I have  a 
good  degree  of  confidence,  although  I have  been  unable  to  procure  all 
the  armament  required.  Fort  Caswell,  on  the  south  side  of  the  Cape 
Fear  River,  about  30  miles  from  Wilmington,  is  manned  by  three  unat- 
tached companies  and  one  company  of  the  Twentieth  Regiment  North 
Carolina  Volunteers ; aggregate  strength  of  the  garrison,  350  men. 
Fort  Caswell  is  supported  by  the  remaining  nine  companies  of  the 
Twentieth  Regiment  North  Carolina  Volunteers,  stationed  at  Smith- 
ville  or  Fort  Johnston,  numbering  in  the  aggregate  765  men. 

At  the  Northern  or  New  Inlet  of  the  Cape  Fear  River  the  defenses 
consist  of  a battery  on  Zeeke’s  Island,  manned  by  one  company,  of  the 
aggregate  strength  99,  and  Fort  Fisher,  manned  by  two  unattached 
companies  and  one  company  of  the  Thirtieth  Regiment  North  Carolina 
Volunteers,  aggregate  250,  supported  by  nine  companies  of  the  Thir- 
tieth Regiment,  aggregate  of  which  is  770,  and  a battery  of  light  artil- 
lery of  four  12-pounders. 

The  coast  of  the  district  is  watched  by  five  companies  of  cavalry,  of 
vhich  three  are  “ local  defense”  companies,  and  four  are  only  partially 
or  indifferently  armed.  Fort  Fisher  is  about  25  miles  from  Wilmington ; 
the  road  very  difficult,  on  account  of  deep  sand. 

I have  at  Wilmington  the  Twenty-eighth  Regiment  North  Carolina 
Volunteers,  aggregate  933,  and  one  battery  of  light  artillery  of  six 
6-pounders. 

There  are  several  points  east  of  Wilmington  within  10  miles  of  the 
city  where  the  enemy  might  land  if  he  should  choose  not  to  attempt  to 
pass  the  main  batteries,  but  to  cross  with  a large  land  force  the  narrow 
strip  of  land  which  separates  the  city  from  the  ocean. 

You  will  thus  see  that  I have  only  one  regiment  and  a light  battery 
to  oppose  such  a march  of  the  enemy.  Before  I could  withdraw  the 
two  regiments  from  the  mouth  of  the  river  by  land  or  water  the  enemy 
could  reach  the  city  or  the  railroad  to  Weldon,  having  to  accomplish 
only  8 miles,  while  my  regiments  would  have  to  move  30. 

In  this  reference  to  my  exposed  line  I leave  out  of  view  the  coast 
south  of  Fort  Caswell,  on  which  he  may  land,  march  against  Smith - 
ville  and  thence  to  Wilmington,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  river.  But 
were  I able  to  concentrate  all  the  men  I have  instantaneously  at  the 
point  of  attack  which  the  enemy  may  select,' you  are  still  aware  that 
my  strength  would  not  be  sufficient  to  resist  the  force  he  will  probably 
bring  against  us,  judging  by  the  past. 

I therefore  beg  that  Clingman’s  and  Radcliffe’s  regiments  and  Moore’s 
battery  of  the  North  Carolina  troops,  placed  here  for  the  defense  of 
This  point  and  sent  by  me  to  Port  Royal,  by  direction  of  the  honora 
ble  Secretary  of  War,  under  peculiar  circumstances,  be  ordered  back 
immediately.  These  troops  were  sent  there  with  the  belief  that  they 


Ciiap.  XX  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  433 

were  necessary  to  prevent  a sudden  invasion,  and  were  expected  to  re- 
main only  “till  tliey  could  be  replaced  by  other  troops.”  And  I should 
be  doing  injustice  to  the  interest  confided  in  me  if  I did  not  most  re- 
spectfully urge  that  they  be  sent  back,  now  that  we  learn  a large  force 
has  come  to  the  defense  of  that  coast,  whilst  this  is  comparatively 
defenseless  as  to  men. 

I will  advise  General  Lee  of  my  expectations,  and  beg  you  will  in- 
form him  that  I have  stated  the  case  correctly,  and  order  the  return  of 
the  troops.  My  force  would  still  fall  very  much  short  of  what  I esti- 
mated 24th  September.  Still,  with  the  return  of  these  troops  and  the 
aid  of  the  militia,  I believe  we  can  defeat  any  force  he  will  probably 
send. 

The  city  is  defended  by  intrenched  works  on  the  east,  but  I have  no 
men  to  man  them,  nor  is  there  any  force  in  the  vicinity  which  could  be 
sent  to  my  aid.  I have  felt  it  necessary  to  make  this  statement  to  you 
in  order  to  enforce  my  application  for  re- enforcements  and  that  you 
may  see  clearly  the  necessity  therefor. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  R.  ANDERSON, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

P.  S. — In  the  enumeration  of  my  forces  I have  given  the  aggregate, 
which  must  be  abated  30  or  40  per  cent,  for  the  sick. 

fv  [Indorsements 

f Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

Goldsborough , February  15,  1862. 

Respectfully  forwarded,  and  urgently  request  that  the  troops  asked 
for  be  ordered  to  Wilmington  without  delay. 

R.  C.  GATLIN, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding . 


Raleigh,  February  13,  1862. 

J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War: 

Weldon  and  the  Sea  board  Railroad  must  be  defended.  * I am  calling 
together  the  militia  for  that  purpose,  but  that  is  very  insufficient.  We 
must  be  aided  by  your  regiments  from  the  Peninsula  or  elsewhere.  The 
danger  of  cutting  off  Norfolk  is  great  and  a large  supply  of  provisions 
stored  in  that  section. 

HENRY  T.  CLARK, 
Governor  of  North  Carolina. 


Richmond,  Va.,  February  14,  1862. 
Gov.  Henry  T.  Clark,  Raleigh : 

Your  dispatch  received.  We  are  hard  at  work  for  you,  aud  you  will 
see  the  result  in  a very  few  days.  Keep  your  people  in  good  heart. 
The  danger  is  greatly  exaggerated 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


\ 


28  R R— VOL  IX 


434 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

Goldsborough , February  15,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va.  : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  Colonel  Leventhorpe,  with 
the  Thirty-fourth  Regiment  North  Carolina  troops,  is  at  this  time  on 
the  Lower  Roanoke,  to  prevent  the  boats  of  the  enemy  ascending  that 
stream ; that  Colonel  Hoke,  with  the  Thirty-eighth  North  Carolina 
troops,  is  in  the  vicinity  of  Weldon,  to  protect  the  bridge  and  railroad 
at  that  point  j and  that  Bouldin’s  section  of  a light  battery  has  just  left 
for  the  latter  place.  I hear  from  persons  passing  that  Colonel  Clarke’s 
regiment  and  other  troops  are  at  Weldon,  sent  from  Virginia,  but  can- 
not credit  the  statement,  inasmuch  as  I have  received  no  intimation  of 
the  movement  of  these  troops  into  this  department  from  your  office, 
nor  have  the  commanders  reported  to  me. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  C.  GATLIN, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding. 


February  15, 1862. 

Weldon  N.  Edwards, 

President  of  North  Carolina  Convention , Raleigh : 

Your  dispatch  received.  The  defense  of  North  Carolina  occupies 
my  anxious  attention.  I am  sending  there  all  the  aid  I can  procure.  I 
prefer  not  to  send  back  the  North  Carolina  troops  referred  to.  The 
exigency  which  caused  them  to  be  sent  to  South  Carolina  is  not  less 
pressing  now  than  at  the  time  of  their  assignment  to  the  defense  of  that 
locality,  and  they  could  only  be  withdrawn  by  substituting  others. 
To  be  successful,  the  common  means  must  be  employed  for  the  com- 
mon defense,  as  its  necessities  require.* 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

♦ Norfolk , Va.,  February  16,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General: 

Sir:  I submit  for  the  consideration  of  the  Secretary  of  War  a pro- 
posed arrangement  of  the  brigades  of  this  division,  rendered  necessary 
by  the  movements  of  the  enemy. 

I had  sent  the  Sixth  Virginia  Regiment,  Colonel  Corprew,  to  the 
Currituck  Bridge,  with  orders  to  hold  that  point  and  prevent  the  enemy 
from  passing  through  the  South  Branch  of  the  Chesapeake  and  Albe 
marie  Canal. 

General  Wise,  on  his  retreat  from  Nag’s  Head,  came  to  Currituck 
Bridge,  assumed  command,  removed  the  battery  of  three  32-pounders 
erected  there,  and  began  abandoning  the  place  before  any  enemy  ap- 
peared. Soon  after  two  or  three  gunboats  came  up,  fired  a few  rounds, 
which  fell  short,  and  our  troops  left.  The  enemy  have  not  advanced 
since,  and  our  cavalry  pickets  are  still  there. 

I had  no  report  from  General  Wise  for  two  days,  but  heard  he  was 


* See  Davis  to  Avery,  February  18,  p.  435. 


Chap.  XX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE.  435 

falling  back  on  Norfolk.  I sent  yesterday  to  establish  batteries  near 
< treat  Bridge,  on  the  North  Branch  of  Albemarle  and  Chesapeake  Canal, 
to  block  that  passage,  and  visited  that  place  to-day.  I found  General 
Wise  there,  with  the  five  companies  of  the  Sixth  Virginia  Begiment, 
five  pieces  of  artillery,  under  Colonel  Henningsen,  and  about  four  com- 
panies of  his  Legion,  under  Colonel  Richardson.  I inquired  of  General 
Wise  why  he  abandoned'  his  position  at  Currituck  Bridge  without 
s orders,  but  could  get  no  satisfactory  answer.  He  said  he  intended  to 
occupy  a position  on  Northwest  River,  but  on  reaching  there  in  a snow- 
i storm,  found  no  quarters  for  his  men.  He  fell  back  to  Great  Bridge,  12 
- miles  south  of  Norfolk,  where  he  now  is. 

I must  be  allowed  to  consider  General  Wise  supernumerary  with  this 
army,  and  relieve  him  from  duty.  His  Legion  has  no  doubt  fine  ma- 
terial, but  I consider  it  entirely  disorganized,  and  I shall  feel  stronger 
if  it  is  removed. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

«BENJ.  HUGER, 

Major-General , Commanding. 


Richmond,  February  16,  1862. 


Brig.  Gen.  George  W.  Randolph,  Richmond , Va. : 

Sir:  The  Secretary  of  War  directs  that  you  proceed  forthwith  to 
' Suffolk,  Va.,  and  report  for  duty  to  Major-General  Huger,  under  whom 
1 you  will  immediately  proceed  to  fortify  and  defend  the  approaches  to 
Norfolk  and  provide  for  the  protection  of  the  Portsmouth  and  Weldon 
Railroad  between  Suffolk  and  Weldon.  To  effect  these  objects  you  are 
> authorized  to  call  out  a sufficient  negro  force  and  adopt  such  measures 
as  may  be  necessary. 

Capt.  I.  M.  St.  John,  Engineers,  will  be  directed  to  report  to  you  for 


duty. 

You  will  arrange  with  the  Commissary  General  for  the  rations  of  the 
negroes  before  leaving  the  city. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Richmond,  Va.,  February  18,  1862.  x 
Hon.  W.  W.  Avery,  Richmond , Va.: 
j,  My  Dear  Sir  : Your  note  of  yesterday,*  in  reference  to  the  conver- 
sation I had  with  yourself  and  other  Representatives  from  your  State, 
in  consequence  of  the  resolutions  of  the  North  Carolina  Convention,  has 
been  received. 

I have  already  replied  to  the  Convention  by  telegraph!  that  I prefer 
not  to  send  back  the  North  Carolina  troops  referred  to,  for  the  reason 
, that  the  exigency  which  caused  them  to  be  sent  to  South  Carolina  is 
, even  more  pressing  now  than  at  the  time  of  their  assignment  to  the 
defense  of  that  localityr.  The  enemy  seriously  threatens  Savannah, 
and  occupying,  as  he  does,  a secure  position  on  the  islands  in  its  vicin- 
ity, where,  protected  byr  liis  gunboats,  he  can  mature  his  plans  and 


Not  found. 


t See  Davis  to  Edwards,  p.  434. 


436 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


make  bis  arrangements  without  our  being  able  to  obtain  any  informa- 
tion as  to  bis  designs  or  movements,  be  may  at  any  moment  make  a 
sudden  attack  upon  either  Charleston  or  Savannah. 

It  will  require  all  the  ability  for  disposition  of  troops  and  engineer- 
ing skill  of  our  generals  there  to  thwart  his  purposes  and  defend  that 
portion  of  our  extended  coast. 

The  North  Carolina  troops  could  only  be  Withdrawn  by  the  substi- 
tution of  others,  and  this  change  would  necessarily,  to  a greater  or  less 
degree,  disorganize  for  a time  that  portion  of  our  line  from,  which  they 
are  drawn  and  add  to  the  burden  of  our  overtaxed  railroad  transporta-, 
tion. 

The  defense  of  North  Carolina  occupies  my  serious  attention,  and  I 
am  sending  there  all  the  aid  at  my  disposal.  General  Randolph  has 
been  sent  to  protect  the  railroad  which  connects  Weldon  with  Nor- 
folk, with  orders  to  assemble  the  "troops  for  this  purpose  at  points  on 
the  road  convenient  for  concentration  at  any  point  which  may  be 
threatened. 

It  may  not  be  possible,  with  our  limited  means,  to  protect  every  point 
which  the  enemy  can  attack  by  means  of  his  fleets,  but  every  effort  will 
be  made  to  hold  those  positions  which  are  of  vital  interest  to  the  State 
and  to  our  common  cause. 

Our  ability  to  defend  is  limited  by  the  supply  of  arms,  powder,  and 
other  munitions  of  war.  Efforts  were  made,  as  you  are  no  doubt  aware, 
at  an  early  period  of  our  troubles,  to  purchase  arms  from  abroad.  Some 
have  been  received  from  this  source  and  we  have  hopes  of  more. 

I have  received  no  official  reports  of  the  disastrous  affair  at  Roan- 
oke Island.  The  newspaper  accounts  indicate  that  the  greater  portion 
of  our  men  there  behaved  very  badly.  I will  wait  for  more  accurate 
and  full  reports  before  forming  a judgment  as  to  the  cause  of  our  sig- 
nal defeat. 

When  the  island  was  first  occupied  by  our  troops  after  the  fall  of 
Hatteras,  realizing  the  importance  of  the  position  to  us,  I sent  one  of 
my  aides-de-camp  to  make  a personal  examination  of  its  condition  and 
capabilities  for  defense.  From  his  report  I concluded  that  the  condi- 
tion of  affairs  was  such  as  to  justify  a reasonable  hope  of  successful 
resistance  to  any  force  the  enemy  could  then  bring  to  bear  against  it, 
and  capable,  with  x>roper  dispositions  and  energetic  efforts  in  prepara- 
tion, of  making  a creditable,  if  not  successful,  defense  against  any  force 
that  would  be  prepared  for  the  purpose.  To  this  end  it  was  attached 
to  the  department  of  General  Huger.  After  it  became  probable  that 
the  expedition  under  Burnside  would  attack  this  position  General 
Huger  was  directed  to  re-enforce  it  to  the  extent  of  his  means. 

I am  not  sufficiently  informed  as  to  what  was  done  after  the  inspec- 
tion of  my  aide  to  enable  me  to  say  whether  the  preparation  was  de- 
fective or  whether  the  fault  was  in  the  troops. 

Very  respectfullv  and  truly,  yours, 

JEFFERSONT  DAVIS. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

Goldsborough , February  20,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  G.  S.  Army , Richmond , Va. : 
General:  On  the  15th  instant  I sent  my  aide  de  camp  to  Weldon 
to  ascertain  what  troops  were  in  that  vicinity  other  than  those  sent 


Chap.  XX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  437 

there  by  my  orders.  He  found  Colonel  Clarke  at  Garysburg  with  the 
Twenty -fourth  Eegiment  of  North  Carolina  troops,  together  with  a num- 
ber of  detached  companies.  Colonel  Clarke  informed  him  that  he  was 
there  by  orders  from  your  office,  and  was  instructed  to  report  to  Ma- 
jor-General Huger,  commanding  the  Department  of  Norfolk,  and  that 
he  was  then  acting  under  his  orders.  As  Garysburg  is  within  the  De- 
partment of  North  Carolina,  I am  at  a loss  to  know  why  troops  are 
sent  there  and  placed  under  the  orders  of  the  commander  of  another 
department  and  I not  even  officially  informed  of  it. 

Already  a conflict  of  jurisdiction  has  arisen  between  the  officers  act- 
ing under  my  orders  and  those  acting  under  General  Huger.  I hope 
immediate  steps  will  be  taken  to  restore  order.  I have  given  orders, 
but  they  may  not  be  obeyed.  I beg  to  call  your  attention  to  my  letter 
of  the  15th  instant  in  relation  to  the  defense  of  the  Eoanoke,  some  por- 
tion of  which  is  germane  to  this  matter. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  C.  GATLIN, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

[Indorsement.] 

Inform  General  Gatlin  that  the  troops  sent  to  Garysburg  were  not 
intended  for  his  command,  but  were  camped  there  temporarily,  until  Gen- 
eral Huger  could  send  for  them. 

J.  P.  B. 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  February  21,  1862. 

Hon.  Weldon  N.  Edwards, 

President  Convention  of  North  Carolina , Raleigh , N.  C. : 

1 My  Dear  Sir  : Your  communication  of  the  13th  instant,*  with  the 
i accompanying  resolutions  of  the  Convention,  has  been  received. 

I The  North  Carolina  delegation  in  Congress  had  presented  a copy  of 
the  resolutions  before  the  receipt  of  your  letter,  and  have  received  a 
J reply,  the  substance  of  which  has,  I suppose,  been  already  delivered  to 
the  Convention  by  them. 

I am,  verv  truly,  yours, 

JEFFEESON  DAYIS. 

i 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  February  21,  1862. 

A.  J.  Battle,  Esq.,  Wilson , N.  C.: 

My  Dear  Sir  : The  President  has  received  your  letter  of  the  12th  in- 
stant,! in  reference  to  the  defense  of  North  Carolina,  and  instructs  me 
to  say  in  reply  that  inadequate  means  have  limited  preparations  in 
that  State,  as  elsewhere,  and  that  he  had  not  doubted  the  sobriety  of 
General  Gatlin,  although  General  Loring,  an  officer  of  higher  rank,  had 
been  sent  to  North  Carolina. 

Yery  respectfully, 

G.  W.  C.  LEE, 

Colonel , and  Aide- de-  Camp. 

( 


* Not  found.  See  Davis  to  Avery,  p.  435. 


tNot  found. 


438 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX, 


State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

Raleigh , February  22,  1862. 
Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I have  heretofore  drawn  your  attention  to  the  situation  and 
defenses  of  Wilmington  and  the  Cape  Fear  Biver.  The  defenses  on 
the  north  side  of  the  inlet,  at  mouth  of  Cape  Fear  Biver,  were  put  up 
by  the  local  authorities.  There  are  several  batteries  on  the  river  below 
the  town  of  Wilmington,  with  some  guns,  but  are  without  garrison. 
So  you  may  readily  see  that  a fleet  can  pass  the  inlet  and  ascend  the 
river  and  destroy  Wilmington.  They  can  also  land  north  of  the  inlet, 
and  are  within  a march  of  10  miles,  with  only  two  volunteer  regiments 
to  oppose  them.  The  possession  of  Wilmington  commands  the  Great 
Northern  and  Southern  Bailroad,  with  all  its  valuable  machine-shops. 

But  the  most  attractive  feature  for  that  expedition  in  the  eyes  of  the 
enemy  is  the  Fayetteville  Arsenal,  a day’s  journey  up  the  river.  The 
destruction  of  that  arsenal  would  be  a heavy  blow,  a*nd  would  give 
peculiar  gratification,  in  the  Yankee  eye,  as  the  recapture  of  the  Har- 
per’s Ferry  works. 

I have  just  received  a memorial  from  the  town  authorities  of  Fay- 
etteville, asking  for  assistance  and  urging  a system  of  defense  by 
blocking  the  channel  of  the  Cape  Fear,  which  is  necessary  [sic]  enough 
to  be  effected  very  easily. 

The  defense  of  Wilmington  cannot  be  delayed  much  longer.  Moore’s 
light  battery,  Clingman’s  regiment,  1,100  strong,  and  Badcliffe’s  regi- 
ment have  been  taken  from  the  defense  of  Wilmingtoil  and  sent  to  Port 
Boyal.  They  are  not  permitted  to  return  and  no  efforts  are  known  to 
be  made  to  supply  their  places,  and  there  is  the  most  painful  anxiety 
for  the  safety  of  Wilmington  and  Fayetteville.  If  you  have  any  dis- 
posable force,  they  could  not  be  sent  to  any  position  where  they  are 
more  needed  or  where  they  could  render  more  valuable  service. 

Most  respectfully,  yours, 

HENBY  T.  CLABK. 


Dept,  of  Norfolk,  Hdqrs.  Third  Brigade, 

Portsmouth , Va.,  February  24,  1862. 

Lieut.  Col.  S.  S.  Anderson, 

Adjutant- General,  Norfolk: 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I returned  to  Suffolk  and 
continued  the  works  on  Nansemond  Biver  and  held  correspondence  with 
the  different  commands.  On  the  20th  instant  the  news  of  the  first  attack 
on  Winton  reached  me,  and  I moved  Colonel  Armistead’s  Fifty-seventh 
Begiment  of  Virginia  and  one  section  of  Girardey’s  battery  to  Franklin 
to  defend  the  Blackwater  and  block  it  up.  He  is  still  there.  I regret 
to  say  that  the  three  companies  of  South  Carolina  Volunteers  at  the 
mouth  of  Blackwater  had  fallen  back  from  that  position.  I inclose 
Captain  Butler’s  report.*  At  the  request  of  many  citizens  I carried 
the  cotton  (500  bales)  lying  at  Franklin  to  Portsmouth.  On  the  21st 
Major-General  Huger  and  Brigadier-General  Bandolph  came  to  Suffolk 
and  relieved  me  from  duty.  At  the  request  of  General  Bandolph  I 
remained  with  him.  The  news  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Williams’  retreat 
reached  me,  and  that  Colonel  Clarke  had  arrived  at,  Franklin.  We 


Not.  found. 


hat.  XX  ] CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  439 

tartecl  with  a train  of  cars,  and  found  the  Fifty-seventh  Virginia  and 
fourteenth  North  Carolina  down  the  river  on  scout.  The  North  Caro- 
ina  regiment  was  recalled,  and  an  order  sent  to  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Williams  to  return  forthwith  to  Win  ton.  I send  copy  of  his  report.* 
can  see  no  reason  or  excuse  for  his  retreat.  His  men  have  lost  all 
xcept  their  arms  and  what  they  wore.  He  is  under  command  of 
Colonel  Clarke.  He  left  Newsom’s  for  Murfreesborough  on  the  22d. 
Jolonel  Clarke’s  regiment  also  went  there. 

The  want  of  cavalry  is  excessive.  I have  ordered  the  detachment  of 
Captain  Gillett’s  company,  which  was  relieved  at  Winton  by  the  Nanse- 
lond  cavalry,  to  stay  with  Colonel  Armistead  until  further  orders. 

I have  sent  Captain  Brewer’s  Nansemond  cavalry  toward  Edenton 
o co-operate  with  the  militia  in  getting  off  the  provisions  in  that  sec- 
ion. 

| Major  Brabble,  First  North  Carolina  Battalion,  went  into  Edenton, 
nd  arrested  Messrs.  Norcom  and  Bland  as  traitors,  in  dealing  with  the 
nerny.  They  are  sent  to  Raleigh.  The  Union  men  south  of  Chowan 
fere  arrested  by  Colonel  Williams’  order,  but  escaped  during  the  re- 
peat. The  whole  country  south  of  Chowan  is  more  or  less  disaffected, 
send  Colonel  Moore’s  report.* 

These  two  reports  of  mine  will  partially  show  that  I have  not  been 
lie  since  my  command  was  extended  and  that  no  point  in  the  district 
;as  neglected.  I must  therefore  respectfully  ask  that  General  Order, 
To.  14,  of  20th  February,  1862,  reducing  my  command  to  a small  bri- 
gade, while  the  youngest  brigadier  in  the  Army  has  charge  of  two 
rigades,  be  so  modified  as  to  express  the  opinion  of  the  general  that 
lie  service  required  such  action  and  was  not  done  from  any  disapproval 
f my  conduct. 

. Colonel  Wright,  Third  Georgia  Begiment,  has  acted  separately,  and 
iis  reports  have  been  sent  in. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  G.  BLANCHARD, 
Brigadier- General,  P.  A.  C.  S. 


Headquarters  Fifth  Brigade,  Huger’s  Division, 

Murfreesborough , N.  <7.,  February  24,  1862. 

Ton.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War , G.  8.: 

1 Sir  : Having  been  placed  in  command  of  the  forces  covering  the 
irge  territory  between  the  Chowan  and  the  Roanoke  Rivers,  consisting 
f my  own  regiment,  numbering  less  than  600  effective  men ; Colonel 
Villiams’  Battalion  North  Carolina  Volunteers,  400;  one  company  of 
avalry  of  Wise’s  Legion,  only  40  of  whom  are  with  me,  and  Nichols’ 
attery  of  four  small  pieces,  I hasten  to  inform  you  that  these  forces 
re  wholly  inadequate  to  the  important  services  required  of  them,  and 
espectfully,  but  most  urgently,  request  that  an  additional  force  of 
avalry  and  artillery  may  be  immediately  placed  at  my  disposal.  I 
m using  my  utmost  endeavors  to  raise  a small  body  of  mounted  men 
i this  vicinity  to  act  as  couriers  and  vedettes,  but  being  wEolly  un- 
isciplined  and  but  poorly  armed,  they  will  be  incompetent  to  meet 
he  enemy  in  the  field,  even  should  I be  able  to  raise  them,  which  is 
oubtful. 


Not  found. 


440  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA.  [Chap.  XX. j 

My  artillery  consists  of  four  light  pieces,  insufficient,  both  in  range) 
and  caliber,  to  defend  the  rivers  against  the  heavily-armed  gunboats 
of  the  enemy.  An  order  received  from  you  stopped  the  march  of  two 
companies  of  cavalry  of  Wise’s  Legion,  who  were  at  Garysburg,  N.  C. 
and  were  about  moving  to  re-enforce  me.  I have  detained  Lieu  ten  anti 
Tucker,  who  was  ordered  to  proceed  to  Manassas,  until  you  could  be 
informed  of  the  indispensable  necessity  of  his  remaining  with  me 
until  some  other  cavalry  force  should  relieve  him.  My  only  means  of 
obtaining  information  and  keeping  up  communication  is  by  means  of 
vedettes,  and  these  should  be  men  that  have  seen  service,  that  I may| 
not  be  misled  by  erroneous  reports.  Instead  of  depriving  me  of  cav- 
alry my  force  should  be  strengthened,  for  if  ten  times  as  strong  it 
would  not  be  sufficient  for  the  service  necessary  in  the  territory  com 
mitted  to  my  charge.  By  means  of  one  cavalry  company  I was  enabled 
a few  days  ago  to  secure  a large  amount  of  Government  property, 
which  otherwise  would  most  probably  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of 
the  enemy. 

Permit  me  to  inform  you  that  my  command  embraces  a highly  pro 
ductive  tract  of  country,  which  now  contains  provisions  sufficient  to 
subsist  the  whole  Army  of  the  Confederate  States  for  at  least  half  a 
year,  and  it  is  of  the  first  importance  that  it  should  not  be  ravaged  by 
the  enemy.  The  white  population  is  sparse,  and  they  have  been  so 
long  neglected  that  they  are  perfectly  demoralized.  An  exhibition  of 
force,  which  I made  a few  days  ago,  has  been  of  inestimable  value  in 
inspiring  our  people  with  confidence  and  in  intimidating  our  foes. 

I expect  to  be  able  to  obstruct  this  (the  Meherrin)  river  effectually 
by  the  time  this  reaches  you,  and  with  two  18-pounders  and  two  24s 
or  32s  I could  destroy  any  vessels  that  should  attempt  to  come  up  to 
this  place  and  at  the  same  time  effectually  protect  the  bridge  of  the 
Seaboard  and  Roanoke  Railroad  over  this  river. 

With  two  more  regiments  of  infantry  and  500  cavalry,  in  addition 
to  the  force  now  present,  I could  keep  the  enemy  from  advancing  in- 
land in  my  department. 

I beg  that  you  will  countermand  the  order  removing  Wise’s  cavalry, 
and  that  the  whole  battalion  will  be  ordered  here,  and  also  artillery 
and  experienced  artillerists. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  J.  CLARKE, 

Colonel , Commanding  Fifth  Brigade , Huger'’ s Division. 


Headquarters  Department  of*  North  Carolina, 

Goldsborough , February  27,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va.  : 

General:  I received  last  night  the  following  telegram  from  the 
Secretary  of  War,  viz: 

Send  a statement  as  promptly  as  possible  of  your  forces,  their  disposition,  and  your 
means  and  plans  of  defense. 

I inclose  herewith  an  imperfect  return  of  the  troops  within  the  depart- 
ment* It  may  answer  for  present  purposes,  but  I hope  to  be  able  to 
forward  a more  complete  one  in  a few  days. 

For  a detailed  report  of  the  defenses  of  the  Cape  Fear  District,  the 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XX  ] 


441 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

location  of  the  troops,  &c.,  I beg  to  refer  to  the  report  of  Brigadier- 
General  Anderson,  dated  the  13th  instant,*  and  which  was  forwarded 
to  you  through  these  headquarters.  As  General  Anderson  will  be  in 
Richmond  to-day,  he  will  be  able  to  explain  in  person  anything  not  un- 
derstood in  that  communication.  In  case  he  is  attacked,  his  defenses 
destroyed,  and  his  troops,  driven  from  their  positions,  it  is  understood 
that  he  is  to  fall  back  in  the  direction  of  Fayetteville,  with  the  view  of 
checking  the  advance  of  the  enemy  in  that  direction.  It  is  hoped  and 
believed  that  his  defenses  are  sufficient,  but  he  is  sadly  deficient  in 

Conceiving  the  town  of  New  Berne,  the  point  most  likely  to  be  attacked, 

I have  assembled  in  its  vicinity  as  large  a body  of  troops  as  in  my  power. 
They  are  under  the  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  L.  O’B.  Branch,  who  also 
commands  the  District  of  the  Pamlico.  Batteries  have  been  erected  on 
the  Neuse  below  the  town  and  the  river  effectually  blocked.  These 
batteries  are  open  and  the  guns  mounted  in  barbette,  but  it  is  hoped 
they  will  not  fail  to  drive  off  the  fleet  of  gunboats  should  they  attempt 
to  reduce  them.  Below  these  batteries  are  breastworks  running  from 
the  river  to  the  swamps  on  Bryce’s  Greek,  which  are  believed  to  be  im- 
passable. The  breastworks  are  thought  to  be  strong  enough  to  enable 
our  troops  to  resist  and  hold  them  against  a large  force  of  the  enemy. 
I regret  that  I have  no  sketch  of  these  works  to  transmit.  You  will 
perceive  that  a large  increase  to  the  force  at  New  Berne  should  be  made 
to  place  them  upon  an  equality  with  such  a force  as  attacked  Boanoke 
Island. 

In  case  they  are  driven  from  their  positions  they  are  to  fall  back  upon 
the  line  of  the  Atlantic  and  North  Carolina  Railroad,  and  take  up  the 
first  defensible  position,  not  yet  determined  upon,  which  may  confine 
the  enemy  as  close  to  New  Berne  as  practicable. 

The  batteries  at  Harkers’  and  Huggins’  Islands  have  been  withdrawn, 
and  the  garrison  at  Fort  Macon  reduced  to  five  companies  of  artillery, 
the  largest  number  that  could  be  sheltered  inside  the  fort  in  case  of 
siege.  The  fort  has  a supply  of  seven  months’  provisions,  and  its  com- 
mander is  of  opinion  that  he  can  hold  it  as  long  as  powder  and  his  pro- 
visions last.  A large  supply  of  powder  is  required  to  meet  the  contin- 
gencies of  a siege. 

The  Pamlico  River  is  protected  by  batteries  some  8 mdes  below  the 
town  of  Washington.  They  are  considered  sufficient  to  beat  off  the 
gunboats,  but  the  force  there  is  not  adequate  to  contend  with  a large 
land  force.  In  case  of  the  loss  of  the  batteries  the  troops  will  retreat 
up  the  Tar  River  in  the  direction  of  Greenville. 

The  troops  heretofore  stationed  in  Hyde  County  have  been  withdra  wn, 
as  it  was  considered  imprudent  to  keep  them  there,  there  being  but  one 
road  leading  out  of  the  county  which  could  readily  be  seized  by  the 
enemy,  thus  cutting  off  all  retreat.  A local  company  still  remains  for 
such  service  as  it  may  be  able  to  render  in  preventing  servile  insurrec- 
tion. Five  companies  taken  from  Hyde  have  been  sent  to  New  Berne ; 
the  remainder  are  at  Washington. 

You  will  perceive  that  the  force  under  my  command  is  very  inade- 
quate to  the  defense  of  so  extensive  a coast  against  an  enemy  who  has 
possession  of  our  sounds  and  can  direct  his  large  columns  against  any 
point  he  may  elect. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  C.  GATLIN, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


* See  p.  431. 


442 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA 


[Chap.  XX. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  March  2,  1862. 
Brigadier-General  Gatlin,  Goldsborough , Y.  C. : 

The  President  directs  that  the  troops  be  withdrawn  from  the  defense 
of  Washington  [N.  C.],  and  sent  immediately  to  General  Randolph,  at 
Suffolk,  to  aid  in  defense  of  that  point.  The  artillery  can  be  withdrawn 
to  the  line  of  railroad,  to  be  disposed  of  as  may  be  found  best  hereafter. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

4.  ( Goldsborough , March  9,  1862. 

By  direction  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  all  cotton,  tobacco,  and  naval 
stores  within  this  department  must  be  removed  west  of  the  Wilmington 
and  Weldon  Railroad;  or,  if  distant  from  any  railroad  or  navigable 
stream,  put  in  such  places  of  security  that  they  cannot  be  reached  by 
the  enemy.  Such  of  the  above-mentioned  products  as  are  in  exposed 
positions  must  be  removed  at  once,  and  those  less  exposed  removed 
or  secured  by  the  25th  instant;  otherwise  they  will  be  destroyed  by  the 
military  authorities. 

The  generals  commanding  the  Districts  of  the  Cape  Fear  and  Pamlico 
will  see  that  these  orders  are  carried  into  effect. 

It  is  hoped  that  the  owners  themselves  will  apply  the  torch  rather 
than  see  the  enemy  gain  possession  of  these  much-coveted  products. 

Whenever  it  shall  become  necessary  for  an  officer  or  citizen  to  destroy 
private  property  to  prevent  its  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  he 
will  make  a report  of  the  facts  and  circumstances  to  these  headquarters, 
accompanied  with  a statement  of  the  property  destroyed  and  to  whom 
it  belonged,  and  furnish  the  owner  with  a copy  of  the  statement. 

By  order  of  Brigadier- General  Gatlin : 

JOHN  W.  GRAHAM, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Goldsborough,  March  13,  1862. 
(Received  Richmond,  March  13,  1862.) 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General: 

The  enemy  are  in  large  force  in  Neuse  River — ten  steamers  and  one 
transport ; are  about  12  miles  below  New  Berne.  The  pilot  reports 
fifty  vessels  coming  up.  This  is  General  Branch’s  report,  date  9 p.  m. 
yesterday. 

R.  C.  GATLIN, 
Brigadier-  General. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  March  13,  1862. 
Brigadier-General  Gatlin,  Goldsborough: 

The  two  North  Carolina  regiments  of  Radcliffe  and  Clingman  have 
.been  ordered  to  New  Berne.  In  the  mean  time  draw  re-enforcements 
from  Wilmington,  if  practicable. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


JHAP.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


443 


Richmond,  Ya.,  March  13,  1862. 
Major-General  Pemberton,  Pocotaligo , S.  C. : 

Send  Radcliffe’s  and  Clingman’s  regiments  to  New  Berne,  K.  0.,  to 
report  to  General  Branch.  Will  be  replaced  by  two  regiments  from 

Ge0rgla-  J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

*•  Secretary  of  War. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  March  14,  1862. 
Brigadier-General  Gatlin,  Goldsborough  : 

What  have  you  done  about  destroying  cotton  I What  re-enforce- 
ments  have  you  sent  to  Kew  Berne  % What  are  your  plans  % Keep  us 
constantly  advised.  Have  you  established  a line  of  signals  to  Kew 
Berne  ? 

J.  P.  BEKJAMIK. 


Goldsborouuh,  March  14,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin: 

An  officer  has  just  arrived  from  Kew  Berne,  who  reports  that  the 
town  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  at  10  or  11  a.  m.  to-day,  and  that 
the  troops  are  falling  back  in  the  direction  of  Kinston.  1 will  try  to 
hold  the  line  of  railroad  between  Kew  Berne  and  this  place,  but  to  pre- 
vent the  advance  of  the  enemy  large  re-enforcements  will  be  required. 
A general  order  was  issued  in  regard  to  cotton  on  the  9th  instant. 

R.  C.  GATLIK, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Kor.tH  Carolina, 

Goldsborough , March  14,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

General  : I had  the  honor  to  send  to-day  to  the  honorable  Secretary 
•of  War  a telegram  announcing  the  fall  of  Kew  Berne.  I have  received 
no  report  from  Brigadier-General  Branch,  who  commanded,  and  I learn 
was  on  the  railroad  10  miles  this  side  of  Kew  Berne  at  sunset  this 
evening  with  a part  of  his  forces.  I design  to  collect  at  Kinston  all 
those  who  have  passed  General  B.,  as  at  that  point  the  several  roads 
on  which  they  may  have  retreated  join.  Ko  re-enforcements  reached 
Kew  Berne  in  time  to  take  part  in  the  action.  I have  summoned  Gen- 
eral Anderson  to  my  assistance,  and  will  place  the  troops  in  such  posi- 
tion as  may  seem  best.  In  the  mean  time  I will  telegraph  General  Lee 
for  advice  as  to  the  best  line  of  defense  it  will  be  advisable  to  adopt. 

My  health  for  some  time  past  has  not  been  such  as  to  warrant  my 
taking  the  field,  and  for  a few  days  past  have  been  confined  to  my  room; 
otherwise  I should  have  been  present  to  have  conducted  the  operations 
in  person. 

A telegram  from  the  Secretary  of  War  to-day  would  indicate  that  he 
had  not  seen  my  report,  accompanied  by  a return  of  the  troops  in  Gen- 


444 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


eral  Branch’s  district.  If  such  is  the  case,  I beg  that  it  may  be  laid  be- 
fore him. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  C.  GATLIN, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

No.  51.  j Goldsborough , March  14,  1862. 

I.  Col.  James  H.  Lane,  Twenty-eighth  Regiment  North  Carolina 
troops,  will  assume  command  of  all  troops  in  this  vicinity,  who  have 
escaped  from  New  Berne,  and  proceed  with  them  to  Kinston. 

* * ***** 

Bv  order  of  Major-General  Gatlin : 

JOHN  W.  GRAHAM, 

Aide-de-  Camp. 


Richmond,  V a.,  March  14,  1862. 

General  Joseph  R.  Anderson, 

Wilmington , N.  C.: 

Send  such  re-enforcements  as  you  can,  to  report  to  General  Gatlin 
immediately.  Halt,  if  necessary,  in  their  stead  Radeliffe’s  and  Cling- 
man’s  regiments,  on  way  from  North  [South]  Carolina. 

J,  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Richmond,  Va.,  March  15,  1862. 
Gov.  Henry  T.  Clark,  Raleigh : 

Large  re-enforcements  are  immediately  requisite  for  the  defense  of 
your  State.  The  regiments  of  Clingman  and  Radcliffe  have  been 
ordered  back  to  Wilmington.  Call  on  your  people  to  arm  in  defense 
of  their  homes.  Send  all  the  men  you  can  to  Weldon  as  rapidly  as 
possible.  1 will  find  means  to  arm  them  all.  I pray  you  to  allow  no 
time  to  be  lost. 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

Raleigh , March  15,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond : 

Sir:  On  Wednesday,  the  12th,  the  Burnside  expedition  appeared  in 
large  force  below  our  batteries  on  the  Neuse,  opened  fire  on  the  next 
morning  about  8 o’clock  a.  m.,  and  in  latter  part  of  the  day  effected  a 
landing  of  a large  body  of  troops,  estimated  about  25,000. 

On  Friday  our  force,  about  5,000,  engaged  them  in  the  morning,  and 
after  a severe  conflict  of  two  or  three  hours  were  outflanked  and  nearly 
surrounded. 

In  the  mean  time  the  fleet  had  passed  the  river  batteries  and  entered 
the  Trent  River  off  the  town  and  behind  our  troops,  who  were  on  the 


Ohaf.  XX.  I 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


445 


opposite  bank  from  the  town.  Our  troops,  thus  overpowered  and 
nearly  surrounded,  made  such  an  escape  as  they  could,  and  many  no 
doubt  were  captured,  but  I have  no  reliable  knowledge  of  this  or  of 
the  casualties  on  either  side. 

Kew  Berne  being  in  possession  of  the  enemy,  we  have  no  communi- 
cation there,  except  from  some  refugees  or  stragglers. 

The  hard  fighting  that  took  place  disposes  me  to  believe  that  there 
was  considerable  mortality  on  both  sides. 

I suppose  you  will  soon  have  official  reports. 

I hear  much  complaint  and  criticism  among  the  people  of  the  absence 
of  General  Gatlin  from  the  field  of  battle  and  his  •entire  neglect  and 
inattention  to  the  coast  defenses  of  his  command  for  the  last  five 
months,  and  they  judge  of  this  neglect  and  inattention  from  the  alleged 
fact  that  he  has  not  during  that  period  visited  and  examined  the  forti- 
fications and  inspected  the  troops  more  than  once,  if  at  all,  during  his 
command  of  six  months,  notwithstanding  his  headquarters  are  in 
easy  railroad  communication  of  both  Generals  Anderson’s  and  Branch’s 
commands. 

I am  only  stating  what  I hear  constantly  around  me.  Perhaps  his 
headquarters  is  the  proper  place  for  him,  but  the  people  so  deeply  in- 
terested in  their  own  homes  and  interests  expected  the  benefit  of  his 
military  knowledge  and  experience,  and  [are]  greatly  distressed  that 
they  have  not  had  it,  and  regard  with  much  anxiety  his  want  of  atten- 
tion to  their  safety  and  interest  and  what  they  believe  was  his  special 
business. 

The  present  prospect  is  that  we  shall  soon  have  our  quota,  five  regi- 
ments, and  probably  more,  and  I am  looking  to  you  for  the  supply  of 
arms. 

In  connection  with  the  formation  of  these  regiments  I will  take  the 
liberty  of  suggesting  to  you  some  regulation  or  legislation  to  inquire 
by  examination  or  otherwise  into  the  qualification  of  the  commissioned 
officers. 

It  seems  now  that  there  is  manifest  want  of  attention  to  the  proper 
requisite  for  an  officer.  In  the  great  number  there  must  necessarily  be 
many  that  are  not  qualified,  but  still  there  should  be  some  means  of 
ascertaining  the  fitness  of  at  least  commanding  officers  of  companies, 
regiments,  and  brigades,  and  regulations,  general  in  their  application, 
would  or  ought  to  prove  acceptable.  Too  much  has  to  be  intrusted  to 
the  commanding  officer. 

Very  respectfully, 

HENRY  T.  CLARK. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  60.  } Richmond , March  15,  1862. 

* ■ * * # # # # 

XIV.  Brig.  Gen.  Richard  C.  Gatlin  is  relieved  from  duty  in  North 
Carolina  on  account  of  ill  health,  and  will  be  succeeded  in  the  command 
of  the  Department  of  North  Carolina  by  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  R.  Ander- 
son. 

XV.  Brig.  Geu.  Samuel  G.  French  will  repair  to  Wilmington,  N.  C., 
and  relieve  Brigadier-General  Anderson  in  the  command  of  that  dis- 
trict.* 


*8ee  General  Orders,  No.  13,  dated  at  Wilmiugton,  N.  C.,  March  22,  1862,  p.  450. 


446 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


XVI.  Brig.  Gen.  Carter  L.  Stevenson  will  report  to  Major-General 
Huger  for  assignment  with  troops  on  the  line  of  railroad  near  Weldon, 
X.  C.  ’ 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Richmond,  Va.,  March  17,  1862. 

Gov.  Henry  T.  Clark,  Raleigh : 

I did  not  request  that  militia  should  he  called  out.  If  not  armed, 
they  would  6e  of  no  service.  I will  arm  all  the  volunteers  you  send. 
If  you  have  more  than  two  regiments,  send  the  remainder  to  Golds- 
borough.  Tents,  camp  equipage,  and  blankets  will  be  sent  immedi- 
ately to  Goldsborough. 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


State  of  North  Carolina,  Executive  Department, 

Raleigh , March  17,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Jefferson  Davis, 

President  of  the  Confederate  States  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  present  to  you  the  inclosed  memorial  and 
resolutions  of  the  people  of  Wilmington,  which  have  just  been  handed 
to  me,  and  I feel  a deep  anxiety  that  it  should  receive  your  attentive 
consideration.  I would  not  press  it  on  your  attention  if  I could  grant 
them  assistance  myself,  but  I have  no  troops  at  my  disposal,  and  a call 
for  militia,  with  their  tardiness  of  action,  destitution  of  arms,  and  the 
requisite  of  a soldier,  leaves  no  hope  of  benefit  from  them. 

The  only  troops  at  Wilmington  are  the  few  that  I could  put  there,  and 
insufficient  as  they  were,  they  have  been  removed  by  Confederate  offi- 
cers to  other  positions,  till  there  are  less  than  1,500  left,  which  could 
not  resist  even  a fourth  of  the  Burnside  expedition. 

Wilmington  has  the  great  machine-shops,  the  railroad  connections 
(our  only  means  of  getting  salt),  furnishes  the  materials,  support,  and 
access  for  the  Confederate  States  Arsenal.  Any  one  of  these  presents 
sufficient  claims  to  be  defended  by  the  Confederate  States,  and  it  must 
be  done  quickly  or  not  at  all;  for  it  is  doubtless  the  next  move  of  Burn- 
side, which  will  destroy  the  last  connection  of  North  Carolina  with  the 
ocean. 

The  people  of  Wilmington  must  know  in  time  what  to  depend  on, 
either  to  be  defended  or  to  seek  safety  in  flight.  If  the  great  public 
interests  will  not  secure  a defense  for  them,  they  must  secure  their  pri- 
vate interests  as  far  as  possible  by  removal  to  some  more  secure  spot. 

I will  take  the  liberty  of  further  adding  that  the  adjacent  counties 
to  Wilmington  have  sent  out  an  unusual  number  of  volunteers,  who  are 
now  absent  on  duty  elsewhere,  and  presents  the  great  difficulty  of  pro- 
curing within  -reach  any  amount  of  militia. 

I take  pleasure  in  introducing  to  you  the  committee  who  present 
these  resolutions,  Messrs.  Strange,  Thomas,  and  De  Rosset,  and  hope 
they  will  enlist  your  attention  in  behalf  of  a cause  which  so  much  inter- 
ests both  you  and  them. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  most  respectfully,  yours, 

HENRY  T.  CLARK. 


Chap.  XX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


447 


[Inclosure.  J 

/ Office  of  the  Committee  of  Safety, 

for  the  Town  of  Wilmington, 

Wilmington , N.  C.,  March  15,  1862. 

At  a meeting  of  the  Committee  of  Safety  held  this  day  the  following  resolutions 
were  adopted : 

Resolved,  That  Mai.  Robert  Strange,  A.  J.  De  Rosset,  and  W . G.  Thomas,  as  represent- 
atives from  the  Committee  of  Safety  of  the  town  of  Wilmington,  forthwith  proceed  to 
the  citv  of  Raleigh,  and  confer  with  the  Governor  of  this  State  on  the  subject-matter 
of  the  defenses  connected  with  this  portion  of  the  State  of  North  Carolina,  represent- 
ing to  him  the  present  condition  of  these  defenses,  the  amount  of  the  forces  connected 
with  them,  and  all  such  facts  in  relation  to  this  subject-matter  necessary  to  a lull 

knowledge  of  our  true  condition.  . A , . . , 

Resolved  That  said  committee  ascertain  from  the  Governor  what  are  his  views  as  to 
the  defense  of  this  portion  of  the  State,  and  if  his  purpose  be  to  make  such  defense, 
that  he  be  requested,  without  delay,  to  provide  a competent  force,  with  necessary 

munitions  of  war,  for  that  purpose.  . „ , . „ 

Resolved  That  said  committee,  after  conferring  with  the  Governor,  proceed  to  the 
city  of  Richmond,  and  ascertain,  if  practicable,  the  intentions  of  the  Confederate  States 


reference  to  the  defenses  of  the  town  of  Wilmington. 


S.  D.  WALLACE, 

Secretary. 


Special  "Orders,  \ 
No.  61.  ) 


Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

Richmond , March  17,  1862. 


XV.  Brig.  Gen.  Robert  Ransom  will  proceed  without  delay  to  Golds- 
borough,  N.C.,  and  report  to  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  R.  Anderson,  command- 
ing, for  duty  with  the  troops  in  the  field. 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

**  JNO.  WITHERS, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Special  Orders,  ) 
No.  53.  ) 

* * 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

Goldshorough , March  17,  1862. 

* * • # * 


II.  Brig.  Gen.  Samuel  G.  French,  C.  S.  Army,  having  reported  for 
duty  in  this  department,  agreeably  to  Special  Orders,  No.  1,  from  Head- 
quarters, Richmond,  Va.,  March  14,*  1862,  is  hereby  assigned  to  the 
command  of  the  District  of  the  Pamlico,  which  district  embraces  the 
counties  of  Edgecombe,  Wilson,  Pitt,  Greene,  Wayne,  Lenoir,  Duplin, 
Jones,  Carteret,  Craven,  Beaufort,  and  Hyde. 

The  troops  in  the  field  in  that  district  will  be  formed  into  two  bri- 
gades, as  follows : ^ 1 _ 

The  First  (or  French’s)  Brigade  will  consist  of  the  Seventh,  Twenty- 
sixth,  Twenty-seventh,  Thirty -fifth  Regiments,  and  Maj.  L.  H.  Rogers’ 
battalion  of  infantry,  North  Carolina  troops;  Captains  Sutton,  Tripp, 
Rodman,  Lane,  Harding,  Mallett,  and  Whitehurst’s  companies  of  foot 
artillery,  which  will  be  formed  into  a battalion,  under  the  command  of 
Capt.  William  Sutton;  Captains  Jones  and  Grisham’s  batteries,  and 
• Colonel  Spruill’s  cavalry. 

The  Second  (Branch’s)  Brigade  will  consist  of  the  Eighteenth,  Twenty- 
fifth,  Twenty-eighth,  Thirty-third,  and  Thirty-seventh  Regiments  North 


* (March  15th.)  See  Special  Orders,  No.  60,  March  15,  1862,  from  Adjutant  and  In- 
pector  General’s  Office,  Richmond,  p.  445. 


448 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


Carolina  troops ; Captains  Whitford’s,  Mayo’s,  Leecraft’s,  and  Herring’s 
companies  of  foot  artillery,  which  will  be  formed  into  a battalion,  under 
the  command  of  Capt.  John  N.  Whitford;  Latham’s  and  Bunting’s  bat- 
teries, and  Captain  Evans’  cavalry. 

Any  other  companies  or  parts  of  companies  not  embraced  in  the 
foregoing  will  be  assigned  to  brigades  by  Brigadier-General  French, 
who  will  immediately  report  the  same  to  these  headquarters. 

By  order  of  [Brig.  Gen.  J.  R.  Anderson] : 

R.  H.  RIDDICK, 

A ssistant  A djutant - General. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters, 

Ho.  1.  ) Kinston , March  18,  1862. 

In  accordance  with  Special  Orders,  Ho.  53,  Headquarters  Department 
of  Horth  Carolina,  dated  March  17,  the  undersigned  assumes  command 
of  the  troops  in  the  field  in  the  District  of  Pamlico,  which  district  em- 
braces the  counties  of  Edgecombe,  Wilson,  Wayne,  Lenoir,  Duplin, 
Jones,  Carteret,  Craven,  Beaufort,  Pitt,  Greene,  and  Hyde. 

S.  G.  EREHCH, 
Brigadier-General , C.  $.  Army. 


Headquarters  District  of  Pamlico, 

Kinston , March  18,  1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee,  Richmond: 

General  : 1. 1 have  not  given  this  section  of  country,  as  regards  de- 
fense, any  consideration  until  within  the  last  two  days,  but  from  what 
I have  seen  of  the  country  and  the  force  of  the  enemy  I have  drawn 
certain  conclusions. 

II.  This  place  cannot  be  defended,  because  it  is  an  open,  level  country, 
with  roads  enabling  the  place  to  be  flanked.  A column  of  the  enemy 
approaching  by  the  road  on  the  left  bank  gains  our  left  flank.  The 
stage  road  and  railroad  cross  about  a mile  from  each  other  in  our  front, 
and  then  another  crossing  at  White  Hall,  some  miles  above  us,  gaining 
our  rear;  besides,  wagon  roads  numerously  intersect  them.  The  river 
is  also  boatable. 

III.  If  the  rail  of  the  road  be  taken  up,  which  I would  advise,  it 
would  prevent  its  use  by  the  enemy  hereafter,  and  he  could,  if  he  ad- 
vances, be  better  and  more  successfully  fought  near  Goldsborougb, 
farther  from  his  base  of  operations  and  in  a more  defensible  country. 
Further,  the  country  abandoned  is  sterile  and  destitute  of  supplies. 

IV.  The  force  concentrated  at  or  near  Goldsborough  would  be  in  a 
strategic  position,  and  available  for  Wilmington  and  Suffolk. 

V.  From  numerous  sources,  especially  Captain  Meade,  Engineers,  and 
other  officers,  I am  informed  that,  should  the  expedition  depart  for 
Wilmington,  they  can  land  readily  on  the  land  which  forms  the  sound 
south  of  Sandy  Hall  Inlet,  and,  as  it  connects  with  the  main  land,  get 
to  the  rear  of  the  city. 

The  sound  also  is  at  the  south  end  easily  forded;  after  which  it  be- 
comes deep  and  the  main  shore  easily  approached  by  boats ; hence  a 
land  force  in  strength  is  necessary  for  the  defense  of  the  place.  This 
might  probably  be  sent  in  time  from  Goldsborough. 


Chap.  XX. 1 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


449 


VI.  Hence  I recommend  the  destruction  of  this  road  to  Goldsborough 
and  concentration  of  forces  at  that  point.  I know,  however,  that  you 
have  better  means  of  knowing  the  ease  with  which  a force  can  be  landed 
for  the  attack  on  Wilmington  than  I have  collected  in  the  two  days  I 
have  been  here,  amidst  a press  of  business. 

The  defenses  against  attack  on  Wilmington  by  water  are  represented 
as  being  good.  You  will  excuse  my  making  these  suggestions  to  you, 
who  have  doubtless  considered  them.  I have  thought  they  could  do  no 
harm  in  any  event.  One  of  the  surgeons  who  went  to  New  Berne  lias 
returned.  He  reports  that  General  Burnside  told  him  candidly  that  he 
had  27,000  men,  and  that  he  knew  every  regiment  and  the  exact  nature 
of  the  fortifications  at  New  Berne  before  the  attack,  and  he  named  all 
the  regiments  with  perfect  familiarity. 

Yours,  verv  truly, 

S.  G.  FRENCH, 
Brigadier- General,  C.  S.  Army. 


Richmond,  Va.,  March  20,  1862. 
Governor  Henry  T.  Clark,  Raleigh , N.  G. : 

Call  on  every  man  in  your  State  that  can  come  with  arms  to  rally 
with  the  utmost  dispatch  to  defend  your  line  of  railroad. 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

March  20,  1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee, 

General , Commanding : 

Sir  : As  I reported  by  telegraph,  I have  dispatched  to  Goldsborough, 
to  report  to  Brigadier-General  Anderson,  the  Louisiana  Battalion,  the 
Georgia  Battalion,  Major  Hardeman,  and  Col.  D.  H.  Hamilton’s  regi- 
ment South  Carolina  Volunteers. 

This  latter  regiment  has  eleven  companies,  one  of  which  (Captain 
McIntosh’s)  has  a battery  of  field  artillery  (four  guns). 

I last  night  received  your  dispatch  to  send  to  Goldsborough  Colonel 
Leventliorpe’s  regiment  from  Hamilton,  N.  C.,  Colonel  Hoke’s  regiment 
from  Weldon,  N.  C.,  and  Brig.  Gen.  Howell  Cobb’s  brigade  from  Suf- 
folk. The  orders  were  dispatched  at  once  and  receipt  acknowledged, 
except  from  Colonel  Leventhorpe,  who  cannot  be  reached  so  soon.  The 
railroad  has  been  notified  and  transportation  arranged. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGER, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Va .,  March  21,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  B.  Huger, 

Commanding  Department  Norfolk , Va. : 

General  : I have  had  the  honor  to  receive  your  letter  of  the  20th 
instant,  reporting  the  execution  of  orders  for  the  movement  of  troops 
29  R R — YOL  IX 


450 


Operations  in  north  Carolina. 


[Chat*.  XX. 


in  your  department  to  Goldsborough.  The  battalions  of  Louisiana 
and  Georgia  Volunteers  which  you  forwarded,  to  report  to  General 
Anderson,  it  is  presumed  were  sent  in  lieu  of  the  regiments  of  Colonels 
Clarke  and  Armistead ; it  was  not  intended  that  more  should  be  sent 
than  were  specified  in  telegrams  of  19th.  As  regards  the  regiment  of 
Colonel  Leventhorpe,  stationed  at  Hamilton,  about  which  you  yester- 
day telegraphed,  I do  not  see  that  much  can  be  gained  in  keeping  him 
at  that  place.  Should  the  enemy  attack  him,  so  small  a force  could  do 
but  little  to  resist  him,  and  would  afford  no  material  impediment  to  his 
further  progress.  It  would  seem  much  more  desirable  to  concentrate 
the  troops  nearer  the  railroad  and  keep  them  light  and  movable,  so  as 
to  re-enforce  readily  any  point  of  the  road  he  might  seriously  threaten. 
The  guns  and  all  other  munitions  at  Hamilton  should  of  course  be  re- 
moved, and  could  be  devoted  to  the  strengthening  of  other  points  of 
defense  in  your  department. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E,  LEE, 
General , Commanding. 

Unless  wanted  elsewhere  in  your  department,  it  is  suggested  to  send 
the  section  of  Captain  Bruce’s  artillery  which  was  at  Hamilton  to 
Goldsborough,  where  it  is  likely  to  be  much  needed. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  District  of  the  Cape  Fear, 

No.  13.  f Wilmington , N.  (7.,  March  22,  1862. 

The  undersigned,  by  virtue  of  Special  Orders,  No.  60,  Adjutant  and 
Inspector  General’s  Office,  Richmond,  dated  March  15,  1862,  hereby 
assumes  command  of  the  District  of  the.  Cape  Fear,  embracing  the 
counties  of  New  Hanover,  Onslow,  Brunswick,  Robeson,  Cumberland, 
Bladen,  Columbus,  and  Sampson. 

S.  G.  FRENCH, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding . 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , March  23,  1862. 


Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes, 

Commanding , the.,  Richmond , Va. : 

General  : You  will  proceed  with  the  troops  under  your  command 
to  Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  and  take  command  of  the  operations  in  that 
department.  It  will  be  your  object  to  make  arrangement's  to  ascertain 
whether  the  enemy  will  advance  upon  Goldsborough  or  Wilmington, 
and  to  use  your  whole  force  to  repel  them  and  to  protect  the  railroad. 
Orders  will  be  issued  placing  you  in  command,  and  the  troops  from  the 
Department  of  Northern  Virginia  will  be  forwarded  to  you  as  soon  as 
possible. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General , Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  67.  1 Richmond , March  24,  1862. 

******* 
NXVI.  Maj.  Gen.  Theophilus  H.  Holmes  is  assigned  to  the  command 


Chap.  XX.] 


451 


CORRESPONDENC E,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


of  the  Department  of  North  Carolina,  and  will  proceed  to  Goldsborough 
and  relieve  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  B.  Anderson. 

XXVII.  The  following  troops  will  proceed  at  once  to  Goldsborough, 
N.  C.,  and  report  for  duty  to  the  commanding  general  of  the  Depart- 
ment of  North  Carolina : ^ ™ « ox  i 

First  Begiment  North  Carolina  Volunteers,  Colonel  M.  b.  btokes. 
Second  Begiment  North  Carolina  Volunteers,  Colonel  C.  C.  Tew. 
Third  Begiment  North  Carolina  Volunteers,  Colonel  G.  Meares. 
Third  Begiment  Arkansas  Volunteers,  Colonel  V.  H.  Manning. 
Thirtieth  Begiment  Virginia  Volunteers,  Colonel  B.  M.  Cary. 
Captain  Cooke’s  battery.  . , 

XXVIII.  The  troops  composing  General  Wilcox’s  brigade  will  be 
forwarded  immediately  on  their  arrival  in  this  city  to  Goldsborough, 
N.  C.,  and  will  report  for  duty  to  Major-General  Holmes,  commanding 
Department  of  North  Carolina. 

******* 


XXX.  Brig.  Gen.  J.  G.  Walker  will  proceed  with  his  brigade,  and 
the  battery  attached,  to  Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  and  report  for  duty  to 
Maj.  Gen.  Theophilus  H.  Holmes,  commanding  Department  of  North 


Carolina. 

By  command  of  the 


Secretary  of  War : 

JNO.  WITHEBS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

Kinston , March  25,  1862. 

1 General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. : 

General:  As  I advised  you  by  telegraph,  I arrived  here  yesterday. 
I found  some  confusion  in  the  army,  arising  from  the  recent  events  at 
New  Berne.  In  a few  days  I trust  order  and  system  will  be  restored. 

The  accounts  I am  able  to  get  as  to  the  plans  of  the  enemy  are  con- 
flicting naturally,  but  that  he  will  move  forward  in  this  direction  or  on 
Wilmington  I presume  there  is  no  doubt. 

Under  these  circumstances  I thought  it  best  for  General  French  to 
proceed  to  Wilmington  and  assume  command,  though  I regretted  much 
to  lose  his  services  here.  I also  concluded  to  halt  Starke’s  regiment  and 
Moore’s  battery  at  that  point  for  the  present,  and  the  forces  coming 
from  the  north  "at  Goldsborough,  from  which  point  they  maybe  moved 
■quickly,  as  the  emergency  may  require. 

I have  the  honor  to  forward  a letter  from  General  French,  written 
wliile  he  was  in  command.*  1 concur  in  his  views  as  to  this  position, 
> and  while  I push  my  pickets  down  to  feel  the  enemy’s  within  3 or  4 
' miles  of  New  Berne,  and  will  send  down  large  scouting  parties  with  a 
view  of  annoying  his  progress  if  he  commences  a march,  it  is  my 
•opinion  that  it  will  be  better  to  fallback  gradually  some  10  or  15  miles 
before  fully  testing  our  strength,  with  a view  of  finding  more  favorable 
ground. 

Still,  there  is  no  ground  between  this  and  Goldsborough  on  which  we 
-can  intrench  without  being  likely  to  have  our  flanks  turned  by  a supe- 
rior force,  so  level  and  firm  is  the  ground,  intersected  by  various  roads. 


See  French  to  Lee;  March  18,  p.  448. 


452 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


I will  be  pleased  to  have  the  advice  of  the  Commanding  General.  In 
the  mean  time  we  will  do  our  best  to  watch  and  protect  both  points, 
Goldsborough  and  Wilmington. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  R.  ANDERSON, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  68.  j Richmond , March  25,  1862. 

**#*### 

VI.  General  Wilcox’s  brigade  will  be  halted  at  Weldon,  N.  C.,  until 
the  object  of  the  enemy  is  disclosed. 

******* 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

No.  6.  j Goldsborough , A.  (7.,  March  25,  1862. 

I.  Under  instructions  from  the  President,  the  undersigned  assumes 
command  of  the  Department  of  North  Carolina. 

II.  Maj.  Archer  Anderson  is  announced  as  assistant  adjutant-general. 

TH.  H.  HOLMES, 
Major-General , P.  A.  C. . 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

No.  7.  I March  25,  1862. 

The  enemy  are  before  us  and  must  advance  at  an  early  day.  If  we 
do  not  defeat  him  North  Carolina  will  be  under  his  worse  than  vandal 
despotism.  Let  us  all,  then,  give  ourselves  up,  body  and  mind,  to  the 
sacred  duties  of  her  defense.  To  effect  this  the  strictest  discipline 
must  be  preserved,  and  the  commanders  of  companies,  regiments,  and 
brigades  are  required  to  enforce  the  most  exact  obedience  to  all  orders 
and  regulations.  Until  further  orders  no  furloughs  will  be  granted, 
nor  will  any  officer  or  soldier  be  permitted  to  leave  his  camp  without 
permission  from  his  brigade  commander.  The  most  active  system  of 
drills  will  be  instituted,  and  every  commanding  officer  is  held  respon- 
sible that  his  command  is  ready  to  march  at  a moment’s  notice. 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes : 

WM.  NORWOOD, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Goldsborough,  March  27,  1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee  : 

My  Dear  Sir  : There  appears  to  be  no  disposition  on  the  part  of 
the  enemy  to  advance  in  this  direction.  Erom  the  best  information  I 


Chap.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


453 


have  I doubt  if  he  has  more  than  three  or  four  regiments  in  New  Berne, 
and  on  Monday  last  there  were  but  five  or  six  steamers  at  the  wharves. 
It  is  believed  by  General  Branch  that  their  army  is  encamped  below 
the  town  and  across  the  Trent,  which  is  2,000  yards  wide,  and  on  which 
they  have  destroyed  the  bridges  as  high  up  as  Trenton.  They  have 
established  a ferry  over  it  at  New  Berne,  but  permit  no  citizen,  under 
any  pretense,  to  pass  over.  I have  sent  secret  agents  to  ascertain,  if 
possible,  whether  they  are  there  or  not.  I am  waiting  most  anxiously 
their  report.  The  inclosed  sketch  will  show  you  the  supposed  position 
of  the  enemy  and  its  surroundings.* 

I went  yesterday  to  examine  into  the  position  and  condition  of  the 
army  under  General  Branch.  I was  assured  by  the  colonels  that  there 
was  no  demoralization,  and  that  the  men  were  tolerably  well  supplied 
and  most  anxious  to  advance.  The  position  they  occupy,  7 miles  this 
side  of  Kinston,  is  too  tar  from  the  enemy,  and  I shall  order  General 
Ransom,  with  his  brigade,  to  advance  5 or  6 miles  beyond  Kinston  to 
some  point  from  whence  he  can  more  closely  watch  the  enemy.  In- 
stead of  sending  General  Anderson  back  to  Wilmington  I have  given 
him  a brigade.  I did  so  because  General  French  was  already  there, 
and  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  particular  kind  of  duty  required 
there.  If  Wilcox’s  brigade  and  the  First  North  Carolina  Cavalry  are 
subject  to  my  orders  I shall  let  them  remain  at  Weldon  for  the  present, 
and  authorize  the  commanding  officer  of  that  department  to  use  them 
if  the  enemy  makes  his  appearance  in  that  direction.  I have  ordered 
six  companies  who  have  been  drilled  at  heavy  artillery  to  report  to 
General  French  in  Wilmington.  This  will  make  the  batteries  there 
secure  against  their  Navy,  and  I hope  to  have  timely  notice  before  they 
can  land  to  send  troops  from  here  to  give  him  battle. 

The  Governor  of  North  Carolina  has  detained  the  arms  sent  to  me  until 
he  can  hear  from  you  on  the  subject  of  using  them  for  arming  certain 
regiments  that  he  has  organized  in  Raleigh.  It  would  be  a thousand 
times  better  if  those  regiments  were  sent  to  me  here,  in  order  that  they 
may  be  properly  brigaded  and  instructed.  If  possible,  send  General 
Whiting  to  report  to  me. 

. I am,  General,  very  respectfully, 

TH.  H.  HOLMES, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


Goldsborough,  March  28,  1862. 
General  R.  E.  Lee,  Commanding : 

My  Dear  Sir  : Every  appearance  indicates  that  the  enemy  does  not 
design  to  advance  in  this  direction  at  present,  but  rather  that  he  is 
seeking  to  possess  himself  of  the  counties  along  the  coast  and  to  invest 
Fort  Macon.  If  an  attack  is  made  on  Wilmington  I believe  it  will  be 
by  other  troops  than  those  under  Burnside,  for  I am  assured  that  their 
transports  draw  too  much  water  to  cross  the  Swash  Channel  when 
loaded,  and  that  they  were  three  weeks  entering  the  sound,  having 
been  obliged  to  unload  them  before  doing  so.  I have  very  little  doubt 
that  the  force  here  is  able  to  retake  New  Berne,  but  I fear  to  move 
until  it  is  ascertained  that  they  will  not  be  required  at  Wilmington  or 
some  other  new  point  of  attack.  Please  inform  me  what  you  think  and 
wish  about  it.  I am  oppressed  with  the  responsibility  upon  me.  The 


*Omittecl  as  of  no  present  value. 


454 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


tremendous  issue  involved  makes  it  necessary  that  a more  able  brain 
than  mine  should  direct.  Please,  therefore,  my  dear  General,  come  and 
straighten  out  this  tangled  yarn. 

Since  writing  the  above  your  telegram  is  received.*  I can  drive  the 
enemy  out  of  New  Berne,  because  I can  transport  the  troops  by  rail  5 
but  their  main  army  is  below,  and  I can  only  reach  it  by  crossing  the 
Trent  high  up  and  marching  down,  which  can  only  be  done  after  I have 
collected  transportation  enough  to  carry  provisions.  See  the  sketch  I 
sent  you  two  days  ago.  I am  making  every  effort  to  procure  trans- 
portation, but  my  quartermaster  wants  experience  and  is  inefficient. 
Please  send  me  Major  Cone  or  some  other  who  knows  and  will  do  his 
duty.  If  you  think  I can  attack  New  Berne  without  the  fear  of  being 
out  of  place  when  another  point  is  attacked  I will  do  so  at  once,  though 
from  the  best  evidence  I have  there  are  not  more  than  4,000  men  there, 
and  they  can  retire  beyond  the  Trent  without  my  being  able  to  follow. 

The  people  here  are  to  a certain  extent  reassured.  They  are  loyal 
and  true-hearted,  but  a deep  and  dangerous  despondency,  even  among 
the  members  of  the  Convention,  had  taken  jmssession  of  them,  and 
hence  the  great  necessity  of  some  able  man  to  command  here,  for  if 
this  army  should  meet  with  a reverse  the  political  consequences  would 
be  disastrous  in  the  extreme.  If  you  cannot  come  and  G.  W.  Smith’s 
health  will  permit  it,  please  send  him.  I will  assist  him  in  every  way 
possible,  and  will  be  pleased  to  serve  under  him  if  he  is  a good  gen- 
eral. 

I am,  General,  yours,  very  respectfully, 

TH.  H.  HOLMES, 

Majdr- General. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Fa.,  March  29,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes, 

Commanding , &c.,  Goldsborough , A.  C.  : 

General:  I am  directed  by  General  Lee,  commanding,  to  acknowl- 
edge the  receipt  at  these  headquarters  of  the  letter  of  General  French 
of  March  18,  1862,  from  Kinston,  N.  0.,  forwarded  by  and  inclosed  in 
one  of  the  25th  instant  from  General  Anderson,  in  reference  to  the  dis- 
position of  the  forces  at  Goldsborough  and  Wilmington,  copies  of  which 
are  doubtless  in  your  possession  ; also  of  your  two  telegrams  of  the 
27th  instant.* 

In  reply  the  General  wishes  me  to  say  that  it  now  rests *with  you  to 
assume  such  a line  with  your  army  as  may  to  your  judgment  appear 
best  for  the  protection  of  the  railroad  and  the  security  of  Goldsborough 
and  Wilmington;  and  should  there  be  no  indications  to  lead  you  to  in- 
fer that  the  enemy  intend  to  threaten  seriously  either  of  th'ose  places, 
you  should  so  dispose  your  command  as  to  re-enforce  Suffolk,  as  it  is 
not  unlikely  the  enemy  may  turn  their  attention  to  that  point,  with  a 
view  of  carrying  out  a combined  movement  upon  Portsmouth  and  Nor- 
folk. Being  on  the  ground,  however,  you  have  the  best  opportunity  of 
observing*  the  enemy’s  movements  and  divining  his  intentions.  Cir- 
cumstances must,  however,  in  some  measure  control  your  actions. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  A.  WASHINGTON, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Not  found. 


CHAP.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


455 


Abstract  from  report  of  the  troops  of  the  Department  of  North  CaroUna  commanded  hj  Maj. 
Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes , Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  March  61,  loo^. 


Present  for 
duty. 

a 

<D 

CO 

fr 

present 

:nt. 

Artillery. 

Troops. 

GO 

5 

o 

£ 

O 

i 

O 

o 

> 

*43 

o 

£ 

H 

ft 

<D 

+3 

d 

bfi 

2 

Si 

bO 

<1 

GO 

bO 

o 

GO 

u 

o 

M 

at 

9 

o 

2 

£ 

921 

70 

114 

15,  909 
1,  364 
1,  994  , 

16,  436 
1,400 
, 2,088 

19, 848 

1,  581 

2,  601 

23, 574 
1,833 
| 3,167 

481 

142 

1, 105 

19,  267 

19,  924 

24,  030 

28, 574 

481 

142 

Headquarters, 
Richmond , Ha.,  April  1,  1862. 

General  T.  H.  Holmes, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina : 

General:  From  your  telegraphic  dispatches  I learn  that  the  enemy 
apparently  is  making  no  forward  movement,  nor  do  you  appear  to  be 
able  to  discover  that  he  is  making  any  preparations  with  that  view. 
That  leads  me  to  fear  that  while  making  demonstrations  m that  Quar- 
ter and  on  the  Peninsula  against  General  Magruder,  his  real  object  is 
to  attack  Norfolk  from  both  sides,  with  the  force  now  collecting  at 
Hampton  and  neighborhood  on  one  side  and  that  under  General  Burn- 
side  on  the  other.  I desire  you,  therefore,  to  watch  the  movements  ot 
the  enemy  vigilantly,  and  at  the  same  time  so  to  post  your  troops  that 
while  restraining  his  operations  you  may  readily  re-enforce  any  point 
attacked.  If  Wilmington  should  be  the  point,  you  must  concentrate 
there.  If  Norfolk,  it  will  be  necessary  to  move  all  your  disposable  torce 
there. 

With  this  view  it  might  be  well  to  hold  a portion  of  your  troops  at 
Weldon.  This  will  depend  upon  your  facilities  for  moving,  and  ot  this 
you  may  judge. 

I am,  with  high  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General , Commanding . 


Headquarters, 
Goldsborough , April  2,  1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee,  Commanding  Army: 

GenerIl:  From  information  received  from  a Federal  prisoner  and 
from  Dr.  West,  0.  S.  P.  A.,  just  returned  from  New  Berne,  I have 
verv  little  doubt  that  General  Burnside  will  confine  his  present 
operations  to  the  coast  from  New  Berne  to  Fort  Macon.  Hoping  to 
reduce  the  latter,  he  is  fortifying  New  Berne,  and  has  divided  his 
forces  between  the  two  places.  I am  convinced  that  none  of  his  com- 
mand have  left  the  coast,  and  every  appearance  indicates  that  he  is 
striving  to  conciliate  the  people  and  designs  a permanent  possession. 
His  transports  have  been  sent  oil,  and  it  may  be  they  have  gone  tor 
re-enforcements,  or  rather  for  troops  with  whom  to  make  an  expedi- 


456 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


tion  ui>  the  Albemarle  Sound  or  against  Wilmington.  I much  doubt 
if  they  will  make  any  attack  requiring  land  transportation. 

Your  telegram  is  received.  I will  hold  my  disposable  force  ready  to 
march  at  a moment’s  notice,  though  I do  not  believe  it  should  be  moved 
until  it  is  certain  it  will  all  be  required  elsewhere.  It  has  reassured 
the  people  here,  and  to  a certain  extent  restored  confidence  where  I 
grieve  to  say,  despondency  was  fast  generating  indifference  to  our 
cause,  and  if  the  troops  are  removed  without  a necessity,  perfectly 
apparent  to  the  people,  it  will  produce  a panic  that  will  be  most 
serious  in  its  effects.  X shall  therefore  make  no  move  until  further 
instructed  by  you. 

I am,  General,  very  respectfully, 

TH.  IX.  HOIdVXES, 

Major- General , Commanding. 


Headquarters, 
Goldsborougli , April  6,  18fi2. 

General  R.  E.  Lee,  # 

Commanding  Army , C.  8.  A.: 

General:  1 telegraphed  you  yesterday  that  I should  not  send  the 
troops  to  Suffolk  until  further  developments  of  the  enemy’s  intentions. 
General  Burnside’s  whole  force  is  available  for  an. invasion  in  this 
direction,  and  my  efficient  force  (12,000),  including  the  troops  that 
were  defeated  near  New  Berne,  is  not  more  than  would  be  required  to 
resist  him. 

A serious  panic  will  result  if  it  be  materially  diminished,  and  as 
there  is  a general  feeling  that  North  Carolina  has  been  neglected  by 
the  Government,  the  steps  I have  taken  to  reassure  the  people  and 
restore  confidence  would  be  to  a great  extent  nullified,  and  hence  it 
is  that  I shall  wait  until  I am  certain  that  a blow  will  be  struck  at 
another  point,  or  until,  in  your  superior  wisdom  and  better  informa- 
tion, you  shall  direct  me  otherwise. 

The  Georgia  regiments  have  not  arrived,  and  yesterday  the  Gover- 
nor of  North  Carolina  ordered  Rogers’  battalion  of  five  companies 
back  to  Raleigh  to  complete  its  organization  as  a regiment.  I per- 
mitted it  to  go,  because  it  had  not  been  turned  over  to  the  Confederate 
Government  and  had  been  ordered  here  only  to  meet  an  emergencv. 

I have  ordered  a large  amount  of  transportation  to  be  collected  here, 
so  as  to  throw  the  command  in  the  shortest  time  possible  to  anv  point 
where  it  may  be  required. 

There  are  in  Raleigh  five  or  six  regiments  organized,  or  partially  so, 
but  as  they  have  not  been  turned  over  to  the  Government  I have  no 
authority  over  them.  'Would  it  not  be  well  to  receive  them  as  they  are, 
in  order  that  I could  arrange  for  their  proper  instruction  while  waiting 
to  be  armed J? 

X thank  you,  General,  for  the  kind  confidence  you  so  blindly  repose 
in  me,  and  can  only  pray  that  God  will  give  me  strength  to  justify  it. 

I am,  General,  very  respectfully, 

TH.  H.  HOLMES, 

Major-General. 

P.  S. — I received  a letter  from  General  Burnside,  saying  that  he  had 
released  on  parole  our  sick  and  wounded,  and  requested  me  to  release 
certain  of  his  prisoners.  As  the  United  States  Government  acted  in 


I hap.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


457 


>acl  faith  with  us  in  reference  to  an  exchange  of  prisoners,  I did  not 
inswer  his  letter  or  take  other  action  on  it  than  to  send  to  Washing- 
ton for  the  released  sick. 

TH.  H.  HOLMES, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Va.,  April  9,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes, 

Commanding , <bc.,  Goldsborough , AT.  C.: 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  6th  instant  is  received.  Your  views 
with  reference  to  the  disposition^  the  troops  of  your  command  are 
approved.  I recommend  the  utmost  diligence  in  getting  information  as 
to  the  movements  of  the  enemy,  and  that  you  hold  yourself  fully  pre- 
pared to  move  rapidly  to  any  threatened  point. 

General  Huger,  by  telegram,  dated  the  8th,  informs  me  that  Colonel 
Ferebee,  North  Carolina  Militia,  reports  to  him  that  the  enemy  have 
landed  some  2,000  men  at  Elizabeth  City. 

Your  attention  is  specially  directed  to  this  report  and  to  any  move- 
ment in  that  direction.  I think  ihat  if  an  attack  be  made  on  Norfolk 
it  will  be  from  the  south  side.  The  presence  of  the  Virginia  will,  in 
my  opinion,  deter  the  enemy  from  attempting  a movement  on  Nor- 
folk from  the  direction  of  Fort  Monroe  or  by  way  of  Elizabeth  Fiver. 

I have  directed  the  Georgia  regiments  to  be  sent  to  you  at  once,  and 
as  soon  as  they  arrive  you  will  do  everything  in  your  power  to  arm  and 
prepare  them  for  service.  I am  informed  by  Major  Ashe,  of  North 
Carolina,  that  large  numbers  of  country  rifles  and  other  arms  can  be 
collected  in  that  State,  and  1 have  directed  him  to  get  all  he  can.  You 
will  also  do  everything  in  your  power  to  collect  arms  for  the  troops  that 
you  will  receive. 

With  reference  to  the  North  Carolina  troops,  I am  desirous  that  you 
should  have  them  as  soon  as  possible,  and  the  Governor  of  North  Caro- 
lina has  been  written  to  on  the  subject.  I desire  that  you  shall  do 
whatever  may  be  in  your  power  to  expedite  the  matter,  and  asy  soon  as 
the  troops  arrive  proceed  to  organize  and  prepare  them  for  service,  and 
after  arming  the  Georgia  troops,  those  from  North  Carolina  that  are  un- 
provided with  arms  can  be  supplied  with  such  as  remain  from  what 
Major  Ashe  or  yourself  may  collect  or  any  others  that  may  be  sent  to 
you. 

With  reference  to  the  exchange  of  prisoners,  I would  state  that  while 
I believe  the  enemy  have  acted  in  bad  faith  in  the  matter,  it  is  not  de- 
sirable to  follow  a bad  example.  If  you  have  any  sick  or  wounded 
prisoners  of  the  enemy  I would  advise  their  release  in  return  for  the 
release  of  ours  by  General  Burnside. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ‘ It.  E.  LEE, 

General , Commanding. 


• v Headquarters, 

Goldsborough , April  10,  1862. 

General  B.  E.  Lee,  Commanding  Army : 

General  : The  enemy  were  re-enforced  at  New  Berne  on  Thursday 
last  by  about  4,000  men';  whether  they  were  from  the  North  or  his  re- 


458 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


serve  brought  up  from  Hatteras  and  Roanoke  Island  I don’t  know. 
He  has  taken  possession  of  Beaufort,  and  Fort  Macon  is  invested;  he  is 
also  fortifying  New  Berne  by  a line  of  intrenchments  extending  from 
one  river  to  the  other. 

I see  no  signs  of  an  advance  in  this  direction.  As  near  as  I can. as- 
certain, his  present  position  is,  viz:  2,000  men  about  Beaufort,  4,000  in 
New  Berne,  and  the  remainder  of  his  army  across  the  Trent,  opposite. 
If  I attack  New  Berne,  he  can  concentrate  and  fight  me  if  he  thinks 
proper,  or  he  can  cross  over  the  Trent  and  leave  me  to  be  shelled  out 
of  the  town  from  both  rivers  by  his  gunboats.  This  would  also  imply 
the  destruction  of  the  town,  which  would  not  only  cause  great  misery 
among  the  poor  people  who  remained  there,  but  would  add  to  the  luke- 
warmness that  threatens  to  culminate  here  into  indifference  to  the 
cause.  I have  no  words  to  express  my  disappointment  and  distress  at 
this  feeling,  particularly  as  I can  expect  comparatively  little  sympathy 
beyond  my  power  to  protect  property. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully, 

TH.  H.  HOLMES, 

. Major-General . 


Headquarters, 
Richmond,  April  15,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes, 

Commanding  Department , Goldsborough , A.  C. : 

General  : I have  had  the  honor  to  receive  your  letter  of  13th  in- 
stant,* inclosing  reports  of  the  disposition  and  movements  of  the  enemy 
in  your  front  and  of  the  state  of  affairs  in  Fort  Macon.  I am  deeply 
grievecl  to  hear  of  the  discontent  and  insubordination  which  is  reported 
to  exist  among  the  troops  in  Fort  Macon.  In  addition  to  other  matters, 
Lieutenant  Fenrose  tells  me  they  complain  of  their  fare.  This  is  much 
to  be  regretted,  but  I suppose  is  now  beyond  remedy.  Indeed  from 
the  accounts  given  me  I very  much  doubt  whether  even  a tolerable  re- 
sistance would  be  made  if  the  fort  were  attacked,  and  you  are  author- 
ized, if  it  be  possible,  to  withdraw  the  garrison  and  secure  such  of  the 
public  property  as  can  be  brought  off,  if  you  think  it  advisable. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 
General  Commanding. 


Maj.  Gen.  R.  E.  Lee: 


Headquarters, 
Goldsborough , April  15,  1862. 


My  Dear  General:  The  letters  I sent  you  by  Lieutenant  Primrose 
showed  the  strength  of  the  enemy.  On  this  coast  he  has  twenty  regi- 
ments in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  New  Berne  and  three  near  Fort 
Macon.  His  only  reserve  is  about  3,000  men  at  Roanoke  Island.  His 
effective  force  is  probably  about  20,000,  with  ten  gunboats  in  the  Neuse 
and  Trent  Rivers. 

My  effective  force  is  about  14,000,  three  of  the  regiments  being  raw 
recruits. 


Not  found. 


HAP.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


450 


I am  having  accurate  maps  made  of  all  the  country  between  here  and 
Jew  Berne,  as  the  last  service  I can  render  to  the  general  you  must 
end  here  to  command.  Believe  me,  my  dear  General,  this  is  not  talse 
aodestv  on  my  part:  I know  my  deficiencies,  and  I love  the  cause  too 
auch  to  permit  its  vital  interests  to  be  intrusted  to  my  management, 
ill  my  life  has  been  passed  in  executing  the  orders  of  others  5 send 
herefore  a superior  to  me,  or  else  change  me  for  another  who  is  capa- 
ble, or  who  has  his  own  as  well  as  your  confidence.  ^ , ., 

Do  not  ascribe  this  to  a want  of  ambition  or  to  diffidence,  but  rather 
lelieve  that  I know  myself  and  have  the  honesty  to  sacrifice  my  vanity 
0 the  interest  of  my  country.  I can  execute,  but  I cannot  originate. 

I am,  general,  yours  very  faithfully,  ^ ^ holmES) 

- Brigadier- Genera  l. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Fa.,  April  19,  1862. 

General  J.  G.  Martin,  . 7 • t. 

Adjutant- General  of  North  Carolina , Raleigh: 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  16th  iustant  to  Major-General  Holmes^ 
in  reference  to  the  condition,  &c.,  of  the  new  North  Carolina  troops  at 
Raleigh,  has  been  referred  to  me.  I regret  very  much  to  hear  ot  the 
great  reduction  in  their  strength  by  sickness  and  of  the  inability  on 
the  part  of  the  State  to  furnish  them  with  arms.  All  arms  that  were 
available  have  been  forwarded  to  General  Holmes,  to  be  placed  m the 
hands  of  the  unarmed  troops  in  his  department.  It  was  hoped  that  the 
State  would  succeed  in  collecting  numbers  of  private  arms  for  the  new 
regiments  and  by  this  time  have  them  ready  for  the  field.  I have  been 
compelled  to  remove  one  regiment  from  General  Holmes’  command  and 
may  have  to  deprive  him  of  more.  I had  relied  upon  the  new  regiments 
to  replace  those  removed.  It  is  earnestly  requested  that  you  will  spare 
no  efforts  to  get  them  in  condition  for  active  field  service. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Abstract  from  statement  of  the  troops  serving  in  the  Department  of  North  Carolina , com- 
manded by  Maj.  Gen.  T.  Jf.  Holmes , April  19,  1862. 


Troops. 

Effective  total. 

Aggregate  present,  j 

Aggregate  present 
ana  absent. 

4, 295 
3, 169 
2,873 
3,  693 
3,  623 
294 

4,  954 

3,  820 
4, 030 

4,  520 
4,  369 

375 

6, 211 
4,  795 

4,  665 

5,  373 
4,  962 

427 

-LUSlilCli  OI  XIl©  Jj  ©til  \ x?  1 cnon; 

17,  947 

| 22,068 

26,  433 

460 


[Chap.  XX 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


Organization  of  the  troops  serving  in  the  Department  of  North  Carolina 
commanded  by  Map  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes , April  19 , 1862. 


First  Brigade.* 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  Ransom,  commanding. 

"25th  North  Carolina 
26th  North  Carolina. 

27th  North  Carolina. 

35th  North  Carolina. 

Battalion  North  Carolina. 

9th  North  Carolina  (1st  Cavalry). 

19th  North  Carolina  (2d  Cavalry). 

Evans’  North  Carolina  Troop. 

Orisham’s  Mississippi  Battery. 

Jones’  North  Carolina  Battery. 

Second  Brigade.* 

Brig.  Gen.  L.  O’B.  Branch,  commanding. 

7th  North  Carolina. 

18th  North  Carolina. 

28th  North  Carolina. 

33d  North  Carolina. 

37th  North  Carolina. 

North  Carolina  Battery. 

Bunting’s  North  Carolina  Battery. 
Latham’s  North  Carolina  Battery. 


Third  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  J . R.  Anderson,  commanding. 

45th  Georgia. 

49th  Georgia. 

3d  Louisiana  Battalion. 

34th  North  Carolina. 

38th  North  Carolina. 

1st  South  Carolina  (Hamilton’s). 
Battery  (section  of),  Lieutenant  Bouldin. 
Battery  (four  pieces),  Captain  McIntosh. 


Fourth  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  G.  Walker,  commanding. 

3d  Arkansas. 

44th  Georgia. 

1st  North  Carolina. 

2d  North  Carolina. 

3d  North  Carolina. 

30th  Virginia. 

French’s  Virginia  Battery. 


District  of  the  Cape  Fear. 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  commanding. 

20th  North  Carolina. 

30th  North  Carolina. 

60th  Virginia. 

20  companies  infantry,  cavalry,  and  heavy  artillery. 


Garrison  of  Fort  Macon.! 
Col.  M.  J.  White,  commanding. 

Official. 


ARCHER  ANDERSON, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General, 


"General  R.  E.  Lee, 

Commanding  C.  S.  Army: 


Headquarters, 

Goldsborough , April  20,  1862. 


General  : I have  little  doubt  that  the  force  of  the  enemy  that 
landed  at  Elizabeth  City  was  taken  from  Roanoke  Island,  where  four 
days  ago  they  had  a reserve  of  3,000  men.  I am  almost  certain  that 
they  have' withdrawn  no  men  from  New  Berne.  They  have  repaired  a 
bridge  that  we  burned  7 miles  this  side  of  New  Berne,  and  have 
advanced  three  regiments  there,  but  as  they  have  no  transportation,  I 
doubt  it  they  intend  a serious  advance. 

I have  directed  Colonel  Deshler  to  make  an  estimate  for  funds  to 


* £lie  First  and  Second  Brigades  constituted  a division  under  Branch’s  command, 
t Composition  of.  garrison  not  indicated. 


3hap.  XX.j 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.  — CONFEDERATE. 


461 


pay  for  private  arms.  None  can  be  had  unless  they  are  paid  for  at 

the  time.  1 , , 

I am  deeply  pained  and  mortified  at  the  apathy  that  pervades  the- 
people,  and  have  utterly  failed  in  my  efforts  to  arouse  them. 

Relative  to  the  Enfield  rifles,  I had  issued  them,  according  to  your 
instructions,  to  the  three  Georgia  regiments.  There  was  a small  over- 
plus, which  I gave  to  the  flank  companies  of  other  regiments.  If  I 
should  take  them  from  the  Georgia  regiments  it  would  produce  discon- 
tent, and  as  most  of  the  flank  companies  have  rifles  of  one  sort  or 
another,  I think  it  best  not  to  disturb  them. 

If  you  do  not  insist  on  it  I will  not  send  a regiment  to  Wilmington 
for  the  present  to  take  the  place  of  Colonel  Starke’s,  as  there  is  no  indi- 
cation of  danger  in  that  direction. 

I am,  General,  very  respectfully, 

’ TH.  H.  HOLMES, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Va .,  April  20,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes, 

Commanding , c he.,  Goldshorough , AT.  C. : 

General  : The  demand  for  arms  from  all  sides  is  so  great  and  their 
scarcity  so  keenly  felt,  that  I deem  it  proper  to  call  your  attention  to 
the  importance  of  making  a judicious  distribution  of  the  rifles  recently 
sent  you.  By  a letter  from  General  Martin  to  you,  of  the  16th  instant,, 
I am  advised  of  the  inability  of  the  State  of  North  Carolina  to  arm  the 
regiments  now  in  camp  at  Baleigh.  I have  written  to  him,  urging  that 
the  State  make  all  possible  efforts  by  procuring  private  arms,  Ac.,  to 
arm  them.  The  rifles  sent  you  were  of  a very  fine  quality,  and  I sug- 
gest that  you  place  them  in  the  hands  of  the  flanking  companies  of  the 
regiments,  and  give  the  balance  muskets  or  sucli  private  arms  as  can 
be  procured.  The  rifles  will  thus  be  made  to  do  much  towards  en 
hancing  the  efficiency  of  each  regiment.  If  you  can  use  them  and 
desire  it,  I can  order  a number  of  pikes  to  be  sent  you.  Owing  to  the 
lack  of  tire-arms  some  of  these  have  been  sent  to  nearly  every  army  in 
the  field,  and,  if  well  handled  and  wisely  distributed,  will  undoubtedly 
do  good  service. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Va.f  April  20,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes, 

Commanding  Department , Goldshorough , N.  C.: 

General:  I am  directed  by  General  Lee  to  acknowledge  the  receipt 
of  your  letter  of  the  18th  instant,  wherein  you  state  that  you  cannot 
recommend  the  withdrawal  of  Colonel  Starke’s  regiment  from  your 
department,  and  to  say  that,  the  necessity  having  become  urgent  for 
additional  troops  between  Fredericksburg  and  this  city,  he  on  yester- 
day telegraphed  you  to  send  this  regiment,  at  the  same  time  ordering 
one  from  the  departments  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia  to  this  place. 
No  other  consideration  influenced  him  in  doing  this  except  the  necessi- 


462 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX 


ties  of  the  service,  and  he  hopes  that  you  will  soon  be  able  to  replace 
the  regiment  taken  from  you  by  one  of  the  new  regiments  now  at  Raleigh 
I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  TAYLOR, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

If  the  regiment  has  not  started,  the  General  desires  you  to  send  i 
immediately. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

Qoldsborough , April  21,  1862. 
General  R.  E.  Lee,  Commanding , Ac. : 

General  : The  enemy  show  a disposition  to  remain  entirely  quiet  a 
New  Berne.  They  have  thrown  up  works  extending  from  the  Neuse  t< 
the  Trent,  and  have  cut  down  the  forest  in  frout  of  them.  Their  pur 
pose  there  seems  to  be  only  to  defend  themselves. 

On  the  16th  instant  two  regiments,  and  on  the  18th  instant  thre< 
regiments,  were  sent  by  water  from  New  Berne,  as  I think,  to  re-enforc( 
the  troops  engaged  in  the  investment  of  Fort  Macon.  I may  be  mis 
taken,  however,  as  to  their  destination,  my  opinion  of  it  being  basec 
mainly  on  the  fact  that  the  enemy’s  force  near  Fort  Macon  has  recently 
heen  represented  to  me  as  much  larger  than  it  was  previously  reported 
This  information  reached  me  this  evening.  If  you  think  it  advisable 
under  it  to  withdraw  any  of  the  troops  from  here  please  do  not  desig 
nate  them,  but  permit  me  to  do  so. 

I respectfully  request  authority  under  the  conscript  law  to  order  i 
board  of  examination  upon  the  officers  newly  elected  in  the  voluntee 
regiments;  otherwise  many  very  inferior  officers  will  come  into  tin 
.service,  greatly  to  its  injury. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

TH.  H.  HOLMES, 
Major- General , Commanding. 


Headquarters,  . 

Richmond , Va.,  April  22,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes, 

Commanding  Department , Goldshorough , N.  C. : 

General:  General  Lee  directs  me  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  o 
your  letter  of  the  21st  instant,  brought  by  General  Anderson,  statim 
that  the  enemy  exhibited  no  intention  of  an  immediate  advance,  an< 
to  say  that  on  the  strength  of  it  he  has  ordered  by  telegraph  to-da^ 
that  you  send  a brigade  at  once  to  Fredericksburg,  where  troops  ar< 
much  needed.  The  enemy  are  reported  to  be  5,000  strong  on  the  oppo 
site  side  of  the  river  from  Fredericksburg,  and  a heavy  force  betweei 
that  and  Aquia  Creek,  under  McDowell.  [If]  it  is  [true],  the  necessity 
to  re-enforce  General  Field  is  urgent.  One  brigade  has  been  ordered  ui 
from  your  department.  The  General  would  like  much  to  liaveanothe 
brigade,  and  wishes  to  know  if  you  cannot  spare  an  additional  one  fron 
your  command.  You  will  designate  the  troops  that  are  to  move.  In 
£ tractions  based  upon  the  conscript  law  are  being  prepared  by  tin 
Secretary  of  War  for  the  guidance  of  all  concerned,  and  will  be  for 
warded  to  you  as  soon  as  ready  for  distribution. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  TAYLOR, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


463 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

No.  88.  j Goldsborough , April  22,  1862. 

####### 

IV.  The  First  Regiment  South  Carolina  Volunteers  and  the  Third 
Louisiana  Battalion  will  move  to-night  by  rail  to  Richmond.  The  re- 
mainder of  Brigadier-General  Anderson’s  brigade,  with  the  exception 
of  the  Forty-ninth  Georgia  Regiment  and  Lieutenant  Bouldin’s  section 
of  battery, "will  be  held  in  readiness  to  move  at  a moment’s  notice. 

* * * # # # # 

By  command  of  Mai.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes : 

ARCHER  ANDERSON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Va..  April  23,  1862.  \ 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  G.  French, 

Commanding , (be.,  Wilmington , N.  C. : 

General  : In  reply  to  your  telegram  of  yesterday  , # I am  directed  by 
General  Lee  to  say  that  all  available  arms  have  been  given  to  General 
Holmes  for  distribution  to  the  troops  under  his  command.  There  are 
none  now  on  hand  for  issue  save  pikes.  He  thinks  you  might  arm  the 
[ regiment  at  Wilmington  by  placing  pikes  in  the  hands  of  the  men  at 
>,  the  heavy  batteries,  and  giving  their  muskets,  as  far  as  they  will  go, 
5 to  the  unarmed  regiment,  and  make  up  deficiency  by  arming  some  of  the 
center  companies  with  pikes,  the  flanking  companies  having  the  rifles. 
This  is  the  best  arrangement  that  can  now  be  made. 

1 am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  TAYLOR, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

No.  89.  ) Goldsborough , April  23,  1862. 

I.  The  Thirty-fourth  North  Carolina,  Forty-fifth  Georgia,  and  Thirty- 
eighth  North  Carolina  Regiments  will  move  to-day,  with  three  days’  ra- 
tions, by  rail,  to  Richmond,  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  mentioned. 
The  baggage  transported  will  be  strictly  limited  to  the  necessary  cook- 
ing utensils  and  tents  and  the  field  allowance  for  officers.  The  time  of 
i the  departure  of  each  train  will  be  fixed  by  the  chief  quartermaster, 
Major  Cone,  who  will  make  the  necessary  arrangements  for  the  prompt 
transportation  of  the  troops  as  far  as  Richmond.*  Upon  the  arrival  of 
i each  regiment  at  that  place  its  commanding  officer  will  receive  orders 
from  Brig.  Gen.  J.  R.  Anderson. 


By  command  of  Major-General  Holmes  : 

ARCHER  ANDERSON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

April  24,  1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee,  Commanding : 

General  : My  reports  from  South  Mills,  N.  C.,  up  to  3 p.  m.  last 


* Not  found. 


464 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


evening,  represent  all  quiet.  The  enemy  had  not  returned  there,  and 
the  reported  landing  of  the  day  previous  at  Canal  Bridge,  Currituck 
County,  turned  out  to  be  only  a small  party,  who  soon  retired. 

General  Blanchard  sent  the  wounded  prisoners  up  here,  and  I for 
warded  them  (19)  yesterday  to  General  Wool  at  Fort  Monroe.  Tin 
surgeon  I released  unconditionally. 

You  are  aware  that  no  forces  have  replaced  Colston’s  brigade,  and 
our  batteries  and.  the  country  along  James  River  (Burrell’s  Bay)  are 
undefended. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BE NJ.  HUGER, 
Major-General , &c* 


Headquarters  Department  oe  Norfolk, 

Norfolk , Va .,  April  2G,  1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee,  Commanding : 

General  : My  report  from  South  Mills  up  to  3 p.  m.  yesterday  states 
all  is  quiet.  The  enemy  had  not  returned. 

I conversed  yesterday  with  one  of  the  North  Carolina  Militia  (Ste- 
phen Williams),  who  was  captured  by  the  enemy  near  Elizabeth  City 
some  two  weeks  since  (with  72  others),  and  has  been  on  Roanoke  Isl- 
and. He  was  forced  to  act  as  guide  to  the  expedition,  and  landed 
them  at  12  at  night  2 miles  below  Elizabeth  City.  In  the  dark  and 
during  the  confusion  of  landing  he  made  his  escape.  He  states  he  was 
in  the  cabin  with  General  Reno  and  Colonel  Hawkins  and  other  offi- 
cers, and  they  spoke  openly  of  their  intention  of  seizing  the  south  end 
and  destroying  the  lock  of  the  canal  so  we  could  not  pass  iron-clad 
boats  into  the  sound,  and  that  they  would  fortify  and  hold  the  position 
and  re-enforce  it  to  any  amount  and  threaten  Norfolk  in  the  rear,  while 
McClellan  attacked  it  in  front.  Several  of  the  regiments  sent  on  this 
expedition  came  from  New  Berne. 

II  the  attack  is  renewed  troops  will  no  doubt  be  sent  from  there.  Is 
General  Holmes  strong  enough  to  threaten  them  from  Goldsborough  % 
If  he  can,  it  would  be  well  to  occupy  them. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGER, 

Major-  General , Commanding . 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Fh.,  April  26,  1862. 
Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes,  Goldsborough , N.  C. : 

General  : The  arrival  of  arms  in  Wilmington  enables  me  to  distrib- 
ute some  to  the  troops  organized  in  North  Carolina.  If  I am  correctly 
informed  as  to  the  numbers  receiv  ed  1 will  assign  to  you  2,400,  which, 
with  the  arms  of  the  country,  which  I hope  have  been  collected  by  the 
Governor  for  these  troops,  will  enable  you  to  arm  six  regiments.  We 
can  only  now,  in  the  present  scarcity  of  arms,  distribute  400  to  a regi- 
ment, which  will  enable  you  to  arm  the  flank  companies  with  the  im- 
proved arms  and  the  center  companies  with  the  State  arms. 

In  distributing  the  arms  3rou  are  authorized  to  issue  to  the  flank 
companies  of  the  old  regiments  those  improved  arms,  and  t^ke  from 
them  the  arms  they  now  have  and  issue  them  to  companies  of  the  new 
regiments. 


Chap.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 


465 


An  officer  of  the  Ordnance  Department  goes  on  to  Wilmington  to 
receivo  and  distribute  the  arms,  and  you  are  desired  to  give  him  any 
assistance  he  may  require.  Should  the  equipments  accompany  the 
arms  tliev  will  be  issued  to  the  troops  in  proportion  to  their  quantity, 
as  compared  with  the  whole  number  of  arms.  The  troops  thus  armed 
will  re-enforce  your  army  and  enable  you  to  send  another  brigade  to 
Fredericksburg,  which  I desire  you  to  do  as  soon  as  possible.  I he  se- 
lection of  the  brigade  I leave  to  you,  but  should  you  have  more  trans- 
portation than  is  required  for  the  troops  in  your  depai taent, ! desire 
that  you  will  forward  such  as  can  be  spared  for  service  with  the  troops 
in  this.  Should  you  have  an  engineer  anti  an  ordnance  officer  whose 
services  can  be  spared,  I request  that  they  be  ordered  for  duty  with  the 

troops  near  Fredericksburg. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

K.  D.  Dli/Jii, 

General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

Goldsborough,  April  27,  1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee, 

Commanding  C.  S.  Army  : 

General:  Tour  favor  of  yesterday  is  received.  As  soon  as  the 
arms  are  received  I will  organize  a brigade  out  of  the  troops  m Raleigh, 
and  I will  be  much  obliged  if  you  will  send  me  a brigade  general  to  com- 
mand it.  I greatly  fear  it  will  be  some  time  before  the  country  arms 
can  be  collected  in  sufficient  numbers  to  arm  six  regiments,  as  the  Gov- 
ernor has  but  1,400  of  all  sorts,  and  Major  Ashe  thus  far  has  sent  none. 
I will  order  Major  Thompson  to  report  to  you  as  an  engineer.  Colonel 
Deskler  is  the  only  ordnance  officer  I have,  and  be  cannot  be  spared, 
as  be  is  also  my  chief  of  artillery.  I will  send  Ransom’s  brigade  to 
Fredericksburg  as  soon  as  I can  relieve  it,  unless  you  will  be  satis- 
fied with  the  new  one  to  be  organized  out  of  the  troops  at  Raleigh,  l 
shall  be  left  with  but  two  brigades  (Walker’s  and  Branch’s)  that  can  be 
at  all  relied  on  if  Burnside  advances. 

I am,  General,  very  respectfully  and  truly,  ^ HQLMES 

Major-General , Commanding. 

p.  g. jf  it  be  possible  please  send  me  General  Pettigrew;  he  is 

from  North  Carolina,  and  I need  his  strength  to  discipline  new  recruits 
rapidly. 


Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

Goldsborough , April  27,  1862. 

Maj.  W.  H.  Taylor, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Richmond : 

Major:  I send  herewith,  for  the  information  of  General  Lee,  a copy 
of  a letter  iust  received  from  Capt.  W.  S.  G.  Andrews,  who  commands 
a small  body  of  troops  near  Tarborough.  The  intelligence  it  contains 
is  corroborative  of  accounts  from  other  sources. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant^  ^ HOLMES, 

Maior-  General,  Commanding. 


30  R R— VOL  IX 


466 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


[Inclosure.] 


Maj. 


Headquarters, 

~ m „ Tarborough , N.  C .,  ApnJ  26,  1862. 

Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes, 

Commanding  Department  of  North  Carolina : 


General  : Janies  A.  Corey  and  W.  G.  Andrews,  two  men  who  were 
wounded  at  Hatteras  and  have  been  prisoners  at  Annapolis,  arrived 
inside  our  lines  from  New  Berne  last  night.  They  left  New  Berne  on 
Wednesday  last.  They  have  been  confined  in  the  jail  there  for  two 
weeks,  but  have  been  permitted  to  converse  freely  with  the  soldiers  and 
to  walk  about  for  a limited  time  each  day.  They  were  furnished  bv 
General  Burnside  with  passports  to  cross  the  river,  which  they  did  at 
New  Berne,  and  saw  no  enemy’s  pickets  on  this  side.  What  they  re- 
late is  not  of  their  own  knowledge,  but  the  substance  of  numerous  con- 
versations with  the  soldiers.  They  were  examined  separately  and  agree 
m nearly  every  particular.  Their  statement  is,  General  Burnside  left 
New  Berne  on  Wednesday  morning  with  all  the  gunboats  but  two,  and 
l,dOO  men.  There  is  but  one  regiment  in  the  town.  About  9,000  troops 
around  the  town  at  Fair  Grounds,  across  Trent,  and  at  Deep  Gully. 
They  were  expecting  an  attack  from  the  Confederate  forces.  The 
opinion  expressed  was  that  General  Holmes  could  take  the  town,  but 
could  not  hold  it.  General  Burnside  declared  his  intention  to  be  to  re- 
duce Fort  Macon  at  once,  making  a “ breakfast  spell”  of  it,  and  then 
to  go  immediately  to  Kinston  and  Goldsborough . This  was  spoken  of  bv 
every  one  they  conversed  with.  Never  heard  Wilmington  mentioned ; 
the  talk  was  always  Fort  Macon,  Kinston,  Goldsborough.  No  re-en- 
forcements but  those  previously  reported  by  me.  The  small  pox  was 
spreading  among  the  troops  and  many  were  dying  with  it. 

These  men  are  reliable  and  honest  in  tlieir  intentions.  They  have 
served  under  me,  and  1 know  them  well.  I have  a man  in  an  oyster 
boat  goue  to  Core  Island,  and  hope  to  hear  direct  from  Fort  Macon  by 
vv  ednesday  next. 


Very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 


W.  S.  G.  ANDREWS, 

Captain , Tenth  Begt.  North  Carolina  Artillery , Comdg. 


P.  S.— Since  I wrote  the  above  my  messenger  has  got  in  from  Albe- 
marle Sound.  Six  gunboats  are  still  at  Elizabeth  City  with  the  expe- 
dition to  destroy  the  canal.  They  are  probably  awaiting  re-enforce- 
ments to  attack  Colonel  Wright  again.  No  increase  in  gunboats  or 
troops  at  Roanoke  Island.  Some  of  the  citizens  went  from  Washing- 
ton County  to  Roanoke  Island  to  get  the  enemy  to  send  forces  to  Ply- 
mouth. They  have  not  returned.  A company  of  cavalry  is  needed 
there  to  arrest  such  men  and  keep  the  people  quiet.  Eight  citizens 
went.  No  gunboats  in  the  sound  except  those  at  Elizabeth  City. 

Very  truly,  yours, 


W.  S.  G.  ANDREWS, 

Captain , Tenth  Begt.  North  Carolina  Artillery , Comdg. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

~ i -j-',  -j-  „ April  28,  1862. 

General  R.  E.  Lee,  Commanding : 

General  : I have  tried  to  make  out  a report  of  the  battle  near  South 
Mills  on  19th. # I have  given  a detailed  account  of  the  arrangement  of 


* See  p.  326. 


Chap.  XX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  467 

the  ground,  which  seemed  to  me  judicious  and  showed  resources.  At 
last  accounts,  yesterday,  the  enemy,  with  an  increased  number  of  boats, 
were  still  on  board  their  vessels  off  Elizabeth  City,  thus  threatening 
our  line  from  Powell’s  Point  to  the  Blackwater.  He  may  land  at  Eliza- 
beth City  or  any  other  point  on  the  Chowan  he  pleases.  I am  too 
weak  to  scatter  troops.  Suffolk  is  particularly  weak.  If  any  addi- 
tional force  can  be  spared  from  anywhere  it  should  be  sent  there.* 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENJ.  HUGER, 

Major-General . 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Vu.,  April  28,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes, 

Commanding , cfic.,  Rortli  Carolina , Goldsborough , W.  C. : 

General  : I have  had  the  honor  to  receive  your  letter  of  the  25th 
instant  relative  to  the  removal  of  a brigade  from  your  command,  and 
giving  your  objections  to  a further  decrease  of  your  force.  You  will 
have  learned  since  the  date  of  your  letter,  as  I informed  you  in  mine 
of  the  26th,  of  the  arrival  of  arms  at  Wilmington,  and  the  assignment 
of  a portion  of  them  to  your  order,  for  the  purpose  of  arming  the  new 
troops  within  your  department.  The  number  turned  over  to  you,  to- 
gether with  those  collected  by  your  agents  and  those  of  the  State,  will 
enable  you  to  arm,  it  is  hoped,  six  new  regiments.  The  need  for  troops 
in  the  vicinity  of  Fredericksburg  is  very  urgent,  and  they  can  contrib- 
ute to  the  defense  of  North  Carolina  as  materially  at  that  point  as 
they  would  in  assisting  to  prevent  an  advance  from  the  enemy  now 
occupying  the  eastern  waters  of  the  State. 

In  view  of  the  pressing  necessity  for  re-enforcing  the  army  operating 
in  Northern  Virginia,  and  of  the  assignment  of  arms  to  troops  in  your 
department,  I determined  to  order  a brigade  of  your  forces  to  the 
vicinity  of  Fredericksburg,  as  you  were  advised  on  the  26th.  You  will 
please  forward  the  command  you  may  select  without  unnecessary  de- 
lay, and  lose  no  efforts  to  supply  their  places  by  some  of  the  new  regi- 
ments at  Raleigh.  I would  also  request  that,  if  it  can  possibly  be 
spared,  you  will  forward  some  of  the  land  transportation  heretofore 
used  by  the  troops  which  have  been  withdrawn  from  North  Carolina. 
Wagons  and  teams  are  much  needed  by  the  army  collecting  near  Fred- 
ericksburg. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Fh.,  April  30,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes, 

Commanding , Goldsborough , V.  C. : 

General  : Your  letters  of  the  27th  instant  and  telegram  of  29th 
are  received.  Information  received  by  General  Huger  confirms  the 
report  of  Captain  Andrews  with  regard  to  the  continued  presence  of 
the  enemy  at  Elizabeth  City.  It  does  not  seem  to  me  that  there  are 
any  indications  of  an  advance  toward  Goldsborough  by  General  Burn- 

* Further  correspondence  between  Lee  and  Huger  will  be  printed  in  Series  1,  Vol.  XI. 


468 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


side  at  tliis  time.  I think  your  force  will  enable  you  to  prevent  such 
a movement,  and  in  the  mean  time  I hope  you  will  be  able,  with  the 
improved  arms  that  have  been  sent  you  and  the  country  arms,  to  pre- 
pare a sufficient  number  of  the  new  regiments  to  supply  the  place  of 
the  troops  that  have  been  withdrawn  from  you.  It  would  not  be  well 
to  send  the  new  brigade  to  be  organized  atfealeigh  to  Fredericksburg 
instead  of  Bansom’s.  The  new  men  would  no  doubt  suffer  greatly, 
and  their  efficiency  be  much  impaired  by  the  usual  diseases  of  the 
camp.  They  would  suffer  less  if  retained  in  North  Carolina. 

General  Johnston  writes  that  the  situation  of  affairs  in  the  Peninsula 
is  such  that  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  spare  General  Pettigrew. 

With  reference  to  the  promotion  of  Colonel  Daniel  the  Secretary  is 
unwilling  at  this  time  to  increase  the  number  of  brigadiers.  There  are 
two  now  without  commands,  Generals  Wise  and  Pryor,  either  of  whom 
can  be  ordered  to  you  if  you  desire  it. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters, 
Goldsborough , April  30,  1862. 

General  B.  E.  Lee, 

Commanding  C.  S.  Army : 

General  : I telegraphed  last  night,  asking  permission  to  retain  the 
brigade  ordered  from  me  to  Virginia. 

I know  you  will  not  consider  me  importunate  when  I tell  you  that  it 
will  be  better  to  withdraw  all  the  troops  from  North  Carolina  except 
a few  regiments  for  the  defense  of  Wilmington  than  to  reduce  this 
command,  because  that  would  give  you  material  aid  in  Virginia,  and 
the  demoralization  of  the  people  here  would  be  scarcely  less  than  it 
will  be  if  I am  deprived  of  the  means  of  fighting  Burnside. 

General  French  has  made  a positive  and  stern  demand  on  me  for 
troops  and  I must  send  them,  because  the  great  uncertainty  and  mis- 
management of  the  trains  will  not  justify  me  in  trusting  to  them  for 
defending  Wilmington  by  the  troops  that  are  here. 

As  for  the  troops  at  Baleigh,  it  is  doubtful  when  I shall  get  them  and 
still  more  doubtful  when  they  will  be  armed.  The  military  camp  there 
is  a sort  of  hobby  with  the  authorities,  and  they  require  all  the  arms 
they  have  to  exercise  their  men. 

I wrote  immediately  on  the  receipt  of  your  letter  for  six  regiments. 
This  was  three  days  ago,  and  yet  I have  had  no  word  in  answer  and 
no  evidence  the  regiments  are  coming,  and  if  they  do  come  they  will  be 
nothing  better  than  raw  militia. 

Immediately  on  the  receipt  of  your  order  yesterday  I sent  to  the  rail- 
road authorities  for  transportation  for  the  brigade,  and  was  informed 
it  could  not  be  furnished  before  to-morrow,  the  1st  May. 

I am,  General,  very  respectfully  and  faithfully, 

TH.  H.  HOLMES, 

Major-  General , &c. 

P.  S. — The  common  council  of  Wilmington  has  sent  a committee  to 
the  Governor  and  to  me  begging  for  help. 


Chap.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


460 


Abstract  from  monthly  report  of  the  troops  of  the  Department  of  North  Carolina,  commanded 
by  Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes,  for  April,  1862. 


Troops. 


Cape  Fear  District 

Greenville 

Infantry 

Cavalry 

Artillery 

Grand  total.. 


Present  for 
duty. 

Effective  total. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

ana  absent. 

Artillery 

present. 

Officers. 

§ 

a 

Pieces. 

Horses. 

179 

3,003 

3,153 

3,  890 

4,  502 

6 

94 

94 

116 

132 

593 

10,  258 

10,  680 

13, 396 

15,  006 

69 

1,  450 

1,  524 

1, 751 

2,  068 

2,  058 

24 

579 

591 

669 

753 

129 

543 

871 

15, 384 

16,  042 

19,  822 

22,  461 

129 

2,  601 

Hdqrs.  First  Division,  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Suffolk,  May  1,  1862. 

Col.  S.  S.  Anderson,  Adjutant- General: 

Colonel:  As  the  enemy  is  threatening  the  coast  throughout  this 
division  I respectfully  request  to  know  whether  the  troops  stationed  at 
Eoanoke  River  and  ordered  to  Goldsborough  have  been  asked  for  again. 
That  portion  of  the  division  is  more  exposed  than  any  other,  and  is  at 
the  same  time  important,  as  several  roads  meet  at  Weldon,  and  noth- 
ing to  prevent  the  enemy  from  coming  up  the  river  with  their  gunboats 
except  an  obstruction  now  in  progress  of  construction  below  Hamilton. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  troops  have  left  New  Berne  tor 
Roanoke  Island,  and  General  Holmes  can  doubtless  spare  those  sent 

him  from  this  division.  . , j ^ 

I inclose  to-day  a dispatch  from  below,  showing  that  the  enemy  are 
now  near  Edenton  and  Roanoke  River. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ______ 

W.  W.  LORl-NCr, 

Major- General , Commanding. 

I have  to-day  sent  Captain  Poor,  engineer,  to  the  Roanoke,  to  select 
a place  for  a battery  near  Halifax. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ LORING 

Major-General , Commanding . 

Indorsement  No.  1.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  Norfolk, 

Norfolk,  Va.,  May  2,  1862. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  A simi^r  application  was  sent  from  these 
headquarters  on  14th  April.  REHJ.  HUGER, 

Major-General. 

[Indorsement  No.  2.] 

Richmond,  May  3,  1862. 

Respectfully  returned  to  General  Cooper.  The  movement  of  Gen- 
eral Johnston  renders  re-enforcements  to  General  Huger  necessary  it 
they  were  available.  LEE> 


470 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Cine.  XX. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , F#.,  May  3,  1802. 
Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes,  Goldsborough,  AT.  C.: 

General  : That  you  may  better  understand  the  movements  of  Gen 
era!  Burnside  I must  explain  to  you  that  it  is  in  contemplation  to  with- 
draw the  troops  from  Norfolk.  As  soon  as  he  learns  it  I think  he  will 
move  in  that  direction.  Be  prepared  to  strike  at  him  if  he  offers  the 
opportunity.  I do  not  think  it  advisable  therefore  to  move  your  troops 
to  Wilmington  until  the  indications  are  such  as  to  induce  you  to  believe 
that  he  is  preparing  to  attack  that  city. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Va.,  May  3,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes,  ’ 

Commanding , &c.,  Goldsborough , W.  C.  : 


General  : I am  directed  by  General  Lee  to  acknowledge  the  receipt 
of  your  letter  of  the  30th  ultimo,  and  to  say  that  it  was  with  great 
reluctance  and  regret  that  he  found  himself  compelled  still  further  to 
reduce  your  command.  Such,  however,  is  the  strength  of  the  enemy 
near  Fredericksburg,  and  threatened  as  the  rear  of  the  Army  of  the 
Peninsula  would  be  by  a column  advancing  from  the  Rappahannock, 
it  was  imperatively  necessary  to  re-enforce  our  army  operating  in  that 
quarter,  in  order  to  enable  it  successfully  to  resist  any  advance  from 
that  direction.  He  has  to-day  telegraphed  Governor  Clark,  request- 
ing that  he  would  send  you  the  unarmed  regiments  from  Raleigh,  and 
he  trusts  that  with  the  arms  you  now  have,  with  such  additional  as  he 
hopes  to  be  able  to  give  you,  you  will  soon  have  a number  of  armed 
troops  sufficient  to  replace  the  brigade  of  General  Ransom  ready  for 
active  service. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  TAYLOR, 
Assistant  A djutant-  Genera  l. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Va..  May  7,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes,  ’ 

Commanding , &c.,  Goldsborough , N.  C. : 


General  : I have  instructed  General  Huger  to  have  Colonel  Clarke’s 
regiment  in  North  Carolina,  with*otliers,  to  report  to  you.  The  with- 
drawal of  General  Huger’s  command  from  the  Department  of  Norfolk 
renders  the  transfer  necessary.  With  the  accession  of  this  regiment 
you  will,  I hope,  be  able  to  afford  some  protection  to  the  railroad  and 
aid  the  citizens  of  the  counties  adjacent  to  the  sound  in  their  endeav- 
ors to  move  their  grain  and  provisions  to  places  of  security. 

It  will  be  advisable  also  to  send  a regiment  to  Weldon  if  you  can 
spare  one  for  that  purpose. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 


R.  E.  LEE, 


General. 


Chap.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


471 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Va .,  May  8,  1862. 

General  J.  G.  Martin, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  North  Carolina , Raleigh : 

General:  Your  letter  of  tlie  1st  instant  is  received,  and  I am 
much  gratified  to  hear  of  the  six  regiments  already  ordered  to  move, 
and  hope  the  others  will  soon  he  ready  also.  The  President  is  not 
authorized  by  law  to  accept  troops  in  larger  organizations  than  regi- 
ments. He  is  required  to  organize  the  brigades  and  divisions  and 
.appoint  the  commanding  generals.  You  will  perceive  that  lie  has  no 
authority  to  accept  the  troops  referred  to  in  your  letter  as  a divisiou . In 
organizing  them  into  brigades  and  divisions  the  necessity  of  the  serv- 
ice may  fequire  the  separation  of  these  troops  and  their  distribution 
among  the  different  divisions  in  the  field.  You  will  thus  perceive  that 
it  is  not  in  the  power  of  the  President  to  receive  these  troops  as  a 
division  with  yourself  as  major-general,  and  that  the  question  of  their 
organization  into  a single  division  must  be  determined  by  the  exigen- 
cies of  the  service. 

From  these  facts  you  will  understand  that  the  President  is  unable 
to  appoint  you  as  a major-general  to  command  these  particular  troops, 
ns  you  request.  My  impression,  derived  from  a conversation  with  the 
President,  is  that  he  does  not  consider  it  expedient  to  appoint  another 
major-general  at  this  time.  The  law  to  which  I have  above  alluded  is 
the  act  approved  March  6,  1861,  No.  48. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General . 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Va .,  May  13,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes, 

Commanding  Department,  Goldshorough , N.  C. : 

General  : I have  received  your  telegram  of  yesterday  reporting 
that  the  enemy  was  being  re-enforced  at  New  Berne,  and  asking  if  it 
was  desired  that  you  should  keep  Colonel  Clarke’s  regiment  at  Mur- 
fireesborougli.  As  well  as  can  be  judged  from  this  distance,  this  seems 
to  be  a good  point  to  hold  in  defending  that  line  of  road,  and  it  would 
appear  advisable  to  retain  it  in  that  vicinity.  It  is  thought  that  the 
movements  of  Burnside  are  merely  intended  to  divert  our  attention 
from  other  seriously- threatened  points,  and  that  no  advance  in  force 
is  contemplated  by  Ms  column.  Such  is  the  pressure  in  Virginia  that 
it  is  imperatively  necessary  to  concentrate  our  forces  to  enable  us  suc- 
cessfully to  meet  the  heavy  columns  of  the  enemy.  It  may  be  necessary 
to  draw  still  further  from  your  department,  and  you  are  to  make  every 
exertion  to  get  the  State  troops  down  from  Raleigh  and  do  all  in  your 
power  toward  arming  them.  All  that  we  can  hope  is  to  hold  and  pro- 
tect the  line  of  road  leading  south  through  Weldon,  Goldsborough,  and 
Wilmington.  Whatever  force  may  not  be  necessary  for  this  purpose 
should  be  advanced  to  Virginia  and  united  with  the  army  north  of 
Richmond.  The  re-enforcements  reported  at  New  Berne  are  in  all 
probability  some  force  returning  which  has  been  moving  about  the 
sounds.  Burnside  has  received  none,  as  far  as  can  be  ascertained,  from 
any  other  quarter. 

I am,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

K.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


472 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX, 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Va .,  May  13,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes,  ’ ’ J ’ 

Commanding  Forces  in  North  Carolina: 


.General  : I fear  it  will  be  necessary  to  draw  still  further  from  the 
troops  under  your  command  for  the  defense  of  Eichmond  and  its  neigh- 
boring approaches.  You  are  being  weakened  much  more  than  is  desirable, 
but  the  necessity  is  unavoidable.  The  troops  which  have  been  with- 
drawn  from  you  will  be  replaced  by  the  new  levies  now  being  organized 
in  North  Carolina.  It  is  highly  important  that  these  should  be  brought 
to  the  field  with  as  little  delay  as  possible.  General  James  G.  Martin 
and  Colonel  Clingman  will  be  appointed  brigadier-generals,  and  will 
report  to  you.  Their  brigades  will  be  formed  from  the  North  Carolina 
regiments.  Enjoin  upon  them  the  importance  of  speedily  organizing 
and  equipping  the  new  levies  that  may  compose  their  brigades. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Va..  May  19,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes,  ’ 

Commanding , Ac.,  Goldshorougli , N.  C. : 

General  : I am  directed  by  General  Lee  to  say  that  all  of  General 
Huger’s  command  will  be  withdrawn  in  this  direction,  and  that  it  will 
be  necessary  for  you  to  replace  the  regiment  now  stationed  at  Weldon. 
Col.  S.  E.  Harrison,  commanding  First  Louisiana  Volunteers,  is  now 
there  in  command.  As  soon  as  practicable  you  are  desired  to  send  a 
regiment  to  relieve  him,  that  he  may  proceed  with  as  little  delay  as  pos- 
sible to  join  the  balance  of  General  Huger’s  division. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  H.  TAYLOE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters, 
Richmond,  Va.,  May  22,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  G.  French,  ’ 

Commanding , Wilmington , N.  C. : 


General  : I have  received  your  letter  of  the  20th  instant,  reporting 
attack  on  Fort  Fisher,  and  asking  for  additional  guns  of  long  range. 
Colonel  Gorgas  has  been  directed  to  send  to  you  as  soon  as  possible 
two  32-pounder  rifled  guns,  which  are  the  only  suitable  ones  that  are 
available  at  this  time. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 


E.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  May  23,  1862. 
His  Excellency  Henry  T.  Clark,  Raleigh , N.  C.  : 

You  know  the  importance  of  maintaining  communication  South.  Will 
you  send  a brigade,  under  General  Martin,  to  Petersburg  for  that  purpose, 


Chap.  XX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


47$ 


the  whole  line  of  railroad  to  Wilmington  being  under  General  Holmes. 
By  taking  arms  from  ineffectives  here  I can  add  to  the  arms  you  have 
already  furnished  to  four  of  your  regiments  enough  to  complete  their 
armament.  Will  send  arms  to  Petersburg  to  meet  troops  and  will  add 
two  light  batteries  to  brigade.  Urgent.  JBFFERg0N  DAVIS. 


Special  Orders,  \ 
Xo.  127.  f 


Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

Richmond , Va.,  June  3,  1862. 


w 

XIV.  That  part  of  Xorth  Carolina  west  of  the  Blue  Bidge,  and  ad- 
joiningEast  Tennessee,  will  be  embraced  within  the  Department  of  East 
Tennessee,  under  Maj.  Gen.  E.  K.  Smith. 


By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 


JXO.  WITHEES, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General.. 


Hdqrs.  First  Brigade,  Army  of  the  Pamlico, 

Camp  Johnston , June  17,  1862. 

I Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes, 

Comdg.  Department  of  North  Carolina , Goldsborough,  JS . C.  : 

General  : On  the  1st  of  this  month  I assumed  command  of  this 
brigade,  consisting  of  four  regiments  of  infantry,  one  of  cavalry,  three 
* batteries  of  light  artillery,  and  two  independent  companies  of  cavalry  ^ 
also  Captain  Whitford’s  company  of  heavy  artillery,  acting  as  Partisan 
Eangers,  and  Captain  Xethercutt,  with  about  20  men,  on  the  same  duty,, 
the  whole  force  making  an  aggregate  of  5,329,  of  which  only  3,928  were 
reported  present  for  duty. 

The  rest  of  the  command  were  sick  in  hospitals  m camp,  some  absent 
sick,  with  a few  on  detached  service  and  furloughs. 

My  first  attention  was  called  to  the  large  amount  of  sickness  in  camp 
and  the  probable  cause,  with  the  view  to  remedy  it  if  possible.  The 
ground  on  which  the  troops  were  camped  was  low,  without  any  drain- 
age, and  a swamp  on  the  side  of  each  regiment. 

After  careful  examination  in  every  direction  in  the  vicinity  of  Kins- 
ton I found  it  necessary  to  remove  my  camp  to  Falling  Creek,  where 
there  is  a high  and  dry  encampment  on  the  railroad,  and  to  all  appear- 
ances healthy,  at  least  as  much  so  as  any  place  in  this  section  of  the 
country.  There  is  an  excellent  drill  ground  at  the  camp,  large  enough 

for  the  entire  brigade.  , 

I left  one  regiment  of  infantry  on  picket  around  and  6 miles  m ad- 
vance of  Kinston.  The  cavalry  pickets  extend  to  within  a few  miles  of 
Xew  Berne,  nearly  to  Deep  Gully,  on  the  Trent  road,  and  from  the 
railroad  near  Tuscarora,  running  across  to  the  Xeuse.  This  duty  was- 
done  by  five  companies  of  cavalry,  which  I intend  to  strengthen  by 

three  more.  , „ , . • _ , 

On  the  other  side  of  the  Xeuse,  on  Swift  Creek,  Captain  Carraway  s 
company  of  cavalry  and  Captain  Whitford’s  Partisan  Eangers  picket 
and  keep  the  enemy  close  to  Xew  Berne  in  that  direction.  Captain 
Tucker’s  cavalry  company  picket  on  the  Tar  Eiver  from  Greenville  to 
within  a short  distance  of  Washington.  Captain  Xethercutt,  with  his 


474 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


Partisan  Rangers,  operates  with  the  cavalry  near  Deep  Gully  and  across 
the  Trent  River,  in  Jones  County. 

On  account  of  retiring  6 miles  from  Kinston  I desire  to  strengthen 
my  cavalry  pickets  by  a regiment  of  infantry  and  a battery  of  artillery 
to  support  it,  should  there  be  any  necessity  for  it.  There  is  also  another 
reason : There  is  a large  amount  of  grain  and  meat  in  that  section  of 
the  country  which  1 want  to  secure.  As  soon  as  the  three  additional! 
companies  of  cavalry  are  sent  there  instructions  will  be  given  them  to 
collect  all  the  grain  and  provisions  possible  and  send  them  to  a safe 
place  to  the  rear,  from  which  point  I expect  to  haul  it  to  Kinston. 

The  most  reliable  information  that  can  be  received  of  the  enemv’s 
forces  at  Kew  Berne  estimates  it  from  8,000  to  10,000.  The  balance^of 
General  Burnside’s  forces  are  with  General  McClellan  in  Virginia, 
Should  the  enemy  take  Richmond  or  withdraw  from  the  Peninsula 
Burnside’s  forces  will  doubtless  return  to  him,  and  he  will  at  once  com- 
mence his  onward  march  through  Korth  Carolina.  He  has  a large  num- 
ber of  wagons  and  means  of  transportation  at  Kew  Berne.  He  is  also 
making  arrangements  for  railroad  transportation  and  is  rebuilding  the 
railroad  bridge  across  the  Trent.  Several  engineers  have  already  been 
sent  to  him,  and  it  is  supposed  some  engines  and  cars  are  at  Beaufort. 
He  is  building  at  New  Berne  two  iron-clad  cars  or  batteries,  to  carry 
six  guns  each. 

The  railroad  track  was  taken  up  from  Core  Creek  to  the  Dover  road, 
about  10  miles,  when  I took  command.  Since  then  I had  strong  par- 
ties to  work  on  it.  The  ties  have  been  burned  and  the  iron  bent  so  as 
to  render  it  useless.  Several  additional  miles  of  the  track  are  being 
taken  up  and  the  iron  taken  to  a safe  place  by  the  railroad.  This 
would  render  the  enemy’s  advance  by  railroad,  should  he  attempt  it, 
slow  and  laborious.  In  his  advance,  should  he  take  either  of  the  roads 
along  the  Neuse  or  Trent  Rivers,  I could  offer  but  feeble  resistance 
with  my  present  force.  An  advancing  column  can  march  on  both  sides 
of  the  roads  for  any  distance  that  its  strength  will  permit  it  to  extend. 
Should  he  take  the  Trent  Road  it  would  be  extremely  hazardous  to  go 
below  Kinston  with  my  command,  as  there  is  only  one  bridge,  and  that 
a very  poor  concern,  and  the  river  not  fordable.  If  the  enemy  should 
march  on  the  south  side  of  the-  river,  instead  of  crossing  at  Kinston, 
little  or  no  resistance  could  be  offered  to  him  to  White  Hall. 

The  river  is  at  present  navigdble  to  Kinston,  and  is  higher  than  it 
has  been  for  years.  The  obstructions  placed  in  the  river  below  Kins- 
ton are  entirely  covered  by  several  feet  of  water,  and  I fear  damaged, 
if  not  washed  away. 

As  far  as  I have  been  able  to  examine,  this  section  of  the  country  is 
level  and  intersected  by  many  roads,  making  it  extremely  difficult  to 
defend.  The  enemy  can  only  be  met  with  any  degree  of  safety  by  a 
force  equal  to  his  own  and  well  supplied  with  transportation. 

Since  I assumed  command  of  this  brigade  it  has  been  increased  by 
two  small  new  infantry  regiments,  who  report  less  than  400  men  each 
present  for  duty.  My  aggregate  effective  infantry  force  to-day  fit  for 
duty  is  3,887  men— cavalry,  648,  and  212  artillery.  The  cavalry  are 
deficient  in  arms  and  equipments,  and  I have  been  informed  by  the 
ordnance  officer  at  Goldsborough,  in  answer  to  a requisition  made  on 
him,  that  he  cannot  supply  any. 

The  batteries  are  greatly  in  need  of  men.  In  their  present  weak  con- 
dition they  cannot  be  expected  to  render  good  service.  A few  days 
ago  one  of  them  did  not  have  a sufficient  number  of  men  for  duty  to 
drill  with  four  pieces.  An  officer  should  be  detailed  from  each  of  these 


475 


CHAP,  xx.l  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

batteries  to  recruit,  and  furnished  with  money  to  pay  the  men  their 
bounty. 

The  entire  command  is  deficient  in  transportation.  About  one-half 
of  what  is  on  hand  has  been  furnished  by  the  State,  for  which  the  Con- 
federate States  have  refused  to  refund  the  State  or  give  a per  diem. 

I will  make  requisitions  on  the  depot  quartermaster  at  Goldsborough 
for  the  amount  of  transportation  required,  and  hope  you  will  order  it 
to  be  furnished.  As  the  Tar  River  district  has  only  been  attached  to 
my  command  temporarily  (as  I understand  it),  I will  say  nothing  of 
that  section,  or  the  troops  there,  in  this  letter. 

I thus  explain  my  position  as  far  as  I can  at  present,  so  that  you 
may  clearly  understand  it,  and,  in  case  of  the  enemy’s  advance,  that 
you  may  have  a sufficient  force  with  which  to  meet  him. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  MARTIN, 
Brigadier-  General. 


[Indorsement.  1 

Headquarters  Department  of  North  Carolina, 

Goldsborough , June  19,  1862. 

This  report  is  respectfully  referred  to  the  Adjutant  and  Inspector 
General,  with  the  remark  that  General  Martin’s  force  has  since  been 
reduced  by  ordering  three  of  his  infantry  regiments  to  Petersburg. 

TH.  H.  HOLMES, 

Major-General. 


Special  Orders,  ^ Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

No.  134.  S Goldsborough , June  19,  1862. 

I.  Brig.  Gen.  J.  G.  Martin  will  assume  command  of  the  troops  on 
Tar  River,  and  direct  the  operations  in  that  vicinity. 

******  * 

By  command  of  Major-General  Holmes: 

ARCHER  ANDERSON, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

No.  30.  ] Petersburg , June  21,  1862. 

The  following  order  is  published  for  the  information  of  the  troops  : 

Special  Orders,  \ Headquarters  Department  of  Northern  Virginia, 

No.  140.  $ June  21,  1862. 

******* 

VII.  The  department  of  Maj.  Gen.  Theo.  H.  Holmes  is  hereby  extended  to  the  south 
bank  of  the  James  River,  including  Drewry’s  Bluff.  He  will  establish  his  headquar- 
ters at  Petersburg,  or  at  such  other  point  as  he  may  deem  more  convenient.* 


By  command  of  General  Lee  : 


A.  P.  MASON, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


By  command  of  Major-General  Holmes : 

ARCHER  ANDERSON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


* Correspondence  relating  to  operations  on  the  James  River  will  appear  in  Series  I, 

Vol.XI. 


476 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chai\  XX. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  North  Carolina, 

No.  143.  ] Drewry’s  Bluff , July  5,  1862. 

*#**##* 

II.  Brigadier-General  Martin  will  move  with  two  of  the  regiments 
near  Kinston,  and  the  Forty-fourth  Begiment  North  Carolina  troops 
without  delay  by  rail  to  Petersburg.  He  will  report  his  progress  cn 
route  to  these  headquarters,  so  that  orders  may  reach  him  on  the  ar- 
rival of  the  first  regiment  of  his  command  at  Petersburg. 

####### 

By  command  of  Major-General  Holmes : 

ARCHER  ANDERSON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Abstract  from  the  report  of  the  troops  of  the  Department  of  North  Carolina,  commandid  by 
Maj.  Gen.  T.  H.  Holmes,  for  July  15,  1862. 


Present  for 
duty. 


Troops. 


pi 

O 

GQ 

© 

Ph 


Artillery 

present. 


I 


Daniel’s  brigade 

French’s  brigade 

Martin’s  brigade 

Eansom’s  brigade 

Walker’s  brigade 

District  of  the  Cape  Fear. 

Drewry’s  Bluff 

Near  Kinston 

Near  Petersburg 

Near  Weldon 

Grand  total 


125 

77 

136 

153 

11*9 

130 

12 

51 

117 

12 


1,  943 

1,  344 

2,  092 

2,  538 

3,  028 
2,  265 

157 
1,  015 
1,  934 
127 


2,  009 

1,  429 
2,113 

2,  675 
3, 165 
2,  465 

163 
1,098 
1,  971 
129 


2,  454 
1,  800 
2,528 
3, 109 
4, 133 

3,  049 
211 

1,304 
2,  450 
158 


3, 488 
2, 123 
3, 413 
4,  708 
4,  762 
3,  379 


87 


261 
1,441 
2,  986 
227 


14 

40 

196 

1,012 


16, 493 


17, 217 


21, 196 


26,  826 


141 


196 


Special  Orders,  ) 

No.  165.  f 

# # # # 


July  17,  1862. 


XVI.  Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill  is  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  divis- 
ion and  district  lately  commanded  by  Major-General  Holmes. 

* * # * # # # 


By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 


JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Goldsborough,  N.  C.,  August  7,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill: 

General  : There  are  some  matters  in  relation  to  which,  before  act- 
ing, I should  like  to  be  instructed. 

From  the  condition  of  things  on  this  side  of  New  Berne,  and  more 
particularly  of  Washington,  I think  the  enemy  have  no  difficulty  in 
getting  information  through  our  lines. 


^hap.  XX.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


477 


Captain  Lawrence,  stationed  in  Pitt,  says  that  the  enemy  get  the 
Richmond  papers  and  other  news  regularly. 

Satterth waite,  a member  of  the  State  Convention,  lives  within  the 
enemy’s  lines  unmolested,  and  has  been  allowed  to  come  through  our 
lines  to  Greenville  whenever  he  wishes  it.  This  is  only  one  of  many 
cases.  • 

I fear,  as  you  suggest,  that  Colonel  Williams  is  not  in  all  respects 
fully  qualified  for  the  position  he  holds,  but  the  other  two  colonels  there 
are  much  less  so.  In  fact,  Williams  complains  of  their  want  of  disci- 
pline, &c.  The  greatest  difficulty,  however,  arises  from  the  small  force 
on  the  lines.  In  Pitt  there  are  two  cavalry  companies,  divided  by  the 
Tar  River,  and  they  are  not  sufficient  to  prevent  intercourse,  even  if  the 
officers  were  efficient,  which  they  are  not. 

• Kegrbes  are  escaping  rapidly,  probably  a million  of  dollars’  worth 
weekly  in  all.  It  is  estimated  that  one-third  of  the  negroes  in  the 
State  are  east  of  this  line  of  railroad,  and  gentlemen  complain,  with 
!some  reason,  that  that  section  of  the  State  is  in  danger  of  being  ruined 
if  these  things  continue. 

It  strikes  me  that,  if  we  had  force  sufficient  to  accomplish  the  object, 
negroes  and  other  movable  property  of  value  within  or  near  the  ene- 
my’s lines  should  be  brought  away  and  intercourse  prohibited.  I 
think  it  unwise  to  attempt  it,  however,  until  there  is  an  effective  force, 
because  an  alarm  might  cause  the  enemy  to  run  away  negroes  more 
rapidly  than  they  are  doing.  If  the  force  could  be  had,  a regiment  of 
infantry  might  be  well  employed  in  the  vicinity  of  Greenville,  Pitt.  I 
think  Washington  could  be  taken  5 but  probably  the  best  line  of  attack 
would  be  from  Williamston,  in  Martin,  there  being  no  stream  to  cross. 

If  there  were  two  or  three  reliable  regiments  here  they  might  be 
moved  by  rail  to  Tarborough,  Kinston,  Wilmington,  and  Weldon,  and 
could  thus  aid  either  in  striking  or  defending  those  points. 

If  the  separate  cavalry  companies  could  be  united  into  regiments  or 
battalions  under  proper  officers  they  might  be  made  effective,  while  at 
present  they  are  almost  useless. 

; I had  written  the  above,  general,  when  your  dispatch  reached  me. 

If  the  companies  of  Partisan  Rangers  are  collected  at  this  place  they  . 
leave  a number  of  the  richest  counties  (eastern)  entirely  unprotected, 
and  those  having  most  slaves.  If  the  enemy  are  allowed  to  establish 
themselves  within  30  miles  of  the  railroad,  they  can  by  cavalry  dashes 
constantly  interrupt  it;  whereas  if  we  can  confine  them  to  the  coast,  we 
save  the  negroes  and  the  growing  corn  crop,  as  well  as  secure  the  road. 

I suppose  I must  send  all  applications  for  furlough  to  your  head- 
quarters, no  matter  how  urgent  the  case. 

The  telegraph  wire  to  Kinston  has  been  interrupted  for  an  hour;  what 
I get  I will  send  by  telegraph,  if  worth  it.  I have  felt  it  my  duty,  gen- 
eral, to  lay  before  you  the  late  dispatches  from  Kinston,  as  they  come 
from  persons  said  to  be  reliable.  While  I hope  there  may  not  be  a 
formidable  attack,  yet  if  one  were  made,  I fear  that  it  would  not  be 
successfully  resisted. 

My  anxiety  is  increased  because  I cannot  just  now  either  ride  a horse 
or  walk.  Coming  from  Petersburg  inflamed  my  foot  somewhat,  but  it 
is  getting  better,  and,  unless  hurt  again,  in  three  days  I can  be  on 
horseback,  I think.  I then  hope  to  get  matters  in  better  shape. 

I hope  you  will  excuse  the  frequency  and  length  of  my  letters. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  L.  CLINGMAK, 

Brigadier-  General . 


478 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


Wilmington,  N.  0.,  August  7,  1862. 
Hon.  George  W.  Randolph: 

I have  just  received  the  following  from  Goldsborough  yesterday: 

Enemy’s  gunboats  made  their  appearance  in  the  Neuse,  25  miles  above  New  Berne 
this  morning.  They  are  6 miles  below  Kinston.  One  is  iron-clad.  Shelling  the  woods 
near  the  obstructions.  »5 

I write  you  to-day. 

W.  S.  ASHE. 


Headquarters  Department 


of 


Northern  Virginia, 
August  8,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Henry  T.  Clark, 

Governor  of  North  Carolina: 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter  of 
the  4th  instant.*  I have  been  an  eye-witness  of  the  outrages  and  depre- 
dations upon  private  property  committed  by  the  enemy  in  this  State, 
and  can  fully  appreciate  what  you  say  of  the  injuries  sustained  by  the 
people  of  North  Carolina;  nor  am  I unmindful  of  the  importance  of 
protecting  the  line  of  railroad  and,  as  far  as  practicable,  the  valuable 
private  interests  in  the  section  of  country  to  which  you  refer.  But  it 
is  impossible,  with  the  means  at  our  command,  to  pursue  the  policy  of 
concentrating  our  forces  to  protect  important  points  and  baffle  the  prin- 
cipal efforts  of  the  enemy  and  at  the  same  time  extend  all  the  protec- 
tion we  desire  to  give  to  every  district.  The  safety  of  the  whole  State 
of  North  Carolina,  as  well  as  of  Virginia,  depends  in  a measure  upon  the 
result  of  the  enemy’s  efforts  in  this  quarter,  which,  if  successful,  would 
make  your  State  the  theater  of  hostilities,  far  more  injurious  and  destruc- 
tive to  your  citizens  than  anything  they  have  vet  been  called  upon  to 
suffer. 

To  prevent  effectually  the  enemy’s  gunboats  from  ascending  navi- 
gable rivers  would  require  not  only  batteries,  but  adequate  land  forces 
to  defend  them,  which  would  lead  to  a subdivision  of  our  forces,  from 
which  we  could  anticipate  nothing  but  disaster.  The  selection  of  the 
troops  to  be  withdrawn  from  North  Carolina  was  made  by  General 
Holmes,  who  brought  the  most  serviceable  because  there  was  most 
probability  of  their  being  used,  the  enemy  being  known  to  be  here  in 
great,  force  and  it  being  believed  that  most  of  his  troops  had  been  with- 
drawn from  North  Carolina.  The  raw  troops  were  left  for  the  addi- 
tional reason  that  it  was  thought  they  would  stand  the  usual  camp  dis- 
eases better  at  home  than  if  removed!  General  Holmes  and  part  of  his 
army  left  North  Carolina  before  the  late  battles  and  participated  in 
them.  He  brought  the  brigades  of  Generals  Martin  and  French  because, 
the  enemy  being  in  and  upon  James  River,  it  was  thought  proper  to 
provide  against  any  attempt  he  might  make  to  penetrate  North  Caro- 
lina and  cut  the  railroad  from  the  north,  which  might  have  been  among 
his  designs.  With  this  view  General  Holmes  was  ordered  back  to  the 
south  side  of  the  river  immediately  after  the  battles,  where  he  was 
joined  by  Generals  Martin  and  French.  The  information  received  by 
General  Holmes  led  him  to  believe,  as  I do,  that  the  principal  part  of 
General  Burnside’s  command  had  been  transferred  to  Virginia,  where 
I believe  they  now  are. 

Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill  is  in  command  of  the  district  lately  commanded 
by  General  Holmes,  as  you  will  perceive  from  the  inclosed  copy  of  the 


* Not  found. 


jhap.  XX.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  479 

>rder*  assigning  liim  to  it.  He  will  no  doubt  be  very  glad  to  confer 
vith  you  as  to  the  best  means  of  protecting  the  country  you  refer  to, 
md  I should  be  most  happy  if  your  plan  of  retaking  the  places  on  the 
?oast  now  held  by  the  enemy  can  be  carried  out.  I am  most  anxious 
o do  all  in  our  power  to  accomplish  so  desirable  a result  and  extend 
he  best  protection  to  the  people  our  means  will  permit. 

I regret  to  hear  what  you  say  of  the  character  of  the  officers  appointed 
;o  command  the  troops  in  North  Carolina. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Northern  Virginia, 

August  12,  1862. 

3is  Excellency  Henry  T.  Clark, 

Governor  of  North  Carolina , Raleigh , N.  C. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  Brig.  Gen.  J.  G.  Martin 
las  been  assigned  to  the  immediate  command  of  the  troops  in  the  State 
>f  North  Carolina.  It  is  hoped  and  believed  that  his  position  as  an 
officer  of  the  Confederate  States  Army  will  in  no  way  interfere  with  the 
lischarge  of  the  duties  devolving  upon  him  in  his  capacity  as  Adjutant 
md  Inspector  General  of  the  State,  and  that  under  his  immediate  super- 
zision  the  troops  in  the  State  will  reach  a high  degree  of  efficiency 
ind  nothing  be  neglected  which  can  advance  and  protect  the  interests 
>f  North  Carolina.  I have  desired  that  he  will  render  such  aid  as  he 
;an  toward  collecting  and  enrolling  the  men  liable  to  military  duty,  so 
hat  the  regiments  from  the  State  may  be  speedily  and  fully  recruited. 
I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Northern  Virginia, 

August  12,  1862. 

Irig.  Gen.  J.  G.  Martin,  Commanding , &e. : 

General:  I am  informed  by  the  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General 
hat  your  resignation  has  not  been  accepted,  and  that  you  have  been 
lirected  to  report  to  me  for  duty.  You  will  report  for  further  orders  to 
VTaJ . Gen.  D.  H.  Hill,  commanding  the  Department  of  North  Carolina, 
trust  you  will  be  enabled  to  perform  the  duties,  devolving  upon  you  as 
in  officer  of  the  State  as  well  as  of  the  Confederate  States.  1 particu- 
arly  desire  that  you  will  render  such  assistance  as  may  be  in  your  power, 
is  commanding  officer  of  the  Confederate  troops  in  the  State,  toward 
‘ollecting  and  enrolling  the  men  liable  to  military  duty  under  the  act 
)f  Congress  of  April  16,  1862,  as  it  is  all  important  that  the  ranks  of 
he  regiments  so  reduced  by  sickness  and  battle  shall  be  filled.  Alter 
he  old  regiments  have  been  recruited  the  surplus  men  should  be  col- 
ected  in  camps  of  instruction  and  there  organized  and  prepared  for 
service  in  the  field. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


See  p.  476. 


480 


OPERATIONS  IN  NORTH  CAROLINA. 


[Chap.  XX. 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  District  of  North  Carolina, 

No.  180.  J Petersburg , Va .,  August  18,  1862. 

###.##** 

III.  Brig.  Gen.  J.  G.  Martin  is  assigned,  in  accordance  with  instruc- 
tions from  the  General  Commanding  the  Army,  to  the  District  of  North 
Carolina,  extending  from  the  right  banks  of  the  Roanoke  to  the  South 
Carolina  line. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  J.  Pettigrew  will  relieve  General  Martin  of  the  charge 
of  his  brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  T.  L.  Clingman  will  assume  command  of  the  troops  at 
Wilmington,  N.  C. 

Brigadier- General  Martin  will  render  all  the  assistance  in  his  power 
toward  collecting  and  enrolling  the  men  in  the  State  subject  to  military 
duty,  so  that  the  ranks  of  the  North  Carolina  regiments  may  be  speedily 
recruited. 

After  this  duty  has  been  done  the  surplus  should  be  collected  at 
-camps  of  instruction  and  organized  and  prepared  for  active  service  in 
the  field. 

Bv  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill: 

ARCHER  ANDERSON, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Petersburg,  August  19, 1862. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

Tell  General  D.  H.  Hill  that  Clingman  reports  enemy  landing  at 
Swansborough  from  transports.  Have  been  joined  by  cavalry  and  ar- 
tillery. 


S.  G.  FRENCH. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEXAS,  NEW  MEXICO,  AND  ARIZONA. 


February  1-September  20,  1862. 


SUMMARY  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  EVENTS. 


Feb.  — .f  1862.— The  Confederate  forces  enter  New  Mexico. 

11-13,  1862.— Operations  at  Aransas  Pass,  Tex. 

21,  1862. — Engagement  at  Yal verde,  N.  Mex. 

22,  1862. — Engagement  in  Aransas  Bay,  lex. 

Mar.  2,  1862.— Albuquerque,  N.  Mex.,  abandoned  by  the  Union  forces. 

3,  1862. — Capture  of  Cubero,  N.  Mex. 

4,  1862.— Santa  F6,  N.  Mex.,  abandoned  by  the  Union  forces. 

26,  1862.— Skirmish  at  Apache  Canon,  N.  Mex. 

28,  1862. — Engagement  at  Glorieta,  or  Pigeon’s  Ranch,  N.  Mex. 

April  5-  6,  1862.— Affair  at  San  Luis  Pass,  Tex. 

8,  1862.— Skirmish  at  Albuquerque,  N.  Mex. 

13-22,  1862.— Pursuit  of  the  Confederate  forces,  including  skirmish  at  Peralta, 
N.  Mex.,  April  15. 

13-Sept.  20,  1862.— Expedition  from  Southern  California,  through  Arizona, 
to  Northwestern  Texas  and  New  Mexico. 

15,  1862. — Skirmish  at  Peralta,  N.  Mex. 

Skirmish  at  Picacho  Pass,  Ariz. 

22,  1862.— Capture  of  Union  launches  in  Aransas  Bay,  Tex. 

25,  1862.— Affair  at  Socorro,  N.  Mex. 

May  15,  1862.— Naval  demonstration  upon  Galveston,  Tex. 

20,  1862. — Tucson,  Ariz.,  occupied  by  Union  forces. 

21,  1862. — Affair  at  Paraje,  N.  Mex. 

23,  1862. — Affair  near  Fort  Craig,  N.  Mex. 

26,  1862.— Texas  embraced  in  Confederate  Trans-Mississippi  Department. 

30,  1862. — Martial  law  proclaimed  in  Texas. 

June  8,  1862.— Martial  law  proclaimed  in  Arizona. 

18,  1862.— Brig.  Gen.  Paul  O.  H6bert,  C.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of  the 
District  of  Texas. 

July  4,  1862. — Attack  on  United  States  vessels  near  Velasco,  Tex. 

7-17,  1862. — Operations  in  Aransas  Bay,  Tex. 

15,  1862.— Skirmish  at  Apache  Pass,  Ariz. 

Aug.  10,  1862.— Affair  on  the  Nueces  River,  near  Fort  Clark,  Tex. 

11,  1862. — Affair  at  Velasco,  Tex. 

12,  1862. — Capture  of  the  Breaker  and  destruction  of  the  Hannah  in  Corpus 


Christi  Bay,  Tex. 

16-18,  1862.— Bombardment  of  Corpus  Christi,  Tex. 

20,  1862.— Texas  and  Arizona  embraced  in  Trans-Mississippi  Department. 

1862. — Proclamation  declaring  martial  law  in  Texas  annulled. 

13-14,  1862.— Operations  at  Flour  Bluffs,  Tex. 

18,  1862.— Brig.  Gen.  James  H.  Carleton,  U.  S.  Army,  supersedes  Brig.  Gen. 

E.  R.  S.  Canby  in  command  of  the  Department  of  New  Mexico. 

(481) 


31  It  R— VOL  IX 


482 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.  AND  ARIZ.  rCtiAi*.  XXI. 

FEBRUARY  11-13,  1862. — Operations  at  Aransas  Pass,  Tex. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  C.  G.  Forshey,  C.  S.  Army,  Engineer  of  Coast  Defenses. 

No.  2. — Maj.  Daniel  D.  Shea,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Battalion  of  Artillery. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  C.  G.  Forshey , C.  $.  Army , Engineer  of  Coast  Defenses. 

Camp  Esperanza,  Pass  Cayallo,  Tex., 

February  15,  1862. 

Major  : As  this  command  does  not  report  directly  to  headquarters, 
at  Houston,  I take  the  liberty  to  report  the  matters  of  much  interest 
transpiring  on  this  portion  of  the  coast.  The  bark  reported  to  you  in 
my  letter  of  the  5th  took  her  position  at  Aransas  Pass,  and,  landing- 
in  two  boats  her  small  parties  of  20  or  30  men,  scared  off,  it  would 
appear,  the  companies  posted  there,  assumed  many  liberties,  took  beef 
and  mutton  at  their  pleasure,  burned  several  houses,  shelled  the  neigh- 
boring islands  and  sand  hills  in  the  moorings,  to  test  the  presence  of  a 
possible  rebel  arrival  during  the  night,  and  made  themselves  at  home  I 
there. 

Major  Shea,  with  detachment  of  mounted  men,  went  to  Aransas, 
arriving  stealthily,  with  a hope  of  capturing  the  party  and  relieving 
the  citizens  from  their  great  annoyance  and  peril.  In  this  he  was  not 
successful.  His  presence  was  discovered,  and  the  commander  of  the 
bark  Afton  came  into  the  Pass  with  three  boats  and  28  men,  out  of 
range  of  rifles,  his  splendid  rifled  guns  from  the  ship  shelling  the  vil- 
lage and  Major  Shea’s  command  quite  across  the  island.  Major  Shea 
protected  his  men  as  well  as  possible  in  rear  of  the  sand  mounds  and 
avoided  any  serious  casualty,  though  their  well-directed  shells  (thrown 
directly,  and  not  as  from  mortars)  burst  over  their  heads  several  times. 
At  a signal  from  the  boats  his  guns  ceased  firing,  a flag  of  truce  was 
sent  ashore,  and  a parley  asked  with  Major  Shea. 

The  commander  then  came  up  and  held  a long  and  quite  communi- 
cative interview  with  the  major;  wished  to  send  letters  and  packages 
from  his  prisoners,  taken  on  the  McNeill  (already  reported  by  me  as 
captured  near  this  pass),  to  their  families;  delivered  the  letters  to 
Judge  Talbot’s  family  and  others  residing  in  the  vicinity;  said  the 
prisoners  were  well  and  kindly  treated,  messing  at  his  table,  &c.  He 
informed  the  major  that  he  was  well  informed  of  all  the  defenses,  could 
reach  the  whole  coast  with  his  guns,  but  was  not  there  to  fight,  but  to 
stop  the  trade  he  saw  running  by  the  Pass,  and  that  he  would  do ; that 
his  ship  could  enter  that  Pass,  and  he  intended  to  command  it  and  the 
bays  within ; would  have  the  small  vessels  for  the  important  purposes 
he  had  in  view,  with  many  other  saucy  remarks  needless  to  relate.  The 
most  mortifying  remark,  however,  was  that  “ if  Texans  were  like  those 
he  had  seen  ran  away  on  his  approach  his  handful  of  men  could  whip 
five  hundred  of  them.” 

Major  Shea  told  him  that  he  did  not  command  those  men,  in  answer 
to  the  question,  but  would  offer  to  fight  him  then,  man  for  man,  on 
shore,  and  would  thank  him  for  the  opportunity.  He  told  him,  further, 
that  his  profession  that  “ he  did  not  want  to  hurt  the  people  or  their 
property  ” was  belied  by  the  bombardment  of  the  village,  with  women 
and  children,  burning  houses  &c. 


Chat.  XXI.j 


OPERATIONS  AT  ARANSAS  PASS,  TEX. 


483 


Major  Shea  left  Aransas  early  yesterday  morning  and  returned  with 
his  command  at  3 p.  m.  to-day.  He  reports  to  Colonel  Garland,  and 
sends  a messenger  at  once  for  advice  as  to  what  steps  are  next  to  be 
taken,  if  any,  to  protect  the  interests  at  stake.  As  he  came  up  the  large 
schooner  that  passed  here  yesterday  was  hugging  the  shore,  apparently 
bound  for  Aransas,  doubtless  having  supplies  on  board  and  perhaps 
forces.  She  was  lined  with  surf-boats  along  her  deck. 

The  light  house  there,  like  this  at  Pass  Cavallo,  furnishes  the  enemy 
with  many  advantages.  The  line  of  trade  for  the  present  is  destroyed. 
No  boats  will  be  allowed  to  pass  below  this  point  in  future.  I have 
been  thus  circumstantial,  that  you  may  lay  before  General  Hebert  the 
weakness  of  the  forces  and  the  defenses  on  this  portion  of  the  coast. 

Very  respectfully  submitted. 

J 0.  G.  FORSHEY, 

Major  of  Artillery  and  Engineer  of  Coast  Defenses. 

Maj.  Samuel  Boyer  Davis, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  0.  S.  Prov.  Army , Houston , Tex. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  Daniel  D.  Shea , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Battalion  of 

Artillery .« 

Camp  Esperanza,  near  Saluria,  Tex., 

Eebruary  16,  1862. 

Colonel  : 1 have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  the  result  of  my  ex- 
cursion down  the  island  and  the  information  it  furnished  for  the  public 
service : 

As  already  reported  to  you  by  Major  Forshey,  I took  a detachment 
of  mounted  men,  32  in  number,  under  Lieutenants  Patton  and  Preston, 
and  went  down  to  Cedar  Bayou,  35  miles,  in  hopes  to  capture  the  par- 
ties landing  from  the  blockading  bark  Afton. 

On  my  arrival  there  I learned  that  she  was  at  Aransas  Pass,  and  the 
citizensin  great  alarm  from  the  precipitate  retreat  of  Captain  Neal’s 
command,  the  capture  of  the  sloop  that  his  pickets  were  using,  and  the 
impudence  of  the  enemy  making  his  landings,  getting  such  supplies  as 
he  chose,  and  reconnoitering  the  vicinity.  1 therefore  pushed  directly 
on  to  Aransas,  and  took  a position  on  the  rear  of  the  island,  remote  as 
possible  from  the  ship. 

Immediately  after  my  arrival  it  was  reported  that  the  crew  were  on 
Light-House  Island,  and  that  Captain  Neal  had  landed  a force  of  200 
men  the  night  before  on  Mustang  Island,  and  would  attack  them.  I 
waited  on  the  point  of  San  Joseph’s  Island  with  my  force  to  act  in 
concert  with  the  party  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Pass } but  when  the 
enemy’s  boats  were  going  out  of  the  harbor  only  about  6 men  tired  at 
them  from  the  hills  on  Mustang.  I perceived  this  mode  of  attack  was 
attempted  by  a party  of  civilians,  and  not  regular  troops ; therefore,  I 
kept  my  party  secreted.  The  enemy’s  four  boats,  manned  by  only  28 
men,  passed  out  over  the  bar  without  sustaining  any  damage.  1 drew 
my  party  off  to  await  the  landing  on  San  Joseph’s.  They,  however, 
returned  to  their  ship. 

Wednesday,  12th,  the  ship  made  sail  and  came  to  off  Mustang  Island 
about  10  a.  m.  and  commenced  shelling.  I could  not  find  a boat  of  any 


484 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[Cttaf.  XXI 


character  to  cross  me  on  the  island.  1 intended  to  take  command  o 
Neal’s  companies.  The  shelling  from  the  ship  ceased,  when  I sue 
ceeded  in  getting  a boat.  On  approaching  the  land  I discovered  ; 
house  on  fire  (Mr.  Clubb’s  residence),  and  saw  the  sailors  of  the  enenn 
on  the  island,  and  on  closing  up  on  the  land  they  went  into  Mercer7; 
house  and  set  it  on  fire.  Then  I was  fully  convinced  that  Captain  Nea 
had  vacated  the  island  and  that  it  was  occupied  by  Lincoln.  I turnec 
back  disgusted  with  the  spirit  of  our  men  in  that  section,  and  immedi 
ately  sent  a letter  to  Neal’s  camp,  10  miles  on  the  main  land,  demand 
ing  50  volunteers.  I had  taken  up  a position  out  of  sight  of  tin 
ship  with  my  cavalry  detachment  and  watched  the  movements  of  tin 
enemy. 

Thursday,  13th,  about  2 a.  m.,  22  men  and  3 lieutenants  reported  t( 
me.  This  small  number  was  inadequate  to  carry  out  my  plan  of  cap 
taring  the  crew,  and  therefore  kept  them  secreted  on  San  Joseph’; 
Island,  hoping  the  enemy  would  land.  I had  caused  this  detachmen: 
to  be  divided  into  two  parties,  one  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Conklin 
stationed  in  Mercer’s  store,  at  the  head  of  his  wharf;  the  other  bt> 
Lieutenant  Canfield,  at  the  town.  I drew  off  the  cavalry  from  picke 
and  secreted  them  in  the  town.  All  kept  quiet. 

About  1 o’clock  three  boats  of  the  enemy  started  down  towards  th< 
Pass  with  the  intention  to  land  at  some  point.  I immediately  disposec 
of  my  force  to  engage  them  when  they  should  land.  Thoy  came  inside 
the  Pass  and  continued  to  advance  up  Aransas  Bay  toward  the  town 
When  within  1,000  yards  of  my  position  the  ship  opened  fire  on  u; 
with  shell.  They  were  thrown  with  remarkable  precision  at  a distance 
of  3J  miles  and  bursted  over  our  heads.  I saw  that  I could  not  use 
my  men  mounted,  and  ordered  the  detachment  to  dismount,  sent  the 
horses  to  the  rear;  but  the  ship  continued  firing,  the  shells  bursting 
in  our  midst.  Some  of  the  horses  and  2 of  the  men  were  struck,  bu 
not  wounded. 

I saw  no  chance  of  engaging  the  boats  from  under  the  ship’s  fire 
the  horses  became  unmanageable,  and  I ordered  my  men  to  fall  baclJ 
and  take  shelter  close  to  the  town ; also  the  lieutenant  and  10  men,  o 
Neal’s  command,  I had  secreted  in  the  house  that  was  bombarded  byi 
the  enemy,  to  retreat  toward  the  sand  hills  and  concentrate  close  tel 
the  town,  where  I waited  for  the  approach  of  the  enemy  in  his  boats 
I expected  he  would  land  his  force,  and  I could  get  a chance  to  engage 
him  from  under  his  ship’s  fire.  I expected  he  would  fire  the  store  ant 
dwelling  of  Mr.  Mercer,  but  he  passed  it  and  advanced  toward  my 
little  force. 

I was  informed  by  the  citizens  that  Captain  Neal  fell  back  in  the  pres 
ence  of  the  enemy’s  force,  numbering  only  28  men,  and  I expected  this 
captain  would  follow  up  his  former  successes.  He  came  within  rifle 
range  and  3 men  landed;  the  other  two  boats  stood  off.  Immediately 
one  of  the  three  advanced  with  a white  flag.  Some  of  the  citizens  were 
at  a short  distance  in  the  rear.  I ordered  one  of  them  to  ascertain  wha 
he  wanted.  I still  hoped  to  draw  him  from  under  the  fire  of  the  ship 
The  person  bearing  the  white  flag  stated  that  there  were  prisoners  or 
board  the  ship,  and  wished  to  communicate  with  some  persons  on  shore 
The  bearer  of  the  white  flag  requested  the  citizens  (Mr.  Mercer  and  Cap 
tain  Wells)  to  see  the  captain  of  the  ship,  who  was  on  shore  and  neai 
his  boats.  He  (captain)  asked  who  commanded,  and  they  said  1 com 
manded.  He  asked  if  I would  respect  a white  flag  ; he  wished  to  sec 
and  speak  with  me,  and  one  of  the  citizens,  Captain  Wells,  came  to  me 
and  delivered  the  message.  I advanced  toward  him  within  50  yard; 


Chap.  XXL] 


OPERATIONS  AT  ARANSAS  PASS,  TEX.  485 

and  stood.  He  then  came  toward  me  and  both  advanced  and  met.  He 
stated  to  me  he  did  not  come  here  to  make  war  on  women  and  children ; 
he  was  sent  to  blockade  this  harbor,  and  he  would  carry  out  his  orders. 
To  which  I replied  that  his  causing  to  be  destroyed  the  dwellings  of 
Messrs.  Mercer  and  Clubb,  on  Mustang  Island,  and  killing  of  cattle  and 
sheep,  the  property  of  inoffensive  citizens,  looked  to  me  that  his  mode 
of  warfare  was  of  a promiscuous  character.  He  said  when  he  went  on 
shore  on  Mustang  Island  he  met  Mr.  Mercer’s  son,  and  thought  that 
Mercer  and  himself  had  understood  each  other.  Mercer  was  one  of  the 
party  that  fired  on  his  boat  when  passing  out  of  Aransas  Pass,  and  he 
was’ compelled  to  retaliate.  He  said  he  captured  a schooner  off  Pass 
Cavallo.  He  sent  some  of  the  crew  prisoners  on  the  prize  to  New  York. 
He  had  Judge  Talbot  and  Captain  Hopper  and  wife  on  his  ship.  He 
said  they  had  the  liberty  of  the  ship  and  dined  at  his  table. 

The  surgeon,  white  flag  bearer,  remarked  that  the  captain  had  treated 
them  kindly,  and  endeavored  to  make  them  feel  easy  on  the  vessel. 

J The  captain  continued,  and  said  he  sent  Captain  Coffin  to  New  York, 
and  handed  to  me  two  letters  and  a package  directed  to  Mrs.  Smith, 
Coffin’s  daughter,  and  a package  from  Judge  Talbot,  directed  to  George 
Bunkmark,  at  Matagorda.  He  requested  me  to  say  to  Judge  Talbot’s 
1 friends  and  relatives  that  the  old  gentleman  was  well,  and  he  would 
intercede  for  his  release  with  the  commodore  at  Ship  Island.  The  cap- 
! tain  asked  me  if  I commanded  the  troops  on  this  island.  I answered, 
i “I  command  a detachment  of  cavalry.”  The  surgeon  inquired  if  I com- 
manded the  troops  on  Mustang  Island  and  vicinity.  I said,  “No,  sir.” 
The  captain  remarked,  “You  perceive  I can  shell  this  island.  I can 
hold  and  command  this  coast  with  my  ship.”  I said,  “I  perceive  that. 
i and  we  could  not  hold  this  portion  of  the  coast,  from  the  fact  we  had 

I no  ordnance  here  to  defend  it  j but  I would  like  to  have  the  pleasure 
of  meeting  you  on  main-land  or  with  equal  numbers  from  under  the  fire 
of  your  ship.”  He  replied,  “ Let  that  be  as  it  may  j I admire  your  gal- 
lantry.” He  inquired  if  the  people  on  the  coast  would  respect  a white 
flag.  I answered,  “I  presume  they  would  j but  the  white  flag  was  not 

) respected  on  the  Atlantic  coast  by  his  party.”  He  said  he  would  not 
' do  any  harm  to  citizens.  He  wanted  fresh  provisions  occasionally,  and 
: would  pay  for  what  he  would  take.  The  surgeon  remarked  naively  they 
only  wished  to  come  on  shore  and  get  some  oysters  and  fish.  The  cap- 
• tain  said  he  would  come  on  shore  again,  and  bring  with  him  Judge  Tal- 

II  bot’s  trunk  and  some  other  packages  and  forward  them  to  my  care  at 
1 Pass  Cavallo.  We  bid  each  other  adieu,  and  when  at  the  distance  of 

about  50  yards  he  called  and  asked  if  Captain  Nichols  still  lived  at 
Pass  Cavallo.  I answered,  “Yes.”  He  asked  if  he  was  at  home.  I 
answered  in  the  affirmative,  and  he  then  went  on  board  his  boat. 

One  of  the  boats  had  a mast  rigged  and  signalized  the  ship  when  to 
open  fire  and  when  to  cease.  The  surgeon  stated  to  K.  A.  Mercer,  jr., 
a few  days  previous,  when  they  landed  on  Mustang  Island,  that  he  was 
a Texan  and  his  name  is  Ohborne.  He  is  a large  man,  about  forty-seven 
to  fifty  years  old.  The  captain  is  a small,  light  man,  sallow  complexion, 
f about  thirty-five  years  old.  He  told  Mercer  he  intended  to  break  up  the 
commerce  now  carried  on  through  the  bays,  and  he  intends  to  go  to 
Lamar,  and  would  have  the  pilot  schooner  Twin  Bisters.  He  is  very 
anxious  to  capture  small  boats.  He  said  he  could  take  his  ship  to  Lamar 
and  his  crew  and  boats  could  take  Corpus  Chris ti.  He  said  two  of  the 
crew  captured  by  him  joined  his  ship $ these,  of  course,  have  given  him 
all  the  information  he  requires. 

I must  state  that  the  captain  is  a brave  and  daring  officer,  and  is 


486  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

putting  himself  in  the  way  of  being  captured  by  a small  party  of  good 
men.  If  this  man  is  not  stopped  immediately,  before  he  can  capture 
the  small  boats  now  in  the  lower  bays  and  salt-works,  he  will  command 
our  whole  western  coast. 

When  returning  from  Aransas  I saw  a three-masted  schooner  sailing 
to  the  westward.  I suppose  her  to  be  a supply  vessel.  She  had  launches 
slung  along  her  sides  and  more  men  than  a vessel  of  her  class  requires 
for  her  own  purposes. 

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  testify  to  the  good  conduct  of  the  whole  party 
under  my  command,  and  specially  to  compliment  Lieut,  I.  A.  Patton 
and  his  detachment  of  Beaumont’s  cavalry  for  their  coolness  and  sol- 
dierly behavior  under  a heavy  fire  of  shells.  Lieutenant  Conklin  and  a 
small  party  of  Captain  NeaPs  command  were  also  under  the  same  fire 
and  conducted  themselves  with  commendable  coolness. 

I would  close  this  communication  by  stating  my  conviction  that 
nothing  short  of  immediate  and  energetic  action,  under  a prudent  and 
skillful  commander,  can  prevent  the  enemy  from  getting  a foothold  at 
Aransas  and  destroying  the  commerce  of  the  bays,  and  thus  rescue  the 
vast  interests  at  this  moment  periled  in  that  region. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DAN.  D.  SHEA, 

Major , Prov.  Army  G.  $.,  Gomdg.  Batt.  Art.,  Pass  Cavallo. 

Col.  R.  R.  Garland,  C.  S.  Army, 

Gomdg.  Sixth  Regiment  Texas  Infantry , Victoria,  Tex. 

P.  S. — I forgot  to  embody  in  the  above  report  that  Capt.  B.  F.  Neal 
reported  to  me  about  60  men  for  duty  on  the  morning  after  the  parley 
with  the  commander  of  the  blockading  vessel.  I had  concluded  to  re- 
turn to  my  post  and  lay  before  you  the  above  report,  in  order  to  pre- 
pare a proper  military  force  to  protecc  our  commerce  west,  and  advised 
him  to  retire  from  the  island. 


FEBRUARY  21,  1862. — Engagement  at  Val verde,  XL  Mex. 

REPORTS,  ETC. 

No.  1. — Col.  Edward  R.  S.  Canby,  Nineteenth  U.  S.  Infantry,  commanding  Depart- 
ment of  New  Mexico. 

No.  2. — Col.  Benjamin  S.  Roberts,  Fifth  New  Mexico  Infantry. 

No.  3. — Maj.  Thomas  Duncan,  Third  U.  S.  Cavalry,  and  resulting  correspondence. 
No.  4. — Col.  Christopher  Carson,  First  New  Mexico  Infantry. 

No.  5. — Col.  Miguel  E.  Pino,  Second  New  Mexico  Infantry. 

No.  6. — Lieut.  Col.  Jos6  M.  Valdez,  Third  New  Mexico  Infantry  (mounted). 

No.  7. — Findings  of  Court  of  Inquiry  on  conduct  pf  Capt.  R.  S.  C.  Lord,  First 
U.  S.  Cavalry. 

No.  8. — Brig.  Gen.  Henry  H.  Sibley,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Army  of  New  Mexico, 
including  operations  from  January  — to  May  4,  1862. 

No.  9. — Maj.  Charles  L.  Pyron,  Second  Texas  Cavalry. 

No.  10.  —Lieut.  Col.  William  R.  Scurry,  Fourth  Texas  Cavalry. 

No.  11. — Maj.  Henry  W.  Ragnet,  Fourth  Texas  Cavalry. 

No.  12. — Col.  Thomas  Green,  Fifth  Texas  Cavalry. 

No.  13. — Col.  William  Steele,  Seventh  Texas  Cavalry. 

No.  14. — Capt.  Powhatan  Jordan,  Seventh  Texas  Cavalry. 

No.  15. — Capt.  Trevanion  T.  Teel,  Texas  Light  Artillery. 


-HAP.  XXI.1 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  VALVERDE,  N.  MEX. 

No.  1. 


487 


Reports  of  Col  Edward  E.  S.  Canby , Nineteenth  TJ.  8.  Infantry , com- 
manding  Department  of  New  Mexico  * 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Fort  Craig , W.  Ife.,  February  22,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  a battle  was  fought  yesterday 
at  Valverde,  a few  miles  above  this  place,  between  the  Union  troops 
under  my  command,  and  the  Confederate  force  under  General  Sibley. 
The  battle  commenced  at  an  early  hour  in  the  morning  and  was  con- 
tinued with  unvarying  success  until  about  5 o’clock  m the  evening, 
when,  in  a desperate  charge  of  the  Confederates,  McRae’s  battery  was 
taken,  the  supporting  party  repulsed  and  thrown  into  confusion  and 
driven  from  the  field  at  the  moment  that  success  seemed  certain  the 
battle  was  fought  almost  entirely  by  the  regular  troops  (trebled  m 
number  by  the  Confederates),  with  no  assistance  from  the  militia  and 
but  little  from  the  volunteers,  who  would  not  obey  orders  or  obeyed 
them  too  late  to  be  of  any  service.  The  immediate  cause  of  the  disas- 
ter was  the  refusal  of  one  of  the  volunteer  regiments  to  cross  the  river 
and  support  the  left  wing  of  the  army.  . 

The  contemporary  operations  of  the  right  wing  were  eminently  suc- 
cessful, but  the  confusion  produced  by  the  loss  of  the  battery  could  not 
be  remedied  in  season  to  retrieve  the  fortunes  of  the  day.  The  retreat 
was  effected  in  good  order  and  without  further  loss. 

Under  a flag  the  killed  and  wounded  have  been  removed  from  the 
field  and  properly  cared  for.  The  absolute  loss  cannot  yet  be  ascer- 
tained. It  will  probably  reach  40  killed  and  150  wounded,  with  per- 
haps a few  prisoners.!  Large  numbers  of  the  militia  and  \olunteeis 
have  deserted,  but  this  adds  to  rather  than  diminishes  our  strength. 
Among  the  killed  are  Captain  McRae,  Captain  Bascom,  and  Lieutenant 
Mishler.  Among  the  wounded.  Captain  Wingate,  Captain  Stone,  and 
Acting  Second  Lieutenant  McDermott. 

The  troops  are  not  dispirited  by  this  result,  as  all  are  satisfied  that 
we  have  inflicted  greater  losses  upon  the  enemy  than  we  have  suffered 
ourselves  and  that  the  ultimate  result  of  the  contest  will  be  in  our 


favor. 

I will  report  more  in  detail  in  a few  days. 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

J 1 ED.  R,  S.  CANBY, 

Colonel  Nineteenth  Infantry , Commanding  Department 

The  Adjutant-General  of  the  Army, 

- Washington , D.  C. 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Fort  Craig , N.  Mex.,  March  1, 1862. 

Sir  : In  submitting  my  report  of  the’battle  of  Y alv erde  I have  thought 
it  necessary  for  a proper  appreciation  of  the  battle  itself  to  include  a 
connected  history  of  the  events  that  immediately  preceded  and  fol- 
lowed it. 


* See  also  Canby  to  Adjutant-General  U.  S.  Array,  February  23,  in  “Correspondence, 
etc,”  post. 

i But  see  revised  statement  on  p.  493. 


488  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

You  were  advised  by  previous  reports  that  the  advauce  of  the  enemy 
made  its  appearance  in  the  neighborhood  of  this  post  as  early  as  the  12th 
ultimo.  His  force  consisted  of  Riley’s  and  Green’s  regiments,  five  com- 
panies of  Steele’s  and  five  of  Baylor’s  regiments,  Teel’s  and  Riley’s  bat- 
teries, and  three  independent  companies,  making  a nominal  aggregate,  as 
indicated  by  captured  roils  and  returns,  of  nearly  3,000  men,  but  reduced, 
it  was  understood,  by  sickness  and  detachments  to  about  2,600  when  it 
reached  this  neighborhood. 

To  oppose  this  force  I had  concentrated  at  this  post  five  companies 
of  the  Fifth,  three  of  the  Seventh,  and  three  of  the  Tenth  Infantry,  two 
companies  of  the  First  and  five  of  the  Third  Cavalry,  McRae’s  battery 
(G  of  the  Second  and  I of  the  Third  Cavalry),  and  a company  of  Colo- 
rado volunteers.  The  Yew  Mexican  troops  consisted  of  the  First  Regi- 
ment (Carson’s),  seven  companies  of  the  Second,  seven  of  the  Third, 
one  of  the  Fourth,  two  of  the  Fifth,  Gray  don’s  Spy  Company,  and  about 
1,000  hastily-collected  and  unorganized  militia,  making  on  the  morning 
of  the  21st  an  aggregate  present  of  3,810. 

Having  no  confidence  in  the  militia  and  but  little  in  the  volunteers, 
I had  determined  from  the  first  to  bring  on  a battle  if  possible  in  a posi- 
tion where  the  New  Mexican  troops  would  not  be  obliged  to  maneuver 
in  the  presence  of  or  under  the  fire  of  the  enemy.  Several  days  were 
spent  in  the  endeavor  to  accomplish  this  object,  which  failed,  "for  the 
reason  that  several  officers  of  the  Confederate  force  had  lived  or  served 
in  New  Mexico  and  thoroughly  understood  and  appreciated  the  char- 
acter of  its  people. 

On  the  19th  the  enemy  fell  back  from  his  advanced  position  and 
crossed  to  the  east  bank  of  the  river,  about  7 miles  below  the  post,  with 
the  evident  intention  of  reaching  the  country  above  without  fighting  or 
of  forcing  us  to  attack  him  upon  ground  of  his  own  choice.  On  the  20th 
the  first  movement  for  turning  the  post  or  occupying  a point  within 
range  which  commanded  it  was  commenced,  and  in  order  that  the  oper- 
ations of  this  and  the  subsequent  day  may  be  understood  it  is  neces- 
sary to  give  a short  topographical  sketch  of  the  country  embraced  in 
these  operations. 

From  Paraje,  7 miles  below,  to  a point  immediately  opposite  the  post, 
the  valley  of  the  Rio  Grande  is  bounded  on  the  east  by  a basaltic  mesa 
from  40  to  80  feet  in  height,  accessible  at  a few  points  by  bridle-paths, 
and  at  only  one  point  by  a road  practicable  for  artillery.  Immediately 
opposite  the  post  a point  of  the  pedregal  projects  into  the  valley,  and 
at  the  distance  of  1,000  yards  has  a slight  command  over  the  post, 
which  would  be  tenable  only  by  preventing  the  establishment  of  bat- 
teries on  the  point.  Two  and  a half  miles  above  the  post  the  Mesa  del 
Contadero,  about  3 miles  long  and  2 wide,  rises  to  the  height  of  300  feet 
above  the  level  of  the  valley.  At  the  southern  and  northern  ends  of 
this  mesa  the  valley  of  the  river  is  accessible,  and  at  both  points  was 
favorable  for  the  establishment  of  a camp  beyond  the  reach  of  our  ar- 
tillery and  covered  in  front  by  the  river  itself. 

The  mal  pais,  or  pedregal,  is  traversed  by  ridges  of  drifting  sand, 
broken  in  places  by  protruding  beds  of  lava,  and  parallel  in  their  gen- 
eral direction  to  the  valley  of  the  river.  The  ravines  between  these 
ridges  are  natural  covered  ways,  affording  the  enemy  great  advantages, 
by  concealing  his  movements  and  securing  him  from  attack  by  the  im- 
practicable character  of  the  country  between  them  and  our  position. 

On  the  20th  the  main  force  of  the  enemy  moved  up  one  of  these 
ravines,  and  at  4 o’clock  in  the  afternoon  iiad  reached  a position  in 
which  it  was  possible  to  attack  him,  although  the  ground  in  his  front 


CH^r.  XXI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  VALVERDE,  N.  MEX. 


489 


was  exceedingly  difficult  for  tlie  operations  of,  cavalry  or  artillery.  For 
the  purpose  of  attacking  him  while  on  the  march  the  mam  body  of  our 
force  had  already  been  thrown  across  the  river  and  advanced  into  the 
neighborhood  of  the  ravine  up  which  he  was  moving.  Preparations  tor 
the  attack  were  made,  and  skirmishers  thrown  forward  tor  the  purpose 
of  drawing  the  fire  of  his  batteries  and  developing  his  position,  lhis  was 
accomplished,  but  one  of  the  volunteer  regiments  (Pino  s)  was  thrown 
into  such  utter  confusion  by  a tew  harmless  cannon-shots  that  it  was 
impossible  to  restore  them  to  any  kind  of  order.  This  and  the  near 
approach  of  night  rendered  it  inexpedient  to  continue  the  attack,  lo 
mask  our  intentions  and  keep  the  enemy  in  his  position  as  long  as  pos- 
sible a demonstration  upon  his  right  flank  was  made  by  Colonel 
Roberts  with  all  the  cavalry  force,  under  cover  of  which  the  troops  were 
withdrawn,  the  infantry  posted  so  as  to  prevent  his  effecting  a lodgment 
during  the  night  on  the  point  opposite  the  post,  and  the  artillery  and 

cavalry  crossed  the  river  to  the  fort.  , 

These  movements  had  the  intended  effect,  and  on  the  morning  ot  the 
21st  the  enemy  was  found  in  the  position  lie  had  occupied  on  the  pre- 
vious evening.  During  the  night  many  of  bis  animals  stampeded  trom 
the  want  of  water  and  between  200  and  300  horses  and  mules  were  cap- 
tured and  brought  into  the  fort. 

At  8 o’clock  his  advance  was  seen  moving  m the  direction  o±  the  upper 
ford  and  Colonel  Roberts  was  detached  with  the  regular  and  volunteer 
cavalry  to  occupy  and  hold  the  lord.  He  was  followed  immediately  by 
two  sections  of  McRae’s  battery  and  Hall’s  24-pounder  howitzers  (two), 
supported  by  Brotherton’s  company  of  the  Fifth,  Ingraham  s of  the 
Seventh,  and  two  (Mortimore’s  and  Hubbell’s)  selected  companies  ot 
volunteers.  Grayrlon’s  Spy  Company  and  500  mounted  militia,  under 
Colonels  Pino  and  Stapleton,  bad  already  been  sent  to  the  eastern  side 
of  the  river  to  watch  the  movements  of  the  enemy,  threaten  his  flanks 
and  rear,  and  impede  his  movements  as  much  as  possible. 

As  his  movement  in  the  direction  of  the  upper  ford  became  more 
determined,  Selden’s  battalion,  eight  companies  of  regular  infantry,  and 
one  of  Colorado  Volunteers,  were  recalled  from  the  opposite  side  ot  the 
river  and  sent  forward  to  re-enforce  Colonel  Roberts.  Carson  s regi- 
ment (eight  companies  of  Rew  Mexican  Volunteers)  followed  imme- 
diately afterwards.  Soon  after  noon  the  object  of  the  enemy  was  fully 
developed,  and  his  whole  force,  with  the  exception  of  about  500  men, 
was  moving  in  the  direction  of  the  upper  ford.  Leaving  two  companies 
of  volunteers,  a regiment  of  militia  under  Colonel  Armijo,  and  some 
detachments  from  the  regular  troops  to  garrison  the  post,  I ordered 
Pino’s  regiment  from  its  position  on  the  opposite  bank,  and  moved  with 
Company  G,  First  Cavalry,  and  the  remaining  section  of  McRae’s  bat- 
tery, to  the  upper  crossing.  On  reaching  the  field  I learned  that  the 
advance  of  the  enemy  had  gained  the  crossing  before  our  own  advance, 
and  endeavored  to  effect  a lodgment  that  would  command  the  ford. 
Major  Duncan,  Third  Cavalry,  in  command  of  the  immediate  advance, 
promptly  crossed  the  river,  dismounted  his  men,  and  in  a sharp  and 
spirited  skirmish  drove  the  enemy  from  the  position  he  had  seized,  en- 
abling Colonel  Roberts  to  establish  his  batteries  in  positions  to  drive 
the  enemy  from  the  heavy  bosques  in  rear  ot  the  ford. 

After  a contest  of  two  hours  with  artillery  and  small-arms,  during 
which  the  Confederate  forces  fought  with  great  determination  and 
made  several  desperate  efforts  to  obtain  command  oi  the  crossing,  this 
was  accomplished,  and  they  were  driven  from  all  the  points  near  the 
ford.  At  12  o’clock  Selden’s  command  reached  the  field,  and  under 


490  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARtZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

Colonel  Roberts’  direction  immediately  crossed  the  river,  attacked  the 
enemy  in  his  new  position,  repulsed  a desperate  charge  of  his  cavalry 
drove  him  with  great  loss  from  this  position,  and  remained  master  of 
the  field.  The  batteries  were  now  crossed  to  the  east  bank  of  the  river 
and  the  effective  fire  of  McRae’s  and  Hall’s  batteries,  aided  by  the 
small-arms  of  Selden’s  and  Duncan’s  commands,  dislodged  the  enemy 
from  all  the  positions  and  forced  him  to  take  shelter  behind  the  sand 
hills.  Three  of  his  guns  were  disabled  and  left  on  the  ground  traversed 
by  our  troops,  but  were  too  much  injured  to  be  removed. 

The  position  now  occupied  by  the  enemy  was  one  of  great  natural 
strength,  behind  a sand  ridge  nearly  parallel  to  the  course  of  the  river, 
which  covered  his  guns  and  men  from  our  fire,  and  in  a great  measure 
concealed  his  movements.  TJp  to  this  time  our  loss  in  the  Regulars 
and  Colorado  Volunteers  had  been  10  killed  and  63  wounded.  The 
arrival  of  the  cavalry  company  and  section  of  McRae’s  battery  (94) 
actually  added  but  21  men  to  our  effective  strength,  while  the  enemy, 
abandoning  a large  portion  of  his  train,  had  just  brought  upon  the  field 
an  additional  force  of  500  men. 

The  reports  of  the  several  commanders  and  a personal  reconnaissance 
satisfied  me  that  a direct  attack  upon  his  position  would  be  attended 
with  great  loss,  and  would  be  of  doubtful  result.  I determined  to 
attempt  to  force  the  left  of  his  line,  and  the  disposition  of  the  troops 
to  effect  this  was  at  once  commenced,  McRae’s  battery,  resting  on  the 
river  and  strongly  supported,  forming  the  left,  Selden’s  regular  infantry 
and  Carson’s  volunteers  the  center,  Hall’s  battery,  with  its  infantry  sup- 
port and  Duncan’s  cavalry  (dismounted  riflemen),  the  right  of  our  line: 
Pino’s  volunteers,  a squadron  of  the  First  Cavalry,  and  Valdez’s  volun- 
teers the  reserve. 

With  this  arrangement  I hoped  by  advancing  the  right  and  center, 
turning  upon  the  left  as  a pivot,  to  force  the  left  of  his  line,  enfilade 
his  position  behind  the  sand  hill,  and  drive  him  from  the  field.  Accord- 
ingly Carson’s  regiment,  which  at  his  own  request  had  not  hitherto 
been  brought  into  action,  was  ordered  to  cross  the  river.  Captain 
Lord  was  ordered  to  unite  his  own  with  Claflin’s  company,  and  report 
to  me  as  the  cavalry  reserve.  The  support  of  McRae’s  battery  was 
increased  by  Plympton’s  battalion  (four  companies  of  regulars  and  one 
of  Colorado  Volunteers),  and  Pino’s  regiment,  then  just  coming  up,  was 
ordered  to  cross  the  river  as  the  reserve  for  our  left  and  an  additional 
support  for  the  battery.  While  these  arrangements  were  in  progress 
Hall’s  battery  was  attacked  by  a large  force  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry. 
Receiving  from  Major  Duncan  urgent  and  repeated  messages,  I de- 
tached first  Ingraham’s  company  of  the  Seventh  Infantry  to  support 
the  battery,  and  then  Wingate’s  battalion  of  the  Fifth  to  aid  in  repell- 
ing the  attack.  This  was  soon  accomplished,  and  Carson’s  regiment, 
which  had  just  crossed  the  river,  attracted  by  the  firing,  joined  in  the 
pursuit,  and  by  a well-directed  fire  added  to  the  discomfiture  of  the 
enemy,  who  fled  precipitately,  and  did  not  stop  until  he  had  passed 
beyond  the  second  range  of  sand  hills. 

At  this  moment  a formidable  storming  party,  supported  by  several 
infantry  columns  and  four  pieces  of  artillery,  the  whole  estimated  at 
more  than  1,000  men,  suddenly  made  its  appearance  from  behind  the 
sand  ridge,  and  moved  rapidly  upon  McRae’s  battery.  Perceiving  that 
Plympton’s  command  was  entirely  unsuspicious  of  the  danger  that 
threatened  the  battery,  I hastened  in  person  to  point  it  out  and  make 
arrangements  for  its  defense,  but  before  this  could  be  fully  accom- 
plished the  volunteers  that  formed  a part  of  its  support  gave  way,  and 


:,IAP.  XXI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  VALVERDE,  N.  MEX. 


491 


I)  passing  through  Plympton’s  battalion  communicated  their  panic, 
ixid  carried  with  them  a part  of  his  men.  The  main  body  of  his  com* 
nand,  however,  rushed  into  the  battery  and  engaged  in  a gallant  and 
lesperate  attempt  to  repel  the  enemy.  The  advance  of  the  storming 
iarty  was  driven  bach,  and  under  cover  of  this  repulse  the  first  lugi- 
ives  from  the  battery  crossed  the  river  with  but  little  loss.  Lord  s 
squadron  coming  up  from  the  right  (where  he  had  been  ordered  tor 
he  purpose  of  uniting  his  company  with  Claflin’s),  was  ordered  to 
Large,  but  on  approaching  the  battery  became  exposed  to  the  fire  of  our 
)wn  men  as  well  as  that  of  the  enemy,  turned  to  the  left,  and  for  reasons 
hat  are  not  entirely  satisfactory  fell  back  without  making  the  charge. 
The  storming  party  proper  was  deployed  as  skirmishers,  en\  eloping 
the  left,  front,  and  a part  of  the  right  of  the  battery  by  a circular  seg- 
ment nearly  half  a mile  in  length.  Armed  with  double-barreled  fowl- 
ing-pieces and  revolvers,  and  converging  as  they  approached,  a rapid 
and  destructive  fire  was  poured  into  the  battery.  From  the  moment 
that  it  made  its  appearance  the  storming  party  was  met  by  a terrible 
fire  of  grape  and  double  canister  from  the  battery  and  ot  musketry 
from  its  infantry  support.  This  contest  was  continued  in  and  about 
the  battery  long  after  its  guns  had  been  silenced,  the  gunners  with 
their  revolvers  and  the  infantry  with  their  muskets  in  desperate  and 
often  hand-to-hand  conflicts,  until,  overwhelmed  by  superior  numbers, 
this  gallant  band  was  driven  from  the  field,  but  not  until  it  had  lost 
in  killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners  nearly  one-half  of  its  effective  lorce. 

At  this  moment  Wingate’s  battalion,  coming  up  at  the  double-quick, 
poured  upon  the  Confederates  a rapid  and  destructive  fire,  under  which 
they  recoiled  in  disorder.  So  great  was  the  confusion  produced  by 
this  sudden  and  to  them  unexpected  attack  that  for  some  moments  I 
entertained  the  confident  hope  that  the  battery,  and  with  it  the  fortunes 
of  the  day,  would  yet  be  saved  j but  the  rapidly-gathering  re-enforce- 
ments of  the  enemy  and  the  distance  to  which  our  troops  on  the  right 
(though  promptly  recalled  by  Colonel  Roberts,  commanding  on  that 
flank)  had  pursued  the  flying  enemy,  convinced  me  that  to  prolong 
the  contest  would  only  add  to  the  number  of  our  casualties  without 
changing  the  result.  Orders  were  accordingly  sent  to  Captain  Selden 
to  fall  back  slowly  and  cover  the  retreat,  and  to  the  other  commanders 
to  recross  the  river.  The  movement  of  Selden’s  column  (four  com- 
panies of  the  Fifth  Infantry),  in  the  immediate  presence  and  under  the 
fire  of  the  enemy,  was  admirably  executed,  the  command  moving  with 
deliberation,  halting  occasionally  to  allow  the  wounded  to  keep  up  with 
it,  and  many  of  the  men  picking  up  and  carrying  with  them  the  arms 
of  their  dead  or  wounded  comrades.  The  other  columns,  under  the 
personal  superintendence  ot  Colonel  Roberts,  crossed  over  without  dis- 
order, confusion,  or  loss.  The  ammunition  wagons,  a disabled  gun, 
and  all  the  material  except  the  captured  battery  and  a part  of  the  arms 
of  the  killed  and  wounded,  were  safely  passed  over. 

On  the  west  bank  of  the  river  the  troops  that  had  escaped  from  the 
battle  were  found  to  be  much  scattered,  but  the  regular  troops  were 
easily  collected  and  sent  forward  in  the  direction  of  the  fort.  Pino’s 
regiment,  of  which  only  one  company  (^Sena’s)  and  part  of  another 
could  be  induced  to  cross  the  river,  was  in  the  wildest  confusion,  and 
no  efforts  of  their  own  officers  or  of  my  staff  could  restore  any  kind  of 
order.  More  than  100  men  from  this  regiment  deserted  from  the  field. 
Under  cover  first  of  Selden’s  column  and  afterwards  of  the  regular 
cavalry  the  stragglers  were  collected,  arrangements  made  lor  the  re- 
moval of  the  dead  and  the  care  of  the  wounded,  the  beef  herds  driven 


492 


[Ciiat.  XXL 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  AEIZ. 

in,  and  the  public  property  collected  and  removed.  Nothing  was  aban- 
doned on  the  field  except  some  tents  and  fixtures  of  the  field  hospital 
left  behind  to  make  room  for  wounded  men,  and  one  wagon,  from  which 
the  escort  (volunteers)  had  cut  the  mules  and  tied  to  the  mountains. 
W ith  the  cavalry  as  a rear  guard  the  command  marched  in  without  con- 
tusion or  loss. 

Besides  the  superiority  in  numbers  the  Confederate  Army  possessed 
a great  advantage  over  us  in  the  superior  mobility  of  its  force,  which 
was  all  mounted.  Occupying  on  the  morning  of  the  21st  a position 
which  threatened  two  points  of  vital  importance  to  us,  he  was  able  to 
evade  the  attacks  directed  against  him  and  to  concentrate  superior 
numbers  at  any  other  point.  Our  infantry,  which  in  the  morning  held 
him  m check  at  the  lower  end  of  the  mesa,  was  obliged  to  march  7 
miles  and  to  ford  twice  a deep  and  rapid  stream  in  order  to  reach  the 
field  he  had  finally  chosen.  In  all  the  earlier  conflicts  of  the  day,  as 
in  the  final  struggle,  our -troops  were  always  encountered  bv  superior 
numbers,  never  less  than  two  and  sometimes  four  to  one. 

Although  defeated,  my  command  is  not  dispirited.  All  teel  that 
greater  injuries  have  been  inflicted  upon  the  enemy  than  we  have  sus- 
tained ourselves,  and  that  what  we  have  lost  has  been  without  loss  of 
honor. 

A ith  deep  sorrow  I transmit  the  list  of  our  killed,  wounded,  and 
missing,  amounting  in  the  aggregate  to  one-fourth  of  the  effectives  we 
the  field.  On  the  list  are  the  names  of  several  accomplished 
officers  and  many  brave  and  noble  men,  who  have  exhibited  the  last 
and  highest  example  of  devoted  loyalty  and  patriotism.  Their  memory 
is  commended  to  the  respect,  and  their  relatives  and  friends  to  the 
sympathy,  ot  our  countrymen.  Among  these,  however,  is  one,  isolated 
by  peculiar  circumstances,  whose  memory  deserves  notice  from  a higher 
authority  than  mine.  Pure  in  character,  upright  in  conduct,  devoted 
to  his  profession,  and  of  a loyalty  that  was  deaf  to  the  seductions  of 
tamily  and  friends,  Captain  McRae  died,  as  he  had  lived,  an  example 
ol  the  best  and  highest  qualities  that  man  can  possess. 

I desire  to  bring  to  your  notice  Colonel  Roberts,  Third  Cavalry,  for 
some  time  past  the  energetic  and  efficient  commander  of  the  troops  at 
Port  Craig,  and  on  the  21st  the  immediate  commander  of  the  troops  at 
Van  erde,  until  2.30  o’clock.  He  was  then,  as  he  has  always  been,  dis- 
tinguished for  coolness,  gallantry,  and  efficiency. 

The  officers  whose  conduct  came  under  my  own  observation  or  is  re- 
ported by  subordinate  commanders  are  Captains  Selden,  Wingate,  and 
Brotherton,  Lieutenants  Anderson  and  Cook,  of  the  Fifth  Infantry ; 
Captain  Plympton,  of  the  Seventh  Infantry;  Lieutenant  Hall,  of  the 
Tenth  Infantry;  Captains  Morris  and  Howland,  Third  Cavalry;  First 
Lieutenant  Bell,  Second,  and  Captain  Mortimore,  Third  New  Mexico 
Volunteers.  These  names  are  presented  because  the  officers  were  iso- 
lated by  command,  by  position,  or  by  peculiar  circumstances,  and  I 
adopt  as  my  own  the  commendation  bestowed  byT  other  commanders 
upon  the  officers  and  men  ot  their  commands.  The  names  of  the  non- 
commissioned officers  and  men  who  were  distinguished  have  been  called 
for,  and  will  be  presented  hereafter. 

My  thanks  are  especially  due  to  the  members  of  my  staff,  Major 
Donaldson,  Captains  Archer,  Evans,  and  Nicodemus,  and  Lieutenant 
D’Amours,  all  of  whom  were  much  exposed,  and  exhibited  the  greatest 
coolness  and  zeal  in  the  performance  of  their  duties. 

Higher  thanks  than  any  I can  bestow  are  due  to  the  medical  officers 
of  the  command,  and  especially  to  Assistant  Surgeons  Norris  (medical 


Chap.  XXI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  VALVERDE,  N.  MEX. 


493 


director),  Clements,  aud  Bill,  upon  whom  the  chief  labors  fell,  for  their 
untiring  devotion  to  the  comfort  of  our  wounded  men.  Assistant  Sur- 
geons Shout  and  Rankin,  of  the  volunteer  service,  and  Doctors  Arnold 
and  Belt  are  specially  noticed  by  the  medical  director 

Colonels  Pino  and  Carson,  Lieut.  Cols.  J.  F.  and  Manuel  Chavez, 
and  many  other  officers  of  the  New  Mexican  Volunteers,  were  noted  for 

their  zeal  and  energy.  , , . 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  serv  ant, 

ED.  R.  S.  CANBY, 

Colonel  Nineteenth  Infantry , Commanding  Department. 

The  Adjutant-General  of  the  Army, 

Washington , D.  C. 


? I 


[Addenda.] 


Return  of  casualties  in  the  United  States  troops,  commanded  by  Col.  Edward  R.  S.  Canby , at 
the  battle  of  Valverde,  N.  Me x.,  February  21,  1862. 


[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.] 


- 


Command. 


1st  New  Mexico  Infantry  

2d  New  Mexico  Infantry 

3d  New  Mexico  Infantry 

4th  New  Mexico  Infantry 

5th  New  Mexico  Infantry  ....  

Graydon’s  company,  New  Mexico 

Dodd’s  company,  Colorado 

1st  U.  S.  Cavalry,  Companies  D and  G 

2d  U.  S.  Cavalry,  Company  G 

3d  U.  S.  Cavalry,  Companies  C,  D,  G, 
I,  and  K. 

5th  TJ.  S.  Infantry,  Companies  B,  D,  F, 
I,  andK. 

7th  IJ.  S.  Infantry,  Companies  C,  F, 
and  H. 

10th  U.  S.  Infantry,  Companies  A,  F, 
and  H. 


Total. 


Killed. 


Wounded. 


65 


Missing. 


157 


263 


Remarks. 


No  loss  reported. 
No  los a reported. 


Note.— McRae’s  battery  (provisional)  was  composed  of  Companies  G,  Second,  and  I,  Third,  U.  S. 
Cavalry. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Col . Benjamin  8.  Roberts , Fifth  New  Mexico  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Southern  Military  District, 

Department,  of  New  Mexico , Fort  Craig , February  23,  18G2. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  depart- 
ment commander,  the  operations  of  my  command  at  the  battle  of  Val- 
verde, near  Fort  Craig,  N.  Mex.,  on  the  21st  instant. 

Conforming  to  his  orders,  I proceeded  with  one  company  of  the  First 
and  four  of  the  Third  Cavalry  and  the  four  companies  of  mounted  vol- 


494 


[Chap.  XXI 


OPEKATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 

unteers,  commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Valdez,  to  watch  the  move- 
ments of  General  Sibley’s  Confederate  forces,  supposed  to  be  attempt- 
ing to  reach  the  river  near  Valverde,  and  to  prevent  their  effecting  that 
object.  This  mounted  force  was  supported  by  Captain  McBae’s  field 
battery  of  four  pieces,  Lieutenant  Hall’s,  Tenth  Infantry,  two  24- 
pounder  howitzers,  Captain  Brotherton’s  company  of  the  Fifth,  Captain 
Ingraham’s  of  the  Seventh  Infantry,  Captain  Hubbell’s  company  of  the 
Filth  Begiment,  and  Captain  Mortimore’s  of  the  Third  Begiment  New 
Mexico  Volunteers. 

On  reaching  the  crossing  at  the  foot  of  the  mesa  of  the  Contadero  I 
discovered  that  the  Confederate  forces  had  already  reached  the  river 
and  occupied  the  large  bosques  in  the  Valverde  bottom  with  quite 
heavy  forces  of  cavalry  and  several  guns.  Major  Duncan,  commanding 
the  regular  cavalry,  m advance,  promptly  crossed  the  ford,  and  dismount- 
ing his  force,  commenced  the  action  by  skirmishing  on  foot,  and  in  a 
spirited  and  sharp  skirmish  with  the  Confederates  cleared  the  bosque 
of  their  forces,  enabling  me  to  establish  the  batteries  to  cover  the  cross- 
ing and  to  shell  the  enemy  from  the  heavy  timbers  he  had  alreadv 
seized.  • 1 *’ 

V careful  examination  of  the  field  of  battle  made  by  me  some  months 
ago  impressed  me  with  the  importance  of  seizing  and  holding  the  thick 
bosque  at  the  lower  ford  the  moment  1 discovered  the  Confederate 
forces  had  reached  the  river.  For  this  reason  I directed  all  the  strength 
ot  my  command  toward  the  accomplishment  of  that  object.  But  the 
enemy  had  discovered  it  was  the  strength  of  their  position,  and  they 
struggled  with  desperation  to  keep  it.  It  was  of  paramount  conse- 
quence to  lose  no  time  in  gaining  this  point,  as  re-enforcements  were 
rapidly  increasing  the  Confederate  forces,  and  their  possession  of  this 
bosque  in  force  gave  them  the  command  of  the  ford.  They  were  first 
diiven  from  it  by  the  dismounted  cavalry.  Three  times  afterwards  with 
accumulated  strength,  they  swarmed  into  it,  but  they  were  three  times 
driven  out  by  the  slaughter  of  McBae’s  and  Hall’s  guns,  that  disabled, 
m their  last  attempt  to  establish  a counter-battery,  one  of  their  pieces 
and  destroyed  one  caisson.  My  anxiety  to  gain  this  position  was 
extreme,  and  three  times  I sent  orders  to  Major  Duncan  to  take  it  and 
hold  it  at  all  hazards.  It  was  my  intention  to  place  McBae’s  battery 
there,  and  had  the  dismounted  cavalry,  conforming  to  my  orders  vig- 
orously supported  the  advance  of  Brotherton,  with  liis  company  of 
bayonets,  and  held  the  position  twenty  minutes,  McBae’s  guns  and 
Hall  s howitzers  could  have  been  crossed  over  and  placed  in  battery  on 
this  key  of  the  field.  The  disorder  of  the  Confederates  was  very  great 
at  that  time.  Their  re-enforcements  were  swarming  down  from  the 
mesa  in  confusion,  and  the  effect  of  our  guns  from  this  commanding 
point  1 had  hoped  to  gain  would  have  forced  them  back  on  the  mesa 
and  kept  them  from  the  river. 

I cannot  withhold  my  expression  of  regret  that  the  commanding 
ofhcer  ot  the  cavalry  made  no  efforts  to  take  and  hold  this  bosque  after 
my  reiterated  orders  had  been  conveyed  to  him  to  do  so.  The  success 
ot  my  plan  seemed  to  me  beyond  peradventure  at  the  time  I crossed 
Captain  Brotherton’s  company  over  and  reiterated  the  order  to  Major 
Duncan  to  support  him  and  clear  the  bosque.  Colonel  Carson’s  regi- 
ment and  Captain  Selden’s  command  of  regulars  would  then  have  been 
crossed  at  the  lower  ford  and  thrown  upon  the  Confederates’  left  flank 
with  an  assurance  of  victory  as  certain  as  the  laws  of  nature. 

The  failure  to  secure  this  position  iu  the  early  part  of  the  action 
lorced  upon  me  the  subsequent  operations  on  the  Confederates’  right 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  VALVERDE,  N.  MEX. 


495 


Chap.  XXI.]  - — - * — 7 -■-  

■wing  bv  crossing  Captain  Selden’s  command  higher  up  the  river,  which 
I was  only  enabled  to  do  in  consequence  of  the  low  stage  of  the  water 
No  fords  were  known  above,  but  the  regulars  took  the  water  and 
crossed,  selecting  step  by  step  their  foothold  among  quicksands  and 
against  the  strong  current  of  the  Bio  Grande  up  to  their  arms  in  its 
w&tGr 

The  fire  of  our  batteries  commenced  at  10  o’clock,  and  under  the  ad- 
mirable serving  of  Captain  McRae,  Third  Cavalry,  Lieuts.  L.  Mishlei, 
Fifth  Infantry,  I.  McC.  Bell,  Second  New  Mexico  Volunteers,  and 
Robert  H.  Hall,  Tenth  Infantry,  drove  the  enemy’s  forces  from  all  then- 
main  positions.  But  they  were  constantly  receiving  re-enforcements, 
and  having  established  their  guns  at  different  points  within  twenty 
minutes  after  Captain  McRae’s  first  shot,  replied  with  well-directed  and 
rapid  returns  of  shot,  shell,  and  grape,  making  the  most  desperate 
efforts  to  regain  the  ground  from  which  they  had  been  driven  by  Major 
Duncan’s  skirmishers.  This  contest  of  artillery  and  rifles  was  continued 
for  more  than  two  hours  with  a desperation  on  the  part  of  the  Con- 
federates well  worthy  of  a better  cause.  At  about  12  meridian  1 had 
driven  them  from  all  the  positions  they  had  taken,  forced  them  to  with- 
draw their  guns,  and  take  a position  higher  up  the  river. 

Captain  Selden’s  battalion  of  regular  infantry,  including  Captain 
Mingate’s  and  Captain  Plympton’s  battalions  and  Colonel  Carsons 
regiment  New  Mexican  Volunteers,  reported  to  me  at  this  juncture.  I 
directed  Captain  Selden  with  his  command  to  cross  the  river  higher  up, 
in  the  direction  the  enemy  had  been  driven,  and  engage  them  with  the 

^Kavin"  received  information  that  500  Confederate  cavalry  had  crossed 
the  river* above  and  threatened  my  rear,  I placed  Colonel  Carson’s  reg- 
iment in  a bosque  higher  up,  near  the  main  road  to  Valverde,  to  ob- 
serve that  direction,  and  to  prevent  any  attempts  011  my  left  and  rear. 
Captain  Selden  promptly  formed  after  fording  the  liver,  and  m the 
most  gallant  manner  attacked  the  large  forces  that  had  been  dirven 
from  their  first  positions  and  taken  a still  stronger  one  higher  up  the 
* river.  He  drove  them  with  great  slaughter  from  the  bosque  they  had 
then  seized,  repulsed  a determined  charge  of  their  Lancers,  made  with 
audacity  and  desperation,  and  was"  master  of  the  field. 

I had  intended  Major  Duncan’s  dismounted  cavalry  and  Captain 
Brotherton’s  regular  infantry  to  press  the  enemy’s  left  at  the  same 
time  Captain  Selden  attacked  their  right,  and  had  sent  my  aide  de-camp, 
Lieutenant  Meinhold,  to  the  major  with  the  order  to  do  so,  and  it  is 
to  be  regretted  that  Major  Duncan  conceived  that  his  small  force  justi- 
fied a non-compliance  with  my  order.  I am  uudoubting  in  my  convic- 
tion that  if  the  dismounted  cavalry  and  Brotherton’s  infantry  had  vig- 
orously pushed  the  enemy’s  left  while  Captain  Selden  wats  successfully 
forcing  their  right  wing  their  rout  would  have  been  complete. 

I now  felt  secure  in  crossing  the  batteries,  and  having  posted  them 
on  Captain  Selden’s  right,  with  the  support  of  Captain  Brotherton’s 
and  Captain  Ingraham’s  companies  of  regular  infantry  and  Captains 
Hubbell’s  and  Mortimore’s  companies  of  volunteers,  opened  fire  again 
on  the  other  parts  of  the  field  still  held  by  the  enemy.  This  move- 
ment forced  the  Confederates  to  change  the  positions  of  their  guns, 
and  they  renewed  the  artillery  combat  with  activity  and  spirit,  but 
the  superior  service  of  our  guns,  under  the  skill  and  conduct  of  Cap- 
tain McRae,  again  silenced  their  batteries,  and  seemed  to  assure  us  of 
victory. 

In  this  manner  I continued  the  combat  until  2.30  p.  in.,  when  infor- 


496  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ  [Chap.  XXI. 

mation  reached  me  that  Colonel  Canby  was  arriving  with  re-enforce- 
ments. The  commands  were  fatigued  with  five  hours’  constant  action, 
and  while  waiting  the  arrival  of  the  commanding  colonel  the  men 
were  permitted  to  lunch  and  ordered  to  replenish  their  cartridge-boxes. 
During  this  time  the  batteries  continued  to  operate  on  the  enemy  when- 
ever he  displayed  himself  until  Colonel  Canby  reached  the  field,  fifteen 
minutes  before  3 o’clock  p.  m.  The  heavy  bosques  in  our  front  were 
terminated  by  a drift  of  sand  extending  from  the  high  bluff  of  the  Con 
tadero  to  the  river.  Behind  this  drift  the  enemy,  concealed  from  my 
observation,  rallied  all  their  forces  abandoning  wagons  on  the  sand 
hills,  tents,  and  other  supplies,  including  ammunition,  with  the  desper- 
ate resolve  to  storm  our  batteries.  Hiding  their  design,  they  formed 
two  strong  parties  of  stormers,  that  were  undiscovered  until  they  fell 
with  great  fury  on  McRae’s  battery  on  our  left  and  Lieutenant  Hams 
24-pounder  howitzers  near  Major  Duncan  on  our  right.  Major  Duncan’s 
cavalry  on  foot  and  Captain  Brotherton’s  company  of  the  Fifth  Infantry, 
re-enforced  promptly  by  Colonel  Carson’s  regiment  of  volunteers  and 
Captain  Wingate’s  battalion  of  regulars,  opened  a destructive  fire  on 
the  charging  columns  on  the  right  and  repulsed  them  with  great  slaugh- 
ter. McRae’s  battery,  though  held  with  unexampled  determination 
after  the  loss  of  every  horse  and  more  than  half  the  gunners  disabled 
and  killed,  was  carried,  and  fell  into  the  enemy’s  hands.  Captain  Mc- 
Rae, Third  Cavalry,  and  Lieutenant  Mishler,  Fifth  Infantry,  were  killed 
at  their  pieces,  and  illustrated  a courage  and  conduct  that  will  render 
the  battle  of  Valverde  memorable  among  the  glories  of  American  arms. 
It  is  due  to  the  memories  of  the  dead  who  served  this  battery  and  to 
the  survivors,  whose  gallant  and  heroic  service  commends  them  to  the 
praise  of  the  country,  to  mention  them  as  deserving  honor  and  thanks. 

The  supporting  columns  of  McRae’s  battery  and  the  left  wing  having 
retired  across  the  river,  I ordered  the  cavalry  forces  to  recross,  and  they 
fell  back  in  good  order  into  this  post. 

It  is  with  a heavy  heart  I inclose  you  a list  of  the  killed  and  wounded 
of  my  command,  exceeding  in  the  regular  forces  one-fifth  of  all  that 
command  in  the  field — a loss  unexampled,  it  is  believed,  in  any  single 
battle  ever  fought  on  this  continent. 

The  officers  whose  conduct  came  under  my  own  observation  and  were 
distinguished  above  praise  are  Capt.  H.  R.  Selden,  Fifth  Infantry  : 
Capt.  B.  Wingate,  Fifth  Infantry,  badly  wounded ; Captain  Mortimore, 
Third  NTew  Mexico  Volunteers,  three  times  wounded;  Lieut.  I.  McC. 
Bell,  Second  JSTew  Mexico  Voluuteers,  serving  with  McRae’s  battery : 
Lieutenant  Anderson,  Fifth  Infantry,  acting  adjutant  to  Captain 
Selden’s  battalion ; Lieut.  F.  Cook,  Fifth  Infantry,  and  Lieut.  R.  H. 
Hall,  Tenth  Infantry^,  serving  the  24-pounder  howitzers.  These  names 
are  not  mentioned  to  lessen  the  great  praise  due  to  many  other  officers 
who  served  in  my  command,  and  who  are  deserving  honor  and  grati- 
tude. I refer  the  commanding  officer  of  the  department  to  the  reports  of 
battalion  commanders  for  their  names,  and  present  them  as  especially 
entitled  to  distinction. 

I mention  with  pleasure  Lieuts.  Charles  Meinhold  and  William  W. 
Mills,  of  the  Fifth  Regiment  of  Volunteers,  who  served  as  my  aides  on 
the  field,  and  who  executed  every  duty  gallantly,  rendering  most  im- 
portant and  valuable  service.  Capt.  James  Graydon,  with  his  inde- 
pendent Spy  Company,  rendered  me  eminent  service  by  his  vigilant 
watch  of  the  enemy’s  movements,  and  great  energy,  enterprise,  and 
daring  during  the  entire  day.  Assistant  Surgeon  Bill,  in  charge  01 


Chap.  XXL]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  VAL VERDE,  N.  MEX.  497 

ambulances  on  the  field,  was  distinguished  for  his  energy  and  admirable 
arrangements  for  the  relief  of  the  dying  and  care  of  the  wounded. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  S.  ROBERTS, 

Colonel , Volunteers , Commanding . 

Capt.  William  J.  L.  Nicodemus, 

12th  Infantry , Act.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  Hew  Mexico . 

t 

i No.  3. 

Reports-  of  Maj.  Thomas  Duncan , Third  TI.  S.  Cavalry , and  resulting 

correspondence. 

Headquarters  Third  Regiment  of  Cavalry, 

Fort  Craig , N.  Alex.,  February  23,  1862. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  operations 
of  the  troops  under  my  command  at  the  battle  of  Valverde,  on  the  21st 

‘ instant:  . _ , _ 

On  leaving  here  at  about  8 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  that  day  my 
command  was  composed  of  Companies  C,  I),  G-,  and  K,  Third  XT.  S. 
Cavalry,  and  Company  G,  First  U.  S.  Cavalry.  After  marching  a 
short  distance  up  the  river  I was  directed  by  Col.  B.  S.  Roberts,  com- 
manding column,  to  leave  my  rear  company  as  an  escort  and  to  pro- 
’ ceed  rapidly  with  the  other  four  to  the  upper  end  of  the  Mesa  del  Con- 
; tadero,  and,  if  possible,  to  cross  the  river  and  hold  the  bosque  on  the 
opposite  side,  so  as  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  reaching  the  water. 
l«  on  arriving  at  the  ford  I found  two  companies  of  Colonel  Valdez’s 
mounted  volunteers.  These,  as  well  as  my  own  command,  were  crossed 
over  as  promptly  as  possible;  but  we  had  no  sooner  arrived  on  the 
river  bank  than  a large  force  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  could  be  seen  in 
the  woods  a few  hundred  yards  to  our  front.  It  was  soon  discovered 
that  his  squadrons  of  cavalry  were  moving  rapidly  to  our  left  under 
l cover  of  the  timber,  and  I immediately  ordered  Lieutenant  Claflin,  with 
his  company  (G,  First  U.  S.  Cavalry),  to  proceed  up  the  river,  in  order  to 
observe  the  enemy’s  movements.  In  a few  minutes  this  officer  returned 
) anq  reported  that  the  enemy’s  cavalry  had  reached  the  river  about 
b 1,000  yards  above  us,  watered  their  horses,  and  were  returning  to  their 
i position  in  front  of  us.  As  the  enemy  was  greatly  superior  in  numbers, 
j Raq  the  advantage  of  a thick  cover  of  timber,  and  by  this  time  had 
- brought  up  a piece  of  artillery  and  pint  it  in  position  at  close  range  to 
my  front  and  right,  I saw  that  it  would  be  folly  to  move  forward  and 
/ attack  him.  I therefore  dismounted  my  command,  had  the  horses 
and  horse-holders  concealed  as  well  as  possible  behind  a low  sand 
ridge,  about  80  yards  from  and  parallel  to  the  river,  and  deployed  the 
i remainder  of  the  men  behind  some  small  sand  hills,  logs,  and  a few 
scattering  trees,  about  100  yards  in  advance  of  the  horses,  determined, 
if  possible,  to  hold  the  position  and  keep  the  enemy  back  from  the  ford 
until  our  artillery  and  infantry  could  arrive  and  cross.  The  enemy 
I constantly  sent  forward  small  reconnoitering  parties  to  examine  the 
nature  of  the  ground  and  the  number  and  kind  of  my  force,  but  the 
accurate  aim  of  our  sharpshooters  as  often  prevented  them  from  get- 
ting near  enough  to  ascertain  my  real  weakness. 

1 32  R R — VOL  IX 


AQS 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


Roberts,  who  was  waiting  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  river  to  place 
McRaes  battery,  which  was  then  approaching.  in  position 


battery  opened  a deadly  fire  of  shot  and  shell  into  the  bosque,  sup- 
t-Ittt  'I  ^irmishers  and  Captain  Brotherton’s  company  of  the 
filth  U.  S.  Infantry,  which  Colonel  Roberts  had  sent  across  the  river 
to  their  support.  Our  fire  soon  became  so  galling  that  the  enemy  was 
driven  from  the  woods  in  great  disorder  and  with  heavy  loss,  abandon- 
ing  them  gun,  but  soon  rallied  and  carried  it  off  by  hand,  the  animals 
all  being  killed  or  crippled.  From  this  until  about  noon  a fire  was  kept 
up  by  McRae’s  battery  and  Hall’s  howitzer  upon  every  par  tv  that 
showed  itself,  as  well  as  upon  the  enemy’s  battery,  which  had  for  some 
time  turned  its  attention  from  my  cavalry  to  our  guns  across  the  river. 
Our  infantry  arrived  soon  after  this,  and  crossing  the  river  at  the  upper 
lord,  just  above  my  left  flank,  deployed  through  the  thick  woods  up  the 
river.  Colonel  Roberts  followed  with  the  artillery,  taking  McRae’s 
battery  with  him  up  to  the  left,  and  at  mv  request  sending  Hall’s  24- 
pounder  howitzer  down  to  the  right. 

After  silencing  the  gun  which  had  been  playing  from  9 o’clock  in  the 
mornmg  alternately  on  my  command  and  upon  the  battery.  Lieutenant 
Hall  was  sent  to  the  right  with  his  gun  to  dislodge  a large  party  of  the 
enemy  reported  by  Captain  Morris,  commanding  skirmishers  in  the 
bosque,  to  be  directly  in  his  front.  As  soon  as  Lieutenant  Hall  could 
ascertain  the  exact  position  of  the  enemy  he  commenced  shelling  it  with 
such  precision  as  to  entirely  clear  the  woods  in  a few  minutes.  After 
this  no  part  of  the  enemy’s  force  was  seen  on  our  right  for  some  time 
and  all  remained  quiet. 

Before  the  arrival  of  Colonel  Canby  on  the  field  I had  asked  for  and 
received  authority  from  Colonel  Roberts  to  move  my  whole  force  through 
the  timber  on  our  right  whenever  I should  discover  that  a general 
movement  was  being  made  against  the  enemy’s  right.* 

Being  informed  soon  after  3 o’clock  that  a concerted  movement  by 
our  whole  left  flank  was  soon  to  be  made  against  the  enemy’s  right  I 
sent  a request  that  one  more  company  of  infantry  might  be  sent  to  join 
Brotherton’s,  as  a support  to  Hall’s  howitzer,  in  order  that  I might  be 
able  to  throw  the  whole  of  my  dismounted  cavalry  forward  as  skirraish- 
ers.  Captain  Ingraham  was  promptly  sent  to  me,  and  Colonel  Carson 
soon  followed  with  his  regiment,  deploying  on  my  left.  Soon  after  we 


* See  inclosure  to  Duncan  to-  Roberts,  March  7,  p.  500. 


Chap.  XXI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  VALVERDE,  N.  MEX. 


499 


commenced  the  forward  movement  a terrific  cannonading  and  roar  of 
small-arms  was  heard  on  our  left  flank,  and  immediately  a large  force 
of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  came  charging  down,  with  the  evident  intention 
of  seizing  Hall’s  howitzer. at  the  same  time  of  the  attack  on  McRae’s 
battery ; but  before  they  could  get  nearer  than  150  yards  a deadly  dis- 
charge of  rifles  and  musketry  by  my  skirmishers,  the  two  companies  of 
infantry.  Graydon’s  Spy  Company,  and  part  of  Colonel  Carson’s  regi- 
ment was  poured  into  their  column,  causing  the  enemy  to  wheel  about 
in  full  retreat.  Just  then  Lieutenant  Hall  dropped  a shell  in  the  midst 
of  them,  and  so  increased  the  panic  which  the  enemy  had  just  received 
from  our  volley  of  small- arms  that  he  retreated  entirely  out  of  sight. 
At  this  moment,  and  when  I was  hurrying  Hall’s  howitzer  forward  to 
place  it  in  an  advantageous  position  about  300  yards  in  advance,  I was 
informed  by  an  aide-de-camp  that  McRae’s  battery  had  been  taken,  and 
was  ordered  to  recross  the  river  without  delay.  My  whole  command, 
including  the  howitzer  and  infantry  support,  was  immediately  put  in 
motion  in  the  direction  of  the  lower  ford  and  crossed  over  in  perfect 


order. 

It  only  remains  for  me  to  say  that  during  the  whole  of  the  day  I was 
nobly  supported  by  all  the  officers  and  men  under  my  command. 

The  conduct  of  Captains  Morris,  Howland,  Tilford,  and  Treacy,  com- 
manding companies,  and  Lieutenants  Falvey,  Texter,  Wall,  and  Ewing, 
was  characterized  by  the  greatest  zeal  and  coolness.  The  conduct  and 
deportment  of  the  non-commissioned  officers  and  men  were  equally 
commendable. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  DUNCASr, 

Major , Third  IT.  8.  Cavalry , Commanding  Regiment . 

Acting  Second  Lieut.  C.  Meinhold,  Third  U.  8.  Cavalry , 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Southern  Military  District, 

Fort  Craig , FT.  Mex.,  March  5,  1862. 

Major  : On  reading  your  report  I discover  that  you  say  on  pages  4 
and  5 : 

After  this  no  part  of  the  enemy’s  force  was  seen  on  onr  right  for  some  time  and  all 
remained  quiet.  Before  the  arrival  ot  Colonel  Canby  on  the  field  I had  asked  for  and 
! received  authority  from  Colonel  Roberts  to  move  my  whole  force  through  the  timber 
•n  our  right  whenever  I should  discover  that  a general  movement  was  being  made 
against  the  enemy’s  right. 

If  you  sent  any  request  of  this  kind  to  me  I did  not  receive  it;  but 
as  I had  sent  reiterated  orders  to  you  to  take  and  hold  the  bosque  on 
• the  enemy’s  left  and  had  used  McRae’s  battery  to  aid  you  in  that  ob- 
ject, your  report  should  be  so  corrected  as  [to]  show  that  fact. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  S.  ROBERTS, 
Colonel  of  Volunteers , Commanding . 

Maj.  T.  Duncan, 

Commanding  Third  U.  8.  Cavalry , Fort  Craig. 


Headquarters  Third  IT.  S.  Cavalry, 

Fort  Craig , FT.  Mex.,  March  7,  1862. 

Colonel  : Herewith  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a copy  of  my  report 
of  the  part  taken  by  the  troops  under  my  command  in  the  battle  of 


500 


[Chap.  XXL 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


Valverde,  corrected  in  accordance  with  the  suggestion  contained  in 
your  letter  of  the  5th  instant.  You  will  observe  that  I have  made 
another  slight  correction  in  regard  to  the  time  that  Captain  Treacv’s 
company  was  first  sent  into  the  bosque  as  skirmishers  and  also  an 
allusion  to  Lieutenant  Claflin. 


I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  DUNCAN, 

Major  Third  U.  S.  Cavalry , Commanding  Regiment . 
Col.  B.  S.  Roberts, 

Fifth  Regiment  Few  Mexico  Volunteers , Commanding  District . 


[Inclosure.] 


Headquarters  Third  Regiment  of  Cavalry, 

Fort  Craig , N.  Mex.,  February  23,  1862. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  opera- 
tions of  the  troops  under  my  command  at  the  battle  of  Valverde,  on  the 
21st  instant 

***###* 
Directly  after  I had  gotten  my  command  in  position  a 6-pounder  to 
the  front  of  my  right  flank  opened  upon  us  with  vigor  and  kept  up  the 
fire  with  an  occasional  cessation  until  about  1.30  p.  m.,  when  it  was 
either  disabled  or  driven  from  its  position  by  two  or  three  well-directed 
shells  from  Hall’s  24-pounder  howitzer.  Very  soon  after  the  enemy’s 
6-pounder  gun  had  opened  its  fire  a heavy  force  of  his  cavalry,  soon  fol- 
lowed by  a piece  of  artillery,  moved  down  through  the  timber  toward 
the  Mesa  del  Contadero,  with  the  evident  intention  of  assailing  our 
right  flank  and  resting  his  left  on  the  river  below  the  ford.  Colonel 
Roberts,  who  was  waiting  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  river  to  place 
McRae’s  battery,  which  was  then  approaching,  in  position,  discovered 
this  movement  of  the  enemy  through  an  opening,  promptly  advised  me 
of  it,  and  directed  me  to  throw  some  skirmishers  into  the  thick  timber 
immediately  to  my  right  and  below  the  ford,  to  drive  the  enemy  back. 
Company  C,  Third  U.  S.  Cavalry,  under  Captain  Howland,  was  imme- 
diately dispatched  to  re-enforce  Capthin  Treacy’s  company  (D),  which  I 
had  thrown  into  the  bosque  as  skirmishers  to  keep  out  some  small  re- 
connoitering  parties  that  had  been  seen  to  our  right  previous  to  the 
colonel’s  arrival.  After  a spirited  skirmish  for  several  minutes  the 
enemy  was  driven  back,  but  soon  rallied  and  renewed  the  assault  with 
vigor,  and  although  several  times  repulsed,  he  as  often  returned. 

* * * * # # # 

After  silencing  the  gun  which  had  been  playing  from  9 o’clock  in  the 
morning  alternately  on  my  command  and  upon  the  battery,  Lieutenant 
Hall  was  sent  to  the  right,  with  his  gun,  to  dislodge  a large  party  of  the 
enemy  reported  by  Captain  Morris,  commanding  skirmishers  in  the 
bosque,  to  be  directly  in  his  front.  As  soon  as  Lieutenant  Hall  could 
ascertain  the  exact  position  of  the  enemy  he  commenced  shelling  it  with 
such  precision  as  to  entirely  clear  the  woods  in  a few  minutes.  After 
this  no  part  of  the  enemy’s  force  was  seen  on  our  right  for  some  time 
and  all  remained  quiet. 

After  the  arrival  of  our  infantry,  and  before  Colonel  Canby  had 
reached  the  field,  I sent  several  messages  to  Colonel  Roberts,  request- 
ing authority  to  move  my  whole  force  through  the  timber  on  our  right 


So  much  of  this  as  is  a repetition  of  the  report  on  p.  497  is  omitted. 


Chap.  XXI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  VALVERDE, 


N.  MEX. 


501 


whenever  I should  discover  that  a general  movement  was  being  made 
acminst  the  enemy’s  right.  I was  finally  informed  by  one  of  my  mes- 
sengers that  the  request  was  granted;  but  it  is  proper  to  state  that  I 
have  since  been  informed  by  Colonel  Eoberts  that  he  received  no  such 

request. 

******* 

It  only  remains  for  me  to  say  that  during  the  whole  of  the  day  I was 
nobly  supported  bv  all  the  officers  and  men  under  my  command. 

The  conduct  of  Captains  Morris,  Howland,  Til  ford,  and  jCreac^  com- 
manding companies,  and  Lieutenants  Falvey,  Tester,  Wall,  and  Ewing 
was  characterized  by  the  greatest  zeal  and  coolness. 

Lieutenant  Clafliu  also  obeyed  the  orders  given  him  with  alacrity, 
but  before  the  most  important  events  of  the  day  occurred  he  had  bee 

detached  from  my  command.  . . _ _ 

The  conduct  aiid  deportment  of  the  non-commissioned  officers  and 

men  were  equally  commendable.  , . 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your 

Major,  Third  TJ.  8.  Cavalry,  Commanding  Regiment. 

Acting  Second  Lieut.  C.  Meinhold,  Third  XT.  8.  Cavalry, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Southern  Military  Dist.,  Dept,  of  N.  Mex., 

Fort  Craig,  N.  Mex.,  March  8,  1862. 

Major:  I have  received  your  report,  corrected,  as  you  state,  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  suggestion  contained  in  my  letter  of  the  5th  instant. 
Ton  have  not,  however,  in  that  alteration  removed  the  clear  repugnancy 
of  your  statement  that — 

After  the  arrival  of  our  infantry,  and  before  Colonel  Canby  had  reached  the  I 

se^t  severa^me Jsengers1  to  Colonel  Roberts,  requesting  authority  to  move  my  whole 
force  through  the  timber  to  our  right,  &c. 

That  position  through  the  timber  to  your  right  is  the  very  one  I had 
repeatedly  ordered  you  to  take  and  hold,  and  you  had  three  times  justi- 
fied your  non-execution  of  the  order  by  saying  your  force  was  insuffi- 
cient, the  ground  did  not  permit  it,  &c.  From  the  beginning  of  the 
action  I was  directing  all  my  forces  to  drive  the  enemy  from  his  position 
in  this  bosque  and  to  move  McEae’s  battery  to  that  point,  as  I knew 
that  the  position  enfiladed  the  line  of  sand  drift  and  commanded  every 
position  on  the  field  where  the  Confederates  could  find  shelter  and  pre- 
pare any  plan  of  battle.  , 

The  contradiction  of  your  report,  major,  is  this  : That  you  sent  sev- 
eral messages  to  me  requesting  permission  to  take  position  where  1 had 
repeatedly  ordered  you  [to]  go,  and  you  had  as  often  declined  even  to 
make  the  attempt.  An  officer  must  have  strong  reasons  for  any  justi- 
fication of  non-execution  of  orders  on  the  field  of  battle,  and  I am  con- 
strained to  confess  that  after  a good  deal  of  reflection  I am  convinced 
that,  had  you  attacked  vigorously  with  all  your  force  after  I re-enforced 
you  with  Brotherton’s  company  of  bayonets,  you  would  have  carried 
and  held  the  enemy’s  left  with  little  loss,  and  the  subsequent  misfor- 
tunes of  the  day  would  not  have  occurred. 

I will  thank  you  for  the  names  of  the  messengers  you  sent  me  with 


502 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXL 


the  requests  referred  to,  as  I wish  to  arrest  and  punish  them,  whoever 
they  may  he,  for  not  conveying  your  orders.* 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  S.  ROBERTS, 
Colonel  of  Volunteers . Commandinq. 

Maj.  T.  Duncan, 

Commanding  Third  U.  S.  Cavalry. 


No.  4. 

Reports  of  Col.  Christopher  Carson , First  New  Mexico  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Third  Column  Troops  in  the  Field, 

Near  Fort  Craig , N.  Mex.,  February  26,  1862. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the 
operations  of  the  third  column,  composed  of  eight  companies  of  the 
First  Regiment  of  New  Mexico  Volunteers,  under  my  command,  during 
the  battle  of  Valverde,  on  the  21st  instant,  and  prior  to  the  arrival  on 
the  field  of  Col.  E.  R.  S.  Canby,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  depart- 
ment: 

Pursuant  to  the  order  of  the  department  commander  my  command 
marched  from  Fort  Craig  and  arrived  on  the  battle  ground  about  9 
o’clock  in  the  morning,  soon  after  the  batteries  had  opened  fire.  I re- 
mained on  the  west  side  of  the  Rio  Grande,  gradually  moving  up  the 
bank  of  the  river  as  the  enemy  extended  his  right  in  the  same  direc- 
tion, until  after  the  arrival  of  Colonel  Canby,  commanding,  upon  the 
field,  when  I was  ordered  to  cross  the  river,  which  I did  at  once.  My 
after  operations  will,  as  directed,  be  made  to  him. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  C ARSON, 

Colonel  First  New  Mexico  Vols .,  Commanding  Third  Column. 

Col.  B.  S.  Roberts, 

Fifth  Regt.  N.  Mex.  Vols.,  Comdg.  Fort  Craig , N.  Mex. 


Hdqrs.  Third  Column  Troops  in  the  Field, 

Camp  near  Fort  Craig , February  26,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  oper- 
ations of  the  third  column,  composed  of  eight  companies  of  the  First 
Regiment  New  Mexico  Volunteers,  under  my  command,  during  the  bat- 
tle of  Valverde,  on  the  21st,  and  subsequent  to  the  arrival  on  the  field 
of  Colonel  Canby,  commanding  department,  until  which  time  my  column 
had  remained  on  the  west  side  of  the  river  and  taken  no  part  in  the 
battle : 

About  1 o’clock  in  the  afternoon  I received  from  Colonel  Canby  the 
order  to  cross  the  river,  which  I immediately  did,  after  which  I was 
ordered  to  form  my  command  on  the  right  of  our  line  and  to  advance 
as  skirmishers  toward  the  hills.  After  advancing  some  400  yards  we 
discovered  a large  body  (some  400  or  500)  of  the  enemy  charging  diag- 
onally across  our  front,  evidently  with  the  intention  of  capturing  the 
24-pounder  gun,  which,  stationed  on  our  right,  was  advancing  and 
doing  much  harm  to  the  enemy.  As  the  head  of  the  enemy’s  column 


Answer,  if  any,  not  found. 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  VALVERDE,  N.  MEX. 


503 


CHAr.  XXI.] 

came  within  some  80  yards  of  my  right  a volley  from  the  whole .column 
was  poured  into  them,  and  the  firing  being  kept  up  caused  them  to 
break  in  every  direction  and  retreat.  Almost  at the > sa me  time  a shell 
from  the  24-pounder  was  thrown  among  them  with  fatal  effect.  1 he; y 
did  not  attempt  to  reform,  and  the  column,  supported  by  the  gun  on  the 
rio’ht,  was  moving  forward  to  sweep  the  wood  near  the  hills,  when  1 
received  the  order  to  retreat  and  recross  the  river.  This  movement 
was  executed  in  good  order.  The  column,  after  crossing  the  nver,re. 
turned  to  its  station  near  Fort  Craig,  where  it  arrived  about  7 o clock 

in  the  evening.  _ _ . , , 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  V^RS0^ 

Golonel  First  N.  Mex.  Vols .,  Commanding  Third  Column . 

C-apt.  William  J.  L.  Nicodemus,  . 

A.  A.  A.  G .,  Edqrs.  Dept,  of  N.  Mex.,  Fort  Craig,  N.  Mex. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Col.  Miguel  F.  Fino , Second  New  Mexico  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Regiment  New  Mexico  Vols., 

Camp  near  Fort  Craig,  N.  Mex.,  February  26,  1862. 

Sir  • I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  depart- 
ment commander,  the  operations  of  the  column  under  my  command  on 
the  21st  February,  1862,  in  the  field,  viz : . 

The  column,  being  stationed  on  the  eastern  bank  of  the  river  oppo- 
site Fort  Craig,  received  orders  to  cross  the  river  and  escort  the  am- 
munition train  to  the  field  of  battle.  The  column  crossed  and  proceeded 
with  the  train  to  the  crossing  of  the  river  in  rear  of  the  engagement, 
where  orders  were  received  to  cross  and  form  on  the  eastern  bank. 
While  this  movement  was  being  executed  we  were  ordered  back  to 
form  on  the  western  bank,  where  we  took  our  position  and  fired  upon 
the  enemy  until  ordered  to  return  to  Fort  Craig  and  occupy  our  former 
encampment.  , . , 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  -piNO 

Colonel  Second  Regiment  New  Mexico  Volunteers. 

Captain  Nicodemus, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Lieut,  Col.  Jose  M.  Valdez,  Third  New  Mexico  Infantry. 

Fort  Craig,  N.  Mex.,  February  26,  1862. 

I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  conduct  of  the 
companies  under  my  command  of  the  Third  Regiment  New  Mexico  Yo- 
unteers  during  the  battle  of  Yalverde,  on  the  21st  instant,  against  the 
Confederate  troops,  according  [to]  the  reports  of  the  commanders  ot 
said  companies : 


504 


[Chap.  XXL 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 

Capt.  Pedro  Sanchez,  Third  Regiment  New  Mexico  Volunteers  re- 
ports that  his  company  (0)  fought  gallantly  during  the  battle  without 
making  any  retreat  without  orders ; that  his  company,  with  some  other 
companies,  under  the  direction  of  the  gallant  Major  Duncan,  did  com- 
mence the  attack  against  the  enemy  before  the  battery  and  troops  of 
ours  could  reach  the  camp  of  battle,  but  he  makes  special  mention  that 
Corp.  Antonio  Chawn,  Privates  Jesus  Archuleeta  and  Pastor  Archu- 
leeta  did  act  on  that  occasion  with  such  encouragement  and  valor  that 
they  killed  some  men  of  the  enemy’s  battery. 

Oapt.  Juan  A.  Sarracino,  Third  Regiment  New  Mexico  Volunteers 
reports  that  Company  G,  under  his  command,  acted  in  the  battle  in 
good  spirits  at  all  times  during  the  war,  and  that  they  did  not  make 
any  retreat  without  orders. 

Capt.  Rafael  Chacon,  Pirst  Regiment  New  Mexico  Volunteers,  reports 
that  his  company  did  fight  well  and  with  valor  during  the  battle,  and 
that  when  the  company  was  ordered  to  retreat  they  were  satisfied  of 
having  obliged  the  enemy  to  retreat  in  all  their  charges,  and  that  his 
company,  when  retired  from  camp  of  battle,  was  in  good  and  quiet 
spirits. 

Capt.  Ricardo  Branch,  Third  Regiment  New  Mexico  Volunteers, 
reports  that  his  company  (B)  was  in  the  camp  of  battle  acting  as  well 
as  they  could,  fighting  all  the  time  with  valor  and  activity,  and  that 
the  company  did  not  make  any  retreat  without  orders. 

The  commander  of  the  company  of  Capt.  William  Mortimore,  Third 
Regiment  New  Mexico  Volunteers,  reports  that  the  following  non-com- 
missioned officers  and  privates,  viz,  First  Sergt.  J.  W.  Lewelling,  Sergts. 
Edward  Watters  and  Trancer  Moore ; Corps.  Biter  Terreme,  Jose  Leyra, 
S.  C.  Miller,  C.  A.  Reisden,  George  Beker,  Henry  York,  Marceline  Mar- 
tinez, and  Jose  Anar taico  Crespin,  with  others  that  are  killed  and 
missing,  fought  in  the  battle  the  21st  instant  gallantly  and  sustained 
the  battery  to  the  last  moment. 

I certify  in  honor  that  the  above  is  correct  and  just. 

JOSfi  M.  VALDEZ, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  Third  Regiment  New  Mexico  Mounted  Vols . 

Acting-  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 

Southern  Military  District , Fort  Craig , N.  Mex. 


No.  7. 

Findings  of  Court  of  Inquiry  on  conduct  of  Cant . R.  S.  C.  Lord , First 

U.  S.  Cavalry. 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  New  Mexico, 

No.  92.  ) Santa  Fe,  October  13,  1862. 

I.  At  the  request  of  Capt.  R.  S.  C.  Lord,  TT.  S.  First  Cavalry,  a Court 
of  Inquiry,  consisting  of  Maj.  Henry  D.  Wallen,  U.  S.  Seventh  Infantry, 
Surg.  Elisha  I.  Baily,  medical  director,  U.  S.  Army,  and  Surg.  James  M. 
McNulty,  First  Infantry,  California  Volunteers,  with  Capt.  Andrew  W. 
Evans,  U.  S.  Sixth  Cavalry,  was  assembled  at  Santa  Fe,  on  the  2d  of 
October,  1862,  to  investigate  certain  allegations  made  against  the  offi- 
cial reputation  of  the  applicant. 

The  court  was  ordered  to  report  the  essential  facts  and  its  opinion  in 
the  case,  and  the  following  is  the  result  of  the  investigation  : 

The  court  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  statement  in  the  Santa  F6  Ga- 


BAP.  XXI. J 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  VAL VERDE,  N.  MEX. 


505 


ette  of  the  battle  of  Yal verde  is  incorrectly  given.  The  evidence  of 
^irst  Sergeant  Walker,  of  Captain  Lord’s  company,  goes  to  show  that 
he  battery  was  charged  by  Captain  Lord’s  order,  and  that  he  led  the 
harge.  The  evidence  of  Lieutenant  Meinhold  is  that  Colonel  Donald- 
on  was  not  dressed  in  uniform,  and  therefore  the  soldiers  of  Captain 
jord’s  command  were  not  bound  to  recognize  his  orders.  Lieutenant- 
)olonel  Donaldson  did  not  give  that  order  to  Captain  Lord  in  person, 
hor  did  he  see  him  on  the  battle-field. 

In  reference  to  the  second  allegation,  the  court  is  of  the  opinion  that 
he  orders,  as  sworn  to  by  Lieutenant  Meinhold,  may  have  been  given 
io  Captain  Lord,  but  from  the  fact  that  they  were  not  heard  or  under- 
stood by  the  officer  on  duty  with  Captain  Lord,  nor  by  First  Sergeant 
Yalker,  who  was  by  his  side,  they  may  likewise  have  been  misunder- 
stood or  lost  by  him  in  the  confusion  of  the  battle. 

I The  evidence  given  by  Acting  Second  Lieutenant  Bernard  is  that 
Oaptain  Lord’s  command,  while  proceeding  to  join  Colonel  Donaldson, 
tad  lost  their  guides,  and  were  out  of  provisions,  and  that  their  horses 
Vere  broken  down,  and  that  they  were  ignorant  of  the  country,  and 
hey  found  themselves  under  these  circumstances  between  two  supe- 
ior  forces  of  the  enemy.  The  court  is  of  opinion  that  the  evidence 
i daces  the  conduct  of  Captain  Lord  in  its  true  light,  and  exonerates 
aim  from  all  censure  on  that  allegation. 

The  evidence  before  the  court  goes  to  show  that  the  company  did  not 
lee  in  gloriously  from  the  field,  but  that  it  did  charge  the  battery,  did 
;over  the  men,  and  form  in  good  order  on  the  opposite  side  and  open 
ire  on  the  enemy,  and  all  this  was  in  obedience  to  the  orders  of  Colo- 
lel  Canby. 

The  court  is  of  opinion  that  this  investigation  should  have  been 
Ranted  Captain  Lord  months  since,  and  that,  in  denying  this  oppor- 
tunity to  vindicate  his  character,  much  injustice  has  been  done  him. 
Che  evidence  now  presented  before  the  court  acquits  him  of  all  censure 
>r  blame  for  the  loss  of  the  battle  of  Yal  verde. 

The  court  is  further  of  opinion  that  no  further  action  should  be  taken 
n the  case  of  Capt.  B.  S.  C.  Lord,  First  Cavalry,  U.  S.  Army. 

II.  The  proceedings  of  the  court  of  inquiry  are  approved.  Captain 
Lord  will  proceed  to  join  his  company  in  the  East. 

III.  The  court  of  inquiry,  of  which  Maj.  Henry  D.  Wallen,  TJ.  S. 
Seventh  Infantry,  is  president,  is  hereby  dissolved. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Carleton : 

BEK  C.  CUTLEB, 
Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  8. 

| i Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  H.  Sibley,  C.  S.  Army , commanding  Army 
of  New  Mexico s including  operations  from  January  — to  May  4,  1862. 

Headquarters  Army  of  New  Mexico, 

Battle  Ground  of  Yal  verde, 

February  22,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you,  for  the  information  of 
the  -President,  that  1 encountered  the  enemy  at  this  point  (6  miles 
above  Fort  Craig)  in  force  at  11  o’clock  yesterday  morning,  and  after 
one  of  the  most  severely-contested  actions-,  lasting  until  5 p.  m.,  the 


506 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[CiiAr.  XXY. 


enemy  was  driven  from  the  field  with  a loss,  as  estimated,  of  4 captains 
of  the  Regular  Army  and  some  300  killed  and  wounded,  and  the  cap 
ture  of  his  entire  field  battery,  the  disabling  of  one  24-pounder,  and 
the  abandonment  of  another  in  the  river.  We  have  but  few  prisoners ; 
among  them  is  Capt.  William  H.  Rossell,  of  the  Tenth  Infantry. 

The  enemy  had  upon  the  field  about  3,500  men,  l,20p  of  whom  were 
old  regulars.  We  never  had  more  than  1,500  engaged.  For  the  first 
time,  perhaps,  on  record  batteries  were  charged  and  taken  at  the 
muzzle  of  double-barreled  shot-guns,  thus  illustrating  the  spirit,  valor, 
and  invincible  determination  of  Texas  troops.  Nobly  have  they  emu 
lated  the  fame  of  their  San  Jacinto  ancestors. 

Our  loss  was  severe — 10  killed,  including  Maj.  S.  A.  Lockridge,  ©t 
the  Fifth  Regiment,  and  Capt.  M.  Heuvel,  of  the  Fourth.  I have  no 
reports  of  the  wounded,  but  I think  100  will  cover  it. 

Before  closing  this  report  it  is  especially  due  to  Col.  Thomas  Green, 
of  the  Fifth,  to  say  that,  in  consequence  of  severe  and  prolonged  illness 
and  weakness  resulting  from  it,  I could  only  keep  my  saddle  until 
o’clock,  and  at  that  hour  I relinquished  to  him  the  full  direction  of 
active  operations.  His  coolness  under  the  heaviest  fire  and  intrepidity 
under  the  most  trying  circumstances  are  sufficiently  attested  by  the 
results.  I cannot  commend  Colonel  Green  too  highly  to  the  favorable 
consideration  of  the  Executive. 

Where  so  much  gallantry  was  displayed  I cannot,  before  reaching 
the  reports  of  commanders,  particularize  individuals. 

It  will  be  necessary,  to  secure  our  purpose,  to  re-enforce  me  largely 
from  Texas  at  as  early  a day  as  possible.  The  force  we  had  to  contend 
against  amounted  to  near  6,000  men. 

I beg  leave,  m conclusion,  to  bring  to  your  notice  the  intelligence 
and  valor  of  the  members  of  my  staff,  Maj.  A.  M.  Jackson,  assistant 
adj utant- general ; Maj.  R.  T.  Brownrigg,  commissary  of  subsistence; 
Lieutenant  Ochiltree,  aide-de-camp,  and  Col.  W.  L.  Robards,  Major 
Magoffin,  and  Capt.  J.  Dwyer,  volunteer  aides. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  H.  SIBLEY, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Ya. 


P.  S.— Lieut.  Col.  J.  S.  Sutton,  of  the  Seventh  Regiment  (Col.  Will 
iam  Steele’s),  in  command  of  his  battalion,  and  Capt.  Willis  L.  Lang 
of  the  Fifth,  greatly  distinguished  themselves,  and  were  both  severely 
wounded;  and  I should  not  omit  Lieut.  D.  M.  Bass,  of  Captain  LangY 
company,  who  was  also  severely  wounded  in  front  of  the  charge  lead 
ing  the  Lancers  upon  the  enemy. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  H.  SIBLEY, 
Brigadier- Genera  l. 


Headquarters  Army  of  New  Mexico, 

Fort  Bliss , Tex.,  May  4,  1862. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  Sec 
retary  of  War,  the  operations  of  this  army  during  the  months  of  Febi 
ruary,  March,  and  April,  ultimo : 

This  report  is  made  to  cover  the  whole  campaign,  for  the  reason  tha 


hap.  XXI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  VALVERDE,  N.  MEX.  507 

ae  special  reports  of  the  various  commanders,  herewith  inclosed,  enter 
; efficiently  into  detail  to  elucidate  the  various  actions  in  which  the 
i coops  were  engaged  during  the  campaign. 

It  is  due  to  the  brave  soldiers  I have  had  the  honor  to  command  to 
remise  that  from  its  first  inception  the  “ Sibley  brigade”  has  encoun 
ered  difficulties  in  its  organization  and  opposition  and  distaste  to  the 
ervice  required  at  its  hands  which  no  other  troops  have  met  with. 

From  misunderstandings,  accidents,  deficiency  of  arms,  &c.,  instead 
f reaching  the  field  of  its  operations  early  in  September,  as  was  antich 
•ated,  I found  myself  at  this  point  as  late  as  the  middle  of  January, 
862,  with  only  two  regiments  and  a half,  poorly  armed,  thinly  clad, 
nd  almost  destitute  of  blankets.  The  ranks  were  becoming  daily 
binned  by  those  two  terrible  scourges  to  an  army  small-pox  and  pneu- 
aonia.  Not-  a dollar  of  quartermaster’s  funds  was  on  hand  or  ever  had 
>een  to  supply  the  daily  and  pressing  necessities  of  the  service,  and 
he  small  means  of  this  sparse  section  had  been  long  consumed  by  the 
orce  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Baylor,  so  that  the 
redit  of  the  Government  was  not  as  available  a resource  as  it  might 
otherwise  have  been. 

Having  established  a general  hospital  at  Dona  Ana,  I determined  to 
aove  forward  with  the  force  at  hand.  Accordingly,  during  the  first 
reek  in  January  [February?  ],  the  advance  was  put  in  march  for  old  Fort 
Lhorn;  thence  on  the  7th  of  February  the  movement  was  continued  to 
} i,  point  7 miles  below  Fort  Craig,  where  the  Santa  Fe  papers  boasted 
vq  were  to  be  met  and  overwhelmed  by  Canby’s  entire  army. 

On  February  16  a reconnaissance  in  force  was  pushed  to  within  a 
uile  of  the  fort  and  battle  offered  on  the  open  plain.  The  challenge 
vas  disregarded,  and  only  noticed  by  the  sending  out  of  a few  well- 
nounted  men  to  watch  our  movements.  The  forces  of  the  enemy  were 
-cept  well  concealed  in  the  bosque  (or  grove)  above  the  fort  and  within 
nts  walls. 

The  reconnaissance  proved  the  futility  of  assaulting  the  fort  in  front 
vith  our  light  metal,  and  that  our  only  hope  of  success  was  to  force 
he  enemy  to  an  open-field  fight.  It  was  accordingly  determined  by  a 
>artial  retrograde  movement  to  cross  the  Bio  Grande  to  the  east  bank, 
urn  the  fort,  and  force  a battle  for  the  recrossing.  To  do  this  involved, 
irst,  the  hazardous  necessity  of  crossing  a treacherous  stream  in  full 
dew  of  the  fort;  second,  to  make  a “dry  camp”  immediately  opposite 
md  remote  from  the  fort,  only  a mile  and  a half,  and  the  next  day  to 
ight  our  first  battle.  The  enemy  seemed  to  have  been  so  confounded 
)y  the  boldness  and  eccentricity  of  these  movements  that  the  first  was 
iccomplished  without  molestation,  save  a demonstration  on  the  after- 
mon  of  the  20th,  as  we  were  forming  our  camp  by  the  crossing,  of  some 
3,500  infantry  and  cavalry,  with  the  purpose  apparently  of  making  an 
issault  upon  our  lines.  Here  the  spirit  and  courage  of  our  men  were 
evidenced  by  the  alacrity  shown  in  getting  into  line  to  confront  the 
memy.  A few  rounds  from  our  well-directed  guns,  under  the  manage- 
nent  of  Captain  Teel,  Lieutenants  Biley  and  Woods,  checked  his  ad- 
vance and  drove  him  to  the  cover  of  his  sand-revetted  mud  walls. 

It  is  proper  to  state  here  that  these  operations,  approved  by  me,  were 
conducted  by  Col.  Thomas  Green,  of  the  Fifth  Begiment,  the  state  of 
my  health  having  confined  me  to  the  ambulance  for  several  days  pre- 
vious. 

On  the  morning  of  fhe  21st,  considering  that  the  impending  battle 
must  decide  the  question  at  issue,  though  still  very  weak,  I took  the 
saddle  at  early  dawn  to  direct  in  person  the  movement.  Green’s  regi- 


508 


[Chap.  XXI. 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  AR1Z. 

ment.  with  a battalion  of  the  Seventh,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sutton 
and  Captain  TeeFs  battery,  were  ordered  to  make  a strong,  threatening 
demonstration  on  the  fort,  while  Scurry,  with  the  Fourth,  well  flanked 
by  Pyron’s  command  on  the  left,  should  feel  his  way  cautiously  to  the 
river. 

This  movement  was  unfortunately  delayed  by  the  loss  during  the 
night,  by  careless  herding,  of  100  mules  of  the  baggage  train  of  the 
h ourth  Regiment.  Father  than  the  plan  should  be  defeated  a number 
of  wagons  were  abandoned,  containing  the  entire  kits,  blankets,  books 
and  papers  of  this  regiment,  and,  meanwhile,  what  was  left  of  the  trains 
was  kept  in  motion  over  the  sand  hills,  which  the  enemy  had  deemed 
impossible. 

On  reaching  the  river  bottom  at  Valverde  it  was  ascertained  that  the 
enemy,  anticipating  our  movement,  had  thrown  a large  force  of  in- 
fantry and  cavalry  up  the  river  to  dispute  the  water  with  us.  Pyron  im- 
mediately engaged  him  with  his  small  force  of  250  men,  and  gallantly 
held  his  ground  against  overwhelming  odds  until  the  arrival  of  Scurry 
with  the  Fourth  Eegiment  and  Lieutenant  Riley’s  battery  of  light  how- 
itzers. 

At  12  m.,  the  action  becoming  warm  and  the  enemy  evidently  receiv- 
ing large  re-enforcements,  I ordered  Green’s  regiment  and  TeeFs*"  battery 
to  the  front.  These  in  the  course  of  an  hour  gallantly  entered  into  ac- 
tion and  the  battle  became  general.  Subsequently  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Sutton,  with  his  battalion,  was  ordered  forward  from  the  rear  and  did 
right  good  service,  leading  his  men  even  to  the  cannon’s  mouth. 

At  1.30  p.  in.,  having  become  completely  exhausted,  and  finding  myself 
no  longer  able  to  keep  the  saddle,  I sent  my  aides  and  other  staff  officers 
to  report  to  Colonel  Green.  His  official  report  attests  the  gallantry  of 
their  bearing  and  his  final  success,  resulting  in  the  capture  of  their  bat- 
tery and  driving  the  enemy  in  disorder  from  the  field,  and  thus  evi- 
dencing his  own  intrepidity  and  the  indomitable  courage  of  all  engaged. 

From  information  derived  from  reliable  sources,  the  forces  opposed 
to  us  could  not  have  been  less  than  5,000  men,  with  a reserve  of  3,000 
at  the  fort.  Ours  did  not  exceed  1,750  on  the  field,  viz : the  Fourth 
Regiment,  600 ; Fifth,  600;  Seventh,  300;  and  Pvron’s  command  (of 
Second  Mounted  Regiment  Rifles),  250.  This  signal  victory  should  have 
resulted  in  the  capture  of  the  fort,  as  fresh  troops  had  been  brought  for- 
ward to  pursue  and  follow  the  discomfited  column  of  the  enemy.  A fla°* 
of  truce  was  opportunely  dispatched  by  the  Federal  commander  before 
he  reached  the  gates  of  his  fort,  and  which  was  for  two  hours  supposed 
by  our  troops  to  be  a proposition  to  surrender. 

This  flag  had  for  its  object  the  burying  of  the  dead  and  removal  of 
their  wounded ; and  I regret  to  state  here,  for  the  sake  of  old  associa- 
tions, that,  under  this  flag  and  another  sent  next  day,  the  enemy,  a vailing 
himself  of  our  generosity  and  confidence  in  his  honor,  not  only  loaded 
his  wagons  with  arms  picked  up  on  the  battle-field,  but  sent  a force  up 
and  actually  succeeded  in  recovering  from  the  river  one  24-pounder 
which  had  been  left  in  our  hands.  Even  a guidon  and  a flag,  taken  in 
the  same  way,  under  the  cover  of  night,  and  a white  flag  were  boast- 
ing’1^ pointed  to,  in  an  interview  under  a flag  of  truce  between  one  of 
my  aides  and  the  Federal  commander  at  the  fort,  as  trophies  of  the 
fight. 

The  burying  of  the  dead  and  care  of  the  wounded  occasioned  a delay 
of  two  days  on  the  field,  thus  leaving  us  wflth.  but  five  days’  scant 
rations.  In  this  dilemma  the  question  arose  whether  to  assault  the 
fort  in  this  crippled  condition  or  move  rapidly  forward  up  the  river, 


-Ur.  XXL]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  VAL VERDE,  N.  MEX.  509 

here  supplies  of  breadstuffs  and  meat  could  be  procured.  The  latter 
)urse,  in  a council  of  war,  was  adopted. 

Depositing  our  sick  at  Socorro,  30  miles  above  Fort  Craig,  the  march 
as  uninterruptedly  made  to  Albuquerque,  where,  notwithstanding  the 
estruetion  by  the  enemy  of  large  supplies  by  fire,  ample  subsistence  was 
3cured.  A very  considerable  quantity  of  supplies  and  ammunition  was 
iso  obtained  at  Cubero,  a temporary  post  60  miles  west  of  Albuquerque. 
>ther  supplies  were  also  taken  at  Santa  F6,  and  upon  the  whole  we  had 
sufficiency  for  some  three  months. 

It  is  due  to  the  Fourth  Regiment  to  mention  at  this  place  an  action 
f devotion  and  self-sacrifice  worthy  of  high  praise,  and  the  more  com- 
lendable  because  they  are  Texans. 

In  the  action  at  Yalverde  many  of  their  horses  were  killed,  thus  leav- 
ag  them  half  foot  and  half  mounted.  The  proposition  being  made  to 
hem  to  dismount  the  whole  regiment,  without  a dissenting  voice,  a 
avalry  regiment,  which  had  proudly  flaunted  its  banner  before  the 
nerny  on  the  20th,  took  the  line  of  march  on  the  24th  a strong  and 
eliable  regiment  of  infantry. 

Having  secured  all  the  available  stores  in  and  about  Albuquerque 
nd  dispatched  Maj.  Charles  L.  Pyron  with  his  command  to  Santa  Fe  to 
ecure  such  as  might  be  found  there,  I determined  to  make  a strong 
lemonstration  on  Fort  Union. 

With  this  view  Col.  William  R.  Scurry,  with  the  Fourth  and  the  bat- 
alion  of  Colonel  Steele’s  regiment,  under  Maj.  Powhatan  Jordan,  was 
>ushed  forward  in  the  direction  of  Gallisteo,  while  Colonel  Green,  with 
iis  regiment  (Fifth),  being  somewhat  crippled  in  transportation,  was 
,ield  for  a few  days  in  hand  to  check  any  movement  from  Fort  Craig. 

Meanwhile  the  enemy  (having  received  re-enforcements  at  Fort  Union 
>f  950  men  from  Pike’s  Peak,  on  or  about  March  12)  took  the  initiative 
ind  commenced  a rapid  march  on  Santa  Fe. 

Major  Pyron,  re-enforced  by  four  companies  of  the  Fifth  Regiment, 
mder  Major  Shropshire,  receiving  notice  of  this  movement,  advanced 
it  once  to  meet  him  on  the  high  road  between  Santa  F6  and  Fort  Union. 

On  March  26th  a sharp  skirmish  ensued,  described  in  detail  by  that 
officer,  wherein  many  acts  of  daring  heroism  were  enacted.  The  company 
)fuBrigandes”  (independent  volunteers),  under  the  command  of  Capt. 
John  Phillips,  is  said  to  have  done  good  service.  One  of  their  number, 
Mr.  Thomas  Cator,  was  killed  and  2 wounded.  On  this  occasion,  as  on 
svery  previous  one,  this  company  showed  a devotedness  to  the  cause 
which  has  elevated  them  and  inspired  confidence  throughout  the  army. 
Colonel  Scurry  reached  the  scene  of  action  at  daylight  next  morning, 
and  the  next  day  fought  the  battle  of  Glorieta,  driving  the  enemy  from 
the  field  with  great  loss. 

His  report  is  respectfully  referred  to  for  the  details  of  this  glorious 
action.  Pending  this  action  I was  on  my  route  to  Santa  F6,  in  rear  of 
,Green’s  regiment,  which  had,  meanwhile,  been  put  in  march  for  that 
place,  where,  on  my  arrival,  I found  the  whole  exultant  army  assembled. 
The  sick  and  wounded  had  been  comfortably  quartered  and  attended; 
the  loss  of  clothing  and  transportation  had  been  made  up  from  the 
enemy’s  stores  and  confiscations,  and,  indeed,  everything  done  which 
should  have  been  done. 

Many  friends  were  found  in  Santa  Fe  who  had  been  in  durance. 
Among  the  rest  General  William  Pelham,  who  had  but  recently  been 
released  from  a dungeon  in  Fort  Union. 

' After  the  occupancy  of  the  capital  of  the  Territory  for  nearly  a month 
from  the  time  of  our  first  advance  upon  it,  the  forage  and  supplies  ob- 


510 


[Chap.  XXL 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 

tamable  there  having  become  exhausted,  it  was  determined  to  occupy 
with  the  whole  army,  the  village  of  Manzano,  intermediate  between 
T ort  Union,  Albuquerque,  and  Fort  Craig,  and  securing  as  a line  of 
communication  the  road  to  Fort  Stanton. 

This  plan  was  disconcerted,  however,  by  the  rapid  and  continuous 
expresses  from  Albuquerque,  urging  the  necessity  of  re-enforcements 
to  hold  the  place  (the  depot  of  all  our  supplies)  against  the  advancing 
forces  of  Canby  from  Fort  Craig. 

The  entire  force  was  accordingly  moved  by  forced  marches  in  the 
direction  of  Albuquerque,  arriving  too  late  to  encounter  the  enemv,  but 
time  enough  to  secure  our  limited  supplies  from  the  contingency  of  cap- 

in  our  straightened  circumstances  the  question  now  arose  in  myi 
imnd  whether  to  evacuate  the  country  or  take  the  desperate  chances 
of  fighting  the  enemy  in  his  stronghold  (Union),  for  scant  rations  at  the 
best.  The  course  adopted  was  deemed  the  wisest. 

On  the  morning  ot  April  12  the  evacuation  commenced  by  the  cross- 
ing of  Scurry’s  (Fourth)  regiment,  the  battalion  of  Steele’s  regiment, 
Pyron’s  command,  and  a part  of  the  artillery,  by  ferry  and  ford,  to  the 
west  bank  of  the  river.  Green’s  regiment  was  ordered  to  follow ; but 
finding  the  ford  to  be  difficult,  he  encamped  for  the  night  on  the  east 
bank,  hoping  to  be  able  on  the  ensuing  morning  to  find  a better  ford 
lower  down  the  river. 

Accordingly  on  the  next  day  that  officer  proceeded  with  his  regiment 
as  low  down  as  Peralta,  opposite  Los  Lunas,  the  point  at  which  I had 
halted  the  balance  of  the  army  to  await  his  arrival. 

In  the  mean  time  Canby,  having  formed  a junction  with  a large  force 
from  Fort  Union,  debouched  through  a canon  after  night-fall  to  the 
neighborhood  of  the  river,  taking  a commanding  position  in  close  prox- 
imity to  Green’s  camp,  and  in  the  morning  opened  a furious,  but  harm- 
less, cannonade. 

On  being  notified  of  the  critical  situation  of  this  detached  portion  of 
the  army  the  whole  disposable  force  at  Los  Lunas,  reserving  a sufficient 
guard  for  the  train,  was  dispatched  to  its  relief.  The  passage  of  the 
river  by  this  force  and  the  artillery  was  successfully  effected,  under  the 
direction  of  Colonel  Scurry. 

Following  shortly  after  with  a portion  of  my  staff  to  assume  the  im- 
mediate command,  and  having  crossed  the  river,  I was  notified  by 
several  officers  who  had  preceded  me  some  hundred  yards  of  the  rapid 
approach  of  a large  number  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry.  Finding  myself 
completely  cut  off,  I had  no  other  alternative  than  to  recross  the  river 
amid  a shower  of  balls.  The  day  was  occupied  at  Peralta  in  ineffectual 
firing  on  both  sides. 

Alter  night-fall  I gave  orders  for  the  recrossing  of  the  whole  army  to 
the  west  bank  of  the  river,  which  was  effected  without  interruption  or 
casualty,  and  on  the  next  morning  the  march  down  the  river  was  re- 
sumed. The  enemy  followed  on  the  opposite  bank,  and  both  armies 
encamped  in  full  view  of  each  other,  the  river  alone  intervening. 

The  transportation  and  artillery  had  by  this  time  become  such  an 
incumbrance  on  the  heavy,  sandy  road,  without  forage  or  grass,  that  the 
abandonment  of  one  or  the  other  became  inevitable.  My  original  plan 
had  been  to  push  on  by  the  river  route  in  advance  of  the  enemy,  having 
the  start  of  him  two  whole  days  from  Albuquerque  to  Fort  Craig,  attack 
the  weak  garrison,  and  demolish  the  fort.  This  plan  was  defeated  by 
Colonel  Green  not  finding  a crossing  of  the  river  at  a convenient  point. 

Colonels  Green  and  Sctirry,  with  several  other  practical  officers,  here 


IAP.XXI.]  engagement  at  valverde,  n.  mex.  511 

line  forward  and  proposed,  in  order  to  avoid  the  contingency  of  an- 
lier  general  action  in  our  then  crippled  condition,  that  a route  through 
ie  mountains,  avoiding  Fort  Craig  and  striking  the  river  below  that 
Dint,  should  be  pursued,  they  undertaking  with  their  respective  com- 
ands  to  push  the  artillery  through  at  all  hazards  and  at  any  expend- 
ure  of  toil  and  labor.  Maj.  Bethel  Coopwood,  who  had  familiarized 
[mself  with  the  country,  undertook  the  difficult  and  responsible  task 
T guiding  the  army  through  this  mountainous,  trackless  waste. 

The  arguments  presented  in  favor  of  this  course  were  potent.  Besides 
aving  the  advantage  of  grass  and  a firm  road,  with  very  little  differ - 
ace  in  distance,  the  enemy  would  be  completely  mystified,  as  after  - 
ards  proved  to  be  the  case.  Accordingly,  all  the  wagons  which  could 
ossibly  be  dispensed  with  were  ordered  to  be  abandoned  on  the  ground, 
3ven  days’  provisions  to  be  i>acked  on  mules,  and  the  entire  force  put 
1 march  after  night-fall.  The  route  was  a difficult  and  most  hazardous 
ne,  both  in  respect  to  its  practicability  and  supply  of  water.  The 
iaccessful  accomplishment  of  the  march  not  only  proved  the  sagacity 
f our  guide,  but  the  pledge  of  Colonel  Scurry  that  the  guns  should  be 
,ut  over  every  obstacle,  however  formidable,  by  his  regiment,  was 
obly  fulfilled.  Not  a murmur  escaped  the  lips  of  these  brave  boys, 
descents  into  and  ascents  out  of  the  deepest  canons,  which  a single 
orseman  would  have  sought  for  miles  to  avoid,  were  undertaken  and 
ccomplisked  with  a cheerfulness  and  ability  which  were  the  admira- 
ion  and  praise  of  the  whole  army.  Thus  in  ten  days,  with  seven  days’ 
ations,  a point  on  the  river  where  supplies  had  been  ordered  forward 
Vas  reached.  The  river,  which  was  rising  rapidly,  was  safely  crossed 
o the  east  bank,  under  the  direction  of  Colonel  Green,  and  at  this 
lornent,  I am  happy  to  repeat,  the  whole  force  is  comfortably  quar- 
tered in  the  villages  extending  from  Dona  Ana  to  this  place. 

My  chief  regret  in  making  this  retrograde  movement  was  the  neces- 
ity  of  leaving  hospitals  at  Santa  Fe,  Albuquerque,  and  Socorro. 
Everything,  however,  was  provided  for  the  comfort  of  the  sick,  and 
efficient  funds,  in  Confederate  paper,  provided  them  to  meet  every 
vant,  if  it  be  negotiated.  It  has  been  almost  impossible  to  procure 
pecie  upon  any  terms.  One  thousand  dollars  is  all  I have  been  able 
o procure  for  the  use  of  hospitals  and  for  secret  service.  The  ricos, 
r wealthy  citizens  of  New  Mexico,  had  been  completely  drained  by  the 
federal  powers,  and,  adhering  to  them,  had  become  absolute  followers 
•f  their  army  for  dear  life  and  their  invested  dollars.  Politically  they 
iave  no  distinct  sentiment  or  opinion  on  the  vital  question  at  issue, 
fower  and  interest  alone  control  the  expression  of  their  sympathies. 
[Cwo  noble  and  notable  exceptions  to  this  rule  were  found  in  the 
brothers  Bafael  and  Manuel  Armijo,  the  wealthiest  and  most  respect- 
ive native  merchants  of  New  Mexico.  The  latter  had  been  pressed 
lito  the  militia,  and  was  compulsorily  present  in  the  action  at  Yal- 
rerde.  On  our  arrival  at  Albuquerque  they  came  forward  boldly  and 
protested  their  sympathy  with  our  cause,  placing  their  stores,  contain- 
ng  goods  amounting  to  $200,000,  at  the  disposal  of  my  troops. 
f When  the  necessity  for  evacuating  the  country  became  inevitable, 
hese  two  gentlemen  abandoned  luxurious  homes  and  well-filled  store- 
houses to  join  their  fate  to  the  Southern  Confederacy.  I trust  they 
vill  not  be  forgotten  in  the  final  settlement. 

In  concluding  this  report,  already  extended  beyond  my  anticipations, 
t is  proper  that  I should  express  the  conviction,  determined  by  some 
experience,  that,  except  for  its  political  geographical  position,  the  Ter- 
ritory of  New  Mexico  is  not  worth  a quarter  of  the  blood  and  treasure 


512 


[Chap.  XXI. 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 

expended  in  its  conquest.  Asa  field  of  military  operations  it  possesses 
not  a single  element,  except  in  the  multiplicity  of  its  defensible  posi- 
tions. The  indispensable  element,  food,  cannot  be  relied  on.  During 
the  last  year,  and  pending  the  recent  operations,  hundreds  of  thousands 
of  sheep  have  been  driven  off  by  the  Navajoes.  Indeed,  such  were  the 
complaints  of  the  people  in  this  respect  that  I had  determined,  as  good 
policy,  to  encourage  private  enterprises  against  that  tribe  and  the 
Apaches,  and  to  legalize  the  enslaving  of  them. 

As  for  the  results  of  the  campaign,  I have  only  to  say  that  we  have 
beaten  the  enemy  in  every  encounter  and  against  large  odds:  that  from 
being  the  worst  armed  my  forces  are  now  the  best  armed  in  the  country. 
We  reached  this  point  last  winter  in  rags  and  blanketless.  The  army 
is  now  well  clad  and  well  supplied  in  other  respects.  The  entire  cam- 
paign has  been  prosecuted  without  a dollar  in  the  quartermaster’s  de- 
partment, Captain  Harrison  not  having  yet  reached  this  place.  But 
sir,  I cannot  speak  encouragingly  for  the  future,  my  troops  having 
manifested  a dogged,  irreconcilable  detestation  of  the  country  and 
the  people.  They  have  endured  much,  suffered  much,  and  cheerfully* 
but  the  prevailing  discontent,  backed  up  by  the  distinguished  valor 
displayed  on  every  field,  entitles  them  to  marked  consideration  and 
indulgence. 

These  considerations,  in  connection  with  the  scant  supply  of  pro- 
visions and  the  disposition  of  our  own  citizens  in  this  section  to  de- 
preciate our  currency,  may  determine  me,  without  waiting  for  instruc- 
tions, to  move  by  slow  marches  down  the  country,  both  for  the  purpose 
of  remounting  and  recruiting  our  thinned  ranks. 

Trusting  that  the  management  of  this  more  than  difficult  campaign, 
intrusted  to  me  by  the  Government,  may  prove  satisfactory  to  the 
President,  I have  the  honor,  general,  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  H.  SIBLEY, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Richmond , Va. 


No.  9. 

Report  of  Maj.  Charles  L.  Byron , Second  Texas  Cavalry. 

Socorro,  N.  Mex.,  February  27,  1862. 

Major  : On  the  morning  of  the  21st  instant  I left  our  camp,  opposite 
Fort  Craig,  with  180  men  of  my  command,  under  Captains  [JamesJ 
Walker  and  [Isaac  C.]  Stafford,  Lieutenant  Nicholson,  of  Captain  Coop- 
wood’s  Spy  Company,  and  Lieutenant  [William  G.]  Jett,  Company  B, 
Second  Regiment  Mounted  Volunteers,  to  reconnoiter  the  road  leading  to 
the  river  near  V alverde.  Upon  reaching  the  river  I could  see  the  water, 
with  none  of  the  enemy  intervening.  I immediately  dispatched  a note 
to  the  general  commanding,  stating  the  road  was  clear  and  the  water 
in  sight,  and  proceeded  leisurely  to  the  river  to  water  our  horses,  they 
having  been  over  twenty-four  hours  without  water. 

When  I reached  the  woods  I discovered  a body  of  cavalry,  which  I 
supposed  to  be  about  four  companies,  and  immediately  gave  chase,  they 
withdrawing  to  my  left.  I followed  until  reaching  the  bank  of  a slough 
in  the  bottom,  when  I found  myself  in  front  of  a large  force  of  ail  arms. 
Immediately  my  men  were  formed  along  the  bank,  when  the  action 


Chap.  XXI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  VALVERDE,  N.  HEX. 


513 


commenced,  and  for  over  one  hour,  by  the  courage  and  determmation 
of  the  men,  I was  enabled  to  maintain  the  position  m the  unequa 
struggle,  when  I was  relieved  by  the  Fourth  Begiment  Texas  Mounted 
Volunteers,  under  the  command  of  Lieut.  Col.  W.  B.  Scurry. 

For  nearly  two  hours  our  joint  commands  held  our  position  against 
©dds  of  three  to  one,  checking  every  attempt  to  outflank  us  and  ?keck- 
in p-  every  effort  to  drive  us  back.  The  arrival  of  Teel  s battery  of  aitil- 
lerv  was  the  first  re-enforcement  we  received,  but  it  was  soon  followed 
bv  Major  Lockridge’s  battalion,  of  the  Fifth  Begiment  Texas  Mounted 
Volunteers,  and  about  1 o’clock  Colonel  Green  reached  the  field  and 

t0  Late  hi ^he^afternoon  a general  charge  was  made  along  our  line,  by 
which  a battery  of  artillery,  consisting  of  six  guns,  was  taken  and  their 

^Following  rapidly  up  our  successes,  the  enemy  were  driven  back  at 
all  points;  and  the  field  of  Valverde  was  won. 

It  is  proper  to  state  that  all  the  officers  and  men  of  my  command 
behaved  in  the  most  gallant  manner,  and  where  ad  were  equally  brave 
it  would  be  invidious  to  particularize.  It  is  sufficient  to  say  that  it 
was  a day  on  which  deeds  of  personal  valor  were  continually  occurring. 

I cannot  consent  to  close  this  report  without  bearing  my  testimony 
to  the  gallant  bearing  and  personal  valor  of  Colonels  Green,  Scurrj, 
and  Sutton,  and  Majors  Eagnet  and  Lockndge,  and  others  equally 

courageous^  ^ to  be>  ^ yourS)  most  respectfully, 

C.  L.  FjlBUJN, 

Major  Second  Texas  Mounted  Rangers . 

Maj.  A.  M.  Jackson,  ^ . 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Army  of  Lew  Mexico. 


FTo.  10. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  William  R.  Scurry , Fourth  Texas  Cavalry. 

Valverde,  N.  Mex.,  February  22,  1862. 

Major  : Early  on  the  morning  of  yesterday,  while  the  army  was 
encamped  on  the  east  side  of  the  Bio  Grande,  opposite  Fort  Craig,  I 
received  orders  to  march  with  my  command,  Fourth  Begiment  Texas 
Mounted  Volunteers,  and  take  possession  at  as  early  an  hour  as  practi- 
cable of  some  point  on  the  river  above  Fort  Craig  at  which  water  might 
be  obtained.  By  8 o’clock  the  regiment  took  up  the  line  ol  march, 
accompanied  by  Capt.  George  M.  Frazier,  of  Major  Pyron  s battalion, 
with  his  company  acting  as  guide  for  the  command.  Supposing  that  we 
were  the  advance  of  the  army,  to  prevent  surprise  I ordered  Major  H. 
W.  Bagnet  to  take  the  advance,  with  four  companies  and  Captain  I ra- 
zier’s  company,  throwing  out  at  the  same  time  front  and  flank  patrols. 
In  a short  time  I learned  that  Major  Pyron,  with  180  men,  was  m our 
advance.  Aware  of  the  great  vigilance  of  that  active  officer,  1 recalled 
Maior  Bagnet  and  reunited  the  regiment.  A report  was  received  trom 
Maior  Pyron  that  the  road  was  clear  of  the  enemy  and  the  river  m 
sight ; but  in  a short  time  a second  message  was  received,  through  Capt. 
John  Phillips,  from  the  major,  informing  me  that  large  masses  ot  the 

33  R R— VOL  IX 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


514  

* [Ciiai\  XXL 

butM^I  was 'fearful  that  he 'would  bo  “ attack’  his  fo™e  was 

ISsi^l 

enemy  now  known  to  be  near  5 000  strong  °r  1positlon  m front  of  an 
not  over  700  in  number  immediat.U  n g’  whll£our  »™  forces  were 
Frazier  joined  thc“ommand7n wwiJi upon  reaching  the  field  Captain 

service  during  tt°  remZd^r  of  The  day°  bel°nged’  Where  he  did  S-d 

SiifSii=SSSs?'« 

Seeing  his  situation,  1 ordered  Lieutenant  -Riler*  • , . . . 
to  ioin  him  and  assist  in  tni  • I , • lley>  wltb  hls  command, 

iPisiiiiiiS 

§S£7~IS|iSssg 

pSSSS'TsSSRfe5 

£?SfZL™,e  Kfi““  If  - “» Tl“  «»“ SS . a 

Bm^rnmrnm 

SsSSSSEi 


HAP.  XXI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  VALVEEDE,  N.  MEX. 


515 


oas  Just  before  sunset  Lieut.  Thomas  P.  Ochiltree,  of  General  Sib- 
ey’s  staff,  brought  an  order  to  prepare  for  a charge  all  along  the  line. 

All  prepared  for  its  prompt  execution,  and  when  the  words  Up 
,ovs,  and  at  them!”  were  given,  straight  at  their  battery  of  six  guns 
supported  by  columns  of  infantry  and  cavalry,  some  700  yards  in  front 
,f  our  position,  went  our  brave  volunteers,  unmindful  of  the  driving 
-form  of  grape  and  canister  and  musket  balls  sent  burling  around  them. 
With  yells  and  ringing  sbouts  they  dashed  on  and  on,  until  the  guns 
ivere  won  and  the  enemy  in  full  retreat  before  them.  After  carrying 
he  battery,  their  guns  were  turned  upon  themselves,  Captains  Harcle- 
nan  and  Walker  manning  those  on  the  right.  Lieutenant  Bagnet,  of 
Riley’s  battery,  being  on  the  ground,  I placed  one  gun  in  his  charge, 
manning  it  with  such  of  the  men  as  were  nearest,  lhe  rammer  being 
o-one,  a flag-staff  was  used  in  its  stead.  Captain  Teel  coming  up,  an 
effective  lire  was  kept  up  as  long  as  the  enemy  was  in  reach.  In  the 
mean  time  a most  timely  and  gallant  charge  was  made  by  Major  Bagnet 
from  our  left,  thus  effecting  a favorable  diversion  at  the  moment  of  our 
charge  upon  their  battery.  This  charge  by  Major  Bagnet  and  his  com- 
mand was  characterized  by  desperate  valor.  , 

In  the  last  brilliant  and  successful  charge,  which  decided  the  fortunes 
of  the  day,  there  were  six  companies  of  the  Fourth  Begiment  lexas 
Mounted  Volunteers,  under  their  respective  captains,  Hardeman,  Oros- 
son,  [Charles  M.]  Lesueur,  [W.  W.]  Foard,  [Georgy  J.]  Hampton,  and 
[D  A 1 Nunn.  Besides  those,  I saw  Captains  [John  S.]  Shropshire, 
J.’g.I  Killough,  and  [H.  A.]  McPhaill,  of  the  Fifth  Begiment,  and 
Captain  Walker,  of  Major  Pyron’s  battalion.  . 

The  brave  and  lamented  Major  Lockridge,  of  the  Fifth  Begiment, 
fell  almost  at  the  muzzle  of  the  enemy’s  guns.  , , 

Major  Pyron  was  also  in  the  thickest  of  the  fray,  and  contributed 
much  by  his  example  to  the  success  of  the  charge,  as  did  also  Lieu- 
tenant Ochiltree,  of  the  general’s  staff. 

There  were  others  there  whom  I now  regret  my  inability  to  name. 
Where  all,  both  officers  and  men,  behaved  so  well  it  is  impossible  to 
say  who  is  the  most  deserving  of  praise.  The  enemy  retired  across 
the  river,  and  were  in  full  retreat  when  Major  Bagnet,  Captains  Shan- 
non,  Adair,  [W.  L.]  Alexander,  [Charles]  Buckholts,  and  Lieut.  A.  S. 
Thurmond  reached  the  field  with  their  companies,  mounted.  I asked 
and  obtained  permission  from  Colonel  Green  to  cross  the  river  with 
these  companies  to  pursue  the  flying  foe. 

When  the  head  of  the  column  reached  the  opposite  shore  we  were 
ordered  to  return.  Night  closed  in  on  the  hard-won  field  of  Malverde. 
This  brilliant  victory,  which,  next  to  Heaveu,  we  owe  to  the  heroic 
endurance  and  unfaltering  courage  of  our  volunteer  soldiers,  was  not 
won  without  loss.  Of  the  regiment  which  I have  the  honor  to  command 
there  were  8 killed  and  56  wounded,  2 of  which  were  mortal. 

It  affords  me  great  pleasure  to  be  able  to  bear  testimony  to  the  calm, 
cool,  and  discriminating  courage  of  Col.  Thomas  Green  during  the  fight. 
Maior  Pyron  also  deserves  great  credit  for  his  soldiery  bearing  from 
the  commencement  to  the  close  of  the  battle.  Of  the  general’s  staff, 
Major  Jackson  was  early  on  the  ground,  as  was  also  Major  Brownngg, 
Captain  Dwyer,  and  Lieutenant  Ochiltree,  actively  engaged  in  the  dis- 
charge of  the  duties  assigned  them.  Each  of  these  gentlemen  exhib- 
ited that  high  courage  which  I hope  will  ever  distinguish  the  officers  of 
the  army.  To  Majors  Jackson  and  Brownrigg  I am  under  obligations 
for  valuable  aid  in  the  early  part  of  the  action. 

It  is  due  to  the  adjutant  of  thi-s  regiment,  Ellsberry  B.  Lane,  that  I 


516 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 


should  not  close  this  report  without  stating  that  he  was  actively  and 
bravely  engaged  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties  on  horseback  until  his 
norse  tailed,  when,  taking  - 1 - j ’ ’ - - 


„ , 7 — a gun,  he  entered  the  ranks  of  Captain 

SeTay  COmpany’  and  did  duty  as  a private  during  the  remainder  of 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant 
T . , , „ 7 7 ^ W.  E.  SC  CEE  Y,  ’ 

* -Lieutenant- Colonel,  Comdg.  Fourth  Begt.  Texas  Mounted  Vols, 

A.  M.  Jackson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Army  of  New  Mexico. 


No.  11. 


Report  of  Maj.  Henry  W.  Ragnet,  Fourth  Texas  Cavalry. 

Camp  Valverde,  Army  of  New  Mexico, 

February  23,  1862. 

Major  : About  sunrise  on  the  21st  instant,  while  in  camp  opposite 
Port  Craig,  I was  ordered  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Scurry  to  take  four 
companies  of  the  Fourth  Texas  Mounted  Volunteers,  to  which  would  be 
added  Captain  Frazier’s  company,  from  Major  Pyron’s  battalion,  and 
inarch  as  an  advance  to  the  river  at  the  best  point  for  approachinsr  it 
above  the  fort,  supposed  to  be  about  6 miles  distant.  After  marching 
about  o miles  I was  ordered  to  halt  and  join  Lieutenant-Colonel  Scurry 
who  was  approaching  with  other  companies  of  the  regiment  and  Lieu- 
tenant Eiley’s  artillery. 

Our  course  was  then  changed  for  a nearer  point  on  the  river.  After 
a half-hour’s  march,  while  descending  a canon,  the  rapid  advance  of  the 
head  of  our  column  gave  notice  that  we  were  approaching  the  enemy 
and,  emerging  into  the  valley,  the  firing  of  skirmishers  told  that  Major 
Pyron,  who  had  been  marching  on  our  left  flank,  was  already  engaged 
with  the  enemy.  A half-mile  gallop  brought  us  within  range  of  the 
enemy  s artillery,  when  Lieutenant-Colonel  Scurry  ordered  us  to  dis- 
mount and  advance,  when  we  were  soon  within  range  of  their  small- 
arms,  and  took  position  on  the  right  of  Major  Pyron,  behind  a low 
bank,  about  9 a.  m. 

After  we  had  taken  this  position  about  half  an  hour  the  enemy  moved 
up  on  our  right,  with  the  evident  intention  of  flanking  us,  which  at  the 
would  have  been  fatal,  when  Lieutenant-Colonel  Scurrv,  dividing 
the  command,  assigned  that  position  to  me,  and  moved  up  to  the  posi- 
^1(TFu°CCUp^ed  ky  p}m  during  the  day,  and  checked  their  advance. 

Jn trooPs  at  this  time  with  me  were  Major  Pyron,  with  his  battalion 
of  180  men,  under  Captains  Walker,  Stafford,  and  Frazier,  and  Lieu- 
tenants Nicholson  and  Jett,  and  four  companies  of  the  Fourth  Eegi- 
ment,  under  Captains  [A.  J.]  Scarborough,  Buckholts,  Heuvel,  and 
Alexander. 

About  noon  one  piece  of  Captain  Teel’s  battery,  uuder  Lieutenant 
[James]  Bradford,  was  added  to  my  position,  which  did  good  service  until 
the  heavier  metal  of  the  enemy  silenced  it.  Soon  after  the  arrival  of  this 
gun  Major  Lockridge  arrived  with  three  companies  of  the  Fifth  Eegi- 
ment  Texas  Mounted  Volunteers,  uuder  Captains  [John  S.]  Shropshire, 
[CL  W.]  Campbell,  and  [Darnel  H.]  Ragsdale,  and  Major  Pyron,  and 
Lieutenant  Bradford’s  commands  were  withdrawn  to  the  right.  Major 


Chap.  XXI  ] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  VALVERDE,  N.  MEX. 


517 


Lockridge  called  my  attention  to  tlie  gun,  which  had  been  partly  dis- 
abled and  silenced,  on  our  left,  ajt  the  toot  of  the  mesa,  where  it  had 
been  placed  in  an  endeavor  to  disable  the  enemy’s  battery  on  the  west 
bank  of  the  river.  I ordered.  Company  B,  Fourth  Regiment,  Captain 
Scarborough,  to  the  rescue,  and  with  part  of  that  company,  under  their 
captain  and  Sergeant  Nelson,  of  Company  H,  Fourth  Regiment,  Cap- 
tain Alexander,  and  some  of  that  company,  I succeeded  in  drawing  the 
o-uii  by  hand  from  its  perilous  position  amid  the  hottest  cannonading 
on  that  part  of  the  held,  losing  only  1 man  killed  and  a few  wounded. 

The  horses  of  this  gun  had  nearly  all  been  killed  by  the  enemy’s 
artillery.  This  gun  was  then  used  by  three  of  Lieutenant  Riley’s  com- 
pany, assisted  by  a few  others,  until  I ordered  the  fire  discontinued  for 
want  of  gunners,  leaving  it  double-shotted,  to  await  an  anticipated 
charge  of  the  enemy.  The  enemy  threatened  us  in  such  great  numbers 
and  their  hre  was  so  heavy  that  Major  Lockridge  and  myself  each  sent 
messengers  to  Colonel  Green  for  re-enforcements  5 failing  to  get  which, 
Major  Lockridge  deemed  it  prudent  to  fall  back  to  a sand  bank,  about 
100  yards  in  our  rear,  which  was  done  by  companies,  after  the  artillery 
and  the  wounded  had  been  removed.  This  gave  us  a better  position, 
as  the  ground  was  somewhat  broken  in  front. 

The  section  of  Teel’s  artillery  was  now  withdrawn  to  the  right,  leav-  ^ 
ing  only  one  howitzer,  under  Lieutenant  Woods,  who  had  arrived  at  our 
new  position.  Lieutenant- Colonel  Sutton  now  arrived  on  the  held,  ap- 
proaching in  our  rear,  when  a messenger  was  dispatched  asking  that  he 
be  ordered  to  remain  by  us.  . 

He  soon  marched  up  to  the  right  and  then  returned.  Major  Lock- 
ridge now  told  me  that  we  were  to  move  up  and  join  the  forces  on  the 
right  for  a charge;  that  he  would  cover  any  movement  to  get  my  horses, 
which  were  on  the  left  and  rear.  Ordering  the  companies  of  the  Fourth 
Regiment  to  horse,  I soon  marched  up  on  the  right  in  the  rear  of  the 
rest  of  the  command,  dismounted,  and  ordering  the  companies  then 
with  me,  under  Captains  Buckholts,  Heuvel,  and  Alexander,  ot  the 
Fourth,  and  Captain  Ragsdale,  of  the  Fifth,  into  line  to  advance. 

Colonel  Greeu  rode  up  and  ordered  me  to  reserve  my  command  for 
a charge  as  cavalry.  No  sooner  were  we  mounted  than  an  order  came 
by  Major  Pyrou  to  move  down  on  the  left  and  menace  the  enemy,  now 
flanking  us  in  large  force.  Marching  down  to  within  600  yards  I dis- 
mounted my  command  under  cover,  when  I was  joined  by  Captain  Scar- 
borough, of  the  Fourth,  and  received  an  order  through  Captain  Dwyer 
to  charge  the  enemy.  _ _ , . 

Aligning  in  single  rank,  I charged  to  within  about  100  yards  of  the 
enemy’s  lines,  composed  of  infantry,  supported  by  cavalry  on  each  flank 
and  in  the  rear  and  by  artillery  on  their  right,  when,  looking  back, 
I saw  great  confusion  from  the  wounded  and  fallen  horses,  for  we  had 
aligned  and  advanced  under  the  heavy  fire  of  their  infantry  and  artil- 
lery. I thought  we  could  not  break  their  lines,  and  ordered  my  command 
to  fall  back  and  rally  at  the  sand  bank  which  we  had  left  on  our  rear 
and  left.  When  I had  arrived  at  the  sand  bank  I found  that  most  of 
my  command  had  passed  it  for  some  others  still  on  their  left,  and  that 
the  position  was  untenable,  as  the  enemy’s  artillery  now  raked  it.  I 
ordered  those  there  to  follow  those  yet  in  advance,  and,  rallying,  we 
could  return. 

Finding  Lieutenant  Woods,  with  one  howitzer,  uselessly  exposed 
under  the  enemy’s  fire,  I ordered  him  to  a position  between  the  enemy 
and  the  train,  to  protect  it  as  well ‘as  he  could,  and  ordering  such  of  my 
command  as  I met  to  join  in  the  action  on  the  right,  I galloped  down, 


518 


[Chai\  XXI 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX., 


N.  HEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


then  too  late,  however,  to  participate  in  that  brilliant  charge  whicl 
gave  us  tlie  victory.  h 

A few  moments  after  reaching  the  river  bank  Lieutenant  Oolone 
Scurry  asked  permission  of  Colonel  Green  to  cross  and  pursue  the  eneim 
with  some  fresh  companies  that  had  just  come  up.  which  permissioi 
being  granted,  I joined  with  my  command  who  were  present,  and  at 
the  head  of  our  column  gained  the  opposite  shore  we  were  orderec 
back.  Shortly  after  the  arrival  of  the  flag  of  truce  ended  the  battle  o 
Valverde  after  sunset. 


During  the  entire  day  my  position  on  the  left  was  under  a constant 
fire  of  the  enemy’s  heaviest  artillery,  and  their  small-arms,  whose 
longer  range  enabled  them  to  keep  out  of  our  small-arm  range.  WFeii 
they  threatened  an  advance  and  would  reach  our  aim  thev  were  re 
pulsed.  J 


The  gallant  Major  Lockridge,  of  the  Fifth,  while  in  command  of  the 
left,  won  the  admiration  of  all  who  saw  him,  and  whose  regrets  are 
now  mingled  with  those  of  his  other  friends  at  his  death.  The  brave 
Heuvel,  of  this  command,  who  fell  in  the  charge  he  had  so  impatiently 
waited  for,  added  another  to  the  list  of  our  gallant  dead  at  Valverde 
For  the  officers  and  privates  whom  I had  the  honor  to  command  on 
that  day  I can  well  say  that  they  have  never  faltered  in  their  dangerous 
duty ; and  for  those,  less  than  200,  whom  I led  to  the  charge  against 
more  than  eight  times  their  numbers,  together  with  artillery,  the  recital 
of  the  act  is  their  praise.  This  charge,  though  at  the  cost  of  nearly 
one-fifth  the  men  and  horses  in  killed  and  wounded,  succeeded  in  check- 
ing the  flank  movement  of  the  enemy  in  time  to  enable  the  charge 
which  won  the  day  to  be  made. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  W.  RAGNET, 

Major , Fourth  Regiment  Texas  Mounted  Volunteers. 

A.  M.  Jackson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Army  of  Few  Mexico. 


No.  12. 

Report  of  Col.  Thomas  Green , Fifth  Texas  Cavalry. 

Camp  Valverde,  N.  Mex., 

February  22,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  of  submitting  to  you  the  following  report  of 
the  battle  of  Valverde,  fought  on  yesterday  by  a part  of  the  brigade  of 
General  Sibley,  under  my  command  : 

While  in  the  act  of  turning  Fort  Craig,  on  the  east  side  of  the  Rio 
Grande,  Major  Pyron,  with  200  men,  was  sent  to  reconnoiter,  early  on 
the  morning  of  the  21st,  the  route  around  the  mesa,  north  of  the  fort, 
and  secure  a footing  on  the  river  above.  While  Major  Pyron  was  ap- 
proaching the  river  with  his  command  the  enemy  appeared  in  consider- 
able numbers  between  his  command  and  the  river  on  the  north  of  the 
mesa,  and  opened  on  him,  about  8 o’clock,  a heavy  fire  of  artillery  and 
small-arms.  The  gallant  Pyron,  with  his  brave  little  force,  kept  up  the 
unequal  contest  for  an  hour  or  two,  until  the  arrival  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Scurry  with  a part  of  his  regiment,  and  Lieutenant  Riley’s 
howitzer  battery.  Scurry  took  position  on  the  right  of  Pyron,  and  both 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  VALVERDE,  N.  MEX. 


519 


Chap.  XXI  ] 

UD  tUe  contest  and  maintained  their  position  behind  a low  line  of 
sand  h ills  About  this  time  one  section  of  Captain  Teel’s  battery  came 
nn  and  took  position  and  replied  to  the  fire  of  the  enemy. 

1 At  12  o’clock,  while,  under  the  orders  of  the  general,  I was  threaten- 
in- the  fort  on  the  south  side  of  the  mesa,  I received  his  orders  to  move 
nlf  ,vjti,  an  I1IV  disposable  force,  to  the  support  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Scurry  and  Major  Pyron,  after  leaving  a sufficient  force  to  protect  the 
train  which  was  then  moving  from  our  late  camp  around  the  mesa,  to 
the  battle  ground,  and  which  was  stretched  out  for  several  miles.  Our 
rain^ was threatened  by  a considerable  body  of  troops  of  the  enemy, 
who  made  their  appearance  on  the  mesa.  Detaching  Lieutenant-Colo- 
nel Sutton’s  command  and  a detachment  from  my  own  regiment 
protect  the  train,  I moved  up,  with  as  much  speed  as  practicable,  with 
d°ht  companies  of  my  regiment,  sending  , or  ward  Major  Lockridge, 
with  the  two  companies  of  lancers,  under  Captains  Lang  and  [Jeiome 
B.l  McCown.  My  companies  were  placed  m the  line  of  battle,  between 
p'yron  on  the  left  and  Scurry  on  the  right,  except  three,  which  were 
sent  by  me,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  [H.  C.]  McNeill,  to  drive  the 
enemy  from  the  north  point  of  the  mesa,  where  they  were  annoying  oui 

»p » 

by  the  orders  of  the  general  took  command  of  the  forces  present, 
enemy  during  the  day,  and,  with  little  intermission,  kept  up  a brisk 
cannonade  upon  us,  to  which  our  6-pounders,  under  Captain  Teel,  re- 
plied with  effect.  The  enemy  repeatedly  advanced  with  their  skir- 
mishers to  near  our  lines,  killing  many  of  our  horses  tiedm  the  rear . 

About  3 p.  m.  a most  galling  fire  was  opened  upon  Lieutenant-Col 
onffi  Scurry’s  command,  on  our  right,  by  300  or  400  of  the  enemy  h .rifle- 
men. Captain  Lang,  of  the  Fifth  Regiment,  with  about  40  of  his  lan- 
cers, made  at  this  time  one  of  the  most  gallant  and.  furious  charges  on 
these  light  troops  of  the  enemy  ever  witnessed  in  the  annals  of  battle^. 
His  little  troop  was  decimated,  and  the  gallant  captain  and  Lieuten- 
ant Bass  severely  wounded— the  latter  in  seven  places.  The  enemy 
were  repulsed  by  this  gallant  charge,  and  our  right  was  tor  some  time 

"Targebodies  of  the  enemy’s  infantry  having  crossed  the  river  about 
3.30  r>.  m.,  bringing  over  with  them  six  pieces  of  splendid  artillery,  took 
position  in  front  of  ns,  on  the  bank  of  the  river,  at  a distance  of  600 
yards  In  addition  to  this  body  of  troops  two  24-pounder  howitzers 
were  placed  on  our  left  flank  by  the  enemy.  These  were  supported  by 
a regiment  of  infantry  and  a regiment  of  cavalry.  The  heaviest  fire  of 
the  whole  dav  was  opened  about  this  time  on  our  left,  which  was  under 
the  command  of  the  gallant  Lockridge.  Our  brave  men  on  that  part 
of  the  line  maintained  the  unequal  fight  with  desperate  courage,  though 
overwhelmingly  outnumbered.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sutton,  now  com- 
in£f  up  with  part  of  bis  battalion,  took  position  on  our  left. 

The  enemy,  now  being  on  our  side  of  the  river,  opened  upon  us  a 
tremendous 'fire  of  round  shot,  grape,  and  shell.  Their  force  m num- 
bers was  vastly  superior  to  ours;  but,  having  the  lnost  unbounded 
confidence  in  the  courage  of  our  troops,  I ordered  a charge  on  their 
battery  and  infantry  of  regulars  in  front,  anil  at  the  same  time  Major 
Hairnet,  of  the  Fourth,  with  four  companies  of  the  same,  and  Captain 
Ragsdale’s  company,  of  the  Fifth,  were  directed  by  me  to  charge  as 
cavalry  upon  the  infantry  and  Mexican  cavalry  and  the  two  24-pounder 

howitzers  on  our  left  flank.  4*4i1AT?Alir.+K 

Our  dismounted  troops  in  front  were  composed  of  parts  of  the  r ourtu 


520 


[Chap.  XXI. 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 

an^  Fifth  Regiments  Texas  Mounted  Volunteers  and  parts  of  Lieuten- 
an^' t^1011?,1  Sutton’s  and  most  of  Ryron?s  battalions,  and  Teel’s,  Riley’s 
and  Wood’s  batteries  of  artillery,  numbering  about  750  on  the  ground 
Major  Ragnet’s  cavalry  numbered  about  250,  making  about  1 000  men 
m the  charge. 

At  the  command  to  charge,  our  men  leaped  over  the  sand  bank,  which 
had  served  as  a good  covering  to  them,  and  dashed  over  the  open  plain 
thinly  interspersed  with  cottonwood  trees,  upon  the  battery  and  in- 
fantry of  the  enemy  m front,  composed  of  United  States  Regulars  and 
JJenver  City  Volunteers,  and  in  a most  desperate  charge  and  hand-to- 
hand  conflict  completely  overwhelmed  them,  killing  most  of  their  gun- 
ners around  their  cannon  and  driving  the  infantry  into  the  river.  Never 
were  double-barreled  shot-guns  and  rifles  used  to  better  effect.  A lar^e 
number  of  the  enemy  were  killed  in  the  river  with  shot-guns  and  six- 
shooters  in  their  flight. 

While  we  were  occupied  with  the  enemy  in  front  Major  Ragnet 
made  a gallant  and  most  timely  charge  upon  the  infantry  and  cavalry 
of  the  enemy  on  our  left  flank.  This  charge  was  made  against  ten 
times  the  number  of  Ragnet’s  force,  and  although  we  suffered  severely 
and  were  compelled  to  fall  back,  he  effected  the  object  of  his  mission 
and  occupied  the  attention  of  our  powerful  enemy  on  the  left,  while  our 
dismounted  men  were  advancing  upon  those  in  front  and  running  them 
into  the  river. 

So  soon  as  the  enemy  had  fled  in  disorder  from  our  terrible  fire  in 
tront  we  turned  upon  his  infantry  and  cavalry  and  24-pounders  on  our 
lett  flank,  just  engaged  by  Major  Ragnet.  We  charged  them  as  we  had 
those  in  front,  but  they  were  not  made  of  as  good  stuff  as  the  regulars, 
and  a few  fires  upon  them  with  their  own  artillery  and  Teel’s  guns,  a 
few  volleys  of  small-arms,  and  the  old  Texas  war-shout  completely  dis- 
persed them.  They  fled  from  the  field,  both  cavalry  and  infantry,  in 
the  utmost  disorder,  many  of  them  dropping  their  guns  to  lighten  their 
heels,  and  stopping  only  under  the  walls  of  the  fort.  Our  victory  was 
complete.  The  enemy  must  have  been  3,000  strong,  while  our  force  act- 
ually engaged  did  not  exceed.600.  Six  splendid  pieces  of  artillery  aud 
^ mV>eil^re  e(luiPage  fell  into  our  hands ; also  many  fine  small-arms. 

This  splendid  victory  was  not  achieved  without  severe  loss  to  us 

Major  Lockridge,  of  the  Fifth,  fell  at  the  mouth  of  the  enemv’s  guns, 
gallantly  leading  our  brave  troops  to  the  assault. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Sutton,  of  the  Seventh,  fell  mortally  wounded  at 
the  head  of  his  battalion  while  assaulting  the  enemy’s  battery. 

Several  of  our  officers  were  desperately  wounded;  some  of  them  no 
doubt  mortally.  Among  them  are  the  gallant  Captain  Lang,  of  the 
Lancers,  and  Lieutenant  Bass,  both  of  Company  B,  and  Lieut,  D A 
Hubbard,  of  Company  A,  Fifth  Regiment, 

Captain  Heuvel,  of  the  Fourth,  fell  in  the  gallant  cavalry  charge  of 
Major  Ragnet.  He  was  one  of  the  most  distinguished  of  the  heroes  of 
the  day.  Like  the  gallant  Lang,  of  the  Fifth,  he  could  not  appreciate 
odds  m a battle. 

I cannot  say  enough  in  praise  of  the  gallantry  of  our  surviving  offi- 
cers and  men.  It  would  be  invidious  to  mention  names.  Were  I to  do 
so,  the  rolls  of  captains,  lieutenants,  and  men  would  have  to  be  here  in- 
serted. I will  only  mention  the  principal  field  and  staff  in  the  engage- 
ment. The  cheering  voice  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Scurry  was  heard 
where  the  bullets  fell  thickest  on  the  field.  Lieutenant- Colonel  McNeill, 
and  the  gallant  Major  Ryron,  who  has  been  before  mentioned,  displayed 
the  most  undaunted  courage.  Major  Ragnet,  of  the  Fourth,  though 


Chap.  XXI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  VALVERDE,  N.  MEX. 


521 


wounded,  remained  at  his  post,  and  retired  not  until  the  field  was  won. 
These  were  the  field  officers  present,  as  I have  just  stated.  The  cap- 
tains, lieutenants,  and  men  in  the  action  displayed  so  much  gallantry 
that  it  would  be  invidious  to  make  distinctions.  They  fought  with  equal 
valor  and  are  entitled  to  equal  credit  with  the  field  and  staff  here  men- 

ti(>I  will  not  close  this  report  without  a just  meed  of  praise  to  the  gen- 
eral staff,  who  served  me  as  aides-de-camp  during  the  day.  Col.  W.L. 
Robards  was  in  the  dashing  charge  of  the  gallant  Lang,  and  wounded 

in  several  places.  _ _ , 

Capt  Tom  P.  Ochiltree,  aide-de-camp  to  General  Sibley,  was  ex- 
ceedingly useful  to  me  on  the  field  and  active  during  the  whole  en- 
gagement, He  assisted  me  in  the  most  critical  moment  to  cheer  our 
men  to  the  assault.  He  deserves  the  highest  praise  for  his  undaunted 
chivalry  and  coolness,  and  I recommend  him  to  the  general  tor  promo- 

tl0Captain  Dwyer  was  also  very  useful,  gallant,  and  active  during  the 

I cannot  close  without  the  mention  of  Captain  Frazier,  of  the  Ari- 
zona Volunteers.  To  him,  more  than  all  others,  we  are  indebted  tor 
the  successful  turning  of  Fort.  Craig.  He  led  us  over  the  high  ground 
around  the  mesa  to  the  east  of  the  fort,  where  we  at  all  times  had  the 
advantage  of  the  enemy  in  case  he  had  attacked  us  in  the  act  o±  turn- 
ing the  fort.  _ . 

I will  only  personalize  further  by  the  mention  of  my  own  regimental 

S^3ergt.  Mai.  C.  B.  Sheppard  shouldered  his  gun  and  fought  gallantly 
in  the  ranks  of  Captain  McPhaili’s  company  in  the  charge.  Lieut. 
Joseph  D.  Sayers,  adjutant  of  the  Fifth,  during  the  whole  day,  re- 
minded me  of  a hero  of  the  days  of  chivalry.  He  is  a gallant,  daring, 
and  dashing  soldier,  and  is  as  cool  in  a storm  of  grape,  shell,  canister, 
and  musketry  as  a veteran.  I recommend  him,  through  the  general, 
to  the  President  for  promotion. 

Our  killed  and  wounded  are  as  follows : 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

2d  Regiment  Texas  Mounted  Volunteers,  Major  Pyron  s command ....  ---------  - - • 

4th  Regiment  Texas  Mounted  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Scurry  s command.. 
5th  Texas  Mounted  Volunteers,  Colonel  Green’s  regiment. . . . . - - ...  - ; - - 

-,th  Regiment  Texas  Mounted  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sutton  s command. 

4 

8 

20 

2 

2 

17 

36 

67 

26 

4 

1 

36 

150  | 1 

1 

Since  which  time  Lieutenant- Colonel  Sutton,  of  the  Seventh,  and  ^ 
privates  of  the  Fifth,  and  2 of  Teel’s  battery,  have  died  from  wounds 

received  in  battle.  _T  . 4 , 

The  enemy’s  loss  was  far  greater  than  ours.  The  precise  number 
cannot  be  ascertained  by  us,  as  many  were  killed  in  the  river,  and  as 
the  enemy’s  white  flag,  asking  permission  to  gather  up  their  dead  and 
wounded,  came  almost  before  the  sound  of  the  last  cannon  had  ceased 
to  reverberate  in  the  hills.  It  is  confidently  asserted  and  believed  by 
many  of  our  officers  and  men  that  the  enemy,  under  the  flag  ot  truce, 
picked  up  many  small-arms  and  carried  them  off  with  the  dead-wagons  j 


522  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI 

twS°-  C1!‘,lied  °ff  thT®ir. two  24-pounder  howitzers  which  werj 
left  by  them  m the  river.  It  is  certain  that  during  the  cessation  ni 
hostihties  they  picked  up  a company  flag  and  guidon  of  my  regiment 
left  on  the  field  during  our  charge,  while  they  were  gathering  up“heir 
wounded  and  dead:  and  it  is  said  these  are  considered 'by  them V 
trophies.  I do  not  believe  that  the  commanding  officer  of  the  enemy 

trophies  °f  th6Se  faCtS’  aS  h°  would  not  have  spoken  of  stolen  flags  as 

i *tWn!vfr0m,the  best  pfonnation  in  my  possession,  that  the  enemy’s 
loss  must  have  been  m killed  and  wounded  at  least  350  or  400.  Among 
their  killed  were  several  gallant  officers.  The  gallant  McRae  fell  at 
his  guns.  Several  other  captains  and  lieutenants  were  killed.^ Cap 

FifthEamiellTe0nfflthT  f ^ U-  J?fantry’  and  several  privates  of  the 
prisoners!  T ^ Infantry  and  Denver  City  Volunteers,  were  taken 

Respectfully  submitted. 

„ , , ti‘ jy  i THOMAS  GREEN, 

Colonel  Fifth  Regiment  Texas  Mounted  Volunteers 
Maj.  A,  M.  Jackson, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General,  Army  of  Few  Mexico. 


No.  1.3. 


Report  of  Col.  William  Steele,  Seventh  Texas  Cavalry.  , 

Camp  near  Fillmore,  N.  Mex., 

March  1,  1862. 

General:  I have  received  a verbal  express  from  General  Siblev 
the  numerous  parties  of  Mexicans  in  the  employ  of  the  enemy  render- 
ing it  dangerous  to  write.  Our  forces  turned  the  enemy’s  position  by 
crossing  the  river  to  the  east  side,  which  drew  him  out  of  his  intrench- 
ments,  and  an  engagement  ensued  just  above  Fort  Craig,  which  com- 
menced  about  9 o clock  on  the  morning  of  February  21  ’ and  lasted 
with  little  intermission  until  near  sunset,  when  the  enemy  was  driven 
in  confusion  from  the  field.  We  captured  seven  pieces  of  artillery  and 
a,  considerable  number  of  small-arms  were  picked  up.  Much  of  the 

Pil5f  pinl^v'1!  0tp the  en?my  f!Wl  t0  the  Mlls-  Tbe  Aguiars  and 
Tikes  Peak  Volunteers  returned  to  the  fort.  Our  forces  were  en- 

3s‘t?ll5d°LtileioceW  wll®n  ioy  i" formants  left.  Our  loss  is  stated  at 

t hpkidiipd  p 106  Wi°S“med\  Lockridge  recollected  as  one  of 

the  killed.  General  Sibley  had  been  sick  some  days  previous  to  the 

action,  and  the  command  devolved  upon  Col.  Thomas  Green,  who  was 
in  command  most  of  the  day,  General  Sibley  being  unable  to  remain 
long  upon  the  field. 

This  account  agrees  with  the  information  I had  a few  days  previous 
as  to  the  contemplated  movement.  I received  this  intelligence  the  day 
alter  the  stage  left  lor  San  Antonio  and  have  delayed  writing,  honing 
to  get  some  more  particulars,  but  as  yet  have  none. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  STEELE, 

Colonel  Seventh  Texas  Mounted  Regiment . 
General  S.  Cooper,  Adjutant- General, 


Chap.  XXI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  VAL VERDE,  N.  MEX. 


523 


No.  14. 

Report  of  Gapt.  Powhatan  Jordan , Seventh  Texas  Cavalry . 

In  Camp  near  Socorro,  N.  Mex., 

February  27,  1862. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  First  Battalion  of  the  Sev- 
enth Regiment  Texas  Mounted  Volunteers  in  the  battle  of  Valvercle, 
N Mex.  on  February  21.  The  First  Battalion  of  the  Seventh  Regi- 
ment, under  command  of  Lieut.  Col.  J.  S.  Sutton,  with  Companies 
and  H of  the  Fifth  Regiment,  were  detailed  as  a guard  for  the  trans- 
portation on  the  morning  of  the  21st.  Before  the  tram  had  gotten 
fairly  out  of  camp  we  were  apprised  of  the  fight  having  commenced  at 
Valverde  Crossing  of  the  Rio  Grande  by  hearing  the  sullen  roax  ot 
cannon.  The  train  being  in  danger  of  attack,  we  were  kept  m position 
as  the  guard,  and  all  thought  for  a time  the  Seventh  would  have  no 
share  in  the  conflict : but  in  about  two  hours  after  the  commencement 
of  the  battle  an  officer  appeared  with  the  order  for  us  to  move  on  to  the 
battle-field.  Colonel  Sutton  detached  from  his  command  Companies  A 
and  F,  of  the  Seventh,  and  Company  C,  of  the  Fifth,  to  remain,  and 
then  gave  the  order  to  forward,  when  the  remainder  of  his  command, 
consisting  of  Companies  B,  F,  and  I,  of  the  Seventh,  and  F,  of  the 
Fifth,  moved  on  to  the  scene  of  action.  We  went  at  a gallop,  and 
were  met  on  the  field  by  Major  Lockridge,  who  ordered  us  to  take 
position  on  the  left.  We  were  here  held  for  an  hour  or  more,  running 
the  gauntlet  by  countermarch  under  a most  galling  and  destructive 

fire  from  their  batteries.  . 

While  in  this  position  we  lost  2 men  and  some  3 horses  killed,  lhe 
battle  having  now  continued  several  hours,  the  charge  was  ordered, 
and  the  Seventh  was  most  gallantly  led  in  the  charge  by  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Sutton,  who  fell  mortally  wounded  when  within  20  paces  ot 
the  enemy’s  battery.  The  battle  was  now  soon  ended,  and  victory  was 
ours,  though  purchased  by  the  Seventh  with  the  death  of  the  heroic 
Sutton.  The  Seventh  did  its  duty  bravely,  nobly,  all  acting  gallantly. 

To  make  mention  of  individuals  would  be  unjust.  They  all  shared 
equally  the  dangers  of  the  field,  and  all  deserve  equal  praise.  To  C apt. 
Redden  S.  Pridgen  and  his  company  (H,  of  the  Fifth),  who  acted  with 
our  command,  we  must  give  great  credit  for  their  coolness  and  gal- 
lantry, and  wish  himself  and  company  to  share  with  us  whatever  credit 

may  fall  to  our  command.  _ , A ,, 

Accompanying  is  the  list*  of  killed  and  wounded,  together  with  the 
horses  killed  in  the  battle,  as  furnished  me  by  captains  of  companies. 
I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectMl^gmr  o^dien^servant, 

Captain , Comdg.  First  Battalion , 
Seventh  Regiment  Texas  Mounted  Volunteers , Army  of  V.  Mex, 
General  H.  H.  Sibley,  C.  S.  Army. 


Sir 


No.  15. 

Report  of  Capt,  Trevanion  T.  Teel , Texas  Light  Artillery. 

Camp  Lockridge,  N.  Mex.,  February  27,  1862. 

: I have  the  honor  to  report  to  the  general  commanding  the 


* Not  found. 


524 


[Chap.  XXL 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  AUIZ. 

Army  of  New  Mexico  the  operations  of  the  light  battery  which  I had 
the  honor  to  command  in  the  battle  of  Yalverde,  N.  Hex.  on  Febru- 
ary 21. 

I received  orders  on  the  morning  of  the  21st,  at  camp,  5 miles  below 
the  battle-ground,  and  opposite  Fort  Craig,  to  detach  one  section  of 
the  battery,  under  Lieutenant  [James]  Bradford,  to  march  in  the  front 
of  the  column  and  head  of  the  train  to  Yalverde,  and  place  the  other 
section  and  remain  myself  in  rear  with  the  Second  Begiment  of  Sibley’s 
brigade,  which  orders  were  executed. 

About  an  hour  after  the  head  of  the  column  had  moved  I received 
intelligence  that  a large  body  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  infantry,  and 
artillery  had  taken  up  the  line  of  march  for  Yalverde. 

I then  placed  the  section  of  the  battery  in  command  of  Lieutenants 
[Jordan  W.]  Bennett  and  [Joseph  H.]  McGinnis,  and  went  to  the  head 
ot  the  column ; before  reaching  the  head  of  the  train  I heard  the  firing 
of  the  advance  at  Yalverde. 

I found  Lieutenant  Bradford,  with  his  section,  at  the  head  of  the 
tram,  and  ordered  the  pieces  to  the  place  of  firing  at  a gallop,  and  in 
a few  minutes  it  was  placed  in  battery  about  the  center  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Scurry’s  regiment,  and  commenced  firing  upon  the  battery  of 
the  enemy  and  his  line  in  a few  minutes.  I lost  1 man  killed  and  2 
wounded,  which  left  but  5 cannoneers  to  man  the  two  pieces.  I then 
kept  up  the  fire  alternately  with  the  pieces.  Finding  it  impossible  to 
use  the  pieces  with  steady  and  effective  fire,  I called  upon  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Scurry  for  men  to  fill  up  the  detachments  of  the  guns,  which 
were  immediately  sent  from  Lieutenant  Biley’s  company  of  howitzers. 
After  sustaining  the  action  for  some  time  the  enemy  changed  his  front. 
I then  placed  the  section  in  another  position. 

Lieutenants  Bennett  and  McGinnis  having  by  this  time  reached  our 
line,  I ordered  them  to  place  their  section  in  battery,  which  they  did 
and  opened  upon  the  enemy  with  good  effect. 

From  the  great  length  of  the  enemy’s  line  and  his  superior  number 
I found  it  necessary  to  detach  the  pieces.  Lieutenant  Bradford  was 
sent  to  the  extreme  left  flank  with  his  piece  to  support  Majors  Lock- 
ridge  and  Pyron’s  commands,  which  had  been  engaged  with  the  enemy 
for  more  than  an  hour;  Lieutenant  McGinnis,  with  his  gun,  on  the 
right  of  Major  Lockridge’s  battalion ; Lieutenant  Bennett  at  the  center 
of  the  right  flank,  and  the  other  piece  at  the  extreme  right  flank ; 
Lieutenant  Riley,  with  his  battery  of  howitzers,  on  the  left  wing,  and 
Lieutenant  Woods,  with  his  battery  of  howitzers,  on  the  right  wing. 
The  different  pieces  and  howitzers  changed  positions,  however,  during 
the  action  as  circumstances  required,  and  were  used  with  effect  when- 
ever the  enemy  presented  a front  or  his  battery  in  view. 

Having  received  orders  that  our  troops  were  about  to  charge  the 
enemy,  I placed  the  guns  in  battery  upon  the  extreme  right  flank  as  a 
reserve,  in  case  the  charge  was  unsuccessful,  so  that  I could  open  the 
line  of  the  enemy  with  raking  shots  or  engage  his  battery  until  our 
troops  would  prevent  my  firing  by  their  closing  with  the  enemy.  The 
charge  was  made  by  our  line,  and  in  eight  minutes  his  battery  was 
captured  and  his  troops  completely  routed.  Lieutenant  Ochiltree, 
aide-de-camp,  rode  back  and  ordered  the  guns  forward,  which  order 
was  executed,  and  soon  the  enemy’s  guns,  as  well  as  ours,  were  opened 
on  his  retreating  forces.  Firing  was  kept  up  from  our  guns  until  the 
enemy’s  rear  was  out  of  range  of  them;  I then  ordered  the  firing  to 
cease. 

I lost  4 men  killed,  including  2 who  died  the  day  after  the  battle, 


HAP.  XXI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  IN  ARANSAS  BAY,  TEX. 


525 


nd  6 wounded ; 25  horses  killed  and  wounded,  one  gun  partially  dis- 
abled, and  eight  sets  of  harness  rendered  unserviceable. 

I refer  with  great  pleasure  to  the  gallant  conduct  of  Lieutenants 
Jennett,  McGinnis,  and  Bradford,  of  my  company,  as  well  as  Lieu  ten- 
in  ts  Biley,  Woods,  Bagnet,  and  Falerod,  of  the  batteries  of  howitzers ; 
llso  of  the  non-commissioned  officers  and  privates  of  all  the  batteries. 

I cannot  close  mv  report  without  bearing  testimony  to  the  bravery 
ind  coolness  of  the  officers  under  whom  I acted  during  this  sanguinary 
md  well-contested  battle.  Colonel  Green,  and  especially  Lieutenant- 
colonel  Scurry,  who  so  promptly  manned  my  guns  from  lus  regiment 
the  First),  and  who  was  present  with  my  guns  under  the  heavy  fire  in 
he  morning,  and  whose  voice  was  heard  above  the  dm  of  battle,  and 
smoke,  and  flame,  and  death,  encouraging  the  men  to  stand  by  their 
oosts.  Also  the  lamented  Lockridge;  Major  Jackson,  assistant  adju- 
tant-general ; Major  Brownrigg,  brigade  commissary;  Lieutenant-Lol- 
onel  McNeill  and  Lieutenant  Ochiltree,  aide-de-camp,  who  were  rally- 
ing the  men  to  the  charge  and  were  in  the  line  leading  on  the  troops  j 
also  Captain  Dwyer,  of  the  staff,  Colonel  Bobards,  and  Major  Bagnet. 
Also  the  deep  obligations  I am  under  to  Lientenant-Colonel  Scurry, 
and  Captain  Scarborough  and  his  company,  who  hauled  out _a _ d isabled 
piece  by  hand  under  a hot  fire;  to  Captains  Campbell,  McPhail , and 
Killough,  and  their  respective  companies,  for  the  promptness  and  will- 
ingness with  which  they  replaced  the  killed  and  wounded  at  my  guns, 
many  of  their  comrades  having  been  killed  and  wounded  while  aiding 
in  manning  the  battery  during  the  action. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant^  ^ TEEL 

Captain , Artillery. 

Maj.  A.  M.  Jackson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  C.  S.  Army . 


FEBRUARY  22,  1862.— Engagement  in  Aransas  Bay,  Tex. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1— Col.  H.  E.  McCulloch,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Western  Military  District. 
No.  2.— Capt.  B.  F.  Neal,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding. 

No.  1. 


Letter  of  Col.  E.  E.  McCulloch,  C.  8.  Army,  commanding  Western  Mili- 
tary District . 

Headquarters  Western  Military  District, 

San  Antonio , Tex.,  February  27,  1862. 

Sir  : I inclose  a report  from  Capt.  B.  F.  Neal,  commanding  at 

^LI'£LI1S<1S 

Major  Yager,  with  his  two  cavalry  companies,  are  there  before  this 

time.  I sent  the  ammunition  required  by  Captain  jbeal  with  Majoi 
Yager’s  cavalry  when  they  went  down.  This  re-enforcement  and  am- 
munition will  be  sufficient,  I hope,  to  enable  them  to  deiend  that  sec- 
tion  until  better  can  be  done. 


526  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

I regret  that  the  18-pounders  sent  from  Galveston  have  been  de- 
layed. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  E.  McOULLOCH, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Western  Military  District. 
Maj.  Samuel  Boyer  Davis,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  B.  F.  Neal,  C.  8.  Army , commanding. 


Headquarters  Camp  Aransas,  Tex., 

February  22,  1862 — 9 p.  m. 

Colonel:  I have  just  returned  to  camp  this  moment,  and  hasten  to 
communicate  to  you  the  movements  of  the  enemy  this  evening.  At 
3.30  o’clock  this  evening  the  enemy  appeared  within  3 miles  of  our 
camp  with  two  launches,  captured  a sloop  boat  bound  for  Corpus 
Christi,  and  took  from  her  a lot  of  medicines  aud  other  articles  for  the 
Government — I presume  this  command.  Two  or  three  of  my  men  were 
oystering  .and  gave  the  alarm.  I immediately  ordered  out  my  com- 
mand, got  aboard  all  the  boats  I could  raise,  and  went  in  pursuit.  We 
overtook  one  of  the  launches  in  Aransas  Bay  and  engaged  them.  The 
wind  was  ahead,  consequently  we  were  prevented  from  capturing  them, 
as  the3r  could  out-travel  us  with  their  horses.  They  returned  our  fire, 
but  none  of  our  men  were  injured.  We  drove  them  within  range  of 
their  guns.  Night  coming  on,  we  retired. 

I do  not  know  what  effect  our  Minie  rifles  had  upon  them,  but  I pre- 
sume some  one  must  have  been  hurt. 

We  should  have  re-enforcements  and  powder.  I made  a requisition, 
through  Major  Yager,  when  at  San  Antonio,  tor  ammunition,  but  it 
has  not  arrived  yet.  All  w~e  want  is  powder  for  our  two  x>ieces  of 
ordnance — 6-pounders. 

The  enemy  is  becoming  quite  bold  and  daring,  and  will  destroy  the 
commerce  of  these  bays  unless  checked  in  their  buccaneering.  I shall 
do  all  I can  to  annoy  them  and  keep  them  back  until  we  are  better 
prepared.  They  have  the  advantage  of  us,  possessing  better  boats 
and  being  more  accustomed  to  them  than  we  are. 

Excuse  this  hastily- written  letter.  I shall  give  further  particulars 
of  our  skirmish  this  evening. 

Yours,  respectfully, 


BENJ.  F.  NEAL, 

Captain , Commanding  Troops  near  Shell  Banlc. 
Col.  H.  E.  McCulloch, 

Comdg.  Western  Military  District , Department  of  Texas. 


MARCH  2-4,  1862. — Evacuation  of  Albuquerque  and  Santa  Fd,  N.  Mex., 

by  Union  forces. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  James  L.  Donaldson,  Quartermaster,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  District  of 
Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex. 

No.  2. — Capt.  Herbert  M.  Enos,  Assistant  Quartermaster,  U.  S.  Army. 


iHAP.  XXI.] 


527 


ALBUQUERQUE  AND  SANTA  FE,  N.  MEX. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  James  L.  Donaldson , Quartermaster , U.  & Army,  com- 
manding District  of  Santa  Fe,  A.  Mex. 


Headquarters, 

Fort  Union , A.  Mi&r.,  March  10,  1862. 
Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  consequence  of  the 
tear  approach  of  the  enemy,  and  his  not  having  troops  to  defend  the 
dace,  Captain  Enos,  assistant  quartermaster,  abandoned  Albuquerque 
>n  the  2d  instant,  having  first  loaded  up  a train  with  his  most  valuable 
tores,  started  it  to  Santa  Fe,  and  destroyed  the  rest.  His  report  is 
lerewith  inclosed.  On  the  4th  instant  I deemed  it  necessary  to  pursue 
he  same  course,  as  Santa  Fe  was  not  defensible,  being  commanded  on 
ill  sides  by  hills,  and  the  safety  of  the  train,  composed  of  120  wagons, 
oaded  with  the  most  valuable  stores  in  the  department,  required  a 
itrong  escort.  Its  value  could  not  have  been  less  than  a quarter  of  a 
aillion  of  dollars,  and  its  safety  was  a matter  of  paramount  importance, 
am  glad  to  say  that  it  has  arrived  under  the  guns  of  Fort  Union,  and 
hat  the  enemy  has  gained  nothing  of  importance  along  the  line.  The 
orce  I brought  from  Santa  Fe  consists  of  Captain  Lewis’  company,  Fifth 
nfantry;  Captain  Ford’s  company,  Colorado  Volunteers ; Lieutenant 
Banks’  company  (E),  Third  Cavalry,  and  two  mounted  howitzers,  under 
jieut.  C.  J.  Walker,  Second  Cavalry.  Some  volunteers  also  accom- 
)anied  me,  under  Lieut.  Col.  Manuel  Chavez,  but  all  of  them  except 
he  lieutenant-colonel  and  some  officers  deserted  on  the  march.  I beg 


o call  your  attention  to  Capt.  W.  H.  Lewis,  Fifth  Infantry,  whose 
fficiency  was  of  great  service  to  me  in  evacuating  the  town  and  in 
:onducting  the  train  to  Union. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  L.  DONALDSON, 

Major , Commanding  District  Santa  Fe. 


Col.  G.  B.  Paul,  Commanding  Fort  Union. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  Herbert  M.  Enos , Assistant  Quartermaster , U.  S.  Army. 

Assistant  Quartermaster’s  Office, 

Fort  Union , A.  Mex .,  March  11,  1862. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  statement  relating 
o the  abandonment  and  destruction  of  the  public  property  under  my 
•barge  at  Albuquerque,  N.  Mex. : 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  1st  instant  I received  reliable  information 
hat  a body  of  Texans,  about  400  strong,  supposed  to  be  the  advance 
?uard  of  the  enemy,  had  reached  the  town  of  Belen,  35  miles  below 
Albuquerque.  Upon  this  intelligence  I ordered  that  every  prepara- 
ion  be  made  for  destroying  the  public  stores,  both  quartermaster’s 
md  subsistence,  which  could  not  be  carried  off.  At  about  6 p.  m.  one 
if  my  express  riders  came  in  and  reported  that  a party  of  about  50 
aad  reached  the  town  of  Los  Lunas  and  captured  a citizen  train,  car- 
rying public  stores.  I had  in  the  mean  time  loaded  what  ammunition 
md  orduance  stores  the  ordnance  agent,  Mr.  Bronson,  deemed  im- 


528 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[Chap.  XXI 


portant  to  secure,  and  started  them  on  the  road  to  Santa  Fe.  I had 
all  the  teams  that  were  left,  some  eight  or  nine,  harnessed  and  ready 
for  moving  at  a moment’s  warniug,  for  the  purpose  of  carryiug  the 
baggage  of  some  militia  and  volunteer  companies  and  12  regular  sol  ! 
diers.  The  latter  were  my  only  dependence,  and  I had  assumed  com  i 
mand  of  them. 

The  night  passed  without  the  appearance  of  the  enemy,  but  believing 
that  he  would  soon  be  upon  me,  and  not  hearing  of  any  troops  being 
on  the  way  from  Santa  Fe  to  hold  the  town,  I gave  the  order  to  fire  the 
property  at  about  6.30  on  the  morning  of  the  2d  instant.  The  destruc 
tion  would  have  been  complete  had  it  not  been  for  the  great  rush  of 
Mexican  men,  women,  and  children,  who  had  been  up  the  whole  night, 
waiting  anxiously  for  an  opportunity  to  gratify  their  insatiable  desire 
for  plunder.-  The  only  property  that  was  not  burned  consisted  of 
molasses,  vinegar,  soap,  and  candles  in  the  subsistence  department, 
and  a few  saddles,  carpenter’s  tools,  and  office  furniture  in  the  quarter- 
master’s department.  Most  of  these  articles  were  carried  offi  by  the 
Mexicans.  The  destruction  of  the  stores  involved  the  destruction  of 
the  buildings  containing  them,  as  it  would  have  been  impossible  with 
the  force  and  the  short  time  at  my  disposal  to  have  removed  the  prop- 
erty from  the  buildings  in  order  that  it  might  then  be  burned.  Had 
I attempted  to  carry  out  this  plan  I am  of  the  opinion  that  the  native 
population  would  have  overpowered  me  and  saved  the  property  for 
the  enemy. 

The  last  wagons,  five  in  number,  which  left  the  town  were  escorted 
by  Mexican  volunteers  and  militia.  While  in  camp  near  the  puebla 
of  Sandilla  the  train  was  attacked  by  deserters  from  the  militia  and 
volunteers,  when  the  escort  was  thrown  in  confusion,  and  the  robbers 
succeeded  in  carrying  offi  three  wagons,  with  a portion  of  the  mules. 
Much  credit  is  due  to  Wagon-master  Reiliey  for  getting  away  with  the 
remainder. 

Six  wagons  and  teams  which  had  been  sent  to  the  mountains  for 
fuel  on  the  morning  of  the  1st  instant,  and  afterwards  ordered  to  move  by 
the  way  of  Gallisteo  to  SautaFe,  are  missing,  and  I have  been  informed ! 
that  they  were  attacked  by  Mexican  robbers  aud  the  train  carried  offi 1 

H.  M.  ENOS, 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Quartermaster . 

Maj.  James  L.  Donaldson, 

Quartermaster , U.  8.  A.,  Comdg.  Udst.  Dist.JST.  Mex.,  Fort  Union . 


MARCH  3,  1862. — Capture  of  Cubero,  N.  Mex. 

Report  of  Capt.  A.  8.  Thurmond , Third  Regiment , Sibley's  Brigade. 

Cubero,  N.  Mex.,  March  19, 1862. 

Sir  : In  making  an  official  report  of  my  entry  into  this  place,  &c.,  I 
will  furnish  a transcript  of  the  notes  handed  me  by  men  whom  I have 
myself  found  to  be  sound. 

Note  1. — At  9 a.  m.  March  3,  Dr.  F.  E.  Kavenaugh,  in  command  of 
three  Americans,  demanded  of  Capt.  Francisco  Aragon,  U.  S.  Army,  com-  j 
manding  military  post  of  Cubero,  the  surrender  to  him  for  the  Confed- 1 
erate  States  of  himself  and  command,  consisting  of  Dr.  Boyd,  surgeon 
of  post,  42  New  Mexican  soldiers,  and  3 Americans,  one  of  whom  was 


!hap.  XXI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  CUBERO,  N.  MEX. 


529 


Sergeant  Wahl,  bugler,  U.  S.  Army,  together  with  the  post,  and  all 
tores,  arms,  ammunition,  and  property,  of  whatsoever  description, 
)elon<nng  thereto.  Captain  Aragon  was  allowed  ten  minutes  to  decide 
whether  he  would  peaceably  comply  with  the  demand  or  resist.  At 
he  expiration  of  the  time,  he  not  having  returned  an  answer,  one  of 
£avenaugh’s  party  was  sent  to  receive  the  arms,  which  were  formally 
lemanded.  The  following  correspondence  will  show  the  formal  surren- 
ler  of  the  post  to  Dr.  Kavenaugh  and  his  regiment,  to  hold  the  same 
n the  name  of  the  Confederate  States  of  America,  which  said  corre- 
spondence I herewith  inclose*  ^ 

The  amount  of  property  turned  over  will  be  accurately  shown  by 
she  quartermaster’s  invoices,  which  show  a large  and  valuable  lot  of 
niartermaster’s,  commissary,  and  ordnance  stores.  The  surgery  is  also 
well  supplied  with  valuable  medicines,  &c.  There  was  not  less  than 
30  arms  and  3,000  rounds  of  ammunition  turned  over.  Captain  Ara- 
gon and  company  were  furnished  with  arms  and  transportation  suffi- 
cient to  take  and  protect  them  to  Albuquerque  upon  promise  to  deliver 
fche  Government  property  furnished  them  to  the  Confederate  States 
Army  officer  commanding  there. 

Upon  taking  command  of  the  post  Dr.  Kavenaugh  dispatched  Mr. 
Richmond  Gillespie,  one  of  his  party,  to  take  information  to  Albu- 
querque of  the  surrender  of  the  post,  and  to  procure  assistance  in  hold- 
ing it.  This  trip  was  performed  by  Mr.  Gillespie  greatly  to  his  credit, 
he  having  voluntarily  risked  his  life  a second  time  in  passing  without 
protection  through  a most  dangerous  portion  of  hostile  Indian  country 
to  a post  where  he  was  not  certain  but  what  he  might  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  enemy.  The  successful  execution  of  this  hazardous  trip 
brought  to  the  protection  of  the  post  Capt.  A.  S.  Thurmond,  C.  S. 
Army,  with  25  men  of  his  command  ; arrived  at  Cubero  on  March  5,  at 

2 Kext  day  the  command  was  turned  over  to  him  by  Dr.  Kavenaugh. 

George  Gardenhier,  one  of  Dr.  Kavenaugh’s  party,  has  rendered 
most  valuable  services  as  assistant  quartermaster  and  commissary, 

; working  incessantly  in  saving  and  protecting  property  belonging  to 
1 those  defenses. 

Mr.  R.  T.  Thompson  has,  not  only  at  the  capture  ol  the  post,  but 
always,  been  truly  Southern,  being  a Virginian  by  birth,  and  certainly 
his  services  were  most  efficient  in  carrying  out  the  duties  of  adjutant, 
treating  the  enemy  always  with  much  leniency,  but  with  the  sternness 
and  decision  of  a true  Southern  gentleman. 

In  conversing  with  both  friends  and  enemies  I have  found  the  above 
to  be  substantially  true;  yea,  more  than  true,  for  such  an  act  of  bravery, 
under  the  circumstances,  could  not  be  expected  from  the  number  of 
men.  Dr.  Kavenaugh  and  Messrs.  Thompson,  Gillespie,  and  Garden- 
hier constituted  the  whole  reliable  force  on  the  side  of  the  Confederate 
States,  and  they,  too,  men  who  had  been  persecuted  by  the  Federal 
Government.  They  were  not  only  suspected  but  were  known  to  be 
friends  of  the  Confederate  States,  consequently  there  was  but  one  game 
to  play,  and  they  did  play  it  with  profit  to  the  Confederate  States  and 
great  credit  to  themselves.  The  game  would  be  in  other  countries 
called  bluff,  though  it  was  not  intended  so  by  them,  although  it  had 
that  effect. 


* Omitted  as  unimportant. 


31  It  R— VOL  IX 


530  OPEEATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  AEIZ.  [Chap.  XXL 

a gentleman  of  high  medical  attainments, 
and  is  at  this  time  doing  us  valuable  service,  as  I have  quite  a number 
of  cases  of  pleurisy  in  my  company.  4 nurnoer 

This  at  Cubero,  March  20. 

r.  * n A mi.  A*  S.  THURMOND, 

Comdg.  Co.  A,  Third  Regt .,  Sibley’s  Brig.,  Army  of  N.  Mex. 

To  the  Officer  Commanding  C.  S.  Forces, 

Albuquerque,  JV.  Mex. 


MARCH  26,  1862.— Skirmish  at  Apache  Canon.  N.  Mex 

REPORTS.* 

No.  1.— Maj.  John  M.  Chivington,  First  Colorado  Infantry. 

No.  2--C«^J-hWallcer,  Second  U.  S.  Cavalry,  including  engagement  at 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  John  M.  Chivington,  First  Colorado  Infantry . 

Camp  Lewis,  near  Pecos  Church,  N.  Mex., 

March  26,  1862. 

Oeneral  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  to  you  the  following  report 
battik  of  Apac^^Cafion  .COmmand  2^h  of  March,  1862,  atPthe 

i /Ihe  nrCe  consi®te£ ^as  Allows : Company  A,  60  men,  Captain  Wyn- 

T)  ril°Ty  E’  60  0aptain  AnthonV  and  60  men  of  Company 
D,  Captain  Downing,  of  the  First  Regiment  Colorado  Infantry  Volurn 

ann)  men/n  C°mpan£  CA  6 men  of  Company  D,  6 men  of  Com- 
pa*PT-  f me?  04Crpan^  ™rd  CavallT,  under  Captain  Howland 
and  Lieutenants  Wall  and  Falvey ; 50  men  of  Company  E,  Third  Cav- 

aky,  commanded  by  Captain  Walker  and  Lieutenant  Banks  : 50  men 
of  Companies  D and  G-,  First  Cavalry,  under  Captain  Lord  and  Lieu- 
tenant  Bernard  (all  of  the  U.  S.  Army),  and  88  men  of  Company  F 
First  Regiment  Cavalry  Colorado  Volunteers,  under  Captain  Cook 

s£e  nT  mcn  w!  a?d  i making  the  total  force  on  our 

side  418  men.  We  marched  from  Bernal  Springs  for  Santa  Fe  at  3 

odockp.  m.  of  the  25th  instant,  intending  to  surprise  the  enemy  in 
small  force  at  that  place.  After  a march  of  35  miles,  and  learning^e 

TnTVfV^V^nify  of  enemy’s  pickets,  we  halted  about  midnight, 
and  at  2 o clock  a.  m.  on  the  26th  Lieutenant  Nelson,  with  20  men,  was 

at  lOotlock  arm1SeTh  ' **  fhich  they  did’  and  eaptured  them 

at  10  o clock  a.  m.  The  detachment  again  moved  forward,  and  just  as 

?e  entered  the  canon  (Apache)  discovered  the  advance  guard  of  the 
S^  ai{df?aptured  t1W0  lieutenants.  In  a few  minutes  they  planted 
their  battery  and  began  to  throw  grape  and  shell  among  us.  In 
double-quick  Companies  A and  E,  First  Colorado  Volunteers?  were  de- 

D°E?r^Sr ki11?miiSh  wSit0  ?he  left  and  on  the  m°uutain  side, and  Company 
D,  lirst  Colorado  Volunteers,  was  deployed  as  skirmishers  to  the  right 
on  the  mountain  side,  and  an  order  was  given  that  the  cavalry  be  held 

and  Scur^s  rePorts~oFengagemenq 


jHAr.XXI.j  SKIRMISH  AT  APACHE  CANW,  N.  MEX.  531 

n readiness  to  charge  whenever  the  cannon  were  about  to  retreat. 
Soon  our  men  from  the  mountain  sides  made  it  too  hot  for  their  gunners, 
*11  d they  fell  back  about  1£  miles  and  took  another  and  more  advan- 
tageous position,  completely  covering  the  sides  of  the  mountains  with 
their  skirmishers  to  support  their  guns  in  the  canon  below  them. 

Having  mean  time  assembled  our  skirmishers  in  the  canon,  we  again 
deployed  Company  D,  First  Colorado  Volunteers,  on  the  right,  and 
Companies  A and  E,  First  Colorado  Volunteers,  on  the  left,  and  dis- 
mounted all  the  cavalry  and  deployed  them  as  skirmishers,  except 
Company  F,  First  Colorado  Volunteers,  Captain  Cook,  who  was  ordered 
to  charge  them  the  moment  they  gave  way  before  the  fire  of  our  in- 
fantry. After  a contest  of  an  hour  they  began  to  prepare  for  another  re- 
treat, and  by  this  time  Company  D,  Captain  Downing,  had  well-nigh 
flanked  them,  so  as  to  cut  off  their  retreat,  Captain  Cook  and  Lieuten- 
ants Kelson  and  Marshall  leading  the  way.  Company  F now  made  a 
flying  charge  on  the  enemy,  running  over  and  trampling  them  under 
the  horses’  feet.  Captain  Downing  with  his  men,  and  Lieutenant  Ber- 
nard with  Company  C,.  Third  Cavalry,  poured  into  him  a sharp  fire  from 
the  right,  which  drove  him  up  a canon  on  the  left  side  of  the  main 
canon,  when  Companies  A and  E,  First  Colorado  Volunteers,  took  a 
large  number  of  prisoners.  It  now  being  sundown,  and  we  not  know- 
ing how  near  the  enemy’s  re-enforcements  might  be,  and  having  no 
cannon  to  oppose  theirs,  hastened  to  gather  up  our  dead  and  wounded 
and  several  of  the  enemy’s,  and  then  fell  back  to  Pigeon’s  Banch  and 
encamped  for  the  night. 

Our  loss  was  5 killed  and  14  wounded.  The  loss  of  the  enemy  was, 
as  we  ascertained  from  their  own  accounts,  32  killed,  43  wounded,  and 
71  taken  prisoners. 

I am,  sir,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  M.  CHIVIKGTOK, 

Major , First  Regiment  Colorado  Volunteers. 

Brig.  Gen.  E.  B.  S.  Canby,  IT.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Department  New  Mexico , Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex. 


Bo.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  Charles  J.  Walker , Second  TJ.  S.  Cavalry , including 
engagement  at  Glorieta , March  28. 

Fort  Craig,  V.  Mex.,  May  20, 1862. 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  orders  from  the  Headquarters  of  the  South 
Military  District,  Fort  Craig,  K.  Mex.,  of  May  18,  1862,  requiring  a 
detailed  report  of  the  operations  of  myr  company  or  command  in  the 
recent  actions  of  Apache  Canon  and  Pigeon’s  Banch,  I have  the  honor 
to  state  that  on  the  morning  of  the  26th  of  March  last  my  company, 
forming  a part  of  the  cavalry  command  under  Capt.  G.  W.  Howland, 
Third  Cavalry,  moved  from  Gray’s  Banch,  near  the  old  Pecos  Church, 
in  the  direction  of  Johnson’s  Banch,  in  Apache  Canon,  a point  near 
which  we  reached  about  2 o’clock  p.  m.  We  here  discovered  the  enemy, 
about  250  or  300  strong,  some  400  or  500  yards  in  front  of  us.  They 
had  two  pieces  of  artillery  in  position  on  the  road,  and  were  awaiting 
us.  As  soon  as  our  column  appeared  they  opened  fire  with  their  bat- 
tery, and,  though  they  kept  it  up  between  five  and  ten  minutes  at  close 
range,  did  us  no  damage.  They  then  retired  with  their  guns,  and  our 


532  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXL 

•* 

entire  force,  infantry  and  cavalry,  advanced  about  600  or  800  yards  far- 
ther on  the  road.  At  this  point  my  company  was  ordered  to  dismount 
and  assist  Captain  Wynkoop’s  company  of  Colorado  Yolunteers  in 
clearing  the  hills  to  the  left  and  front  of  our  position.  Some  little  skir- 
mishing occurred  after  this  at  long  range,  but  the  enemy  fell  back  so 
rapidly  that  we  scarcely  got  sight  of  them. 

By  this  time  the  firing  had  ceased  at  every  point  of  the  field  and 
the  troops  were  recalled  to  the  road,  where  my  company  remained 
until  about  9.30  o’clock  that  night,  when  I retired  to  Pigeon’s  Ranch 
and  rejoined  Colonel  Chivington.  Next  morning  we  marched  to  old 
Pecos  Church,  at  which  place  Colonel  Slough  united  all  of  the  forces. 
On  the  following  morning  (March  28)  the  entire  command,  my  com- 
pany in  advance,  moved  to  Pigeon’s  Ranch,  where  we  halted  about 
an  hour  and  a half,  after  which  we  started  on.  We  had  not,  however, 
proceeded  more  than  600  or  700  yards  before  we  discovered  the  enemy 
in  force  immediately  in  front  of  us.  They,  as  on  the  26th,  had  their 
artillery  (three  pieces)  in  the  road,  ready  to  receive  us.  As  soon  as  I 
learned  the  position  of  their  guns  I at  once  moved  into  the  timber  on 
our  left,  and  dismounted  my  company  and  commenced  skirmishing  on 
foot.  About  this  time  Captain  Ritter’s  battery  arrived,  and,  supported 
by  the  infantry,  took  position  in  the  road  on  my  right.  As  soon  as  he 
opened  on  the  enemy’s  guns  my  company  was  ordered  to  mount  and 
follow  the  colonel  commanding.  I followed  Colonel  Slough,  in  obe- 
dience to  this  order,  for  a half  or  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  by  which 
time  the  action  had  become  general.  I was  then  ordered  to  occupy 
the  high  ridge  running  obliquely  back  from  the  road  and  on  the  right 
of  Pigeon’s  house.  I did  so,  and  held  that  position  during  the  remain- 
der of  the  day,  or  at  least  until  our  forces  had  retired  from  the  field. 
While  in  this  position  we  at  several  times  during  the  day  had  some 
skirmishing  with  the  enemy  in  small  parties.  The  company,  though 
under  fire  a great  part  of  the  day,  accomplished  nothing  that  I remem- 
ber of  special  importance,  though  they  (lid  all  that  the  position  assigned 
them  required.  The  officer  (Lieut.  Sidney  Banks)  and  men  behaved 
handsomely  whenever  brought  under  the  enemy’s  fire,  and  gave  every 
evidence  of  a willingness  and  determination  to  do  any  duty  tha  t might 
be  required  of  them.  The  strength  of  the  company  (E,  Third  U.  S.  Cav- 
alry) during  these  two  actions  was  one  officer  (Lieut.  Sidney  Banks, 
Third  Cavalry)  besides  myself  and  about  40  or  45  enlisted  men. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  J.  WALKER, 

Second  Cavalry,  Commanding  Company  F,  Third  Cavalry . 

Lieut.  N.  M.  Macrae, 

Fourth  New  Mexico  Volunteers , Act.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen. 


MARCH  28,  1862. — Engagement  at  Glorieta,  or  Pigeon’s  Ranch,  N.  Mex. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Col.  John  P.  Slough,  First  Colorado  Infantry. 

No.  2. — Lieut.  Col.  Samuel  F.  Tappan,  First  Colorado  Infantry. 

No.  3. — Maj.  John  M.  Chivington,  First  Colorado  Infantry. 

No.  4,-^Capt.  John  F.  Ritter,  Fifteenth  U.  S.  Infantry,  commanding  light  battery. 
No.  5. — Brig.  Gen.  Henry  H.  Sibley,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  6. — Col  William  R.  Scurry,  Fourth  Texas  Cavalry. 


Chap.  XXL] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  GLORIETA,  N.  MEX. 

No.  1. 


533 


Reports  of  Col.  John  P.  Slough , First  Colorado  Infantry. 


Kozlowski’s  Ranch,  March  29,  1862. 

Colonel  : Learning  from  our  spies  that  the  enemy,  about  1,000 
strong,  were  in  the  Apache  Canon  and  at  Johnson’s  Ranch  beyond,  I 
concluded  to  reconnoiter  in  force,  with  a view  of  ascertaining  the  posi- 
tion of  the  enemy  and  of  harassing  them  as  much  as  possible  ; hence 
left  this  place  with  my  command,  nearly  1,300  strong,  at  8 o’clock 
yesterday  morning.  To  facilitate  the  reconnaissance  I sent  Maj.  J.  M. 
Chivington,  First  Regiment  Colorado  Volunteers,  by  a road  running  to 
the  left  of  the  canon  and  nearly  parallel  thereto,  with  about  430  officers 
and  picked  men,  with  instructions  to  push  forward  to  Johnson’s.  With 
the  remainder  of  the  command  I entered  the  canon,  and  had  attained 
but  a short  distance  when  our  pickets  announced  that  the  enemy  was 
near  and  had  taken  position  in  a thick  grove  of  trees,  with  their  line 
extending  from  mesa  to  mesa  across  the  canon,  and  their  battery,  con- 
sisting of  four  pieces,  placed  in  position.  I at  once  detailed  a consid- 
erable force  of  flankers,  placed  the  batteries  in  position,  and  placed  the 
cavalry — nearly  all  dismounted — and  the  remainder  of  the  infantry  in 
position  to  support  the  batteries. 

Before  the  arrangement  of  my  forces  was  completed  the  enemy 
opened  fire  upon  us.  The  action  began  about  10  o’clock  and  continued 
until  after  4 p.  m.  The  character  of  the  country  was  such  as  to  make 
the  engagement  of  the  bushwhacking  kind.  Hearing  of  the  success  of 
Major  Chivington’s  command,  and  the  object  of  our  movement  being 
successful,  we  fell  back  in  order  to  our  camp.  Our  loss  in  killed  is 
probably  20,  including  Lieutenant  Baker,  of  Company  I,  Colorado  Vol- 
unteers ; in  wounded  probably  50,  including  Lieutenant  Chambers,  of 
Company  C,  Colorado  Volunteers,  and  Lieutenant  McGrath,  U.  S. 
Army,  who  was  serving  with  Captain  Ritter’s  battery ; in  missing  prob- 
ably 30.  The  enemy’s  loss  is  in  killed  from  40  to  60  and  wounded 
probably  over  100.  In  addition  we  took  some  25  prisoners  and  ren- 
dered unlit  for  service  three  pieces  of  their  artillery.  We  took  and 
destroyed  their  train  of  about  60  wagons,  with  their  contents,  consist- 
ing of  ammunition,  subsistence,  forage,  clothing,  officers’  baggage,  &c. 
Among  the  killed  of  the  enemy  2 majors,  2 captains  and  among  the 
prisoners  are  2 captains  and  1 lieutenant.  During  the  engagement  the 
enemy  made  three  attempts  to  take  our  batteries  and  were  repelled  in 
each  with  severe  loss. 

The  strength  of  the  enemy,  as  received  from  spies  and  prisoners,  in 
the  canon  was  altogether  some  1,200  or  1,300,  some  200  of  whom  were 
at  or  near  Johnson’s  Ranch,  and  were  engaged  by  Major  Chivington’s 


command. 

The  officers  and  men  behaved  nobly.  My  thanks  are  due  to  my  staff 
officers  for  the  courage  and  ability  with  which  they  assisted  me  in  con- 
ducting the  engagement. 

As  soon  as  all  the  details  are  ascertained  I will  send  an  official  report 
of  the  engagement. 

Very  respectfully, 

JNO.  P.  SLOUGH, 


Colonel , Commanding  Northern  Division , Army  of  New  Mexico. 


Col.  E.  R.  S.  Canby, 

Commanding  Department  of  Neic  Mexico. 


534 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 


Headquarters  Northern  Division,  U.  S.  Forces, 

San  Jose , A.  Mex .,  March  30,  1862. 

Sir  : As  the  department  commander  is  at  Fort  Craig,  beyond  the  lines 
of  the  enemy,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  direct  a synopsis  of  the  mili- 
tary operations  ol  the  division  since  its  organization  at  Fort  Union 
When  an  opportunity  occurs  a complete  report  will  be  submitted  through 
the  proper  channels.  s 

After  the  a^val  of  the  First  Regiment  Colorado  Volunteers  at  Fort 
Union  I found  that  Colonel  Paul,  Fourth  Regiment  New  Mexico  Vol- 
unteers, had  completed  the  preliminary  arrangements  for  throwing  a 
column  of  troops  into  the  field,  and  by  seniority  of  volunteer  commis- 
sion I claimed  the  command.  Accordingly  the  following  division  was 
organized  and  I assumed  the  command  of  the  whole:  First  Colorado 
Volunteers,  aggregate  916;  Captain  Lewis’  battalion  Fifth  Infantry  and 
Captain  Ford’s  company  volunteers  (Fourth  New  Mexico),  three  com- 
panies, 191 ; Captain  Howland’s  cavalry  detachment  of  First  and  Third 
Cavalry  and  Company  E,  Third  Cavalry,  150;  Captain  Ritter’s  battery, 
Total^l^l^  ’ lieutenant  Claflin’s  battery,  four  small  howitzers,  32. 

The  movement  commenced  from  Fort  Union  on  Saturday,  the  22 d 
March,  and  the  command  encamped  at  Bernal  Springs,  45  miles  from 
Union,  on  Tuesday,  the  25th  instant.  On  Wednesday,  the  26th  instant 
a command  of  200  cavalry  and  180  infantry,  under  Major  Chivington’ 
was  advanced  toward  Santa  F6,  with  a view  of  capturing  or  defeat- 
ing a force  of  the  enemy  reported  to  be  stationed  there.  The  enemv 
in  force  was  engaged  near  Johnson’s  Ranch,  Apache  Canon,  about  15 
miles  on  this  side  of  Santa  F6.  The  result  was  victorious  to  our  forces 
T“e  enemy  was  defeated,  with  some  20  to  25  killed,  more  wounded,  and 
about  70  prisoners,  who  fell  into  our  hands.  Our  loss  was  small— 3 men 
killed  m battle,  2 since  died,  and  some  8 others  wounded.  Among  the 
wounded  is  Captain  Cook,  Colorado  Volunteers,  badly.  I regret  to  re- 
port  that  Lieutenant  Marshall,  Colorado  Volunteers,  accidentally  shot 
himself  while  breaking  a loaded  musket  which  he  held  in  his  hand  by 
the  muzzle.  Having  accomplished  this,  Major  Chivington’s  command 
took  position  on  the  Pecos,  at  Kozlowski’s  Ranch,  27  miles  from  Santa 

About  noon  on  the  27th  I left  Camp  Paul,  at  Bernal  Springs,  and 
about  2 o clock  next  morning  I had  posted  my  entire  force  at  Kozlow- 
ski  s.  On  the  28th  a movement  was  made  upon  the  enemy  in  two  col- 
umns, with  a view  of  reconnoitering  his  position  at  Johnson’s  Ranch, 
lor  this  purpose  an  infantry  force  of  regulars  and  volunteers,  under 
Major  Chivington,  was  directed  to  move  off  on  the  Gallisteo  road,  attain 
the  principal  heights  upon  the  side  of  Apache  Canon,  and  occupy  them, 
while  the  main  body,  under  my  command,  moved  directly  into  the  canon! 
It  was  known  before  this  movement  was  made  that  the  enemy  had  been 
strongly  re-enforced,  and  his  estimated  strength  was  from  1,200  to  3,400 
At  9 o clock  we  left  our  encampment,  and  at  10.30  a.  m.  we  arrived  at 
Pigeon’s  Ranch,  5 miles  distant,  the  command  under  Major  Chivington 
having  flanked  off  at  a point  about  2 miles  beyond  Kozlowski’s.  We 
had  just  reached  Pigeon’s  when  I directed  Captain  Chapin,  Seventh 
intantry,  adjutant-general,  to  proceed  forward  with  the  cavalry  and 
reconnoiter  the  position  ot  the  enemy.  He  had  proceeded  but  about 
300  yards  when  our  pickets  were  driven  in,  and  the  enemy  opened  a fire 
S*ieli/rom  a battery  carefully  placed  in  position  upon  the 
mil-side  above.  The  batteries  were  brought  forward  and  the  infantry 
thrown  out  upon  the  flanks  The  cavalry,  with  an  addition  of  infantry, 


Chap.  XXL]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  GLORIETA,  N.  MEX.  535 

supported  the  batteries,  and  the  firing  became  general.  The  battle  con- 
tinued over  five  hours.  The  fighting  was  all  done  in  thick  covers  of 
cedars,  and  having  met  the  enemy  where  he  was  not  expected  the  ac- 
tion was  defensive  from  its  beginning  to  its  end.  Major  Chivington’s 
command  continued  on  toward  Johnson’s,  where  some  200  of  the  enemy 
were  posted,  and  fell  upon  the  enemy’s  train  of  60  wagons,  capturing 
and  destroying  it  and  capturing  and  destroying  one  6-pounder  gun, 
and  taking  2 officers  and  about  15  men  prisoners.  The  loss  of  this  train 
was  a most  serious  disaster  to  the  enemy,  destroying  his  baggage  and 
ammunition,  and  depriving  him  of  provisions,  of  which  he  was  short. 
Much  praise  is  due  to  the  officers  and  men  of  Major  Ohivington’s  com- 
mand. 

About  5 o’clock  p.  m.  a flag  of  truce  came  from  the  enemy,  and  meas- 
ures were  taken  by  both  forces  to  gather  up  the  dead  and  take  care  of 
the  wounded.  Our  loss  is  not  great.  We  have  1 officer  (Lieutenant 
Baker,  Colorado  Volunteers)  killed  and  2 (Lieutenant  McGrath,  17.  S. 
Army,  and  Lieutenant  Chambers,  Colorado  Volunteers)  wounded;  28 
men  killed  and  40  wounded.  We  lost  some  15  prisoners.  The  loss 
of  the  enemy  is  great.  His  killed  amount  to  at  least  100,  his  wounded 
at  least  150,  and  1 captain  and  several  men  prisoners.  He  is  still  bury- 
ing his  dead.  It  is  claimed  in  the  battles  of  the  26th  and  28th  together 
that  we  damaged  the  enemy  at  least  350  killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners, 
and  have  destroyed  their  entire  train  and  three  pieces  of  artillery — one 
by  Major  Chivington  and  two  by  our  batteries.  We  have  killed  5 of 
their  officers — 2 majors,  1 captain,  and  2 lieutenants — and  have  captured 
5 more — 2 captains  and  3 lieutenants.  This  has  been  done  with  the 
purpose  of  annoying  and  harassing  the  enemy  and  under  orders  from 
Colonel  Canby,  commanding  department.  But  as  the  instructions  from 
him  are  to  protect  Fort  Union  at  all  hazards  and  leave  nothing  to 
chance,  and  as  the  numbers  and  position  of  the  enemy  in  a mountain 
canon  are  too  strong  to  make  a battle  with  my  force,  I shall  now  oc- 
cupy a position  to  protect  Fort  Union  and  at  the  same  time  harass  and 
damage  the  enemy. 

Officers  and  men,  regulars  and  volunteers,  all  acquitted  themselves 
handsomely  during  both  engagements.  It  is  especially  proper  that  praise 
should  be  accorded  Captain  Ritter  and  Lieutenant  Claflin,  U.  S.  Army, 
for  the  efficient  manner  in  which  they  handled  their  batteries  during 
the  battle  of  the  28th  instant. 

I desire  to  notice  the  members  of  my  staff  for  the  efficient  manner  in 
which  they  assisted  me  in  the  battle  of  Pigeon’s  Ranch,  and  especially 
Captain  Chapin,  U.  S.  Army,  assistant  adjutant-general:  Lieutenants 
Bonesteel  and  Cobb,  of  the  Colorado  Volunteers,  and  Mr.  J.  Howe 
Watts,  volunteer  aide,  upon  all  of  whom  fell  the  heavier  portion  of  dan- 
gerous duty  during  the  battle,  and  whose  intelligent,  courageous,  and 
prompt  action  contributed  much  towards  the  result  attained. 

In  conclusion,  I would  add  that  to  Captain  Chapin,  whose  connection 
with  me  was  the  most  intimate,  and  upon  whom  fell  the  burden  of  duty, 
I owe  and  return  especial  thanks. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

jisro.  P.  SLOUGH, 

Colonel  First  Regiment  Colorado  Volunteers , Commanding. 

The  Adjutant-General  U.  S.  Army, 

Washington  City , I).  C . 


536 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[Chap.  XXI. 


No.  2. 


Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Samuel  F.  Tappan , First  Colorado  Infantry. 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  May  21,  1862. 

f ™nTCTpli^Ce7ith  <Vders  just  received  from  department  headquar- 
ters I have  the  honor  herewith  to  submit  report  of  engagement  at 
Glorieta,  or  Pigeon’s  Kanch,  on  the  28th  March  last,  betwef/the  forces 
of  the  enemy,  under  Colonei  Scurry,  and  Colonel  Slough’s  column  of 
of1rrtnI“herS’  Howland’s  cavall'y>  Bitter’s  and  Claim’s  batteries, 

On  the  morning  of  the  day  last  mentioned  I was  assigned  to  the  im- 
mcdiatecommaiHl  of  a battalion  °f  infantry,  consisting  of  Companies 

E’./m/i  8TI’  n’  (?aPta™  PownillS;  G,  Captain  Wilder;  I,  Cap- 
tain Maile,  and  K,  Captain  Bobbins,  First  Colorado  Volunteers.  A 

T?HwyT?f  four  ^uns— i two  12-pounders  and  two  6-pounders— Captain 
Snant  ^d/^r^Ponnder  mountain  howitzers,  Lieu- 

tenant Glafira,  TJ.  S.  Begular  Army,  were  attached  to  mv  command. 
W e marched  out  of  camp  near  the  Old  Pecos  Church,  Howland’s  cavalry 
1rl1-advar.ice’  and  Proceeded  about  5 miles  down  the  road  toward  Santa 
WM«  ta’  situated  in  a deep,  narrow,  and  thickly. wooded  canon. 
While  my  command  was  at  a rest  information  of  the  immediate  presence 
WaS  bro2£ht  b-^  some  Pickets  falling  back  on  Captain 
P;r,''!a<[  ?advance;  They  reported  the  enemy  in  position  in  the  tim- 
ber  about  800  yards  in  advance.  My  command  was  immediately  formed 

l°nthe  ?rders  °f  Colonel  Slough  I advanced  half  that 
distance  at  a double-quick,  where  the  batteries  were  stationed  on  a 
m and  to  the  left  of  the  road.  Company  D deployed  to 
the  left  and  Company  I to  the  right,  to  occupy  the  hill-sides  as  skir- 
mishers ^Company  C was  assigned  to  the  support  of  Bitter’s  and  Com- 
pany K Olaflm’s  batteries.  The  enemy  were  concealed  among  the  trees, 
and  opened  lire  upon  us  with  their  batteries,  which  was  promptly  re! 
turned  by  ours,  and  our  skirmishers  from  the  hill-sides  discharged  volley 
alter  volley  among  the  enemy  with  telling  effect.  J 

Company  I,  in  deploying  to  the  right,  passed  an  opening  commanded 
by  the  enemy’s  batteries  and  suffered  severely.  They,  however  reached 
the  position  assigned  them  and  did  excellent  service.  Occupied  this 
position  for  nearly  half  an  hour,  when  the  order  was  given  to  fall  back 
to  a new  position  in  fropt  of  and  near  the  house  of  Mr.  Pigeon.  Claf- 


lin’s  battery  took  position  on  an 


eminence,  to  the  left  and  Bitter’s 


cupied  the  road.  At  this  juncture  Company  G,  that  morning  detailed 
as  rear  guard,  came  up,  and  were  assigned  with  Company  C to  support 
Bitter  s battery  Subsequently  the  first  platoon  of  this  company,  com- 
manded by  Captain  Wilder,  was  ordered  by  Colonel  Slough  to  deploy 
///  rl8'ht  as  skirmishers.  The  enemy  advanced  and  occupied1  the 
position  we  had  left,  and  the  firing  was  renewed  and  kept  up  a con- 
Bld?rrableyn‘e-  Then  our  batteries  fell  back  to  their  third  position. 

While  the  batteries  occupied  their  second  position  Captain  Chapin 
and  myself  were  requested  to  accompany  Colonel  Slough  up  the  hill 
to  the  right  to  reconnoiter.  It  was  there  suggested  to  the  colonel  the 
necessity  of  occupying  the  hill  to  the  left  with  skirmishers,  to  prevent 
the  enemy  from  outflanking  us  in  that  direction,  to  fall  upon  our  rear, 
and  destroy  our  tram,  and  it  would  also  afford  support  to  our  batteries. 
He  thereupon  ordered  me  to  take  20  men  from  Captain  Sopris’  companv 
and  take  position  on  the  hill.  These  men  were  furnished,  and  not 
considering  them  sufficient  I took  the  police  guard,  not  yet  assigned 


Chat.  XXI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  GLORIETA,  N.  MEX. 


537 


to  any  special  duty,  numbering  about  70  men,  and  with  them  took  posi- 
tion in  front  of  and  to  the  left  of  the  batteries  on  the  summit  of  the  hill, 
extending  my  line  of  skirmishers  for  nearly  three-quarters  of  a mile  in 
a half  circle  and  at  nearly  a right  angle  from  the  road  occupied  by  our 
train  of  100  wagons.  This  position  commanded  the  valley  in  part,  and 
the . irregularities  of  the  surface  afforded  excellent  protection  for  the 
men  from  the  fire  of  the  enemy.  Eemained  here  for  about  four  hours. 
Occasionally  small  parties  of  the  enemy  would  attempt  to  ascend  the 
hill  toward  my  line,  but  were  driven  back  as  often  as  they  made  their 
appearance.  . 

Before  the  batteries  had  fallen  back  to  their  third  position  I noticed 
200  or  300  of  the  enemy  nearly  a mile  off  assembling.  Apprehending 
that  they  were  preparing  to  charge  our  batteries,  1 descended  to  the 
valley  and  communicated  my  apprehensions  to  Colonel  Slough.  Soon 
after,  returning  to  the  position  assigned  me  on  the  hill,  I received  in- 
formation from  Colonel  Slough  that  the  enemy  evidently  intended  to 
charge  my  skirmishers  to  get  my  position,  from  which  they  could 
assault  our  battery  and  train ; was  ordered  to  hold  it  at  all  hazards, 
for  all  depended  upon  it ; also  to  be  in  readiness  to  advance  and  attack 
the  enemy’s  flank  when  he  should  charge  him  in  front,  which  he  de- 
signed doing  as  soon  as  Major  Chivington  should  attack  him  in  rear, 
which  he  expected  every  moment.  About  half  an  hour  afterward  a 
party  approached  my  line,  dressed  in  the  uniform  of  the  Colorado  V ol- 
unteers,  requesting  us  not  to  shoot,  as  they  were  our  own  men.  They 
were  allowed  to  come  within  a few  paces  of  us,  when,  not  giving  satis- 
factory answers  to  interrogations  in  reference  to  their  commanders  and 
recognizing  them  as  Texans,  my  men  were  ordered  to  fire.  The  enemy, 
suddenly  disappeared,  leavin g several  dead  and  wounded.  Apprehend- 
ing at  this  time  the  arrival  of  Major  Chivington  with  his  command  to 
attack  the  enemy’s  rear  and  that  some  of  his  men  might  get  in  our 
front  while  deployed  as  skirmishers,  I was  therefore  extremely  cautious 
not  to  give  the  order  to  fire  on  parties  approaching  until  they  were  near 
enough  to  be  recognised. 

At  the  time  the  enemy  charged  our  battery  a battalion  ot  the  enemy 
made  its  appearance  among  the  trees  before  us,  approaching  the  center 
of  my  line,  Major  Shropshire  and  Captain  Shannon  at  head  of  column. 
When  thev  had  arrived  to  within  a few  paces  of  my  skirmishers,  Private 
Pierce,  of  Company  F,  Colorado  Volunteers,  approached  them,  killing 
and  disarming  the  major  and  taking  the  captain  prisoner.  He  returned 
to  our  main  body  and  delivered  over  his  prisoner  to  Captain  Chapin,  U. 
S.  Array.  The  fire  of  my  skirmishers  was  directed  against  the  head 
of  the  still  advancing  column  with  such  rapidity  and  effectiveness  that 
the  enemy  were  compelled  to  retire,  with  the  loss  ot  several  killed  and 
wounded.  They  once  again  appeared  in  the  valley,  but  were  repulsed 
and  driven  back.  Our  column  had  fallen  back  from  the  valley  to  my 
right  a considerable  distance.  The  enemy  occupied  the  place  we  had 
left.  Considering  it  extremely  hazardous  to  remain  longer,  and  there- 
by enable  the  enemy  to  get  in  my  rear  and  cut  me  off  from  support  of 
our  battery  and  protection  of  our  train,  I ordered  my  men  to  fall  back 
and  close  in  in  the  rear  of  the  retiring  column,  which  they  did  in  good 
order  at  a point  nearly  2 miles  back,  and  then  returned  to  the  camp  we 
left  in  the  morning. 

Not  having  at  my  command  at  this  time  the  several  reports  of  com- 
manders of  companies  engaged  in  the  battle  I am  consequently  unable 
to  particularize  individual  acts  of  heroism,  and  the  exact  number  of 
killed,  wounded,  and  missing.  Therefore  my  report  must  necessarily 


538 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap 


XXL 

*T£uld’  ll0we.ver>  remark  that  an  estimate  was  made 
after  the  battle  of  the  casualties  of  my  command,  and,  if  mv  memory 
serves  me,  29  killed,  64  wounded,  and  13  missing.  Companies  D and  L 
T irst  Colorado  Volunteers,  were  the  greatest  sufferers.  Several  of  the 
wounded  have  since  died  from  the  effects  of  their  wounds,  making  the 
number  killed  38.  The  missing  were  taken  prisoners  by  the  enemy 
one  of  whom  escaped.  The  others  were  released  on  their  paroles! 
-Lieutenant  'Baker,  of  Company  I,  was  severely  wounded  during  the 
earJy  part  of  the  engagement,  and  afterward  beaten  to  death  by  the 
enemy  with  the  butt  of  a musket  or  club  and  his  body  stripped  of  its 
clothing.  He  was  found  the  next  morning,  his  head  scarcely  recogniza- 
ble, so  horribly  mangled.  He  fought  gallantly,  and  the  vengeance  of 
the  foe  pursued  him  after  death.  Lieutenant  Chambers,  of  Company 
C,  Colorado  Volunteers,  was  also  severely  wounded,  from  which  there 
is  but  little  hope  of  his  recovery.  He  proved  himself  a gallant  officer. 

Suffice  it  to  say  that  officers  and  men  acted  with  great  gallantrv,  and 
where  all  did  so  well  to  particularize  and  refer  to  individuals  becomes 
unnecessary. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  yours,  with  respect, 

T . , „ 7 7 SAM.  F.  TAPP  AH, 

.Lieutenant- Colonel,  First  Regiment  Colorado  Infantry  Vols. 

Capt.  G.  Chapin, 

1th  Inf. , U.  8.  A .,  A.  A.  A.  G .,  Dept,  Hdqrs .,  Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex. 


Ho.  3. 


Report  of  Maj.  John  M.  Chivington , First  Colorado  Infantry. 

Camp  Lewis,  Hear  Pecos  Church,  H.  Mex., 

March  28,  1862. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  to  you  the  following  report 
of  the  troops  under  my  command  on  the  28th  of  March,  1862,  at  the 
battle  of  Pigeon’s  Ranch : ? ’ 

• In  ^^ieuce  to.  General  Orders,  Ho.  — , issued  to  me  on  the  morn- 
ing ot  this  day,  with  the  following  command:  1st,  Captain  Lewis’  bat- 
talion, by  Captain  Carey,  consisting  of  60  men:  Companies  A 

and  G,  infth  Infantry,  in  charge  of  Lieutenants  Barr  and  Horvell: 
Company  B,  First  Regiment  Colorado  Volunteers,  78  men,  in  charae  of 
Capt.  fe.  M.  Logan  and  Lieutenant  Jacobs,  and  Capt.  James  H.  Ford’s 
company,  Senond  Colorado  Volunteers,  in  charge  of  Captain  Ford  and 
Lieutenant  He  h orrest.  2d,  Captain  Wynkoop’s  battalion,  consisting 
of  Company  A,  Hirst  Regiment  Colorado  Volunteers,  in  charge  of  Lieu- 
tenant Shaffer,  68  men  5 Company  E,  First  Regiment  Colorado  Volun- 
teers, 111  charge  of  Capt.  Scott  J.  Anthony  and  Lieut.  J.  A.  Dawson 
Company  H,  First  Regiment  Colorado  Volunteers,  in  charge 
of  Capt,  George  L.  Sanborn  and  Lieut.  B.  H.  Sanford,  numbering  about 
80  men,  I left  Camp  Lewis  at  8.30  o’clock  a.  m.,  and  at  9.30  o’clock  a. 
m.  we  left  the  mam  road  and  took  the  trail  leading  to  Gallisteo,  which 
k??  *r  8, anl?s’  and  then  without  road  we  traveled  about  8 miles,  and 
Ranch  ^0  ° clock  m*  we  cached  an  eminence  overlooking  Johnson’s 

After  recon  1101  tering  the  position  it  was  ascertained  that  there  were 
corraled  in  the  canon  80  wagons  and  one  field  piece,  all  in  charge  of 


Chai\  XXI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  GLORIETA,  N.  MEX. 


539 


some  200  men.  The  command  was  given  to  charge,  and  the  troops 
started  upon  double-quick.  Captain  Wynkoop,  with  30  of  his  men,  were 
deployed  to  the  mountain  side  to  silence  their  guns  by  picking  oft*  their 
gunnefs,  which  they  did  effectually,  Captain  Lewis  capturing  and 
spiking  the  gun  after  having  five  shots  discharged  at  him.  The  re- 
mainder of  the  command  surrounded  the  wagons  and  buildings,  killing 
3 and  wounding  several  of  the  enemy.  The  wagons  were  all  heavily 
loaded  with  ammunition,  clothing,  subsistence,  and  forage,  all  of  which 
were  burned  upon  the  spot  or  rendered  entirely  useless.  During  the 
engagement  one  of  the  wagons  containing  ammunition  exploded,  se- 
verely wounding  Private  Ritter,  of  Company  A,  First  Colorado  Volun- 
teers : the  only  person  injured.  We  retook  5 privates,  who  had  been 
taken  in  the  forenoon  in  the  battle  between  Slough’s  and  Scurry’s  forces, 
from  whom  we  gleaned  our  first  intelligence  of  the  general  engagement, 
and  upon  reaching  the  summit  of  the  mountain  we  were  met  by  Lieu- 
tenant Cobb,  bringing  an  order  from  Colonel  Slough  for  our  advance  to 
support  the  main  column,  which  we  hastened  to  obey.  W e also  took  17 
prisoners,  and  captured  about  thirty  horses  and  mules,  which  were 
in  a corral  in  the  vicinity  of  the  wagons. 

Both  officers  and  men  performed  their  duty  efficiently.  Captain 
Lewis  had  the  most  dangerous  duty  assigned  him,  which  he  performed 
with  unfaltering  heroism.  I repeat,  all,  all  did  well.  The  command 
returned  to  Camp  Lewis  about  10  o’clock  p.  m.  the  same  day. 

I am,  general,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  M.  CHIVIHGTOH, 

Major , First  Regiment  Colorado  Volunteers. 

p.  s._i  ought  in  justice  to  say  that  a Mr.  Collins,  in  some  way  con- 
nected with  Indian  affairs  in  this  Territory,  and  one  of  Colonel  Slough’s 
volunteer  aides,  by  his  own  request  and  Colonel  Slough’s  desire  accom- 
panied the  command,  and  gave  evidence  that  he  was  a brave  man,  and 
did  us  good  service  as  a guide  and  interpreter,  though  he  did  not  burn 
the  train  or  cause  it  to  be  done. 

J.  M.  C. 

27  killed  j 63  wounded.  Total,  90. 


Ho.  4. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  F.  Ritter , Fifteenth  U.  S.  Infantry , commanding 

light  battery. 

Fort  Union,  H.  Mex.,  May  16,  1862. 

Sir  : Pursuant  to  a letter  dated  Headquarters,  Department  of  Hew 
Mexico,  Santa  F6,  H.  Mex.,  May  15,  1862,  I have  the  honor  to  submit 
the  following  report : 

The  light  battery  which  I commanded  in  the  action  of  Pigeon’s 
Ranch  was  composed  of  two  12-pounder  howitzers  and  two  6-pounder 
guns,  without  caissons,  there  being  none  then  in  the  department.  Its 
total  strength  consisted  of  3 commissioned  officers,  4 non-commissioned, 
and  46  enlisted  men  present.  The  commissioned  officers,  besides  my- 
self, were  First  Lieut.  P.  McGrath,  Sixth  Cavalry,  and  Second  Lieut. 
R.  S.  Underhill,  Fourth  Hew  Mexico  Volunteers.  The  order  for  the 
formation  of  this  battery  was  dated  March  9,  1862,  and  on  March  23 
it  was  ordered  with  Colonel  Slough’s  column  into  the  field.  On  March 
28  the  enemy  was  reported  in  advance,  and  the  battery  was  ordered  to 
the  front  to  a position  in  the  road  a few  hundred  yards  west  of 


540 


[Chap.  XXI 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  AR1Z. 

Pigeon’s  Ranch,  where  it  commenced  fire  upon  the  enemy.  After 
firing  a number  of  rounds  I was  ordered  to  take  position  farther  to  the 
rear  and  south  of  the  road,  some  distance  from  it  Here  I was  exposed 
to  a galling  fire  without  being  able  to  return  it  effectually,  the  enemy 
being  some  distance  off  and  entirely  sheltered  by  trees’,  &c.,  and  I was 
also  some  distance  from  my  ammunition  wagons.  The  supports  to  the 
battery  were  all  ordered  away  with  the  exception  of  about  one  platoon  I 
i • ^lora(t0  * olunteers,  and  I deemed  it  proper  to  return  to  the  road 
which  I did  after  firing  a few  rounds.  It  was  here  that  Lieutenant 
McGrath  was  fatally  wounded.  I then  took  position  nearly  in  front  of 
Pigeon’s  Ranch,  and  established  one  6-pounder  in  the  road,  while  the 
lunber -boxes  of  the  pieces,  two  at  a time,  went  to  the  rear  to  be  replen- 
ished. Here  one  of  the  enemy’s  pieces  was  dismounted  by  a round 
shot  striking  it  full  m the  muzzle,  and  another  was  disabled  and  a 
limber-box  was  blown  up  by  a case  shot  striking  it.  Private  Kellv 
Company  E,  Fifth  Infantry,  was  gunner  at  the  piece  which  did  this 
execution. 

From  here  I was  ordered  by  Captain  Chapin  to  cross  the  ravine  to 
the  other  side  of  the  canon  and  take  up  a position  there,  which  I did. 
Lieutenant  Claflin’s  mountain  howitzer  battery  joined  and  took  posi- 
tion  with  me.  The  enemy  here  made  a desperate  charge  on  the  bat- 
tenes,  and  was  repulsed  with,  I think,  great  loss.  The  enemy  then  got 
on  the  rocky  hill  on  my  right  flank,  and  was  pouring  a destructive  fire  ! 
ot  small-arms  in  the  batteries  and  killed  two  horses,  so  that  I.  deemed 
it  proper  to  withdraw  from  my  position.  Private  G.  H.  Smith,  Com- 
pany E,  Fifth  Infantry,  was  killed,  and  Privates  Raleigh  and  Woolsey 
same  company,  and  Private  Leddy,  Company  I,  Second  Cavalry,  were 
wounded  at  this  place.  I then  took  position  some  distance  farther 
1°  xre.ar  position  was  selected  by  Capt.  G.  Chapin,  Seventh  In- 
tantry)  m front  of  a deep  ravine,  where  the  supports  were  entirely 
sheltered  from  the  enemy’s  fire.  The  supply  train  was  in  the  road 
about  40  yards  from  the  left  of  the  battery.  The  enemy  here  made 
another  desperate  charge  on  the  battery,  and  apparently  also  the  train, 
but  was  again  repulsed,  with,  I think,  great  loss  and  in  great  disorder. 
-Lhis  was  my  last  position,  and  I heard  no  more  firing  from  either  side 
afterwards.  The  command  then  retired  for  the  day  to  Kozlowski’s. 

I wish  to  state  in  conclusion  that  I had  made  a night  march  the  night 
before  the  action,  and  did  not  get  into  camp  until  4 a.  m.,  and  officers  ! 
and  men  were  necessarily  much  fatigued.  I was  very  much  impeded  I 
m my  movements  by  reason  of  the  deficiency  of  caissons. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  F.  RITTER, 

Captain , Fifteenth  Infantry , Commanding  Light  Battery . 
Capt.  G.  Chapin, 

Seventh  Inf , A.  A.  A.  G.,  Dept,  of  A.  Mex.,  Santa  FS,  A.  Mex. 


Ho.  5. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  H.  Sibley , C.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Army  of  Hew  Mexico, 

Albuquerque , A.  Mex.,  March  31,  1862. 

General:  I have  the  honor  and  the  pleasure  to  report  another 
victory. 

After  the  battle  of  Val verde  our  advance  was  uninterrupted  to  this 


! 


:hap.  xxi.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  GLORIETA,  N.  MEX. 


541 


oitv  Here  sufficient  supplies  were  secured  for  sixty  days,  while  from 
Cubero  a village  60  miles  distant,  large  supplies  have  been  drawn  fro 
tho  enemv’s  depot  We  have  been  surrounded  with  every  description 
& ZZLLtmeni  general  and  individual.  Whole  trains  had  been 
abandoned  and  scantily  provided,  as  they  had  originally  been,  wit 
blankets  and  clothing,  the  men  had,  without  a murmur,  given  up  t 
Tittle  left  them!°  More  than  all  this,  on  the  representation  of  their  offi- 
that  forage  could  not  be  procured  with  one  accord  the  regiment 

agThase  preliminary^arts  are  stated  because  it  is  due  to  the  brave  men 
under  my  command5  that  they  should  be  known  and  the  hand-to-hand 

dea^batt“rfG^!eta  w^'hmght  March  28  by  detached  troops, 
under  the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Scurry,  and  Federal  forces, 
principally  Pike’s  Peakers,  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Sloughj  the 
one  having  1,000  men  and  the  other  estimated  at  1,500  or  -.,000.  Glo- 
T>ipfa  to  q canon  23  miles  east  of  Santa  Fe.  . . „ , 

Pending  the  battle  the  enemy  detached  a portion  h‘s 
attack  and  destroy  our  supply  train,  which  he  succeeded  in  doing,  thus 
crippling  Colonel  Scurry  to  such  a degree  that  he  was  two  days  with- 
out provisions  or  blankets.  The  patient,  uncomplaining  endurance  of 
our  men  is  most  remarkable  and  praiseworthy. 

Our  toss  was  33  killed  and  35  wounded.  Among  the  killed  are 
Majors  Bagnlt  and  Shropshire  and  Captain  Buckholts.  Colonel  Scurry 
had  his  cheek  twice  grazed  by  Mime  balls,  and  Major  Pyron  had  his 

h0irconseequence  ofthe  toss  of  his  train  Colonel  Scurry  has  fallen 

ba!  must'have^e^nforcements.  The  future  operations  of  this  army 
will  be  duly  reported.  Send  me  re-enforcements. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  you^ob^dmnt^servant, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding . 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  Richmond,  Va. 


No.  6. 

Reports  of  Col.  W.  R.  Scurry,  Fourth  Texas  Cavalry. 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  March  30, 1862. 

General:  I arrived  here  this  morning  with  my  command  and  have 
taken  quarters  for  the  present  in  this  city.  I will  m a short  time  give 
you  an  official  account  of  the  battle  of  Gloneta,  which  occurred  on  day 
before  yesterday,  in  the  Canon  Gloneta,  about  22  miles  from  this  city, 
between  the  Confederate  troops  under  my  command  and  the^Federai 
forces,  commanded  by  Colonel  Slough,  of  the  Colorado  V olunteers, 
(Pike’s  Peakers),  when  another  victory  was  added  to  the  long  list  ot 

Confederate  triumphs.  , , , koa 

The  action  commenced  at  about  11  o’clock  and  ended  at  o.30,  and, 
although  every  inch  of  the  ground  was  well  contested,  we  steadily  drove 
them  back  until  they  were  in  full  retreat  our  men  pursuing  until  from 
sheer  exhaustion  we  were  compelled  to  stop. 

Our  loss  was  33  killed  and,  I believe,  35  wounded.  Among  the  killed 


542 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXL 


was  that  brave  soldier  and  accomplished  officer  Major  Ragnet,  the  gal- 
lant and  impetuous  Major  Shropshire,  and  the  daring  Captain  Buek- 
holts,  all  of  whom  fell  gallantly  leading  the  men  around  against  the 
toe.  Major  Pyron  had  his  horse  shot  under  him,  and  my  own  cheek 
was  twice  brushed  by  a Minie  ball,  each  time  just  drawing  blood  and 
my  clothes  torn  in  two  places.  I mention  this  simply  to  show  how  hot 
was  the  fire  of  the  enemy  when  all  of  the  field  officers  upon  the  ground 
were  either  killed  or  touched.  As  soon  as  I can  procure  a full  report 
of  all  the  casualties  I will  forward  them. 

Our  train  was  burned  by  a party  who  succeeded  in  passing  undis- 
a™und  tiie  mountains  to  our  rear.  I regret  to  have  to  report 
that  they  fired  upon  and  severely  wounded  Rev.  L.  H.  Jones,  our  chap- 
iam,  of  the  Fourth  Regiment.  He  was  holding  in  his  hand  a white  fla«- 
when  fired  upon. 

The  loss  of  the  enemy  was  very  severe,  being  over  75  killed  and  a large 
number  wounded.  & 

The  loss  of  my  supplies  so  crippled  me  that  after  burying  my  dead  I 
was  unable  to  follow  up  the  victory.  My  men  for  two  days  went  unfed 
and  blanketless  unmurmuringly.  I was  compelled  to  come  here  for 
something  to  eat. 

At  last  accounts  the  Federalists  were  still  retiring  towards  Fort 
Union. 

t ^ra^ri  blew  up  the  limber-box  and  spiked  the  6-pounder 

1 had  lett  at  the  train,  so  that  it  was  rendered  useless,  and  the  cart- 
burners  left  it. 

Lieutenant  Bennett  writes  for  more  ammunition.  Please  have  it  sent 
As  soon  as  I am  fixed  for  it  I wish  to  get  after  them  again. 

From  three  sources,  all  believed  to  be  reliable,  Canby  left  Craig  on 
the  24th.  & 

Yours,  in  haste, 

W.  R.  SCURRY. 

p.  S.—I  do  not  know  if  I write  intelligently.  I have  not  slept  for 
three  nights,  and  can  scarcely  hold  my  eyes  open. 

W.  R.  S. 


Sante  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  March  31,  1862. 

Major  : Late  on  the  afternoon  of  the  26th,  while  encamped  at  Gal- 
listeo,  an  express  from  Major  Pyron  arrived,  with  the  information  that 
the  major  was  engaged  in  a sharp  conflict  with  a greatly  superior  force 
ot  the  enemy,  about  16  miles  distant,  and  urging  me  to  hasten  to  his 
rebel.  The  critical  condition  of  Major  Pyron  and  his  gallant  comrades 
was  made  known  to  the  command,  and  in  ten  minutes  the  column  was 
formed  and  the  order  to  march  given.  Our  baggage  train  was  sent 
forward  under  a guard  of  100  men,  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant 
layJ°L  ot  the  Seventh  Regiment,  to  a point  some  6 miles  in  the  rear 
of  Major  Pyron’s  position,  the  main  command  marching  directly  across 
the  mountains  to  the  scene  of  conflict.  It  is  due  to  the  brave  men 
making  this  cold  night  march  to  state  that  where  the  road  over  the 
mountain  was  too  steep  for  the  horses  to  drag  the  artillery  they  were 
unharnessed,  and  the  men  cheerfully  pulled  it  over  the  difficulties  of 
the  way  by  hand. 

About  3 o’clock  in  the  morning  we  reached  Major  Pyron’s  encamp- 
ment at  Johnson’s  Ranch,  Canon  Cito.  There  had  been  an  agreed  ces- 


Chap.  XXL]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  GLORIETA,  N.  MEX.  543 

sation  of  hostilities  until  8 o’clock  the  next  morning.  Too  much  praise 
cannot  he  bestowed  upon  the  courage  of  the  officers  and  men  engaged 
in  the  affair  of  the  26th. 

As  soon  as  daylight  enabled  me  I made  a thorough  examination  of 
the  ground,  and  so  formed  the  troops  as  to  command  every  approach 
to  the  position  we  occupied,  which  was  naturally  a very  strong  one. 
The  disposition  of  the  troops  was  soon  completed,  and  by  8 o’clock 
were  ready  to  receive  the  expected  attack. 

In  this  position  we  remained  until  the  next  morning.  The  enemy 
still  not  making  their  appearance,  I concluded  to  march  forward  and 
attack  them.  Leaving  a small  wagon  guard,  I marched  in  their  direc- 
tion with  portions  of  nine  companies  of  the  Fourth  Regiment,  under 
their  respective  officers,  Captains  [George  J.]  Hampton,  Lesueur,  Foard, 
Crosson,  Julius  Giesecke,  Alexander,  Buckholts,  [J.  M.]  Odell,  and  Lieu- 
tenant Holland,  of  Company  B,  Captain  Scarborough  being  unwell;  four 
companies  of  the  Seventh  Regiment,  under  Captains  [Gustav]  Hoffman, 
[J.  W.]  Gardner,  [J.  F.]  Wiggins,  and  [Isaac]  Adair;  four  companies  of 
the  Fifth  Begiment,  under  Captains  [Denman]  Shannon  and  [Daniel  H.] 
Ragsdale  and  Lieuts.  Pleasant  J.  Oakes  and  John  J.  Scott;  three  pieces 
of  artillery,  under  Lieutenant  Bradford,  together  with  Captain  Phillips’ 
company  of  independent  volunteers. 

From  details  and  other  causes  they  were  reduced  until  (all  combined) 
they  did  not  number  over  600  men  fit  for  duty.  At  about  6 miles  from 
our  camp  the  advance  guard  gave  notice  that  the  enemy  were  near  in 
force.  I hastened  in  front  to  examine  their  position,  and  found  they 
were  .about  1 mile  west  of  Pigeon’s  Ranch,  in  Canon  Glorieta.  The 
mounted  men  who  were  marching  in  front  were  ordered  to  retire  slowly 
to  the  rear,  dismount,  and  come  into  action  on  foot.  The  artillery  was 
pushed  forward  to  a slight  elevation  in  the  canon  and  immediately 
opened  fire.  The  infantry  was  rapidly  deployed  into  line,  extending 
across  the  canon  from  a fence  on  our  left  up  into  the  pine  forest  on  our 
right. 

About  the  time  these  dispositions  were  made  the  enemy  rapidly  ad- 
vanced in  separate  columns  both  upon  our  right  and  left.  I dispatched 
Major  Pyron  to  the  right  to  check  them  in  that  direction,  and  placing 
the  center  in  command  of  Major  Ragnet  I hastened  with  the  remainder 
of  the  command  to  the  left.  A large  body  of  infantry,  availing  them- 
selves of  a gulch  that  ran  up  the  center  of  an  inclosed  field  to  our  left, 
were  moving  under  its  cover  past  our  left  flank  to  the  rear  of  our  posi- 
tion. Crossing  the  fence  on  foot,  we  advanced  over  the  clearing  some 
200  yards  under  a heavy  fire  from  the  foe,  and  dashed  into  the  gulch 
in  their  midst,  pistol  and  knife  in  hand.  For  a few  moments  a most 
desperate  and  deadly  hand-to-hand  conflict  raged  along  the  gulch,  when 
they  broke  before  the  steady  courage  of  our  men  and  fled  in  the  wildest 
disorder  and  confusion. 

Major  Pyron  was  equally  successful,  and  Major  Ragnet  with  his  force 
charged  rapidly  down  the  center.  Lieutenant  Bradford,  of  the  artillery, 
had  been  wounded  and  borne  from  the  field.  There  being  no  other 
officer  of  the  artillery  present,  three  guns,  constituting  our  battery,  had 
been  hastily  withdrawn  before  I was  aware  of  it.  Sending  to  the  rear 
to  have  two  of  the  guns  brought  back  to  the  field  a pause  was  made  to 
reunite  our  forces,  which  had  become  somewhat  scattered  in  the  last 
rencounter.  When  we  were  ready  to  advance  the  enemy  had  taken 
cover,  and  it  was  impossible  to  tell  whether  their  main  body  was  sta- 


544 


[Chap.  XXI. 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 

tioned  behind  a long  adobe  wall  that  ran  nearly  across  the  canon  or  had 
taken  position  behind  a large  ledge  of  rocks  in  the  rear.  Private  W.  D. 
Kirk,  of  Captain  Phillips7  company,  had  taken  charge  of  one  of  the  guns 
and  Sergeant  Patrick,  of  the  artillery,  another,  and  brought  them  to  the 
ground. 

While  trying  by  the  fire  of  these  two  guns  to  ascertain  the  locality 
of  the  enemy,  Major  Shropshire  was  sent  to  the  right,  with  orders  to 
move  up  among  the  pines  until  he  should  find  the  enemy,  when  he  was 
to  attack  them  on  that  flank.  Major  Eagnet,  with  similar  orders,  was 
cuspatched  to  the  left.  I informed  these  gallant  officers  that  as  soon  as 
the  sound  of  their  guns  was  heard  I would  charge  in  front  with  the  re- 
mainder of  the  command.  Sending  Major  Pyron  to  the  assistance  of 
Major  Eagnet,  and  leaving  instruction  for  the  center  to  charge  as  the 
fire  opened  on  the  right,  I passed  in  that  direction  to  learn  the  cause  of 
delay  m making  the  assault.  I found  that  the  gallant  Major  Shrop- 
shire had  been  killed.  I took  command  of  the  right  and  immediately 
attacked  the  enemy  who  were  at  the  ranch.  Majors  Eagnet  and  Pyron 
opened  a galling  fire  upon  their  left  from  the  rock  on  the  mountain  side, 
and  the  center  charging  down  the  road,  the  foe  were  driven  from  the 
ranch  to  the  ledge  of  rocks  before  alluded  to,  where  they  made  their 
final  and  most  desperate  stand.  At  this  point  three  batteries  of  eight 
guns  opened  a furious  fire  of  grape,  canister,  and  shell  upon  our  ad- 
vancing troops. 

Our  brave  soldiers,  heedless  of  the  storm,  pressed  on,  determined  if 
possible  to  take  their  battery.  A heavy  body  of  infantry,  twice  our 
number,  interposed  to  save  their  guns.  Here  the  conflict  was  terrible. 
Our  men  and  officers,  alike  inspired  with  the  unalterable  determination 
to  overcome  every  obstacle  to  the  attainment  of  their  object,  dashed 
among  them.  The  right  and  center  had  united  on  the  left.  The  intrepid 
Eagnet  and  the  cool,  calm,  courageous  Pyron  had  pushed  forward  among 
the  rocks  until  the  muzzles  of  the  guns  of  the  opposing  forces  passed 
each  other.  Inch  by  inch  was  the  ground  disputed,  until  the  artillery 
of  the  enemy  had  time  to  escape  with  a number  of  their  wagons.  The 
infantry  also  broke  ranks  and  fled  from  the  field.  So  precipitate  was 
their  flight  that  they  cut  loose  their  teams  and  set  fire  to  two  of  their 
wagons.  The  pursuit  was  kept  up  until  forced  to  halt  from  the  ex- 
treme exhaustion  of  the  men,  who  had  been  engaged  for  six  hours  in 
the  hardest  contested  fight  it  had  ever  been  my  lot  to  witness.  The 
enemy  is  now  known  to  have  numbered  1,400  men,  Pike’s  Peak  miners 
and  regulars,  the  flower  of  the  U.  S.  Army. 

During  the  action  a part  of  the  enemy  succeeded  in  reaching  our 
rear,  surprising  the  wagon  guard,  and  burning  our  wagons,  taking  at 
the  same  time  some  16  prisoners.  About  this  time  a party  of  prisoners, 
whom  I had  sent  to  the  rear,  reached  there,  and  informed  them  how 
the  fight  was  going  in  front  $ whereupon  they  beat  a hasty  retreat,  not, 
however,  until  the  perpetration  of  two  acts  which  the  most  barbarous 
savage  of  the  plains  would  blush  to  own.  One  was  the  shooting  and 
dangerously  wounding  of  the  Eev.  L.  H.  Jones,  chaplain  of  the  Fourth 
Eegiment,  with  a white  flag  in  his  hand;  the  other  an  order  that  the 
prisoners  they  had  taken  be  shot  in  case  they  were  attacked  on  their 
retreat.  These  instances  go  to  prove  that  they  have  lost  all  sense  of 
humanity  in  the  insane  hatred  they  bear  to  the  citizens  of  the  Confed- 
eracy, who  have  the  manliness  to  arm  in  defense  of  their  country’s  in- 
dependence. 

We  remained  upon  the  battle-field  during  the  day  of  the  29th  to 
bury  our  dead  and  provide  for  the  comfort  of  the  wounded,  and  then 

• 


AFFAIR  AT  SAN  LUIS  PASS,  TEX 


c AP  XXI]  » TITU  TD  IT  CAXT  1,1  I IS  HASS.  L IL7V  545 

marched  to  Santa  Fe,  to  procure  supplies  and  transportation  to  replace 

^Our'loss  was^ffikilled  and^OO  wounded.  Of  the  killed  24  were  of  the 
Fourth  Regiment,  1 of  the  Fifth  Regiment,  8 of  the  Seventh  Regiment, 

^That  ^the  ^nemy  greatly  exceeded  this  number,  44  of  their  dead 
being  counted  where  the  battle  first  opened.  Their  killed  must  have 

^The^ountry^has'to  mourn  the  loss  of  four  as  brave  and  chivalrous 
officers  as  ever  graced  the  ranks  of  any  army.  The  gallant  Major 
Shropshire  fell  early,  pressing  upon  the  foe  and  cheering  his  men  on. 
The  brave  and  chivalrous  Major  Ragnet  fell  mortally  wounded  while 
engaged  in  the  last  and  most  desperate  conflict  of  the  day.  He  sui- 
vived  long  enough  to  know  and  rejoice  at  our  victory,  and  then  died 
with  loving-  messages  upon  his  expiring  lips.  The  brave  gallant  Cap- 
tain Buckholts  and  Lieutenant  Mills  conducted  themselves  with  dis_ 
tinguished  gallantry  throughout  the  fight  and  fell  near  its  close.  Of 
the  living  it  is  only  necessary  to  say  all  behaved  with  distinguished 

l°This  battle  proves  conclusively  that  few  mistakes  were  made  in  the 
selection  of  the  officers  in  this  command.  They  were  ever  in  the  front, 
leading  their  men  into  the  hottest  of  the  fray.  It  is  not  too  much  to 
sav  that,  even  in  the  midst  of  this  heroic  band,  among  whom  instances 
of  individual  daring  and  personal  prowess  were  constantly,  occurring, 
Maior  Pyron  was  distinguished  by  the  calm  intrepidity  of  his  bearing. 
It  is  due  to  Adjt.  Ellsberry  R.  Lane  to  bear  testimony  to  the  courage 
and  activity  he  displayed  in  the  discharge  of  his  official  duties,  and  to 
acknowledge  my  obligations  for  the  manner  in  which  he  carried  out  my 
orders 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your 

Colonel , Commanding  Army  of  New  Mexico . 

Maj.  A.  M.  Jackson,  . 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Army  of  New  Mexico. 


APRIL  5-6,  1862. — Affair  at  San  Luis  Pass,  Tex.,  including  destruction  of 

the  Columbia. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Col.  J.  Bates,  Thirteenth  Texas  Infantry. 

No.  2.— Maj.  S.  S.  Perry,  Thirteenth  Texas  Infantry. 

No.  3.— Capt.  S.  L.  S.  Ballowe,  Thirteenth  Texas  Infantry. 

No  1. 

Reports  of  Col  J.  Bates , Thirteenth  Texas  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Bates’  Begiment, 

Velasco , Tex.,  April  6,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  as  follows : 

Information  reached  my  headquarters  at  7 p.  m.  on  yesterday  that 
at  4 p.  m.  of  that  day  a large  steamer  anchored  off  San  Luis  Pass,  dis- 

35  R R— VOL  IX 


546 


[Chap.  XXI. 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 

playing  an  English  and  a Confederate  ensign  and  what  seemed  to  be 
from  the  shore  a white  flag.  I immediately  dispatched  a detachment  of 
25  mounted  men  from  Captain  Moseley’s  company,  under  the  command 
of  Maj.  S.  S.  Perry,  with  instructions  to  watch  the  enemy  closely  and 
prevent  depredations  in  case  of  their  attempting  to  land. 

When  about  half  way  to  San  Luis,  which  is  16  miles  from  this  post 
Major  Perry  met  an  expressman*,  who  stated  that  Lieut.  O.  W.  Edwards’ 
of  Captain  Ballowe’s  company,  and  7 of  his  men,  with  Mr.  Alexander 
Eollett,  residing  near  the  Pass,  had  been  decoyed  out  to  the  steamer  and  ' 
captured ; that  the  enemy  had  then  taken  the  boat  in  which  Edwards 
and  his  men  had  gone  out  and  had  passed  our  battery  (one  18-pounder) 
on  San  Luis  Island,  and  were  between  the  island  and  the  main-land* 
that  it  was  supposed  that  they  had  captured  the  schooner  Columbia’ 
lying  m the  rear  of  the  island,  loaded  with  cotton  ; that  their  force  was 
unknown,  and  Captain  Ballowe’s  command  was  in  danger  of  being 
cut  off. 

I immediately  dispatched  Lieut.  Col.  B.  R.  Brown,  with  the  remainder 
of  Captain  Moseley’s  artillery  company  and  two  field  pieces,  to  the  scene 
of  action.  [Lieutenant]  Colonel  Brown  arrived  at  San  Luis  at  daylight 
this  morning.  The  Columbia  was  then  in  flames  and  nearly  consumed 
the  enemy  having  retired  to  their  vessel. 

At  daylight  an  action  commenced  between  our  battery,  under  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Brown,  and  the  enemy’s  vessel,  in  which  a few  shots 
were  exchanged  and  the  enemy  drew  off.  As  she  steamed  down  the 
coast  she  sent  the  crew  of  the  destroyed  cotton  schooner  ashore  in  a 
small  boat,  retaining  Lieutenant  Edwards  and  his  men  as  prisoners. 
!No  other  casualties  on  our  side. 

Captain  Ballowe  was  absent  from  his  command  when  the  vessel 
arrived,  and  did  not  reach  there  until  late  in  the  night.  The  night  was 
very  dark  and  the  force  of  the  enemy  in  the  bay  was  unknown.  Our 
best  boat  was  captured  and  the  others  were  too  frail  to  risk  a night 
attack  from  the  small  force  on  the  island. 

Further  particulars  will  be  reported  as  soon  as  information  can  be 
received,  with  a list  of  the  prisoners. 

J.  BATES, 

^ „ Colonel , Commanding. 

Col.  Samuel  Boyer  Davis, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  Texas. 


Headquarters  Bates’  Regiment, 

* Velasco , Tex.,  April  13,  1862. 

Col.  Samuel  Boyer  Davis, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  Texas  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  to  you  copies  of  reports  made  by 
Major  Perry  and  Captain  Ballowe,  of  my  command.  These  reports  are 
in  reference  to  the  unfortunate  capture  of  Lieutenant  Edwards  and  7 of 
Captain  Ballowe’s  company  and  the  burning  of  the  schooner  Columbia 
and  her  cargo  of  cotton. 

It  seems  to  me  that  the  conduct  of  Captain  Ballowe  on  that  occasion, 
as  represented  by  Major  Perry,  deserves  a court-martial.  However, 
the  reports  are  respectfully  submitted  for  your  consideration. 

Yery  respectfully, 


J.  BATES, 
Colonel , Commanding. 


lJHAP.  XXI.] 


AFFAIR  AT  SAN  LUIS  PASS,  TEX. 

No.  2. 


547 


Report  of  Map  8.  8.  Perry , Thirteenth  Texas  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Bates’  Kegiment, 

Velasco , April  7,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  lay  before  you  for  your  consideration  the 

following  report : A ^ T A ..  , T . . . 

According  to  your  order,  issued  to  me  April  5,  I detailed  Lieutenant 
Duff  and  25  men  of  Captain  Mosley’s  company,  and  proceeded  down 
the  coast  to  San  Luis.  When  about  6 miles  from  this  place  I met  Mr. 
Follett  with  an  express  from  Captain  Ballowe,  who  informed  me  that 
the  enemy  had  decoyed  off  Lieutenant  Edwards,  O rderly- Sergeant  West- 
ervelt,  Sergeant  Carville,  and  5 privates  of  Captain  Ballowe’s  company, 
and  Alexander  Follett,  citizen,  and  that  they  had  passed  into  the  bay 
in  small  boats  from  the  steamship,  which  lay  about  2 miles  from  the 
fort  and  near  the  bar,  and  he  (Mr.  Follett)  supposed  their  object  to  have 
been  to  capture  the  schooner  Columbia,  loaded  with  cotton,  which  was 
lying  in  the  bay  near  San  Luis  Island,  or  attack  the  said  island.  I 
then  ordered  one  of  my  party  to  return  immediately  and  report  the 
above  facts  to  Colonel  Bates.  I then  proceeded  to  San  Luis  at  a very 
rapid  gait,  and  arrived  there  about  10.30  p.  m.,  and  immediately  ordered 
out  and  posted  scouts  on  the  east  end  of  the  peninsula,  and  went  to  the 
fort  and  had  an  interview  with  Captain  Ballowe.  During  said  inter- 
view he  informed  me  that  the  schooner  Columbia  was  captured  by  the 
enemy,  and  that  there  must  have  been  at  least  100  of  the  enemy  on 
board  of  her.  They  also  captured  a small  sail-boat  with  passengers 
(the  number  I did  not  ascertain),  which  had  been  sent  by  the  enemy 
out  to  the  steamship,  and  that  he  expected  to  be  attacked  by  the  enemy 
with  about  300  men,  and  that  he  wanted  100  more  men. 

I will  also  state,  sir,  that  the  enemy  set  the  schooner  on  fire,  and  that 
it  was  burning  when  I got  to  San  Luis.  Thus  matters  stood  when  I 
arrived.  I detailed  a scout  from  my  party,  on  ascertaining  the  above, 
to  proceed  to  Velasco,  to  report  the  condition  of  affairs  to  Colonel  Bates. 
I went  from  the  island  to  the  mainland  for  said  purpose,  and  sent 
Lieutenant  Duff  with  5 men  to  re-enforce  Captain  Ballowe,  and  also 
sent  orders  to  Captain  Ballowe  to  have  all  his  small  boats  concentrated 
at  a point  designated  by  me,  intending  to  follow  immediately  when  I 
had  made  the  necessary  arrangements  with  my  pickets  on  the  main- 

land.  , _ 

During  my  absence,  after  those  arrangements  were  made,  1 went  to 
the  beach  to  cross  over  to  the  island,  at  which  time  I was  informed 
that  Captain  Ballowe  had  not  concentrated  his  boats,  but  had  made 
arrangements  for  abandoning  the  island,  having  sent  back  Lieutenant 
Duff,  with  the  5 men  that  I sent  him  and  his  entire  company,  under 
command  of  his  first  lieutenant,  reserving  only  13  men  on  the  island, 
all  of  which  acts  were  contrary  to  my  orders,  and  in  my  opinion  prema- 
ture and  not  necessary ; and  on  the  arrival  of  the  first  lieutenant  he 
informed  me  that  Captain  Ballowe  and  13  men  were  coming  off  the 
island  at  once.  I then  ordered  the  first  lieutenant  (having  waited  some 
time  for  the  arrival  of  Captain  Ballowe)  to  collect  all  the  small  boats 
that  he  could,  and  after  considerable  delay  he  succeeded  in  collecting 
three  or  four  small  boats,  which  would  have  only  carried  about  four 
men  each.  I then  waited  with  the  boats  and  the  men  under  my  com- 
mand on  the  east  end  of  the  peninsula,  momentarily  expecting  Captain 
Ballowe’s  arrival,  expecting  some  information  from  him.  Not  daring 


548  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

to  trust  my  command  to  any  person  else  in  case  of  an  attack  by  the 
enemy,  and  while  thus  waiting,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Brown,  with  the 
balance  of  Captain  Moseley’s  men,  arrived.  After  consulting  with 
[Lieutenant]  Colonel  Brown  I went  over  to  the  fort,  and  found  Captain 
Ballowe,  Lieutenant  Taylor,  and  a few  men  at  the  fort ; the  balance  of 
his  command  were  scattered  about. 

I remained  at  the  fort  until  daylight,  at  which  time  I discovered  four 
boats,  two  of  which  belonged  to  the  enemy,  and  two  with  the  passen- 
gers and  crew  of  the  Columbia,  that  had  been  captured.  They  were 
then  lying  about  one  mile  and  a half  from  the  fort.  As  soon  as  I dis- 
covered them  I ordered  Captain  Ballowe  to  fire  on  the  enemy’s  boats, 
which  he  did,  this  being  the  first  cannon-shot  fired,  though  the  steamer 
had  been  lying  since  1 o’clock  the  previous  day  within  firing  distance 
of  the  fort.  After  firing  [Lieutenant]  Colonel  Brown  arrived  at  the 
fort,  when  our  shot  was  answered  by  one  from  the  steamship.  [Lieu- 
tenant] Colonel  Brown  then  took  command  and  fired  again,  exchanging 
some  six  shots,  none  of  which  took  effect.  The  captured  passengers 
and  crew  of  the  Columbia  having  been  sent  on  shore  from  the  steamer, 
she  weighed  anchor  and  put  to  sea. 

Colonel,  I will  say,  in  conclusion,  that  had  the  orders  I issued  to 
Captain  Ballowe  on  my  arrival  been  carried  out,  I have  not  the  slightest 
doubt  but  that  I could  have  got  between  the  steamer  and  the  party 
Sent  to  burn  the  cotton  schooner  and  captured  every  one  of  them  • but 
my  orders  being  disregarded,  all  my  efforts  proved  abortive. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  S.  PERRY, 

Major , Bates ’ Regiment. 

Col.  J.  Bates,  Commanding  Bates ’ Regiment. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Copt.  8.  L.  8.  Ballowe , Thirteenth  Texas  Infantry. 

Fort  San  Luis,  Tex.,  April  5,  1862. 

Sir  : 1 have  to  report  to  you  the  capture  of  Second  Lieut.  O.  W.  Ed- 
wards and  7 others  of  my  command  off  this  post  on  yesterday  by  the 
Federal  screw  propeller  Montgomery,  Captain  Hunter,  under  the  fol- 
lowing circumstances,  viz  : She  appeared  off  the  bar  with  English  col- 
ors, with  a signal  for  a pilot,  and  fired  a blank  cartridge  and  anchored. 
After  some  time  Lieutenant  Edwards  sent  the  life-boat  out  to  the  bar, 
with  instructions  to  anchor  inside  and  hoist  a white  flag  and  wait  for 
them  to  meet  them  with  a boat  from  the  steamer.  The  crew  obeyed 
instructions,  but  the  steamer  refusing  to  send  a boat,  as  expected,  they 
raised  anchor  and  returned  to  the  fort.  By  this  time  Mr.  A.  G.  Follett 
arrived  at  the  fort  with  the  intention  of  getting  the  life-boat  and  a crew 
and  going  out  to  her,  and  was  so  well  satisfied  that  she  was  an  English 
vessel,  that  he  induced  the  lieutenant  to  take  a boat  and  go  out.  They 
went  aboard  about  3 p.  m.  I returned  to  my  quarters  at  3.30  p.  m.  and 
watched  their  movements  until  night.  About  this  time  I saw  one  boat 
leave  the  steamer  and  come  in  the  direction  of  the  fort,  and  as  soon  as 
she  arrived  inside  the  bar  I discovered  that  there  were  two  instead  of 
one,  and  supposed  their  destination  to  be  the  schooner  Columbia,  lying 
in  the  bay  and  laden  with  cotton,  or  else  that  they  intended  an  attack 
on  this  island.  It  soon  grew  so  dark,  however,  that  I could  not  see 
them,  and  made  my  arrangements  as  best  I could  with  my  small  force 


Chap.  XXI.] 


SKIRMISH  AT  ALBUQUERQUE,  N.  MEX. 


549 


to  receive  tliem,  hut  the  sentinel  placed  near  the  entrance  to  the  canal 
saw  them  going  to  the  schooner  and  fired  on  them.  My  first  intention 
was  to  throw  15  or  20  men  on  the  schooner,  hut  it  would  have  taken  all 
the  boats  I had  to  do  so,  and  only  left  me  with  about  that  number  of 
men  and  no  means  of  retreat  in  case  I should  be  compelled  to  do  so. 
Believing  it  to  be  unwise  and  unsafe  to  attempt  to  save  her  and  sustain 
myself  on  the  island,  1 concluded  to  let  her  go,  knowing  that  it  was  im- 
possible for  them  to  get  her  out,  the  wind  and  tide  both  being  against 
them.  I had  also  sent  to  Major  Perry  for  re-enforcements,  by  the  aid 
of  which  I hoped  to  be  enabled  not  only  to  hold  my  position,  but  to 
take  the  crew  that  had  been  sent  to  the  schooner.  As  soon  as  they 
got  possession  of  her  they  made  a signal-light  on  her,  which  was  an- 
swered by  the  steamer.  After  about  an  hour  the  sentinel  nearest  the 
schooner  saw  three  boats  leave  and  pull  over  near  the  Galveston  shore, 
returning  to  the  steamer,  the  signal-light  still  burning  on  deck  and  no 
evidences  of  her  being  on  fire,  which  forced  me  to  the  conclusion  that 
they  had  left  a crew  on  board  and  went  after  a force  to  attack  me. 

About  11  o’clock  Major  Perry  arrived  and  reported  re-enforcements 
to  the  number  of  25  men  on  the  main-land,  but  that  there  were  only  5 
or  6 of  them  armed,  and  that  he  had  sent  for  40  or  50  more.  I re- 
quested him  to  return  to  his  men  and  as  soon  as  the  others  arrived  to 
bring  them  over. 

* ri]  waited  until  1.30  o’clock  and  no  assistance  came,  and  expecting 
an  attack  every  moment,  and  knowing  that  I had  only  boats  enough 
to  take  off  25  or  30  men,  I deemed  it  prudent  to  send  off  a portion  ot 
my  men,  and  did  so,  with  instructions  that  if  re-enforcements  came  up 
to‘  return  to  the  island.  Lieutenant- Colonel  Brown  arrived  with  re-en- 
forcements on  the  opposite  side  of  the  channel  on  the  main  land  about 
half  an  hour  before  day.  ,.  , 

At  2.20  o’clock  I discovered  the  schooner  to  be  on  fire.  1 continued 
on  my  lines  from  dark  until  daylight. 

The  names  of  my  men  taken  are  as  follows : Second  Lieut.  O.  yv . 
Edwards,  a native  of  Texas ; Orderly  Sergt.  C.  H.  W estervelt,  a native 
of  New  York  : Third  Sergt.  James  Carville,  a native  of  Indiana ; First 
Corp.  William  Turner,  a native  of  England ; Privates  A.  Metcalf,  R. 
W.  Silk,  and  Samuel  Gibson,  natives  of  England,  and  P.  Cornyn,  a 
native  of  Ireland. 

This  report  has  assumed  much  greater  length  than  I intended,  but  I 
have  been  unable  to  give  all  the  circumstances  without  entering  into 
detail. 

With  high  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

6 ’ S.  L.  S.  BALLOWE, 

Captain , Commanding  Post  San  Luis. 

Col.  J.  Bates,  Commanding , Velasco.  Tex . 


APRIL  8,  1862.— Skirmish  at  Albuquerque,  N.  Mex. 


Report  of  Col  Edward  R.  S.  Canby , Nineteenth  U.  S.  Infantry , com - 
manding  Department  of  New  Mexico. 

Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

San  Antonio , N.  Mex.,  April  11,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  in  pursuance  of  the  intention 
reported  in  ray  communication  of  the  31st  ultimo  my  command  (860 


550 


[Chap.  XXI. 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


regulars  and  350  volunteer  troops)  left  Fort  Craig  on  the  1st  instant, 
and  arrived  before  Albuquerque  on  the  afternoon  of  the  8th.  I imme- 
diately made  a demonstration  upon  the  town,  for  the  purpose  of  ascer- 
taining its  strength  and  the  position  of  the  enemy’s  batteries  This 
demonstration  was  made  by  Captain  Graydon’s  Spy  Company,  sup- 
ported by  the  regular  cavalry,  and  developed  the  position  of  the 
batteries.  In  the  skirmish  Major  Duncan,  Third  Cavalry,  was  se- 
riously but  it  is  hoped  not  fatally  wounded.  No  other  casualties  were 
sustained. 


It  was  my  wisli  to  have  made  a junction  if  possible  below  the  Con- 
federate troops  in  order  to  cut  off  their  retreat,  but  the  state  of  our 
supplies  and  the  inferiority  of  our  force  rendered  this  inexpedient,  and 
it  was  determined  to  continue  the  demonstration  before  Albuquerque 
m order  that  the  Confederate  forces  might  be  withdrawn  out  from 
feanta  he,  and  then  by  a night  march  place  my  command  in  a position 
from  which  the  junction  could  be  effected  without  danger  of  opposition 
to  either  column.  Accordingly  the  demonstrations  against  the  town 
were  continued,  and  during  the  night  of  the  9th  and  the  succeeding 
day  the  command  marched  to  this  place.  I am  now  in  communication 
with  the  commander  of  the  troops  from  Fort  Union,  and  can  effect  a 
junction  at  any  point. 

My  spies  from  Santa  Fe  report  that  the  entire  Confederate  force  left 
that  city  and  moved  rapidly  to  Albuquerque  upon  the  news  of  our 
appearance  before  that  place.  Their  preparations  indicate  the  inten- 
tion of  leaving  the  country.  I shall  therefore  remain  at  this  place  to 
watch  their  movements  and  instruct  Colonel  Paul  to  join  me  here. 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  B.  S.  CANBY, 

Colonel  'Nineteenth  Infantry , Commanding  Department. 


To  the  Adjutant-General  of  the  Army,' 

Washington , D.  C. 


APRIL  13-22,  1862.— Pursuit  of  Confederate  forces,  including  skirmish  at 
Peralta,  N.  Mex.,  April  15. 

REPORTS.* 

I*  Col.  Edward  R.  S.  Canby,  Nineteenth  U.  S.  Infantry,  commanding  Depart- 
ment of  New  Mexico. 

Eo.  2.  Col.  Gabriel  R.  Paul,  Fourth  New  Mexico  Infantry,  commanding  district. 

No.  3.  Col.  Benjamin  S.  Roberts,  Fifth  New  Mexico  Infantry,  commanding  district. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  Edward  R.  8.  Canby , Nineteenth  U.  8.  Infantry , com- 
manding Department  of  New  Mexico . 

Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Fort  Craig , N.  Mex.,  April  23,  1862. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  a junction  with  Colonel  Paul's 
command  was  effected  at  Tijeras  on  the  evening  of  the  13th  instant. 
I had  in  the  mean  time  received  information  that  the  Confederate  force 


* See  also  Sibley’s  report  of  engagement  at  Valverde,  p.  506. 


Chap.  XXI] 


SKIRMISH  AT  PERALTA,  N.  MEX. 


551 


had  left  Albuquerque,  moving  down  the  river,  and  during  the  day  and 
nifflit  of  the  14th  the  united  command  was  marched  to  leralta,  3t> 
miles  distant,  arriving  there  before  the  Confederates  had  any  suspicion 
of  the  movement.  On  the  morning  of  the  15th  a mountain  howitzer, 
and  a train  of  7 wagons,  loaded  with  supplies  and  escorted  by  a lieu- 
tenant and  30  men,  were  captured.  In  the  conflict  6 of  the  Conled- 
erates  were  killed,  3 wounded,  and  22  captured.  To  cover  this  move- 
ment Colonel  Paul,  with  his  column  and  three  companies  of  cavalry, 
under  Captain  Morris,  Third  Cavalry,  had  been  detached,  and,  alter 
completing  it,  received  permission  to  clear  the  bosque  in  front  of  1 eralta 
of  the  enemy’s  force  that  then  occupied  it.  After  some  sharp  skir- 
mishing, in  which  our  loss  was  1 killed  and  3 wounded,  this  work  was 
handsomely  executed,  and  the  bosque  in  front  and  rear  of  the  town 

occupied  by  our  troops.  _ , , ,, 

The  point  occupied  by  the  Confederate  troops  was  known  to  be  the 
strongest  (except  Fort  Union)  in  New  Mexico,  and  as  nearly  all  the 
men  had  been  twenty-four  and  many  of  them  thirty-six  hours  without 
food,  no  general  attack  was  designed  until  after  the  approaches  to  the 
place  had  been  thoroughly  reconnoitered  and  the  troops  allowed  time 
to  obtain  food  and  rest.  This  reconnaissance  was  made  on  the  after- 
noon of  the  same  day,  the  points  and  direction  of  attack  selected,  and 
the  camp  of  the  command  advanced  to  a point  nearer  the  town,  and 
where  the  trains  could  be  guarded  by  a smaller  number  of  men.  During 
the  night  the  enemy  abandoned  his  position  and  crossed  to  the  right 
bank  of  the  river,  leaving  his  sick  and  wounded  behind  him,  without 
attendance,  without  medicines,  and  almost  without  food. 

After  detaching  the  staffs  officers  attached  to  department  headquar- 
ters to  make  arrangements  for  future  operations  and  the  train  that 
could  be  spared  for  supplies  the  pursuit  was  continued  down  the  left 
bank  of  the  river  (the  shortest  route),  with  the  intention  of  crossing  at 
La  Joya,  Polvadera,  Sabino,  or  Fort  Craig,  if  the  enemy  should  not  be 
overtaken  sooner.  On  the  night  of  that  day  our  camp  was  5 miles  m 
his  rear.  On  the  16th  we  had  nearly  overtaken  the  rear  of  his  column, 
and  the  march  was  continued  during  the  remainder  of  the  day  in  sight 
and  almost  within  cannon  range,  but  on  opposite  sides  of  the  river.  At 
night  our  oamps  were  directly  opposite,  but  during  the  night  he  aban- 
doned a large  portion  of  his  train,  38  wagons  and  the  supplies  that 
thev  contained,  and  fled  into  the  mountains.  After  making  arrange- 
ments for  securing  the  property  abandoned  by  the  enemy  the  march 
was  continued  to  Polvadera.  At  this  place  the  command  was  halted 
for  a day,  in  order  to  assure  myself  of  the  position  and  movements 
of  the  enemy  and  to  secure  the  safety  of  a supply  train  in  our  rear. 
These  objects  having  been  accomplished,  the  march  was  resumed  and 
continued  until  we  reached  this  post  on  the  afternoon  of  the  22d  (yes- 


terday). 

The  Confederate  force  is  still  in  the  mountains  west  of  us.  If  they 
have  taken  the  route  by  the  Miembres  it  will  be  impossible  to  over- 
take them.  If  they  have  taken  that  by  Canada  Alamosa  I am  not 
without  hopes  of  intercepting  them,  although  my  scouts  report  that 
they  have  abandoned  everything  that  would  encumber  them  in  their 
flight. 

Aery  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

J ED.  E.  S.  CANBY, 

Colonel  Nineteenth  Infantry , Commanding  Department. 

The  Adjutakt-General  op  the  Army,  Washington , D.  C. 


552 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX,,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Cap.  XXI 


No. 


Report  of  Col.  Gabriel  II.  Paul,  Fourth  Few  Mexico  Infantry,  command- 

mg  district. 

Headquarters  Southern  District  New  Mexico 
,,  Fort  Craig,  N.  Mex.,  May  1,  1862. 

general  : I ha  ve  the  honor  to  report  that  I left  Fort  Union  N 
Mex.,  on  the  6th  of  April,  1862,  in  command  of  a column  to  form  a 

Marchni869  V’  CiUlby’  wh°  had  left  Craig  on  the™ st! 

ich,  186^.  llie  junction  was  made  at  Tijeras,  and  our  combined 

Anr?f  Tt° ped  ffgamst,the  enemy’  who  retreated  before  us.  On  the  15tli 
4P”’?  at  Peralta,  we  had  several  skirmishes  with  the  enemy,  and  during 

wnVwu  10  eva?uated  Peralta  and  continued  his  retreat.  ' The  pursuit 

we  lmUedU.P  tV,  °Ur  arr-1Val  aj.this  post’  wheu  from  want  of  provisions 
IL™.  •’,tj  enemy  in  a disorganized  state,  leaving  behind  him 
wagons,  sick,  &c.,  is  making  his  way  out. of  the  Territory.  I was  left 

Fort  Oridg  m the  cominand  of  this  district>  with  my  headquarters  at 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Colonel  Fourth  Regiment  New  Mexico  Voh.,  Comdg.  Pist. 
The  Adjutant-General  U.  8.  Army, 

Washington , ]).  C. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Col,  Benjamin  8.  Roberts,  Fifth  New  Mexico  Infantry,  com- 

manding  district. 

Hdqrs.  Central,  Santa  Fe,  and  Northern  Mil.  Dist. 

Department  of  New  Mexico, 
Santa  Fe,  JV.  Mex.,  April-  23,  1862. 

CpnfrnfR^ri  J ua'Ve  to  ^Port  myself  in  compiand  of  the 

£tr5  ?anta  Fe,  and  Northern  Military  Districts,  Department  of 
New  Mexico,  and  that  I have  established  and  garrisoned  the  posts  at 

^lbGXe^TlSihld  >SaiUt-a  recently  occupied  by  Confederate  troops 
Tpvan  bl  ^ S ^figade.  . It  will  gratify  you  to  know  that  the 

Texan  troops  are  m retreat  out  of  the  country,  having  been  compelled 

ufir01!!!  0I)eratl?D-S  t0  abando?1  most  of  their  supplies  of  all  kinds  and  to 
take  the  mountain  route  behind  the  Socorro  range  to  avoid  the  capture 

TprrhTrASm  TL  re™amm£  f°Jce  f the  3>000  trooPs  that  invaded  the 
Territory.  They  have  abandoned  their  sick  and  wounded  everywhere 

ft  retreat,  and  are  leaving  in  a state  of  demoralization 
and  suffenng  that  has  few  examples  m any  war.  The  long  line  of  their 
letieat  over  Jornada  and  wastes  of  country,  without  water  and  that 
furnish  no  supplies  will  render  their  march  extremely  difficult  and 
aggravate  the  ordinary  sufferings  of  a disorganized  army  under  defeat. 
The  broken-down  condition  of  all  our  animals,  the  want  of  cavalry,  and 
deficiencies  of  all  our  supplies  will  make  a successful  pursuit  equally 
impracticable,  if  not  impossible. 

reports  of  the  operations  of  my  division  in  the  field  from  the  1st 
to  the  loth  instant  will  reach  you  in  time  through  the  proper  channels. 


chai'.  xxi.  i 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


553 


I effected  a junction  with  Colonel  Paul’s  command  at  San  Antonio  on 
the  loth,  after  a demonstration  on  Albuquerque  and  artillery  combats 
there  on  the  8th  and  sharp  skirmishing  on  the  8th  and  9th.  The  last 
engagement  was  at  Peralta,  on  the  15th.  That  drove  the  main  Confed- 
erate forces  from  that  position  and  put  their  army  in  utter  rout. 

We  have  great  numbers  of  their  prisoners,  but  I am  unable  to  give 
the  figures  with  accuracy,  and  some  f>0  wagons  of  their  supply  train 
and  two  pieces  of  artillery  have  fallen  into  our  hands. 

Colonel  Canby  is  on  the  pursuit  with  bo.th  the  northern  and  southern 
divisions  of  the  army,  and  this  information  is  communicated  indirectly, 
because  it  will  be  many  days  before  his  official  reports  can  be  made. 

According  to  the  most  reliable  information  General  Sibley  has  not 
left  1,200  men  of  the  army  of  3,000  that  appeared  before  Fort  Craig 
on  February  13th,  and  his  retreat  is  the  complete  annihilation  of  his 
remaining  forces. 

I am,  general,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ s ’ B.  S.  ROBERTS, 

* Colonel , Commanding. 

General  LorLnzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  TL  8.  Army , Washington , D.  C. 


APRIL  13-SEPTEMBER  20,  1862.— Expedition  from  Southern  California, 
through  Arizona,  to  Northwestern  Texas  and  New  Mexico. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Brig.  Gen.  James  H.  Carleton,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  expedition. 

No.  2.— Lieut.  Col.  Edward  E.  Eyre,  First  California  Cavalry. 

No.  3.— Surg.  James  M.  McNulty,  U.  S.  Army,  Medical  Inspector. 


No.  1. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  H.  Carleton , II.  8.  Army , commanding  expe- 
dition. 

Headquarters  Column  from  California, 

Fort  Barrett , Fima  Villages , Ariz .,  May  25,  1862. 

Major:  The  advance  guard  of  this  column,  under  Lieut.  Col.  Joseph 
B.  West,  First  California  Volunteer  Infantry,  took  possession  of  Tuc 
son,  in  this  Territory,  on  the  20th  instant,  without  firing  a shot.  All 
the  secession  troops  who  were  in  the  Territory  and  all  of  the  secession- 
ists, so  far  as  we  can  learn,  have  fled — the  troops  to  the  Rio  Grande, 
the  citizens  to  Sonora.  Our  arrival  is  hailed  with  great  joy  by  all  the 
people  who  remain.  We  shall  doubtless  be  able  to  get  some  forage, 
flour,  and  beef,  and  perhaps  sugar,  from  Sonora;  but  of  this  I will 
write  you  in  detail  from  Tucson  in  a few  days.  A rumor  comes  from 
the  Bio  Grande  that  Sibley  has  met  with  a serious  reverse. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  H.  CABLETON, 
Colonel  First  California  Volunteers , Commanding . 

Maj.  Bichard  C.  Drum, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen .,  V.  8.  Army , 8an  Francisco , Cal. 


554 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[Chap.  XXL 


Headquarters  Column  from  California, 

Tucson , Ariz.,  July  22,  1862. 

Major  : In  my  letter  to  you,  dated  June  18,  I informed  you  that  I 
had  sent  Expressman  John  Jones,  Sergeant  Wheeling,  of  Company  F, 
Eirst  California  Volunteer  Infantry,  and  a Mexican  guide  named  Chavez’ 
with  communications  for  General  Canby. 

These  men  started  from  Tucson  on  the  evening  of  June  15.  On  the 
18th  they  were  attacked  by  a party  of  Apaches,  and  Sergeant  Wheeling 
and  the  guide  (Chavez)  were  killed,  and  Jones,  almost  by  a miracle, 
succeeded  in  getting  through  the  Indians,  and  after  a hot  pursuit  on 
their  part  made  out  to  reach  the  Eio  Grande  at  a point  known  as 
Picacho,  6 miles  above  Mesilla.  He  was  taken  prisoner  by  the  secession 
ists,  who  brought  him  before  Colonel  Steele  (William  Steele,  late  Second 
Dragoons),  who  examined  him,  took  his  dispatches,  and  threw  him  into 
jail.  He  managed,  however,  to  get  word  to  General  Canby  that  he 
was  there  and  that  the  Column  from  California  was  really  coming — an 
achievement  that  was  considered  absolutely  impracticable.  However, 
as  soon  as  Steele  ascertained  this  matter  as  a fact,  hurried  preparations 
were  made  to  abandon  the  country.  Meantime  General  Canby  had  sent 
a large  force  to  Fort  Craig  to  move  on  Mesilla  as  soon  as  transportation 
could  be  provided.  A strong  reconnoitering  force,  under  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Eyre,  left  Tucson  on  June  21,  and  after  a hard  march  arrived 
on  the  Eio  Grande  near  Fort  Thorn  on  July  4. 

On  the  5th  this  force  occupied  that  work,  it  having  been  abandoned 
by  the  enemy.  Here  the  colors  were  run  up  by  the  California  troops. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Eyre  was  then  re-enforced  by  a squadron  of  the 
Third  IJ.  S.  Cavalry,  and  having  constructed  a raft  and  built  a boat, 
was  at  the  last  advices  about  to  cross  the  river  to  march  on  Fillmore 
and  Fort  Bliss,  in  Texas.  Steele,  meanwhile,  had  abandoned  Mesilla 
and  was  making  his  way  to  Texas.  The  Mexican  population  was  rising 
on  every  hand  and  were  killing  his  men  and  running  off  his  stock.  It 
is  said  that  Teel’s  battery,  C.  S.  Army,  the  one  taken  from  Canby  at 
Val verde,  had  been  attacked  some  30  miles  below  Fort  Bliss  and  taken 
by  the  people,  who  had  hovered  around  it  to  the  number  of  1,500.  It 
was  believed  that  neither  Steele  nor  Teel  would  ever  reach  Texas. 
Sibley  and  Colonel  Eeily  had  fallen  back  on  Texas  in  May,  leaving 
Steele  with  what  was  considered  force  enough  to  hold  Arizona. 

All  this  news  came  last  night.  It  was  brought  by  Captain  McCleave,  I 
who  had  been  exchanged  for  two  lieutenants,  one  of  whom  was  Steele’s  * 
adjutant,  who  had  been  taken  by  Captain  Fritz,  First  California  Vol- 
unteer Cavalry.  Captain  Fritz  went  after  Colonel  Steele  with  a flag  of 
truce  to  effect  the  exchange.  He  overtook  Colonel  Steele  20  miles  below 
Fort  Fillmore  in  full  retreat. 

As  you  have  been  informed,  the  uncommon  drought  of  this  summer 
had  so  dried  up  the  country  that  it  was  impracticable  to  move  a large 
force  in  the  direction  of  the  Eio  Grande  until  the  rains  commenced 
falling.  Usually  this  occurs  by  June  24,  but  this  year  there  has  been 
but  little  fall  even  yet.  The  column,  however,  has  been  taking  the  road 
by  installments,  commencing  with  Eoberts’  company  of  infantry  and  I 
Cremony’s  cavalry,  which  was  sent  with  25,000  pounds  of  corn  and  thirty 
days’  rations  for  Eyre  in  case  he  was  obliged  to  fall  back  to  the  Eio  de 
Sauz,  128  miles  from  Tucson,  starting  on  July  9.  (See  letter  to  Colonel 
West,  marked  A,*  herewith  inclosed.)  I also  inclose  Colonel  Eyre’s 
report,!  dated  at  Fort  Thorn,  July  6,  1862.  This  officer  deserves  great  ! 
credit  for  his  enterprise.  I trust  the  Governor  will  notice  the  conduct 


Not  found. 


t See  report  No.  2,  p.  585. 


HAP.  XXI.] 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


555 


,f  himself  and  men.  This  report  is  marked  B.t  I also  send  a subse- 
inent  report  of  Colonel  Eyre’s,  dated  July  8,  1862  (Ct),  and  also  one 
till  later,  dated  July  13, 1862,  marked  D,*  and  still  another,  dated  July 
4 1862,  marked  Est  also  a letter  from  Colonel  Chivington,  marked  F ; * 
Iso  a letter  from  General  Canby,  marked  G,*  and  letters*  from  General 
lanby  to  Colonel  Chivington,  dated  June  9, 16, 18,  27,  and  July  1 and  4, 
&62.  I also  inclose  General  Orders,  Nos.  10  and  11,  from  these  head- 


The  troops  marched  on  the  days  specified.  I shall  leave  this  post 
o-morrow  and  move  rapidly  to  the  front.  If  a demonstration  on  North- 
western Texas  will  serve  as  a diversion  in  favor  of  forces  landing  on 
he  coast  that  State  will  soon  be  ours.  The  country  is  still  dry,  but  we 
ball  do  our  best. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  __ 

1 JAMES  H.  CARLETON, 

Brigadier- General,  JJ.  S.  Army. 

Maj.  Richard  C.  Drum, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  San  Francisco , Cal. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 


General  Orders,  i Hdqrs.  Column  from  California, 

jsfo,  10.  f Tucson , Ariz .,  July  17,  1862. 

The  Column  from  California  will  move  to  the  Rio  Grande  in  the  fol- 


owing  order  i 

I.  On  the  20th  instant  Col.  Joseph  R.  West,  First  California  Vol- 
mteer  Infantry,  with  Companies  B,  C,  and  K,  of  his  regiment,  and 
Company  G,  of  the  Fifth  California  Volunteer  Infantry.  This  command 
it  the  Rio  de  Sauz  will  receive  the  addition  of  Company  E,  of  West’s 
regiment,  and  Thompson’s  mountain  howitzers.  Maj.  Theodore  A.  Coult, 
>f  the  Fifth  California  Volunteer  Infantry,  is  assigned  to  duty  with  this 
3ommand.  Colonel  West  will  take  40,000  rounds  of  rifle-musket  ain- 

31  ll^On  the  21st  instant  a second  command,  consisting  of  Shinn’s  light 
battery,  Third  U.  S.  Artillery,  and  Companies  A,  First,  and  B,  Fifth 
California  Volunteer  Infantry,  will  take  up  its  line  of  march  for  the 
Rio  Grande.  This  command  will  be  supplied  with  all  the  artillery  am- 
munition now  here  which  pertains  to  Shinn’s  battery  and  17 ,000  rounds 


of  ammunition  for  the  rifle  musket.  . 

III.  On  the  23d  instant  a third  command,  under  Lieut.  Col.  Edwin  A. 
Rigg  consisting  of  Companies  I,  F,  D,  and  H,  First  California  Volun- 
teer Infantry,  will  start  for  the  Rio  Grande.  This  command  will  have 

28.000  rounds  of  ammunition  for  the  rifle  musket. 

IV.  Each  of  these  commands  will  be  supplied  with  subsistence  for 
thirty  days,  with  at  least  two  tents  for  each  company  and  with  a good 
supply  of  intrenching  tools.  Each  command  will  also  liatfe  one  hos- 
pital tent  complete  and  an  ambulance  for  the  sick  and  wounded,  and 
will  have  a forge  and  material  for  shoeing  horses  and  mules,  and  also 
a water-tank  and  a good  supply  of  water-kegs. 

V.  On  the  31st  instant  a train  of  wagons  laden  with  forty  days’  sup- 
plies of  subsistence  for  the  whole  command  hereby  ordered  forward, 
with  the  following  ammunition,  viz,  40,000  rounds  of  the  rifle  musket, 

30.000  rounds  for  the  Sharp’s  carbine,  and  20,000  rounds  for  the  navy 
size  Colt’s  revolver,  together  with  such  other  supplies  of  clothing, 


* Not  found. 


t See  report  No.  2,  p.  585. 


556  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX  , N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXL 

tents,  tools,  spare  wagon  timbers,  leather,  wagon  grease,  horseshoes! 
mule-shoes,  horseshoe-nails,  stationery,  &c.,  as  may  be  required,  will 
leave  Tucson  for  the  Rio  Grande,  escorted  by  Companies  A,  Fifth  Cal 
ifornia  Volunteer  Infantry,  and  A,  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry 
each  furnished  with  sixty  days’  rations.  This  command  will  have  ar 
ambulance,  forge,  and  water-tank,  and  such  other  articles  as  may  b< 
required  to  render  it  efficient. 

VI.  Company  D,  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry,  will  move  from 
Tubac  directly  for  the  crossing  of  the  San  Pedro,  where  it  will  arrive 
on  the  22d  instant.  From  that  point  it  will  form  the  advance  guard  of 
the  column,  and  habitually,  unless  otherwise  ordered,  will  march  one 
day  in  front  of  West’s  command. 

VII.  Captain  Cremony’s  company  (B,  of  the  Second  California  Vol 
unteer  Cavalry)  will  march  near  the  head  of  the  column,  to  serve  as 
flankers  or  as  vedettes,  as  occasion  may  require. 

VIII.  The  staff*  officers  attached  to  these  headquarters,  except  the 
chief  . commissary,  will,  until  further  orders,  move  with  West’s  com 
maud.  Surgeon  Prentiss,  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry,  will 
move  with  the  second  command,  and  Surgeon  Wooster,  Fifth  California 
Volunteer  Infantry,  will  move  with  Rigg’s  command. 

IX.  The  chief  quartermaster,  chief  commissary,  and  medical  director 
are  charged  with  giving  the  most  perfect  efficiency  possible  to  all  mat- 
ters pertaining  to  the  public  service  in  their  several  departments,  keep 
ing  in  mind  the  fact  that  this  column  is  presumed  now  to  move  forward 
prepared  at  all  points  to  engage  the  enemy  at  any  moment  by  night  or 
by  day.  Let  nothing  be  omitted  or  neglected  which  will  give  due 
effect  to  this  idea,  whether  on  the  march  or  on  the  field  of  battle, 

X.  That  every  soldier  may  move  forward  with  a light,  free  step,  now 
that  we  approach  the^enemy,  he  will  no  longer  be  required  to  carry  his 
knapsack. 

XI.  This  is  the  time  when  every  soldier  in  this  column  looks  forward 
with  a confident  hope  that  he,  too,  will  have  the  distinguished  honor 
of  striking  a blow  for  the  old  Stars  and  Stripes  ; when  he,  tqo,  feels  in 
his  heart  that  he  is  the  champion  of  the  holiest  cause  that  has  ever  yet 
nerved  the  arm  of  a patriot.  The  general  commanding  the  column  de- 
sires that  such  a time  shall  be  remembered  by  all,  but  more  particularly 
by  those  who  from  their  guilt  have  been  so  unfortunate  as  to  be  pris 
oners  on  such  an  occasion.  He  therefore  orders  that  all  soldiers  un 
der  his  command  who  may  be  now  held  in  confinement  shall  be  at  once 
released. 

By  command  of  Brigadier- General  Carle  ton : 

BEX.  C.  CUTLER, 

First  Lieutenant , First  Cal.  Vol.  Inf.,  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen. 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Column  from  California, 

No.  11.  j Tucson , Ariz .,  July  21,  1862. 

I.  All  of  the  Territory  of  Arizona  west  of  a meridian  line  running  i 
through  what  is  known  as  Apache  Pass,  on  the  Eutterfield  Mail  Route, 
hence  to  Mesilla,  will  constitute  a military  district,  to  be  known  as  the 
District  of  Western  Arizona,  the  headquarters  of  which  shall  be  Tuc 
son,  Ariz.  Maj.  David  Ferguson,  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry, 
is  hereby  placed  in  command  of  this  district,  as  well  as  of  the  post  and  I 
town  of  Tucson. 

II.  The  duties  which  devolve  upon  Major  Ferguson  by  this  order  are 


hap.  XXI.]  THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


557 


additional  to  those  he  is  required  to  perform  as  chief  commissary  of 
his  column.  He  is  also  empowered,  to  make  estimates  of  all  funds 
jecessary  to  he  used  in  the  quartermaster’s  department  and  subsistence 
lepartment,  so  far  as  the  wants  and  necessities  of  those  departments 
nay  be  concerned  direct  to  the  proper  officers  at  the  headquarters 
department  of  the  Pacific.  Major  Ferguson  will  disburse  and  direct 
he  disbursement  of  these  funds  when  received  to  the  best  interests 
>f  the  public  service,  having  reference  first  to  having  on  hand  an  ade- 
quate supply  of  all  articles  of  prime  necessity,  such  as  food  and  forage; 
ikewise  all  that  will  insure  mobility  to  the  column  by  having  its  means 
)f  transportation  always  in  as  good  order  and  good  repair  as  practica- 


ole. 

III.  Great  vigilance  will  be  exercised  by  Major  Ferguson  to  see  that 
ao  successful  attack  is  made  on  his  trains  within  his  district  by  seces- 
sionists or  Indians.  The  troops  in  the  district  are  to  be  kept  in  fight- 
ing condition,  and  the  public  animals  and  public  stores  so  carefully 
guarded  a.s  to  secure  against  loss  by  surprise  or  by  depredation  and 
secure  against  destruction  by  fire  or  by  flood. 

By  command  of  Brigadier-General  Oarleton  : 

BEK.  0.  CL  I LEE, 

First  Lieutenant , First  Cal.  Vol.  Inf.,  A.  A.  A.  G. 


Headquarters  Column  from  California, 

Ojo  de  la  Vaca , Ariz.,  August  2,  1862. 

General:  General  George  Wright,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  the 
Department  of  the  Pacific,  recommended  to  the  General-m-Chiel  that 
a force  from  California,  to  consist  of  a battery  of  four  guns  (Company 
A U S Third  Artillery),  the  First  Regiment  of  Infantry  Calitornia 
Volunteers,  and  five  companies  of  the  First  Cavalry  California  Volun- 
teers should  cross  the  Yuma  and  Colorado  Deserts,  and  recapture  the 
posts  in  Arizona  and  Southern  Kew  Mexico,  then  supposed  to  be  m 
the  hands  of  the  rebels,  and  open  the  Southern  Overland  Mail  Route. 

These  recommendations  or  suggestions  were  approved  by  the  Gen- 
: eral-in-Chief,  and  arrangements  were  set  on  foot  to  carry  them  into 
' effect.  But  what  with  unprecedented  floods  in  California  and  uncom- 
mon drought  on  the  Yuma  and  Colorado  Deserts,  and  other  serious 
difficulties  which  had  to  be  encountered,  it  has  been  quite  impossible 
to  bring  forward  the  force  above  indicated  in  a fighting  condition  at  an 
earlier  date  than  the  present. 

I was  baffled  in  every  effort  I attempted  to  communicate  with  you. 
My  first  note,  marked  A,  after  many  days  came  back  to  me,  the  mes- 
senger not  being  able  to  ascend  the  Salt  Fork  of  the  Gila  on  account 
of  high  water.  My  second  note,  marked  B,  after  several  days  was 
returned  from  Sonora,  as  the  Mexican  expressmen  were  too  much  afraid 
to  encounter  the  dangers  of  the  journey  through  Chihuahua  to  El  Paso 
and  so  on  to  your  headquarters.  Of  the  3 men  whom  I sent  with  my 
third  notes,  marked  C and  D,  2 were  killed  by  the  Apache  Indians 
near-  the  Chiricahua  Mountains  on  the  evening  of  the  18th  of  June 
last.  The  third,  after  a miraculous  escape  and  a perilous  ride,  arrived 
on  the  Rio  Grande  at  sunset  on  the  evening  of  the  20th,  160  miles  from 
where  his  companions  were  murdered.  Here,  in  an  exhausted,  halt- 
delirious  state,  he  was  captured  by  secessionists,  and,  together  with  his 
, dispatches,  taken  to  Colonel  Steele,  C.  S.  Army.  On  the  17th  of  June 
I directed  Lieutenant-Colonel  Eyre,  First  Cavalry,  California  \ olun- 


558  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXL 

teers,  witli  a small  command  from  his  regiment,  to  make  a forced  recon- 
naissance toward  the  Rio  Grande.  He  started  irom  Tucson  on  this  duty 
on  the  evening  of  June  21.  (See  my  letter  to  him,  marked  E.) 

On  the  8th  of  July  I directed  some  supplies  to  be  forwarded  half  way 
to  the  Rio  Grande,  to  provide  for  the  emergency  of  Eyre’s  being  obliged 
to  fall  back.  (See  letter  to  Colonel  West,  marked  F.)  Roberts’  com 
mand,  which  acted  as  a guard  to  these  supplies,  had  a fight  with  the 
Apache  Indians  at  Apache  Pass,  in  which  he  lost  2 killed  and  2 wounded 
but  in  which  he  succeeded  in  driving  the  Indians,  as  he  reports,  with  a 
loss  of  9 killed  on  their  side. 

From  June  7 until  July  17  I was  busily  employed  in  repairing  trains 
in  getting  supplies  up  from  Fort  Yuma  and  from  Sonora,  and  in  regu- 
lating somewhat  the  affairs  of  Western  Arizona.  On  the  17th  July 
without  yet  having  heard  from  the  Rio  Grande,  I made  the  order  for 
the  advance  to  that  river.  It  is  herewith  inclosed,  marked  G.* 

On  the  evening  of  the  21st  of  July,  after  the  second  detachment  of 
the  column  had  started  from  Tucson,  I received  your  note  of  the  4th 
ultimo,  together  with  copies  of  some  orders  and  instructions  to  the 
commander  of  the  Southern  Military  District,  Department  of  Hew 
Mexico. 

I left  Tucson  on  the  23d  ultimo  and  arrived  at  this  point  on  the  1st 
instant.  I left  100  men  at  Apache  Pass.  (See  General  Orders,  Ro.  12 
marked  H.t ) 

Colonel  West’s  detachment  will  arrive  here  to-morrow;  Captain 
Willis’ the  next  day;  Lieutenant-Colonel  Rigg’s  on  the  5th.  I shall 
halt  two  or  three  days  on  the  Miembres  to  recruit  and  let  the  column 
close  up,  and  shall  then  proceed  by  the  stage  route  to  Mesilla. 

I received  your  letter  of  the  9th  of  July  day  before  yesterday. 

It  was  not  the  intention  of  General  Wright  to  throw  a command 
into  your  department  which  would  embarrass  you  to  keep  it  supplied. 
The  troops  from  California  were  to  draw  nearly  all  their  stores  from 
Fort  Yuma,  to  which  point  they  are  shipped  from  San  Francisco. 
Some  were  to  be  bought  in  Sonora.  My  supply  tram,  which  leaves 
Tucson  to-day,  will  have  forty  days’  rations  for  the  whole  command 
from  the  20th  instant.  Even  those  rations  of  yours  consumed  by 
Eyre’s  cavalry  I had  hoped  to  replace,  learning  to  what  straits  you 
had  been  put  for  subsistence  for  your  own  command.  I am  happy  to 
know  that  you  have  now  such  an  abundance  of  stores,  and  should  I 
fall  short  of  anything,  I will  cheerfully  avail  myself  of  your  authority 
to  draw  on  your  depot  at  Fort  Craig  for  what  I need. 

A train  of  about  50  wagons  will  ply  between  Fort  Yuma  and  Tucson, 
starting  from  Tucson,  say,  the  12th  instant,  to  accumulate  and  keep  up 
a good  supply  at  that  point.  A contractor  has  given  bonds  to  keep 
the  Column  from  California  supplied  with  fresh  beef  at  9 cents  a pound. 
Stores  can  be  hauled  by  private  trains  from  the  port  of  Guaymas  to 
Tucson  for  five  cents  a pound.  This  latter  information  may  be  of 
service  to  you.  I have  no  subsistence  funds  here;  the  paper  marked 
If  will  exhibit  the  condition  of  those  in  the  quartermaster’s  depart- 
ment. 

The  paper  marked  Kf  will  tell  you  of  my  means  of  transportation 
after  the  arrival  of  the  train  which  leaves  Tucson  to-day,  minus,  say, 
three  teams  left  at  Fort  Bowie,  Apache  Pass,  Chiricahua  Mountains,  j 

All  my  troops  except  one  company  of  cavalry  have  pay  due  from 
February  28,  1862.  It  will  be  a great  kindness  to  have  them  paid,  if 


* Inclosure  G is  a duplicate  of  General  Orders,  No.  10,  p.  555. 
t Omitted  as  of  no  present  importance. 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


559 


!hap.  XXL] 


■t  can  be  done  without  inconvenience  to  the  troops  of  your  own  depart- 
aent.  I have  no  paymaster  with  me,  and  was  not  counting  on  the 
roops  being  paid  by  your  paymaster.  The  men  are  sadly  in  want  of 
imall  stores,  tobacco,  &c.  We  have  no  sutler,  and  of  course,  on  the 
lesert,  the  soldiers  have  exhausted  what  few  necessaries  they  happened 
)v  chance  to  have. 

*1  pave,  say,  100  rounds  of  ammunition  for  small-arms  per  man,  and 
>an  soon  have  more  from  Fort  Yuma,  and  I have  for  the  four  pieces  of 
trtillery  the  ammunition  named  in  a letter  to  Lieutenant  Shinn,  U.  S. 
Third  Artillery,  marked  L* 

The  men  have  only  fatigue  clothing  and  that  somewhat  worn,  but  1 
expect  some  up  from  Fort  Yuma  very  soon.  Can  you  spare  any  ? 

Capt.  Tredwell  Moore,  assistant  quartermaster,  is  the  only  staff 
officer  belonging  to  the  army  with  me,  and  he  will  be  relieved  from 
luty  in  this  column  shortly  after  my  arrival  at  Mesilla.  I have  with 
ne  two  surgeons,  one  assistant  and  one  acting  assistant  surgeon,  all 
>f  the  volunteer  service.  For  the  state  of  my  medical  supplies,  see 
Burgeon  McNulty’s  letter,  marked  M.* 

The  strength  of  the  command  when  it  arrives  at  Mesilla  will  be 
ipproximately : 


Field  and  staff 

lay  of  artillery,  aggregate 

)f  infantry 

)f  cavalry 


25 

73 

825 

350 


fetal  fighting  force. 
)f  employes 


1,273 

127 


Total  requiring  subsistence L 400 

s I will  send  you  an  accurate  field  return  as  soon  as  the  command 
tinder  Captain  McCleave  reaches  Mesilla. 

I inclose  herewith  a letter  from  Maj.  Richard  C.  Drum,  assistant 
idiutant-general  Department  of  the  Pacific,  marked  N ; also  a copy  of 
General  Orders,  No.  29  [1862],  from  the  War  Department,  on  the  same 

fcheet.  . 

I beg  to  be  fully  instructed  by  you  in  all  measures  wherein  myself 
or  the  California  Column  can  be  of  the  most  service.  We  have  not 
crossed  the  continent  thus  far  to  split  hairs,  but  with  an  earnest  reso- 
ution  to  do  our  duty  whatever  be  our  geographical  position;  and  so 
lie  marches  of  this  column  tend  always  toward  the  heart  of  the  rebel- 
ion  ; the  men  will  forget  their  toils  and  sufferings  on  the  Great  Desert 
n their  hope  ultimately  to  reach  the  enemy. 

In  all  this  I am  sure  I but  express  the  sentiments  of  General  Wright. 
As  the  gallantry  of  the  troops  under  your  command  has  left  us  noth- 
ng  to  do  on  the  Rio  Grande,  it  would  be  a sad  disappointment  to  those 
Tom  California  if  they  should  be  obliged  to  retrace  their  steps  without 
Reeling  the  enemy. 

I hope  I do  not  ask  too  much  when  I inquire  whether  a force  could 
lot  profitably  be  thrown  into  Western  Texas,  where  it  is  reported  the 
Union  men  are  only  waiting  for  a little  help  to  run  up  the  old  flag. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

JAMES  H.  CARLETON, 

Brigadier- General,  U.  8.  Army. 

A Brig.  Gen.  E.  R.  S.  Canby,  Gomdg.  Dept,  of  Hew  Mexico . 


* Omitted  as  of  no  present  importance. 

♦ 


560 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[Chap.  XXI 


[Inclosure  A.] 

Headquarters  District  of  Southern  California, 

Fort  Yuma , Cal..  May  3,  1862. 

Col.  E.  R.  S.  Canby, 

Commanding  Department  of  New  Mexico  : 

Colonel:  Having  no  means  of  getting  reliable  information  fron 
you  except  by  a special  express,  I send  tlie  bearer  of  this  to  you  foi 
that  purpose.  He  will  be  able  to  tell  you  about  this  part  of  the 
country,  and  will  bring  to  me  any  communication  you  may  desire  t< 
write* 

I have  a force  of  light  battery  (Company  A,  Third  Artillery)  of  tw<; 
12-pounder  howitzers  and  two  6-pounder  guns,  and  fifteen  companies 
of  infantry  and  five  companies  of  cavalry,  California  Volunteers,  well 
armed  and  provided  for,  and  the  men  are  as  fine  material  as  any  in  tht 
service.  I can  move  on  from  Tucson  or  Fort  Breckinridge  as  soon  as 
I hear  from  you.  I am  ready  and  anxious  to  co-operate  with  you. 

If  necessary  I can  be  followed  by  still  another  regiment  or"  more  ol 
infantry,  to  be  sent  by  steam  to  the  mouth  of  the  Colorado. 

It  will  afford  me  pleasure  to  enter  into  any  plan  you  may  suggest,  so 
my  force  can  be  of  service  to  you  and  to  the  cause. 

Let  me  know  your  strength,  your  situation,  your  purposes ; th(; 
strength,  situation,  and  probable  purposes  of  Sibley  and  his  troops. 

Please  send  an  escort  with  my  messenger,  to  get  him  safely  through 
the  Apaches. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully, 

JAMES  H.  CARLETOY, 
Colonel  First  California  Volunteers , Commanding. 

[Indorsement.] 

At  the  time  this  letter  was  written  it  was  the  intention  of  General 
Carleton  to  move  forward  to  the  Rio  Grande  five  companies  of  the 
Fifth  Infantry,  California  Volunteers.  Some  of  those  companies  are 
now  serving  in  Western  Arizona. 

BEIL  C.  CUTLER, 

First  Lieut.,  First  Infantry , Cal.  Vols.,  A.  A.  A.  General. 

[Inclosure  B.] 

Headquarters  Column  from  California, 

Tucson , Ariz .,  June  11,  1862. 

General  E.  E.  S.  Canby,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  U.  8.  Forces  in  New  Mexico  : 

General  : I had  the  honor  to  write  to  you  on  the  3d  ultimo  from  Fortj 
Yuma,  Cal.,  that  I was  on  my  way  to  Arizona,  and  desired  to  co-operatei 
with  you  in  driving  the  rebels  from  Yew  Mexico.  My  messenger  was! 
unable  to  reach  you  via  the  Salinas  Fork  of  the  Gila  on  account  of  high 
water.  I therefore  dispatch  another  through  Mexican  territory. 

I am  ordered  to  recapture  all  the  works  in  Yew  Mexico  which  had 
been  surrendered  to  rebels.  This  I shall  proceed  to  do,  starting  from 
here  as  soon  as  the  rains  have  filled  the  natural  tanks,  say  early  in 
July. 

Wliat  number  of  troops  can  find  subsistence,  say  at  twenty  days*! 
notice,  at  Mesilla  and  Fort  Bliss,  in  Texas  ? I can  start  from  here  with 
sixty  days*  supply  for  one  battery  of  artillery,  one  regiment  of  infantry, 


'Chap.  XXI.] 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


561 


and  five  companies  of  cavalry.  With,  this  force  I desire  to  co-operate 
with  von.  This  will  enable  me  to  hold  this  country  besides. 

I have  placed  Arizona  under  martial  law,  and  shall  continue  it  so 
until  the  civil  officers  come.  I can  bring  more  force  if  necessary.  Let 
me  know  by  the  bearer  your  wishes,  purposes,  strength ; the  strength, 
position,  and  apparent  purposes  and  condition  of  Sibley  and  his  forces. 

I am,  general,  your  obedient  servant^  ^ CARLETON) 

Colonel  First  California  Volunteers , Commanding. 

[Inclosure  C.] 

Headquarters  Column  from  California, 

Tucson , Ariz .,  June  15, 1862. 

General  E.  B.  S.  Canby,  „ j „ . ,,  ,, 

Comdg.  Department  of  New  Mexico , Fort  Craig , A . A lex. . 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  1 have  advanced 
thus  far  from  California  with  a force  of  regulars  and  volunteers  suffi- 
cient in  numbers  to  occupy  this  Territory. 

I have  assumed  to  represent  the  United  States  authority,  and  for  the 

time  being  have  placed  the  Territory  under  martial  law. 

Inclosed  herewith  please  find  a proclamation  to  this  enect.  1 sen 
this  to  you  by  express,  that  you  may  not  go  to  the  expense  of  sen  mg 
troops  from  your  department  to  occupy  Arizona. 

I congratulate  you  on  your  success  against  the  Confederate  forces  under 
Sibley.  If  you  can  send  an  escort  to  the  expressman  who  takes  this  1 
shall  feel  greatly  obliged. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  ^ CAELETON? 

Colonel  First  California  Volunteers , Commanding. 

[Inclosure  to  C.] 

To  all  whom  it  may  concern : 

The  Congress  of  the  United  States  has  set  apart  a portion  of  Eew 
Mexico  and  organized  it  into  a Territory  complete  of  itself.  This  is 
known  as  the  Territory  of  Arizona.  It  comprises  within  its  limits  all 
the  country  eastward  from  the  Colorado  Eiver,  which  is  now  occupied 
bv  the  forces  of  the  United  States  known  as  the  Column  from  Califor- 
nia ; and  as  the  flag  of  the  United  States  shall  be  carried  by  this  column 
still  farther  eastward,  these  limits  will  extend  in  that  direction  until 
they  reach  the  farthest  geographical  boundary  of  this  territory. 

y0w  in  the  present  chaotic  state  in  which  Arizona  is  found  to  be, 
with  no  civil  officers  to  administer  the  laws— indeed,  with  an  utter 
! absence  of  all  civil  authority— and  with  no  security  of  life  or  property 
1 within  its  borders,  it  becomes  the  duty  of  the  undersigned  to  represent 
the  authority  of  the  United  States  over  the  people  of  Arizona  as  well 
as  over  all  those  who  compose  or  are  connected  with  the  Column  tiorn 
California,  Thus,  by  virtue  of  his  office  as  military  commander  ot  the 
United  States  forces  now  here,  and  to  meet  the  fact  that  wherever 
within  our  boundaries  our  colors  fly  there  the  sovereign  power  ot  our 
country  must  at  once  be  acknowledged  and  law  and  order  at  once  pre- 
vail, the  undersigned,  as  a military  governor,  assumes  control  ot  this 
Territory  until  such  time  as  the  President  of  the  United  States  shall 
otherwise  direct. 

36  R R— VOL  IX 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

-i  Tius^also  is  here^y  declared  that  until  civil  officers  shall  be  sent 
by  the  government  to  organize  the  civil  courts  for  the  administration 

fn6  tk-nrl0ry  °f  ^■rin°1na  is  hereby  Placed  under  martial  law. 
Trials  for  capital  offenses  shall  be  held  by  a military  commission,  to  be 
composed  of  not  more  than  thirteen  nor  less  than  nine  commissioned 
officers.  The  rules  of  evidence  shall  be  those  customary  in  practice 
under  the  common  law.  The  trials  shall  be  public  and  shall  be  trials 
of'r^?rd)  aud  tbe  m°de  of  procedure  shall  be  strictly  in  accordance 
with  that  of  courts-martial  in  the  Army  of  the  United  States.  Unless 
the  public  safety  absolutely  requires  it,  no  execution  shall  follow  con- 
viction  until  the  orders  in  the  case  by  the  President  shall  be  known. 

Tnais  for  minor  offenses  shall  be  held  under  the  same  rules,  except 
that  tor  these  a commission  of  not  more  than  five  nor  less  than  three 
commissioned  officers  may  sit,  and  a vote  of  a majority  determine  the 
issue.  In  these  cases  the  orders  of  the  officer  organizing  the  commis- 
sion shall  be  final. 

All  matters  in  relation  to  rights  in  property  and  lands  which  may  be 
m dispute  shall  be  determined  for  the  time  being  by  a military  commis- 
sion,  to  be  composed  of  not  more  than  five  nor  less  than  three  commis- 
sioned officers.  Of  course  appeals  from  the  decisions  of  such  com- 
missions can  be  taken  to  the  civil  courts  when  once  the  latter  have 
been  established. 

There  are  cert^n  fundamental  rules  for  the  government  of  the  people 
of  this  Territory  which  will  be  rigidly  enforced: 

I.  No  man  who  has  arrived  at  lawful  age  shall  be  permitted  to  reside 
within  this  Territory  who  does  not  without  delay  subscribe  to  the  oath 
of  allegiance  to  the  United  States. 

II.  No  words  or  acts  calculated  to  impair  that  veneration  which  all 
good  patriots  should  feel  for  our  country  and  Government  will  be  tol- 
erated within  this  Territory  or  go  unpunished  if  sufficient  proof  can  be 
had  of  them. 

III.  No  man  who  does  not  pursue  some  lawful  calling  or  have  some 
legitimate  means  of  support  shall  be  permitted  to  remain  in  the  Terri- 
tory. 

Ha\  ing  no  thought  or  motive  in  all  this  but  the  good  of  the  people 
and  aiming  only  to  do  right,  the  undersigned  confidently  hopes  and 
expects,  in  all  he  does  to  further  these  ends,  to  have  the  hearty  co-op- 
eration of  every  good  citizen  and  soldier  in  Arizona.  All  this  is  to  go 
into  effect  from  and  after  this  date,  and  will  continue  in  force,  unless 
disapproved  or  modified  by  General  George  Wright,  U.  S.  Army,  com- 
manding the  Department  of  the  Pacific,  under  whose  orders  the  Column 
from  California  has  taken  the  field. 

Done  at  the  headquarters  Column  from  California,  in  Tucson,  Ariz., 
this  8th  day  of  June,  A.  D.  1862.  ’ 7 

JAMES  H.  CAELETON, 

Colonel  First  Cal.  Vols.,  Major  Sixth  XI.  S.  Cavalry. 


[Inclosure  D.j 

Headquarters  Column  prom  California, 

Tucson , Ariz.,  June  15,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  E.  E.  S.  Canby,  U.  S.  A., 

Comdg.  Department  of  New  Mexico , Fort  Craig , N.  Mex. : 
General  : I have  forwarded  by  another  express  the  originals  of  the 
notes  numbered  2,  which  the  bearer  of  this  takes  to  you. 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


563 


Wr.  XXI.]  

My  wagons  are  so  shrunk  in  coming  over  the  desert  that  I am  obliged 
o delay  here  until  the  1st  proximo,  when  from  the  rains  having  fallen 
£ pope  to  be  able  to  move  to  the  Rio  Grande.  I hope  1 can  count  on 
getting  meat  and  bread  there.  Mesilla  is  far  removed  from  my  source 
of  supply.  Pray  advise  me  of  all  this. 

I am  anxious  to  co-operate  with  you.  My  men  are  the  finest  material 
£ have  ever  seen  and  anxious  to  strike  a blow  for  the  cause. 

Have  you  a plenty  of  rifled-musket  ammunition  ? 

' We  can  be  on  the  Rio  Grande  in  fifteen  days  from  this  post. 

Respectfully,  &c., 

JAMES  H.  CARLETOH, 
Colonel  First  California  Volunteers , Commanding. 


p.  S.— I am  straining  every  point  to  get  up  supplies  so  as  to  leave 
July  1. 

[Inclosure  E.] 

Headquarters  Column  from  California, 

Tucson , Ariz.j  June  17,  1862. 

Lieut.  Col.  Edward  E.  Eyre, 

First  Cavalry , California  Volunteers,  Present: 

Colonel  : It  is  important  that  a forced  reconnaissance  be  made  in 
advance  of  the  column  from  the  Rio  Grande,  and  you  are  selected  for 
this  delicate  and  at  the  same  time  hazardous  duty. 

You  will  take  with  you  for  this  purpose  a squadron  of  your  regiment, 
to  be  composed  of  all  the  effective  officers  and  men  of  Companies  B and 
C now  here. 

Eor  transportation  you  will  have  three  six-mule  teams.  Take  six 
aparejos  in  the  wagons  for  packing  purposes  when  necessary.  Take, 
say,  four  days7  pork,  and  dried  beef  and  pemmican,  and  flour,  coffee, 
sugar,  salt,  and  vinegar  for  thirty  days.  Take  70  rounds  of  ammunition 
for  the  Sharp’s  carbines  per  man,  and  30  rounds  per  man  of  navy-re- 
volver ammunition.  You  should  have  at  least  6 pick-axes  and  12  long- 
handled  shovels  as  intrenching  tools. 

Acting  Assistant  Surgeon  Kittredge  will  accompany  you. 

All  other  essentials  of  your  outfit  will  readily  suggest  themselves  to 
you.  When  you  bear  in  mind  that  you  are  always  to  be  ready  to  fight, 
with  your  horses  in  the  best  possible  condition,  all,  and  only  all,  you 
will  want  practically  to  fulfill  these  requirements  will  come  to  your 
mind. 

You  go  to  watch  the  road  in  the  direction  of  the  enemy.  If  possible 
you  will  capture  or  drive  in  his  pickets,  and  observe  and  report  upon 
his  situation,  strength,  movements,  and  apparent  purposes.  To  do  this 
successfully  the  greatest  prudence,  sagacity,  forecast,  and  boldness  are 
necessary.  I hardly  need  assure  you  that  I have  the  fullest  confidence 
in  your  ability  to  carry  the  purpose  of  your  reconnaissance  to  the  most 
useful  results. 

Avoid  collision  with  the  Indians.  Of  course  you  will  report  back  to 
me  all  that  it  is  necessary  for  me  to  know. 

Wishing  you  success,  I am,  colonel,  very  sincerely,  yours, 

JAMES  H.  CARLETOR, 
Colonel  First  California  Volunteers , Commanding. 

\ 


564 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  (Chap.  XXI. 


[Inclosure  F.J 


Headquarters  Column  erom  California, 

Tucson , 1m,,  July  8,  1862. 

Col.  Joseph  R.  West, 

First  Infantry , Gal.  Vols .,  Comely,  at  Tucson , iw, : 

Colonel  : You  will  order  a sergeant  and  9 trusty  infantry  soldiers 
and  3 first-rate  cavalry  spldiers  to  the  crossing  of  the  San  Pedro  to 
guard  some  forage  which  the  quartermaster  will  send  to  that  point  ? 

A ou  Will  order  Roberts’  company,  of  the  First  Infantry,  California 
v olunteers,  to  the  San  Simon,  en  route  to  the  Rio  Grande,  where  they 
will  make  an  intrenched  camp,  if  possible,  near  the  inail  station,  and 
there  await  further  orders. 

A tram  will  accompany  these  troops  with  thirty  days’  rations  for 
Colonel  Eyre  s command,  commencing  on  its  arrival  at  the  San  Simon 
and  thirty  days  for  the  troops  who  are  to  remain  at  the  San  Pedro  ’ 
Each  soldier  will  have  110  rounds  of  ammunition,  and  the  party  at 
' au  Simon  will  have  some  intrenching  tools  and  also  some  scythes, 
lhese  troops  are  sent  to  guard  these  supplies  until  the  column  reaches 
them  on  its  march  to  the  Rio  Grande.  They  also  go  to  observe  the  road 
and  to  form  a support  to  Colonel  Eyre  in  case  he  falls  back. 

You  cannot  be  too  minute  in  your  instructions  to  them,  having  in  view 
the  furtherance  of  these  ends.  They  are  to  have  scouts  all  the  time  well 
to  the  front,  unless  menaced,  say  50  or  more  miles : they  are  to  keep 
me  informed  of  movements  in  their  vicinity  of  the  enemy,  and  if  attacked 
they  are  not  to  surrender  on  any  terms.  They  are  to  be  uncommonly 
watchful  that  Indians  do  not  run  off  their  stock,  and  at  the  same  time 
are  not  to  attack  the  Indians  unless  the  latter  are  the  aggressors 
I am,  colonel,  respectfully, 

JAMES  H.  CARLETOY, 
Brigadier- General,  U.  8.  Army,  Commanding. 

[Inclosure  N.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Pacific 

Ban  Francisco,  Cal,  May  30,  1862. 

Col.  James  H.  Carleton, 

First  Infantry,  Cal.  Vols.,  Comdg.  Column  from  California: 

Sir  : Inclosed  I have  the  honor  to  transmit,  by  direction  of  the  gen- 
eral commanding  the  department,  General  Orders,  Yo.  29,  from  the  War 
Department.  It  is  probable  that  your  command  may  enter  the  De- 
partment of  Yew  Mexico.  You  will  nevertheless  act  under  the  orders 
of  the  general  commanding  the  Department  of  the  Pacific,  and  make 
3/ our  returns  as  usual  to  these  headquarters. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R,  C.  DRUM, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Sub-inclosure.] 

General  Orders,  ) War  Department,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

^S0‘  J Washington,  March  22,  1862. 

In  the  changes  recently  made  in  the  boundaries  of  department  com- 
mands it  may  happen  that  troops  belonging  to  one  department  may 
either  be  m,  or  may  unavoidably  pass  into,  another.  In  such  a case 
the  tioops  so  situated  will  continue  under  the  command  of  the  general 


CiiAr.  XXI. 1 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


565 


under  whose  orders  they  may  have  been  operating;  but  it  is  expected 
that  they  will  be  withdrawn  as  soon  as  the  position  they  may  occupy 
comes  within  the  control  of  the  proper  commander  of  the  department. 
Bv  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War  : 

L.  THOMAS, 

Adjutant-  General. 


[Indorsement.] 

AUGUST  10,  1862. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  I have  supposed  that  General  Orders,  No. 
99  of  1862,  applied  to  troops  passing  through,  even  temporarily  within, 
the  limits  of  a department  to  which  they  did  not  belong,  but  it  will  be 
seen  that  General  Wright  has  given  it  a more  extended  application. 
This  is  not  immediately  material,  as  no  question  of  command  or  per- 
sonal consideration  will  be  allowed  by  me  to  interfere  with  the  interests 
of  the  service.  It  is  proper,  however,  that  its  status  should  be  fixed 
by  superior  authority. 

"if  this  force  is  to  return  to  the  Department  of  the  Pacific,  that  fact 
will  modify  materially  the  recommendations  made  in  my  report  of  the 
6th  instant. 


Headquarters  Column  from  California, 

Santa  Fe , N.  Mex.,  September  20,  1862. 

Colonel:  I wrote  to  you  on  July  22,  informing  you  of  all  the  im- 
portant events  connected  with  the  Column  from  California  from  June 
18  to  that  date.  I then  inclosed  copies  of  General  Orders,  Nos.  10 
and  11,  from  these  headquarters,  which  prescribed  the  manner  in  which 
the  column  should  march  across  the  desert  from  Tucson  to  the  Rio 

I left  Tucson  myself  on  July  23;  passed  Colonel  West,  with  most  of 
the  troops  encamped  on  the  San  Pedro,  on  the  24th,  and  led  the  advance 
of  the  column  from  that  point  to  Las  Cruces,  N.  Mex.,  with  one  com- 
pany of  infantry  and  two  of  cavalry.  From  the  hostile  attitude  of  the 
Chiricahua  Indians,  I found  it  indispensably  necessary  to  establish  a 
post  in  what  is  known  as  Apache  Pass.  It  is  known  as  Fort  Bowie,  and 
garrisoned  by  100  rank  and  file  of  the  Fifth  California  Volunteer  In- 
fatnry,  and  13  rank  and  file  of  Company  A,  First  California  Volunteer 
Cavalry.  This  post  commands  the  water  in  that  pass.  Around  this 
water  the  Indians  have  been  in  the  habit  of  lying  in  ambush  and  shoot- 
ing troops  and  travelers  as  they  came  to  drink.  In  this  way  they  killed 
3 of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Eyre’s  command,  and  in  attempting  to  keep 
Captain  Roberts’  First  California  Volunteer  Infantry  away  from  the 
spring  a fight  ensued,  in  which  Captain  Roberts  had  2 men  killed  and  2 
wounded.  Captain  Roberts  reports  that  the  Indians  lost  10  killed.  In 
this  affair  the  men  of  Captain  Roberts’  company  are  reported  as  behav- 
ing with  great  gallantry. 

Two  miles  beyond  Apache  Pass  I found  the  remains  of  9 white  men, 
who  had  been  murdered  by  the  Indians.  They  were  a party  traveling 
from  the  Pino  Alto  inin^s  to  California,  One  of  them  had  been  burned 
at  the  stake ; we  saw  the  charred  bones  and  the  burnt  ends  of  the  rope 
by  which  he  had  been  tied.  The  remains  of  7 of  these  men  were  buried 
on  that  spot. 

From  the  Rio  de  Sauz  to  Ojo  de  la  Vaca  there  was  a great  dearth  ol 
water.  At  the  latter  place  I addressed  a letter  to  Geiferal  Canby,  giv- 


566 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[Chap.  XXL 


ing  Mm  all  the  elements  going  to  make  up  tlie  column,  the  obiect  of  its 
march,  and  the  wishes  of  General  Wright.  A copy  of  that  letter 
herewith  inclosed,  marked  A.*  h 1 y ° tnat  letter  18 

Ving  bee-n  iu^orm.etl  tliat  a large  number  of  men,  women  and 
children  were  m a destitute  and  starving  condition  at  Pino  Alto  mines 

wwl™!168  n?rH'.eastw.ard  from  the  °j°  de  la  Vaca,  I directed Colonel 
fllnlls,J  them  Wlth  some  subsistence  stores  as  a gratuity  ( See 
letter  of  instructions  to  Colonel  West,  marked  B,  and  CantaTn  Shir 
land’s  report  on  the  starving  condition  of  these  people,  maike  cf 
I a™.Ved  ou  tbe.  Ei0  grande  on  August  7 at  a poiAt  3 Liles  above 
le?ter,  Lafked  D.  lmmedlateIy  communicated  with  General  Canby  by 

On  August  9 I passed  the  Bio  Grande  at  the  San  Diego  Crossing  IS 
miles  below  Fort  Thorn.  The  river  was  still  very  high  and  very rated 
but  the  men  stripped  off  their  clothes  and  dragged  the  wagons  thron  e-h 
by  mam  force;  the  baggage,  subsistence  stores,  ammunition  &c  were 
crossed  m two  small,  leaky  boats.  At  this  point  w“bteltaiarger  and 
bettor  boat  for  the  use  of  the  detachments  of  the  column  stil?  to  come 

T o’lle.]l<;;ul  of, the  coIlmin  arrived  at  Las  Cruces  on  August  10  Here 
I found  the  advance  guard,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Eyre  First  Cali 

lengthened  by  four  companies %f  tee  Kfth 

which  had  been  sent  down  from  Fort  Craig.  Two  com- 
Fvre  !fW  UVCajfry  bad  also  been  ^nt  down  to  re-enforce  CoS 
on  August  9 had  b6en  recalled  and  bad  started  back  to  Fort  Craig 

tm?  amirplTteliyCT0l°11^1  Eyre  liad  been  forbidden  by  Colonel  Chiving- 
Crneef  1 Howe i to  proceed  in  the  direction  of  Texas  below  hL 

Steelel’ forceTf V,,Lf lie7ei h°  "’0ul<i  have  caPtured  the  whole  of 
marked  p an  Confederate  troops.  (See  his  report  t on  this  subject 

“s  exhibbed  inhhi<f“er^d’  enterprise,  and  resources  of  Colonel  Eyre 
as  exhibited  m Ins  rapid  march  from  Tucson  to  the  Bio  Grande*  hie 

crossing  of  that  river,  and  his  unlooked-for  presence  directlv  noon  tlie 
heels  of  the  retreating  rebels,  cannot  be  too  highte  apprecfated  He 
Sited  sprue  of  the  finest  qualities  of  a soldier"  and  K he  not  bem 
fettered  by  orders  from  higher  authority  than  himself  he  would  with 
out  a doubt,  have  achieved  advantages  over  the  enemy  cred  table  to 
himself  and  to  the  Column  from  California.  But  fo  hTs  thnelv  arri  val 

IS,  Sis?"  "1K>" For* Thor"’  F“' 


funds.  General 


Wrfohf  wi  1 h»’  Jf  fl  WltL,  $30’000  subsistence 
thaUetter  thte-  to,read  d 5 is  marked  F.  It,  will  be  seen  by 

ment  of  Hew  Mth®  dlCal  suPPhes  and  ordnance  stores  in  the  Depart- 
ment  ot  -New  Mexico  are  so  abundant  as  to  preclude  the  necessitv  of 

of  the  P^mc  fofanvrof  teeiDtg  purchased  or  shipped  in  the  Department 
Column  from!  CalifoLL . °°PS  eaSt  °f  Fort  Y"ma  belo“^  to  the 

wldcVheteeateo?Teal  °aUb?  Se«‘to  me  ^o-ther  communication,  in 
ch  he  treats  of  the  impracticability  of  an  invasion  of  Texas  from 

* Sec  Carielon’s  report  to  Canby  of  August  2,  p.  557. 
t Isg.  2,  dated  August  30,  1862,  p.  585. 


CHAP.  XXI.  1 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


567 


this  direction,  and  in  which  he  speaks  of  removing  the  regular  troops 
from  New  Mexico  and  of  receiving  other  re-enforcements  from  California. 
As  the  views  it  sets  forth  seem  to  be  of  great  value,  I submit  it  for  the 
perusal  of  General  Wright  5 it  is  marked  G. 

On  August  12  General  Canby  wrote  still  another  letter,  m which  he 
authorized  me  to  use  my  own  judgment  in  regard  to  the  disposition  of 
troops  in  Arizona  and  Southern  New  Mexico;  it  is  marked  H.  My 
letter  to  General  Canby,  dated  August  15,  together  with  General  Orders, 
Nos.  14  and  15,  herewith  inclosed,  will  inform  General  Wright  of  the 
distribution  of  the  troops  along  the  Eio  Grande.  These  communications 

are  marked  I.  „ 

On  August  16  1 started  with  three  companies  of  cavalry  tor  Fort 
Bliss,  in  Texas.  At  the  town  of  Franklin,  opposite  El  Paso,  I found 
a surgeon  of  the  Confederate  Army  and  25  sick  and  disabled  soldiers, 
whom  I made  prisoners  of  war  by  order  of  General  Canby.  I also  found 
that  a large  amount  of  hospital  stores  and  quartermaster’s  property, 
which  once  had  belonged  to  the  United  States,  was  in  store-rooms  con- 
nected with  the  custom-house  at  El  Paso,  in  Mexico.  These  stores  I 
managed  to  recover ; there  were  12  wagon  loads  of  them.  I sent  them 
to  the  depot  at  Mesilla,  which  I had  established.  I then  proceeded  100 
miles  farther  down  the  valley  of  the  Eio  Grande  into  Texas.  The  object 
of  my  march  was  to  restore  confidence  to  the  people.  They  had  been 
taught  by  the  Texans  that  we  were  coming  among  them  as  marauders 
and  as  robbers.  When  they  found  we  treated  them  kindly  and  paid 
them  a fair  price  for  all  the  supplies  we  required  they  rejoiced  to  find, 
as  they  came  under  the  old  flag  once  more,  that  they  could  now  have 
protection  and  will  be  treated  justly.  The  abhorrence  they  expressed 
for  the  Confederate  troops  and  of  the  rebellion  convinced  me  that  their 
loyalty  to  the  United  States  is  now  beyond  question. 

On  August  22  the  troops  of  the  Column  from  California  hoisted  the 
Stars  and  Stripes  over  Fort  Quitman.  This  was  done  by  Capt.  John 
C.  Cremony,  with  his  company  (B,  Second  California  Volunteer  Cavalry). 
On  the  same  day  Captain  Shirland,  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry, 
was  directed  to  proceed  to  Fort  Davis,  140  miles  still  farther  into  Texas, 
and  hoisted  the  national  colors  over  that  post.  (See  General  Orders, 
No.  16,  marked  K.)  How  well  Captain  Shirland  performed  this  duty 
and  how  gallantly  he  and  his  men  behaved  in  a fight  with  the  In- 
dians will  be  seen  by  his  report,  a copy  of  which  is  herewith  inclosed, 

marked  L.  . 

Captain  Eoberts’  company,  which  whipped  the  Indians  m Apache 
Pass,  is  from  Sacramento.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Eyre,  who  led  my  ad- 
vance guard  to  the  Eio  Grande  and  hoisted  the  colors  over  Forts  Thorn, 
Fillmore,  Bliss,  and  Mesilla,  is  from  Sacramento,  and  so  is  Captain 
Shirland,  who  hoisted  the  Stars  and  Stripes  240  miles  farther  into  the 
State  of  Texas,  and  also  whipped  the  Indians  in  that  neighborhood. 
This  speaks  nobly  for  the  men  from  that  city. 

I inclose  a telegraphic  communication  from  General  Canby  to  the 
Adjutant-General  of  the  Army,  dated  August  10,  in  which  he  requests 
that  a regiment  more  of  infantry  and  five  companies  of  cavalry  be  sent 
into  the  Department  of  New  Mexico  from  California,  so  as  to  relieve 
i the  regular  troops  now  here  ; it  is  marked  M. 

On  August  21 1 was  instructed  to  arrange  the  affairs  of  the  District 
of  Arizona  so  as  to  turp  over  that  district  to  the  officer  next  in  rank  to 
myself,  and  to  hold  myself  in  readiness  to  repair  to  the  headquarters 
Department  of  New  Mexico.  I also  received  Special  Orders,  No.  148, 
from  the  headquarters  of  that  department,  directing  me  to  send  an  officer 


568  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXL 

as  bearer  of  dispatches  to  the  commander  of  the  Department  of  the 
Pacific.  Copies  of  these  documents  are  herewith  inclosed,  marked  N 
On  September  2 I received  Special  Orders,  No.  153  (marked  6) 
directing  me  to  relieve  Brigadier-General  Oanby  in  the  command  of 
the  Department  of  New  Mexico.  Previous  to  this  order  Had  pub 

T^roeCii^en<Tral  °r<*ers>  17>  wllich  posted  a company  of  infantry  at 
Franklin,  Tex.  and  another  one  at  Hart’s  Mill,  Tex.  It  is  herewith 
inclosed,  marked  P.  ’ eicwun 

On  beptember  1 I put  the  Texan  prisoners  of  war  whom  I found 
at  hranklin  on  their  parole,  and  sent  them  on  their  way  to  San  Anto 
mo,  Tex.,  escorted  by  Company  D,  First  California  Yolimteer  Cavalry. 
(See  my  letter  to  the  commanding-  officer  of  the  Confederate  forces 
San  Antonio,  Tex.,  marked  Q.)  1 then  returned  to  Las  Cruces,  N.  Mex 
uffiere  I published  General  Orders,  No.  20  (marked  R),  regulating  the 

dDtGct°tohr  lpistrlct  Tof  Arw°nf  t'"1  transferring  the  command  of  that 
t0.  Col.  Joseph  R.  West,  First  California  Volunteer  Infantry. 
(I  still  retain  the  command  of  the  Column  from  California,  and  shall 
cause  all  the  reports  which  you  require  in  your  letter  to  me,  dated  at 

of  thp  ^ 3°’  +v  be  -Seut  t0  the  headquarters  Department 

of  the  Pacific,  until  I am  otherwise  ordered  by  competent  authority.)  I 
then  proceeded  to  Santa  Fe,  arriving  here  on  the  16th  instant. 

General  Canby  relinquished  the  command  of  the  Department  of  New 
Mexico  on  the  18th  instant.  (See  General  Orders,  No.  83,  marked  S > 

oS™No?°84, “marked  TO department  on  tbe  same daD  (See  General 

addltioual 1 changes  have  been  made  of  the  troops  pertaining  to 
the  Column  from  California,  which  are  indicated  in  a letter  to  Colonel 
w q\' i 1 September  8 (marked  U),  and  in  another  dated  Septem 
and  N “espectiXly)alS°  tW°  °tberS’  date<l  September  14  (marked  W 

I inclose  for  your  information  three  communications  (marked  Y)  * 

1 also  inclose  a copy  of  an  order  directing  Lieut.  Col.  Edward  E.  Eyre 
California  Volunteer  Cavalry,  to  bear  these  dispatches  to  ‘the 
headquarters  Department  of  the  Pacific;  it  is  marked  Z. 

„± y.s,e  ™S  c°mm  unications  will  give  General  Wright  a pretty 
1<  ea  of  the  operations  of  the  troops  composing  the  Column  from 
California  from  July  22,  of  this  year,  to  the  present  time. 

. . a<l  tl,at  tbe  supply  of  provisions  in  this  department  is  adequate 
to  the  wants  of  all  the  troops  from  California  now  serving  here  and 

purchasedrfor  tlm  (VI  reco“mend  that  n°  more  subsistence  stores  be 
£ t ! C?lufn  from  California  until  further  advices  on  this 
®aXct-  J iucpose-  to  transport  from  Fort  Yuma  to  Tucson  during  the 

now  7nexcessfJhtI  P1  and  wintf  a larSe  quantity  of  subsistence  stores 
f 'y  , ‘ efcess  at  tfle  former  post,  so  as  to  provide  for  the  contingency 
*P°PS  beinS  ordered  to  New  Mexico  from  California;  to  pro^ 
jPf.a«e  P°ops  already  stationed  in  Arizona,  and  to  form  a maga- 

our  Present  sfw/eVernvS  herf  wbich  maL  lead  to  the  destruction  of 
towards  the  PariL  ™ge(?e  California  or  other  troops  to  retire 
TnTtml  htb!  ePo • fl  he?  these  supplies  have  been  accumulated  at 
a tram  now  employed  for  that  purpose  that  train  will  be  re- 

Saiimfrf'1!?  P v‘S  dePartment;  meantime  it  can  be  used  as  trans- 
1 tation  from  Fort  Yuma  to  the  Rio  Grande  for  any  troops  which 

SkornaorNlw  MeXofd*er  **°m  th®  Departmeat  of  tbe  1>aciflc  iato 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXI.] 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


56D 


The  Southern  Overland  Mail  Route  has  been  opened,  and  the  mili- 
tary posts  in  Arizona,  Southern  New  Mexico,  and  Northwestern  Texas- 
have  been  reoccupied  by  troops  composing  the  Column  from  California. 
Thus  far  the  instructions  of  the  general  commanding  the  Department 
of  the  Pacific  have  been  carried  out. 

It  was  no  fault  of  the  troops  from  California  that  the  Confederate 
forces  fled  before  them.  It  is  but  just  to  say  that  their  having  thus 
fled  is  mainly  to  be  attributed  to  the  gallantry  of  the  troops  under 
General  Canby’s  command.  That  they  were  hurried  in  their  flight 
by  the  timely  arrival  of  the  advance  guard  of  the  Column  from  Cali- 
fornia, under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Eyre,  there  cannot  be  a doubt.  The 
march  from  the  Pacific  to  the  Rio  Grande  by  the  Column  from  Cali- 
fornia was  not  accomplished  without  immense  toil  and  great  hard- 
ships or  without  many  privations  and  much  suffering  from  heat  and 
want  ot  water. 

The  amount  of  labor  performed  by  Col.  Joseph  R.  West,  the  second 
in  command,  was  immense  and  of  the  greatest  practical  importance. 
Much  of  our  success  was  dependent  on  his  energy,  perseverance, 
cheerfulness,  and  high  soldierly  qualities.  I cannot  too  strongly 
recommend  that  this  officer  be  promoted  to  the  grade  of  brigadier- 
general  of  volunteers  as  a reward  for  these  services,  and  particularly 
as  he  now  commands  the  most  important  district  in  this  department.. 
I trust  that  General  Wright  will  urge  the  necessity  of  this  advance- 
ment of  Colonel  West,  and  set  forth  to  the  General-in-Chief  his  eminent 
fitness  for  the  office  of  brigadier- general.  This  will  promote  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Rigg,  which  will  be  a reward  for  his  important  services  as- 
commanding  officer  at  Port  Yuma  during  the  past  winter  and  for  his 
efficient  labors  in  the  column  while  crossing  the  Great  Desert.  I 
regard  Colonel  Rigg  as  one  of  the  finest  soldiers  in  the  Column  from 
California.  Those  "who  knew  the  troops  from  California  as  I knew 
them  will  consider  this  a high  compliment. 

Lieut.  Col.  Edward  E.  Eyre,  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry,, 
deserves  a regiment.  The  zeal  he  has  manifested  in  the  discharge  of 
his  duties  and  the  alacrity  and  cheerfulness  he  has  always  shown 
when  called  upon  for  any  hazardous  enterprise  distinguished  him  as 
one  eminently  fitted  for  the  profession  of  arms.  If  five  companies 
more  of  cavalry  are  to  be  sent  from  California,  as  requested  by  General 
Canby,  1 trust  they  will  be  added  to  the  five  which  now  compose  the 
First* California  Volunteer  Cavalry,  and  that  Lieutenant  Colonel  Eyre 
will  be  commissioned  as  full  colonel. 

The  services  of  Major  Coult,  Fifth  California  Volunteer  Infantry, 
and  of  Major  Ferguson,  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry,  and  of 
Major  McMullen,  First  California  Volunteer  Infantry,  have  been  most 
arduous  and  are  deserving  of  reward. 

The  officers  and  men  of  the  Second  California  Volunteer  Cavalry 
and  of  the  Fifth  California  Volunteer  Infantry  shared  alike  in  all  the 
privations  and  toil  encountered  by  the  First  California  Volunteer 
Infantry  and  the  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry.  As  soldiers,  in 
the  highest  acceptation  of  that  word,  they  were  all  equally  subordi- 
nate, patient,  energetic,  and  patriotic.  If  I should  select  the  names  of 
some  of  them  to  be  rewarded  for  these  high  qualities  it  would  be  an 
invidious  distinction. 

Capt.  John  B.  Shinn  and  First  Lieut.  Franklin  Harwood,  of  the 
Third  U.  S.  Artillery,  for  their  incessant  toil  by  night  and  by  day  to 
bring  the  battery  of  light  artillery  which  is  attached  to  the  Column 
from  California  "through  the  Yuma  and  Gila  Deserts,  should  each 


570  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

receive  the  compliment  of  a brevet— Captain  Shinn  to  be  brevetted  as 
major  and  First  Lieutenant  Harwood  as  captain.  Unless  these  vouno- 
men  are  rewarded  by  a compliment  of  this  kind  I shall  always  feel 
tha,t  the  passage  of  a battery  of  light  artillery,  always  in  fightino-  con 
dition,  oyer  such  an  inhospitable  waste,  in  the  midst  of  the  heats  of 
summer,  is  a matter  of  such  trivial  importance  in  the  profession  of 
arms  as  not  to  be  worthy  of  notice.  Theirs  was  the  first  battery  that 
ever  crossed  the  desert.  I am  sure  that  he  who  crosses  the  next  one 
will  be  considered  an  accomplished  soldier. 

I trust  that  General  Wright  will  call  the  attention  of  the  General-in- 
Chief  to  the  credit  which  is  eminently  due  these  young  gentlemen  for 
their  services  in  this  column.  I have  already  asked  for  promotion  of 
my  adjutant-general,  Lieut.  Benjamin  C.  Cutler:  for  my  medical  di 

Firtt^Honf ' Taif  6S  “d  for  my  regimental  quartermaster, 

First  Lieut.  Lafayette  Hammond,  all  of  the  First  California  Volnn? 
teer  Infantry  Their  merits  are  too  well  known  at  the  headquarters 

fromamysdf.0f  the  PaClfl°  ^ UCCd  any  further  words  of  commendation 

In  conclusion,  I beg  to  thank  General  Wright  for  the  confidence  he 
always  reposed  in  me.  In  carrying  out  his  orders  and  instructions  I 

field  nfn^eay°f-ed  t0  d0  mJ  best>  yet’  as  U was  a new  and  very  extended 
field  of  opeiations,  my  judgment  about  what  was  best  to  be  done  under 
emergencies  as  they  arose  was  doubtless  not  always  of  the  soundest 
character  ; yet  I feel  that  General  Wright  has  kindly  overlooked  111 
imperfections  of  this  nature,  and  saved  me  the  pain  of  many  rebukes 
which  no  doubt  I have  deserved.  For  this  I feel  very  grateful.  ’ 
The  inarch  of  the  column  from  California  in  the  summer  months 
fi? 1 iv  t'e  Great.Deser.t> the  driest  season  that  has  ever  been  known 
ini  Alrty years;  1S  a military  achievement  creditable  to  the  soldiers  of 
If  tr!1™081!  ^my;  but  it  would  not  be  just  to  attribute  the  success 
of  this  march  to  any  ability  on  my  part.  That  success  was  o-amed 
only  by  the  high  physical  and  moral  energies  of  that  peculiar  class  of 
officers  and  men  who  composed  the  Column  from  California.  With 
any  other  troops  I am  sure  I should  have  failed. 

I send  you  a set  of  colors  which  have  been  borne  by  this  column 
They  were  hoisted  by  Colonel  West  on  Forts  Breckinridge  and  Buch- 
an^n’ over  Tucson,  Ariz.,*  by  Colonel  Eyre  over  Forts  Thorn 
and  Fillmore,  and  over  Mesilla,  N.  Mex.,  and  over  Fort  Bliss  in  Texas 
C^rr4h?1Stf  ^ Captain^  Cremon^  over  Fort  QuTtS  and  by 
Captain  Shirland  over  Fort  Davis,  in  Texas  5 and  thus  again  have 
those  places  been  consecrated  to  our  beloved  country 
All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

JAMES  H.  CARLETOK 
Brigadier-  General,  TJ.  S.  Army , Commanding . 
Lieut.  Col.  Richard  C.  Drum, 

Asst.  Adjt.  General , TJ.  8.  Army , San  Francisco , Cal. 

[Inclosure  B.J 

Headquarters  Column  from  California, 

^ , Miembres  River , Ariz..  August  6,  1862. 

Col.  Joseph  R.  West,  ’ 

First  California  Volunteer  Infantry , Comdg.  Camp : 

farndi^^m  J have  been  ?re,dibly  informed  that  there  are  some  20 
families  of  men,  women,  and  children  at  the  Pino  Alto  mines,  some  40 


Chap.  XXI.] 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


571 


miles  from  this  camp,  who  are  nearly  perishing  for  want  of  food,  the 
Indians  having  robbed  them  of  what  they  had,  and  the  secessionists  hav- 
ing captured  and  appropriated  to  themselves  a train  of  supplies  which 
was  on  the  way  some  time  since  to  their  relief.  You  will  send  Capt. 
E.  D.  Shirland,  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry,  and  Lieut.  D.  C. 
Vestal,  First  California  Volunteer  Infantry,  with  a sufficient  escort  of 
cavalry  and  infantry,  to  the  Pino  Alto  mines  with  some  provisions  for 
these  starving  people.  Send  them  5 beeves,  600  pounds,  more  or  less, 
of  pemmican,  3,000  pounds  of  flour,  and  1,500  pounds  of  panoche  (Mex- 
ican sugar).  These  provisions  will  be  given  to  the  most  needy.  If  it 
be  not  practicable  to  distribute  them  all  at  once,  they  will  be  left  in 
the  hands  of  some  responsible  man  for  this  purpose,  proper  receipts 
being  taken  therefor.  I instruct  Captain  Shirland  particularly  on 
these  points,  and  direct  him  and  Lieutenant  Vestal  to  make  a joint 
report  on  the  number  and  sufferings  of  the  people  at  Pino  Alto,  and 
whether  they  are  strong  enough  to  protect  themselves  from  further 
harm  from  the  Indians. 

I am,  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  H.  CAKLETO^, 

Brigadier- General,  U.  $.  Army. 

[Inclosure  C.] 

Camp  on  Rio  Miembres,  Ariz., 

August  10,  1862. 

Col.  Joseph  R.  West, 

First  California  Volunteer  Infantry  : 

Colonel  : Pursuant  to  instructions  received  on  the  6th  instant  we 
left  this  place  on  that  day  for  the  Pino  Alto  mines,  taking  with  us  a 
quantity  of  provisions  for  distribution  among  the  inhabitants  of  that 
place,  represented  to  be  in  a starving  condition.  We  arrived  there  on 
the  7th,  and  called  upon  the  principal  men  of  the  place  to  assist  us  in 
ascertaining  the  names,  ages,  business,  condition,  number,  &c.,  of  the 
inhabitants.  We  found  about  30  Americans,  French,  Germans,  &c. ; 
two  of  the  Germans  with  families ; all  the  rest  were  Mexicans.  Most 
of  them  were  extremely  poor  and  destitute,  there  being  scarcely  any 
ore  at  all  in  the  mines.  They  had  received  some  little  assistance  pre- 
vious to  our  arrival,  before  which  time  they  had  been  living  on  purs- 
lane and  roots,  and  several  had  become  insane  from  hunger. 

******* 

Number  of  families  in  the  mines,  two — Mr.  Schneider’s  and  Mr. 
Holtz’s  ; number  of  Mexican  families  living  in  the  mines,  about  30,  all 
extremely  poor. 

All  the  people  seemed  to  be  loyally  inclined,  although  several  of 
them  had  belonged  to  the  Arizona  Rangers,  a company  formed  for  the 
purpose  of  fighting  the  Indians  in  the  Territory.  The  Indians  were 
represented  as  being  extremely  hostile  and  in  the  habit  of  committing 
depredations  upon  the  settlers  whenever  they  had  anything  to  steal. 
At  the  time  of  our  visit  there  were  no  Indians  in  the  neighborhood,  but 
every  one  thought  that  as  soon  as  trains  with  supplies  commenced 
their  trips  the  Indians  would  begin  to  commit  depredations.  All  were 
extremely  anxious  to  have  the  Government  extend  to  them  sufficient 
protection  and  station  at  least  one  company  in  their  neighborhood. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  D.  SHIRLAND, 

Captain , First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry. 


572 


[Chap.  XXL 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 

[Inclosure  D.] 

Headquarters  Column  from  California, 

Camp  on  the  Rio  Grande,  Ariz., 

Three  and  a half  miles  above  Fort  Thorn , August  8,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  E.  R.  S.  Canby, 

Comdg.  Department  of  New  Mexico , Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex. : 

General:  Before  arriving  at  Cooke’s  Wells  I learned  that  there  was 
not  any  water  to  speak  of  between  that  point  and  El  Picacho  on  the 
Rio  Grande,  55  miles  from  Cooke’s  Wells  and  6 miles  above  Mesilla. 
The  Rio  Grande  had  divided  in  the  great  flood  and  broken  across  the 
country,  so  as  to  leave  the  town  of  Mesilla  on  an  island,  difficult  of 
access  from  the  west,  and  that  the  facilities  for  grazing  in  the  neigh- 
borhood of  Mesilla  were  bad.  This  information  decided  me  to  strike 
the  Rio  Grande  at  or  near  Fort  Thorn,  a distance  of  not  less  than  35 
miles,  nor  more  than  40,  from  Cooke’s  Wells,  but  destitute  of  water  the 
whole  way. 

I arrived  here  last  evening  with  two  companies  of  cavalry  and  one 
of  infantry,  having  left  Cooke’s  Wells  at  8 a.  m.  The  other  detach- 
ments West’s,  Willis’,  and  Rigg’s,  a day  apart — will  reach  this  point, 
commencing  with  West’s,  to-morrow  evening.  I leave  to-day  for  the 
San  Diego  Crossing,  at  the  foot  of  the  Jornada,  and  I shall  pass  the 
Rio  Grande  at  that  point. 

} ^ve  this  day  written  to  Colonel  Howe,  that  if  they  have  not  already 
left  Fort  Craig,  to  go  up  the  river.  The  Colorado  Volunteers  can  leave  at 
once,  agreeably  with  your  Special  Orders,  No.  128,  current  series. 

I inclose  for  your  information  a copy  of  a rote  to  Colonel  West,  First 
California  Volunteer  Infantry,  in  relation  to  sending  some  provisions 
to  some  destitute  men,  women,  and  children  at  the  Pino  Alto  mines. 

If  I have  authority  to  occupy  posts  in  the  northwestern  portion  of 

Texas,  %.  e.,  Forts  Bliss  and , will  you  permit  me  to  have  mv 

headquarters,  say,  at  Hart’s  Mill,  on  the  Rio  Grande,  some  3 miles  above 
Fort  Bliss  ? 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  H.  CARLETON, 

Brigadier-General , TJ.  S.  Army . 

Note. — My  command  did  not  use  tents  in  crossing  the  desert.  I 
had  a few  (two  to  a company)  when  I left  Tucson,  but  13  of  these  were 
left  to  shelter  the  garrison  at  Fort  Bowie,  Apache  Pass,  Chiricahua 
Mountains.  I have  sent  to  Fort  Yuma  to  have  all  the  tents  at  that 
post  repaired  and  sent  on  as  soon  as  possible.  Should  I need  them 
can  you  lend  me  some  ? 7 

I left  Tucson  July  23;  stopped  one  day  at  the  Cienega  de  Sauz,  and 
tour  and  a half  at  Ojo  de  la  Vaca,  and  arrived  here  on  the  7th. 

J.  H.  C. 

[Inclosure  I.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  August  11,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  James  II.  Carleton, 

Commanding  Column  from  California , District  of  Arizona: 

^ave  Just  received  your  interesting  communication  of 
the  -d  instant  and  the  accompanying  papers. 


Chap.  XXI.] 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


573 


The  chief  quartermaster,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Donaldson,  has  been 
instructed  to  send  an  additional  supply  of  clothing  to  the  depot  at 
Fort  Craig  to  meet  your  immediate  wants.  He  will  communicate 
with  your  chief  quartermaster  in  relation  to  the  wants  of  your  com- 
mand and  the  supplies  that  can  be  furnished  from  the  depots  under 

11  I have  directed  the  chief  commissary  to  place  $30,000  subsistence 
funds  in  the  hands  of  the  commissary  at  Fort  Craig,  subject  to  your 
order.  This  course  has  been  adopted  in  consequence  of  the  insecurity 
of  the  mails  below  Fort  Craig.  He  also  will  communicate  with  your 
commissary  in  relation  to  his  branch  of  the  service. 

The  statement  of  your  medical  director  has  been  referred  to  the 
medical  director  of  the  department,  who  will  send  to  you  such  medical 
and  hospital  supplies  as  appear  to  be  needed.  The  medical  supplies 
and  ordnance  stores  in  the  department  will  be  largely  in  excess  of  the 
wants  of  the  troops,  and  as  both  classes  are  liable  to  deterioration,  it 
will  be  advisable  to  exhaust  those  on  hand  before  drawing  again  from 
the  east  or  the  Pacific  coast.  If  you  have  not  already  ordered  these 
' supplies  from  Fort  Yuma,  please  make  your  requisitions  upon  the 
depots  in  this  department. 

The  depot  at  Fort  Craig  will  be  subject  to  requisitions,  and  any  sup- 
plies that  are  not  there  now  will  be  sent  there  as  soon  as  advised  that 
you  need  them.  A part  of  the  supplies  will  be  late  in  reaching  that 
point,  having  been  detained  by  the  commander  of  the  Department  of 
Kansas  until  he  could  provide  an  escort  for  them,  and  subsequently 
delayed  by  the  unusual  floods  in  the  Arkansas. 

I have  heretofore  recommended  that  all  posts  in  Arizona  west  of 
the  Eio  Grande  should  be  supplied  by  the  way  of  the  Gulf  of  Cali- 
fornia and  Guaymas.  From  the  information  contained  in  your  letter 
the  cost  of  transportation  from  Guaymas  to  points  on  the  Eio  Grande 
below  Fort  Craig  will  be  about  the  same  as  to  the  depot  at  Fort  Union. 

One  of  the  paymasters  in  this  department  has  been  ordered  to  the 
East  for  the  purpose  of  renewing  his  bond  and  the  commission  of 
another  has  expired,  leaving  but  one  for  the  payments  nowin  progress. 
Another  is  expected  by  the  next  mail  from  the  East,  and  as  soon  after 
lie  arrives  as  possible  arrangements  will  be  made  for  the  payment  of 
your  command. 

The  wants  of  your  men  in  tobacco  and  sutler’s  stores  will  be  made 
known  to  the  merchants  in  this  city,  who  will  no  doubt  be  very  glad 
of  the  opportunity  of  supplying  them. 

General  Wright  has  given  a more  extended  application  to  War  Depart- 
ment General  Orders,  No.  29,  than  I have  understood  it  to  warrant.  That, 
however,  is  of  no  material  consequence.  We  are  here  in  the  same 
cause  and  for  a common  purpose,  and  nothing  shall  be  wanting  on  my 
part  to  insure  the  harmony  of  action  which  is  essential  to  efficiency,  and 
I feel  assured  from  your  character  that  I may  count  upon  your  co-opera- 
tion in  everything  that  has  for  its  object  the  advancement  of  the  honor 
I and  interest  of  our  country. 

Please  communicate  with  me  freely,  and  be  assured  that  whatever 
I can  do,  either  officially  or  personally,  to  advance  the  interests  or 
add  to  the  comforts  of  your  command  will  be  done  with  the  greatest 
pleasure. 

Verv  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  E.  S.  CAKBY, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Department. 


574 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX  , AND  AKIZ. 


[Chai>.  XXI, 


[Inclosure  G.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  Kew  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  V.  Mex .,  August  11,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  James  H.  Carleton, 

Commanding  Column  f rom  California , District  of  Arizona  : 

General  : At  an  early  period  of  last  year  I reported  that  an  inva- 
sion of  Texas  from  New  Mexico,  although  practicable,  was  not  a prac- 
ticable undertaking ; the  length  of  the  march,  the  desert  character  of 
the  country  to  be  traversed,  the  scarcity  of  supplies  on  the  route  the 
necessity  of  bringing  from  the  Missouri  River  or  from  the  Pacific  coast 
every  article  of  equipment  and  munition  and  much  of  the  food,  all  con- 
spired to  make  it  an  undertaking  of  great  magnitude  and  of  question- 
able value  j and  that  the  troops  that  would  be  required  for  the  expedition 
could  be  more  usefully  employed  at  points  that  are  not  only  near  the 
sources  of  supply  but  near  the  points  to  be  attacked.  The  same  views 
appeared  to  have  been  entertained  at  the  Headquarters  of  the  Army  as 
before  my  report  could  have  reached  Washington  I received  instructions 
to  withdraw  first  a part  and  afterward  the  whole  of  the  regular  force 
then  in  New  Mexico.  These  last  instructions  were  subsequentlv  so 
modified  as  to  direct  the  withdrawal  of  these  troops  “at  such  time  and 
m such  manner  as  would  not  expose  the  Territory  to  conquest  or  inva- 
sion before  the  Volunteer  troops  of  New  Mexico  are  properly  organized 
armed,  and  posted.’7  * 7 

At  a later  period  I reported  that  it  would  be  difficult,  if  not  imprac- 
ticable, to  raise  the  additional  force  authorized  for  this  Territory  • nor 
do  I think  it  desirable  that  it  should  be  done  if  it  is  practicable  to  send 
one  or  two  volunteer  regiments  from  the  East  to  replace  the  regular 
troops  when  they  are  withdrawn.  The  New  Mexican  Volunteers,  unless 
supported  by  regular  troops  or  by  volunteers  drawn  from  some  other 
section  of  the  country,  cannot  be  relied  on  to  resist  invasion  of  the 
Terntorj7  if  one  is  attempted. 

When  a force  from  the  Department  of  the  Mississippi  was  under 
°U*ers  for  ^is  department  1 received  instructions  from  the  Secretary 
o±  \\  ar  to  disband  the  New  Mexican  Volunteers  whenever  I thought 
proper.  The  force  from  the  Department  of  the  Mississippi  was  subse- 
quently diverted  from  its  destination,  and  soon  after  information  was 
received  that  your  command  was  on  the  march.  I have  coupled  these 
changes  with  the  instructions  for  the  movement  of  the  regular  troops 
and  supposed  that  your  command  was  intended  for  service  in  New 
Mexico.  Acting  upon  this  supposition,  I have  reported  that  “ the  near 
approach  of  General  Carleton’s  force  justifies  the  opinion  that  the  reg- 
ular troops  may  now  be  withdrawn,  as  originally  intended,  without 
detriment  to  the  service,77  and  have  already  made  some  arrangements 
tor  the  movement j but  as  there  have  been  some  material  changes  since 
these  instructions  were  given,  I do  not  intend  to  put  any  of  the  regular 
troops  beyond  the  reach  of  recall  until  I receive  further  instructions. 

1 have  been  thus  particular,  not  only  for  the  purpose  of  answering  your 
question,  but  to  indicate  the  policy  and  instructions  under  which  I have 
been  acting,  and  which  I suppose  will  devolve  upon  you  when  the  reg- 
ular troops  leave  the  country. 

In  the  arrangements  that  were  made  for  the  reoccupation  of  Arizona 
it  was  my  intention  to  restore  the  sovereignty  of  the  United  States  in 
its  original  integrity,  post  the  troops  so  as  to  protect  the  inhabitants 
and  guard  against  invasion,  and,  in  addition,  to  occupy  such  points  in 
lexas  as  could  be  reached  without  throwing  the  troops  so  employed 


! 


Chap.  XXI.]  THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN.  575 

beyond  the  reach  of  support.  This  has  been  directed  in  general  terms 
in  the  instructions  given  to  the  commander  of  the  Southern  Military 
District,  and  who  would  also  have  been  the  commander  of  the  expedi- 
tion organized  for  that  purpose.  Copies  of  these  instructions  have 
already  been  furnished  you.  The  retreat  of  the  rebels  and  the  approach 
of  your  command  rendered  it  unnecessary  to  send  this  force  below  the 
Jornada,  and,  with  the  exception  of  the  infantry  battalion  and  the  cav- 
alry force  with  Lieutenant-Colonel  Eyre,  it  has  been  recalled.  The 
detachments  will  also  be  recalled,  but  the  movement  will  not  be  com- 
menced until  your  arrangements  are  so  far  perfected  that  it  can  be  done 
without  inconvenience. 

I do  not  think  that  an  invasion  of  New  Mexico  will  again  be  at- 
tempted by  the  Eio  Grande ; but  if  our  troops  in  the  Southwest  should 
meet  with  any  serious  reverses,  it  may  be  by  the  Canadian  or  attempts 
may  be  made  to  interrupt  our  communications  with  the  East.  This  last 
I have  regarded  as  the  most  probable  danger,  and  some  time  since  re- 
quested the  commander  of  the  Department  of  Kansas  to  place  a suffi- 
cient force  on  that  line  (within  his  department)  to  secure  it.  The  renewal 
of  the  disturbances  in  Missouri  has  prevented  this,  and  I am  now  put- 
ting some  of  the  Colorado  troops  on  the  line. 

If  there  should  be  no  change  in  the  order  for  the  removal  of  the 
regular  troops  a part  of  your  command  will  probably  be  needed  at  and 
above  Fort  Craig.  I have  estimated  the  force  required  at  that  post  and 
the  Eio  Grande  as  far  as  Fort  Bliss  at  2,000  men.  I infer  from  your 
letter  of  May  3 that  you  can  readily  be  re-enforced  from  California,  and 
there  is  no  doubt  that  troops  can  better  be  spared  from  that  State  than 
from  any  other  quarter.  I make  these  suggestions  now  for  your  consid- 
eration, and  will  be  pleased  to  hear  from  you  in  relation  to  them  before 
any  general  movement  of  the  regular  troops  takes  place. 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  E.  S.  CANBY, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding  Department . 

[Inclosure  H.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  August  12,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  James  H.  Carleton, 

Commanding  Column  from  California , District  of  Arizona : 

General  : I have  just  received  your  communication  of  the  8th  in- 
stant. It  is  my  wish  that  you  should  exercise  your  own  judgment  both 
with  regard  to  the  distribution  of  your  troops  and  the  point  at  which 
your  headquarters  will  be  established.  My  instructions  to  Colonel 
Chivington  of  June  22  and  subsequent  dates  were  predicated  upon  the 
supposition  that  he  would  meet  with  some  resistance,  and  were  more  in 
detail  than  I should  have  considered  necessary  with  an  officer  of  more 
experience. 

In  my  letter  of  yesterday  I gave  the  general  tenor  of  my  instructions, 
in  order  that  you  might  use  your  discretion  in  carrying  out  the  policy 
of  the  Government  with  reference  to  this  department.  Directions  will 
be  given  to  send  tents  to  Fort  Craig  for  the  use  of  your  command,  and 
I trust  that  you  will  not  hesitate  in  asking  for  anything  that  will  add 
to  the  comfort  of  your  command.  If  not  already  at  Fort  Craig,  it  will 
be  sent  there,  and  if  not  now  in  abundance,  we  will  share  what  we  have,, 
and  renew  our  supplies  when  the  trains  come  in.  It  will  probably  be 


576  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

necessary  for  a time  to  send  your  own  transportation  to  Fort  Craig  for 
any  supplies  that  you  may  need  from  that  place. 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  R.  S.  CAKBY, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Department. 

[Inclosure  I.J 

Headquarters  District  of  Arizona, 

Las  Cruces , JST.  Mex .,  August  15,  1862, 

Brig.  Gen.  E.  R.  S.  Canby, 

Commanding  Department  of  New  Mexico , Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.  : 

General  : I wrote  to  you  a letter  from  Ojo  de  la  Vaca  on  the  2d 
instant  advising  you  of  the  strength  of  the  forces  under  my  command 
then  en  route  to  the  Rio  Grande.  Since  then  I have  not  received  any 
letters  from  your  headquarters  advising  me  of  the  receipt  of  that  com- 
munication. The  inclosed  general  orders  (Ros.  14  and  15,  from  these 
headquarters)  will  give  you  an  idea  of  the  force  stationed  at  Mesilla. 
In  Las  Cruces  there  are  four  companies  of  the  Fifth  U.  S.  Infantry  j at 
Fort  Fillmore  there  are  Shinn’s  light  battery,  Third  FT.  S.  Artillery ; 
Companies  A and  E,  First  California  Volunteer  Infantry ; Company  fe, 
Fifth  California  Volunteer  Infantry,  and  Companies  B and  D,  First 
California  Volunteer  Cavalry,  and  Company  B,  Second  California  Vol- 
unteer Cavalry.  I placed  all  the  cavalry  and  nearly  all  the  quarter- 
master’s wagons  and  teams  at  Fort  Fillmore  on  account  of  the  good 
grazing  in  that  vicinity  and  the  abundance  of  mesquite  beans  now  in 
that  neighborhood,  which  for  the  present  precludes  the  necessity  of 
purchasing  much  forage.  As  there  are  sufficient  quarters  at  La  Mesilla 
for  the  four  companies  of  the  Fifth  U.  S.  Infantry  I shall  establish 
them  in  that  town,  unless  otherwise  directed  by  yourself,  at  least  for 
the  present.  The  emulation  which  will  naturally  spring  up  between 
them  and  the  volunteers,  as  to  who  shall  best  perform  their  duties, 
will,  in  my  opinion,  be  of  great  service  to  both  ; besides,  there  is  a fine 
building  there,  where  the  supplies — quartermaster’s  and  subsistence — 
can  be  kept  free  of  expense,  and  the  town  of  Mesilla  is  said  to  be  a 
cooler  and  healthier  locality  than  Las  Cruces.  Colonel  Howe  wrote  to 
me  desiring  that  I would  send  these  four  companies  to  Fort  Craig,  but 
this  I do  not  feel  authorized  to  do  unless  you  order  it. 

Mr.  Woods,  the  beef  contractor,  wrote  me  a note  in  relation  to  furnish- 
ing beef  for  my  command.  It  is  herewith  inclosed,*  together  with  my 
reply.  I hope  my  decision  in  this  case  will  meet  with  your  approval. 
I have  not  yet  learned  officially  whether  Mr.  Woods  will  or  not  supply 
beef  for  only  the  four  companies  of  regulars ; I have  heard  that  he 
would  not. 

To-morrow  I leave  for  Fort  Bliss,  in  Texas,  with  Companies  B,  of  the 
First,  and  B,  of  the  Second,  California  Volunteer  Cavalry.  Company 
C,  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry,  is  already  at  Hart’s  Mill,  as  you 
had  doubtless  heard  previous  to  my  arrival.  There  are  many  matters 
of  moment  which  require  my  attention,  as  I have  heard,  in  the  neigh- 
borhood of  Fort  Bliss. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  H.  CARLETOFT, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXI.] 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


577 


[Inclosure  K.] 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Col.  from  Cal.,  Camp  on  Eio  Grande, 
No.  16.  f Near  Fort  Quitman , Tex.,  August  22,  1862. 

I.  At  12  m.  to-day  Capt.  John  C.  Cremony,  with  his  company  (B,  of 
the  Second  California  Volunteer  Cavalry),  will  proceed  to  Fort  Quitman 
and  hoist  over  it  the  national  colors,  the  old  Stars  and  Stripes.  By  this 
act  still  another  post  comes  under  its  rightful  flag  and  once  more  be- 
comes consecrated  to  the  United  States. 

II.  Capt.  Edmond  D.  Shirland,  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry, 
will  proceed  without  delay,  yet  by  easy  marches,  to  Fort  Davis,  Tex., 
and  hoist  over  that  post  the  national  colors.  If  Captain  Shirland  finds 
any  sick  or  wounded  soldiers  there  he  will  make  them  prisoners  of  war, 
but  put  them  upon  their  parole  and  let  them  proceed  without  delay  to 
Texas.  If  they  are  unable  to  travel,  Captain  Shirland  will  report  to 
these  headquarters  by  express  what  they  need  in  the  way  of  surgical  or 
medical  attention ; what  they  need  in  the  way  of  food  or  transporta- 
tion, and  all  other  essential  facts  connected  with  them  which  it  may  be 
necessary  to  have  known  to  have  them  properly  cared  for.  If  the  fort 
is  abandoned,  Captain  Shirland  will  retrace  his  steps  and  report  in  per- 
son to  these  headquarters. 

III.  Twenty  effective  men  will  be  ordered  from  Company  B,  First 
California  Volunteer  Cavalry,  to  report  to  Captain  Shirland  for  detached 
service  to  Fort  Davis,  Tex. 

Bv  order  of  Brigadier-General  Carleton : 
y BEX.  C.  CUTLEE, 

First  Lieut , First  Cal.  Vol.  Infantry , A.  A.  A.  G. 

[Inclosure  L.] 

Camp  on  Eio  Grande,  September  2,  3862. 
Lieut.  Benj.  C.  Cutler, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  FranHin,  Tex.: 

Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  state  that,  in  pursuance  to  instruc- 
tions received  from  General  James  H.  Carleton,  commanding  Column 
from  California,  I left  this  camp  at  3 p.  m.  August  23  en  route  to  Fort 
Davis.  Encamped  at  8 o’clock  the  same  evening,  having  marched  15 
miles 

Started  at  daybreak  of  the  24th  and  arrived  at  Eagle  Springs  at  9.30 
a.  m.,  17  miles ; found  the  springs  filled  with  rubbish  and  carrion;  by 
cleaning  them  out  found  water  for  men  and  animals.  There  being  no 
grass  in  the  vicinity,  I left  the  springs  at  4 p.  m. ; marched  about  5 miles 
and  made  a dry  camp ; grass  abundant  and  good. 

Started  at  daybreak  and  marched  20  miles  to  Van  Horn’s  Wells  ; 
found  these  wells  entirely  filled  up ; cleared  out  one  of  them,  but  found 
it  impossible  to  obtain  sufficient  water  for  the  men.  Many  of  the  horses 
being  unfit  to  proceed  farther,  I thought  it  best  to  go  on  from  here  with 
20  men  and  picked  horses,  taking  the  ambulance  with  me.  Accordingly 
I directed  Lieutenant  Haden  to  retrace  his  steps  to  Eagle  Springs  with 
the  remainder  of  the  detachment,  to  clean  out  the  springs  thoroughly, 
and  to  remain  there  eight  days,  unless  he  received  other  orders  from 
me.  If  at  the  expiration  of  eight  days  I should  not  have  returned  or 
sent  back  an  express,  I directed  him  to  return  to  the  river  and  wait  for 
me  there  two  days  and  then  proceed  up  the  river  and  report  to  General 
Carleton. 

37  R R— VOL  IX 


578 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ  [Chap.  XXI. 


■pr  0 V,an  ^?rn  s w®lls  a*  about  4 p.  m.  and  arrived  at  Dead  Man’s 
Hole  at  about  2 a.  m.;  found  sufficient  water  there  for  the  animals  but 
not  enough  for  a company;  distance  35  miles. 

•Started  at  6.30  a.  m.  and  arrived  at  Barrel  Springs  at  3 p.  m„  having 
halted  on  the  road  to  graze  the  animals.  Found  water  enough  at  these 
springs  for  one  company.  Bemained  here  that  night,  and  on  the  next 
afternoon  sent  forward  Corporal  Bartlett,  with  one  private  and  the  Mex- 
ican  guide,  to  find  out  the  condition  of  affairs  at  Fort  Davis,  distant  18 
miles.  They  returned  about  noon  the  next  day,  having  performed  their 
duty  in  such  a manner  that  if  the  fort  had  been  occupied  by  the  Con 
federate  States  troops  their  (Corporal  Bartlett  and  party)  presence 
!wi  t +£•  !'aVe  been  discovered.  They  reported  the  fort  unoccupied, 
and  I,  thinking  it  best  not  to  send  back  for  the  company  on  account  of 
the  scarcity  of  water  proceeded  to  the  fort,  I found  it  entirely  deserted, 
but  in  one  of  the  buildings  of  the  Overland  Mail  Company  1 found  the 
dead  body  of  a man  lying  on  the  floor.  He  had  been  shot  through  the 
body  with  a bullet  and  had  an  arrow  wound  on  the  head  and  one  on  the 
arm  From  the  appearance  of  the  room  I think  that  it  had  been  used 
by  the  Confederate  troops  as  a hospital,  and  this  man  left  there  sick 
and  afterward  killed  by  the  Indians.  I had  the  body  buried.  The  fort 
appears  to  have  been  garrisoned  by  the  Confederate  States  troops  since 
their  first  appearance  m the  country  by  at  least  a portion  of  one  com- 
pany.  It  also  seemed  to  have  been  used  as  a rendezvous  for  sick 
soldiers,  but  they  had  all  left  with  the  last  detachment  for  San  Antonio. 

The  following  is  a description  of  the  buildings  at  the  fort:  Five  com- 
pany  quarters,  about  80  by  25  feet;  one  story  high;  built  of  stone: 
thatched  roof.  Four  of  these  buildings  are  in  fair  condition.  The  roof 
9?  r widows  of*  one  have  been  burned.  One  guard-house,  about 
by  25  feet;  building  stone;  roof,  doors,  and  windows  burned.  One 
quartermaster’s  store-house,  about  100  by  20  feet,  built  of  stone;  roof, 
doors,  and  windows  entirely  destroyed;  surrounded  by  several  small 
buildings ; use  not  known.  One  wooden  or  slab  building,  30  by  16  feet  • 
thatched  roof ; used  as  an  adjutant’s  office.  One  wooden  building,  36 
by  27  feet,  with  kitchen  and  several  small  outbuildings ; supposed  to 
have  been  the  commanding  officer’s  quarters.  On  this  building  the  flag 
was  raised  and  kept  up  one  day.  One  wooden  building,  48  by  22  feet 
with  kitchen  and  outhouses  attached;  supposed  to  have  been  officers’ 

bffihw’  u?r  iI°r0dFen  building>22  by  12  feet,  with  one  small  out- 

°ne™°den building,  36  by  18  feet;  one  out- 
feet;  ?n.e  flab  building,  40  by  15  feet;  one  slab  build- 

90ghv °19 ? feet;  °in£  ilan  buildmS>  20  by  12  feet;  one  slab  building, 
20  bj  12  feet;  one  slab  building,  30  by  15  feet;  one  outhouse,  10  by  12 
feet,  seven  small  slab  outhouses;  one  slab  stable,  50  by  14  feet;  one 
stone  and  mud  house;  three  small  slab  buildings.  These  are  esti- 
mated measurements,  as  I had  no  other  means  of  doing.  One  Over- 
umk  Mai1  statloa?  consisting  of  house,  store-house,  shop,  stable,  sad- 
Mnnv  J.rana7’  &c-?  one.  adobe  building,  formerly  used  as  a store. 

d?°f  ai?d  windows  have  been  destroyed.  Some  seem  to 
lifmhA^eeiT1ifUle<l  °d’i  others  burned.  One  wagon  stands  loaded  with 
th  P f ->  baIe  b(?aTd  a rcP°r^  in  fact,  that  the  entire  fort  was  sold  by 
the  Oonfete^e  States  officers  to  some  party  at  Del  Norte,  Mexico. 

1 roperty  consists  of  some  iron  m quartermaster’s  store-house,  some  100 
sboes>  ,two  old  citizen  wagons,  several  wagon  and  cart  wheels, 

^irre-^  ®eyeral  ?bams?  many  hospital  bedsteads,  but  all  broken 
or  m a dilapidated  condition. 


Chap.  XXI.] 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


579 


I started  from  the  fort  on  my  return  at  daylight  of  the  30th  and 
marched  to  Dead  Man’s  Hole  $ watered  the  animals,  and  made  a dry  camp 
in  the  prairie.  . _ . 

Left  camp  at  9 a.  m.  and  marched  about  10  miles,  when  an  Indian 
made  his  appearance  with  a white  flag,  followed  by  5 others,  all  mounted. 

I tried  to  hold  a talk  with  them,  but  they  seemed  unwilling  to  have  any- 
thing to  say,  they  being  followed  by  25  or  30  more  mounted  men,  and 
still  farther  behind  was  a large  party  on  foot,  and  it  being  evident  that 
their  only  intention  was  to  gain  time  and  delay  us  until  they  could  sur- 
round us,  coming  towards  us  in  every  direction,  a large  proportion  of 
them  mounted.  Wishing  to  get  rid  of  the  footmen,  I made  a running 
fight  of  it,  expecting  the  mounted  men  to  follow,  which  they  did  for  a 
short  distance ; but  finding  it  too  hot  for  them,  they  returned.  They 
left  4 men  dead  on  the  field,  2 of  them  the  leaders,  respectively,  of  the 
mounted  and  footmen.  I have  good  reason  to  believe  that  at  least  20 
were  wounded.  1 had  2 men  wounded,  1 slightly  and  1 painfully,  by  a 
pistol-ball  in  the  shoulder.  I had  also  1 horse  wounded. 

I then  came  on  to  Eagle  Springs,  where  I arrived  at  11  p.  m., 
watered  all  my  animals,  and  found  that  Lieutenant  Haden,  with  the 
remainder  of  the  command,  had  left  for  the  river  several  days  before. 
Encamped  for  the  remainder  of  the  night,  and  on  the  next  day  pro- 
ceeded to  the  river,  arriving  there  about  5 p.  m.,  and  found  Lieutenant 
Haden,  with  the  remainder  of  the  command,  he  stating  that  he  could  not 
find  sufficient  water  at  Eagle  Springs  for  the  use  of  the  animals. 

I omitted  in  the  foregoing  report  to  state  that  about  10  miles  from 
Van  Horn’s  Wells  I met  two  Mexicans  coming  this  way.  I arrested 
them  and  brought  them  to  this  camp,  where  I released  them,  and  they 
went  on  up  the  river  and  will  report  to  General  Carleton  in  person. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ E.  D.  SHIRLAHD, 

Captain  Company  <7,  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry. 

[Inclosure  M.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  Hew  Mexico, 

August  10,  1862. 

To  the  Adjutant-General, 

Washington , D.  C. : 

General  Carleton’s  force  in  the  Mesilla  will  be  less  by  700  men  than 
is  stated  in  my  report  of  the  6th.  He  reports  that  he  can  be  fol- 
lowed by  another  regiment  of  infantry  or  more.  I recommend  that  one 
regiment  of  infantry  and  five  companies  of  cavalry  be  ordered  from 
California.  The  regular  troops  can  be  ready  to  leave  as  soon  as  the 
answer  to  my  report  of  the  6th  is  received,  or  earlier  if  I find  it  safe  to 
move  them. 

ED.  R.  S.  CAHBY, 

Brigadier-  General. 

[Inclosure  N.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  Hew  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  W.  Mex .,  August  21,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  James  H.  Carleton, 

Commanding  District  of  Arizona , Fort  Bliss , Tex. : 

General:  The  commanding  general  desires  that  you  will  arrange 
the  affairs  of  your  district  so  that  the  command  may  be  turned  over  to 


580 


[Chap.  XXI. 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 

the  officer  next  in  rank  as  soon  as  practicable,  and  hold  yourself  in 
readiness  to  repair  to  the  headquarters  of  the  department. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GURDEH  CHAPIH, 

Captain,  Seventh  U.  S.  Infantry , Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen . 

[Inclosure  0.] 

Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  New  Mexico 

Ko.  153.  j Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex .,  August  26,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  James  H.  Carleton,  U.  S.  Army,  will  repair  without  de- 
lay to  Santa  Fe,  for  the  purpose  of  relieving  Brigadier-General  Oanbv 
in  the  command  of  the  Department  of  Hew  Mexico. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Canby: 

GURDEH  CHAPIH, 

Captain , Seventh  U.  S.  Infantry , Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen. 

[Inclosure  P.] 

General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  District  of  Arizona, 

^°-  17-  i Franklin , Tex.,  August  27,  1862. 

******  # 

II.  Captain  Roberts’  company  (E,  First  California  Volunteer  In- 
fantry) and  Captain  Pislion’s  company  (D,  First  California  Volunteer 
Cavalry)  will  be  ordered  by  Colonel  West  to  proceed  without  delay  to 
Franklin,  Tex.,  where  Captain  Roberts’  company  will  take  post,  and 
whence  Captain  Pishon’s  company  will  march  to  Fort  Stockton,  in 
Texas,  as  a guard  to  some  prisoners  of  the  Confederate  Army  who  are 
to  be  sent  to  Texas  on  parole. 

Each  of  these  companies  will  be  rationed  from  the  depot  at  Mesilla 
to  include  the  30th  proximo.  Besides  these  rations  Colonel  West  will 
send,  escorted  by  Roberts’  company,  6,000  rations  of  subsistence  stores 
from  the  Mesilla  depot  to  Franklin,  Tex. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Carleton  : 

BEH.  C.  CUTLER, 

First  Lieutenant,  First  Cal.  Vol.  Infantry,  A.  A.  A.  G. 

[Inclosure  Q.] 

Headquarters  District  of  Arizona, 

Franklin , Tex.,  September  1,  1862. 
Commander  of  Confederate  Troops,  San  Antonio,  Tex.: 

Sir  : I found  on  my  arrival  here  some  20-odd  sick  and  wounded 
soldiers  of  the  Confederate  States  Army,  whom  I was  ordered  by  Gen- 
eral Canby,  commanding  the  Department  of  Hew  Mexico,  to  make 
prisoners  of  war.  These  men,  at  their  earnest  solicitation,  I sent  to 
ban  Antonio  on  their  parole.  They  have  been  furnished  with  rations 
ot  subsistence  for  forty  days  and  with  such  medicines  and  hospital 
stores  as  were  necessary  for  them  for  the  road.  I have  also  furnished 
two  wagons  for  the  transportation  of  those  who  are  unable  to  walk, 
l Jwv®  se?^  -SB  escort  of  1 lieutenant  and  25  rank  and  file  of  the 
First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry  to  guard  them  from  attack  by  Mexi- 
cans or  Indians  until  a sufficient  force  from  your  army  is  met,  to  whom 
they  may  be  transferred,  or  until  they  reach  some  point  near  San  An- 
tonio,  where  from  thence  onward  they  can  travel  with  safety.  From 
that  point  the  lieutenant  is  ordered  to  return  with  his  party  and  all 


Chap.  XXI.] 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


581 


the  means  of  transportation  belonging  to  the  United  States  with  which 
he  is  intrusted  for  the  use  of  his  escort  and  benefit  of  these  prisoners. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  H.  CARLETON, 
Brigadier -General , TJ.  S.  Army , Commanding. 

[Inclosure  R.] 

General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  District  of  Arizona, 

;NTo.  20.  j Las  Cruces , N.  Mex .,  September  5,  1862. 

I Mai.  Theodore  A.  Coult,  Fifth  California  Volunteer  Infantry,  will 
proceed  without  delay  to  Tucson,  and  relieve  Maj.  David  Ferguson, 
First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry,  in  the  command  of  the  District  of 
Western  Arizona. 

II.  Maj.  David  Ferguson,  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry,  is  here- 
by relieved  from  duty  as  chief  commissary  of  the  Column  from  Califor- 
nia, and  will  immediately  transfer  all  funds,  property,  records,  &c.,  per- 
taining to  the  subsistence  department  to  Capt.  Nicholas  S.  Davis,  First 
California  Volunteer  Infantry,  who  is  hereby  appointed  acting  chief 
commissary  of  the  Column  from  California.  Having  done  this,  Major 
Ferguson  will  proceed,  via  Arivaca  and  Altar  or  Cubero,  without  delay, 
to  a point  at  or  near  Lobos  Bay,  on  the  Gulf  of  California,  known  as 
Libertad,  and  examine  the  intermediate  country,  with  a view  to  the 
transportation  of  supplies.  He  will  ascertain  the  resources  of  the 
country  on  this  route ; also  the  availability  of  Lobos  Bay  as  a port 
where  the  military  supplies  destined  for  Arizona  may  be  landed.  Major 
Ferguson  will  then  repair  in  person  to  the  headquarters  District  of 
Arizona,  and  make  a report  of  his  examination  of  the  Port  Lobos  route 
to  the  general  commanding  the  Column  from  California.  As  soon  there- 
after as  practicable  Major  Ferguson  will  assume  command  of  his  regi- 
ment, the  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry. 

III.  Capt.  Nicholas  S.  Davis,  chief  of  transportation  of  the  Column 
from  California,  will  discharge  all  mechanics  from  Government  employ- 
ment at  Tucson,  except  such  as  may.be  necessary  to  keep  the  train  that 
plies  to  Fort  Yuma  in  repairs.  This  train  and  any  other  quarter- 
master’s property  in  Western  Arizona  for  which  he  is  responsible  may, 
if  the  exigencies  of  the  service  so  require  it,  be  transferred  by  Captain 
Davis  to  the  depot  quartermaster  at  Tucson.  Captain  Davis  and  Lieu- 
tenant Lysander  E.  Hanson,  First  California  Volunteer  Infantry,  with 
Mr.  George  C.  Alexander,  clerk  to  the  chief  commissary  of  the  Column 
from  California,  will  report  by  the  first  opportunity  to  the  commander 
of  the  District  of  Arizona. 

IV.  Surg.  John  H.  Prentiss,  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry,  will 
relieve  Surgeon  McNulty  as  medical  purveyor  of  the  District  of  Arizona, 
and  will  receipt  for  the  medical  supplies  appertaining  to  the  same. 

V.  Estimates  for  medical  supplies  and  ammunition  required  at  Fort 

Bowie  and  Tucson  will  be  made  upon  the  proper  officers  at  the  head- 
quarters of  the  District  of  Arizona.  * 

VI.  Brigadier-General  Carleton  having  been  ordered  to  Santa  Fe,  to 
relieve  Brigadier-General  Canby,  in  the  command  of  the  Department 
of  New  Mexico,  he  hereby  relinquishes  the  command  of  the  District  of 
Arizona  to  Col.  Joseph  R.  West,  First* California  Volunteer  Infantry. 
Brigadier-General  Carleton  still  retains  the  command  of  the  Column 
from  California,  and  his  staff — Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.  Benjamin  C. 
Cutler,  Surg.  James  M.  McNulty,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Eyre,  chief  quar- 
termaster, and  Lieut.  Joseph  F.  Bennett,  acting  assistant  adjutant- 
general — will  accompany  him  to  Santa  Fe,  starting  to-day. 


582 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  AEIZ. 


[Chap.  XXI. 


,,  X11'  The  District  of  Arizona  comprises  the  Territory  of  Arizona  ami 
that  portion  of  New  Mexico  which  lies  south  of  an  efst  and  west  line 
drawn  through  Fort  Thorn  and  also  Northwestern  Texas.  The  execu- 
Vj®P°"’ers  assumed  by  Brigadier-General  Carleton  in  his  proclamation 
thafofficerUCS°n’  Jun6  §’  1862’  wU1’ lmtil  further  orders,  be  retained  by 
By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Carleton  : 

— ben.  0.  CUTLER, 

-hirst  Lieutenant,  First  Cal.Vol.  Infantry,  A.  A.  A.  G. 

[Inclosure  S.] 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Department  of  New  Mexico 
JN0,  f Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  September  18,  1862. 

ment  toUBr,VS^PnedThweny  TePnqni85®8  the  command  of  this  depart- 
mceesso?  af  Carl®ton> and  1S  gratified  in  announcing  as  his 

successor  an  officer  whose  character,  services,  and  experience  in  this 
country  entitle  him  to  the  confidence  of  the  people  of  New  Mexico. 

J®av?  of*h,e  troops  he  has  for  some  time  had  the  honor  to 
, “?nd  desires  to  leave  with  them  the  assurance  of  his  high  respect 

and  admiratmn  and  his  best  wishes  for  their  happiness  and  advance- 

ED.  R.  8.  CANBT, 
Brigadier-General , U.  S.  Volunteers . 

[Inclosure  T.] 

General  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

JNo.  84.  ( Santa  Fe , JV.  Mex.,  September  18,  1862. 

New  MexicoderSigne<i  hereby  assumes  command  of  the  Department  of 

n ?taff  officcrs  are  announced:  First  Lieut.  Ben.  C. 

Lutler,  lirstCaliforma  Infantry,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general;  Mai. 
Henry  D.Wallen,  Seventh  JJ.  S.  Infantry,  acting  inspector-general ; 
Capt.  A.  W.  Evans,  Sixth  U.  S..  Cavalry,  acting  assistant  inspector- 
generalj  Capt.  John  C.  McFerran,  U.  S.  Army,  chief  quartermaster; 
Capt,  A.  F.  Garrison,  TJ.  S.  Volunteers,  chief  commissary  of  subsistence; 

JJ‘  S‘  Army?  medical  director.  Surg.  James  M. 
McNulty,  of  the  First  California  Volunteer  Infantry,  in  addition  to  his 
duties  as  medical  director  of  the  Column  from  California,  is  assigned  to 
duty  as  acting  medical  inspector  of  the  Department  of  New  Mexico, 
and  will  be  governed  in  the  performance  of  these  duties  by  such  in- 
structions as  he  may  receive  from  these  headquarters.  Maj.  William  J 
Martin  IJ.  S.  Army,  chief  paymaster.  Capt.  William  H.  Bossell,* 
lentn  U . fe.  Infantry,  will  continue  to  perform  the  duties  of  disbursing 
officer  of  the  lund  for  collecting,  drilling,  and  organizing  volunteers. 
Capt.  William  B.  Shoemaker,  military  store-keeper  of  ordnance,  will 
pertorm  the  duties  of.  chief  of  ordnance  at  Fort  Union. 

orderly  hours  at  department  headquarters  will  be  from  9 
to  10  a.  m.  for  chiefs  of  staff  departments  and  officers  on  duty,  and  from 
11  a.  m.  to  12  m.  for  citizens  on  business. 

XTly*  A11.  orders  and  instructions  from  headquarters  Department  of 
New  Mexico,  unless  hereafter  modified  or  repealed,  will  remain  in  full 
force ; and  particular  attention  is  directed  to  department  General  Or- 
ders, No.  62,  of  July  7, 1862  • its  requirements  will  be  strictly  observed. 

JAMES  H.  CABLETON, 

Brigadier- General,  JJ.  S.  Volunteers , Gomdg.  Department. 


Chap-  XXI.] 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


583 


[Inclosure  U.] 

Headquarters  Column  from  California, 
Jornada  del  Muerto , A.  Mex.,  September  8,  1862. 

Col.  Joseph  E.  West, 

Commanding  District  of  Arizona , Mesilla , Ariz. : 

Colonel:  I met  this  morning  some  paroled  prisoners  of  war.  I 
have  heard  there  are  93  of  them.  They  are  on  their  way  to  Texas. 
Surgeon  Covey,  of  the  C.  S.  Army,  who  goes  with  them,  informs  me 
that  they  have  some  arms  belonging  to  the  United  States,  with  which 
to  defend  themselves  en  route  to  San  Antonio.  Give  orders  so  that 
Lieutenant  French,  First  California  Cavalry,  whom  I sent  towards  Texas 
with  other  prisoners,  may  bring  these  arms  and  this  transportation 
back,  escorted  by  his  men.  I have  not  received  one  word  of  instruc- 
tion in  relation  to  these  prisoners,  and  know  nothing  about  them  except 
what  I gleaned  from  orders  in  Lieutenant  Bennett’s  possession  and 
from  what  Surgeon  Covey  told  me.  Having  these  arms  they  will  need 
no  escort  from  you,  and  it  will  not  be  well  to  have  our  men  and  animals 
broken  down  without  good  cause.  Keep  them  moving.  Have  no 
delays  at  Fillmore.  Let  them  camp  down  near,  but  not  at,  the  grazing 
camp.  Do  not  let  them  delay  at  all  at  Franklin.  If  care  is  taken  the 
brigands  and  others  ip  El  Paso  will  attempt  to  communicate  with 
them  and  may  be  caught.  Surgeon  Covey  should  not  know  the  full 
extent  of  our  force  now  en  route  from  California. 

******* 

Be  sure  and  have  Wagon-master  Yeck  report  at  Peralta  with  15 
wagons  and  the  ambulance  and  team  and  driver  which  went  below 
with  me  (Truett’s). 

Assistant  Wagon-master  Francis  will  be  placed  in  charge  of  the  train 
of  25  wagons  which  are  to  go  to  Tucson.  No  soldier  teamster  will  go 
with  that  train,  and  no  man  who  is  mustered  as  teamster  who  does  not 
drive  a team ; nor  will  any  such  men  be  permitted  to  remain  with  any 
train,  whether  in  camp  or  on  the  road.  All  such  men  will  at  once  be 
provided  with  teams,  and  a like  number  of  soldiers  be  relieved  from 
extra  duty.  I desire  that  you  will  see  that  this  rule  goes  into  effect  at 
once.  Should  a teamster  become  sick  in  camp  or  on  the  road,  his  place 
will  be  supplied  temporarily  by  a soldier.  It  follows,  therefore,  that 
there  will  not  be  a single  man  mustered  as  teamster  who  does  not 
drive  a team,  nor  will  any  extra  man  be  allowed  as  a cook  for  the 
teamsters.  They  must  cook  for  themselves.  If  you  can  swoop  up 
other  people  about  you  who  had  better  travel  to  Texas,  now  is  a good 
opportunity  to  send  them  to  that  country. 

You  must  discharge  every  civil  employe  whose  services  are  not  in- 
dispensably necessary. 

Please  make  me  a report  of  the  amount  of  provisions  you  have  on 
hand  and  the  number  of  troops,  &c.,  to  be  rationed,  as  soon  as  the 
Texans  have  gone. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 

JAMES  H.  CAELETON, 
Brigadier- General,  TJ.  S.  Army , Commanding . 

. Note. Ask  Colonel  Bowie  to  do  me  the  favor  to  release  and  send 

to  California  a political  prisoner  named  J.  S.  Bratton  on  his  taking 
the  oath  of  allegiance. 


J.  H.  C. 


[Chap.  XXI. 


584 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 
[Inclosure  V.] 


Headquarters  Column  prom  California 

Col.  Joseph  E.  West,  ^ September  is62' 

Commanding  District  of  Arizona,  Mesilta,  Ariz.: 

. Colonel  : Captain  Archer,  commissary  of  subsistence  at  this  post, 
informs  me  that  he  sent  $5,000  subsistence  funds  to  Lieutenant  Bald- 
win at  the  tame  the  Confederate  prisoners  went  below  a few  days  since, 
lhis  must  be  transferred  to  your  depot  commissary  or  be  disbursed 
under  your  direction.  He  informs  me  that  he  can  send,  on  your  esti- 
mate (dated  September 1, 1862),  for  $19,986.66,  $10,000  in  drafts  on  the 
assistant  treasurer  in  Hew  York.  The  remainder  will  be  sent  to  you 
as  soon  as  Captain  Garrison  gives  him  further  authority  to  make  addi- 
tional drafts.  I have  placed  in  his  hands  your  estimates  for  stores,  for 
expenditures,  veterinary  tools,  and  horse  medicines,  carpenter’s  tools 
stationery,  miscellaneous  tools,  and  for  blank  forms,  and  asked  him  to 
hll  them  as  far  as  he  can  and  send  them  on  to  me,  to  be  completed  at 
other  depots  when  Yeck  comes  up.  The  articles  from  Fort  Craig;  will 
be  sent  down  on  the  train  which  came  up  with  me. 


Your  arrangement  about  sending  Swilling  as  an  expressman  is  a 
good  one,  and  I have  given  Colonel  Steen  a memorandum  of  it.  and 
will  endeavor  to  have  the  time  so  fixed  for  other  expressmen  that  there 
will  be  no  delay  m the  transmittal  of  letters  up  and  down  the  river 
Please  give  Azbon  C.  Marcy,  who  took  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  Col- 
onel  Eyre,  a free  pass  to  California. 

I inclose  herewith  a list  of  the  quartermaster’s  property  on  hand  at 
this  post.  I have  asked  Captain  Archer  to  send  one  also  of  the  sub- 
sistence stores,  which  will  embrace  many  things  received  to-day. 


Whatever  you  want  to  make  your  command  efficient  you  shall  have 
Only  bear  m mind  not  to  get  a thing  you  do  not  need.  I wish  to 
accumulate  but  little  of  public  stores  below  the  Jornada. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  H.  CARLETOH, 
Brigadier-General , U.  S.  Army , Commanding. 


[Inclosure  W.] 

Headquarters  Column  from  California, 

_ . T Albuquerque , A.  Mex..  September  14,  1862. 

Col.  Joseph  R.  West, 

First  Cal.  Vol.  Infantry , Comdg.  Dist.  of  Arizona: 

Colonel  : By  the  same  express  which  carries  this  letter  you  will 
receive  an  order  from  department  headquarters,  directing  you  to  send 
troops  to  Fort  Craig  to  relieve  the  garrison  now  at  that  post.  The  gen- 
eral  commanding  directs  that  you  send  for  this  purpose  Lieut.  CoL 
Edwin  A.  Rigg,  First  California  Volunteer  Infantry,  with  about  200 
rank  and  file,  so  selected  as  not  to  take  from  your  command  more  than 
three  companies. 

Captain  Fritz,  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry,  will  proceed  to  * 
Tucson,  as  previously  directed,  with  25  wagons.  If  Wagon-master 
Veek  has  not  already  started  for  Peralta  with  15  wagons,  as  directed, 
the  general  commanding  orders  that  his  train  be  increased  to  35  wagons. 


! . 

Jhap.  XXI.]  THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN.  585 

;f  he  has  already  started,  send  20  additional  wagons  when  Colonel 
3igg  goes  to  Fort  Craig.  Wagon-master  Francis  will  go  with  Cap- 
tain Fritz  to  Tucson,  and  Winston  will  remain  with  the  rest  of  the 
wagons. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BEN.  C.  CUTLEB, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- (general. 

[Inclosure  X.] 

Headquarters  Column  from  California, 

Albuquerque , N.  Mex .,  September  14,  1862. 
Col.  Joseph  B.  West,  Comdg.  List,  of  Arizona,  Mesilla,  Ariz. : 

Colonel  : It  is  presumed,  from  advices  lately  received  from  Maj. 
David  Ferguson,  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry,  commanding  Dis- 
trict of  Western  Arizona,  that  about  1,000  head  of  cattle  will  shortly 
oe  at  Tucson  en  route  to  the  Bio  Grande  for  the  use  of  the  Column  from 
California.  The  general  commanding  directs  that  you  give  to  the  com- 
nanding  officer  at  Tucson  such  detailed  instructions  as  will  insure  the 
arrival  in  this  valley  of  these  cattle  at  an  early  day.  After  deducting 
i sufficient  number  for  the  use  of  the  troops  in  the  District  of  Western 
Arizona,  the  cattle  should  be  sent  forward  in  small  herds,  so  that  too 
nany  may  not  arrive  at  the  watering  places  at  any  one  time — say,  one 
portion  with  Greene’s  company  and  another  with  Wellman’s  cavalry 
and  so  on. 

The  general  commanding  directs  that  you  arrest  one  Manuel  Barella, 
a brother  of  Anastacio  Barella,  of  Mesilla,  and  send  him  up  the  country 
is  far  as  Fort  Craig. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BEN.  C.  CUTLEB, 

First  Lieutenant , First  Gal.  Vol.  Infantry , A.  A.  A.  G. 

[Inclosure  Z.] 

Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Column  from  California, 

No.  36.  j Santa  Fe,  N . Mex.,  September  17,  1862. 

II.  Lieut.  Col.  Edward  E.  Eyre,  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry, 
will  proceed  without  delay  to  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  as  bearer  of  dis- 
patches to  the  commander  of  the  Department  of  the  Pacific,  in  accord- 
ance with  Special  Orders,  No.  148,  from  Headquarters  Department  of 
New  Mexico,  dated  August  22,  1862.  Having  performed  this  duty,  he 
will  rejoin  his  regiment  at  the  earliest  practicable  moment. 

By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Carleton : 

BEN.  C.  CUTLEB, 

First  Lieutenant , First  Cal.  Vol.  Infantry,  A.  A.  A.  G. 


No.  2. 

Reports  df  Lieut.  Col.  Edward  E.  Eyre,  First  California  Cavalry. 

Hdqrs.  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry, 

Fort  Thorn,  Ariz.,  July  6,  1862. 

Lieutenant  : In  compliance  with  orders  received  from  the  colonel 
commanding,  dated  June  17,  1862,  I have  the  honor  to  make  the  fol- 
lowing report: 


586  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI 

June  21,  left  Tucson  at  3 a.  m.  with  Captain  Fritz,  Lieutenant^ 
Haden  and  Baldwin,  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry,  and  14<; 
en;  marched  35  miles  to  Cienega  de  los  Pinos,  and  encamped  at  12  30 
i,water  aad  grazing  abundant.  The  road  to-day  is  very  good 
with  the  exception  of  two  or  three  hills.  At  a distance  of  about  23 
miles  the  road  descends  into  the  eienega,  then  7 miles  to  water  near 
the  burned  station,  which  stood  on  the  hill'  to  the  right  of  the  road 
Course,  southeast;  35  miles.  8 IIle  roauJ 

rolling  conn 


June  22, 


left  Cienega  at  6 a.  m.;  marched  over  a hiffh, 


try,  but  good  wagon  road,  and  splendid  grazing  all  the  wav  for  a clU 
tance  of  about  22  miles,  when  the  road  dlscend!  through?caSon  for  i 
mile,  and  then  opens  on  the  San  Pedro  Valley.  Two  miles  farther  the 
river  is  reached  at  the  Overland  Mail  Station^  strong  bridge  ovS  e 
nver;  water  and  grass  abundant;  wood  very  scarce  Course  north 

ea^ne  2?1  el;  eThere/°and-the  “r6  0fJmes’  the  expressma’n 
June  23,  left  camp  at  crossing  of  the  San  Pedro  at  7.30  a.  m The 

road  at  once  leaves  the  river  and  enters  a valley  about  1 mile  wide 
and  t miles  long,  when  it  terminates  at  the  foot  of  the  mesa  which  is 

hmne<Ti,hr0U'1  a.na;TOw  eaf>°n,  in  which  is  a long  but  not  very  steep 
thl1'  nb' e canon  is  about  li  miles,  when  the  top  of  the  mesa  is  reached^ 
then  about  14  miles  to  Overland  Mail  Station  at  Dragoon  Spring,  at 

T amved  al12'30  P-  ra'  and  encamped;  found  water 
cnhilu  by  dlSSing,  up  the  canon  2 miles,  the  trail  to  which  is  diffi- 

Line  241  mflanS  t0  lead  a“mals  ovt'r.  Course,  northeast;  19£  miles. 
June  24,  left  Dragoon  Spring  at  10.30  a.  m .;  was  detained  in  con 
sequence  of  scarcity  of  water.  Marched  25  miles  over  an  excellent 
Frir^  fm  Ewell’s  Station,  arriving  there  at  5.30  p.  m.;  sent  Captata 

north  of  stathfn  WTTchPode?  t0  examme  the  spring  in  the  mountain 
north  ot  station.  He  had  returned  to  station  by  the  time  the  command 

arrived  and  reported  only  enough  water  for  the  men.  Encamped  at  6 
p.  m.  Course,  northeast;  25  miles.  ^ 

™JTi.25,  leit  E"iell’s  Station  at  1 a.  m.;  marched  15  miles  over  a 
very  hilly  and  in  places  a very  rocky  road  to  station  in  Apache  Pass 

15  miinesamPed  ^ 6 a‘  W';  WatCr  scarce>  uo  grass.  Course,  northeast; 

About  12  m.— I being  engaged  at  the  spring  superintending  the 

watering  of  animals,  it  being  necessary  to  dip  it  with  tin  cups four 

rfiots  were  heard  m the  vicinity  of  where  the  horses  that  had  been 
watered  were  being  grazed  under  a strong  guard.  Immediately  there 
after  it  was  reported  that  Indians  were  in  sight  and  that  the  guard  had 

to  met0thateri  «e  fT'”'  Almost  immediately  thereafter  it  was  reported 
to  me  that  the  Indians  were  waving  a white  flag.  I at  once  started 

At  danfD  i WIf  “e  tWhitr  flag’  and  Mr‘  NewTOmb,  as  interpreter 

ii,,1  f ib°Ut  °ne  hour  1 succeeded  in  getting  sufficiently  near 
0n.e  to  be  understood.  I explained  to  him  what  I desired  and 

sfahf  Iv'lnf  At  tPis1  tirae  at  least  75  t0  100  Indians  were  in 
sight,  many  of  them  mounted  on  good-looking  horses  and  all  of  them 

flre'arm8>  somc  witli  cities  and  six-shooting  pistols.  Of  the 
latter  I observed  a great  number  and  occasionally  single-barreled  shot- 
W hen  the  chief  came  forward  I told  him  we  were  Americans, 

friendhs  of0theGA nan  n ap1T  Jiv®d  at  Washington;  that  we  wished  to  be 
thoii  A,0f  ttbe  Ar'  ,les’  t,hat  at  Present  I was  only  traveling  through 
™ai*  ?,  iry’  and  desired  he  would  not  interfere  with  mv  men  or  ani-  ; 

a gre.at  captain  was  at  Tucson  with  a large  number  of  sol- 
diers, that  he  wished  to  have  a talk  with  all  the  Apache  chiefs  and  to 
make  peace  with  them  and  make  them  presents.  He  professed  a great 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


587 


AP.  XXI.] 


esire  to  be  friendly  with  the  Americans,  and  assured  me  that  neither 
ay  men  nor  animals  should  be  molested.  He  asked  for  tobacco  and 
omething  to  eat.  I gave  him  all  that  could  possibly  be  spared,  and  we 
Parted,  with  a request  on  his  part  that  I would  meet  him  at  the  same 
dace  at  sunset.  On  my  return  it  was  reported  to  me  that  3 of  the  men 
vere  missing.  A party  of  30  were  at  once  sent  out  in  the  vicinity  of 
vhere  the  firing  was  heard,  and  after  an  hour’s  search  the  bodies  of  the 
aissing  men  were  found  stripped  of  all  their  clothing  and  two  of  them 
calped.  Each  was  shot  through  the  chest  with  fire-arms  and  lanced 
hrough  the  neck.  They  were  victims  to  their  own  imprudence,  the 
intire  command  having  been  repeatedly  warned  by  me  not  to  wander 
rom  camp.  It  appears  they  had  started,  leading  their  horses  from  the 
pring  where  the  watering  was  being  done,  over  the  ridge  into  another 
pilch,  when  they  came  on  the  Indians  and  were  murdered.  The  Indians 
’ucceeded  in  getting  one  horse.  When  the  bodies  of  our  murdered  men 
were  found  instant  pursuit  of  the  Indians  was  made, some  of  whom 
vere  seen  on  a hill  half  a mile  distant ; but  being  unable  to  come  up 
vith  them  a return  to  camp  was  ordered,  carrying  in  the  dead  bodies, 
vhich  were  buried,  the  entire  command  being  present.  The  animals 
iow  being  all  watered,  or  as  much  as  could  be  obtained  for  them,  and 
here  being  very  little  grass  in  the  pass,  at  6 p.  m.  left  camp ; marched 
>ut  and  made  a dry  camp  on  the  plain  2 miles  beyond  the  canon, 
bourse,  east  by  northeast ; 4 miles. 

At  11  p.  m.  a volley  of  six  or  eight  shots  was  fired  into  camp,  wound- 
ng  Acting  Assistant  Surgeon  Kittredge  in  the  head  and  killing  one 
jiorse  at  the  picket  line. 

June  26,  left  Dry  Camp  No.  1 at  3.30  a.  m. ; marched  15  miles  over  an 
ixcellent  road  to  San  Simon  Station,  then  turned  square  to  the  right 
jind  marched  13  miles  up  the  dry  bed  of  the  river  to  a large  cienega 
md  encamped  at  2 p.  m.  Course,  east,  northeast,  and  southeast;  28 
niles.  This  is  a splendid  camping  place — water  and  grass  in  the  great- 
st  abundance.  The  proper  road  to  the  cienega  turns  to  the  right 
Tom  the  stage  road  about  6 miles  from  Apache  Pass  and  around  the 
ooint  of  the  mountain.  It  comes  on  the  San  Simon  1 mile  below  the 
water. 

At  12,  midnight,  camp  was  alarmed  by  a shot  fired  by  one  of  the  guard. 
On  examination  it  was  found  to  be  a coyote,  which  he  mistook  in  the 
lark  for  an  Indian  crawling  through  the  scattered  bushes,  but  which 
tie  instantly  killed.  This  was  a very  hard  day’s  march  on  men  and 
animals,  being  obliged  to  leave  Dry  Camp  without  breakfast  owing  to 
the  scarcity  of  water,  having  but  eight  five-gallon  kegs  in  which  to  carry 
water  for  the  men,  and  not  being  able  to  get  at  the  pass  as  much  water 
as  the  animals  required. 

June  27,  laid  over. 

June  28,  left  camp  at  Cienega  of  San  Simon  at  4 p.  m. ; marched  5 
miles  north-northeast  to  the  pass  in  the  mountains ; road  heavy.  On 
arriving  at  the  pass,  found  the  road  through  it  very  good  and  the  pass 
wide.  Marched  15  miles  from  San  Simon,  and  made  Dry  Camp  No.  2 
at  10.15  p.  m.  Course,  north-northeast ; 15  miles. 

June  29,  left  Dry  Camp  at  4 a.  m. ; marched  9 miles  to  Lightendorffer’s 
Well,  in  Round  Mountain  Canon ; good  road ; well  on  right  of  and  close 
to  the  road.  It  is  about  8 feet  square  and  7 feet  deep  ; rock  bottom. 
Halted  at  well  one  hour  and  obtained  a very  limited  supply  of  water 
for  my  command.  This  is  a tolerably  good  camping  place  for  three 
companies  of  infantry.  By  care  they  could  obtain  sufficient  water, 
which  is  good.  Left  Lightendorffer’s  Well  at  8 a.  m.;  marched  22  miles 


588- 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XX! 


to  Densmore  s Station  (Soldier’s  Farewell)  and  halted  at  5 p.  m.  Di= 
covered  here  a small  spring  about  2 or  3 miles  up  the  arroyo,  north  o 
station,  and  a hole  of  bad  water  800  yards  south  of  station.  Left  Dem 
more  s Station  at  8 p.m.;  marched  14  miles  to  Cow  Springs,  and  encampe 
at  12,  midnight ; water  and  grazing  abundant.  The  road  from  th 
Cienega  of  San  Simon  to  this  place  is  good  for  loaded  teams,  exceptim 
4 or  5 miles  to  the  pass.  Course,  northeast  5 46  miles  P 

Soon  after  leaving  Densmore’s  Station  found  2 men  on  the  side  o 
the  road  under  rather  suspicious  circumstances;  took  three  letter 
from  them,  one  directed  to  the  commander  of  Federal  forces  at  Tucsor 
or  route ; put  the  men  in  charge  of  guard  and  brought  them  back 
(Letters  herewith  inclosed,  marked  Nos.  1, 2,  and  3.*)  There  discovered 
9 men  encamped,  who  proved  to  be  a party  sent  by  Colonel  Chivington 
commanding  Southern  Military  District  of  New  Mexico,  at  Fort  Craig 
with  a letter  to  Colonel  Carleton,  with  verbal  orders  to  deliver  it  to  th( 
commander  of  the  advance  of  his  column  when  met  with,  and  return  t( 
Tort  Craig.  Eead  the  communication,  and  returned  Mr.  Milligan  anc 
one  of  his  party  with  the  answer  to  Fort  Craig  at  3 p.  m.  on  the  30th 
instant,  at  which  place  he  would  arrive  on  the  evening  of  the  2d  nrox 
imo.  Letter  of  Colonel  Ohivington  and  my  answer  thereto  herewith 
inclosed*  From  Mr.  Milligan  I learned  of  the  capture  of  Jones,  th! 
expressman,  by  the  secessionists  at  the  Picacho,  near  Mesilla,  his  twc 
companions  having  been  killed  by  Indians  at  Apache  Pass  and  himsell 
chased  by  them  for  a great  many  miles.  This  information  was  brought 
of  Jones°rai^  ^ a fnendly  Mexican,  who  was  present  at  the  capture 

June  30,  laid  over. 

July  1.  This  morning  a number  of  men  were  discovered  by  the  look- 
out approaching  from  the  direction  of  the  Pino  Alto  gold  mines-  sent 
0cIa  n?ar^y  and.brouSht  them  into  camp.  They  proved  to  be  a party 
ot  30  Mexican  miners,  returning  to  Sonora  in  consequence  of  the  almost 
total  absence  of  provisions  at  the  mines;  allowed  them  to  proceed  on 
their  journey.  Left  Cow  Springs  at  8 a.  m. ; arrived  at  the  Rio  Miem- 
bres  at  1 p.  m.  and  encamped  2 miles  above  station;  water  and  grazing 
abundant  and  of  the  best  quality ; road  good.  Course,  northeast : 16 

July  2,  laid  over.  At  1 o’clock  this  morning  one  of  the  pickets  dis- 
covered persons  approaching  camp.  They  were  arrested  and  brought 
m— 12  men  and  2 women,  one  a German,  the  others  Mexicans.  Thev  also 
were  from  the  mines  en  route  for  Mesilla.  Ordered  them  confined,  in 
order  to  secure  the  secrecy  of  my  movements.  At  9 a.  m.  sent  out  party 
ot  20  men  to  examine  Cooke’s  Canon,  with  orders  to  arrest,  if  possible, 
all  persons  they  may  meet  with,  and  remain  at  Cooke’s  Spring  until 
the  command  came  up.  5 

Juiy  3,  ieft  Miembres  Fiver  at  6.30  a.  m.;  marched  12  miles  over  a 
good  road  to  Cooke’s  Pass.  From  here  to  summit  road  hilly.  A long 
rocky,  but  not  very  steep,  hill  brings  you  to  the  top  of  the  pass;  from 
there  the  descent  to  the  spring  is  good;  distance  from  pass  to  spring  6 
miles.  Course’  north-northeast  and  northeast;  18  miles.  There  came 
up  with  the  party  sent  in  advance  yesterday;  they  reported  no  person 
m sight  and  no  fresh  traces. 

July  4,  left  Cooke’s  Spring  at  6.30  a.  m.;  took  Fort  Thorn  road,  which 
keeps  a north-northeast  course,  while  the  Mesilla  road  turns  to  the 
right  immediately  at  the  springs  and  bears  east-northeast,  passing  the 


* Not  found. 


Chap.  XXI.  1 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


589 


Overland  Mail  Station,  which  is  seen  on  the  hill  about  half  a mile  dis- 
tant. Marched  13  miles  to  Mule  Spring;  good  road.  Here  no  water 
could  be  found  even  by  digging,  having  sent  a party  m advance  with 
spades  for  that  purpose.  Left  Mule  Spring  at  12  m. ; marched  22  miles 
to  the  Eio  Grande,  and  encamped  at  7 p.  in.  near  Fort  Thorn.  Course, 
north-northeast  and  northeast;  35  miles. 

The  road  for  about  8 miles  after  leaving  Mule  Spring  is  very  good, 
when  it  enters  a rolling  country,  the  hills  becoming  more  and  more 
abrupt  for  a distance  of  about  6 miles,  when  it  descends  into  a broad 
canon  which  is  followed  on  a good  road  to  the  river.  Immediately  on 
making  camp  the  national  colors  were  raised  amid  the  loud  and  con- 
tinued cheers  of  the  assembled  command.  This  was  the  first  time  the 
Stars  and  Stripes  floated  on  the  Eio  Grande  below  Fort  Craig  since  the 
occupation  of  the  country  by  the  Confederate  troops,  and  it  being  the 
anniversary  of  our  National  Independence,  was  not  calculated  to  dampen 
the  ardor  of  the  command. 

We  are  now  within  35  miles  of  the  enemy,  which  the  prisoners  whom 
I have  taken  variously  estimate  from  200  to  800  strong.  As  soon  as 
the  horses  have  a little  recruited  (they  being  considerably  reduced  on 
a march  of  about  300  miles  through  a broiling  sun  and  over  a country 
utterly  destitute  of  water  for  distances  ranging  from  35  to  60  miles) 
will  reconnoiter  his  position  and  endeavor  to  ascertain  his  strength, 
which  I have  but  little  doubt  of  accomplishing,  and  in  case  he  does  not 
greatly  outnumber  me  will  give  him  a fight. 

July  5,  moved  3 miles  down  the  river  to  and  reoccupied  Fort  Thorn; 

3 miles.  • _ . , 

I am,  lieutenant,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  EYEE, 

Lieut.  Col. , First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry , Commanding . 

Lieut.  Benj.  C.  Cutler, 

A.  A.  A.  6r.,  Column  from  California , Tucson , Amz. 

i 


Hdqrs.  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry, 

Fort  Thorn , Ariz .,  July  8,  1862. 

j Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  reoccupation  of  Fort 
Thorn  by  the  squadron  of  First  California  V olunteer  Cavalry,  under  my 
command,  on  the  evening  of  the  5th  instant.  Immediately  thereafter 
the  national  colors  were  run  up  and  the  old  flag  once  more  floated  over 

the  garrison.  , ^ ^ 

On  the  morning  of  the  6th  instant  an  express  arrived  from  1 ort 
Craig,  with  a- communication  from  Colonel  Chivington,  First  Colorado 

- Volunteers,  commanding  Southern  Military  District  of  New  Mexico,  a 

- copy  of  which  is  herewith  inclosed.  * He  also  sent  a communication 
i addressed  to  Colonel  Steele,  C.  S.  Army,  empowering  me  to  negotiate 

an  exchange  for  Captain  McCleave  and  the  men  who  were  made  pris- 
oners with  him.  Soon  after  the  express  from  Colonel  Chivington 
P arrived  a party  of  men  were  seen  approaching  from  the  direction  ol 
Mesilla.  One  of  them  proved  to  be  Captain  McCleave,  on  his  way  to 
Fort  Craig,  bringing  with  him  a proposition  from  Colonel  Steele  tor  an 
exchange  for  Captain  Gardner,  C.  S.  Army.  Having  learned  from  t e 
expressman  just  arrived  that  Captain  Gardner  died  a few  days  since,  I 


* Not  found. 


590 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ 


[Chap.  XXL 


at  once  sent  Captain  Fritz,  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry  to  Fort 

a,.re{|ues^  t0  0olonel  steele  to  name  any  other  captain 
General  Canby  had  made  prisoner  in  exchange  for  Captain  McCleave- 
also  proposing  an  exchange  for  the  men  taken  with  him,  as  well  as  an 
exchange  for  our  expressman  (Jones)  and  a Mr.  John  Lemon  of  Me 
silla,  who  was  extremely  kind  to  Captain  McCleave  during  his  contoe- 
ment,  and  who  had  horses  ready  saddled  and  hid  out  for  Jones’  escape 

lmeiWX°r,dered  t0  b0Jmi1!?’  and  was  taken  t0  a tree  for  that  purpose, 
but  after  hanging  a Mr.  Marshall,  who  was  taken  out  with  him  his 

WtS  Postponed-  Captain  Fritz  will  probably  be  back  ton 

ght,  when  I will  at  once  send  Captain  McCleave  with  a party  of  25 
men  through  to  Tucson.  It  is  not  safe  for  a less  number  totravel 
caution^  °n  account  of  tbe  tndians,  and  even  then  with  the  utmost 

**  if  !he  deS,re  of  the  colonel  commanding  to  keep  open  comnmni- 

tween  Tucson  and  the  Bio  Grande  I would  respectfully  recom- 
mend that  a company  of  infantry  be  stationed  at  Dragoon  Spring  and 
two  companies  at  the  Apache  Pass.  That  corps  would  be  far  more 
effective  against  the  Indians  in  the  rugged  mountains  at  the  points 
above  named  than  cavalry ; besides,  horses  could  not  be  kept  in  flesh  on 

fiTif-  alone’  tk®y  would  be  utterly  useless  in  two  weeks’ 
riding.  At  this  season  of  the  year  sufficient  water  and  of  a good  quality 
can  be  obtained  for  two  companies  of  infantry  at  the  foot  of  the  mount 
am,  four  miles  north  of  Ewell’s  Station.  The  spring  is  prominently 
ttmwlrter^  & large’  wblte  sP°t  on  the  mountain,  which  is  directly  over 

The  Eio  Grande  has  been  unusually  high  this  summer  almost  the 
entire  bottom  between  Fort  Craig  and  Mlsilla  being  still’ ’overflowed 
It  is  impossible  at  this  time  to  approach  Mesilla  on  the  west  side  of  the 

twr’  nn6n  • w?"?1  havl“g  be.en  washed  out  on  that  side  of  the  town, 
through  which  the  largest  portion  of  the  water  flows;  besides,  the  bot- 
tom for  a long  distance  is  overflowed,  and,  the  soil  being  of  a loose 
nature,  animals  mire  down  in  attempting  to  get  through  it.  This 
morning  I sent  Captain  McCleave  with  a small  party  to  examine  the 

be  fo^ed^filfT8’  -1  e m™S  bel°W  here’  t0  ascertain  if  the  river  can 
be  forded  at  that  point.  The  moment  a crossing  can  be  effected  it  is 

my  intention,  unless  otherwise  ordered  by  General  Canby,  to  move  on 
Mesilla  and  reoccupy  Forts  Fillmore  and  Bliss.  When  that  is  done 
that  portion  of  the  proclamation  of  the  colonel  commanding  will  not 
oniy  have  been  carried  out,  but  the  sacred  soil  of  Texas  will  have  been 
mvadeii.  Captam  McCleave  reports  Colonel  Steele  with  the  rear  of 
Sibley’s  brigade  making  • hurried  exertions  to  get  away  from  Texas. 
He  is  pressing  every  team,  both  mule  and  oxen,  he  can  find  into  serv- 
ice, compelling  the  owners  (generally  Mexicans)  to  take  Confederate 
scrip  m payment  therefor.  The  same  mode  is  resorted  to  by  him  in 
regard  to  provisions. 

Captain  Howland,  Third  H.  S.  Cavalry,  in  advance  of  his  squadron,  has 
just  arrived;  his  command  (100  men)  will  probably  be  here  this  evening. 
His  horses  are  m shocking  condition.  Should  we  come  up  with  Colonel 
Steele  and  a mounted  charge  be  made,  it  must  be  done  by  the  squad- 
ron  of  my  regiment.  4 

On  the  capture  of  Jones  greatly-increased  exertions  were  made  by 
Colonel  Steele  to  get  away.  Mesilla  was  evacuated,  and  Captain  Mc- 
Cleave,  who  was  at  the  time  on  parole  to  the  limits  of  the  town,  imme- 
diately confined  under  a strong  guard.  Mr.  White,  of  the  Pima  Yil- 


HAP.  XXI.] 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


591 


ages,  has  been  released,  and  will  probably  be  here  with  the  return  of 

Captain  Fritz.  _ , , , 

The  horses  are  out  grazing  (under  a strong  guard)  from  daybreak 
util  dark,  then  tied  up  to  the  picket  line,  with  as  much  grass  as  they 
;an  eat  during  the  night.  They  are  doing  very  well,  but  have  not  yet 
•ecovered  from  the  effects  of  the  very  distressing  march  from  Tucson 

^Captain  McCleave  has  just  returned,  and  reports  the  road  down  the 
iver  almost  impassable  for  loaded  wagons  and  the  river  swimming  at 

he  crossing.  , , , 

July  9 [7th?]  sent  Captain  McCleave,  with  an  escort  and  two  wagons, 

'O  Fort  Craig  for  supplies.  . , , 

The  squadron  of  Third  U.  S.  Cavalry  (100  strong)  arrived  and  gone 

nto  quarters  at  this  post.  „ 

Captain  Fritz  returned  this  evening,  having  effected  an  exchange  tor 
Daptain  McCleave  and  the  others  named  in  my  communication  to  Ool- 
mel  Steele,  a copy*  of  which  is  herewith  inclosed.  Two  lieutenants 
were  given  in  exchange  for  Captain  McCleave,  as  Colonel  Steele  affected 
to  know  of  no  captain  of  theirs  for  that  purpose,  although  there  are  a 
number.  His  real  object  was  to  exchange  for  officers  of  his  own  regi- 

m About ^ 6 o’clock  this  evening  an  express  arrived  from  Captain  Mc- 
Oleave,  informing  me  of  an  attack  on  his  party,  as  they  were  moving  up 
the  river,  by  the  Navajoes  ,60  or  70  strong;  that  he  had  made  camp,  but 
was  being  surrounded  by  them.  I immediately  sent  Captain  Howland, 
with  Lieutenant  Baldwin  and  40  men,  to  his  relief. 

I forward  herewith,  for  the  information  of  the  colonel  commanding,  an 
communications*  received  or  written  by  me  since  my  arrival  on  the  Bio 

Grande.  _ _ . , , 

I am,  lieutenant,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  EYRE, 

Lieutenant-Colonel , First  Cal  Vol.  Cavalry , Comdg. 

Lieut.  Benj.  C.  Cutler,  . 

A.  A.  A.  G.j  Column  from  California , Tucson , Anz. 


Hdqrs.  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry, 

Fort  Thorn , Ariz .,  July  14,  1862. 

Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  arrival  here  on  yester- 
day of  another  express  from  General  Canby,  the  second  one  alluded  to 
in  Colonel  Chivington’s  communication  of  the  7th  instant. 

******* 

I leave  here  to-morrow  morning  with  my  command  for  Mesilla.  On 
examination  found  the  road  from  here  to  Rough  and  Ready  Station 
impracticable,  and  have  determined  to  make  a road  to  the  San  Diego 
Crossing,  and  then  pass  the  river  on  a raft,  which  I am  now  haying 
made  for  that  purpose,  and  which  will  be  floated  down  to  the  crossing. 
The  road  on  the  east  side  of  the  river  from  San  Diego  to  Mesilla  is 
good.  It  is  my  determination,  unless  otherwise  ordered,  to  hoist  the 
national  Colors  over  Mesilla  and  Forts  Fillmore  and  Bliss  before  the 
end  of  the  present  month.  # 


* Not  found. 


592  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXL 

I neglected  in  my  report  of  the  march  to  this  place  to  give  the  names 
of  the  men  killed  by  the  Indians  at  Apache  Pass.  Their  names  are 
Privates  James  F.  Keith,  Peter  Maloney,  and  Albert  Schmidt,  of  Com- 
pany B,  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry. 

I am,  lieutenant,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  EYEE, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  First  Cal.  Vol.  Cavalry , Comdg. 
Lieut.  Benj.  C.  Cutler, 

A.  A.  A.  G .,  Column  from  California , Tucson , Ariz. 


Hdqrs.  First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry, 

Las  Cruces , Ariz.,  August  30,  1862. 

Lieut.  Benj.  C.  Cutler, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Column  from  California , Franldin,  Tex. : 

Lieutenant  : In  compliance  with  verbal  orders  received  from  the 
general  commanding  the  column,  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  imme- 
diately after  my  arrival  on  the  Bio  Grande,  July  4,  I sent  a scouting 
party  down  the  river  as  far  as  the  San  Diego  Crossing,  for  the  double 
purpose  of  ascertaining  if  the  enemy  had  pickets  within  that  distance  of 
my  camp,  and  also  whether  the  high  stage  of  water  in  the  river  ren- 
dered it  impracticable  to  move  my  command  that  far  for  the  purpose 
of  crossing,  it  being  my  intention  to  follow  and,  if  possible,  overtake 
the  retreating  Texans  under  Colonel  Steele.  On  their  return  they 
reported  it  impracticable  to  get  to  the  crossing  with  wagons,  but  that 
the  river  was  falling  fast,  and  that  in  a short  time — say  one  week — I 
would  be  able  to  accomplish  my  purpose  of  moving  on  Fort  Fillmore, 
where  a portion  of  the  Texans  were  then  quartered.  I therefore  deter- 
mined to  remain  at  Fort  Thorn  for  a short  time  longer,  to  recruit  the  men 
and  animals  and  to  receive  re-enforcements  from  Fort  Craig,  which  I 
had  asked  for  from  Cow  Springs,  having  sent  an  express  from  that  point 
on  June  28. 

On  the  8th  ultimo  Captain  Howland,  Third  IT.  S.  Cavalry,  with  100 
men,  arrived  at  Fort  Thorn  and  reported  to  me  for  duty.  I was  now 
still  more  anxious  to  pursue  the  enemy,  being  confident  of  my  ability 
to  successfully  cope  with  his  disorganized  and  disheartened  troops, 
although  they  outnumbered  me  more  than  two  to  one. 

On  the  morning  of  the  10th  ultimo  I received  a communication  from 
Colonel  Chivington,  commanding  Southern  Military  District  of  NTew 
Mexico,  of  which  the  following  is  an  extract : • 

You  will  do  all  you  can  to  learn  the  enemy’s  strength,  position,  and  purpose,  hut 
General  Canby  does  not  design  an  advance  from  where  you  are  until  he  can  go  in  force. 

I am  undey  orders  to  advance  to  Santa  Barbara  or  thereabouts  with  sixteen  companies 
of  infantry  and  a battery  of  four  6-pounder  guns  and  two  24-pounder  howitzers  and 
an  additional  cavalry  force,  to  support  the  advance  of  General  Carleton  and  to  co-oper- 
ate with  the  forces  under  him  in  the  reoccupation  of  the  valley  of  Mesilla. 

Although  this  was  not  a positive  order  to  remain  where  I was,  yet 
it  intimated  too  clearly  the  desire  of  the  district  commander  to  lead 
the  advance  on  Mesilla  and  Fort  Fillmore,  that  I felt  exceedingly  em- 
barrassed as  to  whether  I would  be  authorized  in  leaving  Fort  Thorn 
until  the  arrival  there  of  Colonel  Chivington;  but  on  consultation  with 
Captains  Howland,  Tilford,  and  Fritz  I determined,  unless  more  posi- 
tively ordered,  to  remain,  and  to  move  down  to  the  San  Diego  Crossing 
as  soon  as  the  water  would  permit. 


CHAP.  XXI.l 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


593 


Accordingly,  on  tlie  13th  ultimo,  I sent  Wagon-master  Black,  with  a 
party  to  the  crossing,  to  ascertain  if  it  was  yet  practicable  to  get  the 
train  of  thirteen  wagons  to  that  point.  On  his  return  the  same  day 
be  reported  favorably,  and  on  the  15th  ultimo  I left  with  my  command 
and  arrived  at  the  crossing  on  the  16th  ultimo,  a distance  of  18  miles. 

On  the  17th  ultimo  I had  succeeded  in  crossing  successfully  my  com- 
mand in  a small  boat,  which  I caused  to  be  made  for  that  purpose  before 
leaving  Fort  Thorn. 

On  the  19th  ultimo  I received  from  Lieut.  F.  Van  Yliet,  acting  assist- 
ant adjutant-general,  the  following  communication : 

I am  instructed  by  tbe  colonel  commanding  the  district  to  inform  you  that  your 
troops  will  not  cross  the  river  until  further  orders. 


This  was  from  Colonel  Howe’s  acting  assistant  adjutant- general,  he 
then  being  in  command  of  the  Southern  Military  District  of  New  Mex- 
ico • but  having  crossed  the  river  before  its  receipt,  and  having  received 
supplies  from  Fort  Craig,  I determined  to  push  on  to  Robledo  or  Dona 
Ana  and  there  await  his  further  orders,  and  so  wrote  him.  But  on  my 
arrival  at  the  latter  place  I found  neither  forage  nor  grazing  for  the 
animals,  and  pushed  on  to  Las  Cruces,  where  quarters  were  found  tor 
the  command  in  unoccupied  houses  belonging  to  notorious  secessionists. 

On  my  arrival  at  Las  Cruces  I at  once  made  inquiry  as  to  the  where- 
abouts of  the  Texans,  and  learned  from  reliable  authority  that  a por- 
tion of  them  were  yet  at  Franklin,  Tex. ; that  they  were  collecting  at 
that  point  a large  amount  of  Government  property  which  had  been  by 
them  secreted  at  different  places  on  their  march  up  the  river,  and  that 
they  designed  selling  it  to  a citizen  of  El  Paso,  Tex.  This  property  I 
could  undoubtedly  have  taken,  and  in  all  probability  have  captured 
the  Texans  then  at  Franklin,  had  I at  once  pushed  on  to  that  point;  but 
the  strong  intimation  not  to  leave  Fort  Thorn  which  I received  from 
Colonel  Chivington,  and  the  positive  order  not  to  cross  the  river  which 
I received  from  Colonel  Howe,  and  my  letter  to  him  that  I would  await 
his  further  orders  at  Las  Cruces,  compelled  me  to  remain  at  the  latter 
place.  Indeed,  by  moving  farther  down  the  river  I would  have  run 
1 counter  to  the  expressed  wishes  of  the  district  commanders  of  the 
Southern  Military  District  of  New  Mexico,  if  not  against  their  positive 

01  On  the  28th  ultimo  I received  a positive  order  from  Colonel  Howe 
not  to  leave  Las  Cruces  until  further  orders. 

Subsequently,  while  accompanying  the  general  commanding  on  his 
march  to  Fort  Quitman,  I learned  that  Colonel  Steele  greatly  feared 
he  would  be  overtaken  by  the  California  troops,  and  in  his  hurried 
retreat  burned  a number  of  his  wagons  and  destroyed  a large  amount 
of  ammunition.  I also  learned  that  so  much  were  his  men  disheart- 
ened and  so  thoroughly  disorganized,  that  had  they  been  attacked  by 
even  a small  force  they  would  have  at  once  surrendered.  Certainly  it 
is  an  opportunity  wouid  have  been  given  them  to  do  so  had  it  not  been 
for  the  orders  received  from  Fort  Craig,  for  I should  certainly  have 
followed  and  as  certainly  overtaken  them  before  they  left  the  river  at 
Fort  Quitman. 

I am,  lieutenant,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  E.  EYRE, 

Lieutenant-Colonel,  ' First  California  Volunteer  Cavalry. 


38  n it— VOL  IX 


5.94  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXL 

No.  3. 

Report  of  Surg.  James  M.  McNulty , U.  S.  Army , Acting  Medical  Ip,. 

spector. 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  October  — , 1863. 
Brig*.  Gen.  W.  A.  Hammond, 

Surgeon- General  U.  S.  Army , Washington , 1).  C. : 

General  : Agreeably  to  the  wish  conveyed  in  your  letter  of  Jul>| 
27,  1863,  I send  you  the  following  history  of  that  portion  of  the  Call! 
fornia  Volunteers  known  as  the  Column  from  California. 

The  march  of  this  column  from  the  Pacific  Ocean  to  the  Eio  GrandJ 
is  somewhat  remarkable,  from  the  fact  that  almost  the  entire  distance 
is  a desert  waste,  with  great  scarcity  of  water  and  that  of  the  worst! 
quality. 

Men  marching  day  after  day  through  the  burning  sands  and  nearly 
suffocated  with  alkali  dust  required  to  be  made  of  stern  stuff— of  such 
were  the  men  composing  this  column.  Men  inured  to  mountain  life 
in  California,  pioneers  and  miners;  men  self-reliant  and  enduring;  men 
equal  to  any  emergency,  if  guided  by  a firm  hand  and  clear  head.  That 
they  were  equal  to  a great  emergency  is  evinced  by  the  fact  that  they 
conquered  vast  deserts,  and  accomplished  a march  not  equaled  in  mod 
ern  times,  traversing  a distance  of  nearly  a thousand  miles  and  almost 
Mie  entire  route  over  a sterile  waste. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

james  m.  mcnulty, 

Surgeon , U.  S.  Volunteers , Acting  Medical  Inspector. 

On  the  22d  of  July,  1861,  the  President  of  the  United  States  approved 
i;An  act  to  authorize  the  employment  of  volunteers  to  aid  in  enforcing 
the  laws  and  protecting  public  property.”  Under  this  act  was  raised 
in  California  one  regiment  of  infantry  and  five  companies  of  cavalry. 
These  were  called  respectively  the  First  Infantry  and  First  Cavalry, 
California  V olunteers.  The  troops  were  raised  for  the  protection  of  the 1 
Overland  Mail  Route  between  California  and  the  Eastern  States,  by  way! 
of  Salt  Lake  City.  The  force  was  placed  under  the  command  of  Bvt. 
Maj.  James  H.  Carleton,  First  U.  S.  Cavalry,  with  the  rank  of  colonel. 
The  regiments  rendezvoused  at  Oakland,  opposite  San  Francisco,  Cal. 
During  the  latter  part  of  August  and  the  month  of  September  they 
had  acquired  nearly  their  full  complement  of  men.  Active  prepara- 
tions were  making  to  put  the  command  in  the  best  condition  for  active  j 
field  service,  and  by  the  1st  of  October  everything  was  in  readiness 
for  the  movement  of  the  troops.  About  this  time  the  spirit  of  rebellion 
became  manifest  in  California.  u Treason  stalked  abroad.”  In  the 
southern  part  of  the  State  an  open  rupture  was  apprehended.  In  con 
sequence  of  this  condition  of  affairs  the  command  of  Colonel  Carleton 
was  diverted  from  its  original  destination  by  General  Sumner,  depart- 
ment commander,  and  moved  to  the  infected  district.  About  the  1st 
of  October  the  troops  moved  down  the  coast  and  formed  a camp  near  I 
Los  Angeles,  called  Camp  Latham. 

On  the  14tli  three  companies  of  the  First  Cavalry,  California  Volun- 
teers, under  the  command  of  Major  Eyre,  of  the  same  regiment,  wer« 
ordered  to  relieve  the  regular  troops  stationed  at  San  Bernardino.  This 
place  was  the  hot-bed  of  secessionism  in  California.  On  the  same  day 
orders  were  received  to  send  three  companies  of  the  First  Infantry,  Cal- . 


Chai\  XXI.] 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


595 


ifornia  Yolunteers,  under  the  command  of  Lieut.  Col.  J.  B.  West,  to 
relieve  the  regulars  stationed  at  Fort  Yuma.  Eegular  troops  stationed 
at  different  parts  of  the  State  were  ordered  to  rendezvous  at  two  points, 
viz  San  Diego  and  San  Pedro,  for  the  purpose  of  embarkation,  orders 
having  been  issued  by  the  War  Department  that  all  regular  troops  on  the 
Pacific  coast  be  sent  to  the  seat  of  war  in  the  East.  Brig.  Gen.  E.  A . 
Sumner,  at  that  time  in  command  of  the  Department  of  the  Pacific, 
was  also  ordered  in.  On  the  departure  of  General  Sumner,  Gol.  George 
Wright  Ninth  U.  S.  Infantry,  assumed  command  of  the  department. 
The  Southern  District  of  California  was  turned  over  by  Colonel  Wright 
to  the  command  of  Colonel  Carleton.  ■ 

During  the  two  succeeding  months  quiet  and  order  were  restored 
throughout  the  southern  part  of  the  State.  The  distribution  of  the 
troops  indicated  to  the  disaffected  the  determination  of  the  authorities 
to  keep  California  firm  and  steadfast  to  the  Union. 

On  the  12th  of  January  Colonel  Carleton  was  summoned  to  ban 
Francisco,  to  consult  with  Colonel  Wright  in  reference  to  the  movement 
of  troops  into  Utah.  About  this  time  rumors  reached  California  that 
Van  Dorn,  of  the  rebel  service,  was  fitting  out  an  expedition  for  the 
invasion  of  California  by  way  of  Arizona,  The  fact  was  well-estab- 
lished that  Arizona  and  a portion  ot  New  Mexico  were  occupied  by  Con- 
federate troops,  and  it  was  apparent  to  all  that  California  was  more 
accessible  through  Arizona  by  way  of  Fort  Yuma  than  any  other  point. 
Fort  Yuma,  located  on  the  Colorado  Eiver,  on  the  southeastern  line  ot 
the  State,  is  our  extreme  outpost.  Surrounded  as  it  is  by  a vast  desert, 
if  once  in  the  possession  of  an  enemy  the  key  to  the  State  was  lost. 

In  view  of  all  these  threatened  dangers  to  the  State  and  coast  Gen- 
eral Wright  suggested  to  the  War  Department  that  perhaps  the  Gov- 
ernment would  be  better  served  by  throwing  the  California  troops  into 
Arizona  and  driving  the  rebels  from  that  Territory.  A double  object 
would  thus  be  gained ; first,  an  effectual  guard  would  be  kept  against 
anv  invasion  of  the  Pacific  coast  from  that  quarfer;  second,  the  Cali- 
fornia troops  would  foil  in  the  rear  of  the  Confederate  forces  then  m 
New  Mexico  and  assist  the  Federal  forces  in  expelling  them  from  that 
Territory. 

The  suggestions  of  General  Wright  were  favorably  received  by  the 
War  Department.  The  feasibility  of  the  movement  was  so  apparent, 
that  the  consent  of  that  Department  was  at  once  obtained. 

On  the  receipt  of  the  decision  of  the  War  Department  authority  was 
granted  to  Colonel  Carleton  to  organize  and  fit  out  the  expedition. 
The  Fifth  Infantry,  California  Yolunteers,  under  the  command  of  Col. 
George  W.  Bowie ; also  Company  A,  Third  U.  S.  Artillery,  with  a light 
battery,  under  command  of  First  Lieut.  John  L.  Sliinn,  of  the  U.  S. 
Army  were  added  to  Colonel  Carleton’s  command;  also  Captain  Cre- 
mony’s  company,  Second  Cavalry,  California  Yolunteers. 

1 Active  preparations  were  at  once  made  for  the  movement  ot  the 
column.  It  was  important  that  the  troops  should  move  as  soon  as 
possible,  in  order  that  they  might  receive  the  benefit  of  the  cool  winter 
weather  while  passing  over  the  Gila  and  Colorado  Deserts.  The  great 
distance  from  the  Pacific  Ocean  to  the  Bio  Grande,  the  entire  and 
complete  desolation  of  nearly  the  whole  route,  presented  obstacles 
almost  insurmountable  to  marching  a column  of  over  2,000  men  and 
the  same  number  of  animals.  It  was  well  known  that  forage  and  pro- 
visions could  be  obtained  but  at  two  points  between  Fort  Yuma  and 
the  Bio  Grande  in  time  of  peace,  and  then  m limited  quantities,  viz, 
at  the  Pima  Villages  and  at  Tucson ; and  it  being  well  known  that  the 


596  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXL 

enemy  occupied  one,  if  not  both,  of  these  points,  it  was  necessary  that 
transportation  should  be  made  entirely  independent  of  them.  Th<-j 
greatest  difficulty  appeared  to  be  in  subsisting  animals.  Unless  this 
could  be  done  rations  could  not  be  furnished  the  troops,  and  the 
expedition  would  necessarily  fall  to  the  ground. 

With  the  commencement  of  preparations  came  unlooked-for  difficul 
ties.  Not  for  twenty  years  had  a winter  of  such  severity  occurred  in 
California.  The  whole  country  was  flooded;  hundreds  of  horses  and 
cattle  mired  down  in  the  open  plains  and  were  lost.  For  weeks  it  was 
almost  impossible  to  move  a vehicle  of  any  kind,  and  the  movement  of 
baggage  trains  was  out  of  the  question. 

In  the  mean  time  commissary  stores  and  forage  were  sent  by  sea  to 
Fort  Yuma,  making  this  point  a general  depot  and  base  of  operations. 

The  troops  during  this  terrible  winter  lived  in  tents.  As  the  rain 
subsided  and  the  ground  became  more  settled  the  troops  were  grad- 
ually moved  toward  Fort  Yuma  by  companies  of  twos  and  threes.  A 
sub-depot  was  formed  at  Oak  Grove,  near  the  edge  of  the  Yuma 
desert,  120  miles  from  Los  Angeles,  called  Camp  Wright.  From  this 
point  to  Fort  Yuma,  180  miles,  it  is  a continuous  desert,  entirely  des- 
titute of  vegetation ; water  very  scarce,  and  generally  of  bad  quality. 
Before  moving  the  troops  on  this  desert  Colonel  Carleton  sent  out 
parties  and  had  the  wells  cleaned  out  and  new  ones  dug,  in  order  that 
every  drop  of  water  might  be  available.  Forage  for  the  animals  was 
deposited  at  different  points  between  Camp  Wright  and  Fort  Yuma. 
The  troops  were  marched  across  by  companies,  one  day  apart.  At 
some  of  the  wells  there  was  so  little  water  that  it  was  necessary  to 
dip  it  out  in  a pint  cup,  thus  consuming  nearly  a whole  night  in  water- 
ing 100  animals. 

In  order  that  this  desert  may  be  more  thoroughly  understood  I 
quote  from  the  notes  of  Lieutenant- Col  one!  West,  of  the  First  Infantry, 
California  Volunteers,  who  marched  the  first  three  companies  over. 
The  description  of  the  route  commences  at  Oak  Grove,  Camp  Wright, 
near  the  edge  of  the  desert : 

Left  Camp  Wright,  near  Warner’s  Ranch,  at  7.30  a.  m. ; marched  5 miles  over 
pleasant  rolling  roads  and  well-wooded  country  to  La  Puerta,  at  which  place  found 
mountain  stream,  but  no  place  fora  camp  ground;  thence  by  fair  road,  without  water, 
to  San  Felipe,  8 miles;  pasturage  good,  but  no  wood;  water  neither  overabundant! 
nor  good ; camp  ground  inferior. 

Left  San  Felipe  at  3.30  a.  m.  by  heavy,  hilly  roads  to  Vallecito.  Road  sandy  through 
bottom  land  to  first  hill,  7 miles;  thence  broken  road,  6 miles,  a great  portion  of  which 
is  a canon,  with  but  one  wagon  track,  winding  between  cliffs.  A very  small  force 
could  oppose  an  enemy  of  far  superior  numbers.  The  la  f ter  part  of  the  road  more 
level.  On  the  left  side  and  about  half  a mile  from  the  road  is  a spring,  that  affords-] 
water  enough  for  50  men;  thence  a small  rugged  hill  is  surmounted  and  a valley 
reached,  5 miles  in  length,  by  sandy  road  to  Vallecito;  water  in  fair  supply;  no  wood 
but  mesquite  bushes ; pasturage  fair. 

Left  Vallecito  at  3.30  a.  m. ; marched  9 miles  by  heavy,  sandy  road  to  Palm  Springs;! 
water  in  limited  supply,  and  required  to  be  prepared  for  a command.  The  locality 
can  be  used  for  a camp.  Thence  l y a heavy,  sandy  road  to  Cariso  Creek;  no  pas- 
turage. The  country  has  now  become  a complete  desert  of  most  forbidding  aspect. 
The  creek  is  a small  stream,  affording  an  abundant  supply  of  water  of  an  inferior 
quality.  The  bottom  land  is  filled  with  a stunted  growth  of  mesquite  and  arrow 
bushes. 

Left  Cariso  Creek  at  11.30  a.  m.,  following  the  stream  and  constantly  crossing  it; 
road  heavy  and  sandy;  thence  over  a level  road,  with  somewhat  impr  ved  traveling, 

4 miles,  to  a short,  steep  hill;  thence  to  a level  plain,  with  desert  brush,  to  Sackett’s- 
Wells.  Last  part  of  the  road  fair  traveling ; the  desert  complete ; water  good,  but! 
uncertain ; in  dry  weather  it  certainly  disappears. 

Left  Sackett’s  Wells  at  5.45  p.  m.,  through  a continuous  desert;  first  5 miles  sandy* 
thence  better  traveling  to  Indian  Well. 

Indian  Well  is  some  30  feet  deep;  water  good,  but  in  small  quantities.  Signal 


ClIAP.  XXI.] 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


597 


Mountain  is  a prominent  landmark ; bears  southwest  about  15  miles;  reached  camp 
at  11  p.  m. ; distance,  15  miles.  Left  at  5 p.  m.  for  New  River  Station ; road  a perfect 
level,  over  an  alkali  plain,  with  a few  patches  of  mesquite  bushes ; road  dusty  and 
'heavy  for  wagons;  well  deep  ; water  scarce  and  of  inferior  quality. 

Started  at  5 p.  m.  for  Alamo  ; road  heavy,  over  barren  flat ; there  is  a well  some  30 
feet  deep,  affording  some  water.  Left  at  4 p.  m.  for  Gardner’s  Wells ; no  water ; 9 
miles;  thence,  by  same  character  of  road  and  country,  to  Salt  or  Seven  Wells;  water 
plenty,  but  brackish.  Started  at  4 p.  m.,  9 miles,  to  Cooke’s  Wells.  First  2£  miles 
bad  road.  At  Cooke’s  Wells  water  and  wood  abundant  and  good ; thence,  15  miles,  to 

> Pilot  Knob.  Camped  on  the  bank  of  the  Colorado  at  foot  of  mountain.  From  Cooke’s 
the  road  is  generally  good,  through  mesquite  flat,  and  latter  part  through  Indian 
Gardens;  distance  25  miles.  Started  at  1.30  p.  m.  The  road  follows  the  Rio  Colorado 
to  Fort  Yuma ; distance  10  miles ; road  much  broken.  Reached  Fort  Yuma  at  4.30  p.  m. 

I have  been  thus  minute  in  detail  in  order  that  a correct  idea  may 
be  had  of  some  of  the  difficulties  encountered  in  marching  troops  across 
this  desert. 

[ It  will  be  seen  that  nearly  every  march  was  made  in  the  night-time. 
By  starting  at  4 or  5 in  the  afternoon  the  march  would  be  accomplished 
: before  daylight,  thus  enabling  men  to  sleep  a part  of  the  night. 

I The  ground  did  not  become  sufficiently  settled  for  the  movement  of 
, Shinn’s  battery  until  the  13th  April.  Previous  to  this  nearly  all  the 
command  had  been  moved  toward  Fort  Yuma,  one  company  only  re- 
maining to  accompany  the  battery.  Colonel  Carleton  arrived  at  Fort 
Yuma  on  the  29th  of  April.  Active  preparations  were  made  to  move 
the  command  eastward  without  delay.  Water-tanks,  holding  600  gal- 
lons each,  were  prepared  to  accompany  each  detachment.  Contracts 
were  made  at  Fort  Yuma  to  have  hay  cut  and  deposited  at  different 

> points  between  the  fort  and  the  Pima  Villages. 

It  was  ascertained  that  Tucson  was  still  in  the  hands  of  the  Texans. 
Their  pickets  extended  down  the  Bio  Gila  till  within  50  miles  of  Fort 
Yuma.  Hay  deposited  at  different  points  by  Colonel  Carleton’s  agents 
was  burned."  The  Pima  Indians  are  an  agricultural  people,  and  culti- 
i vate  large  quantities  of  wheat.  Knowing  this  fact  and  the  importance 
of  securing  as  much  as  possible,  Colonel  Carleton  had  for  some  time 
been  in  communication  with  an  American  living  at  these  villages.  He 
was  directed  to  purchase  all  the  wheat  the  Indians  had.  A consider- 
i able  quantity  was  thus  accumulated ; but  before  the  advance  of  the 
i column  reached  that  point  the  Texans  had  destroyed  it  all,  with  the 
exception  of  a small  quantity  the  Indians  had  cached.  This  was  a 
r serious  loss,  but  the  growing  crops  had  not  been  molested,  and  Colonel 
Carleton  was  enabled  to  secure  a considerable  amount  for  his  animals. 
Two  companies  of  infantry  and  one  of  cavalry  were  sent  forward 
toward  the  Pima  and  Tucson.  As  our  forces  advanced  the  Texans  fell 
; back  to  Tucson.  The  command  followed  them  to  within  a short  dis- 
; tance  of  that  place ; but  not  feeling  sufficiently  strong  to  attack  them, 
fell  back  to  the  Pima.  Lieutenant-Colonel  West  was  then  ordered 
forward  with  four  companies  of  infantry.  The  following  itinerary  was 
made  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  West: 

' To  Gila  City,  17  miles;  no  grass,  wood;  camp  on  river;  tkence  to  Mission  Camp, 
11  miles;  wood,  water,  and  a little  grass;  wood,  water,  and  grass  4 miles  farther  on. 

’ From  Mission  Creek  to  Filibuster  is  6 miles ; thence  to  Antelope  Peak,  9 miles ; 

grass  within  three-fourths  of  a mile;  camp  at  station.  From  this' place  to  Mohawk 
f Station,  12  miles ; no  grass ; camp  on  the  river.  To  Texas  Hill,  11  miles ; a little  grass 
on  the  hill  station,  one-half  mile  back  from  the  river.  Lagoon  Camp ; fine  water, 
wood,  grass,  and  shade ; thence  to  Bnrwell’s  Ranch,  11  miles;  very  dusty  and  disagree- 
able ; men  nor  animals  cannot  recruit  much.  At  Grassy  Camp,  3 miles  distant,  they 
! do  much  better.  From  Grassy  Camp  to  Berk’s  Station,  6 miles ; a very  poor  camp ; 
i little  better  at  Oatman  Flat,  11  miles  farther.  From  Oatman  Flat  to  Kenyon  Station, 
11  miles;  poor  camp  ; no  grass.  To  Shady  Camp,  10  miles;  everything  good.  From 
j1  Shady  Camp  to  Gila  Bend,  4 miles;  wood  and  water,  but  no  grass:  thence  to  Desert 


598 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


I Chap.  XXI. 


Station,  22  miles:  good  wood  ; no  water  or  grass.  To  the  Tanks,  7 miles:  same  as 
Desert  Station.  To  Maricopa  Wells,  11  miles;  plenty  of  brackish  water ; some  salt 
grass;  and  from  thence  to  the  Pima  Villages,  11  miles;  road  fair,  with  some  sloughs. 

* The  march  from  Fort  Yuma  to  the  Pima  Villages  was  fatiguing  in  the 
extreme.  The  intense  heat  and  alkali  dust  was  almost  unbearable ; both 
men  and  animals  suffered  very  much.  As  fast  as  possible  the  troops 
were  pushed  forward.  Ou  the  14th  of  May  Lieutenant- Colonel  West 
was  sent  forward  by  way  of  Fort  Breckinridge  with  four  companies  of 
infantry.  This  fort  was  reoccupied,  and  the  Stars  and  Stripes  again 
floated  to  the  breeze.  From  Fort  Breckinridge  Colonel  West  proceeded 
to  Tucson  by  way  of  Canada  del  Ora.  A description  of  the  route  is 
taken  from  the  notes  of  Colonel  West: 

May  14,  left  Fort  Barrett,  Pima,  at  7 a.  m.  ; road  tends  toward  the  river  on  the  left 
hand ; detached  and  irregular  mountains,  from  5 to  9 miles,  to  the  right ; soil  becomes 
sandy  and  the  country  desert.  Greasewood  and  mesquite  wood  abounded,  but  no 
thickets.  The  river  is  gradually  approached  and  touched  at  Sacaton  Station ; there 
plenty  of  sacaton  grass ; a poor  article  for  pasturage ; good  camp  on  the  river ; road 
fine  for  marching  and  transportation.  Course,  east-northeast. 

15th,  left  Sacaton  Station  at  5.40  a.  m.  Road  parts  from  the  river  and  leaves  it 
from  1 to  2 miles  to  the  left ; mountain  spurs  trend  off  southeast ; a lone  peak  about 
1-i  miles  long  is  detached  from  the  main  range.  The  Butterfield  road  to  Tucson 
passes  between  the  peak  and  main  mountain.  A picket  there  can  effectually  watch 
both  roads.  A small  lagoon  of  water  is  found  at  the  north  base.  The  Picacho  is 
plainly  visible  throughout  the  day’s  march.  Dense  mesquite  thickets ; road  fine  for 
marching  and  transportation.  Camp  on  the  river  in  a cottonwood  grove,  one-fourth 
mile  below  White’s ; good  grazing  and  fine.  Course,  east  by  south. 

May  16,  left  White’s  at  5.50  a.  m.  Road  leaves  the  river  and  takes  the  mesa  ; the 
ascent  is  gradual  and  road  good  for  20  miles.  Thickets  of  cactus  and  palo  verde.  At 
20  to  31  miles  a steep  descent  leads  to  Dry  Camp,  a basin  in  the  hills  of  some  30  acres 
in  area ; a trail  makes  out  of  this  due  north  to  Ojo  Verde  Springs,  4 miles ; the  Gila 
River  is  3 miles  farther  in  the  same  direction.  Ojo  Verde  can  be  used;  the  water  is 
inferior  and  not  abundant;  the  quality  and  perhaps  the  quantity  could  be  improved. 
The  spring  is  4 miles  off  the  road,  and  the  return  must  be  made  by  the  same  track. 
Left  Dry  Camp  at  6.40  p.  m. ; road  turns  off  southeast  up  an  arroyo ; very  heavy  sand 
for  about  6 miles ; then  gradual  ascent  of  5 miles;  then  more  abrupt  and  up  high 
hills. 

At  15  miles  from  Dry  Camp  a finger-post,  marked  “Water,”  points  to  the  right. 

Cottonwood  Spring  is  distant  half  a mile,  in  a ravine.  The  grazing  is  fine  and 
water  abundant  for  such  a body  of  troops  as  this.  A lone  cottonwood  tree  promi- 
nently marks  the  spring.  Course,  east  by  south-southeast. 

May  17,  laid  by. 

May  18,  left  Cottonwood  Spring  at  5 a.m.;  road  over  rolling  hills  5 miles ; good 
grass,  then  pass  the  summit,  and  the  descent  commences  towards  San  Pedro  River. 
Sandy  arroyo  for  8 miles  and  heavy  traveling;  the  road  becomes  a canon.  A walnut 
tree,  3 miles  west  of  Fort  Breckinridge,  marked  “Water,”  stands  in  the  middle  of  the 
road.  At  this  point  the  road  to  Tucson  turns  off  square  to  the  right ; thence  to  the 
San  Pedro  and  Fort  Breckinridge.  Colonel  Carleton  changed  the  name  of  this  fort, 
and  called  it  Fort  Stanford,  in  honor  of  Leland  Stanford,  Governor  of  California. 
The  fort  is  3 miles  to  the  right,  up  a canon ; rocks  from  100  to  300  feet  high  ; pass 
from  20  to  70  yards  wide ; road  extremely  heavy.  At  this  fort  fine  stream,  good  graz- 
ing, and  abundance  of  wood.  Course,  east  by  south. 

19,  left  Fort  Breckinridge  at  5.45  a.  m.  Returned  by  the  canon  to  the  walnut 
tree ; thence  turned  abruptly  to  the  left  and  south  up  a similar  canon,  which  gradu- 
ally expands  to  open  country;  road  for  12  miles  excessively  heavy  and  sandy;  thence 
gently  rolling  hills  until  the  foot  of  a mountain  is  reached  on  the  left,  about  17  miles 
from  the  walnut  tree.  Next  3 miles  the  hills  are  sidling  and  difficult.  A steep  descent 
of  1 mile  leads  to  Cafiada  del  Oro.  Camp  on  a fine  mountain  stream;  grazing  very 
fine  and  wood  abundant.  This  is  a very  difficult  day’s  march.  Course,  northwest 
and  south. 

20th,  left  Canada  del  Oro  at  2 p.  m.  ; road  follows  a ravine  between  the  mesa  on 
the  right  and  a mountain  range  on  the  left;  a good  deal  of  sand,  but  mainly  a fair 
road  ; fine  grass  along  the  road. 

At  11.55  the  road  forks,  the  left-hand  leading  1 mile  to  the  Rincon,  a small,  running 
stream ; fine  camp ; grass  immediately  under  the  mountain.  Course,  southwest. 

May  21,  left  Rincon  at  5.30  a.  m.  Road  turns  round  the  point  of  the  mountain  on 
the  left;  traveling  rather  heavy.  Sandy  arroyo,  and  then  the  ground  becomes  roll- 


Chap.  XXI.;  THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


599 


nx  About  8 miles  from  Rincon  a mesa  covered  witli  cactus  and  mesquite  is 
! cached ; traveling  improves.  Course,  southwest  and  south  by  east. 

Our  troops  entered  and  occupied  Tucson  without  firing  a shot.  At 
jur  approach  the  Texans  made  a precipitate  retreat.  Colonel  Oarleton 
determined  to  collect  the  troops  at  this  point  for  rest,  drill,  &c.  Men 
and  animals  required  rest;  wagons  wanted  repairing.  The  dryness  ol 
the  atmosphere  and  the  intolerable  heat  had  shrunk  them  to  the  point 
of  falling  to  pieces.  Communication  was  opened  with  Sonora  for  the 

purchase  of  flour,  grain,  &c.  . 

In  the  first  part  of  Jaane  all  the  troops  composing  the  column  were  in 
and  about  Tucson,  with  the  exception  of  a part  of  the  Fifth  Infantry, 
left  to  garrison  Forts  Yuma  and  Barrett,  There  is  another  and  more 
direct  road  leading  from  the  Pima  Villages  to  Tucson.  This  road  was 
taken  by  Lieutenant  Shinn  and  two  companies  of  infantry.  A descrip- 
tion of  the  road  by  Lieutenant  Shinn  is  appended. 


Special  Orders, 
No.  15. 


Headquarters  Column  from  California, 

Tucson,  Ariz.,  June  16,  1862. 


The  following  itinerary  of  the  marches  from  Fort  Barrett  (Pima  Villages)  to  Tucson, 
i Ariz.,  via  Picacho  Mountain,  made  by  Captain  Shinn,  Third  Artillery,  U.  S.  Army,  is 
uublished  for  the  information  of  all  concerned : 

June  1,  left  camp  at  Fort  Barrett  at  4.15  p.  in.,  with  battery,  one  ambulance,  one 
water  and  eight  transportation  wagons  (loaded  to  3,600  pounds  with  ammunition, 
flour  and  forage),  87  men,  and  153  animals.  Road  on  Gila  River  fine  for  trans- 
portation of  heavily-loaded  wagons.  No  water ; no  grass ; vegetation  mesquite  and 
| Greasewood.  At  Sacaton  Station  very  dirty;  encamped  on  river  at  8 p.  m.;  11.8 

m June  2,  filled  water-tank  (600  gallons),  and  left  camp  at  Sacaton  at  4.20  p.  m.  Road 
l leaves  the  river  and  sweeps  round  from  southeast  by  south  to  south  by  east,  with 
i Gradually  ascending  slope  to  summit,  5£  miles  between  mountain  spur  and  detached 
peak  on  left,  2 miles  of  road  dusty,  then  soil  changes  from  the  alkali  dust  of  Gila  River 
, bottom  to  mixture  of  sand  and  gravel,  very  hard  and  quite  smooth.  From  summit 
Casa  Grande  in  sight  on  desert  to  left  and  the  Picacho  straight  ahead  south  by  east 
i 31  miles:  desert  continues  to  Oneida  Station;  road  continues  good ; at  8 miles  gravel 
replaced  by  hard  alkali  clay;  vegetation,  mesquite,  greasewood,  and  cactus;  no 
water  or  grass  on  road;  wood  plenty  and  sufficient  for  cooking  near  Oneida  Station, 
which  is  on  the  left ; well  on  the  right  of  road ; depth  29  feet,  with  o feet  of  water; 

; encamped  there  at  7.45  p.  m. ; train  all  in  10  minutes  later. 

One  hundred  and  seventy-five  buckets  (equal  to  700  gallons)  was  taken  from  the 
well  at  the  rate  of  10  gallons  per  minute,  apparently  without  diminishing  the  supply. 

| The  water  is  excellent,  cold,  and  sweet;  the  best  this  side  of  Fort  Yuma;  arrived 
i and  departed  during  the  night;  found  no  grass  near  station;  11.1  miles, 
i June  3 left  camp  at  4 a.  m.  Old  marks  of  surface  water  show  a gradual  rise  of  the 
desert  toward  Blue  Water  Station;  road  fine  for  marching;  very  little  sand.  At  6 
■ miles  halted  from  5.45  to  6.45  for  grass,  which  may  be  found  m considerable  quantity 
100  vards  to  the  left  of  road  in  the  belt  of  mesquite  or  arroyo  leading  east  from  that 
point,  and  said  to  extend  4 or  5 miles  in  the  same  direction ; obtained  sufficient  for 
i a good  night’s  feed.  This  grass  is  gramma,  with  some  little  gaeta.  The  gaeta  was 
also  observed  on  the  left  of  the  road  1 mile  farther  on ; no  water ; vegetation, 
L desert  plants,  mesquite,  and  greasewood.  Arrived  and  encamped  at  Blue  Water 
! Station  at  7.45  a.  m. ; well  (69  feet  in  depth,  with  2£  feet  of  water)  and  station  both 
on  rmht  of  road ; drew  water  at  the  rate  of  6 gallons  per  minute  for  If  hours ; watered 
, 90  horses  at  same  time,  4 gallons  each;  mules  in  Ihe  p.  m.  and  horses  again m the  p.  m. 

' Took  from  this  well  in  ten  hours  over  1,600  gallons  of  water  and  left  the  depth  of 
water  as  found.  It  will  probably  afford  4,000  gallons  of  water  in  twenty-four  hours ; 

1 duality  good  and  water  cool.  At  4 p.  m.  sent  a detachment  forward  to  clean  out  well 
I at  the  point  of  mountain;  wood  plenty;  some  gramma  and  a little  gaeta  reported 
\ to  exist  in  the  mesquite  500  yards  northwest  of  the  station;  9.7  miles, 
i June  4,  left  Blue  Water  Station  at  2.10  a.  m.  and  expected  to  march  to  Tucson,  o4 
i miles,  in  the  next  twenty-four  hours,  as  there  is  no  water  on  the  road,  and  not  enough 
l with  company  to  encamp  on;  some  wagons  remain  loaded  with  3,600  pounds;  morn- 
: ing  quite  cool  and  very  fine  for  marching ; road  continues  to  rise  to  the  Picacho ; at  4.4U 
| a.  ra.  9.6  miles  from  Blue  Water ; soil,  clay,  water-washed,  and  very  hard  and  smooth, 
extends  for  miles  on  either  side  of  the  road;  considerable  dry  gramma  grass  m the 
} immediate  vicinity  and  mesquite  sparde.  At  13.9  miles  passed  graves  of  Lieutenant 
Barrett  and  two  soldiers  on  the  left  of  road.  The  chalcos  or  water-holes,  now  r ry, 


600 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  LChap.  XJLL 


are  m the  mesquite,  on  the  right  of  the  road;  here  quite  a thicket;  some  gra  , hut 

^ “ nOW  ieve1’  ?r  nearl>r  so>  for  3 or  4 miles-  At  6.45  a.  m.  halted  at 
the  Picacho  Station  on  the  right,  and  distant  from  Blue  Water  Station  14.9  miles 
saw  a hand  of  antelope  near  toot  of  peak  ; no  water  at  this  point;  consumed  about 
200  gallons  of  water  m tank,  for  which  had  to  wait  half  an  hour;  resumed  march  at 
7.4o  a.  m. ; road  begins  to  descend  towards  the  south  2 miles  beyond  the  Picacho  and 
so  continues  to  point  of  mountain,  a very  excellent  road  all  the  way.  At  25  5 miles 
passed  adeep^  well ; dry  on  right;  no  water  ever  found  here;  high  mountains  on 
right ; distant  from  30  to  100  miles,  and  between  mountain  and  road  valley  of  Santa 
Cruz  River,  here  only  an  arroyo,  which  road  crosses  near  point  of  mountain ; at  12  m 
and  29  miles  halted  one-half  hour ; met  a messenger  at  1.30  p.  m.  and  received  notice  of 
water  m abundance  at  point  of  mountain,  where  company  arrived  and  encamped  at 
4.1op.  m. ; station  on  right  and  well  on  left  of  road;  water  plenty;  no  grass:  no 
wood  at  well,  and  but  little  on  last  8 miles  of  road ; used  water  brought  from  Tucson 
on  wagons,  and  did  not  thoroughly  test  the  capacity  of  the  well,  which  is  39  feet  deep 
with  4 teet  of  water;  all  agree  in  pronouncing  it  the  best  on  the  desert  and  sav  it 
cannot  be  dipped  dry;  39.1  miles.  J 

4.-udlin^  ^ left  camp  at  3 a.  m.,  about  5 miles  from  point  of  mountain;  dense  mesquite 
thicket  a good  cover  for  Indians ; at  6 miles  crossed  arroyo  of  Santa  Cruz  River 
descending  to  left ; quite  dry ; a little  sand  and  some  more  at  11  miles,  one-half  mile  of 
it  this  time ; remainder  of  road  very  good  ; numerous  cottonwood  trees  on  road  this  day 
and  much  mesquite  ; no  water  ; between  7 and  10  miles  from  point  of  mountain  much 
salt  grass ; poor  stuff  for  forage.  First  5 and  last  3*  miles  of  to-day’s  march  very  fine  • 
roadot  hard  gravel;  arrived  at  Tucson  at  8.45  a.  in.  ; 15  miles.  Total,  86.7  miles! 


Tucson  is  about  half  way  between  Fort  Yuma  and  the  Eio  Grande, 
and  contains  a population  of  400,  or  perhaps  500,  mostly  Mexicans. 
A few  Americans  and  foreigners  were  living  here,  principally  gamblers 
and  ruffians,  traitors  to  their  country— secessionists. 

Colonel  Carleton  received  his  promotion  to  brigadier-general  of  vol- 
unteers while  on  the  desert  in  the  early  part  of  June.  On  his  arrival  at 
Tucson  the  Territory  of  Arizona  was  at  once  placed  under  martial  law 
and  the  following  proclamation  issued.* 


* * * 


A number  of  notorious  characters  were  arrested,  examined  by  mili- 
tary commissions,  and  sent  to  Fort  Yuma.  Order  sprang  from  dis- 
order, and  in  a short  time  a den  of  thieves  was  converted  into  a peace- 
ful village. 

In  the  mean  time  General  Carleton  was  making  active  preparations  to 
move  his  command  to  the  Eio  Grande ; wagons  were  repaired;  stores 
collected  from  Sonora,  and  everything  put  in  as  good  condition  as  cir- 
cumstances would  permit  after  the  severe  march  over  the  Yuma  and 
Gila  Deserts. 


Yo  communication  up  to  this  time  could  be  had  with  our  forces  in  Yew 
Mexico.  The  strength  of  the  rebels  and  their  locality  entirely  unknown. 
The  great  difficulty  in  communicating  with  General  Canby,  at  that  time 
in  command  of  the  Department  of  Yew  Mexico,  was  on  account  of  hos- 
tile Indians.  The  Apache  Yation  occupying  the  whole  country  between 
the  Eio  Grande  and  the  Colorado  Eiver,  the  great  distance  to  be 
traversed  through  their  country,  rendered  it  hazardous  if  not  impossi- 
ble for  any  small  party  to  get  through  it. 

General  Carleton  endeavored  to  send  an  express  to  General  Canby 
from  Tucson.  This  was  carried  by  3 men.  The  party  was  attacked  near 
Apache  Pass,  and  2 of  the  men  were  killed  by  the  Indians;  the  sur- 
vivor was  pursued  some  40  miles  and  barely  escaped  death.  He  was 
captured  by  the  Texans  near  Mesilla  and  the  dispatches  to  General 
Canby  fell  into  their  hands.  From  these  they  learned  the  exact  strength 
of  General  Carleton’s  command  and  the  intended  movement  of  the 
Column. 

On  the  22d  of  June  General  Carleton  sent  forward  Lieutenant-Colo* 


See  in  closure  C to  Carleton’s  report  of  August  2,  p.  561. 


THE  CALIFORNIA  COLUMN. 


601 


■HA1\  XXI.]  

el  Eyre,  of  the  First  Cavalry,  California  Volunteers,  with  140  men. 
his  was  the  advance  guard  of  the  column.  With  the  exception  of  fre- 
uent  skirmishing  with  Indians  and  the  loss  of  3 men  killed  and  several 
ounded  at  Apache  Pass,  the  party  met  with  no  other  enemy  before 

baching  the  Rio  Grande.  • m 

Apache  Pass  is  about  midway  between  Tucson  and  the  river.  1 be 
| ass.is  through  a spur  of  the  Chiricahua  Mountains,  about  3J  or  4 miles 
Nng.  In  this  pass  is  a fine  spring  of  water,  and  a favorite  haunt  of 
he  Indians.  A company  of  infantry  and  a part  of  a company  of  cav- 
Iry  with  two  mountain  howitzers,  fought  the  Indians  at  this  spring  for 
bur  hours.  A number  of  the  savages  were  killed  in  the  fight.  Our 
iss  was  3 killed  and  several  wounded.  On  either  side  of  this  pass  ex- 
I ends  a plain  from  30  to  40  miles  in  width.  The  Indians  can  see  par- 
ies approach  and  lay  in  wait  for  them. 

On  the  17th  of  July,  preparations  for  the  movement  of  the  command 
paving  been  completed,  General  Carleton  issued  the  following  general 

reri*  »*«*** 

['  Vo  report  had  been  received  from  Colonel  Eyre.  The  strength  and 
rocality  of  the  Confederates  was  unknown;  consequently  the  column  was 
Kept  well  in  hand,  the  companies  marching  only  one  day  apart. 

I Eor  a description  of  the  country  I quote  from  the  notes  of  Colonel 

pH  • * * * ■ _ * 

As  soon  as  the  arrival  of  Colonel  Eyre  on  the  river  was  known  the 
Texans  made  a hasty  flight.  Their  army  was  completely  demoralized, 
tnd  Colonel  Eyre’s  force  magnified  fourfold.  What  they  could  not 
I *arry  with  them  they  destroyed.  One  hundred  and  fifty  sick  and 
I vounded  were  left  in  hospital  at  Franklin,  Tex.,  and  above. 

‘ Colonel  Eyre  crossed  the  river  near  Fort  Thorn  and  pushed  down 
oward  the  retreating  rebels.  He  entered  Las  Cruces,  opposite  Mesilla, 
md  raised  our  national  colors.  Franklin  was  also  occupied  by  a detach- 
nent  of  his  command.  General  Carleton,  with  the  head  of  the  column, 
reached  the  river  on  the  8tli  of  August,  the  time  consumed  m the  march 
Hein  o'  eighteen  days.  The  sight  of  this  beautiful  stream  after  the  many 
flays  o7  toil  and  suffering  gladdened  the  hearts  of  all.  The  last  day’s 
[inarch  was  particularly  severe;  over  40  miles  had  been  made  by  the  in-, 
fantry  without  water  without  a murmur.  The  desert  had  been  con- 
quered, and  the  command  arrived  on  the  river  in  good  fighting  condi- 
tion. No  deaths  had  occurred  between  Tucson  and  the  river,  and  but 

• few  remained  on  the  sick  list.  . _ . . ^ 

t General  Carleton  crossed  the  river  at  the  point  where  Colonel  Eyre 
[crossed.  The  river  was  so  high  that  it  could  not  be  forded,  and  the 
'only  boats  were  two  small  scows,  made  by  Colonel  Eyre.  First  the 
animals  were  swum  over.  This  was  successfully  accomplished;  none 
were  lost.  A rope  was  attached  to  both  sides  of  the  boats  and  extended 
to  cither  bank  of  the  river.  A number  of  men  were  stationed  on  both 
flanks.  By  this  means  they  were  enabled  to  pull  the  boat  from  shore 
to  shore,  being  constantly  in  the  water.  The  wagons  were  unloaded  ; 
their  contents  ferried  across  in  the  boats,  which  were  hauled  across  by 
opes.  In  this  manner  each  command  as  it  came  up  was  crossed  m 
afetv.  Nothing  was  lost  or  injured. 

General  Carleton  moved  the  column  down  the  river  as  far  as  Las 

* See  inclosure  G to  Carleton’s  report,  p.  555. 

t Surgeon  McNulty  here  quotes  Eyre’s  entire  report  of  July  6,  see  p.  oSo. 


602 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[Chap.  XXI. 


Cruces,  La  Mesilla,  and  Franklin.  Taking  with  him  two  companies  ot 
cavalry,  he  proceeded  on  down  as  far  as  Fort  Quitman,  Tex.  5 from 
there  he  dispatched  a company  of  the  First  Cavalry  as  far  as  Fort 
Davis,  distant  from  Fort  Quitman  — - miles.  The  Texans  had  aban 
doned  this  post.  One  man,  much  reduced,  was  found  dead,  his  body 
being  pierced  in  many  places  with  arrows.  This  man  had  evidently  been 
left  behind  sick.  The  sick  and  wounded  Texans  left  behind  at  Frank 
lin  were  sent  with  an  escort  to  San  Antonio. 

General  Canby,  at  this  time  in  command  of  the  Department  of  New 
Mexico,  had  been  ordered  East,  and  on  the  16th  of  September,  1862, 
General  Carleton  arrived  in  Santa  Fe,  and  on  the  18th  assumed  com 
mand  of  the  department.  Before  leaving  the  lower  country  he  pub- 
lished the  following  general  order  : 

General  Orders,  £ Headquarters  District  of  Arizona, 

No.  15.  5 Las  Cruces,  N.  Hex.,  August  14,  1862. 

I.  Commanders  of  towns  will  at  once  establish  sanitary  regulations,  and  require 
them  to  be  observed  by  the  inhabitants  and  by  the  troops,  so  far  as  the  policing  of  the 
streets  and  the  keeping  of  their  dwellings,  quarters,  stores,  corrals,  &c.,  in  a state  oi 
cleanliness  may  be  necessary  to  their  health  and  comfort.  Frequent  inspections  will 
be  made  by  commanding  officers  or  by  a medical  officer  under  his  direction,  to  see  that 
in  all  respects  these  regulations  are  followed. 

II.  It  is  expected  that  all  of  the  inhabitants  living  along  the  Rio  Grande  southward 
from  the  Jornada  del  Muerto  to  Fort  Bliss,  in  Texas,  will,  at  the  earliest  practicable 
moment,  repair  their  dwellings  and  clean  up  their  streets. 

The  people  may  now  rest  assured  that  the  era  of  anarchy  and  misrule — when  there 
was  no  protection  to  life  or  property,  when  the  wealthy  were  plundered,  when  the  poor 
were  robbed  and  oppressed,  when  all  were  insulted  and  maltreated,  and  when  there 
was  no  respect  for  age  or  sex — has  passed  away ; that  now,  under  the  sacred  banner  of 
our  country,  all  may  claim  and  shall  receive  their  just  rights.  Therefore  let  the  burden 
of  anxiety  be  lifted  from  their  hearts,  and  once  more  let  them  pursue  their  avocations 
with  cheerfulness,  and  with  the  full  confidence  that  the  protection  which  now  shelters 
them  from  injustice  will  always  be  stronger  in  proportion  as  they  shall  be  powerless 
to  protect  themselves. 

The  success  of  the  march  of  this  column  was  dependent  upon  two 
things : First,  the  endurance  of  the  men ; second,  the  care  taken  oi 
them.  From  the  first  organization  of  the  column  the  constant  care  ot 
General  Carleton  was  given  it  ; the  health  of  the  men  first,  discipline 
next.  Constantly  watchful,  the  minutest  detail  received  his  personal 
attention.  Every  movement  was  based  upon  calculation ; nothing  avoid 
able  left  to  chance.  To  conduct  this  expedition  successfully  required  a 
clear  head,  sound  judgment,  indomitable  will,  and  perseverance.  All 
these  General  Carleton  possesses  in  an  eminent  degree. 

It  will  not  be  too  much  to  say  that  there  are  probably  few  men  in 
the  United  States  Army  so  well  fitted  to  command  an  expedition  oi 
this  kind.  A military  experience  of  more  than  twenty  years,  a great 
portion  of  it  spent  on  our  frontiers,  has  made  him  familiar  by  experi 
ence  with  the  wants  and  requirements  of  men  in  desert  marching. 

In  this  march  everything  was  reduced  to  the  smallest  possible  com 
pass.  No  tents  were  used  by  officers  or  men  during  the  whole  march. 
Two  wagons  were  allowed  to  a company.  In  these  were  carried  camp 
and  garrison  equipage,  ten  days’  rations,  mess  furniture — everything 
belonging  to  a company.  Every  article  was  weighed.  Officers,  from 
the  general  down,  carried  but  80  pounds  of  baggage,  including  bed- 
ding, mess  kit,  &c. 

The  troops  suffered  very  little  from  sickness.  The  mortality  was 
very  small.  Not  one  single  death  occurred  on  the  march  of  the  column 
from  the  Pacific  Ocean  to  the  Bio  Grande,  from  the  13th  of  April  to 
the  8th  of  August,  and  but  five  deaths  from  disease  in  hospital  during 
this  time — two  at  Fort  Barrett  and  three  at  Tucson. 


UP.  XXI.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  ARANSAS  BAY,  TEX. 


603 


eneral  Orders,  ) 
No.  85.  S 


Everv  possible  care  was  observed  to  guard  against  sickness.  This, 

) get  her  with  the  splendid  material  of  the  men,  will  account  for  the 
lccess  of  the  expedition  and  the  slight  mortality  from  disease  attend- 

lGeneral  Oarleton,  on  relinquishing  the  immediate  command  of  the 
Dlumn,  published  the  following  general  order,  viz  : 

Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 
x>u<  ou#  y Santa  Fe,  N.  Hex.,  September  21,  1862. 

In  entering  upon  the  duties  that  remove  him  from  immediate  association  with  the 
’oops  constituting  the  Column  from  California  the  commanding  general  desires  to 
xpress  his  grateful  acknowledgment  of  the  conduct  and  services  ol  the  officers  and. 
ion  of  that  command.  Traversing  a desert  country,  that  has  heretofore  been  regarded 
s impracticable  for  the  operations  of  large  bodies  of  troops,  they  have  reached  their 
estination,  and  accomplished  the  object  assigned  them,  not  only  without  loss  of  any 
ind.but  improved  in  discipline,  in  morale,  and  in  every  other  element  of  efficiency 
'hat  patient  and  cheerful  endurance  of  hardships,  the  zeal  and  alacrity  with  which 
hey  have  grappled  with  and  overcome  obstacles  that  would  have  been  msurmount- 
ble  tb  any  but  troops  of  the  highest  physical  and  moral  energy,  the  complete  abne- 
•ation  of  self  and  subordination  of  every  personal  consideration  to  the  grand  object 
f our  hopes  and  efforts,  give  the  most  absolute  assurance  of  success  in  any  held  o 

^California  has  reason  to  be  proud  of  the  sons  she  has  sent  across  the  continent  to 
^sist  in  the  great  struggle  in  which  our  country  is  now  engaged.  . 

The  commanding  general  is  requested  by  the  officer  who  preceded  him  in  00  " 
nand  of  this  department  to  express  for  him  the  gratihcation  felt  by  every  officer  and 
oldier  of  his  command  at  the  fact  that  troops  from  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  slope, 
rom  the  mountains  of  California  and  Colorado,  acting  in  the  same  cause,  impelled  by 
he  same  duties,  and  animated  by  the  same  hopes,  have  met  and  shaken  hands  m tne 
.enter  of  tliie  great  continent.  JAMES  R CAKLEXONi 

Brigadier- General,  U.  S.  Army,  Commanding  Department . 


Very  respectfully, 


J.  M.  MoNULTY, 
Surgeon , TJ.  S.  Volunteers. 


APRIL  22,  1862— Capture  of  Union  launches  in  Aransas  Bay,  Tex. 


Report  of  Mctj.  William  0.  Yager , commanding  Camp  Aransas . 

Headquarters  Camp  Ara^nsas,  Tex., 

April  25,  1862. 

Sir  : On  the  22d  instant  intelligence  reached  Shell  Banks  that  the 
enemy  had  run  two  of  their  launches  through  Cedar  Bayou  and  cap- 
tured three  sloops,  one  of  which,  the  Democrat,  they  stripped  of  her 
sails  and  left  the  captain  and  mate  to  pole  their  way  to  land.  With 
the  other  two  they  bore  down  toward  Shell  Banks,  with  the  purpose  o± 
running:  past  the  fort  under  friendly  appearance,  and  thence  out  the 

1 Aransas  Pass  to  the  blockader.  They  had  approached  within  C miles 
of  the  fort,  and  were  tacking  back  and  forth  as  if  waiting  for  night 
before  attempting  to  pass.  When,  with  two  sloops  carrying  32  men, 
Captain  Neal,  myself,  and  Lieutenant  Canfield  set  out  after  them,  they 
put  back  in  haste.  But  having  no  place  where  they  could  get  out  of 
the  bay  with  their  prizes  without  passing  us,  they  quit  them  and  took  to 
their  launches.  They  made  directly  for  Blind  Bayou  and  soon  entered 
it  We  left  our  boats  and  hurried  across  by  land  to  intercept  them. 
Finding  themselves  thus  headed  off,  they  reluctantly  abandoned  their 
launches  and  made  off  to  the  sand  hills,  firing  upon  our  men,  who  were 


604 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[Chap.  XXI 


now  kept  from  pursuing  them  by  the  depth  of  the  water  in  the  pass  at 
the  point  where  we  approached  it.  (We  could  have  swum  across,  bu 
would  then  have  been  on  the  wrong  side,  with  wet  ammunition.  Their 
Are  was  returned  with  spirit  for  several  rounds,  but  without  damage  to 
either  party.)  The  blockading  vessel,  meantime,  was  within  2 miles  of 
the  scene,  an  interested  spectator.  I wonder  that  she  did  not  shell  us 
It  may  be  she  did  not  fully  understand  the  situation  of  parties,  and  mav 
have  mistaken  our  boats  for  their  prizes.  The  Yankees,  22  in  number 
soon  disappeared  among  the  sand  hills,  and  the  folly  of  groping  about 
m the  dark  alter  them  being  manifest,  we  returned  with  their  launches 
and  contents  to  Shell  Bank.  Our  prizes  are  cutters  or  launches— one 
pulling  five  and  the  other  four  oars — capable  of  carrying  10  or  14  men 
respectively,  with  sails ; a fine  mariner’s  compass,  a pennant,  three  pairs 
of  handcuffs,  and  two  guns  belonging  to  the  men,  taken  by  them  on 
the  two  sloops;  the  sails  of  the  Democrat,  some  rations,  one  boarding- 
pistol,  and  other  trifles. 

On  our  return  to  the  bank  we  met  Major  Forshey  and  Lieutenants 
Aspinwall,  Conklin,  and  Bussell,  with  parties,  on  three  other  boats* 
but  darkness  prevented  any  at  tempt  at  further  proceedings. 

The  captain  of  the  bark  (Kittredge)  was  in  the  party.  They  left  the 
bark  with  five  days  rations;  handcuffed  the  men  taken  on  the  Swan 
and  Mustang,  more  for  humiliation  than  to  secure  them. 

Some  of  the  Yankee  soldiers  expressed  great  dissatisfaction  with  their 
commander;  said  they  would  not  fight  for  him  if  they  could  avoid  it. 

ihe  men  of  the  Swan  and  Mustang  seemed  very  grateful  for  their 

J.  vl0(iuv» 

On  the  21st  the  Burkhart  was  chased  by  these  launches  for  several 
hours;  but  want  of  knowledge  of  the  channels  on  the  part  of  the  enernv 
prevented  them  from  overtaking  her.  J 

I have  not  been  able  to  engage  suitable  schooners  for  guard  boats  in 
the  bays.  Chartered  a sloop  (the  Eebecca)  to  lay  about  Blind  Pass, 
but  for  some  cause  she  has  not  returned  from  Saluria  according  to  con- 
tract. 1 sent  an  armed  party  up  to  Saluria  yesterday  to  carry  some 
returning  boats  and  to  escort  Major  Forshey. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 
lr  . WM.  O.  YAGEB, 

Major,  Mounted  Battalion,  Comdg.  Camp  Aransas,  Tex. 

Lieut.  B.  E.  Benton, 

A.  A.  A.  G.,  Southern  Military  District  of  the  Bio  Grande. 

P.  S. — The  compass  taken  from  the  enemy  was  sent  by  Major  For- 
shey to  General  Hebert,  to  be  presented,  with  his  permission,  to  Com- 
modore William  Hunter,  chief  naval  commander  of  the  Department  of 
Texas,  from  the  officers  engaged  in  the  expedition. 

Bespectfully, 

W.  O.  Y. 


APRIL  25,  1862. — Affair  at  Socorro,  K.  Mex. 

Report  of  Maj,  Charles  E . Wesche,  Second  New  Mexico  Militia. 

Santa  F£,  £T.  Mex.,  May  5,  1S62. 
General  : In  accordance  with  your  verbal  order  I herewith  report 
to  you  the  movements  and  surrender  of  that  part  of  the  Second  Begi- 


AFFAIR  AT  SOCORRO,  N.  MEX. 


605 


iHAr.  XXI.] 

lent  New  Mexico  Militia  which,  under  command  of  Col.  Nicolas  Pino, 
Rort  Craig  the  niglft  of  February  22  last: 

The  morning  of  the  24th  said  detachment,  consisting  of  280  men, 
,assed  through  Socorro  en  route  to  Polvadera.  Not  far  from  Limitar  we 
aet  Lieutenant  Cooley,  with  letters  from  General  O.  P.  Hovey,  order- 
ng  Colonel  Pino  to  fall  back  on  Socorro,  and  to  station  his  militiamen 
tgor  below  said  place.  A halt  was  made  to  refresh  our  animals,  and 
Irly  in  the  afternoon  Second  Major  Rivera,  with  a hie  of  deserted  \ml- 
mteers  and  militiamen  whom  we  had  picked  up  on  the  road  the  <*ay  be- 
bre  started  for  Polvadera,  while  the  detachment  countermarched  to 
Socorro.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Baca  and  myself  went  ahead  and  selected 
he  place  where  to  establish  quarters.  As  soon  as  our  detachment 
irrived  Colonel  Pino  ordered  an  advance  guard  of  14  mounted  men, 
mder  Captain  Gutierrez,  below  the  town,  and  the  animals  were  to  be 
sent  to  graze  under  a strong  guard,  but  had  scarcely  gone  five  minutes 
vhen  Captain  Gutierrez  sent  word  that  a picket  of  the  enemy 
inproaching.  By  this  time  it  grew  dark.  Colonel  Pmo  ordered  out 

wo  companies  afoot,  with  Lieutenant-Colonel  Baca,  to  reconnoiter  the 
wu  wiuimuiv  .’  oorna  t ttia  nnr  animals  were 


orce  of  the  advancing  enemy.  T 

irdered  back  and  to  be  guarded  in  a corral  near  by.  Immediately  be- 
ow  the  town,  under  the  cover  of  some  adobe  walls,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Baca  had  posted  his  two  companies,  when  Captain  Gutierrez  pointed 
nit  to  him1  the  place  where  the  enemy’s  advance  guard  were  ambushed. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Baca  ordered  Captain  Gutierrez  to  dislodge  them. 
Hie  Gutierrez  picket  had  moved  on  a short  distance  when  the  Texans 
fired  a shot,  whereupon  Lieutenant-Colonel  Baca  s party  discharged 
their  rifles  iA  the  direction  whence  they  saw  the  flash  of  the  enemy’s 
o-v m This  made  the  Texan  picket  retreat  to  their  mam  hod} , and 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Baca  came  back  to  our  headquarters  and  reported 
the  above-stated  facts  to  Colonel  Pino,  who  ordered  the  different  cap- 
tains under  his  command  to  keep  their  men  underarms  and  to  be  ready 
for  immediate  action.  Small  parties  of  our  men  were  sent  to  cover 
such  points  as  appeared  most  important.  M ^ ... 

Meantime  a part  of  the  Texans,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  McNeill, 
had  taken  position  on  an  elevation  southwest  of  Socorro,  while  Cap- 
tain Frazier  went  around  the  town  and  intercepted  the  road  north,  it 
was  about  8 p.  m.  the  enemy  fired  a cannon-ball  over  the  town,  and. 
from  that  moment  our  men  began  to  desert  and  to  hide  themselves  away. 
I sent  Ygn°  Montoya  to  Camp  Connelly  with  a note,  addressed  to  the 
commanding  officer  there,  asking  for  re-enforcements  Acco^amedby 
\diutant  Gonzales  I visited  the  houses  of  some  of  the  influential  Mex- 
icans, and  tried  my  best  to  make  them  take  up  arms  m defense  of  their 
Government,  their  homes,  and  firesides.  Yam  endeavor . No  one > re- 
sponded to  the  call.  Bon  Pedro  Baca  went  even  so  far  as  to  say  that 
the  United  States  Government  was  a curse  to  this  Territory,  and  if  the 
Texans  would  take  and  keep  possession  of  New  Mexico  the  change 

could  only  be  for  the  better.  , 

I went  back  to  headquarters,  and  having  reported  to  Colonel  Pino 
the  revolting  ingratitude  of  Don  Pedro  Baca  and  the  stupid  mdiner- 
ence  of  other  citizens,  the  alcalde  of  Socorro  made  his  appearance,  and 
told  us  that  a Texan  officer  who  came  to  his  house  had  sent  him  to 
bring  about  an  interview  with  our  commanding  officer  Colonel  lino 
sent  me  to  see  who  the  Texan  officer  was  and  to  find  out ; his ’ inten- 
tions. The  alcalde  conducted  me  to  a house  not  far  from  the  cfimch, 
where  I found  Lieutenant  Simmons,  who  told  me  that  by  order  ot 


606  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXlj 

Colonel  McNeill  he  had  come  to  ask  the  unconditional  surrender  o 
the  town;  moreover,  he  manifested  the  desire  to  speak  to  Colone 
Pino  himself.  I replied  that,  although  only  an  inferior  militia  officer 
I could  assure  him  that  Colonel  Pino  would  not  listen  to  such  a del 
mand,  and  that  if  he  had  no  other  business  with  my  colonel  he  coulc 
save  himself  the  trouble  of  going  to  our  headquarters ; but  as  Lieu 
tenant  Simmons  again  expressed  his  wish  to  see  Colonel  Pino,  I com 
ducted  him  to  our  quarters.  Here  the  Texan  messenger  made  the 
same  request  as  he  had  stated  to  me,  and  Colonel  Pino  answered  abouj 
in  the  same  way  as  I had  anticipated,  when  Lieutenant  Simmons  addec 
that  Colonel  McNeill  would  be  sorry  to  attack  Socorro  and  sacrifice 
the  lives  of  innocent  families ; to  which  Colonel  Pino  replied  that  he  was 
as  anxious  to  spare  the  innocent  families  as  Colonel  McNeill  could  be 
and  that  at  daybreak  he  (Colonel  Pino)  would  meet  the  Texans  and 
give  them  battle  in  the  plain  south  of  Socorro.  Lieutenant  Simmon- 
promised  to  inform  Colonel  McNeill  of  that  proposition  and  to  returr 
his  answer.  I mounted  my  horse  to  accompany  the  Texan  officei 
through  our  pickets,  but  our  pickets  had  disappeared,  and  the  enemy’s 
pickets  extended  to  the  very  houses  of  Socorro.  At  a short  distance  I 
met  several  Texan  officers,  and  among  them  Colonel  McNeill,  who, 
after  having  listened  to  Lieutenant  Simmons’  report,  went  with  me  tc 
our  headquarters.  At  the  conference  which  now  commenced  Colonel 
Pino;,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Baca,  and  myself  attended  from  our  side,  and 
Lieutenant  Colonel  McNeill,  Major  Bagnet,  and  Interpreter  Stewart 
from  the  rebels.  Colonel  Pino  repeated  he  was  willing  not  to  expose 
the  town,  but  to  fight  next  morning  in  the  open  field.  Colonel  McNeill 
wanted  to  take  possession  of  the  town  at  once.  Our  object  was  to  gain 
time,  as  we  expected  that  on  my  message  to  the  commander  of  Camp 
Connelly,  Governor  Connelly,  General  Hovey,  and  Adjutant- General 
Clever,  who  at  the  time  were  at  Polvadera,  would  come  to  our  relief  with 
the  vol unteers  stationed  at  that  place.  The  discussion  between  Pino  ami 
McNeill  was  interrupted  by  some  of  our  officers,  who  wanted  to  speal^ 
to  Colonel  Pino  alone.  The  latter  went  out,  returned  after  a fevj 
minutes,  and  then  taking  me  aside  ordered  me  to  inquire  into  the  state 
of  affairs  at  the  quarters,  inasmuch  as  the  officers  complained  that  all 
their  men  had  absconded,  i^t  the  principal  door  of  the  quarters  I 
found  Capt.  Mercedes  Sanchez  as  sentinel,  which  place  he  had  taken, 
he  told  me,  because  the  militiamen  on  guard  had  abandoned  their  post^ 
and  no  soldiers  were  left  to  replace  the  sentinel.  Inside  I met  Capts. 
Bamon  Sena  y Bivera  and  Cruz  Gutierrez,  Lieutenants  Garcia,  Her- 
rera, Homberger,  Ortiz  y Tafoya,  Sergeant  Martinez,  and  several 
others,  amounting  to  37  persons  in  all.  This  deplorable  state  of  things 
I reported  to  Colonel  Pino,  and  then  the  conference  was  continued. 
Colonel  McNeill  would  not  wait  until  next  morning,  he  said,  because  he 
knew  he  had  the  advantage  at  that  moment ; but  if  Colonel  Pino  couldl 
give  his  word  of  honor  that  we  had  not  written  to  anybody  or  other- 
wise given  notice  of  the  approach  of  the  Confederates,  in  such  case  he 
would  consent  that  hostilities  should  not  be  commenced  until  daylight. 
As  Colonel  Pino  replied  indirectly  the  conference  was  considered  con-1 
eluded. 

Colonel  McNeill  had  invited  Colonel  Pino  several  times  to  visit  his 
camp  and  persuade  himself  that  the  Confederates  largely  outnumbered 
ns,  and  Colonel  Pino  now  determined  to  go.  Colonel  Pino,  Lieutenant  j 
Colonel  Baca,  and  myself  rode  along  with  our  visitors,  and  after  having* 
looked  at  the  long  line  of  rebels  and  seeing  that  no  relief  came  from 
Camp  Connelly,  then,  at  2 a.  m.  April  25,  Colonel  Pino  surrendered. 


pHAr.  XXI.]  NAVAL  DEMONSTRATION  UPON  GALVESTON,  TEX.  607 

It'  it  liad  beeu  disgusting  to  us  to  see  our  militiamen  abscond  in  the 
hours  of  trial,  it  was  more  provoking  to  see  them  come  out  of  their 
hiding  places  when  the  danger  was  over.  There  were  at  least  150 
nilitiamen  who  at  10  a.  m.  took  the  oath  of  neutrality.  Colonel  Pino, 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Baca,  and  myself  were  paroled. 

1 am,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

s CHAS.  EMIL  WESCHE, 

First  Major , Second  New  Mexico  Militia. 


MAY  15,  1862. — Naval  Demonstration  upon  Galveston,  Tex. 

Report  of  Col.  Joseph  J.  CooA’,  commanding  Military  District  of  Galveston. 

Hdqrs.  First  Brig.  Tex.  Vols.,  Mil.  Dist.  Galveston, 
Galveston , Tex .,  May  15,  1862 — 6 p.  m. 

Sir:  I beg  most  respectfully  to  report  to  the  commanding  general 
that  about  3 p.  m.  to-day  the  schooner  Sam  Houston  approached 
South  Battery  from  westward,  a brisk  sea-breeze  blowing,  and  stood 
down  within  a mile  and  a half  of  the  battery,  ostensibly  for  the  pur- 
pose of  drawing  our  fire  or  making  an  attack.  Captain  Schneider, 
thinking  that  he  could  cripple  or  sink  her,  fired  four  shots,  striking  very 
close,  and  thinking  that  one  shot  struck.  She  tacked  after  the  first 
fire.  Finding  that  she  was  too  close  in,  she  stood  off  and  returned  to 
her  anchorage  near  the  frigate.  Captain  Schneider  and  his  officers 
have  had  repeated  verbal  orders  from  me  to  send  me  word  if  approached 
by  any  vessel  and  not  provoke  an  attack ; also  a written  order  from 
Col.  E.  B.  Nichols,  under  date  of  December  6,  1861,  viz  : 

Should  appearances  indicate  an  attack,  you  will  immediately  telegraph  to  me  at  the 
office  of  E.  B.  Nichols  & Co.,  where  my  headquarters  are  established. 

Captain  Schneider  failed  to  inform  me  of  the  approach,  and  had  I 
been  present  I should  not  have  allowed  the  firing.  Captain  Schneider, 
however,  justified  himself  under  Post  Order,  No.  1,  dated  July  25, 1861, 
i issued  by  Col.  J.  C.  Moore,  paragraph  IY,  viz : 

C Should  any  of  the  enemy’s  vessels  come  within  effective  rauge  of  either  battery,  the 
officer  in  charge  will  open  fire  without  hesitation  and  give  him  the  warmest  reception 
his  metal  will  afford. 


v After  the  firing  at  the  schooner  the  movements  on  board  the  frigate 
indicated  her  intention  to  move,  whereupon  orders  were  issued  for  ex- 
traordinary vigilance  on  the  part  of  the  vedettes. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOS.  J.  COOK, 

Colonel , Commanding  Military  District. 

iCapt.  Samuel  Boyer  Davis, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

j.  All  passed  quiet  during  the  night. 

I X ■ 


May  16,  1862 — 6 a.  m. 


J.  J.  C. 


608 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chav.  XXI. 
MAY  21,  1862. — Affair  at  Paraje,  N.  Mex. 

Report  of  Capt.  Joseph  G.  Tilford,  Third  U.  8.  Cavalry. 

Paraje,  N.  Mex,  May  30,  1862. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  21st,  about  sunup  iii 
the  morning,  a person  was  brought  me  by  my  guard  bearing  a white  flag. 
On  being  questioned  as  to  his  business,  he  replied  that  his  commanding 
officer  (Lieutenant  Bowman,  I think)  demanded  a surrender  of  the  town. 
On  my  declining  to  surrender  and  instructing  him  to  inform  Lieutenant 
Bowman  that  a compliance  with  his  demand  depended  altogether  on 
his  ability  to  enforce  it,  he  left,  and  I immediately  proceeded  to  place 
my  small  command  (45  men)  in  the  best  positions  to  resist  an  attack. 
None,  however,  was  made.  A few  straggling  shots  at  long  ranges  were 
made,  and  the  Texans  commenced  a retreat  down  the  Jornada.  My 
spies  reported  them  to  be  about  100  strong.  My  horses  were  so  very* 
poor  and  weak,  and  not  knowing  but  that  they  had  a stronger  force 
below  and  were  only  attempting  to  draw  me  out,  I did  not  deem  it  pru- 
dent to  follow.  I saw  no  more  of  them. 

At  about  the  time  the  demand  for  a surrender  came  a smaller  party 
was  seen,  and  near  where  my  horses  had  been,  until  a few  days  previ- 
ous, herded  day  and  night,  which  leads  me  to  believe,  as  my  party  was 
very  small  and  about  half  with  the  herd,  that  simultaneous  with  their 
attack  on  me  they  would  run  off  my  herd ; but  finding  the  herd  in,  they 
declined  the  attack.  1 believe  the  white  flag  that  camb  up  with  Lieu- 
tenant Taylor’s  party  some  time  since  covered  a party  of  spies.  I had 
only  about  20  men  then  and  herded  my  animals  day  and  night. 

In  conclusion,  I beg  to  say  that  I regret  that  they  approached  so  near 
before  I had  notice  of  their  coming,  as  I might  then  have  been  enabled 
to  have  so  disposed  my  force  as  to  have  done  them  some  injury.  I hadj 
every  confidence  in  my  spies,  as  they  were  highly  recommended  to  me, 
but  they  entirely  neglected  their  business  on  that  occasion,  which  I 
reported  to  you  on  the  next  day. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOS.  G.  TILFOBD, 
Captain , Third  TJ.  8.  Cavalry. 

Lieut.  A.  L.  Anderson, 

A.  A.  A.  G .,  Southern  Mil.  Dist .,  Fort  Craig , A.  Mex. 


MAY  23,  1862.— Affair  near  Fort  Craig,  NT.  Mex. 

Report  of  Brig . Gen . Edward  R.  8.  Canby , TJ.  8.  Army , commanding  De- 
partment of  JSTeiv  Mexico . 

Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe , N.  Mex.,  May  25,  1862. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  one  of  our  pickets,  8 miles  below 
Fort  Craig,  was  attacked  by  a superior  force  of  the  enemy  on  the  23d 
instant,  and  repulsed,  without  loss  on  our  side  and  a loss  of  4 on  the 
part  of  the  assailants.  With  this  exception  there  has  been  no  change  m\ 
the  state  of  affairs  since  my  last  reports.  Supplies  are  being  accumu- 
lated at  Fort  Craig  and  Peralta  as  rapidly  as  possible,  but  the  great  flow 


-hap.  XXI.  1 ATTACK  ON  U.  S.  VESSELS  NEAR  VELASCO,  TEX.  609 

in  the  Rio  Grande  continues  to  be  a serious  embarrassment  to  all  our 
operations. 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  R.  S.  CANBY, 

Colonel  Nineteenth  Infantry  and  Brig.  Gen.  Comdg.  i>ept. 

The  Adjutant-General  of  the  Army, 

Washington , D.  C. 


JULY  4,  1862. — Attack  on  U.  S.  Vessels  near  Velasco,  Tex. 

c 

Report  of  Col.  J.  Bates , Thirteenth  Texas  Infantry. 

I 

Headquarters  Bates’  Regiment, 

Velasco , Tex.,  July  5,  1862. 

Sir  : On  the  3d  instant,  at  dusk,  I received  information  from  Capt. 
William  Saunders  that  there  was  a vessel  outside,  near  San  Luis.  It 
was  the  impression  of  the  pilots  that  she  had  some  designs  upon  a cot- 
ton schooner  in  the  canal,  intending  to  capture  or  burn  her.  At  Cap- 
tain Saunders’  request  I issued  him  an  order  to  take  10  of  his  men,  with- 
out delay,  repair  to  the  cotton  schooner,  and  defend  her. 

On  the  morning  of  the  4th  a schooner  was  reported  near  shore  this  side 
of  San  Luis,  on  the  peninsula,  and  soon  afterwards  I saw  a large  steamer 
coming  from  the  west.  When  near  the  schooner  the  steamer  opened  fire. 
I started  immediately  for  the  scene  of  action.  The  schooner  was  about 
6 miles  east  of  this  place.  When  about  half  way  to  the  schooner  I met 
Captain  Saunders  and  his  command.  I halted  them,  ascertained  that 
the  schooner  had  been  beached,  and  was  out  of  gun-shot  of  the  shore. 
Our  men  had  been  driven  off  by  a constant  fire  of  the  enemy  of  shot 
and  shell.  I felt  that  Capcain  Saunders  and  his  men  had  performed  all 
that  was  in  their  power  and  with  much  hazard  to  their  lives.  I per- 
ceived, also,  that  the  cotton  schooner  was  in  line  with  the  steamer  and 
beached;  schooner  with  her  sails  lowered.  Captain  Saunders  informed 
me  that  he  thought  her  crew  had  abandoned  her.  I at  once  ordered  a 
forward  movement  of  Captain  Saunders’  company  as  skirmishers,  and 
sent  an  order  back  to  Vela&eo  to  Lieutenant  Moss  to  move  forward,  with 
Captain  Clark’s  infantry  company  as  a reserve,  to  defend  the  schooner 
in  the  canal,  and  have  no  doubt  that  the  presence  of  Captain  Saunders 
and  his  men  saved  the  schooner  from  conflagration.  Fire  was  now  seen 
to  be  raging  on  the  beached  schooner  and  shells  were  thrown  at  all  who 
attempted  to  approach  her.  Captain  Saunders  disposed  of  his  men  in 
detachments  near  the  scene  of  action,  and  advanced  with  a few  of  his 
men  under  fire  to  the  burning  schooner.  Soon  afterwards  the  steamer 
got  under  way,  apparently  abandoning  all  designs  upon  the  schooner  in 
the  canal,  and  I ordered  Captain  Clark’s  company  back  to  Velasco,  and 
some  of  Captain  Saunders’  men  also  commenced  to  return,  when,  to  my 
surprise,  the  steamer  put  back,  came  close  in  to  shore  near  the  cotton 
schooner,  and  landed  three  boats  full  of  men  under  a brisk  fire.  Such 
of  Captain  Saunders’  men  who  were  within  reach  I ordered  rapidly  for- 
ward, with  instructions  to  attack;  others  voluntarily  returned,  and  shots 
were  exchanged  between  the  enemy  and  our  force.  The  fire  from  the 
steamer  upon  our  men  became  very  galling,  they  firing  round  shot  and 
shell  at  the  rate  of  six  per  minute,  and  scattering  our  men  whenever 
39  R R — VOL  IX 


610  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

they  formed.  The  enemy  made  no  attempt  to  advance  inward  from  the 
beach,  and  after  remaining  some  time  on  shore  retreated  hastily  to  the 
steamer  and  put  to  sea. 

We  sustained  no  loss,  although  under  a fire  at  times  very  heavy,  and 
continued  at  intervals  seven  or  eight  hours,  and  saved  from  the  burn- 
ing schooner  some  $2,000  worth  of  stores,  principally  medicines. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BATES, 
Colonel , Commanding . 


JULY  7-17,  1862. — Operations  in  Aransas  Bay,  Tex. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Col.  diaries  Livenskiold,  C.  S.  Army,  Provost-Marshal,  &c. 

No.  2.— Capt.  B.  F.  Neal,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  Charles  Livenshiold , Provost-Marshal , Corpus  Christi. 

Corpus  Christi,  Tex.,  July  17,  1862. 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  11th  instant,  by  express,  came  duly  to 
hand,  but  only  this  day.  From  its  tenor  I see  that  my  communication 
in  relation  to  the  appearance  of  the  enemy  off  Aransas  Bay  and  his  en- 
trance in  the  bay  had  not  then  been  received.  I will  therefore  report 
to  you  in  full  since  the  7th  instant,  the  date  of  his  first  appearance. 

On  the  7th  a bark,  with  a 100-ton  schooner  and  one  large  frigate 
(second-class  cutter),  came  off  the  bay.  The  schooner  and  cutter,  with 
six  launches,  entered  the  bay  and  proceeded  to  take  a position  near  the 
Shell  Bank,  and  so  as  to  rake  and  control  the  ship  channel  leading  from 
Aransas  [Bay]  to  Corpus  Christi  Bay.  Upon  receiving  this  news  I 
sent  the  dispatch-boat  Breaker,  under  Captain  Bose,  with  Captain  Ware 
and  10  men,  to  make  a reconnaissance,  and,  returning,  they  reported  the 
enemy’s  force  to  be  as  before  represented — all  well  armed  and  probably 
some  225  men.  Next  Captain  Harrison,  in  command  of  gunboat  Gen- 
eral Bee,  of  Major  Shea’s  command  (here  present  on  recruiting  service 
for  a crew  of  sailors),  went  down  and  reconnoitered  the  enemy  very 
closely,  say  within  200  yards.  His  report  was  to  the  effect  that  the 
schooner  was  heavily  armed  with  cannon,  about  125  tons  burden,  evi- 
dently a fine  sailer,  sharp  and  deep,  and  drawing  at  least  6 feet  of  water. ! 
The  cutter  was  thirty-oared  and  armed  with  one  24-pounder  howitzer,  j 
the  launches  four-oared  whale-boats.  The  force  was  deemed  too  formi- 
dable, on  account  of  its  superiority  in  artillery,  to  warrant  any  attack  or 
action  on  the  offensive.  Three  prizes  had  already  been  taken  by  the 
enemy,  say  sloop  Bella  Italia,  of  10  or  12  tons,  with  corn  and  bacon ; ; 
schooner  Beindeer,  of  about  15  tons,  with  52  bales  of  cotton,  and  a lug-  j 
ger,  with  corn,  name  unknown.  The  schooner  Monte  Christo  had  been  j 
visited,  and  the  cotton  at  Lamar  (some  47  bales)  taken  off  to  Saint  Joseph 
and  stored  near  Johnson’s  house. 

I received  a communication  from  Captain  Neal  upon  the  subject, 
which  I inclose,  marked  No.  1*.  From  its  tenor  I concluded  that  he 
was  undecided  as  to  what  he  should  do,  and  desired  advice  from  me.  | 


*See  p.  720. 


Chap.  XXI.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  ARANSAS  BAY,  TEX. 


611 


I wrote  liim  at  once  that  there  could  he  no  danger  for  his  command,  as 
from  mv  information  the  numerical  strength  of  the  enemy  must  be 
insignificant ; that  I deemed  it  of  great  importance  that  he  should  retreat 
or  fall  back  no  farther,  but,  on  the  contrary,  maintain  his  position,  and 
that,  if  practicable,  without  too  great  a risk  of  life  or  public  property, 
he  should  endeavor  to  tease  the  enemy,  so  as  to  draw  his  fire  and  ascer- 
tain range  and  caliber  of  guns  of  the  armed  schooner.  . , 

I inclose  subsequent  communications  from  Captain  Neal,  marked 
Kos.  2 and  3,  which  will  throw  further  light  on  proceedings  up  to  this 

The  rapid  movements  of  the  enemy,  the  numerous  exaggerated  re- 
ports, and  the  absence  of  the  commanding  officer,  together  with  want 
of  experience  in  the  officers  present  and  unwillingness  to  assume 
responsibility  for  fear  of  consequences,  all  tended  to  create  a perfect 
panic  at  the  very  beginning ; and  to  put  this  down  and  take  all  neces- 
sary steps  for  the  proper  defense  of  the  town  and  the  protection  or 
rescuing  of  a large  amount  of  cotton  and  tobacco,  with  the  cargo  just 
landed  from  the  schooner  Penelope,  it  became  necessary  that  some  one 
should  command  and  take  the  lead.  As  the  officers  all  seemed  to  look 
to  me  for  guidance,  advice,  and  orders,  and  showed  themselves  willing 
and  anxious,  with  their  men,  to  obey  me,  under  the  circumstances,  I did 
not  shrink  from  the  great  responsibility,  and  at  once  made  all  necessary 

suggestions.  , - ,, 

All  the  necessary  ammunition  was  at  once  prepared,  and  finding  tne 
troops  without  caps  for  their  arms,  almost  barefoot,  very  small  quantity 
of  serviceable  powder  on  hand,  and  in  want  of  clothing,  I took  irom 
the  cargo  of  the  schooner  20,000  percussion  caps,  400  pounds  of  fine 
powder,  the  necessary  shoes,  1£  dozen  flannel  overshirts,  and  2 pieces 
ditto ; also— as  the  company  of  Captain  Ware  needed  them  I took 
for  them  15  double-barrel  shot-guns  and  3 five-shooters.  Thereupon 
I obtained  the  requisite  transportation,  and  forwarded  the  remainder 
of  said  cargo  to  Victoria,  and  sent  all  the  cotton  and  Tobacco  on  hand 
k to  its  places  of  destination.  There  have  been  sent  ofi  from  the  7th 
until  date  421  bales  of  cotton,  500  bales  of  tobacco,  also  about  7,000 
pounds  of  powder.  If  the  enemy  should  be  able  to  pay  us  a visit  here 
he  will  not  find  anything  worth  plundering  or  carrying  away.  The 
[;  records  of  the  county  and  district  clerk  I have  caused  to  be  made  ready 
for  packing  in  chests  made  for  the  purpose,  ready  to  be  moved  at  a 

moment’s  warning.  . ^ - 

From  the  passengers  referred  to  by  Captain  Neal  as  sent  irom  on 
board  the  enemy’s  bark,  and  whom  I critically  examined,  assisted  by 
f Captain  Ware,  Lieutenant-Commanding  George,  and  Mr.  Robert  Mott, 
i late  of  New  Orleans,  and  known  as  an  able  lawyer,  we  learned  that  the 
enemv’s  forces  did  not  number  125  men,  all  told,  and  that  the  men  on 
the  gunboat,  cutter,  and  launches  were  supplied  from  the  bark,  leaving 
this  latter  with  only  about  20  men  or  less.  Captain  Kittredge  is  m 
command  inside  on  board  gunboat,  which  carries  two  32-pounder  Oahl- 
grens  and  one  large  caliber  gun  amidships.  She  was  a pleasure  yacht 
in  New  Orleans,  built  by  Robinson,  owned  by  Story,  and  lastly  taken 
and  fitted  up  by  and  for  General  Lovell,  and  brought  out  as  one  ol  the 
enemy’s  trophies  of  war,  about  125  tons  burden,  and  about  b leet 
draught  of  water.  The  cutter  carries  30  oars,  one  24-pounder  howitzer, 
and  is  manned  from  the  schooner.  The  greatest  number  of  men  ever 
seen  on  these  vessels,  including  the  prizes,  does  not  exceed  o7.  lne 
cotton  taken  by  the  enemy  is  piled,  as  before  stated,  on  Saint  Joseph  s 
Island,  opposite  Captain  Johnson’s  house.  The  conclusion  as  to  the 


612  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARTZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

prisoners  was  unanimous  that  Andres  Roeg  and  wife  were  citizens  of 
Matamoros,  caught  in  New  Orleans  by  the"  enemy  on  his  taking  pos- 
session, and  that  as  a matter  of  kindness  Captain  Kittredge  had  car- 
ried them  as  passengers.  But  in  relation  to  Mr.  Cavanos,  a doubt  as 
to  his  true  status  and  feelings  was  created,  and  hence  I released  the 
former  two  and  detained  the  latter,  to  be  sent  to  Colonel  Luckett, 
whom  he  claims  to  be  well  and  intimately  acquainted  with,  for  final 
disposition. 

Owing  to  the  information  received  as  above — that  from  Captain  Neal, 
the  results  of  several  reconnaissances,  and  reports  brought  in  from  vari- 
ous quarters  as  to  the  designs  of  the  enemy  and  his  expecting  re -en- 
forcements within  a few  weeks— I called  the  officers  together  for  consul- 
tation and  to  decide  as  to  what  ought  to  be  done  to  oppose  and  prevent 
the  further  encroachments  of  the  enemy.  It  was  unanimously  decided — 

1st.  To  send  the  gunboat  General  Bee,  Capt.  Thomas  Harrison,  with 
a picked  crew,  and  the  dispatch-boat  Breaker,  Capt.  J.  Harding,  with 
a detachment  from  Captain  Ireland’s  company,  to  guard  the  ship 
channel. 

2d.  To  obstruct  the  ship  channel  by  sinking  in  the  narrowest  point 
such  number  of  u come-at-able”  vessels  as  were  requisite,  the  vessels  to 
be  loaded  with  stone. 

3d.  To  take  possession  of  the  schooner  Elma  and  fit  her  for  a gun- 
boat at  once,  arm  and  man  her,  and  place  her  at  Corpus  Christi  Pass, 
to  prevent  the  enemy’s  cutters  or  launches  to  force  [from  forcing]  an 
entrance  to  our  bay  from  said  point. 

4th.  To  send  40  picked  men,  as  well  armed  and  mounted  as  possible, 
under  a proper  guide,  and  commanded  by  Lieut.  W.  Mann,  around  by 
the  reef,  avoiding  the  coast  until  above  Lamar,  and  thence  crossing  to 
Saint  Joseph’s  Island,  to  burn  and  destroy  the  cotton  taken  by  the 
enemy  and  piled  at  Johnson’s  house  in  the  night. 

5th.  To  fit  out  an  expedition  by  water,  to  make  a feint  upon  the 
enemy  at  the  Shell  Bank,  to  divert  his  attention  from  Saint  Joseph’s 
Island,  while  Lieutenant  Mann’s  forces  attempt  to  destroy  the  cotton. 

6th.  To  appoint  Capt.  John  Dix  to  superintend  and  direct  the  arm- 
ing, equipping,  and  fitting  out  of  the  vessels  to  be  employed. 

tinder  the  second  head  the  schooners  Relief  and  Confederate,  after 
appraisement,  were  taken,  loaded  with  concrete,  and  sunk  in  the  night 
unobserved  by  the  enemy,  and  the  sloop  Iowa  is  now  in  like  manner 
being  loaded  for  the  same  purpose.  These  will  effectually  prevent  the 
enemy’s  gunboat  from  coming  into  Corpus  Christi  Bay  through  the  ship 
channel.  All  the  other  heads  have  been  acted  on,  and  are  either  exe- 
cuted or  in  progress  of  execution.  I inclose  you  slip  from  Captain 
Ware,*  and  will  report  final  results  as  soon  as  possible.  Captain  Ware, 
with  his  party,  attacked  the  enemy  near  the  Shell  Bank  and  drove  him 
back,  firing  with  rifles  at  200  yards,  and  causing  the  enemy- to  seek  shel- 
ter in  the  hold  of  his  boat.  The  prize  Bella  Italia  now  fitted  up  by  him 
as  a small  gunboat.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Corpus  [Christi]  Pass  is 
now  blockaded  by  the  prize-schooner  Reindeer,  and  that  the  entrance 
thence  must  be  guarded.  I will  see  that  tbe  proper  steps  are  taken  for 
preventing  a surprise.  The  cotton  at  the  Flour  Bluffs  and  the  salt  trade 
along  the  Laguna  de  la  Madre  are  the  objects  sought  by  the  enemy. 

I trust  that  my  action  in  the  foregoing  may  meet  with  your  appro- 
bation. Should  it  be  otherwise  I should  feel  much  chagrined.  I send 
you  English  paper  and  a New  Orleans  Delta  of  the  1st,  in  which  see 


* Not  found. 


Ciiai*.  XXI.] 


OPERATIONS  IN  ARANSAS  BAY,  TEX. 


613 


an  infamous  special  order  from  Butler  in  relation  to  Mrs.  Philips.  I 
have  not  had  time  to  answer  your  letter  in  relation  to  McKinney.  He 
lies  basely  if  the  messenger  reports  him  correctly.  I thank  you  for 
having  taken  notice  of  it,  and  will  furnish  proper  refutation  as  soon  as 
the  present  excitement  is  over. 

I must  not  forget  to  say  that  all  here  is  harmony  and  perfect  union 
among  all  officers,  men,  and  myself,  and  all  vie  with  one  another  in 
zealously  obeying  orders. 

In  haste,  very  truly,  yours, 

CHAS.  LIVENSKIOLD. 

General  H.  P.  Bee, 

Comdg.  Mil.  JDist.  of  the  Lower  Bio  Grande , San  Antonio , Tex . 

P.  S. — I trust  you  will  at  once  send  Major  Shea  to  assume  command 
of  the  operations  or  return  Captain  Ireland. 


No.  2. 

Beports  of  Gapt.  Benjamin  F.  Beal,  G.  S.  Army. 

Camp  near  Dredge-Boat,  July  13,  1862. 

Sir:  To-day,  about  11  o’clock,  the  picket  guard  reported  a launch 
•coining  down  the  cut  toward  the  dredge-boat.  I immediately  ordered 
the  company  down,  and  observed  that  they  were  approaching  the  dredge 
under  a flag  of  truce.  I notified  them  to  land  on  the  opposite  side  of 
the  channel,  some  200  or  300  yards  from  the  dredge,  when  I took  a 
boat,  accompanied  by  Captain  Ware  and  Lieutenant  Conklin,  and  went 
over  to  them.  The  interview  lasted  some  half  an  hour.  The  officer, 
second  in  command  I presume,  stated  that  his  object  was  to  pass  to 
Corpus  Christi  Cavanos  and  another  Mexican  gentleman  and  his  lady, 
who  was  then  at  Saint  Joseph’s  Island.  I consented  that  they  should 
go  down  on  board  the  Bebecca,  and  have  given  orders  to  Lieutenant 
Bussell  to  carry  them  down  and  report  them  to  you.  I had  no  oppor- 
tunity of  asking  or  ascertaining  how  Cavanos  got  on  board  the  bark, 
further  than  he  was  in  [New]  Orleans  when  that  city  was  taken  by  the 
nnemy.  1 therefore  leave  it  for  you  to  investigate  the  whole  matter 
when  they  arrive  in  Corpus  [Christi].  Sergeant  Bradley  has  just  arrived 
from  Lamar,  and  says  that  the  enemy  held  Captain  Brown  for  the  pur- 
pose of  piloting  the  schooner  down  to  Corpus  Christi.  They  also  say 
that  Kittredge,  who  is  in  command  of  the  expedition,  stated  at  Lamar 
that  15,000  troops  would  be  landed  on  Saint  Joseph’s  Island  in  a few 
weeks.  I think  that  is  only  bombast.  I have  sent  a party  of  men  to 
Lamar  to-night  to  burn  the  Monte  Christo,  as  they  are  going  up  for 
her  on  Monday  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  out  the  cotton  they  have 
captured.  I presume  you  can  get  more  accurate  information  from 
Cavanos.  I shall  hold  my  position  here  until  ordered  or  driven  away. 

Verv  respectfully, 

BENJ.  F.  NEAL, 
Captain , Commanding  Camp  Aransas. 

Colonel  Livenskiold. 


Camp  near  Dredge-Boat,  July  16,  1862. 
Sir  : I received  your  note  per  Mr.  Hooper,  and  willingly  comply 


614 


[Chap.  XXL 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


with  your  request,  believing  that  his  services  would  be  more  valuable 
to  the  public  interest  in  some  other  capacity.  Mr.  Hooper  is  truly 
patriotic  and  true  to  the  Southern  interest,  and  his  services,  considering 
his  age,  should  be  appreciated. 

I committed  an  error  in  my  letter  of  Sunday  in  stating  that  the  officer 
with  whom  I had  the  interview  was  second  in  command.  I misunder- 
stood him.  I have  learned  since  he  was  only  purser  of  the  blockading 
squadron. 

We  have  had  some  little  excitement  in  camp  to-day.  For  the  pur- 
pose of  obtaining  better  water  I had  to  move  my  command  nearer  and 
in  front  of  the  enemy.  This  morning  the  Bella  Italia,  one  of  the  cap- 
tured boats,  came  into  Shell  Bank,  and,  from  her  movements,  I sup- 
posed she  was  coming  down  the  cut,  but  she  only  went  down  the  Corpus 
Chrrsti  channel  some  200  or  300  yards  below  the  cut  and  returned. 
Shortly  afterward  the  schooner  got  under  way  and  took  a position  as 
near  our  camp  as  she  could,  and  has  been  throwing  shell  occasionally 
ever  since,  but  nothing  has  come  near  enough  to  us  to  create  any  appre- 
hension. She  is  some  3 or  4 miles  from  us.  She  evidently  had  not 
given  us  the  full  strength  of  her  guns,  as  I observe  the  fuse  in  every 
case  was  too  short.  What  she  may  do  hereafter  can  only  be  determined 
by  future  experiments.  I intend  to  hold  my  position  at  this  point  until 
driven  or  ordered  away,  unless  I deem  it  necessary  to  aid  some  other 
point.  I must  have  more  transportation  to  remove  all  of  my  guns  and 
camp  equipage,  besides  ammunition. 

On  yesterday  the  bark  and  captured  schooner  left  and  sailed  up  the 
coast.  This  morning  the  bark  returned,  but  without  the  schooner.  I 
was  apprehensive  she  was  going  down  toward  Corpus  Christi  Pass,, 
but  I think  she  did  not.  If  I observe  her  going  down  the  coast  I will 
send  an  express. 

Very  respectfully, 


BENJ.  F.  NEAL, 

Captain , Comdg.  Company  of  Artillery , Coast  Defense . 


Col.  C.  Livenskiold. 


AUGUST  10,  1862. — Affair  on  the  Nueces  River  near  Fort  Clark,  Tex. 

Report  of  Lieut.  C.  D.  McRae , Second  Regiment  Texas  Mounted  Rifles . 

San  Antonio,  Tex.,  August  18,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  general 
commanding,  the  result  of  a scout  under  my  command,  consisting  of 
detachments  from  Captain  Donelson’s  company,  Second  Regiment 
Texas  Mounted  Rifles;  Captain  Duff’s  company,  Texas  Partisan 
Rangers;  Captain  Davis’  company  of  State  troops,  and  Taylor’s  bat- 
talion; amounting  in  the  aggregate  to  94  men,  rank  and  file. 

I left  camp  on  the  morning  of  the  3d  instant  on  the  Perdinalis  and 
proceeded  up  the  South  Fork  of  the  Guadalupe  River. 

On  the  morning  of  the  6th  instant  struck  the  trail  of  a party  of 
horsemen,  numbering,  as  I suppose,  from  60  to  100;  pursued  the  trail 
in  a southwesterly  direction  four  consecutive  days,  and  on  the  evening 
of  the  9th  instant,  about  3 o’clock,  my  advance  guard  reported  a camp 
in  sight  on  the  headwaters  of  the  Western  Fork  of  the  Nueces  River. 
I immediately  diverged  from  the  trail  to  the  right,  secreting  my  com- 


AFFAIR  ON  NUECES  RIVER,  TEX. 


615 


Chap.  XXI.] 

raancl  in  a canon  about  2£  miles  from  the  enemy,  and  at  once  proceeded, 

S company  with  Lieutenants  Homsley,  Lilly,  Harbour,  and  Bigham  to 
make  a careful  reconnaissance  of  the  position  of  the  enemy  s enca  p 
ment,  which  we  were  fortunate  enough  in  ejecting  without  bemg  di 8 
covered.  Returned  to  camp,  and  proceeded  to  make  my  dispositions  for 
an  attack  at  daylight  on  the  following  morning. 

Accordingly,  at  1 o’clock  that  night,  I moved  my  command  to  within 
300  yards  of  their  camp,  where  I divided  my  command  into  two  equ 
divisions,  placing  one  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant  Homslej, 
whom  I directed  to  take  position  on  the  right  of  the  enem^  J^ 
of  a dense  cedar-brake,  about  50  yards  from  them  camp,  which  Ae  suc^ 
ceeded  in  doing  without  detection.  In  the  mean  time  I had  had  equal 
success  in  obtaining  another  cedar-brake  with  my  division  within 
about  40  yards  of  the  enemy,  on  their  left.  These  movements  were 
accomplished  about  an  hour  before  daylight.  Shortly  after  having 
secured  our  positions  a sentinel  on  his  rounds  came  near  the  position 
of  Lieutenant  Homsley’s  division,  which  he  had  the  misfortune  t 
discover:  whereupon  he  was  shot  dead  by  Lieutenant  Harbour,  which 
caused  an  alarm  in  the  enemy’s  camp,  and  a few  shots  were  exchanged 
between  the  parties,  and  all  became  quiet  again  for  the  space  of  halt 
an  hour,  when  another  sentinel  hailed  us  on  the  left,  and  shared  the 
fate  of  the  first.  It  being  still  too  dark  for  the  attaek,  I ordered  my 
men  to  hold  quietly  their  positions  until  daylight.  The  enemy  m the 
mean  time  were  actively  engaged  preparing  to  resist  us.  The  momen 
it  became  light  enough  to  see  I ordered  the  attack  to  be  made  by  a 
steady  and  slow  advance  upon  their  position,  firing  as  we  advanced 
until  within  about  30  paces  of  their  line,  when  I ordered  a charge  of 
both  divisions,  which  was  executed  in  fine  style,  resulting  m the  com- 
plete rout  and  flight  of  the  enemy.  . 

They  left  on  the  field  32  killed.  The  remainder  fled,  scattering  m 
all  directions  through  the  many  dense  cedar-brakes  in  the  immediate 
vicinity.  From  the  many  signs  of  blood  I infer  many  of  those  escap- 
ing were  seriously  wounded. 

We  captured  83  head  of  horses,  33  stand  6f  small-arms,  13  six- 
shooters,  and  all  their  camp  equipage,  and  provisions  tor  100  men  tor 
ten  days.  The  arms  I turned  over  to  the  commanding  officer  at  r oit 
Clark.  The  horses  are  en  route  to  this  place.  The  provisions  were 

consumed  by  my  command.  , T ^ 

Although  the  surprise  and  rout  of  the  enemy  was  complete,  I regret 
to  state  it  was  not  unattended  with  loss  on  our  part.  We  had  2 killed 

on  the  field  and  18  wounded.  ^ ^ ^ . i • 1 

The  fight  occurred  about  20  miles  north  of  Fort  Clark,  to  which 
point  I sent  for  assistance,  both  surgical  and  transportation,  for  my 
wounded,  which  was  promptly  forwarded  by  the  commanding  officer, 
Captain  Carolan,  and  Assistant  Surgeon  Downs,  to  whom  I am  greatly 
indebted  for  many  kind  attentions  to  myself  and  command,  as  also  to 
Mr.  D.  H.  Brown.'  My  wounded  are  all  well  provided  for  and  are 

doing  well.  , „ , , , , 

I have  learned  from  one  of  the  party  whom  we  tought,  captured 
some  four  or  five  days  subsequent  to  the  fight,  that  the  party  was  com- 
posed of  63  Germans,  1 Mexican,  and  5 Americans  (the  latter  running 
the  first  fire),  all  under  the  command  of  a German  by  the  na,me  of 
Fritz  Tegner.  They  offered  the  most  determined  resistance  and  lought 
with  desperation,  asking  no  quarter  whatever  5 hence  I have  no  pris- 
oners to  report.  , , , , , 

My  officers  and  men  all  behaved  with  the  greatest  coolness  and  gal- 


616  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  TChap.  xxt 

lantry,  seeming  to  vie  with  each  other  in  deeds  of  daring  chivalry.  It 
would  be  invidious  to  attempt  to  draw  any  distinctions  when  all  did 
their  part  most  nobly  and  gloriously. 

Inclosed  find  a list  of  killed  and  wounded  of  each  company.* 

I remain,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

0.  D.  McBAE, 

Mrst  Lieut.,  Second  Regt.  Texas  Mounted  Rifles,  Comdg.  Scout . 
Maj.  E.  F.  Gray, 

A.  A.  A.  G.,  Sul-Military  District  of  the  Rio  Grande. 


AUGUST  11,  1862. — Affair  at  Velasco,  Tex. 

Report  of  Col.  J.  Bates,  Thirteenth  Texas  Regiment. 

Headquarters  Bates*  Regtment, 

Velasco,  Tex.,  August  16,  1862. 

Sir:  1 have  the  honor  to  report  operations  at  this  post,  resulting  in 
a collision  with  the  enemy,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  11th  instant: 

About  4 p.  m.  of  that  day  a screw-propeller  of  about  800  tons  burden 
two-masted,  and  marked  with  a figure  5 on  her  smoke-stack,  steamed 
slowly  in  from  the  eastward,  and  when  opposite  the  battery  at  this 
place,  immediately  outside  the  bar,  opened  fire,  without  showing  colors 
or  giving  any  notice  of  her  intentions.  Her  fire  was  promptly  responded 
to,  and  after  firing  four  times  and  receiving  five  shots  from  us  she  drew 
out  of  range  and  disappeared  down  the  coast.  It  is  believed  that  our 
third  shot  took  effect.  We  sustained  no  damage.  A 13-inch  shell 
which  failed  to  explode,  was  picked  up  by  our  men.  One  other  shell 
exploded  m our  camp ; the  others  went  overhead  and  struck  some  dis- 
tance out  in  the  prairie.  1 am  confident  that  if  we  had  had  even  a 
single  piece  of  heavy  ordnance  she  could  have  been  disabled.  Of  late 
the  vessels  which  pass  here  have  been  coming  much  nearer  the  shore 
than  formerly.  This  may  result  from  their  having  adopted  more 
hostile  intentions,  but  I think  it  is  due  in  part  from  a knowledge  (how 
acquired  I know  not)  of  our  defenseless  condition.  A late  freshet 
m the  Brazos  River  has  considerably  deepened  the  water  on  the 
bar  at  the  mouth.  Vessels  are  constantly  receiving  permits  to  pro- 
ceed to  sea  from  this  port,  and  lie  in  the  river  above  awaiting  a favor- 
able opportunity  to  run  the  blockade,  and  a well-sustained  attack 
trom  the  sea  might  well  result  in  great  loss  both  to  Government  and 
individuals. 

Allow  me  to  respectfully  urge  upon  your  consideration  that  there 
are  quite  a number  of  heavy  pieces  of  ordnance  nowin  this  department 
dismounted  and  not  in  use,  which,  if  placed  in  battery  here,  could  de- 
fend my  position  and  our  foreign  trade,  and  save  my  command  from 
this  now  constant  source  of  annoyance,  which,  although  as  yet  result- 
ing m no  damage,  might  at  any  time  become  fraught  with  humiliation 
and  disaster.  I have  but  one  18-pounder  gun  in  battery  at  this  place. 

I ask,  if  compatible  with  the  interests  of  the  service,  a 32  rifled  cannon 
a 64-pounder,  or  both.  If  granted,  they  will  do  good  service  ere  long! 
snould  we  continue  to  be  menaced  and  insulted  by  our  vaunting  foe. 


* Not  found. 


Chap.  XXI.]  OPERATIONS  IN  CORPUS  CHRISTI  BAY,  TEX. 


617 


If  they  are  needed  at  more  important  points  they  can  he  promptly  for- 
warded. 

Very  respectfully,  j.  BATES; 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Capt.  0.  M.  Mason, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  San  Antonio,  Tex. 


AUGUST  12,  1862. — Capture  of  the  Breaker  and  destruction  of  the  Han- 
nah in  Corpus  Christi  Bay,  Texas. 

REPORTS. 

No.  i. — Capt.  John  Harding,  of  the  capture  of  the  Breaker. 

No.  2.— Capt.  Jack  Sands,  of  the  destruction  of  the  Hannah. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  Harding,  of  the  capture  of  the  BreaJcer. 

Corpus  Christi,  Tex.,  August  27,  1862. 

On  the  evening  of  August  11  I was  directed  by  Maj.  A.  M.  Hobby 
to  take  on  board  of  the  Breaker  Captain  Jones  and  a party  of  men 
from  his  battalion.  On  Captain  Jones,  accompanied  by  Lieutenant 
Yinyard  and  party,  coming  on  board,  he  informed  me  that  he  was  sent 
in  charge  of  the  boat  for  the  purpose  of  watching  the  movements  of 
the  enemy,  then  engaged  in  removing  the  obstructions  in  the  channel. 
Got  under  way  and  proceeded  to  McGloin’s  Bluffs,  where  we  anchored 
for  the  night.  . 

Next  morning  got  under  way  and  stood  down  in  the  direction  of  the 
enemy;  discovered  them  at  work  on  the  obstructions;  stood  down 
about  three-quarters  of  a mile  of  them,  took  a look,  came  around,  and 
stood  back  about  a quarter  of  a mile  and  came  to  anchor.  Just  as  we 
came  to,  discovered  that  they  had  removed  the  last  of  the  obstructions. 
Their  large  schooner  made  all  sail  and  stood  up  the  channel.  I imme- 
diately got  under  way  and  made  all  sail  for  Corpus  Christi.  Soon  dis- 
covered that  the  enemy  were  overhauling  us,  and  thought  it  best  to 
make  for  the  nearest  shore  (Indian  Point),  being  about  6 miles  distant. 
Just  after  passing  McGloin’s  Bluffs  they  commenced  firing  on  us,  and 
continued  to  do  so  until  the  boat  was  beached  and  this  party  landed 
from  her.  I gave  orders  to  have  the  boat  fired  some  time  before  she 
was  beached,  knowing  that  at  the  rate  she  was  sailing  no  injury  could 
result  to  the  party  on  board ; but  there  was  a clamor  raised  against 
me  by  the  officers  on  board,  who  told  me  that  Major  Hobby  gave  them 
the  command  of  the  boat,  and  that  they  would  not  allow  her  to  be  fired 
until  she  was  beached.  A few  minutes  before  she  struck  she  was  set 
on  fire,  and  all  of  the  party  left  as  fast  as  they  could,  leaving  me  alone 
on  board.  I did  everything  that  I could  think  of  to  aid  in  her  destruc- 
tion. but  the  enemy  were  too  close  after  me  and  I had  to  leave,  as  I 
would  have  been  killed  or  captured  by  staying  longer.  The  enemy  sent 
a boat  alongside,  put  out  the  fire,  and  towed  her  off. 

Respectfully,  . 

’ JOHN  GRABBING, 

Captain . 


618  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXL 

No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  Jack  Sands,  of  the  destruction  of  the  Hannah. 

Corpus  Christi,  Tex.,  August  27, 1862. 

A few  days  before  the  arrival  of  the  enemy  at  this  place  I solicited 
Maj.  A.  M.  Hobby  to  allow  me  to  get  my  boat  to  a place  of  safety  in 
Nueces  Bay,  there  being  at  the  time  plenty  of  water  on  the  reef  for  her 
to  get  over.  He  said  that  he  wanted  the  Hannah  and  the  Breaker  to 
. remain  at  this  place  as  spy  boats,  but  assured  me  that  none  of  the 
larger  boats  should  attempt  to  cross  the  reef  before  mine.  Accordingly 
I remained  at  the  wharf. 

On  the  afternoon  of  August  12,  when  the  enemy  were  in  full  sight, 
distant  about  7 miles  of  the  town,  I was  ordered  to  get  over  the  Nueces 
Beef  with  all  speed.  Got  under  way  immediately  and  stood  for  the 
reef.  The  Elma,  or  Major  Minter,  had  been  run  into  the  channel  the 
previous  day,  where  she  grounded,  leaving  only  a narrow  place  for  ves- 
sels to  pass.  On  arriving  off  the  reef  discovered  that  she  had  been  fired, 
and  seemed  to  be  on  fire  fore  and  aft.  Hearing  that  she  had  powder 
on  board,  did  not  like  to  attempt  to  pass  her.  An  explosion  would  have 
killed  us  all.  Came  around  and  stood  back  for  the  town,  intending  to 
run  on  the  flats,  where  the  boat  could  have  been  hauled  out  and  been 
safe  from  capture,  but  was  ordered  back,  and  the  boat  was  run  on  shore 
above  the  town  on  a bold  bank.  Major  Hobby  said  that  he  would  send 
men  to  haul  her  out,  a thing  that  was  impossible  without  ways,  as  the 
bank  at  that  place  was  at  least  4 feet  in  height.  A party  of  15  unarmed 
men  came  down  and  were  at  work  on  her,  when  the  enemy  came  abreast 
of  the  boat  and  fired  a shot  at  the  party.  They  all  immediately  left. 
The  enemy  then  came  to  anchor,  distant  about  400  yards,  and  com- 
menced manning  a boat.  Fearing  that  they  would  cut  her  out,  I im- 
mediately fired  her  and  she  was  consumed. 

Bespectfully, 

JACK  SANDS,  Captain. 


AUGUST  16-18,  1862. — Bombardment  of  Corpus  Christi,  Tex. 


No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Hamilton  P.  Bee,  C.  S.„Army. 

No.  2. — Maj.  A.  M.  Hobby,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Hamilton  P.  Bee,  C.  S.  Army. 

Hdqrs.  Sub-Mil.  Dist.  of  the  Bio  Grande, 

Corpus  Christi,  Tex.,  August  21,  1862. 

Sir  : I reached  this  place  yesterday,  and  have  the  honor  to  report 
that  I find  all  things  quiet.  The  enemy  attacked  the  town  on  Satur- 
day and  again  on  Monday,  firing  between  200  and  300  shell  and  shot. 
They  were  bravely  resisted  by  our  forces,  and  after  being  struck  a num- 
ber of  times  by  the  shot  from  our  battery  (which  was  planted  during 
the  night  of  Friday)  he  was  forced  to  retire,  we  believe  in  a crippled 
condition.  • 

On  Tuesday  morning  the  enemy  left,  and  is  now  lying  at  his  old 
anchorage  near  the  Shell  Bank.  His  return  is  looked  for,  as  his  dis- 


XXI.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  CORPUS  CHRISTI,  TEX. 


619 


•omfiture  was  a source  of  great  mortification.  A more  full  report  will 
>e  forwarded  at  an  early  day.  The  damage  to  the  town  is  inconsider- 
able. We  had  but  1 man  killed. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  p BEE 

Brigadier- General,  Provisional  Army. 

Capt.  0.  M.  Mason,  . _ 

A.  A.  A.  G .,  Dept,  of  Texas , San  Antonio , lex. 


Hdqrs.  Sub-Mil.  Dist.  of  the  Bio  Gbatoe, 

# Corpus  Christi , Tex.,  August  26,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I proceeded  to  within  4 miles 
of  the  anchorage  of  the  fleet  of  the  enemy  on  yesterday,  and,  except 
witnessing  the  arrival  of  a large  schooner  from  sea,  found  the  fleet  all 
quiet.  There  are  now  eight  vessels  of  all  sizes  lying  within  the  bar  at 
Aransas  Pass.  It  was  impossible  to  ascertain  anything  about  the  new 
arrival.  She  seemed  to  be  a large  merchant  schooner,  probably  loaded 
with  supplies  and  men,  but  may  be  a mortar  boat.  I have  sent  a spy 
onto  Mustang  Island  to  ascertain  her  character  and  hope  to  report  it 

There  has  been  no  movement  by  the  enemy  since  their  repulse  from 
this  place.  The  steamer  was  much  injured,  as  her  steam-pumps  were 
heard  during  the  day  and  night  she  consumed  in  passing  ttirough  the 
canal.  I examined  the  Shell  Bank  and  found  that  it  would  be  unten- 
able even  if  cannon  could  be  placed  on  it,  which,  from  its  proximity  to 
the  fleet  and  in  full  view  of  them,  would  be  impossible,  it  being  3 miles 
from  water  and  the  guns  of  the  enemy  covering  its  approach;  nor  is 
there  any  other  point  adjacent  to  the  canal  on  which  guns  can  be 
erected,  owing  to  the  low,  marshy  approaches;  therefore  all  hopes  of . 
defending  the  narrow  bayou  and  canal  must  be  abandoned.  I he  ob- 
structions placed  there  proved  no  obstacle,  as  with  the  steam-power  of 
their  boat  they  were  easily  removed.  I am  making  another  effort  to 
sink  more  permanent  obstructions,  which,  if  successful,  will  prevent  at 
least  any  sudden  attack,  but  if  unsuccessful  forces  me  to  rely  on  the 
naturally-strong  position  of  this  place  for  its  defense.  The  battery 
used  in  the  late  fight  on  the  north  side  of  the  town  was  thrown  up  by 
General  Taylor  in  1845,  of  shell  and  sand,  which,  being  solid  and  impen- 
etrable to  32-pound  shot,  has  proved  an  admirable  defense.  Another 
work  of  similar  character  is  now  complete  on  the  south  side  of  the  town, 
both  being  on  the  water’s  edge.  I shall  at  once  erect  another  on  the 
bluff  overlooking  the  water  batteries,  and  distant,  say,  400  yards,  which, 
completed,  will  be  all  that  can  be  done. 

I found  great  confusion  existing  in  the  quartermaster’s,  commissary, 
and  ordnance  departments  here,  owing  to  the  inexperience  ot  the  offi- 
cers, and  deeming  it  indispensable  for  the  public  interest,  I have  ap- 
pointed H.  A.  Gilpin,  who  distinguished  himself  in  the  late  engage- 
ment and  is  a man  of  experience  and  business  habits,  to  act  as  quar- 
termaster  and  commissary  at  this  point,  subject  to  the  approval  ot  the 
general  commanding,  and  respectfully  request  that  the  appointment 
may  be  confirmed.  I have  also  appointed  (subject  to  like  approval)  I . 
Blucher,  major  of  Engineers,  and  charged  him  with  the  erection  ot  the 
necessary  defenses  of  this  place.  He  is  a nephew  ot  Marshal  Blucher, 
and  an  educated  soldier,  and  as  civil  engineer  has  resided  many  years 


[Chap.  XXI. 


620 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


T°e?  Major  Blucher  were  indispensable  and 
the  rank  was  temporanly  given  linn  to  facilitate  his  labors.  With  great 
satisfaction  I tendered  to  Mr.  William  Mann  the  position  of  cantain  of 
artillery,  vacated  by  the  declension  of  Captain  Livenskiold  TMs  mark 
(>  my  appreciation  for  his  gallant  services  I felt  satisfied  would  meet 
the  approval  of  the  general  commanding.  But  he  declines  the  commit 
sion,  owing  to  the  shattered  state  of  his  health  from  exposure  at  Island 
w'f10’  kut  he  accepts  the  position  temporarily,  and  will  command  his 
battery  until  this  emergency  passes  over,  when  he  will  retire. 

Captain  Willke  s battery  of  light  artillery,  from  Ringgold  Barracks 
will  be  here  to-morrow.  His  guns  are  four  12  and  two  24  pounder 
howitzers,  and  will  add  materially  to  our  defenses,  but  the  fact  of  his 
company  being  well-drilled  artillerists  is  the  most  pleasant  reflection 
attending  his  arrival.  A delay  of  a few  more  days  on  the  part  of  the 

factory  results  S6emS  probable)  wil1  enable  me  to  meet  him  with  satis- 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

^ _ H.  P.  BEE, 

Bng.  Gen.,  Prov.  Army,  Comdg.  Sub-Mil.  Dist.  of  the  Rio  Grande. 

Capt.  C.  M.  Mason, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  Texas. 


Hdqrs.  Sub-Mil.  Dist.  of  the  Rio  Grande, 

Corpus  Christi,  Tex.,  August  26,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  the  official  reports  of  Mai  A M 
Hobby,  commanding  this  post,  of  the  bombardment  of  Corpus  Christi.’ 
It  is  with  great  satisfaction  that  I call  the  attention  of  the  general  com- 
manding the  Department  of  Texas  to  the  judgment  and  gallantry  of 
Major  Hobby,  as  well  as  to  the  satisfactory  manner  in  which  he  dis- 
charged his  duty  under  the  trying  circumstances  in  which  he  was  placed. 
Ihe  enemy  brought  into  action  seven  pieces  of  heavy  artillery,  adapted 
to  and  using  all  the  modern  improvements  in  projectiles.  Our  force 
was  two  18-pounder  and  one  12-pounder  guns,  manned  by  inexperienced 
.artillerists,  and  supported  by  volunteers  but  a few  days  in  the  service: 
yet  the  furious  fire  of  shot  and  shell  by  the  enemy,  after  the  first  few 
rounds,  served  but  to  inspire  the  men,  and  their  spirit  and  braverv  are 
worthy  of  all  praise. 

After  several  hours  of  incessant  fire  on  our  little  battery,  without 
eliect,  a force  of  about  40  men,  with  a rifled  gun,  was  landed  on  the 
beach  about  a mile  from  the  battery  (which,  having  but  a water  front, 
was  not  able  to  resist  their  approach),  and  slowly  advancing,  endeavor- 
ing to  flank  it,  the  three  heavy  gunboats  being  within  400  yards  of  the 
fhore,  covering  their  advance  with  a continuous  fire  of  grape  and  can- 
lster.  So  completely  did  the  guns  of  the  boats  cover  their  approach 
that  the  advancing  force  may  fairly  be  considered  as  equal  to  two  bat- 
teries of  24  and  32  pounders.  To  charge  through  such  a formidable 
fire  seemed  hopeless  ; yet,  when  almost  within  musket;range  of  the 
battery,  Major  Hobby  led  a charge  of  25  men  and  put  the  marines  to 
flight.  At  this  moment  Captain  Ware’s  fine  company  of  cavalry  came 
flashing  into  the  plain,  and  but  for.  the  peremptory  order  from  Major 
Hobby  in  person  would  in  another  moment  have  cut  them  to  pieces  and 
captured  their  gun;  but,  when  it  is  considered  that  this  charge  would 
ha\e  been  made  through  a flank  fire  of  heavy  guns,  loaded  with  grape 
and  canister,  at  400  yards  distance,  and  must  have  resulted  in  the  sac- 


Chap.  XXI.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  CORPUS  CHRISTI,  TEX.  621 

rifice  of  most  of  the  men,  I approve  of  the  order  of  Major  Hobby  in  re- 
straining them,  considering  the  object  to  be  gained  as  not  commen- 
surate with  the  almost  certain  loss. 

It  is  due  to  Captain  Ware  and  his  command  to  say  that,  with  all  its 
probable  consequences,  they  were  not  only  ready  for  the  work  and 
actually  under  fire,  but  were  bitterly  disappointed  at  losing  the  oppor- 
tunity thus  presented.  1 , . ' . , , 

Foiled  in  all  his  plans,  the  enemy  vented  his  spleen  on  the  defense- 
less houses  of  the  town  for  a short  time  and  then  withdrew,  with  his 
fleet  badly  crippled,  but  with  what  loss  we  have  no  means  of  knowing. 
Between  400  and  500  shot  and  shell  were  fired  by  the  enemy. 

One  man  killed  and  1 wounded  constitute  the  casualties  among 
our  troops.  Major  Hobby  was  struck  on  the  head  by  a glancing  ball,, 
which  inflicted  but  a slight  wound.  A great  many  houses  in  the  town 
were  struck,  but  the  damage  is  slight. 

Too  much  praise  cannot  be  given  to  the  patriotic  citizens  ot  Corpus 
Christi.  They  removed  out  into  the  woods  with  their  families  out  of 
fire  and  in  tents  and  under  trees  calmly  and  confidently  awaited  the 
result.  They  have  suffered  many  inconveniences  and  privations,  espe- 
cially for  want  of  water,  as  the  drought  of  this  section  has  been  unpre- 
cedented, yet  they  have  set  a laudable  example  to  their  countrymen 
and  added  another  to  the  many  instances  of  patriotism  which  this  war 
has  elicited.  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  the  citizens  of  the  surround- 
ing counties,  for  a distance  of  100  miles,  attracted  by  the  fire  of  the  can- 
non with  their  rifles  in  hand,  repaired  to  the  scene  and  tendered  their 
services  to  the  commanding  officer,  demonstrating  that  when  the  emer- 
gency arises  their  country  can  depend  on  them. 

~ The  defenses  of  the  town  have  been  materially  strengthened  and 
heavier  guns  added  to  the  batteries,  and  should  the  enemy  renew  the 
attack  I feel  confident  of  reporting  equally  as  successful  a result. 

The  attention  of  the  general  commanding  is  specially  called  to  the 
service  rendered  by  Mr.  William  Mann,  a young  gentleman  of  this 
place,  who,  having  served  at  Belmont,  Columbus,  and  Island  No.  10, 
brought  all  the  experience  of  those  well-fought  fields  to  the  assistance 
of  his  native  city,  and  materially  contributed  by  his  gallantry  and  skill 
to  the  discomfiture  of  our  enemies. 

Major  Buckner,  a citizen  of  Corpus  Christi,  but  an  experienced  soldier 
from  the  Old  World,  rendered  useful  service. 

Judge  H.  A.  Gilpin,  chief  justice  of  Nueces  County,  was  much 
exposed,  and  rendered  good  service,  as  did  many  other  citizens  of  the 
town. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 

Brig . Gen.,  Prov.  Army , Comdg.  Sub-Mil.  JDist.  of  the  Bio  Grande . 

Capt.  C.  M.  Mason,  A.  A.  A.  G.,  Department  of  Texas. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Map  A.  M.  Hobby,  C.  S.  Army. 

Hdqrs.  Sub-Mil.  Dist.  Corpus  Christi  and  Aransas, 
Corpus  Christi,  Tex.,  August  16,  1862. 

Sir  : In  my  communication  of  yesterday  I reported  the  arrival  of  four 
Federal  vessels  in  Corpus  Christi  Bay,  they  having  removed  the  obstruc- 


622  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

tion  placed  in  the  ship  channel— the  yacht  Corypheus,  Beindeer,  Bella 
Italia,  and  steam  gunboat.  The  yacht  appeared  off  Ingleside  at  4 n. 
m.,  chasing  the  Breaker,  a pilot-boat  in  the  Confederate  service,  which 
was  just  returning  froin  a reconnoitering  expedition,  with  a detachment 
of  men  under  Capt.  B.  E.  Jones.  To  prevent  her  capture  by  the  enemv 

S^e  Y3?  ™ on  shore  at  Indian  Point?  and  the  reconnoitering  partv 
effected  their  escape.  The  Breaker  was  fired  some  distance  from  shore 
but  unfortunately  not  in  time  to  prevent  her  from  falling  into  the  hands 
ot  the  enemy,  who  extinguished  the  flames.  Eleven  shots  were  fired  at 
her  during  the  chase.  The  Breaker  is  a small  boat,  carrying  a crew  of 
3 men.  The  yacht  then  steered  for  Corpus  Christi,  standing  close  along 
the  shore,  and  fired  a shot  at  a detachment  of  Captain  McCampbelFs 
company,  hauling  a boat  upon  the  beach.  She  came  to  anchor  opposite 
the  city,  and  was  joined  during  the  night  by  the  remainder  of  the  fleet. 

At  9 o’clock This i morning  Captain  Kittredge,  in  a launch,  approached 
the  wharf  with  a flag  of  truce,  at  which  point  I met  him.  He  informed 
me  that  he  had  been  ordered  by  the  United  States  Government  to 
examine  the  public  buildings  in  the  city  and  make  an  official  report  of 
their  condition.  I informed  him  that  the  United  [Statesl  Government 
owned  no  property  in  Corpus  Christi,  and  that  he  should  not  be  allowed 
to  land.  He  replied  that  it  was  his  prerogative  to  land  when  and  where 
he  pleased,  under  what  he  called  the  national  ensign.  I told  him  the 
Confederate  Government  recognized  no  such  right,  and  I was  here  to 
prevent  him  from  placing  his  foot  upon  our  soil.  He  then  desired  to 
accompany  me  ashore  or  go  alone  under  a white  flag.  Every  proposi- 
tion to  land,  under  whatever  pretext,  was  peremptorily  rejected.  He 
then  demanded  that  the  women  and  children  should  be  removed  beyond 
the  limits  of  the  town  in  twenty-four  hours,  as  he  intended  to  land  with 
a force  and  execute  his  orders.  I demanded  forty-eight  hours  which 
was  finally  agreed  upon.  He  requested  that  the  matter  again  be  taken 
into  consideration.  The  second  interview  resulted  as  did  the  first 
One  of  the  conditions  of  the  armistice  was  that  the  forty-eight  hours 
be  exclusively  devoted  to  the  removal  of  the  families  from  town,  which 
I strictly  complied  with. 

On  the  evening  of  the  15th  the  Federal  fleet  took  position  opposite 
the  northern  suburbs  of  the  city  in  line  of  battle,  within  range  from  the 
shore.  Immediately  after  dark  I planted  a battery  of  two  guns  (a  12 
and  18  pounder)  behind  a strong  fortification  near  the  water’s  edge,  and 
supported  it  by  a detachment  from  Captain  Ireland’s  company  and  my 
battalion,  they  furnishing  also  an  extra  detachment  to  move  the  guns. 

At  daylight  on  the  16th  we  opened  on  the  enemy.  Six  shots  were 
fired  at  the  fleet  before  they  replied.  The  enemy  shelled  the  battery 
and  the  town  furiously,  doing,  however,  but  little  damage.  At  9 o’clock 
we  drove  him  from  his  position.  Beyond  the  reach  of  our  guns  he 
repaired  damages  and  mended  sails  rent  by  our  shot.  At  3 o’clock  he 
again  returned,  and  when  within  reach  of  our  battery  it  opened  on  him 
striking  both  yacht  and  steamer,  and  compelled  them  to  withdraw  be- 
yond the  reach  of  our  guns.  They  contented  themselves  with  shelling 
the  battery  during  the  remainder  of  the  day. 

Mr.  William  Mann  volunteered  his  services  in  the  battery,  and  I placed 
him  m charge  of  the  guns.  By  his  coolness,  courage,  and  judgment  he 
elicited  the  admiration  of  all,  and  I herein  acknowledge  the  value  of 
services  in  our  gallant  attack  upon  the  enemy’s  boasted  gunboats. 
With  guns  of  inferior  caliber  and  a smaller  force  than  their  own  they 
were  twice  driven  from  their  position,  and  resulted  in  their  discomfiture. 
Five  shots  were  seen  to  do  execution.  The  enemy  fired  296  times. 


Chap.  XXI.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  CORPUS  CHRISTI,  TEX. 


623 


The  casualties  on  our  side  were  inconsiderable.  Private  Steiner,  of 
Captain  Ireland’s  company,  was  slightly  wounded  in  head  by  a spent 
ball  To  Judge  Gilpin  and  Major  Blucher  I am  indebted  lor  valuable 
services.  To-night  all  is  quiet.  We  do  not  need  more  troops. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  M.  HOBBx, 

Major , Commanding. 

Maj.  E.  F.  Gray, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  San  Antonio , Tex. 


Headquarters, 

Corpus  Christi , Tex.,  August  18,  1862. 

Sib:  On  the  morning  of  the  18th  the  enemy  again  opened  on  our  bat- 
terv,  brfnoing  his  whole  force  to  bear  on  it.  Failing  to  silence  our  guns, 
a portion  of  his  fleet  withdrew  and  landed  a 12-pounder  rifled  gun,  sup- 
ported by  30  or  40  well-armed  men,  who  approached  our  battery  by  the 
beach,  close  under  cover  of  their  gunboats,  firing  continuously,  lhey 
attempted  to  enfilade  our  battery,  their  balls  passing  just  above  our 
intrenchments.  I immediately  ordered  25  men  to  charge  the  gun,  which 
they  did  in  gallant  style.  When  from  under  cover  of  the  breastworks 
they  entered  an  open  plain  and  rapidly  neared  the  gun,  the  gunboats 
of  the  enemy  opened  a heavy  fire  upon  them.  Undaunted  they  pressed 
onward,  and  when  within  range  of  small-arms  I ordered  them  to  fire, 
which  they  did,  still  advancing,  the  enemy  in  the  mean  time  retreating 
in  double-quick,  carrying  with  them  their  gun.  They  left  m the  re- 
treat their  ammunition-box,  hatchet,  rat-tail  files,  (intended,  I presume, 
to  spike  our  guns) ; a hat  and  rifle-cartridges  were  scattered  along  the 
road.  We  chased  them  to  their  gunboats,  to  which  they  retreated 
without  delay.  Whenever  a ball  from  the  battery  would  strike  the 
boats  of  the  enemy  they  would  rise  and  cheer,  regardless  of  the  fire  to 
which  they  were  exposed.  The  enemy  withdrew,  and  taking  position 
in  front  of  the  city,  avenged  themselves  upon  a few  unoffending  houses. 
A few  shots  from  our  guns  drove  them  off,  and  on  the  following  morning 


stood  away  for  Aransas  Pass.  . _ ,T  , 

Our  loss  in  the  engagement  was  one  killed — Private  Henry  Mote,  m 
Capt.  B.  E.  Jones’  company.  He  was  shot  through  the  head  among 
the  foremost  in  the  charge.  Captain  Ware’s  fine  cavalry  company  was 
present  and  eager  for  the  fray. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  M.  HOBBY, 

Major,  Commanding. 


Maj.  E.  F.  Gray,  . 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Corpus  Christi,  Tex . 


624 


[Chap.  XXL 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 

SEPTEMBER  13-14, 1862.— Operations  at  Flour  Bluffs,  near  Corpus  Christi 

Tex. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Hamilton  P.  Bee,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Maj.  E.  F.  Gray,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  3. — Capt.  John  Ireland,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Hamilton  P.  Bee , G.  S.  Army. 

Hdqrs.  Sub-Mil.  Dist.  of  the  Rio  Grande, 

San  Antonio , Tex.,  September  24,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  Lieutenant  Kittredge,  command- 
ing United  States  fleet  in  the  waters  of  Aransas  Bay,  arrived  at  Corpus 
Christi  under  a flag  of  truce  on  the  12th  instant,  asking  permission 
to  convey  the  family  of  E.  J.  Davis,  a renegade  traitor  of  Texas,  to 
New  Orleans.  Maj.  E.  F.  Gray,  commanding  at  that  post,  received  the 
flag,  and  refusing  to  allow  Mrs.  Davis  to  comply  with  the  request  until 
permission  should  be  received  from  headquarters,  notified  Lieutenant 
Kittredge  that  ten  days  would  elapse  before  an  answer  could  be  given; 
whereupon  Lieutenant  Kittredge  withdrew,  and  proceeded  down  the 
bay  some  15  miles  toward  the  salt-works,  on  the  Laguna  de  la  Madre. 
On  the  same  night  Major  Gray  dispatched  Captain  Ireland,  with  50  men 
and  one  piece  of  artillery,  to  watch  his  proceedings,  accompanied  by 
Captain  Ware,  of  the  cavalry.  Captain  Ireland  posted  a portion  of 
his  men  under  Captain  Ware  at  a vacated  house  near  the  shore,  and 
within  a short  distance  of  where  it  was  known  that  the  fleet  of  the 
enemy  was  anchored  for  the  night,  the  piece  of  artillery  being  well 
masked  in  the  sand  hills. 

Early  in  the  ensuing  morning  the  enemy  shelled  the  houses  and  sur- 
rounding points  for  some  time ; then,  the  ground  being  apparently 
unoccupied,  Lieutenant  Kittredge,  accompanied  by  7 men,  landed  and 
approached  the  house.  Our  men  being  concealed,  the  adventurous 
lieutenant  fell  gracefully  into  the  trap  set  for  him,  and,  with  his  whole 
party,  were  taken  prisoners.  The  report  of  Captain  Ireland  of  this  well- 
conceived  and  successful  plan  is  herewith  inclosed  for  the  information 
of  the  general  commanding. 

It  is  worthy  of  note  that  as  soon  as  the  gunboats  of  the  enemy  be- 
came aware  of  the  fate  of  their  officer  they  opened  a rapid  fire  of  shell 
and  grape  on  the  command,  which  fell  alike  on  soldiers  and  prisoners', 
bur  without  damage  to  either. 

Maj.  E.  F.  Gray  immediately  forwarded  Lieutenant  Kittredge,  under 
escort  of  Major  Hobby,  to  this  place,  where  he  arrived  on  the  20th 
instant,  and  having  given  his  parole,  now  awaits  the  order  of  the  gen- 
eral commanding.  The  7 seamen  are  also  en  route  to  this  place. 

It  gives  me  great  satisfaction  to  announce  this  creditable  sequel  of 
the  defense  of  Corpus  [Christi]  by  the  capture  of  the  bold  and  ener- 
getic leader  of  the  enemy,  and  the  end  of  the  campaign  for  the  present, 
as  the  fleet  have  all  retired  to  their  usual  place  of  anchorage  near 
Aransas  Bar. 

It  is  also  proper  to  state  that  the  course  of  Lieutenant  Kittredge, 
while  for  many  months  in  command  on  our  coast,  has  been  that  of  an 


Chap.  XXI.]  OPERATIONS  AT  FLOUR  BLUFFS,  TEX. 


625 


honorable  enemy,  and  as  such  be  is  entitled  to  the  consideration  due 
to  his  situation  by  the  terms  of  civilized  warfare. 

With  great  respect,  H p BEE 

Brigadier-  General , Provisional  Army. 

Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert, 

Commanding  Department  of  Texas. 


Hdqrs.  Sub-Mil.  Dist.  of  the  Bio  Grande, 

JSan  Antonio , Tex.,  September  26,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  forward  to  the  general  commanding 
the  Department  of  Texas  a flag  of  the  enemy,  captured  by  a detach- 
ment of  Confederate  troops  under  command  of  Captain  Ireland,  on  the 
waters  of  the  Corpus  Christi  Bay. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  P.  BEE, 
Brigadier- General. 


Papt.  C.  M.  Mason, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General , San  Antonio , Tex . 


Ko.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  B.  F.  Gray , C.  S.  Army . 


Corpus  Christi,  Tex.,  September  16,  1862. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  expedition  under  Capt.  John 
Ireland,  of  which  I notified  you  in  my  last  communication,  has  returned 
to  this  place  successful.  Inclosed  I forward  a copy  of  his  official  report, 
which  will  explain  itself.  I request  that  the  special  recommendations 
contained  in  his  report  may  be  considered  as  my  own,  without  a repeti- 
tion, as  I am  firmly  satisfied  they  are  merited. 

Major  Hobby  has  been  directed  to  accompany  Lieutenant  Kittredge 
to  San  Antonio  and  to  be  governed  by  your  further  directions.  The 
other  prisoners  will  be  forwarded  to-morrow  with  an  escort.  I inclose 
you  Lieutenant  Kittredge’s  parole.*  I have  informed  him  that  he  would 
be  forwarded  across  the  lines  without  delay.  I would  most  respectfully 
request  that  my  assurance  may  be  complied  with,  or,  rather,  verified ; 
yet  he  understands  that  everything  remains  subject  to  your  decision. 
After  his  capture  I communicated  with  his  vessels  under  a flag  of  truce 
for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  wearing  apparel  for  him  and  for  his  men, 
which  has  been  done.  I consented  that  the  vessels  should  approach 
and  retire  under  a flag  of  truce. 

Everything  is  progressing  here  to  my  satisfaction,  and  I hope  to  send 
you  additional  good  news  ere  long.  I will  write  again  by  mail. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  F.  GBAY, 
Major , Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  P.  Bee, 

Comdg.  Sub-Mil.  Dist.  of  the  Rio  Grande , San  Antonio , Tex. 


40  R R— VOL  IX 


Omitted. 


626  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

No.  3. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  Ireland , C.  S.  Army. 

Corpus  Christi,  Tex.,  September  15,  1862. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  your  orders  I left  Corpus  Christi  at  8 p.  m.  on 
the  13th  instant.  I took  with  me  one  small  piece  of  Captain  Willke’s 
battery,  under  Lieutenant  Johnson,  a detachment  of  50  men  from  my 
own  company,  and  Capt.  J.  A.  Ware.  I proceeded  to  Flour  Bluffs,  15 
miles  south  of  this  place.  Arrived  there  at  1.30  o’clock  same  night.  I 
took  two  positions  within  half  a mile  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats,  three  in 
number.  At  one  place  I stationed  Captain  Ware  with  a detachment 
of  20  men,  and  the  other  I occupied  with  the  remainder  of  my  force. 
The  positions  were  selected  with  a view  of  commanding  the  channel 
leading  to  [Point]  Penascal  and  of  cutting  off  any  force  *;hat  might 
attempt  to  land.  After  throwing  a number  of  shells  at  some  unoffend- 
ing citizens  on  shore  the  enemy  landed,  which  he  effected  near  the 
point  where  Captain  Ware  was  posted.  When  the  enemy  were  within 
musket-range  Captain  Ware  advanced,  and  without  firing  a gun  cap- 
tured the  party,  consisting  of  Captain  Kittredge,  commanding  block- 
ading fleet  off  this  coast,  and  7 of  his  men.  This  occurred  at  11  o’clock 
of  the  14th. 

It  now  being  certain  that  they  would  not  then  attempt  to  enter 
Laguna  de  la  Madre,  and  there  being  nothing  further  that  I could 
accomplish  by  remaining,  the  line  of  march  was  resumed  for  this  place. 
The  enemy  then  threw  some  40  or  50  shells,  but  without  effect.  I also 
captured  8 stand  of  arms — Enfield  rifles,  Colt’s  six-shooters,  and  2 
cutlasses. 

I take  great  pleasure  in  calling  your  attention  to  the  efficient  service 
and  gallant  conduct  of  Captain  Ware,  who  obeyed  orders  with  alacrity 
and  executed  them  with  great  judgment.  I desire  also  to  call  your 
attention  to  the  gallantry  of  Private  William  Saffold,  who  in  person 
captured  Captain  Kittredge.  I have  also  to  acknowledge  valuable 
services  rendered  by  four  of  Captain  Ware’s  cavalry  as  guides. 

The  enemy’s  boats  immediately  left  the  bay. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

I am,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  IRELAND, 
Captain , Commanding  Expedition. 

Maj.  E.  F.  Gray,  Commanding. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ORDERS,  AND  RETURNS  RELATING 
TO  OPERATIONS  IN  TEXAS,  NEW  MEXICO,  AND  ARI- 
ZONA FROM  FEBRUARY  1 TO  SEPTEMBER  18,  1862. 

UNION  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. 

Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Belen , N.  Mex.,  January  28,  1862. 

Memorandum,  No.  116.] 

As  the  bulk  of  the  enemy’s  force  is  mounted,  it  is  to  be  expected  that 
his  principal  efforts  will  be  directed  to  attempt  to  cripple  the  means  of 
transportation  by  attacking  the  trains,  or  impede  the  operations  of  the 


Chap.  XXL]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


627 


troops  by  stampeding  the  animals,  or  subjecting  the  men  to  the  annoy- 
ance of  night  attacks.  These  will,  of  course,  be  guarded  against  by  the 
usual  precautions,  but  the  colonel  commanding  desires  that  command- 
ers will  impress  upon  their  men  that  these  attacks  are  to  be  feared  only 
when  they  succeed  in  throwing  a portion  of  the  command  into  confu- 
sion and  in  forcing  their  way  within  the  lines,  and  that  in  this  event 
they  should  be  enjoined  to  repel  the  enemy  by  the  use  of  the  bayonet 
or  clubbed  musket,  and  not  by  firing,  which  is  more  likely  to  endanger 
their  friends  than  enemies.  In  any  encounter  with  the  enemy’s  horse- 
men the  main  reliance  of  the  infantry  should  be  in  their  bayonets.  An 
infantry  soldier  who  is  cool  is  more  than  a match  for  a horseman,  and 
in  groups  they  are  safe  against  any  number. 

Four  days’  rations  will  habitually  be  carried  in  the  company  wagons 
and  the  remainder  in  the  supply  train. 


By  order  of  Ool.  E.  B.  S.  Ganby : 

J WM.  J.  L.  NICODEMUS, 

Captain,  Twelfth  Infantry , Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Pacific, 

San  Francisco , January  29,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  JJ.  S.  Army,  Washington,  D.  C.: 

General:  Inclosed  herewith  is  a copy  of  a telegraphic  dispatch 
which  I had  the  honor  to  transmit  to  you  yesterday ; also  copy  of  ex- 
tract from  a letter  from  Mr.  Thomas  Bobinson,  a resident  of  Guaymas, 
Sonora.  This  extract  was  presented  to  me  by  Mr.  Flint,  of  this  city,  a 
gentleman  of  standing  and  reliability,  connected  with  the  steamship 
line  between  this  place,  and  Guaymas.  From  the  bes.t  information  in 
my  possession  at  this  moment  I am  dispo'sed  to  believe  that  the  views 
taken  by  Mr.  Bobinson  as  to  the  intended  movements  of  the  rebel 
forces  are  in  the  main  correct.  The  large  force  I am  assembling  in  the 
southern  portion  of  this  State,  preparatory  to  an  advance  from  Fort 
Yuma,  will  doubtless  cause  the  rebel  leaders  to  deflect  from  their  line 
of  operations  and,  if  possible,  gain  the  port  of  Guaymas.  To  frustrate 
all  such  attempts  I deem  it  of  the  first  importance  that  a strong  force 
should  be  thrown  into  that  city,  aided  by  the  presence  of  a few  ships 
of  war.  I propose  to  open  a correspondence  with  the  Governor  of 
Sonora  on  this  subject,  and  I am  assured  by  the  best  authority  that 
our  temporary  occupation  of  Guaymas  or  any  portion  of  the  State,  to 
protect  it  from  the  inroads  of  the  rebels,  would  be  cheerfully  acquiesced 
in  by  the  authorities  and  people  of  that  country. 

The  storm  has  somewhat  abated  for  a few  days  past.  To-day  it  is 
raining  again,  and  the  roads  are  not  in  a condition  to  advance  my  ex- 
peditionary forces  to  Fort  Yuma.  However,  it  is  only  a question  of 
time.  We  will  be  successful. 

I have  no  special  news  from  the  District  of  Oregon.  All  was  quiet 
in  that  quarter  when  last  heard  from.  The  winter  has  been  unusually 
severe,  and  the  navigation  of  the  Columbia  Biver  entirely  obstructed 
by  ice. 

The  Legislature  of  California  is  now  in  session  in  this  city,  compelled 
to  abandon  Sacramento  temporarily. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  WBIGHT, 

Brigadier- General,  TJ.  S.  Army,  Commanding, 


628 


[Chai-.  XXX 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  AEIZ. 

[Inclosures.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Pacific, 

San  Francisco , Gal.,  January  28,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  TJ.  S.  Army , Washington , D.  G.: 

From  the  latest  and  most  reliable  information  I am  more  strongly 
than  ever  impressed  with  the  importance  of  an  early  and  prompt  occu- 
pation of  Guaymas. 

G.  WRIGHT, 

Brigadier- General,  TJ.  S.  Army,  Commanding. 

Copy  of  letter  from  Thomas  Bohinson,  Fsq. 

******* 

Immediately  on  the  receipt  of  this  please  call  upon  General  Wright, 
and  state  to  him,  in  my  name,  that  by  express  received  by  me  to-day  from 
Arizona,  and  from  most  reliable  source,  I have  the  following  state- 
ment : 

The  Southern  troops,  under  Colonel  Baylor,  Military  Governor,  are  expected  at  Tuc- 
son within  ten  days,  numbering  900  men.  It  is  said  they  will  immediately  make  a 
strong  and  continued  campaign  on  the  Apaches.  Reports  say  (which,  I fear,  is  very 
probable)  they  march  into  Sonora.  In  the  mean  while  their  headquarters  will  be  at 
Calabazas,  on  the  line.  Agents  to  purchase  flour,  corn,  &c.,  are  actually  in  the  Ter- 
ritory under  escort.  Contracts  for  hay  have  already  been  given  out.  Brigadier-General 
Sibley,  C.  S.  Army,  with  3,000  men,  takes  command  in  Arizona  and  New  Mexico,  and 
will  immediately  attack  the  United  States  forces  in  New  Mexico.  The  Southern  sol- 
diers are  full  of  fight.  Only  the  other  day  100  crossed  the  Jornada  del  Muerto,  drove 
in  the  pickets  of  the  United  States  forces,  and  made  40  prisoners. 

These  same  reports  were  afloat  here  three  days  since,  when  I arrived* 
and  to-day  they  are  confirmed.  There  is  no  doubt  in  my  mind  as  to  the 
desires  and  intentions  of  these  Southern  forces.  What  the  devil  do 
they  care  for  Arizona,  without  100  souls  in  it,  and  nothing  worth  hav- 
ing there  ? They  wish  to  march  into  Sonora,  as  is  intimated  from  many 
sources,  and  take  quiet  possession,  for  we  are  not  at  present  in  condition 
to  resist,  having  just  passed  through  a very  sore  trial,  although  with 
success.  If  they  once  get  possession  of  this  State  and  its  ports,  the 
North  may  just  as  well  give  up  the  complete  line  through  from  Gulf 
of  Mexico  to  Gulf  of  California,  and  it  will  require  a supreme  effort  then 
to  rout  them. 

This  is  no  newspaper  talk,  but  something  certain,  and  the  only  way 
to  avoid  a most  serious  and  difficult  position  is  for  the  United  States 
Government  to  send,  without  a moment’s  delay,  the  necessary  forces 
to  act. 

Let  me  request  of  you  to  urge  upon  General  Wright  the  necessity  of 
this  step.  Let  1,000  men,  properly  equipped,  be  sent  immediately  to 
Guaymas,  officered  by  gentlemen  of  prudence  an^  judgment,  and  I will 
see  that  they  get  through  immediately  to  Arizona.  The  Governor 
and  people  will  be  too  happy  to  see  such  a friend  coming  to  their 
rescue.  If  necessary,  let  the  general  telegraph  to  Washington  for  the 
necessary  powers,  but  he  must  act  promptly,  and  I will  guarantee  his 
full  success,  and  by  adopting  these  measures  he  will  have  acquired  a 
victory  which  will  be  more  than  galling  to  the  South. 

******* 

I will  take  the  contract  for  transporting  troops  and  equipments  to 
Arizona  and  furnishing  everything  necessary.  You  are  aware  the 
Congress  of  Mexico  has  given  a cordial  permit  for  transit  of  troops 


€IIAP.  XXI. 1 


629 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 

through  Sonora,  and  our  State  will  be  pleased  to  forward  the  views  of 
the  United  States  Government  or  its  representatives.  You  can  assure 
General  Wright  that  all  my  influence  and  that  of  my  friends  will  be 
used  in  favor  [of]  his  forces. 

Yours,  sincerely, 

THOS.  ROBINSON. 


War  Department, 
Washington  City,  JD.  C.,  February  3,  1862. 
Hon.  W.  H.  Seward,  Secretary  of  State: 

Sir  : I am  directed  by  the  Secretary  of  War  to  acknowledge  the  re- 
ceipt of  your  communication  of  the  29th  instant,  inclosing  copies  of 
letters  from  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  and  the  United  States  consul  at 
Havana,  and  suggesting  that,  should  the  exigencies  of  the  public  serv- 
ice permit,  a militaryforce  of  observation  be  posted  opposite  to  or  near 
Matamoros,  on  the  Rio  Grande ; that  he  referred  your  communication 
and  inclosures  to  Major-General  McClellan,  who  reports  as  follows,  viz: 

The  occupation  of  Brazos  de  Santiago  and  Brownsville  is  important  and  desirable 
for  many  reasons.  It  would  not  De  prudent,  however,  to  attempt  *it  without  force 
sufficient  to  hold  points  farther  north  and  east.  We  have  not  the  disposable  force  at  the 
present  moment,  nor  would  it  do  to  risk  a detached  force  in  so  remote  a position,  with- 
out retreat  or  succor,  until  certain  that  our  foreign  relations  are  entirely  satisfactory. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  H.  WATSON, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


Department  of  State, 

Washington , February  7,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I inclose  for  your  information  a copy  of  a letter  of  the  11th  ulti- 
mo, addressed  to  this  Department  by  the  Governor  of  the  Territory  of 
New  Mexico. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  W.  SEWARD, 

Acting  Secretary. 

' [Inclosure.] 


Executive  Department, 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  January  -11,  1862. 
Hon.  W.  H.  Seward,  Secretary  of  State , Washington , B.  C.  : 

Sir  : Since  my  last,  of  the  4th  instant,  there  has  nothing  taken  place 
in  relation  to  the  Texans  that  merits  attention.  They  retired  precipi- 
tately from  the  settlement  of  Alamosa,  30  miles  below  Fort  Craig,  and 
have  made  no  demonstration  against  that  place.  Since  Colonel  Canby 
has  divided  his  forces,  leaving  about  one-half  at  Craig,  and  has  or  is 
about  to  take  a position  midway  between  Craig  and  the  Pecos  River,  so 
as  to  enable  him  to  act  in  conjunction  with  the  forces  at  Union  on  the 
Pecos,  or  with  those  at  Craig  on  the  Rio  del  Norte,  as  circumstances 
may  require,  I am  of  opinion  that  there  are  no  Texan  forces  on  the 
Pecos;  but  this  is  merely  an  opinion,  the  truth  of  falsehood  of  which 
will  be  revealed  within  a few  days. 

The  spy  companies  sent  in  that  direction  ten  or  twelve  days  since 
have  not  returned.  We  have  no  fears  of  any  armed  lorce  that  Texas 


630 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[Chap.  XXI. 


can  send  against  this  Territory.  We  have  now  in  the  service  of  the 
Government  and  under  fair  discipline  something  more  than  4,000  volun- 
teers and  militia  of  this  Territory;  also,  say,  1,500  regular  troops.  With 
this  force  and  what  I could  call  into  the  field  of  the  organized  militia 
in  a few  days’  notice  I am  sure  we  can  repel  any  force  that  will  he  sent 
against  this  Territory. 

We  are  in  great  want  of  arms  and  ammunition,  and  hope  that  by  the 
early  spring  trains  our  requisition  will  be  filled. 

The  Navajo  and  Apache  Indians  still  continue  their  depredations  to 
an  alarming  extent,  altogether  in  robberies.  Few  deaths  occur,  but  a 
continual  spoliation  of  property.  The  losses  of  the  Territory  the  past 
year  will  not  fall  short  of  half  a million  of  dollars.  The  Texans  keep 
us  in  such  continual  uneasiness  that  we  can  make  no  effective  cam- 
paign against  those  hostile  tribes. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  CONNELLY, 
Governor  of  New  Mexico . 

% 

Headquarters  Department  of  EAnsas, 

Fort  Leavenworth , Kans .,  February  10,  1862. 
To  His  Excellency  Acting  Governor  of  Colorado, 

Denver  City , Colo.: 

Send  all  available  forces  you  can  possibly  spare  to  re-enforce  Colonel 
Canby,  commanding  Department  of  New  Mexico,  and  to  keep  open  his 
communication  through  Fort  Wise.  Act  promptly  and  with  all  the 
discretion  of  your  latest  information  as  to  what  may  be  necessary  and 
where  the  troops  of  Colorado  can  do  most  service. 

D.  HUNTER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Circular.]  Hdqrs.  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Fort  Craig , N.  Mex.,  February  14,  1862. 
The  following  arrangements  of  the  columns  for  field  operations  will 
govern  the  chiefs  of  the  staff  departments  in  making  the  necessary 
provisions  for  supplying  the  troops  : 


First  column. 


Headquarters,  Company  D,  First  Cavalry,  and  detachment 

First  column : Capt.  H.  R.  Selden,  Fifth  Infantry. 

First  Battalion:  Capfc.  B.  Wingate. 

Headquarters  and  Companies  B,  D,  F,  and  I,  Fifth  Infantry 306 

Second  Battalion:  Capt.  P.  W.  L.  Plympton. 

Companies  C and  F,  Seventh  Infantry;  A and  H,  Tenth  Infantry,  and 
CoLorado  Volunteers 310 

McRae’s  battery 130 

Hall’s  battery 37 


Second  column. 
Col.  B.  S.  Roberts. 


86 

616 

167 


Headquarters  and  Companies  C,  D,  G,  and  K,  Third  Cavalry,  Major 

Duncan ^ 210 

Companies  B,  E,  and  G,  Third  New  Mexico  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colo- 
nel Chavez 234 

Barriento’s  company,  Fifth  New  Mexico  Volunteers 63 

Four  companies  New  Mexico  Mounted  Militia,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Otero.  200 

707 


HAP.  XXI. J 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

Third  column. 

Col.  C.  Carson. 


631 


i,irSt  Battalion,  four  companies,  First  New  Mexico  Volunteers,  Lieuten- 

iecond  Battalion,  four  companies,  First  New  Mexico  Volunteers,  Major  ^ 
Mcrrison 5^2 


Fourth  column. 

Col.  M.  E.  Pino. 

rirst  Battalion,  four  companies,  Second  New  Mexico  Volunteers,  Lieuten- 

ant-Colonel  Chavez VT' i 

Second  Battalion,  two  companies,  Second  and  Third  New  Mexico  Volun- 

teers,  Maj  or  Pino 490 

Fifth  column. 

Six  companies  First  New  Mexico  Militia,  Colonel  Armijo ; four  companies 
Second  New  Mexico  Militia - 

The  ambulances  and  wagons  (hospital)  and  an  ammunition  wagon  for 
sach  column  will  be  kept  in  readiness  to  move  with  the  column  when- 
ever it  marches.  , . _ . 

Three  days’  cooked  rations,  to  be  carried  m the  haversacks,  are  re- 
quired to  be  kept  constantly  on  hand.  - 

If  any  of  the  columns  leave  the  post  permanently  the  amount  ot  sup- 
plies and  the  transportation  to  be  taken  will  be  specially  directed. 

Bv  order  of  Col.  E.  R.  S.  Canby : m 

y wm.  j.  l.  nicodemtts, 

Captain , Twelfth  Infantry , Acting  Asst.  Adjt.  General 


Headquarters  of  the  Army,  A.  G.  O., 
Washington , February  14,  1862. 

I.  Fort  Garland,  Colorado  Territory,  is  transferred  from  the  Depart- 
nent  of  Kansas  to  the  Department  of  New  Mexico. 


General  Orders, 
No.  14 


By  command  of  Major-General  McClellan: 


THOMAS, 

Adjutant - General . 


Executive  Department,  Colorado  Territory, 

Denver , February  14,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  E.  R.  S.  Canby, 

Commanding  Department  of  New  Mexico : 

General  : Orders  have  been  received  from  Maj.  Gen.  David  Hunter, 
commanding  the  Department  of  Kansas,  to  which  this  Territory  is  at- 
tached, to  send  all  the  available  forces  of  the  Territory  to  your  support. 
I have  therefore  ordered  the  seven  remaining  companies  of  the  First 
Regiment  to  march  immediately  to  Santa  F6,  under  command  of  Col. 
John  P.  Slough. 

The  other  three  companies  of  the  regiment  are  stationed,  as  you  are 


632 


[Chap.  XXI. 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 

aware,  at  Fort  Wise,  under  command  of  Lieut.  Col.  S.  F.  Tappan.  I 
have  written  to  Colonel  Tappan  to  hold  himself  in  readiness  to  join  his 
regiment  in  case  you  desire  it.  I think  that  in  the  present  state  of 
things  at  that  post  it  might  he  easily  held  by  a detachment  of  Mexican 
troops $ in  which  case  three  very  efficient  companies,  two  of  infantry  and 
one  of  cavalry,  could  be  added  to  your  force. 

Feeling  that  it  was  possible  that  you  might  desire  these  troops,  I 
have  written  to  Colonel  Tappan  to  consider  himself  under  your  orders. 
I trust  that  this  course  will  be  agreeable  to  you. 

You  will  find  this  regiment,  I hope,  a most  efficient  one  and  of  great 
support  to  you.  It  has  had,  of  course,  no  experience  in  the  field,  but  I 
trust  that  their  enthusiasm  and  patriotic  bravery  will  make  amends,  and 
more  than  that,  for  their  lack  of  active  service  in  the  past. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

LEWIS  WELD, 

Secretary  and  Acting  Governor  of  Colorado  Territory. 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Fort  Craig , N.  Mex.,  February  14,  1862. 
To  the  Adjutant -General  of  the  Army, 

Washington , D.  0.  : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  since  my  report  of  the  10th  in- 
stant* the  Confederate  forces  have  been  moving  slowly  up  the  riverf 
and  are  now  about  20  miles  below  this  place.  From  spies  captured  yes- 
terday by  our  pickets  their  entire  force  is  estimated  at  3,000  men.  I have 
now  at  this  post,  including  the  New  Mexican  Volunteers  and  Militia, 
nearly  4,000.  The  Mexican  population  appear  to  be  animated  by  a very 
good  spirit. 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  E.  S.  CANBY, 

Colonel  Nineteenth  Infantry , Commanding  Department. 


* 

Headquarters  Army  of  New  Mexico, 

Camp  near  Fort  Craig , N.  Mex.,  February  22,  1862. 
Col.  E.  E.  S.  Canby, 

Commanding  U.  S.  Forces  in  the  Territory  of  New  Mexico : 

Colonel:  I desire  hereby  to  accredit  to  you  Lieut.  Col.  William  E. 
Scurry,  of  the  Fourth,  and  Capt.  D.  W.  Shannon,  of  the  Fifth,  Eegiment 
of  Texas  Mounted  Volunteers,  in  the  service  of  the  Confederate  States. 

These  gentlemen  are  dispatched  under  flag  of  truce,  to  hold  com- 
munication with  you  upon  matters  pertaining  to  the  military  service  of 
our  respective  Governments,  in  regard  to  which  they  will  express  to  you 
my  views  and  purposes. 

I commend  them  as  officers  and  gentlemen  to  your  highest  esteem 
and  confidence. 

I am,  colonel,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  H.  SIBLEY, 

Brig.  Gen.  Army  of  C.  $.,  Comdg.  Army  of  New  Mexico. 


'Not  found. 


Chat . XXI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


633 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Fort  Craig , N.  Mex.:  February  23,  1862. 

The  Adjutant-General  of  the  Army, 

Washington , D.  C. : 

Sir  : After  the  battle  of  the  21st  instant  there  remained  for  the  troops 
at  this  post  but  three  plans  of  operation : 

1.  To  retain  this  post  to  the  last  extremity,  await  the  arrival  of  the 
re-enforcements  that  had  previously  been  asked  for,  and  upon  their 
arrival,  by  concerted  operations  in  the  direction  of  the  Pecos  and  the 
Rio  Grande,  defeat  the  enemy  and  force  him  to  retreat  down  that  river, 
and  in  that  event  cut  qff  his  retreat  with  the  force  at  this  point.  This 
post  is  regarded  as  of  paramount  importance,  not  only  for  the  purpose 
above  indicated,  but  to  intercept  any  re-enforcements  that  might  be  sent 
from  Texas,  and  with  a view  to  ulterior  operations  against  the  Mesilla 
Valley. 

2.  To  abandon  the  post  and  endeavor  to  throw  the  force  now  here 
above  the  enemy,  impede  his  further  progress  up  the  river,  and  then 
unite  with  any  force  that  might  be  found  above.  This  course  would 
involve  the  loss  of  the  supplies  on  hand,  the  abandonment  of  an  impor- 
tant strategic  point,  and  of  the  sick  and  wounded  who  could  not  be 
transported. 

3.  To  bring  on  a second  battle  with  the  Confederate  Army,  and  sub- 
mit this  portion  of  our  Army  and  New  Mexico  to  the  chances  of  that 
battle.  The  organized  Confederate  force  in  the  battle  of  the  21st  was 
above  2,500  men.  Our  own  force  on  the  field  was  2,200,  of  whom  more 
than  half  were  volunteers  and  militia.  Our  loss  in  killed,  wounded,  and 
prisoners  was  222  in  the  regulars  and  Colorado  Volunteers  ; in  the  New 
Mexican  Volunteers  about  15.*  The  loss  of  the  Confederates  was  some- 
what greater,  but  independent  of  the  loss  of  our  battery  the  proportional 
disparity  of  force  was  increased  by  the  results  of  the  battle. 

The  first  of  these  plans  was  in  my  judgment  best  calculated  to  secure 
the  ultimate  success  of  our  operations,  and  was  concurred  in  by  the 
several  commanders  and  functionaries  of  the  Territory  who  were  con- 
sulted. It  was  adopted,  and  measures  immediately  taken  to  carry  it 
into  effect. 

I have  disembarrassed  myself  of  the  militia  by  sending  them  away, 
and  have  arranged  with  the  officers  of  that  force  to  impede  the  opera- 
tions of  the  enemy,  obstruct  his  movements  if  he  should  attempt  to  ad- 
vance, and  cut  off  his  supplies,  by  removing  from  his  route  the  cattle, 
grain,  and  other  supplies  in  private  hands  that  would  aid  him  in  sustain- 
ing his  force.  I have  also  sent  away  all  the  public  animals  not  required 
for  the  immediate  service  of  the  post. 

I am  now  organizing  a partisan  force  from  the  volunteers,  for  the 
purpose  of  operating  on  the  flanks  of  the  enemy.  This  force  will  be 
composed  of  picked  men,  and  I anticipate  some  good  results  from  their 
action.  If  there  be  any  consistency  of  purpose  or  persistence  of  effort 
in  the  people  of  New  Mexico,  the  enemy  will  be  able  to  add  but  little 
to  his  resources  from  a temporary  occupation  of  the  country. 

If  the  enemy  should  determine  to  advance,  I will  send  a part  of  the 
regular  cavalry  now  here  to  re-enforce  our  troops  in  the  northern  part 
of  the  Territory,  as  they  are  now  deficient  in  that  class  of  troops. 

On  the  night  of  the  21st  instructions  were  sent  to  the  commander 
above  to  remove  or  destroy  any  public  property  that  might  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  enemy.  Major  Donaldson,  quartermaster,  having  volun- 


* But  see  p.  493. 


634 


[Chap.  XXX 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 

teered  for  the  purpose,  was  detached  last  night  with  the  militia,  and 
charged  with  the  duty  of  superintending  the  removal  of  the  public 
property,  procuring  supplies,  and  collecting  troops  for  future  opera- 
tions. 

The  enemy  still  occupies  a position  near  the  battle-field.  His  inten- 
tions are  not  yet  developed  $ but  as  a demand  for  a surrender  has  been 
made,  I anticipate,  of  course,  an  attempt  to  enforce  it.  If  it  should  be 
made,  I have  no  apprehensions  as  to  the  result. 

Our  loss  in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  is  somewhat  greater  than 
I supposed  when  my  report  of  yesterday  was  made.  The  wounds,  how- 
ever, are  generally  of  a light  character,  and  th6  proportion  that  will 
terminate  fatally  will  be  small. 

Yery  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  E.  S.  CANBY, 

Colonel  Nineteenth  Infantry , Commanding  Department. 


Headquarters  Department  op  Hew  Mexico, 

Acting  Inspector-General^  Office, 

Santa  Fe.,  N.  Mex.,  February  28,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Comdg.  the  Dept,  of  the  Missouri , Saint  Louis , Mo. : 

Dear  Sir  : I wrote  to  you  fully  and  freely,  as  acting  inspector-gen- 
eral of  this  Territory  and  a member  of  Colonel  Canby’s  staff,  in  order 
that  you  may  have  a proper  view  of  the  situation  of  affairs  here. 

This  communication  would  have  been  sent  to  General  Hunter,  as  a 
nearer  military  commander,  had  it  not  suggested  itself  that  possibly  he 
would  be  absent  on  the  field  when  this  communication  should  have 
reached  his  headquarters. 

You  will  probably  learn  from  the  telegraph,  from  rumor,  and  from 
other  sources  that  we  have  had  a most  desperate  and  bloody  struggle 
with  the  Texans,  and  that,  notwithstanding  the  great  loss  upon  their 
part,  we  have  lost  one  light  battery  and  retreated  to  Fort  Craig. 
Colonel  Canby  did  everything  which  man  could  do  to  retake  his  bat- 
tery and  thus  save  the  day.  He  beseeched  and  begged,  ordered  and 
imperatively  commanded,  troops  to  save  his  guns,  and  a deaf  ear  met 
alike  his  supplications  and  commands.  Our  loss  is  great ; 4 officers 
killed— Captains  McRae  and  Stone,  Lieutenant  Mishler,  and  Captain 
Bascom.  Stone  was  first  wounded  and  has  since  died $ Captain  Win- 
gate, leg  shattered ; Lieutenant  McDermott,  volunteers,  killed.  Our 
loss,  as  far  as  ascertained  up  to  the  present  moment,  is  62  killed  and 
about  140  wounded.* 

The  loss  of  the  enemy  is  150  killed  and  450  wounded.  Major  Don- 
aldson thinks  they  lost  over  100  killed  in  front  of  McRae’s  battery. 
The  enemy  is  now  above  Colonel  Canby,  on  the  Rio  Grande,  and  of 
course  has  cut  him  from  all  communication  with  his  supplies.  It  is 
needless  to  say  that  this  country  is  in  a critical  condition.  The  militia 
have  all  runaway  and  theNew  Mexican  Volunteers  are  deserting  in  large 
numbers.  No  dependence  whatever  can  be  placed  on  the  natives  $ they 
are  worse  than  worthless ; they  are  really  aids  to  the  enemy,  who  catch 
them,  take  their  arms,  and  tell  them  to  go  home. 

A force  of  Colorado  Volunteers  is  already  on  the  way  to  assist  us, 
and  they  may  possibly  arrive  in  time  to  save  us  from  immediate  danger  j 
but,  my  dear  sir,  we  must  look  to  the  future.  The  conquest  of  it  (New 


But  see  p.  493. 


UP.  XXI.) 


COEEESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


635 


rexicoi  is  a great  political  feature  of  the  rebellion.  It  will  gam  the 
>bels  a name  and  a prestige  over  Europe,  and  operate  against  the 
rnfon  cause.  It  therefore  should  not  only  be  checked,  but  it  should  at 
nv  future  period  during  the  spring  or  summer  be  rendered  impossible. 
These  Texans  will  not  rest  with  the  forces  they  have  already  with 
lem,  but  they  will  have  large  additions  to  their  command  here,  in 
rder  to  extend  their  conquest  toward  old  Mexico  and  in  the  direction 
f Southern  California.  I therefore  beg  you,  in  the  name  of  Colonel 
lanbv.  who  is  fighting  two  to  one,  and  laying  valuable  lives  upon  this 
isue  to  send  at  once— lose  not  a day— at  least  two  regiments  infantry 
nda  battery  of  rifled  cannon  to  Fort  Union.  These  troops  cannot 
erve  the  Government  better  than  by  saving  this  Territory.  Do  not 
eoend  on  the  New  Mexican  regiments  serving  in  Kansas ; they  are  not 
lied  up  nor  ready  for  the  field.  Send  us  troops  already  organized; 
hev  can  start  bv  the  time  this  reaches  you.  . . 

Believe  no  reports  you  may  hear  of  the  number  of  troops  Canby  has. 
Iiave  given  yon  a true  picture  of  the  state  of  this  country,  and  if 
ou  wish  to  save  it,  you,  I hope  and  pray,  will  act  immediately  in  its 

aV01'  I remain,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your^edirad  80^^,^ 

Captain,  Seventh  Infantry,  Acting  Inspector-General. 

Colonel  Canby  has  but  1,100  men,  exclusive  of  his  volunteers,  and 
he  Texans  have  at  least  2,200,  all  mounted.  a , 

Please  inform  the  headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico,  Santa 
L?e  what  you  can  do  for  this  country,  and  if  you  cannot  help  us,  be 
rind  enough  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  Of  this  communication. 


lUtract  from  return  of  the  Department  of  New  Mexico  Col.  Edward  B S.  Canby,  Nine- 
J teenth  Infantry,  commanding,  for  the  month  of  February,  1862. 


Commands. 


Department  staff. 

Abo  Pass 

Albuquerque 

Camp  Connelly . - - 


Cnbero. 

Fort  Craig  and  vicinity. 

Fort  Garland 

Fort  Marcy* 

Fort  Union  and  depot.. 

Hatch’s  Ranch 

In  the  field 


Total. 


Present  for 
duty. 


110 

3 


14 


138 


2, 130 
37 


267 

57 


2, 491 


2,  677 
48 


359 

73 


3, 162 


§ 

GO 

© -i 


51 


601 

102 


pi 


* >> 
n a 

txo 

fchS 

<1 


5 

145 

162 

167 

74 

1,  208 
130 
221 
780 
261 
1,  775 


3, 651  4, 


No  return. 


IS 


IS 


Headquarters  District  of  Santa  He, 

Santa  Fe,  March  1,  1862. 

General  Lorenzo  Thomas,  Adjutant- General,  Washington,  D.  C.: 
General  : In  obedience  to  an  order  from  Colonel  Canby,  command* 


636 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chav.  XXI. 


ingth®  department  of  New  Mexico,  I respectfully  inclose  his  report* 
ot  the  battle  of  Valverde,  which  took  place  near  Port  Craig-,  on  the  21st 
instant.  T 

The  colonel  is  sanguine  that  he  will  succeed  in  holding  the  enemy  in 
check,  but  haying  been  in  the  battle,  and  having  succeeded  in  getting 
through  the  enemy’s  line  from  Craig  on  the  night  of  the  22d  with  the 
view  of  turning  back  any  trains  that  may  have  been  on  the  road,  as 
well  as  to  secure  the  public  property  on  the  river  below  Albuquerque 
X may  be  allowed  to  express  the  opinion  that  I consider  the  colonel’s 


situation  as  critical,  and  would 


most  earnestly  advise  that  no  time  be 


lost  in  sending  re-enforcements  to  this  country.  Four  regiments  of 
infantry,  some  cavalry,  and  a battery  of  rifled  cannon  at  least  should 
be  sent.  The  enemy  numbers  about  2,000  men,  all  mounted,  and  is 
expecting  re-enforcements.  He  suffered  severely  in  the  battle,  and  is 
now  encumbered  with  a large  number  of  wounded.  This  may  prevent 
him  from  moving  up  the  river  at  present,  but  his  foraging  parties  have 
already  come  within  60  miles  of  Albuquerque.  No  reliance  can  be 
placed  on  the  New  Mexican  Volunteers  or  Militia,  and  I advise  their 
being  disbanded.  They  have  a traditionary  fear  of  the  Texans,  and 
will  not  face  them  in  the  field. 

I will  not  anticipate  Colonel  Canby’s  detailed  report,  but  I must  say 
that  he  made  every  exertion  to  save  Captain  McRae’s  battery. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  L.  DONALDSON, 

Quartermaster , Brevet  Major , Comdg.  Dist . Santa  Be. 


Headquarters  District  of  Santa  Fe, 

Santa  Be.  March  1,  1862. 

General  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General,  Washington , Z>.  G.: 

General  : I am  in  receipt  of  a letter  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Tap- 
pan,  of  the  Colorado  Volunteers,  informing  me  that  General  Hunter 
had  ordered  his  regiment  immediately  from  Denver  City  to  Santa  F6 
to  re-enforce  Colonel  Canby,  who,  as  you  will  see  bv  his  report,  has 
had  a severe  conflict  with  the  Texans  near  Fort  Craig.  This  order  of 
General  Hunter  is  most  seasonable,  and  may  perhaps  save  the  Terri- 
tory. Colonel  Tappan  is  stationed  at  Fort  Wise  with  two  companies 
of  his  regiment  and  a mounted  company,  the  rest  of  the  garrison  being 
a regular  company,  under  Lieutenant  Warner.  I have  not  hesitated 
to  order  Colonel  Tappan  to  Santa  F6  by  special  express  to  join  the 
other  companies  of  his  regiment  (seven)  coming  by  way  of  Garland, 
and  if  Colonel  Canby  can  hold  the  enemy  in  check  for  fifteen  or  twenty 
days  I am  in  hopes  of  marching  to  his  assistance  with  1,000  men,  100  ! 
of  whom  will  be  regulars,  under  Captain  Lewis,  Fifth  Infantry. 

I have  dates  from  Colonel  Canby  to  the  25th  instant.  I sent  a trusty 
messenger  to  him  last  night,  urging  him  to  delay  the  enemy  as  much  i 
as  possible,  and  communicating  the  fact  of  a Colorado  regiment  being 
on  the  road  to  his  relief.  Nothing  as  yet  has  fallen  into  the  hands  of  ! 
the  enemy.  When  1 left  Craig,  which  I did  the  evening  after  the 
battle,  Colonel  Canby  authorized  me  to  use  his  name  and  to  take  such 
steps  as  I deemed  best.  If  disaster  happens  to  the  colonel  before  re- 
enforcements arrive  I shall  throw  myself  into  Union,  but  I need  hardly 
urge  the  importance  of  at  once  putting  en  route  to  Union  a force  that 
will  overwhelm  the  enemy. 


* See  Canby’s  report  of  February  22,  on  p.  487. 


Chap.  XXI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


637 


I send  a copy  of  these  letters  to  General  Halleck,  Saint  Louis,  being: 
apprehensive  that  General  Hunter  has  gone  South. 

Yerv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J 1 ’ JAS.  L.  DONALDSOK, 

Brevet  Major , Commanding  District  of  Santa  Fe. 


Headquarters  District  of  Santa  F£, 

Santa  Fe , March  1,  1862. 


General  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commanding  Department  of  Missouri , Saint  Louis : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a copy  of  the  official  report* 
of  a battle  between  the  Union  troops  under  Colonel  Canby  and  the 
Texans,  near  Fort  Craig. 

The  loss  was  heavy  on  both  sides,  that  of  the  enemy  being  at  least 


double  that  of  ours. 

The  enemy  have  possession  of  the  road  above  Craig,  and  may  march 
up,  as  Colonel  Canby  is  embarrassed  with  his  wounded,  as  well  as 
having  lost  McKae’s  battery. 

Everything  will  be  done  here  to  succor  him.  You  will  see  by  my 
letter  to  the  Adjutant-General  of  the  Army  that  a regiment  of  Colorado 
Volunteers  is  on  the  march  to  this  city  from  Denver  and  Fort  Wise, 
but  the  snow  is  deep  on  the  Taos  Mountains  and  they  may  not  get 
through  in  time. 

I urgently  recommend  that  four  regiments  of  infantry,  some  cavalry, 
and  a battery  of  rifled  cannon  be  at  once  put  en  route  for  Union. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J ’ JA8.  L.  DONALDSON, 

Quartermaster , Commanding  District  of  Santa  FS. 


ft 


Executive  Department, 

# Santa  Fe , March  1,  1862. 

Secretary  of  State,  Washington , D.  C. : 

Sir:  Since  my  last  communication  from  Fort  Craig  I have  been 
unable  to  write  you  until  this  day,  in  consequence  of  the  commotion 
and  excitement  that  have  existed  from  that  day  to  the  present.  On 
the  19th  of  February  the  enemy  retrograded  from  their  position,  5 
miles  below  Craig,  to  the  place  called  Paraje,  where  they  crossed  to 
the  opposite  or  east  side  of  the  river.  On  the  20th  he  advanced  up 
the  river,  but  at  the  distance  of  4 or  5 miles  from  it,  until  about  oppo- 
site the  fort,  when  Colonel  Canby  marched  out  to  give  him  battle. 
The  ground  over  which  the  enemy  passed,  and  over  which  our  forces 
had  to  pass  in  order  to  reach  him,  was  a bed  of  sand,  covered  generally 
with  loose  volcanic  rocks,  which  impeded  the  progress  of  our  train  of 
artillery,  and  made  it  quite  late  in  the  evening  before  the  position  of 
the  enemy  was  reached.  This  position  he  had  taken  with  great  labor 
on  a sandy  height  somewhat  inaccessible  to  our  heavy  artillery.  After 
some  fifty  or  sixty  shots  fired  by  the  enemy  with  their  largest  guns 
without  effect  our  forces  retired  again  to  the  fort,  arriving  some  time 
after  dark. 

On  the  21st  the  enemy  were  met  5 miles  above  the  fort,  having  dur- 
ing the  night  and  the  next  morning  made  their  way  to  the  river  at 


Canby’s  report  of  February  22,  p.  487. 


638  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

that  distance  above  the  fort.  The  action  commenced  about  10  o’clock 
with  artillery  across  the  river  at  a distance  of  1,000  yards  and  in  a for- 
est ot  cottonwood  trees,  which  gave  the  enemy  greatly  the  advantage 
as  it  shielded  them  from  our  artillery  and  even  the  small-arms  that 
were  used  at  that  distance. 

About  1 o’clock  our  whole  force  passed  the  river,  having  previously 
driven  the  enemy  from  his  position  near  the  river  to  the  foot  of  and 
into  the  sand  hills.  The  battle  now  raged  with  increased  fury,  and  the 
enemy  was  to  all  appearances  in  the  act  of  retreating  from  the  ground 
when,  to  hasten  his  retreat,  one  of  our  batteries  of  six  guns,  light 
artillery,  was  advanced  some  200  yards  nearer  their  position,  which 
was  in  a degree  covered  by  a ridge  of  sand,  behind  which  they  had 
taken  momentary  refuge,  when,  to  the  surprise  of  all,  about  500  men 
came  forth  from  that  position  and  advanced  steadily  on  to  and  finally 
captured  the  battery.  This  was  not  done  without  great  loss  to  the  cap- 
tors,  for  of  the  500  men  that  left  the  position  of  concealment  not  more 
than  200  arrived  at  the  battery. 

It  is  painful  to  relate  that  of  the  forces  in  position  for  the  protection 
of  the  battery  not  one  company  advanced  to  its  relief  or  even  fired 
upon  the  enemy  as  he  approached.  The  force  consisted  of  two  or  more 
companies  of  regular  troops  and  one  regiment  of  volunteers.  The  reg- 
ulars were  ordered— nay,  implored— to  charge  the  enemy,  by  Colonel 
Canby,  Major  Donaldson,  and  Colonel  Collins,  superintendent-  of  Indian 
affairs,  who  were  all  three  present  in  immediate  contact  with  the  troops 
and  within  10  or  20  yards  of  the  battery  when  it  was  taken.  The  reg- 
ulars having  refused  to  advance,  the  volunteers  followed  their  example, 
and  both  retired  from  the  field,  recrossing  the  river  and  leaving  the  bat- 
tery in  possession  of  the  enemy.  There  was  no  flight,  and  the  enemy 
gave  no  pursuit.  He  was  evidently  greatly  crippled,  and  chose  as  the 
more  prudent  course  to  close  the  day  with  the  advantage  gained.  Col 
onel  Canby  now  ordered  all  our  forces  to  recross  the  river,  and  marched 
into  the  fort  some  time  after  dark.  Thus  ended  the  bloody  day  of  the 
21§t  February. 

A cessation  of  hostilities  intervened  the  next  day,  for  the  purpose  of 
burying  the  dead  and  removing  the  wounded  from  the  field.  On  the 
following  day,  23d,  a deputation  of  two  officers  waited  upon  Colonel  | 
Canby,  asking  a surrender  of  the  fort,  and  indicated  that  very  honor- 
able terms  would  be  granted.  The  proposition  was  peremptorily  refused,  j 
The  day  following  it  was  thought  that  the  fort  would  certainly  be  at-  I 
tacked  by  the  enemy.  A council  of  war  was  held,  in  which  it  was  j 
determined  rather  to  await  the  attack  of  the  enemy  in  the  fort  than  to 
attack  him  again  in  his  strong  position.  The  number  of  men  in  the  fort 
was  more  than  could  be  usefully  employed,  and  it  was  ordered  by  Col- 
onel Canby  that  the  militia  lately  called  into  the  service  should  with- 
draw from  the  fort  and  make  a detour  that  would  place  them  in  advance  j 
of  the  enemy.  This  had  to  be  done  by  a night  march,  which  was  effected  j 
without  much  difficulty  and  with  no  loss,  except  in  the  dispersion  of 
the  militia,  but  few  of  whom  have  been  embodied  since  they  emerged  j 
from  the  mountains  and  reached  the  settlements  upon  the  Rio  Grandq. 
In  fact,  the  enemy  gave  but  little  time  for  rallying. 

On  the  morning  of  our  arrival  on  the  river  in  advance  of  the  enemy, 
and  before  all  had  reached  the  place  of  rendezvous,  it  was  ascertained  j 
that  a body  of  the  enemy,  400  strong,  with  two  pieces  of  artillery,  was  ! 
in  our  neighborhood,  and  advancing  at  the  rate  of  30  miles  per  day. 
This  they  had  done  in  order  to  capture  a depot  of  provisions  that  was  I 
at  Polvadera,  50  miles  from  Craig.  The  provisions,  however,  had  been 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


639 


Chap.  XXI.l 

gent  off  in  advance,  and  the  enemy  captured  nothing  or  very  little. 
Under  this  state  of  things  I saw  that  my  presence  out  of  the  capital 
would  be  of  no  further  utility,  and  therefore  came  m company  with  a 
few  militia  officers,  and  arrived  here  on  the  27th  of  February. 

Colonel  Canby  is.  or  was  at  last  accounts  (25th),  still  at  Craig.  J-he 
enemy  had  not  attacked  the  fort,  as  was  expected,  but  had  crossed  to 
the  west  side  of  the  river,  and  was  encamped  8 miles  in  advance  ol  the 
fort.  It  is  supposed  that  Colonel  Canby  will  attack  him  so  soon  as  he 
leaves  the  strong  position  he  occupies,  and  his  forces  are  quite  sufficient 
to  defeat  the  enemy.  He  has  yet  1,000  regular  troops,  with  five  pieces 
of  artillery,- among  them  two  24-pounder  howitzers,  and  a volunteer 
force  of  not  less  than  1,500  men.  His  stock  is  in  much  better  condition 
than  that  of  the  enemy,  and  we  are  expecting  the  result  of  a decisive 

action  daily.  , , _ , 

The  advance  party  of  the  enemy  mentioned  had  not  progressed 
farther  at  last  accounts  than  the  depot  of  provisions  spoken  of  before. 
Whether  they  will  continue  to  advance  with  their  small  number  will 
be  known  in  a short  time.  Albuquerque  is  defenseless  as  to  any  armed 
force  in  that  place,  and  if  the  enemy  advance  it  is  very  likely  that  they 
will  succeed  in  taking  that  place.  All  the  Government  stores  have 
been  removed,  however,  and  are  far  on  their  way  to  this  place  and  to 
Fort  Union.  We  are  making  some  efforts  here  to  repel  any  small 
force  that  may  arrive  in  advance,  and  we  will  be  able  to  do  so ; but  all 
will  be  determined  by  the  result  of  the  operations  of  Colonel  Canby 
upon  the  enemy.  If  he  defeats  him,  or  even  be  not  routed  and  dis- 
persed by  the  enemy,  we  will  be  able  to  expel  the  invaders  from  the 
Territory. 

Our  loss  consisted  of  46  killed  and  160  wounded.*  Among  the  former 
were  several  valuable  officers.  Captain  McKae,  commanding  the  bat- 
tery, died  at  his  guns,  with  one  or  two  other  officers.  The  80  men  at 
the  battery  defended  it  with  a heroic  valor  worthy  of  better  success,  ot 
whom  43  were  either  killed  or  wounded.  The  loss  of  the  enemy,  it  is 
ascertained  by  deserters  from  their  camp,  was  very  large — at  least  300 
killed,  and  the  wounded  in  proportion.  The  deserters  say  that  a con- 
sultation was  held  two  days  after  the  battle  in  regard  to  an  attack  upon 
the  fort,  and  that  the  more  daring  officers  were  in  favor  of  an  attack, 
but  that  the  men  utterly  refused  to  put  their  lives  in  such  imminent 
danger,  which  would  lead  to  certain  defeat  and  dispersion  of  the  whole 
invading  force.  There  was  some  talk  of  their  trying  to  effect  a retreat, 
as  it  was  thought  that  the  conquest  of  the  Territory  could  never  be 
effected  by  the  force  then  in  the  Territory. 

I have  been  absent  from  the  capital  one  month,  and  am  sorry  to  be 
able  to  give  no  better  account  of  the  operations  of  our  army.  1 had 
anticipated  a very  different  result.  Through  the  official  reports  you 
will  be  informed  more  in  detail  as  to  the  cause  of  our  repulse. 

March  2.  An  express  has  just  arrived,  giving  information  that  nearly 
or  quite  the  whole  force  of  the  Texans  are  on  their  march  up  the  river  and 
have  reached  the  town  of  Socorro.  No  news  of  Colonel  Canby  having 
moved  from  Craig.  Under  these  circumstances  Major  Donaldson,  com- 
mander of  this  district,  has  ordered  all  the  Government  stores  from  this 
place  to  Union,  and  most  likely  will  leave  himself  with  the  three  com- 
panies of  troops  that  have  arrived  here  within  the  last  two  days-  Should 
this  be  the  case  I shall  follow  him  to  Union,  and  even  to  the  States, 


*But  see  p.  493. 


640  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

should  the  Territory  be  abandoned  to  the  enemy 5 for  I feel  no  disposi- 
tion to  be  taken  prisoner  by  them. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  CONNELLY. 


Department  of  State, 
Washington , B.  (7.,  March  4,  1862. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I transmit  for  your  information  a copy  of  a letter  of  the  31st  of 
January  last,  addressed  to  this  Department  by  Henry  Connelly,  esq., 
the  Governor  of  the  Territory  of  New  Mexico. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  H,  SEWARD. 

[Inclosure.] 

Socorro,  N.  Mex.,  January  31,  1862. 

Hon.  W.  H.  Seward, 

Secretary  of  State , Washington , B.  G.  : 

Sir  : I wrote  you  on  the  25th  instant  that  I should  leave  the  day 
following  for  the  theater  of  war,  Fort  Craig,  having  left  the  major-gen- 
eral of  divisions  of  the  militia  actively  engaged  in  organizing  and 
sending  into  the  field  all  the  disposable  militia  force  in  the  Territory. 

I have  daily  intelligence  from  them,  and  from  appearances  there  will  j 
be  an  additional  force  of  1,500  men  with  us  within  five  days.  The 
forces  of  Texas  have  fallen  back  to  Fort  Thorn,  75  miles  below  Fort 
Craig,  and  I think  it  very  doubtful  whether  they  will  give  us  battle 
this  side  of  that  place.  Colonel  Canby  left  here  yesterday  with  1,500 
men  for  Craig,  35  miles  distant,  and  will  increase  the  number  of  men 
at  that  place  to  3,000.  We  have  now  no  fears  of  any  serious  reverse 
to  our  arms.  The  whole  Texan  force  is  concentrated  at  and  near  Fill- 
more, Robledo,  and  Thorn,  distant  from  each  other  25  miles.  We  have 
a force  at  Craig  equal  to  theirs,  and  with  the  militia  now  en  route  will  ! 
have  fully  1,000  men  more.  Whether  Colonel  Canby  will  advance  upon 
them  I have  no  idea,  but  think  he  will  pursue  a prudential  course  un- 
til he  is  sure  of  success.  The  proclamation  of  General  Sibley  to  the 
people  of  this  Territory,*  which  has  been  found  in  considerable  num-  j 
bers  scattered  through  the  villages  in  this  part  of  the  Territory,  has, 
when  found,  been  universally  delivered  to  the  military  commander, 
without  having  circulated  among  the  people  any  number  of  copies.  1 
have  none  by  me,  or  I would  inclose  you  one.  It  will  have  no  effect, 
even  if  circulated.  I am  sure  the  Territory  is  safe  at  present,  and  only 
by  re-enforcements,  which  the  enemy  in  all  probability  will  never  ob- 
tain, can  there  be  any  danger  of  a great  disaster  to  our  arms.  A 
great  inconvenience  will  always  be  felt  by  having  to  keep  so  many  men 
under  arms  to  meet  and  repel  this  force  of  the  enemy  which  is  threat- 
ening our  borders.  Perhaps  a few  days  or  weeks  may  lead  to  new 
developments,  and  teach  us  more  of  their  plans  and  their  means  of 
executing  them. 

I have  remained  at  this  place  a few  days  to  await  the  arrival  of  the 
militia  now  en  route  from  the  counties  above.  When  they  arrive  much  ; 
more  will  be  known  as  to  the  position  and  intentions  of  the  enemy  than 
we  now  know,  and  then,  in  co-operation  with  Colonel  Canby,  will  be 

•Reference  is  probably  to  proclamation  printed  on p.  89,  Series  I,  Yol.  IY. 


Jhap.  XXL] 


641 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


able  to  determine  upon  the  course  most  prudent  to  be  pursued.  I will 
keep  you  advised  of  anything  worthy  of  note  that  may  take  place. 
The  enemy  is  in  straitened  circumstances,  both  as  to  subsistence  and 
forage,  and  will  have  to  advance  upon  us  with  a hope  of  success,  or 
forage  upon  Mexico  for  the  means  of  subsistence.  It  is  said  they 
are  in  doubt  which  course  of  the  two  presents  the  fairer  prospect  of 


success. 

Very  respectfully,  your 


obedient  servant, 

HENRY  CONNELLY, 
Governor  of  New  Mexico . 


Department  of  State, 
Washington , D.  0.,  March  11,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  a copy  of  dispatch  No.  3, 
received  on  the  7th  instant,  from  Franklin  Chase,  esq.,  United  States 
consul  at  Tampico,  recommending  the  capture  and  occupation  of 
Brownsville,  Tex.,  by  our  forces.  Believing  as  I do  that  such  occupa- 
tion is  necessary  to  prevent  the  injury  to  our  Government  which  would 
ensue  from  the  unrestricted  intercourse  between  Tampico  and  the 
Southern  States,  I beg  to  commend  the  subject  to  your  consideration, 
and  to  suggest  that  you  confer  with  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  in  re- 
gard to  it,  to  whom  I have  also  written  and  inclosed  a copy  of  Mr. 
Chase’s  dispatch. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ WILLf AM  H.  SEWARD. 


[In  closure.  J 

Consulate  of  the  United  States  of  America, 

Tampico , January  24,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  W.  Seward, 

Asst.  Secy,  of  State  of  the  United  States , efic.,  Washington , D.  C.: 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  that  since  the  commencement 
of  this  month  the  military  and  civil  authorities  have  been  busily  en- 
gaged in  making  preparations  to  vacate  this  place.  All  the  forts  and 
fortified  points  have  been  dismantled,  and  vast  quantities  of  armament 
have  been  embarked  in  vessels  and  lighters,  and  sent  as  far  up  the 
river  as  practicable.  About  fourteen  pieces  of  light  artillery  have  been 
detained  to  cover  the  retirement  of  the  forces  under  General  Tapia  the 
moment  the  allied  forces  appear  off  the  bar. 

The  civil  authorities  here,  who  acted  as  chiefs  in  revolt  against  the 
late  elected  Governor,  Don  Jesus  Serna,  on  hearing  of  the  success  of 
the  opposite  party  at  Matamoros  and  the  city  of  Victoria,  closed  their 
offices  and  disappeared  from  the  place.  These  occurrences  took  place 
on  the  17th  instant,  and  on  that  day  General  Tapia  took  formal  pos- 
session of  the  offices  thus  vacated,  viz:  Collector  of  customs,  Governor 
of  the  State,  and  that  of  the  political  chief  or  prefect. 

At  the  instance  of  the  President  of  this  Republic  all  the  archives  of 
the  different  offices  have  been  sent  to  this  consulate  and  to  the  stores 
belonging  to  my  premises,  which  I received  as  an  act  of  kindness 
toward  these  distracted  people. 

On  the  18th  instant  a schooner,  called  the  Lord  Lyons,  under  the 
British  flag,  arrived  in  this  port,  in  fifteen  days  from  Matamoros.  I 
41  R R— VOL  IX 


642 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[Chap.  XXI. 


have  ascertained  that  this  vessel  was  formerly  called  the  Sultan,  be- 
longing to  Key  West,  and  that  her  nationality  was  changed  at  the 
British  consulate  at  Havana.  She  is  only  57£f  tons  burden,  laden  with 
720  pigs  of  lead  and  a quantity  of  goat-skins,  with  a clearance  for 
Nassau,  N.  P.,  notwithstanding  she  had  9 passengers  on  board  for 
Havana. 

I have  intimated  to  General  Tapia  the  expediency  of  detaining  the 
lead  brought  by  the  Lord  Lyons,  who  assured  me  that  he  would  con- 
sult with  the  district  judge,  and  if  he  considered  it  contraband  of  war 
it  should  not  leave  the  port;  but  I have  lost  all  confidence  in  these 
people,  and  we  must  only  look  to  our  own  resources  for  the  means  of 
our  national  security. 

The  sloop  Warrior,  mentioned  in  my  No.  29,  27th  ultimo,  has  been 
made  over  to  a Mr.  David  Jolley,  British  merchant  of  this  place,  and 
furnished  with  authority  to  sail  under  the  flag  of  that  nation  by  Her 
Majesty’s  consul  here. 

The  secession  schooner  Clarinda,  Sherffins  master,  arrived  here  from 
Sabine  in  the  early  part  of  this  month  with  a cargo  of  lumber  and  left 
in  ballast  on  the  18th  instant,  the  exportation  of  arms  and  provisions 
having  been  denied  her. 

By  the  inclosed  copy  of  the  letter  from  John  M.  Coe,  esq.,  you  will 
be  informed  of  the  movements  of  our  enemies  in  the  interior  of  this 
Bepublic. 

The  people  of  New  Orleans  have  conceived  a plan  for  the  purpose 
of  expediting  the  transmission  of  their  correspondence  with  foreign 
nations  through  the  medium  of  this  port,  and  to  effect  that  object  they 
have  sent  Mr.  Augustine  Leona  as  commissioner  to  this  place,  to  pro- 
vide the  means  of  connecting  an  express  with  the  monthly  British  mail 
steamers.  1 may  add  that  this  port  is  now  becoming  the  medium  for 
all  persons  wishing  to  return  to  the  Southern  States  who  do  not  like  to 
incur  the  risk  of  attempting  to  force  the  blockade,  and  as  we  are  now 
momentarily  expecting  the  place  to  fall  under  the  rule  of  European 
powers,  incalculable  injury  may  accrue  to  our  Government  unless  this 
intercourse  can  be  interrupted  by  the  capture  and  occupation  of  Browns- 
ville by  our  forces. 

Permit  me  now  to  impress  upon  your  mind  the  importance  of  having 
this  coast  closely  guarded  by  our  ships  of  war,  with  instructions  to 
communicate  with  the  consulates  at  least  semi-monthly,  assuring  you 
that  no  other  means  can  effectually  put  a final  check  to  military  sup- 
plies going  into  the  hands  of  our  enemies. 

I am,  with  great  esteem  and  respect,  sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

FRANKLIN  CHASE. 

[Inclosure.] 

Zacatecas,  January  2,  1862. 

Franklin  Chase,  Esq.,  Tampico: 

My  Dear  Sir  : On  my  arrival  here  yesterday  I was  informed  that  a 
certain  individual  named  J.  E.  Sehenck,  a German  by  birth,  and  an 
American  citizen,  was  actively  purchasing  ammunition  of  war  for  the 
Southern  Confederacy.  To-day  I met  the  same  person  at  one  of  the 
commercial  houses  of  this  place,  where  he  has  purchased  130  flasks 
quicksilver,  some  saltpeter,  sulphur,  and  all  the  percussion  caps  he 
has  been  able  to  obtain.  I have  been  assured  that  he  leaves  in  a few 
days  for  Matamoros. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


643 


DiiAr.XXI.l 

I have  thought  it  my  duty  to  communicate  this  intelligence  to  you 
as  a representative  of  the  United  States. 

Hoping  you  may  he  able  to  communicate  the  same  to  our  Govern- 
ment,  I remain,  dear  sir,  yours,  very  truly,  J0HN  M.  0OE. 


Department  of  State, 

Washington , March  11,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  : I inclose  for  perusal  two  letters,  dated  respectively  the  5th  and 
11th  ultimo,  addressed  to  this  Department  by  Henry  Connelly,  esq., 
Governor  of  the  Territory  of  New  Mexico. 

Please  cause  them  to  be  returned  when  you  may  no  longer  have 
occasion  for  them. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  H.  SEWAKD. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.1 


Fort  Craig,  N.  Mex.,  February  5, 1862. 
Hon.  W.  H.  Seward,  Secretary  of  State : 

Sir  : I arrived  at  this  place  to-day,  having  delayed  three  days  in 
Socorro  waiting  the  arrival  of  the  first  column  of  the  militia  called  out 
under  my  recent  order.  With  that  column  1 came  in  company.  Within 
four  or  five  days  the  entire  militia  force  will  be  in  the  immediate  neigh- 
borhood of  this  post.  The  exact  number  I cannot  at  this  time  state 
except  by  approximation ; not  less,  however,  than  1,000,  and  perhaps 
as  many' as  1,500,  consisting  of  our  principal  citizens. 

The  Texans  have  made  no  demonstrations  upon  this  post  since  my 
last,  and  in  fact  nothing  new  has  beeil  heard  from  them. 

We  expect  to  hear  something  certain  within  two  days,  as  spies  are 
out  to  ascertain  if  possible  their  exact  position,  and  something  reliable 
as  to  their  preparations  to  move  against  the  forces  of  the  Territory  now 
assembled  at  this  place.  Colonel  Canby,  I think,  has  not  determined 
whether  he  will  march  against  them,  but  most  likely  will  resolve  ac- 
cording to  the  information  he  may  receive  by  the  spies,  whose  return 
is  daily  expected. 

There  is  now,  or  will  be  within  a few  days,  a force  concentrated  at 
this  place  of  4,500  men,  3,500  of  which  are  volunteers  and  militia.  This 
force  is  fully  equal  to  the  protection  of  the  Territory  against  the  forces 
of  Texas  north  of  the  desert  of  Jornada,  but  it  might  be  a question  as 
to  the  propriety  of  advancing  upon  them  at  disadvantage  at  so  great  a 
distance  from  all  resources  in  the  event  of  a reverse  to  our  arms. 

The  matter  will  be  duly  considered  by  Colonel  Canby,  and  in  his 
good  judgment  we  all  have  entire  confidence.  There  is  something  not 
well  understood  in  the  late  movements  of  the  Texans ; their  falling 
back  rather  precipitately  from  all  their  positions  on  the  Rio  Grande 
north  of  Robledo,  when  we  all  expected  a forward  movement  of  the 
whole  force  upon  this  place,  has  created  some  surprise,  and  is  attributed 
to  various  motives ; such  as  disaffected  feeling  among  the  men,  to  the 
unexpected  force  of  citizen  soldiery  arrayed  against  them,  and  to  the 
prevalence  of  small-pox  to  an  alarming  degree  in  their  ranks.  Perhaps 
something  of  all  these  causes  may  have  contributed  to  change  their 


644  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXL 

program  and  advised  to  a defensive  instead  of  an  offensive  course.  I 
am  sure  that  a few  days  will  lead  to  new  developments,  of  which  you 
will  he  duly  apprised. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  CONNELLY, 
Governor  of  New  Mexico. 

February  6. 

After  writing  the  foregoing  last  night  the  spies  came  in  and  reported 
the  advance  of  the  whole  Texan  force  upon  this  post.  They  were  at 
and  above  Fort  Thorn,  80  miles  distant,  but  without  a doubt  march- 
ing forward  to  determine  by  a decisive  battle  the  fate  of  the  Territory, 
I have  no  fears  as  to  the  result  here.  We  will  conquer  the  Texan 
forces,  if  not  in  the  first  battle,  it  will  be  done  in  the  second  or  subse- 
quent battles.  We  will  overcome  them.  The  spirit  of  our  people  is 
good,  and  I have  here  and  en  route  1,000  and  more  of  the  elite  of  the 
yeomanry  of  the  country  to  aid  in  defending  their  homes  and  firesides, 
Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  CONNELLY, 
Governor  of  New  Mexico . 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Fort  Craig,  N.  Mex.,  February  11,  1862, 
Hon.  W.  H.  Seward,  ’ 

Secretary  of  State , Washington , I).  C. : 

Sir  : The  enemy  are  approaching  in  full  force,  not,  I think,  exceed- 
ing  3,000  men.  They  are  within  20  miles  of  this  post.  To-day  our 
united  forces  march  out  to  meet  them.  The  battle  will  most  likely  take 
place  on  the  13th,  about  10  miles  below.  We  have  no  fears  of  the  re- 
sult. Enthusiasm  prevails  throughout  our  lines. 

About  800  militia  will  arrive  to-morrow,  there  being  already  here  and 
in  service  500  of  those  called  out  by  my  late  order,  issued  on  the  25th  of 
January.  The  militia  have  displayed  a commendable  spirit  in  the  pres- 
ent emergency,  and  I have  great  confidence  that  they  will  do  good  serv- 
ice. We  have  fully  4,000  men  under  arms,  among  them  1,200  regular 
troops. 

Colonel  Canby  has  the  entire  confidence  of  the  army  and  of  the 
country.  He  will  be  ably  assisted  by  his  regular  and  temporary  staff*, 

I may  owe  an  apology  or  explanation  for  having  left  the  capital  during^ 
the  session  of  the  Legislature.  It  was  thought  by  all  that  my  presence 
would  be  very  necessary  and  my  example  more  so,  which  I think  has. 
been  the  case,  as  there  are  hundreds  of  our  best  citizens,  with  their  re- 
tainers, now  present,  who  might  have  hesitated  had  I remained  at  Santa 
Fe. 

The  Legislature  had  but  five  days  remaining  of  the  session  when  I 
left,  and  but  few  aud  unimportant  laws  to  pass;  the  most  of  which 
were  sent  to  me  and  were  signed  before  the  Legislature  adjourned. 

I learn  that  Secretary  Holmes  has  left  Santa  Fe  for  the  States  since 
my  departure.  He  will  doubtless  explain  to  the  President  the  neces- 
sity that  compelled  him  to  leave. 

So  soon  as  anything  decisive  takes  place  I will  communicate  the  re- 
sult. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  CONNELLY, 
Governor  of  New  Mexico , 


Chap.  XXI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


645 


Fort  Union,  1ST.  Mex.,  March  11,  1862. 
Hou.  W.  H.  Seward,  Secretary  of  State,  Washington  City: 

Sre : Since  my  last  communication,  of  the  1st  instant,  there  has  been 
no  further  encounter  between  the  forces  under  Colonel  Canby  and 
those  of  Texas,  so  far  as  heard  from.  On  the  4th  instant,  Major  Don- 
aldson, then  commander  of  the  District  of  Santa  F6,  determined  to 
leave  that  city  with  the  small  force  he  had  under  his  command,  say  200 
men,  and  fall  back  upon  this  place.  It  was  then  said  that  the  ad- 
vanced guard  (500  strong)  of  the  enemy  had  entered  Albuquerque  and 
would  proceed  immediately  to  the  capital.  His  departure  became  the 
more  necessary  in  order  to  escort  and  defend  a large  amount  of  Gov 
eminent  property  then  on  the  way  from  Albuquerque  and  Santa  Fe  to 
this  place.  The  capital  having  been  abandoned  by  the  United  States 
forces,  I came  in  company  with  them,  and  I have  for  the  present  estab- 
lished the  executive  department  at  Las  Vegas,  30  miles  west  of  this  post. 

Since  my  last  there  has  been  nothing  official  received  from  Colonel 
Canby,  but  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  he  has  left  Fort  Craig  and 
is  now  on  march  for  this  place  or  its  neighborhood.  The  enemy  in  full 
force  are  said  to  have  entered  Albuquerque  four  days  since;  if  so, 
Colonel  Canby  will  have  an  opportunity  to  make  a detour,  and  march 
to  this  place,  or  to  a position  in  advance  of  them,  by  the  way  of 
Manzauo. 

I presume  he  wishes  to  avoid  a decisive  engagement  until  he  can 
unite  with  the  re-enforcements  that  are  here  from  Colorado  Territory, 
of  whose  arrival  or  near  approacli  he  is  doubtless  apprised.  Colonel 
Slough,  from  Denver  City,  arrived  here  last  night,  with  950  men,  who  from 
all  accounts  can  be  relied  upon.  These,  with  300  or  400  that  are  already 
here,  will  give  Colonel  Canby  a force  of  2,000  regular  troops ; that  is, 
American  troops.  He  has  still  the  fragments  of  three  regiments  of 
Mexican  Volunteers,  I think  to  the  amount  of  1,500  men,  which  would 
make  his  force  fully  3,500.  The  militia  have  all  dispersed,  and  have 
gone  to  preparing  their  lands  for  the  coming  harvest,  and  this  is  by  far 
the  best  use  that  could  be  made  of  them. 

Should  the  forces  at  this  place  unite  with  Colonel  Canby,  of  which 
at  this  time  I have  no  doubt,  the  enemy  will  be  driven  from  the  Terri- 
tory. Should  Colonel  Canby  be  attacked  by  the  enemy  and  suffer  a 
defeat,  with  considerable  loss  of  men  and  arms,  we  will  then  be  in  a 
very  precarious  condition  until  re- enforcements  arrive.  The  whole 
force  from  this  place,  say  1,300  men,  will  leave  in  a few  days  to  meet 
Colonel  Canby  should  he  be  on  this  side  or  south  of  Santa  F6,  and  if 
he  be  still  in  the  rear  of  the  enemy,  to  engage  them  between  two  fires 
or  operate  as  circumstances  may  require.  I hope  by  next  mail  to  give 
you  the  information  that  the  enemy  are  either  vanquished  in  battle  or 
are  in  retreat  from  the  Territory. 

Very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  CONNELLY, 
Governor  of  New  Mexico. 

I 

Headquarters  Eastern  District, 

Fort  Union y N.  Mex .,  March  11,  1862. 

Adjutant-General  U.  S.  Army, 

Washington , B.  C.  : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  since  the  battle  of  Val- 
verde,  on  the  21st  of  February,  the  state  of  affairs  in  the  Department 


646  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXL 

of  Kew  Mexico  has  been  daily  growing  from  bad  to  worse.  All  the 
militia  and  a large  number  of  the  volunteers  (natives)  who  were  called 
into  the  service  of  the  United  States  have  deserted  and  taken  to  the 
mountains.  A general  system  of  robbery  and  plunder  seems  to  be  the 
order  of  the  day.  There  is  a general  panic  in  the  country,  and  people 
are  flying  from  their  homes. 

Communication  with  Colonel  Canby  at  Fort  Craig  has  been  nearly 
cut  off,  and  since  the  27th  of  February,  1862,  nothing  whatever  has 
been  heard  from  him.  On  the  27th  he  dispatched  Captains  Lord  and 
Howland,  each  with  50  mounted  men,  to  observe  the  enemy  and  to 
communicate  with  Maj.  J.  L.  Donaldson,  commanding  the  Santa  F 6 
District,  directing  him  to  go  to  his  relief.  This  order  was  doubtless 
given  under  the  belief  that  regiments  of  Kansas  Yolunteers  had  ar- 
rived in  the  Territory.  Major  Donaldson,  however,  had  no  sufficient 
force  either  to  go  to  Colonel  Canby’s  relief  or  even  to  hold  Santa  FA 
He  therefore  sent  all  public  property  that  could  be  transported  to  this 
post,  and  abandoned  Santa  Fe.  His  report  is  herein  inclosed.*  The 
supplies  reached  Fort  Union  safely.  Under  these  circumstances,  as  the 
senior  officer,  I assumed  command  of  all  troops,  posts,  and  depots  in 
the  department  not  immediately  under  command  of  Colonel  Canby,  and 
ordered  Major  Donaldson  to  march  all  his  forces  to  this  post. 

The  main  body  of  the  enemy,  about  2,000  strong,  is  at  Albuquerque, 
K.  Mex.,  and  a strong  force  is  near  Fort  Craig,  watching  Colonel 
Canby’s  movements.  I am  now  organizing  a column  to  march  against 
the  enemy  and  form  a junction  with  Colonel  Canby.  Should  this  expe- 
dition prove  successful — of  which  I entertain  no  doubt — the  Territory 
will  be  saved  to  the  United  States  $ but  should  it  fail,  the  country  will 
be  lost.  In  either  case  I cannot  too  strongly  urge  the  absolute  neces- 
sity for  a re  enforcement  of  4,000  men,  two  batteries  of  rifled  cannon, 
and  six  siege  pieces.  Maj.  J.  L.  Donaldson,  whom  I have  ordered  to 
Washington  to  represent  the  interests  and  wants  of  the  department, 
will  enter  more  fully  into  details. 

On  the  arrival  of  Colonel  Slough,  with  his  regiment  of  Colorado 
Yolunteers,  I had  the  mortification  to  discover  that  his  commission  was 
senior  to  mine,  and  thus  I am  deprived  of  a command  which  I had 
taken  so  much  pains  to  organize  and  with  which  I expected  to  reap 
laurels.  Thus,  also,  an  officer  of  only  six  months’  service,  and  without 
experience,  takes  precedence  of  one  of  many  years’  service,  and  who 
has  frequently  been  tried  in  battle.  It  is  as  little  as  I can  ask  of  the 
War  Department  for  past  and  present  service  to  give  me  such  rank  as 
will  prevent  in  future  such  mortifications.  I therefore  ask  for  the  rank 
of  brigadier-general  of  volunteers. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

G.  K.  PAUL, 

Colonel  Fourth  Regt.  Y.  Mex.  Vols .,  Comdg.  East.  Fist. 


Kote. — At  a late  hour  last  night  the  two  inclosed  notes  were  received 
from  Colonel  Canby,  the  express,  after  many  narrow  escapes,  having 
made^ais  way  safely  through  the  enemy’s  lines.  I also  inclose  the  copy 
of  a letter  received  by  Dr.  Baily  from  Dr.  Norris. 

G.  R.  P. 

[In  closures.] 

Fort  Craig,  N\  Mex.,  March  5, 1862. 

Doctor  : I am  not  yet  prepared  to  make  my  official  report,  and  I 


See  p.  527. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


647 


Chap.  XXI.] 

have  only  to  say  at  present  that  our  department  is  conducted  satisfac- 
torily We  have  everything  which  is  needed  for  the  wounded. 

Cant  W.  A.  Van  Vliet,  assistant  quartermaster,  has  furnished  us 
with  100  blankets  and  50  bed-sacks.  Fifty-six  men  killed  on  the  field, 
including  9 volunteers.  One  hundred  and  forty  men  were  brought  to 
the  hospitals  wounded,  17  of  whom  have  since  died.  The  wounded  are 
treated1^  five  hospitals,  established  in  the  officers’  and  company  quar- 
ters, and  under  the  charge  of  the  following  medical  officers : 1st,  Dr. 

T>  A Clements:  2d,  Dr.  S.  Bankm ; 3d,  Dr.  J.  H.  Bill;  4th,  Dr.  E. 
Arnold ; 5th,  Dr.  J.  H.  Shout.  Up  to  the  2d  of  March  I had  charge  of 
Hospital  5,  including  five  amputations  in  a separate  ward.  I had  also 
charge  of  Captain  Wingate,  Captain  Stone,  and  Captain  Mortimore, 
severely  wounded,  and  Lieutenant  McDermott,  disabled  by  a deep  flesh- 

WIUwas1attackedBon  the  2d  instant  with  pneumonia,  and  was  compelled 
to  take  my  bed,  since  which  time  Dr.  Shout  has  been  in  charge  of  par 
of  mv  duties  and  Dr.  Clements  with  the  rest.  Dr.  Shout  remained 
until  very  late  on  the  battle-field,  and  was  unable  to  attend  to  his  duties 
for  several  days  afterward.  Dr.  Bill,  haying  been  assigned  to  duty  as 
post  surgeon,  has  been  exclusively  occupied  with  the  sick  ot  the  garri- 
son. His  industry  and  experience  have  rendered  him  very  useful  m 
that  field.  I will  write  you  more  in  full  as  soon  as  I feel  able.  1 will 
forward  my  report  of  sick  in  a day  or  two.  Articles  needed  for  the 
wounded  of  another  battle  are  lint,  muslin,  tow,  field  stretchers  with 
handles,  pulveris  licii,  and  dressings  of  every  description.  Mattresses 
will  be  very  much  needed,  and  I recommend  that  woolen  ones  be  made. 
We  have  been  compelled  to  seize  all  the  mattresses  of  the  garrison. 
The  mattresses  allowed  by  the  supply  table  would  not  be  sufficient  lor 
the  minimum  number  of  severely  wounded  to  be  expected  alter  any 
battle.  Liquors  we  have  found  very  useful,  and  I would  recomment 
another  supply  purchased  for  future  occasions.  Ether  and  chloroform 
are  indispensable,  and  should  be  preserved  with  the  greatest  care. 

I have  purchased  of  the  sutler  of  this  post  200  yards  of  muslm  and 
40  yards  of  canton  flannel,  which  is  a tolerable  substitute  for  lint.  Cur 
wounded  are  doing  well,  and  if  we  are  ordered  to  move,  all  but  about 

15  could  be  easily  conveyed. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BAblJj  JN  Uitiilfej 

Assistant  Surgeon,  TJ.  S.  Army , . 

Medical  Director  and  Purveyor  of  Troops  in  the  Field . 

E.  I.  Baily,  Surgeon,  TJ.  S.  Army, 

Medical  Director,  Dept,  of  New  Mexico,  Santa  Fe,  A.  Mex. 

[Fort  Craig-],  March  7, 1862. 

Major  *.  Our  wounded  are  all  doing  well  and  the  men  are  in  good 
spirits.  We  have  supplies  of  every  kind  for  two  months,  except  flour, 
and  that  we  can  eke  out  for  fifty,  or,  if  necessary,  sixty  days.  Do  not 
trust  the  Mexican  troops.  If  the  Colorado  or  Kansas  or  California 
troops  have  not  joined  you,  do  not  risk  an  engagement  until  they  do. 

I have  sent  you  three  messengers  to  advise  you  of  my  movements, 
but  they  have  not  returned. 

Tours,  &c.,  ED  E g CANBY_ 

Maj.  James  L.  Donaldson. 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

Fort  Craig,  H.  Mex.,  March  7, 1862. 

Colonel:  As  our  communications  via  Santa  Fe  will  probably  be 
interrupted,  I wish  you  to  send  me  by  reliable  expressmen,  and  as 
frequently  as  possible,  any  information  that  you  can  gain  with  regard 

TVe?i?1ltS  0f  ^TpS  CTing  int0  the  Territory,  and  any  other 
information  that  would  be  useful  in  our  present  position 

Our  wounded  are  all  doing  well,  and  the  men  are  in  good  spirits 
very  truly,  yours,  &e.,  r 

Col.  G.  E.  Paul.  ED>  * CANBY‘ 


Department  op  State, 

Washington , March  13,  1862. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : This  Department  has  recently  had  correspondence  with  the  De- 
partment of  War  upon  the  subject  of  the  occupation  of  a part  at  least 
of  the  west  bank  of  the  Bio  Grande,  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  trade 
between  the  adjacent  region  of  Texas  and  the  Mexican  bank  of  the 
river,  particularly  Matamoros.  Though  fully  appreciating  the  objec- 
tions and  difficulties  suggested  by  the  military  authorities  against  that 
occupation  at  this  juncture,  I cannot  forbear  to  mention  a recent  marked 
instance  of  its  importance. 

There  has  in  all  probability  been  an  extensive  importation  of  mer- 
chandise,  especially  contraband  of  war,  into  Matamoros,  destined  for 
the  insurgent  States,  and  an  exportation  of  cotton  from  those  States 
through  the  same  channel.  Our  right  to  blockade  the  mouth  of  the 
fT  ^ande  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  this  commerce  may  be  con- 
Sefe(VlS  at  least  Questionable.  A British  steamer,  with  a cargo  of 
cotton,  has  recently  been  captured  near  the  mouth  of  that  river,  and  has 
been  sent  to  Bew  York  for  adjudication.  In  all  probability  this  G<tv- 
, ultimately  have  to  pay  heavy  damages  for  this  capture. 

A nuhtaryforce,  however  competent  to  guard  the  roads  leading  toward 
Matamoios  from  Texas,  might  check  the  carriage  of  cotton  to  that  port, 
and  consequently  the  temptation  to  vessels  to  proceed  thither  and  ex- 
change it  for  contraband  of  war. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  H.  SEWAED. 


Headquarters  Eastern  District, 

Fort  Union , N.  Mex.,  March  17,  1862. 
The  Adjutant-General  IT.  S.  Army, 

Washington , I).  C.  : 

tPe  Po?or  t0  state  that  on  the  9th  instant  Colonel 
Canby  was  still  at  Fort  Craig  awaiting  the  arrival  of  re-enforcements. 
His  note  to  Major  Donaldson  is  herein  inclosed*  The  enemy  has 
thr^El°  Gran1de1and  taken  possession  of  Albuquerque  and 
feanta  Fe.  Their  mam  body  is  at  or  near  the  former  place,  and  their 
advance  guard  is  at  the  latter.  I expect  an  answer  to-morrow  from 
Colonel  Canby  to  a dispatch  I sent  him  proposing  a plan  for  his  relief. 
As  soon  as  it  reaches  me  I shall  move  forward.  I have  just  written  a 
communication  to  His  Excellency  Governor  W.  Gilpin,  of  Colorado  Ter- 
ntory , urging  him  to  send  forward  all  the  assistance  he  can  to  the  re- 

* Not  found  herewith,  but  see  iuclosures  to  Paul’s  letter  of  March  11,  p.  646. 


Chap.  XXI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


649 


lief  of  New  Mexico,  and  I would  respectfully  call  your  attention  to  the 
situation  of  our  little  army  here,  and  assure  you  of  the  necessity  of 
large  re-enforcements. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  It.  PAUL, 

Colonel  Fourth  Eegt .,  New  Mexico  Vols .,  Comdg.  District. 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Fort  Craig , N.  Mex.,  March  18,  1862. 

Col.  J.  P.  Slough, 

First  Colorado  Volunteers : 

Sir  : Keep  your  command  prepared  to  make  a junction  with  this 
force.  I will  indicate  the  time  and  route.  Move  with  as  little  bag- 
bage  as  possible.  Take  no  tents  and  only  the  camp  equipage  essential 
for*  comfort  and  efficiency.  Ammunition,  at  least  100  cartridges  per 
man  and  gun.  To  save"  transportation,  take  only  bread  and  meat, 
coffee  and  sugar.  Reduce  the  flour  and  increase  the  fresh  meat  ration. 
Increase  the  coffee  and  sugar  for  guards  and  pickets.  Do  not  rely  upon 
the  New  Mexican  troops  except  for  garrisons  and  for  partisan  opera- 
tions. Impress  upon  your  men  not  to  place  too  much  confidence  in  their 
battery,  but  to  rely  upon  the  musket,  and  especially  upon  the  bayonet. 
Be  on  your  guard  against  attempts  to  cripple  your  operations  by 
stampeding  your  animals.  If  you  have  been  joined  by  a sufficient 
force  to  act  independently  against  the  enemy,  advise  me  of  your  plans 
and  movements,  that  I may  co-operate.  In  this  you  must  be  governed 
by  your  own  judgment  and  discretion,  but  nothing  must  be  left  to 
chance.  There  is  no  necessity  for  a premature  movement  on  account 
of  this  post.  We  have  flour  to  last  until  the  10th  of  next  month 
(April),  and  it  can  be  made  to  last  until  the  end.  I am  jerking  beef 
to  serve  as  bread.  Of  all  other  supplies  we  have  enough  tor  three 
months.  The  question  is  not  of  saving  this  post,  but  of  saving  New 
Mexico  and  defeating  the  Confederates  in  such  a way  that  an  invasion 
of  this  Territory  will  never  again  be  attempted.  It  is  essential  to  the 
general  plan  that  this  post  should  be  retained  if  possible.  Fort  Union 
must  be  held  and  our  communications  with  the  East  kept  open.  If 
you  move,  a reliable  garrison  must  be  left  in  it.  The  communication 
by  Fort  Garland  should  also  be  kept  open.  If  it  cannot,  that  post 
should  be  destroyed.  All  other  points  are  of  no  importance.  While 
waiting  for  re-enforcements  harass  the  enemy  by  partisan  operations. 
Obstruct  his  movements  and  cut  off  his  supplies.  Use  the  mounted 
volunteers  for  these  purposes  and  keep  the  regular  cavalry  in  reserve. 
Feed  their  horses  well. 

This  post  will  be  retained  until  the  last  moment.  If  forced  to 
abandon  it  everything  will  be  destroyed,  and  I will  move  without 
incumbrances.  The  sick  and  wounded  will  be  left  at  Limitar.  Advise 
me  of  the  arrival  of  re-enforcements;  what  troops  are  en  route ; when 
they  are  expected.  Sepd  carriers  daily  and  by  different  routes — dupli- 
cates or  triplicates  of  important  communications  by  different  couriers. 
Reports  in  relation  to  plans  and  movements  will  be  made  in  cipher. 
Colonel  Paul  will  give  you  the  key.  Keep  the  Adjutant- General  ad- 
vised of  the  state  of  affairs  in  this  department. 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ED.  E.  S.  CANBY, 

Colonel  Nineteenth  Infantry , Commanding  Department . 


650  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

War  Department, 
Washington , D.  C .,  March  19,  1862. 
Hon.  W.  H.  Seward,  Secretary  of  State  : 

Sir  : The  Secretary  of  W ar  directs  me  to  acknowledge  the  receipt 
of  yonr  letter  of  the  11th  instant,  inclosing  a copy  of  dispatch  No.  3, 
from  Franklin  Chase,  United  States  consul  at  Tampico,  recommending 
the  capture  and  occupation  of  Brownsville,  Tex.,  by  our  forces,  and 
in  reply  to  inform  you  that  your  letter  has  been  carefully  considered, 
with  the  conclusion  that  the  condition  of  the  United  States  forces  does 
not  admit  at  present  of  the  detachment  of  the  troops  that  such  an  ex- 
pedition would  require. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  H.  WATSON, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


[March  20-23,  1862. — For  Halleck  to  Secretary  of  War,  March  20, 
21,  and  23,  and  to  Prince,  March  21 $ and  Secretary  of  War  to  Hal- 
leck, March  20,  all  in  relation  to  re-enforcements  from  Department  of 
the  Mississippi  for  New  Mexico,  see  Series  I,  Yol.  VIII,  pp.  627-629, 
631, 633.]  ivv  9 


Washington  City,  March  23,  1862. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck: 

Dear  Sir  : I am  placed  under  deep  obligation  of  gratitude  for  the 
prompt  dispatch  of  six  regiments  to  the  relief  of  the  oppressed  people 
of  New  Mexico.  I am  pained  to  think  of  the  fearful  outrages  which 
the  Texas  forces  will  heap  upon  them.  The  valley  of  the  Eio  Grande 
will  be  desolated  for  200  miles.  I feel  assured  that  the  re-enforce- 
ments sent  by  you  will  capture  the  whole  Texas  force  if  they  move 
with  rapidity.  If  they  do  not  do  so  they  might  as  well  not  go,  for  they 
will  find  a desolated  country  and  an  absent  and  retreating  enemy. 
Texas  will  bring  up  from  San  Antonio  re-enforcements  rapidly,  and  the 
prospect  of  plunder  will  fill  New  Mexico  with  this  class  of  troops  as  fast 
as  they  can  go.  Colonel  Canby  will  no  doubt  destroy  and  abandon 
Fort  Craig,  and  re-enforce  Fort  Union  by  a rapid  march  by  Monganos  to 
Fort  Union,  on  the  east  side  of  the  mountains.  Colonel  Canby,  when  at 
Fort  Union  with  the  regiment  from  Denver,  can  hold  that  place  until 
the  re-enforcements  get  to  him.  Excuse  me  for  urging  that  at  least 
the  mounted  portion  of  the  column  be  urged  forward  at  the  most  rapid 
rate  possible.  The  infantry  and  artillery  can  follow  at  leisure.  It  is 
probable,  if  you  will  look  at  the  map,  that  the  Texas  forces  will,  after 
taking  and  plundering  Santa  Fe,  attempt  to  pass  out  to  Fort  Smith  by 
the  Canadian  Eiver,  under  the  impression  that  a large  column  of  the 
Confederates  are  at  that  point,  threatening  Missouri.  I hope  that  in 
selecting  the  head  of  this  expedition  it  will  not  be  forgotten  that  the 
rapidity  of  the  movement  is  the  most  important  requisite  of  leaders.  I 
shall  trust  with  the  utmost  confidence  to  your  judgment.  Major  Gen- 
eral Harney,  Major  Steen,  General  Davidson,  who  is  well  known  to  the 
country  gnd  people  of  New  Mexico,  and  others  have  been  suggested  to 
me  as  suitable  persons,  but  I shall  be  perfectly  satisfied  with  any  one 
that  your  judgment  dictates  as  most  suitable  to  insure  success.  I have 
been  twenty-six  times  across  the  plains;  feel  a deep  interest  in  the 
rescue  from  destruction  of  the  people  of  New  Mexico,  who  have  been 
my  friends  for  many  years,  and  if  my  services  should  be  required  I will 


:hap.  XXI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION.  bOl 

Leave  my  place  here  vacant,  and  without  money  and  without  price  aid 
all  I can  to  forward  the  movement.  I do  not  wish  any  command,  but 
will  go  and  aid  the  command  or  commandant  all  in  m^  power  it  it 
should  he  thought  best  for  me  to  do  so. 

With  kind  regards,  I remain,  yours^&c,  g ^ 

Delegate  for  New  Mexico. 


Executive  Department, 

Las  Vegas}  March  23,  1862. 

Hon.  W.  H.  Seward, 

Secretary  of  State , Washington  City : 

Sir  : Since  my  last  from  Fort  TJnion,  dated  11th  instant,  there  has 
occurred  nothing  indicating  a speedy  encounter  with  the  enemy  until 
this  time.  To-day  the  whole  force  from  Denver  City,  Colo.,  together 
with  the  Territorial  forces,  numbering  1,400  men  in  all,  will  leave  this 
place  in  the  direction  of  the  enemy,  but  I am  informed  will  go  but  a 
short  distance  until  they  receive  further  communications  and  orders 
from  Colonel  Canby,  who  still  remains  at  Fort  Craig.  These  orders  are 
daily  expected,  anil  with  them  a simultaneous  movement  of  the  two 
forces,  so  as  to  reach  the  position  of  the  enemy  on  the  same  day. 

There  has  been  some  little  discord  in  relation  to  the  movement  now 
made  from  Union,  in  consequence  of  the  want  of  orders  from  Colonel 
Canby.  Major  Paul,  in  command  at  Union,  was, of  opinion  that  the 
orders  of  Colonel  Canby  were  essential  to  an  effective  forward  move- 
ment from  Union;  whereas  Colonel  Slough,  in  command  of  the  forces 
from  Colorado,  was  of  opinion  that  an  advance  of  a day  or  more  march 
in  advance  could  lead  to  no  evil,  and  would  curtail  the  limits  of  the 
enemy,  and  mayhap  lead  to  the  expulsion  of  the  enemy  from  the  capital, 
now  occupied  by  about  100  men,  with  two  pieces  of  artillery.  I think 
this  slight  difference  of  opinion  and  movement  will  lead  to  no  unfavor- 
able result,  as  Colonel  Slough  will  advance  upon  the  road  that  the 
enemy  will  necessarily  have  to  march  to  reach  Union,  should  an  attempt 
be  made  upon  that  place,  which  seems  to  be  the  fear  entertained  by 
Colonel  Paul. 

The  enemy  in  force  are  now  occupying  a pass  in  the  mountains  east 
of  Albuquerque,  some  15  miles,  called  Carnavel,  with  a view,  doubtless, 
to  preveut  the  junction  of  the  commands  from  Union  and  Craig,  near 
which  the  commands  will  have  to  pass  in  order  to  form  a junction^ 
The  forces  in  either  command  are  nearly  equal  to  those  of  the  enemy, 
but  I presume  that  Colonel  Canby  desires  to  avoid  an  engagement  with 
them  until  he  unites  the  two  commands.  I am  sorry  to  say  that  the 
Texans  have  not  behaved  with  the  moderation  that  was  expected,  and 
that  desolation  has  marked  their  progress  on  the  Rio  Grande  from 
Craig  to  Bernalillo.  Exactions  and  confiscations  are  of  daily  occurrence, 
and  the  larger  portion  of  those  who  have  anything  to  give  or  to  lose 
are  here  on  this  frontier,  seeking  a refuge  from  their  rapacity,  and 
have  left  their  houses  and  contents  a prey  to  the  invaders. 

My  own  house,  90  miles  from  Santa  Fe,  was  despoiled  of  its  entire 
contents,  including  a valuable  stock  of  goods,  together  with  everything 
in  the  way  of  subsistence.  On  yesterday  there  arrived  at  this  place 
some  20  of  our  most  prosjjerous  and  respectable  citizens  from  the  neigh- 
borhood of  Albuquerque  and  Bernalillo,  who  had  fled  from  the  exac- 
tions of  Sibley;  among  the  number  a gentleman  of  eighty  years  of  age? 


<652  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  AEIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

Don  Pedro  -Tos6  Perea,  and  his  three  sons,  upon  whom  a demand  had 
been  made  for  a large  sum  of  money,  which  they  had  not  in  their  houses 
having  advanced  all  their  available  means  to  the  disbursing  officers  of 
the  Government  but  a short  time  before.  The  threat  of  personal  vio- 
lence m case  of  refusal  so  alarmed  them,  that  they  left  their  houses  and 
entire  contents  at  the  mercy  of  the  enemy. 

It  is  said  that  the  Texans  are  preparing  for  a precipitate  retreat  from 
the  Territory  by  way  of  Port  Stantpn  and  the  Pecos  River,  which  I think 
is  not  without  probability,  from  the  fact  of  their  sudden  and  mercenary 
demand  for  money,  and  from  the  fact  that  they  know  there  is  a force 
superior  to  their  own  in  the  field,  to  which  they  must  finally  succumb, 
iheir  position  at  this  time  is  directly  on  the  road  to  Stanton,  and  it  is 
thought  was  taken  with  the  view  indicated. 

I hope  in  my  next  to  give  you  the  news  of  a more  favorable  condition 
of  things  in  this  Territory.  We  have  the  means  now  on  hand  to  destroy 
the  lexan  forces  now  among  us,  except  they  receive  large  re-enforce- 
ments, of  which  there  exists  no  probability.  I hope  in  ten  or  fifteen 
days  more  to  advise  you  of  their  expulsion  from  the  Territory 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  . 

HENRY  CONNELLY, 

Governor  New  Mexico . 


Headquarters  Eastern  District, 

Fort  Union , N.  Mex.,  March  24,  1862. 
The  Adjutant- General  U.  S.  Army, 

Washington , I).  G.  : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  state  that  on  the  9th  instant  I sent 
a dispatch  to  Colonel  Gan  by,  proposing  a plan  to  form  a junction  with 
him  (cojiy  of  dispatch  marked  A).  In  a dispatch  from  Colonel  Canby, 
14 1*1’  instant  he  approved  of  the  proposed  plan,  and  on  the  receipt 
ot  his  note  I completed  the  organization  of  a column,  which  I turned 
over  to  Col.  John  P.  Slough,  First  Colorado  Volunteers.  On  the  2.1st 
1 received  another  dispatch  from  Colonel  Canby  (marked  B),  in  which 
he  concludes  by  saying:  “Do  not  move  from  Fort  Union  to  meet  me 
until  1 advise  you  of  the  route  and  point  of  junction.”  Notwithstand- 
ing tins  order  Colonel  Slough  determined  to  leave  two  days  sooner  than 
the  original  plan  contemplated.  I then  addressed  him  a note  (marked 
C),  to  which  he  replied,  through  his  acting  assistant  adjutant-general 
(marked  D)  Believing  that  the  best  interests  of  the  Government  de- 
manded it  I wrote  again,  urging  upon  him  to  leave  me  a part  of  the 
troops  tor  the  defense  of  this  post  (letter  marked  E).  To  this  letter  he 
paid  no  attention  whatever  and  left  with  his  column.  I am  thus  left 
with  a feeble  garrison  and  no  suitable  artillery  for  the  defense  of  the 
principal  and  most  important  post  in  the  Territory. 

My  object  in  this  communication  is  to  throw  the  responsibility  of  any 
disaster  which  may  occur  on  the  right  shoulders.  The  position  of  affairs 
in  the  Territory  is,  with  the  exception  of  the  occupation  of  Santa  Fe  by 
a small  force  of  the  enemy,  the  same  as  stated  in  my  last  communica- 
tion.  Colonel  Canby  is  still  (March  16)  at  Fort  Craig,  with  1,600  men ; 
Colonel  Slough  is  now  at  Bernal  Springs,  with  nearly  1,400  men  and 
eight  pieces  of  artillery.  The  enemy’s  main  force  is  now  at  and  near 
Albuquerque,  say  1,900  men  and  fifteen  pieces  of  artillery;  about  120 
men  and  two  pieces  of  artillery  are  at  Santa  Fe,  and  numerous  pickets 
will  swell  their  number  to  2,500  men. 


Chap.  XXI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


653 


I once  more  urge  upon  the  War  Department  strong  re-enforcements 
of  at  least  4,000  men  and  several  batteries  of  the  best  cannon. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

’ G.  R.  PAUL, 

Colonel  Fourth  Regiment , JSf.  Mex.  Vols .,  Comdg.  Fist. 

[Inclosure  A.] 

March  9,  18G2. 

Colonel  : I shall  move  from  Fort  Union  with  1,200  Americans  and 
four  guns  on  the  24th,  and  be  at  Anton  Chico  on  the  26th.  If  you  leave 
Fort  Craig  on  the  20th  you  can  be  at  Punta  del  Agua  on  24th  and 
Berenda  Spring  on  the  25th ; on  26th  make  a forced  march,  and  on 
27th  we  can  unite  our  forces.  If  no  danger  threatens  I shall  await  you 
at  Anton  Chico,  but  if  it  does  I shall  move  to  meet  you.  I shall  have 
provisions  for  you.  Do  not  fail  to  meet  me  at  the  time  designated,  for 
everything  depends  on  your  uniting  with  me.  To  throw  the  enemy  off 
his  guard  move  your  mounted  men  and  two  guns  30  or  40  miles  up  the 
river  above  La  Joy  a,  to  convey  the  idea  that  you  are  about  to  attack 
his  rear.  This  will  compel  him  to  concentrate,  and  under  cover  of  this 
move  by  Socorro  and  road  to  Abo  Pass  and  Punta  del  Agua,  and  before 
the  enemy  can  unite  and  attack  us  separately  we  can  form  a junction. 
Send  your  express  to  meet  me  on  the  road  to  Anton  Chico.  Leave  your 
sick  and  wounded  at  Fort  Craig  if  they  impede  your  march. 

C.  R.  PAUL. 


[Inclosure  B.J 


March  16. 

Place  no  reliance  on  the  New  Mexican  troops  except  for  partisan 
operations,  and  then  only  when  the  main  operations  will  not  be  affected 
by  the  result.  . Concentrate  all  your  reliable  troops  until  the  re-enforce- 
ments from  Kansas,  Colorado,  and  California  arrive.  If  in  sufficient 
force  to  operate  directly  upon  the  enemy,  advise  me  of  your  plans,  in 
order  that  I may  co-operate.  Fort  Union  must  be  held  and  our  com- 
munication with  the  East  kept  open.  Fort  Garland  is  not  so  important. 
If  it  cannot  be  held,  it  should  be  destroyed.  All  other  points  are  of  no 
importance.  While  awaiting  re-enforcements  harass  the  enemy  by 
partisan  operations  ; obstruct  his  movements,  and  remove  or  destroy 
any  supplies  that  might  fall  into  his  hands.  This  post  must  be  held 
in  order  to  cut  off  his  retreat.  Our  supplies  will  last  until  the  10th  of 
next  month  (April),  and  can  be  made  to  last  until  the  end.  If  it  is 
necessary  to  abandon  the  post,  everything  will  be  destroyed.  I will 
move  from  the  post  at  the  last  moment,  and  without  incumbrances  of 
any  kind.  The  sick  and  wounded  will  be  left  at  Limitar.  In  this  case 
it  will  be  necessary  to  effect  a junction  with  your  command.  I will 
indicate  the  route  and  point  of  junction  verbally  and  by  several  mes- 
sengers. Keep  the  Adjutant-General  advised  of  the  state  of  affairs  in 
the  department  and  advise  me  of  the  arrival  of  re-enforcements.  Do 
not  move  from  Fort  Union  to  meet  me  until  I advise  you  of  the  route 
and  point  of  junction. 

ED.  R.  S.  CANBY, 

Colonel . 


654  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Ohap.  XXI. 

[Inclostire  C.] 

Headquarters  Eastern  District, 

Fort  Union , N.  Mex.,  March  22,  1862. 

Col.  J.  P.  Slough, 

First  Colorado  Regiment : 

Sir  : Although  I had  organized  and  transferred  to  you  all  the  avail- 
able troops  in  this  district  previous  to  the  receipt  of  the  dispatch  from 
Colonel  Canby  dated  the  16th  instant,  yet  you  are  aware  it  was  done  to 
carry  out  plans  approved  by  that  officer  for  the  relief  of  and  junction 
with  his  forces,  to  the  end  that  when  united  the  -entire  force  should  be 
used  to  drive  the  enemy  from  the  Territory.  Colonel  Canby’s  dispatch 
of  the  16th  instant  directs  that  the  movement  from  here  be  delaved 
until  further  instructions  from  him,  and  urges  the  maintenance  of  this 
post  at  all  hazards  as  of  vital  importance  to  all.  I fully  coincide  with 
him  in  his  views  regarding  this  post.  If,  therefore,  you  are  determined 
on  moving  toward  the  enemy,  I request  that  you  will  do  so  with  vour 
own  regiment,  one  section  of  Captain  Ritter’s  battery,  and  one  section 
of  Lieutenant  Claflin’s  battery,  and  the  regular  cavalry  now  in  your 
front.  The  remaining  sections  of  Ritter’s  and  Claflin’s  batteries  and 
the  command  of  Capt.  W.  H.  Lewis  are  in  my  opinion  the  least  force 
required  to  garrison  this  post  securely,  and  I request  that  they  be 
directed  to  report  to  me.  Even  this  force  will  not  be  sufficient  for  the 
purpose  should  you  meet  with  disaster  or  advance  so  far  as  to  render 
it  impossible  to  return  promptly  to  my  relief  in  case  I am  attacked  bv 
the  enemy.  J 

Hoping  that  you  coincide  with  me  in  these  views,  I remain,  very  re- 
spectfully, your  obedient  servant, 

„ 7 7 „ G.  R.  PAUL, 

Colonel  Fourth  N.  Mex.  Vols .,  Comdg.  Eastern  District . 

[Inclosure  D.] 

Headquarters  Northern  Division, 

Fort  Union , A.  Mex.,  March  22,  1862. 

Col.  G.  E.  Paul, 

Comdg.  Eastern  Eist.,  Fort  Union,  N.  Mex.  : 

Sir  : I am  instructed  by  Colonel  Slough  to  acknowledge  the  receipt 
of  your  communication  of  this  date,  and  to  state  in  reply  that  the 
instructions  of  Colonel  Canby  are  not  only  to  protect  Port  Union,  but 
also  to  harass  the  enemy.  By  moving  the  command  to  or  near  Bernal 
Springs  both  ends  can  be  accomplished,  and  as  the  command  will  be 
between  the  enemy  and  Fort  Union,  the  latter  is  as  much  protected  as 
it  the  troops  remained  here.  By  being  at  the  Springs  we  can  better 
operate  for  the  double  purpose  of  harassing  the  enemy  and  protecting; 
Santa  F 6 from  depredation.  & 

If  the  enemy  at  San  Antonio  are  no  stronger  than  reported  by 
Captain  Walker,  the  troops  under  my  command  will  be  sufficient  to 
C°rri  • . eir  action  and  to  defeat  them  in  case  of  an  attack. 

Thinking  that  the  command  assigned  by  you  can  be  spared  for  the 
purpose  named,  the  colonel  commanding  cannot  consent  to  leave  any 
portion  behind.  J 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 
„ . „ GURDEN  CHAPIN, 

Captain , Seventh  Infantry,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


hap.  XXI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

[Inclosure  E.] 


655  . 


Headquarters  Eastern  District, 

Fort  Union , N.  Mex .,  March  22,  1862. 


)ol.  J.  P.  Slough, 

First  Regiment  Colorado  Volunteers: 

Colonel  : Yours  in  answer  to  mine  of  this  date  is  received.  You 
oust  be  aware  that  no  part  of  the  regular  force  of  this  district  would 
lave  been  turned  over  to  you  had  the  instructions  of  Colonel  Oanby  of 
he  16th  instant  been  received  twelve  hours  earlier.  I had  trusted 
hat  this  knowledge  and  the  fact  that  your  movement  is  m direct  con- 
lict  with  Colonel  Canby’s  positive  orders  and  m disregard  of  his 
tnxiety  for  the  safety  of  this  department  that  my  request  would  have 
)een  answered  differently.  The  force  offered  you  m my  first  note  was 
imple  to  answer  all  purposes  of  annoying  and  harassing  the  enemy,  as 
7ou  state  that  as  the  object  of  your  advance.  You,  however,  indicate 
hat  an  attack  upon  the  enemy’s  position  at  San  Antonio  is  within 
jour  calculations.  This  most  certainly  is  or  will  be  m violation  ot 
Jolonel  Canby’s  instructions,  and,  if  unsuccessful,  must  result  m the 
mtire  loss  of  the  Territory,  at  least  for  a time,  and  render  its  recon- 
mest  much  more  difficult.  I must  urge  upon  you  to  reconsider  your 
lecision  and  to  submit  to  the  plan  of  the  department  commander.  The 
arrangements  I proposed  in  my  first  letter  on  this  point  give  you  suffi- 
cient force  to  comply  fully  with  Colonel  Canby’s  orders  to  “annoy  the 
enemy.”  With  due  deference  to  your  superior  judgment  I must  insist 
that  your  plans  do  not  meet  either  of  these  ends,  but  must  inevitably 
result  in  disaster  to  us  all.  Colonel  Canby  must  have  had  good  rea- 
sons for  the  change  directed  in  the  plans  he  at  first  approved,  and  his 
anxiety  to  have  the  change  made  known  is  indicated  by  his  sending 
duplicates  of  his  instructions  by  different  messengers,  both  of  which 
have  been  received. 

In  the  name  of  the  department  commander,  of  the  best  interests  ot 
the  service,  and  of  the  safety  of  all  the  troops  in  this  Territory,  I 
protest  against  this  movement  of  yours,  made  as  it  is  two  days  before 
the  time  first  agreed  upon,  and  as  I conceive  in  direct  disobedience  ot 

the  orders  of  Colonel  Canby. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Gr.  R.  PAUL, 

Colonel  Fourth  N.  Mex.  Vols .,  Comdg.  Eastern  District. 


War  Department, 
Washington  City , D.  (7.,  March  24,  1862. 
Hon.  W.  H.  Seward,  Secretary  of  State : 

Sir:  The  Secretary  of  War  directs  me  to  acknowledge  the  receipt 
of  your  letter  of  the  i3th  instant,  relative  to  the  occupation,  by  United 
States  troops,  of  the  left  bank  of  the  Rio  Grande,  with  a view  of  pre- 
venting trade  between  the  adjacent  region  of  Texas  and  the  Mexican 
bank  of  the  river,  particularly  Matamoros,  and  in  reply  to  inform  you 
that  your  letter  has  received  careful  consideration,  with  the  conclusion 
that  the  condition^of  the  United  States  forces  does  not  admit  at  present 
of  the  detachment  of  the  necessary  troops  for  such  an  expedition. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  resjJectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  H.  WATSON, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


656 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[Chap.  XXI. 


Kansas  City,  March  24,  1862. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War: 

Major  Donaldson  is  here  en  route  to  Washington.  Furnishes  the 
following : 

Santa  F6  evacuated  on  the  5th.  Troops  and  supplies  withdrawn  to  Fort  Union. 
Colonel  Slough,  of  Colorado,  arrived  at  Fort  Union  with  950  men,  making  total  strength 
of  that  place  1,500.  They  would  form  junction  with  Colonel  Canby.  Colonel  Canby 
was  at  Fort  Craig  on  7th,  with  800  regulars  and  about  same  number  Mexicans,  with 
supplies  for  sixty  days.  Advance  guard  of  Texans  was  at  Algodones,  45  miles  from 
Santa  F6,  on  4th  instant.  Another  battle  expected  before  April  1. 

JAS.  ROBERTS. 


Consulate  of  the  United  States  of  America, 

Matamoros , March  24,  1862. 

Hon.  W.  H.  Seward, 

Secretary  of  State , Washington , Z>.  C. : 

Sir ; * * * in  a conversation  with  the  colonel  commanding  this 

line  he  informed  me  that  a force  was  being  organized  of  Mexicans  on 
the  Texas  side  to  capture  Matamoros,  and  that  many  Texans  were  join- 
ing, and  that  the  real  object  was  the  capture  of  all  the  Americans  on 
this  side,  and  on  observing  everything  in  relation  to  it  I find  such  to  be 
the  facts  without  a doubt. 

The  colonel  here  (Colonel  Quiroyo),  who  is  a warm  advocate  of  the 
Union,  and  has  been  throughout  the  war,  has  assured  me  that  he  will 
protect  all  American  citizens  in  Matamoros  to  the  extent  of  his  power, 
and  for  my  own  personal  safety  and  the  safety  of  my  documents  he  has 
several  times  offered  me  apartments  in  his  own  quarters,  but  as  I have 
a small  force  of  true  Americans  constantly  around  me  I have  declined, 
thinking  that  I can  fight  my  way  out  if  attacked. 

A collision  is  becoming  more  imminent  every  day,  and  hundreds  of 
heartfelt  wishes  are  uttered  both  by  Americans  and  Mexicans  that  a 
Government  force  may  appear  at  Brazos  Santiago  and  restore  order. 

The  Texan  troops  are  becoming  demoralized  and  disorderly  in  the 
extreme,  declaring  that  they  will  burn  and  destroy  everything  of  both 
friend  and  foe. 

A force  of  1,000  men  could  conquer  the  entire  line  of  the  Rio  Grande, 
as  most  of  the  German  and  the  old  United  States  soldiers  would  imme- 
diately turn  at  sight  of  the  Union  flag. 

The  difficulty  in  our  mail  facilities  being  now  obviated  and  a regular 
line  being  established  to  Tampico,  I am  relieved  of  the  expense  of  my 
own  courier,  my  great  difficulty  now  being  in  procuring  stationery. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient, 

L.  PIERCE,  Jr., 

United  States  Consul. 


[March  28,  1862. — For  Halleck  to  Secretary  of  War,  in  reference  to 
re-enforcements  for  Kew  Mexico,  see  Series  I,  Yol.  VIII,  p.  647.] 


Executive  D:£partment, 

Las  Vegas , N.  Mex..  March  30, 1862. 
Hon.  W.  H.  Seward,  • . ’ 

Secretary  of  State , Washington  City: 

Sir:  In  my  communication  of  the  23d  instant  I informed  you  that 


:hap.  xxi.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


657 


Colonel  Slough,  with  the  troops  from  Colorado  Territory,  together  with 
the  small  regular  force  at  Union,  had  advanced  through  this  place  in 
the  direction  of  the  enemy. 

On  the  26th  the  advance  guard  of  our  forces,  making  a reconnaissance 
and  without  anticipating  any  encounter  with  the  enemy,  came  in  con- 
tact with  his  advance  guard  of  600  men,  neither,  it  would  seem,  being 
aware  of  the  presence  or  near  approach  of  the  other.  This  took  place 
at  the  Canon  del  Apache,  the  east  end  thereof,  on  the  road  to  and  about 
20  miles  from  Santa  Fe.  An  action  ensued,  in  which  the  enemy  were 
entirely  routed,  with  a loss  of  25  or  30  killed  and  wounded  and  62 
prisoners.  A flag  of  truce  was  sent  in  at  night  by  the  enemy  asking  a 
suspension  of  hostilities  for  the  purpose  of  burying  their  dead  and 
taking  care  of  the  wounded.  The  27tli  was  occupied  in~  these  acts  of 
humanity.  The  main  body  of  their  forces  being  at  the  canon,  only  about 
7 miles  distant,  they  advanced  on  the  28th  in  full  force  to  the  attack  of 
ours,  which  had  all  been  called  to  the  scene  of  action.  The  engage- 
ment commenced  at  about  noon  and  lasted  until  sunset,  without  any  de- 
cisive result.  The  cause  of  this  indecision  as  to  result  was  that  early 
in  the  day  Major  Chivington,  with  500  men,  had  been  ordered  to  make  a 
detour  on  the  heights  (mesa)  and  observe  the  operations  of  any  forces 
that  might  approach  in  that  direction.  His  position  on  the  table-land, 
and  parallel  to  the  whole  length  of  the  canon,  gave  him  a full  view,  part 
of  the  way,  of  everything  that  was  in  it,  and  to  his  joy  and  surprise  when 
he  reached  the  lower  end  of  the  canon  he  found  the  enemy’s  whole  train 
parked,  together  with  the  mules  and  horses  necessary  for  its  transpor- 
tation, guarded  by  200  men.  The  nature  of  the  country  enabled  him  to 
approach  very  near  without  the  observance  of  the  guard.  He  made  a 
sudden  and  unexpected  attack  upon  them,  and  captured  the  whole  train 
of  80  wagons,  with  all  the  stock  except  the  few  upon  which  some  of  the 
guard  made  their  escape.  He  also  captured  40  prisoners,  and  after 
burning  the  train,  with  all  its  contents  of  provisions  and  ammunition, 
he  returned  to  the  command  late  at  night  by  the  way  of  the  same  table- 
land over  which  he  had  advanced 

Meantime  and  before  his  arrival  at  the  train  the  enemy  had  advanced 
1,200  strong  to  attack  our  forces  at  the  east  end  of  the  canon  and  about 
7 miles  distant.  The  absence  of  Major  Chivington  from  the  field  gave 
the  enemy  a greatly  superior  force,  ours  not  passing  700  men,  and  hence 
the  contest  was  delayed  and  became  very  obstinate  and  doubtful  until 
dark.  Both  armies  remained  upon  the  field  a short  distance  from  each 
other,  but  Major  Chivington  having  returned  and  rejoined  our  forces 
made  our  numbers  nearly  equal. 

There  were  some  reports  that  General  Sibley  was  moving  by  another 
road  upon  Fort  Union  with  the  balance  of  his  forces.  It  was  thought 
best  to  fall  back  to  a point  at  which  he  must  necessarily  pass  in  order 
to  reach  that  place.  This  was  done,  and  our  forces  will  to-morrow 
take  a position  at  Bernal  Springs  for  the  purposes  indicated.  Our 
loss  in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  in  the  two  days’  encounter  will 
reach  150;  that  of  the  enemy  fully  double  that  number.  It  is  the 
opinion  of  those  who  are  better  capable  of  judging  that  the  enemy  lost 
their  entire  stock  of  provisions  and  ammunition  in  the  train  that  was 
burnt,  and  hence  that  he  will  have  to  fall  back  on  Santa  Fe  or  scatter 
in  confusion  through  the  country  seeking  subsistence.  A few  days 
will  determine  his  future  movements.  1 had  forgot  to  state  that  the 
enemy  lost  three  pieces  of  artillery  in  the  engagement,  two  with  the 
wagons  and  one  on  the  field. 

42  R R— VOL  IX 


658 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[Chai\  XXI. 


We  have  reliable  information  to-day  that  General  Sibley  left  Albu- 
querque five  days  since  for  Santa  Fd,  with  500  men,  but  at  the  distance 
of  20  miles  was  informed  of  the  approach  of  Colonel  Canby  from  Fort 
Craig,  and  returned  to  meet  him.  This  I think  is  reliable,  and  as 
Colonel  Canby  has  full  2,000  men  with  him,  there  can  be  no  doubt  as 
to  his  entire  rout  or  capture  by  Colonel  Canby. 

From  the  facts  above  stated  you  will  see  that  our  Territory  will  soon 
be  liberated  from  the  further  progress  of  the  desolating  foe.  Our  forces 
here  are  fully  equal  to  the  encounter  and  dispersion  of  the  enemy  we 
have  before  us,  and  Colonel  Canby  will  soon  dispose  of  Sibley  and  come 
to  our  aid,  should  any  be  necessary. 

I am  pleased  to  be  able  to  give  you  this  flattering  account  of  our 
affairs,  and  hope  in  my  next  to  say  that  we  have  not  a Texan  in  arms 
within  our  limits. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

HENRY  CONNELLY, 
Governor  of  New  Mexico . 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Fort  Craig , N.  Mex.,  March  31,  1862. 
The  Adjutant-General  of  the  Army, 

Washington , I).  C. : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a copy  of  a communication*  from 
Colonel  Slough,  of  the  First  Regiment  of  Colorado  Volunteers,  report- 
ing an  engagement  in  Apache  Canon  on  the  26th  instant,  and  announc- 
ing his  intention  to  move  against  the  enemy  with  his  entire  force.  This 
movement  is,  in  my  judgment,  premature,  and  is  at  variance  with  my 
instructions,  but  as  it  may  involve  serious  consequences,  I have  deter- 
mined to  move  to-morrow  with  the  force  under  my  immediate  com- 
mand, leaving  a garrison  of  volunteers  for  this  post,  and  effect  a junc- 
tion with  the  troops  in  the  northern  part  of  the  department.  There 
are  two  routes  by  which  this  junction  may  be  effected : First,  by  the 
Abo  Pass  and  Anton  Chico ; second,  by  the  river  to  Albuquerque,  and 
thence  by  San  Antonio  and  Gallisteo.  Both  of  these  routes  are  liable 
to  interruption  by  an  enterprising  enemy ; but  the  latter,  as  the  boldest, 
will  be  the  least  suspected,  and  I shall  move  directly  upon  Albuquerque, 
for  the  purpose  of  occupying  that  place  if  it  can  be  done  without  serious 
loss,  and  holding  it  until  the  junction  can  be  effected,  .or,  if  it  cannot 
be,  making  such  demonstration  against  it  as  will  draw  the  main  force 
of  the  Confederates  from  Santa  F6  and  enable  the  columns  to  unite 
without  opposition.  When  united,  the  force  under  my  command  will 
be  sufficient  to  expel  the  enemy  from  the  country  north  of  this  post, 
but  not  to  follow  them  into  the  Mesilla  Valley,  unless  in  the  mean  time 
re-enforcements  from  the  East  sufficient  for  the  occupation  of  the  uppei 
country  should  arrive.  The  New  Mexican  Volunteers  cannot  be  relied 
on  for  any  purpose  of  this  kind. 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  R.  S.  CANBY, 

Colonel  Nineteenth  Infantry , Commanding  Department 


See  Slough’s  report  of  March  29,  p.  533. 


HAP.  XXI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


659 


Headquarters 
Pol.  C.  Carson: 


Department  of  New  Mexico, 
Fort  Craig , JT.  Mex.:  March  31,  1862. 


Colonel  : You  are  charged  with  the  duty  of  holding  this  post, 
rour  command  will  consist  of  seven  companies  of  your  own  regiment, 
wo  of  the  Second,  and  one  of  the  Fourth  Kegiment  New  Mexico  Vol- 
in teers.  The  convalescents,  as  they  become  effective,  will  add  to  your 


strength. 

I am  instructed  by  the  colonel  commanding  to  say  that  the  objects 
□ view  and  the  plan  of  operations  require  that  it  should  be  held  to  the 
ast  extremity.  The  manner  of  doing  this  is  left  to  your  judgment 
nd  discretion,  in  both  of  which  he  has  the  utmost  confidence.  The 
orce  of  the  enemy  in  the  Mesilla  will  not  allow  him  to  make  a regular 
ttack  upon  the  post,  but  it  may  be  attempted  by  surprise.  To  guard 
gainst  this  he  desires  that  you  will  exercise  yourself  and  exact  from 
11  of  your  command  the  most  unremitting  vigilance. 

The  sick  and  wounded  left  in  your  care  will  of  course  receive  every 
Attention,  and  the  colonel  commanding  desires  me  to  say  that  any  ex- 
•enditures  that  will  add  to  their  comfort  or  conduce  to  their  recovery 
rill  be  fully  authorized. 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  J.  L.  NICODEMUS, 
Captain , Twelfth  Infantry , Actg . Asst.  Adjt.  Gen* 


[April  2,  1862.— For  Denver  to  Halleck,  in  reference  to  expedition 
o New  Mexico,  see  Series  I,  Vol.  VIH,  p.  653.] 


[April  5-6, 1862. — For  Halleck  to  Denver,  April  5,  and  to  Sturgis, 
^pril  6,  in  reference,  among  other  matters,  to  New  Mexico  expedition, 
ee  Series  I,  VoL  VHI,  pp.  664,  668.] 


Executive  Department, 

La#  Vegas , N.  Mex .,  April  6,  1862. 

Ion.  W.  H.  Seward, 

Secretary  of  State , Washington  City , D.  C. : 

Sir  : In  my  communication  of  the  30th  ultimo  I informed  you  that 
air  forces  had  fallen  back  to  Bernal  Springs,  20  miles  from  the  place  of 
*ur  late  encounter  with  the  enemy. 

On  the  day  of  their  arrival  at  that  place  the  adjutant-general  of 
lolonel  Canby,  Lieutenant  Nicodemus,  arrived  in  camp,  bringing  news 
nd  orders  from  Colonel  Canby.  The  first  was  that  he  had  not  on  the 
:5th  of  March  left  Fort  Craig",  and  the  orders  were  for  the  whole  force 
o fall  back  on  Union. 

These  orders  were  obeyed,  and  on  the  31st  ultimo  the  troops  passed 
his  place  en  route  to  Fort  Union. 

Since  the  late  encounter  with  the  enemy  we  have  had  occasion  to 
earn  much  more  of  the  particulars  and  consequences  of  that  engage- 
nent  than  I could  write  you  in  my  last  communication. 

Two  days  having  been  given  for  the  burial  of  the  dead  and  taking 


660 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[Chap.  XXI. 


care  of  the  wounded,  an  opportunity  was  thereby  offered  to  ascertain 
.the  loss  of  the  enemy  and  their  subsequent  movements.  As  I had 
anticipated,  they  fled  in  confusion  from  the  field  and  returned  to 
Santa  Fe,  not  having  on  an  average  10  rounds  of  ammunition  to  the  , 
man,  the  whole  of  the  ammunition  having  been  destroyed  in  the  train 
that  was  burned  by  Major  Chivington  on  the  day  of  the  battle.  So  it 
turned  out  that  had  our  troops  advanced  the  day  after  the  battle  it 
would  have  led  to  the  entire  capture  or  dispersion  of  the  enemy’s  force 
in  the  neighborhood  of  Santa  Fe. 

This  opportunity  has  been  lost,  and  we  have  again  to  try  the  fortune 
of  another  battle.  Upon  hearing  of  the  defeat  of  the.  troops  under  the 
command  of  Colonel  Scurry  and  their  retreat  to  Santa  Fe,  General 
Sibley  sent  a re-enforcement  of  500  men  from  Albuquerque,  which  re- 
enforcement reached  Santa  Fe  two  days  since,  together  with  as  much 
ammunition  and  provisions  as  could  be  spared  from  that  quarter.  These 
troops,  united  with  those  lately  routed  from  the  Apache  Canon,  I do 
not  think  will  pass  1,500,  and  perhaps  not  reach  that  number.  With 
the^e  I have  no  doubt  that  an  attempt  will  be  made  either  to  defend 
Santa  Fe  or  make  a stand  again  in  the  canon  15  miles  this  side,  which 
can  be  defended  by  a smaller  against  a superior  force,  acting  only  on 
tliG  cl ©fdlSIVG# 

We  have  certain  intelligence  that  Colonel  Canby  has  left  Fort  Craig, ; 
and  on  the  1st  of  this  month,  so  that  by  to-day  he  must  be  at  or  on  this 
side  of  Albuquerque,  The  troops  from  Union  will  also  leave  to-day 
for  Santa  Fe  or  to  form  a junction  with  Colonel  Canby  by  concert. 
The  junction  will  be  formed  as  the  situation  of  the  enemy  and  his 
strength  will  permit.  It  may  be  at  or  near  the  canon  before  mentioned, 
say  at  Gallisteo,  15  miles  south  of  Santa  Fe,  or  in  the  more  immediate 
neighborhood  of  that  city. 

Certain  it  is  that  we  are  on  the  eve  of  another  battle,  which  will  be 
decisive,  as  all  our  forces,  save  a few  left  at  Craig,  will  be  in  the  field 
and  also  the  whole  available  force  of  the  enemy.  I do  not  doubt  the 
result.  We  shall  triumph.  Our  troops  are  more  in  numbers,  buoyant 
with  the  late  success,  and  resolved  to  drive  the  enemy  from  the  Ter- 

11  The  loss  of  the  enemy  in  the  late  encounter  does  not  fall  short  of  400  | 
men  in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing.  Many  officers  of  high  grade,  1 
colonel,  said  to  be  Green  or  McNeill,  2 majors,  1 captain,  and  2 lieuten- 
ants killed  on  the  field.  Three  captains  (Shannon,  Wells,  and  Scott), 
8 lieutenants,  names  not  given,  taken  prisoners.  Their  wounded  are 
in  a hard  condition  on  the  late  field  of  battle,  without  medicine,  medical 
aid,  or  the  necessary  subsistence,  and  are  said  to  be  near  200  in  numbers. 

By  next  mail  I hope  to  give  you  the  welcome  intelligence  of  a final  j 
and  decisive  victory  over  the  enemy. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 


servant, 


HENBY  CONNELLY, 
Governor  of  New  Mexico. 


Department  of  State, 
Washington , April  8,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  for  your  information  an 


!hap.  XXI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


661 


extract  from  a dispatch  (No.  3),  dated  March  21,  received  this  day  from 
dr  Leonard  Pierce,  jr.,  United  States  consul  at  Matamoros,  Mexico, 
•elative  to  the  prosjject  of  a battle  near  Austin,  Tex.,  between  loyal 
md  disloyal  citizens  of  that  State. 

I have  the  honor  to  he,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  H.  SEWAED. 


[Inclosure.] 


Consulate  of  the  United  States  of  America, 

Matamoros , Mexico , March  21,  1862. 


Eon.  W.  H.  Seward, 

Secretary  of  State , Washington , D.  C.  : 

Sir  : * * * The  Union  men  in  Texas  are  becoming  bolder,  and  a 

oattle  is  expected  in  the  neighborhood  of  Austin  and  San  Antonio. 

I am  continually  besieged  with  refugees  and  deserters ; most  of  them 
without  funds,  who  expect  me  to  send  them  North.  For  many  I have 
procured  situations,  where  they  can  earn  a subsistence,  and  otheis  I 
lave  to  provide  for  to  the  best  of  my  ability. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

7 ’ L.  PIERCE,  Jr., 

United  States  Consul. 


War  Department, 
Washington  City , D.  0.,  April  9,  1862. 


Hon.  W.  H.  Seward,  Secretary  of  State : 

Sir:  By  direction  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  I have  the  honor  to  ac- 
knowledge the  receipt  of  your  letter  of  yesterday,  inclosing  an  extract 
from  a dispatch  of  the  United  States  consul  at  Matamoros,  Mexico,  and 
to  say  that  the  suggestion  contained  therein  will  receive  the  considera- 
tion of  this  Department. 


Very  respectfully, 


P.  H.  WATSON, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War. 


Executive  Department, 

Las  Vegas , April  11,  1862. 

Hon.  W.  H.  Seward, 

Secretary  of  State , Washington , JD.  C. : 

Sir  : I informed  you  in  my  communication  of  the  6th  instant  that  the 
troops  from  Union  had  marched  forward  in  the  direction  of  the  enemy, 
at  that  time  in  and  around  Santa  Fe,  having  been  re-enforced  by  the 
remnant  of  their  forces  under  General  Sibley  from  Albuquerque.  On 
the  7th  and  8th  instant  all  our  forces  had  concentrated  at  Bernal 
Springs,  20  miles  west  of  this  place,  and  from  there  marched  on  the  9th 
toward  the  capital.  At  San  Jose,  7 miles  distant,  they  were  met  by 
a flag  of  truce,  borne  by  Maj.  A.  M.  Jackson  and  another  officer  high  in 
rank,  the  object  and  purport  of  which  have  not  come  to  my  knowledge. 
Enough  is  known,  however,  to  enable  me  to  say  that  nothing  asked  for 
under  the  flag  of  truce  was  granted,  and  our  troops  marched  hastily  on, 
1 Colonel  Paul  having  disposed  of  the  bearers  of  the  flag  in  a very  short 


662 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[Chap.  XXI. 


conference.  But  a few  hours  after  leaving  San  Jos6  Colonel  Paul  received 
information  direct  from  Santa  Fe  that  the  whole  Texan  force  had  evac- 
uated that  place  and  were  then  marching  hurriedly  toward  Albuquerque, 
leaving  behind  them  all  their  wounded.  The  information  also  confirms 
the  intelligence  that  I gave  you  in  my  last  as  to  the  great  loss  of  the 
enemy  on  the  28th  ultimo  in  the  engagement  with  our  forces  on  that 
day.  It  now  appears  certain  that  their  loss  exceeded  my  calculation, 
not  falling  short  of  450  in  killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners,  so  that  when 
they  had  collected  the  fragments  of  their  dispersed  forces  together  in 
Santa  Fe  (and  this  was  not  done  until  at  the  end  of  three  days)  it  was 
ascertained  that  out  of  1,200  men  that  had  been  engaged  in  the  conflict 
of  that  day  not  more  than  750  could  be  found  ready  for  duty.  This 
number,  united  with  the  force  brought  by  Sibley  from  Albuquerque— 
say  400  men — constitutes  the  whole  Texan  force  now  in  the  Territory 

Colonel  Canby  left  Albuquerque  on  the  7th  instant,  and  is  presumed! 
to  be  on  his  way  to  the  capital  either  by  the  way  of  the  river  or  on  the 
east  side  of  the  mountains  by  the  way  of  the  Placer.  In  either  event  an 
encounter  with  the  enemy  is  inevitable.  His  movements  are  all  now  in 
concert  with  those  of  the  forces  from  Union  under  Colonel  Paul.  The 
enemy  is  between  them,  and  but  a short  distance  from  either.  A des- 
perate effort  will  be  made  either  to  defeat  Colonel  Canby  or  elude  his 
forces  before  Colonel  Paul’s  command  arrives  in  their  rear  and  to  Col- 
onel Canby’s  assistance.  The  force  o#  Colonel  Canby  now  with  him  is 
about  equal  to  that  of  the  enemy — say  1,100  or  1,200—900  of  whom  are 
regulars,  so  that  we  may  not  fear  any  serious  reverse  before  Colonel 
Paul  can  arrive  upon  the  pound  and  aid  in  the  capture  of  the  entire 
Texan  force  now  in  the  Territory.  It  is  very  sure  that  the  Texans  are  now 
in  full  flight,  but  if  not  permitted  by  Colonel  Canby  to  pass  round  him, 
I have  no  doubt  but  that  they  will  give  him  battle,  and  attempt  to  force 
their  passage  down  the  river  to  Fort  Craig,  and  thence  out  of  the  Ter- 
ritory. 

The  road  to  the  capital  is  now  clear  of  the  enemy  and  his  spies,  and 
there  is  not  a Texan  in  Santa  Fe  except  the  wounded,  one  surgeon,  and 
a few  attendants.  I have  this  from  a gentleman  direct  from  Santa  F6, 
who  left  there  the  day  after  the  evacuation  by  the  enemy,  and  to  whom 
every  credence  can  be  given.  I shall  leave  to-morrow  for  the  capital, 
and  from  there,  by  next  mail,  I hope  to  be  able  to  give  you  the  intel- 
ligence that  the  enemy  are  either  captured  or  dispersed. 

We  are  greatly  indebted  to  the  command  under  Colonel  Slough,  from 
Denver  City,  for  this  favorable  result  in  our  struggle  with  the  Texan 
invaders.  Their  defeat  and  utter  annihilation  is  now  sure,  and  I think 
it  will  be  the  last  attempt  upon  the  Territory  from  that  quarter. 

I am  sorry  to  say  that  the  Indians  during  the  last  three  months  have 
entirely  desolated  the  Territory  of  all  the  stock  within  their  reach,  hav- 
ing advanced  as  far  east  as  the  Canadian,  a point  far  in  advance  of  all 
their  former  depredations. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  serv- 
ant, 

HENRY  CONNELLY, 

Governor  New  Mexico. 

[Copy  furnished  to  War  Department  by  Secretary  of  State  May  6, 1862.] 


vHAF . XXL] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


663 


Executive  Department, 

Las  Vegas,  AT.  Mex .,  April  13,- 1862. 

W.  H.  Seward,  Secretary  of  State : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  inform  the  Department  that  on  the  lltli 
nstant  Colonel  Canby  formed  a junction  with  the  command  under  Col- 
mel  Paul  at  Gallisteo,  15  miles  south  of  Santa  Ed,  and  proceeded  by 
forced  marches  on  to  Albuquerque,  at  which  place  the  enemy  with  their 
3ntire  force  had  concentrated.  On  his  march  upwards  and  in  the  town 
)r  neighborhood  of  Albuquerque  Colonel  Canby  had  an  encounter  with 
either  the  whole  or  a part  of  the  enemy’s  forces,  in  which  it  is  said  he 
took  several  pieces  of  artillery,  and  that  Major  Duncan,  ot  our  cavalry , 

was  wounded  in  the  head.  „ ^ ~ 

Colonel  Canby  made  the  detour  by  way  of  the  Canon  Carnavel,  and 
came  on  the  east  side  of  the  mountains  to  the  junction  at  Gallisteo.  To- 
day he  will  arrive  at  Albuquerque,  and  doubtless  decide  the  question 
of  the  occupancy  of  this  Territory  by  the  Texans.  It  is  thought  the 
Texans  are  in  hasty  retreat,  and  have  full  three  days’  march  the  ad- 
vantage. Should  that  be  the  case,  it  will  not  be  easy  to  overtake  them. 
Col  Kit  Carson,  with  his  entire  regiment,  and  some  auxiliary  torces,  is 
stili  at  Craig,  and  may  offer  some  embarrassment  to  the  safe  retreat  of 
the  enemy. 

I think  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  result  of  any  action  between 
the  forces  under  Colonel  Canby,  now  united  with  the  late  victorious 
troops  from  Denver,  and  the  enemy,  with  all  the  forces  thej  have  in  the 
Territory. 

The  cavalry  and  means  of  transportation  on  both  sides  are  completely 
broken  down,  and  neither  a retreat  nor  pursuit  can  be  effected  with  any 

degree  of  rabidity.  _ ,,  . « 

The  Territory  has  been  completely  exhausted  of  grain  on  the  route  ot 
the  military  movements,  and  nothing  can  be  obtained  of  forage  for  ani- 
mills 

I give  you  herein  the  latest  news  from  and  the  positions  of  the  differ- 
ent forces.  Not  having  left  for  the  capital  the  day  mentioned  in  my 
last,  of  the  10th  instant,  has  enabled  me  to  do  so.  I leave  on  to-mor- 
row for  that  place,  and  will  by  next  mail  give  you  the  result  of  the  im- 
pending conflict.  , , . 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ HENRY  CONNELLY, 

Governor  of  New  Mexico. 

p.  s. The  inclosed  communication  from  Colonel  Paul  was  received 

after  the  above  was  written.  I forward  it  tor  the  satisfaction  of  the 
Department. 

[Copy  furnished  War  Department  by  Secretary  of  State  May  6, 1862.] 

[Inclosure.] 


Headquarters  Eastern  District, 

Gallisteo , N.  Mex.,  April  12,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Henry  Connelly, 

Governor  of  New  Mexico , Las  Vegas , N.  Mex.: 

Sir  : It  affords  me  great  pleasure  to  inform  you  that  Santa  Ed  is  now 
in  our  possession,  and  that  Your  Excellency  will  hazard  nothing  by  re- 
turning to  the  seat  of  government  and  resuming  the  duties  of  your  office 
whenever  it  may  suit  your  convenience. 


664  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

I tender  to  you,  sir,  the  best  guarantee  of  the  future  prosperity  of 
New  Mexico  in  assuring  you  of  the  junction  of  my  command  at  an 
early  hour  with  the  forces  under  General  Canby,  and  I am  confident 
that  the  rebel  troops  will  be  driven  before  us. 

Your  Excellency  will  be  glad  to  know  that  the  Union  troops  on  enter- 
ing Santa  Fe  were  received  with  public  demonstrations  of  joy. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  E.  PAUL, 

Colonel  Fourth  Regiment  Few  Mexico  Vols .,  Comdg.  Fist, 


General  Orders,  > Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  New  Mexico, 

No.  30.  ( Camp  near  Peralta , A.  Mex.,  April  16,  1862. 

I.  Col.  G.  E.  Paul,  Fourth  New  Mexico  Volunteers,  is  assigned  to  the 
command  of  the  first  column,  and  Colonel  Chivington,  First  Colorado 
Volunteers,  to  the  command  of  the  second  column,  of  the  Union  xlrmy 
of  New  Mexico. 

II.  Col.  B.  S.  Eoberts,  Fifth  New  Mexico  Volunteers,  is  assigned  to 
the  command  of  that  part  of  New  Mexico  including  the  Central,  North- 
ern, and  Santa  Fe  Districts,  and  charged  with  the  duty  of  establishing 
garrisons  and  taking  such  other  measures  as  may  be  necessary  for  the 
security  of  public  property  and  the  restoration  of  order  at  the  point  re- 
cently occupied  by  Confederate  forces. 

III.  Capt.  E.  M.  Morris,  Third  Cavalry,  is  assigned  to  the  command 
of  all  the  cavalry  force  with  this  command  except  Graydon’s  Spy  Com- 
pany. 

IV.  Two  companies  of  the  Second  Kansas  Eegiment  will  re-enforce 
the  garrison  oi  Fort  Union;  the  remainder  of  that  regiment  will  join 
this  command  with  as  little  delay  as  possible. 

V.  Capt.  J.  C.  McFerran,  senior  quartermaster,  will  proceed  to  Fort 
Union,  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  and  forwarding  supplies  and  super- 
intending the  operations  of  his  department  on  his  arrival  at  Fort  Union. 
H.  M.  Enos,  assistant  quartermaster,  will  report  in  person  at  the  head- 
quarters of  the  Army. 

VI.  Surg.  E.  I.  Baily,  medical  director  of  the  department,  will  pro- 
ceed to  Santa  Fe  and  to  Fort  Union,  afid  is  charged  with  the  duty  of 
providing  the  supplies  and  making  arrangements  for  the  comfort  of  the 
sick  and  wounded.  He  will  establish  such  general  hospitals  and  pur- 
chase such  supplies  as  may  be  necessary  to  secure  the  comfort  and 
speedy  recovery  of  the  wounded.  Surg.  J.  M.  Whitlock,  First  New 
Mexico  Volunteers,  will  report  for  duty  to  Surgeon  Baily. 

VII.  Capt.  Chacon’s  company  of  the  First,  Sena’s,  Eaton’s,  and  San- 
chez’s, companies  of  the  Second,  and  Hubbell’s  company  of  the  Fifth 
Eegiment,  will  report  for  duty  to  Col.  B.  S.  Eoberts. 

VIII.  Col.  M.  S.  Howe,  Third  Cavalry,  will  report  in  person  at 
these  headquarters.  The  officers  accompanying  him  will  join  without 
delay  their  regiments  or  companies  in  the  field  or  at  the  stations  at 
which  they  may  be  found. 

IX.  The  senior  paymaster  will  make  immediate  arrangements  for  the 
payment  of  the  troops,  commencing  with  those  that  have  been  the 
longest  unpaid. 

X.  The  chief  commissary  will  [make]  the  necessary  provision  for  the 
supplies  pertaining  to  this  department. 

By  order  of  Col.  E.  E.  S.  Canby : 

WM.  J.  L.  NICODEMUS, 

Captain  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


HAV.  XXI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


665 


Executive  Department, 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  April  20,  1862. 

Ion.  W.  H.  Seward,  Ac.  : _ ^ 

Sib:  In  mv  communication  of  the  11th  instant  I informed  you  that 
i i unction  had  been  made  between  the  forces  under  General  Canby  and 
hose  under  Colonel  Paul  at  the  place  called  Gallisteo,  15  miles  south  of 
fanta  Fcf  I have  learned  since  that  the  main  body  of  the  two  forces 
lkl  not  unite  until  they  reached  the  Canon  of  Carnavel,  directly  eastot 
md  about  15  miles  from  Albuquerque.  General  Canby,  having  lelt  ins 
position  on  the  river  below  Albuquerque,  at  which  place  he  had  a slight 
skirmish  with  a small  force  of  the  enemy,  left  a garrison,  and  taking  tc 
position  to  which  I have  referred,  in  the  Canon  of  Carnavel  the  two 
‘ommands  were  united  on  the  13th  instant. 

The  fugitive  forces  of  the  Texans  had  meantime  reached  Albuquerque 
from  this5 place,  and,  uniting  with  the  small  force  there,  took  up  their 
line  of  march  down  the  river  on  the  east  side,  not  being  a ■ , 

the  stream  at  Albuquerque.  They  had  progressed  only  20  miles,  when 
they  were  overtaken  by  General  Canby  at  and  m full possession  of  my 
residence.  It  being  late  at  night  when  General  Canby  arm ed  within 
hearing  of  their  position,  his  ears  were  saluted  with  the  sound  of  lev 
elrv  by  night.”  The  violin  was  in  full  blast,  accompanied  by  othei  and 
more  noisy  instruments.  The  enemy  seemed  to  be  entirely  unconscious 
of  his  approach,  nor  was  his  presence  known  to  them  until ^extend 
My  residence  is  surrounded  by  quite  a dense  forest  of  ticcs,  exte 
in"-  in  every  direction  for  at  least  half  a mile,  and  the  only  approach  loi 
vehicles  is  by  the  main  road.  The  ditches  (asequias),  for  the  purpose  of 
irrigation,  running  across  and  parallel  with  the  road,  oiler  no  small  lm 

pediment  to  the  operation  of  artillery.  it-  of  flip 

During  the  day  after  General  Canby  had  reached  the p os: itaon  of  the 
enemy,  as  related,  a cannonading  was  carried  on  from  both  sides  with- 
out any  serious  result.  The  position  of  the  enemy  was  a s mg  on* 
and  dangerous  to  be  approached  by  infantry,  having  high .walls, made 
of  adobes,  which  constitute  our  inclosures  ot  farming  lands.  Against 
this  position  General  Canby  did  not  think  prudent  to  make  any  demon- 

St  During  the  night,  however,  the  enemy  silently  left  their  position,  and 
nassed  below  a mile  or  two  to  a ford  in  the  river,  where  they  attempted 
to  cross,  but  their  teams  being  weak  and  the  river  swollen  by  the  spring 
floods  the  whole  of  their  train,  consisting  of  CO  wagons,  was  left  m the 
river  and  on  the  banks,  the  mules  alone  having  been  crossed  over  to 
the  opposite  shore.  I am  not  informed  that  any  of  then  aitilleiy  was 
either  left  behind  or  captured  by  our  forces,  with  the  nts 

piece  the  day  previous,  together  with  seven  wagons  and  the  contents. 

The  latest  news  from  General  Canby  by  Colonel  Roberts,  who  a 
rived  in  town  this  evening,  is  that  our  forces  were  still  ' A, 

euemv  and  had  taken  a position  in  advance  of  him  at  La  J 03  a,  ou  nines, 
where  they  crossed  the  river,  but  on  the  east  side,  where  the  enemy 
could  not  pass  except  under  the  direct  fire  ot  our  artillery. 

Colonel  Paul,  with  the  forces  from  Colorado,  urns  harassing  the  enemy 
in  the  rear,  having  crossed  the  river  to  the  west  side.  -There  can  be  no 
doubt  of  the  entire  capture  of  the  Texans,  with  all  their  tram  °f  a^V 
lery,  numbering  some  eighteen  pieces,  and  this  closes  the  scene  of  this 
devastating  Texan  invasion.  , , , 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  very  respectfully^^ 


666 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 


[Copy  furnished  War  Department 
1862.] 


by  Secretary  of  State  May  14, 


* 

Hdqrs.  Central,  Santa  F^,  and  North.  Mil.  Dists., 
Department  of  New  Mexico , Santa  Fe,  April  23, 1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  U.  8.  Army , Washington,  D.  C.: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  myself  in  command  of  the 
Central,  Santa  Fe,  and  Northern  Military  Districts,  Department  of 
Tsew  Mexico,  and  that  I have  re-established  and  garrisoned  the  postsi 
at  Albuquerque  and  at  this  place,  recently  occupied  by  Confederate 
troops  of  General  Sibley’s  brigade. 

It  will  gratify  you  to  know  that  the  Texan  troops  are  in  retreat  out 
ot  the  country,  having  been  compelled  by  our  operations  to  abandon 
most  of  their  supplies  of  all  kinds,  and  to  take  the  mountain  route  be- 
hind the  Socorro  Range,  to  avoid  the  capture  of  the  small  remaining 
force  ot  the  3,000  troops  that  invaded  the  Territory. 

They  have  abandoned  their  sick  and  wounded  everywhere  on  their 
hue  ot  retreat,  and  are  leaving  the  country  in  a state  of  demoralization 
and  suffering  that  has  few  examples  in  any  war.  The  long  line  of  then- 
retreat  over  Jornada  and  wastes  of  country  without  water,  and  that 
furnish  no  supplies,  will  render  their  march  extremely  difficult,  and 
aggravate  the  ordinary  suffering  of  a disorganized  army  under  defeat 
The  broken-down  condition  of  all  our  animals,  the  want  of  cavalry,  and 
deficiencies  in  all  our  supplies  will  make  a successful  pursuit  equally 
impracticable,  if  not  impossible. 

My  report  of  the  operations  of  my  division  in  the  field  from  the  1st 
to  the  16th  instant  will  reach  you  in  time  through  the  proper  channel. ! 
1 effected  a junction  with  Colonel  Paul’s  command  at  San  Antonio  on 
the  13th,  after  a demonstration  on  Albuquerque  and  artillery  combats 
there  on  the  8th  and  sharp  skirmishing  on  the  8th  and  9th.  The  last 
engagement  was  at  Peralta,  on  the  15th  ; that  drove  the  main  Confed- 
erate forces  from  that  position  and  put  their  army  in  utter  rout. 

We  have  great  numbers  of  their  prisoners,  but  I am  unable  to  give  j 
the  figures  with  accuracy,  and  some  60  wagons  of  their  supply  train 
and  two  pieces  of  artillery  have  fallen  into  our  hands. 

Colonel  Canby  is  on  the  pursuit  with  both  the  Northern  and  South- 
ern Divisions  ot  the  Army,  and  this  information  is  communicated  to  ; 
you  indirectly,  because  it  will  be  many  days  before  his  official  reports 
can  be  made. 

According  to  the  most  reliable  information,  General  Sibley  has  not 
left  1,200  men  of  the  army  of  3,000  that  appeared  before  Fort  Craig  on 
the  13  th  of  February,  and  his  retreat  is  the  complete  annihilation  of  his  I 
remaining  forces. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  S.  BOBERTS, 

Colonels  Commanding . 


General  Orders,  ) *ETdqrs.  Dept,  of  New  Mexico, 

^°*  34.  f Fort  Craig , N.  Mex.,  April  23, 1862. 

I.  Col.  G.  B.  Paul,  Fourth  New  Mexico  Volunteers,  is  assigned  to  the 
command  of  the  field  force  operating  in  this  neighborhood.  The  cav- 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


667 


?HAP.  XXI.] 

ilry  force  under  command  of  Capt.  R.  M.  Morris,  Third  Cavalry , will 

report  to  Colonel  Paul  for  duty  as  soon  as  possible. 

II.  The  companies  of  the  Seventh  Infantry  and  Claflm’s  battery  will 
form  part  of  the  garrison  of  this  post. 

By  order  of  Ool.  E.  R.  8.  Oanby : ^ ^ L KICOI)EMUS) 

Captain , Twelfth  Infantry , Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Department  of  State, 
Washington , D.  0.,  April  25,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : I inclose  a telegram  to  this  Department  from  the  United  States 
consul  at  Halifax,  announcing  a change  of  the  destination  of  certain 
British  steamers  believed  to  contain  contraband  of  war,  from  Charles- 
ton to  Tampico.  This  change  was  undoubtedly  with  the  view  ot  trans- 
ferring their  cargoes  from  Tampico  to  Matamoros  or  adjacent  points  on 

the  coast  of  Texas.  . 

On  several  recent  occasions  I have  done  myself  the  honor  ot  suggest- 
ing to  the  Department  of  War  the  necessity  of  occupying  Brownsville 
with  a competent  military  force.  The  objections  to  that  course  at  this 
iuncture  which  have  been  offered  by  the  Department  of  War  are  duly 
appreciated.  Permit  me,  however,  in  view  of  the  peculiar  position  ot 
our  boundary  on  the  Rio  Grande  frontier,  the  impossibility  of  blockad- 
ing the  mouth  of  that  river,  at  least  without  the  consent  of  Mexico,  and 
consequently  the  impunitv  with  which  arms  and  munitions  of  war  may 
be  introduced  into  Texas  in  that  direction,  again  to  urge  the  importance 
of  posting  a military  force  for  the  purpose  of  endeavoring  to  check  such 

proceedings.  n . , 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  nr,  your  obecWservant, 


[Inclosure.] 

Halifax,  N.  ’S.,  April  23, 1862. 

Hon.  W.  H.  Seward,  Secretary  of  State  : 

I am  advised  by  consul  at  Bermuda  English  steamer  Stellia  arrived 
there  with  cargo  destined  for  Charleston,  but  has  changed  destination 
for  Tampico.  Will  probably  be  accompanied  by  steamers  Bermuda 

and  Herald.  jyj.  M.  JACKSON, 

Consul. 


Kansas  City,  April  28, 1862. 

E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War : 

Through  Santa  Fe  mail,  with  dates  to  12th,  has  arrived.  Colonel 
Slouch  and  General  Canby  formed  junction  at  Gallisteo  on  11th.  Major 
Duncan,  who  was  in  command  of  General  Canby’s  advance  guard,  en- 
countered a large  party  of  Texans  and  routed  them.  Major  Duncan 
was  slightly  wounded.  The  Texans  were  30  miles  south  of  Gallisteo,  m 
full  flight  from  the  Territory.  General  Canby  designs  giving  immedi- 
ate pursuit.  No  doubt  is  entertained  of  the  speedy  capture  ot  Sibley  s 
command,  as  they  are  entirely  destitute  of  everything^  ROBERTS 


668 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[Chap.  XXL 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Pacific 

-p  . „ _ Sm  Francisco , April  30,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  U.  S.  Army,  Washington , D.  C.  : 

General  : Major  Drum  is  still  absent  inspecting  the  troops  at  qn6 
near  Fort  luma.  My  latest  dates  from  him  are  of  the  14th  instant 
It  is  probable  that  Colonel  Carleton  is  now  at  or  in  advance  of  Fort 

Fifth  lnfantr^  Cal;fornia  ^dunteers^ s con 
at  F J rt  Vuma  as  a reserve.  Carleton’s  movement  will 
sweep  the  predatory  bands  of  Baylor  and  Beilv  out  of  Arizona  and 
break  up  their  plan  of  obtaining  a foothold  in  Sonora;  and  then  with 
the  well-appointed  force  under  his  command,  strengthened  if  necessarv 
by  the  fine  reserve  regiment  of  Bowie,  I have  no 
the  result  m any  conflict  with  the  rebels  this  side  of  the  Bio  Grande 
Outwardly  everything  is  quiet  in  this  country,  but  I know  that  there 
are  many  men  on  this  coast  who  are  traitors  at  heart,  and  who  are^  at 
this  moment  writhing  under  the  defeats  of  the  rebels.  They  are  harm- 
less now,  because  so  greatly  in  the  minority ; but  such  men  require  CW 
surveillance.  In  the  southern  portion  of  this  State  there  aremore 

the  rebeIs  tliau  anywhere  else,  and  I have  now 
ordered  Colonel  Forman,  of  the  Fourth  Infantry,  California  Volunteers 

vVLn1  ca™P  at  Sacramento,  to  proceed  by  the  next  steamer  to  San 
Pedro  with  Ins  headquarters  and  three  companies.  The  colonel  will 
Like  post  at  Camp  Latham,  near  Los  Angeles,  where  we  have  already 
four  companies  of  the  Second  Cavalry.  r eaay 

It  has  been  my  aim  not  to  create  any  unnecessary  alarm  in  the  public 
mind  on  this  coast  but  to  watch  closely  the  progress  of  events,  and  be 

thf  Pacific  t0yonSwinnyH  ttemPi t0  raikl?  the  standard  of  rebellion  on 
tne  ± acinc.  You  will  observe,  by  my  General  Orders  Vo  17  +im+  i 

am  gradually  drawing  the  cords  a little  closer  around  treason.  ’ 

V ery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

p . 7.  ^ G.  WEIGHT, 

Brigadier -General,  U.  S.  Army , Commanding . 


Headquarters,  U.  S.  Mil.  Dept,  of  the  Pacific, 

р.  T,  „ „ Sm  Francisco , Cal.,  May  3,  1862. 

His  Excellency  Senor  Don  Ignacio  Pesquiera, 

Governor  of  the  State  of  Sonora : 

Sir:  By  the  last  steamer  from  the  Gulf  of  California  I received  a 

DeclmbeVirSfil'IfvH  Y°ur  Excellency,  under  date  of 

ecember  lb,  1861,  by  H.  H.  Sibley,*  the  rebel  chief  in  command  of  a 

copv  of  YourTxcdl^  F,ew  Mfxico>  and  although  I did  not  receive  a 
! L Excellency’s  reply,  yet  I was  much  gratified  by  the  assur- 

ZT.f  m <'0rres|l,!1"lent  tllat  Your  Excellency  had  declined  entering 
the  m v rpu,et“e“  ProP°.sed>  the  rebel  commander.  Oonsiderinf 

с, /;  bl  .J  relations  subsisting  between  the  Government  of  the  United 
States  and  that  of  the  Kepublic  of  Mexico,  as  well  as  between  the 
citizens  ot  the  contiguous  States  of  Sonora  and  California,  any  other 

d~eSted  ^ Exce11^  has  “ad*  would ’ha  v'e  been 

an^Sonora^ie  jitinted  in^Scrit^l’*VoLIV^  tbe  ^ovornors  °f  CWliualiua 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


669 


pilAP.  XXI.] 

I need  not  point,  out  to  Your  Excellency  the  utter  ruin  and  devasta- 
ion  which  would  inevitably  befall  the  beautiful  State  of  Sonora  should 
he  rebel  forces  obtain  a foothold  within  its  limits,  as  m that  event  it 
would  be  indispensably  necessary  that  the  frontier  should  be  passed  y 
She  United  States  forces  and  our  enemies  pursued  possiblj  to  the  city 

°fIClbesDYour  Excellency  to  rest  assured  that  under  no  circumstances 
will  the  Government  of  the  United  States  permit  the  rebel  horde  to 
take  refuge  in  Sonora.  I have  an  army  of  10,000  men  ready  to  pass  the 

“wS  ■ «*. «—• *» 

most  obedient  servant,  q.  nUUIGtHT 

Brigadier-General,  U.  S.  Army,  Comdg.  Dept,  o}  the  Pacific. 


Headquaetees  Depaetment  op  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  A.  Mex.,  May  4,  18G2. 

The  Adjutant-General  of  the  Army, 

Washington , V.  C.: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I left  Fort  Craig  on  2 ' ^ 
ultimo,  and  reached  this  place  last  night,  making  arrangements  on  the 
road  to  facilitate  the  transmission  of  supphes  to  the  troops  in  the  South 
The  Confederate  force,  in  rapid  retreat,  had  taken  the  icnite  o>  the 
Eenesco  through  a mountainous  and  difficult  country  exceedingly  des 1- 
tute  of  water.  They  will  probably  reach  the  Rio  Grande  m the  u'njr 
borhood  of  Santa  Barbara,  where  Colonel  Steele  wouhl  probablj  meet 
them  with  supplies.  Scouts  and  prisoners  report  this  force  as  great  y 
demoialized  and  that  they  have  abandoned  everything  that  could 
impede  their  flight.  The  sick  and  wounded  have  been  left  by  the  way- 
sX  without  care  and  often  without  food.  Many  of  them  have  been 
collected  and  are  properly  cared  for,  and  arrangements  have fumade 
to  bring  in  the  others  and  secure  any  valuable  property  that  has  been 

abI  shXaccumulateXrapidly  as  possible  at  ^0.r\^a!g  ^rmer  plac^ 
the  supplies  that  are  necessary  for  a movement  below  the  former  place. 
This  will  occupy  some  time,  as  with  our  extremely  limited  means  and 
the  length  of  the  liue  it  is  very  difficult  to  meet  the  current  want.,  ot 

the  troops.  _ 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ CANBY 

Colonel  Nineteenth  Infantry,  Commanding  Department. 


Headquaetees  Depaetment  op  Hew  Mexico, 

Santa  Fer  A.  Mex.,  May  4,  1862. 

Adjutant-General  of  the  Army,  Washington , D.  C.: 

Sir:  I have  learned  through  the  newspapers  that  five  regiments  ot 

volunteers  have  been  ordered  from  the  East  to  this  Territory.  It  this 
force  is  intended  only  for  the  defense  of  New  Mexico  aud  the  reoccupa- 
tion of  Arizona,  the  whole  of  it  will  not  in  my  judgment 
Two  regiments,  in  addition  to  the  troops  now  here,  will,  I think,  be  amply 
sufficient  if  at  the  same  time  arrangements  are  made  to  secure  our  com- 
mmiication  with  the  East  by  arming  and  garrisoning  strongly  the  posts 
between  Fort  Union  and  Fort  Eiley. 


670 


[Chap.  XXL 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  AEIZ. 

The  difficulty  of  procuring  supplies  of  all  kinds  in  this  country  makes 
it  important  that  no  greater  force  should  be  sent  here  than  is  absolutely 
necessary.  No  operations  can  be  carried  on  with  advantage  from  New 
Mexico  against  any  part  of  the  South,  as  all  the  supplies  for  such  opera- 
tions must  be  brought  from  the  East,  as  no  reliance  can  be  placed  upon 
the  resources  of  this  country,  Arizona,  or  Chihuahua. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 
_ , . ED.  E.  S.  CANBY, 

Colonel  Nineteenth  Infantry , Commanding  Department. 


Saint  Louis,  Mo.,  May  9, 1862. 

General  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  U.  S.  Army: 

General  Halleck  telegraphs  me  he  can  give  no  orders  in  reference  to 
the  troops  for  New  Mexico. 

I reiterate  my  recommendation  that  not  more  than  500  infantry  500 
cavalry  and  two  batteries  of  light  artillery  be  sent  All  their  subsist- 
ence will  have  to  go  from  the  Missouri  Eiver. 

JA&  L.  DONALDSON. 


War  Department,  May  10,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War , Fort  Monroe: 

The  following  telegram,  received  by  General  Meigs  from  quarter- 
master at  Saint  Louis,  namely : 

Colonel  Donaldson  decidedly  of  opinion  1,000  men  and  two  batteries  ample  force  to 
send  to  New  Mexico.  General  Canby’s  force  now  snperior  to  enemy.  If  original  or- 

idxfflttCaTnd  °Ui'  expedltion1wi11  C08t  probably  $10,000,000,  three-quarters  of  which  can 
be  saved  by  reducing  expedition  to  needed  force. 

Watts.  Delegate  from  New  Mexico,  Colonel  Donaldson,  and  General 
Meigs  all  think  force  should  be  reduced,  to  save  expense  and  expedite 
its  leaving.  Have  you  any  orders  to  give  $ f 

P.  H.  WATSON, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War . 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fd,  N.  Mex.,  May  10,  1862. 
The  Adjutant-General  of  the  Army, 

Washington , D.  C .: 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  Confederate  troops,  after 
passing  the  Nugales,  broke  up  into  small  parties,  and  reached  the  river 
10m  the  mountains  at  different  points  between  Canada  Alamosa  and 
Santa  Barbara  (Old  Fort  Thorn).  They  made  no  stay  at  this  place, 
but  continued  their  retreat,  and  crossed  the  river  at  San  Diego,  near 

* Of  April  23,  for  six  regiments. 

m!S e°™: t'aJ7’s  orders  fonnd.  The  only  re-enforcements  sent  to  New 
consln)  fron^Fonf  Leavenwm-th,  “ ™ ““  °f  KsM  artiUery  (Niutl1  Wis' 


Jh-ap.  XXI.] 


671 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 

Dona  Ana.  The  Rio  Grande  is  unusually  high,  and  has  added  greatly 
to  our  embarrassments  in  supplying  the  troops  at  Fort  Craig*.  I hope, 
however,  to  accumulate  a sufficient  quantity  of  supplies  at  that  place 
to  enable  me  to  resume  active  operations  by  the  1st  of  next  month. 
Two  companies  of  mounted  Colorado  Volunteers  reached  Fort  Union 
on  the  8th  instant.  I am  now  making  arrangements  to  reduce  and 
consolidate  the  New  Mexican  Volunteers,  and  expect,  by  the  discharge 
of  incompetent  officers  and  inefficient  men,  to  have  one  serviceable 

regiment.  , , 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  R.  S.  CANBY, 

Colonel  Nineteenth  Infantry , Commanding  Department. 


Headquarters 


Department  of  New  Mexico, 
Santa  Fe,  N . Mex.,  May  12,  1862. 


The  Adjutant-General  of  the  Army, 

Washington , D . C. : 

Sir  * I have  the  honor  to  report  that  before  the  receipt  of  the  regu- 
lations published  in  General  Orders,  No.  I had  given  instructions 
to  parole  and  send  out  of  the  country  as  soon  as  possible  all  the  pris- 
oners of  the  Confederate  Army  who  had  been  or  should  be  taken  in  this 

^The  two  reasons  that  influenced  me  in  giving  these  instructions 
were  * 

First  The  difficulty  of  supplying  our  own  troops  with  provisions. 
The  troops  at  the  most  distant  stations  have  for  some  time  past  been 
and  are  now  upon  reduced  rations — 12  ounces  of  flour — and  this  cannot 
be  materially  increased  until  additional  means  of  transportation  are 
received. 

Second.  My  inability  to  furnish  guards,  if  they  are  held  as  absolute 


^CJnder  these  instructions  240  have  already  been  sent  out  of  the  country 
and  about  240  remain.  Of  these  last  two-thirds  are  sick  or  wounded 
men  and  their  attendants. 

Before  leaving  Fort  Craig  for  this  place  an  officer  was  sent  to  pro- 
pose an  exchange  of  the  officers  and  men  (about  30)  of  this  command 
who  were  taken  prisoners,  but  he  returned  without  effecting  his  object, 
having  been  unable  to  overtake  the  Confederate  troops. 

There  are  still  many  stragglers  and  deserters  and  abandoned  men  m 
different  parts  of  the  country  who  are  now  being  collected,  and  will 
probablv  make  the  whole  number  of  prisoners  about  500. 

The  consolidated  return  will  be  forwarded  as  soon  as  the  correct 
reports  are  received. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  R.  S.  CANBY, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Department. 


Polvadera,  N.  Mex.,  May  14, 1862. 

Colonel  Paul,  Commanding: 

Sir  : Last  night  I reached  here  from  Salada.  On  the  8th  I reached 
Nugales  Spring.  From  there  the  road  ran  between  the  hills  for  about  lo 


672  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXL 

miles,  then  took  toward  the  Magdalene  Mountain,  where  they  found  water 
distance  from  Nugales  about  29  miles ; road  very  rough.  On  the  road 
they  deserted  one  wagon  and  a camp  and  left  three  dead  bodies  half 
buried.  In  another  place  found  bones  of  a man’s  arm,  half  eaten  by 
wolves.  I had  all  buried.  From  there  the  road  took  toJFeather  Sprin  <>\s. 
I called  it  so  on  account  of  feather-beds  beiug  strewed  around : distance 
from  Dead  Man’s  Spring  17  miles.  They  encamped  there.  From  there 
they  took  the  road  to  Ojo  del  Pueblo,  distance  15  miles 5 road  very  rough. 
Here  they  blew  up  a caisson,  burned  three  wagons,  hospital  department* 
medicines,  &c; ; left  a few  shell  and  round  shot.  From  there  they  took 
to  the  Salada,  distance  from  Ojo  del  Pueblo  about  30  miles ; road  very 
rough.  On  this  road,  near  and  at  Salada,  they  blew  up  and  burned  six 
caissons,  one  12-pounder  howitzer,  and  two  mountain-howitzer  carriages. 
I found  out  where  they  had  buried  some  40  shell,  loaded,  in  one  place* 
and  38  in  another;  78  in  all.  I took  them  up  and  hid  them  in  another 
place.  To-morrow  the  quartermaster  from  here  sends  for  them.  They 
burned  up  about  19  wagons,  10  ambulances,  6 caissons,  and  3 carriages. 
I think  they  left  3 howitzers,  one  12-pouuder  and  two  mountain.  I had 
with  me  a man  who  came  with  them,  who  saw  them  leave  the  howitzers. 
I believe  the  Mexicans  have  the  large  one  buried,  and  by  offering  a re- 
ward we  could  find  out.  They  destroyed  six  100-pound  barrels  of  pow- 
der at  Salada  and  a great  deal  of  camp  equipage.  The  road  from  Ojo 
del  Pueblo  is  strewn  with  old  harness,  iron  ovens,  and  in  fact  every- 
thing but  small  ammunition.  It  seems  they  destroyed  very  little,  if  any, 
of  that.  It  appears  that  the  Mexicans  have  carried  off  a great  deal.  There 
is  nothing  worth  sending  for  in  the  shape  of  ammunition  except  the 
shell.  The  distance  from  Nugales  to  liio  Puerco  is  about  109  miles : 
road  very  bad.  Sibley’s  command  made  it  in  five  days.  Left  dead  on 
the  road  about  60  or  70  mules  and  horses.  Inclosed  1 send  a letter*  I 
found  about  hiring  the  wagons. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  GRAYD02T, 

Captain , New  Mexico  Mounted  Volunteers . 


17,  1862. 


Executive  Department, 

Santa  Fe7  May 

Hon.  W.  H.  Seward, 

Secretary  of  State , Washington  City: 

Sir  : A few  days  since  I returned  from  a visit  to  my  place  of  resi- 
dence near  Peralta,  and  90  miles  from  this  city.  The  visit  was  made  to 
see  in  what  state  the  Texans  had  left  my  house  and  its  contents.  I am 
sorry  to  say  that  all  I had  heretofore  been  informed  of  as  to  the  wan- 
ton destruction  of  property  proved  to  be  true. 

They  remained  in  entire  possession  for  near  forty-eight  hoqrs ; all 
of  which  time  was  devoted  to  the  destruction  of  everything  of  value 
about  the  premises.  The  same  would  have  happened  no  doubt  to  my' 
neighbors  ot  Peralta  had  it  not  been  for  the  timelyT  arrival  of  General 
Can  by,  who  gave  them  no  time  for  further  depredations  upon  private 
property. 

My  loss  has  been  very  heavy,  not  less  than  $30,000,  and  much  of 
this  through  a pure  vandalic  spirit.  There  was  much  about  the  house. 


Not  found. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC  — UNION. 


G7  3 


HAP.  XXL] 


•f  goods  and  furniture  that  they  could  put  to  no  useful  pin  poses,  yet  all 
vras  taken  or  wantonly  destroyed. 

The  last  thing  heard  of  the  Texans  they  had  arrived  with  about  one- 
ialf  of  their  original  number,  in  a perfectly  disorganized  condition,  at 
he  Mesilla,  on  the  west  side  of  the  river,  where  they  hurriedly  crossed! 
t and  continued  their  flight  without  delay  to  El  Paso,  driving  before- 
hem  every  quadruped  that  was  upon  the  borders  of  the  river  or  in  the- 
jossession  of  the  inhabitants  of  that  valley.  That  they  have  suffered 
ntensely  by  thirst,  starvation,  and  fatigue  we  have  every  evidence  by 
hose  who  voluntarily  came  into  Fort  Craig  seeking  succor,  and  by  one 
>r  more  contrabands  who  have  returned  from  Mesilla,  after  having  ac- 
companied them  that  far.  This  is  the  second  invasion  our  Territory 
las  suffered  from  Texans,  both  of  which  have  proved  equally  disastrous,, 
tnd  it  is  to  be  hoped  we  will  never  witness  another. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain, 'sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

HENRY  CONNELLY, 
Governor  of  New  Mexico ~ 


[Copy  furnished  War  Department  by  Secretary  of  State  June  9, 
.862.] 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  May  18,  1862.. 

Hie  Adjutant-General  of  the  Army, 

Washington , D.  C. : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  since  my  report  of  the  10th 
nstant  no  material  changes  in  the  state  of  affairs  in  this  department 
lave  occurred.  The  Confederate  troops  are  scattered  along  the  Rio 
Glrande  from  Dona  Ana  to  El  Paso,  Colonel  Steele  with  500  men  (the 
re-enforcements  that  attempted  to  reach  General  Sibley  about  the  20th 
ff  March)  occupying  their  most  advanced  position.  They  reached  the 
Mesilla  with  six  guns  and  seven  wagons.  The  remainder  of  their  guns 
and  wagons  and  the  caissons  of  all  their  guns  were  abandoned  or 
destroyed.  The  command  sent  out  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  them 
has  not  yet  returned.  The  Confederate  troops  in  the  Mesilla  are  now 
collecting  the  means  necessary  to  enable  them  to  leave  the  country,  and 
many  of  the  citizens  who  had  embraced  their  cause  are  preparing  to 
leave  with  them.  I have  succeeded  with  some  difficulty  in  getting  to 
Fort  Craig  a sufficient  quantity  of  subsistence  to  prevent  any  suffering 
among  the  troops  now  there,  and  hope  to  accumulate  within  the  next 
(twenty  days  sufficient  to  warrant  a movement  below. 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  R.  S.  CANBY, 

Colonel  19 th  Inft .,  and  Brig.  Gen.  Vols .,  Comdg.  Dept. 


Department  of  State, 
Washington , May  24,  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  for  your  information  an  extract 
43  r R — VOL  IX 


674 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  HEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[0 IIAP.  XXI. 


from  a dispatch  received  at  this  Department  on  the  23d  instant  from 
Leonard  Pierce,  jr.,  United  States  consul  at  Matamoros,  Mexico. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  H.  SEWARD. 


[Inclosure.J 


Consulate  of  the  United  States  of  America, 

Matamoros , March  1,  18G2. 


Hon.  W.  If.  Seward, 

Secretary  of  State , Washington , I).  C. : 


Sir  : * * * It  has  been  with  the  greatest  difficulty  that  I have 

established  myself  here,  as  the  Confederates  had  used  every  possible 
exertion  to  get  me  driven  out,  and  succeeded  so  far  that  none  of  the 
authorities,  with  the  exception  of  the  commanding  general,  would  ac- 
knowledge my  right  until  after  the  receipt  of  my  exequatur.  When  I j 
say  the  Confederates,  I mean  the  military ; most  of  the  citizens  of  j 
Brownsville  being  really  LTnion  men.  The  prefect  (Martin  Lougona, 
who  was  among  the  slain  in  the  final  assault),  a man  unknown  to  me1 
personally,  endeavored  in  every  possible  manner  to  show  his  authority, 
and  went  so  far  as  to  enter  my  room  with  ten  armed  men  to  search  (as 
he  said)  for  gunpowder.  Although  he  would  not  acknowledge  my  I 
right  as  consul  until  the  arrival  of  my  exequatur,  still  he  had  seen  my 
passport  and  appointment,  and  knew  that  the  general-in-chief  had 
recognized  me  and  had  also  given  me  permission  to  hoist  my  flag,  which 
was  flying  over  my  house  at  the  time. 

The  Confederates  occupy  both  the  Texan  and  Mexican  side  of  the! 
Rio  Grande  at  its  mouth,  and  use  every  exertion  to  prevent  me  from 
communicating  with  the  U.  S.  ship  Portsmouth. 

The  general  commanding  here,  with  most  of  his  officers,  are  much 
against  the  people  of  the  South,  and,  in  fact,  are  all  the  better  class  of 
Mexicans.  The  general  has  said  to  me  that  lie  will  endeavor  to  protect 
his  side  of  the  river,  in  which  case  I can  then  communicate  freely. 
There  are  now  in  port  fourteen  vessels,  among  them  one  American 
only,  from  New  York.  As  the  only  lighters  here  bear  the  rebel  flag, 
they  were  unable  to  unload  them  while  the  ship  of  war  may  lay  there, 
but  the  merchants  have  now  purchased  three  steamboats  and  ]]>ut  them  i 
under  the  Mexican  flag.  The  difficulty  is  obviated. 

Matamoros  is  now  the  great  thoroughfare  to  the  Southern  States. 
They  pass  their  coffee,  flour,  and  in  fact  all  the  supplies  they  receive  j 
through  here.  They  have  also  a large  pile  of  cotton  on  the  east  bank 
of  the  river,  to  take  out  when  an  opportunity  offers,  or,  as  they  say, 
burn,  in  case  of  an  invasion. 

There  are  at  Brownsville  and  Brazos  Santiago  about  1,200  men, 
among  them  some  German  companies,  whose  loyalty  to  the  Southern 
Confederacy  is  much  doubted  in  Texas. 

# # # # # # # 

There  are  many  of  the  citizens  of  Texas  leaving  since  the  Governor’s  ! 
proclamation  calling  out  the  militia,  and  some  that  have  been  prisoners 
and  escaped ; nearly  all  without  friends  or  means  to  take  them  North,  j 
I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient, 

L.  PIERCE,  Jr., 
Consul. 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


G 75 


Ichap.  xxr.] 


Department  oe  State,  Washington , June- 5,  1862. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War: 

Sir  : I have  tlie  honor  to  submit  for  your  perusal  the  inclosed  orig- 
inal note,  with  annexed  translation,  dated  the  2d  instant,  from  Senor 
Romero,  charge  d’affaires  of  Mexico,  in  relation  to  the  incursions  com- 
mitted by  the  insurgents  of  Texas  upon  the  Territory  and  citizens  of 
Mexico. 

I will  be  very  glad  to  know  that  the  disposition  of  our  forces  will 
enable  you  to  give  assurances  that  such  aggressive  acts  will  hereafter 
be  prevented. 

Requesting  the  return  of  the  inclosures,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir, 


your  obedient  servant, 


WILLIAM  H.  SEWARD. 


[Iuclosure  No.  1. — Translation.! 


Mexican  Legation  in  the  United  States  of  America, 

Washington , June  2,  1862. 

Hon.  W.  H.  Seward,  Secretary  of  State : 

Mr.  Secretary:  The  Mexican  citizen  Juan  Bustamente,  a deputy 
’ from  the  State  of  San  Luis  Potosi  to  the  General  Congress  of  Mexico, 
and.  who  is  now  in  this  capital,  to  which  he  has  come  on  personal 
affairs,  informed  me  upon  his  arrival  here  of  the  unsatisfactory  state 
of  things  at  present  upon  the  eastern  frontier  of  Mexico  and  the  United 
States,  and  of  the  assaults  which,  in  violation  of  treaties  and  the  rights 
of  sovereignty  of  Mexico,  the  insurgents  ot  Texas  have  made  i^pon  the 
Mexican  territory. 

I requested  him  to  communicate  to  me  in  writing  this  information, 
and  I have  to-day  received  the  communication  of  which  I have  the 
honor  to  transmit  you  a copy  for  the  information  of  the  Government  of 
the  United  States. 

Through  other  channels  I had  received  notice  of  the  incursions  made 
by  the  insurgent  Texans  against  the  defenseless  towns  of  Mexico,  and 
I "had  abstained  from  communicating  them  to  you  owing  to  the  want 
of  official  data  confirming  them.  The  situation  of  the  frontier  is  repre- 
sented in  general  to  be  very  dangerous  to  Mexico.  The  dissenters  of 
the  South  maintain  considerable  bodies  of  armed  men  upon  the  fron- 
tiers of  Chihuahua  and  Sonora,  and  it  appears  that  they  desire  to  make 
common  cause  with  the  traitors  of  Mexico,  which  will  cause  great 
, injuries  both  to  the  Government  of  that  Republic  and  to  the  United 
States.  I deem  it,  therefore,  my  duty  to  call  your  attention  to  this 
j subject,  requesting  of  you  that  the  Government  of  the  United  States 
jnay  take  the  proper  measures  to  prevent  armed  bodies  from  passing 
over  to  its  territory  with  a view  of  invading  a friendly  republic. 

I shall  take  great  pleasure  in  transmitting  to  my  Government  the 
- assurances  which  you  may  be  enabled  to  give  me  upon  this  matter. 

I avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  to  renew  to  you,  sir,  the  assur- 
ances of  my  distinguished  consideration. 

M.  ROMERO. 

[Inclosure  No.  2.— Translation.] 

Washington,  May  31,  1862. 

To  the  Citizen  Licentiate  M.  Romero, 

Charge  d1  Affaires  of  the  Mexican  Republic  in  Washington,  present : 

Sir  : I avail  myself  of  my  arrival  in  this  capital  to  address  you  thq 
present,  with  the  view  of  bringing  to  your  knowledge  that,  in  April 


676 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  AR1Z. 


[Chap.  XXI. 


last  past,  the  people  of  Piedras  Negras  were  assaulted  by  a party  of 
Texans,  numbering  some  200,  who  robbed  dnd  set  lire  to  said  town. 
This  outrage  will  not  be  the  last  one,  since  the  Texans  are  badly  dis- 
posed toward  the  Mexicans  in  consequence  of  our  government  not 
having  received  the  representative  which  the  insurgents  of  the  South 
sent. 

This  circumstance  and  the  facilities  which  the  former  have  for  invad- 
ing our  territory  will  cause  these  incursions  to  be  repeated  if  the  Gov- 
ernment of  this  Republic  does  not  send  a respectable  force  to  prevent 
not  only  robberies  but  also  the  Texans  from  giving  some  aid  to  the 
retrograde  faction  of  Mexico,  who  has  offered  them  to  recognize  the 
independence  of  the  Southern  States.  This  is  sufficient  for  believing 
that  the  Texans  referred  to  will  assist  them  as  far  as  they  can  in  over- 
throwing the  government,  which,  by  the  vote  of  the  nation,  to-day 
governs  our  destinies. 

From  what  I have  stated  you  will  perceive  that  it  is  most  important 
to  remedy  such  serious  evils,  and  I have  no  doubt  that,  as  the  repre- 
sentative of  Mexico  in  this  Eepublic,  you  will  do  all  in  your  power  that 
this  Government  may  determine  upon  what  is  necessary  to  prevent  the 
Texans  from  carrying  on  hostilities,  by  making  an  agreement  to  that 
effect  with  the  clerical  faction. 

Upon  addressing  you  the  present  it  gives  me  pleasure  to  tenderyou 
my  respect  and  consideration. 

Liberty  and  reform. 

JUAN  BUSTAMENTE. 

» 

Washington,  June  3,  1862. 

This  is  a copy. 

ROMERO. 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  N~.  Mex.,  June  21,  1862. 
The  Adjutant-General  U.  S.  Army, 

Washington , I).  C. : 

Sir  : The  inclosed  report  from  Colonel  Chivington,  commanding  the 
Southern  Military  District,  of  the  11th  instant,  and  note  from  El  Paso, 
old  Mexico,  of  the  10th  instant,  give  the  last  information  from  Arizona. 
This  last  comes  from  a gentleman  who  has  heretofore  furnished  very 
reliable  information,  and  gives,  I believe,  a nearer  approximation  to 
the  actual  facts  than  any  of  the  previous  reports. 

My  letters  to  Colonel  Chivington,  of  the  16th,  18tlr,  and  20th  instant-, 
copies  of  which  are  inclosed,  indicate  the  operations  proposed  in  the 
direction  of  Arizona.  Delay  in  the  arrival  of  necessary  supplies,  the 
unexampled  flood  in  the  Rio  Grande,  which  has  flooded  the  valley  and 
destroyed  the  roads,  and  the  inertness  and  inefficiency  of  the  flour  con- 
tractors, have  deferred  these  movements  much  beyond  the  time  when  I 
expected  to  commence  them,  but  1 believe  that  I will  in  a few  days 
have  the  control  of  means  that  will  enable  me  to  carry  them  on  with- 
out interruption.  Heretofore  it  has  been  impossible  to  accumulate  a 
supply  of  flour  at  Fort  Craig  beyond  what  was  required  for  daily  con- 
sumption, and  it  was  with  great  difficulty  that  a supply  to  that  extent 
could  be  kept  up. 

The  movement  directed  in  my  instructions  of  the  20th  instant  will 
be  a few  days  in  advance  of  full  supplies  for  the  force  at  Fort  Craig, 


JOHAF.  XXI.J 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


677 


but  it  is  necessary  in  consequence  of  the  unexpected  contingency  of 
the  approach  of  troops  from  California,  which  may  require  support, 
and  it  will  be  followed  up  as  rapidly  as  possible. 

I do  not  propose  to  occupy  the  interior  posts  in  Arizona  until  after 
the  arrival  of  the  troops  that  are  expected  from  Colorado  Territory  and 
Kansas,  but  will  establish  the  main  body  of  the  force  to  be  sent  into 
that  Territory  in  a strong  position  in  the  neighborhood  of  E3  Paso,  and 
will  not  weaken  it  by  detachments  until  affairs  in  this  Territory  have 
assumed  a more  settled  shape. 

A change  in  the  manner  of  supplying  posts  that  may  be  established 
in  Arizona  west  of  the  Rio  Grande  is  suggested,  adopting  for  all  the 
posts  west  of  that  river  the  route  by  the  Gulf  of  California  and  the  post 
of  Guaymas  for  a1!  supplies  that  cannot  be  procured  in  the  country. 

In  this  Territory  there  has  been  no  material  change  since  my  report 
by  the  last  mail.  About  one-half  (521)  of  the  deserters  from  New 
Mexican  Volunteers  have  availed  themselves  of  the  conditional  pardon 
offered  them  in  Department  General  Orders,  No.  43,  of  May  7.  The 
remainder  are  still  at  large,  and  are  giving  much  trouble  to  the  frontier 
settlements. 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  R.  S.  CANBY, 

Colonel  Nineteenth  Infantry , Brig.  Gen.  Vols .,  Comdg.  Dept. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Headquarters  Southern  Military  District, 

Fort  Craig , V.  Mex.,  June  11,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  E.  R.  S.  Oanby,  TJ.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Department  New  Mexico , Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  state  that  five  men  arrived  here  yes- 
terday from  the  Pino  Alto  mines  in  Arizona,  and  fully  confirmed  what 
the  two  Mexicans  last  week  reported  about  the  California  forces  and 
the  movements  below.  They  saw  the  California  captain  at  the  mines 
before  Hunter  took  him  over  to  Mesilla.  They  say  that  Colonel  Baylor 
has  been  appointed  Governor  of  Arizona,  and  his  first  act  was  to  pub- 
lish Jefferson  Davis’  conscription  proclamation,  and  they  are  impress- 
ing all  white  men  in  Arizona  into  their  service  5 also  all  in  the  Mesilla 
Valley.  Those  men  all  fled  to  keep  from  being  forced  to  fight  against 
the  Government.  The  Arizona  Guards,  who  were  raised  for  the  pro- 
tection of  the  settlements  against  the  Indians,  and  who  are  more  than 
1 half  Northern  and  Union  men,  are  pressed  into  the  Confederate  service. 
Colonel  Reily  had  been  to  Sonora,  and  reports  that  he  had  made  a fa- 
vorable treaty  with  the  authorities  there.  But  one  of  these  men  is  just 
up  from  Sonora,  and  he  asserts  that  they  only  obtained  the  privilege 
! of  buying  for  cash  anything  the  citizens  had  to  dispose  of,  and  that 
they  will  not  touch  the  Confederate  scrip.  The  name  of  the  California 
1 captain  who  was  captured  by  Hunter  is  McCleave.  His  company  is 
independent  or  unattached,  and  used  exclusively  for  picket  and  scout- 
ing purposes,  named  u California  Mounted  Grays.”  When  he  was  taken 
several  of  Hunter’s  men  were  taken  by  his  company.  The  names  of 
these  men  from  whom  this  information  is  obtained  are  James  S.  Chase, 
James  Cranston,  John  McLaughlin,  A.  J.  King,  and  Patrick  Connell, 
and  one  of  them  has  been  a soldier,  and  has  his  discharge  with  him. 

I am,  general,  with  much  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  M.  CHIVINGTON, 

Col.  First  Colorado  Vols.,  Comdg.  Southern  Mil.  Dist.:  N.  Mex . 


678  . OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

[Inclosure  Xo.  2.J 

The  skeleton  of  Sibley’s  brigade,  consisting  of  1,250  men,  returned 
from  New  Mexico  to  Dona  Ana  on  or  about  the  3d  of  May..  General 
Sibley  made  his  headquarters  at  Fort  Bliss;  Colonel  Green  and  Colonel 
[probably  Keily]  at  Fort  Fillmore.  Colonel  [Lieutenant-Colo- 
nel] Scurry  is  now  in  San  Antonio.  Major  Pyron  left  Fort  Franklin 
[Bliss]  with  his  command  about  twenty  days  ago.  Since  then  parties 
of  15  and  20  men  of  infantry  companies  have  been  leaving  and  are  now 
on  the  road  to  San  Antonio.  Those  that  were  left  of  the  Second  Regi- 
ment have  been  leaving  on  the  road  to  San  Antonio.  Most  of  their 
artillery  has  passed  San  Elizario  on  the  way  down.  General  Sibley 
was  ready  to  move  this  morning.  Colonel  Steele,  it  is  said,  will  remain 
until*  further  orders.  He  is  at  Dona  Ana.  He  has  between  300  and 
400  men.  Colonel  Herbert,  with  two  or  three  companies,  remains,  also 
under  Colonel  Steele ; but  it  is  believed  that  these  movements  are  to 
cover  their  retreat. 

The  Second  Regiment  (Green’s)  is  scattered  in  parties  Of  15  or  20 
along  the  road  between  Dona  Ana  and  Franklin,  committing  out- 
rages upon  the  inhabitants  they  meet  upon  the  highway.  They  are 
almost  on  the  point  of  starvation,  receiving  as  a ration  one  pound  and 
a quarter  of  beef  and  twelve  ounces  of  flour.  The  Mexican  population 
are  much  enraged  against  them  on  account  of  their  rude  treatment. 
There  are  no  provisions  to  be  bought  in  this  valley,  for  they  are  not 
to  be  had.  Sibley  has  pressed  all  the  spare  provisions  on  the  Ameri- 
can side  of  the  river,  and  has  given  orders  to  take  all  the  necessary 
transportation  and  provisions  from  the  villages  below.  No  army  can 
subsist  in  this  valley  this  year  unless  they  bring  the  necessary  supplies 
along,  for  there  is  no  supply,  not  even  of  live  stock,  and  there  will  be 
a scanty  wheat  crop  to  say  the  best  of  it.  It  is  believed  here  that  there 
will  be  a famine  among  the  people  at  Mesilla,  Las  Cruces,  Dona  Aha, 
and  Picacho. 

The  Confederate  money  (paper)  is  selling  at  20  cents  on  the  dollar, 
and  large  amounts  could  be  bought  for  less  if  there  were  any  pur- 
chasers. Captain  Hunter’s  company  has  returned  from  Tucson.  They 
report  a large  Federal  force  near  that  place  when  they  left. 


■ [Indorsement.] 

This  information  is  furnished  by  a merchant  of  El  Paso,  old  Mexico, 
and  sent  to  the  commanding  officer  at  Fort  Craig. 

ED.  R.  S.  CAN  BY, 

Brigadier- General  Volunteers , Commanding  Department. 

T Inclosure  Xo.  3.1 

Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  June  16,  1862. 

Col.  J.  M.  Chivington, 

1st  Colo.  Vols .,  Comdg.  Southern  Mil.  Dist .,  Fort  Craig , A.  Mex. : 

Colonel  : Your  communication  of  the  11th  has  been  received.  The 
information  is  certainly  very  circumstantial,  and  seems  probable, 
but  I cannot  think  that  any  large  force  would  have  been  sent  from 
California  without  being  advised  of  it.  It  is  more  probable  it  is  a 
detachment  from  the  force  at  Fort  Yuma,  sent  to  Tucson  for  the  pur- 
pose of  acquiring  information.  The  Mesilla  jiroduces  but  little  beyond 
what  is  required  for  its  own  population,  and  it  is  certain  that  there  is 


JUAP.  XXI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


679 


no  surplus  at  this  time.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that  we  should  lia\  e 
supplies  for  at  least  forty  days  after  reaching  the  valley,  as  it  will  take 
that  time  to  get  there  from  Chihuahua  (or  that  we  should  have  suffi- 
cient means  of  transportation  to  keep  up  the  supply  from  this  country) 

^expected  confidently  to  have  been  prepared  in  this  respect  by  the 
1st  of  this  month,  but  the  inefficiency  of  the  contractors,  the  destitu- 
tion of  the  country,  and  the  flooding  of  the  river  have  all  concurred  to 
delav  this;  but  I hope  that  these  difficulties  will  be  overcome  m a few 
davs  and  I wish  your  command  to  be  kept  in  readiness  to  move  the 
moment  that  the  state  of  the  supplies  will  permit  it.  I do  not  antici- 
pate any  future  difficulties,  as  abundant  supplies  from  the  bast  are  near 
at  hand,  and  with  them  are  considerable  means  of  transportation  that 
will  be  available  for  our  operations. 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, g 0ANBY 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding  Department. 

[Inclosure  No.  4.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  A.  Mex .,  June  18,  1862. 

^0l’lsi  llolo.  Vols.,  Comdg.  Southern  Mil.  Fist,.  Fort  Craig , A.  Mex.: 

Colonel:  The  force  intended  for  the  movement  against  the  Con- 
federate troops  in  Arizona  will  be  composed  of  the  sixteen  companies 
of  infantry  and  eight  companies  of  cavalry  and  one  or  two  batteries. 
These  troops  will  be  organized  into  two  or  three  columns,  as  may  e 
considered1 most  expedient  by  the  immediate  commander.  The  head- 
quarters and  eight  companies  of  the  Fifth  Infantry  will  form  one,  and 
headauarters  and  eight  companies  of  the  First  Colorado  Volun- 
teers tbe^tker  infantry  column.  The  cavalry  force  will  be  composed 
of  two  companies  of  the  First,  three  companies  ol  the  Third , °^alry, 
one  company  of  the  First  Colorado  and  two  companies  of  the  becond 
Colorado  Volunteers.  The  cavalry  forcenow  atFort  Union  will  be  sent 
down  as  soon  as  the  troops  from  Kansas  are  m striking  distance  of  that 
lost.  If  it  arrives  in  season  the  battery  attached  to  the  Second  Colo- 
rado  Volunteers  will  form  one  of  the  batteries,  and  it  is  intended  to  re- 
place the  pieces  in  McRae’s  battery  by  four  12-pounder  guns  and  two 
32-pounder  howitzers,  now  on  their  way  to  this  countiy , but  as  these 
pieces  may  not  arrive  as  early  as  they  are  expected,  the  present  battej 
should  be  put  in  the  most  perfect  condition  tor  the  field  that  is  P°ssi 
ble,  so  that  there  may  be  no  delay  in  the  movement  after  the  supp  le 

^The'garrison  of  Fort  Craig  will  be  composed  of  four  companies  of  in- 
fantry and  two  of  cavalry.  Two  companies  of  infantry  and  two  of 
cavalry  will  be  posted  temporarily  at  Santa  Barbara,  ^Jtveadditional 
securitv  to  the  communication  between  Fort  Craig  and  the  Mesilla. 
These  garrisons  will  be  in  addition  to  the  field  force  designated  abov  . 

Mule  transportation  for  the  baggage  tram  lias  been  ordered  and  is 
being  prepared  as  rapidly  as  possible.  Clothing  is  expected  at  Fort 
Union  from  the  East  in  three  or  four  days,  and  will  be  sent  down  at 
once.  Corn  for  the  cavalry  and  artillery  horses  is  being  sent  as  rapidly 

“ Action  of  mountain  howitzers  to  move  with  the  cavalry  should 


680 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,’N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


(Ciiap.  XXL 


also  be  prepared.  Some  pack  saddles  for  the  use  of  detachments  that 
move  rapidly,  or  when  wagons  cannot  be  taken,  will  be  necessary. 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  E.  S.  CAABY, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Department. 

[Inclosure  Xo.  5.] 

Headquarters  Department  oe  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  A.  Mex.,  June  20,  1862. 

Col.  J.  M.  Chivington, 

1st  Colo.  Yols.,  Gomdg.  Southern  Mil.  Dist .,  Fort  Craig , A.  Mex. : 

Sir:  I have  received  a telegraphic  dispatch  from  Captain  Aicodemus, 
to  the  effect  that  Colonel  Carleton,  with  500  California  Volunteers,  was 
on  this  side  of  the  Pima  Villages  on  the  7th  of  May,  moving  in  the 
direction  of  the  Mesilla  Valley.  I wish  you  to  advance  a portion  of 
your  command,  say  1,000  men,  if  you  have  the  means  of  .moving  and 
supplying  that  number,  in  the  direction  of  Santa  Barbara,  open  a com- 
munication with  Colonel  Carleton,  if  possible,  and  hold  yourself  in 
readiness  to  support  him  if  he  should  be  advancing  on  this  side  of 
Tucson.  Unless  it  should  be  absolutely  necessary,  in  order  to  support 
Colonel  Carleton,  I do  not  wish  the  command  moved  into  the  Mesilla 
Valley  until  I have  the  means  of  subsisting  them  there.  This  will  be 
arranged  in  a few  days,  and  in  the  mean  time  the  force  at  Fort  Craig 
must  be  held  in  readiness  to  move  at  any  moment  and  at  any  sacrifice, 
if  it  should  be  necessary. 

Verv  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  E.  S.  CAABY, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Department. 


Headquarters  Department  of  NIew  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  A.  Mex.,  June  27,  1862. 

Col.  J.  M.  Chivington, 

Comdg.  Southern  Military  District , Fort  Craig,  N.  Mex.: 

Sir  : The  general  object  of  the  expedition  to  Arizona  is  the  re-occu- 
pation  of  that  country  and  the  restoration  of  the  authority  of  the  United 
States  in  and  over  it.  In  carrying  out  these  instructions  I wish  to  leave 
you  as  untrammeled  as  possible  by  special  instructions,  and  shall  in- 
dicate in  general  terms  the  particular  objects  to  be  accomplished,  leav- 
ing the  details  of  execution  to  your  own  judgment  and  discretion. 

The  force  that  will  be  under  your  command  has  already  been  indi- 
cated in  my  instructions  of  the  18th.  It  is  probable  that  the  cavalry 
may  be  somewhat  reduced  by  the  non-arrival  of  troops  that  were  ex- 
pected. This  force  will  be  kept  as  mobile  and  complete  as  possible. 
Ao  other  baggage  than  is  necessary  for  the  comfort  and  efficiency  of  the 
troops  will  be  taken.  Ao  incumbrances,  as  laundresses  or  other  per- 
sons not  immediately  necessary  for  the  service,  w ill  be  permitted  to 
move  with  the  troops.  Many  persons  will  no  doubt  attempt  to  go  with 
the  command,  but  all  persons  not  directly  connected  with  the  Army  by 
enlistment  or  employment  will  be  vigorously  excluded.  The  only  ex- 
ception will  be  in  the  case  of  civil  officers  going  to  their  duties  in  that 
Territory  or  contractors  and  their  necessary  employes.  If  the  condi- 
tion of  the  road  or  other  circumstances  of  the  route  should  render  it 
necessary  to  subdivide  your  command,  the  columns  should  always  be 


Chap.  XXI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


681 


kept  within  supporting  distance,  and  no  operations  should  be  under-  ^ 
taken  that  are  foreign  to  the  main  object  of  the  expedition,  and  until 
that  is  accomplished  everything  else  will  be  subordinate. 

Immediate  operations  against  the  enemy  must  be  governed  by  cir- 
cumstances and  your  own  judgment.  . . ■ 

As  soon  as  possession  of  the  country  is  secured  the  main  body  ot 
your  command  will  be  established  in  eligible  position  for  defense,  for 
supplies,  and  for  facility  of  movement  in  any  direction.  It  will  be  made 
your  depot  of  supplies,  and  strengthened  so  as  to  be  held  by  a small 
force  when  your  main  body  is  engaged  in  active  operations. 

Doha  Ana,  or  that  neighborhood,  is  suggested  as  suitable  for  that 
purpose,  as  it  commands  the  road  leading  into -Arizona  and  the  aj)- 
proach  to  the  country  from  crossing  of  the  Pecos.  The  position  to  be  se- 
lected should  be  strengthened  so  as  to  be  held  by  a small  force  when- 
ever the  main  body  of  the  force  is  in  the  field,  and  should  be  made  the 
depot  for  your  supplies.  . ,, . 

It  will  be  your  duty  to  secure  the  inhabitants  of  the  Territory  m their 
civil  rights,  and  to  protect  them  in  their  persons  and  property  as  far 
as  the  means  in  your  power  will  permit.  They  will  also  be  secured  as 
far  as  possible  from  the  aggression  of  hostile  Indians,  but  any  opera- 
tions undertaken  for  this  purpose  will  of  course  be  subordinate  to  the 
main  object  of  the  expedition.  If  there  should  be  no  civil  authorities 
in  the  Territory  the  administration  of  civil  affairs,  so  far  as  may  be 
necessary  to  prevent  anarchy  and  confusion,  will  devolve  upon  the  mil- 
itary authorities,  employing  as  subordinate  the  civil  functionaries  author- 
ized by  the  laws  of  the  United  States.  Collectors  of  customs,  &c.,  will  be 
provisionally  appointed  by  the  commander  of  the  district,  subject  to 
the  approval  of  the  department  commander  ; the  territorial  officers  by 
election,  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  the  Territory,  commissioned  by 
the  Governor,  unless  in  the  mean  time  a separate  Territorial  govern- 
ment is  organized  for  Arizona,  care  being  taken  that  no  one  is  allowed 
to  enter  upon  the  discharge  of  their  functions  whose  loyalty  is  at  all 
questioned.  If  it  can  be  procured,  a copy  of  the  Territorial  laws  will 
be  sent  to  yon. 

The  question  of  supplies  for  your  command  will  be  one  ot  great  im- 
portance and  difficulty ; they  should  be  drawn  as  far  as  practicable 
from  Arizona  or  the  neighboring  Mexican  States  of  Chihuahua  and 
Sonora/  After  the  necessary  arrangements  have  been  made  these  will 
no  doubt  supply  vou  with  fresh  meat  and  breadstuff's,  bacon,  &c.,  for 
subsistence,  and  forage  for  the  animals,  and  you  will  at  once  send  agents 
into  the  neighborhood  from  which  these  supplies  can  be  procured  tor 
the  purpose  of  making  these  arrangements.  Until  these  are  definitely 
fixed  your  requisitions  will  be  made  upon  the  depot  at  Tort  Craig. 

It  is  apprehended  that  many  disloyal  and  lawless  individuals  will  be 
found  in  Arizona,  both  in  the  native  and  foreign  population.  These 
should  be  vigorously  dealt  with.  The  provisions  of  martial  law,  as 
promulgated  in  General  Orders,  hTo.  53,  of  October  20,  1861,  furnishes 
the  necessary  power  for  controlling  this  part  of  the  population.  This 
order,  modified  in  some  particular,  will  be  republished,  and  furnished  you 
for  distribution. 

The  country  south  of  Santa  Barbara  will  constitute  the  District  ot 
Arizona,  to  be  commanded  by  the  senior  officer  of  the  troops  serving 

there. 

Verv  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  B.  S.  CABBY, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding  Department. 


682 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap. 


XXI 


Headquarters -Department  op  New  Mexico 

__  Santa  Fe,  Y.  Mex .,  July  G,  1862. 

I lie  Adjutant-General  of  the  Army7 

Washington , 1).  C. : 

Sir  : I Lave  the  honor  to  report  that  the  party  sent  for  the  purpose 
ot  opening  a communication  with  General  Carleton’s  command  met 
his  advance  (130  cavalry)  at  the  Ojo  de  la  Yaca,  140  miles  southwest 
of  Fort  Craig.  This  command  and  the  advance  forces  of  that  post  will 
meet  at  Santa  Barbara  to-day.  1 1 

General  Carleton  was  at  Tucson  on  the  17th  ultimo,  with  ten  com 
pames  of  infantry,  five  of  cavalry,  and  one  field  battery  of  four  pieces. 
In  addition  to  this,  some  companies  of  infantry  and  one  of  cavalry  are 
P°m,  dl^er?nt  Points  (not  mentioned  in  the  report)  in  Arizona. 

, force  designed  for  the  reoccupation  of  Arizona,  and  assembled 
at  Tort  Craig,  consists  of  about  2,000  men,  but  upon  information  arriv- 
ing from  the  commander  of  the  Department  of  Kansas  of  the  movement 
of  a rebel  force  against  Fort  Wise  and  the  supply  trains  coming  to  this 
country  I have  diverted  a part  of  this  force  for  the  purpose  of  re-en- 
foicing  Fort  Wise  and  guarding  the  supply  trains  reported  to  be  com 
mg  out  by  the  Cimarron  route. 

The  squadron  of  Kansas  cavalry  which  came  to  this  country  as  the 
escort  ot  the  paymaster  will  halt  at  Fort  Wise  and  report  by  letter  to 
the  commander  of  the  Department  of  Kansas.  The  squadron  of  Col- 
orado cavalry  which  was  on  the  road  to  Fort  Craig  has  been  ordered 
back  to  Fort  Union  tor  duty  on  the  Cimarron  route.  I have  requested 
General  Blunt  to  issue  the  order  given  by  General  Hunter,  at  my  re- 
quest, directing  all  trains  to  come  by  the  way  of  Fort  Wise,  as  this 
division  ot  the  trains  multiplies  the  chances  of  loss,  doubles  the  duty 
ot  guarding  them,  and  weakens  the  command  by  detachments  that 
would  not  be  necessary  if  only  one  route  is  used. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  B.  S.  CABBY, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding  Department. 


Headquarters  Department,  of  New  Mexico 

Santa  Fe , Y.  Mex.,  July  9,’  18G2. 

Brig.  Gen.  James  H.  Carleton, 

Commanding  District  of  Arizona: 

General  : The  reported  movements  of  the  rebel  force  threatening 
our  communications  with  the  East  and  the  supply  trains  en  route  to 
this  country  has  rendered  it  necessary  to  divert  a portion  of  the  com- 
mand heretofore  designated  for  operations  in  Arizona. 

A part  of  the  force  at  Fort  Craig  has  accordingly  been  ordered  to 
Tort  Union  for  service  on  the  plains,  and  another  part  will  be  held  in 
reserve  atFort  Craig  tomeet  further  contingencies,  reducingthe  strength 
of  the  command  that  will  report  to  you  for  duty  in  Arizona  to  about  l,t)00 
men.  This,  with  the  part  of  your  command  not  required  for  duty  in  the 
interior  of  Arizona,  will,  I have  no  doubt,  be  amply  sufficient  for  the  pur- 
poses intended  in  the  instructions  heretofore  given,  and  of  which  copies 
have  been  furnished  you. 

In  consequence  of  the  scarcity  of  water  in  the  direct  route  from  Coolds 
opring  to  Mesilla,  I have  supposed  the  most  eligible  point  for  the  junc- 
tion of  the  two  commands  would  be  on  the  Bio  Grande,  at  or  near  Santa 


XXI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


683 


larhara  The  commander  of  the  sub-military  district  was  accordingly 
SStod  to  advance  1,000  men  to  that  point  for  the  purpose  of  open 
an  a communication  with  you  and  supporting  your  movements,  if  the 
careitv  of  water  on  the  route  should  render  it  necessary,  as  is  piobable 
t this  season,  to  move  your  command  by  mule  detachments. 

’ If  you  should  consider  it  expedient  tliat  the  junction  should  be  made 
it  anv  other  point  you  will  give  the  necessary  order  to  the  commander 
if  the  troops  in  the  neighborhood  of  Santa  Barbara,  without  waiting  foi 

hem  to  come  within  the  limits  of  your  district. 

Until  the  reoccupation  of  the  country  and  the  restoration  of  order  are 
lecured  your  headquarters  and  main  body  of  your  command  will  be  kept 
n the  neighborhood  of  the  Mesilla  Valley.  

The  force  that  is  ordered  to  report  to  you  will  be  deficient  inartillerj 
ind  cavalry  horses.  Every  deficiency  I hope  to  remedy  soon,  two 
aeavy  field  batteries  (12-pounder  guns  and  32-pounder  howitzers)^ corn^ 
aletelv  equipped,  are  now  on  the  way  out,  and  one  of  them  will  be  sent 
town  as  soon  as  it  arrives.  Eight  hundred  cavalry  and  : artillery  horses 
ire  also  on  the  road,  and  a sufficient  number  to  mount  the  cavalry  to 
somplete  the  equipment  of  the  cavalry  batteries  will  be  sent  to  you  as 

5°The  staff  department  are  throwing  forward  to  Fort  Craig  additional 
supplies  to  meet  the  positive  wants  of  your  command.  The  order  now 
in  force  requires  200,000  rations  in  depot  of  subsistence  ; and,  m addition 
to  this  a daily  issue  of  5,000  rations  at  and  below  Fort  Craig  is  provided 
for  to  meet  unexpected  contingencies.  One  hundred  thousand  rations 
will  be  in  depot  at  Peralta,  and  other  supplies  in  ^ same  proportion 
wiU  be  sent  down  as  fast  as  they  are  received  from  the  East  or  can  be 

fe™  SSSWS&Um  « set  „ ,o  the  elate  of  your  .upplte, 
the  sources  from  which  they  are  drawn,  and  the  arrangements  made  for 
procuring  tliem.  Please  advise  me  m this  respect  as  soon  as  P°™e? 
in  order  that  the  arrangements  for  supplying  your  command  may  he 

completed  as  soon  as  possible.  . ^ fnr 

The  chief  paymaster  has  estimated  prospectively  foi  funds  tor the 
payment  of  your  command,  but  if  there  are  any  arrearages  which  have 
not  been  provided  for,  you  will  cause  the  estimates  (if  you  have  a pay- 
master with  your  column)  or  the  data  for  preparing  them  to  be  torwarded 

^iTis1 hoped^ha^ arrangements  will  be  made  by  which  the  greater  part 
of  the  subsistence  and  the  forage  required  for  your  troops  can  be  sup- 
plied from  that  country  and  the  neighboring  State  of  Mexico  but  the 
necessity  of  depending  for  some  time  upon  the  depot  at  Fort  Giaig  is 
anticipated  and  will  be  provided  for. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ ^ CANBY  * 

Colonel  Nineteenth  Infantry , Brigadier- General, 


Headquarters  Department  of  the 

San  Francisco , 


Pacific, 

July  10,  1862. 


Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant- General  U.  S.  Army , Washington , D.  C.: 

General:  My  latest  dates,  from  the  Department  of  Oregon  are  to 
July  1,  when  all  was  quiet.  My  latest  dates  from  General  Carletonare 
of  June  18,  which  I inclosed  yesterday  to  you,  with  certain  other  papers. 


684 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  HEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap. 


XX 

Th§  expedition  has  thus  far  been  a perfect  success.  Our  army  wit 

mentor8D»Dper%haSA^^’m5e-d  a“d  passe,d  many  deserts  without  loss  , 
wi-f*  P , Arizona  is  recovered  and  now  held  under  niartb 
p i’  iting  for  the  re-establishment  of  the  civil  powers,  and  th 

forced  Hew- MezLTa  aAvsai*a*  eas.tvard  to  co-operate  with  th 

Tli  preparing  the  expedition  under  General  Carleton,  as  well  as  th 
one  under  Colonel  Connor,  for  the  protection  of  the  mail  route  we  haw 
been  compelled  to  make  large  purchases,  principally  of  mules  am 
means  of  transportation ; but  I can  assure  the  Department  that  in  a! 

CrLeuepfactfced.  eC°n0rny’  C0"sistent  with  the  good  of  the  service 

The  great  difficulty  is  to  guard  the  public  interests  on  such  a vas 

miles  distan°tnn  HoJIvh  Sma11  pofs’  S0lne  a thousaild  or  mor, 

miles  distant.  However,  the  losses  which  the  Government  will  sustaii 

nortion  Iam  bapPy  to  say,  will  be  small ; and  but  a smal 

agepts  f that  °an  be  S6t  d°Wn  t0  the  unfaithfulness  of  officers  oj 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

_ . ,.  „ G.  WEIGHT, 

Brigadier- General,  U.  8.  Army,  Commanding. 


Department  of  State, 
Washington,  July  11.  1862. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War : 

Sie:  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a copy  of  two  letters  to  this  Depart 
nient,  one  from  the  United  States  consul  at  Matamoros  and  the  oPthei 
from  the  consul  at  Monterey,  written  at  the  former  place.  The  condi 
tion  of  the  ffiya!  mhabitants  of  Texas  in  that  neighborhood  is  repre 
sen  ted  to  bo  so  miserable,  that  it  occurs  to  me  those  of  them  of  a suitable 
age  to  bear  arms  might  be  most  readily  and  effectually  relieved  if  tliev 
would  accept  service  in  our  Army.  It  is  consequently  suggested  that 
an  arrangement  be  made  with  the  Secretary  of  the  Havy  for  receiving 

ZIZft  I,erS0"f  °U  b°f rd  Xth6  bl0<*ading  vessel  or  vessels  in  that 
q?  recruits,  in  order  that  they  may  be  transferred  to  the  nearest 
United  btates  military  command. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  H.  SEWAED. 

[Inclosure  No.  LJ 

Consulate  of  the  United  States  of  America, 

Matamoros,  Mexico,  May  5,  1862. 
Hon.  W.  H.  Seward,  ’ 

Secretary  of  State,  Washington,  B.  C.  : 

SlE  :,tn  my.  last  (N°-  5)  I informed  you  of  the  arrest  and  imprison- 
ment of  American  citizens.  After  their  release  I had  thought  that  I 

theod1  it  m?'ah  Tw  With  Such  0l,tra8'es;  b"t  on  the  evening  of 
;bftv7d’  a?rM.!  f Lffed  Westr°P>  a young  man  in  my  employ,  was  coming 
y^ed  States  steamer  Montgomery  with  several  letters,  he  was 
seized  by  four  Texas  Bangers,  who  had  crossed  the  river  (for  the  pur- 
pose) and  waited  for  him,  and,  with  his  letters,  taken  across  and  to  Fort 
Drown.  Mr.  Westrop  is  an  English  citizen,  the  only  one  that  I knew 


HA1\  XXI.  j 


COKRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


685 


hat  I could  put  any  confidence  in,  twenty-three  years  of  age,  and  has 
esided  nine  years  in  this  country,  his  father  and  mother  now  living  in 
he  neighborhood,  of  Monterey. 

Immediately  on  hearing  of  his  arrest  the  commander  of  this  city 
lemanded  him,  and  he  was  released,  but  the  letters  were  retained.  I 
md  addressed  a letter  to  the  commander,  urging  him  to  demand  the 
•elease  of  the  prisoner  and  whatever  documents  he  might  have  with 
iim.  Since  this  I have  not  pressed  the  matter  further,  as  it  would  only 
jring  a collision  between  the  two  cities.  ......  , , 

The  crowds  of  refugees  from  Texas  do  not  diminish  m the  least, 
d though  it  is  very  difficult,  owing  to  the  strict  watch  kept  upon  their 
Movements,  for  them  to  get  out.  Many  are  arrested  ; some  are  hung  ; 
others  are  taken  and  pressed  into  service. 

False  dispatches  of  the  most  ridiculous  kind  are  circulated  through- 
jut  the  country  and  through  Mexico ; but  even  this  mode  of  encourag- 
ing the  masses  is  failing,  and  throughout  the  counties  bordering  on  the 
Eio  Grande  there  exists  a perfect  reign  of  terror. 

At  Austin  there  is  a strong  Union  party,  headed  by  Fx-Senator  Ham- 
ilton who  will  probably  resist  all  attempts  that  may  be  made  by  the 
rebels  to  subdue  them.  At  San  Antonio  nearly  all  the  stores  are 
closed  and  many  of  the  merchants  are  now  residing  here,  waiting  pa- 
tiently for  their  time  to  come  when  they  can  return. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

’ L.  PIERCE,  Jr., 

United  States  Consul . 


[Inclosure  Xo.  2.1 


Matamoros,  Mexico,  May  23,  1862. 
Hon.  W.  H.  Seward,  Secretary  of  State , Washington , D.  C.  : 

Sir  : I arrived  in  the  country  the  26th  instant.  Of  course  I hn\  e no 
business  and  nothing  really  worthy  an  official  letter,  } et,  sir,  I hope 
to  make  it  worth  reading.  I have  seen  much  that  my  Government 
at  Washington  should  know,  then  correct  as  fast  as  their  many  duties 

shall  afford.  ,, 

Captain  Hunter,  of  the  United  States  steamer  Montgomery,  is  all  that 
the  Government  can  ask  or  expect  ; yes,  more;  Ins  position  is  difficult ; 
he  lays  in  a fleet  of  all  nations.  To  take  a prize  is  out  of  the  question. 
Smuggling  is  apparent,  but  the  neutral  river  affords  excuses,  &c. 

There  is  no  harbor:  exposed  to  gales,  in  many  ot  which  lie  has  at 
great  risk  saved  vessels  and  lives.  The  Mexicans  have  been  laid  under 
obligations  by  his  saving  9 of  them  from  drowning  m the  surf.  IJiey 
appreciate  it,  and  are  on  the  shore  furnishing  beef,  &e.;  also  giving 
shelter  and  feeding  the  destitute  Union  men  that  make  their  escape 
from  Texas.  They  do  it,  sir,  to  the  risk  of  their  lives  against  the  threats 
of  the  Texas  army,  to  which  the  little  Mexican  villages  will  be  exposed, 

especially  if  our  ship  is  removed.  _ „ 

Captain  Hunter  had  brought  off  through  the  surf  ^0  of  these  refugees. 
There  does  not  appear  to  be  provision  for  the  protection  ot  this  class 

of  our  citizens.  . . , . , 

I hope  it  may  be  consistent  for  you  to  give  me  some  special  instruc- 
tions or  advice.  I have  been  for  the  past  two  days  with  Mr.  Pierce 
(consul  here),  and  from  what  I see  it  is  evident  that  he  should  expend 
treble  his  salary  upon  the  worthy  Union  citizens.  It  is  really  painful 
for  a consul  to  see  men  driven  from  home  and  the  comforts  of  life,  not 
even  allowed  to  bring  an  article  of  clothing;  the  only  cause  of  com- 


686  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI 

plaint  in  many  cases  that  they  were  Northern  men  (had  never  kille. 
any  one),  and  refused  to  fight  against  the  United  States.  O,  sir,  wouli 
that  I could  show  cases  vividly  before  the  Department!  Must  thi 
thing  be,  that  our  best,  truest  citizens  must  be  turned  into  the  streets 
trom  the  door  of  an  American  consul  upon  a population  poor  them 
selves,  not  able  to  speak  their  language,  also  threatened  by  the  soldier 
from  Brownsville  for  harboring  them?  It  is  not  uncommon  for  com 
plaints  and  favors  asked  from  Government,  but,  sir,  I am  confident  n< 
portion  of  the  United  States  has  been  so  badly  oppressed  as  the  Unioi 
men  of  Texas,  and  I can  learn  nothing  is  yet  done  to  relieve  the  refugee 
or  avenge  the  oppressors.  I have  received  reliable  information  that 
. within  one  week  6 of  those  refugees  have  been  hung  on  the  frontier  01 
Texas  on  trees  and  left  hanging;  °r  01 

1 bave  conversed  to-day  with  a secessionist  to  find  out  both  sides  ol 
this  hanging  business.  To  excuse  it,  lie  alleged  that  4 of  them  wer< 
deserters  and  the  other  2 alleged  to  be  suspicions  characters;  not  im 
probable  they  may  have  joined  the  Home  Guard  for  peace  or  to  save 
tanging  previous,  but  learning  they  could  get  onto  a United  States 
steamer,  made  the  attempt,  for  which  they  have  been  hanged. 

Let  me  urge  that  a force  be  sent  onto  this  frontier;  it  may  not  be 

be1? r bavePlent,y  of  a™s-  1 am  assured  that  there  could 
be  8,000  enlisted  from  Texas  as  soon  as  it  was  known.  I am  informed 

that  there  is  oyer  300  men  at  Monterey  fed  by  charity;  that  they  have 
impatient  for  the  United  States  consul  to  arrive.  A merchant 
ot  high  standing  from  Monterey  says  the  merchants  there  have  been 
[laying  the  expenses  of  this  number  for  months;  that  when  the  consul 
arrived  they  expected  to  turn  them  over,  &c. 

My  office,  is  [not]  a rich  one;  expensive  place  to  get  to;  fees  not  hali 
enough  to  pay  my  board;  more  callers  than  at  an  almshouse.  I shall 
not  turn  back.  I have  been,  since  April  5 on  the  route  to  my  appoint- 
ment; shall  get  there  after  300  miles  farther,  or  thereabouts  [on]  the 
stage  route.  1 am  willing  my  country  shall  have  inv  time  and  all  I 
can  do  for  her  during  this  rebellion,  but  I have  been  so  badly  robbed 
oj  it  that  1 cannot  contribute  much  more. 

May  I hope  that  some  provision  will  be  made  for  those  sufferers,  that 
the  United  States  consul  may  not  be  a disgrace  in  the  eyes  of  other 
nations  by  driving  away  from  his  presence  honorable  citizens  that  seek 
the  protection  of  his  and  their  country;  honorably  for  their  country’s 
welfare  thus  reduced  that  they  cannot  feed  themselves. 

* tllis  naffer  cannot  be  redressed  through  the  Government,  then 
petitions  should  be  circulated  through  cities.  Those  who  contributed  to 
teed  foreign  nations  I know  will  not  withhold  from  those  Union  refugees 

I am  aware  I have  not  followed  rules  in  this  long  and  hearty  letter, 
mt  i shall  expect  au  answer,  and  hope  prompt  action  may  be  had. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  B.  H.  BLOOD, 

U.  S.  Consul,  Monterey , Mexico. 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  July  20,  1862. 
Adjutant-General  of  the  Army,  Washington,  D.  C. : 

Sir  : 1 have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  advance  of  General  Carle- 
ton  s command  (two  companies  of  cavalry)  reached  the  Eio  Grande 


Ohap.XXI] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 


687 


near  Santa  Barbara  on  the  4tli  instant.  Two  companies  of  the  Third 
U.  S.  Cavalry  from  Fort  Craig  reached  the  same  point  on  the  6tli  m- 

St  The  Confederate  forces  under  Colonel  Steele,  variously  represented 
i\t  from  500  to  800  men,  commenced  their  retreat  on  the  6th  as  soon  as 
advised  of  the  near  approach  of  the  United  States  troops.  The  Rio 
Grande  is  still  so  high  that  our  troops  were  unable  to  cross,  and  conse- 
nuentlv  any  attempt  to  pursue  was  impracticable.  The  latest  accounts 
from  the  Mesilla  Valley  represent  that  the  Confederate  troops  left  in 
great  destitution,  and  that  more  than  100  of  their  men  were  left  at  dif- 
ferent points  on  the  road  from  the  want  of  transportation  to  move  them. 
The  American  jiart  of  the  population  that  had  taken  part  with  the  reb- 
els left  the  country  with  them.  . • , 

I have  no  information,  yet  as  to  the  orders  under  which  General 
Carleton  is  acting,  but  presume  that  his  force  will  be  available  tor  the 
reoccupation  of  Arizona,  and  have  given  orders  accordingly,  ike 
presence  of  these  troops  will  render  a portion  of  the  force  now  in  this 
department  available  for  service  elsewhere  if  they  should  be  needed, 
and  I propose  as  General  Carleton’s  troops  come  into  position  to  with- 
draw the  First  Regiment  Colorado  Volunteers  from  the  southern  part 
of  the  Territory  and  order  them  to  report  to  the  commander  of  the  De- 
partment of  Kansas  for  service  on  the  route  from  Fort  Leavenworth 
to  Fort  Union,  on  which,  in  my  judgment,  there  should  be  at  least 

1,000  men.  , _ 

I inclose  herewith  a copy  of  General  Carleton  s proclamation  and  ot 
a letter  from  Colonel  Steele,  of  the  Confederate  Army. 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

J ’ . ’ ED.  R.  S.  CAKBY, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Department. 


[Inclosure.] 

Fqrt  Fillmore,  July  5,  1862. 

% 

Commanding  Officer  United  States  Forces: 

Sir  : As  I am  about  to  leave  this  Territory  under  circumstances  which 
have  caused  ill-feeling  between  white  men  aud  Mexicans,  and  as  1 have 
many  Americans,  some  with  their  families,  in  some  degree  at  the  mercy 
of  the  Mexican  population,  I have  entered  into  a covenant  with  the 
principal  Mexicans  of  Mesilla,  who  have  bound  themselves  to  protect 
the  Americans  remaining  in  the  country,  the  consideration  being  the 
release  of  one  Domingo  Cebeno,  who  is  my  prisoner  under  circumstances 
which  would  ordinarily  cost  him  his  life.  The  citizens  are  those  re- 
maining here  as  having  taken  no  partin  the  struggle  now  going  on  be- 
tween the  Confederate  and  United  States  of  America.  All  those  who 
have  by  holding  office  or  otherwise  compromised  themselves  with  your 
side  of  the  question  having  already  withdrawn,  I trust  that,  for  the 
sake  of  humanity,  you  will  inquire  into  the  manner  in  which  the  agree- 
ment has  been  kept. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  STEELE, 

Colonel  First  Texas  Mounted  Volunteers , 

4 Commanding  in  Arizona. 


* For  tlie  proclamation  see  p.  561. 


688 


[Chap.  XXI. 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 

Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  FeyN.  Mex.,  July  27,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  James  G.  Blunt, 

Commanding  Department  of  Kansas,  Fort  Leavenworth , Kans.: 

SiR  • I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  (during  a temporary 
absence)  of  your  communication  of  the  26th  ultimo,*  and  to  express 
my  thanks  for  the  measures  you  have  taken  to  secure  the  supplies  com- 
ing to  this  country. 

General  Carleton,  with  about  1,500  California  troops,  is  now  between 
Tucson  and  the  Bio  Grande.  This  advance  and  the  advance  from  Fort 
Craig  united  at  Santa  Barbara  on  the  7th  instant.  The  Confederate 
force  in  the  Mesilla  Valley  commenced  their  retreat  on  the  same  day. 
Unfortunately  the  Bio  Grande  was  so  high  that  our  troops  were  unable 
to  cross  until  the  rebels  got  beyond  the  reach  of  pursuit. 

As  General  Carleton’s  force  will  be  sufficient  for  the  occupation  of 
Arizona,  I propose,  as  soon  as  his  troops  get  into  position,  to  withdraw 
the  Colorado  regiment  to  Fort  Lyon,  and  place  them  under  your  orders* 
as  1 do  not  think  they  will  be  needed  longer  in  this  country. 

I do  not  think  that  an  invasion  of  this  country  by  the  Bio  Grande 
will  again  be  attempted,  but  it  may  be  by  the  Canadian  or  the  Arkan 
sas,  if  our  troops  in  the  South  should  meet  with  any  serious  reverses. 

A copy  of  the  latest  returns  of  the  Colorado  troops  serving  in  this 
department  will  be  sent  to  you  by  the  next  mail. 

I have  directed  copies  of  the  most  important  orders  issued  in  this 
department  to  be  sent  to  you. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  B,  S.  CANBY, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding  Department. 


Special  Orders,  ) War  Dept.,  Adjt.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  181.  / , * Washington , August  5,  1862. 

****### 

7.  Brig.  Gen.  E.  B.  S.  Can  by,  TJ.  S.  Volunteers,  is  relieved  from  duty 
in  the  Department  ot  New  Mexico.  He  will  turn  over  the  command  to 
the  next  officer  and  repair  without  delay  to  this  city  and  report  to  the 
Secretary  of  W ar. 

* * # # * # # 

By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General . 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  V.  Mex.,  August  6,  1862. 
Adjutant-General  of  the  Army, 

Washington , D.  C. : 

Sir  : The  instructions  from  the  War  Department  and  the  Headquar- 
ters of  the  Army,  of  August  15,  1861,  contemplated  the  withdrawal  of 


Not  found. 


3 HAP.  XXL] 


689 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

ft 

the  regular  force  in  this  department  upon  the  organization  of  the  addi- 
tional volunteer  force  then  authorized.  I have  already  (May  17, 1862) 
conditionally  recommended  the  withdrawal  of  a part  of  the  regular 
force  now  here,  and  the  near  approach  of  General  Carletoffs  force,  un- 
derstood to  be  about  2,000  strong,  justifies  the  opinion  that  the  origina. 
instructions  of  the  Department  may  be  carried  out  without  detriment  to 

the  service.  . , , T>. 

I do  not  apprehend  another  invasion  of  this  country  by  the  Rio 
Grande,  but  in  the  event  of  any  serious  reverses  to  our  troops  in  the 
Southwest  it  may  be  attempted  by  the  Canadian,  or  an  attempt  may  be 
made  to  cut  off  or  destroy  the  supply  trains  coming  to  this  country. 
This  last  1 regard  as  the  most  probable  danger,  and  since  the  renewal 
of  the  disturbances  in  Missouri  have  made  arrangements  to  send  a por- 
tion of  the  troops  now  in  this  department  upon  that  line,  believing  that 
they  could  be  better  spared  from  New  Mexico  than  from  Kansas.  One 
regiment  of  Colorado  Volunteers  will  be  sufficient  in  my  judgment  for 
the  occupation  of  Fort  Lyon  (Wise)  and  to  keep  in  check  the  Indians 
of  Colorado  Territory.  The  Second  Regiment  for  Fort  Union  and  the 
northern  part  of  New  Mexico,  the  California  troops  for  the  southern 
part  of  this  Territory  and  for  Arizona,  while  the  New  Mexican  Volun- 
teers will  be  sufficient  for  the  Indian  frontiers.  This  will  give  for  New 
Mexico  proper  about  4,000,  with  an  additional  thousand  (in  Colorado) 
within  reach,  if  their  services  should  be  needed.  If  this  force  should 
not  be  considered  sufficient,  re-enforcements  may,  I suppose,  be  drawn 
from  California  with  more  ease  than  from  the  East. 

I have  received  no  report  from  General  Carleton,  but  have  learned 
unofficially  that  he  expected  to  leave  Tucson  about  the  middle  of  last 
month.  As  he  will  be  obliged,  in  consequence  of  the  scarcity  of  water, 
to  move  by  detachments,  his  entire  force  will  not  reach  the  Rio  Grande 
until  some  time  in  this  month. 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant* 

ED.  R.  S.  CANBY, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Department  of  New  Mexico . 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  August  10,  1862. 

The  Adjutant-General  of  the  Army, 

Washington , D.  C. : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I have  just  received  reports 
from  General  Carleton,  but  too  late  to  copy  them  by  this  mail. 

He  left  Tucson  on  the  17th  ultimo  and  was  at  Ojo  de  la  Vaca  (about 
60  miles  from  the  Rio  Grande)  on  the  27th.  He  would  wait  at  that 
place  for  the  rear  of  his  command  to  close  up.  He  is  now  probably  in 
the  Mesilla  Valley.  He  reports  his  command  in  fine  condition,  and 
that  his  effective  force  in  the  valley  will  be  1,273.  This  is  independent 
of  the  garrisons  of  the  posts  established  in  the  interior  of  Arizona  and 
the  command  (four  companies  of  infantry  and  two  of  cavalry)  sent  from 

Fort  Craig.  _ _ . . , 

His  command  is  generally  well  supplied,  and  any  deficiencies  can  be 

furnished  from  the  depots  in  this  country. 

With  the  exception  of  the  sick  and  some  deserters  and  a few  who 
have  taken  refuge  in  old  Mexico,  none  of  the  Texan  troops  are  now  in 
the  neighborhood  of  El  Paso. 

44  R R— VOL  IX 


690  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chai>.  XXI. 

The  Indians  in  this  department  are  exceedingly  troublesome,  and 
give  constant  employment  to  the  troops  in  this  neighborhood,  thus  fai 
with  but  little  success.  The  depredators  are  the  Navajoes  and  Mesca- 
lero  Apaches. 

Serious  Indian  troubles  are  reported  in  Colorado  Territory,  and  upon 
an  application  for  assistance  I have  sent  a company  of  infantry  and 
one  of  cavalry  to  Fort  Lyon,  and  have  ordered  two  companies  of  in 
fan  try  upon  the  road  between  Fort  Union  and  Fort  Lyon,  for  the  protect 
tion  of  the  trains.  Two  companies  ©f  infantry  and  one  of  cavalry  have 
been  ordered  from  Fort  Craig  to  Fort  Union  to  replace  the  companies 
sent  from  that  place,  and  two  companies  of  infantry  have  been  ordered  tc 
this  place  to  relieve  companies  of  New  Mexican  Volunteers,  which  will 
be  sent  into  the  Indian  country. 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

ED.  R.  S.  CANBY, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Department. 


Department  of  State,  Washington , August  16,  1862. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a letter  of  the  6th  ultimo  and  the 
accompanying  papers,  addressed  to  this  Department  by  Benjamin  C. 
Cutler,  who  styles  himself  u Military  Secretary  of  State  of  the  Terri 
tory  of  Arizona.”  As  that  Territory  has  not  been  organized  by  act  o i 
Congress,  and  consequently  no  civil  officers  have  been  appointed 
therein,  it  is  presumed  that  the  communication  of  Mr.  Assistant  Ad 
jutant-General  Cutler  would  have  more  properly  been  addressed  to  the 
War  Department. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  H.  SEWARD. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Executive  Department,  Territory  of  Arizona, 

Tucson , Ariz.)  July  6,  1862. 

His  Excellency  W.  H.  Seward, 

Secretary  of  State  of  the  United  States , Washington , D.  C. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  certain  documents,  marked) 
A,  B,#  C,  D,  E,  which  relate  to  matters  in  this  Territory,  and  which  it 
may  be  important  for  you  to  know. 

Other  copies,  with  additional  papers,  together  with  a mass  of  evi- 
dence in  the  cases  of  Mr.  Sylvester  Mowry,  will  reach  Washington! 
through  the  headquarters  of  the  Department  of  the  Pacific.  These,  to 
save  time,  I send  direct. 

Very  respectfully,  Your  Excellency’s  obedient  servant, 

BEN.  0.  CUTLER, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General)  Military  Secretary  of  State. 

. [Inclosure  A.] 

Hdqrs.  District  of  Southern  California, 

Fort  Yuma)  Cal.)  May  2,  1862. 
His  Excellency  Don  Ignacio  Pesquiera, 

Governor  of  State  of  Sonora)  UreS)  Sonora)  Republic  of  Mexico : 
Sir  : Your  Excellency  is  doubtless  aware  that  for  certain  military! 
considerations  the  general  command ing%the  United  States  forces  on  the 


Inclosure  B is  a copy  of  proclamation  printed  on  p.  561. 


iHAP.  XXI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — UNION. 


691 


Pacific  coast  interdicted  the  crossing  by  any  person  of  the  Colorado 
diver  unless  such  person  had  a passport  signed  by  himself. 

This  excluded  many  of  the  citizens  of  the  State  of  Sonora,  in  the 
friendly  Republic  of  Mexico,  from  coming  to  work  in  the  rich  mines 
recently  discovered  on  the  Colorado  River,  in  California,  and  also  ex- 
cluded others  from  coming  to  Fort  Yuma  to  sell  provisions  and  other 
of  the  products  and  commodities  of  your  State. 

The  restrictions  as  to  the  crossings  of  the  Colorado  applied  no  less  to 
citizens  of  the  United  States  than  to  citizens  of  our  sister  Republic. 
Thus  you  will  see  that  no  invidious  distinction  was  made  favoring 
Americans  in  preference  to  the  people  of  Your  Excellency. 

It  is  now  my  good  fortune  to  be  able  to  say  to  Your  Excellency  that 
the  prohibitions  about  crossing  the  river  are  removed,  and  the  people  of 
Sonora  are  at  liberty  to  come  and  work  in  our  mines,  or  to  sell  their  pro- 
visions, forage,  fruits,  &c.,  within  our  lines.  The  forces  of  the  United 
States  under  my  command  now  passing  up  the  Gila  River  to  the  Pima 
Villages  and  thence  on  to  occupy  the  Territory  of  Arizona,  though  abun- 
dantly furnished  with  every  necessary  article  of  subsistence  and  forage, 
with  adequate  means  of  transportation  for  all  additional  supplies  from 
the  depot  at  Fort  Yuma  which  they  may  need,  yet  if  the  people  of  Sonora 
desire  to  bring  flour,  pork,  beef,  mutton,  sugar,  coffee,  wheat,  barley, 
fruit,  vegetables,  &c.,  to  the  Pima  Villages  or  Tucson,  after  I have  oc- 
cupied it,  they  will  be  paid  a fair  price  in  gold  and  silver  coin  for  what 
they  sell. 

It  is  our  sincere  desire  as  well  as  our  true  policy  to  maintain  the  most 
friendly  relations  with  the  citizens  of  all  nations,  but  more  particularly 
with  those  who,  like  ourselves  and  like  our  neighbors  of  Mexico,  are 
endeavoring  to  prove  to  the  world  that  any  brave  and  intelligent  people 
are  capable  of  being  governed  by  laws  made  by  themselves  and  by 
rulers  chosen  by  ami  from  among  themselves. 

Therefore  Your  Excellency  may  rest  assured  that  nothing  will  be  done 
on  our  part  to  disturb  the  kind  feelings  which  happily  subsist  between 
your  people  and  those  of  the  United  States. 

The  people  in  the  South,  who  are  in  open  rebellion  against  the  Gov- 
ernment of  the  United  States  having  an  unjust  cause,  can  never  suc- 
ceed in  establishing  themselves  as  an  independent  nation.  As  the  war 
which  they  have  wantonly  commenced  is  an  unrighteous  one,  they  have 
not  the  sympathies  of  a single  Christian  nation  in  the  world.  Such 
being  the  case,  you  can  judge  how  incredulous  I was  when  I heard  that 
an  officer  of  rank  of  the  so-called  Confederate  States  Army,  who  has 
recently  been  to  visit  you,  had  stated  publicly  in  Arizona,  on  his  return 
from  Sonora,  that  he  had  made  such  arrangements  with  Your  Excellency 
that  what  supplies  he  might  need  for  his  troops  could  be  landed  in  the 
ports  of  Sonora  and  be  transported  without  let  or  hinderance  thence 
through  that  State  to  Tucson.  I know  that  Your  Excellency  is  well 
aware  that  the  very  people  whose  emissary,  it  is  alleged,  thus  comes 
to  ask  of  you  these  commercial  privileges  would,  as  filibusters,  usurp 
the  power  you  yourself  hold,  and  subjugate  your  own  State  if  they  had 
but  the  ability  to  do  so.  Therefore  you  can  judge  of  my  astonishment 
at  such  intelligence.  I will  not  even  ask  Your  Excellency  if  what  I have 
heard  is  true,  as  such  an  utter  want  of  faith  toward  a friendly  neighbor 
would  be  so  unworthy  of  your  position  as  a governor,  and  so  much 
against  your  integrity  as  a man,  that  I should  shrink  from  wounding 
your  sensibility  by  such  a question.  I merely  mention  the  rumor  that 
has  reached  me  to  show  Your 'Excellency  how  much  you  have  been 
maligned. 


692 


[Chap.  XXL 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


Wishing  Your  Excellency  health  and  good  fortune  and  your  people 
happiness  and  prosperity,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  Your  Excellency^ 
obedient  servant, 

JAMES  H.  CABLETON, 

Colonel  First  Cal.  Vols.,  Major  U.  S.  Sixth  Cavalry , Comdg. 


[Inclosure  C.] 


Executive  Department,  Territory  of  Arizona, 

Tucson , Ariz.,  June  11,  1862. 


To  all  whom  it  may  concern : 


Be  it  known  that  under  the  authority  assumed  by  the  undersigned 
in  the  proclamation  placing  the  Territory  of  Arizona  under  martiai 
law,  which  proclamation  was  dated  at  Tucson,  in  Arizona,  June  8,  A 
D.  1862, 1 hereby  appoint  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General  Benjamin 
Clarke  Cutler  to  be  secretary  of  state  of  the  Territory  of  Arizona  while- 
the  said  Territory  remains  under  martial  law  or  until  the  time  when  a 
successor  may  be  appointed  to  take  his  place. 

His  duties  shall  be  to  record  and  to  preserve  all  the  acts  and  pro 
ceedings  of  the  Governor  in  his  executive  department,  and  to  transmi 
an  authentic  copy  of  these  acts  and  proceedings  through  the  genera 
commanding  the  Department  of  the  Pacific  to  the  President  of  tin 
United  States  on  the  last  day  of  every  month. 

And  be  it  also  known  that  the  secretary  of  state  of  the  Territory 
while  it  is  under  martial  law,  is  hereby  empowered  to  administer  oaths 
Given  under  my  hand  at  Tucson,  Ariz.,  June  11,  1862. 

JAMES  H.  CABLETOH, 
Military  Governor  of  Arizona. 


[Inclosure.] 


Executive  Department,  Territory  of  Arizona, 

Tucson , Ariz.,  June  11, 1862. 


To  all  whom  it  may  concern  : 


Be  it  known  that  by  virtue  of  the  authority  vested  in  myself  as  Mili 
tary  Governor  of  Arizona  I hereby  empower  the  following  officers  witl 
the  right  to  administer  oaths  within  this  Territory  while  it  shall  remaii! 
under  martial  law  j that  is  to  say : 

Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  B.  West,  First  Infantry,  California  Volunteers. 

Lieut.  Col.  Edward  E.  Eyre,  First  Cavalry,  California  Volunteers. 

Maj.  Edwin  A.  Bigg,  First  Infantry,  California  Volunteers. 

Maj.  Theodore  A.  Coult,  Fifth  Infantry,  California  Volunteers. 

Maj.  David  Ferguson,  First  Cavalry,  California  Volunteers. 

Capt.  Tredwell  Moore,  assistant  quartermaster,  U.  S.  Army. 

Also  the  presidents  and  judge-advocates  of  military  commissions 
when  such  commissions  are  in  session. 

JAMES  H.  CABLETOhT, 
Colonel  First  Cal.  Vols.,  Major , TJ.  S.  Sixth  Cavalry. 


By  the  Governor : 

Ben.  C.  Cutler, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Military  Secretary  of  State. 


693 


MAP.  XXI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. UNION. 

[Inclosnre  D.] 

Executive  Department,  .Arizona  Territory, 

Tucson , June  12,  1862. 

To  all  whom  it  may  concern : 

I^That  from  and  after  this  date  a monthly  tax  of  $5  for  license  to 
trade  shall  be  levied  on  all  merchants  in  Tucson,  Anz.,  including  those 
who  shall  traffic  within  a mile  in  every  direction  from  its  suburbs, 
whose  monthly  sales  of  merchandise  amount  to  $500  or  under,  and  an 
additional  tax  of  $1  per  month  for  each  additional  monthly  sale  ot  $100. 

II.  That  every  keeper  of  a gambling  house  within  the  aforesaid  limits 
shall  pay  a tax  of  $100  per  month  for  each  and  every  table  in  said  house 

whereon  any  banking  game  is  played.  . 

Ill  That  every  keeper  of  a bar,  where  wines,  spirituous  or  malt 
liquors  are  to  be  sold,  shall  pay  a tax  of  $100  per  month  to  keep  said  bar. 

IV.  All  keepers  of  gambling  houses,  for  the  non-payment  of  license 
for  gambling  tables,  will  be  lined  $50  for  the  firsfc  offense;  for  the  sec- 
ond offense  he  shall  have  his  money,  implements,  tools,  &c;  s^zed^d 
the  same  shall  be  confiscated,  and  he  shall  pay  a fine  of  $100  and  be 
forbidden  to  again  gamble  in  this  Territory.  * 

y>  Any  person  who  after  this  date  shall  sell  without  a license  any 
intoxicating  liquors  or  drinks  shall  be  fined  $50  for  the  first  offense ; 
for  the  second  offense  he  shall  pay  a fine  of  $100  and  forfeit  all  the 

liquors 'in  his  possession.  . , . , , 

VI  The  commanding  officer  at  Tucson  is  hereby  empowered  to  grant 
licenses  under  these  rules,  and  collect  all  taxes,  fines,  and  forfeitures. 
The  moneys  thus  collected  shall  be  turned  over  to  the  medical  director, 
who  shall  receipt  for  the  same  and  add  it  to  the  hospital  fond,  to  be 
used  exclusively  for  the  benefit  of  the  sick  and  wounded  soldiers  be- 
longing to  the  Column  from  California  until  further  orders. 

VII.  All  sales  made  by  the  Government  of  the  United  States  shall  be 
exempt  from  taxation,  and  no  license  is  necessary  for  the  sale  of  for- 
age, subsistence  stores,  fruits,  or  vegetables. 

By  order  of  Colonel  Carleton : BEN  a CUTLER, 

Actg.  Asst . Adjt  Gen.,  Military  Secretary  of  State. 

[Inclosure  E.] 

Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Column  from  California, 

-^0 ' yi'  j Tucson,  Anz.,  June  16,  1862. 

I.  A board  of  officers,  to  consist  of  Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  E.  West,  First 
Infantry,  California  Volunteers ; Capt.  Charles  A.  Smith,  Fifth  Infantry, 
California  Volunteers,  and  Capt.  Nicholas  S.  Davis,  First  Infantry, 
California  Volunteers,  will  assemble  at  this  post  at  4 p.  m.  to-day,  or 
as  soon  thereafter  as  practicable,  to  investigate  certain  charges  and 
facts  tending  to  show  that  Mr.  Sylvester  Mowry,  of  the  Patagonia 
mines,  in  this  Territory,  is  an  enemy  to  the  Government  of  the  United 
States,  and  that  he  has  been  in  treasonable  correspondence  and  collu- 
sion with  well-known  secessionists,  and  has  afforded  them  aid  and  com- 
fort when  they  were  known  publicly  to  be  enemies  to  the  legally-con- 
stituted authority  and  Government  of  the  United  States. 

The  board  will  be  duly  sworn  to  the  faithful  performance  of  its  duty, 
and  will  examine  witnesses  on  oath,  and  will  examine  and  make  cer- 
tified extracts  from  such  documents  as  may  be  laid  before  them  which 


694  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXL 

may  have  immediate  or  important  bearing  on  these  points,  and  the 
board  will  report  in  writing  and  in  full  the  evidence  it  receives  on  all 
these  matters,  and  its  opinions  whether  or  not  there  are  sufficient 
grounds  to  restrain  of  his  liberty  and  bring  to  trial  before  a military 
commission  the  said  Mr.  Sylvester  Mo  wry. 

II.  The  board  will  also  inquire  into  the  truth  of  a report  that  a re- 
spectable German  citizen  was  recently  murdered  at  or  near  Patagonia 
mines,  in  this  Territory,  and  report  in  writing  the  evidence  in  the  case 
and  their  opinion,  in  the  event  they  find  the  report  to  be  true  as  to  who 
are  probably  the  guilty  parties. 

The  record  of  this  investigation  will  be  made  up  separately  from  that 
ordered  in  the  first  paragraph  hereof. 

III.  Second  Lieut.  Erastus  W.  Wood,  First  Infantry,  California  Vol- 
unteers, is  appointed  secretary  of  the  board,  and  will  be  duly  sworn  by 
the  president  thereof  to  a faithful  discharge  of  his  duties  as  such. 

By  order  of  Colonel  Carleton : 

BEN.  C.  CUTLER, 

First  Lieut .,  First  Infantry , California  Vols .,  Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen. 

Headquarters  Column  prom  California, 

• Tucson , AHz.y  June  16,  1862. 

Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  R.  West, 

President  of  a Board  of  Officers  convened  by  Special  Orders , 

No.  17,  current  series , from  these  Headquarters : 

Colonel  : The  colonel  commanding  the  column  directs  me  to  inclose 
to  you,  as  one  of  the  charges  against  Mr.  Sylvester  Mowry,  the  original 
of  a letter  directed  to  General  Carleton  from  the  Mowry  silver  mines 
on  the  11th  of  May,  1862,  and  signed  by  one  “T.  Schuiner,  metallur- 
gist, M.  S.  M.;w  also  a paper  in  your  own  handwriting,  purporting  to 
be  a statement  of  one  William  Pyburn,  which  seems  to  touch  on  the 
matter  of  the  alleged  furnishing  of  Captain  Hunter’s  men  at  the  Pata- 
gonia mines  with  percussion  caps.* 

The  board  will  also  examine  such  documentary  evidence  as  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Eyre  may  have  brought  from  the  Patagonia  mines  and 
placed  in  your  custody. 

The  board  will  examine  into  the  facts  touching  the  known  political 
character  of  one  Robinson,  and  whether  he  has  been  a guest  and  re- 
ceived aid  and  comfort  recently  from  Mr.  Mowry,  and  in  all  matters 
touching  this  case  the  board  will  question  the  persons  brought  by  Col- 
onel Eyre  from  the  Patagonia  mines  and  such  other  persons  as  may  be 
thought  to  be  important  witnesses  in  this  matter  not  herein  named,  but 
who  may  become  known  to  the  board  during  its  investigation. 

The  testimony  and  evidence  you  will  receive  will  be  ex  parte , and 
your  inquiry  wilPbe  analogous  to  that  made  by  a grand  jury  in  the  ad- 
ministration of  justice  by  the  civil  authorities." 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

BEN.  C.  CUTLER, 

First  Lieutenant , First  Infantry , California  Volunteers. 

Headquarters  Column  from  California, 

Tucson , Ariz.,  July  6,  1862. 

The  board  having  examined  the  foregoing  personal  testimony  and  doc- 
umentary evidence,  as  directed  by  Special  Orders,  No.  17,  and  by  the 
letters  of  the  colonel  commanding  the  Column  from  California  to  the 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE, 


ETC. UNION. 


695 


^resident  of  this  board,  which  said  order  and  letter  are  copied  on Land 

hf  “sssm  s * ohi 

to  restrSn Ihe  ‘aid  Sylvester  Mowry  of  his  liberty  aud  brmg  him  to 
trial  before  a military  commission.  R WEST 

Lieut.  Col,  First  Infantry , Cal.  Vo^T^fessldent 
CHARLES  A.  SMITH, 
Captain,  Fifth  Infantry,  Cal.  Yols. 

NICHOLAS  S.  DAVIS, 
Captain,  First  Infantry,  Cal.  Yols. 

ER ASTU^W. Lieut. , First  Infantry,  Cal.  Yols.,  Secretary. 


Headquarters  Department  of  New  Mexico, 

Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.,  September  14,  1862. 

Adjutant-General  of  the  Army, 

Washington , V.  C. : 

Sib  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  a report  from  General  Carleton, 
of  the  9th  instant,  which  gives  the  latest  information  in  relation  to 
affairs  in  Arizona  and  Northwestern  Texas.  The  commanding  officer 
at  Fort  Garland  reports  that  his  spies  have  discovered  the  rendezvous 
of  a party  of  guerrillas  on  the  Huerfano,  and  that  he  has  detached  a, 
forceVor  the  purpose  of  destroying  or  capturing  them.  This  party  is 
composed  of  gamblers  and  desperadoes  from  the  southern  mines  of 
Colorado,  ami  it  is  understood  that  their  object  is  to  reach  Arkansas 
or  Texas  They  will  probably  be  intercepted  by  the  troops  operating 
east  of  the  Eaton  Mountains.  The  regular  troops  are  being  concen- 
trated at  Fort  Union  preparatory  to  going  East,  and,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  the  companies  of  the  Fifth  Infantry,  will  be  m readiness  to 
march  by  the  end  of  this  month.  Upon  the  representation  of  Colonel 
Leavenworth  of  the  danger  of  Indian  hostilities  on  the  Arkansas,  I 
have  ordered  the  companies  of  the  Tenth  Infantry  to  proceed  at  once 

‘°Uwill  leave  for  the  East  in  two  or  three  days  after  the  arrival  of 
General  Carleton. 

Very  respectfully,  sir,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ 0ANBY 

Brigadier-General,  Commanding. 


[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Column  from  California, 

Fort  Craig , JY.  Mex.,  September  9,  1862. 

General  E.  R.  S.  Canby: 

I received  the  order  to  go  to  Santa  Fe  to  relieve  you  in  the  command 
of  the  Department  of  New  Mexico  at  Franklin,  Tex  , at  10  p.  m.  on 
the  2d  instant,  and  started  the  following  morning  for  that  city. 

I arrived  here  last  night,  and  shall  leave  this  post  this  evening  and 
endeavor  to  arrive  at  Santa  Fe,  say,  by  the  16th  or  17th  instant.  Since 


696 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[Chap.  XXI. 

SI^JS®iT2^^»SS 

has  returned  having  found  not  a single  SEZ  at  thJte 

giss^sig 

^is?a<ss^^55aarsf,i^^ 

hurried  flight,  as  he  had  heard  rtiAP»iS?^-  I Eagle  SPrinSs  m 

|es:s^shhh§P-= 

sS^—S^SIS 

StiMHIi 

servant,6  **“  t0n°r  t0  H general>  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 

„ . ..  „ JAMES  H.  CAKLETOK, 

Brigadier-  General,  U.  8.  Army,  Commanding. 


Abstract  from  return  of  the  Department  of  Now  Mexico,  Brig.  Gen.  James  B.  Carleton  U 
S.  Army,  commanding,  for  September  20,  1862.  ’ 


Commands. 

Present  for 
duty. 

4^ 

fl 

CO 

2 

Aggregate  present 
and  absent.  ^ 

Officers. 

Men. 

PU 

© 

£ 

hO 

0) 

So 

bo 

Cubero 

F ort  Craig  and  vicinity * 

Fort  Garland  

Fort  Marcy  and  vicinity. 

Fort  Union  and  en  route  to. 

Fort  Union  Depot 

2 

■ 7 

6 

14 

29 

1 

2 

8 

10 

6 

50 

74 
176 
86  • 
311 
571 
15 
52 
119 
283 
138 

1,  232 

89 

216 

137 

431 

869 

16 

71 

152 

362 

172 

1,  503 

90 

281 

147 

418 

1,064 

16 

80 

176 

450 

173 

1,725 

TiiesCalifomia  Column  

Total 

135 

3,057  | 

4,  018 

4,680 

697 


Chai*.  XXI.  1 CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

CONFEDERATE  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. 

[February  2,  1862. — Requisition  made  by  the  Confederate  authori- 
ties upon  Texas  for  fifteen  regiments  “for  the  war.”  The  requisition 
and  resulting  correspondence  appears  in  Series  IV,  Vol.  I.] 


Headquarters  Department  of  Texas, 

Houston , Tex.,  February  5,  1862. 

Hon.  J.  P.  Benjamin,  Secretary  of  W dr , Richmond , Va. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  copy  of  instructions  issued  to  the 
different  commissaries  of  this  department  by  the  chief  commissary  of 
subsistence,  by  direction  of  the  Commissary-General  at  Richmond. 

I am  inclined  to  believe  that  a strict  compliance  with  these  instruc- 
tions will  much  trammel  the  operations  of  the  Subsistence  Depart- 

This  military  department  is  a large  one  and  the  posts  far  apart. 
The  headquarters  of  the  chief  commissary  are  at  San  Antonio,  and  the 
general  commanding,  considering  himself  in  the  field,  is  obliged  to 
establish  his  headquarters  where  he  thinks  his  presence  most  needed, 
and  at  this  time  within  striking  distance  of  the  seaboard,  exposed  at 
any  moment  to  the  attacks  of  the  enemy.  This  necessarily  must  fre- 
quently, if  not  always,  place  the  general  commanding  and  chief  of 
subsistence  at  different  and  distant  stations. 

The  instructions  require  that  receipts  and  certificates  given  by  sub- 
commissaries be  approved  by  the  commanding  general,  and  then  to  be 
presented  to  the  chief  commissary  of  the  department  for  examination 
and  payment.  This  is  very  inconvenient.  For  instance,  troops  on  the 
Rio  Grande  or  at  the  distant  frontier  posts  may  run  short  of  provisions. 
In  this  event  the  difficulty  of  purchasing  supplies  upon  certificates, 
which,  to  be  paid,  would  oblige  the  holders  to  first  find  the  general 
commanding  to  get  his  approval,  and  then  to  repair  to  ban  Antonio  to 
have  these  accounts  examined  and  paid  or  refused  payment,  as  the  case 
may  be,  is  very  apparent. 

The  sub-commissaries  report  to  me  that  it  will  be  impossible  to  obtain 
‘supplies  under  these  difficulties,  as  parties  selling  would  be  unwilling 
to  be  put  to  the  expense,  trouble,  and  traveling  involved  in  getting 
paid  by  the  Government. 

Besides,  it  imposes  more  or  less  commissary  duties  upon  the  general 
commanding  in  a department,  where  the  duties  are  already  very  onerous 
on  account  of  its  vast  geographical  extent,  the  number  of  its  posts,  and 
one  where,  owing  to  many  causes,  the  general  commanding  is  obliged 
to  almost  create  resources  and  means  of  defense. 

Again,  it  subjects  receipts  and  certificates  approved  by  the  general 
commanding  to  the  examination  and  approval  of  an  inferior  officer,  the 
chief  commissary  of  the  department. 

I would,  in  conclusion,  respectfully  remark  that  these  instructions 
shift  responsibility  from  the  chief  commissary  and  his  assistants,  dis- 
bursing officers,  to  the  general  commanding,  who  in  most  cases  will  be 
unable,  especially  at  distant  posts,  to  judge  of  the  nature  and  necessity 
of  supplies  purchased  by  the  different  commissaries. 

Respectfully  calling  the  early  attention  of  the  Secretary  of  War  to 
the  subject  of  this  communication,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respect- 
fully, his  obedient  servant,  ^ 

P.  O.  HUBERT, 

Brigadier- General,  P.  A.,  Comdg.  Dept,  of  Texas. 


698 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  HEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[Chap.  XXL 


[Inclosure.  ] 

Office  of  the  Actgl  Asst.  Com.  of  Sub., 

‘Galveston,  Tex.,  February  1,  1862. 
General  P.  O.  Hubert,  Comdg.  Dept,  of  Texas,  Houston,  Tex. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a certified  copy  of  an  order 
this  day  received  from  Maj.  S.  Maclin,  chief  commissary  Department 
of  Texas. 

As  I interpret  the  order,  I have  no  authority  to  purchase  supplies 
for  the  troops  on  this  island  without  your  approval  of  every  purchase 
being  indorsed  thereon. 

You  are  fully  aware  of  the  difficulty  in  procuring  supplies  for  the 
troops.  Would  respectfully  submit  that,  if  this  order  is  strictly  com- 
plied with,  it  will  be  impossible  to  subsist  the  troops,  from  the  fact 
that  parties  having  subsistence  stores  for  sale  will  be  unwilling  to  visit 
you  for  the  approval  of  their  certified  accounts,  and  then  go  to  San 
Antomo  to  receive  the  money  from  the  chief  of  subsistence. 

I will  be  pleased  to  receive  instructions  from  you  at  your  earliest 
convenience. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DAN.  C.  RICHARDSON, 
Captain,  and  A.  A.  C.  S.,  C.  S.  P.  Army. 

[Sub-inclosure.l 


Principal  Commissary  Office, 

San  Antonio,  Tex.,  January  24,  1862. 
Sir  : In  furnishing  provisions  to  officers  and  others  you  will  be  gov- 
erned by  the  following  instructions,  received  from  the  Commissarv- 
General.  J 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SACKFIELD  MACLIN, 

Major,  C.  S.  Army,  Chief  Com.  Sub.,  Dept,  of  Texas. 


Richmond,  Va.,  December  5, 1861. 


Maj.  S.  Maclin, 

Chief  Commissary  of  Subsistence,  Dept,  of  Texas,  San  Antonio: 

Sir  : The  Commissary-General  directs  me  to  say  to  you  that  you 
will  please  instruct  the  commissaries  in  your  department  that  when  it 
becomes  necessary  to  purchase  supplies  in  the  vicinity  of  their  station 
the  approval  of  the  general  commanding  the  Department  of  Texas 
must  be  expressed  upon  the  receipts  or  certificates  given  to  the  per- 
sons from  whom  the  stores  are  obtained,  and  that  all  such  accounts 
must  be  presented  to  you  for  examination  and  payment. 

That  no  account  for  subsistence  furnished  picket  guards  or  other 
detachments  will  be  allowed  unless  on  the  order  of  the  general  com- 
manding, setting  forth  the  circumstances  rendering  the  purchase  neces- 
sary, and  these  accounts  must  be  submitted  to  you  for  examination 
and  payment. 

You  will  also  cause  instructions  to  be  given  to  the  commissaries  of 
your  de})artment  who  receive  u due-bills”  from  officers  to  whom  pro- 
visions are  sold  to  take  up  the  amount  of  these  bills  (remaining  unpaid) 
when  their  accounts  current  are  rendered  on  that  account,  and  forward 
the  bills  to  this  office  as  vouchers,  with  u abstract  of  sales.” 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  WILLIAMS, 

Major  and  Commissary  Subsistence , C.  S.  Army.  — 


Chap.  XXI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. — CONFEDERATE. 

[Indorsement.] 


699 


Office  of  Commissary-General  of  Subsistence, 

Richmond , March  6,  1862. 

Respectfully  returned  to  the  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 

The  circular  within  referred  to  was  modified  by  substituting  “officers 
commanding  separate  commands”  for  the  words  “general  command- 
ing ” the  object  being  to  check,  as  far  as  practicable,  unnecessary  and 
extravagant  purchases,  and  to  prevent  certificates  from  being  given 
for  provisions  furnished  to  parties  who  were  otherwise  provided  lor  or 
might  have  been,  and  who  are  not  authorized  to  buy  stores  or  create 
claims  against  the  Department.  The  regulations  of  the  C.  fe.  Army 
fix  the  responsibility  upon  the  commanding  officer  of  a department, 
requiring  him  to  enforce  a rigid  economy  in  the  public  expenses,  and 
to  promptly  correct  all  irregularities  and  extravagancies  which  he  may 
discover.  This  circular  does  not  add  to  the  responsibilities  of  com- 
manding officers,  nor  does  the  circular  require  accounts  approved  by 
the  commanding  officer  to  be  afterward  approved  by  the  chief  commis- 
sary of  subsistence  or  “an  inferior  officer,”  but  simply  their  “examina- 
tion,” a clerical  one,  and  that  the  party  holding  the  account  is  the  one 
to  be  paid,  and  finally  the  payment. 

The  circular  does  not  apply  to  commissaries  who  are  furnished  with 
funds  and  are  authorized  to  buy  stores. 

L.  B.  NORTHROP, 
Commissary- General  of  Subsistence. 


Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Office, 

No.  33.  j Richmond , February  10,  1862. 

* ****** 

III.  The  State  of  Texas  is  hereby  divided  into  two  military  districts, 
to  be  called  the  Eastern  and  Western  Districts  of  Texas.  The  country 
embraced  between  the  northern  and  eastern  boundaries  of  the  State 
and  the  eastern  shore  of  Galveston  Bay  and  left  bank  of  the  Trinity 
River  to  its  intersection  with  the  Gross  Timbers  at  Alton,  thence  fol- 
lowing Cross  Timbers  to  Red  River,  will  constitute  the  Eastern  Dis- 
trict. All  other  parts  of  Texas  will  constitute  the  Western  District. 

* * ***** 


By 


command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 


JNO.  WITHERS, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


War  Department,  O.  S.  Army, 
Richmond , Fa.,  February  13,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert,  Galveston , Tex. : 

Sir:  It  is  stated  here  that  you  have  made  calls  for  troops  in  Texas 
for  a less  period  than  three  years  or  the  war.  It  is  not  known  whether 
this  statement  is  correct,  as  the  Department  has  no  official  communica- 
tion on  the  subject.  If  it  be  true,  however,  it  is  in  entire  opposition  to 
the  whole  policy  of  the  Government,  and  tends  to  defeat  all  its  meas- 
ures for  raising  a permanent  body  of  troops  for  the  defense  of  the 
country.  You  are  therefore  instructed  under  no  circumstances  and  in 


700 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[Chap.  XXI. 


110  emergency  to  accept  troops  into  the  Confederate  service  for  a less 
period  than  three  years  or  the  war,  and  if  any  such  have  been  accepted 
at  once  to  disband  them. 

If  any  emergency  arises  you  may  call  out  the  people  en  masse  for 
defense  5 but  you  will  muster  no  troops  whatever  into  the  Confederate 
service,  under  any  pressure,  for  less  than  three  years  or  the  war. 

Respectfully, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War . 


February  24, 1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hubert,  Galveston , Tex. : 

Sir  : Our  recent  disaster  in  Tennessee  has  greatly  exposed  our  line 
of  communication  with  the  West,  and  the  importance  of  this  line  is  so 
great  that  it  must  be  held  at  any  sacrifice. 

You  are  therefore  instructed  at  once  to  send  forward  to  Little  Bock, 
there  to  report  to  Maj.  Gen.  Earl  Van  Dorn,  all  the  troops  in  your  com- 
mand, for  the  defense  of  the  coast,  except  such  as  are  necessary  to  man 
your  batteries.  No  invasion  of  Texas  is  deemed  probable,  but  if  any 
occurs  its  effects  must  be  hazarded,  and  our  entire  forces  must  be  thrown 
toward  the  Mississippi,  for  the  defense  of  that  river  and  of  the  Memphis 
and  Charleston  Railroad. 

I do  not  desire  that  you  withdraw  such  troops  as  you  may  have  on 
the  Rio  Grande  or  Western  frontier,  but  only  the  troops  you  have 
gathered  for  defending  the  Gulf  coast.  If  at  any  point  where  you  have 
batteries  you  deem  that  there  is  danger  of  losing  the  guns  by  the  with- 
drawal of  the  land  forces  you  will  remove  the  guns,  but  the  men  are  to 
be  pushed  forward  with  all  possible  rapidity  to  Little  Rock  by  such 
route  as  you  may  deem  best. 

I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  P.  BENJAMIN, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Special  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Dept,  of  Texas, 

No.  221.  f Houston , February  25,  1862. 

I.  Until  farther  orders  the  command  of  Col.  H.  E.  McCulloch  will  be 
styled  “ Sub-Military  District  of  the  Rio  Grande;”  headquarters,  for  the 
present,  San  Antonio. 

II.  The  command  of  Col.  John  C.  Moore,  “ Sub-Military  District  of 
Houston ; ” headquarters,  for  the  present,  near  Houston. 

III.  The  command  of  Col.  E.  B.  Nichols,  u Sub-Military  District  of 
Galveston;”  headquarters,  for  the  present,  Galveston. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hubert : 

SAML.  BOYER  DAYIS, 

Major  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XXI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


701 


„ . fllp  ™r<<t  Briaade  of  Texas  Volunteers , commanded  by  Col. 

Abstract  from  normng February  28,  1862. 


Troops. 

Present  for  duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Infantry. 

Cavalry. 

Artillery. 

o5 

s 

o 

56 

o 

§ 

S 

CD 

1 

a 

O . 

i 

a 

co 

© 

o 

56 

O 

i 

8 

33 

41 

7 

11 

186 

221 

760 

803 

119 

292 

791 

508 

86 

250 

816 

911 

143 

322 

879 

622 

94 

Kirby’s  battalion  infantry 

Kelson’s  regiment  infantry 

526 

76 

190 

Xichols’  regiment  intantry 

Oswald’s  battalion  infantry 

Spaigbt’s  battalion  infantry 

35 

681 

Debray’s  mounted  battalion. 

24 

5 

347 

58 

Tillgdi  O uatuoij 

100 

1, 581 

35 

681 

29 

405 

3,  580 

4,  037 

Abstract  from  field  return  of  Confederate  forces  on  the  Lower  Bio  Grande,  commanded  by 
* J J Col.  p.  N.  LucTcett,  far  February,  1862. 


r ‘ 1 

Present  for 
duty. 

0 

OJ 

<B 

£ 

o> 

co 

P<§ 

Troops. 

Officers. 

§ 

a 

P* 

© 

"=3 

60 

CD 

Id) 

fel) 

<13 

CD 

r« 

art 
£ 0 

Sc85 

bfi 

38 

5 

392 

48 

264 

505 

62 

557 

88 

M^egim enTlexas  Mounted  Rifles  (three  companies)  

13 

290 

313 

56 

704 

857 

958 

Hdqrs.  Sub-Military  Dist.  of  the  Bio  Grande, 


San  Antonio,  Tex.,  March 


3.  1862. 


Mai.  Samuel  Boyer  Davis,  Assistant  Adjutant-General : 

Sir  • Since  I wrote  you  respecting  the  filling  up  of  the  mounted  regi- 
ment I think  I have  discovered  a pretty  considerable  under  current  at 
work  through  this  country  against  our  cause.  It  does  not  occur  to  me 
that  it  can  he  very  strong,  yet  it  may  amount  m the  end  to  something 
which  will  require  force  to  he  used.  Men  have  been  heard  to  say , when 
we  (the  Confederates)  lost  a battle,  that  “We”  (the  Union  men)  “have 
eained  a victory.”  Others  have  sent  up  small  balloons,  while  others 
have  fired  guns  by  way  of  rejoicing  over  these  victories.  Others  are 
mid  have  been  using  their  utmost  exertions  to  break  down  the  currency 
of  the  country,  and  some  others  have  arms  and  other  supplies  for  sale, 
a„d  ask  us  twice  as  much  for  them  in  our  currency  as  they  would  in 
cold  or  silver,  and  then  refuse  to  let  us  have  them  unless  the  cash  is 
naid  in  hand,  although  assured  that  they  would  be  paid  in  sixty  days 
or  less  Our  friends  do  not  act  in  this  manner,  and  these  men  are  our 
enemies  They  cannot  be  reached  by  civil  law,  yet  they  are  damaging 
our  cause  every  day ; and  if  the  enemy  should  land  in  force  on  the 
coast,  or  invade  us  on  the  north  (which  I think  it  likely  Jim  Lane  will 
do  in  the  spring),  it  will  be  necessary  to  take  charge  of  these  men  m 


702 


[Chap.  XXI. 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 

some  way,  or  it  will  not  be  safe  for  our  friends  to  go  into  the  service 
and  leave  their  homes,  their  families,  and  property,  without  an  armed 
force  could  be  left  to  protect  them. 

Under  these  circumstances  I look  to  the  time  that  it  will  be  neces- 
sary to  declare  martial  law,  in  order  to  effect  that  by  force  which  the 
Governor,  with  all  his  energies,  cannot  effect  through  the  civil  laws  of 
the  land;  and  while  I would  deplore  such  a necessity  among  our  peo- 
ple as  much  or  more  than  any  other  man,  and  as  my  home,  my  family 
and  all  my  interests  would  be  jeopardized  by  such  a step,  I am  ready 
to  take  it,  as  far  as  I am  personally  concerned,  whenever  I see  there  is 
a necessity  for  it,  in  my  judgment,  and  have  commenced  the  prepara- 
tion for  it  by  assembling  the  regiment  here,  and,  if  it  is  necessary,  shall 
resort  to  it,  unless  the  general  commanding  declares  emphatically  that 
it  must  not  be  done. 

I have  but  one  object  in  being  in  the  service,  which  is  to  advance  the 
interest  of  my  country,  and,  according  to  my  judgment,  I shall  strive 
to  do  that  regardless  of  personal  sacrifices  or  danger. 

Most  respectfully,  &c., 

h.  e.  McCulloch, 

Colonel  First  Regiment  Texas  M.  R.,  C.  8.  P.  A ., 
Comdg.  Sub -Military  District  of  Rio  Grande . 


Camp  Esperanza, 

Rear  Saluria , Tex.,  March  4,  1862. 

Col.  E.  E.  Garland, 

Commanding  Sixth  Regiment  Texas  Infantry , Victoria , Tex. : 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  state  that  on  the  night  of  the  27th 
ultimo  a steamer  appeared  off*  our  bar  and  made  the  usual  signal-lights. 
She  remained  at  anchor  until  the  morning  of  the  28th.  It  was  hazy  - I 
could  not  see  the  course  she  had  taken,  but  since  ascertained  she  was 
the  Lincoln  mail  steamer,  in  search  of  the  blockaders. 

About  3 p.  m.  same  day  two  barks,  the  Midnight  and  Arthur,  hove 
in  sight,  coming  from  the  west.  They  came  to  anchor  off  our  bar 
about  2J  miles  from  the  light-house.  The  weather  has  been  so  boister- 
ous they  could  not  land  conveniently  until  yesterday  morning,  when 
the  norther  subsided. 

About  9 a.  m.,  3d  instant,  two  launches  from  the  bark  Arthur  ap- 
proached the  shore,  each  one  bearing  a white  flag.  I caused  a white 
flag  to  be  raised  in  answer.  I met  the  captain  at  the  Point  when  he 
came  on  shore.  He  stated  to  me  that  he  wished  to  release  a prisoner 
°n  parole  whose  wife  was  also  a prisoner,  but  an  invalid.  The  prisoner 
was  Captain  Hopper,  owner  of  the  schooner  McNeil,  which  was  cap- 
tured 12  miles  to  the  westward  of  this  bar  in  January.  He  said  the 
lady  was  so  ill  he  could  not  send  her  to  New  York,  alid  she  required 
the  assistance  of  her  husband  to  wait  on  her ; she  is  badly  afflicted  with 
rheumatism. 

In  my  last  communication  I informed  you  of  the  gentleman’s  bom- 
bastic style;  he  bragged  what  he  could  do  with  his  ship;  pointed  out 
the  position  he  would  occupy  if  he  wished  to  shell  me  out  of  my  posi- 
tion, but  said  he  had  no  orders  to  fire  on  the  coast  unless  he  was  fired 
on  by  us,  then  he  would  retaliate.  He  said  he  knew  the  caliber  and 
number  of  guns  I had;  my  exact  position  and  force.  His  orders  are  to 
blockade  and  break  up  all  commerce  inside,  and  particularly  through 
the  bays;  lie  had  the  means  of  doing  so.  He'  asked,  “ Where  is  Hebert 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


703 


CiiAr.  XXI.] 

now?”  After  answering  liis  pert  questions  mildly,  I asked  him  how  he 
got  all  his  information,  and  remarked  at  the  same  time,  u Your  inform- 
ant is  not  as  well  posted  as  you  imagine.”  The  captain  replied  that  the 
Government  has  provided  to  have  persons  gather  information  and  to 
keep  him  well  informed  of  our  movements.  This  I told  him  I doubted. 
He  answered,  “I  get  your  latest  papers;  I can  show  you  the  Browns- 
ville Flag  and  Houston  Telegraph,”  and  then  said,  “If  I can  get  my 
hands  on  Lieutenant  Maltby  I will  treat  him  harshly;  he  lias  stated 
that  he  chased  my  two  boats’  crew  3 miles ; this  is  not  so ; here  is  his 
muster  roll.”  I looked  at  the  document,  and  saw  the  names  ot  four  men 
whom  I knew,  and  I learned  belonged  to  Maltby’ s party.  He  said 
Maltby’s  statement  reflected  very  much  on  the  action  of  his  crew  in 
that  instance,  and  used  hard  language  against  the  un soldierlike  conduct. 
He  said  in  a short  time  there  would  be  100,000  men  in  the  Gulf,  and  his 
party  intended  taking  Galveston  immediately.  I remarked  that  his 
party  might  take  the  island  with  a large  army  and  naval  force,  but  the 
main-land  was  close  by  ; “there  from  under  your  ship’s  fire  we  would 

measure  bayonets  with  your  armies.” 

We  conversed  for  a space  of  a half  hour.  He  changed  to  politics, 
and  was  at  the  close  of  the  conversation  very  agreeable.  We  agreed  a 
white  flag  would  be  respected;  its  absence  a fight. 

I had  the  lady  carried  to  a house  in  Saluria,  and  the  gallant  cap- 
tain not  exacting  a parole  from  the  poor  afflicted  woman.  I am  glad 
to  state  what  she  lacks  in  strength  in  her  lower  extremities  is  concen- 
trated in  her  upper.  She  cannot  walk,  but  she  has  good  use  ot  her 
tongue,  and  has  given  me  several  items  of  interest.  I would  not  state 
that  her  husband  whispers  in  her  ear  occasionally.  She  says  her 

memory  is  not  very  good.  n - „ _ , , , . 

There  are  2,400  men  at  Ship  Island,  intended  for  Galveston,  to  be 
attacked  with  10,000  men,  time  not  mentioned.  Overheard  talk  between 
Kittredge  and  the  captain  of  the  three-masted  schooner  Kitty  Tane^y . 
There  are  thirty  bomb-proof  gunboats  to  ascend  the  Mississippi. 

The  bark  Midnight  has  six  32-pounders  and  one  Parrott  pivot  20- 
pounder.  She  has  about  66  men,  and  draws  7 feet  water,  light ; 250  tons 
burden.  Station  Pass  Oavallo;  has  four  boats,  and  is  a good  sailer. 

Bark  Arthur,  station  Aransas  Pass,  at  present  here.  She  has  the 
same  armament:  One  Parrott  rifle  30-pounder;  draws  14  feet  water. 
She  has  74  men,  well  equipped  with  small-arms,  pikes,  &c.  The  attack 
upon  Pass  Oavallo  is  expected,  but  only  the  men  report  it.  There  are 
2 men  on  the  Santee  who  have  wives  and  families  in  Galveston;  one  ot 
them  piloted  the  attack  on  the  Eoyal  Yacht.  Captain  Kittredge  made 
a speech  to  his  men,  and  said  as  there  were  no  prizes  outside  he  would 
take  them  inside.  He  took  a sloop  in  Aransas  Bay,  with  medicine. 

There  has  been  a great  deal  said  about  my  blockading  Saluria  Bayou. 
My  object  in  causing  this  pass  to  be  closed  was  to  prevent  the  enemy 
from  getting  our  light-draught  vessels  and  arming  them  against  us. 
There  are  but  few  in  our  bays,  and  if  the  proper  officer  intends  the 
trade  and  commerce  to  continue  through  the  west  bays  he  will  have 
to  arm  a few  of  our  best  schooners.  Whether  he  does  or  not,  it  is  my 
duty  to  guard  well  my  exposed  position  and  keep  such  property  out  of 
the  enemy’s  possession  that  he  might  use  to  advantage  against  me. 

I informed  some  speculators  who  have  been  here  to  see  me  about  our 
blockade  at  Saluria  that  I would  now  let  vessels  pass  with  cotton,  corn, 
&c.,  while  there  was  a chance  for  them  to  get  down  safe.  The  troops 
at  Aransas  have  not  communicated  with  irie,  as  I requested  Captain 
Keal  to  do. 


704  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

I have  reported  some  of  the  leading  facts  above  stated  in  mv  last 
communication,  and  Major  Forshey  has  kept  the  headquarters  at  Hous- 
ton  posted. 

1 ?iot  ^ceived  an  order  of  any  character  relative  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  West.  I earnestly  request  the  colonel  commanding  to 
issue  an  order  relative  to  the  blockade  of  Saluria,  &c. 

The  captain  of  the  bark  Arthur  inquired  of  the  men  who  had  lost  the 
medicines  why  the  schooner  did  not  come  down  as  usual.  He  said 
mentioning  my  name,  I had  stopped  all  vessels  going  west.  He  said 
ne  would  com©  here  and  break  up  my  blockade  immediately;  he  has  not 
attempted  to  do  so  yet.  He  said  emphatically  that  he  must  have  two 
ol  our  best  and  light  Aransas  vessels.  This  history,  in  connection  with 
my  last  communication,  I thought  best  to  let  you  know  in  full  and  sub- 
mit to  your  superior  judgment. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DAK  D.  SHEA, 

C.  S.  P.  A.,  Major , Commanding  Saluria , tbc. 


[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Sub-Military  Dist.  of  the  Rio  Grande, 

San  Antonio , Tex.,  March  12,  1862. 

Respectfully  referred  to  the  commanding  general  for  his  considera- 
tion, as  it  gives  information  (although  not  altogether  reliable)  that 
may  be  of  service  to  him,  and  I must  say  that  1 think  the  suggestions 
ot  arming  a few  schooners  or  light-draught  steamboats  necessarv  for 
the  defense  of  the  commerce  in  those  bays. 

„ 7 ^ ^ h.  e.  McCulloch, 

Col.  First  Regiment  Tex . M.  R.,  C.  S.  P.  A.,  Comdg.  Fist. 


Hdqrs.  Sub-Military  Dist.  of  the  Rio  Grande, 

San  Antonio,  Tex.,  March  25,  1862. 

Col.  Samuel  Boyer  Davis, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General: 

Sir  : I find  that  many  of  the  most  notorious  among  the  leaders  of 
the  opposition,  or  Union  men,  are  leaving  the  country,  principallv  in 
the  direction  of  Mexico.  Some  of  them,  I have  no  doubt,  are  going 
simply  to  avoid  the  draft,  and  under  its  operations  a participation  in 
the  present  struggle  with  the  North,  while  others  are  going  to  co-op- 
erate with  a considerable  number  that  have  already  entered  Mexico 
ana  are  now  at  Monterey  and  other  points,  doing  all  they  can  to  preju- 
dice our  cause  with  the  authorities  of  that  country,  and  prepare  the 
minds  of  the  common  people  to  take  part  against  us  in  case  there  ever 
is  a time  when  they  dare  call  on  them  to  do  so,  and  to  act  in  concert 
with  men  of  like  feelings  about  Austin,  this  place,  Fredericksburg, 
and  other  points  where  they  are  still  living  among  us. 

I have  said,  and  I repeat,  that  there  is,  in  my  opinion,  a considerable 
element  ot  this  character  in  this  section  that  will  have,  ultimately  (if 
the  war  becomes  any  more  disastrous  to  us),  to  be  crushed  out,  even 

it  it  has  to  be  done  without  due  course  of  law,  or  this  country the 

section  m which  I am  stationed  to  protect  and  in  which  mv  familv 
reside — will  suffer.  J 

In  view  of  these  things  I have  taken  steps  to  prevent  as  far  as 


Chap.  XXI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


705 


•possible  the  passage  of  these  men  out  of  the  country  into  Mexico,  by 
instructing  the  military  under  my  command  not  to  let  any  man  go 
unless  he  is  known  to  be  our  friend,  and  not  then  unless  he  can  pro- 
duce satisfactory  evidence  that  he  is  not  going  to  avoid  the  draft  with 
which  the  State  is  threatened  and  which  will  come  upon  it. 

I am  fully  aware  of  the  responsibility  of  the  step  I have  taken,  and 
bow  much  it  perils  my  reputation  as  an  officer,  and  how  much  it  ex- 
poses my  person  and  mv.  domestic  interests— my  home,  my  wife  and 
little  ones — to  the  malignant  acts  of  these  cowardly  traitors,  but  1 
believe  it  my  duty  to  my  country,  and  in  her  case  I am  willing  to 

^Theforce  that  I will  have  congregated  here  in  a few  days  more  will 
he  sufficient  to  enable  the  State  authorities  to  enforce  the  dralt  or  do 
anything  else  that  a military  force  may  be  required  to  do,  and  while  1 
assure  you  that  I shall  take  no  step  rashly  or  without  reflection,  I shall 
use  it  for  the  benefit  of  mv  country  upon  traitors  at  home  it  needs  be. 

Most  respectfully,  &c,  H r McCULL0CH) 

• Col.  First  Regiment  Tex.  M.  R.,  C.  8.  P.  A.,  Comdg.  IHst. 


Hdqrs.  Sub-Military  Dist.  of  the  Rio  Grande, 

San  Antonio,  Tex.,  March  31,  1862. 

Col.  Samuel  Boyer  Davis, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General: 

Sir:  Inclosed  you  will  hnd  a copy  of  a notice  stuck  up  in  a promi- 
nent place  in  this  city,  written  in  a German  hand,  and  showing  plainly 

that  it  was  written  by  a foreigner.  « 

It  may  have  been  by  some  to  array  opposition  to  that  character  ol 
the  population,  but  it  speaks  the  sentiments  of  a large  portion  of  the 
population  here,  many  of  whom  are  doing  all  they  can  to  injure  our 
cause  secretly,  and  would  do  so  openly  if  they  dared. 

Many  Germans  and  some  Americans  are  leaving  here  to  avoid  a par- 
ticipation in  our  struggle.  I have  directed  the  troops  to  permit  none 
to  go  to  Mexico,  unless  they  have  a pass  from  me,  or  can  produce  evi- 
dence that  they  are  our  friends,  and  not  leaving  to  avoid  doing  their 

have  indicated^plainly  on  other  occasions  that  I deemed  it  ad  visa- 
ble  to  declare  martial  law  here  at  some  time,  and  I think  the  time  has 
about  arrived  when  it  will  have  to  be  done.  - .,  1 

I have  force  sufficient  in  the  vicinity  to  enforce  it  if  I declare  it ; and 
if  I could  know  that  it  would  not  displease  the  commanding  general  it 

would  be  declared  to-day. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Col.  1st  Reg.  T.  M.  R.,  C.  S.  P.  A.,  Comdg.  8.  M.  It.  of  Rio  Grande. 

[Inclosure.]  J 

NEWS. 

German  brothers,  are  your  eyes  not  opened  yet  % After  the  rich  took 
everv  picayune  away  from  you,  and  the  paper  is  worth  only  one-half 
what  you  so  hard  earned,  now  that  you  have  nothing  left,  now  they  go 

45  R R— VOL  IX 


706 


[Chap.  XXL 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 

about  and  sell  you,  or  throw  you  out  of  employment  for  Dunhauer,  who 
left  his  wife  and  children,  wants  to  do  the  same  with  you  to  the  poor 
you  might  leave.  Now  is  the  time  to  stay  the  heads  of  Dunhauer 
Maverick,  Mitchel,  and  Menger  to  the  last  bone.  We  are  always  ready. 
If  the  ignorant  company  of  Newton  fights  you,  do  as  you  please.  You 
will  always  stay  the  God  damn  Dutchman.  Do  away  with  that  nui- 
sance, and  inform  everybody  the  revolution  is  broke  out. 

It  is  a shame  that  Texas  has  such  a brand.  Hang  them  bv  their  feet 
and  burn  them  from  below. 


[Indorsement.] 

This  was  found  sticking  up  since  the  letter  was  written : it  was  in 
German,  and  this  is  the  translation. 

McOULLOCH. 


Abstract  from  field  return  of  Confederate  States  forces  stationed  on  the  Lower  Bio  Grande 
commanded  by  Col.  John  S.  Ford,  for  March , 1862.  * ' 


War  Department,  0.  S.  Army, 

Richmond , Va.7  April  14,  1862. 

Ool.  John  R.  Baylor, 

Governor  of  Arizona  Territory : 

Sir  : You  are  authorized  to  enlist  volunteers  in  Arizona  Territory 
and  to  muster  them  into  service,  singly  and  by  companies,  for  three 
years  or  the  war,  to  be  organized  as  soon  as  a sufficient  number  of 
companies  are  mustered  into  a regiment,  electing  field  officers.  You 
will  continue  to  organize  regiments  under  this  authority  until  a brigade 
has  been  raised  for  the  defense  of  the  Territory, 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  W.  RANDOLPH, 

Secretary  of  War. 


General  Orders,  > War  Dept.,  Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Off., 

No.  23.  j Richmond , April  15,  1862. 

Parties  who  have  been  authorized  by  the  War  Department  to  raise 
troops  in  Texas  are  prohibited  from  enlisting  or  receiving  twelve- 
months’  men ; and  all  authority  heretofore  granted  by  this  Government 
to  raise  troops  in  any  State  is  hereby  revoked,  unless  the  organization 


.hap.  XXI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE.  707 

s completed  and  the  muster  rolls  returned  to  this  office  within  sixty 
lays  from  the  date  of  this  order. 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : COOPER 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Texas, 

Houston , April  19,  1862. 

Son.  Georoe  W.  Randolph, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond , Va. : 

Sir  * On  the  14th  of  March  last  I received  an  order,  dated  February 
23  from  the  Secretary  of  War,  directing  me  to  send  all  the  forces  Tin- 
ier my  command,  except  such  as  were  necessary  to  man  the  coast  bat- 
teries, to  report  to  General  Van  Dorn  at  Little  Rock,  Ark.  , 

1 have  since  acted  in  accordance  with  these  instructions,  and  have 
moved  troops  as  rapidly  as  the  necessary  transportation  could  be  ob- 

T Recent  events  in  the  Mississippi  Valley  and  telegraphic  statements 
as  to  the  movements  of  General  Van  Dorn  have  left  me  in  doubt  as  to 
the  position  of  his  command.  I shall  in  consequence,  until  further  or- 
ders forward  the  troops  to  their  destination  according  to  the  orders 
referred  to,  but  by  such  a route  as  to  place  them  on  the  march  within 
striking  distance  of  the  Mississippi— that  is,  direct  to  Alexandria,  La. 

thence  on  by  water  transportation.  , , 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  O.  JdLLf>xLf-K±, 

Brigadier- General,  Provisional  Army. 


Hdqrs.  Seventh  Regiment  Texas  Mounted  Men, 

Camp  above  Doha  Ana , April  20,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  to  you  the  within  letter  from 
Captain  Hunter,  C.  S.  Army,  now  at  Tucson,  N.  Mex. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  ^ STEELE, 

Colonel  Seventh  Texas  Mounted  Men. 


[Inclosute.] 

Tucson,  Ariz.,  April  5,  1862. 

Col.  John  R.  Baylor:  ' __ . 

Sir  • After  a march  made  as  speedily  as  practicable  from  the  Rio 
Grande,  attended  by  some  violently-stormy  weather,  but  without  any 
accident  or  misfortune  save  the  loss  of  one  ot  my  men  (Benjamin  Mays), 
who  died  at  the  San  Simon,  1 have  the  honor  of  reporting  to  you  my 
arrival  at  this  place  on  February  28.  My  timely  arrival  with  my  com - 
maud  was  hailed  by  a majority,  I may  say  the  entire  population,  ot  the 
town  of  Tucson.  1 found  rumors  here  to  the  effect  that  the  town  was 
about  being  attacked  by  a large  body  of  Indians;  that  military  stores 
of  the  Federal  Army  to  a large  amount  had  been  landed  at  Guay  mas, 


708  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXL 

and  that  troops  from  California  were  on  the  march  up  the  Gila  River 
tor  this  place  and  these  reports  were  so  well  accredited  that  a few 

0 the  citizens  more  ultra  in  their  Southern  feelings  than  the  rest  were 
about  [leaving]  rather  than  fall  into  the  hands  of  their  Northern  foes 
to  sacrifice  all  of  their  interests  in  this  place,  and  look  for  safety  among 
their  Southern  brethren  on  the  Rio  Grande. 

Immediately  after  the  departure  of  Colonel  Reily,  on  March  3,  for 
Sonora,  accompanied  by  an  escort  of  20  men,  under  Lieutenant  Tevis 

1 started  with  the  rest  of  my  command  for  the  Pima  Villages,  where 
AtewnW^rrival  1 ne£°tiated  friendly  relations  with  the  Indians ; arrested 
A.  M.  White,  who  was  trading  with  them,  purchasing  wheat,  &c..  for 
the  Northern  troops,  and  confiscated  the  property  found  in  his  posses- 

a hsk*  of  which  I send  you.  Among  the  articles  confiscated  were 
l,oOu  sacks  of  wheat,  accumulated  by  Mr.  White,  and  intended  for  the 
Northern  Army.  This  I distributed  among  the  Indians,  as  I had  no 
means  of  transportation,  and  deemed  this  a better  policy  of  disposing 
of  it  than  to  destroy  or  leave  it  for  the  benefit  (should  it  fall  into  their 
hands)  of  the  enemy. 

While  delaying  at  the  Pima  Villages,  awaiting  the  arrival  of  a train 
ot  oO  wagons  which  was  reported  to  be  en  route  for  that  place  for  said 
wheat  (which  report,  however,  turned  out  to  be  untrue),  my  pickets 
discovered  the  approach  of  a detachment  of  cavalry,  and  which  detach- 
ment, I am  happy  to  say  to  you,  we  succeeded  in  capturing  without 
firing  a gun.  This  detachment  consisted  of  Captain  McCleave  and  9 
ot  his  men,  First  California  Cavalry.  The  captain  and  Mr.  White  I 
send  in  charge  of  Lieutenant  Swilling  to  the  Rio  Grande. 

I learned  also  while  at  Pimo  Villages  that  at  every  station,  formerly 
Overland,  between  that  place  and  Fort  Yuma  hay  had  been  provided  for 
the  use  of  the  Federal  Government,  which  hay  1 have  destroyed  at  six 
of  the  stations  thus  provided.  My  pickets  on  yesterday  rejiorted  troops 
at  Stanwix’s  Ranch,  which  is  on  this  side  of  Fort  Yuma  80  miles. 

Allow  me  to  say,  in  conclusion,  that  I have  no  opinion  to  offer  in 
relation  to  all  of  these  rumors  that  are  afloat,  but  give  them  to  you  as 
I received  them,  knowing  that  your  judgment  and  experience  will  dic- 
tate the  proper  course  to  pursue. 

I am,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  HUNTER, 
Captain  Company  A * 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Sub-Mil.  Dist.  oe  Rio  Grande, 

3.  ) San  Antonio , April  24,  1862.  j 

I.  By  virtue  of  Special  Orders,  No.  525,  from  headquarters  of  the  De- 
partment of  Texas,  the  undersigned  assumes  command  of  the  Sub- 
Military  District  of  the  Rio  Grande. 

II.  The  military  posts  north,  west,  and  south  of  San  Antonio,  includ- 
ing the  posts  at  Victoria  and  Saluria,  are  embraced  in  the  Sub-Military 
District  of  the  Rio  Grande.  Headquarters  for  the  present  at  San 
Antonio,  Tex. 

III.  Maj.  E,  F.  Gray,  Third  Regiment  Texas  Infantry,  is  assigned  to  5 
duty  as  acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  and  will  be  obeyed  and  re- 
spected accordingly.  All  official  communications  from  posts  within 
the  Sub-Military  District  of  the  Rio  Grande  will  be  addressed  to  Maj,  j 
E.  F.  Gray,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  San  Antonio,  Tex. 


* Not  found. 


Chav.  XXI.] 


709 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 

IV.  Called  by  the  President  to  this  important  position,  the  general 
commanding  relies  with  confidence  on  his  fellow-citizens  to  assist  and 
sustain  him  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties.  In  the  belief  that  they  will 
do  it,  he  will  to  the  best  of  his  ability  maintain  the  honor  and  dignity 
of  our  Government  and  require  a zealous  and  cordial  support  and  re- 
spect for  her  institutions.  Military  discipline  will  be  strictly  enforced, 
and  no  obstacle  allowed  to  encumber  the  progress  of  our  country  to 
independence.  H.  p 

Brig.  Gen.:  Comdg . Sub-Military  District  of  the  Bio  Grande. 


Special  Orders,  \ 
Xo.  101.  f 


Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Office, 

Richmond , Va.,  May  2,  1802. 
*###*** 

XVI.  Brig.  Gen.  Hamilton  P.  Bee  will  report  for  duty  to  General  P. 
O.  Hebert,  commanding  Department  of  Texas,  at  Houston,  Tex. 

# * * * * * * 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

J R.  H.  CHILTOX, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General . 


Special  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Mil.  Dist.  of  Galveston, 

Xo.  471.  1 Galveston , May ' 14,  1862. 

Sir  : In  case  the  enemy  should  make  his  appearance  off  our  harbor 
it  will  probably  become  necessary  to  withdraw  the  troops  from  our  bat- 
teries. Commanders  of  batteries  will  therefore  make  every  arrange- 
ment to  spike  the  guns  of  their  batteries,  destroy  the  houses  and  gun- 
carriages  by  fire,  and  fall  back  to  the  Houston  and  Galveston  Railroad 
depot  In  good  order  and  await  further  orders.  All  the  ammunition  and 
things  belonging  to  the  men  that  can  be  removed  will  be  taken  away 
as  means  of  transportation  will  be  furnished.  They  will  not  evacuate 
or  spike  the  guns  until  they  receive  orders  from  these  headquarters, 
unless  they  are  suddenly  attacked,  in  which  case  they  will  use  their 


own  discretion. 
By  order  of 


JOS.  J.  COOK, 

Colonel , Commanding  Military  Sub-District. 


Lieut.  Col.  J.  H.  Manly, 

Commanding  Regiment  Artillery. 


Alto,  Cherokee  County,  Tex., 

May  45,  1862. 

Hon.  John  H.  Reagan, 

Postmaster- General  G.  S.  of  A.,  at  Richmond,  Va.: 

Dear  Sir  : I have  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  your  official  report, 
which  came  to  hand  a few  days  since,  and  for  which  I am  very  grateful 
and  much  pleased.  But  I fear,  from  present  indications,  with  the  Fed- 
erals  in  possession  of  the  Mississippi  River,  that  in  future  all  mail 
facilities  between  Richmond  and  this  country  will  be  cut  off  for  a time. 
We  have  varied  rumors  of  a great  victory  for  our  forces  in  Virginia 
and  at  Corinth,  but  for  want  of  through  mails  all  rest  on  rumor. 


710  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  AR1Z.  [Chap,  xxij 

Although  I am  now  writing  you,  yet  doubt  whether  it  will  be  able  to 
reach  you,  but,  at  all  hazards,  will  risk  its  running  the  blockade,  in 
order  that  I may,  through  you,  call  the  attention  of  the  Government  at 
Richmond  to  the  fact  that  notorious  outrages  are  at  this  time  being 
practiced  in  the  way  of  plunder  through  this  section  from  good  citi- 
zens by  an  armed  party  of  the  citizens  of  Texas,  professing  to  be  Con 
federate  soldiers,  and  under  the  command  of  one  Colonel  Carter,  from 
Hempstead,  near  Houston ; but  all  of  those  professing  to  be  officers 
acknowledge  themselves  void  of  any  commissions  authorizing  them  to 
draft  on  the  Government  for  supplies,  but  notwithstanding  they  are 
marching  eastward  slowly  with  a force  of  from  fifteen  [hundred]  to  3,000 
men,  remaining  in  each  neighborhood  just  long  enough  to  ravage  the 
corn-cribs  and  smoke-houses  of  the  defenseless  surrounding  country, 
and  even  the  defenseless  widow  meets  with  no  mercy  at  their  hands, 
as  I am  credibly  informed.  They  on  yesterday,  with  ax  and  sledge- 
hammer, broke  into  the  smoke-house  and  corn-crib  of  Judge  Baxter, 
near  the  Neelies  (with  whom  you  are  acquainted),  and  took  there- 
from a quantity  of  corn  and  meat,  as  I am  credibly  informed,  and  that 
against  the  wishes  and  kind  remonstrances  of  the  judge  and  family. 
They  offer  pay  at  their  own  price  by  draft  on  some  individual  at  city 
of  Houston,  and  in  all  probability  an  irresponsible  character.  They  on 
yesterday  made  their  boasts  that  they  found  an  old  widow  lady  in 
possession  of  only  280  pounds  bacon.  They  took  half. 

The  good  citizens  left  at  home  for  the  protection  of  families  of  those 
gone  to  the  war  are  in  perfect  dread  for  selves  and  families,  and  know 
not  what  may  come  next.  Instead  of  our  own  citizens  being  a protec- 
tion, they  have  become  our  hourly  dread,  and  while  I write  I have  seen 
them  prowling  about  from  house  to  house,  evidently  seeking  whom  they 
may  devour  next. 

I trust  your  Government  will  take  immediate  notice  of  such  conduct, 
and  take  measures  for  a speedy  suppression  of  all  such  unlawful  and 
unwarrantable  conduct. 

Your  friend  and  obedient  servant, 

W.  W.  FRIZZELL. 


Respectfully  referred  to  the  Secretary  of  War.  Mr.  Frizzell  is  a re- 
spectable citizen. 

JOHN  H.  REAGAN, 

Postmaster- General. 


Galveston,  Tex.,  May  17,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert  : 

Received  following  from  commander  of  frigate  Santee : 


U.  S.  Frigate  Santee,  off  Galveston , Tex.,  May  17,  1862. 
To  the  Military  Commandant, 

Commanding  Confederate  Forces,  Galveston,  Tex . : 

Sir  : Id  a few  days  the  naval  and  land  forces  of  the  United  States  Government  will 
appear  off  the  town  of  Galveston  to  enforce  its  surrender.  To  prevent  the  effusion  of 
hlood  and  destruction  of  property  which  would  result  from  the  bombardment  of  your 
town  I hereby  demand  the  surrender  of  the  place,  with  its  fortifications  and  all  bat- 
teries in  its  vicinity,  with  all  arms  and  munitions  of  war.  I trust  you  will  comply 
with  this  humane  demand. 

I am,  respectfully,  &c., 

HENRY  EAGLE, 

Captain,  Commanding  Naval  Forces  off  Galveston , Tex. 


Bearer  of  message  stated  answer  any  time  within  twenty-four  hours. 

JOS.  J.  COOK. 


Chap  XXI  ] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


711 


Houston,  Tex.,  May  17,  1862. 

Colonel  Cook,  Galveston , Tex. : 

Will  send  answer  in  the  morning.  In  the  mean  time  prepare  quietly 
to  evacuate  in  the  event  of  an  overwhelming  force  making  its  appear- 
ance to  bombard  as  threatened.  Send  np  Major  Kellersberg  by  morn- 

ingtrain-  P.  O.  HEBERT, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Houston,  Tex.,  May  17,  1862—0  p.  m. 
Colonel  Cook,  Galveston , Tex. : 

The  company  at  Pelican  Spit  should  be  removed  quietly.  Spike  the 
gun.  Act  so  that  the  enemy’s  attention  will  not  be  called  to  your  move- 
ments. Call  upon  the  president  of  the  railroad  for  rolling  stock.  Let 
there  be  no  excitement.  Let  the  flag  stand  at  the  Spit.  Don’t  burn 
anything  for  the  present  to  excite  attention  of  the  enemy. 

P.  O.  HEBERT, 
Briaadier-  General. 


Galveston,  Tex.,  May  18,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hubert : 

I desire  to  communicate  to  the  commander  of  the  frigate  that  when- 
ever the  naval  and  land  forces  of  the  United  States  shall  make  their 
appearance  off  Galveston  I shall  answer  their  demand. 

JOS.  J.  COOK,  Colonel. 


Galveston,  Tex.,  May  19,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert: 

I communicated  to  the  commander  of  the  frigate  yesterday  that  the 
proper  time  for  an  answer  to  his  demand  will  be  when  the  land  and 
naval  forces  referred  to  shall  have  arrived,  and  such  an  answer  will 
then  be  given.  This  morning  she  has  up  a white  flag,  and  I have  sent 
out.  I am  making  the  preparations  advised  as  well  as  I can. 

JOS.  J.  COOK,  Colonel . 


Galveston,  Tex.,  May  19,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert: 

Answered  the  flag  of  truce.  Nothing  for  ourselves.  The  foreign 
consuls  received  the  following : 

U.  S.  Frigate  Santee,  May  19,  1862. 

To  the  Foreign  Consuls  residents  of  the  Town  of  Galveston , Tex. : 

Gentlemen:  To  prevent  the  effusion  of  blood  and  destruction  of  property  which 
will  result  from  a bombardment  of  the  town  of  Galveston,  I have  demanded  of  the 
military  commandant  the  surrender  of  the  place,  with  its  fortifications,  &c.  This 
demand  having  been  refused,  I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  four  days  will  be 
allowed  you  from  this  date  in  which  to  remove  your  families  and  property.  After 
that  time  the  bombardment  will  commence  at  my  earliest  convenience. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  EAGLE, 

Commanding  U.  S.  Naval  Forces  off  Galveston , Tex. 

JOS.  J.  COOK,  Colonel. 


[Chap.  XXI. 


712 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


Headquarters 


Col.  J.  J.  Cook, 

Commanding  at  Galveston : 


Department  of  Texas, 

Houston , May  19,  1862. 


From  the  tone  of  Captain  Eagle’s  dispatch  the  inference  is  that  he 
may  again  send  a peremptory  demand  of  surrender.  There  is  to  he 
no  surrender  on  any  circumstances.  There  may  be  an  abandonment 
in  face  of  a superior  force,  but  nothing  else,  when  it  would  be  folly  to 
attempt  resistance. 


P.  O.  HEBERT, 

Brigadier- General,  Provisional  Army. 


Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert: 


Galveston,  Tex.,  May  21,  1862. 


There  are  several  hundred  tons  of  coal  here,  besides  other  articles, 
ordered  to  be  removed  to  a place  of  safety.  The  laboring  classes  refuse 
to  do  duty,  though  offered  large  pay.  The  only  way  to  reach  them  by 
force  will  be  to  declare  martial  law  in  this  place,  which  I think  needs 
this  alternative  to  an  imminent  degree.  Will  you  declare  the  city 
under  martial  law?  J 


JOS.  J.  COOK, 

Colonel. 


Galveston,  Tex.,  May  21,  1862. 
Lieut.  George  R.  Wilson,  Aide-de-Camp : 

I have  received  dispatch  about  not  surrendering  the  city  and  will 
carry  it  out. 

JOS.  J.  COOK, 

Colonel. 


Galveston,  Tex.,  May  22,  1862, 

Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert: 

This  communication  received  from  frigate  to-day  to  the  consuls : 

It  is  not  in  [my]  power  to  give  you  any  assurance  of  security  during  the  bombard- 
ment, for  it  is  impossible  to  tell  what  direction  the  shot  and  shell  will  take. 

I am  making  preparations  to  give  the  frigate  a warm  reception. 
The  frigate  and  one  bark  off  the  bar.  Steamer  went  eastward  this 
morning. 

JOS.  J.  COOK, 

Colonel, 


Special  Orders,  ) Galveston, 

No.  — - i May  25,  1862, 

I.  You  will  require  every  citizen  subject  to  military  duty,  residing  on 
Galveston  Island,  over  the  age  of  thirty-five,  to  be  forthwith  paraded, 
with  the  best  arms  and  ammunition  they  can  procure. 

XI.  You  are  required,  with  the  forces  so  organized,  to  co-operate 
with  the  commanding  officer  in  the  defense  of  the  city  of  Galveston. 
III.  Should  an  emergency  arise,  in  the  opinion  of  the  commanding 


3HAP.  XXI.] 


713 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC.  — CONFEDERATE., 

officer  rendering  the  evacuation  of  the  city  of  Galveston  expedient, 
you  will  see  that  no  citizen  subject  to  military  duty  be  permitted  to  * 

remain.  , . , . , , 

IV.  The  object  of  this  order  being  to  aid  as  far  as  practicable  m 

the  defense  of  the  city  and  to  guard  against  the  capture  by  the  enemy 
of  citizens  whose  services  the  State  has  a right  to  claim,  you  will  see 
that  these  orders  are  rigidly  enforced  and  observed. 

Bv  order  Governor  and  Commander-in-Chief : 

* J.  H.  HEEYDOY, 

Colonel  and  Volunteer  Aide. 

To  Col.  T.  B.  Howard, 


Richmond,  Va.,  May  26,  1862. 

General  P.  O.  Hebert, 

Commanding  in  Texas , dec. 

General:  A military  department  has  been  termed,  comprising  the 
f States  of  Missouri,  Arkansas,  and  that  portion  of  Louisiana  west  of  the 
Mississippi,  and  Texas.  Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  Magruder  will  be  assigned  to 
the  command  as  soon  as  relieved  from  his  present  position.  In  the 
mean  time,  as  senior  officer  of  the  department,  its  command  devolves 
upon  you.  You  have  already  been  instructed  as  to  the  disposition  of 
the  armed  troops  organized  in  Texas  and  not  wanted  in  that  State.  I 
presume  those  ready  for  the  held  are  en  route  for  Arkansas.  I have 
to-day  received  information  that  the  enemy,  in  possession  of  the  city  of 
Yew  Orleans,  are  endeavoring  to  attract  to  that  city  provisions  from 
that  part  of  the  Southern  coast  west  of  the  Mississippi,  which  must  not 
be  allowed,  nor  can  any  commerce  between  him  and  our  citizens  be 
permitted.  It  may  be  necessary  to  send  troops  to  Opelousas  to  pre- 
vent this  illicit  traffic,  but  as  a camp  of  instruction  has  been  estab- 
lished at  that  point,  and  Colonel  Marigny  appointed  to  the  command, 
it  is  hoped  that  he  will  soon  organize  a sufficient  force  to  control  the 
operations  of  the  enemy  in  that  part  of  the  State.  Should  this  not  be 
the  case,  and  he  call  upon  you  for  aid,  you  are  requested  to  send  one 
or  more  of  the  organized  regiments  of  Texas,  according  to  the  number 
he  may  be  able  to  arm,  to  report  to  him. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  E.  LEE, 

General . 


t General  Orders,  ) War  Dept.,  Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Off., 

y0i  39.  ' J Richmond , May  26,  1862. 

******* 

IV.  The  boundary  of  the  Trans-Mississippi  Department  will  em- 
brace the  States  of  Missouri  and  Arkansas,  including  the  Indian  Terri- 
tory, the  State  of  Louisiana  west  of  the  Mississippi  River,  and  the 
State  of  Texas  A • 

******* 

Bv  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

J S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General . 

44 Holmes  was  assigned  to. command  July  16  and  assumed  command  July  30,  1862. 
See  Series  I,  Vol.  XIII,  pp.  855,  860. 


714 


[CiTAr.  XXL 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX„,  AND  ARIZ. 


Bri 


Headquarters  Army  of  New  Mexico 

Fort  Bliss , Tex..  May  27,  1862. 
w Gen.  H.  P.  Bee,  - ’ 

Commanding  Western  District,  Department  of  Texas : 

Sir  : The  mail  of  last  week  brought  unofficial  reports  from  various 
sources  of  the  intention  of  the  Government  to  re-enforce  this  army  with 
one  or  more  regiments  ; that  Col.  Debray  was  already  on  the  march, 
and  finally , as  the  postmaster  at  San  Antonio  expresses  it,  as  derived 
from  you,  that  New  Mexico  and  Arizona  are  to  be  held  at  all  hazards. 

In  the  absence  of  all  official  communication  on  this  subject,  either 
from  the  Government  in  Richmond  or  from  local  departments  nearer  at 
hand,  1 was  constrained  to  abandon  New  Mexico,  our  provisions,  forage 
and  ammunition  being  completely  exhausted.  In  this  vicinity  I find 
myself  but  little  better  off.  . 


The  army  is  absolutely  subsisting  on  poor  meat  and  bread,  with  a 
limited  supply. 

Under  these  circumstances  the  safety  of  the  army  depended  upon  a 
movement  m some  direction  to  the  nearest  point  of  supply. 

The  order  has  consequently  been  given  for  the  movement  down  the 
country  of  the  mass  of  the  forces. 


The  unofficial  information  received  by  the  last  mail  of  course  em- 
barrasses me  very  much,  especially  as,  from  the  information  I have,  no 
hope  can  be  entertained  of  such  supplies  being  thrown  forward  as  will 
serve  the  purposes  of  an  army  in  active  campaign. 

Without  a dollar  in  specie,  nothing  can  be  purchased  on  the  Mexican 
side  of  the  river,  and  our  sick  even  on  this  side  are  suffering  for  the 
want  of  articles  which  can  only  be  procured  with  specie.  Of  sugar 
and  coffee  we  have  scarcely  a pound ; all  other  small  ratious  are  alike 
deficient $ whilst  of  salt  meat  we  have  not  an  ounce. 

Our  ammunition  may  be  said  to  be  exhausted.  For  heavy  «nns  we 
have  perhaps  100  rounds.  Clothing  completely  exhausted,  with  no 
means  of  renewing  the  supply. 

My  purpose  in  addressing  this  communication  to  you  is  to  inform 
you  distinctly  of  the  resources  of  this  country  and  New  Mexico. 

Any  forces  sent  to  operate  in  this  quarter  should  not  depend  upon 
the  productions  of  the  country,  except,  perhaps,  the  single  article  of 


I have  written  briefly  and  to  the  point.  I have  made  report  after 
report  to  the  Government,  but  up  to  this  date  have  received  not  a 
single  line  of  acknowledgment  or  encouragement,  having  been  left  to 
act  entirely  upon  my  own  judgment  and  the  pressure  which  momen- 
tarily surrounded  me. 

My  volunteer  aide,  Captain  AV ager,  will  hand  you  this  communication. 
1 bespeak  for  him  your  kind  attention  and  courtesy. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 


H.  H.  SIBLEY, 

Brigadier - General,  Commanding. 


Houston,  May  27,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert,  Commanding,  dee. : 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  your  Special  Orders,  No.  596,  April  24,  1862  I 
proceeded  toward  New  Orleans,  but  ascertained  at  New  Iberia  that  it 
was  probable  that  New  Orleans  was  occupied  by  the  Federal  forces. 


tJHAP.  XXI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


715 


I therefore  directed  myself  toward  Baton  Rouge  as  the  nearest  place 
from  whence  I could  communicate  by  telegraph  with  the  War  Depart- 

m Treached  Baton  Rouge  on  the  2d  of  May  and  immediately  telegraphed 
to  the  Adjutant-General.  I awaited  an  answer  until  the  4tb  May. 
None  having  reached  me  and  the  Federals  approaching  Baton  Rouge, 

1 proceeded  to  Camp  Moore,  at  Tangipahoa  Station,  on  the  New  Or- 
leans and  Jackson  Railroad,  where  I repeated  my  dispatch  from  Baton 
Rouge,  herewith  attached  and  made  part  of  this  report. 

On  the  7th  May,  being  still  without  an  answer,  I requested  by  tele- 
graph to  be  informed  whether  I should  still  await  an  answer  or  return 

to  Texas.  , J _ . . , , 

On  the  12th  May  I received  the  answer  by  telegraph  hereto  at- 
tached, and  immediately  started  on  my  return  to  Houston. 

I was  much  delayed  by  interruption  in  stage  route  and  crevasses  on 
the  Mississippi  River  and  high  water  generally  through  that  part  of 
Louisiana  I had  to  travel  over.  I reached  here  to-day  and  report  for 

dlRhave  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAML.  BOYER  DAVIS, 
Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[iDclosures.] 

Tangipahoa  Station,  May  5,  1862. 
General  S.  Cooper,  Richmond: 

The  Federal s being  in  possession  of  Baton  Rouge,  I have  come  to 
this  place,  as  I have  not  yet  received  an  answer  to  my  dispatch  of  the 
2d,  which  I repeat  : 

• Baton  Rouge,  La.,  May  2,  1862. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  C.  S.  Army,  Eichmond , Va. : 

I have  been  ordered  here  by  Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hubert,  commanding  Department  of 
Texas,  for  the  purpose  of  communicating  with  you  and  obtaining  instructions. 

General  Hdbert  some  time  since  received  orders  to  send  all  his  available  troops  to 
Little  Rock.  Recent  events  may  make  it  necessary  to  change  their  destination,  and 
he  therefore  applies  for  further  instructions. 

General  Hubert  has  several  infantry  regiments  on  the  march  or  ready  to  march ; 
also  a regiment  and  a battalion  of  mounted  men.  The  infantry  he  sends  via  Alex- 
andria, La. ; the  cavalry  by  the  inland  route.  He  advises  the  dismantling  of  the 
cavalry  under  marching  orders,  unless  wanted  in  Arkansas. 

Transportation  is  being  rapidly  obtained,  and  the  want  of  it  delays  the  troops. 

I am  -prepared  to  give  any  information  the  Department  may  require. 

y 1 * * SAML.  BOYER  DAYIS, 

Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

Richmond,  May  12, 1862. 

Capt.  Samuel  Boyer  Davis: 

Return  to  Texas.  No  definite  instructions  can  be  given  from  here 
in  answer  to  your  dispatches  of  the  2d  and  5th  under  present  state  of 
things. 

S.  COOPER. 


General  Orders,  i Headquarters  Department  of  Texas, 

No.  45.  j Houston , May  30,  1862. 

I.  The  following  proclamation  is  published  for  the  information  of  all 
concerned : 


716 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 


[Chap.  XXI. 


PROCLAMATION. 

?'  P*  ®bert,  brigadier- general  Provisional  Army,  Confederate 
?ve^fstate  ofaT:’etSPrOClaim  ^ lw  is  extended 

Every  white  male  person  above  the  age  of  sixteen  years,  being  tem 
poranly  or  otherwise  within  the  aforesaid  limits,  shall,  upon  ff  sum- 
mons issued  by  the  provost-marshal,  promptly  present  himself  before 
°Jn? -marshal  to  have  Ins  name,  residence,  and  occupation  reg- 
fifn  d’  f 1 I11™15*  Sll,ch  information  as  may  be  required  of  him. 

, s.u.®11  as  claini  to  be  aliens  shall  be  sworn  to  the  effect  that  they 
will  abide  by  and  maintain  the  laws  of  this  State  and  the  Confederate 
States  so  long  as  they  are  permitted  to  reside  therein,  and  that  they 
will  not  convey  to  our  enemies  any  information  whatever  or  do  any 
States1™01'8  t0  tllC  <-!onfederate  States  or  beneficial  to  the  United 

i • provosts -marshal  shall  order  out  and  remove  from  their  respective 
districts  all  disloyal  persons  and  all  persons  whose  presence  is  iniu- 
nous  to  the  interests  of  the  country.  J 

All  orders  issued  by  the  provosts-marshal  in  the  execution  of  their 
duties  shall  be  promptly  obeyed.  Any  disobedience  of  summons  em- 
anatmg  from  them  shall  be  dealt  with  summarily.  All  officers  com- 
manding troops  will  promptly  comply  with  any  requisitions  made  upon 
them  by  provosts-marshal  for  aid  or  assistance.  Any  attempt  to  de- 
preciateAhe  currency  of  the  Confederate  States  is  an  act  of  hostility 
will  be  treated  as  such,  and  visited  with  summary  punishment. 

Ao  interference  with  the  rights  of  loyal  citizens  or  with  the  usual 
routine  of  business  or  with  the  usual  civil  administration  of  the  law 
will  be  permitted,  except  when  necessary  to  enforce  the  provisions  of 
this  proclamation.  a 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert,  Provisional  Army,  C.  S.,  com- 
manding Department  of  Texas : 7 

SAML.  BOYEE  DAVIS, 

Captain  and,  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Headquarters, 
Richmond , Va .,  May,  31,  1862. 

Brigadier-General  Hebert, 

Commanding  Department  of  Texas : 

General  : Communications  have  been  received  by  the  President 
reporting  the  very  destitute  and  critical  condition  of  General  Sibley’s 
command  now  operating  in  Hew  Mexico.  You  were  perfectly  right  in 
sending  the  two  regiments  of  cavalry,  which  had  been  previously  or- 
dered to  Little  Bock,  to  his  relief.  You  will  also  cause  to  be  sent  to 
the  western  frontier  of  Texas  all  the  supplies  you  can  for  the  use  of 
^General  Sibleys  forces.  Call  upon  the  Governor  of  Texas  to  aid  you 
in  this  work.  The  very  remote  and  isolated  position  of  General  Sib- 
leys  command  makes  it  necessary  that  you  should  promptly  afford  him 
all  the  aid  you  can  in  men  and  supplied. 

Iam,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  E.  LEE, 

General. 


Chap.  XXI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


717 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Department  op  Texas, 

No.  46.  j Houston , June  2,  1862. 

1.  By  authority  from  the  executive  department  of  the  State  of  Texas, 
all  State,  military,  and  civil  officers  are  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the 
Confederate  Government,  for  the  purpose  of  enforcing  the  provisions 
of  the  act  approved  April  15,  1862,  and  entitled  “An  act  to  further 
provide  for  the  public  defense.” 

2.  In  virtue  of  this  authority,  brigadier-generals  of  the  State  militia 
are  directed  to  appoint  an  enrolling  officer  for  each  county  included  in 
the  geographical  limits  of  their  brigades. 

3.  The  enrolling  officers  will  immediately  enter  upon  the  discharge 
of  their  duties,  and  comply  with  the  published  regulations  from  the 


War  Department. 

4.  County  enrolling  officers  will  make  their  reports,  with  duplicate 
rolls  of  conscripts,  to  such  enrolling  officers  as  may  be  appointed  from 
these  headquarters  to  certain  districts  or  specified  limits,  and  in  the 
absence  of  these  directly  to  these  headquarters,  addressed  to  Capt. 
Samuel  Boyer  Davis,  assistant  adjutant- general,  Houston,  Tex. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert : 

J SAML.  BOYER  DAYIS, 


Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Special  Orders, 
No.  819. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Texas, 

Houston , June  3,  1862. 

I.  The  counties  of  Austin,  Harris,  Galveston,  Liberty,  Chambers, 
and  Jefferson  will  constitute  the  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston,  De- 
partment of  Texas. 

II.  Col.  George  Flournoy  is  assigned  to  the  immediate  command  ot 
the  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston,  and  will  for  the  present  establish 
his  headquarters  at  Houston. 

III.  The  senior  officer  present  on  duty  at  any  post  within  the  sub- 
military  district  is  the  immediate  commander  thereof. 

IY.  All  official  communications  will  be  addressed  to  the  commander 
of  the  district,  with  the  form  and  mode  prescribed  by  the  regulations. 

By  order  of  Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert: 

SAML.  BOYER  DAYIS, 
Captain  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Executive  Office, 

Richmond , June  7,  1862. 

General  H.  H.  Sibley, 

Commanding , ffic.,  San  Antonio , Tex . : 

General:  I avail  myself  of  an  opportunity  of  communicating  with 
you  in  a speedy  and  direct  manner  through  your  aide-de-camp,  Captain 
Ochiltree.  I rejoice  in  being  able  to  congratulate  you  on  the  distin- 
guished successes  of  your  command,  and  when  I consider  your  field  of 
operations,  the  superior  number  and  means  of  supply  of  the  enemy, 
and  the  other  difficulties  under  which  you  have  labored,  the  conduct 
of  yourself  and  the  army  under  your  command  is  recognized  as  most 
praiseworthy. 

With  the  assistance  of  the  two  regiments  sent  to  you  from  Texas  I 


718  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXL 

trust  that  you  will  be  able  to  meet  the  more  immediate  and  pressing 
exigencies  that  may  arise,  and  that  your  own  ability  and  military  re- 
sources and  the  valor  of  your  troops  may  supply  comparative  inferior- 
ity in  numbers  and  munitions  of  war.  Captain  Ochiltree  will  inform 
you  of  our  condition  in  this  region,  and  this  will  be  to  you  a sufficient 
explanation  for  failure  to  re-enforce  you  to  the  full  extent  of  your  ne- 
cessities. 

With  best  wishes  for  your  continued  success,  and  with  the  hope  that 
we  may  hereafter  meet  to  enjoy  in  peace  the  independence  for  which 
you  are  struggling,  I am,  very  truly  and  respectfully,  yours, 

JEFFERSON  DAYIS. 


General  Orders,  ) Headquarters, 

No.  5.  f Tyler , Tex.,  June  12,  1862. 

I.  By  virtue  of  a commission  as  brigadier-general  in  the  Provisional 
Army  of  the  Confederate  States,  the  undersigned  assumes  command 
of  all  the  troops  within  the  State  east  of  the  Brazos  River  and  north 
of  the  old  San  Antonio  road. 

II.  The  commanders  of  regiments,  battalions,  and  companies,  within 
these  limits,  will  report  by  express  to  these  headquarters  as  early  as  pos- 
sible, giving  arm  of  service,  strength  of  command,  character,  quantity, 
and  condition  of  arms,  ammunition,  camp  and  garrison  equipage,  hos- 
pital and  medical  stores,  and  transportation. 

III.  I announce  as  a portion  of  my  staff  Maj.  John  Henry  Brown, 
assistant  adjutant-general;  Capt.  Ben.  E.  Benton,  aide-de-camp,  and 
Capts.  A.  W.  Terrill,  E.  S.  C.  Robertson,  C.  L.  Robards,  and  W.  A. 
Pitts,  volunteer  aides-de-camp,  who  will  be  respected  and  obeyed  as 
such. 

IY.  All  twelve-months’  volunteers,  who  have  not  reorganized  under 
the  furlough  and  bounty  law  or  the  conscript  act  will  reorganize  as 
early  as  practicable,  and  all  officers  not  re  elected  will  be  relieved  from 
duty,  and  their  names  reported  to  these  headquarters. 

Y.  All  enlisted  men  under  eighteen  and  over  thirty-five  years  of  age, 
who  desire  it,  will  be  discharged  from  the  service,  and  no  person  who 
is  to  be  discharged  under  this  order  will  take  part  in  the  reorganiza- 
tion. 

YI.  All  regiments,  battalions,  and  companies  north  and  east  of  this 
place  (Tyler),  including  those  of  Col.  Edward  Clark,  Col.  W.  B.  Ochil- 
tree, Col.  Richard  Waterhouse,  and  Col.  Horace  Randal,  will  take  up 
the  line  of  march,  with  as  little  delay  as  possible,  for  Little  Rock,  Ark., 
proceeding  by  the  most  practicable  route  from  Marshall  and  Jefferson, 
and  will  report  to  the  commander  of  the  army  west  of  the  Mississippi 
River. 

YII.  All  official  communications  for  these  headquarters  must  be 
indorsed  “Official  business,”  and  directed  to  Maj.  John  Henry  Brown, 
Assistant  Adjutant-General,  C.  S.  P.  A. 

h.  e.  McCulloch, 

Brigadier-  General , C.  8.  P.  A. 

John  Henry  Brown, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


hap.  XXI.1  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


719 


Hdqrs.  Trans-Miss.  Dept.  South  of  Red  River, 

Houston , June  18,  1862. 

leneral  R.  E.  Lee,  Richmond , Va.  : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  at  the  hands  of  Major  Bryan 
tour  dispatches  bearing  date  May  28. 

Being  informed  that  Major-General  Hindman,  who  ranks  me,  was  in 
;ommand  of  the  “Trans-Mississippi  Department  north  of  Red  River, 
r iiave  assumed  command  until  further  orders  of  the  district  south  ot 

bis  river.  , _ , _ , « 

Such  troops  as  can  be  equipped  and  armed  I am  and  have  been  lor 

*ome  time  forwarding  toward  Little  Rock. 

The  great  difficulty,  almost  an  impossibility,  is  m getting  arms;  men 

ve  can  command.  _ . . , , . , 

We  have  now  several  regiments,  both  of  cavalry  and  infantry,  entirely 
inarmed.  Even  when  shot-guns  are  obtained  there  is  a difficulty  in 
preparing  suitable  ammunition  for  such  a variety  of  calibers, 
f I have  ordered  buck-shot  to  be  made,  the  men  to  prepare  their  own 
immunition.  All  possible  means  are  used  to  collect  and  repair  such 
irms  as  may  be  found  in  the  country  . 

1 had  to  some  extent  anticipated  your  instructions  m regard  to 
Western  Louisiana,  by  ordering  a battalion  of  mounted  men  to  New 

Iberia,  on  the  Teche.  . „ _ „ , 

I would  respectfully  advise  the  dismounting  of  nearly  all  the  troops 

vest  of  the  Mississippi. 

There  is  an  excess  of  cavalry,  badly  mounted  and  worse  armed.  As 
nfantry,  if  not  more  efficient,  would  at  least  be  less  expensive. 

1 Captain  Davis,  my  assistant  adjutant- general,  the  bearer  of  this  com- 
munication, may  give  you  valuable  information  in  regard  to  the  troops, 
equipments,  armaments,  means  of  transportation,  &c. 

Yerv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

* P.  O.  HUBERT, 

Brigadier- General,  Provisional  Army. 

i 

[Inclosure.] 


tEneral  Orders, 


Hdqrs.  Trans-Miss.  District 

South  of  Red  River, 
i'  \ Houston , Tex.,  June  18,  1862. 

In  virtue  of  instructions  from  General  Headquarters  at  Richmond, 
earing  date  May  28,  1862,  I assume  command  of  the  district  compris- 
ag  the  State  of  Texas  and  all  that  portion  of  the  State  of  Louisiana 
rest  of  the  Mississippi  River  and  south  of  Red  River,  and  ot  all  the 
iosts,  camps,  and  troops  within  the  limits  of  the  district. 

P.  O.  HEBERT, 

Brigadier- General , Provisional  Army. 


i 

Fort  Fillmore,  June  26,  1862. 

General  H.  H.  Sibley: 

General  : I inclose  herewith  some  dispatches  taken  from  one  of 
Oarleton’s  expresses.*  You  will  see  from  them  that  my  stay  here  must 
be  very  short.  Canby  has  already  crossed  his  forces  to  the  east  side 
of  the  river,  and  the  rains  having  already  commenced,  he  will  in  a few 


* Not  found. 


720  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX„,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI; 

days  be  able  to  cross  tbe  Jornada.  In  this  state  of  affairs  I find  sub 
ject  to  my  control  less  than  thirty  days’  breadstuff,  and  the  idea  whict 
is  prevalent  that  we  are  about  to  leave  renders  it  very  difficult  to  ge' 
any thing.  My  means  of  transportation  are  entirely  inadequate  to  haul 
ing  the  requisite  amount  of  supplies.  Something  must  be  done,  anc 
that  speedily,  or  the  troops  with  me  will  be  in  a state  of  starvation 
Could  not  a portion  of  the  supplies  with  Green  and  Hardiman  be  lefi 
on  the  road  and  supplies  sent  in  time  to  meet  them.  The  flour  anc 
corn-meal  I now  have  would  have  lasted  until  the  new  crop  came  in 
But  it  is  not  likely  that  I shall  [be]  able  to  stay  that  length  of  time 
The  hospital  at  Franklin  will  be  left  in  a destitute  condition. 

Let  me  know  soon  what  you  will  do.  I have  been  sick  for  several 
days,  and  am  scarcely  able  to  be  about,  and  would  not  be  under  othei 
circumstances. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  STEELE, 

Colonel  Seventh  Regt.  Texas  Vols .,  Commanding  in  Arizona. 


Abstract  from  return  of  the  District  of  the  Lower  Bio  Grande , Texas , commanded  by  Col 
F.  N.  Luckett , for  June,  1862. 


Troops. 


Fort  Brown 

Ringgold  Barracks  

Carracitos,  Tex 

Resaca  de  la  Palma — 

Edinburg 

Camp  near  Ringgold  Barracks 
Carrizo,  Tex 

Grand  total 


Present  for 
duty. 

Aggregate  present. 

Aggregate  present 

and  absent. 

Artillery,  pieces  of. 

Officers. 

s 

s 

10 

140 

182 

211 

35 

446 

567 

614 

K 

3 

77 

88 

104 

3 

72 

97 

114 

4 

70 

74 

77 

3 

60 

69 

107 

4 

65 

69 

81 

62 

930 

1, 146 

1,  308 

1C 

•«* 

Camp  near  the  Dredge-Boat, 

[July  8] — 5 p.  in. 

Colonel  Livenskiold,  Provost-Marshal : 

Colonel  : I send  Mr.  Leonard  down  with  this  communication.  On 
leavingthe  Breaker  anclRebecca  late  last  evening! came  around  through 
the  cut  to  the  dredge-boat — saw  two  launches  of  the  enemy  near  the 
shell  bank  $ one  very  large.  With  a spy-glass  observed  every  move- 
ment. They  landed  200  or  300  yards  above  the  fort  and  formed  on  the 
beach.  About  25  marched  up  to  the  fort  and  immediately  hoisted  the 
American  flag  upon  the  ramparts.  I counted  15  or  20,  who  got  up  upon 
the  fort  and  acted  like  they  were  rejoicing  over  their  capture.  They 
remained  at  the  fort  late  last  night  and  crossed  over  the  bayou  and  en- 
camped, so  I was  informed,  all  night.  They  were  at  the  houses  (?) 
early  this  morning.  To  day  the  schooner  came  up  to  the  shell  banks 
and  anchored  in  front  of  the  channel.  I left  the  dredge  late  last  night 
and  reached  my  camp  early  this  morning,  about  an  hour  before  day. 
Fearing  the  enemy  might  land  at  the  dredge  and  cut  us  off,  I concluded 


Chap.  XXI.} 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


721 


to  bring  a detachment  down,  with  two  pieces  of  artillery  ; about  half 
way  I discovered  the  schooner  and  a large  launch  gone  up  Aransas 
Bay.  I immediately  sent  back  men  and  some  of  the  teams  to  remove 
my  camp  equipage  and  ammunition  into  the  interior,  as  I have  no  guns 
to  compete  with  the  one  on  board  the  schooner,  from  the  appearance  of 
its  bulk  as  seen  through  a glass,  being  covered  with  a tarpaulin.  It  is 
amidship.  I fear  they  will  make  an  attack  upon  my  encampment.  1 
shall  save  all  of  my  artillery,  but  shall  lose  a portion  of  things.  There 
has  been  no  boat  down  from  Saluria  for  the  last  few  days,  and  I fear 
they  have  a gunboat  up  there  and  blockaded  the  inland  communica- 
tion. 

I understand  from  Captain  Hawley  that  the  enemy  has  placed  a gun 
on  this  bank,  but  I think  it  doubtful.  They  sounded  the  channel  to-day 
with  one  of  their  launches  as  far  down  as  Hog  Island,  and  Conklin 
[was]  at  anchor  in  a mile  of  them,  but  it  appears  he  did  not  see  them. 

If  1 to-day  had  the  gunboats  the  launches  could  have  been  driven 
from  the  shell  bank,  but  it  seems  impossible  to  do  without  means  to 
act  with.  I think  they  have  captured  this  evening  the  Monte  Christo 
and  cargo.  I ordered  the  captain  to  burn  his  cotton  and  boat  as  soon 
as  the  enemy  appeared  in  sight;  whether  he  will  do  so  or  not  I cannot 
tell.  I am  at  a loss  what  to  do  with  my  force,  situated  as  I am.  The 
steamer  A.  B.  and  two  other  boats  are  at  the  dredge ; Captain  Dunn 
and  Cherry,  the  engineer,  left  to-day  for  Lavaca  by  land,  having  aban- 
doned thq  boat,  there  being  no  chance  to  get  out.  What  the  intention 
of  the  enemy  is  can  only  be  determined  by  future  events.  I shall  have 
to  fall  back  with  my  artillery,  as  it  is  of  no  use  against  their  gunboat ; 
besides,  I have  no  ammunition  suitable  for  12-pound  howitzer.  Should 
they  attempt  to  come  up  the  cut  I shall  give  them  fight.  I look  for 
them  to-night.  I shall  order  these  boats  to  Corpus  Christi,*and  am  now 
trying  to  signalize  Lieutenant  Conklin,  who  is  laying  at  anchor  just 
below  the  dug-out.  Leonard  will  give  you  further  information.  I have 
written  to  General  Bee  to-day. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

BENJ.  F.  NEAL. 

P.  S. — Let  no  boats  start  for  Saluria. 


* 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Mil.  Sub-Dist.  of  Houston, 

No.  5.  f Houston 3 Tex.,  July  8,  1862. 

I.  In  obedience  to  Special  Orders,  No.  6,  from  headquarters  Trans- 
Mississippi  District  South  of  Red  River,  the  undersigned  assumes  to- 
day command  of  this  military  sub-district. 

#*###*# 

X.  B.  DEBRAY, 

Colonel , Commanding  Military  Sub-District , Houston. 


Headquarters  Forces  of  Arizona, 

El  Paso , July  12,  1862. 

S.  Cooper,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , Biclmond  : 

General:  Having  recently  abandoned  the  Territory  of  Arizona, 
and  being  on  the  point  of  starting  with  my  whole  command  for  San 
46  R R— VOL  IX 


,122  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

Antonio,  I deem  it  advisable  to  give  you  a brief  statement  of  the  va- 
rious causes  that  have  compelled  me  to  this  step.  Of  the  strength  of 
the  force  with  which  I was  expected  to  hold  the  Territory— -about  100 
men— you  will  be  able  to  form  a just  estimate  from  the  within  field 
report.* 

After  General  Sibley  had  withdrawn  from  the  country  the  greater 
portion  of  his  command,  the  Mexican  population,  justly  thinking  our 
tenure  very  frail  and  uncertain,  showed  great  unwillingness  to  sell  prop- 
erty of  any  sort  for  Confederate  paper,  which  would  of  course  be  val- 
ueless to  them  should  I be  compelled  to  retire,  which  was  at  any  time 
probable ; and  as  I was  without  specie  with  which  to  make  purchases, 
I was  obliged  to  seize  upon  such  supplies  as  were  required  for  the  sub- 
sistence of  the  troops  and  such  means  of  transportation  as  would  ena- 
ble me  to  move  my  command  whenever  the  necessity  might  arise  for 
so  doing.  This  occasioned  so  much  ill-feeling  on  the'part  of  the  Mexi- 
cans that  in  many  instances  armed  resistance  was  offered  to  foraging 
parties  acting  under  my  orders,  and  in  the  various  skirmishes  which 
took  place  one  captain  and  several  men  of  $ny  regiment  were  killed  by 
them.  Besides  this,  the  troops  with  me  were  so  disgusted  with  the 
campaign  and  so  anxious  to  return  to  Texas  that  in  one  or  two  instances 
they  were  on  the  point  of  open  mutiny,  and  threatened  to  take  the  mat- 
ter in  their  own  hands  unless  they  were  speedily  marched  back  to  San 
Antonio. 

In  the  mean  time  the  forces  from  California,  about  1,500  strong,  were 
steadily  approaching,  and  on  the  6th  of  July  their  advance  was  at  Fort 
Thorn,  on  the  Bio  Grande.  Troops  from  Fort  Craig  had  been  seen  the 
day  previous  moving  toward  the  same  point.  Knowing  this,  and  that 
the  enemy,  after  leaving  competent  garrisons  behind,  would  be  able  to 
bring  3,000  troops  against  me,  independent  of  a recent  re-enforcement 
which  they  received— of  500  men— from  Pike’s  Peak,  and  250  more,  with 
six  rifle  cannon,  who  escorted  the  paymaster  from  Kansas,  the  neces- 
sity of  moving  m37  force  became  imperative. 

I was  then  at  Fort  Fillmore,  with  but  little  ammunition,  and,  not- 
withstanding the  efforts  I had  made,  with  verv  inadequate  means  of 
transportation.  I,  however,  abandoned  the  Territory  on  the  Sth  of  July 
and  marched  for  Fort  Bliss,  at  which  point  I now  am.  As  soon  as  this 
move  had  been  determined  on  the  sale  was  ordered  of  all  public  prop- 
erty at  Fort  Bliss  which  was  too  bulky  for  or  not  worth  transporta- 
tion. This  sale  was  held  for  specie  and  breadstuffs.  The  specie  was 
turned  over  to  the  general  hospital  which  I am  compelled  to  leave  at 
Franklin.  There  was  besides  a considerable  quantity  of  stores  that 
could  not  be  sold  and  which  were  too  weighty  for  transportation,  such 
as  horse  and  mules  shoes,  cannon  ammunition,  tents,  &c.  To  con- 
clude, I am  now  about  to  start  for  San  Antonio  with  very  limited  means 
of  transportation,  and  insufficient  supply  of  breadstuff  and  beef,  de- 
pending on  the  contingency  of  meeting  provisions  forwarded  from  San 
Antonio,  and  with  troops  in  many  instances  almost  naked. 

The  general  hospital  at  Franklin,  under  the  charge  of  Dr.  South- 
worth,  has  been  provided  with  $830  in  specie  and  credit  to  a larger 
amount  with  parties  in  Mexico.  This  I submit  to  you  as  a true  repre- 
sentation of  the  condition  of  affairs  in  this  country. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  STEELE, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXI.] 


723 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC; — CONFEDERATE. 

Hdqrs.  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston, 

Houston , Tex .,  July  14,  1862. 

Capt.  C.  M.  Mason, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  to  you  a report,  with  accom- 
panying documents  from  the  provost-marshal  at  Matagorda  informing 
me  of  the  endangered  condition  of  Matagorda  and  vicinity.  I have 
issued  orders  to  one  squadron  of  my  regiment  to  march  from  the  San 
Bernard  to  Matagorda,  to  lend  assistance  to  the  provost-marshal,  if  neces- 
sary, and  also  to  meet  such  emergencies  as  may  arise  in  case  of  a land- 
in0,  by  the  enemy.  Please  find  herewith  a copy  of  my  answer*  to  the 
provost-marshal  of  Matagorda,  and  also  a copy  of  the  order*  issued  to 
Debray’s  regiment  to  detach  a squadron  to  the  coast  and  to  keep  in 
readiness  to  move  in  case  of  necessity.  I hope  that  these  disposi- 
tions will  meet  the  approval  of  the  general  commanding.  I may  yet, 
if  necessary,  move  Brown’s  battalion  from  the  Chocolate  to  Matagorda 
Bay,  but  I have  no  infantry.  I do  not  deem  it  expedient  to  call  on 
Bates’  battalion,  which  covers  Brazoria  County,  one  of  the  richest  m 
the  State  in  cotton  and  negroes,  the  population  of  which  has  been  con- 
siderably thinned  by  volunteering.  I have  here  but  two  companies  ot 
Griffin’s  battalion,  one  of  which  is  unarmed,  and  they  are  necessary  to 
guard  the  powder  magazine  and  the  provost-marshal’s  office.  I have 
not  been  able  as  yet  to  receive  reports  from  Elmore’s  battalion,  sta- 
tioned at  Hempstead.  I am,  however,  informed  that  it  is  considerably 
reduced  by  sickness — measles  and  flux — and  that  it  is  very  indiffer- 
ently armed.  Some  infantry,  however,  shall  have  to  be  sent  to  the 
coast,  if,  as  it  appears,  the  enemy  intend  to  inaugurate  a warfare  of 
forays  on  our  weak  points.  I am  informed  by  Mr.  Clements,  of  Gal- 
veston, who  just  arrived  from  Matagorda,  that  it  was  reported  that  the 
enemy  had  landed  and  planted  a piece  of  artillery  on  the  shore  of  Aran- 
sas Bay.  . . _ . , 

I am,  very  respectfully,  captain,  your  ol^dmnt^^vai^y 

Colonel , Commanding  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston , Texas. 

p.  s._l  do  not  believe  that  the  enemy  can  approach  Matagorda 
with  large  boats.  We  should  guard  only  against  predatory  parties  in 
launches  and  yawls. 

[In  closures.] 

Matagorda,  Tex.,  July  — , 1862. 

Col.  X.  B.  Debray: 

Dear  Sir  : I wish  to  inclose  to  you  a document  f addressed  to  me  by 
the  best  and  most  influential  citizens  of  Matagorda,  regarding  the  de- 
fense of  the  place  and  vicinity  against  the  demands  of  the  pirate  Kitt- 
redge.  His  object  seems  to  be  to  send  out  small  parties  on  light- 
draught  boats,  with  a few  pieces  of  artillery  on  each,  which  would 
enable  him  to  land,  under  cover,  of  his  guns,  for  the  purpose  of  foraging 
on  the  small  towns  and  rich  vicinities  along  the  coast.  As  I said  m 
my  last  communication,  only  light-draught  boats  can  reach  this  place. 
The  channel  3 miles  below  this  place  is  only  60  yards  wide  and  not 
over  3£  or  4 feet  deep.  You  can  judge  of  the  style  of  launches  and 


Not  found,  but  see  letter  of  July  15,  p.  726. 


t Not  found. 


724 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXI. 

quantity  of  men  which  might  he  forced  upon  us  under  the  circum- 
stances. I do  not  think,  from  the  best  information  I can  glean,  that 
Kittredge’s  forces  at  this  time  amount  to  over  150  or  200  men,  but  he 
seems  to  be  well  supplied  with  boats  and  launches  of  light  draught,  yet 
sufficient  to  carry  a few  pieces  of  artillery.  In  his  language  he  is  threat- 
ening and  his  manners  impudent.  After  seeing  a map  of  the  locality 
you  can  judge  of  the  necessity  of  artillery  or  the  fitting  up  of  boats, 
as  I understand  the  major  commanding  has  proposed.  He  has  fitted  up 
two  boats,  one  to  convey  forage  and  subsistence  to  the  force  stationed 
at  the  neck  of  the  peninsula  and  mouth  of  Old  Oaney,  composed  of  24 
enlisted  men,  under  command  of  an  officer,  with  an  extra  detail  of  2 
men  to  assist  the  sailor  to  run  his  boat.  They  are  sent  out  to  re- 
main nine  days.  This  brings  the  men  on  duty  every  third  night, 
two  sentinels  on  post  at  the  same  time.  This  is  the  point  I spoke 
of  in  my  last  as  being  the  suspicious  place  where  vessels  of  the 
enemy  stopped  from  two  to  seven  days;  also  the  outlet  of  the  rich 
valley  of  Old  Oaney;  from  Matagorda  to  the  canal  20  miles;  by  the 
route  the  horses  go  30  to  35  miles.  From  this  suspicions  locality  to 
the  extremity  of  the  peninsula  (on  account  of  loyal  citizens,  so  I am 
informed  by  the  best  citizens)  no  system  of  espionage  can  be  carried 
on.  From  the  extremity  of  the  peninsula  (the  pass  into  Matagorda 
Bay)  the  water  is  good  in  the  channel  to  within  3 miles  of  the  town 
of  Matagorda.  This  is  the  reef  as  described  in  the  previous  part  of  this 
communication.  In  this  channel  I have  a light,  fast-sailing  vessel, 
which  is  manned  by  6 privates  and  2 non-commissioned  officers,  besides 
the  sailor,  with  a detail  of  1 man  to  assist  him.  These  pickets  are 
relieved  every  twenty-four  hours.  The  protection  from  surprise  by 
this  means  seems  evident.  Every  vigilance  is  enforced  on  the  officers 
and  men  on  duty,  in  whom  I have  confidence.  Should  you  think  fit  to 
keep  a gunboat  in  the  bay  or  establish  a battery  on  Dog  Island  I shall 
require  one  or  more  companies,  as  the  reserve  will  be  too  small. 

Our  forces,  both  below  and  above  this  jflace,  have  acted  (according  to 
the  best  authority  here)  in  a shameful  manner,  and  I hope  to  be  able 
to  prevent  any  reflections  being  cast  on  our  regiment  by  any  injudicious 
conduct  on  the  part  of  our  squadron.  I find  the  citizens  here  are  hos- 
pitable people,  and  the  ladies  pay  every  attention  to  the  wants  of  the 
sick  in  hospital,  both  in  regard  to  diet  and  clothing.  Too  much  cannot 
be  said  for  them.  Our  soldiers  are  orderly  and  respectful  in  their 
conduct. 

Since  writing  the  above  I learn  by  a passenger  from  the  coast  that 
Kittredge  has  received  a new  light-draught  gunboat,  propelled  by  steam, 
to  be  used  in  this  bay.  We  may  possibly  hear  from  him  if  this  report 
be  true.  Major  Chinn  may  visit  you  this  week  and  give  you  full 
details. 

G.  W.  OWENS, 

Capt.,  Comdg.  Companies  E and  F,  Eebraxfs  Begt.  Tex.  Cav. 

Provost-Marshal’s  Office, 
Matagorda , Tex.,  July  12,  1862. 

Maj.  R.  L.  IJpshaw, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Houston,  Tex.: 

Sir  : Inclosed  you  will  find  a copy  of  the  communication  from  Major 
Shea,  of  Indianola,  the  commander  of  that  post,  [and]  a copy  of  my 
communication*  to  J.  D.  Hawkins,  major  of  our  battalion  of  infantry 


*■  Not  found. 


Chap.  XXI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


725 


of  militia.  I would  respectfully  call  your  attention  to 
statistics : 

Number  of  inhabitants  in  our  town,  about. 

Number  of  families  on  the  peninsula,  about 

Number  of  families  in  the  rest  of  the  county 

Number  of  negroes  in  the  county,  over 

Number  of  bales  of  cottoD  here,  about 

Number  of  bales  shipped  since  January  1, 1862 

Number  of  bushels  of  salt  now  here - 

Number  of  bushels  received  since  January  1,  1862 

Number  of  sheep  on  the  peninsula - 

Number  of  goats  on  the  peninsula 

Number  of  cattle  on  the  peninsula 


the  following 


400 

24 

2, 000 
700 
3, 850 
1,000 
16, 000 
10, 000 
100 
1,500 


The  peninsula  is  about  65  miles  long.  The  lower  Matagorda  Bay  is 
from  15  to  30  miles  wide,  affording  access  to  vessels  drawing  from  8 to 
12  feet  of  water.  Below  the  city  of  Matagorda  the  Dog  Island  Beet 
affords  a natural  obstruction,  over  which  not  more  than  1 feet  can  at 
any  time  be  obtained.  The  peninsula  is  about  a mile  in  width,  and  as 
the  bay  runs  up  to  the  mouth  of  the  Caney,  which  is  emptied ^nto  the 
bay  by  an  artificial  canal,  a force  might  be  landed  at  the  mouth  of  Caney , 
take  possession  of  the  bay  and  peninsula,  and  have  free  access  to  the 
whole  of  the  Caney  region.  I regard  it  necessary  to  place  these  facts 
before  you  for  your  consideration,  and  to  ask  instructions  and  orders 
how  to  proceed  in  this  matter.  There  is  among  some  of  our  citizens  a 
great  and  growing  aversion  to  leaving  their  homes  and  residences,  and  if 
evacuation  of  anv  one  point  is  necessary  I think  it  ought  to  be  general, 
complete,  and  thorough,  and  not  by  any  means  partial,  as  those  who 
are  left  behind  will  often,  almost  imperceptibly  to  themselves,  give  in- 
formation and  comfort  to  the  enemy.  Let  me  urge  on  you  that  1 cannot 
at  present  regard  such  harsh  means  as  necessary.  It  may  be  so  on  the 
lower  part  of  the  peninsula,  but  certainly  not  here.  The  inhabitants 
of  the  peninsula  are  left  without  a military  force,  guard,  or  piotection. 
The  inhabitants  are  too  few  and  far  between  to  guard  themselves,  and 
require  some  force  of  that  kind,  as  8,000  to  10,000  head  of  sheep  and 
1,200  or  1,500  head  of  cattle  and  100  goats  would  subsist  a military 
force  for  some  time. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

* 1 ’ R.  H.  CHINN, 

Provost-Marshal , Matagorda  City , Tex. 


[Sub-inclosure.] 


Headquarters  Camp  of  Observation, 

Indianola , Tex.,  July  10,  1862. 


R.  H.  Chinn, 

Provost- Marshal,  Matagorda  County,  Tex. : 

Sir  : I am  just  in  receipt  of  an  express  from  Lamar,  stating^  that  a 
large  schooner,  heavily  armed,  is  now  lying  in  Aransas  Bay.  She  has 
captured  one  vessel  loaded  with  cotton  and  300  bales  at  Lamar,  and 
[will]  doubtless  attempt  to  capture  others.  This  schooner  is  accom- 
panied by  a large  bark,  supposed  to  be  the  Arthur,  commanded  by 
Captain  Kittredge  (a  bold  and  daring  fellow),  who  will  probably  follow 
up  his  success  by  making  forages  in  this  bay.  You  will  therefore  pre- 
vent any  vessel  from  leaving  Matagorda  for  the  lower  bay  until  further 
orders  from  these  headquarters.  Take  such  steps  as  you  may  deem 
necessary  to  prevent  cotton  or  any  species  of  property  that  may  be 
useful  to1  the  enemy  from  falling  into  their  hands.  I would  advise  that 


726 


[Chap.  XXL 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 

you  call  on  the  State  troops  of  your  county  to  hold  themselves  in  read- 
iness to  assist  in  the  defense  of  your  city  if  any  demonstration  is  made 
by  the  enemy  in  their  launches. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  &c., 

DAX.  D.  SHEA, 

Major , Commanding  Indianola , Tex. 


Hdqrs.  Military  Sub-District  of  Houston, 

Houston , Tex.,  July  15,  1862. 

Maj.  E.  H.  Chinn, 

Provost- Marshal,  Matagorda , Tex. : 


Sir  : Your  report*  of  the  12th  instant  has  just  been  received.  It  is 
impossible  for  me  to  give  you  any  positive  instructions  for  your  gov- 
ernment, as  I cannot  anticipate  all  cases  which  may  arise.  It  is  of 
absolute  necessity  that  the  inhabitants  of  Matagorda  and  vicinity  shall 
place  all  their  property— negroes,  cotton,  corn,  and  cattle— out  of  reach 
of  the  enemy.  Such  cotton  as  cannot  be  removed  must  be  destroyed. 
If  patriotism  does  not  dictate  this  course  to  the  citizens,  force  must  be 
resorted  to  in  order  to  carry  out  the  policy  generally  adopted  by  our 
government  and  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  receiving  aid  and  comfort. 
Should  our  citizens  feel  any  repugnance  in  leaving  their  homes  and 
remain  at  the  approach  of  the  enemy,  they  have  but  two  alternatives 
left  insults  or  abject  submission.  I have  ordered  two  companies  of 
my  regiment  to  march  from  Camp  Clark  L.  Owen,  on  the  San  Bernard, 
to  Matagorda,  with  instructions  to  lend  you  assistance.  The  command- 
ing officer  is  instructed  to  concert  his  action  with  you.  Your  duty  is  a 
very  responsible  one.  I ts  discharge  requires  all  your  discretion,  energy 
and  patriotism.  Appeal  first  to  the  citizens.  Cause  them  to  understand 
that  they  owe  to  their  country  the  sacrifice  of  their  comforts,  and  that 
their  mere  presence  would  be  an  aid  and  comfort  to  the  enemy.  Should 
they  be  deaf  to  the  voice  of  patriotism  and  sound  policy  then  you  will 
have  to  make  use  of  force.  Harsh  means  should,  however,  be  resorted 
to  only  at  the  last  extremity.  1 desire  you  to  inform  me  of  every  inter- 
esting event  that  may  transpire  within  your  jurisdiction. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 


X.  B.  DEBEAY. 


Provost-Marshal’s  Office, 
Matagorda , Tex.,  July  17,  1862. 

Col.  X.  B.  Debray, 

Commanding  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston: 

Sir  : Your  dispatch  dated  the  15th  instant  has  just  been  received, 
and  I hasten  to  reply  to  it.  The  enemy’s  vessels  have  captured  sev- 
eral bay  lighters,  and  by  that  means  can  command  the  entire  bay. 
Wiiether  we  require  any  artillery  or  not  I am  perfectly  incapable  of 
informing  you,  but  we  rejoice  in  the  acquisition  we  possess  in  having 
two  companies  of  Debray’s  regiment.  Our  fellow-citizens  are  very 
patriotic,  and  we  rejoice  in  having  it  in  our  power  to  render  all  the  aid 
we  can  to  our  cause.  There  is  a determination  to  remove  all  that 


* See  p.  724. 


}hap.  XXI.  I CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


727 


would  aid  and  assist  the  enemy  m any  way  from  our  midst,  and  we  wil 
exert  ourselves  to  our  utmost  to  get  rid  of  this  cotton  or  other  means 
that  they  may  recognize.  Would  it  he  consonant  with  the  public  in- 
terest o/the  wishes  of  the  department  that  if  we  require  more  aid  and 
assistance  we  may  call  on  Lieut.  Col.  R.  R.  Brown  . 

Respectfully,  E H 

Provost-Marshal,  Matagorda  County. 


Camp  Charles  Russell,  July  19,  1862. 

General  H.  P.  Bee,  Commanding : 

General  : Your  official  communication  of  the  16th, * ordering  me  to 
repair  at  once  to  the  different  points  on  the  bay  and  take  command  ot 
the  troops  there  stationed,  was  received  to-day,  and  m obedience  to 
that  order  I shall  leave  to-morrow.  After  making  the  necessary  in- 
vestigation I shall  inform  you  at  once  of  the  true  state  of  affairs,  and 
under  vour  approval  press  with  energy  -whatever  measures  I niay 'leem 
advisahle  in  ridding  our  bays  of  the  enemy.  The  rumors  afloat  of  their 
strength  and  position  I think  exaggerated.  Their  impudence  is  great. 
Dr.  Dill  can  give  vou  my  views,  but  personal  examination  may  change 
them  Before  receiving  your  orders  I had  detailed  50  men,  fully  armed, 
to  proceed  at  once  to  the  bay  and  lie  in  ambush  for  the  enemy,  who  1 
heard  were  in  the  habit  of  landing  at  certain  points.  I carried 
out  the  design,  feeling  that  it  did  not  in  any  way  conflict  with  the  exe- 
cution of  your  orders.  I intended  to  accompany  them  myself.  I made 
a requisition  on  the  ordnance  officer  of  this  county  for  ammunition , be- 
ing without  it  ourselves,  which  was  at  once  complied  with.  Do  not  let 
Dr.  Dill  resign,  if  you  please. 

I am,  very  truly,  your  obedient  servant,  M H0BBY 

P.  S.— In  Captain  McCampbell’s  company  there  are  100  privates, 
about  half  of  whom  are  Mexicans,  and  they  are  very  anxious  to  lorm 
another  company  exclusively  of  Mexicans.  This  ^h^e  meets  t e 
hearty  wish  of  all  who  compose  the  organization.  I regard  it  almost 
as  a military  necessity,  and  feel  it  would  mutually  advance  the  interest 
of  both  parties.  Orders  have  to  be  repeated  in  Spanish  by  a non-com- 
missioned [officer],  causing  delays;  besides,  in  close  company  associa- 
tion their  modes  of  life,  &c.,  are  dissimilar.  This  matter  I respectfully 
submit  for  your  consideration  and  trust  that  it  may  receive  ^ our  at- 
tention. 

Hdqrs.  Sub-Military  District  op  Houston, 

[July  25,  1862.] 

Capt.  C.  M.  Mason, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Houston,  Tex. : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  reports  of  Captain  Owens, 
Debray’s  regiment,  and  the  provost-marshal  of  Matagorda  upon  the 

state  of  affairs  at  Matagorda  and  vicinity. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

X . J3.  DL-oIajAx, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston. 

* Not  found. 


728 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX  , AND  ARIZ. 


[Chap.  XXL 


[Inclosures.] 


T • 4-  -D  mr -I  T,  Matagorda,  Tex.,  June  [July]  20, 1862. 

Lieut.  R.  [M.]  Franklin:  7 

Sra:  I arrived  here  with  my  command  on  Friday,  18th  instant  I 
found  no  probable  danger  of  an  attack  here  at  this  place.  Captain 
Kittredge,  of  the  bark  Arthur,  blockading  vessel  at  Aransas  Pass 
has  created  some  considerable  alarm  from  here  to  that  Pass  and  has 

ineried°erXoloiea8t  £ 6X?eedin^  -“l-dent,  landing  S “splay 
mg  Federal  colors,  making  extravagant  threats,  &c.,  and  has  succeeded 

in  taking  some  cotton.  From  the  best  information  I can  obtain  he  has 
not  more  than  150  men  all  told.  He  has  not  erected  a battery  at  Lamar 
as  was  reported.  He  is  nevertheless  a troublesome  neighbor,  lauding 

h sttteXonrdeo„Pe°o? lWhere+  th6re  18  aninterest  sufficient -to  invitf 
° e °f  “ost  important  points  is  the  mouth  of  Caney 
Elver  which  once  emptied  into  the  Gulf,  but  now,  by  the  aid  of  a canal 

MAdT  hTdlRd  yar?S  m !eugtb,  empties  into  the  upper  extremity  of 
Matagorda  Bay,  where  the  peninsula  puts  out  some  20  miles  from 
this  place.  There,  I am  informed,  the  Federal  vessels  never  pass  with- 
out  stopping  and  lying  off  tor  from  one  to  six  days.  It  is  not  known 
ay  troops  have  ever  landed  at  this  place,  no  watch  ever 
having  been  kept.  *1  intend  to  send  a detachment  of  men,  under  com- 

aid11^  afboai°flmiSrt.“ne<i  offlcer’  to  be  relieved  once  per  week,  by  the 
aId  °f  i c lr°“!  th?s  P}ace>  carrying  subsistence  and  forage  froni  this 
place,  and  by  a short  ride  down  the  peninsula  to  a resident’s  house  I 
horn  c°mmunicate  with  the  detachment  in  a few  hours.  Three  miles 
WqKT^6  01  ty  ,IS  f ree  extending  entirely  across  the  bay.  I there  can 

Iir-nllV S *f  "i  F ' °k 6 * i,ost’,".1"cl'  wil1  render  a surprise  impossible.  The 
health  of  the  command  has  improved  since  leaving  Camp  Clark  L 
I,"’”1'  °ur„  'mrses  can  have  no  grass  here,  but  I can  supply  them,  I 
think,  with  full  rations  of  corn  and  fodder.  I have  also  made  arrange- 
xnents  to  have  them  stabled.  I think  we  can  probably  subsist  here  as 

hosnitnf  Thene  efr  1 *??7e  obtained  a beautiful  little  place  for  a 
““  Pft  good  water,  &c.,  without  cost.  I am  promised  the  services  of 
one  of  the  best  physicians  here,  if  I need  him.  From  present  prospects 
I expect  the  command  to  fare  as  well  as  usual.  Some  are  suffering  for 
“l6u  behave  themselves  creditably.  I shall  promptly 
report  all  that  transpires  of  interest.  All  plans  have  been  concerted 
with  Major  Chinn,  provost-marshal. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  &c.,  yours,  very  respectfully, 

r,  + . „ „ Gh  W.  OWENS, 

Captain , Commanding  Squadron  at  Camp  Matagorda , Texas . 

Provost-Marshal’s  Office, 

Matagorda , Tex.,  July  22,  1862. 

Capt.  Robert  M.  Franklin, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 


Sir:  I 


regret  much  that  my  information  is  so 


meager,  and  that  I 


ca  not  detail  it  with  any  degree  of  certainty.  All  the  passes  between 
Aransas  Bay  and  Corpus  Christi  Bay  have  been  temporarily  blocked  up. 
lhe  enemy  still  have  possession  of  Aransas  Bay,  and  have  within  the 
past  week  removed  some  cotton  from  Lamar,  Refugio  [Aransas]  County, 
to  Mercer’s  Landing,  Aransas  Town,  Saint  Joseph’s  Island,  where  it 
is  under  the  guns  of  the  vessel  blockading  that  Pass.  Captain  Owens’ 
command  is  here  m good  health  and  high  spirits.  They  have  been 


Uhap.  XXI.] 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


729 


sailed  on  to  perform  some  police  duty — the  removal  of  a suspected 
person  to  Wharton  County.  There  are  no  blockading  vessels  at  pres- 
ent at  Pass  Cavallo,  and  we  learn  here  that  a portion  of  the  military 
force  stationed  there  has  been  removed  to  some  point  on  Aransas  Bay. 

Respectfully,  yours,  &c,  R H 0HINN< 

Provost-Marslial  Matagorda  County , Texas. 


Engineer  Department, 

Harrisburg , July  30,  1862. 

Col.  X.  B.  Debray, 

Commanding  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston , Tex. : 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  your  Special  Orders,  Xo.  95,  I have  exam- 
ined the  defensive  works  of  Sabine  Pass  and  vicinity,  and  have  the 
honor  to  report  the  following:  About  2 miles  south  of  the  town  of  Sa- 
bine, and  on  same  side  of  the  river,  there  is  an  earthwork  thrown  up  not 
sufficient  to  protect  the  four  guns  that  are  in  it.  The  shape  and  figure 
is  also  not  according  to  the  proper  defense,  the  ground  itself  about  2 
feet  too  low,  and  therefore  subject  to  occasional  overflow.  The  loca- 
tion itself  is  a good  one,  and  has  command  over  vessels  that  can  cross 
the  bar,  which  has  about  an  average  depth  of  6J  to  7 feet,  with  §oft, 
muddy  bottom.  The  armament  consists  of  four  guns,  of  which  two  are 
32-pounders  and  two  18-pounders.  All  four  are  [on]  old  and  unwieldy 
truck  carriages.  The  powder  magazine  is  not  bomb-proof,  and  also  sub- 
ject to  overflows.  The  whole  work  is  in  a dilapidated  condition. 
There  is  ammunition  enough  for  all  four  guns,  but  they  have  no  fuses 
for  shells,  nor  port-fires,  neither  gunners’  level,  tangent  scales,  pass- 
boxes,  friction-tubes,  lanyards,  &c.  About  35  miles  up  the  river  there 
are  two  24-pounders  on  barbette  carriages  mounted  on  a shell  bank. 
They  are  there  of  no  use  whatever,  as  there  is  a b&r  with  but  3 feet  of 
water  at  the  mouth  of  Sabine  Biver  into  Sabine  Lake.  Xo  vessels  of 
any  amount  can  therefore  go  up  to  these  guns.  They  can  therefore 
be  employed  somewhere  else.  The  pass  at  Sabine  is  certainly  a very 
important  point,  and  in  fact  the  only  port  from  where  we  receive  our 
powder  and  other  articles.  It  is  the  nearest  point  to  the  West  In- 
dies and  easy  of  access.  I would  therefore  recommend  the  erection  of 
a strong  open  battery  in  place  of  the  old  one,  for  five  guns  (three  of  32 
and  two  of  24-pounders),  all  on  barbette  carriages.  Then  take  those 
two  18-pounders  and  place  them  half  way  between  the  battery  and 
the  town,  so  that  they  may  flank  the  lower  works. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

J. 1 KELLEBSBEBG, 
Major , Engineer  in  Charge. 


Headquarters  Department  of  Texas, 

San  Antonio , Tex.y  August  8,  1862. 

General  H.  H.  Sibley, 

Provisional  Army , C.  $.,  San  Antonio , Tex. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  your  favor  of  the  1st 
instant  requesting  information  in  regard  to  the  troops,  military  re- 
sources, &c.,  of  this  department.  Please  find  inclosed  a statement  of 


730  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXL 

the-  number  of  organized  regiments,  the  arm  they  belong  to,  stations, 
and  destination.  The  regiments  raised  by  my  authority  in  the  State 
are  mostly  armed.  The  regiments  authorized  directly  from  the  War 
Department  by  orders  to  individuals  and  not  passing  through  the  head- 
quarters  of  this  department  are,  1 fear,  very  deficient  in  arms.  Every 
effort  has  been  made  to  procure  arms  and  munitions  both  here  and  from 
abroad,  but  with  little  or  no  success.  Contracts  have  been  made  with 
responsible  parties,  with  permission  given  to  ship  cotton  for  the  pur- 
pose, but  with  meager  results.  It  has  been  found  impossible  to  procure 
arms  in  Mexico  or  at  any  of  the  Gulf  ports.  I am  now  making  an  effort 
to  try  importation  from  Europe  by  furnishing  cotton.  Arms  of  every 
description  are  purchased  by  the  ordnance  department  as  they  are 
picked  up  here  and  there  throughout  the  State.  Mr.  J.  R.  Jefferson, 
of  Seguin,  is  Government  agent  to  purchase  arms,  and  is  assisted  by 
agents  at  different  stations.  The  State  of  Texas  is  making  efforts  to 
procure  arms  by  means  of  cotton,  and  has  an  agent  already  in  Europe. 
Please  also  find  inclosed  a report  of  arms,  ordnance,  &c.,  at  the  San 
Antonio  Arsenal.* 

In  regard  to  the  quartermaster’s  and  commissary  departments,  the 
estimates  were  of  course  based  upon  the  number  of  troops  in  the  de- 
partment. Arrangements,  however,  it  is  supposed,  can  be  made  to 
provide  for  your  brigade  by  the  period  of  its  reorganization.  In  the 
matter  of  clothing  the  quartermaster’s  department  is  only  deficient 
simply  owing  to  the  difficulty  and  impossibility  of  procuring  it.  There 
is  an  existing  contract  with  the  State  penitentiary  by  which  a limited 
monthly  supply  is  obtained.  In  this  respect  I may  mention  that  there 
are  now  in  this  department,  destined  for  the  army  east  of  the  Missis- 
sippi, some  500  bales  (400  yards  each)  of  gray  cloth,  in  care  of  Captain 
Sharkey,  quartermaster,  C.  S.  Army.  In  view  of  the  great  difficulty  in 
transportation  across  the  Mississippi,  I have  directed  Captain  Sharkey 
to  store  the  cloth  at  Houston  and  to  proceed  to  Richmond  for  further 
orders  in  regard  thereto.  Should  it  be  found  impossible  to  place  the 
cloth  across  the  river,  it  might  be  advisable  to  appropriate  a portion  of 
it  to  the  use  of  the  troops  on  this  side. 

Please  find  accompanying  two  letters  of  instruction*  from  General 
Lee,  commanding  the  army. 

In  conclusion,  general,  I beg  leave  to  say  that  any  assistance  in  my 
power  to  render,  as  commander  of  this  department,  "to  your  command 
will  be  cheerfully  extended. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  O.  HEBERT, 

Brigadier -General,  Provisional  Army. 

[Inclosure.] 

Mounted  troops. — Colonel  Ford,  Second  Regiment  Texas  Mounted 
Rifles,  nine  companies,  furloughed  September ; Colonel  Parsons’  regi- 
ment, Arkansas;  Colonel  Debray’s  regiment,  San  Bernard  River;  Colo- 
nel Woods’  regiment,  San  Marcos;  Colonels  Randal’s,  Carter’s,  Wilkes’, 
Gillespie’s,  Burnett’s,  andBurford’s  regiments  en  route  to  Little  Rock; 
Colonel  Gurley’s  regiment,  Partisan,  Waco. 

Raised  under  authority  of  General  Hindman. — Major  Yager’s  battalion, 
Rio  Grande;  Major  Brown’s  battalion,  near  Houston;  Major  Waller’s 
battalion,  Yew  Iberia;  Major  Taylor’s  battalion,  Port  Mason;  Captain 


*Not  found. 


AP.  XXI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


731 


iwles’  company,  unattached,  Galveston;  Captains  Andrews’  and  Bu- 
nt’s companies,  unattached,  Virginia  Point;  Captain  Daly  s company, 
lattached,  Galveston;  Captain  Martin’s  company,  Partisans,  en  route 
New  Iberia;  Captain  Rountree’s  company,  Partisans,  ban  Antonio; 
rptain  Duff’s  company,  Partisans,  Fredericksburg;  Captains  R.  Den- 
udes’, S.  Benavides’,  and  Rhodes’  companies,  unattached,  Rio  Grande; 
iptaiu  Ware’s  company,  unattached,  Corpus  Chnsti;  Captain  Brack- 
iridge’s  company,  unattached,  Indianola,  and  Captain  Navarro  s com- 
my,  unattached,  special  service.  . 

Artillery. — Colonel  Cook’s  regiment,  Galveston  and  mam-land;  Major 
hea’s  two  companies,  Indianola;  Captain  Creuzbar’s  company,  Ri o 
rande;  Captain  Neal’s  company,  Aransas;  Captain  Wilsons  light 
ittery,  Houston;  Captain  Haldeman’s  light  battery,  en  route  to  Little 
ockf  Captains  WillkeNand  Maclin’s  light  batteries,  Rio  Grande,  and 
aptain  Hill’s  Partisans,  organizing.  . 

Infantry.— Colonel  Luckett’s  Third  Regiment,  seven  companies,  Rio 
rande;  Colonel  Garland’s  Sixth  Regiment,  en  route  to  Little  Rock; 
olonel  Nelson’s  regiment,  Arkansas;  Colonels  Flournoy’s,  Youngs, 
paight’s,  Roberts’,  Hubbard’s,  Clark’s,  Waterhouse’s,  Ochiltree’s,  and 
lien’s  regiments  ordered  to  Little  Rock;  Colonel  Elmore  s regiment 
fdered  to  Hempstead;  Major  Griffin’s  battalion,  Houston;  Major 
Lobby’s  battalion,  four  companies,  Aransas;  Captain  Irelands  com- 
any,  unattached,  Corpus  Christi;  Captains  Newton’s,  Toole’s,  Pena- 
)za’s,  and  Boise’s  companies,  unattached,  San  Antonio. 

Mixed  commands. — Colonel  Waul’s  Legion,  en  route  to  Little  Rock; 
lieutenant-Colonel  Bates’  battalion,  Velasco,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel 
paight’s  battalion,  Sabine  Pass.  Q flfiBEET? 

Brigadier- General,  Provisional  Army.] 


eneral  Orders, 


) Hdqrs.  Trans-Miss.  Department, 

]Sf0>  5.  J Little  Bock,  Ark.,  August  20,  1862. 

The  Trans-Mississippi  Department  is  divided  into  districts,  as  follows  : 
1st  The  District  of  Texas,  composed  of  the  State  of  Texas  and  the 
erritory  of  Arizona,  Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert  commanding. 

2d  The  District  of  Louisiana,  composed  of  all  the  State  of  Louisiana 
est* of  Mississippi  River,  Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor  commanding. 

3d.  The  District  of  Arkansas,  composed  of  the  States  of  Arkansas 
nd  Missouri  and  the  Indian  country  west  thereof,  Maj.  Gen.  T.  C. 
lindman  commanding. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Holmes : ^ 

R.  C.  NRvvlOJN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


General  Orders,*  Headquarters  District  of  Texas, 

i.  j San  Antonio,  Tex.,  September  12,  186^. 

In  virtue  of  the  above  order  I assume  command  of  the  First  District 

)f  Texas'  P.  O.  HUBERT, 

Brigadier- General , Provisional  Army  Confederate  States. 


732 


[Chap.  XX; 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 

Headquarters  Department  of  Texas, 

/San  Antonio , Tex.,  August  26,  1862. 
Chief  of  Staff  of  Major-General  Holmes, 

Commanding  Trans-Mississippi  District , Little  Bock,  ArJc,  : 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  maioi 
general  commanding,  as  follows : 

The  evacuation  of  New  Mexico  and  Arizona  by  General  Siblev’ 
command  leaves  the  northwestern  frontier  of  this  State  and  its  line  c 
posts  exposed.  Colonel  Carleton  has  joined  General  Canby,  with  ■ 
torce  from  California,  consisting  of  one  regiment  of  infantry,  a battalioi 
of  cavalry,  and  a battery  of  light  artillery,  and  by  intercepted  dispatche 
we  are  informed  intended  to  occupy  Fort  Bliss.  Under  the  circum 
stances  it  will  be  necessary  to  evacuate  the  line  of  posts  down  to  For 
Clark.  Whether  an  invasion  from  that  direction  is  contemplated  ff 
the  enemy  further  movements  will  develop.  Some  time  since  Cap  tail 
Eagle,  commanding  the  frigate  Santee,  off  Galveston,  demanded,  unde 
a threat  of  bombardment  and  the  speedy  arrival  of  land  and  naval  forces 
the  unconditional  surrender  of  the  city  of  Galveston,  batteries,  &c.  Thi  j 
was  refused.  Since  then  nothing  has  been  done  by  the  enemy,  and  mat 
ters  remain  as  they  were.  A few  days  since  the  blockading  force  a 
Corpus  Chnsti,  after  removing  the  obstructions  in  the  channel,  enterec 
the  bay,  bombarded  the  town,  landed  a small  force,  which  was  repulsed 
and  then  retired  to  their  former  anchorage.  Another  attack  is  ex 
pected  by  G eneral  Bee,  whom  I dispatched  to  that  point.  The  enemy’} 
force  is  too  small  to  justify  an  attempt  to  penetrate  into  the  interior! 
The  landing  of  lumber  on  Saint  Joseph’s  Island  may,  however,  indicate 
future  occupation. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  O.  HUBERT, 

Brigadier -General,  Provisional  Army. 


Corpus  Christi,  Tex.,  August  28,  1862. 

Captain  Mason: 

Dear  Sir  : Nothing  of  interest  has  occurred  since  my  letter  by  the 
express  from  Ringgold.  I have  no  news  as  yet  of  the  schooner,  but 
think  she  is  a war  vessel,  as  she  cruised  yesterday  around  the  Aransas 
Bay  as  if  learning  the  way.  Upon  her  depends  my  stay  here,  as  with- 
out an  increase  of  force  Captain  Kittredge  will  not  renew  the  attack  j 
but  as  it  is  the  post  of  danger  as  well  as  honor,  I shall  not  leave  with, 
out  a word  from  the  general  that  he  needs  me  at  San  Antonio.  I shall 
await  an  answer  to  this  before  I leave.  Say  to  the  general  that  I will 
be  glad  to  get  the  two  Nichols  guns  sent  to  me.  The  Adjutant-General 
of  the  State  gave  me  an  order  for  them,  or  promised  to  do  so,  and  the 
guns  were  supposed  to  be  at  Alleyton.  Wherever  they  are  they  will 
be  very  serviceable  here  and  of  no  use  where  they  are,  and  I hope  he 
will  send  an  officer  or  agent  to  bring  them  here.  You  know  what  theirj 
weight  is  and  how  many  horses  it  will  take. 

Yours,  truly, 


H.  P.  BEE. 


HAP.  XXI.l 


CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


733 


Headquarters  Department  of  Texas, 

San  Antonio , Tex .,  August  28,  1862. 

lis  Excellency  F.  B.  Lubbock, 

Governor  of  State  of  Texas , Austin , Tex.  : 

My  Dear  Sir  : Although  I had  made  my  arrangements  to  that  effect, 
found  it  impossible  to  leave  in  time  to  meet  you  in  Marshall  on  the 
:4th  ultimo.  Matters  not  anticipated  accumulated  at  these  headquar- 
ers  so  as  to  preclude  my  leaving  at  that  time : The  enemy’s  demon- 
tration  at  Corpus  Christi,  since  realized  by  actual  landing  and  bom- 
jardment ; the  reports  of  disloyalty  in  certain  counties,  since  proved 
veil  founded  by  armed  resistance  to  our  troops ; the  evacuation  of  New 
ffexico  and  Arizona  by  General  Sibley,  leaving  our  Northwest  posts 
exposed,  and  the  arrival  of  his  command,  with  other  matters,  made  my 
oresence  here  absolutely  necessary  about  the  time  that  I should  have 
oeen  absent.  Furthermore,  I had  some  faint  fears  that  the  result  of 
;he  conference  might  have  involved  the  taking  of  more  troops  from 
;his  State  (a  military  exodus),  which  I think  it  behooves  us  to  at  least 
out  a stop  to  if  possible,  unless,  in  the  language  of  the  Secretary  of 
W ar  Mr.  Benjamin,  aNo  invasion  of  Texas  is  deemed  probable ; but  it 
t occurs,  its  effect  must  be  hazarded.”  The  landing  of  lumber  on  Saint 
Joseph’s  Island  is  either  for  barracks  for  troops  or  for  a naval  hospital 
for  the  blockading  squadron.  On  the  latter  presumption,  it  means  but 
little;  on  the  former,  much.  Saint  Mary’s— only  113  mdes  from  San 
Antonio— and  Corpus  Christi  are  no  doubt  the  landing  points  for  an 
invasion  by  sea  to  reach  and  support  the  disaffected  portions  ot  the 
State.  The  evacuation  of  New  Mexico  and  Arizona  by  General  Sibley’s 
command  leaves  the  way  free  from  that  direction.  Colonel  Carleton, 
with  his  California  troops,  or  a portion  of  them,  has  no  doubt  ere  this 
occupied  Fort  Bliss;  an  intercepted  dispatch  of  his  showing  this  to  be 
his  intention.  One  line  of  forts  will  have  to  be  abandoned  to  Fort 
Clark.  To  invade  in  that  direction  the  enemy  have  a desert,  without 
water*  to  cross,  and  must  get  their  provisions  from  Missouri.  When, 
nearly  a year  since,  I assumed  command  of  this  department  I immedi- 
ately set  to  work  to  place  it  in  a defensive  position.  This,  I think,  I 
was  in  a fair  way  of  accomplishing  when  my  best  troops  were,  ordered 
away.  Our  intention  at  the  time  was  no  doubt  a military  justification 
of  the  orders  issued,  yet  the  effect  has  been  to  paralyze  my  efforts  and 
strip  me  of  means  of  defense.  Tired  of  negotiating  here  and  filling  the 
position  of  general  recruiting  officer  for  other  commands  and  depart- 
ments, I have  applied  to  Major-General  Holmes,  commanding  Trans- 
Mississippi  District,  to  be  assigned  in  the  coming  campaign  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  Texas  regiments  raised  by  me,  now  in  Arkansas,  and 
whose  commanding  officers  desire  to  be  under  me,  from  written  and 
verbal  communications.  In  the  mean  time  I will  stand  at  my  post  and 
do  all  I can  to  defend  this  department.  Should  the  enemy  land  or 
invade  from  any  quarter  he  shall  be  fought  in  some  way  and  with 
success  if  we  can  only  get  him  into  the  interior.  The  troops  I now  have 
are  disposed  to  the  best  advantage  for  the  general  protection  of  the 
) coast  and  frontier,  and,  owing  to  the  extent  of  both,  are  necessarily 
somewhat  scattered.  Our  best  troops  having  gone,  and  the  conscript 
law  leaving  the  alternative  to  persons  under  and  above  certain  ages,  I 
am  calling  out  partisan  rangers  of  the  class  above  thirty-five  years  of 
age  to  serve  in  the  State.  To  troops  of  that  kind  no  doubt  the  military 
board  would  not  object  to  extend  assistance  when  necessary  and  prac- 
ticable in  the  way  of  arms.  The  infantry  regiments  stationed  near 


734 


[Chap.  XXI. 


OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ. 

Austin  I thought  advisable  to  order  east,  for  reasons  which  Your  Ex 
cellency  no  doubt  appreciates,  as  the  order  was  principally  the  result 
of  a communication  from  Your  Excellency  to  General  Bee.  Should: 
Your  Excellency  think  it  advisable,  I can  order  a mounted  battalion; 
trom  the  east  to  Austin.  Colonel  Ford  appears  to  think  such  a force 
very  necessary.  Please  advise  me  in  regard  to  this.  The  battalion  is 
a good  one,  composed  of  brave,  true,  arid  loyal  men,  and  can  march  at 
once. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  O.  HEBERT, 

Brigadier- General,  Provisional  Army . 


Richmond,  Va.,  September  2,  1862. 
Brig.  Gen.  H.  E.  McCulloch, 

Commanding , Tyler , Tex.: 

General:  I am  instructed  by  the  Secretary  of  War  to  inform  you 
m reply  to  your  communication  of  July  28,  that  the  War  Depart- 
ment has  ordered  18,000  stand  of  arms,  20  pieces  of  artillery,  and  a 
supply  of  ammunition  to  the  Trans-Mississippi  Department,-  that 
10,000  stand,  with  the  artillery  and  ammunition,  must  be  now  cross- 
ing the  Mississippi;  that  $18,000,000  have  been  sent  to  Texas  and 
$14,000,000  to  Arkansas,  and  that  a list  of  the  persons  who  receive 
the  money  will  be  sent  to  General  Holmes,  in  order  that  it  may  be 
accounted  for. 

1 am,  general,  very  respectfully,  &c., 

J.  S.  WHITING, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Velasco,  Tex.,  September' 4,  1862. 
Capt.  C.  M.  Mason,  ’ ’ 

A.  A.  A.  G.,  Trans- Miss.  Dist .,  South  of  Bed  River , 

San  Antonio , Tex. : 

Sir:  1 desire  again  to  call  the  attention  of  the  commanding  general 
to  the  fact  that  this  post  is  unprovided  with  any  gun  larger  than  an 
18-pounder  smooth-bore.  I will  repeat  that  in  mv  opinion  there  is 
not  a more  important  point  upon  the  Gulf  to  be  "defended,  a large 
negro  population  of  many  thousands  being  immediately  in  the  rear  of 
my  position  in  this  and  adjoining  counties.  Three  engagements  had 
with  the  enemy  at  this  point  only  tend  to  confirm  my  opinion  that  any 
demonstration  on  this  portion  of  the  coast  should  be  resisted  at  its 
inception.  This  cannot  be  done  with  success  without  I am  furnished 
with  a piece  or  pieces  of  heavy  ordnance.  I have  so  often  urged  this 
view  of  matters  that  I hesitate  to  do  so  now  for  fear  of  an  intrusion, 
and  would  say  no  more  upon  the  subject;  but  knowing  as  well  as  I do 
the  absolute  want  of  a better  kind  of  ordnance  than  I possess,  with 
two  more  guns  for  my  light  artillery  and  at  least  100  more  muskets, 
with  bayonets,  rifles,  or  shot-guns,  to  complete  the  arming  of  my  force, 
I am  prompted  to  forward  this  communication,  hoping  that  it  may  be 
more  successful  than  former  ones.  This  I urge,  to  enable  me,  if  pos- 
sible, while  I have  the  honor  to  command  at  this  place,  to  keep  the 
Yankees  and  negroes  from  uniting  in  the  midst  of  a population  which 


Chap.  XXI.]  CORRESPONDENCE,  ETC. CONFEDERATE. 


735 


has  paid  every  dollar  of  its  war  tax,  and  in  which  almost  every  family 
has  sent  some  member  to  the  battle-fields  of  Virginia,  Tennessee,  and 
Louisiana.  The  recent  bombardment  at  Corpus  Christi  proves  a deter- 
mination on  the  part  of  the  enemy  to  invade  Texas.  If  injury  and 
annoyance  to  us  be  their  object,  and  it  can  be  accomplished  by  a bom- 
bardment of  Corpus  Christi,  surrounded  as  it  is  by  a desert,  how  much 
more  terrible  would  the  destruction  be  here,  where  the  fairest  por- 
tion of  the  State  lies  open  and  inviting  attack.  Again  permit  me  to 
call  the  attention  of  the  general  commanding  to  our  wants  upon  the 
coast  here.  Let  him  give  me  an  order  for  a long-range  gun  or  more 
of  those  lying  in  the  streets  of  Houston,  and,  if  to  be  spared,  two 
6-pounders  and  100  muskets  with  bayonets,  and  1 indulge  the  boast 
that  they  will  be  placed  in  hands  that  will  use  them  well. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BATES, 
Colonel , Commanding . 


[Indorsements.  ] 

Headquarters,  Velasco , Tex.,  October  5,  1862. 

Lieut,  B.  M.  Franklin, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Houston,  Tex. : 

This  communication  was  forwarded  direct  to  San  Antonio,  and  re- 
turned, as  you  see  it,  without  comment.  I respectfully  submit  it  for 
consideration  and  hope  acquiescence  of  the  proper  department. 
Respectfully,  j.  BATE8, 

Colonel  Bates ’ Regiment. 

— , 1862. 


Bespectfully  referred  to  the  general  commanding.  I have  here  no 
ordnance  to  send  to  Colonel  Bates. 

a . 13 lvA  jl  ^ 

Colonel , Commanding  Sub-Military  District  of  Houston,  Tex. 


Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

Richmond,  Va.,  September  12,  1862. 

Brig.  Gen.  P.  O.  Hebert,  Commanding,  &c.: 

General:  Your  proclamation  extending  martial  law  over  the  State 
of  Texas  has  been  laid  before  the  President,  and  is  disapproved  by  him 
as  an  unwarrantable  assumption  of  authority  and  as  containing  abuses 
against  even  a proper  administration  of  martial  law.  I am  directed 
by  the  Secretary  of  War  to  inclose  herewith  a copy  of  General  Orders, 
Bo.  66,  current  series,  by  which  your  proclamation  is  annulled. 

Very  respectfully',  &c.,  g COOPKR, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector- General. 


[Inclosure.] 


General  Orders,  1 Adjt.  and  Insp.  General’s  Office, 

No.  66.  1 Richmond , September  12,  1862. 

I.  Agreeably  to  paragraph  1,  of  General  Orders,  Bo.  56,  current  series, 
declaring  that  “ military  commanders  have  no  authority  to  suspend  the 


* 


736  OPERATIONS  IN  TEX.,  N.  MEX.,  AND  ARIZ.  [Chap.  XXL 


writ  of  habeas  corpus/7  all  proclamations  of  martial  law  by  general 
officers  and  others  assuming  a power  vested  only  in  the  President  are 
hereby  annulled. 

***#### 

By  order : 


S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


INDEX 


Brigades,  Bivisions,  Corps,  Armies,  and  improvised  organizations  are  “ Mentioned ” under  name  of 
commanding  officer;  State  and  other  organizations  under  their  official  designation. 


Page. 

A.  B.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Abandoned  Lands* Refugees,  etc.  (See  Refugees,  etc.) 

Adair,  Isaac.  Mentioned 515,543 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A. 

Correspondence  witli 

Burnside, Ambrose  E... 364,368,369,371 

Canby,  Edward  R.  S 632, 633, 658, 669-671, 673, 676, 682, 686, 688, 689, 695 

Donaldson,  James  L - 635, 636, 6/  0 

McClellan,  George  B 370 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 29 

Paul, Gabriel  R. 645,648,652. 

Roberts,  Benjamin  666 

Wright,  G 627,628,668,683 

Orders,  General,  series  1862  : No.  29,  564. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862 : No.  181,  688. 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Anderson,  Joseph  R 431,  451 

Davis,  Samuel  Boyer 715 

French,  S.  G 480 

Gatlin,  R.  C 420, 421, 433, 434, 436, 440, 442, 443 

Hubert,  Paul  O 735 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H 475 

Huger,  Benjamin 121, 431, 434, 469 

Lee,  Robert  E : 302, 469 

McCulloch,  H.  E 734 

Magruder,  J.  Bankhead 33*38, 44, 49-51, 57—59, 63—65 

Randolph,  George  W 435 

Steele,  William 707, 721 

Subsistence  Department,  C.  S.  A 699 

War  Department,  C.  S 165, 437 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  23,706;  No.  39,713;  No.  66,  735. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1861:  No.  254,123.  Series  1862:  No.  8,131;  No.  13, 

33;  No.  17,139,421;  No.  33,699;  No.  35,430;  No.  40,161;  No.  45,44;  No. 

60, 445 ; No.  61, 447  ; No.  67, 450 ; No.  68, 452 ; No.  101, 709 ; No.  127, 473 ; 

No.  165, 476. 

Admiral,  Steamer.  Mentioned 94 

Afton,  Bark.  Mentioned - 482,483 

Aitchison,  J.  S.  Mentioned - 214 

Alabama  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments : 3d,  59,  431  ; 4th,  379 ; 8th,  37 ; 10th,  379 ; 13th, 

37;  14th,  379. 

47  R It — VOL  IX 


(737) 


738 


INDEX. 


Albany,  Steamer.  Mentioned 227 

Albatross,  Steamer.  Mentioned 422 

Albuquerque,  N.  Mex. 

Evacuation  of,  by  U.  S.  forces,  Marcli  2-4,  1862.  Reports  of 

Donaldson,  James  L ’ _ 52? 

Enos,  Herbert  M ^7 

Skirmish  at,  April  8, 1862.  Report  of  Edward  R.  S.  Canby _• 549 

Alert,  Tug-boat.  Mentioned 236 

Alexander,  George  C.  Mentioned 

Alexander,  Joseph  H.  Mentioned ' 236 

Alexander,  J.  W.  Mentioned 8 13 

Alexander,  William  B.  Mentioned 91  214 

Alexander,  W.  L.  Mentioned 515-517  543 

Alice  Price,  Steamer.  Mentioned * 201  292 

Allen,  George  D.  Mentioned 222  230 

Allen,  John  A.  Mentioned 278  280  382 

Allen,  Joseph  W.  Mentioned. 357 

Allis,  James  A.  Mentioned 339  349  344 

Allison,  Steamer.  Mentioned 335 

Allison,  Richard  M.  Mentioned 301 

Allston,  Benjamin.  Mentioned 173  367 

Ammon,  John  H.  Mentioned 283  285  287 

Amcry,  Thomas  J.  C. 

Mentioned 339  337 

Report  of  skirmishes  near  Trenton  Bridge,  Young’s  Cross-Roads,  and  Pol- 

locksville,  N.  C.,  May  15-16,  1862  335 

Anderson,  A.  L.  Mentioned 492  499 

Anderson,  Archer.  Mentioned 452 

Anderson,  Frank.  P. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  A.  Wise 151 

Mentioned 115-117, 137, 151, 156, 166, 170-172, 177, 184 

Report  of  battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.,  February  8,  1862 179 

Anderson  J ohn  F 79  gg  214 

Anderson,  Joseph  R. 

Assignments  to  command . 445 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 431,451 

Lee,  Robert  E 423 

Ward,  Edward  W 422 

War  Department,  C.  S _■ 421,444 

Mentioned 140, 424,  441,  443,  445,  447,  449-451, 453, 454, 459, 460, 462, 463 

Anderson,  R.  H. 

Assignments  to  command 43O 

Mentioned 439 

Anderson,  S.  S.  Mentioned 193 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Benjamin  Huger.) 

Andrew,  John  A.  Mentioned 384 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Massachusetts , Governor  of.) 

Andrews,  W.  G.  Mentioned 499 

Andrews,  W.  S. 

Mentioned 76  80 

Report  of  siege  of  Fort  Macon,  N.  C.,  March  23-April  26,  1862 291 

Andrews,  W.  S.  G. 

Correspondence  with  Theopliilus  H.  Holmes 466 

Mentioned 465,467 


INDEX. 


739 


Page. 

Ann  E.  Thompson,  Ship.  Mentioned 

Anthony,  Scott  J.  Mentioned - 538 

Apache  Canon,  N.  Mex.  Skirmishes  at. 

March  26,  1862.  Reports  of 

Chivington,  John  '^39 

Walker,  Charles  J 

July  15,  1862.  (See  Summary  of  Principal  Events,  p.  481.) 

Appleman,  Hiram.  Mentioned 283 

Aragon,  Francisco.  Mentioned - 528)  529 

Aransas  Bay,  Tex. 

Capture  of  Union  launches  in,  April  22,  1862.  Report  of  William  0.  Yager.  603 
Engagement  in,  February  22,  1862.  Reports  of 

^McCulloch,  H.  

Neal,  Benjamin  F '■*28 

Operations  in,  July  7-17,  1862.  Reports  of 

Livenskiold,  Charles 

Neal,  Benjamin  613 

Aransas  Pass,  Tex.  Operations  at,  February  11-13, 1862.  Reports  of 

Forshey,  C.  G - 482 

Shea,  Daniel  483 

Archer,  F.  H.  Mentioned  ..r — 69,70 

Archer,  Samuel.  Mentioned 492’ 584 

Archuleeta,  Jesus.  Mentioned 

Archuleeta,  Pastor.  Mentioned 504 

Arizona.  (For  operations  in,  etc.,  see  New  Mexico.) 

Arizona,  District  of.  (Union.) 

Limits  defined  . v 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:*  No.  17,  580  5 No.  20,  581. 

West,  Joseph  R.,  assigned  to  command 581 

Arizona,  District  of  Western.  (See  Western  Arizona,  District  of— Union.) 

Arkansas,  Military  departments  embracing 713,731 

Arkansas  Troops.  (Confederate.) 

Infantry — Regiments  : 3d,  451, 460. 

Arkansas,  District  of.  (Confederate.) 

Constituted  and  limits  defined 731 

Hindman,  T.  C.,  assigned  to  command 731 

Armigo,  Manuel.  Mentioned 489,511 

Armigo,  Rafael.  Mentioned - 511 

Armistead,  L.  A.  Mentioned 439 

Army  Headquarters. 

Correspondence  with 

Boston  Harbor,  Commanding  Officer  of 19 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E - 352, 354, 356, 358, 360,  362, 364 

Dahlgren,  John  A ^1 

Delaware,  Fort,  Commanding  Officer  of 19 

Foster,  John  G 416,417 

Fox,  G.  V 23 

McDowell,  Irvin 30 

Mifflin,  Fort,  Commanding  Officer  of 19 

Navy  Department,  U.  S - 353 

Newport,  R.  i,  Commanding  Officer  of 19 

New  York  Harbor,  Commanding  Officer  of 19 

Portland,  Me. , Commanding  Officer  of 19 

*For  prior  orders,  see  California  Column. 


740 


INDEX 


Page. 


Army  Headquarters— Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Trumbull,  Fort,  Commanding  Officer  of , 19 

War  Department,  U.  S (329 

Wool,  John  E 15,23,  36 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  2,  353;  No.  14,  631. 

Arnold,  E.  Mentioned • 493.  547 

Arrican,  Ship.  Mentioned 351 

Arrow,  Steamer.  Mentioned 154 

Arthur,  Bark.  Mentioned 702-704,725,728 

Ashcraft,  John  B.  Mentioned 265 

Ashe,  W.  S. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 478 

Mentioned .. 457,  4(35 

Aspinwall,  Charles  A.  Mentioned 004 

Avery,  Clark  M.  Mentioned 204, 213, 243-246, 249, 259-261 

Avery,  William  B.  Mentioned 308,309,340-342 

Avery,  William  W. 

Correspondence  with  Jefferson  Davis 435 

Mentioned ; 434 ? 437 

Babb,  L.  H.  Mentioned 261 

Baca,  Lieutenant-Colonel.  Mentioned 605-607 

Baca,  Pe^dro.  Mentioned 005 

Bacon,  W.  Mentioned 457 

Bagley,  Thomas  C.  Mentioned... isi 

Bagwell,  George  H.  Mentioned 121, 135, 139 

Bailey,  Charles.  Mentioned 181 

Bally,  Elisha  I. 

Correspondence  with  Basil  Norris 646 

Mentioned 504, 582,  646, 664 

Bain,  Mr.  Mentioned 13 

Baker,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 80,100 

Baker,  John.  Mentioned 538,535,538 

Baker,  Joseph.  Mentioned 253,301 

Baker,  R.  B.  Mentioned * 261 

Baldwin,  Ephraim  C.  Mentioned 584,586,591 

Ball,  George  S.  Mentioned 322 

Ballowe,  S.  L.  S. 

Mentioned 546-548 

Beport  of  affair  at  San  Luis  Pass,  Tex.,  April  5-6,  1862  54S 

Baltic,  Steamer.  Mentioned 25,57 

Banks,  Sidney.  Mentioned 530,532 

Barbour,  William  M. 

Mentioned 244, 263, 264 

Beport  of  battle  of  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  14,  1862  265 

Barden,  B.  T.  Mentioned  . *. 257 

Bareila,  Manuel.  Mentioned 585 

Barker,  Charles.  Mentioned 223,224,319,322 

Barnard,  J.  G.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  George  B.  McClellan.) 

Barnard,  J.  M.  Mentioned 343 

Barney,  Commodore,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 269 

Barney,  J.  N.  Mentioned 8, 12 

Barr,  Samuel  L.  Mentioned 1.  538 

Barringer,  W.  D.  Mentioned 253 

Barrow,  Francis.  Mentioned 182 


INDEX. 


741 


Pago. 

Bartholomew,  Walter  G.  Mentioned 219 

Bartlett,  George  W.  Mentioned 22° 

Bartlett,  John  R.  Mentioned 384 

Bartlett,  Thomas  T.  Mentioned 578 

Bascom,  George  N.  Mentioned - - 487 > 634 

Bass,  D.  M.  Mentioned 506,519,520 

Batchelder,  James  C.  Mentioned 210 

Batchelder’s  Creek,  N.  C.  Skirmish  near,  April  29,  1862.  Report  of  Andrew 

El  well - 333 

Bates,  Edwin.  Mentioned 225 

Bates,  Joseph. 

Correspondence  with 

Debray,  X.  B - 736 

Hebert,  Paul  O - _ 734 

Mentioned 647, 735 

Reports  of 

San  Luis  Pass,  Tex.  Affair  at,  April  5-6,  1862 545, 546 

Velasco,  Tex. 

Affair  at,  August  11,  1862 616 

Attack  on  United  States  vessels  near,  July  4,  1862 609 

Battle,  A.  J.  Correspondence  with  Jefferson  Davis 437 

Battle,  G.  Mentioned 333 

Bauman,  F.  Mentioned 300 

Baxter,  B.  D.  Mentioned - - 92 

Baxter,  Enoch  F.  Mentioned - 175 

Baylor,  John  R. 

Correspondence  with 

Hunter,  S 7^7 

War  Department,  C.  S 706 

Mentioned. - 507,628,668.677 

Beaufort,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 8-10>  13> 178 

Beauregard,  Schooner.  Mentioned 178 

Beauregard,  G.  T.  Mentioned 386, 405 

Beaver,  Jacob  G.  Mentioned 232,319 

Bee,  General,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 610,612 

Bee,  Hamilton  P. 

Assignments  to  command 708,709 

Correspondence  with 

Hubert,  Paul  0 732 

Hobby,  A.  727 

Sibley,  H.  H 744 

Mentioned 709,721,732,734 

Reports  of 

Corpus  Christi,  Tex.  Bombardment  of,  August  16-18,  1862  618-620 

Flour  Bluffs,  near  Corpus  Christ!.  Operations  at,  Sept.,  13-14,  1862..  624,625 

Staff.  Announcements  of 768 

Beker,  George.  Mentioned 604 

Belger,  James.  Correspondence  with  Quartermaster-General's  Office,  U.  S.  A. . 25 

Bell,  Eva,  Schooner.  Mentioned 237 

Bell,  I McG.  Mentioned 492,495,496 

Bell,  James  B.  Mentioned 342 

Bell,  Josiah  F.  Mentioned 280 

Bell,  Thomas  S. 

Mentioned 164, 221 , 223, 230-232, 306 

Report  of  engagement  at  South  Mills,  Camden.  County,  N.  C.,  April  19, 1862-  317 


742 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Bella  Italia,  Sloop.  Mentioned 610,612,614,622 

Bellows,  William.  Mentioned 339 

Belsches,  B.  W.  Mentioned 1(30 

Belt,  Dr.  Mentioned 493 

Benjamin,  Judah  P.  Mentioned 6, 14, 33-35, 42-44, 49-52, 57, 58 

64-67,115,117,  121-123,  126,  132,  134,  135,  137,  138,  140,  141,145,146, 
148,  150,  161-164,  189-191,  422,  423,  432,434,  435,442,443,697,707,733 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  C.  S.) 

Bennett,  Captain.  Mentioned ' 202,223,231 

Bennett,  Jordan  W.  Mentioned 524,525,542 

Bennett,  Joseph  F.  Mentioned 581,583 

Benton,  Benjamin  E.  Mentioned 718 

Benton,  Orlando  N.  Mentioned 222,230 

Bermuda,  Steamer.  Mentioned . 667 

Bernard,  Reuben  F.  Mentioned 505, 530, 531 

Berry,  N.  S.  Mentioned 334 

Bible,  Daniel  P.  Mentioned 232 

Bigelow,  Waldo  O.  Mentioned.! 337 

Biggs,  Herman.  Mentioned 201,202,206,275 

Bigham,  James  S.  Mentioned 615 

Bill,  Joseph  H.  Mentioned 493, 496, 647 

Black,  Wagon-Master.  Mentioned 593 

Black,  Grier.  Mentioned 349 

Black,  James  C.  Mentioned 182 

Blacknall,  George.  Mentioned 12 

Blanchard,  A.  G. 

Correspondence  with 

Huger,  Benjamin 325, 438 

Reno,  Jesse  L 326 

Mentioned - 38, 325, 326, 464 

Bland,  Mr.  Mentioned 439 

Blasingame,  John  G.  Mentioned * 301 

Bledsoe,  A.  T.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  C.  S .) 

Blockade,  The.  References  to 32, 

138,282,  354,  382,  421,  422,482-486,546-549,603,604,607,609-614,616- 
626,  642,  648,  667,  684,  685,702-704,720,721,  723-726,  728,729,732,733 

Blood,  C.  B.  H.  Correspondence  with  State  Department,  U.  S 685 

Blucher,  F.  A.  Mentioned 619-621,623 

Blunt,  James  G. 

Correspondence  with  Edward  R.  S.  Canby 688 

Mentioned 682 

Boecking,  Marc.  Mentioned 299 

Bohannan,  John  G.  Mentioned 36,37 

Bolton,  James.  Mentioned 121,139 

Bonesteel,  J.  P.  Mentioned , 535 

Bonnet,  Henry.  Mentioned 285, 29® 

Bonton,  C.  [?]  Mentioned 144,145 

Boone,  J.  B.  F.  Mentioned 253 

Boothe,  John.  Report  of  skirmish  near  Newport,  N.  C.,  April  7,  1862 295 

Bopp,  Henry.  Mentioned 299 

Boston  Harbor,  Commanding  Officer.  Correspondence  with  Army  Head- 
quarters   19 

Bowie,  George  W.  Mentioned 583,595 

Bowman,  Captain.  Mentioned 17 

Bowman,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 608 


INDEX. 


743 


Page. 

Boyd,  Dr.  Mentioned - 528,530 

Brabble,  E.  C.  Mentioned.. 439 

Bradford,  A.  W.  Mentioned 384 

Bradford.  E.  Mentioned 143 

Bradford,  James.  Mentioned 516,524,525,543 

Bradford,  Pelham.  Mentioned 99 

Bradley,  L.  Mentioned 197 

Bradley,  Thomas  M.  Mentioned 613 

Braine,  D.  L. 

Correspondence  with  Oliver  S.  Glisson 

Mentioned ' * 

Braley,  Edward  B.  Mentioned 334 

Branch,  L.  O’B. 

Correspondence  with 

Burnside,  Ambrose  37^ 

Campbell,  Reuben  P - 249 

Gatlin,  R.  420 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H 248>  249 

Lee,  Charles  248 

* Mentioned - 184,188,251, 

252, 263, 265,  266, 268, 384, 385, 424, 441-443, 445, 447, 453, 459, 460, 465 

Reports  of  battle  of  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  14,1862 240,241 

Branch,  Ricardo.  Mentioned - ^°4 

Brand,  Arthur  von.  Mentioned 299 

Bransford,  Private.  Mentioned 192 

Bratton,  J.  S.  Mentioned ,r>83 

Breaker,  Schooner. 

Capture  of,  August  12,  1862.  Report  of  John  Harding 617 

Mentioned 610,  612>  617, 618,  622, 729 

Breed,  Charles  A.  Mentioned 396 

Brem,  T.  H.  Mentioned - 243,264 

Brewster,  E.  A.  P.  Mentioned 2*6 

Bronson,  Mr.  Mentioned 627 

Brookman,  H.  D.  Mentioned 351 

Brotherton,  David  H.  Mentioned : 492,494 

Brown,  Captain.  Mentioned 613 

Brown,  C.  H.  Mentioned 2®6 

Brown,  D.  H.  Mentioned 615 

Brown,  John  Henry.  Mentioned 718 

Brown,  J.  Thompson.  Mentioned 67 

Brown,  Lewis.  Mentioned 67 

Brown,  R.  R.  Mentioned 546,548,549,727 

Brown,  William  L.  Mentioned 5 

Brownrigg,  Richard  T.  Mentioned 606, 515, 525 

Bruehl,  James.  Mentioned 4^ 

Brunner,  Andrew  B.  Mentioned 337 

Bryan,  Guy  M.  Mentioned 719 

Bryan,  Henry.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  J.  Bankhead  Magruder.) 

Bryan,  J.  Mentioned 2^9 

Bryan,  Jesse  L.  Mentioned 300,301,303 

Bryson,  Andrew.  Mentioned r 382 

Buchanan,  Franklin. 

Correspondence  with  J.  Bankhead  Magruder 50,60 

Mentioned - 7, 57, 66 

Report  of  engagement  in  Hampton  Roads,  Ya.,  March  8-9,  1862 3 


744 


INDEX. 


Buckholts,  Charles.  Mentioned 515-517, 541-543^545 

Buckingham,  William  A.  Mentioned 384 

Bunkmark,  George.  Mentioned 485 

Burgwyi),  Henry  K.,  jr.  Mentioned ; 255  256 

Burkhart,  Schooner.  Mentioned 0O4 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E. 

Assignments  to  command 353 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 364,  368,369,371 

Army  Headquarters 352, 354, 356, 358;  360^  362^  364 

Branch,  L.  O’B 371 

Goldsborougli,  L.  M 3g7 

Hawkins,  Rush  C 316 

Lincoln,  Abraham 4q4 

McClellan,  George  B 374, 377, 379, 389, 392, 393, 405, 406 

P urke,  J ohn  G ...... ......  ...... .... ... ...... ......  382  385 

Ransom,  R.,  jr 391 

Reno,  Jesse  L 311,  315j  316>  338 

War  Department,  U.  S 207,370,373,375, 

376,  380,  383,384,  386,387,  389,  391,  393-395,  397-399,  403-406,  408,  409 

White,  M.  J 275, 276 

Expedition  of.  Orders.  Embarkation  of 351 

Mentioned 16,  25,  27,  30,  40*  41,  44, 

48,  56,  66,  71,  85,  93,  95,  97,  108,  109,  133,  136-138,  141,  149,  159,  160, 
170,189,208,209,211-213,  220,  231,  287,  291-295,300,  305,  308.325,331, 
351,  353,  358,361,364,367,368,  370,  371,  381,396,  397,400,405-408,410, 
411,  421,  425,  436,444,  446,  449,453,  455-457,  465-468,  470,  471,  474,478 
Orders,  congratulatory. 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  March  14,  1862 207 

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  February  8,  1862 75 

Soldiers  of  his  command /. 37- 

Proclamation  to  the  people  of  North  Carolina 363 

Reports  of 

Macon,  Fort,  N.  C.  Siege  of,  March  23-April  26,  1862 270,272,273 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  .Battle  of,  March  14,  1862 197, 199,201 

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  February  8,  1862 74,  75 

South  Mills,  Camden  County,  N.  C.  Engagement  at,  April  19,  1862. ..  304 

Winton,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  February  18-21,  1862,  and  skirmish....  193 

Burrows,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 268 

Burwell,  P.  L.  Mentioned 246 

Bustamente,  Juan. 

Correspondence  with  Mexico,  Charge  d’Affaires 675 

Mentioned 675 

Butler,  Captain.  Mentioned..  438 

Butler,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned 15  613 

Butt,  Walter  R.  Mentioned H 

Cabell,  Henry  Coulter. 

Correspondence  with  Lafayette  McLaws 69 

Mentioned 69,70 

Cahawba,  Steamer.  Mentioned 4H 

California.  Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from  G.  Wright 668, 683 

California  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Cavalry— Regiments : 1st,  556-558,  563-569,  576,  577,580,581,  585,586,  589, 
591-594, 601, 602, 708 ; 2d,  554, 556, 567, 569, 576, 577, 595. 

Infa  ntry — Regiments : 1st,  554-558,564,565,  567,569,  572,  576,  580,584,594, 

59;; : 4th,  668  ; 5th , 555, 556, 560, 565, 569, 576, 595, 599’,  668.  * 


INDEX. 


745 


..  591 

571, 577 
516, 525 
12 


Page. 

California  Column.  Expedition  through.  Arizona  to  Texas  and  New  Mexico, 

April  13-September  20,  1862. 

Communications  from  579,680,682,686,688 

Canby,  Edward  R.  

Thomas .‘""i  """"I- " " M4,627;628, '668,683 

Wright,  George *,’***"  596-599 

Itinerary  of  march.  Extracts  from - ■ 

Orders,  General, -series,  1862:  No.  10,  555;  No.  11,  556;  No.  l.>,  602; 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862 : No.  15,  599 ; No.  17,  693 ; No.  36,  080. 

Reports  of  072,574,575,579 

Car  Jon,  dimes  H. . -V.'.. 553, 554, 557, 560-565, 570, 572, 576, 580, 583-585 

T^-1  i -n  5oo, oHy, Oc/i) 

Eyre,  Edward  E - 

McNulty,  James  

Shirland,  E.  

Campbell,  G-.  W.  Mentioned 

Campbell,  Loudon.  Mentioned 

Campbell,  Reuben  P. 

Correspondence  with  L.  O’B.  Branch.  — 

Mentioned  241,243-246,249,252,255,262-264,266-268 

Report  of  battle  of  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  14,  1862  250 

Canby,  Edward  R.  S.  * ^ 

Assignments  to  command  — - ’ 

Correspondence  with  • 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A '*•  ' 

633, 658, 669-671, 673, 676, 682, 68b,  688, 6«9, 695 

Blunt,  James  ria’iao 

Carson,  Christopher ' 

Chivmgton,  J.  

Colorado  Territory,  Governor  of ^ 

Donaldson,  James  * 

Paul,  Gabriel  ’ ’ 

Sibley  Henry  

Slough,  J.  - 

Steele,  William * 

Mentioned  487, 493’ 496’ 498~502’ 505> 507  ’ 510' 

’535*542*552-555,  565-569,  580,581,  590-592,600,  602,629,630,  634-640, 
643-646,  648,  650-652,  654-656,  658-660,  662-667,670,  672,  688,719,7:12 

Relinquishes  command  of  the  Department  of  New  Mexico 582 

Reports  of 

Albuquerque,  N.  Mex.  Skirmish  at,  April  8,  1862  549 

California  Column.  Expedition  through  Arizona  to  Texas  and  New 

Mexico,  April  13-September  20,  1862 572,574,575,579 

Craig,  Fort,  N.  Mex.  Affair  near,  May  23,  1862 v - - - - 608 

New^Mexico.  Pursuit  of  Confederate  forces  in,  April  13-22,  1862  550 

Val verde,  N.  Mex.  Engagement. at,  February  21,  1862  487 

Canfield,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 484> 

Cannady,  W.  E.  Mentioned 

Cape  Fear,  District  of.  (Confederate.) 

Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc 424 

. French,  S.  G.,  assigned  to  and  assumes  command  of 44i>,  450 

Orders,  General,  series  1862 : No.  13,  450.  

, *For  subsequent  orders,  see  District  of  Arizona. 


746 


INDEX. 


Carey,  Asa  B.  Mentioned 1 

Carleton,  James  H. 

Assignments  to  command 580-582,688-695,696 

Correspondence  with 

Canbv,  Edward  R S 579,682,695 

Sonora,  Governor  of 

State  Department.  TJ.  S ,(Qn 

West,  Joseph  R... ! .V  ~ 

Wright,  George :][[’.[[ [. ” 564 

Mentioned  560, 566, 574, 577, 579-582, 

588,  o92, 594-603,  668,680,682-684,  686-689,  692,  694-696  719  732  733 

Proclamations  of.. ! 561,  693 

Reports  of  expedition  through  Arizona  to  Texas  and  New  Mexico  April 

13-September  20,  1862  653, 554, 557, 660-565, 570, 572, 576  580, 583-585 

Carlin,  John.  Mentioned ^ 

Carman,  George  P.  Mentioned ’ " 232 

Carmichael,  A.  B . Mentioned 255  256 

Carolan,  John  M.  Mentioned ^ 

Carson,  Christopher. 

Correspondence  with  Edward  R.  S.  Canby  059 

::::::::::::  493;498;63i, ees 

Report  of  engagement  at  Valverde,  N.  Mex.,  February  21, 1862 502 

Carson,  Joseph.  Mentioned 339 

Carter,  G.  W.  Mentioned ^19 

Carter  Hill.  Mentioned '36, 37, 62, 63 

Carville,  James.  Mentioned 547  549 

Casey,  Silas.  Mentioned ’ ^ 

Cator,  Thomas.  Mentioned ^09 

Cavahos,  Mr.  Mentioned fi10  C10 

Cebeno,  Domingo.  Mentioned 687 

Center,  Addison.  Mentioned * 216 

Ceres,  Steamer.  Mentioned 296 

Chacon,  Rafael.  Mentioned .r^ 

Chadwick,  Mr.  Mentioned 279 

Chambers,  Clark.  Mentioned 533  535  538 

Chambers,  John  G.  Mentioned ’ * ’ 

Chapin,  Gurden. 


Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 

Mentioned 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Edivard  R.  S.  Canby ; 
Chase,  Franklin. 

Correspondence  with 

Coe,  John  M 

State  Department,  U.  S 

Mentioned 

Chase,  James  S.  Mentioned 

Chase,  Salmon  P.  Mentioned 

Chase,  William  S.  Mentioned 

Chasseur,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Chavez,  Guide.  Mentioned 

Chavez,  J.  F.  Mentioned 

Chavez,  Manuel.  Mentioned 

Chawn.  Antonio.  Mentioned 

Cherry, . Mentioned 

Child.  Captain.  Mentioned 


634 

534-537,540 

also  J.  P.  Slough.) 


642 

641 

...  641,650 

677 

....  387 

....  238 

SO,  351, 359 
- - - . 554 

....  493 

..  493,527 
....  504 

... . 721 

....  309 


INDEX. 


747 


Page. 

,'hinn,  R.  H. 

Correspondence  with  724,726,728 

Debray , X.  33.. .... ....  — - ....  ....  ------  * * * 725 

Sbea,  Daniel  724  72g 

SIuppewa^H  S.‘  S."  Mentioned  .* - - - *94’ 359’ 382’ 383 

?hivington,  John  M.  A77_nso 

Forresnondence  with  Edward  R.  S.  Canby * 

Mentioned 532-535, 537, 555, 566, 575, 588, 589, 591-593, 657, 660, 664, 676 

530 

538 

25 


Apache  Canon,  N.  Mex.  Skirmish  at,  March  26,  1862 
Glorieta,  N.  Mex.  Engagement  at,  March  28,  1862 . . . 


•78,80,84,205,206,376 


ZJhocura,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 

Church,  William  H. 

Mentioned 

RePNew°Berne,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  March  14,  1862  209 ’ 

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  February  8,  1862 --  -•  « 

ritv  of  New  York,  Steamer.  Mentioned SbL, 

StoW  Mentioned..... 491,497,500,501,534,536,540,654,667 

Clarinda,  Schooner.  Mentioned 

Clark,  Pilot.  Mentioned 

Clark,  Henry  T.  Mentioned ~ ^ j"'  ’ 430> 447> 453| 456j 457} 4C4)  465>  468, 470 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  North  Carolina,  Governor  of.) 

Clark,  H.  J.  B.  244,249,250 

Mentioned ““w'VVi'i 

Report  of  battle  of  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  14,  1862 

Clark,  R.  F.  Mentioned 

S 101, 203, 221-223, 234, 238, 306, 319, 326 

Reports  of  „ 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  March  14,  1862  ...  ...  — • - — - - ■■■ 

South  Mills,  Camden  County,  N.  C.  Engagement  at,  April  19,  1862 . 

Clarke,  Dr.  Mentioned 

Clarke,  John  J.  Mentioned - 

Clarke,  William  J. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 

Mentioned - 


12 

128, 


267 

343 


223 

319 

.210 

61,69 


..  439 

437-439 


Cleary,  F.  D. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  A.  Wise... 

Mentioned 

Clement,  William  B.  Mentioned 

Clements,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Clements,  Bennett  A.  Mentioned 

Clever  (A.  G.  of  N.  Mex. ) Mentioned  . . . 
Clingman,  T.  L. 

Assignments  to  command  

Correspondence  with  D.  H.  Hill 

Mentioned 

Cobb,  Alfred  S.  Mentioned 

Cobb,  Howell.  Mentioned 

Cobb,  T.  R.  R-  Mentioned 

Coddington,  Clifford.  Mentioned 

Coe,  John  M. 

Correspondence  with  Franklin  Chase 

Mentioned 


. 142 

. 123 

. f45 

,.  723 

493, 647 
..  606 

. . 480 

. . 476 

472, 480 
535, 539 
..  449 

59 

..  222 


642 

642 


748 


INDEX. 


Coffin,  Captain.  Mentioned 

Cogdell,  Daniel.  Mentioned 

Cogswell,  Milton.  Mentioned 

Coit,  George  M.  Mentioned 

Colburn,  A.  V.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Army  Headquarters.) 


Pago! 

48. 

27(1 

i; 

o; 


25; 

158, 159, 173 
.....  417 

361 

...  539,638 

333 


546-548 

398-403 

25 

. 269 


Cole,  B.  L.  Mentioned 

Coles,  Roberts.  Mentioned m ^ 

Colhoun,  Edmund  R.  Mentioned 

Collins,  Captain.  Mentioned 

Collins,  James  L.  Mentioned 

Collins,  N.  W.  Mentioned 

Colorado,  Governor  of 
Correspondence  with 

Canby,  Edward  R.  S 

Hunter,  D * 

Colorado  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry  Regiments : 1st,  530-539,  631,  634, 636,  637,  646, 679,  687  j 2d,  493, 

527,  538,679,  689.  Home  Guards:  Denver  City,  520,  522. 

Colston,  R.  E.  Mentioned ♦ 3g  g9  4g4 

Columbia,  Schooner. 

Destruction  of,  April  5,  1862.  (See  San  Luis  Pass,  Tex.  Affairs  at,  April  5-6 
1862.) 

Mentioned 

Colyer,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Commodore,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Cpmmodore  Barney,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 

Commodore  Perry,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 195  397  qqq 

Cone,  A.  F.  Mentioned  7 7 7 7 _ _ . ’ 45^  463 

Conellard,  Captain.  Mentioned 

Confederate,  Schooner.  Mentioned 

Confederate  Troops. 

Casualties.  Returns  of.  Battle  of  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  14,  1862 247 

Mentioned.  (See  respective  States. ) 

Organization,  strength,  etc. 

Cape  Fear,  N.  C.  District  of,  January  31,  1862  424 

Galveston,  Tex.  Sub-Military  District  of,  February  28,  1862  701 

Lower  Rio  Grande,  Tex. 

February  28,  1862  ; 70l 

March  31,  1862 77777 706 

June  30, 1862 777777777  720 

N orfolk.  Department  of,  January  31, 1862 3 g 

1 North  Carolina.  Department  of 

March  31,  1862 455 

April  19,  1862  777777  '459, 460 

April  30,  1862  469 

July  15,  1862 777777”  476 

Pamlico  District  of 

J anuary  31,  1862 424 

March  17,  1862 7777777777  447 

Peninsula.  Department  of  the 

January  31,  1862  36  37 

February  28,  1862 ’ 49 

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.,  January  31,  1862 425 

Texas.  Department  of,  August  8,  1862  730, 731 

Congress,  U.  S.  Frigate.  Mentioned 2,4-6,8-10,13  IS  19 


INDEX. 


749  • 


Page. 


'ongress,  C.  S. 

Correspondence  with  ^ 

Huger,  Benjamin ^g 

Wise,  Henry  A *"'  * 

Message  to.  Engagement  in  Hampton  Roads,  March  8-9,  1862 

: Report  of  battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.,  February  8,  1862 

Xongress  U.  S.  Resolution  of.  Affairs  in  North  Carolina •’ 

Sn  George.  Mentioned 484,486,604,613,721 

Jonnecticut  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 8th,  77, 83, 85, 105, 106, 108, 203,  210, 211 , 226, 2o2, 234, 

236-240;  272,  277,281,283,  285,291,  358,381,  382,  384;  10th,  78,  79,85  88, 

93,97,  101,105,  107,109, 203,210-213,  215,358,381,414;  11th,  203*,  210-212, 

216,  220, 232-234, 236-238, 357 , 358, 381. 

CJonnell,  Patrick.  Mentioned .'"I"’*  ' 

3onnelly,  Henry.  Mentioned ’ ’ : 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  New  Mexico,  Governor  of.) 

bonner,  Patrick  Edward.  Mentioned 0 4 

Contrabands.  (See  Slaves  and  Slave  Property. ) 

Conway,  T.  W.  Mentioned 6 

Cook,  Franklin.  Mentioned ’ 

Cook,  James  W.  Mentioned 

Cook,  Jordan.  Mentioned  

Cook,  Joseph  J. 

Correspondence  with 

Eagle,  Henry 

Hubert,  Paul  

Manly,  J.  H * 

Report  of  naval  demonstration  upon  Galveston,  Tex.,  May  15,  186~  . ^ ^ 

Cook,  Samuel  H.  Mentioned 530,531,^34 

Cooley,  Cory  don  E.  Mentioned 

Coooer,  J.  C.  Mentioned. ~ 

Cooper,  Samuel.  Mentioned 35,177,469,47!:,/  o 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Office,  C.  o.  A.) 

Coopwood,  Bethel.  Mentioned... ^ 

Corcoran,  Michael.  Mentioned ^ 

; Corey,  James  A.  Mentioned ^ 

Cornyn,  Patrick.  Mentioned - ‘ ‘ ° - 

Corprew,  T.  J.  Mentioned 110,  lit,  o 

Corpus  Christi,  Tex.  Bombardment  of,  August  16-18, 1862.  Reports  of 

V,  TT  , -o  618-620 

Bee,  Hamilton  

_T  . , . ,r  621,623 

Hobby,  A.  M * 

Corsout,  Benjamin.  Mentioned - 

j Corypheus,  Yacht.  Mentioned ' - ^ 

Corzine.  D.  M.  Mentioned 

Cossack,  Steamer.  Mentioned 202,231,351,35 

‘ Cotton,  William.  Mentioned 33b 

Coult,  Theodore  A. 

Assignments  to  command ° 

Mentioned 555.569,581,692 

583 
281 
608 


150 

263 


710,712 
710-742 
..  709 
..  G07 


Covey,  E.  N.  Mentioned 

Cowan,  R.  V.  Mentioned 

Craig,  Fort,  N.  Mex.  Affair  near,  May  23,  1862.  Report  of  Ed.  R.  S.  Canby. 

Craig,  Robert.  Mentioned 

Craig,  William  J.  Mentioned 

Crane,  T.  J.  Mentioned - 


339 


16, 1* 


750 


INDEX. 


Cranston,  James.  Mentioned 

Cremony,  John  C.  Mentioned 

Crespin,  Jose  Anaitaico.  Mentioned 

Crocker,  Captain.  Mentioned 

Crossan,  Thomas  M.  Mentioned 

Crosson,  James  M.  Mentioned 

Crump,  C.  A.  Mentioned 

Cubero,  N.  Mex.  Capture  of,  March  3,  1862. 


Pago. 

67? 

567,570,577 

504 

80 

254,264,371 

515,543 

36,37 

Report  of  A.  S.  Thurmond. ..  528 


Culpeper,  Mr.  Mentioned 132  142 

Cumberland,  U.  S.  Sloop.  Mentioned 2,4-6  8 18  19 

Cumming,  Alfred.  Mentioned 13  60 

Cunningham,  Pilot.  Mentioned 12 

Curlew,  Steamer.  Mentioned 185, 191  239 

Currituck,  Steamer.  Mentioned 114,144,146,151,158  159 

Currituck  Sound.  Expedition  into,  February  19-20, 1862.  (See  Summary  of 
Principal  Events,  p.  72.) 

Curtin,  Andrew  G.  Mentioned 334 

Curtis,  Dr.  Mentioned 269 

Curtis,  Joseph  B.  Mentioned 107  238 

Cutler,  Benjamin  C.  Mentioned 570, 581, 582, 690^  692 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  James  H.  Carleton.) 

Cutter,  Calvin.  Mentioned 1.02,209,228 

Cutting,  William.  Mentioned 79,80,206,273,380 

Dacotah,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 25 

Dahlgren,  John  A.  Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 21 

Hooker,  Joseph 20  22 

Lincoln,  Abraham 20 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 22  25 

Quartermaster-General's  Office,  U.  S.  A 21,26-28  31 

Wyman,  R.  H 20 

Daland,  John.  Mentioned 343 

D’ Amours,  Augustin  P.  Mentioned 490 

Daniel,  Junius.  Mentioned 468  476 

Daniels,  Acting  Master.  Mentioned 213 

Dart,  William  R.  Mentioned 285 

Davidson,  Hunter.  Mentioned 44 

Davidson,  John  W.  Mentioned ^50 

Davis,  Charles  W.  Mentioned 324 

Davis,  E.  J.  Mentioned 624 

Davis,  Frank  G.  Mentioned 228 

Davis,  Jefferson. 

Correspondence  with 

Avery,  W.  W 435 

Battle,  A.  J 437 

Edwards,  Weldon  N 434  437 

Huger,  Benjamin 45,429 

Magruder,  J.  Bankhead 32 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of • 446, 449, 472 

Sibley,  Henry  H 747 

War  Department,  C.  S 442 

Mentioned . . 33, 34, 42, 44, 46, 50-53, 56, 58, 64, 67,  111,  113, 122, 147, 148, 150*  161, 164, 
165, 420,  434,  435,  437,  442, 452, 471, 505, 512,  521, 677, 709, 716, 735, 736 
Message  to  Confederate  Congress.  Engagement  in  Hampton  Roads,  Va., 

March  8-9,  1862 7 

Proclamation  proclaiming  martial  law  in  Southeastern  Virginia 46 


INDEX. 


751 


Page. 

Davis,  J.  Lucius. 

Assignments  to  command 431 

Correspondence  with  Henry  A.  Wise 

Mentioned 123, 124, 146, 160,  422, 431 

Davis,  Nicholas  S.  Mentioned 581,693 

Davis,  Samuel  Boyer. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 715 

Ildbert,  Paul  O 714 

Mentioned 717,719 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Paul  0.  Hubert. ) 

Dawson,  J.  A.  Mentioned 338 

Dawson,  William  C.  Mentioned I82 

Daylight,  Steamer.  Mentioned 382 

Dayton,  E.G.  Mentioned 202,212,214,216 

Debray,  X.  B. 

Assignments  to  command 721. 

Correspondence  with 

Bates,  J - 735 

Chinn,  R.  H 724,726,728 

Hubert,  Paul  O 723,727,735 

Kellersberg,  J 729 

Owens.  G.  W 723,728 

Mentioned 714 

Deep  Gully,  Trenton  Road,  N.  C.  Skirmishes  near  and  at. 

March  31,  1862.  (See  Summary  of  Principal  Events,  p.  72.) 

May  2,  1862.  Report  of  Charles  H.  Pope 334 

De  Forrest,  Cyrus  H.  Mentioned 538 

De  Lagnel,  J.  A.  Mentioned 69 

Delaware,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 76, 84,  86, 97, 194-196, 218, 269, 394 

Delaware  Troops.  Mentioned. 


Infantry — Regiments:  1st,  15. 

Delaware,  Fort,  Commanding  Officer.  Correspondence  with  Army  Head- 


1 quarters 

De  Leon,  D.  C.  Mentioned 134 

Democrat,  Sloop.  Mentioned 603,604 

De  Monteil,  Joseph  A.  Viguer.  Mentioned 74, 80, 84, 85, 88, 107 

Dennison,  A.  R.  Mentioned 90,91,347 

Denver,  J.  W.  Mentioned 659 

D’Epineuil,  L.  J.  Correspondence  with  J.  P.  Hatch 361 

Derby,  George.  Mentioned 209, 210 

De  Rosset,  A.  J.  Mentioned 446,  447 

Derrick,  H.  C.  Mentioned 43 

Deshler,  James.  Mentioned 460,465 

Dill,  Dr.  Mentioned 727 

Dimick,  Justin.  Mentioned - 19 

Dimmock,  Charles.  Mentioned 47 


(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Virginia.  Ordnance  Officer  of.) 

Dimmock,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 

Dimmock,  M.  Mentioned 

Dix,  John.  Mentioned 

Dix.  John  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Hawkins,  Rush  C 


752 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Dix,  John  A. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Lincoln,  Abraham 497 

War  Department,  U.  S 407 

Warren,  Gouverneur  Iv 29 

Mentioned 395,398,407 

Binsmore,  W.  B.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  C.  Vanderbilt.) 

Doland,  Captain.  Mentioned 257 

Dolchite,  Patrick;  H.  Mentioned ^ 

Donaldson,  James  L. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 635,636,670 

Canby,  Edward  R.  S ’ 047 

Halleck,  Henry  W. 037 

Mentioned 492,  505,  573,  633,  634,  638,  639,  645,  646,  648,  656,  670 

Report  of  the  evacuation  of  Albuquerque  and  Santa  F 6,  N.  Mex.,  by  Union 

forces,  March  2-4,  1862 5^7 

Dougherty,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned 337 

Downing,  Jacob.  Mentioned 532 

Downs,  Dr.  Mentioned 025 

Dragoon,  Brig.  Mentioned 352  359 

Drake,  Albert  W. 

Mentioned .* gg  <>14 

Reports  of 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  March  14,  1862 ‘ ■_ 215 

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  February  8, 1862  93 

Drum,  Richard  C.  Mentioned ‘ 559  00g 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  George  Wriglit.) 

Duff,  Frederick  P.  Mentioned 547 

Dufiield,  Charles  B.  Mentioned 129,141,146  158  159 

(For  correspondence,  etc., .see  Henry  A.  Wise.) 

Dugan,  Hammond.  Mentioned 241  146 

Duncan,  Thomas. 

Mentioned 489, 490, 494-496, 498, 504,  550,  630, 663, 667 

Reports  of  engagement  at  Valverde,  N.  Mex.,  February.  21,  1862....  497,499,500 

Dunhauer.  Mentioned 790 

Dunn,  Captain.  Mentioned 722 

Dunn,  John.  Mentioned 226 

DuPont,  Samuel  F.  Mentioned 28  32 

Durr,  Adolph.  Mentioned 299 

Duryee,  J.  Eugene. 


Mentioned 


338 


Report  of  skirmishes  near  Trenton  Bridge,  Young’s  Cross-Roads,  and  Pol- 
locks ville,  N.  C.,  May  15-16,  1862 336 

D’Wolf,  James  F.  Mentioned 77  go  206  239 

Dwyer,  J.  E.  Mentioned 506, 515, 517, 521, 525 

Eagle,  Steamer.  Mentioned  94  239  296 

Eagle,  Henry. 

Correspondence  with 

Cook,  Joseph  J _ 720  712 

Galveston,  Tex.  '’Foreign  Consuls  at 711 

Mentioned 712,732 

Eastern  District  of  Texas.  (Confederate.)  Constituted  and  limits  defined-  699 

Eastern  Queen,  Steamer.  Mentioned 108, 109, 237, 239,  351, 359 

Eastern  State,  Steamer.  Mentioned 357,  359 


INDEX. 


753 


Page. 

E.  A.  Stevens,  U.  S.  R.  Cutter.  Mentioned 38^ 

Eaton,  A.  B.  Mentioned 3^ 

Ebner,  Franz.  Mentioned ^ 

Eckert,  Thomas  T.  r 

Correspondence  with  George  D.  Sheldon 405 

Mentioned ^ 

Edward  Slade,  Schooner.  Mentioned 308 

Edwards,  O.  W.  Mentioned 546-549 

Edwards,  Weldon  N. 

Correspondence  with  Jefferson  Davis 434,  437 

Mentioned ^3^ 

Eggleston,  John  R.  Mentioned 11 

Egloffstein,  F.  W. 

Mentioned - 270, 298, 299,  333, 377,  383 

ReP(ime<tt’s  Farm,  Pebbly  Run,  N.  g.  Skirmish  at,  April  13,  1862 297, 298 

Haugliton’s  Mill,  Pollocks ville  Road,  N.  C.  Skirmish  near,  April  27, 

1862  332 

Elizabeth  City,  N.  C. 

Action  at,  February  10,  1862.  Report  of  C.  F.  Henningsen 191 

Expedition  to,  April  7-8,  1862.  Report  of  Rush  C.  Hawkins 296 

Elliott,  Chailes  G.  Mentioned 182 

Ellis,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned  272’  414 

Elma,  Schooner  (Major  Minter).  Mentioned 612,618 

El  well,  Andrew. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  skirmish  near  Batchelder’s  Creek,  N.  C.,  April  29,  1862 333 

Emerson,  Samuel.  Mentioned 80 

Engelhard,  J.  A.  Mentioned 261 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with 

Magruder,  J.  Bankhead 62 

War  Department,  C.  61 

Enos,  Herbert  M. 

Mentioned 527,664 

Report  of  the  evacuation  of  Albuquerque  and  Santa  Fd,  N.  Mex.,  March 

2-4,1862 52J 

E.  S.  Terry,  Steamer.  Mentioned 37^ 

Eure,  M.  L.  Mentioned * 295,296 

Eva  Bell,  Schooner.  Mentioned 237 

Evans,  Andrew  W.  Mentioned 492,504,582 

Evans,  Peter  G.  Mentioned 243,245 

Evans,  S.  B.  Mentioned 252 

Ewell,  Benjamin  S. 

Correspondence  with 

Magruder,  J.  Bankhead 43 

War  Department,  C.  42 

Mentioned 35-37 

Ewing,  William.  Mentioned 499,501 

Eyre,  C.  Cushing. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.,  February*8,  1862 90 

Eyre,  Edward  E. 

Mentioned 554, 555, 557,  558, 564, 566-570, 575, 581, 584, 585, 594, 601, 692, 694 

Reports  of  expedition  from  Southern  California  through  Arizona  to  North- 
western Texas  and  New  Mexico,  April  13-September  20,  1862..  585, 589, 591, 592 


48  R R— VOL  IX 


754 


INDEX. 


I 


Page. 

Face,  Acting  Master.  Mentioned 13 

Fair,  Samuel.  Mentioned 232  319 

Fairchild,  Harrison  S.  Mentioned ’ 306 

Fairfax,  A.  B.  Mentioned „ 435 

Falvey,  John.  Mentioned 499,501,530 

Farquhar,  Francis  U.  Mentioned 306 

Farthing,  Paul.  Mentioned 266 

Fearing,  George  R.  Mentioned 79, 80, 202, 206, 208, 209, 212, 306 

Fearing,  John  B.  Mentioned 432 

Fellows,  John  F.  Mentioned 346  442 

Ferebee,  Colonel.  Mentioned 327  328  457 

Fergusson,  David. 

Assignments  to  command 555  534 

Mentioned 556,  557  ? 539,  584j  535, 692 

Ferrero,  Edward. 

Mentioned 78,99,223 

Reports  of 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  March  14,  1862  229 

Roanoke  Island.  Battle  of,  February  8,  1862 103 

Field, . Mentioned 278 

Field,  Charles  W.  Mentioned 462 

Fillebrown,  H.  C.  Mentioned 209 

Fitzsimmons,  Charles,  Mentioned 335,338,339,388 

Flagler,  Daniel  W. 

Mentioned 80, 206, 272, 273, 277-279, 282-285, 287, 365,  367, 416 

Reports  of 

Macon,  Fort,  N.  C.  Siege  of,  March  23-April  26, 1862  285 

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  February  8, 1862 81 

Flanders,  Alonzo  B.  Mentioned 239 

Fleckenstein,  Louis.  Mentioned 336 

Flint,  Mr.  Mentioned 627 

Florida  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments : 2d,  37. 

Flour  Bluffs,  Tex.  Operations  at,  September  13-14,  1862.  Reports  of 

Bee,  Hamilton  P 624,625 

Gray,  E.  F.. *625 

Ireland,  John 626 

Flournoy,  George. 

Assignments  to  command 717 

Mentioned 747 

Floyd,  John  B.  Mentioned 112,122,123,161 

Flusser,  C.  W.  Mentioned 195,306 

Foard,  W.  W.  Mentioned 515,543 

Follett,  Alexander  G.  Mentioned 546-548 

Foote,  A.  H.  Mentioned 368 

Ford,  James  H.  Mentioned 538 

Ford,  John  S.  Mentioned 706,734 

Foreman,  Ivey.  Mentioned 13 

Forman,  Ferris.  Mentioned 668 

Forrest,  Steamer.  Mentioned 185 

Forrest,  French.  Mentioned. 6, 125, 135, 142, 147, 154, 429 

Forrest,  Joseph.  [?]  Mentioned 12 

Forshey,  C.  G. 

Mentioned 483, 604, 704 

Report  of  operations  at  Aransas  Pass,  Tex.,  February  11-13,  1862 482 


INDEX. 


755 


Page. 

80 


371 


416,417 


Foster,  John  L.  Mentioned 

Foster,  John  G. 

Appointed  Military  Governor  of  New  Berne,  N.  C 

Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 

War  Department,  U.  410,411,414, 

Mentioned 74-80, 83, 85, 89, 91-99, 101, 102, 105-109, 194, 198- 

205,208,  209,211,216-223,  225,233,234,  236-238,  269,271,273,275,  316, 
335,336,337,347,  349,351,  358,368,  371,372,  375,  378,381,385,  406,414 

Reports  of 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  March  14, 1862 211 

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  February  8,  1862  f 85 

Trenton  and  Pollocksville,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  J uly  24-28,  1862  ....  344 

Succeeds  to  command  in  Department  of  North  Carolina 410 

Foster,  Theodore  S.  Mentioned 99-102 

Foute,  R.  C.  Mentioned * 'I''  * 

Fowle,  Daniel  G.  Mentioned 87, 1/5-178 

Fowler,  James  H.  Mentioned 97 

Fox,  Gustavus  V. 

Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 23 

McClellan,  George  27 

Navy  Department,  U.  18,21,25 

Mentioned 18,24,30,370 

Foy,  Christopher.  Mentioned 2o6’  298> 348 

Foy’s  Plantation,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at,  April  7,  1862.  (See  Summary  of  Prin- 
cipal Events,  p.  72.) 

Francis,  Wagon-Master.  Mentioned 

Franklin,  C.  L.  Mentioned 274 

Franklin,  R.  M.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  X B.  Debray .) 

Frazer,  George  M.  Mentioned 513>  514, 516, 521, 605 

Frazer,  John  D.  Mentioned 222,224,227 

Freedley,  John  J.  Mentioned 324 

Fremont,  John  C.  Mentioned 30,387 

French,  Mr.  Mentioned 206 

French,  Albert  H.  Mentioned 583 

French,  D.  A.  Mentioned 327 

French,  Samuel  G. 

Assignments  to  command 445,  447, 448, 450 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 480 

Lee,  Robert  448, 463, 472 

Mentioned 445, 447, 448, 451, 453, 454, 459, 460,  468, 476, 478 

French,  W.  H.  Mentioned 76, 80 

Fritz,  Emil.  Mentioned 554, 584-586, 590-592 

Frizzell,  W.  W. 

Correspondence  with  Post-Office  Department,  C.  S 709 

Mentioned 4 49 

Fry,  H.  W. 

Mentioned 115-117, 156, 166, 167, 170, 173, 184, 185 

Report  of  battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.,  February  8,  1862  : 179 

Fulcrod,  Philip.  Mentioned 525 

Gabaudan,  E.  C.  Mentioned 213 

Gadsden,  Charles  A.  Mentioned — 310,311,315,326 

Gainer,  Mentioned 386 


756 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Gaither,  B.  S.  Mentioned 222 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Congress,  C.  S.) 

Galena,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned . 3g^ 

Gallop,  Mr.  Mentioned 243  244 

Gallop,  J.  C.  Mentioned 219  143  144 

Galveston,  Tex. 

Blockade  of,  and  operations  about,  May  14-25, 1862.  Communications  from 

Cook,  Joseph  J 709-712 

Eagle,  Henry 710-712 

Hubert,  Paul  O 722  712 

Texas,  Governor  of 722 

Naval  demonstration  upon,  May  15,  1862.  Report  of  Joseph  J.  Cook 607 

Galveston,  Tex.  Foreign  Consuls  at.  Correspondence  with  Henry  Eagle.  711 
Galveston,  Sub-Military  District  of.  (Confederate.) 

Command  of  E.  B.  Nichols  designated 700 

Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc 701 

Orders,  Special,  series,  1862:  No.  471,709. 

Garcia,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned , 006 

Gardenhier,  George.  Mentioned 529 

Gardner,  Charles  T.  Mentioned 207  235,277  278 

Gardner,  J.  M.  Mentioned 230  131  149 

Gardner,  J.  W.  Mentioned 543  5^9 

Garland,  Fort,  Colo.  Transferred  to  Department  of  New  Mexico 631 

Garland,  R.  R. 

Correspondence  with  Daniel  D.  Shea 702 

Mentioned 433 

Garnett,  A.  S.  Mentioned 21  12 

Garrison,  A.  F.  Mentioned 582, 584 

Garrock,  Thomas.  Mentioned 299 

Gates,  Byron  W.  Report  of  expedition  to  Trenton  and  Pollocksville,  N.  C., 

July  24-28,  1862 347 

Gates,  William.  Mentioned 29 

Gatesville,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  May  7-8, 1862.  Report  of  Rush  C.  Hawkins.  334 
Gatlin,  Richard  C. 

Assignments  to  command 445 

Correspondence  with 

Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Office,  C.  S.A 420,421,433,434,436,440,442,443 

Branch,  L.  O’B 420 

War  Department,  C.  S 429, 430, 440, 442, 443 

Mentioned 72,  111,  113, 124, 125, 183, 184, 188, 254, 426, 437, 444, 445 

Gatling,  R.,  jr.  Mentioned 261 

Gault,  John  E . Mentioned 337 

Geiger,  Max.  Mentioned 299 

Gemsbok,  Bark.  Mentioned 382, 383 

General  Bee,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 610,612 

George,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 611 

George  Peabody,  Steamer.  Mentioned 359 

Georgia,  State  of,  Steamer.  Mentioned 382,383 

Georgia  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Battalions : 2d,  449,  450.  Regiments:  3d,  110,  111,  113,  192,  193, 
306,307,310,314,316,318,321,327-329,  331;  6th,  37;  8th,  379;  10th,  13, 

37;  16th,  37,51,57;  23d,  37;  44th,  460;  45th,  460, 463;  49th,  460, 463. 

Cobb’s  Legion,  14, 37, 51, 57. 

Gerard,  George.  Mentioned 308,309 

Gibbes,  W.  H.  Mentioned 124 


INDEX. 


757 


Page. 

Gibson,  A.  A.  Mentioned. - 19 

Gibson,  John  A.  Mentioned 261 

Gibson,  Samuel.  Mentioned. 549 

Giesecke.  Julius.  Mentioned 543 

Gilford,  Corporal.  Mentioned 92 

Gillespie,  Joseph  R.  Mentioned 2^6 

Gillespie,  Richmond.  Mentioned 529 

Gillett’s  Farm,  Pebbly  Run,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at,  April  13, 1862. 

Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 302 

Holmes,  Theophilus  302 

Lee,  Robert  303 

Reports  of 

Egloffstein,  F.  297,298 

Ransom,  Robert,  jr 300 

Gilliam,  Thomas  H.  Mentioned 181,182 

Gilmer,  John  A.,  jr. 

Mentioned 244, 253>  264 

Report  of  battle  of  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  14, 1862 257 

Gilpin,  H.  A.  Mentioned 619,621,623 

Gilpin,  W.  Mentioned 648 

Glen,  Bark.  Mentioned 2^2 

Glisson,  Oliver  S. 

Correspondence  with  D.  L.  Braine 353 

Mentioned 353 

Glorieta,  N.  Mex.  Engagement  at,  March  28,  1862.  Reports  of 

Cbivington,  John  M 538 

Ritter,  J ohn  539 

Scurry,  William  541,542 

Sibley,  Henry  540 

Slough,  John  533, 534 

Tappan,  Samuel  536 

Glyckherr,  Bernhard.  Mentioned 300 

Godwin,  C.  Mentioned 

Goldsborough,  L.  M. 

Correspondence  with 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E 367 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 368 

Mentioned * 27, 

28,  30,  32,  74-76,  80,  170,  197,  352,  356,  359,  362,  364,  366,394,397,399 

Gonzales,  Adjutant.  Mentioned 605 

Goodale,  C.  W.  Mentioned. 97 

Goode,  Thomas  F.  Mentioned 60 

Goodrich,  E R.  Mentioned 206 

Goodwin,  John  H.,  jr.  Mentioned 80 

Gordon,  R.  T.  Mentioned 88, 214,  306 

Gordon,  Steamer.  Mentioned • 354 

Gorgas,  Josiah.  Mentioned 472 

Gowan,  George  W.  Mentioned 284, 290 

Graham,  George  W.  Mentioned 348 

Graham,  William  A.,  jr.  Mentioned 252, 253, 301 

Grapeshot,  Barge.  Mentioned 237 

Graves,  William  W.  Mentioned 181,182 

Gray,  Mr.  Mentioned - xo 


758 


INDEX. 


Page. 


624, 708 
. 625 

. 671 

. 496 

- 181 
84 


Gray,  E.  F. 

Mentioned 

Eeport  of  operations  at  Flour  Bluffs,  Tex.,  September  13-14,  1862.* 

Gray  don,  James. 

Correspondence  with  G.  R.  Paul 

Mentioned 

Green,  J ames  W.  Mentioned " 

Green,  S.  A.  Mentioned 

Green,  Thomas. 

Mentioned 506-511, 513-515, 517, 518, 522, 525, 660, 678, 720 

Report  of  engagement  at  Valverde,  N.  Mex.,  February  21,  1862 ...  m o 

Green,  Wharton  J. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  A.  Wise 135  140 

Mentioned 115-117, 124, 140, 141, 156, 164, 'l66,'l70, 173,180, 184 ! 185 

Report  of  battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  February  8,  1862  277 

Greene,  J.  D.  Mentioned 

Gregory,  Tim.  Mentioned ’ ” 296 

Griffin,  Simon  G.  Mentioned oq«  o0fi 

Griffith,  Mr.  Mentioned V// 100 

Grossmann,  Adolph.  Mentioned 299 

Guerrilla,  Bark.  Mentioned 351 

Guide,  Steamer.  Mentioned 86, 92, 217, 269, 270, 308, 312,  324," 351, 359 

Gutierrez,  Cruz.  Mentioned : 605  g0g 

Hacker,  Martin.  Mentioned 299 

Haden,  Porter.  Mentioned 577  579  ggg 

Hale,  William,  jr.  Mentioned ’253 

Hall,  E.  D.  Mentioned 251  268 

Hall,  Robert  H.  Mentioned 489,  490, 492, 494-496, 498-500  630 

Theron  £2.  Mentioned ...... ....  223  227 

Halleck,  Henry  W. 

Correspondence  with 

Chapin,  Gurden g34 

Donaldson,  James  L g37 

Watts,  John  S ggg 

Mentioned 380,386,387  637,650,656,659,670 

Hallman,  Lewis.  Mentioned 324 

Hamilton,  N.  C.  Capture  of,  July  9,  1862.  (See  Summary  of  Principal  Events 
p.  73.)  # 

Hamilton,  Andrew  J.  Mentioned ggg 

Hamilton,  D.  H.  Mentioned -qq 

Hammond,  J.  B.  Mentioned 7g  gg  213 

Hammond,  Lafayette.  Mentioned 570 

Hampton  Roads,  Va.  Naval  engagement  in,  March  8-9,  1862. 

Communications  from  Jefferson  Davis 7 

Reports  of 

Buchanan,  Franklin g 

Huger,  Benjamin * g 

Jones,  Catesby  Ap  R 20 

Magruder,  J.  Bankhead 23 

Mansfield,  Joseph  K.  F 4 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 7 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 2 

W ardrop,  David  W 5 

Wool,  John  E 3 


INDEX. 


759 


Hampton,  George  J.  Mentioned 

Hancock,  W.  S.  Mentioned 

Hand,  Albert  E.  Mentioned  

Hannah  (Vessel). 

Destruction  of,  August  12,  1862.  Report  of  Jack  Sands 

Mentioned 

Hanson,  Ly sander  E.  Mentioned — 

Happer,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Harbour,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned * 

Hardeman,  W.  P.  Mentioned 

Harding,  John. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  the  capture  of  the  Breaker,  August  12,  1862 . - 

Harkness,  Elijah  A.  Mentioned 

Harland,  Edward. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  battle  of  New  Berne,  N.  C., March  14,1862  — 

Harlow,  William  T.  Mentioned 

Harney,  William  S.  Mentioned 

Harrison,  Ogden.  Mentioned 

Harrison,  S.  R.  Mentioned 

Harrison,  Thomas.  Mentioned  

Harrison,  William  H.  Mentioned ............ 

Hartranft,  John  F. 

Mentioned 


Page. 

515,543 

392 

309 

618 

618 

581 

136 

615 

515,720 

612 

617 

96,219,346 

226,232,279, 281 

236 

319 

650 

340 

472 

610,612 

512 

..  78,99,221,223 


Reports  of 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  March  14, 1862  

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  February  8, 1862  104 

Harwood,  Franklin.  Mentioned - 569’5* 

Hasker,  Charles  H.  Mentioned ~ 

Haslett,  Robert  E.  Mentioned * * - * 150’ 

Hatch,  J.  P.  Correspondence  with  L.  J.  D’Epineuil 

Haughton,  Mr.  Mentioned lo 

Haughton,  J.  L. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  battle  of  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  14,  1862 - ^ 

Haughton’s  Mill,  Pollocksville  Road,  N.  C.  Skirmish  near,  April  27,  1862. 

Report  of  F.  W.  Egloffstein ^ 

Hawkins,  Mr.  Mentioned * 

Hawkins,  J.  D.  Mentioned 7Z 

Hawkins,  Rush  C. 

Correspondence  with 

Burnside,  Ambrose  

Dix,  John  A 

War  Department,  U.  

Mentioned  ..••••••»  - •••  - - - - lvO 

*194,"  305,’  306*  *M8, *31^313,  315-318,  320,  355, 357,  369,  381,  406-408, 464 

Reports  of 

Elizabeth  City,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  April  7-8,  1862 

Gatesville,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  May  7-8,  1862 - 334 

South  Mills,  Camden  County,  N.  C.  Engagement  at,  April  19, 1862  . 309, 313 
Winton,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  February  18-21,  1862,  and  skirmish, 

February  19,  1862 - 

Hawks,  Francis  T.  Mentioned 246,255,267 

Hawley,  Captain.  Mentioned - 


760 


INDEX. 


Hays,  George  Edward.  Mentioned 

Haywood,  Edward  Graham.  ^ 

Report  of  battle  of  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  14,  1862  5’  \ 

Hazard,  S.  F.  Mentioned 75*«n*Qfi  qn.qo 

Heath,  Roscoe  B.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  J.  B.  Anderson  ) ' 

Hebert,  Paul  O. 


Assignments  to  command . 
Correspondence  with 


719, 731 


Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A. 


Bates,  J . 

Bee,  Hamilton  P 

Cook,  Joseph  J 

Davis,  Samuel  Boyer . . 

Debray,  X.  B 

Holmes,  Theophiius  H 

Lee,  Robert  E 

McCulloch,  H.  E 

Richardson,  Daniel  C . 

Sibley,  Henry  H 

Texas,  Governor  of 


Mentioned . 


78, 99, 223, 231,412 


735 

734 

732 

710-712 

714 

723,727,735 

732 

713,716,719 

701,704-706 

698 

729 

733 

War  Department,  C.  S 697, 699," 700, 707 

„ * , , . 483, 604, 702, 709, 715, 716, 731 

Proclamation  declaring  martial  law  in  Texas 716 

Heckman,  Charles  A. 

Mentioned 

Reports  of 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  March  14, 1862 228 

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  February  8,  1862 ”.’**’*’  102 

Swansborough,  N.  C.  Reconnaissance  to,  August  14-15,  1862 350 

Young’s  Cross-Roads,  N.  C.  Reconnaissance  to,  July  26-29,  and  skirmish 

July  27,  1862 347 

Hedden,  James  A. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  February  8,  1862 91 

Helleday,  G.  B.  Mentioned 
Helper,  H.  H.  Mentioned  . 

Henningsen,  C.  F. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  A.  Wise 137.  143 

Mentioned 110  111 

118, 119, 123,  124,  137, 138,  143,  144,  150,  154,*  156,  158-160, 166, 167, 435 

Report  of  action  at  Elizabeth  City,  N.  C.,  February  10,  1862  191 

Henry,  Joseph  J.  Mentioned * 80  99 

Henry,  Patrick,  C.  S.  S. 

Herald,  Steamer.  Mentioned 


15 

201, 400 


Mentioned 8,12,14,41 


* 667 

Herbert,  George- H.  Mentioned 1. 308,309  314 

Herbert,  F.  T.  Mentioned ’ 57s 

Herrera,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned g06 

Herring,  Benjamin.  Mentioned *.*".!”.  12 

Herring,  William  A.  Mentioned .*...*”***."!.**.*  264 

Heth,  Henry.  Mentioned 422 

Heuvel,  Marinus.  Mentioned 506,516-518,520 


Hewitt,  Abram  S.  Mentioned 19 

Highlander,  Schooner.  Mentioned 91  202  212  214  351 

Highland  Light,  Steamer.  Mentioned 332 


INDEX. 


761 


Page. 

Hill,  Captain.  Mentioned 295> 296 

Hill,  D.  H. 

Assignments  to  command 

Correspondence  with  T.  L.  Clingman 476 

Mentioned 113, 127, 183, 184, 188, 418, 476, 478-480 

Hill,  G.  H. 

Correspondence  with  H.  M.  Shaw 424 

Mentioned 107, 115-117, 120, 124, 167, 170-172, 182-184, 420, 425 

Report  of  battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.,  February  8,  1862  181 

Hill,  M.  Asbury . Mentioned 1°5>  497 > 234> 235, 238 

Hindman,  T.  C. 

Assignments  to  command iOL 

Mentioned 719,  739>  784 

Hinton,  John  M.  Mentioned 482 

Hithree,  William.  Mentioned 839 

Hobbs,  Captain*.  Mentioned - 44^ 

Hobby,  A.  M. 

Correspondence  with  Hamilton  P.  Bee - 727 

Mentioned 617, 618, 620, 621, 624, 625 

Reports  of  bombardment  of  Corpus  Christi,  Tex.,  August  16-18,  1862 621,623 

Hodges,  J.  G.  Mentioned - 51 

Hoffman,  Gustav.  Mentioned 548 

Hoffman,  Southard.  Mentioned - 88,214,346 

Hoke,  Robert  F. 

Mentioned 244,246,255,256,259 

Report  of  battle  of  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  14,  1862  259 

Hoke,  William  J. 

Assignments  to  command 484 

Mentioned - 484> 484 

Holland,  James  B.  Mentioned 643 

Holmes,  James  H.  Mentioned 644 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H. 

Assignments  to  command 450,713 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 475 

Andrews,  W.  S.  466 

Branch,  L.O’B 248,249 

Hubert,  Paul  782 

Lee,  Robert  E 303, 331, 450, 452-458, 460-462, 464, 465, 467, 468, 470-472 

Martin,  J.  478 

War  D partment,  C.  392 

Mentioned 41,300,384, 

394,  450,  451,  455,  459,  460,  463,  464, 466,  469, 473, 475,  476,  478,  733, 734 

Homberger,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 606 

Homsley,  James  M.  Mentioned 615 

Hooker,  Joseph. 

Correspondence  with  John  A.  Dahlgren 20,22 

Mentioned ^9 

Hooper,  Mr.  Mentioned 613, 614 

Hooper,  C.  H.  Mentioned 348 

Hopkins,  J.  W.  Mentioned 107 

Hopper,  Captaiu.  Mentioned 485,702 

Horst,  Valentine.  Mentioned 299 

Horton,  W.  L.  Mentioned * 

Hosack,  John  P.  Mentioned - * 


762 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Houston,  Sub-Military  District.of.  (Confederate.) 

Constituted  and  limits  defined 700  717 

Debray,  X.  B.,  assumes  command  of 72j 

Flournoy,  George,  assigned  to  command  of 7 17 

Orders,  General,  series  1862  : No.  5, 721. 

Hovey,  O.  P.  Mentioned 605  gQg 

Hovey,  Solomon,  jr.  Mentioned ’ 99 

Howard,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 230 

Howard,  R.  V.  W.  Mentioned 5 

Howard,  William  A. 

Mentioned 80, 305, 310, 315, 319, 320, 322, 413 

Eeport  of  engagement  at  South  Mills,  Camden  County,  N.  C.,  April  19, 1862.  308 

Howe,  Marshall  S.  Mentioned 566, 572, 576, 593, 664 

Howland,  Cornelius,  jr.  Mentioned 216 

Howland,  George  W.  Mentioned 492, 498-501, 530, 531, 536, 590-592, 646 

Hubbard,  D.  A.  Mentioned • 520 

Hudson,  P.  W.  Mentioned 88 

Hudson,  William  L.  Correspondence  with  Navy  Department,  U.  S 25 

Hufty,  Charles.  Mentioned 222  229 

Huger,  Benjamin. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 121, 431, 434, 469 

Blanchard,  A.  G 325,438 

Congress,  C.  S 1X7 

Davis,  Jefferson 45  429 

Lee,  Robert  E 326, 331, 332, 449, 463,  464, 466 

Loring,  W.  W 469 

Shaw,  H.  M 124, 125, 429 

Talcott,  T.  M.  R 54 

Taylor,  John  S 419* 

War  Department,  C.  S. . . 43, 54-56, 59, 65, 68,  111,  115-117, 147, 163, 167, 420, 429 
Wise,  Henry  A.  114, 115, 117, 119, 126, 133-135, 146, 148, 150, 152-155, 157-163, 427 

Mentioned 38, 44, 112, 118-124, 126, 131-135, 137-139 

142-144,146-148,  150,152,  154,155,  157,158,  160-171,173,  184,188-191, 

331,367,386,420,422,  423,426,  427,  435-438,  446,  457,  467,  469,470,  472 


Reports  of 

Hampton  Roads,  Va.  Naval  engagement  in,  March  8-9,  1862 6 

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  February  8, 1862 110,  111,  113 

South  Mills,  Camden  County,  N.  C.  Engagement  at,  April  19, 1862. . . 324, 326 
Huger,  Frank.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Benjamin  Huger.) 

Hughes,  Thomas  W.  B.  Mentioned 213,214 

Humphry,  Lotte  W.  Mentioned 295,296,348 

Humphreys,  George  H.  Mentioned 1 319 

Hunchback,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 397,399 

Hunter,  Captain.  Mentioned 191 

Hunter,  Charles.  Mentioned 548, 685 

Hunter,  David. 

Correspondence  with  Colorado,  Governor  of 630 

Mentioned 631, 634, 636, 637, 682 

Hunter,  R.  M.  T.  Mentioned 58,66 

Hunter,  S. 

Correspondence  with  John  R.  Baylor 707 

Mentioned 677, 694, 707 

Hunter,  William.  Mentioned 604 

Hussar,  Steamer.  Mentioned 80, 88, 91, 92, 351, 359 


INDEX, 


763 


Page. 

Hynes,  John.  Mentioned 285,290 

[ndiana  Troops.  Mentioned 

Infantry — Regiments:  20th, 5, 15. 

Indians.  Policy  toward 563-565, 571, 586, 587, 590, 597, 681, 690, 695, 708 

[ndian  Territory.  Military  departments  embracing 713 

En galls,  Rufus. 

Correspondence  with  Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A &* 

Mentioned 

Ingraham,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 498 

Iowa,  Sloop.  Mentioned 

Iredell,  C.  Jones.  Mentioned 32 

Ireland,  John. 

Mentioned ’ ’ 

Report  of  operations  at  Flour  Bluffs,  Tex.,  September  13-14,  1862 62b 

Ives,  Thomas  P.  Mentioned 80’ 86’  206> 365’ 

Jackson,  A.  M.  Mentioned 506>  515>  525> 661 

Jackson,  M.  M.  Correspondence  with  State  Department,  U.  S 667 

Jackson,  N.  Mentioned 2^8 

Jacobs,  Edward  A.  Mentioned * 538 

Jacocks,  Private.  Mentioned  * 182 

Jamestown,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 3, 4, 8, 14, 16 

Jardine,  Edward.  Mentioned 311>  p15 

Jarvis,  Horatio  D.  Mentioned 344 ’ 342 

Jeffers,  W.  N.  Mentioned 388 

Jefferson,  J.  R.  Mentioned - 

Jenkins,  F.  H.  Mentioned 

Jepson,  Benjamin.  Mentioned 93 

Jett,  William  G.  Mentioned 512’^4® 

Jewell,  Private.  Mentioned 294 

Jocknick,  George  F. 

Mentioned 34 

Reports  of 

Reconnaissance  to  Tranter’s  Creek,  N.  C.,  June  24,  1862 343 

Skirmish  at  Tranter’s  Creek,  N.  C.,  May  30,  1862 339 

Johnson,  Benjamin.  Mentioned 626 

Johnson,  B.  F.  Mentioned 256 

Johnson,  David  R.  Mentioned 104>  222> 239 

Johnston,  J.  A.  Mentioned 114,144,148,149,427 

Johnston,  Joseph  E.  Mentioned. ..  48, 62, 161, 164, 165, 379, 387, 392, 423, 430, 468, 469 

Johnston,  Robert.  Mentioned 36, 37 

John  Trucks,  Ship.  Mentioned 394>  357, 361 

Jolley,  David.  Mentioned 642 

Jones, . Mentioned 386 

Jones,  Catesby  Ap  R. 

Mentioned 7>  9-11, 60 

Report  of  engagement  in  Hampton  Roads,  Va.,  March  8-9,  1862 19 

Jones,  D.  K. 

Assignments  to  command 434 

Mentioned 434 

Jones,  J.  C.  Mentioned 343 

Jones,  John.  Mentioned 9,r>4>  988} 999 

Jones,  Joseph  N.  Mentioned i*  — 297 

Jones,  L.  H.  Mentioned 542,544 


764 


INDEX. 


Jones,  R.  E.  Mentioned 


Page. 

- 617,622 

Jones,  S.  Mentioned 43! 

Jordan,  John  B.  Mentioned ggg 

Jordan,  John  V. 

Mentioned 99, 112, 115-117, 156, 157, 166, 170, 171, 174, 175, 179, 184, 185 

Report  of  battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  February  8,  1862 ... 175 

Jordan,  Powhatan. 

Mentioned ' ^g 

Report  of  engagement  at  Yalverde,  N.  Mex.,  February  21,  1862 523 

Joslyn,  Jerome  B.  Mentioned 35Q 

Joynes,  Edward  S.  (For  correspondence,  see  War  Department,  C.  S .) 


- 148,149 

F ort  Garland,  Colo. , transferred  from 631 


Kahukee,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Kansas,  Department  of.  (Union.) 

Kansas  Troops.*  Mentioned. 

Regiments— 2d,  664. 

Kavanaugh,  F.  E.  Mentioned 528  529 

Keffer,  Captain.  Mentioned 27 

Keith,  James  F.  Mentioned 592 

Kellersberg,  J. 

Correspondence  with  X.  B.  Debray 729 

Mentioned 722 

Kelly,  Private.  Mentioned 549 

Kelly,  James  H.  Mentioned 333 

Kelsey,  William  A.  Mentioned 285  288  289 

Kemper,  J ames  L.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Virginia  House  of  Delegates.) 


Mentioned 261 


Kesler,  J.  M. 

Kevill,  Thomas.  Mentioned 21 

Killough,  J.  G.  Mentioned 525  525 

Kimball,  Edward  A.  Mentioned 87  206  306 

King,  A.  J.  Mentioned * 577 

King,  John  A.  Mentioned 105, 107, 235, 236, 281, 286 

Kinney,  A.  Mentioned 236 

Kinney,  T.  C.  Mentioned 141, 145, 146, 156, 166, 172, 176, 186 

Kirk,  W.  D.  Mentioned 544 

Kittredge,  J.  W.  Mentioned 604,611-613,622,624-626,703,723-725,728,732 

Kittredge,  W.  A.  Mentioned 563, 587 

Kitty  Stimpson,  Ship.  Mentioned 351 

Kitty  Taney,  Sloop.  Mentioned 703 

Kneeland,  Samuel.  Mentioned 210 

Knight,  C.  W.  Mentioned 170  177 

Kraeuter,  John  L.  Mentioned 299 

Krauth,  Hermann.  Mentioned 299 

Kurtz,  John. 

Mentioned 87,88,214 

Reports  of 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  March  14,  1862  215 

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  February  8,  1862 ' 93 

Lamb,  Junius.  Mentioned 33,34 

Lancer,  Steamer.  Mentioned f 80, 99, 229, 340,  351,  359 

Landers,  Henry  B.  Mentioned 983 

Lane,  Ellsberry  R.  Mentioned 515, 545 

Lane,  James  H.  (Confederate.) 

Assignments  to  command 444 

Mentioned 444 


Organizations  designated  without  regard  to  arm  of  service. 


INDEX.  765 

Page. 

701 

Lane,  James  H.  (Union.)  Mentioned ^ 

Lang,  Anthony.  Mentioned 506* 5 i4' 519-521 

Lang,  Willis  L.  Mentioned 506>  514’ 519 

Langner,  Captain.  Mentioned 2Q4 

Langston,  Private.  Mentioned 

Larned,  D.  R.  Mentioned ’ 2fi3 

Lasater,  H.  J.  Mentioned ' 

Latham,  A.  C.  Mentioned - ’ 

Lauman,  Hiram  J.  Mentioned 

Lawrence,  Joseph  J.  Mentioned * 

Lawson,  John  Mentioned ' ’ 

Lawton,  J.  W.  Mentioned - Z 

Leadbetter,  Danville.  Mentioned  ..I 94 

Leahy,  Michael.  Mentioned *"9 

Leavenworth,  Jesse  H.  Mentioned 

Leddy,  Farrell.  Mentioned * 

Lee,  A.  H.  Mentioned 110,32b 

Lee,  Charles  C. 

Correspondence  with  L.  O’B.  Branch — - 

Mentioned 243-247, 249>  250, 263, 266 

Report  of  battle  of  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  14,  1862  263 

Lee,  G.  W.  C.  Mentioned 45 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Jefferson  Davis.) 

Lee,  Horace  C. 

Mentioned 88>214>412 

Reports  of 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  March  14,  1862 219 

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  February  8, 1862 96 

Trenton  and  Pollocksville,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  J uly  24-28,  1862  ....  345 

qo 

Lee,  R.  D.  Mentioned 

Lee,  Robert  E. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General's  Office,  C.  S.  A 302, 469 

Anderson,  Joseph  429 

French,  S.  448,463,472 

Hdbert,  Paul  O 713,716,719 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H.  303, 331, 450, 452-458, 460-462,  464, 465, 467, 468, 470-472 

Huger,  Benjamin 326, 331, 332, 449, 463, 464, 466 

Magruder,  J.  Bankhead 34, 35, 64, 65, 68, 70 

Martin,  J.  4/9 

North  Carolina,  Adjutant-General  of 459,471 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 478> 479 

Mentioned ^4»  422, 

161,  331,332,  379,  423,  433,443,451,454,  461-463,  465,467,470,  472,730 

Lee,  S.  S.  Mentioned - 135 

Lee,  William  R.  Mentioned 17 

Le  Gendre,  Charles  W.  Mentioned 222,230 

Leggett,  Robert.  Mentioned 93 

Leither,  Ernst.  Mentioned - 300 

Lemon,  John.  Mentioned 599 

Leona,  Augustine.  Mentioned 942 

Leonard,  Mr.  Mentioned 720,721 

Lester,  Mr.  Mentioned... J 192 

Lesueur,  Charles  M.  Mentioned 515,543 

Letcher,  John.  Mentioned 42 


766 


INDEX, 


Leventhorpe,  C.  Mentioned 431  43^449 

Lewelling,  J.  W.  Mentioned * ’504 

Lewis,  George  W.  Mentioned 34^  ^ 

Lewis,  W.  G.  Mentioned 246  260  261 

Lewis,  W.  H.  Mentioned 527  539  636’  e54 

Leyra,  Jose.  Mentioned 504 

Liles,  E.  R.  Mentioned 176  177 

Lilly,  Edwin.  Mentioned ’615 

Lincoln,  Abraham. 

Correspondence  with 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E 404 

Dahlgren,  J ohn  A ’ ’ 20 

Dix,  John  A ; ” 407 

War  Department,  U.  S 3gg 

Mentioned 20, 25, 29, 207, 368, 

371,  375,  380, 387,  391,  Jj.>-3 99,  401,  403-407, 409, 561, 562, 594, 644, 692 
Lindsay,  Mr.  Mentioned 120 

Lindsey,  Hugh.  Mentioned 12 

Littlepage,  H.  B.  Mentioned * ” 

Livenskiold,  Charles. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  F.  Neal 72q 

Mentioned 

T)  - 620 

Jxeport  ot  operations  m Aransas  Bay,  Tex.,  July  7-17,  1862 610 

Lockridge,  S.  A.  Mentioned 506, 513-520, 522, 523, 525 

Lockwood,  Samuel.  Mentioned 284  382  386 

Logan,  S.  M.  Mentioned ’ ’53g 

Long,  J.  C.  Mentioned ^4 

Loomis,  Gustavus.  Mentioned 

Lord  Lyons,  Schooner.  Mentioned 044  042 

Lord,  R.  S.  C.  * 

Court  of  Inquiry  on  conduct  of.  Engagement  at  Valverde,  N.  Mex.,  Feb- 
ruary 21, 1862  504 

Mentioned 490,  504>  505)  530>  646 

Lormg,  Charles  G.,  jr.  Mentioned 206  356 

Loring,  W.  W. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  Huger 409 

Mentioned .Q- 

Lougona,  Martin.  Mentioned 674 

Louisiana,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 236  269 

Louisiana.  Military  departments  embracing 713  731 

Louisiana  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery  Batteries : De  Goumay's,  37;  Donaldsonvi’lle  Artillery,  37 : 
Girardey’s,  111,438. 

Infantry— Battalions : Zouave  ( Coppens ),  37;  1st,  37;  3d,  449,  450,  460,  463. 
Regiments:  1st,  325,327,472;  2d,  37,51,57;  5th,  37,51;  10th,  14th,  37. 
Louisiana,  District  of.  (Confederate.) 

Constituted  aud  limits  defined 734 

Taylor,  Richard,  assigned  to  command 734 

Lovell,  Mansfield.  Mentioned 611 

Lowe,  Thomas  L.  Mentioned 24r 

Loyall,  B.  P.  

Correspondence  with  H.  M.  Shaw 42g 

Mentioned 114,  450,  152)  171>  182j  183j  419>  420)  427 

Lubbock,  Francis  R.  Mentioned _ 074  7q2  740 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Texas , Governor  of  .) 


INDEX. 


787 


Luckett,  P.  N.  Mentioned 

Lydig,  Philip  M.,  jr.  Mentioned 

Lyman,  Luke.  Mentioned 

Lynch,  William  F. 

Correspondence  with 

Navy  Department,  C.  S 

Wise,  Henry  A 

Mentioned 

131, 135, 136, 142, 146-150, 152, 153, 

Lyon,  Isaac  S.  Mentioned 

Lyon,  John  B.  Mentioned 

Lyons,  Lord,  Schooner.  Mentioned 

Lyons,  PeHer.  Mentioned 

McCafferty,  Matthew  J.  Mentioned 

McChesney,  Joseph  M.  Mentioned 

McCleave,  William.  Mentioned 

McClellan,  George  B. 


Page. 

612,701,720 

107,234,235, 238, 240 
219,412 


147 

130 

110,126,129- 

157,  185,  189,191,  192,426,428,  429 

292 

192 

641,642 

134 

--96,219 

222,229,350 

554, 559, 589-591, 677, 708 


Correspondence  with 

Adiutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 379 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E 374, 377, 379, 389, 392, 393, 405, 406 

Fox,  G.  V ^ 

W ar  Department 28, 32, 387 

Wool,  John  ^ 30 

(For  correspondence  as  General-in-Chief,  see  Army  Headquarters.) 

Mentioned 16, 17, 20, 29-32, 41, 48, 75, 273, 360, 367, 370, 371, 380, 383, 384, 

386-388,394,395,  398,  399,404,  405,407-410,  464,  474,557,569,  570,629 

Me  Comas,  W.  W.  Mentioned 325,327-329,331 

McCook,  Roderick  S.  Mentioned 202,203,212,213,223,230,231 

Me  Co  wn,  Jerome  B.  Mentioned • - - 519 

McCulloch,  H.  E. 

Assumes  command  in  Eastern  Texas.... 718 

Command  of,  styled  Sub- Military  District  of  the  Rio  Grande 700 

Correspondence  with 

Adiutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 734 

Hubert,  Paul  0 701,704-706 

Mentioned ; 799 

Orders,  General,  series  1862 : No.  5 718 

Report  of  engagement  in  Aransas  Bay,  Tex.,  February  22,  1862  525 

McDaniel,  Mr.  Mentioned 346 

McDermott,  George.  Mentioned 487 > 634> 647 

McDowell,  Irvin. 

Correspondence  with  George  B.  McClellan 30 

Mentioned 393’462 

McFerran,  John  C.  Mentioned 582,664 

McGrath,  Peter.  Mentioned 533, 535, 539, 540 

McGinnis  [McGuinness?  ],  Joseph  H.  Mentioned 514, 524, 525 

Mclntire,  William  J.  Mentioned 5,6 

McIntyre,  A.  J.  Mentioned 264 

Mack,  General.  Mentioned 49 

McKay,  William.  Mentioned 350 

McKee,  Abram  W.  Mentioned 222,2J*9 

McKinney, . Mentioned 613 

McKinstry,  Robert.  Mentioned. 287 


768 


INDEX. 


McLaughlin,  John.  Mentioned 

McLaws,  Lafayette. 

Correspondence  with 

Cabell,  Henry  Coulter g^, 

Magruder,  J.  Bankhead 51  7q, 

Mentioned 36*  37 

Maclin,  Sackfield. 

Correspondence  with  Daniel  C.  Richardson . gpg 

Mentioned g^ 

McMillan,  A.  N.  Mentioned ggg 

McMullen,  William.  Mentioned gg^ 

McNamara,  Michael.  Mentioned 333 

McNeill,  Schooner.  Mentioned 4§2  7g£ 

McNeill , H.  C.  Mentioned 519, 539, 525, 605,  606^  660 

McNulty,  James  M. 

Mentioned 504,  559)  570j  5gl>  5g2}  601 

Report  of  expedition  from  Southern  California  through  Arizona  to  North- 
western Texas  aod  New  Mexico,  April  ^September  20,  1862  594 

McPhaill,  H.  A.  Mentioned 515  525 

McRae,  Alexander.  Mentioned 4g7_ 

490,  492, 493-496, 498-501, 522, 630, 634, 636, 637, 639, 679 
McRae,  C.  D.  Report  of  affair  on  Nueces  River,  near  Fort  Clark,  Tex.,  Au- 
gust 10,  1862 614 

McWhorter,  R.  L.  Mentioned 32g 

Macon,  Fort,  N.  C.  Siege  of,  March  23-April  26, 1862. 

Capitulation  of.  Terms  of 27ft 

Communications  from 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E 275 

Parke,  John  G 277 

White,  M.  J . 276, 278 

Demand  for  surrender  of,  and  refusal 275-278 

Orders,  congratulatory 276 

Reports  of 

Andrews,  William  J 291 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E 270  272  273 

Flagler,  Daniel  W 285 

Morris,  Lewis  O 289- 

Parke,  John  G 276,278-281 

Prouty,  Merrick  F 288 

Rodman,  Isaac  P 299 

White,  Moses  J 293 

Maggi,  Alberto  C. 

Mentioned 7g  99, 

Report  of  battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  February  8,  1862  109 

Magoffin,  Major.  Mentioned 506 

Magruder,  J.  Bankhead. 

Address  to  soldiers  Army  of  the  Peninsula 53. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A . . 33, 38, 44,  49-51, 57-59, 63-65 

Buchanan,  Franklin 50  69 

Davis,  J efferson 32 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A i 62 

Ewell,  Benjamin  S 43. 

Lee,  Robert  E 34, 35, 64, 65, 6*,  70 

McLaws,  Lafayette 51  79 


INDEX. 


769 

Page. 


Magruder,  J.  Bankhead— Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Norris,  William 60 

War  Department,  C.  S 35, 36, 51, 52 

Mentioned — - 4, 26, 33, 36, 37 , 43, 44, 48-50, 56, 69, 425, 455, 713 

Report  of  engagement  in  Hampton  Roads,  Va.,  March  8-9, 1862 13 

Mahone,  William.  Mentioned 38, 162, 163,  423 

Maillefert,  Benjamin.  Mentioned ; 270,308 

Maine,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 20,24 

Maine,  Thomas.  Mentioned 339 

Major  Minter,  Schooner  (Elma).  Mentioned 612, 618 

Maker,  John  C.  Mentioned - 340,341 

Mallory,  Charles  K.  Mentioned 13 

Mallory,  S.  R.  Mentioned - — 7,33,64,132,146,147 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Navy  Department , C.  S.) 

Maloney,  Peter.  Mentioned — 692 

Maltby,  William  H.  Mentioned 703 

Manly,  J.  H.  Correspondence  with  Joseph  J.  Cook 709 

Mann,  W.  E.  Mentioned ........ — - 191,192 

Mann,  William.  Mentioned - - 612,620-622 

Mansfield,  Joseph  K.  F. 

Mentioned 15 

Report  of  engagement  in  Hampton  Roads,  March  8-9, 1862. 4 

Marblehead,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 26 

Marcy,  Azbon  C.  Mentioned - 684 

Marigny,  Mandeville.  Mentioned — - 713 

Marmaduke,  H.  H.  Mentioned ....  ----  - — ----  ----  H 

Marraro,  [Navarro,  Angel].  Mentioned 696 

Marsh,  Thomas  B.  Mentioned 99,222,292 

Marshall,  Mr.  Mentioned - 690 

Marshall,  William  F.  Mentioned 530,531,534 

Marston,  John.  Correspondence  with  Navy  Department,  U.  S 18 

Martial  Law. 

New  Mexico.* - 561,562,600,681,684,692-694 

North  Carolina,  Department  of.  (Union) 380, 397 

Texas 702,712,716,735,736 

Virginia,  Southeastern 45,46,56 

Martin,  Adam  B.  Mentioned - 337 

Martin,  James  G. 

Assignments  to  command - 475,480 

Correspondence  with 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H , - 473 

Lee,  Robert  E 479 

Mentioned 461, 472, 475, 476, 478-480 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  also  North  Carolina , Adjutant-General  of.) 

Martin,  Knott  V.  Mentioned - 216 

Martin,  William  J.  Mentioned - 682 

Martin,  W.  F.  Mentioned 137,138,191 

Martin,  W.  P.  Mentioned 266 

Martindale,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned - 334 

Martinez,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 299 

Martinez,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 606 

Martinez,  Marceline.  Mentioned 604 


'Embraces  New  Mexico  and  Arizona. 


49  R R — VOL  IX 


770 


INDEX. 


Maryland  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments : 2d,  336-338,376,381;  5th,  30. 

Mason,  C.  M.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Paul  O.  Hubert.) 

Mason,  C.  T.  Mentioned 

Massachusetts  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery— Batteri es:  ( Independent ),  6th,  15. 

Infantry — R egiments : 16th,  15 ; 17th,  335, 345-347, 376, 381, 412,  414 ; 21st, 
77,  78,  85,  97-103,  178,  203,  204,  210-212,  217,  221,  223-229,  234,  238,  239, 
305-308.  312,  313,317-323,  329,337,  358,381;  23d,  78,  85-88,  93,94,96,97, 
101,  203,  210-213,215-217,  220,  333,  334,  358,  381,  414;  24th,  77,79,  85-88, 
92,94-96,99,203,  210-213,217,218,  224,237,269,  270,  340-343,358,  381,414, 
417 ; 25th,  78, 85-88, 94-96, 101, 105, 203, 210-213, 216, 218, 219, 335, 345, 346, 
358, 381, 412, 414 ; 27th,  78, 85-89, 96, 97, 101, 104, 106, 203, 210-212, 216, 216- 


220, 237, 238, 345, 349, 358, 381, 412-414 ; 29th,  15. 

Massasoit,  Steamer.  Mentioned 308,320,414 

Mathewson,  Charles. 

Mentioned 215,233 

Report  of  battle  of  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  14, 1862 236 

Mauran,  Edward  C.  Mentioned 291 

Maverick, . Mentioned 706 

Mayes,  John.  Mentioned * 335,338,339 

Mayo,  James  M.  Mentioned. . 265 

Mays,  Benjamin.  Mentioned 707 

Meade,  R.  K.  Mentioned 35,241,243,246,448 

Means,  James.  Mentioned 411 

Meeker,  E.  P.  Mentioned 213 

Meigs,  Montgomery  C.  Mentioned 20,21,395,670 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Quartermaster- General’ 8 Office,  U.  S.  A.) 

Meinhold,  Charles.  Mentioned 495,496,505 

Menger, . Mentioned 706 

Mercer,  K.  A.,  sr.  Mentioned 484,485 

Mercer,  K.  A.,jr.  Mentioned 485 

Merrimac,  U.  S.  Frigate  (C.  S.  S.  Virginia).  Mentioned 2-11, 

13, 14, 16, 18-24, 26-31, 44, 50, 57, 62-66, 68, 142, 371, 386, 387, 389, 457 

Merritt,  Henry.  Mentioned 214,216 

Messinger,  Daniel. 

Mentioned 88, 212 

Report  of  battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.,  February  8,  1862 89 

Metamora,  Steamer.  Mentioned 28 

Metcalf,  A.  Mentioned 549 

Metzler,  G.  Mentioned 54,111,156 

Mexico.  Relations  with.  Communications  from 

Bustamente,  Juan 675 

Carleton,  James  H 690 

Chase,  Franklin 641 

Coe,  John  M 642 

Mexico,  Chargd  d’ Affaires 675 

Pierce,  L.,jr 656,674,684 

State  Department,  U.  S 641,648,673,675,684 

War  Department,  U.  S 650,656 

Wright,  G 668 

Mexico,  Charge  d’ Affaires.  Correspondence  with 

Bustamente,  Juan 675 

State  Department,  U.  S 675 

Michigan  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry—  Regiments : 1st,  26,30. 


INDEX, 


771 


Page. 

Middleton,  Thomas  W.  Mentioned 222,229 

Midnight,  Bark.  Mentioned 702,703 

Mifflin?  Fort,  Commanding  Officer.  Correspondence  with  Army  Headquar- 
ters  — 19 

Militia. 

New  Mexico 488, 604-607, 633, 634, 636, 640, 643-646 

North  Carolina 137, 138, 155, 157, 191, 192, 332, 421, 426, 433, 446 

Texas 674 

Virginia 32, 42, 43, 50, 58, 67, 71 

Millar,  Robert.  Mentioned 239, 291 

]\/mi  Creek,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at,  July  26,  1862.  (See  Summary  of  Principal 
Events , p.  73. ) 

Miller,  E.  A.  Mentioned - ISO 

Miller,  J.  A.  Mentioned 227 

Miller,  S.  C.  Mentioned 604 

Milligan,  Mr.  Mentioned - 588 

Mills,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 545 

Mills,  William  W.  Mentioned 496 

Minis,  Davis,  jr.  Mentioned 83 

Minnesota,  U.  S.  Frigate.  Mentioned 2-4, 6, 9, 10, 18, 21, 22, 25 

Minor,  Robert  D.  Mentioned 9,10,12,13 

Minter,  Major,  Schooner  (Elma).  Mentioned : 612,618 

Mishler,  Lyman.  Mentioned 487,495,496,634 

Mississippi  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Ba tteries  : Grisham’s,  447, 460. 

Infantry—  Regiments : 2d,  37;  6th,  16th,  379. 

Missouri.  Military  departments  embracing 713,731 

Mitchel,  . Mentioned 706 

Mitchell,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned - 268 

Mix.  John.  Mentioned 338,414 

Mix,  Simon  H.  Report  of  skirmishes  near  Young’s  Cross-Roads  and  Pollocks- 

ville,  N.  C.,  May  15-16,  1862 338 

Monitor,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 1,3,4,6,7,10, 

14, 15, 17, 18, 20-25, 27-31, 44, 62-64, 66, 68, 69, 371, 386 

Monte  Christo,  Schooner.  Mentioned 610,613,721 

Montgomery,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 684,685 

Montoya,  Ygnacio.  Mentioned 605 

Moore,  Mr.  Mentioned 309 

Moore,  Colonel.  Mentioued - 192,439 

Moore,  James  V.  Mentioned 301 

Moore,  John  C. 

Command  of,  styled  Suft-Military  District  of  Houston 700 

Mentioned - 607 , 7 00 

Moore,  Trancer.  Mentioned ...  504 

Moore,  Tredwell.  Mentioned 559,692 

Morgan,  E,  D.  Mentioned 384 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  New  York,  Governor  of .) 

Morgenstern,  John.  Mentioned 299 

Morley,  M.  B.  Mentioned 80 

Morris,  George  U.  Mentioned 2 

Morris,  John  A.  Mentioned 98, 99, 104, 208, 222, 306, 336, 337 

Morris,  Lewis  O. 

Mentioned 278-280, 282-284, 286, 287 

Report  of  siege  of  Fort  Macon,  N.  C.,  March  23-April  26,  1862 289 

Morris,  Richard  H.  Mentioned 308,309 


772 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Morris,  Robert  M.  Mentioned 492, 498-501, 551, 664, 667 

Mortimore,  William.  Mentioned 492,496,504,647 

Moss,  H.  C.  Mentioned 609 

Mote,  Henry.  Mentioned 623 

Mott,  Robert.  Mentioned 611 

Moulton,  Orson.  Mentioned 345 

Mo  wry,  Sylvester.  Mentioned 690, 693-695 

Muhsam,  Adolph.  Mentioned 299,300 

Munford,  C.  Ellis.  Mentioned 141 

Munitions  of  War.  Deficiencies  in,  reported  by  Confederate  officials 112 

129,132,134,138,155-157,426,436,437,  459,  461,  463,  464,  719,  720,722 

Munro,  N.  G.  Mentioned 172 

Mustang,  Launch.  Mentioned 604 

Myers,  A.  C.  Mentioned 52, 71, 123, 124 

Nagel,  Charles.  Mentioned 300 

Nashville,  Steamer.  Mentioned 382,386 

Nauman,  G.  Mentioned 4 

Navy  Department,  C.  S. 

Correspondence  with 

Lynch,  W.  F 147 

War  Department,  C.  S 427 

Report  of  naval  engagement  in  Hampton  Roads,  March  8-9, 1862 7 

Navy  Department,  U.  S. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 29 

Army  Headquarters 353 

Dahlgren,  John  A 22, 25 

Fox,  G.  V 18,21,25 

Goldsborough,  L.  M 368 

Hudson,  William  L 25 

Marston,  John 18 

Paulding,  Hiram - 17, 24 

W ar  Department,  U.  S 28, 32, 396 

Report  of  naval  engagement  in  Hampton  Roads,  Ya.,  March  8-9, 1862 1 

Neal,  Benjamin  F. 

Correspondence  with  Charles  Livenskiold 720 

Mentioned 483, 484, 486, 525, 603, 610-612, 703 

Reports  of  Aransas  Bay,  Tex. 

Engagement  in,  February  22, 1862  526 

Operations  in,  July  7-17, 1862 613 

Neill,  Edward  M.  Mentioned ^ 97,99,222 

Nelson,  Albert  A.  Mentioned 517 

Nelson,  George.  Mentioned 530,531 

Nethercutt,  John  H.  Mentioned 301,473 

Neuse  Road,  N.  C.  Expedition  on,  July  28, 1862.  Report  of  C.  D.  Sanford..  349 
New  Berne,  N.  C. 

Battle  of,  March  14, 1862. 

Casualties.  Returns  of 

Confederate  forces 247 

Union  forces 210,211 

Communications  from 

Branch,  L.  O’B 248, 249, 371 

War  Department,  U.  S 207 

Orders,  congratulatory 207 


INDEX. 


773 

Page. 


New  Berne,  N.  C.— Continued. 

Battle  of,  March  14, 1862. 

Reports  of 

Barbour,  William  M — - . ° 

Branch,  L.  24®’24* 

Burnside,  Ambrose  197 ’ 199’ 201 

Campbell,  Reuben  P - - 

Church,  William  - 2uy  ’ 2iU 

Clark,  H.J.B 

Clark,  Williams 

Drake,  Albert  - 

Ferrero,  Edward ... • • * 

Foster,, John  244 

Gilmer,  J ohn  A.,jr — 

Harland,  Edward - 

Hartranft,  John  

Hanghton,  J.  

Haywood,  Edward  Graham 251 

Heckman , Charles  A 228 

Hoke,  Robert  259 

Kurtz,  John 2^ 

Lee,  Charles  2 

Lee,  Horace  C 2*9 

Mathewson,  Charles 236 

Parke,  J ohn  - 232 

Reno,  Jesse  L ...... ...... ....  ----  220 

7 237 

Rodman,  Isaac  P • • 

2fi1 

Sinclair,  James 

Spruill,  S.  252 

Stevenson,  Thomas  21 ' 

Upton,  Edwin 2*8 

Vance,  Zebulon  B 2^4 

Williamson,  Robert  298 

Wright,  John - 239 

Sketch  of  battle-field 248 

Foster,  John  G.,  appointed  Military  Governor  of 371 

New  Berne,  N.  C.,  Commanding  Officer.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see 
Ambrose  E.  Burnside.) 

New  Brunswick,  Steamer.  Mentioned 91,93,351,359 

Newcomb,  Mr.  Mentioned 586 

New  Hampshire  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments : 6th,  296,  305-307,309,310,  312,  314,317,  318,320,321, 

329, 357, 358, 369, 381. 

New  Jersey  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments:  9th,  78,  84,  85,  97-99,102-104,  203,  210,  211,221,223, 
228-232, 281, 283, 285, 295, 298, 348, 350, 358, 381, 386, 412, 414. 

New  Mexico.* 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Canby,  Edward  R.  S 632,633, 

647,648,649,  658,659,669-671,  673,  676,  678-680,  682,  686,  688,  689,695 

Carleton,  James  695 

Chapin,  Gurden - 634 

Chivington,  J.  M - 977 

Colorado,  Governor  of 631 

* Embraces  also  Territory  of  Arizona. 


774 


INDEX. 


New  Mexico — Continued.  ^>a&e* 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Cutler,  Benjamin  C 690  694 

Davis,  Jefferson **’  ’747 

Donaldson,  James  L 635-637 

Gray  don,  James g74 

Hunter,  D g30 

Hunter,  S % 797 

Lee,  Robert  E 

New  Mexico,  Governor  of. . 629, 637, 640, 643-645, 651, 656, 659, 661, 663, 665, 672 
Norris,  Basil 

Paul,  G.  R . 645,  648>  652-655, 663 

Roberts,  B.  S g66 

Roberts,  J ames ........  . 656  667 

Sibley,  H.  H 632,714 

Slough,  J.P ’654 

State  Department,  U.  S 629,  640,643,690 

Steele,  William 687, 707, 719, 721 

War  Department,  C.  S 7q6 

Authority  to  raise  troops  in,  for  Confederate  service  706 

Confederate  forces  in.  Pursuit  of,  April  13-22,  1862.  Reports  of 

Canby,  Edward  R.  S 559 

Paul,  Gabriel  R 662 

Roberts,  Benjamin  S 662 

Expedition  to,  from  Kansas.  Communications  from 

Denver,  J.  W 659 

Halleck,  Henry  W 659 

Martial  law  in  561,  562, 600, 681, 684, 692-694 

Military  organization  of  Arizona  by  Union  officials 561,562,692,693 

Militia 488, 604-607, 633, 634, 636, 640, 643-646 

Operations  in.  (See 

Feb.  21.  Valverde,  N.  Mex.  Engagement  at. 

Mar.  2.  Albuquerque,  M.  Mex.  Abandoned  by  Union  forces. 

3.  Cubero,  N.  Mex.  Capture  of. 

4.  Santa  Fe,  N.  Mex.  Abandonment  by  Union  forces. 

26.  Apache  Canon,  X Mex.  Skirmish  at. 

28.  Glorieta,  X.  Mex.  Engagement  at. 

April  8.  Albuquerque,  X.  Mex.  Skirmish  at. 

13-22.  Pursuit  of  Confederate  forces  in  Few  Mexico,  etc. 

13 -September  20.  California  Column. 

15.  Peralta , X.  Mex.  Skirmish  at. 

15.  Picacha  Pass,  Ariz.  Skirmish  at. 

25.  Socorro,  AT.  Mex.  Affair  at. 

May  20.  Tucson,  Ariz.  Occupied  by  Union  forces. 

21.  Paraje , X.  Mex.  Affair  at. 

23.  Craig,  Fort,  N.  Mex.  Affair  near „ 

July  15.  Apache  Pass,  Ariz.  Skirmish  at.) 

Proclamation  to  citizens  of * 562  g92  g99 

Re-enforcements  for.  Communications  from 

Canby,  Edward  R.  S 669 

Denver,  J.  W 659 

Donaldson,  James  L 670 

Halleck,  Henry  W 650, 656, 659 

War  Department,  U.  S 650,670 

Watts,  John  S 650 


INDEX. 


775 

Page. 


New  Mexico,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with  g63 

State  Department,'  U.'  S.’. 629. 637, 640, 643-645, 651, 656, 659, 661, 663, 665, 672 

NC  totaen Graydon-s,  489, 493  499^50,  Regi- 
ments- 1st  * 488-490,  493-496,  498-500,  502,  504,  631,  659,  663,  664  , 2d, 
SSA 503,631,659, 664  ; 3d,  488-490,493-495,497,503,504,630  631; 

4th,*  488,  493,  534,550,659  ; 5th,*  488,  493,  494,  630,  664.  Militia- 
Regiments:  1st,  631;  2d;  604-607,631. 

New  Mexico,  Department  of.  (Union.)  fiRR 

Canby,  Edward  R.  S.  Relieved  from  duty  m etc * " ” 595 

Carleton,  James  H.  Assignments  to  command  in 580, 582, 688, 69o,  6b 

Fort  Garland  transferred  to - 

Orders— Circulars— February  14,  1862,  630. 

Orders,  General,  series,  1862:  No.  30,664;  No.  34,  666,  No.  83,  No. 84, 582, 

No.  85,  603. 

Orders,  Memorandum:  No.  116,  626. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862  : No.  153,  580. 

Union  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc - - ’ ’ ’ 

Newport,  N.  C.  Skirmish  near,  April  7,  1862.  Reports  of  ^ 

Boothe,  J ohn 295 

Newport,  R.  I„  Commanding  Officer.  Correspondence  with  Army  Head-  ^ 

quarters * 354 

Newton,  Kent.  Mentioned.... 13 

Newton,  Virginius.  Mentioned - ‘ * * * 359 

New  York,  City  of,  Steamer.  Mentioned........-.-^------------  ’ ’ ’ 

New  York,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 20, 24 

New  York  Troops.  Mentioned.  oc1  ... 

Artillery — Battalions : Rocket,  348,  412,414.  Regiments:  3d,  381,  411  413, 

414,  416 ; C,  349 ; H,  417  ; X,  283,  284,  286,287,  290,  382 ; Marine,  1st,  80, 

R5  211  237  307-309,312,342,410,414,417. 

Cavalry— ffep/me/ifs  •'  1st  (Ki/le),  15;  3d,  335,  338-340,  342-349,  377,  380, 
412-414;  7th  (1st  Mounted  Rifles),  15,29. 

Infantry- Regiments:  1st,  2d,  15;  3d,  375  ; 7th,  15;  9th,  77-79,  8o,  87, 

98  103-109  194,195,  296,305-315,  317,  318,  320-322,  328,329,  334,358,  365, 

366  369  381,414;  10th,  11th,  20th,  15;  51st,  76, 78, 85, 95, 97-99, 101-104, 

203  210  211,  221,  223,  224,228-232,  358,  381 ; 53d,  85,  357,  358,  361,362; 

89th  305-310,  312-314,317,318,320,321,329,357,358,369,381;  99th,  5,  6, 

15,85,211;  103d,  297-300, 317, 375, 381, 414. 

New  York  Harbor,  Commanding  Officer.  Correspondence  with  Army  Head-  ^ 

quarters * 435 

Nichols,  Captain.  Mentioned 340 

Nichols,  Captain.  Mentioned — 

Nl°  Command  of,  styled  Sub-Military  District  of  Galveston 007*700.701 

Mentioned - - ’ 214 

Nichols,  James  B.  Mentioned - ‘ 12  516 

Nicholson,  L.  Mentioned ’06& 

Nicholson,  W.  T.  Mentioned  J"""  492 '659, 680 

Nicodemus,  W.  J.  L.  Mentioned V .i  ' V’r,  " e r<  i,„  \ 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Ldward  B.  S.  Canoy.) 

Niemetz,  Hermann  von  Rottenberg.  Mentioned ^ 

Noble,  Mr.  Mentioned MJUU-II 

* May  31,  1862,  consolidated  and  known  as  First  Cavalry. 


776 


INDEX. 


Noland,  Cadwallader  Saint  George.  Mentioned.. 

Ncrcom,  Mr.  Mentioned __ 

Norfolk,  Va.  Martial  law  in 

Norfolk,  Department  of.  (Confederate.) 

Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc 
Orders,  General,  series  1862 : No.  14,  162, 163. 
Orders,  Special,  series  1862 : No.  8,  131.  * 

Norris,  Basil. 

Correspondence  with  E.  I.  Bailey 

Mentioned _ 

Norris,  William. 

Correspondence  with  J.  Bankhead  Magruder 

Mentioned 

Northampton,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

North  Carolina. 


Page. 

12 

439 

46 

38 


..  646 

492,646 

50 

. 44,57 
$2 


Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 368  369  371 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 420*  431*  435 

Anderson  J R. .. 42l|  431’  451 

Andrews,  W.  S.  G 466 

Army  Headquarters 352,360,’ 362, 364 

Ashe-W-S ....  478 

Blanchard,  A.  G 

Braine,  D.  L.. 353 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E V. 354^  35(i’ 358, 364, 

368,373,375-377,  383,  384,  387,389,  393,  394,  397-399,403,  405,406  408 

Clarke,  William  J ’ 439 

Clingman,  T.  L 476 

Davis,  Jefferson 434, 435, 437, 446, 449, 472 

D’Epineuil,  L.  J ™ 

Dix,  John  A 407 

Foster,  John  G 410,411,414-417 

S.  G 448,480 

Gatlin,  R.  C 420,421,430,433,434,436,440,442,  443 

Goldsborough,  L.  M 367 

Hawkins,  Kush  C 407 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H 452, 453, 455-458, 460, 462* , 465, 468, 475 

Huger,  Benjamin 429,  431 , 434 , 449, 463,  464, 466*  469 

Lee,  Robert  E 423,  449, 450,  454, 455, 457-459, 461-464, 467, 469-472, 478, 479 

Lincoln,  Abraham * ’ 4^4 

Loring,  W.  W 469 

Loyall,  B.  P....  .............. .... ...... ...... ... ... 4%& 

McClellan,  George  B 370,  374^  379,  392,  393^  4q5 

Martin,  J.  G 

Navy  Department,  C.  S ^7 

Navy  Department,  U.  S 353  368  396 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of 425, 430, 433, 438,’  444,’  446 

Parke,  John  G 382,385 

Ransom,  R.,  jr 391 

H-  M ””  ” *.".1.7.!."  418,428 

Sheldon,  George  D 49^ 

Stanley,  Edward ” 393 

Taylor,  John  S 419 

Ward,  Edward  W 422 

War  Department,  C.  S 419, 420, 426, 427, 429, 430, 433, 437, 440, 442-444 


INDEX. 


777 


Apr. 


May 


North  Carolina-Continued. 

Wise,  Henry  A 353’  473 

MiUtia^  138^  155^157^191^  192," 332, 421, 426, 433^  446 

Operations  in.  Orders  congratulatory.  (Burnside.) 375 

(See  also 

Feb.  8.  Roanoke  Island.  Battle  of . 

10.  Elizabeth  City.  Action  at. 

18- 21.  Winion.  Expedition  to  and  skirmish. 

19- 20.  Currituck,  Sound.  Expedition  into. 

Mar.  14 . New  Berne.  Battle  of. 

20- 21.  Washington.  Expedition  to. 

23.  April  26.  Macon , Fort.  Siege  of. 

31.  Deep  Gully.  Skirmish  at. 

7.  Foy's  Plantation.  Skirmish  at. 

Newport.  Skirmish  near. 

7-  8.  Elizabeth  City.  Expedition  to. 

13.  Gillett's  Farm,  Pebbly  Bun.  Skirmish  at. 

19.  South  Mills,  Camden  County.  Engagement  at. 

Trent  Boad.  Skirmish  on  the. 

27.  Haughton's  Mill,  Pollocksville  Boad.  Skirmish  near. 

29.  Batchelder’s  Creek.  Skirmish  near. 

2.  Deep  Gully,  Trenton  Boad.  Skirmish  near. 

7-  8.  Gatesville.  Expedition  from. 

15-16.  Trenton  Bridge,  Young's  Cross-Roads,  and  Pollocksville. 

Skirmishes  near. 

22.  Trenton  and  Pollocksville  Cross-Roads.  Skirmish  at  the. 

30.  Tranter's  Creek.  Skirmish  at. 

2.  Tranter's  Creek.  Skirmish  at. 

5.  Tranter's  Creek.  Action  at. 

24.  Tranter' 8 Creek.  Reconnaissance  to. 

9.  Hamilton.  Capture  of. 

24-28.  Trenton  and  Pollocksville.  Expeditions  to. 

26.  Mill  Creek.  Skirmish  at,  near  Pollocksville. 

26-29.  Young's  Cross-Roads.  Reconnaissance  to,  and  skirmish. 

28.  Neuse  Road.  Expedition  on. 

Aug.  14-15.  Swansborough.  Reconnaissance  to.) 

Pamlico  Sound.  List  of  U.  S.  vessels  at  anchor  in,  February  3,  1862. 

Proclamation  to  people  of - - '* 

Requisition  for  troops  for  Confederate  service 

Resolution  U.  S.  Congress.  Affairs  in 

Stanley  Edward,  appointed  Military  Governor  of 

Union  sentiment  in! 192, 194, 200, 385, 390, 394, 397, 409, 415, 439, 458, 461 

Wise,  Henry  A.,  assigned  to  command  Roauoke  Island * ~~ 

North  Carolina,  Adjutant-General  of.  Correspondence  with  E.  E.  Lee..  450, 471 
North  Carolina,  Department  of.  (Confederate.) 

Anderson,  Joseph  R.,  assigned  to  command  of 

Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc.  447, 448, 4o5, 459, 460,  469, 476 

Gatlin,  Richard  C.,  relieved  from  command  in 445 

Hill,  D.H.,  assigned  to  command  of * ' 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H.,  assigned  to  and  assumes  command  of 4oU, 

. „ , 475 

Limits  extended - * ' ' ■ 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  4,  442;  No.  6,  No.  7,  452;  No.  30,  475. 


June 


July 


359 

363 

426 

395 

396 


445 


INDEX. 


778 


Page. 


North  Carolina,  Department  of.  (Confederate.)— Continued.  ' 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862:  No.  29,  431;  No.  51,  444;  No.  53,  447;  No.  88, 

No.  89,  463 ; No.  134,  475  ; No.  143,  476 ; No.  180, 480. 

Ransom,  Robert,  jr.,  assigned  to  command  in 447 

North  Carolina,  Department  of.  (Union.) 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E.,  assigned  to  and  assumes  command  of 353 

Constituted  and  limits  defined 353 

Foster,  John  G.,  succeeds  to  command  of 410 

Martial  law ’..*.”380,397 

Orders,  General,  series  1862  (Coast  Division):  No.  14,  No.  15,  351  (depart- 
ment proper);  No.  1,  353;  No.  5,  359;  No.  7,  75;  No.  8,  363;  No.  10,  361; 

No.  19,  372;  No.  23,  375;  No.  28,  380;  No.  29,  276;  No.  30,  307. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862 : No.  51,  371 ; No.  56,  372. 

Union  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc 358, 375, 381, 406, 414 

North  Carolina,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Davis,  Jefferson 445, 449^  472 

Lee,  Robert  E 478,479 

War  Department,  C.  S 419, 425, 426, 430, 433, 438^  444 

Wise,  Henry  A 137 

N ortherner,  Steamer.  Mentioned 308, 312, 320, 326, 351, 359 

Northern  Virginia,  Department  of.  (Confederate.) 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862 : No.  140,  475. 

Wise,  Henry  A.,  ordered  to 161 

Northrop,  Lucius  B.  Mentioned 435}  597  ? 698 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Subsistence  Department , C.  S.  A.) 

North  Carolina  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery  {Heavy)— Companies : Edelin’s,  249;  Harding’s,  249,  447,  460; 
Herring’s,  249,  448;  Lane’s,  447,  460;  Leecraft’s,  249,  448;  Mallett’s, 

249,  447 ; Mayo’s,  249, 448 ; Moore’s,  432, 438, 451 ; Rodman’s,  447, 460 ; 
Sutton’s,  249,  447,  460;  Tripp’s,  447,  460;  Whitehurst’s,  250,  262,  447, 

460;  Whitford’s,  249,  448,  473.  Batteries:  {Light),  Brem’s,  226,243,244, 

246,  247,  249-251,  255,  262,263,460;  Bunting’s, 448,  460;  Jones’,  447,  460; 
Latham’s,  246,  247,  249-251,  259,  262,  264,  265,  460,  448. 

Cavalry — Regiments : 1st,  164,  379,  453,  460;  2d,  247,  249,  252-255,  297,299, 
300,303,349,  413,  447,  460;  3d,  268,  269,  448,  460,473. 

Infantry — Battalions : 1st,  196, 439 ; 2d,  145, 154, 173, 177-179, 186.  Regiments : 

1st,  451,  460;  2d,  451,460;  3d,  451,  460;  5th,  425;  7th,  220,  226,243-247, 
249-251,  255,  262,  277,  447,  460 ; 8th,  109,  112,  129,  156,  159,  166,  171-175, 

180,  184,  186 ; 14th,  439;  15th,  37,  51,  57 ; 16th,  226;  17th,  109, 129, 184,' 

192,  425;  18th,  432,  438,  442-444,  447,  460;  19th,  252-254;  20th,  432, 

460 ; 24th,  426,  431,  434,  437,  439,  450,  470, 471 ; 25th,  432,  438,  442-444, 447, 

460;  26th,  243,  244,  246,  247,  249,  254-257,  447,  460;  27th,  244,  246,  247, 
257-259,  263,  264,  447,  460;  28th,  245,  247,  263,  432,  447,  460;  30th,  432, 

460;  31st,  87,  99, 112,  113, 129,  157, 159, 166, 172, 173,  175-178,  183,  184, 186; 

32d,  325, 327,  329 ; 33d,  226, 243,  245-247,  255, 256,  259-261,  447,  460;  34th, 

424,  434,  449,  450,  460,  463;  35th,  226,  243-247,  249,  250,  255,  261-263,  265, 

447,  460;  37th,  226,  244,  246,  247,  249,  250,  263-266,  447,  460;  38th,  431, 

434,  449,  460, 463 ; 44th,  342, 476.  Militia  Battalions : Clark’s,  267,  268  ; 
Rogers’,  447,  456. 

North  Carolina  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Union.) 

Infantry — egiments:  1st,  385. 

Norvell,  Stevens  T.  Mentioned 538 

Nueces,  River,  Tex.  Affair  on,  near  Fort  Clark,  Tex.,  August  10,  1862.  Re- 

jjort  of  C.  D.  McRae 614 

Nunn,  D.  A.  Mentioned 515 

Oakes,  Pleasant  J.  Mentioned 543 


INDEX. 


779 


Page. 

„ . « ; 263 

Oates,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 308  329 

Ocean  Wave,  Steamer.  Mentioned Vor ’^24*525  717’  718 

Ochiltree,  Thomas  P.  Mentioned 506, 515, 521, 524, 525, 717, 71b 

Ochiltree,  W.  B.  Mentioned 543 

Odell,  J.  M.  Mentioned 3Q0 

Ohnesorg,  Emil.  Mentioned 3g4 

Olden,  Charles  S.  Mentioned 12 

Oliver,  C.  B.  Mentioned 24 

Oneida,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned - - 343 

Ordway,  Albert.  Mentioned 324 

Ortlip,  Abraham  L.  Mentioned 

Osborn,  Francis  A.  94  95  357 

Mentioned ' ‘ '**'  '’’U 340 

Report  of  action  at  Tranter’s  Creek,  N.  C. , June  5, 1862 . - 4g& 

Osborne,  Surgeon.  Mentioned g4 

Otis,  George  A.  Mentioned 

Owens,  G.  W.  __  723  7^3 

Correspondence  with  X.  B.  Dehray ’ ?27 

Mentioned 292 

Palmer,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 

Pamlico,  District  of.  (Confederate.)  ^ ^ 424 

Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc 

French,  S.  G.,  assigned  to  and  assumes  command  of ’ ^ 44g 

Limits  defined * 

Pamlico  Souna  'n  C.  List  of  U.  S.  vessels  at  anchor  in,  February  3, 1862. ..  359 

P^  n Ix.  Affair  at,  May  21,  1862.  Report  of  Joseph  G.  Tilford ^ 608 

Pardee,  Benjamin  S.  Mentioned ’ ^ 

Parisen,  Otto  W.  Mentioned 

Parke,  John  G. 

Correspondence  with  3gg  3gK 

Burnside,*  Ambrose  277’  27g 

White,  M.  J _ 74-8O,  85_88?  97, 9S,  100, 

Mentioned-  — -""  — ™ 2oo-205, 211-213, ‘ 219, 222, 236,  240,270-276,  285-287, 
291-295,  300,317,351,  358,361,  368,  372,373,  375-379,381,383  385,  406 

E6P  Maco°n,  Fort,  N.  C.  Siege  of,  March  23-April  26,  1862  276, 278-281 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  March  14,  1862  • 

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  February  8, 1862 ------ 

Parker,  W.  H.  Mentioned g6l 

Parker,  William  T.  Mentioned gl4 

Parrish,  Lewis.  Mentioned... . R 12.14.41 

Patrick  Henry,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned ’ ’ ^44 

Patrick,  John  W.  Mentioned g6l 

Patterson,  William  A.  Mentioned h * *g3  4gf. 

Patton,  I.  A.  Mentioned ’ Q{. 

Patuxent  (Vessel).  Mentioned 

Paul*  Gabriel  R.  , . 664,666 

Assignments  to  command ------ 

Correspondence  with  p 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  648.653 

Canby,  Edward  R.  S--  - - -------- > 


780 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Paul,  Gabriel  R. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Gray  don,  James g^ 

New  Mexico,  Governor  of gg3 

Slough,  J.  P --".'”.".".'.’.”654,655 

Mentioned 534,550,551,553,648,649,651,661-667 

Report  of  pursuit  of  Confederate  forces  in  New  Mexico,  April  13-22, 1862. . 552 

Paulding,  Hiram.  Correspondence  with  Navy  Department,  U.  S 17  24 

Peabody,  George,  Steamer.  Mentioned 359 

Pearce,  James  H. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  A.  Wise 142  144 

Mentioned 110,  118>  119>  141>  143>  14g’  157 

Pelham,  William.  Mentioned 5q9 

Pell,  D.  A.  Mentioned 76, 79, 80, 202, 206, 208, 212, 278, 279, 285, 287," 300, 365 

Pemberton,  John  C.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 443 

Pendergrast,  Austin.  Mentioned 2 9 

Pendleton,  James  M. 

Mentioned 88, 202, 208, 210, 212, 214, 220, 343 

Report  of  battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  February  8,  1862  92 

Penelope,  Schooner.  Mentioned _ g^2 

Peninsula,  Army  of  the.  (Confederate.)  (See  Peninsula , Department  of  the 

Confederate. ) 

Peninsula,  Department  of  the.  (Confederate.) 

Add ress  to  soldiers __ g3 

Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc 36  37  49 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  159,  65;  No.  161,  71. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862 : No.  657,  60. 

Pennsylvania  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Cavalry — Regiments : 11th,  15. 

Infantry  Regiments : 48th,  358,366,369,381;  51st,  78,85,97-99,  104,  105 
202-204,210,211,221,223,  229-232,237,  305-308,  312,  313,  317-321,323,324 
329, 358, 381 ; 58th,  26,  30. 

Penobscot,  U S.  S.  Mentioned 

Peralta,  N.  Mex.  Skirmish  at,  April  15,  1862.  (See  New  MexicQ.  Pursuit  of 
Confederate  forces  in , April  13-22,  1862.) 

Perdinalis,  Steamboat.  Mentioned g44 

Perea,  Pedro  Jose.  Mentioned... _ g^2 

Perkins,  Corporal.  Mentioned jqq 

Perkins,  E.  A.  Mentioned 340 

Perry,  Commodore,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 195  397  399 

Perry,  S.  S. 


25 


Mentioned 

Report  of  affair  at  San  Luis  Pass,  Tex.,  April  5-6,  1862 

Pesquira,  Ignacio.  Mentioned 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Sonoraf  Governor  of) 

Pettigrew,  J.  J. 

Assignments  to  command . 

Mentioned 

Pettway,  O.  C.  Mentioned 

Phifer,  David.  Mentioned 

Phillips,  Mrs.  Mentioned 

Phillips,  D.  B.  Mentioned „ 

Phillips,  J.  C.  [?]  Mentioned 

Phillips,  John.  Mentioned 

Phoenix,  Steamer.  Mentioned 


....  546,549 

547 

627,  628, 668 


480 

465, 468, 480 

263 

261 

613 

11 

60 

509, 513,514 
86,105,308 


INDEX. 


781 

Page. 


Picacho  Pass,  Ariz.  (See  Summary  of  Principal  Events , p.  481.) 

Picket  U S.  Gunboat.  Mentioned 7 » 

76, 80, 86, 90-92, 97, 201, 206, 281, 297, 340, 342, 359, 365 

Pierce,  Private.  Mentioned * 

Pierce,  Henry  R.  Mentioned - 240 

Pierce,  Leonard,  jr.  ...  cci  cqj 

Correspondence  with  State  Department,  U.  S 656,661,674,684 

661,674,685 

Mentioned . 

Pigeon’s  Ranch,  N.  Mex.  Engagement  at,  March  28,  1862.  (See  Glorieta , 

\r  ~\f p,x. ) 

Pilot  Boy,  Steamer.  Mentioned 86,211,212,217,340,414 

Pino,  Miguel  E.  93 

Report  of  engagement  at  Valverde,  N.  Mex.,  February  21,  1862. -- 

Pino,  Nicolas.  Mentioned - ----  - ......  - - — 605  607 

Pioneer,  Steamer.  Mentioned 80, 91, 99, 100, 229, 351, 359 

Pipkin,  Isaac.  Mentioned ' 

Pitts,  W.  A.  Mentioned ' 

Plympton,  P.  W.  L.  Mentioned 490-492,495,630 

Pocahontas,  Steamer.  Mentioned 4 ® 

Polguere,  Louis.  Mentioned ’ ' 

Pollock,  William  K.  Mentioned 

Pollock sville,  N.  C. 

Expedition  to,  July  24-28, 1862.  (See  Trenton,  etc.) 

Skirmish  near,  May  15-16,  1862.  (See  Trenton  Bridge , etc .) 

Poor,  R.  L.  Mentioned 

F°PMention1eTH^ 346,412,415 

Report  of  skirmish  near  Deep  Gully,  Trenton  Road,  N.  C.,  May  2, 1862 334 

Poppe,  Sergeant.  Mentioned - * ^ 

Porter, Lieutenant.  Mentioned 

Porter,  Benjamin  H.  Mentioned 76-78,88,274 

Porter,  D.  D.  Mentioned 

Porter,  James.  Mentioned 2o 

Portland  Me.,  Commanding  Officer.  Correspondence  with  Army  Headquar- 


ters . 


19 


709 

710 
260 

83 


Portsmouth,  U.  S.  Sloop.  Mentioned-..-- — ®74 

Portsmouth,  Va.  Martial  law  in --------  46 

Post-Office  Department,  C.  S.  Correspondence  with 

Frizzell,  W.  

War  Department,  C.S * 

Poteat,  J.  M Mentioned 

Potter,  A.  Mentioned 

Potter,  Edward  E.  Mentioned  86,88,208,214,340,342,343,385,413 

Potter,  Robert  B.  Mentioned 99  > 193> 222 > 229 ’ 230 

Pottier,  Isadore.  Mentioned 18^ 

Powhatan,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 147-14 

Prentiss,  John  H.  Mentioned 556’^ 

Prentiss,  S.  S.  Mentioned- 

President,  C.  S.  (See  Jefferson  Davis.) 

President,  U.  S.  (See  Abraham  Lincoln.) 

Preston,  L.  C.  Mentioned 483 

Price,  Alice,  Steamer.  Mentioned 201,292 

Pridgen,  Redden  S.  Mentioned - 523 

Primrose,  Cicero  S.  Mentioned 458 


782 


INDEX. 


Page. 

342 

650 


Prince,  John  T.  Mentioned 

Prince,  William  E.  Mentioned - 

Prisoners  of  War.  Treatment,  exchange  of,  etc 9,17  274  329 

331,353,360,367,394,456,457,464,568,577,  580,  583,  590,  625,  671,  696 

Prisoners,  Political.  Arrest  and  treatment  of 56  380 

Private  Property.  Action  touching. . 353, 359, 360, 364,  365, 430, 442, 478, 602, 681,’  726 
(See  also  Slaves  and  Slave  Property .) 


Prouty,  Merrick  F. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  siege  of  Fort  Macon,  N.  C.,  March  23-April  26,  1862 

Pryor,  Roger  A.  Mentioned 

Pugh,  Captain.  Mentioned 

Pulley,  William.  Mentioned 

Mentioned 


Putnam,  Steamer. 
Pyburn,  William. 
Pyron,  Charles  L. 

Mentioned 


- 273,285-288 

288 

468 

170 

173,177 

„ . 296 

Mentioned . 694 


v . 508,509,513-520,541-545,678 

Report  of  engagement  at  Valverde,  N.  Mex.,  February  21,  1862 512 

Quackenbush,  S.  P.. 76,86,201,269 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with 

Belger,  James ^ 

Dahlgren,  John  A "I"'. l"'  2^8 ,31 

Ingalls,  Rufus 22 

Queen,  Eastern,  Steamer.  Mentioned 108, 109, 237, 239, 351, 359 

Quentin,  Julius  E.  Mentioned 298  332 

Quinn,  William.  Mentioned *23 

Quiroyo,  Colonel.  Mentioned . . ...1...  [ *_  [ 656 

Ragnet,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 525 

Ragnet,  Henry  W. 

Mentioned 513-515, 519, 520, 525, 541-545, 606 

Report  ot  engagement  at  Valverde,  N.  Mex.,  February  21,  1862 516 

Ragsdale,  Daniel  H.  Mentioned 516  517  543 

Rains,  G.  J.  Mentioned ’ 35  37 

Raleigh,  Steamer.  Mentioned g g 23  147 

Raleigh,  Patrick.  Mentioned ’ ’ * ’ ’ ’ ’64g 

Ramsey,  H.  Ashton.  Mentioned 12 

Rand,  O.  R.  Mentioned ggg 

Randolph,  Charles  B.  Mentioned 


350 


Randolph,  George  W. 

Correspondence  with  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A ..  435 

Mentioned 14, 32, 33, 42, 56, 67, 69, 436, 438, 442, 462, 468, 506, 734, 735 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  also  War  Department , C.  S.) 

Randolph,  John.  Mentioned 252  254 

Ranger,  Steamer.  Mentioned 80, 88-90, 92, 97, 219, 351, 359 

Rankin,  Sylvester.  Mentioned .... . .... .... ...... . ......  493  647 

Ransom,  Robert,  jr. 

Assignments  to  command 447 

Correspondence  with  Ambrose  E.  Burnside *’***”’*’  394 

Mentioned 56, 164, 296, 302, 303, 384, 389, 447, 453, 459, 460, 465, 468*470, 476 

Report  of  skirmish  at  Gillett’s  Farm,  Pebbly  Run,  N.  C.,  April  13,  1862  ...  300 

Rayle,  B.  Y.  Mentioned 261 

Raymond,  John  W.  Mentioned '.........'..  ....1  216 

Reagan,  John  H.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Post-Office  Department , C.  S.) 

• 604,613,720 


Rebecca,  Sloop.  Mentioned 

Recruit,  Schooner.  Mentioned ...... . ...... ... m 89  97  219  351 

Redding,  "William  P.  Mentioned  ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ....  342  343 


INDEX. 


783 


528 
610,612,622 

504 

287 

612 


Page. 

Reed,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 

Refugees,  Abandoned  Lands,  etc.  Communications  from  fig5 

Blood,  C . B.  II - - 684 

Pierce,  L.,  ’*  684 

State  Department,  U.  S . . « « *******  ••••  ***•  **  323 

Reid,  James  S.  Mentioned 

Reily,  James.  Mentioned coo 

Reilley,  Wagon-Master.  Mentioned 

Reindeer,  Schooner.  Mentioned 

Reisden,  C.  A.  Mentioned 

Reising,  John.  Mentioned * 

Reno,  Jesse  L. 

Correspondence  with  .^g 

Blanchard  A G - " ~ 338 

^ur^d0’  Ambrose  ‘ " 74^0," 85-87*  100, 103-109, 198, 200-205, 

en  ion  . . "*"  gl9> 223_225)  231-233,  238, 271,  273,  275,  304,  307,  311, 318-321, 
325,329,331,332,  336,  351,358,  368,372,  375,  378,  381,  385,388,406,464 

Reports  of 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  March  14,  1862  

Roanoke  Island.  Battle  of,  February  8,  1862  /‘V;:"’* 

South  Mills,  Camden  County,  N.  C.  Engagement  at,  April  19, 1862.. 

Renwick,  Henry  B.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 

Respess,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Revere,  Paul  J.  Mentioned 

Reynolds,  Frank.  Mentioned * * 

Rh0Artniery- Vegimnis ; 1st  (F),  202, 334, 345, 357, 358, 369, 374, 381, 412414 
Infantry — Battalions : 5th,  76,  77,  83,  85,  101,  105, 106, 108, 203, 210, 211  232, 

234  236-240,281-283,285,291,358,366,381,384,414.  Regiments:  4th, 76, 

78^79,  85,  93, 105-109,  203,  204,210,211,213,222,226,227,232-240,277,281, 

283, 285, 290, 291, 358, 381, 382, 384. 

Rice,  J.  Marcus.  Mentioned 

Rice,  Joseph  P.  Mentioned 

Richardson,  Daniel  C.  Correspondence  with 

Hebert,  Paul  

Maclin,  Sackfield 

SSir 

Richmond,  Va.  Defense  of  (immediate).  Communications  from  ^ ^ 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A ’ 

Tansill,  46  47 

Virginia  Ordnance  Officer  of £&*£**, 387 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Ambrose  E.  Burnside .)  ^ 

Rieke,  Frederick.  Mentioned ' '^,'^,'^5,692 

Rigg.EdwinA.  Mentioned """""" 507,514,524,525 

RioGrand., Lower^Confederate troops.  Organization, strength, etc. . 701, 706, 720 
Rio  Grande,'  Sub-Military  District  of  the.  (Confederate.) 

Bee,  Hamilton  P.,  assumes  command 

Constituted * - — * 

Orders,  General,  series  1862 : No.  3, 708. 


220 

97 

305, 311 
..  18,24 
. . 385 

17 

..  290 


84 

224,226 

..  698 

..  698 

..  343 


708 

700 


784 


INDEX, 


Ripley,  James  W.  Mentioned Paf®’ 

Ritchie,  Montgomery. 

Mentioned  99,222,306 

Report  of  battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.,  February  8.  1862  inn 

Ritter,  John  F.  

Mentioned 532-536,539,540,654 

Report  of  engagement  at  Glorieta,  N.  Mex.,  March  28, 1862 539 

Ritter,  Simon.  Mentioned 

Rivera,  Ramon  Sena  y.  Mentioned ggg  ggg 

Rivers,  Henry  W.  Mentioned ono  9^’oqq 

Rives,  Alfred  L.  Mentioned 34,35^69 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Engineer  Department , C.  S. 

Roanoke,  U.  S.  Frigate.  Mentioned 2,6,9,10,18,119,145,146,149,151,155,156 

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C. 

Battle  of,  February  8,  1862. 

Casualties.  Returns  of.  Union  forces gg 

Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 165 

Congress,  C.  S "**’’”*  117 

Davis,  Jefferson _ * ’ 

Henningsen,  C.  F 14o 

Hili,  g.  h 124 

Huger, Benj ...  54, 114-117, 119, 121, 131, 146, 154, 155, 157-159, 162, 163, 167 

Lynch,  W.  F 147 

Pearce,  James  H 244 

Shaw,  H.  M 124,125,127 

Talcott,  T.  M.  R 54 

War  Department,  C.  S Ill,  123, 132, 141, 145, 147, 164, 168 

Wise,  Henry  A 115,117,118,122, 

123,126-128,130,  133-135,  137-142,  148,  150-153,  155,157,  159-163,169 

Orders,  congratulatory.  (Burnside.) 75 

Reports  of 

Anderson,  Frank  P 179 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E 74  75 

Church,  William  H gg 

Congress,  C - S 183 

Drake,  Albert  W 93 

Eyre,  C.  Cushing pg 

Ferrero,  Edward 103 

Flagler,  Daniel  W 81 

Foster,  John  G g^ 

Fry,  H.  W 179 

Green,  Wharton  J 177 

Hartranft,  John  F jq4 

Heckman,  Charles  A 102 

Hedden,  James  A 94 

Km,  g.  h mi  rrrir.’i-irrrr-rmrmzr  isi 

Huger,  Benjamin 110,111,113 

Jordan,  John  Y 175 

Kurtz,  Johu P3 

Lee,  Horace  C 9g 

Maggi,  Alberto  C 100 

Messinger,  Daniel g9 

Parke,  John  G 105 

Pendleton,  James  M 92 


INDEX. 


785 


97 

100 

108 

170 

94 
91 

182 

95 


425 


89 


Page. 

Roanoke  Island.  N.  C.— Continued. 

Battle  of,  February  8,  1862. 

Reports  of 

Reno,  Jesse  

Ritchie,  Montgomery 

Rodman,  Isaac  

Shaw,  H.  

Stevenson,  Thomas  

Strong,  James  H - - 

Taylor,  John  

Upton,  Edwin 

Whitson,  James  173 

Wise,  Henry  A 111,122,166 

Confederate  troops  at.  Organization,  strength,  etc 

Orders,  General  (Confederate),  series  1862:  No.  1,  127. 

Orders,  General  (Union),  series  1862:  No.  2,  369. 

Orders,  Special  (Confederate),  series  1862:  No.  2,  130;  No.  6,131;  No.  12, 

144  ; No.  13, 145  ; No.  16,  136. 

Sketch  of * * 

Wise  Henrv  A.,  assigned  to  and  assumes  command  of  Confederate  forces 

! ’ y ’ . 127,131,139,421 

at 718 

Hobards,  C.  L.  Mentioned 

Robards,  W.  L.  Mentioned o06,521,525 

Roberts,  Adjutant.  Mentioned ^ 

Roberts,  Benjamin  S. 

Assignments  to  command 

Correspondence  with  Adjutant -General's  Office,  U.  S.  A 666 

Mentioned 489-492, 497-501, 630, 664,665 

Reports  of 

New  Mexico.  Pursuit  of  Confederate  forces  in,  April  13-22, 1862  552 

Valverde,  N.  Mex.  Engagement  at,  February  21,  1862 493, 499, 501 

Roberts,  James.  Correspondence  with  W ar  Department,  U.  S . - 656, 667 

Roberts,  Joseph.  Mentioned 15 

Roberts,  Thomas  L.  Mentioned 565 

Robertson,  E.  S.  C.  Mentioned 718 

Robinson,  Mr.  Mentioned 611 

Robinson,  Mr.  Mentioned 

Robinson,  Captain.  Mentioned Li) * 

Robinson,  Thomas.  Mentioned 62/ 

Robinson,  William  G.  Mentioned 246, 252-254, 259, 266, 271, 297, 299-303, 378 

Rockwood,  George  W.  Mentioned 

Rodgers,  John.  Mentioned 

Rodman,  Isaac  P. 

Mentioned 106, 203, 226, 232, 234, 281, 382 

Reports  of 

Macon,  Fort,  N.  C.  Siege  of,  March  23-April  26,  1862  290 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  March  14, 1862 237 

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  February  8,  1862  108 

Rodman,  William  B.  Mentioned 244 

Roeg,  Andres.  Mentioned - 

Romero,  M.  Mentioned 675 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Mexico , Charge d’ Affaires.) 

Rootes,  L.  M.  Mentioned - 12 

Rose,  Captain.  Mentioned 61^ 

50  R R — Y OL  IX 


17 

386 


786 


INDEX. 


Ross,  John.  Mentioned Ps^?' 

Rossell,  William  H.  Mentioned 595  522  532 

Rowan,  S.  C. 


Mentioned. 


Proclamation  to  people  of  North  Carolina 
Royal  Yacht,  Schooner.  Mentioned 
Rucker,  D.  H.  Mentioned 


76,  86, 194-201, 204, 206, 271, 279, 306,  326, 366, 378, 382, 395, 


(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  JJ.  S.  A.) 
Rumley,  Mr.  Mentioned 


410 

363 

703 

28 

279 


Russell,  Charles  L.  Mentioned 74  gQ  34  gg  93 

Russell,  John  C.  Mentioned ’ ’ ’ ' ‘ ’ ’ 6q4  g13 

Sabine,  U.  S.  Frigate.  Mentioned ’ 25 

Saffold,  William.  Mentioned 6.2g 

Safford,  Bester  S.  Mentioned ^ 

Saint  Clair,  Arthur,  jr.  Mentioned ’ ’ * ’ 12 

Saint  John,  Isaac  M.  Mentioned 

Saint  Lawrence,  U.  S.  Frigate.  Mentioned 


Sam  Houston,  Schooner.  Mentioned. 

Sanborn,  George  L.  Mentioned 

Sanborn,  L.  B.  Mentioned 

Sanchez,  Mercedes.  Mentioned 

Sanchez,  Pedro.  Mentioned 

Sanders,  Private.  Mentioned 

Sanford,  B.  N.  Mentioned 

Sanford,  Charles  D. 

Mentioned 


..  33,69,435 
2, 3, 9, 10, 18 


Eeport  of  expedition  from  BatcheldeFs  Creek,  on  Neuse  Road,  N.  C.  July 
28,  1862 * 


607 
538 
95 
606 
504 
333 
538 

413 

349 

Sanford,  W.  H.  Mentioned: 252 

Sands,  Jack.  Report  of  the  destruction  of  the  Hannah,  August  12,  1862  618 

San  Jacinto,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 25 

San  Luis  Pass,  Tex.  Affair  at,  April  5-6,  1862.  Reports  of 

Ballowe#  SLS 548 

Bate8’  J - 545,546 

Perry  S.  S 547 

Santa  Fe,  N . Mex.  Evacuation  of,  by  U.  S.  force,  Mar.  2-4,  1862.  Reports  of 

Donaldson,  James  L 527 

Enos,  Herbert  M 527 

Santee,  U.  S.  Frigate.  Mentioned 703  710  732 

Sargent,  Daniel.  Mentioned ’ *214 

Sarracino,  Juan  A.  Mentioned 504 

Satterthwaite,  F.  B.  Mentioned 477 

Saunders,  Colonel.  Mentioned 417 

Saunders,  John  S.  Mentioned 33 

Saunders,  William.  Mentioned gg9 

Sawyer,  S.  T.  Mentioned 125 

Sawyer,  Wesley  C.  Mentioned 214  216  217 

Sayers,  Joseph  D.  Mentioned 52i 

Scarborough,  A.  J . Mentioned 516, 517, 525, 543 

Schall,  Edwin. 

Mentioned 306,318,319 

Report  of  engagement  at  South  Mills,  Camden  Co.,  N.  C.,  April  19,  1862. . . 323 

Schenck,  J.  E.  Mentioned 642 

Schermerhorn,  Captain.  Mentioned 145, 156, 166, 172, 176, 186 

Schmidt,  Albert.  Mentioned 592 


INDEX. 


787 


Page. 

Schmidt,  Bernhard  von.  Mentioned 299 

Schneider,  E.  B.  H.  Mentioned 607 

Schrag,  Christian.  Mentioned 299 

Schuckhart,  Theodore.  Mentioned 298,299 

Schumer,  T.  Mentioned 694 

Scott,  John  J.  Mentioned 543,660 

Scout,  Schooner.  Mentioned 351 

Scroggs,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 192,193 

Scurry,  William  R. 

Mentioned 508-511, 513, 516, 518-520, 524, 525, 530, 536, 541, 632, 660, 678 

Reports  of 

Glorieta,  N.  Mex.  Engagement  at,  March  28,  1862 541,542 

Valverde,  N.  Mex.  Engagement,  at  February  21,  1862 513 

Sea  Bird,  Steamer.  Mentioned 129,147 

S el  den,  Henry  R.  Mentioned 490-492,495,496,630 

Selden,  William  B. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  A.  Wise 128 

Mentioned .• Ill,  112, 128, 156, 158, 159, 172, 173, 176, 186 


333 

11 

. . . 351, 359, 361 

641 

see  State  Department , U.  S. ) 

662,663,666,673 

State  Department,  U.  S.) 

...  538 

261 


Seldenecke,  Leopold  von.  Mentioned 

Semple,  James  A.  Mentioned 

Sentinel,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Serna,  Jesus.  Mentioned 

Seward,  F.  W.  (For  correspondence,  etc., 

Seward,  William  H.  Mentioned 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see 

Shaffer,  James  R.  Mentioned 

Shaffner,  John  F.  Mentioned 

Shannon,  Denman  W.  Mentioned 515, 537, 543, 632, 660 

Sharkey,  William  L.,  jr.  Mentioned 730 

Shaw,  H.  M. 

Correspondence  with 

Hill,  G.  H 124 

Huger,  Benjamin 124,125,429 

Loyall,  B.  P 428 

Wise,  Henry  A 127, 128, 150-152, 418, 428 

Mentioned 55, 59, 74, 87, 95, 115-118, 126-131, 136, 137, 139, 145, 

147-153,  155-157, 166,  167, 169,  174,  175, 179,  184-187, 189,  419, 427, 428 

Report  of  battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.,  February  8,  1862 170 

Shawsheen,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 334,335 

Shea,  Daniel  D. 

Correspondence  with 

Chinn,  R.  H 725 

Garland,  R.  R 702 

Mentioned 482, 483, 610, 613, 724 

Report  of  operations  in  Aransas  Pass,  Tex.,  February  11-13,  1862  483 

Sheehan,  Edward.  Mentioned 224 

Sheffield,  Thomas  D.  Mentioned 272, 283 

Sheldon,  F.  Mentioned.... 356 

Sheldon,  George  D. 

Correspondence  with  T.  T.  Eckert 405 


Mentioned  . . . 

Sheppard,  C.  B. 

Sherffins, . 

Sherman,  Major. 
Sherman,  T.  W. 


Mentioned  . 
Mentioned . 
Mentioned . 
Mentioned. 


405 

521 

642 

380 

364 


788 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Shinn,  J ohn  B . Mentioned 559, 569, 570, 595, 599 

Shirland,  Edmond  D. 

Mentioned 566, 567, 570, 571, 577, 696 

Reports  of  expedition  from  California  through  Arizona  to  Northwestern 

Texas  and  New  Mexico,  April  13-September  20,  1862 571,577 

Shoemaker,  William  R.  Mentioned 582 

Shorkley,  George.  Mentioned 324 

Shout,  J ohn  H.  Mentioned 493}  647 

Shrapnel,  Barge.  Mentioned 237 

Shropshire,  J ohn  S.  Mentioned 509, 515, 516, 537, 541, 542, 544, 545 

Sibley,  Ebenezer  S.  Mentioned 404 

Sibley,  Henry  H. 

Correspondence  with 

Bee,  Hamilton  P 714 

Canby,  Edward  R.  S 632 

Davis,  Jefferson 747 

Hdbert,  Paul  O 729 

Steele,  William 719 

Mentioned 487, 494, 518, 522, 550, 552-554, 560, 561, 

628,  640,651,657,658,  660-662,  666-668,  672,673,  678,716,722,  732,733 

Reports  of 

Glorieta,  N.  Mex.  Engagement  at,  March  28,  1862 540 

New  Mexico,  Army  of.  Operations  of,  from  January  — to  May  4,  1862, 

including  engagement  at  Valverde,  February  21,  1862  505,506 

Silk,  R.  W.  Mentioned 549 

Simmons,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned 150,428 

Simmons,  Lewis  N.  Mentioned 175 

Simmons,  William.  Mentioned 605,606 

Simms,  Charles  C.  Mentioned 11 

Sims,  Samuel  H.  Mentioned 103 

Sinclair,  James. 

Mentioned 242-244,249,250,255,265 

Report  of  battle  of  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  14,  1862 261 

Singeltary,  George  B.  Mentioned 340, 342 

Sketches. 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Battle-field  of,  March  14,  1862  248 

Plan  for  bomb-proof 63 

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C 89 

South  Mills.  Battle-field  of,  April  19,  1862 330 

Skinner.  J.  L.  Mentioned 350 

Skirmisher,  Schooner.  Mentioned 91,351 

Slade,  Edward,  Schooner.  Mentioned 308 

Slaves  and  Slave  Property.  Reference  to 33-36, 

42, 43,  49,  50,  52,  199,  353,  364,  369,  370,  373,  382, 390,  399-403, 435, 477 

Sloan,  B.  Mentioned 325 

Slough,  J.  P. 

Correspondence  with 

Canby,  Edward  R.  S 649 

Paul,  G.  R 654, 655 

Mentioned 530,  532, 536, 537, 539, 541, 631, 645, 646, 651, 652, 654, 656-658, 662, 667 

Reports  of  engagement  at  Glorieta,  N.  Mex.,  March  28, 1862 533, 534 

Smith,  Surgeon.  Mentioned 253 

Smith,  A.  D.  Mentioned 154,429 

Smith,  Charles.  Mentioned 138 

Smith,  Charles  A.  Mentioned 693 


INDEX. 


789 


Smith,  C.  S.  Mentioned 

Smith,  E.  Kirby.  Mentioned  

Smith,  Edward.  Mentioned 

Smith,  G.  H.  Mentioned 

Smith,  G.  W.  Mentioned 

Smith,  Joseph  B Mentioned 

Smith,  William.  Mentioned 

Socorro,  N.  Mex.  Affair  at,  April  25,  1862.  Report  of  Charles  E.  Wesehe . . . 
Sonora,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  with 

Carleton,  James  

Wright,  G 

Sophia,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

South  Carolina  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 


Page. 

238 
4?  3 
334 
540 
454 
2 
9 
604 

690 

668 

21 


Artillery — Batteries : Pee  Dee  (McIntosh),  449,460. 

Infantry — Regiments  (Provisional  Army ) : 1st,  449,  460,  463. 

Southfield,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned * 92,394 

South  Mills,  Camden  County,  N.  C.  Engagement  at,  April  19,  1862. 

Casualties.  Returns  of.  Union  forces 307 

Communications  from 

Blanchard,  A.  

Burnside,  Ambrose  E - 

Hawkins,  Rush  34 

Huger,  Benjamin * * 

Lee,  Robert  331 3 33~ 

Reno,  Jesse  311,315,316,326 

Orders,  congratulatory 

Reports  of 

Bell,  Thomas  S 34 ' 

Burnside,  Ambrose  3 4 

Clark,  William  * 319 

Hawkins,  Rush  399’  343 

Howard,  William  A 39® 

Huger,  Benjamin 324,  326 

Reno,  Jesse  305>311 

Schall,  Edwin 323 

Sketch  of  battle-field 330 

Southeastern  Virginia.  (For  operations,  etc.,  see  Virginia.) 

South  worth,  M.  A.  Mentioned 7 ^ 

Spaulding,  S.  R.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 358,359,367 

Sprague,  Augustus  B.  R.  Mentioned 96,219,412 

Springweiler,  Charles  F.  Mentioned 104 

Spruill,  S.  B.  Reports  of  battle  of  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  14,  1862 252 

S.  R.  Spaulding,  Steamer.  Mentioned 358,  3j9,  367 

Stafford,  Isaac  C.  Mentioned 512,516 

Stanard,  William  B.  Mentioned 121 

Stanford,  Leland.  Mentioned 554> 598 

Stanley,  Edward. 

Appointed  Military  Governor  of  North  Carolina 396 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 395-397,399 

Mentioned 3",  394>  393"398>  400>  403 

Stanton,  Edwin  M.  Mentioned 3,4,19,20, 

22,  25,  29,31,200,371,  375,  401,  406,  574,  629,650,655,656,661,670,688 
(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  U.  S.) 

Stapleton,  Colonel.  Mentioned 489 

Starke.  W.  E.  Mentioned 191,423 


700 


INDEX. 


State  Department,  U.  S.  Correspondence  with  a*e 

Blood,  C.  B.  H 

Carleton,  James  H 

Chase,  Franklin ^ 

Jackson,  M.  M 

Mexi  co,  Charge  d’Affaires  .. 77777" ^ 

New  Mexico,  Governor  of 629,  637,  640, 643-6457^  672 

lerce,  .,jr. ...  656,661,674,684 

War  Department,  U.  S ^ 

«.  . m 4.  640, 641,  643, 648, 650, 655, 660-663, 666, 667, 673, 675, 684, 690 

State,  Eastern,  Steamer.  Mentioned ’ ’ 

State  of  Georgia,  Steamer.  Mentioned oqq 

Stearns,  Alonzo.  Mentioned ” JZ'  IT? 

Steams,  F.  A.  Mentioned 99  102  222  224’ ooe 

Steele,  William.  ' ’ ***•  224> 225 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A mr  701 

Canby,  Edward  R.  S ’ ZZ 

Sibley,  H.  H 77 777  77777 719 

^enti"n*d 554, 567, 566, 589-593, «59,’673,'678,’687, 696 

Keport  of  engagement  at  Valverde,  N.  Mex.,  February  21,  1862  522 

Steen,  Enoch.  Mentioned * a_n 

Steiner,  Victor.  Mentioned 7 77  77  7 7 623 

Stellia,  Steamer.  Mentioned * 

Stevens,  E.  A.,  U.  S.  R.  Cutter.  Mentioned 3gg 

Stevens,  Edwin  A.  Mentioned 27 

Stevenson,  Carter  L. 

Assignments  to  command 44fi 

Mentioned ... 

- - - - - - --  - • > • - ....  ....  . . . . ........  ....  ...  44o 

Stevenson,  Robert  H.  Mentioned ' * 87*95  214 

Stevenson,  Thomas  G.  ’ ’ 

“6n“ 88,  SH,  340, 373, 417 

Reports  of 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  March  14, 1862 217 

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  February  8, 1862 77  94 

Washington,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  March  20-21,  1862 269 

Stewart,  Mr.  Mentioned ’ ” G06 

Stillman,  Henry  M.  Men  t ioned 777 80 

Stimers,  Alban  C.  Mentioned 777 22 

Stimpson,  Kitty,  Ship.  Mentioned 351 

Stokes,  H.  C.  Mentioned 

Stone,  Roderic.  Mentioned IIIII II.  487, 634, 647 

Stone,  S.  E.  Mentioned 2^ 

Stoneman,  George.  Mentioned 302 

Storrs,  Melancthon.  Mentioned ^3 

Story,  Mr.  Mentioned 61^ 

Strange,  James  W.  Mentioned 252, 253, 300, 301, 303 

Strange,  Robert.  Mentioned , ... 

Stratton,  James  S.  Mentioned o24 

Strong,  E.  N.  Mentioned 88,89,202,208,212,214,275 

Strong,  James  H. 

Mentioned  88,208,212,214 

Report  of  battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.,  February  8,  1862 91 

Sturgis,  Samuel  D.  Mentioned 

Stuyvesant,  Moses  S.  Mentioned 7.777  7 5 


INDEX. 


791 

Page. 


Subsistence,  Department,  C.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 699 

Maclin,  Sackfield ^8 

Sullivan,  Matthews.  Mentioned y 

Sultan,  Schooner.  Mentioned ' 

Sumner,  E.  V.  Mentioned  594 ’ 

Sutton,  J.  S.  Mentioned 506,508,513,517,519-521,523 

Sutton,  William.  Mentioned 4 

Suwanee,  Steamer.  Mentioned ’ 

Swan  (Vessel).  Mentioned ' 

Swansborough,  N.  C.  Reconnaissance  to,  August  14-15,  1862.  Report  ot 

Charles  A.  Heckman - ' ^ 

Swift,  H.  R.  Mentioned - r 

Swilling, • Mentioned 

Swilling,  J.  W . Mentioned 

Tabb,  George  E.  Mentioned 

Tabb,  William  B.  Mentioned 134,  is>o, 

Tafoya,  Ortiz  y.  Mentioned 

Talbot,  Judge.  Mentioned 

Talcott,  Andrew.  Mentioned 62 

Talcott,  T.  M.  R. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  Huger 04 

Mentioned 54,126,171,181-183 

Taney,  Kitty,  Sloop.  Mentioned 703 

Tansill,  R.  Correspondence  with  John  S.  Winder 4£> 

Tapia,  General.  Mentioned 641j  642 

Tappan,  Samuel  F. 

Mentioned .. * ’ 

Report  of  engagement  at  Glorieta,  N.  Mex.,  March  28, 1862 636 

Tatnall,  Josiah.  Mentioned A 13 

Taylor,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 608 

Taylor,  A.  Mentioned ^48 

Taylor,  John.  Mentioned 334 

Taylor,  John  S. 

Correspondence  with  Benjamin  Huger 419 

Mentioned 114-117, 120, 167, 170, 171, 176, 181, 182 

Report  of  battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.,  February  8,  1862  182 

Taylor,  John  W.  Mentioned 542 

Taylor,  Richard. 

Assignments  to  command 731 

Mentioned 

Taylor,  Samuel  A.  Mentioned 223 

Taylor,  W.  H.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Robert  E.  Lee.) 

Taylor,  Zachary.  Mentioned - 619 

Teazer,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 8, 9, 13, 14 

Teel,  Trevanion  T. 

Mentioned 507,514,515,519,554 

Reports  of  engagement  at  Valverde,  N.  Mex.,  February  21,  1862  523 

Tegner,  Fritz.  Mentioned 615 

Terrazas,  Luis.  Mentioned 668 

Terreme,  Biter.  Mentioned 504 

Terrill,  A.  W.  Mentioned 748 

Terry,  E.  S , Steamer.  Mentioned JJ75 

Tevis,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 


792 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Texas. 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 715, 735. 

Davis,  Samuel  Boyer 744  745 

Frizzell,  W.  W ’ 799 

Hubert,  Paul  O 697, 707, 719, 729, 732, 733 

Lee,  Robert  E 7jo 

McCulloch,  H.  E 701,704,705 

Maclin,  Sackfield 99g 

Pierce,  L.,  jr 661,674 

Post-Office  Department,  C.  S 710 

Richardson,  Daniel  C 698 

State  Department,  U.  S 660,673 

Subsistence  Department,  C.  S.  A 698, 699 

War  Department,  C.  S 699,706 

War  Department,  U.  S 661 

Coast  of.  Operations  on.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 629 

Bates>  J 734, 735 

Bee,  Hamilton  P 732 

Chinn,  R.  H 724, 726, 728 

Debray,  X.  B 723, 726, 727,  735 

Hobby,  A.  M 727 

Kellersberg,  J 729 

McCulloch,  H.  E , 704 

Neal,  Benjamin  F 720 

Owens,  G.  W 723, 728 

Shea,  Daniel  D 702,725 

War  Department,  C.  S 700 

War  Department,  U.  S 629 

(See  also 

Feb.  11-13.  Aransas  Pass.  Operations  at. 

22.  Aransas  Bay.  Engagement  in. 

Apr.  5-  6.  San  Luis  Pass.  Affair  at. 

22.  Aransas  Bay.  Capture  of  Union  launches  in. 

May  15.  Galveston.  Demonstration  (naval)  upon. 

July  4.  Velasco.  Attack  on  United  States  vessels  near. 

7-17.  Aransas  Bay.  Operations  in 
Aug.  11.  Velasco.  Affair  at. 

12.  Breaker  ( Schoonei ').  Capture  of. 

Hannah  (Sloop).  Destruction  of  . 

16-18.  Corpus  Christi.  Bombardment  of. 

Sept.  13-14.  Flour  Bluffs.  Operations  at.) 

Confederate  troops  from  coast  of,  transferred  for  defense  of  the  Missis- 
sippi River,  etc 700, 707, 714, 715 

Conscription  act.  Enforcement  of,  in 717 

Germans  in.  Affair  with,  August  10,  1862.  (See  Nueces  River.  Affair  on 
the , near  Fort  Clark , Tex. ) 

McCulloch,  H.  E.,  assumes  command  in  Eastern 718 

Martial  law 702, 712, 716, 735, 736 

Military  departments  embracing 713, 731 

Militia 674 

Requisition  for  troops  for  Confederate  service 697 

Union  sentiment  in 614, 615, 684-686, 701, 702, 704-706, 733 


INDEX. 


79S 


Page. 

Texas,  Department  of.  (Confederate.)  799, 

Bee,  Hamilton  P.,  assigned  to  duty  in ----- *s0  731 

Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc 

Orders,  General,  series  1862:  No.  45,715  ; No.  46,717. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1862 : No.  221,  700 ; No.  819,  717. 

Sub-divisions  of.  (See  Eastern  and  Western  Districts  of  Texas.) 

Texas,  District  of.  73j 

Constituted  and  limits  defined - 

Hubert,  Paul  O.,  assigned  to  and  assumes  command 

Orders,  General,  series  1862 : No.  1,  731. 

Texas,  Governor  of.  73^ 

Correspondence  with  Paul  O.  Hebert 

Orders,  Special:  No.  — , May  25,  1862 

Texas  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery- 


513-517,  519-521, ! 

Woods’, 520, 524.  Regiments:  Cook’s,  701,731. 

Cavalry — Battalions : 3d  ( Yager),  486,  525,730  ; 8th  (Taylor),  614,730  r 
13th  ( Waller),  730;  Bates’.  723,  731;  Brown’s.  723,  730.  Companies . 
Andrews’,  R.  Benavides’,  S.  Benavides’,  Bowles  , Brackenndge  s. 

Daly’s  Durant’s,  Navarro’s,  731;  Ware’s,  620-623,  626,  731.  Regi- 
II  2d  (Pyroi),  508,  510,  512,  513,  516,520,521,  614,678,701,706,730  : 

4th  (Beily)  488,  508-510,513-521,524,525,539,541-543,545;  5th  (Green),. 

488,  507-510,  513,  514,  516,  518-524,  543,  545,  678;  7th (Steele),  488 , HMv 
508-510,  516,  519-523,  543,  545;  12th  (Parsons),  13th  (*“•«**)> 

(Burford),  21st  (Carter),  24th  (Wilke,),  25th  (GMeepw),  730;  26th 
(Debray),  701,  723,  726,  728,730  ; 28th  (Bandal),  718,730  ; 30th  (Gurley), 

InfeiIy-Safta/-»ns  .'  3d  (Kirby),  4th  (Oswald),  701 ; Sth  (Hobby),  622,  727, 

731  • Griffin’s,  723, 731.  Companies  : Boise’s.  Durant  s,  7.j1  , Ireland  s,  612, 

622  731  • Newton’s,  Penaloza’s,  Rountree’s,  Toole’s,  731.  Regiments: 
3d(Luckett),  6th  (Garland),  731 ; 9th  (Nichols),  701 ; 10th  i^lson),  701 
731;  11th  (Roberts),  12th  (Young),  731 ; 13th  (Bates),  545-549,  609,  610, 

613  • 14th  (C7arfc),  718,731 ; 15th  (Speight),  16th  (Flournoy),  17th  (Allen), 

731;  18th  (Ochiltree),  19th  (Waterhouse),  718, 731 ; 20th  (Elmore),  723, 

731 ; 22d  (Hubbard),  731.  . * 

Uiscentmeoxm' -Battalions  and  Legions:  Bates’  723  731;  llth(Sp«i^0,  <0 
731:  Waul’s,  731.  Companies:  Duff’s,  614,713,  Martins,  , 
lips’,  543 ; Rhodes’,  731. 

State — Companies  : Davis’,  614.  499  ^ 

Texter,  Theodore.  Mentioned ’ 354 

Theodore.  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Thom,  R.  T.  Mentioned - 253 

Thomas,  C.  A.  Mentioned  "" £ ^S, 289 

Thomas,  George  W.  Mentioned 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Adjutant- General  s Office,  U.  S.  A.)  ^ ^ 

Thomas,  William  H.  Mentioned 446  447 

Thomas,  W.  G.  Mentioned - - - - - ’ 351 

Thompson,  Ann  E.,  Ship.  Mentioned 209  214 

Thompson,  J.  Harry.  Mentioned — ’ ’ 

♦Includes  conTinands  where  arnTof  service  could  not  be  determined. 


794 


INDEX. 


Thompson,  R.  T.  Mentioned Pag^ 

Thompson,  Thomas.  Mentioned ^ 

Thompson,  W.  B.  Mentioned 7” 

Thurmond,  A.  S.  243, 465 

Mentioned 

Report  of  capture  of  Cubero,  N.  Mex.,  March  3. 1862  r«o 

Tilford,  Joseph  G.  

Mentioned 

Report  of  affair  at  Paraje,  N.  Mex.,  May  21,  1862.  499,501,592 

Tillotson,  Charles  W.  Mentioned ' 

Tillinghast,  Charles.  Mentioned ’tit 

Toler,  Caleb.  Mentioned ^ 

Tompkins,  CharlesH.  Mentioned.! * * Z?. 

Tompkins,  Christopher  Q.  Mentioned ’ 

Totten,  Joseph  G.  Mentioned 

^er^:n;d  :v;"  ®5;c74;69i,7oa:7o5, t*. 

Trans-Mississippi  Department.  (Confederate.)  214 

Constituted  and  limits  defined 713 

Hubert,  Paul  O.,  assumes  command  of  that  portion  south  of  Red  River  and 
west  of  Mississippi  River 

• Holmes,  Theophilus  H.,  assigned  to  and  assumes  command  713 

Orders,  General,  series  1862 : (Hebert),  No.  1,  719;  (Holmes),  No.’s!  73l! 
Sub-divisions  of,  announced 73^ 

Supplies,  rtc.,  for.  Communications  from  Adj utant  and  Inspector  General’s 
Omce,  C.  S.  A 

(See  also  ^34 

Arkansas,  District  of— Confederate. 

Louisiana,  District  of — Confederate. 

Texas,  District  of— Confederate.) 

Tranter’s  Creek,  N.  C. 

Action  at,  J une  5, 1862.  Report  of  Francis  A.  Osborn 340 

Reconnaissance  to,  June  24,  1862.  Report  of  George  F.  Jocknick  343 

Skirmishes  at  

May  30,  1862.  Report  of  George  F.  Jocknick 339 

June  2,  1862.  (See  Summary  of  Principal  Events,  p.  72  ) 

Treacy,  Edward.  Mentioned 498  4QQ 

Trenton  and  Pollocksville,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  J uly  24-28,  1862.  Reports  of 
roster,  John  G 

Gates,  Byron  W * 344 

Lee,  Horace  C J 

f°ll0Cksville  Cross-Roads,  N.  C.  Skirmish  at’  the',*  May*22, 

1862.  (See  Summary  of  Principal  Events,  p.  72.) 

Trenton  Bridge,  Young's  Cross-Roads,  and  Pollocksville,  N.  C.  Skir- 

mishes  near,  May  15-16,  1862. 

Communications  from  Jesse  L.  Reno ^ 

Reports  of  

Amory,  Thomas  J.  C 

Duryea,  J.  Eugene 

Mix,  Simon  h !!!!!*’!!*'*!  ‘ ’ !!!... ! ! " ! ! ! ; ^ 

Trent  Road,  N.  C.  Skirmish  on  the,  April  19,  1862.  (See  Summary  of  Prind- 
pal  Events,  p.  72.) 

Trucks,  John,  Ship.  Mentioned 354  ^ ^ 

Trumbull,  Fort,  Commanding  Officer.  Correspondence  with  Army  Head- 

Tryon,  F.  W.  Mentioned ( .'.’.'.‘.'.".'.'7 .7"  7.77  7<»,  222, 230 


INDEX. 


795 


Page. 

Tucker,  J.  Mentioned 449 

Tucker,  John.  Mentioned 404 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,,  U.  8.) 

Tucker,  John  R.  Mentioned 

Tucson,  Ariz.  Occupation  by  Union  force.  Report  of  James  H.  Carleton. ..  553 

Turner,  Josiah.  Mentioned 300-303 

Turner,  William.  Mentioned  549 

Twin  Sisters,  Schooner.  Mentioned 485 

Tyler,  Nat.  Mentioned 124,141,164,422 

Tynan,  John  W.  Mentioned 

Uncle  Ben.  Steamer.  Mentioned ^4 

Underhill,  R.  S.  Mentioned 539 

Underwriter,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 394 

Union,  Steamboat.  Mentioned 79, 86, 94, 233, 237, 278, 366, 382, 386 

Union  Troops. 

Casualties.  Returns  of 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  March  14,  1862 210,211 

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  February  8,  1862 85 

South  Mills,  Camden  County,  N.  C.,  April  19,  1862 307 

Valverde,  N.  Mex.  Engagement  at,  February  21,  1862  493 

Mentioned 

Artillery — Regiments : 1st  (C),  202, 273, 281, 283, 284, 286-290, 358, 366, 369, 
381,382,414;  3d  (A),  555, 557, 560, 576,  595, 597, 599  ; 4th (D),  15;  (L), 


4,15. 

Cavalry — Regiments : 1st,  488-491,  493,497,530,534,  536,  630,679  ; 2d, 
493,668;  3d,  488,490,493,495-501,527,  530-532,534,  554,590-592,630, 


679,687. 

Infantry — Regiments : 5th,  488-491,493-496,  498,501,  527,  534,538,  566, 
576, 630, 654, 679, 695  ; 7th,  488-490, 493-495, 630, 667  ; 10th,  488, 493, 
494, 630, 695. 


(For  Volunteers,  see  respective  States.) 

Organization,  strength,  etc. 

New  Mexico,  Department  of 

February  14,  1862  

February  28,  1862  

September  20,  1862 

North  Carolina,  Department  of 

January  31,  1862  

April  2,  1862 

April  30,  1862 

June  30,  1862  

July  31,  1862 

Virginia,  Department  of,  January  31,  1862 

Upham,  Surgeon.  Mentioned 

Upham,  Charles  L.  Mentioned 

Upshaw,  R.  L.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  X.  B.  Delray.) 
Upton,  Edwin. 

Mentioned 

Reports  of 

New  Berne,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  March  14,  1862 

Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.  Battle  of,  February  8,  1862 

Valdez,  Jose  M. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  engagement  at  Valverde,  N.  Mex.,  February  21,  1862 
Valley  City,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 


630, 631 
..  635 

..  696 


358 

375 

381 

406 

414 

15 

210 

236 


88,244 

218 

95 

494 
503 
. 394 


796 


INDEX. 


Valverde,  N.  Mex.  Engagement  at,  February  &1,  1862.  Pa”e' 

Casualties.  Returns  of,  Union  forces  . 

Reports  of  .* 493 

Canby,  E.  R.  S J 

Carson,  Christopher. . ;• * * 487 

Court  of  Inquiry.  (Case  of  R.  g.  C.  Uord) .!’.**’*! ‘ ' 502 

Duncan,  Thomas 5U4 

Green,  Thomas  ... 497,499,509 

Jordan,  Powhatan „ ' 

Pino,  Miguel  E... . **  52«> 

Pyron,  Charles  L . * * * * j?03 

Ragnet,  Henry  W ,. * * 512 

Roberts,  Beniamin  8 -------  516 

scurry,  WiiiiimR. 

Sibley,  Henry  H 513 

Steele,  William  . • 505’506 

Teel,  Trev anion  T - - 

Valdez,  Josd  M. ._... ... 1....  ^3 

Van  Brunt,  Henry.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  £.  M.  Goldsborouqh  ) * 

Van  Buren,  J.  L.  Mentioned.... - ’ 

Vance,  Zebulon  B.  ---.-.v...  88,214 

Mentioned 0.0  _ / 

Report  of  battle  of  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  14,  1862  ° ° 253’ 261, 

Vanderbilt,  Cornelius.  

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S ,,,  „„ 

Mentioned: «5i,o2 

Van  Dorn,  Earl.  Mentioned  r* " ' ' J? 

Van  Vliet,  F.  Mentioned  ....  .!  " ^95,700,707 

Van  Vliet,  William  A.  Mentioned...  gf 

Veck,  Wagon-Master.  Mentioned Zoo  ro! 

Velasco,'  MeUti°ned 80, 88, 92, 94*217,  35l!  359 

Affair  at,  August  11,  1862.  Report  of  James  Bates 616 

Attack  on  U.S.  vessels  near,  July  4,  1862.  Report  of  James  Bates'.” 609 

Vestal,  D.  C.  Mentioned 

Viall,  Charles.  Mentioned _g° 

Vincent,  James.  Mentioned ' 

Vineyard,  S.  C.  Mentioned * * * ' [ * * 

Vinson,  James  W.  Mentioned *’  

Virginia,  C.  S.  S.  (U.  S.  Frigate  Merrimac) ...  * . . ...  _ _ 2-ll 

. . 13,14,16,18-24,26-31,44,50,57,62-66,68, 142,  371,386,387,  389,457 

Virginia,  Steamer.  Mentioned 296,  308>  309j  314  359 

^lrgima.  Militia - - 32, 42, 43, 50, 58, 67, 71 

ngima,  Department  of.  Union  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc 15 

Virginia  House  of  Delegates.  Correspondence  with.  Ordnance  Officer  of 
Virginia 46  47 

Virginia,  Ordnance  Officer  of.  Correspondence  with  Virginia  House  of  Dele- 
gates  46  47 

Virginia  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery  Batteries : Bagby’s,  Bedford  (T.  C.  Jordan)  Bouton’s.  37; 

Bruce’s,  450;  Cockade  ( Rambaut ),  37;  Cooke’s,  451 ; Ellett’s,  37; 
French’s,  460;  Grandy’s,  133;  Hanover  (Nelson),  37;  Jordan’s  37* 
McComas’,  327,328;  Montague’s,  37;  Nichols’,  110,439;  Orange  (Pey- 
ton),  Otey’s,  37;  Preston’s,  37;  Richmond  Howitzers,  1st  Company, 

14;  3d  Company,  51;  United  Artillery,  Norfolk  ( Kevill ),  11  Rea - 
iments:  1st,  37.  u 


INDEX.  797 

Pag®. 

Virginia  Troops.  Mentioned — C Jktinued. 

Cavalry  -Companies:  Benches’,  160;  Gillette’s,  119,316  327;  Lunenburg, 

67;  Nansemond, (Brewer), 43Q ; Todd’s,  37;  Winfield  s, 67.  Regents. 

lafaatxy— Battalions : 5th  (Grenville  Guards)  ip.  Companies:  Young 
Guard  38.  Reaiments : 6th,  110,157,434,435;  14th,  37,51,  15th,  , 

18th,  123;  26th,  37;  30th,  451, 460 ; 32d,  37,  43;  39th,  139;  46th,  106, 

152, 156, 166, 171-173, 179, 180, 186;  53d,  37, 51 ; 57th,  438, 439, 450;.  59th, 

156’,  166, 171-173, 179, 180, 186, 192 ; 60th,  451,  460, 461. 

Militia— 9th  21st,  52d,  61st,  87th,  37;  115th,  37,43. 

Mixed — Wise’s  Legion,  112, 113, 118, 122-124, 126, 131, 133-143, 145, 146, 149, 

151, 155-159, 163-167, 186, 189, 191,  316, 422, 423, 425,  431,  435,  439, 440. 

VlrSltMrfning<MH'rally,  Communications  from  George  B.  McClellan..  387,392,393 
Re-enforcements  for  Army  of  the  Potomac.  Communications  from  ^ ^ 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E - - ’ ’ ’ ^ 

Dix,  John  A * ^ 

Hawkins,  Rush  ’ ----- 

Lincoln,  Abraham.... ------ * ^ 

McClellan,  George  B - - .* 

Sheldon,  George  D ^;^>409 

W ar  Department,  U.  S 

Virginia,  Southeastern. 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communications  from  ' 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A.. •**  ' 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A ^ ^ 

Army  Headquarters - - - ’ ^ 

Cabell,  Henry  Coulter  ...... .A... 

Dahlgren,  John  A ' 45 

Davis,  Jefferson 

Dix,  John  A - fi1  ^ 

Engineer  Department,  C.  S.  A ' ’4^ 

Ewell  Benjamin  'is'21,23,27 

Fox,  G.  422 

Hooker  Joseph ""‘."."i '43, 50, 65 

Huger,  Benjamm ■—  — - ; " 34> ^ M> 68>70 

McClellan,  George  ' ^ 

McDowell,t  Irvin ^ 

Navy  Department,  U.  ^ 

Norris,  William » oi  oo  ok  o« 

Quartermaster-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A ’ ’ * ^ 45 

Tansill,  * ^ 

Vanderbilt,  4fi  ' ^ 

Virginia,  Ordnance  Officer  of ' " ’ * 

War  Department,  C.  S ***-  ’ ' 6 5 

War  Department,  U.  

Wool,  John  ’ 17 

Worden,  John  L " J 

Martial  law * „ n 

Operations  in.  (See  Hampton  Roads,  Va.  Naval  engagement  m,  Marcli  8-9, 

i862.) 

Vogt,  von,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 

Voltigeur,  Bark.  Mentioned ‘ 


798 


INDEX. 


Wachusett,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 
Wager,  Captain.  Mentioned 


Page. 

25 


529 

292 

226 

299 


Wahl,  Sergeant.  Mentioned ^ 

Wait,  Marvin.  Mentioned 

Walcott,  Charles  F.  Mentioned  ... 

Waldecke,  Louis  von.  Mentioned 
Walker,  Charles  J. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  skirmish  at  Apache  Caiion,  N.  Mex.,  March  26  1862  ' ’ 

Walker,  James.  Mentioned...  OOL 

Walker,  J.  G.  Mentioned 

Walker,  John  S.  Mentioned 451, 459’ 460-465' f 6 

Walker,  Robert  E.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  M.  J.  White.)  °°° 

Walker,  William  L.  Mentioned 

W alker,  William  M.  Mentioned  229 

Wall,  Richard.  Mentioned 

Wallen,  Henry  D.  Mentioned ^4’^’^) 

Walters,  E.  S.  Mentioned ' o04,505,582 

Ward,  Mr.  Mentioned 299 

Ward,  Captain.  Mentioned. ^ 

Ward,  Charles  G Mentioned 
Ward,  Edward  W. 

Correspondence  with  Joseph  R.  Anderson 
Mentioned 

War  Department,  C.  S 


348 

343 

422 


* 348,421 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A.  i«r  aw 

Anderson,  Joseph  R do,  4^5/ 

Ashe,  W.  S 421,444 

478 

706 

4:39 

112 

61 

42 

429,430,440,442,443 

697,699,700,707 

Huger,  Benjamin . 43,54-56,59,65,68,  111,  115-117, 147, 163,167, 'liO,  429 

Magruder,  J.  Bankhead r 

Navy  Department,  C.  S ’ ’ 

North  Carolina, Governor  of ."7  «9,425, '426,430,' 433, '438, 444 

Pemberton,  John  C ’ 

Post-Office  Department,  C.  S 


Baylor,  John  R 

Clarke, William  J 

Davis,  Jefferson 

Engineer  Department,  C.S.  A. 

Ewell,  Benjamin  S 

Gatlin,  R.  C 

Hubert,  Paul  O 

Holmes,  Theophilus  II 


Wise,  Henry  A 

War  Department,  U.  S. 
Army  Headquarters. 
Burnside,  Ambrose  E 


710 

122, 123, 132, 134, 135, 138, 140, 141, 145, 161, 164, 168, 169,  422 

Correspondence  with 

28,30,32,629 

207  370  373  375 

376, 380, 383,  384, 386,  387,  389, 391,  393-395,  397-399,  403-406  ’ 408’  409 

Dix,  John  A ’ 

Eckert,  T.  T ’ 40J 

Foster.  John  g I:::;;  I:;::: w 

Hawkins,  Rush  C ; 407 

Lincoln,  Abraham 

McClellan,  George  B * " I " I” .'I'.'.  ” "J "I "iA'aa.asy 

Maine,  Governor  of 20  24 


INDEX. 


799 

Page. 


War  Department,  U.  S.  Correspondence  with— Continued. 

Massachusetts,  Governor  of 

Navy  Department,  ’ 00  24 

Ren  wick,  Henry  * ’ 

Roberts,  James ^9^.397’  399 

Stanley,  Edward ’ fioq 

State  Department,  U.  ’ 

640, 641, 643, 648, 650, 655, 660-663, 666, 667, 673, 675, 684, 690 

o-«  oo 

Vanderbilt,  Cornelius ’ 

Watson,  P.  

Wool,  John  10,17,26,29-31 

Wardrop,  David  W.  Report  of  naval  engagement  in  Hampton  Roads,  Va., 

March  8-9,  1862 ' JL 

Ware,  J.  A.  Mentioned 610-613, 621, 624, 626 

Warner,  George.  Mentioned ^14 

Warner,  James  M.  Mentioned - 636 

Warren,  Gouverneur  K.  Correspondence  with  John  A.  Dix 10 

Warren,  Orrin.  Mentioned 102,228,306,311,315,319,322 

Warren,  Thomas  D. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  A.  Wise 13d 

Mentioned 120,132,139,142 


Warrior,  Sloop.  Mentioned 

Washburn,  Israel.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Maine,  Governor  of.) 
Washington,  N.  C.  Expedition  to,  March  20-21,  1862.  Report  of  Thomas  G 

Stevenson 

Washington,  T.  A.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Robert  E.  Lee.) 

Watson,  P.  H.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  also  War  Department,  U.  S.) 

Watters,  Edward.  Mentioned 

Watts,  John  S. 

Correspondence  with  Henry  W.  Halleck 

Mentioned 

Watts,  J.  Howe.  Mentioned 

Weatherby,  A.  J.  Mentioned 

Webb,  Daniel.  Mentioned 

Webb,  George  E.  Mentioned 
Wejbb,  L.  N.  Mentioned 


642 


269 


670 


504 


650 

670 

53b 

227 

261 

12,13 

143,144,192 

Webb,  W.  A.  Mentioned - 8>9’12 

Weber,  Max.  Mentioned ^ 

Welch,  Edward.  Mentioned 225 

Weld,  Lewis.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Colorado,  Governor  of .) 

Weller,  Frederick.  Mentioned 84, 357 

Welles,  Gideon.  Mentioned 16, 17 , 28, 30, 32, 367, 395, 629, 641, 684 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Navy  Department,  U.  S.) 

Wells,  Captain.  Mentioned.. ^ 

Wells,  S.  M.  Mentioned * 660 

Wesche,  Charles  E.  Report  of  affair  at  Socorro,  N.  Mex.,  April  25, 1862 ... . 604 

West,  G.  S.  Mentioned 216> 

West,  John.  Mentioned 89 

West,  Joseph  R. 

Assignments  to  command 581 

Correspondence  with  James  H.  Carleton 694 

Mentioned 553-555, 558, 565, 566, 568-570, 572, 580, 581, 595-598, 692, 693 


800 


INDEX. 


Western  Arizona,  District  of.  (Union.) 

Constituted  and  limits  defined 

Coult,  Theodore  A , assigned  to  command 5gl 


Western  Texas,  District  of.  (Confederate.)  Constituted  and  limits  defined.  699 

Westervelt,  C.  H Mentioned 547  549 

Westrof,  Alfred.  Mentioned 0g4 

Wettstein,  Andreas.  Mentioned 299 

Wheeler,  Asahel.  Mentioned 321 

Wheeler,  W.  Mentioned . 250 

Wheeling,  William.  Mentioned 554 

Whipple,  George  M.  Mentioned 216 

White,  Tug.  Mentioned 47^ 

White,  Mr.  Mentioned ’599 

White,  A.  M.  Mentioned 7Qg 

White,  A.  P.  Mentioned 130,131,149,176 

White,  E.  V.  Mentioned 42 

White,  Moses  J. 

Correspondence  with 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E 275  27 6 

Parke,  J oh  11  G- ....  ....  ......  ....  ....  ....  ......  . 277  278 

Mentioned 273, 274, 278, 279, 459’  460 

Report  of  siege  of  Fort  Macon,  N.  C.,  March  23-April  26,  1862 .*  293 

Whitehurst,  C.  C.  Mentioned 250 

W'hitford,  John  NT.  Mentioned 443 

Whiting,  J.  S.  (For  correspondence,  etc,,  see  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s 
Office , C.  S.  A.) 

Whiting,  W.  H.  C.  Mentioned 453 

Whitlock,  J.  M.  Mentioned 994 

Whitson,  James  M.  Report  of  battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.,  February 

8,  1862 173 

Whitty,  Joseph.  Mentioned 176 

Wiggins,  J.  F.  Mentioned 543 

Wilcox,  C.  M.  Mentioned 451-453 

Wilder,  William  F.  Mentioned 539 

Willcox,  Orlando  B.  Mentioned 394 

Williams, . Mentioned ig 

Williams,  Arthur  B.  Mentioned... 255 

Williams,  Seth.  Mentioned 392 

(For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  George  B.  McClellan.) 

Williams,  Stephen.  Mentioned 494 

Williams,  T.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Subsistence  Department,  C.  S.  A.) 

Williams,  Thomas.  Mentioned 357,358,366,369 

Williams,  W.  J.  Mentioned HO 

Williams,  William  T.  Mentioned 196,438,439,477 

Williamson.  George.  Mentioned 114, 125, 126, 170, 171, 178 

Williamson,  Robert  S. 

Mentioned 201-204, 206, 212, 272, 283, 284, 286, 416 

Report  of  battle  of  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  14,  1862 208 

Wilson,  Steamer.  Mentioned 125, 126 

Wilson,  George  R.  (For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Paul  O.  Hebert.) 

Wilson,  James. 

Mentioned 281 

Report  of  skirmish  near  Newport,  N.  C.,  April  7,  1862  295 


INDEX. 


801 


Page. 

325 


181 

158 


585 

60 

193 

195 


127, 131, 139, 161, 421 


Wilson,  Joseph  P.  Mentioned 336  337 

Wilson,  Malcolm.  Mentioned ’ 

Wilson,  William  E . Mentioned 

Wilson,  William  G.  Mentioned 

Winder,  John  H.  ^ ^ ^ 4C, 

Correspondence  with  R.  Tan  si  11 ^ 

Winston, . Mentioned 

Winston,  John  A.  Mentioned * * 

Winton,  N.  C.  Expedition  to  and  skirmish,  February  18-21, 1862.  Reports  of 

Burnside,  Ambrose  

Hawkins,  Rush  

Wisconsin  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery — Batteries : 4th,  15;  9th,  670. 

Wise,  Henry  A. 

Assignments  to  command 

Correspondence  with 

Cleary,  F.  D^ llg 

Congress,  ? s w 

Davis,  J.  Lucius 

Green,  Wharton  

Henningsen,  C.F 

Huger,  Benjamin . - ^ ^ 126>  133_i35}  146, 148, 150, 152-155, 157-163, 427 

Lynch,  

North  Carolina,  Governor  of * 

Pearce,  James  

War  Department,  C.  4^’ 

123, 132, 134, 135. 138, 140, 141, 145, 161, 164, 168, 169, 422 

Warren,  Thomas  139 

en  ion  . * * " 122>  124,  127,  131, 132,  139, 143, 147,  149, 150,  152, 153, 161, 

163,167,168,179, 184,185,187-191,  193,365,  421,  425,  427,  434,  435,468 
Reports  of  battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  N.  C.,  February  8,  1862 Ill,  122, 166 

Wise,  Henry  A.,  jr.  Mentioned 444’  143 

Wise.  O.  Jennings.  Mentioned.  74, 79, 98, 104, 106, 109,  111,  156, 158, 159, 171, 173, 180 

Wise,  R.  A.  Mentioned 449,  444 ’ 450 

Wood,  Albert  M.  Mentioned 47 

Wood,  Erastus  W.  Mentioned 694 

Wood,  John  T.  Mentioned ^ 44 

Woodfin,  J.  W.  Mentioned 2o2-2o4 

Woods,  Mr.  Mentioned 576 

Woods,  William  H.  Mentioned 507, 517, 524, 525 

Woodward,  Thomas  C.  Mentioned 335 

Wool,  John  E. 

Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters lo,  23, 26 

McClellan,  George  29, 30 

War  Department,  U.  S 16,17,26,29-31 

Mentioned 15, 18, 23, 24, 30, 48, 71, 357, 386-388, 395, 464 

Report  of  naval  engagement  in  Hampton  Roads,  March  8-9,  1862 3 

51  R R— VOL  IX 


802 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Woolsey,  Joseph.  Mentioned 540 

Wooster,  David.  Mentioned 556 

Worden,  John  L. 

Indorsement  on  telegram  of  Navy  Department,  March  6,  1862  17 

Mentioned 3}22 

Wright,  . Mentioned 12 

Wright,  A.  R.  Mentioned... 116, 

125, 126, 135, 142, 160, 169, 188, 192, 193, 324-329, 331, 332, 439, 466 

Wright,  George. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 627,628,668,683 

Carleton,  James  H 564 

Sonora,  Governor  of 668 

Mentioned 557-559, 562, 565-570, 573, 595, 628, 629 

Wright,  John. 

Mentioned 232,277,281,291 

Report  of  battle  of  New  Berne,  N.  C.,  March  14,  1862 239 

Wright,  John  G.  Mentioned 103 

Wyman,  R.  H. 

Correspondence  with  John  A.  Dahlgren 20 

Mentioned 20,22,26-28 

Wynkoop,  Edward  W.  Mentioned 539 

Wynn,  James  M.  Mentioned 252 

Yager,  William  O. 

Mentioned 525,526 

Report  of  capture  of  Federal  launches  in  Aransas  Bay,  Tex.,  April  22, 1862..  603 

Yeates,  Jesse  J.  Mentioned 176, 177 

York,  Ship.  Mentioned 422 

York,  Henry,  Mentioned 504 

Yorktown,  Steamer.  Mentioned 3,4,16 

Young’s  Cross-Roads,  N.  C. 

Reconnaissance  to  and  skirmish,  July  26-29,  1862.  Report  of  Charles  A. 

Heckman 347 

Skirmish  near,  May  15-16,  1862.  (See  Trenton  Bridge,  etc.) 

Young,  J.  J.  Mentioned 255 

Zabriskie,  Abram.  Mentioned 348 

Zimmermann,  Bernhard.  Mentioned 300 

Zouave,  Steamer.  Mentioned 351 

O 


