# Greene: Grant's Operations Against Vicksburg 1863 selections, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR; not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, running headers, page numbers, signature marks and map-label text. Local headings are editorial. Bounded passages only; page locators refer to unverified OCR page markers. Reports and letters Greene quotes or summarizes are part of Greene, not separately inspected originals. No maps, returns or facsimiles inspected.

## title-and-preface

CAMPAIGNS OF THE CIVIL WAR.— VIII THE MISSISSIPPI FRANCIS VINTON GREENE, LIEUT. OF ENGINEERS, U. S. AEMY ; LATE MILITARY ATTACHE TO THE U. S. LEGATION AT ST. PETERSBURG ; AUTHOR OF " THE RUSSIAN ARMY AND ITS CAMPAIGNS IN TURKEY IN 1877-78," AND OF " ARMY LIFE IN RUSSIA " NEW YORK CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS 1882 Copyright by CHARLES SCRIBNERS SONS Trow's Printing and Bookbinding Company 201-213 East \2tl1 Street NEW YORK PREFACE The following pages are founded upon a careful study of the Records of the War of the Rebellion, now in course of publication by the War Department, and not upon the recol- lection of personal experience, as it was not my fortune to belong to the generation which fought the Great War. I have earnestly endeavored to make them accurate, and be- lieve that they contain no statement of fact which cannot be substantiated by the Records. Such interpretation as has been put upon these facts is, with all deference, submitted to the judgment of the candid reader. I desire to express my sense of obligation to Colonel R. N. Scott, U. S. Army, in charge of the publication of the Records, for his kindness, not only in affording me unre- stricted access to the Archives, but also in giving me infor- mation, which his thorough knowledge of the subject alone could give, to assist my search through them. Washington. August 31, 1882.

## grand-gulf

Pemberton, however, had become convinced, as we have seen, that the movement in that di- rection was serious, and he had ordered Green's brigade from Edward's Station as a reinforcement. On April 28th, he received word from Bowen that "transports and barges loaded down with troops are landing at Hard Times." On receipt of this, Tilghman was immediately recalled from the direction of Grenada to Jackson ; Buford was directed to march around the break in the railroad at Newton Station, and come to the same place ; another brigade (Gregg's) was ordered up from Port Hudson, and Stevenson was directed to hold 5,000 men in readiness to move at a moment's notice to Bowen's assistance, whose force, including Green's bri- BAYOU EXPEDITIONS. 123 gade, numbered about 4,700 men. None of Stevenson's men were, however, actually sent, for Pemberton did not think that the movement was yet sufficiently developed, and was not entirely convinced that it was not a feint to cover an attack in the direction of Haines' Bluff. This was the condition of affairs on the Confederate side on April 28th. At 7 a.m., on April 29th, Porter's squadron left its moor- ings at Hard Times, and slowly steamed down toward Grand Gulf. Immediately in rear of it were all the transports and flat-boats available, loaded with all the men they could carry, which was three divisions of McClernand's corps. These remained just out of range, above the point opposite Grand Gulf. Grant was on a tug in the middle of the stream, where he could follow closely the progress of the fight, and send in his troops whenever the favorable mo- ment should arrive. Porter's squadron consisted of the following vessels : Benton, Lieutenant-Commander J.A.Greer 16 guns. Lafayette, Captain H. Walke , 10 " Louisville, Lieutenant-Commander E. K. Owen 13 " Tuscumbia, Lieutenant-Commander J. W. Shirk 3 " Mound City, Lieutenant-Commander Byron Wilson 13 " Carondelet, Lieutenant J. M. L. Murphy 13 " Pittsburg, Lieutenant W. R. Hoel 13 " Total 81 guns. The vessels averaged about six hundred tons each. Grand Gulf was an insignificant village, the river terminus of a few miles of railway running to Port Gibson. But it was situated near the mouth of the Big Black Biver, which was navigable for several miles, and behind it rose a sharp line of bluffs, attaining a height of something over a hun- dred feet. Just above the village these bluffs come close to 124 THE MISSISSIPPI. the water's edge. They were fortified by a strong line of earthworks, forming two principal sets of batteries, one above and one below the landing, the two being connected by a trench or covered way for infantry about a thousand yards in length. Work had been prosecuted diligently on the batteries during the seven weeks which had elapsed since the troops had occupied this point ; they were now nearly completed but were only partially armed, containing in fact only thirteen guns, eight of which were of the cali- bre of thirty -pounder Parrots or less. They were but a poor match for Porter's eighty- one pieces, many of them 11 -inch Dahlgrens or 9-inch rifles. The cannonade opened about 8 a.m., and kept up furiously and without intermission until 1 p.m. By that time the Confederate guns were silenced, and their batteries were somewhat ploughed up by the 2,500 projectiles which Porter had sent against them. But the troops had lost only 3 men killed (one of them being Col. Wade, Chief of Artillery) and 15 wounded. On the other hand, Porter had lost 19 killed and 56 wounded, and his vessels had received several hundred shots. The Tus- cumbia had been hit 81 times, many of the shells penetrat- ing her thin plating and bursting inside ; she was so badly damaged as to be unfit for service for some time. The Ben- ton had been struck 47 times and had lost 26 men, and the other vessels had received minor injuries. It was very evident that although the few Confederate guns were temporarily silenced, the batteries were just as capable of resisting assault as before the bombardment be- gan— their guns, in fact, resumed firing later in the day — and the infantry parapet was practically uninjured for defence. It was impossible to bring frail transports, loaded to the gunwales with men, in front of batteries which had held their own against iron-plated gunboats. Grant, therefore, BAYOU EXPEDITIONS. 125 determined to move still farther down the river and effect a landing which would turn the flank of these batteries ; and as soon as Porter withdrew — about 2 p.m. — McClernand was ordered to land his men at Hard Times and march them across the point opposite Grand Gulf, coming out on the Mississippi at De Shroon's plantation, about three miles down the river. As soon as it was dark, Porter was requested to renew the bombardment, under cover of which the trans- ports all slipped by with very little damage, and tied up at De Shroon's. McClernand's entire corps was in that vicin- ity at daylight the next morning. Grant had at first intended to move down as far as Rod- ney, from which point it was known that a road led to Port Gibson, and thence to the various points in rear of Vicks- burg, but during the night he learned from a negro that there was a good road leading to Port Gibson from a land- ing-place called Bruinsburg, just below the mouth of Bayou Pierre, and only five miles below De Shroon's. Grant deter- mined to effect a crossing at this place. At daylight on April 30th the transports and gunboats were all brought into requisition to ferry the troops across, and by noon the whole of McClernand's corps — four divisions, numbering over 18,000 men — were on the east bank. There were no Confederates in sight, and it was most important to get possession of the bluffs, which are here about three miles back from the river, as quickly as possible. But for some unexplained reason rations had not been issued to McCler- nand's corps before landing; their wagons had been left away back at Perkins' two days before, and it was known that the first advance beyond the river would necessarily be made without them. Nevertheless the usual three days' rations in haversacks had not yet been issued, and a delay of four hours occurred on the bank just after landing in 126 THE MISSISSIPPI. order to distribute them. This delay at such a critical period might have been disastrous, but fortunately it was not so ; and at four o'clock McClemand took up his line of march, Carr's division in the lead. At sunset he reached the bluffs, and finding no enemy, pushed on during the night toward Port Gibson. About one o'clock in the night Carr's leading brigade met the enemy about ten miles from Bruins- burg and four from Port Gibson ; a slight skirmish ensued, af ler which the whole division lay down on their arms until daylight should enable them to reconnoitre the ground and the force in front of them. These troops were a portion of Green's brigade, which had been hastily dispatched from Grand Gulf by Bowen on the afternoon of the 30th. Immediately after the bombard- ment of Grand Gulf on the 29th, Bowen had telegraphed the result to Pemberton, and stated the urgent necessity for prompt reinforcement. The wires then failed to work, and nothing more was heard from Bowen until the afternoon of the 30th. Pemberton became alarmed at this, and telegraphed Stevenson to send at once the 5,000 men he had previously ordered to be held in readiness. These were Tracy's and Baldwin's brigades, and they left Yicks- burg for Grand Gulf late on the afternoon of the 29th. Pemberton also ordered Tilghman to collect all available troops in Jackson — about a brigade — and proceed to Ed- ward's Station, and there await further orders. Pemberton was at first somewhat disconcerted by reports from Steven- son of the presence of Union troops at Haines' Bluff, where Sherman with one division of his corps, escorted by eight gunboats, was making a vigorous demonstration, in pursuance of orders to that effect given by Grant on the 27th. But Stevenson expressed himself as being ready to meet any attack at that point, and it soon became evident BAYOU EXPEDITIONS. 127 that the important move was at Grand Gulf.

## port-gibson

Late on the afternoon of the 30th, Pemberton received word from Bowen that 3,000 Union troops were within ten miles of Port Gibson at 3 p.m. of that day, and that more were still landing at Bruinsburg. On receipt of this, Pemberton gave orders to his detachments at Grenada, Columbus, Meridian, and other points to come at once to Jackson ; after which he took the train for Vicksburg. Tracy's brigade reached Grand Gulf on the afternoon of April 30th, and Baldwin's brigade came in during the night, the men of both biigades in a jaded condition from hurried marching. Green's bri- gade, as already stated, had been sent from Grand Gulf to Port Gibson on the afternoon of the 30th, and its advance had met Carr's division on the road to Bruinsburg soon after midnight. Tracy's brigade came to his assistance a little before daybreak. On the morning of May 1st, the Confederates were discov- ered posted across the roads, about three miles west of Port Gibson. At this point the road from Bruinsburg divides into two roads, which, diverging nearly at a right angle, curve around and unite at Port Gibson. Green's brigade was posted across the southern road and Tracy's across the northern. The country was extremely rough and unsuita- ble for manoeuvres, being composed of short, steep hillsides, following no regular system, and separated from each other by ravines, filled with a dense growth of cane and under- brush. Carr's, Osterhaus', and Hovey's division of McCler- nand's corps were all on the ground at daylight, and A. J. Smith's division was so close behind them that it reached the field at 7 a.m. Logan's and Quinby's divisions of Mc- pherson's corps were crossing at Bruinsburg during the night of the 30th and the following morning, so that it was certain they could be relied on during the day, if necessary. 123 THE MISSISSIPPI There was an abundance of force present : the only difficulty was in bringing it into action on such difficult ground. At 5.30 a.m., McClernand opened the battle by sending forward Osterhaus' division on the left along the northerly road. His leading brigade (Garrard's) was quickly met by a hot fire from Tracy's Confederate brigade, and its advance was checked. The other brigade (Sheldon's) having then come to its assistance the Confederates were slightly driven back, but soon made a stand, and Osterhaus' division was unable to make any further progress until late in the afternoon. On the right, Carr's division moved forward at 6.15 a.m., one brigade (Benton's) on the light of the southerly road, and the other (Stone's) on the left of it. Their routes lay through broken country covered with dense underbrush and their progress was slow. The enemy (Green's brigade) was posted in an advantageous position on a commanding ridge. In advancing, Benton's and Stone's brigades had diverged from each other, leaving a gap, into which Hovey's division was ordered about 7 a.m. The two brigades of this division worked their way laboriously forward through the cane and underbrush, and finally came within one hundred and fifty yards of the Confederate ridge, where a battery was posted, well supported by infantiy. A determined assault was then made by Hovey's division, and Benton's brigade of Carr's division, and the ridge was carried, two pieces of artillery, three caissons, and 400 prisoners being captured. Green's brigade then fell back toward Port Gibson. Bowen had sent a short report to Pemberton from Grand Gulf early in the morning, stating the probability of an en- gagement ; after which orders were given to Baldwin to move his brigade to Port Gibson, and to Cockrell (tempo- rarily in command of Bowen's own brigade of Missouri troops) to move to Port Gibson with three regiments, leaving BAYOU EXPEDITIONS. 129 the other three posted respectively at Grand Gulf, at Thomp- son's Bluff on the Big Black, and at the Grindstone Ford on Bayou Pierre. Bowen then rode over to Port Gibson, reaching the battle-field at some time before 9 a.m. At the latter hour Baldwin's brigade passed through Port Gibson, and about a half hour later Green was driven back, as already stated. Baldwin was immediately ordered to form a new line about a mile in rear of Green's first position, and Green's brigade was re-formed and sent over to the assistance of Tracy on the northern road. Cockrell arrived about noon, and two of his regiments were sent to support Baldwin and one to support Tracy. Hovey's and Carr's divisions pushed on as rapidly as the ground would permit in pursuit of Green's brigade, and early in the afternoon they came under the fire of Baldwin's bri- gade and a very severe contest ensued, lasting over an hour and a half. While this was in progress Bowen took two of Cockrell's regiments and made a desperate effort to turn McClernand's right flank. McClernand called up one bri- gade (Burbridge's) of A. J. Smith's division and sent it to meet this attack, and at the same time Hovey brought four batteries into position on a ridge from which they could enfi- lade Cockrell's regiments moving through the ravine toward the right. Under this combined fire Cockrell's attack was defeated, and he was driven to and across the southern road, where he joined Baldwin, who still held firm. The other brigade (Landram's) of A. J. Smith's division now came up and joined Hovey's division and Stone's bri- gade of Carr's division in an attack on Baldwin. The odds were very great, even with the advantages of ground, and Baldwin made a most gallant defence, holding his ground until after the brigade on his right had been driven off the field, just before sunset, and then covering the retreat. G* 130 THE MISSISSIPPI. Grant had left Bruinsburg early in the morning and had reached the field about ten o'clock, just as Hovey's and Carr's divisions had carried the first ridge on the right. Having examined the whole field on the right, he rode over to the left to inspect Osterhaus' position, and he remained there with the intention of using McPherson's corps on that flank as soon as it should arrive. Two brigades (J. E. Smith's and Stevenson's) of Logan's division of this corps were put in mo- tion from Bruinsburg as soon as they landed, on the morning of the 1st. Hearing the sound of the battle, they marched as rapidly as possible through the heat, McPherson and Logan both being with the advance, and came on the field about noon. Owing to repeated requests for reinforcements from McClernand (although he had already three divisions under him opposed to about a brigade and a half), Grant ordered McPherson to send one brigade (Stevenson's) to McCler- nand, but to bring the other one (J. E. Smith's) to the sup- port of Osterhaus on the left. McPherson accompanied this brigade in person and was ordered by Grant to move it in such manner as to turn the Confederate right flank. As soon as the ground was reconnoitred, a judicious position was selected by McPherson from which this movement could be effected, but owing to the tangled and broken character of the country it was several hours before the movement could be accomplished. Having finally got into position about 5 p.m., an attack was made by J. E. Smith's bri- gade in line on the enemy's right flank at the same time that Osterhaus renewed his front attack along the road. The result was the complete defeat of the enemy's right, soon followed by the rest of his line, Baldwin's brigade in the centre bringing up the rear. Green conducted the men from the right (Tracy having been killed early in the action) along the direct road to Grand Gulf, burning the bridge over BAYOU EXPEDITIONS. 131 Bayou Pierre as soon as he had crossed, and taking a posi- tion on the hills north of that stream. Baldwin retreated through Port Gibson, destroying the bridge over the south fork of Bayou Pierre. The retreat was conducted in good order, every foot of the way being contested, so that dark- ness closed over the field before Grant's troops could reach Port Gibson. Under the circumstances, pursuit was impos- sible that night. Before daylight the next morning Bald- win continued his retreat to the Grindstone Ford, on the north fork of Bayou Pierre, crossed the bridge at that point and then burned it, and finally rejoined Bowen and Green by way of Willow Springs. Bowen's force engaged in this action numbered about 8,500 men, according to the latest returns prior to the bat- tle. In his official report, made three months later, he gave his strength at 5,500, although he stated to Loring, who joined him May 2d, that he then had 7,000 men, after de- ducting the losses in the battle. It is hardly necessary to figure down his strength ; his defence was most gallant, even with 8,500 men, against the odds of a whole corps and two brigades of another, numbering in all 23,000 men. He re- ported his losses as follows : Killed. Wounded. Missing. Cockrell's brigade 13 97 96 Green's " 17 83 122 Baldwin's " 12 48 27 Tracy's " 18 112 142 Total 60 340 387 Aggregate 787 According to the Union reports, the Confederates lost over GOO in prisoners alone. Grant's losses were as follows : 132 THE MISSISSIPPI. Killed. Wounded. Missing. Osterhaus1 division 37 171 5 A. J. Smith's " 2 16 0 Hovey's " 42 263 3 Carr's u 42 222 0 Logan's " 6 38 2 Total 129 710 10 Aggregate 849

## raymond

McPherson moved out accordingly before 4 a.m. on the 12th, Logan's division in the lead, followed closely by Crocker's. The enemy's videttes were soon seen falling back before them, and about 9 a.m. stronger bodies of the enemy were encountered. Logan thereupon formed one of his bri- gades (Dennis') in line of battle across the road, the othor two brigades marching by the flank in rear of it. The only cavalry regiment present with the army accompanied Mc- Pherson's command, and it was now thrown out on the flanks, with orders to explore every lateral road on which the enemy might be posted. In this formation Logan con- tinued his advance for about two hours. About 11 a.m., he came to a small stream crossing the road, about two miles from Raymond, and on the hills beyond it the enemy was discovered in force, the infantry drawn up in support of two batteries, which were posted in a position to enfilade the road and the bridge over the stream. A halt was made, and the ground was reconnoitred. It was evident that the en- emy intended to dispute the passage. Logan was at once ordered to attack him, and orders were sent back for Crocker to hasten his march and come up as a reserve. The enemy's force consisted of Gregg's brigade, which had come from Port Hudson to Jackson, in pursuance of Pemberton's orders of April 28th, and had moved out to Raymond to cover Jack- son, and to fall upon Grant's flank should he attack Ed- wards' Station. The brigade numbered, including some State troops picked up at Jackson, something over 3,000 men. Logan's division was at once formed by deploying J. E. Smith's brigade on the right of Dennis', and placing De- Golyer's (8th Michigan) battery on the road in the centre. The infantry advanced, preceded by skirmishers, and a se- vere engagement was soon in progress. Stevenson's brigade THE CAMPAIGN IN REAR OF VICKSBTJRG. 143 was then deployed on the right of Smith's, and the line con- tinued to advance, passing over some open ground, and gain- ing possession of a piece of woods across the creek, in close proximity to the enemy's position on the hills. The fight continued for two or three hours, the line gradually ad- vancing until, during the afternoon, the leading brigade of Crocker's division came up and deployed in support of Dennis' brigade. The enemy then abandoned the field and retreated rapidly toward Jackson. Logan's division followed in pursuit, passing through Raymond at 5 p.m., and pursuing the enemy for some distance beyond the town, but being unable to overtake them the men were halted and went into camp for the night. Crocker's division was but slightly engaged in this affair, losing but two men. Logan lost 65 killed, 335 wounded, and 32 missing ; toial 432. Gregg's loss, according to his own report, was 73 killed, 229 wounded, and 204 missing— total 505. Two dis- abled guns were captured.

## jackson

While these events were in progress JohnstoD had received orders from Richmond on May 9th to " proceed at once to Mississippi and take chief command of the forces there." He arrived at Jackson on the evening of the 13th and found the two brigades of Gregg and Walker just returning from Raymond. Gist's South Carolina brigade and Maxey's Port Hudson brigade were expected to arrive the next day. The total strength of these four brigades was about 12,000 men. He also learned that Pemberton was at Edwards' Station but that a large Union force was at Clinton, cutting off any communication with him. He hastened to telegraph a few words to Richmond conveying this information, and adding, " I am too late." He seemed to foresee disaster, and desired to clear himself in advance of any responsibility for it, rather than to bend his whole energy to avert it. Meanwhile, in pursuance of Grant's orders of the night of May 12th, already referred to, McPherson had moved from Raymond to Clinton on the 13th, and from there toward Jackson on the 14th. Sherman had moved through Ray- mond to Mississippi Springs on the 13th, and thence toward Jackson on the 14th, communicating with McPherson on the other road, so as to approach Jackson about the same hour. McClernand had moved to Raymond on the 13th, and sent one division forward as far as Clinton on the 14th. Sher- man and McPherson approached Jackson in a pouring rain, about 10 a.m. on the 14th. Hearing of their approach from his vedettes, Johnston posted one brigade on each road — Walker toward Clinton, and Gregg toward Raymond — in intrenchments which had previously been constructed on THE CAMPAIGN IN REAR OF VICKSBURG. 147 high ground commanding the approaches over open fields. He instructed them to make enough of a defence to gain time for him to remove stores and valuable property by the railroad leading northward toward Canton. Gregg made but a feeble resistance. After some prelimi- nary artillery firing, Sherman moved a portion of his men around the enemy's flank, and, at 1 p.m., they reached the enemy's intrenchments to find them deserted. About 250 prisoners were taken, together with all their artillery (18 guns), and much ammunition and stores. Sherman lost less than 30 men. Walker made more of a fight. He occupied a fine posi- tion on the crest of a semi-circular ridge, his flanks pro- tected by woods, and in front of him a gently sloping open field terminating, about one-third of a mile distant, in a boggy creek lined with thick willows. His artillery com- manded the bridge over this creek. McPherson arrived in front of this position about 9.30 a.m., but the rain fell in such torrents that his attack was delayed for an hour and a half by the fear of spoiling their ammunition if the men opened their cartridge-boxes (this was before the days of metallic cartridges). Crocker's division had the advance this day, and, during this hour and a half, his men were moved into place, the three brigades being deployed in line, with one brigade of Logan's division in reserve. At 11 a.m., the rain having partially ceased, skirmishers were sent for- ward, and advanced as far as the creek, but were unable to move through the open field beyond it. They were then recalled, and a charge was ordered. The whole division moved forward in a superb line, driving the enemy's skir- mishers out of the creek, and advancing under fire across the field. When they were about half way across it, the en- emy broke from their intrenchments and made a hasty re- 118 THE MISSISSIPPI. treat. They were pursued about a mile and a half, during which Crocker's men fell somewhat into disorder, and were finally brought to a halt by some artillery posted in an inner line of works close to the town. While they were re-form- ing, the Confederates made their escape over to the Canton road. In this engagement McPherson lost 265 men, and he gives the enemy's loss at 845, a large portion of whom were prisoners, and 17 guns. The Confederate reports make their losses a little less than 400. McPherson's and Sherman's troops entered Jackson about the same time, between 3 and 4 p.m. Pemberton's attempt to defend Jackson against a "raid" by a detachment out of supporting distance had led to complete disaster, viz. : the defeat of two brigades with heavy loss, the loss of 35 guns, the capture of Jackson, and the destruction of the railroads and all public property at that place.

## big-black

When Pemberton first moved out from Vicksburg afhcr the battle of Port Gibson, it was his intention to defend the line of the Big Black, and for this purpose he ordered tetes-- de-pont to be constructed, covering the principal ferries and the railroad bridge. Grant's troops arrived at the ferries so quickly that it was impossible to defend them, but a tete-de- pont had been constructed in front of the railroad bridge. At this point the river makes a wide bend in the form of a horseshoe, the distance in a straight line across the loop be- ing about a mile. The ground on the concave side of the bend was perfectly flat and entirely open, excepting some bunches of timber hero and there ; a narrow but deep ditch 162 THE MISSISSIPPI or bayou ran across this ground in a nearly straight line. On the other side of the river the bluffs were 40 or 50 feet high, and the ground very broken. The line selected for the trenches ran straight across the open ground behind this ditch. Work was begun upon it on the 12th of May and finished on the 15th. This line would have served its pur- pose as a tete-de-pont, had it been occupied by a small ad- vanced guard, supported by the main body in strong force, properly posted in its rear on the west bank. Unfortunately for Pemberton, the troops (Loring's division) which he had intended to post on the west bank, as they had been the least engaged at Champion's Hill, were cut off in that battle and never rejoined him. He was thus caught defending a bridge with nearly all his reliable troops in the tete-de-pont, and nothing in support. A complete stampede was the re- sult. In moving forward to Edwards' Station on the 13th and 14th with his field army, Pemberton had called up two bri- gades from those left in the defences of Vicksburg, and had stationed them at the Big Black bridge to secure that point in his rear against surprise. These were Vaughn's and Baldwin's brigades of Smith's division, the former of which was posted in the trenches on the east bank, and the latter at Bovina, a few miles in rear, in support. During the night of the 16th Bo wen's division was halted and placed in the same trenches, Cockrell's brigade on the right and Green's brigade on the left of Vaughn. The object was to defend the position long enough to cover the crossing of Loring's division as soon as it should arrive. In order to facilitate the crossing, the ties of the railroad bridge were planked, and a second bridge was improvised by taking a steamer which haj)pened to be there and mooring it athwart the stream. It was nearly as long as the stream was wide, and THE CAMPAIGN IN REAR OF VICKSBURG. 163 the vacant spaces at stein and stern were bridged over with plank. Grant's army passed the night of the 16th between the battlefield and Edwards' Station, with the exception of Sher- man's corps, which bivouacked at Bolton. At daylight the next morning the pursuit was resumed, McClernand's corps in the lead, moving toward Big Black bridge, followed by MePhersou. Sherman's corps moved from Bolton direct to Bridgeport, in order to turn the position at the bridge. Carr's division, which was in the advance, came in sight of the trenches at the bridge about 8 a.m., and he immediately de- ployed his two brigades on the right of the road. Osterhaus was but a short distance behind him, and as soon as he came up his division was deployed on the left of the road. A few batteries were brought into position and some skirmishers sent forward, but the ground to the left of the road was com- pletely open, and it was not deemed advisable to assault the works across such ground until more troops should come up. On the right of the road, however, there was a clump of woods extending nearly to the river, and Carr moved his men to these woods in order to gain an advantageous posi- tion for assault. On the Confederate side everything was at odds and ends. There seemed to be no one in command, and the horses of the field guns that had been placed in the trenches had been removed across the river ; if a retreat became necessary the guns must bo abandoned. The distance from the point where the trenches crossed the road to the bridge was fully three-quarters of a mile ; it was perfectly open ground, and there was no supporting force on the other bank of the river. Under such circumstances, in case of a retreat the men would be slaughtered. There were not more than 5,000 men in the trenches, and fully double that num- 161 THE MISSISSIPPI. ber now confronted them, with the prospect of more to ar- rive very soon. The " Missouri division " (Bowen's), was renowned for hard fighting, both before and after this affair, but this was a case to try the nerves of the steadiest veterans, for every man felt instinctively that he was in a position where he ought never to have been placed. As they ob- served the movement toward the woods on their left flank, many of them slipped off one by one to the bridge in rear. Meanwhile brisk firing was carried on opposite the centre for about half an hour, during which Carr's division was moving into the piece of woods on the right, and A. J. Smith's division was coming up and forming on Osterhaus' left. Just as Smith's division was coming into line Carr's men emerged from the woods with a loud cheer, and rushed forward upon the intrenchments. Vaughn's brigade in the centre saw that they were cut off from the bridge and im- mediately turned and ran at full speed. Bowen's division at first attempted to make a defence, but in a few minutes saw that it was hopeless, and it then joined in the attempt to reach the bridge. All the reports, Union and Confeder- ate, speak of this as a precipitate flight, every man for him- self. The 18 pieces of artillery were all abandoned, over. 1,400 small arms were thrown away, and one-third of the command (1,751 men) were cut off and made prisoners. The rest reached the bridges in time, and immediately after crossing set fire to them. As they had been rjreviously pre- pared for this purpose by scattering loose cotton and tur- pentine on them, they were quickly consumed. The losses on the Federal side in this engagement were 273 in killed and wounded, all but 30 of which were in Carr's division. The whole affair was over soon after 9 o'clock in the morn- ing.

## siege-works-and-garrison

Vicksburg lies upon the river slope of a range of bluffs which extend for hundreds of miles along the eastern side of the alluvial valley of the Mississippi, and which are here washed by the river itself, though at other points of its winding course it is often from 50 to 100 miles distant from them. These bluffs are about 250 feet in height and are composed of a peculiarly tenacious, semi-indurated clay, which when cut vertically for roads or other pur£>oses resists the action of the weather and retains its vertical sides for generations. In such a soil the action of running water in small streams has, in the course of centuries, resulted in cut- ting the bluff or plateau into deep ravines with remarkably steep sides, separated by very narrow ridges. The topog- raphy is thus extremely broken and complicated, and is of such a character that no manoeuvres of troops are possible over it. On the other hand it lends itself admirably to the purposes of fortification, the narrow ridges having a com- plete command over the deep ravines in front of them, and their sinuous course enabling each point to bring a cross fire in front of adjacent points. A careful study of the map is necessary to form even an approximate idea of the main features of this topography. It will be noticed that from the northeast corner of the town a ridge runs out to the eastward, on which is the Jack- THE SIEGE AND SURRENDER OF VICKSBURG. 175 son road ; about two miles from the outskirts of the town, this ridge meets another ridge, which trends off to the south- west for several miles, following an irregular course, but hav- ing an unbroken crest nearly on the same level all the way. Between the Jackson ridge and this second ridge there is a collection of minor valleys, the drainage of which is finally united into Stout's bayou, which empties into the Missis- sippi a few miles lower down, but is here separated from it by another ridge, on which is the Warrenton road. The Confederate line began on the Warrenton ridge about three miles south of town, crossed Stout's Bayou, and then fol- lowed the ridge without a break for five miles to the Jack- son road. Here the ridge turns to the east and subse- quently to the north and west, reaching the Mississippi at the point of the bend ; but this ridge was considered as giving too long a development to the line of defence, and from the Jackson road the line ran due north, to a ravine called Glass' Bayou, fully 150 feet deep, with precipitous sides, and filled with a dense growth of vines and cane ; crossing this it continued along a lateral spur to the Grave- yard road, where it intersected another narrow, level ridge, running due west about two miles to the river at Fort Hill.1 This line had been selected for fortification in the autumn of 1862, and during the winter and spring it had been most thoroughly fortified. At the salient and commanding points of the ridge, at an average distance of perhaps two hundred yards from one another, batteries were constructed for artil- lery in the form of redans, lunettes, or, in some places, 1 The reports of the Engineer and other officers of the Seventeenth Corps, which held the line at the Jackson road, speak of the crest of the ridge on that road as "Fort Hill." This is a mistake; Fort Hill overlooks the river about two miles north of the city landing, as shown on the accompanying map. It was so named because the Spaniards erected a fort upon it as a defence against the Indians, when they ascended the Mississippi, and it has retained the name to this day. 176 THE MISSISSIPPI. closed redoubts ; the parapets of these batteries were 25 feet thick and 10 feet high, and the ditch was 7 feet deep, making the top of the parapet 17 feet above the bottom of the ditch. Between the salient points there ran a line of intrenchments, which in the whole eight miles of line was broken only at two points, i.e., at Stout's Bayou and Glass' Bayou ; this intrenchment was 10 feet thick and 5 feet high, and the ditch in front of it was 4 feet deep. In a few places, where cross spurs jutted out from the main ridge, advanced batteries were constructed, making a double or triple line, but in general there was only a single line of works. They were defended when the siege began by 128 pieces of artillery, 36 of which were siege guns and the rest field pieces. In addition to these land defences, the circuit was made complete by a series of water batteries, extending from Fort Hill on the north, through the town, and along the Warrenton ridge till they met the land batteries on the south. They mounted 31 pieces of siege artillery of the heaviest calibre, and 13 pieces of field artillery. The troops for the defence numbered about 20,000 effec- tive men, divided into four divisions, under Generals Ste- venson, Forney, Smith, and Bowen, and Waul's " legion." Stevenson's division held the right, beginning at the Warren- ton road and ending at the railroad ; his four brigades ware posted in the following order from right to left, viz. : Bar- ton, from the Warrenton road about one mile north ; Rey- nolds, from Barton's right to the Hall's Ferry road ; Cum- mings, from the Hall's Ferry road to the square fort, about three-quarters of a mile south of the railroad ; Lee, from the square fort to the railroad. Forney's division came next, with two brigades posted as follows : Moore, on both sides of the Baldwin's Ferry road, his right extending to the railroad, and his left nearly to the THE SIEGE AND SURRENDER OF VICKSBURG. 177 Jackson road ; Hebert from the Jackson to the Graveyard road, his troops occupying the main salients on both roads. Smith held the left, with three brigades ; Shoupe, from the Graveyard road about a mile westward ; Baldwin on the left of Shoupe ; and Vaughn on the extreme left, extending to Fort Hill. Bowen's division and Waul's legion were in reserve.

## assault-of-may-22

The result of the assault was therefore unsuccessful at all points. Of the 40,000 infantry present for duty in Grant's army that day all but about 5,000 had been brought into action. The length of line assaulted was about two and a half miles, and it was held in the morning by two Confed- erate brigades (Moore's and Hebert's), and by parts of two others. As soon as the attack was begun, Bowen's division and a part of Smith's division were sent to the threatened points, Green's brigade going to the Baldwin's Ferry road and the railroad, Cockrell's to the Jackson road, and Vaughn's on the Graveyard road. The entire force of de- fenders actually engaged did not number more than 13,000, but the nature of the ground was such that the works could only be approached at three principal points ; these points were salients which covered the line between them with cross-fires, and by holding them the entire line was secure. A force of 4,000 men at each of these points was all that the works would hold, and any more men would have been superfluous. The Confederate loss is not known ; it prob- THE SIEGE AND SURRENDER OF VICKSBURG. 185 ably did not much exceed 500. In Forney's division, which bore the brunt of the assaults of Sherman's and McPherson's corps, the loss was only 42 killed and 95 wounded. Grant's loss in the two assaults of May 19th and 22d were over 4,000, as follows, more than three-fourths of them being on the 22d

## reinforcement

At the close of the siege, there were 17,000 men from Huiibut's corps present at Vicks- burg, and these, with Parke's corps and Herron's division, carried the total strength of Grant's army to 71,141 men, and 248 guns, on June 30th.

## garrison-before-surrender

As the month of June wore on, Pemberton's hopes of re- lief began gradually to diminish, and then to disappear. His men were on reduced rations, but were not at starva- tion point ; his ammunition was deficient., but it had been carefully husbanded during the siege, and he had enough for a battle. Every man capable of doing duty was in the trenches, and many of those previously wounded had recov- HE SIEGE AND SURRENDER OF VICKSBURG. 201 ered, so that their numbers now amounted to nearly 22,000, as shown by their returns — a little more than when the siege began; about 7,000 were in the hospitals. In his report Pemberton vehemently denies that either lack of food or of ammunition induced his surrender. He says he surrendered because his men were enfeebled by long exposure in a cramped position in trenches, and because there was no prospect of relief. It is probable that the most potent cause of surrender was the temper of the men. They were physically exhausted and mentally discouraged, and they saw no object in a continuation of the present state of af- fairs, and no issue from it except in surrender.

## surrender-terms

On the morning of the 3d, therefore, Pemberton sent a flag of truce by Bowen, with a letter to Grant, proposing that three commissioners be appointed on each side to arrange terms for capitulation. Grant replied that he did not favor the proposition of appointing commissioners ; that his only terms were an unconditional surrender of the city and gar- rison, and that Pemberton might feel assured that men who had shown so much endurance and courage as those now in Vicksburg would be treated with all the respect due to prisoners of war. Bowen expressed a desire to converse with Grant, which was refused ; but Grant sent word that if Pemberton desired to see him he would meet him in front of the lines at 3 p.m. At that hour Grant, with his two corps commanders then present, Ord and McPherson, and the division commanders nearest that part of the line, Logan and A. J. Smith, besides several members of his staff, went forward to a point just south of the Confederate works on the Jackson road. Here he was met by Pemberton, Bowen, and some of the former's staff. Pemberton asked what terms he would be allowed, and Grant answered those indi- THE SIEGE AND SURRENDER OF VICKSBURG. 205 eated in his letter that morning. Pemberton replied that then the conference might terminate, and hostilities be resumed. Grant said " Veiy well." Some further conver- sation ensued, when the proposition was made — by whom is a matter of dispute — that Bowen and A. J. Smith should re- tire for consultation. Grant made no objection to this, except that he would not consider himself bound by any- thing they might agree upon. These officers then stepped to one side, but came to no conclusion. Finally the con- ference broke up with the understanding that Grant would formulate his terms in detail, and send them to Pemberton at 10 p.m. The letter which Grant sent that evening conveyed the same idea of unconditional surrender, although those words were not used. He proposed to take possession of the city the next morning, have rolls made out as soon as possible, and individual paroles signed by every officer and man, after which the Confederate troops were to march out ; the rank and file taking no property but their clothing, and officers retaining their side arms and one horse for each mounted officer. Thirty wagons and any desired amount of rations could be taken from their own stores. These terms would not only insure a complete surrender, but they would save the trouble of transporting and feeding the prisoners until exchanged. Pemberton accepted these terms in the main but pro- posed that he should first march out with his colors and arms, before Grant took possession ; also that officers should retain their personal property and " the rights and property of citizens to be respected." This proposition was received after midnight, and Grant at once answered, declining to make any stipulations about citizens, and agreeing to the officers retaining their private baggage and side arms, 206 THE MISSISSIPPI. which was already included in his first letter. As to the proposition to march out with colors and arms, he had no objection, provided that, as soon as the arms were stacked, the troops marched back again and remained within the lines until duly paroled. Pemberton was notified that unless his acceptance of these terms was signified by 9 a.m. they would be regarded as rejected, and measures taken ac- cordingly. He immediately replied accej)ting them. In these negotiations Grant had waived the technical point of not offering any terms further than the words " un- conditional surrender," as in his position of conqueror it was very easy for him to do. But he had kept the negotiations in his own hands, instead of delegating them to commissioners, and he had yielded nothing of the principle for which he contended, i.e., the surrender of the whole force, with their arms and munitions, as prisoners of war, not to take arms again until properly exchanged. At 10 a.m. on July 4th, the Confederate troops marched out, each division in front of its works, stacked arms, laid their colors upon them, and then returned toward the town. Logan's division was marched in to take possession. Paroles were made out and signed as quickly as possible, and the prisoners were meanwhile fed from the Union stores. On July 11th, they marched out without arms, and proceeded to the vicinity of Enterprise, Miss., and Demopolis, Ala., where they remained until they were declared exchanged in the following month of September.1 I 1 On July 10th, Jefferson Davis telegraphed to Pemberton that all the general [officers had been exchanged, and were released from their parole ; and that they should return to duty at once. He also desired to know what portion of the troops ' were really effective, and was informed that Stevenson's, and Bowen's, and a part of Forney's division were fit for service, i.e., about two-thirds of the whole force. On September 11th, the Confederate Agent of Exchange notified the United States Agent that on the following clay the divisions above named would be de- THE SIEGE AXD SURRENDER OF VICKSBURG. 207 The number actually paroled, as certified by the U. S. Commissioner of Exchange, to whom the rolls were for- warded, was 29,391 — viz., 2,166 officers, and 27,225 men. In addition, 790 refused to be paroled, and were sent North as prisoners of war, and several hundreds escaped, or died in the hospitals before they could be paroled, so that the total force surrendered was, in round numbers, 31,000. The artillery found in the place numbered 172 pieces, 67 of which were siege guns, and the rest field pieces. Grant's losses in the entire campaign, including the expe- dition against Jackson, were a little less than 10,000, some of which, being men slightly wounded, were only temporary.

## helena

After this had failed Lt.-Gen. T. H. Holmes, who commanded the District of Arkansas in E. K. Smith's department, sent the following telegram, dated Little Rock, June 15th, to Smith at Shreve- port : "I believe we can take Helena ; please let me do it." To which Smith replied: "Most certainly do it." Holmes then had in his entire district, according to his returns of May 1st, 31,933 men, of whom 11,508 were " estimated" as fit for duty. For his expedition to Helena he collected about twenty regiments, consisting of Price's and Marmaduke's divisions and Fagan's and Walker's brigades. In his report Holmes states that these troops numbered 7,646 men. With their officers the whole force was probably between 8,000 and 9,000 ; it was estimated by the Union officers at 15,000. Holmes, object in this expedition was to capture Helena, by which he hoped to raise the siege of Vicksburg, or if CONCLUDING OPERATIONS. 235 Vicksbiirg fell to still keep the river closed and perhaps make a new Vicksburg on the west bank. Helena had been occupied by the Union troops ever since Curtis arrived there from Western Arkansas, in July, 1862. It had been considerably fortified by a redoubt, called Fort Curtis, just west of the town, and by four outlying batteries — named Batteries A, B, C, and D— which commanded the roads on the west of the town, as shown on the accompanying sketch. The garrison at this time consisted of Ross' division of the 13th Corps (temporarily in command of Brig.- Gen. Salomon) and a brigade of cavalry. The entire force num- bered 4,129 men, and was commanded by Maj.-Gen. B. Prentiss. Holmes arrived in front of the place on the evening of July 3d. His orders were to assault at daylight, Fagan's brigade on the right against Battery D, Price's division in the centre against Battery C, Marmaduke's division on the left against Batteries A and B, and "Walker's cavalry brigade covering the extreme left. Prentiss was expecting an attack, and his troops were under arms all night in order to be pre- pared for it. Helena. July 4, 1863. M. 236 THE MISSISSIPPI. At daylight Fagan and Marmaduke moved forward. The latter's attack was feebly made, and was not supported by Walker's cavalry on his left as had been ordered. It ac- complished nothing all day. Fagan, however, attacked with great determination and carried all the outer intrenchments in front of Battery D, but was unable to enter that work. His men were subjected to a severe cross-fire from the other batteries, and were forced to fall back ; the four regiments of this brigade lost over 400 men. Price also made a most vigorous assault, although he did not come into action until an hour later than Fagan. He carried all the intrenchments in his front and Battery C also. He then ordered one bri- gade to move forward toward the town and the other to as- sault Battery D in rear. But there was a great deal of con- fusion among his men, and the orders were not obeyed. In the midst of the delay he was energetically attacked by the Union troops, and Battery C was recajDtured. Seeing that his attack had no chance of success, Holmes gave the order to withdraw at 10.30 a.m. His troops returned to Little Rock without molestation, Prentiss having too small a force to attempt a pursuit. The Confederate losses, as stated by Holmes, were 173 killed, 687 wounded, and 776 missing, making a total of 1,636. Prentiss certifies that he buried 400 dead, paroled 108 wounded, and sent North 993 prisoners, about one-fourth of whom were wounded, making a total of 1,501 left in his hands. The Union loss was 57 killed, 127 wounded, and 36 missing ; total, 230.
