UNlVtRS'TY  OF^ 
Ki  r^'uQ. 


“r 

its  return  to  the  library  f below, 

on  or  before  the  Latest  Da 

r.en.  — ant.  Unlvataity. 

nary  action  and  may  res  333-84OO 

To  renew  call  Telepho  ' at  i ibbaNA-CHAMPAION_ 

|UUNO;S_tlBRA^^^^,^,,.=== 


MAR  13  931 

FEB  i 4^931 


JAN  0 31 1995 
MAV  0 B 1995 
mar  ^ ^397 


LI6I— 0-1096 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
University  of  Illinois  Urbana-Champaign 


https://archive.org/details/warofrebellion241unit 


remote  storage 

THE 


WAR  OF  THE  REBELLION: 

A COMPILATION  OF  THE 

OFFIOIA.L  RECORDS 

OF  THE 

UNION  AND  CONFEDERATE  ARMIES. 


PREPARED,  UNDER  THE  DIRECTION  OF  THE  SECRETARY  OF  WAR,  BY 

The  late  Lieut.  Col.  ROBERT  N.  SCOTT,  Third  U.  S.  Artillery. 

PUBLISHED  PURSUANT  TO  ACTS  OF  CONGRESS. 


SERIES  I— VOLUME  XXIV—IN  THREE  PARTS. 
PAKT  I-REPOKTS. 


AVASHIKGTON: 

GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE. 

1889. 


f 7 3.  7^^ 

J/.  / 

PREFACE. 


By  au  act  approved  June  23^  1874,  Congress  made  an  appropriation 
^‘to  enable  the  Secretary  of  War  to  begin  the  i>ubiication  of  the  Official 
Eecords  of  the  War  of  the  Eebellion,  both  of  the  Union  and  Confed- 
erate Armies,’^  and  directed  him  ‘‘to  have  copied  for  the  Public  Printer 
all  reports,  letters,  telegrams,  and  general  orders  not  heretofore  copied 
or  printed,  and  nroperly  arranged  in  chronological  order.’^ 

Appropriatioife  for  continuing  such  preparation  have  been  made  from 
time  to  time,  and  the  act  approved  June  16,  1880,  has  provided  “for 
the  printing  and  binding,  under  direction  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  of 

10.000  copies  of  a compilation  of  the  Official  Eecords  (Union  and  Con- 
federate) of  the  War  of  the  Eebellion,  so  far  as  the  same  may  be  ready 
for  publication,  during  the  fiscal  year’^j  and  that  “of  said  number, 

7.000  copies  shall  be  for  the  use  of  the  House  of  Eeprescntatives,  2,000 
copies  for  the  use  of  the  Senate,  and  1,000  copies  for  the  use  of  the 
Executive  Departments.”* 

This  compilation  will  be  the  first  general  publication  of  the  military 
records  of  the  war,  and  will  embrace  all  official  documents  that  can  be 
obtained  by  the  compiler,  and  that  appear  to  be  of  any  historical  value. 

* Volumes  I to  V distributed  under  act  approved  June  16,  1880.  The  act  approved 
August  7,  1882,  provides  that — 

‘‘The  volumes  of  the  Official  Eecords  of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion  shall  be  distributed 
as  follows : One  thousand  copies  to  the  Executive  Departments,  as  now  provided  by 
law.  One  thousand  copies  for  distribution  by  the  Secretary  of  War  among  officers  of 
the  Army  and  contributors  to  the  work.  Eight  thousand  three  hundred  copies  shall 
be  sent  by  the  Secretary  of  War  to  such  libraries,  organizations,  and  individuals  as 
may  be  designated  by  the  Senators,  Representatives,  and  Delegates  of  the  Forty- 
seventh  Congress.  Each  Senator  shall  designate  not  exceeding  twenty-six,  and  each 
Representative  and  Delegate  not  exceeding  twenty-one  of  such  addresses,  and  the 
volumes  shall  be  sent  thereto  from  time  to  time  as  they  are  published,  until  the  pub- 
lication is  completed.  Senators,  Representatives,  and  Delegates  shall  inform  the 
Secretary  of  War  in  each  case  how  many  volumes  of  those  heretofore  published  they 
have  forwarded  to  such  addresses.  The  remaining  copies  of  the  eleven  thousand  to 
be  published,  and  all  sets  that  may  not  be  ordered  to  be  distributed  as  provided 
herein,  shall  be  sold  by  the  Secretary  of  War  for  cost  of  publication  with  ten  per 
cent,  added  thereto,  and  the  proceeds  of  such  sale  shall  be  covered  into  the  Treasury. 
If  two  or  more  sets  of  said  volumes  are  ordered  to  the  same  address  the  Secretary  of 
War  shall  inform  the  Senators,  Representatives,  or  Delegates,  who  have  designated 
the  same,  who  thereupon  may  designate  other  libraries,  organizations,  or  individuals. 
The  Secretary  of  War  shall  report  to  the  first  session  of  the  Forty-eighth  Congress 
what  volumes  of  the  series  heretofore  published  have  not  been  furnished  to  such 
libraries,  organizations,  and  individuals.  He  shall  also  inform  distributees  ^t  whose 
instance  the  volumes  are  sent.” 


Ill 


PREFACE. 


iv 

The  publication  will  present  the  records  in  the  following  order  of’ 
.arrangement : 

The  1st  Series  will  embrace  the  formal  reports,  both  Union  and  Con- 
federate, of  the  first  seizures  of  United  States  property  in  the  Southern 
States,  and  of  ail  military  operations  in  the  field,  with  the  correspond- 
ence, orders,  and  returns  relating  specially  thereto,  and,  as  proposed 
is  to  be  accompanied  by  an  Atlas. 

In  this  series  the  reports  will  be  arranged  according  to  the  campaigns 
:aud  several  theaters  of  operations  (in  the  chronological  order  of  the 
events),  and  the  Union  reports  of  any  event  will,  as  a rule,  be  imme- 
diately followed  by  the  Con  federate  accounts.  The  correspondence,  &c.,  * 
not  embraced  in  the  “ reports  proper  will  follow  (first  Union  and  next 
‘Confederate)  in  chronological  order. 

The  2d  Series  will  contain  the  correspondence,  oi€ers,  reports,  and 
^:eUirns,  Union  and  Confederate,  relating  to  i^risoners  of  war,  and  (so 
far  as  the  military  authorities  were  concerned)  to  State  or  political 
^)2isoners. 

The  3d  Series  will  contain  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
.returns  of  the  Union  authorities  (embracing  their  correspondence  with 
the  Confederate  officials)  not  relating  specially  to  the  subjects  of  the 
first  and  second  series.  It  will  set  forth  the  annual  and  special  reports 
of  the  Secretary  of  War;  of  the  General-in-Chief,  and  of  the  chiefs  of 
the  several  staff  corps  and  departments  j the  calls  for  troops,  and  the 
/correspondence  between  the  national  and  the  several  State  authorities- 

The  dth  Series  will  exhibit  the  correspondence,  orders,  reports,  and 
Teturns  of  the  Confederate  authorities,  similar  to  that  indicated  for  the 
Union  officials,  as  of  the  third  series,  but  excluding  the  correspondence 
§>etween  the  Union  and  Confederate  authorities  given  in  that  series. 

EGBERT  K SCOTT, 

Major  Third  Art,^  and  Bvt.  Lieut.  Col. 

War  Department,  August  23,  1880. 


Approved : 


ALEX.  RAMSEY, 

Secretary  of  ^Yar. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 


Operations  in  Mississippi  and  West  Tennessee  (including  those  in  Arkansas 
and  Louisiana  connected  with  the  siege  of  Vicksburg).  January  20-August 
10,  1863  A.. 


V 

\ 

J 


’.3 


CONTjENTS  OF  PRECEDINO  VOLUMES. 


VOIjUME  I. 


CHAPTER  I.  Page. 

Operations  in  Charleston  Harbor,  South 
Carolina.  December  20,  1860-April  14, 

1861 1-317 

CHAPTER  11. 

The  secession  of  Georgia.  January  3-26, 

1861 318-325 

CHAPTER  III. 

The  secession  of  Alabama  and  Mississippi. 

January  4-20,  1861  326-330 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Operations  in  Florida.  January  6- August 
31,  1861 331-473 


CHAPTER  Y. 

The  secession  of  North  Carolina.  Janu- 

uary  9-May  20,  1861 

CHAPTER  VI. 

The  secession  of  Louisiana.  January  10- 

February  19,  1861 ' 

CHAPTER  YII. 

Operations  in  Texas  and  New  Mexico. 

February  1-June  11,  1861 

CHAPTER  YIII. 

Operations  in  Arkansas,  the  Indian  Terri- 
tory, and  Missouri.  February  7-May  9, 
1861 


VOEUME  II. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Operations  in  Maryland,  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia.  April  16-July  31, 1861.. 

TOEUME  III. 

CHAPTER  X. 

Operations  in  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Kansas,  and  Indian  Territory.  May  lO-November  19,  1861. 

TOEUME  IT. 

CHAPTER  XI.  Page. 

Operations  in  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and 
Arizona.  June  11, 1861-February  1, 1862.  1-174 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Operations  in  Kentucky  and  Tennessee. 

J uly  1-November  19, 1861  175-565 

TOEUME  T. 

* CHAPTER  XIV. 

Operations  in  Maryland,  Northern  Virginia,  and  West  Virginia.  August  1,  lS61-March  17, 1862. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

Operations  in  North  Carolina  and  South- 
eastern V irginia.  August  1, 1861- J anu- 
ary  11, 1862 


TOEUME  TI. 


CHAPTER  XV.,  Page. 

Operations  on  the  coasts  of  South  Carolina, 
Georgia,  and  Middle  and  East  Florida. 

August  21,  1861-April  11,  1862 1-435 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

Operations  in  West  Florida,  Southern  Al- 
abama, Southern  Mississippi,  and  Lou- 
isiana. September  1, 1861-May  12, 1862. 


TOEUME  TII. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

Operations  in  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  N.  Alabana,  and  S.  W.  Virginia.  Nov.  19, 1861-Mar.  4, 1862. 

(ViO 


Page. 

474-488 

■489-501 

502-636 

637-691 

Page. 

1-1012 

Page. 

. 1-749 

Page. 

566-721 

Page. 

1-1106 

Page. 

436-894 

Page. 

1-946 


VIII 


CONTENTS  OF  PRECEDING  VOLUMES, 


VOLUME  VIII. 


CHAPTER  XVIII.  Page. 

Operations  in  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Kansas,  and  Indian  Territory.  Xov.  19, 1801- April  10, 1862.  1-834 


VOLUME  IX. 


CHAPTER  XIX.  Page. 

Operations  in  Southeastern  Virginia.  Jan- 
uary 11-March  17, 1862  1-71 

CHAPTER  XX. 

Operations  in  North  Carolina.  January 
ll-August  20, 1862 72-480 


CHAPTER  XXL  Page. 

Operations  in  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and 
Arizona.  - February  1-Septernber  20, 

1862 481-730 


VOLUME  X-IX  TWO  PARTS. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


Operations  in  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  North  Mississippi,  North  Alabama,  and  Southwest  Virginia. 

March  4-June  10,  1862. 

Page. 


Part  I— Reports 1-927 

Part  IS— Correspondence,  etc 1-642 


VOLUME  XI— IX  THREE  PARTS. 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

The  Peninsular  Campaign,  Virginia.  March  17-September  2,  1862. 


Page. 

Part  I— Reports,  March  17-June  24 1-1077 

Part  II— Reports,  June  25-September  2 1-994 

Part  III— Correspondence,  etc l-69fl. 


VOLUME  XII-IX  THREE  PARTS. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Operations  in  Northern  Virginia,  West  Virginia,  and  Maryland.  March  17-September  2, 1862. 

Page. 


Part  I— Reports,  March  17-June  25 1-818 

Part  II— Reports,  June  26-September  2 1-820 

Part  III- Correspondence,  etc 1-966 


VOLUME  XIII. 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

Page. 

Operations  in  Missoiiri,  Arkansas,  Kansas,  the  Indian  Territory,  and  the  Department  of  the 
Northwest,  April  lO-November  20, 1862  1-9S1 

VOLUME  XIV. 

CHAPTER  XXVI.  ^ 

Page. 

Operations  on  the  coasts  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  and  Middle  and  East  Florida.  April  12, 
1862-Jano  11,  1863 1-1025 


VOLUME  XV. 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 


Operations  in  W est  Florida,  Southern  Alabama,  Southern  Mississipj)!  (embracing  all  operations 
against  Vicksburg,  May  18-July  27, 1862),  and  Louisiana,  May  12,  1862-May  14,  1863 ; and  oper- 
ations in  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Arizona,  September 20, 1862-May  14,  1863 1-1135 


CONTENTS  OF  PRECEDING  VOLUMES. 


IX 


TOIiUME  ICVl—lN  TWO  PAKTS. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 


Operations  in  Kentucky,  Middle  and  East  Tennessee,  Xortli  Alabama,  and  Southwest  Virginia. 

10-October'31,  1862. 


Part  I— Reports 

Part  II— Correspondence,  etc 


June 

Page. 

1-1168 

1-1017 


VOLUME  XVII— IK  TWO  PARTS. 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

Operations  in  West  Tennessee  and  Northern  Mississippi.  June  10,  18C2-January  20,  1863. 

Page. 


Part  I — Reports 1-807 

Part  II— Correspondence,  etc - 1-916 


VOLUME  XVIII. 

CHAPTER  XXX. 

Operations  in  North  Carolina  and  Southeastern  Virginia.  August  20,  1862-June  3,  1863. 


Page. 

1-1104 


VOLUME  XIX— IK  TWO  PARTS. 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 


Operations  in  Northern  Virginia,  West  Virginia,  Maryland,  and  Pennsylvania. 

her  14,  1862. 


September  3-Novem. 

Page. 


Part  I— Reports,  September  3-20 1-1108 

Part  II— Reports,  September  20-November  14 ; Coirespoudeuce,  etc.,  September  3-Novem- 

berl4 1-739 


VOLUME  XX— IK  TWO  PARTS. 

CHAPTER  XXXII. 


Operations  in  .Kentucky,  Middle  and  East  Tennessee,  North  Alabama,  and  Southwest  Virginia. 

vembet  1,  1862-January  20,  1863. 


No- 

Page. 


Part  I— Reports 1-997 

Part  II — Correspondence,  etc.- 1-516 


VOLUME  XXI. 

CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

> Page. 

Operations  in  Northern  Virginia,  West  Virginia,  Maryland,  and  Pennsylvania.  November  15, 

1862- J anuary  25, 1863  1-1152 


VOLUME  XXII— IK  TWO  PARTS. 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 


Operations  in  Missouri,  Arkansas,  Kansas,  the  Indian  Territory,  and  the  Department  of  the  North- 
west. November  20,  1862-December  31,  1863. 


Page. 


Part  I — Reports 1-926 

Part  II— Conespondence,  etc 1-1163 


X 


CONTENTS  OF  PRECEDING  VOLUMES. 


VOIjUME  XXIII— TWO  PARTS. 

CHAPTER  XXXV.  . 

Operations  in  Kentucky,  Middle  and]  East  Tennessee,  Xorth  Alabama,  and  Sonthwest  Virginia.  Jan- 
uary 21-August  10,  1863. 

Page. 

Part  I— Reports 1-858 

Part  II— Correspondence,  etc 1-986 


CHAPTER  XXXVI 


OPERATIONS  IN  MISSISSIPPI  AND  WEST  TENNESSEE, 

INCLUDING  THOSE  IN  ARKANSAS  AND  LOUISIANA  CONNECTED 
WITH  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG. 


January  20-August  10,  1863. 


, PART  I. 

REPORTS— January  20-May  15.* 


SXJ]yLM;A.R,Y  OW  THE  EEIIS'CIEA.IL.  EYENTS.t 

Jan.  25,  1863. — Scout  between  Bolivar,  Tenn.,  and  Ripley,  Miss. 

27,  1863. — Aflfair  near  Germantown,  Tenn. 

28,  1863.— Skirmish  near  Yorkville,  Tenn. 

Skirmish  near  Collierville,  Tenn. 

28-30,  1863. — Scout  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  toward  Ripley,  Miss. 

29,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Richmond,  La. 

30,  1863. — Maj.  Gen.  Ulysses  S.  Grant,  U.  S.  Army,  assumes  immediate  com- 

mand of  the  expedition  against  Vicksburg. 

Skirmish  at  Dyersburg,  Tenn. 

31,  1863. — Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McClernand,  U.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of 

the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

Feb.  2-  3,  1863. — Passage  of  the  Vicksburg  and  Warrenton  batteries,  and  capture 
of  the  steamers  A.  W.  Baker,  Moro,  and  Berwick  Bay  by  the 
Queen  of  the  West. 

2-  5,  1863. — Reconnaissance  in  the  vicinity  of  Saulsbury,  Tenn. 

3,  1863. — Attack  on  Fort  Donelson,  Tenn.t 

6,  1863. — Scout  in  the  vicinity  of  Fort  Pillow,  Tenn. 

8,  1863. — Aifair  near  Camp  Sheldon,  Miss. 

9,  1863. — Affair  near  Moscow,  Tenn. 

10,  1863.— Affair  near  Camp  Sheldon,  Miss. 

Skirmish  at  Old  River,  La. 

Including  the  “General  Reports”  for  whole  period,  January  20-August  10,  1863. 
t Of  some  of  the  minor  conflicts  noted  in  this  “ Summary,”  no  circumstantial  reports 
are  on  file. 

t See  Series  I,  Vol.  XXIII,  Part  I,  p.  31. 

1 R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT 


(1) 


MISSISSIPPI,  AVEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai*.  XXXVI. 


Feb.  10-14,  1863.— Operations  on  the  Ked,  Atchafalaya,  and  Black  Rivers,  La.,  and 

capture  (i4th)  of  the  Queen  of  the  West. 

13,  1863. — Passage  of  the  Vicksburg  batteries  by  the  Indiauola.* 

13- 14,  1863. — Expedition  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  Mount  Pleasant  and  La- 

mar,  Miss. 

14- 26,  1863. — Expedition  to  Greenville,  Miss.,  and  Cyx)ress  Bend,  Ark.,  with 

skirmishes  (19th)  at  Cypress  Bend  and  (23d)  at  Deer  Creek 
and  Fish  Lake  Bridge,  near  Greenville. 

16,  1863. — Maj.  Gen.  Stephen  A.  Ilurlbut,  U.  S.  Army,  assumes  command  of 

the  Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

Skirmish  at  Yazoo  Pass,  Miss. 

17,  1863. — Expedition  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  against  guerrillas. 

17-21,  1863. — Exi)edition  from  Lexington  to  Clifton,  Tenn. 

18,  1863. — Affair  near  Moscow,  Tenn. 

19,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Coldwater  River,  Miss. 

Skirmish  near  Yazoo  Pass,  Miss. 

24,  1863. — Capture  of  the  Indianola. 

24-April  S,  1863. — The  Yazoo  Pass  Expedition  (by  Moon  Lake,  Yazoo  Pass, 
and  the  Coldwater  and  Tallahatchee  Rivers),  including  en- 
gagements (March  11,  13,  and  16,  and  Ax)ril  2 and  4)  at  Fort 
Pemberton,  near  Greenwood,  Miss. 

27,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Bloomington,  on  the  Ilatchie  River,  Tenn. 
Expedition  from  Fort  Pillow,  Tenn. 

Mar.  2-  3,  1863. — Scout  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  Hudson ville  and  Salem,  Miss., 
and  Saulsbury,  Tenn. 

8-12,  1863. — Exi)edition  from  La  Grange,  and  skirmishes  (9th  and  10th)  near 
Covington,  Tenn. 

Expedition  from  Collierville,  Tenn. 

10-16,  1863. — Scout  to  La  Fayette  and  Moscow,  Tenn.,  and  skirmish. 

14- 27,  1863. — The  Steele’s  Bayou  exx)edition  (to  Rolling  Fork,  Miss.,  by  Muddy, 

Steele’s,  and  Black  Bayou  and  Deer  Creek),  with  skirmishes 
(2l8t  and22d)  on  Deer  Creek  and  (24th  and  25th)  on  Black 
Bayou. 

15- 16,  1863. — Skirmishes  near  Hernando,  Miss. 

16- 18,  1863. — Expedition  from  Jackson  to  Trenton,  Tenn. 

19,  1863. — Passage  of  the  Grand  Gulf  batteries  by  the  Hartford  and  Mouon- 
gahela. 

21,  1863. — Guerrilla  attack  ou  railway  train  between  Bolivar  and  Grand 
Junction,  Tenn. 

21-22,  1863. — Scout  from  La  Grange  to  Saulsbury,  Tenn. 

23,  1863. — Attack  on  the  Warrenton  batteries  by  the  Hartford  and  Monon- 

gahela. 

24,  1863. — Skirmish  on  Davis’  Mill  road,  near  La  Grange,  Tenn. 

25,  1863. — Passage  of  the  A^icksburg  batteries  by  the  Switzerland,  and 

destruction  of  the  Lancaster. 

Aimil  1,  1863. — Expedition  to  Booncville,  Miss. 

28-Ai)ril  3,  1863. — Exi)editions  from  La  Grange  to  Moscow  and  Macon,  and 
action  near  Belmont,  Tenn. 

29,  1863. — Affair  at  Moscow,  Tenn. 

31,  1863. — Engagement  at  Grand  Gulf,  Miss. 

31-Aj)ril  3,  1863. — Scout  from  Lexington  to  mouth  of  Duck  River,  Tenn. 

* See  reimrts  of  Acting  liear  Admiral  David  D.  Porter  and  Lieutenant-Comraandei 
George  BrowTi,  U,  S,  Navy.  (Annual  Rei)ort  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December 
7,  1863.) 


CIIAI’.  XXXVI.J  SUMMARY  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  EVENTS.  3 

Mar.  31-Api  il  17,  18G:). — Operations  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  New  Carthage,  La. 
Apr.  1-1(5,  18(53. —Expedition  from  Jackson,  Tenn.,  to  the  Hatchie  River,  and  skir- 
mishes. 

2-  (5,  1863. — Scout  in  Beaver  Creek  Swamp,  Teim. 

2-14,  1863. — Expedition  to  Greenville,  Black  Bayou,  and  Deer  Creek,  Miss., 
with  skirmishes,  April  7,  8,  and  10. 

4,  1863. — Skirmish  on  Nonconnah  Creek,  near  Memphis,  Tenn. 

5-  6,  1863. — Scout  from  Grand  Junction  to  Saulshury,  Tenn. 

5-  7,  1863. — Scout  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  Early  Grove  and  Mount  Pleasant, 
Miss. 

9,  1863. — Skirmish  near  the  Obion  River,  Tenn. 

10- 11,  1863. — Scout  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  Hudsonville,  Lockhart’s  Mills, 

Mount  Pleasant,  and  Early  Grove,  Miss. 

11,  1863. — Scout  from  La  Grange  to  Saulshury,  Tenn. 

Skirmish  at  Courtney’s  Plantation,  Miss. 

15,  1863. — Expedition  from  La  Grange  to  Saulshury,  Tenn. 

15-May  2,  1863. — Dodge’s  exx)edition  from  Corinth,  Miss.,  to  Courtland, 
Ala." 

16,  1863. — Passage  of  the  Vicksburg  batteries  by  gunboats  and  transports. 
17-May  2,  1863. — Grierson’s  raid  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  Baton  Rouge,  La. 

18-24,  1863. — Expedition  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  to  the  Coldwater,  Miss.,  includ- 
ing action  (18th)  at  Hernando,  and  skirmish  (19th)  at  Perry’s 
Ferry. 

19,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Trenton,  Tenn. 

22,  1863. — Passage  of  the  Vicksburg  and  Warrentou  batteries  by  transimrts. 
24,  186.3. — Expedition  to  Lake  Saint  Joseph,  La. 

25-29,  18(53. — Expedition  to  Hard  Times  Lauding,  La.,  and  skirmishes  (26th) 
at  Phelps’  and  Clark’s  Bayous,  and  (28th)  at  Chocta  w Bayou,  or 
Lake  Bruin. 

29,  1863. — Bombardment  of  Grand  Gulf,  Miss.,  and  passage  of  the  batteries. 
29-May  1,  1863. — Demonstration  against  Haynes’ and  Druragould’sBlutfs,  or 
engagement  at  Snyder’s  Mill,  Miss. 

29-May  5,  1863. — Scout  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  into  Northern  Mississippi. 
May  1,  1863. — Battle  of  Port  Gibson,  or  Thompson’s  Hill,  Miss. 

2,  1863. — Skirmish  on  the  South  Fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  Miss. 

3,  1863. — Skirmishes  on  the  North  Fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  at  Willow  Spring's, 

Ingraham’s  Heights,  Jones’  Cross-Roads,  Forty  Hills,  and  Hau- 
kinson’s  Ferry,  Big  Black  River,  Miss. 

4,  1863. — Engagement  at  Fort  Do  Russy,  Red  River,  La. 

Attempt  of  the  tug  George  Sturgess  to  pass  the  Vicksburg  bat- 
teries. 

Skirmish  at  Hankinson’s  Ferry,  Miss. 

5,  1863. — Action  at  King’s  Creek,  near  Tupelo,  Miss. 

Skirmish  at  Big  Sandy  Creek,  Miss. 

9,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Bayou  Tensas,  near  Lake  Providence,  La. 

Skirmish  near  Big  Sandy  Creek,  Miss. 

9-10,  18(53. — Skirmishes  at  and  near  Utica,  Miss. 

10,  1863. — Skirmishes  at  Caledonia  and  Pin  Hook,  La. 

Attack  on  Fort  Beauregard,  La. 

11,  1863. — Raid  on  the  Now  Orleans  and  Jackson  Railroad,  near  Crystal 

Springs,  Miss. 

11- 15,  18(53. — Expedition  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  Panola,  Miss.,  and  skir- 

mishes (11th)  at  Coldwater  and  (14th)  at  Walnut  Hill,  Miss. 
12,  1863. — Engagement  at  liaymond.  Miss. 

* See  Series  I,  Vol.  XXIII,  Part  I,  p.  241. 


4 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVT. 


May  12,  1863. — Skirmisli  at  Greenville,  Miss. 

Skirmisli  at  Fourteen-Mile  Creek,  Miss. 

13,  1863. — Skirmislies  at  Mississippi  Springs  and  at  Baldwin’s  and  Hall’s 

Ferries,  Miss. 

14,  1863. — Engagement  at  Jackson,  Miss. 

JS:R REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Henry  W.  Halleck,  General-in-CIiief,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Maj.  Gen.  Ulysses  S.  Grant,  U,  S.  Army,  commanding  Army  of  the  Tennessee, 
including  corresimndence  with  the  authorities  at  Washington,  January 
20-July  10. 

No.  3. — Mr.  Charles  A.  Dana,  special  commissioner  of  the  United  States  War  De- 
jjartment. 

No.  4. — Capt.  Frederick  E.  Prime,  U.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers,  Chief  Engineer,  of 
operations  January  30-May  4. 

No.  5. — Lieut.  Col.  James  H.  Wilson,  Assistant  Inspector-General,  U.  S.  Army,  Chief 
of  Topographical  Engineers,  of  operations  April  24-May  11. 

No.  6. — Capt.  Ocran  H.  Howard,  U.  S.  Signal  Corps,  Chief  Signal  Officer,  of  opera- 
tions April  3- July  4. 

No.  7. — Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McClernand,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Thirteenth  Army 
Corps,  of  operations  March  30-Juno  17,  with  resulting  correspondence. 

No.  8. — Lieut.  Francis  Tunica,  Engineer  Officer  Ninth  Division,  of  operations  April 
17-May  24. 

No.  1). — Message  of  President  Davis,  transmitting  to  the  Confederate  Congress  cer- 
tain correspondence  with  General  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  10. — General  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  C.  S.  Army,  of  operations  March  12-July  20. 

No.  11. — Lieut.  Gen.  John  C.  Pemberton,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of 
Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana,  of  operations  April  4-July  4, 

Ko.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Heyiry  W.  Halleclc^  General-in-Chief  TJ.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

Washington.,  B.  (7.,  November  15,  1863. 

Sir  : lu  compliance  with  your  orders,  I submit  the  followiug  sum- 
mary of  military  operations  since  my  last  annual  report: 

******* 

DEPARTMENT  OF  THE  TENNESSEE. 

At  the  date  cf  my  last  annual  report  [Nov.  9,  1862],*  Mrijor-Geiieral 
Grant  occupied  West  Tennessee  and  the  northern  bonndary  of  Mis- 
sissippi. The  object  of  the  campaign  of  this  army  was  the  opening  of 
the  Mississippi Eiver,  in  conjunction  with  the  army  of  General  Hanks. 
General  Grant  was  instructed  to  drive  the  enemy  in  the  interior  as  far 
south  as  possible,  and  destroy  their  railroad  communications;  then  to 
fall  back  to  Memphis,  and  embark  his  available  forces  on  transi)orts, 
and,  with  the  assistance  of  the  licet  of  Admiral  Porter,  reduce  Vicks- 
burg. The  first  part  of  this  plan  was  most  successfully  executed,  but 
the  right  wing  of  the  army  sent  against  Vicksburg,  under  iMajor-Gen- 
eral  Sherman,  found  that  place  much  stronger  than  was  expected.  Two 
attacks  were  made  on  the  28th  and  29th  of  December,  but,  failing  in 

* Bracketed  matter  in  compilation  is  explanatory. 


Chap.  XXXVI. ] 


GENEEAL  EEPOBTS. 


5 


their  object,  our  troops  were  withdrawn,  and,  while  waiting  for  re- 
enforcements from  General  Grant,  moved  up  the  Arkansas  Eiver  to 
Arkansas  Post,  which  place  was,  with  the  assistance  of  the  gunboats, 
ca])tured  on  the  11th  of  January. 

Our  loss  at  Vicksburg  was  191  killed,  982  wounded,  and  756  missing  j 
at  Arkansas  Post,  129  killed,  831  wounded,  and  17  missing.  We  cap- 
tured at  the  latter  place  5,000  prisoners,  17  cannon,  3,000  small-arms, 
46,000  rounds  of  ammunition,  and  563  animals.* 

General  Grant  now  assumed  the  immediate  command  of  the  army  on 
the  Mississippi,  which  was  largely  re-enforced.  Being  satisfied  by  the 
result  of  General  Sherman’s  operations  that  the  north  line  of  the  ene- 
my’s works  was  too  strong  to  be  carried  without  a very  heavy  loss,  he 
directed  his  attention  to  opening  the  canal,  which  had  been  commenced 
the  year  before  by  General  Williams,  across  the  peninsula,  on  the  west 
bank  of  the  river.  This  canal  had  been  improperly  located,  its  upper 
terminus  being  in  an  eddy  and  the  lower  terminus  being  exposed  to 
the  enemy’s  guns.  ISTevertheless,  it  was  thought  that  it  could  be  com- 
pleted sooner  than  a new  one  could  be  constructed.  While  working 
l)arties,  under  Captain  Prime,  chief  engineer  of  that  army,  were  dili- 
gently employed  upon  this  canal.  General  Grant  directed  his  attention 
to  several  other  projects  for  turning  the  enemy’s  position.  These  are 
fully  described  in  his  official  report. 

The  canal  proving  impracticable,  and  his  other  plans  being  unsuccess- 
ful, he  determined  to  move  his  army  by  land  down  the  west  bank  of  the 
river  some  70  miles,  while  transports  for  crossing  should  run  past  the 
enemy’s  batteries  at  Vicksburg.  The  danger  of  running  the  batteries 
being  very  great,  and  the  roads  on  the  west  side  in  horrible  condition, 
this  was  a difficult  and  hazardous  expedient,  but  it  seemed  to  be  the 
only  possible  solution  of  the  problem.  The  execution  of  the  ifian,  how- 
ever, was  greatly  facilitated  by  Admiral  Farragut,  who  had  run  two  of 
his  vessels  past  the  enemy’s  batteries  at  Port  Hudson  and  Grand  Gulf, 
and  cleared  the  river  of  the  enemy’s  boats  below  Vicksburg,  and,  Bnally, 
through  the  indomitable  energy  of  the  commanding  general  and  the  ad- 
mirable dispositions  of  Admiral  Porter  for  running  the  enemy’s  batte- 
ries, the  operation  was  completely  successful. 

The  army  crossed  the  river  at  Bruinsburg  April  30,  turned  Grand 
Gulf,  and  engaged  the  enemy  near  Port  Gibson  on  the  1st  and  at  Four- 
teen-Mile Creekfonthe  3d  of  May.  The  enemy  was  defeated  in  both 
engagements,  with  heavy  loss.  General  Grant  then  moved  his  forces, 
by  rapid  marches,  to  the  north,  in  order  to  separate  the  garrison  of 
Vicksburg  from  the  covering  army  of  Johnston.  This  movement  was 
followed  by  the  battles  of  Kaymond,  May  12 ; of  Jackson,  May  14 ; of 
Champion’s  Hill,  May  16,  and  Big  Black  Eiver  Bridge,  May  17,  in  all 
of  which  our  troops  were  victorious.  General  Grant  then  proceeded  to 
invest  Vicksburg. 

In  order  to  facilitate  General  Grant’s  operations,  by  destroying  the 
enemy’s  line  of  communication  and  preventing  the  early  concentration  of 
any  re-enforcements.  Colonel  (now  Brigadier- General)  Grierson  was  sent 
with  a cavalry  force  from  La  Grange,  on  the  17th  of  April,  to  traverse 
the  interior  of  the  State  of  Mississippi.  This  expedition  was  most  suc- 
cessfully conducted.  It  destroyed  many  of  the  enemy’s  railroad  bridges, 
depots,  and  much  rolling  stock,  and  reached  Baton  Bouge,  La.,  in  safety, 
on  the  2d  of  May. 

On  returning  to  Vicksburg,  General  Grant  found  liis  forces  insuffi- 

* See  Series  I,  Vol.  XVIT,  Part  I,  p.  708.  \ Sic.  See  Grant’s  re^jort,  ]).  10. 


6 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


fCnAr.  XXXVTL 


cieut  to  entirely  invest  the  enemy^s  works.  There  was,  therefore,  dan- 
ger that  the  two  bodies  of  the  enemy  under  Pemberton  and  Johnston 
might  yet  effect  a junction,  as  it  was  known  that  the  latter  was  being 
largely  re-enforced  from  Bragg’s  army  in  Middle  and  East  Tennessee. 
Under  these  circumstances.  General  Grant  determined  to  attempt  to 
carry  the  place  by  assault.  Two  unsuccessful  attacks  were  made  May 
1 9 and  22,  but,  as  re-enforcements  reached  him  a few  days  after  suffi- 
ciently large  to  enable  him  to  completely  invest  the  rebel  defenses,  he 
resorted  to  the  slower,  but  more  certain,  operations  of  a regular  siege. 
By  the  M of  July  his  saps  were  so  far  advanced  as  to  render  his  suc- 
cess certain,  and  on  that  day  General  Pemberton  proposed  an  armistice 
and  capitulation,  which  were  finally  accepted,  and  Vicksburg  surren- 
dered on  the  4th  of  July. 

In  the  language  of  General  Grant’s  official  report,  the  results  of  this 
short  campaign  were — 

Tlie  defeat  of  the  euemy  in  live  battles  outside  of  Vichsburg,  the  occupation  of 
Jackson,  the  capital  of  the  State  of  Mississippi,  and  the  capture  of  Vicksburg  and  its 
garrison  and  munitions  of  war,  a loss  to  the  enemy  of  37,000  prisoners,  among  whom 
were  15  general  officers,  at  least  10, ODO  killed  and  wounded,  and  among  the  killed  Gen- 
erals Tracy,  Tilghman,  and  Green,  and  hundreds,  and  perhaps  thousands,  of  strag- 
glers, who  can  never  he  collected  and  reorganized.  Arms  and  munitions  of  war  for  an 
army  of  60,000  men  have  fallen  into  our  hands,  besides  a large  amount  of  other  pub- 
lic property,  consisting  of  railroads,  locomotives,  cars,  steamboats,  cotton,  &c.,  and 
much  was*  destroyed  to  prevent  our  capturing  it. 

Our  losses  in  the  series  of  battles  may  be  summed  up  as  follows 


Killed. 

v 

rS 

n 

p 

o 

Missing. 

Port  Oi  hann 

130 

4 

69 

40 

426 

29 

545 

718 
24 
341 
240 
1,  842 
242 
3,  688 

5 

1<''onrtfiftTi-Milft  Crook  (akirmiah) 

Raymond 

32 

6 

189 

303 

•fackson 

Champion’.s  Hill I 

Bic;  Black  Railroad  Bridge 

Vicksbur" 

Of  the  wounded,  many  were  but  slightly  wounded,  and  continued  on  duty  ; many 
more  required  but  a few  days  or  weeks  for  their  recovery.  Not  more  than  one-half 
of  the  wounded  were  permanently  disabled. 


When  we  consider  the  character  of  the  country  in  which  this  army 
operated,  the  formidable  obstacles  to  be  overcome,  the  number  of  the 
enemy’s  forces,  and  the  strength  of  his  works,  we  cannot  fail  to  admire 
the  courage  and  endurance  of  the  troops  and  the  skill  and  daring  of 
their  commander.  No  more  brilliant  exploit  can  be  found  in  military 
history. 

It  has  been  alleged,  and  the  allegation  has  been  widely  circulated  by 
the  press,  that  General  Grant,  in  the  conduct  of  his  campaign,  posi- 
tively disobeyed  the  instructions  of  his  superiors.  It  is  hardly  neces- 
sary to  remark  that  General  Grant  never  disobeyed  an  order  or  instruc- 
tion, but  always  carried  out,  to  the  best  of  his  ability,  every  wish  or 
suggestion  made  to  him  by  the  Government ; moreover,  he  has  never 
coinplained  that  the  Government  did  not  furnish  him  all  the  means  and 
assistance  in  its  power  to  facilitate  the  execution  of  any  plan  which  he 
saw  fit  to  adopt. 


Hut  .sopgcuonil  summary  of  casualties.  Tart  II,  p.  167. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


i 


While  the  main  Army  of  the  Tennessee  was  operating  against  Vicks- 
burg, the  enemy’s  forces  on  the  west  side  of  the  river  made  unsuccessful 
attacks  on  Milliken’s  Bend  and  Lake  Providence,  on  the  0th  and  10th 
of  June.  Our  loss  in  the  former  was  101  killed,  285  wounded,  and  200 
missing;  loss  in  the  latter  not  reported.  It  is  represented  that  the 
colored  troops  in  these  desperate  engagements  fought  with  great  brav- 
ery, aud  that  the  rebels  treated  this  class  of  prisoners  of  war,  as  well  as 
their  officers,  with  great  barbarity.  It  has  not  been  possible,  however, 
to  ascertain  the  correctness  of  these  representations  in  regard  to  the 
treatment  of  these  prisoners. 

After  the  capture  of  Vicksburg,  General  Grant  reported  that  his 
troops  were  so  much  fatigued  and  worn  out  with  forced  marclies  and 
the  labors  of  the  siege  as  to  absolutely  recprire  several  weeks  of  repose 
before  undertaking  another  campaign.  Nevertheless,  as  the  exigencies 
of  the  service  seemed  to  require  it,  he  sent  out  those  who  were  least 
fatigued  on  several  important  expeditions,  while  the  others  remained  at 
Vicksburg  to  put  that  i^lace  in  a better  defensible  condition  for  a small 
garrison. 

As  soon  as  Vicksburg  capitulated,  General  Sherman  was  sent  in  pur- 
suit of  Johnston’s  forces.  The  latter  retreated  to  Jackson,  Miss.,  which 
place  was  taken  by  us  on  the  16th  of  July.  Our  loss  was  about  1,000 
killed,  wounded,  and  missing.  General  Sherman  captured  764  i>risou- 
ers,  two  rifled  guns,  a large  amount. of  ammunition,  and  destroyed  the 
railroad,  rolling  stock,  &c.  The  enemy  retreated  toward  the  Alabama 
line,  and  General  Sherman  returned  to  Vicksburg  to  recuperate  his 
forces. 

A military  aud  naval  force  was  sent  to  Yazoo  City  on  the  13th.  It 
took  300  prisoners,  captured  one  steamer,  and  burned  five ; took  6 
cannon,  250  small-arms,  and  some  800  horses  and  mules.  No  loss  on 
our  side  reported. 

Small  expeditious  were  also  sent  against  Canton,  Pontotoc,  Grenada, 
and  Natchez,  Miss.  At  Grenada  a large  amount  of  rolling  stock  was 
destroyed,  and  near  Natchez  General  Eansom  captured  5,000  head  of 
Texas  cattle,  a number  of  prisoners  and  teams,  aud  a large  amount  of 
ammunition.  The  other  exi^editions  were  also  successful,  meeting  with 
very  little  opposition. 

As  soon  as  his  army  was  supplied  aud  rested.  General  Grant  sent  a 
I'orce,  under  General  Steele-,  to  Helena,  to  co-operate  with  General  Scho- 
field’s troops  against  Little  Eock,  and  another,  under  Generals  Ord  and 
Herron,  to  New  Orleans  to  re  enforce  General  Banks  for  such  ulterior 
oi)erations  as  he  might  deem  proper  to  undertake. 

Small  expeditions  were  also  sent  to  the  Eed  Eiver  and  to  Harrison- 
burg and  Monroe,  on  the  Washita,  to  break  up  and  destroy  guerrilla 
bands. 

After  General  Grant  left  Vicksburg  to  assume  the  general  command 
east  of  the  Mississippi,  General  McPherson  moved  with  a part  of  his 
force  to  Canton,  Miss.,  scattering  the  enemy’s  cavalry  and  destroying 
his  materials  and  roads  in  the  center  of  that  State. 


* # * * 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War, 


* # * 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


8 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

1^0.  2. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Ulysses  S.  Grants  U.  8.  Army^  commanding  Army 

of  the  Tennessee,  including  correspondence  ivith  the  authorities  at  Wash- 
ington., January  20-July  10. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Memphis j Tenn.,  January  20,  18G3. 

I returned  here  last  night  from  a visit  to  the  expedition  under  Gen- 
eral McOlernand.  I had  a conversation  with  Admiral  Porter,  General 
McOlernand,  and  General  Sherman.  The  former  and  latter,  who  have 
had  the  best  opportunity  of  studying  the  enemy’s  positions  and  plans, 
agree  that  the  work  of  reducing  Vicksburg  is  one  of  time,  and  will 
require  a large  force  at  the  final  struggle.  With  what  troops  I have 
already  designated  from  here,  no  more  forces  will  be  required  for  the 
present,  but  1 will  suggest  whether  it  would  not  be  well  to  know  before- 
hand where  they  are  to  come  from  when  required,  if  required  at  all. 

The  enemy  have  the  bluffs  from  Haynes’  Bluff,  on  the  Yazoo  (this  is 
where  the  raft  across  the  river  is  constructed),  to  the  Mississippi,  and 
down  until  tliey  recede  from  the  river,  completely  and  thoroughly 
fortified. 

I propose  running  a canal  through,  starting  far  enough  above  the  old 
one  commenced  last  summer  to  receive  the  stream  where  it  impinges 
against  the  shore  with  the  greatest  velocity.  The  old  canal  left  the 
river  in  an  eddy,  and  in  a line  perpendicular  to  the  stream,  and  also  to 
the  crest  of  the  hills  opposite,  with  a battery  directed  against  the  outlet. 
This  new  canal  will  debouch  below  the  bluffs  on  the  opposite  side  of 
the  river,  and  give  our  gunboats  a fair  chance  against  any  fortifications 
that  may  be  placed  to  oppose  them. 

But  for  the  intolerable  rains  that  we  have  had,  and  which  have  filled 
the  swamps  and  bayous  so  that  they  cannot  dry  up  again  this  winter, 
a landing  might  be  effected  at  Milliken’s  Bend,  and  roads  constructed 
through  to  the  Yazoo  above  the  raft  or  Haynes’  Bluff,  and  the  enemy’s 
works  turned  from  that  point.  Once  back  of  the  intrenchments  on  the 
crest  of  the  bluffs,  the  enemy  would  be  compelled  to  come  out  and  give 
us  an  open  field  fight,  or  submit  to  having  all  his  communications  cut 
and  be  left  to  starve  out. 

I would  make  no  suggestions  unasked  if  you  were  here  to  see  for 
yourself,  or  if  I did  not  know  that  as  much  of  your  time  is  taken  up 
with  each  of  several  other  departments  as  with  this.  As,  however,  I 
control  only  the  troops  in  a limited  department,  and  can  only  draw  re- 
enforcements from  elsewhere  by  making  application  through  Washing- 
ton, and  as  a demonstration  made  upon  any  part  of  the  old  district  of 
West  Tennessee  might  force  me  to  withdraw  a large  part  of  the  force 
from  the  vicinity  of  Vicksburg,  I would  respectfully  ask  if  it  would 
not  be  policy  to  combine  the  four  departments  in  the  West  under  one 
commander.  As  I am  the  senior  department  commander  in  the  West, 
I will  state  that  I have  no  desire  whatever  for  such  combined  command, 
but  would  prefer  the  command  I now  have  to  any  other  that  can  be 
given. 

I regard  it  as  my  duty  to  state  that  I found  there  was  not  sufficient 
confidence  felt  in  General  McOlernand  as  a commander,  either  by  the 
Army  or  Navy,  to  insure  him  success.  Of  course,  all  would  co-operate 
to  the  best  of  their  ability,  but  still  with  a distrust.  This  is  a matter 
I made  no  inquiries  about,  but  it  was  forced  upon  me.  As  it  is  my  in- 
tention to  command  in  person,  unless  otherwise  directed,  there  is  no 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


9 


special  necessity  of  mentioning  this  matter ; but  I want  you  to  know 
that  others  besides  myself  agree  in  the  necessity  of  the  course  I had 
already  determined  upon  pursuing.  Admiral  Porter  told  me  that  he  had 
written  freely  to  the  Secretary  of  the  l^avy,  with  the  request  that  what 
he  said  might  be  shown  to  the  Secretary  of  War. 

General  Gorman  had  gone  up  the  White  Eiver  with  most  of  his  forces, 
taking  a great  deal  of  the  river  transportation  with  him.  I find  great 
difficulty  in  getting  boats  to  transport  the  troops.  With  the  orders  I 
gave,  however,  to  release  boats  as  fast  as  they  can  be  dispensed  with, 
1 hope  to  remedy  all  difficulties  of  this  kind. 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-General. 

General  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  Washington,  D.  G. 


Memphis,  Tenn.,  January  20,  1863 — 11.30  a.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief  : 

I found  the  Mississippi  expedition  at  the  mouth  of  the  Arkansas,  and 
started  it  from  there  immediately  to  Young’s  Point.  A canal  will  at 
once  be  surveyed  and  cut.  The  weather  is  highly  unfavorable  for  op- 
erations, and  streams  all  very  high  and  rising.  The  work  of  reducing 
Vicksburg  will  take  time  and  men,  but  can  be  accomplished.  Gorman 
has  gone  up  the  White  River  with  a great  part  of  his  force.  So  many 
transports  being  kept  there,  makes  it  almost  impossible  to  get  transpor- 
tation for  troops.  Both  banks  of  the  Mississipi)i  should  be  under  one 
commander,  at  least  during  present  operations. 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major- General. 

Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

Washington,  January  21,  1863. 

Major-General  Grant,  Mem]ghis  ; 

General  : The  President  has  directed  that  so  much  of  Arkansas  as 
you  may  desire  to  control  be  temporarily  attached  to  your  department. 
This  will  give  you  control  of  both  banks  of  the  river.* 

In  your  operations  down  the  Mississippi  you  must  not  rely  too  confi- 
dently upon  any  direct  co-operation  of  General  Banks  and  the  lower 
fiotilla,  as  it  is  possible  that  they  may  not  be  able  to  pass  or  reduce  Port 
Hudson.  They,  however,  will  do  everything  in  their  power  to  form  a 
junction  with  you  at  Vicksburg.  If  they  should  not  be  able  to  effect 
this,  they  will  at  least  occupy  a portion  of  the  enemy’s  forces  and  pre- 
vent them  from  re-enforcing  Vicksburg.  I hope,  however,  that  they 
will  do  still  better  and  be  able  to  join  you. 

It  may  be  proper  to  give  you  some  explanation  of  the  revocation  of 
your  order  expelling  all  Jews  from  your  department.  The  President 
has  no  objection  to  your  expelling  traitors  and  Jew  peddlers,  which,  I 
suppose,  was  the  object  of  your  order;  but,  as  it  in  terms  proscribed  an 
entire  religious  class,  some  of  whom  are  fighting  in  our  ranks,  the 
President  deemed  it  necessary  to  revoke  it. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 

* See  telegram  from  Halleck  to  Grant,  same  date,  quoted  in  Grant  to  Gorman,  Jan- 
uary 22,  Part  III,  p.  5. 


10 


[Chap.  XXX VI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Washington,  D.  0.,  January  25,  18G3. 
Major-General  Grant,  Memphis^  Tcnn, : 

Direct  your  attention  iiarticiilarly  to  the  canal  proposed  across  the 
point.  The  President  attaches  much  importance  to  this. 

H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Memphis,  Tenn.,  January  25,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  IIalleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

1 leave  for  the  fleet  at  Vicksburg  to-morrow.  Since  leaving  there, 
one  week  ago,  I have  not  had  one  word  from  them.  The  constant  rains 
and  tremendous  rise  in  the  river  may  operate  against  us  for  the  time 
being. 

U.  S.  GEAIsT, 

Major-  General. 


Memphis,  Tenn.,  January  27,  1863 — 7 p.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief : 

News  just  received  from  Vicksburg  says  water  nowin  old  canal,  and 
rising  rapidly.  In  a short  time  our  batteries  of  Parrott  guns  will  com- 
mand the  river  below  town.  Vicksburg  papers  say  that  General  Banks 
is  fortifying  Baton  Bouge.  I hold  two  divisions  here  read 3^  to  re-enforce 
the  expedition  as  soon  as  wanted ; also  Gorman’s  forces. 

U.  S.  GEANT, 

Major- Genera Z,  Commanding. 


Vicksburg,  Miss.,  January  20,  1863 — 5 p.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Genera  l-in-  Chief : 

Water  in  the  canal  is  5 feet  deep,  and  river  rising.  There  is  no  wash, 
however,  and  no  signs  of  its  enlarging.  I will  let  the  water  in  from  the 
Yazoo  up,  and  trj^  the  effect.  1 have  ordered  troops  from  Helena, 
escorted  b}"  a gunboat,  the  whole  in  charge  of  Colonel  Wilson,  topo- 
graphical engineer,  to  cut  the  levee  across  Yazoo  Pass,  and  to  explore 
through  to  the  Coldwater,  if  possible. 

U.  S.  GEANT, 

Major- GeJicral. 


Near  Vicksburg,  Miss., 
January  31,  1863 — 3 ]).  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in- Chief : 

1 am  pushing  everj^thing  to  gain  a passage,  avoiding  Vicksburg. 
Prospects  not  flattering  by  the  canal  of  last  summer.  Other  routes  are 
being  prospected,  and  work  in  the  mean  time  progressing  on  the  old 
canal. 


U.  S.  GEANT, 

M ajor-  General,  Commanding. 


Chai*.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


11 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Before  Viclcshurg^  February  1,  1803. 

Col.  J.  0.  Keeton, 

Afisistant  Adjutant- General^  WasMnyton^  1).  C. : 

Colonel:  Herewith  I inclose  you  copy  of  General  Orders,  No.  13, 
from  these  headquarters,  and  of  correspondence  between  General  Mc- 
Clernand  and  myself,  growing  out  of  it. 

It  is  due  to  myself  to  state  that  I am  not  ambitious  to  have  this  or 
au}^  other  command.  I am  willing  to  do  all  in  my  power  in  any  position 
assigned  me. 

General  McClernand  was  assigned  to  duty  in  this  department,  with 
instructions  to  me  to  assign  him  to  the  command  of  an  army  corps  op- 
erating on  the  Mississippi  River,  and  to  give  him  the  chief  command, 
under  my  direction.  This  I did,  but  subsequently  receiving  authority 
to  assign  the  command  to  any  one  I thought  most  competent,  or  to  take 
it  myself,  I determined  to  at  least  be  present  with  the  expedition.* 

If  General  Sherman  had  been  left  in  command  here,  such  is  my  conli- 
dence  in  him  that  I would  not  have  thought  my  presence  necessary. 
But  whether  I do  General  McClernand  injustice  or  not,  I have  not  con- 
fidence in  his  ability  as  a soldier  to  conduct  an  expedition  of  the  magni- 
tude of  this  one  successfully.  In  this  opinion  I have  no  doubt  but  I am 
borne  out  by  a majority  of  the  officers  of  the  expedition,  though  I have 
not  questioned  one  of  them  on  the  subject. 

I respectfully  submit  this  whole  matter  to  the  General-in-Chief  and 
the  President.  Whatever  the  decision  made  by  them,  I will  cheerfully 
submit  to  and  give  a hearty  support. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-  General. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Tennessee, 

Nq.  13.  j In  Field.,  Younfs  Point,  La.,  January  30,  18G3. 

I.  Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant,  commanding  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 
hereby  assumes  the  immediate  command  of  the  expedition  against  Vicks 
burg,  and  department  headquarters  will  hereafter  be  with  the  expedi- 
tion. 

II.  Army  corps  commanders  will  resume  the  immediate  command  of 
their  respective  corps,  and  will  report  to  and  receive  orders  direct  from 
these  headquarters. 

III.  As  army  corps  to  be  effective  should  be  complete  in  tlieir  organ- 
ization, and  ready  at  all  times  for  any  move  they  may  be  called  on  to 
make,  without  looking  to  department  or  other  headquarters  for  any- 
thing more  than  the  replenishing  of  their  supplies,  no  changes  or 
transfers  will  be  made  by  department  orders,  unless  absolutely  neces- 
sary for  the  interest  of  the  service. 

IV.  The  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  Maj.  Gen.  J.  A.  McClerimnd  com 
manding,  is  charged  with  garrisoning  the  post  of  Helena,  Ark.,  and 
any  other  point  on  the  Avest  bank  of  the  river  it  may  be  necessary  to 
hold  south  of  that  place. 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant: 

JNO.  A.  RAWLINS, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

* See  Series  I,  Vol.  XVII,  Part  I,  ]).  470,  and  Part  II,  p.  .557). 


12  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

linclosuro  No.  2.] 

Headquarters  Army  of  the  Mississippi, 

Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Before  Yiclcshurg,  January  30,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Temiessee: 

General  Orders,  No.  13,  is  this  moment  received.  I hasten  to  inquire 
whether  its  purpose  is  to  relieve  me  from  the  command  of  all  or  any 
portion  of  the  forces  composing  the  Mississippi  Eiver  expedition,  or,  in 
other  words,  whether  its  purpose  is  to  limit  my  command  to  the  Thir- 
teenth Army  Corps.  I am  letl  to  make  this  inquiry,  because,  while 
such  seems  to  be  the  intention,  it  conflicts  with  the  order  of  the  Secre- 
tary of  War,  made  under  the  personal  direction  of  the  President,  bear- 
ing date  October  21,  1862,  of  which  the  following  is  an  extract : 

Major-General  McClernand  is  directed  to  proceed  to  tbe  States  of  Indiana,  Illinois, 
and  Iowa,  to  organize  tlie  troops  remaining  in  those  States,  * * and  forward 

them  * * * to  Memphis,  Cairo,  or  such  other  points  as  may  hereafter  be  desig- 
nated, * * * to  the  end  that  when  a sufficient  force  not  required  by  the  opera- 

tions of  General  Grant’s  command  [then  in  West  Tennessee]  shall  be  raised,  an  expe- 
dition may  be  organized  under  General  McClernand’s  command  against  Vicksburg 
and  to  clear  the  Mississippi  to  New  Orleans. 

Also  with  the  order  of  the  General-in-Chief  to  you,  dated  December 
18,  1862,  of  which  the  following  is  an  extract : 

It  is  the  wish  of  the  President  that  General  McClernand’s  corps  shall  constitute  a 
part  of  the  river  expedition,  and  that  he  shall  have  the  immediate  command,  under 
your  direction. 

Also  with  your  communication  of  the  same  date,  based  on  the  pre- 
ceding order,  and  giving  me  command  of  the  expedition,  and  with  your 
verbal  assurance  of  yesterday  that  my  relations  to  the  forces  here  would 
continue  undisturbed.* 

I repeat  that  I respectfully  ask  for  an  explanation  of  this  seeming 
conflict  of  authority  and  orders,  that  I may  be  enabled  to  guide  my 
action  intelligently. 

By  [Special]  Orders,  No.  22,  you  extend  your  command  as  far  west 
from  the  Mississippi  Eiver  as  your  orders  may  reach.  By  General 
Orders,  No.  13,  you  charge  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  with  garrison- 
ing Helena  and  other  points  south.  Is  it  to  be  understood  that  my 
command  west  of  the  Mississippi  is  so  coextensive  with  the  purview  of 
Special  Orders,  No.  22? 

Again,  you  charge  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  with  garrisoning  the 
west  bank  of  the  Mississippi,  Am  I to  understand  that  I am  to  act  on 
my  own  judgment  in  fixing  the  number,  strength,  and  location  of  those 
garrisons,  or  simply  by  your  directions  ? It  is  quite  obvious  that  the 
whole  or  a large  portion  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  must  be  ab- 
sorbed by  these  garrisons  if  the  purpose  is  to  afford  complete  protec- 
tion to  all  lawful  vessels  navigating  the  river;  and  thus,  while  having- 
projected  the  Mississippi  Eiver  expedition,  and  having  been  by  a series 
of  orders  assigned  to  the  command  of  it,  I may  be  entirely  withdrawn 
from  it. 

For  the  reason  last  stated,  and  because  the  portion  of  the  Thirteenth 
Army  Corps  taking  part  in  this  expedition  is  very  much  smaller  than 
any  other  corps  of  your  command,  and  because  my  forces  are  here  and 

* See  Series  I,  Vol.  XVII,  Part  II,  p.  425. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


13 


those  of  others  have  yet  to  come,  why  not  detach  from  the  latter  to 
garrison  the  river  shore  and  relieve  all  those  here  from  liability  to 
that  charge? 

Your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  McOLERNAND, 
Major-General,  Commanding, 


[Inclosure  No.  3.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Before  VicTishurg,  January  31,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McOeernand, 

Commanding  Thirteenth  Army  Corps : 

General  : The  intention  of  General  Orders,  No.  13,  is  that  I will 
take  direct  command  of  the  Mississippi  Elver  expedition,  which  neces- 
sarily limits  your  command  to  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

In  charging  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  with  garrisoning  the  west 
bank  of  the  river,  I add  to  it  any  forces  belonging  to  any  command  on 
that  bank  not  already  assigned  to  other  corps,  and,  instead  of  weaken- 
ing your  force  in  the  field,  it  will  strengthen  it  by  about  7,000  men,  still 
leaving  a proper  garrison  at  Helena,  the  only  place  I now  deem  necessary 
to  garrison.  All  forces  and  posts  garrisoned  by  the  Thirteenth  Army 
Corps  are  under  your  command,  subject,  of  course,  to  directions  from 
these  headquarters. 

I regard  the  President  as  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Army,  and  will 
obey  every  order  of  his,  but  as  yet  I have  seen  no  order  to  prevent  my 
taking  immediate  command  in  the  field,  and  since  the  dispatch  referred 
to  in  your  note,  I have  received  another  from  the  General-in-Chief  of 
the  Army,  authorizing  me  directly  to  take  command  of  this  army. 

I at  first  thought  I would  publish  no  order  taking  command,  but  soon 
saw  it  would  be  much  more  convenient  to  issue  orders  direct  to  corps 
commanders  whilst  present  with  the  command  than  through  another 
commander. 

Tour  obedient  servant, 

IJ.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-General, 

[Inclosure  No.  4.] 


Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Before  Yichshurg,  February  1,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Tennessee: 

General  : Your  dispatch  of  this  date,  in  answer  to  mine  of  yester- 
day, is  received.  You  announce  it  to  be  the  intention  of  General  Or- 
ders, No.  13,  to  relieve  me  from  the  command  of  the  Mississippi  River 
expedition,  and  to  circumscribe  my  command  to  the  Thirteenth  Army 
Corps,  and  undertake  to  justify  the  order  by  authority  granted  by  the 
General-in-Chief.  I acquiesce  in  the  order  for  the  purpose  of  avoiding 
a conflict  of  authority  in  the  presence  of  the  enemy,  but,  for  reasons  set 
forth  in  my  dispatch  of  yesterday,  which,  for  anything  disclosed,  I still 
hold  good,  I protest  against  its  competency  and  justice,  and  respect- 
fully request  that  this,  my  protest,  together  with  the  accompanying 
paper,  may  be  forwarded  to  the  General-in-Chief,  and-  through  him  to 
the  Secretary  of  War  and  the  President.  I request  this,  not  only  in 


14 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAi*.  XXXVI. 


res})ect  I'or  tlie  Presidejit  and  Secretary,  under  whose  exi)ress  authority 
I claim  tlie  right  to  command  the  expedition,  but  in  justice  to  myself 
as  its  author  and  actual  promoter. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  McCLERNAND, 

Major-  General,  Commanding. 

Vicksburg,  Miss., 
February  3,  18G3 — 1 ]).  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief : 

One  of  the  rams  ran  the  blockade  this  morning.  This  is  ot  vast  im- 
l)ortance,  cutting  off  the  euemy^s  communication  with  the  west  bank  of 
the  river.  One  steamboat,  lying  at  Vicksburg,  was  run  into,  but  not 
sunk.  Work  on  the  canal  is  progressing  as  rapidly  as  ])ossible. 

XL  S.  GRANT, 

Major- Genera /,  Commandmg. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Before  Yichshurq.  February  4,  18G3. 

Col.  J.  C.  Keeton, 

Assista^it  Adjutant- General,  Washington  City: 

Colonel:  Herewith  I inclose  you  reports  from  Colonel  Deitzler  and 
Lieutenant-Colonel  ])uff‘,  from  Lake  Ibovidence,  fifty-odd  miles  al)ove 
here. 

On  examining  the  route  of  the  present  canal,  I lost  all  faith  in  its 
ever  leading  to  any  practical  results.  The  canal  is  at  right  angles  with 
the  thread  of  the  current  at  both  ends,  and  both  ends  are  in  an  eddy,  the 
lower  coming  out  under  bluffs  completely  commanding  it.  Warrenton, 
a few  miles. below,  is  capal)le  of  as  strong  defenses  as  Vicksburg,  and 
the  enemy,  seeing  us  at  work  here,  have  turned  their  attention  to  that 
])oint.  Our  labors,  however,  have  had  the  effect  of  making  the  enemy 
divide  his  forces  and  spread  their  big  guns  over  a great  deal  of  territory. 
They  are  now  fortified  from  Haynes’  Bluff’  to  Warrenton.  Taking  the 
views  I did,  I immediately  on  my  arrival  here  commenced,  or  ordered, 
other  routes  prospected. 

One  of  these  is  by  the  way  of  YLazoo  Pass  into  Coldwater,  the  Talla- 
hatchee,  and  Yazoo  Rivers.  This  is  conducted  l>y  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Wilson,  from  whom  no  report  is  yet  received.  This  route,  if  practica- 
ble, would  enable  us  to  get  high  ground  above  Haynes’  Bluff,  and  would 
turn  all  the  enemy’s  river  batteries. 

Another  is  by  Lake  Providence  and  the  network  of  bayous  connect- 
ing it  with  Red  River.  The  accompanying  reports  show  the  feasibility 
of  this  route. 

A third  is  l)y  the  way  of  Willow  and  Rouudaway  Bayous,  leaving  the 
]\Iississi])pi  at  Milliken’s  Bend,  and  coming  in  at  New  (jarthage.  There 
is  no  Question  but  that  this  route  is  much  more  practicable  than  the 
present  undertaking,  and  would  have  been  accomplished  with  much 
less  labor  if  commenced  before  the  water  had  got  all  over  the  country. 
The  work  on  the  present  canal  is  being  jnished.  New  inlet  and  outlet 
are  being  made,  so  that  the  water  will  be  received  where  the  current 
strikes  tlie  shore,  and  will  be  carried  through  in  a current. 

Respectfully,  &c., 


U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-General. 


CiiAr.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


15 


[Inclosuro  Xc.  1.] 

llEADQUARTERS  FlEST  BRIGADE,  McARTHUR’S  DIVISION, 

Lalie  Providence,  La,,  February  3,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Eawlins, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Department  of  the  Tennessee: 

Colonel  : Dispatch,  i^er  War  Eagle,  just  received.  I send  by  same 
boat  100  able-bodied  negroes ; all  that  can  be  secured  at  present.  Will 
send  out  to-morrow  and  collect  as  many  as  possible,  and  forward  them. 

The  planters  have  sent  most  of  their  negroes  and  cotton  back  into 
the  country,  on  Bayou  Macon,  some  lU  or  15  miles  from  here,  and  we 
shall,  therefore,  probably  not  be  able  to  send  you  many  hands  to  work 
on  the  canal. 

Colonel  Duff  has  permitted  me  to  read  his  report  respecting  the  object 
and  probable  result  of  our  expedition,  which  covers  the  ground. 

The  water  in  the  lake  is  about  8 feet  lower  than  the  surface  of  the 
river.  In  about  six  days  we  hope  to  be  able  to  complete  a cut  in  the 
levee,  100  feet  wide,  which  will  connect  the  lake  and  the  river  by  a 
channel  5 feet  deep. 

I do  not  think  that  we  will  have  any  considerable  difficulty  in  finding 
a passage  for  gunboats  and  small  stern-wheel  boats  through  Baxter 
Bayou  and  Bayou  Macon,  a distance  of  from  10  to  15  miles. 

When  the  water  in  Lake  Providence  rises  to  the  level  of  the  water  in 
the  Mississippi,  Baxter  Bayou  will  furnish  a i^assage  for  large  boats  ; 
it  will  only  be  necessary  to  cut  a few  trees,  so  as  not  to  interfere  with 
chimneys.  Once  in  Bayou  Macon,  we  shall  have  a clear  coast  to  Bed 
Biver. 

I look  upon  the  prospect  as  entirely  practicable,  and  shall  feel  very 
much  disappointed  if  the  gunboats  do  not  pass  through  to  Bayou  Macon 
within  three  weeks. 

At  Trenton,  1 mile  above  Monroe,  on  Washita  Biver,  the  rebels  have 
several  batteries  and  a small  infantry  force.  This  force  and  batteries 
were  at  Monroe  until  the  time  our  troops  destroyed  the  depot  at  Delhi. 

About  35  miles  west  of  Monroe,  at  Baven’s  Lake,  the  rebels  have 
extensive  salt-works,  where  they  employ  several  thousand  negroes.  I 
learn  that  these  works  supply  the  whole  southwest  with  salt,  and  they 
ought  to  be  destroyed. 

There  are  in  this  vicinity  many  articles  on  the  list  of  loyal  caj)- 
tures,”  such  as  horses,  mules,  and  cattle.  I can  ‘‘  gobble  up  ” and  send 
down  a large  supply  of  the  latter  if  desired. 

Wlien  the  next  boat  comes  up,  will  you  please  instruct  the  captain 
to  touch  at  General  McArthuPs  headquarters  and  bring  up  our  mail  % 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  verv  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

* GEO.*^  AV.  DEITZLEB, 

Colonel  First  Kansas,  Gommandiny  First  Brigade. 

[Inclosuro  No.  2.] 

On  Board  U.  S.  Steamer  Linden, 

Providence,  La.,  February  3,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Bawlins, 

Assistant  A dj u tan  t-  G en  era  I : 

Coi.ONEL : In  consequence  of  an  impenetrable  fog  and  other  causes 
of  detention  beyond  my  control,  the  expedition  for  the  connection  of 
Lake  Providence  with  the  Mississippi  Biver  did  not  reach  this  jilace 


16 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chav.  XXXYI. 


till  about  2 j).  m.  Sunday,  1st  instant.  At  the  time  of  landing  I was 
prostrated  from  a severe  bilious  attack,  which  had  set  in  almost  im- 
mediately on  our  leaving  the  fleet,  and  from  which  I have  not  yet 
recovered. 

Immediately  on  landing.  Colonel  Deitzler  disembarked  and  occupied 
the  remainder  of  the  day  in  making  a partial  reconnaissance  of  the  rela- 
tive positions  of  the  lake  and  river,  returning  without  coming  to  any 
definite  conclusion  as  to  the  place  best  suited  to  make  the  connection, 
but  fully  convinced  that  a connection  was  entirely  practicable. 

Yesterday  morning  a party  of  80  mounted  men,  under  the  command 
of  Colonel  Deitzler,  and  accompanied  by  Lieutenant  [Herman  A.]  Ulf- 
fers.  Captain  [Thomas  E.]  Smith,  of  the  gunboat,  and  myself  (though 
still  very  sick),  made  the  entire  circuit  of  the  lake,  taking  the  course 
along  the  bayou,  on  the  upper  side  of  the  lake,  as  per  accompanying 
chart,*  and  returning  to  Providence  across  Bayou  Tensas. 

The  bayou  on  the  upper  side  of  the  lake,  although  very  easily  con- 
nected with  the  river,  and,  as  far  as  depth  of  water  is  concerned,  better 
than  the  canal  finally  decided  upon,  is  too  crooked  and  too  much  ob- 
structed by  timber  to  be  made  available  for  navigation  for  several 
weeks,  while  the  course  of  the  proposed  canal  upon  which  we  are  now 
working  is  short,  and  the  work  can  be  done  within  a week,  nature  hav- 
ing already  done  the  best  part  of  it,  and  when  completed  it  will  give  a 
depth  of  5 feet,  sufficient  for  any  vessel  the  dimensions  of  which  would 
admit  of  passing  through  Bayou  Tensas  or  Baxter.  Either  plan  in- 
volves the  destruction  of  the  town  (now  nearly  deserted),  but  neither 
Colonel  Deitzler  nor  myself  thought  this  a matter  of  sufficient  impor- 
tance to  interfere  with  the  accomplishment  of  the  object  in  view.  On 
our  reconnaissance  yesterday  we  passed  down  the  left  bank  of  Tensas 
Bayou  about  a mile,  and  found  it  navigable.  To  make  sure,  however, 
whether  Tensas  or  Baxter  is  best  suited  for  our  purpose,  a strong  recon- 
noitering  party  has  gone  out  to-day,  which  has  not  yet  returned.  One 
of  these  outlets  being  decided  upon  as  the  best,  the  other,  w^e  propose, 
if  iiossible,  to  close  before  admitting  the  water  from  the  river.  In  any 
event,  I do  not  doubt  the  entire  practicability,  during  high  water,  of 
passing  with  such  vessels  as  the  mosquito  fleet  from  the  Mississippi 
and  the  Bed  Eiver.  We  have  heard,  however,  of  a battery  on  the 
Washita,  near  Monroe,  planted  there  with  a view  to  the  defense  of  ex- 
tensive salt-works  in  that  neighborhood,  by  means  of  which,  I am  in- 
formed, the  whole  of  that  part  of  rebeldom  and  the  army  in  Mississippi 
and  Arkansas  are  supplied  with  that  indispensable  article. 

On  this  subject  I hope  to  be  better  informed  in  a few  days,  wffien  I 
will  immediately  advise  you.  I have  sanguine  hopes,  shared  in  by 
Colonel  Deitzler,  that  the  general  commanding  may  authorize  an  expe- 
dition to  destroy  these  salt-works,  should  the  information  we  have  from 
negroes  be  confirmed. 

I should  mention  that  yesterday  we  met  with  no  obstacles  from  guer- 
rillas. A few  fleeing  horsemen  were  chased,  when  they  dismounted  and 
took  to  the  swamps,  leaving  their  horses  and  arms,  which  were  cap- 
tured. We  have  also  driven  in  some  beef-cattle. 

Trusting  that  so  much  as  has  been  done  will  meet  the  apinoval  of 
the  major-general  commanding,  I remain,  colonel,  yours,  very  respect- 
fully, 

W.  L.  DUFF, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Chief  of  Artillery,  Dept,  of  the  Tennessee. 


* Not  found, 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


17 


Headquarters  Department  oe  the  Tennessee, 

Before  VicJislmrg.  Miss.,  February  G,  1863. 

Col.  J.  0.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- Genera, I j Washington.^  D.  C.: 

Colonel:  Inclosed  I send  yon  a report  of  Lieutenant- Colonel  Wil- 
son,* of  the  prospects  of  effecting  a safe  passage  into  the  Yazoo  Eiver 
by  the  way  of  Yazoo  Pass.  Admiral  Porter  will  have  this  pass  thor- 
oughly explored  by  light-draught  gunboats,  upon  which  I ani  putting 
600  riflemen  from  the  army. 

It  is  to  be  hoped  that  this  expedition  will  be  able  to  capture  all  the 
transports  in  the  Yazoo  and  tributaries  and  destroy  two  gunboats  said 
to  be  in  course  of  construction.  They  will  also  attempt  to  ascend  the 
Yalabusha  to  Grenada,  and,  if  possible,  destroy  the  railroad  bridges. 

The  ram  that  ran  the  blockade  on  the  2d  instant  has  returned  to  the 
lower  end  of  the  peninsula,  opposite  Vicksburg.  She  went  as  far  as 
Ked  River,  and  some  miles  up  it,  capturing  and  destroying  three  steam- 
boats loaded  with  commissary  stores,  and  took  about  60  prisoners.  I 
send  dispatches,  every  day  or  two,  to  be  telegraphed  from  Memphis, 
but  as  I do  not  know  that  they  get  through,  I think  it  necessary  to 
notify  you  of  the  fact. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major- General. 


Before  Vicksburg,  AIiss.,  February  0,  1863 — Noon. 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  February  12. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief : 

The  continuous  rise  in  the  river  has  kept  the  army  busy  to  keep  out 
of  water,  and  much  retarded  work  on  the  canal.  I hope  to  be  able  to 
say  something  definite,  in  a day  or  so,  of  the  practicability  of  the  other 
route  mentioned  in  previous  dispatches. 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-  Genera  I,  Commanding, 

War  Department, 
Washington.  February  13,  1863. 
Major-General  Grant,  Via  Memphis.,  Tenn. : 

Cannot  dredge-boats  be  used  with  advantage  on  the  caual?  There 
are  four  lying  idle  at  Louisville,  belonging  to  Iloston,  Robinson  & Co., 
canal  contractors. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

Ge7ieral-in-  Chief. 

Lake  Providence,  La., 

Via  Memphis^  Tenn..,  February  15,  1863 — 12  p.  m. 

Major-General  Halleck,  General-in-Chief : 

Steamboats  through  Yazoo  Pass  have  gone  lo  within  6 miles  of  Cold- 
water.  Express  no  fear  but  that  they  will  reach  it  and  the  Yazoo. 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

M ajor- General^  Commanding. 

Wilson’s  reports,  of  February  2 and  4,  transmitted  with  this  communication.  See 
No.  1,  pp.  :j7I, 

2 R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


18 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Before  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  February  18,  1863. 
General  H.  W.  Halleck,  Washington,  D.  C.’ 

General  ; The  work  ii])0])  tlie  canal  liere  is  progressing  as  well  as 
]iossible,  witb  the  excessively  bad  weather  and  high  water  we  have  had 
to  contend  against.  Most  of  the  time  that  troops  could  be  out  at  all 
lias  been  expended  in  keeping  water  out  of  our  camps.  Five  good  work- 
ing days  would  enable  the  force  here  to  complete  the  canal  60  feet  wide, 
and  of  sufacieut  depth  to  admit  any  vessel  here.  Judging  from  the 
past,  it  is  fair  to  calculate  that  it  will  take  from  ten  to  twelve  days  to  get 
those  five  days.  Three  more,  perhaps,  should  be  allowed,  from  the  fact 
that  the  work  is  being  done  by  soldiers,  the  most  of  whom,  under  the 
most  favorable  circumstances,  could  not  com'e  uj)  to  the  calculations  of 
the  engineer  officers. 

McPherson’s  army  corps  is  at  Lake  Providence,  iirosecuting  the  work 
there.  They  could  not  be  of  any  service  in  helping  on  the  work  here, 
because  there  are  alreadj^  as  many  men  as  can  be  employed  on  it,  and 
then  he  would  have  to  go  5 or  6 miles  above  to  find  land  above  water 
to  encamp  on.  I am  using  a few  hundred  contrabands  on  the  work  here, 
but  have  been  compelled  to  prohibit  any  more  coming  in.  Humanity 
dictates  this  policy. 

Planters  have  mostly  deserted  their  plantations,  taking  with  them  all 
their  able-bodied  negroes  and  leaving  the  old  and  very  young.  Here 
they  could  not  have  shelter  nor  means  of  transportation  when  we  leave. 

I have  sent  a division  of  troops  from  Helena  to  join  the  Yaz’oo  expe- 
dition under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Wilson.  His  last  report  was  sent  you 
a few  days  ago.  If  successful,  they  will  destroy  the  railroad  bridges  at 
Grenada  and  captnre  or  destroy  all  the  transports  in  the  Tazoo  and 
tributaries. 

The  health  of  this  command  is  not  what  is  represented  in  the  public 
journals.  It  is  as  good  as  any  previous  calculation  could  have  prognos- 
ticated. I believe,  too,  that  there  is  the  best  of  feeling  and  greatest 
confidence  of  success  among  them.  The  greatest  drawback  to  the 
spirits  of  the  troops  has  been  the  great  delay  in  paying  them.  Many 
of  them  have  families  at  home  who  are,  no  doubt,  in  a suffering  con- 
dition for  want  of  the  amount  due  them,  and  they  are  bound  for  their 
support. 

U.  S.  GEANT, 

Major-General. 

Before  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  February  25,  1863—12.30  a.  m., 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  March  1. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief : 

The  Queen  of  the  West  is  now  at  Warrentou,  with  the  rebel  Hag  fiy^ 
ipg.  Distant  firing  was  heard,  lasting  from  4 p.  m.  yesterday  until  1 
this  morning.  It  is  supposed  to  have  been  between  the  Queen  and  lu- 
dianola.  Apprehension  is  felt  for  the  safety  of  the  Indianola. 

IT.  S.  GRANT. 


Before  Vicksburg,  IMiss.,  February  27,  1863—2.30  p.  m. 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  March  2. 
Major-General  PIalleck,  General-in-Chief : 

News  just  received  that  the  Queen  of  the  West  and  AVebb  attacked 
file  Indianola  about  35  miles  below  A^icksburg  the  night  of  thp  24th, 


CUAV.  XXXVI.]  GENERAL  REPORTS.  19 

iiiul,  after  an  euga^eraent  of  about  forty  minutes,  captured  her  with 
most  of  her  crew.  It  is  said  the  Indianola  afterward  sank. 

U.  S.  GEANT, 

21ajor-  General. 


Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

Washington,  llarch  1,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

N^ear  Vichshurg,  Miss. : 

General:  There  is  a vacant  major-generalcy  in  the  Eegular  Army, 
and  1 am  authorized  to  say  that  it  will  be  given  to  the  general  in  the 
held  who  hrst  wins  an  important  and  decisive  victory. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-iU’  Chief. 

War  Department, 
Washmgton,  March  5,  1863 — 2.26  p.  m. 

Major-General  Grant, 

Near  VicJcshurg,  3Iiss.: 

It  is  of  great  importance  that  transports  be  returned  from  your  com- 
mand as  far  as  it  is  jmssiblej  otherwise  you  will  be  short  of  supplies. 
Steam  vessels  on  the  upper  rivers  are  very  scarce.  Vessels  on  the 
river  between  Memphis  and  Vicksburg  should  go  in  fleets,  under  con- 
voy. Make  requisition  on  Admiral  Porter  for  convoys.  The  unneces- 
sary detention  of  transports  down  the  Mississippi  Eiver  is  a matter  of 
the  most  serious  importance,  and  requires  your  immediate  attention. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Before  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  March  6, 1863 — 12  p.  m. 

Via  Cairo,  III.,  March  12. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-m-  Chief : 

The  canal  is  near  completion.  Trooiis  expected  from  Saint  Louis 
not  yet  heard  from.  I will  have  Vicksburg  this  month,  or  fail  in  the 
attempt. 

U.  S.  GEAKT, 

31ajor-  General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Before  Vichshurg,  3Iiss.,  3iarch  7,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  Washington,  D.  C. : 

General  : I telegraphed  you  yesterday  the  near  approach  to  com- 
pletion of  the  canal.  The  water  is  extremely  high ; several  feet  above 
the  highest  ground  inside  the  levee.  Last  night  one  of  the  dams  across 
the  upper  end  of  the  canal  gave  way,  filling  up  where  men  were  at  work 
getting  out  stumps,  and  thus  setting  back  the  work  for  several  days. 
1 hope  yet,  however,  to  have  this  work  completed  as  early  as  I could 
possibly  take  advantage  of  it  if  it  was  already  done, 


20 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[C11A1>.  XXXVL 


The  troops  expected  from  Saint  Louis  are  not  yet  heard  from,  and  all 
that  I am  bringing  from  West  Tennessee  are  not  yet  down. 

The  work  of  getting  through  Lake  Providence  and  Jjayou  Macon, 
there  is  but  little  possibility  of  proving  successful.  If  the  work  had 
been  commenced  in  time,  however,  there  is  but  little  question  of  the 
success  of  the  enterprise.  The  land  from  Lake  Providence  and  also 
from'  Bayou  Macon  recedes  until  the  lowest  interval  between  the  two 
widens  out  into  a cypress  swami^,  where  Bayou  Baxter,  which  connects 
the  two,  is  lost.  This  flat  is  now  filled  to  the  depth  of  several  feet  witli 
water,  making  the  work  of  clearing  out  the  timber  exceedingly  s]»ow, 
and  rendering  it  impracticable  to  make  an  artificial  channel.  The 
Yazoo  Pass  expedition  is  a much  greater  success.  Admiral  Porter  sent 
in  four  gunboats,  and  I sent  a fleet  of  transports,  with  about  6,000  men. 
They  were  to  clear  the  Yazoo  and  tributaries  of  all  steamboats  and  em- 
bryo gunboats,  and,  if  possible,  destroy  the  railroad  bridges  at  Grenada. 
The  gunboats  were  to  approach  as  near  Haynes’  Bluff  as  possible,  and 
fire  signal  guns  to  warn  the  squadron  in  the  mouth  of  the  Y^azoo  of  their 
l)resence. 

Last  night,  about  12  o’clock,  Admiral  Porter  sent  me  word  that  the 
signal  agreed  upon  had  been  heard. 

I am  now  sending  General  McPherson,  with  his  army  corps  and 
enough  other  troops  to  make  full  25,000  effective  men,  to  effect  a lodg- 
ment on  the  high  ground  on  the  east  baidv  of  the  Yazoo.  Once  there, 
with  his  entire  force  he  will  move  down  in  transports  and  by  land  to 
the  vicinity  of  Haynes’  Bluff'.  Before  moving  down,  however,  below 
Yazoo  City,  General  JMcPlierson  will  be  made  acquainted  with  the  full 
plan  of  attack  that  may  then  be  determined  upon,  and  the  time  will  be 
so  arranged  that  there  will  be  full  co-operation  of  my  entire  force.  Our 
movements  have  evidently  served  to  distract  the  enemy  and  make  him 
scatter  his  heavy  guns.  His  forces  are  also  scattered,  but  they,  with 
the  light  artillery,  can  be  got  to  any  one  point. 

The  health  of  this  command  is  good,  and  the  greatest  confidence  felt 
by  officers  and  men.  The  most  ample  provision  that  I ever  saw  has 
been  made  for  the  comfort  of  the  sick. 

The  dredging  machines  brought  here  by  Col.  G.  G.  Pride  work  to  a 
charm.  After  the  accident  of  last  night,  all  work  would  have  had  to 
be  suspended  until  there  was  a fall  of  at  least  3 feet  (the  river  is  still 
rising),  but  for  these  machines.  Much  credit  is  due  Colonel  Pride  for 
his  selection  of  them.  But  for  his  personal  attention  to  the  selection 
of  them,  old  and  worn-out  ones  would  have  been  sent,  and  the  result 
probably  would  have  been  that  they  would  have  given  out  before  their 
work  was  half  done. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

U.  S.  GBANT, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Hr;pARTMENT  of  the  Tennessee, 

Before  March  17,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  11.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Glii(f  Washington^  J).  C.: 

General:  Since  the  giving  way  of  the  dam  at  the  upper  end  of  the 
canal,  work  with  the  dredges  has  i)rogressed  favorably,  but  all  attempts 
to  stop  the  rush  of  water  into  the  canal  have  proved  abortive.  If  re- 
(piired,  however,  the  canal  can  be  made  to  i^ass  boats  of  ordinary  size 
in  a few  days. 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


21 


The  eneujy  were  busily  eugaged  firing  from  the  opposite  heights  yes- 
terday and  last  night  at  the  dredge-boat  nearest  the  lower  end  of  the 
canal.  Their  shots  did  no  damage,  though  many  of  the  large  ones 
reached  half  way  across  the  point. 

Ordinary  Ohio  Eiver  boats  can  now  pass  from  Lake  Providence  into 
Bayou  Macon,  and  thence,  by  easy  navigation,  to  the  mouth  of  Bed 
Eiver. 

I make  no  calculations  upon  using  this  route  for  the  present,  but  it 
may  be  turned  to  practical  use  after  effecting  present  plans.  The  same 
may  be  said  of  the  canal  across  the  point. 

I learn  from  Jackson  (Miss.)  papers,  of  the  14th,  that  one  of  our  gun- 
boats had  run  down  to  Greenwood  and  exchanged  a few  shots  with  the 
fort  at  that  point.  Further  information  from  the  enemy  shows  that 
several  thousand  troops  have  gone  from  Vicksburg  up  the  Yazoo  Eiver. 
Besides  four  gunboats  (one  of  them  iron-clad)  I have  a division  of  troops 
there  now,  and  Quinby’s  division  in  the  pass  on  their  way  down.  One 
division  from  Memphis  should  also  be  on  their  way  now.  The  great 
difficulty  of  getting  small-class  steamers  adapted  to  this  service  has 
retarded  movements  by  the  way  of  Yazoo  Pass  materially. 

To  liem  in  the  enem^^  on  the  Yazoo,  Admiral  Porter  has  gone  into 
Deer  Creek  by  the  way  of  Steele’s  Bayou  and  Little  Black  Bayou. 
From  there  he  can  get  into  the  Yazoo  either  by  running  up  Deer  Creek 
to  Eolling  Fork,  thence  through  the  fork  and  down  the  Big  Sunflower, 
all  of  which  are  navigable,  or  down  Deer  Creek  to  the  Yazoo. 

Admiral  Porter  and  myself  went  up  Steele’s  Bayou  to  Little  Black 
Bayou  on  the  15th.  With  the  exception  of  overhanging  trees  in  some 
places,  the  navigation  Avas  good  for  the  gunboat  General  Price.  I am 
having  those  obstructions  removed.  We  Avere  preceded  by  four  of  the 
old  iron-dads,  that  found  no  difficulty  in  the  navigation.  I returned  in 
the  evening  for  the  purpose  of  hurrying  up  men  and  means  for  clear- 
ing the  channel.  I also  sent  Sherman  to  make  a reconnaissance  in  com- 
pany with  the  gu7i  boats,  with  a vieAv  of  effecting  a landing  with  troops 
on  high  ground  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Yazoo,  from  which  to  act  against 
11  ay  lies’  Bluff. 

Last  night  I received  a dispatch  from  Admiral  Porter  saying  that  the 
iron-clads  had  pushed  into  Black  Bayou,  and  had  reached  to  within  a 
quarter  of  a mile  of  Deer  Creek,  where  they  had  become  entangled  in 
the  timber,  and  could  not  moA^e  until  it  was  cut  out,  and  asking  me  for 
a force  of  3,000  men  to  act  with  him.  Fortunately  I had  already  sent  all 
that  the  boats  at  hand  suitable  for  that  navigation  and  immediately 
available  could  carry.  I am  now  sending  the  remainder  of  Sherman’s 
old  division,  and  will  push  troojis  through,  if  Sherman  reports  favorably, 
as  fast  as  our  means  Avill  admit.  These  troops  go  up  the  Mississippi 
Eiver  in  large  transports  about  30  miles,  and  to  where  Steele’s  Bayou 
comes  Avithiu  1 mile  of  the  Mississippi.  The  small-class  boats  can  ferry 
them  from  that  point,  and  thus  save  the  distance  from  the  mouth  of  the 
Yazoo  to,  and  also  the  most  difficult  part  of  the  navigation  in,  Steele’s 
Bayou. 

There  is  evident  indication  of  considerable  excitement  in  Vicksburg. 
I think  they  are  removing  many  of  their  troops,  but  cannot  satisfy  my- 
self to  what  point.  Some  Ave  knoAv  have  gone  up  the  Yazoo,  and  it 
may  be  that  others  are  going  to  Port  Hudson.  I liaA^e  no  means  of 
learning  anything  from  below,  except  what  is  occasionally  learned 
through  Southern  papers. 

U.  S.  GEANT, 

Major- General. 


22 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Washington,  March  20,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Tennessee  : 

General  : Your  letter  of  Mareh  7 is  received.  It  is  the  lirst  coin- 
nmnication  from  you  for  some  time  which  has  reached  here.  It  is  very 
desirable  that  you  keep  us  advised  of  your  operations,  in  order  that 
])roper  instructions  may  be  sent  to  General  Banks,  General  Eosecraus, 
&c.  Send  telegrams  to  Memphis  by  every  opportunity. 

In  operating  by  the  Yazoo,  you  have,  no  doubt,  fully  considered  the 
advantages  and  dangers  of  the  expedition.  Our  information  here  on 
that  subject  is  very  limited  and  unsatisfactory.  There  is  one  point, 
however,  which  has  been  discussed,  and  to  which  I v^ould  particularly 
call  your  attention ; it  is  the  danger,  on  the  fall  of  the  water  in  the 
Mississipi)i,  of  having  your  steamers  caught  in  the  Upper  Yazoo,  so  as 
to  be  unable  to  extricate  them.  In  the  present  scarcity  of  steamers  on 
the  western  rivers,  this  would  be  a very  serious  loss.  Another  danger 
is,  that  the  enemy  may  concentrate  a large  force  upon  the  isolated  col- 
umn of  McPherson  without  your  being  able  to  assist  him.  I mention 
these  matters  in  order  that  you  may  give  them  your  full  attention. 

When  the  operations  of  an  army  are  directed  to  one  particular  object 
it  is  always  dangerous  to  divide  forces.  All  accessories  should  be  sac- 
rificed for  the  sake  of  concentration.  The  great  object  on  your  line  now 
is  the  opening  of  the  Mississippi  Eiver,  and  everything  else  must  tend 
to  that  purpose.  The  eyes  and  hopes  of  the  whole  country  are  now 
ditected  to  your  army.  In  my  opinion,  the  opening  of  the  Mississippi 
Eiver  will  be  to  us  of  more  advantage  than  the  capture  of  forty  Eich- 
monds.  We  shall  omit  nothing  which  we  can  do  to  assist  you. 

Permit  me  to  repeat  the  importance  of  your  frequently  advising  me 
by  telegraph  from  Memphis. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-Chief. 


War  Department, 

W ashington^  March  24,  1863. 

Major-General  Grant, 

Before  VicTishurg.,  Miss.: 

I must  again  call  your  attention  to  the  importance  of  your  not  retain- 
ing so  many  steamers  in  the  Mississippi.  It  is  absolutely  necessary 
that  a part  of  these  boats  be  returned.  We  cannot  otherAvise  supply 
our  armies  in  Tennessee  and  Kentucky.  This  matter  must  be  attended 
to  without  delay. 


II.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in  • Chief. 


Kear  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  Alarch  24, 1863, 

Via  Cairo,  III.,  ]\Iarch  31. 
Maj.  Gen.  [1.  W.  IIalleck,  General-in-Chief : 

At  last  accounts  Yazoo  Pass  expedition  was  yet  at  Grecinvood.  Ad- 
miral Porter  and  Sherman  are  attempting  to  get  into  the  Yazoo  below 
Yazoo  City.  Ko  news  from  them  for  several  days.  Favragut  holds  the 
river  above  Port  Hudson. 

U.  S.  GEANT, 

Major-General. 


Chap.  XXX YI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


23 


iS^EAR  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  March  25, 1863, 

Via  Cairo,  III.,  March  31. 

Maj.  Geii.  U.  W.  Halleck,  . 

Gcneral-in-  Chief : 

Two  rams  attemiited  to  run  the  blockade  this  morning.  One  suc- 
ceeded, in  damaged  condition.  They  v/ere  intended  to  strengthen  Far- 
ragut.  Porter  is  returning.  Did  not  succeed  in  reaching  the  Yazoo. 

U.  S.  GEANT, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Before  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  March  27,  1863. 

General  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Washington,  D.  G. : 

General:  All  Avork,  excepting  repairing  the  crevasse  in  the  canal 
levee,  has  been  suspended  for  several  days,  the  enemy  having  driven 
the  dredgers  entirely  out.  The  canal  may  be  useful  in  passing  boats 
through  at  night,  to  be  used  below,  but  nothing  further. 

Admiral  Porter  has  returned  from  his  attempt  to  reach  the  Yazoo 
Eiver  below  Yazoo  City.  The  difficult  navigation  of  the  bayous  from 
the  Yazoo  Eiver  through  Black  Bayou  and  Deer  Creek  caused  so  much 
time  to  be  consumed  that  the  enemy  got  wind  of  the  movement  in  time 
to  blockade  the  creek  just  where  the  boats  would  leave  it. 

As  the  enemy  occupied  the  ground  in  considerable  force  Avhere  they 
could  prevent  the  clearing  out  of  these  obstructions,  the  admiral  was 
forced  to  desist  from  further  efforts  to  proceed  when  within  a few  hun- 
dred yards  of  clear  sailing  to  the  Yazoo.  Eolling  Fork  and  Sunflower 
are  navigable,  steamers  having  eome  by  this  route  to  within  sight  of  out 
gunboats  while  they  were  in  Deer  Creek. 

The  moment  I heard  that  Admiral  Porter  had  started  on  his  return, 
I sent  orders  for  the  return  of  the  Yazoo  Pass  expedition  from  Fort- 
Greenwood.  From  information  I have,  other  and  greater  difficulties 
would  be  found  in  navigating  the  Yazoo  below  Greenwood.  Consid- 
erable iTreparation  has  been  made  to  receive  our  forces  coming  by  that 
route. 

I get  papers  and  deserters  frequently  from  Vicksburg,  but  am  not 
able  to  arrive  at  any  definite  conclusion  as  to  their  numbers.  I do  not 
anticipate  any  trouble,  however,  if  a landing  can  be  effected. 

On  the  morning  of  the  25th,  General  Ellet  sent  two  rams — the  Switz- 
erland and  the  Lancaster — to  join  Admiral  Farragut.  The  last-named 
ram  received  a shot  in  the  boiler  long  before  reaching  the  front  of  the 
city.  She  floated  down,  however,  receiving  many  more  shots,  but  with- 
out materially  further  disabling  her.  She  will  be  ready  for  service  before 
to-morrow  night,  and  is  a fine  vessel.  The  other  boat  received  a shot, 
and  immediately  went  to  pieces.  A large  part,  containing  the  machin- 
ery, tipped  over,  spilling  it  in  the  river.  The  wreck  floated  down  and 
lodged  at  our  lower  jTickets,  bottom  ux).  She  was  very  rotten  and  worth- 
less. The  shot  received  would  not  have  damaged  a sound  vessel  seri- 
ously. This  is  what  Admiral  Farragut:  and  army  officers,  who  have 
examined  the  wreck,  report  to  me. 

Since  no  casualties  occurred,  it  was  fortunate  that  she  is  lost;  for 
had  she  not  been  at  this  time,  slie  might  have  been  at  some  other  time, 
when  more  valuable  vessels  might  have  been  risked,  relying  on  this 
boat  fo*’ assistance.  It  is  almost  certain  that  had  she  made  one  ram 


24  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

into  anotber  vessel  sbe  would  have  closed  up  like  a spy-glass^  eucompass- 
all  on  board. 

I bave  just  learned  from  a contraband  (reliable)  that  most  of  tbe 
forces  from  Vicksburg  are  now  up  tbe  Yazoo,  leaving’  not  to  exceed 
10,000  in  tbe  city  to-day.  Tbe  batteries  are  tbe  same,  however,  and 
would  cause  tbe  same  difficulty  in  landing  that  would  be  experienced 
against  a heavy  force;  besides,  tbe  very  cause  of  tbe  absence  of  so 
many  troops  from  Vicksburg,  our  gunboats  and  troops  in  and  toward 
tbe  Yazoo,  prevents  our  taking  advantage  of  tbe  circumstances.  1 bave 
no  doubt  of  tbe  truth  of  my  information,  because  it  is  substantiated  by 
Southern  papers  and  by  deserters,  so  far  as  the  sending  of  a large  force 
up  tbe  Yazoo. 

U.  S.  GEANT, 

Major-  Genera  1. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Before  Viclcshurg^  March  29,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  Washington,  I).  C. : 

General  : A dispatch  to  release  boats  and  letter  on  tbe  subject  of 
tbe  Yazoo  expedition  are  both  just  received;  tbe  letter,  also,  enjoining 
me  to  keep  you  informed  of  tbe  situation  constantly  by  telegraph. 

I bave  been  very  particular  to  write  and  telegraph  often,  even  when 
there  was  nothing  important  to  say,  knowing  that  you  would  feel  anx- 
ious to  be  constantly  posted.  Tbe  letters,  I presume,  reach,  but  tbe 
dispatches  must  in  many  instances  bave  failed. 

In  regard  to  sending  back  boats  from  here,  I gave  and  reiterated  tbe 
order  to  General  McClernand  to  do  so  before  leaving  Memphis.  On  my 
arrival,  however,  I found  tbe  river  rising  so  rapidly  that  there  was  no 
telling  what  moment  all  bands  might  be  driven  to  tbe  boats.  As  soon 
as  this  danger  was  passed,  so  many  boats  were  released  that  I could 
bave  moved  but  a small  force  at  one  time. 

I wrote  you  full^^  on  tbe  subject  of  tbe  Yazoo  expedition  a few  days 
ago.  If  you  do  not  receive  at  least  one  letter  and  two  dispatches  per 
week  from  me,  general,  be  assured  that  some  of  them  miscarry.  In  ad- 
dition, I will  telegraph  as  often  as  anything  may  occur  of  any  impor- 
tance. 

I am,  general,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

U.  S.  GEANT, 

Major- General. 


Near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  April  2, 1863. 

Via  Cairo,  III.,  April  7. 

Maj.  Gen.  II.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

In  two  weeks  I exi)ect  to  be  able  to  collect  all  my  forces  and  turn  tbe 
enemy’s  left.  With  present  high  water  tbe  extent  of  gi'ound  ui)on 
which  troops  could  land  at  Haynes’  Bluff  is  so  limited  that  tbe  i)lace  is 
impregnable.  I reconnoitered  tbe  idace  yesterday  with  Porter  and  Sher- 
man. 


U.  S.  GEANT, 

Major-  General. 


CnAi\  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


25 


Washington^  Aiyril  2,  1863. 
Maj.  Geu.  U.  S.  Grant,  before  ^Yickshurg : 

General  : Your  dispatch  of  Alarcli  17  aud  also  your  telegrams  of 
March  24  aud  25  were  received  yesterday. 

W^hile  working  upon  the  canal,  the  division  of  your  forces  into  several 
eccentric  operations  may  have  been  very  proper  for  the  purpose  of  re- 
counoitering  the  country  ; but  it  is  very  important  that,  when  you  strike 
any  blow,  you  should  have  your  troops  sufficiently  concentrated  to  make 
that  blow  effective.  The  division  of  your  army  into  small  expeditions 
destroys  your  strength,  aud,  when  in  the  presence  of  an  enemy,  is  very 
dangerous. 

What  is  most  desired,  aud  your  attention  is  again  called  to  this  object, 
is  that  your  forces  and  those  of  General  Banks  should  be  brought  into 
co-operation  as  early  as  iiossible.  If  he  cannot  get  up  to  co  operate  with 
you  on  Vicksburg,  cannot  you  get  troops  down  to  help  him  on  Port 
Hudson,  or,  at  least,  can  you  not  destroy  Grand  Gulf  before  it  becomes 
too  strong  ? 

I know  that  you  can  judge  of  these  matters  there  much  better  than  I 
can  here  ; but  as  the  President,  who  seems  to  be  rather  imiiatient  about 
matters  on  the  Mississippi,  has  several  times  asked  me  these  questions, 
I repeat  them  to  you. 

As  the  season  when  we  can  do  very  little  on  the  Lower  Mississippi  is 
raiiidly  advancing,  1 hope  you  will  imsh  matters  with  all  possible  dis- 
patch. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLEOK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Before  Viclcsburg^  April  4,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  Washington.,  D.  C. : 

General  : By  information  from  the  south,  by  way  of  Corinth,  I learn 
that  the  enemy  in  front  of  Bosecrans  have  been  re  enforced  from  Rich- 
mond, Charleston,  Savannah,  Mobile,  and  a few  from  Vicksburg.  They 
have  also  collected  a cavalry  force  of  20,000  men.  All  the  bridges  east- 
ward from  Savannah  and  north  from  Florence  are  being  rapidly  repaired. 
Chalmers  is  imt  in  command  of  Northern  Mississippi,  and  is  collecting 
all  the  Partisan  Rangers  aud  loose  aud  independent  coinjiauies  of  cav- 
alry that  have  been  operating  in  this  department.  He  is  now  occuxiy- 
ing  the  line  of  the  Tallahatchee.  This  portends  xireparation  to  attack 
Rosecrans,  and  to  be  able  to  follow  up  any  success  with  rapidity,  also 
to  make  a simultaneous  raid  into  West  Tennessee,  both  from  Northern 
Mississippi  and  by  crossing  the  Tennessee  River.  To  counteract  this. 
Admiral  Porter  has  consented  to  send  the  Marine  Brigade  up  the  Ten- 
nessee River  to  co-operate  with  General  Dodge  at  Corinth.  I have 
also  ordered  an  additional  regiment  of  cavalry  from  Helena  into  West 
Tennessee.  I inclose  with  this  a letter  from  Major-General  Hurlbut, 
giving  a programme,  which  he  wishes  to  carry  out,  and  so  much  of  it 
as  to  drive  the  enemy  from  the  Tallahatchee  and  cutting  the  roads  where 
they  hav^e  been  repaired,  I think  can  be  successfully  executed.  I will  in- 
struct him  not  to  scatter  his  forces  so  as  to  risk  losing  them.  I have 
placed  one  division  of  troojis  on  Deer  Creek,  with  communication  back 
to  the  Mississippi  River,  just  above  Lake  Washington.  The  object  of 


26 


[Chap.  XXX n. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


this  move  is  to  keep  the  enemy  from  drawing-  supplies  from  that  rich 
region  (and  use  them  ourselves)  and  to  attract  the  attention  of  the 
enemy  in  that  direction.  The  navigation  is  practicable  for  our  iron-clads 
and  small  steamers  through  to  the  Yazoo  Iliver,  by  the  route  lately 
tried  by  Admiral  Porter,  with  the  exception  of  a few  hundred  yards  in 
Deer  Creek,  near  Polling  Fork.  This  was  obstructed  by  the  enemy, 
and  they  are  now  guarding  and  fortifying  there.  This  move  will  have 
a tendency  to  make  them  throw  in  an  additional  force  there  and  move 
some  of  their  guns.  My  force  had  as  well  be  there  as  here  until  I want 
to  use  them.  A reconnaissance  to  Haynes’  Bluff  demonstrates  the  im- 
practicability of  attacking  that  place  during  the  present  stage  of  water. 
The  west  bank  of  the  river  is  densely  wooded  and  is  under  water.  The 
east  bank  only  runs  up  to  the  bluff*  for  a short  distance  below  the 
raft,  then  diverges,  leaving  a bottom  widening  all  the  way  down,  in 
most  part  covered  by  water,  and  all  of  it  next  to  the  bluff's  so  covered. 
The  hillsides  are  lined  with  rifle-pits,  with  embrasures  here  and  there 
for  field  artillery.  To  storm  this,  but  a small  force  could  be  used  at  the 
outset. 

With  the  present  batteries  of  the  enemy,  the  canal  across  the  ])oint 
can  be  of  but  little  use.  There  is  a system  of  bayous  running  from 
Milliken’s  Bend,  and  also  from  near  the  river  at  this  point,  that  are 
navigable  for  barges  and  small  steamers  passing  around  by  Richmond 
to  Rew  Carthage.  The  dredges  are  now  engaged  cutting  a canal  from 
here  into  these  bayous.  I am  having  all  the  empty  coal  and  other 
barges  prepared  for  carrying  troops  and  artillery,  and  have  written  to 
Colonel  [Robert]  Allen  for  some  more,  and  also  for  six  tugs  to  tow  them. 
With  these  it  would  be  easy  to  carry  supplies  to  Rew  Carthage,  and  for 
any  point  south  of  that. 

My  expectation  is  for  a portion  of  the  naval  fleet  to  run  the  batteries 
of  Vicksburg,  whilst  the  army  moves  through  by  this  new  route.  Once 
there,  1 will  move  either  to  AVarrenton  or  Grand  Gulf;  most  probably 
the  latter.  From  either  of  these  points  there  are  good  roads  to  Vicks- 
burg, and  from  Grand  Gulf  there  is  a good  road  to  Jackson  and  the 
Black  River  Bridge  without  crossing  Black  River. 

This  is  the  only  move  I now  see  as  practicable,  and  hope  it  will  meet 
your  approval.  I will  keep  my  army  together,  and  see  to  it  that  I am 
not  cut  off*  from  my  supplies,  or  beaten  in  any  other  way  than  in  fair  fight. 
The  discipline  and  health  of  this  army  is  now  good,  and  I am  satisfied 
the  greatest  confidence  of  success  prevails. 

I have  directed  General  Webster  to  commence  the  reconstruction  of 
the  railroad  between  Grand  Junction  and  Corinth.  The  labor  will  be 
performed  by  the  engineer  regiment  and  contrabands,  thus  saving  ad- 
ditional expense.  The  streams  will  be  crossed  on  })iles.  In  this  way 
the  work  should  be  done  by  the  first  of  Maj^ 

1 am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major- General. 


flnclosure  Xo.  1.] 


AIempiiis,  Aj>ril  1,  1SG3. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Geant,  Yoiuufs  Faint : 

General:  The  i)resent  situation  of  the  enemy’s  forces  is  submitted 
to  you : Brig.  Gen.  S.  A.  [AI.J  Wood,  commanding  Northern  Alabama, 
headquarters  Florence;  about  4,000  men,  mostly  mounted;  two  batteries 
artillery;  pickets  along  line  of  Bear  Creek.  Colonel  [C.  R.j  Barteau’s 
4)rigade  of  cavalry,  lately  re-enforced  ; headquarters  Verona ; pickets  to 


Chap.  X:X:XVI.I 


GP^NERAL  REPORTS. 


27 


Bjildwyii.  Next  Ilaiii  and  |W.  O.j  Falkner,  each  a legiaieiit  of  cav- 
alry, extending  along  line  of  Tallabatcliee ; pickets  north  of  Holly 
Springs  (Falkner,  however,  is  now  at  Fanola).  Brigadier-General  Chal- 
mers, commanding  Northern  Mississippi,  headquarters  at  Panola.  [T* 
W.]  Ham,  McGirk  [John  McGuirk],  [W.  W.J  Faulkner,  [G.  L.]  Blythe^ 
aud  [R.  V.]  Richardson,  and  all  roving  bands  are  ordered  to  report  to 
Chalmers.  He  has  one  six-gun  battery  at  Panola  and  one  behind  the 
Tallahatchee,  near  Abbeville.  On  east  side  of  the  river,  Cox,  Roddey,v 
and  a portion  of  Van  Dorn’s  force  are  in  Hardin,  Wayne,  and  other 
counties.  They  are  collecting  stores,  and  have  flats  in  Horse  Creek  and 
Duck  River.  There  is  every  indication  of  a raid  to  be  made  soon  on 
our  lines  of  communication. 

I absolutely  need  another  regiment  of  cavalry  at  once  for  General 
Dodge ; with  that  furnished  me,  a good  regiment  with  good  horses,  I 
will  move  from  Corinth,  La  Grange,  and  this  place  simultaneously, 
sweeping  round  frouj  Corinth  to  Pontotoc,  from  La  Grange  straight 
down  the  ridge,  with  three  regiments,  throwing  one  in  above  Oxford, 
and  cutting  the  Mississippi  Central  j the  other  by  Okolona,  and  perhaps 
to  Columbus,  now  lightly  guarded,  cutting  that  road,  while  Grierson, 
with  his  regiment,  would  i)roceed  by  forced  marches  to  Selma  or  Me- 
ridian. Both  Selma  and  Meridian  have  few  troops.  To  break  the 
Chunkey  River  or  Pearl  River  Bridge  would  be  my  object.  Their  roll- 
ing stock  is  reduced  and  wearing  out,  as  Barney  informs  me,  and  they 
limit  trains  to  10  miles  an  hour.  They  are  drawing  supplies  from  Nox- 
ubee and  other  counties  of  Mississippi,  and  conscriptiug  relentlessly. 
As  part  of  this  movement,  I will  send  from  La  Grange  or  Holly  Springs 
a brigade  of  infantry  and  some  artillery,  and  destroy  the  Tallahatchee 
Bridge,  now  being  repaired,  and  break  up  the  car- wheels  and  axles  left 
there  at  the  time  of  our  withdrawal,  which  are  of  vast  service  to  them. 
I shall  also  move  a force  to  the  left  of  Panola  from  this  place,  so  as  to 
keep  Chalmers  quiet  or  drive  him  back  toward  Grenada. 

I dislike  to  make  this  movement  without  more  cavalry  for  Dodge,  as 
he  is  the  most  exposed  of  any  point.  I therefore  urgently  request  an- 
other regiment  to  be  sent  me  at  once.  If  none  can  be  spared  from 
below,  I will  go  on  with  what  I have  as  soon  as  I receive  your  orders. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

S.  A.  HURLBUT, 

Major-General. 

[Inclopiure  No.  2 — Extract.] 

They  (the  rebels)  are  still  massing  their  forces  upon  Rosecrans,  de- 
termined to  overwhelm  him.  Their  cavalry  force  is  very  large,  fully 
20,000,  and  they  are  making  every  effort  to  swell  it  to  25,000,  and  to 
crush  him  by  relentless  pursuit  if  the  advantage  is  with  them.  They 
are  drawing  forces  to  re-enforce  Johnston  from  Richmond,  Charleston, 
Savannah,  Mobile,  Vicksburg,  although  few  have  gone  from  Vicksburg. 
The  force  Avithin  supporting  distance  of  Vicksburg  he  estimates  at 
from  50,000  to  75,000  men. 


Washington,  April  0,  1SG3. 
Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant,  before  ViclcHhiirg : 

General  : Yours  of  March  20  is  Just  received. 

Your  explanation  in  regard  to  sending  back  steamers  is  satisfactory. 
I liope  you  will  keej)  in  mind  the  great  im])ortance  of  not  unnecessarily 


28 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAr.  XXXVl. 


detaiuiijg  tliem,  ou  account  of  tlie  great  embarrassment  it  causes  tbe 
Quartermaster’s  Department  in  supplying  our  Western  armies. 

In  regard  to  your  dispatches,  it  is  very  probable  that  many  fail  to 
reach  here  in  time.  It  is  exceedingly  important  that  General  Banks 
should  be  kept  advised  of  everything  that  is  done  in  your  vicinity,  and 
the  only  way  he  can  get  this  information  is  through  these  headquarters. 

You  are  too  well  advised  of  the  anxiety  of  the  Government  for  your 
success,  and  its  disappointment  at  the  delay,  to  render  it  necessary  to 
urge  upon  you  the  importance  of  early  action.  I am  confident  that 
you  will  do  everything  possible  to  open  the  Mississippi  Kiver. 

In  my  opinion  this  is  the  most  important  operation  of  the  war,  and 
nothing  must  be  neglected  to  insure  success. 

General  [Charles  S.]  Hamilton’s  resignation  has  been  received,  but 
has  not  yet  been  acted  on,  the  President  and  Secretary  being  absent. 
Ho  doubt  he  resigns  to  get  a higher  command.  This  game  sometimes 
succeeds,  but  it  also  sometimes  tails. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  IIALLECK, 

General-in- Chief. 

Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  April  11,  1863—9  p.  m. 

Via  Cairo,  III.,  Ajyril  16. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief : 

The  Yazoo  expedition  has  reached  the  Mississippi.  My  forces  in  a 
few  days  will  all  be  concentrated  here.  Grand  Gulf  is  the  point  at 
which  1 expect  to  strike,  and  send  an  army  corps  to  Port  Hudson  to 
co-operate  with  General  Banks.  Will  reach  the  Mississippi  at  Hew 
Carthage,  now  in  my  possession,  with  wagon  road  and  canal  and  bayous 
navigable  for  tugs  and  barges  between  here  and  there. 

U.  S.  GBAHT, 

Major-  General. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Millikenh  Bend.  La..  April  12,  1863. 

Col.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.,  Washington,  B.  C. : 

Colonel:  Herewith  I send  you  reports  of  Major-General  Sherman, 
and  the  division  and  brigade  commanders  under  him,  of  the  late  recon- 
naissance through  Steele’s  and  Black  Bayous  and  Deer  Creek,  made  by 
t hem  in  conjunction  with  a portion  of  Admiral  Porter’s  fleet,  commanded 
by  himself  in  person.* 

The  object  of  the  expedition  was  to  find  a practicable  i)assage  to  the 
Yazoo  River  without  passing  the  enemy’s  batteries  at  Haynes’  Bluff,  to 
liberate  our  fleet  and  troops  then  held  above  Greenwood,  and,  if  found 
sufliciently  practicable,  to  enable  me  to  land  most  of  my  forces  east  of 
the  Yazoo,  at  some  point  from  which  Haynes’  Bluff  and  Vicksburg  could 
be  reached  by  high  land.  The  accompanying  reports  show  the  imprac- 
ticjibility  of  the  route. 

This  expedition,  however,  was  not  without  its  results.  It  carried  our 
troops  into  the  heart  of  the  granary  from  which  the  Vicksburg  forces 
are  now  being  fed.  It  caused  great  alarm  among  the  enemy,  and  led 
them  to  move  a number  of  their  guns  from  batteries  on  the  river.  The 
citizens  fled  from  their  plantations,  and  burned  several  thousand  bales 


See  pp.  431-454. 


Chap.  XXXVI.  ] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


29 


of  cotton.  Some  not  burned  was  brought  away  by  the  gunboats.  Much 
of  their  beef,  bacon,  and  poultry  was  consumed  by  our  troops  and  dis- 
tributed among  the  negroes.  A scow  loaded  with  bacon  for  the  enemy 
was  destroyed,  and  probably  200,000  bushels  of  corn,  in  the  crib,  was 
burned  up.  Several  hundred  negroes  also  returned  with  the  troops. 

The  recent  expedition  of  General  Steele  to  the  neighborhood  of  Eoll- 
ing  Fork  shows  that  the  enemy  are  still  holding  that  position.  He  also 
destroyed  several  hundred  thousand  bushels  of  corn,  and  brought  off 
about  1,000  head  of  stock  and  a number  of  the  laboring  class. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

U.  S.  GKAET, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

MilUlien’s  Bend^  La.^  April  12,  1803. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief]  Washington,  D.  G. : 

General  : There  is  nothing  in  the  way  now  of  my  throwing  troops 
into  Grand  Gulf  and  destroying  the  works  there,  then  sending  them 
on  to  Port  Hudson,  to  co-operate  with  General  Banks  in  the  reduction 
of  that  place,  but  the  danger  of  overflowing  the  road  from  here  to  New 
Carthage  when  the  water  is  let  into  the  new  canal  connecting  the  river 
here  with  the  bayous  coming  out  at  Carthage.  One  division  of  trooi)s 
is  now  at  Carthage  and  another  on  the  way.  By  turning  in  the  water 
to  the  canal,  water  communication  can  be  opened  between  the  two 
places  in  a very  few  days  for  barges  and  tugs.  Of  the  former  I L'uve 
but  fifteen  as  yet,  and  of  the  latter  but  three  suitable  for  this  navigation. 
To  use  this  route,  therefore,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  keep  open  the 
wagon  road  to  take  over  artillery  and  to  march  the  troops. 

In  about  three  nights  from  this  time  Admiral  Porter  will  run  the 
Vicksburg  batteries  with  such  of  his  fleet  as  he  desires  to  take  below, 
and  I will  send  four  steamers,  the  machinery  protected  from  shot  by  hay- 
bales  and  sand-bags,  to  be  used  in  transporting  troops  and  in  towing 
barges. 

The  wagon  road,  by  filling  uji  the  lowest  ground  (this  work  must  now 
be  nearly  completed),  will  be  about  20  inches  above  the  water  in  the 
swamps.  The  river,  where  it  is  to  be  let  into  the  canal,  is  4.09  feet 
above  the  land.  This,  however,  is  15  miles,  by  the  river,  below  where 
the  dirt  road  starts  out.  Had  I seen  nothing  of  the  effect  of  crevasses 
upon  the  back  country,  I should  not  doiibt  the  effect  would  be  to  over- 
flow the  whole  country  through  which  we  passj  but  there  has  been  a 
large  crevasse  just  below  where  this  canal  leaves  the  river  for  a long 
time,  through  which  the  water  has  been  pouring  in  great  volume.  1 
cannot  see  that  this  additional  crevasse  is  going  to  have  much  other 
effect  than  to  increase  the  breaks  in  the  bayou  levees,  so  as  to  make  the 
discharge  equal  to  the  supply.  I will  have  a map  of  this  section  made 
to  send  you  by  next  mail,  which  will  make  this  more  intelligible. 

The  embarrassments  I have  had  to  contend  against  on  account  of  ex- 
treme high  water  cannot  be  appreciated  by  any  one  not  i)resent  to  wit- 
ness it.  I think,  however,  that  you  will  receive  favorable  reports  of 
the  condition  and  feeling  of  this  army  from  every  impartial  judge  and 
I’rom  all  who  have  been  sent  from  Washington  to  look  after  its  welfare. 
I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

U.  S.  GPANT, 

Major- General. 


30 


MISSISSIPPIj  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CHAr.  XXXYI. 


Memphis,  Tenn.,  17,  18C3. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  H allege, 

General-in-  Chief : 

Seven  gunboats  and  three  transports  ran  the  Vicksburg  batteries  last 
night.  The  crew  of  the  steamer  Henry  Olay,  excepting  the  pilot,  de- 
serted soon  after  getting  under  fire.  The  boat  took  fire  and  burned  up. 
One  other  transport  slightly  damaged.  One  man  killed  and  3 wounded 
on  the  Henton.  Ko  further  casualties  reported.  A number  of  barges 
were  also  sent. 

U.  S.  GEANT, 

Major- General. 

Forwarded  from  Memiihis  and  sent  by  steamer  to  Cairo.  The  seces- 
sionists here  report  Vicksburg  abandoned. 

S.  A.  HURLBUT, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Millihen^s  Bend^  La.,  April  19,  1863. 

General  H.  W.  H allege, 

Washington,  JD.  C.: 

General  : I returned  last  night  from  Kew  Carthage,  at  and  near 
which  place* Admiral  Porter’s  fleet  is  lying  (six  iron-clads  and  the  ram 
General  Price),  together  with  two  divisions  of  General  McClernand’s 
corps.  The  whole  of  his  corps  is  between  Richmond  and  New  Carthage. 

I had  all  the  empty  barges  here  prepared  for  the  transportation  of 
troops  and  artillery,  and  sent  ten  of  them  by  the  Vicksburg  batteries 
with  the  fleet.  While  uoder  the  guns  of  the  enemy’s  batteries  they 
were  cut  loose,  and  I fear  that  some  of  them  have  been  permitted  to  run 
past  New  Carthage  undiscovered.  They  were  relied  upon  to  aid  in  the 
transportation  of  troops  to  take  Grand  Gulf. 

The  wagon  road  from  here  to  within  2 miles  of  New  Carthage  is  good 
for  artillery.  From  that  iioint  on  the  bayou,  levee  is  broken  in  a number 
of  places,  making  cross  currents  in  the  bajmu;  hence  it  is  ditficnlt  to 
navigate  with  barges.  I think,  however,  steamers  will  be  able  to  run 
from  where  the  wagon  road  ends  to  the  river.  By  clearing  out  the 
bayous  from  timber,  there  will  be  good  navigation  from  here  to  New 
Carthage  for  tags  and  barges,  also  small  stern-wheel  steamers.  This 
navigation  can  be  kept  good,  1 think,  by  using  our  dredges  constantly, 
until  there  is  20  feet  fall.  On  this  subject,  however,  I have  not  taken 
the  opinion  of  an  engineer  officer,  nor  have  I formed  it  upon  sufficient 
investigation  to  warrant  me  in  speaking  positively. 

Our  exi)eriment  of  running  the  batteries  at  Vicksburg,  1 think,  has 
demonstrated  the  entire  practicability  of  doing  so  with  but  little  risk. 
On  this  occasion  our  vessels  went  down  even  slower  than  the  current, 
using  their  wheels  principally  for  backing.  Two  of  the  steamers  were 
drawn  into  the  eddy,  and  ran  over  a part  of  the  distance  in  front  of 
Vicksburg  three  times.  I shall  send  six  more  steamers  by  the  batteries 
as  soon  as  they  can  possibly  be  got  ready. 

1 sent  a dispatch  to  General  Banks  that  I thought  1 could  send  an 
army  corps  to  Bayou  Sara  to  co-operate  with  him  on  Port  Hudson  by 
the  23th.  This  will  now  bo  impossible.  There  shall  be  no  unnecessary 
delay,  however,  in  my  movements.  1 hope  very  soon  to  bo  able  to  re- 
])ort()nr  |)ossession  of  Grand  Gulf,  with  a ])racticable  and  safe  route  to 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENEEAL  REPORTS. 


31 


furnish  supplies  to  the  troops.  Once  there,  I do  not  feel  a doubt  of 
success  in  the  entire  cleaning*  out  of  the  enemy  from  the  banks  of  the 
river. 

At  least  three  of  my  army  corps  commanders  take  hold  of  the  new 
policy  of  arming  the  negroes  and  using  them  against  the  enemy  with  a 
will.  They,  at  least,  are  so  much  of  soldiers  as  to  feel  themselves  under 
obligation  to  carry  out  a policy  which  they  would  not  inaugurate  in  the 
same  good  faith  and  with  the  same  zeal  as  if  it  was  of  their  own  choos- 
ing. You  may  rely  on  me  carrying  out  any  policy  ordered  by  proper 
authority  to  the  best  of  my  ability.  * 

U.  S.  GEANT, 

Major-General. 


Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  April  21,  1863, 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  April  24. 

Maj.  Gen.  If.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief: 

I move  my  headquarters  to  JS;ew  Carthage  to-morrow.  Every  effort 
will  be  exerted  to  get  speedy  possession  of  Grand  Gulf,  and  from  that 
point  to  open  the  Mississippi.  If  I do  not  underestimate  the  enemy,  my 
force  is  abundant,  with  a foothold  once  obtained,  to  do  the  work.  Six 
transports  will  run  the  Vicksburg  batteries  to-night. 

U.  S.  GEANT, 

Major-  General. 


Young’s  Point,  La.,  April  23,  1863, 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  April  25 — 1 p.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief: 

Six  boats  and  a number  of  barges  ran  the  Vicksburg  batteries  last 
night.  All  the  boats  got  by  more  or  less  damaged.  The  Tigress  sunk 
at  3 a.  m.,  and  is  a total  loss.  Crew  all  safe.  The  Moderator  was  much 
damaged.  I think  all  the  barges  went  through  safely.  Col.  C.  B.  Lagow, 
of  my  staff,  was  on  the  Tigress,  in  command  of  the  fleet.  Casualties,  so 
far  as  reported,  2 men  mortally  wounded,  and  several  (number  not 
known)  wounded,  more  or  less  severely.  About  fl v^e  hundred  shots  were 
fired.  1 look  upon  this  as  a great  success.  At  the  Warreuton  batteries 
there  was  heavy  firing,  but  all  the  boats  were  seen  to  go  past.  ^Vhat 
damage  done  there  is  not  known. 

U.  S.  GEANT, 

Major-  General. 


Near  Grand  Gulf,  Miss.,  April  27,  1863, 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  May  2 — 9 p.  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in- Chief : 

Moving  troops  from  Smith’s  plantation  has  been  a tedious  operation  ; 
more  so  than  it  should  have  been.  I am  now  embarking  troops  for  the 
attack  on  Grand  Gulf.  Expect  to  reduce  it  to-morrow. 

U.  S.  GEANT. 

* ,Sco  ffalleck  to  Grant,  Marcli  tU,  J’art  HI,  p.  THG. 


32 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CHAr.  NXXVI. 


Near  Grand  Gulf,  Miss.,  April  29, 1803, 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  May  4—9  p.  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  IJ.  W.  Halleck, 

General- in-  Chief: 

The  gunboats  engaged  Grand  Gulf  batteries  from  8 a.  in.  until  1 p.  m., 
and  from  dusk  until  10  p.  m.  The  army  and  transports  are  now  below 
Grand  Gulf.  A landing  will  be  effected  on  the  east  bank  of  the  river 
to-morrow.  I feel  that  the  battle  is  now  more  than  half  won. 

• U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Grand  Gulf  Mws.,  May  3,  1803. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief  Washington.,  D.  C. : 

General  : On  April  29,  Admiral  Porter  attacked  the  fortifications 
at  this  place  with  seven  iron-clads,  commencing  at  8 a.  m.,  and  con- 
tinued until  1.30  p.  m.,  engaging  them  at  very  close  quarters,  many 
times  not  being  more  than  lOO  yards  from  the  enemy’s  guns.  During 
this  time  I had  about  10,000  troops  on  board  transports  and  in  barges 
alongside,  ready  to  land  them  and  carry  the  place  by  storm  the  moment 
the  batteries  bearing  on  the  river  were  silenced,  so  as  to  make  the 
landing  xiracticable.  From  the  great  elevation  the  enemy’s  batteries 
had,  it  proved  entirely  impracticable  to  silence  them  from  the  river, 
and  when  the  gunboats  were  drawn  off,  I immediately  decided  upon 
landing  my  forces  on  the  Louisiana  shore  and  march  them  across  the 
point  to  below  the  Gulf.  At  night  the  gunboats  made  another  vigorous 
attack,  and  in  the  din  the  transports  safely  ran  the  blockade. 

On  the  following  day  the  whole  of  the  force  with  me  was  transferred 
to  Bruinsburg,  the  first  point  of  land  below  Grand  Gulf  from  which  the 
interior  can  be  reached,  and  the  march  immediately  commenced  for 
Port  Gibson.  General  McOlernand  was  in  the  advance,  with  the  Thir- 
teenth Army  Corps. 

At  about  2 a.  m..  May  1,  when  some  4 miles  from  Port  Gibson,  he  met 
the  enemy,  and  some  little  skirmishing  took  place  before  daylight,  but 
not  to  any  great  extent. 

The  Thirteenth  Army  Corj^s  was  followed  by  Logan’s  division,  of 
McPherson’s  corps,  which  reached  the  scene  of  action  as  soon  as  the  last 
of  the  Thirteenth  was  out  of  the  road.  Tlie  fighting  continued  all  day, 
and  until  after  dark,  over  the  most  broken  country  I ever  saw.  The 
whole  country  is  a series  of  irregular  ridges,  divided  by  deep  and  im- 
])assable  ravines,  grown  up  with  heavy  timber,  undergrowth,  and  cane. 
It  was  impossible  to  engage  any  considerable  portion  of  our  forces  at 
any  one  time.  The  enemy  were  driven,  however,  from  point  to  point, 
toward  Port  Gibson,  until  night  closed  in,  under  which,  it  was  evident 
to  me,  they  intended  to  retreat.  The  pursuit  was  continued  after  dark 
until  the  enemy  was  again  met  by  Logan’s  division  about  2 miles  from 
Port  Gibson.  The  nature  of  the  country  is  such  that  further  pursuit 
in  the  dark  was  not  deemed  i)rudent  or  advisable. 

On  the  2d,  our  troo^is  moved  into  the  town  without  finding  any  enemy 
except  their  wounded.  The  bridge  across  Bayou  Pierre,  about  2 miles 
from  Port  Gibson,  on  the  Grand  Gulf  road,  iiad  been  destroyed,  and 
also  the  bridge  immediately  at  Port  Gibson,  on  the  Vicksburg  road. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


33 


The  enemy  retreated  over  both  these  routes,  leaving  a battery  and 
several  regiments  of  infantry  at  the  former  to  prevent  a reconstruction 
of  the  bridge. 

One  brigade  under  General  Stevenson  was  detached  to  drive  the 
enemy  from  this  position,  or  occupy  his  attention,  and  a heavy  detail 
set  to  work  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Wilson  and  Captain  Tresilian,  to 
reconstruct  the  bridge  over  the  others.  This  work  was  accomplished; 
a bridge  and  roadway  over  120  feet  long  made,  and  the  whole  of  Mc- 
Pherson’s two  divisions  inarched  over  before  night.  This  corps  then 
marched  8 miles  to  North  Fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  rebuilt  a bridge  over 
that  stream,  and  was  on  the  march  by  5.30  this  a.  m.  Soon  after  cross- 
ing the  bayou,  our  troops  were  opened  on  by  the  artillery  of  the  enemy. 
It  was  soon  demonstrated  that  this  was  only  intended  to  cover  the  re- 
treat of  the  main  army.  On  arriving  at  Willow  Springs,  General  Mc- 
Pherson was  directed  to  hold  the  position  from  there  on  to  the  Big  Black 
with  one  division,  and  General  McClernand  on  his  arrival  to  join  him 
in  this  duty. 

I immediately  started  for  this  place  with  one  brigade  of  Logan’s  divis- 
ion and  some  20  cavalrymen.  The  brigade  of  infantry  was  left  about 
7 miles  from  here,  contrabands  and  prisoners  taken  having  stated  that 
the  last  of  the  retreating  enemy  had  passed  that  point. 

The  woods  between  here  and  the  crossing  of  the  Big  Black  are  evi- 
dently filled  yet  with  detachments  of  the  enemy  and  some  of  the  artil- 
lery. I am  in  hopes  many  of  them  will  be  picked  up  by  our  forces. 

Our  loss  will  not  exceed  150  killed  and  500  wounded.*  The  enemy’s 
loss  is  probably  about  the  same.  We  have,  however,  some  500  of  their 
men  prisoners,  and  may  yet  pick  up  many  more.  Many  stragglers, 
particularly  from  the  JMissouri  troops,  no  doubt  have  fallen  out  and 
will  never  join  their  regiments  again. 

The  move  by  Bruinsburg  undoubtedly  took  the  enemy  much  by  sur- 
prise. General  [John  S.]  Bowen’s  (the  rebel  commander)  defense  was 
a very  bold  one  and  well  carried  out.  My  force,  however,  was  too  heavy 
for  his,  and  composed  of  well  disciplined  and  hardy  men,  w'ho  know  no 
defeat,  and  are  not  willing  to  learn  what  it  is. 

This  army  is  in  the  finest  health  and  spirits.  Since  leaving  Milliken’s 
Bend  they  have  marched  as  much  by  night  as  by  day,  through  mud  and 
rain,  without  tents  or  much  other  baggage,  and  on  irregular  rations, 
without  a complaint,  and  with  less  straggling  than  I have  ever  before 
witnessed. 

Where  all  have  done  so  nobly  it  would  be  out  of  place  to  make  in- 
vidious distinction. 

The  country  will  supply  all  the  forage  required  for  anything  like  an 
active  camiiaign,  and  the  necessary  fresh  beef.  Other  supplies  will  have 
to  be  drawn  from  Milliken’s  Bend.  This  is  a long  and  precarious  route, 
but  I have  every  confidence  in  succeeding  in  doing  it. 

I shall  not  bring  my  troops  into  this  place,  but  immediately  follow  the 
enemy,  and,  if  all  promises  as  favorable  hereafter  as  it  does  now,  not 
stop  until  Vicksburg  is  in  our  possession. 

Admiral  Porter  left  here  this  morning  for  the  mouth  of  Eed  Eiver. 
A letter  from  Admiral  Farragut  says  that  Banks  has  defeated  Taylor 
and  captured  about  2,0()()  prisoners. 

Colonel  Grierson’s  raid  from  La  Grange  through  Mississippi  has  been 
the  most  successful  thing  of  the  kind  since  the  breaking  out  of  the 
rebellion.  He  was  5 miles  south  of  Pontotoc  on  April  B).  Tlie  next 

* But  see  revised  staterneut,  p.  582. 

3 B R — VOL  XXIY,  PT  I 


34  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chav.  XXXVI. 

place  he  turned  up  was  at  Newton,  about  30  miles  east  of  Jackson. 
From  there  he  has  gone  south,  touching  at  Hazlehurst,  Byhalia,  and 
various  other  places.  The  Southern  papers  and  Southoin  i^eople  re- 
gard it  as  one  of  the  most  daring  exploits  of  the  war.  1 am  told  the 
whole  State  is  filled  with  men  paroled  by  Grierson. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

U.  S.  GEANT, 

Major- General. 


Grand  Gulp,  Miss.,  May  3,  1863. 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  May  7. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief: 

We  landed  at  Bruinsburg  April  30.  Moved  immediately  on  Port 
Gibson.  Met  the  enemy  (11,000  strong)  4 miles  south  of  Port  Gibson 
at  2 a.  m.  on  the  1st,  and  engaged  him  all  day,  entirely  routing  him, 
with  the  loss  of  many  killed  and  about  500  prisoners,  besides  the 
wounded.  Our  loss  about  100  killed  and  500  wounded.  The  enemy 
retreated  toward  Vicksburg,  destroying  the  bridges  over  the  two  forks 
of  Bayou  Pierre.  These  were  rebuilt,  and  pursuit  continued  until  the 
present  time.  Besides  the  heavy  artillery  at  this  place,  four  field 
pieces  were  captured,  some  stores,  and  the  enemy  driven  to  destroy 
many  more.  The  country  is  the  most  broken  and  difficult  to  operate 
in  I ever  saw. 

Our  victory  has  been  most  complete,  and  the  enemy  thoroughly  de- 
moralized. 

Very  respectfully, 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-  General^  Commanding. 


Grand  Gulp,  Miss.,  May  6,  1863. 

Via  Cairo,  III.,  May  8. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief: 

I learn  that  Colonel  Grierson,  with  his  cavalry,  has  been  heard  of ; 
first  about  ten  days  ago,  in  Northern  Mississippi.  He  moved  thence  and 
struck  the  railroad  30  miles  east  of  Jackson,  at  a point  called  Newtoffis 
Station.  He  then  moved  southward  toward  Enterprise,  demanded  the 
surrender  of  the  place,  and  gave  one  hour’s  grace,  during  which  Gen- 
eral Boring  arrived.  He  left  at  once,  and  moved  toward  Hazlehurst, 
on  the  New  Orleans  and  Jackson  Railroad.  At  this  point  he  tore  up 
the  track  ; thence  to  Byhalia,  10  miles  farther  south  on  the  same  road ; 
thence  eastward  on  the  Natchez  road,  where  he  bad  a fight  with  Wirt 
Adams’  cavalry.  From  this  point  he  moved  back,  to  the  New  Or- 
leans and  Jackson  Railroad,  to  Brookhaven,  10  miles  south  of  Byhalia. 
When  last  heard  from,  he  was  3 miles  from  Summit,  10  miles  south  of 
the  last-named  point,  supposed  to  be  making  his  way  to  Baton  Rouge. 
He  liad  spread  excitement  throughout  the  State,  destroying  railroads, 
trestle-works,  bridges,  burning  locomotives  and  railway  stock,  taking 
l)risoners,  and  destroying  stores  of  all  kinds.  To  use  the  expression  of 
my  informant,  “Grierson  ha^  knocked  the  heart  out  of  the  State.” 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-  General,  Commanding. 


Chap.  XXXVI. J 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


35 


Ueadquarters  in  the  Field,  May  G,  18G3, 

Via  Memppiis,  Tenn.,  May  12. 

Miy.  Geii.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief : 

Ferrying  and  transportation  of  rations  to  Grand  Gulf  is  detaining  us 
on  the  Big  Black  Fiver.  I will  move  as  soon  as  three  days’  rations  are 
received,  and  send  wagons  back  to  the  Gulf  for  more  to  follow.  Infor- 
mation from  the  other  side  leads  me  to  believe  the  enemy  are  bringing 
forces  from  Tullahoma.  Should  not  General  Eosecrans  at  least  make 
a demonstration  of  advancing  ? 

U.  S.  GEANT, 

Major- General, 

General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Tennessee, 

No.  32.  ( In  Field,,  HanMnson’s  Ferry,,  Miss,,,  May  7, 1863. 

Soldiers  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee  ! Once  more  I thank  you  for 
adding  another  victory  to  the  long  list  of  those  previously  won  by  your 
valor  and  endurance.  The  triumph  gained  over  the  enemy  near  Port 
Gibson,  on  the  1st  instant,  is  one  of  the  most  important  of  the  war. 
The  capture  of  five  cannon  and  more  than  1,000  prisoners,  the  posses- 
sion of  Grand  Gulf,  and  a firm  foothold  upon  the  highlands  between 
the  Big  Black  and  Bayou  Pierre,  from  whence  we  threaten  the  whole 
line  of  the  enemy,  are  among  the  fruits  of  this  brilliant  achievement. 
The  march  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  a point  opposite  Grand  Gulf  was 
made  in  stormy  weather,  over  the  worst  of  roads;  bridges  and  ferries 
bad  to  be  constructed ; moving  by  night  as  well  as  by  day,  with  labors 
incessant  and  extraordinary,  privations  have  been  endured  by  men  and 
officers  as  have  rarely  been  paralleled  in  any  campaign.  Not  a mur- 
mur nor  a complaint  has  been  uttered.  A few  days’  continuance  of  the 
same  zeal  and  constancy  will  secure  to  this  army  the  crowning  victory 
over  the  rebellion.  More  difficulties  and  privations  are  before  us.  Let 
us  endure  them  manfully.  Other  battles  are  to  be  fought.  Let  us  fight 
them  bravely.  A grateful  country  will  rejoice  at  our  success,  and  his- 
tory will  record  it  with  immortal  honor. 

JJ.  S.  GEANT, 
Major-General,  Commanding, 

Eocky  Springs,  Miss.,  May  8,  1863, 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  May  12 — 4.30  p.  m. 

MaJ.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief: 

Our  advance  is  15  miles  from  Edwards  Station,  on  Southern  Eail- 
road.  All  looks  well.  Port  Hudson  is  undoubtedly  evacuated,  except 
by  a small  garrison  and  their  heavy  artillery. 

U.  S.  GEANT, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 

Cayuga,  Miss.,  May  11,  1863, 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  May  18. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief; 

My  forces  will  be  this  evening  as  far  advanced  toward  »Tackson  as 
Fourteen-Mile  Cieek— the  left  near  Big  Black  Eiver,  and  extending  in 
a line  nearly  east  and  west — as  they  can  get  without  bringing  on  a 
general  engagement. 


36  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 

As  I sluill  cominiinicate  with  Graad  Gulf  no  more,  except  it  becomes 
necessary  to  send  a train  with  heavy  escort,  you  may  not  hear  from  me 
again  for  several  days. 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-General. 

[Indorsement.] 

Above  message  was  delayed  in  coming  up  the  river  to  Memphis. 

THOS.  T.  ECKERT. 

War  Department, 
Washington.,  May  11,  18G3 — 11  a.  m. 

Major-General  Grant,  via  Memphis,  Tenn. : 

If  possible,  the  forces  of  yourself  and  of  General  Banks  should  be 
united  between  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson,  so  as  to  attack  these 
places  separately  with  the  combined  forces.  The  same  thing  has  been 
urged  upon  General  Banks. 

General  Hooker  recrossed  to  the  north  of  the  Rappahannock,  but  he 
inflicted  a greater  loss  upon  the  enemy  than  he  received  himselt. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


Raymond,  Miss.,  May  14,  1863 — 12.10  p.  m.. 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  May  — , 11  a.  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief : 

McPherson  took  this  place  on  the  12th,  after  a brisk  fight  of  more 
than  two  hours.  Our  loss,  51  killed  and  180  wounded.*  Enemy^s  loss, 
75  killed,  and  buried  by  us;  and  186  prisoners,  besides  wounded.  Mc- 
Pherson is  now  at  Clinton ; Sherman  on  the  direct  Jackson  road,  and 
General  McOlernand  bringing  up  the  rear.  I will  attack  the  State 
capital  to-day. 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-General. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  May  15, 1863, 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  ilfay  20—0.30  a.  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief : 

This  place  fell  into  our  hands  yesterday,  after  a fight  of  about  three 
hours.  Joe  Johnston  was  in  command.  The  enemy  retreated  north, 
evidently  with  the  design  of  joining  the  Vicksburg  forces.  I am  con- 
centrating my  forces  at  Bolton,  to  cut  them  off,  if  possible.  A dispatch 
from  General  Banks  showed  him  to  be  off*  in  Louisiana,  not  to  return 
to  Baton  Rouge  until  May  10.  I could  not  lose  the  time.  I have 
taken  many  prisoners  from  Port  Hudson,  who  state  that  but  one  brigade 
was  left  there.  Port  Hudson  will  be  evacuated  on  the  appearance  of  a 
force  in  the  rear.  I sent  a special  messenger  to  General  Banks,  giving 
him  the  substance  of  the  information  I had,  and  asking  him  to  join  me 
as  soon  as  possible.  This  message  was  sent  on  the  lOih. 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-General. 


But  see  revised  statement,  p.  705. 


Cl’AF.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


37 


Near  Vicksburg,  May  22,  1863, 

Via  Memphis,  May  25. 

General  H.  W.  Ualleck, 

Washington^  D.  C.  : 

Vicksburg  is  now  completely  invested.  I have  possession  of  Haynes’ 
Bluff  and  the  Yazoo  ; consequently  have  supplies.  To-day  an  attempt 
was  made  to  carry  the  city  by  assault,  but  was  not  entirely  successful. 
We  hold  possession,  however,  of  two  of  the  enemy’s  forts,  and  have 
skirmishers  close  under  all  of  them.  Our  loss  was  not  severe.  The 
nature  of  the  ground  about  Vicksburg  is  such  that  it  can  only  be  taken 
by  a siege.  It  is  entirely  safe  to  us  in  time,  I would  say  one  week,  if 
the  enemy  do  not  send  a large  army  upon  my  rear.  With  the  railroad 
destroyed  to  beyond  Pearl  Eiver,  I do  not  see  the  hope  that  the  enemy 
can  entertain  of  such  relief. 

I learn  that  Jeff*.  Davis  has  promised  that  if  the  garrison  can  hold  out 
for  fifteen  days  he  will  send  100,000  men,  if  he  has  to  evacuate  Ten- 
nessee to  do  it. 

What  shall  I do  with  the  prisoners  I have? 

JJ.  S.  GEANT, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Near  Viehshurg,  3£iss.,  May  21,  1863. 

*Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-Chief,  Washingto7i,  D.  G. : 

General  : My  troops  are  now  disposed  with  the  right  (Sherman’s 
corps)  resting  on  the  Mississippi,  where  the  bluff*  strikes  the  water,  we 
having  the  first  crest  and  the  upper  of  the  enemy’s  water  batteries. 
McGlernand  is  on  the  left  with  his  corps,  his  right  having  about  one 
brigade  north  of  the  railroad,  the  rest  south  of  it.  One  division  occu- 
pies the  roads  leading  south  and  southeast  from  the  city.  The  position 
is  as  strong  by  nature  as  can  possibly  be  conceived  of,  and  is  well  forti- 
fied. The  garrison  the  enemy  have  to  defend  it  I have  no  means  of 
knowing,  but  their  force  is  variously  estimated  from  10,000  to  20,000. 

I attempted  to  carry  the  place  by  storm  on  the  22d,  but  was  unsuc- 
cessful. Our  troops  were  not  repulsed  from  any  point,  but  simply  failed 
to  enter  the  works  of  the  enemy.  At  several  iioints  they  got  up  to  the 
parapets  of  the  enemy’s  forts,  and  planted  their  flags  on  the  outer  slope 
of  the  embankments,  where  they  still  have  them:  The  assault  was  made 
simultaneously  by  the  three  army  cor])s  at  10  a.  m.  The  loss  on  our 
side  was  not  very  heavy  at  first,  but  receiving  repeated  dis])atches  from 
General  McOlernand,  saying  that  he  was  hard  jmessed  on  his  right  and 
left  and  calling  for  re-enforcements,  1 gave  him  all  of  McPherson’s  corps 
but  four  brigades,  and  caused  Sherman  to  press  the  enemy  on  our  right, 
which  caused  us  to  double  our  losses  for  the  day.  The  whole  loss  for 
the  day  will  probably  reach  1,500  killed  and  wounded. 

General  McOlernand’s  dispatches  misled  me  as  to  the  real  state  of 
facts,  and  caused  much  of  this  loss.  He  is  entirely  unfit  for  the  posi- 
tion of  corps  commander,  both  on  the  march  and  on  the  battle-field. 
Looking  after  his  corps  gives  me  more  labor  and  infinitely  more  uneasi- 
ness than  all  the  remainder  of  my  department. 

The  enemy  are  now  undoubtedly  in  our  grasp.  The  fall  of  Vicksburg 
and  the  capture  of  most  of  the  garrison  can  only  be  a question  of  time. 
1 hear  a great  deal  of  the  enemy  bringing  a large  force  from  the  east  to 


38 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


effect  a raisiiig  of  the  siege.  They  may  attempt  something  of  the  kiml, 
but  I do  uot  see  how  they  can  do  it.  Tlie  railroad  is  effectually  destroyed 
at  Jackson,  so  that  it  will  take  thirty  days  to  repair  it.  This  will  leave 
a march  of  50  miles  over  which  the  enemy  will  have  to  subsist  an  army, 
and  bring  their  ordnance  stores  with  teams.  My  position  is  so  strong 
that  I could  hold  out  for  several  days  against  a vastly  superior  force. 
I do  not  see  how  the  enemy  could  possibly  maintain  a long  attack  under 
these  circumstances.  I will  keep  a close  watch  on  the  enemy,  however. 

There  is  a force  now  at  Calhoun  Station,  about  6 miles  north  of  Canton, 
on  the  Mississippi  Central  Railroad.  This  is  the  force  that  escaped 
from  Jackson,  augmented  by  a few  thousand  men  from  the  coast  cities, 
intended  to  re-enforce  the  latter  place  before  the  attack,  but  failed  to 
reach  in  time. 

In  the  various  battles  from  Port  Gibson  to  Big  Black  River  Bridge, 
we  have  taken  nearly  6,000  prisoners,  besides  killed  and  wounded,  and 
scattered  a much  larger  number. 

The  enemy  succeeded  in  returning  to  Vicksburg  with  only  three 
pieces  of  artillery.  The  number  captured  by  us  was  seventy-four  guns, 
besides  what  was  found  at  Haynes^  Bluff*. 

From  Jackson  to  this  place  I have  had  no  opportunity  for  communi- 
cating with  you.  Since  that,  this  army  fought  a heavy  battle  near 
Baker’s  Creek,  on  the  16th,  beating  the  enemy  badly,  killing  and  cap- 
turing not  less  than  4,000  of  the  enemy,  besides  capturing  most  of  his 
artillery.  Boring’s  division  was  cut  off*  from  retreat,  and  dispersed  in 
every  direction. 

On  the  17th,  the  battle  of  Big  Black  River  Bridge  was  fought,  the 
enemy  again  losing  about  2,000  prisoners,  seventeen  pieces  of  artillery, 
and  many  killed  and  wounded.  The  bridges  and  ferries  were  destroyed. 
The  march  from  Edwards  Station  to  Big  Black  River  Bridge  was  made, 
bridges  for  crossing  the  army  constructed,  and  much  of  it  over  in  twenty- 
four  hours. 

On  the  19th,  the  march  to  this  place  was  made  and  the  city  invested. 

When  I crossed  the  Mississippi  River,  the  means  of  ferriage  was  so 
limited,  and  time  so  important,  that  I started  without  teams  and  an 
average  of  but  two  days’  rations  in  haversacks.  Our  supplies  had  to 
be  hauled  about  60  miles,  from  Millikeu’s  Bend  to  opposite  Grand  Gulf, 
and  from  there  to  wherever  the  army  marched.  We  picked  up  all  the 
teams  in  the  country  and  free  Africans  to  drive  them.  Forage  and  meat 
were  found  in  great  abundance  through  the  country,  so  that,  although 
not  over  five  days’  rations  were  issued  in  twenty  days,  yet  there  was 
neither  suff*ering  nor  complaint  witnessed  in  the  army. 

As  soon  as  reports  can  be  got  from  corps  commanders,  I will  send  in 
a report,  embracing  the  campaign  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  the  invest- 
ment, if  not  the  capture,  of  Vicksburg. 

When  I crossed  the  Mississipi)i  River,  it  was  my  intention  to  detach 
an  army  corps,  or  the  necessary  force,  to  co-operate  with  General  Banks 
to  secure  the  reduction  of  Port  Hudson  and  the  union  of  the  two  armies, 
but  I received  a letter  from  General  Banks,  stating  that  he  was  in 
Louisiana,  and  would  return  to  Baton  Rouge  by  May  10.  By  the  re- 
duction of  Port  Hudson  he  could  add  only  12,000  to  my  force.  I had 
certain  information  that  General  Joe  Johnstou  was  on  his  way  to  Jack- 
son,  and  that  re-enforcements  were  arriving  there  constantly  from  Port 
Hudson  and  the  Southern  cities.  Under  this  state  of  facts,  I could  not 
afford  to  delay.  Beating  the  enemy  to  near  Port  Gibson,  I followed 
him  to  Hankinson’s  Ferry,  on  the  Big  Black  River.  This  ])laced  my 
forces  15  miles  on  their  way  from  Grand  Gulf  to  this  place,  Big  Black 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


39 


River  Bridge,  or  Jackson,  whichever  I might  turn  my  attention  to. 
Altogether,  I am  satisfied  that  my  course  was  right,  and  has  given  us 
with  comparative  ease  what  would  have  cost  serious  battles  by  delay. 
This  army  is  in  the  finest  possible  health  and  spirits. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,' 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major- General. 

Near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  25, 1863. 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  May  29. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief : 

There  is  evidence  of  a force  collecting  near  Big  Black  River,  north- 
east of  here  about  30  miles.  1 have  ordered  all  the  force  that  can  be 
spared  from  West  Tennessee,  and  communicated  with  General  Banks, 
asking  him  to  come  with  all  the  force  he  can.  I can  manage  the  force 
in  Vicksburg  and  an  attacking  force  on  the  rear  of  30,000,  but  may  have 
more  to  contend  against.  Vicksburg  will  have  to  be  reduced  by  regular 
siege.  My  effective  force  here  is  about  50,000,  and  can  be  increased 
10,000  more  from  my  own  command. 

U.  S.  GRANT, 
Major-General^  Commanding. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Near  Vichsburg,  May  25,  1863. 

Col.  J.  0.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Washington.,  J).  C.: 

Colonel:  Eight  men,  with  200,000  percussion  caps,  were  arrested 
whilst  attempting  to  get  through  our  lines  into  Vicksliurg.  The  in- 
closed cipher  was  found  upon  them.  Having  no  one  with  me  who  has 
the  ingenuity  to  translate  it,  I send  it  to  Washington,  hoping  that  some 
one  there  may  be  able  to  make  it  out.  Should  the  meaning  of  this 
cipher  be  made  out,  I request  that  a copy  be  sent  to  me. 

Very  respectfully, 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-  General. 

[Tnclosnre.] 

Jackson,  May  25, 1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton: 

Mv  X A F V.  U S L X was  VVIJF  LSJPby  the  B R C Y A 
[I  I J 200,000  V E G T.  S TJ  A J.  N E R P.  Z I E'M.  It  will  be  G 
O E C S Z O [Q]  D as  they  N T Y M N X.  Bragg  M J T P H I N 
Z G a Q R [K]  C M KBS  E.  When  it  D Z G J X.  I will  Y O I G. 
AS.  Q H Y.  N 1 T W M do  you  Y T I A M the  I 1 K M.  V F V E 
Y.  How  and  where  is  the  J S Q M L G U G S F T V E.  H B F Y is 
your  R O E E L. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 

[Translations.*] 

Jackson,  May  25,  1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

My was  captured  by  the  picket.  Two  hundred  thousand  caps 

have  been  sent.  It  will  be  increased  as  tliey  arrive.  Bragg  is  sending 


* Tho  key  words  are  “Manchester  Bind’.”  Tlie  first  translation  is  that  of  tlie  War 
Department,  in  18G:J;  the  second  that  of  the  Pn hi ication  Office,  War  Records,  in  1H84. 


40 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chav.  XXXVI. 


a division.  When  it  joins  I will  come  to  you.  Which  do  yon  think  the 
best  route  I How  and  where  is  the  enemy  operating'?  What  is  your 
force  ? 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 
Jackson,  May  25,  1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

My  last  note  was  returned  by  the  hearer.  Two  hundred  thousand 
caps  have  been  sent.  It  will  be  continued,  as  they  arrive.  Bragg  is 
sending  a division.  When  it  comes  I will  move  to  you.  Which  do  you 
think  the  best  route?  How  and  where  is  the  enemy  encamj)edf  What 
is  your  force  ? 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 

Near  Vicksburg,  May  29,  1863. 

Via  Memphis,  May  31. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  Genet ahm- Chief : 

The  enemy  under  Johnston  is  collecting  in  large  force  to  attack  me 
and  rescue  the  garrison  of  Vicksburg.  1 have  had  my  cavalry  and  six 
brigades  of  infantry  out  looking  after  them,  and  they  confirm  the  re- 
port of  a large  force  being  collected  at  Canton.  The  number  is  reported 
to  be  45,000,  but  may  not  be  so  large.  If  Banks  does  not  come  to  my 
assistance,  I must  be  re-enforced  from  elsewhere.  I will  avoid  a.  surprise, 
and  do  the  best  I can  with  all  the  means  at  hand. 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

. Major-General. 

War  Department,  June  2,  1863. 

Major-General  Grant, 

Vichsburg,  via  Memphis : 

Are  you  in  communication  with  General  Banks  ? Is  he  coming  toward 
you  or  going  farther  ohl  Is  there  or  has  there  been  anything  to 
hinder  his  coming  directly  to  you  by  water  from  Alexandria  ? 

A.  LINCOLN. 

• War  Department, 
Washington.,  June  2,  1863 — 12.30  p.  m. 

Major-General  Grant,  Vichshurg,  Miss. : 

Yonrs  of  the  29th  received.  I will  do  all  I can  to  assist  you.  I have 
sent  dispatch  after  dispatch  to  General  Banks  to  join  you.*  AA4iy  he 
does  not  1 cannot  understand.  His  separate  operation  upon  Port  Hud- 
son is  in  direct  violation  of  his  instructions.  If  possible,  send  him  this 
dispatch.  Mv  last  dispatch  from  him  was  May  4. 

H.^  W.  HxVLLECK, 

General-in-  Cli  ief. 


Near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  3,  1863. 

Major-General  Halleck: 

The  ap])roaches  are  gradually  nearing  the  enemy’s  fortifications, 
h^ive  days  more  slionld  ])lant  our  batteries  on  their  parapets.  Johnston 


See  Ilalleck’s  eonespoudence  with  Banks,  Series  I,  Vols.  XV  iiiul  XXVL 


Chai'.  XXXYL] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


41 


is  still  collecting  troops  at  Canton  and  Jackson.  Some  are  coming  over 
the  railroad,  and  all  the  country  is  joining  his  standard.  The  destruc- 
tion of  the  enemj-^s  artillery  and  ordnance  stores  was  so  complete  that 
all  these  must  be  brought  in  from  a distance.  I sent  a large  force  up 
between  the  Yazoo  and  Big  Black  Eivers.  Forage,  beef,  and  bacon 
were  found  in  great  abundance.  The  forage  and  bacon  were  destroyed 
by  our  troops  and  the  stock  brought  to  camp.  1 am  now  i)lacing  all  my 
spare  force  on  the  narrowest  part  of  land  between  the  two  rivers,  about 
45  miles  northeast,  with  the  cavalry  watching  all  the  crossings  of  Big 
Black  Eiver.  We  shell  the  town  a little  every  day,  and  keep  the  enemy 
constantly  on  the  alert.  We  but  seldom  lose  a man  now.  The  best  of 
health  and  spirits  prevail  among  the  troops. 

IT.  S.  GEANT, 

Major-General. 


[June  3,  1863. — For  correspondence  between  Halleck  and  Burnside, 
in  reference  to  re-enforcements  for  Grant,  see  Series  I,  Vol.  XXIII,  Part 
II,  p.  384,] 


Xear  Vicksburg,  June  8,  1863. 

(Eeceived  June  10 — 9.10  p.  m.) 

His  Excellency  Abraham  Lincoln,  President: 

I send  by  mail  letter  from  General  Banks,  of  June  4.  I am  in  com- 
munication with  him.  He  has  Port  Hudson  closely  invested. 

U.  S.  GEAXT, 

Major-General. 


Near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  8,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  II.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief: 

Vicksburg  is  closely"  invested.  I have  a spare  force  of  about  30,000 
men  with  which  to  repel  anything  from  the  rear.  This  includes  all  I 
have  ordered  from  West  Tennessee.  Johnston  is  concentrating  a force 
at  Canton,  and  now  has  a portion  of  it  west  of  Big  Black  Eiver.  My 
troops  have  been  north  as  far  as  Satartia,  and  on  the  ridge  back  of  that 
point  there  is  no  force  yet.  I will  make  a waste  of  all  the  country  I can 
between  the  two  rivers.  I am  fortifying  Haynes’  Bluff,  and  will  defend 
the  line  from  here  to  that  i)oint  at  all  hazards. 

U.  S.  GEANT, 

Major-  General. 


H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 


Near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  8,  1863. 


It  is  reported  that  tlirc'.e  divisions  have  left  Bragg’s  army  to  join 
Johnston.  Breckinridge  is  known  to  huve  arrived. 

U.  S.  GEANT, 

Major-  General. 


42 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX VT. 


Near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  11, 1863, 

Via  Cairo,  III.,  June  10. 

U.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief : 

Ee-enforcements  other  than  from  my  own  command  are  beginning  to 
arrive.  There  is  every  indication  that  they  may  be  required.  The  en- 
emy occupy  Yazoo  City  and  Canton,  with  an  entire  division  of  cavalry 
on  the  ridge  between  the  two  rivers.  I am  fortifying  Haynes’  Eluff,  and 
will  liave  a garrison  there  of  13,000  men,  besides  the  ability  to  throw 
an  equal  amount  more  there  in  case  of  an  attack,  and  still  keep  ui)  the 
investment  of  Vicksburg.  Kirby  Smith  is  showing  signs  of  working  to 
this  side  of  the  river,  either  to  operate  against  General  Banks  or  myself. 
He  may  find  difficulty  in  crossing  the  river,  but  the  great  number  of 
bayous  and  little  lakes  within  a short  distance  of  shore  in  this  region 
afford  such  facilities  for  concealing  boats  that  the  means  of  crossing  an 
army  may  still  be  left  to  the  rebels ; particularly  may  this  be  the  case 
about  Natchez.  I now  fear  trouble  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river, 
between  Lake  Providence  and  Milliken’s  Bend. 

U.  S.  GEANffi, 

Major-General. 


Behind  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  11,  1863, 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  June  14. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  General-in-Chief : 

I have  reliable  information  from  the  entire  interior  of  the  South. 
Johnston  lias  been  re-enforced  by  3,000  troops  from  Mobile  and  other 
])arts  of  Georgia ; by  [J.  P.]  McCown’s  and  Breckinridge’s  divisions 
(9,000  men),  and  4,000  of  Forrest’s  cavalry,  from  Bragg’s  army ; 9,000 
men  from  Charleston,  and  2,200  from  Port  Hudson.  Orders  were  sent 
the  very  day  General  Banks  invested  Port  Hudson,  to  evacuate  it. 
Garrison  there  now  8,000.  Lee's  army  has  not  been  reduced ; Bragg’s 
force  now  46,000  infantry  and  artillery  and  15,000  cavalry.  Everything 
not  required  for  daily  use  has  been  removed  to  Atlanta,  Ga.  His  army 
can  fall  back  to  Bristol  or  Chattanooga  at  a moment’s  notice,  which 
places,  it  is  thought,  he  can  hold,  and  spare  25,000  troops.  Mobile  and 
Savannah  are  now  almost  entirely  without  garrisons,  further  than  men 
to  manage  large  guns.  No  troops  are  left  in  the  interior  to  send  to  any 
place.  All  further  re-enforcements  will  have  to  come  from  one  of  the 
great  armies.  There  are  about  32,000  men  west  of  the  Mississippi,  ex- 
clusive of  the  troops  in  Texas.  Orders  were  sent  them  one  week  ago 
by  Johnston.  The  pur])ort  of  the  order  not  known.  Herron  has  arrived 
here,  and  troops  from  Burnside  looked  for  to-morrow. 

H.  S.  GEANT, 

Major- General. 

War  Department, 
Washington.,  June  12,  1863—11.30  a.  m. 

Major-General  Grant,  Via  Memphis,  Tenn. : 

I ho])e  yon  fully  appreciate  the  im])ortance  of  time  in  the  l eduction 
of  Vicksburg.  The  large  I’e-enforcements  sent  to  you  have  o])ened  IMis- 
souri  and  Kentucky  to  rebel  raids.  The  siege  should  be  ])uslied  night 
and  day  with  all  possible  disi)atch. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 


CIIA1>.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


43 


Near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  18,  1863, 

Via  Cairo,  III.,  June  23. 


Maj.  Gen.  II.  W.  Halleck, 

General-  in-  Chief : 

Everything  progresses  well  here.  Johnston’s  forces  are  at  Yazoo  City, 
Benton,  Brownsville,  and  Clinton.  I am  fortifying  Haynes’  Bluff  to  make 
my  jiosition  certain,  but  believe  I could  go  out  with  force  enough  to 
drive  the  rebels  from  between  the  two  rivers.  Deserters  come  out  daily. 
All  report  rations  short.  We  scarcely  ever  lose  a man  now.  Health 
and  condition  of  troops  most  excellent. 

IJ.  S.  GEANT, 

Major- General,  Commanding. 


Near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  19,  1863, 

Via  Cairo,  III.,  June  23. 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief: 

I have  found  it  necessary  to  relieve  Major-General  McClernand,  par- 
ticularly at  this  time,  for  his  publication  of  a congratulatory  address 
calculated  to  create  dissension  and  ill-feeling  in  the  army.*  I should 
have  relieved  him  long  since  for  general  unfitness  for  his  position. 
Major-General  Ord  is  appointed  to  his  place,  subject  to  the  approval  of 
the  President. 


U.  S.  GEANT, 
Major- General,  Commanding. 


Near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  26,  1863. 

H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

Yesterday  a mine  was  sprung  under  the  enemy’s  most  commanding 
fort,  producing  a crater  sufficient  to  hold  two  regiments  of  infantry. 
Our  men  took  immediate  possession,  and  still  hold  it.  The  fight  for  it 
has  been  incessant,  and  thus  far  we  have  not  been  able  to  establish  bat- 
teries in  the  breach.  Expect  to  succeed.  Joe  Johnston  has  removed 
east  of  the  Big  Black.  His  movements  are  mysterious,  and  may  be  in- 
tended to  cover  a movement  from  his  rear  into  East  or  West  Tennessee, 
or  upon  Banks.  I have  General  Sherman  out  near  his  front  on  the  Big- 
Black  with  a large  force  watching  him.  1 will  use  every  effort  to  learn 
any  move  Johnston  may  make,  and  send  troops  from  here  to  counteract 
any  change  he  may  make,  if  I can. 

U.  S.  GEANT, 

Major- General. 


Near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  27,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

Joe  Johnston  has  postponed  his  attack  until  he  can  receive  10,000 
re-enforcements,  now  on  their  way  from  Bragg’s  army.  They  are  ex- 
pected early  next  week.  I feel  strong  enough  against  this  increas(‘, 

* See  Dana  to  Stanton,  June  19,  p.  102;  McClernaiul  to  Halleck  and  Stanton,  Jnne 
27,  pp.  165,  166. 


44 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chav.  XXXVI. 


and  do  not  despair  of  liaviug  Vicksburg'  before  they  arrive.  This  latter, 
however,  I may  be  disappointed  in.  I may  have  to  abandon  protection 
to  the  leased  plantations  from  here  to  Lake  Providence,  to  resist  a threat 
from  Kirby  Smith’s  troops.  The  location  of  these  leased  plantations  was 
most  unfortunate,  and  against  my  judgment.  I wanted  them  put  north 
of  tlie  White  River. 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-General. 

Near  Vicksburg,  Miss., 

July  4,  1863—10.30  a.  m. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief: 

The  enemy  surrendered  this  morning.  The  only  terms  allowed  is 
their  parole  as  prisoners  of  war.  This  I regarded  as  of  great  advantage 
to  us  at  this  juncture.  It  saves  probably  several  days  in  the  captured 
town  ; leaves  troops  and  transports  ready  for  immediate  service.  Gen- 
eral Sherman,  with  a large  force,  will  face  immediately  on  Johnston  and 
drive  him  from  the  State.  I will  send  troops  to  the  relief  of  General 
Banks,  and  return  the  Ninth  Corps  to  General  Burnside. 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Vicksburg.,  Miss..,  July  6,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
operations  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee,  and  co-operating  forces,  from 
the  date  of  my  assuming  the  immediate  command  of  the  expedition 
against  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  to  the  reduction  of  that  jdace  : 

Prom  the  moment  of  taking  command  in  person,  I became  satisfied 
that  Vicksburg  could  only  be  turned  from  the  south  side,  and,  in  accord- 
ance with  this  conviction,  I prosecuted  the  work  on  the  canal,  which 
had  been  located  by  Brigadier-General  [Thomas]  Williams  across  the 
peninsula  on  the  Louisiana  side  of  the  river,  with  all  vigor,  hoping  to 
make  a channel  which  would  pass  transports  for  moving  the  army  and 
carrying  supplies  to  the  new  base  of  operations  thus  provided.  The 
task  was  much  more  herculean  than  it  at  first  appeared,  and  was  made 
much  more  so  by  the  almost  continuous  rains  that  fell  during  the  whole 
of  the  time  this  work  was  prosecuted.  The  river,  too,  continued  to  rise 
and  made  a large  expenditure  of  labor  necessary  to  keep  the  water  out 
of  our  camps  and  the  canal. 

Finally,  on  March  8,  the  rapid  rise  of  the  river,  and  the  consequent 
great  pressure  upon  the  dam  across  the  canal,  near  the  upper  end,  at 
the  main  Mississippi  levee,  caused  it  to  give  way  and  let  through  the 
low  lands  back  of  our  camps  a torrent  of  water  that  separated  the  north 
and  south  shores  of  the  peninsula  as  effectually  as  if  the  Mississippi 
flowed  between  them.  This  occurred  when  the  enterprise  promised 
success  within  a short  time.  There  was  some  delay  in  trying  to  repair 
damages.  It  was  found,  however,  that  with  the  then  stage  of  water 
some  other  plan  would  have  to  be  adopted  for  getting  below  Vicksburg 
with  trail s])orts. 

Capt.  F.  E.  Prime,  chief  engineer,  and  Col.  G.  G.  Pride,  who  was 
acting  on  my  staff,  prosjiected  a route  through  tlie  bayous  which  run 
from  near  Milliken’s  Bend,  on  the  north,  and  New  Carthage,  on  the 


CHAr.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


45 


south,  througii  Eoundaway  Bayou,  into  the  Tensas  Ei\  er.  Their  report 
of  the  practicability  of  this  route  determined  me  to  commence  work 
upon  it.  Having  three  dredge-boats  at  the  time,  the  work  of  opening 
this  route  was  executed  with  great  rapidity.  One  small  steamer  and  a 
number  of  barges  were  taken  through  the  channel  thus  opened,  but  the 
river  commencing  about  the  middle  of  April  to  fall  rapidly,  and  the 
roads  becoming  passable  between  Milliken^s  Bend  and  New  Carthage, 
made  it  impracticable  and  unnecessary  to  open  water  communication 
between  these  points. 

Soon  after  commencing  the  first  canal  spoken  of,  I caused  a channel 
to  be  cut  from  the  Mississippi  Eiver  into  Lake  Providence ; also  one 
from  the  Mississippi  Eiver  into  Coldwater,  by  way  of  Yazoo  Pass. 

I had  no  great  expectations  of  important  results  from  the  former  of 
tliese,  but  having  more  troops  than  could  be  employed  to  advantage  at 
Young’s  Point,  and  knowing  that  Lake  Provid.ence  was  connected  by 
Bayou  Baxter  with  Bayou  Macon,  a navigable  stream,  through  which 
transports  might  pass  into  the  Mississippi  below,  through  Tensas, 
Washita,  and  Eed  Eivers,  I thought  it  possible  that  a route  might  be 
o])ened  in  that  direction  which  would  enable  me  to  co-operate  with 
General  Banks  on  Port  Hudson. 

By  the  Yazoo  Pass  route  I only  expected  at  first  to  get  into  the. 
Yazoo  by  way  of  Coldwater  and  Tallahatchee  with  some  lighter  gun- 
boats and  a few  troops,  and  destroy  the  enemy’s  transports  in  that 
stream  and  some  gunboats  which  I knew  he  was  building.  The  navi- 
gation, however,  proved  so  much  better  than  had  been  exiiected  that 
1 thought  for  a time  of  the  possibility  of  making  this  the  route  for  ob- 
taining a foothold  on  high  land  above  Haynes’  Bluff,  Miss.,  and  small- 
class  steamers  were  accordingly  ordered  for  transporting  an  army  that 
way. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  McPherson,  commanding  Seventeenth  Army  Corps, 
was  directed  to  hold  his  corps  in  readiness  to  move  by  this  route,  and 
one  division  each  from  the  Thirteenth  and  Fifteenth  Corps  were  collected 
near  the  entrance  of  the  pass,  to  be  added  to  his  command.  It  soon  be- 
came evident  that  a sufficient  number  of  boats  of  the  right  class  could 
not  be  obtained  for  the  movement  of  more  than  one  division. 

While  my  forces  were  opening  one  end  of  the  pass,  the  enemy  was 
diligently  closing  the  other  end,  and  in  this  way  succeeding  in  gaining 
time  to  strongly  fortify  Greenwood,  below  the  junction  of  the  Talla- 
hatchee and  Yalabusha.  The  advance  of  the  expedition,  consisting  of 
one  division  of  McClernand’s  corps,  from  Helena,  commanded  by  Brig. 
Gen.  L.  F.  Eoss,  and  the  Twelfth  and  Seventeenth  Eegiments  Missouri 
Infantry,  from  Sherman’s  corps,  as  sharpshooters  on  the  gunboats, 
succeeded  in  reaching  Coldwater  March  2,  after  much  difficulty  and  the 
partial  disabling  of  most  of  the  boats.  From  the  entrance  into  Cold- 
water  to  Fort  Pemberton,  at  Greenwood,  Miss.,  no  great  difficulty  of 
navigation  was  experienced,  nor  any  interruption  of  magnitude  from 
the  enemy.  Fort  Pemberton  extends  from  the  Tallahatchee  to  the  Yazoo 
at  Greenwood.  Here  the  two  rivers  come  within  a few  hundred  yards 
of  each  other.  The  land  around  the  fort  is  low,  and  at  the  time  of  the 
attack  was  entirely  overflowed.  Owing  to  this  fact,  no  movement  could 
be  made  by  the  army  to  reduce  it,  but  all  depended  upon  the  ability 
of  the  gunboats  to  silence  the  guns  of  the  enemy  and  enable  the  trans- 
ports to  run  down  and  laud  troops  immediately  on  the  fort  itself. 

After  an  engagement  of  several  hours,  the  gunboats  drew  off,  being 
unable  to  silence  the  batteries.  Brig.  Gen.  I.  F.  Quinby,  commanding 
a division  of  McPherson’s  corps,  met  the  expedition  under  Eoss  with 


46 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai’.  XXXVL 


his  division  on  its  return  near  Fort  Pemberton,  on  March  21,  and,  being 
the  senior,  assumed  command  of  the  entire  expedition,  and  returned  to 
the  position  Eoss  had  occupied. 

On  March  23,  I sent  orders  for  the  withdrawal  of  all  the  forces  oper- 
ating in  that  direction,  tor  the  purpose  of  concentrating  my  army  at 
Milliken’s  Bend. 

On  March  14,  Admiral  D.  D.  Porter,  commanding  the  Mississii)pi 
Squadron,  informed  me  that  he  had  made  a reconnaissance  up  Steele’s 
Bayou,  and  partially  through  Black  Bayou  toward  Deer  Creek,  and,  so 
far  as  explored,  these  water  courses  were  reported  navigable  for  the 
smaller  iron-clads. 

Information,  given  mostly,  I believe,  by  the  negroes  of  the  country, 
was  to  the  effect  that  Deer  Creek  could  be  navigated  to  Boiling  Fork, 
and  that  from  there  through  the  Sunflower  to  the  Yazoo  Eiver  there 
was  no  question  about  the  navigation. 

On  the  following  morning  I accompanied  Admiral  Porter  in  the  ram 
Price,  several  iron  clads  preceding  us,  up  through  Steele’s  Bayou  to 
near  Black  Bayou. 

At  this  time  our  forces  were  at  a dead  lock  at  Greenwood,  and  I 
looked  upon  the  success  of  this  enterprise  as  of  vast  importance.  It 
would,  if  successful,  leave  Greenwood  between  two  forces  of  ours,  and 
would  necessarily  cause  the  immediate  abandonment  of  that  strong- 
hold. About  thirty  steamers  of  the  enemy  would  have  been  destroyed 
or  fallen  into  our  hands. 

Seeing  that  the  great  obstacles  to  navigation,  so  far  as  I had  gone, 
was  from  overhanging  trees,  I left  Admiral  Porter  near  Black  Bayou, 
and  pushed  back  to  Young’s  Point,  for  the  purpose  of  sending  forward 
a pioneer  corps  to  remove  these,  difficulties.  Soon  after  my  return  to 
Young’s  Point,  Admiral  Porter  sent  back  to  me  for  a co-operating  mili- 
tary force.  Sherman  was  promptly  sent  with  one  division  of  his  corps. 
The  number  of  steamers  suitable  for  the  navigation  of  these  bayous 
being  limited,  most  of  the  force  was  sent  up  the  Mississippi  Eiver  to 
Eagle  Bend,  a point  where  the  river  runs  within  1 mile  of  Steele’s 
Bayou,  thus  saving  an  important  part  of  this  difficult  navigation. 

The  expedition  failed,  probably  more  from  want  of  knowledge  as  to 
what  would  be  required  to  open  this  route  than  from  any  impractica- 
bility in  the  navigation  of  the  streams  and  bayous  through  which  it  was 
proposed  to  pass.  Want  of  this  knowledge  led  the  expedition  on  until 
difficulties  w^ere  encountered,  and  then  it  would  become  necessary  to 
send  back  to  Young’s  Point  for  the  means  of  removing  them.  This  gave 
the  eneiu}^  time  to  move  forces  to  effectually  checkmate  further  progress, 
and  the  expedition  was  withdrawn  when  within  a few  hundred  yards  of 
free  and  open  navigation  to  the  Yazoo. 

All  this  may  have  been  providential  in  driving  us  ultimately  to  a lino 
of  operations  which  has  proven  eminently  successful. 

For  further  })articulars  of  the  Steele’s  Bayou  expedition,  see  report  of 
Maj.  Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman,  forwarded  on  April  12. 

As  soon  as  I decided  to  open  water  communication  from  a point  on 
the  Mississippi,  near  Milliken’s  Bend,  to  New  Carthage,  I determined 
to  occui)y  the  latter  i)lace,  it  being  the  first  point  below  Vicksburg  that 
could  be  reached  by  land  at  the  stage  of  water  then  existing,  and  the 
occupancy  of  which,  while  it  secured  to  us  a point  on  the  Mississippi 
Eiver,  w'ould  also  ])iotect  the  main  line  of  (jommunication  by  water. 
Accordingly,  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  Maj.  Gen.  3.  A.  iMcClernand 
commanding,  was  directed  to  take  np  its  line  of  march  on  March  29 
for  New  Carthage,  the  Fifteenth  and  Seventeenth  Army  Corps  to  fol- 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


47 


low,  moving  no  faster  than  supplies  and  ammunition  could  l)e  trans- 
ported to  them. 

The  roads,  though  level,  were  intolerably  bad,  and  the  movement  was 
therefore  necessarily  slow.  Arriving  at  Smith’s  plantation,  2 miles 
from  New  Carthage,  it  was  found  that  the  levee  of  Bayou  Vidal  was 
broken  in  several  places,  thus  leaving  New  Carthage  an  island. 

All  the  boats  that  could  be  were  collected  from  the  different  bayous 
in  the  vicinity  and  others  were  built,  but  the  transportation  of  an  army 
in  this  way  was  found  exceedingly  tedious.  Another  route  had  to  be 
found.  This  was  done  by  making  a further  march  around  Vidal  to  Per- 
kins’plantation,  a distance  of  12  miles  more,  making  the  whole  distance 
to  be  marched  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  reach  water  communication  on  the 
opposite  side  of  the  point  35  miles.  Over  this  distance,  with  bad  roads 
to  contend  against,  supplies  of  ordnance  stores  and  provisions  had  to 
be  hauled  by  wagons  with  which  to  commence  the  campaign  on  the  op- 
posite  side  of  the  river.  At  the  same  time  that  I ordered  the  occupa- 
tion of  New  Carthage,  preparations  were  made  for  running  transports 
by  the  Vicksburg  batteries  with  Admiral  Porter’s  gunboat  fleet. 

On  the  night  of  April  16,  Admiral  Porter’s  fleet  and  the  transports 
Silver  Wave,  Forest  Queen,  and  Henry  Olay  ran  the  Vicksburg  batteries. 
The  boilers  of  the  transports  were  protected  as  well  as  possible  with  hay 
and  cotton.  More  or  less  commissary  stores  were  put  on  each . All  three 
of  these  boats  were  struck  more  or  less  frequently  while  passing  the 
enemy’s  batteries,  and  the  Henry  Olay,  by  the  explosion  of  a shell  or  by 
some  other  means,  was  set  on  fire  and  entirely  consumed.  The  other 
two  boats  were  somewhat  injured,  but  not  seriously  disabled.  No  one 
on  board  of  either  was  hurt. 

As  these  boats  succeeded  in  getting  by  so  well,  I ordered  six  more  to 
be  prepared  in  like  manner  for  running  the  batteries.  These  latter,  viz. 
Tigress,  Anglo-Saxon,  Cheeseman,  Empire  City,  Horizon,  and  Moder- 
ator, left  Milliken’s  Bend  on  the  night  of  April  22,  and  live  of  them 
got  hjj  but  in  a somewhat  damaged  condition.  The  Tigress  received  a 
shot  in  her  hull  below  the  water  line,  and  sunk  on  the  Louisiana  shore 
soon  after  passing  the  last  of  the  batteries.  The  crews  of  these  steamers, 
with  the  exception  of  that  of  the  Forest  Queen,  Capt.  C.  D.  Conway,  and 
the  Silver  Wave,  Captain  McMillan,  were  composed  of  volunteers  from 
the  army.  Upon  the  call  for  volunteers  for  this  dangerous  enterprise, 
officers  and  men  presented  themselves  by  hundreds,  anxious  Jbo  under- 
take the  trip.  The  names  of  those  whose  services  were  accepted  will 
be  given  in  a separate  report. 

It  is  a striking  feature,  so  far  as  my  observation  goes,  of  the  present 
volunteer  army  of  the  United  States,  that  there  is  nothing  which  men 
are  called  upon  to  do,  mechanical  or  jirofessional,  that  accomplished 
adepts  cannot  be  found  for  the  duty  required  in  almost  every  regi- 
ment. 

The  transports  injured  in  running  the  blockade  were  repaired  by  order 
of  Admiral  Porter,  who  was  supplied  with  the  material  for  such  repairs 
as  they  required,  and  who  was  and  is  ever  ready  to  afford  all  the  assist- 
ance in  his  power  for  the  furtherance  of  the  success  of  our  arms.  In  a 
very  short  time  five  of  the  transports  were  in  running  order,  and  the 
remainder  were  in  a condition  to  be  used  as  barges  in  the  moving  of 
troops.  Twelve  barges  loaded  with  forage  and  rations  were  sent  in  tow 
of  the  last  six  boats  that  run  the  blockade.  • One-half  of  them  got 
tliiough  in  a condition  to  be  used. 

Owing  to  the  limited  number  of  transports  below  Vicksburg,  it  was 
found  necessary  to  extend  our  line  of  laud  travel  to  Hard  Times,  La,, 


48 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CnAi-.  XXXYI. 


which,  by  the  circiiitons  route  it  was  necessary  to  take,  increased  the 
distance  to  about  70  miles  from  Milliken’s  Beud,  our  starting  point. 

The  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  being  all  through  to  the  Mississi])pi,  and 
the  Seventeenth  Army  Oor{)S  well  on  the  way,  so  much  of  the  Thir- 
teenth as  could  be  got  on  board  of  the  transports  and  barges  were  put 
aboard,  and  moved  to  the  front  of  Grand  Gulf  on  April  29.  The  plan 
here  was  that  the  Navy  should  silence  the  guns  of  the  enemy,  and  the 
troops  landed  under  the  cover  of  the  gunboats,  and  carry  the  i)lace  by 
storm. 

At  8 a.  m.  the  Navy  made  the  attack,  and  kept  it  up  for  more  than 
five  hours  in  the  most  gallant  manner.  From  a tug  out  in  the  stream 
1 witnessed  the  whole  engagement.  Many  times  it  seemed  to  me  the 
gunboats  were  within  jiistol-shot  of  the  enemy’s  batteries.  It  soon  be- 
came evident  that  the  guns  of  the  enemy  were  too  elevated  and  their 
fortifications  too  strong  to  be  taken  from  the  water  side.  The  whole 
range  of  hills  on  that  side  were  known  to  be  lined  with  rifle-pits;  besides, 
the  field  artillery  could  be  moved  to  any  position  where  it  could  be  made 
useful  in  case  of  an  attempt  at  landing.  This  determined  me  again  to 
run  the  enemy’s  batteries,  turn  his  ])osition  by  eflecting  a landing  at 
Bodney,  or  at  Bruinsburg,  between  Grand  Gulf  and  Kodney.  Accord- 
ingly, orders  were  immediately  given  for  the  troops  to  debark  at  Hard 
Times,  La.,  and  march  across  to  the  point  immediately  below  Grand 
Gulf. 

At  dark  the  gunboats  again  engaged  the  batteries,  and  all  the  trans- 
ports run  by,  receiving  but  two  or  three  shots  in  the  passage,  and  these 
without  injury.  I had  some  time  previously  ordered  a reconnaissance 
to  a point  opxiosite  Bruinsburg,  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  from  xiersons 
in  the  neighborhood  the  character  of  the  road  leading  to  the  highlands 
back  of  Bruinsburg.  During  the  night  I learned  from  a negro  man  that 
there  was  a good  road  from  Bruinsburg  to  Port  Gibson,  which  deter- 
mined me  to  land  there. 

The-  work  of  ferrying  the  troops  to  Bruinsburg  was  commenced  at 
daylight  in  the  morning,  the  gunboats  as  well  as  transports  being  used 
for  the  purx)ose. 

As  soon  as  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  was  lauded,  and  could  draw 
three  days’  rations  to  put  in  haversacks  (no  wagons  were  allowed  to 
cross  until  the  troops  were  all  over),  they  were  started  on  the  road  to 
l^ort  Gibson.  I deemed  it  a matter  of  vast  importance  that  the  high- 
lands should  be  reached  witliout  resistance.  The  Seventeenth  Cor[)s 
followed  as  rajiidly  as  it  could  be  put  across  the  river. 

About  2 o’clock,  May  1,  the  advance  of  the  enemy  was  met  8 miles 
from  Bruinsburg,  on  the  road  to  Port  Gibson.  He  was  forced  to  fall 
back,  but,  as  it  was  dark,  he  was  not  pursued  far  until  daylight. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  1st,  I went  out,  accompanied  by  mem- 
bers of  my  staff,  and  found  McClernaud  with  his  corps  engaging  the 
enemy  about!  miles  from  Port  Gibson.  At  thisx)ointthe  roads  branched 
in  exactly  o])posite  directions,  both,  however,  leading  to  Port  Gibson. 
The  enemy  had  taken  i)osition  on  both  branches,  thus  dividing,  as  he 
1‘ell  back,  the  i)ursuiug  forces.  The  nature  of  the  ground  in  that  iiart 
of  the  country  is  such  that  a very  small  force  (;ould  retard  the  progress 
of  a much  larger  one  for  many  hours.  The  roads  usually  run  on  narrow, 
elevated  ridges,  with  deep  and  impenetrable  ravines  on  either  side.  On 
the  right  were  the  divisions  of  Hovey,  Carr,  and  [A.  J.]  Smith,  and  on 
the  left  the  division  of  Osterhaus,  of  McClernand’s  corps.  The  three 
former  succeeded  in  driving  the  enemy  from  position  to  xmsition  back 
toward  Port  Gibson  steadily  all  day. 


CfiAr.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


49 


Osterhaus  did  not,  however,  move  the  enemy  from  the  position  oc- 
cupied by  him  on  our  left  until  Logan’s  division,  of  McPherson’s  corps, 
arrived.  McGlernand,  who  was  with  the  right  in  person,  sent  repeated 
messages  to  me  before  the  arrival  of  Logan  to  send  Logan’s  and  Quinby’s 
divisions,  of  McPherson’s  corps,  to  him. 

I had  been  on  that  as  well  as  all  other  parts  of  the  field,  and  could 
not  see  how  they  could  be  used  there  to  advantage.  However,  as  soon 
as  the  advance  of  McPherson’s  corps  (Logan’s  division)  arrived,  I sent 
one  brigade  to  McGlernand  on  the  right,  and  sent  one  brigade.  Brig. 
Gen.  J.  E.  Smith  commanding,  to  the  left,  to  the  assistance  of  Oster- 
haus. 

By  the  judicious  disposition  made  of  this  brigade,  under  the  imme- 
diate supervision  of  McPherson  and  Logan,  a position  was  soon  ob- 
tained, giving  us  an  advantage  which  soon  drove  the  enemy  from  that 
part  of  the  field,  to  make  no  further  stand  south  of  Bayou  Pierre. 

The  enemy  was  here  repulsed  with  a heavy  loss  in  killed,  wounded, 
and  prisoners.  The  repulse  of  the  enemy  on  our  left  took  place  late  in 
the  afternoon.  He  was  pursued  toward  Port  Gibson,  but  night  closing 
in,  and  the  enemy  making  the  appearance  of  another  stand,  the  troops 
slept  upon  their  arms  until  daylight. 

In  the  morning  it  was  found  that  the  enemy  had  retreated  across 
Bayou  Pierre,  on  the  Grand  Gulf  road,  and  a brigade  of  Logan’s  divis- 
ion was  sent  to  divert  his  attention,  while  a floating  bridge  was  being 
built  across  Bayou  Pierre  immediately  at  Port  Gibson.  This  bridge 
was  completed.  Smiles  marched  by  McPherson’s  corps  to  the  JS^orth  Fork 
of  Bayou  Pierre,  that  stream  bridged,  and  the  advance  of  this  corps  com- 
menced passing  over  it  at  5 o’clock  the  following  morning. 

On  the  3d,  the  enemy  was  pursued  to  Hankinson’s  Ferry,  with  slight 
skirmishing  all  day,  during  which  we  took  quite  a number  of  prisoners, 
mostly  stragglers,  from  the  enemy. 

Finding  that  Grand  Gulf  had  been  evacuated,  and  that  the  advance 
of  my  forces  was  already  15  miles  out  from  there,  and  on  the  road,  too, 
they  would  have  to  take  to  reach  either  Vicksburg,  Jackson,  or  any 
intermediate  point  on  the  railroad  between  the  two  places,  I determined 
not  to  march  them  back ; but  taking  a small  escort  of  cavalry,  some  15 
or  20  men,  I went  to  the  Gulf  myself,  and  made  the  necessary  arrange- 
ments for  changing  my  base  of  supplies  from  Bruinsburg  to  Grand 
Gulf. 

In  moving  from  Milliken’s  Bend,  the  Fifteenth  Army  Gorps,  Maj. 
Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman  commanding,  was  left  to  be  the  last  to  start.  To 
prevent  heavy  re-enforcements  going  from  Vicksburg  to  the  assistance 
of  the  Grand  Gulf  forces,  I directed  Sherman  to  make  a demonstration 
on  Haynes’  Bluff,  and  to  make  all  the  show  possible.  From  informa- 
tion since  received  from  prisoners  captured,  this  ruse  succeeded  admi- 
rably. 

It  had  been  my  intention,  ap  to  the  time  of  crossing  the  Mississippi 
Biver,  to  collect  all  my  forces  at  Grand  Gulf,  and  get  on  hand  a good 
supply  of  provisions  and  ordnance  stores  before  moving,  and  in  the 
mean  time  to  detach  an  army  corps  to  co-operate  with  General  Banks  on 
Port  Hudson,  and  effect  a junction  of  our  forces. 

About  this  time  I received  a letter  from  General  Banks,  giving  his 
position  west  of  the  Mississippi  Kiver,  and  stating  that  he  could  return 
to  Baton  Rouge  by  May  10 ; that  by  the  reduction  of  Port  Hudson  he 
could  join  me  with  12,000  men. 

I learned  about  the  same  time  that  troops  were  expected  at  Jackson 
from  the  Southern  cities,  with  General  Beauregard  in  command.  To 
4 R R — VOL  XXIY,  PT  I 


50  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [CiiAr.  XXXVL 

delay  until  May  10,  and  for  the  reduction  of  Port  Hudson  after  that,  the 
accession  of  12,000  men  would  not  leave  me  relatively  so  strong  as  to 
move  promptly  with  what  I had.  Informalion  received  from  day  to  day 
of  the  movements  of  the  enemy  also  impelled  me  to  the  course  pursued. 

While  lying  at  Hankinson’s  Ferry  waiting  for  wagons,  su])piies,  and 
Sherman’s  corps,  which  had  come  forward  in  the  meantime,  demonstra- 
tions were  made,  successfully,  I believe,  to  induce  the  enemy  to  think 
that  route  and  the  one  by  Hall’s  Ferry,  above,  were  objects  of  much 
solicitude  to  me.  Eeconnaissanccs  were  made  to  the  west  side  of  the 
Big  Black  to  within  6 miles  of  Warrenton. 

On  May  7,  an  advance  was  ordered,  McPherson’s  corps  keeping  the 
road  nearest  Big  Black  Eiver,  to  Eocky  Springs,  McClernand’s  corps 
keeping  the  ridge  road  from  Willow  Springs,  and  Sherman  following 
with  his  corps  divided  on  the  two  roads.  All  the  ferries  were  closely 
guarded  until  our  troops  were  well  advanced.  It  was  my  intention  here 
to  hug  the  Big  Black  Eiver  as  closely  as  possible  with  McClernand’s  and 
Sherman’s  corps,  and  get  them  to  the  railroad  at  some  place  between 
Edwards  Station  and  Bolton.  McPherson  was  to  move  by  wa  j of  Utica 
to  Eaymond,  and  from  there  into  Jackson,  destroying  the  railroad, 
telegraph,  public  stores,  &c.,  and  push  west  to  rejoin  the  main  force. 
Orders  were  given  to  McPherson  accordingly.  Sherman  was  moved 
forward  on  the  Edwards  Station  road,  crossing  Fourteen -Mile  Creek 
at  Dillon^s  plantation  ; McGlernand  was  moved  across  the  same  creek, 
farther  west,  sending  one  division  of  his  corps  by  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry 
road  as  far  as  the  river.  At  the  crossings  of  Fourteen -Mile  Creek  both 
McClernand  and  Sherman  had  considerable  skirmishing  with  the  enemy 
to  get  possession  of  the  crossings. 

McPherson  met  the  enemy  near  Eaymond,  two  brigades  strong,  under 
Gregg  and  Walker,  on  the  same  day  ; engaged  him,  and,  after  several 
hours’  hard  fighting,  drove  him,  with  heavy  loss  in  killed,  wounded,  and 
prisoners.  Many  threw  down  their  arms  and  deserted.  My  position 
at  this  time  was  with  Sherman’s  corps,  some  7 miles  west  of  Eaymond, 
and  about  the  center  of  the  army. 

On  the  night  of  May  12,  after  orders  had  been  given  for  the  corps  of 
McClernand  and  Sherman  to  march  toward  the  railroad  by  parallel  roads, 
the  former  in  the  direction  of  Edwards  Station  and  the  latter  to  a point 
on  the  railroad  between  Edwards  Station  and  Bolton,  the  order  was 
changed,  and  both  were  directed  to  move  toward  Eaymond.  This  was 
in  consequence  of  the  enemy  having  retreated  toward  Jackson  after  his 
defeat  at  Eaymond,  and  of  information  that  re-enforcements  were  daily 
arriving  at  Jackson,  and  that  General  Joe  Johnston  was  hourly  expected 
there  to  take  command  in  person.  I therefore  determined  to  make  sure 
of  that  place  and  leave  no  enemy  in  my  rear. 

McPherson  moved  on  the  13th  to  Clinton,  destroyed  the  railroad  and 
telegraph,  and  captured  some  important  dispatches  from  General  Pem- 
berton to  General  Gregg,  who  had  commanded  the  day  before  in  the 
battle  of  Eaymond.  Sherman  moved  to  a parallel  position  on  the  Mis- 
sissippi Springs  and  Jackson  road.  McClernand  moved  to  a point  near 
Eaymond. 

The  next  day  Sherman  and  McPherson  moved  their  entire  force 
toward  Jackson.  The  rain  fell  in  torrents  all  the  night  before  and  con- 
tinued until  about  noon  of  that  day,  making  the  roads  at  first  slippery 
and  then  miry.  Notwithstanding,  the  troops  marched  in  excellent 
order,  without  straggling  and  in  the  best  of  spirits,  about  14  miles,  and 
engaged  the  enemy  about  12  m.  near  Jackson.  McClernand  occupied 
Clinton  with  one  division.  Mississi})])i  Si)rings  with  another,  Eajmioud 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


51 


with  a third,  and  had  his  fourth  division  and  Blair’s  division,  of  Sher- 
man’s corps,  with  a wagon  train,  still  in  the  rear  near  Kew  Auburn, 
while  McArthur,  with  one  brigade  of  his  division,  of  McPherson’s  corps, 
was  moving  toward  Eaymond  on  the  Utica  road.  It  was  not  the  in- 
tention to  move  these  forces  any  nearer  Jackson,*  but  to  have  them  in 
a position  where  they  would  be  in  supporting  distance  if  the  resistance 
at  Jackson  should  prove  more  obstinate  than  there  seemed  reason  to 
expect. 

The  enemy  marched  out  the  bulk  of  his  force  on  the  Clinton  road, 
and  engaged  McPherson’s  corps  about  miles  from  the  city.  A small 
force  of  artillery  and  infantry  took  a strong  position  in  front  of  Sher- 
man, about  the  same  distance  out.  By  a determined  advance  of  our 
skirmishers,  these  latter  were  soon  driven  within  their  rifle-pits,  just 
outside  the  city.  It  was  impossible  to  ascertain  the  strength  of  the 
enemy  at  this  part  of  the  line  in  time  to  justify  an  immediate  assault; 
consequently  McPherson’s  two  divisions  engaged  the  main  bulk  of  the 
rebel  garrison  at  Jackson  without  further  aid  than  the  moral  support 
given  them  by  the  knowledge  the  enemy  had  of  a force  to  the  south 
side  of  the  city  and  the  few  infantry  and  artillery  of  the  enemy  posted 
there  to  impede  Sherman’s  progress.  Sherman  soon  discovered  the 
weakness  of  the  enemy  by  sending  a reconnoitering  party  to  his  right, 
which  also  had  the  effect  of  causing  the  enemy  to  retreat  from  this  part 
of  his  line.  A few  of  the  artillerists,  however,  remained  in  their  places, 
firing  upon  Sherman’s  troops  until  the  last  moment,  evidently  instructed 
to  do  so,  with  the  expectation  of  being  captured  in  the  end. 

On  entering  the  city  it  was  found  that  the  main  body  of  the  enemy 
had  retreated  north  after  a heavy  engagement  of  more  than  two  hours 
with  McPherson’s  corps,  in  which  he  [the  enemy]  was  badly  beaten. 
He  was  pursued  until  near  night,  but  without  further  damage  to  him. 

During  that  evening  I learned  that  General  Johnston,  as  soon  as  he 
had  satisfied  himself  that  Jackson  was  to  be  attacked,  had  ordered 
Pemberton  peremptorily  to  march  out  from  the  direction  of  Vicksburg 
and  attack  our  rear.  Availing  myself  of  this  information,  I immedi- 
ately issued  orders  to  McOlernand,  and  Blair  of  Sherman’s  corps,  to 
face  their  troops  toward  Bolton,  with  a view  to  reaching  Edwards 
Station,  marching  on  different  roads  converging  near  Bolton.  These 
troops  were  admirably  located  for  such  a move.  McPherson  was 
ordered  to  retrace  his  steps  early  in  the  morning  of  the  15th  on  the 
Clinton  road.  Sherman  was  left  in  Jackson  to  destroy  the  railroads, 
bridges,  factories,  workshops,  arsenals,  and  everything  valuable  for  the 
support  of  the  enemy.  This  was  accomplished  in  the  most  effectual 
manner. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  15th,  I proceeded  as  far  west  as  Clinton, 
through  which  place  McPherson’s  corps  passed  to  within  supporting 
distance  of  Hovey’s  division,  of  McCiernand’s  corps,  which  had  moved 
that  day  on  the  same  road  to  within  miles  of  Bolton. 

On  reaching  Clinton,  at  4.45  p.  m.,  I ordered  McClernand  to  move  his 
command  early  the  next  morning  toward  Edwards  Depot,  marching  so 
as  to  feel  the  enemy  if  he  encountered  him,  but  not  to  bring  on  a gen- 
eral engagement  unless  he  was  confident  he  was  able  to  defeat  him ; and 
also  to  order  Blair  to  move  with  him. 

About  5 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  16th,  two  men,  employes  on 
the  Jackson  and  Vicksburg  Kailroad,  who  had  passed  through  Pember- 
ton’s army  the  night  before,  were  brought  to  my  headquarters.  They 
stated  Pemberton’s  force  to  consist  of  about  eighty  regiments,  with  ten 
batteries  of  artillery,  and  that  the  whole  force  was  estimated  by  the 


52 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAr.  XXXV7. 


enemy  at  about  25,000  men.  From  them  I also  learned  the  positions 
being  taken  up  by  the  enemy,  and  his  intention  of  attacking  our  rear. 
I had  determined  to  leave  one  division  of  Sherman’s  corps  one  day 
longer  in  Jackson,  but  this  information  determined  me  to  bring  his  en- 
tire command  up  at  once,  and  I accordingly  dispatched  him  at5.30  a.  m. 
to  move  with  all  possible  speed  until  he  came  up  with  the  main  force 
near  Bolton.  My  dispatch  reached  him  at  7.10  a.  m.,  and  his  advance 
division  was  in  motion  in  one  hour  from  that  time.  A dispatch  was  sent 
to  Blair  at  the  same  time  to  push  forward  his  division  in  the  direction 
of  Edwards  Station  with  all  possible  dispatch.  McOlernand  was  di- 
rected to  establish  communication  between  Blair  and  Osterhaus,  of  his 
corps,  and  keep  it  up,  moving  the  former  to  the  support  of  the  latter. 
McPherson  was  ordered  forward  at  5.45  a.  m.  to  join  McOlernand,  and 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Wilson,  of  my  staff,  was  sent  forward  to  communi- 
cate the  information  received,  and  with  verbal  instructions  to  McCler- 
nand  as  to  the  disposition  of  his  forces. 

At  an  early  hour  I left  for  the  advance,  and,  on  arriving  at  the  cross- 
ing of  the  Vicksburg  and  Jackson  Kailroad  with  the  road  from  Eaymond 
to  Bolton,  I found  McPherson’s  advance  and  his  pioneer  corps  engaged 
in  rebuilding  a bridge  on  the  former  road  that  had  been  destroyed  by 
ihe  cavalry  of  Osterhaus’  division  that  had  gone  into  Bolton  the  night 
before.  The  train  of  Hovey’s  division  was  at  a halt,  and  blocked  up  the 
road  from  farther  advance  on  the  Vicksburg  road.  I ordered  all  quar- 
termasters and  wagon-masters  to  draw  their  teams  to  one  side  and  make 
room  for  the  passage  of  troops.  McPherson  was  brought  up  by  this 
road. 

Passing  to  the  front,  I found  Hovey’s  division,  of  the  Thirteenth  Army 
Corps,  at  a halt,  with  our  skirmishers  and  the  enemy’s  pickets  near 
each  other.  Hovey  was  bringing  his  troops  into  line  ready  for  battle, 
and  could  have  brought  on  an  engagement  at  any  moment.  The  enemy 
had  taken  up  a very  strong  position  on  a narrow  ridge,  his  left  resting 
on  a height  where  the  road  makes  a sharp  turn  to  the  left,  approaching 
Vicksburg.  The  top  of  the  ridge  and  the  precipitous  hillside  to  the 
left  of  the  road  are  covered  by  a dense  forest  and  undergrowth.  To  the 
right  of  the  road  the  timber  extends  a short  distance  down  the  hill,  and 
then  opens  into  cultivated  fields  on  a gentle  slope  and  into  a valley,  ex- 
tending for  a considerable  distance.  On  the  road  and  into  the  wooded 
ravine  and  hillside  Hovey’s  division  was  disposed  for  the  attack.  Mc- 
Pherson’s two  divisions — all  of  his  corps  with  him  on  the  march  from 
Milliken’s  Bend,  until  Eansom’s  brigade  arrived  that  day  after  the 
battle — were  thrown  to  the  right  of  the  road  (properly  speaking,  the 
enemy’s  rear),  but  I would  not  permit  an  attack  to  be  commenced  by  our 
troops  until  1 could  hear  from  McClernand,  who  was  advancing  with 
four  divisions,  two  of  them  on  a road  intersecting  the  Jackson  road 
about  1 mile  from  where  the  troops  above  described  were  placed,  and 
about  the  center  of  the  enemy’s  line ; the  other  two  divisions  on  a road 
still  north,  and  nearly  the  same  distance  off. 

I soon  heard  from  McOlernand  through  members  of  his  staff  and  my 
own,  whom  I had  sent  to  him  early  in  the  morning,  and  found  that  by 
the  nearest  practicable  route  of  communication  he  was  2^  miles  dis- 
tant. I sent  several  successive  messages  to  him  to  push  forward  with 
all  rapidity.  There  had  been  continuous  firing  between  Hovey’s  skir- 
mishers and  the  rebel  advance,  which  by  11  o’clock  grew  into  a battle. 
For  some  time  this  division  bore  the  brunt  of  the  conflict;  but  finding 
the  enemy  too  strong  for  them,  at  the  instance  of  Hovey,  I directed  first 
one  and  then  a second  brigade  from  Crocker’s  division  to  re-enforce  him. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


53 


All  this  time  Logan’s  division  was  working  upon  the  enemy’s  left  and 
rear,  and  weakened  his  front  attack  most  wonderfully.  The  troops  here 
opposing  us  evidently  far  outnumbered  ours.  Expecting  McClernand 
momentarily  with  four  divisions,  including  Blair’s,  I never  felt  a doubt 
of  the  result.  He  did  not  arrive,  however,  until  the  enemy  had  been 
driven  from  the  field,  after  a terrible  contest  of  hours,  with  a heavy  loss 
of  killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners,  and  a number  of  pieces  of  artillery. 

It  was  found  afterward  that  the  Vicksburg  road,  after  following  the 
ridge  in  a southerly  direction  for  about  1 mile,  and  to  where  it  inter- 
sected one  of  the  Eaymond  roads,  turns  almost  to  the  west,  down  the 
hill  and  across  the  valley  in  which  Logan  was  oiieratiug  on  the  rear  of 
the  enemy.  One  brigade  of  Logan’s  division  had,  unconscious  of  this 
important  fact,  penetrated  nearly  to  this  road,  and  compelled  the  enemy 
to  retreat  to  prevent  capture.  As  it  was,  much  of  his  artillery  and 
Loriiig’s  division  of  his  army  were  cut  ofi',  besides  the  prisoners  cap- 
tured. 

On  the  call  of  Hovey  for  more  re-enforcements  just  before  the  rout  of 
the  enemy  commenced,  I ordered  McPherson  to  move  what  troops  he 
could  by  a left  flank  around  to  the  enemy’s  front.  Logan  rode  up  at 
this  time,  and  told  me  that  if  Hovey  could  make  another  dash  at  the 
enemy,  he  could  come  up  from  where  he  then  was  and  capture  the 
greater  part  of  their  force.  I immediately  rode  forward  and  found  the 
troops  that  had  been  so  gallantly  engaged  for  so  many  hours  withdrawn 
from  their  advanced  position,  and  were  filling  their  cartridge-boxes.  I 
directed  them  to  use  all  dispatch,  and  push  forward  as  soon  as  possible, 
explaining  to  them  the  position  of  Logan’s  division.  Proceeding  still 
farther  forward,  expecting  every  moment  to  see  the  enemy,  and  reaching 
what  had  been  his  line,  I found  he  was  retreating. 

Arriving  at  the  Eaymond  road,  I saw  to  my  left  and  on  the  next  ridge 
a column  of  troops,  which  proved  to  be  Carr’s  division,  and  McClernand 
with  it  in  person  5 and  to  the  left  of  Carr,  Osterhaus’  division  soon 
afterward  appeared,  with  his  skirmishers  well  in  advance.  I sent  word 
to  Osterhaus  that  the  enemy  was  in  full  retreat,  and  to  push  up  with 
all  haste.  The  situation  was  soon  explained,  after  which  1 ordered  Carr 
to  pursue  with  all  speed  to  Black  Eiver,  and  across  it  if  he  could,  and 
to  Osterhaus  to  follow.  Some  of  McPherson’s  troops  had  already  got 
into  the  road  in  advance;  but  having  marched  and  engaged  the  enemy 
all  day,  they  were  fatigued  and  gave  the  road  to  Carr,  who  continued 
the  pursuit  until  after  dark,  capturing  a train  of  cars  loaded  with  com- 
missary and  ordnance  stores  and  other  property. 

The  "delay  in  the  advance  of  the  troops  immediately  with  McClernand 
was  caused,  no  doubt,  by  the  enemy  presenting  a front  of  artillery  and 
infantry  where  it  was  impossible,  from  the  nature  of  the  ground  and 
the  density  of  the  forest,  to  discover  his  numbers.  As  it  was,  the  battle 
of  Champion’s  Hill,  or  Baker’s  Creek,  was  fought  mainly  by  Hovey’s 
division,  of  McClernand’s  corps,  and  Logan’s  and  Quinby’s  divisions 
(the  latter  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  M.  M.  Crocker),  of  McPherson’s 
corps. 

Eausom’s  brigade,  of  McPherson’s  corps,  came  on  to  the  field  where 
the  main  battle  had  been  fought  immediately  after  the  enemy  had  begun 
his  retreat. 

Word  was  sent  to  Sherman,  at  Bolton,  of  the  result  of  the  day’s  en- 
gagement, with  directions  to  turn  his  corps  toward  Bridgeport,  and  to 
Blair  to  join  him  at  this  latter  place. 

At  daylight  on  the  17th,  the  pursuit  was  renewed,  with  McClernand’s 
corps  in  the  advance.  The  enemy  was  found  strongly  posted  on  both 


54 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXYI. 


sides  of  the  Bhick  lliver.  At  this  point  on  Black  Biver  the  blnffs  extend 
to  the  water’s  edge  on  the  west  bank.  On  the  east  side  is  an  open, 
cultivated  bottom  of  nearly  1 mile  in  width,  surrounded  by  a bayou  of 
stagnant  water,  from  2 to  3 feet  in  depth  and  from  10  to  20  feet  in  width, 
from  the  river  above  the  railroad  to  the  river  below.  Following  the 
inside  line  of  this  bayou,  the  enemy  had  constructed  rifle-pits,  with  the 
bayou  to  serve  as  a ditch  on  the  outside  and  immediately  in  front  of 
them.  Carrs  division  occupied  the  right  in  investing  this  place,  and 
Lawler’s  brigade  the  right  of  his  division.  After  a few  hours’  skirmish- 
ing, Lawler  discovered  that  by  moving  a portion  of  his  brigade  under 
cover  of  the  river  bank  he  could  get  a position  from  which  that  place 
could  be  successfully  assaulted,  and  ordered  a charge  accordingly. 
Notwithstanding  the  level  ground  over  which  a portion  of  his  troops  had 
to  pass  without  cover,  and  the  great  obstacle  of  the  ditch  in  front  of 
the  enemy’s  works,  the  charge  was  gallantly  and  successfully  made,  and 
in  a few  minutes  the  entire  garrison,  with  seventeen  pieces  of  artillery, 
were  the  trophies  of  this  brilliant  and  daring  movement.  The  enemy 
on  the  west  bank  of  the  river  immediately  set  fire  to  the  railroad  bridge 
and  retreated,  thus  cutting  off  all  chance  of  escape  for  any  portion  of 
his  forces  remaining  on  the  east  bank. 

Sherman  b/this  time  had  reached  Bridgeport,  on  Black  Eiver,  above. 
The  only  pontoon  train  with  the  exi)edition  was  with  him.  By  the 
morning  of  the  18th,  he  had  crossed  the  river,  and  was  ready  to  march 
on  Walnut  Hills.  McClernand  and  McPherson  built  floating  bridges 
during  the  night,  and  had  them  ready  for  crossing  their  commands  by 
8 a.  m.  of  the  18th. 

The  march  was  commenced  by  Sherman  at  an  early  hour  by  the 
Bridgeport  and  Yicksburg  road,  turning  to  the  right  when  within  3^ 
miles  of  Vicksburg,  to  get  t)Ossession  of  Walnut  Hills  and  the  Yazoo 
Biver.  This  was  successfully  accomplished  before  the  night  of  the  1 8tli. 
McPherson  crossed  Big  Black  Biver  above  the  Jackson  road  and  came 
into  the  same  road  with  Sherman,  but  to  his  rear.  He  arrived  after 
night  fall  with  his  advance  to  where  Sherman  turned  to  the  right.  Mc- 
Clernand moved  by  the  Jackson  and  Vicksburg  road  to  Mount  Albans, 
and  there  turned  to  the  left,  to  get  into  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road.  By  this 
disposition  the  three  army  corps  covered  all  the  ground  their  strength 
would  admit  of,  and  by  the  morning  of  the  19th  the  investment  of 
Vicksburg  was  made  as  complete  as  could  be  by  the  forces  at  my  com- 
mand. 

During  the  day  there  was  continuous  skirmishing,  and  I was  not 
without  hope  of  carrying  the  enemy’s  works.  Belying  upon  the  de- 
moralization of  the  enemy,  in  consequence  of  repeated  defeats  outside 
of  Vicksburg,  I ordered  a general  assault  at  2 p.  m.  on  this  day.  Tlie 
Fifteenth  Army  Corps,  from  having  arrived  in  front  of  the  enemy’s 
works  in  time  on  the  18th  to  get  a good  position,  were  enabled  to  mrd<e 
a vigorous  assault.  The  Thirteenth  and  Seventeenth  Army  Cori)s  suc- 
(ieeded  no  further  than  to  gain  advanced  positions  covered  from  the  lire 
of  the  enemy. 

The  20th  and  21st  were  spent  in  jierfecting  communications  with  our 
supplies.  Most  of  the  troops  had  been  marching  and  lighting  battles 
for  twenty  days,  on  an  average  of  about  five  days’  rations  drawn  from 
the  commissary  department.  Though  they  had  not  suttered  from  short 
rations  up  to  this  time,  the  want  of  bread  to  accomiiany  the  other  ra- 
tions was  beginning  to  be  much  felt. 

On  the  21st,  my  arrangements  for  drawing  supplies  of  every  descrip- 
tion being  complete,  1 determined  to  make  another  eli'ort  to  carry  Vicks- 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


55 


l)ui  g by  assault.  There  were  many  reasons  to  determine  me  to  adopt 
this  course.  I believed  an  assault  from  the  position  gained  by  this  time 
could  be  made  successfully.  It  was  known  that  Johnston  was  at  Can- 
ton with  the  force  taken  by  him  from  Jackson,  re-enforced  by  other 
troops  from  the  east,  and  that  more  were  daily  reaching  him.  With 
the  force  I then  had,  a short  time  must  have  enabled  him  to  attack  me 
in  the  rear,  and  possibly  succeeded  in  raising  the  siege. 

Possession  of  Vicksburg  at  that  time  would  have  enabled  me  to  have 
turned  upon  Johnston  and  driven  him  from  the  State,  and  possessed  ihy- 
self  of  all  the  railroads  and  practical  military  highways,  thus  effectually 
securing  to  ourselves  all  territory  west  of  the  Torabigbee,  and  this  be- 
fore the  season  was  too  far  advanced  for  campaigning  in  this  latitude. 
I w'ould  have  saved  the  Government  sending  large  re-enforcements, 
much  needed  elsewhere  ; and,  finally,  the  troops  themselves  were  im- 
patient to  possess  Vicksburg,  and  would  not  have  worked  in  the  trenches 
with  the  same  zeal,  believing  it  unnecessary,  that  they  did  after  their 
failure  to  carry  the  enemy^s  works. 

Accordingly,  on  the  21st,  orders  were  issued  for  a general  assault  on 
the  whole  line,  to  commence  at  10  a.  m.  on  the  22d.  All  the  corps  com- 
manders set  their  time  by  mine,  that  there  should  be  no  difference  be- 
tween them  in  movement  of  assault.  Promptly  at  the  hour  designated 
the  three  army  corps  then  in  front  of  the  enemy^s  works  commenced  the 
assault.  I had  taken  a commanding  position  near  McPherson’s  front, 
and  from  which  I could  see  all  the  advancing  columns  from  his  corps, 
and  a part  of  each  of  Sherman’s  and  McClernand’s.  A portion  of  the 
commands  of  each  succeeded  in  planting  their  flags  on  the  outer  slopes 
of  the  enemy’s  bastions,  and  maintained  them  there  until  night. 

Each  corps  had  many  more  men  than  could  possibly  be  used  in  the 
assault  over  such  ground  as  intervened  between  them  and  the  enemy. 
More  men  could  only  avail  in  case  of  breaking  through  the  enemy’s  line 
or  in  repelling  a sortie.  The  assault  was  gallant  in  the  extreme  on  the 
part  of  all  the  troops,  but  the  enemy’s  position  was  too  strong,  both 
naturally  and  artificially,  to  be  taken  in  that  way.  At  every  point  as- 
saulted, and  at  all  of  them  at  the  same  time,  the  enemy  was  able  to 
show  all  the  force  his  works  would  cover. 

The  assault  failed,  I regret  to  say,  with  much  loss  on  our  side  in  killed 
and  wounded,  but  without  weakening  the  confidence  of  the  troops  in 
their  ability  to  ultimately  succeed. 

No  troops  succeeded  in  entering  any  of  the  enemy’s  works  with  the 
exception  of  Sergeant  Griffith,  of  the  Twenty-first  [Twenty-second] 
Iowa  Volunteers,  and  some  11  privates  of  the  same  regiment.  Of  these 
none  returned,  except  the  sergeant  and  possibly  1 man.  The  work  en- 
tered by  him,  from  its  position,  could  give  us  no  practical  advantage, 
unless  others  to  the  right  and  left  of  it  were  carried  and  held  at  the 
same  time. 

About  12  m.  I received  a dispatch  from  McOlernand  that  he  was  hard 
l)ressed  at  several  points,  in  reply  to  which  I directed  him  to  re-enforce 
the  points  hard  pressed  from  such  troops  as  he  had  that  were  not  en- 
gaged. I then  rode  around  to  Sherman,  and  had  just  reached  there 
wlieu  1 received  a second  dispatch  from  McOlernand,  stating  positively 
and  unequivocally  that  he  was  in  possession  of  and  still  held  two  of  the 
enemy’s  forts  ; that  the  American  flag  then  waved  over  them,  and  ask- 
ing me  to  have  Sherman  and  McPherson  maRe  a diversion  in  his  favor. 
This  dispatch  I showed  to  Sherman,  who  immediately  ordered  a renewal 
of  the  assault  on  his  front.  I also  sent  an  answer  to  McOlernand, 
directing  him  to  order  up  McArthur  to  his  assistance,  and  started  im- 


56 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


mediately  to  the  position  I had  just  left  on  McPherson’s  line,  to  convey 
to  him  the  information  from  McClernand  by  this  last  dispatch,  that  he 
might  make  the  diversion  requested.  Before  reaching  McPherson,  I 
met  a messenger  with  a third  dispatch  from  McClernand,  of  which  the 
followiug  is  a copy  : 

Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

In  the  Field,  near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  22,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant: 

General:  We  have  gained  the  enemy’s  intrenchments  at  several  points,  hut  are 
brought  to  a stand.  I have  sent  word  to  McArthur  to  re-enforce  me  if  he  can.  Would 
it  not  be  best  to  concentrate  the  whole  or  a part  of  his  command  on  this  point  ? 

JOHN  A.  McClernand, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 

P.  S. — I have  received  your  dispatch.  My  troops  are  all  engaged,  and  I cannot 
withdraw  any  to  re-enforce  others. 

The  position  occupied  by  me  during  most  of  the  time  of  the  assault 
gave  me  a better  opportunity  of  seeing  what  was  going  on  in  front  of 
the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  than  I believed  it  possible  for  the  commander 
of  it  to  have.  I could  not  see  his  i>ossession  of  forts,  nor  necessity  for 
re- enforcements,  as  represented  in  his  dispatches,  up  to  the  time  I left 
it,  which  was  between  12  m.  and  1 p.  m.,  and  I expressed  doubts  of 
their  correctness,  which  doubts  the  facts  subsequently,  but  too  late, 
confirmed.  At  the  time  I could  not  disregard  his  reiterated  statements, 
for  they  might  possibly  be  true ; and  that  no  possible  opportunity  of 
carrying  the  enemy’s  stronghold  should  be  allowed  to  escape  through 
fault  of  mine,  I ordered  Quinby’s  division,  which  was  all  of  McPher- 
son’s corps  then  present  but  four  brigades,  to  report  to  McClernand, 
and  notified  him  of  the  order.  I showed  his  dispatches  to  McPherson, 
as  I had  to  Sherman,  to  satisfy  him  of  the  necessity  of  an  active  diver- 
sion on  their  part  to  hold  as  much  force  in  their  fronts  as  possible.  The 
diversion  was  promptly  and  vigorously  made,  and  resulted  in  the  in- 
crease of  our  mortality  list  fully  50  per  cent.,  without  advancing  our 
position  or  giving  us  other  advantages. 

About  3.50  p.  m.  I received  McClernand’s  fourth  dispatch  as  follows  : 

Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

May  22,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Department  of  the  Tennessee  : 

General  : I bave  received  your  dispatch  in  regard  to  General  Quinby’s  division  and 
General  McArthur’s  division.  As  soon  as  they  arrive  I will  press  the  enemy  with  all 
])ossible  speed,  and  doubt  not  I will  force  my  way  through.  I have  lost  no  ground. 
My  men  are  in  two  of  the  enemy’s  forts,  but  they  are  commanded  by  rifle-pits  in  the 
rear.  Several  prisoners  have  been  taken,  who  inHmate  that  the  rear  is  strong.  At  this 
moment  I am  hard  pressed. 

JOHN  A.  McClernand, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 

The  assault  of  this  day  proved  the  quality  of  the  soldiers  of  this  army. 
Without  entire  success,  and  with  a heavy  loss,  there  was  no  murmuring 
or  complaining  ; no  falling  back,  nor  other  evidence  of  demoralization. 

After  the  failure  of  the  22d,  I determined  upon  a regular  siege.  The 
troops  being  now  fully  awake  to  the  necessity  of  this,  worked  diligently 
and  cheerfully.  The  work  progressed  rapidly  and  satisfactorily  until 
July  3,  when  all  was  about  read3’  for  a final  assault. 

Tiiere  was  a great  scarcity  of  engineer  oflicers  in  the  beginning,  but 
under  the  skillful  superintendence  of  Capt.  P.  E.  Prime,  of  the  Engineer 
Corps,  Lieutenant-Colouel  Wilson,  of  1113^  staff,  and  Capt.  C.  B.  Comstock, 
of  the  Engineer  Corps,  who  joined  this  command  during  the  siege,  such 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


57 


practical  experience  was  gained  as  would  enable  any  division  of  this 
army  hereafter  to  conduct  a siege  with  considerable  skill  in  the  absence 
of  regular  engineer  officers. 

On  the  afternoon  of  July  3,  a letter  was  received  from  Lieutenant- 
General  Pemberton,  commanding  the  Confederate  forces  at  Vicksburg, 
])roposing  an  armistice  and  the  appointment  of  commissioners  to  arrange 
terms  for  the  capitulation  of  the  place.  The  correspondence,  copies  of 
which  are  herewith  transmitted,  resulted  in  the  surrender  of  the  city  and 
garrison  of  Vicksburg  at  10  a.  m.  July  4,  1863,  on  the  following  terms: 

The  entire  garrison,  officers ‘and  men,  were  to  be  paroled,  not  to  take 
up  arms  against  the  United  States  until  exchanged  by  the  proper  au- 
thorities; officers  and  men  each  to  be  furnished  with  a parole,  signed  by 
himself;  officers  to  be  allowed  their  side-arms  and  private  baggage,  and 
the  field,  staff,  and  cavalry  officers  one  horse  each ; the  rank  and  file  to 
be  allowed  all  their  clothing,  but  no  other  property;  rations  from  their 
own  stores  sufficient  to  last  them  beyond  our  lines;  the  necessary  cook- 
ing utensils  for  preparing  their  food,  and  30  wagons  to  transport  such 
articles  as  could  not  well  be  carried. 

These  terms  I regarded  more  favorable  to  the  Government  than  an 
unconditional  surrender.  It  saved  us  the  transportation  of  them  north, 
which  at  that  time  would  have  been  very  difficult,  owing  to  the  limited 
amount  of  river  transportation  on  hand,  and  the  expense  of  subsisting 
them.  It  left  our  army  free  to  operate  against  Johnston,  who  was  threat- 
ening us  from  the  direction  of  Jackson,  and  our  river  transportation  to 
be  used  for  the  movement  of  troops  to  any  point  the  exigency  of  the 
service  might  require. 

I deem  it  proper  to  state  here,  in  order  that  the  correspondence  may 
be  fully  understood,  that  after  my  answer  to  General  Pemberton’s  letter 
of  the  morning  of  the  3d,  we  had  a personal  interview  on  the  subject  of 
the  capitulation. 

The  particulars  and  incidents  of  the  siege  will  be  contained  in  the 
reports  of  division  and  corps  commanders,  which  will  be  forwarded  as 
soon  as  received. 

I brought  forward  during  the  siege,  in  addition  to  Lauman’s  division 
and  four  regiments  previously  ordered  from  Memphis,  fW.  S.]  Smith’s 
and  Kimball’s  divisions,  of  the  Sixteenth  Army  Corps,  and  assigned 
Maj.  Gen.  0.  0.  Washburn  to  command  of  the  same. 

On  June  11,  Maj.  Gen.  F.  J.  Herron’s  division,  from  the  Department 
of  the  Missouri,  arrived,  and  on  the  14th  two  divisions  of  the  Ninth 
Army  Corps,  Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Parke  commanding,  arrived.  This  increase 
in  my  force  enabled  me  to  make  the  investment  most  complete,  and  at 
the  same  time  left  me  a large  reserve  to  watch  the  movements  of  John- 
ston. Herron’s  division  was  put  into  position  on  the  extreme  left,  south 
of  the  city,  and  Lauman’s  division  was  placed  between  Herron  and  Mc- 
Clernand.  Smith’s  and  Kimball’s  divisions  and  Parke’s  corps  were  sent 
to  Haynes’  Bluff.  This  place  I had  fortified  on  the  land  side,  and  every 
l)reparation  made  to  resist  a heavy  force.  Johnston  crossed  Big  Black 
Kiver  with  a portion  of  his  force,  and  everything  indicated  that  he  would 
make  an  attack  about  June  25.  Our  position  in  front  of  Vicksburg 
having  been  made  as  strong  against  a sortie  from  the  enemy  as  his  works 
were  against  an  assault,  1 placed  Major-General  Sherman  in  command 
of  all  the  troops  designated  to  look  after  Johnston.  The  force  intended 
to  operate  against  Johnston,  in  addition  to  that  at  Haynes’  Bluff,  was 
one  division  from  each  of  the  Thirteenth,  Fifteenth,  and  Seventeentli 
Army  Corps  and  Lauman’s  division.  Johnston,  however,  not  attacking, 
1 determined  to  attack  him  the  moment  Vicksburg  was  in  our  possession, 


58 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


and  accordingly  notified  Slierman  that  I slioiild  again  make  an  assault 
on  Vicksburg  at  daylight  on  the  fith,  and  for  him  to  have  up  su])plies  of 
all  descriptions,  ready  to  move  upon  receipt  of  orders,  if  the  assault 
should  prove  a success.  His  preparations  were  immediately  made,  and 
when  the  place  surrendered  on  the  4th — two  days  earlier  than  I had 
fixed  for  the  attack — Sherman  was  found  ready,  and  moved  at  once  with 
a force  increased  by  the  remainder  of  both  the  Thirteenth  and  Fifteenth 
Army  Corps,  and  is  at  present  investing  Jackson,  where  Johnston  has 
made  a stand. 

In  the  march  from  Bruinsburg  to  Vicksburg,  covering  a period  of 
twenty  days,  before  supplies  could  be  obtained  from  Government  stores, 
only  five  days’  rations  were  issued,  and  three  days’  of  these  were  taken 
in  haversacks  at  the  start,  and  were  soon  exhausted.  All  other  sub- 
sistence was  obtained  from  the  country  through  which  we  passed.  The 
march  was  commenced  without  wagons,  except  such  as  could  be  picked 
up  through  the  country.  The  country  was  abundantly  supplied  with 
corn,  bacon,  beef,  and  mutton.  The  troops  enjoyed  excellent  health,  and 
no  army  ever  appeared  in  better  spirits  or  felt  more  confident  of  success. 

In  accordance  with  previous  instructions,  Maj.  Gen.  S.  A.  Hurlbut 
started  Col.  (now  Brig.  Gen.)  B.  H.  Grierson  with  a cavalry  force  from 
La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  make  a raid  through  the  central  portion  of  the 
State  of  Mississippi,  to  destroy  railroads  and  other  public  projierty,  for 
the  purpose  of  creating  a diversion  in  favor  of  the  army  moving  to  the 
attack  on  Vicksburg. 

On  April  17,  this  expedition  started,  and  arrived  at  Baton  Eouge  on 
May  2,  having  successfully  traversed  the  whole  State  of  Mississippi. 
This  expedition  was  skillfully  conducted,  and  reflects  great  credit  on 
Colonel  Grierson  and  all  of  his  command.  The  notice  given  this  raid 
by  the  Southern  press  confirms  our  estimate  of  its  imjiortance.  It  has 
been  one  of  the  most  brilliant  cavalry  exploits  of  the  war,  and  will  be 
handed  down  in  history  as  an  example  to  be  imitated.  Colonel  Grier- 
son’s report  is  herewith  transmitted.* 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  an  expression  of  thankfulness  for 
my  good  fortune  in  being  placed  in  co  operation  with  an  officer  of  the 
Navy  who  accords  to  every  move  that  seems  for  the  interest  and  suc- 
cess of  our  arms  his  hearty  and  energetic  support.  Admiral  Porter  and 
the  very  efficient  officers  under  him  have  ever  shown  the  greatest  readi- 
ness in  their  co-operation,  no  matter  what  was  to  be  done  or  what  risk 
to  be  taken,  either  by  their  men  or  their  vessels.'  Without  this  prompt 
and  cordial  support,  my  movements  would  have  been  much  embarrassed, 
if  not  wholly  defeated. 

Ca])t.  J.  W.  Shirk,  commanding  theTuscumbia,  was  es])ecially  active, 
and  deserving  of  the  highest  commendation  for  his  personal  attention 
to  the  repairing  of  the  damage  done  our  transports  by  the  Vicksburg 
batteries. 

The  result  of  this  campaign  has  been  the  defeat  of  the  enemy  in  fiv^e 
battles  outside  of  Vicksburg;  the  occupation  of  tTackson,the  capital  of 
the  State  of  Mississippi,  and  the  capture  of  Vicksburg  and  its  garrison 
and  munitions  of  war  ; a loss  to  the  enemy  of  37,000  i)risoners,  among 
whom  were  15  general  officers;  at  least  10,000  killed  and  wounded,  ami 
among  the  killed  Generals  Tracy,  Tilghman,  and  Green,  and  hundreds 
and  perhai)s  thousands  of  stragglers,  who  can  never  be  collected  and 
reorganized.  Arms  and  munitions  of  war  for  an  army  of  00,000  men 
have  fallen  into  our  hands,  besides  a large  amount  of  other  public  prop- 


See  p.  521. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


59 


erty,  coiisistiug  of  railroads,  locomotives,  cars,  steamboats,  cotton,  &c., 
and  much  was  destroyed  to  prevent  our  capturing  it. 

Our  loss  in  the  series  of  battles  may  be  summed  up  as  follows:* 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

Port  Gibson 

130 

718 

5 

Pourteen-Mile  Creek  (skirmish) 

4 

24 

liavtnond 

69 

341 

32 

Jackson 

40 

240 

6 

Champion’s  Hill 

426 

1,  842 

189 

Big  Black  Eailroad  Bridge 

29 

242 

2 

Vicksburg 

545 

3,  688 

303 

Of  the  wounded  many  were  but  slightly  wounded,  and  continued  on 
duty;  many  more  required  but  a few  days  or  weeks  for  their  recovery. 
Not  more  than  one-half  of  the  wounded  were  permanently  disabled. 

My  personal  staff  and  chiefs  of  departments  have  in  all  cases  rendered 
prompt  and  efficient  service. 

In  all  former  reports  I have  failed  to  make  mention  of  Company  A, 
Fourth  Regiment  Illinois  Volunteer  Cavalry,  Capt.  E.  D.  Osband  com- 
manding. This  comjiany  has  been  on  duty  with  me  as  an  escort  com- 
pany since  November,  1861,  and  in  every  engagement  I have  been  in 
since  that  time  rendered  valuable  service,  attracting  general  attention 
for  their  exemplary  conduct,  soldiery  bearing,  and  promptness.  It 
would  not  be  overstating  the  merits  of  this  company  to  say  that  many 
of  them  would  fill  with  credit  any  position  in  a cavalry  regiment. 

For  the  brilliant  achievements  recounted  in  this  report,  the  Army  of 
‘ the  Tennessee,  their  comrades  of  the  Ninth  Army  Corps,  Herroifs  divis- 
ion of  the  Army  of  the  Frontier,  and  the  Navy  co  operating  with  them, 
deserve  the  highest  honors  their  country  can  award. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-General  Z7.  S,  Army^  Commanding. 

Col.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Washington^  D.  G. 


[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Headquarters, 
Vidcsburg,  Miss.,  July  3,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  United  States  Forces,  &c.  : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  propose  to  you  an  armistice  for 1 

hours,  with  a view  to  arranging  terms  for  the  capitulation  of  Vicksburg. 
To  this  end,  if  agreeable  to  you,  T will  appoint  three  commissioners  to 
meet  a like  number,  to  be  named  by  yourself,  at  such  place  and  hour 
to-day  as  you  may  find  convenient. 

I make  this  proposition  to  save  the  further  effusion  of  blood,  which 
must  otherwise  be  shed  to  a frightful  extent,  feeling  myself  fully  able 
to  maintain  my  position  for  a yet  indefinite  period. 

This  communication  will  be  handed  you  under  flag  of  truce  by  Maj. 
Gen.  J.  S.  Bowen. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


* But  see  general  summary  of  casualties,  Bart  11,  p.  107. 
t In  Pemberton’s  report,  “several.” 


60 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

In  the  Fields  near  Vicksburg^  Miss.^  July  3,  1863. 
Lieut.  Gen.  J.  0.  Pemberton, 

Commanding  Confederate  Forces^  &c. : 

General:  Your  note  of  this  date  is  just  received,  proposing  an 
armistice  for  several  hours,  for  the  purpose  of  arranging  terms  of  capit- 
ulation through  commissioners  to  be  appointed,  &c. 

The  useless  effusion  of  blood  you  proi)ose  stopping  by  this  course  can 
be  ended  at  any  time  you  may  choose,  by  an  unconditional  surrender  of 
the  city  and  garrison.  Men  who  have  shown  so  much  endurance  and 
courage  as  those  now  in  Vicksburg  will  always  challenge  the  respect  of 
an  adversary,  and  I can  assure  you  will  be  treated  with  all  the  respect 
due  to  prisoners  of  war. 

I do  not  favor  the  proposition  of  appointing  commissioners  to  arrange 
terms  of  capitulation,  because  I have  no  terms  other  than  those  indi- 
cated above. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-  General. 


[Inclosure  No.  3.] 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Near  Vicksburg.,  Miss..,  July  3,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  0.  Pemberton, 

Commanding  Confederate  Forces.,  Vicksburg.,  Miss. : 

General  : In  conformity  with  agreement  of  this  afternoon,  I will  sub- 
mit the  following  proposition  for  the  surrender  of  the  city  of  Vicksburg, 
public  stores,  &c. : 

On  your  accepting  the  terms  proposed,  I will  march  in  one  division 
as  a guard,  and  take  possession  at  8 a.  m.  to-morrow.  As  soon  as  rolls 
can  be  made  out,  and  paroles  signed  by  officers  and  men,  you  will  be 
allowed  to  march  out  of  our  lines,  the  officers  taking  with  them  their 
side-arms  and  clothing,  and  the  field,  staff,  and  cavalry  officers  one  horse 
each.  The  rank  and  file  will  be  allowed  all  their  clothing,  but  no  other 
property.  If  these  conditions  are  accepted,  any  amount  of  rations  you 
may  deem  necessary  can  be  taken  from  the  stores  you  now  have,  and 
also  the  necessary  cooking  utensils  for  preparing  them.  Thirty  wagons 
also,  counting  two  two-horse  or  mule  teams  as  one,  will  be  allowed  to 
transport  such  articles  as  cannot  be  carried  along. 

The  same  conditions  will  be  allowed  to  all  sick  aud  wounded  officers 
and  soldiers  as  fast  as  they  become  able  to  travel. 

The  paroles  for  these  latter  must  be  signed,  however,  while  officers 
are  present  authorized  to  sign  the  roll  of  prisoners. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-  General. 

[Inclosure  No.  4.] 

Headquarters, 
Vicksburg.,  ilfm*.,  July  3,  1863. 

Maj.  Geu.  IT.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  United  States  Forces.,  &c. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  com- 
munication of  this  date,  proposing  terms  of  capitulation  for  this  gar- 
rison and  post. 


CIIAI*.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


G1 


In  the  main,  your  terms  are  accepted  ; but  in  justice  both  to  the  honor 
and  spirit  of  my  troops,  manifested  in  the  defense  of  Vicksburg,  I have 
to  submit  the  following  amendments,  which,  if  acceded  to  by  you,  will 
perfect  the  agreement  between  us. 

At  10  a.  m.  to-morrow  I propose  to  evacuate  the  works  in  and  around 
Vicksburg,  and  to  surrender  the  city  and  garrison  under  my  command, 
by  marching  out  with  my  colors  and  arms,  stacking  them  in  front  of  my 
present  lines,  after  which  you  will  take  possession.  - 
Officers  to  retain  their  side-arms  and  personal  property,  and  the  rights 
and  property  of  citizens  to  be  respected. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


[Inclosure  No.  5.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

' Before  Viclcshurg,  31iss.,  July  4,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Commanding  Confederate  Forces,  VicJcsburg,  Miss.  : 


General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  com- 
munication of  July  3.  The  ameudment  proposed  by  you  cannot  be 
acceded  to  in  full.  It  will  be  necessary  to  furnish  every  officer  and  man 
with  a parole  signed  by  himself,  which,  with  the  completion  of  the  rolls 
of  prisoners,  will  necessarily  take  some  time. 

Again,  I can  make  no  stipulations  with  regard  to  the  treatment  of 
citizens  and  their  private  property.  While  I do  not  propose  to  cause 
them  any  undue  annoyance  or  loss,  I cannot  consent  to  leave  myself 
under  any  restraint  by  stipulations.  The  property  which  officers  will 
be  allowed  to  take  with  them  will  be  as  stated  in  my  proposition  of  last 
evening  j that  is,  officers  will  be  allowed  their  private  baggage  and  side- 
arms,  and  mounted  officers  one  horse  each. 

If  you  mean  by  your  proposition  for  each  brigade  to  march  to  the 
front  of  the  lines  now  occupied  by  it,  and  stack  arms  at  10  a.  m.,  and 
then  return  to  the  inside,  and  there  remain  as  prisoners  until  properly 
paroled,  I will  make  no  objection  to  it. 

Should  no  notification  be  received  of  your  acceptance  of  my  terms 
by  9 a.  m.,  I shall  regard  them  as  having  been  rejected,  and  shall  act 
accordingly.  Should  these  terms  be  accepted,  white  flags  should  be 
displayed  along  your  lines  to  prevent  such  of  my  troops  as  may  not 
have  been  notified  from  firing  upon  your  men. 

I am,  general,  very  respectl’ully,  your  obedient  servant, 

U.  S.  GEANT, 

3Iajor- General. 


[Inclosure  No.  6.] 


Headquarters, 
Yiclcshurg,  31iss.,  July  4,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  V.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  United  States  Forces,  &e. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  com- 
municatiou  of  this  day,  and  in  reply  to  say  that  the  terms  proposed  by 
you  are  accepted. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  0.  PEMBEETOK, 

Lieutenant-  General, 


62 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAP.  XXXYI. 


Vicksburg,  July  (>,  1SG3. 
General  H.  W.  Halleck,  Washington^  D.  G. : 

The  number  of  prisoners  and  pieces  of  artillery  taken  with  Vicksburg 
is  greater  than  was  at  first  supposed.  The  number  proves  to  be  over 
30,000  prisoners*  and  over  one  hundred  and  seventy  pieces  of  artillery. 
We  have  found  considerable  ammunition  and  about  four  days’  rations  of 
hour  and  bacon,  and  250  pounds  of  sugar. 

The  small-arms  are  of  good  quality  and  over  50,000  in  number. 

Sherman  is  after  Johnston,  but  no  news  from  him  to-day. 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-General. 

War  Department, 

Washington^  July  7,  1803. 
Major-General  Grant,  Near  Vichshurg,  Miss.  : 

Advices  just  received  from  New  Orleans  of  the  condition  of  General 
Banks’  army  render  it  important  that  you  send  him  aid  if  it  be  possible 
for  you  to  do  so. 

n.  W.  UALLEOK, 

General-in-  Chief. 

Washington,  D.  C.,  July  7,  1803. 
Major-General  Grant,  Vichshurg^  Miss.  : 

It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  inform  you  that  you  have  been  appointed 
a major-general  in  the  Regular  Army,  to  rank  from  July  4,  the  date  of 
your  caj^ture  of  Vicksburg. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 

War  Department, 
Washingtoyi.,  July  8,  1803 — 0.45  p.  m. 
Major-General  Grant,  Vichsburg,  Miss.  : 

I fear  your  paroling  the  garrison  at  Vicksburg  without  actual  deliv- 
ery to  a proper  agent,  as  required  by  the  fourteenth  article  of  the  car- 
tel, may  be  construed  into  an  absolute  release,  and  that  the  men  will  be 
immediately  placed  in  the  ranks  of  the  enemy.  Such  has  been  the  case 
elsewhere.  If  these  prisoners  have  not  been  allowed  to  depart,  you  will 
retain  them  till  further  orders. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in-  Chief. 

War  Department, 
Washington.,  July  10,  1803 — 10  a.  m. 
Major-General  Grant,  Viclcsburg,  3Iiss.  : 

On  a full  examination  of  the  question,  it  is  decided  that  you,  as  the 
commander  of  an  army,  were  authorized  to  agree  upon  the  parole  and 
release  of  the  garrison  of  Vicksburg  with  the  general  commanding  the 
place. 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General-in- Chief 

* There  were  20,491  captured  at  Viclvshnrg  and  1,147  captured  at  .Jackson,  Natchez, 
and  Yazoo  City.  Tot.al,  30,6.18. 


UUAI',  XXXVI.J 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


63 


War  Department, 
Washington^  Augvst  1,  1863 — 9.45  a.  m. 

Major-GeDeral  Grant, 

Viclishurg^  Miss. : 

General  : Your  report,  dated  July  6,  of  your  campaign  in  Missis- 
sippi, endiug  in  the  capitulation  ofVicksburg,  was  received  last  evening. 
Your  narrative  of  this  cami)aign,  like  the  oiierations  themselves,  is 
brief,  soldierly,  and  in  every  respect  creditable  and  satisfactory.  In 
boldness  of  plan,  rapidity  of  execution,  and  brilliancy  of  results,  these 
operations  will  compare  most  favorably  with  those  of  Napoleon  about 
Ulm.  You  and  your  army  have  well  deserved  the  gratitude  of  your 
country,  and  it  will  be  the  boast  of  your  children  that  their  fathers 
were  of  the  heroic  army  which  reopened  the  Mississippi  River. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  W.  HALLECK, 

General  in-  Chief. 


No.  3. 

Reports  of  Mr.  Charles  A.  Dana^  special  commissioner  of  the  United 
States  War  Department. 

Columbus,  Ky.,  March  20,  1863 — 4.30  p.  m. 

There  is  absolutely  no  information  here  respecting  atfairs  down  the 
river.  General  Rosecrans  having  abandoned  Forts  Henry  and  Heiman 
and  ordered  them  to  be  leveled,  and  a rebel  force  having  appeared  at 
Heiman,  Hurlbut,  on  Asboth’s  reporting  the  facts,  ordered  him  to  re- 
occupy Heiman,  considering  it  to  be  the  key  to  both  Columbus  and 
Paducah.  Asboth  accordingly  proceeded  there  by  water  with  two  regi- 
ments of  infantry,  two  cannon,  and  some  cavalry,  and  found  a small 
body  of  rebels  at  Heiman,  who  escaped  with  their  leader.  Major  Blan- 
ton [*?],  The  order  of  General  Rosecrans  to  level  the  works  had  not  been 
executed,  Henry  being  jjartially  overflowed.  Blanton  was  collecting 
horses  and  raising  conscripts.  The  whole  country  being  open  to  him, 
while  the  ijossession  of  Heiman  would  have  made  him  master  of  the 
navigation  of  the  Tennessee,  the  force  mentioned  was  left  by  Asboth  in 
Heiman,  and  he  got  back  here  by  land  yesterday.  The  iron- clad  gun- 
boat Tuscumbia,  Capt.  J.  W.  Shirk,  co-oj)erated  in  the  movement,  and 
destroyed  all  the  flats  and  skills  collected  by  the  rebels  to  force  their 
operations  on  both  sides  of  the  Tennessee.  Hereafter  two  small  gun- 
boats will  patrol  that  river  as  far  u])  as  Savaunah. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Columbus,  Ky.,  March  20, 1863. 

Captain  [J.  W.]  Rigby,  of  Logan’s  staff,  arrived  here  this  evening, 
and  reports  that  expedition  down  Yazoo,  under  McPherson,  consisting 
of  Seventeenth  Army  Corps  and  Ross’  division,  captured  a rebel  fort 
at  the  junction  of  Tallahatchee  and  Yalabusha  on  the  13th  instant, 
and  took  a small  rebel  force  in  the  fort  prisoners.  Rigby  does  not  know 
how  many  guns  were  in  the  fort.  The  attack  was  made  by  the  gunboat 


64 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


fCiiAi-.  XXXVI. 


Cliillicothe,  which  received  twenty  shots,  one  of  which,  entering  a port- 
hole, killed  3 men  and  w^ounded  several.  McPherson  has  advanced 
down  40  miles  below  the  fort,  and  is  some  25  miles  frow  Yazoo  City. 
That  place  has  not  been  attacked,  and  no  rebel  transports  have  been 
captured.  McPherson^s  army  is  in  perfect  condition  and  excellent 
health.  Forces  to  re-enforce  him  are  now  moving  down  from  Missouri 
under  E.  A.  Carr,  two  regiments  having  passed  here  to-day. 

C.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Memphis,  Tenn.,  March  23,  1863, 

Via  Boat  to  Caiuo,  March  25. 

The  report  brought  to  Columbus  by  Bigby  aud  telegraphed  by  me 
from  there  on  the  20th  was  erroneous.  The  force  on  the  Yazoo  consisted 
originally  of  4,500  men,  under  Boss.  To  this  have  been  added  3,500under 
Quinby,  who  now  commands.  McPherson  with  the  remainder  of  the 
Thirteenth  [Seventeenth  ?]  Corps  is  at  Helena,  and  part  of  Carr’s  force 
is  also  there,  waiting  for  boats  to  join  the  expedition ; but  large  boats 
entering  Yazoo  Pass  may  go  forward,  but  cannot  return,  and  enough 
small  boats  cannot  be  found  to  convey  the  re-enforcements  with  any 
rapidity.  The  expedition  is  now  arrested  at  Greenwood,  at  the  junction 
of  the  Tallahatchee  and  Yalabusha,  where  a rebel  earthwork  named 
Fort  Pemberton,  situated  on  a knoll  made  inaccessible  by  a swamp  and 
mounting  heavy  guns,  commands  the  channel.  This  fort  is  of  recent 
construction,  built  after  the  rebels  discovered  the  plan  of  the  expedi- 
tion. The  heavy  pieces  of  a gunboat  have  been  disembarked,  and  with 
some  24  pounder  howitzers  planted  in  a battery  against  this  fort,  but 
without  serious  effect,  and  the  expedition  is  effectually  checked  for  the 
present.  The  whole  force  under  McPherson  is  in  round  numbers  25,000, 
while  re-enforcements  are  being  hurried  forward  by  way  of  Ynzoo  Pass. 
General  Grant  is  sending  6,000  men  overland  from  Greenvdlle,  on  the 
Mississippi,  to  move  on  Yazoo  and  co-operate  with  the  expedition,  but 
the  country  through  which  this  body  will  have  to  pass  is  difficult  and 
full  of  streams,  of  which  the  Sunflower  is  the  most  considerable.  Gen- 
eral Gorman,  at  Helena,  had  on  the  21st  a report  that  this  corps  had 
effected  a junction  with  Quinby,  but  it  is  scarcely  possible. 

With  regard  to  details  of  operations  before  Vicksburg,  it  is  impossible 
to  procure  them  here.  The  cutting  of  Lake  Providence  is  perfectly 
successful,  but  Bayou  Macon  is  very  full  of  snags,  which  must  be  got 
out  before  the  Tensas  will  be  accessible.  The  canal  opposite  Vicksburg 
has  broken  through  at  its  upper  end.  The  river,  entering  with  great 
force,  strikes  the  railroad  embankment,  built  longitudinally  across  the 
peninsula,  which  diverts  the  current  to  the  bottom  in  the  rear,  and 
floods  the  land  without  cutting  the  channel.  A pile-driver  was  sent 
down  from  here  ten  days  ago  in  order  to  bar  the  opening  into  the  canal, 
so  that  the  digging  may  be  resumed,  but  by  the  time  it  is  successfully 
completed  the  lower  approaches  to  Vicksburg  will  no  doubt  be  as 
strongly  defended  as  from  above.  The  health  of  General  Grant’s  army 
has  greatly  improved,  and  at  present  the  sick-list  is  no  larger  than  usual. 
This  is  not  so  well  informed  a place  as  I hoped  to  find  it. 

0.  A.  DANA, 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War, 


CHAi’.  XXXVI,] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


65 


Memphis,  Tenn.,  March  24,  18G3 — 3 p.  m., 

Via  Cairo,  111.,  March  27. 

The  Yazoo  Pass  expedition  has  retreated  up  the  Yalabusha  (accord- 
ing to  General  B.  M.  Prentiss)  a distance  of  100  miles,  removing  the 
guns  from  the  battery  planted  against  Port  Pemberton.  It  now  waits 
for  re-enforcements  and  supplies,  the  gunboat  Chillicothe  having  gotten 
out  of  ammunition.  Some  of  the  small  boats  attached  to  this  expedi- 
tion, however,  are  reported  to  me  by  Paymaster  [Edwin  P.]  Judd  (who 
left  Young’s  Point  Friday)  as  having  succeeded  in  passing  Pemberton. 
Those  have  come  down  the  Yazoo  and  made  their  way  into  Steele’s 
Bayou,  near  Vicksburg.  Judd  saw  them,  and  saw  a messenger  from 
them  who  communicated  with  General  Grant.  Learning  from  this 
source  that  the  Yazoo  was  accessible  from  Steele’s  Bayou,  General  Grant 
has  already  moved  D.  Stuart’s  (formerly  Morgan  Smith’s)  division, 
0,000  strong,  under  Sherman,  into  the  Yazoo  from  Eagle  Bend,  on  the 
Mississippi,  about  40  miles  above  Vicksburg.  The  strip  of  laud  between 
that  bend  and  Steele’s  Bayou  is  IJ  miles  wide.  J.  McArthur’s  divis- 
ion, of  McPherson’s  corps,  was  to  move  yesterday  from  Lake  Prov- 
idence to  Eagle  Bend  to  re-enforce  Sherman,  making  his  whole  force 
about  13,000  men.  I learn  from  General  F.  Kimball,  who  left  Young’s 
Point  on  Saturday  afternoon,  that  Admiral  Porter,  with  gunboats,  has 
entered  the  Yazoo  above  Haynes’  Bluff  by  way  of  Steele’s  Bayou.  The 
movement  across  from  Greenville  to  re-enforce  the  Yazoo  Pass  expedi- 
tion has  been  abandoned,  the  route  being  impracticable,  and  the  divis- 
ion (Quinby’s)  by  which  it  was  attempted  is  at  Helena,  waiting  for 
transportation  through  the  pass.  J.  E.  Smith’s  division,  McPherson’s 
corps,  was  to  move  from  Helena  into  the  pass  this  morning.  Tlie  water 
is  now  flowing  freely  through  the  whole  length  of  the  canal  opposite 
Vicksburg,  but  produces  no  effect  in  wearing  away  the  compact  clay 
soil,  which  in  the  lower  half  of  its  course  is  especially  tenacious.  The 
dredging  machines  are  inadequate  to  complete  the  excavations,  and 
the  water,  though  too  shallow^  for  the  boats,  is  too  deep  for  men  to  dig- 
in.  Both  Kimball  and  Judd  think  it  is  a failure,  but  Admiral  Farra- 
gut  having  arrived  from  below  on  Friday  with  the  vessels  Hartford  and 
Albatross,  the  failure  is  of  less  consequence.  In  coming  up.  Admiral 
Farragut  drove  the  Queen  of  the  West  and  the  rebel  boats  into  the  Big 
Black,  where  he  could  not  follow  them  with  his  deep  vessels.  Admiral 
Porter  had  ordered  the  Lafayette  to  pass  Vicksburg  and  join  Farragut 
Saturday  night.  Kimball  reports  Lake  Providence  Canal  will  now 
freely  and  safely  pass  the  largest  vessels  through  into  Bed  Biver.  Kim- 
ball thinks  the  enemy  are  already  moving  away  material  and  prepar- 
ing to  evacuate  Vicksburg. 

The  cutting  of  the  Mississippi  levees  has  flooded  the  whole  country, 
and  their  only  avenue  of  supplies  or  of  escape  is  now  the  Jackson  Bail- 
road.  General  Grant  is  dead  sure  that  he  will  have  the  place  within  a 
fortnight. 

0.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


MempiiIvS,  Tenn.,  March  25,  1803— -5  p.  m.. 

Via  Cairo,  III.,  March  27. 

A steamer  which  left  Young’s  Point  Landing  arrived  this  morning; 
reports  no  news.  Some  officers  came  by  her,  but  I have  vainly  tried  to 

5 R R— YOL  XXIV,  FT  X 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


* 66 


find  them.  Hurlbut  has  no  intelligence.  Private  advices  confirm  that 
PortePs  gunboats  are  in  the  Yazoo,  above  Haynes’  Bluff.  Two  commis- 
sary transports  have  been  sunk  in  Yazoo  Pass  by  snags.  There  is  a 
rumor  that  the  expedition  is  definitely  abandoned,  but  I can  get  noth- 
ing official. 

C.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Memphis,  Tenn., 

March  26,  1863 — 1 in  in. 

A scout  of  Hurlbut’s,  who  left  Mobile  March  17,  reports  extraordi- 
nary trains  of  sick  arriving  there  from  Vicksburg,  Port  Hudson,  Jack- 
son,  and  other  posts  of  the  Vicksburg  army.  The  stations  and  towns 
along  the  way  were  also  full  of  them.  Stopping  supplies  from  Opelou- 
sas has  deprived  that  army  of  meat.  I saw  yesterday  a Mr.  Jordan,  a 
very  intelligent  planter,  who  resides  on  Yazoo.  He  says  that  river  is 
fortified  at  Shell  Bend  and  at  Honey  Island  much  more  powerfully  than 
at  Greenwood.  Liverpool  Bluff,  27  miles  above  Haynes’,  is  equally 
fortified,  as  the  river  is  obstructed  there  by  a raft  as  it  is  at  Haynes’. 
The  fact  reported  by  Paymaster  Judd,  that  boats  from  above  Greenwood 
had  got  down  into  Steele’s  Bayou,  he  pronounce^  physically  impossible. 
The  Big  Black  he  declares  to  be  impracticable  for  boats  of  any  size 
larger  than  skiffs,  except  at  its  mouth,  where  they  may  get  in  behind 
Grand  Gulf,  and  he  denies  what  others  have  asserted,  that  there  is  a 
draw  in  the  railroad  bridge  back  of  Vicksburg.  That  bridge,  he  says, 
is  protected  by  fortifications  held  by  20,000  men,  so  that  the  rebels  re- 
gard its  destruction  as  an  impossibilit3\  They  think  Vicksburg  im- 
pregnable against  any  force  but  starvation. 

Let  me  suggest  that  I should  be  much  more  useful  farther  down  the 
river  than  here.  At  General  Grant’s  headquarters  I can  get  the  truth. 
Here  it  is  difficult  and  uncertain. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Memphis,  Tenn., 

March  27,  1863—3.30  p.  m. 

The  news  from  Young’s  Point  is  to  Monday,  March  23.  There  is 
official  information  from  Helena,  but  none  has  come  here.  The  report 
is  that  Sherman  has  got  twenty  regiments  landed  on  the  east  bank  of 
Yazoo  Kiver  above  Haynes’  Bluff,  and  that  the  greatest  enthusiasm 
prevails  throughout  the  army  at  this  success.  The  report  that  he  is 
supported  by  gunboats  in  Yazoo  Eiver  is  repeated.  It  is  also  stated 
that  the  channel  from  Deer  Creek  into  the  Sunflower  had  to  be  enlarged 
by  digging  in  order  to  pass  them,  but  all  reports  here  on  this  subject 
are  confused  and  doubtful.  The  Y'azoo  Pass  expebition  is  not  aban- 
doned, but  has  received  supplies  and  been  re-enforced  by  Quinby’s  divis- 
ion. General  Ilurlbut’s  advices  of  March  17,  from  Mobile,  report  that 
five  iron-clad  rams  are  ready  for  use  in  the  harbor,  those  built  at  Selma 
having  been  brought  down.  • 

C.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Chap.  XXXVI.J 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


67 


Memphis,  Tenn.,  March  28, 1863 — 4 p.  m., 

Via  Cairo,  March  31. 

On  Tuesday  evening  last,  the  rams  Lancaster  and  Switzerland 
started  to  run  the  batteries  at  Vicksburg.  The  Lancaster  had  her  bow 
carried  away  by  a shot ; was  also  hit  amidships,  and  sank  in  twenty 
minutes.  Whether  any  on  board  were  saved  is  unknown.  The  Switz- 
erland was  also  hit,  but  got  through  without  serious  damage,  being 
taken».in  tow  by  the  Albatross,  which  came  under  fire  to  her  assistance. 
IS^o  news  from  Sherman^s  command  nor  from  Yazoo  Pass.  A passenger 
train  from  Memphis  to  Jackson  was  captured  by  guerrillas  near  Moscow 
this  morning  at  10  o’clock.  Forty  persons  were  taken.  The  engineer 
cat  loose,  and  got  safely  to  Moscow  with  the  locomotive. 

C.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department, 
Washington  City,  Mareh  30,  1863. 

C.  A.  Dana,  Esq., 

Memphis,  Tenn.,  via  Cairo : 

Your  telegrams  have  been  received,  and  although  the  information  has 
been  meager  and  unsatisfactory,  I am  conscious  that  arises  from  no  fault 
of  yours.  You  will  proceed  to  General  Grant’s  headquarters,  or  wher- 
ever you  may  be  best  able  to  accomplish  the  purposes  designated  by 
this  Department.  You  will  consider  your  movements  to  be  governed 
by  your  own  discretion  without  any  restriction. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Memphis,  Tenn.,  March  30,  1863—5  p.  m.. 

Via  Cairo,  III.,  April  1. 

General  Grant  has  sent  for  all  steamboats  that  can  be  had,  as  if  he 
intended  to  move  the  bulk  of  his  army  from  its  present  position,  and 
has  ordered  J.  G.  Lauman’s  division  here  to  be  held  ready  for  instant 
movement.  Three  boat-loads  of  Carr’s  men  jiassed  down  to  Helena  on 
Saturday.  No  official  news  from  below.  An  officer  arrived  here  reports 
the  crew  of  ram  Lancaster  escaped  from  that  vessel  in  yawls  as  she 
sank,  only  two  being  lost  by  drowning.  A report  that  ram  Monarch 
had  run  batteries  safely  he  pronounces  untrue.  No  gunboats  have  en- 
tered Yazoo  River  from  Porter’s  fleet.  They  can’t  force  the  passage 
from  Deer  Creek  into  the  Sunflower.  Porter  himself,  while  reconnoiter- 
ing  a bayou  in  a small  steamer,  was  caught  by  felling  trees  in  his  rear. 
Two  regiments  of  infantry  were  sent  out  and  extricated  him. 

The  newspapers  here  say  Sherman  has  taken  Haynes’  Bluff,  but  I can 
find  no  foundation  for  the  report.  General  Dodge  telegraphs  from  Cor- 
inth that  Midshipman  Henry  Travis,  of  sloop-of-war  Mississippi,  arrived 
there  yesterday,  paroled.  He  left,  prisoners  at  Jackson,  the  captain  of 
marines  and  46  men,  who  escaped  with  him  from  that  vessel.  He  re- 
ports the  ship  lost  by  becoming  uncontrollable  in  the  current  and  getting 
aground,  not  a shot  liaving  struck  her  previously.  After  she  grounded 
they  fought  her  an  hour,  and  then  set  her  on  fire.  All  hands  made  for 
the  shore.  She  then  floated  a distance  down  stream  airil  blew  up.  She 
was  not  harmed  by  the  rebels’  fire,  as  the  guns  on  the  bluff  could  not 
be  depressed  to  damage  her  much.  It  is  ascertained  by  a spy  of  Hurl- 


68 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


but^s  that  up  to  Wednesday  last  no  force  had  been  withdrawn  from 
Vicksburg,  except  one  brigade  sent  to  Yazoo  City.  A great  part  of  the 
rebel  army  was,  however,  previously  east  of  the  Big  Black.  He  also 
reports  but  few  troops,  and  those  militia,  at  Grenada,  but  heavy  force 
at . Since  they  came  into  the they  carried  off  all  the  car- 

penters and  carpenters’  tools  at  Panola ; they  are  also  gathering  troops. 
They  are  evidently  preparing  a movement  either  against  Hurlbut  or 
Yazoo  City.  Eebel  sympathizers  here  are  informed  the  Indianola  is 
not  sunk  or  destroyed,  but  is  being  repaired  behind  Grand  Gulf,  in  Big 
Black.  They  also  declare  Vicksburg  fully  provisioned  for  nine  months. 
The  rebels  have  assembled  a force  of  4,000  at  Tuscumbia,  and  a few 

days  'left  or  against  the  right  of  General  Kosecrans.  I wrote 

from  Columbus  respecting  Fort  Heiman.  Hurlbut  has  notified  General 
Bosecrans,  to  whose  department  it  now  belongs,  that  he  (Hurlbut)  cannot 
continue  to  garrison  it.  I respectfully^  suggest  it  ought  by  no  means  to 
be  abandoned. 

The  mutinous  One  hundred  and  ninth  Illinois,  decimated  by  deser- 
tion, has  gone  down  to  report  to  General  Grant  under  guard,  but  yet 
without  being  disarmed.  The  One  hundred  and  twenty-eighth,  which 
had  nearly  all  deserted  at  Cairo,  have  been  mostly  recaiitured,  and  are 
under  guard  there. 

C.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Memphis,  Tenn.,  March  31,  1863 — 1.30  p.  m. 

Sherman,  with  his  troops,  returned  to  Young’s  Point  on  Friday,  March 
27,  the  attempt  to  reach  the  Yazoo  by  way  of  Steele’s  Bayou  and  the 
Sunflower  having  iiroved  futile. 

Porter’s  entrapment  on  Bolling  Fork,  mentioned  in  my  dispatch  of 
yesterday,  occurred  on  Sunday,  March  22.  The  Confederate  force  was 
about  4,000,  with  artillery,  and  the  skirmish  for  his  extrication  lasted 
nearly  all  day.  We  had  10  or  12  privates  killed  and  wounded,  and  an 
engineer  on  a tug  killed  by  a shell. 

Tflie  ram  Switzerland  was  so  much  damaged  in  passing  Vicksburg  that 
she  must  be  repaired  before  she  can  be  of  service. 

170  news  from  the  Yazoo  Pass  expedition,  which,  as  I now  learn, 
returned  down  the  Cold  water  to  the  Tallahatchee  by  General  Grant’s 
express  order.  Quinby’s  division  is  with  it. 

Ten  of  the  most  prominent  and  wealthy  secession  families  of  Mem- 
])his  yesterday  received  orders  from  Hurlbut  to  leave  the  city  instantly. 
This  is  in  consequence  of  orders  issued  in  January  notifying  all  such 
persons  that  their  remaining  here  depended  upon  their  friends  beyond 
our  lines  leaving  the  railroad  undisturbed.  The  attack  of  28th  near 
Moscow  is  punished  by  this  expulsion.  The  same  attack  has  also  been 
more  severely  punished  by  Lieuteuant-Colouel  [BeubenJ  Loomis,  of 
Grierson’s  cavalry,  from  La  Grange,  who  was  sent  by  General  W.  S. 
Smith  with  200  men  to  pursue  the  guerrillas.  He  overtook  them  Sun- 
day afternoon,  100  strong,  6 miles  southeast  of  Belmont,  Tenn.,  and 
after  a brisk  skirmish  they  gave  way,  leaving  in  Loomis’  hands  Captain 
[Beuben]  Burrow,  1 orderly  sergeant,  and  0 iirivates  jirisoners.  Pro- 
ceeding 5 or  6 miles  farther,  Loomis  bivouacked,  and  precisely  at  mid- 
night his  command,  consisting  of  only  130  men,  deducting  those  out  on 
])icket  duty,  was  attacked  by  Col.  B.  V.  Biebardson  with  500  or  600  men. 
After  fighting  about  fifteen  minutes  the  rebels  fell  back,  leaving  on  the 


C1IA1>.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


G9 


field  2 lieutenants  and  4 privates  killed,  and  Major  [B.  B.]  Benson  mor- 
tally wounded.  The  neighboring  people  report  they  had  40  or  50  killed 
and  several  wounded,  including  Kichardson  himself,  whose  wounds  are 
dangerous.  We  lost  Lieut.  Jesse  B.  Wilson  and  7 privates  killed  and 
35  wounded,  many  of  them  slightly,  including  4 commissioned  officers. 
Wilson  fell  very  gallantly  in  the  thick  of  the  melee,  fighting  in  his  shirt- 
sleeves as  he  had  sprung  from  sleep.  The  rebels  fled  from  their  own 
camp  at  2 o^clock  in  the  morning.  Loomis  brought  in  20  prisoners. 

0.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Memphis,  Tenn.,  Ayril  1,  1803 — 4 p.  m. 

On  Saturday,  the  28th,  after  the  return  of  Sherman,  Grant  said  con- 
fidentially that  he  had  now  tried  unsuccessfully  every  conceivable  in- 
direct means  of  attacking  Vicksburg,  and  that  nothing  but  a direct 
assault  upon  the  enemy’s  works  remained.  This  is  also  the  opinion  of 
the  general  officers  of  his  command.  With  regard  to  such  an  assault, 
the  judgment  of  these  officers  is  divided.  Frank  Blair  is  reported  to 
me  as  favoring  it,  but  I believe  General  Grant  himself  is  opposed  to  it, 
as  is  Sherman,  the  most  influential  of  all  General  Grant’s  subordinates, 
though  I have  no  positive  information  on  that  point.  I have  no  doubt 
that  General  Grant  is  about  to  move  the  bulk  of  his  army  back  up  the 
river.  He  is  confident,  however,  that  without  taking  Vicksburg  he  can, 
in  co-operation  with  Admiral  Farragut  and  General  Banks,  eflectually 
cut  off  Confederate  supplies  from  west  of  the  river.  Deserters  from 
Vicksburg  who  arrived  in  General  Grant’s  camp  on  Saturday  report 
that  food,  excluding  meat,  is  plenty  in  the  town.  There  had  been  a de- 
ficiency, but  now  the  supply  is  ample.  A Mr.  Walton— a respectable 
gentleman,  who  arrived  from  Lower  and  Central  Mississippi  at  General 
W.  S.  Smith’s  headquarters.  La  Grange,  yesterday— reports  that  sup- 
iflies  for  Vicksburg  are  everywhere  being  seized.  In  Noxubee  County 
200,000  pounds  of  pork  have  just  been  taken.  He  also  reports  that 
there  is  not  much  Confedetate  force  in  Northern  and  Eastern  Missis- 
sippi, but  a great  concentration  against  General  Eosecrans,  especially 
of  cavalry.  He  says  there  are  already  20,000  horsemen  in  Johnston’s 
army,  and  every  effort  is  being  made  to  swell  the  number  to  25,000,  in 
order  to  make  the  defeat  of  General  Eosecrans  crushing  in  case  he 
should  have  the  worst  in  the  approachiug  battle. 

Dodge  reports  from  Corinth  to-day  that  the  rebels  are  repairing  all 
the  bridges  across  the  streams  from  Savannah  east  aud  Florence  north. 
They  are  also  building  a large  number  of  boats  in  the  creeks  leading  into 
the  Tennessee  Eiver,  and  have  massed  a body  of  cavalry  at  the  mouth 
of  Duck  Eiver.  The  same  officer  reported  yesterday  that  Van  Dorn’s 
men  had  fallen  back  from  Lawrenceburg  to  Lowry  ville,  and  that  about 
500  cavalry  remained  at  Waynesborough.  The  men  said  they  were  going 
back  to  Mississippi. 

From  Vazoo  Pass  there  is  news  of  the  renewal  of  fighting  at  Fort 
Pemberton,  but  nothing  official  or  decisive  on  this  subject.  I shall 
doubtless  be  able  to  rejiort  tully  from  Helena,  whither  I go  to-morrow. 
Your  dispatch  of  the  30th  is  received. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


C.  A.  DANA. 


70 


[Chav.  XXX VL 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


Memphis,  Tenn.,  April  2,  1863. 

General  J.  D.  Webster,  of  General  Grant’s  staff,  who  left  Young’s 
Point  Tuesday  afternoon,  arrived  here  this  evening.  From  him  I have 
authentic  information.  General  Grant  has  no  intention  of  either  with- 
drawing the  bulk  of  his  army  or  attempting  a direct  assault  on  Vicks- 
burg. When  Webster  left,  arrangements  had  been  completed  for  begin- 
ning to  open  a passage  from  7 to  9 miles  long  through  a bayou  empty- 
ing into  the  Mississippi  atMilliken’s  Bend  to  a point  below  Warrenton. 
Extent  of  canal  to  be  dug  is  from  one-half  to  two-thirds  of  a mile.  The 
bayou  will  also  have  to  be  straightened  and  widened  in  one  or  two 
places  and  cleared  of  trees.  Webster  thinks  that  the  job  will  not  require 
more  than  two  weeks’  time.  Another  plan,  which  is  also  contemplated, 
is  to  float  empty  transports  past  Vicksburg  in  the  dark,  having  steam 
enough  to  save  them  from  floating  ashore  in  case  of  need,  but  not  enough 
to  betray  their  presence  to  the  enemy.  Having  got  them  iiast.  Grant’s 
troops  can  be  marched  down  on  the  Louisiana’  side,  embarked  below 
the  rebel  batteries,  and  conveyed  to  the  point  where  they  will  most 
effectually  threaten  the  bridge  over  the  Big  Black.  Our  engineers  have 
constructed  two  casemates  on  the  shore  opposite  Vicksburg,  whence 
with  30-pounder  Parrotts  they  can  destroy  any  building  in  the  town. 
The  distance  is  some  3,000  yards.  These  casemates  are  of  timber  covered 
with  railroad  iron  and  protected  by  embankments.  When  Webster 
left,  they  were  nearly  completed,  but  as  the  work  was  done  at  night 
they  had  not  attracted  the  attention  of  the  enemy.  They  are  the  more 
safe  because,  little  lateral  play  being  required  for  the  guns,  their  embra- 
sures are  unusually  narrow.  The  Yazoo  Pass  expedition  is  definitely 
abandoned,  but  the  orders  required  a final  and  vigorous  attack  on  Fort 
Pemberton  before  withdrawing.  The  array  ofiicers  in  that  expedition 
blame  very  greatly  the  captain  of  the  Ohillicothe,  who  commanded  the 
naval  force,  for  not  taking  with  him  sufficient  ammunition  at  the  outset. 
Could  he  have  fought  his  vessel  a little  longer,  the  fort  might  easily  have 
been  taken.  I leave  for  Young’s  Point  on  first  boat. 

C.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


P.  S.— General  Grant  has  ordered  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Bail- 
road  between  Grand  Junction  and  Corinth  to  be  opened.  Webster  begins 
it  to-morrow.  Paymaster  Judd  received  to-day  $5,000,000,  which  has 
been  distributed  to  his  subordinates,  who  willrJeave  for  the  points  of 
disbursement  to-morrow.  General  Hurlbut  proposes  to  settle  the  negro 
question  hereby  enrolling  for  duty  as  pioneers,  teamsters.  &c.,  all  who 
are  fit  for  service  in  this  immediate  vicinity  and  along  the  line  of  the 
railroad  which  he  is  guarding,  taking  sufficient  bonds  for  the  good  treat- 
ment and  return  of  the  persons.  This  plan  General  Grant  has  ai)i)roved, 
and  it  will  at  once  be  put  into  execution.  Hurlbut  also  proposes  to 
select  out  of  the  enrolled  men  a regiment  of  artillerymen  to  garrison 
the  fort  here.  He  says  he  can  find  excellent  material,  and  that  the  men 
will  not  be  troubled  by  the  white  soldiers.  This  project  has  not  been 
submitted  to  General  Grant — C.  A.  D. 


Helena,  April  5,  1863, 

Via  Memphis,  April  10. 

I find  here  no  important  information  respecting  General  Grant’s  move- 
ments. McClernand  has  moved  from  his  position  at  IMilliken’s  Bend 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


71 


and  on  tlie  3d  occupied  Eicliinond,  on  the  railroad  opposite  Vicksburp;'. 
Yesterday  lie  was  to  have  occupied  IS^ew  Carthage,  on  the  Louisiana 
side,  below  Warreiiton.  Steele’s  division  has  been  thrown  up  to  Green- 
ville, on  the  Mississippi  side,  with  the  design  of  capturing  a rebel  foi  ce 
of  one  or  two  regiments  in  the  country  between  that  point  and  the  Sun- 
tiower.  Ino  part  of  the  Y^azoo  Pass  expedition  has  arrived  here,  nor  is 
there  any  information  that  the  retreat  is  yet  commenced. 

0.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Milliken’s  Bend,  Aj)ril  G,  18G3— 3 p.  m.. 

Via  Cairo,  111.,  April  10 — 8.40  p.  m. 

I arrived  here  to-day  at  noon.  General  Grant  is  very  confident  that 
Vicksburg  will  soon  be  taken,  not  only  from  the  result  of  the  operations 
now  on  foot,  but  also  from  the  starvation  of  the  garrison.  He  tells  me 
that  all  supplies  from  his  side  of  the  river  are  already  entirely  cut  off, 
and  those  from  the  Yazoo  country  are  greatly  diminished  ; that  he  ex- 
pects them  to  be  altogeiher  stopped  by  the  operations  of  Steele’s  divis- 
ion, whose  movement  to  Greenville  was  mentioned  in  my  dispatch  from 
Helena  yesterday.  His  advices  from  the  town  represent  the  people  as 
already  suffering  much, and  the  garrison  on  reduced  rations;  that  Mc- 
Clernand'S  corps  occupied  New  Carthage  yesterday,  and  that  McPherson 
is  about  to  move  from  Lake  Providence  to  this  place.  The  new  cut-off'  is 
already  half  completed.  Three  thousand  five  hundred  men  are  at  work 
on  it  to-day,  and  Col.  G.  G.  Pride,  the  engineer  in  charge,  says  that  he 
will  be  ready  for  it  just  as  soon  as  the  necessary  tugs  and  liarges  can 
be  got  here  from  u})  the  river.  The  length  of  infvigation  in  this  cut- 
off'will  be  some  30  miles,  and  the  plan  is  to  take  through  it  small  tugs, 
with  some  fifty  barges,  enough  to  cross  the  whole  army,  with  artillery 
and  baggage,  in  twenty-four  hours.  The  channel  will  only  be  wide 
enough  for  narrow  crafts.  The  half  dozen  steamboats,  protected  by 
defenses  of  sand  bags  and  wet  hay,  will  be  floated  down  the  river  past 
the  batteries,  to  ser\-e  as  transports  of  supplies  after  the  crossing  is 
eff'ected  ; the  landing  to  be  made  at  or  about  Grand  Gulf,  and  the  army 
is  to  operate  on  the  southern  or  eastern  shore  of  the  Big  Black,  where 
the  land  is  elevated  and  the  roads  good,  threatening  both  the  bridge 
across  the  Big  Black  and  Jackson,  the  one  point  some  50  miles  and  the 
other  some  75  miles  from  the  place  of  debarkation.  The  enemy  will  be 
compelled  to  come  out  and  fight.  The  wagon  train  left  behind  when 
the  army  left  Memphis  has  now  been  ordered  down  for  the  purposes  of 
this  movement. 

(Jf  course  this  dispatch  is  hurried  and  incomplete  as  regards  details, 
but  I deemed  it  best  to  lose  no  time  in  sending  it  forward. 

C.  A.  DANA.. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Milliken’s  Bend,  April  8,  18G3, 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  April  11—5  p.  m. 

Everything  is  going  on  cheeringly.  The  canal  from  Ducki)ort  to  the 
bayou  will  be  ready  by  niglit  to  let  in  the  water.  A force  equal  to  live 
regiments  is  now  at  work  digging,  while  a strong  body  of  ])ioneers  are 
engaged  clearing  the  bayou.  From  Kiclimond  to  the  river  it  is  already 


72 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  SXXVI. 


clear,  steamboats  having  formerly  ascended  to  that  place.  None  of 
Quinby’s  forces  have  yet  been  heard  of  here,  though  the  rebel  news- 
paper, the  Appeal,  says  they  withdrew  up  tlie  Cold  water  on  Thurs- 
day last.  There  are  no  indications  of  any  attempt  on  the  part  of  the 
rebels  to  cut  them  off.  Quin  by  will  come  directly  here  and  not  debark 
at  Lake  Providence,  where  McPherson  and  the  rest  of  the  Seventeenth 
Army  Corps  are.  I learn  that  when  Admiral  Porter  was  entrapped  by 
the  rebels  at  Deer  Creek  week  before  last,  his  situation  was  so  desperate 
that  when  Sherman’s  forces  arrived  to  relieve  him,  they  found  he  had 
already  smeared  his  gunboats  with  turpentine  preparatory  to  abandon- 
ing them  and  setting  them  afire. 

Weather  continues  cool  here.  Neither  mosquitoes  nor  gnats  have  yet 
troubled  men  or  animals. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Milliken’s  Bend,  April  10,  1863, 

Yia  Memphis,  Tenn.,  April  13. 

Everything  goes  forward  encouragingly.  The  canal  will  be  ready  for 
trial  in  two  or  three  days,  as  soon  as  the  water  is  let  in,  which  it  is  deemed 
advisable  to  postpone  for  fear  the  overflow  may  destroy  the  road  hence 
to  Richmond  and  Carthage  before  the  remaining  troops  of  McGlernand’s 
corps  have  marched  over  it.  The  preparations  for  running  the  batteries 
by  the  gunboats  and  transports  are  also  nearly  completed,  and  that 
enterprise  will  soon  be  accomplished.  Probably  five^  or  six  gunboats, 
including  the  rest  of  the  squadron,  led  by  Admiral  Porter  himself,  will 
go  down  within  two  days,  as  the  nights  are  dark  and  promise  to  be 
cloudy.  The  actual  length  of  the  canal  and  bayou  navigation  x>roves 
to  be  37  miles,  and  Capt.  F.  S.  Prime,  who  returned  last  night 
from  exploring  the  whole  passage,  reports  that  there  will  be  no  dif- 
ficulty in  making  it  practicable  throughout,  if  necessary,  by  cutting 
the  levee  near  the  head  of  the  bayou  and  flooding  the  whole  country. 
A depth  of  15  feet  of  water  can  be  gotten  throughout  the  entire  passage. 
But  perhaps  the  best  evidence  of  the  possibility  of  the  iiroject  is  found 
in  the  ffict  that  the  river  men  who  have  seen  it  pronounce  its  success 
certain.  General  Sherman,  with  whom  I have  conversed  at  length  upon 
the  subject,  thinks  there  is  no  difficulty  in  opening  the  passage,  but  that 
the  line  will  be  a precarious  one  after  the  army  is  thrown  across  the 
Mississippi.  His  preference  is  for  a movement  by  way  of  Yazoo  Pass, 
landing  the  army  somewhere  in  the  region  of  Charleston,  and  threaten- 
ing Grenada  and  Jackson  from  that  point,  at  the  same  time  that  the 
rich  region  of  Northern  Mississippi  is  held  and  the  enemy  deprived  of 
the  supi)]ies  derived  from  the  line  of  the  Yazoo  and  the  Sunflower;  or 
lie  is  in  favor  of  moving  down  by  vray  of  Lake  Providence  to  the  line  of 
the  Tensas  and  Red  Rivers,  and  by  holding  that  region  sever  the  rebel 
connections  and  sliut  off'  their  western  supplies;  but  I judge  that  his 
mind  is  now  tending  to  the  conclusion  of  General  Grant  in  favor  of 
crossing,  seizing  Grand  Gulf,  and  operating  from  that  basis.  As  for 
General  Grant,  his  purpose  is  set  in  that  direction,  and  if  the  new  canal 
should  fail  he  will  move  his  entire  forces  overland  to  Carthage  or  there- 
abouts, run  transiiorts  enough  jiast  batteries  to  carry  them,  and  ])rovis- 
ion  them  by  wagons,  and  by  running  the  batteries  afterward.  Admiral 
Porter  cordially  agrees  with  the  plan  now  being  executed.  How  far 
the  enemy  suspects  this  scheme  is  uncertain.  Parts  of  it  have  been 


CiiAr.  xxxri.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


73 


published  in  some  of  the  . Northern  papers,  but  the  probability  is  that 
the  rebels  regard  the  publication  as  a blind  to  cover  other  designs. 
They  believe  Snyder’s  or  Drumgould’s  Bluff  is  to  be  assaulted,  and 
there  and  at  Chickasaw  Bayou  they  are  making  considerable  prepa- 
rations. They  are,  however,  i^erfectly  aware  of  the  construction  of  our 
casemated  batteries  in  front  of  the  city,  two  of  which  were  completed 
yesterday,  while  the  other  two  are  to  be  done  to  night.  They  fired  one 
gun  at  tliem  yesterday,  but  evidently  do  not  mean  to  waste  ammunition 
on  them.  These  batteries  will  open  on  the  town  whenever  a feigned 
attack  is  made  on  Snyder’s  Bluff  and  whenever  the  gunboats  go  down. 

Whether  the  enemy  is  strengthening  Grand  Gulf  is  not  known.  At 
last  advices,  J.  S.  Bowen’s  Missouri  brigade  was  there,  with  one  or  two 
Louisiana  companies.  The  forces  are  all  safe  out  of  Yazoo  Pass.  The 
weather  is  warm,  but  not  uncomfortable.  The  health  of  the  troops 
could  hardly  be  better.  Sterling  Price  and  Kirby  Smith  were  both  at 
Little  Eock  on  the  1st  or  2d.  Price  has  offered  i)ardon  to  all  deserters 
who  will  return,  and  has  gathered  about  10,000  men. 

0.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  April  12,  1863, 

Yia  Memphis,  Tenn.,  April  15 — 1 p.  m. 

(Eeceived  April  15 — 9.30  p.  m.) 

An  important  modification  has  resulted  in  the  immediate  plan  of 
operations  from  a letter  of  General  Halleck  received  on  the  10th.  It 
is  now  determined  that  after  the  occnjiation  of  Grand  Gulf,  instead  of 
operating  up  the  Big  Black  toward  Jackson  and  the  bridge  in  the  rear 
of  Vicksburg,  the  main  force  shall  proceed  against  Port  Hudson.  Dis- 
patches will  at  once  be  sent  to  General  Banks  inviting  him  to  co-oper- 
ate. There  is  still  some  uncertainty  respecting  the  time  of  the  move- 
ment. The  original  plan  was  to  depend  on  the  canal  for  transporting 
supplies,  and,  if  necessary,  troops  also,  but  about  Wednesday  last  this 
plan  was  changed  so  far  as  to  determine  to  march  the  troops  to  New  Car- 
thage by  way  of  Eichmond,  and  preparations  have  been  made  to  improve 
the  road  for  that  purpose  by  raising  it  above  the  expected  level  of  the 
water,  but  it  now  appears  that  the  canal  and  road  cannot  both  be  relied 
upon.  If  the  water  is  let  into  the  canal,  the  road  will  probably  be  over- 
flowed, while  a rain-storm  which  prevailed  through  last  night  made  the 
road  very  muddy,  and  iiroved  that  a storm  of  twenty-four  hours  would 
render  it  impassable  for  days.  It  is  probable,  accordingly,  that  the 
canal  will  be  employed  for  troops  as  well  as  supplies,  and  that  the  move- 
ment will  be  X)ostponed  till  it  can  be  fully  opened.  Col.  G.  G.  Pride 
estimates  that  another  week  will  be  requisite  to  let  in  the  water,  finish 
the  dredging,  and  entirely  clear  out  all  the  trees.  The  digging  is  already 
complete  so  far  as  it  can  be  done  by  hand,  and  the  clearing  of  the  trees 
has  been  carried  nearly  to  Eichmond.  The  barges  and  tugs  which  are 
expected  from  Saint  Louis  will  probably  not  arrive  before  the  end  of 
the  present  week.  If,  however.  General  Grant  adheres  to  his  later  idea 
of  marching  some  30,000  men  to  New  Carthage,  the  water  cannot  be  let 
into  the  canal  until  they  have  gotten  over  the  road.  There  will  be  no 
chance  of  their  finding  ground  to  camp  on  out  of  reach  of  the  overflow 
that  the  opening  of  the  canal  will  produce,  but  if  this  i)lan  is  adopted. 
Admiral  Porter  will  take  his  vessels  down  within  the  next  three  days, 
and  transports  for  the  troops  will  also  run  the  batteries,  and  the  blow  at 


74 


[Cum*.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


Grand  Gulf  will  be  struck  before  the  canal  is  finished  and  its  utility 
decided  by  experiment.  Admiral  Porter  is  ready  and  anxious  to  go 
forward,  but  I presume  tlie  more  cautious  course  will  be  chosen.  The 
attack  on  Grand  Gulf  will  be  led  by  McClernand,  and  though  General 
Grant  has  not  told  me  so,  I conclude  he  intends  the  same  officer  to  have 
command  of  the  further  movement  against  Port  Hudson.  I have  re- 
monstrated, so  far  as  I could  properly  do  so,  against  intrusting  so 
momentous  an  operation  to  McClernand,  and  I know  that  Admiral 
Porter  and  prominent  members  of  his  staff  have  done  the  same,  but 
General  Grant  will  not  be  changed.  McClernand  is  exceedingly  desir- 
ous of  this  command.  He  is  the  senior  of  the  other  corps  commanders. 
He  is  believed  to  be  an  especial  favorite  of  the  President,  and  the  posi- 
tion which  his  corps  occupied  on  the  ground  here  when  this  movement 
was  first  projected  was  such  that  the  advance  naturallj^  fell  to  its  lot; 
besides,  he  entered  zealously  into  the  plan  from,  the  first,  while  Sher- 
man doubted  and  criticised,  and  McPherson,  whom  General  Graut 
would  really  much  prefer,  is  away  at  Lake  Providence;  and  though  I 
understand  him  to  approve  of  the  scheme,  helms  had  no  active  part  in 
it.  It  is  estimated  that  10,000  men  can  take  Grand  Gulf,  fortif3"  it,  and 
hold  it,  and  at  the  same  time  make  any  necessary  feints  up  the  sliore 
of  the  Big  Black,  while  20,000  more  go  down  to  Port  Hudson.  In  this 
operation  McClernand  and  McPherson  will  both  be  engaged,  while  Sher- 
man will  remain  to  menace  Vicksburg  from  here  and  guard  the  line  of 
communications.  McPherson’s  troops  have  been  ordered  here  for  the 
movement.  P.  Steele  reports  from  Greenville  that  he  has  taken  2,000 
head  of  cattle  and  great  numbers  of  negroes,  and  destroyed  enormous 
quantities  of  forage  that  he  could  not  remove.  He  pursued  S.  W.  Fer- 
guson as  far  as  he  dared.  General  [Lorenzo]  Thomas  arrived  here 
yesterday.  He  is  quite  ill  with  the  diarrhea,  but  is  better  this  morning. 

C.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  ]\r.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Milliken’s  Bend,  A][)ril  14,  18G3, 

Via  Memphis,  April  23. 

Col.  G.  G.  Pride  let  the  water  into  his  canal  at  12  m.  yesterday.  The 
channel  is  now  full,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  its  usefulness. 
The  dredges  have  been  at  work  deepening  it  all  to-day.  Maj.  W. 
Tweeddale,  who  was  sent  with  a working  party  to  clear  out  the  trees 
from  the  bayou,  reports  that  all  is  done  to  within  5 miles  of  Bich- 
mond,  but  that  the  remaining  distance  is  much  more  obstructed  than 
the  rest  of  the  line,  so  that  four  days  at  least  will  be  required  to  open 
the  passage  for  tugs  and  barges.  Prom  Eichmond  to  New  Carthage 
the  way  is  believed  to  be  clear,  though  it  is  not  yet  settled  whether  open- 
ing this  canal  will  overflow  the  road.  General  Grant  is  pushing  troops 
forward  to  New  Carthage  by  the  road.  He  thinks  no  overflow  will 
occur.  Osterhaus’  division  has  been  at  New  Carthage  for  ten  days ; A. 
J.  Smith’s  division  is  under  orders  to  march  to-morrow,  and  Hovey  fol- 
lows immediately,  all  under  McClernand.  The  camp  equipage  of  the 
army  cor])s  is  to  be  sent  down  in  four  barges  along  with  Admiral  Por- 
ter’s gunboats,  which  are  intended  to  run  the  batteries  to-morrow  night, 
taking  with  them  three  transports.  Having  passed  the  batteries,  the 
transi)orts,  barges,  and  gunboats  will  take  on  board  10,000  troops,  and 
cai)ture  Grand  Gulf  before  it  can  be  re-enforced.  The  transports  and 
barges  will  at  once  return  lor  more  troops,  and  as  soon  as  the  whole 


Chap.  XXXYL] 


GENERAL  REPORT. 


force  can  be  embarked  and  the  working  of  the  canal  insures  supplies, 
the  movement  against  Port  Hudson  will,  proceed.  Though  the  danger 
of  going  against  Grand  Gulf  before  the  canal  is  done  is  understood,  still, 
General  Grant  thinks  it  necessary  to  take  the  risk,  for  fear  the  enemy 
may  get  before  him.  It  is,  however,  now  settled  that  McClernand  will 
not  go  farther  than  Grand  Gulf,  but  will  remain  there  to  command  the 
post,  while  General  Grant  himself  will  go  on  to  Port  Hudson,  taking 
McPherson  and  30,000  troops  with  him.  Enemy  still,  apparently,  have 
no  idea  of  this  movement,  but  look  constantly  for  an  assault  on  Haynes’ 
Bluff  or  Vicksburg  direct. 

Health  and  spirits  of  troops  excellent.  Weather  cool  and  somewhat 
rainy,  but  not  enough  so  to  spoil  the  roads. 

C.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department, 
Washington  City,  April  30,  1863. 

C.  A.  Dana, 

Millihe7i\s  Bend,  via  Memphis : 

Your  several  dispatches  have  been  duly  received,  and  are  very  wel 
come.  Allow  me  to  suggest  that  you  carefully  avoid  giving  any  advice 
in  respect  to  commands  that  may  be  assigned,  as  it  may  lead  to  misun- 
derstanding and  troublesome  complications. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON. 


Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  April  IG,  1863 — 6 p.  ni., 

Via  Memphis,  April  24. 

(Peceived  Aimil  25 — 4.40  p.  m.) 

Vicksburg  batteries  will  be  run  to-night  about  0 o’clock.  Fleet  will 
consist  of  six  iron-clad  turtles,  viz : Benton,  Mound  City,  Carondelet, 
Louisville,  Pittsburg,  and  DeKalb,  besides  Lafayette,  iron-clad,  and 
General  Price,  heavy  armed  ram.  Admiral  Porter  had  intended  to  take 
theTuscumbia,  iron-clad,  also,  but  has  concluded  to  leave  her  in  Yazoo. 
Transports  consist  of  Henry  Olay  and  Forest  Queen,  side-wheel  steam- 
ers, and  Silver  AV^ave,  stern-wheel,  having  twelve  barges  in  tow,  or  fol- 
lowing separately  in  the  current.  The  barges  carry  the  camp  equipage 
of  General  McOlernand’s  corps,  some  forage,  and  some  coal.  There  is 
also  one  which  will  float  down  far  astern,  carrying  ammunition.  Admiral 
Porter,  who  goes  in  command,  also  takes  a small  tug.  The  gunboats 
and  transports  are  protected  in  vulnerable  parts  by  bulwarks  of  hay, 
cotton,  and  sand-bags.  No  doubt  is  felt  that  the  design  is  known  in 
Vicksburg,  and  Admiral  Porter  will  fire  all  his  guns  in  iiassing.  Our 
new  batteries  on  the  levee  will  also  participate. 

General  Grant  goes  to  New  Carthage  to-morrow  morning  to  direct  the 
subsequent  operations  from  that  point,  though,  as  I have  previously 
reported.  General  McClernand  will  command  the  attack  upon  Grand 
Gulf.  All  of  McClernand’s  troops  that  remain  here,  including  A.  J. 
Smith’s  and  Carr’s  divisions,  have  marched  for  New  Carthage. 

Qiiinby’s  division,  of  General  McPherson’s  corps,  arrived  here  yester- 
day. Quinb}"  remains  at  Helena,  dangerously  sick,  and  the  command 
devolves  upon  Col.  J.  B.  Sanborn.  McPherson,  with  oiic  of  his  other 
divisions,  ])robably  McArthur’s,  is  expected  to-day  or  to-morrow,  and 
his  whole  corps  should  be  here  within  five  days.  The  wcatlier  is  per- 


76 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


feet  for  either  marchiDg  or  fighting,  and  the  spirit  of  the  troops  is  all 
that  could  be  desired.  The  labor  on  Pride’s  cut-olf  is  pushed  forward 
with  energy,  and  everything  about  it  continues  to  be  encouraging. 
The  road  to  Eichmond  and  New  Carthage  is  overflowed  to  some  extent, 
but  is  not  rendered  impassable. 

C.  A.  DANA. 


non.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  April  17,  18G3— 10  a.  m.. 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  April  24. 

Admiral  Porter’s  squadron  cast  loose  from  its  moorings  in  month  of 
Yazoo  just  before  10  o’clock  last  night,  and  dropped  down  the  Missis- 
sippi darkly  and  silently,  showing  neither  steam  nor  light  save  occa- 
sionally a signal  astern,  wLere  the  enemy  could  not  see  it.  The  vessels 
moved  at  intervals  of  about  200  yards,  the  Benton  leading,  the  rest  fol- 
lowing, as  pointed  out  in  my  dispatch  of  yesterday,  save  that  the  Tus- 
cumbia  went  instead  of  the  De  Kalb,  and  closed  the  column,  having  the 
three  transports  immediately  before  her.  The  most  of  the  gunboats  had 
already  doubled  the  tongue  of  land  which  stretches  in  front  of  Vicks- 
burg when  there  was  a flash  from  the  enemy’s  upper  batteries,  and 
then  for  an  hour  and  a half  the  cannonade  was  terrific,  raging  inces- 
santly along  the  line  of  about  4 miles  in  extent.  I counted  five  hundred 
and  twenty-five  discharges,  w^hile  early  in  the  action  the  enemy  lit  a 
bonfire  in  front  ofVicksburg  to  light  up  the  scene  and  direct  his  fire. 

About  12.45  a.  m.  a steamer,  which  proved  to  be  the  Henry  Clay, 
also  took  fire  and  burned  for  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  but  I rejoice  to 
report  this  was  the  only  vessel  we  lost ; that  the  gunboats  all  passed 
down  uninjured,  tlie  Benton  alone  of  the  squadron  being  hit,  and  she 
only  by  a single  ball,  which  killed  1 man  and  wounded  3 others.  Not 
another  gunboat  was  touched,  and  only  one  hit  (the  Porest  Queen, 
transport),  and  this  did  her  no  serious  damage.  The  Henry  Clay  was 
lost  by  being  abandoned  by  her  captain  and  crew  in  a panic,  they  think- 
ing her  to  be  sinking.  The  pilot  refused  to  go  with  them,  and  said  if 
they  would  stay  they  would  get  her  through  safely.  After  they  had 
fled  in  the  yawis,  the  cotton  bales  on  her  deck  took  fire,  and  one  wLeel 
became  unmanageable.  The  pilot  then  ran  her  aground,  and  got  upon 
a plank,  on  which  he  was  picked  up  4 miles  belovr.  1 have  the  facts 
from  an  otficer  of  Quinby’s  division.  Sherman  was  aboard  the  Benton 
after  she  had  got  through.  The  substance  of  his  personal  statement 
will  be  forwarded  by  General  Grant  to  General  Halleck  along  with  this 
dispatch,  and  will  correct  any  errors  in  my  report. 

(3ur  new  batteries  were  ordered  to  open  on  the  public  buildings  of 
Vicksburg  at  daylight  this  morning.  McPherson  arrived  here  last 
night  with  Logan’s  division.  General  Grant  is  just  starting  for  New 
Carthage.  I go  with  him. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Milliken’s  Bend,  April  20,  1SG3. 

(Received  April  24.) 

General  Grant  went  to  New. Carthage  on  the  17th,  returning  on  the 
18th.  Found  Admiral  Porter’s  squadron  there,  all  in  fighting  condition, 


% 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


77 


though  most  of  them  had  been  hit  yesterday,  with  Silver  Wave  (trans- 
port). Forest  Queen  (transport)  had  her  steam  drum  broken  under 
Vicksburg  batteries,  and  was  left  above  Warrenton,  but  has  been 
repaired,  and  was  brought  down  at  2 o’clock  this  moruing.  Admiral 
Porter  reports  no  batteries  at  Warrenton,  but  some  10  or  12  pounder 
guns,  which  feebly  answered  his  tire.  No  one  was  killed  in  passing 
Vicksburg;  man  supposed  killed  was  only  stunned.  J.  S.  Bowen,  com- 
manding at  Grand  Gulf,  has  sent  over  three  regiments  to  dislodge  Oster- 
haus  from  New  Carthage.  His  outposts  were  near  ours,  and  there  had 
been  some  ineffectual  cannonading  on  the  levee,  the  only  point  of  ap- 
proach by  land. 

On  morning  of  17th,  before  Admiral  Porter  arrived,  a rebel  steamer 
appeared  just  below  New  Carthage,  but  did  not  stay.  On  afternoon  of 
17th,  iAdmiral  Porter  sent  the  Tuscumbia  to  shell  out  Boweffs  camp, 
about  2 miles  below  Carthage.  Whether  Bowen  had  succeeded  in  get- 
ting his  force  back  to  Grand  Gulf  is  unknown. 

Admiral  Porter  sent  Louisville  (gunboat)  down  the  Mississippi  on 
morning  of  18th,  but  we  have  received  no  news  from  there  since.  Gen- 
eral McCleruand  has  his  headquarters  on  Mrs.  Smith’s  plantation,  on 
Boundaway  Bayou,  opposite  the  entrance  of  Bayou  Vidal,  about  3 miles 
from  New  Carthage.  Osterhaus’  division  is  mainly  encamped  there. 
Hovey’s,  Carr’s,  and  A.  J.  Smith’s  lie  along  the  road.  Smith’s  holding 
the  rear  at  Holmes’  plantation,  about  8 miles  from  Mr.  Forsyth’s.  The 
levee  along  the  Bayou  Vidal  is  badly  broken  in  three  places,  and  the 
whole  country  between  Boundaway  and  Mississippi  being  overflowed, 
troops  can  only  be  moved  to  New  Carthage  by  water.  General  McCler- 
nand  has  constructed  a number  of  scows,  using  for  the  purpose  a tine 
saw-mill  on  Holmes’  plantation,  and  with  these  and  a few  yawls  he  is 
hard  at  work  transporting  troops  and  supiflies  to  New  Carthage.  By  the 
same  means,  as  well  as  by  a scanty  wagon  train,  somewhat  increased  by 
the  ox-wagons  of  the  country,  he  is  transporting  supplies  down  from 
Bichmond. 

On  the  18th  he  was  about  to  try  and  get  the  Silver  Wave  (transport) 
up  Bayou  Vidal,  but  a letter  from  him,  written  on  the  evening  of  that 
day,  does  not  report  that  he  has  succeeded.  It  is  probable  that  some 
dredging  will  be  required  at  the  mouth  of  that  bayou  before  it  will  be 
accessible  to  any  but  very  small  steamers.  Pride’s  cut-off*  is  constantly 
worked  at  with  much  energy,  but  the  engineers  differ  in  opinion  as  to 
when  loaded  barges  can  get  through  it.  Two  small  steamers,  with 
barges  carrying  pioneers  with  tools,  have  this  morning  passed  through 
the  canal  into  Walnut  Bayou,  and  Pride  thinks  that  within  three  days 
he  will  steam  to  New  Carthage,  but  Lieut.  Col.  J.  H.  Wilson,  topo- 
graphical engineer,  thinks  it  will  take  a fortnight.  The  wagon  road 
hence  to  Smith’s  plantation  is  in  very  good  condition,  and  not  likely  to 
be  overflowed.  This  road,  as  well  as  Pride’s  cut-off’,  is  now  x)rotected 
against  inroads  of  the  enemy  by  overflow  of  the  country  toward  the 
Tensas.  The  strip  of  dry  land  between  the  two  lines  of  water  is  nowhere 
more  than  3 miles  wide. 

Six  transport  steamers  are  being  repaired  to  run  Vicksburg  batteries, 
viz.  Tigress  (side-wheeler),  Anglo-Saxon,  Cheeseman,  Moderator,  Hori- 
zon, and  Empire  City,  all  stern-wheelers ; none  of  them  less  than  500 
tons.  Each  will  carry  one  hundred  thousand  rations  in  her  hold  and 
forty  days’  coal.  They  will  hardly  be  ready  before  to-morrow  niglit. 
As  soon  as  they  have  gone  down,  General  (Irant  will  move  his  head- 
quarters to  Ne\v  Carthage,  and  the  attack  on  Grand  Gulf  will  be  made 
as  soon  as  8,000  troops  can  be  embarked,  but  this  will  be  delayed  by 


78 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


of  movinj]^  down  Bayou  Vidal. . General  Grant  now  seems  in- 
clined to  direct  this  attack  himself,  and  to  leave  McClernand  to  hold 
this  place,  while,  with  the  bulk  of  McClernand’s  and  McPherson’s  corps, 
he  himself  goes  down  to  Port  Hudson,  for  which,  he  thinks,  20,000 
troops  will  suffice.  J.  McArthur’s  division  has  not  yet  arrived  here. 
The  last  of  Logan’s  came  yesterday.  Quinby  being  sick.  General  Grant 
tells  me  J.  0.  Sullivan  will  take  his  division.  From  our  batteries  of 
30-pounder  Parrotts  on  levee  opposite  Vicksburg  250  rounds  have  been 
fired,  mainly  at  railroad  depot,  without  apparent  effect.  They  are  firing 
to- day  at  the  court-house  used  by  the  enemy  as  a signal  station.  It  is 
a mile  farther  than  the  depot.  General  Grant  talks  of  building  a team- 
road  hence  to  Kew  Carthage,  for  use  in  case  the  canal  is  left  dry  by  falling 
of  the  Mississippi.  He  proposes  to  use  the  iron  on  the  Vicksburg  and 
Shreveport  Kailroad. 

A very  trustworthy  spy  ot‘  General  Grant  tells  him  that  there  are  in 
Mississippi  agents  of  secret  organizations  in  Southern  Indiana  and  Illi- 
nois, who  report  that -they  are  armed  and  ready  for  insurrection.  Offi- 
cers in  this  army,  who,  three  months  ago,  told  me  they  would  never 
serve  along  with  negro  regiments,  now  say  that  Adjutant-General 
Thomas  makes  bad  speeches  to  troops,  but  that  they  shall  obey  orders, 
nevertheless. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  ^Yar. 


Milliken’s  Bend,  April  22,  18G3, 

Via  Memphis,  April  25. 

Yours  of  the  IGth  was  received  yesterday.  Its  direction  shall  be 
scrupulously  observed  even  in  extreme  cases.  The  fleet  of  six  trans- 
ports could  not  be  gotten  ready  to  run  the  Vicksburg  batteries,  but  are 
now  prepared  and  go  to-night.  They  are  manned  throughout — officers, 
engineers,  pilots,  and  deck  hands — by  volunteers  from  the  army,  mainly 
from  Logan’s  division.  This  service  was  sought  with  great  eagerness, 
and  experienced  men  have  been  found  for  every  post.  If  10,000  men 
had  been  wfinted  instead  of  150,  they  would  have  been  zealously  sup- 
plied. In  addition  to  bulwarks  of  hay,  cotton,  and  beef  barrels,  each 
transport  is  protected  by  a barge  on  each  side  of  it.  Orders  are  to  drop 
noiselessly  down  with  the  current  from  mouth  of  Yazoo,  and  not  show 
steam  till  batteries  begin  firing,  when  they  are  to  use  all  their  legs.  The 
sky  is  now  cloudy,  and  a very  favorable  night  is  promised. 

No  dispatches  from  McClernand.  Admiral  Porter  reports  to  General 
Grant  that  McClernand  has  succeeded  in  getting  a transport  up  Bayou 
Vidal  to  Smith’s  plantation,  so  that  he  can  move  his  troops  down  to 
New  Carthage  with  some  rapidity.  Admiral  Porter  has  found  a mouth 
to  Bayou  Vidal  which  has  15  feet  of  water,  and  with  but  few  trees  to  be 
removed,  and  even  those  do  not  prevent,  though  they  hinder,  naviga- 
tion. Admiral  Porter  does  not  report  any  important  reconnaissance 
down  the  river,  or  say  that  he  has  done  anything  to  iirevent  Bowen’s 
return  to  Grand  Gulf.  G.  G.  Pride  has  got  two  small  transports  and 
some  barges  through  his  canal  into  the  bayou,  and  thinks  they  must 
have  reached  Bichmond  by  last  evening.  At  the  mouth  of  tlie  canal 
the  de])th  of  water  is  now  15  feet,  and  at  its  entrance  into  tlie  bayou  G 
feet.  Four  dredges  work  day  and  night  deepening  the  channel,  bub 
some  alarm  is  felt  at  the  report  of  a sudden  and  unexpected  fall  of  the 
JMississippi  at  Memphis  and  above.  A fall  of  15  feet,  which  is  rumored 


Chai’.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


79 


to  Lave  occurred  at  Memphis,  would  leave  the  canal  without  water. 
There  would  still  be  water  in  the  bayou,  whicli  can  be  made  navigable 
for  barges  throughout  the  summer,  and  commissary  stores  and  ammu- 
nition would  have  to  be  wagoned  for  a few  miles  only,  but  coal  for  the 
gunboats  and  transports  would  have  to  be  drifted  down  past  Vicksburg. 
►Such  a fall  of  water  would  also  deprive  the  line  of  the  protection  of 
the  flood  from  the  Tensas,  which  it  now  enjoys.  If  the  six  transports 
get  down  to-night.  General  Grant  moves  his  headquarters  to  New  Car- 
thage to-morrow,  and  I go  with  him. 

C.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Smith’s  Plantation,  near  New  Carthage, 

April  24,  1863 — 3 p.  m. 

General  Grant  arrived  here  last  night,  and  has  now  gone  dowm  with 
Admiral  Porter  to  reconnoiter  Grand  Gulf.  Admiral  Porter  was  there 
on  the  22d  instant,  and  by  opening  fire  ascertained  the  position  and 
strength  of  the  batteries.  There  are  four  distinct  works  stretched  along 
the  height  on  the  Mississippi  shore,  each  armed  wnth  three  guns,  and  a 
new  work  is  being  built  in  the  rear,  which,  as  Admiral  Porter  learned 
from  some  gentlemen  whom  he  saw,  and  who  had  just  been  there,  is  to 
be  mounted  with  one  large  gun.  The  works  along  the  brow  of  the  bluff 
are  provided  with  rifle-pits  in  front,  and  the  strongest  of  them,  which 
is  the  second  in  order,  is  connected  by  a covered  way  with  those  below 
it,  and  with  the  new  one  in  the  rear.  The  enemy  have  been  zealously 
working  and  strengthening  their  works  and  to  re-enforce  the  garrison, 
which  Admiral  Porter  now  estimates  at  12,000.  He  earnestly  advises 
against  a front  attack,  and  proposes  that  the  troops  be  either  marched 
across  from  Perkins’  plantation,  where  Osterhaus’  division  is  now  en- 
camped, to  a point  where  they  can  be  ferried  over,  just  below  the  place, 
or  that  they  be  embarked  on  the  transports  and  barges  and  floated  past 
the  Grand  Gulf  batteries  in  the  night.  It  is  now  jirobable  that  the 
former  course  will  be  adopted. 

The  transports  which  ran  the  Vicksburg  batteries  on  the  night  of  the 
22d  now  lie  at  New  Carthage,  with  the  exception  of  the  Tigress,  which 
was  sunk.  The  five  which  escaped  have  mainly"  been  repaired  by  zealous 
exertion  of  Admiral  Porter,  and  will  be  ready  for  use  to-morrow.  The 
loss  by  their  running  the  Vicksburg  batteries  is  2 men  seriously  and 
half  a dozen  slightly  wounded.  Of  McClernand’s  corps  10,000  will  be 
ready  to  move  from  New  Carthage  to-morrow.  McPherson’s  corps  is 
moving  over  from  Milliken’s  Bend,  with  the  exception  of  McArthur’s 
division,  not  yet  arrived  from  Providence.  Of  Sherman’s  corps  all  are 
under  marching  orders  hither,  Steele’s  division  being  constantly  expected 
from  Greenville.  General  Grant  has  directed  that  two  regiments  from 
each  army  corx)s  shall  remain  to  guard  the  line  bet  ween  here  and  Mil- 
liken’s Bend,  but  if  the  water  falls  so  as  to  leave  the  canal  dry  and  to 
uncover  the  country  on  both  sides  of  the  road,  it  will  require  for  that 
duty  a division  at  least.  The  fall  of  the  river,  xireviously  reported,  still 
continues.  None  of  the  steamers  or  barges  from  Milliken’s  Bend  have 
yet  got  through  to  this  point,  though  as  wo  came  along  the  bayou  yes- 
terday we  saw  the  working  x)arties  industriously  employed  clearing  out 
the  trees.  It  is  now  most  pt'obable  that  the  road  will  be  the  chief 
avenue  of  transx)ortation. 


[CflAr.  XXXVL 


80  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

The  weather  is  hot,  hat  the  troops  are  in  high  spirits  at  the  prospect 
of  fighting. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Smitii\s  Plantation,  April  25, 1863—9  a.  m., 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  April  29. 

General  Grant’s  reconnaissance  at  Grand  Gulf  has  convinced  him 
that  the  place  is  not  as  strong  as  Admiral  Porter  supposed,  and  as  I 
yesterday  reported . The  key  to  the  position  is  the  first  bluff  approached 
in  descending  the  Mississippi  Eiver.  The  enemy  are  fortifying,  hut 
have  no  guns  there  yet.  The  shell  of  the  gunhoats  yesterday  drove 
the  men  from  the  newiy  begun  works,  hut  drew  no  firing  in  reply.  It 
is  accordingly  determined  that  the  attack  shall  he  made  hy  the  gun- 
boats, and  that  the  troops  shall  laud  at  the  foot  of  this  hlufif  as  soon  as 
the  batteries  there,  if  any  should  finally  he  found,  and  at  the  other 
commanding  points  along  the  shore,  are  silenced.  This  will  take  place 
to-morrow  or  next  day — just  as  soon  as  troops  can  be  gotten  ready.  I am 
sorry  to  report  that  there  is  much  apparent  confusion  in  McCleinand’s 
command,  especially  about  his  staff  and  headquarters,  and  that  the 
movement  is  delayed  to  some  extent  hy  that  cause.  Though  it  is  or- 
dered that  officers’  horses  and  tents  must  he  left  behind,  McCleruand 
carries  his  bride  along  with  him. 

0.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Smith’s  Plantation,  April  27, 1863—9  a.  m., 

Via  Memphis,  May  2 — 10  p.  m. 

(Eeceived  May  4 — 6 p.  m.) 

The  movement  against  Grand  Gulf  is  still  delayed.  General  Grant 
went  hy  water  yesterday  down  to  New  Carthage  and  Perkins’  planta- 
tion, just  beyond  New  Carthage,  where  (Jsterhaus  and  E.  A.  Carr  are 
encamped,  to  order  the  immediate  embarkation  of  the  troops.  The 
seven  transports  were  all  in  good  working  order,  except  the  Anglo- 
Saxon,  whose  broken  stern-wheel  was  being  repaired,  and  was  finished 
night  before  last,  and  which  transport  might  at  any  time  have  been 
towed.  On  these  transports  7,000  troops  could  have  been  embarked, 
with  artillery  and  ammunition,  while  the  barges  at  hand  and  ready 
for  use  could  easily  have  carried  5,000  more.  The  first  thing  which 
struck  us  on  approaching  the  points  of  embarkation  was  that  the  steam- 
boats and  barges  were  scattered  about  in  the  river  and  in  the  bayou  as 
if  there  were  no  idea  of  the  imperative  necessity  of  the  promptest  pos- 
sible movements. 

We  arrived  at  Admiral  Porter’s  flag-ship,  above  Grand  Gulf,  and  Gen- 
eral Grant  at  once  sent  for  General  McClernand,  discussed  with  him  the 
point  of  attack,  and  ordered  him  to  embark  his  men  without  losing  a 
moment.  Osterhaus  and  Carr  were  then  encamped  at  Perkins’  planta- 
tion, and  full  half  of  A.  J.  Smith’s  division  were  with  Smith  at  New  Car- 
thage, the  other  half  being  still  at  Smith’s  i)lantation  awaiting  trans- 
portation, the  steamboat  that  was  to  carry  them  having  only  made  one 
trip  the  day  before  instead  of  two,  as  she  might  have  done,  had  General 
Grant’s  orders  been  obeyed,  by  leaving  behind  officers’  horses  and  bag- 


Chap.  XXXVI. J 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


81 


gage  j this  boat  was  also  somewhat  delayed  by  carrying  General  Mc- 
Clernand’s  wife,  with  her  servants  and  baggage.  But  though  the  whole 
of  A.  J.  Smith’s  troops  had  not  yet  arrived,  and  though  Hovey’s  divis- 
ion, encamped  at  the  junction  of  Bayou  Vidal  and  Bayou  Gilbert,  and 
ordered  to  march  to  Perkins’  by  land,  the  bayous  having  been  bridged, 
was  also  still  absent,  there  were  already  encamped  at  the  points  of 
embarkation  quite  as  many  troops  as  all  the  transports  could  carry. 
Still,  at  dark  last  night,  when  a thunder-storm  set  in,  not  a single  man 
or  cannon  had  been  embarked.  Instead  of  this,  McClernand  held  a re- 
view of  a brigade  of  Illinois  troops  at  Perkins’  about  4 p.  m.,  when  Gov- 
ernor Yates  made  a speech.  At  the  same  time  a salute  of  artillery  was 
fired,  notwithstanding  that  positive  orders  had  repeatedly  been  given  to 
use  no  ammunition  for  any  purpose  except  against  the  enemy.  What 
course  General  Grant  will  take  under  these  circumstances  i have  no 
idea,  as  I have  had  no  opportunity  of  conversing  with  him  since  yester- 
day forenoon. 

McPherson  arrived  here  last  night  with  Quinby’s  division,  McAr- 
thur’s, forming  his  rear,  being  at  Bichmond.  His  whole  corps  would 
have  been  here  to-day,  but  its  movements  have  been  arrested  until  Gen- 
eral McOlernand’s  can  be  got  out  of  the  way.  General  Thomas  told  me 
this  morning  that  he  had  no  doubt  that  McPherson’s  corns  could  now 
be  embarked  sooner  than  Gen^^ral  McClernand’s.  General  Grant  pro- 
posed to  Admiral  Porter  yesterday  to  make  a feint  attack  against  Vicks- 
burg at  Haynes’  or  Snyder’s  Bluffs.  I believe  the  feint  was  not  decided 
on.  General  Grant  also  asked  Admiral  Porter  to  send  a gunboat  up  the 
Big  Black  to  prevent  the  rebels  from  completing  scows  at  a ferry  some 
o miles  above  Grand  Gulf,  but  Admiral  Porter  declined  because  it  was 
too  risky. 

From  Milliken’s  Bend  we  hear  that  there  is  now  only  6 inches  of  water 
in  Pride’s  canal  at  the  point  where  it  embouches  in  the  bayou.  The 
dredges  are  at  work,  but  whether  they  can  dig  as  fast  as  the  river  falls 
is  a question.  The  boats  and  barges  previously  got  into  the  bayou  will 
get  through,  however.  The  road  hence  to  Milliken’s  Bend  is  somewhat 
injured  by  last  night’s  rain  and  cut  up  by  wagons,  but  can  be  depended 
on  for  transportation  unless  we  should  have  very  heavy  storms.  If  they 
should  come  upon  us  as  unexpectedly  as  the  fall  of  the  river  has  done, 
the  army  will  be  in  straits. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


C.  A.  HxABA. 


Hard  Times  Landing,  La.,  April  29,  1863—5  p.  m.. 

Via  Memphis,  May  5 — 11  a.  m. 

(Received  May  8 — 2.45  p.  m.) 

My  last  dispatch  was  dated  on  Ajiril  27.  On  the  morning  of  that  day 
General  Grant  went  from  Smith’s  plantation  down  to  New  Carthage 
and  wrote  to  McClernand  a very  severe  letter,  which  he  did  not  send  on 
discovering  that  at  last  the  transport  steamers  and  barges  had  during 
the  previous  night  been  concentrated  for  use.  He  sjient  the  day  there 
in  completing  the  preparations  for  embarking,  and  on  the  morning  of 
the  28th  the  divisions  of  Osterhaus  and  Carr  were  embarked,  in  all  a 
little  more  than  10,000  troops.  This  force  not  being  deemed  sufficient 
for  the  attack  on  Grand  Gulf,  the  Irooiis  were  brought  down  to  this 
place,  and  Carr’s  men  and  part  of  Osterhaus’  debarked  in  order  that 
6 R R — YOL  XXIV;  PT  I 


82 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


part  of  tlie  transports  miglit  return  for  the  division  of  Hovey — G,000 
strong.  They  did  not  get  here  until  daylight  this  morning,  when 
the  troops  being  ready  to  land  as  soon  as  the  batteries  were  silenced, 
the  gunboats  opened  the  attack  at  8 a.  m.  precisely.  Seven  gunboats, 
all  iron  clads,  were  engaged.  The  Price  was  kept  out  of  the  fight, 
being  employed  to  tow  the  Anglo-Saxon  (steamboat),  whose  wheel, 
damaged  by  running  the  Vicksburg  batteries,  it  had  been  impossible  to 
repair. 

It  was  found  that  the  enemy  had  five  batteries,  the  first  and  most 
formidable  of  them  being  placed  on  the  high  promontory  next  to  the 
embouchure  of  the  Big  Black.  In  this  battery  there  were  four  guns,  of 
which,  after  a constant  fire  of  five  hours  from  the  gunboats,  only  one 
has  been  dismounted.  The  work  is  placed  in  a shoulder  of  the  hill 
about  30  feet  above  the  river.  It  is  entirely  open,  protected  only 
by  a parapet,  behind  which  the  heads  of  the  gunners  can  be  seen  as  they 
load  their  pieces.  These,  as  Captain  [James  A.]  Greer,  of  the  gunboat 
Benton,  informs  me,  are  100-pounder  rifles.  The  lower  batteries,  mount- 
ing smaller  guns  and  having  no  more  than  two  pieces  each,  were  silenced 
early  in  the  action,  but  this  one  obstinately  resisted  to  the  last,  the  gun- 
boats finally  withdrawing  at  about  1.30  p.  m.  For  the  last  four  hours 
the  whole  seven  were  employed  in  firing  at  this  one,  now  at  long  range, 
seeking  to  drop  shells  within  the  parapet,  now  at  the  very  foot  of  the 
hill,  within  about  200  yards,  seeking  to  dismount  its  guns  by  direct 
fire.  It  was  hit  again  and  again,  but  its  pieces  had  not  been  disabled 
when  Admiral  Porter  gave  the  signal  to  withdraw.  There  was  some 
reason  to  believe  that  it  was  short  of  ammunition,  but  this  could  not 
be  certainly  known.  The  gunboats  were  hit  more  or  less  severely. 
I was  on  board  the  Benton,  and  saw  that  her  armor  had  repeatedly 
been  pierced  both  in  her  sides  and  her  pilot  house,  but  she  had  not  a 
gun  disabled,  and,  except  the  holes  through  her  mail  (some  of  them  in 
her  hull),  was  as  ready  to  fight  as  at  the  beginning  of  the  action.  Of 
the  other  vessels,  the  Tuscumbia  had  her  hog-chains  cut,  but  the  others 
are  reported  as  substantially  uninjured.  The  Mound  City  received  but 
three  hits.  On  the  Benton,  7 men  were  killed  and  a few  wounded.  The 
other  casualties  are  not  yet  reported.  The  Lafayette  remains  under 
the  fort,  and  firing  is  still  kept  up  occasionally. 

The  batteries  having  thus  proved  too  much  for  the  gunboats,  General 
Grant  determined  to  execute  an  alternative  plan,  which  he  had  in  mind 
from  the  first,  and  accordingly  had  the  troops  all  to  disembark  from 
transports  and  march  across  the  neck  of  land  in  front  of  Grand  Gulf, 
distance  miles,  to  a point  below,  out  of  range  of  its  guns.  The  trans- 
ports are  to  be  run  past  the  batteries  as  soon  as  it  is  dark,  under  cover 
of  a renewed  attack  from  the  gunboats.  The  troops  will  then  be  em- 
barked, and  either  landed  at  Grand  Gulf,  just  below  the  batteries,  or 
else  carried  down  to  Eodney  and  marched  into  the  rear  of  Grand  Gulf 
by  way  of  Port  Gibson.  I judge  the  latter  move  will  be  adopted.  Gen- 
eral Grant,  however,  is  in  favor  of  a direct  assault  on  Grand  Gulf.  The 
whole  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Oor])s  is  now  here,  A.  J.  Smith’s  division 
having  arrived  by  land,  marching  around  Saint  Josei)h’s  Lake.  Of  the 
Seventeenth  Corps,  Logan’s  division  lias  also  arrived  by  the  same  road, 
wliile  Quinby’s  is  close  at  liand,  and  McArthur’s  will  be  at  the  place  of 
embarkation  before  morning. 

There  can  be  no  difiiculty  in  throwing  35,000  troops  across  the  river 
into  liodney  before  morning  of  May  1.  The  enemy  have  about  10,000 
troops  in  Grand  Gulf.  The  weather  continues  fine.  General  Thomas 
is  liere  assisting  General  Grant  as  much  as  possible. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


83 


I have  to  report  that  the  paymasters  have  finished  their  work  and 
gone,  and  henceforth  any  shrewd  person  can  see  that  I am  not  attend- 
iug  to  their  transactions. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


• Dishroon^s  Plantation,  April  29,  1863—11.30  p.  m.. 

Via  AIemphis,  Wlay  5—9.30  a.  m. 

(Eeceived  Alay  8 — G p.  m.) 

The  gunboats  and  transports  came  safely  through  from  Hard  Times 
Landing  this  evening.  The  batteries  at  Grand  Gulf  were  nearly  as 
active  as  in  the  morning,  and  Admiral  Porter  thinks  that  in  one  of  the 
lower  batteries  a large  gun  had  been  mounted  during  the  afternoon. 
No  harm  was  received  in  the  passage  either  by  boats  or  men.  General 
AlcOlernand^s  corps  are  all  ready  to  embark,  but  it  seems  to  me  doubtful 
whether  they  will  get  on  board  before  daylight,  though  General  Grant 
has  given  the  most  urgent  orders.  They  will  land  above  Eodney,  just 
below  the  mouth  of  Bayou  Pierre.  The  casualties  on  the  fleet  to-day 
have  been  22  killed  and  55  wounded. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Dishroon’s  Plantation,  April  30,  1863 — 2 p.  m.. 

Via  Memphis,  May  4—7  p.  m. 

(Eeceived  Alay  8 — 4.10  p.  m.) 

The  divisions  of  Carr,  Hovey,  and  Osterhaus  were  landed  safely 
without  opposition  at  Bruinsburg,  Miss.,  at  the  mouth  of  Bayou  Pierre, 
at  11  a.  m.  to-day.  The  divisions  of  A.  J.  Smith  and  Logan  are  now 
embarking  and  will  be  landed  before  night.  All  seems  now  to  be  going 
on  well,  though  had  any  other  general  than  McClernand  held  the  ad- 
vauce,  the  landing  would  certainly  have  been  effected  at  daylight. 


Hon.  E.  AI.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


C.  A.  DANA. 


Grand  Gulf,  May  4,  1863. 

Via  Memphis,  illay  9— 11.30  a.  m. 

My  information  from  the  front  this  morning  is  that  Logan  occupied 
the  ferry  across  the  Big  Black,  on  the  principal  road  hence  to  Vicks- 
burg, at  Lynax’s  yesterday.  He  had  a brief  skirmish  there  and  took 
100  prisoners,  including  those  picked  up  by  him  in  his  march  during  the 
afternoon. 

General  Grant  left  him  for  the  front  at  1 a.  m.  this  morning.  He  has 
ordered  up  from  Millikeifs  Bend  120  wagons  loaded  with  hard  bread, 
coffee,  sugar,  and  salt,  to  come  via  Perkins’  and  this  place;  four  hun- 
dred thousand  rations  similarly  constituted  are  to  run  the  Vicksburg 
batteries.  Of  Sherman’s  corps,  the  three  divisions  of  Steele,  Tuttle, 
and  Blair  should  begin  to  arrive  here  to-daj^,  having  moved  from 
Young’s  Point  on  the  1st  instant. 

The  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry,  for  some  weeks  employed  on  the  Louisi- 
ana side,  disembarked  here  and  at  Bruinsburg  this  morning,  and  will 


84 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAr.  XXXVI. 


reach  the  front  by  to-morrow  morning.  The  colonel  tells  me  that  he 
has  just  come  back  from  a raid  down  the  river  on  that  side  to  within 
20  miles  of  Natchez ; that  he  has  taken  100  prisoners,  mainly  of  Har- 
rison^s  cavalry,  and  brought  back  large  numbers  of  mules  and  horses. 
Geoeral  Grant  intends  to  lose  no  time  in  pushing  his  army  toward  the 
Big  Black  Bridge  and  Jackson,  threatening  both  and  striking  at  either, 
as  is  most  convenient.  As  soon  as  Sherman  comes  up  and  the  rations 
on  the  way  arrive,  he  will  disregard  his  base  and  depend  on  the  country 
for  meat  and  even  for  bread.  Beef-cattle  and  corn  are  both  abundant 
evervwhere. 

The  enemy  is  not  suffering  for  want  in  the  least  j the  prisoners  cap- 
tured are  also  well  clothed  and  provided  with  blankets.  Their  arms 
and  their  stores  are  both  good.  General  Grant  is  of  the  opinion  that 
Pemberton  will  endeavor  to  bring  on  the  decisive  battle  within  the  next 
ten  days. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War, 


VvAR  Department,  May  5,  1863. 

0.  A.  Dana, 

SmiWs  FlantaMofi,  or  Granfs  Headquarters^  via  Memijhis  : 

General  Grant  has  full  and  absolute  authority  to  enforce  his  own 
commands,  and  to  remove  any  person  who,  by  ignorance,  inaction,  or 
any  cause,  interferes  wither  delays  his  operations.  He  has  the  full 
confidence  of  the  Government,  is  expected  to  enforce  his  authority,  and 
will  be  firmly  and  heartily  supported ; but  he  will  be  responsible  for 
any  failure  to  exert  his  powers.  You  mav  communicate  this  to  him. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Hankinson’s  Ferry,  May  5,  1863—10  a.  m.. 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  May  18 — 11  a.  m. 

Enemy  had  built  a bridge  of  flat-boats  across  the  Big  Black  at  this 
point.  Logan  pressed  upon  them  so  hard  in  his  pursuit  that  they  were 
not  able  to  destroy  it.  It  is  reported  by  our  pickets  that  they  have  two 
brigades  in  our  front  on  the  other  shore,  and  McPherson  is  going  over 
this  morning  with  a competent  force  to  stir  them  up.  But  for  the  ex- 
ceeding incompetency  of  General  McGlernand,  and  the  delay  thence 
arising,  the  movement  from  Bruinsburg  in  this  direction  must  have 
resulted  in  the  capture  of  5,000  instead  of  about  700  rebels.  A tug  with 
barges  ran  the  Vicksburg  batteries  on  Sunday  night,  the  3d  instant. 
The  hay  with  which  the  loading  of  thebarges  was  covered  was  set  on  fire, 
and  the  hard  bread  beneath  was  considerably  damaged  by  water  in  put- 
ting it  out,  but  yesterday  200  wagons  loaded  with  rations  arrived  from 
Millikeffs  Bend  at  Perkins’  plantation.  As  soon  as  these  sui)plies  reach 
liere  and  Sherman’s  troops  arrive,  the  general  advance  up  this  i)euinsula 
will  be  resumed.  Sherman  himself  was  at  Grand  Gulf  yesterday,  and 
two  of  his  divisions  will  debark  there  to-day.  The  army  liere  is  distrib- 
uted across  the  peninsula,  guarding  every  point.  General  McClernand 
is  on  the  right  center ; McPherson  here  on  the  left.  A reconnaissance 
])ushed  as  far  as  Eocky  Springs  and  in  the  vicinity  of  the  ferry  on  the 
Vicksburg  road  discovers  no  enemy.  Please  notice  that  in  my  dispatch. 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


GENEEAL  REPORTS. 


85 


of  yesterday  I was  loisinformed  as  to  Logan’s  movement  of  tlie  evening 
previous.  It  was  on  the  Warrenton  and  not  the  Vickshurg  road.  The 
army  is  thoroughly  recovered  from  the  fatigue  of  the  late  operations. 

0.  A.  DAKA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  ^Yar. 


Rocky  Springs,  Miss.,  May  8,  18G3— 9 j).  m., 

Via  Memphis,  May  14—3.30  p.  m. 

General  Grant  advanced  his  headquarters  about  5 miles  to  this  place 
yesterday.  The  relative  position  of  the  different  divisions  remains  gen- 
erally as  in  my  last  dispatch.  General  Sherman’s  forces  have  not  yet 
come  up,  and  the  old  division  of  Quinby,  now  under  M.  M.  Crocker, 
remains  to  guard  Hankinson’s  Ferry.  As  soon  as  it  is  relieved  by  Sher- 
man’s advance,  McPherson  will  move  his  corps  in  the  direction  of  Ray- 
mond. No  doubt  this  movement  will  commence  to-day.  The  advance 
of  Osterhaus  is  at  Hall’s  Ferry,  and  he  reports  that  enemy  have  bat- 
teries posted  on  the  other  side  of  Big  Black  River.  From  the  Sixth 
Missouri  Cavalry  (sent  day  before  yesterday  back  to  Port  Gibson)  we 
heard  last  night  that  enemy  were  pressing  them.  Col.  C.  Wright  saw 
two  regiments,  which  he  was  holding  in  check  at  Port  Gibson  Bridge. 
Contrabands  told  him  that  they  were  part  of  the  forces  from  Port  Hud- 
son. The  ammunition  and  subsistence  have  begun  to  arrive  from  Grand 
Gulf,  and  it  is  expected  that  the  necessary  supplies  will  have  come  up 
before  to-morrow  night.  From  Milliken’s  Bend  we  have  a report  from 
Colonel  Prime,  chief  engineer,  that  the  proposed  shorter  road  across 
the  peninsula  opposite  Vicksburg  will  not  do.  He  says  a crevasse  is 
in  the  way  which  cannot  be  got  over. 

The  weather  is  cool  and  splendid. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War. 


Headquarters  Rocky  Springs,  Miss.,  May  1 [10  ^],  1863, 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  May  18. 

All  our  reports  from  the  front  favorable.  McPherson  reached'  yester- 
day, with  the  cavalry  of  his  advance,  a point  5 miles  beyond  Utica,  meet- 
ing a reconnaissance  of  the  enemy,  which  retired.  McClernand  moved 
on  the  main  road  to  Edwards  Station.  Sherman  reached  this  place 
with  Tuttle’s  division  and  Hankinson’s  Ferry  with  Steele’s.  To-day 
Sherman  will  destroy  the  bridge  at  that  ferry  and  push  forward  his  whole 
force  to  Auburn,  having  Raymond  as  his  destination.  McPherson  and 
McClernand  each  move  from  5 to  7 miles,  so  that  by  to-night  our  line 
will  rest  at  10  to  12  miles  from  Vicksburg  and  Jackson  Railroad.  Unless 
enemy  attacks,  no  battle  will  probably  occur  for  two  or  three  days. 
Leaving,  therefore,  Blair’s  and  McArthur’s  brigades  to  come  up,  General 
Grant  moves  his  headquarters  this  morning  to  Auburn.  The  trains 
with  ammunition  and  subsistence  are  coming  up  well.  Grand  Gulf  is 
to  be  garrisoned  by  a brigade  of  J.  McArthur’s  until  J.  G.  Lauman 
arrives  there,  when  one  of  the  latter’s  brigades  will  form  a permanent 
garrison.  The  reports  respecting  a short  road  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to 
below  Warrenton  are  contradictory,  but  J.  C.  Sullivan,  left  in  command 
of  the  line,  writes  that  it  would  be  finished  for  use  last  night. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War. 


86 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Memphis,  Tenn.,  May  23,  1863—11.30  a.  m. 

noil.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  ^Var: 

The  following  dispatch  has  just  been  received  at  these  headquarters, 
and  is  forwarded  as  requested : 


Eear  of  Vicksburg,  May  20,  1863— G a.  m. 

General  Grant  has  won  a g^reat  and  momentous  victory  over  the  rebels  under  Pem- 
berton, on  the  Jackson  and  Vicksburg  road,  at  Baker’s  Creek,  on  the  16th  instant. 
Pemberton  had  a most  formidable  position  on  the  crest  of  a wooded  hill,  over  which 
the  road  passes  longitudinally.  He  had  above  25,000  men.  The  battle  began  at  11 
a.  m.  and  was  gained  at  4 p.  m.  Its  brunt  was  borne  by  Hovey’s  division,  of  McCler- 
riand’s  corps,  and  by  Logan’s  and  Crocker’s  [division],  of  McPherson’s.  Hovey  at- 
tacked the  hill,  and  held  a great  part  of  it  till  2 p.  m.,  when,  having  lost  1,600  men,  he 
was  succeeded  by  Boomer’s  arid  Holmes’  brigades,  of  Crocker’s  division,  by  which  the 
conflict  was  ended  in  that  part  of  the  field.  Boomer  lost  500  men.  Logan  operated  on 
the  right,  and  cut  off  the  enemy’s  direct  retreat,  so  that  he  was  compelled  to  escajie 
by  his  right  flank  through  the  woods.  Logan  lost  400  killed  and  wounded.  We  took 
about  2,0^00  prisoners. 

On  the  17th,  advancing  to  the  Big  Black,  we  fought  Pemberton  again  at  his  bridge 
head,  and  captured  3,000  more  prisoners.  He  fought  in  rifle-pits,  protected  by  a diffi- 
cult bayou  full  of  abatis.  Lawler’s  brigade,  of  McClernand’s  corps,  charged  the  rifle- 
pits  magnificently,  and  took  more  prisoners  than  their  own  numbers.  Pemberton 
burned  his  bridge,  and  returned  to  Vicksburg  with  only  three  cannon  out  of  sixty  that 
he  had  taken  out. 

Building  four  bridges  over  the  Big  Black,  General  Grant  arrived  before  the  town 
on  the  evening  of  the  18th,  and  now  holds  it  closely  invested.  He  had  opened  a line 
of  supplies  via  Chickasaw  Bayou,  having  cut  the  town  off' from  Haynes’  Bluff,  which 
is  abandoned  by  the  enemy,  and  which  General  Grant  will  occupy.  There  was  sharp 
fighting  through  the  day  yesterday.  Steele  won,  and  holds  the  upper  bluffs  and  the 
enemy’s  upper  water  batteries,  and  gets  water  from  the  Mississippi. 

Sherman’s  corps  lost  yesterday  500  killed  and  wounded.  McPherson,  who  holds  the 
center,  lost  little,  as  did  McClernand,  who  holds  the  left. 

The  gunboats  kept  the  enemy  alert  during  the  night,  and  probably  the  town  will 
be  carried  to-day.  There  are  from  15,000  to  20,000  men  in  it.  Pemberton  fights  with 
the  greater  obstinacy,  because  his  people  believe  he  has  sold  their  cause.  Joe  John- 
ston went  into  the  town,  but  we  have  not  heard  of  him  since. 

C.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  tFar. 


S.  A.  nUELBUT, 

Major-  General. 


Behind  Vicksburg,  May  23, 1863 — 9 a.  m., 

Via  Memphis,  May  29—3  p.  m. 

(Keceived  June  1 — 3.50  a.  m.) 

The  town  was  assaulted  yesterday.  The  order  required  the  columns 
to  move  by  every  road  at  10  a.  m.  iirecisely,  but  they  did  not  all  get 
started  at  the  same  hour.  The  attempt  failed,  but  without  heavy  loss. 
At  2 p.  ra.  McClernand  reported  that  he  was  in  possession  of  two  forts 
of  the  rebel  line,  was  hard  pressed,  and  in  great  need  of  re-enforcements. 
Not  doubting  that  he  had  really  succeeded  in  taking  and  holding  the 
works  he  pretended  to  hold,  General  Grant  ordered  J.  G.  Bauman’s 
division,  of  McPherson’s  corps,  to  his  support,  and  at  the  same  time 
McPherson  and  Sherman  both  made  new  attacks.  McOlernand’s  re- 
port was  false,  as  he  held  not  a single  fort,  and  the  result  was  disas- 
trous. Bauman’s  division  was  pushed  by  McClernand  to  his  front  and 
suffered  heavily.  Col.  G.  B.  Boomer,  Twenty-sixth  Missouri,  among  the 
killed. 

Eansora’s  brigade,  on  McPherson’s  right,  lost  25  per  cent,  of  its 
strength,  including  Cols.  G.  Nevins  and  T.  W.  Humphrey  killed,  and 


CiiAr.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


87 


Steveuson^s  brigade  lost  some  300,  iucludiug  Col.  J.  J.  Doliins  killed. 
Sherman  told  me  he  had  lost  about  500,  iucludiDg  Major  [D.  T.]  Kirby, 
Eighth  Missouri,  who  led  a forlorn  hope  of  150  men,  none  of  whom  came 
back.  The  loss  of  the  day  in  killed  and  wounded  will  probably  not  fall 
short  of  1,500,  though  but  for  MeCleruand’s  mistake  it  would  have  been 
inconsiderable. 

Our  position  was  somewhat  though  not  much  improved  by  the  day^s 
operations.  Sherman  had  at  night  two  brigades  sheltered  by  the  front 
of  the  enemy^s  parapets.  McPherson  had  gained  the  opportunity  of 
mining  a salient  of  the  principal  rebel  fort. 

NTotwith  Stan  ding  this  repulse,  involving  the  necessity  of  a more  pro- 
tracted investment,  there  is  no  doubt  of  the  final  result.  NTothing  can 
save  the  town  except  the  arrival  of  heavy  re-enforcements.  To  bring 
these  up  will  be  difficult  unless  force  is  withdrawn  from  before  General 
Kosecrans. 

The  Warrenton  road,  which  alone  had  been  left  open,  was  closed  yes- 
terday by  McArthur  with  one  brigade.  He  will  be  strengthened  to-day 
and  enabled  to  advance,  so  as  to  touch  McClernand  on  his  right ; then 
the  town  will  be  absolutely  inclosed.  Our  army  is  in  the  best  of  spirits, 
though  impatient  at  the  delays.  Twenty -five  thousand  troops  of  Gen- 
eral Banks’  forces  are  on  the  way  hither  from  Bed  Eiver,  and  should 
arrive  to-morrow  at  furthest.  Of  Joe  Johnston  we  have  no  further  in- 
telligence, except  that  it  is  certain  he  is  not  in  the  town,  and  has  prob- 
ably gone  east.  Pemberton  is  sick,  and  his  command  is  exercised  by 
S.  B.  Lee.  The  garrison  is  apparently  short  of  ammunition.  Of  this 
we  took  from  them  six  railroad-car  loads  at  Edwards  Depot,  and  they 
destroyed  four  loads  to  prevent  their  falling  into  our  hands. 

G.  A.  DAKA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Behind  Vicksburg,  May  24,  1863 — 7 p.  m., 

Via  Memphis,  May  29—6  p.  m. 

(Received  June  1—3  a.  m.) 

Your  dispatch  of  the  5th  instant  was  received  at  Jackson  and  com- 
municated to  General  Grant  according  to  your  direction.  Yesterday 
morning  he  had  determined  to  relieve  General  McClernand,  on  account 
of  his  false  dispatch  of  the  day  before  stating  that  he  held  two  of  the 
enemy’s  forts,  but  he  changed  his  mind,  concluding  that  it  would  be 
better  on  the  whole  to  leave  McClernand  in  his  present  command  till 
the  siege  of  Vicksburg  is  concluded,  after  which  he  will  induce  McCler- 
nand to  ask  for  leave  of  absence.  Meanwhile  he  (General  Grant)  will 
especially  supervise  all  of  McClernand’s  operations,  and  will  place  no 
reliance  on  his  reports  unless  otherwise  corroborated.  My  own  judg- 
ment is  that  McClernand  has  not  the  qualities  necessary  for  a good 
commander,  even  of  a regiment.  The  siege  operations  were  energetically 
pushed  yesterday  and  last  night.  McPherson  holds,  by  nature  of  the 
ground  in  his  front  and  the  great  advance  of  his  line  of  sharpshooters, 
the  position  nearest  the  rebel  works;  in  fact,  he  yesterday  had  a battery 
planted  within  50  yards  of  one  of  their  most  important  forts,  and  the 
rebels’  guns  were  entirely  prevented  by  his  sharpshooters  from  return- 
ing the  fire  of  this  battery.  Last  evening  he  opened  a mine  under  one 
of  the  salients  of  the  work,  and  Capt.  S.  R.  Tresilian,  engineer  in  charge, 
reported  that  he  would  be  ready  to  blow  it  up  at  8 o’clock  this  morning. 
It  is  uncertain  whether  the  rebels  have  not  another  height  within  that 


88 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiTAP.  XSXVI. 


on  which  this  part  stands  from  which  they  will  still  he  able  to  dispute 
McPherson’s  entrance  into  the  city,  but  its  possession  will  certainly 
enable  him  to  reach  with  his  batteries  almost  every  part  of  the  place. 
The  rebel  infantry  now  lie  securely  on  the  slope  in  the  rear  of  this  fort, 
whence  they  are  able  to  repel  any  effort  of  our  infantry  to  get  over  its 
parapet.  On  Sherman’s  front  we  are  at  a greater  distance  from  the 
enemy,  the  approach  being  naturally  less  advantageous  to  us.  General 
Sherman  told  me  last  evening  that  he  must  advance  for  a considerable 
part  of  the  way  toward  the  principal  fort  in  his  front  by  a regular  sap, 
and  that  it  would  be  five  days  before  he  could  blow  up  the  salient  he 
intends  to  undermine.  It  is  thought  that  one  of  the  best  points  ot 
attack  is  on  Sherman’s  extreme  right,  where  Steele’s  division  abuts  on 
the  Mississippi.  With  the  co-operation  of  gunboats,  the  enemy’s  upper 
water  battery  can  be  silenced,  which  will  enable  Steele  decisively  to  turn 
his  left  flank,  but  Porter  is  extremely  cautious  about  exposing  vessels 
to  the  fire  of  that  battery.  He  has  for  some  days  been  playing  upon  the 
town  with  his  mortars,  and  promised  to  have  fourteen  of  them  in  posi- 
tion this  morning,  but  they  are  placed  at  such  a distance  on  the  Louis- 
iana shore,  being  behind  the  tongue  of  land  which  stretches  in  front  of 
the  town,  that  their  fire  can  hardly  be  very  effective.  They  are,  however, 
to  be  removed  to  this  side  under  the  lowest  of  the  bluffs  which  Steele 
holds,  where  they  will  be  equally  secure,  and  at  least  IJ  miles  nearer 
the  enemy’s  works.  The  fortifications  on  the  Warren  ton  road  prove 
more  formidable  than  was  supposed,  but  probably  the  front  of  McCler- 
nand  will  be  found  to  be  more  accessible  than  either  that  of  Sherman 
or  McPherson.  From  his  engineer  we  have  not  yet  received  any  report 
on  this  subject.  Lauman  has  been  ordered  from  Haynes’  Bluff  to  the 
Warren  ton  road.  He  has  eleven  regiments,  four  of  them  having  been 
brought  with  him  down  from  Memphis.  A body  of  cavalry  will  remain 
at  Haynes’  to  observe  the  enemy  in  that  direction.  McArthur’s  divis- 
ion will  take  its  proper  position  in  McPherson’s  corps  as  soon  as  Lau- 
man reaches  his  new  post.  One  thousand  cavalry  have  been  sent  north 
to  dispose  of  bridges  over  Big  Black  on  the  Memphis  and  Jackson  Kail- 
road,  and  to  burn  corn  and  forage  in  the  Yazoo  region,  so  as  to  impede 
the  possible  approach  of  enemy.  General  Banks  has  decided  to  attack 
Port  Hudson  at  once  instead  of  moving  hither.  He  has  taken  for  the 
puriDOse  the  transports  sent  him  by  General  Grant. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War, 


G.  A.  DANA. 


Behind  Vicksburg,  May  26,  1863 — 1 p.  m.. 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  May  29 — 10  a.  m. 

(Received  May  30 — 10.30  p.  m.) 

The  situation  has  not  essentially  altered  since  my  last  dispatch.  Sher- 
man has  pushed  the  siege  works  in  front  of  his  center  with  great  energy 
and  admirable  skill,  and  might  to-morrow  plant  his  guns  within  50 
yards  of  the  fortifications  and  clear  tliem  out  for  an  assault,  but  helms 
not  yet  got  near  enough  to  commence  mining.  On  his  right,  where 
Steele  commands,  the  opportunity  is  still  exceedingly  favorable,  but 
Porter  has  not  yet  consented  to  bring  a gunboat  near  enough  for  effective 
co-operation.  McPherson’s  miniug  operations  have  proved  much  more 
difficult  than  his  engineers  first  calculated,  and  it  must  still  be  some 
time  before  the  work  he  is  digging  at  can  be  blown  up.  On  McClernand’s 


CHAt>.  SXXVl.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


89 


front,  where  the  approaches  are  naturally  most  favorable  to  us  and  the 
enemy’s  line  of  works  evidently  much  the  weakest,  nothing  in  the  way 
of  siege  operations  had  been  accomplished  when  1 was  there  last  even- 
ing. Lieutenant-Colonel  Powell,  whom  General  Grant  sent  to  examine 
the  line,  reported  that  McOlernaud’s  artillery  was  in  good  position  and 
effectively  distributed. 

Pemberton  sent  a flag  at  4 p.  m.  yesterday,  asking  for  a truce  of  two 
hours  and  a half  to  bury  the  dead.  The  bodies  of  our  men  fell  about 
his  works  last  Friday,  and  whom  we  have  not  been  able  to  bring  off' 
evidently  caused  his  garrison  great  annoyance  by  their  odor.  He  prob- 
ably also  hoped  to  gain  information.  The  truce  was  had  and  the  dead 
buried.  Deserters  from  the  town  state  uniformly  that  supplies  of  food 
and  ammunition  are  short.  Thirty  days  is  the  limit  during  which  they 
say  Pemberton  may  hold  out.  His  officers  with  the  flag  yesterday  loudly 
declared  that  they  had  provisions  for  six  months.  General  Grant  was 
determined  to  fortify  Haynes’  Bluff  on  the  land  side  against  any  possible 
attack.  Troops  have  been  sent  to  important  points  in  that  quarter  to 
guard  against  the  contingency  of  the  enemy  coming  in.  We  have,  how- 
ever, no  information  to  cause  the  fear  of  such  an  event  happening  im- 
mediately ; but  allow  me  earnestly  to  urge  the  necessity  of  putting  a 
force  here  at  once  which  will  render  futile  all  attempts  to  raise  this 
siege.  This  town  must  fall  unless  the  enemy  bring  troops  in  great  num- 
bers from  the  east  and  southeast,  and  that  should  be  provided  against. 
It  is  an  incomparable  position  as  regards  the  health  and  comfort  of  our 
men.  These  high,  wooded  hills  afford  pure  air  and  shade,  the  deep 
ravines  abound  in  springs  of  excellent  water,  and  if  they  should  fail  it  can 
easily  be  brought  from  the  Mississippi.  General  Grant  last  night  sent 
a staff'  officer  to  General  Banks,  urging  him  to  bring  his  forces  here  as 
promptly  as  practicable,  and  assuring  him  that  he  (Grant)  would  gladly 
serve  under  him  as  his  superior  in  rank,  or  simply  co-operate  with  him 
for  the  benefit  of  the  common  cause,  if  he  should  prefer  that  course. 

C.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Behind  Vicksburg,  May  27,  1863—9  a-,  m., 

Via  Memphis,  June  3. 

The  cavalry  sent  out  a few  days  since  found  a body  of  enemy  about 
30  miles  northeast  of  Haynes’  Bluff’,  and  returned  without  having  eff'ected 
their  purpose.  General  Grant  had  determined  to  clear  the  country  in 
that  direction ; yesterday  sent  out  three  brigades  of  McPherson’s  corps 
under  McArthur  and  three  of  Sherman’s  under  Mower,  the  whole  com- 
manded by  F.  P.  Blair,  to  disperse  rebels,  who  are  6,000  to  8,000,  com- 
manded by  W.  H.  T.  Walker,  and  to  devastate  the  region,  so  that  an 
army  must  carry  all  its  supplies  in  order  to  pass  through  it.  The  forces 
marched  hence  just  after  dusk,  without  wagons.  Deserters  who  came 
in  yesterday  from  different  parts  of  the  city  agree  in  the  statement  that 
the  garrison  is  on  quarter  rations.  About  9 cubic  inches  of  corn  bread 
and  one-quarter  pound  of  boiled  fresh  beef  served  at  8 p.  m.  is  their 
daily  food.  They  are  kept  in  the  trenches  without  relief.  The  reserve 
comsists  of  one  brigade  and  a half  only.  Deserters  differ  as  to  the  sup- 
ply of  ammunition,  some  saying  there  is  plenty,  others  that  it  is  scarce. 
According  to  them  all,  a majority  of  the  })rivates  wish  to  surrender  the 
place,  but  the  officers  are  determined  to  figlit  to  tlie  last.  Our  engineers 


90 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap,  NXXVl. 


say  the  rebel  lines  are  about  5J  miles  long,  containing  from  tbirty-tbree 
to  tbirtj^-five  forts  coniiectecl  by  rifle-pits.  Tbe  garrison  we  now  believe 
consists  of  20,000  to  25,000  men;  tlieir  hospitals  crowded. 

C.  A.  DAXA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Behind  Vicksburo,  May  28,  18G3, 

Via  Memphis,  May  30—0  p.  m. 

(Ileceived  June  1 — 3.15  a.  m.) 

Tbe  siege  works  progress  satisfactorily.  Sberman  bas  bis  parallels 
completed  to  witbin  80  yards  of  tbe  rebel  fortifications.  He  is  able  to 
carry  artillery  and  wagons  with  borses  under  cover  to  that  point.  Mc- 
Pherson’s rifle-pits  are  at  about  tbe  same  distance  from  tbe  forts  in  bis 
front.  On  both  these  lines  our  sharpshooters  keep  tbe  rebels  under 
cover  and  never  allow  them  to  load  a cannon.  It  is  a mistake  to  say 
that  tbe  place  is  entirely  invested.  I made  tbe  complete  circuit  of  tbe 
lines  yesterday.  Tbe  left  is  open  in  direction  of  Warrenton,  so  that  tbe 
enemy  have  no  difficulty  in  sending  messengers  in  and  out.  Our  force 
is  nob  large  enough  to  occupy  tbe  whole  line  and  keep  tbe  necessary 
reserves  and  outposts  at  dangerous  and  important  points ; still,  tbe 
enemy  cannot  either  escape  by  that  route  or  receive  supplies. 

An  officer  who  returned  yesterday  from  a visit  to  Jackson  with  a flag 
of  truce  to  take  supplies  to  our  wounded,  found  Loring  there  with  bis 
force,  apparently  reorganizing  and  ready  for  movement.  Tbe  number 
be  could  not  ascertain,  but  thought  it  was  5,000  at  least.  Loring,  you 
may  remember,  escaped  to  the  southeast  with  bis  division  after  tbe  bat- 
tle of  Baker’s  Creek. 

Tbe  gunboat  Cincinnati  was  disabled  yesterday  in  a sharp  engage- 
ment with  tbe  enemy’s  upper  water  battery,  on  Steele’s  Ifont.  She  was 
compelled  by  discharges  of  grape  to  close  her  bow  port  holes,  and  in 
endeavoring  to  get  away,  swung  her  stern  around  toward  tbe  battery, 
when  she  was  so  badly  bit  that  her  commander  ran  her  ashore,  and  she 
sank  in  shoal  water.  Some  twenty- odd  lives  were  lost.  She  may  be 
raised  and  saved. 

Tbe  weather  is  hot,  but  not  at  all  oppressive. 

, C.  A.  HAJSLV. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

ISecretary  of  War. 


Behind  Vicksburo,  Many  30,  1863—9  a.  m.. 

Via  Memphis,  June  3 — 9 p.  m. 

(Beceived  June  4 — 3.35  a.  m.) 

We  have  from  Blair  reports,  which  come  to  him  on  bis  march,  that 
Joe  Johnston  is  at  Canton  \yitb  a force  of  45,000  men,  said  to  consist  of 
W.  H.  T.  Walker’s  division^  being  division  which  escaped  in  disorder 
from  tbe  battle  of  Baker’s  Creek ; 2,000  stragglers  from  other  troops 
engaged  in  that  battle,  three  divisions  from  Bragg’s  army,  and  a body 
from  Mobile.  These  reports  are  undoubtedlj"  exaggerated,  but  that 
Johnston  is  there,  doing  bis  best  to  collect  and  bring  [forces]  for  the  re- 
1 ief  of  Vicksburg,  there  is  no  question.  General  Grant  has  ordered  Blair 
to  return  to  Haynes’  Bluff,  without  further  exposing  himself,  but  to  de- 
vastate the  country  as  he  returns.  All  the  roads  from  the  Big  Black 
hither,  except  the  main  one  from  the  railroad  bridge  (where  Osterhaus 


Chap.  XXXVL]  GENERAL  REPORTS.  91 

is  posted  with  a brigade),  are  beiag  obstructed  by  felling  trees  and  de- 
stroying bridges. 

The  siege  is  being  pressed  with  all  possible  vigor.  Sherman  has  a 
breaching  battery  of  four  30-pouuder  Parrotts  at  work  within  80  yards 
of  the  chief  fort  in  his  front.  McPherson  has  his  approaches  within  50 
yards,  with  a battery  all  ready  for  three  similar  guns,  which  will  be  in 
position  to  day  or  to-morrow.  A messenger  from  Pemberton  to  John- 
ston has  come  into  our  lines.  His  message  was  that  the  place  could 
not  hold  out  longer  than  the  end  of  next  week.  The  garrison  is  worn 
out,  and  the  majority  of  it  anxious  to  surrender. 

General  Grant  having  twice  sent  to  General  Banks  for  re-enforcements, 
and  [they]  not  having  yet  made  their  appearance,  I have  consented,  at 
his  urgent  desire,  to  go  down  and  urge  General  Banks  to  furnish  them 
at  once. 

I have  thought  it  to  be  my  duty  to  do  everything  that  may  obviate 
the  possible  necessity  of  raising  the  siege  of  Vicksburg.  I expect  to 
be  hack  here  by  June  4. 

C.  A.  DAVA. 

Hon.*E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Chickasaw  Bayou,  May  31,  1863—12  m.. 

Via  Memphis,  June  5 — 10.30  a.  m. 

(Beceived  June  7 — 8 p.  m.)  • 

I have  returned  here  on  my  way  to  General  Grant’s  headquarters, 
having  met  his  previous  messenger  to  General  Banks  last  night,  on  the 
Mississippi,  above  Grand  Gulf.  General  Banks  is  investing  Port  Hud- 
son, and  declines  to  send  any  forces  here.  He  opened  his  lines  May 
21,  with  12,000  men,  and  on  the  27th  assaulted  the  place  ineffectualljq 
losing  1,000  killed  and  wounded.  He  has  ordered  up  4,000  more  troops 
from  his  forces  below,  which  will  make  his  force  15,000,  and  desires  that 
General  Grant  should  also  send  him  re-enforcements.  Grierson’s  cavalry, 
which  General  Grant  iiressingly  needs.  General  Banks  retains  on  the 
plea  of  necessity.  He  says  that  if  he  were  to  raise  the  siege,  in  order 
to  help  General  Grant,  he  would  still  be  unable  to  send  him  any  more 
than  5,000  troops,  as  he  must  retain  the  bulk  of  his  army  there  as  long 
as  Port  Hudson  is  ginsubdued.  The  number  of  the  garrison  he  esti- 
mates at  6,000.  Of  their  supplies  of  food  and  ammunition  he  knows 
nothing  positively,  and  does  not  say  how  long  he  thinks  it  will  require 
to  reduce  the  place.  I learn  that  Blair,  with  his  two  brigades,  has 
arrived  at  Haynes’  Bluff,  in  compliance  with  General  Grant’s  order  of 
day  before  yesterday.  Of  the  news  at  General  Grant’s  headquarters, 
nothing  is  known  here. 

C.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Rear  of  Vicksburg,  May  31,  1863—4  p.  m.. 

Via  Memphis,  June  3 — 3.30  p.  m. 

Blair  reports  that  there  is  no  rebel  force,  between  the  Yazoo  and  tlie 
Big  Black,  and  that  Johnston  lias  now  at  Canton  only  18,000  men,  and 
does  not  intend  to  move  until  he  has  40,000.  Blair  eonlirras  his  own 
lirevious  report  that  three  divisions  have  been  withdrawn  by  Johnston 
from  the  army  opposed  to  General  Rosecrans,  but  these  three  divisions 


92 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


have  not  yet  reported  at  Canton.  This  tallies  with  General  Grant’s  in- 
formation from  other  sources.  Johnston  says  that  he  shall  have  liis 
40,000  in  time  to  save  Yicksburg. 

Pardon  me  for  again  urging  that  re-enforcements  be  at  once  sent 
here  from  Tennessee,  Kentucky,  or  Missouri  in  numbers  sufficient  to  put 
our  success  beyond  all  peradventure.  The  same  messenger  who  bears 
this  to  Memphis  bears  also  General  Grant’s  orders  for  7,000  men  from 
Hurlbut’s  forces  to  be  sent  here  at  once;  but  this  will  not  meet  all  tlie 
requirements  of  the  case.  Our  position  here  is  infinitely  more  secure 
and  the  result  incomparably  more  certain  than  our  position  and  its  re- 
sult at  Corinth  last  year.  The  place  is  far  more  important.  Its  ultimate 
possession  ought  to  be  assured  by  all  the  means  in  our  power.  Better 
retreat  to  Kashville  than  retreat  from  the  hills  of  Vicksburg. 

C.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Behind  Yicksburo,  June  3,  1863 — 8 a.  m., 

Via  Memphis,  June  G — Noon. 

(Beceived  June  7 — 6.15  p.  m.) 

The  expeditionary  corps  under  E.  P.  Blair,  which  has  been  resting  for 
two  days  at  Haynes’  Bluff  after  its  recent  march  of  90  miles  in  five  days, 
will  be  back  to-night,  and  will  take  its  position  on  the  extreme  left  of  our 
investing  lines,  filling  the  space  hitherto  occupied  by  pickets  of  enemy 
between  J.  G.  Lauman  and  the  Mississippi.  This  will  render  the  invest- 
ment total,  and  as  soon  as  the  rifle-pits  and  field  works  are  completed 
in  that  part  of  the  line  it  will  be  impassable. 

On  the  night  of  the  1st  instant  we  had  an  alarm  on  McClernand’s 
front,  and  it  was  supposed  that  the  enemy  were  about  to  attempt  a 
sally.  Their  attack  on  a pioneer  company  was  soon  repulsed,  and  they 
fell  back.  Our  lines  are  now  so  strong  from  the  extreme  right  around 
to  McClernand’s  left,  that  5,000  troops  can  hold  them  against  any  sortie. 

General  Grant  has  ordered  heavy  re-enforcements  from  Hurlbut’s 
commund.  W.  S.  Smith’s  division,  five  brigades,  7,000  strong,  N.  Kim- 
ball, above  5,000,  and  from  A.  Asboth’s  command  5,000,  are  on  their 
way.  The  first  brigade  of  Kimball  arrived  here  yesterdaj^  The  line 
between  Dodge’s  left  and  Memphis  will  be  confined  to  the  shortest 
railroad,  and  should  Joe  Johnston,  finding  all  lost  at  Yicksburg,  make 
a sudden  dash  at  Memphis,  General  Grant  will  have  to  rely  on  the 
vigilance  of  Hurlbut’s  cavalry  and  the  rapidity  of  his  own  transport 
steamers  to  get  re-enforcements  there  in  season.  The  outpost  here 
toward  the  northeast  is  at  Mechanicsburg,  3 miles  east  of  Satartia, 
where  it  is  supplied  by  steamers.  It  consists  of  one  brigade  under  3.  A. 
Mower,  with  two  cavalry  regiments.  The  latter  have  again  been  sent  out 
to  attempt  the  northern  railroad  bridge  over  Big  Black.  All  the  roads 
by  which  the  enemy  can  approach  are  being  filled  with  everj'  practicabli* 
obstruction.  Of  this  last  work  much  has  already  been  well  done. 

All  our  reports  keep  Joe  Johnston  still  at  Canton.  The  siege  works 
steadily  progressing  on  the  whole  line.  Those  prosecuted  with  the  least 
energy  and  the  least  intellectual  effort  are,  I regret  to  say,  those  of  Gen 
eral  E.  Steele.  His  inertia  is  surprising.  His  camps  are  also  In  very 
bad  order  and  very  dirty.  1.  E.  Quinby  leaves  again  to-day  on  account 
of  sickness,  and  3.  I'l.  Smith  takes  his  division. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War. 


Chai>.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


93 


Behind  Vicksburg,  June  5,  18G3 — 8 a.  m., 

Via  Memphis,  June  7 — 5 p.  m. 

The  siege  works  progress  steadily,  though  there  is  a deplorable  lack 
of  engineer  officers.  Of  the  half  dozen  of  those  in  this  army,  one  very 
valuable,  sent  from  Eocky  Springs  about  May  5 with  dispatches  to  Gen- 
eral Banks,  has  been  retained  by  him  just  as  he  has  retained  Grierson’s 
cavalry.  The  rebels  in  McPherson’s  and  Sherman’s  front  have  strength- 
ened their  works  within  two  days  by  building  demi-lunes  in  front  of 
their  re-entrants.  In  Sherman’s  judgment,  there  is  ho  evidence  of  their 
erecting  new  works  in  the  rear  of  their  original  line.  Our  line  and 
theirs  must  be  in  contact  within  three  days.  The  expeditionary  corps, 
under  Blair’s  command,  commenced  its  march  yesterday  morning  to 
occupy  fully  the  southern  approaches  to  the  city,  but  were  called  back 
about  noon,  and  the  brigades  returned  to  their  original  divisions.  This 
was  a result  of  some  new  demonstrations  of  the  enemy,  thought  to  be 
indicative  of  a purpose  to  sally,  and  also  of  General  Grant’s  unwilling- 
ness to  scatter  his  troops.  The  cannonade  from  our  whole  line  is  now 
steadily  maintained  by  night  as  well  as  by  day.  Some  fifteen  8 and  9 
inch  Navy  guns  lent  by  Admiral  Porter,  with  crews  to  fight  them,  are 
being  put  in  position.  General  Grant  is  considering  the  subject  of  sud- 
den attack  in  great  force  on  the  south,  where  there  are  no  siege  lines 
and  where  enemy  expect  nothing.  From  the  drift  of  his  remarks,  how- 
ever, I conclude  he  will  not  adopt  the  measure.  Another  brigade  of  N. 
Kimball’s  has  arrived,  and  is  now  at  Haynes’  Bluff.  Kimball  has  been 
ordered  with  his  whole  division  to  Mechanicsburg,  to  increase  and  to 
command  the  observing  force  previously  sent  there  under  Mower.  Joe 
Johnston  has  sent  some  troops  to  Yazoo  City,  and  appears  to  be  occupy- 
ing with  small  detachments  the  line  thence  to  Canton.  Admiral  Porter’s 
wihole  force  of  light  steamers  left  for  there  yesterday  evening.  The 
rebels  are  reported  to  have  several  large  transports  up  near  Yazoo.  No 
signs  of  any  movement  of  Johnston  on  the  lower  line  of  Big  Black.  A 
body  of  guerrillas  are  troubling  the  leased  plantations  in  Louisiana.  J. 
0.  Sullivan  has  been  relieved  of  command  there  for  inertia,  and  Dennis 
lias  gope  to  his  place.  Unfortunately,  J.  P.  Hawkins  is  absent,  sick,  or 
General  Grant  would  have  given  him  the  command.  Two  regiments  of 
McClernand’s  have  been  sent  over,  and  there  are  four  colored  regiments 
there,  numbering  about  2,500,  armed  but  not  disciplined.  The  fortifica- 
tions at  Haynes’  Bluff  advance  with  exceeding  slowness  for  want  of 
both  engineers  and  laborers. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department,  June  5,  1803. 

C.  A.  Dana,  Esq.,  Granfs  EeadcpiarterSj  near  Viclcshurg  : 

Your  telegrams  up  to  the  30th  have  been  received.  Everything  in 
the  power  of  this  Government  will  be  put  forth  to  aid  General  Grant. 
The  emergency  is  not  underrated  here.  Your  telegrams  are  a great 
obligation,  and  are  looked  for  with  deep  interest.  I cannot  thank  you 
ns  innch  as  T feel  for  the  service  you  are  now  rendering.  You  have  been 
appointed  an  assistant  adjutant-general,  with  rank  of  major,  with  lib- 
erty to  report  to  General  Grant,  if  he  needs  you.  The  appointment  may 
be  a protection  to  you.  I shall  expect  daily  reports,  if  jmssible. 

EDWIN  M.  STANTON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


94 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX VL 


Behind  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  Ju7ie  G,  18G3— 7 ]).  m., 

Via  Memphis,  June  12 — 5 p.  m. 

Kimball  rei)orts  from  Mechauicsburg  that  on  entering  that  place  from 
Sataitia  day  before  yesterday,  he  found  the  enemy  drawn  up  in  line  of 
battle.  Attacked  immediately,  and  drove  him  out.  His  cavalry  were 
pursuing  as  he  wrote.  Ko  other  particulars.  General  Grant  has  just 
started  for  the  place,  deeming  it  necessary  to  examine  the  situation 
there  himself.  I go  with  him.  The  siege  goes  on  steadily.  Deserters 
all  report  short  rations  and  divided  councils  within,  a great  part  of  the 
soldiers  and  all  the  citizens  desiring  to  surrender. 

They  fired  a good  deal  yesterday,  having  evidently  received  a new 
supply  of  caps. 

0.  A.  DAKA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secreimy  of  War. 


Haynes’  Bluff,  June  7, 18G3, 

ViY  Memphis,  June  10. 

On  approaching  to  within  2 miles  of  Satartia  last  evening,  we  found 
that  K.  Kimball  had  retreated  to  Oak  Eidge  Post-Ofiice,  sending  the 
commissary  stores  and  baggage  by  the  river  to  this  place.  The  gun- 
boats were  also  coming  down,  and  General  Grant  returned  here  with 
them. 

The  reason  of  Kimball’s  movement  appears  to  be  an  extraordinary 
fall  in  the  Yazoo,  which  caused  him  to  fear  that  his  supplies  might 
become  insecure  at  Satartia.  His  aftair  on  the  4th  was  but  a small 
skirmish,  in  which  he  took  some  40  prisoners,  with  no  loss  to  himself, 
as  I am  informed  from  Kimball.  We  have  no  ofiicial  report.  A rebel 
deserter  reports  that  General  W.  H.  T.  Walker  is  at  Yazoo  City  with 
eight  brigades,  and  that  Joe  Johnston  is  advancing  from  Canton  to  the 
Big  Black  with  a large  force. 

C.  A.  DAKA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

ISeeretary  of  War. 


Behind  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  8,  18G3 — 10  a.  m.. 

Via  Memphis,  Jiine  10 — 5 p.  m. 

I have  just  returned  from  the  vicinity  of  Mechanicsbnrg,  wdiither  I 
went  with  a party  of  cavalry  from  Haynes’  Blulf  yesterday.  There  were 
no  signs  of  any  considerable  force  of  the  enemy,  though  Kimball  had 
retreated  from  there  the  day  before  in  a semi-panic.  No  doubt  Johnston 
has  moved  some  of  his  troops  this  side  of  the  Big  Black,  but  his  main 
force  yet  stays  at  Canton.  The  idea  of  operating  in  that  direction,  both 
for  devastation  and  for  more  direct  military  objects.  General  Grant  has 
by  no  means  abandoned.  His  intention  has  been  to  put  C.  C.  Washburn 
in  command  there,  but  1 now  think  he  will  send  Sherman  with  a force  of 
from  15,000  to  20,000  troops,  including  2,500  cavalry.  The  coiintiy  is 
like  the  rest  of  this  peninsula — broken,  wooded,  unpopnlous,  with  few 
streams.  It  still  has  many  cattle,  but  the  corn  is  pretty  thoroughly 
cleared  out.  Johnston  cannot  move  through  it  without  bringing  all  his 
sn])i)lies  with  him. 

Advices  from  Port  Hudson  to  the  Ith  instant  were  brought  yesterday 
bv  Cob  J.  Biggin,  of  General  Grant’s  stafi.  The  siege  has  not  reached 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


95 


a decisive  point.  General  Banks  thinks  if  he  had  10,000  troops  more 
he  could  reduce  the  place  in  a few  days,  but  we  have  not  facts  enough 
to  understand  the  grounds  of  this  opinion.  So  far  as  it  is  possible  to 
judge  at  this  distance,  a regular  siege  is  as  indispensable  there  as  it  is 
here.  The  reason  General  Banks  gives  for  not  co-operating  with  Gen- 
eral Grant  is  that  he  could  not  spare  more  trooi^s  from  his  own  army 
and  still  hold  New  Orleans  safe  against  any  x^ossible  attack ; then  he 
would,  by  giving  up  the  siege,  liberate  the  enemy  to  join  Johnston. 

Milliken’s  Bend  and  Young’s  Point  were  both  attacked  day  before 
yesterday  by  a body  of  rebels  reported  at  about  1,500.  At  Milliken’s 
Bend  the  negro  troops  at  first  gave  way,  but  hearing  that  those  of  their 
number  who  were  captured  were  killed,  they  rallied  with  great  fury  and 
routed  the  enemy.  The  white  troops  at  Young’s  Point  also  repulsed 
him  decisively. 

0.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Beak  of  Vicksburg,  June  10,  1863 — 7 a.  m.. 

Via  Memphis,  June  16—10,30  a.  m. 

(Peceived  June  23 — 1.30  a.  m.) 

General  Grant  has  finally  sent  Washburn  to  Haynes’  Bluff,  and  he 
will  direct  operations  there  for  the  present.  Joe  Johnston,  with  his 
main  force,  still  remains  at  Canton,  and  Breckinridge  at  Jackson.  The 
fortifications  at  Haynes’  Bluff  are  now  completely  laid  out.  No  great 
work  will  be  required  to  render  it  easy  to  defend  the  place  effectually. 
Our  iutrenchrnents  there  are  calculated  for  30,000  to  50,000  troops. 
The  siege  here  has  not  yet  reached  fortifications  of  the  enemy.  Sher- 
man’s approach,  though  conducted  through  the  most  difficult  ground, 
is  nearest  of  all.  His  sap  was  within  50  feet  of  the  rebels’  front  at  9 
p.  m.  yesterday.  AlcPherson  is  at  about  SO  yards  or  more.  Both  Sher- 
man and  McPherson  have  abandoned  the  idea  of  mining,  and  intend 
to  crown  the  enemy’s  parapet  with  their  artillery.  It  is  now  certain 
that  the  enemy  have  constructed  a new  interior  line  of  defense  within 
the  main  works,  which  Sherman  is  attacking.  A violent  fire  of  mus- 
ketry was  heard  within  Vicksburg  yesterday  afternoon.  No  doubt  it 
was  mutiny,  as  we  know  that  disaffection  has  long  existed  among  their 
troops,  and  that  on  the  day  of  our  attack  (May  22)  both  Tennessee  and 
Georgia  regiments  refused  to  fight. 

A portion  of  W.  S.  Smith’s  division  has  arrived  at  Haynes’  Bluff.  I 
have  from  Dennis  the  particulars  of  the  fight  of  the  7th  instant  at  Mil- 
liken’s Bend.  There  was  no  fighting  at  Young’s  Point,  Captain  Town- 
send, commander  of  convalescents,  having  drawn  up  his  men  so  cun- 
ningly that  the  rebels,  who  were  within  sight  in  line  of  battle,  thought 
themselves  greatly  outnumbered  and  withdrew.  At  the  Bend,  the  bat- 
tle began  soon  after  daybreak  and  lasted  about  three  hours.  The  rebel 
force  was  a division  of  Texans,  about  2,000  strong,  who  marched  from 
Pine  Bluff  April  30,  and  arrived  at  Alexandria  after  General  Banks 
had  left  there,  and  were  then  ordered  this  way.  They  were  commanded 
by  General  J.  G.  Walker,  with  Generals  H.  E.  McCuilocli,  J.  M.  Hawes, 
and  Kandal  under  him.  They  had  no  artillery.  Our  forces,  who  also 
had  no  artillery,  consisted  of  Ninth  [Eleventh]  Louisiana  (colored).  Col. 
E.  W.  Chamberlain,  and  Twenty-third  Iowa,  Col.  iS.  L.  Glasgow,  in  all 
about  1,000  men.  General  Dennis  describes  the  battle  as  the  hardest 
he  has  ever  seen.  It  was  fought  mainly  hand  to  hand.  After  it  w’as 


96 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


over,  many  men  were  found  dead  with  bayonet  stabs,  and  others  with 
their  skulls  broken  open  by  butts  of  muskets. 

The  Ninth  Louisiana  lost  62  killed  and  130  wounded  ; the  Eleventh, 
30  killed  and  120  wounded ; the  Twenty-third  Iowa,  26  killed  and  60 
wounded;  the  Ninth  bas  also  a great  number  missing.  Of  the  rebels, 
we  buried  130.  General  McCulloch  died  on  the  field  from  the  efiects  of 
a wound. 

‘Mt  is  imi^ossible,”  says  General  Dennis,  ^Gbr  men  to  show  greater 
gallantry  than  the  negro  troops  in  this  fight.”  He  does  not  know 
whether  it  is  true  that  the  rebels  murdered  their  negro  prisoners. 

Col.  H.  Lieb,  who  was  wounded,  behaved  admirably ; Colonel  Cham- 
berlain badly. 

General  Grant  has  ordered  Mower,  with  his  brigade,  to  Milliken’s 
Bend,  and  the  enemy  there  will  be  cleared  out  beyond  Tensas  and  in 
the  neighborhood  of  Monroe. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Behind  Vicksburg,  June  11,  1863 — 1 p.  m., 

Via  Memphis,  June  14—8  p.  m. 

(Eeceived  June  16 — 2 p.  m.) 

General  Herron  has  just  reported.  His  eight  regiments  are  ordered 
to  take  position  south  of  Vicksburg,  between  Bauman’s  troops  and  Mis- 
sissippi Eiver,  completely  closing  the  lines,  and  rendering  egress  and 
ingress  absolutely  impossible.  General  Burnside’s  re- enforcements  and 
the  rest  of  the  detachments  from  the  Sixteenth  Army  Corps  are  still 
wanting.  Of  the  former,  one  regiment  was  at  Cairo  when  Herron  left. 
From  Haynes’  Bluff,  Washburn  reports  one  division  cavalry,  under 
W.  H.  Jackson,  2 miles  beyond  Mechanicsburg.  It  left  Bragg  three 
weeks  ago.  A body  of  infantry  under  W.  H.  T.  Walker  is  at  Yazoo 
City,  as  before  reported.  Deserters  from  Vicksburg  last  evening  report 
corn-meal  getting  short,  so  that  the  ration  of  bread  is  one-half  of  pea 
flour.  Hovey’s  artillery  have  destroyed  one  of  their  mills  and  injured 
the  remaining  one.  They  are  also  out  of  fresh  beef,  and  have  begun  to 
issue  bacon,  of  which  some  deserters  were  told  by  their  officers  that  they 
have  thirty  days’  supply.  The  re-enforcements  yet  to  arrive  will  be 
concentrated  at  Haynes’.  C.  C.  Washburn  reports  that  place  of  such 
strength  on  the  land  side  that  10,000  can  hold  it  against  30,000.  The 
engineers  report  the  artificial  defenses  there  will  require  little  labor. 

General  Grant  thinks  the  demonstration  of  the  enemy  west  of  Mis- 
sissippi Eiver  more  serious  than  we  have  supposed.  Of  course,  every 
means  in  their  iiower  on  that  side  will  be  directed  to  hindering  his  oper- 
ations here. 

Our  forces  now  at  Milliken’s  Bend,  including  Mower’s  brigade,  will  not 
be  sufficient  for  aggressive  purposes  toward  Natchez,  but  will  be  ample 
for  defense.  The  gunboats  are  judiciously  placed — one  at  Haynes’  Blufi’, 
one  at  Chickasaw  Bayou,  one  at  Young’s  Point,  one  at  Milliken’s  Bend, 
one  at  Lake  Providence,  one  at  Greenville,  one  at  Island  65,  two  at 
White  Eiver,  besides  others  in  motion.  The  seven  gunboats  below 
Vicksburg  are  also  stationed  where  most  needed;  but  the  line  is  long, 
and  the  rebels  west  of  Mississippi  Eiver  may  manage  to  cross  some- 
where. 

It  is  R)y  duty  to  report  that  the  Marine  Brigade,  with  its  seven  large 


Chat.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


97 


steamers  aud  its  varied  apparatus  of  artillery,  infantry,  and  cavalry, 
is  a very  useless  as  well  as  a very  costly  institution. 

Your  dispatch  of  the  5th  just  received.  Many  tiianks. 

O.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretarij  of  War. 


Behind  Vicksburg,  June  12,  1863 — 7 a.  m.. 

Via  Memphis,  June  14. 

(Eeceived  June  16 — 4 p.  m.) 

Col.  E.  W.  Gantt,  of  Arkansas,  who  commanded  a brigade  at  Island 
No.  10,  was  exchanged,  and  has  since  lived  in  retirement,  came  in  yes- 
terday from  within  the  enemy’s  lines,  and  surrendered  himself  to  Gen- 
eral Grant,  who  has  sent  him  to  Memjihis  at  his  own  wish  as  a prisoner. 
He  gives  information  of  the  greatest  importance.  His  motive  is  desire 
to  bring  the  war  to  a close.  The  rebellion,  he  says,  is  near  its  end,  and, 
if  it  should  not  perish  by  our  arms,  must  fall  from  its  own  administra- 
tion and  general  corruption  into  mere  military  despotism.  Slavery", 
he  thinks,  is  also  ended  forever.  According  to  his  report,  Bragg  has 
sent  all  his  material  to  Atlanta,  and  is  ready  with  his  unincumbered 
troops  to  fall  back  to  Bristol  and  Chattanooga  as  soon  as  ordered,  so  that 
he  may  hold  those  places,  while  he  detaches  25,000  men,  in  addition  to 
those  he  has  already  sent,  to  swell  the  forces  here  under  Johnston. 
From  Mobile  and  Savannah  all  the  troops,  except  enough  to  man  the 
heavy  guns,  have  already  been  withdrawn,  so  that  a small  force  could 
take  either  place.  Johnston’s  i)resent  army  amounts  to  37,000  men, 
exclusive  of  the  garrison  of  Vicksburg,  which  is  25,000,  including  sick 
and  wounded.  The  order  to  evacuate  jPort  Hudson  arrived  there  the 
very  day  General  Banks  opened  his  lines  before  it.  West  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi, exclusive  of  Texas,  is  Kirby  Smith’s  command  (32,500  men). 
He  has  been  ordered  to  leave  every  object,  except  the  relief  of  Vicks- 
burg. Lee’s  army  has  not  been  reduced ; on  the  contrary,  it  is  stronger 
and  more  concentrated  than  ever.  What  supplies  of  provisions  Pem- 
berton has  he  does  not  know,  but  he  knows  that  percussion  caps  have 
been  got  to  him,  and  that  Johnston  and  he  have  daily  communication. 

Herron  will  to-day  take  his  position  on  the  Warrenton  road,  taking 
care,  of  course,  that  the  garrison  at  Vicksburg  shall  see  the  whole  of 
his  march  from  Young’s  Point  across  to  the  point  just  below  Vicksburg, 
where  his  troops  will  be  ferried  across  the  Mississipiii.  General  Grant 
has  also  determined  to  place  the  whole  of  Burnside’s  re-enforcements  in 
tliat  part  of  the  lines,  and  to  put  the  whole,  from  McGlernaud’s  left,  in- 
cluding Lauman’s,  Herron’s,  and  Burnside’s  troops,  under  command  of 
Ord,  whose  arrival  is  constantly  expected.  The  siege  works  have  been 
checked  for  twenty -four  hours  by  violent  storms,  but  were  resumed  yes- 
terday’. A 9-inch  navy  gun  in  McPherson’s  front  is  doing  very  efficient 
work.  Fired  at  300  yards,  its  shells  penetrate  the  rebel  parapet  some 
10  feet  and  then  explode,  clearing  the  parapet  avv'ay  as  if  by  a mine. 
Should  General  Grant  think  it  advisable  to  assault  again,  we  are  now 
in  position  to  do  it  with  effect;  but,  unless  Johnston  becomes  very 
pressing,  he  will  rather  trust  to  time  and  general  compression.  General 
Grant  has  ascertained  that  a colonel,  a captain,  and  4 men  got  out  of 
Vicksburg  night  before  last  by  going  up  the  Mississippi  in  a boat,  land- 
ing on  this  side  of  the  river  just  above  the  sunken  gunboat  Cincinnati, 
and  making  their  way  through  the  bottom  and  across  the  Yazoo  2 miles 
7 B B— VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


98 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


ICjiap.  XXXNI. 


above  its  moatli.  Paymaster  Judd  arrived  here  yesterday  with  19  sub* 
ordiuate  paymasters  and  funds  to  pay  this  army  to  April  30.  As  the 
operation  of  paying  men  engaged  as  these  are  must  i)rove  very  incon- 
venient and  injurious  to  the  public  interest,  General  Grant  has  ordered 
him  back  to  Memphis  for  the  present. 

G.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Behind  Yicksbijkg,  June  14,  1803 — 8 a.  m.. 

Via  Memphis,  June  17 — Noon. 

(Received  7 p.  in.) 

All  the  indications  point  to  the  speedy  surrender  of  this  place.  De- 
serters who  came  out  yesterday  say  that  the  Tennessee  and  Georgia 
regiments  have  determined  to  stack  their  arms  within  three  days  and 
refuse  to  continue  the  defense  on  the  ground  thatit-is  useless,  and  that 
it  is  impossible  to  fight  on  the  rations  they  receive.  All  the  deserters 
are  worn  out  and  hungry,  and  say  the  whole  garrison  are  in  the  same 
condition ; besides,  the  defense  has  for  several  days  been  conducted  with 
extraordinary  feebleness,  which  must  be  due  either  to  the  deficiency  of 
ammunition,  or  exhaustion  and  depression  in  the  garrison,  or  to  their 
retirement  to  an  inner  line  of  defense.  The  first  and  third  of  these 
causes  no  doubt  operate  to  some  extent,  but  the  second  we  suppose  to 
be  the  most  influential.  These  deserters  also  say  that  fully  one-third 
of  the  garrison  are  in  hospital,  and  that  officers,  as  well  as  men,  have 
begun  to  despair  of  relief  from  Johnston.  The  troops  of  General  Herron 
got  into  position  yesterday.  The  advance  of  the  Ninth  Army  Corps  is 
also  believed  by  General  Grant  to  have  arrived  at  Young's  Point,  though 
he  has  no  i)ositive  report,  and  does  not  expect  one  till  it  has  its  place  as 
a part  of  the  besieging  force  on  the  south  of  the  city,  whither  he  has 
sent  orders  for  it  to  proceed.  After  the  arrival  there  of  this  corps.  Gen- 
eral Herron  is  to  move  to  the  right  of  General  Lauman,  and  occupy  that 
I)ortiou  of  the  lines  which  is  now  held  by  Hovey’s  division,  whicli 
McOlernand  will  then  station  as  a reserve  to  support  the  other  divisions 
of  his  corps.  All  of  W.  S.  SmitlPs  division  are  now  at  Haynes’  Blufl’, 
where  I saw  them  yesterday  working  upon  the  intrenchments  with  ad- 
mirable zeal.  The  fortifications  there  for  an  army  of  25,000  troops  will 
be  in  a condition  for  practical  use  by  the  ICth  instant.  It  is  a stronger 
defensive  position  even  than  Vicksburg.  The  distance  hence  to  Drum- 
gould’s  Bluff  is  11  miles,  to  Haynes’  Bluff’  14.  Drumgould’s,  on  which 
the  rebels  placed  their  most  elaborate  works,  is  an  isolated  mamelon. 
Snyder’s  and  Haynes’  Bluffs  are  connected  by  a ridge,  though  flanks  on 
the  river  side  are  separated  bj"  two  ravines  and  a bayou  slope.  Snyder’s 
commands  the  lower,  Haynes’  the  upper  bend  of  the  Yazoo.  Snyder’s 
Bluff’  is  now  being  fortified.  When  the  works  there  are  completed,  they 
will  be  extended  around  Haynes’  also.  They  will  then  form  an  in- 
trenched camp  for  .50,000  troops.  Prom  Joe  Johnston  there  is  no  news 
since  my  last  dispatch,  except  that  which  merely  confirms  its  principal 
contents.  He  has  made  no  new  movements  in  this  quarter. 

Sebastian,  Senator  from  Arkansas,  has  determined  to  claim  his  seat 
in  the  next  Congress.  With  the  ffill  of  Vicksburg,  he  says  that  all  west 
of  the  Mississii)pi  is  einancii)ated  from  the  Confederacy,  and  that  Ar- 
kansas  can  be  brought  back  into  the  Union.  He  has  taken  no  part  in 
the  war. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


99 


Please  inform  me  by  telegraph  whether  you  wish  me  to  go  to  General 
Posecrans  after  the  fall  of  Vicksburg,  or  whether  you  have  any  other 
orders  for  me.  I should  like  to  go  home  for  a short  time. 


G.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Behind  Vicksburg,  June  15,  1863 — 8 a.  m., 

Via  Memphis,  Jtme  18 — 11  a.  m. 

(Eeceived  June  20 — 5.30  a.  m.) 

General  Parke  reported  here  last  evening.  Three  brigades  landed  at 
Young’s  Point  yesterday ; two  more  debark  to-day.  General  Parke  will 
take  his  position  on  the  extreme  left  of  the  lines,  where  General  Herron 
is  now  posted.  General  Herron  takes  Hovey’s  place,  between  Generals 
Lauman  and  Carr.  General  Hovey’s  brigade  [division?]  becomes  a 
reserve.  The  enemy  yesterday  laid  aside  his  long-standing  inactivity, 
and  opened  violently  with  both  artillery  and  musketry.  Two  mortars 
placed  at  the  left  of  our  center,  in  a ravine  near  the  railroad,  in  front  of 
A.  J.  Smith,  fired  during  the  day  some  sixty  shell  at  the  trenches  of 
Logan,  in  McPherson’s  center.  These  mortars  are  out  of  reach  of  our 
artillery  and  sharpshooters.  Though  they  had  the  range  pretty  accu- 
rately, they  accomplished  nothing  more  than  wounding  one  man.  On 
General  Sherman’s  lines  the  enemy  fired  vehemently  with  musketry, 
but  did  no  great  damage.  They  are  hard  at  work  placing  a 42-pounder, 
brought  up  from  their  water  battery,  so  as  to  bear  on  General  Sher- 
man’s center.  In  that  place  our  approach  has  reached  the  ditch  of 
their  main  fort  at  the  salient.  It  has  been  Sherman’s  intention  to  crown 
the  parapet  of  this  work  at  that  point,  but  having  reason  to  believe 
that  the  enemy  have  placed  a mine  there,  he  is  now  opening  trenches 
])arallel  with  the  ditch  along  each  flank  of  the  work  and  crown  of  the 
glacis  instead.  The  curtains  are  each  about  100  feet  long.  On  each 
flank  Sherman  intends  to  place  six  12-pounder  howitzers.  The  violence 
of  yesterday’s  fire  has  also  led  him  to  place  a battery  of  four  12-pouuder 
howitzers  and  two  30  pounder  Parrotts  in  an  advanced  position,  within 
50  yards  of  the  fort.  These  batteries  were  opened  at  daybreak  this 
morning,  with  what  effect  is  not  reported.  The  musketry  firing 
about  Sherman’s  sap  was  active  all  night  on  McPherson’s  right.  Mor- 
gan gained  yesterday  an  important  advantage  by  permanently  occupy- 
ing a fortification  or  spur  of  the  ridge  along  whose  crest  the  enemy’s 
lines  extend ; hitherto  a ravine  has  extended  between  him  and  them. 
At  McPherson’s  center,  Logan  told  me  last  evening  that  his  sap  yester- 
day debouched  upon  the  rebels’  salient  at  which  he  has  been  working. 
This  fort  has  no  ditch,  but  is  escarped  and  is  25  feet  high,  the  escarp- 
ment being  formed  by  cutting  away  the  natural  declivity  of  the  hill. 
This  escarpment  McPherson  will  either  dig  down  or  mine.  McOlernand 
is  pressing  his  approaches,  but  is  still  much  farther  off  than  either  of 
the  others.  He  has  some  heavy  24-pounders  in  position  and  is  getting 
up  some  8-inch  navy  guns.  On  Lauman’s  front  nothing  of  importance 
has  been  done  in  the  way  of  regular  approaches,  but  rifle-pits  have  been 
opened  and  our  lines  considerably  shortened.  Lauman  has  brought 
from  Warrenton  a rebel  rifled  64-pounder,  and  has  a 9-inch  columbiad 
derived  irom  the  same  source  ready  to  place.  General  Parke’s  arrival 
makes  a very  great  addition  to  our  engineering  strength  in  that  quar- 
ter. Two  competent  engineers  absent  on  sick  leave  also  returned  yes- 
terday, so  that  wo  shall  no  longer  be  deficient  in  that  regard.  General 


100 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Parke  will  have  command  both  of  Lauman’s  and  Herron^s  forces.  Ad- 
miral Porter  has  mounted  a 100-pounder  rifle  on  flat-boat,  and  placed  it 
on  the  Louisiana  shore,  under  the  point  which  stretches  in  front  of  the 
town.  It  was  fired  yesterday  with  much  effect.  In  the  night  the  enemy 
sent  five  boats  up  the  river  either  to  attack  this  gun  and  the  mortars  or 
to  look  after  the  officers  whom  they  sent  up  the  Yazoo  last  week  by  way 
of  Steele’s  Bayou.  The  boats  returned  without  accomplishing  anything. 
General  Grant  has  placed  pickets  to  watch  for  these  officers.  From  Joe 
Johnston,  who  is  now  at  Jackson,  we  have  trustworthy  information  this 
morning.  He  has  six  divisions  of  infantry,  varying  from  4,000  to  9,000 
each,  and  one  of  cavalry.  Of  the  former,  two  are  at  Yazoo  City  and 
the  latter  is  near  Mechanicsburg.  Pickett,  with  a force  composed  of  we 
know  not  what,  is  ordered  to  move  from  Canton  by  the  Valley  road  and 
cross  Big  Black.  General  Grant  regards  the  movement  as  intended  for 
the  present  simply  to  occupy  the  line  of  Mechanicsburg  in  force.  0.  G. 
Washburn  in  some  alarm,  thinking  he  would  soon  be  attacked,  sent  for 
a division  of  re-enforcements.  General  Grant  has  determined  to  issue 
an  order  extending  the  command  of  Sherman  so  as  to  include  Ha^mes’ 
Bluff.  Sherman,  whose  lines  already  touch  those  of  Washburn,  will 
thus  have  the  chief  command  in  all  that  region,  and  can  be  there  in 
])erson  and  move  re-enforcements  there  from  his  own  corps  whenever  it 
may  be  necessary.  At  Sherman’s  request,  General  Grant  has  modified 
his  order  to  the  paymasters,  sending  them  back  to  Memphis,  so  far  as 
to  have  them  pay  Sherman’s  troops  at  once  and  any  others  whose  com- 
manders may  desire  it. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Behind  Yicksbueg,  June  16,  1863—8  a.  m. 

Via  Memphis,  June  19 — 1 p.  m. 

(Received  June  21 — 4 i).  m.)  • , 

General  Parke’s  troops  are  ordered  to  Haynes’  Bluff*.  This  is  done 
on  no  new  information,  but  after  fuller  consideration  of  that  received 
yesterday  morning.  Part  of  his  two  divisions  had  already  marched  over 
opposite  Warren  ton,  and  at  8 p.  m.  yesterday  they  had  all  been  brought 
back  and  re-embarked  for  the  voyage  up  Yazoo  River.  They  will  all  be 
encamped  at  Haynes’  Bluff*  by  this  evening.  The  chief  command  there 
remains  with  Sherman,  as  I reported  yesterday.  The  position  of  the 
besieging  forces  continues  as  before  General  Parke’s  arrival.  McOler- 
naud’s  engineers  reported  yesterday  that  his  approach  was  within  30 
yards  of  the  enemy’s  lines.  Firing  was  quite  active  throughout  the  day 
yesterday  along  the  whole  line,  and  was  continued  through  the  night, 
especially  on  the  front  of  Generals  Sherman  and  Herron. 

Our  total  loss  during  the  last  week  was  over  50  killed  and  wounded, 
of  whom  about  a dozen  were  killed.  I have  not  been  able  to  get  the 
precise  figures. 

Much  of  the  ammunition  supplied  to  this  army  is  very  bad.  A board 
of  survey  just  held  here  reports  that  the  Parrott  shells  are  uniformly 
defective  from  sand-holes.  Some  of  these  are  filled  with  ])utty ; some 
are  left  undisguised.  The  small-arm  ammunition  from  Indianapolis  is 
rascally,  the  powder  worthless  and  deficient  in  quantity. 

An  intelligent  Kentuckian  who  deserted  from  Boring’s  corps  last 
week  and  arrived  here  yesterday  fully  confirms  the  intelligence  respect- 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  GENERAL  REPORTS. 


lOi 


ing  the  numbers  of  Joe  Johnstou^s  forces  forwarded  in  my  dispatch  of 
yesterday. 

The  days  here  are  hot,  thermometer  sometimes  rising  to  ninety  at 
noon,  but  the  nights  are  very  cool.  Showers  have  laid  the  dust  for  a 
week  past.  The  army  has  hitherto  got  water  from  springs  in  the  ra- 
vines, but  this  source  is  running  out.  Some  brigades  are  digging  wells ; 
others  haul  water  from  distance.  Health  of  troops  is  excellent. 

C.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Behind  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  17,  1803—8  a.  m.. 

Via  Memphis,  June  21 — 11.30  a.  m. 

(Eeceived  June  23 — 9.15  p.  m.) 

General  Sherman  came  down  from  Haynes’  Bluff  last  evening.  He 
reports  the  intrenchments  there  as  perfectly  satisfactory  both  in  design 
and  forwardness  of  execution.  Eeports  from  enemy  he  found  very  con- 
tradictory, but  judges  that  Boring  is  this  side  of  the  Big  Black,  and  is 
feeling  this  way  down  the  peninsula,  having  the  occupation  of  Oak  Eidge 
Post-Office  for  his  immediate  object.  That  place  is  on  the  Benton  and 
Vicksburg  road,  9 miles  south[north  ?]east  of  Vicksburg,  and  nearly 
equidistant  between  the  Yazoo  and  Big  Black.  General  Sherman  does 
not  propose  to  hinder  the  approach  of  Boring  by  any  active  opposition, 
but  to  complete  our  chain  of  defense  by  simple  works  at  two  or  three 
points  between  Haynes’  Bluff'and  Vicksburg.  The  command  at  Haynes’ 
Bluff  is,  of  course,  held  by  General  Parke,  though  in  the  event  of  an 
active  campaign  General  Sherman  will  go  there. 

General  Herron  reports  that  on  the  night  of  the  15th  he  threw  forward 
the  lines  on  his  left,  making  an  advance  of  500  yards,  and  bringing  his 
artillery  and  rifle-pits  within  200  or  300  yards  of  the  enemy’s  lines. 
They  fired  at  him  yesterday  with  six  pieces  of  artillery,  but  killed  only 
2 of  his  men  and  wounded  a few  more.  On  the  rest  of  the  lines,  as  I 
have  before  reported,  our  sharpshooters  prevent  their  firing  cannons 
at  all,  except  in  the  morning  they  sometimes  discharge  the  pieces  they 
have  loaded  in  the  ni^ht.  General  Grant  will  make  another  general  as- 
sault as  soon  as  McOlernand’s,  Bauman’s,  and  Herron’s  lines  are  brought 
up  close  enough.  Our  reports  from  within  the  place  show  that  they 
are  feeding  their  men  more  ample  and  with  better  food.  The  attempt 
to  make  bread  of  peas  is  abandoned,  and  corn-meal  is  used  exclusively, 
and  for  meat  they  are  issuing  salt  beef.  Captain  Comstock,  of  the  En- 
gineers, arrived  here  yesterday.  General  Ord  is  expected  to-day.  He 
will  command  both  Herron’s  and  Bauman’s  forces. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

lion.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Behind  Vicksburg,  June  18,  1803 — 8 a.  m., 

Via  Memphis,  June  21 — 9 a.  m. 

(Eeceived  June  23 — 9 p.  m.) 

’Trustworthy  information  received  here  yesterday  from  Joe  Johnston 
confirms  what  1 have  previously  reported.  Breckinridge  is  at  Clinton 
with  one  small  division;  N.  G.  Evans,  who  now  commands  J.  P.  Mc- 
Cown’s  division,  is  between  here  and  Big  Black;  Boring,  whose  divis- 


102 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


iou  is  9,000  strong,  has  advanced  with  it  to  Benton,  this  side  the  Big 
Black,  but  has  had  to  fall  back  toward  that  river  to  find  water  for  his 
troops;  Walker  is  at  Yazoo  City,  and  W.  H.  Jackson’s  cavalry, 
strengthened  by  some  re-enforcements,  are  between  Yazoo  City  and 
Mechanicsbnrg.  General  Grant  is  ruminating  the  idea  of  an  offensive 
movement  suddenly  and  without  impediments  from  Haynes’  Bluff’. 
Will  threaten  all  the  enemy’s  detachments  in  detail  and  take  them 
separately,  if  possible. 

Deserters  from  within  the  city  yesterday  vary  somewhat  in  their  re- 
ports concerning  rations,  but  all  agree  that  pea  bread  is  no  longer  issued. 
On  Herron’s  front  yesterday  the  rebels  kept  up  a fire  of  large  artillery, 
and  on  McPherson’s  the  fire  of  an  11-inch  mortar  was  maintained  dur- 
ing the  day  at  intervals  of  thirty  minutes,  l^o  damage  was  done  by  it. 
The  siege  works  of  Sherman  and  McPherson  are  slackened  in  order  to 
give  time  for  McClernand,  Lauman,  and  Herron  to  bring  theirs  up.  Ord 
takes  command  of  Bauman’s  and  Herron’s  divisions  this  afternoon. 
Herron  has  with  him  eight  regiments  only. 

I send  you  to-day  by  special  messenger  the  topographical  map  of  the 
siege. 

Eichmond,  La.,  was  destroyed  by  Mower  on  the  15th,  after  a skirmish 
therewith  the  forces  who  lately  attacked  us  atMilliken’s  Bend.  Mower 
had  his  own  brigade  and  Ellet’s  Marine  Brigade,  with  ten  cannon.  After 
a few  shots  the  rebels  fled,  and  Mower  burned  every  building  which  had 
sheltered  them,  bringing  the  few  women  and  children  who  had  been  left 
in  the  place  back  with  him  to  Milliken’s  Bend.  Col.  Kilby  Smith,  of 
the  Fifteenth  Army  Corps,  who  witnessed  the  late  battle  at  Milliken’s 
Bend,  certified  in  an  official  statement  that  the  rebels  carried  a black 
flag  bearing  a death’s  head  and  cross-bones. 

C.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Behind  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  Jiine  10,  18G3 — 10  a.  m.. 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  June  22 — 9 a.  m. 

(Keceived  June  24 — 3.35  a.  m.) 

McClernand  last  night  was  reliev^ed  of  his  command  and  ordered  to 
report  to  Washington  for  orders.  As  the  matter  may  be  of  some  im- 
portance, I telegraph  the  correspondence  connected  with  it.  The  con- 
gratulatory address  spoken  of  in  General  Grant’s  first  letter  is  one  that 
first  reached  here  in  the  Missouri  Democrat  of  June  11.  In  it  he  claims 
for  himself  most  of  the  glory  of  the  campaign ; reaffirms  that  on  May  22 
he  held  two  rebel  forts  for  several  hours,  and  imputes  to  other  com- 
manders a failure  to  aid  him  to  keep  them  and  take  the  city.  The  let- 
ters are  as  follows : 


Headquatiteks  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

In  Camp  tiear  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  17,  1863. 

Major-General  McClernand, 

Commanding  Thirteenth  Armg  Corps: 

General:  Inclosed  I send  you  wliat purports  to  he  your  congratulatory  address  to 
the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps.  I would  respectfully  ask  if  it  is  a true  copy.  If  it  is 
not  a correct  copy,  fuiTiish  me  one  hy  hearer,  as  required  both  hy  regulations  aiwl 
existing  orders  of  the  Department. 

Respectfully, 

U.  S.  GRANT, 
Alajor-  Cenaal. 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


103 


Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Ju)ie  18,  1803. 


Major-General  Grant  : 

I have  jnst  returned.  The  newspaper  slip  is  a correct  copy  of  my  congratulatory 
order  No.  72.  I am  prepared  to  maintain  its  statements.  I regret  that  my  adjutant 
did  not  send  you  a coiiy  promiitly  as  he  ought,  and  1 thought  ho  had. 

JOHN  A.  AIcCLERNAND, 

Major-General. 


Special  Orders,  ? Headquarters  Department  oi"  the  Tennessee, 

No.  1(54.  5 Near  Vickshurg,  Miss.,  Jane  18,  1863. 

if  * * 

IV.  Major-General  McClernand  is  hereby  relieved  from  the  command  of  the  Tliir- 
teenth  Army  Corps.  He  will  proceed  to  any  point  he  may  select  in  the  Stat(5  of 
Illinois,  and  report  by  letter  to  Headquarters  of  the  Army  for  orders.  Maj.  Gen.  E. 
O.  C.  Ord  is  hereby  appointed  to  the  command  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  sub- 
ject to  the  apx)roval  of  the  President,  and  will  immediately  assume  charge  of  the  same. 

Py  order  of  Major-General  Grant: 

JNO.  A.  RAWLINS, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

Battle-field  near  Vicksburg,  June  18,  1863. 

Major-General  Grant, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Tennessee  : 

Your  order  relieving  me  and  assigning  Major-General  Ord  to  the  command  of  the 
Thirteenth  Army  Cordis  is  received.  Having  been  appointed  by  the  President  to  the 
command  of  the  corjis  under  a definite  act  of  Congress,  I might  justly  challenge  your 
authority  in  the  premises,  but  forbear  to  do  so  at  present.  I am  (]uite  willing  that  any 
statement  of  facts  in  my  congratulatory  order  to  the  Thirteenth  Army  Coiqisto  which 
you  think  just  exception  may  be  taken  should  be  made  the  subject  of  investigation, 
not  doubting  the  result. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  McCLERNAND, 

Major-General. 

Though  the  congratulatory  address  in  questiou  is  the  occasion  of 
McClernand’s  removal,  it  is  not  its  cause,  as  McClernand  intimates  when 
lie  says  incorrectly  that  General  Grant  has  taken  exceptions  to  this 
address.  That  cause,  as  I understand  it,  is  his  repeated  disobedience 
of  important  orders,  his  general  insubortlinate  disposition,  and  his  pal- 
pable incompetence  for  the  duties  of  the  position.  As  I learned  by  [iri- 
vate  conversation,  it  was,  in  General  Grant’s  judgment,  also  necessary 
that  he  should  be  removed,  for  the  reason,  above  all,  that  his  relations 
with  other  corps  commanders  rendered  it  impossible  that  the  chief  com- 
mand of  this  army  should  devolve  upon  him,  as  it  would  have  done  were 
General  Grant  disabled,  without  most  pernicious  consecfuences  to  the 
cause. 

Lauman’s  division,  having  for  some  days  past  been  temporarily 
attached  to  the  Thirteenth  Corps,  will  remain  under  Ord’s  command. 
Herron  will  continue  to  report  directly  to  department  headquarters. 
Captain  Comstock  takes  general  charge  of  the  siege  works  on  the  lines 
of  both  Lauinan  and  Herron.  The  siege  works  here  are  steadily  pro- 
gressing on  the  right  and  center,  rather  in  the  way  of  enlargement  of 
covered  ways  and  strengthening  of  the  lines  than  of  direct  advances. 
On  the  front  of  the  Thirteenth  Corps  and  the  extreme  left,  our  works 
constantly  aiiproach  those  of  the  enemy.  On  the  right  of  our  center, 
however,  an  important  advantage  was  this  morning  gained  by  General 
Itansom,  who  during  the  night  ]>ushed  his  trenches  so  that  at  daylight 
his  shaiqishooters  were  able  to  take  in  reverse  the  whole  right  Hank  oi’ 
the  main  rebel  fort  in  his  front,  called  Fort  Hill.  He  soon  drove  out 
the  enemy,  killing  and  wounding  many,  and  will  be  able  to  crown  the 
rebel  jiarapet  with  his  artillery  whenever  the  order  is  given.  The  rebels 


104 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


are  constructing  an  interior  battery  to  cover  the  works  they  have  thus 
virtually  lost.  Trustworthy  advices  from  Jackson  to  the  16th  show 
that  Joe  Johnston  had  withdrawn  his  troops  thence.  A few  guards 
were  all  the  troops  there.  As  I have  before  reported,  Breckinridge  was 
at  Clinton.  The  rebels  are  endeavoring  to  establish  at  Demopolis,  on 
the  Tombigbee,  the  gun-carriage  factory  we  burned  at  Jackson.  Ten 
thousand  troops  from  Bragg  had  passed  through  that  place — re-enforce- 
ments to  Joe  Johnston.  No  cavalry  was  among  them  nor  any  heavy 
artillery. 

Weather  is  hot ; thermometer  at  95  degrees.  The  springs  from  which 
we  get  water  are  becoming  bad.  They  are  full  of  lime  from  decayed 
shells. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Behind  Vicksburo,  Miss.,  June  20,  1863 — 7 a.  m., 

Via  Memphis,  June  23 — 9 a.  m. 

(Received  June  26 — 9.20  a.  m.) 

A spy  of  Admiral  Porter,  who  got  into  Vicksburg  some  months  ago 
and  has  served  in  an  engineer  company,  came  out  to  us  last  night.  He 
reports  that  enemy  have  mines  in  front  of  Sherman,  of  Ransom,  and  of 
Logan.  He  has  worked  on  that  before  Sherman.  It  is  made  from  the 
ditch  of  the  principal  fortifications,  so  that  its  explosion  will  leave  the 
work  unharmed,  and  extends  toward  the  sap,  which  is  now  almost  in 
contact  with  the  ditch,  there  being  but  about  12  feet  between  them  in 
front  of  Logan’s  position.  Of  McPherson’s  lines  he  does  not  know  the 
precise  position  of  the  mine,  but  as  they  talked  of  exploding  it  last  night, 
he  supposes  it  must  be,  like  the  others,  outside  of  the  work,  which,  as 
I have  before  reported,  is  on  the  most  commanding  height  of  this  whole 
system  of  defense.  On  Ransom’s  front  he  is  also  ignorant  of  the  exact 
position,  and  cannot  say  whether  the  mine  covers  the  position  gained 
by  Ransom  yesterday  morning.  Ord  reports  that  at  noon  yesterday 
A.  J.  Smith  had  also  gained  the  ditch  and  would  mine.  The  same  spy 
tells  us  that  the  garrison,  though  weak  from  deficient  food  and  exces- 
sive work,  generally  determined  to  hold  out  to  the  last.  Their  corn  is 
nearly  exhausted,  and  the  ration  includes  a portion  of  wheaten  flour. 
They  say  they  can  be  starved  out,  but  that  the  place  can  never  be  taken 
otherwise. 

A private  letter  captured  at  Lake  Providence  contains  the  infor- 
mation, which  the  writer  had  from  an  agent  of  the  Confederate  Gov- 
ernment, that  Vicksburg  has  food  enough  to  hold  out  to  August  1. 
General  Grant  opened  at  4 o’clock  this  morning  a general  cannonade, 
which  is  to  continue  till  10  a.  m.  We  have  in  position  one  and  a half 
hundred  and  eighteen  guns.  There  will  be  no  attack  unless  a special 
opportunity  should  offer.  From  Joe  Johnston  we  learn  that  the  troops 
at  Yazoo  City  and  the  other  division  this  side  of  Big  Black  have  been 
moved  back  across  toward  Clinton,  leaving  only  detachments  and  a 
body  of  cavalry  on  this  side.  Joe  Johnston  has  also  notified  C.  C. 
Washburn,  at  Haynes’  Bluff,  who  lately  sent  a flag  of  truce  by  steam- 
boat up  Yazoo  River  to  Satartia,  that  no  more  flags  will  be  received  by 
the  river,  but  that  they  must  come  by  the  front.  General  Grant  is 
doubtful  whether  these  movements  of  Joe  Johnston  indicate  an  attemiit 
to  avoid  Haynes’  Bluff'  by  crossing  Big  Black  near  Bridgeport  or  else- 
where lower  down,  or  whether  he  is  about  to  attack  General  Banks  at 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


GENEKAL  REPORTS. 


105 


Port  Hudson.  A body  of  Texas  troops,  about  800,  attacked  Lake 
Providence  on  the  10th  instant,  and  were  repulsed  without  much  loss  on 
either  side.  An  African  regiment  fought  well. 

Have  no  news  of  Kirby  Smith.  An  expedition  to  Deer  Creek  returned 
to  Haynes’  Bluff  day  before  yesterday  with  400  cattle,  a large  number 
of  horses  and  mules,  300  negroes,  and  10  or  12  rebel  prisoners.  There, 
as  everywhere  else,  the  country  is  rich  in  corn  and  cattle.  McClernand 
left  yesterday  on  his  way  to  Memphis.  It  api)ears  that  ten  days  ago  he 
invited  General  M.  K.  Lawler  to  attend  a meeting  of  officers  from  his 
corps,  at  which  resolutions  commendatory  of  himself  (McClernand)  were 
to  be  passed.  Lawler  refused,  on  the  ground  that  it  would  be  a mutin- 
ous proceeding,  and  does  not  know  whether  such  a meeting  was  held. 

C.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

/Secretary  of  War, 


Near  Vicksburg,  June  21,  18G3— 6 a.  m.. 

Via  Memphis,  June  26 — 9 a.  m. 

(Received  June  29 — 2.40  p.  m.) 

Artillery  attack  yesterday  from  4 a.  m.  till  10.  a m.  vigorously  main- 
tained. Besides  gunboats  enumerated  in  my  last  dispatch.  Porter  had 
two  [guns]  on  flats  behind  the  point,  and  brought  two  gunboats  close  up 
before  Vicksburg,  making  in  all  about  two  hundred  cannon  engaged.  The 
result  is  to  settle  the  question  of  a further  attempt  at  present  to  assault 
the  place,  or  to  leave  its  reduction  to  the  regular  progress  of  siege  opera- 
tions. During  the  attack  no  rebels  were  visible,  nor  was  any  reply  made 
to  our  artillery,  their  musketry  fire  also  scarcely  amounted  to  anything. 
Of  course  much  damage  was  done  to  the  buildings  of  the  town  by  such  a 
conceutrated  cannonade, but  we  cannot  tell  whether  their  mills,  foundry, 
or  store-houses  were  destroyed.  Their  earthworks  were,  of  course,  little 
injured.  General  Grant  has  ordered  of  mortars  one-fifth  of  one  hundred. 
On  Steele’s  right,  in  the  bottom,  about  half  a mile  in  the  rear  of  his 
advance  lines,  a position  has  been  found  from  which  the  entire  town  is 
seen  and  commanded.  The  earthworks  for  a heavy  and  powerful  battery 
hav^e  been  thrown  up.  It  is  intended  to  put  in  it  the  guns  of  the  sunken 
gunboat  Cincinnati,  which  are  but  little  under  water  and  can  easily  be 
recovered.  I may  state  here  that  the  report  that  any  of  them  have  been 
taken  out  is  false.  It  will  require  some  days  to  complete  the  battery, 
but  when  it  is  done  all  the  buildings  in  the  town  can  be  destroyed  by 
it.  Porter  reports  to  General  Grant,  on  the  authority  of  several  desert- 
ers, that  5 or  6 Federal  prisoners,  black  and  white,  captured  by  the 
rebels  in  the  recent  fight  at  Milliken’s  Bend,  were  hanged  at  Delhi  in 
the  presence  of  General  Taylor  and  his  forces,  drawn  up  in  hollow  square 
for  the  purpose.  A sergeant  of  ours,  taken  by  I.  F.  Harrison’s  rebel 
cavalry  at  Perkins’  plantation,  was  also  hanged. 

C.  A.  DANA. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  22,  1863—9  a.  m., 

Via  Memphis,  June  28— Noon. 

(Received  July  1 — 11  p.  m.) 

Joe  Johnston’s  phiTi  is  at  lastdeveloped.  He  began  yesterday  to  throw 
his  army  across  the  Big  Black  at  various  points  above  Bridgeport,  and 


106 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


priucipally  in  the  vicinity  of  Birdsong’s  Ferry.  A squadron  of  the 
Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry  had  a fight  at  Bridgeport  witli  about  500  rebel 
horse,  and  lost  40  or  50  killed,  wounded,  and  captured,  besides  one 
mountain  howitzer.  At  once  on  the  receipt  of  this  intelligence  the 
troops  prepared  for  Sherman  here,  v/ith  the  division  at  Haynes’  Bluff, 
proceeded  to  move  out,  and  before  11  a.  m.  to-day  all  will  be  at  their 
destination  on  the  heights  and  beyond  the  bottoms  in  the  headwaters 
of  Clear  Creek.  Johnston  must  move  up  mainly  by  the  Benton  or  Jack- 
son  road,  which  makes  a detour  from  Oak  Ridge  Post  Office  to  the  north- 
east, until  in  the  region  of  his  crossing  it  nearly  touches  the  Big  Black ; 
but  the  greater  part  of  this  road  winds  along  ver^^  narrow  and  precij)!- 
tous  ridges,  heavily  wooded,  where  a column'  cannot  deploy,  and  where 
the  advance  can  easily  be  checked  or  its  attack  repulsed.  On  this  side 
of  Oak  Ridge,  about  the  head  of  Clear  Creek,  there  is  a broad,  open 
region,  extensively  cultivated,  where  a great  army  might  deploy  and 
fight  advantageouslj^ — at  least  on  equal  terms.  The  effort  of  Sherman 
will  be  to  settle  the  question  before  Joe  Johnston  can  get  to  this  open 
place.  Sherman  has  in  all  about  30,000,  besides  cavalry.  General 
Grant  holds  in  readiness  to  march  to  re-enforce  him  five  brigades  more, 
under  A.  J.  Smith  and  Herron,  while  Osterhaus,  with  one  brigade  sta- 
tioned at  the  Vicksburg  and  Jackson  Railroad  crossing  of  Big  Black,  is 
to  join  him  in  case  of  need.  As  to  the  strength  that  Joe  Johnston  com- 
mands, we  have  no  new  information.  If  he  pushes  his  advance,  a battle 
may  be  fought  to-day  or  to-morrow.  The  roads  he  has  before  him  have 
all  been  obstructed. 

Nothing  to  report  here  except  steady  progress  in  the  siege.  Ord  is 
working  very  hard  to  bring  up  the  lines  where  McCleruand  left  them 
behind,  but  it  will  take  some  time  to  remedy  the  disorder  which  that 
incompetent  commander  produced  in  every  part  of  the  corps  he  has 
left. 

Allow  me  to  represent  the  very  great  necessity  that  some  first-rate 
officer,  wdth  suitable  energy,  patient  in  character,  should  be  sent  here, 
or  found  here,  to  take  the  ])lace  of  General  J.  P.  Hawkins,  and  conduct 
the  organization  of  the  African  forces.  Hawkins  is  sick,  and  very  prob- 
ably will  not  again  be  robust  enough  to  efficiently  resume  his  duties  in 
this  climate,  and  the  public  service  is  suffering  terribly  in  this  most  deli- 
cate matter  in  consequence  of  his  absence.  I do  not  know  here  an  offi- 
cer who  could  do  the  duty  half  as  well  as  he,  so  that  I make  no  recom- 
mendation ; but  none  but  a man  of  the  very  highest  qualities  can  succeed 
in  the  work.  I am  happy  to  report  that  the  sentiment  of  this  army  witli 
regard  to  the  emj)loyment  of  negro  troops  has  been  revolutionized  by 
the  bravery  of  the  blacks  in  the  recent  battle  of  Milliken’s  Bend.  Prom- 
inent officers,  who  used  in  private  to  sneer  at  the  idea,  are  now  heartily 
in  favor  of  it. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Near  Vicksburg,  J^^ne  22,  1803 — 10  a.  m., 

* Via  Memphis,  June  20 — 0 a.  m. 

(Received  June  29 — 5 p.  m.) 

Additional  information  from  beyond  Big  Black  confirms  my  former 
reports.  Joe  Johnston  himself  has  gone  to  Jackson,  and  the  forces 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


107 


hitherto  north  and  northeast  of  Haynes^  Bluff  are  now  all  the  other  side 
of  Big’  Black,  have  sent  their  knapsacks  and  Avagons  to  Canton,  and 
with  three  days’  cooked  rations  are  moving  southward  of  Vernon.  An 
intelligent  spy  estimates  them  at  three  divisions,  with  one  battery  only 
to  each.  The  whole  operation  is  a puzzle  here.  General  Grant  has 
ordered  a heaA\y  reconnaissance  eastward  from  Haynes’  Bluff*,  and 
Slierman  has  a strong  force  blockading  the  roads  Avith  fallen  timber  on 
every  possible  line  which  might  be  used  for  a rear  attack  on  General 
Grant  between  Haynes’  Bluff*  and  the  Jackson  Kailroad. 

Ord  reports  that  it  will  require  about  ten  days  to  bring  the  siege 
works  in  his  front  to  the  same  general  efficiency  and  safety  as  those  of 
McPherson  and  Sherman. 

The  trenches  opened  by  McGlernand  are  mere  rifle  pits  3 or  4 feet 
wide,  and  Avill  neither  allow  the  i)assage  of  artillery  nor  the  assem- 
blage of  any  considerable  numbers  of  troops.  There  are  no  places  for 
arms  of  troo])s,  and  the  batteries  are,  Avith  scarcely  an  exception,  in 
the  position  they  apparently  held  when  the  siege  was  opened.  Iffie 
rifle-])its  are  also  not  systematically  arranged  for  the  defenses  and 
strengthening  of  each  other.  This,  as  Ord  reports,  is  a])paiently  not 
the  fault  of  Lieut.  P.  C.  Hains,  the  engineer  in  charge  of  that  part  of 
tlie  lines,  but  is  due  to  the  fact  that  thecorps  commanders  and  generals 
of  divisions  were  not  willing  to  follow  his  directions,  either  as  to  the 
manner  of  opening  the  lines  of  advance  or  the  positions  of  the  batte 
lies  to  protect  those  lines.  Deserters  from  Avithin  the  town  report  that 
during  the  bombardment  of  day  before  yesterday  the  whole  garrison 
Avas  under  arms,  expecting  an  assault,  and  that  the  Tennessee  and  Geor- 
gia regiments  which  are  stationed  on  the  rebel  left,  in  front  of  Steele, 
were  resolved  to  stack  their  arms,  but  their  officers  urged  them  to  hold 
out,  saying  among  other  things  that  they  had  rations  for  a week  longer, 
and  that  it  would  be  disgraceful  to  surrender  as  long  as  they  still  lusd 
the  means  of  defense ; besides,  it  was  probable  that  Joe  Johnston  Avould 
relieA^e  them  before  the  end  of  that  period. 

General  Grant  is  sending  a flag  to  Taylor,  at  Delhi,  La.,  to  notify  him 
that  the  GoA^ernment  is  bound  to  protect  all  its  enlisted  soldiers,  and 
that  if  he  (Taylor)  is  resoHed  to  hang  prisoners  of  war,  the  issue  must 
be  accepted  on  our  side. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Near  Vicksburo,  Miss.,  June  24,  1863—10  a.  m , 

Via  Memphis,  June  28 — Noon. 

(Deceived  July  1 — 11  p.  m.) 

The  report  that  Joe  Johnston  had  crossed  Big  Black,  or  Avas  crossing, 
was  erroneous.  Sherman  can  find  no  trace  of  him.  He  is  still  on  the 
other  side.  The  siege  goes  on  as  usual.  I was  at  Herron’s  lines  yester- 
day. He  has  pushed  them  forward  with  much  energy.  His  rifle-] )its 
extend  within  150  yards  of  the  enemy,  and  his  batteries  are  well  ad- 
vanced. We  have  by  the  gunboat  Arizona,  of  Admiral  Farragut’s  fleet, 
Avhich  arrived  at  Warrenton  yesterday,  a report  tliat  General  Banks 
had  taken  Port  Hudson.  No  details  have  reached  us. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


108 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Near  ViCKSBURa,  Miss.,  June  25,  1863—9  a.  m.. 

Via  Memphis,  June  28—11  a.  m. 

(Eeceived  July  1 — 10  p.  m.) 

We  have  authentic  information  from  Joe  Johnston.  He  is  between 
Canton,  Bolton,  and  Bridgeport,  and  has  made  no  movement  of  iip- 
portance  since  that  of  Boring’s  back  across  the  Big  Black.  The  report 
from  the  spy  of  General  Grant,  which  led  to  the  sending  out  of  Sherman 
on  the  22d  instant,  was  a mistake,  though  it  must  have  had  some  founda- 
tion. Our  present  accounts  indicate  35,000  as  about  the  limit  of  the 
total  troops  of  Joe  Johnston.  No  new  re-enforcements  from  Bragg  have 
come  up,  so  far  as  we  are  informed.  Pemberton  yesterday  sent  out  to 
General  Grant  4 men  whom  he  has  for  several  months  held  as  hostages 
for  the  slaying  of  a Mr.  White  while  concerned  in  a guerrilla  fight  in 
Western  Tennessee.  Their  release  indicates  the  near  surrender  of 
Vicksburg.  The  prisoners’  statements  agree  with  our  other  accounts 
in  representing  the  siege  at  about  an  end.  From  the  best  intelligence 
we  can  gain,  the  supply  of  food  cannot  be  stretched  to  last  more  than  a 
week  longer.  Wheaten  and  rice  flour  are  now  issued  for  bread.  Mean- 
while our  siege  works  are  urged  forward  with  great  industry,  though, 
if  there  was  a better  supply  of  engineer  officers,  the  labor  would  be 
much  more  efiectively  applied.  On  Sherman’s  front  everything  is  ad- 
vancing favorably.  McPherson  has  a mine,  with  three  trenches  extend- 
ing 35  ieet  under  the  great  fort  in  his  front,  which  is  now  being  tapped, 
aiid  will  probably  be  exploded  before  my  next  dispatch.  It  is  expected 
this  will  open  that  fort  to  our  occupation,  and  as  it  is  the  key  of  the 
rebel  line  on  the  eastern  side,  its  i)ossession  must  in  all  probability  be 
followed  by  the  early  submission  of  the  town.  On  Ord’s  front  a great 
deal  has  been  accomplished,  especially  in  widening  the  trenches,  con- 
necting them,  and  making  it  practicable  to  move  men  and  artillery 
through  them.  Ord  is  devoting  his  attention  particularly  to  llovey’s 
approaches,  which  he  thinks  offer  perhaps  the  most  favorable  attack 
in  our  whole  line,  but  which  McOlernand  has  left  in  great  backward- 
ness. A week’s  labor  will,  however,  bring  them  into  such  a condition 
that  Hovey  will  probably  be  able  to  crown  the  rebel  lines  with  his 
artillery. 

Next  to  Hovey  is  Bauman,  who  has  repeatedly  lost  pickets,  and 
night  before  last  had  a lieutenant-colonel  and  9 men  captured  by 
the  enemy.  Bauman  is  a brave  man,  but  an  ox  is  just  as  fit  to  com- 
mand as  he. 

Further  on,  upon  our  extreme  left,  Herron  continues  to  press  on  with 
zeal.  Bast  night,  after  a brisk  skirmish,  he  took  the  last  rebel  rifle  pits 
outside  of  their  intrenchments,  and  captured  in  it  a lieutenant  and  9 
men.  His  siege  approaches  are  going  forward  well,  under  the  direction 
of  Captain  Comstock,  of  the  Engineers.  In  front  of  the  town  Admiral 
Porter  has  established  on  the  point  behind  one  of  the  levees  a battery 
of  three  rifled  guns  and  four  smooth-bores,  which  bears  directly  on  the 
city,  and  does  most  effective  work.  Ample  preparation  has  been  made 
in  that  quarter  against  an  attempt  of  the  garrison  to  escape  by  means 
of  skifls,  of  which  we  learn  they  are  provided  some  two  thousand  or 
more  for  this  purpose. 

The  Marine  Brigade  has  gone  on  an  expedition,  or  rather  a reconnais- 
sance, to  Delhi.  The  enemy  are  endeavoring  to  cut  off'  the  navigation 
of  the  Mississippi.  They  have  planted  a battery  of  six  guns  ou  Catfish 
Point,  opposite  Greenville,  and  have  annoyed  several  boats  on  their  way 
down.  An  expedition  leaves  to-day  to  clear  them  out.  The  troops  are 


CHAI>.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


109 


taken  from  Ilaynes’  Bluff.  The  forces  under  Sherman  still  remain  on 
Clear  Creek  and  Bear  Creek.  No  orders  to  return  have  been  sent  to 
them. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  26,  1863—10  a.  m.. 

Via  Memphis,  June  29—3  p.  m. 

(Received  July  1 — 8.40  p.  m.) 

McPherson,  yesterday,  just  before  4 p.  m.,  sprung  his  mine.  It  was 
charged  with  1,200  pounds  of  powder,  the  explosion  forming  a crater 
about  35  feet  in  diameter,  and  carrying  away  a greater  part  of  the  bas- 
tion but  not  reaching  the  terre-plein  of  the  fort.  The  working  party  of 
oue  regiment  was  at  once  hastened  into  the  opening,  and  another  regi- 
ment was  thrown  out  as  sharpshooters  to  cover  them  on  the  east  flank  of 
the  work.  Some  of  our  men  climbed  the  parapet  with  a view  of  taking 
aim  over  it  at  the  enemy  within,  but  were  obliged  to  fall  back  and  seek 
protection  on  the  outer  slope  of  the  parapet.  No  attempt  was  made  to 
enter  the  work  through  the  breach  j indeed,  even  after  the  explosion, 
the  ascent  remained  so  steep  that  an  assault  would  have  encountered 
serious  difficulties  from  that  cause  alone.  Our  men  remaining  on  the 
outer  slope,  as  I have  said,  were  obliged  to  fire  very  much  at  random, 
but  the  rebels  had  no  better  chance  at  them.  The  object  of  our  work- 
ing party  was  to  prepare  places  for  cannon,  and  also  to  dig  rifle-pits 
beiiind  the  crest  of  the  parapet. 

The  enemy  very  soon  opened  a galling  fire  from  shells  with  short  fuses, 
thrown  over  the  ridge  by  hand-like  grenades.  To  this  we  replied  as 
actively  as  possible,  and  this  conflict  between  parties  invisible  to  each 
other,  not  only  on  account  of  the  darkness,  but  also  on  account  of  the 
barrier  between  them,  was  kept  up  with  fury  during  the  night,  and  still 
continues  up  to  this  hour.  We  have  made  no  progress  in  the  work 
whatever,  and  have  not  been  able  either  to  plant  a battery  or  open  a 
rifle-pit,  or  even  to  ascertain  what  is  the  real  practical  value  of  the  fort 
of  which  we  have  just  got  possession  of  one  corner,  and  cannot  tell 
whether  the  adjoining  works  are  or  are  not  enfiladed  against  fire  from 
it.  Our  loss  since  the  explosion  to  this  hour  is  from  60  to  100  killed 
and  wounded,  including  2 lieutenant-colonels  and  1 major. 

Immediately  on  the  springing  of  the  mine  a tremendous  cannonade 
was  opened  along  our  whole  line,  accompanied  by  active  firing  from 
the  rifle-pits.  This  fire  was  continued  with  little  relaxation  during  the 
night,  and  is  still  maintained  with  vigor.  The  siege  works  in  front  of 
Sherman  are  the  most  advanced,  but  have  been  delayed  for  two  or 
three  days  by  the  effort  to  find  a mine  which  the  enemy,  starting  from 
the  counter-scarp  and  working  from  the  ditch,  has  run  under  our  lines. 

General  Grant  this  morning  sent  for  Steele,  who  is  in  command  there 
during  Shermaifs  absence  up  Big  Black,  and  directed  him  to  push  his 
approach  with  the  utmost  energy,  and  endeavor  to  crown  the  work  to- 
day, if  possible.  • F.  Steele  says  it  cannot  be  done  before  to-morrow. 
Similar  orders  have  been  sent  to  Ord,  and  every  means  will  be  taken  to 
prevent  the  enemy  from  concentrating  against  McPherson.  Steele’s 
pickets,  on  the  Mississippi,  just  above  the  wreck  of  the  sunken  gunboat 
Cincinnati,  yesterday  captured  a rebel  mail-carrier  attempting  to  make 
his  way  through  the  Yazoo  bottoms.  Among  his  letters  was  one  from 


110 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CIIAI>.  XXXVI. 


General  M.  L.  Smith  and  one  from  Major  [W.  T.]  Withers,  chief  of  artil- 
lery in  Vicksburg.  They  contained  no  facts  of  moment  except  the  settled 
and  desperate  expedient  of  the  speedy  surrender  of  the  place.  All  these 
letters  agreed  in  saying  that  they  were  on  short  rations — on  quarter 
pound  of  bacon  daily,  with  bread  of  wheat  and  rice  mixed.  The  de- 
serters who  came  out  yesterday  report  that  surrendering  is  the  topic 
most  discussed.  The  majority,  however,  of  the  troops  appear  to  be  for 
fighting  to  the  last.  Several  of  the  letters  I have  spoken  of  say  that 
they  shall  eat  their  horses  and  mules  before  they  give  up.  General 
Dennis,  commanding  at  Young’s  Point,  has  thoroughly  picketed  the  river 
front  of  Vicksburg  (on  the  Louisiana  side,  of  course),  and  began  yes- 
terday to  keep  the  people  from  procuring  water  from  the  Mississippi  by 
the  fire  of  his  sharpshooters.  This  he  was  also  able  to  do  to  a great 
extent  during  the  night.  The  rebels  fired  their  water  batteries  at  him, 
but  up  to  this  morning  their  shells  have  done  him  no  damage. 

The  officers  whom  General  Grant  sent  over  into  Louisiana  on  the  22d 
with  a flag  of  truce  for  General  E.  Taylor  returned  this  morning.  They 
penetrated  as  far  as  Delhi,  where  they  found  an  inconsiderable  body 
of  Taylor’s  forces,  and  delivered  their  dispatches,  to  which  no  answer 
had  yet  been  received.  The  officers  they  met  denied  positively  that  any 
of  our  soldiers  or  officers,  black  or  white,  have  been  hanged  or  are  likely 
to  be  hanged.  The  white  men,  however,  are  held  as  hostage  in  some 
way,  and  the  negroes  have  been  handed  over  to  the  State  authorities, 
by  whom  they  will  probably  be  sold.  These  statements  may,  of  course, 
be  modified  by  the  official  reply  of  Taylor,  which  is  to  be  forwarded  at 
once.  Our  officers  got  the  impression  that  Taylor  is  at  Alexandria. 
They  say  that  all  parties  with  whom  they  conversed,  citizens  and  sol- 
diers, manifest  great  dismay  at  the  idea  of  our  arming  negroes,  which 
they  suppose  must  be  followed  by  insurrection  with  all  its  horrors,  ^fo 
news  from  Joe  Johnston  since  my  last. 

C.  A.  DANA. 


Uon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Near  Vicksburg,  June  27,  1863 — 9 a.  m.. 

Via  Memphis,  July  1—4  p.  m. 

(Eeceived  July  3 — 1.55  p.  m.) 

Spy  from  Canton,  25th,  arrived  at  Haynes’  Bluff  on  2Gth.  Troops  of 
Joe  Johnston  (35,000)  under  marching  orders  ; Joe  Johnston  persoujilly 
in  command;  10,000  from  Bragg,  viz,  5,000  from  Polk  and  5,000  from 
Hardee’s  corps,  now  on  their  way ; will  re-enforce  Joe  Johnston  on  or 
before  30th.  Never  saw  so  extensive  a wagon  train  as  that  accumulat- 
ing at  Canton;  mules  all  in  good  order;  artillery  very  numerous,  but 
of  mixed  sizes  and  characters.  Whole  body  will  move  to  attack  Sher- 
man early  next  week,  just  as  soon  as  re-enforcements  from  the  east 
arrive.  All  are  zealous  for  fight;  conscripts  numerous  in  their  ranks. 
They  bring  corn  by  rail  from  the  country  south  of  Grenada.  I was  at 
Sherman’s  camp,  on  Bear  Creek,  yesterday  afternoon,  and  found  his 
amazing  activity  and  vigilance  pervading  his  whole  force.  The  country 
is  exceedingly  favorable  for  defense,  and  he  hasoccu])ied  the  command- 
ing points;  oi)ened  rifle-pits  wherever  they  will  add  to  his  advantage; 
obstructed  tbe  cross-roads  and  most  of  the  direct  roads  also,  and  ascer- 
tained every  x)oint  where  the  Big  Black  can  be  forded  between  the  line 
of  Benton,  on  the  north,  and  the  line  of  railroad,  on  the  south.  By  rapid 
movements  of  his  forces,  also,  and  by  deploying  them  on  all  the  ridges 


CUAI*.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


Ill 


and  open  headlands,  he  produces  the  impression  that  his  forces  are  ten 
times  as  numerous  as  they  really  are.  He  has  moved  but  one  division 
from  Haynes’  Bluff,  and  has  General  Parke’s  corps  still  encamped  at 
Milldale,  in  front  of  Haynes’  Bluff*,  where  it  was  placed  on  its  first  arrival. 
His  right,  under  Osterhaus,  still  rests  on  the  railroad  bridge  across  the 
Big  Black.  Scouts  before  mentioned  say  that  Price  and  E.  Kirby  Smith 
combined  are  about  to  attempt  to  provision  Vicksburg  by  way  of  Milli- 
ken’s  Bend,  which  they  will  try  to  capture.  A vast  number  of  small 
boats  have  lately  been  prepared  in  Vicksburg.  Of  the  siege,  there  is 
nothing  of  importance  to  report  since  my  last  dispatch.  McPherson  has 
not  yet  succeeded  in  placing  batteries  or  rifle-pits  in  the  breach  made 
by  tiie  explosion  of  the  25th.  He  is  now  busily  engaged  in  mining  the 
adjoining  fort  on  the  left  of  the  one  whose  bastion  he  then  blew  up. 
Kockets  were  thrown  ui)  in  Vicksburg  last  night  and  night  before  last, 
and  they  were  answered  from  a point  on  the  Louisiana  side  opposite 
W arrenton. 

0.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War. 


Kear  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  28,  18G3 — 9 a.  m.. 

Via  Memphis,  July  1 — 4 ]).  m. 

(Received  July  3 — 11  a.  m.) 

Ko  progress  has  been  made  in  the  siege  since  my  last  dispatch.  On 
Sherman’s  front,  enemy  yesterday  morning  sprung  a mine,  which  de- 
stroyed those  Sherman’s  engineers  had  nearly  finished,  and  threw  the 
head  of  his  sap  into  confusion  generally.  The  engineers  have  gone  back 
some  50  feet  to  run  a new  mine  under  the  fort.  The  gully  will  not  be  less 
than  one  and  a quarter  hundred  feet  in  length,  and  will  require  several 
days  to  complete.  On  McPherson’s  front  nothing  hais  been  accom- 
plished. An  attempt  is  now  being  made  to  raise  a cavalier  work  on 
the  parapet  of  the  crater  formed  by  the  recent  explosion.  Sand-bags 
are  to  be  laid  up,  if  possible,  with  loop  holes  for  sharpshooters,  and 
short  rifle-pits  dug  on  each  flank,  with  the  design  of  driving  the  enemy 
from  the  interior  of  the  fort ; but  this  effort  is  of  doubtful  success,  for 
the  enemy  maintain  a most  obstinate  defense,  and  with  their  hand- 
grenades  render  it  difficult  for  our  working  parties  to  remain  in  the 
crater  at  all.  The  wounds  inflicted  by  those  missiles  are  frightful.  The 
working  i:>arties  of  Ord  are  also  getting  near  enough  to  be  checked  by 
hand-grenades,  wliile  Laumau,  while  farther  from  the  rebel  lines,  is 
almost  nightly  assailed  by  little  sorties  of  the  enemy.  He  loses  one  or 
two  men  every  night,  and  sometimes  more,  generally  by  carelessness, 
and  lately  had  one  of  his  rifle-pits  filled  up  by  a i)arty  that  made  a dash 
upon  him.  Herron,  too,  has  been  stopped  for  the  last  two  nights  by 
the  brightness  of  the  moonlight,  which  has  enabled  the  enemy  to  fire  at 
his  men  on  fatigue  duty.  The  heat  of  the  weather,  the  unex|)ected 
length  of  the  siege,  the  absence  of  any  thorough  organization  of  the 
engineer  department,  and  the  general  belief  of  our  officers  and  men  that 
the  town  must  presently  fall  into  our  hands  without  any  special  effort  or 
sacrifice,  all  conspire  to  produce  comparative  inactivity  and  inefficiency 
on  our  part. 

Captain  Prime,  chief  engineer  of  the  depa-rtment,  went  north  yester- 
day, very  sick.  Captain  Comstock  succeeds  him  as  chief  engineer. 
Captain  [Miles  D.]  McAlester  arrived  yesterday;  succeeds  Comstock  in 
charge  of  the  lines  of  Otd,  Lauman,  and  Herron,  while  Comstock,  in 


112  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

addition  to  bis  general  duties,  is  to  take  charge  of  those  of  McPherson 
and  Sherman.  There  is  still  a.  lamentable  deficiency  of  engineer  officers. 

No  further  news  from  Joe  Johnston.  It  is  certain  that  he  is  waiting 
only  for  his  new  re-enforcements  from  Bragg.  His  attack  will  be  made 
immediately  on  their  arrival.  We  have  no  details  of  the  late  operations 
of  General  Banks.  The  report  of  his  success,  which  I telegraphed  the 
other  day  as  brought  by  a gunboat,  was  certainly  false.  Admiral  Porter 
has  a later  report  that  the  second  assault  has,  like  the  first,  been  disas- 
trously repulsed,  but  how  true  it  is  no  one  here  can  tell. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Near  Yicksburo,  June  29,  1863 — 9 a.  m., 

Yia  Memphis,  July  1—10  p.  m. 

(Keceived  July  4 — 8 p.  m.) 

Two  separate  parties  of  deserters  from  Yicksburg  agree  in  the  state- 
ment that  the  provisions  of  the  place  are  near  the  point  of  total  ex- 
haustion ) that  rations  have  now  been  reduced  lower  than  ever;  that 
extreme  dissatisfaction  exists  among  the  garrison,  and  that  it  is  agreed 
on  all  hands  that  the  city  will  be  surrendered  on  Saturday,  July  4,  if, 
indeed,  it  can  hold  on  so  long  as  that.  Col.  0.  R.  Woods,  who  holds  our 
extreme  right  on  the  Mississippi,  has  got  out  five  of  the  thirteen  guns 
of  the  sunken  gunboat  Cincinnati,  and  this  morning  opens  three  of  them 
from  batteries  on  the  bluff.  The  others,  including  those  still  in  the 
vessel,  he  will  i)lace  as  rapidly  as  possible  in  a battery  he  has  con- 
structed on  the  river  half  a mile  in  the  rear  of  his  lines.  Though  this 
battery  has  no  guns  in  it,  yet  the  enemy  has  been  firing  its  heaviest 
ordnance  at  it  for  several  days  past,  and  has  done  to  the  embrasures 
some  little  damage,  easily  repairable.  It  commands  the  whole  face  of 
the  town.  On  McPherson’s  front  a new  mine  is  now  nearly  completed, 
and  will  at  furthest  be  ready  to  spring  at  daylight  to  morrow.  It  is 
intended  to  destroy  internal  rifle-pits  with  which  the  rebels  still  hold 
the  fort  whose  bastion  was  overthrown  by  McPherson’s  former  mine. 
If  successful,  it  will  give  us  complete  possession  of  that  fort,  as  the 
narrowness  of  the  ridge  on  which  it  stands  and  the  abruptness  of  the 
ravine  behind  it  made  it  impossible  that  it  should  be  defended  by  any 
third  line  in  the  rear  of  that  now  being  undermined.  The  new  line  in 
Sherman’s  front  will  probably  not  be  ready  so  soon,  but  the  engineer’s 
morning  report  has  not  been  made.  No  news  from  Joe  Johnston. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Near  Yicksburg,  Miss.,  June  30,  1803 — 2 p.  m., 

Yia  Memphis,  July  5. 

(Received  July  8 — 9.20  a.  m.) 

General  Grant  this  morning  held  a council  of  war  with  his  army  corj)s 
commanders  to  take  their  judgment  on  the  question  of  trying  another 
general  assault,  or  leaving  the  result  to  the  exhaustion  of  the  garrison. 
The  conclusion  of  the  council  was  in  favor  of  the  latter  policy,  and  as 
General  Grant  had  himself  previously  strongly  inclined  to  that  course, 
it  will,  no  doubt,  be  adhered  to. 


Chap.  XXXVL]  GENERAL  REPORTS.  113 

Captain  Comstock,  cliief  engineer,  reports  to-day  that  in  the  present 
condition  of  the  siege  works,  and  the  indisposition  of  the  troops  to  work 
zealously  in  the  trenches,  it  will  require  at  least  a fortnight  to  take  the 
place  by  that  means  only;  still,  it  is  possible  that  the  explosion  of  a 
new  mine,  now  nearly  finished,  in  the  fort  on  McPherson^s  center,  and 
another  mine,  under  the  rifle-pits  on  the  front  of  Eansom,  who  holds 
McPherson’s  right,  may  give  us  advantages  that  will  expedite  the  catas- 
trophe. The  first  of  these  mines  will  be  sprung  within  twenty-four 
hours. 

I visited  yesterday  the  front  of  Vicksburg  on  the  Louisiana  side. 
There  are  six  guns  of  various  calibers  planted  opposite  the  town,  mostly 
in  the  railroad  embankment.  About  De  Soto  the  batteries  are  badly 
constructed,  and  the  guns  are  exposed  to  a converging  fire  from  the 
heavy  artillery  of  the  rebels,  but  the  town  is  there  so  completely  ex- 
posed to  us  that,  though  our  guns  are  only  fired  occasionally,  they  are 
quite  effective.  Two  12-pounder  howitzers  are  kept  masked  against  a 
possible  attempt  of  the  enemy  to  escape  in  that  direction,  and  one  regi- 
ment of  infantry  is  kept  on  picket.  It  is  not  true  that  our  sharpshooters 
prevent  the  rebels  from  getting  water. 

A rebel  force,  said  to  be  6,000  men,  with  two  guns,  attacked  General 
H.  T.  Eeid  at  Lake  Providence  on  the  28th,  and  was  repulsed.  Keid 
had  three  regiments  of  white  troops.  The  rebels  took  the  way  down 
river,  devastating  the  plantations.  No  signs  of  an  attack  from  Joe 
Johnston.  General  fSherman  still  remains  about  Bear  Creek,  waiting 
and  preparing. 

C.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War, 

Near  Vicksburg,  July  2,  1863—10  a.  m., 

Via  Memphis,  July  5 — 10.30  a.  m. 

(Eeceived  July  8 — 9 a.  m.) 

We  have  no  positive  information  concerning  Joe  Johnston.  All  of 
General  Grant’s  and  General  Sherman’s  scouts  concur  in  saying  that 
the  main  body  of  his  army  remains  in  the  same  position,  between  Can- 
ton, Vernon,  Brownsville,  and  Bolton.  Day  before  yesterday  a report 
was  received  from  some  cavalry  outpost,  who  crossed  the  Big  Black  at 
Hall’s  Ferry,  penetrated  5 miles  on  the  other  side,  and  learned  from  in- 
habitants that  a force,  variously  estimated  from  1,200  to  12,000,  had 
pushed  down  the  Eocky  Springs  road.  Yesterday  a squadron  of  the 
Fifteenth  Illinois  Cavalry  had  a skirmish  with  a body  of  the  enemy  at 
Hankinson’s  Ferry.  He  drove  them  back  and  made  their  way  across 
to  this  side.  The  number  of  this  force  is  reckoned  at  about  200.  M.  K. 
Lawler’s  brigade  marched  from  here  last  night  to  look  after  them. 
McPherson  yesterday  exploded  a second  mine  under  the  main  fort  in 
his  front.  Six  rebels  were  thrown  into  our  lines  by  the  explosion ; all 
dead  but  one,  a negro.  The  right  flank  fort  was  cleared  oif  by  it,  so 
that  Eansom’s  shells  had  free  way  into  the  work.  Many  rebels  were 
killed,  but  McPherson  has  not  yet  got  possession  of  the  fort.  In  the 
absence  of  ordinary  mortars,  he  has  constructed  several  of  wood,  throw- 
ing 12-pounder  shells  eflectively. 

On  Ord’s  front  the  enemy  have  exploded  a mine  before  a sap  of  ours, 
doing  us  no  damage,  but  giving  us  the  advantage  of  carrying  the  trench 
into  the  crater.  Orders  have  been  given  to  abandon  all  attempts  to 
push  forward  saps  with  a view  of  entering  the  enemy’s  works  by  that 
8 R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


114 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


means,  and  to  devote  the  labor  of  working  parties  to  widening  the  cov- 
ered ways  and  carrying  them  as  near  the  rebel  lines  as  practicable,  in 
order  to  aiford  cover  for  storming  columns. 

The  reports  of  deserters  generally  agree  that  the  town  is  to  be  sur- 
rendered on  the  4th  instant.  They  also  say  that  mule  meat  is  issued  to 
the  garrison,  though  some  report  that  flour  and  bacon  are  both  plenty. 
If  enemy  do  not  give  up  Vicksburg  before  6th  instant,  it  will  be  stormed 
on  that  day.  From  Milliken’s  Bend,  E.  S.  Dennis  reports  that  the  rebel 
force,  about  7,000  strong,  which  recently  appeared  at  Lake  Providence, 
have  come  down  as  far  as  Goodrich^s,  15  miles  above  Milliken’s  Bend, 
destroying  plantations,  burning  all  the  buildings,  and  carrying  ofi*  some 
negroes.  The  weather  is  hot ; thermometer  at  noon  above  100  degrees. 

0.  A.  DANA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War. 


Near  Yioksburo,  Miss.,  July  4,  1866. 

Vicksburg  has  capitulated.  Yesterday  General  Grant  received  the 
following  letter : 

HEADQUARTERS;  FicJcshiirg,  July  3,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  United  States  Forces : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  propose  to  yon  an  armistice  for hours,  with  a 

view  to  arranging  terms  for  the  capitulation  of  Vicksburg.  To  this  end,  if  agreeable 
to  you,  I will  appoint  three  commissioners  to  meet  a like  number,  to  ho  named  by  your- 
self, at  such  x>laco  and  hour  to-day  as  you  may  find  convenient. 

I make  this  proposition  to  save  the  further  effusion  of  blood,  which  must  otherwise 
he  shed  to  a frightful  extent,  feeling  myself  fully  able  to  maintain  my  position  for  a 
yet  indefinite  period. 

This  communication  will  be  handed  you  under  flag  of  truce  by  Maj.  Gen.  J.  S.  Bowen. 
Very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Lieutenant-General. 

To  this  Grunt  replied  as  follows : 

Headquarters  Depariment  of  the  Tennessee, 

In  the  Field,  near  Vicksburg,  July  3,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Commanding  Confederate  Forces,  ^'C. : 

General  : Your  note  of  this  date  is  just  received,  proposing  an  armistice  for  several 
hours,  for  the  purpose  of  arranging  terms  of  capitulation  through  commissioners  to  be 
appointed,  &c. 

The  useless  effusion  of  blood  you  propose  stopping  by  this  course  can  be  ended  at 
any  time  you  may  choose,  by  an  unconditional  surrender  of  the  city  and  garrison. 
Mon  who  have  shown  so  much  endurance  and  courage  as  those  now  in  Vicksburg  will 
always  challenge  the  respect  of  an  adversary,  and  I can  assure  yon  will  bo  treated  with 
all  the  respect  due  to  imisoners  of  war. 

I do  not  favor  the  proposition  of  appointing  commissioners  to  arrange  terms  of  capi- 
tulation, because  I have  no  terms  other  than  those  indicated  above. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-General. 

Bowen,  the  bearer  of  Pemberton’s  letter,  was  received  by  General  A. 
J.  Smith.  He  expressed  a strong  desire  to  converse  with  General  Grant, 
and  accordingly  Grant,  wLile  declining  this,  requested  General  Smith 
to  say  that  if  General  Pemberton  desired  to  see  him,  an  interview  would 
be  granted  between  the  lines  in  McPherson’s  front  at  any  hour  in  the 
afternoon  which  Pemberton  might  appoint.  A message  was  soon  sent 
back  to  Smith,  appointing  3 o’clock  as  the  hour.  Grant  was  there  with 
his  staff  and  with  Generals  Ord,  McPherson,  Logan,  and  A.  J.  Smith. 
Pemberton  camp  late,  attended  by  General  Bowen  and  Colonel  [L.  M.] 


Chap.  XXXVI.  ] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


115 


Montgomery.  He  was  much  excited,  and  was  impatient  in  his  answer 
to  Grant.  The  conversation  was  held  apart  between  Pemberton  and  his 
officers,  and  Grant,  McPherson,  and  A.  J.  Smith.  The  rebels  insisted 
on  being  paroled  and  allowed  to  march  beyond  our  lines  here,  officers 
and  all,  with  eight  days^  rations,  drawn  from  their  own  stores,  officers 
to  retain  their  private  property  and  body  servants.  Grant  heard  what 
they  had  to  say,  and  left  them  at  the  end  of  an  hour  and  a half,  saying 
that  he  would  send  in  his  ultimatum  in  writing  before  evening  j to  which 
Pemberton  promised  to  reply  before  night,  hostilities  to  cease  in  the 
mean  time.  Grant  then  conferred  at  his  headquarters  with  his  corps 
and  division  commanders,  all  of  whom,  except  Steele,  who  advised  to 
unconditional  surrender,  favored  a plan  proposed  by  McPherson,  and 
which  Grant  finally  adopted.  The  argument  against  the  plan  was  one 
of  feeling  only.  In  its  favor  was  urged  that  it  would  at  once  demoralize 
Grant^s  whole  army  for  offensive  operations,  while  to  guard  and  trans- 
port so  many  prisoners  would  require  a great  portion  of  its  strength. 
Keeping  them  would  also  absorb  all  our  steamboat  transportation,  while 
paroling  them  would  leave  it  free  to  move  our  troops.  Paroling  would 
also  save  us  an  enormous  expenditure.  After  long  consideration.  Gen- 
eral Grant  reluctantly  gave  way  to  these  reasons,  and  at  6 p.  m.  sent 
the  following  letter  by  the  hands  of  General  Logan  and  Lieutenant-Col- 
onel Wilson : 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Near  Vickslurg,  July  3,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Commanding  Confederate  Forces,  VicJcshurg,  Miss. : 

General  : In  conformity  with  agreement  of  this  afternoon,  I will  submit  the  follow- 
ing proposition  for  the  surrender  of  the  city  of  Vicksburg,  public  stores,  &c.: 

On  your  accepting  the  terms  proposed,  I will  march  in  one  division  as  a guard  and 
take  possession  at  8 a.  m.  to-morrow.  As  soon  as  rolls  can  be  made  out,  and  paroles 
signed  by  officers  and  men,  you.  will  be  allowed  to  march  out  of  our  lines,  the  oflScers 
taking  with  them  their  side-arms  and  clothing,  and  the  field,  staff,  and  cavalry  officers 
one  horse  each.  The  rank  and  file  will  be  allowed  all  their  clothing,  but  no  other 
property.  If  these  conditions  are  accepted,  any  amount  of  rations-  you  may  deem 
necessary  can  be  taken  from  the  stores  you  now  have,  and  also  the  necessary  cooking 
utensils  for  preparing  them.  Thirty  wagons  also,  counting  two  two-horse  or  mule 
teams  as  one,  will  be  allowed  to  transport  such  articles  as  cannot  be  carried  along. 

The  same  conditions  will  be  allowed  to  all  sick  and  wounded  officers  and  soldiers 
as  fast  as  they  become  able  to  travel. 

The  paroles  for  these  latter  must  be  signed,  however,  while  officers  are  present 
authorized  to  sign  the  roll  of  prisoners. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-General. 

The  officers  who  received  this  letter  stated  that  it  would  be  impossible 
to  auswer  it  by  night,  and  it  was  not  till  a little  before  peep  of  day  that 
the  proposed  reply  was  furnished : 

Headquarters,  VicTcshurg,  July  3,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant,  Commanding  United  States  Forces,  ^c. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communication  of 
this  date,  proposing  terms  of  capitulation  for  this  garrison  and  post. 

In  the  main  your  terms  are  accepted,  but  in  justice  both  to  the  honor  and  spirit  of 
my  troops,  manifested  in  the  defense  of  Vicksburg,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the 
following  amendments,  which,  if  acceded  to  by  you,  will  perfect  the  agreement  be- 
tween us : 

At  10  a.  m.  to-morrow  I propose  to  evacuate  the  works  in  and  around  Vicksburg, 
and  to  surrender  the  city  and  garrison  under  my  command,  by  marching  out  with 
my  colors  and  arms,  stacking  them  in  front  of  my  present  lines,  after  which  you  will 
take  possession.  Officers  to  retain  their  side-arms  and  personal  property,  and  the 
rights  and  property  of  citizens  to  be  respected. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


116 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


To  this  General  Grant  immediately  replied  as  follows : 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Before  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  4,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Commanding  Confederate  Forces,  Vicksburg,  Miss: 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communication  of 
July  3.  The  amendment  proposed  hy  you  cannot  be  acceded  to  in  full.  It  will  he  neces- 
sary to  furnish  every  officer  and  man  with  a parole  signed  hy  himself,  which,  with 
the  completion  of  the  rolls  of  prisoners,  will  necessarily  take  some  time. 

Again,  I can  make  no  stipulations  with  regard  to  the  treatment  of  citizens  and  their 
private  property.  While  I do  not  propose  to  cause  them  any  undue  annoyance  or 
loss,  I cannot  consent  to  leave  myself  under  any  restraint  hy  stipulations.  The  prop- 
erty which  officers  will  be  allowed  to  take  with  them  will  he  as  stated  in  my  proposi- 
tion of  last  evening;  that  is,  officers  will  he  allowed  their  private  baggage  and  side- 
arms,  and  mounted  officers  one  horse  each. 

If  you  mean  hy  your  proposition  for  each  brigade  to  march  to  the  front  of  the  lines 
now  occupied  hy  it,  and  stack  arms  at  10  a.  m.,  and  then  return  to  the  inside,  and 
there  remain  as  prisoners  until  properly  paroled,  I will  make  no  objection  to  it. 

Should  no  notification  he  received  of  your  acceptance  of  my  terms  by  9 a.  m.,  I shall 
regard  them  as  having  been  rejected,  and  shall  act  accordingly.  Should  these  terras 
he  accepted,  white  flags  should  he  displayed  along  your  lines,  to  prevent  such  of  my 
troops  as  may  not  have  been  notified  from  firing  upon  your  men. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-  General. 

To  this  the  subjoined  answer  has  this  moment  been  received  : 

Headquarters,  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  4,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  United  States  Forces,  <^c. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communication  of 
this  day,  and  in  reply  to  say  that  the  terms  proposed  hy  you  are  accepted. 

V ery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Lieutenant-General. 

All  preparations  for  occupying  the  town  are  completed.  In  an  hour 
it  will  be  in  our  possession.  In  anticipation  of  this  result,  orders  were 
yesterday  given  to  Sherman  to  prepare  to  cross  Big  Black  and  strike 
at  Johnston.  In  addition  to  the  forces  previously  under  his  command, 
he  takes  from  the  lines  here  the  remainder  of  the  Thirteenth  and  Fif- 
teenth Army  Corps.  These  move  out  instantly  by  way  of  the  rail- 
road bridge,  while  Sherman  has  built  bridges  at  MessingeFs  Ford  and 
Birdsong  Ferry.  They  all  march  light,  with  provisions  of  hard  bread, 
coffee,  and  sugar  and  salt  only.  Sherman  is  restricted  by  no  special 
instructions,  except  that  he  is  to  destroy  railroads,  bridges,  and  crops. 
Alexander  Boss,  lawyer,  of  Magnolia,  Columbia  County,  Arkansas,  con- 
script in  the  rebel  army,  deserted  to  us  recently  at  Lake  Providence, 
reports  the  existence  of  a strong  Union  feeling  in  all  parts  of  that  State. 
Union  men,  including  many  large  slaveholders,  are  organized  in  secret 
societies,  with  watchwords  and  passes,  in  Montgomery,  Clarke,  Hemp- 
stead, Calhoun,  Bradley,  and  Columbia  Counties.  There  have  been 
fights  between  these  societies  and  Confederate  troops  with  various  re- 
sults. Where  the  former  have  been  defeated,  they  have  generally  been 
hanged  without  trial.  Among  the  conscripts  in  Marmaduke’s  and 
Tabbat’s  [J.  C.  Tappan’s?]  troops  are  many  of  these  secret  Unionists. 
He  also  reports  that  in  Arkansas  the  Confederates  have,  under  Ster- 
ling Price,  sixteen  regiments,  in  four  brigades,  commanded  by  Parsons, 
Fagan,  Frost,  and  McBae,  averaging  400  men  to  each  regiment,  with 
one  brigade  of  1,500  conscripts  and  civilians,  under  General  Cabell. 
There  is  also  under  Marmaduke  a brigade  of  1,500  cavalry,  poorly 
mounted,  and  armed  with  shot-guns. 


Chap.  XXXYl.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


117 


Of  artillery,  Price  has  in  all  four  batteries,  of  four  guns  each.  In 
Louisiana  are  three  brigades  of  Texans,  two  of  which  are  commanded 
by  Eandal  and  McCulloch,  and  one  brigade  of  Arkansians,  under  Tab- 
bat  [Tappan '?].  These  four  brigades  count  together  5,000  men.  There 
is  also  a cavalry  brigade,  under  Parsons,  of  1,600  men ; artillery,  four 
batteries,  of  four  guns  each,  and  Richard  TayloPs  division,  headquar- 
ters Alexandria,  4,000  men. 

Thus,  according  to  Mr.  Ross,  Kirby  SmitKs  whole  force  is  little  more 
than  20,000  effective  men.  Powder,  he  says,  is  manufactured  at  Arka- 
delphia ; other  ammunition  at  Camden,  on  the  Washita.  Both  places 
are  very  lightly  garrisoned.  The  number  of  negroes  carried  oft'  from 
the  leased  plantations  in  Louisiana  is  400. 

C.  A.  DAKA. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton. 


Ko.  4. 

Reports  of  Capt.  Frederick  F,  Primes  U.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers^  Chief 
Engineer^  of  operations  January  SO-May  4. 

Steamer  Magnolia, 

Camp  opposite  Vicksburg^  Miss.^  January  30,  1863. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  forward  herewith  tracing  of  point  op- 
posite Yicksburg.  The  dotted  line  at  the  entrance  of  the  canal  shows  the 
new  direction  so  as  to  correspond  with  the  course  of  the  current.  Ground 
was  broken  to-day.  To-morrow  I shall  try  and  dam  the  canal  at  the  point 
marked,  not  having  any  levels  but  such  as  used  by  masons.  I shall  then 
be  enabled  to  obtain  the  approximate  diff'erence  of  level  between  the  water 
level  at  the  entrance  and  exit  of  the  canal.  At  present  it  is  variously 
estimated  from  28  inches  to  3 feet.  The  velocity,  as  roughly  measured 
to-day  by  using  a floating  body,  was  422  feet  in  two  minutes.  I shall 
commence  making  a few  fascines  and  gabions  to-morrow.  There  is  dif- 
ficulty in  procuring  proper  materials  for  withes  and  for  gabions  in  the 
immediate  neighborhood. 

Should  circumstances  require  the  expedition  to  remain  here  for  some 
length  of  time,  and  the  river  continues  to  rise,  there  will  be  much  trouble 
from  the  backwater  in  the  swami)s  coming  from  the  crevasses  in  the 
levee.  There  is  a crevasse  above  here,  as  shown  on  the  map,  which  in 
a few  days  will  probably  be  repaired.  About  2J  miles  above  the  mouth 
of  the  Yazoo  River  there  is  another  and  more  troublesome  crevasse^ 
which  I have  not  been  able  to  examine,  nor  have  I any  person  to  send. 
There  is  also  another  crevasse  some  10  or  12  miles  below  here.  The  earth 
from  the  new  entrance  to  the  canal  will  be  used  on  the  east  side  to  form 
a species  of  levee  connecting  with  the  old  levee,  in  order  to  prevent  the 
current  (in  case  it  should  show  a tendency  to  cut)  from  expending  itself 
on  the  low  land  outside  of  the  levee  when  the  old  levee  is  passed.  The 
levee,  as  stated  in  my  previous  letter,  is  being  constructed  on  the  west 
side,  in  order  to  prevent  the  camping-ground  from  being  inundated. 

I shall  continue  to  give  the  Department  all  information  that  I can 
obtain  in  connection  with  the  engineer  part  of  the  expedition.  As  1 
have  no  means  or  time  to  keep  copies  of  my  letters,  any  repetitions  must 
be  laid  to  that  cause. 

1 am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FREDERICK  E.  PRIME, 

Captain  of  Engineers. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  G.  Totten, 

Chief  Engineer  of  the  Army,  Washington,  D.  C, 


118 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


Chap.  XXXVI.l 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


119 


Steamer  Magnolia, 

Camp  opposite  Viclcsburg,  February  1,  18G3. 

General  : I have  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  Department  letter  of 
January  23  and  telegram  of  January  28.  The  canal  was  closed  yester- 
day afternoon  by  a dam  of  corn-sacks,  filled  with  earth,  resting  against 
a wooden  framework.  ISTo  difficulty  was  experienced.  Leveling  shows 
the  difference  of  level  of  the  water  at  the  two  ends  of  the  canal  to  be  2.G2 
feet.  Another  trial  of  the  velocity  yesterday  gave  three  minutes  for  422 
feet,  the  same  distance  as  mentioned  in  a previous  letter  to  have  been 
l)erformed  in  two  minutes.  What  causes  the  discrepancy  I am  unable 
"K)  say.  The  river  is  still  rising.  Captain  Jenney  reports  6 inches  rise 
in  last  twenty-four  hours,  as  opposed  to  5 inches  in  previous  twenty- 
four  hours.  Captain  Kossak  (from  Corinth)  reported  here  for  duty  to- 
day. He  says  the  works  there  should  be  completed  within  ten  or  twelve 
days  if  the  men  work  well.  He  complains  of  want  of  energy  and  in- 
difference on  the  part  of  the  contrabands.  When  the  present  works  are 
completed,  there  will  still  remain  two  or  more  large  reserve  magazines 
to  be  constructed  near  the  brick  seminary.  The  map  of  Corinth  (our 
works,  the  rebel  works,  and  our  approaches)  is  completed,  and  will 
shortly  be  sent  to  General  Cullum  through  the  Department.  A trace 
copy  will  be  retained  here  for  reference. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FREDERICK  E.  PRIME, 

Captain  of  Engineers. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  G.  Totten,  Chief  Engineer  of  the  Army. 


Steamer  Magnolia, 
Opposite  Yichsburg^  February  9,  18G3. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  as  follows  with  respect  to  opera- 
tions in  my  charge  at  this  point : The  water  is  still  rising  at  the  rate 
of  2^  inches  per  twenty-four  hours  for  past  two  days.  A dam  has  been 
erected  at  each  point  where  the  canal  crosses  the  levee.  The  water  in  the 
intermediate  space  will  be  let  out  into  the  swamps  and  low  grounds  as 
soon  as  the  camps  south  of  the  railroad  and  west  of  the  canal  have  been 
entirely  removed,  which,  I trust,  will  be  to-morrow.  This  will  render 
it  practicable  to  remove  the  stumps  and  trees  now  in  the  canal,  and  to 
widen  and  deepen  the  canal  to  the  necessary  dimensions.  A frame  is 
being  sunk  in  the  excavation  for  the  new  entrance.  It  has  reached  a 
depth  of  6 feet  below  the  surface,  and  stiff  clay  is  the  material  now  en- 
countered. The  water  seeps  in  so  that  at  present  the  excavation  in  the 
new  entrance  cannot  be  pushed  deeper  than  about  4 feet  on  an  average. 
The  well  formed  by  the  frame  and  sheet-piling  is  to  be  used  for  drain- 
ing the  canal,  by  large  steam-pump  ram — a steamer  belonging  to  the 
Ravy;  one  has  an  11-inch  discharge  and  the  other  18-inch.  But  few 
soldiers  are  at  present  employed,  on  account  of  shifting  camps,  building 
roads,  &c.,  and  the  delays  which  have  prevented  the  canal  from  being 
emptied.  Five  hundred  and  fifty  contrabands  are  now  here  and  are 
employed  on  the  new  entrance  of  the  canal.  The  wmrk  on  the  canal 
between  the  levees  will  most  probably  be  assigned  to  the  details  fur- 
nished by  the  troops.  With  fair  weather  and  strong  working  i)arties, 
there  is  a fair  prospect  of  obtaining  satisfactory  results. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FREDERICK  E.  PRIME, 

Captain  of  Engineers. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  G.  Totten,  Chi(f  Engineer  of  the  Army. 


120 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAP.  XXKYl. 


Steamer  Magnolia, 
Opposite  Viclcsburg,  February  16,  1863. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  Department 
letter  of  February  5,  with  respect  to  funds  applied  for.  The  water 
in  the  river  has  been  very  nearly  at  the  same  level  since  my  last  letter. 
Work  on  the  new  entrance  is  i^rogressing ; this  work  is  done  by  contra- 
bands. Between  the  levees  but  little  work  has  been  done  as  yet  by  the 
troops,  on  account  of  the  bad  weather  for  the  past  two  days.  The 
water  in  the  canal  has  been  drawn  off  by  a cut  leading  into  the  low 
ground  to  the  westward ; It  is  now  about  7 feet  below  the  level  of  the 
water  in  the  river. 

Colonel  BisselPs  engineer  regiment,  which  arrived  yesterday,  will 
be  employed  extracting  the  stumps  in  the  present  canal,  and  also  in 
the  proposed  enlargement,  and  in  clearing  a channel  of  200  feet  in 
width  through  the  lowest  part  of  the  swamx}s  and  low  ground  between 
the  canal  and  crevasse  at  Johnson’s  plantation.  The  water-marks  on 
the  trees  are  10  feet  above  the  soil,  and  even  now  it  is  probable  a depth 
of  from  5 to  6 feet  could  be  obtained  by  allowing  the  river  to  flow  into 
these  bottoms.  This  new  channel  would  be  tried  in  case  too  heavy  a 
fire  should  be  brought  to  bear  by  the  rebel  batteries  on  the  present  out- 
let of  the  canal.  A few  shells  and  shot  have  been  thrown  about  100 
yards  north  of  the  lower  levee  from  batteries  above  and  below  the  out- 
let of  the  canal ; there  is,  therefore,  a cross-fire,  though  as  yet  there  is 
nothing  to  indicate  the  existence  of  an  enfilading  battery. 

Mr.  Halleck,  engineer  clerk,  who  leaves  to-day  for  Memphis,  will,  on 
his  arrival, forward  by  Adams  Express  to  the  Department  the  original 
map  of  Corinth,  our  approaches,  and  the  enemy’s  works.  He  will  also 
transmit  at  the  same  time  all  weekly  reports  connected  with  the  works 
at  Corinth  and  Memphis.  To  complete  the  record  with  respect  to  the 
works  at  Corinth,  I have  directed  Captain  Kossak  to  draw  up  a memoir 
thereon,  extending  up  to  his  first  weekly  report. 

I have  experienced  much  difiiculty  in  making  the  necessary  surveys 
at  Memphis  and  Corinth,  for  want  of  proper  instruments.  I have,  there- 
fore, to  request  that  a surveyor’s  compass  and  tripod,  a level  and  tripod, 
and  three  pocket  compasses  may  be  sent  to  me  by  the  engineer  agent 
at  New  York,  through  Adams  Express.  I shall  on  receipt  of  the  level 
be  able  to  furnish  the  references  of  interior  crests  of  works  at  Corinth 
and  prominent  points  in  the  neighborhood,  which  will  render  the  draw- 
ing complete. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FEEDERICK  E.  PRIME, 

Captain  of  Engineers. 


Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  G.  Totten, 

Chief  Engineer  of  the  Army. 


Steamer  Magnolia, 
Opposite  YicJisburg,  February  21,  1863. 
General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  we  have  had  but  tw  o 
days  favorable  for  work  since  my  letter  of  the  16th  (the  19th  and  20th). 
To-day  it  is  again  raining.  The  troops  are  at  work  on  the  part  of  the 
canal  assigned  to  them.  The  steam  pump  was  started  on  the  19th,  and 
answers  well  in  keex)ing  the  new"  entrance  of  the  canal  clear  of  water. 
It  is  only  worked  to  one-half  of  its  capacity,  and  even  then  is  sucking 
most  of  the  time.  Colonel  Bissell’s  engineer  regiment,  with  the  ex- 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  RERORTS. 


121 


ception  of  two  companies  under  command  of  Major  Tweeddale,  has 
been  sent  to  Lake  Providence,  for  duty  under  Major-General  McPher- 
son. The  companies  here  are  employed  extracting  stumps,  and  will 
put  up  the  steam  dredge  daily  expected.  Another  steam  dredge,  or- 
dered here,  will  be  used  at  Lake  Providence,  if  needed.  By  direction  of 
the  major-general  commanding,  nothing  will  be  done  at  present  toward 
cutting  the  proposed  opening  through  the  woods  in  the  bottoms  toward 
Johnson’s  Bayou  or  Crevasse.  The  water  is  falling.  The  fall  for  the 
past  three  days  has  averaged  between  1 and  2 inches.  Captain  Kossak, 
on  examination  of  batteries  opposite  the  outlet  of  the  canal,  reports 
three — one  in  casemate,  nearly  enfilading  the  canal.  None  of  these 
batteries  have  opened  as  yet,  an^  from  appearances  they  would  seem 
to  have  but  one  gun  in  each.  Lieutenant  Lochbihler’s  company  is  em- 
ployed, when  the  weather  is  favorable,  in  preparing  gabions  and  fas- 
cines. We  have  one  hundred  and  twenty  of  the  latter  and  some  thirty 
of  the  former;  these  are  made  from  vines,  which  are  in  great  abundance. 
As  soon  as  practicable,  frames  for  magazines  and  timber  for  casemates 
will  be  provided.  No  instructions  with  respect  to  the  construction  of 
batteries  have  as  yet  been  received. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FKEDEEICK  E.  PKIME, 

Captain  of  Engineers, 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  G.  Totten,  Chief  Engineer  of  the  Army. 

[P.  S.]  —Fall  of  river  at  Memphis  reported  as  over  6 feet. 


Steamer  MagnGlia, 
Opposite  Vicksburg,  March  1,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  as  follows  with  respect  to  oper- 
ations on  canal  since  my  last,  of  21st  instant  [ultimo] : 22d  and  23d,  little 
or  nothing  done — rain ; 24th,  25th,  and  part  of  26th,  at  work — favor- 
able weather;  27th  and  28th,  no  work — rain,  and  water  high.  To-day 
is  a fine  day ; wind  from  northwest,  and  mud  drying  rapidly.  No 
work  outside  of  the  main  levees,  on  account  of  high  water  and  the  river 
still  rising.  The  dams  outside  of  levees  have  been  overflowed,  and 
pump  cannot  work.  One  steam  dredge  is  here,  and  will  go  to  work  to- 
morrow. There  are  over  1,000  contrabands  here.  The  six-gun  battery 
below  mouth  of  canal  is  progr  ^ :ng  favorably,  and,  I trust,  will  bo 
ready  for  the  guns  in  about  tl  '■‘^ys.  Shall  send  by  to-day’s  mail, 
under  separate  envelope,  trac.  map  of  Vicksburg  and  neighbor- 
hood, prepared  by  Captain  Pitzm....,^  General  Sherman’s  topographical 
otticer. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FEEDERICK  E.  PRIME, 

Captain  of  Engineers. 

Brig.  Geu.  Joseph  G.  Totten,  Chief  Engineer  of  the  Army. 


Steamer  Magnolia, 
Opposite  Vicksburg,  March  11,  1863. 
General:  I have  the  honor  to  forward  herewith  Captain  Jenney’s 
report  for  month  of  February,  and  Lieutenant  [I.  G.j  Kappner’s  report 
for  week  ending  March  l.t 


To  appear  in  Atlas. 


t Omitted  as  unimportant. 


122 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap,  XXXVL 


Since  my  report  of  March  1,  an  order  was  issued  requiring  half  the 
effective  force  of  each  regiment  to  work  on  the  canal  for  twenty-four  hours 
each  day.  The  work  was  progressing  very  satisfactorily,  when,  on  the 
morning  of  the  7th,  the  upper  dam  gave  way.  The  opening  in  the  canal 
levee  which  had  been  used  to  drain  the  water  was  still  open,  and  there  was 
consequently  a heavy  rush  of  water  at  this  point,  which  it  was  found  im- 
possible to  stop.  This  opening  is  now  about  150  feet  wide,  double  its 
original  width.  The  condition  of  the  canal  is  at  present  as  follows: 
Between  upper  main  levee  and  railroad,  mostly  dug  out  to  required 
width,  and  about  six  or  eight  stumps  in  the  canal ; the  canal  levee  is  above 
water  of  river  18  inches.  There  was  reason  to  fear  a break  in  this  levee, 
where  it  joins  the  main  levee,  but  at  present  there  need  be  no  apprehen- 
sion on  that  score.  Between  railroad  and  lower  main  levee  all  of  the 
canal  to  full  width  j four  to  six  trees  and  from  twelve  to  fifteen  stumps 
in  canal;  levee  for  about  half  its  length  in  good  order,  and  grade  18 
inches  above  level  of  water  in  the  river;  balance  from  12  to  18  inches 
below  grade,  and  levee  not  strong  enough.  Two  dredges  are  at  work 
in  new  entrance,  making  channel  11  feet  deep. 

By  direction  of  the  general  commanding,  endeavors  are  being  made 
to  cut  off  the  influx  of  water  on  the  upper  side  of  the  upper  main  levee, 
by  using  barges  filled  with  dirt  and  by  using  the  dredges. 

A pile-driver  and  machine  for  cutting  trees  under  water  are  expected 
daily  from  Memphis;  also  additional  grain  sacks.  I am  very  doubtful  of 
closing  the  upper  entrance,  but  think  that  by  driving  piles  across  the 
break  in  the  canal  levee,  using  grain  bags,  and  then  the  dredges,  the 
opening  in  the  canal  levee  can  be  closed.  The  dredges  can  then  enlarge 
and  raise  the  levee  between  railroad  and  lower  levee,  where  there  always 
has  been  difficulty  in  obtaining  material  for  the  levee.  The  battery  has 
been  completed  with  the  exception  of  the  magazines.  No  work  is  being 
done  on  it  at  present,  owing  to  the  difficulty  of  reaching  it. 

Two  orders,  sent  herewith,*  show  the  proposed  organization  of  pioneer 
companies  in  this  department.  When  carried  into  effect,  it  will  enable 
me  to  dispense  with  the  contrabands  now  under  my  immediate  charge, 
and  I shall  only  retain  Company  I,  Thirty-fifth  Missouri  Volunteers, 
which  has  done  all  the  special  work  on  the  batteries  at  Corinth  and 
the  new  battery  here.  This  company  and  the  necessary  working  par- 
ties at  Fort  Pickering  will  be  all  that  will  remain  under  my  immediate 
charge. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FBEDERICK  E.  PRIME, 

Captain  of  Engineers. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  G.  Totten,  Chief  Engineer  of  the  Army. 

P.  S. — The  dredges  work  well,  and  will  remove  all  obstructions  in  the 
canal;  another  is  expected  daily.  The  water  is  still  rising  to-day,  though  | 
slowly,  notwithstanding  the  water  drawn  from  the  river  at  Yazoo  Pass  | 
and  also  into  Bayou  Macon  at  the  Arkansas  line.  I 


Steamer  Magnolia, 
Young's  Point,  La.,  March  19,  18G3. 
General  : Since  my  report. of  the  11th  instant  concerning  the  canal, 
an  attempt  was  made  to  stop  the  How  of  water  into  the  canal.  This 
was  done  by  making  a dam  where  necessary,  by  means  of  the  dredges. 


Omitted. 


Chap.  IIXYL] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


123 


around  the  opening  through  the  main  levee  and  some  distance  above 
it,  leaving  a gap  to  the  east  of  canal  entrance  and  perpendicular  to  main 
levee,  which  was  to  be  closed  by  a large  barge  filled  with  earth.  It  was 
attempted  to  put  this  barge  in  place  on.the  14th,  but  the  effort  was  not 
successful,  the  posts  yielding  and  some  of  the  lines  breaking.  The 
barge  brought  up  against  one  of  the  dredges  which  had  been  placed 
within  the  dam  for  work  on  the  canal.  During  the  night,  as  there  was 
danger  the  dredge  would  be  sunk,  the  remaining  lines  were  cut.  Next 
day,  as  the  current  from  the  opening  left  for  the  barge  was  cutting 
through  the  canal  levee,  endeavors  were  made  to  change  the  course  of 
this  current  by  reopening  the  communication  with  the  new  entrance. 
This  proved  sufficient  to  throw  the  point  of  impact  lower  down,  and,  as 
the  canal  levee  is  being  revetted  with  planks,  &c.,  it  will  probably  not 
be  cut  through. 

One  of  the  dredges  has  been  employed  strengthening  the  canal  levee 
in  the  vicinity  of  the  opening  previously  mentioned.  This  has  drawn 
the  fire  of  the  enemy^s  heavy  guns  in  prolongation  of  the  canal,  which 
reaches  nearly  to  thie  railroad. 

This  greatly  increased  range  of  the  enemy’s  artillery,  and  the  number 
of  their  shot  that  fall  in  the  canal,  will  probably  render  it  necessary  to 
alter  the  direction  of  the  canal  below  railroad.  As  soon  as  any  decision 
is  made,  I will  notify  the  Department. 

As  the  work  on  the  canal  will  be  chiefly  by  steam-power  hereafter, 
and  Colonel  Pride,  volunteer  aide-de-camp,  will  be  in  charge  of  same,  ic 
will  relieve  me  from  the  immediate  superintendence  of  this  part  of  my 
duties  on  his  arrival  here.  This  will  enable  me  to  repair  to  the  Yazoo, 
in  case  operations  now  in  progress  there  should  render  it  necessary. 

I have  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  Department  letter  of  March  5. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

FEEDERIOK  E.  PRIME, 

Captain  of  Engineers. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  G.  Totten, 

Chief  Engineer  of  the  Army. 


Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  April  11,  1863. 

General  : I have  to  report  that  since  my  letter  of  the  31st  ultimo 
I have  visited  New  Carthage,  following  the  bayous.  Walnut  Bayou 
takes  the  name  of  Brushy  Bayou  at  Mrs.  Amis’  plantation,  where  it  re- 
ceives the  Brushy  Bayou  proper ; from  that  point  to  Richmond  it  has 
many  bushes  and  large  trees  in  the  channel.  The  trees,  not  being  very 
close  together,  can  be  removed  without  much  trouble,  to  give  the  re- 
quired channel  of  from  35  feet  to  40  feet.  From  Richmond  to  Smith’s* 
plantation,  on  Vidal  Bayou,  Rouhdaway  Bayou  is  leveed  on  the  west 
side,  but  not  on  the  opposite  bank.  The  water  is  now  about  a foot  above 
most  of  the  land  protected  by  the  levee.  The  water  flows  from  John- 
son’s crevasse  and  the  break  in  the  canal  into  Roundaway  Bayou ; at 
Richmond  the  water  flows  to  the  westward,  and  about  half  way  from 
Richmond  to  Smith’s  plantation  the  water  runs  to  the  south.  At  Smith’s 
plantation  the  water  in  Bayou  Vidal  runs  to  the  west  and  to  the  south  j 
about  half  way  from  Smith’s  plantation  to  Carthage  the  water  runs 
north,  coming  from  the  Mississippi.  A levee  extends  from  opposite 

* Smith’s  plantation  is  onRonndaway  Bayou,  where  it  runs  into  Bayou  Vidal,  and 
is  General  Osterhaus’  headquarters. 


124 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Smith’s  plantation  to  New  Carthage,  connecting  with  the  main  levee. 
There  are  three  breaks  in  the  Yidal  Bayou  levee,  each  from  300  to  500 
feet  wide.  The  bayou  from  Eichmond  to  New  Carthage  offers  but  little 
diflSculty  in  obtaining  the  necessary  water-way.  At  New  Carthage, 
where  there  is  a break  in  the  main  levee,  there  is  for  several  hundred 
yards  but  a depth  of  2J  or  3 feet.  This  can  be  avoided  by  following 
Harper’s  Bayou,  branching  to  the  southeast  from  Yidal  Bayou,  and  com- 
municating with  the  river  by  a break  in  the  levee  about  one-half  mile 
above  New  Carthage.  General  Osterhaus  reports  that  this  channel 
offers  a depth  of  over  7 feet. 

From  the  above,  it  seems  that  no  water  is  received  into  Eoundaway 
Bayou  from  the  water  passing  through  Tensas  and  Macon  Bayous  and 
the  net- work  of  bayous  connected  therewith.  I send  herewith  a sketch,* 
showing  where  the  water  will  pass  into  the  bayou  from  the  river.  The 
channel  has  been  dug  by  the  troops  as  far  as  practicable  ; a depth  of  7 
feet  has  been  reached  between  the  main  level  and  the  back-water  by 
the  aid  of  the  steam-pump.  The  balance  of  the  work  to  the  bayou  will 
have  to  be  done  by  the  dredges.  The  levee  could  be  cut  this  day,  but 
is  delayed  in  order  to  raise  portions  of  the  road  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to 
Eichmond,  which  might  otherwise  be  flooded  by  the  influx  of  water 
from  the  river  into  the  low  wooded  land  when  the  levee  is  cut.  Three 
companies  of  Bissell’s  engineer  regiment  and  three  pioneer  companies, 
under  Major  Tweeddale,  are  employed  clearing  the  bayou  from  Cooper’s 
plantation  to  Hecla  Place.  This  portion  of  the  work  it  is  hoped  will 
be  completed  to-morrow.  Colonel  Pride  has  general  charge  of  canal 
and  bayou  operations.  The  levee  of  the  old  canal  has  broken  close  to 
the  main  levee,*  the  break  from  30  feet  has  increased  to  over  400  feet  in 
width. 

Captain  Kossak  is  constructing  four  casemate  batteries  in  the  levee 
opposite  Yicksburg.  Two  casemates  had  been  erected  by  Colonel  Bis- 
sell,  which,  on  inspection,  I found  it  advisable  to  alter. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FEEDEEICK  E.  PEIME, 

Captain  of  Engineers, 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  G.  Totten,  Chief  Engineer  of  the  Army, 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Millikenh  Bend,  La,,  April  18,  1863. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  operations  since 
my  last,  of  11th  instant:  The  main  levee  was  cut  on  the  13th.  During 
the  twenty-four  hours  subsequent  the  water  at  Hecla  Place  rose  over  8 
inches,  and  has  been  slowly  rising  since,  though  I am  not  informed  of 
the  rate.  The  rise  has  not  been  as  great  as  I expected,  but  will  increase 
when  the  channel  is  deepened  through  to  the  bayou  so  as  to  guide  the 
current,  and  when  the  bottoms  are  filled.  All  the  pioneer  companies 
available  have  been  put  to  work  on  clearing  the  bayou.  Major  Tweed- 
dale reports  that  Bissell’s  four  engineer  companies  and  Spicer’s  pioneer 
company  will  have  cleared  the  bayou  to  Eichmond  (to  the  prescribed 
width)  by  the  20th  or  21st.  Colonel  Pride  will  start  to-morrow  morn- 
ing, with  a small  steamboat,  for  Eichmond.  Two,  and  if  possible  three,  ! 
barges,  of  from  100  to  120  [feet]  in  length,  will  be  passed  into  the  bayou  | 
at  the  same  time,  with  pioneers  on  them,  provided  with  saws  to  cut  6 j 
feet  under  water,  and  other  tools  necessary.  They  will  clear  out  any 


Not  fonud. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


125 


obstacles  they  may  encounter.  I am  afraid  that  it  will  take  them  from 
three  to  five  days  to  reach  Richmond.  When  these  barges  have  once 
passed,  it  will  enable  all  necessary  supplies  to  be  forwarded  to  New 
Carthage,  unless  prevented  by  a fall  of  the  river.  The  river  has  been 
falling  one-half  inch  per  day  for  the  last  two  days.  The  steamboat 
and  barges  cannot  be  passed  through  the  proposed  passage,  as  shown 
on  sketch  sent  with  previous  letter,  but  will  pass  through  field  beyond 
small  bayou  (James^),  and  enter  Walnut  Bayou  by  wide  ditch  at  Cul- 
bertson^s  plantation,  as  indicated  by  the  other  line  of  soundings.  This 
route  will  be  used  until  the  other  is  prepared,  which  I deem  indispen- 
sably required  to  keep  the  stage  of  water  in  Walnut  Bayou  as  high  as 
possible  in  case  of  a fall  in  the  river. 

Captain  Kossak  has  completed  the  four  casemate  batteries  between 
railroad  and  angle  of  levee  north  of  it.  The  two  30-i)ounder  (Parrott) 
guns  opened  yesterday  morning,  but  with  no  very  decided  results. 

The  fire  is  to  be  continued  to-day.  Captain  Kossak  has  been  directed 
to  hand  in  a report  with  respect  to  these  batteries,  which  will  be  for- 
warded to  the  Department  as  soon  as  received. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FREDERICK  E.  PRIME, 

Captain  of  Engineers, 


Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  G.  Totten, 

Chief  Engineer  of  the  Army, 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Millikenh  Bend,  La.,  May  4,  1863. 

General  : Since  my  last  report,  of  the  18th  ultimo,  the  water  has 
fallen  to  such  an  extent  as  to  prevent  most  of  the  work  on  the  canal 
from  being  prosecuted.  The  two  dredges  at  the  entrance  of  the  canal 
have  been  drawn  out  and  brought  to  this  point.  The  other  two  cannot 
be  removed,  one  being  hard  aground  and  the  other  having  barely  enough 
to  work  into  the  bayou.  Twenty-odd  barges  are  in  the  bayou  at  and 
below  Cooper’s  plantation,  which  there  is  but  little  prospect  of  moving 
to  Richmond  until  a rise  in  the  river.  Major  Tweeddale,  with  some  four 
companies  of  his  regiment  and  the  One  hundred  and  twenty-seventh 
Illinois  Regiment,  is  engaged  in  damming  the  Roundaway  Bayou,  below 
Richmond,  so  as  to  prevent  the  escape  of  water  to  the  westward  as 
much  as  possible.  The  change  in  the  river  level  is  shown  by  RF.^exed 
statement,*  obtained  from  Colonel  Wilson’s  topographical  office,  xhere 
are  two  barges  in  the  Roundaway,  and  Major  Tweeddale  thinks  that,  if 
his  dam  succeeds,  they  can  be  used  advantageously  in  moving  supplies 
from  about  2 miles  above  Richmond  to  New,  Carthage. 

On  the  2d,  Captain  Freeman,  with  Lieutenant  Lochbihler’s  comi)any, 
moved  to  the  front  with  the  pontoon  train  (India-rubber) — 20  pontoon 
wagons,  2 abutment  wagons,  and  1 supply  wagon.  No  trestle  pontoon 
of  the  bridge  sent,  as  it  was  not  ready. 

The  guns  were  withdrawn  several  days  since  from  the  casemates 
below  the  canal,  and  I am  informed  their  casemates  were  burned  by 
the  enemy  some  two  nights  since.  I have  neglected  to  mention  that 
the  Victor,  the  small  steamboat  referred  to  in  my  last  report,  did  pass 
through  the  canal  and  the  bayou,  and  is  now  in  use  below  New  Carthage. 

Colonel  Pride  left  several  days  since  for  the  North.  All  of  the  pioneer 


* Omitted. 


126 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXYI. 


companies,  except  one,  have  been  ordered  to  join  their  divisions  as  they 
proceeded  to  the  front,  and  I have  only  four  companies  of  Bissell’s  engi- 
neer regiment  and  the  One  hundred  and  twenty-seventh  Illinois,  which 
General  Sherman  agrees  to  allow  to  remain  until  its  division  moves. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FEEDERIOK  E.  PKIME, 

Captain  of  Engineers, 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  G.  Totten, 

Chief  Engineer  of  the  Army, 

P.  S. — Captain  Kossak  sick  from  exposure  and  local  fever.  Has  been 
ordered  to  Saint  Louis  until  further  instructions. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  James  H.  Wilson^  Assistant  Inspector- General, 

(J.  S.  Army,  Chief  of  Topographical  Engineers,  of  operations  April  24- 

May  11. 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

In  rear  of  Yichshurg,  Miss.,  May  30,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  engineer 
operations  during  the  time  in  which  I was  the  senior  officer  of  engineers 
with  the  army  in  the  field: 

On  April  24,  having  accompanied  General  Grant  to  Smithes  planta- 
tion, I was  directed  by  him  to  examine  the  route  by  Vidal,  Negro,  and 
Brushy  Bayous  to  Perkins’  plantation,  with  the  view  of  getting  a prac- 
ticable line  of  communication  to  the  Mississippi  Eiver. 

The  following  is  a copy  of  my  report  made  to  General  McOlernand, 
commanding  the  troops  in  that  vicinity : 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Smiths  Plantation,  La.,  April  24,  1803. 

Major-General  McClernand, 

Commanding  Thirteenth  Army  Corps : 

General  : After  examination  of  Yidal  Bayou,  and  consultation  with  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Hovey,  I am  of  the  opinion  that,  in  order  to  cross  any  number  of  troops  greater 
than  one  division  to  the  Mississippi  levees,  and  secure  a’practicable  line  of  communica- 
tion, much  time  will  be  gained  by  constructing  two  boat-bridges  on  the  route,  fol- 
lowing Vidal,  Negro,  and  Brushy  Bayous;  the  one  nearer  the  month  of  Gilbert  Bayou, 
now  in  construction,  and  to  be  ready  by  to-morrow  evening;  the  other  between  the 
mouths  of  Negro  and  Mound  Bayous.  For  the  construction  of  the  latter,  twelve  or 
fourteen  of  the  small  flats  now  used  as  ferry-boats  at  Smith’s  plantation  will  be  nec- 
essary. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  WILSON. 

The  bridges  recommended  in  the  above  were  begun  and  constructed 
by  Captain  Patterson,  with  his  company  of  pioneers  and  details  of  men 
from  the  troops,  under  the  direction  of  Brig.  Gen.  A.  P.  Hovey,  com- 
manding Fourteenth  Division. 

For  description  of  these  bridges  I refer  to  the  following  report: 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Smith’s  Plantation,  Madison  Parish,  La.,  April  27,  18C3. 
Lieut.  Col.  J.  H.  Wilson: 

Colonel  : In  accordance  with  your  instructions,  received  this  morning,  I proceeded 
to  Vidal  and  Negro  Bayous,  to  inspect  the  bridges  constructed  across  them,  and  have 
the  honor  to  report  as  follows  : 

The  bridge  over  Bayou  Vidal  is  formed  of  a large  flat,  100  feet  long  and  24  feet 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


127 


Tvicle,  ancliored  across  the  main  channel  of  the  hayou  hy  a cable  and  chain  on  the 
southern  end  and  braced  against  a tree  on  the  northern.  Ties  of  timber,  trimmed  to 
6 or  8 inches  thickness,  are  laid  over  the  gunwales,  upon  which  rest  8 by  12  string- 
pieces,  supporting  the  planks.  The  next  span  toward  either  shore  rests  on  a 12  hy  12 
timber,  notched  half  into  trees  on  either  side,  pinned  and  secured  by  chains.  There 
are  three  more  spans  toward  both  shores,  resting  on  trestles,  each  formed  of  four 
uprights,  8 inches  square,  secured  at  top  and  bottom  to  squared  logs.  The  roadway 
is  confined  hy  heavy  beams,  pinned  to  the  planks  and  string-pieces,  and  on  the 
north  end  a wooden  railway  has  been  formed,  which  is,  however,  too  smooth  on  the 
ascent  to  be  of  any  advantage. 

The  bridge  is  3G2  feet  long,  240  feet  resting  on  trestles  and  immovable,  the  balance 
afloat.  If  the  bayou  should  rise  or  fall  more  than  18  inches,  the  connection  between  the 
floating  and  fixed  part  would  he  insecure,  and  the  ascent  and  descent  almost  imprac- 
ticable. The  roadway  is  not  laid  exactly  along  the  center  of  the  flat,  but  rather  down 
stream,  which  causes  a slight  sideway  slope.  The  flat  has  sagged  considerably,  rising 
at  the  middle ; but  whether  this  is  an  old  defect  or  caused  by  overloading  the  ends,  I 
cannot  say,  as  I could  not  examine  it  very  closely,  the  bridge  being  crowded  by  the 
passage  of  troops.  As  long  as  the  bayou  remains  at  its  present  stage,  I think  the 
bridge  perfectly  secure. 

The  bridge  across  Negro  Bayou  is  550  feet  long,  curved  up  stream,  and  rests  on  sixteen 
flats,  mostly  new,  from  25  to  40  feet  long  and  12  feet  wide,  with  landings  on  trestles 
on  either  side.  The  boats  are  anchored  to  a 2^-inch  line,  stretched  from  shore  to  shore, 
and  supported  in  the  center  by  a tree.  Some  of  the  boats  are  fastened  directly  to  the 
cable  passing  over  their  bows ; others  are  connected  with  it  by  short  ropes.  The 
connection  with  both  shores  is  eflected  in  a manner  similar  to  that  of  the  Bayou 
Vidal  bridge,  including  some  ties  resting  in  notches  cut  into  trees. 

Another  bridge,  150  feet  long,  has  been  constructed  across  a slough  between  the  two 
bayous.  It  rests  on  a center  pier,  formed  of  logs,  placed  crosswise,  and  on  trestles  on 
either  side  of  the  pier.  The  roadway  is  formed  of  split  logs,  and  appears  sufficiently 
firm. 

Squads  of  pioneers  are  stationed  at  all  three  bridges  to  repair  such  damages  as  may 
occur.  On  account  of  the  heavy  rain  and  continual  passage  of  troops  and  trains,  I 
was  unable  to  obtain  more  minute  measurements. 

I reported  on  the  condition  of  the  bridges  to  Major  Hickenlooper,  acting  engineer 
on  General  McPherson’s  staflf. 

I have  the  honor  to  he,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  A.  ULFFERS, 
Assistant  Engineer. 

With  these  two  bridges,  both  of  which  were  very  substantial,  a good 
road  was  completed  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  Perkins^  plantation,  8 
miles  below  New  Carthage.  After  the  failure  of  the  Navy,  with  seven 
iron-clads,  to  silence  the  batteries  at  Grand  Gulf  on  April  29,  after 
five  and  a quarter  hours’  cannonading,  it  was  determined  to  run  the  six 
transports  by  that  place,  and  march  the  troops  to  a point  below. 

On  April  25,  in  accordance  with  instructions  of  General  Grant,  ac- 
companied by  Assistant  Engineer  Eigby  and  one  regiment  of  infantry, 
I landed  just  above  the  mouth  of  Big  Black,  and  carefully  examined 
the  country  up  to  the  foot  of  Palmyra  Island,  for  a practicable  road  to 
the  highlands.  The  river  bottoms  throughout  the  entire  distance,  sev- 
eral miles  wide,  were  overflowed  from  4 to  10  feet  deep  near  the  hills,  so 
that  communication,  except  at  Congo  plantation,  was  entirely  cut  off. 

This  plantation,  lying  just  south  of  and  on  the  Big  Bogasha,  is  prob- 
ably 18  inches  higher  than  the  bottom  above  and  below,  and  protected 
from  the  freshets  by  a levee,  extending  entirely  around  it.  It  has  a 
good  road,  just  passable,  running  through  it  and  the  adjoining  place  to 
Cox’s  or  Thompson’s  Ferry,  over  the  Big  Black.  The  two  rivers  in  this 
locality  are  only  about  2J  miles  apart.  The  Mississippi  was  at  that 
time  about  3 feet  below  its  highest  mark  for  this  season.  There  being 
no  fixed  plane  of  reference  for  high  water,  it  is  impossible  to  describe 
accurately  at  what  stages  this  road  could  be  used;  but  that  part  next 
the  Big  Black  beiug  unprotected  by  a levee,  would  have  been  entirely 
submerged  by  a slight  rise  in  either  river.  The  country  north  of  the 
Bogasha  was  overflowed  at  the  time  of  the  reconnaissance,  but  the  hills 


128 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAP.  XXXVL 


coming  down  to  the  Big  Black  on  the  south  side,  a good  landing  was 
to  be  had  at  all  times  about  300  yards  above  the  ferry  at  Cox’s  place. 
At  this  point  the  river  did  not  exceed  250  feet  in  width,  but  the  land- 
ings opposite  being  in  an  overflowed  bottom,  a bridge  must  have  been 
at  least  600  feet  long  and  thrown  almost  lengthwise  with  the  stream. 
The  hills  are  quite  steep  at  this  place,  densely  timbered  and  overgrown 
by  canebrakes,  and  about  300  feet  high.  The  rebels  had  just  seized 
upon  them  for  defense,  and  begun  the  erection  of  several  works,  to 
sweep  the  river,  the  roads,  and  the  fields  beyond ; but  after  careful  per- 
sonal observation  and  examination  of  negroes  who  had  been  working  on 
the  fortifications  only  that  morning,  I ascertained  that  only  a slight  para- 
pet had  been  constructed  and  two  6-pounder  field  guns  put  in  position. 

The  road  and  ferry  just  described  afforded  at  that  time  the  only  means 
between  Grand  Gulf  and  Warren  ton  of  reaching  the  high  land.  Upon 
receiving  the  report  of  my  reconnaissance.  General  Grant  requested 
Admiral  Porter,  commanding  Mississippi  Squadron,  to  send  one  of  his 
iron-clads  into  the  Big  Black,  with  instructions  to  remove  any  obstruc- 
tions that  might  be  encountered,  ascend  to  the  ferry,  and  hold  the  cross- 
ing. In  order  to  prevent  the  gunboat  from  being  annoyed  by  sharp- 
shooters, the  general  proposed  to  land  a strong  regiment  at  Congo  and 
let  it  march  through.  The  admiral  declined  to  risk  his  vessel  in  so  nar- 
row a stream.  ‘ 

Subsequent  events  have  clearly  demonstrated  the  weakness  of  the 
rebel  aefenses  at  the  ferry  and  along  the  Big  Black,  as  well  as  the  prac- 
ticability of  the  route  just  described.  It  is  possible  that  gunboats  could 
not  have  entered  this  stream,  and  that  it  would  have  been  too  dangerous 
for  a transport  to  attempt  it ; but  the  subsequent  passage  of  Grand 
Gulf  by  the  entire  fleet  is  rather  in  favor  of  the  feasibility  of  entering 
Big  Black,  at  least  by  armed  vessels,  even  under  the  fire  of  the  heavy 
batteries  at  the  Point  of  Eocks,  Grand  Gulf.  One  such  vessel,  under 
cover  of  another,  could  have  crossed  our  troops  rapidly  enough  for  all 
ordinary  purposes. 

On  April  30,  the  advanced  corps  of  McClernand  was  landed  at  Bruins- 
burg,  about  10  miles  below  Grand  Gulf,  having  been  ferried  from  the 
landing  on  the  opposite  shore,  just  below  that  place,  by  the  transports 
and  gunboats.  McPherson’s  corps  had  all  been  ferried  across  by  10 
a.  m.  of  the  1st. 

After  the  battle  near  Port  Gibson,  the  rebels  retreated  beyond  Bayou 
Pierre,  burning  the  railroad  bridge  over  the  main  stream,  and  the  sus- 
pension bridges  across  the  South  and  North  Forks. 

At  8 a.  m.  our  advance  took  possession  of  Port  Gibson,  and  under 
orders  from  General  Grant  I proceeded  at  once  to  provide  means  of  cross- 
ing the  South  Fork.  Smith’s  brigade,  of  Logan’s  division,  followed 
by  Dennis’  brigade,  was  sent,  under  the  guidance  of  a negro,  to  examine 
and  cross  at  the  ford  3 miles  above  the  town,  while  the  troops  of  McOler- 
nand’s  corps  were  to  assist  in  constructing  a bridge.  The  roadway  of 
the  suspension  bridge  having  been  entirely  destroyed,  and  not  needing 
a permanent  structure,  it  was  determined  to  construct  a raft  bridge. 
A point  about  20  yards  above  the  site  of  the  old  bridge  was  chosen. 
Buoyant  materials  in  abundance  were  obtained  by  tearing  down  the 
buildings,  cotton-gins,  &c.,  in  the  vicinity. 

At  about  8.30  a.  m.  I applied  for  a brigade  of  infantry  to  do  the 
work,  and  was  informed  by  General  McClernand  that  it  should  be  fur- 
nished immediately.  My  request,  under  General  Grant’s  order,  was 
renewed  several  times,  and  each  time  I was  informed  that  the  detail 
had  been  made,  It  did  not  report  tiU  12  m.  'fhe  houses  torn 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


129 


down,  materials  broiiglit  to  tbe  water,  ai)])roaeLes  prepared,  and  the 
bridge  completed,  so  that  by  4.30  p.  m.  the  troops  were  in  full  motion 
across  it.  The  stream  at  this  place  is  about  5 feet  deep.  This  bridge 
was  simply  a continuous  raft  IGG  feet  long,  12  feet  wide,  with  three 
rows  of  large  mill-beams  lying  across  the  current,  and  the  intervals 
between  them  closely  filled 'by  buoyant  timber;  the  whole  firmly  tied 
together  by  a cross-floor  or  deck  of  light  2-inch  stuft.  The  roadway, 
the  proper  width,  was  made  by  laying  the  same  kind  of  material  parallel 
with  the  axis  of  the  bridge.  Side  rails  of  5-inch  scantling  were  laid 
to  keep  the  teams  on  the  proper  track.  The  approaches  were  over 
quicksand;  were  corduroyed  and  covered  with  earth.  The  abutments 
were  formed  by  building  a slight  crib- work,  and  filling  in  with  rails 
covered  by  sand. 

From  the  very  gentle  current  of  the  stream  only  one  guy  was  used, 
and  that  as  a simple  precaution.  From  the  structure  of  the  bridge,  and 
the  manner  in  which  it  was  joined  with  the  shore,  it  was  necessarily 
sufficiently  rigid. 

By  7.30  p.  m.  I had  arrived  at  the  Grindstone  Ford,  North  Fork  of 
Bayou  Pierre,  distant  8 miles  from  Port  Gibson.  At  this  place  found 
the  fine  suspension  bridge,  similar  to  that  at  Port  Gibson,  in  flames; 
but,  with  the  assistance  of  the  escort  and  a few  negroes  from  the  plan- 
tation near 'by,  the  fire  was  soon  extinguished.  I found,  by  an  exami- 
nation of  the  ford,  that  it  was  entirely  practicable  for  infantry,  though, 
from  bad  approaches  and  quicksand  in  places,  rather  difficult  for  cav- 
alry or  artillery.  The  roadway,  side-truss,  and  string-pieces  of  the 
suspension  bridge  for  120  feet,  beginning  on  the  farther  side  near  the 
abutments,  were  entirely  destroyed;  but  the  cross  ties  having  been  re- 
cently renewed  from  unseasoned  timber,  although  set  on  fire  about  11 
o’clock  the  night  before,  only  four  of  the  cross-ties  were  burned  entirely 
off.  They  were  5 by  9 inches,  and,  with  the  exception  of  the  four  men- 
tioned, had  left  from  3 to  7 inches  of  sound  timber,  quite  a number 
being  reduced  to  the  former  dimensions.  The  charred  parts  were  left 
undisturbed,  and  dispositions  made  to  construct  a new  roadway  over 
the  remains  of  the  old  one,  so  as  to  distribute  all  of  the  strain  upon  that 
])art  of  the  cross- ties  just  next  to  the  stirrups  of  the  suspension-rods. 
Several  long  pieces  of  timber,  3 by  7,  were  found  near  the  bridge. 
These  were  lashed  firmly  to  the  suspension-rods  by  wire  taken  from  the 
telegraph  line,  and  rested  on  the  charred  cross-ties.  They  were  made 
to  bear  equally  by  wedging.  Timber  for  cross-ties  was  obtained  near 
by.  These  were  i^laced  at  intervals  of  3 feet,  the  ends  projecting  a foot 
beyond  the  side  rails  or  new  string-pieces.  Where  the  old  ties  were 
but  slightly  injured,  wedges  were  placed  between  them  and  the  new 
ones  near  the  axis  of  the  bridge.  Five  string-pieces,  3 by  7,  were  laid, 
and  the  road  covering,  of  boards  of  various  thicknesses  and  qualities, 
obtained  Irom  the  farm  houses  near  by,  was  then  x)ut  down,  secured  by 
side  rails,  si^iked,  and  lashed  to  their  places.  The  roadway  was  made 
perfectly  secure  by  rack-lashings  at  intervals  of  about  12  feet.  The 
rope  for  this  purpose  was  5-inch  grass  cable,  passing  around  the  new 
string-pieces  and  cross-ties  and  over  the  suspension-chain.  The  lash- 
ings were  drawn  taut  by  using  rack-sticks  5 feet  long  and  twisting 
around  the  suspension-rods.  The  new  roadway  being  about  10  inches 
above  the  level  of  the  old  one,  ramj)S  of  the  proper  declivity  were  con- 
structed at  both  ends. 

The  i)ioneer  company  and  detail  did  not  report  till  11.30  p.  m.  By 
5.30  a.  m.  the  ]iext  morning  the  bridge  was  completed  and  the  army  in 
full  march. 

9 R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


130  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  ' [Chap.  XXXVL 

The  greatest  delay  was  experienced  here  from  the  difficulty  of  obtain- 
iijg  proper  timber.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Eawlins,  assistant  adjutant-gen- 
eral of  General  Grant^s  staff,  took  this  matter  in  hand,  and  by  his  vigor, 
activity,  and  personal  attention  during  the  entire  night,  succeeded  in 
obtaining  a sufficient  supply. 

Captain  Hickenlooper,  Fifth  Ohio  Battery,  chief  engineer  of  the 
Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  gave  most  active  and  intelligent  assistance 
till  the  work  was  finished.  The  lashings  were  all  made  under  his  per- 
sonal supervision. 

Captain  Tresilian,  division  engineer,  Third  Division,  was  also  ener- 
getic and  efficient  in  preparing  and  selecting  the  timbers. 

After  the  entire  army  had  crossed,  an  examination  revealed  no  per- 
ceptible injury  to  the  bridge. 

On  May  11,  Capt.  H.  0.  Freeman,  in  charge  of  the  pontoon  train,  re- 
ported to  me  at  Cayuga.  During  the  ensuing  campaign  he  was  directed 
to  march  with  that  column  which  inclined  itself  most  toward  Pearl  Eiver. 

On  May  4,  Captain  Tresilian  repaired  the  bridge  of  boats  across  the 
Big  Black  at  Hankinson’s  Ferry.  1 submit  his  report  herewith.* 

Assistants  Ulfiers,  Rigby,  and  Hartwell  were  actively  engaged  in  re- 
connaissances and  surveys.  Mr.  Ulfiers  went  with  dispatches,  April 
10,  to  General  Banks.  Captain  Rigby,  having  been  quite  unwell  when 
the  army  marched  out  of  Jackson,  did  not  accompany  headquarters.  He 
is  i)robably  a prisoner  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy  or  parolled  in  hospital. 

First  Lieut.  Peter  C.  Hains,  U.  S.  Engineers,  and  chief  engineer  Thir- 
teenth Army  Corps,  displayed  great  activity  and  intelligence  in  the  per- 
formance of  the  duties  of  his  department.  I submit  herewith  his  re- 
port.* 

During  the  march  of  Osterhaus’  division  and  McPherson’s  corps 
from  Perkins’  to  Hard  Times  Landing,  several  bridges  were  built  and 
repaired,  for  particulars  of  which  I refer  you  to  the  accompanying 
reports  of  Captain  Hickenlooper  * and  his  assistant,  F.  Tunica. 

The  inclosed  map  fully  explains  the  line  of  march  followed  by  the 
aruiy  from  Milliken’s  Bend,  embodying  such  topographical  features  as 
could  be  obtained,  t Great  credit  is  due  to  Maj.  Otto  H.  Matz,  Illinois 
volunteers,  for  the  artistic  manner  in  which  it  is  executed. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  WILSON, 

First  Lieut.  Fngrs.^  Lieut.  Col.  and  Asst.  Insp.  Gen. 

Capt.  F.  E.  Prime, 

Chief  Engineer,  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


No.  C. 

Reports  of  Capt.  Oeran  11.  Howard,  U.  S.  Signal  Corps,  Chief  Signal 
Officer,  of  operations  April  S-July  4.  » 

Hdqrs.  Signal  Detachment,  Dept,  of  the  Tennessee, 

Memphis,  Tenn.,  June  6,  1863. 

Sir  : Since  the  last  report  wffiich  I had  the  honor  to  submit,'  the  dif- 
ferent signal  parties  composing  this  detachment  have  been  doing  good 
service,  both  in  reconnaissance  and  as  signalists. 

* See  siege  of  Vicksburg  for  tbe  only  reports  of  Hains,  Hickenlooper,  and  Tresilian 
that  havtt  been  found,  but  their  dates  indicate  that  they  could  not  have  been  in- 
closures  al>ove  report, 
t To  appear  in  Athis. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


131 


My  last  reported  the  operations  of  the  detachment  to  the  9th  ultimo. 
During  the  active  campaign  preceding  the  investment  of  Vicksburg  the 
party  serving  with  the  army  in  the  field  accompanied  it  in  all  its  marches 
from  Grand  Gulf  through  Port  Gibson,  Eaymond,  Black  Kiver  Bridge, 
Jackson,  and  Champion’s  Hill  to  the  immediate  rear  of  Vicksburg.  The 
country  through  which  the  route  of  the  forces  lay  is  generally  flat  and 
wooded,  and  unsuited  to  any  extensive  lines  of  communication  by  sig- 
nals, and,  pursuant  to  suggestions  contained  in  the  last  annual  report  of 
the  Signal  Ofi&cer  of  the  Army,  the  party  was  employed  almost  wholly 
in  reconnoitering.  The  party  was  divided  into  four  detachments,  one  of 
which  was  kept  at  General  Grant’s  headquarters  and  one  at  each  of 
the  three  corps  headquarters. 

Prom  the  detachment  kept  at  general  headquarters  an  officer  was  sent 
each  day  to  each  of  the  corps  headquarters  with  instructions  to  obtain 
the  result  of  the  observations  made  the  same  day  by  the  detachments 
assigned  to  the  respective  corps  Warmee,  and  to  report  the  same  each 
evening  to  Major-General  Grant  in  person. 

The  detachments  with  the  various  army  corps  were  engaged  each  day 
in  reconnoitering  in  advance,  and  reported  by  signal  or  courier,  as  was 
found  most  expedient,  the  result  of  all  observations  worthy  of  notice  to 
the  general  commanding  the  corps.  Thus  each  corps  commander  was 
kept  well  informed  as  to  his  own  command  and  General  Grant  as  to  the 
whole'  army.  The  credit  of  this  arrangement  is  due  to  Captain  De  Ford. 

Upon  the  arrival  of  the  army  at  the  rear  of  Vicksburg,  Captain  De 
Ford  caused  communications  to  be  opened  from  Snyder’s  Blutf,  where 
tlie  right  of  the  army  rested,  to  Admiral  Porter’s  flag-ship,  lying  in  the 
Yazoo,  a distance  of  4 or  5 miles.  The  station  on  the  bluff  was  occu- 
pied by  Captain  McClintock  and  Lieutenant  Fisher,  and  the  one  on  the 
flag-ship  by  Captain  Hoyt  and  Lieutenant  Magner.  They  did,  and  are 
still  doing,  valuable  service.  A line  was  also  established  from  General 
Grant’s  headquarters  to  the  extreme  left,  but  tlie  peculiar  toi)ography 
of  the  country  necessitated  so  many  stations  that,  in  the  opinion  of  Cap- 
tain De  Ford,  this  line  was  nearly  useless,  as  a courier  could  ride  over 
the  line  in  less  time  than  a message  could  be  transmitted  in  the  usual 
manner.  He  consequently  recalled  the  officers  stationed  on  this  line. 
The  resignation  of  Captain  De  Ford  at  this  time  placed  Captain  Rose  in 
command  of  the  party,  he  being  the  senior  officer  present.  Captain 
Rose  immediately  re-established  the  line  to  the  left,  together  with  some 
other  important  lines. 

The  following  is  a copy  of  a report  received  from  him,  showing  the 
present  locations  of  the  lines  and  the  operations  of  the  party  since  he 
assumed  command : 

Hdqrs.  Signal  Detachment,  Army  in  the  Field,  Dept,  oe  the  Tenn., 

Hear  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  31,  1863. 

Sir  : I liavo  the  honor  to  report  that  this  detachment  has,  since  I assumed  com- 
mand, been  doing  good  service,  having  been  at  work  almost  constantly  day  and  nigbt. 
Wo  have  now  three  lines  in  good  working  order,  and  officers  and  men  are  all  taking 
an  interest  in  their  duties. 

Our  line  to  Haynes’  Bluff  is  of  the  greatest  importance,  as  it  is  the  only  means  of 
communication  with  the  two  divisions  of  our  trooi)S  in  that  part  of  the  country, 
stationed  there  to  observe  the  movements  of  General  Johnston’s  forces  in  our  rear. 
The  best  officers  I have  are  on  this  line,  and  it  works  to  a charm. 

The  line  from  General  Grant’s  headquarters  to  Young’s  Point,  La.,  is  of  the  utmost 
importance ; it  is  the  means  of  communication  between  the  army  and  the  navy.  Ad- 
miral Porter  is  highly  pleased  with  the  corps. 

The  lino  from  General  Grant’s  headquarters  to  the  Yazoo  Landing,  the  depot  of  sup- 
plies for  the  use  of  the  medical,  commissary,  quartermaster’s,  and  ordnance  depart- 
ments, is,  of  course,  of  much  utility. 


132 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


The  line  from  the  end  of  the  telegraph  line,  reaching  to  the  extreme  left,  is  not 
mnch  used,  but  is  important  to  be  kept  open. 

Inclosed  I send  yon  a small  ]>lat,  showing  the  different  lines. 

Our  officers  are  all  busy  at  present,  hut  the  teicgraj)!!  will  relieve  some  of  them 
soon.  I noticed  live  signal  officers  with  the  Marine  Brigade  as  they  i)assed  up  the 
Yazoo. 

We  arc  at  present  well  supplied  with  all  kinds  of  stores,  transportation,  &c. 

I remain,  very  res^jectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  M.  ROSE, 

Captain  and  Chief  A ctin<j  SUjnal  Officer. 

Captain  Kose  also  reports  that  the  most  commeiulable  zeal  is  evinced 
by  the  officers  and  men  of  his  command,  and  he  feels  confident  that 
each  officer  will  do  all  in  his  power  to  second  him  in  all  his  efiorts  to 
promote  the  honor  and  effi(?ieucy  of  the  corps. 

The  signal  party  under  Lieutenant  Wilson,  serving  with  the  Missis- 
sippi Marine  Brigade,  is  also  doing  good  service. 

The  brigade  is  on  transports,  which  sail  in  company.  The  only  and 
constant  means  of  communication  from  boat  to  boat  is  by  signals. 
This  command  served  on  the  Mississippi  and  Tennessee  Elvers,  and  has 
been  AYiriously  employed  between  Nashville  and  Vicksburg.  Below  is 
a copy  of  the  last  report  received  from  that  party : 

U.  S.  Steamer  Adams, 

Offi  Helena,  Ark.,  May  25,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  .submit  the  following  reiiort : 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  24th  instant  a part  of  General  Ellet’s  brigade  landed 
at  Austin,  a small  town  some  15  miles  above  Helena,  for  the  purpose  of  chastising  a 
band  of  rebels  who  had  at  that  place  captured  and  burned  a small  trading-boat  the 
day  previous. 

Lieutenant  Warren  and  my.self  proceeded  with  the  forces,  ho])ing  that  in  case  of 
action  to  be  able  to  do  something  for  the  service.  When  3 miies  out,  the  advance 
came  upon  the  enemy,  concealed  in  a thick  wood,  when  quite  a severe  .skirmish  en- 
sued, resulting  in  the  rout  of  the  enemy,  with  the  loss  of  .several  of  their  number 
killed.  Owing  to  the  dense  wood  and  underbrush.  Lieutenant  Warren  and  myself 
were  employed  as  aides,  scouts,  and  with  skirmishers,  an  opportunity  not  occurring 
in  which  we  could  use  signals. 

I have  also  the  honor  to  state  that  I have  submitted  a similar  report  to  General 
Ellet. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  W.  WILSON, 

Acting  Signal  Officer  in  Charge. 

Wlieu  tbe  brigade  is  in  the  vicinity  of  Vicksburg,  General  Ellet  com- 
municates by  signal  with  General  Grant. 

That  portion  of  the  detachment  now  here  in  cam])  of  instruction 
will  be  ready  for  the  field  as  soon  as  they  can  be  equipjied.  I shall 
then  take  the  field  myself  in  charge  of  them. 

xV  duplicate  report  of  the  operations  of  this  detachment  will  be  made, 
embodying  an  account  of  all  its  operations,  as  soon  as  the  fate  of  Vicks- 
burg is  decided,  and  in  time  to  accompany  General  Grant’s  official  re- 
l)ort  of  the  campaign. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  res[)ectfullv,  your  obedient  servant. 

O.  Jl.  ITOAVxVEJ), 

Captain  and  Acting  Chief  Signal  Ojficer. 

Chiee  Signal  Oeficeu  U.  S.  Army,  ^YasMngton^  J).  C. 


Office  of  the  Chief  Signal  Officer, 

Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Vichshurg.,  Miss..,  August  28,  1803. 

Colonel  : 1 have  the  honor  to  hand  you  herewith  a report  of  the 
operations  of  that  portion  of  this  corps  that  w’as  in  active  service  in  the 


Chap.  XXXVL]  GENERAL  REPORTS.  133 

vicinity  of  Yicksbur^i:  during  the  campaign  which  ended  in  the  fall  of 
that  city : 

Handing  you  this  report  at  this  late  hour  involves  the  necessity,  or, 
at  least,  the  expediency,  of  stating  the  reasons  why  it  was  not  presented 
at  the  proper  time,  or  immediately  upon  the  termination  of  the  cam- 
paign. They  are  as  follows  : 

The  officers  in  immediate  charge  of  the  corps  with  your  army,  and 
whose  duty  it  was  to  make  the  report,  were  Oapt.  J.  W‘  He  Ford,  who 
resigned  during  the  operations  in  the  rear  of  the  city  ; Oapt.  L.  M.  Eose, 
who  was  forced  by  illness  to  leave  the  department  before  the  end  of  the 
campaign,  and  Oapt.  J.  M.  McOliutock,  upon  whom  the  command  de- 
volved at  a very  late  period,  and  who  was,  no  doubt,  unmindful  that  a 
report  of  the  campaign  would  be  required  of  him. 

As  to  myself,  1 was,  previous  to  the  capitulation,  ordered  to  Wash- 
ington, and  have  but  lately  returned  therefrom.  I have  endeavored, 
with  the  data  at  my  command,  to  make  as  plain  a statement  as  possible 
of  the  duties  performed  by  the  corps,  and  trust  that  any  deficiency 
therein  may  be  attributed  not  to  a lack  of  desire  to  do  justice  to  the 
officers  and  men  who  compose  it,  but  to  my  lack  of  opportunity  to  pro- 
vide myself  with  such  complete  data  as  I should  have  had,  and  such  as 
I shall  feel  it  my  duty  to  keep  hereafter. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

O.  11.  HOWAED, 
Captain  and  Chief  Signal  Officer. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Eawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 

[Inclosure,]  ^ 

Hdqrs.  Signal  Corps,  Dept,  of  the  Tennessee, 

Vielcshurg.^  Miss..,  August  25,  18G3. 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
operations  of  this  corps  from  the  time  of  its  reporting  for" duty  in  charge 
of  Capt.  J.  W.  He  Ford,  at  Young’s  Point,  La.,  on  April  3, 1^/10  the  time 
of  the  surrender  of  Vicksburg,  July  4,  18G3: 

On  April  3,  a line  of  communication  by  signals  was  opened  from  Mil- 
liken’s  Bend  to  the  foot  of  the  old  canal,  over  which  many  important 
official  messages  were  transmitted  to  different  points  on  the  line,  and  to 
Admiral  Porter’s  fiag-ship,  where  an  officer  of  the  corps  was  perma- 
nently stationed. 

At  a point  on  this  line  directly  opposite  Vicksburg  a station  of  ob- 
servation was  established.  The  officer  in  charge  of  this  station  was 
instructed  to  report  everything  of  interest  occurring  in  the  town  and 
within  the  enemy’s  lines  to  the  commanding  general. 

On  April  7,  a line  was  opened  from  General  Grant’s  headquarters,  then 
at  Milliken’s  Bend,  through  General  McPherson’s  headquarters,  to  Gen- 
eral Osterhaus’,  at  Eichmond.  This  line  was  used  as  a means  of  com- 
munication between  those  points  until  the  removal  of  General  Oster- 
haus’ command  to  Grand  Gulf.  From  a point  in  this  line  another  was 
l)rojected  to  New  Carthage,  and  oi)ene<l  as  far  as  Holmes’  plantation, 
but  was  not  long  in  operation  when  the  advancing  of  the  army  caused 
it  to  be  abandoned.  During  the  time  that  the  main  body  of  tlie  army 
remained  upon  this  side  of  the  river,  these  lines  were  in  considerable 
use  as  a means  of  communication  between  the  different  headquarters. 
M ith  one  or  two  exceptions,  the  officers  employed  on  them  ijerfornied 
then  and  there  their  first  duty  in  the  field  as  signal  officers,  but  by  their 


134 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX.Vt. 


zeal  and  activity  they  made  up  in  a great  degree  for  their  lack  of  experi- 
ence, and  acquitted  themselves  very  creditably. 

On  the  night  of  the  running  of  the  blockade  by  the  gunboats,  First 
Lieutenant  [William  H.]  Sherfy  reported  for  duty  on  board  the  Benton, 
on  which  he  passed  the  batteries,  in  readiness  to  communicate  with  the 
signal  officers  on  shore,  should  it  be  necessary. 

On  May  1,  a party  of  8 officers,  in  charge  of  First  Lieut.  Samuel  S. 
Sample,  was  directed  by  Captain  De  Ford  to  report  for  duty  to  Major- 
General  Grant,  at  Hard  Times  Landing.  This  party  reached  the  gen- 
eral’s headquarters,  on  the  road  between  Thompson’s  Hill  and  Port 
Gibson.  By  direction  of  the  general  commanding,  two  officers  were 
dispatched  thence  to  the  landing  at  Bruinsburg,  to  open  communication 
with  the  opposite  shore.  This  line  was  immediately  opened  to  Hard 
Times  Landing,  and  remained  open  for  four  or  five  days,  during  the  cross- 
ing of  the  Seventeenth  Army  Corps.  Near  Port  Gibson  the  officers 
were  assigned  to  Generals  McPherson,  Logan,  and  Crocker,  a party  still 
remaining  with  the  commanding  general.  The  officers  were  thus  as- 
signed for  duty  either  as  signalists  or  upon  reconnaissances.  The 
army  being  now  in  motion,  and  the  country  being  ill-adapted  to  any  ex- 
tensive lines  of  communication  by  field  signals,  the  officers  reconnoi- 
tered  the  country  as  far  in  advance  of  the  army  as  possible,  and  estab- 
lished stations  of  observation  upon  such  points  as  were  suitable  for 
that  purpose. 

During  the  march  of  the  army  from  Port  Gibson  to  Eocky  Springs, 
the  officers  of  the  corps  were  constantly  on  duty,  reconnoitering  the 
country  in  front  and  reporting  the  result  of  their  observations  to  com- 
manders to  whom  they  were  assigned.  Lieutenants  [Cyrus  M.]  Eoberts 
and  [Jacob  P.]  Sampson,  with  General  Logan,  and  Lieutenant  Irvin, 
with  General  Crocker,  are  entitled  to  notice  for  zeal  displayed  and 
services  rendered  during  this  time.  These  officers,  together  with  Lieu- 
tenants Morris  and  [William  C.]  Magner,  with  Major-General  McPher- 
son, were  complimented  by  that  officer  for  services  rendered  during 
that  march. 

When  General  Grant  reached  Grand  Gulf,  a line  was  opened  in  ten 
minutes  to  Hard  Times  Lauding,  affording  the  general  a means  of  com- 
munication between  those  points  during  his  stay.  This  line  was  in 
constant  use.  When  the  army  reached  Hankinsou’s  Ferry,  Lieutenant 
SampH,  who  remained  with  General  Grant,  reconnoitered  the  country 
as  far  as  Eocky  Springs  and  Hall’s  Ferry,  and,  when  the  army  reached 
the  former  place,  proceeded  to  Cayuga  and  established  a station  of  ob- 
servation at  that  point;  thence,  when  the  advance  reached  Cayuga,  to 
New  Auburn,  passing,  in  so  doing,  3 miles  inside  of  the  enemy’s  pickets, 
capturing  the  enemy’s  dispatches,  and  returning  by  the  same  route.  At 
Five-Mile  Creek  the  remainder  of  the  corps,  in  charge  of  Captain  I)e 
Ford,  reached  headquarters  from  Grand  Gulf.  At  the  battle  of  Eay- 
mond,  a detachment  of  the  corps,  under  command  of  Capt.  L.  M.  Eose, 
took  an  active  part,  and  were  complimented  for  their  activity,  bravery, 
and  reliability.  At  Eaymond  the  corps  was  divided  into  four  detach- 
ments, and  a detachment  assigned  to  eacli  army  corps  (the  Thirteenth, 
Fifteenth,  and  Seventeenth),  in  charge,  respectively,  of  Lieutenant 
Irvin,  Captain  McCliutock,  and  Captain  Eose,  while  the  fourth  re- 
mained with  General  Grant,  in  charge  of  the  commandant  of  the  cor])S, 
to  visit  each  day  the  detachments  with  the  different  army  corps,  report- 
ing the  result  of  the  reconnaissances  ])erformed  by  each  party  to  General 
Grant  at  night.  A station  of  observation  was  established  on  the  cupola 
of  the  court-house  at  E^iymond  by  Lieutenant  [Gustav  B.]  Gryden.  The 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


135 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


i3G  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

(letacliment  witli  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  remained  with  that  corps 
at  Eaymond,  wliile  tliose  with  the  Fifteenth  and  Seventeenth  Corps 
moved  forward  to  Jackson.  On  the  approach  of  the  army  to  Clinton, 
Lieutenant  Sample,  with  one  enlisted  man,  without  support,  reconnoi- 
tered  the  road  within  one-half  mile  of  Clinton,  and  when  the  skirmishers 
reached  that  point,  he,  with  Captain  Hoyt,  acting  signal  officer  and  an 
officer  of  the  Fifth  Iowa,  was  the  first  to  enter  the  town.  A station  of 
observation  was  immediately'  established,  which  overlooked  the  road  in 
the  direction  of  Jackson  as  far  as  the  enemy^s  pickets,  when  the  army 
entered  Jackson  next  morning  by  different  roads.  Mucli  good  work  was 
done  by  officers  of  the  corps  during  the  engagement  which  took  place. 
Lieutenant  [Clifford]  Stickney,  with  Captain  [Julius]  Pitzman,  engineer 
of  General  Sherman’s  staff,  was  the  first  to  enter  the  city,  and  captured 
some  20  x^risoners.  Of  the  detachment  with  the  Seventeenth  Army 
Corps,  Lieutenant  [Thaddeus  C.]  Withers  was  the  first  to  enter  the 
enemy’s  works,  and  Captain  McCiintock  the  first  to  raise  the  Stars  and 
Stripes  on  the  State  capitol.  While  the  Fifteenth  Corps  remained  at 
Jackson,  Lieutenant  Sample  made  a reconnaissance  of  the  country  for 

'miles  in  the  direction  of  Canton,  meeting  the  enemy’s  lookouts,  and 
afterward  in  the  direction  of  Livingston  for  4 miles,  leaving  the  advanc- 
ing army  at  Clinton. 

At  the  battle  of  Charnjnon’s  Hill  the  officers  were  active,  and  rendered 
very  efficient  service.  Lieutenant  Koberts  was  engaged  in  signaling 
w'hile  he  could  do  so,  and  afterward  served  on  the  staff  of  General 
Logan,  and  was  complimented  by  that  general  for  his  activity  and 
bravery.  Lieutenant  Sami^son,  from  a station  at  General  McPherson’s 
headquarters,  communicated  by  signals  to  the  right  of  the  line,  to  a 
station  which  was  established  and  worked  by  Lieutenants  McHary  and 
Morris,  until  the  retreat  of  the  enemy.  Lieutenants  Irvin  and  Gryden 
should  also  be  mentioned  for  their  services  during  this  engagement. 

Two  days  thereafter.  Lieutenant  Irvin  led  the  advance  guard  after 
crossing  the  Big  Black,  reaching  Bovina  2 miles  in  advance  of  the 
army. 

When  taking  i)osition  in  the  rear  of  Vicksburg,  Lieutenants  Samxffe, 
Sherfy,  and  White  performed  imx^ortant  duties  for  the  general  com- 
manding. 

As  soon  as  the  troops  were  in  x^osition.  Captain  Eose  and  others 
opened  communication  from  headquarters  Thirteenth  and  Seventeenth 
Army  Corps  to  General  Grant’s  headquarters,  which  line  remained  iu 
operation  for  some  time,  and  over  it  many  communications  of  imxmr- 
tance  x^assed. 

The  line  from  Chickasaw  Bluffs  to  Young’s  Point,  established  by 
Cax)tain  McCiintock  and  Lieutenant  Magner,  was  of  the  first  importance, 
as  the  only  available  means  of  communication  between  General  Grant 
and  Admiral  Porter. 

A line  was  partially  ox^ened  from  General  Grant’s  headquarters  to 
Haynes’  Bluff'  by  Lieutenant  Gryden  and  others,  but  the  removal  of  the 
forces  from  the  latter  ])oint  caused  this  to  be  abandoned  before  its  com- 
X)letion.  Desiring  to  improve  tlie  communication  between  headquarters 
and  the  station  at  Chickasaw  Bluffs,  Lieutenant  Sample,  ux>on  a recon- 
naissance for  that  xnirpose,  found  it  expedient  to  make  imx^ortant  alter- 
ations in  the  whole  line,  and  communication  was  ox^ened  by  him  to 
Haynes’  Bluff  (that  x>oint  being  reoccuxned),  Chickasaw  Landing,  and 
Young’s  Point  through  stations  Nos.  27,  28,  and  31,  on  the  accomx)any- 
ing  max>.* 


Sec  p.  135. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


137 


These  lines  were  in  constant  use,  transmitting  messages  of  the  first 
importance — the  Chickasaw  Landing  and  Haynes’  Bluff  lines  until  re- 
lieved by  the  telegraph,  and  the  line  to  Young’s  Point  till  the  surren- 
der of  Vicksburg. 

Lieutenant  Sampson  deserves  particular  mention  for  the  manner  in 
which  he  conducted  affairs  at  his  station,  at  General  Grant’s  headquar- 
ters. 

During  the  occupation  and  fortification  of  Haynes’  Bluff,  a detach- 
ment in  charge  of  Lieutenant  Sample  was  directed  to  report  for  duty 
to  Major-General  Washburn,  commanding  that  post;  reconnoitered  lines 
to  advance  cavalry  pickets  and  to  Big  Black  Eiver  railroad  bridge,  and 
pronounced  communication  by  si gnais  practicable ; but  General  Oster- 
haus,  commanding  at  bridge,  not  desiring  communication.  General  Grant 
directed  that  the  line  should  not  be  established,  as  he  had  other  use 
for  the  signal  force.  A party  was  then  ordered  to  open  a line  from 
General  McPherson’s  headquarters  (from  which  communication  was  had 
with  General  Grant  by  telegraph)  to  Major-General  Herron,  nearWar- 
renton.  This  line  was  opened  and  used  for  a time,  when  another  was 
opened  from  General  Herron  to  the  gunboats,  which  remained  open 
and  in  use  until  the  surrender  of  Vicksburg.  The  party  with  General 
Washburn  were  constantly  on  duty  with  the  troops  stationed  at  dif- 
ferent points  ; reconnoitered  the  whole  country  from  Haynes’  Bluff'  to 
Big  Black  Eiver  railroad  bridge,  where  they  were  at  the  surrender  of 
Vicksburg. 

Captains  De  rord,Eose,  and  McCliutock,  who  were  at  diff'erent  times 
in  immediate  charge  of  the  corps,  have  in  many  instances  spoken  in 
the  highest  terms  of  the  activity  and  zeal  displayed  by  the  officers  and 
men,  and  of  t-he  alacrity  with  which  they  performed  the  duties  assigned 
them,  sometimes  the  most  arduous  and  trying. 

To  the  officers  and  men  of  this  corps,  many  of  whom  are  now  pros- 
trated by  illness  from  fatigue  and  exposure  during  the  campaign,  but 
who  bore  up  manfully  until  the  great  object  was  obtained;  who,  fresh 
from  the  camp  of  instruction,  there  performed  their  first  duty  as  signal 
officers,  and  who,  under  the  most  trying  circumstances,  unaided  by  pre- 
vious experience,  have,  by  persevering  toil,  overthrown  or  turned  aside 
obstacles  which  would  have  appeared  discouraging  to  more  experienced 
officers,  and  who  have  patiently  and  bravely  performed  their  whole  duty, 
1 am  under  the  highest  obligations. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

O.'H.  HOWAED, 
Captain  and  Chief  Signal  Ojficer. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Eawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


Ko.  7. 

Deports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McClernand,  U.  S.  Army.,  commanding 
Thirteenth  Army  Corps.,  of  operations  March  30-June  17,  u'iih  result- 
ipg  correspondence. 

Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Battle  field.,  near  Viehshurg^  Miss.j  June  17,  1803. 
Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
principal  operations  of  the  forces  with  me  since  March  30  last,  in  com- 
pliance with  instructions  from  department  headquarters  to  that  effect. 


138 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI 


These  forces  consist  of  a portion  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corixs,  and 
comprise  four  divisions,  organized  as  follows,  viz : 

NINTH  DIVISION. 


Brig.  Gen. 

First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  T.  T.  Garrard. 

118th  Illinois. 

49th  Indiana. 

G9th  Indiana. 

7th  Kentucky. 

120th  Ohio. 

Artillery. 

7th  Michigan  Battery, 
lat  Wisconsin  Battery. 


J.  OSTERHAUS. 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  L.  A.  Sheldon  (42d  Ohio). 

54th  Indiana. 

22d  Kentucky. 

16th  Ohio. 

42d  Ohio. 

114th  Ohio. 

Cavalry. 

3d  Illinois,  Companies  A and  K. 


TENTH  DIVISION. 

Brill.  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith. 


First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  G.  Burrridge. 

IGth  Indiana. 

60th  Indiana. 

67th  Indiana. 

83d  Ohio. 

96th  Ohio. 

23d  Wisconsin. 

Artillery. 

Chicago  Mercantile  B.attery. 

17th  Ohio  Battery. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  W.  J.  Landram  (19th  Keutneky), 

77th  Illinois. 

97th  Illinois. 

108th  Illinois. 

130th  Illinois. 

19th  Kentncky. 

48th  Ohio. 

Cavalry. 

4th  Indiana,  Conip.any  [C]. 


TWELFTH  DIVISION. 


First  Brigade. 


Brig.^  Gen.  A.  P.  TTovey. 

Second  Brigade. 


Brig.  Gen.  G.  F.  McGinnis. 

11th  Indiana. 

24th  Indiana. 

34th  Indiana. 

46th  Indiana. 

29th  Wisconsin. 


Col.  J.  R.  Slack  (47th  Indiana). 

47th  Indiana. 

24th  Iowa. 

28th  Iowa. 

.56th  Ohio. 


Artillery. 

Peoria  Light  Battery. 

1st  Missouri,  Battery  A. 
2d  Ohio  Battery. 

16th  Ohio  Battery. 


Cavalry. 

1st  Indiana,  Company  C. 


FOURTEENTH  DIVISION. 

Briir.  Gen.  E.  A.  Carr. 


First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  P.  Benton. 

33d  Illinois. 

99th  Illinois. 

8th  Indiana. 

18th  Indiana. 

1st  United  States. 

Artillery. 

1st  Indiana  Battery. 


Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  M.  K.  Lawler. 

21st  Iowa. 

22d  Iowa. 

23d  Iowa. 

11th  Wisconsin. 


Cavalry. 

3d  Illinois,  Companies  E and  F. 


Chap.  XXXVL]  GENERAL  REPORTS.  139 

Detacliments  of  the  Second  and  Third  Illinois,  and  the  Sixth  Mis- 
souri, also  form  part  of  my  immediate  command. 

After  several  fruitless  efforts  to  penetrate  the  State  of  Mississippi 
above  Vicksburg  and  turn  the  rear  of  that  city,  it  became  a question  of 
extreme  interest  and  importance  whether  a point  below  on  the  Missis- 
sippi Eiver  might  not  be  reached,  from  which  the  same  result  might  be 
accomplished. 

My  corps,  happily,  was  in  favorable  condition  to  test  this  question. 
It  was  inspired  by  an  eager  desire  to  prove  its  usefulness,  and  impa- 
tiently awaited  an  opportunity  to  do  so.  Sharing  with  it  in  this  feel- 
ing, I was  more  than  rejoiced  in  permission  to  essay  an  effort  to  cross 
the  peninsula  opposite  Vicksburg  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  Kew  Carthage. 

MILLIKEN’S  BEND  TO  NEW  CARTHAGE. 

Accordingly,  on  March  29  [30  ?],  I ordered  General  Osterhaus  to  send 
forward  a detachment  of  infantry,  artillery,  and  cavalry,  to  surprise  and 
capture  Eichmond,  the  capital  of  Madison  Parish,  Louisiana. 

On  the  morning  of  the  30th  [31st],*  Colonel  Bennett,  with  the  Sixty- 
ninth  Indiana,  a section  of  artillery,  and  a detachment  of  the  Second  Ilii- 
nois  Cavalry,  took  up  the  line  of  march  in  execution  of  this  order.  By 
2 p.m.  he  had  marched  12  miles  over  a miry  road,  and  reached  the  bank 
of  Eoundaway  Bayou,  opi^osite  Eichmond. 

Artillery  first  and  infantry  next  opened  fire  on  the  small  force  gar- 
risoning the  town,  and  immediately  dislodged  it.  A portion  of  the  cav- 
alry, dismounting  from  their  horses,  sprang  into  the  small  boats  brought 
along  on  wagons,  and,  paddling  them  across  the  bayou  with  the  butts 
of  their  carbines,  hastened  to  occupy  the  town.  Hot  pursuit  of  the 
fugitive  enemy  was  soon  after  made  by  another  portion  of  the  cavalry, 
who  swam  their  horses  over  the  bayou.  Seven  of  the  enemy  were 
wounded,  four  of  whom  fell  into  our  hands. 

This  spirited  and  successful  attack  was  consummated  under  my  own 
observation,  and  effectually  cut  off  the  wonted  supplies  transported 
through  Eichmond  from  the  rich  tracts  traversed  by  the  Tensas  Eiver 
and  Bayou  Macon  to  Vicksburg. 

On  the  night  of  the  3d,  a bridge  200  feet  long,  made  of  logs  taken 
from  houses,  had  been  thrown  across  Eoundaway  Bayou  at  Eichmond 
by  the  pioneer  corps,  under  Captain  [William  F.]  Patterson.  This  was 
the  work  of  twenty-four  hours,  and  a way  being  thus  opened,  the  re- 
mainder of  General  Osterhaus’  division  was  rapidly  moved  forward,  and 
so  disposed  as  to  cover  and  hold  the  only  practicable  land  route  between 
Milliken’s  Bend  and  Smith’s  plantation,  2 miles  north  of  New  Carthage. 

Meantime  many  obstacles  were  overcome,  old  roads  were  repaired, 
new  ones  made,  boats  constructed  for  the  transportation  of  men  and 
supplies,  20  miles  of  levee  sleeplessly  guarded  day  and  night,  and  every 
possible  precaution  used  to  prevent  the  rising  flood  from  breaking 
through  the  levee  and  ingulfing  us.  Other  obstacles  also  opi)osed  our 
advance.  Harrison’s  rebel  cavalry,  supported  by  a detachment  of  in- 
fantry, were  active  and  vigilant  to  prevent  it ; but,  after  having  been 
repeatedly  repulsed,  on  the  4th  fled  across  Bayou  Vidal,  and  returned 
to  their  camp  at  Perkins’  plantation,  on  the  Mississippi,  G miles  below 
Carthage. 

On  the  same  day,  embarking  in  a skiff*  at  Smith’s  plantation,  and  ac- 
companied by  General  Osterhaus  and  a few  members  of  our  resi)ective 


See  Oaterlians’  report,  p.  489. 


140  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVX 

staffs,  I made  a recounaissance,  terminating  only  half  a mile  from  New 
Carthage  and  the  river,  and  in  fall  view  of  both.  We  discovered  the 
conntry  to  be  deluged  from  Smith’s  plantation,  where  Bayous  Vidnl 
and  Koundaway  unite,  and  whence  they  communicate  by  a common 
channel  with  the  Mississippi  near  Carthage ; also  that  the  levee  ex- 
tending from  Bayou  Vidal  to  Carthage  and  the  Mississippi  was  broken 
and  crossed  by  rapid  currents  at  three  different  places.  Upon  our  ap- 
proach to  the  last  crevasse^  half  a mile  from  Carthage,  we  were  fired  on 
by  the  enemy  and  our  skiff  stopped,  but  not  until  we  had  ascertained 
that  steamers  could  pass  from  the  Mississippi  to  Smith’s  plantation,  and 
that  by  such  means  our  forces  could  be  transferred  from  Smith’s  to  the 
Mississippi  shore. 

Having  thus  determined  this  important  point,  on  the  bth  a flat-boat 
was  wrested  from  the  enemy  on  Bayou  Vidal,  8 miles  below  Smith’s, 
and  brought  to  the  latter  place. 

On  the  6th,  after  the  boat  had  been  hastily  prepared  to  receive  them, 
a small  party,  with  two  mountain  howitzers,  were  embarked,  and  moved 
forward  to  dislodge  the  enemy  from  Carthage.  Upon  the  approach  of 
the  boat  within  range  of  her  armament,  the  enemy  hastily  evacuated 
Carthage,  and  took  refuge  IJ  miles  below,  among  a number  of  buildings 
on  James’  plantation.  Rapidly  disembarking,  the  party  pursued  and 
again  dislodged  him,  killing  a rebel  lieutenant  and  taking  possession  of 
the  buildings. 

On  the  7tb,  General  Osterhaus  pressed  his  advantages  by  sending  for- 
ward artillery  and  shelling  the  woods  across  Bayou  Vidal  in  the  neigh- 
borhood of  Dunbar’s  plantation,  and  dislodging  the  enemy’s  sliarp- 
shooters. 

In  turn,  on  the  8th  the  enemy  took  the  offensive,  and  sought  to  dis- 
lodge the  detachment  at  James’.  For  this  purpose  he  opened  two  12- 
pounder  howitzers  upon  it,  but  after  an  hour  had  been  spent  in  fruitless 
endeavors,  again  fell  back  to  Perkins’. 

On  the  9th,  Lieutenant  Stickel,  with  a company  of  the  Second  Illinois 
Cavalry,  while  scouring  the  country  westward  toward  the  Tensas,  fell 
in  with  a recruiting  party  of  the  enemy,  and  succeeded  in  capturing  3 
officers  and  1 ])rivate. 

Having  been  considerably  strengthened  by  re-enforcements,  su])posed 
to  have  been  sent  from  Grand  Gulf,  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Mississippi, 
the  enemy  on  the  15th  sought  to  reinstate  his  line  between  Perkins’ 
and  Dunbar’s  plantations,  the  latter  place  being  8 miles  from  Perkins’ 
and  the  same  distance  from  Smith’s.  For  this  purpose  he  divided  liis 
force,  directing  one  portion  across  Mill  Bayou  against  our  rear,  in  the 
neighborhood  of  Dunbar’s,  and  the  remainder  against  the  detacliment 
at  James’. 

Our  pickets  near  Dunbar’s’,  upon  the  approach  of  the  enemy,  fell 
back  upon  their  reserves,  who,  being  rapidly  re-enforced,  ])romptly  at- 
tacked and  forced  the  enemy  to  recross  Mill  Bayou,  taking  2 prisoners, 
and  losing  1 killed  and  1 wounded  of  the  Second  Illinois  Cavalry.  Thus 
failing  at  this  point,  that  portion  of  the  enern}-  operating  in  front  of 
James’  also  retreated. 

Up  to  this  time  I had  been  restrained  from  throwing  any  considerable 
l)ortion  of  my  forces  upon  the  river,  for  want  of  any  other  means  than 
a few  skiffs  and  other  small  boats,  and  because,  in  the  absence  of  gun- 
boats to  protect  them,  while  limited  by  the  flood  to  the  occupancy  of 
the  Mississippi  levee,  tliey  would  have  been  ex])Osed  to  destruction  b^- 
the  guidmats  of  the  enemy,  then  sui)posed  to  be  cruising  near  New 
Carthage. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


141 


To  siippl}"  the  iiieaiiis  of  moving  my  forces  from  Smith’s  to  Carthage, 
and  across  the  Mississij)i)i  to  some  point  from  which  operations  could 
be  directed  against  Vicksburg,  and  also  of  aftbrding  them  needed  pro- 
tection against  river  attack,  1 ventured  earnestly  to  urge  the  pressing 
and  transcendent  importance  of  forwarding  steam  transports  and  gun- 
boats from  their  moorings  above  Vicksburg  below  to  Carthage. 

Happily,  on  the  17th,  my  recommendation  was  responded  to  by  the 
appearance  of  three  transports  and  seven  gunboats,  and  on  the  22d  by 
three  more  transports,  all  of  which  had  run  the  blockade.  A number  of 
barges,  having  started  in  tow  of  the  transports,  had  been  cut  loose  on 
the  way,  and  were  caught  and  brought  to  by  parties  from  General  Oster- 
haus’  division,  who  went  out  in  skiffs  for  that  purpose,  i^or  should  I 
omit  to  add  that  during  the  advance  of  my  forces  from  Milliken’s  Bend 
they  subsisted  in  large  part  u])on  the  country  through  which  they 
]>assed,  and  seized  and  sent  back  as  a forfeiture  to  the  United  States  a 
large  quantity  of  cotton  owned  by  the  rebel  Government.  The  increased 
facilities  afforded  by  the  transports  and  barges  alluded  to  hastened  the 
removal  of  the  Ninth  Division  from  Smith’s  to  Carthage.  The  Fourteenth 
Division  followed  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  the  same  place ; also  the 
Tenth  Division  to  Smith’s  and  a part  of  it  to  Carthage.  The  rest  of  the 
Tenth  Division  rested  near  Smith’s  until  a land  route  had  been  o])ened 
10  miles  from  there  to  Perkins’.  The  Twelfth  Division,  which  only  ar- 
I'ived  at  Milliken’s  Bend  on  the  14th,  followed  to  Smith’s,  and  was  fol- 
lowed from  there  to  Perkins’  by  the  rest  of  the  Tenth,  a large  part  of 
the  trains  of  the  whole  corps,  and  afterward  by  the  Seventeenth  and 
Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 

The  last  5 miles  of  the  route  from  Smith’s  to  Perkins’  was  obstructed 
by  numerous  bayous.  To  accelerate  the  general  movement,  General 
Hovey  undertook  the  experiment  of  overcoming  these  obstacles ; but, 
in  order  to  do  so,  he  had  to  construct  nearly  2,000  feet  of  bridging  out 
of  materials  created,  for  the  most  part,  on  the  occasion.  This  he  did 
•within  the  short  space  of  three  days  and  nights,  thus  extending  and 
completing  the  great  military  road  across  the  peninsula  from  the  Mis- 
sissippi above  to  the  Mississippi  40  miles  below  Vicksburg.  The 
achievement  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  occurring  in  the  annals  of 
war,  and  justly  ranks  among  the  highest  examples  of  military  energy 
and  perseverance. 

On  the  22d,  receiving  a communication  from  Admiral  Porter  inform- 
ing me  that  he  would  attack  the  enemy  at  Grand  Gulf  on  the  following 
morning,  and  requesting  me  to  send  an  infantry  force  to  occupy  the 
jdace  when  he  had  silenced  the  enemy’s  guns,  I directed  General  Oster- 
haus  immediately  to  embark  his  division  on  all  available  boats  and  to 
co-operate  with  the  gunboats  in  carrying  into  effect  the  ])urpose  men- 
tioned. In  imompt  execution  of  my  order.  General  Osterhaus  embarked 
his  division  during  the  night  of  the22d;  but  Admiral  Porter  inform- 
ing mein  the  morning  that  further  observation  had  convinced  him  that 
the  enemy  were  in  much  stronger  force  than  he  at  first  supposed,  and 
that  more  extensive  preparations  on  the  part  of  our  land  and  naval 
forces  were  required  than  could  be  immediately  made,  the  contemplated 
attack  was  postponed. 

On  the  23d,  accompanied  by  General  Osterhaus,  I made  a personal 
reconnaissance  of  the  enemy’s  works  and  position  at  Grand  Gulf,  on 
bojird  the  gunboat  General  Price,  which  had  been  kindly  placed  at 
my  disposal  for  that  purpose  by  Admiral  Porter,  and  found  them  very 
strong. 

On  the  24th,  in  obedience  to  my  order,  General  Osterhaus  sent  a de- 


142 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


tachmeiit  of  the  Second  Illinois  Cavalry,  under  Major  Marsh,  and  the 
Forty-ninth  Indiana  and  the  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Ohio  Infantry, 
together  with  a section  of  artillery,  all  under  command  of  Colonel  Keig- 
win,  to  reconnoiter  the  country  between  Perkins^  and  the  mouth  of 
Bayou  Pierre,  and  to  examine  into  the  xiracticability  of  exxiediting  tlie 
general  movement  by  marching  troox)S  across  the  country  to  the  mouth 
of  that  stream.  The  expedition  was  frequently  interrupted  by  rebel 
cavalry,  but  not  until  reaching  a iioint  on  the  west  side  of  Bruin’s  Lake 
did  it  meet  any  considerable  resistance.  Here  the  cavalry  of  the  enemy, 
000  or  700  strong,  with  several  pieces  of  masked  cannon,  drawn  up  in 
line  of  battle  on  the  oi^posite  side  of  Choctaw  Bayou,  made  a resolute 
stand.  A desultory  fight,  however,  of  four  hours  served  to  dislodge 
him  and  leave  us  master  of  the  field.  Thence  the  detachment  continued 
its  march  to  Hard  Times,  15  miles  below  Perkins’  and  3 miles  above 
Grand'  Gulf;  thence  the  cavalry  marched  across  Coffee  Point  to 
D’Schron’s  plantation,  3 miles  below  Grand  Gulf,  and  on  to  a x)oint 
opposite  Bruinsburg,  the  landing  for  Port  Gibson,  12  miles  below  Grand 
Gulf,  thus  demonstrating  the  existence  of  a x^racticable  land  route  from 
Perkins’  to  a i)oint  opposite  Bruinsburg.  The  whole  or  a portion  of  the 
Seventeenth  Army  Corps  afterwards  followed  to  H’Schron’s,  and  so  the 
Fifteenth  as  far  as  Hard  Times. 

Having  concentrated  my  whole  corps  at  Perkins’,  on  the  28th,  with- 
out wagons,  baggage,  tents,  or  officers’  horses,  which  were  left  behind 
for  want  of  means  of  river  transportation,  the  whole  of  it,  except  tbe 
detachment  at  Hard  Times  and  two  regiments  ordered  to  remain  at 
Perkins’  as  a garrison,  embarked  on  steamers  and  barges,  including  the 
gunboat  General  Price,  for  Grand  Gulf.  Arriving  at  Hard  Times  that 
evening,  they  rested  there  during  the  night  on  boats  and  on  shore. 

THE  ATTACK  ON  GRAND  GULF. 

On  the  morning  of  the  29th,  the  gunboats  steamed  3 miles  down  the 
river  to  Grand  Gulf,  and,  closely  ax^proaching  the  enemy’s  batteries, 
opened  fire  upon  them.  The  Mnth,  Tenth,  and  Twelfth  Divisions  of 
my  corps  followed  on  transports,  casting  anchor  in  full  view  of  the  Gulf, 
and  holding  themselves  in  readiness  to  push  forward  and  disembark 
the  moment  the  enemy’s  water  batteries  should  be  silenced  and  a foot- 
ing for  them  thus  secured.  General  Carr’s  division  remained  at  Hard 
Times,  waiting  for  the  return  of  transports  to  bring  them  on,  too.  At 
the  termination  of  a daring  and  x^ersistent  bombardment  of  five  and  a 
half  hours,  the  enemy’s  principal  batteries  had  not  been  silenced,  sev- 
eral of  the  gunboats  had  been  crippled,  and  all  of  them  were  drawn 
off.  Keturning  to  Hard  Times,  the  Ninth,  Tenth,  and  Twelfth  Divis- 
ions disembarked,  and,  together  with  the  Fourteenth  Division,  crossed 
over  the  point  opposite  Grand  Gulf  that  evening  and  night  to  D’Schron’s. 
The  same  night  the  gunboats,  transports,  and  barges  ran  the  blockade 
at  Grand  Gulf  and  landed  at  D’Schron’s. 

If  the  attack  ux^on  Grand  Gulf  had  succeeded,  it  would  have  secured 
either  or  both  of  two  objects  : First,  a base  for  operations  against  the 
rear  of  Vicksburg,  and,  secondly,  safety  in  re-enforcing  General  Banks, 
at  Port  Hudson.  But  failing,  it  became  important  to  gain  a footing  at 
some  other  favorable  point.  The  reconnaissance  made  by  my  cavalry, 
in  pursuance  of  your  order,  indicated  Bruinsburg  to  be  that  x)oint. 
Hence,  embarking  on  the  morning  of  the  3()th,  my  corps  immediately 
X)roceeded  to  that  xfiace,  and  disembarked  before  noon,  only  halting  long 
enough  to  draw  and  distribute  three  days’  rations. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENEKAL  REPORTS. 


143 


At  4 o’clock  all  my  corps,  except  tlie  cavalry  on  tlie  opposite  side  of 
the  river,  took  up  the  line  of  march,  agreeably  to  instructions  from  Major- 
General  Grant,  for  the  bluffs,  some  3 miles  back.  Beaching  the  bluff's 
some  time  before  sunset,  and  deeming  it  important  to  surprise  the  enemy 
if  he  should  be  found  in  the  neighborhood  of  Port  Gibson,  and,  if  pos- 
sible, to  prevent  him  from  destroying  the  bridges  over  Bayou  Pierre  on 
the  road  leading  to  Grand  Gulf  and  to  Jackson,  I determined  to  push 
on  by  a forced  march  that  night  as  far  as  practicable. 

About  1 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  May  1,  upon  approaching  Magnolia 
Church,  13  miles  from  Bruinsburg  and  4 miles  from  Port  Gibson,  Gen- 
eral Carr’s  division,  leading  the  advance,  was  accosted  by  a light  fire 
from  the  enemy’s  infantry,  and  soon  after  by  the  fire  of  his  artillery. 
Harris’  brigade,  the  command  of  which  had  devolved  upon  Colonel  Stone, 
of  the  Twenty-second  Iowa,  in  consequence  of  the  illness  of  the  former, 
was  immediately  formed  in  line  of  battle,  Griffiths’  and  Klauss’  batteries 
brought  up,  and  the  enemy’s  fire  briskly  replied  to  and  silenced.  The 
division  rested  upon  its  arms  at  Shaiffer’s  plantation  during  the  short 
remnant  of  the  night. 

Coming  up  about  day-dawn  in  the  morning,  I learned  from  a fugitive 
negro  that  the  two  roads  diverging  at  Shaiffer’s  led  to  Port  Gibson,  one 
to  the  right  by  Magnolia  Church,  and  the  other  to  the  left,  passing  near 
Bayou  Pierre,  where  it  is  spanned  by  a rail  and  earth-road  bridge ; also 
that  the  greatest  distance  between  the  roads  was  only  some  2 miles; 
that  the  space  between,  and  for  miles  around,  was  diversified  by  fields, 
thick  woods,  abrupt  hills,  and  deep  ravines,  and  that  the  enemy  was  in 
force  in  front  and  intended  to  accept  battle.  I immediately  proved  the 
general  correctness  of  this  information  by  further  inquiry  and  by  per- 
sonal reconnaissance,  and  determined  to  advance  my  forces  upon  the 
cord  of  the  rude  ellipse  formed  by  the  roads,  resting  my  reserves  back 
near  the  forks  of  the  roads. 

After  the  smoke  of  the  previous  engagement  and  the  glimmering  of 
the  rising  sun  had  ceased  to  blind  our  view,  I ordered  General  Oster- 
haus  to  move  his  division  on  the  road  to  the  left,  to  relieve  a detach- 
ment of  General  Carr’s  division  which  had  been  sent  to  watch  the  enemy 
in  that  direction,  and  to  attack  the  enemy’s  right.  The  object  of  this 
movement  was  to  secure  whatever  direct  advantage  might  result  from 
attacking  the  enemy’s  line  at  a point  supposed  to  be  comparatively 
weak,  and  to  make  a diversion  in  favor  of  my  right,  preparatory  to  its 
attack  upon  the  strong  force  understood  to  be  in  its  front. 

The  First  Brigade  of  General  Osterhaus’  division,  hastening  forward 
in  execution  of  this  order,  at  5.30  a.  m.  encountered  the  enemy  in  con- 
siderable force  a short  distance  from  Shaiffer’s  house.  The  position  of 
the  enemy  was  a strong  one,  and  he  seemed  determined  to  maintain  it ; 
yet,  after  an  obstinate  struggle  for  more  than  an  hour,  he  was  forced  to 
yield  and  seek  temporary  safety  at  a greater  distance,  under  a cover  of 
ravines  and  houses. 

The  splendid  practice  of  Lanphere’s  and  Foster’s  batteries  disabled 
two  of  the  enemy’s  guns,  which  were  with  difficulty  withdrawn,  and 
contributed  largely  to  this  success. 

Communicating  with  General  Osterhaus,  I offered  him  re-enforce- 
ments, but  his  Second  Brigade  having  now  come  up,  he  declined  them 
until  more  urgent  occasion  should  arise.  Thus  strengthened,  he  pressed 
forward  until  insurmountable  obstacles  in  the  nature  of  the  ground  and 
its  exposure  to  the  fire  of  the  enemy  arrested  his  progress,  and  proved 
the  impracticability  of  successful  front  attack. 

It  was  now  2 p.  m.,  and  about  this  time  General  J.  E.  Smith’s  brigade, 


144 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


Chap.  XXXVI. 


of  General  Logan’s  division,  came  up,  and  attempting  to  carry  the  ene- 
my’s position  by  such  an  attack,  failed  to  do  so,  thus  attesting  the  cor- 
rectness of  General  Osterliaus’  admonition  upon  that  point. 

A flank  movement  had  been  resolved  upon  by  General  Osterhaus  to 
accomplish  the  same  object.  With  the  view  to  deceive  the  enemy,  he 
caused  his  right  center  to  be  threatened,  and,  taking  advantage  of  the  ef- 
fect, rapidly  moved  a strong  force  toward  his  extreme  right,  and  person- 
ally leading  a brilliant  charge  against  it,  routed  the  enemy,  taking  three 
pieces  of  cannon.  A detachment  of  General  Smith’s  brigade  joined  in 
the  pursuit  of  the  enemy  to  a point  within  a half  mile  of  Port  Gibsou. 

BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON. 

At  G.15  a.  m.,  when  sufficient  time  had  elapsed  to  allow  Osterhaus’ 
first  attack  to  work  a diversion  in  favor  of  my  right,  i ordered  General 
Carr  to  attack  the  enemy’s  left.  General  Benton’s  brigade  promptly 
moved  forward  to  the  right  of  the  main  road  to  Port  Gibson.  His  way 
lay  through  woods,  ravines,  and  a light  canebrake;  yet  he  pressed  on 
until  he  found  the  enemy  drawn  up  behind  the  crest  of  a rauge  of  hills 
intersected  by  the  road.  Upon  one  of  these  hills,  in  plain  view,  stood 
Magnolia  Church.  The  hostile  lines  immediately  opened  on  each  other, 
and  an  obstinate  struggle  ensued.  Meanwhile  Stone’s  brigade  moved 
forward,  on  and  to  the  left  of  the  road,  into  an  open  field,  and  opened 
with  artillery  uiion  the  enemy’s  left  center. 

The  action  was  now  general,  except  at  the  center,  where  a continua- 
tion of  fields,  extending  to  the  front  of  my  line  for  more  than  a mile, 
separated  the  antagonists.  The  enemy  had  not  dared  to  show  himself 
in  these  fields,  but  continued  to  press  my  extreme  right,  with  the  hope, 
as  I subsequently  learned,  of  crushing  it  and  closing  his  concave  line 
around  me. 

General  Hovey  came  up  at  an  opportune  moment,  and  reported  his 
division  to  be  on  the  ground.  I immediately  ordered  him  to  form  it  in 
two  lines  near  the  fork  of  the  two  roads,  and  to  hold  it  there  for  further 
orders.  About  the  time  it  had  been  thus  formed.  General  Smith’s  divis- 
ion came  up,  and  General  Hovey  was  ordered  to  advance  his  division  to 
the  support  of  General  Carr’s.  In  the  execution  of  this  order.  General 
McGinnis’  brigade  moved  to  the  right  front,  in  support  of  Benton’s,  en- 
countering the  same  obstacles  that  had  been  overcome  by  the  latter. 
Colonel  Slack’s  brigade  moved  by  the  flank  near  the  main  road,  and  with- 
out much  difficulty  gained  its  proper  position  to  the  left  of  McGinnis. 

During  the  struggle  between  Benton’s  brigade  and  the  enemy,  the  for- 
mer had  moved  to  the  right  to  secure  its  flank,  and  left  a considerable 
gap  between  it  and  Stone’s.  This  gap  was  immediately  closed  up  by  a 
I)ortion  of  General  Hovey’s  division  upon  its  arrival  ui)on  the  ground 
assigned  to  it.  The  enemy’s  artillery  was  only  150  yards  in  front,  and 
was  supported  by  a strong  line  of  infantry,  which,  it  was  reported,  had 
just  been  re-enforced,  and  was  the  occasion  of  the  shout  of  the  enemy 
distinctly  heard  about  this  time. 

To  terminate  a sanguinary  contest  which  had  continued  for  several 
hours,  General  Hovey  ordered  a charge,  which  was  most  gallantly  ex- 
ecuted, and  resulted  in  the  capture  of  400  prisoners,  two  stand  of  colors, 
two  12-pounder  howitzers,  three  caissons,  and  a considerable  quantity  ot 
ammunition.*  A ])ortion  of  General  Carr’s  division  joined  in  this  charge. 
About  this  time  I heard  that  Mojor-General  Grant  had  come  up  from 

* See  Carr  to  Rawlins,  July  22,  18C3,  appeuded  to  Can’s  report  of  the  battle  of  Port 
Gibson,  p.  623. 


Chap.  XXXVL]  GENERAL  REPORTS.  145 

Bruinsburg,  and  soon  after  had  the  pleasure  of  meeting  him  on  the 
field. 

Determined  to  press  my  advantages,  I ordered  Generals  Carr  and 
Hovey  to  push  the  enemy  with  all  vigor  and  celerity.  This  they  did, 
beating  him  back  over  a mile,  and  frustrating  all  his  endeavors  to  make 
an  intermediate  stand. 

For  particular  mention  of  the  regiments,  companies,  officers,  and  men 
who  distinguished  themselves  in  this  daring  charge,  I would  refer  to 
the  reports  of  these  generals. 

Keturning  to  bring  up  the  narrative  of  other  oj)erations.  General 
Smith’s  division  came  up  to  Schaiffer’s  about  7 a.  m.,  and  just  before 
General  Hovey’s  moved  to  the  support  of  General  Carr’s.  The  four 
divisions  of  my  corps  were  now  upon  the  field,  three  of  them  actually 
engaged,  and  the  fourth  eager  to  be.  The  last  immediately  moved  for- 
ward into  tbe  fields  in  front  of  Schaiffer’s  house,  and,  together  with  a 
portion  of  General  Osterhaus’  division,  held  the  center,  and  at  the  same 
time  formed  a reserve. 

The  second  position  taken  by  the  enemy  on  my  right  front  was 
stronger  than  the  first.  It  was  in  a creek  bottom,  covered  with  trees 
and  underbrush,  the  approach  to  which  was  over  ojjen  fields  and  ragged 
and  exposed  hill-slopes.  Having  advanced  until  they  had  gained  a bald 
ridge  overlooking  the  bottom,  Generals  Hovey’s  and  Carr’s  divisions 
again  encountered  the  enemy’s  fire.  A hot  engagement  ensued,  in  the 
course  of  which,  discovering  that  the  enemy  was  massing  a formidable 
force  on  my  right  front,  with  the  evident  design  to  force  l3ack  and  turn 
my  right  flank,  I ordered  General  Smith  to  send  forward  a brigade  to 
support  that  flank.  Burbridge’s  brigade  rapidly  moved  forward  for 
that  purpose ; meanwhile  General  Hovey  massed  his  artillery  on  the 
light,  and  opened  a partially  enfilading  and  destructive  fire  on  the  en- 
emy. The  eflect  of  these  combined  movements  was  to  force  the  enemy 
back  upon  his  center  with  considerable  loss. 

Here,  with  a large  concentration  of  forces,  he  renewed  the  atttick, 
directing  it  against  my  right  center.  General  Carr  met  and  retaliated 
it  both  with  infantry  and  artillery  with  great  vigor.  At  the  same  time 
Landram’s  brigade,  of  General  Smith’s  division,  re-enforced  by  a detach- 
ment from  General  Hovey’s  division,  forced  its  way  through  cane  and 
utiderbrush  and  joined  in  Carr’s  attack.  The  battle  was  now  trans- 
ferred from  the  enemy’s  left  to  his  center,  and  after  an  obstinate  strug- 
gle he  was  again  beaten  back  upon  the  high  ridge  on  the  opposite  side 
of  the  bottom,  and  within  a mile  of  Port  Gibson.  General  Stevenson’s 
brigade,  of  General  Logan’s  division,  came  up  in  time  to  assist  in  con- 
summating this  final  result. 

The  shades  of  night  soon  after  closed  upon  the  stricken  field,  which 
the  valor  of  our  men  had  won  and  held,  and  upon  which  they  found 
the  first  repose  since  they  had  left  D’Schron’s  Landing,  twenty-four 
hours  before. 

At  day-dawn  on  the  morning  of  the  2d,  Smith’s  division,  leading  the 
advance,  and  followed  by  the  rest  of  my  corps,  triumphantly  entered 
Ifort  Gibson,  through  which  place  and  across  the  South  Branch  of  Bayou 
Pierre  the  enemy  had  hastily  fled  the  night  before,  burning  the  bridge 
across  that  stream  in  his  rear. 

This,  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  on  Bayou  Pierre,  was  one  of  the  most 
admirably  and  successfully  fought  battles  in  whicli  it  has  been  my  lot 
to  participate  since  the  present  unhappy  war  commenced,  if  not  a de- 
cisive battle,  it  was  determinate  of  the  brilliant  series  of  successes  that 
followed.  It  continued  twelve  hours,  and  cost  us  803  men  killed  and 
10  R R— YOL  XXiV,  PT  I 


146  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  IGuap.  XXXVI. 

wounded,  of  wliicli  tlie  Ninth  Division  lost  37  killed  and  176  wounded; 
the  Tenth  Division,  2 killed  and  16  wounded ; the  Twelfth  Division,  42 
killed  and  266  wounded,  and  the  Fourteenth  Division,  42  killed  and  222 
wounded,  making  the  aggregate  above  named,  including  8 reported 
missing.* 

The  loss  of  the  enemy  was  2 stand  of  colors,  2 pieces  of  cannon,  3 
caissons,  a quantity  of  ammunition,  a number  of  small  arms  and  am- 
munition wagons,  and  580  prisoners.  His  loss  in  killed  and  wounded 
is  not  known,  but  must  have  been  considerable. 

Kemaining  at  Port  Gibson,  on  May  2 my  corps  assisted  in  construct- 
ing a bridge  across  the  South  Branch  of  Bayou  Pierre,  under  the  di- 
rection of  Lieutenant-Oolouel  Wilson,  engineer  and  aide-de  camp  on 
Mnjor-General  Grant’s  staff;  reconnoitered  the  country  east  and  north 
of  that  stream,  and  skirmished  with  a detachment  left  by  the  enemy 
on  the  north  side  of  it  to  watch  our  movements. 

On  the  night  of  the  2d,  the  fugitive  enemy  was  met  by  re-enforce- 
ments reported  to  be  on  their  way  from  Grand  Gulf  and  Vicksburg, 
and  communicating  their  fears  to  the  latter,  the  whole  fled  across  Big 
Black.  The  panic  also  extended  to  the  garrison  at  Grand  Gulf,  only 
7 miles  from  Port  Gibson,  who  spiked  their  guns,  and,  hastily  abandon- 
ing the  place,  also  fled  across  the  same  river.  Next  day  a naval  force 
took  possession  of  the  place. 

On  the  same  day  Brigadier-General  Lawler,  having  reported  to  me 
for  duty  under  your  order,  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Second 
Brigade,  of  General  Carr’s  division. 

MAKCH  FROM  PORT  GIBSON  TO  CHAMPION’S  HILL. 

On  the  3d,  agreeably -to  3^our  instructions,  my  corps,  save  Lawler’s 
brigade,  which  was  left  behind  to  garrison  Port  Gibson,  marched  on 
the  Kaymond  road  to  Willow  Springs;  on  the  6th  to  Eocky  Springs; 
on  the  8th  to  Little  Sand^N  and  on  the  9th  to  Big  Sandy. 

General  Osterhaus  led  the  advance  from  Little  to  Big  Sandy,  and  on 
arriving  at  the  latter  creek  immediatelj^  threw  a detachment  of  infantry, 
}>receded  by  the  Second  Illinois  Cavalry,  over  it  toward  Hall’s  Ferrj^,  on 
Big  Black.  Finding  a detachment  of  the  enemy  in  front  of  the  ferry, 
a companj^  of  cavalr3%  under  Lieutenant  Stickel,  dashed  forward  and 
dispersed  it  before  it  had  time  to  form,  killing  12  men  and  capturing 
30  prisoners. 

Resuming  its  march  on  the  11th,  my  corps  moved  to  Five-Mile  Creek, 
and  on  the  12th  to  Fourteen-Mile  Creek. 

During  these  thirteen  days  mj^  command  subsisted  on  six  da^^s’ 
rations  and  what  scanty  supply  the  country  in  the  immediate  vicinity 
of  the  route  afforded ; were  wholly  without  tents  and  regular  trains, 
and  almost  without  cooking  utensils;  yet  they  were  cheerful  and  promi)t 
in  the  discharge  of  duty. 

General  Hovey’s  division  led  the  advance  to  Fourteen-Mile  Creek, 
followed  by  General  Carr  and  General  Osterhaus.  General  Smith’s 
division  moved  b^^  the  way  of  Hall’s  Ferry,  on  Big  Black  River,  and, 
leaving  a detachment  there  to  guard  that  crossing,  passed  on  to  Mont- 
gomery’s bridge,  on  Fourteen-Mile  Creek,  3 miles  below  the  point  of 
General  Hovey’s  a])proach.  An  outpost  of  the  rebel  force  at  Edwards 
Station,  concealed  in  the  thick  woods  and  underbrush  lining  the  creek, 
was  first  encountered  by  General  Hovey’s  advance  guard,  consisting 

* But  yoe  revised  stateuieut,  i).  584. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


147 


of  a (letaclimeut  of  the  Second  Illinois  Cavalry,  under  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Bush,  and  soon  after  hy  his  artillery  and  infantry,  which  were 
boldly  advanced  across  the  open  lields  to  the  creek.  Overcoming  the 
resistance  of  the  enemy,  and  driving  him  from  his  cover.  General  Hovey 
pushed  forward  a portion  of  his  command  beyond  the  creek  and  secured 
the  crossing. 

My  loss  in  this  skirmish  was  4 men  wounded.  The  loss  of  the  enemy 
is  unknown,  but  must  have  been  greater.  On  the  same  day.  General 
Sherman  seized  the  crossing  of  Turkey  Creek,  a few  miles  to  my  right, 
and  General  McPherson,  after  a sharp  skirmish,  seized  Kaymond,  still 
farther  to  the  right.  The  flight  of  the  enemy  from  Eaymond  left  the 
way  open  to  Jackson,  the  capital  of  Mississippi,  and  Major-General 
Grant  determined  to  march  his  army  in  that  direction.  This  involved 
a change  in  the  direction  of  its  movements.  Up  to  this  time  Edwards 
Station,  to  which  I had  been  leading  the  advance,  was  the  objective 
point.  There  it  was  known  the  enemy  had  concentrated  a considerable 
force  and  intended  to  accept  battle  when  offered.  Jackson  uoav  be- 
came the  objective  point. 

Hence,  on  the  night  of  the  12th,  I was  ordered  by  Major-General 
Grant  to  move  the  following  morning,  on  the  north  side  of  Fourteen- 
Mile  Creek,  to  Kaymond.  At  this  time  my  corps  rested  within  4 miles 
of  Edwards  Station,  with  an  outpost  oul^^  3 and  a i^icket  only  2 miles 
from  that  i)lace.  The  outpost  of  the  enemy  had  been  driven  back  from 
the  creek,  and  he  was  fully  advised  of  the  fact  and  of  our  proximity. 
The  movement  ordered  was  a delicate  and  hazardous  one,  but  was  cal- 
culated to  deceive  the  enemy  as  to  our  design. 

To  insure  it  against  casualties,  as  far  as  possible,  1 ordered  General 
Hovey  to  advance  his  division  early  on  the  morning  of  the  13th  a mile 
on  the  main  road  to  Edwards  Station,  and  to  form  it  in  line  of  battle 
across  the  road.  The  movement  was  happily  executed,  and  had  the 
effect  to  throw  the  enemy  upon  his  defense  against  apprehended  attack. 
Meanwhile  Osterhaus’  and  CarPs  divisions  crossed  the  creek,  and,  filing 
by  the  flank  to  the  rear,  and  under  cover  of  Hovey^s  line,  crossed  Ba- 
ker’s Creek,  a mile  eastward,  on  the  road  to  Eaymond,  and  halted. 
Hovey’s  division  followed  in  successive  detachments,  under  cover  of 
woods.  The  movement  was  discovered  by  the  enemy  too  late  to  allow 
him  to  x)reveut  or  embarrass  it.  His  attack  ux)on  the  rear  guard  was 
hesitating  and  feeble,  and  was  x^romptly  and  completely  repulsed.  All 
were  now  safe  beyond  Baker’s  Creek. 

On  the  same  morning  General  Smith’s  division,  after  destroying 
Montgomery’s  bridge,  hastened  back  on  the  south  side  of  the  creek,  in 
pursuance  of  Major-General  Grant’s  order,  to  Old  Auburn,  to  guard 
and  bring  forward  to  Eaymond  the  army’s  trains.  That  night  the  same 
division  rested  at  Old  Auburn,  while  the  remaining  three  divisions 
rested  on  the  Eaymond  road,  between  Turkey  Creek  and  Eaymond. 

The  morning  of  the  14th  found  General  Osterhaus’  division  in  Eay- 
mond, which,  in  pursuance  of  Major-General  Grant’s  direction,!  ordered 
to  garrison  that  place.  On  the  same  day,  in  ]>ursuance  of  like  direction. 
Generals  Carr’s  and  Hovey’s  divisions  marched  through  Eaymond  in  a 
heavy  rain-storm  ; the  former  to  Forest  Hill  Church,  within  6 miles  of 
General  Sherman’s  position  at  Jackson,  the  latter  to  a creek  within  4 
miles  of  General  McPherson’s  position  at  Clinton.  This  was  the  most 
fatiguing  and  exhausting  day’s  march  that  had  been  made. 

Tliat  night  1 received  a dispatch  from  Major-General  Grant,  inform- 
ing me  that  the  enemy  had  retreated  from  Jackson,  and  was  i)robably 
attemx)ting  to  reach  Vicksburg  in  advance  of  us,  and  ordering  me  im- 


148 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


mediately  to  move  my  coi’ps  8 miles  nortli,  to  Boltou  Station,  to  frus- 
trate tbe  design.  Corresponding  orders  were  immediately  issued  by 
me  to  commamlers  of  divisions,  and,  by  0.30  o’clock  on  the  Ibtb,  Gen- 
eral Osterbaus’  division  bad  seized  Bolton  Station,  capturing  several 
prisoners  and  driving  tbe  balance  of  tbe  enemy’s  picket  away. 

General  Hovey’s  division  soon  after  came  up  from  Clinton,  and  both 
divisions  were  disposed  to  meet  any  attack  that  might  come  from  tbe 
enemy  known  to  be  in  front.  During  the  day  an  active  reconnaissance 
was  pushed  by  Colonel  Mudd,  chief  of  cavalry  of  my  corps,  up  to  the 
enemy’s  picket  lines,  and  at  some  points  bej’ond.  General  [Albert  L.] 
Lee,  who  bad  reported  for  duty  that  morning,  and  who  kindly  volunteered 
bis  service  as  aide-de-camp  until  be  could  be  assigned  to  a command,  also 
displayed  great  enterprise  and  daring.  Indeed,  every  effort  was  made 
by  myself  personally  and  by  others  to  acquire  familiar  knowledge  of 
tbe  ground  and  roads  for  7 miles  west  to  Edwards  Station.  It  was 
found  three  roads  led  from  tbe  Raymond  and  Bolton  road  to  Edwards 
Station,  one  diverging  IJ  miles  north  of  Raymond,  a second  3^  miles, 
and  a third  7J  miles  from  Raymond,  and  I mile  south  of^Bolton  and  the 
railroad.  These  roads  may  be  designated  as  the  northern,  middle,  and 
southern  roads  to  Edwards  Station,  and  united  within  some  2 miles  of 
that  point. 

Night  found  Generals  Hovey’s,  Osterhaus’,  and  Carr’s  divisions,  in  the 
order  stated,  at  the  entrance  to  these  several  roads,  jmepared  to  receive 
a threatened  attack,  or  to  move  forward  upon  converging  lines  agaiust 
Edwards  Station.  General  Smith’s  division  came  up  during  the  night 
and  bivouacked  north  of  Raymond,  near  General  Carr’s.  General  Blair’s 
division,  of  General  Sherman’s  corps,  bivouacked  at  Raymond.  This 
disposition  of  my  corps  but  anticipated  events. 

During  the  evening  of  the  15th,  I received  a dispatch  from  Major- 
General  Grant,  advising  me  that  the  entire  force  of  the  enemy  at  Vicks- 
burg had  probably  crossed  the  Big  Black  and  taken  position  at  Ed- 
wards Station,  and  ordering  me  to  feel  the  enemy  without  bringing  on 
a general  engagement,  and  to  notify  General  Blair  what  to  do. 

BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL. 

It  only  remained  to  execute  what  has  been  already  intimated ; hence, 
on  the  night  of  the  15th,  orders  were  issued  to  commanders  of  divisions 
to  move  forward  on  the  following  morning. 

General  Smith  moved  forward  on  the  southern  road  at  5 a.  m.  on  the 
IGth,  followed  and  supported  by  General  Blair;  General  Osterhaus  on 
the  middle  road  at  G o’clock,  followed  and  supported  by  General  Carr; 
and  General  llovey  at  the  same  hour  on  the  northern  road.  The  start- 
ing of  different  divisions  at  different  hours  was  in  consequence  of  the 
difference  in  the  distances  they  had  to  march,  and  was  designed  to 
secure  a parallel  advance  of  the  different  columns.  Each  division  was 
instructed  to  keep  up  communication  with  that  or  those  next  to  it. 

Believing  that  General  Hovey’s  division  also  needed  support,  1 sent 
a dispatch  on  the  15th  to  Major-General  Grant,  requesting  that  General 
IMcPherson’s  corps,  then  arrived  in  rear  of  General  llovey,  should  also 
move  forward,  and  early  on  tbe  morning  of  the  IGth  I rode  over  to  Gen- 
eral JMcPherson’s  headquarters  and  suggested  the  same  thing,  urging, 
among  other  things,  that  if  his  corps  should  not  be  needed  as  a su}>port, 
it  might,  in  the  event  I should  beat  the  enemy,  fall  upon  his  flank  and 
rear  and  cut  him  off.  Assurances  altogether  satisfactory  were  given  by 
the  general,  and  I felt  confldent  of  our  superiority  on  the  right.  I went 
forward  with  the  center,  formed  by  Osterhaus  and  Carr. 


Chap.  XXXVl.l 


GE^^EEAL  EEPORTS. 


149 


At  7.30  a.  m.,  when  my  whole  line  had  approached  within  some  5 
miles  of  Edwards  Station,  General  Smith’s  division,  on  my  left,  en- 
countered the  enemy’s  skirmishers,  who  retired.  A half  mile  farther 
on  they  encountered  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s  artillery,  which  was  briskly 
replied  to  until  it  ceased. 

At  the  moment  these  demonstrations  commenced,  there  was  strong 
reason  to  believe  (corroborated  by  subsequent  information)  that  the 
enemy  was  moving  in  large  force  on  the  Eaymond  road,  with  the  hope 
of  turning  my  left  flank  and  gaining  my  rear;  but  the  sudden  appear- 
ance of  my  forces  in  that  direction  foiled  the  design  and  threw  his  right 
back  in  some  confusion  toward  his  center  and  left. 

Hearing  the  report  of  artillery  on  the  left,  General  Osterhaus  pushed 
forward  through  a broad  field  to  a thick  wood,  which  covered  a seem- 
ing chaos  of  abrupt  hills  and  yawning  ravines.  From  the  skirt  of  this 
wood  he  drove  a line  of  skirmishers,  and,  continuing  his  advance  until 
he  discovered  the  enemy  in  strong  force,  commenced  feeling  him. 

Early  notifying  Mfljor-Generals  Grant  and  McPherson  of  what  had 
transpired  on  the  left,  I requested  the  latter  to  co-operate  with  my 
forces  on  the  right,  and  directed  General  Hovey  to  advance  iiromptly 
but  carefully. 

At  9.45  a.  m.  I received  a dispatch  from  General  Hovey,  informing 
me  that  he  had  found  the  enemy  strongly  posted  in  front;  that  Gen- 
eral McPherson’s  corps  was  behind  him ; that  his  right  flank  would 
])robably  encounter  severe  resistance,  and  inquiring  whether  he  should 
bring  on  the  impending  battle. 

My  whole  command  was  now  about  4 miles  from  Edwards  Station, 
and  immediately  informing  Major-General  Grant,  whom  I understood  to 
be  on  the  field,  of  the  position  of  afiairs,  I inquired  whether  General 
McPherson  could  not  move  forward  to  the  support  of  General  Hovey, 
and  whether  I should  bring  on  a general  engagement.  A dispatch 
from  the  general,  dated  12.35  p.  m.,  came,  directing  me  to  throw  for- 
ward skirmishers  as  soon  as  my  forces  were  in  hand ; to  feel  and  attack 
the  enemy  in  force,  if  opportunity  occurred,  and  informing  me  that 
lie  was  with  Hovey  and  McPherson,  and  would  see  that  they  fully  co- 
operated. 

Meanwhile  a line  of  skirmishers  had  connected  Generals  Osterhaus’ 
and  Smith’s  divisions,  closing  up  the  narrow  space  between  them.  Gen- 
eral Blair  had  moved  a brigade  farther  to  the  right,  to  support  the 
skirmishers  and  the  proximate  flanks  of  Osterhaus  and  Smith.  General 
Bansom’s  brigade,  of  the  Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  had  been  ordered 
to  hasten  up  from  the  neighborhood  of  Eaymond,  and  skirmishing  along 
my  left  and  center,  particularly  the  latter,  was  quite  brisk. 

These  measures  in  part  had  been  taken  in  compliance  with  Major- 
General  Grant’s  orders,  based  on  information,  of  which  he  had  advised 
me,  that  the  enemy  was  in  greatest  strength  in  front  of  my  center  and 
left,  aiid  might  turn  my  left  flank  and  gain  my  rear.  This,  doubtless, 
as  already  explained,  had  been  the  tendency  of  the  enemy  early  in  the 
morning,  but  had  been  counteracted  by  General  Smith’s  operations. 
Later  information  was  brought  by  an  aide-de-cam])  of  General  Smith, 
and  communicated  by  me  to  Major-General  Grant,  of  the  absence  at  that 
time  of  the  danger  he  apprehended. 

Instantly  upon  the  receipt  of  Major-General  Grant’s  order  to  attack, 
1 hastened  to  do  so,  ordering  Generals  Smith  and  Osterhaus  to  ^Littack 
the  enemy  vigorously  and  press  for  victory,”  General  Blair  to  su])port 
the  former  and  General  Carr  the  latter,  holding  Lawler’s  brigade  in 
reserve. 


150 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[V'HAP.  XXXVI. 


At  10  a.  m.  General  Ilovey  resumed  Lis  advance,  and,  approacLin^ 
in  jdain  view  of  the  enemy,  disposed  his  forces  for  battle  along  a shirt 
of  wood  and  across  the  road  of  his  approach.  General  McGinnis’  bri- 
gade was  formed  on  the  right,  and  Colonel  Slack’s  on  the  left.  General 
Logan’s  division,  of  General  McPherson’s  corps,  was  between  the  rail- 
road and  my  right,  and  about  half  a mile  from  the  latter. 

A mile  in  front  stood  a hill  some  00  or  70  feet  high,  covered  with  a 
thick  wood.  In  this  wood  the  enemy  were  drawn  up  in  strong  force, 
doubtless  augmented  by  his  tendency  to  his  right,  above  noticed.  This 
hill  is  indiffercivtly  called  Midway  or  Champion’s  Hill,  from  the  fact  of 
its  being  half  way  between  Jackson  and  Vicksburg,  and  the  reputed 
])roperty  of  a citizen  by  the  name  of  Champion.  The  space  between  the 
hill  and  my  right  was  composed  of  undulating  fields,  exposed  to  the 
enemy’s  fire,  while  the  ground  to  its  left  and  front  was  scarred  by  deep 
ravines  and  choked  with  underbrush,  thus  making  a farther  advance 
extremely  difficult.  Undaunted,  the  brave  men  of  the  Twelfth  Division 
pressed  on  under  a galling  fire.  By  11  a.  m.  the  engagement  became 
general  all  along  the  hostile  lines,  and  continued  to  rage  with  increas- 
ing fury  until  after  12  m.  Meantime  the  enemy  had  been  driven  back 
with  great  slaughter,  quite  GOO  yards,  leaving  in  our  hands  300  prison- 
ers and  eleven  pieces  of  cannon. 

Eallying  in  his  desperation,  and  bringing  forward  fresh  troops,  he 
])oured  down  the  road,  and  with  superior  numbers  renewed  the  conflict. 
NTot  daring  to  cross  the  open  fields  in  the  direction  of  General  McPher- 
son, who  had  handled  him  roughly  on  the  extreme  right,  his  main  force 
was  directed  against  General  Hovey.  A crisis  had  come.  Struggling 
heroically  against  the  adverse  tide,  that  officer  called  for  the  support  of 
a division  of  General  McPherson’s  corps,  hard  by,  which  had  not  yet 
been  engaged,  but  did  not  get  it  until  his  line  was  being  borne  back. 
The  support  finally  came,  and  was  also  borne  back.  Slowly  and  stub- 
bornly our  men  fell  back,  contesting  every  inch  of  ground  lost  with 
death,  until  they  had  neared  the  brow  of  the  hill.  Here,  under  i^artial 
cover,  they  rallied  and  checked  the  advance  of  the  enemy,  but  a bold 
and  decisive  blow  was  necessary  to  retrieve  the  day  in  this  part  of  the 
field.  This  was  happily  struck  by  General  Hovey.  Massing  his  artil- 
lery, strengthened  by  Dillon’s  Wisconsin  battery,  upon  elevated  ground 
beyond  a mound  to  his  right,  he  opened  an  enfilading  fire  upon  the 
enemy,  which,  challenging  the  cheers  of  our  men,  went  crashing  through 
the  woods  with  deadly  effect.  The  enemy  gave  way  and  the  fortune  of 
the  <lay  in  this  part  of  the  field  was  retrieved.  Generals  Hovey’s  and 
Crocker’s  divisions  pushed  forward  to  the  crest  of  the  hill,  while  Gen- 
eral Logan’s  division,  falling  upon  the  flank  of  the  broken  foe,  captured 
many  prisoners.  Five  of  the  enemy’s  guns  that  had  been  captured  by 
General  Hovey  and  had  not  been  brought  off*  again  fell  into  our  hands. 
The  carnage  strewing  the  field  literally  stamped  Midway  as  the  ‘Hlill 
of  Death.”  General  Hovey  had  lost  nearly  one-third  of  his  men,  killed 
and  wounded.  It  was  now  about  2.30  p.  m. 

As  already  mentioned.  General  Osterhaus’  division  early  advanced  to 
feel  the  enemy.  General  Garrard’s  brigade  on  the  right  and  Colonel 
Lindsey’s  on  the  left.  The  shari>  skirmish  that  followed  upon  the  re- 
ceipt of  my  order  to  attack  was  pressed  until  the  centers  of  the  oppos- 
ing lines  became  hotly  engaged.  The  battle  was  raging  all  along  my 
center  and  right.  In  front  of  my  center,  as  well  as  my  right,  the  enemy 
api)eared  in  great  numbers.  Garrard’s  brigade  Vas  liard  pressed,  and 
General  Osterhaus  requested  that  it  should  be  supported.  Support  was 
aff’orded  by  Benton’s  brigade,  of  Can’s  division,  which  promptly  moved 


CnAf.  XXXVL] 


GENERAL  REEORTS. 


151 


forward,  in  obedience  to  my  order,  and  joined  with  tlie  former  in  the 
conflict.  All  of  Lawler’s  brigade,  of  the  same  division,  except  a reserve 
of  one  regiment,  also  advanced  to  support  Lindsey,  who  had  pushed  a 
charge  near  the  mouth  of  a battery.  Lawler’s  brigade  here  cast  the 
trembling  balance  in  our  favor.  Himself  narrowly  escaping  the  elfect 
of  a shell,  his  men  joined  Lindsey’s,  and  both  dashed  forward,  shooting 
down  the  enemy’s  battery  horses,  driving  away  his  gunners,  and  cap- 
turing two  pieces  of  cannon.  This  success  on  the  left  center,  forcing  a 
portion  of  the  enemy  to  the  right,  caused  the  resistance  to  my  right  cen- 
ter to  be  increased  and  continued  until  the  flight  of  the  enemy  on  my 
extreme  right  had  communicated  its  effect  to  his  center.  The  enemy, 
thus  beaten  at  all  points,  fled  in  confusion,  the  main  body  along  the 
road  leading  to  Vicksburg,  a fragment  to  the  left  of  that  road.  Gen- 
eral Carr’s  division,  taking  the  advance,  hotly  pursued  the  former,  and 
Lindsey’s  and  Burbridge’s  brigades  the  latter,  until  night  closed  in,  each 
taking  many  prisoners.  The  rebel  General  Tilghman  was  killed  by  a 
shot  from  one  of  General  Burbridge’s  batteries. 

At  8 p.  m.  General  Carr  arrived  at  Edwards,  where  the  flames  were 
consuming  a train  of  cars  and  a quantity  of  stores  which  the  enemy  had 
fired.  Both,  to  a considerable  extent,  were  saved  by  the  activity  and 
daring  of  his  men.  During  the  same  night  General  Carr’s  division  was 
joined  by  General  Osterhaus’.  Generals  Blair’s  and  Smith’s  divisions 
rested  some  3 miles  southeast  of  Edwards  Station,  and  General  Hovey’s 
division  at  Midway,  under  orders  to  care  for  the  wounded  and  bury  the 
dead. 

The  loss  sustained  by  my  corps  attests  the  severity  of  this  memo- 
rable battle,  which  is  as  follows  : 


Command. 


General  Tlovey’s  division 

General  Osterhaus’  division* 

General  Smith’s  division 

General  Carr’s  division 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

211 

872 

119 

14 

76 

20 

24 

4 

1 

2 

Aggregate,  1,334. 

Of  General  Blair’s  loss  I am  not  advised,  not  having  received  a report 
from  him. 

Besides  the  captures  already  mentioned,  a large  number  of  small-arms 
were  taken.  The  field  was  strewn  with  the  dead  and  wounded  of  the 
enemy,  and  his  loss  must  have  been  very  great. 

BATTLE  OF  BLACK  BIVEB  BRIDGE. 


At  3.30  on  the  morning  of  the  ITtli,  my  corps  again  resumed  the  ad- 
vance, General  Carr’s  division  leading,  and  General  Osterhaus’  closely 
following,  on  tlie  road  to  Black  lliver  Bridge,  G miles  distant.  On  the 
way.  General  Carr’s  division  captured  a number  of  prisoners,  which  w'ere 
sent  to  the  rear,  and,  upon  nearing  a skirt  of  wood  masking  the  enemy’s 
position,  encountered  and  drove  liack  his  picket. 

Passing  to  the  farther  edge  of  the  wood,  the  enemy  was  discovered 
in  full  force,  strongly  iiitrenclied  in  elaborate  defenses,  consisting  of  a 


But  SCO  revised  statement,  p.  582. 


152 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC 


[Oiup.  XXNVt 


series  of  works  for  artillery  and  two  lines  of  breastworks — the  inner 
one  about  balf  a mile  in  length,  tlie  outer  about  1 mile — both  resting; 
their  extremities  upon  Big  Black,  and  forming  the  segmeht  of  a rude 
circle.  Outside  of  the  latter  was  a deep,  miry  slough,  the  approach  to 
which,  from  the  line  of  my  advance,  was  across  a field  connecting  with 
others  that  widened  on  the  right  and  left. 

General  Carr’s  division,  having  entered  the  wood  mentioned,  was  im- 
mediately formed  in  obedience  to  my  order  *,  General  Lawler’s  brigade 
on  the  right,  resting  its  flanks  near  Big  Black,  and  General  Benton’s 
brigade  on  its  left  and  to  the  right  of  the  railroad.  A section  of  Fos- 
ter’s battery  and  two  regiments  of  General  Osterhaus’  division  were 
ordered  to  the  right  and  rear  of  Lawler,  to  support  him  and  counteract 
any  approach  through  the  forest  to  the  opposite  bank  of  the  river.  Os- 
terhaus’ division  was  ordered  to  form  to  the  left  of  the  road ; Lindsey’s 
brigade  in  front,  and  the  remaining  two  regiments  of  Garrard’s  brigade 
obliquely  on  the  left  and  rear  of  Lindsey’s,  to  counteract  any  movement 
in  that  direction. 

Two  sections  of  Foster’s  battery  were  brought  forward,  and  while 
being  posted  in  the  center  of  the  two  divisions,  under  the  personal 
direction  of  General  Osterhaus,  was  opened  on  by  the  enemy’s  artillery. 
General  Osterhaus  and  Captain  Foster  were  both  wounded,  1 man  killed, 
and  a limber-box  exploded  by  a shell.  The  command  of  the  division, 
by  my  order,  was  immediately  devolved  upon  General  Lee. 

A brisk  action  had  continued  for  a half  hour  or  more,  w hen  General 
Smith’s  division  came  up  and  was  ordered  by  me  to  extend  and  sup- 
port my  left,  in  which  direction  it  was  reported  that  the  enemy  w^ere 
moving  in  large  numbers.  After  this  disposition  had  been  made,  my 
right  center  and  left  engaged  the  enemy  with  increased  efi'ect,  and 
General  Lawler,  aided  by  this  diversion,  and  availing  himself  of  infor- 
mation obtained  by  Colonel  [J.  J.]  Mudd,  chief  of  cavalry,  of  the  practi- 
cability of  making  a near  approach,  under  partial  cover,  on  the  extreme 
right,  dashed  forward  under  a heavy  fire  across  a narrow  field,  and  with 
fixed  bayonets  carried  the  enemy’s  works,  capturing  many  prisoners 
and  routing  him. 

Tlie  feat  was  eminently  brilliant,  and  reflects  the  highest  credit  upon 
the  gallant  officers  and  men  of  Generals  Lawler’s  and  Osterhaus’  com- 
mands wLo  achieved  it.  It  was  determinate  of  the  success  of  the  day. 
Fleeing  toward  a steamer  forming  a bridge  across  the  Big  Black  near 
the  railroad  bridge,  most  of  the  enemy  escaped  to  the  commanding  blufl' 
on  the  opposite  side,  while  others,  hotly  pressed  by  Benton’s  and  the 
right  of  Lindsey’s  brigade,  were  cut  off  from  that  escape,  and  driven 
to  the  left  and  down  the  river  upon  the  left  of  Lindsey’s  and  the  front 
of  Burbridge’s  brigades,  and  fell  into  their  hands. 

A victory  could  hardly  have  been  more  complete.  The  enemy  burned 
the  bridge  over  wdiich  he  had  passed,  two  other  steamers,  and  the  rail- 
road bridge.  About  1,500  prisoners  and stand  of  arms  fell  into 

our  hands, ‘eighteen  ])ieces  of  cannon,  and  a considerable  quantity  of 
ammunition  and  cotton.  A number  of  the  enemy  were  found  dead  upon 
the  field,  but  nothing  more  is  certainly'  knowui  of  his  loss  in  killed  and 
wmunded. 

The  loss  on  our  part  was  limited  to  my  own  forces,  which  alone  were 
engaged.  The  Ninth  Division  lost  10  killed,  10  w ounded,  and  1 missing; 
the  Fourteenth  Division  19  killed,  223  wounded,  and  1 missing;  making 
in  all  273.*  Among  the  killed  is  Colonel  Kinsman,  Twenty-third  Iow  a, 


Jiut  SCO  revised  statement,  Part  It,  p.  123. 


OiiAP.  XXXVI.]  GENERAL  REPORTS.  153 

who  fell,  mortally  wounded,  wdiilo  leading  liis  regiment  in  the  charge 
upon  the  enemy’s  works. 

I)ii veil  across  the  river,  the  enemy  made  a feeble  stand  to  cover  his 
trains  and  retreat  upon  Vicksburg,  but  several  hours  before  sunset  was 
dislodged  by  my  forces,  leaving  tents,  a considerable  quantity  of  cloth- 
ing and  other  stores,  together  with  a large  number  of  small-arms,  a 
smoking  ruin. 

During  the  following  night  and  morning  a bridge  was  thrown  across 
the  Big  Black  by  the  pioneer  corps  under  Captain  Patterson. 

On  the  morning  of  the  18th,  I crossed  with  Generals  Osterhaus’,  Smith’s 
and  Carr’s  divisions,  of  my  corps,  and  took  up  the  line  of  march  for  Vicks- 
burg, 12  miles  distant.  General  Smith’s  division  led,  followed  by  Gen- 
erals Osterhaus  and  Carr,  on  the  Jackson  and  Vicksburg  road  to  Saint 
Albans,  and  thence  by  a cross-road  and  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road  at 
Four-Mile  Creek,  arriving  there  about  sunset,  and  resting  for  the  night 
4 miles  from  Vicksburg.  Several  prisoners  and  wagons  were  captured 
during  the  march.  General  Osterhaus  resumed  command  of  the  Ninth 
Division  on  the  west  bank  of  Big  Black,  and  General  Bee  was  assigned 
to  the  command  of  the  First  Brigade  of  that  division  during  the  absence 
of  General  Garrard,  who  had  been  ordered  to  report  to  General  Prentiss, 
at  Helena.  ’ 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  19th,  accompanied  by  my  staff,  I made 
a personal  reconnaissance  to  the  brow  of  a long  hill  overlooking  a creek 
2 miles  from  Vicksburg.  This  hill  runs  north  and  south,  and  conforms 
very  much  to  the  line  of  Vicksburg’s  defenses,  in  plain  view  on  a simi- 
lar range  a mile  west.  The  creek  is  called  Two-Mile  Creek  because  it 
IS  only  2 miles  from  Vicksburg.  Colonel  Mudd  came  very  near  being 
sliot  by  one  of  the  enemy’s  pickets  during  the  reconnaissance. 

The  intervening  space  between  these  two  ranges  consisted  of  a series 
ot  deep  hollows  separated  by  narrow  ridges,  both  rising  near  the  enemy’s 
\y)rks,  and  running  at  angles  from  them  until  they  are  terminated  by 
the  narrow  valley  of  Two-Mile  Creek.  The  heads  of  the  hollows  were 
entirely  open.  Nearer  their  termination  they  were  covered  with  a thicket 
oi  trees  and  underbrush.  At  this  time  the  picket  and  skirmishers  of 
the  enemj^  were  in  this  thicket,  W'atchful  to  discover  and  obstruct  our 
advance. 

The  enemy’s  defenses  consist  of  an  extended  line  of  rifle-pits  occupied 
by  intantry,  covered  by  a multitude  of  strong  works  occupied  by  artil- 
lery, so  arranged  as  to  command  not  only  the  approaches  by  the  ravines 
and  ridges  in  front,  but  each  other. 

THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG. 

Since  4 a.  m.  my  command  had  been  under  orders  to  be  in  readiness 
to  move  forward  and  commence  the  investment  of  the  city.  By  G.oO 
a.  m.  It  came  up,  and  in  obedience  to  my  orders  formed  behind  the  crest 
ot  the  hill  upon  which  I had  been  waiting.  General  Smith’s  division  on 
the  right  ot  the  Vicksburg  road;  General  Osterhaus’ on  the  left,  and 
Deneral  Carr’s  along  the  base  of  the  hill,  as  a reserve.  Skirmishers 
were  thrown  forward,  who  engaged  the  enemy’s  skirmishers,  and  artil- 
lery was  opened  from  the  most  commanding  positions  upon  the  enemy’s 
works,  and  a body  of  infantry  observed  between  them  and  Burbridgv’s 
irigade,  on  my  right.  In  a short  time  the  enemy’s  skirmishers  Icll 
oack,  and  my  line  advanced  across  Two-Mile  Creek  to  the  hills  on  the 
opposite  side. 

About  this  time  (10.30  a.  m.)  an  order  came  from  Major-General 


154 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiTAp,  xxxvx. 


. Grant  directing  corps  commanders  to  gain  as  close  a position  as  possi- 
ble to  the  enemy’s  works  until  2 p.  m. ; at  that  hour  lire  tliree  volleys 
from  all  their  pieces  in  position,  when  a general  charge  of  all  tlie  corps 
along  the  line  should  be  made. 

By  2 o’clock,  with  great  difficulty,  my  line  had  gained  a half  mile, 
and  was  within  800  yards  of  the  enemy’s  works.  The  ground  in  front 
was  unexplored  and  commanded  by  the  enemy’s  works,  yet,  at  the  ap- 
pointed signal,  my  infantry  went  forward  under  such  cover  as  my  artil- 
lery could  afford,  and  bravelj^  continued  a wasting  conflict  until  they 
had  approached  within  500  yards  of  the  enemy’s  lines,  and  exhaustion 
and  the  lateness  of  the  evening  interrupted  it.  An  advance  had  been 
made  by  all  the  corps,  and  the  ground  gained  firmly  held,  but  the 
enemy’s  works  were  not  carried. 

A number  of  brave  officers  and  men  fell,  killed  or  wounded,  and 
among  the  latter  General  Lee,  who  had  signalized  his  brief  command 
with  equal  activity,  intelligence,  and  gallantry.  The  command  of  his 
brigade  devolved  on  Colonel  Keigwin,  an  able  and  worthy  successor. 

On  the  20th,  General  Hovey  brought  up  Colonel  Slack’s  brigade,  of 
l]is  division,  from  Champion’s  Hill,  and  supported  General  Osterhaus  on 
the  left.  General  Carr  supported  General  Smith  on  the  right.  Lively 
skirmishing  continued  during  the  20th  and  21st,  and  farther  approach 
to  the  enemy’s  works  was  made  where  it  could  be  done. 

On  the  evening  of  the  21st,  I received  an  order  of  the  same  date  from 
Major-General  Grant,  in  material  part  as  follows  : 

A simultaneous  attack  will  be  made  to-morrow  at  10  a.  m.  by  all  tbe  army  corps  of 
this  army.  During  to-day  army  corps  commanders  will  have  examined  all  practicable 
routes  over  which  troops  can  possibly  pass.  They  will  get  into  position  all  the  artil- 
lery x)08sible,  and  gain  all  the  ground  they  can  with  their  infantry  and  skirmishers. 
At  an  early  hour  in  the  morning  a vigorous  attack  will  be  commenced  by  artillery 
and  skirmishers.  The  infantry,  with  the  exception  of  reserves  and  skirmishers,  will 
be  jdaced  in  columns  of  platoons,  or  by  a flank,  if  the  ground  over  which  they  have  to 
]>ass  will  not  admit  of  a greater  front,  ready  to  move  forward  at  the  hour  designated. 
Promptly  at  the  hour  designated  all  will  start  at  quick  time,  with  bayonets  fixed,  and 
march  immediately  upon  the  enemy,  without  tiring  a gun  until  the  outer  works  are 
carried.  Skirmishers  will  advance  as  soon  as  possible  after  heads  of  columns  pass 
them,  and  scale  the  walls  of  such  works  as  may  confront  them. 

General  Carr’s  division  relieved  General  Smith’s  on  the  same  day,  and 
now  formed  the  advance  on  the  right,  supported  by  the  latter.  On  the 
left,  dispositions  continued  as  before.  Communicating  Major-General 
Grant’s  order  to  division  commanders  during  the  same  evening,  as  far 
as  practicable,  everything  was  done  calculated  to  insure  success. 

On  the  morning  of  the  22d,  I opened  with  artillery,  including  three 
30,  six  20,  and  six  10  pounder  Parrotts  (in  all,  thirty-nine  guns),  and 
continued  a well-directed  and  effective  fire  until  10  o’clock,  breaching 
the  enemy’s  works  at  several  points,  temporarily  silencing  his  guns  and 
ex]fioding  four  rebel  caissons. 

Live  minutes  before  10  o’clock  the  bugle  sounded  the  charge,  and  at 
10  o’clocic  my  columns  of  attack  moved  forward,  and  within  fifteen  min- 
utes Lawler’s  and  Landram’s  brigades  had  carried  the  ditch,  slope,  and 
bastion  of  a fort.  Some  of  their  men,  emulous  of  each  other,  rushed 
into  the  fort,  finding  a piece  of  artillery,  and  in  time  to  see  the  men  who 
had  been  serving  and  supporting  it  escape  behind  another  defense 
commanding  the  interior  of  the  former.  All  of  this  daring  and  heroic 
l)arty  were  shot  down,  except  one,  who,  recovering  from  the  stunning 
effect  of  a shot,  seized  his  musket  and  captured  and  brought  away  13  . 
rebels,  who  had  returned  and  fired  their  guns.  The  captor  was  Sergt. 
Joseph  E.  Griffith,  of  the  Twenty-second  Iowa,  who,  I am  happy  to  say. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


OENERAL  REPORTS. 


155 


lias  since  been  promoted.  The  colors  of  the  One  hundred  and  thirtieth 
Illinois  were  jilanted  upon  the  counter-scarp  of  the  ditch,  while  those  of 
the  Forty-eighth  Ohio  and  Seventy-seventh  Illinois  waved  over  the 
bastion. 

Within  fifteen  minutes  after  Lawless  and  Landram’s  success,  Ben- 
ton’s and  Burbridge’s  brigades,  fired'  by  the  example,  rushed  forward 
and  carried  the  ditch  and  slope  of  another  heavy  earthwork,  and  planted 
tlieir  colors  upon  the  latter.  Crowning  this  brilliant  feat  with  a parallel 
to  Sergeant  Griffith’s  daring.  Captain  White,  of  the  Chicago  Mercantile 
Battery,  carried  forward  one  of  his  pieces  by  hand  quite  to  the  ditch, 
and,  double-shotting  it,  fired  into  an  embrasure,  disabling  a gun  in  it 
ready  to  be  discharged,  and  scattering  death  among  the  rebel  cannon- 
eers. A curtain  connected  the  works  forming  these  two  points  of  at- 
tack. 

My  men  never  fought  more  gallantly — nay,  desperately.  For  more 
than  eight  long  hours  they  maintained  their  ground  with  death-like 
tenacity.  Neither  a blazing  sun  nor  the  deadly  fire  of  the  enemy  shook 
them.  Their  constancy  and  valor  filled  me  with  admiration.  The  spec- 
tacle is  one  never  to  be  forgotten. 

A portion  of  the  First  U.  S.  Infantry,  under  Major  Maloney,  serving 
as  heavy  artillery,  added  to  their  previous  renown.  Neither  officers 
nor  men  could  have  been  more  zealous  and  active.  Being  in  the  center, 
they  covered  in  considerable  part  the  advance  of  Benton’s  and  Lawler’s 
brigades  and  materially  promoted  their  partial  success. 

Meantime  Osterhaus’  and  Hovey’s  forces,  forming  the  column  of 
assault  on  the  left,  pushed  forward  under  a withering  fire  upon  a more 
extended  line  until  an  enfilading  fire  from  a strong  redoubt  on  their 
left  front  and  physical  exhaustion  compelled  them  to  take  shelter  be- 
hind a ridge.  Here  they  could  distinctly  hear  the  words  of  hostile  com- 
mand. Their  skirmishers,  however,  kept  up  the  conflict.  Alarmed  for 
his  safety,  and  the  assault  of  the  corps  immediately  on  my  left  having 
failed,  the  enemy  early  hastened  to  mass  large  numbers  from  his  right 
and  left  in  my  front.  Thus  re-enforced,  he  renewed  his  efibrts  with  in- 
creased effect.  All  my  forces  were  now  engaged,  including  reserves. 
Failure  and  loss  of  my  hard-won  advantages  became  imminent.  Ad- 
vising General  McArthur,  who  was  on  his  way  from  Warrenton,  of  the 
state  of  affairs,  I requested  re-enforcements  and  notified  Major-General 
Grant  of  the  fact. 

At  11  a.  m.  I informed  him  that  I was  hotly  engaged ; that  the  enemy 
was  massing  upon  me  from  his  right  and  left,  and  that  a vigorous  blow 
by  General  McPherson  would  make  a diversion  in  my  favor.  Again, 
at  12  m.,  that  I was  in  partial  possession  of  two  forts,  and  suggested 
whether  a vigorous  push  ought  not  to  be  made  all  along  our  lines. 
Responding  to  these  dispatches,  Major-General  Grant  directed  me  to 
communicate  with  General  McArthur,  to  use  his  forces  to  the  best  ad- 
vantage, and  informed  me  that  General  Sherman  was  getting  on  well. 
This  dispatch  was  dated  at  2 p.  m.  and  came  to  hand  at  3.15  p.  m. 
About  the  same  time  I received  information  that  General  Qninby’s 
division  was  coming  to  my  support.  Hastening  to  acknowledge  the 
receipt  of  this  welcome  intelligence,  I replied  that  I had  lost  no  ground  ; 
that  prisoners  informed  me  that  the  works  in  which  I had  made  lodg- 
ments were  commanded  by  strong  defenses  in  the  rear,  but  that  with 
the  divisions  promised  I doubted  not  that  I would  force  my  way  through 
the  hostile  lines,  and,  with  many  others,!  doubt  it  not  yet;  but  obstacles 
intervened  to  disappoint.  General  McArthur’s  division,  being  several 
miles  distant,  did  not  get  up  until  next  day.  Colonel  Boomer’s  and  San- 


15G 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


born’s  brigades,  of  General  Quinby’s  division,  mucb  exhausted,  came 
up,  but  before  either  of  them  could  be  fully  applied— indeed,  before 
one  of  them  was  entirely  formed — night  set  in  and  terminated  the 
struggle.  Colonel  Boomer  fell  early  while  leading  his  men  forward, 
lamented  by  all.  Meanwhile  the  enemy,  seeing  Quinby’s  division  mov- 
ing in  the  direction  of  my  position,  hastened  to  concentrate  additional 
forces  in  front  of  it,  and  made  a sortie,  which  was  repelled. 

About  8 p.  m.,  after  ten  hours’  continuous  fighting,  without  food  or 
water,  my  men  withdrew  to  the  nearest  shelter  and  rested  for  the  night, 
holding  by  a strong  picket  most  of  the  ground  they  had  gained. 

My  loss  during  this  memorable  day  comprised  fully  three-fourths  of 
my  whole  loss  before  Vicksburg,  and  was  as  follows: 


Command. 

Killed. 

rs 

0) 

a 

§ 

1 

Missing.  | 

rrp.np.ral  Oafprliana’  divi.aioTi 

35 

233 

1 

General  Smith’s  division 

49 

400 

30 

General  Hovey’s  division 

*42 

Genera,!  Carr’s  division  

109 

559 

57 

Aggregate,  1,487. 


To  say  that  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  has  done  its  whole  duty  man- 
fully and  nobly  throughout  this  arduous  and  eventful  campaign  is  only 
to  say  what  historical  facts  abundantly  establish.  They  opened  and 
led  the  way  to  the  field  of  Port  Gibson,  and  had  successfully  fought 
that  battle  for  several  hours  before  re -enforcements  came.  They  led 
the  way  to  Champion’s  Hill,  and  bore  the  brunt  of  that  battle.  Unas- 
sisted, they  fought  and  won  the  battle  of  Big  Black.  They  made  the 
first,  if  not  the  only,  lodgment  in  the  enemy’s  works  at  Vicksburg,  re- 
taining their  advantages  longest,  withdrawing  last,  and  probably  sus- 
taining the  greatest  loss. 

That  their  officers  are  subject  to  no  just  reproach  is  equally  true. 
On  the  contrary,  that  my  officers  generally  have  borne  themselves 
faithfully  and  gallantly  is  attested  by  conspicuous  and  incontrovertible 
facts.  Their  success  is  a conclusive  testimonial  of  their  merit. 

While  referring  to  the  reports  of  division,  brigade,  and  regimental 
commanders  for  x)articular  notice  of  the  officers  of  their  commands  most 
distinguishing  themselves,  it  is  proj^er,  as  the  commander  of  the  corps, 
that  I should  recommend  Brigadier-Generals  Hovey,  Carr,  and  Oster- 
haus  for  promotion;  also  Colonels  Slack,  Stone,  Keigwin,  Landram, 
Lindsey,  and  Mudd.  The  skill,  valor,  and  signal  services  of  these  offi- 
cers entitle  them  to  it. 

Not  having  received  the  reports  of  Generals  Blair,  Smith,  and  Quinby, 
I have  been  unable  to  furnish  a more  particular  account  of  the  opera- 
tions of  their  commands. 

To  the  members  of  my  staff  I am  largely  indebted  for  zealous  and 
valuable  assistance.  Colonel  [Thomas  S.]  Mather,  chief  of  staff  and 
acting  ordnance  officer;  Colonel  Mudd,  chief  of  cavalry;  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  [Don  A.]  Pardee,  acting  inspector-general ; Lieutenant-Colonel 
[Flenry  C.]  Warmoth,  aide-de-camp ; Lieutenant-Colonel  [Walter  B.J 
Scales,  assistant  adjutant-general,  and  Major  Butler,  provost-marshal, 
all  have  been  active,  zealous,  and  eminently  useful  in  their  respective 


Killed  ai/(I  wounded. 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


157 


si)lieres  of  duty.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Warmotli,  while  by  my  side  during 
the  assault  of  the  22d  ultimo,  was  severely  wounded. 

Lieutenants  Hains,  chief  engineer  of  the  corps,  [William  E.]  McComas, 
[Henry]  Jayne,  and  Mason,  have  commended  themselves  by  ability, 
activity,  and  usefulness. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  [Grantham  I.J  Taggart,  chief  commissary,  and 
Lieutenant-Colonel  [James]  Dunlap  and  Captain  [Michael  C.]  Garber, 
quartermasters,  have  administered  their  affairs  with  an  energy  and  suc- 
cess commanding  my  hearty  approbation. 

JMajor  Forbes,  medical  director,  has  done  everything  that  could  be 
expected  of  an  officer  of  rare  talent,  shill,  and  varied  experience  in  his 
dei)artment. 

Sympathizing  with  the  general  commanding  the  noble  army  of  the 
Tennessee  in  the  loss  of  so  many  brave  men  killed  and  wounded,  I can- 
not but  congratulate  him,  in  my  thankfulness  to  Providence,  upon  the 
many  and  signal  successes  which  have  crowned  his  arms. 

JOHN  A.  McCLEENAKD, 

Major- General^  Commanding. 

[Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Eawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.] 


LIndorsemeut.J 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

ViclcsJjurg^  Miss.^  July  19,  1803. 

Kespectfull^"  forwarded.  This  report  contains  so  many  inaccuracies 
that  to  correct  it,  to  make  it  a fair  report  to  be  handed  down  as  histori- 
cal, would  require  the  rewriting  of  most  of  it.  It  is  pretentious  and 
egotistical,  as  is  sufficiently  shown  by  my  own  and  all  other  reports 
accompanying. 

The  officers  and  men  composing  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  through- 
out the  campaign  ending  with  the  capture  of  Vicksburg,  have  done 
nobly,  and  there  are  no  honors  due  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee  in  which 
they  do  not  share  equally. 

D.  S.  GEANT, 

^ . Major-  General. 

[Adjutant  General  D.  S.  Army.] 


Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Camj)  near  Viclcshurg,  3Iiss.,  May  30,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant  : 

General  : 1 have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  a tabular  statement 
of  the  number  ot  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  of  the  several  divisions 
ot  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corjis,  except  the  Muth,  in  the  several  battles 
Jind  skirmishes  since  I crossed  the  Mississipiu  Eiver  into  the  State  of 
Mississippi.  I can  only  give  a partial  report  at  the  present  time.  I will 
ndd  a summary  of  the  casualties  of  the  Ninth  Division  as  soon  as  re- 
ceived. In  the  more  extended  or  full  reports,  which  will  be  ready  soon, 
slight  corrections,  doubtless,  of  this  statement  will  be  found.  The  press 
ot  public  duties  must  be  my  apology  for  this  delay. 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  MgCLFENAND, 

Major-  G enera /,  Commanding. 


158  • MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 

[Inclosure.]  , 

Abstract  of  killed  and  wounded  in  the  Thirteenth  Army  Cories  since  it  crossed  the  Mississipni 

River,  Aiwil  30,  1863. 


Command. 

Name  of  battle-hold. 

o 

3 

M 

ns 

o 

'a 

a 

a 

o 

Missing. 

Total. 

TljviwinH  

Port  Gibson 

37 

157 

194 

L TJj Yi«inTi  

do 

3 

14 

2 

19 

Tlivisinn  

do 

308 

piO.Tij’B  T)ivi.«iinT»  ..  

42 

222 

264 

....  - 

Chanii)ion’s  Hill 

G 

GO 

66 

lIivwL>n  ...... 

do 

24 

2t 

Twelfth.  Division 

do 

1,202 

3 

Eourteenth  Division 

do 

1 

2 

N inth  Division 

Black  River  Bridge 

2 

19 

21 

'I'entli  Division ...... 

do - 

1 

1 

Twelfth  Division .... ...  

Fourteenth  Division  ...... 

do 

19 

223 

1 

243 

TJ^iiith  Divisiou 

V icksburg 

'IViit.h  Div’isiori 

do 

69 

400 

30 

499 

Twelfth  Division 

do 

50 

Fourteenth  Division 

do 

109 

559 

57 

725 

n’r'iith  Divi.sioTi--  

Ba.ldwin’.s  Ferry 

4 

4 

Twelfth  Division. 

Fourteen-Mile  Creek 

4 

4 

Total 

288 

98 

3,  627 

j 1, 681 

Tbo  ajisrc^ate  only  of  killed  and  wounded  in  tke  Twelfth  Division  is  given.  The  casualties  of  the 
Ninth  Division  is  from  tUe  medical  director,  aiid  is  only  approximate. 

Very  respectfully, 

WALTER  B.  SCATES, 

Lieutenant-Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General,  Department  of'the  Tennessee. 


Cairo,  III.,  June  23,  18G3. 

Abraham  Lincoln, 

Fresident  of  the  United  fStates : 

I have  been  relieved  for  an  oitiission  of  my  adjutant.*  Hear  me. 

JOHN  A.  McCLEIINAND. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

In  Camp  near  Vwhshurgj  Miss.j  June  20,  1803. 

Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas,  * 

Adjutant- General  of  the  Army^  Washington,  D.  C. : 

General  : Inclosed  I respectfully  transmit  the  letters  of  Maj.  Gen.  W. 
T.  Sherman,  commanding  Fifteenth  Army  Corjis,  and  Maj.  Gen.  J.  B. 
McFhcrson,  commanding  Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  of  date,  res|)eet- 
ively,  the  17th  and  18th  instant,  relative  to  the  congratulatory  order  of 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McClernand  to  his  troops,  a copy  of  whieli  order  is 
also  herewith  transmitted,  together  with  copies  of  the  correspondence 
relating  thereto,  and  my  order  relieving  General  McClernand  Irom  the 
command  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  and  assigning  Maj.  Gen.  E.  O. 
C.  Ord  to  the  command  thereof,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  Bresi* 
dent. 

A disposition  and  earnest  desire  on  my  i)art  to  do  the  most  I could 


See  Inelosure  No.  6,  p.  164. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


159 


with  the  means  at  my  command,  without  interference  with  the  assi^^n- 
ments  to  command  which  the  President  alone  was  authorized  to  make, 
made  me  tolerate  General  McOlernand  long  after  I thought  the  good 
of  the  service  demanded  his  removal.  It  was  only  when  almost  the 
entire  army  under  my  command  seemed  to  demand  it  that  he  was  re- 
lieved. 

The  inclosed  letters  show  the  feelings  of  the  armv  corps  serving  in  the 
field  with  the  Thirteenth  Corps.  The  removal  of  "General  McOlernand 
from  the  command  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  has  given  general 
satisfaction,  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  sharing,  perhaps,  equally  in 
that  feeling  with  the  other  corps  of  the  army.  My  action  in  the  reliev- 
ing of  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McOlernand  from  the  command  of  the  Thir- 
teenth Army  Corps  and  the  assignment  of  Maj.  Gen.  E.  O.  C.  Ord  to 
that  command  I trust  will  meet  the  approval  of  the  President.* 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

U.  S.  GKAKT, 

Major-General, 

[luclosure  No.  1.] 

Headquarters  Department  op  the  Tennessee, 

Near  Vickshtirg,  Miss.,  June  17,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McOlernand, 

Commanding  Thirteenth  Army  Corps: 

General  : Inclosed  I send  you  what  purports  to  be  your  congratu- 
latory address  to  the  Thirteenth  Army  Cori)s.  I would  respectfully  ask 
if  it  is  a true  copy.  If  it  is  not  a correct  copy,  furnish  me  one  by  bearer, 
as  required  both  by  regulations  and  existing  orders  of  the  Department. 
Very  respectfully, 

H.  S.  GEANT, 

Major-  General. 

[Sub-Inclosure.] 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

No.  72.  j Battle-field,  in  rear  of  Viekshurg,  May  30, 1863. 

Comrades  : As  your  commander,  I am  proud  to  congratulate  you  upon 
your  constancy,  valor,  and  successes.  History  affords  no  more  brilliant 
example  of  soldierly  qualities.  Your  victories  have  followed  in  such 
rjpid  succession  that  their  echoes  have  not  yet  reached  the  country. 
They  will  challenge  its  grateful  and  enthusiastic  applause.  Yourselves 
striking  out  a new  path,  your  comrades  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee 
followed,  and  a way  was  thus  opened  for  them  to  redeem  previous  dis- 
appointments. Your  march  through  Louisiana,  from  Milliken’s  Bend 
to  New  Carthage  and  Perkins’  plantation,  on  the  Mississippi  Eiver,  is 
one  of  the  most  remarkable  on  record.  Bayous  and  miry  roads,  threat- 
ened with  momentary  inundation,  obstructed  your  progress.  All  these 
were  overcome  by  unceasing  labor  and  unflagging  energy.  The  2 000 
leet  of  bridging  which  was  hastily  improvised  out  of  materials  created 
on  the  spot,  and  oyer  which  you  passed,  must  long  be  remembered  as  a 
marvel.  Descending  the  Mississippi  still  lower,  you  were  the  first  to 
Bruin’s  Lauding  and  to  plant  our  colors  in  the  State 
ot  Mississippi  below  Warrenton.  Eesuming  the  advance  the  same  day, 
you  pushed  on  until  you  came  up  to  the  enemy  near  Port  Gibson.  Only 
restrained  by  the  darkness  of  night,  you  hastened  to  attack  him  on  the 


*Scc  also  McClcj’uaud  to  Hallcck,  June  27,  p.  lGr>. 


160 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


inorning  of  May  1,  and  by  vigorously  pressing  him  at  all  points  drove 
him  from  his  position,  taking  a large  number  of  prisoners  and  small- 
arms  and  five  pieces  of  cannon.  General  Logan’s  division  came  up  in 
time  to  gallantly  share  in  consummating  the  most  valuable  victory  won 
since  the  capture  of  Fort  Donelson. 

Taking  the  lead  on  the  morning  of  the  2d,  you  were  the  first  to  enter 
Port  Gibson  and  to  hasten  the  retreat  of  the  enemy  from  the  vicinity  of 
that  place.  During  the  ensuing  night,  as  a consequence  of  the  victory 
at  Port  Gibson,  the  enemy  spiked  his  guns  at  Grand  Gulf  and  evacuated 
that  ])lace,  retiring  upon  Vicksburg  and  Edwards  Station.  The  fall  of 
Grand  Gulf  was  solely  the  result  of  the  victory  achieved  by  the  land 
forces  at  Port  Gibson.  The  armament  and  public  stores  captured  there 
are  but  the  just  trophies  of  that  victory.  Hastening  to  bridge  the  South 
Branch  of  the  Bayou  Pierre,  at  Port  Gibson,  you  crossed  on  the  morning 
of  the  3d,  and  pushed  on  to  Willow  Springs,  Big  Sandy,  and  the  main 
crossing  of  Fourteen-Mile  Creek,  4 miles  from  Edwards  Station.  A de- 
tachment of  the  enemy  was  immediately  driven  away  from  the  crossing, 
and  you  advanced,  passed  over,  and  rested  during  the  night  of  the  12th 
within  3 miles  of  the  enemy,  in  large  force  at  the  station. 

On  the  morning  of  the  13th,  the  objective  point  of  the  army’s  move- 
ments having  been  changed  from  Edwards  Station  to  Jackson,  in  imr- 
suance  of  an  order  from  the  commander  of  the  department,  you  moved 
on  the  north  side  of  Fourteen-Mile  Greek  toward  Kaymond.  This  deli- 
cate and  hazardous  movement  was  executed  by  a portion  of  your  num- 
ber under  cover  of  Hovey’s  division,  which  made  a feint  of  attack  in 
line  of  battle  upon  Edwards  Station.  Too  late  to  harm  you,  the  enemy 
attacked  the  rear  of  that  division,  but  was  promptly  and  decisively 
repulsed. 

Besting  near  Eaymond  that  night,  on  the  morning  of  the  14th  you 
entered  that  place,  one  division  moving  on  to  Mississippi  S^irings,  near 
Jackson,  in  support  of  General  Sherman  j another  to  Clinton,  in  sup- 
port of  General  McPherson  ; a third  remaining  at  Eaymond,  and  a 
fourth  at  Old  Auburn,  to  bring  up  the  army  trains. 

On  the  15th,  you  again  led  the  advance  toward  Edwards  Station, 
which  once  more  became  the  objective  point.  Exi)elling  the  enemy’s 
pickets  from  Bolton  the  same  day,  you  secured  and  held  tliat  important 
position. 

On  the  IGth,  you  led  the  advance,  in  three  columns  upon  three  roads, 
against  Edwards  Station.  Meeting  the  enemy  on  the  way  in  strong 
force,  you  heavily  engaged  him  near  Champion’s  Hill,  and  after  a san- 
guinary and  obstinate  battle,  with  the  assistance  of  General  McPher- 
son’s corps,  beat  and  routed  him,  taking  many  prisoners  and  small-arms 
and  several  pieces  of  cannon.  Continuing  to  lead  the  advance,  you 
rai)idly  pursued  the  enemy  to  Edwards  Station,  capturing  that  place,  a 
large  (piantity  of  public  stores,  and  many  prisoners.  Night  only  stopped 
you. 

At  day-dawn  on  the  17th,  you  resumed  the  advance,  and  earl^’ coming 
upon  the  enemy  strongly  intrenched  in  elaborate  works,  both  before  ami 
behind  Big  Black  Eiver,  immediately  opened  with  artillery  upon  liim, 
followed  by  a daring  and  heroic  charge  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet, which 
put  him  to  rout,  leaving  eighteen  pieces  of  cannon  and  more  than  1,000 
prisoners  in  your  hands. 

By  an  early  hour  on  the  ISth,  3 011  had  constructed  a bridge  across 
the  Big  Black,  and  had  commenced  the  advance  upon  Vicksburg. 

On  the  10th,  20th,  and  21st  you  continued  to  reconnoiter  ;nid  skirmish 
until  3’ou  had  gained  a near  approach  to  the  enemy’s  works. 


CHAr.  XXXVL] 


GENEEAL  REPORTS. 


161 


On  the  22d,  in  pursuance  of  the  order  from  the  commander  of  the  de- 
partment, you  assaulted  the  enemy’s  defenses  in  front  at  10  a.  m.,  and 
Avithin  thirty  minutes  had  made  a lodgment  and  planted  your  colors 
upon  two  of  his  bastions.  This  partial  success  called  into  exercise  the 
highest  heroism,  and  was  only  gained  by  a bloody  and  protracted  strug- 
gle;  yet  it  was  gained,  and  was  the  first  and  largest  success  achieved 
anywhere  along  the  whole  line  of  our  army.  For  nearly  eight  hours, 
under  a scorching  sun  and  destructive  fire,  you  firmly  held  your  footing, 
and  only  withdrew  when  the  enemy  had  largely  massed  their  forces  and 
concentrated  their  attack  upon  you.  How  and  why  the  general  assault 
failed,  it  would  be  useless  now  to  explain.  The  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 
acknowledging  the  good  intentions  of  all,  would  scorn  indulgence  in 
weak  regrets  and  idle  criminations.  According  justice  to  all,  it  would 
only  defend  itself.  If,  while  the  enemy  was  massing  to  crush  it,  assist- 
ance was  asked  for  by  a diversion  at  other  points,  or  byre-enforcement, 
it  only  asked  what  in  one  case  Major-General  Grant  had  specifically 
aud  peremptorily  ordered,  namely,  simultaneous  and  persistent  attack 
all  along  our  lines  until  the  enemy’s  outer  works  should  be  carried,  and 
what,  in  the  other,  by  massing  a strong  force  in  time  upon  a weakened 
point,  would  have  iirobably  insured  success. 

Comrades,  you  have  done  much,  yet  something  more  remains  to  be 
done.  The  enemy’s  odious  defenses  still  block  your  access  to  Vicksburg. 
Treason  still  rules  that  rebellious  city,  and  closes  the  Mississippi  Eiver 
against  rightful  use  by  the  millious  who  inhabit  its  sources  and  the  great 
J^orthwest.  Shall  not  our  flag  float  over  Vicksburg  ? Shall  not  the 
great  Father  of  Waters  be  opened  to  lawful  commerce '?  Methinks  the 
emphatic  response  of  one  and  all  of  you  is,  ‘‘It  shall  be  so.”  Then  let 
us  rise  to  the  level  of  a crowning  trial.  Let  our  common  sufierings  and 
glories,  while  uniting  as  a band  of  brothers,  rouse  us  to  new  and  sur- 
passing eflorts.  Let  us  resolve  upon  success,  God  helping*  us. 

I join  with  you,  comrades,  in  your  sympathy  for  the  wounded  and 
sorrow  for  the  dead.  May  we  not  trust,  nay,  is  it  not  so,  that*  history 
will  associate  the  martyrs  of  this  sacred  struggle  for  law  and  order,  lib- 
erty and  justice,  with  the  honored  martyrs  of  Monmouth  and  Bunker 
HiU? 

JOHH  A.  McCLEENAND, 

Major -General^  Commanding, 

[Inclosuro  Xo.  2.] 

Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Near  Yickshurg,  Miss.,  June  13,  18G3. 
Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Eawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  Major-General 
Grants  dispatch  to  General  McClernand  in  relation  to  his  address  to 
the  Officers  and  soldiers  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps.  The  major- 
general  commanding  was  absent  at  the  time  of  its  receipt,  and  has  not 
yet  returned.  ’ 

I hasten  to  comply  with  the  order  of  General  Grant  by  inclosing  a 
correct  copy  of  the  address. 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

WALTEE  B.  SCATES, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 

11  R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


162  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

[Inclosure  Xo.  3.] 

Hdqrs.  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  June  13,  1863. 
Major-General  Grant  : 

I have  just  returned.  The  newspaper  slip  is  a correct  copy  of  my 
congratulatory  order,  N’o.  72.  I am  prepared  to  maintain  its  state- 
ments. I regret  that  my  adjutant  did  not  send  j'ou  a copy  i)romptly, 
as  he  ought,  and  I thought  he  had. 

JOHN  A.  McCLEENAND, 

Major-General. 

[Inclosure  Xo.  4.] 

Headquarters  Fifteenth  Army  Corps, 

Camp  on  Walnut  RillSy  June  17,  1863. 
Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Eawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General,  Department  of  the  Tennessee: 

Sir  : On  my  return  last  evening  from  an  inspection  of  the  new  works 
at  SnydeFs  Bluff,  General  Blair,  who  commands  the  Second  Division  of 
my  corps,  called  my  attention  to  the  inclosed  publication  in  the  Mem- 
phis Evening  Bulletin  of  June  13,  instant,  entitled  “ Congratulatory 
Order  of  General  McClernand,’^  with  a request  that  I should  notice  it, 
lest  the  statements  of  fact  and  inference  contained  therein  might  receive 
credence  from  an  excited  public.  It  certainly  gives  me  no  pleasure  or 
satisfaction  to  notice  such  a catalogue  of  nonsense — such  an  effusion  of 
vain-glory  and  hypocrisy  ; nor  can  I believe  General  McClernand  ever 
published  such  an  order  officially  to  his  corps.  I know  too  well  that 
the  brave  and  intelligent  soldiers  and  officers  who  comx)ose  that  corps^ 
will  not  be  humbugged  by  such  stuff. 

If  the  order  be  a genuine  production  and  not  a forgery,  it  is  mani- 
festly addressed  not  to  an  army,  but  to  a constituency  in  Illinois,  far 
distant  from  the  scene  of  the  events  attempted  to  be  described,  who 
might  innocently  be  induced  to  think  General  McClernand  the  saga- 
cious leader  and  bold  hero  he  so  complacently  paints  himself  j but  it  is 
barely  possible  the  order  is  a genuine  one,  and  was  actuallj^  read  to  the 
regiments  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  in  which  case  a copy  must 
have  been  sent  to  your  office  for  the  information  of  the  commanding 
general. 

I beg  to  call  his  attention  to  the  requirements  of  General  Orders,  No. 
151,  of  1862,  which  actually  forbids  the  publication  of  all  official  letters 
and  reports,  and  requires  the  name  of  the  writer  to  be  laid  before  the 
President  of  the  United  States  for  dismissal.  The  document  under 
question  is  not  technically  a letter  or  report,  and  though  styled  an  order, 
is  not  an  order.  It  orders  nothing,  but  is  in  the  nature  of  an  address 
to  soldiers,  manifestly  designed  for  publication  for  ulterior  political  pur- 
poses. It  perverts  the  truth  to  the  ends  of  flattery  and  self-glorification, 
and  contains  many  untruths,  among  which  is  one  of  monstrous  false- 
hood. It  substantially  accuses  General  McPherson  and  myself  with 
disobeying  the  orders  of  General  Grant  in  not  assaulting  on  May  10 
and  22,  and  allowing  on  the  latter  day  the  enemy  to  mass  his  forces 
against  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  alone.  General  McPherson  is  fully 
able  to  answer  for  himself,  and  for  the  Fifteenth  Army  Corps  I answer 
that  on  May  19  and  22  it  attacked  furiously,  at  three  distinct  points, 
the  enemy’s  works,  at  the  very  hour  and  minute  fixed  in  General  Grant’s 
written  orders;  that  on  both  days  we  planted  our  colors  on  the  exterior 
slope  and  kept  them  there  till  nightfall ; that  from  the  first  hour  of  in- 
vestment of  Vicksburg  until  now  my  corps  has  at  all  times  been  far  in 


CIIAI’.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


163 


iulvance  of  General  McOIernancPs ; that  the  general-in-chief,  by  personal 
inspection,  knows  this  truth } that  tens  of  thousands  of  living  witnesses 
beheld  and  participated  in  the  attack ; that  General  Grant  visited  me 
duriug  both  assaults  and  saw  for  himself,  and  is  far  be.tter  qualified  to 
judge  whether  his  orders  were  obeyed  than  General  McClernand,  who 
was  nearly  3 miles  off;  that  General  McClernand  never  saw  my  lines; 
that  he  then  knew,  and  still  knows,  nothing  about  them,  and  that  from 
his  position  he  had  no  means  of  knowing  vv^hat  occurred  on  this  front. 
¥ot  only  were  the  assaults  made  at  the  time  and  place  and  in  the  man- 
ner prescribed  in  General  Grant’s  written  orders,  but  about  3p.  m.,  five 
hours  after  the  assault  on  the  22d  began,  when  my  storming  party  lay 
against  the  exterior  slope  of  the  bastion  on  my  front,  and  Blair’s  whole 
division  was  deployed  close  up  to  the  parapet,  ready  to  spring  to  the 
nssault,  and  all  my  field  artillery  were  in  good  position  for  the  work, 
General  Grant  showed  me  a note  from  General  McClernand,  that  moment 
handed  him  by  an  orderly,  to  the  effect  that  he  had  carried  three  of  the 
enemy’s  forts,  and  that  the  flag  of  the  Union  waved  over  the  stronghold 
of  Vicksburg,  asking  that  the  enemy  should  be  pressed  at  all  points  lest 
he  should  concentrate  on  him.  Not  dreaming  that  a major-general 
would  at  such  a critical  moment  make  a mere  buncombe  communication, 
I instantly  ordered  Giles  A.  Smith’s  and  Mower’s  brigades  to  renew  the 
assault  under  cover  of  Blair’s  division  and  the  artillery,  deployed  as 
before  described,  and  sent  an  aide  to  General  Steele,  about  a mile  to  my 
right,  to  convey  the  same  mischievous  message,  whereby  we  lost,  need- 
lessly^, many  of  our  best  officers  and  men. 

I would  never  have  revealed  so  unwelcome  a truth  had  General  Mc- 
Clernand, in  his  process  of  self-flattery,  confined  himself  to  facts  in  the 
reach  of  his  own  observation,  and  not  gone  out  of  the  way  to  charge 
others  for  results  which  he  seems  not  to  comprehend.  In  cases  of  repulse 
and  failure,  congratulatory  addresses  by  subordinate  commanders  are 
not  common,  and  are  only  resorted  to  by  weak  and  vain  men  to  shift 
the  burden  of  responsibility  from  their  own  to  the  shoulders  of  others. 
I never  make  a practice  of  speaking  or  writing  of  others,  but  during 
our  assault  of  the  19th  several  of  my  brigade  commanders  were  under 
the  impression  that  McClernand’s  corps  did  not  even  attemi)t  an  assault. 

In  the  congratulatory  order  I remark  great  silence  on  the  subject. 
Merely  to  satisfy  inquiring  parties,  I should  like  to  know  if  McClernand’s 
corps  did  or  did  not  assault  at  2 p.  m.  of  May  19,  as  ordered.  I do  not 
believe  it  did,  and  I think  General  McClernand  responsible. 

With  these  remarks  I leave  the  matter  where  ft  properly  belongs,  in 
the  hands  of  the  commanding  general,  who  knows  his  plans  and  orders, 
sees  with  an  eye  single  to  success  and  his  country’s  honor,  and  not  from 
the  narrow  and  contracted  circle  of  a subordinate  commander,  who  ex- 
aggerates the  importance  of  the  events  that  fall  under  his  immediate 
notice,  and  is  filled  with  an  itching  desire  for  ‘‘fame  not  earned.” 

AVith  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

AY.  T.  SHEEMAN, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 

[Inclosuro  Xo.  5.] 

IIdqrs.  ITtii  Army  Corps,  Dept,  of  the  Tennessee, 

Near  Yiclcshurg,  Miss,  June  18,  1803. 
Major-General  Grant,  Comdg.  Dept,  of  the  Tennessee : 

General  : IMy  attention  has  just  been  called  to  an  order  ])ublished 
in  the  Missouri  J)emocrat  of  the  10th  instant,  purporting  to  be  a con- 
gratulatory order  from  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McClernand  to  his  command 


164  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

The  whole  teuor  of  the  order  is  so  ungenerous,  and  the  insinuations  and 
criminations  against  the  other  corps  of  your  army  are  so  manifestly  at 
variance  with  the  facts,  that  a sense  of  duty  to  my  command,  as  well 
as  the  verbal  protest  of  every  one  of  my  division  and  brigade  com- 
manders against  allowing  such  an  order  to  go  forth  to  the  public  un- 
answered, require  that  I should  call  your  attention  to  it.  After  a care- 
ful perusal  of  the  order,  I cannot  help  arriving  at  the  conclusion  that  it 
was  written  more  to  influence  public  sentiment  at  the  North  and  impress 
the  public  mind  with  the  magnificent  strategy,  superior  tactics,  and 
brilliant  deeds  of  the  major-general  commanding  the  Thirteenth  Army 
Corps  than  to  congratulate  his  troops  uppn  their  well-merited  successes. 
There  is  a vain-gloriousness  about  the  order,  an  ingenious  attempt  to 
w^rite  himself  down  the  hero,  the  master-mind,  giving  life  and  direction 
to  military  operations  in  this  quarter,  inconsistent  with  the  high-toned 
principles  of  the  soldier,  sans  peur  et  sans  reprocJie,  Though  born  a 
warrior,  as  he  himself  stated,  he  has  evidently  forgotten  one  of  the 
most  essential  qualities,  viz,  that  elevated,  refined  sense  of  honor, 
which,  while  guarding  his  own  rights  with  zealous  care,  at  all  times 
renders  justice  to  others. 

It  little  becomes  Major-General  McOlernand  to  complain  of  want  of 
co-operation  on  the  part  of  other  corps  in  the  assault  on  the  enemy^s 
works  on  the  22d  ultimo,  when  1,218  men  of  my  command  were  placed 
hors  de  combat  in  their  resolute  and  daring  attempt  to  carry  the  positions 
assigned  to  them,  and  fully  one-third  of  these  from  General  Quinby’s 
division,  with  the  gallant  and  accomplished  Colonel  [George  B.]  Boomer 
at  their  head,  who  fell  in  front  of  his  own  lines,  where  they  were  left 
(after  being  sent  2 miles  to  support  him)  to  sustain  the  whole  brunt  of 
the  battle  from  5 p.  m.  until  after  dark,  his  own  men  being  recalled.  If 
General  McClernand’s  assaulting  columns  were  not  immediately  sup- 
ported when  they  moved  against  the  enemy’s  intrenchments,  and  few 
of  the  men  succeeded  in  getting  in,  it  most  assuredly  was  his  own  fault 
and  not  the  fault  of  any  other  corps  ‘commander.  Each  corps  com- 
mander had  the  positions  assigned  to  him  which  he  was  to  attempt  to 
carry,  and  it  remained  with  him  to  dispose  his  troops  in  such  a way  as 
to  support  promptly  and  efficiently  any  column  which  succeeded  in 
getting  in.  The  attack  was  ordered  by  the  major-general  commanding 
the  department  to  be  simultaneous  at  all  the  points  selected,  and  pre- 
cisely at  the  hour  the  columns  moved,  some  of  them  taking  a little  longer 
than  others  to  reach  the  enemy’s  works,  on  account  of  the  natural  and 
artificial  obstacles  to  be  overcome,  but  the  difference  in  time* was  not 
great  enough  to  allow  of  any  changing  or  massing  of  the  enemy  from 
one  part  of  the  line  to  the  other. 

The  assault  failed,  not,  in  my  oinnion,  from  any  want  of  co-operation 
or  bravery  on  the  part  of  our  troops,  but  from  the  strength  of  the  works, 
the  difficulty  of  getting  close  up  to  them  under  cover,  and  the  deter- 
mined character  of  the  assailed. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  B.  McPHEBSON, 

ALajor- General. 

[Inclosuro  Xo.  C.J 

Special  Orders,  1 IIdqrs.  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

No.  104.  \ Kear  Viclcsburg.,  Jlfm.,  June  18,  1803. 

****### 

ly.  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McOlernand  is  hereby  relieved  from  the  com- 
mand of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps.  lie  will  proceed  to  anj^  point  he 


CiTAr.  XXXVI.] 


GENEEAL  KEPORTS. 


165 


may  select  in  the  State  of  Illinois,  and  report  by  letter  to  Headquarters 
of  the  Army  for  orders.*  Maj.  Gen.  E.  O.  O.  Ord  is  hereby  appointed 
to  the  command  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  subject  to  the  approval 
of  the  President,  and  will  immediately  assume  charge  of  the  same. 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  II.  S.  Grant: 

JNO.  A.  KAWLINS, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


ADDENDA. 

Springfield,  III.,  June  27,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief : 

General  : On  the  4th  instant  I personally  delivered  the  original  of 
the  accompanying  paper,  marked  A,  to  Major-General  Grant,  upon  the 
perusal  of  which  he  remarked  in  substance  that  he  had  underrated  the 
obstacles  frustrating  the  assault  upon  Vicksburg’s  defenses,  and  that 
he  would  answer  my  note  in  writing,  and,  as  I understood  him,  satis- 
factorily. It  has  not  yet  been  answered. 

The  original  of  the  accompanying  paper,  marked  B,t  was  received  by 
me  on  the  evening  of  the  18th  instant.  The  paper  marked  is  a copy 
of  my  answer,  and  paper  marked  D is  a copy  of  General  Grant’s  reply.  § 
Paper  marked  E is  a copy  of  my  protest. 

In  compliance  with  General  Grant’s  order,  I have  the  honor  to  report 
to  Headquarters  of  the  Army  by  letter  for  orders. 

Having  opened  the  way  from  Milliken’s  Bend  above  to  Perkins’  plan- 
tation, 40  miles  below,  Vicksburg;  having  led  the  advanced  corps  to 
Port  Gibson  and  to  Champion’s  Hill,  and  borne  the  brunt  of  both  of  these 
battles,  as  statistics  will  prove ; having  fought  the  battle  of  Big  Black 
unassisted  by  any  other  corps ; having  made  the  first  and  perhai)s  only 
lodgments  in  the  enemy’s  works  at  Vicksburg  on  the  22d  ultimo,  and 
demonstrated  the  vigor  and  persistency  of  my  assault  by  the  greatest 
loss,  I ask,  in  justice,  that  I may  be  restored  to  my  command  at  least 
until  Vicksburg  shall  have  fallen.  Only  twb.  days  before  my  banish- 
ment from  the  Department  of  the  Tennessee,  General  Grant  had  in- 
creased my  command  by  the  positive  addition  of  one  division  and  by 
the  contingent  addition  of  two  others,  making  it  larger  than  the  Fifteenth 
and  Seventeenth  Army  Corps  combined,  and  therefore  cannot  consist- 
ently object  upon  the  score  of  distrust  of  my  fidelity  or  ability. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  McCLERIIAND, 

Major- Ge7ieral. 

[Inclosure  A.] 

Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 
Battle-field  near  Yickshurg^  il/Iss.,  June  4,  1803. 
[Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant  :] 

General  : What  appears  to  be  a systematic  effort  to  destroy  my  use- 
fulness and  character  as  a commander  makes  it  proper  that  I should 
address  you  this  note.  It  is  reported,  among  other  things,  as  I under- 
stand, that  I attacked  on  the  22d  ultimo  without  authority ; again,  that 
I attacked  too  late ; again,  that  I am  responsible  for  your  failure  and 

* See  ^McCleniaiid  to  Grant,  Jnnc  18,  p.  lOH.  t Seo  Inclosuro  No.  8,  p.  1G2. 
t Seo  Inclosnro  No.  1,  p.  IGO.  ^ See  Inclosuro  No.  0,  p.  1(54. 


166 


MISSISSIPPI^  WEST  TENNESSEE^  ETC. 


[CiiAr.  XSXVI. 


losses ; again,  that  I am  arrested  and  being  sent  North ; again,  that  my 
command  is  turned  over  to  another  officer,  and,  again,  that  you  have  per- 
sonally assumed  command  of  it.  These  reports  are  finding  their  way 
from  the  landings  up  the  river.  I hardly  need  say  to  you  that  all  these 
reports  are  false  j that  I obeyed  orders  in  attacking ; that  my  attack  was 
prompt  and  in  a larger  measure  more  successful  than  any  other ; that 
the  ultimate  failure  of  the  general  attack  and  the  losses  attending  it 
were,  under  the  circumstances,  unavoidable  consequences  of  obstacles*! 
found  to  be  unsurmountable,  and  [notwithstanding]  a determined  effort, 
at  least  on  my  i)art,  to  carry  and  hold  the  works  in  obedience  to  your 
express  and  peremptory  order.  You  know  that  I am  not  yet  under 
arrest,  or  being  sent  away,  or  superseded  in  my  command.  All  these 
things  being  known  to  you,  and  these  false  reports  being  brought  to 
your  notice,  it  remains  for  you  to  determine  whether  truth,  justice,  and 
generosity  do  not  call  on  you  for  such  a declaration  as  will  be  conclusive 
in  the  matter. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  McOLERNAND, 

Major-General,  Commanding. 

[Inclosure  E.] 

Battle-field,  near  Vicksburg,  Miss., 

June  18,  181)3. 

Maj.  Gen.  TJ.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Tennessee : 

Your  order,  relieving  me  and  assigning  Major-General  Ord  to  the 
command  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  is  received.  Having  been 
appointed  by  the  President  to  the  command  of  that  corps,  under  a defi- 
nite act  of  Congress,  1 might  justly  challenge  your  authority  in  the 
premises,  but  forbear  to  do  so  at  present.  I am  quite  willing  that  any 
statement  of  fact  in  my  congratulatory  [order]  to  the  Thirteenth  Army 
Corps,  to  which  you  think  just  exception  may  be  taken,  should  be  made 
the  subject  of  investigation,  not  doubting  the  result. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  ]\IcCLEPtNx\ND, 

Major-General. 

Springfield,  III  , Jiine  27,  18G3. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  V^^ar: 

Under  authority  conferred  by  you  in  previous  correspondence  to  com- 
municate freely,  I inclose  the  accompanying  correspondence*  between 
Major-General  Grant  and  myself.  From  that  corresiiondence  you  will 
learn  that  General  Grant  has  assumed  xiower  to  relieve  me  from  the 
command  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  and  to  banish  me  from  the 
, Hepartment  of  the  Tennessee.  The  ostensible  motive  for  this  act  is  the 
failure  of  my  adjutant  to  send  General  Grant  a copy  of  a congratulatory 
order  communicated  to  commanders  of  divisions  of  the  Thirteenth  Army 
Corps,  the  design  of  which  was  to  assert  the  just  claims  of  that  corps  and 
to  stimulate  its  soldierly  pride  and  conduct. 

The  order  reflected  upon  no  one,  nor  was  it  to  have  been  expected 
that  I could  have  personally  supervised  the  routine  cf  the  adjutant’s 
office  in  this  or  any  like  particular.  I was  in  the  ])resence  of  the  enemy, 

*^800  McClcrnand  to  ITalloclc,  p.  105.  i 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


167 


and  my  attention  and  best  efforts  were  due  to  what  was  transpiring  in 
the  field ; besides,  sent  or  unsent,  outside  of  the  purpose  mentioned,  the 
order  effected  nothing. 

The  real  motive  for  so  unwarranted  an  act  was  hostility — personal 
hostility — growing  out  of  the  early  connection  of  my  name  with  the 
Mississippi  Eiver  expedition  and  your  assignment  of  me  to  the  com- 
mand of  it.  This  feeling  subsequently  became  intensified  by  the  con- 
trast made  by  my  success  at  Arkansas  Post  with  General  Grant’s  retreat 
from  Oxford  and  his  repulse  at  Chickasaw  Bayou,  and,  later  still,  more 
intensified  by  the  leadership  and  success  of  my  corps  during  the  advance 
from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  Port  Gibson,  to  Champion’s  Hill,  and  to  Big 
Black.  In  all  these  battles  my  corps  led  the  advance  and  bore  the 
brunt;  indeed,  I made  the  dispositions  for  the  battles  of  Port  Gibson 
and  Champion’s  Hill,  also  for  the  battle  of  Big  Black,  which  was  fought 
on  our  part  alone  by  my  own  corps. 

During  May  19,  20,  21,  and  22,  I lost  1,487  men  killed  and  wounded 
before  Vicksburg  in  fruitless  attempts  to  carry  the  enemy’s  works,  in 
obedience  to  General  Grant’s  orders — orders  which,  under  the  circum- 
stances, were  incapable  of  execution. 

On  the  22d,  I was  the  first  to  attack.  I made  the  only  lodgments ; held 
them  all  day  under  a scorching  sun  and  wasting  fire,  while  the  corps  on 
my  right,  sustaining  repulse,  left  the  enemy  to  mass  upon  me.  Yet,  so 
far  as  I have  seen,  the  only  dispatch  from  General  Grant  noticing  me 
or  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  placed  me  in  the  position  of  bringing  up 
the  rear. 

The  fact  that  McPherson  and  Sherman  gained  the  lead  for  a day  or 
two  by  reason  of  the  temporary  substitution  of  Jackson  for  Edwards 
Station  as  the  objective  point  of  the  army’s  movements,  was  thb  occa- 
sion for  a statement  calculated  to  induce  the  belief  that  I was  uniformly 
in  the  rear.  All  this,  however,  is  but  consistent  with  the  motive  that 
censured  me  for  the  Arkansas  expedition,  which,  fortunately  for  me  and 
the  country,  terminated  in  the  fall  of  Post  Arkansas,  and  the  attempt 
to  charge  me  with  the  failure  at  Chickasaw  Bayou,  which  occurred  be- 
fore I took  command  of  the  Mississippi  Eiver  expedition. 

I ask,  injustice,  for  an  investigation  of  General  Grant’s  and  my  con- 
duct as  officers  from  the  battle  of  Belmont  to  the  assault  of  the  22d  upon 
Vicksburg,  inclusive;  and  meantime,  until  the  public  service  will  allow 
the  investigation,  that  I be  restored  to  my  command,  at  least  until  the 
fall  of  Vicksburg.  General  Grant  cannot  consistently  object  to  the  lat- 
ter, because  only  two  days  before  my  dismission  he  made  my  command 
larger  than  the  Pifteenth  and  Seventeenth  Army  Corps  combined  by 
the  addition  of  one  division  certainly  and  two  others  contingently,  thus 
in  an  emergency,  notwithstanding  his  personal  feelings,  testifying  his 
confidence  in  my  fidelity  and  capability.  Please  early  advise  me  of 
the  determination  of  the  Government  in  the  premises. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

JOHE  A.  McCLEEYAND, 

Major- General. 


Springfield,  III.,  June  30,  1863. 

His  Exccllem^y  Abraham  Lincjoln, 

President  of  the  United  States  : 

Major-General  McClernand  arrived  here  on  the  2Gth  instant.  He  has 
been  received  by  the  people  here  with  the  greatest  demonstrations  of 


168 


[Chap.'XXXVL 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

respect,  all  regretting  that  he  is  not  now  in  the  field.  I desire  to  sug- 
gest that  if  General  McOlernand,  with  some  Western  troops,  was  put  in 
comn;and  of  Pennsylvania,  it  would  inspire  great  hope  and  confidence 
in  the  Northwest,  and  perhaps  throughout  the  country. 

EIOH’D  YATES, 

Governor. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 


Springfield,  III., 

August  24,  18G3. 


On  June  27,  ultimo,  I had  the  honor  to  address  you  a respectful  com- 
munication, giving  the  circumstances  attending  my  removal  by  General 
Grant  from  the  command  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  and  contain- 
ing, among  other  things,  the  following  passages  : 


I ask,  in  justice,  for  an  investigation  of  General  Grant’s  and  my  conduct  as  officers 
from  tke  battle  of  Belmont  to  tbe  assault  of  May  22  on  Vicksburg,  inclusive. 


Please  early  advise  me  of  tbe  determination  of  tbe  Government  in  tbe  premises. 

Fearing  that  the  foregoing  matter,  in  the  multitude  of  your  engage- 
ments, has  escaped  your  attention,  I write  again,  respectfully  asking  that 
you  will  please  immediately  advise  me  whether  the  desired  investiga- 
tion will  or  will  not  be  ordered. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  McOLEENAND, 

Major-General. 


Springfield,  III.,  September  5,  18G3. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 

I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communication 
of  the  29th  ultimo.*  By  it  I am  advised  that  the  President  has  declined 
to  order  a court  of  inquiry.  If  the  reason  for  this  determination  was 
because  my  application  contemplated  an  investigation  extending  beyond 
my  own  official  conduct,  I beg  to  obviate  the  objection  by  requesting 
a court  of  inquiry  simply  to  investigate  my  own  conduct.  If  the  court 
be  granted,  I would  prefer  that  its  jurisdiction  be  extended  to  my  entire 
conduct  as  an  United  States  officer  in  the  present  war;  or,  if  that  may 
not  be,  to  my  conduct  in  connection  with  the  Mississippi  liiver  expedi- 
tion ; or,  if  that  may  not  be,  to  my  conduct  in  connection  with  the  late 
campaign  from  Milliken’s  Bend  around  to  Vicksburg,  and  resulting  in 
the  fall  of  that  place. 

Pardon  this  further  intrusion  upon  your  attention,  which  is  made  in 
no  improper  spirit,  but  to  ascertain  the  intended  efiect  of  the  President’s 
determination,  and  to  ask  of  you  to  farther  oblige  me  by  early  advising 
me  in  the  premises. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  McOLEENAND, 

Major-  General. 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENEEAL  REPOETS. 


169 


War  Department, 
Washington  City^  September  14,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  AIcOlernand, 

Springfield^  III. : 

General  : Your  letter  of  the  5th  instant  has  been  submitted  to  the 
President,  who  directs  me  to  say  that  a court  of  inquiry  embracing  any 
one  of  the  subjects  specified  in  that  letter  would  necessarily  withdraw 
from  the  field  many  officers  whose  presence  with  their  commands  is 
absolutely  indispensable  to  the  service,  and  whose  absence  might  cause 
irreparable  injury  to  the  success  of  operations  now  in  active  progress. 
For  these  reasons  he  declines  at  present  your  applications,  but  if  here- 
after it  can  be  done  without  prejudice  to  the  service,  he  will,  in  view  of 
your  anxiety  upon  the  subject,  order  a court. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

EDWm  M.  STANTOY, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Springfield,  III.,  September  28,  1863. 

To  the  President: 

Failing  to  be  restored  to  my  command  (now,  as  I understand,  passed 
from  General  GranPs  control),  or  to  any  command,  and  failing  also  to 
obtain  a court  of  inquiry,  no  other  mode  of  self- vindication  is  left  to  me 
than  an  official  and  responsible  statement  by  myself  of  my  own  case. 
The  accompanying  paper  is  that  statement,  which  1 send  to  you  for 
your  perusal  as  a matter  rightfully  claiming  your  attention,  and  which, 
ill  justice  to  myself,  my  children,  and  my  friends,  I propose  to  publish. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  McOLEENAND, 

Major- General. 

October  9,  1863. 

P.  S. — Governor  [Eichard]  Yates,  having  returned  from  Ohio  without 
visiting  Washington  and  delivering  this  note  and  accompanying  pack- 
age, I avail  myself  of  the  first  opportunity  to  send  both  by  mail.  I also 
send  copies  of  the  statement  of  my  case  to  the  Secretary  of  War  and  tlie 
General-in-Ohief. 

[Inclosure.] 

Springfield,  III.,  September  25,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in-  Chief  : 

This  paper  is  respectfully  communicated  as  an  official  and  responsible 
protest  against  portions  of  Major-General  Grant’s  report  of  the  6th 
ultimo,  purporting  to  give  an  account  of  the  operations  of  the  Army  of 
the  Tennessee  in  the  late  campaign  resulting  in  the  fall  of  Vicksburg. 
To  allow  that  report,  with  its  multitude  of  errors,  inaccuracies,  and  im- 
perfections to  pass  unnoticed  by  me  would  allow  the  truth  of  history 
to  be  jeoparded  and  gross  injustice  done  not  only  to  myself  but  to  my 
comrades  in  arms  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  without  an  effort  to 
prevent  it.  This  I am  unwilling  should  be  done. 

How  far  General  Grant  is  indebted  to  the  forbearance  of  officers  under 
his  command  for  his  retention  in  the  public  service  so  long,  I will  not 
undertake  to  state  unless  he  should  challenge  it.  None  know  better 


170 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


than  himself  how  much  he  is  indebted  to  that  forbearance.  Neither 
will  1 undertake  to  show  that  he  is  indebted  to  the  good  conduct  of  offi- 
cers and  men  of  his  command  at  different  times  for  the  series  of  suc- 
cesses that  have  gained  him  applause  rather  than  to  his  own  merit  as 
a commander,  unless  he  should  challenge  it,  too.  It  will  suffice  in  this 
connection  to  say  that  while  I have  been  and  still  am  proud  of  the 
honors  that  have  been  conferred  upon  him  as  my  commander,  I only 
regret  that  he  should  use  the  influence  he  has  acquired  (in  a consider- 
able degree  through  the  eflbrts  of  citizen  soldiers)  for  any  purpose  less 
commendable  than  the  promotion  of  the  public  good. 

General  Grant’s  report  appears  to  have  two  objects — one  to  gixQ  an 
account  of  the  operations  of  his  army,  the  other  to  disparage  me;  and 
any  one  who  will  carefully  and  candidly  read  it,  can  hardly  fail  to  per- 
ceive that  in  a persistent  effort  to  do  the  latter  he  has  interrupted  the 
logical  and  orderly  development  of  the  former  and  marred  the  symme- 
try of  an  official  document.  Take,  for  example,  his  narrative  of  the  as- 
sault of  May  22  upon  the  defenses  of  Vicksburg.  He  says : 

All  the  corps  commanders  set  their  time  by  mine,  that  there  should  be  no  difference 
between  them  in  movement  of  assault.  Promptly  at  the  hour  designated  the  three 
army  corps,  then  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  works,  commenced  the  assault. 

*#**##» 

The  assault  was  gallant  in  the  extreme  on  the  part  of  all  the  troops,  but  the  enemy’s 
position  was  too  strong,  both  naturally  and  artifieially,  to  bo  taken  in  that  way.  At 
every  point  assaulted,  and  at  all  of  them  at  the  same  time,  the  enemy  was  able  to  show 
all  the  force  his  works  would  cover.  The  assault  failed,  I regret  to  say,  with  much 
loss  on  our  side  in  killed  and  wounded,  but  without  weakening  the  confidence  of  the 
troops  in  their  ability  ultimately  to  succeed. 

Here  is  a clear  and  unequivocal  admission  that  all  the  corps  and 
their  commanders  did  their  duty — their  whole  duty;  that  their  con- 
duct was  gallant  in  the  extreme ; that  the  assault  failed  with  much  loss 
in  killed  and  wounded  of  our  men,  and  only  because  the  enemy’s  po- 
sition was  too  strong,  both  naturally  and  artificially,  to  be  taken  by 
assault.  Yet,  in  juxtaposition  and  in  contradiction  to  this  clear  and 
unmistakable  admission,  he  goes  on  to  argue,  through  a longer  space 
than  that  devoted  to  the  legitimate  account  of  the  assault,  that  I sent 
false  dispatches,  and  thereby  caused  Sherman  and  McPherson  to  make 
an  assault,  resulting — 

in  the  increase  of  our  mortality  list  full  50  per  cent.,  without  advancing  our  position 
or  giving  us  other  advantages. 

Again,  he  says : 

Each  corps  had  many  more  men  than  could  xiossibly  bo  used  in  the  assault,  over 
such  ground  as  intervened  between  them  and  the  enemy.  More  men  could  only  avail 
in  case  of  breaking  through  the  enemy’s  line,  or  in  repelling  a sortie. 

Again — 

No  troops  succeeded  in  entering  any  of  the  enemy’s  works,  with  the  exception  of  Ser- 
geant Griffith,  of  Twenty-first  [Twenty-second]  Eegiment  Iowa  Volunteers,  and  some 
11  privates  of  same  regiment.  Of  these  none  returned  except  the  sergeant  and  pos- 
sibly 1 man.  The  work  entered  by  him  from  its  position  could  give  us  no  practical 
advantage,  unless  others  to  the  right  and  left  of  it  were  carried  and  held  at  the  same 
time.  About  12  m.  I received  a dispatch  from  McClernand  that  he  was  hard  pressed 
at  several  points,  in  reply  to  which  I directed  him  to  re-enforce  thepointshard  pressed 
from  such  troops  as  he  had  that  were  not  engaged.  I then  rode  around  to  Sherman, 
and  had  just  reached  there,  when  I received  a second  dispatch  from  McClernand, 
stating  positively  and  unequivocally  that  he  was  in  possession  of,  and  still  held,  two 
of  the  enemy’s  forts ; that  the  American  flag  then  Avaved  over  them,  and  asking  me  to 
have  Sherman  and  McPherson  make  a diversion  in  his  favor.  This  dispatch  I shoAved 
to  Sherman,  who  immediately  ordered  a renewal  of  the  assault  on  his  front.  I also 
sent  an  answer  to  McClernand,  directing  him  to  order  nj)  McArthur  to  his  assistance, 


CiTAP.  XXX VI.  ] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


171 


aud  started  inimediatoly  to  tlie  position  I had  just  left  on  McPherson’s  liue,  to  convey 
to  him  the  information  from  McCJernand  by  this  last  dispatch,  that  he  might  make 
the  diversion  requested. 

Again — 

1 had  taken  a commanding  i)osition  near  McPherson’s  front,  and  from  which  I 
could  see  all  the  advancing  columns  from  his  corps,  and  a part  of  each  of  Sherman’s 
and  McClernand’s,  A portion  of  the  commands  of  eacli  succeeded  in  planting  their 
tlags  on  the  outer  slopes  of  the  enemy’s  bastions,  and  maintained  them  there  until 
night. 

# -Jf 

The  position  occupied  by  me  during  most  of  the  time  of  the  assault  gave  me  a bet- 
ter opjjortunity  of  seeing  what  was  going  on  in  front  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps 
than  1 believed  it  possible  for  the  commander  of  it  to  have.  I could  not  see  his  pos- 
session of  forts  nor  necessity  for  re-enforcements,  as  represented  in  his  dispatches,  up 
to  the  time  I left  it,  which  was  between  12  m.  and  1 p.  m.,  and  I expressed  doubts  of 
their  correctness,  which  doubts  the  facts  subsequently,  but  too  late,  confirmed.  At 
the  time  I could  not  disregard  his  reiterated  statements,  for  they  might  possibly  be 
true;  and  that  no  possible  opportunity  of  carrying  the  enemy’s  stronghold  should  be 
allowed  to  escape  through  fault  of  mine,  I ordered  Quinby’s  division,  which  was  all 
of  McPherson’s  corps  then  present  but  four  brigades,  to  report  to  McClernand,  and 
notified  him  of  the  order. 

Before  proceeding  to  examine  tlie  statements  contained  in  these  ex- 
tracts, it  is  firoper,  as  tending  to  the  elucidation  of  the  matters  to  which 
they  relate,  that  I should  give  General  Grant’s  order  for  the  assault,  and 
the  dispatches  that  -passed  between  him  and  me  during  the  following 
day  in  relation  to  it. 

General  Field  Orders,  ? Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

No.  — . 5 Near  Vicksburg,  May  21,  1863. 

A simultaneous  attack  will  be  made  to-morrow  at  10  a.  m.  by  all  the  army  corps  of 
this  army.  During  the  day  army  corps  commanders  will  have  examined  all  practi- 
cable roads  over  which  troops  can  possibly  pass.  They  will  get  in  position  all  the 
artillery  possible,  and  gain  all  the  ground  they  can  with  their  iufautry  and  skir- 
mishers. At  an  early  hour  in  the  morning,  a vigorous  attack  will  be  commenced  by 
the  artillery  and  skirmishers.  The  infantry,  with  the  exception  of  reserves  and  skir- 
mishers, will  be  placed  in  columns  of  platoons,  or  by  a flank  if  the  ground  over  which 
they  may  have  to  pass  will  not  admit  of  a greater  front,  ready  to  move  forward  at  the 
hour  designated.  Promptly  at  the  hour  designated  all  will  start  at  quick  time,  with 
bayonets  fixed,  and  march  immediately  upon  the  enemy  without  firing  a gun  until 
the  outer  works  are  carried.  The  troops  will  go  light,  carrying  with  them  only  their 
ammunition,  canteens,  and  one  day’s  rations.  The  skirmishers  will  advance  as  soon 
as  possible  after  heads  of  columns  pass  them,  and  scale  the  walls  of  such  works  as  may 
confront  them.  If  prosecuted  with  vigor,  it  is  confidently  believed  this  course  will 
carry  Vicksburg  in  a very  short  time,  and  with  much  less  loss  than  would  be  sustained 
by  delay.  Every  day’s  delay  enables  the  enemy  to  strengthen  his  defenses  and  in- 
crease his  chance  for  receiving  aid  from  outside. 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant : 

JNO.  A.  RAWLINS, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

Major-General  McClernand, 

Commanding  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

Kothiiig  is  said  in  tliis  order  respecting  the  expediency  of  a feint  on 
iny  left,  which  was  uncovered  and  unsupported  from  the  point  where 
it  rested  for  the  whole  length  of  the  enemy’s  lines  (some  4 miles)  around 
to  the  Mississippi  below  Vicksburg.  To  secure  the  advantage  of  such 
a demonstration,  I ordered  Major  [Daniel  B.]  Bush,  [jr.,]  commanding 
the  Second  Illinois  Cavalry,  during  the  night  of  the  lilst  to  build  fires 
to  my  left  in  front  of  tlie  enemy’s  works,  and  to  x>ush  forward  inckets 
close  enough  to  them  to  excite  the  belief  and  apprehension  that  they 
were  i n vested  and  threatened.  This  was  skillfully  and  efiectually  done, 
and  to  it  I attribute  the  failure  of  the  enemy  the  next  day  to  attempt 
to  advance  from  his  works  and  turn  my  left. 


172  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 


I advised  General  Grant  of  this  purpose  in  the  following  dispatch: 


Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

In  the  Field,  near  Viclcsburg,  Miss.,  May  22,  1863 — 1.30  a.  m. 
Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Colonel  : The  major-general  commanding  directs  me  to  say  that  he  has  formed  his 
lines,  taken  his  positions,  and  is  prepared.  He  has  determined  upon  a feint  uponlhe 
left.  In  case  of  the  feint  or  attack,  he  will  instruct  division  commanders  to  take  and 
press  every  opportunity  and  advantage  that  offers.  He  is  prepared  to  begin  a can- 
nonade at  daylight  this  morning. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

WALTER  P.  SCATES, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Ad  jut  ant- General. 

P.  S. — The  major-general  commanding  further  directs  me  to  inform  Major-General 
Grant  that  he  was  very  much  annoyed  on  yesterday  by  one  of  the  enemy’s  batteries  on 
his  right,  which  ]ioured  a cross-fire  upon  his  lines.  He  desires  that  General  McPherson 
may  concentrate  his  fire  upon  this  battery  as  far  as  possible  early  in  the  morning. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  22d,  preparatory  to  the  contemplated 
assault  of  my  infantry,  I opened  with  all  my  artillery  (thirty -nine  pieces), 
and  breaching  the  enemy^s  works  in  several  places,  silenced  his  guns. 
My  infantry  promptly  following  with  their  assault  at  10  o’clock,  pressed 
the  advantage,  of  which  I advised  General  Grant  in  the  following  dis- 
patch : 

Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

In  Battle-field,  near  Viclcshurg,  Miss.,  May  22,  1863 — 11.15  a.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Tennessee : 

General:  I am  hotly  engaged  with  the  enemy.  He  is  massing  on  me  from  the 
right  and  left.  A vigorous  blow  bv  McPherson  would  make  a diversion  in  my  favor. 

JOHN  A.  McCLERNAND, 

Major-General,  Commanding. 

General  Grant  sent  the  following  dispatch  : 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

In  rear  of  Vichshurg,  Miss.,  May  22,  1863 — 11.50  a.  m. 

General  McClernand  : 

If  your  advance  is  weak,  strengthen  it  by  drawing  from  your  reserves  or  otlier  parts 
of  the  lines. 

Verv  respectfully, 

U.  S.  GRANT, 
Major-General. 

Again,  I sent  a dispatch  as  follows  : 


Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  22,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant  : 

General:  We  have  gained  the  enemy’s  intrenchments  at  several  points,  but  are 
brought  to  a stand.  I have  sent  word  to  McArthur  to  re-enforce  me  if  he  can.  Would 
it  not  be  best  to  conceiitrate  the  whole  or  a part  of  his  command  at  this  point  ?• 

JOHN  A.  McClernand, 

Major-General,  Commanding. 

P.  S. — I have  received  your  dispatch.  My  trooiis  are  all  engaged,  and  I cannot  with- 
draw any  to  re-enforce  others. 

And  again  the  following  dispatch  : 

Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

In  the  Battle-field,  near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  22,  1863—12  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant: 

General  : We  are  hotly  engaged  with  the  enemy.  Wo  have  part  possession  of  two 
forts,  and  the  Stars  and  Stripes  are  floating  over  them.  A vigorous  push  ought  to  bo 
made  all  along  the  lino. 

JOHN  A.  MCCLERNAND, 

]\fa jor- G enera I,  Com mand ing. 


CuAr.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


173 


General  Grant  sent  the  following  dispatches: 


General  McClernaxd: 


From  Field  Signal  Station. 


McArthur  advanced  from  Warren  ton  last  night, 
v’ith  him,  and  use  his  forces  to  the  best  advantage. 


He  is  on  your  loft.  Communicate 

U.  S.  GRANT, 
Major-General. 


From  Field  Signal  Station. 

General  McClernand: 

Sherman  and  McPherson  are  pressing  the  enemy.  If  one  portion  of  yonr  troops  are 
pressed,  re-enforce  them  from  another.  Sherman  has  gained  some  successes. 

U.  S.  GRANT. 


May  22,  1863—2.80  p.  m. 

General:  I have  sent  a dispatch  to  you  saying  that  McArthur  left  Warrentoii  last 
night.  Was  about  half  way  to  the  city  this  morning  at  1 a.  m.  Communicate  with 
him,  and  use  his  forces  to  the  best  advantage.  McPherson  is  directed  to  send 
Quinby’s  division  to  you  if  ho  cannot  etfect  a lodgment  where  he  is.  Quinby  is  next 
to  your  right,  and  you  will  bo  aided  as  much  by  his  penetrating  into  the  enemy’s 
lines  as  by  having  him  to  support  the  columns  you  have  already  got.  Sherman"  is 
getting  on  well. 

Yours, 

U.  S.  GRANT. 

Major-General. 

Subsequently  General  Grant  changed  his  mind,  and  ordered  two  bri- 
gades of  Quinby’s  division  to  report  to  me,  upon  notice  of  which  1 sent 
the  following  dispatch  to  General  Grant : 


Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant: 


Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

May  22,  1863—3.1.6  p.  m. 


General:  I have  received  your  dispatches  in  regard  to  General  Quinby’s  division 
and  General  McArthur’s.  As  soon  as  they  arrive,  I will  press  the  enemy  with  all  pos- 
sible dispatch,  and  doubt  not  that  1 will  lorce  my  way  through.  1 have  lost  no  ground. 
My  men  are  in  two  of  the  enemy’s  lorts,  but  they  are  commanded  by  rifle-pits  in  the 
rear.  Several  prisoners  have  been  taken,  who  intimate  that  tlie  rear  is  strong.  At 
this  moment  I am  hard  pressed. 

JOHN  A.  McCLERNAND, 

Major- Genei'al,  Commanding. 


Keturniiig  to  the  foregoing  extracts  from  General  Grant^s  report,  it  is 
found  that  he  distinctly  and  emphatically  affirms — 

1.  That  “ each  corps  had  many  more  men  than  could  possibly  be 
used  in  the  assault,”  and  that  ‘‘  more  men  could  only  avail  in  case  of 
breaking  through  the  enemy’s  lines,”  &c. 

In  noticing  this  allegation,  it  is  proper  that  I should  advert  to  a 
lew  ]irefatory  tacts,  which  seem  to  have  escaped  the  attention  of  Gen- 
eral Grant. 

My  army  corps  (the  Thirteenth),  in  common  with  others,  even  before 
It  commenced  the  march  from  Milliken’s  Bend,  had  been  deplorably 
wasted  and  diminished  by  disease  and  death,  caused  by  useless  but  ex- 
hausting labor  in  digging  and  opening  canals,  sometimes  nnintermitted 
during  nights,  and  often  attended  with  exjiosure  in  rain  and  in  mud  and 
water.  Hundreds,  perhaps  thousands,  of  valuable’  lives  were  lost  in 
that  way.  Others  of  my  corps  were  added  to  this  list,  in  consequence 
ot  exposure  encountered  in  making  roads,  repairing  and  watching 
levees,  and  building  bridges  across  bayous,  while  opening  the  way  for 
themselves  and  other  corps  that  followed  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  Car- 


174 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [CiiAr.  XXXVL 

thage  and  to  Hard  Times,  and  still  otliers  were  subsequently  added  by 
the  casualties  of  battle. 

Leading  the  advance  to  Port  Gibson,  Champion's  Hill,  and  Big  Black, 
and  bearing  the  brunt  of  these  battles,  the  losses  of  my  corps  in  them 
probably  exceeded  those  of  all  the  rest  of  the  army  operating  in  the 
same  field  up  to  the  same  date.  Including  these  losses  and  those  sus- 
tained by  it  in  the  assault  of  May  19  upon  Vicksburg,  and  in  previous 
skirmishes  occurring  during  the  advance  upon  that  place,  and  by  dis- 
ease during  the  same  period,  it  had  lost  full  3,000  men  in  killed,  wounded, 
missing,  and  sick  since  it  had  crossed  the  Mississippi  and  before  the  as- 
sault of  May  22  upon  Vicksburg ; in  other  words,  within  the  short  space 
of  twenty-two  days.  In  addition  to  this,  two  regiments  of  my  command 
had  been  left,  by  General  Grant’s  order,  on  the  west  bank  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi to  garrison  a post,  two  other  regiments  of  it  had  been  sent  away 
to  guard  captives,  and  a whole  brigade  of  it  had  been  left  behind  by 
him  at  Champion’s  Hill,  leaving  with  me  only  the  skeleton  and  name  of 
a corps. 

In  estimating  my  available  and  effective  force  at  Vicksburg  on  the 
morning  of  May  22  at  10,000,  I do  not  think  I am  wide  of  the  mark. 
On  the  same  morning,  with  this  meager  and  inadequate  force,  I was 
holding  a line  miles  in  length,  confronted  by  a corresponding  line  of 
hostile  rifle-pits,  and  numerous  forts,  redoubts,  lunettes,  and  epaule- 
ments  occupied  by  artillery,  covering  and  supporting  the  rifle-pits.  On 
my  left,  as  I have  already  explained,  I was  wholly  unsupi)orted  for 
some  4 miles  around  to  the  Mississippi  below  Vicksburg,  leaving  the 
enemy’s  works  uninvested  for  the  same  distance,  and  my  left  flank  ex- 
posed to  the  danger  of  a sortie  or  being  turned.  On  my  right  there  was 
a gap  between  it  and  McPherson’s  left,  and  this  gap  was  crossed  by  a 
road  leading  from  the  enemy’s  works.  The  front  of  the  three  army 
corps  was  some  3 or  4 miles  in  length. 

General  Grant  admits  in  his  report  that  at  every  point  assaulted, 
and  at  all  of  them  at  the  same  time,  the  enemy  was  able  to  show  all  the 
force  his  works  would  cover,”  and  his  works  could  not  have  been  less 
than  6 or  7 miles  in  length  ; indeed,  it  is  doubtful  whether  at  the  moment 
of  the  assault  the  eqemy’s  force  inside  of  his  works  was  not  as  strong 
as  ours  investing  them.  I understand  that  intelligent  general  officers 
have  expressed  that  opinion.  This  disadvantage  was  enhanced  by  Gen- 
eral Grant’s  plan,  which  required  “ all  the  army  corps’’  to  advance  from 
their  respective  positions  and  make  a simultaneous  attack,”  thus  at- 
tenuating the  line,  or  multiplying  the  columns  of  attack,  and  thereby 
weakening  it. 

It  follows,  therefore,  from  these  facts  that  if  the  nature  of  the  ground 
would  not  allow  all  of  our  diminished  force  to  be  used,  no  assault  should 
have  been  made ; but  the  ground  in  my  front  would  have  allowed  more 
men  than  I had  to  be  used.  They  could  have  been  used  in  augmenting 
the  weight  and  momentum  of  my  attacking  columns  and  in  maintaining 
the  advantages  gained  by  them ; they  could  have  been  used  in  widening 
the  front  of  my  attacking  columns  and  in  assaulting  the  curtain  con- 
necting two  forts  forming  the  points  of  my  attack,  and  to  which  a bri- 
gade of  Quinby’s  division,  of  McPherson’s  corps,  when  it  came  up  to 
re-enforce  me,  was  about  to  be  applied,  when  night  cut  short  the  con- 
flict. They  could  have  been  used  in  these  ways,  and  no  doubt  with  the 
effect  of  increasing  the  advantage  gained  by  my  columns,  weak  as  they 
were,  from  the  causes  mentioned,  and  notwithstanding  the  obstacles  they 
had  to  overcome  in  the  nature  of  the  ground  they  passed  over. 

Concentration  of  our  forces  against  one  or  two  i)oints,  and  not  the  dis- 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


175 


persion  of  them  into  a multitude  of  columns,  was  my  volunteered  sug- 
gestion to  General  Grant  the  day  before  the  assault,  when  he  announced 
his  purpose  to  make  it.  General  Sherman’s  was  that  it  was  a question 
of  how  many  men  he  was  willing  to  lose.  And  concentration,  doubtless, 
was  the  true  policy,  and  with  it  directed  against  one  or  two  points,  aided 
by  a feint  against  others,  we  might  have  been  successful.  Without  it 
we  failed,  with  the  loss  of  many  lives  as  an  answer  to  General  Sher- 
man’s question.  My  men  having  succeeded  in  breaking  through  the 
enemy’s  line,  the  contingency  had  arisen  in  which  General  Grant  admits 
that  more  men  might  have  been  available,  and  yet  he  censures  me  for 
asking  re-enforcements. 

2.  He  affirms  that  “ no  troops  succeeded  in  entering  any  of  the  en- 
emy’s works  with  the  exception  of  Sergeant  Griffith,  of  the  Twenty- 
first  [Twenty-second]  Eegiment  Iowa  Volunteers,  and  some  11  privates 
of  the  same  regiment.” 

The  meaning  of  the  term  “works”  here  becomes  important.  Has 
it  a definite  signification;  and,  if  so,  what  is  it'?  In  military  parlance, 
according  to  received  lexicographers,  it  means  walls,  trenches,  and  the 
like,  made  for  fortifications.  In  this  sense,  as  a military  man,  doubtless, 
General  Grant  uses  it,  and  in  this  sense  he  is  mistaken,  as  the  sequel 
will  show  that  not  only  did  Sergeant  Griffith  and  the  men  with  him 
enter  the  enemy’s  works,  but  that  tieutenant-Colouel  [H.]  Graham,  of 
the  Twenty-second  Iowa,  with  some  200  men,  charged  the  enemy’s  in- 
trenchments  and  drove  him  away,  and  held  them  until  near  nightfall. 
And  I may  add  that  men  of  Benton’s  and  Burbridge’s  brigades,  of  Carr’s 
and  Smith’s  divisions,  did  about  as  much,  driving  the  enemy  from  another 
part  of  his  trenches. 

3.  General  Grant  affirms  that  he 

received  a second  dispatch  from  McClernand,  stating  positively  and  unequivocally 
that  he  was  in  possession  of,  and  still  held,  two  of  the  enemy’s  forts ; that  the  American 
Hag  then  waved  over  them,  and  asking  to  have  Sherman  and  McPherson  make  a di- 
version in  his  favor. 

General  Sherman,  in  his  report  of  the  assault,  in  alluding  to  this 
same  dispatch,  says : 

Having  heard  McClernand’s  report  to  General  Grant  read,  that  he  had  taken  three 
of  the  enemy’s  forts,  and  that  his  flags  floated  on  the  stronghold  of  Vicksburg,  I or- 
dered General  Tuttle  to  send  directly  to  the  assault  one  of  his  brigades. 

Here  are  two  versions  of  my  dispatch,  one  General  Grant’s  and  the 
other  General  Sherman’s.  Why  did  not  General  Grant  give  the  dis- 
patch totidem  verbis  f In  a question  of  veracity  between  us  it  was  bat 
fair  and  just  that  he  should  have  done  so.  I never  wrote  or  knowingly 
authorized  such  a dispatch  to  be  sent.  If  he  received  such  an  one  pur- 
porting to  come  from  me,  it  was  through  the  mistake  of  a copyist.  The 
dispatch  I did  write  and  authorize  to  be  sent  to  him  was  very  different. 
In  most  material  part  it  was  nearly  the  opposite.  It  was  that  I had 
part  possession ; not  that  my  possession  was  complete ; not  that  it  was 
undisputed ; not  that  it  was  secure;  but  that  it  was  disputed  and  inse- 
cure, and  needed  to  be  strengthened  and  perfected  by  re-enforcements 
or  a diversion.  On  the  contrary,  I would  not  have  asked  for  support 
without  having  first  unsuccessfully  tried  to  press  my  advantage.  As 
to  my  saying  that  the  American  flag  waved  over  two  forts,  and  asking 
to  have  Sherman  and  McPherson  make  a diversion  in  my  favor,  I have 
only  to  add  that  while  again  my  language  is  not  given,  the  facts  stated 
are  substantially  true,  as  will  hereafter  appear. 

yhe  pj'jginal  of  the  mooted  dispatch  and  the  authentication  of  its 


176 


[CiiAr.  XXXVL 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

genuineuess  by  Sergeant  Kugg,  Company  A,  Seventy- seven tli  Illinois 
infantry,  is  in  the  following  words  and  figures  : 

Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

In  the  Battle-Field,  near  Vickslmrg,  Miss.,  May  22,  1863 — 12  in. 
Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant: 

General  : We  are  hotly  engaged  with  the  enemy.  We  have  part  possession  of  two 
forts,  and  the  Stars  and  Stripes  are  waving  over  them.  A vigorous  push  ought  to  he 
made  all  along  the  line. 

JOHN  A.  McCLERNAND, 

Major- General,  Commandiny. 


[Certificate.] 


This  is  a correct  and  perfect  copy  of  the  original  disiiatch,  which  I have  seen  and 
read. 


A.  H.  EUGG. 


4.  General  Grant  affirms  that  he  ‘^had  taken  a commanding  posi- 
tion near  McPherson’s  front,”  &c.  That  ^‘the  position  occupied  by” 
him  “during  most  of  the  assault  gave”  him  “a  better  opportunity 
of  seeing  what  was  going  on  in  front  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps 
than”  he  “believed  it  possible  for  the  commander  of  it  to  have,”  and 
that  he  “ could  not  see  McClernand’s  possession  of  forts  nor  necessity 
for  re-enforcements,  as  represented  in  his  dispatches.”  That  General 
Grant  had  taken  “ a commanding  position  near  McPherson’s  front” 
may  be  true.  That  he  could  not  see  my  “ possession  of  forts  nor  ne- 
cessity for  re- enforcements,”  may  also  be  true.  His  position,  although 
commanding,  may  not  have  enabled  him  to  do  it,  although  the  facts 
may  have  existed.  Indeed,  he  admits  in  another  part  of  his  report  that 
he  could  only  see  “ a part  of  each  of  .Sherman’s  and  McClernand’s  ad- 
vancing columns,”  but  that  his  position  gave  him  “a  better  opportunity 
of  seeing  what  was  going  on  in  front  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  ” 
than  mine  afforded  me,  is  a mistake.  As  I understand,  he  was  about  1 J 
miles  to  the  right  of  my  position,  which  was  a commanding  one,  only 
500  or  600  yards  in  the  rear  of  tlje  center  of  my  advance  and  from  the 
enemy’s  works.  I could  see,  and  did  see,  flags  of  my  corps  planted  upon 
the  enemy’s  works,  and  could  see,  and  did  see,  officers  and  men  of  my 
command  enter  them  and  rebel  captives  brought  out  of  them.  General 
Grant  himself  admits — not,  as  I understand,  from  his  own  personal 
knowledge — that  “ Sergeant  Griffith  and  some  11  privates”  of  my  com- 
mand “ entered  one  of  the  forts,”  but  upon  information  derived  from 
others,  perhaps  from  my  official  report. 

5.  He  affirms  that  he  “ sent  an  answer  to  McClernand,  directiug 
him  to  order  up  McArthur  to  his  assistance,”  and  himself  “ ordered 
Quinby’s  division  * * * to  report  to  McClernand.”  He  said  he 
did  this  because  he  “ could  not  disregard”  my  “reiterated  statements,” 
although  he  “ could  not  see”  my  “ possession  of  forts,  nor  necessity  for 
re-enforcements,”  and  although  he  doubted  the  truth  of  my  dispatches. 
Doubting  in  a matter  of  such  vital  importance  imposed  an  absolute 
obligation  to  investigate — to  go  or  send  a staff  officer,  and  see  and  clear 
up  his  doubts.  Not  to  do  so  would  render  him  guilty  of  an  omission  as 
culpable  as  the  act  of  commission  charged  by  him  upon  me.  He  admits 
that  he  rode  over  to  Sherman’s  position  and  showed  him  my  dispatch 
and  rode  back  again  to  McPherson’s.  Why  could  he  not,  why  did  he 
not,  ride  or  send  over  to  me  ? He  admits,  furthermore,  that  he  was  not 
occupying  the  “ commanding  position  near  McPherson’s  front”  when 
he  received  the  dispatch  upon  which  he  based  his  orders  to  Sherman 
and  McPherson  for  the  renewal  of  the  assault,  but  vms  at  Sherman’s 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


177 

position— probably  a mile  or  two  beyond  McPherson’s  and  probably 
out  of  sight  of  his  position  as  well  as  my  own.  Could  he  there  see ; was 
It  possible  for  him  there  to  see  whether  I had  ‘^possession  of  forts”  and 
needed  re-enforcements  ? He  does  not,  and  1 presume  he  could  not,  say 
so.  It  is  true  that,  as  above  stated,  General  Grant  ordered  re-enforce- 
ments, but  he  does  not  say,  as  already  shown  by  his  dispatches,  that 
he  delayed  sending  Qumby’s  division,  and  that  neither  it  nor  McArthur’s 
as  will  be  shown  by  the  sequel,-  arrived  in  time.  ’ 

In  support  and  confirmation  of  what  I have  thus  denied  or  affirmed 
respecting  General  Grant’s  allegations — that  1 had  “ more  men  than 
could  possibly  be  used  in  the  assault,”  and  that  more  men  could  only 
avail  in  case  of  breaking  through  the  enemy’s  lines,”  &c. ; that  he  “ re- 
ceived a second  dispatch  from  McOlern and  stating  positively  and  un- 
equi vocally  that  he  was  in  possession  of  and  still  held  two  of  the  enemy’s 
forts ; that  the  American  flag  waved  over  them,  and  asking  to  have 
Sherman  and  McPherson  make  a diversion  in  his  favor that  he  had 
taken  a commanding  position  near  McPherson’s  front,”  &c. ; that  “ the 
position  occupied  by”  him  during  most  of  the  assault  gave  ” him  a 
better  opportunity  of  seeing  what  was  going  on  in  front  of  the  Thirteenth 
Army  Corps  than  he  believed  it  possible  for  the  commander  of  it  to 
have,  and  that  he  could  not  see”  McClernand’s  possession  of  forts 
re-enforcements,”  &c.— in  support  a^d  confirmation  ot 
all  that  I have  denied  or  affirmed  in  regard  to  these  matters,  I offer  the 
following  testimony  of  living,  disinterested,  and  creditable  witnesses, 
who  speak  of  what  they  saw,  did,  and  knew  of  that  of  which  they  were 
magnum  j^ars: 

f Brigade,  Fourteenth  Division, 
and  Lot.  W.  J.  Landram  (Nineteenth  Kentucky),  commanding  Second  Brigade,  Tenth 
Diiision,  whose  commands  formed  one  of  my  columns  of  attack. 

Second  Brigade,  Tentu  Division— 10.10. 
Ueneral  McClernand,  per  General  Smith  : 

movement  of  ourtroops  on 

M.  K.  LAWLER, 

Brigadier-  General. 

W.  J.  LANDRAM, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Second  Brigade. 

\~Dis]gatch  of  W.  J.  Landram,  colonel,  commanding  brigade,  to  General  Smith  and  for- 
warded to  me.  ’ 

Headquarters  Second  Brigade,  Tenth  Division 
Jeneral  Smith,  ^“2^  2®'  1863-2.40  p.  lo. 

Commanding  Tenth  Division : 

f ® liowms  tie  flanks  of  the  fort  in  our  front.  There  is  a iieavy  oross-f.io 
.pon  us,  andweliavo  lost  many  killed  and  wounded.  They  are  linrliug  liaud-greuades 
pen  ns,  and  hurting  us  considerably  in  that  "vrav.  ^ 

' Yours,  &c.,  ^ J 

W.  J.  LANDRAM, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Brigade. 

3. — Letter  of  Col.  William  M.  Stone. 

tajor-General  McClerhahi,  : Knoxvii.te,  Iowa,  Scptemlcr  8,  1863. 

interrogatories  presented  by  Mr.  Jones,  I state  the  following  facts, 
mv  ^ observation,  connected  with  the  assault  of  the  Thirteenth 

my  Corps  upon  the  enemy’s  works  at  Vicksburg  on  May  22  last: 
was  m command  of  the  Twenty-second  Iowa,  which  regiment  was  in  the  Second 
12  R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


178 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Brigade,  Fourteeutli  Division,  of  said  corps.  On  the  evening  of  May  21, 1 was  served 
with  a copy  of  the  circular  or  order  directing  the  assault  to  bo  made  the  next  day  at 
10  a.  m.  I was  informed  by  my  brigade  commander  (General  Lawler)  that  I would 
have  the  advance,  and  that  I could  approach  any  point  of  the  enemy’s  works  I con- 
sidered the  most  salient,  and  in  any  form  I thought  x>roper.  Between  sundown  and 
dark  I went  up  to  within  50  yards  of  the  enemy’s  lines,  and  made  a personal  recon- 
naissance of  the  ground  on  our  front  and  of  their  lines.  My  observations  satisfied  me 
that  the  fort  next  to  the  railroad  could  be  carried  more  easily  and  with  less  sacrifice 
than  any  other  point  on  our  front,  and  I determined  to  direct  my  regiment  against  it. 
I took  my  regiment  over  the  hill  in  front  of  Maloney’s  siege  battery  that  night,  and 
had  it  in  readiness  for  the  morning’s  work.  At  a little  before  10  o’clock  by  my  time,  I 
received  the  order  from  General  Lawler’s  assistant  adjutant-general  to  advance,  and  I 
did  so  immediately,  supported  by  the  Twenty-first  Iowa.  I advanced  as  I intended, 
directly  against  the  fort,  but  in  passing  over  the  crest  of  the  hill  the  enemy’s  fire  was 
so  terrific  that  the  left  wing  of  my  regiment  was  driven  into  the  hollow  on  the  left  of 
the  fort,  but  the  right  wing  advanced  steadily  toward  the  fort,  and  within  ten  min- 
utes from  the  time  we  started  my  men  entered  it,  and  held  it,  to  my  knowledge,  for 
over  an  hour.  The  fort  was  small,  and  the  ox)en  space  inside  very  limited,  and  but 
few  men  could  find  room  in  it.  When  the  enemy  were  driven  from  the  fort,  they  also 
retired  from  the  rifle-pits  on  the  right  (our  right),  between  that  and  the  railroad.  The 
Eleventh  Wisconsin  had  also  advanced  against  the  second  fort,  some  300  yards  from 
the  first  one,  and  I saw  the  enemy  leave  that  one.  They  also  retired  from  the  pits 
between  the  two  forts,  and  went  down  the  hill  into  the  ravine  or  hollow  beyond 
toward  the  city,  leaving  only  a few  straggling  sharpshooters  behind.  I stood  with 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Dunlap,  of  the  Twenty-first  Iowa,  on  the  highest  and  most  ex- 
posed point  near  the  fort.  We  saw  them  leave  and  conversed  about  it.  I sent  word 
back  to  General  Carr  to  send  me  a brigade  and  I would  hold  the  works.  I regarded 
the  thing  as  easily  done.  I do  not  know  that  my  message  reached  the  general. 

I then  regarded  the  door  to  Vicksburg  as  opened,  and  so  said  to  Colonel  Dunlap, 
and  we  were  there  looking  over  the  ground,  congratulating  ourselves  upon  our  suc- 
cess, when  I was  shot  in  the  arm  by  a sharpshooter  from  the  woods  beyond  their  rifle- 
pits,  and  he  was  killed.  I ordered  the  color-bearer  of  the  Seventy-seventh  Illinois  to 
bring  up  his  colors,  as  mine  were  down  in  the  hollow  on  the  left,  and  my  own  men 
iflanted  them  on  top  of  the  fort.  Soon  after  this  my  own  colors  were  brought  up  and 
placed  beside  them.  They  remained  there  to  my  certain  knowledge  till  6 o’clock  in 
the  evening.  Had  we  been  re-enforced  at  any  time  before  12  m.  by  a fresh  brigade,  I 
have  no  doubt  that  the  whole  army  could  have  gone  into  Vicksburg.  After  that  my 
knowledge  of  the  situation  up  there  was  not  so  good,  as  I had  retired  from  the  field. 
I stated  this  opinion  to  several  after  I went  back.  There  were  no  interior  works  at 
that  time  in  the  rear  of  the  line  we  held,  as  I could  see  far  beyond.  Maloney’s  battery 
of  siege  guns  was  about  500  yards  directly  in  the  rear  of  our  operations,  and  commanded 
a fine  view  of  all  our  movements.  I do  not  know  where  General  McPherson’s  head- 
quarters were,  but  I should  think  there  was  no  point  from  which  our  operations  could 
have  been  so  correctly  observed  as  from  this  battery. 

W.  M.  STONE, 

Late  Colonel  Twenty-second  Iowa. 

4. — Letter  of  Lieut.  Col.  Harvey  Graham. 

Benton  Barkacks,  Mo.,  Sejytcmber  1,  1803. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McClernand  : 

Your  note  of  August  26  has  just  been  handed  to  me  by  Mr.  Jones,  and  in  reply  1 
hasten  to  say  : 

1.  That  on  May  22,  ultimo,  when  the  combined  assault  was  made  ux)on  the  enemy’s 
works  at  Vicksburg,  my  jiosition  was  such  as  afforded  me  only  an  opportunity  of 
viewing  the  doings  of  Lawler’s  brigade.  Early  in  the  morning  of  that  day  my  reg- 
iment was  formed  in  line  on  the  extreme  right  of  Lawler’s  brigade,  and  as  we  led  the 
advance  I can  only  speak  of  the  successes  attending  that  portion  of  your  command.  It 
is  my  firm  conviction  and  belief  that  had  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  been  re-enforced 
by  a few  brigades,  thus  enabling  you  to  send  support  to  the  front,  the  success  of  your 
command  would  have  been  complete.  As  it  was,  success  was  achieved,  but  was  after- 
ward lost.  Victory  was  in  your  hands,  but  was  wrested  from  you  by  superior  numbers. 

2.  At  10  a.  m.,  I,  with  some  200  of  my  command,  charged  upon  the  defenses  of 
the  enemy,  and  within  thirty  minutes  had  stormed  one  of  the  forts  and  driven  the 
enemy  away  from  the  front  of  their  works,  and  had  possession  of  his  iutrenchments. 
This  was  one  of  the  principal  forts  of  the  enemy,  and  was  situated  almost  directly  in 
front  of  Maloney’s  battery  of  Parrott  guns.  My  command  held  their  position  there 
until  nearly  dark,  when,  from  the  want  of  proper  suiiport,  they  were  captured.  Ser- 
geants [N.  C.]  Messenger  and  Griffith,  of  Company  I,  Twenty-second  Iowa,  entered 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


179 


the  fort  with  about  20 men,  capturing  many  prisoners,  and  remaining  inside  the  works 
until  nearly  all  were  killed.  This  occurred  between  10.30  and  12  m.,  as  near  as  I can 
judge.  Sergeant  Griffith  was  inside  the  fort  over  an  hour,  and  had  I had  the  men  to 
send  to  his  aid,  I could  have  retained  it  in  full  possession. 

3.  Two  stand  of  colors  were  planted  upon  the  parapet  of  the  fort  by  11  a.  m., 
and  remained  there  all  day,  in  spite  of  all  the  efforts  of  the  enemy  to  cajiture  them. 
Late  in  the  evening,  as  it  was  nearly  dark,  they  were  taken,  having  floated  for  over 
nine  hours  on  the  highest  portion  of  the  works. 

4.  * * * Between  11  a.  m.  and  12  m.  I observed  that  the  enemy  all  along  the 

line,  especially  at  the  fort  to  my  right,  seemed  to  be  panic-stricken,  and  it  is  my 
impression  that  could  a strong  attack  have  then  been  made,  the  works  would  have  all 
been  carried. 

5.  The  ground  upon  which  Maloney’s  battery  was  situated  was  about  600  yards 
from  the  works  of  the  enemy,  and  was  the  most  commanding  position  in  the  neigh- 
borhood, and  afforded  ample  opportunity  for  witnessing  all  the  movements  of  the 
Thirteenth  Army  Corps.  From  my  position  on  the  fort  I could  see  nothing  of  that 
portion  of  the  field  where  General  McPherson’s  headquarters  were,  and  am  convinced 
no  one  could  observe  the  operations  of  my  command  from  that  point. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HARVEY  GRAHAM, 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Twenty-second  Iowa  Infantry, 


5. — Letter  of  Maj.  J.  B.  Atherton. 

Knoxville,  Iowa,  SejHemher  5,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McClernand: 

Dear  Sir  : In  answer  to  certain  questions  propounded  by  you  concerning  my  knowl- 
edge of  the  action  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  in  the  assault  upon  the  enemy’s  de- 
fenses in  the  rear  of  Vicksburg  on  May  22  last,  I would  state  : 

1.  That  I was  major  of  the  Twenty-second  Regiment  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry,  and 
participated  in  said  assault.  I was  with  the  left  wing  of  my  regiment,  and,  from  the 
rough  and  uneven  character  of  the  country  and  the  abatis  of  the  enemy,  could  not 
see  the  action  of  any  but  my  own  brigade.  The  assault  began  near  10  a.  m.,  and  within 
three-quarters  of  an  hour  from  that  time  the  colors  of  our  regiment  and  one  other 
(Seventy-seventh  Illinois)  were  raised  upon  the  fort  immediately  in  our  front.  The 
fort  was  occupied  by  our  men  from  one  to  two  hours.  Our  colors  remained  upon  it  for 
the  same  time.  We  were  successful,  and  couldhave  held  what  we  had  gained  had  wo 
been  re-enforced  at  the  proper  time.  We  were  compelled  to  fall  back  before  superior 
numbers  of  the  enemy  and  our  men  to  abandon  the  fort. 

2.  The  enemy  was  driven  from  the  fort  above  referred  to.  It  was  occupied  by  our 
men ; held  by  them  over  an  hour— as  long  as  it  was  possible  to  hold  it  without  addi- 
tional force.  The  two  stand  of  colors  mentioned  in  my  answer  to  the  first  interroga- 
tory were  i)lanted  ou  it,  one  of  which  remained  there  several  hours. 

3.  I have  ever  been  of  opinion,  and  have  no  doubt,  that  had  we  been  re-enforced 
by  two  divisions  when  in  possession  of  the  fort,  we  would  have  held  it,  forced  our  way 
through  the  enemy’s  works,  and  driven  them  from  our  right  and  left.  The  posses^- 
sion  of  this  fort  by  us  divided  the  enemy,  and  prevented  them  from  rallying  rapidly 
from  right  to  left  as  occasion  might  require,  giving  us  command  of  the  rifle-pits  on 
either  side,  which  could  soon  have  been  cleared  of  the  enemy,  and  an  entrance  made 
for  any  number  of  troops  needed. 

4.  The  position  of  Maloney’s  battery  being  immediately  in  our  rear  and  on  a hi"h 
])oint,  afforded  a much  better  opportunity  for  witnessing  the  action  of  the  Thirteenth 
Army  Corps  than  any  position  a half  mile  or  more  either  to  the  right  or  left  of  it  could 
atlord. 

I am,  general,  with  much  rcsitect,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  B.  ATHERTON, 

Late  Major  Twenty-second  I.oiva  Ipfantry. 


6. — Letter  of  Seryt.  A.  H.  Riigg. 


Springfield,  III.,  Avgust  31,  1863. 

1 hereby  certify  that  I was  on  the  field  with  Major-General  McClernand  at  Vicks- 
burg on  Majr  22, 186.3,  and  saw  the  flags  of  the  Seventy’^-seventh  Illinois  Infantry  planted 
on  the  rebel  forts.  The  national  colors  were  afterward  carried  inside  and  captured, 
together  with  a nura])er  of  men  of  the  regiment,  after  nightfall. 

A.  II.  RUGG, 

Sergeant  Comimny  A,  Seventy-seventh  Illinois  Infantry. 


180  MISSISSIPPI;  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [CnAr.  XXXVI. 

7. —Letter  of  H.  C.  Warmoth,  late  lieutenant-colonel  and  aide-de-camp. 

Saint  Nicholas  Hotel, 
Springfield^  III.,  August  24,  1863. 

General:  In  answer  to  your  inquiry  of  this  date,  I have  to  say  thart  I was  detached 
from  my  regiment  by  order  of  Major-General  Grant,  with  orders  to  report  to  you  for 
duty  upon  your  staff.  I was  with  you  in  the  siege  of  Vicksburg  up  to  the  evening  of 
May  22,  when  I was  wounded  and  caught  by  you  in  your  arms  as  I fell.  On  May  22 
I was  repeatedly  sent  by  you  to  different  parts  of  the  field,  and  had  good  opportuni- 
ties of  knowing  what  was  done  by  your  corps  (Thirteenth)  on  that  occasion. 

At  10  o'clock  your  columns  of  attack  moved  forward  to  the  assault.  In  less  than 
one  hour,  Joseph  E.  Griffith,  a sergeant  of  the  Twenty-second  Iowa,  with  a part  of  the 
storming  party,  entered  one  of  the  works  of  the  enemy,  drove  the  enemy  out,  and 
held  the  place  for  some  hours.  He  captured  13  men  with  a lieutenant  in  this  work, 
and  reported  them  to  you  about  2 o'clock.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Graham,  of  the  Twen- 
ty-second Iowa,  with  a small  detachment,  entered  another  fort  and  drove  the  enemy 
out,  maintaining  himself  there  until  after  nightfall,  when  the  enemy  massed  their 
forces  upon  us  and  drove  us  back  from  our  line,  which  was  up  to  the  works  of  the 
enemy,  capturing  Lieutenant-Colonel  Graham  and  his  men.  The  American  flag 
floated  from  on  top  of  two  of  the  enemy's  works,  and  our  men  kept  them  there  until 
after  nightfall,  as  I am  informed.  They  were  there  when  I was  wounded,  which  was 
after  5 o'clock.  All  this  time  many  of  our  men  were  in  the  ditches  of  the  enemy,  and 
sent  back  for  spades  and  shovels  with  which  to  dig  down  the  enemy's  works. 

About  5.30  o'clock  a part,  if  not  the  whole,  of  Quinby's  division  arrived.  McArthur 
did  not  arrive  until  next  day  (May  23).  I believed  then  if  the  two  divisions  had 
arrived  in  reasonable  time  that  we  would  have  been  able  to  have  pushed  through  the 
lines  of  the  enemy.  It  was  so  believed  by  every  officer  I saw. 

Your  position  during  the  assault  was  to  the  left  and  a little  to  the  rear  of  our  bat- 
tery of  30-poundor  Parrotts,  which  was  about  COO  yards  from  the  enemy's  works.  We 
could  plainly  see  the  line  of  works  in  our  front  and  to  the  extreme  left  of  our  corps, 
but  a part  of  the  right  was  obstructed  by  the  foliage  of  a grove  of  trees.  This  was 
the  best  point  for  observation  along  our  entire  line,  and  from  the  top  of  the  battery, 
where  you  often  went  for  observation,  you  could  see  perfectly  everything  in  our  front 
from  right  to  left. 

In  my  opinion,  it  was  about  1|  miles  from  the  elevated  point  in  General  McPher- 
son's line  from  which  he  and  General  Grant  made  observations.  The  position  occu- 
pied by  them  was  perhaps  higher  ground,  but  I do  not  believe  they  could  observe  our 
movements  with  the  accuracy  we  could  from  the  position  occupied  by  you. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  C.  WARMOTH, 

Late  Lieutenant-Colonel  and  Aide-de-Camp. 

8. — Letter  of  F.  H.  Mason,  late  captain  and  aide-de-camp. 

Springfield,  III.,  August  24,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McClernand: 

Sir  : Your  note  of  this  morning  is  received,  and  in  reply  I beg  leave  to  submit  the 
following  report : 

1.  I was  acting  throughout  the  attack  on  Vicksburg  in  the  capacity  of  aide-de- 
camp  on  your  staff,  and  being  sent  at  various  times  to  your  division  and  brigade  com- 
manders with  orders,  inquiries,  &c.,  and  being  all  the  remainder  of  the  time,  when  not 
thus  occupied  in  your  immediate  presence,  taking  notes  of  the  various  incidents  and 
hearing  the  various  messages  and  reports  brought  by  staff  and  general  officers  to  you, 
I enjoyed  as  good  advantages  for  hearing  and  seeing  the  assault  and  the  part  you  took 
as  could  be  possible  for  any  one  in  my  capacity. 

2.  At  about  10.10  a.  m.  on  the  22d,  I saw  the  advance  of  General  Lawler's  brigade, 
of  Carr's  division,  rush  up  the  slope  leading  to  the  large  work  of  the  enemy  imme- 
diately to  the  left  of  the  railroad.  Though  met  by  a fierce  fire,  they  continued  to 
advance,  leaped  into  the  ditch,  and  began  to  climb  the  enemy's  parapet.  A moment 
afterward  a flag  was  planted  on  the  crest  of  the  parapet  and  held  there  by  two  men, 
while  a party  of  fifteen  or  twenty  (as  I should  judge)  sprang  over  into  the  fort,  imme- 
diately after  which  those  of  the  enemy  who  had  been  firing  over  the  part  of  the  fort 
opposite  to  where  the  entrance  was  made  disappeared,  leading  me  to  the  belief  that 
they  had  all  been  driven  by  our  men  from  the  works.  At  this  time  you  observed 
that  the  assaultiug  column  was  weak,  and  ordered  it  to  be  vigorously  supported,  and 
also  sent  an  aide  to  General  Carr,  with  orders  to  push  Benton  forward  to  create  a 
diversion  in  favor  of  General  Lawler,  or,  if  necessary,  to  his  immediate  support.  Im- 
mediately afterward  information  was  brought  to  you  that  the  advance  of  General 
Smith's  division  had  effected  a lodgment  and  forced  the  enemy  to  abandon  a portion 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


181 


of  his  rifle-pits;  but  whether  the  interior  of  the  works  had  been  reached,  or  merely 
the  ditch,  I did  not  understand.  A part  of  the  language  of  the  officer  brino-ing  the 
report  was  that  our  flag  is  planted  on  the  enemy’s  works.”  At  11.46  an  officer  arrived 
and  said  that  tl>e  fort  first  referred  to  was  ours,  and  asked  you  to  order  that  it  should 
not  be  further  fired  upon.  You  seemed  incredulous,  and  sent  me  to  Colonel  Landram 
who  was  in  a very  advanced  position,  to  ascertain  as  far  as  possible  the  exact  state 
of  the  case.  I found  that  officer,  and,  upon  delivering  my  message,  received  from  him 
in  addition  to  his  confident  opinion  that  the  fort  was  ours,  a note  from  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Graham,  of  the  Twenty-second  Iowa,  with  the  remark  that  the  “note  was 
Aviitten  inside  the  fort.”  This  note,  the  contents  of  which  I do  not  remember  with 
sufficient  accuracy  to  repeat,  I delivered  to  you,  believing  fully  that  the  fort  was  in 
our  entire  possession. 

8.  Although  from  the  great  length  of  the  line  occupied  by  the  Thirteenth  Corps, 
and  the  number  of  forts  on  the  enemy’s  line,  the  attack  seemed  desperate,  yet  it  was 
my  beliet  that  with  the  aid  of  re-enforcements  the  position  might  be  fully  carried. 
Ou  this  point  General  Landram  said  at  1.50  p.  m.,  “ If  General  Osterhaus,  on  my  left 
will  press  forward,  I think  the  works  can  soon  be  cleared.” 

position  occupied  by  you  during  the  day  was  a commanding  knoll,  about 
600  yards  from  the  enemy’s  works,  and  upon  which  a battery  of  30-pounder  Parrotts 
had  been  planted.  Irom  this  point  all  your  lino  could  be  seen,  except  a part  of 
Geueral  Smith  s command,  which  formed  your  extreme  right,  and  which,  though 
near,  was  partially  hidden  by  the  foliage  of  trees  and  the  extreme  unevenness  of  the 
ground,  rour  post  ot  observation  owed  its  entire  safety  to  the  slight  parapet  in  front 
as  many  of  the  enemy’s  bullets  went  far  beyond  us  into  the  woods,  and  men  were  con- 
being  wounded  all  about  you.  The  distance  from  the  above  point  to  General 
McPhersons  headquarters,  where  General  Grant  was  located,  was,  in  my  judgment, 
General  Grant’s  position  enjoyed  some  advantages  in  point  of 
altitude,  yet  I cannot  believe  that  this  or  any  other  place  afforded  nearly  so  good  a 
view  of  the  Thirteenth  Corps  as  the  one  you  occupied. 

5.  Boomer’s  brigade  arrived  at  5 o’clock,  and  was  sent  to  the  front.  Twenty  min- 

utes afterward  a regiment  arrived,  and  was  held  for  some  time  in  reserve  near  head- 
quarters. This  regiment  may  have  been  part  of  the  Second  Brigade,  of  Quinby’s 
‘ division  of  General  McArthur  arrived  at  10  a.  m.  the  day  followino-. 

6.  Ihe  dispatches  sent  from  time  to  time  during  the  day  to  General  Grant  v^ere 

less  sanguine  ot  success  and  less  positive  in  regard  to  what  had  been  already  accom- 
officers  own  opinion,  and,  as  I believed,  the  opinion  of  the  majority  of  your 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  H.  MASON, 

Late  Captain  and  Aide-de-Camp. 

d.— Letter  of  A.  A.  Blount,  late  captain  Seventeenth  Ohio  Volunteer  Artillery, 


w . ^ T A ^ Springfield,  Ohio,  ASeptemlier  5,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  A.  McClernand:  ’ j , 

General  : Your  favor  of  August  23  is  received,  requesting  me  to  state  what  I 
know  about  any  of  the  colors  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  having  been  planted  upon 
the  enemy’s  forffi  during  the  assault  on  May  22  upon  the  defenses  of  Vicksburo-.  In 
reply,  1 would  state  that  I saw  the  colors  of  the  Seventy-seventh  Illinois  Regiment 
planted  upon  the  parget  of  one  of  the  enemy  forts,  as  also  were  the  colors  of  the 
t wenty-second  Iowa  Regiment,  and  that  the  men  of  the  latter  regiment  occupied  one 
"^as  divided  by  a traverse.  I heard  General  Carr  give  orders  to 
uis  aitillery  not  to  fire  upon  that  fort,  as  it  was  in  our  possession.  The  regimental  flag 
the  Seventy-seventh  Illinois  remained  upon  the  parapet  of  the  fort  from  eight  to  ten 
iiours,  when  it  was  brought  away.  The  narional  flag  of  the  same  regiment  could  not ' 
'if..  Y’  covered  with  earth  in  the  ditch.  I saw  upon  another  fort 

battery  the  colors  of  the  Eighty-third  Ohio  Regiment,  and  I 
f Sixteenth  Iowa.  There  were  colors  of  other  regiments  planted  upon 

lie  extreme  slope  ot  the  parapet  and  upon  the  crest  of  the  glacis  of  other  forts,  where 
° remained  from  eight  to  ten  hours.  It  was  the  universal  opinion  of  officers  and 
lieu  tliat  had  we  sufficient  force  the  fort  occupied  by  our  men  could  have  been  held. 
Kespectiully,  your  obedient  servant. 


^ . A.  A.  BLOUNT, 

Late  Captain  Seventeenth  Ohio  Volunteer  Artillery. 

Other  letters  in  iny  possession  might  be  added,  but  they  would  ex- 
<611(1  this  communication  too  much.  Those  already  given  will  abun- 
lantly  suffice  for  the  purpose  in  hand.  They  not  only  prove  all  I have 
lenied  or  affirmed,  but  they  prove  more.  They  prove  the  promptness 


182  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

of  my  assault ; that  Lawler’s  and  Landram’s  commands,  forming  the 
column  of  attack  on  my  left  center,  planted  their  colors  on  the  enemy’s 
works ; moreover,  that  they  were  carried  inside  of  one  of  the  main  forts ; 
that  officers  and  men  of  the  commands  of  one  or  both  of  them  forced 
their  way  into  the  same  fort;  that  observing  that  the  assaulting  column 
was  weak,  I ordered  it  to  be  supported ; that  immediately  afterward 
information  was  brought  to  me  that  the  advance  of  Smith’s  division, 
together  with.  Benton’s  brigade,  of  Carr’s  division,  forming  another 
column  of  attack,  had  effected  another  lodgment  in  the  enemy’s  works, 
and  had  also  planted  our  flag  on  them ; that  prisoners  had  been  cap- 
tured and  brought  out  of  the  fort  assaulted  by  Lawler  and  Landram ; 
that  afterward  an  officer  brought  word  to  me  that  the  same  fort  was 
ours,  and  a request  that  it  should  not  be  further  fired  upon ; that,  doubt- 
ing, I sent  a staff  officer  to  verify  the  fact ; that  he  brought  word  from 
Colonel  Landram  not  only  that  the  fort  was  ours,  but  a note  from  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Graham,  of  the  Twenty-second  Iowa,  with  the  remark 
that  “ the  note  was  written  inside  of  the  fort,”  and  that  he  was  fully  per- 
suaded of  the  truth  of  the  information ; that  the  Twenty-second  Iowa 
advanced  against  one  fort,  and  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin  against  another, 
and  that  Colonel  Stone  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dunlap  (killed)  saw 
the  Twenty-second  and  Twenty-first  Iowa  Begiments  advance  upon 
two  different  forts,  and  the  enemy  retire  from  both,  and  the  rifle-i)its 
connecting  them,  down  a hill  and  toward  the  city,  and  talked  about  it 
while  it  was  going  on.  They  prove  that  I could  have  used  more  men 
in  making  my  assault,  and  with  timely  re-enforcements  of  two  divisions 
would  have  Crowned  it  with  success ; that  my  position  was  much  more 
favorable  than  General  Grant’s  for  seeing  what  was  going  on  in  front  of 
my  corps ; that  my  position  was  near  the  center  of  my  line,  and  only  500 
or  GOO  yards  from  the  enemy’s  works,  while  General  Grant’s  was  about 
1 J miles  to  the  right  of  my  position ; that  my  dispatches  to  General 
Grant  were  a qualification  rather  than  an  exaggeration  of  my  success, 
and  that  the  re-enforcements  finally  ordered  by  General  Grant  did  not 
arrive  in  time,  Quinby’s  division  only  arriving  about  5 o’clock,  and  too 
late  to  be  properly  formed  and  successfully  applied,  and  McArthur’s 
not  until  next  day. 

As  I have  already  shown.  General  Grant  says  that — 

Tlie  works  entered  by  bim  (Sergeant  Griffith)  from  its  position  could  give  us  no 
practical  advantage,  unless  others  to  the  right  and  left  of  it  were  carried  and  licld 
at  the  same  time. 

Is  not  this  declaration  too  broad  Is  it  not  as  much  as  to  say  that 
no  practical  advantage  could  have  been  derived  from  taking  any  part 
less  than  the  whole  of  the  enemy’s  works  at  once ; that  the  i)ossession 
.of  any  part,  however  extended,  flanked  by  other  parts  held  by  the  enemy, 
would  have  been  worthless?  Is  it  not  as  much  as  to  say  that  the  only 
condition  of  our  success  was  the  impossibility  of  carrying  the  whole  of 
the  enemy’s  line,  which  wms  much  longer  than  our  own,  at  once,  and 
consequently  that  our  attack  must  have  been  by  our  forces  in  line,  instead 
of  in  column,  as  he  directed  ? And  yet,  strange  enough,  lie  censures  me 
for  asking  for  the  co-operation  of  a simultaneous  attack  by  Sherman 
and  McPherson,  according  to  the  terms  of  his  original  plan,  and  with- 
out which,  by  his  own  admission,  “no  practical  advantage”  could  have 
resulted  from  Sergeant  Griffith’s  partial  success.  By  his  own  showing, 
I only  asked  for  what  his  original  plan  promised,  and  what,  by  his  own. 
admission,  was  necessary  to  our  success. 

This  of  itself  is  a suflicient  refutation  of  the, charge  that  what  I asked  , 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


183 


for  makes  me  responsible  for  the  “increase  of  onr  mortality  list  fully 
50  per  cent.f^  but,  apart  from  it,  there  is  another  essential  fact  which 
goes  to  the  root  of  this  whole  matter,  which  makes  General  Grant  re- 
sponsible not  only  for  the  alleged  increase  of  our  mortality  list,  but  for 
our  whole  loss,  and  which  truth  and  justice  require  should  be  laid  bare. 
I allude  to  General  Grant’s  order  of  May  21  for  the  assault.  That  order 
was  issued  by  him  with  knowledge  of  the  diminished  numbers  and  ex- 
hausted condition  of  our  forces,  with  knowledge  of  the  roughness  of  the 
ground  over  which  they  had  to  pass,  and  with  at  least  partial  knowledge 
of  the  great  strength  of  the  enemy’s  position  and  works,  and  was  deemed 
not  only  by  me,  but  by  all  my  general  officers  who  spoke  to  me  ui)on  the 
subject,  as  unfortunate  and  likely  to  bring  disaster  u];)on  us  rather  than 
the  enemy.  My  answer  to  these  officers  was  that  it  was  an  order,  and, 
if  possible,  must  be  executed.  They  answered,  “If  we  fail  it  shall  not 
be  our  fault,”  and  their  partial  success  while  others  failed,  and  the  car- 
nage of  hundreds  of  their  number  who  fell  killed  or  wounded  in  gaining 
that  success,  conclusively  testify  that  their  final  failure  was  not  their 
fault  5 indeed.  General  Grant  himself  testifies  to  it,  as  I have  already 
shown,  by  his  admission  in  another  part  of  his  report  that  “the  assault 
was  gallant  in  the  extreme  * * * but  the  enemy’s  position  was 

too  strong,  both  naturally  and  artificially,  to  be  taken  in  that  way” — 
by  assault. 

Comparing  General  Grant’s  report  with  his  dispatches,  another  dis- 
crepancy will  appear.  He  says  in  his  report  that  the  asked-for  “diver- 
sion was  promptly  and  vigorously  made  * * without  advancing 

our  position  or  giving  us  other  advantages,”  leaving  it  to  be  inferred 
that  unmitigated  evil  was  the  consequence  of  the  diversion ; yet  in  one  of 
his  dispatches  he  says  that  “ Sherman  has  gained  some,  successes,”  and 
in  another,  dated  2.30  (two  hours  and  a half  after  my  dispatch  stating 
that  I had  part  possession  of  two  forts),  he  says,  “ Sherman  is  getting 
on  well,”  proving  that  the  diversion  was  justifying  itself  and  insj)iring 
him  with  hope  of  success. 

General  Grant  speaks  of  Sherman  ordering  ‘-a  renewal  of  the  assault 
on  his  front,”  and  of  a “diversion”  in  my  favor  both  by  Sherman  and 
McPherson,  leaving  the  inference  that  there  had  been  a cessation  of  the 
assault  by  both  of  them.  This  cessation  was  either  by  General  Grant’s 
order  or  with  his  consent,  or  without  both ; and  this  brings  me  to  a most 
grave  and  important  point.  If  it  was  by  General  Grant’s  order  or  with 
his  consent,  he  failed  to  notify  me  of  the  fact,  leaving  me  under  the 
operation  of  his  original  order,  discriminating  against  my  corps  and 
dooming  it  to  stand  in  the  breach  and  press  the  assault  alone  and  un- 
supported, and,  as  a forlorn  hope,  to  be  destroyed  in  a desperate  effort 
to  accomplish  an  object  that  he  had  abandoned  ; and,  if  so,  does  not  the 
blood  of  the  hundreds  of  brave  men  who  were  thus  sacrificed  cry  aloud 
against  him?  If  it  was  without  either  his  order  or  consent,  it  was  a 
case  of  deplorable  disobedience,  and  the  same  responsibility  attaches  to 
him  for  not  advising  me  of  it. 

General  Grant’s  account  of  the  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill  also  does 
me  and  portions  of  my  command  injustice.  Emphasizing  what  himself 
and  others  did,  and  assuming  that  the  field  of  action  was  limited  by 
the  operations  of  McPherson’s  corps  and  of  Hovey’s  division,  of  my 
corps,  he  indirectly  arraigns  me  for  want  of  zeal,  promj)titude,  and 
energy.  He  says  he  was  at  Clinton  on  May  15,  and  Sherman  at  Jack- 
son,  and  that  the  latter,  responsively  to  his  order,  promptly  moved 
forward  toward  Bolton  on  the  morning  of  the  battle;  that  he  (General 
Grant)  ordered  McPlierson  forward  at  5.45  a.  m.,  and  sent  Lieutenant- 


184 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


Colonel  [James  H.]  Wilson,  of  his  staff,  “ with  verbal  instructions  to’^  me 

as  to  the  disposition  of  my  forces,”  and  followed  himself  at  an  early 
hour  from  Clinton  j that  he  found  Hovey’s  division  disposed  for  the 
attack,”  but  would  not  permit  it  to  be  commenced  until  he  could  hear 
from  ” me,  “ who  was  advancing  with  four  divisions;  ” that  “ Logan  rode 
up  ” and  told  him  that  if  Hovey  could  make  another  dash  at  the  enemy, 
he  could  come  up  from  where  he  then  was  and  capture  the  greater  part 
of  their  force,”  and  that,  after  all  this,  he  saw  me  with  Carres  division  to 
liis  left,  and  that  “ Osterhaus’  division  soon  afterward  appeared,  with 
liis  skirmishers  well  in  advance.” 

General  Grant  says  all  this,  but  he  accidentally  or  otherwise  omits  to 
state  what  is  essential  to  a proper  understanding  of  the  incidents  and 
agencies  of  that  battle.  He  omits  to  state  that  while  he  was  yet  behind 
at  Clinton,  I selected  the  lines  of  advance  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 
including  Blair’s  division,  and  moved  all  the  forces  forward  to  the  attack 
except  McPherson’s ; that  revoking  an  order  changing  my  disposition 
of  Blair’s  forces,  he  afterward  sent  a dispatch  to  me,  saying,  “ Your 
disposition  of  Blair’s  forces  is  satisfactory  ; place  him  to  the  best  advan- 
tage,” &c. ; that  on  the  day  before  the  battle  I urged  him  in  a dispatch 
to  move  McPherson’s  corps  upon  the  right  of  Hovey,  to  cut  off  the  enemy 
if  I should  beat  him ; that  on  the  morning  of  the  battle,  after  putting 
my  columns  in  motion,  I hastened  to  General  McPherson’s  headquarters, 
in  my  rear,  before  he  had  risen,  and  urged  him  to  do  the  same  for  the 
same  purpose,  and  to  support  Hovey ; that  the  subsequent  execution  of 
this  movement  secured  to  us  many  prisoners  and  a number  of  cannon. 

He  omits  to  state  that  the  enemy’s  skirmishers  and  artillery  were  first 
encountered  on  my  left  by  General  Smith’s  division,  supported  by  Gen- 
eral Blair’s ; next  by  General  Osterhaus’  division,  supported  by  Gen- 
eral Carr’s,  and  next  by  General  Hovey,  forming  my  right,  and  that  I 
informed  him  that  I had  received  a dispatch  from  the  latter,  dated  9.30 
a.  m.,  notifying  me  that  he  had  found  the  enemy  strongly  posted,  and 
believed  that  his  right  flank  would  encounter  severe  resistance ; and 
that  I asked  him  whether  McPherson  should  not  support  Hovey,  and 
whether  I should  bring  on  a general  engagement;  that  afterward,  send- 
ing several  dispatche's,  he  failed  to  answer  any  more  directly  than  by 
the  following  dispatch,  dated  12.35  p.  m. : ^^As  soon  as  your  command 
is  all  in  hand,  throw  forward  skirmishers  and  feel  the  enemy,  and  attack 
him  in  force  if  an  opportunity  occurs,  and  I will  see  that  Hovey  and 
McPherson  fully  co-operate,”  as  though  Hovey  had  not  been  hotly  and 
desperately  engaged  since  11  a.  m. 

He  also  fails  to  state  that  upon  the  receipt  of  this  dispatch  I imme- 
diately ordered  my  center  and  left  to  attack  the  enemy  vigorouslj^  and 
press  for  victory;”  that  he  allowed  Hovey’s  division  to  be  forced  back 
twice  or  thrice  with  great  loss  from  the  ground  gained,  although,  as  was 
credibly  reported,  there  was  a brigade  or  division  of  McPherson’s  corps 
unengaged  and  within  easy  supporting  distance.  Moreover,  that  he 
sent  me  several  dispatches  leading  me  to  the  belief  that  the  enemy  was 
in  greatest  force  in  front  of  my  center  and  left,  and  warning  me  to  guard 
against  letting  him  gain  the  rear  of  that  part  of  my  line;  aud  that  after 
or  about  the  time  the  enemy  gave  way  on  the  right,  Garrard’s  brigade, 
leading  my  right  center,  was  so  formidably  opposed  as  to  need  the  sup- 
port of  Benton’s  and  Lindsey’s,  leaving  my  left  center  to  be  supported 
by  Lawler’s  brigade,  forming  a reserve. 

He  omits  all  these  things,  and,  in  fine,  to  notice  the  fact  that  an  early 
ofBcial  dispatch  sent  by  him  to  Washington  giving  an  account  of  the 
battle  was* so  unjust  even  to  Hovey’s  division  as  to  cause  Hovey  to 


Chap.  SXXVI.] 


GENEEAL  EEPOETS. 


185 


make  it  the  subject  of  a communication  to  me  complaining  of  it,  and 

me  to  concur  m It  and  send  it  to  General  Grant.  ^ 'i',  ana 

My  position  during  the  battle  was  with  my  center,  composed  of  Oster- 
f Oarr  s divisions,  and  during  its  progress,  when  I ordered  Oster- 
haus  P]ish  for^ar^i  and  make  a diversion  in  favor  of  Hovey  he  sent 
me  word  that  his  column  was  as  much  advanced  as  Hovey^sfwas  con- 

doing  all  it  could  do.  General 

thefeTSbS  Biver  Bridge,  General  Grant  also  omits 

the  lact  that  he  did  not  come  up  until  after  I had  disposed  my  forces 

he  noticing  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson 

? morning  of  May  1,  I went  out  * * * Zd 

corps  engaging  the  enemy  about  4 miles 
erni^^rn  “ight  be  inferred  from  this  statement  that  Gen- 

hetlr^ef  arrived  on  the  field,  yet  the  truth  is  I neither  saw  nor 

Se  Ltoe'^anlwi  ^ dispositions 

rfffht  oimfeinWe  1*^  ^ enemy  from  his  first  position  on  my 

aZ'";, “ =«"'’■  p»'»o".  »• 

Again  he  says: 

General  Grant  to  send  forward  re- 
^forcements,  It  was  because  my  early  and  intimate  knowledo*e  of  what 
ioTi^n^fh^  on  justified  it,  and  General  Grant,  notwithstanding  his  opin- 
j re-enforcements,  and  Steyenson^s  brigade^  of 

applied  to  strengthen  my  center  and 

M . a,M  moment,  All  ,L«  great  OMten,  lnonlcM?S i a fan dZ 

mental  principle,  as  a condition  of  success,  as  the  characteristic  of  a 

sSkKsjSt  SKisr  “ "•k.wt,ia5?rd  Sol; 

^ contest  that  was  to  ox^en  or  close  the  door  to  the  nf 

the  Bayou  Pierre  and  the  road  to  Vicksburg.  UnlLs  GenS  Grtnt 
held  contrary  views,  and  was  unwilling  that  others  should  share  with 

pff 

Benton^s  wid^e  from^  evening  General  Grant  sent  an  order  detaching 


186 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 


Further,  whether  it  was  alone  “by  the  judicious  disposition  made  of 
this  brigade  under  the  immediate  supervision  of  McPherson  and  Jogan, 
which  by  consequence  “drove  the  enemy  from  that  part  ot  the 
a controverted  ciuestion;  for  General  Osterhans’  report  claims  that  his 
suggestions  and  forces  had  something,  nay,  much  to  do  with  it,  and  1 
prelume  Colonel  [James]  Keigwin,  Forty-ninth  Indiana,  who  is  reported 
to  have  borne  himself  gallantly  in  that  part  of  the  field,  also  claims  to 
have  had  something  to  do  with  it.  The  truth  is,  in  all  these  battles  and 
their  preliminaries  I acted,  and  was  left  to  act,  more  or  less  upon  mj 
own  responsibility.  1 moved  by  a forced  night  march  from  the  vicinity 
of  Bruinsburg  to  the  battle-field  ot  Port  Gibson  without  ordeis  and 
upon  mv  own  responsibility,  and  fought  the  battle  in  considerable  part 
before  General  Grant  came  up.  My  object  was  to  seize  the  crossings  of 
Bayou  Pierre  before  the  enemy  could  gain  intelligence  of  our  approach. 
I thought  the  result  justified  the  risk,  although  I was  convinced  that  if 
disaster  or  defeat  followed  I would  be  ruined. 

The  victory  of  Port  Gibson  ostensibly  indemnified  me,  although  it 
did  not  avert  from  me  the  censure  and  injurious  implic^ions  ot  General 
Grant’s  report,  no  more  than  the  victory  of  Arkansas  Post  averted  the 
written  disapprobation  of  the  expedition  that  led  to  it;  neither  did  the 
nart  borne  by  me  throughout  the  Mississippi  campaign  prevent  hirn 
from  removing  me  from  the  command  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  at 
the  moment  when  the  Mississippi  Eiver  expedition,  which  I had  recom- 
mended to  the  President  and  Secretary  of  War  near  a year  before,  was 
about  to  be  crowned  with  success  in  the  fall  of  Vicksburg.  , , • . 

With  all  these  facts  laid  bare,  and  with  a public  life  of  nearly  thirty 
years’  duration  in  civil  and  military  station  before  the  public,  I leave 
iny  public  actions  and  my  character,  which  is  worth  more  to  me  than 
my  life,  for  the  impartial  judgment  of  my  military  superiors  and  ot  the 

country  and  history.  a xttx 

JOHN  A.  McGLEKNAND, 

Major-General. 


No.  S. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Francis  Tunica,  Engmeer  Officer  Ninth  nivision,  of 
operations  April  ll-A[ay  24. 

Hdqrs.  Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Big  Blach  River  Bridge,  Miss.,  June  1,  ISOd. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  a report  of  the  work  executed 

by  me  since  April  17,  18G3.  - 

' On  April  17,  I received  orders  from  you  to  proceed  without  dcla.\  to 
the  lieadquarters  of  this  division,  and  to  report  in  person  to  Brig.  Gen. 

P.  J.  Osterhans  for  duty.  ^ i „ 

I reported  to  this  officer  on  April  18,  at  Smith  s plantation,  and  on 
the  morning  of  the  19th  marched  to  New  Carthage,  La.,  and  established 
headquarters  at  James’  plantation,  on  the  Mississijipi  lUyer. 

April  20. — I made  reconnaissance  up  to  Negro,  INIound,  and  Brushy 
Bayous  to  the  so-called  basin,  and  placed  pickets  about  9 miles  in  cii- 
c*  11.  Ill  i Gi'dico 

April  21.— I conducted  Lieut.  P.  C.  Hains  to  the  basin,  with  the  view 
of  selecting  a proper  place  for  bridging  Bayou  Vidal,  to  enable  Gen- 
eral llovey’s  command  to  cross  this  bayou.  In  the  evening  1 mane 
sketch  of  the  result  of  my  explorations  for  General  Osterhans. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


187 


April  22. — Made  another  exploration  with  General  Osterhans  up 
Bayou  Vidal,  some  8 or  9 miles  along  this  bayou,  part  in  flats  and  part 
on  horseback,  with  a view  of  selecting  the  best  place  for  the  intended 
bridge.  We  met  General  Hovey  at  the  basin,  who  was  als6  in  search 
of  a place  to  bridge  this  bayou.  Selected  place  for  bridge,  and  in  the 
afternoon  moved  camp  4 miles  south,  to  Perkins’  plantation. 

April  23. — Embarked  for  Grand  Gulf.  Generals  McClernand,  Os- 
terhaus,  several  other  officers,  and  myself  went  down  on  the  gunboat 
General  Price.  Sketched  Grand  Gulf. 

April  24. — Made  another  sketch  of  Grand  Gulf  for  the  general. 

April  25. — I received  orders  from  General  Osterhaus  to  accompany  an 
expedition,  under  command  of  Colonel  Keigwin,  from  Perkins’  plantation 
around  Lake  Saint  Joseph  to  Hard  Times  Landing,  opposite  Grand  Gulf, 
Miss.  On  this  expedition  I superintended  the  construction  of  three 
bridges,  varying  in  spans  of  from  80  to  120  feet,  over  Holt’s,  Durassett’s, 
and  Phelps’  Bayous.  (See  map.)  These  bridges  were  made  of  timber 
taken  from  barns  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  respective  places. 
Large,  dry  beams,  50  feet  long  by  18  inches  square,  x^roperlj^  connected, 
were  used  to  bear  the  flooring,  which  was  also  obtained  from  the  side- 
boarding of  the  barns.  The  flooring  was  again  kept  in  iflace  by  so-called 
stretchers  (pieces  of  timber  0 inches  square).  Whenever  the  banks  of 
the  streams  were  too  steex>,  I had  them  i)artly  excavated  and  xmrtly  filled 
with  rails,  of  which  there  was  an  abundance.  When  selecting  the  place 
for  the  fourth  bridge  over  Clark’s  Bayou,  on  the  27th,  I received  orders 
to  return  to  headquarters.  After  my  arrival,  I reported  to  General  Mc- 
Clernand, and,  upon  his  suggestion,  also  to  MaJ.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant,  where 
I had  the  pleasure  of  meeting  you  also. 

April  28. — Embarked  again  for  Grand  Gulf. 

April  29. — The  bombardment  of  Grand  Gulf  took  place.  Our  division 
marched  4 miles  farther  south. 

April  30. — Crossed  the  river  to  Bruinsburg,  and  marched  toward  Port 
Gibson.  A fight  ensued  about  dusk,  some  6 miles  from  Port  Gibson,  and 
lasted  till  3 a.  m.  May  1.  Early  in  the  morning  the  fight  was  resumed, 
and  the  battle  of  Thomxison’s  Hill,  4 miles  ^vest  of  Port  Gibson,  took 
iflace.  Sketched  and  surveyed  the  battle-field  during  the  action,  our 
division  forming  the  left  wing  of  General  McClernamrs  corps  d’armee. 
(See  accqmpanying  map.) 

May  2. — Marched  to  Port  Gibson.  Surveyed  the  road  from  battle- 
field to  this  place  roughly. 

May  3. — Marched  to  Willow  Springs. 

May  4. — Made  reconnaissance  with  General  Osterhaus. 

May  5. — Marched  toward  Black  Eiver  to  within  5 miles  south  of  it 
on  the  Utica  or  Cayuga  road,  24  miles  northeast  of  Port  Gibson.  Met 
mounted  enemy,  about  500  strong,  and  dispersed  them. 

(See  accompanying  map  of  route  marched  by  this  division.) 

May  0. — Made  sketch  of  this  vicinity  for  the  general. 

May  7. — Made  sketch  of  southern  approaches  to  Vicksburg,  partly 
from  information  gathered  and  i^artly  from  own  observations,  including 
Jackson,  Gallatin,  and  Canton. 

May  8. — Moved  headquarters  about  2 miles  north.  Made  several 
copies  of  the  sketch  of  the  vicinity  of  Vicksburg  and  also  reconnais- 
sance to  Big  Black  Biver.  Enemy  on  the  other  side  intrenching. 

May  9. — Commenced  another  map.  Got  sick.  Was  in  bed  in  the 
afternoon. 

]\lay  10. — Moved  forward  to  Five-Mile  Creek. 


188 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Csap.  X^Xn. 


MAP 

OK 

"PARTS  OF  THE  PARISHES  OF  MADISON  AND  TENSAS,  LA, 
Showing  the  route  taken  by  a detachment  of  the  9th  Div. 
(Colonel  KEIGWIN  Commanding.) 

FROM  PERKINS’  PLANTATION  TO  HARD  TIMES, 
AROUND  LAKE  SAINT  JOSEPH 

AND 

EXPLORATION  UP  BAYOU  VIDAL. 

Compiled  and  parity  surveyed  by  F.  TUNICA,  Eng 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  GENERAL  REPORTS.  189 

May  11.— Delivered  a copy  of  my  map,  containing  all  information  of 
tbe  approaches  to  Vicksburg,  to  Lieutenant  Hains. 

May  12. — Marched  toward  Edwards.  Was  very  sick  in  carriage. 

May  13.— Moved  again  toward  Eaymond.  (See  map  of  march.) 

May  14.— Arrived  at  Eaymond.  Made  four  sketches  for  the  use  of 
outposts  at  this  place. 

May  15. — Moved  again  toward  Bolton  <ind  Edwards  Station. 

MaylQ. — Battle  of  Champion^s  Hill,  near  Baker’s  Creek.  Owing 
to  my  illness  on  this  daj^,  and  being  obliged  to  march  at  night,  I was 
unable  to  survey  the  ground  of  this  battle-field. 

May  17.— Moved  toward  Big  Black  Eiver  Bridge.  At  this  place 
another  battle  took  place.  Enemy  strongly  intrenched.  Surveyed  and 
sketched  the  ground  (see  accompanying  map)  soon  after  the  evacuation 
of  the  enemy. 

May  18. — Marched  on  to  Vicksburg  to  within  4 miles  of  the  place. 

May  19.— Moved  a little  ahead  to  about  2 miles  of  town.  Fighting 
commenced. 

May  20. — Continued  fighting.  Ii^o  ground  gained. 

May  21. — Selected  place  for  one  of  our  batteries  (Foster’s)  and  made 
sketch  of  the  enemy’s  intrenchments,  to  be  assailed  by  this  division,  for 
field  use.  Eather  dangerous  sharpshooting  at  this  point. 

May  22. — Witnessed  grand  charge  on  the  enemy’s  works,  and  improved 
sketch  of  same. 

May  23.— Made  reconnaissance  with  some  cavalry  of  by-roads  in  the 
vicinity  of  Mount  Alban  and  Vicksburg. 

May  24.— Our  division  received  orders  to  march  back  to  Big  Black 
Eiver  Bridge. 

From  this  date  to  June  1 my  time  was  employed  without  intermission 
in  making  an  addition  to  the  survey  of  Big  Black  Eiver  Bridge  and 
vicinity ; in  compiling  map  of  route  marched  by  this  division,  and  in 
plotting,  mapping,  and  copying  the  battle-fields  of  Thompson’s  Hill 
(Port  Gibson)  and  Big  Black  Eiver  Bridge. 

***##*# 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  TUmCA, 

Engineer  Ninth  Division^  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

Lieut.  Col.  James  H.  Wilson, 

Asst.  Eisp.  Gen..,  and  First  Lieutenant  of  Engineers. 


No.  9. 

Message  of  President  Davis,  transmitting  to  the  Confederate  Congress  cer- 
tain correspondence  ivith  General  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  C.  8.  Army. 

Eichmond,  Va.,  January  29,  1864. 

To  the  House  of  Representatives : 

In  response  to  your  resolution  of  the  11th  ultimo,  I herewith  transmit, 
im-  your  information,  a copy  of  my  correspondence,  together  with  that 
Secretary  ot  War  and  of  the  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General, 
with  General  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  during  the  months  of  May,  June, 
ana  July,  1863,  concerning  his  command  and  the  operations  in  his  de- 
partment. 


190 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


As  the  resolution  fixes  definitely  the  dates  within  which  the  corre- 
spondence is  desired,  I have  not  deemed  it  proper  to  add  anything 
which  was  prior  or  subsequent  to  those  dates. 


JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


[Inclosures.] 

• Richmond,  Va.,  May  6,  1803. 
General  Joseph  E.  Johnsto’n, 

. TuUalioma,  Tenn. : 

How  and  why  was  Brigadier-General  [W.  T.]  Martin  withdrawn  from 
Mississippi  for  service  with  the  cavalry  of  which  he  was  appointed  % 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Tullahoma,  Tenn.,  May  7,  1803. 

His  Excellency  the  President: 

Brigadier-General  Martin  was  assigned  to  Van  Dorn’s  cavalry,  which 
was  ordered  to  this  dei)artment  in  January.  He  is  not  now  with  Van 
Dorn,  who  is  in  front  of  Columbia.  He  commands  the  cavalry  directly 
between  this  army  and  Murfreesborough. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Richmond,  Va.,  May  18,  1803. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Headquarters^  via  JacJcson,  Miss. : 

Have  seen  your  dispatch  of  this  date.  The  cavalry  mentioned  can- 
not reach  you  before  weeks.  Other  larger  and  more  practiced  cavalry 
I had  hoped  could  be  drawn  to  you  from  another  part  of  your  depart- 
ment, as  suggested  in  telegram  some  time  since.  Several  of  the  best 
infantry  regiments,  if  wanted,  might  serve  as  substitute  for  the  cav- 
alry, so  much  and  immediately  required.  I hope  you  will  have  larger 
accessions  to  your  army,  when  advancing  to  attack,  by  the  junction  of 
militia  and  less  organized  bodies  of  citizens.  Your  presence  will  efiect 
much  to  inspire  confidence  and  activity. 

The  enemy  will  probably  seek  to  join  his  fleet  at  Warrenton,  draw 
the  remaining  forces  from  the  camp  above  Young’s  Point,  and  prepare 
for  land  and  water  attack  on  the  defenses  of  Vicksburg.  If  you  could 
unite  with  Pemberton  and  attack  the  enemy  in  his  retrograde  move- 
ment toward  the  river,  the  chances  would  be  much  better.  Every  effort 
will  be  made  to  aid  you.  and  I desire  to  know  fully  your  wishes. 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Canton,  Miss.,  May  21,  1863. 

His  Excellency  the  President  : 

There  is  a division  without  a major-general,  the  only  officer  competent 
to  command  it  being  General  W.  H.  T.  Walker  j*  he  is  the  junior  briga- 
dier. Please  appoint  immediately.  Another  will  be  wanted  for  com- 
ing troops.  I recommend  Brigadier-General  [C.  M.]  Wilcox.*  These 
officers  are  indispensable. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


* These  names  in  the  original  dispatch  received  appeared  as  General  W.  II.  Taliaferro 
and  Brigadier-General  Wilson. 


UHAr.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


191 


The  President: 


Camp  near  Canton,  Miss., 

Via  Jaclcson,  May  21,  1863. 


Your  dispatch  of  the  18th  received,  but  cannot  be  deciphered.  On 
account  of  heavy  loss  of  artillery,  we  want  field  pieces,  with  harness 
and  ammunition.  Troo^is  coming  from  the  east  are  generally  without 
artillery. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTOK. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  May  22,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Via  Jackson,  Miss.: 

Brig.  Gen.  John  S.  Bowen  is  appointed  major-general,  to  meet  the 
want  specified  in  your  dispatch.  General  Loring  becomes  available 
for  assignment  to  the  division  you  designate.  Field  batteries  and 
small-arms  are  on  the  way  to  your  command. 

Signal  cipher  was  employed.  If  you  have  the  book  formerly  used  by 
us,  will  resort  to  that. 


JEFFEESOK  DAVIS. 


Richmond,  Va.,  May  22,  1863. 

General  Bragg,  Tullahoma,  Tenn.: 

The  vital  issue  of  holding  the  Mississippi  at  Vicksburg  is  depeudeut 
on  the  success  of  General  Johnston  in  an  attack  on  the  investing  force. 
The  intelligence  from  there  is  discouraging.  Can  you  aid  him  ? If  so* 
and  you  are  without  orders  from  General  Johnston,  act  on  your  iud<^- 
ment.  ^ j ^ 

JEFFERSOK  DAVIS. 


^ ^ , Richmond,  Va.,  May  22,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Via  Jackson,  Aliss. : 

I do  not  understand  recommendation  for  promotion  of  Brio-adier-Gen- 
eral  Wilson  in  your  dispatch  of  21st.  ^ 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  May  23,  1863. 

His  Excellency  the  President: 

It  was  Brig.  Gen.  Cadmus  M.  Wilcox  that  I recommended.  Major- 
General  Loring  is  commanding  his  own  division.  Brigadier-General 
Bowen  commands  a division  of  the  troops  invested  i]i  Vicksburg.  The 
division  I mentioned  has  no  officer  in  it  competent  to  command  but 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  U.  T.  Walker.  It  must  be  without  a commander  until  a 
maior-general  is  appointed  for  or  assigned  to  it.  We  have  tremendous 
odds  against  us.  I respectfully  urge,  therefore,  a thorough  organization. 
1 ceased  to  carry  the  book  referred  to  upon  being  informed  that  the  copy 
your  office.  The  enemy’s  gunboats  have  possession 

of  the  Yazoo. 


J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


192 


[Chat.  XXXVL 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Shelby YiLLE,  Tenn.,  May  23,  1863. 
Jefeekson  Davis,  President: 

Sent  3,500  with  the  general ; three  batteries  of  artillery  and  2,000  cav- 
alry since.  Will  dispatch  6,000  more  immediately.  Have  no  orders. 
The  general  did  not  consider  it  safe  to  Aveaken  this  point. 

BEAXTOK  BEAGG. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  May  23,  1863. 


General  Braxton  Bragg, 

Commanding^  djc.,  Shelhyville,  Tenn,: 


Your  answer  is  in  the  spirit  of  patriotism  heretofore  manifested  by 
you.  The  need  is  sore,  but  you  must  not  forget  your  own  necessities. 

JEFFEESOX  DAYIS. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  May  23,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Via  Canton^  Miss.  : 

Your  first  dispatch  was  so  changed  as  to  present  the  names  of  W.  H. 
Taliaferro  and  Wilson,  both  supposed  to  be  errors.  Bowen  was  ap- 
pointed, supposing  him  to  be  with  Boring.  Since  your  dispatch  received 
to-day,  gave  order  to  appoint  Walker  major-general.  Am  making  every 
effort  to  aid  you,  and  hopeful  of  junction  of  your  forces  and  defeat  of 
the  enemy. 

JEFFEESOX  DAVIS. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  May  23,  1863. 

His  Excellency  the  President: 

Troops  are  coming  very  slowly.  The  last  of  Bragg’s  arrived  on  Tues- 
day. Since  then  but  300  have  arrived  and  1,300  are  reported  this  side 
of  Meridian.  An  officer  who  left  Vicksburg  on  Tuesday  reports  that  an 
assault  near  the  Yazoo  road  had  been  repelled  this  time.  It  is  said  here 
to-day  that  another  was  made  near  the  Jackson  road  and  also  repulsed. 
This  gives  me  confidence  in  Pemberton’s  tenacity.  If  army  can  be  or- 
ganized and  well  commanded,  we  shall  win. 

Major-generals  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  brigades  are  necessary. 
Is  Major-General  Ewell  assigned*?  I have  great  confidence  in  him,  and 
should  be  glad  to  have  him. 

J.  E.  JOHXSTOX. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  May  23,  1863. 

The  President  : 

The  number  of  troops  I expect  to  concentrate  now  in  Mississippi  is 
19,000,  exclusive  of  the  garrisons  of  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson.  The 
latter  I have  ordered  to  join  me.  Vicksburg  is  invested.  Xumber,  1 6,000 
or  18,000.  Grant’s  force  is  estimated  at  60,000. 


J.  E.  JOHXSTOX. 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


193 


Canton,  Miss.,  May  24,  1863. 

His  Excellency  the  President: 

The  following,  received  by  courier  at  Jackson  yesterday  from  General 
Pemberton,  telegraphed  to  me  by  Colonel  [B.  s!]  Ewell  \ 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  20. 

Enemy  assaulted  intrenchments  yesterday  on  center  and  left : were  repulsed  with 
heavy  loss ; our  loss  small.  Enemy's  force  at  least  60,000. 

May  21. 

Enemy  kept  up  heavy  artillery  fire  yesterday;  two  guns  dismounted  in  center  and 
works  injured.  Their  sharpshooters  picked  off  officers  and  men  all  day.  Works  re- 
paired and  guns  replaced  last  night.  The  vital  question  is  ammunition.  The  men 
are  encouraged  by  a report  that  you  are  near  with  a large  army,  and  are  in  good  spirits. 

2 p.  m.  Brisk  artillery  and  musketry  fire  to-day;  three  guns  dismounted  in  cen- 
ter; will  replace  them  if  possible.  Heavy  mortar  firing  from  gunboats.  The  fire  of 
the  sharpshooters  is  severe. 

3 p.  m.-— During  past  two  days  enemy  has  gone  up  river  in  transports  in  laro-e 

force.  Where  going  not  known.  ° 

. J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  May  24,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Canton^  Miss.: 

I concur  in  your  reliance  on  [belief  of]  the  tenacity  with  which  Gen- 
eral Pemberton  will  defend  his  position,  but  the  disparity  of  numbers 
renders  prolonged  defense  dangerous.  I hope  you  will  soon  be  able  to 
break  the  investment.  Make  a junction  and  carry  in  munitions.  Gen- 
eral [G.  J.J  Pains,  who  has  made  valuable  inventions,  is  ordered  to  you 
for  special  service,  and  will,  I think,  be  useful  both  on  land  and  river. 
General  Bragg  has  probably  communicated  with  yon.  If  my  strength 
permitted,  I would  go  to  you. 

JEFEEPSON  DAYIS. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  May  27, 1863. 

His  Excellency  the  President: 

A young  man  sent  out  by  Major-General  Stevenson  reports  that  hard 
fighting  has  been  going  on  since  Tuesday  of  last  week  with  continued 
success  to  us.  Gur  men  confident  and  in  fine  spirits;  but  we  cannot 
break  the  investment  without  an  army.  General  Cooper  tells  me  that 
but  13,000  have  been  ordered.  General  Pemberton  estimates  Grant’s 
force  at  not  less  than  60,000.  When  all  the  re-enforcements  arrive  shall 
have  but  23,000.  Tell  me  if  additional  troops  can  be  furnished. 

The  two  cases  of  cipher  are  independent  of  each  other. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


^ ^ PiOHMOND,  Ya.,  May  28,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Canton.,  Miss.: 

The  re-enforcements  sent  to  you  exceed  by,  say,  7,000  the  estimate  of 
your  dispatch  of  27th  instant.  We  have  withheld  nothing  which  it  was 
practicable  to  give.  We  cannot  hope  for  numerical  equality,  and  time 
will  probably  increase  the  disparity. 

13  B E — ^VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


JEFFERSON  DAYIS, 


194 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  May  28, 1863. 

His  Excellency  the  President  : 

It  is  reported  that  the  last  infantry  coming  leave  Montgomery  to-night. 
When  they  arrive  shall  have  about  23,000.  Pemberton  can  be  saved 
only  by  beating  Grant.  Unless  you  can  promise  more  troops,  we  must 
try  with  that  number.  The  odds  against  us  will  be  very  greab  Can  you 
not  add  7,000*?  Asked  for  another  major  general— Wilcox,  or  whoever 
you  may  prefer.  We  want  good  general  officers  quickly.  I have  to 
organize  an  army,  and  collect  ammunition,  provisions,  and  transpor- 
tation. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Kichmond,  Ya.,  May  30,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Jacicson,  Miss. : 

Your  dispatch  of  28th  received.  The  Secretary  of  War  reports  the 
re-enforcement  ordered  to  you  as  greater  than  the  number  you  request. 
Added  to  the  forces  you  have  from  Pemberton’s  army,  he  states  your 
whole  force  to  be  34,000,  exclusive  of  militia.  Bowen  and  Walker  pro- 
moted. French  and  Breckinridge,  ordered  to  you,  will,  I hope,  meet 
your  want  of  major-generals.  If  another  be  required,  S.  D.  Lee  is,  I 
think,  equal  to  that  grade.  Officers  in  the  field  here  cannot  be  sent  to 
you  without  too  great  delay.  The  troops  sent  to  you  were  so  fully  or- 
ganized that  I suppose  you  will  have  little  trouble  as  to  organization, 
unless  it  be  of  militia.  Colonel  [Philip]  Stockton  can  probably  answer 
your  requisitions  for  ammunition.  You  no  doubt  will  be  embarrassed 
by  deficiency  of  field  transportation.  The  recent  robberies  have  dimin- 
ished the  amount  in  the  country. 

.TT7,I7KF.T?S()N  DAVIS. 


* Canton,  May  31,  1863. 

The  President  : 

Your  dispatch  of  30th  received.  By  official  returns,  troops  near 
Canton,  including  Gist’s  and  Walker’s  brigades  of  Beauregard’s  army, 
Ector’s  and  McNair’s  of  Bragg’s,  and  Gregg’s  of  Pemberton’s,  have 

eflectives  9,400.  ....  , ,/r  ? 

The  troops  near  Jackson,  including  Boring’s  division  and  Maxeys 
brigade  of  Pemberton’s  troops  and  Evans’  of  Beauregard’s,  have  eflect- 
ives 7,800.  Major-General  Breckinridge  reports  to-day  5,800,  Brigadier- 
General  [W.  H.]  Jackson’s  cavalry,  numbering  about  1,600  when  I was 
in  Tennessee,  not  included,  nor  five  field  batteries,  probably  400. 

General  Cooper  informs  me  that  no  other  re-enforcements  have  been 
ordered  to  this  department.  Major-General  Gardner  is  invested  in  Port 

Hudson.  JOHNSTON. 


[Indorsement.] 

Referred  to  the  Secretary  of  War  for  reply  as  to  the  difierence  be- 
tween this  statement  and  the  reported  number  of  troops  sent  to  General 
Johnston  and  gained  by  him  from  General  Pemberton. 

J.  D.  [JEFFERSON  DAVIS.] 


This  letter  not  transmitted  to  Confederate  Congress. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


195 


Canton,  Miss.,  June  1,  1863, 

Via  Montgomery,  June  2. 

His  Excellency  the  President  : 

The  Secretary  of  War  is  greatly  mistaken  in  his  numbers.  By  their 
own  returns  the  troops  at  my  disposal  available  against  Grant  are— 


Of  Pemberton’s  . 

Of  Bragg’s 

Of  Beauregard’s 


9,700 
8, 400 
6, 000 


Total 24,100 

Not  including  a few  hundred  irregular  cavalry,  nor  Jackson’s  com- 
mand, the  strength  of  which  I do  not  know.  Bowen  and  Lee  are  in 
Vicksburg,  beyond  my  reach.  In  the  estimate,  that  garrison  is  not  in- 
cl  uded.  The  total  of  the  above,  24,100.  These  are  numbers  of  effectives. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Canton,  Miss.,  [June  9,  1863,] 

Via  Montgomery,  June  10. 

His  Excellency  President  Davis  : 

It  has  been  suggested  to  me  that  the  troops  in  this  department  are 
very  hostile  to  officers  of  Northern  birth,  and  that  on  that  account 
Major-General  French’s  arrival  will  weaken  instead  of  strengthening  us, 
I beg  you  to  consider  that  all  the  general  officers  of  Northern  birth  are 
on  duty  in  this  department.  There  is  now  a want  of  major-generals 
[discipline].  It  is  important  to  avoid  any-  cause  of  further  discontent. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Bichmond,  Va.,  June  11,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston: 

Your  dispatch  received.  Those  who  suggest  that  the  arrival  of  Gen- 
eral French  will  produce  discontent  among  the  troops  because  of  his 
Northern  birth  are  not  probably  aware  that  he  is  a citizen  of  Mississippi: 
was  a wealthy  planter  until  the  Yankees  robbed  him,  and,  before  the 
Confederate  States  had  an  army,  was  the  chief  of  ordnance  and  artil- 
lery in  the  force  Mississippi  raised  to  maintain  her  right  of  secession. 
As  soon  as  Mississippi  could  spare  him,  he  was  appointed  a brigadier- 
general  in  the  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate  States,  and  has 
Irequently  been  before  the  enemy,  where  he  was  the  senior  officer.  If 
malignity  should  undermine  him,  as  it  has  another,  you  are  authorized 
to  notify  him  of  the  fact  and  to  relieve  him,  communicating  it  to  me  by 
telegram.  Surprised  by  your  remark  as  to  the  general  officers  of  North- 
ern birth,  I turned  to  the  register,  and  find  that  a large  majority  of  the 
number  are  elsewhere  than  in  the  Department  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern 
Louisiana. 

_ JEFFEESON  DAVIS. 

, Eiohmond,  Va.,  June  13,  1863. 

General  Bragg,  Tullahoma,  Tenn.: 

General  Johnston  communicates  report  of  re-enforcements  to  Grant 
?oing  down  the  Mississippi.  The  estimated  number  30,000.  Have  you 
inowledge  whence  they  were  drawn?  If  from  Rosecrans,  can  you  fur- 
her  aid  the  defense  of  Vicksburg,  indirectly  or  directlv,  bv  advance  or 
letachment?  ‘ ' 


JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


196 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Richmond,  Ya.,  June  15,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

JacJcson,  Miss. : 

Your  dispatch  of  12th  instant  to  Secretary  of  War  noted.  The  order 
to  go  to  Mississippi  did  not  diminish  your  authority  in  Tennessee,  both 
being  in  the  country  placed  under  your  command  in  original  assignment. 

To  what  do  you  refer  as  information  from  me  restricting  your  authority 
to  transfer  troops  because  no  more  could  be  spared  ? Officers  ordered 
to  you  for  duty  generally  are,  of  course,  subject  to  assignment  by  you. 

, JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  June  16,  1863. 

His  Excellency  the  President  : 

Your  dispatch  of  15th  received.  I meant  to  tell  the  Secretary  of  W ar 
that  I considered  the  order  directing  me  to  command  here  as  limiting 
my  authority  to  this  department,  especially  when  that  order  was  accom- 
panied by  War  Department  orders  transferring  troops  from  Tennessee 
to  Mississippi;  and,  whether  commanding  there  or  not,  that  your  reply 
to  my  application  for  more  troops  that  no  more  could  be  spared  would 
have  made  it  improper  for  me  to  order  more  from  Tennessee.  Permit 
me  to  repeat  that  an  officer  having  a task  like  mine,  far  above  his  ability, 
cannot  in  addition  command  other  remote  departments.  Ko  general 
can  command  wseparate  armies.  I have  not  yet  been  able  to  procure 
the  means  of  moving  these  troops ; they  are  too  weak  to  accomplish 
much.  The  re-enforcements  you  mention  have  joined  Grant. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTOK. 


.Richmond,  Ya.,  June  17,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Jackson^  Miss.: 

I do  not  find  in  my  letter-book  any  communication  to  you  containing 
the  expression  which  you  again  attribute  to  me  and  cite  as  a restriction 
on  you  against  withdrawing  troops  from  Tennessee;  and  have  to  repeat 
mv  inquiry,  to  what  do  you  refer  % Give  date  of  dispatch  or  letter. 

^ ’ JEFFERSON  DAYIS. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  June  17,  1863. 

General  Braxton  Braog, 

Commanding  at  IShelbyville  : 

General  : General  Johnston,  in  telegrams  of  15th  and  16th,  repeats 
the  expression  of  his  opinion  that  he  cannot  under  exiwsting  circum- 
stances advantageously  command  both  in  Mississipj)!  and  Tennessee; 
and,  in  referring  to  the  reported  movement  of  Burnside’s  corps  to  re-en- 
force Grant,  says,  “Will  not  this  enable  us  to  invade  Kentucky  ? For 
this,  General  Bragg’s  command  should  extend  over  East  Tennessee.”  j 
The  arrangement  made  of  several  de])artments  in  a geographical: 
district,  to  the  command  of  which  General  Johnston  was  assigned,  wafij 
intended  to  secure  the  fullest  co-operation  of  the  troops  in  those  depart-* 
ments,  and  at  the  same  time  to  avoid  delay  by  putting  the  commandei 
of  each  department  in  direct  corresi)ondence  with  the  W ar  Office.  Undei; 
this  view  of  the  case,  the  Department  of  East  Tennessee,  &c.,  wat; 
preated,  because  of  the  delay  which  would  attend  the  transmission  oJj 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  GENERAL  REPORTS.  197 

reports  and  orders  if  they  must  needs  pass  from  Southwestern  Virginia 
to  Middle  Tennessee  and  thence  to  Eichmond,  Va. 

Your  telegram  of  the  15th,  suggesting  orders  for  co-operative  move- 
ment by  General  Buckner,  manifests  the  defect  of  the  existing  arrange- 
ment while  General  Johnston’s  attention  is  absorbed  by  operations  in 
Mississippi.  I would  be  glad  to  have  from  you  such  suggestions  as  you 
may  please  to  make  in  relation  to  the  proper  remedy  for  the  existing 
evil.  Your  command  could  be  extended  to  embrace  that  of  General 
Buckner,  by  extending  the  limits  of  the  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 

You  will  know  better  than  myself  how  far  the  means  of  communica- 
tion and  your  own  leisure  would  permit  you  to  direct  the  operations, 
especially  in  the  eastern  portion  of  General  Buckner’s  department.  You 
can  also  judge  better  than  myself  how  far  co-operation  can  be  relied 
upon  without  the  exercise  of  other  command  than  that  which  arises 
alter  the  junction  of  forces  in  camps,  marches,  &c.  There  are  no  doubt 
many  conditions  which  do  not  now  occur  to  me,  but  which  experience 
has  brought  to  your  attention,  and  I will  b^  glad  to  have  a full  expres- 
sion ol  your  views,  being  happily  fully  aware  that  your  wish  can  in 
nowise  differ  from  my  own— the  success  of  our  cause  in  the  unequal 
struggle  in  which  we  are  engaged. 

Very  respectfully  and  truly,  yours, 

JEFFEESO^^^  DAVIS. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  June  20, 1863. 

His  Excellency  the  President  : 

I much  regret  the  carelessness  of  my  reply  of  the  16th  to  your  tele- 
gram of  the  15th.  In  my  dispatch  of  the  12th  to  the  Secretary  of  War, 

I refer  to  words  “ we  have  withheld  nothing  which  it  was  practicable 
to  give”  in  your  telegram  of  May  28,  and  to  the  telegram  of  June  5,* 
except  the  last  sentence.  I consider  Executive”  as  including  Secretary 
of  War. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  June  25, 1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Jackson^  Miss.: 

Telegram  from  Governor  Pettus  informs  me  of  conference  with  you. 
Commodore  [Samuel]  Barron  will  transfer  the  funds  to  you,  to  be  applied 
you  for  the  purpose  indicated — in  the  defense  of  Western  rivers. 
You  will  exercise  discretionary  power  as  to  manner  and  objects. 

JEFFEESON  DAVIS. 


Jackson,  Miss., 

Via  Montgomery^  June  28,  1863. 

His  Excellency  the  President: 

I have  received  what  you  directed  Commodore  Barron  to  give  me,  but 
since  learning  particulars  of  the  scheme  with  which  he  was  connected 
!iiave  no  hope  now  of  [the  purchase  of  Helena].  The  third  object  seems 
me  feasible,  and  agents  have  been  dispatched.  [It  is  the  destruction 
)i  transports.]  I shall  probably  not  require  a tenth  part  of  the  money.t 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON.' 


I '‘  From  the  Secretary  of  War. 

■ t The  words  in  brackets  are  in 
o the  Confederate  Congress. 


original  dispatch,  bnt  were  omitted  in  coi)y  as  sent 


i 


198 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX VT. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  June  30,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Jackson^  Miss.: 

After  full  examination  of  all  the  correspondence  between  you  and  my- 
self and  the  War  Office,  including  the  dispatches  referred  to  in  your 
telegram  of  the  20th  instant,  I am  still  at  a loss  to  account  for  your 
strange  error  in  stating  to  the  Secretary  of  War  that  your  right  to  draw 
re-enforcements  from  Bragg’s  army  had  been  restricted  by  the  Execu- 
tive or  that  your  command  over  the  Army  of  Tennessee  had  been  with- 
drawn. 

In  compliance  with  your  request,  I am  engaged  in  correspondence  with 
General  Bragg  on  the  subject  of  making  such  new  arrangements  as 
shall  relieve  you  hereafter  of  the  command  of  his  department.  Your 
suggestion  to  extend  Bragg’s  command  over  East  Tennessee  is  likewise 
the  subject  of  correspondence,  and  your  recommendation  to  attempt  a 
movement  in  Kentucky  has  been  approved,  and  every  effort  will  be  made 
to  carry  into  effect  that  as  well  as  any  other  i)racticable  movement  to 
aid  you. 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Richmond,  Ya.,  July  2,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston: 

I have  this  day  sent  a dispatch  to  General  E.  K.  Smith  and  to  your 
care.  Please  send  copies  of  the  dispatch  to  General  Smith  by  several 
reliable  couriers,  going  at  different  times,  so  as  to  insure  its  speedy  de- 

JBFFEBSOK  DAVIS. 


Headquarters  Caney  Creek,  Madison  County, 

YiA  Jackson,  July  4,  1863. 


His  Excellency  President  Davis  : 

Your  dispatch  of  the  2d  instant  received,  but  none  of  it  can  be  deci- 
phered. Please  repeat. 

^ J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Caney  Creek  Camp,  July  5,  1863. 


His  Excellency  the  President: 

Your  dispatch  of  June  30  received.  I considered  my  assignment  to 
the  immediate  command  in  Mississippi  as  giving  me  a new  position  and 
limiting  my  authority  to  this  department.  The  orders  of  the  War  De- 
partment transferring  three  separate  bodies  of  troops  from  General 
Bragg’s  army  to  this,  two  of  them  without  my  knowledge  and  all  of 
them  without  consulting  me,  would  have  convinced  me  had  1 doubted. 
These  orders  of  the  War  Department  expressed  its  judgment  of  the 
number  of  troops  to  be  transferred  from  Tennessee.  I could  no  more 
control  this  judgment  by  increasing  the  number  than  by  forbidding  the 
transfer.  I regret  very  much  that  an  impression  which  seemed  to  me 
to  be  natural  should  be  regarded  by  you  as  a strange  error.  I thank 
Your  Excellency  for  your  approval  of  the  several  recommendations  yon 


mention. 


J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


199 


JACKSON)  MivSS.,  July  7;  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

fSecretary  of  War  : 

Vicksburg  capitulated  on  the  4th  instant.  Garrison  was  paroled  and 
are  to  be  returned  to  our  lines,  the  olhcers  retaining  their  side-arms  and 
personal  baggage.  This  intelligence  was  brought  by  an  officer  who  left 
the  place  on  Sunday,  the  5th.  In  consequence,  I am  falling  back  from 
the  Big  Black  Kiver  to  Jackson. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON.  . 


Richmond,  Va.,  July  8,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Jackson,  Miss, : 

Your  dispatch  of  5th  instant  received.  The  mistakes  it  contains  will 
be  noticed  by  letter.  Your  dispatch  of  7th  instant,  to  Secretary  of  War, 
announcing  the  disastrous  termination  of  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  received 
same  day.  Painfully  anxious  as  to  the  result,  I have  remained  with- 
out information  from  you  as  to  any  plans  proposed  or  attempted  to  raise 
the  siege.  Equally  uninformed  as  to  your  plans  in  relation  to  Port  Hud- 
son, I have  to  request  such  information  in  relation  thereto  as  the  Gov- 
ernment has  a right  to  expect  from  one  of  its  commanding  generals  in 
the  field. 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  July  9,  1863. 

His  Excellency  the  President: 

Your  dispatch  of  to-day  * received.  I have  never  meant  to  fail  in  the 
duty  of  reporting  to  the  Executive  whatever  might  interest  it  in  mj" 
command.  E informed  the  Secretary  of  AVar  that  my  force  was  much 
too  weak  to  attempt  to  raise  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  and  that  to  attempt 
to  relieve  Port  Hudson  would  be  to  give  up  Mississippi,  as  it  would  in- 
volve the  loss  of  this  point,  and  that  the  want  of  adequate  means  of 
transportation  kept  me  inactive  until  the  end  of  June.  I then  moved 
toward  Vicksburg  to  attempt  to  extricate  the  garrison,  but  could  not 
devise  a plan  until  after  reconuoitering,  for  which  I was  too  late.  With- 
out General  Pembertoffis  co-operation,  any  attempt  must  have  resulted 
in  disaster.  The  slowness  and  difficulty  of  communication  rendered  co- 
operation next  to  impossible. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Richmond,  Va.,  July  9,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Jackson,  Miss. : 

If  it  be  true  that  General  Taylor  has  joined  General  Gardner  and 
routed  Banks,  you  will  endeavor  to  draw  heavy  re-enforcements  from 
that  army  and  delay  a general  engagement  until  your  junction  is  ef- 
fected. Thus  it  is  to  be  hoped  the  enemy  may  yet  be  crushed  and  the 
late  disaster  be  repaired. 

Send  by  telegraph  a list  of  the  general  and  staff  officers  who  have  come 
out  on  parole  from  Vicksburg,  so  that  they  may  be  exchanged  imme^ 


Dated  Ricliinoud,  .July  8,  1863. 


200 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

cliately.  As  soon  as  practicable  let  the  lists  of  regiments  and  other  or- 
ganizations be  forwarded  for  same  purpose.  General  Eains  should  now 
fully  apply  his  invention. 

JEFFEESON  DAVIS. 
Jackson,  Miss.,  July  9,  1863. 

His  Excellency  the  President: 

The  enemy  is  advancing  in  two  columns  on  Jackson;  now  about  4 
miles  distant.  I shall  endeavor  to  hold  the  place,  as  the  possession  of 
Mississippi  depends  on  it.  His  force  is  about  double  ours. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 

General. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  July  10,  1863. 

His  Excellency  President  Davis  : 

Your  dispatch  of  yesterday  received.  No  report  of  Taylor’s  junction 
with  Gardner  has  reached  me,  as  it  must  have  done  if  true,  as  we  have 
1,200  cavalry  in  that  vicinity.  I have  nothing  official  from  Vicksburg. 
Maj.  Jacob  Thompson,  of  General  Pemberton’s  staff,  gives  me  the  fol- 
lowing list : Lieutenant-General  Pemberton,  Major-Generals  Stevenson, 
Forney,  M.  L.  Smith,  and  Bowen ; Brigadier-Generals  Barton,  Lee, 
Gumming,  Moore,  Hubert,  Baldwin,  Vaughn,  Shoup;  Colonels Eeynolds, 
Waul,  and  Cockrell,  commanders  of  brigades  5 also  Brigadier-General 
[John  V.]  Harris,  of  Mississippi  militia. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 
Jackson,  Miss.,  July  11,  1863. 

The  President  : 

Under  General  Pemberton’s  orders,  a line  of  rifle-pits  was  constructed 
from  the  Canton  road,  at  Colonel  Withers’  house,  passing  a few  hundred 
yards  from  the  railroad  depot,  and  going  to  the  New  Orleans  Eailroad, 
1,000  yards  south.  It  is  very  defective — cannot  stand  siege — but  im- 
proves a bad  position  against  assault.  I thought  want  of  water  would 
compel  this ; but  the  enemy  has  made  no  attempt,  but  skirmished  all 
day  yesterday.  Should  he  not  assault,  we  must  attack  him  or  leave  the 
place.  Prisoners  say  there  are  Ord’s  and  Sherman’s  corps  and  three 
other  divisions.  Their  right  is  near  Eaymond  road  j their  left  on  Pearl 
Eiver,  opposite  Insane  Asylum.  Our  men  are  deserting  in  large  num- 
bers by  the  fords  on  Pearl  Eiver. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 
Eichmond,  Va.,  July  11,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Jackson^  Miss. : 

Dispatch  of  this  day  received  and  remarks  on  defects  of  intrenched 
line  noted.  Though  late  to  attempt  improvement,  every  effort  should  be 
made  to  strengthen  the  line  of  deleuse,  and  compel  the  enemy  to  assault. 
Am  deeply"  distressed  at  report  of  desertions.  (3annot  the  Governor  aid 
you  to  check  them  by  employing  citizens  as  guards  at  the  fords'?  Beau- 
regard and  Bragg  are  both  threatened.  The  former  now  engaged  with 
the  enemy.  We  are  entitled  to  discharge  of  the  paroled  prisoners,  and 
the  War  Department  will  8i)are  no  effort  to  promptly  secure  it.  The 
importance  of  your  position  is  apparent,  and  you  will  not  fail  to  employ 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


201 


all  available  means  to  insure  success.  I have  too  little  knowledge  of 
your  circumstances  to  be  more  definite,  and  have  exhausted  my  power 
to  aid  you. 

JEFFEESON  DAYIS. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  July  12,  1863. 

His  Excellency  President  Davis  : 

Your  dispatch  of  11th  received.  A heavy  cannonade  this  morning 
for  two  hours  from  batteries  east  of  the  Canton  and  south  of  the  Clinton 
road.  The  enemy^s  rifles  reached  all  parts  of  the  town,  showing  the 
weakness  of  the  position  and  untenableness  against  a powerful  artillery. 
Breckinridge^s  front,  south  of  the  town,  was  assaulted  this  morning,  but 
not  vigorously.  A party  of  skirmishers  of  the  First,  Third,  and  Fourth 
Florida,  Forty-seventh  Georgia,  and  Cobb’s  battery  took  the  enemy’s 
flank,  and  captured  200  prisoners  and  colors  of  the  Twenty-eighth, 
Forty-first,  and  Fifty-third  Illinois  Eegiments.  Heavy  skirmishing  all 
day  yesterday. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  July  12,  1863. 

(Eeceived  Eichmond,  Ya.,  July  13.) 
His  Excellency  President  Davis  : 

I have  just  learned  from  Colonel  [John  L.]  Logan  that  Port  Hudson 
capitulated  at  6 a.  m.  on  the  9th  instant.  Terms  not  given. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  July  13,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

JacTcson^  Miss.: 

Nothing  from  you  since  Saturday.  What  is  the  state  of  aflairs  ? 

JEFFEESON  DAYIS. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  July  13,  1863. 

His  Excellency  the  President  : 

Your  dispatch  of  11th  received.  The  Governor  cannot  help  us.  Under 
our  joint  call,  but  17 6 men  have  been  obtained.  I think  Grant  will  keep 
the  Yicksburg  prisoners  until  operations  here  are  ended.  He  may  be 
strongly  re-enforced  from  Port  Hudson.  If  the  position  and  works  were 
not  bad,  want  of  stores  (which  could  not  be  collected)  would  make  it  im- 
possible to  stand  siege.  If  the  enemy  will  not  attack,  we  must,  or  at 
the  last  moment  withdraw.  W e cannot  attack  seriously  without  risking 
the  army ; but  it  is  difficult  to  yield  this  vital  point  without  a struggle. 
On  afternoon  of  11th,  the  enemy  extended  his  right  to  Pearl  Eiver. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  July  13,  1863. 

His  Excellency  the  President  : 

Colonel  [C.  A.]  Fuller  has  just  arrived  from  Yicksburg.  The  Federals 
issued  31,000  rations  to  the  garrison  after  the  siege.  There  were  18,000 
men  fit  for  duty  in  the  treiujlies  the  day  of  the  surrender.  About  6,000 
sick  and  wounded  in  hospitals.  Losses  killed  and  wounded  during  the 


202 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


siege  supposed  to  be  2,500.  General  Green  the  only  general  officer 
killed.  The  garrison  left  Vicksburg  on  the  11th,  and  will  reach  a point 
10  miles  east  of  Brandon  on  W ednesday,  the  15th.  Colonel  Fuller  thinks 
the  troops  are  much  demoralized,  and  a large  proportion  of  the  men  will 
straggle.  The  cause  is  their  objection  to  going  to  a paroled  camp. 
They  ask  a furlough  of  thirty  days,  which  General  Pemberton  recom- 
mends. Subsisting  these  men  will  be  attended  with  serious  difficulties. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  July  14,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

JacJcson,  Miss. : 

Your  dispatch  of  yesterday  received.  If  lists  of  the  paroled  prisoners, 
as  heretofore  directed,  be  promptly  furnished,  there  will  be  no  need  to 
detain  the  men  in  a paroled  camp,  as  we  shall  insist  on  immediate  dis- 
charge, and  give  to  them  an  opportunity  again  to  serve  their  country. 

JEFFERSON  DAVIS. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  July  14,  1863. 

(Received  Richmond,  Va.,  July  15.) 
His  Excellency  President  Davis  : 

We  learn ‘from  Vicksburg  that  a large  force  lately  left  that  place  to 
turn  us  on  the  north.  This  will  compel  us  to  abandon  Jackson.  The 
troops  before  us  have  been  intrenching  and  erecting  batteries  since 
their  arrival. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 

Executive  Office, 

Richmond.,  July  15,  1863. 
General  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  0.  S.  Army : 

General  : [I.  *]  Your  dispatch  of  the  5th  instant,  stating  that  you 
“ considered”  your  assignment  to  the  immediate  command  in  Missis- 
sippi ” as  giving  you  a “ new  position,”  and  as  “ limiting  your  authority,” 
being  a repetition  of  a statement  which  you  were  informed  was  a grave 
error,  and  being  persisted  in  after  your  failure  to  point  out,  when  re- 
quested, the  letter  or  dispatch  justifying  jmu  in  such  a conclusion,  ren- 
dered it  necessary,  as  you  were  informed  in  my  dispatch  of  8th  instant, 
that  I should  make  a more  extended  reply  than  could  be  given  in  a tel- 
egram. That  there  may  be  no  possible  room  for  further  mistake  in  this 
matter,  lam  compelled  to  recapitulate  the  substance  of  all  orders  and 
instructions  given  to  you  so  far  as  they  bear  on  this  question. 

[II.]  On  the  24th  November  last  you  were  assigned,  by  Si)ecial  Orders, 
No.  275,  to  a defined  geographical  command.  The  descrij)- 
24th November,  1862.  included  a portlon  of  Western  North  Carolina  and 

Northern  Georgia,  the  States  of  Tennessee,  Alabama,  and  Missis- 
sippi, and  that  part  of  the  State  of  Louisiana  east  of  the  Mississipi)i 
River.  The  order  concluded  in  the  following  language : 

General  Johnston  will,  for  the  purpose  of  correspondence  and  reports,  establish  his 
headquarters  at  Chattanooga,  or  such  other  place  as  in  his  judgment  will  best  secure 
communication  with  the  troops  within  the  limits  of  his  command,  and  will  repair  in 
person  to  any  part  of  said  command  whenever  his  presence  may  for  the  time  be  nec- 
essary or  desirable. 

*The  paragraphs  w'ere  numbered  by  General  Johnston. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


203 


[III.]  This  commaDd  by  its  terms  embraced  the  armies  under  com- 
mand of  General  Bragg  in  Tennessee,  of  General  Pemberton  at  Vicks- 
burg, as  well  as  those  at  Port  Hudson,  Mobile,  and  the  forces  in  East 
Tennessee. 

[IV.j  This  general  order  has  never  been  changed  nor  modified  so  as  to 
aftect  your  command  in  a single  particular^  uor  has  your  control  over 
it  been  interfered  with.  I have,  as  commander-in-chief,  given  you  some 
orders,  which  will  be  hereafter  noticed ; not  one  of  them,  however,  in- 
dicating in  any  manner  that  the  general  control  confided  to  you  was  re- 
stricted or  impaired. 

[V.j  You  exercised  this  command  by  visiting  in  person  the  armies  at 
Murfreesborough,  Vicksburg,  Mobile,  and  elsewhere,  and  on  the  22d 
January  I wrote  you,  directing  that  you  should  repair  in  person  to  the 
army  at  Tullahoma,  on  account  of  a reported  want  of  harmony  and  con- 
fidence between  General  Bragg  and  his  officers  and  troops.  This  letter 
closed  with  the  following  passage: 


As  that  army  is  part  of  your  command,  no  order  will  be  necessary  to  give  you  author- 
ity there,  as,  whether  present  or  absent,  you  have  a right  to  direct  its 
operations  and  do  whatever  else  belongs  to  the  general  commanding.  22d  January,  isas. 


[VI.]  Language  cannot  be  plainer  than  this;  and  although  the  differ- 
ent armies  in  your  geographical  district  were  ordered  to  report  directly 
to  Eichmond  as  well  as  to  yourself,  this  was  done  solely  to  avoid  the  evil 
that  would  result  from  reporting  through  you  when  your  headquarters 
might  be,  and  it  was  exj^ected  frequently  would  be,  so  located  as  to 
create  delays  injurious  to  the  public  interest. 

[VII.]  While  at  Tullahoma  you  did  not  hesitate  to  order  troops  from 
General  Pemberton’s  army ; and,  learning  that  you  had  ordered  the 
division  of  cavalry  from  Northern  Mississippi  to  Tennessee,  I telegraphed 
you  that  this  order  left  Mississippi  exposed  to  cavalry  raids  without 
means  of  checking  them.  You  did  not  change  your  orders,  and  although 
I thought  them  injudicious,  I refrained  from  exercising  my  authority  in 
deference  to  your  views. 

[VIII.]  When  I learned  that  prejudice  and  malignity  had  so  under-  • 
mined  the  confidence  of  the  troops  at  Vicksburg  in  their  commander  as 
to  threaten  disaster,  I deemed  the  circumstances  such  as  to  present  the 
case  foreseen  in  Special  Orders,  No.  275,  that  you  should — 


repair  in  person  to  any  part  of  said  command  whenever  your  presence  may  for  the 
time  be  necessary  or  desirable. 

[IX.]  You  were  therefore  ordered  on  9th  May  to — 

proceed  at  once  to  Mississippi  and  take  chief  command  of  the  forces, 
giving  to  those  in  the  field  as  far  as  practicable  the  encouragement  and  **** 
benefit  of  your  personal  direction. 

[X.]  Some  details  were  added  about  re  enforcements,  but  not  a word 
affecting  in  the  remotest  degree  your  authority  to  command  your  geo 
graphical  district. 

[XI.]  On  the  4th  June  you  telegraphed  to  the  Secretary  of 
War,  in  response  to  his  inquiry,  saying:  4th June, isea. 

My  only  plan  is  to  relieve  Vicksburg.  My  force  is  far  too  small  for  the  purpose. 
Tell  me  if  you  can  increase  it  and  how  much. 

[XII.]  To  which  he  answered  on  the  5th  ; 5th  June,  1863. 

I regret  inability  to  promise  more  Iroops,  as  we  have  drained  resources  even  to  the 
danger  of  several  points.  You  know  best  concerning  General  Bragg’s  army,  but  I fear 
to  withdraw  more.  AVe  are  too  far  outnumbered  in  Virginia  to  spare  any,  &c. 

[XIII.]  This  dispatch  shows  that  up  to  the  5th  June,  the  War  Office 


204 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


had  no  knowledge  of  any  impression  on  your  part  that  you  had  ceased 
to  control  Bragg’s  army,  but,  on  the  contrary,  you  were  clearly  informed 
that  you  were  considered  the  proper  person  to  withdraw  troops  from  it, 
if  you  deemed  it  judicious. 

[XIV.]  On  the  8th  June  the  Secretary  was  more  explicit, 
if  possible.  He  said : 


8th  June,  1863. 


Do  you  advise  more  re-enforcements  from  General  Bragg?  You,  as  commaudant  of 
tlie  department,  have  power  so  to  order,  if  you,  in  view  of  the  whole  case,  so  deter- 
mine. 


[XV.]  On  the  10th  June  you  answered  that  it  was  for  the  Govern- 
ment to  determine  what  department  could  furnish  the  re-enforcements  ; 
that  you  could  not  know  how  General  Bragg’s  wants  compared  with 
yours,  and  that  the  Government  could  make  the  comparison. 

[XVI.]  Your  statement  that  the  Government  in  Richmond  was  better 
able  to  judge  of  the  relative  necessities  of  the  armies  uuder  your  com- 
mand than  you  were,  and  the  further  statement  that  you  could  not 
know  how  General  Bragg’s  wants  compared  with  yours,  were  considered 
extraordinary,  but  as  they  were  accompanied  by  the  remark  that  the 
Secretary’s  dispatch  had  been  imperfectly  deciphered,  no  observation 
was  made'on  them  till  the  receipt  of  your  telegram  to  the  Secretary,  of 
the  12th  instant,  stating  : 

I have  not  considered  myself  commanding  in  Tennessee  since  assignment  here,  and 
12th  June,  1863.  should  not  have  felt  authorized  to  take  troops  from  that  department  after 
having  been  informed  by  the  Executive  that  no  more  could  be  spared. 

[XVII.]  My  surprise  at  these  two  statements  was  extreme.  You 
had  never  been  “assigned”  to  the  Mississippi  command.  You  went 
there  under  the  circumstances  and  orders  already  quoted,  and  no  justi- 
fication whatever  is  perceived  for  your  abandonment  of  your  duties  as 
commanding  general  of  the  geographical  district  to  which  you  were 
assigned.  Orders  as  explicit  as  those  under  which  you  were  sent  to  the 
west,  and  under  which  you  continued  to  act  up  to  the  9th  May,  when 
you  were  directed  to  repair  in  person  to  Mississippi,  can  only  be  im- 
paired or  set  aside  by  subsequent  orders  equally  explicit,  and  your  an- 
nouncement that  you  had  ceased  to  consider  yourself  charged  with  the 
control  of  affairs  in  Tennessee  because  ordered  to  repair  in  person  to 
Mississippi,  both  places  being  within  the  command  to  which  you  were 
assigned,  w^as  too  grave  to  be  overlooked,  and,  when  to  this  was  added 
the  assertion  that  you  should  not  have  felt  authorized  to  draw  troops 
from  that  department  (Tennessee)  “ after  being  informed  by  the  Execai- 
tive  that  no  more  could  be  spared,”  I was  unable  to  account  for  your 
language,  being  entirely  confident  that  I had  never  giv^eu  you  any  such 
information. 

[XVIII. ] I shall  now  proceed  to  separate  your  two  statements,  and 
begin  with  that  which  relates  to  your  “ not  considering”  yourself  com- 
manding in  Tennessee  since  assignment  “here,”  i.  e.,  in  Mississippi. 

fXIX.]  When  you  received  my  telegram  of  15th  June,  in- 

15th  June,  1863.  ^ ,,  a 'yr'  • • • i - i ^ 

forming  you  “ that  the  order  to  go  to  Mississippi  did  not 
diminish  your  authority  in  Tennessee,  both  being  in  the  country  ])laced 
under  your  command  in  original  assignment,”  accompanied  by  an  in- 
(piiry  about  the  information  said  to  have  been  derived  from 
16th  June,  1863.  restiictiiig  your  authority  to  transfer  troops,  your  answ^^ 
on  the  Ifith  June  was: 

I meant  to  tell  the  Secretary  of  War  that  I considered  the  order  directing  me  to  com- 
mand here  as  limiting  my  authority  to  this  department,  especially  when  that  order 
was  accompanied  by  War  Department  orders  transferring  troops  from  Tennessee  to 
Mississippi. 


Chap.  XXXVI.  ] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


205 


[XX.  J This  is  in  substance  arepetition  of  the  previous  statement,  with- 
011 1 any  reason  being  given  for  it.  The  fact  of  orders  being  sent  to  you  to 
transfer  some  of  the  troops  in  your  department  from  one  point  to  another 
to  wliich  you  were  proceeding  in  person  could  give  no  possible  ground 
for  your  considering  ” that  Special  Orders,  No.  275,  was  rescinded  or 
moditied.  Your  command  of  your  geographical  district  did  not  make 
you  independent  of  my  orders  as  your  superior  officer,  and  when  you 
were  directed  by  me  to  take  troops  with  you  to  Mississippi,  your  control 
over  the  district  to  which  you  were  assigned  was  in  no  way  involved ; 
but  the  statement  that  troops  were  transferred  from  Tennessee  to  Missis- 
sippi by  order  of  the  War  Department  when  you  were  directed  to  re- 
pair to  the  latter  State  gives  but  half  the  fact,  for  although  you  were 
ordered  to  take  with  you  3,000  good  troops,  you  were  told  to  replace 
them  by  a greater  number  then  on  their  way  to  Mississippi,  and  whom 
you  were  requested  to  divert  to  Tennessee,  the  purpose  being  to  hasten 
re-enforcements  to  Pemberton  without  weakening  Bragg.  This  was  in 
deference  to  your  own  opinion  that  Bragg  could  not  be  safely  weakened  j 
nay,  that  he  ought  even  to  be  re-enforced  at  Pemberton’s  expense;  for 
you  had  just  ordered  troops  from  Pembertoffis  command  to  re-enforce 
Bragg.  I differed  in  opinion  from  you,  and  thought  Yicksburg  far  more 
exposed  to  danger  than  Bragg,  and  was  urging  forward  re-enforcements 
to  that  point  both  from  Carolina  and  Virginia  before  you  were  directed 
to  assume  command  in  person  in  Mississippi. 

[XXI.]  I find  nothing,  then,  either  in  your  dispatch  of  16th  June 
or  in  any  subsequent  communication  from  you,  giving  a justification 
for  your  saying  that  you  had  not  considered  yourself  commanding  in 
Tennessee  since  assignment  here  {i.  e.,  in  Mississippi).  Your  dispatch 
of  the  5th  instant  is  again  a substantial  repetition  of  the  same  state- 
ment without  a word  of  reason  to  justify  it.  You  say,  considered 
my  assignment  to  the  immediate  command  in  Mississippi  as  giving  me 
a new  position  and  limiting  my  authority  to  this  department.”  I have 
characterized  this  as  a grave  error,  and  in  view  of  all  the  facts,  cannot 
otherwise  regard  it.  I must  add  that  a review  of  your  correspondence 
shows  a constant  desire  on  your  part,  beginning  early  in  January,  that 
I should  change  the  order  placing  Tennessee  and  Mississippi  in  one 
command  under  your  direction,  and  a constant  indication  on  my  part 
whenever  I wrote  on  the  subject  that  in  my  judgment  the  public  serv- 
ice required  that  the  two  armies  should  be  subject  to  your  control. 

[XXII.]  I now  proceed  to  your  second  statement  in  your  telegram  of 
12th*  June,  that  you  ‘‘should  not  have  felt  authorized  to  take  troops 
tom  that  department  (Tennessee)  after  having  been  informed  by  the 
ifxecutive  that  no  more  could  be  spared.” 

[XXIII.]  To  my  inquiry  for  the  basis  of  this  statement,  you  answered 
on  the  16th  by  what  was  in  substance  a reiteration  of  it. 

[XX lY.]  I again  requested  on  the  17th  that  you  should  refer  by  date 
to  any  such  communication  as  that  alleged  by  you. 

[XXY.]  You  answered  on  20th  June,  apologized  for  carelessness  in 
your  first  reply,  and  referred  me  to  a passage  from  my  telegram  to  you 
on  the  28th  May  and  to  one  from  the  Secretary  of  War  of  5th  June, 
and  then  informed  me  that  you  considered  “Executive”  as  including 
Secretary  of  War. 

[XXYI.]  Your  telegram  of  12th  June  was  addressed  to  the  Secre- 
tary of  War  in  the  second  person.  It  begins,  “Your  dispatch,”  and 
then  speaks  of  the  Executive  in  the  third  person,  and  on  reading  it,  it 


To  Secretary  of  War. 


206 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


was  not  supposed  that  the  word  ‘‘Executive”  referred  to  any  one  but 
myself;  but,  of  course,  in  a matter  like  this,  your  own  explanation  of 
your  meaning  is  conclusive. 

[XXYIL]  The  telegram  of  the  Secretary  of  War  of  5th  June,  followed 
by  that  of  8th  June,  conveyed  unmistakabl}^  the  very  reverse  of  the 
meaning  you  attributed  to  them,  and  your  reference  to  them  as  support- 
ing your  position  is  unintelligible.  I revert,  therefore,  to  my  telegram 
of  28th  May.  That  telegram  was  in  answer  to  one  from  you  in  which 
you  stated  that,  on  the  arrival  of  certain  re-enforcements  then  on  the 
way,  you  would  have  about  23,000;  that  Pemberton  could  be  saved  only 
by  beating  Grant,  and  you  added : 

Unless  you  can  promise  more  troops,  we  must  try  with  that  number.  The  odds 
against  us  will  be  very  great.  Can  you  add  7,000  ? 

My  reply  was : 

The  re-enforcements  sent  to  you  exceed  by,  say,  7,000  the  estimate  of  your  dispatch 
of  27th  instant.  We  have  withheld  nothing  which  it  was  practicable  to  give  you. 
We  cannot  hope  for  numerical  equality,  and  time  will  probably  increase  the  disparity. 

[XXYIII.]  It  is  on  this  language  that  you  rely  to  support  a state- 
ment that  I informed  you  no  more  troops  could  be  spared  from  Ten- 
nessee, and  as  restricting  your  right  to  draw  troops  from  that  depart- 
ment. It  bears  no  such  construction.  The  re-enforcements  sent  to  you 
(with  an  exception  presently  to  be  noticed)  were  from  points  outside  of 
your  department.  You  had,  in  telegrams  of  1st,  2d,*  7th  May,  and 
others,  made  repeated  applications  to  have  troops  withdrawn  from 
other  departments  to  your  aid.  You  were  informed  that  we  would 
give  all  the  aid  we  possibly  could.  Of  your  right  to  order  any  change 
made  in  the  distribution  of  troops  in  your  own  district  no  doubt  had 
ever  been  suggested  by  jmurself  nor  could  occur  to  your  superiors  here, 
for  they  had  given  you  the  authority. 

[XXIX.]  The  re-enforcements  which  went  with  you  from  Tennessee 
were  (as  already  explained,  and  as  was  communicated  to  you  at  the 
time)  a mere  exchange  for  other  troops  sent  from  Yirginia. 

[XXX.]  The  troops  subsequently  sent  to  you  from  Bragg  were  for- 
warded by  him  under  the  following  dispatch  from  me  of  22d  May: 

The  vital  issue  of  holding  the  Mississippi  at  Vicksburg  is  dependent  on  the  success 
of  General  Johnston  in  an  attack  on  the  investing  force.  I he  intelligence  from  there 
is  discouraging.  Can  you  aid  him  ? If  so,  and  you  are  without  orders  from  General 
Johnston,  act  on  your  judgment. 

[XXXI.]  The  words  that  I now  underscore  suffice  to  show  how  thor- 
oughly your  right  of  command  of  the  troops  in  Tennessee  was  recog- 
nized. I knew  from  your  own  orders  that  you  thought  it  more  advisa- 
ble to  draw  troops  from  Mississippi  to  re-enforce  Bragg  than  to  send 
troops  from  the  latter  to  Pemberton,  and  one  of  the  reasons  which  in- 
duced the  instruction  to  you  to  proceed  to  Mississippi  was  the  convic- 
tion that  your  views  on  this  point  would  be  changed  on  arrival  in  Mis- 
sissippi. Still,  although  convinced  myself  that  troops  might  be  spared 
from  Bragg^s  army  without  very  great  danger,  and  that  Yicksburg  was, 
on  the  contrary,  in  immediate  peril,  I was  unwilling  to  overrule  your 
judgment  of  the  distribution  of  your  troops  while  you  were  on  the  spot, 
and  therefore  simply  left  to  General  Bragg  the  power  to  aid  you  if  he 
could  and  if  you  had  not  given  contrary  orders. 

[XXXII.]  The  cavalry  sent  you  from  Tennessee  was  sent  on  a similar 
dispatch  from  the  Secretary  of  War  to  General  Bragg,  informing  him 


* Dated  May  1 ; received  May  2, 1863. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


207 


of  your  earnest  appeal  for  cavalry,  and  asJcing  him  if  he  could  spare  any. 
Your  request  was  for  a regiment  of  cavalry  to  be  sent  to  you  from 
Georgia.  dispatch  of  18th  May  pointed  out  to  you  the  delay  which 
a compliance  would  involve,  and  suggested  that  cavalry  could  be  drawn 
from  “another  part  of  your  department,”  as  had  been  previously  indi- 
cated. 

[XXXIIL]  In  no  manner,  by  no  act,  by  no  language  either  of  myself 
or  of  the  Secretary  of  War,  has  your  authority  to  draw  troops  from  one 
portion  of  your  department  to  another  been  withdrawn,  restricted,  or 
modified. 

[XXXIV.]  Now  that  Vicksburg  has  disastrously  fallen,  this  subject 
would  present  no  pressing  demand  for  attention,  and  its  examination 
would  have  been  postponed  to  a future  period  had  not  your  dispatch  of 
the  5th  instant,  with  its  persistent  repetition  of  statements  which  I had 
informed  you  were  erroneous,  and  without  adducing  a single  fact  to 
sustain  them,  induced  me  to  terminate  the  matter  at  once  by  a review 
of  all  the  facts.  The  original  mistakes  in  your  telegram  of  12th  June 
would  gladly  have  been  overlooked  as  accidental  if  acknowledged  when 
pointed  out.  The  perseverance  with  which  they  have  been  insisted  on 
has  not  permitted  me  to  pass  them  by  as  mere  oversights,  or,  by  refrain- 
ing from  an  answer,  to  seem  to  admit  the  justice  of  the  statements. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JEFFERSOX  DAVIS. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  July  15,  1863. 

President  Davis  : 

The  enemy  will  not  attack,  but  has  intrenched ; is  evidently  making 
a siege  which  we  cannot  resist.  It  would  be  madness  to  attack  him.  In 
the  beginning  it  might  have  been  done,  but  I thought  then  that  want  of 
water  would  compel  him  to  attack  us.  It  is  reported  by  some  of  its  offi- 
ceis  who  were  here  yesterday  and  by  some  gentlemen  of  Brandon  that 
the  Vicksburg  garrison  is  diminishin gly  rapidly.  Incessant  but  slight 
cannonading  kept  up.  Our  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  about  350.  The 
remainder  of  the  army  under  Grant  at  Vicksburg  is  beyond  doubt  on 
its  way  to  this  place. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  July  16,  1863. 

His  Excellency  President  Davis  : 

The  enemy  being  strongly  re-enforced,  and  able  when  he  pleases  to  cut 
us  off,  I shall  abandon  this  place,  which  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  hold. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  July  16,  1863. 

His  Excellency  President  Davis  : 

Your  dispatch  of  yesterday*  received.  Lieutenant-General  Pember- 
ton has  been  instructed  to  send  an  ofhcer  to  Richmond  with  lists  of 
paroled  prisoners.  Reports  indicate  that  few  of  them  will  re-enter  the 
service  very  soon,  as  they  are  rapidly  dispersing.  Little  firing  yester- 
day ; none  this  morning.  1 sent  a body  of  cavalry  to  the  enemy ^s  rear 
afternoon  of  14th,  but  have  not  heard  from  it. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Dated  Richmond,  July  14,  1863.  See  p.  202. 


208 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Brandon,  Miss.,  July  17,  1863. 

His  Excellency  the  President: 

Jackson  was  abandoned  last  night.  The  troops  are  now  moving 
through  this  place  to  encamp  3 miles  to  the  east.  Those  officers  who 
have  seen  the  Vicksburg  troops  think  that  they  cannot  be  kept  together. 
General  Pemberton  thinks  the  best  policy  is  to  furlough  them  by  regi- 
ments. 

J.  E.  JOHi^STOK 

Eichmond,  Ya.,  July  18,  1863. 
General  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  Brandon^  Miss.: 

Your  dispatch  of  yesterday  received,  informing  me  of  your  retreat 
from  Jackson  toward  the  east.  I desire  to  know  your  ulterior  purpose. 
The  enemy  may  not  pursue,  but  move  up  the  Central  road,  lay  waste 
the  rich  country  toward  Tennessee,  and  co-operate  afterward  with  Eose- 
crans.  Another  column.  Eastern  Louisiana  being  abandoned,  may  be 
sent  from  New  Orleans  to  attack  Mobile  on  the  land  side. 

The  recommendation  to  furlough  the  paroled  troops  from  Vicksburg 
offers  a hard  alternative  under  the  pressure  of  our  present  condition. 

JEFP^EESON  DAVIS. 

July  19,  1863. 

His  Excellency  the  President  : 

Tour  dispatch  of  yesterday  cannot  be  deciphered.  My  purpose  is  to 
hold  as  much  of  the  country  as  I can,  and  to  retire  farther  only  when 
compelled  to  do  so.  Should  the  enemy  cross  Pearl  Eiver,  I will  oppose 
his  advance,  and,  unless  you  forbid  it,  order  General  Bragg  to  join  me 
to  give  battle.  Prisoners  all  say  that  Mobile  is  to  be  attacked.  1 will 
re-enforce  the  garrison  if  necessary,  not  expecting  Sherman  to  move 
through  Mississippi  at  present.  He  must  repair  railroads  first,  and  our 
cavalry  can  break  them  behind  him.  In  the  mean  time  I will  try  to 
restore  discipline. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Eichmond,  Va.,  July  21,  1863. 
General  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  Near  Morton.,  Miss. : 

Eeturn  to  me  the  cipher  dispatch  of  18th,  to  enable  me  to  learn  why 
my  cipher  dispatches  to  you  are  illegible. 

JEFFEESON  DAVIS. 


Camp  near  Morton,  Miss.,  July  22,  1863. 
His  Excellency  the  President  : 

As  it  is  of  the  highest  importance  that  you  should  have  the  best  Intel 
ligence  of  the  condition  of  military  affairs  in  Mississippi,  I have  desired 
Brigadier- General  [W.  S.]  Featherston  to  go  to  Eichmond  to  give  you 
information,  which  he,  an  eminent  Mississippiau  and  distinguished  sol- 
dier, can  communicate  better  than  any  other  officer  of  this  army.  In 
selecting  General  Featherston  for  this  service.  1 have  been  influenced  as 
much  by  my  belief  of  your  high  opinion  of  him  as  by  my  own. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 

OeneraL 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


209 


Morton,  Miss.,  July  23  [22  ?J,  1863. 

His  Excellency  the  President  : 

Two  divisions  of  the  enemy  drove  our  cavalry  through  Brandon  and  ■ 
returned  to  Jackson  next  day.  Scouts  report  railroad  bridges  destroyed 
by  them.  Prisoners  say  that  they  will  attack  Mobile  next.  A paroled 
prisoner  reports  to  Col.  Wirt  Adams  that  a garrison  of  one  corps  was 
left  in  Jackson,  the  rest  going  to  Vicksburg.  Large  quantities  of  artil 
lery  ammunition  are  being  sent  from  Vicksburg.  Said  in  the  army 
that  they  are  to  move  via  Memphis  and  Mobile  and  Ohio  road.  Deser- 
tions continue,  especially  of  Mississippians.  I shall  visit  Mobile  in  a 
day  or  two,  Lieutenant-General  Hardee  being  here. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Near  Morton,  Miss.,  July  24,  1863. 
His  Excellency  the  President  : 

Brigadier-General  [G.  B.]  Cosby  reports  that  the  enemy’s  rear  guard 
left  Jackson  yesterday,  [moving]  toward  Vicksburg,  and  that  Col.  Tom 
[H.]  Taylor  met  General  Sherman  at  Edwards  Depot,  and  was  told  by 
him  that  his  troops  would  not  stay  a day  in  Vicksburg,  but  instantly 
move  up  the  river.  Does  this  indicate  re-enforcing  Meade  1 A deserter 
said  yesterday  that  these  troops  expect  to  go  to  Richmond. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


* Morton,  Miss.,  August  8,  1863. 

Mr.  President:  I.  Your  letter  of  July  15  was  handed  to  me  in  Mo- 
bile on  the  28th  by  Colonel  [Prank]  Schaller.  The  want  of  papers  to 
which  it  was  necessary  to  refer  has  prevented  me  from  replying  sooner. 

II.  I respectfully  ask  Your  Excellency  to  reconsider  the  several  alle- 
gations of  your  letter,  and  especially  to  consider  whether  my  misappre- 
hension of  the  order  sending  me  to  Mississippi  (my  having  regarded  my 
assignment  to  the  immediate  command  in  that  department  as  giving 
mo  a new  position  and  limiting  my  authority,  an  opinion  which  had  no 
practical  results,  which  affected  in  no  way  the  exercise  of  my  military 
functions,  and  which  had  been  removed  before  you  noticed  it)  was  a 
serious  military  offense.  It  affected  my  military  course  in  no  way,  be- 
cause, while  commanding. on  the  spot  in  Mississippi,  I could  not  direct 
General  Bragg’s  operations  in  Tennessee,  and  because  I felt  that  the 
question  of  ordering  more  troops  from  Bragg — one  of  great  magnitude, 
involving  at  least  the  temporary  loss  of  Tennessee  or  Mississippi — ought 
to  be  decided  by  the  Government  and  not  by  me.  This  opinion  was  ex- 
pressed in  my  dispatch  to  the  Secretary  of  War  of  June  12,  in  these 
words : 

To  take  from  Bragg  a force  which  would  make  this  army  fit  to  oppose  Grant,  would 
involve  yielding  Tennessee.  It  is  for  the  Government  to  decide  between  this  State 
and  Tennessee. 

The  idea  was  thus  repeated  on  the  15th  : 

Nor  is  it  for  me  to  judge  which  it  is  best  to  hold — Mississippi  or  Tennessee ; that  is 
for  the  Government  to  determine.  Without  some  great  blunder  by  the  enemy  we 
cannot  hold  both. 

'This  letter  not  transmitted  by  President  Davis  (see  his  message  to  House  of  Rep- 
resentatives, p.  189),  but  transmitted  by  Secretary  of  War,  Juno  11,  1864  (see  x).  237). 

14  R R — VOL  XXTV,  PT  I 


210 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


Had  I received  a copy  of  your  orders  of  May  22,  directing  General 
Bragg  to  send  troops  from  his  army  to  Mississippi,  my  error  would  have 
been  corrected  then,  but  it  was  not  sent  to  me,  ^uid  I have  its  evidence 
for  the  first  time  in  your  letter.  The  dispatch  of  the  Secretary  of  War, 
June  8,  received  on  tlie  10th,  removed  my  ndsapprehension. 

III.  In  regard  to  the  repetition  and  persistence  which  you  impute  to 
me  in  the  first  sentence  of  your  letter,  I cannot  feel  that  my  three  brief 
telegrams,  dictated  by  the  respect  due  from  me  to  you,  deserved  to  be  so 
characterized ; the  first  and  second  being  replies  to  direct  questions  in 
yours  of  the  15th  and  17th,  and  the  third,  in  reply  to  yours  of  June  30, 
an  attempt  to  say  more  clearly  what  had  been  carelessly  expressed  in 
the  first.  They  are  so  brief  as  to  require  scarcely  more  than  a minute 
for  reading,  and  are  respectful  in  thought  and  language.  You  subse- 
quently characterized  my  misunderstanding  the  order  sending  me  to 
Mississippi  as  a grave  error.  This  error  of  mine,  which  was  removed 
by  the  dispatch  from  the  War  Department  dated  June  8,  and  which 
had  no  effect  on  my  military  course,  does  not  seem  to  me,  1 must  con- 
fess, a grave  one. 

IV.  In  the  seventh  paragraph  of  your  letter  you  write: 

While  at  Tullahoma  yon  did  not  hesitate  to  order  troops  from  General  Pemberton’s 
army;  and,  learning  that  you  had  ordered  the  division  of  cavalry  from  Northern 
Mississippi  to  Tennessee,  I telegraphed  yon  that  this  order  left  Mississippi  exposed  to 
cavalry  raids  without  means  of  checking  them.  Yon  did  not  change  your  orders,  &c. 

The  only  order  I gave  sending  cavalry  from  Mississippi  to  Tenuessee 
was  early  in  January,  when  I was  at  Jacksou,  not  Tullahoma.  I can 
fiud  but"  one  telegram  received  from  you  on  the  subject.  It  is  dated 
April  30,  and  in  these  words : 

General  Pemberton  telegraphs  that  unless  he  has  more  cavalry  the  approaches  to 
Northern  Mississippi  are  almost  unprotected,  and  that  he  cannot  prevent  the  cavalry 
raids. 

My  reply  is  of  the  same  date : 

About  3,000  of  General  Bragg’s  cavalry  beyond  the  Tennessee  are  employing  about 
12,000  Federal  troops  from  Mississippi.  General  Pemberton  has  been  so  informed 
twice. 

The  main  body  of  the  cavalry  of  Mississippi  was  uear  Grenada  in 
Jamiary,  unorganized  and  unemployed,  and  from  the  condition  of  the 
country  it  was  supposed  by  the  officers  and  intelligent  citizens  whom  I 
consulted,  inclnding  the  Governor,  that  it  would  be  useless  in  the  State 
until  late  in  the  spring.  Grant  had  fallen  bapk  toward  Memphis,  and 
Sherman  and  McOlernaiid  had  been  repulsed  at  Vicksburg,  but  Bragg’s 
army  had  been  terribly  reduced  by  the  engagements  near  Murtreesbor- 
ough.  I therefore  directed  Major-General  Van  Dorn  to  form  about  two- 
thirds  of  the  cavalry  near  Grenada  into  a division  and  to  join  General 
Bragg  with  it.  These  troops  were  transferred  from  a country  in  which 
they  could  not  operate  and  a department  not  threatened,  and  in  which  the 
enemy  had  just  been  repulsed,  to  one  in  which  they  were  greatly  needed, 
where  we  had  just  suffered  a reverse  and  were  in  danger  of  another. 
These  troops  and  their  gallant  leader  rendered  very  important  services 
in  Tennessee.  They  had  several  engagements  witli  the  enemy  to  the 
advantage  and  honor  of  our  arms.  Without  them  wc*  could  not  have 
held  the  country  which  till  tiie  latter  ])art  of  June  furnished  food  tor 
Bragg’s  army.  More  than  two  weeks  before  Your  Excellency’s  disi)atch 
of  Aiuil  30,  a brigade  of  cavalry  was  sent  across  the  Tenuessee  to  aid  in 
the  ])rotectioii  o1  Mississippi,  and  reports  of  large  re-enforcements  to  the 
garrison  of  Corinth  being  received,  Brigadier-General  Forrest  was  sent 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


211 

with  another  on  April  23.  These  two  brigades  constituted  the  force  re- 
ferred  to  in  my  dispatch  of  April  30,  As  soon  as  the  fulling-  back  of  the 
Federal  Army  made  it  practicable,  Colonel  [P.  D.J  Boddey  was  trans- 
ferred to  Mississippi  with  about  two-thirds  of  the  joint  force 
In  Paragraph  XII  you  quote  the  dispatch  of  the  War  Department  to 
me  of  June  5 as  follows: 

I regret  inability  to  promise  more  troops,  as  we  have  drained  resources  even  to  tho 
danger  ot  several  points.  You  know  best  concerning  General  BragTs  a?my  Wt  I fea? 
to  withdraw  more.  We  are  too  far  outnumbered  in  Virginia  to  spi?e  al^r/  &c. 

The  dispatch  sent  to  me  reads  thus: 

yo«  have  and 

dispatches  which  gave  me  the  impression  that  the 
Executive  wished  no  more  troops  withdrawn  from  Tennessee. 

• rn  ^ “h*  hiot  draw  from  that  telegram  the  inference  which  you  express 
m the  next  paragraph,  but  understood  the  words,  “You  know  best  con 
tnrv'aff  army,”  to  refer  to  the  acquaintance  with  mili- 

acquirfd!  “ ® Tennessee  which  1 might  be  supposed  to  have 

dnlment  of  Tour  Excellency  charges  me  with  the  aban- 

1 re^nectfniw^dl  general  of  a geographical  district. 

I respectfully  deny  the  commission  of  such  a military  crime.  During 

he  nenertm  ^ luyself  Commanding  onlf 

the  Department  of  Mississippi,  it  was  not  possible  for  me  to  direct  operi^ 

onsm  Tennessee  also.  It  is  true  that  I might  have  drawn  troops  from 

War  Denfr  J‘’*V^“  my  opinion  on  that  subject  was  expressed  to  the 
War  Department  m my  dispatches  of  June  12  and  15,  as  follows: 

To  take  from  Bragg  a force  which  would  make  this  army  fit  to  ouuose  Grant  wrtnia 
mvolve  yielding  Tennessee.  It  is  for  the  Government 

ue^s^^-Thatls  fofthVr^^  to  judge  which  it  is  best  to  hold— Mississippi  or  Ten- 

BnTm^ve  :lnnot  S^ea,  binder  by  the 

In  Paragraph  XX  you  write: 

deference  to  your  own  opinion  that  Bragg  could  not  be  safelv  weakened  • 

S/eXoXrtg!!!;  rmVert^“4ro“d  r^eTnfer 

ir^r^ofToS!*^  ^ Inference  is  to  the 

)rder  ot  that  date.  The  United  States  Army  had  then  crossed  the  iMis- 

fissippi  and  defeated  a large  detachment  of  ours.  To  have  ‘^ordered 
roops  from  Pemberton’s  command  to  re-enforce  Bragg”  at  that  time 

wn  therein  i.mapacity.  our  Excelleucy 

widpup^^  T?  pardon  me,  1 am  sure,  for  denying  the  existence  of  sncii 
^rbnth  ordered  troops  from  Mississippi  to  Tennessee  but  twice, 

u both  occasions  the  condition  ot  aflairs  was  very  different  from  tint 

“v^  carK-^f  ? ^ giv^.i  to  ^ 

avalry  early  m January.  It  was  explained  in  Paragraph  IV.  Tlie 
nfonnpd?  about  April  13,  when  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton 
Id  that  Grant  had  abandoned  operations  against  Vicksburg 

Te  h nn  his^army  up  the  river-he  supposed  to  join  Kosecrans" 

5ra-^^m  oo  longer  tl.reatened. 

is  the  Other  hand,  could  not  tiilly  cover  tlie  country  which  fed 

o PpmTf  f ^ tti^efore  directed  a force  equal  to  that  sent  'from  Bragg 
j berton  in  December  last,  under  your  instructions,  to  be  sent  from 


212  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI 

Mississippi  to  Tennessee,  intending,  should  Lieutenant  General  Pem- 
berton’s surmise  prove  correct,  to  continue  to  draw  troops  from  his  army. 
But  in  a few  days  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  reported  the  United 
States  Army  returning,  and  the  troops  on  the  way  to  Bragg  (none  of 
which  had  arrived)  were  ordered  back.  This  was  about  April  19,  when 
the  Federal  Army  was  on  the  Mississippi  in  transports,  or  on  the  west 
side  of  the  river,  and  Pemberton’s  condition  far  less  unfavorable  than 
it  was  at  the  time  to  which  you  refer,  when  the  enemy  had  crossed  the 
river  and  driven  back  his  advanced  troops. 

In  Paragraph  XXXI,  in  explaining  your  orders  to  General  Bragg  of 
May  22,  you  say : 

I knew  from  your  own  orders  that  you  thought  it  more  advisable  to  draw  troops 
from  Mississippi  to  re-enforce  Bragg  than  to  send  troops  from  the  latter  to  Pemberton. 

I have  transferred  but  two  bodies  of  troops  from  Mississippi  to  Ten- 
nessee— the  first  a division  of  cavalry,  the  other  a division  of  infantry; 
the  first  in  January,  when  McGlernand  and  Sherman  had  abandoned 
their  siege  of  Vicksburg  and  Bragg  had  not  begun  to  recover  from  the 
effects  of  the  battle  of  Murfreesborough  ; the  second  on  April  13,  when 
Grant’s  army  had  abandoned  Vicksburg.  I respectfully  submit  to  Your 
Excellency  that  these  orders  do  not  prove  that  at  a subsequent  period — 
when  the  relativ^e  condition  of  the  two  armies  was  entirely  changed, 
when  Pemberton  was  most  threatened,  a powerful  army  having  forced 
the  passage  of  the  Mississippi  and  beaten  back  his  advanced  troops — 
I thought  it  “ more  advisable  to  draw  troops  from  Mississippi  to  re-en- 
force Bragg  than  to  send  troops^  from  the  latter  to  Pemberton.”  But 
my  sending  back  the  division  of  infantry,  employing  a division  of  Bragg’s 
cavalry  to  aid  Pemberton  in  April,  transferring  a large  brigade  of  cav- 
alry into  Mississippi  on  May  5,  and  applying  for  re- enforcements  for 
Pemberton  on  the  7th,  suggesting  that  the  withdrawal  of  Foster’s 
troops  might  enable  Beauregard  to  furnish  them,  prove  the  contrary. 

In  Paragraph  XXI  Your  Excellency  refers  to  the  constant  desire 
shown  in  my  correspondence,  beginning  early  in  January,  that  you 
should  change  the  order  placing  Tennessee  and  Mississippi  in  one  com- 
mand under  my  direction.  That  desire  was  founded  on  the  belief  that 
the  arrangement  was  not  in  accordance  with  military  principles,  which 
require  that  every  army  should  have  its  own  general,  and  especially  that 
two  armies  far  apart,  having  different  objects  and  opposed  to  enemies 
having  different  objects,  should  not  be  under  one  general.  I thought 
these  armies  too  far  apart  to  re  enforce  each  other  on  emergencies.  Ex- 
perience has  confirmed  that  opinion.  I thought,  however,  the  troops  in 
Arkansas  should  co-operate  with  those  of  Lieutenant-General  Pember- 
ton, for  both  had  the  same  great  object — the  defense  of  the  Mississippi 
Valley — and  both  were  opposed  to  troops  having  one  object — the  pos- 
session of  the  Mississippi — and  the  main  force  of  these  troops  was 
operating  on  this  side  of  the  river. 

Permit  me  to  say  that,  after  careful  consideration,  I can  find  nothing 
in  my  three  brief  telegrams  which  seems  to  me  to  call  for  the  animadver- 
sions in  your  last  paragraph.  They  were  written  in  answer  to  dispatches 
of  yours ; referred  to  an  opinion  of  mine  which  had  been  corrected 
before  your  attention  was  called  to  it,  and  had  no  other  object,  besides 
the  duty  of  replying  to  your  dispatches,  than  to  prevent  your  suppos- 
ing that  the  opinion  concerning  which  you  questioned  me  was  entirely 
unfounded;  but  whether  well  founded  or  uutbnnded,  that  opinion  was 
a thing  of  the  past  when  first  brought  to  your  notice,  and  therefore  I 
cannot  feel  that  the  having  once  entertained  it  is  a military  offense,  or 


Chap.  XXXVI.  ] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


213 

that  the  maDner  in  which  I attempted  to  extenuate  m.y  misapprehension 
of  the  honorable  Secretaries  telegram  of  May  9 makes  me  obnoxious 
to  the  imputations  of  your  letter,  especially  those  of  the  concluding  par- 
agraph. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 

P.  S. — This  letter  was  prepared  at  the  time  of  its  date,  to  be  trans- 
mitted by  an  officer  then  going  to  Eichmond.  I have  just  discovered 
that  he  did  not  take  it. 

[Inclosure.] 

CORRESPONDENCE  OF  THE  SECRETARY  OF  WAR  WITH  GENERAL  J.  E.  JOHNSTON  AND 
THE  ADJUTANT  AND  INSPECTOR  GENERAL.* 

War  Department, 
Richmond^  Va.^  January  8,  1864. 
The  President  of  the  Confederate  States: 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  copies  of  the  orders  given  to,  and 
correspondence  with,  General  Joseph  E.  Johnston  during  the  mouths  of 
May,  June,  and  July,  1863,  concerning  his  command  and  the  operations 
in  his  department,  by  this  Department,  as  called  for  by  a resolution  of 
the  House  of  Eepresentatives  adopted  on  December  11  last.  Copies  of 
the  order  assigning  General  Johnston  to  command  and  of  those  consti- 
tuting General  Bragg’s  a separate  department  (with  the  accompanying 
correspondence)  are  also  sent  in  further  elucidation  of  the  subject. 
Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 

[Sub-Inclosures.] 

Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

No.  275.  I Richmond.;  Fa.,  November  24,  1862. 

♦ # # # # # * 

III.  General  J.  E.  Johnston,  C.  S.  Army,  is  hereliy  assigned  to  the 
following  geographical  command,  to  wit : Commencing  with  the  Blue 
Ridge  range  of  mountains  running  through  the  western  par!  of  North 
Carolina,  and  following  the  line  of  said  mountains  through  the  northern 
part  of  Georgia  to  the  railroad  south  from  Chattanooga;  thence  by  that 
road  to  West  Point,  and  down  the  west  or  right  bank  of  the  Chatta- 
hoochee River  to  the  boundary  of  Alabama  and  Florida,  following  that 
boundary  west  to  the  Choctawhatchee  River,  and  down  that  river  to 
Choctawhatchee  Bay  (including  the  waters  of  that  bay)  to  the  Gulf  of 
Mexico.  All  that  portion  of  country  west  of  said  line  to  the  Missis- 
sippi River  is  included  in  the  above  command.  General  Johnston  will, 
for  the  purpose  of  correspondence  and  reports,  establish  his  headquar- 
ters at  Chattanooga,  or  such  other  place  as  in  his  judgment  will  best 
secure  facilities  for  ready  communication  with  the  troops  within  the 
limits  of  his  command,  and  will  repair  in  person  to  any  part  of  said  com- 
mand whenever  his  presence  may  for  the  time  be  necessary  or  desirable. 
♦ * * * # # # 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War : 

JNO.  WITHERS, 

A sfiistant  A djutant- General. 

* Duplicates  of  dispatches  transmitted  already  printed,  pp.  189-212,  omitted. 


214 


[CHAr.  XXXVI 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Tullahoma,  Tenn.,  May  1,  18G3. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  Geyieral : 

General  Pemberton  reports  from  Vicksburg  to-day  a furious  battle 
has  been  going  on  since  daylight.  General  Bowen,  commanding,  says 
he  is  outnumbered  terribly.  He  has  about  8,000.  Enemy’s  army  can 
cross  at  Bruiusburg,  below  Bayou  Pierre.  Lieutenant-Colonel  [C.  K.] 
Barteau,  at  Allatoona,  telegraphs  to  him  3,000  enemy  crossed  Talla- 
hatchee  at  New  Albany  yesterday. 

General  Pemberton  calls  for  heavy  re-enforcements.  They  cannot  be 
sent  without  giving  up  Tennessee.  Can  one  or  two  brigades  be  sent 
from  the  east? 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 

General. 


Tullahoma,  Tenn.,  May  1,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

Eeports  of  our  scouts  in  Kentucky  indicate  invasion  of  East  Ten- 
nessee by  a strong  force  under  Burnside. 

Cannot  our  troops  there  be  re-enforced  from  Western  Virginia  or 
elsewhere  % 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 

General. 


[Indorsement.] 


May  2,  1863. 

Telegraph  this  to  General  Sam.  Jones.  Add  that  if  in  his  power  to 
render  the  aid,  he  will  do  so. 

He  must  exercise  his  judgment  in  view  of  the  circumstances  of  the 
situation  and  his  own  forces. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Tullahoma,  Tenn.,  May  7,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

Both  General  Pemberton  and  General  Maury  ask  for  re-euforcementsi 
and  need  them  greatly. 

It  is  reported  that  General  [John  G.]  Foster’s  troops  have  left  South 
Carolina. 

Cannot  General  Beauregard  and  Major-General  [Sam.]  Jones  spare 
troops  to  re-enforce  Mississippi  and  East  Tennessee? 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 

General. 


Tullahoma,  Tenn.,  May  7,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

I have  just  received  the  painful  intelligence  of  the  death  of  the  dis 
tinguisheil  Major-General  Van  Dorn,  which  occurred  this  morning  at 
Spring  Hill. 


J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


CiiAr,  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


215 


Tullahoma,  Tenn.,  May  9,  18G3. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

I earnestly  recommend  to  the  War  Department  that  General  Bragg’s 
command  be  extended  over  East  Tennessee.  It  is  of  great  importance. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 

General. 

War  Department, 
Richmond.^  Ea.,  May  9,  1863, 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Tullalioma^  Tenn.: 

Proceed  at  once  to  Mississippi  and  take  chief  command  of  the  forces, 
giving  to  those  in  the  held,  as  far  as  })racticable,  the  encouragement  and 
benefit  of  your  personal  direction.  Arrange  to  take  for  temporary  serv- 
ice with  you,  or  to  be  followed  without  delay,  3,000  good  troops,  who  will 
be  substituted  in  General  Bragg’s  army  by  a large  number  of  prisoners 
recently  returned  from  the  Arkansas  Post  capture,  and  reorganized,  now 
on  their  way  to  General  Pemberton.  Stop  them  at  the  i)oint  most  con- 
venient to  join  General  Bragg.  You  will  find  re  enforcements  from 
General  Beauregard  to  General  Pemberton,  and  more  may  be  expected. 
Acknowledge  receipt. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 

Tullahoma,  Tenn.,  May  9,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon: 

Your  dispatch  of  this  morning  received.  I shall  go  immediately, 
although  unfit  for  field  service. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 

War  Department, 
Richmond^  Pa.,  May  12,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Jachson,  Miss.  : 

In  addition  to  the  5,000  men  originally  ordered  from  Charleston,  about 
4,000  more  will  follow.  I fear  more  cannot  be  spared  to  you. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  May  13,  1863. 

James  A.  Seddon: 

I arrived  this  evening,  finding  the  enemy’s  force  between  this  i)lace 
and  General  Pemberton,  cutting  off  the  communication.  I am  too  late. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 

General. 

Calhoun  Station,  Seven  Miles  South  of  Canton, 

May  16,  1863 — 7.30  a.  m. 

Iloi),  James  A.  Si.ddon, 

Richmond^  Va. : 

Sir:  1 re])orted  to  you  by  telegrai)h  that  1 learned,  on  arriving  in 
Jackson  on  the  evening  of  the  13th,  that  a Federal  army  had  just  placed 


216  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

itself  at  Clinton,  on  the  railroad  to  Vicksburg,  10  miles  from  Jackson. 
The  brigades  of  [John]  Gregg  and  [W.  H.  T.j  Walker  had  engaged  this 
force  the  day  before  near  Raymond,  and  arrived  in  Jackson  as  I did. 
Brigadier-General  Gregg  estimates  the  force  which  he  met,  and  a part 
of  which  he  encountered,  at  25,000. 

On  the  following  morning  it  was  reported  that  a large  body  of  Fed- 
eral troops  had  encamped  at  Raymond  the  night  before,  and  about  9 
o’clock  the  pickets  on  the  roads  from  Clinton  and  Raymond  reported 
the  enemy  approaching  and  about  4 miles  distant.  The  opposition  of 
our  troops  delayed  the  enemy  sufQciently  to  enable  the  b.iggage  to  be 
withdrawn,  and  about  1.30  o’clock  the  troops  followed  j encamping  that 
night  miles  from  Jackson,  and  yesterday  here,  lOJ  miles  farther. 

A dispatch  from  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton,  received  yesterday, 
informed  me  that  he  would  march  on  the  15th  from  Edwards  Station 
to  a point  miles  west  of  Raymond. 

On  leaving  Jackson  I was  compelled  to  send  orders  to  the  troops 
coming  from  the  east  to  halt.  I have  given  orders  to  provide  them  with 
field  transportation,  that  they  may  join  me  to  unite  with  General  Pem- 
berton, but  wagons  and  horses  must  be  brought  from  a distance.  The 
force  with  me  is  about  6,000.  General  [S.  R.j  Gist,  commanding  the 
halted  eastern  troops,  reported  them  yesterday  morning  at  1,500. 

I have  no  information  from  General  Pemberton  except  of  his  move 
to  Dillon’s  with  17,000  men. 

I learned  at  Jackson  that  a brigade  holds  Port  Hudson.  I have  no 
information  of  the  enemy’s  force  except  that  written  above. 

My  object  is  to  unite  aU  the  troops. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  E.  JOHNSTOK 

[Indorsement.] 

Read  and  returned  to  the  Secretary  of  War.  Do  not  perceive  why  a 
junction  was  not  attempted,  which  would  have  made  our  force  nearly 
equal  in  number  to  the  estimated  strength  of  the  enemy,  and  might 
have  resulted  in  his  total  defeat  under  circumstances  which  rendered 
retreat  or  re-enforcement  to  him  scarcely  practicable. 

J.  D.  [JEFFERSON  DAVIS.] 


Calhoun  Station,  Miss., 

May  17,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper  : 

I am  just  moving  west  to  endeavor  to  join  General  Pemberton.  Brig- 
adier General  [John]  Adams  has  reason  to  think  that  his  appointment 
was  not  confirmed.  I hope  the  apprehension  is  groundless.  He  is  very 
valuable.  Please  inform  me. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Camp,  between  Livingston  and  Brownsville, 

May  18,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper,  Richmond^  Ya. : 

I inclose  herewith  a coi)y  of  a letter  received  last  night  from  Lieuteu- 
ant-Genei  al  Pemberton.  I have  just  telegraphed  to  you  the  informa- 
tion it  contains,  and  added  that  a Mr.  Shelton,  of  this  neighborhood. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENEKAL  REPORTS. 


217 


who  says  that  he  left  General  Pemberton^s headquarters  yesterday,  wrote 
to  me  last  night  that  our  troops  had  fallen  back  to  Vicksburg.  A gen- 
tleman who  said  that  he  was  just  from  Bovina  was  here  at  10.30  last 
night  and  made  the  same  statement.  I was  preparing  to  join  General 
Pemberton  personally  when  this  information  came.  It  is  now  imprac- 
ticable and  would  be  useless. 

I shall  endeavor,  after  collecting  all  available  troops,  to  hold  as  much 
of  the  country  as  possible. 

Besides  the  garrison  of  Port  Hudson,  the  strength  of  which  I do  not 
know,  there  are  now  about  11,000  infantry  in  the  department ; 0,000  or 
7,000  more  may  soon  be  expected  ; therefore,  to  make  it  possible  to  re- 
lieve Vicksburg,  very  large  re-enforcements  will  be  necessary.  I hope 
that  the  Government  will  send  without  delay  all  that  can  possibly  be 
spared  from  other  points. 

I suppose  that  General  Pemberton’s  force  before  the  battle,  including 
that  in  Vicksburg,  was  near  28,000.  He  has  provisions  for  sixty  days. 
If,  as  he  says,  Haynes’  Bluff  is  untenable,  the  enemy,  using  navigation 
of  the  Yazoo,  can  soon  reduce  him  by  siege.  Whatever  efforts  the  Gov- 
ernment may  propose  to  make  must,  therefore,  be  carried  into  imme- 
diate effect. 

Most  respectfully,  &c., 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 


General. 


[Sub-Inclosure.] 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

Bovina.,  Miss..,  May  17,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Calhoun,  Miss. : 

General  : 1 notified  you,  on  the  morning  of  the  14th,  of  the  receipt 
of  your  instructions  to  move  and  attack  the  enemy  toward  Clinton.  I 
deemed  the  movement  very  hazardous,  preferring  to  remain  in  position 
behind  the  Big  Black  and  near  to  Vicksburg.  I called  a council  of  war, 
composed  of  all  the  general  officers  who  were  then  with  my  movable 
army,  and  placing  the  subject  before  them  (including  your  instructions) 
in  every  view  in  which  it  appeared  to  me,  asked  their  o])inions  respect- 
ively. A majority  of  the  officers  expressed  themselves  favorable  to  tlie 
movement  indicated  by  you.  The  others,  including  Major  Generals 
Loring  and  Stevenson,  preferi  ed  a movement  by  which  this  army  might 
endeavor  to  cut  off* the  enemy’s  supplies  from  the  Mississippi  My  own 
views  were  expressed  as  unlavorable  to  any  movement  whi<'h  would  re 
move  me  from  my  base,  which  was  and  is  Vicksburg.  1 did  not  see  lit, 
however,  to  place  my  own  judgments  and  opinions  so  far  in  opposition 
as  to  prevent  the  movement  altogether;  but  believing  the  only  possi- 
bility of  success  to  be  in  the  plan  proposed,  by  cutting  off*  the  enemy’s 
supplies,  I directed  all  my  disposable  force  (say  17.500)  toward  Ray- 
mond or  Dillon’s,  encamping  the  night  of  the  15th  at  Mrs.  Ellison’s,  on 
the  main  Raymond  and  Edwards  Depot  road,  at  a fork  from  which  I 
could  advance  either  to  Raymond  or  llillon’s. 

About  7 a.  m.  on  the  16th,  the  enemy  advanced  his  skirmishers  at 
several  points.  Our  line  of  battle  was  quickly  formed  and  the  i)ositi()n 
a strong  one.  Heavy  demonstrations  were  made  on  our  right,  left,  and 
center.  Gradually,  however,  theenemy  developed  himself  in  great  force 
against  our  left,  under  General  Stevenson,  re-enforced  after  some  time 
by  Bowen’s  division  and  subsequently  by  tv/o  brigades  of  Loring’s.  The 
enemy  was  repeatedly  driven  back,  but  constantly  throwing  in  fresii 


218 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


troops  from  his  heavy  re-euforcemeiits,  we  were  about  5 p.  m,  compelled 
to  withdraw.  This  was  done  by  the  ford  over  baker’s  Creek  (at  which 
a temporary  bridge  had  been  laid),  crossing  tlie  middle  Eaymond  road. 

Our  loss  was  heavy.  We  have  lost  eleven  pieces  of  artillery,  and 
although  every  arrangement  was  made  to  secure  the  retreat  of  all  our 
troops.  General  Loring’s  division,  which  was  comparatively  fresh,  and 
which  covered  the  approach  to  the  ford,  has  not  yet  crossed  the  Big 
Black.  I am  unable  to  account  for  his  absence,  as  I know  of  no  cause 
sufficient  to  have  prevented  his  following  the  divisions  of  Bowen  and 
Stevenson,  neither  of  whom  lost  a man  on  the  retreat. 

1 am  unable  to  give  further  particulars  at  present.  1 commanded  in 
person.  I am  for  the  present  holding  the  Big  Black  Bridge,  where  a 
heavy  cannonading  is  now  going  on.  There  are  so  many  points  by  which 
1 can  be  flanked  that  I fear  1 shall  be  compelled  to  withdraw.  If  so, 
the  position  at  Snyder’s  Mill  will  also  be  untenable.  General  Tilghman 
was  killed  yesterday.  1 have  about  sixty  days’  rations  in  Vicksburg 
and  at  Snyder’s. 

I respectfully  await  your  instructions. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-General^  Commanding. 

P.  S. — I regret  to  say  that  some  of  Stevenson’s  troops  behaved  very 
badly. 


Camp,  between  Livingston  and  Brownsville, 

Via  Jackson  and  Montgomery^  May  18,  [1863.] 

General  S.  Cooper  ; 

Lieutenant  General  Pemberton  was  attacked  by  the  enemy  on  the 
morning  of  the  16th  near  Edwards  Depot,  and  after  nine  hours’  fight 
ing  was  compelled  to  fall  back  behind  Big  Black.  Mr.  Shelton,  of  this 
neighborhood,  wrote  last  night  that  he  was  just  from  Lieutenant-Gen- 
eral Pemberton’s  headquarters,  and  that  the  army  was  falling  back  to 
Vicksburg.  Mr.  Robinson,  just  from  Bovina  last  night,  made  the  same 
report.  There  are  two  months’  provisions  in  Vicksburg.  It  must  ulti- 
mately fall  unless  we  can  assemble  an  army  to  relieve.  I can  gather  iu 
a few  days  11,000,  besides  a garrison  at  Port  Hudson.  Send  us  [R.  H.] 
Anderson’s  cavalry  regiment  from  the  Isle  of  Hope,  Ga.  We  need  it 
greatly. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 

General. 


War  Department, 
Richmond^  Fa.,  May  19,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Jackson.^  Miss. : 

The  following  dispatch  just  received  from  General  Bragg: 

Shelbyville,  Tenn.,  May  18,  [1863.] 

A brigade  of  cavalry  from  Northern  Alabama  moved  to  Mississippi  several  days  ago. 
Another  division  is  ordered  to-day. 

BRAXTON  BRAGG. 


J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Chai>.  XXXVI.  ] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


219 


*War  Department, 
Richmond^  Fot.,  May  23,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Commanding^  &c. : 

Dear  Sir  : I have  no  official  communications  or  instructions  to  send 
you,  but  cannot  omit  the  ojjportunity  afforded  by  a courier  going  to  you, 
to  offer  the  encouragement  of  my  full  confidence  and  best  wishes  in  the 
trying  circumstances  in  which  you  are  placed. 

1 regretted  deeply,  when  I received  the  telegram  announcing  your 
arrival  at  Jackson,  that  you  had  not  been  ordered  to  that  vital  field  of 
operations  at  an  earlier  period,  but  I could  not  think  or  feel  that  you 
were  too  late.  Indeed,  events  since  have  made  your  presence  of  even 
greater  moment  than  I had  anticipated,  and  now,  to  retrieve  our  grave 
disasters,  and  save,  if  practicable,  the  all-important  command  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi Eiver,  is  felt  to  be  dependent  on  the  presence  and  inspiration 
of  your  military  genius. 

All  aids  and  facilities  in  the  x)ower  of  tlie  Department  to  render  you 
will  be  promptly  and  heartily  given,  but  they  are  felt  to  be  far  less 
adequate  than  we  would  gladly  furnish.  Guns  and  artiller^^  have  been 
forwarded  from  the  nearest  points  we  could  find  them,  and,  in  addition 
to  the  10,000  men  previously  ordered  from  Charleston,  since  your  de 
parture  General  Bragg,  under  suggestions  from  the  President,  has  for- 
warded you  2,500  cavalry  and  6,000  infantry.  Unfortunately  these  lat- 
ter re-enforcements  may  not  reach  you  in  time  for  the  decisive  struggle, 
but  such  despondent  anticipations  will  not  be  entertained.  I am  alto- 
gether too  remote  and  too  uninformed  as  to  your  own  resources  and 
forces  or  those  of  the  enemy,  even  if  I had  the  requisite  military  ex- 
perience or  knowledge,  to  venture  on  instructions,  or  even  counsel,  as 
to  your  operations.  I can  only  assure  you  of  my  full  appreciation  and 
confidence,  and  cheer  myself  under  the  darkening  aspect  of  our  late 
reverses  by  unabated  reliance  on  your  zeal,  fertility  of  resource,  and 
generalship. 

I venture,  with  diffidence,  only  one  suggestion,  and  that  not  strictly 
applicable  to  your  own  field  of  operations.!  It  is,  that  should  oppor- 
tunity of  communication  with  General  Holmes  or  General  Price  occur, 
it  might  be  well  to  urge  they  should  make  diversions  for  you,  or,  in 
case  of  the  fall  of  Vicksburg,  secure  a great  future  advantage  to  the 
Confederacy  by  the  attack  on  and  seizure  of  Helena,  while  all  availa- 
ble forces  of  the  enemy  are  being  imshed  to  Grant’s  aid.  Had  I com- 
mand of  communication,  this  suggestion  would  be  directly  addressed 
and  pressed  by  the  Department.  Its  policy  is  so  apparent  that  it  is 
hoped  it  will  be  voluntarily  embraced  and  executed. 

With  my  best  wishes,  most  cordially,  yours, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War, 


Jackson,  Miss.,  May  25, 1863. 

General  S.  Cooper  : 

It  is  important  that  I should  know  what  troops  to  expect.  Please  in- 
form me  and  have  tliem  urged  on  j they  come  too  slowly. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


* This  letter  was  not  transmitted  to  the  Confederate  Congress, 
t An  extract  embracing  all  that  follows  was  transmitted  to  E.  Kirby  Smith.  See 
Series  I,  Vol.  XXII,  Part  I,  j).  407. 


220  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC,  [Chap,  xxxvi. 

* Jackson,  Miss.,  May  .25,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper,  Richmond: 

Of  the,  10,000  men  promised  from  Carolina  and  Georgia,  but  6,500 
have  arrived.  Do  urge  them  forward. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  May  25,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Ja€kso7ij  Miss  : 

General  Bragg  telegraphs  the  President,  the  23d,  that  he  sent  with 
you  3,500,  three  battalions  of  artillery,  and  2,000  cavalry,  and  will  dis- 
patch 6,000  more  immediately.  No  troops  have  been  ordered  from  this 
quarter  except  about  7,000  from  General  Beauregard’s  command,  which 
it  is  presumed  have  already  joined  you. 

S.  COOPEE, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Canton,  Miss.,  May  26,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

Please  remind  the  President  that  in  my  dispatch  of  the  21st  I stated 
that  two  major-generals  would  be  required  in  Mississippi.  Let  me  urge 
immediate  action.  Could  not  Brigadier- General  [Joseph  E.]  Davis’  bri- 
gade be  sent  I 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 

War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond.,  Fa.,  May  27,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Comm  anding,  &c. : 

General  : Brig.  Gen.  G.  J.  Eains,  having  been  detailed  for  duty  in 
connection  with  torpedoes  and  sub-terra  shells,  has  been  ordered  to  re- 
port to  you.  The  President  has  confidence  in  his  inventions,  and  is 
desirous  that  they  should  be  employed  both  on  land  and  river,  if  oppor- 
tunity offers,  at  Vicksburg  and  its  vicinity.  Should  communications 
allow,  you  are  desired  to  send  him  there;  but  if  otherwise,  to  employ 
him  in  his  devices  against  the  enemy  where  most  assailable  in  that  way 
elsewhere.  All  reasonable  facilities  and  aid  in  his  supply  of  men  or 
material  for  the  fair  trial  of  his  torpedoes  and  shells  are  requested  on 
your  part.  Such  means  of  offense  against  the  enemy  are  ap])roved  and 
recognized  by  the  Department  as  legitimate  weapons  of  warfare. 

With  high  esteem,  very  truly,  yours, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War.  . 

Jackson,  Miss.,  May  27,  1863.  j 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon,  j 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond  Ya.  : ] 

Sir  : Saturday  night,  May  9,  I received  at  Tullahoma  your  order,  by  ] 
telegraphic  dispatch,  to  proceed  to  Mississippi  and  take  immediate  com-  J 
mand  of  the  army.  I started  the  next  morning.  At  Lake  Station  I re-  j 


This  letter  uot  trausuiitted  to  the  Confederate  Congress. 


Chap.  XXXVI.j 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


221 


ceived  a dispatch  from  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton,  directed  to  Tul- 
lahoma,  asking  for  re-enforcements,  as  the  enemy  in  large  force  was  mov 
ing  easterly  from  the  Mississippi  south  of  the  Big  Black,  and  stating 
that  Edwards  Depot,  their  probable  destination,  would  be  the  battle- 
field. 

I arrived  in  Jackson  on  Wednesday  evening,  May  13,  and  learned 
from  Brigadier  General  Gregg,  who  had  just  arrived,  that  he  had  about 
5,000  men  ; also  that  Sherman’s  corps  (four  divisions)  occupied  Clinton. 
Immediately  I dispatched  written  messages  by  couriers  to  Lieutenant- 
General  Pemberton,  informing  him  of  my  arrival  and  of  the  occupation 
of  Clinton  by  Sherman’s  corps — four  divisions,  as  I had  been  informed. 
I urged  the  importance  of  re-establishing  communication,  that  he  might 
be  re-enforced ; ordered  that  he  should,  if  practicable,  come  upon  the 
enemy’s  rear  at  once  with  all  the  strength  he  could  quickly  assemble, 
informing  him  that  we  could  co- operate  in  such  an  attack. 

On  Thursday,  May  14,  after  all  preparations  had  been  completed,  and 
orders  to  Brigadier-Generals  Gist  and  [S.  B.j  Maxey  for  the  security  of 
their  commands  had  been  given,  I evacuated  Jackson  about  noon  (2 
p.  m.),  being  obliged  to  take  the  Canton  road,  at  right  angles  to  that 
upon  which  the  enemy  approached.  That  evening,  from  our  camp  about 
6 miles  from  Jackson,  I sent  dispatch  to  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton, 
informing  him  that  General  Gregg  and  his  command  had  been  com- 
pelled to  evacuate  Jackson,  and  of  the  direction  taken;  that  Brigadier- 
General  Gist  had  been  ordered  to  assemble  the  approaching  troops  at 
a point  40  or  50  miles  from  Jackson,  and  Brigadier-General  Maxey  to 
return  to  his  wagons  and  advised  to  join  Brigadier-General  Gist;  ex- 
pressed the  hope  that  this  force  would  be  able  to  })revent  the  enemy  in 
Jackson  from  drawing  provisions  from  the  east,  and  that  Brigadier-Gen 
eral  Gregg’s  force  would  be  able  to  keep  him  from  the  country  toward 
Panola ; inquired  if  the  enemy  could  not  be  cut  off  from  his  supplies 
from  the  Mississippi,  and,  above  all,  should  the  enemy  from  want  of  sup- 
plies be  compelled  to  fall  back,  could  he  (General  Pemberton)  not  beat 
him.  I strongly  urged  concentration  of  troops. 

On  Friday  morning.  May  15,  I received  a dispatch  from  Lieutenant- 
ant  General  Pemberton,  dated  5.40  p.  m.,  Edwards  Depot,  May  14,  stat- 
ing that  he  would  move  early  next  morning  with  a column  of  17,000  men 
to  Dillon’s  (situated  on  the  main  road  leading  from  Raymond  to  Port 
Gibson,  miles  below  Raymond  and  miles  from  Edwards  Depot),  to 
cut  enemy’s  communications  and  force  the  enemy  to  attack  him,  as 
he  did  not  consider  his  force  sufficient  to  justify  his  attacking  the  enemy 
in  position  or  cutting  his  way  to  Jackson.  This  dispatch  was  brouglit 
by  Caiitain  [William  S.]  Yerger,  who  bore  the  dispatch  of  the  13th  in- 
stant to  General  Pemberton.  I immediately  acknowledged  receipt  of 
the  above  dispatch,  and  answered  General  Pemberton  that  our  movement 
to  the  north  rendered  his  plan  of  junction  by  Raymond  impracticable, 
and  ordered  him  to  move  so  as  to  effect  a junction,  and  to  communicate 
with  me,  so  that  I might  unite  to  his  force  about  6,000  men.  The  copy 
of  this  dispatch  (sent  from  a point  on  the  Jackson  and  Canton  road  about 
K)  miles  from  Jackson)  was  mislaid,  and  at  present  cannot  be  found. 

On  Saturday,  May  16,  at  Calhoun  Station,  1 received  a dispatch  from 
Lieutenant-General  Pemberton,  dated  9.10  a.  ra.,  Bovina,  May  14,  stat- 
ing that  he  moves  at  once  from  Edwards  Depot  with  his  whole  available 
force,  explaining  disposition  of  his  troojis,  and  closing  dispatch  by  stat- 
ing that  he  at  once  complies  with  my  order.  This  dispatch  1 received 
in  the  afternoon,  having  waited  here  all  day  to  be  advised  by  General 
Pemberton  of  the  direction  of  his  movements. 


222 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX VI. 


In  the  evening  of  the  same  day  I received  a dispatch  from  General 
Pemberton,  dated  8 a.  m.,  4 miles  south  of  Edwards,  May  16,  acknowl- 
edging receipt  of  my  letter  written  from  the  Canton  road,  stating  that 
he  received  it  at  6.30  o’clock  that  morning;  that  it  found  the  army  in 
the  middle  road  to  Eaymond  ; that  he  had  issued  the  order  of  counter- 
march ; that  owing  to  destruction  of  bridge  on  Baker’s  Greek  his  march 
would  be  on  the  road  from  Edwards  Depot  in  the  direction  of  Browns- 
ville ; that  in  going  to  Clinton  he  would  leave  Bolton  Depot  to  the 
right.  In  a postscript  he  reported  heavy  skirmishing  then  going  on  in 
his  front. 

On  Sunday,  May  17, 1 marched  15  miles  in  the  direction  indicated  in 
General  Pemberton’s  note,  and  on  that  evening  Captain  [Thomas]  Hen- 
derson brought  me  a letter  from  General  Pemberton,  dated  Bovina, 
May  17,  giving  me  intelligence  of  his  being  com])elled  on  the  16th  in- 
stant, after  engaging  the  enemy,  to  withdraw  with  heavy  loss  to  Big 
Black  Bridge.  A copy  of  this  letter  I forwarded  that  night  to  General 
Cooper. 

General  Pemberton  expressed  fears  that  he  would  be  compelled  to 
fall  back  from  Big  Black  Bridge,  and,  if  so,  he  represented  that  the 
position  at  Snyder’s  Mill  would  also  be  untenable. 

During  the  night  I received  information  that  General  Pemberton  had 
fallen  back  to  Vicksburg.  I then  determined  by  easy  marches  to  estab- 
lish my  line  between  Jackson  and  Canton,  as  the  junction  of  the  two 
commands  had  become  impossible.  During  that  night,  after  having  re- 
ceived the  above  information,  I sent  a dispatch  to  General  Pemberton 
that,  “if  Haynes’  Bluff  be  untenable,  Vicksburg  is  of  no  value  and 
cannot  be  held  ; evacuate  the  place,  if  not  rendered  too  late  by  invest 
ment  to  save  the  troops.” 

(Jn  Monday,  the  18th  instant,  near  Vernon,  I received  a letter  from 
General  Pemberton,  dated  Vicksburg,  May  17,  informing  me  that  he 
had  fallen  back  to  the  line  of  intrenchments  around  Vicksburg,  having 
been  attacked  and  forced  back  from  Big  Black  Bridge.  Also  that  he 
had  ordered  the  abandonment  of  Snyder’s  Mill.  . 

On  the  19th  instant,  I received  a letter  from  General  Pemberton,  ac- 
knowledging the  receipt  of  my  communication  in  reply  to  his,  brought 
by  Captain  Henderson,  and  stating  that  he  assembled  a council  of  war 
of  the  geneial  officers  of  his  command,  who  unanimously  exi)ressed  the 
opinion  upon  my  instructions  that  it  was  impossible  to  withdraw  the 
army  from  Vicksburg  with  such  morale  and  material  as  to  be  of  fur- 
ther service  to  the  Confederacy. 

On  the  19th  instant,  I sent  orders  by  telegraphic  dispatches  and  by 
couriers  to  Major-General  Gardner  to  evacuate  Port  Hudson. 

On  the  20th  and  21st  instant,  the  brigades  of  Generals  Gist,  Ector, 
and  McNair  joined  my  command.  The  last  troops  of  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Evans’  brigade  arrived  on  the  day  before  yesterday.  Major-Gen- 
eral Boring,  with  his  command,  arrived  here  about  the  19th  instant, 
and  Brigadier-General  Maxey’s  brigade  on  the  23d  instant. 

The  troops  above  mentioned,  with  General  Breckinridge’s  division, 
of  General  Bragg’s  army,  will  uiake  a force  of  about  23,000  effective 
men.  Grant’s  army  is  estimated  at  60,000  or  80,000  men,  and  his  troops 
are  worth  double  the  number  of  Northeastern  troops.  We  cannot  re- 
lieve General  Pemberton  except  by  defeating  Grant,  who  is  believed 
to  be  fortifying.  We  must  make  the  attemi)t  with  such  a force  as  the 
Government  can  furnish  for  the  object ; unless  more  may  be  expected, 
tiie  attempt  must  be  made  with  tbe  force  now  here  and  that  coming. 
If  possible,  however,  additional  troops  should  be  sent  to  make  up  an 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


223 


army  of  at  least  30,000  men — infantry.  Even  that  force  would  be  small 
for  the  object.  An  army  of  23,000  men  for  otfensive  operations  against 
Grant  seems  to  me  too  small,  considering  his  large  force.  We  need  very 
much  good  general  officers. 

I find  it  necessary  to  organize  an  army,  and  to  provide  for  it  sub- 
sistence, ammunition,  and  means  of  transportation. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 

General. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  May  28,  isfe. 
Hon.  James  A.  Seddon,  Secretary  of  War  : 

I respectfully  ask  that  Surg.  D.  W.  Yandell,  medical  director  Hardee^s 
cori)s,  be  assigned  as  medical  director  of  my  command.  He  is  now  on 
duty  with  me.  Be  pleased  to  answer  by  telegraph. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 

General. 

War  Department, 
Richmond^  Va.,  May  30,  1863. 
General  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  JacJcson,  Miss: 

Surg.  D.  W.  Yandell  will  be  assigned  as  you  desire. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  June  2,  1863. 

(Eeceived  June  4.) 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon,  Secretary  of  War: 

Your  letter  of  the  25th  and  a telegram  from  the  President  show 
that  you  are  misinformed  as  to  the  force  at  my  disposal.  The  effective 
force,  infantry  and  artillery,  is:  From  Lieutenant-General  Pemijerton, 
0,831  ; from  General  Bragg,  7,930 ; from  General  Beauregard,  6,283  j 
total,  24.053,  Brigadier-General  [W.  H.J  Jackson’s  cavalry  (not  arrived), 
and  irregular  troops  protecting  northern  and  southern  frontiers  not 
iitcluded. 

Grant  is  receiving  continual  accessions.  Tell  me  if  it  is  your  inten- 
tion to  make  up  the  number  you  gave  the  President  as  my  "force,  or  if 
1 may  expect  more  troops.  With  the  present  force  v\e  cannot  succeed 
without  great  blunders  by  the  enemy.  Each  portion  of  this  disi)atch 
in  cipher  is  independent  of  the  preceding. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 

War  Department, 
Richmond.,  Ya.j  June  3,  1863. 
General  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  Jackson^  Miss.  : 

1 am  concerned  at  your  telegram  to  the  President  as  to  the  number 
of  your  forces.  1 had  reported  them  to  him  as  rather  more  than  30,()()(), 
thus  mad(‘.  up:  3,500  tak(‘n  with  you;  10,000  sent  from  Charleston; 
2,500  cavalry,  and  6,000  infantry  from  General  Bragg;  4,000  at  least, 
umku'  [J.]  Gregg,  at  Jackson  on  your  arrival ; 6,000  under  Loi  ing.  In 
addition,  1 suggested  you  might  have  a brigade  or  so  from  Port  Hudson. 
Where  was  the  mistake  on  my  part? 


[Chap.  KXKVl. 


?<24  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

I feel  intense  anxiety  as  to  your  plans,  and  should  be  gratified  to 
learn  them  as  far  as  you  deem  safe  to  inform  me. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Canton,  Miss.,  June  4,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Your  dispatch  of  yesterday  received.  By  [The]  mistake  on  your  part 
is,  that  all  your  numbers  are  too  large;  in  reference  to  Beauregard  nearly 
as  ten  to  six.  The  troops  you  mentioned,  including  Jackson’s,  just  ar- 
rived, are  less  than  5,600.*  My  only  plan  is  to  relieve  Yicksburg.  My 
force  is  far  too  small  for  the  purpose;  tell  me  if  you  can  increase  it,  and 
how  much.  Grant  is  receiving  re  enforcements.  Port  Hudson  is  closely 
invested.  The  great  object  of  the  enemy  for  this  campaign  is  to  acquire 
possession  of  the  Mississippi.  Can  you  collect  here  a force  sufficient  to 
defeat  the  object 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  June  5,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston: 

The  mistake  was  not  mine,  as  I rested  on  official  reports  of  numbers 
sent.  I regret  inability  to  promise  more  troops,  as  we  have  drained  re- 
sources even  to  the  danger  of  several  points.  You  know  best  concerning 
General  Bragg’s  army,  but  I fear  to  withdraw  more.  We  are  too  far 
outnumbered  in  Yirginia  to  spare  any.  You  must  rely  on  what  you 
have  and  the  irregular  forces  Mississippi  can  afford.  Your  judgment 
and  skill  are  fully  relied  on,  but  I venture  the  suggestion  that  to  relieve 
Yicksburg  speedy  action  is  essential.  With  the  facilities  and  resources 
of  the  enemy  time  works  against  us. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 

Canton,  Miss.,  June  5,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon  : 

Dear  Sir  : I thank  you  cordially  for  your  kind  letter  of  May  25  [23], 
but  almost  regret  that  you  feel  such  confidence  in  me  as  is  expressed  in 
it.  From  the  present  condition  of  aftairs,  I fear  that  confidence  dooms 
you  to  disappointment.  Every  day  gives  some  new  intelligence  of  the 
enemy’s  strength — of  re-enforcements  on  the  way  to  him.  My  first  inten- 
tion on  learning  that  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  was  in  Yicksburg 
was  to  form  an  army  to  succor  him.  I suppose,  from  my  telegraphic 
correspondence  with  the  Government,  that  all  the  troops  to  be  hoped  for 
have  arrived.  Our  resources  seem  so  small,  and  those  of  the  enemy  so 
great,  that  the  relief  of  Yicksburg  is  beginning  to  api)ear  impossible  to 
me.  Pemberton  will  undoubtedly  make  a gallant  and  obstinate  defense, 
and  hold  out  as  long  as  he  can  make  resistance;  but  unless  we  assem- 
ble a force  strong  enough  to  break  Grant’s  line  of  investment,  the  sur- 
render of  the  place  will  be  a mere  question  of  time.  General  Grant  is 
receiving  re-enforcements  almost  daily.  His  force,  according  to  the  best 
information  to  be  had,  is  more  than  treble  that  which  I command.  Our 

* In  General  Johnston’s  “ Letters-sent  ” book,  this  appears  as  26,000;  it  is  as  above 
in  dispatch  received  by  Mr.  Seddon. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


225 


scouts  say,  too,  that  he  has  constructed  lines  of  circumvallation  and  has 
blocked  up  all  roads  leading  to  his  position.  The  enterprise  of  forcing 
the  enemy’s  lines  would  be  a difficult  one  to  a force  double  that  at  my 
disposal.  If  you  are  unable  to  increase  that  force  decidedly,  I must  try 
to  accomplish  something  in  aid  of  the  besieged  garrison  j and  yet,  when 
considering  it,  it  seems  to  me  desperate. 

Your  suggestion  to  General  Krby  Smith  was  promptly  dispatched  to 
him.  I have  no  doubt  that  the  time  is  favorable  for  attacking  Helena. 

In  replying  by  telegraph  to  your  letter  and  telegrams,  I have  said 
that  if  you  can  increase  this  army  it  should  be  done.  If  you  cannot, 
nothing  is  left  for  us  but  to  struggle  manfully  with  such  means  as  the 
Government  can  furnish. 

I beg  you  to  consider  in  connection  with  affairs  in  this  department  that 
I have  had  not  only  to  organize,  but  to  provide  means  of  transportation 
and  supplies  of  all  sorts  for  an  army.  The  artillery  is  not  yet  equipped. 
All  of  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton’s  supplies  were,  of  course,  with 
his  troops  about  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson.  I found  myself,  there- 
fore, without  subsistence,  stores,  ammunition,  or  the  means  of  conveying 
those  indispensables.  It  has  proved  more  difficult  to  collect  wagons  and 
provisions  than  I expected.  We  have  not  yet  the  means  of  operating 
for  more  than  four  days  away  from  the  railroads.  That  to  Vicksburg  is 
destroyed.  W e draw  our  provisions  from  the  northern  part  of  the  State. 
The  protection  of  that  country  employs  about  2,500  irregular  cavalry. 
It  is  much  too  small.  I am  endeavoring  to  increase  it  by  calling  for 
volunteers,  but  am  by  no  means  sanguine  as  to  the  result. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Canton,  Miss.,  June  5, 1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon: 

Grant  still  receives  re-enforcements.  Scouts  near  Friar’s  Point  re- 
l)ort  8 boats,  loaded  with  troops,  passed  down  Monday  and  Tuesday. 
Twelve  empty  transports  passed  up. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Canton,  Miss.,  June  5,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon; 

Brigadier- General  [J.  W.]  Whitfield,  who  was  ordered  to  report  to  me 
when  I was  in  Tennessee,  but  could  not,  has  just  done  so.  What  is 
your  intention  in  regard  to  him  % I am  informed  that  it  will  be  very 
unfortunate  for  him  to  command  the  brigade  to  which  he  has  belonged. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 

Ill  • 

,,  Canton,  June  6,  1863. 

(general  S.  Cooper: 

The  following  is  just  received  from  Capt.  Thomas  Henderson,  of  scout 
service : 

Panola,  Miss.,  June  6,  1803. 

Scout  Wilson  reports,  11  o’clock  yesterday,  since  Sunday  seventeen  transports  with 
troops  gone  down  the  river  from  Memphis.  All  came  from  railroad.  Grant  orders 
lorces  possible  sent  him.  Eight  thousand  wounded  arrived  and  lariro  arraime- 
Bleuts  made  for  more. 

THOS.  HENDERSON. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 

15  11  R — VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


226 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXYL 


Eichmond,  Ya.,  June  8,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Canton,  Miss : 

General  Whitfield  was  believed  to  be  peculiarly  acceptable  to  his 
brigade.  What  is  the  objection  ? Do  you  advise  more  re-enforcements 
from  General  Bragg  ? You,  as  commandant  of  the  department,  have 
power  so  to  order,  if  you,  in  view  of  the  whole  case,  so  determine. 
We  cannot  send  from  Virginia  or  elsewhere,  for  we  stand  already  not 

J.  A.  8EDDON, 

Secretary  of  War, 

Canton,  Miss.,  June  9,  1863. 

Via  Montgomery,  [June]  10. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon: 

Your  dispatch  of  yesterday  in  cipher  was  received,  but  cannot  be 
road.  Please  repeat  it.  JOHNSTON. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  June  10,  1863. 

(Keceived  June  13.) 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon,  Secretary  of  War : 

Your  dispatch  of  June  8,  in  cipher,  received.  You  do  not  give  orders 
in  regard  to  the  recently  appointed  general  officers.  Please  do  it.  I 
have  not  at  my  [disposal]  half  the  number  of  troops  necessary.  It  is 
for  the  Government  to  determine  what  department,  if  any,  can  furnish 
the  re-enforcements  required.  I cannot  know  here  General  Bragg^s 
wants  compared  with  mine.  The  Government  can  make  such  compari- 
sons. Your  dispatch  is  imperfectly  deciphered. 

J,  J Oxi-N  fe  J-i-J JN  • 

Jackson,  Miss.,  June  12, 1863. 
Hon.  James  A.  Seddon,  Secretary  of  War : 

Your  dispatch  of  the  8th  imperfectly  deciphered  and  partially  answered 
on  the  10th.  I have  not  considered  myself  coinmanding  in  Tennessee 
since  assignment  here,  and  should  not  have  felt  authorized  to  take 
troops  from  that  department  after  having  been  informed  by  the  Exec- 
utive that  no  more  could  be  spared.  To  take  from  Bragg  a force  which 
would  make  this  army  fit  to  opiiose  Grant,  would  involve  yielding  Ten- 
nessee. It  is  for  the  Government  to  decide  between  this  State  and 

. J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Camden,  Miss.,  June  13, 1863. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

Scout  at  EriaPs  Point  on  the  9th  instant  reports  nine  transports  full 
of  infantry  and  artillery  went  down  the  river  since  Sunday  ; force  sup- 
posed to  be  about  13,000.  In  addition  to  the  above,  same  scout  reports 
fourteen  more  transports  crowded  with  infantry  and  artillery  went  down 

the  river  on  the  10th  instant.  JOHNSTON. 


Ohai>.  XXXTL] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


227 


Jackson,  Miss.,  June  15, 1863. 

Hod.  James  A.  Seddon: 

Your  repeated  dispatch  of  the  8th  is  deciphered.  I cannot  advise  in 
regard  to  the  points  from  which  troops  can  best  be  taken,  having  no 
means  of  knowing,  nor  is  it  for  me  to  judge  which  it  is  best  to  hold — 
Mississippi  or  Tennessee;  that  is  for  the  Government  to  determine. 
Without  some  great  blunder  of  the  enemy  we  cannot  hold  both.  The 
odds  against  me  are  much  greater  than  those  you  express.  I consider 
saving  Vicksburg  hopeless. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTOH. 


War  Department,  0.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  Ya.^  June  16,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston: 

Your  telegram  grieves  and  alarms  me.  Vicksburg  must  not  be  lost 
without  a desperate  struggle.  The  interest  and  honor  of  the  Confederacy 
forbid  it.  I rely  on  you  still  to  avert  the  loss.  If  better  resources  do 
not  offer,  you  must  hazard  attack.  It  may  be  made  in  concert  with  the 
garrison,  if  practicable,  but  otherwise  without,  by  day  or  night,  as  you 
think  best. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

' Secretary  of  War. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  June  16,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon: 

General  Bragg  informs  me  that  a telegram  from  Louisville  of  the  10th 
says  that  part  of  the  Ninth  and  Twenty-third  Corps  have  been  sent  to 
re-enforce  Grant.  Will  not  this  enable  us  to  invade  Kentucky  ? For 
this.  General  Bragg^s  command  should  extend  over  East  Tennessee. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 

General. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  June  19  [18],  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon: 

Dispatch  of  16th  received.  I think  that  you  do  not  appreciate  the 
difficulties  in  the  course  you  direct  nor  the  probabilities  or  consequences 
of  failure.  Grant’s  position,  naturally  very  strong,  is  intrenched  and 
protected  by  powerful  artillery,  and  the  roads  obstructed.  His  re-en- 
forcements have  been  at  least  equal  to  my  whole  force.  The  Big  Black 
covers  him  from  attack,  and  would  cut  off*  our  retreat  if  defeated.  We 
cannot  combine  operations  with  General  Pemberton  from  uncertain  and 
slow  communication.  The  defeat  of  this  little  army  would  at  once  open 
Mississippi  and  Alabama  to  Grant.  I will  do  all  I can,  without  hope  of 
doing  more  than  aid  to  extricate  the  garrison. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  June  19,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon: 

A courier  has  arrived  here  with  dispatches  from  General  Gardner  of 
the  10th  instant.  The  courier  reports  the  garrison  in  good  spirits.  Gen- 
eral Gardner  states  that  he  has  repulsed  the  enemy  in  several  severe 


228 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

attacks,  but  he  is  still  closely  invested ; that  he  is  getting  short  of  pro- 
visions and  ammunition,  and  should  be  speedily  relieved. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  June  20, 1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

On  arriving  here  I informed  General  Kirby  Smith  of  the  condition  of 
Vicksburg  and  l^ort  Hudson,  and  rec^uested  his  aid  and  co-opeiation, 
which  he  has  given.  General  Taylor,  with  8,000  men,  is  opposite  Vicks- 
burg, and  temporarily  occupies  Milliken^s  Bend  and  other  points  on  the 
river.  The  presence  of  this  force  is  encouraging.  Nothing  can  be  done 
by  us  to  relieve  Port  Hudson,  which  is  in  imminent  peril.  General 
Tavlor  will  make  such  demonstrations  opposite  Port  Hudson  as  he  can. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Richmond,  Va.,  June  21, 1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Jacicson,  Miss,  : 

Yours  of  the  19th  received.  Consequences  are  realized  and  difficulties 
are  recognized  as  very  great,  but  I still  think,  other  means  failing,  the 
course  recommended  should  be  hazarded.  The  aim,  in  my  judgment, 
iustifies  any  risk  and  all  probable  consequences. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Richmond,  Va.,  June  21,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

JacJcson,  Miss. : 

Only  my  conviction  of  almost  imperative  necessity  for  action  induces 
the  official  dispatch  I have  just  sent  you.  On  every  ground  I have  great 
deference  to  your  superior  knowledge  of  the  position,  your  judgment  and 
military  genius,  but  I feel  it  right  to  share,  if  need  be  to  take,  the  re- 
sponsibility, and  leave  you  free  to  follow  the  most  desperate  course  the 
occasion  may  demand.  Rely  upon  it,  the  eyes  and  hopes  of  the  whole 
Confederacy  are  upon  you,  with  the  full  confidence  that  you  will  act, 
and  with  the  sentiment  that  it  were  better  to  fail  nobly  daring  than 
through  prudence  even  to  be  inactive.  I look  to  attack  in  last  resort, 
but  rely  on  your  resources  of  generalship  to  suggest  less  desperate 
modes  of  relief.  I can  scarce  dare  to  suggest,  but  might  it  not  be  pos- 
sible to  strike  Banks  first  and  unite  the  garrison  of  Port  Hudson  with 
you  or  to  secure  sufficient  co-operation  from  General  Smith,  or  to  prac- 
tically besiege  Grant  by  operations  with  artillery  from  the  swamps  now 
dry  on  the  north  side  of  the  Yazoo  below  Haynes^  Bluff?  I rely  on  you 
for  all  possible  [efforts]  to  save  Vicksburg. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  June  22  [21?],  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon  : 

Positive  information  has  just  been  received  from  General  E.  K.  Smith 
that  fiftv-seven  transports  with  troops  passed  Napoleon  on  the  lltU 
and  12th  last,  going  down  the  Mississippi  River.  ^ ^ johNSTON, 


Chap.  XXXVI.1 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


229 


Hod.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War  : 


Canton,  Miss.,  June  22,  1863. 


Your  dispatcli  of  21st  received,  but  canDot  be  deciphered.  Please 
repeat  it,  using  as  few  words  as  possible  in  cipher. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTOH. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  June  23,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon  : 

General  Euggles  reports  that  on  the  20th  instant  attacked  the  enemy, 
800  strong,  with  two  guns,  near  Eocky  Ford,  on  Tallahatchee.  Eouted 
him  completely,  captured  his  baggage  train,  ammunition,  and  supplies, 
killing  about  50.  Our  loss  small. 

J.  E.  JOHHSTOK 


Canton,  Miss.,  June  24, 1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon: 

Your  two  dispatches  of  21st  received.  There  has  been  no  voluntary 
inaction.  When  I came,  all  military  materials  of  the  department  were 
in  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson.  Artillery  had  to  be  brought  from  the 
east;  horses  for  it  and  all  field  transportation  procured  in  an  exhausted 
country — much  from  Georgia  brought  over  wretched  railroads— and  ‘ 
provisions  collected.  I have  not  had  the  means  of  moving.  We  can- 
not contend  with  the  enemy  north  of  the  Yazoo.  He  can  place  a large 
force  there  in  a few  hours ; we  a small  one  in  ten  or  twelve  days.  We 
cannot  relieve  Port  Hudson  without  giving  up  Jackson,  by  which  we 
should  lose  Mississippi.  Kirby  Smith  sent  troops  to  give  all  possible 
aid  to  Vicksburg,  but  they  have  not  been  used  by  their  commanders. 

J.  E.  JOHHSTOK, 

General, 


Eichmond,  Va.,  June  26,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

JaeJcson,  Miss.  : 

I have  just  received  reliable  information  through  a friend  from  Balti- 
more that  Grant  telegraphed  for  supplies  and  ammunition, both  failing. 
Train  ot  cars  laden  with  such  was  sent  through  Baltimore  ten  days  ago, 
marked  for  Yazoo  City,  to  proceed  via  Cairo,  under  charge  of  a’person 
friendly  to  the  South  and  anxious  to  have  a chance  to  yield  them  to 
capture.  This  may  possibly  prove  useful. 

J.  A.  SEDDOK, 

. Secretary  of  War, 


Jackson,  Miss.,  June  29,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

Tlie  following  dispatch  has  just  been  received: 


General  Joseph  E.  Johnston: 


Alexandria,  June  26,  1863, 

Via  Natchez,  June  27. 


1 have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  on  the  23(1  instant  General  Taylor  stormed,  at 
tne  point  of  the  bayonet,  ^71111  unloaded  muskets,  the  enemy’s  position  at  Berwick 


230 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVl. 


Bay,  capturing  over  1,000  imsonery,  ten  heavy  guns,  and  a large  amount  of  stores  of 
all  descriptions.  The  position  of  Tliibodeaux  was  also  carried.  This  gives  him  the 
command  of  the  Mississippi  River  above  New  Orleans,  and  will  enable  him  in  a great 
measure  to  cut  off  Banks’  supplies. 

E.  SURGET, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 

, General. 


Richmond,  Va.,  July  7,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Jackson.^  Miss. : 

A telegram  of  the  5th  instant,  signed  “Woodson,”  approved  by  T.  B. 
Lamar,  chief  of  staff,  informing  of  the  fall  of  Vicksburg,  is  just  received. 
Telegraph  if  this  be  true  and  any  particulars  known. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 
Secretary  of  War. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  July  8,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon: 

Your  dispatch  of  the  7th  received.  The  following  was  sent  you  yes- 
terday directly  after  the  intelligence  of  the  fall  of  Vicksburg  was  re- 
ceived : 

Vicksburg  capitulated  on  the  4th  instant ; the  garrison  was  paroled  and  are  to  be 
returned  to  our  lines,  the  officers  retaining  their  side-arms  and  personal  baggage. 
This  intelligence  was  brought  by  an  officer  who  left  the  place  on  Sunday,  the  5tli  in- 
stant. In  consequence,  I am  failing  back  from  the  Big  Black  to  Jackson. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 

Colonel  [L.  M.]  Montgomery  has  just  arrived  from  Vicksburg.  He  was 
directed  by  General  Pemberton  to  have  supplies  prepared  at  this  place 
for  22,000  men,  the  paroled  garrison  of  Vicksburg. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  July  8,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper: 

The  paroled  garrison  of  Vicksburg  will  be  here  in  a few  days.  What 
shall  be  done  with  the  men  ? They  cannot  remain  in  this  department 
without  great  injury  to  us  from  deficiency  of  supplying  them.  Shall 
they  go  to  their  homes  until  exchanged,  or  be  distributed  in  regiments 
in  their  respective  States?  Can  they  be  exchanged  immediately  for 
prisoners  taken  in  the  recent  great  Confederate  victory  ? 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Richmond,  Va.,  July  8,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Jackson.,  Miss.: 

Inform  fully  as  you  know  of  the  terms  of  capitulation  of  Vicksburg, 
especially  the  position  of  officers  and  men  in  relation  to  parole  and 
power  of  exchange. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Chap.  XXXVI. ’j 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


231 


Jackson,  Miss,,  J%dy  0,  18G3. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon: 

I have  nothing  official  of  capitulation  of  Vicksburg.  An  officer  of  the 
garrison  told  me  that  the  terms  were  those  I stated : The  troops  to  be  iia- 
roled  and  sent  into  our  lines  as  soon  as  form  is  complied  with  ; officers 
to  retain  baggage  and  side-arms ; soldiers  their  clothing.  Provisions 
being  exhausted,  the  general  officers  proposed  capitulation  to  General 
Pemberton.  I have  not  heard  of  the  garrison. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 

General. 


Executive  Department, 

• Richmond Yh.,  July  10,  1863. 

Hon.  Secretary  of  War: 

The  following  telegram  was  received  by  the  President,  and  is  for- 
warded to  you  for  your  information : 

Your  dispatch  of  yesterday  received.  No  report  of  Taylor’s  junction  has  reached  me, 
as  it  must  have  done,  if  true,  as  we  have  1,200  cavalry  in  that  vicinity.  I hear  noth- 
ing official  from  Vicksburg.  Maj.  Jacob  Thompson,  of  General  Pemberton’s  staff, 
gives  me  the  following  list : Lieutenant-General  Pemberton,  Major-Generals  [C.  L.] 
Stevenson,  [J.  H.]  Forney,  M.  L.  Smith,  and  [J.  S.]  Bowen  ; Brigadier-Generals 
[S.  M.]  Barton,  [S.  D.]  Lee,  [A.]  Gumming,  [J.  C.]  Moore,  [W.  E.]  Baldwin,  [L.] 
Hubert,  [J.  C.]  Vaughn,  and  [F.  A.]  Shoup ; Colonels  [A.  W.]  Reynolds,  [T.  N.] 
Waul,  and  [F.  M.]  Cockrell,  commanders  brigades;  also  Brigadier- General  [John  V. ] 
Harris,  of  Mississippi  militia. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  PEESTON  JOHNSTON, 

Colonel  and  Aide-de-Camp. 


tlndorsement.] 


July  11,  1863. 

Eeferred  to  Colonel  [Eobert]  Ould  for  information  as  to  general  officers 
for  exchange. 


J.  A.  S.  [SEDDONJ, 

Secretary. 


War  Department, 
Richmond  J Fa.,  July  10,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Jackson,  Miss.: 

To  afford  facilities  for  exchange  at  the  earliest  period,  telegraph  as 
soon  as  you  know  the  number  of  privates,  sergeants,  corporals,  lieuten- 
ants, captains,  majors,  lieutenant-colonels,  colonels,  brigadiers,  and  gen- 
erals, designating  as  far  as  practicable  the  number  of  the  foregoing 
belonging  to  each  regiment ; at  any  rate  send  the  designation  of  the 
regiments  captured.  After  full  lists  are  prepared,  you  will  send  them 
on  without  delay,  but  telegraph  only  as  above. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  July  14,  1863. 

General  S.  Cooper  : 

General  Pemberton  has  recommended  that  his  troops  be  furloughed. 
Should  the  recommendation  be  accepted,  it  will  have  an  injurious  effect 


232 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


upon  this  army,  unless  the  paroled  troops  are  first  moved  to  a distance. 
I suppose  that  they  should  move  to  the  camp  at  Demopolis,  and  have 
so  informed  General  Pemberton. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


War  Department, 
Eichmondf  Va,,  July  16,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Jackson,  Miss.: 

The  following  officers,  having  been  duly  exchanged,  are  released  from 
parole,  and  at  liberty  to  return  to  service : 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  0.  Pemberton 5 Major-Generals  Stevenson,  Forney,  M. 
L.  Smith,  and  Bowen ; Brigadier-Generals  Barton,  Lee,  Gumming,  Moore, 
Hubert,  Baldwin,  Vaughn,  and  Shoup;  Colonels  Reynolds,  Waul,  and 
Cockrell,  commanding  brigades;  also  Brigadier-General  Harris,  Missis- 
sippi militia. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department,  Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.^s  Office, 

Richmond^  July  22,  1863. 

General  Johnston,  Morton,  Miss. : 

In  conformity  with  your  expressed  wish,  you  are  relieved  from  the 
further  command  of  the  Department  of  Tennessee,  which,  as  advised  by 
you,  is  united  to  that  of  East  Tennessee,  so  as  to  extend  General  Bragg^s 
command  over  the  department  of  General  Buckner. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


War  Department, 
Richmond,  Ya.,  July  24,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Commanding,  &c. : 

General  : The  president  of  the  Mississippi  Central  Railroad  tele- 
graphs that  you  have  ordered  the  destruction  by  fire  of  railroad  equip- 
ments to  the  value  of  $5,000,000.  The  President  directs  that  efforts  be 
made  to  bring  away  the  equipments,  which  should  be  taken  down  the 
road  for  removal  as  far  as  may  be  necessary.* 

Tour  obedient  servant, 


J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


War  Department, 
Richmond,  Ya.,  July  24,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Commanding,  &c.: 

General  : If  you  have  not  had  occasion  to  use  the  funds  transmitted 
through  Commodore  [Samuel]  Barron,  you  will  idease  return  them  by  tlie 

* For  reply  of  August  2,  see  Addenda,  p.  235. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


233 


first  safe  opportunity,  as  the  Secretary  of  the  IsTavy,  from  whose  appro- 
priations they  were  drawn,  needs  the  amount  for  sterling*  exchange. 
With  high  regard,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  A.  SEDDOK, 
Secretary  of  War. 


General  S.  Cooper  : 


Morton,  Miss.,  July  24,  1863. 


1 our  dispatch  of  22d,  relieving  me  from  command  of  Department  of 
Tennessee,  received.  Major-General  Maury  thinks  attack  on  Mobile 
^ request  that  [H.  D.]  Olayton^s  brigade,  belonging  to 
Mobile  garrison,  and  sent  by  me  to  General  Bragg  in  emergency,  may 
be  ordered  back  immediately.  Major-General  Maury  has  but  2,500  men 
for  land  defense.  • 


J.  E.  JOHNSTOK 


War  Department, 

^ ^ Richmond.  7^.,  July  25,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

MortoUj  Miss.: 

I am  requested  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  to  instruct  that  all 
cotton  belonging  to  the  Government  liable  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy,  which  cannot  be  removed,  be  destroyed. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 


General  S.  Cooper: 


Mobile,  Ala.,  July  29,  1863. 


I came  here  because  Major-General  Maury  apprehends  attack.  His 
scouts  at  Pensacola  report  Admiral  Farragut  went  north  yesterday, 
which  indicates  no  attack.  Officers  from  Vicksburg  report  that  all 
troops  go  up  the  river. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


General  S.  Cooper  : 


Mobile,  Ala.,  July  29, 1863. 
(Deceived  at  Eichmond,  Ya.,  July  30.) 


What  is  the  extent  of  my  command  ? I return  to  Morton  to-night. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Hon.  James  A.  Seddon: 


Morton,  Miss.,  July  30, 1863. 


I conversed  this  morning  with  Major  [H.  M.]  Mathews,  of  the  artillery, 
just  from  Vicksburg,  who  says  that  one  of  Maj.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smithes  staff 
that  Grant  had  sent  very  few  troops  up  the  river,  but  about 
the  22d  had  seventeen  transports  of  troops  down.  Others  had  preceded 
these.  Deports  from  different  sources  all  so  contradictory  that  no  opin- 
ion of  the  enemy’s  intentions  can  be  formed.  The  ofQcer  above  named 
says  that  the  Federals  destroyed  everything  connected  with  cultivation 
ot  ground  between.  Jackson  and  Big  Black  Diver,  including  growing 


J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


234 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVT. 


War  Department,  Adjt.  and  Insp.  Gen.’s  Office, 

Bichmondy  Fa.,  July  31,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Morton,  Miss. : 

Your  command  embraces  the  country  west  of  the  line  between  Georgia 
and  Alabama,  and  running  south  to  the  Gulf,  as  before  General  Bragg’s 
department  was  formed.  Its  western  limit  is  the  Mississippi  Eiver  and 
its  northern  boundary  the  Tennessee  Eiver  and  Kentucky  line. 

S.  COOPEE, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General, 


Morton,  Miss.,  July  31,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War: 

The  following  telegram  is  forwarded  for  the  information  of  the  War 
Department: 

Mobile,  Ala.,  July  30,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston: 

A gentleman  wlio  left  Vicksburg  on  Friday  states  that  Grant  is  still  in  Vicksburg. 
Is  repairing  road  to  Jackson.  Expect  bridge  over  Big  Black  to  be  ready  for  trans- 
portation of  cars  in  about  thirty  days.  There  is  great  and  increasing  sickness  in  the 
army,  and  their  expectation  is  that  it  will  be  sixty  daysbeforethey  will  move  to  Jack- 
son.  They  propose  to  go  to  Meridian,  to  Eemopolis,  and  to  Selma,  and  then  invest 
Mobile.  They  were  actively  organizing  negro  regiments,  which  they  threw  sicross 
into  Louisiana  as  fast  as  organized.  No  large  force  has  been  sent  up  the  river.  Those 
sent  were  of  Burnside^s  corps  and  troops  whose  time  had  expired.  McPherson  in  com- 
mand at  Vicksburg ; Parke  at  Snyder’s  Bluff.  Informant  is  person  of  intelligence  and 
veracity,  with  peculiar  opportunities  of  -information.  Another  officer  just  in  from 
New  Orleans  with  prisoners  states  that  Banks’  force  has  been  recently  increased  from 
Grant,  and  that  they  propose  soon  sending  one  portion  « of  Banks’  army  oyer  into 
Louisiana,  and  another,  20,000  strong,  to  Pascagoula.  Grant  is  collecting  immense 
supplies  of  stores  at  Vicksburg. 

DABNEY  H.  MAURY, 

Major-General,  Commanding. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


Eichmond,  August  12,  1863. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Morton,  Miss. : 

General  : The  limits  of  your  department  on  the  east  and  north 
seem  settled  by  Special  Orders,  copies  of  which  are  herein  inclosed;  but 
as  you  request  a more  explicit  statement  defining  them,  I reply  by  let- 
ter. It  is  contemplated  that  your  command  shall  embrace  the  country 
west  of  the  Appalachicola  and  Chattahoochee  Eivers,  and  of  the  Ala- 
bama and  Georgia  State  line,  until  it  strikes  the  southeastern  corner  of 
Calhoun  County,  in  the  former  State;  thence  along  the  southern  line 
of  the  following  tier  of  counties  in  Alabama,  to  wit,  Calhoun,  Saint 
Clair,  Blount,  Morgan,  Lawrence,  and  Franklin;  thence  along  the  Ala- 
bama and  Mississippi  State  line  to  the  Tennessee  Eiver,  and  along  tliat 
river  to  its  confluence  with  the  Ohio  Eiver.  The  counties  named  above, 
and  all  the  country  north  of  them,  come  within  the  limit  of  General 
Bragg’s  department. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Chap,  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


235 


[Inclosures.] 

Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Oepice, 

]N^o.  176.  I Richmond^  Ya.^  July  25,  1863. 

*****  # * 

VI.  The  Department  of  East  Tennessee  is  merged  in  the  Department 
of  Tennessee,  which  will  be  separate  and  independent,  reporting  directly 
to  this  office. 

YII.  The  limits  of  the  Department  of  Tennessee  will  embrace  the 
country  now  included  in  the  Department  of  East  Tennessee,  and  west 
of  the  Blue  Bidge  Mountains  in  North  Carolina  and  a line  running 
south  to  the  Georgia  Eailroad  j thence  along  the  lines  of  railroad  via 
Atlanta  to  West  Point,  and  from  that  place  north  to  the  Tennessee 
Eiver  and  down  that  stream  to  its  mouth. 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War. 

JNO.  WITHEES, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 

Special  Orders,  ) Adjt.  and  Inspector  General’s  Office, 

No.  184.  i Richmond.)  August  4,  1863. 

♦ ****## 

YIII.  The  limits  of  the  Department  of  Tennessee,  as  described  in 
Paragraph  YII,  Special  Orders,  No.  176,  current  series,  will  embrace 
also  the  following  counties  in  Alabama,  viz,  the  counties  of  Franklin, 
Lawrence,  Morgan,  Blount,  Saint  Clair,  Calhoun,  Cherokee,  De  Kalb, 
and  Marshall. 

* * ***** 

By  command  of  the  Secretary  of  War: 

JNO.  WITHEES, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Morton,  Miss.,  August  20,  1863. 
General  S.  Cooper,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General: 

General:  I thank  you  for  your  letter  of  the  12th,  which  I have  just 
received,  with  copies  of  so  much  of  Special  Orders,  Nos.  176  and  184,  as 
define  the  limits  of  General  Bragg’s  command,  and  your  telegram  to  me 
of  July  31.  These  papers  cannot  be  misunderstood.  As  my  apology 
for  having  troubled  you  more  than  once  on  this  subject,  I respectfully 
inclose  copies  of  your  telegram  and  Paragraph  YII,  Special  Orders,  No. 
176,  as  I received  them  originally,*  one  marred  by  the  operator,  the 
other  without  the  important  line  following  the  name  “ West  Point.” 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 

ADDENDA. 

Morton,  August  2,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Your  letter  of  July  24  received.  The  order  concerning  rolling  stock 
of  Mississippi  railroads  was  to  destroy  rather  than  permit  it  to  fall  into 
the  enemy’s  hands.  The  enemy  has  fallen  back,  and  the  superintendents 
of  roads  have  been  promised  protection  if  they  repair.  I hope  to  be 
able  soon  to  draw  supplies  again  from  the  country  through  which  the 
Mississippi  Central  Eailroad  passes. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


* Not  found. 


236 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CHAr.  XXXVI. 


Executive  Department,  0.  S.  A., 

Richmond,  Ya.,  August  6,  1863. 

Col.  B.  S.  Ewell, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  Army  of  the  West : 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter 
of  the  28th  ultimo,  transmitting  copy  of  a dispatch  in  cipher  from  the 
President  to  General  J.  E.  Johnston,  which  you  were  not  able  to  deci- 
pher. I inclose  a copy  from  the  original  of  the  dispatch  for  the  com- 
pletion of  your  files. 

' Very  respectfully, 

G.  W.  C.  LEE, 
Colonel  and  Aide-de-Camp, 

P.  S. — I have  tested  parts  of  your  copy,  and  find  no  difficulty  in  de- 
Diphering  it.  The  old  key  was  probably  used  by  your  officer  instead  of 
the  new,  which,  we  had  been  informed  by  the  Chief  of  the  Signal  Corps, 
had  been  substituted  in  all  the  military  departments  for  the  old  key. 

[Inclosnra.] 

Executive  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond,  Ya.,  July  18,  1863. 
General  Joseph  E.  Brandon,  Miss.: 

Your  dispatch  of  yesterday  received,  informing  me  of  your  retreat 
from  Jackson  toward  the  east.  I desire  to  know  your  ulterior  purpose. 
The  enemy  may  not  pursue,  but  move  up  the  Central  road,  lay  waste 
tberich  country  toward  Tennessee,  and  co-operate  afterward  with  Eose- 
crans.  Another  column.  Eastern  Louisiana  being  abandoned,  may  be 
sent  from  Kew  Orleans  to  attack  Mobile  on  the  land  side. 

The  recommendation  to  furlough  the  paroled  troops  from  Vicksburg 
offers  a hard  alternative  under  the  pressure  of  our  present  condition. 

JEFFERSOI^  DAVIS. 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond,  Ya.,  December  29,  1863. 
The  President  of  the  Confederate  States: 

Sir  : In  response  to  a resolution  of  the  House  of  Representatives, 
adopted  on  the  11th  instant,  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  a copy  of 
‘‘  the  orders  given  to  and  correspondence  had  with  General  Joseph  E. 
Johnston  during  the  months  of  May,  June,  and  July,  1863,  concerning 
his  command  and  the  operations  in  his  department.”  A copy  of  the 
order  assigning  General  Johnston  to  command  is  also  transmitted. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary  of  War. 

[Inolosare.] 

December  31,  1863. 

Captain  [R.  G.  H.]  Eean; 

The  President  directs  me  to  suggest  to  the  Secretary  of  War  that  the 
resolution  seems  to  call  for  all  correspondence  had  with  General  John- 
ston during  the  time  specified — that  which  was  had  with  the  Executive 
as  well  as  that  with  the  War  Office. 

Did  not  the  bundle  of  correspondence  taken  from  this  office  by  Major 
Barton  include  all  ? If  so,  will  you  not  be  good  enough  to  ask  him  to 
have  the  proper  additions  made  to  this? 


Chap.  XXXYI.] 


GENERAL  REPOI^TS. 


237 


Again,  you  will  perceive  from  the  pencil  cross  near  the  top  of  the  first 
page  of  the  first  telegram  from  General  Johnston  that  there  is  a mani- 
test  omission  of  one  or  more  words.  Please  have  the  error  corrected, 
and  the  rest  of  the  manuscript  carefully  examined,  and  oblige,  your 
obedient  servant, 

BUETO^iT  N.  HAEEISON, 

Private  Secretary. 


Dalton,  January  30,  1864. 

General  S.  Cooper,  Eiclimond: 

I respectfully  ask  to  be  furnished  with  Lieutenant-General  Pember- 
ton^s  explanation  of  his  report,  and  also  his  supplemental  report. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTOhT. 

War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  Fa.,  June  11,  1864. 

The  President  of  the  Confederate  States  : 

Sir  : I have  received  the  following  resolution  of  the  House  of  Eep- 
resentatives,  referred  by  Your  Excellency  to  this  Department : 

Resolved,  That  the  President  he  respectfully  requested,  in  addition  to  the  corre- 
spondence heretofore  communicated  to  Congress  between  the  President  and  Secre- 
tary of  War  and  General  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  in  relation  to  the  conduct  of  the  war  in 
the  Valley  of  the  Mississippi,  to  communicate  to  Congress  so  much  of  said  correspond- 
ence as  has  not  yet  been  called  for  by  this  House,  commencing  with  a letter  of  Novem- 
ber 24,  18623  addressed  by  General  Johnston  to  the  Hon.  G.  W.  Randolph,*  Secretary 
of  War,  and  including  General  J ohnston’s  reply  t to  the  letter  of  the  President  of  July 
last,  which  closes  the  published  correspondence. 

In  response,  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  the  accompanying  copies  | 
of  the  correspondence  on  file  in  this  Department.  The  preparation  of 
these  copies  has  been  delayed  by  the  absence  in  the  field  of  most  of 
the  clerical  force  during  the  entire  session  of  Congress,  and  the  difficulty 
ot  finding  some  ot  the  letters.  One  of  General  Johnston’s  communica- 
tions, under  date  of  April  28,  1863,  has  not  yet  been  found,  but  I have 
directed  further  search  to  be  made  for  it  in  the  office  of  the  Adjutant- 
General.  As  the  adjournment  of  Congress  is  at  hand,  I have  thought 
it  best  not  to  delay  longer  a response  to  the  resolution  of  the  House. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  A.  SEDDOK, 

Secretary  of  War. 


No.  10. 

Report  of  General  Joseph  E.  Johnston.  O.  S.  Army,  of  operations  March 

12-July  20. 

War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 

Richmond^  Fa.,  December  24,  1863. 
The  President  of  the  Confederate  States: 

Sir  : In  response  to  a resolution  of  the  House  of  Kepresentatives,  I 
have  the  honor  to  submit  herewith  the  report  of  General  J.  E.  John- 

* See  Johnston  to  Cooper,  Series  I,  Vol.  XVII,  Part  II,  n.  758. 
t Of  August  8,  1863.  See  p.  209. 

t Not  identibed  ; but  see  Johnston’s  correspondence,  in  Part  III. 


238 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chav.  XXXVI. 


stoii  of  bis  operations  in  tbe  Department  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern 
Louisiana.  In  natural  connection  with  this,  I likewise  send  the  report 
of  Lieut.  Gen.  J.  0.  Pemberton  * of  the  battles  of  Port  Gibson,  BakePs 
Creek,  and  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  which  is  among  the  reports  called 
for  by  the  House  of  Eepresentatives.  With  the  latter  is  presented  a let- 
ter from  the  Department,  asking  further  explanations  on  some  points  of 
the  reports,  and  the  answer  made  thereto  at  the  time  by  General  Pem- 
berton. Subsequently,  after  seeing  the  report  of  General  Johnston, 
General  Pemberton  considered  his  reply  to  that  letter  as  not  so  fully 
elucidating  the  points  of  inquiry  as  the  additional  details  presented  by 
General  Johnston  rendered  appropriate  and  necessary.  He  therefore 
asked  the  privilege  of  making  a further  reply,  which,  injustice  to  him- 
self, was  accorded.  That  reply  is  likewise  annexed,  and  thus  the  whole 
subject,  it  is  believed,  will  be  fairly  and  satisfactorily  submitted  in  ap- 
propriate connection. 

Eespectfully  submitted. 

J.  A.  SEDDOK, 

Secretary  of  War. 

fliiclosure.J 

Meridian,  Miss.,  November  1,  1863. 

Sir  : The  following  report  of  my  operations  in  the  Department  of 
Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana  is  respectfully  offered  as  a substitute 
for  the  imperfect  one  forwarded  by  me  from  Jackson  on  May  27,  1863.t 

While  on  my  way  to  Mississippi,  where  I thought  my  presence  had 
become  necessary,  I received,  in  Mobile,  on  March  12,  the  following 
telegram  from  the  Secretary  of  W ar,  dated  March  9 : 

Order  General  Bragg  to  report  to  the  War  Department  for  conference.  Assume 
yourself  direct  charge  of  the  Army  of  Middle  Tennessee. 

In  obedience  to  this  order,  I at  once  proceeded  to  Tullahoma.  On  my 
arrival,  I informed  the  Secretary  of  War,  by  a telegram  of  March  19, 
that  General  Bragg  could  not  then  be  sent  to  Eichmond,  as  he  was 
ordered,  on  account  of  the  critical  condition  of  his  family. 

On  April  10,  I repeated  this  to  the  President,  and  added  : 

Being  unwell  then,  I afterward  became  sick,  and  am  not  now  able  to  serve  in  the 
held.  General  Bragg  is  therefore  necessary  here. 

Oil  the  28th,  my  unfitness  for  service  in  the  field  was  reported  to  the 
Secretary  of  War. 

On  May  9,  I received,  at  Tullahoma,  the  following  dispatch  of  the 
same  date  from  the  Secretary  of  War  : 

Proceed  at  once  to  Mississippi  and  take  chief  command  of  the  forces  there,  giving 
to  those  in  the  held,  as  far  as  practicable,  the  encouragement  and  benefit  of  your  per- 
sonal direction. 

It  is  thus  seen  that  neither  my  orders  nor  my  health  permitted  me  to 
visit  Mississippi  after  March  12,  until  the  time  when  I took  direct  charge 
of  that  department. 

From  the  time  of  my  arrival  at  Tullahoma  until  April  14,  General 
Pemberton’s  reports,  all  by  telegraph,  indicated  that  the  efforts  of  the 
enemy  would  be  against  General  Bragg  rather  than  himself,  and  looked 
to  the  abandonment  of  his  attempts  on  Vicksburg. 

In  that  of  April  13,  he  says: 

I am  satisfied  Rosecrans  will  be  re-enforced  from  Grant’s  .army.  Shall  I order  troops 
to  Tullahoma? 


See  No.  11,  p.  249. 


+ See  p.  220.  Transmitted  by  Davis. 


ChAi’.  XXXVI.]  GENERAL  REPORTS.  239 

Ou  April  17,  General  Pemberton  telegraphed  the  return  of  Grant  and 
the  resumption  of  the  operations  against  Vicksburg. 

On  April  29,  he  telegraphed : ^ 

The  enemy  is  at  Hard  Times  in  large  force,  with  barges  and  transports,  indicating  a 
purpose  to  attack  Grand  Gulf  with  a view  to  Vicksburg. 

He  also  reported : 

Heavy  firing  at  Grand  Gulf.  The  enemy  shelling  our  batteries  both  above  and  below. 

On  May  1,  he  telegraphed: 

A furious  battle  has  been  going  on  since  daylight  just  below  Port  Gibson.  * * * 

Enemy  can  cross  all  his  army  from  Hard  Times  to  Bruinsburg.  I should  have  largo 
re-enforcements.  Enemy’s  movements  threaten  Jackson,  and,  if  successful,  cut  off 
Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson. 

I at  once  urged  him  to  concentrate  and  to  attack  Grant  immediately 
on  his  landing,  and  on  the  next  day  I sent  the  following  dispatch  to  him : 

If  Grant  crosses,  unite  all  your  troops  to  beat  him.  Success  will  give  back  what  was 
abandoned  to  win  it. 

I telegraphed  to  you  on  the  1st: 

General  Pemberton  calls  for  large  re-enforcements.  They  cannot  be  sent  from  here 
without  giving  up  Tennessee.  Can  one  or  two  brigades  be  sent  from  the  east? 

On  the  7th,  I again  asked  for  re-enforcements  for  Mississippi. 

I received  no  further  report  of  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  and  on  the 
5th  asked  General  Pemberton,  “What  is  the  result  and  where  is  Grant’s 
army*?”  I received  no  answer  and  gained  no  additional  information  in 
relation  to  either  subject  until  I reached  the  Department  of  Mississippi, 
in  obedience  to  my  orders  of  May  9. 

There,  on  May  13,  I received  a dispatch  from  Genera,!  Pemberton, 
dated  Vicksburg,  May  12,  asking  for  re-enforcements,  as  the  enemy  in 
large  force  was  moving  from  the  Mississippi  south  of  the  Big  Black,  ap- 
parently toward  Edwards  Depot,  “ which  will  be  the  battle-field  if  I 
can  forward  suflacient  force,  leaving  troops  enough  to  secure  the  safety 
of  this  place.” 

Before  my  arrival  at  Jackson,  Grant  had  beaten  General  Bowen  at 
Port  Gibson,  made  good  the  landing  of  his  army,  occupied  Grand  Gulf, 
and  was  marching  upon  the  Jackson  and  Vicksburg  Kailroad. 

Ou  reaching  Jackson,  on  the  night  of  May  13,  I found  there  the 
brigades  of  Gregg  and  Walker,  reported  at  6,000;  learned  from  General 
Gregg  that  Maxey’s  brigade  was  expected  to  arrive  from  Port  Hudson 
the  next  day ; that  General  Pemberton’s  forces,  except  the  garrison  of 
Port  Hudson  (5,000)  and  of  Vicksburg,  were  at  Edwards  Depot,  the 
general’s  headquarters  at  Bovina;  that  four  divisions  of  the  enemy, 
under  Sherman,  occupied  Clinton,  10  miles  west  of  Jackson,  between 
Edwards  Depot  and  ourselves.  I was  aware  that  re-enforcements  were 
on  their  way  from  the  east,  and  that  the  advance  of  those  under  General 
Gist  would  probably  arrive  the  next  day,  and,  with  Maxey’s  brigade, 
swell  my  force  to  about  11,000. 

Upon  this  information,  I sent  to  General  Pemberton  on  the  same  night 
(13th)  a dispatch,  informing  him  of  my  arrival  and  of  the  occupation  of 
Clinton  by  a portion  of  Grant’s  army ; urging  the  importance  of  re-es- 
tablishing communications,  and  ordering  him  to  come  up,  if  practicable, 
on  Sherman’s  rear  at  once,  and  adding: 

To  beat  such  a detacbmcnt  would  be  of  iraniense  value  ; tlio  trooj)8  here  could 
cooperate ; all  the  strength  you  can  quickly  assemble  should  be  brought : time  is  all- 
important. 


240 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


IChat.  XXXVI. 


On  Thursday,  May  14,  the  enemy  advanced  by  the  Eaymond  and 
Clinton  roads  upon  Jackson.  The  resistance  made  by  the  brigades  of 
Gregg  and  Walker  gave  sufficient  time  for  the  removal  of  the  public 
stores,  and  at  2 p.  m.  we  retreated  by  the  Canton  road,  from  which  alone 
we  could  form  a junction  with  General  Pemberton.  After  marching  6 
miles  the  troops  encamped. 

Prom  this  point  I sent  to  General  Pemberton  the  dispatch  of  May  14, 
of  which  the  following  is  a copy : 

General,  : The  body  of  troops  mentioned  in  my  note  of  last  night  compelled  Briga- 
dier-General Gregg  and  his  command  to  evacuate  Jackson  about  noon  to-day.  The 
necessity  of  taking  the  Canton  road  at  right  angles  to  that  upon  which  the  enemy  ap- 
proached prevented  an  obstinate  defense.  A body  of  troops  reported  this  morning  to 
have  reached  Raymond  last  night  advanced  at  the  same  time  from  that  direction.  Pris- 
oners say  that  it  was  McPherson’s  corps  (four  divisions)  which  marched  from  Clinton. 
I have  no  certain  information  of  the  other.  Both  skirmished  very  cautiously.  Tele- 
grams were  dispatched  when  the  enemy  was  near,  directing  General  Gist  to  assemble 
the  approaching  troops  40  or  50  miles  from  Jackson,  and  General  Maxey  to  return  to 
his  wagons  and  provide  for  the  security  of  his  brigade — for  instance,  by  joining  Gen- 
eral Gist.  That  body  of  troops  will  be  able,  I hope,  to  prevent  the  enemy  in  Jackson 
from  drawing  provisions  from  the  east,  and  this  one  may  be  able  to  keep  him  from  the 
country  toward  Panola.  Can  he  supply  himself  from  the  Mississippi  ? Can  you  not 
cut  him  off  from  it  ? And,  above  all,  should  he  be  compelled  to  fall  back  for  want  of 
supplies,  beat  him  f As  soon  as  the  re-enforcements  are  all  up,  they  must  be  united  to 
the  rest  of  the  army.  I am  anxious  to  see  a force  assembled  that  may  be  able  to  inflict 
a heavy  blow  upon  the  enemy.  Would  it  not  be  better  to  place  the  forces  to  support 
Vicksburg  between  General  Loring  and  that  place,  and  merely  observe  the  ferries,  so 
that  you  might  unite  if  opportunity  to  fight  presented  itself?  General  Gregg  will 
move  toward  Canton  to-morrow.  If  prisoners  tell  the  truth,  the  forces  at  Jackson 
must  be  half  of  Grant’s  army.  It  would  decide  the  campaign  to  beat  it,  which  can  bo 
done  only  by  concentrating,  especially  when  the  remainder  of  the  eastern  troops  ar- 
rive. They  are  to  be  12,000  or  13,000. 

This  dispatch  was  not  answered.  General  Pemberton  stated  in  his 
official  report  that  it  was  received  at  6 p.  m.  on  the  16th,  ‘‘  while  on  the 
retreat  from  the  battle-field  of  BakePs  Creek. 

On  the  next  day.  May  15  (Friday),  the  troops  under  me  marched  10 J 
miles  farther,  to  Calhoun  Station.  On  the  morning  of  that  day  1 
received  a letter  from  General  Pemberton,  dated  Edwards  Depot,  May 
14  (Thursday),  5.40  p.  m.: 

I shall  move  as  early  to-morrow  morning  as  practicable  a column  of  17,000  to  Dil- 
lor.’s.  The  object  is  to  cut  off  enemy’s  communications  and  force  him  to  attack  me, 
as  I do  not  consider  my  force  sufficient  to  justify  an  attack  on  the  enemy  in  position, 
or  to  attempt  to  cut  my  way  to  .Jackson. 

This  was  the  first  communication  received  from  General  Pemberton 
after  my  arrival  at  Jackson ; and  from  it  I learned  that  he  had  not 
moved  toward  Clinton  ten  hours  after  the  receipt  of  my  order  to  do 
so,  and  that  the  junction  of  the  forces,  which  could  have  been  effected 
by  the  15th,  was  deferred,  and  that,  in  disobedience  of  my  orders  and 
ill  opposition  to  the  views  of  the  majority  of  the  council  of  war,  com- 
posed of  all  of  his  generals  present,  before  whom  he  placed  the  subject, 
he  had  decided  to  make  a movement  by  which  the  union  would  be  im- 
l)ossible.  General  Pemberton  was  immediately  instructed  that  there 
was  but  one  mode  by  which  we  could  unite,  viz,  by  his  moving  directly 
to  Clinton. 

The  brigadier-generals  representing  that  their  troops  required  rest 
after  the  fatigue  they  had  undergone  in  the  skirmishes  and  marches 
preceding  the  retreat  from  Jackson,  and  having  yet  no  certain  intelli- 
gence of  General  Pemberton’s  route  or  of  General  Gist’s  position,  1 did 
not  move  on  Saturday. 

In  the  evening  I received  a reply  to  my  last  dispatch,  dated  4 miles 


CnAi*.  XXXVI.] 


GENEEAL  REPORTS. 


241 


soutli  of  Edwards  Depot,  May  16,  stating  it  had  reached  him  at  6.30 
that  morning ; that — 

It  found  the  army  on  the  middle  road  to  Raymojid.  The  order  of  cormtermarch 
■has  been  issued.*  Owing  to  the  destruction  of  a bridge  on  Baker’s  Creek,  which,  runs 
for  some  distance  parallel  with  the  railroad  and  south  of  it,  our  march  will  be  on  the 
road  leading  from  Edwards  Depot  in  the  direction  of  Brownsville.  This  road  runs 
nearly  parallel  with  the  railroad.  In  going  to  Clinton  we  shall  leave  Bolton  Depot 
4 miles  to  the  right.  I am  thus  particular,  so  that  you  may  be  able  to  make  a junction 
with  this  army. 

In  ti  postscript  he  reported : 

Heavy  skirmishing  is  now  going  on  in  my  front. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day,  I received  General  Pemberton’s 
first  reply  to  the  order  sent  him  from  Jackson  to  attack  Sherman,  dated 
Bovina,  May  14,  9.10  a.  m.,  as  follows : 

I move  at  once  with  my  whole  available  force  from  Edwards  Depot.  In  directing 
this  move,  I do  not  think  you  fully  comprehend  the  condition  Vicksburg  will  be  left 
in,  but  I comply  at  once  with  your  order. 

On  May  17  (Sunday),  I marched  15  miles  in  the  direction  indicated 
in  General  Pemberton’s  note  received  the  previous  evening.  In  the 
afternoon  a letter  was  brought  from  him,  dated  Bovina,  May  17,  a copy 
of  which  has  been  forwarded  to  the  War  Department.  In  this,  refer- 
ring to  my  dispatch  of  May  13,  from  Jackson,  General  Pemberton 
wrote : 

I notified  you  on  the  morning  of  the  14th  of  the  receipt  of  your  instructions  to  move 
and  attack  the  enemy  toward  Clinton.  I deemed  the  movement  very  hazardous, 
preferring  to  remain  in  position  behind  the  Big  Black  and  near  to  Vicksburg.  I 
called  a council  of  war,  composed  of  all  the  general  officers.  * * * A majority  of 

the  officers  expressed  themselves  favorable  to  the  movement  indicated  by  you.  The 
others,  including  Major-General  Loring  and  Stevenson,  preferred  a movement  by 
which  this  army  might  endeavor  to  cut  off  the  enemy’s  supplies  from  the  Mississippi. 
My  own  views  were  expressed  as  unfavorable  to  any  movement  which  would  remove 
me  from  my  base,  which  was  and  is  Vicksburg.  I did  not,  however,  see  fit  to  place 
my  own  judgment  and  opinions  so  far  in  opposition  as  to  prevent  the  movement  alto- 
gether, but,  believing  the  only  possibility  of  success  to  be  in  the  plan  proposed,  of 
cutting  off  the  enemy’s  supplies,  I directed  all  my  disposable  force,  say  17,500,  to- 
ward Raymond  or  Dillon’s. 

It  also  contained  intelligence  of  his  engagement  with  the  enemy  on 
tlie  16th  near  Baker’s  Greek,  3 or  4 miles  from  Edwards  Depot,  and  of 
liis  having  been  compelled  to  withdraw,  with  heavy  loss,  to  Big  Black 
Bridge.  He  further  expressed  apprehension  that  he  would  be  compelled 
10  fall  back  from  this  point,  and  represented  that,  if  so,  his  position  at 
Snyder’s  Mill  would  be  untenable,  and  said  : 

I have  about  sixty  days’  provisions  at  Vicksburg  and  Snyder’s.  I respectfully  await 
your  instructions. 

I immediately  refilled.  May  17  : 

If  Haynes’  Bluff  be  untenable,  Vicksburg  is  of  no  value  and  cannot  be  held.  If, 
therefore,  you  are  invested  in  Vicksburg,  you  must  ultimately  surrender.  Under  such 
circumstances,  instead  of  losing  both  troops  and  place,  you  must,  if  possible,  save  the 
troops.  If  it  is  not  too  late,  evacuate  Vicksburg  and  its  dependencies,  and  march  to 
the  northeast. 

That  night  I was  informed  that  General  Pemberton  had  fallen  back 
to  Vicksburg. 

On  Monday,  May  18,  General  Pemberton  informed  me  by  letter,  dated 
Vicksburg,  May  17,  that  he  had  retired  within  the  line  of  intrenchments 

’'Note  on  General  Pemberton’s  coi)y  says:  ‘^Sent  off  by  General  P.  before  being 
finished — copied.” 

16  R R — VOL  XXVI,  PT  I 


242 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


around  Vicksburg,  liaving  been  attacked  and  forced  back  from  Big 
Black  Bridge,  and  that  lie  had  ordered  Haynes’  Bluff  to  be  abandoned. 
His  letter  concluded  with  the  following  remark  : 

I greatly  regret  that  I felt  compelled  to  make  the  advance  beyond  Big  Black,  which 
has  proved  so  disastrous  in  its  results. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  General  Pemberton  expected  that  Ed- 
wards Depot  would  be  the  battle-field  before  I reached  Jackson  (see his 
dispatch  of  the  12th,  already  quoted),  and  that  his  army,  before  he  re- 
ceived any  orders  from  me,  was  7 or  8 miles  east  of  the  Big  Black,  near 
Edwards  Depot. 

On  May  19,  General  Pemberton’s  reply,  dated  Vicksburg,  May  18,  to 
my  communication  of  the  17th,  was  brought  me  near  Vernon,  where  I 
liad  gone  with  the  troops  under  my  command  for  the  purpose  of  effect- 
ing a junction  with  him  in  the  event  of  his  evacuating  Vicksburg,  as  I 
had  ordered,  in  which  he  advised  me  that  he  had — 

assembled  a council  of  war  of  the  general  officers  of  this  command,  and  having  laid 
yonr  instructions  before  them,  asked  the  free  expression  of  their  opinion  as  to  the 
practicability  of  carrying  them  out.  The  opinion  was  unanimously  expressed  that  it 
was  impossible  to  withdraw  the  army  from  this  position  with  such  morale  and  mate- 
rial as  to  be  of  further  service  to  the  Confederacy. 

On  receiving  this  information,  I replied  : 

I am  trying  to  gather  a force  which  may  attempt  to  relieve  you.  Hold  out. 

The  same  day  I sent  orders  to  Major-General  Gardner  to  evacuate 
Port  Hudson.  I then  determined,  by  easy  marches,  to  re-establish  my 
line  between  Jackson  and  Canton,  as  the  junction  of  the  two  commands 
had  become  impossible. 

On  May  20  and  21, 1 was  joined  by  the  brigades  of  Generals  Gist,  Ec- 
tor, and  McNair.  The  division  of  General  Boring,  cut  oft  from  Gen- 
eral Pemberton  in  the  battle  of  Baker’s  Creek,  reached  Jackson  on  the 
20th,  and  General  Maxey,  with  his  brigade,  on  the  23d. 

By  June  4,  the  army  had,  in  addition  to  these,  been  re-enforced  by  the 
brigade  of  General  [N.  G.]  Evans,  the  division  of  General  Breckinridge, 
and  the  division  of  cavalry,  numbering  2,800,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen. 
W.  H.  Jackson. 

Small  as  was  this  force  (about  24,000  infantry  and  artillery,*  not  one- 
third  of  that  of  the  enemy),  it  was  deficient  in  artillery,  in  ammunition 
for  all  arms,  and  field  transportation,  and  could  not  be  moved  upon  that 
enemy  (already  intrenching  his  large  force)  with  any  hope  of  success. 
The  draught  upon  the  country  had  so  far  reduced  the  number  of  horses 
and  mules,  that  it  was  not  until  late  in  June  that  draught  animals  could 
be  procured  from  distant  points  for  the  artillery  and  trains. 

There  was  no  want  of  commissary  supplies  in  tlie  dei)artment,  but  the 
limited  transportation  caused  a deficiency  for  a moving  army. 

On  May  23, 1 received  a dispatch  from  Major-General  Gardner,  dated 
Port  Hudson,  May  21,  informing  me  that  the  enemy  was  about  to  cross 
at  Bayou  Sara  j that  the  whole  force  from  Baton  Bouge  was  in  his  front, 
and  asking  to  be  re-enforced.  On  this,  my  orders  for  the  evacuation  or 
Port  Hudson  were  repeated,  and  he  was  informed  : 

You  cannot  be  re-cnf'orcetl.  Do  not  allow  yourself  to  be  invested.  At  every  risk 
save  the  troops,  and,  if  practicable,  move  in  this  direction. 

This  dispatch  did  not  reach  General  Gardner,  Ihut  Hudson  being  then 
invested. 


See  Johnston  to  Mason,  December  (5,  p.  249. 


CnAP.  XXXVT.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


243 


About  May  24,  the  enemy  made  such  demonstrations  above  the  Big 
Black  and  toward  Yazoo  City,  that  1 sent  Walker^s  division  to  Yazoo 
City,  with  orders  to  fortify  it,  and,  the  demonstrations  being  renewed, 
placed  Boring’s  division  within  supi^orting  distance  of  Walker’s,  and  in 
person  took  post  at  Canton. 

Dispatches  arrived  from  General  Pemberton,  dated  Vicksburg,  May  20 
and  21.  In  that  of  the  20th  he  stated  that  the  enemy  had  assaulted  his 
intrenched  lines  the  day  before  and  were  repulsed  with  heavy  loss.  He 
estimated  their  force  at  not  less  than  60,000,  and  asked  that  musket- 
caps  be  sent,  they  being  his  main  necessity.  He  concluded  : 

An  army  will  be  necessary  to  save  Vicksburg,  and  that  quickly.  Will  it  be  sent  ? 

On  the  21st,  he  wrote : 

The  men  credit  and  are  encouraged  by  a report  that  you  are  near  with  a large  force. 
Tliey  are  lighting  in  good  spirits  and  their  organization  is  complete. 

Cai^s  were  sent  as  fast  as  they  arrived. 

On  May  29,  I sent  a dispatch  to  General  Pemberton  to  the  following 
effect : 

I am  too  weak  to  save  Vicksburg;  cau  do  no  more  than  attempt  to  save  you  and 
your  garrison.  It  will  be  impossible  to  extricate  you  unless  you  co-operate  and  we 
make  mutually  supporting  movements.  Communicate  your  plans  and  suggestions  if 
possible. 

The  receipt  of  this  was  acknowledged  in  a communication  dated  Vicks- 
burg, June  3,  in  which  General  Pemberton  says  : 

We  can  get  no  information  from  outside  as  to  your  position  or  strength,  and  very 
little  in  regard  to  the  enemy. 

In  a dispatch  dated  June  10,  from  General  Gardner  (the  first  received 
since  his  investment),  he  reported  having  repulsed  the  enemy  in  several 
severe  attacks,  but  that  he  was  getting  short  of  provisions  and  ammu- 
nition. To  which  I replied  June  15,  informing  him  that  I had  not  means 
of  relieving  him,  adding  : 

General  Taylor  will  do  what  he  can  on  the  opposite-  side  of  the  river.  Hold  the 
place  as  long  as  you  can,  and,  if  possible,  withdraw  in  any  direction  or  cut  your  way 
out.  It  is  very  important  to  keep  Banks  and  his  forces  occupied. 

In  a dispatch  dated  June  20, 1 said  that  General  Taylor  had  intended 
to  attack  the  enemy  opposite  Port  Hudson  on  the  night  of  the  15th,  and 
attempt  to  send  cattle  across  the  river.  The  want  of  field  transporta- 
tion rendered  any  movement  for  the  relief  of  Port  Hudson  impossible 
had  a march  in  that  direction  been  advisable  ; but  such  a march  would 
have  enabled  Grant  (who  had  now  completed  his  strong  lines  around 
Vicksburg)  to  have  cut  my  line  of  communication  and  destroyed  my 
army,  and  from  the  moment  that  1 put  my  troops  in  march  iii  that  di- 
rection, the  whole  of  Middle  and  Korthern  Mississippi  would  have  been 
open  to  the  enemy. 

On  June  7,  I repeated  the  substance  of  my  dispatch  of  May  29,  to 
General  Pemberton. 

On  June  4,  I told  the  Secretary  of  War,  in  answer  to  his  call  for  my 
plans,  that  my  only  plan  was  to  relieve  Vicksburg,  and  my  force  was  lar 
too  small  for  the  purpose. 

On  June  10,  I told  him  I had  not  at  my  disposal  half  the  troops  neces- 
sary. 

On  the  12th,  I said  to  him  : 

Totckc  from  Bnigg  u force  wliicli  would  make  tlii.s  army  fit  to  opjioso  Grant  would 
involve  yielding  Tennessee,  It  is  for  the  Government  to  decide  between  this  State 
and  Tennessee. 


244 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


On  the  14th,  I sent  General  Pemberton  the  following : 

All  that  we  can  attempt  to  do  is  to  save  you  and  your  garrison.  To  do  this,  exact 
co-operation  is  indispensable.  By  fighting  the  enemy  simultaneously  at  the  same 
points  of  his  line,  you  may  he  extricated.  Our  joint  forces  cannot  raise  the  siege  of 
Vicksburg.  My  communications  with  the  rear  can  best  be  preserved  by  operating 
north  of  railroad.  Inform  me  as  soon  as  possible  what  points  will  suit  yon  best.  Your 
dispatches  of  the  12th  received.  General  Taylor,  with  8,000  men,  will  endeavor  to 
open  communications  with  you  from  Richmond. 

To  this  communication  General  Pemberton  replied,  June  21,  recom- 
mending me  to  move  north  of  the  railroad  toward  Vicksburg,  to  keep 
the  enemy  attracted  to  that  side,  and  stating  that  he  would  himself 
move  at  the  proper  time  by  the  Warrenton  road,  crossing  the  Big  Black 
at  Hankinson’s  Ferry;  that  ‘‘the  other  roads  are  too  strongly  in- 
trenched and  the  enemy  in  too  heavy  force  for  a reasonable  prospect  of 
success,”  unless  I could  compel  him  to  abandon  his  communications  by 
Snyder’s. 

On  the  15th,  I expressed  to  the  Department  the  opinion  that  without 
some  great  blunder  of  the  enemy  we  could  not  hold  both  Mississippi 
and  Tennessee,  and  that  I considered  saving  Vicksburg  hopeless. 

On  the  18th,  I said : 

Grant’s  position,  naturally  very  strong,  is  intrenched  and  protected  by  powerful 
artillery  and  the  roads  obstructed.  His  re-enforcements  have  been  at  least  equal  to 
my  whole  force.  The  Big  Black  covers  him  from  attack,  and  would  cut  off  onr  retreat 
if  defeated. 

On  June  22,  in  reply  to  a dispatch  from  General  Pemberton  of  the 
15th,  in  which  he  said  that,  though  living  on  greatly  reduced  rations, 
he  had  sufficient  for  twenty  days,  I informed  him  that  General  Taylor 
had  been  sent  by  General  E.  K.  Smith  to  co-operate  with  him  from  the 
west  bank  of  the  Mississippi,  and  that  in  a day  or  two  Itvould  try  to 
make  a diversion  in  his  favor,  and,  if  possible,  open  communications, 
adding — 

though  I fear  my  force  is  too  small  to  effect  the  latter.  I have  only  two-thirds  of 
the  force  you  told  Messenger  Saunders  to  state  tome  as  the  least  with  which  I ought 
to  make  an  attempt.  Scouts  report  the  enemy  fortifying  toward  us  and  the  roads 
blocked. 

A day  or  two  after  this,  a dispatch  was  brought  me  from  General  Pem- 
berton, dated  June  22,  suggesting  that  I should  make  to  Grant  “propo- 
sitions to  pass  this  army  out,  with  all  its  arms  and  equipages,”  renewing 
his  hope  of  my  being  able,  by  force  of  arms,  to  act  with  him,  and  ex- 
pressing the  opinion  that  he  could  hold  out  for  fifteen  days  longer.  To 
this  dispatch  I replied  June  27,  informing  him  that  General  E.  K. 
Smith’s  troops  had  fallen  back  to  Delhi,  and  that  I had  urged  him  to 
assume  the  direct  command,  and  continued : 

The  determined  spirit  you  manifest,  and  his  expected  co-operation,  encourage  me  to 
hope  that  something  may  yet  be  done  to  save  Vicksburg  and  to  postpone  both  of  the 
modes  suggested  of  merely  extricating  the  garrison.  Negotiations  with  Grant  for  the 
relief  of  the  garrison,  should  they  become  necessary,  must  be  made  by  you.  It  would 
bo  a confession  of  weakness  on  my  part,  which  I ought  not  to  make,  to  ijroposo  them. 
When  it  becomes  necessary  to  make  terms,  they  may  be  considered  as  made  under  my 
authority. 

On  June  29,  field  transportation  and  other  supplies  having  been  ob- 
tained, the  army  marched  toward  the  Big  Black,  and  on  the  evening 
of  duly  1 encamped  between  Brownsville  and  the  river. 

Keconnaissances,  which  occupied  the  2d  and  .3d,  convinced  me  that 
attack  north  of  the  railroad  was  impracticable.  I determined,  therefore, 
to  make  the  examinations  necessary  for  the  attempt  south  of  the  rail- 
road ; thinking,  from  what  was  already  known,  that  the  chance  for  sue- 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


Chap.  XXXVI.  J 


245 


cess  was  much  better  there,  although  tlie  consequences  of  defeat  might 
be  more  disastrous. 

On  the  night  of  the  3d,  a messenger  was  sent  to  General  Pemberton 
with  information  that  an  attempt  to  create  a diversion  would  be  made 
to  enable  him  to  cut  his  way  out,  and  that  I hoped  to  attack  the  enemy 
about  the  7th. 

On  the  5th,  however,  we  learned  the  fall  of  Vicksburg,  and  therefore 
fell  back  to  Jackson. 

The  army  reached  Jackson  the  evening  of  the  7th,  and  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  9th  the  enemy  appeared  in  heavy  force  in  front  of  the  works 
thrown  up  for  the  defense  of  the  place.  These,  consisting  of  a line 
of  rifle-pits,  prepared  at  intervals  for  artillery,  extended  from  a point 
north  of  the  town,  a little  east  of  the  Canton  road,  to  a point  south  of 
the  town,  within  a short  distance  of  Pearl  Eiver,  and  covered  most  of 
the  approaches  west  of  the  river;  but  were  badly  located  and  con- 
structed, presenting  but  a slight  obstacle  to  a vigorous  assault.  The 
troops  promptly  took  their  assigned  positions  in  the  intrenchments  on 
the  appearance  of  the  enemy,  in  expectation  of  an  immediate  assault, 
Major-General  Loring  occupying  the  right,  Major-General  Walker  the 
right  of  the  center,  Major-Gieneral  French  the  left  of  the  center,  and 
Major-General  Breckinridge  the  left.  The  cavalry,  under  Brigadier- 
General  Jackson,  was  ordered  to  observe  and  guard  the  fords  of  Pearl 
Eiver  above  and  below  the  town.  The  reports  that  had  at  various  times 
been  made  to  me  by  the  commanding  oflicers  of  troops  encamped  near 
Jackson  of  the  scarcity  of  water  led  me  to  believe  that  Sherman,  who 
advanced  in  heavy  order  of  battle  from  Clinton,  could  not  besiege,  but 
would  be  compelled  to  make  an  immediate  assault.  His  force  was  rep- 
resented to  consist  of  his  own  and  Ord’s  army  corps  and  three  divisions 
in  addition.  The  spirit  and  confidence  manifested  by  the  whole  army 
under  my  command  was  such  that,  notwithstanding  this  vast  superiority 
of  numbers,  I felt  assured,  with  the  advantage  given  by  the  intrench- 
ments, weak  as  they  were,  an  assault  by  him  would  result  in  his  dis- 
comfiture. Instead  of  attacking,  the  enemy  as  soon  as  they  arrived 
commenced  intrenching  and  constructing  batteries. 

On  the  10th,  there  was  siiirited  skirmishing,  with  slight  cannonading 
continuing  throughout  the  day.  This  was  kept  up  with  varying  intensity 
and  but  little  interruption  until  the  period  of  our  evacuation.  Hills 
commanding  and  encircling  the  town  within  easy  cannon-range  ofiered 
favorable  sites  for  batteries.  A cross-fire  of  shot  and  shell  reached  all 
parts  of  the  town,  showing  the  position  to  be  entirely  untenable  against 
a ])owerful  artillery. 

On  the  11th,  I telegraphed  the  President : 

If  the  position  and  works  were  not  had,  want  of  stores  (which  could  not  be  collected) 
would  make  it  impossible  to  stand  a siege.  If  the  enemy  will  not  attack,  we  must,  or 
at  the  last  moment  withdraw.  We  cannot  attack  seriouslj'"  without  risking  the  army. 

On  the  12th,  besides  the  usual  skirmishing,  there  was  a heavy  can- 
nonade from  the  batteries  near  the  Canton  and  south  of  the  Clinton 
roads.  The  missiles  reached  all  parts  of  the  town.  An  assault,  thougli 
not  a vigorous  one,  was  also  made  on  Major-General  Breckinridge’s  line. 
It  was  quickly  repelled,  however,  principally  by  the  direct  fire  of  Cobb’s 
and  Slocomb’s  batteries  and  flank  attack  of  the  skirmishers  of  the  First, 
Third,  and  Fourth  Florida  and  Forty-seventh  Georgia  Eegiments.  The 
enemy’s  loss  was  200  prisoners,  nearly  the  same  number  killed,  many 
W()unded,  and  the  colors  of  tlie  Twenty-eighth,  Forty-first,  and  Fifty- 
third  Illinois  Eegiments. 


246  MISSTSSTPPTj  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Ohav.  XXXVL 

By  tlie  13tli,  the  enemy  had  extended  his  lines  until  botli  his  hanks 
rested  on  Pearl  Eiver. 

I telegraphed  the  President  on  the  14th  that  a large  force  lately  left 
Vicksburg — 

to  turn  us  on  the  north.  This  will  compel  us  to  abandon  Jackson.  The  troops  before 
us  have  been  intrenching  and  constructing  batteries  since  their  arrival. 

On  the  15th,  I telegraphed  the  President: 

The  enemy  is  evidently  making  a siege  which  we  cannot  resist.  It  would  bo  mad- 
ness to  attack  him.  The  remainder  of  the  army  under  Grant  at  Vicksburg  is  beyond 
doubt  oil  its  way  to  this  place. 

On  the  16th  of  July,  information  was  received  that  a large  train  from 
V^icksburg,  loaded  with  ammunition,  was  near  the  enemy^s  camp.  This 
and  the  condition  of  their  batteries  made  it  probable  that  Sherman 
would  on  the  next  day  concentrate  upon  us  the  fire  of  nearly  two  hun- 
dred guns.  It  was  also  reported  that  the  enemy  had  crossed  Pearl 
Piver  in  rear  of  their  left  flank.  The  evacuation  of  Jackson  that  night 
was  therefore  determined  on. 

Our  withdrawal  was  effected  on  the  night  of  the  16th.  All  public 
lu’operty,  and  the  sick  and  wounded,  except  a few  not  in  a condition  to 
be  moved,  had  been  previously  carried  to  the  rear.  The  right  wing  re- 
tired toward  Brandon  by  the  new  Brandon  road  and  the  left  wing  by 
the  old  Brandon  road.  The  cavalry  remained  to  destroy  the  bridges 
over  Pearl  Biver  and  observe  the  enemy.  The  evacuation  was  not  dis- 
covered by  the  enemy  until  the  next  day. 

Our  loss  during  the  siege  was  estimated  at  71  killed,  504  wounded, 
and  about  25  missing. 

The  army  retired  by  easy  marches  to  Morton,  distant  about  35  miles 
from  Jackson.  Desertions  during  the  siege  and  on  the  march  were,  I 
regret  to  say,  frequent. 

Two  divisions  of  the  enemy,  with  cavalry,  drove  our  cavalry  through 
Brandon  on  the  19tli,  returning  to  Jackson  the  next  day.  Their  object 
seemed  to  be  to  destroy  the  railroad  bridges  and  depots. 

Col.  J.  L.  Logan,  commanding  a mounted  force  around  Port  Hudson, 
reported  three  successful  engagements  with  detachments  of  the  enemy. 

On  July  12,  I received  information  from  Colonel  Logan  of  the  sur- 
render of  Port  Hudson  on  the  9th.  Subsequently  the  report  of  Mnjor 
[C.  M.]  Jackson,  acting  assistant  inspector-general,  was  received,  in- 
forming me  of  the  surrender.  That  officer  stated  that  i>rovision  was 
exhausted,  and  that  the  position  of  the  enemy  rendered  it  impossible 
for  the  garrison  to  cut  its  way  out.  But  2,500  of  the  garrison  were  fit 
for  duty  at  the  time  of  surrender. 

The  enemy  advanced  against  Yazoo  City  both  by  land  and  water  on 
the  13th.  The  attack  by  the  gunboats  was  handsomely  repulsed  by  our 
heavy  battery,  under  the  command  of  Commander  Isaac  N.  Brown,  of  the 
Navy.  The  i)e  Kalb,  the  flag-ship  of  the  hostile  squadron,  an  iron-clad, 
mounting  thirteen  guns,  was  sunk  by  a torpedo.  To  the  force  advanc- 
ing by  land  no  resistance  was  made  by  the  garrison,  commanded  by 
Ccflonel  [William  B.]  Creasman,  of  the  Twenty-ninth  North  Carolina 
Begiment. 

I have  introduced  my  dispatch  of  May  14  into  this  report  because 
(xcneral  Pemberton,  after  stating  that  it  was  not  received  until  after  the 
battle  of  Baker’s  Creek,  claims  that,  although  lie  had  not  acted  on  those 
instructions,  tlie  letter  suggested  tlie  very  movement  he  had  made  and 
for  the  same  ])nrpose.  When  the  enemy  was  at  Jackson,  the  letter 
suggested  a movement  for  the  sole  purpose  of  dislodging  him,  and  so 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


247 


stated.  General  Pemberton’s  march,  with  wliatever  |)urx)ose  made,  was 
begun  after  the  enemy  had  abandoned  Jackson  and  was  almost  in  his 
presence. 

My  order  of  the  15th,  at  which  time  I should  have  joined  General 
Pemberton  to  take  immediate  command  of  the  main  army,  but  that  I 
was  still  too  weak  to  attempt  such  a ride,  which  was  received  by  him 
very  early  on  the  morning  of  the  16th,  required  him  to  abandon  that 
movement.  Had  he  obeyed  it,  the  battle  of  Baker’s  Creek  would  have 
been  escaped. 

About  the  middle  of  January,  finding  the  cavalry  in  Mississippi 
inactive,  and  being  satisfied  by  the  representations  of  well-informed 
persons  acquainted  with  the  country  that  it  could  not  be  usefully 
employed  in  Mississippi  until  late  in  the  spring,  and  persuaded  that  a 
larger  cavalry  force  was  needed  to  cover  that  portion  of  Tennessee  from 
which  General  Bragg  was  drawing  his  supplies,  I transferred  about  two- 
thirds  of  the  cavalry  of  Mississippi  to  Tennessee.  By  this  transfer  from 
Mississippi,  at  a time  when  Grant  had  fallen  back  on  Memphis,  and 
Sherman  and  McClernand  had  been  repulsed  at  Vicksburg,  I gave 
strength  to  the  Army  of  Tennessee,  which  had  been  greatly  reduced  by 
the  engagements  near  Murfreesborough,  and  enabled  General  Bragg  to 
cover  the  country  and  secure  supplies  for  his  army. 

About  March  20,  General  Pemberton  applied  for  cavalry  for  the  pro- 
tection of  the  northern  part  of  the  State  during  the  planting  season,  but 
his  reports,  heretofore  referred  to,  indicated  that  the  enemy’s  forces 
were  to  be  employed  in  Tennessee  rather  than  in  Mississippi;  and  Van 
Dorn’s  cavalry  being  then  absolutely  necessary  to  hold  the  country  from 
which  General  Bragg  was  drawing  his  supplies,  I would  not  send  it,  and 
so  informed  General  Pemberton.  When  he  reported  that  Grant’s  army 
was  returning  to  Mississippi,  a strong  brigade  of  cavalry  was  ordered 
from  Tennessee  into  that  State. 

The  time  to  strike  the  enemy  with  the  best  hope  of  saving  Vicksburg 
was  when  he  was  landing  near  Bruinsburg.  To  do  this  with  any  pros- 
pect of  success,  a rapid  concentration  of  all  the  forces  should  have  been 
made  and  an  attack.  Under  this  conviction,  I telegraphed  to  General 
Pemberton  on  May  1,  from  Tullahoma : 


If  Grant’s  army  land  on  this  side  of  the  river,  the  safety  of  Mississippi  depends  on 

OCcltlllg  it.  rnrfcT  P.nQ.f  xmn  „ l „ j? 


For  that  object  you  should  unite  your  whole  force. 


And  again  on  May  2 : 


If  Grant  crosses,  unite  your  whole  force  to  beat  him.  Success  will  e ive  back  what 
was  abandoned  to  win  it. 


These  instructions  were  neglected,  and  time  was  given  to  Grant  to 
gam  a foothold  in  the  State.  At  Port  Gibson  and  Baymond  detach- 
ments of  our  troops  were  defeated  and  driven  back  by  overwhelmiim 
numbers  of  the  enemy.  ^ 

^ 13th,  when  I learned  that  there  were  four  divisions  of  the  enemy 

at  Clinton,  distant  20  miles  from  the  main  body  of  General  Pemberton’s 
forces,  I gave  him  orders  to  attack  them,  and  notified  him  that  we  could 
CO- operate.  This  order  General  Pemberton  disobeyed,  and  so  reported 
to  me  in  his  letter  of  the  17th.  It  directed  him  to  move  20  miles  to  the 
east,  to  co-operate  with  me  in  attacking  Sherman.  He  moved  to  the 
south,  and  made  our  co-operation  and  junction  impossible.  He  claims 
that  tins  order  compelled  him  to  make  the  advance  beyond  the  Big 
i>la(;k,  which  proved  so  disastrous.  Before  1 had  reached  Jackson,  anil 
letore  the  order  was  given,  General  Pemberton  made  his  first  advance 
legend  (east  of)  the  Big  Black,  to  Edwards  Depot..  After  the  receipt 


248 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chav.  XXX VI. 


of  tlie  order,  in  violation  of  it,  lie  made  his  second  and  last  advance  from 
that  point  to  the  field  of  Baker^s  Creek.  He  further  claims  that  this 
order  caused  the  subversion  of  his  “ matured  plans.”  I do  not  know 
what  these  plans  were,  but  am  startled  to  find  ‘‘  matured  plans  ” given 
up  for  a movement  in  violation  of  my  orders,  rejected  by  the  majority 
of  his  council  of  war,  and  disapproved  (as  he  states)  by  himself. 

On  the  12th,  he  wrote  me  that,  if  he  could  collect  force  enough,  Ed- 
wards Depot  would  be  the  battle-field.  The  battle  of  Baker’s  Creek 
was  fought  3 or  4 miles  from  Edwards  Depot.  The  presence  of  the 
enemy  was  reported  to  him  the  night  before.  There  was  no  apparent 
obstacle  to  prevent  his  resuming  his  original  position  and  carrying  out 
his  matured  plans.” 

It  is  a new  military  principle  that,  when  an  officer  disobeys  a posi- 
tive order  of  his  superior,  that  superior  becomes  responsible  for  any 
measure  his  subordinate  may  choose  to  substitute  for  that  ordered  ; 
but  had  the  battle  of  Baker’s  Creek  not  been  fought,  General  Pember- 
ton’s belief  that  Vicksburg  was  his  base  rendered  his  ruin  inevitable. 
He  would  still  have  been  besieged,  and,  therefore,  captured.  The  larger 
force  he  would  have  carried  into  the  lines  would  have  added  to,  and 
hastened,  the  catastrophe.  His  disasters  were  due  not  merely  to  his  en- 
tangling himself  with  the  advancing  columns  of  a superior  and  unob- 
served enemy,  but  to  his  evident  determination  to  be  besieged  in  Vicks- 
burg, instead  of  maneuvering  to  prevent  a siege. 

Convinced  of  the  impossibility  of  collecting  a sufficient  force  to  break 
the  investment  of  Vicksburg  should  it  be  completed,  appreciating  the 
difficulty  of  extricating  the  garrison,  and  convinced  that  Vicksburg  and 
Port  Hudson  had  lost  most  of  their  value  by  the  repeated  passage  of 
armed  A essels  and  transports,  I ordered  the  evacuation  of  both  places. 
General  Gardner  did  not  receive  this  order  before  the  investment  of 
Port  Hudson,  if  at  all.  General  Pemberton  set  aside  this  order  under 
the  advice  of  a council  of  war,  and,  though  he  had  in  Vicksburg  8,000 
fresh  troops,  not  demoralized  by  defeat,  decided  that  it  ‘‘  was  impossi- 
ble to  witlidraw  the  army  from  this  position  with  such  morale  and  ma- 
terial as  to  be  of  further  service  to  the  Confederacy,”  but  to  hold 
Vicksburg  as  long  as  possible,  with  the  firm  hope  that  the  Government 
may  yet  be  able  to  assist  me  in  keeping  this  obstruction  to  the  enemy’s 
free  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  Biver.”  Vicksburg  was  greatly  im- 
j)eriled  when  my  instructions  from  Tullahoma  to  concentrate  were 
neglected.  It  was  lost  when  my  orders  of  May  13  and  15  were  dis- 
obeyed. To  this  loss  were  added  the  labor,  i)rivations,  and  certain  ca])- 
ture  of  a gallant  army  when  my  orders  for  its  evacuation  were  set  aside. 

In  this  report  I have  been  compelled  to  enter  into  many  details  and 
to  make  some  animadversions  upon  the  conduct  of  General  Pemberton. 
The  one  was  no  pleasant  task;  the  other  a most  painful  duty.  Botli 
have  been  forced  upon  me  b^^  the  official  report  of  General  Pemberton, 
made  to  the  War  Department  instead  of  to  me,  to  whom  it  was  due. 

General  Pemberton,  by  direct  assertion  and  by  implication,  i>uts  upon 
me  the  responsibility  of  the  movements  which  led  his  army  to  defeat  at 
Baker’s  Creek  and  the  Big  Black  Bridge;  defeats  which  produced  tlic 
loss  of  Vicksburg  and  its  army. 

This  statement  has  been  circulated  by  the  press  in  more  or  less  detail, 
and  with  more  or  less  marks  of  an  official  character,  until  my  silence 
would  be  almost  an  acknowledgment  of  the  justice  of  the  cliarge. 

A proper  regard  for  the  good  opinion  of  my  Government  has  comiielled 
me,  therefore,  to  throw  aside  that  delicacy  which  I would  gladly  have 
observed  toward  a brother  ofiicer  suftering  much  undeserved  obloipiy. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


249 


and  to  show  that  in  his  short  campaign  General  Pemberton  made  not  a 
single  movement  in  obedience  to  my  orders  and  regarded  none  of  my 
instructions,  and,  finally,  did  not  embrace  the  only  opportunity  to  save 
Ids  army — that  given  by  my  order  to  abandon  Vicksburg. 

Most  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 

GeMeral. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Meridian,  December  6,  1863. 

Maj.  A.  P.  Mason,  Bichmond^  Ya. : 

Amend  my  report  by  inserting  after  force,’’  in  the  paragraph  begin- 
ning “ Small  as  was  this  force,”  the  words  about  24,000  infantry  and 
artillery.”  * Leave  the  remainder  of  the  paragraph  as  it  is  now. 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


No.  11. 


Reports  of  Lieut.  Gen.  John  G.  Pemberton,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding 
Department  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana,  of  operations  April 
^r-July  4. 

Headquarters, 
Gainesville,  Ala.,  August  25,  1863. 
General  : I have  the  honor  to  forward,  by  the  hands  of  my  aide-de- 
camp  (Lieut.  J.  H.  Morrison),  my  report  of  the  operations  previous  to 
and  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  together  with  the  reports  of  sub- 
ordinate commanders  and  Appendices  A,  B,  and  0.  The  report  is,  nec- 
essarily, very  voluminous,  but  as  brief  as  I could  make  it. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  0.  PEMBEETON, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  Richmond,  Ya. 


P.  S. — I leave  to-morrow  morning  for  Demopolis;  thence  to  Atlanta. 

[Incloaure.] 

Headquarters, 
Gainesville,  Ala.,  August  2,  1863. 

General  : At  the  earliest  moment  compatible  with  the  performance 
of  other  and  very  pressing  duties,  I have  the  honor  to  present  the  follow- 
ing report  of  the  operations  of  the  troops  in  the  Department  of  Missis- 
sippi and  Eastern  Louisiana  xireceding  and  during  the  siege  resulting  in 
the  capitulation  of  Vicksburg  : 

The  enemy,  after  long-continued  and  strenuous  efforts  to  reach  the 
right  flank  of  Vicksburg  by  forcing  a passage  through  the  Ux)per  Yazoo 
Eiver,  finally  relinquished  his  design,  and  on  the  night  of  Ai^ril  4 and  5 
re-embarked  his  troops,  and  before  daylight  was  in  raxnd  retreat.  About 
the  same  time  a heavy  force  of  the  enemy,  which  had  been  collected  at 
Baton  Eouge,  was  mostly  withdrawn  and  transferred  to  Western  Louis- 


8eo  p 242. 


250  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

iiimi,  leaving  but  one  division  to  occupy  that  place.  After  consultation 
by  telegrapb  with  Major-General  Gardner,  cominandiug  Port  Hudson 
and  the  Third  Military  District,  deeming  the  garrison  at  Port  Hudson 
more  than  sufficient  under  existing  circumstances,  and  to  save  supplies 
at  a point  so  difficult  to  provide,  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  Eiver 
being  then  obstructed  to  us,  and  the  mouth  of  Eed  Eiver,  from  whence 
large  quantities  of  subsistence  stores  were  drawn,  being  blockaded  by 
one  of  the  enemy^s  gunboats,  I ordered  [A.]  Eust’s  brigade  and  two  reg- 
iments, under  Brigadier- General  [A.]  Buford,  to  proceed  immediately 
to  Jackson,  Miss.,  with  the  then  view  of  employing  them  against  raids 
of  the  enemy  in  jSrorthern  Mississippi,  my  great  deficiency  in  cavalry 
leaving  that  portion  of  the  department  almost  without  protection. 

About  March  11,  fearing  that  the  enemy  might  succeed  in  opening  a 
canal  practicable  for  the  passage  of  transports  across  the  peninsula  op- 
posite Vicksburg,  I deemed  it  necessary  to  occupy  Grand  Gulf,  near  the 
mouth  of  the  Big  Black,  and  assigned  Brig.  Gen.  John  S.  Bowen,  with 
his  Missouri  brigade,  to  that  point,  with  instructions  to  construct  bat- 
teries for  the  protection  of  the  mouth  of  the  Big  Black,  and  as  a second- 
ary obstacle  to  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  Eiver.  General  Bowen 
was  also  directed  to  look  well  to  the  approaches  by  the  Bayou  Pierre. 
He  subsequently  informed  me  that  he  had  prepared  for  the  defense  on 
both  sides  of  the  bayou. 

On  the  22d,  five  heavy  guns  were  mounted  and  ready  for  service.  Two 
of  these  were  removed  from  the  batteries  at  Vicksburg,  and  three,  in- 
tended for  gunboats  being  built  in  the  Trans-Mississippi  Department, 
were  detained  by  my  order,  it  being  impracticable  to  obtain  them  else- 
where. At  the  same  time  the  enemy  commenced  his  movement  to  reach 
Vicksburg  by  the  Hushpuckanawand  Deer  Creek.  Another  expedition 
was  also  attempted  through  Steele’s  Bayou  via  Eolling  Fork  and  the 
Sunflower,  the  object  of  both  being  to  enter  the  Yazoo  Eiver  above 
Haynes’  Blufi:'.  In  these  designs  he  was  completely  baffled.  Many  of 
our  smaller  boats,  which  were  alone  fitted  for  the  navigation  of  these 
streams,  and  which  were  employed  in  the  transportation  of  supplies  for 
Vicksburg,  were  necessarily  diverted  from  this  purpose  to  transport 
troops  to  meet  and  repel  these  expeditions.  The  same  interruption  in 
the  transportation  of  supplies  was  also  of  constant  occurrence  during 
the  protracted  expedition  via  the  Yazoo  Pass. 

On  April  7, 1 received  a telegram  from  the  President,  inquiring  as  to 
the  practicability  of  sending  re-enforcements  to  General  Bragg  in  Mid- 
dle Tennessee,  and  directing  me  to  send  them  if  existing  circumstances 
in  the  department  would  admit  of  it. 

On  the  same  day  I informed  the  President  by  telegram  that,  in  my 
judgment,  it  was  not  safe  to  diminish  the  forces  in  this  department  at 
that  time. 

On  April  9, 1 telegraphed  General  S.  Cooper,  Adjutant  and  Inspector 
General,  as  follows: 

I aui  confident  that  few  re-enforcements,  if  any,  have  been  sent  to  Rosecrans  from 
Grant;  no  troops  whatever  are  reported  to  have  gone  above  the  month  of  the  Yazoo 
Pass.  I endeavor  to  keep  General  [J.  E.]  Johnston  advised  of  any  movement  whicli 
may  affect  his  army.  The  enemy  is  constantly  in  motion  in  all  directions.  He  ap- 
pears now  to  be  particularly  engaged  with  Deer  Creek  by  land  from  Greenville.  I 
have  forces  there  to  meet  him.  It  is  reported,  but  not  yet  confirmed,  that  a move- 
ment under  McClernand  in  large  force,  by  land,  is  in  progress  west  of  the  river  and 
southward.  I doubt  it.  My  operations  west  of  the  Mississi])pi  must  greatly  depend 
on  the  movement  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats.  I have  several  regiments  now  near  New 
Carthage.  I will  inform  yon  promptly  of  anything  imi)ortant,  and  if  I ascertain  that 
part  of  Grant’s  army  is  re-enforcing  Rosecrans,  will  dispatch  trooiis  to  General  John- 
ston as  rapidly  as  possible. 


Chat.  XXXYL] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


251 


Oil  A]nil  11,  1 a<4ain  telegraphed  General  Cooper,  Adjutant  and  In- 
spector General,  and  General  d.  E.  Johnston,  at  Tnllahoma,  as  follows  : 

A scout  from  Austiu  reports  that  forty  transports,  loaded  down,  hut  witliont  troops, 
passed  up  the  Mississippi  River  on  the  3d  and  4th  instant. 

Brigadier-General  Chalmers  reports  that — 

Ellet’s  Marine  Brigade  ijassed  up  the  Mississippi  on  the  7th.  The  same  evening  three 
gunboats  and  nineteen  transports  loaded  with  troops  passed  up,  tlie  last  ten  boats 
from  Tallahatchee,  20  miles  up  Coldwater,  on  Wednesday,  going  up.  I think  that 
most  of  Grant’s  forces  are  being  withdrawn  to  Memphis. 

On  the  same  day  I again  telegraphed  General  Johnston  as  follows : 

The  following  report  just  received:  Scout  Kemp  reports,  ‘‘Near  Byhalia,  on  the 
10th,  the  enemy  is  strengthening  his  guard  on  the  Memi)his  and  Charleston  Railroad. 
Twelve  thousand  troops  passed  Memphis  going  up  the  river  on  the  7th.  The  same 
day  fifty  pieces  of  artillery  were  landed  at  Memphis  and  taken  to  the  Memphis  and 
Charleston  depot.  Part  of  Grant’s  army  reported  to  bo  going  to  Corinth  and  down 
the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad;  the  balance  to  re-enforce  Rosecrans.” 

Lawson  reports  near  Memphis,  10th — 

Marine  Brigade  gone  up  the  Cumberland  River ; also  fourteen  transports  and  two 
gunboats  passed  ux)  the  river.  On  the  night  of  the  7th,  a coips  of  engineers  reached 
Meiux^his  from  below. 

Acting  on  these  and  other  corroborating  reports,  I said  to  General 
Johnston,  in  closing  my  dispatch,  “I  am  collecting  troops  here,  and  can 
send  you  4,000  at  once,  if  absolutely  necessary;”  and  accordingly  the 
brigades  of  Generals  Tilghman,  Bust,  and  Buford  were,  on  April  13, 
])laced  under  orders  to  move  with  dispatch  to  Tnllahoma,  while  General 
Vaughn^s  brigade  of  East  Tennesseeans  was  ordered  to  be  held  in  readi- 
ness to  move  at  short  notice.  Maj.  L.  Mims,  chief  ciuartermaster,  was 
instructed  to  furnish  the  necessary  transportation  as  speedily  as  possible, 
and  the  following  dispatch,  dated  April  12,  was  transmitted  to  General 
Johnston: 

I will  forward  troops  to  you  as  fast  as  transportation  can  be  furnished— about  8,000 
men.  Am  satisfied  Rosecrans  will  be  re-enforced  from  Grant’s  army.  Shall  I order 
trooi)s  to  Tnllahoma? 

On  April  15,  statements  made  by  persons  just  out  of  Memphis,  of 
which  I was  notified  by  telegraph,  indicated  that  the  retrograde  move- 
ment from  Vicksburg  was  probably  a ruse,  and  that  an  early  attack 
might  be  expected  on  that  place ; and  on  the  16th  I telegraphed  General 
Johnston  thus  : 

I can  send  you  only  two  brigades.  The  latest  information  induces  the  belief  that 
no  large  i)art  of  Grant’s  army  will  be  removed. 

On  the  same  day  General  Stevenson  was  directed  to  delay  the  move- 
ment of  [J.  0.]  Vaughn’s  brigade,  and  on  the  17th  Major  Mims,  chief 
quartermaster,  was  instructed  that  no  more  troops  would  be  forwarded 
in  the  direction  of  Tullahoma  until  further  orders.  General  Tilghman’s 
brigade  was  held  in  position  between  Jackson  and  the  Big  Black  Bridge, 
and  on  the  same  day  the  following  telegram  was  dispatched  to  General 
Cooper,  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

General  Stevenson  reports  that  eight  boats  attempted  to  pass  Vicksburg  last  night ; 
five  succeeded  in  passing,  one  was  burned  and  sunk,  and  two  disabled.  General 
Chalmers  reports  sixty-four  steamers  left  Memphis  on  the  15th  instant,  loaded  with 
tro()])s  and  negroes,  apparently  with  intention  of  making  an  assault  on  Vi<;ksburg. 
The  enemy  has  nine  boats  between  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson.  I cannot  send  ai'ty 
more  troops,  and  think  that  those  on  the  way  to  General  Johnston  should  come  back. 

General  Bowen,  at  Grand  Gulf,  was  immediately  advised  of  the  pas- 
sage of  the  boats  referred  to  in  the  above  dispatch,  and  instructed  to 


252 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


withdraw  his  troo})S  from  the  Louisiana  shore  at  the  first  favorable  op- 
])ortunity.  He  was  also  immediately  re-enforced  by  the  Sixth  Missis- 
sippi Regiment,,  the  First  Confederate  Battalion,  and  a field  battery. 

On  the  same  day  the  following  telegram  was  dispatched  to  General 
Johnston : 

The  troops  sent  you  were  taken  from  Port  Hudson — a brigade,  under  Brigadier- 
General  Buford,  aggregate  present  4,065.  The  enemy  has  nine  hoats  between  Vicks- 
burg and  Port  Hudson.  He  has  landed  forces  at  New  Carthage  from  Grant’s  army,  and 
can  re-enforce  them  to  any  extent.  He  can  use  his  nine  boats  to  cross  his  trooijs  to  this 
side.  The  arrival  of  General  Lorenzo  Thomas  has  changed  the  enemy’s  plans,  or  his 
movement  up  the  river  was  a ruse.  I ought  to  have  back  Buford’s  brigade ; certainly 
710  more  troops  should  leave  this  department.  A dispatch  from  Brigadier- General 
Chalmers  yesterday  says  sixty-four  boats  left  Memphis  since  Thursday,  loaded  with 
soldiers  and  negroes,  ostensibly  to  assault  Vicksburg. 

The  raft  in  the  Yazoo  at  Snyder’s  Mill  has  given  away,  and  is  entirely  destroyed. 
I am,  therefore,  compelled  to  strengthen  the  batteries  there  at  the  expense  of  Vicks- 
burg. 

General  Stevenson  reports  that  eight  boats  passed  the  Bend  last  night.  One  was 
burned  and  two  apparently  disabled  ; the  other  five  escaped  uninjured. 

Indications  of  an  attack  on  Vicksburg  are  so  strong  that  I am  not  warranted  in 
sending  any  more  troops  from  this  department. 

From  information  received  after  this  dispatch  was  sent,  I learned  that 
eight  of  the  enemy’s  most  formidable  gunboats,  besides  his  transports 
and  barges,  succeeded  in  passing  safely  on  the  16th. 

I found  it  a very  difficult  matter  to  obtain  the  necessary  hawsers  and 
chains  for  the  raft  in  the  Yazoo,  but  it  was  speedily  replaced  under  the 
active  and  energetic  supervision  of  Mr.  Thomas  Weldon. 

My  request  for  the  return  of  the  troops  forwarded  to  Middle  Tennes- 
see to  re-enforce  General  Bragg  was  immediately  complied  with.  A por- 
tion of  them,  however,  had  reached  Chattanooga ; the  remainder  were 
halted  by  telegraph  at  various  points  on  the  route,  and  the  whole  were 
restored  to  this  department  as  soon  as  was  practicable. 

The  enemy’s  vessels  of  war  occupying  the  river  between  Vicksburg 
and  Grand  Gulf,  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  operate  effectually  in  the 
Trans-Mississippi  Department  to  prevent  the  advance  of  the  enemy  to 
the  west  bank  of  the  river. 

On  April  17,  therefore,  I addressed  the  following  telegraphic  com- 
munication to  Oapt.  E.  Powell,  assistant  quartermaster  at  Natchez : 

Forward  the  foUowiug  to  Lieutenant-General  Smith  or  Major-General  Taylor,  viz  : 

‘‘For  the  want  of  the  necessary  transportation,  I cannot  operate  effectually  on  the 
west  bank  of  the  river  ; the  enemy  is  now  in  force  at  New  Carthage  and  Richmond. 
1 beg  your  attention  to  this.” 

Captain  Powell  notified  me  at  once  that  this  dispatch  had  been  for- 
warded by  courier. 

On  the  18th,  I addressed  a second  communication,  through  the  same 
medium,  as  follows : 

Lieutenant-General  Smith  or 

Major-General  Taylor:  , 

The  enemy  are  cutting  a passage  from  near  Young’s  Point  to  Bayou  Vidal,  to  reach 
the  Mississippi  River  near  New  Carthage.  Without  co-operation  it  is  impossible  to 
o])pose  him.  Inform  me  what  action  you  intend  to  take. 

To  these  communications,  and  to  a subsequent  one  of  April  22,  I re- 
ceived no  reply  until  after  the  capitulation  of  Vicksburg,  when  an 
acknowledgment  of  the  receipt  of  that  of  the  22d,  dated  May  20,  reached 
me. 

Ou  the  19th,  reports  of  raids  in  Northern  Mississippi  from  several 
])ointR  in  Tennessee  reached  me.  All  the  available  cavalry  north  of  the 
►Southern  Railroad  tvas  at  once  placed  at  the  disposal  of  Brigadier-Gen- 


Cnxr.  XXXVL] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


253 


erals  Ruggles  and  Chalmers,  commanding,  respectively,  the  First  and 
Fifth  Military  Districts,  which  embraced  all  the  northern  portion  of  the 
State  of  Mississippi,  and  both  were  notified  of  the  expected  raids.  Two 
companies  of  cavalry  of  WauFs  Legion  alone  were  ordered  to  report  to 
Brigadier- General  Barton  at  Warrenton.  One  of  these  marauding  ex- 
peditions, under  Colonel  [Brigadier- General]  Grierson,  which  crossed 
the  Tallahatchee  Eiver  at  New  Albany,  succeeded  in  passing  directly 
through  the  State,  and  eventually  joined  General  Banks’  forces  at  Baton 
Eonge,  La.  So  great  was  the  consternation  created  by  this  raid  that  it 
was  impossible  to  obtain  any  reliable  information  of  the  enemy’s  move- 
ments, rumor  placing  him  in  various  places  at  the  same  time. 

On  the  20th,  I addressed  the  following  telegram  to  General  Johnston : 

Can  yon  not  make  a heavy  demonstration  with  cavalry  on  the  Tallahatchee  toward 
Abbeville,  if  only  for  50  miles  ? The  enemy  are  endeavoring  to  compel  a diversion  of 
my  troops  to  Northern  Mississippi. 

The  same  day  the  following  communication  was  addressed  to  General 
Johnston, -in  response  to  one  from  him,  asking  if  I could  not  send  re- 
enforcements to  the  assistance  of  Colonel  [P.  D.]  Eoddey : 

I have  not  sufficient  force  to  give  any  efficient  assistance  to  Colonel  Roddey.  The 
enemy  are  advancing  from  Memphis  via  Herndon,  from  Grand  Junction  and  La  Grange 
via  Holly  Springs  and  Salem,  and  from  Corinth  via  New  Albany.  You  are  aware  that 
I have  but  a feeble  cavalry  force,  but  I shall  certainly  give  you  all  the  aid  I can.  I 
have  literally  no  cavalry  from  Grand  Gulf  to  Yazoo  City,  while  the  enemy  is  threaten- 
ing to  pass  the  river  between  Vicksburg  and  Grand  Gulf,  having  now  twelve  vessels 
below  the  former  place.  A gunboat  and  one  transport  passed  Austin  on  the  18th, 
having  in  tow  fifteen  flat-boats,  or  pontoons,  with  twenty-five  skitfs  on  them.  An- 
other transport  passed  Austin  on  the  19th,  towing  sixteen  flats,  or  pontoons. 

Brigadier-General  Euggles  was  directed  to  send  all  his  available  cav- 
alry, both  Confederate  and  State,  at  once  toward  Corinth,  as  a diversion 
in  favor  of  Colonel  Eoddey  5 General  Johnston  having  informed  me  that 
a superior  force  of  the  enemy  from  Corinth  was  in  front  of  Eoddey  at 
Tuscumbia,  and  desiring  me,  if  possible,  to  send  aid  to  the  latter.  Hav- 
ing no  available  cavalry  to  meet  the  raid  of  Grierson,  which  was  ravag- 
ing the  northern  portion  of  the  State,  I endeavored  to  employ  a portion 
of  Buford’s  brigade  (infantry),  then  returning  to  the  department,  and 
directed  the  commanding  officer  of  the  first  regiment,  on  his  arrival 
at  Meridian,  to  remain  until  further  orders,  to  firotect  the  most  impor- 
tant points  on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Eailroad,  and  thereby  succeeded  in 
saving  the  valuable  property,  machinery,  &c.,  at  Enterinise,  upon  which 
town  the  enemy  advanced  and  demanded  its  surrender,  but  Major-Gen- 
eral Loring  having  reached  there  with  a sufficient  force  of  infantry  in 
time,  their  object  was  frustrated.  The  enemy  had  previously  succeeded 
in  destroying  several  miles  of  the  track  of  the  Southern  Eailroad  west 
of  Chuukey  Eiver,  which  for  more  than  a week  greatly  delayed  the  trans- 
portation of  troop^  and  entirely  prevented  that  of  supplies  (except  by 
wagons)  from  our  depots  on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Eailroad. 

To  meet  these  raids  as  far  as  possible,  Major-General  Loring  was  i)laced 
in  command  of  all  the  troops  then  on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Eailroad. 
He  was  directed  not  to  leave  the  line  of  the  road  for  any  great  distance, 
to  keep  in  telegraphic  communication  with  me,  and  constantly  to  advise 
me  of  his  x)osition,  and  that,  operations  upon  that  line  being  minor  in 
importance  to  those  upon  the  Mississippi  Eiver,  his  troops  must  be  so 
disposed  as  to  enable  him  to  move  them  in  that  direction  at  a moimnit’s 
notice.  The  same  day  the  following  communication,  was  addressed  to 
General  Johnston  at  Tullahoma: 

Heavy  raids  are  making  from  Tennessee  deep  into  this  State.  One  is  reported  now 


254 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai‘.  XXXVI. 


Jit  Sturkville,  30  miles  west  of  Columbus.  Cavalry  is  indispensable  to  meet  these 
expeditions.  The  little  that  I have  is  on  the  field  there,  but  totally  inadequate. 
Could  you  not  make  a demonstration  with  a cavalry  force  on  their  rear  ? 

Another  expedition  having  been  reported  moving  across  the  country 
in  a southwesterly  direction  from  Pontotoc,  Brigadier-General  Feather- 
ston,  then  commanding  Fort  Pemberton,  on  the  Yazoo,  was  ordered  to 
move  without  delay  toward  Duck  Hill  or  Winona,  and  General  Tilgh- 
man,  then  at  Canton,  was  directed  to  hold  trains  in  readiness  to  move  to 
Winona  at  a moment’s  notice.  This  became  more  necessary,  as  a heavy 
column  of  infantry  as  well  as  cavalry  was  reported  moving  from  Mem- 
phis with  the  supposed  view  of  taking  possession  of  Grenada.  The  same 
day  the  following  communication  was  telegraphed  to  General  Cooper, 
Adjutant  and  Inspector  General : 

I have  so  little  cavalry  that  I am  compelled  to  divert  a portion  of  my  infantry  to 
meet  raids  in  Northern  Mississippi.  If  any  troops  can  possibly  be  spared  from  other 
departments,  I think  they  should  be  sent  here. 

Every  effort  was  made  by  me  to  provide  cavalry  to  arrest  Grierson’s 
raid;  also  to  accumulate  a force  for  operations  in  the  direction  of  War- 
renton  and  Grand  Gulf,  thinking  it  quite  as  probable  that  Grierson 
would  return  by  the  route  on  which  he  was  advancing  as  that  he  would 
continue  his  progress  southward. 

On  the  24th,  Brigadier-General  Chalmers,  at  Panola,  was  directed  to 
move,  with  all  his  cavalry  and  light  artillery,  via  Oxford,  to  Okolona,  to 
intercept  the  force  of  the  enemy  then  at  Newton  Station,  on  the  Southern 
Eailroad.  Captain  [Samuel]  Henderson,  commanding  special  scouts  at 
Grenada,  was  also  instructed  to  send  couriers  to  Generals  Boring,  Buford, 
and  Buggies,  notifying  those  officers  by  telegrams  from  the  nearest  tele- 
graph office,  and  advising  each  station  on  the  road,  that  the  enemy  had 
reached  Newton,  on  the  Southern  road.  A force  was  also  ordered  to 
proceed  from  Jackson  to  Forrest,  or  Lake  Station,  or  to  such  other  points 
as  circumstances  might  render  necessary.  Major-General  Gardner,  at 
Port  Hudson,  was  notified  that  the  enemy  had  reached  the  Southern  Bail- 
road — that  it  was  probable  he  would  endeavor  to  form  a junction,  with 
Banks  at  Baton  Bouge — and  was  instructed  to  send  all  his  dis])osablc 
cavalry  to  intercept  him.  Brigadier-General  Featherston,  with  his  bri- 
gade, then  at  or  en  route  for  Winona,  was  ordered  to  move  to  Grenada, 
if  there  was  any  approach  of  the  enemy  (as  was  reported)  from  the  north 
ou  that  place,  unless  he  was  also  threatened  by  an  advance  from  the  east. 
As  it  was  possible  that  Grierson’s  forces  might  return  by  Jackson,  such 
arrangements  as  my  means  allowed  were  made  to  defend  the  capital  of 
the  State.  Brigadier-General  Tilghman,  then  at  Canton,  was  authorized 
to  mount  one  of  his  regiments  at  that  place,  by  the  impressment  of 
horses  or  otherwise,  and  immediate  steps  were  taken  to  mount  the 
Twentieth  Mississippi  and  a detachment  of  the  Fourteenth  Mississippi,  ^ 
both  of  these  regiments  being  at  the  time  ou  duty  in  Jackson.  Similar  j 
authority  was  given  to  General  Boring,  then  on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio 
Bailroad,  to  mount  what  force  he*  could  on  that  line.  In  the  impress- 
ment of  horses,  and  their  necessary  equipments,  Maj.  B.  Mims,  chief 
quartermaster,  was  materially  aided  by  His  Excellency  the  Governor  of 
Mississippi,  who  was  also  earnestly  advised  to  mount  by  the  same  process 
a portion  of  the  State  troo])s  in  Northern  Mississippi.  All  the  cavalry  1 
could  thus  collect  south  of  tlie  Southern  Bailroad  was  placed  under  the 
orders  of  Col.  11.  V.  Bichardson  until  he  should  fall  in  with  (b)l.  Wirt  i 
Adams,  who  was  then  directed  to  assume  command  and  direct  the  move- 
ments of  the  whole. 


Chai‘.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


255  . 


On  the  28th,  it  was  ascertained  that  Grierson  was  continuing  his  move- 
ment south  of  Hazlehurst,  and  not  toward  Grand  Gulf  or  the  Black 
Bridge.  Colonel  [Wirt]  Adams  was  directed  to  follow  him  up  and  am- 
buscade him,  if  possible.  These  instructions  were  carried  out  as  far  as 
practicable,  and  resulted  in  a smart  skirmish  near  Union  Church.  Col- 
onel Adams’  force,  however,  was  too  weak  to  effect  anything  important. 
Grierson,  after  suffering  considerable  loss  by  an  ambuscade  farther 
south,  which  was  well  planned  and  executed  by  a cavalry  force  from 
Major-General  Gardner’s  command,  eventually  succeeded  in  joining 
General  Banks’  army  at  Baton  Eouge. 

I have  been  thus  circumstantial  in  reciting  the  incidents  connected 
with  this  celebrated  raid  that  I might  clearly  demonstrate  the  great  de- 
ficiency— I may  almost  say  absence — of  cavalry  .in  my  department,  and 
the  absolute  impossibility  of  protecting  my  com'munications,  depots,  and 
even  my  most  vital  positions,  without  it  j and,  further,  to  show  that  con- 
sequent upon  this  want  of  cavalry  I was  compelled  to  employ  infantry, 
and  thus  weaken  my  force  in  that  arm  at  other  important  points.  I 
wrote  to  General  Johnston  on  March  25,  urgently  requesting  that  the 
division  of  cavalry  under  Major-General  Yan  Dorn,  which  had  been  sent 
to  the  Army  of  Tennessee  for  special  and  temporary  purposes,  might  be 
returned  to  me. 

Under  date  of  Tullahoma,  April  3,  Col.  B.  S.  Ewell,  assistant  adju- 
tant-general, replied  to  my  request,  and  from  that  reply  I make  the 
following  extract : 

In  the  present  aspect  of  affairs,  General  Van  Dorn’s  cavalry  is  much  more  needed  in 
this  department  than  in  that  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana,  and  cannot  be  sent 
l)ack  as  long  as  this  state  of  things  exists.  You  have  now  in  your  department  five  bri- 
gades of  the  troops  you  most  require,  viz,  infantry,  belonging  to  the  Army  of  Tennessee. 
This  is  more  than  a compensation  for  the  absence  of  General  Yan  Dorn’s  cavalry  com- 
mand. 

I will  terminate  this  subject  with  the  following  telegram,  addressed 
to  General  Johnston  at  Tullahoma  on  April  27 : 

However  necessary  cavalry  may  be  to  the  army  in  Tennessee,  it  is  indispensable  for 
me  to  maintain  my  communications.  The  enemy  are  to-day  at  Hazlehurst,  on  the  New 
Orleans  and  J ackson  Railroad.  I cannot  defend  every  station  on  the  roads  with  in- 
fantry. I am  compelled  to  bring  cavalry  here  from  Northern  Mississippi,  and  thus 
the  whole  of  that  section  of  the  State  is  left  open ; further,  these  raids  endanger  my 
vital  positions. 

When  it  seemed  probable  that  the  enemy  would  succeed  in  opening 
a navigable  canal  across  the  peninsula  opposite  Vicksburg,  and  thus  to 
a great  extent  ^^void  the  batteries  established  there,  I directed  that 
Grand  Gulf  should  be  occupied,  and  as  many  heavy  guns  placed  in 
position  as  could  be  without  too  much  weakening  the  defenses  of  Vicks- 
burg. Believing  that  the  urgency  of  the  case  demanded  it,  I assumed 
the  responsibility  of  detaining  three  heavy  guns  en  route  for  tlie  Trans- 
Mississippi  Department,  and  withdrew  two  others  from  the  batteries  at 
Vicksburg.  Insufficient  as  I knew  this  battery  to  be,  it  was  the  heav- 
iest 1 could  place  there. 

Fort  Pemberton,  on  the  Tallahatchee,  then  occupied  our  attention. 
The  enemy  in  large  force,  by  land  and  water,  was  exerting  all  his  ener- 
gies against  that  position,  with  the  view  of  turning  the  right  flank  of 
Vicksburg,  and  every  available  gun  was  required  for  its  defense.  Tliis 
neo(^sity  continued  to  exist  until  tiie  fall  of  the  rivers  rendered  an 
apjuoacli  by  water  impracticable. 

Grand  Gulf  w[is  not  selected  as  a position  for  land  defense,  but  lor 
the  protection  of  the  mouth  of  the  Big  Black,  and  also  as  a precaution- 


256 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


ary  ineasurG  agaiust  tli6  passags  of  transports,  should  tho  canal  before 
referred  to  i)rove  a success,  which  then  seemed  highly  probable.  The 
necessary  works  were,  however,  constructed,  under  the  direction  of  Brig- 
adier-General Bowen,  to  defend  the  batteries  against  an  assault  from 
the  river  front  and^  against  a direct  attack  from  or  across  Big  Black. 
TVhen  however,  the  enemy  succeeded  in  passing  sufficient  transports 
to  cross  his  troops  from  the  west  bank  of  the  river  below  Grand  Gulf, 
there  being  a practicable  route  by  which  to  move  his  land  forces  trom 
above  Vicksburg  to  a point  nearly  opposite  Bruinsburg,  the  position  of 
Grand  Gulf  itself  lost  most  of  its  value ; but  so  great  were  his  facilities 
of  transportation  and  so  rapid  his  movements  that  it  was  impracticable 
to  withdraw  the  heavy  guns.  The  only  means  of  subsisting  an  army 
south  of  Big  Black  are  from  Vicksburg  or  Jackson,  the  former  requiring 
a transportation  by  dirt  road  of  40  and  the  latter  of  45  miles,  in  addition 
to  that  by  rail.  Without  cavalry  I could  not  have  protected  my  own 
communications,  much  less  have  cut  those  of  the  enemy.  To  have 
marched  an  army  across  Big  Black  of  sufficient  strength  to  warrant  a 
reasonable  hope  of  successfully  encountering  his  very  superior  forces 
would  have  stripped  Vicksburg  and  its  essential  flank  defenses  of  their 
garrisons,  and  the  city  itself  might  have  fallen  an  easy  prey  into  the 

eager  hands  of  the  enemy.  ^ ^ ^ 

The  enemy  having  succeeded,  on  the  night  of  April  16  (as  heretofore 
related),  in  passing  the  batteries  at  Vicksburg  with  a number  of  his  gun- 
boats and  transports,  and  the  report  of  a heavy  movement  to  the  south- 
ward on  the  Louisiana  shore  being  fully  confirmed,  I immediately  made 
the  necessary  dispositions  for  more  perfectly  guarding  all  points  between 
Vicksburg  and  Grand  Gulf,  and  re-enforced  Brigadier- General  Bowen 
with  Green’s  brigade,  the  Sixth  Mississippi  Eegiment,  the  First  Confeder- 
ate Battalion,  and  a battery  of  field  artillery.  Other  troops  were  collected 
on  the  line  of  the  railroad  between  Jackson  and  the  Big  Black  Bridge,  and 
measures  were  taken  to  get  the  troops  that  were  being  returned  from 
Middle  Tennessee  into  such  positions  that  they  could  be  readily  moved 
at  a moment’s  notice.  Major-General  Stevenson  was  directed  to  iilace 
5 000  men  in  easy  supporting  distance  of  Warreiitou,  in  addition  to  the 
brigade  already  there.  Major  [Samuel  H.]  Lockett,  my  chief  engineer, 

was  sent  to  Grand  Gulf.  -r>Tr-i 

On  the  22d,  I addressed  a communication  to  Lieut.  Ben.  B.  iVii  o> 
Smith,  acknowledging  the  receipt  of  one  from  him  of  the  15th  asking 
my  co-operation  on  the  west  side  of  the  Mississippi,  and  stating  my  ina- 
bility to  do  so  because  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  in  the  river  and  from 
want  of  transportation,  and  again  asking  his  co-operatioii  in  front  of 
Grand  Gulf  and  New  Carthage. 

The  following  telegram  was  addressed  to  Major-General  Stevenson  on 
the  23d : 


I consider  it  essentia.!  that  communications,  at  least  for  infantry,  should  be  made 
by  the  shortest  practicable  route  to  Grand  Gulf.  The  indications  now  are  that  the 
attack  will  not  be  made  on  yoiir  front  or  right,  and  all  troops  not  absolutely  necessary 
to  hold  the  works  at  Vicksburg  should  be  hold  as  a movable  force  for  either  V airen- 
ton  or  Grand  Gulf. 


On  the  28th,  Bri^adier  Oeneral  Bowen  te]cgra,phed  that  “ transports 
and  barges  loaded  down  with  troops  are  landing  at  Hard  Times,  on  the 
west  bank.” 

I immediately  replied  as  follows  : 


Have  you  force  enough  to  hold  your  position  ? If  not,  give  me  the  smallest  addi- 
ional  number  with  which  you  can.  My  small  cavalry  force  necessitates  the  use  ot 
nfautry  to  protect  important  points. 


Chap.  XXXVI.J 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


257 


Major-General  Loriug,  tlien  at  Meridian,  was  ordered  to  send  two  of 
liis  regiments  across  the  break  on  the  Southern  Eailroad,  near  Chiinkey 
Eiver,  and  Colonels  [M.]  Farrell  and  [A.  E.]  Eeynolds,  who  were  west 
of  the  break,  were  ordered  to  proceetj; immediately  to  Jackson.  Major- 
General  Buckner,  commanding  at  Mobile,  was  notified  that  I should 
look  to  him  to  assist  me  in  protecting  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Eailroad,  as 
I required  all  the  troops  I could  spare  to  strengthen  General  Bowen. 
Major-General  Gardner,  at  Port  Hudson,  was  also  ordered  to  move 
Gregg’s  brigade  rapidly  to  Jackson.  Brigadier-General  Tilghman,  then 
on  the  Mississippi  Central  Eailroad,  was  directed  to  move  promptly  with 
all  of  his  troops  (save  bridge  guards)  to  Jackson.  Major  [M.  E.]  Clark, 
commanding  at  Brookhaven,  was  instructed  to  send  couriers  to  all  cav- 
alry commanders  near  him,  ordering  them  to  move  toward  Grand  Gulf, 
with  directions  not  to  encounter  the  main  body  of  the  enemy,  but  to 
harass  him  in  the  rear  and  flank.  Similar  instructions  were  forwarded 
to  Osyka  and  Hazlehurst.  To  General  Johnston,  at  Tullahoma,  the  fol- 
lowing telegram  was  sent : 

The  enemy  is  at  Hard  Times,  La.,  in  large  force,  with  barges  and  transports,  indi- 
cating an  attack  on  Grand  Gulf,  with  a view  to  Vicksburg.  I must  look  to  the  Army 
of  Tennessee  to  protect  the  approaches  through  Northern  Mississippi. 

The  following  also  to  Major-General  Stevenson  at  Vicksburg  : 

Hold  5,000  men  in  readiness  to  move  to  Grand  Gulf,  and  on  the  requisition  of  Brig- 
adier-General Bowen  move  them.  With  your  batteries  and  rifle-pits  manned,  the  city 
front  is  impregnable. 

To  General  Bowen,  at  the  same  time,  the  following  was  sent : 

I have  directed  General  Stevenson  to  have  5,000  men  ready  to  move  on  your  requi- 
sition, but  do  not  make  requisition  unless  absolutely  necessary  for  the  safety  of  your 
position.  I am  also  making  arrangements  for  sending  you  2,000  or  3,000  men  from  this 
direction  in  case  of  necessity.  You  cannot  communicate  with  me  too  frequently. 

I believe  that  I fully  estimated  the  importance  of  preventing  an  ad- 
vance upon  Jackson,  if  it  could  be  done  without  sacrificing  Vicksburg; 
but  if  the  latter  was  lost,  the  former  was  comparatively  of  little  value. 
Vicksburg  might  still  be  held  with  Jackson  in  possession  of  the  enemy, 
but  it  was  the  hope  of  being  able  to  hold  the  position  on  Bayou  Pierre, 
upon  which  the  safety  of  Jackson  depends,  that  made  me  most  anxious 
to  re-enforce  General  Bowen,  or,  failing  in  that,  at  least  to  have  a suffi- 
cient force  at  hand  to  secure  his  retreat  across  the  Big  Black. 

On  April  30, 1 received  the  first  information  of  the  landing  of  the 
enemy  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Mississippi  Eiver.  General  Bowen  re- 
ported by  telegraph  that  3,000  Federal  troops  were  at  Bethel  Church, 
10  miles  from  Port  Gibson,  at  3 o’clock  on  the  evening  of  the  29th,  and 
that  they  were  still  landing  at  Bruinsburg.  Brigadier- General  Tracy, 
of  Stevenson’s  division,  had  reached  Grand  Gulf  with  his  brigade  on 
the  30th.  Lieutenant-Colonel  [William  1^.]  Brown,  of  the  Twentieth 
Mississippi,  with  50  mounted  men  of  his  regiment,  left  Jackson  for  the 
same  place  on  the  29th,  and  Maj.  J.  I).  Bradford,  a good  artillery  officer, 
was  sent  to  replace  the  lamented  Colonel  [William]  Wade,  as  chief  of 
artillery. 

Between  12  m.  and  2 p.  m.  on  the  30th,  Brigadier-General  Baldwin, 
with  his  brigade,  of  Smith’s  division,  had  crossed  the  Big  Black  at  Han- 
kinson’s  Ferry. 

At  9 a.  m.  May  1,  General  Bowen  informed  me  by  telegraydi,  his 
army  being  then  in  position  3 miles  south  of  Port  Gibson,  that  General 
Baldwin  was  entering  the  latter  place.  On  the  same  day  General 
Bowen  telegraphed  me  that  prisoners  taken  reported  McClernand  in 
17  R R — VOL  XXIV,  FT  I 


258 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CnAr.  XXX'n. 


command;  that  three  divisions  had  landed,  one  of  which  took  the  right- 
hand  road  from  Kodney,  and  that  the  enemy’s  force  was  estimated  at 
20,000  men.  He  adds,  however,  “I  disbelieve  the  report.”  At«3  p.  ai. 
the  same  day,  General  Bowen  advised  me  that  he  still  held  his  position, 
but  that  heVas  hard  pressed,  and  concluded  by  asking  when  Maj<;r- 
General  Boring  would  arrive.  In  reply,  he  was  notified  by  telegram  th  at 
another  brigade  from  Vicksburg  was  en  route  to  re-enforce  him,  and 
would  probably  reach  him  before  Major-General  Boring  could  arrive 
from  Jackson.  At  5.30  p.  m.  he  informed  me  that  he  was  falling  bac,k 
across  the  Bayou  Pierre,  and  that  he  would  endeavor  to  hold  that  posi- 
tion until  the  arrival  of  re-enforcements.  On  reaching  Eocky  Springs, 
about  18  miles  from  Grand  Gulf,  Major-General  Boring,  learning  that 
Brigadier- General  Bowen  had  fallen  back  before  a large  force  from  Port 
Gibson  in  the  direction  of  Grand  Gulf,  directed  two  regiments  and  a 
field  battery  of  Tilghman’s  brigade,  which  had  been  withdrawn  from  the 
Big  Black  Bridge,  to  move  as  rapidly  as  possible  to  Grindstone  Ford, 
and  hold  it  at  all  hazards,  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  flanking  Bow(m 
in  that  direction,  and  then  proceeded  himself  to  the  headquarters  of 
General  Bowen,  near  Grand  Gulf.  Major-General  Boring,  concurring 
with  General  Bowen  as  to  the  impracticability  of  holding  his  position 
with  so  small  a force,  directed  its  withdrawal  across  Big  Black  at  Han- 
kinson’s  Ferry. 

In  his  official  report  Major-General  Boring  says  : 

This  had  hardly  been  determined  upon,  when  your  communication  was  received, 
statinj;  that  the  army  had  fallen  back  toward  Grand  Gulf,  and  ordering  it  to  move  at 
once  out  of  its  position,  and  to  cross  the  Big  Black  at  Hankinson's  Ferry. 

The  movement  was  promptly  carried  out.  Previous  to  crossing  Gie 
river,  however,  Ool.  A.  W.  Eeynolds’  brigade,  of  Stevenson’s  division, 
had  arrived.  Not  having  heard  from  General  Bowen  after  5.30  p.  m. 
on  the  1st  instant,  I dispatched  him,  via  Eocky  Springs,  on  the  morning 
of  the  2d,  as  follows  : 

If  you  are  holding  your  position  on  the  Bayou  Pierre,  and  your  communication  is 
open  by  the  Big  Black  to  this  place,  continue  to  hold  it.  I am  informed  that  you  have 
fallen  back  to  Grand  Gulf.  If  this  is  so,  carry  out  my  instructions,  j ust  sent  in  cipher. 

These  instructions  were,  in  case  he  had  fallen  back  to  Grand  Gulf, 
which  is  a cul-de-sac^  to  destroy  his  heavy  guns  and  such  stores  as  could 
not  be  transported,  and  endeavor  to  retire  across  the  Big  Black.  The 
last  brigade  of  Major-General  Stevenson’s  division,  which  had  been  hur- 
ried forward  tore-enforce  Bowen,  with  the  hope  of  enabling  him  to  hold 
his  position  on  the  Bayou  Pierre,  or,  in  case  he  should  be  compelled  to 
fall  back,  to  protect  his  retreat,  had  not  all  arrived  when  the  retiring 
column,  under  Major-General  Boring,  commenced  crossing  the  Big  Black 
at  Hankinson’s  Ferry. 

For  the  details  of  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  the  list  of  casualties, 

I beg  to  refer  to  the  official  report  of  Brigadier-General  Bowen  and  the 
reports  of  his  subordinate  commanders,  which  I have  the  honor  to  trans- 
mit herewith,*  as  also  the  report  of  Major-General  Boring,  who  com- 
manded the  retreat  after  tlie  column  had  been  put  in  motion  by  Brig- 
adier-General Bowen. 

Among  the  slain  Avhom  the  country  deplores  I regret  to  mention  Brig. 
Gen.  E.  H.  Tracy,  a brave  and  skillful  officer,  who  fell  where  it  is  the 
soldier’s  pride  to  fall — at  the  post  of  duty  and  of  danger. 

Though  disastrous  in  its  results,  the  bloody  encounter  in  front  of  Port 


See  pp.  C57  et  seq. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


259 


Gibson  nobly  illustrated  the  valor  and  constancy  of  our  troops,  and  shed 
additional  luster  upon  the  Confederate  arms.  Confronted  by  overwhelm- 
ing numbers,  the  heroic  Bowen  and  his  gallant  officers  and  men  main- 
tained the  unequal  contest  for  many  hours  with  a courage  and  obstinacy 
rarely  equaled,  and  though  they  failed  to  secure  a victory,  the  world 
will  do  them  the  justice  to  say  they  deserved  it.  With  a moderate  cav- 
alry force  at  my  disposal,  I am  firmly  convinced  that  the  Federal  Army 
under  General  Grant  would  have  been  unable  to  maintain  its  commu- 
nications with  the  Mississippi  Eiver,  and  that  the  attempt  to  reach  Jack- 
son  and  Vicksburg  from  that  base  would  have  been  as  signally  defeated 
in  May,  1803,  as  a like  attempt  from  another  base  had  by  the  employ- 
ment of  cavalry  been  defeated  in  December,  1862. 

The  repulse  of  General  Bowen  at  Port  Gibson,  and  our  consequent 
withdrawal  to  the  north  bank  of  the  Big  Black,  rendered  it  necessary 
that  I should  as  rapidly  as  possible  concentrate  my  whole  force  for  the 
defense  of  Vicksburg  from  an  attack  in  the  rear  by  Grant^s  army,  which 
was  hourly  swelling  its  numbers.  Orders,  therefore,  were  immediately 
transmitted  to  the  officers  in  command  at  Grenada,  Columbus,  and  Jack- 
son  to  move  all  available  forces  to  Vicksburg  as  rapidly  as  possible. 

On  the  morning  of  the  3d,  two  of  the  enemy’s  barges,  loaded  with  hos- 
pital and  commissary  stores,  were  destroyed  in  attempting  to  pass  the 
batteries  at  Vicksburg. 

On  the  5th,  I telegraphed  General  Johnston  that— 

Six  thousand  cavalry  should  he  used  to  keep  my  communications  open,  and  that  the 
enemy  advancing  on  me  was  double  what  I could  bring  into  the  field. 

To  the  honorable  Secretary  of  War  I sent  the  following  telegram, 
under  date  of  May  6 : ^ ? 

General  Beauregard  sends  but  two  brigades,  perhaps  not  5,000  men.  This  is  a very 
insufficient  number.  The  stake  is  a great  one.  I can  see  nothing  so  important. 

On  the  7th,  the  President  notified  me  that  all  the  assistance  in  his 
power  to  send  should  be  forwarded,  and  that  it  was  deemed  necessary 
to  hold  Port  Hudson  as  a means  of  keeping  up  our  communications  with 
the  Trans-Mississippi  Department.  Major-General  Gardner,  who,  with 
Brigadier-General  Maxey  and  5,000  men,  had  previously  been  ordered 
to  Jackson  to  re-enforce  this  army,  was  immediately  directed  to  send 
Maxey’s  brigade  rapidly  forward,  and  to  return  himself  with  2,000  men 
to  Port  Hudson,  and  hold  the  place  at  all  hazards. 

On  the  7th,  indications  rendered  it  probable  that  the  enemy  would 
make  a raid  on  J ackson.  The  stafi*  departments,  therefore,  and  all  valu- 
able stores,  were  ordered  to  be  removed  east. 

In  the  mean  time  my  troops  were  so  disposed  as  to  occupy  the  War- 
renton  and  Hall’s  Ferry  road,  which  afibrded  great  facilities  for  concen- 
tration, and  various  positions  on  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road,  and  from 
tuence  between  Bovina  and  Edwards  Depot,  each  division  being  in  good 
supporting  distance  of  the  other.  Colonel  [T.  N.]  Waul,  commanding 
Fort  Pemberton,  was  directed  to  leave  a garrison  of  300  men  at  that 
place,  and  proceed  with  the  remainder  of  his  force  to  Snyder’s  Mill. 

On  the  10th,  information  was  received  from  a scouting  party  that 
vusited  Cayuga  and  Utica,  where  the  enemy  had  recently  been,  that  his 
cavalry  force  was  about  2,000,  and  that  he  was  supposed  to  be  moving 
in  Vicksburg.  My  dispositions  were  made  accordingly,  and  every  effort 
^as  used  to  collect  all  the  cavalry  possible.  Such  as  could  be  obtained 
jv'ere  placed  under  the  command  of  Col.  Wirt  Adams,  who  was  directed 
>0  harass  the  enemy  on  his  line  of  march,  cut  his  communications  wher- 
ever practicable,  patrol  the  country  thoroughly,  and  to  keep  Brigadier- 


260 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


General  Gregg  (who  bad  just  arrived  with  bis  brigade  from  Port  Hudson 
and  was  then  at  Raymond)  fully  advised  of  tbe  enemy’s  movements. 

On  tbe  lltb.  Brig.  Gen.  John  Adams,  commanding  at  Jackson,  was 
directed  to  burry  forward,  as  fast  as  they  could  arrive,  tbe  troops  from 
South  Carolina,  to  re-enforce  Brigadier-General  Gregg  at  Raymond.  At 
this  time  information  was  received  from  Brigadier-General  Tilgbman 
that  the  enemy  was  in  force  opposite  Baldwin’s  Perry,  and  Gregg  wa§ 
notified  accordingly,  and  informed  that  tbe  enemy’s  movements  were 
apparently  toward  tbe  Big  Black  Bridge,  and  not,  as  bad  been  sup- 
posed, against  Jackson. 

On  tbe  12tb,  tbe  following  was  addressed  to  Major-General  Stevenson ; 

From  information  received,  it  is  evident  tbe  enemy  is  advancing  in  force  on  Edwards 
Depot  and  Big  Black  Bridge;  hot  skirmishing  has  been  going  on  all  the  morning,  and 
the  enemy  are  at  Fourteen-Mile  Creek.  You  must  move  up  with  your  whole  division 
to  the  support  of  Loring  and  Bowen  at  the  bridge,  leaving  Baldwin’s  and  Moore  s 
brigades  to  protect  your  right. 

In  consequence  of  this  information,  Brigadier-General  Gregg  was  or- 
dered not  to  attack  tbe  enemy  until  be  was  engaged  at  Edwards  or  tbe 
bridge,  but  to  be  ready  to  fail  on  his  rear  or  flank  at  any  moment,  and 
to  be  particularly  cautious  not  to  allow  himself  to  be  flanked  or  taken 
in  tbe  rear.  Thus  it  wilt  be  seen  that  every  measure  bad  been  taken  to 
protect  Edwards  Depot  and  Big  Black  Bridge,  and,  by  ofiering  or  accept- 
ing battle,  to  endeavor  to  preserve  my  communications  with  tbe  east. 

At  tbis'juncture,  however,  the  battle  of  Raymond  was  fought  by  a 
large  body  of  tbe  enemy’s  forces  and  one  brigade  of  our  troops  under 
tbe  command  of  Brigadier-General  Gregg. 

I have  received  no  official  report  of  that  affair,  and  hence  cannot  say 
bow  it  was  fought  or  by  whom  tbe  engagement  was  brought  on.  Un- 
official information  represents  Brigadier-General  Gregg  and  bis  small 
command  to  have  behaved  with  great  gallantry  and  steadiness,  but  after 
an  obstinate  conflict  of  several  hours  they  were  finally  overwhelmed 
by  superior  numbers  and  compelled  to  retire.  Tbe  command  was  with- 
drawn in  good  order,  and  retired  to  Jackson. 

On  the  14tb,  a large  body  of  tbe  enemy  made  their  appearance  in 
front  of  Jackson,  tbe  capital  of  tbe  State.  After  some  fighting,  our 
troops  were  withdrawn,  and  tbe  enemy  took  possession  of  the  place ; 
but  as  General  Johnston  was  commanding  there  in  person,  bis  official 
report,  which  has  doubtless  gone  forward,  will  furnish  all  tbe  informa- 
tion required.  , x t i 

On  tbe  12tb,  tbe  following  telegram  was  sent  to  General  J.  E.  John- 
ston : 

The  enemy  is  apparently  moving  his  heavy  force  toward  Edwards  Depot^,  on 
Southern  Railroad;  with  my  limited  force  I will  do  all  lean  to  meet  him.  that 
will  be  the  battle-field  if  I can  carry  forward  sufficient  force,  leaving  troops  enough, 
1o  secure  the  safety  of  this  place  (Vicksburg).  Re-enforcements  are  arriving  very 
slowly,  only  1,500  having  arrived  as  yet.  I urgently  ask  that  more  be  sent ; also  that 
3,000  cavalry  be  at  once  sent  to  operate  on  this  line.  I urge  this  as  a positive  neces- 
sity The  enemy  largely  outnumber  me,  and  I am  obliged  to  hold  back  a large 
force  at  the  ferries  on  Big  Black  lest  he  cross  and  take  this  place.  I am  also  com- 
pelled to  keep  considerable  force  on  either  flank  of  Vicksburg  out  of  supporting  dis- 
tance. 

The  same  dispatch  was  also  sent  to  His  Excellency  President  Davis 
on  tbe  same  date. 

Tbe  divisions  of  Major-Generals  Loring  and  Stevenson  moved  Irom 
tbe  line  they  bad  occupied  between  Warrenton  and  Big  Black  Bridge 
to  Edwards  Depot,  General  Stevenson  being  directed  to  keep  well 
closed  upon  tbe  rear  of  General  Boring’s  column. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  GENERAL  REPORTS.  261 

On  tlie  evening  of  tlie  12tli,  I moved  my  headquarters  to  Bovina,  to 
be  nearer  the  scene  of  active  operations. 

The  command  arrived  at  Edwards  Depot  on  the  13th,  and  was  placed 
in  position,  covering  all  approaches  from  the  south  and  east,  in  the  fol- 
lowing order,  viz : Bowen  on  the  right,  Boring  in  the  center,  and  Ste- 
venson on  the  left.  This  position  was  occupied  from  the  night  of  the 
13th  until  the  morning  of  the  15th. 

On  the  13th,  the  following  dispatch  was  sent  to  General  Johnston : 

General  Forney  reports  from  Vicksburg  this  morning  four  transports  loaded  with 
troops  arrived  at  Young’s  Point  this  morning.  Five  regiments  and  a battery  passed 
down  by  Brown  & Johnston’s.  Wagon  trains  continue  to  pass  back  and  forth.  My 
re-enforcements  will  be  very  small  and  arrive  very  slowly.  If  possible,  Port  Hudson 
should  also  be  re-enforced.  I have  been  forced  to  draw  largely  from  there.  I have  no 
major-general  to  command  brigades  arriving  in  Jackson.  I am  in  position  with 
eight  brigades  near  Edwards  Depot. 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th,  while  on  my  way  to  Edwards  Depot  from 
Bovina,  I received  the  following  dispatch,  dated  May  13,  from  General 
Johnston,  then  at  Jackson: 

I have  lately  arrived,  and  learn  that  Major-General  Sherman  is  between  us,  with 
four  divisions,  at  Clinton.  It  is  important  to  re-establish  communications,  that  yon 
may  be  re-enforced.  If  practicable,  come  up  in  his  rear  at  once.  To  beat  such  a de- 
tachment would  be  of  immense  value.  The  troops  here  could  co-operate.  All  the 
strength  you  can  quickly  assemble  should  be  brought.  Time  is  all-important. 

I immediately  replied  as  follows  : 

Bovina,  May  14,  1863. 

I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  your  communication.  I move  at  once 
with  whole  available  force  (about  16,000)  from  Edwards  Depot,  leaving  Vaughn’s  bri- 
gade (about  1,500)  at  Big  Black  Bridge.  Tilghman’s  brigade  (1,500),  now  at  Baldwin’s 
Ferry,  I have  ordered  to  bring  up  the  rear  of  my  column ; ho  will  be,  however,  from 
15  to  20  miles  behind  it.  Baldwin’s  Ferry  will  be  left  necessarily  unprotected.  To 
hold  Vicksburg  are  Smith’s  and  Forney’s  divisions,  extending  from  Snyder’s  Mill  to 
Warrenton,  numbering  7,500  effective  men.  The  men  have  been  marching  several 
days,  are  much  fatigued,  and  I fear  will  straggle  very  much.  In  directing  this  move, 

I do  not  think  you  fully  comprehend  the  position  that  Vicksburg  will  be  left  in,  but 
I comply  at  once  with  jmur  order. 

The  “ detachment”  General  Johnston  speaks  of  in  his  communica- 
tion consisted  of  four  divisions  of  the  enemy,  constituting  an  entire  army 
corps,  numerically  greater  than  my  whole  available  force  in  the  field ; 
besides,  the  enemy  had  at  least  an  equal  force  to  the  south,  on  my  right 
flank,  which  would  be  nearer  to  Vicksburg  than  myself  in  case  I should 
make  the  movement  proposed.  I had,  moreover,  positive  information 
that  he  was  daily  increasing  his  strength.  I also  learned  on  reaching 
Edwards  Depot  that  one  division  of  the  enemy  (A.  J.“ Smith’s)  was  at 
or  near  Dillon’s.  This  confirmed  me  in  the  opinion,  previously  ex- 
pressed, that  the  movement  indicated  by  General  Johnston  was  ex- 
tremely hazardous.  I accordingly  called  a council  of  war  of  all  the 
general  officers  present,  and  placing  the  subject  before  them  (including 
General  Johnston’s  dispatch)  in  every  view  in  which  it  appeared  to  me, 
asked  their  opinions  respectively.  A majority  of  the  ofiicers  present 
expressed  themselves  favorable  to  the  movement  indicated  by  General 
Johnston.  The  others,  including  Major-Generals  Boring  and  Steven- 
son, preferred  a movement  by  which  the  army  might  attempt  to  cut  off 
the  enemy’s  supplies  from  the  Mississippi  Biver.  My  own  views  were 
strongly  expressed  as  unfavorable  to  any  advance  which  would  sepa- 
rate me  farther  from  Vicksburg,  which  was  my  base.  I did  not,  how- 
ever, see  fit  to  put  my  own  judgment  and  opinions  so  far  in  opposition 
as  to  prevent  a movement  altogether,  but  believing  the  only  ])ossibility 
of  success  to  be  in  the  plan  of  cutting  the  enemy’s  communications,  it 


262 


MISSISSIPPI;  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVX 


was  adopted,  and  the  following  dispatch  was  addressed  to  General 

Johnston  . Edwards  Depot,  May  14,  1863. 

I shall  move  as  early  to-morrow  morning  as  practicable  with  a cdumn  of  17,000 
men  to  Dillon’s,  situated  on  the  main  road  leading  from  Kaymond  to  Port  Gibson  ^ 
miles  below  Raymond  and  9i  miles  from  Edwards  Depot.  The  object  is  to  cut  the 
enemy’s  communications  and  to  force  him  to  attack  me,  as  I do  not  fojco 

sufficient  to  justify  an  attack  on  the  enemy  in  position  or  to  ^ 

to  Jackson.  At  this  point  your  nearest  communication  would  be  through  Raymond. 
I wish  very  much  I could  join  my  re-enforcements.  Whether  it  will  be  most  practi- 
cable  forthere-enforcemeuts  to  come  by  Raymond  (leaving  it  tbe 

cannot  be  made  through  Raymond)  or  to  move  them  west  along  the  line  ot  railroad 
(leavinglt  totbS  Snd  solth  of  the  line  of  march)  to  Bolton  Depot,  or  some  other 
point  west  of  it,  you  must  determine.  In  either  movement  I should  be  advised  as  to 
the  time  and  road,  so  that  co-operation  may  be  had  to 

come  through.  I send  you  a map  of  the  country,  which  will  furnish  you  with  a cor 
rect  view  of  the  roads  and  localities. 


Pursuant  to  tlie  plan  laid  down  in  this  dispatch,  the  army  was  put  m 
motion  on  the  15th,  about  1 p.  m.,  in  accordance  with  the  following 
order,  viz : 


Special  Orders,  ? Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  Eastern  Louisiana 

>.  — . 5 


No 


Edwards  Depot,  May  14,  1863. 

This  army  will  move  to-morrow  morning  (15th  instant)  in  the  direction  of  Raymond, 

on  the  military  road,  in  the  following  order  : of  1 mile  in 

I.  Col.  Wirt  Adams’  cavalry  will  form  the  advance  guard,  keeping  at  J 

advance  of  the  head  of  the  column,  tlirowmg  out  one  company  in  front  of  ^ 

and  a small  detachment  in  its  advance,  besides  the  flankers  upon  his  column,  when 

LOTffig’s  division  will  constitute  the  right  and  the  advance  in  the  line  » ^ “mrek 
He  will  throw  a regiment  of  infantry,  with  a section  of  artifleiy,  at 
in  his  front,  with  a company  of  infantry  at  least  75  yards  m its  advance,  all  v ith  t 

necessary  detachments  and  flankers.  -n -r  n moauio- fiivi^inn 

3.  Bowen’s  division  will  constitute  the  center,  and  will  follow  the 

4.  Stevenson’s  division  will  constitute  the  left,  bringing  up  the  rear  of  the  column. 

5.  The  artillery  of  each  brigade  will  march  m the  rear  of  their  brigade. 

6.  The  ambulances  of  each  brigade  will  follow  m the  rear  • 

7.  The  ordnance  wagons  of  each  division  will  follow  in  the  rear  of  their  division. 

8.  The  wagon  train  will  follow  in  rear  of  the  entire  column.  . 

9 Should  Tilghman’s  brigade  arrive  after  the  departure  of  the  columu,  it  will  c 
stitute  with  a field  battery,  tlie  rear  guard,  followiug  immediately  in  rear  of  the 

Accompany  of  Wirt  Adams’  cavalry  will  close  the  order  of  „„„„„ 

II.  The  wagon  train  will  follow  in  the  order  of  division;  that  is  to 

train  of  Loriug’s  division  on  the  right  of  the  train;  that  <>f  Bowen’s  division  m the 
center,  &o.  Quartermasters,  commissaries,  and  ordnance  officers  wili  reimim 
their  trains  unless  otherwise  ordered.  Straggling,  always 

particularly  forbidden.  Stringent  orders  wiil  be  issued  hy  the  t nnn^to  fSl 

to  prevent  this  evil.  The  rear  guard  is  especially  instructed  to  permit  no  one  to  fan 
to  the  rear  under  any  circumstances. 


A continuous  and  heavy  rain  had  made  Baker’s  Greek  impassable  bj 
the  ordinary  ford  on  the  main  Eaymond  road,  where  the  country  tedge 
had  been  washed  away  by  previous  freshets.  In 
the  march  was  delayed  for  several  hours,  but  the  water  not  falling  s 
flciently  to  make  the  creek  fordable,  the  column  was  directed  by  t - 
Olinton  road,  on  which  was  a good  bridge,  and,  after  passing  the  ere  ' 
upward  of  IJ  miles,  was  filed  to  the  right  along  a neighborhood  road 
so  as  to  strike  the  Kaymond  road  about  3 J miles  from  Bdv  ards  ^^1 
The  march  was  continued  until  the  head  of  the  column  had  pass 
Mrs.  Elliston’s  house,  where  it  was  halted,  ami  the  ^^nop®  bivouacke^ 
in  order  of  march.  1 made  my  headquarters  at  Mrs.  Elliston  s,  wher 
1 found  Maior-General  Boring  had  also  established  his. 

The  divisions  of  Generals  Stevenson  and  Bowen  having  ^een  on  t 
march  until  fiast  midnight,  and  the  men  considerably  fatigued-desiim, 


C«AP.  XXXVI.] 


GENEEAL  EEPOETS. 


263 


also  to  receive  reports  of  reconDaissances  made  iu  my  front  before  pro- 
ceeding farther — I did  not  issue  orders  to  continue  the  movement  at  an 
e.nrly  hour  the  following  morning. 

Immediately  on  my  arrival  at  Mrs.  Elliston^s  on  the  night  of  the  15th, 
I sent  for  Col.  Wirt  Adams,  commanding  the  cavalry,  and  gave  him 
tte  necessary  instructions  for  picketing  all  approaches  in  my  front,  and 
directed  him  to  send  out  scouting  parties  to  discover  the  euemy^s  where- 
abouts. I also  made  strenuous  efforts  to  effect  the  same  object  through 
citizens,  but  without  success.  IS'othing  unusual  occurred  during  the 
night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  16th,  at  about  6.30  o’clock,  Col.  Wirt  Adams 
reported  to  me  that  his  jiickets  were  skirmishing  with  the  enemy  on  the 
E aymond  road  some  distance  in  our  front.  While  in  conversation  with 
h/m,  a courier  arrived  and  handed  me  the  following  dispatch  from  Gen- 
eral Johnston : 

Canton  Eoad,  Ten  Miles  from  Jackson, 

May  15,  1863 — 8.30  a.  m. 

Our  being  compelled  to  leave  Jackson  naakes  your  plan  impracticable.  The  only 
mode  by  which  we  can  unite  is  by  your  moving  directly  to  Clinton,  informing  me, 
that  we  may  move  to  that  point  with  about  6,000  troops.  I have  no  means  of  esti- 
mating enemy’s  force  at  Jackson.  The  principal  officers  here  differ  very  widely,  and 
I fear  he  will  fortify  if  time  is  left  him.  Let  me  hear  from  you  immediately.  ‘ Gen- 
eral Maxey  was  ordered  back  to  Brookhaven.  You  probably  have  time  to  make  him 
join  you.  Do  so  before  he  has  time  to  move  away. 

I immediately  directed  a countermarch,  or  rather  a retrograde  move- 
ment, by  reversing  the  column  as  it  then  stood,  for  the  purpose  of  re- 
turning toward  Edwards  Depot  to  take  the  Brownsville  road,  and  thence 
to  proceed  toward  Clinton  by  a route  north  of  the  railroad.  A written 
reply  to  General  Johnston’s  instructions,  in  which  I notified  him  that 
tke  countermarch  had  been  ordered  and  of  the  route  I should  take,  was 
d/spatched  in  haste,  and  without  allowing  myself  sufficient  time  to  take 
a copy. 

Just  as  this  reverse  movement  commenced,  the  enemy  drove  in  Colo- 
onel  Adams’  cavalry  pickets,  and  opened  with  artillery  at  long  range 
ODi  the  head  of  my  column  on  the  Eaymond  road.  E^ot  knowing  whether 
this  was  an  attack  in  force  or  simply  an  armed  reconnaissance,  and 
being  anxious  to  obey  the  instructions  of  General  Johnston,  I directed 
the  continuance  of  the  movement,  giving  the  necessary  instructions  for 
securing  the  safety  of  the  wagon  train.  The  demonstrations  of  the  enemy 
soon  becoming  more  serious,  orders  were  sent  to  division  commanders 
to  form  in  line  of  battle  on  the  cross-road  from  the  Clinton  to  tlie  Kay- 
mond  road.  Boring  on  the  right,  Bowen  in  the  center,  and  Stevenson  on 
the  left.  Major-General  Stevenson  was  instructed  to  make  the  neces- 
sary dispositions  for  the  protection  of  the  trains  then  on  the  Clinton  road 
and  crossing  Baker’s  Creek.  The  line  of  battle  was  quickly  formed, 
without  any  interference  on  the  part  of  the  enemy.  The  position  selected 
was  naturally  a strong  one,  and  all  approaches  from  the  front  well  cov- 
ered. A short  time  after  the  formation  of  the  line,  Boring’s  division  was 
thrown  back  so  as  to  cover  the  military  road,  it  being  reported  that  the 
enemy  had  appeared  in  that  direction.  The  enemy  made  his  first  dem- 
onstration on  our  right,  but  after  a lively  artillery  duel  for  an  hour  or 
more,  this  attack  was  relinquished,  and  a large  force  was  tlirowui  against 
our  left,  where  skirmishing  became  heavy  about  10  o’clock,  and  the 
battle  began  in  earnest  along  Stevenson’s  entire  front  about  noon. 

Just  at  this  time  a column  of  the  enemy  were  seen  moving  in  front  of 
our  center  toward  the  right.  [John  C.j  Bandis’  battery,  of  Bowen’s 
division,  opened  upon  and  soon  broke  this  column,  and  compelled  it  to 


264 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CTiAr.  XXXYL 


retire.  I then  directed  Major-General  Loring  to  move  forward  and  crush 
the  enemy  in  his  front,  and  directed  General  Bowen  to  co-operate  with 
him  in  the  movement.  Immediately  on  the  receipt  of  my  message,  Gen- 
eral Bowen  rode  up  and  announced  his  readiness  to  execute  his  part  of 
the  movement  as  soon  as  Major-General  Boring  should  advance.  Ko 
movement  was  made  by  Major-General  Boring,  he  informing  me  that  the 
enemy  was  too  strongly  posted  to  be  attacked,  but  that  he  would  seize 
the  first  opportunity  to  assault,  if  one  should  offer.  The  enemy  still 
making  strenuous  efforts  to  turn  Major-General  Stevenson’s  left  flank, 
compelled  him  to  make  a similar  movement  toward  the  left,  thus  ex- 
tending his  own  line  and  making  a gap  between  his  and  Bowen’s  divis- 
ions. General  Bowen  was  ordered  to  keep  this  interval  closed,  and 
the  same  instructions  were  sent  to  General  Boring  in  reference  to  the 
interval  between  his  and  General  Bowen’s  division. 

General  Stevenson  having  informed  me  that  unless  re-enforced  he 
would  be  unable  to  resist  the  heavy  and  repeated  attacks  along  his 
whole  line,  Bowen  was  ordered  to  send  one  brigade  to  his  assistance, 
which  was  promptly  brought  forward  under  Col.  F.  M.  Cockrell,  and  in 
a very  short  time  his  remaining  brigade,  under  the  command  of  Brig. 
Gen.  Martin  E.  Green,  was  put  in,  and  the  two  together,  under  their 
gallant  leaders,  charged  the  enemy,  and  for  the  time  turned  the  tide  of 
battle  in  our  favor,  again  displaying  the  heroic  courage  which  this  vet- 
eran division  has  made  conspicuous  on  so  many  stricken  fields. 

The  enemy  still  continued  to  move  troops  from  his  left  to  his  right, 
thus  increasing  his  vastly  superior  forces  against  Stevenson’s  and 
Bowmen’s  divisions.  Feeling  assured  that  there  was  no  important  force 
in  his  front,  I dispatched  several  staff  officers  in  rapid  succession  to 
Major-General  Boring,  ordering  him  to  move  all  but  one  brigade  (Tilgh- 
man’s,  which  was  directed  to  hold  the  Baymond  road  and  cover  the 
bridge  and  ford  at  Baker’s  Greek)  to  the  left  as  rapidly  as  possible. 
To  the  first  of  these  messages,  sent  about  2 p.  m.,  answer  was  returned 
by  Major-General  Boring  that  the  enemy  was  in  strong  force  in  his  front, 
and  endeavoring  to  flank  him.  Hearing  no  firing  on  the  right,  I re- 
peated my  orders  to  Major-General  Boring,  explained  to  him  the  condi- 
tion of  affairs  on  the  left,  and  directed  him  to  put  his  two  left  brigades 
into  the  fight  as  soon  as  possible.  In  the  transmission  of  these  various 
messages  to  and  fro,  over  a distance  of  more  than  a mile,  much  valuable 
time  was  necessarily  consumed,  which  the  enemy  did  not  fail  to  tate 
advantage  of. 

About  4 i>.  m.  a ])art  of  Stevenson’s  division  broke  badly  and  fell 
back  in  great  disorder,  but  were  partially  rallied  by  the  strenuous  exer- 
tions of  myself  and  staff,  and  put  back  under  their  own  officers  into  ti  e 
fight,  but  observing  that  large  numbers  of  men  were  abandoning  the 
field  on  Stevenson’s  left,  deserting  their  comrades,  who  in  this  momeiit 
of  greatest  trial  stood  manfully  at  their  posts,  I rode  up  to  General 
Stevenson,  and  informing  him  that  I had  repeatedly  ordered  two  bri- 
gades of  General  Boring’s  division  to  his  assistance,  and  that  I was 
momentarily  expecting  them,  asked  him  whether  he  could  hold  h.s 
])Osition  5 he  replied  that  he  could  not;  that  he  was  fighting  from  60,0(i0 
to  80,000  men.  I then  told  him  I would  endeavor  myself  to  find  Gen- 
eral Boring  and  hasten  him  uj),  and  started  immediately  with  that  ole 
ject.  I presently  met  Brigadier-General  Buford’s  brigade,  of  Boring's 
division,  on  the  march  and  in  rear  of  the  right  of  Bowen’s  division. 

Colonel  Cockrell,  commanding  the  First  Missouri  Brigade,  having  in 
person  some  time  i)reviously  urgently  asked  for  re-enforcements,  which 
(none  of  Boring’s  troops  having  come  up)  I was  then  unable  to  giie 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


265 


him,  one  regiment  of  Buford’s  brigade  was  detached  at  once  and  di- 
rected to  his  support  j the  remainder  of  Buford’s  brigade  was  moved 
as  rapidly  as  possible  to  the  assistance  of  General  Stevenson. 

Binding  that  the  enemy’s  vastly  superior  numbers  were  pressing  all 
my  forces  engaged  steadily  back  into  old  fields,  where  all  advantages 
of  position  would  be  in  his  favor,  I felt  it  to  be  too  late  to  save  the  day, 
even  should  Brigadier-General  Featherston’s  brigade,  of  General  Bor- 
ing’s division,  come  up  immediately.  I could,  however,  learn  nothing 
of  General  Boring’s  whereabouts  j several  of  my  staff  were  in  search  of 
him,  but  it  was  not  until  after  General  Bowen  had  personally  informed 
me  that  he  could  not  hold  his  position  longer,  and  not  until  after  I had 
ordered  the  retreat,  that  General  Boring,  with  Featherston’s  brigade, 
moving,  as  I subsequently  learned,  by  a country  road  which  was  con- 
siderably longer  than  the  direct  route,  reached  the  position  on  the  left 
known  as  Champion’s  Hill,  where  he  was  forming  line  of  battle  when 
he  received  my  order  to  cover  the  retreat. 

Had  the  movement  in  support  of  the  left  been  promptly  made  when 
first  ordered,  it  is  not  improbable  that  I might  have  maintained  my 
position,  and  it  is  possible  the  enemy  might  have  been  driven  back, 
though  his  vastly  superior  and  constantly  increasing  numbers  would 
have  rendered  it  necessary  to  withdraw  during  the  night  to  save  my 
communications  with  Vicksburg. 

Early  in  the  day  Major  [Samuel  H.]  Bockett,  chief  engineer,  had  been 
instructed  to  throw  a bridge  across  Baker’s  Creek,  on  the  Eaymond  road. 
The  stream  had  also  fallen  sufficiently  to  render  the  ford  practicable. 
The  retreat  was  ordered  to  be  conducted  by  that  route,  and  a staff  offi- 
cer immediately  dispatched  to  Brigadier- General  Tilghman,  who  was 
directed  to  hold  the  Eaymond  road  at  all  hazards  j it  was  in  the  execu- 
tion of  this  important  trust,  which  could  not  have  been  confided  to  a 
fitter  man,  that  the  lamented  general  bravely  lost  his  life.  He  was 
struck  by  a fragment  of  shell  and  died  almost  instantly. 

Although,  as  before  stated,  a large  number  of  men  had  shamefully 
abandoned  their  commands,  and  were  making  their  way  to  the  rear,  the 
main  body  of  the  troops  retired  in  good  order. 

On  reaching  the  ford  and  bridge  at  Baker’s  Creek,  I directed  Brigadier- 
General  Bowen  to  take  position  with  his  division  on  the  west  bank,  and 
to  hold  the  crossing  until  Boring’s  division,  which  was  directed  to  bring 
up  the  rear,  had  effected  the  passage.  I then  i)roceeded  at  once  to  the 
intrenched  line  covering  the  wagon  and  railroad  bridges  over  the  Big 
Black,  to  make  the  necessary  arrangements  for  holding  that  point  during 
the  passage  of  the  river. 

In  his  official  report,  Major-General  Stevenson  says  : 

On  my  arrival,  about  sunset,  at  the  ford  on  Baker’s  Creek,  I found  that  the  enemy 
had  crossed  the  bridge  above,  and  were  advancing  artillery  in  the  direction  of  the  road 
[On  which  we  were  moving.  One  battery  had  already  taken  position  and  was  playing 
on  the  road,  but  at  right  angles,  and  with  too  long  a range  to  prevent  the  passage  of 
troops.  Here  I found  on  the  west  side  the  brigades  of  General  Green  and  Colonel 
Cockrell,  of  Bowen’s  division,  who  had  there  halted  and  taken  up  position  to  hold  the 
Vitil  boring’s  division  could  cross.  I found  Colonel  [Thomas  M.]  Scott,  of  the 
[Iwelfth  Louisiana  Regiment,  of  boring’s  division,  halted  about  half  a mile  from  the 
jtord,  on  the  east  side,  and  directed  him  to  cross.  I there  addressed  a note  to  General 
coring  informing  him  of  what  I had  done,  telling  him  of  .the  change  I had  caused 
colonel  Scott  to  make  in  his  position,  stating  that  with  the  troops  then  there,  and 
otiiers  that  I could  collect,  I would  hold  the  ford  and  road  until  his  division  could 
ross,  and  urging  him  to  hasten  the  movement.  To  this  note  I received  no  answer, 
•lit  in  a short  time  Colonel  Scott  moved  olf  his  regiment  quickly  in  the  direction  of 
:us  original  position,  in  obedience,  I was  informed,  to  orders  from  General  boring, 
interring  from  this  that  General  boring  did  not  intend  to  cross  at  that  ford,  he  having 


266 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


had  ample  time  to  commence  the  movement,  I suggested  to  General  Green  and  Colonel  i 
Cockrell  to  move  forward  to  the  railroad  bridge.  My  command  reached  that  point  at  / 
about  1 o’clock  that  night  and  bivouacked  near  Bovina. 

The  entire  train  of  the  army,  under  the  judicious  management  of  Col.  i 
A.  W.  Eeynolds,  commanding  Tennessee  Brigade,  of  Stevenson^s  di-  i 
vision,  was  crossed  without  loss,  though  the  movements  of  the  enemy  [ 
compelled  Colonel  Keynolds’  brigade  to  cross  the  Big  Black  above  the  t 
railroad  bridge. 

On  reaching  the  line  of  intrenchments  occupied  by  Brigadier-General  ; 
Vaughn’s  brigade  of  East  Tennesseeans  (Smith’s  division),  he  was  in-  ? 
structed  by  myself  in  person  to  man  the  trenches  from  the  railroad  to  i 
the  left,  his  artillery  to  remain  as  then  posted,  and  all  wagons  to  cross 
the  river  at  once.  Special  instructions  were  left  with  Lieut.  J.  H.  Mor- 
rison, aide-de-camp,  to  be  delivered  to  Generals  Loring,  Stevenson,  and 
Bowen,  as  they  should  arrive,  and  were  delivered  to  all  except  General 
Loring,  as  follows : 

General  Stevenson’s  division  to  cross  the  river  and  proceed  to  Mount 
Alban. 

General  Loring’s  to  cross  and  occupy  the  west  bank. 

Brigadier-General  Bowen’s  division,  as  it  should  arrive,  was  directed 
to  occupy  the  trenches  to  the  right  and  left  of  Vaughn’s,  and  his  artil- 
lery to  be  parked,  that  it  might  be  available  for  any  point  of  the  lines 
most  threatened. 

General  Stevenson’s  division,  arriving  very  late  in  the  night,  did  not 
move  beyond  Bovina,  and  I awaited  in  vain  intelligence  of  the  approach 
of  General  Loring.  It  was  necessary  to  hold  the  position  to  enable  him 
to  cross  the  river,  should  the  enemy,  which  was  probable,  follow  him 
closely  up. 

Eor  this  purpose  alone  I continued  the  troops  in  i)Osition  until  it 
was  too  late  to  withdraw  them  under  cover  of  night.  I then  deter- 
mined not  to  abandon  so  strong  a front  while  there  was  yet  a hope  of 
his  arrival. 

I have  not  up  to  this  time  received  General  Loring’s  report  of  the 
share  taken  by  his  division  in  the  battle  of  Baker’s  Creek,  nor  have  I 
yet  been  informed  of  the  reason  why  he  failed  to  rejoin  the  army  under 
my  command. 

The  Big  Black  Biver,  where  it  is  crossed  by  the  railroad  bridge,  makes 
a bend  somewhat  in  the  shape  of  a horseshoe.  Across  this  horseshoe, 
at  its  narrowest  part,  a line  of  rifle-pits  had  been  constructed,  making 
an  excellent  cover  for  infantry,  and  at  proper  intervals  dispositions  were 
made  for  field  artillery.  The  line  of  pits  ran  nearly  north  and  south, 
and  was  about  1 mile  in  length.  North  of  and  for  a considerable  dis- 
tance south  of  the  railroad  and  of  the  dirt  road  to  Edwards  Depot, 
nearly  parallel  with  it,  extended  a bayou,  which  in  itself  opposed  a seri- 
ous obstacle  to  an  assault  upon  the  pits.  This  line  abutted  north  on 
the  river  and  south  upon  a cypress- brake,  which  spread  itself  nearly  to 
the  bank  of  the  river. 

In  addition  to  the  railroad  bridge,  which  I liad  caused  to  be  floored 
for  the  passage  even  of  artillery  and  wagons,  the  steamer  Dot,  from 
which  the  machinery  had  been  taken,  was  converted  into  a bridge,  by 
iflacing  her  fore  and  aft  across  the  river.  Between  the  works  and  the 
bridge,  about  three-(piartcrs  of  a mile.,  the  country  was  open,  being  either 
old  or  cultivated  fields,  afl'ording  no  cover  should  the  troops  be  driven 
from  the  trenches.  East  and  south  of  the  railroad  the  topographical 
features  of  the  country  over  Avhich  the  enemy  must  necessarily  pass 
were  similar  to  those  above  described ; but  north  of  the  railroad  and 


OiAP.  XXXVI.]  GENERAL  REPORTS.  267 

about  300  yards  in  front  of  the  rifle-pits  a copse  of  wood  extended  from 
ti  )e  road  to  the  river. 

Our  line  was  manned  on  the  right  by  the  gallant  CockrelFs  Missouri 
brigade,  the  extreme  left  by  Brigadier-General  Green’s  Missouri  and  Ar- 
kansas men  (both  of  Bowen’s  division),  and  the  center  by  Brigadier- 
G eneral  V aughn’s  brigo  de  of  East  Tennesseeans,  in  all  about  4,000  men— 
a/\  many  as  could  be  advantageously  employed  in  defending  the  line — 
with  about  twenty  pieces  of  field  artillery.  So  strong  was  the  position, 
that  my  greatest,  almost  only,  apprehension  was  a flank  movement  by 
B ridgeport  or  Baldwin’s  Ferry,  which  would  have  endangered  my  com- 
n unications  with  Vicksburg.  Yet  this  position  was  abandoned  by  our 
t7  oops  almost  without  a struggle  and  with  the  loss  of  nearly  all  our 
attillery. 

I speak  not  now  of  the  propriety  nor  of  the  necessity  of  holding  this 
lK>sition.  I had,  as  heretofore  noticed,  my  object  in  doing  so.  I con- 
sidered that  object  sufficient,  and  I also  deemed  the  force  employed  for 
the  purpose  ample.  Brigadier-General  Vaughn’s  brigade  had  not  been 
engaged  at  Baker’s  Creek ; his  men  were  fresh,  and  I believed  were  not 
de  moralized.  I knew  that  the  Missouri  troops,  under  their  gallant  leaders, 
could  be  depended  upon. 

By  whose  order  the  battery  horses  were  so  far  removed  from  their 
guns  as  not  to  be  available  I do  not  know 5 it  certainly  was  not  by  mine. 
General  Bowen,  with  whom  I had  a personal  interview  in  his  tent  on 
the  night  of  the  16th,  and  who  received  his  instructions  from  my  own 
lips  (Lieutenant-Colonel  [L.  M.]  Montgomery,  of  Lieut.  Gen.  E.  Kirby 
Smith’s  staft*,  being  then  present  and  acting  as  my  aide-de-camp),  I 
do  not  believe  to  be  responsible  for  it.  He  was  too  old  and  too  good  a 
soldier.  Enough,  however,  will,  I think,  be  developed  in  a few  words 
to  cover  the  whole  case. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  17th,  the  enemy  opened  his  artillery  at 
loQg  range,  and  very  soon  pressed  forward  with  infantry  into  the  copse 
of  wood  north  of  the  railroad.  About  the  same  time  he  opened  on  Colo- 
nel Cockrell’s  position  with  two  batteries,  and  advanced  a line  of  skir- 
raiishers,  throwing  forward  a column  of  infantry,  which  was  quickly 
diriyen  back  by  our  batteries.  Pretty  heavy  skirmishing  was  for  a 
while  kept  up  along  our  whole  line,  but  presently  the  enemy,  who  had 
massed  a large  force  in  the  woods  immediately  north  of  the  railroad, 
ad^^anced  at  a run  with  loud  cheers.  Our  troops  in  their  front  did  not 
remain  to  receive  them,  but  broke  and  fled  precipitately.  One  portion 
of  iLe  line  being  broken,  it  very  soon  became  a matter  of  sauve  qui  pent. 

1 shall  only  add  with  reference  to  the  affair  of  Big  Black,  that  a strong- 
position,  with  an  ample  force  of  infantry  and  artillery  to  hold  it,  was 
shamefully  abandoned  almost  without  resistance. 

The  troops  occupying  the  center  did  not  do  their  duty.  With  an 
almost  impassable  bayou  between  themselves  and  the  enemy,  they  fled 
before  the  enemy  had  reached  that  obstacle. 

I have  received  no  report  from  Brigadier-General  Vaughn  of  the 
ojierations  of  his  brigade  on  this  occasion. 

Colonel  Cockrell  says  in  his  official  report : 

After  a lively  skirmish  fire  had  been  kept  up  for  some  time  along  our  whole  front,  I 
saw  the  line  between  the  railroad  and  first  skirt  of  timber  north  of  the  railroad  begin- 
niiigto  give  way  and  then  running  in  disorder.  I watched  this  disorderly  falling 
back  a few  minutes,  when  I saw  that  the  enemy  had  possession  of  the  trenches  north 
of  the  railroad  and  were  rapidly  advancing  toward  the  bridge — our  only  crossing  and 
w;ay  of  escape— the  enemy  now  being  nearer  this  crossing  than  my  line.  I therefore 
oraenid  the  brigade  to  fall  back,  and,  moving  rapidly,  gained  the  bridge,  crossed  over, 
anil  reformed  on  the  west  bank  of  the  river  north  of  the  railroad. 


268 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


fCHAP.  XXXYL 


Colonel  [Elijali]  Gates,  commanding  Second  Brigade,  Bowen’s  divis- 
ion, says  in  his  official  report : 

They  (the  enemy)  formed  their  men  on  the  river  in  the  timber,  where  we  could  not 
see  them.  They  brought  their  men  out  by  the  right  flank  in  column  of  fours,  about 
140  yards  in  front  of  my  regiment,  at  a double-quick.  I then  opened  a most  terrific 
fire  upon  them  and  kept  it  up  until  the  brigade  had  passed  out  of  my  sight  behind  a 
grove  of  timber  immediately  upon  my  right.  They  moved  so  as  to  strike  the  trenches 
occupied  by  General  Vaughn’s  brigade,  so  I am  informed.  I do  not  know  whose  troops 
were  there,  but  it  was  immediately  on  the  right  of  Green’s  brigade.  After  they  had 
passed  me,  I listened  for  our  men  to  open  a heavy  volley  on  my  right  and  drive  the 
enemy  back.  Upon  not  hearing  any  firing  on  the  right,  I directed  Lieutenant-Colonel 
[George  W.]  Law  to  mount  his  horse  and  go  to  General  Green,  and  know  whether  the 
center  was  holding  their  position  or  not.  Colonel  Law  returned  in  a few  minutes  and 
said  that  General  Green  ordered  me  to  fall  back.  I did  so  at  once.  After  I had  got 
back  below  the  bend  of  the  river,  I discovered  that  they  had  crossed  the  ditches  and 
were  between  me  and  the  bridge. 

In  this  precipitate  retreat  but  little  order  was  observed,  the  object 
with  all  being  to  reach  the  bridge  as  rapidly  as  possible.  Many  were 
unable  to  do  so,  but  effected  their  escape  by  swimming  the  river.  Some 
were  drowned  in  the  attempt;  a considerable  number,  unable  to  swim, 
and  others  too  timid  to  expose  themselves  to  the  fire  of  the  enemy  by 
an  effort  to  escape,  remained  in  the  trenches  and  were  made  prisoners. 

In  this  connection  I deem  it  my  duty  to  make  the  following  extract 
from  the  report  of  Colonel  Cockrell : 

Capt.  Thomas  B.  Wilson,  of  the  Second  Infantry,  Company  G,  claiming  to  have- 
been  exhausted,  did  not  go  with  his  company  into  the  battle  of  Baker’s  Creek,  and 
having  made  his  way  to  Big  Black,  joined  his  company  in  the  rifle-pits  early  on  the 
morning  of  the  17th  instant,  and,  when  his  company  was  ordered  to  fall  back,  aban- 
doned his  company  and  remained  lying  in  the  rifle-pits,  and  was  captured  by  the 
enemy,  and,  while  a prisoner,  stated  to  Col.  Elijah  Gates,  of  the  First  Missouri  Cav- 
alry, who  was  also  a prisoner,  that  he  (Captain  Wilson)  intended  to  take  the  oath  and 
then  go  to  fighting  the  enemy  as  a guerrilla.  Such  conduct  merits  a dismissal  in  dis- 
grace, and  such  an  officer  should  not  remain  in  the  way  of  gallant  and  efficient  officers 
now  commanding  his  company. 

In  this  opinion  I fully  concur. 

Neither  Brigadier- Generals  Bowen  nor  Green  had  furnished  reports 
of  the  action  on  Big  Black  previous  to  their  death;  to  the  former  had 
been  intrusted  the  defense  of  the  tete-de-pont,  and  he  had  received  my 
instructions  in  person ; the  latter  had  been  second  in  command.  Brig- 
adier-General Vaughn  having  failed  to  render  his  report,  I am  depend- 
ent for  the  particulars  of  the  action  upon  those  of  Colonels  Gates  and 
Cockrell,  which  are  respectfully  forwarded  herewith. 

Major  Lockett,  chief  engineer,  was  instructed  to  fire  both  bridges  after 
seeing  that  all  the  troops  had  crossed.  This  was  effectually  accomplislied 
under  his  personal  supervision.  The  guns  in  position  were  ample  for 
the  defense,  but  the  infantry  failing  to  support  them,  they  were  aban- 
doned. Such  as  were  not  in  position  were  safely  brought  from  the  field, 
placed  in  battery  on  the  bluff  on  the  west  bank,  and,  with  others  already 
established  and  a sufficient  force  of  infantry,  held  the  advancing  col- 
umns of  the  enemy  effectually  in  check. 

It  had  become  painfully  apparent  to  me  that  the  morale  of  my  army 
was  not  such  as  to  justify  an  attempt  to  hold  the  line  of  the  Big  Black 
Kiver.  Not  only  was  it  greatly  weakened  by  the  absence  of  General 
lioring’s  division,  but  also  by  the  large  number  of  stragglers,  who,  having 
abandoned  their  commands,  were  already  making  their  way  into  Vicks- 
burg. 

Tbe  enemy,  by  flank  movements  on  my  left  by  Bridgeport  and  on  my 
right  by  Baldwin’s  or  other  ferries,  might  reach  Vicksburg  almost  simul- 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


269 


taneouslj^  with  myself,  or  perhaps  interpose  a heavy  force  between  me 
and  that  city.  Under  these  circumstances  nothing  remained  but  to  retire 
the  army  within  the  defenses  of  Vicksburg,  and  to  endeavor  as  speedily 
as  possible  to  reorganize  the  depressed  and  discomfited  troops. 

Orders  w^ere  accordingly  issued  at  10  a.  m.,  and  Major-General  Steven- 
son directed  to  conduct  the  retreat,  which  w^as  executed  without  haste 
and  in  good  order.  I myself  proceeded  at  once  to  Vicksburg  to  prepare 
for  its  defense. 

I think  it  due  to  myself,  in  bringing  this  iiortion  of  my  report  to  a 
conclusion,  to  state  emphatically  that  the  advance  movement  of  the 
army  from  Edwards  Depot  on  the  afternoon  of  May  15  was  made 
against  my  judgment,  in  opposition  to  my  previously  expressed  inten- 
tions, and  to  the  subversion  of  my  matured  plans.  In  one  contingency 
alone  I had  determined  to  move  toward  Jackson  j the  safety  of  Vicks- 
burg was  of  paramount  importance  j under  no  circumstances  could  I 
abandon  my  communications  with  it.  A sufficient  force  must  also  be 
left  to  defend  the  river  front  of  the  city,  the  approaches  by  Chickasaw 
Bayou,  by  Snyder’s  Mill,  and  Warrenton  against  a coup  de  main.  My 
effective  aggregate  did  not  exceed  28,000.  At  least  8,000  would  be  re- 
quired for  these  purposes ; it  would  also  be  necessary  to  hold  the  bridges 
across  the  Big  Black,  on  the  line  of  the  Southern  Eailroad.  With  these 
deductions  my  movable  army  might  reach  18,500.  I give  this  number 
as  the  maximum. 

In  the  event,  therefore,  of  the  enemy  advancing  with  his  whole  force 
east  of  the  Mississipj)!  Eiver  against  Jackson,  my  communications  by 
the  shortest  line  being  open  would  have  enabled  me  to  move  upon  his 
rpr.  General  Johnston’sforces  and  my  own  might  have  formed  a junc- 
tion or  have  attacked  simultaneously  in  front  and  rear.  But  I did  not 
think  it  would  be  wise  to  attempt  to  execute  this  plan  until  the  arrival 
of  expected  re-enforcements  at  or  near  Jackson.  Hence  I received 
General  Johnston’s  instructions  on  the  morning  of  the  14th  to  move  to 
Clinton  with  all  the  force  I could  quickly  collect  with  great  regret ; and 
I well  remember  that  in  the  presence  of  one  or  more  of  my  staff  officers 
I remarked  in  substance,  Such  a movement  will  be  suicidal.”  Never- 
theless, notifying  General  Johnston  of  the  fact,  I took  measures  for  an 
advance  movement  at  once ; not,  it  is  true,  directly  toward  Clinton,  but 
m the  only  direction  which,  from  my  knowledge  of  the  circumstances 
surrounding  me,  I thought  offered  a possibility  of  success.  Had  I 
moved  directly  to  Clinton,  the  enemy  would  not  have  given  me  battle  in 
Iront,  but  would  have  interi)osed  a force  greater  than  my  own  between 
me  and  Vicksburg.  It  is  only  necessary  to  refer  to  the  maps  accom- 
panying this  report  * to  see  how  feasible  was  such  a movement. 

I have  already  given  in  the  body  of  this  report  the  two  letters  of  in- 
General  Johnston,  dated  respectively  May  13  and  15, 
IftOJ.  In  obedience  to  the  instructions  contained  in  the  former,  which 
was  received  on  the  morning  of  the  14th,  I lost  no  time  in  putting  my 
army  in  motion  in  the  direction  already  stated  and  for  the  reasons  given. 

About  7 a.  m.  on  the  16th,  I received  the  latter,  which  reiterated  tlie 
previous  instructions.  I had  in  no  measure  changed  my  views  as  to  the 
propriety  of  tbe  movement  therein  indicated,  but  I no  longer  felt  at 
liberty  to  deviate  Irorn  General  J ohnston’s  positive  orders.  He  had  been 
made  aware  of  my  views  and  did  not  sustain  them.  The  order  of  march 
was  at  once  reversed,  but  the  army  was  hardly  in  motion  before  it  be- 
lorm  lineot  battle  to  meet  the  greatly  superior  forces 

ot  the  enemy. 


To  .appear  in  Atlas. 


270 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX^  I. 


About  6 p.  m.  on  the  16thj  while  on  the  retreat,  the  following  (joia- 
munication  was  handed  to  me : 


Camp,  Seven  Miles  from  Jackson, 

May  14,  1863. 

General  : The  body  of  troops  mentioned  in  my  note  of  last  night  compelled  Bri  i- 
adier-General  Gregg  and  his  command  to  evacuate  Jackson  about  noon  to-day.  Tae 
necessity  of  taking  the  Canton  road  at  right  angles  to  that  upon  which  the  enen  ly 
approaches,  prevented  an  obstinate  defense.  A body  of  troops,  reported  this  morning 
to  have  reached  Raymond  last  night,  advanced  at  the  same  time  from  that  directioo. 
Prisoners  say  that  it  was  McPherson’s  corps  (four  divisions),  which  marched  from 
Clinton.  I have  no  certain  information  of  the  other ; both  skirmished  very  cautiousl  y. 
Telegrams  were  dispatched  when  the  enemy  was  near,  directing  General  Gist  to  a*- 
semble  the  approaching  troops  at  a point  40  or  50  miles  from  Jackson,  and  General 
Maxey  to  return  to  his  wagons  and  provide  for  the  security  of  his  brigade;  for  in- 
stance, by  joining  General  Gist.  That  body  of  troops  will  be  able,  I hope,  to  prevent 
the  enemy  in  Jackson  from  drawing  provisions  from  the  east,  and  this  one  may  be 
able  to  keep  him  from  the  country  toward  Panola.  Can  he  supply  himself  from  tiie 
Mississippi  ? Can  you  not  cut  him  off  from  it ; and,  above  all,  should  he  be  compelh  d 
to  fall  back  for  want  of  supplies,  beat  him  ? As  soon  as  the  re-enforcements  are  a 11 
up,  they  must  be  united  to  the  rest  of  the  army.  I am  anxious  to  see  a force  assembh  d 
that  may  be  able  to  inflict  a heavy  blow  upon  the  engmy.  Would  it  not  be  better  1 o 
place  the  forces  to  support  Vicksburg  between  General  Loring  and  that  place,  and 
merely  observe  the  ferries,  so  that  you  might  unite  if  opportunity  to  fight  prescmted 
itself  ? General  Gregg  will  move  toward  Canton  to-morrow.  If  prisoners  tell  the 
truth,  the  force  at  Jackson  must  be  half  of  Grant’s  army.  It  would  decide  the  cam- 
paign to  beat  it,  which  can  only  be  done  by  concentrating,  especially  when  the  re- 
mainder of  the  eastern  troops  arrive;  they  are  to  be  12,000  or  13,000. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 

It  will  be  observed  that  General  Johnston^s  letter  of  the  15th,  which 
caused  me  to  reverse  my  column,  with  a view  of  marching  to  Clinton, 
was  received  before  the  retreat  commenced,  and  about  eleven  houis 
earlier  than  the  one  of  the  14th,  just  presented.  I know  nothing  of  the 
causes  which  produced  this  result,  but  I respectfully  invite  attention  to 
the  fact  that  in  this  letter  of  the  14th  General  Johnston  suggests  the 
very  movement  which  I had  made,  and  for  the  purpose  I had  indicated. 
After  expressing  the  hope  that  certain  dispositions  made  by  himself 
might  prevent  the  enemy  from  drawing  provisions  from  the  east  or  from 
the  country  toward  Panola,  he  says  : 

Can  he  supply  himself  from  the  Mississippi?  Canyon  not  cut  him  off  from  it; 
and,  above  all,  should  he  be  compelled  to  fall  back  for  want  of  supplies,  beat  him  ? 

I have  introduced  General  Johnston’s  letter  entire,  that  the  contest, 
as  well  as  that  portion  to  which  I have  particularly  called  attention, 
may  be  considered.  I had  resisted  the  popular  clamor  for  an  advance, 
which  began  from  the  moment  the  enemy  set  his  polluting  foot  upon  the 
eastern  bank  of  the  Mississippi  Eiver.  I had  resisted  the  universal 
sentiment,  I believe  of  the  army — I know  of  my  general  officers — in  its 
favor,  and  yielded  only  to  the  orders  of  my  superior.  I was  not  invited 
by  General  Johnston  to  submit  my  plans  to  him  for  his  consideration  ; 
it  is,  therefore,  unnecessary  now  to  speak  of  them. 

One  of  the  immediate  results  of  the  retreat  from  Big  Black  was  the 
necessity  of  abandoning  our  defenses  on  the  Yazoo  at  Snyder’s  Mill. 
That  position  and  the  line  of  Chickasaw  Bayou  were  no  longer  tenable. 
All  stores  that  could  be  transported  were  ordered  to  be  sent  into  Vicks- 
burg as  rapidly  as  possible ; the  rest,  including  heavy  guns,  to  be  de- 
stroyed. 

There  was  at  this  time  a large  quantity  of  corn  (probably  25,000  or 
30,000  bushels)  on  boats,  much  of  which  might  have  been  brought  in 
had  it  been  possible  to  furnish  the  necessary  wagons.  The  boats  were 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


271 


sent  up  the  river.  Two  companies  were  directed  to  remain  at  Snyder’s 
Mill,  making  a show  of  force  until  the  approach  of  the  enemy  by  land 
should  compel  them  to  retire.  To  them  was  intrusted  the  duty  of  for- 
warding all  stores  possible  and  of  destroying  the  remainder.  This  de- 
tachment rejoined  its  command  in  Vicksburg  on  the  morning  of  the 
18th.  Every  precaution  was  taken  to  guard  the  important  approaches 
to  the  city  by  Forney’s  and  Smith’s  divisions,  while  the  troops  which  had 
been  engaged  in  the  battles  of  the  IGth  and  17th  were  bivouacked  in 
rear  of  the  intrenchments.  During  these  battles,  the  troops  of  Major- 
General  Forney’s  division  were  disposed  as  follows : Brigadier-General 
Hebert’s  brigade  occupied  the  line  along  the  Yazoo  Eiver,  from  Haynes’ 
Bluff  to  the  Mississippi,  including  the  approaches  by  Chickasaw  Bayou  ; 
Brigadier-General  [J.  0.]  Moore’s  brigade,  with  tlie  Mississippi  State 
troops  (under  General  [John  Y.]  Harris)  attached  (about  600),  guarded 
the  river  front  at  Warrenton  and  the  approaches  from  the  lower  ferries  on 
Big  Black  Eiver;  Brigadier- General  [F.  A.]  Shoup’s brigade,  of  Major- 
General  Smith’s  division,  guarded  the  river  front  of  the  city ; Brigadier- 
General  [W.  E.]  Baldwin’s  brigade,  with  [T.  IST.]  Waul’s  Legion  attached, 
guarded  the  approaches  to  the  city  from  the  Hall’s  Ferry  road  around 
to  the  railroad  bridge  on  the  Big  Black ; the  heavy  artillery  at  the  bat- 
teries on  the  river  front  under  Colonel  [Edward]  Higgins."  Brigadier- 
General  Moore’s  brigade  was  drawn  in  at  once  from  Warrenton,  and 
placed  in  the  intrenchments  on  either  side  of  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road. 
Brigadier-General  Hubert’s  brigade  arrived  before  daylight  on  the  18th, 
bringing  with  it  all  the  light  pieces,  and,  in  addition,  two  20-pounder 
Parrotts  and  a Whitworth  gun.  This  brigade  immediately  occupied 
the  intrenchments  on  both  sides  of  the  Jackson  road. 

On  the  morning  of  the  18th,  the  troops  were  disposed  from  right  to 
left,  as  follows : Major-General  Stevenson’s  division  of  four  brigades 
occupied  the  line  from  the  Warrenton  road,  including  a portion  oi  the 
river  front,  to  the  railroad,  a distance  of  about  5 miles ; Major-General 
Forney,  with  two  brigades,  the  line  between  the  railroad  and  the  Grave- 
yard road,  about  2 miles,  and  Major-General  Smith,  with  three  brigades 
(the  Mississippi  State  troops)  and  a small  detachment  from  Boring’s 
division,  the  line  from  the  Graveyard  road  to  the  river  front  on  the 
north,  about  IJ  miles.  Brigadier-General  Bowen’s  division  was  held  in 
reserve  to  strengthen  any  portion  of  the  line  most  threatened,  and  Waul’s 
Texas  Legion  (about  500)  was  in  reserve,  especially  to  support  the  right 
of  Moore’s  or  the  left  of  Lee’s  brigades.  On  the  entire  line  about  one 
hundred  and  two  pieces  of  artillery,  of  different  caliber,  principally  field, 
were  placed  in  position  at  such  points  as  were  deemed  most  suitable  to 
the  character  of  the  gun,  changes  of  location  being  made  when  occasion 
called  for  it.  An  engineer  officer,  under  the  supervision  of  Major 
Lockett,  chief  engineer  of  the  department,  was  assigned  to  each  divis- 
ion, with  an  assistant  to  each  brigade  commander.  Daily  reports  were 
made  through  the  proper  channel  to  Major  Lockett  of  the  operations  of 
the  engineer  department  and  of  the  progress  of  the  enemy’s  works. 
Major  Lockett  thus  kept  me  constantly  informed  of  all  important 
changes,  making  himself  a daily  report.  Instructions  had  been  given 
from  Bovina  that  all  cattle,  sheep,  and  hogs  belonging  to  private  par- 
ties, and  likely  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  should  be  driven 
within  our  lines.  A large  amount  of  fresh  meat  was  secured  in  this 
way.  The  same  instructions  were  given  in  regard  to  corn,  and  all  dis- 
posable wagons  applied  to  this  end. 

On  the  18th,  Col.  Wirt  Adams,  who  had  been  previously  directed  to 
cross  to  the  west  bank  of  the  Big  Black  with  all  his  cavalry,  was  noti- 


272 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CUAP.  XXXVI. 


fled  that  Snyder’s  Mill  would  be  abandoned,  and  that  he  was  expected 
to  operate  on  the  flank  and  rear  of  the  enemy,  with  the  view  of  cuttin.s^ 
oft*  his  supplies  in  that  direction.  Colonel  Adams’  force  was,  however, 
very  inadequate  to  this  purpose. 

During  the  night  of  the  17th,  nothing  of  importance  occurred.  Most 
of  the  artillery  was  speedily  placed  in  position  on  the  lines,  and  imme- 
diate measures  were  taken  to  arm  all  men  who  had  either  unavoidably 
lost  or  who  had  thrown  away  their  arms  on  the  retreat. 

General  Johnston  was  notified  on  the  17th  of  the  result  of  the  battles 
of  Baker’s  Creek  and  Big  Black,  and  informed  that  I had  in  consequence 
been  compelled  to  evacuate  Snyder’s  Mill. 

About  noon  of  May  18,  while  engaged  in  an  inspection  of  the  intrench- 
ments  with  Major  Lockett,  my  chief  engineer,  and  several  of  my  general 
ofQccrs,  the  enemy  was  reported  to  be  advancing  by  the  Jackson  road. 
Just  at  this  moment  the  following  communication  was  received  by 
courier : 

Camp,  between  Livingston  and  Brownsville, 

May  17,  1863. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : 

Your  dispatcli  of  to-day  by  Captain  [Thomas]  Henderson  was  received.  If  Haynes’ 
Blutt'  is  untenable,  Vicksburg  is  of  no  value  and  cannot  be  held.  If,  therefore,  you 
are  invested  in  Vicksburg,  you  must  ultimately  surrender.  Under  such  circumstances, 
instead  of  losing  both  troops  and  place,  we  must,  if  possible,  save  the  troops.  If  it 
is  not  too  late,  evacuate  Vicksburg  and  its  dependencies,  and  march  to  the  northeast. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 

General. 

The  evacuation  of  Vicksburg ! It  meant  the  loss  of  the  valuable  stores 
and  munitions  of  war  collected  for  its  defense  j the  fall  of  Port  Hudson ; 
the  surrender  of  the  Mississippi  Eiver,  and  the  severance  of  the  Confed- 
eracy. These  were  mighty  interests,  which,  had  I deemed  the  evacua- 
tion practicable  in  the  sense  in  which  I interpreted  General  Johnston’s 
instructions,  might  well  have  made  me  hesitate  to  execute  them.  I be- 
lieved it  to  be  in  my  power  to  hold  Vicksburg.  I knew  and  appreciated 
the  earnest  desire  of  the  Government  and  of  the  people  that  it  should  be 
held.  I knew,  perhaps  better  than  any  other  individual,  under  all  the 
circumstances,  its  capacity  for  defense.  As  long  ago  as  February  17 
last,  in  a letter  addressed  to  His  Excellency  the  President,  I had  sug- 
gested the  xiossibility  of  the  investment  of  Vicksburg  by  land  and  water, 
and  for  that  reason  the  necessity  of  amxfle  supplies  of  ammunition  as 
well  as  of  subsistence  to  stand  a siege.  My  application  met  his  favorable 
consideration,  and  additional  ammunition  was  ordered.  With  proper 
economy  of  subsistence  and  ordnance  stores,  I knew  that  I could  stand 
a siege.  I had  a firm  reliance  on  the  desire  of  the  President  and  of 
General  Johnston  to  do  all  that  could  be  done  to  raise  a siege.  I felt 
that  every  effort  would  be  made,  and  I believed  it  would  be  successful. 
With  these  convictions  on  my  own  mind,  I immediately  summoned  a 
council  of  war  composed  of  ali  my  general  ofticers.  I laid  before  them 
General  Johnston’s  communication,  but  desired  them  to  confine  the  ex- 
[)ression  of  their  opinions  to  the  question  of  iiracticability.  Having 
obtained  their  views,  the  following  communication  was  addressed  to 
General  Johnston: 

Hdqrs.  Department  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

Ficlcshnrg,  May  18,  1863. 

Geuenil  Joseph  E.  Johnston: 

General:  I have  the  bouor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communication,  in 
reply  to  mine  by  the  hands  of  Caiitain  [Thomas]  Henderson.  In  a subsequent  letter  of 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


273 


Bi??  ■'**  '“/omied  you  that  tbo  men  had  failed  to  hold  the  trenches  at 

.hmed  “ consequence,  Snyder’s  Mill  was  directed  to  ho  ahau- 

tar  of  th^  o-enersToffi^e"*  >0“,  I “semhled  a conneil  of 

Thtni  asl^^rfthe  freo^v^ro  • instructions  hefore 

them’ont  Vho  of  their  opinions  as  to  the  practicability  of  carrying 

/Irnw  The  opinion  was  unanimously  expressed  that  it  was  imposible  to  with^ 
diaw  the  array  from  this  position  with  such  morale  and  material  as  to  be  of  further 
service  to  the  Confederacy.  While  the  council  of  war  was  assembkd,  thrc^uns  of  tlm 

fn 1?^  reported  that  they  were  cross- 

• Brandon’s  Ferry,  above  Snyder’s  Mill.  I have  decided  to  hohl 
yn^to  possible,  with  the  firm  hope  that  the  Government  mav  yet  be 

M isissin^l  T?;^r  obstruction  to  the  enemy’s  free  navigation  of  the 

M issis^ppi  River.  I still  conceive  it  to  be  the  most  important  point  in  the  Confederacy. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  t.uuieie:y. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-General,  Commanding. 

The  development  of  the  intrenched  line  from  the  extreme  risfht  of 
Major-General  Stevenson’s  position  to  the  left  of  Major-General  Smith’s 
was  about  8 miles,  the  shortest  defensible  line  of  which  the  topography 
if  the  country  admitted.  The  plan  was  submitted  to  me  immediately 
liter  1 assumed  command  of  the  Department  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern 
Louisiana,  in  the  latter  part  of  October,  1862 ; was  approved,  and  ordered 
'?  earned  out  with  the  utmost  dispatch.  Similar  instructions  were 
i bout  the  same  time  given  for  fortifying  the  strong  position  at  SnydeFs 
Vlill,  and  the  land  defenses  of  Port  Hudson  were  also  ordered  to  be 
iommenced  at  once.*  The  line  of  defense  around  the  city  of  Vicksburg 
lonsisted  (as  is  shoivn  in  the  map  accompanying  the  report  of  Major 
o.  H.J  Lockett,  chief  engineer)  of  a system  of  detached  works  (redans, 
iiuettes,  and  redoubts)  on  the  prominent  and  commanding  points,  with 
he  usual  profile  of  raised  field  works,  connected  in  most  cases  by  rifle- 
iits.  To  man  the  entire  line,  I was  able  to  bring  into  the  trenches  about 
hghteeu  thousand  five  hundred  muskets,  but  it  was  absolutely  neces- 
■ary  to  keep  a reserve  always  ready  to  re-enforce  any  point  heavily 
hreatened.  It  became  indispensable,  therefore,  to  reduce  the  number 
a the  trenches  to  the  minimum  capable  of  holding  them  until  a re- 
orvo  could  come  to  their  aid.  It  was  also  necessary  that  the  reserve 
hould  be  composed  of  troops  among  the  best  and  most  reliable.  Ac- 
rbnn"/rn/p^®"'®“  ? division  (about  2,400)  and  Waul’s  Texas  Legion 
about  oOO)  were  designated  tor  that  purpose,  thus  reducing  the  force 
a the  trenches  to  little  over  15,500  men.  The  Legion  was  on  the  18th 

vTcSr*^  o division,  and  was  held  in  rear  of 

> feadier-General  Moore  s right,  but  on  the  evening  of  the  19th  was 
ansterred  to  Stevenson’s  division,  and  during  the  remainder  of  the 
no^nf  if  Brigadier-General  Lee’s  brigade,  occupying 

ne  of  the  most  exposed  and  important  positions  on  the  whole  lino  ^ 
On  the  night  of  the  17th,  and  during  the  18th,  Major-General  Smith 
iisapprohending  my  instructions  given  him  immediately  after  my  re- 
nni  irom  the  Big  Black,  had  occupied  an  outer  line  of  defense  oil  the 
ange  of  hills  north  of  the  Fort  Hill  road.  This  line  had  uXubtedly 

mmanded  one  of  our  most  important  river  batteries.  I considered 
owever,  that  the  increased  length  which  would  necessarily  be  "iven  to 

lie  whole  1.110  of  defense,  the  intervening  valley,  and  other  ob  Ltions  to 
nf  than  counterbalanced  the  advantages  ; the  trooiis 

■ hdrawn"  mu? r;  silently  and  safely 

' e rmn-d  ’.for  Jb?  ™ m occupied  the  inner  lino  during 
■w ?.  Uu  ' f * **  enemy,  however,  had  made  d iiring  the 

■»y  a demonstration  with  artillery  and  infantry  on  his  position,  and 

18  R R — VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


274 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


early  ou  the  morning  of  the  19th  he  occupied  the  abandoned  heights. 
During  the  day  there  was  constant  and  heavy  skirmishing  along  the 
left  of  our  center  on  the  Graveyard  road,  accompanied  with  brisk  ar- 
tillery fire.  In  the  afternoon  the  enemy  made  a charge  on  Smithes  right 
and  Dorney^s  left,  but  was  severely  repulsed,  losing  two  stand  of  colors. 
Later  their  sharpshooters  and  artillery  opened  heavily  on  the  Jackson 
and  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road. 

A courier  was  dispatched  with  the  following  telegram  to  the  Presi- 
dent : 

We  are  occupying  the  trenches  around  Vicksburg.  The  enemy  is  investing  it,  and 
will  probably  attempt  an  assault.  Our  men  have  considerably  recovered  their  morale, 
but  unless  a large  force  is  sent  at  once  to  relievo  it,  Vicksburg  before  long  must  fall. 
I have  used  every  effort  to  prevent  all  this,  but  in  vain. 

20th. — The  enemy  continued  to  move  from  our  right  with  heavy  can- 
nonading toward  the  center  and  left;  three  guns  temporarily  disabled. 
At  noon  the  mortar  fleet  of  Admiral  Porter  took  position  on  the  west 
side  of  the  peninsula,  and  commenced  the  bombardment  of  the  city. 

The  following  disi)atch  was  forwarded  by  courier  to  General  Johnston : 

The  enemy  assaulted  our  intrenched  lines  yesterday  at  two  points  (center  and  left.), 
and  was  repulsed  with  heavy  loss.  Our  loss  small.  I cannot  estimate  the  enemy’s 
force  now  engaged  around  Vicksburg  at  less  than  60,000 ; it  is  probably  more.  At 
this  hour  (8.30  a.  m.)  he  is  briskly  cannonading  with  long-range  guns.  That  we  may 
save  ammunition,  his  fire  is  rarely  returned.  At  present  our  main  necessity  is  musket- 
caps.  Can  you  send  them  to  me  by  hands  of  couriers  or  citizens?  An  army  will  be 
necessary  to  relieve  Vicksburg,  and  that  quickly.  Will  it  not  be  sent?  Please  let 
me  hear  from  you,  if  possible. 

21st — The  fire  from  the  mortar  fleet  continued  without  intermission, 
accompanied  by  heavy  musketry  and  artillery  fire  from  the  rear,  to 
which  but  slight  response  was  given.  Several  guns  were  dismounted, 
and  a number  of  officers  and  men  killed  and  wounded.  In  the  after- 
noon the  enemy’s  gunboats  steamed  up  and  threw  a large  number  of 
shells  into  the  city,  but  without  material  damage.  Anticipating  an 
attack  on  the  right,  General  Bowen  was  ordered  to  hold  his  command 
in  readiness  to  assist  the  threatened  point;  and  that  the  safety  of  the 
magazines  might  be  secured  from  the  possible  danger  of  disloyal  persons 
within  the  lines.  General  Stevenson  was  ordered  to  organize  a guard  for 
their  protection  from  among  the  most  reputable  of  the  citizens,  and  to 
place  the  guard  under  the  command  of  a commissioned  officer.  The 
])rospect  of  a protracted  siege,  and  the  uncertainty  as  to  how  many  as- 
saults we  might  have  to  repel,  and  in  view  of  the  possibility  of  having 
to  march  out  from  our  intrenchmeuts  to  meet  and  co-operate  with  an 
assisting  army  expected  under  General  Johnston,  rendered  it  a matter 
of  vital  importance  that  every  charge  of  ammunition  on  hand  should  be 
hoarded  witli  the  most  jealous  care.  The  amount  of  ammunition  in 
Vicksburg,  though  large,  would  not  have  sufficed  for  an  unlimited  daily 
expenditure  for  a protracted  fieriod.  The  importance  of  the  most  rigid 
economy,  therefore,  in  its  use  was  apparent,  and  strict  orders  were  con- 
sequently issued  against  all  picket  skirmishing  and  artillery  duels  where 
neither  served  any  useful  purpose.  These  orders  were  repeated  as  oc- 
casion required. 

It  being  impracticable  to  continue  feeding  the  large  number  of  mules 
and  horses  then  in  Vicksburg,  General  Stevenson  was  directed  to  have 
them  driven  beyond  the  lines  for  pasturage,  or,  if  i^racticable,  to  send 
them  in  charge  of  a detail  to  General  Johnston.  By  this  means  we 
were  relieved  of  a serious  incumbrance,  which  would  else  have  drawn 
heavily  upon  our  limited  supplies  of  forage. 


CHAr.  XXXVI.]  GENERAL  REPORTS.  275 

Anotlier  courier  was  to-day  sent  to  General  Johnston  with  the  fol- 
lowing dispatches: 

During  the  past  two  days  the  enemy  has  passed  up  the  river  in  transports  in  large 
force  for  a point  not  yet  discovered. 

The  enemy  has  continued  a spirited  fire  all  day;  also  his  shelling  from  mortar-boat.M. 
Our  men  have  replied  rarely.  Two  large  transports  came  down  loaded  with  troops. 
They  are  evidently  re-enforcing  their  present  large  force.  Am  I to  expect  re-enforce- 
ments ? From  what  direction,  and  how  soon  ? Have  you  heard  anything  from  Gen- 
eral Loriug  ? Can  you  send  me  musket-caps  hy  courier  ? 

The  enemy  kept  up  incessant  sharpshootiug  all  yesterday  on  the  left  and  center, 
and  picked  off  our  officers  and  men  whenever  they  showed  themselves.  Their  artil- 
lery fire  wa^very  heavy;  plowed  up  our  works  considerably,  and  dismounted  two 
guns  on  the  center.  The  works  were  repaired,  and  the  guns  replaced  last  nighli. 
The  great  question  is  ammunition.  The  men  credit  and  are  encouraged  by  a report 
that  you  are  near  with  a large  force.  They  are  fighting  in  good  spirits,  and  the 
reorganization  is  complete. 

P.  S.— Brisk  musketry  and  artillery  fire  to-day  on  center.  Three  guns  there  dim- 
mounted;  will  he  replaced  as  far  as  possible.  Officers  suffer  most  from  their  shar]ii- 
shooters.  Incessant  mortar-firing  from  the  river,  and  last  night  three  of  their  gun- 
boats engaged  the  lower  batteries. 

22  J. — The  fire  from  the  enemy’s  artillery  and  sharpshooters  in  the  rear 
was  heavy  and  incessant  until  noon,  when  his  gunboats  opened  upon 
the  city,  while  a determined  assault  was  made  along  Moore’s,  Hebert’is, 
and  Lee’s  lines.  I cannot  better  describe  this  assault  than  by  the  fol- 
lowing extracts  from  the  official  reports  of  my  several  division  com- 
manders. General  Stevenson  says  in  his  report : 

On  the  morning  of  May  22,  many  indications  showed  that  they  (the  enemy)  contem- 
plated an  assault  upon  the  line  of  General  Lee.  A tremendous  artillery  fire  was  openc  d 
and  kept  up  for  about  two  hours,  while  the  fire  of  their  large  force  of  sharpshootei  s 
was  heavy  and  incessant. 

At  about  1 p.  m.  a heavy  force  moved  out  to  the  assault,  making  a gallant  charge. 
They  were  allowed  to  approach  unmolested  to  within  good  musket  range,  whenever  p 
available  gun  was  opened  upon  them  with  grape  and  canister,  and  the  men,  rising  i o 
the  trenches,  poured  into  their  ranks  volley  after  volley  with  so  deadly  an  effect  tlial,, 
leaving  the  ground  literally  covered  in  some  places  with  their  dead  and  wounded,  the  v 
precipitately  retreated.  ^ 

The  augle  of  one  of  our  redoubts  having  been  breached  by  their  ar- 
tillery previous  to  the  assault,  when  the  repulse  occurred,  a party  of 
about  60  of  the  enemy,  under  the  command  of  a lieutenant-colonel,  made 
a rush,  and  succeeded  in  effecting  a lodgment  in  the  ditch  at  the  foot  of 
the  redoubt,  and  planted  two  colors  on  the  parapet.  It  was  of  vital 
importance  to  drive  them  out,  and,  upon  a call  for  volunteers  for  that 
purpose,  two  companies  of  Waul’s  Texas  Legion,  commanded,  respect- 
ively, by  Caiitain  [L.  D.]  Bradley  and  Lieutenant  [James]  Hogue,  ac- 
companied by  the  gallant  and  chivalrous  Col.  E.  W.  Pettus,  of  the 
Twentieth  Alabama  Eegiment,  musket  in  hand,  promptly  presented 
themselves  for  the  hazardous  service.  Of  their  success  and  the  mauner 
ill  which  it  was  achieved.  General  Stevenson  says: 

A more  gallant  feat  than  this  has  not  illustrated  our  annals  during  the  war.  Tl/e 
preparations  were  quietly  and  quickly  made,  but  the  enemy  seemed  at  once  to  divine 
our  purpose,  and  opened  upon  the  angle  a terrible  fire  of  shot,  shell,  and  musket rr.  | 
undaunted,  this  little  band,  its  chivalrous  commander  at  its  head,  rushed  upon  the 

ork,  and,  in  less  time  than  it  requires  to  describe  it,  it  and  the  flags  were  in  our  pos- 
session. Preparations  were  then  quickly  made  for  the  use  of  hand-grenades,  when 
luo  enemy  in  the  ditch,  being  informed  of  our  purpose,  immediately  surrendered. 

General  Forney  in  his  report,  speaking  of  the  assault  upon  our  in- 
irenchment,  says : 

On  May  22,  he  assaulted  three  xioints  on  my  line  as  follows  : Three  times  on  my  ex- 
;remo  Jelt,  and  extending  to  General  Smith’s  front;  twice  on  the  Jackson  road,  aiod 
i^wjce  on  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road,  at  11  a.  m.  and  5 p.  m. 


276 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


These  assaults  were  made  by  larger  bodies,  and  apparently  with  greater  determina- r 

tion,  than  those  of  May  19.  . , , ^ r.  i i ^ > 

Colonel  WanPs  Legion  had  previously  been  sent  to  General  Stevenson,  but  Green’s 
bri«»-ade  of  Bowen’s  division,  was  in  reserve  behind  niy  right,  and  assisted  in  repeil- 
ing^the  attack  at  that  point.  There  were  also  on  this  day  two  Louisiana  regiments 
of^Smith’s  division  in  reserve  behind  my  division. 

The  enemy  was  repulsed  in  each  of  his  attempts,  though  he  succeeded  in  getting  a. 
few  men  into  our  exterior  ditches  at  each  point  of  attack,  from  which  they  were,  how-i 
ever  driven  before  night.  Hand-grenades  were  used  at  each  point  with  good  effect., 
A color-bearer  and  two  stand  of  colors  were  captured  by  the  Second  Texas  Kegi-i 
ment,  of  Moore’s  brigade.  ^ , 

On  this  day  the  casualties  in  my  division  were  42  killed  and  9o  wounded,  the  lose 
of  the  enemy  must  have  reached  2,000.  0 

General  Smith,  in  his  report  of  this  assault,  says : 

The  22d  passed  in  the  same  manner  until  about  2 p.  m.,  when  a column  was  dis-: 
covered  advancing  against  the  right  of  Shoup’s  brigade.  It  was  immediately  driven, 
back.  Another  then  approached  on  the  right  of  the  center.  This  was  dispersed  with 
out  great  effort  and  with  considerable  loss.  Again  the  enemy  appeared  in  increased 
force  on  my  right  and  Forney’s  left.  He  was  promptly  repulsed  with  heavy  loss. 
This  terminated  the  day’s  operations,  with  the  exception  of  the  same  heavy  tire  ol 
musketry  and  artillery  kept  up  until  dark  along  my  entire  front.  After  these  severa 
decided  repulses,  the  enemy  seemed  to  have  abandoned  the  idea  of  taking  by  assault 
and  went  vigorously  at  work  to  thoroughly  invest  and  attack  by  regular  approaches 
and  the  history  of  one  day  is  pretty  much  the  history  of  all. 

23^.— This  (lay  was  unusually  quiet,  with  but  little  artillery  firing  unti 
late  in  the  afternoon.  The  sharpshooters  of  the  enemy  were  more  cau 
tious,  and  he  was  evidently  staggered  by  the  severe  repulse  of  the  da\ 
previous.  Many  of  his  dead  were  still  lying  unburied  in  sight  of  oai 
trenches.  The  fire  from  the  mortar- fleet  continued  heavy  and  incessant 
At  night  the  engineers  were  again  busily  engaged  in  repairing  the  workf 
in  front  of  Lee,  Moore,  and  Hebert,  which  were  badly  shattered. 

24:ih. — At  an  early  hour  the  mortar-fleet  opened  and  kept  up  a continu 
ous  and  heavy  bombardment  throughout  the  day.  Just  before  dark  th( 
artillery  from  the  rear  opened  a rapid  and  heavy  fire,  but  not  of  lon^ 
duration.  In  the  afternoon  the  enemy  attempted  to  mine  our  works  oi 
the  Jackson  road,  but  were  soon  driven  ofl‘  by  the  use  of  hand-grenades 
During  the  night  the  engineers  were  engaged  in  increasing  and  strength 
ening  our  works.  Before  daylight  our  river  pickets  captured  a barg 
laden  with  coal,  which  was  sunk,  it  being  found  impracticable  to  uii 
load  it. 

General  Stevenson  was  ordered  to  have  collected  all  the  ammunitioi 
scattered  in  front  of  our  trenches,  and  to  have  the  cartridge-boxes  of  tli 
enemy’s  dead  emfitied  of  their  contents,  it  being  important  to  add  i 
any  way  to  our  limited  supply  of  ammunition,  and  of  musket-caps 
pecially,  of  which  latter  we  stood  greatly  in  need,  having  one  millio 
more  of  cartridges  than  caps,  without  which  latter,  of  course,  the  forme 
could  be  of  no  possible  value. 

25t/L — The  enemy  appeared  in  force  to-day  on  the  Warrenton  au 
Hall’s  Ferry  roads.  The  firing  was  about  as  usual  until  G o’clock,  whe 
a cessation  of  hostilities  was  agreed  upon,  to  permit  the  enemy  to  bur 
Ills  dead,  killed  in  the  assault  of  Friday.  The  following  is  the  corn 
spondence  on  the  subject : 

Hdqrs.  Department  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

Viclishurg,  Miss.,  May  25,  1803. 

Commanding  General  United  States  Forces, 

In  Front  of  Viclishurg  : 

Sir  : Two  clays  luaving  elapsed  since  yonr  dead  and  wounded  have  been  lying  in  oi 
front,  and  as  yet  no  disi)Osition  on  your  part  of  a desire  to  remove  them  being  cxln  i 


ojiAP.  xxxvr.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


277 


iioura  ."m™!  InN'tSfi’f  vn?,  InYv  1“'“  ,*?  Propnse .a  cessation  ofliostilitiesfor two 

I IS  ami  <1  lialt,  tliat  jou  may  be  ena.bled  to  remove  your  dead  and  dviim  mpn  if 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 


J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieuicnani- General,  Conimanding. 


To  whicli  communication  the  following  reply  was  received  : 


Headquarteks  Department  of  the  Tennessee 

Lieut.  Geu.  J.  C.  PuMBKr.TON, 

Commanding  Confederate  Forces,  VicJcsburg,  Miss,: 

TiR'for^tC^In“rno"iir‘^  P^P^^’IS  » cessation  of  hostilities  for  two  hours  .aiul  a 
s ust  reecivnsit  winlfl-*?  so“  thede.a.l  and  wouiuled! 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

IJ.  S.  GRANT, 
Major-General. 


iul+',7wo^  the  day  about  100  prisoners  were  captured,  and  a worhino- 
wrty  was  sent  to  throw  up  obstructions  on  the  flat  below  the  city  nH 
f fhe special  note  occurred  between  this  date  ami  that 
Li  o.ri  ^ *7  enemy  evidently  was  discouraged  by  his  previous  fruit, 

^ss  and  costly  assaults  upon  our  works  in  the  rear,  and  ho  therefore 
V ,1  l?o®®*We,  to  attempt  to  silence  our  upper  battery,  and  tlien 

r'hic'Lool''*  ''^®*^^’*’ ,®“  morning  of  the  27th,  at  about  9 o’clock,  four 
iti  u , “‘^'^^/’^Siiged  our  lower  batteries;  at  the  same  time  the  Cincia- 

1 she  ^Lnf if guns 
dshed  boldly  down  the  river,  rounded  the  pcninsatl.a:  and  was  soon 

> engaged  with  our  upper  battery  at  short  rauge.  After  a si^iritod 
igagement  of  about  forty  .five  minutes,  the  Cincinnati  tas  femdered  a 
tmf  m escaped  total  destructiou  by  being  run  auround 

1 the  Mississippi  shrire,  where  she  is  probably  still  lyin|.  TIio'^^t 

.iSSh'illpoSS'S 

eadiff  n' comnW-'*''®®’  11  continued  to  wo^rk 

iMireonfff?^^  strengthening  his  line  of  circumvallation 

iiior  if  artiliery  was  continuous  during  each  day. 

J r [11.  Al.]  Mathews,  ordnance  officer,  was  instructed  to  Invo  tbf» 

nftoIHxforfJ  shells  scattereraround  tTe  c S 

It  to  1 axton’s  foundry  and  recapped. 

ir^aiid  enemy  opened  a terrific  fire  from  tlie 

v’ferkiisiJfl"  "'=‘S  Painert  upou  the 

rn’kifTsoldierff  ^’1"^  b'liblings,  killing  and  wounding  a large 

ri  -ed  nm  I citizens.  During  the  day  ]5llet’s  Marine  llrigadc 
yfl,  .Iiid  anchored  at  the  bend  above.  Two  couriers  Iiad  •iriivcd 
Ccneral  Johnston  on  the  28th  and  2!)th,  respectively.  The  former 


278 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 


brought  18,000  caps,  and  the  latter  20,000, 
the  first  received  since  the  18th  : 


and  the  following  dispatch, 


May  25,  18G5. 


Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  : , ^ ^ 

Mv  last  note  was  returned  by  the  bearer.  Two  hundred  thoupnd  caps  have  been  sent. 
It  wfll  b1  cotthmedls  they  a^rrive  . Bragg  is  sending  a clivision  When 
will  move  to  you.  Which  do  you  thinh  the  best  route  ? How  and  where  is  tlie  enemy 
encamped  ? What  is  your  force  ? 


J.  E.  JOHNSTON. 


The  200,000  caps  mentioned  in  the  above  dispatch  were  captured  by 
the  enemy.  I dispatched  the  following  in  reply : 


Your  (lispatcli  of  25tli  received  this  evening  with 
pyiug  all  rLds.  He  has  three  corps-ShermM  on  my  left, 

iiild  on  mv  riirht.  Hurlbut’s  division  from  Memphis  and  Ellet  s I 

rS  aSoa”^  EnoW  has  made  several  assanlts.  ^y  are  m ^ood  ^ 
your  arrival.  Since  investment  wo  have  lost  about  1,000  men  y ^ 

may  depend  on  my  holding  the  place  as  long  as  possible.  On  the  27th  we  sunk  one 

of  their  best  iron-clad  gunboats. 


On  the  30th,  I again  dispatched  as  follows : 


Scouts  report  the  enemy  to  have  withdrawn  most  of  his  forces  from  our  right  yes- 
terSea'rg  road  open,  I apprehend,  for  a movement  against  you.  1 

expect  this  courier  to  return  to  me. 


The  meat  ration  having  been  reduced  one-half,  that  of  ^ , 

beans  was  largely  increased.  It  was  important  above  all  t . & . ‘ 

every  cnconragemcnt  should  be  given  to  the  troops, 
in  view,  I ordered  the  impressment  of  chewing  tobacco  and  its  issue  t 
the  troops.  This  bad  a very  beneficial  infiuence.  The  enemy  Kepi 

steadily  at  work  day  and  night,  and,  U, 

the  hills,  had  run  his  parallels  up  to  withm  i5  yards  of  our  woiks.  Ui 
was  also  mining  at  different  points,  and  it  f 

stant  attention  of  our  engineers  to  repair  at  night  'J  “ 

upon  our  works  during  the  da,y,  and  to  meet  ' "iig' aiii 

counter-mining.  Orders  were  issued  to  prepare  thunder  barrels  an 
petards  for  the  defense  of  weak  points,  and  every  Precantion  was  takci 
to  check  the  enemy  in  his  operations  and  to  delay  them  as  fai  as  i 

On  .Tune  7,  the  following  dispatch  was  sent  to  General  Johnston : 

I am  still  witliont  information  from  Jon 'ater  than  yonr  disp.ate^^^^ 

enemy  continues  to  intrench  his  position  ^ ‘ i,„taro  still  in  goe 

to  yon  .almost  daily.  Tho  same  men  are  constimtly  m f are  sti^  ^ 

HpiritiS,  expecting  your  approach.  The  enemy  is  so  vigilant  ^Imt  . J]  , 
Xtain  rehahlo  rnformatimi.  When  may  I expect  you  to  move,  ami  iii  what  .hre. 
tion  ? My  subsistence  may  he  put  down  lor  about  twenty  (lays. 

On  tlie  lOtli,  I again  dispatebed  as  follows : 

The  enemy  homb.ard  day  and  night,  from  seven  '"?J-|'a:;"  7' 

Riila.  Ho  also  beeps  up  constant  hro  on  onr  lines  with  ; if  yo\ 

Wo  are  losing  many  officers  and  men.  ^ f or.  T slvill  endcuV' 

intentions.  Have  lieard  nothing  of  yon  nor  from  you  2,  J 

to  hold  out  as  long  as  wo  have  anytbmg  to  cat.  ^ swimmiim  aero 

wage  by  a courier  crossing  the  river  above  or  below  Vichshnrg  and  s^vimmi  „ 

again  opposite  Vicksburg? 

Again,  on  the  12th,  I dispatched  as  follows : 

Courier  AValker  arrived  this  morning  with  caps.  No  message  from  jon.  Ve 
heavy  firing  yesterday  from  mortars  and  on  lines. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


279 


About  this  time  our  provisions,  particularly  of  meat,  having  become 
almost  exhausted.  General  Stevenson  was  instructed  to  impress  all  cattle 
in  the  city,  and  the  chief  commissary  directed  to  sell  only  one  ration 
per  diem  to  any  officer.  He  was  also  instructed  to  issue  for  bread  equal 
portions  of  rice  and  flour,  four  ounces  of  each. 

About  the  13th,  Captain  Sanders  arrived  from  Jackson  via  Steele’s 
Bayou  with  200,000  percussion-caps,  and  a day  or  two  subsequent  I re- 
ceived the  following  dispatch  from  General  Johnston : 

May  29,  1863. 

I am  too  weak  to  save  Vicksburg.  Can  do  no  more  than  attempt  to  save  you  and 
your  garrison.  It  will  be  impossible  to  extricate  you  unless  you  co-operate  and  we 
make  mutually  supporting  movements.  Communicate  your  plans  and  suggestions,  if 
possible. 

On  the  14th  and  15th,  I addressed  General  Johnston  as  follows: 

ViCKSBUKG,  June  14,  1863. 

Last  night  Captain  Sanders  arrived  with  200,000  caps,  but  brought  no  information 
as  to  your  position  or  movements.  The  enemy  is  landing  troops  in  large  numbers  on 
Louisiana  shore  above  Vicksburg.  They  are  probably  from  Memphis,  but  it  may  be 
from  Yazoo;  I cannot  ascertain  positively.  On  the  Graveyard  road  the  enemy  has 
run  his  saps  to  within  25  yards  of  our  works.  He  will  probably  attempt  to  sink  a mine. 
I shall  try  to  thwart  him.  I am  anxiously  expecting  to  hear  from  you  to  arrange  for 
co-operation. 

Vicksburg,  June  15,  1863. 

The  enemy  has  placed  several  very  heavy  guns  in  position  against  our  works,  and 
is  approaching  them  very  nearly  by  sap.  His  tire  is  almost  continuous.  Our  men 
have  no  relief ; are  becoming  much  fatigued,  but  are  still  in  pretty  good  spirits.  I 
think  your  movement  should  be  made  as  soon  as  j^ossible.  The  enemy  is  receiving 
re-enforcements.  Wo  are  living  on  greatly  reduced  rations,  but  I think  sufficient  for 
t^renty  days  yet. 

The  enemy  bad  now  placed  in  position  on  the  peninsula  several  very 
lieavy  guns,  the  fire  of  which  was  very  destructive ; and  though  re- 
peated attempts  were  made,  we  could  not  succeed  in  silencing  them. 

On  the  19th,  the  following  telegram  was  sent  to  General  Johnston : 

The  enemy  opened  all  his  batteries  on  our  lines  about  3.30  o’clock  this  morning,  and 
continued  the  heaviest  tiro  we  have  yet  sustained  until  8 o’clock,  but  he  did  not  as- 
sault our  works.  Artillery  is  reported  to  have  been  distinctly  heard  about  2 a.  m. 
toward  and  east  of  Snyder’s  Mill,  supposed  to  have  been  an  engagement  with  your 
troops.  On  the  Graveyard  road  the  enemy’s  works  are  within  25  feet  of  our  redan; 
also  very  close  on  Jackson  and  Baldwin’s  Ferry  roiids.  I hope  you  will  advance 
with  the  least  possible  delay.  My  men  have  been  thirty-four  days  and  nights  in 
trenches,  without  relief,  and  the  enemy  within  conversation  distance.  We  are  living 
on  very  reduced  rations,  and,  as  you  know,  are  entirely  isolated.  What  aid  am  I to 
expect  from  you  ? The  bearer,  Captain  [G.  D.]  Wise,  can  be  confided  in. 

Oil  the  night  of  the  22d,  a party  from  Gumming’s  Georgia  brigade, 
Stevenson’s  division,  made  a gallant  sortie  on  the  Hall’s  Ferry  road,  and 
captured  a lieutenant-colonel  and  12  men,  with  their  intrenching  tools,  «&c. 

On  the  night  of  the  23d,  a heavy  skirmish  occurred  in  front  of  Cum- 
miug’s  line  for  the  possession  of  a picket  station,  which  resulted  in  the 
repulse  of  the  enemy. 

Under  date  of  the  21st,  the  following  dispatcli  was  sent  out  to  General 
Johnston : 

Your  dispatches  of  14th  aud  16th  received.  If  it  is  absolutely  impossible,  in  your 
opinion,  to  raise  the  siege  with  our  combined  forces,  and  that  nothing  more  can  be  done 
Lban  to  extricate  this  garrison,  I suggest  that,  giving  Jiie  full  information  in  time  to  act, 
you  move  by  the  north  of  the  railroad,  drive  jn  the  enemy’s  pickets  at  night,  and  at 
daylight  next  morning  engage  him  heavily  with  skirmishers,  occupying  hini  during 
the  entire  day,  and  that  on  that  night  I move  by  the  Warrenton  road  by  Hankinson’s 
Ferry,  to  which  i)oint  you  should  previously  send  a brigade  of  cavalry,  with  twm  field 
batteries,  to  build  a bridge  there  and  hold  that  ferry ; also  Hall’s  aud  Baldwin’s,  to 
cover  my  crossing  at  Hankinson’s.  I shall  not  ho,  able  to  move  Avith  my  artillery  or 


280 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX^L 


wagons.  I suggest  this  as  tbe  best  plan,  because  all  tlie  other  roads  are  too  strongly 
intrenched  and  the  enemy  in  too  heavy  force  for  a reasonable  prospect  of  success, 
unless  you  move  in  sufficient  force  to  compel  him  to  abandon  his  communication  with 
Snyder’s,  which  I still  hope  we  may  be  able  to  do.  I await  your  orders.  Captain 
[J.  M.]  Coui)er  understands  all  my  views,  and  will  explain  further. 

I insert  here  two  dispatches  from  General  Johnston  received  about 
this  time,  one  of  which  is  acknowledged  in  my  letter  above : 

June  14,  1863. 

All  that  we  can  attempt  is  to  save  you  and  your  garrison.  To  do  this,  exact  co- 
operation is  indispensable.  By  fighting  the  enemy  simultaneously  at  the  same  point 
of  his  line,  you  may  be  extricated.  Our  joint  forces  cannot  raise  the  siege  of  Vickfi;- 
burg.  My  communications  with  the  rear  can  best  be  preserved  by  operating  north  of 
railroad.  Inform  me  as  soon  as  possible  what  point  will  suit  you  best.  Your  dis- 
patches of  the  12th  received.  General  Taylor,  with  8,000  men,  will  endeavor  to  open 
communication  with  you  from  Richmond. 

June  22,  1863. 

Your  dispatch  of  the  15th  received.  General  Taylor  is  sent  by  General  E.  Kirby 
Smith  to  co-operate  with  you  from  the  west  bank  of  the  river,  to  throw  in  supplied, 
and  to  cross  with  his  force,  if  expedient  and  practicable.  I will  have  the  means  of 
moving  toward  the  enemy  in  a day  or  two,  and  will  try  to  make  a diversion  in  your 
favor,  and,  if  possible,  communicate  with  you,  though  I fear  my  force  is  too  small  to 
effect  the  latter.  I have  only  two-thirds  of  the  force  you  told  Messenger  Saunders  to 
state  to  me  as  the  least  with  which  I ought  to  make  an  attempt.  Scouts  report  the 
enemy  fortifying  toward  us  and  the  roads  blocked.  If  I can  do  nothing  to  relieve 
you,  rather  than  surrender  the  garrison,  endeavor  to  cross  the  river  at  the  last  momeiit 
if  you  and  General  Taylor  communicate. 

Late  in  the  afternoon  of  the  25th,  the  enemy  exploded  his  first  mine 
under  the  parapet  of  General  Forney’s  works.  In  his  official  report 
that  officer  says : 

The  explosion  effected  a breach,  through  which  the  enemy  immediately  attempted 
to  charge,  but  was  promptly  and  gallantly  repulsed.  The  Sixth  Missouri  Regimenf:, 
which  had  been  held  in  reserve,  was  on  the  spot  immediately  after  the  explosion,  and 
its  commander  (Cdl.  Eugene  Erwin)  was  instantly  killed  while  attempting  to  lead  a 
charge  over  the  works.  ' Six  men  of  the  Forty-third  Mississippi  Regiment,  who  weie 
in  a shaft  countermining  at  the  time  of  the  explosion,  were  buried  and  lost.  At  dark 
the  enemy  had  possessed  himself  of  the  ditch  and  slope  of  the  parapet,  and  our  forccis 
retired  to  an  interior  line  a few  feet  back.  This  point  was  now  re-enforced  by  Colonel 
[F.  M.]  Cockrell’s  brigade,  of  Bowen’s  division,  and  work  was  resumed  by  the  enemy 
and  by  us,  they  mining  and  we  countermining. 

From  this  time  until  the  1st  [July]  uothing  of  moment  occurred.  Oja 
tliat  day,  however,  the  enemy  sprung  another  mine  on  the  right  of  the 
Jackson  road,  which  is  thus  spoken  of  by  General  Forney  in  his  re- 
port : 

The  result  was  the  entire  demolition  of  the  redan,  leaving  only  an  immense  chas:/n 
where  it  stood.  The  greater  portion  of  the  earth  was  thrown  toward  the  enemy,  the 
line  of  least  resistance  being  in  that  direction.  Our  interior  line  was  much  injured. 
Nine  men  who  were  countermining  were  necessarily  lost,  and  a large  number  of  thoiie 
manning  the  works  were  killed  and  wounded.  The  enemy,  however,  made  no  a(- 
tempt  to  charge,  seeming  satisfied  with  having  materially  wenkened  the  position.  I 
understand  that  the  amount  of  powder  used  by  the  enemy  in  this  explosion  was  one  ton . 
While  all  this  was  taking  place  on  the  Jackson  road,  the  enemy  was  by  no  means  idle 
at  other  points.  At  the  work  on  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road,  his  sappers  had  nearly 
reached  the  ditch.  At  this  place  we  sprung  a countermine,  which  was,  unfortunately, 
a little  premature. 

From  this  time  forward  our  engineers  were  kept  constantly  and  busily 
employed  in  countermining  against  the  enemy,  who  was  at  work  day 
and  nigjit  in  mining  on  different  portions  of  the  line.  About  this  time, 
our  stock  of  bacon  having  been  almost  exhausted,  the  experiment  of 
using  mule  meat  as  a substitute  was  tried,  it  being  issued  only  to  those 
who  desired  to  use  it,  and  I am  gratified  to  say  it  was  found  by  both 


Chap.  XXXVL]  GENERAL  REPORTS.  281 

officers  and  men  not  only  nutritions,  but  very  palatable,  and  every  way 
preferable  to  poor  beef. 

I have  already  given  in  extenso  the  several  letters  received  from  Gen- 
eral J ohnston  up  to  this  time,  and  my  replies  thereto.  In  this  connection 
I take  occasion  to  introduce  General  Johnstoffis  letter  of  June  27,  which 
was  never  received  by  me,  but  a copy  of  which  General  Johnston  was 
kind  enough  to  furnish. 

June  27,  1863. 

lour  dispatch  of  the  22d  received.  General  E.  K.  Smith’s  troops  have  been  mis- 
managed, and  have  lallen  back  to  Delhi,  I have  sent  a special  messenger,  urging  him 
to  assume  direct  command.  The  determined  spirit  you  manifest  and  his  expected  co- 
operation encourage  me  to  hope  something  may  yet  be  done  to  save  Vicksburg,  and 
to  postpone  both  the  modes  suggested  of  merely  "extricating  the  garrison.  Negotia- 
tions "with  Grant  for  the  jjelief  of  the  garrison,  should  they  become  necessary,  must  bo 
made  by  you.  It  would  be  a confession  of  weakness  on  my  part,  which  I "ought  not 
to  make,  to  propose  them.  When  it  becomes  necessary  to  make  terms,  thev  may  be 
considered  as  made  under  my  authority. 

To  preserve  the  continuity  of  the  narrative,  and  that  events  may  be 
mentioned  in  the  order  of  their  dates,  I also  give  General  Johnston’s 
letter  of  July  3,  which  was  received  by  me  on  the  10th : 

Camp  near  Birdsong  Ferry,  July  3,  [1863.] 
Your  dispatches  of  the  28th  were  destroyed  by  messenger.  He  states  that  General 
Smith  s troops  were  driven  back  to  Monroe.  This  statement  and  his  account  of  your 
condition  make  me  think  it  necessary  to  create  a diversion,  and  thus  enable  you  to  cut 
yonr  way  out  if  the  time  has  arrived  for  you  to  do  this.  Of  that  time  I cannot  judge ; 
you  must,  as  it  depends  upon  your  condition.  I hope  to  attack  the  enemy  in  yonr 
front  the  7th,  and  your  co-operation  will  be  necessary.  The  manner  and  the  proper 
point  for  you  to  bring  the  garrison  out  must  be  determined  by  you,  from  your  superior 
knowledge  of  the  ground  and  distribution  of  the  enemy’s  forces.  Our  firing  will  show 
you  where  we  are  engaged.  If  Vicksburg  cannot  be  saved,  the  garrison  must. 

Oil  July  1,  I felt  satisfied  that  the  time  had  arrived  when  it  was  nec- 
essary either  to  evacuate  the  city  and  cut  my  way  out  or  to  capitulate 
upon  the  best  attainable  terms.  My  own  inclination  led  me  to  favor  the 
former.  With  this  view,  therefore,  I addressed  to  my  division  com- 
manders— Generals  Stevenson,  Forney,  Smith,  and  Bowen — the  follow- 
ing communication : 

Hdqrs.  Department  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

Fickshurg,  July  1,  1863. 

General  : Unless  the  siege  of  Vicksburg  is  raised  or  supplies  are  thrown  in,  it  will 
become  necessary  very  shortly  to  evacuate  the  place.  I see  no  prospect  of  the  former, 
and  there  are  many  great,  if  not  insuperable,  obstacles  in  the  way  of  the  latter.  You 
are,  therefore,  requested  to  inform  me  with  as  little  delay  as  possible  as  to  the  condi- 
tion  of  your  troops,  and  their  ability  to  make  the  marches  and  undergo  the  fatigues 
necessary  to  accomplish  a successful  evacuation.  You  will,  of  course,  use  the  utmost 
discretion  while  informing  yourself  through  your  subordinates  upon  all  points  tending 
to  a clear  elucidation  of  the  subjects  of  my  inquiry. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-General,  Commanding. 

The  next  day  I received  a reply  from  each  of  these  officers,  which  is 
herewith  submitted : 

Headquarters  Stevenson’s  Division, 

Fickshurg,  July  2,  1863. 

General  : Your  note  (confidential)  of  yesterday,  requesting  me  to  inform  you  as 
o ^ne  condition  of  my  troops  and  their  ability  to  make  the  marches  and  undergo  tlio 
•a  necessary  to  accomplish  a successful  evacuation  of  this  city,  was  duly  received, 

and  1 have  the  honor  to  reply  thereto  as  follows : My  men  are  very  cheerful,  but  from 
ong  confinement  (more  than  forty-five  days)*  in  tbe  trenches  on  short  rations,  are 
lecessarily  much  enfeebled,  and  a eonsiderable  number  would  bo  unable  to  make  tbe 
larches  and  undergo  the  fatigues  which  would  probably  bo  necessary  to  a successful 


282 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


evacuation  of  tliis  city.  If  pressed  by  tbe  enemy,  and  it  should  be  necessary  to  place 
the  Big  Black  in  our  rear  in  one  march,  tlie  chances  are  that  a large  number  of  them 
now  in  the  trenches  could  not  succeed.  I believe,  however,  that  most  of  them,  rather 
than  be  captured,  would  exert  themselves  to  the  utmost  to  accomplish  it.  I respect- 
fully transmit  herewith  the  opinions  of  my  brigade  commanders  on  these  points. 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  L.  STEVENSON, 

Major-General. 

Division  Headquarters, 

Near  VieJcshurg,  July  2,  1863. 

General:  In  reply  to  your  confidential  note  of  yesterday,  requesting  to  be  informed 
as  to  the  condition  of  my  troops  and  their  ability  to  make  the  marches  and  undergo 
the  fatigues  necessary  to  accomplish  a successfui  evacuation,  as  heartrending  as  the. 
reply  may  be,  I have  to  state  that  I concur  in  the  unanimous  opinion  of  the  brigade 
and  regimental  commanders,  that  the  physical  condition  and  health  of  our  men  are 
not  sufficiently  good  to  enable  them  to  accomplish  successfully  the  evacuation.  The 
spirit  of  the  men  is  still,  however,  unshaken,  and  I am  satisfied  they  will  cheerfully 
continue  to  bear  the  fatigues  and  privations  of  the  siege.  I inclose  herewith  for  your 
further  information  the  brigade  reports. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  H.  FORNEY, 

Major-General. 

Division  Headquarters,  July  2,  1863. 

General  : Your  note  of  yesterday  desires  of  me  a reply  on  two  points,  viz : The 
condition  of  my  troops,  and  their  ability  to  make  the  marches  and  undergo  the  fatigue 
necessary  to  a successful  evacuation  of  this  place.  The  length  of  the  marches  and 
the  amount  of  fatigue  necessary  to  a successful  evacuation  not  being  indicated,  I 
confine  myself  to  giving  the  following  information  and  opinions : There  are  about 
3,000  men  in  my  division,  including  State  troops,  in  a condition  to  undertake  a march 
of  8 or  10  miles  a day  in  this  weather,  if  there  is  an  opportunity  of  resting  at  inter- 
vals. Out  of  these  3,000,  only  about  2,000  are  considered  reliable  in  case  we  are  strongly 
opposed  and  much  harassed.  A secret  evacuation  I consider  almost  impossible,  ou 
account  of  the  temper  of  many  in  my  command,  who  would,  of  necessity,  be  left  be- 
hind, not  to  mention  their  natural  timidity  when  left  alone,  which  would  induce  them 
to  at  once  get  into  communication  with  the  enemy  for  their  own  fancied  safety.  I 
would  really  expect  the  enemy  to  become  aware  of  the  movement  before  my  command 
had  cleared  the  right  of  our  line.  It  is  proper  to  mention  that  the  2,000  alluded  to 
have  suffered  severely  in  the  loss  of  field  officers  during  the  siege;  and  while  their  in- 
dividual bravery  remains  the  same,  they  will  be  more  readily  thrown  into  confusion 
from  want  of  officers  to  handle  them,  if  forced  to  halt  and  go  through  any  formation 
to  oppose  an  enemy.  In  other  words,  while  under  the  impression  that  the  troops  will 
to-day  resist  an  assault  as  obstinately,  or  perhaps  more  so,  as  when  they  first  manned 
tlie  trenches,  I do  not  think  they  would  do  as  well  out  of  them  and  in  the  field. 

I believe  that  General  Johnston  either  has  or  will  fight  Grant,  and  my  hope  has 
been  that  he  would  be  successful  and  in  time  to  relieve  us.  At  present,  however,  I see 
no  chance  of  timely  relief  from  him,  and  his  dispatches  have  never  indicated  a hope 
of  being  able  to  raise  the  siege.  Under  these  circumstances,  I deem  it  best  to  propose 
terms  of  capitulation  before  forced  to  do  so  from  want  of  provisions. 

The  following,  although  not  called  for  by  your  note,  is  respectfully  stated  on  account 
of  a personal  conversation  had  some  days  since.  In  regard  to  evacuating  with  or 
without  entering  into  terms  of  agreement  with  the  enemy,  I should  much  prefer  the 
former.  There  is  to  my  mind  no  practical  difference  between  giving  up  a place  openly 
or  secretly. 

I am,  very  respect  full  v,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  L.  SMITH, 
Major-General. 

Headquarters  Bowen’s  Division, 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  2,  1863. 

General:  In  reply  to  your  inquiry  of  this  morning  in  regard  to  the  condition  of 
my  command  to  force  their  way  through  the  enemy’s  lines  in  case  that  the  necessity 
should  arise  to  evacuate  this  position,  1 have  the  honor  to  state  that  my  men  are  in 
as  good,  if  not  better  spirits,  than  any  others  in  the  line,  and  able  to  stand  as  much 
fatigue,  yet  I do  not  consider  them  capable  (physically)  of  enduring  the  hardships  in- 
cident to  such  an  undertaking.  Forty-five  days’  incessant  duty  day  and  night,  with 
short  rations,  the  wear  of  both  mind  and  body  incident  to  our  situation,  has  had  a 
marked  effect  upon  them,  and  I am  satisfied  they  cannot  give  battle  and  march  over 


Chap,  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


283 


10  or  12  miles  in  tlie  same  day.  In  view  of  the  fact  that  General  Johnston  has  never 
held  out  the  slightest  hope  to  us  that  the  siege  could  he  raised ; that  his  demonstra- 
tion in  our  favor  to  relieve  this  exhausted  garrison  would  of  necessity  he  sufficient  to 
raise  ifc,  I see  no  alternative  hut  to  endeavor  to  rescue  the  command  hy  making  terms 
with  the  enemy.  Under  the  most  favorable  circumstances,  were  we  to  cut  our  way 
out,  we  could  not,  in  my  opinion,  save  two-thirds  of  our  present  effective  strength. 
No  provision  could  he  made  for  our  wounded  who  fell  in  the  attempt,  or  those  wo 
leave  behind  in  the  hospitals,  and  our  army  would  reach  General  Johnston  (if  we  should 
get  through)  a mere  handful  of  broken-down  stragglers.  I would,  therefore,  recom- 
mend that  an  immediate  proposition  ho  made  to  capitulate.  If  accepted,  wo  get  every- 
thing wo  have  any  right  to  hope  for;  if  rejected,  we  can  still  hold  out  stubbornly  for 
some  days,  and  our  enemy  may  make  the  proposal  to  us.  When  our  rations  are  ex- 
hausted, or  nearly  so,  we  may  accept  a surrender  with  the  condition  of  a general  pa- 
role instead  of  imprisonment  for  the  command.  If  the  offer  is  made  at  once,  we  have 
a better  chance  of  making  terms  than  when  wo  have  only  one  day’s  resistance  in  store 
in  case  of  a refusal.  The  proposition  coming  from  us,  if  rejected,  will  make  our  men 
determined  to  fight  to  the  last;  theirs,  on  the  contrary,  will  feel  that  after  Vicksburg 
has  been  offered,  their  blood  is  shed  to  gratify  a mere  vindictive  feeling  against  its 
garrison,  whose  only  fault  has  been  the  noble  defense  they  have  made,  and  I believe 
that  numbers  of  the  enemy  have  still  enough  manhood  to  admire  our  courage  and  de- 
termination and  urge  liberal  terms  of  capitulation. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

Major-General. 

The  opinions  of  General  Stevenson’s  brigade  commanders  will  be  found 
in  that  officer’s  report,  * while  those  of  General  Forney’s  are  presented 
in  the  appendix  to  this.  So  far  as  I know,  not  a solitary  brigade  or 
regimental  commander  favored  the  scheme  of  cutting  out,  and  only  two, 
whose  views  were  presented  to  me,  intimated  the  possibility  of  making 
more  than  one-half  of  their  commands  available  for  that  purpose.  With 
this  unanimous  opinion  of  my  officers  against  the  practicability  of  a suc- 
cessful evacuation,  and  no  relief  from  General  Johnston,  a surrender 
with  or  without  terms  was  the  only  alternative  left  me.  I therefore 
addressed  the  following  note  to  Major-General  Grant : 

Headquarters, 
Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  3,  1803. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  United  plates  Forces : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  propose  to  you  an  armistice  for  several  hours,  with 
a view  to  arranging  terms  for  the  capitulation  of  Vicksburg.  To  this  end,  if  agree- 
able to  you,  I will  appoint  three  commissioners  to  meet  a like  number,  to  be  named  by 
yourself,  at  such  place  and  hour  to-day  as  you  may  find  convenient. 

I make  this  proposition  to  save  the  further  effusion  of  blood,  which  must  otherwise 
bo  shed  to  a frightful  extent,  feeling  myself  fully  able  to  maintain  my  position  for  a 
yet  indefinite  period. 

This  communication  will  be  handed  you  under  a flag  of  truce  by  Maj.  Gen.  John 
S.  Bowen. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-General,  Commanding. 

In  the  course  of  two  hours  the  unnexed  reply  was  received : 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

In  the  Field,  near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  3,  i8G3. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Commanding  Confederate  Forees,  tfc.  : 

General  : Your  note  of  this  date  is  just  received,  proposing  an  armistice  for  several 
hours,  for  the  jmrpose  of  arranging  terms  of  capitulation  through  commissioners  to  bo 
appointed,  &c. 

The  useless  effusion  of  blood  you  propose  stopping  by  this  course  can  l»e  ended  at 
any  time  you  may  choose,  by  an  unconditional  surrender  of  the  city  and  garrison. 

^ Sec  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Part  H,  p.  347. 


284 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Men  wlio  have  shown  so  much  endurance  and  courage  as  those  now  in  Vicksburg  will 
always  challenge  the  respect  of  an  adversary,  and  I can  assure  you  will  be  treated 
with  all  the  respect  due  to  prisoners  of  war. 

I do  not  favor  the  proposition  of  appointing  commissioners  to  arrange  terms  of 
capitulation,  because  I have  no  terms  other  than  those  indicated  above. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

U.  S.  GRANT, 
Major-General. 

Upon  the  return  of  General  Bowen  with  this  letter,  I understood  that 
it  was  the  desire  of  Major-General  Grant  to  have  a personal  conference 
with  me,  aud  this  being  agreed  to,  at  3 p.  m.,  accompanied  by  General 
Bowen  and  Captain  [L.  M.]  Montgomery  (then  supi^osed  to  be  a lieuten- 
ant-colonel), I proceeded  to  the  lines,  where  I met  General  Grant  sur- 
rounded by  a number  of  his  officers.  I soon  learned  that  there  was  a 
mutual  misunderstanding  in  regard  to  the  desire  for  this  interview,  and 
therefore  informed  General  Grant  that  if  he  had  no  terms  to  propose 
other  than  were  contained  in  his  letter,  the  conference  could  terminate 
and  hostilities  be  resumed  immediately.  After  some  further  conversa- 
tion, he  proposed  that  General  Bowen  and  Captain  Montgomery  and  two 
of  his  officers  (Major-Generals  McPherson  and  Smith)  should  retire  for 
consultation,  and  suggest  such  terms  as  they  might  think  proper  for 
our  consideration.  After  some  conversation  between  these  officers,  we 
parted,  with  the  understanding  that  General  Grant  would  communicate 
with  me  by  10  p.  m.,  and  about  that  hour  the  following  letter  was  re- 
ceived : 

Headquauters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Near  Viclcslurg,  Miss.,  July  3,  18G3. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Commanding  Confederate  Forces,  VicJcshurg,  Miss. : 

General:  In  conformity  with  agreement  of  this  afternoon,  I will  submit  tbe  follow- 
ing proposition  for  tbe  surrender  of  tlie  city  of  Vicksburg,  x^nblic  stores,  &c. : 

On  your  accepting  the  terms  proposed,  I will  march  in  one  division  as  a guard,  and 
take  possession  at  8 a.  m.  to-morrow.  As  soon  as  rolls  can  be  made  out,  and  paroles 
signed  by  officers  and  men,  you  will  be  allowed  to  march  out  of  our  lines,  the  officers 
taking  with  them  their  side-arms  and  clothing,  and  the  field,  staff,  and  cavalry  offi- 
cers one  horse  each.  The  rank  and  file  will  be  allowed  all  their  clothiug,  but  no 
other  jiroperty.  If  these  conditions  are  accepted,  any  amount  of  rations  you  may 
deem  necessary  can  bo  taken  from  the  stores  you  now  have,  and  also  the  necessary 
cooking  utensils  for  preparing  them.  Thirty  wagons  also,  counting  two  two-horse 
or  mule  teams  as  one,  will  be  allowed  to  transport  such  articles  as  cannot  be  carried 
along. 

The  same  conditions  will  bo  allowed  to  all  sick  and  wounded  officers  aud  soldiers 
as  fast  as  they  become  able  to  travel. 

The  paroles  for  these  latter  must  be  signed,  however,  while  officers  are  present 
authorized  to  sign  the  roll  of  prisoners. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

U.  S.  GRANT, 
Major-General. 

This  letter  was  immediately  submitted  to  a council  of  general  officers. 
My  own  inclination  was  to  reject  these  terras,  but  after  some  discussion 
I addressed  General  Grant  as  follows : 

Headquarters, 
Vidcslurg,  Miss.,  July  3, 1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  United  States  Forces,  tjc. ; 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communicatioji  of 
this  date,  jiroposing  terms  of  capitulation  for  this  garrison  and  post. 

In  the  main,  your  terms  are  accepted  ; but  in  justice  both  to  the  honor  and  spirit  of 
my  troops,  manifested  in  the  defense  of  Vicksburg,  I have  to  submit  the  following 
amendments,  Avhich,  if  acceded  to  by  yon,  will  perfect  the  agreement  between  ns  : 

At  10  a.  m.  to-morrow  I propose  to  evacuate  the  works  in  and  around  Vicksburg, 
and  to  surrender  the  city  aud  garrison  under  my  command,  by  marching  out  with 


Chap.  XXXYL]  GENERAL  REPORTS. 


285 


luy  colors  and  arms,  stacking  them  in  front  of  my  present  lines,  after  which  you  will 
take  possession. 

Officers  to  retain  their  side-arms  and  personal  proiierty,  and  the  rights  and  property 
of  citizens  to  he  respected. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-General,  Commanding. 


Early  on  the  morning  of  the  4th,  the  following  reply  was  received : 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Before  Viclcshurg,  Miss.,  July  4,  1863. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Commanding  Confederate  Forces,  Vicksburg,  Miss : 


General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  your  communication  of  July 
3.  The  amendment  proposed  by  you  cannot  be  acceded  to  in  full.  It  will  be  neces- 
ssiry  to  furnish  every  officer  and  man  with  a parole  signed  by  himself,  which,  with  the 
completion  of  the  rolls  of  prisoners,  will  necessarily  take  some  time. 

Again,  I can  make  no  stipulations  with  regard  to  the  treatment  of  citizens  and  their 
pituvate  property.  While  I do  not  propose  to  cause  them  any  undue  annoyance  or 
loss,  I cannot  consent  to  leave  myself  under  any  restraint  by  stipulations.  The  prop- 
erty which  officers  will  be  allowed  to  take  with  them  will  be  as  stated  in  my  propo- 
sition of  last  evening;  that  is,  officers  will  be  allowed  their  private  baggage  and 
side-arms,  and  mounted  officers  one  horse  each. 

If  you  mean  by  your  proposition  for  each  brigade  to  march  to  the  front  of  the  lines 
now  occupied  by  it,  and  stack  arms  at  10  a.  m.,  and  then  return  to  the  inside,  and 
there  remain  as  prisoners  until  properly  paroled,  I will  make  no  objection  to  it. 

Should  no  notification  bo  received  of  your  acceptance  of  my  terms  by  9 a.  m.,  I 
shall  regard  them  as  having  been  rejected,  and  shall  act  accordingly.  Should  these 
terms  bo  accepted,  white  flags  should  be  displayed  along  your  lines  to  prevent  such 
of  my  troops  as  may  not  have  been  notified  from  firing  upon  your  men. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

U.  S.  GRANT, 
Major-General. 


In  response  to  this  note,  I immediately  dispatched  the  following,  ac- 
cepting the  terms  of  surrender  as  modified  by  General  Grant: 


Mi 


aj. 


Headquarters, 
Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  4,  1863. 

Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  United  States  Forces,  ^'C.  : 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  communication  of 
this  day,  and  in  reply  to  say  that  the  terms  proposed  by  you  are  acceided. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Lieutenant-General. 


These  terms,  it  may  be  proper  to  add,  were  approved  by  every  divis- 
ion and  brigade  commander  with  one  exception  (Brigadier-General 
[W.  E.]  Baldwin),  who,  without  offering  any  objection  to  them,  insisted 
upon  holding  out,  but  assigned  no  reason  for  it.  In  accordance  with 
this  agreement,  the  garrison  was  surrendered  at. 10  a.  m.,  and  the  Eed- 
(UTil  forces  immediately  took  possession  of  our  works  and  placed  guards 
in  the  city.  If  it  should  be  asked  why  July  4 was  selected  as  the  day 
for  the  supender,  the  answer  is  obvious.  I believed  that  upon  that 
day  I should  obtain  better  terms.  Well  aware  of  the  vanity  of  our  foes, 
I knew  they  would  attach  vast  importance  to  the  entrance  on  July  4 
into  the  stronghold  of  the  great  river,  and  that  to  gratify  their  national 
vanity  they  would  yield  then  what  could  not  be  extorted  from  them  at 
any  other  time.  This  question  of  time  was  also  discussed  by  a council 
of  iny  general  officers,  and  my  views  concurred  in. 

The  assertion  that  the  surrender  of  Vicksburg  was  compelled  by  the 
want  ot  subsistence,  or  that  the  garrison  was  starved  out,  is  one  entirely 
destitute  of  truth.  There  was  at  no  time  any  absolute  suffering  for 


286 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


want  of  food  among  the  garrison.  That  the  men  were  put  ui)on  greatly 
reduced  rations  is  undeniably  truej  but,  in  the  opinion  of  many  medical 
officers,  it  is  at  least  questionable  whether  under  all  the  circumstances 
this  was  at  all  injurious  to  their  health.  It  must  be  remembered  that  for 
forty-seven  days  and  nights  these  heroic  men  had  been  exposed  to  burn- 
ing suns,  drenching  rains,  damp  fogs,  and  heavy  dews,  and  that  during 
all  this  period  they  never  had  by  day  or  by  night  the  slightest  relief. 
The  extent  of  our  works  required  every  available  man  in  the  trenches, 
and  even  then  they  were  in  mauy  places  insufficiently  manned.  It  was 
not  in  my  power  to  relieve  any  portion  of  the  line  for  a single  hour. 
Oonlined  to  the  narrow  limits  of  a trench,  with  their  limbs  cramped  and 
swollen,  without  exercise,  constantly  exi)osed  to  a murderous  storm  of 
shot  and  shell,  while  the  enemy’s  unerring  sharpshooters  stood  ready 
to  pick  off  every  one  visible  above  the  parapets,  is  it  strange  that  tlie 
men  grew  weak  and  attenuated  f They  had  made  a most  heroic  defense. 
Many  had  met  death  with  a smile  upon  their  lips,  all  had  cheerfully  en- 
countered danger,  and  almost  without  a murmur  had  borne  privations 
and  hardships  well  calculated  to  test  their  manhood.  They  had  held 
the  place  against  an  enemy  five  times  their  number,  admirably  clothed 
and  fed,  and  abundantly  supplied  with  all  the  appliances  of  war.  Whe  ii- 
ever  the  foe  attempted  an  assault,  they  drove  him  back  discomfiteil, 
covering  the  ground  with  his  killed  and  wounded,  and  already  had  they 
torn  from  his  grasp  five  stand  of  colors  as  trophies  of  their  prowess, 
none  of  which  were  allowed  to  fall  again  into  his  hands.  Knowing  the 
anxious  desire  of  the  Government  to  relieve  Vicksburg,  I felt  assured 
that  if  within  the  compass  of  its  power  the  siege  would  be  raised,  but 
when  forty-seven  weary  days  and  nights  had  passed,  with  the  knowledgie 
I then  possessed  that  no  adequate  relief  was  to  be  expected,  I felt  that 
I ought  not  longer  to  place  in  jeopardy  the  brave  men  whose  lives  had 
been  intrusted  to  my  care.  Hence,  after  the  suggestion  of  the  alterna- 
tive of  cutting  my  way  out,  I determined  to  make  terms,  not  becauJie 
my  men  were  starved  out,  not  because  I could  not  hold  out  yet  a little 
longer,  but  because  they  were  overpowered  by  numbers,  worn  dov  n 
with  fatigue,  and  each  day  saw  our  defenses  crumbling  beneath  their 
feet.  The  question  of  subsistence,  therefore,  had  nothing  whatever  to 
do  with  the  surrender  of  Vicksburg.  With  an  unlimited  supply  of  pro- 
visions, the  garrison  could  not,  for  the  reasons  already  given,  have  held 
out  much  longer. 

My  previous  dispatches  from  General  Johnston  had  not  made  me  very 
sanguine  of  relief,  and  his  dispatch  of  June  22  was  not  calculated  to 
render  me  more  hopeful.  He  said  : 

General  Taylor  is  sent  by  General  E.  K.  Siuitli  to  co-operate  with  you  from  the  west 
bank  of  the  river,  to  throw  in  supplies  and  to  cross  with  his  force,  if  expedient  and 
practicable.  I will  have  the  means  of  luovinj^  toward  the  enemy  in  a day  or  two,  and 
will  try  to  make  a diversion  in  your  favor,  and,  if  possible,  commnnicate  with  yon, 
though  I fear  my  force  is  too  small  to  effect  the  iatter.  * * * If  I can  do  notliing 

to  relieve  you,  rather  than  surrender  the  garrison,  endeavor  to  cross  the  riv'cr  at  the 
last  moment,  if  you  and  General  Taylor  can  communicate. 

I never  received  any  communication  from  Major-General  Taylor  on*  ! 
the  subject  of  co-operation,  nor  had  I any  knowledge  of  his  whereabouts 
or  of  his  forces,  and  I heard  no  more  from  General  Johnston  until  July 
10,  when  I received  his  dispatch  of  the  3d  in  Vicksburg  from  the  bearer, 
who  had  been  several  da3^s  confined  and  a prisoner  to  the  Federal  au- 
thorities. Had  I received  General  Johnston’s  dispatch  of  June  27,  in  . 
which  he  encouraged  the  hope  that  both  Vicksburg  and  the  garrison  ‘ 
might  bo  saved,  I would  have  lived  upon  an  ounce  a day  and  have  con- 


CiiAr.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


287 


tinned  to  meet  the  assaults  of  all  Grant’s  army  rather  than  have  sur- 
rendered the  city  until  General  Johnston  had  realized  or  relinquished 
that  hope  ; but  I did  not  receiv^e  his  dispatch  until  August  20, in  Gaines- 
ville, Ala.,  nor  had  I the  most  remote  idea  that  such  an  opinion  was 
entertained  by  General  Johnston.  He  had  for  weeks  ignored  its  iiossi- 
bility.  I had  notified  him  on  June  15  that  I had  enough  to  subsist  my 
army  for  yet  twenty  days,  but  he  held  out  no  hope  of  raising  the  siege. 

On  May  25,  thirty-four  days  previous,  he  had  informed  me  that  on 
the  arrival  of  an  expected  division  from  Bragg’s  army  he  would  “ move 
to  me.”  I supposed  then,  with  my  co-operation,  to  raise  the  siege.  No 
subsequent  disi)atch  from  him  sustained  my  understanding  of  his  com- 
munication : all,  without  exception,  of  later  date,  spoke  only  of  the  pos- 
sibility of  extricating  the  garrison.  His  dispatch  of  July  3,  received  by 
me  six  days  after  the  capitulation,  held  out  no  such  hope,  and  I am  fully 
and  entirely  satisfied  that  no  efficient  aid  would  have  been  given  me 
even  to  efiect  an  evacuation.  I do  not  mean  nor  desire  to  be  understood 
as  implying  that  it  might  have  been  given  me.  I only  express  my  con- 
viction, that  had  I been  able  to  hold  the  enemy  at  bay  for  yet  a month,  I 
do  not  believe,  anxious  as  I was  to  co-operate,  that  I would  have  been 
relieved  by  any  force  from  the  outside. 

In  a dispatch  of  the  16th,  I think  (for  I have  not  the  copy),  I suggested 
that,  as  General  Johnston  deemed  it  impracticable  to  do  more  than  by 
possibility  relieve  the  garrison,  a i)roposition  from  him  for  an  evacua- 
tion of  Vicksburg  might  be  favorably  entertained  by  General  Grant. 
In  his  dispatch  of  the  27th,  already  alluded  to  and  previously  copied, 
will  be  found  his  views  on  that  point. 

The  dispatch  of  June  22  from  General  Johnston  rendered  it  painfully  . 
apparent  that  the  siege  could  not  be  raised.  To  cross  the  Mississippi 
River,  as  suggested,  in  the  face  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  and  land  bat- 
teries, was  an  impossibility ; and  unless  this  w as  effected,  the  defense 
w hich  had  been  so  long  and  gallantly  maintained  ceased  to  be  of  any 
practical  utility.  Proud  as  I was  of  my  brave  troops,  honoring  them, 
as  I did  and  do,  for  the  courage,  fortitude,  and  constancy  they  had  so 
nobly  displayed,  I felt  that  it  would  be  an  act  of  cruel  inhumanity  to 
subject  them  longer  to  the  terrible  ordeal  to  w^hich  for  so  many  days  and 
nights  they  had  already  been  exj^osed.  Brain  and  sinew  will  alike  wear 
out ; the  bravest  may  be  overpowered  by  numbers ; and  I saw  no  ad- 
vantage to  be  gained  by  protracting  a hopeless  defense,  which  I knew 
must  be  attended  with  a useless  waste  of  life  and  blood.  1 had,  then, 
to  choose  between  such  favorable  terms  as  I might  be  able  to  obtain 
and  an  uncouditional  surrender,  or  subject  the  garrison  and  the  citizens 
(including  hundreds  of  women  and  children)  to  the  horrors  of  an  as- 
sault, which  I could  no  longer  iio])e  to  repel. 

Much,  and  1 think  unmerited,  obloquy  has  been  cast  upon  me  by  a 
large  i^ortion  of  the  public  press  for  an  imputed  failure  to  provide  ade- 
(piately  for  the  subsistence  of  the  garrisons  of  Vicksburg  and  Port 
Hudson.  The  Government  and  my  immediate  military  superior,  i)erhaps 
better  informed  of  facts,  have,  so  far  as  I am  aware,  refrained  from  cen- 
sure, reserving  a decision  until  a full  investigation  shall  have  determined 
to  w'hat  extent,  if  any,  it  is  deserved. 

Immediately  on  assuming  command  of  the  Department  of  Mississippi 
and  Eastern  Louisiana,  on  October  14, 1862, 1 gave  my  earnest  and  unre- 
mitting attention  to  the  reorganization  of  the  several  staff  departments 
and  to  the  great  question  of  supplies.  It  is  unnecessary  to  speak  of  the 
confusion  and  general  want  of  system  which  prevailed.  1 found  most 
of  the  district  commanders  exercising  the  authority  w^hich  pertained 


288 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai’.  XXX VL 


ouly  to  a department  commander,  or  to  a general  commanding  an  army 
in  the  field.  Each  appeared  to  be  in  a great  measure  acting  independ- 
ently of  the  other.  To  some  considerable  extent  this  seemed  to  be  nec- 
essary under  the  existing  circumstances.  Major-General  Yan  Dorn  was 
in  the  immediate  command  of  the  army  at  Holly  Springs,  and  it  natu- 
rally engaged  most  of  his  attention.  General  Bragg,  to  whose  depart- 
ment the  geographical  districts  (just  organized  into  a separate  depart- 
ment) had  been  attached,  was  too  far  removed  to  permit  him  to  give  his 
personal  supervision.  It  resulted  almost  necessarily  from  this  state  of 
things  that  but  little  attention  had  been  given  to  the  accumulation  of 
supplies.  No  depots  of  importance  existed  within  the  limits  of  the  de- 
partment, nor  had  any  measures  been  taken  to  establish  them.  Much 
of  the  season  best  suited  to  the  collection  of  stores  from  the  Trans-Mis- 
sissippi had  gone  by.  They  were  undoubtedly  abundant  there,  but  my 
command  did  not  embrace  that  district  of  country.  I had  no  control 
over  the  steamboats  in  Eed  Eiver.  It  was  one  thing  to  purchase  sup- 
plies, but  another  to  transport  them.  Most  of  the  boats  were  engaged 
in  carrying  sugar,  molasses,  and  salt  either  for  private  parties  or  for 
the  Government.  There  was  great  opposition  on  the  part  of  owners  at 
every  attempt  to  divert  them  from  these  purposes.  The  Government 
vras  appealed  to  against  what  was  styled  the  violation  of  the  rights  of 
the  citizen  by  the  military  authorities.  It  required  time  to  ascertain 
v/hat  was  needed  to  be  done,  and  time  to  acquire  the  means  of  its  ac- 
complishment. 

On  October  25,  the  necessary  orders  were  issued  to  procure  and  trans- 
port supplies  from  the  parishes  of  Pointe  Coupee,  Concordia,  and  Tensas. 
Major  [E.  H.]  Cuney,  then  chief  commissary,  was  directed  to  confer  with 
Lieut.  Col.  [W.  A.]  Broadwell,  agent  of  the  Commissary-General,  then  in 
the  Trans-Mississii)pi  Department,  but  to  make  arrangements  for  supply 
ing  this  department  without  relying  upon  him.  Major  [Edward]  Dillon, 
commissary  of  the  army  with  Major-General  Yan  Dorn,  was  directed  to 
use  every  effort  to  subsist  it  from  the  northern  and  northwestern  counties. 
Eor  several  months  after  I entered  upon  duty  in  the  department,  there 
was  not  water  enough  to  admit  of  the  passage  into  the  Mississippi  of  the 
larger  boats,  which  had  been  run  ui)  the  Yazoo  or  Eed  Eiver  for  safety. 
As  early  as  the  latter  part  of  October,  I authorized  the  opening  of  the 
raft  in  the  Yazoo,  that  the  smaller  boats  might  pass  out.  Notwithstand- 
ing the  violent  opposition  of  private  parties,  very  many  of  them  were 
immediately  taken  either  into  the  permanent  employ  of  the  Govern- 
ment or  chartered  as  supplies  could  be  obtained.  The  transportation 
of  sugar  and  molasses,  owned  by  the  Government  and  by  speculators, 
interfered  materially  with  the  rapid  accumulation  of  other  supplies. 
When,  however,  about  January  1,  the ’larger  boats  were  able  to  enter 
the  Mississippi,  a sufiScient  number  was  at  once  put  into  requisition  for 
Government  transportation,  and  a large  amount  of  corn  and  bacon  was 
thrown  into  Yicksburg  and  Port  Hudson  from  the  Trans-Mississippi 
Department.  I regret,  however,  to  say  that  from  want  of  proper  care 
and  energy  upon  the  part  of  those  responsible  for  its  safe-keeping,  a 
large  quantity  of  corn  which  had  been  landed  on  the  sliore  was  removed 
so  slowly,  and  so  little  precaution  used  to  secure  it  from  the  efiects  of  the 
heavy  rains  of  the  season,  that  much  was  destroyed  by  that  cause,  and 
much  was  carried  oft  by  the  rapid  rise  of  the  river.  It  hap])ened  that 
just  at  this  time,  about  January  10,  I made  an  official  visit  to  I^ort  Hud- 
son, and  was  myself  a witness  of  the  consequences  of  tl)is  neglect  at 
that  point. 

On  January  II,  I addressed  the  following  letter  to  Lieutenant-Colonel 


CI1A1>.  XXXVI.]  GENERAL  REPORTS.  281) 

|W.  A.]  Broadwell,  agent  of  the  Commissary-General  and  also  for  my 
department,  under  my  immediate  instructions : 

Purchase  bacon  for  this  department ; if  possible,  buy  several  million  ponnds.  Also 
send,  if  you  can,  a few  thousand  live  hogs  to  Port  Hudson  and  Vicksburg.  If  the 
present  navigation  should  be  interrupted,  try  to  get  the  hogs  across  the  river,  so  that 
they  can  be  driven  to  the  interior  of  the  State  and  rendered  available  for  the  use  of 
the  troops.  If  nothing  better  can  be  done,  you  will  contract  with  energetic  men  to 
get  from  Texas  200  or  .300  wagons  loaded  with  bacon,  the  meat  to  be  paid  for  by  the 
chief  of  subsistence  of  this  department,  the  transportation  settled  by  the  quartermas- 
ter, and  the  wagons  and  teams  taken  at  fair  valuation  by  the  Government.  You  had 
better  attend  to  salt  first,  to  bacon  next,  and  to  sugar  afterward.  You  are  properly 
accredited  to  commanding  generals  elsewhere,  who  are  requested  to  assist  you  in  ac- 
complishing my  wishes  as  herein  indicated. 

I was  extremely  desirous  at  this  time  to  procure  a sufficient  supply 
of  salt  to  enable  me  to  cure  bacon,  aod  with  that  purpose  an  order  was 
issued  prohibiting  the  exportation  of  hogs  from  the  department.  The 
difficulty  of  obtaining  salt  in  sufficient  quantity  at  the  proper  season 
prevented  the  success  of  this  plan  to  any  great  extent.  Though  ex- 
tremely anxious  at  this  time  to  purchase  all  the  meat  possible,  I did 
not  think  it  advisable  to  make  large  imrchases  of  corn  from  the  Trans- 
Mississippi  for  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Broadwell  was  so  notified.  It  has  already  been  shown  that  the  large 
amount  at  Port  Hudson  had  not  been  properly  secured,  and  more  was 
still  being  delivered.  The  enemy’s  attempt  on  Vicksburg  via  Chicka- 
saw Bayou  had  just  signally  failed,  and  his  troops  been  withdrawn  and 
re- embarked. 

Before  January  1,  supplies  from  Deer  Creek  and  Sunflower  could  not 
be  brought  down,  owing  to  the  low  stage  of  water,  and  when  the  rise  of 
those  streams  admitted  of  their  being  landed  at  Snyder’s  Mill,  the  char- 
acter of  the  soil  and  the  roads  over  which  the  wagons  must  pass  was 
such  as  to  render  transportation  almost  utterly  impracticable.  I had, 
however,  appropriated  100  wagons  for  that  especial  purpose. 

In  a communication  dated  February  20,  General  Stevenson  says  : 

I During  w^et  weather  we  cannot  use  the  dirt  road  from  Haynes^  Blufi'  to  this  point 
(Vicksburg).  The  passage  of  our  train  of  over  100  wagons  would  render  it  impassa- 
ble in  one  day  ; besides,  not  being  able  to  haul  more  than  a quarter  load,  it  would 
prevent  its  being  kept  in  good  order.  To  relieve  it  at  such  times,  grain  should  bo 
obtained  by  railroad,  but  it,  as  now  managed,  cannot  be  relied  on. 

There  was  an  abundance  of  corn  in  the  department,  but  in  very  many 
instances  planters  refused  to  sell  except  for  cash  payments,  and  the 
great  delay  in  forwarding  funds  embarrassed  me  exceedingly. 

On  January  20,  I telegraphed  as  follows  to  the  honorable  Secretary 
of  War: 

Unless  funds  are  sent  immediately  to  Maj.  Theodore  Johnston,  chief  commissary  of 
subsistence  of  the  department,  the  army  cannot  bo  supplied.  Estimates  have  been 
forwarded.  Please  have  money  sent  at  once. 

During  this  time  stores  in  large  quantity  were  being  rapidly  collected 
at  various  depots,  but  the  difficulty  of  transportation,  owing  to  the 
wretched  condition  of  the  Southern  Kailroad,  the  obstacles  that  were 
continually  thrown  in  the  way  by  railroad  authorities,  and  the  clamor 
raised  at  any  attempt  of  mine  to  make  private  interests  subservient  to 
Government  necessities,  had  the  effect  of  preventing  effectually  the  raifid 
accumulation  of  supplies.  Positive  prohibition  had  been  issued  from 
the  War  Department  against  the  interference  of  commanding  generals 
,or  other  officers  with  railroad  transportation.  Immediately  on  the  re- 
19  R R — VOL  XXIY,  PT  I 


LCiiAr.  XXXVT. 


290  MISSISSIPPI,  AVEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

ceipt  of  this  prohibition,  I telegraphed  the  Adjutant  and  Inspector  Gen> 
eral,  Richmond : 

If  I cannot  control  the  railroads  in  this  department,  the  business  of  the  department 
and  subsistence  of  the  troops  will  fail.  I beg  that  Colonel  [William  M.]  Wadlcy  may 
be  sent  here  at  once. 

Arrangements  had  been  made,  as  already  stated,  as  fully  as  the  means 
at  my  disposal  would  admit,  to  transfer  supplies  from  Snyder’s  Mill  to 
Vicksburg,  and  the  chief  of  subsistence  was  positively  directed  to  keep 
constantly  on  hand  a supply  for  not  less  than  sixty  days.  Similar  in- 
structions were  given  to  the  chief  quartermaster  of  the  department. 
Rvery  i)ossible  effort  was  made  to  carry  out  my  orders.  If  I failed  in 
the  full  accomplishment  of  my  wishes,  it  was  from  circumstances  utterly 
beyond  my  control.  It  must  be  remembered  that  almost  continuous 
movements  of  troops  and  ordnance  were  necessary,  in  consequence  of 
the  persistent  efforts  of  the  enemy  from  about  the  middle  of  December 
to  the  date  of  the  investment  of  Vicksburg. 

About  February  10,  the  enemy  began  his  movement  through  the 
Yazoo  Pass.  None  but  our  smallest  boats  could  be  employed  in  the 
upper  waters  from  this  date  until  the  enemy  abandoned  his  designs, 
not  only  by  the  Pass  and  Tallahatchee,  but  also  by  the  Sunflower  and 
Deer  Creek.  The  boats  which  Avere  employed  in  bringing  down  sup- 
])lies  from  those  small  streams  were  frequently  and  necessarily  diverted 
to  the  transi)ortation  of  troops  and  munitions  of  war.  Early  in  Febru- 
ary, also,  the  enemy  succeeded  in  passing  two  of  his  gunboats  by  our 
batteries  at  Vicksburg.  This  at  once  rendered  the  navigation  of  the 
Mississippi  and  Red  Rivers  dangerous,  and  from  that  time  forth  it  was 
only  by  watching  opiiortunities  and  at  great  risk  of  capture  that  sup- 
plies could  be  thrown  into  Port  Hudson  and  Vicksburg ; nevertheless, 
large  amounts  were  successfully  introduced  into  both  i^laces  (into  the 
latter  via  Big  Black).  Port  Hudson,  however,  received  much  the  larger 
portion,  being  easier  of  access.  In  addition  to  the  efforts  made  by 
agents  under  my  own  instructions  to  supply  Port  Hudson,  the  chief  of 
subsistence  of  the  department  was  ordered  on  February  18  to  furnish 
Major-General  Gardner’s  commissary  Avith  ample  funds  to  meet  the  de- 
mands of  the  service. 

About  the  middle  of  the  same  month,  belieAing  it  to  be  highly 
probable  that  not  only  the  subsistence  of  iny  own  army  but  also  that  of 
General  Bragg’s  might  be  dependent  upon  the  supplies  of  the  country 
intersected  by  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad,  I issued  iiositive  orders 
that  neither  grain  nor  meat  should  be  allowed  to  leave  the  department 
by  that  road.  The  condition  of  the  Southern  Railroad  daily  groAviug 
Avorse  in  consequence  of  the  heavy  rains  and  its  light  structure,  every 
effort  was  made  on  my  part  to  aid  the  managers  in  its  speedy  and  effect- 
ual repair.  A communication  urging  its  importance  in  a military  point 
of  Anew  Avas  addressed  to  His  Excellency  the  GoA^ernor  of  the  State,  of 
February  20,  asking  his  assistance  by  the  impressment  of  negroes  to 
labor  on  it,  the  vice-president  haAung  informed  me  that  planters  would 
not  hire  their  hands. 

On  February  28  and  on  March  2,  instructions  Avere  again  sent  to  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Broadwell  to  purchase  all  the  meat  possible  at  the  price 
suggested  by  him,  and  [he  Avas]  notified  also  that  beef  could  then  be 
crossed  safely,  and  to  send  lorward  all  he  could  control. 

March  I,  Brigadier-General  Ruggleswas  directed  by  telegraph  as  fol- 
lows : 

You  must  give  every  possible  assistuuce  in  procuriug  -vvitliin  your  district  all  tbft 


CIIAI’.  XXXVI-l 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


291 


corn,  beeves,  and  bacon  or  salted  pork  that  can  be  had,  and  forward  as  rapidly  as 
possible  for  army  at  Vicksburg.  Purchase  from  planters  at  the  lowest  prices  you  can, 
and  impress  all  in  hands  of  speculators  at  same  rate. 

• About  the  same  time  Major-General  Taylor,  commanding  West  Loui- 
siana, was  respectfully  urged  to  have  all  the  beeves,  bacon,  and  salted 
pork  possible  forwarded,  and  it  gives  me  mucli  pleasure  to  add  that  1 
am  greatly  indebted  to  his  active  exertions,  as  well  as  to  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Broadwell,  for  large  supfjlies  of  corn  and  meat. 

On  March  23,  the  following  letter  was  received  from  Lieutenant-Colo- 
nel Broadwell : 

Alexandria,  La.,  March  17,  186:3. 

General:  Four  steamboats  arrived  here  to-day  from  Shreveport  and  Jefiersoii, 
loaded  chiefly  with  corn.  One  of  them  had  600,000  pounds  of  bacon ; three  others 
(the  Charm,  Texas,  and  Frolic)  are  reported  coming  down  with  loads.  Five  others 
(the  Falls  City,  Louisville,  Starlight,  General  Hodges,  anclNina  Sims)  are  below  here, 
witli  full  cargoes  designed  for  Port  Hudson,  but  the  Federal  gunboats  are  reported 
blockading  this  river.  Great  God,  how  unfortunate  ! We  must  try  to  get  cattle  to 
Bowman’s  Landing,  15  miles  back  of  Waterproof,  and,  if  possible,  swim  them  at  the 
latter  point ; but  the  cattle  here  are  thin,  and  may  be  unlit  for  beef  when  they  arrive 
on  the  other  side.  In  fact,  it  is  doubtful  whether  many  of  them  ever  get  thro'ugh  the 
swamps  and  bayous  through  which  they  are  required  to  pass  on  this  side.  As  the 
water  declines,  I think  it  likely  that  cattle  in  large  quantities  can  be  crossed  over  by 
swimming,  but  at  present  the  prospect  of  your  getting  supplies  from  this  side  is  gloomy 
enough.  With  the  hope,  general,  that  the  suspension  of  steamboat  navigation  will 
embarrass  you  less  than  is  now  apprehended. 

Very  respectfully,.  &c., 

W.  A.  BROADWELL. 

Oil  tlie  day  of  its  receipt,  the  above  letter  was  referred  to  Maj.  Theo- 
dore eJoboston,  chief  of  subsistence,  for  his  information,  and  was  returned 
witli  the  following  indorsement : 

Office  Chief  of  Subsistence,  Department  of  Miss,  and  E.  La., 

Jackson,  March  24,  1863. 

Respectfully  returned.  The  following  boats  have  arrived  out  of  Red  River  and 
have  discharged  their  cargoes  at  Port  Hudson  : Frolic,  corn  to  assistant  quarter- 
master; Louis  d’Or,  corn  to  assistant  quartermaster ; Trent,  corn  to  acting  commis- 
sary of  subsistence ; Drover,  corn  to  acting  commivssary  of  subsistence ; Red  Chief 
corn  to  acting  commissary  of  subsistence;  Starlight,  corn  to  acting  commissary  of 
subsistence;  Indian  No.  2,  corn  to  acting  commissary  of  subsistence ; T.  D.  Hlne, 
bacon,  hogs,  and  beef,  to  acting  commissary  of  subsistence.  The  steamer  Generai 
Hodges,  spoken  of,  discharged  her  cargo  at  Alexandria.  The  Louisville  had  20,000 
bushels  of  corn.  The  Falls  City  turned  over  all  her  cargo,  except  350  barrels  of  mo- 
lasses, to  steamer  T.  D.  Hine.  Lieutenant  [George]  Cammack  left  Alexandria  on 
18th  instant,  one  day  later  than  the  communication  from  Colonel  Broadwell. 

THEO.  JOHNSTON, 

Major  and  Chief  of  Subsistence. 

Evidence  of  a similar  character,  all  showing  the  constant  and  earnest 
efforts  made  by  myself  and  my  officers  to  secure  an  ample  store  of  sub- 
sistence for  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson,  could  be  adduced  to  an  in- 
definite extent,  but  to  give  the  whole  would  swell  this  report  to  a huge 
volume.  I content  myself,  therefore,  with  throwing  a number  of  letters, 
orders,  telegrams,  &c.,  on  this  subject  into  an  appendix.  In  the  month  of 
March,  I was  in  the  receipt  of  a number  of  letters  from  respectable  citi- 
zens, containing  suggestions  that  were  frequently  valuable,  but  unfor- 
tunately they  were  such  as  should  have  been  made  months  before,  and 
some  of  them  at  a time  when  I was  not  in  the  department.  But  these 
suggestions,  whether  timely  and  valuable  in  themselves  or  not,  were 
rendered  worthless  to  me  by  reason  of  the  then  active  military  operations 
on  the  Aazoo  Biver  and  its  tributaries,  which  w' ere  constantly  diverting 
all  ot  my  boats  from  the  important  duty  of  transporting  subsistence  to 
tlie  indisiiensable  service  of  transporting  troops  and  munitions  of  war. 


292 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


LCiiAr.  XXXVI. 


This  was  also  the  case  iu  many  instances  where  provisions  were  oftered 
me  by  citizens.  1 was  offered  supplies  of  corn  and  meat,  bat  at  a time 
when,  from  the  proximity  of  the  enemy  and  other  causes,  it  was  utterly 
impracticable  for  me  to  make  them  available.  In  this  connection  I can- 
not forbear  saying  that  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten  where  subsistence  was 
offered  me,  the  offer  carried  with  it  a demand  for  transportation,  which 
it  was  entirely  out  of  my  power  to  furnish.  To  have  made  purchases 
under  such  circumstances  would  have  been  simply  ridiculous. 

A cargo  of  bacon,  which  had  been  run  up  Choctaw  Bayou  on  Aiiril  18 
to  avoid  the  enemy’s  gunboats  on  Bed  River,  was  by  the  energetic  ex- 
ertions of  Mr.  Howell  Hinds,  of  Jefferson  County,  Mississippi,  success- 
fully transported  from  the  bayou  across  the  river  to  Port  Gibson.  I 
was  extremely  anxious  to  get  this  meat  to  Port  Hudson,  but  the  diffi- 
culties of  transportation  prevented,  and  before  it  could  be  removed  by 
General  Bowen  to  a point  of  safety,  it  became  necessary  to  destroy  much 
of  it,  to  prevent  its  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  In  this  con- 
nection I again  refer  to  the  fact  that  when  I was  compelled  to  abandon 
Snyder’s  Mill,  there  were  at  least  30,000  bushels  of  corn  at  that  place. 
I mention  this  to  show  that  there  was  no  deficiency  of  corn  in  the  de- 
partment, but  that  the  great  and,  indeed,  insuperable  obstacle  was  the 
want  of  traus])ortation  by  dirt  road  and  the  almost  constant  and  daily 
interruiition  of  railroad  communication  on  the  Southern  road,  which 
was  the  only  means  of  transportation  of  subsistence  to  Vicksburg.  ’ 

I think  I have  now  shown  conclusively  that  I spared  no  exertions  to 
have  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson  abundantly  iirovisioned,  and  that 
whenever  the  supply  fell  short  of  the  demand  or  of  my  expectations  it 
was  caused  by  circumstances  wholly  beyond  my  control.  In  this  con- 
nection I may  add  that  I had  at  the  time  of  the  surrender  of  Vicksburg 
about  40,000  pounds  of  pork  and  bacon,  which  had  been  reserved  for 
the  subsistence  of  my  troops  in  the  event  of  attempting  to  cut  my  way 
out  of  the  city;  also,  51,241  pounds  of  rice,  5,000  bushels  of  peas,  92,234 
pounds  of  sugar,  3,240  iiounds  of  soap,  527  pounds  of  tallow  candles,  27 
pounds  of  Star  candles,  and  428,000  pounds  of  salt. 

Much  unnecessary  clamor  has  been  raised  about  the  want  of  ammu- 
nition in  Vicksburg.  I have  already  shown  that  my  su])])ly  of  ammu- 
nition was  large,  and  that  the  iirincipal,  indeed  the  onlj^,  deficiency 
was  in  musket-caps.  The  appendix  devoted  to  the  subject  of  ordnance 
will  demonstrate  that  I am  not  responsible  for  that  deficiency,  whatever 
its  extent  may  have  been.  I therefore  beg  special  attention  to  my  tele- 
grams to  Colonel  [J.]  Gorgas,  of  the  Ordnance  Department,  for  ord- 
nance and  ammunition,  commenced  as  early  as  ITovember,  within  three 
weeks  after  I assumed  command  of  the  department,  and  they  were  con- 
tinued persistently  up  to  almost  the  last  hour  of  uninterrupted  commu- 
nication with  Richmond.  I believe  that  the  Chief  of  Ordnance  fur- 
nished me  with  everything  in  his  power.  I only  desire  that  I may  not 
be  held  responsible  for  what  the  Government  could  not  furnish. 

I am  unable  as  yet  to  give  full  reports  of  the  casualties  at  Baker’s 
Greek,  Big  Black,  and  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg.  They  will  be  for- 
warded so  soon  as  division  commanders  shall  have  rendered  them  com- 
plete. The  same  with  reference  to  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores. 

Very  many  officers  and  soldiers  have  distinguished  themselves  by  i)ar- 
ticular  acts  of  gallantry,  or  have  rendered  themselves  conspicuous  by 
untiring  exertions  and  devotion  to  duty;  so  many,  indeed,  as  to  i)recludc 
the  i)ossibility  of  my  referring  to  each  in  the  body  of  this  report.  At- 
tention is,  therefore,  respectfully  invited  to  the  ap])endix  and  to  the 
reports  of  division,  brigade,  and  other  commanders. 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


293 


1 cannot,  however,  close  witlioiit  expressiiAi^  iny  esi)ecial  thanks  to 
]\Iaj.  Gens.  C.  L.  Stevenson,  John  11.  Forney,  and  M.  L,  Smith,  and  to 
Brijradier-Generals  Barton,  Gumming-,  Lee,  and  CoL  A.  W.  Beynolds, 
of  General  Stevenson’s  division;  to  Major-General  Forney’s  brigade 
commanders  (Brigadier-Generals  Hebert  and  Moore);  to  Maj.  Gen.  M. 
L.  Smith’s  brigade  commanders  (Brigadier-Generals  Shoup,  Baldwin, 
and  Vaughn);  to  Colonels  [E.]  Gates,  [T.  P.]  Dockery,  and  [F.  M.] 
Cockrell,  of  Bowen’s  division,  and  to  Colonel  [Edward]  Higgins,  com- 
manding the  heavy  batteries,  and  Colonel  [T.  N.]  Waul,  of  the  Texas 
Legion.  If  the  most  unremitting  attention  to  the  arduous  duties  of  their 
position  entitle  officers  to  commendation  and  respect,  they  have  each 
and  all  won  it  during  the  protracted  and  trying  siege. 

To  Maj.  Gen.  C.  L.  Stevenson  I am  particularly  indebted  for  much 
and  valuable  aid  in  many  ways  during  the  siege.  To  his  immediate 
supervision  was  principally  intrusted  the  subsistence  of  the  troops. 

To  the  officers  of  my  staff  I return  my  sincere  thanks  for  the  cheerful 
and  zealous  manner  in  which  they  have  discharged  all  their  duties. 
Col.  Thomas  H.  Taylor,  who  accompanied  me  on  the  field  at  Baker’s 
Creek,  and  who  during  the  siege  was  assigned  to  duty  as  inspector- 
general  and  commandant  of  the  post,  in  both  capacities'rendered  most 
valuable  service. 

Maj.  Jacob  Thompson,  inspector- general  of  the  department,  also  ac- 
companied me  on  the  field,  and  on  that  occasion,  as  on  all  others,  whether 
in  the  office  or  in  the  active  performance  of  the  duties  of  his  department, 
has  ever  shown  himself  zealous  and  competent.  Major  Thompson,  im- 
mediately after  the  retreat  into  Vicksburg,  was,  in  company  with  Major 
[Sturges]  Sprague,  dispatched  to  communicate  personally  with  General 
Johnston. 

Maj.  K.  AV.  Memminger,  assistant  adjutant-general  and  chief  of  staff*, 
and  Maj.  AV.  H.  McCardle,  assistant  adjutant- general,  have  for  many 
months  been  in  the  constant  performance  of  the  arduous  and  responsible 
duties  pertaining  to  the  adjutant-general’s  department.  It  is  little  to 
say  that  on  these  officers,  assisted  by  Second  Lieut.  F.  M.  Stafford,  C. 
S.  Army,  and  acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  has  devolved  a labor 
and  an  amount  of  business  scarcely  equaled  in  any  other  military  de- 
partment of  the  Confederacy.  Day  and  night  they  have  devoted  them- 
selves to  the  public  service,  and  I specially  commend  them  and  Maj.  J. 
Thompson  to  the  favorable  consideration  of  the  Government. 

Ko  officer  in  the  department  has  been  more  constantly  and  actively 
engaged  than  Maj.  Samuel  H.  Lockett,  chief  engineer.  His  professional 
skill  and  excellent  judgment  have  been  exhibited  wherever  occasion  re- 
quired it,  from  Grenada  to  Port  Hudson.  During  the  siege  of  Vicks- 
burg, none  exposed  themselves  more  fearlessly  to  danger  than  he  and 
his  gallant  assistants,  Capts.  Powhatan  Eobinson,  J.  M.  Couper,  J.  J. 
Conway,  D.  Wintter,  and  James  [T.]  Hogane,  and  Lieuts.  E.  W.  Mc- 
Mahon, W.  O.  Flynn,  George  Donnellan,  A.  W.  Gloster,  [E.  E.]  South- 
ard,   Blessing,  and  Mr.  [H.]  Ginder.  It  gives  me  pleasure  to  name 

them  and  to  ask  a recognition  of  their  merits. 

I consider  myself  to  have  been  particularly  fortunate  in  the  selection  of 
chief  quartermaster  of  the  Department  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Loui- 
siana. Maj.  L.  Mims  entered  upon  the  duties  of  that  office  immediately 
on  my  assuming  command,  and  has  proved  himself  eminently  qualified 
for  the  position.  His  energy  and  capacity  I have  rarely  seen  equaled. 
I believe  no  man  could  have  done  more  with  the  means  at  his  disposal. 
Major  Mims  was  greatly  aided  by  that  most  excellent  and  efficient  offi- 
cer, Maj.  George  Whitfield,  quartermaster  in  charge  of  transportation 


294 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


(lepartuieut.  Maj.  Tlieo.  Jolinstoii,  chief  of  subsistence,  lias  been  un- 
tiring in  bis  efforts  to  provide  for  so  large  a command,  lie  bad  great 
difficulties  to  contend  with  and  generally  bas  met  them  successfully.  I 
am  also  greatly  indebted  to  Maj.  A.  B.  Cooke,  my  chief  paymaster,  for 
the  ability  and  energy  be  bas  displayed  in  the  execution  of  the  business 
of  bis  office. 

To  Maj.  G.  L.  Gillespie,  chief  commissary  of  General  Stevenson’s 
division,  and  acting  chief  commissary  of  the  army  during  the  siege,  1 
owe  my  thanks.  Much  is  due  to  his  energy  and  good  judgment.  Also 
to  Major  [Richard]  Orme,  General  Stevenson’s  chief  quartermaster. 

Surg.  E.  H.  Bryan,  acting  medical  director  of  the  army  of  Vicks- 
burg, accompanied  me  on  the  field,  and  performed  all  his  duties  there 
and  during  the  siege  to  my  entire  satisfaction. 

Capt.  [J.]  Brice,  ordnance  storekeeper,  displayed  great  ability  and 
devotion  to  duty  during  the  siege.  He  was  ever  where  he  should  have 
been,  and  was  emphatically  the  right  man  in  the  right  place. 

Col.  C.  A.  Fuller,  inspector  of  heavy  artillery ; Lieut.  Col.  J.  S.  Saun- 
ders (Provisional  Army),  chief  of  artillery  of  the  department,  performed 
their  respective  duties  satisfactorily,  and  Colonel  Saunders  accompanied 
me  on  the  field,  where  he  rendered  me  valuable  service. 

Col.  W.  T.  Withers,  chief  of  field  artillery  with  the  army,  was  active 
and  attentive  to  his  duties  and  prompt  in  the  execution  of  orders.  In 
addition  to  his  duties  as  chief  of  artillery,  Colonel  Withers  continued 
in  the  command  of  his  regiment.  He  also  accompanied  me  on  the  field. 

Capt.  C.  McRae  Selph,  assistant  adjutant- general,  on  duty  with  Col. 
T.  H.  Taylor,  was  of  great  assistance  to  that  excellent  officer,  more  par- 
ticularly during  the  siege.  He  also  accompanied  me  on  the  field,  and 
was  constantly  engaged  in  the  transmission  of  orders. 

To  my  personal  staff* — Lieut.  J.  H.  Morrison,  aide-de-camp  ; Lieut.  J. 
C.  Taylor,  aide-de-camp;  and  Lieut.  H.  C.  Tupper,  Twenty-fourth  Mis- 
sissippi Volunteers,  and  aide-de-camp — I am  greatly  indebted  not  only 
for  service  on  the  field,  but  for  much  laborious  duty  in  the  office,  and  I 
commend  them  to  the  favorable  consideration  of  the  Government. 

Capt.  L.  M.  Montgomery,  being  unable  to  reach  the  Trans 'Mississipi)i 
Department  to  which  he  had  been  assigned,  tendered  his  services  as  vol- 
unteer aide-de-camp.  I found  him  an  energetic  and  gallant  officer  and 
a most  valuable  assistant.  To  him  and  to  Maj.  Sturges  Sprague,  vol- 
unteer aide-de-camp,  who  also  accompanied  me  on  the  field  and  was 
constantly  engaged  in  the  transmission  of  orders,  I tender  my  sincere 
thanks.  Also  to  Capt.  J.  M.  Couper,  Fourteenth  [Twentieth]  Missis- 
sit)pi,  who  served  me  as  volunteer  aide-de-camp  on  the  occasion  of  the 
battle  of  Baker’s  Creek. 

Captain  [J.  W.]  Barclay  and  Lieutenant  [Harris]  Wilkerson,  of  Bowen’s 
division,  with  50  braA^e  fellows  of  that  command,  are  entitled  to  special 
mention  for  their  gallant  conduct  on  the  night  of  May  30,  in  burning 
the  sunken  gunboat  Cincinnati,  which  they  accomplished  as  far  as  was 
practicable  with  an  iron-clad  vessel  in  her  condition.  They  brought  ofi’ 
her  flag,  which  I presented  to  them. 

My  thanks  are  also  due  to  the  following  officers  and  men,  who  ren- 
dered valuable  service  in  transmitting  dispatches  through  the  enemy’s 
lines  to  and  from  General  Johnston,  viz : Captains  Hill,  Sanders,  and 
Couper,  Lieut.  G.  D.  Wise,  Lieutenant  Smith  (of  the  Twentieth  Missis- 
sippi Regiment),  and  Privates  [E.  G.]  Walker  and  [Charles]  Mclnroc 
(of  Johnson’s  cavalry),  Lamar  Fontaine  (a  discharged  soldier),  and  Pri- 
vate W.  H.  Webb,  of  the  Twentieth  Mississippi  Regiment,  who  twice  suc- 
cessfully passed  from  Vicksburg  to  General  Johnston’s  headquarter.s. 


CiiAr.  XXXVl.J 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


2&5 


Sergt.  Thomas  r.  Lynch,  First  Louisiana  Artillery,  commanding  the 
river  police,  by  his  vigilance  and  activity,  reMered  most  valuable  serv- 
ices throughout  the  siege,  and  is  entitled  to,  as  he  deserves,  the  con- 
sideration of  the  Government. 

Sergt.  R.  H.  [G.]  Gaines,  Company  K,  Twenty-third  Alabama  Regi- 
ment, was  conspicuous  for  his  personal  gallantry  at  BakeFs  Creek.  The 
men  at  a gun  having  been  all  disabled,  he  served  the  piece  alone,  firing 
from  10  to  15  rounds.  ^ ^ 

Crdnance  Sergt.  W.  F.  Luckett  was  also  distinguished  for  his  coolness 
and  daring,  and  was  killed  while  carrying  ammunition  through  a verv 
heavy  fire. 

Private  Pudic,  of  the  Nineteenth  Arkansas,  was  also  conspicuous  for 
his  heroic  bearing.  Constantly  in  the  thickest  of  the  fight,  always  in 
advance  of  his  regiment,  unheeding  the  orders  to  retire,  his  gallantrv 
won  universal  admiration.  7 j 

engineer  corps,  my  thanks  are  due.  On  May 
IJ,  1 dispatched  him  to  Richmond  with  maps  and  valuable  papers.  In 
the  tace  of  many  obstacles  he  succeeded  in  passing  the  enemy’s  lines 
and  successfully  discharged  his  mission.  ’ 

Maj.  J.  D.  Bradford,  assistant  inspector-general,  is  entitled  to  my 
tnanks  for  valuable  and  important  services  on  several  occasions,  and  I 
regret  that  I was  by  his  illness  at  the  time  of  the  investment  deprived 
of  them  during  the  siege. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  a brief  tribute  to  the  memory  of  two 
of  the  best  soldiers  in  the  Confederate  service.  I refer  to  Mai  Gen 
John  S.  Bowen  and  Brig.  Gen.  Martin  E.  Green.  ‘ ‘ 


^ * Always  faithful,  zeal- 

ous, and  brave,  they  fell  as  became  them  in  the  discharge  of  their  duty 
(xeueral  Green  died  with  a bullet  in  his  brain  upon  the  lines  he  had  so 
long  and  so  gallantly  defended.  General  Bowen,  having  passed  scath- 
Port  blocKly  scenes  of  Shiloh,  luka,  Corinth,  Grand  Gulf, 

ort  Gibson,  Bakers  Greek,  and  Vicksburg,  perished  by  disease  on  the 
marcli  from  Vicksburg  to  Jackson,  after  the  capitulation.  I can  utter 
no  higher  eulogium  upon  him  than  to  say  he  always  performed  his  duty 
and  never  avoided  danger. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Lieutenant-General, 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  liichmond,  Va. 


Headquarters, 
Gainesville,  Ala.,  August  26, 1863. 

operations  in  Vicksburg,  I omitted  to  mention 
w ' ^^^thews,  chief  of  ordnance  for  Stevenson’s  division  and 

< mg  chief  for  the  entire  command,  as  entitled  to  commendation  for 
tiie  active  and  zealous  performance  of  all  his  duties.  Please  make  the 
insertion  in  my  report. 

t am,  general,  very  respectfully,  &c,, 

J.  C.  PEAIBERTON, 

1 Cl  /f  Lieutenant-General. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General^  Lichmond. 


296 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

[Appendix  A.  ] 

Corresj^ondence  relative  to  Subsistence. 

Commissary  Office,  Canton^  March  7, 180.3. 

Maj.  Theo.  Johnston, 

Chief  of  Subsistence^  Jacicson,  Miss. : 

Dear  Sir  : My  agent  returned  this  evening  from  some  of  the  counties 
above  this  place,  and  has  purchased  some  bacon  and  corn,  which  will 
be  in  in  a few  days.  He  reports  a good  deal  of  bacon  for  sale.  Some 
are  willing  to  take  50  cents;  some  ask  as  much  as  75  cents  a pound. 
He  says  the  farmers  are  expecting  to  have  their  meat  impressed,  and 
will  not  sell  until  it  is  impressed,  and  then  they  will  be  willing  to  di- 
vide, believing  that  if  they  sell  all  they  can  spare,  an  order  might  come 
to  impress  the  balance.  My  agent  says  that  by  setting  the  price  at  50 
cents,  and  an  order  to  impress,  he  thinks  he  can  get  some  30,000  or  50,000 
pounds  in  two  or  three  counties  above  here. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

W.  W.  MERIWETHBlt, 
Captain  and  Acting  Commissary  of  Subsistence. 


Macon,  Miss.,  March  7,  18G3. 


Maj.  Theo.  Johnston: 

Colonel  Baskerville,  of  Columbus,  Miss.,  has  an  agent  here  whom  he 
has  instructed  to  pay  70  cents  for  bacon.  What  can  be  expected  for  us 
to  do  when  such  a course  is  permitted  by  Government  agents'? 

[W.  C.]  DOWD, 

[C.  M.]  BOYCE, 

Captains  and  Acting  Commissaries  of  Subsistence. 


Jackson',  Miss.,  March  7, 18G3. 
Captains  Dowd  and  Boi^e,  Macon,  Miss.: 

I know  no  Government  agent  by  the  name  of  Baskerville.  There  is  a 
merchant  of  that  name  who  resides  at  Columbus.  You  are  authorized 
to  impress  bacon  in  the  hands  of  speculators.  'No  authority  has  been 
given  to  pay  70  cents  for  bacon.  Take  the  bacon. 

THEO.  JOHNSTON, 

Major  and  Chief  of  Subsistence. 


Office  Chief  of  Subsistence,  Dept.  Miss,  and  E.  La., 

Jachson,  March  9,  18G3. 

Maj.  E.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Jachson  ; 

Major  : Inclosed  I have  the  honor  to  forward  consolidated  report  of 
commissary  stores  at  the  different  posts  and  depots  within  the  depart- 
ment. Since  the  1st  instant,  I have  had  about  900  hogs  at  Port  Hudson 
slaughtered,  which  will  increase  the  salt-meat  rations  about  300,000; 
1,000  hogs  I have  ordered  sent  to  Vicksburg.  It  is  too  late  now  to  at- 
tempt to  cure  meat,  and  I have  ordered  hogs  killed  and  issued  to  the 
troops  at  that  idace.  By  doing  this,  I think  I will  have  a sufficiency  of 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


297 


meat  to  subsist  tbe  troops  well  uutil  beef-cattle  can  be  furnisbed.  There 
have  been  received  at  Vicksburg  since  this  report  was  made  up  600,000 
rations  of  rice  and  other  stores  that  were  in  transitu  on  the  Mobile  and 
Ohio  and  Mississippi  Central  Eailroads.  Many  of  the  stores  that  were 
on  these  roads  are  not  reported  at  all,  for  the  reason  that  they  were 
shipped  before  the  1st  instant,  and  not  received  prior  to  that  date  at 
Vicksburg.  It  will  be  seen  by  reference  to  the  report  that  there  is  a 
larger  accumulation  of  stores  at  Port  Hudson  than  elsewhere ; a portion 
of  them  has  been  ordered  to  Vicksburg.  There  is  a boat  recently  out  of 
Eed  Eiver,  now  in  Big  Black,  with  180,000  rations  of  bacon,  530  hogs, 
and  3,000  pounds  of  lard  for  Vicksburg.  The  railroads  being  now  in 
running  condition,  large  quantities  of  stores  will  be  sent  to  Vicksburg 
from  points  on  these  roads.  • Besides  the  boat  now  in  Big  Black,  the 
steamer  Hine,  with  a load  of  commissary  stores  out  of  Eed  Eiver,  is  now 
at  Port  Hudson. 

I am,  major,  &c., 

THEO.  JOHNSTON, 

Major  and  Chief  of  Subsistence. 


Office  Chief  of  Subsistence,  Dept.  Miss,  and  E.  La., 

Jacicson,  March  9,  1863. 

Maj.  E.  W.  Memminger,  Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Major:  Inclosed  is  a letter  from  an  ofiQcer  at  Canton,  and  copies  of 
dispatches  from  officers  at  Macon,  and  replies  thereto.*  I respectfully 
request  that  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  determine  upon  such 
course  as  he  may  deem  advisable  in  relation  to  the  purchase  of  bacon, 
bulk  pork,  and  beeves  within  the  department,  and  authorize  impress- 
ments of  the  articles  that  cannot  otherwise  be  obtained. 

I am,  major,  &c., 

THEO.  JOHHSTON, 

Major  and  Chief  of  Subsistence. 


Jackson,  March  18,  1863. 
Maj.  Gen.  Prank  Gardner,  Fort  Hudson  : 

******* 

Eeports  are  daily  made  to  me  of  the  waste  of  stores  at  Port  Hudson. 
Whether  these  reports  be  true  you  are  best  able  to  determine.  I would 
respectfully  request  that,  in  view  of  the  scarcity  of  subsistence  stores  and 
the  difficulty  of  collecting  them,  you  will  urge  upon  the  subsistence  offi- 
cers the  importance  of  a proper  preservation  of  all  stores  that  arrive  at 
Port  Hudson.  * * * 

THEO.  JOHNSTON, 

Major  and  Chief  of  Subsistence. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

Jaclcson,  Miss.^  March  18,  1863. 
Major  [L.]  Mims,  Chief  Quartermaster : 

The  general  desires  to  know  how  many  wagons  he  can  calculate  upon 
to  transport  provisions  to  Port  Hudson  via  Osyka.  He  directs  that,  as 
the  roads  are  in  pretty  good  order,  you  obtain  all  the  wagons  practica- 


Not  found. 


298  MISSISSIPPI,  ^VEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXX Vi. 

ble  to  on  this  road.  The  inclosed  letter*  he  refers  to  you,  as  con- 
taining many  truths  and  valuable  suggestions  both  for  your  department 
and  the  commissary.  He  desires  the  letter  to  be  returned. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

J.  D.  BEABFOED, 

Major,  &c. 

Headquaetees,  &c., 
Jaclcson,  Miss.,  March  18,  1863. 
Major-General  Stevenson,  Yiclcslurg,  Miss. : 

Put  every  man  at  work,  if  necessary,  in  unloading  the  cars.  Trans- 
portation on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Eailroad  almost  stopped  for  want  of 
cars.  Send  Mobile  and  Ohio  cars  first.  Send  all  back  as  fast  as  un- 
loaded, 

J.  0.  PEMBEETON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Headquaetees,  &c., 
Jachson,  Miss.,  March  18, 1863. 
Major-General  Gaednee^  Port  Hudson: 

Send  all  spare  wagons  to  Osyka,  to  aid  in  transportation  of  supplies. 

J.  C.  PEMBEETOK, 

Lieittenant-  General. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  March  18, 1863. 
Major-General  Stevenson,  yichshurg.  Miss. : 

Have  every  exertion  made  to  repair  break  in  road  near  Vicksburg. 
See  Colonel  [W.  M.]  Wadley  on  the  subject.  The  two  boats  passed 
Eoduey  at  4.30  p.  m. 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  March  18  [19 1863. 
Major-General  Gaednee,  Port  Hudson,  Miss. : 

Hartford  and  Monongahela  passed  Grand  Gulf,  going  up  at  7 a.  m. 
One  supply-boat  at  a time  might  run  down  and  unload  at  Port  Hudson. 
It  is  so  important  that  the  risk  might  be  run,  but  perfect  arrangements 
must  be  made  to  destroy  her,  if  necessary.  Can  you  arrange  it*? 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON^, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  March  10,  1863. 
Brigadier-General  Chalmees,  Panola,  Miss.: 

Have  the  bacon  and  corn  forwarded  to  this  point  as  rapidly  as  pos- 
sible. 


J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Lieutenant-General,  Commanding.  \ 


) 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


299 


Jac'kson,  AIiss.,  March  19,  1863. 
Jloii.  James  A.  Seddon,  t:iGcretary  of  War : 

I propose  to  endeavor  to  subsist  my  army  as  hitiierto — have  agents 
with  large  amount  of  funds  to  make  purchases  of  corn,  beef,  and  bacon 
west  of  Mississippi  Eiver,  and  also  collecting  some  supplies  in  this 
State.  The  instructions  of  Commissary-General  to  Major  Johnston  to 
withdraw  his  agents  from  west  of  the  Mississippi  Eiver,  and  to  make  all 
j)urchases  through  Lieutenant-Colonel  [W.  A.]  Broadwell,  would  upset 
all  my  arrangements,  and  is,  besides,  impracticable.  Colonel  Broadwell 
has  not  been  within  this  department  for  about  six  weeks.  I am  glad  to 
receive  assistance  from  him,  but  chief  of  subsistence  of  this  department 
must,  of  course,  be  under  my  control.  Have  released,  pursuant  to  your 
order,  all  sugar  except  six  weeks’  supply  for  this  department.  iSTaviga- 
tion  of  Mississippi  Eiver  again  cut  off;  neither  subsistence  nor  ord- 
nance can  come  or  go.  I hope  you  will  not  attribute  my  acts  or  requests 
to  any  motives  but  good  of  the  service.  I have  none  other. 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Lieutenant-  General^  Comm andin g. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  March  19,  1863. 
Major-General  Gardner,  Fort  Mudson,  Miss. : 

If  notified  by  General  Stevenson  that  boats  pass  np  by  Vicksburg, 

send  about  200,000  pounds and  10,000  bushels  of  corn,  of  that 

which  will  arrive  by  boats  at  Port  Hudson,  immediately,  up  Big  Black. 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Lieutenant- General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters,  &c., 

Jachson,  March  19,  1863. 
Major-General  Stevenson,  Yichshurg.,  Miss. : 

General  : I am  directed  by  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  to 
say  that  the  chief  quartermaster  and  commissary  of  the  department 
have  been  directed  to  instruct  their  agents  engaged  in  purchasing  and 
transporting  supplies  of  grain  along  the  Vazoo  and  its  tributaries  that 
they  will  maintain  a uniformity  of  prices,  avoiding  all  competition.  It 
is  desired  that  all  instructions  as  to  purchases  in  this  section  should 
come  through  the  chiefs  of  the  departments. 

I am,  respectful Iv,  &c., 

E.  W.  MEMMINGEE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

. Headquarters,  &c., 

JacJcson,  March  19,  1863. 
Maj.  Theo.  Johnston,  Chief  of  Subsistence: 

Major  : I am  directed  by  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  to  say 
that  in  reference  to  supplies  of  grain,  &c.,  collected  on  the  Yazoo  and 
its  tributaries  to  be  at  Snyder’s  Bluff*,  you  will  make  such  ar- 

rangements with  Maj.  L.  Mims,  chief  quartermaster,  both  as  regards 
the  purchase  and  transportation  of  such  supplies,  as  will  secure  a uni- 
formity in  the  purchase  price  and  the  cost  of  transportation.  You  will 
also  see  that  all  your  agents  obtain  and  follow  such  instruction,  and 


300 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CriAr.  XXXVr. 


tbiit  uniform  price  is  established  throughout.  You  will  see  that  the 
agent  of  the  commissary  of  the  second  military  district  follows  similar 
instructions.  The  object  to  be  maintained  is  uniformity  in  price,  that 
no  competition  arise  between  the  agents  of  the  quartermaster’s  and 
commissary  departments.  He  also  directs  you  establish  on  some  steam 
transport  a mill  for  the  i)urpose  of  grinding  corn  at  sucb  points  as  is 
convenient,  as  he  is  informed  that  there  are  many  transports  that  can 
be  used  as  such. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  W.  MEMMINGER, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

JaclcsoUj  March  20,  1863. 

Maj.  L.  Mims,  Chief  Quartermaster : 

Major  : The  lieutenant-general  commanding  directs  me  to  inclose 
this  dispatch  to  you,  and  say  to  you  that  you  will  take  measures  to 
provide  boats  to  transport  troojis  up  the  river  and  supplies  down.  You 
will  inform  him  what  boats  you  can  obtain.  Boats  of  larger  class  will 
be  retained  for  the  transportation  on  the  Yazoo,  and  those  of  the  smaller 
class  kept  for  the  navigation  of  the  small  streams  and  the  Tallahat- 
chee.  The  general  desires  a complete  organization  of  the  boat  system 
on  the  Yazoo.  Such  boats  as  are  being  armed  and  clad  with  cotton 
will  be  exempt  from  these  arrangements. 

I am,  respectfully. 


J.  D.  BRADFORD, 

Major,  d'C. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

Jaehson,  March  20,  1863. 

Col.  B.  S.  Ewell,  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Tullajioma  : 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  the  within  communication  of 
Major  Mims,  chief  quartermaster,  with  regard  to  complaints  made 
against  his  department,  with  his  reply.*  I fully  concur,  and  think  the 
case  so  palpable  as  not  to  require  that  further  be  said.  Should  there 
be  any  charges  specifically  brought  against  any  officer  of  the  quarter- 
master’s or  commissary  department  in  this  command,  I will  use  every 
effort  to  have  the  case  thoroughly  investigated.  I deem  it  scarce  nec- 
essary to  say  to  you  that  the  efforts  which  have  brought  complaint 
against  myself  and  the  officers  of  the  quartermaster’s  and  commissary 
departments  acting  under  my  instructions  have  been  entirely  for  the 
public  good. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  0.  PEMBERTO^l, 
Lieutenant- General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

Jachson,  March  20,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor,  Commanding,  dc.,  Alexandria: 

The  lieutenant-general  commanding  directs  me  to  say,  in  reply  to 
your  letter  of  12th  instant,  that  he  addressed  General  Smith  only  after  : 


Not  foil  11(1, 


Chai’.  XXXVL] 


gp:neral  reports. 


301 


repeated  assurauces  from  diftereiit  parties  that  you  had  prohibited  his 
agents  in  the  purchase  of  supplies ; that  Port  Hudson  depends  almost 
entirely  for  supplies  on  the  other  side  of  the  river.  Further,  that  he  has 
ever  thought  and  is  glad  to  hear  that  you  are  willing  to  assist  him,  as 
he  is  also  to  assist  you  when  able. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

J.  C.  TAYLOE, 

Aide-de-Camp. 

March  21,  18G3. 

******* 

I found  a large  quantity  of  corn  on  the  levee,  notwithstanding  there 
had  been  no  arrival  previous  to  the  Trent  for  three  or  four  days.  I also 
noticed  on  the  levee,  within  a few  feet  of  the  water,  the  410  barrels  of 
salt  Avhich  was  discharged  there  more  than  a month  since.  I saw  many 
soldiers  shelling  corn  about  the  landing  merely  to  obtain  the  cobs  to 
throw  at  one  another.  Others  were  filling  their  haversacks  with  shelled 
corn  and  corn  in  the  ear.  * * * Captain  Woods  stated  that  he 

had  seen  a large  quantity  of  the  bulk  pork  remain  in  the  rain  on  the 
levee  for  a week,  and  half  the  lot  was  spoiled  and  unfit  for  use.  * # * 

Mr.  Macauley  told  me  that  25,000  bushels  of  corn  were  submerged  on  the 
levee  at  Port  Hudson,  and  several  parties  stated  that  more  subsistence 
had  been  wasted  than  consumed. 

******* 

GEO.  CAMMACK. 


March  21,  1803. 

Maj.  E.  W.  Memminger,  Assistant  Adjutant- G eneral : 

******* 

I am  informed  by  Mr.  F.  D.  Conrad,  a gentleman  of  unimpeachable 
credit,  that  about  the  time  when  the  gunboat  Queen  of  the  West  was 
captured  by  our  forces,  there  was  a large  quantity  of  corn  upon  the 
banks  of  the  river  at  Port  Hudson,  which  remained  unstored  for  eight 
or  ten  days.  At  the  expiration  of  this  time  it  was  removed  from  the 
lauding  and  stored  in  a damaged  condition.  * * * 

THEO.  JOHNSTON, 

Major  and  Chief  of  Subsistence. 

P.  S. — Capt.  J.  V.  Duvalde,  of  the  parish  of  West  Baton  Eouge,  was 
in  my  office  when  Mr.  Conrad  made  his  statement,  and  said  either  that 
he  had  heard  of  or  had  himself  seen  the  condition  of  commissary  stores 
at  Port  Hudson  stated  by  Mr.  Conrad  as  existing. 


Headquarters,  &c., 

Jaclcson,  March  21,  1863. 

Maj.  L.  Mims,  Chief  Quartermaster : 

Major:  The  lieutenant-general  commanding  directs  that  you  will 
rc(inire  the  quartermaster  at  Vicksburg  to  report  to  you  the  arrival  of 
every  train  of  supplies  and  ordnance,  reporting  the  number  of  car-loads 
of  each.  You  will  render  a similar  report  to  these  headquarters. 

I am,  imijor,  &c., 

J.  H.  BEADFOEH, 

Major  and  Assistant  Inspector- General. 


302 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Jackson,  Jfarc'/i.  21,  1863. 

Major-General  Gardner, 

Port  Hudson  : 

Send  no  boat  here  until  you  hear  from  myself  or  General  Stevenson 
that  the  river  is  clear.  I have  every  confidence  of  your  using  every 
exertion  to  unload  the  boats.  Telegraph  every  day  the  amount  of  corn 
and  meat  on  hand. 

J.  C.  PEMBEKTON, 
Lieutenant-  General^  Commanding. 


Ueadquarters,  &c., 

Jaelison,  Mar  eh  21,  1863. 

Maj.  Theo.  Johnston, 

Chief  of  Subsistence: 

Major  : The  lieutenant-general  directs  that  you  send  a bonded  com- 
missary to  the  Yazoo,  with  money  to  make  any  necessary  payments  due 
there,  and  to  purchase  supplies  not  only  for  the  troops  at  SnydePs  Mill, 
but  for  General  Loring  and  all  the  troops  in  and  around  the  Tallahatchee, 
Sunflower,  and  Deer  Creek.  You  can,  at  your  option,  employ  Mr.  John 
McFarland  for  this  purpose,  making  him  either  disbursing  and  pur- 
chasing agent,  or  simply  an  agent  for  the  procuring  of  supplies  as  above. 
He  is  reported  as  an  active,  energetic,  and  reliable  gentleman,  and  a 
most  trustworthy  agent.  In  case  you  employ  Mr.  McFarland  as  agent, 
you  can  supply  him  with  funds  to  make  immediate  payments,  or  cause 
all  his  bills  to  be  paid  on  presentation.  The  rates  of  purchase  must 
conform  to  those  established. 

I am,  major,  &c., 


J.  D.  BEADFOED, 

Major^  &c. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

Jackson  J March  22,  1863. 

Major-General  Buckner, 

Commanding.,  &c.,  Mobile,  Ala. : 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  request  that  a lot  of  flour  (490  bar- 
rels), seized  in  Mobile,  be  released,  and  transportation  allowed  to  its 
destination,  Capt.  G.  A.  Woodward,  Vicksburg.  This  flour  was  pur- 
chased for  use  in  the  commissary  department,  and  is  much  needed  here. 
You  will  remember  that  all  produce  not  grown  or  raised  in  this  depart- 
ment is  allowed  to  pass  freely  to  Mobile. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  EEMBEETON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Jackson,  March  22,  1863. 

Major-General  Stevenson:  S 

Notify  Colonel  when  it  is  safe  to  send  boats  up  river  from  ^ 

Natchez  or  Eed  Eiver.  f 

J.  C.  I’EMBEKTOX,  i. 

Lieutenant- Generalj  Commandiny.  T 


CiiAr.  XXXVI.J 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


303 


Jackson,  March  22,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  S.  Bowen, 

Grand  Gulf]  Miss. : 

Bo  not  take  more  tiian  ten  days’  sui)plies  from  steamer  Hine.  I 
want  the  Hine  to  go  np  to  bridge,  if  possible. 

J.  C.  BEMBERTOJS;, 
Lieutenant-  General^  Commanding. 


Office  of  Chief  of  Subsistence,  Bept.  Miss,  and  E.  La., 

JaclcsoUj  Miss.^  March  23,  1863. 
MaJ.  11.  W.  Memminger,  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Jackson,  Miss. : 

Major  : Your  letter  of  instructions  of  the  19th  instant  inclosing  a 
communication  from  W.  J.  Britton,  esq.,  received.  Belative  to  that  por- 
tion of  it  instructing  concert  of  action  between  Major  [L.J  Mims  and  my- 
self, in  order  to  secure  a uniformity  in  the  purchase  price  of  articles  on 
the  part  of  our  respective  agents,  I would  reply  that  such  arrangement 
bas  already  been  made,  and  by  reference  to  the  inclosed  papers*  you 
will  perceive  that,  as  earlj^  as  February  13, 1 instructed  Mr,  John  McFar- 
land to  take  possession  of  the  steam  transport  Edward  J.  Gay,  and  send 
her  immediately  to  Snyder’s  Bluff,  to  place  a grist-mill  upon  her,  and 
use  her  for  storing  and  grinding  corn  into  meal,  to  be  turned  over  to  the 
commissary  for  the  troops  on  Yazoo  Eiver.  You  will  perceive  that  the 
boat  was  taken  for  some  other  purpose.  The  commissary  of  the  Sec- 
ond Military  Bistrict  has  been  furnished  with  the  list  of  prices  govern- 
ing the  agents  of  Major  Mims  and  myself. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THEO.  JOHNSTON, 

Major  and  Chief  of  Subsistence. 


* Jackson,  March  23,  1863. 

Major-General  Stevenson,  Vicksburg: 

General  Chalmers  is  paying  30  cents  per  pound  for  bacon  at  Panola, 
while  Major  [T.  B.]  Keed’s  agent  is  offering  50  cents.  This  must  be 
stopped.  Major  Feed’s  agent  must  not  pay  more  than  General  Chal- 
mers. 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 

Lieutenant-  General. 

Jackson,  March  23,  1863. 

General  Chalmers,  Lanola,  Miss. : 

General  Stevenson  has  been  directed  to  notify  Major  Eeed  not  to  pay 
more  for  bacon  than  vour  agents. 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Lieutenant-  Genera  I,  Commanding. 


Jackson,  March  24,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  C.  L.  Stevenson  : 

Additional  boats  have  been  ordered  to  Snyder’s  Mill,  and  it  is  thought 
they  must  be  there  by  this  time.  Additional  urgent  orders  have  been 


Not  found. 


304 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAl*.  XXX7J. 


given  to  send  all  the  boats  that  can  be  controlled.  It  is  impossible  to 
do  more  than  has  been  done. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTOK, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Jackson,  March  24, 1863. 

General  Bowen,  Grand  Gulf:  • 

ISTotify  at  Rodney  and  Katchez  if  either  of  the  Federal  gunboats  passes 
down,  as  my  object  is  that  boats  may  run  from  Red  River  into  Big 
Black  with  subsistence. 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-General,  Commanding. 


Jackson,  March  24,  1863. 

G.  W.  'KooiiiTZ,  Natchez  : 

Send  courier  up  Red  River  to  notify  the  boats  Charm,  Texas,  and 
J.  H.  Tucker  that  I wish  them  to  go  up  Big  Black.  They  should  stop 
at  Rodney,  and  obtain  all  information  in  regard  to  movements  of  Fed- 
eral gunboats. 


J.  G.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Jackson,  March  24, 1863. 

General  Bowen,  Grand  Gulf : 

I have  ordered  the  boats  Charm,  Texas,  and  J.  H.  Tucker,  loaded 
with  subsistence,  up  Big  Black  River. 


J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Jackson,  March  25,  1863. 
Major-General  Stevenson,  Yiclcsburg,  Miss.-: 

The  Charm  is  at  Natchez,  loaded  with  meat.  Can  she  run  for  Big 
Black  with  safety?  Answer  immediately,  and,  if  so,  telegraph  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel [W.  S.]  Lovell  at  Natchez. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant- General,  Commanding. 


Jackson,  March  25,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  Bowen,  Grand  Gulf : 

The  Charm  is  at  Natchez,  loaded  with  meat.  Will  it  be  safe  to  let 
her  run  uj)  to  Big  Black?  If  so,  telegraj)!!  Lieut.  Col.  W.  S.  Lovell 
at  Natchez.  Answer  immediately. 

3.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Chai*.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


305 


JacksoNj  March  25,  18G3. 
Brig.  Gen.  John  S.  Bowen,  Grand  Gulf: 

Use  your  judgment  in  collecting  the  corn  whenever  you  deem  it  safe 
and  can  get  a boat. 


J.  C.  PEMBERTOlSr, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Jackson,  March  27,  18G3. 
Maj.  Theo.  Johnston,  Chief  of  Suhsistence: 

I am  directed  by  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  to  say,  in  reply 
to  your  communication  of  the  25th  instant,  that  you  are  authorized  to 
exchange  salt  for  bacon  at  the  rates  you  propose. 

I am,  major,  &c., 

H.  G.  TUPPEE, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


Oefice  Post  Commissary, 

Port  Hudson,  La.,  March  29,  18G3. 

Maj.  T.  E.  Willson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Major:  The  letters  of  Maj.  Theodore  Johnston  and  Lieut.  George 
Cammack,  of  the  21st  instant,  which  have  been  referred  to  me  for  ex- 
planation, are  remarkable  official  papers.  They  are  composed  almost 
entirely  of  statements  made  by  persons  unknown  to  me,  and,  for  aught 
I laiow,  quite  irresponsible.  Certainly  their  accounts  are  in  the  main 
without  foundation,  and  evidently  engendered  by  ill-feeling  or  a wanton 
spirit  of  fault-finding.  It  is  harassing  to  have  labors  usually  extending 
far  into  the  night  protracted  still  farther  by  the  necessity  of  answering 
charges  so  vague,  groundless,  and  captious.  At  the  tim'e  to  which  Mr. 
Conrad  refers,  I had  no  corn  here  at  all,  and  was  drawing  upon  the  quar- 
termaster’s department  for  my  daily  supply.  Of  the  five  boats  said  by 

Lieutenant  Cammack  to  have  arrived  during  his  stay,  three the  Trent 

lied  Chief,  and  Starlight — were  consigned  to  me.  The  others  came  to 
the  quartermaster,  as  he  might  have  learned  had  he  inquired  at  official 
sources  as  eagerly  as  he  seems  to  have  done  of  idlers  and  casual 
passers-by.  The  large  quantity  of  corn  which  he  saw  upon  the  levee 
was  a small  part  of  the  cargoes  discharged  at  the  time  of  the  bombard- 
ment, which  was  being  shucked  and  hauled  away  as  fast  as  the  meager 
Eausportation  and  the  difficulty  of  access  to  the  lauding  j)ermitted. 
llie  same  was  the  case  with  the  salt.  The  best  vindication  of  this  de- 
nartmeut,  and  the  proof  of  the. justness  of  the  reasons  assigned,  lie  in 
the  celerity  with  which  the  whole  landing  has  been  cleared  since  the 
requisite  transportation  has  been  obtained. 

The  statement  regarding  soldiers  throwing  corn  at  each  other  and 
stealing  would  be  puerile  were  it  not  for  the  exaggeration,  which  is 
clearly  malicious.  The  young  gentleman  who  makes  it  must  have  seen 
out  little  service,  and  knew  still  less  of  working  fatigue  details,  or  he 
would  not  have  hazarded  his  reputation  upon  so  frail  a venture.  As  to 
the  unloading  the  Starlight  and  steamboats  generally,  the  small  landing 
was  crowded,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  statement  of'the  lieutenant  that 
leie  were  five  boats  here  at  the  time,  and  it  is  quite  reasonable  that 
me  labor  should  be  directed  to  one  at  a time,  to  give  space  and  to  save 
20  R R—YOL  XXIY,  PT  I 


306 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAl*.  XXX  VI. 


the  wastage  which  would  result  from  puttieg  off  corn  in  situations  in- 
accessible to  wagons.  The  statements  of  the  anonymous  ‘‘  captain  of 
the  Trent”  are  in  the  sense  in  which  they  are  meant — false ; as  is  also 
that  of  Captain  Woods  in  regard  to  the  bulk  pork,  and  of  “Mr.  Ma- 
cauley  ” about  the  corn,  i^o  such  things  occurred  at  all  in  this  depart- 
ment. I have  never  had  pork  lying  a week  in  the  rain  or  one  moment 
longer  than  was  absolutely  necessary  to  have  it  hauled.  I believe  there 
was  only  one  lot  rained  upon — that  only  for  one  day.  It  was  resalted 
and  saved.  I have  never  lost  a pound  of  corn  by  submersion. 

In  conclusion,  the  letter  of  Lieutenant  Cammack  is  reckless,  un- 
founded, and  dictated  by  an  evil  spirit  unbecoming  an  official  docu- 
ment. I am  surprised  Major  J ohnston  should  have  lent  so  eager  an  ear 
to  such  vague  and  thoughtless  accusations  against  an  officer  whom  he 
has  complimented  for  the  very  qualities  the  want  of  which  is  now 
charged.  Surely  that  is  not  to  “render  unto  Caesar  the  things  which 
are  Caesar’s,”  and  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  an  excessive  aversion 
to  unnecessarily  expending  “toil,  time,  and  money,”  evinced  in  his  letter 
as  well  as  in  the  scanty  supplies  sent  to  this  post,  coupled  with  an 
equally  strong  desire  to 'escape  the  consequent  responsibility. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  &c., 

JOSEPH  P.  CAEK, 

Major  and  Acting  Coimnissary  of  Subsistence, 


Jackson,  March  29, 1863. 

Brigadier-General  Chalmers, 

Panola,  Miss.  : 

If  you  consider  it  practicable  that  supplies  can  be  drawn  from  country 
along  Memphis  Eailroad,  press  it  to  completion  as  far  as.Sardis.  You 
are  authorized  to  impress  negroes.  If  it  is  probable  enemy  will  break 
up  railroad,  do  not  press  it  forward. 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Lieutenant-General,  Commanding. 


Jackson,  March  30, 1863. 

Maj.  L.  Kms,  Jachso7i : 

I am  directed  by  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  to  inquire  if 
arrangements  have  been  made  to  supply  animals  for  the  horse-cars  be- 
tween Oxford  and  Holly  Springs, 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  &c., 

H.  C.  TUPPEE, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


Jackson,  March  30, 1863. 

Maj.  Theo.  Johnston, 

Chief  of  Subsistence : 

Major  : I am  directed  by  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  to  direct 
you  to  make  arrangements  to  have  the  cattle  driven  down  from  the 
Mississippi  Central  Eailroad  without  waiting  for  transportation. 

Yerv  respectfully, 

H.  C.  TUPPEE, 

Aide-de-Camp. 


CnAi\  XXXVI.] 


GENEEAL  KEPOKTS. 


307 


Jackson,  March  30,  1863. 
Brigadier-General  Chalmers,  Panola,  Miss. : 

When  parties  refuse  Confederate  money  for  supplies  wanted  by  the 
Government,  impress  them. 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Lieutenant- General^  Commanding. 


IIdqrs.  Dept,  oe  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

• X X.  Jackson.  Aj)ril  1,  1863. 

Maj.  John  McFarland,  Yazoo  City : ? ^ ? 

Sir  : In  reply  to  your  letter,  lieutenant-general  commanding  directs 
me  to  say  that  he  relies  upon  you  to  supply  the  troops  with  beef.  He 
will  not  restrict  you  to  10  cents  per  pound,  but  hopes  you  will  obtain  it 
on  the  best  possible  terms.  Major  [Theo.]  Johnston  will  keep  you  sup- 
plied with  funds,  so  you  may  purchase  on  the  most  advantageous  terms. 
It  would  be  more  difficult  to  get  a proper  amount  of  molasses  to  you  than 
to  procure  beef. 


Say  to  Mr.  Weldon  that  his  account  will  be  paid  at  Fort  Pemberton 
as  soon  as  the  amount  is  ascertained  by  a proper  officer.  General  Lor- 
mg  must  ip  all  cases  examine  and  approve  the  account,  and  he  must 
• ^ expenses  properly  incurred  by  each  branch  of  the  serv- 

ice. loG  construction  of  rafts  and  the  necessary  expenses  incident 
thereto  belongs  to  the  engineer  bureau;  the  transportation,  &c.,  to 
quartermaster,  and  the  subsistence  to  the  commissary.  Each  of  the 
three  Items  belonging  to  these  drfiferent  classifications  must  be  kept  dis- 
tinct  and  stated  separately. 

I am,  with  respect, ^your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  PEMBEETOl^l, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

.c  . T Jackson,  April  3,  1863. 

Maj.  L.  Mims,  ’ ^ ’ 

Chief  Quartermaster,  Jackson,  Miss. : 

1 ^ ^^^•^ii’Gcted  by  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  to  say 

hat  the  means  of  tmnsportation  on  the  Mississippi  Central  Eailroad  is 
ly  no  means  sufficient,  and  the  transportation  of  supplies  is  thereby 
,Heatly  delayed.  Your  attention  is  directed  to  thisfact,  to  remedy  which 
rou  will  request  the  authorities  of  the  17ew  Orleans  and  Jackson  Eail- 
oad  to  return  the  cars  belonging  on  the  Mississippi  Central  Eailroad. 
t they  are  unwilling  so  to  do,  you  will  return  the  cars  (a  sufficient  num- 
jcr),  notwithstanding  the  dissent  of  such  authorities. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  W.  MEMMINGEE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Jaj.  Gen.  C.  L.  Stevenson: 

The  Hine  must  not  go  down  until 
ast  report  enemy^s  fleet  was  there. 


Jackson,  April  5,  1863. 
mouth  of  Eed  Elver  is  open.  At 


J.  C.  PEMBEETOII, 
Jjieutenant- General,  Commanding. 


308  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 

Jackson,  April  G,  1863. 

Oapt.  E.  Powell,  Natchez: 

Send  a courier  at  once  to  Ked  Eiver  to  notify  all  loaded  boats  to  be  in 
readiness  to  come  to  Big  Black  the  moment  they  are  ordered. 

J.  0.  PEMBEETON, 
Lieutenant-  General^  Commanding. 


Jackson,  April  G,  1863. 

Maj.  L.  Mims, 

Jackson y Miss. : 

In  reply  to  your  communication  of  this  day’s  date,  referring  to  the 
necessity  of  the  transfer  of  corn  from  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Eailroad  to 
the  Southern  Eailroad,  I am  directed  by  the  lieutenant-general  com- 
manding to  say  that  he  deems  it  advisable  that  the  corn  referred  to  be 
stored  at  Meridian,  the  necessity  for  its  shipment  to  Vicksburg  not 
being  very  pressing,  and  regarding  it  more  important  that  the  cars  be 
retained  on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Eailroad  for  the  purpose  of  bringing 
supplies  from  the  country  above  Meridian  to  that  point  than  that  at 
the  present  time  the  cars  be  run  through  to  Vicksburg  and  the  trans- 
portation on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Eailroad  temporarily  delayed.  This 
corn  can,  therefore,  for  the  present  be  stored  at  Meridian,  and  removed 
when  transportation  can  be  more  readily  obtained  on  the  Southern 
Eailroad. 

Eespectfully,  &c., 

E.  W.  MEMMINGEE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Jackson,  Ax^ril  6,  18G3. 

Maj.  Gen.  Frank.  Gardner, 

Port  Hudson : 

General:  In  reply  to  your  communication  of  3d  instant,  inclosing 
report  from  Major  [J.  P.]  Carr,  acting  commissary  of  subsistence,  I am 
directed  by  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  to  say : As  complaints 
ill  the  delay  of  removing  corn  were  not  only  preferred  by  Major  [Theo.] 
Johnston,  but  also  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  [W.  A.]  Broadwell,  agent  for 
the  Commissary-General  for  supplying  the  armies  of  the  Confederate 
States,  it  would  appear  that  there  was  inexcusable  delay  in  unloading 
the  boats  and  removing  the  suiiplies.  If  there  were  not  sufficient  hands, 
soldiers  should  have  been  detailed  for  the  purpose. 

I am,  respectfully,  &c., 

E.  W.  MEMMIKGEE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Lieut.  Col.  W. 


S.  Lovell, 

Natchez : 


Jackson,  April  7,  18G3. 


You  don’t  mention  amount  of  corn  on  river  ; think  it  as  safe  to  run 


up  Eed  Eiver  5 unless  gets  full  load,  can  take  it  coming  back.  Ordei 
Hine  accordingly. 

J.  C.  PEMBEETOi7, 
Lieutenant-General^  Comnwnding. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


309 


IlDQRS.  Dept,  oe  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

Jackson.  April  7,  1803. 

[Victor  E.  Wilson,] 

President  Southern  Railroad : 


Sir  : The  lieutenant-general  commanding  the  department  instructs 
me  to  say  that  the  shipment  of  Government  supplies  and  stores  to  Vicks- 
burg is  much  too  slow  tor  the  requirements  of  the  service  5 that  he  de- 
sires that  you  will  give  your  attention  to  this,  and  employ  more  cars  in 
this  transportation,  and,  further,  that  he  thinks  one  day  in  the  week  is 
all  that  should  be  allowed  for  shipment  of  private  freights. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  0.  TAYLOE, 

Aide- de- Camp. 


Jackson,  April  7.  18G3, 

General  John  S.  Bowen, 

Grand  Gulf,  via  Port  Gibson: 

Send  a boat  to  Saint  J oseph  for  1,500  sacks  of  corn  there. 

J.  C:  PEMBEETON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

Jackson,  April  7,  1803. 

Judge  Z.  L.  Eabers,  Carrollton,  Ala. : 

Sir:  General  Pemberton  has  directed  General  Euggles  to  allow  you 
to  purchase  the  amount  of  corn  mentioned  in  your  letter  in  Eoxubee 
and  Lowndes  Counties,  and  ship  it  for  the  use  of  the  destitute  families 
of  volunteers  now  absent  in  the  service,  on  the  conditions  and  in  the 
manner  prescribed  in  your  letter. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 

J.  THOMPSON, 

Inspector-  General. 

April  8, 1863. 

♦ * ♦ * * # * 

When  I arrived  at  Port  Hudson,  the  steamer  Eed  Chief  was  lying 
at  the  landing  loaded  with  corn  in  shuck.  A detail  was  ordered  to  un- 
load her.  * * * One  portion  of  the  detail  procured  coal  hods  (hold- 
ing each  about  a bushel  of  corn),  and  carried  the  corn  to  the  edge  of  the 
bank,  where  they  deposited  it.  The  other  portion  of  the  detail  stood 
on  board  the  boat,  and  threw  the  corn  on  shore  ear  by  ear.  Had  proper 
care  been  taken  in  discharging  the  boat,  and  the  corn  been  deposited 
10  or  12  yards  farther  from  the  edge  of  the  bank,  no  corn  would  have  been 
lost  5 whereas  it  was  deposited  upon  the  very  edge  of  the  bank,  and  when 
t^e  pile  got  to  a certain  height,  almost  every  load  from  the  hods  when 
deposited  upon  the  top  would  roll  down  into  the  river.  In  this  manner, 
could  we  ascertain  with  any  certainty  the  amount  of  corn  which  has 
been  sunk  at  the  landing  at  Port  Hudson,  we  would  find  that  we  have 
Sunered  an  almost  incredible  loss  in  that  item  alone,  and  all  through 
neglect.  * * * On  the  bluff  there  was  sugar,  salt,  and  molasses, 
winch  had  been  lying  there  for  more  than  a month,  the  molasses  being 
on  end,  with  the  sugar  and  salt  piled  u})on  it,  the  cooperage  ocing  very 


310 


[CnAP.  XXXVl 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

bad,  and  the  whole  lot  surrounded  with  a pool  of  sugar  and  molasses 
which  had  leaked  out.  * ^ ^ Major  [J.  P.]  Carr  says  it  is  impossi- 

ble for  him  to  do  more  than  he  does  at  present,  and  that  he  has  had  to 
build  his  store-rooms  and  warehouses  himsel^^^^  ^ WIKGATP^ 


Hdqps.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

Jaclcson,  April  8,  18G3. 


Maj.  Theo.  Johnston, 

Chief  Commissary  of  Subsistence  ; 

The  lieutenant-general  commanding  desires  to  know  whether  satis- 
factory and  sufficient  arrangements  have  been  made  for  the  receipt  and 
keeping  of  the  beef-cattle  coming  from  beyond  the  Mississippi  Eiver ; 
and  he  directs  that  hereafter  no  contracts  for  butchering  must  be  made 
which  allows  as  compensation  to  the  butcher  the  hides.  These  must  be 
retained,  and  kept  subject  to  the  control  of  the  quartermaster’s  depart- 
ment. 


I am,  respectfully, 


J.  THOMPSON, 

Inspector-  General. 


Jackson,  April  8,*18G3. 

General  Steyenson,  Yichshurg  : 

Steamer  Dot,  with  200,000  pounds  bacon,  reached 


Big  Black  this 


evening.  Have  arrangements  made  at  once  for  its  transportation. 

J.  O.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Jackson,  April  9,  18G3. 

General  Stevenson,  Yichsburg : 

Have  ordered  1,500  men  from  above  as  rapidly  as  possible  to  Rolling 
Fork.  Send  small  boats  to  mouth  of  Sunflower  to  take  them  from  large 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Office  Chief  of  Subsistence,  Dept.  Miss,  and  E.  La., 

Jachson,  April  10,  1803. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General,  J acTcson,  Miss. : 

Major  : On  the  29th  ultimo  I addressed  you  a communication  in 
which  I asked  that  all  the  purchasing  officers  in  the  Second 
District,  as  in  all  other  districts,  be  instructed  not  to  go  outside  ot  then 
districts  without  authority  from  me.  Will  you  please  inform  me  if  sue 
instructions  have  been  issued?  Information  from  various  sources  n 
been  furnished  me  to  the  effect  that  agents  from  the  several  military 
districts  are  being  sent  out  in  every  direction,  producing  conflict  a 
confusion  in  the  purchase  of  suxiplies.  I quote  from  a letter  recei 
this  day  from  Red  River: 


Tliero  liavo  been  a good  many  outside  commissaries  or  agents  from 
Vicksburg,  who,  instead  of  facilitating  the  shipment  of  articles  necessary  foi  the  arm}, 


Chav.  XXXVI.]  GENERAL  REPORTS.  311 

simply  create  tlie  impression  tliat  there  must  ])c  a great  deiuaml,  and,  consequently, 
cause  the  planter  to  hold  back  for  higher  j)rices.  Such  action  should  cease. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THEO.  JOHNISTOK, 

Major^  iSjC. 

Jackson,  April  13,  18G3. 
General  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  TuUahoma  : 

Cars  cannot  run  above  Okolona.  I am  now  establishing’  depots  of 
corn  at  Enterprise  and  Meridian ; shall  also  at  Macon  and  Columbus. 
Meat  can  only  be  obtained  in  moderate  quantities  for  want  of  wagon 
transportation.  Will  do  all  I can.  Have  no  knowledge  of  my  iiurchas- 
ing  agents  being  in  Alabama.  Have  ordered  recall. 

J.  C.  PEMBEKTOiSr, 
Lieutenant- General j Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

Jacicson,  April  13,  18G3. 

Maj.  Theo.  Johnston,  Chief  of  Subsistence,  Jaclcson : 

Major:  In  reply  to  your  communication  of  this  day^s  date,  I am 
directed  by  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  to  say  that  no  more 
shipments  are  desired  to  be  made  to  Yicksburg  at  present. 

I am,  respectfully, 

E.  W.  MEMMIKGEE, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 

Office  Chief  of  Subsistence,  Dept.  Miss,  and  E.  La., 

Jaclcson,  April  14,  18G3. 

Maj.  E.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Jaclcson,  Miss.: 

Major:  Inclosed  I remit  all  the  information  that  I have  in  relation 
to  the  condition  of  commissary  stores  at  Port  Hudson,  except  what  has 
been  said  by  persons  whose  names  I did  not  take;  but  almost  all  with 
whom  I have  conversed  united  in  saying  that  there  was  great  waste  of 
stores  at  that  iiost.  Whether  these  statements  were  true  I have  not  had 
an  opportunity  of  my  own  knowledge  to  ascertain,  but  I know  the  gen- 
tlemen who  have  made  the  statements  to  be  of  undoubted  integrity.  I 
am  i)leased  to  know  that  an  investigation  is  to  be  made,  and,  if  there 
has  been  neglect  of  duty,  the  fact  will  be  known. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THEO.  JOHNSTON^, 

Major  and  Chief  of  Subsistence. 


Jackson,  April  14,  18G3. 

Maj.  Theo.  Johnston,  Chief  of  Subsistence,  Jaclcson: 

Major  : In  reply  to  your  communication  of  this  day,  I am  directed 
by  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  to  say  that  the  enemy’s  gun- 
boats are  reported  at  the  mouth  of  Eed  Eiver.  Nothing  can  go  down. 
I am,  respectfully,  &c., 

E.  W.  MEMMINGEE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


312 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Hdqes.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

Jaclcson,  Miss.,  April  14,  18G3. 
Maj.  L.  Mims,  Chief  Quartermaster,  Jaclcson,  Miss.: 

Major  : In  connection  with  the  accompanying  communication  from 
General  Stevenson,  referred  to  you,  I am  directed  by  the  lieutenant- 
general  commanding  to  say  he  thinks  it  better  to  haul  the  machinery, 
iron,  &c.,  to  Yaughn^s  Station  from  Yazoo  City,  and  that  to  take  off 
the  wagons  from  hauling  corn  to  Vicksburg  would  be  to  prevent  the 
accumulation  of  corn,  &c.,  on  the  line  of  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Eailroad, 
which  is  now  so  much  desired. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  W.  MEMMINGEE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

Office  Chief  of  Subsistence,  Dept.  Miss,  and  E.  La., 

Jaclcson,  April  16,  1803. 

Maj.  E.  W.  MemminGtER,  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Jaclcson: 

Major  : In  reply  to  your  communication  of  the  13th  instant,  asking 
for  information  in  relation  to  the  amount  of  supplies  that  can  be  col- 
lected at  once  on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Eailroad,  say  at  Meridian,  En- 
terprise, Macon,  and  Columbus,  I have  the  honor  to  state  I am  accumu- 
lating supplies  rapidly  along  the  line  of  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Eailroad  ; 
but  the  amount  I can  collect  it  is  difficult  for  me  to  determine  with  any 
accuracy.  Inclosed  is  a consolidated  statement  of  the  stores  now  at 
different  points  along  the  road.*  As  they  accumulate  I will  inform  you. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THEO.  JOHNSTOK 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Miss,  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

Jaclcson,  April  16,  1863. 

Maj.  Theo.  Johnston,  Chief  Commissary  : 

Major  : The  lieutenant-general  commanding  directs  me  to  say  that 
corn  and  corn-meal  are  not  rapidly  enough  accumulated  by  your  depart- 
ment ; that  8,500  bushels  of  corn  is  but  a small  amount  to  have  on  the 
line  of  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Eailroad. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  TAYLOE, 

Aide  de- Camp. 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Miss,  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

Jaclcson,  April  17,  1863. 
Maj.  Theo.  Johnston,  Chief  of  Subsistence  : 

Sir:  The  lieutenant-general  commanding  is  very  solicitous  for  the 
collection  of  supplies  at  the  different  points  named  in  the  order  of  yes- 
terday, viz  : Meridian,  Macon,  Columbus,  and  West  Point.  He  hopes 
the  greatest  energy  will  be  used  by  all  the  employes  of  your  department, 
and  no  effort  be  spared  to  effect  the  object.  He  relies  upon  you  to  com- 
mand success. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  THOMPSON, 

Inspector- General. 


Omitted. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


313 


Jackson,  Aj)ril  18,  1868. 

General  Chalmers,  Fanola,  Miss.: 

I regard  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  Eiver  shut  out  from  us 
now.  JSTo  more  supplies  can  be  gotten  from  the  Trans-Mississippi  De- 
partment. Can  you  not  supply  15,000  men  from  Panola 

J.  C.  PExMBEETON, 
Lieutenant-  General^  Commanding. 


Jackson,  April  18,  1863. 

Maj.  Howell  Hinds,  Fayette^  Miss. : 

We  have  a cargo  of  bacon  on  a boat  in  Choctaw  Bayou,  4 miles  west 
of  Water  Proof.  It  is  of  vital  imx)ortance  to  save  it.  Can  it  be  trans- 
ported to  the  river,  and  crossed  at  Eodney,  and  from  thence  sent  to  the 
railroad  ? If  so,  you  will  undertake  the  direction  of  the  enterprise.  If 
you  can  get  it  across  anywhere  you  will  do  a great  service,  for  whicli 
Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  will  be  most  grateful.  Answer. 

W.  H.  McCAEDLE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

Jackson,  April  18,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  John  S.  Bowen,  Grand  Gulf: 

Steamer  Vigo  is  now  in  Choctaw  Bayou,  4 miles  west  of  Water  Proof, 
with  a cargo  of  bacon  for  Vicksburg.  Send  an  energetic  commissary 
and  quartermaster  to  receipt  for  the  bacon  and  provide  transportation, 
by  impressment  if  necessary.  What  means  would  you  suggest  for  get- 
ting it  across  the  river  ? It  is  too  necessary  for  it  to  be  lost.  Answer 
as  soon  as  possible. 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Lieutenant- General^  Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

JacJcson,  April  20,  1863. 

Maj.  Theo.  Johnston,  Chief  of  Subsistence  : 

Major  : I am  directed  by  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  to  say, 
in  reply  to  your  communication  of  to-day’s  date,  relative  to  subsistence 
at  Port  Hudson,  La.,  that  he  is  satisfied  with  amount  now  on  hand,  but 
hereafter  the  supply  must  not  be  decreased,  as  it  will  have  to  be  ke])t 
up  by  land.  Every  effort  must  be  made  to  supply  as  fast  as  consumed. 
1 am,  major,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  MOEEISO^T, 

Aide-de-  Camp. 

Jackson,  April  22,  1863. 

Col.  W.  S.  Lovell,  Natchez : 

Am  arranging  to  haul  the  one  thousand  sacks  corn  to  Port  Hudson. 
You  must  get  all  you  can  for  that  place.  Is  it  quartermaster  or  com- 
missary ? 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
TAeutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


[CiiAr.  XXXVI. 


314  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Jackson,  April  22,  1863. 

Col.  L.  B.  Nokthkop, 

Commissary-General^  Richmond : 

Steamboats  in  Mississippi  will  greatly  impede,  if  not  prevent,  supply 
of  beef  from  Texas.  Planters  here  want  from  25  to  35  cents.  By  wliat 
rule  shall  I proceed  to  obtain  it 

J.  G.  PEMBEETON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding.. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  April  22,  1863. 

Maj.  E.  W.  Memminoer, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Major  : The  management  of  the  commissariat  at  Port  Hudson  is 
unsatisfactory.  The  facts  are  as  follows : 

Maj.  J.  P.  Carr  reports  on  hand  March  15 — 


Rations  of  bulk  pork 393, 750 

Rations  of  bacon 627, 560 

1,021,310 

Hogs 1,674 

On  hand  as  per  report  of  March  31: 

Rations  of  bulk  pork 371, 132 

Rations  of  bacon 622, 132 

993, 264 

(Hogs  slaughtered  and  included  in  report  of  bulk  pork.) 

On  hand  as  per  report  of  April  15 : 

Rations  of  bulk  poi;k 3, 760  ' 

Rations  of  bacon 460,000 

463,760 

Difference  in  fifteen  days  (rations) 529, 504 

Bacon  and  pork,  if  issued  exclusively  for  fifteen  days  (rations) 197, 640 

Remaining  unaccounted  for  (rations) 331,864 

Major  Carr,  as  will  be  seen,  reports  on  March  15: 

Rations 1,021,310 

Hogs  on  hand 1,674 

Between  March  15  and  31,  the  1,674  hogs  were  slaughtered,  which,  at 
150  pounds  each  (a  small  average),  and  three-quarter  pound  to 
the  ration,  would  make 334, 800 


1,356,110 

On  April  17, 1 addressed  Major  Carr  as  follows : 

Your  telegraphic  report  to-day  gives  but  1,880  pounds  of  pork.  Is  that  all  you 
have  ? There  is  a decrease,  according  to  your  report,  of  529,504  rations  of  bacon  and 
bulk  pork  within  the  last  fifteen  days.  Is  not  this  an  error  ? 

The  followiug  is  Major  Carr’s  reply : 

The  last  report  is  correct;  that  of  the  first  was  bungled  by  clerk,  and  is  a largo 
overestimate.  In  next  report  there  will  be  a heavy  deduction  for  loss  in  estimated 
weight  of  hogs. 

I have,  in  a communication  to  Major  [J.  J.]  Wheadon,  chief  commis- 
sary of  General  Gardner,  insisted  that  a depot  commissary  bo  assigned 
to  duty  at  Port  Hudson.  He  has  assigned  Major  Carr,  and  Capt.  J.  P. 
tfones  as  post  commissary. 


CiiAr.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


31  f) 


If,  in  the  oi)iiiioii  of  the  lieuteuaut-geucral  commanding,  any  action 
is  necessary,  I would  be  pleased  to  have  an  investigation  or  something 
done  which  will  prevent  a repetition  or  continuation  of  such  a condition 
of  things  as  has  for  some  time  existed  at  that  post.  I cannot  determine 
wliere  the  fault  lies,  but  the  facts  are  as  stated. 

Under  date  of  April  5,  Major  Carr  says : 

The  issues  have  been  of  pork  and  bacon  for  the  greater  part  of  the  time  at  three- 
. fourths  of  a pound  to  the  ration,  by  order  of  General  Gardner. 

I respectfully  request  that  General  Gardner  be  desired  to  revoke  his 
order.  One-half  pound  per  day  is  all  that  has  been  issued  for  many 
months  in  this  department.  In  Virginia  one-fourth  of  a pound  only  is 
issued.  I request  also  that  General  Gardner  be  instructed  to  have 
issued  to  the  troops  of  his  command  beef  five  days  in  seven. 

I am,  major,  respectfully,  &c., 

THEO.  JOHNSTON, 

Major  and  Chief  of  Subsistence. 


Maj.  Gen.  Frank.  Gardner, 

Fort  Hudson^  La. : 


Jackson,  April.  24,  1863. 


You  will  issue  salt  meat,  not  to  exceed  three  times  a week,  including 
salt  beef  and  lard,  rice  in  lieu  of  the  corn,  at  the  rates  directed  by  de- 
partment. Molasses  and  sugar  may  be  issued  in  lieu  of  meat  until  fresh 
beef  can  be  obtained.  You  must  send  to  Louisiana  parishes  a party  to 
assist  Captain  [J.  B.]  Chrisman  in  collecting  beef  for  Port  Hudson. 
Enemy  is  making  raids  as  low  as  Southern  Kailroad  j danger  of  supplies 
being  cut  ofi^^ 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Lieutenant-  General.,  Commanding. 


Jackson,  April  25,  1863. 


Brig.  Gen.  John  S.  Bowen,  Grand  Gulf : 

What  amount  of  bacon  in  cargo  ? I propose  sending  it  to  Port  Hud- 
son, via  Woodville.  Answer. 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Lieutenant-  General^  Commanding. 


Brig.  Gen.  John  S.  Bowen: 


Jackson,  April  26,  1863. 


The  meat  in  Cole’s  Creek  must  be  sent  direct  to  Port  Hudson,  via 
Washington,  to  Woodville,  where  General  Gardner’s  agents  will  take  it. 
What  is  now  on  the  way  to  Port  Hudson  may  await  their  further  orders. 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


IIdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

Jaclcson,  April  30,  1863. 

President  Southern  Eailroad,  Jachson  : 

Sir  : It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  tlmt  tin',  break  in  your  road  should 
be  repaired  with  the  grentest  ex])edition,  and  1 Jiope  that  you  will  de- 


31G 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


vote  your  energy  iind  atteutiou  to  the  inattei',  and  employ  sucli  a force 
on  the  work  that  the  necessary  repairs  may  be  completed  in  the  short- 
est possible  time,  as  a great  x)ortion  of  the  supplies  for  this  command 
must  now  come  over  your  road. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant- General^  Commanding. 


Jackson,  A]gril  30,  1863. 
Brig.  Gen.  John  S.  Bowen,  Grand  Gulf: 

The  meat  at  Port  Gibson  must  by  no  means  be  allowed  to  fall  into 
hands  of  the  enemy.  Have  the  re-enforcements  arrived  ? 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  Genera  1,  Commanding. 

[Appendix  B.] 

Corresjpondence  relative  to  Ordnance, 

Holly  Springs,  Miss.,  November  6,  1803. 

Col.  J.  Gorgas, 

Chief  of  Ordnance,  Richmond,  Ya. : 

I need  600  rounds  3-incli  Parrott  projectiles  and  300  rounds  20-pounder 
Parrott  as  soon  as  possible ; also  small-arms  and  ammunition ; also  fixed 
ammunition,  assorted,  for  field  guns.  Have  none  on  hand,  except  what 
is  in  the  hands  of  regiments  and  battalions,  only  partially  supplied.  , ' 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  November  12,  1862. 
Col.  J.  Gorgas,  Richmond,  Va.: 

Neither  of  the  Parrott  guns,  siege  guns,  24-pounder  howitzers,  or  12- 
pounder  bronze  guns  have  been  received  yet.  Have  any  been  sent?  I 
am  terribly  in  want  of  arms. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  November  23,  1862. 
Col.  J.  Gorgas,  Richmond,  Ya.: 

The  arms  sent  by  messenger  on  the  29th  have  never  been  heard  of 
here.  Flats  will  be  sent  from  Chattanooga  as  soon  as  they  arrive  for 
10-inch  guns. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-General,  Command  mg.  . 


Vicksburg,  Miss.,  January  3,  1863. 

Col.  J.  Gorgas,  Chief  of  Ordnance,  Richmond,  Va. : 

Please  order  General  [G.  J.]  Rains,  at  Augusta,  to  send  me  at  once 
30,000  pounds  of  powder.  Must  have  it  immediately. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

JAeutenant-  General. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


GENEKAL  KEPOKTS. 


317 


Jackson,  Miss.,  January  28,  1803. 
Col.  [J.]  Gorgas,  Biclmond^  Ya.: 

Please  order  the  4,000  arms  required  for  by  Major  [George  Upshur] 
Mayo  sent  here  without  delay.  They  are  indispensable  at  this  juncture. 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant- General,  Comynanding. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  February  5, 1803. 

Col.  J.  Gorgas,  Richmond,  Ya. : 

I fear  you  do  not  appreciate  the  importance  of  meeting  ordnance 
requisitions  for  this  department.  A constant  supply  of  held  and  small- 
arm  ammunition  (especially  buck  and  ball)  must  come.  1 want  1,000,000 
percussion-cai)s  immediately. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  April  10, 1803. 

Col.  [J.j  Q OUG A.H,  Richmoyid,  Ya.: 

I have  a battalion  of  sharpshooters  without  arms.  Can  you  let  me 
have  three  hundred  Enfield  rifles  to  arm  them?  I need  a number  of 
small-arms  for  unarmed  men  in  my  department. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commayiding. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  April  18, 1803. 
Col.  J . Gorgas,  Chief  of  Ordyiance,  Riclmiond,  Ya. : 

If  ammunition  for  the  three  9-inch  guns  is  not  sent  with  them,  they 
will  be  useless  to  me.  Ilave  heard  nothing  from  you  of  bolts  for  the 
Brooks  gun  now  here.  Without  bolts  it  had  as  well  been  left  in  Rich- 
mond. I have  no  coal,  and  am  unable  to  obtain  any. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant- General,  Coynmanding. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  April  19,  1803. 
Col.  J.  Gorgas,  Chief  of  Ordyiance^  Richmond,  Ya. : 

The  dimensions  for  eyes  for  shells  is  not  uniform.  Please  have  the 
shells  fixed  with  fuses,  or  have  the  e^^es  uniform.  Order  extra  sabots, 
as  many  are  broken  by  railroad  in  transportation.  Different  arsenals 
make  the  eyes  larger  or  smaller  than  prescribed  j should  be  corrected. 
Irictiou-primers  frequently  fail. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Lieutenant-General,  &c. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  April  23, 1803. 
Col.  J.  Gorgas,  Chief  of  Ordnance,  Richmond,  Ya. : 

JJave  but  one  10-inch  mortar,  but  can  throw  incendiary  shells  from 
JO-iiich  and  8-inch  columbiads.  Send  me  as  many  as  you  can,  and 
powder,  or,  better,  cartridges  with  them. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
TAeutenant- General,  Coynmayidiyig. 


318 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CnAr.  XXXVI. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  Ax)nl  29,  1863. 

Col.  J.  Gorgas, 

Chief  of  Ordnance^  Biclwiond,  Va. : 

Daily  complaints  are  made  of  friction-primers  sent  to  this  dei)artment. 
Usually  three  out  of  five  fail.  It  is  worse  than  useless  to  send  tin  ones 
here.  Send  at  least  10,000  copper  ones  by  special  messenger  with  all 
haste. 

J.  0.  TEMBEETON, 
Lieiiteyiant- General^  Commanding. 


[Appendix  C.] 

List  of  officers  and  enlisted  men  mentioned  for  gallant  conduct  in  battles  of 
Balcerh  Creeic,  Big  BlacJc,  and  during  siege  of  Viclcshurg ; also  tabular 
statement  of  hilled.,  wounded,  and  missing  of  ^ievenson^s  and  Bowen'^s 
divisions  during  same  time. 

List  of  officers,  non-commissioned  officers,  and  enlisted  men  specially 
mentioned  for  gallant  conduct  in  the  battle  of  BakeEs  Creek  and 
during  the  siege  of  Yicksburg : 

BAKER^S  CREEK. 

Mentioned  by  Maj.  Gen.  C.  L.  Stevenson : 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  D.  Lee,  gallant  conduct  during  entire  engagement, 
having  three  horses  shot  under  him.  Major  [J.  W.]  Anderson,  chief  of 
artillery,  gallantly  falling  in  full  discharge  of  his  duties.  Captain  [S.  J.] 
Eidley,  Company  A,  First  Mississippi  Artillery,  fell,  fighting  his  guns 
single-handed  and  alone,  winning  even  from  his  enemies  the  highest  trib- 
ute of  admiration.  Captains  [Max  Van  Den]  Corput  and  [J.  W.j'John- 
ston,  fought  their  batteries  to  last  extremity,  aided  by  non-commissioned 
officers  and  men.  Captain  [J.  F.j  Waddell,  First  Mississippi  [Alabama] 
Artillery,  fought  guns  to  last  extremity,  and,  when  battery  was  retaken, 
aided  by  Lieut.  G.  D.  Wise,  ordnance  officer  of  Cumming’s  brigade, 
fought  guns  until  Missourians  had  to  fall  back.  Maj.  J.  J.  Eeeve,  as- 
sistant adjutant-general,  gallant  conduct  and  coolness  in  leading  men 
into  action.  Major  [Howell]  Webb,  inspector-general,  gallant  conduct. 
Capt.  J.  W.  Mathews,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  gallant  con- 
duct. Surg.  H.  M.  Compton,  gallant  conduct.  First  Lieutenant  [Henry 
T.j  Botts,  gallant  conduct.  Col.  G.  A.  Heyward,  volunteer  aide-de- 
camp,  gallant  conduct.  Mr.  D.  E.  Norris,  telegraph  operator,  for  ren- 
dering valuable  services.  Private  A.  T.  Sullivan,  for  rendering  valuable 
services. 

Mentioned  by  Colonel  [T.  P.J  Dockery,  commanding  Missouri  brigade: 
Sergt.  E.  H.  G.  Gaines,  Company  K,  Twenty -third  Alabama,  gallant 
conduct ; unassisted  and  alone,  he  used  with  good  effect  a 12-pouuder 
howitzer  on  the  flanking  column  of  enemj",  firing  from  12  to  15  rounds. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  [W.  H.j  Dismukesfell,  mortally  wounded,  gallantly 
charging  the  enemy’s  batteries.  Private  Pudic,  Nineteenth  Arkansas, 
gallant  conduct  during  entire  engagement,  keeping  in  front  of  his  regi- 
ment during  whole  day,  using  his  gun  with  good  effect. 

Mentioned  by  Colonel  [F.  M.]  Cockrell,  commanding  Missouri  brigade: 
Captain  Waddell,  First  Mississippi  [Alabama]  Artillery,  gallant  con- 
duct. Captains  Carrington  and  Spangler  and  Lieutenant  [T.  J.  | 
Dobyns,  First  Missouri  infantry,  fell,  gallantly  fighting  the  eiimny. 
Captain  [VV.  P.]  Mcllvain,  Third  Missouri  Infantry,  fell,  gallanlly  light- 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


319 


ing.  Lieutenant-Colonel  [F.  L.]  Hubbell,  Third  Missouri,  fell,  mortally 
wounded,  in  hottest  of  the  fight.  Captain  [H.  G.]  McKinney,  mortally 
wounded,  in  hottest  of  fight.  Lieutenant  [E.  S.]  Eankin,  First  Missouri, 
mortally  wounded,  gallantly  fighting.  Colonel  [A.  C.]  Eiley  and  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel [H.  A.]  Garland,  First  Missouri,  gallant  conduct.  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel [P.  S.]  Senteny  and  Major  [T.  M.]  Carter,  Second  Mis- 
souri, gallant  conduct.  Colonel  [W.  E.]  Cause  and  Major  [J.  E.] 
McDowell,  Third  Missouri,  gallant  conduct.  Colonel  [James]  McCown, 
Lieutenant-Colonel  [E.  S.]  Bevier,  and  Major  [O.  A.]  Waddell,  Fifth 
Missouri,  gallant  conduct.  Major  [Stephen]  Cooper,  Sixth  Missouri, 
gallant  conduct.  Capts.  U.  M.  Young,  J.  M.  Flanagan,  acting  assistant 
adjutants-general,  and  E.  L.  Maupin,  acting  aide-de-camp,  gallant  con- 
duct. 

DURING  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG. 

Mentioned  by  Maj.  Gen.  C.  L.  Stevenson : 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  D.  Lee,  gallant  conduct  in  repulsing  the  only  decided 
assault  made  on  General  Stevenson^s  line  during  siege.  Lieut.  Col.  E. 
W.  Pettus,  gallant  conduct  in  leading  charge  against  enemy  in  ditch 
and  capturing  two  stand  of  colors  placed  by  the  enemy  on  parapet. 
Colonel  [ C.  S.]  Guyton,  Fifty-seventh  Georgia,  gallant  conduct  in  lead- 
ing sally.  Colonel  [W.  E.]  Curtiss,  Forty-first  Georgia,  gallant  conduct 
in  picket  fight,  capturing  107  Federals.  Colonel  [I.  W.]  Garrott,  Twen- 
tieth Alabama,  killed ; true  soldier  and  gifted  patriot.  Captain  [F.  O.] 
Claiborne,  artillery  corps,  gallant  conduct ; killed.  Lieut.  G.  D..  Wise, 
ordnance  officer  Cumming^s  brigade,  gallant  conduct;  specially  men- 
tioned for  valuable  services  rendered  in  carrying  dispatches  to  General 
[J.  E.]  Johnston.  Maj.  J.  J.  Eeeve,  assistant  adjutant-general,  gallant 
conduct  and  strict  attention  to  duty.  Major  [G.  L.]  Gillespie,  chief  of 
subsistence,  valuable  services  in  subsisting  garrison  by  close  attention 
to  duties.  Capt.  J.  W.  Johnston,  inspector-general  light  artillery,  for 
valuable  services  rendered.  Captains  Waddell  and  [John  B.]  Grayson, 
commanding  light  batteries,  valuable  services.  Capt.  P.  Eobinson,  en- 
gineer officer,  valuable  services.  Major  [J.  E.]  McElrath,  quartermas- 
ter, valuable  services. 

Mentioned  by  Colonel  Cockrell,  commanding  Missouri  brigade : 

Ordnance  Sergt.  William  F.  Luckett,  mortally  wounded  while  carry- 
ing ammunition  through  severe  fire.  Col.  Eugene  Erwin,  killed  while 
fighting  most  gallantly.  Lieut.  Col.  P.  S.  Senteny,  killed  while  fight- 
ing most  gallantly.  Lieutenants  [J.  T.]  Crenshaw  and  [John]  Eose- 
i)ery,  killed  while  fighting  gallantly.  Col.  A.  C.  Eiley  and  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Garland,  First  Missouri,  gallant  conduct.  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Senteny  and  Major  Carter,  Second  Missouri,  gallant  conduct.  Major 
McDowell,  Third  Missouri,  gallant  conduct.  Colonel  McCown  and 
Major  Waddell,  Fifth  Missouri,  gallant  conduct.  Major  Cooper,  Sixth 
Missouri,  gallant  conduct.  Capt.  E.  L.  Maupin,  gallant  conduct  and 
valuable  services.  Capts.  W.  P.  Pitman,  assistant  inspector-general, 
II.  M.  Pollard,  assistant  adjutant-general,  and  Lieut.  T.  B.  Green,  aide- 
de-camp,  gallant  conduct.  Sergeant  [W.  A.]  Fisher,  Lowe’s  Missouri 
artillery,  gallant  conduct. 

Mentioned  by  Col.  Edward  Iliggins,  commanding  river  batteries : 

Capts.  J.  P.  Lynch  and  [T.  N.]  Johnston,  First  Tennessee  Heavy  Ar- 
tillery, for  liandsomely  handling  their  guns  during  entire  siege.  Maj. 
P.  W.  Iloadley,  First  Tennessee  Heavy  Artillery,  gallant  conduct; 
killed.  Colonel  [A.]  Jackson,  jr.,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  [Eobert]  Ster- 
ling, First  Tennessee  Heavy  Artillery,  gallant  conduct.  Maj.  F.  K. 


320 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Ogdei),  Eigiitli  Louisiana  Battalion  Heavy  Artillery,  gallant  conduct. 
Captains  [W.  0.]  Capers,  [R.  C.]  Bond,  [Rufus  J.]  Bruce,  Lieutenants 
[Richard]  Agar,  [Ed.  H.]  Woodlief,  [C.  A.]  Conrad,  First  Louisiana 
Regular  Artillery,  gallaut  conduct.  Lieutenant  [W.  T.]  Mumford,  act- 
ing assistant  adjutant-general ; Lieut.  W.  M.  Bridges,  acting  assistant 
inspector-general;  Lieut.  W.  Yerger,  aide-de-camp;  Lieut.  AY.  O.  Flynn, 
engineer  officer,  valuable  services.  Sergt.  Thomas  P.  Lynch,  First 
Louisiana  Artillery,  valuable  services  as  chief  of  river  police,  always 
discharging  his  duties  with  promptness  and  to  the  full  satisfaction  of 
his  commanding  officer. 

Mentioned  by  Colonel  [T.  N.]  Waul,  commanding  WauPs  Texas 
Legion  : 

Captain  [Louis]  Papendieck,  assistant  adjutant -general,  and  Lieu- 
tenant Simmons,  aide-de-camp,  fell,  fighting  gallaiitly  for  their  country. 
Major  [Allen]  Cameron,  gallant  conduct ; killed.  Capt.  H.  Wickeland, 
gallant  conduct.  Captain  [J.  B.]  Fleitas,  First  Louisiana  Zouaves,  gal- 
lant conduct. 

Mentioned  by  Maj.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith: 

Lieutenant-Colonel  [Edward]  Ivy,  chief  of  artillery;  Major  [J.  G.] 
Devereux,  assistant  adjutant-general;  Major  [J.  F.]  Girault,  assistant 
inspector-general;  Major  [T.  C.]  Fearn,  quartermaster;  Capt.  M.  Mc- 
Donald, ordnance  officer;  Lieut.  G.  H.  Frost,  aide-de  camp;  Lieutenant 
[B.  M.]  Harrod,  aide-de-camp  ; Surgeon  [H.  H.  ?]  Whitfield,  and  Capt. 
Hobart,  volunteer  aide-de-camp,  gallant  conduct  and  very  valuable 
services. 

Mentioned  by  Brigadier-General  Hubert : 

Col.  Charles  H.  Herrick,  mortally  wounded ; gallant  conduct.  Lieut. 
Charles  A.  Brusle,  aide-de-camp,  killed ; gallant  conduct.  Lieut.  Bless- 
ing, engineer  officer,  killed ; gallant  conduct. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Lieutenant-  General. 


Eetiirn  of  Casualties  in  the  Confederate  forces  at  Baker^s  Creek,  Big  Black,  and  Vicksburg, 

Miss.,  1863. 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

1 

1 

1 

1 

Command. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

d 

0 

a 

r:^ 

0 

00 

'a 

W 

® 

to 

® 

to 

to 

< 

Stevenson’s  division  : 

baker’s  Creek 

13 

211 

■41 

603 

60 

1,828 

2, 756 
448 

Vicksburg 

8 

114 

17 

283 

2 

24 

Total 

21 

325 

58 

886 

62 

1,  852 

3,  204 

n(»^von^s  division : 

803 

baker’s  Creek 

16 

115 

64 

366 

7 

300 

bi"  Black  

1 

2 

9 

105 

907 

1,  024 

Vickslinro- 

24 

166 

35 

459 

74 

758 

Total 

41 

283 

99 

834 

112 

1,281 

2,  C50 

Grand  total*  

62 

608 

~i5r 

1,  720 

174 

3, 133 

1 

5,8M 

* Note  on  original  states  that  no  reports  had  been  received  from  Forney’s  division, 
Smith’s  division,  the  river  batteries,  or  Waiil’s  Legion. 


Chap.  XXXVI. ] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


321 


War  Department,  C.  S.  A., 
Richmond,  Va.,  October  1,  1863. 
Lieut.  Gen.  J.  0.  Pemberton,  Richmond,  Va. : 

General  : At  the  suggestion  of  the  President,  I would  call  your  at- 
tention to  several  points  in  your  recent  report  of  operations"  in  Mis- 
sissippi which  it  would  be  gratifying  to  me  to  have  elucidated  or  ex- 
plained. 

The  first  dispatch  of  General  J.  E.  Johnston,  from  Jackson,  instructed 
you  to  advance  and  attack  in  the  rear  the  corps  of  the  enemy  at  Clinton, 
and  promised  co-operation  in  such  attack  on  his  part.  Clinton  was  on 
the  railroad  between  General  Johnston  and  Jackson,  and  yourself  at 
Edwards  Depot.  I have  understood  this  direction  to  instruct  you  to 
march  toward  Clinton  at  once,  and  by  the  direct  or  nearest  route, 
considering  the  rear  to  be  the  side  most  remote  from  him  (General  J.) 
and  nearest  you,  and  not  to  have  contemplated  that  you  should  make 
a detour  to  come  around  on  the  rear  of  the  line  by  which  the  enemy 
had  advanced  toward  Clinton.  Was  a dilferent  view  entertained  by 
you  of  the  intent  of  this  order?  As  the  object  of  the  order  was  to 
have  the  corps  at  Clinton  promptly  assailed  while  separate  and  be- 
yond support,  I have  supposed  it  contemplated  immediate  movement 
on  your  part  to  execute  it,  and  that  the  distance  was  not  so  great  but 
that  you  might,  could  you  have  marched  at  once,  have  reached  and 
struck  the  corps  in  from  twelve  to  twenty-four  hours.  Will  you  state 
the  distance  and  what  obstacles  prevented  movement  on  your  part  for 
some  twenty-six  hours  ? I have  deemed  it  unfortunate  that  on  receiv- 
ing this  first  dispatch  from  General  Johnston,  you — knowing  that  he 
must  necessarily  be  very  imperfectly  acquainted  with  your  position  and 
resources,  as  well  as  with  the  movements  and  forces  of  the  enemy— did 
not  take  the  responsibility  of  acting  on  your  better  knowledge  and  main- 
tain your  preconceived  plan,  or,  if  unwilling  to  do  that,  that  you  did 
not  at  once  carry  out  strictly  the  order  received.  It  appears  to'  me  the 
more  to  be  regretted  that,  having  written  to  General  Johnston  that  you 
would  move  at  once,  though  against  your  judgment,  in  execution  of  his 
instructions,  you  should  afterward  have  so  far  deviated  from  them  as 
to  resolve  to  direct  your  movements  toward  Kaymond  instead  of  toward 
Clinton.  When  you  came  to  this  resolve,  you  at  once  informed  General 
Johnston,  but  it  happened,  unfortunately,  that  after  the  receipt  of  your 
first  [communication],  General  Johnston  had  been  compelled  to  act  by 
the  advance  of  the  enemy  on  Jackson,  and  to  proceed  in  evacuating, 
on  the  supposition  that  you  were  executing  his  first  orders,  and  that 
you  were  more  easily  to  be  approached  by  his  moving  out  to  the  north 
rather  than  to  the  south  of  the  Vicksburg  Eailroad.  Had  he  known  of 
your  purpose  to  move  toward  Raymond,  the  reasonable  inference  is  he 
would  have  directed  his  movements  southward,  or  more  in  the  direc- 
tion of  your  proposed  advance.  I think  it  not  unlikely  misapprehen- 
sion on  this  subject  prevented  his  so  moving  as  to  have  enabled  him  to 
have  taken  part  in  the  battle  so  soon  to  be  fought  by  you. 

Will  you  explain  more  fully  the  motives  for  your  deviation  from  the 
direct  execution  of  the  instructions,  and  the  consequences  which,  in 
your  judgment,  would  have  resulted  from  jiursuing  the  instructions  liter- 
ally ? Were  you  acquainted  with  the  movements  of  the  several  corps 
of  the  enemy  when,  as  it  appears,  they  were  separated  into  two  or  more 
distinct  columns  (separated  by  12  or  15  miles),  and  when  you  were 
nearer  to  one  and  perhaps  to  two  than  they  were  to  each  other  ? Could 
>ou  not  have  struck  at  one  separately  j and,  if  so,  what  reasons  induced 
21  R R— VOL  XXIV;  PT  I 


322 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CHAr.  XXXVI. 


you  to  wait  till  nearly  all  their  several  forces  concentrated  and  attacked 
you  on  your  inarch,  in  obedience  to  General  Johnston’s  renewed  order? 

While  I have  not  approved  General  Johnston’s  instructions,  as  under 
the  circumstances  I think  it  would  have  been  better  to  have  left  you  to 
the  guidance  of  your  superior  knowledge  of  the  position  and  your  own 
judgment,  I confess  to  have  been  surprised  that,  seeing  he  had  taken 
the  responsibility  of  positive  directions  with  a view  to  a prompt  attack 
on  a separate  detachment  of  the  enemy,  you  had  not  seized  the  occasion 
while  they  were  severed  to  attempt  the  blow.  I consider  the  essential 
part  of  his  orders  to  have  been  immediate  advance  a;nd  attack  on  a 
separate  column,  and  that  if  you  could  not  execute  that,  you  would  have 
been  well  justified  in  attempting  no  other  compliance,  and  falling  back 
on  your  previous  plan.  As  it  was,  neither  plan  was  pursued,  and  inval- 
uable time  and  the  advantage  of  position  were  lost  in  doubtful  move- 
ments. So,  at  least,  the  case  has  struck  my  mind. 

On  another  distinct  point  I should  be  pleased  to  have  information  : 
How  happened  it  that  General  [J.]  Gregg  with  his  small  force  was  so 
far  separated  from  you,  and  compelled  alone  at  Kaymond  to  encounter 
the  greatly  superior  forces  of  the  enemy  ? Had  he  been  placed  at  such 
distance  as  a covering  force  to  Jackson  (the  capital),  or  with  what  view? 

To  recur  again  to  the  battle  of  Baker’s  Greek  : I should  be  pleased  to 
know  if  General  Boring  had  been  ordered  to  attack  before  General 
Oumming’s  brigade  gave  way,  and  whether  in  your  opinion,  bad  Steven- 
son’s division  been  promptly  sustained,  the  troops  with  him  would  have 
fought  with  so  little  tenacity  and  resolution  as  a portion  of  them  exhib- 
ited. Have  you  had  any  explanation  of  the  extraordinary  failure  of 
General  Boring  to  comply  with  your  reiterated  orders  to  attack,  and  do 
you  feel  assured  your  orders  were  received  by  him  ? His  conduct,  un- 
less explained  by  some  misapprehension,  is  incomprehensible  to  me. 

You  will,  I trust,  general,  eycuse  the  frankness  with  which'  I have 
presented  the  foregoing  subjects  of  inquiry.  They  will,  doubtless,  only 
enable  you  more  fully  to  explain  the  movements  made  by  you  and  the 
reasons  inducing  them,  to  the  satisfaction  as  well  of  others  interested 
as  of — 


Yours,  with  esteem. 


J.  A.  SEDDOis% 

Secretary  of  War. 


Eichmond,  November  10,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War,  Richmond: 

Sir:  To  your  communication  of  the  1st  ultimo  I have  the  honor  to 
make  the  following  reply,  taking  the  points  presented  in  order  as  you 
have  placed  them: 

The  first  order  from  General  Johnston  was,  I conceived,  to  move  on 
the  rear  of  the  corps  of  the  enemy  known  by  him  to  be  at  Clinton,  and 
I believed  his  intent  to  be  by  the  most  direct  route;  but  as  he  did  not 
in  Ids  dispatch  indicate  by  what  route,  it  was,  consequently,  left  entirely 
with  my  own  judgment  and  discretion  (had  I seen  fit  to  move  to  Clinton 
at  all)  to  decide  the  most  advantageous  route  under  the  circumstances 
for  the  advance.  I deem  that  to  have  made  the  movement  to  Clinton 
by  any  route  (but  more  especially  by  the  “most  direct  or  nearest  route”) 
would  have  been  hazardous  in  the  extreme ; yes,  suicidal,  for  in  that  case 
would  my  Hank  and  rear  have  been  entirely  unprotected,  and  a large  por- 
tion of  the  enemy’s  force  (of  whose  position  General  Johnston  seemed  to 


CHAi’.  XXXVI.] 


GENERAL  REPORTS, 


323 


be  entirely  ignorant)  conld  have  interposed  itself  between  my  army  and 
its  base  of  operations  (Vicksburg),  and  have  taken  that  stronghold  almost 
without  a struggle,  so  small  was  its  garrison  after  I had  drawn  all  my 
available  force  for  the  field.  The  object,  no  doubt,  of  the  order  was  that 
the  detachment  of  the  enemy  at  Clinton  should  be  promptly  assailed 
“ while  separate  and  beyond  support.”  But  was  it  beyond  supporting 
distance  of  the  other  columns  ? Of  the  positions  of  the  enemy  1 was  not 
definitely  informed  j but  only  knew  that  the  whole  of  GranCs  army 
(three  corps)  had  taken  the  general  direction  (northeast)  toward  the 
railroad.  At  what  point  on  this  they  would  strike,  or  the  positions  of  the 
two  corps,  not  mentioned  nor  seemingly  regarded  by  General  Johnston, 
I was  not  infonned,  except  inasmuch  as  I had  learned  from  prisoners 
that  Smith’s  division  was  at  Dillon’s  and  the  rest  of  the  corps  to  which 
he  was  attached  were  near  him,  could  I make  the  movement  on  the  one 
corps  at  Clinton  irrespective  and  regardless  of  the  major  force  of  the 
enemy?  jeopardizing  my  lines  of  communication  and  retreat,  and  giving 
up  Vicksburg  an  easy  capture  to  the  euemj’’,  the  retention  of  which  in 
our  possession  I knew  to  be  the  great  aim  and  object  of  the  Government 
in  the  campaign;  and  for  this  end  all  my  dispositions  of  troops  had  been 
made  and  plans  arranged — subverted  entirely  by  the  order 
under  consideration;  for  it  had  not  been  my  intention  to  make  any  for- 
ward movement  from  Edwards  Depot,  but  to  have  there  awaited  an 
attack  from  the  enemy  (which  must  have  taken  xJace  in  forty-eight  hours, 
or  he  would  have  been  compelled  to  have  sought  suxix)lies  at  his  base  on 
the  Mississippi  Eiver),  in  a chosen  jiosition,  with  my  lines  secured,  and, 
if  overwhelmed  by  numbers,  with  a way  of  retreat  open  across  the  Big 
Black,  which  line  of  defense  I would  have  then  held  as  an  obstruction 
to  the  euemj^’s  investing  Vicksburg.  And  this  disarrangement  of  my 
jilan  caused  “the  delay  for  some  twenty-six  hours.”  Kot  having  con- 
temiilated  an  advance,  all  the  arrangements  had  to  be  made  for  the  move- 
ment, all  my.  available  troops  had  to  be  collected,  and  great  difhculty 
was  caused  by  the  heavy  rain  which  fell  in  the  twenty-four  hours  suc- 
ceeding the  receipt  of  the  order.  My  movement,  considering  the  diffi- 
culties to  be  encountered  and  the  jfreparations  necessary  to  be  made,  was, 

I think,  promiitly  executed  and  without  “delay,”  in  the  usual  acceiita- 
tion  of  the  meaning  of  that  term. 

General  Johnston  not  having  consulted  with  me,  or  in  any  way  asked 
for  my  plan  or  opinion,  I had  perhaps  no  right  to  supxiose  that  he  was 
“ imi)erfectly  acquainted  with  my  position  and  resources,  as  well  as  with 
the  movements  and  forces  of  the  enemy  ; ” but,  oti  the  contrary,  when  he 
ordered  my  advance,  I would  have  been  justified  in  siijiiiosing  that  he 
must  have  been  better  informed  as  to  the  disiiosition  of  the  forces  of  the 
enemy  than  myself.  But,  notwithstanding  this,  had  I been  u})held  by 
the  oi)inions  of  my  general  ofiicers,  1 would  not  have  advanced  beyond 
Ldwards  Dex)ot,  as  I deemed  it  very  hazardous  to  make  any  forward 
movement,  but  Avould  there  have  awaited,  on  chosen  ground,  the  attack 
of  the  enemy. 

The  interval  which  elax^sed  between  my  communications  (informing 
iTeneral  Johnston  in  the  first  that  I would  obey  his  instructions  at  once, 
niough  against  my  own  judgment,  and  in  the  second  that  1 would  move 
01  a direction  to  cut  off  the  sujiplies  of  the  enemy)  was  not  long  enough 
t^o  change  or  interfere  with  any  movement  of  his. 

By  no  possibility  could  General  Johnston  have  effectually  co-operated 
jyith  me  in  the  movement  toward  Clinton,  he  at  that  time  having  re- 
ired  before  the  greatly  superior  force  of  the  enemy,  in  the  direction  of 
canton;  was  some  20  miles  distant  from  Clintoiq  ap.(l,  moreover,  the 


324 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  XXXVI. 


enemy  would  certainly  have  forced  battle  from  me  before  I should  have 

reached  the  latter  place.  ^ 

“The  consequence  which,  in  my  judgment,  would  have  resulted  froui 
nursuing  the  instructions  literally”  would  have  been  the  certain  fall  of 
Vicksburg,  almost  without  a blow  being  struck  in  its  defense,  so  over- 
whelming' a force  could  the  enemy  then  have  thrown,  without  opposition, 
on  its  small  garrison.  For  further  elucidation  on  this  point,  I beg  leave 
to  refer  you  to  an  examination  of  the  positions  on  the  map  accom- 

^ In  consequence  of  my  great  deficiency  in  cavalry,  the  force  of  that  arm 
in  my  command  being  scarcely  adequate  for  the  necessary  picketing,  I 
was  not  “acquainted  with  the  movements  of  the  several  corps  of  the 
enemv  ” but  only  knew,  as  before  stated,  that  the  general  direction  of 
the  whole  of  Grant’s  army  was  to  the  northeast  from  its  base  on  the 

General  Johnston,  when  he  sent  me  the  first  instructions  for  the  move- 
ment on  the  detachment  at  Clinton,  was  not  informed  ot  the  positions  ot 
the  other  detachments  of  the  enemy,  for  he  writes  me  on 
ing  (the  14th)  that  another  corps  of  the  enemy,  he  learns,  is  at  Eaymond, 
to  which  he  had  not  in  any  manner  referred  in  his  letter  of  the  13th.t 

Having  concluded  that  it  would  be  suicidal  to  make  the  direct  advance 
to  Clinton,  I would  have  attempted  “ no  other  compliance  with  the  order 
had  the  opinions  of  my  general  officers  in  any  manner  sustained  me  in  so 
doing ; but  they  being  all  eager  for  an  advance,  I made  a movement,  ui 
the  shortest  poLble  time,  to  threaten  the  roads  to  Raymond  and  to 
Dillon,  thus  to  cut  off  the  supplies  of  the  enemy,  which  a communica- 
tion previously  written  (of  the  14th)  by  General  Johnston,  but  not  re- 
ceived until  after  the  battle  of  Baker’s  Creek,  suggested. 

General  f J.l  Gregg,  with  his  brigade  from  Port  Hudson,  having  arrived 
at  a point  near  Jackson,  and  being  without  his  wagon  transportation,  was 
ordered  to  take  position  at  Eaymond  (that  being  an  advantageous  pom) 
for  the  collection  of  the  troops  either  to  move  on  the  flank  of  enenij 
advancing  on  Edwards  Depot  or  to  retire  on  J acksou),  and  on  there  beinf 
joined  by  the  re  enforcements,  which  were  expected  and  daily  arriving  a,l 
Jackson,  including,  as  I hoped,  a force  of  cavalry,  to  “oj® 
and  rear  of  the  enemy  should  he  attack  me  in  position  at  Edwaids  De 
pot.  To  await  and  draw  on  this  attack  I bad  matured  all  my  plims  a 
arranoements.  Vide  following  telegrams  to  Generals  Gregg  and  Wa,lkei 
on  thfs  point,  where  it  will  be  seen  that  though  General  Gregg 
the  advance  of  the  enemy  nobly  and  bravely,  my  orders,  wen 

for  him  to  retire  on  Jackson  if  attacked  by  a greatly  superior  force . 


Vicksburg,  May  11,  1863. 

ou  Black  Bridge,  in  wkicli  case  you  must  be  prepared  to  attack  them 
fliuik.  j Q PEMBERTON, 

Lieutenant-General,  Commanding. 


Vicksburg,  May  11,  1863. 


* To  be  found  in  Atlas. 


t Raymond  is  8 miles  from  Clinton, 


Chap.  XXXYL] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


325 


strong  force,  you  will  meet  them.  If,  instead  of  afl  vancing  on  Jackson,  lie  should  ad- 
vance on  Big  Black  Bri<lge,  the  command,  under  direction  of  the  senior  officer  will 
attack  him  in  rear  and  flank.  ’ 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Lieu  ten  an  t-  Gen  eral,  Comman  ding. 


n T n T TTT  ^ , Vicksburg,  Maij  11,  1863. 

Brigadier- General  Walker,  Jaclcson: 

Enemy  is  reported  advancing  in  heavy  force  on  Jackson.  Hold  your  command  in 
readiness,  and  move  toward  Raymond,  either  to  support  General  Gregg  at  that  place 
or  to  cover  his  retreat.  Telegraph  to  hurry  up  re-enforcements. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-General,  Commanding . 


General  Loring  “had  been  or<lered  to  attack  before  General  Cum- 
brigade  gave  way,^^  and  tlie  order  had  been  again  and  again  re- 
peated^ and  in  my  opinion  “had  Stevenson^s  division  been  promptly 
sustained,”  his  troops  would  have  deported  themselves  gallantly  and 
creditably. 

I have  received  no  explanation  of  “the  extraordinary  failure  of  Gen- 
eral  Loring  to  comply  with  my  reiterated  orders  to  attack,”  and  I do 
“feel  assured  that  my  orders  were  received  by  him.” 

Hoping,  sir,  that  these  explanations  may  prove  satisfactorv,  I am, 
with  respect,  your  obedient  servant,  " 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
hieutenant-  Genera^  Commanding. 


TT  -r  Richmond,  Ya.,  Becemher  14,  1863. 

Hon.  James  A.  Seddon, 

Secretary  of  War : 

Sir:  Having  been  allowed  the  opportunity  of  reading  General  J.  E 
Johnston^s  report  of  the  military  operations  in  the  Department  of  Mis- 
sissippi and  Eastern  Louisiana  during  the  months  of  May,  June,  and 
•July  last,  m justice  to  myself  I request  to  be  permitted  to  make  the  fol- 
lowing additional  report: 

The  first  order  from  General  Johnston,  dated  at  Jackson,  May  13 
was  received  by  me  near  Bovina  on  the  morning  of  the  14th,  I think 
between  9 and  10  o’clock.  It  was  in  these  terms : 

that  Major-General  Sherman  is  between  us  with 
X hpTTfn.LS  important  to  re-establish  communication,  that  you 

aSmPTif  wnnm  practicable,  come  up  in  his  rear  at  once.  To  beat  such  a de- 

he  of  immense  value.  The  troops  here  could  co-operate.  All  the 
t,th  you  can  quickly  assembly  should  he  brought ; time  is  all-important. 

In  this  note  General  Johnston  does  not  intimate  a probable  movement 
t the  corps  under  General  Sherman  from  Clinton  upon  Jackson,  nor 
loes  he  say  how  “ the  troops  here  [at  Jackson]  could  co-operate.”  He 
mly  directs  me  for  purposes  named— “if  practicable,  come  up  in  his 
enemy  s]  rear  at  once.  General  Sherman  with  his  corps  of  four  divis- 

General  Johnston  to  be  between  him  and  my- 

General  Johnston 

ished  me  to  advance.  If  the  enemy  should  await  my  approach  at  Clin- 
OD  and  give  me  battle  there,  General  Johnston  would  have  been  in  his 
co-operated;  or,  if  he  advanced  upon  Jackson  and 
liiirf  n®  small  force  there,  and  I could  by  any  possibility,  in  obe- 
p!n  ^ Johnston’s  orders,  have  come  up  in  his  rear  while  so 

ccupied,  there  would  have  been  co-operation ; but,  in  either  event,  to 
our  troops  in  this  way,  it  is  plain  that  the  enemy,  whatever  his 


326 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAr.  XXXVL 


strength,  must  he  first  completely  routed.  I see  no  other  mode  hy  which 
a junction  could  have  been  effected,  unless  either  General  Johnston  or 
myself  should  pass  completely  around  the  iiosition  or  moving  columns 
of  the  enemy.  I have  no  reason  to  suppose  he  contemplated  such  a 
movement  when  he  addressed  to  me  his  note  of  the  13th.  In  the  ab- 
sence of  special  instructions  as  to  my  route  to  reach  the  rear  of  the  en- 
emy at  Clinton,  I was  certainly  at  liberty  to  select  that  which  I should 
deem  the  most  advantageous,  time  or  the  distance  to  be  marched  being 
only  one  element  (though  a very  important  one)  which  should  influence 
my  selection.  I have  no  desire,  however,  to  conceal  the  fact  that  my 
understanding  of  General  Johnston^s  orders  was  to  move  as  rapidly  as 
possible  to  attack  Sherman’s  corps  at  Clinton,  or  wherever  I might  find 
it,  and  I believed  that  his  instructions  were  influenced  by  his  supposing 
that  these  were  the  only  troops  I should  encounter,  as  no  reference  is 
made  to  any  other  force  of  the  enemy. 

It  will  be  remembered  now  that  I received  these  instructions  between 
9 and  10  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  14th,  near  Bovina,  on  the  west 
of  the  Big  Black  Eiver.  I at  first  determined  to  obey  them  at  once,  al- 
though, in  my  judgment,  fraught  with  peril  and  absolute  disaster,  and 
so  informed  General  Johnston.  Before  leaving  Bovina,  I gave  some  nec- 
essary instructions  to  meet  this  unexpected  movement,  and  as  soon  as 
possible  proceeded  to  Edwards  Depot,  where  I arrived  at  about  12 
o’clock,  and  learned  from  prisoners  just  captured  that  a corps  of  the 
enemy  was  on  my  right  flank,  with  one  division  of  it  near  Dillon’s. 

It  will  be  observed  in  General  Johnston’s  communication  of  the  14th, 
given  in  my  report  (unfortunately  not  received  until  the  evening  of  the 
16th),  that  he  informs  me  he  was  compelled  to  evacuate  Jackson  about 
noon  on  that  day,  thus  showing  that  within  less  than  three  hours  of  my 
receipt  of  his  order  he  was  himself  compelled  to  leave  Jackson,  the 
enemy  having  moved  from  Olinton  against  that  place.  And  in  the  same 
communication  he  further  informs  me  that  a body  of  troops,  which  was 
reported  to  have  reached  Raymond  on  the  preceding  night,  advanced 
at  the  same  time  from  that  direction.  Therefore,  had  I moved  imme- 
diately, which  I could  not  have  done  with  more  than  16,000  effective 
men,  I should  have  encountered  their  combined  forces  in  my  front  had 
they  chosen  to  give  me  battle,  while  McClernand’s  corps,  upon  my  right, 
could  either  have  interposed  between  me  and  Vicksburg  or  have  moved 
at  once  upon  my  rear.  Ror  could  I have  had  much  assistance  from  the 
re-enforcements  referred  to  by  General  Johnston,  for  in  the  same  com- 
munication he  informs  me  that — 

Telegrams  were  dispatched  when  the  enemy  was  near,  directing  General  Gist  to  as- 
semble the  approaching  troops  at  a point  40  or  50  miles  from  Jackson,  and  General 
Maxey  to  return  to  his  wagons  and  provide  for  the  security  of  his  brigade ; for  instance, 
by  joining  General  Gist. 

He  himself  having  moved,  on  the  14th,  with  the  small  force  at  Jack- 
son,  some  7 miles  toward  Canton,  and  thus  placed  himself  not  less  tliaii 
15  miles  (as  I am  informed)  by  the  nearest  practicable  route  from  Clin- 
ton ; and  on  the  following  day  he  marched  lOJ  miles  nearer  to  Canton 
and  farther  from  Olinton. 

Let  us  suppose,  therefore,  for  the  moment,  that,  neglecting  all  provis- 
ion for  the  safety  of  Vicksburg,  and  by  withdrawing  Vaughn’s  brigmle 
of  1,500  men  from  the  defense  of  the  Big  Black  Bridge  (my  direct  line 
of  communication  with  Vicksburg),  I had  swelled  my  little  army  at  Ed- 
wards Dei)ot  to  17,500  (it  must  be  remembered  Tilghman’s  brigade  was 
west  of  Big  Black,  guarding  the  important  apiiroach  by  Baldwin  ^ 
Ferry,  which  was  threatened  by  the  whole  of  McClernand’s  corps,  and 


Chap.  XXXVl] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


327 


he  could  not,  therefore,  have  joined  me  earlier  than  the  morning  of  the 
15th),  and  that  I had  pushed  hurriedly  forward  on  the  direct  road  to 
Clinton.  I ask  any  candid  mind  what  would  probably,  nay,  what  must 
certainly,  have  been  the  result  ? 1 can  see  none  other  than  the  entire 

destruction  or  capture  of  my  army  and  the  immediate  fall  of  Vicksburg. 
Such  were  my  firm  convictions  at  the  time,  and  I so  expressed  myself 
to  my  general  officers  in  council,  and  such  they  are  still. 

I have  explained,  in  my  report,  why,  contrary  to  my  own  judgment 
nnd  to  the  subversion  of  all  my  plans  for  the  defense  of  Vicksburg,  I 
determined  to  advance  from  my  position  at  Edwards  Depot,  and  thus 
abandon  the  line  of  the  Big  Black,  which  (although  I had  crossed  when 
I learned  that  the  main  body  of  General  Grant’s  army  was  api)roaching 
the  Southern  Eailroad,  to  protect  my  communications  with  the  east  and 
more  easily  to  avail  myself  of  the  assistance  of  my  re-enforcements,  which 
were  daily  arriving)  i was  yet  in  a position  to  recross  readily  by  both 
the  bridges,  at  the  railroad  and  by  Bridgeport,  and  thus  defend  iny  vital 
positions  at  Snyder’s  Mill  and  Chickasaw  Bayou,  if  I should  find  that 
the  enemy  was  advancing  in  too  heavy  force  against  Edwards  Dei)Ot ; 
and  I accordingly  informed  General  Johnston,  on  May  12,  that  the 
enemy  was  api)arently  moving  his  heavy  force  toward  Edwards  Depot, 
adding — 

That  will  he  the  hattle-field,  if  I can  carry  forward  sufficient  force,  leaving  troops 
enough  to  secure  the  safety  of  this  place  (Vicksburg). 

I was  firmly  convinced  that  the  enemy’s  supplies  must  be  very  lim- 
ited, as  he  moved  with  but  few  wagons,  and  his  dependence  upon  those 
to  be  drawn  from  his  distant  base  at  Grand  Gulf  or  Bayou  Pierre  very 
precarious.  I had  good  reason,  therefore,  to  believe  that  he  would  be 
forced  either  to  advance  immediately  upon  Edwards  Depot  to  give  me 
battle  (which  I should  have  accepted  or  avoided,  according  to  circum- 
stances) or  to  return  at  once  to  his  base  upon  the  Mississippi  Eiver. 

On  May  7,  and  previous  to  my  movement  across  the  Big  Black,  the 
President  of  the  Confederate  States  telegraphed  me  as  follows : 

•I  am  anxiously  expecting  intelligence  of  your  further  active  operations.  Want  of 
transportation  of  supplies  must  compel  the  enemy  to  seek  a junction  with  their  ileet 
after  a few  days’  absence  from  it.  To  hold  both  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson  is  neces- 
sary to  a connection  with  Trans-Mississipj)!.  Yon  may  expect  whatever  it  is  in  my 
power  to  do. 

I have  now  shown  how  important  I considered  it  not  to  advance  be- 
yond my  direct  communication  with  Vicksburg  and  close  proximity  to 
the  Big  Black.  Nor  would  I have  done  so — and  I believe  that  every  gen- 
eral officer  of  my  command  who  attended  the  council  held  at  Edwards 
Depot  will  sustain  me  in  the  assertion,  so  far  as  his  opinion  may  go — 
but  for  the  orders  received  from  General  Johnston  on  the  morning  of 
May  14.  They  know,  one  and  all,  the  loud-voiced  public  sentiment 
which  urged  a forward  movement.  They  also  know  (there  may  be  an 
individual  exception  or  two)  how  eager  they  themselves  were  (though 
they  differed  as  to  the  preferable  movement)  to  leave  the  position  in 
Avhich  they  had  been  in  line  of  battle  from  the  13th  to  the  morning  of 
the  15th,  and  to  advance  upon  the  enemy,  and  they  know  further" the 
feeling  of  their  respective  commands  on  the  same  subject. 

1 have  stated  in  my  official  report,  and  I reiterate  here,  that — 

I bad  resisted  the  popular  clamor  for  an  advance,  wliicli  began  from  the  moment,  the 
enemy  set  liis  polluting  foot  upon  the  eastern  bank  of  the  Mississii)pi  River.  I had  re- 
sisted, I believe,  the  universal  sentiment  of  the  army — I know  of  my  general  offic('rs — 
in  its  favor  (I  now  add,  there  may  have  been  an  exception  or  two),  and  yielded  only  to 
the  orders  of  my  superior. 


328 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAr.  XXXVI. 


I do  not  say,  nor  have  I ever  said,  that  General  Johnston  ordered  me 
to  make  precisely  the  movement  I did  make.  He  did,  however,  order  a 
movement,  the  consequences  of  which  would,  in  my  judgment,  have  been 
utterly  disastrous  had  I attempted  literally  to  execute  it.  But  Avhen  it 
was  known  that  General  Johnston  had  ordered  an  advance,  the  weight 
of  his  name  made  the  pressure  upon  me  too  heavy  to  bear,  and  a move- 
ment became  necessary.  The  council  was,  I think,  nearly  equally  divided 
in  opinion  as  to  the  respective  advantages  of  the  two  movements. 
Among  others,  those  of  most  experience  and  of  highest  rank  advocated 
that  which  was  ultimately  adopted  by  my  accepting  what  I declared  to 
be  in  my  judgment  only  the  lesser  of  two  evils. 

When,  on  April  28,  General  Bowen  informed  me  by  telegraph  that 
“transports  and  barges  loaded  down  with  troops  were  landing  at  Hard 
Times,  on  the  west  bank,”  I made  the  best  arrangements  I could,  if  it 
became  necessary  to  forward  to  his  assistance  as  rapidly  as  possible  all 
the  troops  not,  in  my  opinion,  absolutely  indispensable  to  prevent  a coup 
de  maiUj  should  it  be  attempted  against  Vicksburg.  It  was  indispensable 
to  maintain  a sufficient  force  to  hold  Snyder’s  Mill,  Chickasaw  Bayou, 
the  city  front,  and  Warren  ton,  a line  of  over  20  miles  in  length. 

In  addition  to  his  troops  at  Young’s  Point  (whose  strength  I had  no 
means  of  ascertaining),  which  constantly  threatened  my  upper  positions, 
the  enemy  had,  as  has  already  been  shown,  a large  force  at  Hard  Times 
and  afloat  on  transports  between  Vicksburg  and  Grand  Gulf,  which 
threatened  the  latter  as  well  as  Warrenton,  where  a landing  under  coA^er 
of  his  gunboats  might  ha\^e  been  easily  effected,  and  his  whole  army  con- 
centrated there  instead  of  at  Bruinsburgj  and  this  movement  would  have 
placed  him  at  once  west  of  the  Big  Black.  It  was  impossible  for  me  to 
form  an  estimate  of  his  absolute  or  relative  strength  at  the  two  points 
named. 

•To  concentrate  my  whole  force  south  and  east  of  Big  Black  for  the 
support  of  General  Bowen  against  a landing  at  Grand  Gulf,  or  any  point 
south  of  it  not  yet  apparently  even  threatened,  would,  I think,  have  been 
unwise,  to  say  the  least  of  it.  To  show  that  I was  not  alone  in  my  opinion, 
I add  a telegram  from  General  Stevenson,  then  commanding  the  troops 
in  and  about  Vicksburg: 

The  men  will  he  ready  to  move  promptly.  To  cross  the  Mississippi,  both  gunboats 
and  transports  must  pass  the  batteries  at  Grand  Gulf.  An  army  large  enough  to 
defend  itself  on  this  side  would  consume  much  time  in  crossing.  As  it  is  not  known 
what  force  has  been  withdrawn  from  this  front,  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  force 
opxiosite  Grand  Gulf  is  there  to  lay  waste  the  country  on  that  side  and  a feint  to 
withdraw  troops  from  a main  attack  here.  I venture  to  express  the  hope  that  the 
troops  will  not  be  removed  far  until  further  developments  below  render  it  certain  that 
they  will  cross  in  force. 

Ou  April  30, 1 received  by  telegraph  from  General  Bowen  the  first  in- 
formation of  the  landing  of  the  enemy  at  Bruinsburg,  and  on  the  fol- 
lowing day  (May  1)  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson  was  lost  by  us. 

In  corroboration  of  the  statements  made  with  regard  to  the  threaten- 
ing aspect  of  affairs  toward  Vicksburg  and  its  flank  defenses,  I beg 
leave  to  draw  attention  to  the  following  dispatches  from  General  Steven- 
son : 

Vicksburg,  May  29. 

Eight  boats  loaded  with  troops  from  our  front  arc  now  moving  up  Yazoo.  The 
display  made  in  moving  them  showed  a desire  to  attract  our  attention. 

May  30. 

The  enemy  have  been  shelling  Snyder’s  at  long  range  most  of  the  day.  Forney 
thinks  that  five  regiments  have  ianded  at  Blake’s  lower  quarters. 


Chap.  XXX YL] 


GENERAL  REPORTS. 


329 


The  only  instructions  or  suggestions  received  from  General  Johnston 
iu  reference  to  the  movements  at  Grand  Gulf  are  contained  in  the  fol- 
lowing dispatches,  which  were  dated  and  received  after  the  battle  of 
Port  Gibson,  and  when  our  army  in  retreat  from  that  position  was  re- 
crossing  the  Big  Black : 

Tullahoma,  Marj  1. 

If  Grant's  army  lands  on  this  side  of  the  river,  the  safety  of  Mississippi  depends  on 
heating  it.  For  that  object  you  should  unite  your  whole  force. 

Tullahoma,  May  2. 

If  Grant  crosses,  unite  your  whole  force  to  beat  him.  Success  will  give  back  what 
was  abandoned  to  win  it. 

The  question  of  supplies  and  the  necessity  of  a sufficient  cavalry  force 
(without  which  I was  powerless)  to  protect  my  communications,  in  event 
of  a movement  south  of  Big  Black  toward  Bayou  Pierre,  has  been  suffi- 
ciently referred  to  in  the  body  of  my  report. 

1 have  one  more  remark  to  make  with  reference  to  cavalry : General 
Johnston  informed  me  about  the  middle  of  April  that  he  had  ordered 
a brigade  to  my  assistance.  So  far  as  my  knowledge  extends,  it  did  not 
enter  the  limits  of  my  department.  For  a few  days  subsequently,  Gen- 
eral Johnston  notified  me  that  a strong  force  of  the  enemy  in  front  of 
Koddey  prevented  his  leaving  Northern  Alabama  at  that  time,  and  re-^ 
quested  me,  if  possible,  to  send  a force  to  co-operate  with  him.  To  this 
I replied,  under  date  of  April  20,  from  Jackson,  reminding  him  that  1 
had  but  a feeble  cavalry  force,  but  that  I would  certainly  give  Colonel 
[P.  B.]  Eoddey  all  the  aid  I could,  and  added  : 

I have  virtually  no  cavalry  from  Grand  Gulf  to  Yazoo  City,  while  the  enemy  is 
threatening  to  cross  the  river  between  Vicksburg  and  Grand  Gulf,  having  twelve  ves- 
sels below  Vicksbui'g. 

In  relation  to  the  battle  of  BakePs  Creek,  I wish  to  add  a few  words 
in  elucidation  of  my  official  report:  When  I left  my  position  at  Edwartls 
Depot,  it  was  with  the  expectation  of  encountering  the  enemy.  I was, 
therefore,  neither  surprised  nor  alarmed  Avhen  on  the  night  of  the  ISth  I 
l(^arned  his  close  proximity ; nor  should  I have  then  desired  or  attempted 
to  avoid  a battle,  but  for  my  anxiety  to  comply  with  General  Johnstoifs 
instructions  of  the  15th  instant,  in  which  he  says: 

The  only  mode  by  which  we  can  unite  is  by  your  moving  directly  to  Clinton,  inform- 
ing me,  that  we  may  move  to  that  point  with  about  6,000. 

The  remainder  of  this  dispatch  is  embodied  in  my  report.  I used 
every  exertion  to  comply  implicitly  with  his  directions,  but  the  enemj^ 
prevented  it.  It  appears,  as  will  be  seen  by  reference,  that  General 
Johnston  supposed  the  enemy  to  be  still  at  Jackson  when  he  wrote  on 
the  loth,  while  in  his  note  of  the  14th  (received  subsequently),  the  enemy 
being  then  also  at  Jackson,  he  informs  me  that  the  force  under  General 
Gist,  he  hopes — 

will  be  able  to  prevent  the  enemy  in  Jackson  from  drawing  provisions  from  the  east. 
This  one  [Gregg’s,  with  w’hich  he  w^as  present  in  person]  maybe  able  to  keep  him 
from  the  country  toward  Panola.  Can  ho  sup})ly  himself  from  the  Mississipj)!  ? Can 
yon  not  cut  him  otf  from  it ; and,  above  all,  should  he  be  compelled  to  fall  back  for 
want  of  supplies,  beat  him  ? 

The  remainder  of  this  dispatcli  is  also  contained  in  my  report. 

1 here  insert  a dispatch  from  General  Johnston  not  given  or  referred 
to  in  my  report : 

Calhoun  Station,  May  16. 

I have  just  received  a dispatch  from  Captain  [W.  8.]  Yerger,  informing  me  that  a 
detachment  of  his  «]uadron  went  into  .Jackson  this  morning  just  as  the  enemy  was 


330 


[CiiAr.  .^XXVI. 


Mississirn,  west  Tennessee,  etc. 


leaviug-  it.  They  (the  Eederals)  took  the  Clinton  road.  It  is  matter  of  great  onxiety 
to  me  to  add  this  little  force  to  your  army,  hut  the  enemy  heing  exactly  between  us, 
und  consultation  by  correspondence  so  slow,  it  is  difficult  to  a'range  a meeting.  1 
will  take  the  route  you  suggest,  however,  if  I understand  it.  We  have  small  nieans 
of  transportation,  however.  Send  forward  a little  cavalry  to  communicate  with  me 
orally.  Is  the  force  between  us  too  strong  for  you  to  light,  if  it  interposes  itself? 

The  various  suggestious  and  instructions  in  these  dispatches  seem  to 
me  to  evidence  a want  of  clear  and  well-defined  plans,  and  all,  however, 
seem  to  ignore  Vicksburg,  the  defense  of  which  I had  conceived  to  be 
the  main  i)urpose  of  the  Government  in  retaining  the  army  in  Missis- 
sippi. 

1 would  only  further  remark  that  when  General  Johnston,  on  May  13, 
informed  me  that  Sherman  was  at  Clinton,  and  ordered  me  to  attack 
him  in  the  rear,  neither  he  nor  I knew  that  Sherman  was  in  the  act  of 
advancing  on  Jackson,  which  place  he  entered  at  12  o^clock  on  the  next 
day  5 that  a corps  of  the  enemy  was  at  Kaymond,  following  Sherman’s 
march  upon  Jackson,  and  that  another  corps  was  near  Dillon’s,  prob- 
ably moving  in  the  same  direction,  and  consequently  that  the  order  to 
attack  Sherman  could  not  be  executed.  Nor  was  I myself  aware,  until 
several  hours  after  I had  received  and  promised  to  obey  the  order,  that 
it  could  not  be  obeyed  without  the  destruction  of  my  army;  but  on  my 
arrival  at  Edwards  Depot,  two  hours  after  I received  the  order,  1 found 
a large  force  of  the  enemy  near  Dillon’s,  on  my  right  flank,  and  ready 
to  attack  me  in  the  flank  or  rear  if  I moved  on  Clinton.  Not  being  able, 
therefore,  to  make  .the  movement,  I determined,  in  consequence  of  the 
wish  indicated  by  General  Johnston’s  order  for  a forward  movement  on 
my  part,  to  make  the  only  movement  of  that  descrif)tion  which  gave  any 
promise  of  success ; and,  in  so  doing,  I relinquished  my  own  plans  for 
the  purpose  of  carrying  out  what  I supposed  to  be  those  of  General 
Johnston. 

The  battle  of  Baker’s  Creek  and  the  entire  consequences  of  my  move- 
ment resulted  from  General  Johnston’s  order,  and  he  is  in  part  respon- 
sible for  them,  for  if  that  order  had  never  been  given,  the  battle  of 
Baker’s  Creek  would  not  have  been  fought. 

In  relation  to  General  Johnston’s  complaint  that  I had  made  my  re- 
I)ort  direct  to  the  War  Department  instead  of  to  him,  I am  surprised, 
inasmuch  as  General  Johnston  had  been  previously  informed  by  the 
War  Department  that  I had  the  right  to  do  so. 

In  conclusion,  I earnestly  ask  that  there  may  be  as  little  delay  as 
possible  in  reconvening  the  court  of  inquiry  directed  to  investigate  the 
subjects  herein  referred  to. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  C.  PEMBEKTON, 

Lieutenant-  General. 

ADDENDA.* 


Ytoksburg,  July  2,  18(33. 

A meeting  of  the  general  officers  (jMiiJor-Generals  Stevenson,  Smith, 
Bowen,  and  Forney)  and  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton,  when  the 
following,  in  substance,  was  spoken  : 

All  agree  to  the  impracticability  of  the  marching  of  the  troo})s  on  any 
forced  march,  and  exhibit  brigadier  generals’  rejKuts. 

General  Pemberton.  You  all  know  General  Johnston’s  dispatches. 
You  are  of  opinion  to  what  extent  he  can  aid  us  ? 


Meiuorandiuii  Connd  amonj^  t.lic  r<‘nil)ert()u  paj^ers.' 


CiiAr.  XXXVI.] 


BOLIVAR,  TENN.,  AND  RIPLEY,  MISS. 


331 


General  Bowen.  I iiuderstaiid  lie  cannot  give  us  aid  in  raising  tlie 
siege.  I have  no  hopes  of  his  doing  so. 

General  Smith.  1 am  of  opinion  it  is  due  to  himself  to  light  Grant. 
I believe  he  has  had  a battle  probably  already,  but  I believe  he  has 
not  the  ability  to  aid  us  now,  and  I see  no  iirobability  of  his  being  able 
to  raise  the  siege. 

(They  reread  from  memory  J.  E.  Johnston’s  dispatches,  and  judge 
therefrom  that  there  is  a more  cheerful  tone  in  his  last  dispatch;  still, 
they  concur.) 

General  Pemberton  desires  generals  to  understand  J.  E.  Johnston’s 
position.  They  do  not  hold  out  any  hopes  of  raising  the  siege  now, 
whatever  he  may  have  intended. 

General  Pemberton.  The  next  point  is  to  consider  how  long  we  can 
remain  in  statu  quo,  remain  as  we  are  until  we  are  minus  food,  and  sur- 
render, or  make  proposition. 

General  Bowen.  I am  decidedly  of  opinion  to  propose  to  General 
Grant  now,  and  then  we  can  have  some  alternative  after,  if  he  refuses. 

All  are  agreed  upon  proposing  terms  of  capitulation  at  once. 

MODE  OF  CAPITULATION — TERMS. 

General  Pemberton.  That  we  be  allowed  to  move  out  with  all 
troops;  that  we  can  march  with  arms  and  officers’  personal  effects,  as 
is  customary,  servants  and  baggage,  &c.,  and  not  less  than  eight  days’ 
full  rations. 

Is  it  better  that  General  Pemberton  address  Grant  or  appoint  three 
commissioners  to  meet  three  of  Grant’s  commissioners  ? 

Generals  Bowen  and  Stevenson  propose  the  latter,  and  it  is  adopted. 

It  is  proposed  that  one  of  General  Pemberton’s  staff  officers  goes  and 
proiioses  the  commission.  The  general  does  not  deem  it  important  as 
what  officer,  as  long  as  he  selects  the  officer.  An  officer  is  selected — 
General  Bowen — and  the  following  note  is  to  be  conveyed. 

Tills  is  read  to  generals  and  approved. 

L.  M.  M.  [MONTGOMEPY.J 


JANUARY  25,  1863. — Scout  between  Bolivar,  Tenn.,  and  Ripley,  Miss. 

Report  of  Maj.  Daniel  M.  Emerson,  First  West  Tennessee  Cavalry. 

Headquarters  First  West  Tennessee  Cavalry, 

Bolivar,  Tenn.,  January  28,  1863. 

Sir  : On  the  25th  day  of  January,  1863,  in  pursuance  of  Sjiecial  Or- 
ders, No.  17,  post  headquarters,  with  a detachment  of  First  West  Ten- 
nessee Cavalry  and  the  independent  companies  of  the  Tippah  and  Mis- 
sissippi Bangers,  I proceeded  to  scout  the  country  between  Bolivar, 
Tenn.,  and  Bipley,  Miss.,  to  break  up  the  guerrilla  bands  infesting  that* 
neighborhood. 

About  4 J).  m.,  after  I had  proceeded  about  18  miles,  my  rear  guard 
was  attacked  by  15  men,  wlio  fired  a volley,  disabling  a Iiorse  belonging 
to  Private  John  Bose,  of  the  First  West  Tennessee  Cavalry;  he,  being 
thrown  to  the  ground,  Avas  captured  by  them.  As  soon  as  the  firing  was 
heard,  I immediately  faced  the  column  about,  and  pursued  them  about 


332 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


2 miles  into  a piece  of  woods,  when  they  scattered  in  different  direc- 
tions, making-  farther  pursuit  useless.  They  were  dressed  partly  in 
Federal  uniform,  and  were  a portion  of  the  noted  Sol.  [G.]  Street’s  com- 
pany of  guerrillas,  who  infest  that  section  of  the  country. 

January  26. — I scouted  the  woods  and  by-paths  supposed  to  be  fre- 
quented by  the  enemy,  but  was  unsuccessful  in  meeting  him  j learned 
that  he  camped  a short  distance  from  me  the  night  before,  his  force  not 
being  sufficient  to  attack  me. 

January  27. — On  the  march  to-day  captured  the  following  Confeder- 
ates, viz ; F.  M.  Stewart,  lieutenant-colonel  Twenty-second  Tennessee 
Infantry;  F.  Stith,  lieutenant  and  adjutant  Twenty-second  Tennessee  In- 
fantry; N.  Crouch,  private  Twenty-third  Mississippi  Infantry,  and  J.  C. 
Jackson,  Thirty-seventh  Mississippi  Infantry.  In  conversing  with  these 
officers,  I found  their  intentions  were  to  pass  our  lines  during  the  night 
between  Bolivar  and  Grand  Junction,  and  make  their  way  to  Shelby 
County,  Tennessee.  They  undoubtedly  were  going  to  recruit  for  their 
regiment.  The  privates  were  found  at  their  houses,  being  at  home  on 
furlough.  My  intentions  were  to  proceed  to  Ripley,  Miss.,  but  having 
received  reliable  information  that  a regiment  of  rebel  cavalry  was  there, 
I thought  it  prudent  not  to  venture  farther,  so  I commenced  my  march 
toward  Bolivar,  bringing  my  prisoners  with  me.  Camped  about  30 
miles  from  Bolivar,  the  enemy  following  near. 

January  28. — Resumed  march  toward  Bolivar,  and  arrived  here  about 
4 p.  m.,  and  turned  the  prisoners  over  to  the  provost-marshal  for  dis- 
posal. 

The  independent  rangers  were  of  great  service  to  me  as  guides,  they 
being  residents  of  the  country  I passed  through.  My  whole  command 
beliaved  themselves  on  the  march  well.  Nothing  has  been  done,  to  my 
knowledge,  contrary  to  existing  orders. 

All  of  which  I beg  leave  to  submit. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DANIEL  M.  EMERSON, 

Major ^ Commanding  First  West  Tennessee  Cavalry. 

Cai)t.  John  Peetz,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JANUARY  27,  1863. — Affair  near  Germantown,  Tenn. 

Report  of  Col.  Ephraim  R.  Ecldey,  Eightieth  Ohio  Infaiitry^  command- 
. ing  Ideeond  Brigade.,  Seventh  Division.,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

Camp  near  Germantown,  January  28, 1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  yesterday  a forage  train  from 
this  brigade  was  attacked  by  a force  of  rebel  cavalry  of  about  75.  The 
escort  covered  the  train,  and  brought  it  off  in  safety  without  any  loss  to 
this  brigade.  But  a party  of  24,  of  the  Fourth  Illinois  Cavalry,  being 
in  the  same  vicinity,  were  drawn  into  ambush  and  fired  on  by  the  whole 
party.  Tliree  were  killed,  3 wounded  (2  seriously),  and  16  missing. 

I sent  re-enforcements  immediately,  but  they  retreated  hastily  across 
the  Coldwater.  I immediately  placed  a force  of  infantry  at  the  bridge 
across  the  Nonconnah,and  informed  Colonel  Lee,  of  the  Seventh  Kansas, 
who  sent  a force  of  cavalry  this  morning  at  daylight  down  the  Her- 
nando road  and  another  to  Miller’s  Bridge,  who  are  pressing  them  hard. 


Chap.  XXXVI.l  SKIRMISH  NEAR  YORKVILLE,  TENN.  333 

Their  force  south  of  the  Ooldwater  and  west  of  Byhalia  is  represented 
to  be  at  least  500  strong.  They  have  annoyed  us  almost  every  day  by 
sending  small  parties  to  attack  and  harass  our  trains  and  pickets.  As 
yet  we  have,  by  caution,  prevented  any  [loss]  to  my  command,  except 
1 private  was  slightly  [wounded]  in  the  leg  while  on  picket. 

I am  still  confident  that  no  one  has  been  permitted  to  cross  the  rail- 
road without  permission. 

The  almost  impassable  condition  of  the  roads  has,  I think,  saved  us 
from  a general  attack  from  the  south.  Citizens  who  communicate  with 
me  confidentially  inform  me  that  it  is  [G.  L.]  Blythe’s  force  that  is  in  our 
front.  [B.  V.]  Richardson’s  force  is  badly  cut  up,  and  is  no  longer 
formidable  for  mischief. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  R.  EOKLEY, 

Colonel j Commanding  Second  Brigade. 

Capt.  M.  Rochester, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JANUARY  28,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Yorkville,  Tenn. 


Report  of  Col.  Oliver  Wood.,  Tiventy-seeond  Ohio  Infantry. 


Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

Trenton,  Tenn.,  January  29,  1863. 


Sir:  I have  to  report  to  you  concerning  the  skirmish  near  Yorkville, 
Tenn.  (15  miles  northwest  of  Trenton),  as  follows,  viz: 

Yesterday,  28th  instant,  about  9 a.  m.,  the  detachment  of  infantry,  110 
men,  under  command  of  Captain  Govette,  Twenty-second  Regiment  Ohio 
Volunteers,  after  having  been  divided  into  four  parties  for  foraging,  were 
attacked  by  [W.  A.]  Dawson  and  his  band,  98  or  99  men  (as  the  citizens 
report).  The  party  which  was  attacked  numbered  30  in  all,  under  the 
immediate  command  of  Captain  Govette,  who,  with  the  assistance  of 
Captain  Moffitt  and  10  men  of  the  Eleventh  Illinois  Volunteer  Cavalry, 
soon  repulsed  Dawson,  with  no  loss  whatever  on  our  side.  Dawson  lost 
1 killed  and  5 wounded  j also  2 horses  wounded. 

Immediately  after  the  skirmish,  our  forage  party  commenced  gather- 
ing what  they  had  left  when  attacked,*  making  in  all  6 wagon  loads  of 
corn  and  2,000  pounds  of  salted  meats,  which  will  be  sent  to  Jackson 
to-night,  excepting  the  meat.  The  infantry  detachment  (Twenty-second 
Ohio)  will  return  to  Trenton  to-night. 

As  soon  as  the  cavalry  which  was  sent  for  this  morning  arrives  from 
Jackson,  I intend  sending  out  every  horse  and  man  that  can  be  mounted, 
for  the  purpose  of  entirely  clearing  the  country  of  Dawson.  Last  night 
I had  occasion  to  send  Captain  Miner  with  9 men,  inounted,  to  South 
Gibson.  On  his  way  down  he  reports  that  he  passed  the  picket  line  at 
Humboldt  without  being  halted,  and  that  the  guard  fired  but  once,  and 
that,  too,  after  the  squad  had  passed. 

Respectfully,  yours. 


O.  WOOD, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Post. 


Capt.  T.  H.  Harris, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


334 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


JANUARY  28,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Collierville,  Tenn. 

Ueport  of  Col.  Albert  L.  Lce^  Seventh  Kansas  Cavalry^  commanding 
Second  Brigade,  Cavalry  Division. 

Germantown, 

January  29,  1803. 

II;i(l  a skirmish  with  200  guerrillas  south  of  Collierville,  aiul  killed 
about  a dozeu.  Lost  1 man.  All  right  ou  the  road. 

A.  L.  LEE, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Second  Brigade,  Cavalry  Division. 
General  Hamilton. 


JANUARY  28-30,  1863. — Scout  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  toward  Ripley, 

Miss. 


Report  of  Mag.  William  D.  Blackburn,  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry. 

La  Grange,  Tenn., 

January  30,  1803. 

Sir:  In  pursuance  of  orders,  I sent  Major  Blackburn,  in  command  of 
the  effective  force  of  this  regiment,  112  men  and  officers,  on  the  28th 
instant,  on  scouting,  for  the  purpose  indicated  in  said  order.  Major 
Blackburn  has  just  returned,  and  reports  as  follows : 

Colonel  : In  obedience  to  your  order,  I started  on  the  morning  of  the  28th  instant, 
with  103  men  and  9 officers,  and  proceeded  to  Ripley,  leaving  Salem  a little  to  the  right, 
and  calling  on  Captain  Street,  of  guerrilla  notoriety.  Found  no  force  at  Ripley,  ex- 
cept stragglers.  Captured  in  Ripley  Lieutenant-Colonel  [L.  B.]  Hovis,  of  Seventh 
Mississippi  Cavalry;  Private  Davis,  of  Seventh  Mississippi  Cavalry;  Private  Patten, 
of  Twenty- seventh  Mississippi  Cavalry,  and  a private  of  Street’s  band ; also  recaptured  I 
Privates  Henry  [M.]  .Jenkins,  Fred.  Miller,  James  Cornelison,  William  Going,  Will-  ; 
iam  Cornelison,  J.  H.  Eaton,  William  D.  Harris,  S.  A.  Eaton,  and  Martin  Smith,  all 
of  Company  G,  Sixty-sixth  Indiana  Infantry,  who  were  captured  at  Tuscumbia  Bridge,  ; 
G miles  south  of  Corinth,  on  the  27th  instant;  also  captured  a number  of  muskets, 
shot-guns,  rifles,  &c.,  which  were  destroyed  as  not  worth  carrying. 

We  patrolled  the  roads  4 miles  south  and  east  of  Ripley.  Found  nothing  but  strag-  ; 
glers.  Lost  1 man — taken  prisoner,  private  Company  E,  while  on  that  duty.  Re-  . 
turned  by  the  way  of  Saulsbury,  and  crossed  the  trail  of  60  Southern  cavalry  within  i 
a mile  of  that  place.  They  took  the  Holly  Springs  road,  and  gave  out  that  they  were  = 
Forrest’s  men.  We  were  within  three  hours  of  them. 

Got  reliable  information  froui  Pontotoc  on  the  28th.  Pinson’s  First  Mississippi  Cav- 
alry was  there,  and  Van  Dorn,  with  his  usual  force,  say  6,000,  were  then  moving  from  i 
ncjir  Grenada  toward  Verona,  on  the  Mississippi  and  Ohio  Railroad.  They  gave  out  |i 
that  they  were  going  north,  and  had  ton  days’  rations.  i 

All  the  conscripts  of  that  region  are  being  organized  and  sent  to  Savannah,  on  the  t* 
Tennessee  River,  where  they  are  said  to  be  forbfying.  { 

The  roads,  except  near  here  and  near  Ri^iley,  are  good.  ' 


liesi)ectfully, 


EDWARD  PRINCE, 
Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commandmg  Regiment. 


Lieutenant  Woodward, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adgt.  Gen.,  First  Brigade,  Cavalry  Division. 


Chap.  XXXVI. ] 


335 


SKIRMISH  AT  DYERSBURG,  TENK. 

JANUARY  30,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Dyersburg,  Tenn. 

Kepovt  of  Col.  Oliver  Twenty -second  Ohio  lvfa7itry. 

Headquarters  Uimited  States  Forces, 

Trenton,  Tenn.^  February  4,  1803. 

Sir  : I respectfully  send  you  the  following  report  of  the  skirmish  at 
Dyersburg,  of  the  forces  under  my  command,  with  [W.  A.]  Dawson’s 
guerrillai  band : 

The  expedition,  consisting  of  100  of  the  Eleventh  Illinois  Cavalry, 
under  Captains  Burbridge  and  Mofhtt,  and  38  of  the  Twenty-second 
Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry,  under  Lieutenant  Whitehead,  left  this  place 
at  2 p.  m.  January  30,  in  three  detachments— the  right,  under  Captain 
Burbridge,  taking  the  Newbern  road ; the  center,  Captain  Moffitt,  the 
Dyersburg  road ; the  left.  Lieutenant  Whitehead,  with  mounted  infantry, 
taking  the  Chestnut  Bluft  road — with  orders  to  concentrate  at  Dyers- 
burg as  soon  as  possible. 

Captain  Moffitt  was  the  first  to  arrive  at  Dyersburg,  and  found  the 
enemy  posted  in  a house  at  the  west  end  of  the  bridge  across  the  Forked 
Deer  River.  The  rebels  had  been  in  this  position  for  some  time  during 
the  day,  skirmishing  with  a detachment  of  the  Third  Michigan  Cavalry, 
under  Captain  Quackenbush,  to  prevent  them  from  crossing  the  brido’e. 
It  was  near  midnight  when  Captain  Moffitt  arrived,  and,  finding  where 
the  enemy  was  posted,  ordered  his  men  to  charge,  which  they  did  in 
gallant  style.  Captain  Moffitt  leading  the  advance,  completely  routed 
them,  killing  2,  wounding  4,  and  capturing  17,  when  the  rebels  broke 
every  direction.  Captain  Moffitt  was  severely  wounded  in 
the  thigh.  This  was  the  only  casualty  on  our  side.  Captains  Burbridge 
and  Quackenbush  and  Lieutenant  Whitehead  arrived  soon  after  with 
them  commands,  and  were  sent  in  different  directions  in  pursuit  of  the 
tugitives.  The  country  was  completely  scoured  for  several  miles  in 
^^ery  direction,  and  every  ferry  destroyed  on  the  Obion  and  Forked 
Deer  Rivers  that  could  be  found.  The  search  was  kept  up  for  three 
days,  when  I ordered  it  discontinued,  the  men  and  horses  being  nearly 
worn  down  from  hard  service  and  exposure.  We  captured  in  all  30 
prisoners,  25  horses,  and  28  guns,  of  all  kinds,  calibers,  and  descriptions. 

Every  officer  and  man  did  his  duty  faithfully  and  with  alacrity.  Were 
1 to  personate,  duty  would  compel  me  to  name  every  officer  and  man  of 
the  command.  One  incident  will  illustrate  the  temper  of  the  men. 
Eieutenant  Whitehead,  commanding  the  mounted  infantry,  swam  his 
command  across  a branch  of  the  Forked  Deer  rather  than  march  2 miles 
to  a lord,  fearing  that  he  would  be  behind  time.  Many  of  the  horses 
tailed  on  the  march,  and  I allowed  the  men  to  take  the  captured  horses 
am  remount.  I have  taken  charge  of  the  horses  that  had  given  out  on 
the  march  and  brought  them  to  this  place. 

I regret  to  state  that  Lieutenant  Neeley,  Third  Michigan  Cavalry 
was  accidentally,  and,  I fear,  mortally,  wounded  in  the  thigh.  The  sur- 
geon thinks  there  is  but  little  hope  of  his  recovery. 

ot  the  Eleventh  Illinois  Cavalry,  under  the  com- 
maim  ot  Captain  Burbridge,  at  Dyersburg,  to  watch  the  movements  of 
^ e rebels  and  report  to  me.  If  Dawson  shows  himself,  we  will  soon  be 

his  track. 

Respectfully,  yours, 

O.  WOOD, 

^ Colonel^  Commanding, 

Capt.  T.  H.  Harris,  Adjt.  Gen.,  District  of  Jackson. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chav.  XXXVI. 


FEBRUARY  2-3, 1863.— Passage  of  the  Vicksburg  and  Warrenton  batteries, 
and  capture  of  the  steamers  A.  W.  Baker,  Moro,  and  Berwick  Bay  by 
the  Q,ueen  of  the  West. 

RKFORTS.* 

No.  1. — Col.  Charles  Elvers  Ellet,  Ram  Fleet. 

No.  2.— Maj.  Gen.  Franklin  Gardner,  C.  S.  Army,  of  capture  of  steamers. 

No.  3.— Brig.  Gen.  Henry  H.  Sihley,  C.  S.  Army,  of  capture  of  steamers. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Col  Charles  Rivers  Mlet,  Ram  Fleet. 

U.  S.  Steam  Bam  Queen  of  the  West, 

Below  Vielcshurg,  Miss.,  February  2,  1863. 

Admiral  : In  compliance  with  your  instructions  [following],  I started 
on  the  Queen  of  the  West  at  4.30  o’clock  this  morning  to  pass  the  bat- 
teries at  Vicksburg  and  sink  the  rebel  steamer  lying  before  that  city. 
I discovered  immediately  on  starting  that  the  change  of  the  wheel  from 
its  former  position  to  the  narrow  space  behind  the  Queen’s  bulwarks 
did  not  permit  the  boat  to  be  handled  with  sufficient  accuracy.  An 
hour  or  more  was  spent  in  rearranging  the  apparatus,  and  when  we 
linally  rounded  the  point  the  sun  had  risen,  and  any  advantage  which 
would  have  resulted  from  the  darkness  was  lost  to  us.  The  rebels  opened 
a heavy  fire  upon  us  as  we  neared  the  city,  but  we  were  only  struck  three 
times  before  reaching  the  steamer.  She  was  lying  in  nearly- the  same 
position  that  the  Arkansas  occupied  when  General  Ellet  ran  the  Queen 
into  her  on  a former  occasion.  The  same  causes  which  prevented  the 
destruction  of  the  Arkansas  then  saved  the  City  of  Vicksburg  this 
morning.  Her  position  was  such  that  if  we  had  run  obliquely  into  her 
as  we  came  down,  the  bow  of  the  Queen  would  inevitably  have  glanced. 
We  were  compelled  to  partially  round  to  in  order  to  strike.  The  con- 
sequence was  that  at  the  very  moment  of  collision  the  current,  very 
strong  and  rapid  at  this  point,  caught  the  stern  of  my  boat,  and,  acting 
on  her  bow  as  a pivot,  swung  her  round  so  rapidly  that  nearly  all  her 
momentum  was  lost.  I had  anticipated  this  result,  and  therefore  caused 
the  starboard  bow  gun  to  be  shotted  with  three  of  the  incendiary  pro- 
jectiles recommended  in  your  orders.  As  we  swung  around,  Sergt.  J.  H. 
Campbell,  detailed  for  the  purpose,  fired  this  gun.  A 64-pounder  shell 
crashed  through  the  barricade  just  before  he  reached  the  spot,  but  he  did 
not  hesitate.  The  discharge  took  place  at  exactly  the  right  moment, 
and  set  the  rebel  steamer  in  flames,  which  they  subsequently  succeeded 
in  extinguishing.  .At  this  moment  one  of  the  enemy’s  shells  set  the 
cotton  on  fire  near  the  starboard  wheel,  while  the  discharge  of  our  own 
gun  ignited  that  portion  which  was  on  the ' bow\  The  flames  spread 
rapidly,  and  the  dense  smoke,  rolling  into  the  engine  room,  suffocated 
the  engineers.  I saw  that  if  I attempted  to  run  into  the  City  of  Vicks- 
burg again,  my  boat  would  certainly  be  burned.  I ordered  her  to  be 
headed  down  stream,  and  turned  every  man  to  extinguishing  the  flames. 
After  much  exertion,  we  finallv  put  out  the  fire  by  cutting  the  burning 
bales  loose.  The  enemy,  of  course,  were  not  idle.  We  were  struck  twelve 
times,  but,  though  the  cabin  was  knocked  to  pieces,  no  material  injuiy  to 

* See  also  reports  of  Acting  Rear-Admiral  David  D.  Porter,  IT,  S.  Navy,  in  Annual 
Rexmrt  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  7,  1863. 


Chai*.  XXXVI.] 


PASSAGE  OF  BATTERIES,  ETC. 


337 


the  boat  or  to  any  of  those  on  her  was  inflicted.  About  two  regiments 
of  rebel  sharpshooters  in  rifle-pits  kept  up  a continuous  fire,  but  did 
no  damage.  The  Queen  was  struck  twice  in  the  hull,  but  above  the 
water  line.  One  of  our  guns  dismounted  and  ruined. 

I can  only  speak  in  the  highest  terms  of  the  conduct  of  every  man 
on  board.  All  behaved  with  cool,  determined  courage. 

I remain,  very  respectfully, 

OHAELES  EIVEES  ELLET, 
Colonel^  Commanding  Bam  Fleet. 

Actg.  Rear-Admiral  David  D.  Porter, 

Commanding  Mississippi  Squadron. 

A D D E N D A . 

Yazoo  ItiVER,  February  1,  1863. 

Col.  Charles  Rivers  Ellet, 

Bam  Queen  of  the  West : 

Sir  : You  will  proceed  with  the  Queen  of  the  West  to  Vicksburg,  and 
destroy  the  steamer  Vicksburg,  lying  off  that  place;  after  which,  you 
will  proceed  down  the  river  as  far  as  our  batteries,  below  the  canal,  and 
report  to  me.  In  going  down  you  will  go  along  under  low  speed,  having 
steerage-way  enough,  and  keeping  close  to  the  right-hand  shore  going 
clown.  Before  you  start,  it  would  be  better  to  have  a large  bed  of  coal 
in,  so  that  you  will  not  have  to  put  in  fresh  coal.  The  smoke  might 
betray  you.  After  you  have  destroyed  the  steamer,  go  down  stream, 
ind,  when  clear  of  the  city,  show  three  vertical  lights,  that  our  batteries 
may  not  fire  on  you.  If  you  get  disabled,  drift  down  until  abreast  of 
3ur  batteries,  and  the  small  army  steamer  will  go  to  your  assistance. 
Save  every  light  in  your  ship  put  out  before  you  leave  for  Vicksburg, 
except  the  three  lights  to  be  shown  to  our  batteries,  which  must  be  kept 
30vered  up.  See  that  no  lights  show  from  the  stern  as  you  iiass  the 
:own,  enabling  them  to  rake  you ; and  adopt  every  means  of  conceal- 
ment. The  best  place  to  strike  the  steamer  is  20' feet  forward  of  her 
vheel.  After  disabling  her  there,  so  that  she  will  sink,  fire  through  her 
joilers  and  in  among  her  machinery  as  she  goes  down. 

It  will  not  be  part  of  your  duty  to  save  the  lives  of  those  on  board. 
Chey  must  look  out  for  themselves,  and  may  think  themselves  lucky  if 
hey  do  not  meet  the  same  fate  meted  out  to  the  Harriet  Lane.  Think 
)i  the  fate  of  that  vessel  while  performing  your  duty,  and  shout  ‘^Har- 
iet  Lane!”  into  the  ears  of  the  rebels.  If  you  can  fire  turpentine  balls 
rom  your  bow  field-pieces  into  the  light  upper  works,  it  will  make  a 
ine  finish  to  the  sinking  part. 

Further  orders  for  duty  to  be  performed  below  will  be  given  after  your 
•eport. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DAVID  D.  PORTER, 

Acting  Bear-Admiral^  Commanding  Mississippi  Squadron. 


Hdqrs.  Mississippi  River  Marine  Brigade, 

U.  S.  Steam  Ram  Queen  of  the  West, 

Below  VicJcsburg,  Miss.,  February  5,  1863. 
General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  that  I left  the  landing 
jSlow  the  cut-off*  about  1 p.  m.  on  the  2d  iustant,  and  proceeded  down 
lie  river. 

22  R R — VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


338  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  NSXVI. 

At  Warreuton,  a few  miles  below,  the  enemy  had  two  batteries,  of 
four  pieces  each,  of  which  four  are  20-pouiider  rifled  guns.  Ihey  opened 
upon  us  as  we  i)assed,  but  only  struck  us  twice,  doing  no  injury. 

On  reaching  the.  Big  Black  Eiver,  I attempted  to  ascend  it,  but  found 
it  impossible  from  the  narrowness  of  the  stream.  Passing  it,  we  reached 
Natchez  iiist  at  midnight.  I landed  at  Vidalia,  on  the  oxiposite  shore, 
fhrlw  oufsome  ^cketf,  and  went  into  the  village,  in  the  hope  of  pick- 
ing UP  some  rebel  officers.  j • -4. 

There  can  be  no  telegraphic  line  between  Vicksburg  and  this  point, 
for  not  a word  of  our  coming  had  reached  theplac^and  the  people 
scarcely  knew  who  we  were.  One  rebel,  Colonel  [Z.]  York,  was  halted, 
V)ut  made  so  rapid  a retreat  that  he  escaimd 

Leaviu"  this  point,  I kept  on  down  the  river.  We  passed  kll  s Clitts 
art  3 a m There  are  no  fortifications  at  that  or  any  other  point  between 

W..-  11..  m-U.  «1  M « 

met  a side-wheel  steamer  coming  up.  Her  pilot  blew  the  whistle Joi 
the  Oueen  to  take  the  starboard  side,  supposing  her  to  be  a Soiitheiu 
boat  Eeceiving  no  answer,  and  not  liking  the  Queen  s looks,  as  she 
boro  str^ht  down  upon  him,  he  ran  his  boat  ashore.  As  we  neared 
her  numerous  rebel  officers  sprang  into  the  water  ami  made  their  escape. 
Le  proved  to  be  the  A.  W.  Baker;  had  just  discharged  her  carp  at 
Port^^Hudsou,  aud  was  returning  for  another.  We  captured  on  her  o 
cantains  2 lieutenants,  and  a number  of  civilians,  among  them  7 or  8 
ladies.  I had  just  placed  a guard  on  the  boat,  when  another  steamer 
was  seen  coming  down  the  river.  A shot  across  her  bows  brought  hei 
to.  She  proved  to  be  the  More,  laden  with  110,000  pounds,  of  pork, 
nearly  500  hogs,  and  a large  quantity  of  salt,  destined  for  the  rebel 
army  at  Port  Hudson.  I placed  Capt.  Asgill  Conner  in  command  ot 
the  Lptured  boats,  and,  as  the  Queen’s  supply  of  coal  was  very  limited, 

^ A°shorVtotanoraWour  landing,  I destroyed  25,000  pounds  of 
meal  awaiting  transportation  to  Port  Hudson.  ^ 

On  reaching  Bed  Eiver,  I stopped  at  a plantation  to  put  ashore  the 
la^es  who  did  not  wish  to  go  any  farther.  I also  released  the  civ  iliaiis. 
While’  doing  so,  another  steamboat,  the  Berwick  Bay,  came  out  of  Ee 
Eiver  and  was  immediately  seized.  She  was  laden  with  supplies  h 
the  re’bel  forces  at  Port  Hudson,  consisting  of  200  barrels  ot  molasses, 
10  hogsheads  of  sugar,  and  30,000  pounds  of  flour.  She  had  also  on 

ascended^Eed  Eiver  15  miles  in  the  hope  of  getting  some  more  boats, 

Nteht  camfon^as  we  again  started  on  our  return.  I found  at  once 
that  the  progress  of  the  three  prizes  was  so  slow  that  our  short  supply 
of  coaAS  not  permit  us  to  wait  for  them.  I accordingly  ordered 
them  to  be  set  on  fire.  We  had  not  time  to  transfer  their  cargoes.  \V  e 
meTwUh  L Lerr^  on  our  return  until  we  reached  Warren  ( . 

Before  arriving  at  this  point,  I landed  and  sent  my  prisoneis  ^ > 

land  under  a strong  guard,  to  avoid  exposing  them  to  the  enem} 

' On  passing  Warrenton,  we  found  another  battery  had  been  ere  ^ 
there  and  the  three  combined  opened  a very  heavy  Are  upon  us.  > 
struck  us  several  times,  but  did  no  damage  worth  mentioning. 

Very  respectfully,  your  o^edieu^t^e^gink^ 

Brio-.  Gen.  Alprei)  W.  Ellet,  , 

Mississippi  MoTinc  lyTUjddc. 


339 


CiiAP.  XXXVL]  EECONNAISSANCE  NEAR  SAULSBURY,  TENN. 

No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  Geti.  Franklin  Gardner,  C.  JS.  Army,  of  capUire  of  steamers. 

Headquarters,  Port  Hudson,  February  6,  1803. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  a copj^  of  a letter  from 
General  Sibley.  I do  not  know  the  boats  named,  except  the  Baker, 
which  I started  from  here,  on  the  morning  of  the  2d  instant,  to  go  up  Bed 
Eiver,  and  she  ought  to  have  passed  into  Bed  Biver  before  the  night  of 
the  2d.  Why  she  did  not,  I do  not  know.  This  boat  came  down  Bed 
Biver  on  a private  speculation,  with  salt  and  bacon,  and,  being  a slow 
boat,  I did  not  wish  to  retain  her  in  my  employ,  but  ordered  her  imme- 
diately up  Bed  Biver.  I have  the  Beaty  here  now,  and  have  kept  her 
since  the  gunboat  passed.  I sent  a courier  to  General  Sibley,  and  also 
one  to  Bed  Biver,  on  the  receipt  of  your  telegram  that  the  gunboat  had 
passed,  but  it  appears  to  me  that  the  information  could  not  have  reached 
Bed  Biver.  My  object  was  to  warn  boats  going  down,  not  having- 
knowledge  of  any  boats  in  danger  going  up,  except  the  Beaty,  which! 
kept  at  this  place. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

FBANK.  GABDNEB, 

Major-  Geyieral, 

Maj.  J.  B.  Wadt>y,  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Jaekson,  Miss. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  H.  Sibley,  C.  S.  Army,  of  eapture  of  steamers. 

Headquarters  Department  East  of  Atchafalaya, 

Rosedale,  February  4,  1863. 

General  : I have  just  received  a dispatch  from  one  of  my  officers  near 
the  mouth  of  Bed  Biver,  who  reports  that  the  gunboat  which  passed 
Vicksburg  has  appeared  there;  had  captured  three  of  our  boats— the 
Moro,  the  Baker,  and  the  Berwick  Bay.  The  gunboat  is  the  Queen  of 
the  West.  She  is  an  iron-clad,  but  is  arranged  on  MagriideBs  plan 
with  cotton  bales.  Prisoners  released  from  her  state  her  armament  is 
composed  of  twelve  12-pounders.  She  placed  prize  crews  on  the  boats 
captured,  and  has  proceeded  up  Bed  Biver.  I have  ordered  a company 
ot  cavalry  and  one  section  of  artillery  to  that  point,  to  attempt  the  re- 
capture of  the  boats,  which,  at  last  accounts,  were  lying  near  the  river 
banks,  and  but  slimly  guarded. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully, 

H.  H.  SIBLEY, 
Brigadier-  General. 

Maj.  Gen.  Frank.  Gardner,  Commanding  at  Port  Hudson. 


FEBRUARY  2-5,  1863.— Reconnaissance  in  the  vicinity  of  Saulshury,  Tenn. 

I ^ of  Lieut.  Col.  Edivard  Prinee,  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry. 

[ T3EADQUARTERS  SEVENTH  BeUIMENT  ILLINOIS  CAVALRY, 

Lja  Grange,  Tenn.,  February  6,  1863. 
PSiR  : 111  obedience  to  orders  of  Colonel  Hatch,  commanding  brigade, 
•n  the  2d  instant.  Captain  Herring,  of  this  regiment,  in  command  of 


340 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


four  compauies,  proceeded  to  Saulsbur.y,  and  reported  to  xMajor  Coon, 
Second  Iowa  Cavalry,  by  whose  orders  Captain  Herring  moved  with  his 
command  4 miles  south,  on  the  liipley  road,  and  encamped  near  the 
plantation  of  Mrs.  Hines,  scouting  the  country  south  and  east  for  a dis- 
tance of  5 miles,  until  the  morning  of  the  5th,  when  he  was  ordered  by 
Major  Coon  to  return  to  camp. 

Nothing  worthy  of  note  transpired  during  the  expedition,  except  that 
on  the  4th  instant,  about  noon,  Sergts.  Daniel  H.  Dunbar  and  Edward 
M.  Gibbs,  and  Privates  Charles  E.  Smythe,  Company  I,  and  Samuel 
Buckingham,  Company  F,  straggled  from  camp,  and  were  surrounded 
by  a band  of  men,  under  the  guerrilla  [S.  G.]  Street,  12  in  number,  to 
whom  they  surrendered  without  offering  any  resistance. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWAED  PEINCE, 
Lieutenant- Colonel^  Commanding  Regiment, 

Lieut.  Samuel  L.  Woodward, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General j First  Cavalry  Brigade. 


FEBRUARY  8,  1863. — AlFair  near  Camp  Sheldon,  Miss. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Charles  S.  Sheldon^  Eighteenth  Missouri  Infantry. 

Camp  Sheldon,  February  8,  1863. 
General  : A scout  from  my  command  crossed  the  river  to-day  and 
had  a slight  skirmish  with  a part  of  Captain  Smith’s  company  (con- 
scripts). The  rebels  fled  in  all  directions,  losing  one  gun  and  a quantity 
of  x>rovisions.  Several  of  the  enemy  were  wounded.  Captain  Smith 
has  about  60  men.  Ham  is  in  Forks  of  Hatchie  with  about  75  men. 
If  you  can  send  me  a company  of  cavalry  for  a few  days,  I will  clean  out 
that  section  and  stir  up  Street. 

CHARLES  S.  SHELDON, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel. 

Brigadier-General  Dodge,  Corinth. 


FEBRUARY  9,  1863.— Affair  near  Moscow,  Tenn. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Seth  C.  Earl,  Fifty-third  Illinois  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Fifty-third  Illinois  Volunteers, 

Moscow,  Tenn.,  February  9,  1863. 

Sir  : 1 have  delayed  making  any  report  of  the  attack  on  our  pickets 
until  now.  Acting  Lieut.  M.  Dare,  of  Company  E,  who  was  in  com- 
mand of  the  men,  being  one  of  the  wounded,  has  not  been  in  a condition, 
on  account  of  his  wound,  to  make  any  report  until  a few  moments  ago, 
and  the  other  reports  being  so  indefinite  that  I did  not  consider  them 
reliable  enough  to  base  a report  on.  At  the  same  time  they  all  went 
to  convince  me  that  it  was  neither  an  attack  of  the  enemy’s  pickets  nor 
even  a guerrilla  party,  but  probably  some  oftended  citizens  chasing  in 
or  looking  after  some  stragglers. 

I find,  however,  on  inquiring  of  the  oflicer  in  command  of  the  pickets, 
that  as  he  was  going  from  the  reserve  post  to  the  advance  picket,  he 
heard  some  one  command ‘Hialt,”  and  saw  two  mounted  men  coming 
toward  him,  one  of  them  having  on  a blue  coat.  He  saw  no  arms,  and 


Chap.  XXX VL]  CAPTURE  OF  THE  QUEEN  OF  THE  WEST. 


341 


tlioiiglit  that  they  were  some  of  onr  men  who  had  been  out  scouting 
around  the  country.  He  heard  them  tell  tlie  pickets  to  hold  up  their 
liands,  when,  seeing  they  were  rebels,  he  commanded  his  men  to  fire, 
but  not  having  their  guns  loaded  could  not,  but  were  fired  on  by  the 
two  horsemen,  wounding,  as  I said  before,  Acting  Lieut.  M.  Dare,  of 
Company  E,  and  Private  John  Stiugly,  of  the  same  company.  The  two 
horsemen  then  turned  and  ran. 

The  lieutenant  in  command  says  his  guns  were  not  loaded  at  the  time, 
as  he  had  been  instructed  by  difierent  officers  of  the  day  to  load  his 
pieces  at  night.  The  men  at  the  reserve  post,  hearing  the  noise,  ad- 
vanced and  fired  several  times.  The  man  who  was  wounded  says  he  is 
confident  one  of  the  men  who  fired  on  them  was  a negro.  The  strength 
of  that  picket  post  is  1 commissioned  officer,  2 non-commissioned,  and 
15  privates,  2 being  on  the  outpost. 

Very  respectfully,  yours, 

S.  C.  EAEL, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel^  Commanding. 

Oapt.  W.  H.  E.  Eandall, 

Assistant  Ad  jut  ant- General.,  Fourth  JJivision. 


FEBRUARY  10,  1863. — Affair  near  Camp  Sheldon,  Miss. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Charles  8.  Sheldon.,  Eighteenth  Missouri  Lnfantry. 

Camp  Sheldon,  February  10,  1863. 
General  : Had  another  skirmish  to-day,  capturing  six  guns,  and 
overcoats,  blankets,  &c.  Chased  the  enemy  3 miles,  but  they  beat  us 
running.  One  man  wounded  on  our  side. 

CHAELES  S.  SHELDOhT, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel. 

Brigadier-General  Dodge,  Corinth. 


FEBRUARY  10-14,  1863. — Operations  on  the  Red,  Atchafalaya,  and  Black 
Rivers,  La , and  capture  (14th)  of  the  Queen  of  the  West. 

JREFOLf/rS.* 

No.  1. — Col.  Charles  Rivers  Eliot,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Ram  Fleet. 

No.  2. — Maj.  Gen.  Ricliard  Taylor,  C.  8.  Army,  commanding. 

No.  3. — Lient.  Col.  W.  S.  Lovell,  acting  assistant  adjutant  and  inspector  general, 
C.  S.  Army. 

No.  4. — Mr.  George  W.  Koontz,  Confederate  States  agent  at  Natchez, 

No.  ,*3. — Capt.  John  Kelso,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Fort  Taylor,  La. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  Charles  Rivers  Filet,  TJ.  8.  Army,  eommanding  Ram  Fleet. 

U.  S.  Steamer  Era  No.  5, 

Below  VieJeshurg,  Miss.,  February  21,  1863. 
Admiral:  I have  the  lionor  to  report  to  you  tliat  1 left  tlie  landing 
below  Vicksburg,  in  obedience  to  your  written  instructions  | following], 


Sec  also  Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  Decern Ixu-  7,  18(13. 


342 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVT, 


Oil  the  iiijilit  of  J^lie  lOtli  instant,  taking  with  me  the  De  Soto  and  coal 
barge,  and  proceeded  down  the  river.  We  passed  Warrenton  without 
interruption,  and  reached  Eed  Eiver  on  the  following  evening.  I de- 
stroyed, as  you  directed,  the  skiffs  and  ffat-boats  along  either  shore. 

I ascended  Eed  Eiver,  on  the  morning  of  the  12th,  as  far  as  the 
mouth  of  the  Atchafalaya.  Leaving  the  De  Soto  and  coal  barge  in 
a secure  position,  I proceeded  down  this  stream.  Six  miles  from  its 
mouth  I met  a train  of  12  army  wagons  returning  from  Simsport.  I 
landed  and  destroyed  them. 

. On  reaching  Simsport,  I found  that  two  rebel  steamboats  had  just 
left,  taking  with  them  the  troops  and  artillery  stationed  at  this  iioint. 
They  had  left  on  the  bank  70  barrels  of  Government  beef,  which  I 
broke  up  and  rolled  into  the  river.  I pursued  another  train  of  wagons 
for  some  distance,  but  they  retreated  into  the  swamps  and  escaped. 
One  of  their  wagons,  loaded  with  ammunition  and  stores,  fell  into  our 
hands,  and  was  destroyed. 

On  her  return  at  night,  a party  of  overseers  and  other  civilians  fired 
into  the  Queen  from  behind  a levee,  and  immediately  fied  under  cover 
of  the  darkness.  First  Master  James  D.  Thompson,  a gallant  and  effi- 
cient officer,  was  shot  through  the  knee. 

Anchoring  at  the  mouth  of  the  Atchafalaya,  I waited  until  morning, 
and  then  returned  to  the  spot  from  which  we  had  been  attacked. 

All  the  buildings  on  three  large  adjoining  plantations  were  burned 
by  my  order. 

I started  up  Eed  Eiver  the  same  day,  and  reached  Black  Eiver  by 
night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th  instant,  when  about  15  miles  above  the 
mouth  of  Black  Eiver,  a steamboat  came  suddenly  around  a sharp  bend 
in  the  river,  and  was  captured  before  she  could  escape.  She  proved  to 
be  the  Era  No.  5,  laden  with  4,500  bushels  of  corn.  She  had  on  board 
2 rebel  lieutenants  and  14  privates.  The  latter  I at  once  paroled  imd 
set  ashore. 

Hearing  of  three  very  large  boats  lying,  with  steam  down,  at  Gor- 
don’s Lauding,  30  miles  above,  I decided  on  making  an  effort  to  capture 
them,  intending  to  return  if  I should  find  the  battery  at  that  point  too 
strong,  and  ascend  the  Washita.  I left  the  Era  and  coal  barge  in 
charge  of  a guard.  We  reached  the  bend  just  below  Gordon’s  Landing 
before  dusk.  The  dense  smoke  of  several  boats  rapidly  firing  up  could 
be  seen  over  the  tops  of  the  trees  as  we  approached.  I ordered  the 
pilot  to  proceed  very  slowly,  and  merely  show  the  bow  of  the  Queen 
around  the  point.  From  the  sharp  bend  which  the  river  makes  at  this 
jilace  there  was  no  apparent  difficulty  in  withdrawing  out  of  range  of  the 
enemy’s  guns  whenever  it  might  be  desired.  The  rebels  opened  upon  us 
with  four  32-pounders  the  moment  we  came  in  sight.  Their  guns  were  in 
a fine  position,  and,  at  the  third  shot,  I ordered  Mr.  Garvey,  the  pilot, 
to  back  the  Queen  out.  Instead  of  doing  so,  he  ran  her  aground  on 
the  right-hand  shore.  The  position  at  once  became  a very  hot  one. 
Sixty  yards  below  we  would  have  been  in  no  danger ; as  it  was,  the 
enemy’s  shots  struck  us  nearly  every  time.  The  chief  engineer  had 
hardly  repeated  to  me  that  the  escape-pipe  had  been  shot  away,  when 
an  explosion  below  and  a rush  of  steam  around  the  boat  told  me  that 
the  steam-pipe  had  been  cut  in  two.  Nothing  further,  of  course,  could 
be  done.  I gave  orders  to  lower  the  yawl  at  the  stern  of  the  Queen,  to 
carry  oft*  Captain  Thomjison,  who  lay  wounded  in  my  state-room.  Some 
persons  had  already  taken  the  yawl,  however,  and  it  was  gone.  The 
other  yawl  was  on  the  De  Soto,  a short  distance  below.  Fortunately, 


CHA1>.  XXXVI.]  CAPTURE  OF  THE  QUEEN  OF  THE  WEST. 


343 


tlie  cotton-bales  with  wliicli  tlie  Qneen  was  protected,  afibrded  an 
avenue  of  escape,  aiid  the  majority  of  the  men  and  otlicers  succeeded 
in  reaching  the  De  Soto.  I ordered  this  boat  to  be  brought  up  as  far  as 
at  was  practicable  without  being  struck,  and  sent  her  yawl  to  the  Queen, 
Lieutenant  [John  L.]  Tuthill  and  Third  Master  Duncan  bravely  volun- 
teered for  this  purpose. 

I remained  with  the  De  Soto  over  an  hour,  picking  up  men  on  cotton- 
bales.  Lieutenant  Tuthill  barely  succeeded  in  escaping  from  the 
Queen,  the  rebels  boarding  her  in  skiffs  as  he  escaped.  Mr.  Duncan 
staid  too  long  and  was  captured.  The  Queen  could  easily  have  been 
burned,  but  this  could  not  be  done  while  Captain  Thompson  was  on 
board,  and  it  was  impossible  to  remove  him.  All  the  passages  had  been 
blocked  up  with  cotton.  The  interior  of  the  boat  was  intensely  dark, 
full  of  steam,  and  strewn  with  shattered  furniture.  The  display  of  a 
light  enabled  the  batteries  to  strike  her  with  unerring  certainty.  To 
have  brought  the  De  Soto  alongside  would  have  insured  her  destruction, 
as  the  light  from  the  latter’s  furnaces  rendered  her  a conspicuous  mark. 
A dense  fog  sprang  up  as  we  started  down  in  the  De  Soto,  and  she  lost 
her  rudders  by  running  into  the  bank.  Drifting  down  15  miles,  I took 
possession  of  the  Era,  and  scuttled  and  burned  the  De  Soto  and  barge. 
Knowing  that  the  rebels  would  lose  no  time  in  pursuing,  I pushed  on 
down  through  the  fog,  throwing  off  the  corn  to  lighten  her.  We  reached 
the  Mississippi  at  dawn,  opposite  Ellis’  Cliffs.  Mr.  Garvey  ran  the  Era, 
a boat  drawing  less  than  2 feet  of  water,  ^‘hard  aground,”  actually  per- 
mitting her  wheels  to  make  several  revolutions  after  she  had  struck, 
and  it  was  with  the  utmost  difficulty  she  could  be  gotten  off’.  The  dis- 
loyal sentiments  openly  expressed  by  Mr.  Garvey  a few  hours  previous 
to  this  occurrence  rendered  it  necessary  for  me  to  place  him  under  ar- 
rest, and  fixed  upon  me  the  unwilling  conviction  that  the  loss  of  the 
Queen  was  due  to  the  deliberate  treachery  of  her  pilot.  It  is  to  be  re- 
gretted that  the  unfortunate  illness  of  Mr.  Scott  Long,  who  piloted  the 
Queen  past  Vicksburg,  rendered  it  necessary  for  me  to  intrust  the  Queen 
to  the  management  of  Mr.  Garvey. 

The  next  morning,  a short  distance  below  Natchez,  I met  the  Indi- 
anola.  Captain  [George]  Brown  thought  that  he  might  be  able  to  as- 
cend Bed  River  and  destroy  the  battery  at  Gordon’s  Landing,  and  I 
accompanied  him  down  in  the  Era,  leading  the  way.  I had  not  gone  3 
miles  when  a break  in  the  dense  fog  disclosed  a steamer  rapidly  moving 
up  stream  about  a mile  ahead.  I at  once  rounded  to,  and  caused  the 
whistle  to  be  blown,  to  warn  Captain  Brown  of  her  presence.  As  soon 
as  the  rebel  steamer,  which  was  undoubtedly  the  Webb,  perceived  the 
Indianola,  she  turned  and  fled.  The  latter  fired  two  shots  at  her,  but 
without  effect.  I learned  afterward  that  three  other  armed  boats  had 
been  sent  in  pursuit  of  the  Era,  and  had  been  turned  back  by  the  Webb 
on  her  retreat.  They  all  went  back  up  the  Red  River. 

On  reaching  this  stream.  Captain  Brown  decided  not  to  ascend  it, 
and  I thought  it  best  to  return  at  once.  Tliinking  we  might  be  attacked 
on  the  way  up,  I seized  170  bales  of  cotton,  and  protected  the  Era’s 
machinery  as  far  as  practicable.  At  Saint  Joseph  I landed  and  seized 
the  mails,  and  learned  from  them  that  Colonel  [Wirt]  Adams  was  wait- 
ing for  us  at  Grand  Gulf  with  two  pieces  of  artillery.  Thirty-six  shots 
were  fired  at  the  Era  while  passing  this  point,  none  of  which  took  effect. 
On  reaching  Island  No.  107,  a body  of  riflemen  opened  a heavy  fire  upon 
the  Era  from  the  Mississippi  shore.  Suspecting  it  to  be  a ruse  to  draw 
us  to  the  other  side  of  the  river,  I decided  on  keeping  to  the  riglit  of  the 
island.  The  furnaces  of  the  Era  became  so  clogged  at  this  point  that 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST.  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Crai>.  NXxri. 

I foiiDd  it  necessary  to  stop  and  luive  them  cleaned  out,  a delay  of  twenty 
minutes  being  caused  by  this.  The  Era  liad  scarcely  passed  the  island 
when  a battery  of  three  guns  opened  upon  us  from  the  Louisiana  shore. 
Forty-six  shots  were  fired,  but  did  no  injury. 

At  Warrenton,  the  rebels  opened  fire  upon  the  Era  with  two  rifled 
20-pounder  guns.  They  fired  twenty-four  shots,  but  did  not  succeed  in 
striking  her.  Extraordinary  as  it  may  appear,  there  is  even  reason  to 
believe  that  no  one  was  killed  on  the  Queen.  It  is  probably  attribu- 
table to  the  fact  that  those  below  got  into  the  hold  through  the  numer- 
ous hatches,  and  thus  escai)ed  the  effects  of  the  steam.  Mr.  Taylor,  one 
of  the  engineers,  is  reported  by  a deserter  from  the  Webb  to  be  badly 
scalded. 

Twenty-four  men  were  taken  prisoners,  10  of  whom  were  civilians  em- 
ployed on  the  boat.  Assistant  Surgeon  Booth  was  the  only  commissioned 
officer  captured. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

OHAKLES  EIVEBS  ELLET, 

Commanding  Ram  Fleet. 

Actg.  Bear-Admiral  David  D.  Pouter, 

Commanding  Missiiisi])pi  Squadron. 

ADDENDA  . 

i 

United  States  Mississippi  Squadron, 

February  8,  1863. 

Col.  Charles  Biyeks  Ellet, 

Commanding  Mississippi  Ram  Fleet: 

Colonel  : When  you  have  taken  in  your  coal,  jmu  will  proceed  at 
night,  after  dark,  with  the  De  Soto  and  the  coal  barge,  down  the  river, 
showing  no  lights.  When  you  get  near  Bed  Biver,  wait  until  daylight, 
above  the  mouth ; from  there  you  will  be  able  to  see  the  smoke  of  any 
steamer  over  the  trees  as  she  comes  down  Bed  Biver.  When  you  cap- 
ture them,  do  not  burn  them  until  you  have  broken  all  the  machinery. 
Then  let  go  the  anchors,  and  let  them  burn  under  your  own  eyes  at  their 
anchors.  There  will  be  no  danger,  then,  of  any  part  of  them  floating 
down  to  the  enemy. 

There  is  one  vessel  (the  Webb)  that  you  must  look  out  for.  If  you 
can  get  the  first  crack  at  her  you  will  sink  her,  and  if  she  gets  the  first 
crack  at  you  she  will  sink  you.  My  advice  is  to  imt  a few  cotton  bales 
over  your  bow,  about  15  feet  abaft  the  stem,  and  if  she  strikes  you 
then,  there  will  be  no  harm  done.  It  is  likely  that  an  attempt  will  be 
made  to  board  you.  If  there  is,  do  not  open  any  doors  or  ports  to 
board  in  return,  but  act  on  the  defensive,  giving  the  enemy  steam  and 
shell. 

Do  not  forget  to  wet  your  cotton  before  going  into  action.  Do  not  lose 
sight  of  the  De  Soto,  unless  in  chase,  and  under  circumstances  when  it 
will  be  perfectly  safe.  When  your  coal  is  all  out  of  the  barge,  you  can 
take  the  De  Soto  alongside.  You  can  help  each  other  along.*  Destroy 
her  at  once  when  there  is  the  least  chance  of  her  falling  into  the  hands 
of  the  enemy.  She  is  now,  though,  a Government  vessel,  and  should  be 
brought  back  if  possible.  Destroy  all  small  boats  you  meet  with  on  the 
river;  also  wharf-boats  and  barges.  If  you  have  a chance,  and  have 
])lenty  of  coal,  take  a look  at  Port  Hudson,  and  give  them  a few  rifle- 
shots, but  do  not  pass  by.  Communicate  with  the  squadron  below  by 
signal,  if  possible.  The  great  object  is  to  destroy  all  you  can  of  the 


Chap.  XXXVL]  CAPTURE  OF  THE  QUEEN  OF  THE  WEST. 


345. 


enemy’s  stores  and  provisions,  and  get  yonr  vessel  back  safe.  Pass  all 
batteries  at  night.  If  the  canal  is  opened,  I will  keei)  yon  supihied  with 
coal. 

Keep  your  pilot-house  well  supplied  with  hand-grenades,  &c.,  in  case 
the  enemy  should  get  on  your  upper  decks.  Do  not  show  your  colors 
along  the  river,  unless  necessary  in  action. 

Very  respectfully, 

DAVID  D.  POPTER, 

Acting  Rear-Admiral^  Commanding  Misslsnippi  Squadron. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor^  (J.  S.  Army.,  Commanding. 

Alexandria,  [Fehrnary]  15,  1863. 

(Received  at  Richmond,  February  22.) 

The  ram  Queen  of  the  West  was  captured  at  the  fortifications  below 
this  point  on  the  14th,  with  all  her  armament  and  supiilies.  Most  of  the 
crew  and  commanding  officer  escaped  on  another  boat.  The  De  Soto, 
a small  boat,  filled  up  with  cotton,  and  the  consort  of  the  ram,  was  sunk 
in  the  same  engagement. 

R.  TAYLOR, 

Major- General. 

General  S.  Cooper. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  W.  8.  Lovell.,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant  and  In- 
spector General,  C.  8.  Army. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  February  28,  1863. 

General  : In  compliance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  35,  dated  Jack- 
son,  Miss.,  February  4,  1863,  I proceeded  with  all  possible  dispatch  to 
Trinity,  La.,  at  which  point  1 arrived  on  the  8th  instant,  and  found  that 
the  Webb  had  left  the  day  before  for  Alexandria,  by  command  of 
General  Taylor,  to  fit  out  at  that  place.  1 pushed  on  immediately,  and 
arrived  at  the  latter  place  on  the  evening  of  the  10th.  I met  General 
Taylor  on  my  way  up  Red  River,  and  showed  him  my  orders.  He  in- 
formed me  that  he  had  placed  an  officer  in  command  of  the  Webb,  and 
asked  me  to  go  and  assist  in  getting  her  ready.  I replied  that  1 was 
ordered  to  take  command,  and,  unless  allowed*  to  do  so,  would  return. 
He  then  indorsed  my  orders  to  take  command,  which  I did  on  the  11th 
instant. 

I found  that  nothing  had  been  done  to  the  Webb  except  a little  calk- 
ing on  the  outside,  and  nothing  at  all  to  either  of  the  other  two  boats 
which  had  been  ordered  to  be  fitted  out.  I had  the  greatest  difficulty 
in  getting  carpenters  to  work  on  the  vessels,  although  Tottered  them 
every  inducement.  1 had  the  same  difficulty  with  negroes.  The  com- 
mittee who  were  building  a raft  in  Red  River  furnished  me  with  thirty; 
they  rent  twenty  more,  but  would  not  allow  them  to  go  on  board  tiie 
Grand  Duke,  the  other  vessel  being  fitted  out,  she  having  had  a case  of 
small-pox  on  board  some  days  iirevious.  I was  unable  until  the  third 


34G 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TEmESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


day  after  I arrived  to  ^?et  the  miinber  of  carpenters  and  negroes  I re- 
(jidred,  Major  [Th]  Snrget  pressing  the  latter  force. 

At  1.30,  Monday  morning,  I received  information  from  Major  Snrget 
that  the  enemy  had  attacked  Fort  Taylor,  at  Gordon’s  Landing,  in  Eed 
Eiver,  and  he  requested  me  to  go  down  with  all  possible  dispatch  and 
assist  the  fort.  1 reported  the  Webb  ready  by  7 in  the  morning.  By  0 
I received  a detachment  of  about  100  officers  and  men  and  left  Alex- 
andria. The  Webb  was  by  no  means  properly  xirotected,  not  having  had 
sufficient  time ; the  boilers,  about  30  feet  long  and  4 feet  above  the 
water  line,  had  no  x>rotection  whatever,  saving  the  sides  of  the  vessel, 
which  could  easily  be  penetrated  by  a Miuie  ball.  On  my  arrival  at 
Fort  Taylor,  1 found  that  the  Queen  of  the  West  had  surrendered  about 
8 o’clock,  having  had  one  of  her  steam  x>ipes  cut ; that  the  commanding 
officer  and  a number  of  the  crew  had  escaxied  on  the  steamer  Era  No. 
5,  having  first  burned  the  steamer  Be  Soto.  1 pushed  on  with  all  speed 
after  the  Era  No.  5,  and  arrived  in  the  Mississippi  Eiver  at  about  9 o’clock 
in  the  evening.'  The  fog  at  that  time  was  so  dense  that  we  could  make 
but  little  or  no  progress  ; finally  it  became  so  thick  that  we  had  to  tie 
up.  The  xiilots  did  everything  in  their  xiower  to  make  progress.  We 
made  only  a few  miles  from  9 in  the  evening  until  9 in  the  morning, 
when  we  started  again.  Had  to  work  along  very  slowly,  as  the  fog  was 
still  very  thick.  On  my  way  down  the  Eed  Eiver  I cax.'tured  9 men 
belonging  to  the  Queen  of  the  West,  one  her  second  mate.  He  informed 
me  that  Colonel  Ellet  expected  a powerful  iron-clad  to  meet  him  at  the 
mouth  of  Eed  Eiver,  and  that  it  was  time  for  her  to  be  along,  at  the 
same  time  advising  me  to  keep  a bright  lookout  for  her. 

1 received  information  in  the  Mississippi  Eiver  that  another  gunboat 
had  passed  Vicksburg  on  Friday  night,  13th  instant.  Off  Ellis’  Cliffs, 
about  5.15  in  the  evening,  1 saw  two  chimneys  sticking  up  through  the 
fog  ; supposing  it  to  be  the  Era  No.  5,  xmshed  on  ; shortly  afterward  I 
saw  another  pair  of  chimneys  ; I at  once  concluded  they  must  be  the 
gunboat  and  Era  No.  5.  An  officer  from  aloft  reported  three  steamers 
in  sight.  A number  of  officers  were  confident  they  saw  three.  From 
the  information  received,  and  the  steamer  appearing  very  low  in  the 
Avater  in  the  fog,  I was  fully  convinced  she  was  an  iron- clad,  as  was  all 
my  officers.  I supposed  the  steamers  to  be  from  2 to  miles  from  us  ; 
the  captain  of  the  Webb,  an  old  xhlot,  thought  about  IJ  miles.  Itwms 
impossible  to  tell  on  account  of  the  fog.  One  of  the  vessels  fired  at  us 
three  times.  We  endeavored  to  reply,  but  our  friction-xArimers  failed. 
I turned  around  and  made  all  xiossible  dispatch  down  the  river,  fearful 
that  the  fog  would  again  rise  and  that  the  steamers  Louis  d’Or  and  Grand 
Duke  wmuld  X)ass  me  and  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  they  follow- 
ing me  ux).  I succeeded  in  turning  them  and  other  steamers  back.  I 
arrived  at  Fort  Taylor  Monday  morning,  the  18th  instant ; made  a report 
to  General  Taylor,  and  asked  him  what  disxiosition  he  wished  made  of 
the  Webb,  stating  that  I had  done  all  I could  under  orders  from  you. 
I informed  him  1 should  remain  at  Gordon’s  Landing,  to  assist  the  fort 
in  case  of  an  attack,  until  I learned  his  wishes.  Immediately  on  receiv- 
ing my  communication.  General  Taylor  sent  me  orders  to  assume  com- 
mand of  the  forces  at  Fort  Taylor,  Avhich  I did.  On  his  arrival  I turned 
the  Webb  over  to  him.  Shortly  afterward  he  relieved  me  by  one  of  his 
stall  officers,  saying  he  did  not  feel  authorized  to  detain  me  any  longer 
than  possible.  I left  as  soon  as  xmssible  for  this  xdace.  Lieutenant  [J. 
II.J  Morrison  rendered  me  great  assistance.  His  ability  and  efficiency 
tliroughout  contributed  largely  to  further  all  my  efforts,  and  I am 
greatly  indebted  to  him  for  the  willingness  and  promptitude  with  which 


Chav.  XXXVI.  CAPTURE  OF  THE  QUEEN  OF  THE  WEST.  347 


lie  performed  all  tlie  duties  assigned  to  Idm  by  me,  for  wliieli  I take 
this  oeeasion  to  return  bim  my  tiiaiiks. 

I am,  general,  very  respeetfully,  yours, 

W.  S.  LOVELL, 

Lieut.  Col.  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 

Lieut.  Geu.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Comdg.  Department  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana. 


[Indorsement.] 


IlDQRs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  Eastern  Louisiana, 

Jaclcson,  March  2,  1863. 

Eespectfully  forwarded  for  information  of  General  J.  E.  Johnston 
and  War  Department. 


J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


1:^0.  4. 

Reports  of  Mr.  George  W.  Koontz^  Confederate  States  agent  at  Natchez. 

Natchez,  [February]  17,  1863. 

(Deceived  February  19.) 

The  Yankee  iron-clad  gunboat  Indianola  passed  here  Sunday  at  3 p. 
111.  She  laid  10  miles  below  here  yesterday  morning.  The  Queen  of  the 
West  and  De  Soto  iiassed  up  Eed  Eiver  on  Friday  evening.  On  their 
way  up,  captured  the  steamboat  Era  No.  5.  The  Queen  of  the  West  at- 
tacked our  batteries  at  Fort  Taylor,  but  was  very  soon  disabled  by  our 
guns  and  got  aground,  when  Colonel  [0.  E.]  Ellet  and  many  of  the  men 
abandoned  her,  floating  off  on  cotton  bales,  and  she  is  now  supposed 
to  be  in  our  possession.  Before  the  Queen  of  the  West  went  up  Eed 
River,  she  went  down  the  Atchafalaya  near  Simsport  and  destroyed 
five  or  six  plantations.  After  Colonel  Ellet  and  some  of  the  men  aban- 
doned the  Queen  of  the  West,  they  went  on  board  the  Era  No.  5,  which 
lay  some  5 miles  below  the  batteries,  and  came  out  of  Eed  Eiver,  and 
yesterday  morning  gained  the  Indianola,  10  miles  below  here.  This  in- 
formation I got  from  a white  boy  who  was  a prisoner  on  board.  During 
the  engagement,  the  De  Soto  was  destroyed  in  sight  of  our  batteries  by 
the  enemy.  The  boy  was  brought  up  on  the  Era.  I consider  the  in- 
formation reliable.  The  Indianola  has  no  doubt  gone  down.  A courier 
has  been  sent  to  Alexandria. 

GEO.  W.  KOONTZ, 

Government  Agent. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Natchez,  [February  18,  1863.] 

(Deceived  February  19.) 

The  following  official  report  of  the  engagement  on  the  Eed  Eiver  re- 
ceived from  Alexandria  to-day:* 

* * , * # * # # 
^T^re  has  been  nothing  further  heard  from  the  Indianola  since  my 


See  No.  .5,  p.  348. 


348 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVX 


dispatch  of  yesterday.  Tliis  afternoon,  at  4 o’clock,  the  Era  No.  5 passed 
up  alone,  witli  one  tier  of  cotton  on  her  and  apparently  very  few  men. 

GE.O.  W.  kOONTZ, 

Government  Agent. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Gapt.  John  Kelso.)  G.  8.  Army^  commanding  Fort  Taylor^  La. 

Headquarters  Eed  River  Fortifications, 

February  15,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  two  Federal  gunboats  made 
their  appearance  in  front  of  this  position  at  5 p.  in.  last  evening.  I had 
previously  assigned  every  officer  to  his  post;  tire  was  therefore  instantly 
opened  on  the  enemy. 

After  a brief  cannonade,  the  leading  gunboat,  the  Queen  of  the  West, 
struck  her  colors. 

Immediately  ordered  Captain  [T.  H.]  Hutton,  of  the  Crescent  Artil- 
lery, and  Second  Junior  Lieutenant  Dehihunty  to  go  on  board  and 
demand  the  unconditional  surrender  of  the  boat,  officers,  and  crew. 
These  officers  report  that  but  13  officers  and  crew  were  found  on  board, 
the  others  having  escaped  under  cover  of  the  night. 

The  visible  results  of  the  capture  consist  in  one  32-pounder  rifled 
Parrott  gun,  one  24-pounder  rifled  Parrott  gun,  three  12-pounder  Por- 
field  brass  pieces,  one  12-j)ounder  Porfield  brass  piece,  slightly  damaged 
(I  use  the  expression  of  the  senior  commanding  officer),  a tremendous 
supply  of  ordnance  stores,  a large  supply  of  quinine,  one  fine  case  am- 
putating instruments,  one  equally  flue  dental  instrument,  and  other 
verj^  superio-r  cases  of  surgical  instruments,  clothing,  bacon,  flour,  beef, 
])ork,  hard  bread,  and  other  stores  in  iiroportion. 

The  list  of  prisoners  I inclose.* 

Allow  me,  major,  to  mention  that  for  coolness  and  efficiency  the  ofticers 
and  privates  of  this  command  are  entitled  to  eminent  credit. 

To  satisfy  you  of  the  precision  and  accuracy  of  the  fire,  thirteen 
out  of  thirty-one  shots  from  our  batteries  took  effect  on  the  enemy’s 
boat. 

Lieut.  James  Delahunty  performed  efficient  service ; he  suggested 
and  volunteered  to  fire  a warehouse  which  would  give  us  the  enemy’s 
range  and  position.  In  spite  of  the  darkness,  he  accomplished  this  im- 
jiortant  and  difficult  undertaking  with  perfect  success  and  signal  gal- 
lantry. 

All  my  officers  discharged  their  duties  with  promptness  and  exem- 
plary coolness. 

I omitted  to  mention  that  the  boat  was  loaded  with  bales  of  cotton. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  major,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  KELSO, 

Gaptain)  Gommanding  Post. 

Maj.  E.  SuRGET, 

Assisi  ant  Adjutant-  General. 


List,  not  found 


Chap.  XXXVI.J  EXPEDITIONS  TO  GREENVILLE^  MISS.,  ETC. 


349 


FEBRUARY  13-14,  1863. — Expedition  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  Mount 
Pleasant  and  Lamar,  Miss. 

Report  of  Maj.  William  I).  Blaelchurn^  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry. 

La  Grange,  Tenn.,  February  15,  1863. 

Colonel  : In  obedience  to  orders,  I started  on  the  13th,  with  about 
130  men  and  7 commissioned  officers,  to  Mount  Pleasant,  by  way  of  Mos- 
cow. Camped  the  first  night  near  Moscow,  in  the  night,  without  feed. 
Reported  early  next  morning  to  the  adjutant-general  at  Moscow,  the 
commanding  officer  being  absent,  and  asked  for  information.  Learned 
that  there  were  500  or  600  rebels  near  Mount  Pleasant,  who  moved  from 
there  to  Early  Grove  and  back  at  pleasure.  Went  from  thence  to  Mount 
Pleasant  5 visited  all  the  haunts  of  the  supposed  rebels,  and  found  none 
there,  nor  has  there  been,  except  Mitchell’s  men,  not  to  exceed  60,  a few 
Texas  Rangers,  say  20,  and  some  few  times  Street’s  expeditions  reach 
that  far,  but  very  seldom. 

W e found  the  country  from  Mount  Pleasant  to  Lamar  full  of  strag- 
glers. We  chased  and  fired  at  several  of  them,  but  did  not  succeed  in 
cai>turing  any.  Many  of  the  young  men  in  that  region  have  discharges 
or  paroles  either  of  their  own  or  some  one  else.  We  brought  in  two  as 
specimens.  One  claimed  to  be  discharged,  but  had  a Federal  overcoat 
and  Federal  saddle,  bridle,  and  halter.  The  negroes  in  the  neighbor- 
hood say  they  are  both  secesh  soldiers  and  are  spies.  These  papers  are 
herewith  inclosed.* 

We  staid  last  night  3 miles  south  of  Early  Grove,  and  returned  to 
camp  about  noon  to-day.  Found  the  road  desperately  bad. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  D.  BLACKBURN, 

Major  Seventh  Regiment  Illinois  Cavalry  Volunteers. 


FEBRUARY  14-26,  1863. — Expedition  to  Greenville,  Miss.,  and  Cypress. 
Bend,  Ark.,  with  skirmishes  (19th)  at  Cypress  Bend  and  (23d)  at  Deer 
Creek  and  Fish  Lake  Bridge,  near  Greenville. 

REFORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Stephen  G.  Burhridge,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2.— Lieut.  Col.  S.  W.  Ferguson,  C.  S.  Army,  of  skirmish  (23d)  at  Fish  Lake  Bridge. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Stephen  G.  Burbridge^  U.  S.  Army. 

Udqrs.  First  Brig.,  Tenth  Biv.,  Thirteenth  A.  C., 

I Youngls  Point,  La.,  February  27,  1863. 

Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
Oppratioiis  of  my  brigade  against  rebel  forces  at  Greenville  and  other 
]Jlaces : 

^n  obedience  to  Special  Orders,  No.  44,  dated  Headquarters  Tenth 

* Not  found. 


350 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  Department  of  the  Tennessee,  Young’s  i 
Point,  La.,  February  13,  1863,  this  brigade  embarked  on  transports  on  ,j 
the  morning  of  the  14th  instant,  and  moved  to  Greenville,  which  place  i 
we  reached  at  10  a.  m.  of  the  16th  instant.  I immediately  disembarked  , 
my  command,  and  moved  out  on  the  Vicksburg  road  to  the  plantatiou  ! 
of  Smith  and  Hood,  on  Deer  Greek,  miles  from  Greenville.  At  this  i 
l)oint  I learned  that  the  rebel  force,  consisting  of  six  pieces  of  artillery 
and  a force  of  cavalry  and  infantry,  variously  estimated  at  from  300  to  \ 
1,000,  had  passed  this  place,  going  toward  Bolivar,  20  miles  distant. 
As  the  roads  were  almost  impassable,  in  consequence  of  rain,  which  had 
been  falling  since  we  left  our  transports,  the  command  rested  here  and 
returned  to  the  boats  next  morning. 

On  the  morning  of  the  18th.  I moved  the  fleet  to  Cypress  Bend,  where, 
but  a few  days  previous,  a transport  had  been  fired  into,  and  on  the 
morning  of  the  19th  started  a detachment  of  the  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry, 
under  Major  [Bacon]  Montgonery  and  Captain  Chambers,  and  about  50 
infantry,  mounted  on  mules.  About  4 miles  from  the  river  they  en- 
countered a small  picket  force  and  drove  it  to  their  camp,  killing  1 and 
capturing  the  lieutenant  in  command.  Six  miles  farther  on  they  en- 
countered a battery,  which  opened  upon  them  from  the  opposite  bank 
of  Boggy  Bayou,  which  at  this  point  runs  nearly  parallel  with  the  river, 
and  connects  with  Cypress  Bayou  8 miles  from  the  point  where  our 
transports  were.  There  is  another  bayou  which  flows  into  Boggy  Bayou 
at  the  place  where  the  battery  was  planted. 

Major  Montgomery  had  retired  to  the  banks  of  Cypress  Bayou,  and 
was  engaging  a small  force  of  the  enemy  from  the  opposite  bank  of  the 
stream  when  the  advance  of  the  infantry  came  up.  I immediately  threw 
the  Twenty-third  Wisconsin  into  line  and  opened  fire  upon  them,  but 
they  were  not  dislodged  until  a few  rounds  of  canister  had  been  fired  into 
them.  I could  not  ascertain  definitely  their  loss  from  this  fire.  Before 
the  infantry  came  up,  they  had  lost  2 men  killed  and  3 horses.  We  lost 
the  same  number  of  horses.  I then  moved  my  command  to  the  point 
where  the  artillery  had  been  in  the  morning.  I had  some  difficulty  in 
crossing  at  this  point,  as  they  had  taken  the  skiff  and  ferry-boat  up  the 
other  bayou,  and  I was  compelled  to  send  men  over  after  them  on  tem- 
porary rafts.  After  shelling  the  enemy  from  the  bank  with  two  pieces 
of  the  Seventeenth  Ohio  Battery,  a private  of  the  Sixth  Missouri  Cav- 
alry attempted  to  swim  it,  and  reached  the  opposite  bank,  but  was 
compelled  to  return  on  account  of  the  enemy’s  tire.  Fight  came  on, 
and  I was  compelled  to  halt  the  command  for  want  of  sufficient  knowl- 
edge of  the  roads. 

On  the  morning  of  the  20th-,  a gun,  which  they  were  compelled  to 
abandon,  and  had  concealed  in  the  canebrake,  was  brought  in  by  the 
cavalry.  The  gun  is  a 12-pounder  howitzer,  stamped  U.  S.,  1828. 

Hearing  from  three  deserters,  who  came  in  to  us  on  the  morning  of 
the  20th,  that  the  enemy  had  gone  beyond  our  reach,  I returned  to  the 
transports,  and  remained  there  that  night,  intending  to  drop  down  next 
morning  to  Perkins’  Landing,  4 miles  from  Cypress  Bend,  where  I had 
heard  I could,  by  a road  leading  into  the  Bolivar  and  Vicksburg  road, 
cut  off*  the  retreat  of  Colonel  [S.  W.]  Ferguson’s  force,  and  compel  him 
to  give  battle  or  surrender ; but  the  weather  was  so  inclement  that  I 
remained  at  Cypress  Bend,  while  Captain  Sutherland,  of  the  steam  ram 
Monarch,  went  up  to  Bolivar  to  hear  of  the  location  of  the  enemy.  He 
reported  that  the  whole  force  had  left  Bolivar  the  day  juevious  and  had 
returned  to  the  vicinity  of  Greenville. 

The  rain  continuing  to  ffill,  the  next  day,  February  22,  I took  tiie 


CHAr.  XXXVI.]  EXPEDITIONS  TO  GREENVILLE,  MISS.,  ETC. 


351 


opportunity  to  wood  my  transports  at  Island  NTo.  82.  We  took  on  nearly 
1,000  cords  of  wood,  which  we  found  there.  1 also  landed  at  Perkins’ 
Landing,  and  sent  my  cavalry  to  ascertain  where  the  enemy  was,  and 
their  retreat  toward  Greenville  was  corroborated.  I then  moved  down 
to  Greenville,  and  remained  that  night  on  the  transports. 

At  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  23d,  I ordered  one  regiment,  the 
Eighty-third  Ohio,  Major  L’Hommedieu  commanding,  to  move  out  of 
the  road  we  had  previously  marched  over,  in  order  to  draw  the  enemy 
to  that  point,  while  I moved  the  remainder  of  the  command  by  another 
route,  which  was  a little  farther,  but  the  streams  that  we  would  be  com- 
pelled to  cross  were  narrower. 

On  the  former  road  was  a bridge  about  150  feet  in  length,  crossing 
Fish  Lake,  6 miles  from  Greenville;  this  bridge  had  been  burned  the 
day  after  my  first  expedition  returned.  On  the  road  I marched  my 
command  there  was  one  stream,  which  was  very  narrow,  to  be  crossed  ; 
the  bridges  over  both  had  been  burned.  I therefore  took  the  staging 
of  a steamboat  with  me  for  the  purpose  of  making  a bridge,  if  neces- 
sary ; I did  not  use  them,  however,  as  they  had  left  a bridge  near  the 
one  they  had  burned,  perhaps  with  the  purpose  of  misleading  me,  but 
probably  because  the  stream  was  fordable.  I took  the  timber  from  this 
bridge,  and  in  a half  hour  had  reconstructed  the  bridge  which  had  been 
burned. 

My  force  of  cavalry  had  been  increased  by  a small  detachment  of  the 
Second  Illinois  Cavalry,  under  Maj.  John  J.  Mudd,  who  were  on  their 
way  to  Young’s  Point.  I gave  Colonel  Wright,  of  the  Sixth  Missouri 
Cavalry,  who  was  with  me  on  the  expedition,  and  rendered  me  efficient 
service,  command  of  all  the  cavalry. 

We  had  hardly  completed  the  bridge,  when  the  enemy  opened  with 
three  guns  on  the  Eighty-third  Ohio  from  the  opposite  side  of  Fish 
Lake,  and  I immediately  ordered  the  cavalry  forward,  hoping  that  I 
might  be  able  to  cut  off  their  retreat  before  they  discovered  my  move- 
ment ; but  their  picliets,  which  we  encountered  here,  gave  them  word, 
and  they  had  the  advance  of  our  cavalry  about  2 miles.  A short  dis- 
tance beyond  the  Smith  and  Hood  farm  is  a bend  in  Deer  Creek,  in 
which  is  a plantation.  They  had  taken  the  road,  and  I therefore  or- 
dered the  cavalry  forward  across  this  field.  As  they  crossed  this  field 
the  enemy  opened  the  battery  on  them.  They  encountered  here  the 
cavalry  of  the  enemy,  and  drove  them  before  them,  separating  them 
from  their  artillery. 

I had  heard  of  a bridge  in  another  bend  of  the  creek  below  this,  and 
directed  the  cavalry  to  take  it,  vrhich  they  did  in  gallant  style,  driving 
the  guard  from  it.  , 

In  the  skirmish  at  this  place  we  lost  1 killed,  of  the  Sixth  Missouri 
Cavalry,  and  2 prisoners,  of  the  Second  Illinois.  The  loss  of  the  enemy 
was  reported  by  residents  at  30  killed  and  about  the  same  number 
wounded.  The  enemy,  having  the  advantage  of  a knowledge  of  the 
roads,  while  the  cavalry  were  in  this  bend  moved  out  across  a i)lanta- 
tion  by  a route  3 miles  less  than  the  main  road,  and  escaped. 

About  50  prisoners  that  were  left  with  a small  guard  escaped  in  the 
woods,  and  the  number  of  prisoners,  therefore,  was  reduced  to  9.  Two 
wounded  men,  who  were  unable  to  be  removed,  were  paroled  by  Major 
Mudd,  Second  Illinois  Cavalry,  and  left  at  the  house  of  Judge  Dicken- 
son ; also  1 sick  man  and  nurse.  Their  paroles  I forward  with  this 
report. 

The  infantry  halted  at  this  place,  which  is  15  miles  from  our  trans- 
ports. Tliey  iiad  marclied  that  distance  in  an  incredibly  short  time, 


352 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAr.  XXXVL 


tlirougil  a swamp  about  3 miles  wide,  and  forded  a stream  which  was 
about  feet  deep.  I pushed  the  cavalry  forward  4 miles  farther,  but 
the  enemy  had  crossed  the  stream  and  burned  the  bridge  after  them. 
At  one  time  we  had  three  caissons  and  20  men,  which  had  been  cap- 
tured by  7 men,  under  Adjutant  Conover,  of  the  Sixteenth  Indiana,  of 
whose  gallantry  I cannot  speak  too  highly.  When  he  was  in  advance 
of  the  command  with  this  small  force,  he  saw  these  wagons  retreating 
in  advance  of  the  guns,  and  made  a dash  upon  them,  capturing  the 
whole  number,  and  held  them  until  the  enemy  came  up  and  drove  him 
away  with  his  shell.  The  prisoners  nearly  all  escaped  in  the  woods. 

On  the  24th  instant,  I returned  to  the  transports,  bringing  with  me 
all  the  cattle,  mules,  and  horses  that  I could  collect — about  200  mules, 
100  head  of  cattle,  and  25  horses,  as  near  as  1 can  approximate  to  the 
number  captured  without  a statement  from  the  quartermaster’s  depart- 
ment. 

I found  the  citizens  more  willing  to  give  up  their  negroes  than  their 
stock,  especially  horses  and  mules,  and  in  nearly  every  instance  they 
had  attempted  to  hide  them  from  us. 

I found  the  country  that  I have  been  througb  abounding  in  corn,  and 
where  cotton  had  been  burned  it  was  where  they  were  afraid  of  its  fall- 
ing into  our  hands.  I saw  in  the  vicinity  of  Greenville  nearly  2,000 
bales  of  cotton. 

My  command,  consisting  of  the  Sixteenth  Indiana,  Col.  T.  J.  Lucas; 
Twenty-third  Wisconsin,  Col.  J.  J.  Guppey ; Mnety- sixth  Ohio,  Col.  J. 
W.  Yance;-  Sixty-seventh  Indiana,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Buehl^r  com- 
manding; Eighty-third  Ohio,  Ma;jor  [S.S.]  L’Hommedieu,  jr.;  and  Six- 
tieth Indiana,  Captain  Pleisch  commanding;  four  pieces  of  the  Seven- 
teenth Ohio  Battery,  Lieut.  James  Bice,  and  the  detachment  of  the 
Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry,  about  60  men  of  Captain  Chambers’  company, 
under  Major  Montgomery,  making  about  1,600  effective  men. 

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  s^ieak  in  the  highest  terms  of  the  officers  and 
men  of  my  command.  The  infantry  were  always  re*ad3",  and  there  was 
very  little  straggling.  The  cavalry  that  was  with  n)e  on  the  expedition 
I can  recommend  as  the  most  efficient  body  of  men  in  that  arm  of  the 
service  that  I have  ever  met  with. 

To  Captain  Sutherland,  of  the  steam  ram  Monarch,  I am  indebted  for 
many  acts  of  courtesy  in  his  official  capacity.  His  ram  was  with  my 
transports  from  the  time  we  reached  Greenville  until  our  return,  and  I 
was  by  that  means  able  to  leave  the  boats  with  no  guard,  and  take  all 
the  well  men  with  me  in  whatever  expedition  I needed  them. 

I find  that  there  are  no  road  improvements  in  the  country,  and  it  is 
impossible  for  infantry  tg  be  effective  against  cavalry  in  such  a country. 
Their  information  is  always  better  than  our  own ; the  citizens  all  sym- 
pathize with  them.  The  only  force  which  can  capture  any  of  those  rebel 
forces  that  fire  into  our  transports  is  cavalry  or  mounted  infantry,  and 
light  mountain  howitzers.  I believe  that  there  is  hardly  20  miles  be- 
tween this  point  and  where  I have  been  that  they  do  not  have  their 
spies  or  pickets,  and  as  the  peo^ile  assert  that  it  is  not  their  intention 
to  tight,  they  can  only  be  captured  by  a chase. 

To  Colonel  Wright,  Sixtli  Missouri  Cavalry,  who  was  with  me  during 
the  whole  of  the  expedition,  my  thanks  are  due  for  efficient  service. 

I am,  with  much  respect,  &c., 

S.  G.  BUKBBIDGE, 

Brigadier -General. 

Lieut.  J.  UouaH, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen,  Tenth  J>iv.,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


Chap.  XXXVL]  EXPEDITIONS  TO  GREENVILEE,  MISS.,  ETC.  353 

^o.  2. 

Bcports  of  Lieut.  Col.  8.  W.  Ferguson.,  C.  8.  Army,  of  sMrmish  (23d) 

at  Fish  Lake  Bridge. 

Deer  Creek,  Washington  County,  Mississippi, 

February  26,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  Sunday  morning,  the  22d 
instant,  the  force  of  the  enemy  which  had  landed  the  Monday  previous 
at  the  same  point  to  capture  my  command,  disembarked  at  Greenville. 
1 was  at  the  time  encamped  on  Deer  Creek,  at  the  head  of  the  road  lead- 
ing directly  to  Greenville,  over  Fish  Lake,  distant  by  this  route 
miles  from  the  river,  and  separated  from  it  by  Fish  Lake  and  the  up- 
per portion  of  same  stream,  Ctilled  Black  Bayou.  All  the  bridges  over 
these  had  been  destroyed,  except  one,  and  the  roads  guarded.  The  un- 
destroyed bridge  I used  to  cross  pickets  to  the  river  j it  was  arranged 
for  instant  destruction,  and  held  by  a sufficient  guard. 

On  the  advance  of  their  infantry  to  Fish  Lake  Bridge,  on  the  morning 
of  the  23d,  I detailed  one  section  of  artillery  to  hold  that  point,  which 
they  did  until  recalled,  when  the  enemy  had  obtained  possession  of  the 
iindestroyed  bridge,  the  guard  of  which  shamefully  abandoned  it  at  the 
distant  approach  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry.  On  learning  this,  I ordered 
the  artillery  to  move  down  the  creek,  which  protected  their  left  flank, 
all  the  bridges  in  rear  being  destroyed.  To  the  right  was  anppen,  level 
country,  about  a mile  in  width.  They  had  started  some  ten  or  fifteen 
minutes,  when  the  cavalry  of  the  enemy  appeared  in  the  distance,  ad- 
vancing at  full  speed  through  the  open  country,  in  pursuit  of  some  cit- 
izens and  the  guard  which  had  abandoned  the  bridge  they  should  have 
destroyed.  I at  once  ordered  Captain  [James]  Lewers,  with  all  the 
cavalry  present,  consisting  of  the  greater  portion  of  his  company,  and 
1 lieutenant  and  3 privates  of  Captain  [George]  Barnes’  company,  to 
join  the  artillery  at  a gallop,  and  to  support  it. 

Eemaining  some  little  time  alone  to  observe  the  enemy,  I started  by 
a short  cut  through  the  fields  to  cut  ofl*  my  artillery  and  get  them  in  a 
position  I had  previously  selected.  I had  barely  got  into  the  road  along 
which  they  were  advancing  when  the  whole  cavalry  command  dashed 
up  in  full  flight,  officers  and  men  mixed  up  together,  throwing  away 
their  arms  and  all  that  impeded  their  flight.  Not  one  shot  had  been 
fired.  The  enemy  in  sight,  but  still  half  a mile  distant,  not  more 
than  50  or  at  most"60  in  number,  and  separated  from  them  by  a stout 
fence.  I did  all  in  my  power  to  stop  them,  with  the  success  one  man 
might  expect  in  a herd  of  stampeded  cattle.  Some  10  or  12  of  the  rear 
tiles  did  stop  for  perhaps  one  minute.  I called  on  them  to  follow  me, 
and  started  for  the  artillery,  now,  although  utterly  abandoned  by  every 
one,  gallantly  tiring  on  the  enemy.  Not  one  man  would  follow  me,  but 
the  panic-stricken  cowards  rejoined  their  worthy  comrades  at  a rate 
which  made  up  for  lost  time.  Left  alone,  I endeavored  to  join  my 
brave  artillery,  but  was  by  this  time  completely  cut  ofl*  from  them, 
lolled  in  this,  I determined  to  make  another  effort  to  rally  the  cavalry, 
borne  30  of  them  had  run  into  a culde-sac;  these  1 overtook,  and  pleaded 
with  to  follow  me.  Threats  and  entreaties  were  alike  vain.  Some 
dashed  down  the  almost  perpendicular  sides  of  the  creek  and  attempted 
to  swim  their  horses ; others  jumped  off  their  horses  and  swam  for  dear 
lie.  At  last  9 of  them  promised  to  follow  me,  and  with  them  I cut  my 
way  out,  but,  in  doing  so,  unfortunately  had  to  cross  to  the  opiiosite 
side  of  the  creek  from  the  artillery.  To  reach  this  gallant  baud,  1 had 
23  R R — VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


354 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CHAr.  XXXVL 


to  make  a long  detour  through  the  swamp.  When  I reached  them  it 
was  to  find  that  they  had  fought  their  way,  step  by  step,  for  more  than 
6 miles,  without  the  support  of  a single  man,  with  the  enemy’s  con- 
stantly increasing  force  of  cavalry  in  front,  flank,  and  rear  of  them,  so 
that  they  would  sometimes  have  to  fire  in  three  directions  at  once ; that 
they  had  recaptured  the  entire  baggage  train  of  the  command,  as  well 
as  their  caissons,  which  had  been  started  on  ahead  at  the  first  approaieh 
of  the  enemy ; that  they  had  compelled  the  enemy  to  abandon  a num- 
ber of  prisoners,  including  their  caisson  drivers,  and  that  they  had 
brought  off  everything  safely  except  two  or  three  wagons,  upset  in  the 
stampede.  By  burning  the  bridges  behind  them  they  arrested  the  pur- 
suit of  the  cavalry. 

I cannot  praise  too  highly  the  cool  and  gallant  conduct  of  this  little 
baud.  In  this  hurried  report  much  th^t  is  deserving  of  mention  must 
be  omitted.  I crossed  in  a small  flat  all  the  artillery,  &c.,  over  Bogiie 
Pheliah  on  the  night  of  the  23d  and  the  morning  of  the  24th,  but  was 
there  in  a position  from  which  I could  not  retreat  with  wheels,  and  where 
I did  not  have  two  acres  of  dry  ground  for  the  whole  command,  so  I 
procured  three  flats  and  one  flat-boat ; took  possession  of  the  steamer 
Emma  Bett,  which  came  up  for  corn,  and  got  all  wagons  and  artillery 
on  board  ready  to  move  at  a moment’s  notice,  ordering  the  portion  of 
the  cavalry  with  me  (23  in  number)  and  the  artillery  horses  and  wagon 
teams  across  the  swamp  to  the  Sunflower  Eiver,  at  Klein’s  Ferry.  On 
information,  which  seemed  authentic,  that  the  enemy  were  advancing 
on  me,  I started  down  the  Bogue  on  the  night  of  the  24th  for  Colonel 
Latham’s  plantation,  on  Sunflower.  When  everything  was  fairly  and 
safely  started,  I left  the  boat,  with  orders  after  landing  to  go  to  Klein’s 
for  the  animals,  and  rejoined  the  cavalry,  still  on  Deer  Creek,  for  im- 
portant reasons.  Finding  that  the  enemy  have  gone  off,  I have  sent  to 
recall  all  my  force  to  Deer  Creek,  but  fear  the  execution  of  this  may  be 
delayed  some  time  from  the  flood  of  water  which  has  fallen  since  yes- 
terday. I have  sent  a flag  of  truce  to  communicate  with  Capt.  E.  W. 
Sutherland,  and  will  report  more  fully  at  the  earliest  practicable  mo- 
ment. 


Very  respectfully,  your 


obedient  servant, 

S.  W.  FEKGUSON, 
Lieutenant- Colonel^  Commanding. 


IVIaj.  »T.  J»  Bee V e. 

Assistant  A djutant-  Genera  1. 


Keae  Geeenyille,  Washington  Countv, 

February  28,  18G3. 

]\fAJOE : Your  favor  of  23d  instant  has  just  come  to  hand.  I have  to 
report  that  I am  here  with  a small  party  waiting  to  communicate,  by 
flag  of  truce,  with  the  ram  Monarch,  instructions  of  the  20th  instant 
direct  from  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton.  My  future  moveinents  will 
depend  in  a great  measure  on  the  result  of  the  desired  interview. 

In  the  mean  time  I am  collecting  scattered  cavalry,  and  have  ordered 
the  artillery  to  camp  on  Deer  Creek,  near  Colonel  Falls’,  and  recruit 
their  exhausted  animals.  I am  so  continually  in  the  saddle  that  1 
cannot  prepare  a careful  report  of  the  recent  engagement.  A very 
hurried  one  will  accompany  this.  i i i 

As  far  as  I can  ascertain,  my  loss  is  7 prisoners,  2 men  wounded  ana 


Chap,  xxxvl]  EXPEDITIONS  TO  GREENVILLE,  MISS.,  ETC.  355 

paroled  by  the  enemy,  2 wagons  burned,  and  a number  of  horses  and 
arms  abandoned  by  the  cavalry  in  their  flight. 

The  conduct  of  Captain  Lewers  and  several  of  the  lieutenants  of  cav- 
alry will  have  to  be  investigated  thoroughly,  unless  something  is  devel- 
oped to  cause  me  to  change  my  mind.  I shall  arrest  most  of  them  as 
soon  as  practicable.  Captain  Lewers’  company  is,  without  exception, 
the  poorest  I have  ever  seen.  I know  of  no  way  to  remedy  the  evil  but 
to  break  the  company  up  entirely,  transferring  certain  of  the  men  to 
Captain  Barnes  and  the  rest  to  infantry  companies.  As  cavalry  they  are 
not  worth  one  day’s  support  by  the  Confederate  Government.  Captain 
Lewers  himself  is  in  every  respect  inefficient  and  unfitted  for  his  posi- 
tion, and  I fear  the  same  remark  applies  to  all  his  officers.  In  sending 
me  such  a command.  Colonel  [Wirt]  Adams  risked  my  battery  and  the 
lives  of  brave  men.  He  broke  up  two  squadrons  to  make  this  detail,  and 
then  only  sent  one-half  of  one  company  (viz,  of  Captain  Barnes),  so  that 
I have  not  even  had  the  small  force  ordered  by  the  lieutenant-general 
commanding. 

There  are  many  reasons  for  me  to  remain  and  defend  this  country, 
even  with  my  handful  of  men.  The  principal  one  is  the  amount  of 
corn  in  it,  all  of  which  may  be  transported  to  Vicksburg  by  boat,  via 
Bogue  Pheliah  and  the  Sunflower.  Another,  the  stores  of  Government 
cotton,  which  must  otherwise  be  burned  or  fall  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy.  Even  now  the  Abolitionists  are  trying  to  get  out  all  the  cotton 
from  the  vicinity  of  Lake  Washington.  The  citizens  are  afraid  to  burn 
it,  and  I have  not  a man  I can  spare  for  the  purpose. 

Knowing  well  that  additional  troops  cannot  be  sent  me,  I would  not 
be  importunate  in  my  demands,  but  only  ask  for  soldiers  in  place  of 
Captain  Lewers’  rabble,  now  partly  disarmed  and  dismounted.  Let  me 
have  Captain  [G.  T.]  Blackburn’s  company,  if  within  reach,  or  Captain 
[W.  H.j  Johnson’s,  both  of  my  own  regiment,  and  I will  give  a good  ac- 
count of  them. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  W.  FERGUSOK, 

Lieu ^enant-  Colonel^  Commanding. 

Maj.  J.  J.  Reeve, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Kear  Greenville,  February  28,  1863. 

Major:  I send  two  prisoners  of  war  by  Private  B.  P.  Eenfroe,  of 
Company  B,  Adams’  cavalry,  an  intelligent  man,  who,  if  you  desire  it, 
may  give  much  information  of  things  here.  As  the  company  lost  mucli 
in  their  wagon  destroyed  by  the  enemy,  it  may  be  well  to  let  him  go 
where  it  was  raised  to  procure  clothing,  &c.,  for  it. 

I mention  for  what  it  is  worth  that  many  Yankee  officers  on  the  fleet 
were  overheard  in  conversation  to  say  that  the  attack  on  Vicksburg 
would  be  made  very  soon ; that  they  expected  to  silence  the  guns  and 
land  directly  under  them.  This  I would  not  deem  worthy  of  mention 
were  it  not  for  the  peculiar  circumstances  under  which  it  was  obtained. 
They  also  discussed  an  expected  descent  of  a fleet  of  boats  to  procure 
cotton  along  the  river,  accompanied  by  a brigade  of  cavalry. 

Very  respectfidly,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  W.  FERGUSOK, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel.  Commanding. 

Maj.  J.  J.  Reeve,  ^ 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General^ 


356 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Omai*.  X-XXVX 


FEBRUARY  17-21,  1863. — Expeditioji  from  Lexington  to  Clifton,  Tenm 

No.  1. — Col.  John  K.  Mizner,  Third  Michigan  Cavalry,  Chief  of  Cavalry,  District 
of  Jackson. 

No.  2. — Capt.  Frederick  C.  Adamson,  Third  Michigan  Cavalry. 

Ko.  1. 


Report  of  Col.  John  K.  Mizner^  Third  Michigan  Cavalry^  Chief  of  Cav- 
alry District  of  JacJcson. 


Jackson,  Tenn.,  February  22,  1863. 

Captain  : To  add  to  the  pleasurable  remembrances  of  the  anni- 
versary we  h.ave  to-day  celebrated,  I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the 
information  ot  the  general  commanding,  that  the  cavalry  I sent  toward 
the  Tennessee  River  have  succeeded  in  capturing  Colonel  [J.  F.]  New- 
som, with  7 of  his  officers  and  60  men,  besides  all  their  horses,  arms, 
accouterments,  &c.,  together  with  a large  amount  of  supplies.  This 
splendid  achievement  was  accomplished  by  Capt.  Cicero  Newell,  of  the 
Third  Michigan  Cavalry,  who,  with»60  picked  men,  crossed  the  Tennes- 
see River  on  the  night  of  the  19th  instant,  and  surprised  and  captured 
Newsom  and  his  whole  party  at  Clifton.  He  recrossed  to  this  side  with 
all  his  prisoners,  when  our  gunboats  came  in  sight,  and  gave  them  val- 
uable assistance  in  discovering  boats  and  small  craft  which  the  enemy 
had  concealed  and  had  continually  used  in  crossing  the  river.  Captain 
Adamson,  Third  Michigan  Cavalry,  was  second  in  command,  and  he,  as 
well  as  all  of  the  officers  and  men,  deserve  the  highest  i)raise  for  cap- 
turing a force  of  the  enemy  exactly  equal  to  their  own. 

I regret  to  inform  you  that  Captain  Newell  was  wounded  in  the  action 
at  Clifton. 

I inclose  Captain  Adamson’s  report,  which  gives  a full  account  of  the 
affair. 


The  prisoners  were  turned  over  to  Lieutenant  Fitch,  commanding 
gunboat  fleet.  Captain  Newell,  being  disabled,  was  also  taken  on  board 
the  gunboat. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  K.  MIZNER, 
Colonel  and  Chief  of  Cavalry. 


Capt.  T.  H.  Harris, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  District  of  Jachson. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  Frederich  C.  Adamson.,  Third  Michigan  Cavalry. 

Lexington,  Tenn.,  February  21,  1863. 
Sir  : On  behalf  of  Captain  Newell,  I would  respectfully  submit  the 
following  rei)ort  of  the  operations  of  the  detachment  of  cavalry  under 
his  command  from  the  17th  instant  until  the  present  date: 

On  the  17th  instant  he  started  for  Clifton,  with  23  men  of  Company 
A,  under  Sergeant  [Thomas]  Dean  j 14  men  of  Company  L^  under  com- 


Chap.  XXXV I.] 


t:Xl>EDlTlOH  TO  CLiETON,  TEM. 


357 


mand  of  Lieutenant  Leonardson  ; 24  men  of  Company  K,  under  com- 
mand of  Lieutenant  McIntyre;  23  of  Company  B,  commanded  by  Cap- 
tain Adamson  (all  of  the  above  of  the  Third  Michigan  Cavalry),  and  14 
men  of  the  Second  Tennessee,  commanded  by  Sergeant  Mize. 

We  reached  Johnson^s  house,  8 miles  from  Clifton,  about  sundown, 
without  any  adventure  worth  noting,  having  scouted  the  country  thor- 
oughly for  some  miles  on  either  side  of  the  road.  At  midnight  our 
pickets  sent  in  two  Confederate  soldiers,  who  had  just  crossed  from 
Clifton,  from  whom  we  gained  some  valuable  information  in  relation  to 
the  force  at  Clifton. 

At  daylight  we  started  for  the  river,  leaving  a small  party  at  John- 
son^s.  We  struck  the  enemy’s  pickets  on  the  river  bank,  2 miles  from 
the  point  opposite  Clifton.  We  then  dashed  down,  hoping  to  capture 
the  ferry.  The  pickets  had  evidently  signaled  their  confederates  on 
the  opposite  shore,  as  they  greeted  us  with  a volley.  We  got  our  horses 
under  cover  immediately,  and,  dismounting  the  men,  led  part  of  [Com- 
panies] A and  K to  the  bank  and  returned  their  fire.  The  firing  was 
continued  on  both  sides  for  a short  time,  resulting  in  no  damage  to 
men,  but  wounding  two  of  Company  B’s  horses,  which,  we  supposed, 
had  been  placed  entirely  out  of  danger.  Captain  Newell  left  his  com- 
pany to  watch  the  enemy  and  cover  our  retreat.  We  then  returned  to 
Johnson’s,  where  we  found  a conscript  who  had  come  in  to  surrender 
himself.  From  the  information  given  by  him.  Captain  Newell  went 
with  his  company  to  Turnbull’s  Creek,  leaving  orders  with  me  to  pro- 
ceed with  the  remainder  of  the  command  to  Decaturville,  and  secure 
quarters  for  the  men,  &c. 

The  captain’s  scout  resulted  in  the  discovery  of  an  old  flat-boat,  some 
40  feet  long  and  10  wide.  He  immediately  conceived  the  idea  of  cross- 
ing the  river  and  making  an  attack  on  Clifton,  and  left  Sergeant  [Henry 
0.]  Vowles  and  6 men,  with  orders  to  make  a pair  of  oars,  bail  out  the 
boat,  and  take  her  down  the  river,  under  cover  of  the  night,  to  a point  4 
miles  above  Clifton,  and  there  await  our  coming.  He  then  joined  me  at 
Decaturville,  where  we  decided,  from  the  information  collected,  upon  a 
plan  of  attack  to  be  carried  into  effect  that  night.  Information  of  the 
discovery  of  the  boat  having  reached  the  citizens,  through  the  indiscre- 
tion of  some  of  Company  K’s  men,  we  feared  they  might  guess  at  our 
intention  and  prepare  the  rebels  for  our  coming,  so  we  announced  our 
departure  for  Lexington,  and  started  off  on  that  road  (leaving  at  2 p.  m.). 

Getting  out  some  4 miles,  we  struck  into  the  woods,  under  the  guidance 
of  Mr.  Dow  White ; remained  concealed  in  the  woods  until  night,  when 
we  started  for  our  boat,  some  10  miles  off;  found  everything  all  right, 
riie  river  was  very  high  and  full  of  drift-wood,  which  the  strong  current 
drove  along  at  fearful  speed.  It  was  now  12  m.  We  could  not  take  all 
the  men  at  once,  and  we  knew,  in  the  state  of  the  river,  that  we  could  not 
make  a second  trip  in  time  to  carry  out  our  plans.  So  we  told  off  60 
in^eii  22  from  A,  10  from  L,  14  from  K,  and  14  from  B — under  command 
n their  respective  officers,  as  before  noted  (Lieutenants  Bingham  and 
Drew  accompanying  their  companies).  We  left  the  remainder  of  the 
nen,  under  command  of  a sergeant,  to  take  charge  of  our  horses.  We  got 
)ur  living  freight  aboard  our  crazy  craft,  the  boat’s  gunwale  being  just  6 
iJches  above  water-mark,  made  the  men  lie  flat  in  the  bottom,  crossed 
dritted  down  about  2 miles ; then  landed,  after  considerable 
liniculty  and  danger,  and  wended  our  way  through  the  woods  for  town, 
^.iter  niarching  some  2 miles  through  the  brush  along  the  river  bank,  we 
Micountered  a serious  obstacle  to  our  farther  progress,  in  the  sliape  of 
Ml  extensive  bayou,  which  we  could  not  cross  in  any  direction.  Nothing 


358 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVX 


discouraged  at  our  failure,  we  marclied  back  to  the  boat,  shoved  oif, 
aud  drifted  down  withiu  half  a mile  of  town,  again  landed,  reconnoitered 
cautiously,  marched  within  sight  of  town,  found  everything  quiet,  lay 
down  on  the  ground,  and  sent  our  guide  to  a house  to  ascertain  with 
exact  certainty  the  strength  and  position  of  the  enemy;  found  it  just 
as  we  expected,  and  no  more.  We  waited  som*e  two  hours  anxiously 
for  the  proper  moment  to  arrive.  The  night  was  very  dark  and  cold. 
Our  men  suffered  considerably,  having  left  their  overcoats  in  the  boat, 
but  they  bore  it  in  silence,  as  not  a murmur  was  heard  among  them. 

Day  just  breaking,  we  crept  cautiously  into  town.  Company  B in  ad- 
vance. Their  only  guard  now  espied  us,  and,  calling  “ treason  ” at  the 
top  of  his  voice,  started  for  the  quarters.  We  soon  secured  him,  sent 
a couple  of  men  to  their  ferry,  surrounded  the  houses,  which  we  knew 
contained  the  men,  dashing  in  the  doors  and  windows,  thrusting  in  our 
guns,  and  pointing  them  at  the  heads  of  the  astonished,  half-awake,  and 
undressed  occupants,  demanding  with  loud  shouts  their  instant  sur- 
render. Considerable  resistance  was  shown  in  some  of  the  buildings, 
but  we  bore  down  everything  before  us.  Some  thirty  shots  were  fired ; 
the  second  one,  I am  sorry  to  say,  disabled  Captain  Newell,  striking 
him  in  the  leg,  under  the  knee,  making  a painful,  but  not  dangerous, 
flesh  wound.  Colonel  Newsom  had  his  right  arm  fearfully  shattered 
and  Lieutenant  Shelby  was  struck  in  the  shoulder,  which  were  all  the 
known  casualties  that  occurred  on  both  sides. 

The  command  now  devolving  upon  me,  and  the  town  being  fully  in 
our  possession,  I instantly  mounted  a few  men,  and  [sent]  them  on  the 
different  roads  to  pick  up  runaways,  and  turned  my  immediate  atten- 
tion to  getting  the  prisoners  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  as  I had 
reliable  information  that  there  was  an  Alabama  regiment  of  cavalry 
camped  at  Ague  Creek,  only  7 miles  east,  and  a strong  force  at  Waynes- 
borough,  17  miles  distant.  Some  of  our  men  left  with  the  horses  now 
made  their  appearance  on  the  opposite  bank,  according  to  instructions, 
so  I sent  50  over  (in  the  ferry  just  captured)  with  a strong  guard,  com- 
manded by  Lieutenant  Bingham,  putting  Captain  Newell  in  the  same 
boat;  signaled  our  own  boat,  which  the  guard  immediately  brought 
down ; loaded  her  with  the  rest  of  the  prisoners,  a party  of  our  men, 
the  captured  saddles,  guns,  &c. 

We  plied  both  boats  briskly  for  some  time,  carrying  from  four  to  six 
horses  a trip.  It  was  severe  work,  as  the  current  would  carry  the  boats 
a long  distance  down  stream ; consequently  we  had  to  haul  them  up  along 
shore,  so  that  they  might  reach  the  landing  on  the  opposite  side.  In  the 
mean  time  I had  crossed  over;  and  fearing  the  co-operation  of  the  pris- 
oners in  case  of  an  attack,  I directed  Lieutenant  Drew  to  move  them  to 
Hughes’  house,  2 miles  distant.  We  were  about  getting  over  our  last 
load  of  horses  when  we  were  most  agreeably  surprised  by  the  appear- 
ance of  a fleet  of  five  gunboats.  The  Lexington,  in  advance,  put  out 
her  guns,  intending  to  shell  us,  but  a cheer  from  this  side  aud  a white 
flag  from  the  other  checked  her  intention.  Lieutenant  Fitch,  flag- 
officer  of  the  fleet,  gave  our  tired  men  a capital  dinner,  which  they  much 
needed,  having  eaten  nothing  since  noon  of  the  day  before. 

Before  the  arrival  of  the  boats,  I had  ordered  the  firing  of  the  build- 
in  cs  that  had  been  occupied  by  the  enemy,  as  they  were  well  filled  up 
with  bunks,  &c.,  and  the  hotel  in  which  we  found  over  30  men  contained 
a quantity  of  commissary  stores,  which  I could  not  transport,  so  was 
compelled  to  destroy. 

Our  raid  was  entirely  successful.  The  result  was  the  capture  of  8 com- 
missioned officers  and  some  60  enlisted  men,  40  splendid  horses,  some 


CWAP.  XXXVl  ] 


EXPEDITION  TO  CLIFTON,  TENN. 


359 


saddles,  about  40  stand  of  arms,  principally  old  shot-guns,  many  of 
which  we  threw  in  the  river,  some  Sharps’  and  Smith’s  carbines  (four  of 
the  latter),  a few  Enfield  rifles,  several  old  muskets,  flint-locks,  &c.,  and 
a few  Colt’s  pistols  (how  many  I cannot  ascertain,  as  the  property  has 
not  yet  been  collected  from  the  men).  I regret  to  say  that  many  of  the 
old  guns  were  carried  ofl:*  by  the  officers  and  men  of  the  gunboats  dur- 
ing my  absence,  as  their  men  were  all  allowed  to  come  ashore. 

Captain  Fitch  offered  to  take  the  prisoners  off'  our  hands,  and,  upon 
consulting  with  Captain  ^Newell,  who  had  been  moved  to  Hughes’,  he 
decided  it  would  be  best  to  get  rid  of  them,  as  several  were  unable  to 
ride,  and  I could  not  mount  them  all.  I fear  that  I have  erred  in  this 
matter,  but  did  it  for  the  best.  The  horses  are  distributed  among  the 
companies,  subject  to  the  order  of  the  colonel  commanding. 

Having  had  information  that  Wright’s  Island  contained  several 
horses  belonging  to  the  Confederates,  I took  a small  party  on  the  gun- 
boat and  searched  the  island.  The  horses  had  been  removed  several 
days  before,  but  we  found  two  boats,  one  of  which  we  destroyed  ; the 
other  was  one  of  Francis’  metallic  life-boats,  which  1 also  turned  over 
to  Captain  Fitch. 

It  was  now  dusk,  so  we  crossed  in  our  old  boat,  which  we  had  towed 
up,  entirely  destroyed  it,  and  marched  on  foot  to  Johnson’s,  to  which 
place  I had  ordered  the  command. 

Early  on  the  21st,  I started  for  Lexington,  through  a drenching  rain  ; 
reached  there  at  3 p.  m.,  and  reported  to  Major  [Thomas]  Saylor,  whom 
I found  in  command. 

I am  thoroughly  satisfied  that  there  is  no  force  anywhere  in  this 
vicinity,  on  this  side  of  the  Tennessee  Eiver.  Van  Dorn  is  at  Colum- 
bia ; parties  of  his  cavalry  are  stationed  at  different  points,  close  to 
the  river,  and  it  seems  to  be  the  impression  that  it  is  his  intention  to 
attemx)t  to  hold  the  river  at  these  points. 

I inclose  a list  of  the  prisoners*  and  Captain  Fitch’s  receipt  for  54;* 
one  of  the  slips  containing  their  names  was  mislaid,  which  accounts  for 
the  difference  between  the  list  and  receipt,  and  4 were  released  on 
l)arole. 

I must  apologize  for  the  length  of  this  report,  but  in  justice  to  the 
men  and  officers,  who  all,  without  exception,  conducted  themselves 
bravely  on  our  rather  dangerous  expedition,  I could  not  do  less  than 
tell  the  whole  story. 

I am,  sir,  very  resi)ectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  C.  ADAMSOK, 
Captain  Third  Michigan  Cavalry. 

Capt.  T.  B.  Weir, 

Adjutant  Cavalry  Division. 

P.  S. — Net  result  of  expedition  : Prisoners,  61 ; horses,  40 ; saddles, 
about  40;  stand  of  arms,  40;  flat-boats  destroyed,  2;  yawls  destroyed, 
2 ; skiffs  destroyed,  2 ; life-boat  found,  1 ; 4 barrels  flour,  3 barrels  salt, 
10,000  pounds  pork  and  bacon,  a quantity  of  corn-meal,  beans,  &c., 
burned. 

Colonel  Newsom  and  Lieutenant  [M.  T.]  8helby  were  dangerously 
wounded  and  paroled. 

I neglected  to  state  that  Captain  New’ell  went  on  the  gunboat  Fair- 
play,  as,  owing  to  the  state  of  the  roads  and  the  lack  of  transportation, 
we  could  not  [take]  him  to  a suitable  place. 


Omitted. 


360 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX VT. 


FEBRUARY  18,  1863.^ — Affair  near  Moscow,  Tenn. 

Report  of  Maj.  Francis  M.  Long,  Forty-first  Illinois  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Forty -first  Reoiment  Illinois  Volunteers, 

Moscow,  Tenn.,  February  22,  1863. 

Sir  : On  the  morning  of  the  18th  instant,  I was  detailed  to  take  com- 
mand of  160  men,  comprised  of  details  from  the  Third  Iowa,  Forty-first 
and  Fifty-third  Illinois,  and  Thirty-third  Wisconsin,  to  escort  a forage 
train  that  was  going  out  after  forage. 

I reported  at  division  headquarters  at  8 a.  m.,  and  took  command  of 
the  aforesaid  guards,  who  had  reported  there.  We  started  out  in  a 
northwest  direction.  After  going  or  6 miles,  we  stopped  at  the  plan- 
tation of  Colonel  Ruckles  and  loaded  our  train. 

While  we  were  loading  the  train,  I received  information  that  150  of 
[R.  V.]  Richardson’s  rebel  cavalry  bad  made  their  appearance  about  a 
mile  west  of  us,  and  that  they  were  moving  in  a southeast  direction.  I 
immediately  ordered  the  guards  in  line,  ready  for  action. 

When  our  train  was  loaded,  I placed  half  the  guards  in  front  and  the 
remainder  in  the  rear  of  the  train.  I took  all  necessary  precautions  to 
have  the  train  move  in  good  order,  and  we  started  for  camp,  moving 
unmolested  until  within  2 J or  3 miles  of  camp,  when  I discovered  a body 
of  rebel  cavalry  south  of  the  road,  about  150  strong,  preparing  to  make 
a dash  upon  the  train.  I sent  orders  to  the  front  guards  to  return  with 
all  possible  speed,  at  the  same  time  hurrying  forward  with  the  rear 
guards.  In  consequence  of  the  bad  condition  of  the  roads,  the  train 
was  somewhat  scattered,  and  both  the  front  and  rear  guards  were  from 
a half  to  three-fourths  ot  a mile  from  the  center  of  the  train. 

In  the  mean  time  the  rebels  had  made  their  dash  and  attacked  the 
train  in  the  center  ; the  front  and  rear  guards  coming  up,  eugaged  the 
enemy  at  the  same  time.  The  engagement  lasted  about  five  minutes, 
when  the  enemy  were  repulsed  and  in  full  retreat. 

Our  loss  was  1 man  wounded  and  16  missing.  We  also  lost  42  mules 
and  2 horses.  Loss  of  the  enemy  unknown. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  iVI.  LONG, 

Major  Forty -fir  St  Regiment  Illinois  Volunteers. 

Lieut.  William  Warner, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Qen.,  First  Brigade,  Fourth  Division. 


FEBRUARY  19,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Yazoo  Pass,  Miss. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McGlernand,  TJ.  B.  Army. 

Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Before  Vicksburg,  February  22,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  a detachment  of  the  First 
Indiana  Cavalry,  under  Lieut.  Col.  W.  F.  Wood,  engaged  a detachment, 
or  some  200,  of  Forrest’s  rebel  cavalry  on  the  19th  instant,  near  Yazoo 
Pass,  killing  6,  wounding  3,  and  capturing  15  of  the  enemy,  and  (;om- 
pletely  putting  him  to  rout.  No  loss  on  our  side.  He  also  reports  that 


Chap.  XXXYI.] 


CAPTUtlE  OF  THE  INHIANOLA. 


aei 


the  prospect  of  opeoiD^  the  pass  is  encouraging,  and  that  General  Wash- 
burn expected  to  reach  the  Coldwater  with  his  transports  to-morrow. 

JOHN  A.  McOLERNAND, 
Major-General^  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant. 


FEBRUARY  24,  1863. — Capture  of  the  Indianola. 

RKI'OJRTS.* 

No.  1. — Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Department  of  Missis- 
sippi and  Eastern  Louisiana. 

No.  2.— Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  District  of  Western  Loui- 
siana, with  congratulatory  orders. 

No.  3. — Lieut.  Col.  Frederick  B.  Brand,  Miles’  (Louisiana)  Legion. 

No.  4. — Maj.  J.  L.  Brent,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  5. — Maj.  Gen.  Carter  L.  Stevenson,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  6. — Col.  Wirt  Adams,  Mississippi  Cavalry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Gen.  J.  G.  Pemberton,)  G.  S.  Army,,  commanding  Depart- 
ment of  Mississixjpi  and  JEastern  Louisiana. 

Vicksburg,  February  25,  1863. 

Expedition,  fitted  up  in  Eed  River  and  Port  Hudson,  captured  iron- 
clad gunboat  ludianola  at  11  o’clock  last  night ; is  now  sunk  in  the 
Mississippi;  shows  bow  and  upper  works  out  near  Mr.  Joe  Davis’  plan- 
tation ; armament,  two  11-inch  forward,  two  9-inch  aft.  Lieutenant 
Brown,  IJ.  S.  Navy,  commanding,  with  his  ofiScers  and  men,  captured ; 
will  do  everything  possible  to  raise  and  get  her  afloat  immediately. 
There  will  probably  be  an  attempt  by  other  iron-clads  to  run  do\\n 
past  our  batteries  to-night.  Maj.  J.  L.  Brent,  of  General  Taylor’s  forces, 
commanded  the  expedition. 

J.  G.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General^  Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


N3N2. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor.,  G.  8.  Army,  commanding  District 
of^  Western  Louisiana,  with  congratulatory  orders. 

Vicksburg,  February  25,  1863. 

1 have  the  honor  to  report,  after  a severe  and  hot  engagement,  the 
capture  of  the  Federal  iron-clad  steamer  Indianola,  Lieutenant-Com- 
mander Brown,  U.  S.  Navy,  together  with  all  her  officers  and  crew,  by 
the  Confederate  States  steamers  Queen  of  the  West  and  Webb,  forming 


* For  reports  of  Actg.  Rear-Admiral  David  D.  Porter  and  Lieut.  Commander  George 
Brown,  U.  S.  Navy,  see  Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  7, 18b3. 


3G2 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TEN:^^ESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVl. 


an  expedition  sent  out  by  me  for  that  purpose,  under  the  command  of 
Major  [J.  L.]  Brent.  The  iirize  is  a good  deal  damaged. 

K.  TAYLOE, 

Major-  General^  Commanding). 

General  S.  Coopek. 


Headquarters  District  of  Westei^n  Louisiana, 

Alexandria^  March  1,  1863. 

General  : I beg  respectfully  to  add,  in  addition  to  the  report  of  Maj. 
J.  L.  Brent,  that  the  prize  steamer  Indianola  was  towed  to  a point  where 
she  sunk  in  shoal  water  with  her  gun  decks  above  water.  Her  guns 
were  traversed  so  as  to  bear,  all  of  them,  on  the  river,  thus  making  her 
a powerful  water-battery.  Our  boats  then  returned  to  this  point  for 
necessary  repairs. 

Very  respectfully,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  TAYLOE, 

Major-  General. 


General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Bispector  General. 


General  Orders,  ) Hdqrs.  Dist.  of  Western  Louisiana, 

No.  20.  f Alexandria.,  A]^ril  2,  1863. 

The  major-general  commanding  takes  pleasure,  in  behalf  of  the  Gov- 
ernment, in  returning  thanks  to  the  detachment  of  Texas  troops  of 
Major  [James]  Burnet’s  command;  of  Tennessee  troops  of  Capt.  J.  D. 
Thomas’  command,  and  to  the  section  of  Maryland  Light  Artillery  Bat- 
tery, under  command  of  Lieutenant  [W.  Thompson]  Patten  and  Ser- 
geant [Edward]  Langley,  for  the  valuable  and  gallant  services  rendered 
by  them  in  the  gunboat  engagement  with  the  United  States  steam  ram 
Indianola.  Their  bravery  and  soldierlj^  conduct  entitle  them  to  the 
gratitude  of  the  nation  and  the  highest  appreciation  of  their  country- 
men, and  should  excite  the  just  emulation  of  their  comrades.  The 
major-general  commanding,  in  justice  to  themselves  and  his  own  feel- 
ings, cannot  allow  them  to  return  to  their  commands  in  another  depart- 
ment without  making  this  public  acknowledgment  of  their  gallant  and 
meritorious  services. 

By  command  of  Major-General  Taylor; 

E.  SUEGET, 

^ Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  3. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  Col.  Fredericlc  B.  Brand,  Miles'  [Louisiana)  Legion. 

Steamer  Dr.  Beaty, 

Thirty  miles  below  Vichsburg,  February  25,  1863. 

Sir:  Last  night,  about  10  p.  m.,  fell  iu  with  the  U.  S.  iron-clad  gun- 
boat Indianola,and  after  the  rams  Queen  of  the  West  and  Webb,  under 
JMajor  Brent,  had  engaged  her  for  an  hour,  I went  alongside,  when  the 
commander,  Lieutenant-Commander  Brown,  U.  S.  Navy,  surrendered  to 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  THE  INDIANOLA. 


368 


me.  As  all  the  credit  is  due  to  Major  Brent,  I have  turned  over  to  him, 
in  a sinking  condition,  the  prize,  which  we  hope  to  save.  Nobody  but 
5 hurt. 

FEEDK.  B.  BRAND, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel^  Commanding. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


On  Board  C.  S.  Gunboat  Dr.  Beaty, 

February  2G,  1863. 

Sir  : On  the  morning  of  the  21st,  while  wooding  at  Morganzia,  I re- 
ceived information  that  the  Federal  gunboat  Indianola  had  left  the 
mouth  of  Red  River.  I proceeded  to  the  mouth  of  Red  River ; arrived 
at  3 p.  m. ; found  a picket,  with  whom  I established  a code  of  signals  for 
boats  coming  up  the  river.  Ran  up  Red  River  as  far  as  Black  River, 
where  I had  to  lie  up  until  the  fog  cleared,  which  was  about  8 a.  m.  on 
the  22d.  Proceeded  on  up  Red  River  j when  within  about  20  miles  of 
the  fortifications,  I met  Major  [J.  L.]  Brent,  in  command  of  the  ram 
Queen  of  the  West  and  the  Webb,  with  the  Grand  Era  as  tender.  I 
turned  back,  and  proceeded  down  the  river  in  company  with  them  to 
find  the  enemy  and  attack  him  at  night,  as  I knew  their  immense  supe- 
riority of  metal  and  power. 

Went  on  up  the  Mississippi  River  to  within  30  miles  of  Yicksburg, 
near  the  little  town  of  Carthage,  where  we  discovered  our  adversary 
close  in  shore  about  10  p.  m.  24th  instant.  The  Queen  of  the  West  and 
the  Webb  most  gallantly  charged  upon  her  their  first  and  second  rams, 
doing  but  little  damage.  The  third  time  they  struck  her  j the  Webb 
struck  her  at  the  back  part  of  the  starboard  wheel-house,  cutting  down 
below  the  water  into  the  hull,  making  also  a large  hole  in  her  own  bow. 
The  Queen  of  the  West  made  another  gallant  charge  in  the  face  of  two 
9-inch  guns  at  her  stern,  for  the  purpose  of  crushing  her  propellers  and 
rudders,  which  broke  down  the  whole  of  her  stern.  Major  Brent  then 
gave  me  notice  (I  being  within  300  yards)  that  she  was  disabled.  I 
immediately  rushed  up  to  board  her.  On  running  alongside,  I grappled 
her,  and,  on  giving  the  order  to  board,  Lieutenant  Brown,  U.  S.  Navy, 
commanding  iron-clad  gunboat  Indianola,  said  he  ‘‘  was  in  a sinking 
condition.’^  I asked  if  he  surrendered.  He  replied,  ‘‘‘  I surrender.”  I 
th*en  kept  my  boarders  back,  jumped  on  board  myself,  and  received  his 
sword.  I then  had  her  pushed  into  shore,  where  we  found  that  they 
had  cut  all  their  pipes,  and  had  blown  the  water  and  steam  out  of  their 
boilers.  I found  her  to  be  one  of  the  most  formidable  iron-clads  in  their 
Navy,  protected  in  every  manner  possible  with  thick  heavy  timber  and 
heavy  iron  plates,  mounting  two  11-inch  (completely  casemated)  Dahl- 
gren  guns  forward,  from  which  she  had  fired  eleven  shots  at  us.  She 
liad  two  9-inch  Dahl gren  guns  in  her  stern,  from  which  she  had  fired  six 
solid  shots  at  us.  Lieutenant  Brown  informs  me  that  she  would  have 
been  used  as  a ram  had  he  thought  we  had  the  boldness  to  attack  him 
at  night. 

Too  much  credit  cannot  be  awarded  to  Major  Brent  and  his  command 
for  the  gallant  manner  in  which  they  behaved.  I therefore  turned  the 
])rize  over  to  him,  to  have  her  taken  up  Red  River,  where  she  could  be 
repaired  and  fitted  out.  After  towing  her  down  as  far  as  His  Excellency 
President  Davis’  plantation,  we  found  that  she  made  so  much  water 
that  we  were  compelled  to  run  her  ashore,  where  she  now  lies  in  10  feet 
water.  I dispatched  the  Queen  of  the  West  to  Warrenton  to  communi- 


364 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVl. 


cate  to  Major-General  Stevenson,  of  Vicksburg,  for  assistance  in  the 
shape  of  pumps,  &c. 

1 then  started  off  in  the  Grand  Era  with  the  prisoners,  numbering 
about  90,  with  7 negroes  j delivered  them  over  to  Col.  Wirt  Adams^  com- 
mand, to  be  forwarded  to  Jackson,  Miss,  On  my  return  to  join  the  squad- 
ron, met  the  Queen  of  the  West,  Webb,  and  the  Dr.  Beaty,  in  full  re- 
treat, having  learned  that  the  two  gunboats  expected  by  Lieutenant 
Brown,  U.  S.  Navy,  had  passed  Vicksburg,  our  rams  leaking  so  much 
that  it  was  impossible  for  us  to  make  another  attack.  My  port  end  was 
cut  into  by  the  Queen  of  the  West  by  accident.  I was  obliged,  in  con- 
sequence, to  leave  qbout  70  bales  of  cotton  on  shore  near  where  the 
Indianola  has  sunk. 

The  officers  and  men,  one  and  all,  deserve  great  praise  for  their  cool- 
ness and  the  promptitude  with  which  they  executed  all  my  commands, 
especially  when  1 gave  the  order  to  board.  I take  pleasure  in  saying 
that  I never  saw  men  behave  better  under  any  circumstances. 

The  West  had  2 killed  and  3 wounded  by  a 11-inch  shot  striking  her 
upper  bulwarks.  The  Webb  and  Beaty  had  not  a man  hurt.  The  enemy 
had  1 killed  and  1 wounded  by  our  sharpshooters. 

So  well  protected  were  the  enemy  by  their  iron,  that  our  20,  30,  and 
32  pounders  made  very  little  indentation  at  a distance  of  10  or  15 
yards. 

Some  40  or  50  of  my  men  were  detailed  to  work  on  the  Indianola,  who 
are  now  on  board  the  Webb,  having  gotten  on  her  daring  the  stam- 
pede; also  Surgeon  [Thad.  J.]  Wetherly,  Lieutenant  [S.  M.]  Thomas  ([R. 
M.]  Boone’s  battery),  and  Lieutenant  Frith  (Miles’  Legion).  Sergeant- 
Major  King,  with  15  men,  was  detailed  to  carry  dispatches  to  Warren- 
ton  in  a boat.  He  has  not  yet  returned.  The  detachment  of  the  signal 
corps  with  me  rendered  me  very  efficient  service,  some  of  whom  were 
on  board  the  West  and  Webb. 

I remain,  sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

EREDK.  B.  BRAND, 
Lieutenant- Colonel^  Commanding  Expedition. 

Major-General  Gardner. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Maj.  J.  L.  Brent,  C.  S.  Army. 

February  25,  1863. 

Major  : My  last  dispatch  to  you,  exclusive  of  the  telegraphic  commu- 
nication sent  you  last  night,  was  from  Natchez.  The  Federal  iron-clad 
Indianola  had  forty-eight  hours’  start  of  us  at  Ackland’s  Landing ; at 
Natchez  she  was  less  than  twenty-five  hours  in  advance. 

We  left  Natchez  on  the  evening  of  the  23d,  and  I found  that  we  could 
easily  overhaul  the  enemy  in  the  morning  of  the  24th,  but  I determined 
not  to  do  so,  in  order  to  bring  him  to  an  engagement  at  night,  consider- 
ing for  many  reasons  that  this  time  was  eminently  advantageous  to  us. 
We  reached  Grand  Gulf  before  sunset,  and  there  learned  that  he  w^as 
only  about  four  hours  in  advance  of  us.  As  we  were  running  more  than 
2 miles  to  his  1,  the  time  required  to  overtake  him  could  easily  be  calcu- 
lated; so  I determined  to  overtake  and  bring  him  to  action  at  9 o’clock 
that  evening.  We  came  up  with  him  about  9.40,  just  above  New  Car- 
thage, near  the  foot  of  Palmyra  Island,  and  I immediately  signaled  the 


Chap.  XXXVI. J 


CAPTURE  OF  THE  INDIANOLA. 


365 


Webb  to  prepare  for  action.  Our  order  of  approach  was  as  follows  : 
The  Queen  of  the  West  about  500  yards  in  advance  of  the  Webb,  and 
the  Beaty,  Lieutenant-Colonel  [F.  B.]  Brand  commanding  (who,  I wrote 
you,  had  joined  us  with  a force  and  steamer  fitted  out  from  Port  Hud- 
son), 2 miles  in  the  rear,  and  lashed  to  my  tender,  the  Grand  Era.  The 
moon  was  partially  obscured  by  a veil  of  white  clouds,  and  gave  and 
permitted  just  sufficient  light  for  us  to  see  where  to  strike  with  our 
rams,  and  just  sufficient  obscurity  to  render  uncertain  the  aim  of  the 
formidable  artillery  of  the  enemy.  We  first  discovered  him  when  about 
1,000  yards  distant,  hugging  the  eastern  bank  of  the  Mississippi,  with 
his  head  quartering  across  and  down  the  river.  Xot  an  indication  of 
life  was  given  as  we  dashed  on  toward  him — no  light,  no  perceptible 
motion  of  his  machinery  was  discernible.  We  had  also  obscured  every 
light,  and  only  the  fires  of  the  Era  could  be  seen,  2 miles  back,  where 
she  was  towing  the  Beaty.  The  distance  between  him  and  us  had  di- 
minished to  about  500  yards.  We  could  clearly  distinguish  the  long 
black  line  of  his  two  coal-barges,  which  protected  his  sides  from  forward 
of  his  bow  to  nearly  abreast  of  his  wheels.  The  impatience  of  our  men 
to  open  fire  could  be  scarcely  restrained,  but  I was  too  sensible  of  the 
vast  advantage  to  be  obtained  by  traversing  the  distance  to  be  passed 
over  without  drawing  the  fire  of  his  powerful  guns.  At  last,  when 
within  about  150  yards  of  him,  I authorized  Captain  [James]  McClos- 
key  to  open  fire,  which  he  accordingly  did  with  his  two  Parrott  guns 
and  one  brass  12-pounder.  At  the  second  fire,  the  20  pounder  Parrott 
gun  was  disabled  by  the  blowing  out  of  its  vent-piece.  Our  intention 
was  to  dash  the  bow  of  our  boat  in  his  larboard  wheel-house,  just  in  the 
rear  of  the  coal-barge,  but  when  about  150  yards  from  him  he  backed 
and  interposed  the  barge  between  us  and  him.  Our  bow  went  crashing 
clear  through  the  barge,  and  was  not  arrested  until  it  shattered  some  of 
his  timbers  amidships  and  deeply  indenting  the  iron  plating  of  his  hull. 
So  tremendous  had  been  the  momentum  of  our  attack,  that  for  nearly 
five  minutes  we  could  not  disengage  ourselves,  but  remained  stuck  fast. 
In  this  position  our  sharpshooiers  opened  fire  on  every  light  and  crevice 
that  could  be  seen,  but  no  living  men  were  to  be  seen  on  the  enemy’s 
decks.  While  thus  adhering  to  the  enemy,  the  Webb  came  dashing  by 
us,  and  plunged,  with  terrific  force,  just  in  the  rear  of  his  bow.  Some 
few  iron  plates  were  loosened,  but  this  blow  of  the  Webb  produced  no 
serious  external  injury  to  the  enemy.  The  prisoners  since  report  that 
it  disabled,  by  the  jar,  the  starboard  engine.  Urged  forward  by  the 
Webb,  the  Indianola  swung  away.  One  end  of  the  coal-barge  that  the 
Queen  had  cut  in  two  sunk,  and  the  other  drifted  down  the  current  a 
little  way,  and  immediately  sunk,  and  the  Queen,  finding  herself  free, 
immediately  rounded  up  stream  to  add  to  the  impetuosity  of  her  next 
charge  the  additional  power  obtainable  from  the  descending  current  of 
Ihe  river.  As  the  Webb  approached  on  her  first  charge,  the  two  ll-inch 
Dahlgren  guns  on  the  bow  of  the  Indianola  opened  on  her  at  75  yards 
with  solid  shot,  but  fortunately  she  was  untouched.  Tlie  vigor  of  her 
onset  pushed  the  enemy  around,  and,  carrying  her  forward,  laid  her 
across  and  under  the  very  muzzle  of  these  monstrous  guns.  Dashing 
safely  around  from  this  i)erilous  position,  the  Webb  swung  on  the  star- 
board side  of  the  enemy,  between  him  and  his  coal-barge,  breaking  the 
fastenings  and  setting  the  barge  adrift. 

The  result  of  our  first  onset  was  to  strip  tbe  Indianola  of  her  coal- 
barges,  which  protected  her  sides,  and  to  injure  her  to  some  extent  in 
her  wheel,  as  was  apparent  from  her  subsequent  want  of  rapidity  and 
precision  in  her  movements.  As  soon  as  the  Webb  swept  away  clear 


366 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSER,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX VI. 


of  the  euemy,  the  Queen  of  the  West  swung  round  and  again  dashed 
upon  him,  who  this  time  with  partial  success  endeavored  to  break  the 
force  of  the  onset  by  presenting  her  bow  to  our  blow ; but  his  move- 
ments were  too  torpid,  and  were  not  entirely  successful,  which  tends  to 
confirm  the  belief  entertained  by  some  that  her  machinery  was  injured 
by  the  first  blow.  The  Queen  struck  a little  in  advance  of  amidships, 
but,  as  she  was  turning,  the  force  of  the  blow  glanced  along  his  side  and 
past  his  wheel-house  without  inflicting  any  very  serious  damage.  Just 
as  the  Queen  swung  clear  of  his  stern,  he  opened  on  her  with  his  two 
aft  9-inch  guns.  One  struck  us  on  the  shoulder  and  knocked  off  our 
cotton,  and  one  on  the  starboard  and  knocked  away  ten  or  twelve  bales 
of  cotton,  causing  us  to  list  over  considerably;  and  another  (a  shell) 
entered  our  front  port-hole  on  the  port  side,  passed  out,  and  struck  the 
chase  of  a brass  12-pounder  gun,  and  exploded,  killing  2 men,  disabling 
4,  and  disabling  two  pieces.  This  time  the  Queen  swung  around  rapidly 
up  the  stream,  and  in  a very  brief  interval  again  dashed  on  him,  strik- 
ing a little  to  the  rear  of  his  starboard  wheel-house,  crushing  through 
and  shattering  his  frame  work  and  loosening  some  of  his  iron  plates. 

By  this  time  the  Webb  had  run  up  stream,  turned  and  came  career- 
ing on  with  a full  head  of  steam,  and  struck  him  very  nearly  in  the  same 
place  where  the  Queen  of  the  West  had  before  hit  him.  Through  and 
through  his  timbers,  crushing  and  dashing  aside  his  iron  plates,  the 
sharp  bow  of  the  Webb  penetrated  as  if  it  were  going  to  pass  entirely 
through  the  ship.  As  the  Webb  backed  clear,  the  Indianola,  with  all 
the  speed  she  could  raise,  declined  further  fight,  and  ran  down  the  river 
toward  the  bank,  with  the  intention,  as  afterward  appeared,  of  getting 
a line  out,  in  order  that  the  officers  and  crew  might  land  and  abandon 
their  steamer,  which  was  making  water  rapidly.  In  fact,  a line  was 
got  out  on  land,  but  not  fastened,  and  three  of  the  crew  effected  their 
escape  from  the  vessel,  but  were  recaptured  next  day  by  the  cavalry  of 
Major  [Isaac  F.]  Harrison.  After  the  Queen  of  the  West  struck  the 
Indianola  the  third  time,  she  was  for  some  time  almost  unmanageable. 
She  had  listed  so  much  over  to  the  port  side,  that  one  of  her  wheels  was 
much  the  most  raised  out  of  the  water.  She  was  making  water,  and 
presented  every  appearance  of  sinking.  Captain  McOloskey  righted 
her  a little  by  throwing  over  cotton  from  his  upper  decks,  and  they  were 
able  to  bring  her  round  very  slowly,  but  still  she  was  brought  up  by 
her  gallant  commander  for  a further  charge.  While  the  Webb  had  her 
bow  knocked  off,  her  splendid  machinery  was  unhurt,  and  she  quickly 
and  gallantly  bore  up  for  her  third  charge.  When  bearing  down  and 
approaching  the  enemy,  Captain  [Charles  J.]  Pierce  reports  that  he  was 
hailed  from  the  deck,  announcing  the  surrender,  and  begging  to  be 
towed  ashore,  as  he  was  sinking.  Captain  Pierce  represents  that  he 
placed  a line  on  board  and  commenced  towing  the  Indianola,  when  the 
line  parted.  As  the  Queen  of  the  West  was  running  off*  from  her  last 
charge  to  make  a circuit  to  obtain  space  to  add  increased  momentum  to 
her  onset,  we  encountered  the  Dr.  Beaty  (Lieutenant-Colonel  Brand), 
who  had  cast  off  from  the  tender  Grand  Era,  and  was  hovering  round 
to  enter  the  tight  when  an  opportunity  oft'ered. 

The  Dr.  Beaty  is  a frail  steamer,  with  but  little  power,  and  incapa- 
ble of  being  used  as  a ram,  or  of  resisting  the  terrible  fire  to  which  wc 
were  exposed.  She  was  crowded  with  nearly  250  gallant  spirits,  who 
volunteered  from  the  forces  at  Port  Hudson,  and  who  had  embarked  in 
the  Beaty  with  the  resolution  to  fight  the  enemy  by  boarding  her.  We 
called  out  to  them  that  the  opportunity  for  boarding  her  had  arrived,  as 
it  was  apparent  that  the  enemy  was  disabled  and  much  demoralized. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


CAPTURE  OF  THE  INDIANOLA. 


367 


Lieutenaut-Colonel  Brand  with  bis  command  gallantly  bore  away,  ap- 
proached the  enemy,  and  gave,  as  I am  informed  by  him,  the  command 
“prepare  to  board,”  when  he  was  greeted  by  a voice  from  the  decks 
of  the  Indianola,  announcing  that  she  had  surrendered  and  was  in  a 
sinking  condition.  Colonel  Brand  then  boarded  her  upper  deck  and  re- 
ceived the  sword  of  Lieutenant-Commander  Brown.  This  result  must 
have  been  very  gratifying  to  Colonel  Brand,  as  it  was  obtained  with- 
out the  loss  or  injury  of  a single  man  of  his  command.  Upon  my  reach- 
ing the  deck,  Colonel  Brand  most  handsomely  acknowledged  that  the 
capture  was  entirely  due  to  the  Queen  of  the  West  and  the  Webb.  I 
have  no  doubt  if  it  had  been  necessary  that  himself  and  his  gallant 
command  would  have  again  demonstrated  that  nothing  can  resist  the 
desperation  of  troops  who  regard  not  their  own  lives,  but  victory.  I im- 
mediately appointed  Lieutenant  Handy,  of  the  Webb,  as  prize-master. 
We  found  our  prize  a most  formidable  monster,  mounting  two  11  inch 
guns  forward  and  two  9-inch  guns  aft,  and  all  protected  by  splendid  iron 
casemates,  utterly  impervious  except  to  the  heaviest  artillery  at  the 
very  shortest  range.  Her  propelling  power  consisted  of  side- wheels  and 
two  screw  i)ropellers.  She  was  filled  with  a most  valuable  cargo,  em- 
bracing supplies  of  every  kind.  The  officers  and  crew,  amounting  to 
over  100,  fell  into  our  hands  as  prisoners.  Nothing  shows  more  clearly 
how  well  protected  were  her  men  than  the  fact  that  our  artillery,  though 
they  frequently  fired  at  the  range  of  20  and  30  yards,  utterly  failed  to 
injure  her.  Lieutenant  Handy,  of  the  Webb,  fired  his  32-pouuder  ritied 
gun  so  close  to  the  casemates  of  the  enemy  that  it  actually  enveloj)ed 
both  port-holes  in  flames,  and  yet  no  injury  was  sustained.  Our  skillful 
and  courageous  sharpshooters  fired  deliberately  at  every  onset. 

Notwithstanding  all  these  circumstances,  the  enemy  lost  but  1 man 
killed  and  none  wounded.  The  Webb  had  but  1 man  wounded,  while 
the  Queen  of  the  West  had  2 killed  and  4 wounded. 

The  fire  of  the  enemy  was  terrific.  Their  huge  shot  and  shell  came 
whizzing  by  us,  directed  wide  of  the  mark  in  every  instance,  except  the 
two  shots  that  struck  the  Queen  and  one  that  passed  through  the  bul- 
warks of  the  Webb,  while  the  far-darting  flames  of  their  enormous  guns 
almost  licking  our  bows,  and  the  loud  thunder  of  their  reports  (heard 
as  far  as  Vicksburg,  30  miles  off),  added  unusual  sublimity  to  the  scene. 
The  Queen  of  the  West  has  some  appearance  of  protection  for  her  men — 
how  feeble  was  manifested  by  the  injury  inflicted  by  one  shot  alone; 
but  the  men  on  the  Webb  were  utterly  without  protection.  The  boilers 
were  rudely  surrounded  by  cotton,  but  her  walking  beams  were  entirely 
exposed.  I think  the  annals  of  naval  warfare  may  be  safely  challenged 
to  produce  an  instance  where  a feeble  craft  was  thrice  precipitated  upon 
the  iron  sides  of  a first-class  war  steamer,  mounting  as  heavy  an  arma- 
ment as  is  to  be  found  in  the  western  waters. 

The  heroic  gallantry  of  both  captains  in  rushing  their  steamers  against 
the  iron-clad  enemy  in  face  of  and  against  the  muzzles  of  9- inch  and 
11-inch  guns  cannot  be  overestimated. 

I am  much  indebted  for  the  success  that  crowns  this  expedition  to 
the  skill  and  gallantry  of  my  officers. 

Captain  McGloskey,  commanding  the  Queen  of  the  West,  combined 
with  the  courage  of  the  soldier  the  skill  and  aptitude  that  characterizes 
the  sailor  of  our  western  waters.  Taking  his  position  in  the  front  of  the 
steamer,  by  word  and  example  he  cheered  the  men  on  to  their  duty  and 
rallied  them  when  disheartened.  I reserve  to  him  the  mention  of  the 
names  of  the  officers  and  men  under  him  who  merit  special  mention, 
but  I feel  compelled  in  one  case  to  specify  an  example  of  heroic  courage 


368 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chav.  XXXVI. 


and  skill  as  exhibited  by  Sergt.  Edward  Langley,  of  the  Third  Mary- 
land Artillery.  He  had  on  the  Queen  a detachment  of  13  men  of  his 
artillery,  and  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  two  Parrott  guns.  He  him- 
self took  command  of  the  30  pounder  gun  in  our  bow,  where  he  re- 
inained  during  the  action,  neither  he  nor  his  gallant  comrades  ever 
leaving  their  posts  for  a moment.  While  our  bows  were  resting  against 
the  side  of  the  Indianola,  he  still  manned  and  fired  his  gun,  though  he 
and  his  men  were  without  the  least  covering  or  protection.  In  addition 
to  this  courage,  the  skill  and  judgment  he  showed  in  maneuvering  his 
piece,  mounted  on  wheels  within  a most  contracted  space,  is  deserving 
of  equal  commendation. 

Lieutenant  [T.  H.]  Handy,  of  the  Crescent  Artillery,  commanded  the 
troops  on  tbe  Webb.  He  exhibited  the  greatest  skill  and  courage  in 
handling  his  command,  and  he  himself  in  person  manned  and  pointed 
his  rifled  32-pounder  gun.  His  report  will  disclose  the  names  of  such 
officers  and  men  as  merit  special  mention. 

I learn  from  verbal  report  that  Lieutenant  [H.  A.]  Eice,  of  the  Twenty- 
first  [Thirty-first]  Tennessee,  on  board  of  the  W^ebb,  served  most  effi- 
ciently and  gallantly. 

Acting  Lieutenant  Prather  served  his  two  field  pieces,  entirely  unpro- 
tected, with  most  unshrinking  courage,  and  was  ably  seconded  by  Mr. 
Charles  Scholer,  acting  as  captain  of  the  guns. 

Capt.  Charles  J.  Pierce,  a civilian,  commanded  and  controlled  the 
movements  of  the  Webb.  It  was  he  who  selected  the  weak  spots  of 
the  enemy,  and  with  a steady  hand  and  eye  dashed  the  Webb  against 
the  Indianola. 

Eot  only  did  the  officers  do  their  duty,  but  I Have  nothing  but  com- 
mendation for  the  private  soldiers.  Captain  [E  E.]  Carnes’  and  Lieu- 
tenant Eice’s  company,  of  the  Twenty-first  [Thirty-first]  Tennessee,  and 
the  detachment  of  Lieutenant  [E.  S.]  Dulin,  adjutant  of  Major  [James] 
Burnet’s  battalion  of  Texans,  were  in  the  expedition  of  the  Queen  and 
Webb,  and  under  fire  they,  as  well  as  their  gallant  officers,  comported 
themselves  with  courage  and  disciiiline. 

On  taking  possession,  we  found  our  prize  rapidly  making  water,  which 
we  could  not  arrest.  Seeing  that  she  would  sink,  I did  not  wish  that  this 
should  take  place  on  the  western  side  of  the  river,  and  therefore  made 
fast  to  her  with  two  of  the  steamers,  and  towed  her  over  the  river,  when 
she  sank  in  the  water  up  to  her  gun  deck,  thus  losing  to  us  the  greater 
part  of  the  valuable  stores  that  were  in  her  hold. 

Captain  [James  W.]  Maugum,  assistant  adjutant-general  of  Brigadier- 
General  [J.  C.]  Moore,  being  in  Alexandria,  accompanied  the  expedition 
as  a volunteer  and  acted  as  my  adjutant.  He  comported  himself  gal- 
lantly under  fire,  and  throughout  the  expedition  rendered  me  valuable 
service. 

I herewith  submit  the  report  of  Captain  McCloskey,*  of  the  Queen  of 
the  West.  He  mentions  favorably  Captain  Carnes  and  Lieutenant 
[Henry]  Miller,  of  the  Twenty-first  [Thirty-first]  Tennessee  Volunteers ; 
Lieutenant  [E.  S.]  Dulin,  adjutant  of  Major  Burnet’s  battalio]i  of  Tex- 
ans, and  Capt.  T.  H.  Hutton,  chief  of  artillery ; Sergt.  Edward  Langley, 
acting  as  lieutenant  in  charge  of  the  two  Parrott  guns  and  the  volun- 
teers ; Capt.  C.  H.  White,  slightly  wounded,  acting  with  great  efficiency 
as  ordnance  officer;  Captain  Tank,  Lieutenant  Fisk,  Lieut.  C.  Stanmyer, 
and  Lieut.  K.  E.  Hyams,  quartermaster  and  commissary,  who  exhibited 
much  energy.  Lieutenants  Stanmyer  and  Fisk  were  wounded  at  their 
pieces  while  gallantly  acting  as  captains  of  artillery. 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXXVI.  ] 


CAPTURE  OF  THE  INDIANOLA. 


369 


As  I was  on  board  the  Queen  during  the  action,  the  conduct  of  these 
gentlemen  was  under  my  own  eye,  and  I cheerfully  indorse  the  com- 
mendation of  Captain  McOloskey.  Captain  McCloskey  also  speaks 
highly  of  the  intrepid  promptness  and  skill  of  Pilots  Z.  Milligan,  W. 
Melloy,  Frank  Fittrell,  and  N.  Dunbar.  Also  of  the  engineers  (Messrs. 
J.  E.  Allyboy,  E.  Woods,  J.  Crawford,  P.  Montrose,  and  G-.  W.  Daniel) 
and  of  the  mate,  Mr.  W.  H.  Parker.  Though  the  gentlemen  were  civil- 
ians, yet  knowing  that  the  boat  was  well  and  skillfully  handled,  I have 
thought  it  a matter  of  justice  to  approve  the  indorsement  of  Captain 
McCloskey.  He  also  speaks  approvingly  of  the  conduct  of  Assistant 
Surgeon  Blanchard,  who  manifested  much  care  and  coolness,  coming  on 
the  gun  deck  in  the  midst  of  the  action  and  personally  su])ervising  the 
removal  of  the  wounded. 

Sergeant  Magruder,  of  the  Signal  Corps,  also  deserves  mention  for 
having  rendered  very  important  services  in  the  discharge  of  the  respon- 
sible duties  devolved  upon  him. 

Captain  Pierce,  of  the  Webb,  reports  to  me  verbally  that  his  pilots 
(Mr.  Norman  White,  mate,  and  the  Messrs.  Elijah  Trene,  Frank  Smith, 
Charles  Oakey,  and  O.  S.  Burdett),  and  chief  engineer  (Hugh  Derby) 
and  the  assistant  engineers  (George  Marsh,  Eichard  Stockton,  J.  E. 
Conklin,  and  William  Kuvish)  behaved  themselves  with  the  utmost  gal- 
lantry and  bravery,  and  discharged  their  duties  with  promptness  and 
ability.  I have  no  doubt  this  is  correct,  from  the  skillful  manner  in 
which  the  Webb  was  handled  while  she  was  in  action. 

I am,  major,  vours,  respectfully, 

J.  L.  BEENT, 


Maj.  E.  SURCrET, 

A ssistant  Adj utant-  General. 


Major,  Commanding  Expedition. 


[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  District  of  Western  Louisiana, 

Alexandria,  March  1,  1863. 

Eespectfully  forwarded. 

No  more  gallant  feat  has  illustrated  the  war.  Maj.  J.  L.  Brent  is  my 
chief  of  ordnance.  Capt.  James  McCloskey  is  post  quartermaster  at 
this  point.  Mr.  Charles  [J.]  Pierce  is  a Eed  Eiver  pilot.  The  expedi- 
tion was  fitted  out  by  me  with  the  utmost  dispatch  to  destroy  the  Indi- 
anola  before  the  enemy  could  pass  another  boat  by  Vicksburg  or  cut 
ofl‘  our  communication.  Both  the  Queen  and  the  Webb  returned  here 
much  shattered  by  their  terrible  conflict.  I shall  use  every  effort  to 
repair  them  at  once  and  meet  the  enemy. 

E.  TAYLOE, 

Major-General,  Commanding. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Garter  L.  Stevenson,  G.  S.  Army. 

ViCKSBURU,  March  4,  1863. 

The  Indianola  is  not  destroyed.  We  are  at  work  to  raise  her.  One 
11-inch  was  burst;  the  others  are  not  injured.  The  Grand  Era  is  sent 
by  Taylor  to  claim  it.  I have  possession,  and  will  hold  it.  I will  send 
24  R R— VOL  XNiy,  pt  I 


370 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


Paul  Jones  to  her  as  soon  as  possible.  Have  dispatched  to  (xardner  for 
a part  of  the  fleet.  The  report  of  the  gunboats  passing  Vicksburg  has 
run  the  whole  fleet  up  Ked  River.  The  boat  was  a coal-barge  which  was 
taken  by  Major  [Isaac  F.]  Harrison.  I ask  to  keep  the’ Navy  prisoners 
until  Admiral  Porter  withdraws  his  instructions. 

C.  L.  STEVENSON, 

Major  General, 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Col.  Wirt  Adams,,  Mississippi  Cavalry. 

March  1,  1863. 

Major:  I believe  I am  now  in  possession  of  all  the  facts  relative  to 
the  capture  and  destruction  of  the  Federal  steamer  Indianola.  From 
the  moment  the  Federal  flag  was  struck  and  our  forces  took  possession 
of  the  vessel,  there  appears  to  have  been  an  utter  want  of  authority, 
system,  or  plan.  The  vessel  was  towed  or  drifted  down  several  miles, 
making  water  rapidly  in  her  hold;  not  so  much  from  injuries  received 
as  from  four  plug  holes,  opened  by  the  Federal  commander  for  the  pur- 
pose of  scuttling  her.  She  lodged  in  the  front  of  Mr.  Joe  Davis’  place. 

The  following  morning  (Wednesday),  a detail  was  made  of  about  100 
men,  under  command  of  a lieutenant,  to  go  on  board  the  prize  and  try 
and  save  her.  They  were  furnished  with  two  6-pounder  field  pieces  and 
al)out  fifteen  muskets  or  rifles.  Meantime  the  Queen  of  the  West  was 
sent  to  Warren  ton  with  dispatches  and  as  a picket  for  the  fleet.  In  a 
short  time  the  Queen  of  the  West  came  back  in  great  haste,  reporting 
a gunboat  of  the  enemy  approaching.  All  the  vessels  at  once  got  under 
way  in  a panic,  and  proceeded  down  the  river,  abandoning  without  a 
word  the  working  party  and  field  pieces  on  the  wreck.  The  Federal 
vessel  did  not  approach  nearer  than  miles,  and  appeared  very  appre- 
hensive of  attack.  The  position  of  the  Indianola  was  such  that  her  two 
11-inch  Dahlgren  guns  commanded  the  river  above,  and  the  two  9-inch 
guns  could  also  have  been  brought  in  battery.  With  the  assistance  of 
our  two  vessels,  the  Queen  of  the  West  and  Webb,  there  is  scarcely  a 
doubt  that  we  could  have  saved  the  Indianola,  and  possibly  have  cap-  ; 
tured  the  other  gunboat  of  the  enemy.  Major  [Isaac  F.]  Harrison’s  ! 
command,  nearly  opposite,  tendered  their  assistance. 

The  lieutenant  commanding  the  working  party  made  some  effort  to  i 
free  the  vessel  of  water,  but  finding  himself  abandoned  by  our  fleet,  > 
and  the  enemy’s  gunboat  lying  above  him,  he  on  Thursday  night  burst  ■ 
three  of  the  valuable  guns  on  board,  spiked  the  other,  threw  his  field 
ifleces  overboard,  blew  up  the  vessel,  and  fled  with  his  command.  Many  ' 
of  them  wandered  about  Palmyra  Island,  on  which  they  were,  and  about 
25  are  supposed  to  have  been  captured  by  the  crew  of  the  last  Federal 
gunboat.  The  others  have  been  straggling  into  my  camp  for  two  or  three 
days.  With  the  exception  of  the  wine  and  liquor  stores  of  the  Indianola, 
nothing  was  saved.  The  valuable  armament,  the  large  supplies  of  pow- 
der, shot,  and  shell  are  all  lost. 

I shall  to-day  send  Lieutenant-Colonel  [Robert  C.]  Wood,  jr.,  with 
one  squadron  across  Big  Black,  instructed  to  approach  the  wreck,  if 
be  possibly  can  from  this  side,  drive  off  any  Fetlerals  who  may  be  lurk- 


Chai\  XXX VI.]  ■ 


371 


THE  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC. 

ing  about  it,  and  recover,  if  practicable,  the  two  field  pieces.  There  are 
bayous  intervening,  which  may  prevent  his  approaching  the  wreck. 
*#=***#* 

I remain,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WIET  ADAMS, 

Colonel^  Commanding  Cavalry  Regiment, 
Maj.  J.  J.  Eeeve,  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


FEBRUARY  24-APRIL  8,  1863. — The  Yazoo  Pass  Expedition  (by  Moon 
Lake,  Yazoo  Pass,  and  the  Coldwater  and  Tallahatchee  Rivers),  including 
engagements  (March  11,  13,  and  16,  and  April  2 and  4)  at  Fort  Pember- 
ton, near  Greenwood,  Miss. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Lieut.  Col.  James  H.  Wilson,  Assistant  Inspector-General,  U.  S.  Army,  Chief 
of  Topographical  Engineers,  Army  of  the  Tennessee,  of  operations  Feb- 
ruary 1-April  9. 

No.  2.— Brig.  Gen.  Benjamin  M.  Prentiss,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  District  of  East- 
ern Arkansas. 

No.  .3.— Brig.  Gen.  Leonard  F.  Boss,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Thirteenth  Division, 
Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  of  operations  March  2-April  8. 

No.  4.— Brig.  Gen.  Frederick  Salomon,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Brigade. 

No.  5.  Brig.  Gen.  Cadwallader  C.  Washburn,  U.  S.  Army,  of  preliminary  opera- 
tions. 

No.  6.— Maj.  Gen.  James  B.  McPherson,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Seventeenth  Army 
Corps. 

No.  7.— Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  F.  Quinby,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Seventh  Division, 
of  operations  March  9-28. 

No.  8.— Lieut.  Commander  Watson  Smith,  U.  S.  Navy. 

No.  9.— Maj.  Gen.  William  W.  Loring,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Fort  Pemberton, 
etc.,  of  operations  February  17-April  11.  ’ 

No.  10.— Maj.  Gen.  Dabney  H.  Maury,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  division,  etc.,  of 
operations  April  1-10. 

No.  11.— Capt.  Isaac  N.  Brown,  C.  S.  Navy. 


No.  1. 

RejwrU  of  Lieut.  Col.  James  S.  Wilson,  Assistant  Inspector- General, 
V.  a.  Army,  Clnef  of  Topographical  Engineers,  Army  of  the  Tennessee, 
of  operations  February  l-April  9. 


Yazoo  Pass,  Miss.,  February  2, 1863—8  p.  m. 

‘■eacbed  Helena  last  night,  and  had  all  arrangements 
complete  to  start  from  there  this  morning  at  10  o’clock.  General  Gor- 
man  accompanied  me,  sending  under  my  command  500  men,  provided 
with  two  days’  rations,  and  implements  complete  for  the  necessary  labor. 
He  returned  to  Helena  this  evening,  and  will  send  down  all  the  pro- 
Visions,  tents,  &c.,  needed.  ^ ^ 

and  found  a much 

more  favorable  state  of  aliairs  than  I at  first  anticipated.  The  stream 
navigable,  and  I am  sure  will  allow  the  boats  now  here  to 
hani?*^  ® d'fflcnlty.  I had  the  men  at  work  cutting  the  em- 

...  and  by  to-morrow  night  will  have  a water-way 

■J  1 ? '^*de  cut.  The  diflerence  of  level  between  the  water  outside 

>nd  inside  of  the  levee  is  feet. 

Ine  steamers  Henderson  and  Hamilton  came  in  the  Pass  this  after- 


372  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXX VT. 

HOOD,  landed  against  the  embankment,  and  turned  about  without  diffi- 
culty, and  went  back  into  the  Mississippi. 

The  following  rough  sketch  will  convey  an  idea  of  the  state  of  affairs 
here  at  present: 


Chap.  XXXVi.] 


THE  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC. 


373 


From  the  above  you  will  perceive  that  there  are  two  ontrauces  into 
the  Pass ; the  lower  one  is  the  one  formerly  used,  but  the  upper  is  the  one 
through  which  our  boats  passed  to-day,  and  is  the  best.  You  will  also 
perceive  that  the  levee  is  a very  heavy  one,  and,  therefore,  will  require 
a good  deal  of  work  to  cut  through  5 but  from  the  fact  that  there  is  8 J 
feet  difference  of  level  between  the  water  inside  and  out,  once  opened, 
the  crevasse  will  enlarge  very  rapidly.  The  back  country  both  north 
and  south  of  the  pass  is  partially  overflowed  by  water  from  crevasses  in 
the  levee.  I think  boats  can  go  through  our  cut  in  three  days.  The 
undertaking  promises  fine  results. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  WILSON, 

Lieutenant-Colonel^  Chief  Topographical  Engineer. 

Lieut.  Ool.  John  A.  Eawlins, 

A.  A.  G.j  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Teim.,  near  Vichshurg^  Miss. 


Yazoo  Pass,  Miss.,  February  4,  1863 — 8 a.  m. 

Colonel  : The  Pass  is  open,  and  a river  75  or  80  yards  wide  is  run- 
ning through  it  with  the  greatest  velocity.  1 wrote  you  on  the  evening 
of  the  2d  that  by  the  next  (yesterday)  evening  the  water  would  be  let 
through. 

About  7 o^clock,  after  discharging  a mine  in  the  mouth  of  the  cut, 
the  water  rushed.  The  channel  was  only  about  5 feet  at  first,  though 
the  embankment  was  cut  through  in  two  places,  with  an  interval  of 
about  20  feet  between  them,  the  cut  through  which  the  water  was  first 
started  being  considerably  the  larger. 

By  11  p.  m.  the  opening  was  40  yards  wide,  and  the  water  pouring 
through  like  nothing  else  I ever  saw  except  Niagara  Falls.  Logs,  trees, 
and  great  masses  of  earth  were  torn  away  with  the  greatest  ease.  The 
work  is  a perfect  success. 

The  pilots  and  the  captain  of  the  gunboat  Forest  Bose  think  it  will 
not  be  safe  to  undertake  to  run  through  the  Pass  for  four  or  five  days, 
on  account  of  the  great  rapidity  and  fall  of  the  water.  It  will  take 
several  days  to  fill  up  the  country  so  much  as  to  slacken  the  (mrrent. 

A prominent  rebel  living  near  Helena,  General  Alcorn,  says  there  will 
be  no  diffi(iulty  whatever  in  reaching  the  Yazoo  Eiver  with  boats  of 
medium  size. 

Captain  Brown  will  go  in  with  the  gunboat  at  the  very  earliest  moment 
the  passage  becomes  practicable. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  WILSON, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Assistant  Lnspector- General,  (&c. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Eawlins, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.  and  Chief  of  Staff,  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Tenn. 


. Helena,  Ark.,  February  9,  1863 — 6 p.  in. 

General:  Your  note  of  the  7th  instant  is  just  received  by  the 
steamer  Emma. 

I have  been  waiting  all  day  for  a boat  to  return  to  Vicksburg,  in 
order  to  report  in  person  the  condition  of  affViirs  in  Yazoo  Pass;  but 
as  tin  expedition  has  already  been  arranged,  and  yon  gave  me  permis- 
sion to  accompany  it,  I shall  go  back  to  the  Pass  in  the  morning. 


374 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXkVI. 


After  tbe  levee  bad  beeu  cut,  tbe  pilots  tbougbt  it  unsafe  to  under- 
take an  entrance  for  several  days.  Tbe  gunboat  Forest  Eose,  needing 
repairs,  plank,  &c.,  ran  up  to  Memphis,  returned,  and,  on  tbe  morning 
of  tbe  7tb,  we  ran  down  and  entered  tbe  Pass  with  great  ease.  About 
a mile  inside  of  tbe  levee  we  struck  Moon  Lake,  ran  down  it  about  5 miles, 
to  tbe  point  where  tbe  Pass  leaves  it,  and  from  that  point  I proceeded 
to  make  further  examinations.  I was  somewhat  disappointed  to  find 
tbe  stream  neither  so  large  nor  straight  as  it  is  nearer  tbe  river.  I went 
in  it  about  3 miles  in  an  open  boat,  but  found  no  obstruction  of  a serious 
nature.  However,  we  found  three  men  who  had  just  come  through  in  a 
dug-out  from  tbe  Tallabatcbee,  ostensibly  for  supplies  of  salt,  &c.  They 
said  that  the  people  at  tbe  mouth  of  Ooldwater  had  discovered  what 
had  been  done  at  the  levee,  and  that  a force  of  rebels  (some  30  or  40), 
with  about  100  negroes,  had  been  engaged  for  several  days  in  felling 
timber  across  the  stream  at  intervals  between  its  junction  with  the  Cold- 
water  and  a point  nearly  5 miles  from  Moon  Lake. 

The  next  day  (yesterday),  after  waiting  till  noon  for  a small  steamer 
that  I had  expected  the  day  before.  I went  in  again  with  Captain 
[G.  W.]  Brown’s  cutter  and  crew,  and  descended  the  Pass  nearly  6 miles. 
During  this  trip  we  took  2 men  who  had  belonged  to  a company  of 
partisan  cavalry.  They  spoke  of  the  rebels  having  been  there  in  small 
force,  engaged  in  cutting  timber,  but  said  they  had  left  the  evening 
before. 

I saw,  perhaps,  at  different  points,  forty  trees  that  had  been  cut  so  as 
to  fall  in  the  stream,  but  in  no  place  had  it  obstructed  the  channel  so  as 
to  resist  or  prevent  the  passage  of  boats.  At  three  places  some  drift 
timber  had  collected  against  standing  trees,  so  as  to  contract  the  water- 
way, but  a few  hours’  work  would  open  it  so  as  to  make  the  passage 
easy.  The  timber,  or,  at  least,  all  that  I saw,  which  had  been  cut  into 
the  water,  had  either  sunk  out  of  sight  or  been  drifted  against  the  shore 
so  as  to  hurt  nothing.  From  this  fact,  and  the  opinion  of  boatmen  ac- 
customed to  small  streams,  I am  inclined  to  think  that,  although  many 
more  trees  may  have  been  cut  lower  down,  and  at  points  opposite  each 
other,  they  will  not  materially  interfere  with  navigation.  The  stream  is 
only  about  100  feet  wide  (but  very  deep),  and,  as  the  timber  overhangs 
it  in  many  places,  it  will  be  necessary  to  cut  out  considerable  in  order 
to  prevent  the  smoke-stacks  of  the  steamers  from  being  knocked  down. 
This  will  be  a more  tedious  operation  than  usual,  from  the  fact  that,  in 
many  places,  the  banks  of  the  stream  are  under  water  j but,  with  all 
these  difficulties,  no  one  here  entertains  a doubt  of  our  being  able  to 
work  through. 

General  Gorman  sent  General  Washburn  down  yesterday  with  1,000 
men  and  sent  500  more  this  morning.  They  have  begun  operations.  1 
shall  go  down  myself  early  in  the  morning  and  push  matters  as  rapidly 
as  possible. 

Before  I left  there  the  ferry-boat  Luella,  about  100  feet  long,  had  gone 
into  the  Pass  nearly  3 miles,  turned  about,  and  returned. 

Information  of  no  very  reliable  character  has  reached  General  Gor- 
man to  the  effect  that  the  rebels  were  aware  of  our  movements,  and 
were  making  arrangements  for  our  reception.  Where  or  how  is  not 
known. 

I have  been  thus  minute  in  my  statement  so  that  you  could  see  ex- 
actly how  the  matter  stands. 

I am  quite  sure  that  no  material  advantages  in  the  way  of  a surprise 
can  be  obtained,  unless  our  expedition  gets  through  within  five  or  six 
days.  I see  nothing,  however,  except  the  non-arrival  of  the  gunboats 


Ohap.  XXXVX.]  the  YA200  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC.  375 

to  prevent  this,  unless,  indeed,  the  obstructions  in  the  other  end  of  the 
Pass  are  more  serious  than  we  now  think. 

Should  the  river  hill  again  8 or  10  feet,  there  is  not  the  possibility  of 
a doubt  that  Yazoo  Pass  can  be  opened  to  admit  a large  class  of  boats, 
and  after  the  Ooldwater  is  reached  there  are  no  obstacles  of  any  kind, 
and  very  little  chance  of  interposing  any,  until  you  arrive  at  Yazoo  City  5 
there  is  a bluff  there,  and  the  next  high  land  is  at  Haynes^  Bluff. 

I shall  accompany  the  Yazoo  expedition  unless  you  direct  otherwise. 
1 am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  WILSON, 

First  Lieutenant  Topographical  Engineer s^  Lieut.  Col.^  &g. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 

P.  S. — It  is  called  12  miles  from  Moon  Lake  to  the  junction  of  the 
Pass  with  the  Coldwater,  and,  therefore,  there  is  only  6 or  7 miles  yet 
unexplored  5 certainly  2 miles  of  which  are  no  more  difficult  than  what 
I have  explored  already.  I will  keep  you  informed  of  our  progress. 


In  Yazoo  Pass,  14  Miles  from  the  Mississippi, 

February  12,  1863 — 8 p.  m. 

Colonel  : In  my  letter  of  the  9th  to  the  general,  I informed  him  of 
the  fact  that,  although  eminently  successful  in  opening  the  levee  across 
the  Pass,  as  'well  as  fortunate  in  finding  it  naturally  a stream  entirely 
capable  of  navigation,  the  rebels  had  discovered  our  operations  time 
enough  to  obstruct  the  channel  by  felling  trees  across  and  into  it. 

On  the  morning  of  the  10th,  I joined  General  Washburn  over  a mile 
from  Moon  Lake,  inside  the  Pass.  Since  then,  with  three  days’  constant 
work,  we  have  made  somewhat  more  than  5 miles,  having  i)assed  and 
removed  two  somewhat  considerable  obstructions  of  fallen  and  drifted 
timber.  Just  in  front  of  us  there  is  another  about  a half  mile  long,  in 
which  many  of  the  trees  reach  entirely  across  the  stream.  Some  of 
them,  cottonwoods  and  sycamores,  are  4 feet  through  at  the  butt,  and 
will  weigh  35  tons.  To  add  to  the  difficulty  of  removing  them,  the 
country  near  the  stream  is  overflowed;  nowhere  is  there  more  than  a 
mere  strip  of  land  next  the  bank,  and  that  only  a few  inches  out  of  the 
water;  but,  with  all  these  things  against  us,  there  is  no  doubt  of  our 
ability  to  remove  the  obstructions,  and  make  the  Pass  navigable  for  the 
largest  boats  that  pass  through  the  Louisville  Canal.  We  have  brought 
three  steamers  with  us  all  the  way,  two  of  which,  the  Mattie  Cook  and 
Luella,  have  been  turned  about,  and  run  to  and  from  Helena.  Our 
greatest  difficulty  so  far  has  been  to  obtain  tackle  strong  enough  to 
resist  the  strains  brought  upon  it;  but  by  to-morrow  noon  we  expect 
to  have  new  6-inch  cables.  With  these  we  shall  be  able  to  lift  the 
heaviest  logs.  By  sawing  in  two  the  larger  trees,  removing  such  parts 
as  will  not  sink,  and  taking  out  the  smaller  trees  entirely,  we  can  re- 
move all  the  obstructions  in  time.  The  narrowness  and  rapidity  of 
the  streams  require  everything  to  be  taken  out  that  will  not  float  off  or 
sink. 

I learned  to-day  what  I previously  suspected,  that  rebel  sympathizers 
in  Helena,  through  some  means  or  other,  obtained  information,  and 
communicated  to  their  friends  the  nature  of  our  operations  at  the  levee 
the  day  we  began.  At  all  events,  it  is  certain  that  while  we  were  en- 


376 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap. 

gaged  in  opening  tlie  Pass  at  one  end  tlie  rebels  were  closing  it  at  the 
other. 

We  are  now  about  7 miles  from  Moon  Lake,  and  by  the  meanderings 
of  the  stream  the  same  distance  from  the  Ooldwater,  though  the  map 
shows  both  distances  scarcely  6 miles.  It  will  take  from  seven  to  ten 
days,  possibly  longer,  to  reach  the  end  of  our  work. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  WILSOl^, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel  and  Chief  of  Topographical  Engineers. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Eawlins, 

A.  A.  G.  and  Chief  of  Staff.,  Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Tennessee. 

[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Before  Yichshurg.,  Miss..,  February  16,  1863. 

Eespectfully  forwarded  to  the  Headquarters  of  the  Army,  Washing- 
ton, for  the  information  of  the  General-in-Chief.  There  is  a force  now 
diligently  at  work  clearing  out  Yazoo  Pass,  and  four  light-draught  gun- 
boats (one  iron -clad)  with  the  party.  I am  also  sending  an  additional 
division  of  infantry,  with  a few  pieces  of  artillery,  without  horses,  to 
accompany  the  expedition.  If  successful,  they  will  clear  out  the  Yazoo 
and  all  tributaries  of  all  vessels  that  can  do  us  any  injury,  saving  them 
for  the  Government,  if  possible,  or  as  many  of  them  as  possible.  The 
first  attempt  will  be  to  ascend  the  Yalabusha  to  Grenada  and  destroy 
the  railroad  bridges  there.  The  force  now  at  Grenada  is  not  large. 

U.  S.  GKANT, 

Major-General. 


Helena,  Ark.,  February  24,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  major-general  com- 
manding, that  Yazoo  Pass  is  now  open  for  navigation. 

The  levee  at  the  entrance  was  cut  on  the  3d  instant,  with  compara- 
tively little  difficulty,  and  by  the  7th  the  rush  of  water  through  the 
crevasse  had  so  subsided  that  the  U.  S.  gunboat  Forest  Eose,  Capt. 
George  W.  Brown,  entered  as  far  as  the  exit  of  the  Pass  from  Moon 
Lake.  About  this  time  it  was  fully  ascertained  that  the  rebels  had 
obstructed  the  stream  by  felling  heavy  trees  into  and  across  it. 

On  the  8th,  fresh  trooi)S,  under  the  command  of  General  Washburn, 
arrived  at  Moon  Lake,  and  began  the  removai  of  the  blockades.  By  the 
evening  of  the  21st,  the  work  was  accomplished,  and  at  5 p.  m.  of  the 
22d  the  steamers  Henderson  and  Mattie  Cook,  with  one  regiment  of 
troops  on  board,  entered  the  Coldwater  Eiver  and  descended  it  2^  miles, 
to  Cole’s  plantation.  On  the  23d,  they  went  down  from  10  to  12  mihis 
farther,  through  some  of  the  shortest  bends,  and  returned  the  same  diiy 
to  Hunt’s  Mill,  on  the  Pass. 

I am  confirmed  in  the  opinions  expressed  in  my  previous  reports  con- 
cerning the  practicability  of  this  route,  during  proper  stages  of  water, 
as  a line  of  military  operations.  In  navigating  Yazoo  Pass  some  diffi- 
culty will  be  experienced  from  limbs  of  overhanging  trees,  not  removed 
because  of  the  impossibility  of  cutting  them  down  without  letting  the 
whole  tree  fall  into  the  channel.  Should  the  water  fall  4 or  5 feet,  this 
could  be  easily  obviated  by  cutting  and  pulling  inland  the  trees  now 
partly  in  the  way. 

The  Coldwater  is  a considerable  stream  after  its  junction  with  the 


iHAP.  XXXVI.] 


THE  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC. 


371 


3?8  Mississippi,  WEST  Tennessee,  etc.  cuav.  x^^n. 

Pass — from  120  to  150  feet  in  width  inside  of  its  banks ; is  now  quite  full, 
rising  slowly,  and  is  easily  navigable  for  any  boat  that  can  work  its 
way  through  the  Pass.  Like  the  latter,  it  might  be  improved  by  cutting 
off  more  of  the  overhanging  trees,  though  it  is  not  essential  in  either 
case.  It  would  simply  facilitate  the  navigation. 

In  the  present  condition  of  affairs,  I think  boats  180  feet  in  length, 
and  of  any  proportional  beam  and  draught  of  water,  can  be  sent  from 
tbe  Mississippi  to  the  Tallahatchee  by  this  route  in  four  days,  possibly 
in  less  time,  with  good  management.  The  period  for  which  this  route 
can  be  used  will  depend  entirely  upon  the  stage  of  water  in  the  Mis- 
sissipi)i,  the  shallowest  part  being  on  the  bar,  over  which  boats  are 
compelled  to  pass  in  order  to  reach  the  entrance. 

In  submitting  this  report  of  the  work  assigned  me,  it  would  be  unjust 
not  to  call  attention  to  the  difficulties  encountered  and  the  arduous  labor 
performed  by  the  troops  in  overcoming  them.  With  the  exception  of 
the  secondary  ridges,  some  distance  from  the  stream,  and  occasional 
strips  of  land,  from  20  to  50  feet  wide,  close  to  it,  the  entire  country  was 
overflowed,  so  that  communication  was  nearly  impossible,  and  the  work 
could  only  be  done  by  small  parties,  beginning  at  the  upper  end  and 
working  toward  the  Cold  water.  In  no  case  were  more  than  500  men 
employed,  and  frequently  not  half  that  number.  The  obstructions  were 
found  at  intervals,  all  along  the  Pass,  from  a point  4 miles  from  Moon 
Lake  to  a point  near  the  Coldwater,  the  principal  one  being  a mile  long, 
and  composed  of  the  heaviest  trees,  cut  from  both  sides  of  the  stream, 
so  as  to  lie  across  and  upon  each  other.  Various  plans  were  tried  for 
removing  them,  all  attended  with  the  breakage  of  cables  and  boat  ma- 
chinery, but  finally,  by  cutting,  sawing,  and  pulling  out  upon  the  banks 
entire  trees,  the  way  was  opened.  The  labor  was  so  severe,  and  the  ex- 
posure so  great,  that  it  was  found  necessary  to  relieve  the  troops  several 
times  by  fresh  regiments  from  Helena. 

Brigadier-General  Washburn,  who  was  in  actual  command  of  the 
forces  employed,  after  leaving  Moon  Lake  will  doubtless  report  concern- 
ing them  ; but  I take  the  liberty  of  commending  the  zeal  and  intelligence 
of  Lieut.  George  [G.]  Murdock,  of  the  Sixteenth  Ohio  Battery;  Captain 
Whipple,  of  the  Thirty-third  Iowa,  and  Colonel  Cameron,  of  the  Thirty- 
fourth  Indiana.  They  rendered  valuable  assistance  (Lieutenant  Mur- 
dock from  the  lake  to  the  Coldwater)  in  directing  and  prosecuting  the 
work. 

Tke  steamer  Henderson,  under  the  efficient  command  of  Capt.  A.  La- 
mont,  rendered  invaluable  service.  Her  cordage  and  light  upper  work 
were  considerably  broken  ; it  would,  therefore,  be  no  more  than  justice 
to  put  her  in  repair  at  the  public  expense. 

Inclosed  herewith  I hand  a sketch*  of  the  Pass  and  adjacent  country. 
I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  WILSON, 

Lieut.  Col.j  U.  S.  Army^  and  Chief  Topographical  Engineer. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Eawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


Hr.  Curtiss’  Plantation, 

Eear  Greenwood^  Miss.,  3Iarch  13,  1863 — 9 p.  m. 
General:  The  land  and  naval  forces  constituting  the  Yazoo  expedi- 
tion, after  many  provoking  delays,  arrived  at  this  point  on  the  morning 


See  p.  377. 


Chap.  XXXVI.  ] 


THE  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC. 


379 


of  the  lltb,  and  after  a reconnaissance  of  the  fort  and  a slight  engage- 
ment between  the  Ohillicothe  and  one  of  its  heavy  guns,  the  troops  were 
landed. 

The  Ohillicothe,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  11th,  from  a position  near  the 
one  indicated  on  the  inclosed  sketch,*  opened  her  batteries  upon  the 
enemy,  but  in  a very  short  time  received  a rifle  shot  in  her  left  port, 
killing  and  wounding  14  of  her  crew. 

On  the  night  of  the  11th,  a cotton-bale  battery  was  erected  at  the 
point  marked,  about  700  yards  from  the  large  gun,  with  a view  to  dis- 
mounting it,  if  possible.  Having  no  siege  guns,  a naval  30-pounder 
battery  was  placed  in  it. 

On  the  12th,  the  naval  forces  not  being  ready  to  attack,  nothing  was 
done,  but  on  that  night  (last)  another  30-pounder  was  added  to  the  bat- 
tery; and  this  morning,  at  10,  it  and  the  Ohillicothe,  Baron  De  Kalb, 
and  the  mortar-boat  began  the  attack,  but  to-night  we  are  not  able  to 
perceive  any  advantage  gained. 

Last  night  the  enemy  erected  heavy  traverses  against  our  Parrott 
battery,  so  that  it  could  do  him  no  serious  damage  to-day. 

The  rebel  position  is  a strong  one  by  virtue  of  the  difficulties  of  ap- 
proach, though  it  is  defended  by  only  two  guns  of  any  weight,  one  a 
powerful  rifle,  6.4-inch  bore.  General  Tilghman  is  in  command.  Gen- 
eral Loring  was  there,  but  recently  relieved.  How  many  troops  he  has 
we  cannot  ascertain. 

The  Ohillicothe  has  not  stood  the  work  well ; that,  too,  at  1,100  yards. 
What  may  be  the  result  at  close  range  must  depend  entirely  upon  chance. 
I understand  Commander  Smith  intends  to  go  close  up  to-morrow,  though 
I don’t  think  he  or  his  commanders  are  very  sanguine. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  WILSON. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant,  Commanding  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


March  13,  [1863] — 11  p.  m. 

Hear  Eawlins  : I’ve  just  written  a hasty  note  to  the  general ; please 
apologize  for  its  meager  character.  I’ve  now  been  two  days  and  entire 
nights  without  sleep,  and  am  almost  dead.  The  mail  boat  goes  early 
to-morrow,  so  I can’t  give  details ; but  my  next  will  compensate. 

I’m  disgusted  with  7,  9,  10,  and  11  inch  guns;  to  let  one  6J-inch  rifle 
stop  our  Navy.  Bah!  They  ought  to  go  up  to  200  yards  and  make 
a spoon  or  spoil  a horn.”  They  are  to  attack  to  morrow,  but  may  not 
do  much.  I have  no  hope  of  anything  great,  considering  the  course 
followed  by  the  naval  forces  under  direction  of  their  able  and  efficient 
Acting  Bear- Admiral,  Commodore,  Captain,  Lieutenant-Commander 
Smith.  One  chance  shot  will  do  the  work;  we  may  not  make  it  in  a 
thousand.  No  more  troops  are  needed  here  till  Greenwood  is  taken.  I 
think  we  have  troops  enough  to  whip  all  the  rebels  in  this  vicinity  if  we 
can  only  get  by  the  fort.  One  good  gunboat  can  do  the  work,  and  no 
doubt;  the  two  here  are  no  great  shakes. 

We  are  stopped  now  certain.  Boss  has  done  all  in  his  power  to  urge 
this  thing  forward.  If  what  he  suggested  had  been  adopted,  the  iron- 
clads would  have  been  here  fifteen  days  ago  and  found  no  battery  of 
any  importance.  So  much  for  speed. 

Very  truly,  your  friend. 


J.  H.  WILSON. 


Not  found. 


380 


MISSISSIPPI,  WPST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  :S:XXV1. 


Headquartees  Yazoo  Expedition, 

Five  miles  from  Greenwood^  March  15,  1863 — 9 p.  m. 

•My  Dear  Eawlins  : We  are  no  nearer  Greenwood  than  when  I 
wrote  you  night  before  last.  We  didn^t  attack  yesterday,  because  the 
gunboats  had  not  finished  their  repairs,  and  put  it  off  to-day  out  of  re- 
spect for  the  Sabbath ; but  to-morrow  it  is  arranged  to  try  it  again, 
though  I am  not  over-sanguine  of  success,  since  I can  see  a disposition 
on  the  part  of  the  Navy  to  keep  from  a close  and  desperate  engagement. 
Pve  talked  with  them  all  and  tried  to  give  them  backbone,  but  they  are 
not  confident.  Smith,  you  doubtless  have  understood  by  this  time,  I 
don’t  regard  as  the  equal  of  Lord  Nelson.  Walker  and  Foster,  of  the 
De  Kalb  and  Ohillicothe,  are  good  men,  and  will  cheerfully  do  what 
they  are  ordered,  but  both  think  of  Commodore  Smith  just  as  I do.  I 
don’t  hesitate  to  say  that,  although  the  rebels  got  ahead  of  us  in  ob- 
structing the  Pass,  and  thereby  kept  us  back  ten  days,  and  although 
we  were  furnished  with  miserable  old  transports  and  a new  element  of 
delay  introduced.  Commodore  Smith  is  entirely  responsible  for  the  de- 
tention at  this  point  and  the  consequent  failure  of  the  expedition,  and 
responsible  for  no  other  reason  than  his  timid  and  slow  movements. 
When  the  iron-clads  started  into  the  Pass,  I urged  with  all  the  force  I 
could  the  absolute  necessity  of  sending  them,  the  rams,  and  two  mos- 
quitoes forward  with  all  possible  dispatch.  Both  Foster  and  Walker 
and  General  Boss  agreed  with  this  plan.  Had  this  been  done,  they 
could  have  reached  the  mouth  of  the  Tallahatchee  in  four  days,  I think, 
and  even  less.  Pll  bet  my  life  I could  have  brought  them  to  this  point 
in  three  days;  but  grant  that  it  would  have  required  five  days,  that 
would  have  brought  them  to  this  place  on  the  1st  of  March,  two  whole 
weeks  ago,  at  which  time  no  heavy  guns  were  here.  The  rifle  did  not 
arrive  till  about  ten  days  ago.  This  we  have  from  reliable  authority. 

I haven’t  time  to  tell  you  all  the  details  of  our  operations  here ; but 
in  the  gunboat  engagements  they  have  suffered  pretty  heavily  from  the 
effects  of  the  heavy  rifle.  At  the  distance  of  1,100  yards  the  shots  from 
this  gun  have  battered  and  hammered  the  armored  crafts  sadly;  they 
have  not  penetrated,  but  come  so  near  that  there  is  no  fun  in  it.  The 
Chillicothe  is  an  inglorious  failure;  the  wooden  backing  to  her  armor  is 
of  only  9-inch  pine,  and  shivers  into  pieces  every  time  the  plating  is 
struck  ; her  bolt- work  flies  off'  at  a terrible  rate.  If  she  is  hit  half  as 
many  times  to  morrow  at  close  range  as  she  has  been  at  long,  she’ll  be 
in  a sad  condition.  The  De  Kalb  stands  it  well  as  long  as  she  is  square 
to  the  front,  though  her  sides  do  not  fare  so  well.  Add  to  all  this,  these 
gentlemen  have  ammunition  for  only  two  hours’  fighting. 

I have  erected  a battery  on  shore  only  700  yards  from  the  rebel  fort, 
and  have  two  SO-pounder  Parrotts  and  one  8-inch  ship  gun  in  position 
to  assist  the  Navy,  but  have  only  an  average  of  50  or  60  rounds  for  them. 
In  addition  to  this,  it  is  intended  to  embark  one  brigade  on  the  light- 
draught  gunboats,  and  in  case  the  rebel  batteries  are  silenced,  they  will 
be  landed  at  the  fort  to  assault  it  and  attack  the  rebel  infantry  if  it 
should  stand. 

The  latter  part  of  the  programme  cannot  be  carried  out  unless  the 
battery  is  completely  disabled,  so  that  we  can  run  down  and  break  up 
the  raft  that  lies  just  above  the  fort. 

The  old  steamship  Star  of  the  West  is  sunk  just  below  the  raft, 
across  the  stream,  and  they  have  the  John  Walsh  close  to  the  same 
place,  either  ready  to  sink  or  use  as  a boarding  craft  and  ram.  We 
have  captured  several  prisoners,  but  can  learn  nothing  of  the  rebel  force. 


Chap.  XXXVL]  THE  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC.  381 

nothing  definite  at  least.  Loring,  Tilghman,  Colonel  Waul  of  the  Texas 
Legion,  the  Second  Texas,  Forty-sixth  and  Twentieth  Mississippi  are 
all  the  troops  we  have  heard  of.  The  Second  Texas  left  Yicksburg  on 
the  15th  of  February,  went  to  Jackson,  marched  thence  to  Yazoo  City, 
and  came  from  there  by  steamer.  They  are  doubtless  fortifying  Yazoo 
City  strongly. 

If  we  should  succeed  to  morrow  in  capturing  their  fort,  and  all  de- 
pends upon  the  determination  and  distance,  we  may  succeed  in  captur- 
ing a large  number  of  prisoners. 

The  rebel  fort  called  Greenw'ood  and  Pemberton  is  constructed  of 
cotton  bales  covered  over  with  sand  and  earth,  and  in  itself  would  be 
very  valuable. 

Colonel,  I have  written  you  freely  upon  all  that  concerns  this  expedi- 
tion, and  wish  you  to  preserve  my  letters.  They  are  semi-ofi&cial,  and  I 
believe  in  no  case  will  you  find  a misstatement  of  facts  or  an  error  in 
judgment  stated  in  them.  I should  have  directed  them  to  the  general, 
perhaps,  but  upon  deliberation  thought  I could  write  with  more  free- 
dom to  you,  and  subserve  the  same  purpose. 

There  is  yet  one  matter  to  which  I wish  to  call  your  attention,  and 
that  is,  notwithstanding  your  wish  that  I should  have  been  consulted, 
and  the  generaPs  letter  to  General  Prentiss  directing  the  same  thing, 
ill  no  case  and  in  no  regard  was  my  opinion  solicited,  either  explicitly 
or  implicitly,  directly  or  indirectly.  With  reference  to  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  expedition,  I knew,  as  I told  you,  absolutely  nothing  of  it 
until  I returned  to  Moon  Lake.  Since  we  have  been  on  the  move.  Gen- 
eral Eoss  has  consulted  me  freely  upon  all  matters. 

From  all  this  you  will  see  I am  solicitous  for  my  reputation  at  head- 
quarters. I would  not  have  you  or  any  one  else  imagine  I have  stood 
upon  punctilio  in  matters  that  concern  the  public  welfare;  but,  to  the 
contrary,  I have  not  hesitated  to  tender  my  opinion  upon  a single  oc- 
casion where  I thought  it  worthy  of  attention,  even  to  the  naval  authori- 
ties. The  only  case  in  which  I regret  my  own  negligence  or  want  of 
foresight  was  in  not  advising  General  Gorman  to  send  a heavy  detach- 
ment down  the  Pass  to  Cold  water  before  we  began  operations  at  the 
levee,  in  order  to  prevent  interference  with  it.  I was  thrown  off  my 
guard  by  the  appearance  of  the  country,  giving  confirmation  to  the  re- 
port of  the  people  that  the  whole  country  was  flooded  from  back  water 
and  crevasses.  Every  appearance  indicated  this  to  be  so.  The  fact  is 
it  was  so  nearly  everywhere,  and  the  trees  had  to  be  cut  by  men  stand- 
ing in  boats.  We  might  have  prevented  this,  and  might  not.  Even  if 
we  had,  the  expedition  would  not  have  been  exi)edited  by  it,  for  as  it 
was,  it  did  not  get  ready  to  enter  until  a couple  of  days  after  we  had 
returned  to  Helena.  The  transports  were  not  ready  until  two  or  three 
days  after.  But  suppose  they  had  been,  and  the  trees  had  not  been  cut, 
the  rebels,  instead  of  depending  upon  the  obstructions  and  difficulties 
of  navigation  to  detain  us,  would  have  begun  at  once  to  fortify  at  Green- 
wood. 

As  the  thing  stands  now,  without  two  or  three  good  iron  clads  are 
sent  very  soon,  together  with  a siege  train  of  six  or  eight  8-inch  how- 
itzers and  30-pounder  rifles,  or  unless  fortune  should  favor  us  to-mor- 
row, the  game  is  blocked  on  us  here  as  well  as  below. 

Should  it  turn  out  this  way,  Yicksburg  becomes  subordinate,  our 
department  secondary,  and  Eosecrans^  army  our  hope  in  the  West. 
Wofft  we,  in  that  event,  be  required  to  furnish  50,000  or  60,000  men? 

Before  closing  this  letter,  it  may  not  be  improper  to  mention  the  fact 
that  the  rebels  are  making  great  calculations  “to  bag  us”  entire.  As 


382 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


long  as  we  are  here  that’s  out  of  the  question,  and  only  becomes  prac- 
ticable when  they  have  rammed  our  irbn-clads,  or  carried  them  by 
boarding.  It  is  said  that  they  have  a battalion  of  volunteers  from  the 
different  Mississippi  regiments,  commanded  by  Todd,  selected  for  their 
prowess,  and  to  be  used  as  boarders.  We  can  receive  such  gentlemen 
with  bloody  hands. 

What  has  become  of  Casey  and  my  horse  ? Eemember  me  to  Bow- 
ers and  Osband.  Say  to  the  latter,  if  he  moves  his  horses  from  Mem- 
phis, to  please  make  arrangements  concerning  my  mare. 

I wrote  you  hastily  a few  evenings  ago,  and  referred  to  my  brother 
of  the  Eighteenth.  I wish  I could  show  you  the  testimonials  and  recom- 
mendations he  has  received,  since  his  court-martial,  from  Haynie,  Sul- 
livan, Brayman,  Lawler,  and  his  lieutenant-colonel  (who  preferred  the 
charges  against  him  and  has  been  at  enmity  with  him),  urging  his  pro- 
motion to  the  majority  of  the  Eighteenth.  He  has  twice  received  this 
promotion,  and  twice  had  it  withdrawn  in  favor  of  political  aspirants. 
He  ought  to  have  it  now,  and  if  you  can  do  anything  for  him  I wish 
you  would. 

Eemember  me  kindly  to  the  general,  and  say  I will  write  again  when 
the  result  of  to-morrow’s  attack  is  known. 

I believe  I explained  the  difficulty  of  land  operations  here,  arising 
from  the  high  water.  Nearly  the  whole  country  is  under  water.  There 
is  no  way  of  our  reaching  the  fort  except  by  landing  against  it  with 
our  boats,  after  the  guns  are  silent  and  the  raft  destroyed. 

Write  me  about  affairs  below  and  the  prospect.  Your  letter  of  the 
latest  date  was  very  interesting.  Accept  my  grateful  acknowledg- 
ments of  the  kind  sentiments  manifested  toward  me,  and  believe  me, 
dear  Eawlins,  very  trulv,  your  friend, 

J.  H.  WILSON. 


Headquarters  Yazoo  Expedition, 

Curtiss^  Plantation^  5 miles  north  of  Greenwood^  March  16,  1863. 

General  : I wrote  to  you  hurriedly  a few  days  ago,  and  to  Colonel 
Eawlins  quite  fully  last  night. 

I am  sorry  to  say  we  are  no  nearer  the  accomplishment  of  our  object 
to-night  than  we  were  yesterday.  In  accordance  with  the  arrangement 
between  General  Eoss  and  the  commodore,  we  had  placed  an  8-inch 
shell  gun  in  battery  with  our  Parrott  last  night,  and  were  ready  at 
daylight  to  make  the  final  effort.  General  Eoss  selected  the  three  best 
regiments  of  his  command,  and  embarked  them  on  three  of  the  light- 
clad  gunboats,  ready  to  throw  them  ashore  at  the  battery,  provided  the 
heavy  guns  of  the  enemy  should  be  silenced  and  the  raft  broken,  so  as 
to  permit  a landing. 

About  noon  our  battery  opened  and  was  vigorously  replied  to  by  some 
rifled  field  pieces  from  two  little  batteries,  erected  on  the  bank  of  the 
Yazoo,  300  or  400  yards  below  the  fort  last  night.  Our  8 inch  gun  was 
well  handled,  but  having  only  the  muzzle  of  their  heavy  gun  to  fire  at, 
could  not  have  effected  much  without  great  good  fortune.  Then,  too,  the 
rebels  were  supplied  with  plenty  of  cotton  bales,  which  they  used  judi- 
ciously in  covering  their  piece.  In  a few  minutes  after  the  land  battery 
opened,  the  Chillicothe,  followed  by  the  De  Kalb,  moved  out  with  the 
intention  of  “ going  in”  upon  the  well-established  principle  of  gunboat 
warfare, close  quarters  and  quick  work,”  but  the  former  had  hardly 
leached  her  old  position,  1,100  yards  from  the  fort,  before  she  was  struck 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC.  383 

with  great  violence  several  times,  and  in  fifteen  minutes,  during  which 
her  two  guns  were  fired  only  seven  times,  she  was  struck  six  times  with 
solid  8-inch  shot  and  the  rifled  6.4-inch  gun,  resulting  in  closing  “her- 
metically’^ both  ports,  so  that  neither  could  be  opened  till  they  were 
lifted  off  and  hammered  out.  The  De  Kalb,  for  the  reason  that  the 
Chillicothe  was  compelled  to  retire,  was  also  drawn  out.  The  fire  from 
our  land  battery  was  kept  up  till  night,  and  with  so  much  effect  that  I 
am  convinced  the  two  boats  assisting  it  would  have  had  a better  chance 
than  at  any  previous  time.  I urged  that  the  De  Kalb  alone  should  try 
it  at  close  quarters,  but  it  was  not  done.  Our  sharpshooters  were 
pushed  out  through  the  overflow,  to  a point  only  450  yards  distant  from 
the  rebel  batteries,  and  succeeded  in  annoying  their  gunners  very 
greatly. 

The  rebel  8-inch  gun  was  mounted  and  placed  in  position  last  night, 
and  a few  more  days  of  such  policy  as  we  have  been  compelled  to  adopt 
by  the  tardy  unreadiness  of  the  naval  commander  will  enable  them  to 
make  Fort  Greenwood  entirely  efficient  against  any  force  that  can  operate 
against  it  from  this  quarter.  It  has  already  shown  considerable  power 
in  resisting  gunboats  and  battering  them.  The  Chillicothe  has  been 
under  its  fire  five  times,  varying  from  fifteen  minutes  to  an  hour  and  a 
quarter,  during  which  she  has  been  hit  fifty-two  times,  and  I don’t  hes- 
itate to  say  is  now  almost  incapable  of  further  active  service.  In  the 
first  place,  she  is  a great  cheat  and  swindle  upon  the  Government.  Her 
plating  is  laid  against  a backing  of  onlj^  9 inches  of  pine  wood,  and 
fastened  on  by  G-inch  spikes  shaped  thus : D===-  instead  of  bolts 
with  taps  and  screws.  The  framing  which  supports  the  plating  is 
broken  short  near  the  middle  of  the  two  ports,  and  has  settled  down 
so  that  the  grating  over  the  top  has  to  be  propped  up  in  order  that  the 
steering-wheel  may  be  turned.  Another  8 inch  solid  shot  between  the 
ports  will  bring  the  whole  turret  down. 

If  we  had  the  guns  and  materials,  and  a good  supply  of  ammunition, 
with  another  division  of  troops,  we  might  b^e  able  to  erect  counter  bat- 
teries on  this  and  the  left  bank  of  the  Tallahatchee  Eiver  sufficiently 
strong  to  silence  the  rebel  guns  everywhere  else  but  at  the  positions  of 
the  two  pointing  up  the  river,  and,  by  means  of  raft  and  boat  bridges, 
throw  our  troops  upon  the  point  in  rear,  or  beyond  the  present  line  of 
rebel  works.  But  with  the  troops  now  here,  without  siege  materials  of 
any  kind,  it  is  impossible  to  do  anything  without  the  gunboats  first 
silencing  the  large  guns.  Eemember,  the  enemy  is  in  an  isolated  posi- 
tion, unapproachable  by  land,  and  no  way  for  transports  to  reach  him 
except  by  the  river,  directly  in  front  of  his  heavy  guns.  We  can  get 
within  about  450  yards  of  their  works,  or  different  parts  of  them,  on 
both  banks  of  the  Tallahatchee,  and  at  one  place  on  the  left  bank  can 
approach  nearly  opposite  their  camps;  but  it  seems  to  me,  without  a 
<lirect  approach  to  the  front,  no  serious  damage  can  be  done  them,  for 
they  can  traverse  their  guns  from  oblique  fire  easily,  and  still  command 
the  river.  How  ever,  I am  perfectly  certain  the  place  can  be  taken  in 
time,  by  a proper  and  prompt  array  of  strength,  and  all  the  necessary 
materials  for  such  an  operation.  I have  no  confidence  in  the  snaj)  or 
^tivity  of  the  present  naval  commander  in  this  quarter,  and  don’t  hes- 
itate to  say  I regard  him  entirely  responsible  for  the  failure  to  take  this 
place  without  a fight.  His  juniors.  Captains  Foster  and  Walker,  I be- 
lieve will  bear  me  out  in  this.  They  both  agreed  with  me  in  the  policy 
to  be  pursued,  and  both  attribute  our  failure  to  its  neglect.  There  is 
MO  doubt  but  that,  with  all  the  difficulties  we  encountered,  the  iron  clads 
could  have  been  Itere  by  the  1st  instant,  There  is  just  as  little  doubt 


384 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 


that  we  would  have  found  this  point  unprepared  for  resistance.  Before 
adopting  the  policy  of  concentrating  a heavy  force  here,  there  are  one 

or  two  points  to  be  regarded.  m ^ ^ i 

First,  the  confluence  of  the  Xalabusha  and  the  Tallahatchee  is  a 
position  of  considerable  importance,  as  being  the  key  to  a large  area  of 
rich  country,  at  the  head  of  a river  capable  of  easy  navigation  for  large 
steamers,  while  to  approach  it  we  are  compelled  to  thread  several 
streams,  with  more  or  less  difficulties  of  navigation  to  overcome,  y^th- 
out  the  gunboats  could  of  themselves  silence  and  destroy  the  rebel  bat- 
teries at  once,  we  should  be  compelled  to  adopt  the  slow  and  tedious 
process  of  a siege,  under  no  very  favorable  circumstances— a siege, 
with  the  object  of  silencing  and  destroying  their  guns  in  the  hrst  place, 
and,  in  the  second,  to  cross  the  river  in  such  force  as  to  expel  the  rebels 
from  the  point,  and  hold  it  ourselves  till  the  obstacles  to  nayi^gation 
could  be  removed.  I don’t  undertake  to  say  how  many  days  this  would 
require,  but  it  is  quite  clear  that  as  the  matter  now  stands  it  would 
require  several  weeks.  A fall  of  10  feet  in  the  Mississippi  would  prob- 
ably prevent  the  return  of  our  transports  and  naval  vessels.  There 
would  then  remain  the  necessity  of  going  out  by  the  Yazoo  or  ot  burn- 
ing the  boats.  A contingency  of  this  kind  could  be  prevented  by  be- 
o’inning  the  operation  with  the  understanding  that  it  should  be  aban- 
doned when  the  river  had  fallen  a certain  amount.  There  is  yet  one 
other  point  in  the  enemy’s  favor.  He  can  move  guns  up  the  railroad 
to  Panola,  and  float  them  down  to  the  mouth  of  Coldwater,  and,  unless 
that  point  is  vigilantly  guarded,  can  erect  a strong  battery  ^ 

have  suggested  that  a regiment  of  troops  and  one  “ tm-clad”  be  left  or 
sent  to  that  point  as  soon  as  possible.  There  is  also  a great  chance  yet 
for  us.  If  the  water  rises  4 feet  more  here,  it  will  flood  almost  the 
entire  country,  so  much  of  it,  at  any  rate,  that  the  rebels  cannot  occupy 
their  present  position.  To  induce  this  rise,  1 have  advised  General 
Boss  to  write  to  General  Prentiss,  requesting  him  to  put  a strong  force 
at  work  destroying  the  levee  near  the  entrance  to  the  Pass.  The  gen- 
eral’s letter  will  go  out  by  the  naval  dispatch  boat  that  leaves  in  the 
morning.  If  the  river  is  still  as  high  as  it  was  at  the  last  dates  we  had, 
an  opening  even  a half  mile  wide  near  the  entrance  will  let  in  an  im- 
mense volume  of  water,  but  whether  enough  to  produce  the  desirea 
eflect  is  the  problem  to  be  solved.  -It’s  worth  trying,  I think. 

We  had  1 man  wounded  in  the  land  battery  to-day.  A C-pounder 
rifle  shot  came  in  at  the  embrasure,  traversed  a cotton  bale  from  end 
to  end,  and  took  off  his  arm.  Several  of  our  men  have  been  wounded 
in  different  skirmishes,  and  have  taken  several  prisoners. 

You  will  please  remember,  general,  that  I am  not  responsible  for  the 
defects  in  the  organization  of  this  expedition,  neither  directly  nor  in- 
directly, for  although  you  were  good  enough  to  direct  General  I rentiss 
to  answer  my  suggestions  and  “requisitions  for  troops  and  materials  as 
coining  from  yourself,  I received  no  notice  of  this  till  furnished  with 
a copy  by  Colonel  Kawlins,  and  in  no  way  was  I consulted  by  any  one 

^^/donT^^mention  this  with  a desire  to  convince  yon  that  the  result 
would  have  been  otherwise  had  I been  consulted,  but  simply  to  assure 
you  that  the  land  forces  would  not  have  been  entirely  without  siege 
materials  and  guns  suitable  for  any  ordinary  operations.  -r  • i + 

In  relation  to  the  activity  displayed  by  the  expedition,  I wish  to 
be  clearly  understood.  I have  written  Colonel  Kawlins  quite  fully  Irom 
time  to  time  concerning  the  causes  of  delay.  I frequently,  from  the 
day  the  expedition  left  Moon  Lake^  urged  that  the  rams,  iron-clads,  and 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC.  385 

two  ligiit-clads,  but  certainly  the  rams  andiron-clads,  should  be  pushed 
forward  with  the  greatest  possible  speed,  leaving  the  transports  and 
balance  of  naval  vessels  to  come  forward  as  rapidly  as  they  could.  I 
went  so  far  as  to  obtrude  my  opinions  upon  Acting  Commodore  Smith, 
urging  that,  for  the  main  objects  of  the  expedition,  the  trooi)s  were  an 
incumbrance,  and  could  only  assist  by  occupying  important  points  after 
they  had  been  taken  possession  of.  But  notwithstanding  General  Boss 
insisted  on  this  in  more  than  one  interview,  it  was  not  assjented  to.  It 
was  with  the  greatest  difficulty  that  we  could  persuade  him  to  put  his 
coal-barges  behind  and  allow  the  expedition  to  steam  a little  faster  than 
the  stream  would  float  them. 

I believe  I have  given  you  quite  as  full  an  account  of  matters  here 
as  1 can  in  a letter. 

Our  oflensive  operations  are  suspended  till  more  ammunition  can  be 
obtained,  the  gunboats  wishing  to  hold  some  on  hand  for  defense. 

I don’t  know  what  course  General  Boss  and  Commodore  Smith  will 
now  adopt,  but  it  is  the  intention  to  wait  on  the  defensive  till  we  can 
determine  something  better. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

j.  n.  WILSON, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel j c. 

Major-General  Gkant, 

* Commanding  Army  of  the  Tennessee, 


Headquarters  Yazoo  Expedition, 

U.  S.  Transport  Volunteer, 

Near  Fort  Greenwood^  Miss.^  March  18,  1863 — 10  p.  m. 

Dear  BAwlins  : Military  and  naval  operations  here  are  about  ter- 
nunated  for  the  present.  His  Excellency  Acting  Bear- Admiral  Commo- 
dore Smith  left  to-day  for  a more  salubrious  climate,  very  sick,  giving 
it  as  his  opinion  that  the  present  force  of  iron- clads  could  not  take  the 
two  rebel  guns  in  our  front.  Captain  Foster,  the  next  in  rank,  has  as- 
sumed command,  and  insists  on  withdrawing  his  force.  General  Boss 
assented  at  first,  but  has  since  determined  to  delay  here  till  General 
Quinby  arrives  to  assume  the  responsibility  of  attempting  to  reduce  the 
rebel  work  or  of  withdrawing  the  land  forces. 

I am  satisfied  there  is  but  one  right  way  to  take  the  fort,  and  that  is 
for  the  gunboats  to  go  right  at  it  and  hammer  it  till  they  take  it.  A 
deserter  came  in  this  morning,  confirming  in  every  particular  the  justice 
of  my  view.  He  says  there  were  no  heavy  guns  mounted  here  till  the 
10th  or  12th  of  this  month  ,*  that  a heavy  force  is  collecting  at  Yazoo 
City,  and  that  they  are  building  a tremendous  raft  there,  upon  which 
they  keep  constantly  employed  1,000  men.  They  are  also  building  one 
gunboat  a mile  below  the  citj^,  300  feet  long,  but  for  want  of  material  it 
will  require  twenty-four  months  to  finish.  With  this  exception  they 
have  neither  gunboat  nor  ram  anywhere  on  these  waters. 

General  Loring  is  in  command  in  our  front ; don’t  know  his  force,  but 
heard  some  one  say  over  3,000  men.  Captains  [Isaac  N.]  Brown  and 
[F.  E.]  Shepperd,  of  the  rebel  Navy,  have  charge  of  the  two  large  guns 
over  in  the  fort,  and  when  we  made  our  attack  on  Monday  they  had  but 
a very  limited  supply  of  ammunition.  Tlie  rifle  6.4  was,  in  fact,  silenced 
for  want  of  projectiles.  The  Chillicothe  drew  out  early,  and  Smith 
wouldn’t  let  the  De  Kalb  go  dowm  to  press  the  matter.  The  deserter 
25  R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


386 


MISSISSIITI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


says  tliore  is  uo  possibility  of  a donbt  that  we  should  have  captured 
the  battery  had  our  gunboats  continued  in  action.  Night  before  last 
they  received  a small  supply  of  rifle  shot,  and  on  Sunday  night  they 
received  and  mounted  the  8-inch  gun  which  threw  solid  shot  at  us  on 
Monday. 

We  have  thrown  away  a magnificent  chance  to  injure  the  enemy,  and 
all  because  of  the  culpable  and  inexcusable  slowness  of  the  naval  com- 
mander in  the  first  place,  and  his  timidity  and  cautiousness  in  the 


second. 

The  matter  rests  just  this  way  now:  If  Admiral  Porter  can  send  three 
good  iron-clads,  well  supplied  with  ammunition,  say,  400  rounds  for  each 
gun,  and  a good  man  to  fight  them,  they  can  yet  capture  the  i)lace.  If 
he  can’t  do  so,  it  is  childish  folly  to  keep  the  present  force  here,  thereby 
causing  the  enemy  to  strengthen  his  position  and  allowing  him  an  op- 
portunity to  bag  our  entire  force.  Twenty  thousand  men  would  be  safe 
here,  and,  supplied  with  a liberal  allowance  of  siege  material,  might  so 
damage  the  enemy  as  to  require  him  to  evacuate  ; but  if  the  land  forces 
are  required  to  stop  at  every  Y)oint  of  imi)ortance,  and  reduce  it  by  a 
siege,  how  long  do  you  think  it  will  require  them  to  reach  Yazoo  City? 

It’s  provoking  beyond  measure  to  think  that  everything  we  undertake 
must  be  marred  by  incompetency  and  stupidity  ! I am  intensely  dis- 
gusted to-night.  . • 

In  case  of  our  withdrawal  entirely  or  partially,  I shall  avail  myself 
of  the  first  opportunity  to  return  to  Vicksburg  or  to  headquarters  to 
see  3^ou  and  the  general. 

It  seems  to  me  the  principal  advantages  of  this  line  have  already  been 
lost,  and  what  remain  derive  their  importance  from  the  fact  that  the 
gunboats,  by  being  vigorously  handled,  ought  to  open  us  a rapid  and 
safe  line  of  communication,  at  least  to  Yazoo  City.  If  the  gunboats 
can’t  do  this  work,  the  venture  fails,  at  least  so  far  as  concerns  its  ad- 
vantages.  An  army  in  time  can  go  through  unassisted,  but  I would 
not  like  to  be  answerable  for  all  the  time  consumed,  nor  for  the  success 
of  the  army  afterward. 

I have  just  finished  dismantling  our  land  battery  and  removing  the 
guns  to  tiie  landing.  This  was  thought  best,  since  we  were  nearly  out 
of  ammunition  for  them,  and  to  save  the  labor  of  guarding  the  battery. 

I can’t  begin  to  give  you  an  idea  of  my  disgust. 

Write  me  soon,  and  in  the  mean  time  believe  me,  dear  Rawlins,  very 
truly,  your  friend, 

’ J.  H.  WILSON. 


Headquarteiis  Department  of.  the  Tennessee, 

Millikcn^s  Bend.,  La.,  Aj)ril  9,  1803. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report,  for  the 
information  of  the  Engineer  Department: 

On  the  29th  of  January,  while  at  the  mouth  of  the  Yazoo  River,  I re- 
ceived verbal  instructions  from  Major-General  Grant  to  proceed  at  once 
to  Helena,  Ark.,  and  organize  an  expedition  for  opening  and  examining 
the  Yazoo  Pass.  Brigadier-General  Gorman,  commanding  District  of 
Eastern  Arkansas,  was  directed  to  furnish  all  necessary  details,  boats  and 
implements.  I was  instructed  to  cut  the  levee  across  the  mouth  of  the 
Pass,  and  descend  at  least  as  far  as  the  Cold  water,  if  practicable;  re- 
turn as  soon  as  possible,  and  report  upon  the  i^racticability  of  the  route 
as  a line  of  military  operations. 

At  2 1).  m.  on  the  2d  of  February,  with  400  men,  furnished  with 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC.  387 

shovels,  axes,  and  picks,  I began  work.  The  levee  was  cut  in  two 
places,  the  cuts  being  respectively  15  and  20  feet  wide  on  top,  with  an 
interval  of  50  feet  between  them,  the  wider  one  being  directly  in  the 
axis  of  the  old  channel. 

On  the  evening  of  the  3d,  at  6 o’clock,  the  excavation  was  comideted, 
and  the  water  let  in  by  the  explosion  of  a small  mine  planted  in  the 
mouth  of  the  cut.  A mine  was  exploded  under  the  mass  of  earth  be- 
tween the  two  cuts,  simultaneously  shattering  and  loosening  it  so  that 
the  rapid  rush  of  water  which  ensued  soon  carried  it  entirely  awa3^, 
uniting  the  two  cuts  into  one.  By  11  p.  m.,  a crevasse  40  yards  wide  was 
opened,  and  by  morning  the  old  entrance  of  the  Pass  was  entirely  clear 
of  the  embankment.  The  level  of  the  water  on  the  exterior  side  of  the 
levee  was  10  feet  below  the  top  of  the  embankment;  on  the  inside,  18J 
feet  below  ; difference  of  level,  8J  feet.  The  water  was  15  feet  deep  in 
the  bed  of  the  stream  at  the  foot  of  the  exterior  slope.  The  width  of 
the  levee  on  the  top  was  10  feet;  exterior  slope,  4 upon  1;  interior  slope, 
3J  upon  1.  Prom  the  violence  with  which  the  water  rushed  through 
the  crevasse^  the  steamboat  pilots  did  not  consider  it  safe  to  run  a boat 
into  it  till  the  lake  and  the  country  in  the  vicinity  were  filled  up. 

On  the  7th  of  March,  with  the  steamer  Henderson,  I entered  the  Pass, 
through  Moon  Lake,  to  the  exit  from  the  latter.  Before  going  farther, 
1 was  informed  by  some  citizens  from  Cold  water  that  the  rebels  had 
been  busily  engaged,  since  about  the  2d,  in  felling  trees  into  and  across 
the  stream.  I subsequently  learned  that  General  Pemberton  had  given 
orders  two  months  before,  and  had  reiterated  them  about  two  weeks 
before  I reached  Helena,  directing  the  obstruction  of  Yazoo  Pass.  A 
party  had  been  organized  for  this  purpose  before  I began  operations, 
and  began  work  immediately  after  they  learned  the  levee  was  cut. 

On  the  8th,  I descended  the  stream  nearly  6 miles  in  an  open  boat, 
but,  not  thinking  it  prudent  to  go  farther  without  a larger  escort,  I did 
not  learn  the  entire  extent  of  the  obstacles.  I was,  however,  confirmed 
in  the  opinion  expressed  in  my  report  of  the  2d,  informing  General 
Grant  of  the  suitability  of  the  route  as  a line  of  operations  against  the 
country  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Yazoo  Kiver. 

On  the  9th,  General  Washburn,  with  three  small  steamers  and  two 
regiments  of  infantry,  provided  with  axes,  cables,  and  implements,  ar- 
rived from  Helena,  and  entered  the  Pass  2 or  3 miles  without  meeting 
any  serious  blockades. 

On  the  10th,  after  a careful  examination  of  the  obstructions  and  their 
probable  extent,  with  the  steamboats  and  two  regiments  of  infantry, 
under  the  command  of  Brigadier-General  Washburn,  the  work  of  remov- 
ing the  obstructions  was  begun. 

The  first  barricade  was  a mile  in  length,  and  the  second  about  2 miles, 
but  not  so  compactly  constructed,  though  slighter  obstructions  were 
found  all  along  the  Pass  from  Pennington’s  to  within  a mile  of  Cold- 
water.  They  were  formed  by  felling  trees  into  and  across  the  stream. 
The  forest  being  very  dense,  and  the  growth  luxuriant,  the  trees  were 
of  the  largest  and  heaviest  kinds,  cottonwood,  s^xamore,  oak,  elm,  and 
pecan  prevailing,  and  all,  except  cottonwood,  having  a greater  specific 
gravity  than  water.  These,  mixed  with  drift-wood,  rendered  the  bar- 
ricade of  no  trifling  nature,  and,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  would 
have  required  great  labor  to  remove.  To  add  to  the  difficulties  of  the 
jTork,  the  rapid  rise  of  the  water  from  the  crevasse  at  the  entrance  over- 
lowed  the  entire  country,  except  a very  narrow  strip  of  land  next  the 
lank,  not  to  exceed  in  any  place  50  yards  wide,  and  frequently  not  half 
^hat.  The  working  parties  were  kept  necessarily  on  board  the  boats. 


388  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  IChai-.  XXXVI. 

There  being  no  way  of  reaching  the  lower  end  of  the  Pass  with  troops 
and  the  necessary  provision  and  implements,  the  work  had  to  be  done 
from  the  upper  end  and  the  “ blockades  ” removed  successively.  After 
resorting  to  the  use  of  windlasses  and  other  machinery  for  removing 
the  fallen  trees  and  drift  timber,  all  attended  with  the  breakage  of 
cables,  tackle,  and  boat  macbinery,  besides  being  entirely  too  slow,  the 
plan  of  cutting  off  the  limbs,  sawing  in  two  the  logs,  and  drawing  out 
such  parts  as  would  not  sink  entirely  out  of  the  way  was  adopted. 

In  many  cases  where  a footing  could  be  obtained,  entire  trees,  meas- 
uring 90  feet  in  length  and  4 feet  througb  the  butt,  were  drawn  out  by 
attaching  two  or  three  G-inch  cables  and  liauling  upon  them  with  from 
250  to  400  men.  In  this  way,  by  the  21st  instant,  the  entire  Pass  was 
cleared,  and,  with  the  cutting  of  an  occasional  overbanging  tree,  pre- 
pared for  navigation. 

The  width  of  the  waterway  is  from  GO  to  80  feet  clear,  and  from  18 
to  30  feet  deep  at  the  stage  of  water  indicated.  The  distance  from  Moon 
Lake  to  the  Ooldwater  is  about  15  miles. 

The  Ooldwater  from  its  junction  with  Yazoo  Pass  is  a considerable 
river,  from  100  to  130  feet  wide,  running  through  a dense  wilderness 
nearly  all  the  way. 

The  Tallahatchee  is  a stream  of  very  similar  nature,  from  130  to  180 
feet  wide,  and  from  30  miles  below  the  mouth  ot  Ooldwater  affords  fine 
navigation  for  boats  250  feet  long. 

There  are  not  more  than  fifty  ])lantations  between  the  entrance  to 
Yazoo  Pass  and  the  mouth  of  the  Tallahatchee,  a distance  of  nearly  200 
miles. 

By  the  time  Yazoo  Pass  was  ready  for  navigation.  General  Grant  had 
organized  an  expedition  of  about  5,000  men,  to  co-operate  with  a naval 
force  of  two  iron-clads,  two  rams,  and  six  light-draught  gunboats.  On 
the  24th  of  February,  the  iron-clad  Ghillicothe,  IGO  feet  long  and  50  feet 
beam,  followed  by  the  Baron  De  Kalb,  175  feet  long  and  51  feet  beam, 
entered  the  Pass  from  Moon  Lake.  The  light-clads,  rams,  and  transports, 
to  the  number  of  twenty-two,  some  of  them  as  much  as  220  feet  long 
and  55  feet  beam,  followed,  and  without  any  serious  accident  reached  Dr. 
Curtiss^  plantation,  a few  miles  from  the  junction  of  the  Yalabusha  and 
the  Tallahatchee  Eivers,  on  the  evening  of  March  10, 18G3.  It  may  not  be 
improper  to  state  that  the  rams  and  iron  clads  could  have  reached  the 
same  point  easily’’  by  the  3d  March,  and  with  extra  activity  by  the  1st. 

On  the  morning  of  the  11th,  the  Ghillicothe  moved  down  in  range  of 
the  battery  erected  by  the  rebels  in  a loop  between  the  Tallahatchee  and 
the  Yazoo,  covering  the  mouth  of  the  Yalabusha  and  Greenwood,  and 
when  within  about  1,100  yards  of  the  fort  was  opened  upon  by  a rifle 
32-pounder  and  several  smaller  pieces.  One  shot  took  effect  near  the 
right-hand  corner  of  the  square  turret,  bending  and  denting  the  plate 
upon  which  it  took  effect,  about  4 inches  from  the  plane  of  its  original 
liosition,  and  knocking  the  9-inch  pine  backing  into  fragments. 

On  the  afternoon  of  this  day,  both  the  Ghillicothe  and  De  Kalb  moved 
down  to  the  attack,  but,  having  aiiproached  no  nearer  than  900  or  1,000 
yards,  their  shots  had  produced  no  visible  effect,  when  the  Ghillicothe 
received  a shot  in  her  left  bow  port  and  withdrew. 

On  the  night  of  the  12th,  by  direction  of  General  Boss,  commanding 
the  land  forces,  I erected  a cotton-bale  battery  at  a point  indicated  on 
the  inclosed  sketch,  putting  in  it  one  30-pounder  rifled  Parrott  obtained 
from  the  Kavj'.  The  materials  were  moved  from  Glarke’s  plantation 
house  at  night,  and  the  battery  completed  between  11  p.  m.  and  G a.  ni, 
13th. 


Ohap.  xxxvr.] 


THE  YAZOO  TASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC. 


ARMAMENT  OF  FORT  GREEN  WOOD.— (Pemberton.) 

1 G 4-10  inch  Rifle  {!). 

2 8-inch  Columhiacl,  (/)  mounted  night  of  15th. 

3 20-pdr.  Rifle  Parrott,  {!). 

One  battery  of  field  piece-.^,  rifles  and  smooth-bores,  {1  Whitworth  10-pdr.) 
Waul’s  Legion,  2d  Texas,  4Gth  Miss.,  20th  Miss.,  all  we  could  hear  of, 
not  to  exceed  3500  men. 

ARMAMENT  OF  ATTACKING  FORCE. 

Land  Battery,  30-pds.  Parrotts. 

f 1 8 -inch  Shin  Ilowitz 

Dc  Kalb, 

In 


■inch  Ship  Ilowitzpr. 
[2  D-ineh  Guns. 

10  "" 

Chillicothe,  2 11  “ “ 


NOTE.— The  Cotton-bale  Battery  was  a partly  sunhen  Redan,  35  feet  long,  8 feet  relief, 
composed  of  cotton  bales,  (partly  covered  with  earth,)  two  tiers  high,  six  tiers  deep, 
embrasures  one  foot  splay,  revetted  with  sheet  ir  on,  which  blew  ovt  soon.  Cotton  did  not 
burn  to  any  Juirtful  extent;  hept  wet  by  pouring  water  on.  The  platforms  were  0 by  14, 
one  foot  below  surface,  four  inches  higher  on  the  rear  line. 


[OIIAP.  xxxvl. 


390  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

The  Navy  having  accomplished  nothing,  on  account  of  long  range, 
another  30-poauder  Parrott  was  added  on  the  night  of  the  13th,  and  on 
the  night  of  the  15th  an  8-inch  ship  howitzer  was  put  in  position. 

These  guns  were  not  used  with  any  hope  of  seriously  injuring  the 
enemy,  since  the  battery  could  not  be  placed  so  as  to  enfilade  the  ene- 
my’s work,  nor  close  enough  to  give  any  reasonable  ground  for  hope  of 
dismounting  his  guns  by  direct  fire. 

Prom  the  inclosed  sketch  * you  will  perceive  that  the  position  of  Fort 
Pemberton  was  unassailable  by  infantry,  and  therefore  could  only  be 
taken  by  a vigorous  and  determined  naval  attack.  This  was  not  made, 
the  closest  the  gunboats  ever  went  not  being  less  than  800  yards. 

The  site  of  the  fort  was  but  very  little  above  water,  and  therefore  it 
occurred  to  me  that  by  cutting  the  Mississippi  levee,  near  Austin, 
about  18  miles  above  Helena,  a large  volume  of  water  might  be  induced 
to  take  the  line  of  the  Ooldwater  and  Tallahatchee  and  flood  the  coun- 
try near  both  streams.  The  levee  was  cut  by  General  Prentiss,  but  not 
sufficiently  to  produce  the  desired  effect had  it  been  destroyed  for  2 
miles,  at  the  point  indicated,  1 have  little  doubt  that  2 feet  of  a rise 
would  have  reached  Greenwood.  The  enemy  could  not  have  withstood 
more  than  12  inches. 

• During  our  presence  in  the  vicinity  of  Fort  Greenwood,  the  rebels 
mounted  one  8-inch  columbiad.  The  armament  is  given  in  the  sketch. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  WILSON, 

First  Lieutenant  Engineers^  Lieutenant- Colonel j &e. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  G.  Totten, 

Chief  Engineer^  U.  S.  Army. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Near  Vielcshurg,  31iss.,  June  18,  18G3. 

General:  The  report  of  Brig.  Gen.  L.  F.  Boss,  commanding  the 
Yazoo  expedition,  having  failed  to  reach  you,  1 have  the  honor  to  make 
the  following  statement,  for  your  information  : 

On  the  23d  day  of  February,  18G3,  the  Yazoo  Pass  was  opened  for 
navigation.  On  the  24th,  the  expedition  left  Moon  Lake,  and  on  the  lOtli 
day  of  March  arrived  at  or  near  Fort  Pemberton.  The  distance  trav- 
ersed was  about  225  miles.  The  difiiculties  of  navigation,  as  described 
in  my  letters  to  you,  were  great,  and  some  of  the  transports  were  old 
and  unseaworthy,  yet  all  of  these  things  are  insufficient  to  account  for  all 
of  the  delay.  Such  other  causes  as  may  have  existed  should  be  known, 
and  out  of  justice  to  both  branches  of  the  public  service  involved  in  tlie 
expedition  I deem  it  my  duty  to  state  them. 

To  the  timidity,  over  cautiousness,  and  lack  of  interest  displayed  by 
Lieut.  Commander  Watson  Smith,  commanding  the  gunboats,  and  the 
delays  growing  out  of  them,  is  attributable  the  failure  of  the  entire  expe- 
dition. Lieutenant-Commander  Smith  was  frequently  urged  by  General 
Boss,  myself,  and  Captains  Walker  and  Foster,  of  the  Navy,  to  move 
with  more  rapidity,  or,  at  least,  allow  the  iron-clads  and  rams  to  proceed 
with  all  practicable  dispatch  to  the  mouth  of  the  Tallahatchee.  I have 
no  hesitation  in  saying  that,  had  these  suggestions  been  followed,  the 
entire  expedition  could  have  reached  Fort  Pemberton  from  three  to  five 
days  sooner  than  it  did,  and  that  the  iron-clads,  the  only  ones  dependc^ 


See  p.  389. 


Chap.  XXXTL]  THE  YAZOO  PASS'  EXPEDITION,  ETC.  391 

upon  in  attacking  land  batteries,  could  have  arrived  there  by  the  2d  of 
March  at  farthest. 

It  is  not  necessary  at  this  time  to  arge  the  importance  of  the  lost 
days,  or  what  might  have  been  the  result  had  more  activity  been  dis- 
played by  Lieutenant-Commander  Smith. 

\Vith  the  highest  admiration  for  the  gallantry  and  intelligence  dis- 
played by  Captains  [James  P.]  Poster  and  [John  G.]  Walker,  of  the 
Chillicotl)e  and  De  Kalb,  and  the  earnest  conviction  that  they  would 
have  cheerfully  obeyed  any  order  from  their  superior  officer,  I am  con- 
strained to  state  that  in  the  attack  upon  Port  Pemberton  Lieutenant- 
Commander  Smith  again  failed  to  exhibit  the  decision  and  intelligence 
necessary  under  such  circumstances  to  secure  the  advantage  of  a vic- 
tory. After  the  Chillicothe  and  T)e  Kalb  had  silenced  the  fort,  he  failed 
to  push  the  latter  close  enough  to  it  to  ascertain  the  cause  of  its  not 
replying  to  her  fire.  I requested  General  Koss  at  the  time  to  urge  upon 
him  the  importance  of  this  step  and  the  probability  of  our  success,  and 
have  reason  to  believe  he  followed  my  suggestion.  At  all  events,  it 
was  ascertained  a few  days  afterward,  from  reliable  sources,  that  had 
tlie  De  Kalb  been  advanced  she  would  have  met  with  no  further  resist- 
ance, because  the  rebel  ammunition  was  exhausted.  The  truth  of  this 
is  now  beyond  i)erad venture. 

It  was  simply  impossible  for  General  Koss  to  assault  the  works  at 
this  or  any  other  time,  with  or  without  re-enforcements. 

Hoping  that  this  matter  may  be  investigated,  and  the  responsibility 
fixed  where  it  belongs,  I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  serv- 
ant, 

J.  H.  WILSON, 

Lieut.  Col..,  Acting  Insjgector- General.,  First  Lieutenant  Engrs. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  Army  of  the  Tennessee. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Benjamin  M.  Prentiss,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding 
District  of  Eastern  Arhansas. 

Headquarters  District  of  Eastern  Arkansas, 

Helena,  Arh.,  March  17,  1803. 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  inclose  with  this,  for  the  information 
of  the  general  commanding  department,  a copy  of  a dispatch  this  day 
received  by  me  from  Brigadier-General  Koss,*  on  the  Yazoo,  giving  an 
account  of  his  meeting  with  the  enemy  at  Greenwood;  also  a copy  of  a 
plan  of  the  enemy’s  works  at  that  point,  which  accompanied  the  dis- 
patch.  These  dispatches  came  by  the  small  steamer  Carl,  which  left 
Greenwood  at  9 a.  m.  on  Saturday  last,  up  to  which  time  the  firing  had 
not  been  recommenced. 

The  Carl  arrived  here  this  j).  m.,  having  consumed  a little  over  three 
days  in  the  trip. 

To-morrow  morning  I send  the  Hamilton  Belle,  a small  boat,  with 
50,000  rations  to  General  Boss. 

I inclose  also  copy  of  a letter  received  from  General  Hovey,!  whom 
“ See  Report  No.  3,  of  March  13,  p.  385. 


t Not  found. 


392 


MISSISSltTI,  WEST  TEHNESSEt:,  ETC. 


tCiiAP.  xxxvt 


I have  sent  on  a flying  trip  to  seonre  small  boat.s.  He  notes  some  of  tbe 
difficulties  in  the  way  of  obtaining  boats  suitable  to  go  into  the  Pass. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  M.  PEENTISS, 

Brigadier-General^  Commanding  District. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Eawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


Headquarters  District  of  Eastern  Arkansas, 

Helena,  Arlc.,  March  19,  18G3. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  my  latest  advices  from 
General  Eoss  are  of  the  date  of  the  15th  instant,  when  he  was  still  con- 
fronting the  rebel  fort.  Greenwood.  He  was  still  at  work  cannonading 
the  enemy,  but  had  made  little  or  no  impression  on  them,  although  bo 
had  added  an  8-inch  howitzer  to  his  land  battery.  General  Eoss  re- 
ported the  fort  as  being  much  stronger  than  was  anticipated,  and 
required  more  work  for  its  reduction. 

We  intended  on  Monday  to  resume  firing,  but  could  not  sustain  an 
action  for  over  two  hours,  owing  to  scarcity  of  ammunition,  for  which 
he  sent  to  me.  Colonel  Wilson  also  sent  a requisition  for  four  8-inch 
siege  howitzers  and  four  30-pounder  Parrotts.  I to-day  sent  to  Gen- 
eral Eoss  a supply  of  ammunition,  all  I had  here.  Last  night  I dis- 
patched a boat  to  Memphis  to  iirocure  the  guns  called  for,  and  ammu- 
nition for  the  same.  I expect  they  will  arrive  to-night,  so  that  they 
can  be  sent  to  General  Eoss  to-morrow.  I am  sparing  no  pains  to  keep 
up  communication  with  General  Eoss,  keep  him  supplied  with  rations, 
&c.,  and  do  all  in  my  power  to  help  liim  till  General  Quinby  assumes 
command  of  the  expedition.  I do  not  doubt  my  ability  to  keep  up 
communications  with  both  generals,  but  am  sadly  in  want  of  transports 
at  present.  Fort  Greenwood  General  Eoss  represents  as  inaccessible  to 
infantry,  so  that  he  must  depend  upon  artillery  for  its  reduction.  I 
look  for  further  advices  from  there  very  soon. 

I am,  general,  very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  M.  PEENTISS, 

Brigadier -General,  Commanding  District. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 

P.  S. — 20tb,  8 a.  m. — Two  regiments  from  General  Carr’s  command 
at  Saint  Genevieve  are  just  in.  I shall  change  them  from  small  to  largo 
boats,  and  send  them  immediately  forward,  retaining  the  small  boats. 


Headquarters  District  of  Eastern  Arkansas, 

Helena,  Arlc.,  March  20,  18G3. 

General  : I liave  tlie  honor  to  transmit  herewith  copies  of  a com- 
munication just  received,  G.3()  p.  m.,  from  General  Eoss,*  and  a com- 
munication from  Colonel  Wilson  to  General  Eoss.t 


* See  Rosh  to  I’roiitisa,  with  inclosure,  March  17,  ]).  39(5. 
t Sec  inclosuro,  p,  39(5. 


Chap.  XXXVI.j  THE  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC.  393 

I have  made  the  copies  in  haste,  to  detain  the  gunboat  as  brief  a 
time  as  possible. 

I am,  general,  very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  M.  PKENTISS, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding  District. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 

P.  S. — I shall  follow  the  suggestions  of  General  Boss,  and  cut  the 
levee  and  let  the  water  inj  it  will  do  us  no  harm,  and  can  do  the  enemy 
no  good. 


No.  3. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Leonard  F.  Ross,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Thir- 
teenth Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  of  operations  March  2-April  8. 

Hdqrs.  Thirteenth  Div.,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

On  transports  in  Coldwater  River,  March  2,  18G3. 

General  : My  entire  fleet  was  in  the  Coldwater  at  11  o’clock  this 
a.  m.,  though  some  of  my  boats  are  in  a damaged  condition.  The  Diana 
and  Emma  are  very  much  damaged,  but  I hope  to  get  through  with 
them.  If  I find  it  impossible  to  take  them  through,  will  send  them 
back  from  the  mouth  of  this  river  or  leave  them  there.  A cavalry  force 
sent  out  from  Alcorn’s  (only ‘20  miles  from  the  mouth  of  Coldwater) 
would  be  able  to  communicate  with  them,  if  left  behind. 

I would  advise  that  the  cavalry  stationed  on  the  Pass  make  a tour  in 
that  direction  in  the  course  of  a couple  of  days.  Commodore  Smith 
informs  me  that  he  will  send  the  Key  West  back  to  Helena, 'or  that  he 
will  direct  her  captain,  with  100  troops  on  board,  to  report  to  me.  He 
lias  that  many  more  troops  than  he  wants,  and  I have  no  use  for  them, 
or  rather  no  place  to  put  them,  and  will  send  them  back  with  the  boat. 

A large  force  of  rebels  is  reported  on  the  Tallahatchee  awaiting  our 
advance.  I do  not  credit  the  report,  but  if  they  are  there  we  shall  prob- 
ably find  them  in  the  course  of  a couple  of  days,  when  we  shall  do  just 
the  best  we  can. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

L.  F.  BOSS, 

Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  B.  M.  Prentiss. 

P.  S. — If  you  desire  to  keep  up  communication  with  us,  why  not  rig 
up  the  Carl  with  a couple  of  light  howitzers  and  from  50  to  75  infantry- 
men ? It  would,  in  my  opinion,  be  sufficient  until  we  get  in  the  Yazoo. 


On  the  Tallahatchee, 

Fifteen  miles  below  mouth  of  Coldwater,  March  7,  18G3. 

General:  Wo  got  into  the  Tallahatchee  last  night,  and  have  made 
hut  10  miles  to-day,  in  consequence  of  the  delay  for  coaling  the  gun- 
boats. We  leave  arranged  to  leave  the  coal-barges  in  charge  of  the  gun- 
boat (Marmora)  and  the  Twenty-ninth  Iowa  Inlantry,  and  with  the  bal- 
ance of  our  forces  to  push  on  to  Greenwood.  - We  expect  to  arrive  at 


394 


Mississirn,  west  tenkessee,  etc. 


[Chap.  XXXVt 


tl)c  moiitli  of  tlie  Yalabiislia  on  Monday  evening,  go  forward  to  Green- 
wood in  the  morning  (lOth),  and  by  12  m.  to  have  possession  of  it.  Here 
we  shall  await  our  coal-barges,  and  in  tlie  mean  time  possibly  make  a 
move  tow^ard  Grenada.  Greenwood  is  represented  as  being  fortified, 
and  we  have  been  very  kindly  informed  that  there  were  from  20,000  to 
30,000  troops  awaiting  our  arrival. 

In  regard  to  rations,  I have  enough  only  to  supply  me  to  the  13th.  I 
ordered  30,000  more  rations  forward ; if  received,  will  have  enough  to 
last  to  the  22d.  I learn  that  many  of  the  gunboats  are  about  out,  and 
are.  expecting  to  get  from  mej  in  fact,  I have  already  issued  to  some  of 
tliem.  If  I remain  to  do  the  work  that  seems  to  be  before  me,  I shall 
want  more  rations,  say  50,000  more.  They  can  be  safely  sent  forward; 
if  tliey  do  not  find  me  at  Greenwood,  there  will  be  a gunboat  there  or 
at  the  mouth  of  the  Yalabusha,  to  receive  them.  I sliall  also  have  one 
regiment  of  infantry  with  the  gunboat,  to  guard  our  provisions,  coal,  &c. 

I am,  general,  verv  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

LEONAED  F.  EOSS, 
Brigadier ' General^  Commanding  Division. 

Brig.  Gen.  B.  M.  Prentiss. 


IIdqrs.  Thirteenth  Biv.,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

On  the  Tallahatclieej  20  miles  heloic  the  Coldwater^ 

March  8,  1863 — 8.30  a.  m. 

General  : We  have  again  made  a late  start  this  morning,  being  de- 
layed for  the  gunboats  to  complete  coaling.  The  work  should  have 
been  done  by  2 o’clock  this  morning,  and  we  on  our  way  by  5.30,  but  it 
was  7.30  this  morning  before  we  started,  and  tlien  had  to  leave  one 
of  the  gunboats  to  finish  her  coaling.  I am  a little,  yes,  considerably, 
disgusted  with  these  necessary  delays.  I hope  it  will  be  better  in  the 
future. 

Many  complaints  having  been  made  of  the  unserviceable  condition  of 
some  of  our  boats,  I had  Lieut.  Col.  J.  H.  Wilson  make  examination  of 
them,  and  inclose  you  a memorandum  made  by  him  in  regard  to  them. 
I don’t  believe  the  boats  mentioned  will  be  able  to  get  back  through  the 
Pass ; they  certainly  will  not  be  without  repairs.  I will  try  to  get  them 
to  the  mouth  of  the  Yalabusha  and  leave  them  until  the  mouth  of  the 
Yazoo  is  opened,  when  they  can  be  floated  through.  I am  very  much  in 
want  of  two  or  three  good  boats  about  the  size  of  the  Yolunteer,  and  a 
couple  of  boats  about  the  size  of  the  Winona  or  Carl,  to  be  used  as  dis- 
jiatch  boats  and  for  foraging.  I hope  they  will  be  sent  through  at  once. 
I send  up  this  morning  the  Luella.  She  is  in  bad  condition,  and  should 
be  repaired  at  once.  I send  up  one  company  of  Twenty-eighth  AViscon- 
sin  as  a guard  for  the  Luella,  and  I wish  them  returned  on  first  boat 
coming  dowui.  We  shall  probably  move  from  40  to  50  miles  to-day. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

L.  F.  EOSS, 

Brigadier- General.,  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  B.  M.  Prentiss, 

Commanding  District  Eastern  Arhansas,  ITeJena. 


[Iiiclosiire.] 

[March  8,  1863.] 

Key  West  No.  2 com])letely  broken  down  and  unabl(‘,  to  proceed.  Di- 
ana, .)ohn  Bell,  Luella,  and  llayard  (very)  unsea  worthy’,  and  incapable 


Chap.  XXX  71.] 


395 


THE  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC. 

of  making  the  trip  without  great  risk  of  their  loss.  Saint  Lonis  not  in 
good  condition.  Some  of  .the  others,  such  as  the  Lavinia  Logan  and 
Old  Lebanon,  might  fail  at  any  moment  under  a stress  of  work.  Emma 
broken  down  and  exchanged  for  Key  West  Ko.  2. 

J.  H.  WILSON. 


In  Ekont  of  Greenwood,  Miss.,  March  13,  1803. 

General  : My  fleet  of  transports  are  now  lying  in  the  Tallahatchee, 
about  5 miles  from  Greenwood  on  a direct  line,  and  about  12  by  the 
Tallahatchee  and  Yazoo  Eivers. 

We  arrived  here  on  the  morning  of  the  11th  instant,  and  have  been 
prevented  from  advancing  any  farther  by  a strong  fortiflcation,  extend- 
ing from  the  Tallahatchee  to  the  Yazoo  Eiver,  across  a neck  of  land 
some  2^  miles  below. 

On  the  morning  of  the  11th,  I w^ent  on  board  of  the  gunboat  Chi  11  i- 
cothe,  in  company  with  Commander  Smith  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Wil- 
son, for  the  purpose  of  making  a reconnaissance,  in  which  we  exchanged 
several  shots,  two  Gl-pounder  shot  of  the  enemy  striking  the  Chilli- 
cothe,  but  doing  her  no  damage. 

1 sent  Colonel  Slack,  of  the  Forty-seventh,  and  Colonel  Bringhurst, 
of  the  Forty-sixth  Indiana  Yolunteers,  out  on  a reconnaissance  by  land. 
We  soon  met  the  outposts  of  the  enemy,  when  a brisk  skirmish  followed, 
in  which  2 of  our  men  were  wounded.  The  loss  of  the  enemy  not  known. 
We  drove  them  back  into  their  fortifications,  which  you  will  observe, 
by  il^osed  iflats,  are  very  difficult  of  access,  being  entirely  surrounded 
by  wafer. 

In  tbe  afternoon  the  Chillicothe  again  made  an  advance  on  the  works 
of  the  enemy,  and  after  remaining  in  action  about  thirty  minutes,  re- 
ceived a shot  in  one  of  her  port-holes,  which  killed  4 and  wounded  12 
of  her  crew. 

On  the  12th,  we  were  engaged  in  repairing  the  damage  to  the  Chilli- 
cothe and  making  preparations  for  the  erection  of  a land  battery. 

QTiis  morning  we  had  in  i^osition  on  land  two  30-pounder  Parrott  guns 
and  one  12-pounder  howitzer,  with  which  we  opened  on  the  enemy  at 
11  a.  m.  At  11.20  the  gunboats  Chillicothe  and  De  Kalb  and  the  mor- 
tar-boat also  opened  fire.  All  were  hotly  engaged  until  about  1 p.  m., 
when  the  Chillicothe  withdrew  for  the  purpose  of  filling  shell  and  cut- 
ting fuses. 

Up  to  that  time  she  had  been  struck  about  twenty  times  without  in- 
flicting any  serious  damage.  Firing  was  continued  by  the  others  until 
sundown  with  but  little  effect.  There  has  been  an  immense  amount  of 
fifthting  done  during  the  day,  and  but  3 or  4 slightly  wounded  on  our 
side.  We  have  no  means  of  knowing  the  extent  of  the  enemy^s  dam- 
age. If  no  greater  than  our  own,  I may  truly  say  nobody  is  hurt  by 
to-day’s  operations. 

We  go  at  them  again  in  the  morning,  and  shall  continue  fighting  at 
them  until  we  get  possession.  When  the  work  is  completed,  will  for- 
ward detailed  report.  I inclose,  for  information,  plat  of  fortifications 
and  surrounding  country*  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Wilson. 

1 am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  F.  BOSS, 

Brifjadier-General,  Commanding  Division. 

Brig.  Cen.  B.  M.  Prentiss,  Comdg.  Dist.  of  Eastern  Arlcansas. 


Sec  p.  389. 


396 


MTSSISSIPn,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


In  Front  of  Fort  Greenwood,  Miss., 

March  17,  18G3. 

General  : Having  added  to  onr  land  battery  one  68-pounder  colum- 
biad,  we  opened  on  the  enemy  again  at  12.30  o’clock  yesterday.  The 
gunboat  Chillicothe  engaged  them  ten  minutes  later.  Our  fire  was 
responded  to  by  the  enemy  with  spirit.  They  had  added  some  heavy 
guns,  and  erected  two  new  batteries  during  the.night.  In  view  of  the 
shortness  of  our  ammunition,  I had  arranged  for  a short  and  brisk  fight 
at  close  quarters,  and,  if  successful  in  silencing  their  batteries,  to  make 
a descent  upon  tlie  fort  with  infantry,  loaded  on  the  light-draught  gun- 
boats, and  storm  it.’  The  arrangements  being  all  made,  and  the  infantry 
placed  on  the  boats,  we  opened  the  fight.  The  Chillicothe  had  not  been 
engaged  fifteen  minutes  until  she  was  struck  six  times,  and  both  of  her 
port-holes  closed,  by  being  so  battered  that  the  doors  to  her  ports  could 
not  be  opened.  She  had  to  withdraw,  and  the  De  Kalb,  being  unwilling 
to  engage  alone,  also  retired. 

Our  land  battery  continued  until  sundown  j but  as  soon  as  the  gun- 
boats withdrew,  the  enemy  covered  his  heavy  guns  with  cotton,  and 
replied  to  us  with  light  field  pieces.  Only  1 man  had  his  arm  shot  ofi 
at  org"  land  battery,  and  1 wounded  on  the  Chillicothe.  In  order  to 
take  this  fort,  we  must  have  ordnance  of  heavy  caliber  and  plenty  of 
ammunition.  Better  gunboats  must  be  sent  us,  if  it  is  expected  to  ac- 
complish anything  with  them.  I don’t  believe  our  two  iron-clads  can 
stand  the  terrific  fire  of  the  guns  now  on  the  fort  for  one  hour  without 
total  destruction. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  F.  BOSS, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding  Division. 

General  B.  M.  Prentiss, 

Commanding  District  of  Eastern  Arkansas. 

P.  S. — I herewith  inclose  a communication  from  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Wilson,  in  regard  to  the  enlargement  of  the  opening  in  the  levee.  I 
approve  of  the  suggestions.  Let  all  the  water  in  you  can.  Tliat,  with 
a good  strong  stream  of  fire,  will  rout  them,  I think. 

[Inclosnro.  ] 

Headquarters  Yazoo  Expedition, 

U,  S.  Transport  Volunteer,  March  10,  1863. 

Sir  : As  the  position  occupied  by  the  rebel  fortifications  below  here 
is  very  little  above  the  present  level  of  the  water,  it  has  occurred  to  me 
that  a further  rise  of  4 feet  would  possibly  compel  the  abandonment  of 
the  place.  This  increased  rise  might  be  induced  by  cutting  the  levee, 
so  as  to  make  a crevasse  a mile  or  so  long  at  the  entrance  of  Yazoo 
Pass.  In  addition  to  opening  the  present  crevasse,  another  a mile  or 
two  lower  down,  at  the  point  where  the  levee  strikes  the  old  lake,  could 
be  easily  made,  and  would  furnish  a very  large  volume  of  water. 

Small  mines  of  powder,  say  50  to  100  pounds,  established  at  intervals 
along  the  levee,  and  exploded  by  slow  match,  would  afibrd  an  expedi- 
tious method  of  doing  the  work.  Post  augers,  with  a 12  or  15  inch  bit, 
and  handles  long  enough  to  bore  10  feet,  would  be  the  most  expeditious 
instrument  for  sinking  the  shafts.  These  augers  could  be  made  by  any 
good  mechanic  in  a short  time.  The  experiment,  I think,  is  worth  trying. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectliilly,  your  obedient  scrvmnt, 

J.  JI.  WILSOK, 

TAent.  Col.,  A.  I.  G.,  and  Chief  Topi.  Engrs.,  Army  of  Tenn. 


CuAr.  XXXVI. ] 


THE  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC. 


397 


TALLAHATCnEE  Eiver,  March  21,  1803. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
operations  of  the  infantry  forces  engaged  in  the  Yazoo  expedition  while 
it  continued  under  my  command: 

I embarked  my  command  on ‘steamers  Volunteer,  Lebanon  No.  2, 
Cheeseman,  Diana,  L.  Logan,  Saint  Louis,  Mariner,  Moderator,  Ida  May, 
Emma,  Citizen,  and  John  Bell,  and  made  every  preparation  required  “ to 
be  used  with  the  Yazoo  expedition,”  proceeded  at  once  to  Yazoo  Pass, 
and  joined  fleet  of  gunboats  lying  at  Moon  Lake.  I entered  the  Pass 
on  the  25th  of  February  ; was  detained  by  high  winds  and  the  difficulty 
in  moving  coal-barges,  but  succeeded  in  entering  the  Coldwater  on  the 
evening  of  March  1,  having  been  five  days  in  going  the  distance  of  IG 
miles. 

The  steamer  Emma,  being  reported  totally  disabled,  was  ordered  back 
to  nelena,  and  the  Key  West  taken  in  her  stead.  We  arrived  in  the 
Tallahatchee  on  the  evening  of  the  6th  of  March.  Here  we  determined 
on  leaving  the  coal-barges  behind,  and  pushing  forward  with  all  x^ossi- 
ble  dispatch.  As  we  moved  forward  through  a well-cultivated  country, 
cotton  fires  were  seen  on  all  sides. 

On  the  evening  of  the  10th,' we  came  upon  the  wreck  of  the  steamer 
Parallel  and  barge,  loaded  with  cotton,  and  in  flames.  The  enemy  being 
unable  to  get  them  away,  had  set  them  on  fire.  The  boats  were  rexiorted 
to  contain  over  3,000  bales,  and  I think  we  saw  over  that  number  on 
fire  at  the  different  plantations  passed  by  us. 

On  the  morning  of  the  11th,  arrived  in  front  of  Fort  Greenwood,  a 
strong  fortification,  about  3 miles  from  the  village  of  Greenwood.  A 
full  description  of  the  fort,  of  the  reconnaissance  on  board  the  Chillicothe 
and  by  land  with  the  Forty-sixth  and  Forty-seventh  Indiana  Volunteers 
on  the  11th,  also  the  engagement  of  the  same  day,  have  been  heretofore 
forwarded,  under  date  of  the  13th. 

On  the  12th,  a reconnaissance  was  made  by  a small  party  under  Cap- 
tain Kyan.  The  Chillicothe  was  making  some  repairs,  and  two  30- 
l)ounder  Parrott  guns  and  one  GS-pounder  howitzer  were  xilaced  in  bat- 
tery. 

On  the  13th,  the  gunboats  Chillicothe,  Captain  Foster,  and  De  Kalb, 
Captain  Walker,  the  mortar-boat,  and  our  land  battery  oxiened  and  kept 
up  a constant  fire  for  about  an  hour  and  a half,  when  the  gunboats 
withdrew,  the  land  battery  and  mortar  continuing  until  sunset.  Two 
killed  and  4 wounded  during  the  day. 

On  the  14th,  our  land  battery  fired  a few  rounds;  the  gunboats  were 
not  yet  ready  to  renew  the  attack.  The  Thirty- third  Missouri,  Colonel 
Pile,  and  Forty-seventh  Indiana,  Colonel  Slack,  were  engaged  in  making 
important  reconnaissances  on  both  sides  of  the  river.  Two  prisoners 
were  taken  by  the  Thirty-third  Missouri. 

On  the  IGth,  it  was  arranged  to  make  another  effort  to  take  the  fort. 
The  gunboats  were  to  engage  at  close  quarters,  and  the  land  battery  to 
open  at  the  same  time,  and,  if  successful  in  silencing  tlie  batteries  of  the 
enemy,  the  infantry  were  to  move  down  in  light-draught  gunboats  and 
assault  the  fort.  The  gunboat  Chillicothe  was  disabled  within  fifteen 
minutes  after  she  became  engaged,  and  withdrew ; the  De  Kalb  followed, 
and  the  movement  was  a failure.  The  Chillicothe  was  so  severely 
damaged,  and  the  suxiply  of  ammunition  was  so  short,  that  it  was  con- 
sidered unsafe  to  renew  the  attack. 

We  remained  in  front  of  the  fort  until  the  morning  of  the  20th,  occu- 
pying the  time  constantly  reconnoitering  the  country  thoroughly  by 


398  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 

«troDg  parlies,  accompanied  by  Lieutenant- Colonel  Wilson  and  the 
officers  of  iny  staff,  but  every  attempt  to  find  any  feasible  point  of  at- 
tack for  infantry  failed.  The  rebels’  works  were  so  surrounded  by 
swamps,  bayous,  and  overflowed  country  as  to  be  inaccessible  for  land 
forces.  The  iron  clads  were  nearly  out  of  ammunition,  and  the  Chilli- 
cothe  so  damaged  as  to  be  disabled.  We  had  heard  nothing  from  re- 
enforcements that  w ere  expected ; 'our  dispatch  boats  had  been  so  long 
delayed  as  to  excite  our  apprehensions  for  their  safety,  and  we  had 
information  of  rebel  movements  to  establish  a blockade  at  the  mouth  of 
Coldwater  by  sending  infantry  and  artillery  by  railroad  to  Panola,  and 
thence  down  the  Tallahatchee.  Under  these  circumstances,  being 
wholly  destitute  of  siege  artillery,  or  any  means  of  eflecting  the  reduc- 
tion of  the  fort,  it  was  thought  advisable  to  fall  back. 

At  12  m.  of  the  21st,  we  met  General  Quinby,  with  a portion  of  his 
division,  moving  toward  the  Yazoo  Eiver.  Under  his  orders  we  are  to 
return  to  the  attack.  During  the  expedition  my  officers  and  men  have 
behaved  nobly ; they  are  entitled  to  my  thanks.  To  the  active  industry 
of  General  Fisk,  and  for  the  cool  counsel  of  General  Salomon,  Colonels 
Slack,  Bringhurst,  and  Pile,  I feel  greatly  indebted.  Lieutenant-Colo- 
nel Wilson,  of  General  Grant’s  staff,  who  accompanied  the  expedition 
as  chief  engineer,  made  himself  useful  generally.  He  made  reconnais- 
sances, built  batteries,  and  occasionally  worked  them,  and  was  ready 
at  all  times,  day  and  night,  to  aid  in  pushing  forward  the  work. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  [John  A.]  McLaughlin,  my  picket  and  grand  guard 
officer ; Major  [James  L.]  Dicken,  medical  director ; Captain  [Milton  S.] 
Kimball,  assistant  adjutant-general;  Captain  [Henry  T.]  Noble,  quar- 
termaster, and  Captain  [Abraham  H.]  Eyan  and  Lieutenant  [James  K.] 
Catlin,  aides-de-camp,  were  always  at  their  posts  and  engaged  in  the 
faithfnl  discharge  of  their  various  duties,  and  I should  not  fail  to  state 
that  Colonel  Lewis,  of  the  Twenty-eighth  Wisconsin,  arranged  to  lead 
the  assault  on  the  fort  in  case  the  heavy  guns  had  been  silenced.  We 
did  not  take  the  fort,  but  I feel  that  all  was  done  that  could  be  done 
with  the  means  at  our  disposal. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  F.  EOSS, 

Brigadier-  General^  Commanding  Division. 

General  B.  M.  Prentiss. 


Helena,  Ark.,  April  18,  1863. 

Colonel:  In  compliance  with  the  request  of  the  major-general  com- 
manding the  department,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  sug- 
gestions in  regard  to  the  causes  of  the  failure  of  the  Yazoo  expedition 
to  accomplish  the  object  originally  contemplated : 

The  forces  under  my  command  consisted  of  nine  regiments  of  infantry 
and  one  light  field  battery.  We  embarked  upon  thirteen  transports  at 
Helena,  Ark.,  February  24,  and  moved  into  the  Pass  in  the  rear  of  the 
fleet  of  gunboats.  Our  transports,  though  perhaps  the  best  that  could 
be  procured,  were  very  poor,  and  frequently  delayed  us  by  breakage 
and  derangement  of  machinery. 

The  gunboats  had  three  barges  loaded  with  coal,  which  they  towed 
or  floated  with  them.  These  were  very  difficult  to  manage,  the  channel 
was  so  extremely  narrow  and  tortuous,  often  impeding  our  movements 
very  greatly.  It  was  impossible,  from  the  character  of  the  stream,  lo 
move  except  by  daylight.  With  the  utmost  expedition  that  could  be 


Chap.  XXXVL]  THE  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC.  390 

used,  it  was  not  until  the  evening  of  Marcli  1 that  tLe  light-drauglit 
gunboats  and  transports  entered  the  Coldwater.  By  this  time  a num- 
ber of  our  transports  were  more  or  less  crippled,  and  it  seemed  to  me 
quite  evident  that  it  was  of  the  utmost  importance  that  a part  of  the 
ex])edition  should  advance  more  rapidly  than  the  coal-barges  and  the 
partially  disabled  transports  could  be  moved. 

We  were  entering  the  enemy^s  country  through  a route  with  which  he 
was  hnniliar,  and  he  was  advised  daily  by  a line  of  couriers  connecting 
with  his  telegraph  lines  of  our  progress.  The  point  at  which  we  were 
aiming — the  confluence  of  the  Yalabusha  and  Tallahatchee  Eivers — if 
gained,  opened  to  us  the  Yazoo  Yalley,  the  richest  in  the  southwest, 
containing  immense  supplies  of  all  descriptions. 

The  enemy  was,  by  means  of  the  Yazoo  Kiver,  in  easy  communica- 
tion with,  this  point,  and  could  speedily  concentrate  any  desired  force 
to  oppose  our  progress.  Keports  began  to  reach  us  of  the  enemy’s 
determination  to  make  a stand  at  Greenwood,  but  if  even  a single  gun- 
boat could  reach  the  point  before  the  rebels  had  erected  fortiflcations, 
and  mounted  heavy  guns,  they  could  very  easily  be  prevented  from 
effecting  a lodgment. 

The  Avide  strips  of  overflowed  country  on  each  side  between  the  river 
and  the  hills  rendered  the  movement  of  boats  comparatively  safe,  as 
there  were  very  few  points  above  Greenwood  that  could  be  reached  by 
infantry  and  artillery,  and  if  the  enemy  came  in  force  he  must  come 
by  the  river. 

The  iron-clads,  not  being  subject  to  the  impediments  that  constantly 
retarded  the  light-draughts  and  transports,  moved  down  the  stream 
with  great  facility,  and,  if  allowed  to  proceed  without  waiting  for  the 
rest  of  the  fleet,  could  have  reached  Greenwood  probably  in  two  days 
after  leaving  the  Pass.  Besides  the  delay  necessarily  attending  this 
movement,  there  were  many  that  I deemed  quite  unnecessary.  Instead 
of  moving  in  the  morning  at  early  dawn,  as  could  and  should  have 
been  done,  it  was  frequently  delayed  until  7 or  7.30  o’clock.  On  several 
occasions  the  gunboat  immediately  in  my  advance  stopped  and  lay  to 
an  hour  for  dinner ; and  when  in  motion  it  seemed  that  they  moved 
very  slowly,  as  I had  no  difficulty  in  keeping  up  with  my  transports.  In 
consulting  with  Lieut.  Commander  Watson  Smith,  I urged  the  neces- 
sity of  greater  rapidity  of  movement;  advised  leaving  the  coal-barges 
in  the  rear,  with  sufficient  guard  to  protect  them,  and,  with  the  iron- 
clads and  such  light  transports  and  light  gunboats  as  could  keep  up 
with  them,  to  push  forward  with  the  utmost  expedition,  and  gain  the 
mouth  of  the  Tallahatchee,  and  hold  it  until  the  rest  of  the  fleet  could 
join'them.  I was  ably  seconded  by  Lieutenant  Colonel  Wilson.  Lieu- 
tenant-Commanders Foster  and  Walker,  commanding  the  iron  clads, 
also  concurred  in  these  views,  and  were  very  desirous  to  be  permitted 
to  push  forward. 

They  entered  the  Coldwater  on  the  morning  of  February  27,  and,  had 
they  moved  directly  on,  would  have  reached  the  point  now  known  as 
Fort  Pemberton  before  a single  gun  was  mounted,  thus  giving  us  easy 
control  of  the  Yalabusha  and  the  Yazoo  as  far  as  Yazoo  City;  but  the 
plan  was  rejected,  and  it  was  not  until  the  11th  of  March  that  wo 
reached  the  mouth  of  the  Tallahatchee. 

By  this  time  the  rebels  had  concentrated  there  about  G,000  men,  and 
had  formidable  works  completed.  Possibly,  we  still  might  have  suc- 
ceeded, had  not  the  Chillicothe,  through  fault  of  construction,  proved 
unable  to  sustain  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s  heavy  guns.  Infantry  being 
precluded,  by  the  situation  of  the  fort  and  extent  of  the  OA^erflow,  from 


400 


MISSISSIPPI;  WEST  TENNESSEE;  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


aiiytliing  by  direct  attack,  we  were  compelled  to  rely  on  the 
gunboats  to  silence  tiie  enemy’s  battery.  Had  this  been  done,  our  in- 
fantry forces  could  have  soon  cleared  the  river  of  obstructions,  and  a 
single  gunboat  once  past  the  fort  would  have  secured  us  not  only  the 
position  but  the  entire  garrison;  but,  failing  in  this,  nothing  could  be 
effected. 

I have  deemed  it  unnecessary  to  encumber  this  communication  with 
details.  Having  made  full  reports,  with  plats  accompanying,  from  time, 
to  time  during  the  progress  of  the  expedition,  it  is  but  just  to  say  that, 
while  I am  satisfied  Lieutenant-Commander  Smith  might,  by  more  en- 
ergy and  rapidity  of  movement,  have  made  the  expedition  successful, 
the  error  was  one  of  the  judgment  only ; that  he  was,  although  in  very 
feeble  health,  after  arriving  in  front  of  the  fort,  indefatigable  in  his 
labors,  and  exhibited  during  the  engagement  the  utmost  coolness  and 

gallantry.  , 

I have  not  alluded  to  the  period  during  which  Brigadier-General 
Quinby  commanded  tlie  expedition,  for,  in  my  opinion,  its  fate  was  de- 
cided, and  a withdrawal  inevitable,  as  soon  as  it  appeared  that  the  gun- 
boat could  not  silence  the  enemy’s  work. 

The  officers  and  soldiers  of  my  command  performed  the  many  ardu- 
ous duties  required  of  them  with  a vigilance  and  alacrity  deserving  of 
the'highest  praise,  and,  although  we  were  scouting  and  reconnoitering 
constantly,  aud  made  repeated  captures  of  rebel  soldiers  singly  and  in 
squads,  I did  not  have  a man  captured  by  them  during  the  entire  expe- 
dition. 

Upon  a full  retrospect,  with  my  present  knowledge  of  the  facts,  1 can 
discover  nothing  that  the  infantry  force  could  have  done,  with  the 
means  at  hand,  more  than  they  did  to  insure  success. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  F.  BOSS, 

Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Bawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  4. 

Beport  of  Brig.  Gen,  Frederielc  Salomon^  U.  S,  Army^  commanding 

First  Brigade. 

Headquarters  First  Brigade,  Thirteenth  Division,  - 

[nelena,]  April  10,  18G3. 

General:  My  brigade  having  formed  a part  of  the  Yazoo  Pass  ex- 
pedition, under  your  command,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  follow- 
ing report  of  the  same: 

In  compliance  with  former  instructions,  my  command,  numbering  in 
aggregate  1,803  effective  men,  was  embarked  on  six  transports,  with 
fifteen  days’  rations  and  tents  for  shelter,  on  the  24th  of  February.  The 
inclosed  tabular  statement,  marked  A,*  gives  the  different  regiments 
with  the  expedition,  and  their  respective  strength. 

On  the  11th  day  of  March,  the  forces  arrived  2 miles  north  of  rebel 
Fort  Pemberton,  after  a tedious  and  perilous  passage  through  the  Yazoo 
Cut,  Moon  Lake,  Yazoo  Pass,  Coldwater,  and  Tallahatchee  Bivers,  my 


* Not  found. 


401 


CHAr.  XXXVL]  the  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION^  ETC. 

com maudhaviDg  the  advance,  under  your  personal  direction.  The  Forty- 
sixth  Indiana  was  disembarked  first  for  a reconnaissance  to  the  front, 
and  drove  in  the  enemy^s  pickets.  The  command  was  then  encamped 
at  that  place.  Has  done  during  all  the  time  of  our  stay  picket  duty  in  the 
front  j furnished  heavy  fatigue  details  for  the  construction  of  batteries; 
has  made  reconnaissance  to  McNutt,  toward  the  Yalabusha  and  Yazoo 
Fivers.  The  command  was  in  the  beginning  suflering  for  medical  stores 
and  medicines,  but  was  soon  fully  supplied.  Officers  and  men  have 
cheerfully  performed  the  heavy  duties  required  by  the  situation.  The 
position  was  finally  evacuated  on  the  5th  day  of  April,  and  the  com- 
mand arrived  at  Helena  on  the  8th.  The  inclosed  tabular  statement* 
gives  the  loss  of  the  command.  Considering  that  parts  of  the  command 
have  been  under  the  fire  of  the  enemy  all  the  time,  the  loss  is  extremely 
light. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  mentioning  the  good  efiect  obtained 
by  the  strict  discipline  enforced  under  your  command. 

F.  SALOMON, 

Brigadier- General,  Coynmanding. 

General  L.  F.  Foss. 


No.  5. 

Reports  of  Brig,  Gen.  Cadwalladcr  C.  Washburn,  U.  S.  Army,  of  pre- 
liminary operations. 

Headquarters  District  of  Eastern  Arkansas, 

Helena,  Ark.,  February  18,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  Army  of  the  Tennessee : 

General  : I have  the  honor  herewith  to  hand  to  you  two  autograph 
letters  from  Brigadier-General  Washburn,  in  command  of  the  enter- 
l)rise  at  the  Yazoo  Pass,  which  I think  will  be  the  best  report  I can 
make  to  you  of  the  iirogress  of  that  enterprise.  I have  no  doubt  that 
the  plan  upon  which  we  are  there  working  will  be  successful,  and  will 
l)rove  of  great  advantage  to  us.  1 will  issue  such  a dispatch  as  is  sug- 
gested by  Genera]  W ashburn  in  Inclosure  No.  2. 

1 am,  general,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  M.  PFENTTSS, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Distriet. 

[Inclosure  No.  1.] 

Headquarters  Yazoo  Pass  Expedition, 

* February  10,  1803. 

General  : 1 shall  send  a steamer  up  in  the  morning  with  3 wounded 
men  who  were  shot  to-day  by  rebel  cavalry.  They  are  still  hanging 
around,  watching  our  movements  and  embarrassing  us  a little.  I report 
good  progress  to-day.  Have  taken  out  a good  many  very  large  trees, 
and  1 believe  that  in  four  days  T can  reach  the  Coldwater,  and  if  the 
water  does  not  fall  any  more  1 will  have  a channel  cut  that  will  take 
through  a boat  200  leet  long  and  50  feet  wide.  I am  satisfied  that  they 
cannot  establish  any  timber  blockade  that  I cannot  remove.  My  recon- 

^ Not  found. 

20  R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


402 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


Chai». 


naissaiKie  to  tlie  Coldwater  leads  me  to  think  that  they  cannot  blockade 
that  to  any  great  extent  with  timber.  I think  we  ought  to  have  two 
powerful  rams  and  one  iron -clad  ready  to  send  through  as  soon  as  the 
blockade  is  cleared  out.  It  would  be  hazardous  to  send  a large  fleet  of 
light  transports  down  the  Yazoo  until  we  know  what  kind  of  rams  and 
gunboats  the  rebels  have  there.  If  the  water  does  not  fall  any  more,  I 
am  satisfied  that  we  can  take  as  large  an  army  down  here  as  we  can 
find  transports  for.  Unless  I meet  with  unforeseen  obstacles,  I believe 
I can  get  a boat  through  to  the  Tallahatchee  within  one  week,  and  I 
would  urge  that  as  soon  as  we  have  this  Pass  clear,  a small  gunboat  be 
sent  through  and  down  as  far  as  the  mouth  of  Coldwater,  as  it  will  be 
difficult  for  me  to  say  that  the  Coldwater  is  clear,  from  a land  recon- 
naissance, as  there  are  many  places  that  a land  force  cannot  get  to  it. 
I wish  very  much  that  you  would  come  down  here,  as  I am  anxious  to 
have  your  opinion.  The  rebel  cavalry  that  is  hovering  around  1 am 
anxious  to  run  out  of  the  country  or  capture,  and  to  that  end  I wish  you 
would  send  me  to-morrow  200  more  cavalry.  Send  them  to  Moon  Lake, 
and  land  them  half  a mile  east  of  Dr.  Dowd’s  plantation,  on  the  north 
side  of  the  lake,  with  instructions  to  proceed  to  Hunt’s  Mill,  on  the 
Yazoo  Pass,  where  I hope  to  be  by  the  time  they  can  get  there.  Have 
them  take  two  days’  rations  of  all  but  meat,  with  their  blankets  and  a 
plenty  of  ammunition. 

The  men  I have  here  I wish  to  retain  until  this  job  is  done,  and  I have 
promised  them  that  a paymaster  shall  remain  at  Helena  until  they  can 
get  back,  and  I request  that  you  will  see  that  it  is  so. 

I am,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  C.  WASHBURN, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  B.  M.  Prentiss, 

Commanding  District  of  Eastern  Arlcansas,  Helena. 

P.  S. — In  sending  me  cavalry,  I wish  you  would  see  that  an  officer  of 
a rank  not  less  than  a major  is  sent.  I should  like  to  have  either  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Wood,  First  Indiana  Cavalry,  or  Major  Walker,  Fifth 
Kansas.  If  you  can  hasten  this  matter  so  that  this  cavalry  shall  reach 
Hunt’s  Mills  to-morrow  night,  I shall  be  glad. 

[Inclosure  No.  2.] 

Tazoo  Pass,  February  16,  1863. 

General:  Since  writing  you  a few  moments  since,  it  has  occurred 
to  me  that  we  might  throw  the  enemy  off  his  guard.  I wish  you  would 
contrive  to  have  it  telegraphed  to  the  Associated  Press  about  as  follows, 
viz : 

“The  attempt  to  open  the  Yazoo  Pass  is  likely  to  prove  an  entire 
failure.  After  expending  great  labor  to  remove  the  obstructions  placed 
in  it  by  the  rebels,  it  is  found  impossible  to  o})en  it  excei)t  for  the  very 
smallest  kind  of  boats.  Besides,  the  rapid  fall  of  water,  it  is  reported, 
has  caught  a number  of  boats  in  the  Pass,  which,  unless  strongly 
guarded,  are  liable  to  be  destroyed.” 

Such  a dispatch  would  find  its  way  to  Vicksburg  in  two  days  after 
it  was  published  in  the  Eastern  papers. 

Truly,  yours. 


Brigadier-General  Prentiss. 


C.  C.  WASHBURN, 

Brigadier- General, 


Chaf.  XXXYI.] 


.THE  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC. 
No.  6. 


403 


Beports  of  Maj.  Gen.  James  B.  McPherson.,  TJ.  S.  Army.,  commanding 
Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


Headquarters  Seventeenth  Army  Corps, 

Lalce  Providence.,  La..,  March  13,  1863. 


General  : Inclosed  please  find  copies  of  dispatches  just  received 
from  Generals  Quiuby*  arid  Eoss,t  which  will  give  you  an  idea  of  the 
difliculties  they  have  to  contend  with.  The  whole  country  on  the  east 
side  of  the  Mississippi  in  the  vicinity  of  Yazoo  Pass  and  in  Moon  Lake 
is  overfiowed,  and  General  Quinby  was  obliged  to  disembark  his  troops 
on  the  western  bank  of  the  Mississippi,  not  far  from  the  Pass,  on  the 
only  dry  ground  he  could  find.  As  General  Quinby  was  obliged  to 
discljarge  some  boats  for  repairs,  only  six  have  returned,  and  I cannot 
leai  n that  any  more  are  coming  down.  These  will  carry  about  two- 
thirds  of  Logan’s  division.  Unless  1 can  obtain  more  boats,  it  will  take 
over  two  weeks  to  get  the  command  here  to  the  entrance  to  Moon  Lake. 
I am  extremely  anxious  to  get  into  the  Yazoo  as  soon  as  i:>ossible  with 
re-enforcements,  for  I am  apprehensive  that  Quinby  will  meet  with  a 
stronger  force  than  he  can  attend  to. 

General  Logan’s  division  will  commence  embarking  to-morrow,  and 
will  probably  be  off  the  day  after,  or  at  least  as  much  of  it  as  the  boats 
can  carry. 

Colonel  Lagow  has,  I presume,  given  you  all  the  points  in  relation  to 
cotton,  contrabands,  cutting  the  levee,  &c. 

Very  respectfully. 


JAS.  B.  MCPHERSON, 

Major-General. 


Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


^ Lake  Providence,  La., 

March  22,  1863 — 4 p.  m. 

General:  One  brigade  of  General  Logan’s  division  and  part  of 
another  are  on  board  of  transports,  ready  to  start  for  Eagle  Bend,  and 
will  reach  that  point  early  to-morrow.  I shall  leave  General  McArthur 
here  and  go  down  with  General  Logan’s  division. 

I inclose  you  a copy  of  General  Quin  by ’s  dispat  ch,|  just  received, 
from  which  you  will  understand  the  difficulties  he  has  had  to  conteml 
with.  I have  just  received  a letter  from  Colonel  Boomer,  dated  the  20th, 
stating  that  boats  enough  had  arrived  to  take  the  balance  of  General 
Qniiil)y’s  division,  and  that  he  wmuld  be  off*  double  quick.  He  also 
stated  that  he  thought  boats  enough  would  be  down  yesterday  to  take 
General  Smith’s  division. 

Since  cutting  the  levee  at  this  point,  the  water  has  risen  steadily  in 
the  lake  until  tlie  sliore  is  all  overflowed,  except  in  a few  high  points. 
I have  been  obliged  to  move  the  whole  of  Logan’s  division,  and  all  but 
one  brigade  of  McArthur’s,  up  the  river  about  5 miles,  in  order  to  get 


* See  No.  7,  report  of  March  9,  p.  404. 
t See  No,  '.I,  report  of  Marcli  7,  p. 

I See  No.  7,  leport  of  March  1(3,  p.  40(3. 


404 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAP.  XXXVI. 


caui])iiig  ground.  General  Eansoin  is  still  up  the  river,  at  American 
Bend,  with  two  regiments  from  here,  and  the  force  that  came  u})  from 
the  tleet.  1 am  expecting  him  down  to  night  or  to-morrow. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  B.  McPHEESOK, 

Major- General. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


1^0.  7. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  F.  Quinhy.,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Seventh 
Division,  of  operations  March  9-28. 

IIdqrs.  Seventh  Division,  Seventeenth  Army  Gorps, 

Near  Helena,  Arlc.,  March  9,  1803. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  my  arrival  at  the  entrance  to 
the  passage  to  Moon  Lake  at  3 p.  in.  yesterday  ; but  as  the  wind  was 
then  blowing  quite  hard  from  the  north,  and  there  was  also  some  fog, 
I did  not  think  it  prudent  to  attempt  passing  to  the  lake  until  the 
wind  should  fall  and  the  fog  clear  away.  The  land  adjoining  the  en- 
trance for  some  distance,  both  above  and  below,  is  overflowed,  and  I 
therefore  made  for  the  opposite  shore  of  the  river,  where  I found  dry 
land  and  a good  place  for  tying  up  boats.  I then  went  to  Ilelena,  about 
4 miles  distant,  to  get  some  definite  information  about  the  character  of 
the  pass  to  the  lake,  as  well  as  that  from  the  lake  to  the  Coldwater. 

1 saw  General  Prentiss  and  Major  [Eeuben  B.]  Hatch,  acting  quarter- 
master, both  of  whom  advised  against  the  attempt  to  take  my  large 
transports  into  the  lake.  I determined  that  I would  take  a small  steamer 
to-day  and  go  through  the  Pass,  to  enable  me  to  judge  for  myself,  first, 
as  to  the  propriety  of  going  in  with  the  large  boats,  and,  secondly,  to 
select  the  best  position  for  establishing  the  camp  of  my  division. 

I have  but  just  returned  from  the  lake,  and  am  compelled  to  say  that, 
in  my  opinion,  it  would  be  unwise  to  try  the  passage  with  the  large 
transports.  The  current  is  rapid,  and  the  narrow  channel,  at  about  100 
yards  from  the  river,  makes  a sharp  bend  of  at  least  90  degrees.  Long 
boats,  without  the  most  skillful  management,  could  not  make  this  turn. 

Should  one  such  boat  be  sunk  in  the  channel,  no  others  could  pass 
until  the  wreck  was  removed,  and  that  would  be  a work  of  much  time 
and  difiiculty. 

Kearly  all  of  the  lake  shore  is  now  submerged,  and  the  water  is  still 
rising. 

Por  the  above  reasons,  I shall  deem  myself  justified  in  departing  from 
the  strict  letter  of  your  and  General  Grant’s  instructions,  and  will  look 
for  some  convenient  i)oint  other  than  that  indicated  at  which  to  disem- 
bark my  troops,  believing  that  in  so  doing  I am  complying  with  what 
would  be  your  wishes  in  view  of  the  facts. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

I.  P.  QUINBY, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Seventh  Division. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  McPherson, 

Commanding  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


Ohai*.  XXXVL]  the  YAZOO  TASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC.  405 

Neaii  IIelena,  Aeic.,  March  11, 18G3. 

General  : Inclosed  please  find  copies  of  communications  from  Gen- 
eral Ross  to  General  Prentiss,*  wliicli  were  received  yesterday.  They 
are  sent  in  order  that  yon  may  know  of  tlie  pro^^ress  of  the  Yazoo  ex- 
])e(lition,  and  of  the  difficulties  and  embarrassments  it  lias  to  encounter, 
without  being  discouraged.  I confess  myself  very  much  annoyed  by 
the  unwilling  and  unaccommodating  spirit  of  the  steamboat  men  in 
charge  of  the  boats  which  have  been  thus  far  assigned  to  take  my  divis- 
ion forward.  Without  exception,  all  have  found  some  serious  defects 
in  their  respective  boats,  which  render  them  unfit  for  the  service,  and 
they  resort  to  all  sorts  of  pleas  and  subterfuges  to  get  out  of  it. 

Of  all  the  boats  in  which  my  division  embarked,  two  only  can  be  used 
for  the  expedition.  One  other  (the  Brazil)  is  of  the  right  size,  but  she 
leaked  badly  when  we  left  Memphis,  and  is  now  in  a still  worse  condition. 
It  would  retard  rather  than  advance  our  i^rogress  to  take  her,  and  I have, 
therefore,  ordered  her  to  Memphis  for  repairs.  She  will  probably  be 
ready  for  service  when  Logan’s  division  arrives.  A crack  was  reported 
in  the  boiler  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  when  she  arrived  here,  which  I had 
examined  b^^  the  engineer  of  the  Superior,  who  pronounced  her  unsafe 
without  rei)airs,  and  I accordingly  ordered  her  to  Memphis  for  that  pur- 
pose. She  should  be  back  to-night.  The  Ed.  Walsh  and  John  II. 
Dickey  are  both  in  bad  order,  and  uufit  for  the  transportation  of  troops. 
They  also  have  been  ordered  to  Memxihis  for  necessary  repairs.  With 
tliese  exceptions,  all  the  boats  which  brought  my  division  will  start 
for  Lake  Providence  to-morrow.  It  seems  to  me  of  the  utmost  conse- 
quence that  re-enforcements  to  General  Ross  should  be  speedily  sent 
forward,  and  my  determination  now  is  to  load  what  transports  there 
may  be  at  my  disposal  to-morrow,  and  start  down  the  Pass  to  overtake 
him.  He  has  but  about  4,000  troops,  and  evidently  does  not  apprehend 
the  dangers  by  which  he  is  surrounded.  I shall  leave  Colonel  Boomer 
behind,  to  follow  with  the  rest  of  the  division  as  soon  as  he  has  trans- 
portation. 

I am,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

I.  E.  QUIYBY, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding  ^Seventh  Division. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  McPherson,  Comdg.  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


Hear  Memphis,  Tenn.,  March  12,  18G3. 

General  : We  are  now  loading  the  few  boats  we  have,  and  shall  be 
ready  to  start  down  the  Yazoo  Pass  early  to-morrow  morning  with  the 
headquarters,  the  pioneer  cori)s,  and  at  least  one  brigade  of  this  division. 
Tlie  dispatch  boat  Winona  was  sent  down  to  the  Yazoo  fleet  two  days 
since,  with  instructions  to  General  Ross.  She  may  be  back  this  after- 
noon, and  I shall,  of  course,  be  governed  by  tlie  tenor  of  the  news  she 
may  bring.  Should  slie  not  arrive,  however,  I shall  take  the  lead  with  all 
the  troops  of  my  division  that  the  transports  at  my  disposal  can  carry. 

Trusting  tliat  you  will  approve  my  course,  I am,  general,  very  re- 
spectl'ully,  your  obedient  servant, 

I.  E.  QIJINBY, 
Brigadier- G enera Z,  Gommandi ng. 

Major-General  McPherson,  Comdg.  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


See  Roas  to  Preiitisa,  March  7,  p.  39^5,  aiul  March  8,  p.  )i94, 


406 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai*.  XXXVI. 


Steamer  Prima  Donna, 

March  16,  1863 — 8 p.  m. 

General:  On  the  morning  of  the  4th  [14th]  instant,  the  First  Bri- 
gade and  tlie  headquarters  of  this  division,  together  with  the  pioneer 
corps  and  two  companies  of  cavalry,  on  six  transports,  left  their  en- 
cami)ment,  3 miles  below  Helena,  and  entered  the  Yazoo  Pass.  After 
three  days  of  unremitting  toil,  and,  for  me,  much  painful  anxiety,  we 
have  reached  the  Coldwater,  and  passed  down  it  about  2 miles. 

The  other  five  boats  were  some  distance  in  my  rear  when  I started 
this  morning,  but  I hope  they  will  reach  this  point  before  noon  to-mor- 
row. At  all  events,  I shall  not  move  forward  until  all  get  through  the 
Pass. 

The  Coldwater  at  its  present  stage  might  be  called  a navigable 
stream,  but  the  passage  from  Moon  Lake  to  it  can  scarcely  be  made  by 
any  except  the  smallest  sized  steamboats. 

The  Prima  Donna  is  greatly  damaged,  although  handled  with  the 
utmost  care.  A great  portion  of  our  time  was  occupied  in  clearing 
away  obstructions  which  impeded  her  progress,  as  they  probably  would 
have  that  of  the  other  boats  ; still,  she  kept  well  in  advance,  and  will 
now  have  to  wait  at  least  half  a day  for  them  to  close  up. 

It  being  the  determination  of  Major-General  Grant  to  send  your  whole 
army  corps,  and  perhaps  two  additional  divisions,  over  this  route,  1 
may  be  permitted  to  suggest  that  both  expedition  and  economy  would 
be  consulted  by  employing  a number,  say,  twenty,  well-constructed  flat- 
boats,  and  a few  small  but  powerful  tugs,  rather  than  the  steamboats 
such  as  we  are  now  using.  A flat-boat,  120  feet  long  and  50  feet  broad, 
with  ordinary  skill  in  its  management,  would  have  made  in  one  day  tlie 
distance  that  has  occupied  us  three.  The  first  cost  of  such  a flat-boat 
would  scarcely  exceed  that  for  repairing  the  damage  to  one  of  the  steam- 
boats after  making  the  passage.  I commend  this  to  your  serious  con- 
sideration, as  I believe  it  a physical  impossibility  to  transport  and  sub- 
sist a large  army  by  this  route  with  steamboats  such  as  we  are  now 
using,  and  it  is  not  likely  that  a sufficient  number  of  a suitable  size  can 
be  found  on  the  Western  waters. 

The  steamer  Carl  came  up  to-night  just  after  we  had  tied  up.  Sbe 
brought  no  official  dispatches  for  me,  but  the  passengers  inform  me 
that  General  Boss  is  about  2 miles  above  Greenwood,  at  a point  which 
is  fortified  by  the  enemy. 

Our  gunboats  engaged  the  rebel  batteries  last  Friday,  but  were  com- 
pelled to  retire  after  sustaining  some  injury. 

I shall  hurry  forward  with  this  brigade  as  fast  as  possible,  and  hope 
before  you  overtake  me  to  eftect  a lodgment  at  some  good  position  on 
the  Yazoo. 

The  rest  of  my  division  will  follow  me  by  brigades  as  fast  as  trans- 
portation is  provided. 

I very  much  fear  that  the  boats  which  have  been  down  the  Pass 
will  not  be  in  a condition  to  transport  other  troops  without  extensive  re- 
pairs. I predicate  this  upon  the  damage  the  Prima  Donna  has  already 
received. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

I.  F.  QUINBY, 

Brigadier-  Oeneral, 

Major-General  McPherson, 

Commanding  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC.  407 

Steamer  Prima  Donna, 

March  21,  18G3. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  arrival  of  the  expedition 
with  which  I started  from  Helena,  Ark.,  on  the  14th  instant,  down  the 
Tallahatchee,  about  40  miles  below  the  mouth  of  Ooldwater.  We  should 
have  gone  at  least  40  miles  farther  to-day  had  I not  been  surprised,  at 
12  m.,  by  meeting  a fleet  of  transports  bringing  the  division  of  General 
Boss  up  the  river. 

It  seems  that  after  two  unsuccessful  attempts  by  the  gunboats  to  re- 
duce the  rebel  works  just  above  Greenwood,  in  which  the  Chillicothe 
was  quite  seriously  damaged,  it  was  decided  by  the  commanders  of  the 
land  and  naval  forces  to  abandon  the  expedition,  or  rather  to  deler 
further  operations  until  more  extensive  preparations  should  be  made 
for  it. 

I immediately  had  an  interview  with  General  Boss,  and,  after  w^eigh 
ing  carefully  his  reasons  for  making  this  retrograde  movement,  deemed 
it  best  to  order  him  to  return  with  me  to  the  point  he  had  left  above 
Greenwood.  Falling  back,  after  forcing  our  way  thus  far,  would  have 
a depressing  efiect  upon  our  army  and  the  country,  and  raise  the  hoi)es 
and  the  determination  of  the  rebels. 

I also  had  an  interview  with  Lieutenant-Commander  Foster,  com- 
manding the  gunboat  fleet,  and  induced  him  to  return  likewise.  We 
all  leave  at  daylight  to-morrow  morning,  and  hope  to  reach  our  imme- 
diate destination  before  dark. 

After  disembarking,  I shall  send  up  a sufiicient  number  of  transi)orts 
tp  bring  down  the  Second  and  Third  Brigades  of  this  division.  This, 
of  course,  will  leave  me  without  means  of  transporting  the  whole  of  my 
command  by  water,  which  may,  at  any  moment,  become  desirable. 

1 trust,  therefore,  you  will  direct  the  requisite  number  of  trans])orts 
to  move  my  whole  command  to  be  sent  to  me  at  the  earliest  possible 
moment.  In  the  belief  that  you  will  approve  my  course,  I am,  ^'e^y 
respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

I.  F.  QUINBY, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding, 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  McPherson, 

Commanding  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


Headquarters  Yazoo  Expedition, 

Tallahatchee  River,,  March  25,  1863 — 11  p.  m. 

General  : This  expedition  reached  the  yjosition  formerly  held  by  the 
command  under  Brigadier-General  Boss,  about  2 miles  above  Fort  Pem- 
berton, on  the  afternoon  of  the  23d  instant.  At  3 p.  m.,  the  same  day,  1 
induced  Lieutenant-Commander  Foster  to  move  down  with  the  Chilli- 
cothe and  De  Kalb  to  draw  the  fire  of  the  fort ; only  three  shots  were  fired 
from  the  Chillicothe  and  none  from  the  De  Kalb.  The  guns  of  the  fort 
made  no  response.  General  Boss  and  myself,  during  the  firing,  were 
on  the  right  bank  of  the  river,  700  yards  from  the  works,  and  could  dis- 
tinctly see  the  guns,  but  the  gunners  kept  under  cover,  evidently  re- 
serving their  fire  for  a nearer  approach  of  the  gunboats.  It  was  raining 
liard  at  the  time,  and  continued  to  do  so  until  noon  yesterday,  when  it 
cleared  up.  I deemed  it  best  not  to  have  the  troops  disembark  until 
to-day.  In  the  mean  time  I have  thoroughly  examined  both  banks  of 
the  river  to  the  fort  on  the  west,  and  several  miles  below  it  on  the  east 
bank.  At  the  i^resent  stage  of  the  water  it  is  impracticable  to  reach  the 


408 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAr.  .tXXVt 


fort  by  land,  or  the  Yazoo  Eiver,  below  it,  on  the  west  bank  5 but  from 
the  position  I hold  on  the  east  bank  we  can  easily  get  to  the  Talla- 
hatchee  below  the  fort,  and  also  to  the  Yalabusha.  Both  banks  of  the 
Tallahatchee,  about  3-  miles  below  the  fort,  are  several  feet  above  the 
water,  and  by  means  of  a pontoon  bridge  a force  could  be  thrown  in  the 
rear  of  the  fort  and  beyond  the  reach  of  its  guns. 

By  crossing  the  Yalabusha  just  above  its  mouth,  and  following  down 
the  Yazoo  until  we  get  below  the  fort,  we  could  cut  off  the  supplies  of 
the  garrison,  and  compel  it  to  come  out  to  fight  or  surrender.  Either  of 
these  places  will  require  a pontoon  bridge  250  feet  long. 

Lieutenant  Foster,  commanding  gunboat  fleet,  declares  positively  that, 
unless  he  receives  orders  to  the  contrary,  he  will  start  for  the  Missis- 
sippi Eiver,  via  Moon  Lake,  with  his  whole  fleet  on  or  before  the  1st 
proximo.  Should  he  act  on  this  determination,  the  land  forces  would  be 
left  here  in  a very  precarious  position,  with  nearly  200  miles  of  unguarded 
water  communications  between  them  and  the  Mississippi. 

1 shall  do  my  best  to  induce  him  to  leave  behind  the  five  light-draught 
gunboats  now  in  the  Tallahatchee,  but  I scarcely  hope  to  change  his  de- 
termination. Six  of  our  transports  are  under  orders  to  leave  for  Helena 
at  daylight  to-morrow  morning,  to  bring  down  the  rest  of  my  division; 
but  since  I have  learned  of  the  decision  of  Lieutenant  Foster,  I do  not 
know  that  it  would  be  prudent  to  send  them  up.  It  is  one  of  the  great 
evils  of  our  service  tbat  the  land  and  naval  forces  are  left,  in  a great 
measure,  independent  of  each  other.  The  best  concerted  plans  are  liable 
to  fail  from  this  cause. 

In  the  hope  that  you  will  soon  be  here,  I remain,  general,  very 
respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

I.  F.  QLIYBY, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  McPherson, 

Commanding  Seventeenth  Army' Corps. 

March  26,  1863— 9 a.  m. 

P.  S. — I detained  the  transports  this  morning  until  I could  have  an 
interview  with  Lieutenant  Foster.  This  I have  had,  and  he  ])romises,  in 
the  event  of  his  leaving  the  Tallahatchee,  not  to  take  witli  him  all  his 
light-draught  gunboats,  but  promises  that  I shall  have  a sufficient  num- 
l>er  of  them  to  keep  open  my  communications.  The  transports  will, 
therefore,  leave  immediately. 


Tallahatchee  Eiver,  March  28,  1863. 

General  ; I wrote  you  a dispatch  on  the  25th  instant,  a copj^  of 
which  I inclose,*  fearing  that  through  the  delays  and  accidents  to  onr 
mails  it  may  not  have  reached  you. 

In  the  mean  time  the  other  two  brigades  of  my  division  have  not  ar- 
rived, land  a note  from  Colonel  Boomer,  of  the  19th  instant,  in  which  he 
informs  me  that  no  transports  had  yet  reported  to  him,  gives  me  no 
reason  to  expect  them  for  several  days.  This  delay  is  to  be  greatly  re- 
gretted, for  the  rebels  are  constantly  receiving  re-enforcements,  adding 
to  and  strengthening  their  works.  It  is  evident  that  they  intend  to 
make  a determined  stand  at  this  point.  Every  move  that  we  make  is 
answered  by  one  from  them. 


See  r.  407. 


Chap.  XXXVL]  THE  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC.  409 

The  point  at  which  I propose  to  force  a passage  of  the  Tallahatchee 
is  now  covered  one  of  their  field-works,  as  I discovered  by  a personal 
reconnaissance  yesterday.  The  recent  rains  have  made  the  roads  by 
which  we  pass  from  the  point  we  now  occupy  to  the  river  below  their 
fort  almost  impassable. 

But  for  a heavy  rain  last  night,  we  should  have  put  under  cover  to- 
night a battery  of  four  10-pounder  Parrotts,  to  silence  their  battery 
and  prevent  the  construction  of  additional  works  at  the  point  above 
referred  to.  This  must  now  be  postponed  at  least  another  day. 

I have  written  to  General  Prentiss,  at  Helena,  to  send  forward,  if  he 
has  it,  material  for  a bridge  300  feet  long,  and  this  morning  disi)atched 
a boat  up  the  river  for  the  purpose  of  having  a saw-mill  examined,  and, 
if  possible,  put  in  running  order,  to  get  out  such  lumber  as  we  require. 
My  fear  is  that  our  troops  on  their  way  down  injured  and  destroyed  the 
machinery  to  such  an  extent  that  the  mill  cannot  be  put  in  repair  in 
time  for  our  purposes. 

Yesterday  four  24-pounder  siege  guns  arrived — two  of  our  own  and 
two  of  rebel  manufacture.  Of  the  latter,  one  only  can  be  used,  but  it 
is  proposed  to  mount  on  the  carriage  of  the  other  a 30-pounder  Parrott, 
taken  from  one  of  the  gunboats. 

We  hope  to  get  these  four  guns  in  battery  within  700  yards  of  the 
fort  to-night. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  &c., 

I.  F.  QUINBY, 
Brigadier-  Oeneralj  Commanding. 

, Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  McPherson, 

Commanding  ^Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  8. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  Commander  ^Vatson  Smith,  JJ.  S.  Navy. 

United  States  Mississippi  Squadron, 

March  12,  1803. 

General:  Lieut.  Commander  Watson  Smith  informs  me  that  he  has 
but  a month’s  supply  of  provisions.  I am  anxious  to  supply  him,  but  have 
no  vessel.  Can  you  furnish  me  with  a small  steamer  that  will  go  with- 
out fail  through  the  Pass  and  join  the  vessels  and  troops  you  have  sent 
up?  He  will  also  want  ammunition,  which  I will  send  him  by  same 
conveyance. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DAVID  D.  POBTER, 

Acting  Rear-Admiral,  Commanding  Mississippi  Squadron. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  Army  of  the  Mississippi. 


[Incloaure  No.  1.] 


U.  S.  S.  Rattler, 
Coldwatcr,  March  3,  1803. 

Sir  : We  are  adVancing  but  slowly.  This  stream  is  not  so  much 
wider  or  clearer  than  the  Pass  as  to  make  much  dillerence  in  either 
speed  or  the  amount  of  damage  inflicted  on  these  vessels. 


410 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENN^ESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai  XXXVI. 


Our  hull  has  suffered  as  much  to-day  as  on  any  day  yet.  We  can 
only  advance  with  the  current ; faster  than  that  brings  us  foul.  Our 
si)eed  is  not  more  than  IJ  miles  per  hour,  if  that. 

Wheels  and  stacks  have  escaped^  through  care;  but  with  over  20  feet 
above  water,  and  less  than  3 in  it,  without  steerage-way,  light  winds 
play  with  us,  bringing  the  sides  and  trees  in  rough  contact.  I imagine 
that  the  character  of  this  navigation  is  different  from  what  was  ex- 
pected. We  will  get  through  in  fighting  condition,  but  so  much  de- 
layed that  all  the  advantages  of  a surprise  to  the  rebels  will  have  been 
lost. 

Evening. — The  steamer  Bayard  broke  her  stern-post  to-day,  and  that 
has  caused  delay.  In  the  Pass,  had  a hole  punched  in  her  below  wnter; 
she  half  filled,  but  was  re-covered.  The  crooked  course  of  the  stream, 
and  the  thickly  wooded  shore,  prevents  our  having  more  than  an  occa 
sional  glimpse  of  other  vessels.  Each  has  its  position  and  distance  as- 
signed, but  a knowledge  of  the  whereabouts  of  those  next  can  generally 
only  be  ascertained  by  means  of  a boat. 

The  iron-clads  have  the  least  trouble  from  trees  or  overhanging 
branches,  and  are  scarcely  affected  by  the  wind. 

A case  of  small-pox  was  reported  by  the  Petrel  to-day,  and  was  im- 
mediately transferred  to  a returning  transport,  for  passage  to  Helena 
and  the  hospital. 

The  shore  occasionally  makes  down  to  the  clear  water,  but  mucli  ot‘ 
the  route  is  through  a clearing  amidst  trees  standing  in  water.  I don’t 
think  we  have  seen  a plantation  in  the  last  8 miles ; all  is  swamp. 

March  4. — The  Petrel  comes  in  with  her  wheel  much  damaged,  and 
without  the  means  of  repairing.  I can  repair  it,  but  my  supply  was  for 
but  one  vessel. 

March  5. — The  river  is  clearer,  and  we  make  better  speed.  If  we  reach 
the  Tallahatchee  this  evening,  which  our  advance  may  do,  our  total  dis- 
tance from  Delta  will  be  but  50  miles,  not  6 miles  ])er  day.  1 am  ha  v- 
ing an  account  of  the  number  of  navy  rations  in  the  expedition  taken. 
No  vessel  has  more  than  a mouth’s  supply  at  this  date,  and  tlie  Chilli- 
cothe  but  seven  days,  the  Lioness  thirteen,  and  the  Fulton  seven.  The 
last  reports  one  boiler  badly  burrued.  My  first  knowledge  of  the  Petrel, 
Lioness,  and  Fulton  being  attached  to  the  expedition  was  receivecl 
after  entering  the  Pass.  They  joined  after  reaching  Coldwater,  too  laie 
for  me  to  prepare  them  for  the  expedition,  which  could  only  have  been 
done  by  sending  them  to  Memphis.  We  are  better  off'  than  the  army, 
however,  and  have  a fair  supply  of  coal.  An  organized  party  of  army  : 
and  navy  collects  beef  for  rations  and  cotton  for  defense.  The  peojna  ) 
report  rebels  and  batteries  below,  &c.  Gathered  some  cotton  to-day;  ; 
much  that  we  find  is  so  badly  baled  as  to  be  dangerous.  1 hope  to  make  ! 
better  speed  from  this  time  through. 

Tallahatchee  Biver^  12  miles  from  Coldwater.,  March  6,  evening. — Sto])ped  1 
for  the  night,  and  waiting  for  the  others  to  close  up. 

Our  intelligence,  received  from  various  sources,  at  diff'erent  ])laces  and  t 
from  diff'erent  people,  is  that  Yazoo  City  is  being  fortified,  3,000  negroes 
doing  the  labor,  and  that  a large  army  is  there  for  its  defense,  i)rovided  ’ 
with  heavy  guns. 

The  same  is  said  of  Greenwood,  but  I do  not  place  the  same  credit  in  [ 
the  reports  concerning  Greenwood. 

A receipt  in  the  possession  of  a man  near  us  on  the  shore,  for  cotton  , 
for  a rebel  steamer,  shows  a naval  organization  amongst  them.  It  reads  ^ 
in  this  way : 


CHAP,  xxxvi.l  THE  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC.  411 

By  coDimand  of  Isaac  N.  Brown,  I take  (specifying  quantity,  quality,  &c.)  cotton 
for  tlie  steamer  Saint  Mary’s,  to  protect  her  from  the  enemy’s  shot. 

V.  E.  SHEPPERD. 
Lieutenant  G.  S.  Navy. 

As  he  has  a few  bales  left,  he  will  have  another  receipt  to-morrow 
from  a grade  above  that  in  the  U.  S. 

This  river  is  high  and  the  current  strong. 

Eespectfully,  yours, 

vV.  SMITH, 
TAeutenant- Commander. 


. Actg.  Rear-Admiral  David  D.  Porter, 

Commanding  Mississijgpi  Squadron, 


[Inclosure  No.  2.] 


U.  S.  S.  Rattler, 
TallaJiatchee  Biver^  March  7,  1863. 

Sir  : I am  obliged  to  leave  the  Petrel  about  12  miles  from  the  Gold- 
water,  in  the  Tallahatchee.  Her  wheel  is  about  destroyed  by  accitlents 
and  bad  management.  We  will  coal  to-night,  and  go  on  to  Greenwood 
with  the  gunboats  and  transports,  leaving  the  Marmora  at  the  junction 
of  the  Yalabusha  and  Tallahatchee,  to  guard  the  coal  (two  barges)  and 
the  steamer  Bayard  and  an  army  transport  with  troops.  The  Romeo 
follows  with  the  mortar.  The  little  provision  that  the  army  has  is  spoil- 
ing. They  have  five  days’  on  hand,  and  have  sent  for  only  six  days’  in 
addition.  I can  maintain  my  party  (those  now  drawing  rations)  for  one 
month.  If  all  entitled  drew  rations,  would  have  rations  for  twenty-two 
days. 

We  have  these  disadvantages — that  we  must  fight  down-stream,  and 
that  all  are  stern-wheelers  but  one,  and  the  rams  cannot  reach  a vessel 
with  wide  guards  in  a tender  place  without  bringing  up  against  their 
own  works  in  front  of  the  boilers.  I have  cut  away  their  bitts,  and 
made  the  most  of  those  vessels. 

The  Lioness  has  eighty-five  bales  of  cotton  for  defense,  two  deep  be- 
fore boilers;  the  Pulton  cannot  carry  any  on. the  sides  forward.  The 
army  have,  I believe,  sent  for  more  provisions,  but  they  will  be  scant 
when  those  are  received.  This  delay  has  spoiled  our  chances.  There 
will  be  more  of  it,  as  they  must  forage  for  provisions  and  fuel,  and  every 
transport,  I am  told,  has  an  empty  hold.  I anticipate  a rough  time. 
Have  made  the  best  preparations  that  our  time  and  means  would  admit, 
and  go  to  work  trustingly. 

Two  cases  (contrabands)  of  small-pox  were  reported  by  the  Forest 
Rose  to-day.  I will  have  them  sent  to  Helena,  and  thence  to  Cairo,  if 
possible.  Several  of  the  light-draughts  are  cottoned  forward  and  on 
the  sides  abreast  of  boilers ; a good  defense  of  bales,  too,  on  cabin  decks 
forward  and  around  bows  inboard  of  hammock-nettings,  the  trees  hav- 
ing nearly  brushed  the  nettings  away.  The  light-draughts  with  huiTi- 
cane  cut  roofs  have  had  all  the  after  parts  of  decks  swept  away. 

Respectfully,  yours. 


W.  SMITH, 

Lieutenant- Commander^  Comdg.  Gunboats  Yazoo  Expedition, 


Actg.  Rear-Admiral  David  D.  Porter, 

Commanding  Mississippi  Squadron, 


412  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  ICiiav.  XXXVI. 

No.  9. 

Reports  of  ]\[aj.  Gen.  William  W.  Loring,  G.  R.  Army,  commanding 
at  Fort  Pemherton,  Sc.,  of  operations  February  IT-April  11. 

ITeadquaiiters  Fort  Pemberton, 

March  11,  18G3.  (Received  March  12.) 

General  : Iron-clad  turret-boat  Cliillicotlie  came  down  and  attacked 
ns  this  morning  at  10  o’clock.  Two  of  our  shots  struck  her.  Firing 
kept  up  lialf  an  hour,  when  the  boat  withdrew^  Enemy  reported  in 
force  landing  above  about  2 miles,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  Talla- 
batchee.  I have  ordered  a regiment  and  battery  from  [L.]  Tilghman  to 
Chockachuma,  on  the  Yalabusha,  and  himself  to  take  the  balance  of  his 
command  to  Yazoo  City  as  rapidly  as  possible.  If  you  can  spare  other 
troops  and  heavy  arms,  wmuld  advise  sending  them  to  Yazoo  City,  and 
block  the  river  there  strongly,  in  hopes  of  resisting  them  at  this  point. 
Please  order  ammunition  to  be  sent,  and  order  Lieutenant  Ilarrod, 
engineers,  at  Yazoo  City,  now  at  Vicksburg. 

W.  W.  LORING, 

Major-  General,  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  0.  Pemberton. 

Commanding,  Sc. 


ITeadquartees  Fort  Pemberton, 

March  11,  18G3. 

General  : Another  of  the  enemy’s  iron-clads  attacked  this  position 
this  afternoon,  and  was  repelled  with  injury. 

Our  32-pounder  shot  nearly  exhausted  ; they  are  our  main  reliance. 
Received  this  evening  extraordinary  dispatch  from  Major  Mayo.  For 
some  reason  unknown  to  us,  he  takes  upon  himself  the  responsibility 
of  refusing  to  send  ammunition.  The  requisition,  approved  by  me,  was 
made  in  accordance  with  your  order,  with  great  care,  and  by  actual 
measurement  of  each  gun.  I liear  it  is  too  late  to  send  us.  The  requi- 
sition by  Colonel  [T.  N.]  .Waul  was  in  accordance  with  the  invoices  sent 
him  of  the  guns.  There  was  no  material  difference  betw^een  the  two 
requisitions. 

W.  W.  LORING, 

Major- General,  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  0.  Pemberton. 


Jackson,  March  14,  18G3. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Chattanooga,  Tenn.  : 

Eor/r  PEMUEinoN,  on  T.)  leatiatctiee  River, 

March  i:J — 1 p.  m. 

Terrific  fire  from  enemy;  four  liours;  nninterrnpted ; from  teii  to  sixteen  heavy 
caliber  gunboat  guns;  two  lieavy  guns  on  land,  and  a mortar.  All  their  gnns  from 
gunboats,  exce])t  one,  have  ceased  firing.  Gunboats  retired  around  the  Bend,  800 
yards  distant,  showing  only  one  gun.  Enemy’s  gunboats  and  batteries  struck  con- 
stantly ; large  quantities  of  burning  cotton  struck  from  them.  Wo  have  lost  some 
valuable  gunners  and  a few'  others.  Thank  God,  our  loss  small  so  far.  Enemy’s  loss 
must  bo  very  great. 

Later — 7.30j}.  m. — Just  as  I scut  off  my  last  dispatcli  to  you,  enemy  opened  upon  us 


CiiAi.’xKXVr.J  THE  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC.  413 

agaib,  wKli  one  ‘gunboat  guns  aud  laud  battery  aud  13-iucli  mortar.  Kept  it  up  with 
great  8i)irit  until  alter  suuset.  Ammuuitioii  arrived  just  now  for  heavy  gnus. 

The  above  just  received  from  General  Loring. 

J.  0.  PEMBEIITON, 
Lieutenant-General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Fort  Pemberton, 

March  14,  1803 — 8 p.  m. 

Enemy  remained  (piiet  until  3 p.  m.,  wlien  they  oxiened  from  their 
land  batteries,  which  was  briskly  returned  by  us.  Lasted  but  few  min- 
utes. Evidently  to  try  strength  of  our  guns. 

W.  W.  LOPING, 

Major- General^  Commanding. 

Lieuteuant-Geueral  Pemberton. 


Fort  Pemberton,  March  10,  1803. 

General  : From  information  aud  observation,  thirik  the  enemy  num- 
ber between  5,000  and  10,000.  Am  of  opinion  it  is  but  the  advance  of  a 
very  powerlul  force.  Two  of  the  largest  class  boats  have  just  come  down 
through  the  Pass.  1 think  it  will  require  the  heaviest  guns  to  resist 
them.  They  are  now  erecting  land  batteries  with  heavy  guns.  1 have 
ordered  three  more  regiments  from  Yazoo  City  to  protect  my  flanks  by 
preventing  the  crossing  of  Tallahatchee  in  my  rear  and  reaching  Yazoo 
ill  my  front.  Both  are  difficult  for  the  enemy  to  do,  owing  to  overflows. 
Would  advise  the  sending  of  columbiads  to  Yazoo  City.  If  you  have 
a competent  engineer  to  spare,  I would  like  him  ordered  here.  Dr. 
Voorhies  arrived  yesterday. 

W.  W.  LOPING, 

Major-  G eneral^  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton. 


Headquarters  Fort  Pemberton, 

March  IG,  1863 — 9 p.  m. 

The  enemy,  with  one  iron-clad  covered  with  cotton  and  sides  jiro- 
tected  by  cotton  on  raft,  opened  upon  us  at  12.30  o’clock  to-day.  The 
iron-clad  retired  in  about  forty-five  minutes.  The  laud  battery  kept 
up  the  lire  until  sunset.  No  loss  on  our  side.  VVe  are  unable  to  prevent 
land  batteries  from  increasing,  because  we  are  fearful  of  not  receiving 
inore  ammunition  in  time.  Have  ordered  another  raft  constructed  on 
\azoo,  op])osite  here,  and  works  thrown  up  on  other  side  river.  If  1 
can  have  one  week,  will  eflect  it. 

W.  W.  LOPING, 

Major- Genera  I,  Comm  anding. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton. 


Fort  Pemberton,  March  17,  18G3— 10  a.  m. 
Yours  of  IGth  received.  If  I can  hold  the  enemy  back  a week,  will 
have  another  raft  constructed  in  Yazoo  Piver  opposite  this  and  works 


414 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE.  T TC. 


[Chap.  XXXYL 


thrown  up  on  the  other  side.  Still  have  strong  iiopes  of  the  enemy 
being  unable  to  force  the  obstructions  here.  Principal  fear  is  that  they 
may  turn  one  of  my  flanks,  particularly  my  left  front.  In  order  to 
counteract  an  attempt  in  that  direction,  1 have  ordered  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral [J.  0.]  Moore  to  move  up  near  the  point  referred  to  with  the  re- 
mainder of  his  brigade.  In  accordance  with  your  suggestion,  I Iioi>e 
then  to  be  able  to  check  the  enemy’s  force;  but  as  heavy  additions  are 
reported  being  made  to  tlieir  force,  it  will  take  one  correspondingly 
large  to  successfully  meet  them. 

W.  W.  BORING, 

Major- Generalj  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  O.  Pemberton. 


Headquarters  Fort  Pemberton,  March  17,  1863. 

(Received  March  18.) 

Up  to  this  hour,  9 p.  m.,  the  enemy  made  no  demonstration  to-day. 
Got  information  from  Panola  and  from  scouts  on  Coldwater  relative  to 
the  two  large  class  boats.  Have  done  all  that  could  be  done  up  to  this 
time  to  intercept  transports.  Have  given  instructions  to  parties  at 
Panola  and  up  Tallahatchee,  at  Cassidy  Bayou,  to  Lave  round  rafts  made 
and  floated  down  the  river  into  fleet,  covered  with  burning  cotton. 

W.  W.  BORING, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Fort  Pemberton,  March  18,  1863—9  a.  m. 

General:  My  information  is  positive  that  the  expedition  now  com- 
ing against  us  is  a most  formidable  one.  Have  made  up  our  minds 
to  fight  it  to  the  bitter  end.  You  may  look  for  nothing  but  a series  of 
hardly  fought  battles  throughout  the  whole  length  of  the  Yazoo.-  I 
must  have  all  the  strength  here  that  I can  possibly  get.  Send  heavy 
guns  and  plenty  of  ammunition.  If  we -had  received  ammunition  in 
time,  could  have  prevented  the  erection  of  land  batteries,  but,  as  it  was, 
could  not  afford  to  spend  our  supply  and  leave  none  for  their  assault. 
At  the  same  time,  I would  urge  the  most  vigorous  measures  for  defetjse 
of  Yazoo  City.  Lend  us  and  send  three  heavy  guns  and  plenty  of  am- 
munition. I have  ordered  the  guns  at  Yazoo  City  up  here.  Please  send 
order  to  Yazoo  City;  also  have  not  the  cipher,  and  do  not  understand. 
Send  also  artillerists  for  our  guns ; we  need  them  badly,  and  have  none 
at  all. 

W.  W.  BORING, 

Major- General. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton. 


Headquarters  Fort  Pemberton, 

March  20,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 

In  consequence  of  the  crippled  condition  of  their  gunboats,  the  injury 
done  to  tlieir  land  batteries,  and,  from  all  we  can  learn,  tlieir  great  loss 
of  life,  the  enemy  liave  commenced  a precipitate  retreat  up  tiie  Tnlla 


Ohap.  XXXVL]  the  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC.  415 

hatchee,  abaudoiiing  the  position  of  their  land  batteries.  I have  ordered 
pursuit  upon  their  rear  and  both  flanks. 

W.  W.  LOEING, 

Major- (Jeneral, 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  0.  Pemberton. 


Fort  Pemberton,  March  20,  1863 — 5 p.  m. 

I start  a fully-clad  cotton  boat  down  to-night,  keeping  one  here  in 
case  of  accident.  Enemy  in  full  run,  as  fast  as  steam  can  carry  him, 
and  my  men  after  him.  This  place  capable  of  very  strong  defense ; 
should  be  made  perfect,  and  I have  given  orders  to  have  it  so.  The 
engineer  officer  ordered  by  you  has  not  yet  reported,  as  the  enemy  is 
steaming  away  from  here  as  fast  as  he  can.  I will,  if  you  wish  it,  go  to 
the  Sunflower  and  stop  him. 

W.  W.  LOEING, 
Major-General^  Commanding. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Headquarters  Fort  Pemberton, 

' Near  Greenwood.,  Miss.,  March  22,  1863. 

Major  : I beg  leave  to  submit  the  following  report  of  operations  on 
the  Yazoo  and  Tallahatchee  Eivers: 

In  accordance  with  your  instructions,  I left  Jackson,  Miss.,  on  the 
morning  of  February  17  last,  with  the  view  to  finding  some  suitable 
place  on  the  Yazoo  of  Tallahatchee  whereat  to  erect  works  and  place 
obstruhtions  to  the  passage  down  of  the  enemy.  An  examination  of  the 
two  rivers  from  Yazoo  City  to  100  miles  above  here  satisfied  me  that  this 
position  was  the  only  one  offering  the  slightest  advantage  for  defensive 
works,  and  having  previously  ordered  Major  [Minor]  Meriwether,  of  the 
engineers,  to  this  place,  determined  to  avail  myself  of  its  strong  points. 
Accordingly,  a line  of  works  composed  of  cotton  bales  and  earth  was 
thrown  up,  extending  from  the  Yazoo  to  the  Tallahatchee,  and  a raft 
constructed  by  the  able  and  united  labors  of  Maj.  Thomas  Weldon  and 
Mr.  John  McFarland,  and  with  great  skill  placed  in  the  Tallahatchee  on 
our  right.  These  necessary  arrangements  were  prosecuted  with  the 
utmost  diligence  day  and  night ; and  notwithstanding  every  exertion  to 
perfect  our  defenses,  the  enemy  made  his  descent  of  the  river  and  found 
us  but  poorly  prepared  to  receive  him. 

On  Wednesday  (March  11),  the  enemy  made  his  appearance  before  us 
with  nine  gunboats  and  twenty-four  transports,  a land  force  of  7,000 
infantry  and  artillery.  The  raft  in  an  unfinished  state  was  hastily 
swung  across  the  Tallahatchee,  and  the  Confederate  States  steamer 
Star  of  the  West  sunk  behind  it.  My  inspector-general,  Gapt.  John 
D.  Myrick,  was  placed  in  command  of  the  batteries,  and  we  awaited  the 
assault. 

At  10  a.  m.  the  formidable  iton-clad  Ohillicothe  steamed  around  the 
bend  of  the  river  in  our  front,  as  though  it  was  intended  to  rush  upon 
the  raft  and  destroy  it.  A well-directed  shell  from  our  32-pouDder  fell 
upon  her  turret,  and  she  sensibly  diminished  her  speed.  This  was  fol- 
lowed by  a solid  shot  from  an  18-pounder  rifle,  which  also  struck,  and 
the  Ohillicothe  backed  up  stream  until  her  hull  was  hidden  around  the 
bend,  save  her  bow  and  that  portion  of  her  which  coptained  the  11-ipch 


416 


MlSSISSim,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiFAi*.  XXX7I. 


gaiis.  She  then  opened  fire,  and  cannonading  was  kept  up  for  an  hoar, 
when  the  gunboat  withdrew,  having  been  struck  several  times  by  three 
of  our  guns. 

At  4 o’clock  in  the  afternoon  the  fight  was  resumed  by  another  gun- 
boat, which  we  supposed  to  be  the  iron-clad  De  Kalb.  After  two  hours 
hard  fighting,  the  boat  withdrew.  During  the  day,  Colonel  [T.  N.] 
Waul,  commanding  post,  sent  out  a detachment  of  his  Legion  as  skir- 
mishers, who  engaged  a large  body  of  the  enemy’s  infantry  and  cavalry 
and  drove  them  back  to  their  transports.  ’ 

Thursday  (the  12th),  the  enem}^  was  engaged  in  erecting  a battery 
upon  a point  in  front,  thickly  wooded,  whk3h  we  could  not  prevent  in 
consequence  of  the  scarcity  of  ammunition. 

On  k'riday  morning,  at  10  o’clock,  the  enemy  again  opened  upon  our 
works  from  two  gunboats  abreast,  their  land  batteries,  and  a 13  inch 
mortar.  We  promptly  responded  with  every  gun  we  had  in  position, 
and  the  fight  raged  furiously  the  entire  day,  night  putting  an  end  to  it. 

It  was  in  this  day’s  engagement  that  an  11-inch  shell  from  the  Ohil- 
licothe  passed  through  the  parapet,  displaced  a cotton  bale,  and  ig- 
nited a tub  of  cartridges  in  the  magazine  of  the  Whitworth  gun.  The 
fire  was  communicated  by  the  fuse.  Fortunately  the  shell  itself  did  not 
explode.  By  this  casualty  Lieut.  [J.  Q.]  Wall,  of  the  Pointe  Coupee 
Artillery,  in  command  of  the  gun,  was  slightly  [wounded],  and  15  of  his 
detachment  were  burned,  some  badly. 

In  this  day’s  engagement  we  experienced  our  only  loss.  A shell  ex- 
ploded over  one  of  our  guns,  wounding  3 of  the  gunners,  one  of  whom 
died  in  a few  hours. 

Our  troops  labored  the  entire  night  in  repairing  damages  to  the  para- 
pet and  strengthening  the  works. 

Saturday  was  quiet  until  4 p.  m.,  when  we  were  engaged  by  their  land 
batteries  and  a gunboat  spiritedly  for  about  half  an  hour. 

Sunday  was  occupied  by  the  enemy  and  ourselves  in  adding  strength 
to  our  respective  works. 

Monday,  as  we  afterward  discovered,  was  fixed  by  the  enemy  for  a 
grand  assault  with  their  entire  force  upon  our  works.  Accordingly,  the 
gunboat  Chillicothe  (the  other  iron  clad  having  been  disabled  in  Fri- 
day’s engagement)  got  into  position,  bow  on,  at  1,200  yards  range,  and 
with  their  land  batteries  and  sharpshooters  the  day’s  work  began.  In 
about  twenty  minutes  after  the  engagement  commenced,  a shot  from  one 
of  our  heavy  guns  penetrated  the  Chillicothe  and  so  badly  injured  her 
that  the  proposed  assault  was  abandoned  and  she  withdrew,  leaving 
the  land  batteries  and  sharpshooters  to  keep  ni)  the  fight  until  sunset. 

Our  loss  during  the  engagement  was  1 killed  and  4 wounded,  and  10 
severely  burned  or  injured  by  the  explosion  of  our  magazine.  Total  of 
casualties,  21. 

A significant  silence  characterized  their  movements  the  three  follow- 
ing days,  although  we  could  see  them  plainly  at  their  batteries. 

On  Friday,  before  day,  they  abandoned  their  breastworks  and  com- 
menced a rapid  retreat  np  the  river. 

Thus  was  conducted  the  battle  of  the  Tallahatchee. 

While  I am  thankful  for  the  perfectly  successful  result  of  our  labors 
here,  I wish  to  express  my  obligations  to  Col.  T.  N.  Waul,  Texas  Legion, 
for  his  energy,  promptness,  and  good  judgment  in  the  discharge  of  his 
duty  with  his  Legion  in  the  fortifications  during  the  engagements.  I 
was  greatly  indebted  to  him  for  the  assistance  he  rendered  on  so  man^^ 
occasions,  and  which  contributed  to  our  frequent  successes. 

Cbl.  Ashbel  Smith,  commanding  Second  Texas,  in  charge  of  the  right 


Chap.  XXSiVl.]  THE  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC.  417 

of  our  defenses,  with  great  gallantry  and  skill  prevented  the  enemy  turn- 
ing that  flank. 

Lieut.  Col.  W.  N.  Brown,  commanding  Twentieth  Mississippi,  and 
Oapt.  H.  Cantey,  also  of  the  Twentieth,  for  important  aid  in  collecting 
material  for  our  raft  while  in  readiness  to  defend  the  works. 

Col.  D.  R.  Russell,  Twentieth  Mississippi,  during  the  last  engagement, 
and  General  Tilghman  subsequently  (though  the  enemy  was  still  in  our 
front),  rendered  every  possible  aid.  The  general,  in  command  of  our 
left  flank,  kept  the  enemy  apprehensive  of  their  rear. 

I cannot  speak  in  too  much  praise  of  the  courage,  coolness,  and  effi- 
ciency of  Capt.  John  D.  Myrick,  my  aide  and  acting  chief  of  artillery, 
not  only  under  the  fire  of  the  enemy  in  battle,  but  at  the  critical  moment 
of  the  explosion  of  our  magazine.  In  the  midst  of  it,  when  every  one 
was  appalled,  he  stood  unfalteringly,  and  with  great  heroism  rallied  his 
men  to  their  guns. 

Captain  [B.  J.]  Hogue,  Lieuts.  W.  S.  Wheatley,  [J.  Q.]  Wall,  and 
Captain  [W.  H.]  Heddeu,  artillery;  Sergt.  E.  Fullerton,  of  Heddeffis 
battery;  Lieutenant  Moon,  engineers,  and  Sergt.  J.  Hennerberry,  Com- 
pany A,  Twenty-second  Louisiana  Volunteers,  commanded  guns,  and 
served  them  with  great  skill  and  courage.  Sergts.  David  Eaton  and 
Hugh  Moldoon,  belonging  to  the  Navy,  are  mentioned  for  their  accuracy 
as  gunners  and  courage  as  men. 

Before  and  after  the  enemy  appeared,  the  weather  was  inclement, 
and  when  all  depended  upon  the  greatest  energy,  none  rendered  better 
service  or  were  more  exposed  than  the  following  officers : Maj.  George 
McKnight,  assistant  adjutant-general;  Dr.  [A.  H.]  Voorhies,  chief  sur- 
geon ; Captain  Armstead,  ordnance  [officer] ; Captain  [Belton]  Mickle, 
quartermaster;  Major  Meriwether  and  Captain  [Powhatan]  Robinson, 
engineers;  Dr.  [E.]  Randall,  Captains  [Samuel]  Carter  and  [B.  F.| 
Stirling  and  [H.]  Wickeland,  and  Lieutenant  [Peter]  Schwander,  WauFs 
Legion. 

1 would  here  remark  that  this  expedition  was  the  prominent  one  of  a 
great  plan  for  the  attack  of  Vicksburg  in  rear.  It  was  to  move  rapidly 
down  the  Yazoo  River  to  the  mouth  of  Sunflower;  there  await  another 
(‘xpedition  down  that  river ; the  two  united  were  to  meet  a third  up  the 
Yazoo;  the  three  to  force  the  raft  at  Snyder’s  Bluff;  united,  to  turn 
Vicksburg.  After  many  months  of  secret  preparations,  they  were  cer- 
tain of  success.  TVith  but  little  time  to  fortify,  they  were  determinedly 
met  and  forced  to  an  ignominious  retreat,  leaving  behind  them  evi- 
dences that  their  loss  was  great  in  men  and  material— a check  which 
will  undoubtedly  prevent  a further  invasion  of  the  State  of  Mississippi 
by  the  way  of  Tallahatchee  and  Yazoo  Rivers. 

With  respect,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  W.  LORING, 

Major-  General^  Commanding. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger,  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Fort  Pemberton,  Mareh  23,  1863—4.30  p.  m. 
Ihe  enemy  in  force  with  their  gunboats  have  again  made  their  ap* 
pearance,  opening  fire  at  2.15  and  immediately  ceasing  fire. 

, W.  W.  LORING, 

Major-General.  Commanding. 

General  J.  C.  Pemberton. 

(Same,  Pemberton  to  Stevenson,  March  24.) 

27  R R — VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


418 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap,  XXX VL 


Fort  Pemberton,  A]^ril  1,  18G3. 

(Eeceived  April  2.) 

Enemy  re  enforcing,  and  erecting  a battery  to- day  of  three  32-pound- 
ers. 


General  J.  0.  Pemberton. 


W.  W.  POKING, 
Major-General^  Commanding. 


Port  Pemberton,  April  2,  1863. 

(Keceived  April  3—10  a.  m.) 

The  enemy  are  sending  their  boats  to  the  Pass  for  re-enforcements. 
They  are  receiving  heavv  guns.  Can  any  heavy  guns  be  sent  here  ? 

W.  W.  POKING, 

Major- General. 

General  J.  C.  Pemberton. 

Jackson,  April  3,  1863. 

Major-General  Poring, 

Fort  Pemberton,  via  Grenada: 

I am  expecting  more  heavy  guns,  but  have  none  now  to  lend  you. 

J.  O.  PEMBEKTON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Fort  Pemberton,  April  3,  1863. 

The  enemy  got  another  large  re-enforcement  to  day,  at  least  3,000. 
This  fight,  from  the  preparations  making  by  the  enemy,  will  be  desper- 
ate. I therefore  think  we  should  have  an  additional  quantity  of  ammu- 
nition sent  at  once  for  our  guns.  We  are  compelled  to  use  our  shot  to 
prevent  the  enemy  erecting  batteries  in  our  front,  and  I will  cover  the 
amount  by  requisition.  Send  one  hundred  rockets. 

W.  W.  POKING, 

Major-General. 

Pieiit.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton. 


Fort  Pemberton,  April  4,  1863. 
On  the  1st  and  2d,  seventeen  transports  loaded  with  troops  came 
down  the  river,  and  passed  a point  100  miles  above  j have  no  doubt  ar- 
rived here.  Can  vou  send  us  intrenching  tools  I 

W.  W.  POKING, 

Major-  General. 

Pieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton. 


Fort  Pemberton,  April  5,  1863, 

(Keceived  April  6.) 

The  enemy  commenced  embarking  last  night  at  10  o’clock,  and  before 
day  this  morning  were  in  rapid  retreat,  after  re-enforcing  yesterday 
10,000  men.  llaving  our  works  strengthened,  we  commenced  shelling 
their  camps  and  transports,  and  kept  it  up  for  two  days  and  at  inter- 
vals during  the  night. 


Chap.  XXXVL]  THE  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC.  419 

Yesterday  we  made  a reconnaissance  in  force  from  oiir  left  dank, 
alarming  them  very  much.  A part}^  we  have  up  the  river,  under  Cap- 
tain Mott,  with  a field  piece,  fired  three  shots  into  a trai] sport  loaded 
with  troops  yesterday,  doing  considerable  damage  among  them,  and 
disabling  the  boat.  These  no  doubt  influenced  their  retreat.  I do  not 
know  yet  how  far  they  have  gone.  Wijl  send  another  telegram  shortly. 

W.  W.  LORING, 

Major- General. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton. 


Port  Pemberton,  April  0,  18G.3. 

The  enemy  are  moving  up  the  Tallahatchee,  toward  the  mouth  of 
Cold  water.  The  information  is  not  sufficient  yet  to  make  it  certain  that 
they  are  going  to  the  Mississippi  River.  The  probability  is  that  it  is 
their  intention  to  do  so.  We  are  certain  that  our  shells  and  shot  did 
great  execution  in  their  crowded  camps  before  leaving. 

W.  W.  LG  RING, 

Major- Genera  1. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton. 


Port  Pemberton, 

JS^ear  Greenwood^  April  12,  18G3. 

Major  : I had  the  honor  to  make  to  you  a report  of  the  operations 
of  this  command  up  to  March  22,  1863. 

The  enemy,  after  getting  100  miles  up  the  Tallahatchee,  was  heavily 
re  enforced  and  returned,  fully  determined  to  make  a deadly  attack  upon 
these  works.  During  their  short  absence  we  greatly  strengtheiu'd  our 
lines,  and  were  fully  prepared  to  give  them  a 'warm  reception.  We  waited 
a short  time  after  their  arrival,  in  the  hope  that  they  would  muster 
courage  to  attack  us,  but  it  seems  that  it  failed  them  in  the  critical 
moment.  We  then  commenced  the  otiensive  by  driving  away  their  la- 
boring parties  from  the  works  intended  for  batteries,  and  getting  our 
lines  of  fire  upon  their  camps  and  the  direction  of  their  forces  for  the 
support  of  their  pickets. 

We  commenced  shelling  on  the  evening  of  April  2,  and  continued 
through  the  3d  and  4th. 

In  the  mean  time  a forced  reconnaissance  was  made  from  our  left  by 
General  Maury.  A considerable  force  was  also  displayed  upon  our 
right.  While  our  fire  was  destructive  to  their  crowded  camps,  our 
action  from  right  to  left  alarmed  them  very  much,  and  on  the  night  of 
April  4 they  commenced  embarking,  and  by  daylight  they  were  in  rapid 
retreat  up  the  river.  We  can  hear  of  them  steaming  toward  the  Pass. 
How  far  they  have  got  we  are  not  fully  advised,  but  think  that  they 
will  go  entirely  through  to  the  Mississippi. 

I beg  leave  here  to  mention  that,  in  consequence  of  the  extensive 
overflow  of  both  sides  of  the  Tallahatchee  and  Cold  water  Rivers,  it  was 
impossible  to  get  to  the  rivers,  except  in  small  canoes.  Enterprising 
and  gallant  officers  of  this  command — Col.  A.  E.  Reynolds,  Twenty- 
sixih  Mississippi  regiment,  Lieutenant  Henry,  Second  Texas,  and  (kipt. 
George  [W.J  Mott,  commanding  a detachment  of  McCulloclds — made 
their  boats  for  the  purpose.  The  latter  fortunately  reached  the  enemy 
and  fired  upon  them  with  small-arms,  killing  several,  and  uimn  one 
occasion  fired  three  shots  from  a field  piece,  which  was  sent  him,  into 


420  ^ MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 

a transport  loaded  with  troops,  disabling  the  transport  and  doing  con- 
siderable execution.  I have  also  to  mention  that  a party  of  State 
troops,  under  the  command  of  Major  Lidell,  fired  into  them,  and  on  sev- 
eral occasions  our  cavalry  on  this  side  of  the  river  annoyed  them.  In 
order  to  strike  them  in  the  future  successfully,  I would  recommend  that 
large  canoes  be  ordered.  They  can  be  readily  made  along  the  river, 
and  guns  usually  used  by  the  Navj^,  6 or  12  pounders,  breech-loading, 
be  obtained  for  the  purpose.  I have  no  doubt  that  two  regiments,  scat- 
tered along  the  Tallahatchee,  Cold  water,  and  Sunflower,  under  men  of 
energy  and  courage,  would  break  up  any  expedition  the  enemy  might 
send  here  in  future. 

With  respect,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  W.  LOEING, 
Major-General,  Commanding, 

Maj.  E.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  10. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Dabney  H.  Maury,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  divis- 
ion, &c.,  of  operations  April  1-10. 

Vicksburg,  April  11,  1863, 

(Eeceived  April  15.) 

Major:  In  pursuance  of  the  instructions  of  the  lieutenant-general 
commanding,  I joined  Major-General  Loring,  at  Fort  Pemberton,  on  the 
morning  of  April  1.  He  was  re-enforced  the  same  day  by  the  whole  of 
Featherston’s  brigade  and  six  guns  of  my  division,  making  his  whole 
force  ample  to  hold  the  position. 

I was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  forces  at  Cureton’s,  constitut- 
ing our  left  wing. 

On  the  evening  of  the  1st,  the  enemy  commenced  the  construction  of 
a very  heavy  battery  about  1,000  yards  from  the  fort.  During  the  2d, 
3d,  and  4th,  a constant  fire  of  shells  was  kept  up  by  us  upon  it,  aud 
sharpshooters  were  sent  to  annoy  the  workmen,  so  that  they  were  com- 
pelled to  cease  work  before  the  battery  was  completed.  The  enemy  was 
very  quiet  during  this  whole  time.  He  made  no  scouts,  and  only  one 
reconnaissance,  and  made  no  reply  to  the  fire  of  our  guns  or  of  our 
sharpshooters.  Eumors  came  in  that  he  was  retreating. 

On  the  4th,  I sent  Colonel  [O.  S.j  Holland,  in  command  of  a regiment 
and  battalion  of  sharpshooters,  with  orders  to  discover  the  force  and 
position  of  the  enemy.  He  drove  in  his  pickets,  aud  discovered  him  still 
in  force  in  his  position  on  the  Tallahatchee.  xVs  the  enemy  formed  his 
line  to  receive  Holland's  attack,  a heavy  fire  was  opened  upon  him  by 
the  fort,  which  occasioned  considerable  annoyance  and  some  loss.  That 
night  and  next  morning  the  enemy  re-embarked  his  army  aud  retreated. 
During  the  6th,  7th,  and  8th,  my  scouts  reported  him  still  retreating, 
and  as  having  entered  the  Coldwater  Eiver. 

The  operations  of  the  enemy  were  characterized  by  a great  want  of 
energy,  but  by  the  usual  disregard  of  the  claims  of  humanity  and  of  the 
usages  of  manly  warfare;  women  and  unarmed,  helpless  men  were  in- 
sulted, private  dwellings  aud  plantations  were  destroyed  and  plundered, 
the  stock  stolen  or  wantonly  killed,  the  fruit  trees  belted,  and  every 
other  means  taken  to  gratify  the  cowardly  instincts  of  base  natures. 


Chap.  XXXVL]  THE  YAZOO  PASS  EXPEDITION,  ETC.  421 


The  position  of  the  enemy  was  such  that  it  was  not  possible  to  make 
an  attack  upon  him  with  any  hope  of  success.  His  force  was  estimated 
at  about  12,000  men. 

On  the  8th  instant,  I was  informed  by  Major-General  Loring  that  my 
services  were  no  longer  required  near  Fort  Pemberton,  and  that  I 
might,  in  compliance  with  the  instructions  of  the  lieutenant-general 
commanding,  return  at  once  to  Vicksburg. 

I reached  Haynes’  Bluff  yesterday  at  1 p.  m.,  bringing  with  me  Hol- 
land’s regiment  and  [W.  K.]  Hogg’s  battery. 

I remain,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DABNEY  H.  MAUEY, 

Major-General, 


Maj.  B.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  11. 

Report  of  Capt.  Isaac  N.  Brown,  G.  S.  Navy. 

Camp  Pemberton, 

TaValiatcliee  River,  March  10,  1863.  (Received  March  12.) 

General  : 1 have  to  send  the  little  steamer  Saint  Mary’s  to  Yazoo 
City,  and  probably  to  Snyder’s  Mill,  and  General  Boring  does  not  send 
dispatches,  from  the  fact,  I believe,  of  the  steamer  Sharp’s  having  been 
ordered  down,  and  which  may  in  fact  get  ahead  of  the  Saint  Mary’s. 

The  enemy  in  great  force  are  near  our  works,  and  will  attack  perhaps 
early  to-morrow. 

It  has  been  raining  hard  for  two  days  here,  which  made  it  verj^  un- 
favorable for  us. 

I think,  from  what  I can  learn,  that  twenty-five  or  more  transports  and 
six  or  more  gunboats  will  be  within  5 miles  of  us  to-night.  I have  but 
two  boats — the  Keene  and  Magenta.  I went  up  the  river  two  days  ago 
on  the  Parallel  (steamer),  to  get  cotton  to  finish  the  Magenta.  When 
up  70  miles,  I fouud  myself  near  the  enemy,  and  shifted  to  the  Saint 
Mary’s,  to  remain  and  make  observations,  sending  the  steamer  Parallel 
ahead.  The  latter,  from  the  extreme  narrowness  of  the  stream,  ran  into 
the  woods  and  disabled  herself,  so  that,  to  save  falling  into  the  hands  of 
the  enemy,  I ordered  her  burned,  which  was  done  as  the  enemy  came  in 
sight. 

I have  never  been  well  pleased  with  our  position  here,  but  hope  that 
we  may  not  have  to  regret  taking  it  up,^  rather  than  concentrating  our 
whole  force  at  Yazoo  City. 

I beg  pardon  for  trespassing  so  far  on  General  Boring’s  department 
as  to  speak  to  you  of  military  matters  about  which  I presume  he  gives 
you  much  more  full  information  than  I could  do.  I have  done  my 
utmost  against  most  incomprehensible  difficulties  to  fit  out  the  cotton- 
clad  fieet.  The  cotton  was  not  on  the  banks  of  the  river,  and  the  state 
of  the  country  from  overflow  prevented  hauling  it.  Besides,  I could 
not  get  the  proper  boats  for  the  Tallahatchee  for  reasons  already  made 
known  in  my  late  letter  to  you. 

I am,  very  respectfully, 

ISAAC  N.  BROWN, 

Commanding,  G.  S.  Navy. 

Bieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton. 


422 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


FEBRUARY  27,  1863.-— Skirmish  near  Bloomington,  on  the  Hatchie  River, 

Tenn. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Alexander  Ashotli.,  JJ.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  District  of  Columbus, 

March  2,  18G3. 

General  : Colonel  Wolfe,  commanding  at  Fort  Pillow,  reports  that 
Captain  Moore,  Second  Illinois  Cavalry,  reached,  on  the  27th  ultimo, 
at  daybreak,  with  200  mounted  [men],  the  principal  camp  of  the  rebel 
Colonel  [R.  V.]  Richardson,  in  the  neighborhood  of  Bloomington,  on  the 
Hatchie.  The  rebels,  however,  started  on  the  previous  day  to  the 
southeast,  leaving  only  8 men  to  guard  the  camp  and  collect  conscripts. 
This  guard  was  taken,  with  all  the  irroperty  in  their  charge,  27  horses 
and  mules,  wagons  and  commissary  stores,  and  the  camp,  with  several 
large  buildings  and  comfortable  quarters,  entirely  destroyed. 

ASBOTH, 
Brigadier-  General. 

Major-General  Hurlbut, 

Commanding  Sixteenth  Army  Corps,  Memphis. 


MARCH  2-3,  1863. — Scout  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  Hudsonville  and 
Salem,  Miss.,  and  Saulsbury,  Tenn. 

Report  of  Maj.  William  B.  Blackburn,  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry. 

La  Grange,  Tenn.,  March  3,  1863. 

Colonel:  In  obedience  to  orders  from  Colonel  Grierson,  I started 
on  the  morning  of  the  2d,  with  the  First  Battalion  of  this  regiment,  con- 
sisting of  140  men  and  5 commissioned  officers,  on  the  Holly  Springs 
road,  to  Old  Lamar,  thence  to  the  neighborhood  of  Early  Grove,  thence 
to  Hudsonville,  thence  to  near  Salem,  where  we  staid  all  night  with 
Mr.  Hall,  a wealthy  “ secesh.”  In  the  morning  passed  through  Salem  to 
near  Wolf  River;  found  the  bridge  gone,  and  had  to  turn  up  to  Mc- 
Dowell’s Mill  to  cross;  found  the  ‘‘rebs”  thick  from  Salem  to  Wolf,  but 
in  small  squads  and  as  wild  as  ducks ; distributed  the  force  in  all  direc- 
tions, and  had  plenty  of  chases,  a good  many  shots,  and  a few  captures, 
as  hereafter  described.  From  Wolf  we  went  to  near  Saulsbury;  found 
nothing ; thence,  by  Bob  Smith’s  place,  down  on  the  north  side  of  Wolf, 
to  camp.  A description  of  the  persons,  with  the  papers  captured  on 
them,  is  herewith  inclosed. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  D.  BLACKBURN, 

Major,  Commanding  Detachment. 

Colonel  Prince. 


[Indorsement.] 

List  of  prisoners,  with  papers  found  on  the  persons  of  the  prisoners, 
sent  to  provost-marshal’s  office. 

J.  B.  HARRIS, 

Major. 


CiiAP.  XXXVL]  EXPEDITION  FROM  Lzi  GRANGE,  TENN.,  ETC. 


423 


MARCH  8-12,  1863. — Expedition  from  La  Grange,  and  skirmishes  (9th 
and  10th)  near  Covington,  Tenn. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Col.  Benjamin  H.  Grierson,  Sixth  Illinois  Cavalry,  commanding  First  Cavalry 
Brigade,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

No.  2. — Lieut.  Col.  Reuben  Loomis,  Sixth  Illinois  Cavalry. 

No.  3. — Col.  Edward  Prince,  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry. 

No.  4. — Col.  R.  y.  Richardson,  First  Tennessee  Partisan  Rangers. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  Benjamin  M.  Grierson^  Sixth  Illinois  Cavalry^  command- 
ing First  Cavalry  Brigade^  Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

La  Grange,  Tenn.,  March  16,  1863. 

Captain  : In  accordance  with  verbal  instructions  from  General  Ham- 
ilton, I left  camp  on  the  8th  instant,  with  900  men  of  the  Sixth  and 
Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry,  on  an  expedition  against  Eichardson  and  his 
command.  When  within  about  3 miles  of  Somerville,  our  advance  came 
upon  a party  of  rebels,  who  immediately  fled.  Encamping  here  for  the 
night,  I sent  one  company  of  the  Seventh  Illinois  in  pursuit  of  the 
enemy,  and  succeeded  in  wounding  4 and  capturing  1 man  and  2 horses. 
Here  I received  information  of  the  removal  of  Kichardson^s  camp, 
which  was  confirmed  by  a communication  which  I also  received  from 
scouts  whom  I had  previously  sent  out  to  go  into  his  camp. 

On  the  9th,  at  3 a.  m.,  I proceeded  northwest,  making  a forced  march 
of  35  miles  in  seven  hours,  over  roads  almost  impassable  from  the  re- 
cent heavy  rains.  We  came  upon  him  on  Big  Creek,  3 miles  southeast 
of  Covington,  attacked  and  completely  routed  him,  killing  22,  wounding 
and  capturing  over  70,  among  whom  were  Captains  Cobb  and  Cush- 
man; also  taking  and  destroying  his  camp  and  equipage,  commissary 
and  quartermaster’s  stores,  his  train,  ammunition,  and  records.  I find 
among  the  latter  over  two  hundred  paroles  of  Federal  soldiers,  all  his 
muster-rolls,  lists  of  conscripts,  letters,  and  receipts,  giving  the  names 
of  a number  of  citizens  who  have  been  engaged  in  smuggling  arms, 
ammunition,  and  equipments  from  Memphis  and  other  points  for  the 
enemy;  also  some  valuable  maps  of  the  country  between  the  Memphis 
and  Charleston  Eailroad  and  the  Hatchie  Eiver.  We  scoured  the  coun-  * 
try  thoroughly  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Hatchie  and  Covington  [Rivers] ; 
also  south  toward  Portersville. 

On  the  10th,  I moved  southeast  to  Mason’s  Depot,  whence  a detach- 
ment of  the  Second  Brigade,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Wallace,  of  the 
F ourth  Illinois  Cavalry,  reported  to  me,  and  whom  I ordered  to  scout 
the  country  southwest  toward  Galloway,  Smith’s,  and  Wythe  Depot. 

I encamped  near  Belmont  on  the  night  of  the  10th,  and  4 miles  south  of 
Somerville  on  the  11th,  returning  to  this  place  on  the  12th,  about  2 
p.  m.  I have  the  satisfaction  to  report  the  success  of  the  expedition, 
having  lost  none  killed  or  wounded,  and  but  4 prisoners,  who  have  since 
returned,  paroled. 

Respectfully, 


B.  H.  GRIERSON, 
Colonel^  Commanding  Brigade, 


424 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

[Indorsement.] 

La  Grange,  March  17,  1863. 

Capt.  E.  M.  Sawyer, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Eespectfully  forwarded.  The  conduct  of  Colonel  Grierson  and  his 
command  is  to  he  highly  commended. 

C.  S.  HAMILTON, 

Major-General, 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Eeuhen  Loo7nis,  Sixth  Illinois  Cavalry, 

La  Grange,  Tenn.,  March  15,  1863. 

Colonel  : In  pursuance  of  your  order  of  the  7th,  I had  my  com- 
mand, 500  in  number,  in  the  saddle  at  9.30  o’clock  of  the  8th,  and 
started  on  the  Somerville  road ; camped  3 miles  this  side  of  Somerville. 
By  your  order  we  started  at  3 a.  m.  for  Eichardson’s  camp,  about  30 
miles  north  of  Somerville,  which  we  reached  about  12  o’clock  of  the 
same  day.  P'ouud  the  enemy  drawn  up  in  line  in  a dense  wood  and 
swamp,  ready  to  give  us  battle.  We  attacked  them  vigorously,  by 
your  order,  broke  their  [line],  which  they  in  vain  repeatedly  tried  to 
form.  We  drove  them  steadily  forward  for  5 or  6 miles,  finally  break- 
ing them  up  and  scattering  them  in  every  direction.  We  killed  some 
15  or  16,  as  I afterward  ascertained,  wounded  a large  number,  captured 
their  train  with  all  their  stores,  also  some  15  or  16  prisoners,  to  the 
best  of  my  recollection,  among  whom  was  Captain  Cobb  and  a lieu- 
tenant. 

Officers  and  men  behaved  with  great  gallantry,  without  a single  ex- 
ception, not  only  risking  the  balls  of  the  enemy,  but  in  leaping  fences, 
ditches,  logs,  and  swamps  of  all  depths  of  mud  and  water. 

Colonel,  hoping  what  we  have  done  may  meet  your  approbation,  I 
am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  LOOMIS, 

Lieuteiiant-  Colonel,  Commandmg, 

Col.  B.  H.  Grierson, 

Commanding  First  Cavalry  Brigade, 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Col.  Edward  Prince,  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry. 

La  Grange,  Tenn.,  March  12,  1863. 

Sir  : I report  that,  in  i)ursuance  of  orders  of  the  brigadier-general 
commanding,  I moved,  in  command  of  this  regiment,  the  first 'day  in 
advance  of  the  brigade,  starting  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  at  0.30  a.  m., 
March  8,  1863.  The  rest  of  the  time  the  regiment  marched  in  rear  of 
the  Sixth  Eegiment  Illinois  Volunteer  Cavalry,  and  consequently  par- 
ticipated but  little  in  the  gallant  engagement  with  the  enemy.  By  or- 
der of  the  colonel  commanding  the  brigade.  Company  II,  of  this  regi- 
ment, destroyed  the  camj)  and  garrison  equipage  of  Colonel  Eichardson, 
First  Eegiment  Tennessee  Guerrillas,  consisting,  in  part,  of  fifty  tents, 
ammunition,  quartermaster’s  and  commissary  stores,  and  the  entire  regi- 


dHAP.  XXXVi.]  EXPEDITION  FROM  LA  GRANGE,  TENN.,  ETC. 


4^5 


mental  property  at  the  camp  near  Covington,  Tenn.  On  approaching 
Somerville,  I sent  forward  Company  A,  of  this  regiment,  to  make  a feint, 
and,  meeting  with  a squad  of  rebel  cavalry,  they  captured  1 in  a charge 
upon  the  town. 

In  leaving  the  camp  of  Richardson,  near  Covington,  Major  NTelsou, 
commanding  the  First  Battalion,  this  regiment,  detached  a squad  of 
men  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  truth  of  a report  that  a Federal 
horse  and  saddle  was  some  2 miles  from  camp.  They  proceeded,  and, 
8 in  number,  encountered  26  of  the  rebels,  under  the  command  of  Cap- 
tain Cushman,  who  had  cut  them  off  entirely  from  the  main  body.  The 
gallant  little  squad  charged  the  rebels,  severely  wounded  the  captain 
in  the  arm,  killed  1 lieutenant  ([Thos.  J.]  Ray),  and  captured  and 
brought  off'  a prisoner.  I desire  to  mention  the  names  of  the  party  for 
their  gallant  conduct,  as  follows : Sergt.  Charles  C.  Hays,  Corpl.  David 
B.  Spencer,  Privates  [Peter  S.]  Traphagen,  [Joseph  D.]  Brown,  Neff', 
[Edward  W.]  Tift,  [William  1 .]  Handly,  and  [William]  Potter,  all  of 
Company  K,  this  regiment. 

On  March  10,  I detailed  Company  F,  this  regiment,  to  endeavor  to 
ascertain  where  certain  wagons  had  been  secreted,  the  tracks  of  which 
had  been  followed  from  Richardsoifs  camp.  Captain  McDonald,  Com- 
pany F,  this  regiment,  being  at  the  head  of  his  company,  came  near  a 
house,  and  observed  several  men  (some  mounted  and  some  on  foot) 
fleeing  from  the  house.  Being  well  mounted,  he  gave  chase,  and,  by 
the  spirit  and  activity  of  his  horse,  had  left  behind  him  and  had  dis- 
tanced his  company  some  300  yards.  Having  lost  his  fire  arms  the  pre- 
ceding day,  he  was  fired  at  five  times  at  very  close  range  by  the  rebel 
he  engaged,  who  was  armed  with  both  revolver  and  musket.  The  cap- 
tain pursued  with  his  only  weapon  (the  saber),  and,  with  a blow,  dis- 
mounted his  enemy,  but  was  at  the  same  moment  caught  by  a limb  and 
himself  dismounted.  He,  however,  pursued  on  foot  and  captured  his 
prisoner.  He  deserves  great  praise  for  his  bravery  and  gallantry.  At 
this  time  and  place  was  captured  Captain  Cushman  and  squad.  The 
regiment  captured  some  20  prisoners,  horses,  and  other  property. 
Respectfully,  yours, 

EDWARD  PRINCE, 
Colonel^  Commanding  Regiment, 

Lieutenant  Woodward, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Col.  R.  V.  Richardson.,  First  Tennessee  Partisan  Rangers. 

Fayette  County,  Tennessee,  March  13,  1863. 

Dear  Sir  : * * * On  the  9th  instant,*  the  Sixth  and  Seventh  Illi- 
nois Cavalry,  with  a six-gun  battery,  attacked  my  position  in  Tipton 
County,  2 miles  from  Covington,  at  the  Lemmon  woods ; at  the  same 
time  a heavj^  cavalry  force  was  advancing  on  me  from  Collierville  (but 
did  not  reach  the  scene  of  action)  5 in  all,  about  2,000  men. 

The  action  commenced  at  12  m.,  and  lasted  for  two  hours,  when  we 
were  forced  to  retire  from  the  field.  My  men  engaged  did  not  exceed 


* Portion  of  report  omitted  above  relates  to  organization  of  the  regiment  and  skir- 
mish, January  11,  at  Lowry’s  Ferry,  Tenn.  See  Series  I,  Vol.  XVII,  Part  I,  p.  797. 


426 


[Chap.  XXX 71. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


150,  while  the  enemy  had  actually  engaged  about  1,000  men  and  his 
battery  of  six  pieces.  We  charged  the  enemj^  twice  and  repelled  one 
charge  from  him,  when,  finding  ourselves  about  to  be  flanked  on  both 
sides,  we  yielded  the  field. 

Our  loss  was  2 men  killed  and  5 wounded.  The  enemy  admitted  a 
loss  of  7 killed,  G wounded,  and  20  prisoners.  We  lost  8 men  taken  as 
prisoners.  Some  small  proportion  of  my  men  ingloriously  fled  the  field, 
but  generally  my  companies  fought  bravely  and  retired  in  good  order. 

1 desire  especially  to  mention  Captains  [R.]  Burrow,  [J.  H.]  Hazle- 
wood,  [W.  A.]  Bell,  [J.  H.]  Hicks,  and  [J.  S.J  Caruthers,  who  distin- 
guished themselves  for  courage;  also  Lieut.  Col.  James  U.  Green  and 
Maj.  Berry  [B.]  Benson,  for  coolness  and  courage  in  the  midst  of  all  the 
circumstances. 

The  enemy  captured  a portion  of  our  train,  &c.,  valued  at  about  $4,000. 
We  are  consoled,  however,  in  this  by  the  reflection  that  we  had  taken 
it  in  former  conflicts  from  him.  I retreated  about  7 miles ; encamped 
all  night. 

Next  morning  as  I left  my  camp  I came  on  the  enemy,  commanded  by 
Colonel  [Albert  L.]  Lee,  of  the  Seventh  Kansas  [Cavalry],  and  another 
regiment,  who  had  been  marching  on  me  from  Collierville,  with  a view 
to  surround  me  and  crush  my  command  in  the  folds  of  a vastly  superior 
force.  A slight  skirmish  ensued,  which  availed  for  all  my  purposes, 
when  I escaped  from  the  nearly  completed  circle  designed  for  my  de- 
struction. Finding  myself  unable  to  meet  the  numbers  pressing  upon 
me  on  three  sides,  I ordered  my  companies  upon  detached  service,  and 
threw  out  squads,  under  efiicient  officers,  to  harass  and  annoy  the  enemy 
on  every  hand.  He  soon  lost  the  track  of  my  regiment,  and  found  him- 
self surrounded  by  small  bands,  annoying  him  in  every  possible  way. 
He  remained  but  three  days,  when  he  retired  to  his  posts  at  La  Grange, 
Collierville,  and  Memphis. 

During  the  time  (about  five  months)  in  which  I have  been  enlisting 
and  organizing  my  regiment,  we  have  killed  about  50  of  the  enemy,  have 
wounded  about  100,  and  paroled  about  700  men. 

I believe  that  a force  of  5,000  men  can  be  raised  in  West  Tennessee 
for  the  defense  of  this  part  of  the  State  through  the  operations  of  the 
conscript  law.  My  command  is  probably  the  first  and  only  regiment  of 
partisan  rangers  organized  in  Tennessee  within  the  enemy^s  lines.  It 
is  a nucleus  around  which  a larger  force  may  be  gathered.  In  West 
Tennessee  there  are  large  supplies,  enough  for  the  sustenance  of  an 
army  sufficient  to  defend  the  country.  These  are  lost  to  the  cause  un- 
less a force  is  raised  to  defend  the  country.  Here  also  are  horses  and 
mules ; these  are  taken  by  the  enemy  whenever  he  makes  a raid.  My 
lines,  now  limited  north  by  the  Big  Hatchie,  might  be  extended  north, 
and  thus  reach  a region  of  country  where  there  are  many  soldiers  away 
from  their  commands  and  many  conscripts.  I suggest,  would  it  not  be 
well  enough  to  encourage  the  raising  of  partisan  corps  within  the  en- 
my\s  lines,  and  thus  avail  yourself  of  a class  of  men  now  rendering  no 
service  to  their  country  ? I have  made  out  a requisition  for  articles 
needed,  and  hope  you  will  approve  it  and  supply  us  as  soon  as  practi- 
cable. Captain  Harrison  and  Lieutenant  [N.]  McMullen  will  give  all 
desirable  information  as  to  my  wants  and  the  exigencies  of  the  service 
in  this  region. 

Very  respectfully. 


R.  Y.  RICHARDSOK, 

CoL,  Comdg.  First  Tennessee  Eegt.  Partisan  Rangers^  G.  S,  A. 
General  [Braxton]  Bragg. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  EXPEDITION  FROM  COLLIERVILLE,  TENN. 


427 


MARCH  8-12,  1863. — Expedition  from  Collierville,  Tenn. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Martin  R.  M.  Wallace,  Fourth  Illinois  Cavalry. 

Collierville,  Tenn.,  March  12,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  at  9.30  a.  m.,  March  9,  1863,  in 
pursuance  of  orders  from  brigade  headquarters,  dated  Headquarters 
Second  Brigade,  Cavalry  Division,  March  8,  1863, 1 took  210  men  of  the 
Seventh  Kansas  Cavalry  and  170  of  the  Fourth  Illinois  Cavalry,  and 
proceeded  west  from  Little’s  Bridge,  on  Wolf  Kiver  (about  3 miles  west 
of  this  place),  northeast  through  Fisherville  to  the  Memphis  and  Somer- 
ville stage  road,  where  we  met  5 of  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  who  fled  at  our 
approach  ; thence  along  that  road  over  the  Cypress  Levee  to  about  2 
miles  east  of  that  place,  then  turned  to  the  left  and  proceeded  to  a little 
village  called  Wythe  Depot,  and  fed  the  command.  While  there,  one  of 
the  troopers,  who  had  been  placed  on  picket,  left  his  post  and  rode  to  a 
house  near  by,  for  the  purpose  of  (he  said)  taking  prisoner  a couple  of 
Richardson’s  men  he  had  heard  were  there  eating  dinner  j he  was  him- 
self taken  prisoner,  and  is  now  in  camp  with  his  parole.  Several  shots 
were  fired  at  the  guard  in  the  road  while  at  this  place.  From  thence 
we  proceeded  in  a northwesterly  direction  to  Jackson’s  Mills,  on  the 
Loosahatchee  j captured  near  the  river  1 of  Richardson’s  men.  Here  a 
very  unfortunate  circumstance  o(^curred.  A man  by  name  of  Forbes 
being  near  the  road,  and  seeing  my  flankers  coming  through  his  field, 
armed  himself,  and  on  approach  of  two  of  the  flankers  to  the  house,  and 
being  ordered  by  them  to  come  out,  refused  to  do  so,  but  immediately 
fired,  cutting  the  carbine  belt  and  riddling  the  overcoat  of  one  of  the 
soldiers ) he  then  ran  to  another  house  and  refused  to  come  out.  My 
men  burst  the  door  open,  and  rushed  in,  firing  up -stairs  at  him  (he  having 
gone  there),  and  he  in  turn  firing  at  them.  One  man  of  Company  E, 
Fourth  Illinois  Cavalry,  fell,  in  the  house,  badly  wounded,  and  one  of 
Company  B fell,  mortally  wounded,  and  since  died.  The  soldiers  imme- 
diately set  the  house  on  firej  this  brought  Forbes  out.  When  I rode  up 
it  was  hardly  possible  to  save  the  house;  it  might  probably  have  been 
done  if  we  had  nothing  else  to  do.  The  first  words  spoken  by  Forbes 
were,  “ Oh,  gentlemen,  I am  mistaken,”  and  from  that  time  protested 
he  was  a Union  man.  He  was  severely  wounded  in  the  right  arm.  We 
left  him  at  his  house  (being  unable  to  travel).  The  evidence  is  over- 
whelming that  he  is  a genuine  Union  man. 

After  disposing  of  the  dead  and  wounded,  I proceeded  with  the  com- 
mand to  Galloway  Station,  on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad,  about  25 
miles  from  this  place  by  the  road  we  traveled,  not  being  able  to  com- 
municate with  Colonel  Grierson  as  yet. 

At  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  lOth  instant,  I proceeded  on  the 
road  north  to  Concordia.  Here  I learned  that  Colonel  Grierson,  of  the 
Sixth  Illinois  Cavalry,  had,  at  about  10  o’clock  on  the  day  previous, 
surprised  Richardson  in  his  camp,  and,  after  a fight  of  about  twenty 
minutes,  Richardson  and  his  men  fled,  leaving  their  camp  an  easy  prey, 
which  he  wholly  destroyed.  I immediately  sent  a party  to  communi- 
cate with  him,  and  his  reply  was,  he  did  not  know  I was  out,  and  I 
might  do  what  I thought  ])roper.  1 also  sent  a party  back  to  Jackson’s 
Mills  to  pick  up  the  wounded  man  and  bring  him  to  camp. 

I proceeded  with  the  balance  of  the  command  west  on  Fort  Randolph 
road,  and  after  traveling  about  2 miles,  and  just  entering  the  bottom  of 
East  Beaver  Dam  Creek,  I ran  on  to  a squad  of  Richardson’s  men.  The 
advanced  guard,  under  Lieutenant  [James]  Smith,  Company  C,  Seventh 


428 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Mississippi,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Kansas  Cavalry,  engaged  them,  and  drove  them  rapidly  along  the  road. 
I immediately  ordered  forward  Comiiany  A,  Seventh  Kansas,  to  the 
support  of  Lieutenant  Smith,  and  they  pursued  the  flying  rebels,  taking 
several  prisoners.  When  I reached  the  edge  of  the  bottom  with  the 
head  of  the  column,  I found  the  main  body  of  the  rebels  had  left  the 
road,  turning  south.  I then  ordered  back  the  advance,  and  took  the  trail 
of  the  main  bodj^,  and  followed  them  into  the  swamii  of  Beaver  Dam 
Bottom  until  they  had  scattered  to  the  four  winds  of  heaven.  From 
the  best  information  I could  gather,  I think  there  were  about  100  in  the 
party  when  we  first  met  them. 

The  rain  came  down  in  torrents  all  day,  and  made  the  bottoms  and 
swamps  very  difficult  to  pass  over.  After  becoming  satisfied  that 
Eichardson’s  forces  were  well  scattered,  I turned  back,  and  proceeded 
to  near  Galloway  Station,  the  place  where  I encamped  the  night  previ- 
ous, thence  to  the  Brownsville  and  Memphis  road,  thence  southwest 
toward  Memphis,  Tenn.,  and  crossed  the  Loosahatchee  near  the  house  of 
Captain  [J.  TI.]  Murry  (of  Richardsoifis  command),  near  Wythe  Station, 
on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad. 

After  passing  AVythe  about  miles,  the  advance  guard  came  upon 
a negro  picket,  who  ran  upon  our  apx)roach  to  the  house  of  General 
Hayes,  at  present  occupied  by  his  son,  A.  J.  Hayes.  The  advance 
promptly  moved  up  and  surrounded  the  buildings  on  the  plantation, 
but  some  of  the  birds  had  flown.  Col.  Robert  F.  Looney  (called  Briga- 
dier-General Looney),  formerly  colonel  of  the  Thirty-eighth  Tennessee 
Infantry;  Maj.  R.  A.  Sanford,  formerly  of  said  regiment,  and  Capt. 
David  Bright,  all  tied,  but  were  overtaken  and  captured  by  the  prompt- 
ness of  the  advance.  After  securing  the  prisoners,  I encamjied  the  com- 
mand on  the  plantation. 

At  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  11th  instant,  I moved  about  1 
mile  to  the  southwest,  toward  Memphis,  crossing  Clear  Creek  at  that 
jfiace,  then  in  a southeasterly  direction  toward  Morning  Sun,  on  the 
Missouri  State  road  to  Fisherville,  thence  to  Little’s  Bridge,  on  Wolf 
River.  Here  I divided  the  command,  sending  the  Seventh  Kansas  with 
the  prisoners,  under  Major  Merriman,  of  that  regiment,  to  Germantown, 
with  orders  to  report  to  Col.  A.  L.  Lee,  commanding  brigade,  and  with 
the  Fourth  Illinois  Cavalry  came  into  camp  at  this  place. 

The  folloAving  is  a list  of  prisoners,  with  rank,  taken  on  this  ex- 
pedition: Col.  Robert  F.  Looney,  Thirty-eighth  Tennessee  Infantry, 
commanding  Partisan  Rangers;  R.  A.  Sanford,  first  lieutenant  and 
adjutant  Thirty-eighth  Tennessee  Infantry;  Cai)t.  David  Bright,  Com- 
pany K,  Eighteenth  Mississippi  Infantry.  * 

###**** 

Colonel  Looney  professes  to  have  been  sent  here  for  the  purposes  of 
investigating  the  complaints  of  citizens  against  Richardson  and  his 
command.  I have  talked  with  several  citizens,  and  they  all  say  that  he 
is  here  for  the  purpose  of  recruiting  and  organizing  a cavalry  brigade 
in  VV^estern  Tennessee.  I am  not  prepared  to  determine  the  truth  of 
the  statement. 

Where  all  acted  cheerfully  and  bravelj^,  it  would  be  invidious  to  dis- 
criminate. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

M.  R.  M.  WALLACE, 

Lieut.  Col..,  Comdg.  Detachment  2d  Brigade^  Cavalry  Division. 
Lieut.  J.  II.  Parker,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


* The  names  of  ‘J  men  omitted. 


CiiAr.  XXXVL]  SCOUT  TO  LA  FAYETTE  AND  MOSCOW,  TENN.,  ETC.  429 


MARCH  10-16, 1863. — Scout  to  La  Fayette  and  Moscow,  Tenn,,  and  skirmish. 


REP»OJRTS. 

No.  1. — Lieut.  Col.  Thomas  P.  Herrick,  Seventh  Kansas  Cavalry. 
No.  2. — Lieut.  W.  J.  Floyd,  Peach  Creek  (Confederate)  Rangers. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Thomas  F.  Herrich,  Seventh  Kansas  Cavalry, 

Camp  on  Mount  Pleasant  and  Early  Groye  Eoad, 

March  16,  1863. 

General  : On  arriving  at  Mount  Pleasant,  this  afternoon,  I found 
that  the  enemy  had  taken  the  Moscow  road,  probably  with  the  design  of 
attacking  a forage  train  from  that  direction  to-morrow.  I followed  them 
rapidly,  and  about  5.30  p.  m.  came  up  with  3 pickets.  I immediately 
charged  at  a gallop,  in  front  and  on  both  flanks,  hoping  to  find  them 
unprepared  either  for  a fight  or  a run.  They  had  halted  to  feed  at  a 
point  on  the  Mount  Pleasant  and  Moscow  road,  where  two  roads  diverge, 
one  to  the  northeast  and  the  other  south.  On  coming  in,  found  them 
already  in  the  saddle.  They  did  not  stop  to  fire  even  a single  volley,  but 
fled  in  confusion  on  both  roads  toward  the  south,  and  rapidly  scattered 
into  the  timber  and  fields.  We  pursued  them  at  the  best  speed  of  our 
horses  for  5 miles,  when  darkness  came  on,  and  we  were  obliged  to  re- 
linquish the  chase.  The  result,  so  far  as  I have  been  able  to  learn,  is  3 
killed,  3 wounded,  and  6 prisoners;  the  rest  scattered — God  only  knows 
where.  This  command  numbered  150  men,  uuder  [W.  R.]  Mitchell  and 
Floyd  ; the  latter  force  from  the  neighborhood  of  Yazoo  Pass.  I learned 
that  about  100  of  the  same  force  crossed  Coldwater,  southward,  last 
night,  after  the  fight  with  Major  [Mindret]  Wemple.  I shall  cross  Cold- 
water  at  an  early  hour  to-morrow  morning  and  try  to  find  them.  No  one 
hurt  on  our  side,  and  the  men  spoiling  for  a fight. 


Morning,  17th. 

1 crossed  Coldwater  at  an  early  hour  this  morning,  at  Alexandria’s 
iMills.  I met  Colonel  Prince  with  detachment  of  three  difereut  regiments. 
He  had  been  to  Hudsonville,  thence  down  south  side  of  Coldwater.  I 
liave  scoured  the  country  south  and  west  to  Queen’s  Mills.  Nothing 
important  has  occurred.  Captain  Utt  had  a long  chase  after  25  rebels, 
but  their  horses  were  too  good.  The  entire  force  which  attacked  Major 
Wemple  is  now  far  south  of  Coldwater,  except  about  26,  who  are  between 
here  and  railroad.  I shall  try  and  find  them,  and  expect  to  be  in  camp 
to-night. 

Respectfully, 


Brig.  Gen.  A.  L.  Lee. 


T.  P.  HERRICK, 
Lieutenant- Colonel^  Commanding, 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Lieut.  W,  J.  Floyd,  Reach  Creelc  [Confederate)  Rangers. 

Headquarters, 

Peach  Creelc,  Miss.,  March  27,  1863. 
General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  lOth  instant  I left 
camp  with  47  men. 

The  15th  found  us  near  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Railroad,  in  the 


430 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


uortheast  comer  of  Marshall  County.  Here  we  encamped  for  the  night. 
About  nightfall  I took  15  men,  and  pressing  a guide  made  my  [way] 
northward  to  La  Fayette  Depot.  When  we  arrived  within  three-fourths 
of  a mile  of  the  depot,  we  dismounted,  leaving  the  main  road.  We  pro- 
ceeded on  foot,  and  within  300  yards  of  the  depot  crossed  the  railroad 
and  moved  in  the  direction  of  some  camp  fires,  supposed  to  be  pickets. 
When  we  had  arrived  within  100  yards  of  them,  we  halted.  I took  1 
man,  and  advanced  near  enough  to  find  the  exact  position  and  strength 
of  the  enemy.  I found  one  company  of  men  intrenched,  or  inside  their 
fortifications,  in  the  shape  of  a half-moon,  built  of  logs  and  dirt.  I 
threw  my  men  in  line,  and  marched  up  in  the  rear  of  this  place  and 
within  25  or  30  paces  of  its  mouth  before  we  were  halted.  I l^ad  selected 
some  men  to  fire  upon  the  pickets  so  soon  as  we  were  baited  by  them. 
This  w^as  well  executed.  We  then  rushed  up  and  poured  in  a volley  of 
buckshot  while  the  enemy  were  getting  over  their  breastworks. 

We  learned  from  a reliable  source  that  the  enemy’s  loss  was  10  killed 
and  wounded  and  several  missing.  We  sustained  no  loss,  a few  balls 
passing  through  some  of  the  men’s  clothing. 

We  fell  back  to  our  horses  and  made  our  way  back  to  camp  about 
sunrise.  After  stopping  two  or  three  hours,  we  started  in  the  direction 
of  Moscow.  W^e  fell  in  with  Captain  Mitchell,  who  had  about  50 
men.  At  noon  we  halted  to  feed,  and  about  4 o’clock  were  attacked  by 
the  Seventh  Kansas  Cavalry.  We  exchanged  a few  shots  with  them 
and  fell  back.  The  enemy  had  sent  three  companies  on  our  left  and  two 
on  our  right  to  cut  off  our  retreat.  They  captured  6 men  of  our  rear 
guard,  viz,  J.  H.  Jones,  J.  K.  McLeod,  Adolphus  Motle}^,  Samuel  John- 
son, J.  W.  Ward,  and  P.  B.  Waldraup.  We  had  1 man  wounded  slightly 
and  1 horse  killed. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  J.  FLOYD, 

Lieutenant,  Commanding  Peach  CrecJc  Rangers, 
[Gomjgany  H,  18th  Battalion  Mississippi  Cavalry). 

Brig.  Gen.  James  R.  Chalmers. 


MARCH  14-27,  1863. — The  Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition  (to  Rolling  Fork, 
Miss.,  by  Muddy,  Steele’s,  and  Black  Bayous  and  Deer  Creek),  with  skir- 
mishes (21st  and  22d)  on  Deer  Creek  and  (24th  and  25th)  on  Black  Bayou. 

RKFORTS.* 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Fifteenth  Army 
Corps. 

No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  David  Stuart,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Division. 

No.  3. — Col.  Giles  A.  Smith,  Eighth  Missouri  Infantry,  commanding  First  Brigade. 
No.  4. — Col.  George  B-  Iloge,  One  hundred  and  thirteenth  Illinois  Infantry. 

No.  5.— Col.  Thomas  Kilby  Smith,  Fifty-fourth  Ohio  Infautry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade. 

No.  6.— Lieut.  Col.  Americus  V.  Rice,  Fifty-seventh  Ohio  Infantry,  commanding 
regiment  and  Second  Brigade. 

""  For  reports  of  xVctg.  Rear-Admiral  David  D.  Porter  and  Lieut.  Commanders  James 
P.  Foster,  Watson  Smith,  and  John  G.  Walker,  U.  S.  Navy,  see  Annual  Report  of  the 
Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  7,  1863. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  STEELE’s  BAYOU  EXPEDITION,  ETC.  431 

No.  7. — Col.  Hamilton  N.  Eldridge,  One  hundred  and  twenty-seventh  Illinois  In- 
fantry. 

No.  8. — Capt.  Benjamin  H.  Myers,  Eighty-third  Indiana  Infantry. 

No.  9. — Lieut.  Col.  Cyrus  W.  Fisher,  Fifty-fourth  Ohio  Infantry. 

No.  10.— Capt.  John  McClure,  Fifty-seventh  Ohio  Infantry. 

No.  11. — Brig.  Gen.  Hugh  Ewing,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Brigade. 

No.  12. — Lieut.  Col.  Theodore  Jones,  Thirtieth  Ohio  Infantry. 

No.  13. — Col.  Edward  Siber,  Thirty-seventh  Ohio  Infantry. 

No.  14. — Col.  Augustus  C.  Parry,  Forty-seventh  Ohio  Infantry. 

No.  15. — Col.  Joseph  A.  J.  Lightburn,  Fourth  West  Virginia  Infantry. 

No.  16. — Maj.  Gen.  Carter  L.  Stevenson,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  district. 

No.  17. — Maj  ..Gen.  Dabney  H.  Maury,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  division. 

No.  18. — Brig.  Gen.  Winfield  S.  Featherston,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  brigade. 

No.  19. — Brig.  Gen.  Stephen  D.  Lee,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  brigade. 

No.  20. — Col.  Samuel  W.  Ferguson,  C.  S.  Army,  couimanding  detachment. 

NTo.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman^  U.  S.  Army,  commanding 

Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 

Headquarters, 

Deer  Creek,  March  16,  1863. 

Dear  Sir  : I came  up  Steele’s  Bayou  and  overtook  the  fleet  of  iron- 
clads just  before  they  reached  Deer  Creek.  Four  of  them  have  gone  up 
Deer  Creek  to  Boiling  Fork  Cut-off,  thence  into  Sunflower,  thence  into 
Yazoo,  just  below  Yazoo  City.  The  Louisville  remains  here,  but  goes 
up  the  moment  I can  get  a guard  through  to  this  point.  Deer  Creek 
is  not  as  large  nor  has  it  as  much  current  as  I expected,  but  the  water 
is  deep  and  narrow.  The  iron-clads  push  their  way  along  unharmed, 
but  the  trees  and  overhanging  limbs  tear  the  wooden  boats  all  to 
pieces.  I found  the  Diligent  nearly  up  to  the  fleet,  and  they  have  been 
at  work  to-day,  but  most  of  the  time  were  engaged  in  collecting  rafts 
whereon  to  stand  whilst  cutting  trees.  I don’t  think  any  boat  can  as 
yet  come  through  this  Black  Bayou,  but  I will  push  the  work. 

There  is  no  high  land  here,  nor  is  the  route  practicable  for  troops 
unless  the  admiral  cleans  out  the  Yazoo  and  secures  the  mouth  of 
Deer  Creek,  when  I might  use  Deer  Creek  as  the  route  for  a diverting 
force.  The  main  attack  on  Haynes’  Bluff*  must  be  in  larger  boats,  di- 
rectly up  the  main  Yazoo.  None  but  my  small  boats  can  navigate  Deer 
Creek.  I don’t  think  we  can  make  a lodgment  on  high  land  by  this 
route,  on  account  of  the  difficulty  of  navigation. 

The  admiral  wants  me  to  hold  this  place  secure  for  him  whilst  he 
operates  above,  and  1 will  undertake  it.  We  are  only  25  miles  by  land 
from  Haynes’  Bluff,  but  I don’t  apprehend  they  will  do  worse  than  send 
a party  up  to  ascertain  our  strength  and  purposes.  One  brigade  (Giles 
A.  Smith’s)  is  as  much  as  should  be  sent  here  till  the  trees  are  cut  away. 

The  plantation  here  is  not  more  than  3 feec  above  water,  and  is  the 
same  kind  of  ground  we  have  on  the  Mississippi. 

I send  the  Diligent  back,  having  landed  the  Eighth  Missouri  here, 
and  arranged  for  bringing  it  through  the  bayou  in  a coal-barge  towed 
by  a tug. 

Colonel  Ihrie  will  describe  the  topographical  features  of  this  locality. 
Yours,  truly, 


Maj.  Gen.  IJ.  S.  Grant. 


W.  T.  SHERMAN, 
Major- General,  Coimnanding. 


432 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAr.  XXXVL 


Headquarters  Fifteenth  Army  Corps, 

Camp  at  intersection  of  Blade  Bayou  and  Beer  Creek,  Miss.^ 

AlarcJi  21,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  hoDor  to  report  that,  in  pursuance  of  Major-General 
Grant’s  instructions  of  the  15th  instant,  I ordered  the  Eighth  Missouri, 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Coleman  in  command,  with  50  pioneers,  to  embark 
on  the  steamer  Diligent,  and  to  proceed  with  all  dispatch  up  the  Yazoo, 
and  clean  out  the  channel  leading  thence  up  Steele’s  Bayou. 

This  party  subsequently  received  instructions  to  follow  the  admiral 
up  Steele’s  Bayou  to  the  Big  Black,  and  proceed  to  clear  it  of  overhang- 
ing trees,  and  in  person  I repaired  on  board  the  flag-ship  Black  Hawk, 
and  at  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  16th,  in  the  tug  Fern,  I followed, 
overtook  the  Diligent  in  Steele’s  Bayou,  and  passed  on  and  overtook 
the  fleet  of  gunboats  just  as  they  were  entering  Deer  Creek. 

There  I met  Admiral  Porter,  with  whom  in  a tug  I proceeded  up  about 
3 miles  to  Fore’s  plantation,  and  returned  to  this  point.  My  orders 
were  to  see  as  to  the  practicability  of  moving  my  corps  from  Young’s 
Point  to  some  tenable  position  on  the  main  land  east  of  the  Yazoo,  from 
which  to  operate  against  Vicksburg  and  the  Yazoo  forts  at  Haynes’ 
Bluff.  Admiral  Porter  proposed  to  move  up  Deer  Creek  to  the  Boiling 
Fork,  thence  into  Sunflower,  and  so  on  to  the  Yazoo,  below  Yazoo  City, 
and  he  firi^fc  proposed  to  leave  one  gunboat,  the  Louisville,  at  this  point, 
and  to  reconnoiter  with  the  other  four  and  the  tugs. 

I was  to  remain  here  till  he  went  above.  The  same  night,  Monday, 
he  sent  orders  back  for  the  Louisville  to  follow,  whereupon  I disem- 
barked the  Eighth  Missouri  at  this  point  as  a guard,  and  set  the  pio- 
neers to  work  in  cleaning  away  the  trees  and  brush  in  Black  Bayou. 
This  is  about  4 miles  long,  narrow,  crooked,  and  filled  with  trees. 

The  heavy  iron-clads  could  force  their  way  through,  pressing  aside 
the  bushes  and  trees,  but  the  transports  could  not  follow.  The  Eighth 
Missouri  passed  through  on  a coal-barge,  drawn  by  a navy  tug.  Other 
pioneers  and  negroes  have  been  sent  up  by  Major-General  Grant,  among 
them  two  companies  of  Colonel  Bissell’s  regiment,  all  of  whom  are  busy, 
and  have  so  far  progressed  in  their  work  that  yesterday  the  Eagle  ami 
Silver  Wave  came  up  far  enough  to  land  two  regiments,  viz,  the  Sixth 
Missouri  and  the  One  hundred  and  sixteenth  Illinois,  at  the  first  ground 
above  water  from  the  Yazoo  to  this  point.  They  have  backed  out  and 
gone  down  to  Eagle  Bend  for  more  troops. 

On  Tuesday,  in  a tug,  I recounoitered  up  Steele’s  Bayou  to  see  if  I 
could  reach  the  Bolling  Fork  by  that  route,  but  found  it  utterly  im- 
practicable for  a small  tug,  much  less  a transport.  All  the  country  on 
both  sides  was  deep  under  water.  I next  examined  the  left  fork  up  to 
and  beyond  the  Tallulah  Bridge,  but  the  bridge  is  swept  away  and  the 
road  deep  under  water.  Indeed,  all  the  country  bordering  Steele’s 
Bayou  is  submerged  swamp.  Satisfied  that  the  only  dry  land  in  this 
climate  was  to  be  found  here  on  Deer  Creek,  I returned,  and  renewed 
the  orders  to  push  the  work  in  clearing  out  Black  Bayou. 

Learning  that  General  Stuart’s  division,  of  my  corps,  had  been  sent 
up  to  the  Muddy  Bayou,  I proceeded  down  on  Thursday  to  see  what 
progress  they  were  making  in  getting  across  to  Steele’s  Bayou,  and  found 
the  division  there,  with  two  regiments,  the  Sixth  Missouri  and  Oue 
hundred  and  sixteenth  Illinois,  embarked  in  the  Silver  Wave,  which 
started  out,  and  General  Stuart  accompanied  me.  Our  tug  broke  her 
rudder,  and  in  the  night  carried  away  the  smoke-stack,  which  disabled 
her  all  day  yesterday ; but  she  is  now  repaired,  and  will  be  used  in  tow- 
ing an  cmi)ty  coal-barge  freighted  with  soldiers  as  they  arrive. 


433 


Ci]Ai>.  XXXVI.]  the  Steele’s  bayou  expedition,  etc. 

On  my  way  up,  I met  a messenger  from  Admiral  Porter,*  reporting 
continued  obstructions  in  bis  way,  and  that  in  the  end  he  would  want 
10,000  men  to  hold  the  countiy,  that  he  might  remove  the  obstructions. 
I wrote  him  at  once  of  the  delays  in  getting  forward  men  to  this  point, 
and  that  it  was  a physical  impossibility  for  us  to  reach  his  boats  with 
anything  like  that  force,  but  1 would  hurry  up  the  troops  of  Stuart’s  t 
division  to  this  point,!  which  is  really  the  first  high,  or,  rather,  dry 
ground.  But  it  does  not  fulfill  any  of  General  Grant’s  conditions,  for 
we  cannot  reach  the  Yazoo  from  this  point  by  land  or  water.  I sent 
you  Admiral  Porter’s  letter  by  General  Stuart. 

About  3 a.  m.  to-day  I received  another  letter  from  Admiral  Porter, 
telling  me.that  he  was  still  in  Beer  Creek,  and  that  his  passage  was 
obstructed  by  the  enemy,  and  asked  me  to  hurry  up  to  co-operate. 
But  as  the  great  bulk  of  my  corps  is  still  behind,  it  would  be  improper 
for  me  to  pass  beyond  all  reach  of  them,  and  I have  accordingly  sent 
up  Col.  Giles  A.  Smith,  with  all  of  his  brigade  now  up,  with  orders  to 
march  up  the  east  bank  of  Beer  Greek  to  the  gunboats.  He  got  off 
about  daylight,  and  has  21  miles  to  march.  The  admiral  is,  doubtless, 
concerned  lor  the  safety  ot  his  gunboats,  and  with  propriety. 

Beer  Greek  is  a narrow,  sluggish  sHeam,  full  of  willow  bushes  and 
overhanging  trees,  through  which  nothing  but  keel  boats  have  usually 
plied.  His  iron-dads  move  like  snails,  but  with  great  power,  forcing 
all  saplings  and  bushes  and  drift  aside,  but  the  channel  is  useless  tons 
in  a military  way.  It  cannot  be  used  at  this  present  stage  of  water. 
Its  banks  are  usually  from  1 to  3 feet  above  water,  and  the  road  keeps 
upon  the  river  bank  a natural  levee.  There  are  a series  of  well-im- 
proved plantations  the  whole  distance,  and  provisions  are  abundant; 
that  is,  cattle,  sheep,  hogs,  and  poultry.  The  wagon  road  will  be  use- 
less at  this  season,  as  the  wheels  would  cut  to  the  hubs  in  the  damp, 
low  places,  on  which  troops  can  march  very  well.  If  we  want  to  op- 
erate along  this  narrow  strip  of  land,  of  course  the  creek  must  be  used 
to  carry  all  articles  of  ammunition  or  subsistence  other  than  what  the 
men  have  on  their  backs. 

My  own  impression  is  that  the  enemy  have  so  obstructed  Rolling 
Fork  Bayou  that  it  will  be  absolutely  impassable  to  the  admiral’s  fleet, 
and  it  will  be  a difficult  and  dangerous  task  to  withdraw  it  safely  back 
to  Steele’s  Bayou  and  deep,  navigable  water.  He  must  go  through  to 
Rolling  Fork  to  turn  his  boats,  but  I understand  the  fleet  is  now  within 
a mile  of  Rolling  Fork.  I will  bring  forward  Stuart’s  division  as  fast 
as  possible,  and  get  it  here,  and  it  may  be  prudent  to  send  Steele’s 
division  to  the  same  point,  that  we  may  have  a force  sufficient  for  any 
possible  contingency. 

I have  heard  some  considerable  cannonading  above  this  morning, 
which  was  doubtless  from  • the  gunboats,  but  it  ceased  after  about  an 
lioiir.  1 suppose  the  admiral  was  shelling  the  channel  to  protect  his 
working  jiarties.  The  enemy  has  a quicker  route  to  reach  Rolling  Fork 
tlian  we.  Their  boats  can  go  from  Yazoo  Gity  or  Haynes’  Bluff'  fiirectly 
up  the  Sunflower,  which  is  a large,  good  stream,  and  Rolling  Fork  is 
only  < miles  long,  and  I understand  the  levee  along  it  is  continuous 
and  above  w^ater.  To  reach  this  point,  which  is  21  miles  from  the  fleet, 
we  mive  to  disembark  at  Muddy  Bayou,  march  across  to  Steele’s,  ferry 
up  ^8  miles  to  the  mouth  ot  Black  Bayou,  and  again  transfer  to  a coal- 
oarge,  and  tow  up  about  2 miles  before  we  find  the  first  land.  Thence 
(^this  point  is  2\  miles,  and  21  up  to  the  fleet.  We  were  not  and  are 

* 8eo  Addenda,  p.  436.  t See  iiiclosiue  to  Fcatberston’s  report  of  March  21,  p.  457. 

28  It  11 — VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


434 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CllAP.  XXXVI. 


not  prepared  to  move  troops  in  this  way,  but  I will  keep  everything 
moving  as  fast  as  I can,  but  you  know  the  difficulty  of  managing  de- 
tached boats  in  small,  crooked  streams,  where  overhanging  boughs  and 
submerged  trees  obstruct  their  progress  at  every  quarter  of  a mile. 

The  three  regiments  which  have  gone  up  to  the  admiral  ought  to 
reach  him  about  5 p.  in.,  and  if  I can  possibly  get  the  Second  Brigade 
up  to-day  or  to-night,  I will  also  send  them  forward,  as  they  will  cover 
the  advance  of  the  fleet;  but,  so  far  as  accomplishing  the  original  ob- 
ject, viz,  finding  a practicable  point  on  the  east  bank  of  the  Yazoo 
whereon  to  disembark  my  corps,  I pronounce  it  impossible  by  any 
channel  communicating  with  Steele’s  Bayou.  If  the  fleet  pushes  be- 
yond Boiling  Fork,  we  can  hold  that  point  or  this,  and  thereby  enable 
the  admiral  to  use  his  whole  fleet.  The  Price  is  still  in  Steele’s  Bayou, 
and  cannot  pass  through  Black  Bayou.  Captain  [Selim  D.]  Woodworth, 
her  commander,  expects  the  wooden  gunboat  Linden  every  hour,-  and 
thinks  she  can  pass  to  this  point.  I only  have  the  Eagle  and  Silver 
Wave  to  ferry  troops  up  from  Muddy  Bayou,  and  expect  the  Diligent 
up  every  hour — she  is  past  due — and  will  set  her  to  work  at  once  iu 
bringing  up  men. 

I take  it  for  granted  the  five  iron-clad  gunboats  can  fight  anything 
that  can  be  brought  against  them,  and  land  forces  are  only  needed  to 
cover  the  ground,  to  enable  them  to  clean  out  obstructions. 

If  you  want  me  to  hold  Deer  Creek  country,  please  so  order  it,  and 
also  how  far  you  want  me  to  proceed. 

I am,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major-  General,  Commanding, 

Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


Headquarters  Fifteenth  Army  Corps, 

Camp,  before  Viclcshurg,  March  29,  1863. 

Sir  : I had  the  honor  to  report  to  you  the  result  of  my  observations 
on  the  projected  route  to  the  Yazoo,  by  way  of  Steele’s  Bayou,  up  to 
the  21st  of  March.  On  that  day  I was  at  Hill’s  plantation,  on  Deer 
Creek,  where  Black  Bayou  enters  it,  and  hiid  sent  forward  to  Admiral 
Porter  all  the  troops  then  with  me,  viz,  the  Sixth  and  Eighth  Missouri 
and  One  hundred  and  twenty-seventh  Illinois,  under  the  command  of 
Col.  Giles  A.  Smith,  with  orders  to  march  up  the  east  bank  of  Deer 
Creek  to  the  vicinity  of  Rolling  Fork,  and  there  report  to  Admiral 
Porter. 

At  that  time  the  admiral  had  advanced  up  Deer  Creek  with  five  iron- 
clads, but  before  reaching  Rolling  Fork  had  found  the  creek  so  full  of 
growing  trees  and  willows  that  his  progress  was  slower  thun  he  had 
calculated,  and  the  enemy  had  begun  further  to  obstruct  his  x>iogress  , 
by  felling  trees  in  the  channel  and  firing  from  ambush  on  his  working  i 
parties  when  exposed  on  the  decks  or  on  the  banks  of  the  stream.  I , 
had,  at  his  call,  sent  forward  every  man  then' with  me,  and  had  put  in 
motion  all  my  steamboats  to  bring  forward  more  troops  from  Eagle  j 
Bend.  [ 

By  night  three  steamboat  loads  had  arrived  at  the  foot  of  Black  j 
Bayou,  and  were  transferred  to  the  first  visible  ground  above  water,  at  ' 
a })oint  on  the  south  shore  of  Black  Bayou,  about  1.^  miles  from  its  , 
mouth  and  2J  miles  from  Hill’s  plantation.  I conducted  them  through  , 


ciiAr.  XXXVI.]  the  Steele’s  bayou  expedition,  etc. 


435 


the  dense  canebrake,  by  lighted  candles,  up  to  the  plantation  that  night, 
and  on  the  next  morning  (March  22),  without  means  of  transportation  or 
other  facilities,  save  what  we  carried  on  our  persons,  we  marched  over 
the  same  road  which  had  been  traveled  by  Colonel  Smith. 

These  troops  were  the  battalion  of  the  Thirteenth  Eegulars  and  the 
One  hundred  and  thirteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  being  the  remainder  of 
Col.  Giles  A.  Smith’s  brigade,  and  the  Eighty-third  Indiana,  One  hun- 
dred and  sixteenth  Illinois,  Fifty-fourth  and  Fifty-seventh  Ohio,  com- 
manded by  the  senior  officer  present,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Eice,  of  the 
Fifty-seventh  Ohio. 

Having  reason  to  believe,  from  the  sound  of  artillery  in  the  direction 
of  the  fleet,  the  enemy  to  be  in  force  near  the  gunboats,  we  hastened 
forward,  and  shortly  after  noon  came  to  a detachment  of  the  Eighth 
Missouri,  stationed  at  Indian  Mound,  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  fell- 
ing trees  in  Deer  Creek  to  the  rear  of  the  fleet,  and  about  3 p.  m.  our 
advance  guard,  under  the  command  of  Captain  [Edward  C.]  Washing- 
ton, came  in  contact  with  the  enemy. 

Our  arrival  was  very  opportune,  and  the  two  leading  battalions  pushed 
the  enemy  along  the  swamp  in  rear  of  the  plantation  fields  that  bordered 
Deer  Creek  for  about  2 nliles,  and  until  they  were  to  the  north  and  rear 
of  the  gunboat  fleet.  In  person  I pushed  along  the  bayou  road  till  I 
met  Colonel  Smith  coming  down  to  interpose  between  this  same  party 
and  his  outlying  detachment. 

As  soon  as  possible  I communicated  with  the  admiral,  and  learned 
that  he  had  found  the  route  far  more  difficult  than  he  had  been  led  to 
believe,  and,  owing  to  natural  and  artificial  obstacles  to  his  advance,  he 
had  abandoned  the  attempt  to  reach  the  Yazoo,  and  at  the  time  of  my 
meeting  him  was  in  the  act  of  backing  down  Deer  Creek.  I accord- 
ingly made  the  necessary  dispositions  to  cover  his  boats  while  engaged 
in  this  slow  and  tedious  process. 

The  progress  was  slow,  consuming  all  of  the  22d,  23d,  and  part  of  the 
24th  of  March,  when  the  fleet  again  reached  Black  Bayou,  at  Hill’s  plan- 
tation. Yot  a shot  was  fired  at  the  gunboats  after  we  drove  the  enemy 
back  on  first  encountering  him.  The  enemy  hung  upon  the  rear  of  our 
column,  but  would  not  come  within  reach. 

We  remained  at  Hill’s  plantation  all  of  the  25th,  during  which  day 
the  enemy  appeared  at  Fore’s  plantation,  about  3 miles  above  Hill’s, 
displaying  three  regiments  of  infantry  and  some  cavalry. 

I endeavored  to  draw  them  within  range,  but  they  came  no  nearer. 
Admiral  Porter  left  the  fleet  at  that  point  on  the  morning  of  the  25th, 
and  I proposed  to  remain  for  some  days,  but  on  the  morning  ©f  the  26th 
I received  General  Grant’s  note  of  March  22,  and  a note  addressed  to 
the  admiral  by  his  flag-captain,  [K.  Eandolph]  Breese,  which  the  ad- 
miral had  sent  up  to  me,  urging  the  immediate  return  to  the  mouth  of 
the  Yazoo  of  the  fleet  for  certain  reasons  therein  set  forth ; and  having 
sent  scouts  well  to  the  front,  I concluded  that  the  enemy  had  no  design 
to  come  nearer  than  Watson’s,  5 miles  above.  I determined  to  return. 
Accordingly,  at  noon  that  day  pickets  were  drawn  in,  all  the  men  and 
working  parties  were  embarked  on  the  gunboats  and  transports,  and  we 
returned  to  our  original  camps,  reaching  them  in  the  night  of  March  27. 

I now  inclose  a map  made  by  Lieutenant  Pitzman,  topographical  en- 
gineer, showing  the  rohte  as  traveled.*  Hence  to  the  mouth  of  Cypress 
Bayou  (12  miles)  the  navigation  is  good.  Thence  up  Cypress  5 miles, 
also  good.  Thence  7 miles  to  Muddy  Bayou  ; channel  deep  but  crooked  j 


Not  found. 


436 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


boats  experience  much  trouble  from  short  bends  and  overhanging  trees. 
Thence  20  miles  up  Steele’s  Bayou ; good  navigation  for  small  boats. 
Thence  4 miles  through  Black  Bayou ; navigation  has  been  much  im- 
proved by  our  pioneers,  but  is  still  impracticable  to  any  save  iron  boats ; 
wooden  boats  would  be  all  torn  to  pieces.  Thence  30  miles  up  Deer 
Greek  water  deep  but  channel  narrow,  crooked,  and  filled  with  young 
willows,  which  bind  the  boats  and  make  navigation  difficult,  and  the 
banks  along  the  whole  length  are  lined  with  heavy  trees  and  over- 
hanging branches  that  tear  down  chimneys  and  carry  away  pilot-houses, 
stanchions,  and  aU  wood-work. 

I did  not  see  the  Roiling  Fork,  but  without  hesitation  I pronounce 
Black  Bayou  and  Deer  Creek  useless  to  us  as  a military  channel. 

All  the  country  along  Steele’s  Bayou  and  Black  Bayou  is  under 
water,  but  along  Deer  Greek  are  many  fine  plantations,  well  stocked 
with  mules,  cattle,  sheep,  hogs,  corn,  and  cotton. 

Our  expedition  being  chiefly  for  reconnaissance  and  partially  to  pro- 
tect the  gunboats,  we  went  no  farther  than  these  objects  required. 

. I inclose  the  report  of  Gol.  Giles  A.  Smith  and  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Rice,  and  being  myself  along,  bear  testimony  to  the  alacrity  of  the 
troops,  their  eagerness  to  pursue  the  enemy,  and  the  cheerfulness  with 
which  they  marched  in  rain  and  mud. 

I feel  assured  Admiral  Porter  will  admit  we  rendered  him  and  his 
fleet  good  service,  as  without  our  presence  it  would  have  cost  him  many 
valuable  lives  to  have  extricated  his  boats  while  the  banks  of  Deer 
Greek  were  lined  by  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters,  against  whom  his  heavy 
ordnance  could  not  well  be  brought  to  bear. 

We  lost  but  2 men — one  of  the  Sixth  Missouri  and  one  of  the  Eighty- 
third  Indiana — whose  names  are  given  in  the  appropriate  places. 

In  order  that  the  general  may  fully  understand  the  disposition  made 
of  the  troops  sent  on  this  expedition,  I inclose  the  reports  of  Brigadier- 
General  Stuart,  commanding  the  division,  and  his  brigadiers.  Cols. 
Giles  A.  Smith,  T.  Kilby  Smith,  and  Hugh  Ewing;  also  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Rice,  who  commanded  the  Second  Brigade  in  its  march  up 
Deer  Creek  and  back. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  T.  SHERMAK, 

Major- Ge^ieral,  Commanding  Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 

Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 

ADDENDA. 

Deer  Creek,  March  19,  1863. 

General  [Sherman]: 

We  are  within  IJ  miles  of  Rolling  Fork,  having  undergone  an  im- 
mensity of  labor.  Had  the  way  been  as  good  as  represented  to  me,  I 
should  have  been  in  Yazoo  City  by  this  time ; but  we  have  been  de- 
layed by  obstructions  which  I did  not  mind  much,  and  the  little  willows, 
wliich  grow  so  thick  that  we  stuck  fast  hundreds  of  times, 

I beg  that  you  will  shove  up  troops  to  us  at  once.  I am  holding  the 
mouth  of  Rolling  Fork  against  [Wirt]  Adams’  troops,  which  have  at- 
tacked our  200  men.  We  have  only  two  pieces  of  artillery;  they  have 
six,  and  200  men.  We  should  take  possession  here  at  once  with  the 
army.  There  is  everything  here  the  heart  of  a soldier  could  desire; 
everything  in  abundance.  Please  send  ; it  takes  all  my  men  to  defend 
the  position  I have  taken.  I think  the  distance  is  only  14  miles  by  land. 


Chap.  XXSVL]  THE  STEELE’s  BAYOU  EXPEDITION,  ETC. 


437 


I shall  look  for  these  re-enforcements.  I send  yon  a dispatch  from 
Captain  Murphy.  Please  send  on  troops. 

I think  a large  force  will  be  used  to  block  us  up  here.  We  must  have 
every  soldier  to  hold  the  country  or  they  will  do  it.  Our  difficulties 
increase. 

Truly  yours,  &c., 

DAVID  D.  POETEE, 

Acting  Rear-Admiral. 

P.  S. — I think  10,000  troops  could  be  transported  here  rapidly  from 
abreast  of  Island  OB,  below  Bunch’s  Bend,  Mississippi  Eiver.  Wo  will 
require  that  many  here  before  we  get  through  with  this  matter. 

[Indorsement.] 

Maech  21—8  a.  m. 

Eeceived  midnight  March  10-20,  answered  March  20,  describing  state 
of  facts  at  the  moment.  All  the  country  but  Deer  Creek  and  Missis- 
sippi levees  under  water.  Sixth  and  Eighth  Missouri  and  One  hundred 
and  Sixteenth  Illinois  are  up.  Balance  of  Stuart’s  division  at  Muddy 
Bayou. 

W.  T.  SHEEMAN^, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


Ko.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  David  Stuart,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second 

Division. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Division,  Fifteenth  Aemy  Corps, 

Young’’ s Point,  La.,  March  29,  1863. 

Sir:  In  pursuance  of  an  order  of  General  Grant,  I embarked  the 
troops  of  the  Second  Division  on  transports  at  Young’s  Point,  on  the 
morning  of  the  17th  instant,  with  the  exception  of  the  Fifty- fifth  Illi- 
nois, then  absent  on  other  duty,  and  the  Eighth  Missouri,  which  had 
preceded  us  on  the  16th,  bj^  order  of  General  Sherman.  My  instructions 
were  to  debark  at  Eagle  Bend,  on  the  river,  and  cross  the  plantation 
near  Muddy  Bayou,  to  Steele’s  Bayou  j there  to  embark  on  transports 
and  move  up  to  Eolling  Fork,  reporting  to  Major-General  Sherman. 

Arriving  about  1 p.  m.  at  Eagle  Bend,  I reconnoitered  the  ground,  and 
found  it  impassable  for  the  troops  without  the  construction  of  rafts  and 
bridges.  A suggestion  from  a citizen  that  the  crossing  might  be  effected 
some  20  miles  above,  near  Tallulah,  induced  me  to  dispatch  Col.  Giles 
A.  Smith,  commandiug  First  Brigade,  with  his  boat,  to  reconnoiter 
that  point.  Meanwhile  I proceeded  to  construct  a crossing  at  Eagle 
Bend,  using  for  the  purpose  the  negro  huts  and  frame  of  the  cotton-gin 
found  on  the  plantation  belonging,  as  I learned,  in  part  to  Senator 
[William  M.]  Gwin,  of  California. 

At  night  I returned  to  Young’s  Point  to  acquaint  Major-General 
Grant  with  the  condition  of  things,  and  receive  his  instructions.  The 
general  informed  me  that  he  had  ordered  his  boat,  the  Magnolia,  to 
move  up  to  our  rendezvous  at  1 o’clock  that  night,  and  that  he  would 
join  us  at  daylight. 

On  my  return  to  Eagle  Bend,  Col.  Giles  A.  Smith  reported  to  me,  as 
the  result  of  his  exploration,  that  the  country  back  of  Tallulah  was 
submerged,  and  that  it  was  impracticable  for  the  passage  of  troops. 
General  Grant  arriving,  passed  over  the  route,  and  ordering  it  pro- 


438  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

ceeded  with  as  rapidly  as  possible,  I pushed  it  with  all  the  force  I 
could  employ  upon  it. 

I passed  the  troops  over  it  oil  the  19tb,  and  embarked  950  men  on 
the  Silver  Wave,  the  only  boat  reporting  for  the  service.  I met  Gen- 
eral Sherman  on  a tug,  at  the  mouth  of  Muddy  Bayou,  while  embark- 
ing for  the  first  trip.  We  landed  at  the  first  piece  of  dry  laud  on  Black 
Bayou,  about  IJ  miles  below  Hill’s  plantation.  General  Sherman  re- 
maining with  the  troops,  I returned  on  the  Silver  Wave,  to  push  for- 
ward the  remainder  of  the  troops.  Another  load  by  the  W^ave  I landed 
at  the  mouth  of  Black  Bayou,  and  transferred  them  on  a flat-boat  to 
the  landing  above  mentioned.  A third  trip  by  the  Wave,  and  two  each 
by  the  Diligent  and  Eagle,  transported  the  entire  command. 

Arriving  at  Hill’s  plantation  on  the  morning  of  the  23d  instant  with 
General  Ewing’s  brigade,  I soon  received  an  order  from  General  Sher- 
man, advising  me  that  the  gunboats  and  troops  were  on  their  return 
march,  and  instructing  me  to  send  out  a regiment  to  meet  them  some  4 
miles  out.  I dispatched  at  once  the  Fourth  West  Virginia,  established 
a strong  picket  on  the  west  side  of  Deer  Creek,  with  a regiment  thrown 
out  some  4 miles  in  that  direction,  and  awaited  the  return  of  the  troops. 

On  the  24th,  General  Sherman,  with  the  troops  and  gunboats,  came 
back.  AVe  remained  at  Hill’s  plantation  until  the  26th,  awaiting  some 
threatening  demonstrations  of  the  enemy ; but  finding  they  had  no  in- 
tention of  coming  near  us,  but  seemed  a mere  hovering  party,  General 
Sherman  ordered  the  re-embarkation  of  the  troops,  and  about  3 o’clock 
in  the  afternoon  we  descended  the  Black  Bayou  and  arrived  at  Young’s 
Point  on  the  evening  of  the  27th. 

The  few  casualties  are  referred  to  in  the  reports  of  my  brigade  com- 
manders, to  which  I beg  leave  respectfully  to  refer. 

I take  leave  to  compliment  Major  Vance,  Fourth  WYst  Virg«iuia,  who 
was  detailed  as  a field  officer  in  command  of  the  details  ordered  from 
each  regiment  to  accompany  and  guard  the  stores  on  the  Silver  Wave. 
He  was  of  very  great  service  and  assistance  to  me  in  every  way,  in 
embarking  and  disembarking,  distributing  and  regulating  the  distribu- 
tion of  the  rations,  ammunition,  &c.  He  is  a very  faithful,  assiduous, 
and  intelligent  officer. 

Colonel  Parry,  with  his  Forty-seventh  OhioEegiment,  built  the  road, 
rafts,  and  bridges  across  the  plantation  at  Muddy  Bayou.  I never  knew 
a regiment  do  so  much  and  so  good  a work  in  so  short  a time.  They 
are  the  best  set  of  men  I have  had  to  do  with  in  the  army,  and  Colonel 
Parry  himself  one  of  the  most  energetic  of  officers. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  STUAET, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 

Capt.  L.  M.  Dayton,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Col.  Giles  A.  Smith.,  Eighth  Missoxiri  Infantry.,  commanding 

First  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  First  Brig.,  Second  Div.,  Fifteenth  A.  C., 

Young’’ s Point.,  La.,  March  28,  1863. 
Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  movements  of  the  First 
Brigade  in  the  expedition  up  Steele’s  Bayou,  Black  Bayou,  and  Deer 
Creek. 


439 


Chap.  XXXVI.j  THE  STEELE’.S  BAYOU  EXPEDITION,  ETC. 

Tbe  Sixth  Missouri  and  Oue  huudied  aud  sixteenth  Illinois  Eegi- 
inents  embarked  at  the  mouth  of  Muddy  Bayou  on  the  evening  of 
Thursday,  March  18  [10],  and  proceeded  up  Steele’s  Bayou  to  the 
mouth  of  Black ; thence  up  Black  Bayou  to  Hill’s  plantation  and  junc- 
tion with  Deer  Creek,  where  we  arrived  on  Friday  at  4 p.  m.,  where  we 
joined  the  Eighth  Missouri,  Lieutenant  Colonel  Coleman  commanding, 
which  had  arrived  at  that  point  two  days  before.  General  Sherman 
had  also  established  his  headquarters  here,  having  preceded  the  Eighth 
Missouri  in  a tug,  with  no  other  escort  than  two  or  three  of  his  per- 
sonal staff,  reconnoitering  all  the  different  bayous  and  branches,  thereby 
greatly  facilitating  the  movements  of  the  troops,  but  at  the  same  time 
exposing  himself  beyond  precedent  in  a commanding  general. 

At  3 o’clock  on  Saturday  morning,  the  20th  [21st]  instant,  General 
Sherman  having  received  a communication  from  Admiral  Porter,  at  the 
mouth  of  Bolling  Fork,  asking  for  a speedy  co-operation  of  the  land 
forces  with  his  fleet,  I was  ordered  by  General  Sherman  to  be  ready 
with  all  the  available  force  at  that  point  to  accompany  him  to  his  relief; 
but  before  starting  it  was  arranged  that  I should  proceed,  with  the  force 
at  hand  (800  men),  while  he  remained,  again  entirely  unprotected,  to 
hurry  up  the  troops  expected  to  arrive  that  night,  consisting  of  the 
Thirteenth  Infantry  and  Cue  hundred  and  thirteenth  Illinois  Volun- 
teers, completing  my  brigade,  and  the  Second  Brigade,  Col.  T.  Kilby 
Smith  commanding. 

This,  as  the  sequel  showed,  proved  a very  wise  measure,  aud  resulted 
in  the  safety  of  the  whole  fleet.  At  daybreak  we  were  in  motion  with 
a negro  guide.  AVe  had  proceeded  but  about  G miles  when  we  found 
the  enemy  had  been  very  busy  felling  trees  to  obstruct  the  creek.  All 
the  negroes  along  the  route  had  been  notified  to  be  ready  at  nightfall  to 
continue  the  work.  To  prevent  this  as  much  as  possible,  I ordered  all 
able-bodied  negroes  to  be  taken  along,  and  warned  some  of  the  principal 
inhabitants  that  they  would  be  held  responsible  for  any  more  obstruc- 
tions being  placed  across  the  creek. 

AVe  reached  the  admiral  about  4 p.  m.,  with  no  opposition  save  my 
advance  guard  (Company  A,  Sixth  Missouri)  being  fired  into  from  the 
opposite  side  oi  the  creek,  killing  I man  and  slightly  wounding  another. 
Having  no  way  of  crossing,  we  had  to  content  ourselves  by  driving 
them  beyond  musket-range,  and,  proceeding  with  as  little  loss  of  time  as 
])ossible,  I found  the  fleet  obstructed  in  front  by  fallen  trees  and  in  rear 
by  a sunken  coal  barge,  and  surrounded  by  a large  force  of  rebels  with 
an  abundant  supply  of  artillery,  but  wisely  keeping  their  main  force  out 
of  range  of  the  admiral’s  guns.  Every  tree  and  stump  covered  a sharp- 
shooter, ready  to  pick  off  any  luckless  marine  who  showed  his  head 
above  decks,  and  entirely  preventing  working  parties  from  removing 
obstructions. 

In  pursuance  of  orders  from  General  Sherman,  I reported  to  Admiral 
Porter  for  orders,  who  turned  over  to  me  all  the  land  forces  in  his  fleet, 
about  150  men,  together  Avitli  two  howitzers,  and  was  instructed  by  him 
to  retain  a sufficient  force  to  clear  out  the  sharpshooters,  and  distribute 
the  remainder  along  the  creek  for  0 or  7 miles,  to  prevent  any  more 
obstructions  being  placed  in  it  during  the  night.  This  was  speedily 
arranged,  our  skirmishers  capturing  3 prisoners. 

Immediate  steps  were  now  taken  to  remove  the  coal-barge,  which  was 
accomplished  about  daylight  on  Sunday  morning,  when  the  fleet  moved 
back  toward  Black  Bayou.  By  3 ]).  m.  we  had  only  marched  about  G 
miles,  owing  to  the  large  number  of  trees  to  be  removed.  At  this  point, 
where  our  progress  was  very  slow,  we  discovered  a long  line  of  the  en- 


440 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


IChap.  XXXVL 


emy  filing  along  the  edge  of  the  woods  and  taking  position  on  the  creek, 
about  1 mile  ahead  of  our  advance.  Shortly  after,  they  opened  fire  on 
the  gunboats  from  batteries  behind  the  cavalry  and  infantry.  The  boats 
not  only  replied  to  the  battery,  which  they  soon  silenced,  but  poured  a 
destructive  fire  into  their  lines.  Heavy  skirmishing  was  also  heard  in 
our  front,  supposed  to  be  three  companies  from  the  Sixth  and  Eighth 
Missouri,  whose  position,  taken  the  previous  night  to  guard  the  creek, 
was  beyond  the  point  reached  by  the  enemy,  and  consequently  liable  to 
be  cut  off  or  captured. 

Captain  [Elias  K.]  Owen,  of  the  Louisville,  the  leading  boat,  made 
every  effort  to  go  through  the  obstructions  and  aid  in  rescuing  the  men. 
I ordered  Major  Kirby,  with  four  companies  of  the  Sixth  Missouri,  for- 
ward, with  two  companies  deployed.  He  soon  met  General  Sherman, 
with  the  Thirteenth  Infantry  and  One  hundred  and  thirteenth  Illinois, 
driving  the  enemy  before  tliem  and  opening  communication  along  the 
creek  with  the  gunboats.  Instead  of  our  three  companies  referred  to 
engaging  the  enemy.  General  Sherman  had  arrived  at  a very  opportune 
moment  with  the  two  regiments  mentioned  above  and  the  Second  Bri- 
gade. The  enemy  not  expecting  an  attack  from  that  quarter,  after  some 
hot  skirmishing  retreated.  General  Sherman  immediately  ordered  the 
Thirteenth  Infantry  and  the  One  hundred  and  thirteenth  Illinois  to 
I)ursue,  but  after  following  their  trace  for  about  2 miles  they  were  re- 
called. We  continued  our  march  for  about  2 miles,  when  we  bivouacked 
for  the  night. 

Early  on  Monday  morning,  March  22  [23],  we  continued  our  march, 
but  owing  to  the  slow  progress  of  the  gunboats  did  not  reach  HilFs 
l)lantation  until  Tuesday,  the  23d  [24th]  instant,  where  we  remained 
until  the  25th  [26th],  then  re-embarked  and  arrived  at  Young’s  Point 
on  Friday,  the  27th  instant.  Below  you  will  find  a list  of  casualties.* 
Verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GILES  A.  SMITH, 

Colonel  Eighth  Missouri  Volunteers^  Comdg,  First  Brigade. 

Capt.  G.  McDonald, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

V.  S. — I forgot  to  state  above  that  the  Thirteenth  Infantry  and  One 
hundred  and  thirteenth  Illinois,  being  under  the  immediate  command 
of  General  Sherman,  he  can  mention  them  as  their  conduct  deserves. 

G.  A.  S. 


Ko.  4. 

Report  of  Col.  George  B.  Hoge,  One  hundred  and  thirteenth  Illinois  In- 
fantry. 

, • Hdqrs.  113th  Eegiment  Illinois  Volunteers, 

Young^s  Foint,  La.,  March  28,  1863. 
Colonel  : I would  respectfully  submit  the  following  report  of  my 
command,  the  Thirteenth  U.  S.  Infantry  and  the  One  hundred  and  thir- 
teenth Illinois  Infantry,  in  the  skirmish  on  Deer  Creek,  near  Rolling 
Fork,  March  22,  1863 : ‘ 

While  marching,  as  per  order  of  General  Sherman,  when  within  about 
3 miles  of  Rolling  Fork,  my  advance  guard,  under  command  of  Captain 


Shows  1 man  killed  and  3 men  wounded. 


441 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  STEELE’s  BAYOU  EXPEDITION,  ETC. 

WasbingtoD,  of  the  Tbirteeutb  U.  S.  lufaiitry,  were  fired  into  by  tbe 
enemy.  I ordered  Captain  Washington  to  deploy  bis  command  as  skir- 
mishers, and  advance  in  a southwesterly  direction  about  200  yards.  I 
then  marched  my  command  forward  to  within  a short  distance  of  where 
the  first  skirmishing  took  place,  and  there  formed  the  line  of  battle. 
Previous  to  forming  the  line  of  battle,  1 ordered  Captain  Williams,  of 
the  One  hundred  and  thirteenth  Eegiment  Illinois  Volunteers,  to  deploy 
his  company  as  skirmishers,  his  right  resting  on  Captain  Washingtoifis 
left.  After  line  of  battle  was  formed,  I ordered  Captains  Ewing  and 
Irish,  and  Lieutenant  Knox,  of  the  Thirteenth  U.  S.  Infantry,  to  deploy 
their  commands  as  skirmishers  on  the  line  running  north  and  south.  I 
then  advanced  my  command  in  line  of  battle  about  200  yards,  when  I 
halted,  awaiting  a report  from  the  skirmishers,  which  was  brought  to 
me  by  the  adjutant  of  the  Thirteenth  U.  S.  Infantry.  I then  advanced 
till  I came  close  on  to  the  skirmishers,  when  I varied  the  direction  some- 
what of  the  skirmishers,  inclining. to  the  north,  and  ordered  all  the  skir- 
mishers to  keep  their  commands  as  nearly  on  a line  as  possible.  The  skir- 
mishers having  driven  the  enemy  very  rapidly,  and  not  being  able  to 
follow  them  in  line  of  battle,  I changed  my  command  from  line  of  battle 
into  the  march  by  column,  and  followed  the  skirmishers  as  closely  as 
possible.  When  within  about  1^-  miles  of  Polling  Fork,  I halted  the 
column  and  drew  in  the  skirmishers.  I then  marched  my  Command  in 
a southeasterly  direction  until  I came  to  the  Deer  Creek  road,  when  I 
again  halted,  and  the  skirmishers  all  reported.  I then  countermarched, 
and  marched  down  Deer  Creek  road,  when  I had  the  honor  to  report  to 
you. 

Casualties,  1 man  wounded  in  the  ankle,  in  Captain  Washington’s 
company,  Thirteenth  D.  S.  Infantry. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEO.  B.  HOGE, 

Colonel^  Commanding. 

Col.  Giles  A.  Smith, 

Commanding  First  Brigade^  Second  Division. 


No  5. 

Report  of  Col.  Thomas  Kilby  Smithy  Fifty  fourth  Ohio  Infantry.,  com- 
manding Second  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Brig.,  Second  Div.,  Fifteenth  A.  C., 

Camp  opposite  Vicksburg.,  March  27,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  four  regiments  of  the  Second  Brigade,  under  my  command,  in 
the  late  expedition  in  aid  of  Admiral  Porter.  (The  Fifty-fifth  Illinois 
was  ordered  on  special  service  the  15th  instant,  under  command  of  Brig- 
adier-General Eansom,  and  did  not  report  back  to  my  command  till  the 
2Gth  instant.) 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th  instant,  the  brigade  was  embarked  at 
Young’s  Point  upon  transports,  and,  proceeding  up  the  Mississippi 
Eiver,  landed  at  Eagle  Bend,  from  whence  a bridge  and  road  sufficient 
for  the  passage  of  infantry  was  constructed  to  Steele’s  Bayou  by  details 
from  the  division. 

On  the  evening  of  the  19th,  the  brigade  was  debarked,  and,  marching 
to  Steele’s  Bayou,  bivouacked  near  its  intersection  with  Muddy  Bayou. 
At  this  time  I placed  the  command  with  Lieutenant-Colonel  Eice,  of  the 


442 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Fifty-seventh  Ohio,  the  senior  officer  of  the  brigade,  and,  in  company 
with  Generals  Sherman  and  Stuart,  i)roceeded  up  Steele’s  Bayou  in  a 
tug,  to  reconnoiter  and  prepare  the  way  for  the  transit  of  troops.  The 
bayou  was  tortuous  and  overhung  with  trees,  whose  branches  seriously 
impeded  the  passage  of  transports.  Great  skill  and  constant  vigilance 
on  the  part  of  navigators  was  required  to  keep  these  from  irreparable 
injury ; the  sinking  of  a boat  would  have  been  fatal  to  the  expedition 
and  resulted  in  disaster  to  the  gunboat  fleet. 

1 remained  with  General  Stuart,  aiding  him  iu  facilitating  the  em- 
barkation and  debarkation  of  troops  until  the  whole  division  was  landed 
at  the  mouth  of  Black  Bayou.  By  misunderstanding,  I was  prevented 
from  joining  my  own  brigade  at  Hill’s  plantation,  2 miles  above,  it  hav- 
ing marched  before  my  arrival  at  that  point,  where  I expected  to  meet 
it  with  the  residue  of  the  troops.  The  brigade,  therefore,  remained  under 
the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Rice,  to  whose  report,  forwarded 
herewith,  I respectfully  refer  lor  its  proceedings  from  the  evening  of  the 
21st  to  the  morning  of  the  24th  instant.  While  I was  mortified  at  being 
separated  from  my  soldiers,  my  perfect  confidence  in  the  ability  of  this 
fine  officer  left  me  no  apprehension  as  to  his  conduct  of  the  command. 

You  will  observe  by  his  report  that,  on  the  morning  of  the  22d,  the 
brigade  marched  up  the  east  bank  of  Deer  Creek,  and  having,  in  co- 
operation with  the  First  Brigade,  extricated  Admiral  Porter  and  his 
gunboats  from  their  perilous  position,  returned  to  Hill’s  plantation  at 
11  a.  m.  of  the  24th  instant.  Here  it  bivouacked. 

At  noon  on  the  25th  instant,  I ordered  the  Eighty- third  Indiana,  Colo- 
nel Spooner  commanding,  to  take  position  on  Fore’s  plantation,  a mile 
or  more  distant  from  Hill’s,  as  an  advance  post,  a body  of  cavalry  and 
regiments  of  infantry  from  the  enemy  making  demonstration  iu  that 
direction.  With  these  a sharp  skirmish  ensued,  and  Private  William 
Lathrop,  of  Company  G,  Eighty-third  Indiana,  was  killed,  the  only 
casualty  or  accident  of  any  kind  I have  to  report. 

In  the  engagement  1 he  regiment  sustained  its  high  reputation,  and 
for  minute  particulars  I respectfully  refer  you  to  the  report  of  then  Cap- 
tain (now  Lieutenant-Colonel)  Myers. 

At  the  close  of  evening,  the  Eighty-third  was  withdrawn  from  the 
front,  and  the  following  day  (26th)  the  brigade  was  embarked,  with 
other  troops,  upon  the  transports  Silver  Wave  and  Eagle,  and,  after  an 
exciting  passage  through  the  bayous  into  the  Yazoo,  debarked  at  the 
lower  landing  of  Young’s  Point  on  the  27th,  from  whence  it  marched,  in 
good  order,  to  canq)  on  the  levee. 

It  is  usual,  in  reports  of  this  character,  to  compliment  officers  and  sol- 
diers, and  because  the  custom  is  common  the  compliment  loses  value ; 
yet  I cannot,  in  justice  to  the  hardy  veterans  of  the  Second  Brigade,  let 
the  opportunity  pass  without  once  more  testiiying  to  the  courage,  con- 
stancy, and  uncomplaining  fortitude  that  sustains  them  under  every 
exposure,  fatigue,  and  privatioTi.  The  whistling  of  bullets  is  as  familiar 
to  their  ears  as  household  words.  Danger  they  scorn,  and  the  cheerful- 
ness with  which  they  encounter  hardships  is  beyond  all  praise. 

Bespectfully  referring  to  the  accompanying  reports  of  regimental 
commanders,  with  request  that  they  be  returned  at  some  future  time  for 
copy,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOS.  KILBY  SMITH, 

CoL,  Comdfj.  Second  Brig.,  Second  I)iv.,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps, 

Oapt.  C.  McDonald, 

A.  A,  G.j  2d  l)iv.,  Wth  Army  Corps,  JDept.  of  the  Tennessee. 


443 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  STEELE’s  BAYOU  EXPEDITION,  ETC. 

No.  6. 

Eeports  of  Lieut.  Col.  Americus  V.  Bice,  Fifty-seventh  Ohio  Infantry, 
commanding  regiment  and  Second  Brigade. 

Hdqes.  Fifty-seventh  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry, 

Young^s  Point,  La.,  March  28,  1803. 

Colonel:  Agreeably  to  your  order  on  March  10,  I took  command 
of  the  Second  Brigade,  Second  Division,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps,  it  being 
at  the  time  on  the  march  from  Eagle  Bend  to  Steele’s  Bayou.  I dis- 
posed the  brigade  along  Steele’s  Bayou  and  JVIuddy  Bayou  to  the  best 
possible  advantage,  where  we  remained  until  12  m.  March  21.  At  this 
time  you  returned  from  a reconnaissance  up  the  bayou,  and  put  the 
Fifty-fourth  and  Fifty-seventh  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry  on  the  steamer 
Eagle,  the  Eighty-third  Indiana  on  the  Silver  Wave,  and  the  One 
hundred  and  twenty-seventh  Illinois  on  the  Diligent.  That  evening  the 
brigade  arrived  at  Hill’s  plantation,  on  the  Black  Bayou. 

On  the  morning  of  the  22d,  by  the  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  W.  T.  Slierman, 
1 again  assumed  command  of  the  Second  Brigade.  At  8 o’clock,  by 
order  of  General  Sherman,  I put  the  brigade  in  line  of  march,  following 
the  First  Brigade,  the  Fifty-fourth  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry  in  advance. 
We  marched  up  the  east  bank  of  Deer  Creek  about  10  miles,  when  I 
heard  brisk  firing  by  the  advance  guard  of  the  First  Brigade,  also  sev- 
eral shots  from  the  gunboats,  some  4 miles  ahead,  replied  to  by  a battery 
from  the  enemy.  The  Fifty -fourth  Ohio,  commanded  by  Maj.  C.  W. 
Fisher,  after  loading,  moved  forward  in  quick  time  till  it  came  up  with 
the  First  Brigade,  which  had  now  filed  to  tlie  right  in  an  open  woods, 
and  formed  line  of  battle  with  skirmishers  in  front.  I had  the  Fifty- 
fourth  Ohio  immediately  join  the  left  of  the  First  Brigade  in  line  of 
battle,  and  Major  Fisher  moved  forward  his  right  company  as  skir- 
mishers, until  it  arrived  in  a line  with  the  skirmishers  of  the  First 
Brigade. 

At  this  time  General  Sherman  came  up,  and  by  his  direction  the  left 
of  the  Fifty-fourth  was  placed  in  the  road  along  the  east  bank  of  Deer 
Creek.  The  One  hundred  and  twenty-seventh  Illinois,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Eldridge  commanding,  came  close  in  support,  followed  by  the 
Eighty-third  Indiana,  Captain  Myers  commanding,  and  the  Fifty-sev- 
enth Ohio,  Captain  McClure  commanding.  The  line  now  moved  forward, 
driving  the  enemy’s  skirmishers,  with  but  little  resistance,  for  about  1 
mile,  when  we  came  to  an  open  field.  The  enemy  had  disappeared  to 
the  right  in  the  woods.  Company  A,  Fifty-fourth,  was  sent  forward  to 
the  houses  on  the  plantation  which  we  had  come  to.  The  Fifty-fourth 
again  moved  by  the  right  flank  and  the  rest  of  the  brigade  followed. 
On  coming  up  to  the  houses,  we  met  the  Eighth  and  Sixth  Missouri, 
and  One  hundred  and  sixteenth  Illinois,  and  the  gunboats  on  their 
retrograde  movement,  much  pleased  that  V7e  had  come  to  their  assist- 
ance, for  they  were  in  a critical  situation,  the  enemy  having  surrounded 
them.  The  Fifty -fourth  Ohio  was  now  sent  ahead  1 mile,  to  relieve  six 
companies  of  the  Sixth  and  Eighth  Missouri,  which  were  guarding  the 
rear  gunboats  on  their  way  down  the  creek.  The  move  down  the  river 
was  continued.  General  Sherman  ordered  me  to  protect  the  gunboats 
on  their  way  down.  I placed  the  Fifty-seventh  in  advance,  opposite 
the  Louisville,  the  Eighty-third  Indiana  and  One  hundred  and  twenty- 
seventh  Illinois  in  the  interior,  and  the  Fifty-fourth  came  up  after  the 


444 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


rear  of  tbe  last  boat,  marched  dowD  the  creek  2^  or  3 miles,  where,  by 
order  of  General  Sherman,  I encamped  the  brigade  for  the  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  23d,  we  resumed  the  march,  the  Second  Bri- 
gade in  advance,  the  One  hundred  and  twenty-seventh  Illinois  leading. 
Marched  to  Watson’s  plantation,  some  5 miles,  where  we  encamped  till 
the  next  morning,  waiting  for  the  gunboats  to  come  up. 

On  the  morning  of  the  24th,  by  order  of  Major-General  Sherman,  I 
had  the  feeble  of  the  command  placed  on  the  gunboat  Carondelet.  At 
8 o’clock  I again  moved  forward  the  brigade,  the  Eighty-third  Indiana 
in  advance,  and  came  to  Hill’s  plantation  at  11  a.  m.,  when  I turned  over 
the  brigade  to  you  and  returned  to  my  regiment. 

Part  of  the  time  the  weather  was  very  inclement,  and  thereby  the 
roads  rendered  exceedingly  bad,  and  the  march  quite  fatiguing  to  the 
men.  With  promptness  and  alacrity  were  all  commands  obeyed  by  the 
different  regiments,  and  I have  to  thank  the  officers  and  men  of  each  for 
their  worthy  bearing,  and  for  their  consideration  to  me  during  the  time 
that  circumstances  gave  me  command  of  the  brigade. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  Y.  KICE, 

‘Lieut.  Col.,  Comdg.  2d  Brigade,  2d  Division,  15^/t  Army  Corps. 

Col.  T.  Kilby  Smith, 

Comdg.  Second  Brig.,  Second  Div.,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 


Hdqrs.  Fifty-seventh  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry, 

Young^s  Point,  La.,  March  28, 1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  part  taken  by  the  Fifty-seventh 
Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry  in  the  late  expedition  to  Bolling  Fork,  Miss. 

By  orders  from  T.  Kilby  Smith,  commanding  brigade,  I marched  the 
Fifty-seventh  Kegiment,  with  two  days’  rations  in  haversacks,  at  day- 
light on  Tuesday  morning,  March  1 7,  some  4 miles  to  the  upper  land- 
ing, and  embarked  on  board  the  steamer  Minnehaha.  At  10  o’clock  the 
boat  with  the  fleet  moved  up  the  river  to  Eagle  Bend.  We  remained 
on  board  till  the  morning  of  the  19th,  during  which  time  a foot  bridge  was 
constructed  over  a part  of  Muddy  Bayou  and  a portion  of  the  country 
overflowed  between  Eagle  Bend  and  Steele’s  Bayou,  the  Fifty-seventh 
performing  its  part  of  the  work. 

Debarked  from  the  Minnehaha  on  the  morning  of  the  19th,  and  soon 
after  dinner  (having  drawn  three  days’  rations  from  Captain  [Frank  J.] 
Crawford,  acting  commissary  of  subsistence),  the  same  day,  marched 
easterly  from  Eagle  Bend  along  Muddy  Bayou  to  Steele’s  Bayou.  At 
this  time,  by  order  of  Col.  T.  Kilby  Smith,  I was  assigned  the  command 
of  the  Second  Brigade,  and  the  command  of  the  Fifty-seventh  Ohio  Vol- 
unteer Infantry  was  turned  over  to  Capt.  John  McClure. 

I resumed  command  of  the  Fifty-seventh  on  the  24th,  the  brigade 
having  returned  to  Hill’s  ])lantation,  where  we  remained  until  the  morn- 
ing of  the  2Gth.  Embarked  on  board  the  steamer  Eagle,  at  the  landing 
on  Black  Bayou,  and  returned  through  Steele’s  and  Cypress  Bayous  to 
the  Yazoo,  thence  to  Young’s  Point,  La.,  where  we  arrived  at  4 o’clock 
last  evening.  Immediately  debarked,  and  put  the  regiment  in  its  quar- 
ters on  the  levee. 

The  conduct  of  officers  and  men  w^as  all  that  I could  desire;  though 
their  duties  at  times  were  arduous,  yet  they  were  performed  cheerfully 
and  with  a will. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  STEELE’s  BAYOU  EXPEDITION,  ETC.  445 

The  report  of  Captain  McClure,  who  had  command  of  the  regiment 
from  the  19th  to  the  24th,  is  herewith  submitted.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  V.  KICE, 

Lieut.  Col,.,  Comcig.  Fifty-seventh  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry, 
Capt.  G.  Moodie  White, 

A.  A.  A.  G.j  Second  Brig.,  Second  Biv.,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Col.  Hamilton  N.  Eldridge,  One  hundred  and  twenty-seventh 

Illinois  Bifantry. 

Hdqrs.  127th  Rehiment  Illinois  Volunteer  Infantry, 

Young’’ s Point,  La.,  March  28,  1863. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  your  request,  I respectfully  submit  the  follow- 
ing report  of  the  part  taken  by  my  regiment  in  the  late  expedition  to 
Rolling  Fork : 

The  regiment  left  camp  at  Young’s  Point  on  Tuesday,,  the  17th  in- 
stant, marched  to  the  upper  landing,  embarked  on  the  steamer  David 
Tatum,  and  proceeded  to  Eagle  Rend,  Miss.,  the  same  day.  The  Eighty- 
third  Indiana  Regiment,  Captain  Myers,  shared  the  steamer  with  us. 

On  the  18th,  we  lay  quietly  on  board  the  steamer.  We  had  been  or- 
dered to  take  but  one  day’s  rations  in  haversacks,  the  remaining  rations 
for  five  days  being  placed  on  the  steamer  Silver  Wave,  in  charge  of  a 
detail  of  2 non-commissioned  officers  and  30  privates,  the  Silver  Wave 
having  ascended  the  Yazoo-  River  and  Muddy  Bayou  to  a point  east  of 
and  about  a mile  from  us.  We  would  have  been  regularly  supplied  with 
rations  but  for  the  necessary  delay  in  building  a bridge  before  the  troops 
could  be  crossed  to  the  point  where  the  Silver  Wave  lay.  As  it  was, 
iny  men  were  without  rations  for  one  day.  We  were  finally  supplied 
from  the  steamer  Fanny  Bullitt. 

On  the  19th,  we  disembarked  and  crossed  over  to  the  junction  of  Steele’s 
and  Muddy  Bayous.  Here  we  remained  until  the  afternoon  of  the  21st, 
when  we  embarked  on  the  steamer  Diligent,  and  proceeded  up  Muddy 
and  Black  Bayous  to  the  point  indicated  for  disembarkation,  and  from 
thence  marched  to  Reality  jilantation,  where  v e found  two  regiments 
of  our  brigade  encamped. 

On  the  22d  (Sunday),  we  started  at  9 a.  m.,  marching  about  12  miles 
up  Black  Bayou,  following  the  Fifty-fourth  Ohio  Regiment.  Heavy  can- 
nonading was  heard  soon  after  noon,  which  was  kept  up,  with  occasional 
intermissions,  till  we  came  in  sight  of  the  gunboats.  When  near 
Wright’s  farm,  musketry  was  heard  from  the  skirmishers  in  the  advance, 
and  I halted  my  regiment  and  had  them  load  their  pieces.  W'e  then 
advanced  about  a mile,  till  we  met  the  gunboat  Louisville,  where  we 
were  halted  and  remained  till  about  6 p.  m.,  when  we  commenced  to 
retreat,  moving  back  this  night  as  far  as  Wright’s  farm. 

On  the  23d  instant,  we  moved  back  to  Watson’s  plantation,  and  on 
the  24th  we  moved  back  nearly  to  the  point  where  we  disembarked 
irom  the  Diligent  on  the  night  of  the  21st,  a mile  below  Reality  planta- 
tion. On  the  2Gth,  we  went  aboard  the  steamer  Silver  Wave,  in  com- 
pany with  the  Eighty-third  Indiana  Regiment  and  a battalion  of  the 


See  No.  10,  p.  448. 


446 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Tliirteentli  U.  S.  lufiintry,  and  proceeded  by  way  of  Black  and  Muddy 
Bayous  and  tbe  Yazoo  and  Mississippi  Eivers  to  the  lower  landing  at- 
Young’s  Point,  La.,  where  w^e  arrived  on  the  27th  instant,  at  5 p.  m. 

My  regiment  numbered  about  20  officers  and  300  enlisted  men  for  duty 
in  this  expedition. 

Very  respectfully,  yours, 

H.  N.  ELDEIDGE, 

Lieutenant' Golonclj  Comdg.  121th  Illinois  Volunteer  Infantry, 

Col.  T.  Kilby  Smith, 

Commanding  Seeond  Brigade, 


Ko.  8. 

Report  of  Capt,  Benjamin  E,  flyers.  Eighty -third  Indiana  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Eighty-thikd  Eegt.  Indiana  Yolunteers, 

Camp^  Young^s  Point,  La.,  March  28,  1863. 

Sir:  I beg  leave  to  report  that  on  the  morning  of  the  17th  instant,  in 
obedience  to  orders,  the  Eighty-third  Eegiment  Indiana  Yolunteers  em- 
barked on  board  the  David  Tatum,  upward  bound  from  this  point.  The 
regiment  disembarked  at  G win’s  farm. 

On  the  following  day,  19th  instant,  the  regiment  moved  across  the 
peninsula  to  Muddy  Bayou,  where  they  remained  until  the  20th  instant, 
at  which  time  we  embarked  on  board  the  Silver  Wave,  and  moved  in  the 
direction  of  Black  Bayou,  and  then  up  the  bayou  to  Hill’s  farm,  where 
we  disembarked.  The  regiment  from  that  point  marched  on  foot  till 
we  reached  our  advance  (say  20  miles).  Our  arrival  was  certainly  very 
timely,  the  enemy  having  our  advance  flanked  and  being  immediately 
upon  their  rear. 

Our  demonstration  was  such  that  the  enemy  withdrew,  and  I received 
orders  to  retire,  which  I complied  with,  reaching  the  then  headquarters 
of  General  Sherman,  on  Hill’s  farm,  on  the  24tli  instant. 

On  the  25th  instant,  we  were  ordered  to  take  position  on  Fore’s  plan- 
tation. At  this  point  and  time  Col.  Benjamin  J.  Spooner  joined  the  regi- 
ment and  assumed  command.  I shall,  however,  at  his  request,  conclude 
this  report. 

I immediately  marched  the  regiment  to  the  iioint  indicated,  where  I 
met  the  enemy.  I had  taken  the  precaution  before  entering  the  woods 
dividing  the  Hill  and  Fore  iflantations  to  throw  out  Company  A, 
Captain  Chipman  commanding,  as  skirmishers,  with  orders  to  skirmish 
the  entire  woods,  which  order  Captain  Chipman  obe3"ed  to  the  letter. 
When  my  line  of  skirmishers  reached  the  cleared  ground  of  Fore’s  plan- 
tation, they  met  the  skirmishers  of  the  enemy,  and  engaged  them  in  a 
sharp  skirmish  of  a half  hour’s  duration.  While  the  skirmishing  was 
very  brisk,  and  indulging  the  idea  that  a general  engagement  would 
follow,  I ordered  up  to  support  my  skirmishers  Companies  G,  Lieuten- 
ant Hazen  commanding,  and  K,  Lieutenant  Scott.  The  firing  at  this 
moment  was  rapid.  I went  in  person  to  the  front,  and  found  the  enemy 
in  force  in  line  of  battle,  preceded  bj^  at  least  one  regiment  as  skir- 
mishers. I lost,  of  Com])an3"  G,  1 killed,  to  wit,  William  Lathroi). 

I then  received  orders  to  withdraw  my  whole  force,  save  a small  picket 
force.  I withdrew  the  regiment,  and  on  the  morning  following  em- 
barked on  board  the  steamer  Silver  Wave,  and  arrived  at  camp  at  this 
point  on  the  27th  instant. 


CflAr.  XXXVI.]  the  STEELE’S  BAYOU  EXPEDITION,  ETC. 


447 


I am  liappy  to  say  that  no  casualty  or  accident  bappened  my  com- 
mand, save  the  one  mentioned  in  this  report. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  favorably  mentioning  the  services 
rendered  by  Acting' Adjutant  Roertz,  who  was  placed  in  command  of 
the  force  engaged  on  the  25th  instant.  His  gallantry  is  worthy  of  com- 
mendation. Indeed,  all  brought  in  contact  with  the  enemy  behaved 
with  that  gallantry  which  should  distinguish  the  citizen  soldier. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

BENT.  H.  MYERS, 

Captain^  Comdg.  Eighty -third  Regiment  Indiana  Volunteers, 
Capt.  G.  Moodie  White,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


NTo.  9. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Cyrus  W.  Fisher,  Fifty -fourth  Ohio  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Fifty-fourth  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry, 

Opposite  Vichshurg,  March  27,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  Fifty-fourth  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry  in  the  expedition  up 
Steele's  Bayou  by  the  Second  Division  of  the  Fifteenth  Army  Corps : 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th  instant,  with  two  days’  rations  in  haver- 
sacks, I marched  the  regiment  from  their  present  camp  to  Young’s  Point, 
a distance  of  miles,  and  embarked  upon  the  steamer  Minnehaha.  We 
landed  at  Eagle  Bend,  in  the  Mississippi  River,  on  the  evening  of  the 
17th  instant,  and  assisted  in  the  construction  of  a foot-bridge  and  road 
from  the  Gwin  plantation  to  Steele’s  Bayou,  which  w^as  so  far  completed 
as  to  allow  the  transit  of  troops  on  the  afternoon  of  the  19th  instant,  at 
which  time  we  disembarked  and  marched  toward  Steele’s  Bayou,  about 
three-fourths  of  a mile,  and  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

We  remained  at  this  point  until  noon  the  21st,  when  we  were  ordered 
by  Colonel  Smith,  commanding  Second  Brigade,  to  embark  on  the 
steamer  Eagle,  then  lying  in  Steele’s  Bayou,  which  order  was  complied 
with  promptly  by  my  command.  We  steamed  up  the  bayou  through 
the  wmods  slowly,  arriving  at  the  mouth  of  Black  Bayou  about  5 p.  m., 
and  were  transferred  into  a coal-barge,  in  which  we  w^ere  transported, 
with  the  aid  of  a steam  tug,  about  2 miles  up  Black  Bayou  to  a landing 
in  a canebrake,  where  we  met  General  Sherman,  who  directed  us  to 
march  to  Hill’s  plantation,  2 miles  farther  up  the  bayou,  and  bivouac 
for  the  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  22d,  having  filled  haversacks  with  hard  bread, 
I took  the  advance  of  the  brigade,  by  order  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Rice, 
Fifty-seventh  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry,  at  that  time  commanding  bri- 
gade, and  kept  within  easy  supporting  distance  of  the  rear  of  the  First 
Brigade.  At  noon  the  regiment  halted  at  tlie  plantation  known  as 
Fore’s  place,  and  after  a rest  of  an  hour  was  ordered  to  proceed.  Wc 
had  marched  about  4 miles  when  the  advance  guard  of  the  First  Bri- 
gade 'was  fired  upon  by  the  enemy,  and  brisk  skirmishing  was  soon 
heard  in  front.  Colonel  Rice  ordered  me  to  form  in  line  of  battle,  and 
advance  until  my  right  should  join  the  left  of  the  First  Brigade.  Major- 
General  Sherman  came  up  at  the  moment,  and  ordered  me  to  advance 
in  line  of  battle,  with  my  left  resting  upon  the  road  wljich  ran  along  the 
bank  of  Deer  Creek.  I ordered  Lieutenant  Enoch,  with  one-half  of  Com- 
pany A deployed  as  skirmishers,  to  advance  rapidly  to  the  front,  until 


448 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


he  should  be  in  Hue  with  the  line  of  skirmishers  of  the  First  Brigade.  We 
advanced  in  this  order  through  the  woods  2 miles,  and  when  we  emerged 
into  an  open  field  we  could  see  our  gunboats  close  at  hand.  By  order 
of  General  Sherman,  I called  in  the  skirmishers,  and  advanced  up  the 
road  by  the  right  flank  until  we  met  the  infantry  force  in  company  with 
the  gunboats. 

After  resting  the  men  an  hour,  by  order  of  Colonel  Eice,  I advanced 
on  the  road  miles,  and  relieved  six  companies  from  the  Sixth  and 
Eighth  Missouri  Eegiments,  which  were  bringing  up  the  rear  of  the 
gunboat  train.  My  dispositions  for  rear  guard  were  scarcely  completed 
when  the  enemy  appeared  to  the  eastward  and  falling  back  from  the 
woods  into  the  open  field,  being  followed  by  our  troops  at  very  long 
musket  range.  They  did  not  come  near  enough  to  draw  a fire  from  us. 
The  gunboat  Carondelet  threw  a few  shells,  by  way  of  impetus  to  their 
backward  movement,  with  excellent  effect. 

At  this  point  commenced  the  backward  movement  of  the  Fifty-fourth 
Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry.  We  moved  along  at  a snaiPs  pace,  keeping 
in  rear  of  the  last  gunboat,  until  sundown,  when  we  were  relieved,  and 
ordered  by  General  Sherman  to  rejoin  the  Second  Brigade,  which  we 
did  2 miles  back  on  the  road,  at  the  Mounds.  During  the  night  the 
rain  fell  heavily. 

On  the  morning  of  the  23d,  we  marched  o miles,  over  very  bad  roads, 
and  were  halted  near  a steam  mill  (I  did  not  learn  the  name  of  the 
planter),  where  we  remained  in  bivouac  until  the  morning  of  the  24th, 
when  we  were  ordered  to  march  on  to  Hill’s'  plantation,  where  we 
arrived  about  noon,  and  were  assigned  our  position  by  Col.  T.  K.  Smitli, 
who  again  assumed  command  of  the  brigade  at  this  point. 

We  remained  at  Hill’s  plantation  until  the  morning  of  the  26th,  and 
were  then  ordered  to  embark  on  the  steamer  Eagle ; ran  down  the  bayou 
into  the  Yazoo  Eiver  and  down  to  Young’s  Point,  arriving  in  camp  this 
evening. 

The  men  and  officers  of  the  regiment  who  accompanied  the  expedi- 
tion did  all  they  were  ordered  to  do  cheerfully,  and  endured  the  ex- 
posure without  a murmur. 

I must  here  mention  the  fact  that  the  major-general  commanding  the 
Fifteenth  Army  Corps  was  himself  on  foot,  and  marched  part  of  the 
time  at  the  head  of  the  Fifty-fourth,  and  this  exhibition  of  carelessness 
of  personal  comfort  on  the  part  of  one  so  high  in  command  filled  the 
men  with  enthusiasm,  and  it  is  saying  but  very  little  to  say  they  all 
believed  in  General  Sherman. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  W.  FISHEE, 

Major,  Coiyimanding  Fifty -fourth  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry. 

Capt.  G.  Moodie  White, 

A.  A.  A.  G.,  2d  Brig.j  2d  Fiv.j  15th  A.  C.,  Army  of  the  Mississippi. 


Eo.  10. 


Report  of  Capt.  John  McClure,  Fifty-seventh  Ohio  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Fifty-seventh  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry, 

Young'' s Point,  La.,  March  28,  1863. 
Sir:  In  compliance  with  your  request  to  furnish  you  with  an  account 
of  the  part  taken  by  the  Fifty-seventh  Ohio  in  the  late  march  upon 


ciiAF.  xxxvL]  the  steele’s  bayou  expedition,  etc.  449 

Eolling  Fork,  during  the  time  the  same  was  under  my  command,  I have 
the  honor  to  report  as  follows : 

On  the  afternoon  of  March  .19,  1863,  I assumed  command  of  the 
Filty-seventb  Ohio.  Nothing  worthy  of  note  on  that  afternoon. 

On  the  20th  of  March  nothing  of  interest  transpired. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  21st,  I marched  the  regiment  to  the  steamer 
Eagle,  then  lying  at  the  mouth  of  Muddy  Bayou,  and  placed  it  on 
board  of  that  boat,  on  which  we  were  carried  through  Steele’s  Bayou 
to  the  mouth  of  Black  Bayou.  At  this  point  I transferred  the  regi- 
ment to  a coal-boat,  and  we  were  taken  some  2 miles  up  that  bayou,  at 
which  point  we  disembarked  and  marched  to  the  cotton-gin  on  the  Hill 
plantation,  where  we  remained  that  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  22d,  I received  your  order  to  march  with  two 
daj’s’  rations  in  haversacks.  Owing  to  a scarcity  of  rations  at  Hill’s 
plantation,  I was  compelled  to  move  my  command  on  less  than  half 
rations  of  hard  bread,  without  meat,  coffee,  sugar,  rice,  hominy,  beans, 
or  potatoes.  We  took  xmsition  in  the  rear  of  the  brigade,  and  marched 
along  the  south  bank  of  Deer  Creek  for  13  miles,  at  which  place  we 
came  up  with  the  gunboats,  at  3 p.  m.  of  that  day.  By  your  order,  I 
marched  the  Fifty-seventh  Ohio  back  to  the  Montauk  Mounds,  and  en- 
camped for  the  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  23d,  we  took  up  line  of  retreat,  and  halted  for 
tbe  evening  at  Watson’s  Mills,  where  we  encamped  for  the  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  24th,  we  again  took  uj)  line  of  retreat,  and 
marched  to  Hill’s  plantation,  where  we  arrived  about  11  a.  m.  of  that 
day,  at  which  time  yon  assumed  command  of'  the  regiment. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  McCLUKE, 

Captain^  Commanding  Fifty -seventh  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry, 

Lieut.  Col.  A.  V.  Rice, 

Comdg., Second  Brig.,  Second  Biv.,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  11. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Hugh  Ficmg,  TJ.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third 

Brigade, 

Hdqrs.  Third  Brig.,  Second  Div.,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps, 

Young^s  Point,  La.,  March  29,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  operations 
of  my  brigade  in  the  late  expedition  to  Rolling  Fork  : 

An  order  to  move  at  6 a.  m.  of  the  17th  instant  was  received  at  11.30 
p.  m.  of  the  16th,  and,  at  the  time  si)ecified,  I marched  along  the  levee 
to  the  upper  landing,  embarked  upon  transports,  and  arrived  at  Eagle 
Bend  on  the  evening  of  the  same  day. 

On  the  morning  of  the  18th,  I ordered  Colonel  Barry,  of  the  Forty- 
seventh  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry,  to  debark  his  regiment,  and  construct 
bridges  over  two  impassable  crevasses  in  the  levee  skirting  Muddy 
Bayou.  The  bridges  were  completed  at  12  m.  on  the  19th,  and  the 
tnx)ps  of  the  First  and  Second  Brigades  i)assed  over  to  Steele’s  Bayou. 
Oil  the  2()th  instant,  I ordered  Colonel  Parry  to  construct  a wagon 
artillery  road  from  the  head  of  Muddy  and  Steele’s  Bayous,  and 

I .29  R R — VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


450 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


fCuAP.  XXXVL 


Colonel  Ligbtburn,  of  the  Fourth  West  Virginia,  to  clear  a channel 
through  Muddy  Bayou  sufficient  to  admit  the  passage  of  flat-boats. 

On  the  morning  of  the  22d,  I embarhed  on  transports,  and  moved  up 
Steele’s  Bayou,  leaving  Colonel  Parry,  with  his  regiment,  and  Colonel 
Lightburn,  with  one  company  of  the  Fourth,  to  complete  the  road  and 
channel ; debarking  on  Hill’s  plantation,  at  the  mouth  of  Deer  Creek, 
on  the  morning  of  the  23d.  On  the  same  day,  by  order  of  General 
Stuart,  I sent  the  Fourth  West  Virginia,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Dayton,  up  the  left-hand  fork  of  Deer  Creek,  to  meet  the  gunboats  and 
infantry,  which  were  then  returning;  and  also  ordered  the  Thirtieth 
Ohio  up  the  west  side  of  Little  Deer  on  picket  and  patrol. 

On  the  24th,  Colonels  Parry  and  Lightburn,  with  their  commands, 
were  ordered  to  join  the  brigade,  which  they  did  the  same  evening. 

On  the  evening  of  the  24th,  Colonel  Siber,  of  the  Thirty- seventh  Ohio 
Volunteer  Infantry,  with  his  regiment,  proceeded  up  the  left  fork  of 
Deer  Creek  to  reconnoiter,  and,  if  possible,  discover  the  force  of  the 
enemy  reported  approaching  in  that  direction. 

At  noon  on  the  26th,  I embarked  on  the  gun  and  mortar  boats;  at 
7 p.  m.  on  the  27th,  reached  the  mouth  of  Yazoo;  at  11  p.  m.,  changed 
to  transports ; and  at  12  m.,  disembarked  at  my  camp  at  Young’s  Point. 

Colonels  Lightburn  and  Parry*  labored  earnestly  and  successfully  at 
the  work  assigned  them. 

I will  forward  regimental  reports  to-morrow. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

HUGH  EWIKG, 
Brigadier- General. 

Capt.  C.  McDonald, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


No.  12. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Theodore  Jones.,  Thirtieth  Ohio  Infantry. 

Hdqes.  Thirtieth  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry, 

Young's  Point,  La.,  March  29,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  movements 
of  the  Thirtieth  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry  since  March  16,  1863:  . 

An  order  to  move  at  6 a.  m.  was  received  at  3 o’clock,  and  at  the  time 
specified  for  moving  the  regiment  was  formed  upon  its  color  line,  and 
shortly  after  followed  the  Forty-seventh  Ohio  up  the  river,  along  the 
levee,  to  the  upper  landing,  where  it  embarked  upon  transports. 

About  9 a.  m.  on  the  17th,  the  regiment  disembarked  on  the  Missis- 
sippi side,  at  Eagle  Bend,  and  encamped  along  the  levee. 

On  the  19th,  two  commissioned  officers  and  150  men  were  detailed  to 
work  upon  a road  under  construction  from  the  Mississippi  Kiver  to 
Steele’s  Bayou. 

On  the  2()th,two  commissioned  officers  and  125  men  were  detailed  for 
the  same  purpose.  At  6 a.  m.  on  tlie  21st,  the  regiment  left  its  camp  at 
Eagle  Bend  and  marclied  down  the  river  to  the  new  road,  and  thence 
along  it  to  the  junction  of  Steele’s  and  JMuddy  Bayous. 

At  9 a.  m.four  companies  embarked  upon  the  Eagle,  and  at  12  m.  the 
remainder  embarked  upon  the  Silver  W ave.  Those  upon  the  Eagle  dis- 


451 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  STEELe’s  BAYOU  EXPEDITION,  ETC. 

embarked  at  3 p.  m.  on  Hill’s  lower  plantation,  known  as  Eeality,  and 
after  marching’  a sboit  mile  quartered  in  the  villa.  Those  upon  the 
Silver  Wave  disembarked  at  the  same  jdace  at  0 a.  m.  on  the  22d,  and 
at  10  o’clock  joined  the  detachment  at  Keality. 

At  12  m.  the  regiment  moved  down  New  Deer  Creek,  leaving  a picket 
post  of  three  companies  (C,  A,  and  K)  at  a cotton-gin  1 mile  from  Ke- 
ality. One  mile  farther  on  we  found  another  villa,  known  as  Good  In- 
tent. Here  another  picket  post  of  three  companies  (I,  E,  and  F)  was 
established.  Two  miles  farther  down  we  entered  another  villa,  known 
as  Kelsaw. 

At  7 p.  m.  a party  of  9 men,  under  command  of  Captain  Groce,  and 
mounted  on  the  horses  and  mules  that  had  been  collected  for  the  pur- 
pose at  the  three  villas,  again  started  down  the  creek. 

At  12  p.  m.  they  returned  with  the  report  that  they  had  visited  an- 
other jilantation  and  villa,  2 miles  distant,  known  as  Omega,  without 
discovering  anything  of  interest. 

On  the  23d,  the  regiment  was  ordered  to  return  to  camp  at  Keality, 
excepting  the  first-established  post  at  the  cotton-gin,  Avhere  it  arrived 
at  3 p.  m. 

At  10  a.  m.  on  the  25th,  this  detachment  joined  the  regiment,  and  at 
12  m.  all  went  on  board  the  gunboats  Cincinnati  and  Mound  City,  the 
right  wing  upon  the  former  and  the  left  wing  upon  the  latter. 

At  7^.  m.  on  the  27th,  the  boats  tied  up  near  the  mouth  of  the  Yazoo ; 
at  11  p.  m.  both  wings  were  transferred  to  the  transport  Sunny  South, 
and  at  12  p.  m.  disembarked  at  our  camp,  at  Young’s  Point,  La. 

Very  respectfully, 

THEODOKE  JONES, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Comdg.  Thirtieth  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry. 

Capt.  G.  LofLand, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  13. 

Report  of  Col.  Edward  Siber,  Thirty -seventh  Ohio  Infantry. 

Camp  of  the  37tii  Kegt.  Ohio  Vol.  Infantry, 

Young’’ s Pgint,  La.,  March  29,  1863. 

Captain  : In  obedience  to  orders  just  received,  I hereby  report  the 
part  taken  by  the  Thirty-seventh  KegimentOhio  Yolunteer  Infantry  in 
the  expedition  to  Deer  Creek : 

The  regiment  moved  with  the  brigade  on  the  morning  of  March  17 
from  camp  to  the  upi)er  landing  ; was  there  embarked  with  the  Tliir- 
tieth  Ohio  on  board  of  the  steamer  Fanny  Ogden,  and  disembarked  on 
the  morning  of  the  18th  at  Gwin’s  plantation,  on  the  left  bank  of  the 
Mississippi. 

At  this  point  the  regiment  bivouacked  during  the  days  of  the  18th, 
19th,  20th,  and  21st,  and  marched  on  the  morning  of  the  22d  to  the 
confiuence  of  Muddy  Creek  and  Steele’s  Bayou,  at  which  })oint  it  was 
again  embarked  on  board  the  steamer  Silver  Wave,  on  which  the  reg- 
iment proceeded  up  this  bayou  as  far  as  Deer  Creek,  where  it  was  dis- 
embarked on  the  evening  of  the  23d,  and  bivouacked  at  this  place  during 
the  next  night,  being  all  this  time  occupied  with  fatigue  and  guard  duty. 

On  the  evening  of  the  24th,  I received  orders  to  proceed  with  a dis- 


452 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


posable  force  of  the  regiment  up  Deer  Creek,  for  tbe  purpose  of  recon- 
noitering  the  force  of  the  enemy  reported  to  approach  from  Yazoo  Eiver. 
Companies  D,  F,  and  E were  taken  up  by  guard  and  picket  duty  in 
and  around  cami).  Company  H,  under  command  of  Captain  Schultz, 
was  sent  the  same  evening  on  the  right  bank  of  Deer  Creek,  to  protect 
Fore’s  plantation,  the  cotton-gin  houses  of  which  had  been  set  fire  to. 
The  remaining  six  companies  of  the  Thirty-seventh  Eegiment  were  de- 
ployed by  me  in  the  night  from  the  24th  to  the  25th  in  the  following 
order : Company  B,  as  reserve,  about  2 miles  from  campj  Company  G, 
in  advance  to  the  exterior  skirt  of  the  woods,  about  4 miles  from  camp, 
observing  the  next  plantation;  Comjiany  I,  on  the  right  flank  in  the 
woods,  and  Companies  A,  C,  and  K,  hidden  in  the  woods  in  rear  of  Com- 
pany G. 

The  next  morning  a detachment  of  mounted  rebels,  variously  esti- 
mated from  40  to  75  men,  approached  the  skirt  of  the  woods  occupied 
by  Company  G,  and  commenced  skirmishing  with  the  pickets  of  said 
company,  soon  withdrawing,  however,  and  turning,  for  the  greater  part, 
to  the  woods  on  our  right,  where  soon  afterward  they  met  the  pickets 
of  Company  I.  As  they  would  not  come  nearer,  I re-enforced  the  right 
flank,  Company  I,  by  Company  C,  under  Major  Hipp,  ordering  him  to 
allow  the  enemy  to  come  in  the  open  field,  where,  in  the  mean  while,  I 
had  hidden  Companies  A,  K,  and  G,  drawn  up  in  line. 

In  this  position  I remained  waiting  during  the  whole  foreno^j  and 
part  of  the  afternoon  of  the  25th.  As  nothing  more  of  the  enemy  was 
to  be  seen,  I reported  the  facts  to  the  general  commanding  brigade,  and 
returned  to  camp  by  5 o’clock  in  the  afternoon.  Com^iany  H,  under 
command  of  Captain  Schultz  (30  men  strong),  which  had  been  on  de- 
tached service  at  Fore’s  plantation,  returned  somewhat  later  to  camp, 
having  waded  through  the  inundations  on  the  left,  threatened,  as  they 
say,  in  front,  and  believing  themselves  turned  by  superior  forces  of  the 
enemy.  On  the  morning  of  the  2Gth,  the  Thirty-seventh  Eegiment  was 
embarked  on  board  the  gunboat  Carondelet  and  first  mortar  Grope, 
and  returned  to  camp  in  the  night  of  the  27th  at  12  o’clock. 

The  regiment  had  no  losses  in  this  expedition. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  SIBEE, 

Colonel  Thirty -seventh  Regiment  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry. 

Capt.  G.  Lofland, 

A.  A.  A.  G..  3d  Brigade^  2d  Division^  loth  Army  Corps. 


No.  14. 

Report  of  Col.  Augustus  C.  Barry,  Forty-seventh  Ohio  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Forty-seventh  Eegt.  Ohio  Vol.  Infantry, 

Camp  in  front  of  Viehshurg,  Miss.,  Mar  eh  29,  18G3. 

Sir  : In  comiiliance  with  orders,  I have  the  honor  to  make  the  follow- 
ing report  of  the  operations  of  the  Forty-seventh  Eegiment  Ohio  Vol- 
uideer  Infantry  in  the  late  expedition  through  Muddy,  Steele’s,  and 
Black  Bayous : 

At  2.30  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  March  17, 1 received  orders  to  have 
the  Forty- seventh  Eegiment  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry  in  readiness  to 
march  at  7 a.  m.  the  same  day,  with  one  day’s  cooked  rations  in  haver- 


453 


Chap.  XXXVL]  THE  STEELE’s  BAYOU  EXPEDITION,  ETC. 

sacks,  and  five  days’  rations,  with  all  necessary  camp  equipage,  on  board 
the  steamer  Silver  Wave.  At  the  appointed  time,  and  by  order,  my 
regiment  marched  to  the  upper  landing,  when  I was  ordered  to  send  all 
horses,  including  the  12-pounder  howitzer  battery,  back  to  camp,  which 
order  I obeyed,  and  accordingly  sent  them  back  to  camp,  and  my  regi- 
ment embarked  on  the  steamer  Swallow. 

We  then  proceeded  up  the  Mississippi  Eiver  to  Eagle  Bend,  and  on 
March  18,  at  10  a.  m.,  was  ordered  to  construct  a bridge  across  two  im- 
passable crevasses  in  Muddy  Bayou,  for  the  troops  to  cross.  Having 
received  tools,  as  also  help,  from  the  One  hundred  and  sixteenth  Illinois 
Volunteer  Infantry,  we  proceeded  to  execute  the  order  and  finish  the 
bridge  across  the  first  deep  water. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  19th,  we  commenced  the  bridge  over  the 
second  crevasse^  and  by  noon  of  the  same  day  had  it  finished,  so  that 
the  troops  could  pass,  and  the  Eirst  and  Second  Brigades  crossed  for 
embarkation  up  Steele’s  Bayou. 

On  the  morning  of  the  2dth,  I received  orders  from  Brig.  Gen.  Hugh 
Ewing  to  construct  a wagon  artillery  road  from  Muddy  Bayou  to  Steele’s 
Bayou,  and  to  call  on  the  Thirtieth  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry  and  the 
pioneers,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  [Samuel  W.]  Ashmead,  for  as- 
sistance, which  was  cheerfully  complied  with  bv  both  ofiicers  and  men. 

The  work  commenced  with  energy  on  the  part  of  officers  and  men. 

On  the  morning  of  the  21st,  we  were  still  working  on  the  artillery 
road,  assisted  by  the  Thirtieth  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry  and  pioneers. 
On  the  same  evening  we  received  orders  that  the  whole  brigade  would 
move  at  5 a.  m.  the  next  day,  and  that  I should  remain  to  finish  the 
road. 

On  the  morning  of  the  22d  instant,  I put  the  Eorty-seventh  Ohio 
Volunteer  Infantry  to  work  on  the  road.  They  made  fine  progress,  con- 
sidering the  inclemency  of  the  weather.  It  rained  very  hard  all  day, 
and  on  the  morning  of  the  23d  (still  raining  hard),  having  put  my  regi- 
ment to  work  to  accomplish  finishing  the  road,  1 received  orders  from 
Brig.  Gen.  Hugh  Ewing,  at  9.30  a.  m.  the  same  day,  to  embark  and  pro- 
ceed up  Steele’s  Bayou  and  join  the  main  body  of  the  division,  we 
having  only  200  yards  of  the  road  to  finish,  which  was  accomplished 
about  noon  the  same  day,  and  arrived  at  our  destination  about  dusk 
the  same  evening.  The  assistant  surgeon  was,  by  order,  left  at  Eagle 
Bend  to  take  care  of  the  sick. 

About  noon  of  the  24th  instant,  I received  orders  to  have  all  the  cotton 
in  the  neighborhood  thrown  into  the  bayou,  and  on  reaching  the  boats 
have  it  taken  upon  the  steamer  Silver  Wave.  I immediately  set  my 
regiment  to  work  throwing  bales  of  cotton  in  the  bayou,  and,  on  reach- 
ing the  steamer  Silver  Wave,  had  them  pull  it  up  on  deck,  having  de- 
tailed two  companies  for  that  purpose.  On  my  arrival  at  this  point,  I 
was  ordered  to  detail  tvro  companies  of  my  regiment  for  the  support  of 
a section  of  a battery  of  Illinois  artillery. 

On  the  morning  of  the  25th,  at  II  o’clock,  I received  orders  to  inspect 
arms  and  examine  the  ammunition  also,  and  to  order  the  com])anies 
which  had  been  detailed  back  to  the  regiment,  and  to  keep  mv  men  to- 
gether for  action.  The  four  companies  reported  to  me  for  duty  during 
the  afternoon  of  the  25th  instant. 

On  the  morning  of  the  26th,  at  8.30  a.  m.,  I received  orders  to  march 
iny  regiment  to  the  lower  landing  and  embark  on  a coal-barge  and  take 
the  steamer  Ghampion,  which  order  was  complied  with.  We  nrrived 
on  the  steamer  at  2 p.  m.  same  day.  We  moved  down  Steele’s  Bayou 
some  K)  miles,  where  we  anchored  for  the  night. 


454 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAP.  XSXYL 


Early  on  the  morning  of  the  27th,  the  boat  started  on  its  way.  On 
reaching  Muddy  Bayou,  I sent  to  General  Stuart  to  know  if  we  should 
disembark  from  that  point.  1 received  orders  to  the  contrary,  but  to 
continue  down  Steele’s  Bayou,  which  we  did.  On  reaching  Yazoo  Biver, 
we  continued  down  this  stream  until  reaching  the  Mississippi  Kiver  j 
thence  to  Young’s  Point,  arriving  here  at  5 p.  m.  same  day. 

I would  beg  leave  to  mention  the  names  of  Capt.  George  M.  Ziegler, 
of  Company  0;  Lieuts.  Samuel  E.  Campbell,  of  Company  G,  and  William 
H.  Kimball,  of  Company  I,  for  the  faithful  and  untiring  energy  with 
which  they  worked  on  the  artillery  bridges  and  road,  being  most  of  the 
time  up  to  their  waists  in  mud  and  water  assisting  ,the  men,  who  also 
deserve  the  highest  praise. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  C.  PAEEY, 

Colonel^  Comclg.  Forty-seventh  Eegt.  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry. 

Capt.  G.  Lofland, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


No.  15. 

Meport  of  Col.  Joseph  A.  J.  Lighthurn^  Fourth  West  Virginia  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Fourth  West  Virginia  Volunteer  Infantry^, 

Camp  opposite  Vichshurg^  Miss.^  March  29,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  a report  of  the  part  performed  by 
my  regiment  in  the  late  expedition  to  Eolling  Fork,  pursuant  to  orders 
from  brigade  headquarters. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th  instant,  1 marched  to  Young’s  Point,  em- 
barked on  the  transport  Silver  Moon,  and  proceeded  to  Eagle  Bend. 
Disembarked  on  the  morning  of  the  19th,  and  bivouacked  on  Senator 
G win’s  plantation. 

On  the  20th,  received  orders  to  clean  out  Muddy  Bayou. 

On  the  22d,  wtis  ordered  to  send  forward  nine  companies  of  my  regi- 
inent,  under  command  of  Lieut.  Col.  J.  H.  Dayton,  which  I did,  keeping 
one  company  to  prosecute  the  work  assigned,  near  Muddy  Bayou.  Lieut. 
Col.  J.  H.  Dayton  proceeded,  with  his  command,  to  the  head  of  Black 
Bayou  ; disembarked  at  Hill’s  plantation. 

On  the  23d,  proceeded  up  the  left-hand  fork  of  Deer  Creek,  meeting 
the  infantry  and  gunboats  some  5 miles  above  Hill’s  plantation. 

On  the  24th,  in  connection  with  Colonel  Parry,  of  the  Forty-seventh 
Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry,  was  ordered  forward  with  the  remainder  of 
my  command,  and  rejoined  the  expedition  at  Hill’s  plantation  on  the 
morning  of  the  25th. 

On  the  2Gth,  at  12  m.,  embarked  on  the  gunboats  Louisville  and  Pitt.s- 
burg,  and  arrived  at  Young’s  Point  on  the  evening  of  the  27th. 

No  casualties  to  report,  excepting  my  assistant  surgeon,  who  was  se- 
verely injured  by  a limb  falling  on  his  head,  wounding  him  severely 
and  injuring  him  otherwise. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  A.  J.  LIGHTBUEN, 

CoZ.,  Comclg.  Fourth  Eegt.  West  Virginia  Volunteer  Infantry. 

Capfc.  G.  Lofland, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


OiiAP.  XXXVL]  THE  STEELE’s  EAYOU  EXPEDITION,  ETC. 


455 


Ko.  IG. 


Report  of  Maj.  Gen,  Carter  L.  StevensoUy  C.  >S.  Army^  commanding 

District. 


Headquarters  Second  District, 
Department  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana, 

Yields  burg,  March  29,  18G3. 

Major  : 1 Lave  the  honor  to  report  that,  on  the  evening  of  the  20t]i 
instant,  I received  information  that  the  enemy  were  endeavoriug  to 
turn  my  right  by  an  expedition,  which,  entering  Steele^s,  i)assed  iiito 
Black  Bayou  and  Deer  Creek,  and  was  at  the  time  that  the  intelligence 
reached  me  within  20  miles  of  Boiling  Fork,  through  which  they  ex- 
pected to  make  their  way  into  the  Sunflower  Biver  and  thence  into  the 
Yazoo. 

The  expedition  consisted  of  five  iron-clad  boats,  three  armed  stern- 
wheel  boats,  four  transports,  three  tugs,  and  nine  barges,  all  heavily 
laden  with  troops.  The  importance  attached  to  it  by  the  enemy  may 
be  estimated  by  the  fact  that  the  boats  were  commanded  by  Acting 
Bear- Admiral  Porter  and  the  troops  by  General  Sherman. 

Some  time  before,  I had  sent  ofl*  sharxishooters,  under  the  command  of 
Major  [H.  W.]  Bridges,  with  orders  to  report  to  Colonel  Ferguson,  and 
CO  operate  with  him  in  protecting  the  country  drained  by  Deer  Creek 
and  the  Sunflower  from  the  raids  of  the  enemy.  This  command  re- 
ported to  him  on  the  IGth  instant. 

As  soon  as  possible  after  the  receipt  of  the  intelligence,  I directed 
jMaj or- General  Maury,  commanding  the  right  wing,  to  send  Brigadier- 
General  Featherston’s  brigade  to  Bolling  Fork,  to  check  their  farther 
advance,  and  immediately  afterward  to  dispa.tch  a force,  under  Briga- 
dier-General Lee,  with  orders  to  make  their  way  up  Deer  Creek,  fortify 
and  obstruct  it  at  the  high  ground  at  Hardee’s,  and  cut  ofl‘,  if  possible, 
the  retreat  of  the  enemy. 

The  attack  made  uiion  them  by  our  forces  in  front  was  successful. 
They  were  repulsed  in  confusion,  with  a loss  of  some  camp  and  garrison 
ecpiipage  and  several  fine  barges  on  the  first  day,  and,  being  closely 
followed  up  subsequently,  were  steadily  driven  back,  and,  at  last, 
comx)letely  foiled,  relinquished  their  attempt,  and,  returning,  resumed 
their  former  position  iu  front  of  the  city  on  the  evening  of  the  27th 
instant. 

The  damage  done  their  boats  was  so  great  that  it  could  easily  be  dis- 
covered from  the  lookout  station  at  this  point. 

I regret  that  not  even  the  energy  of  General  Lee,  who  generously  vol- 
unteered for  the  occasion,  could  overcome  the  difficulties  in -his  way  in 
time  to  intercept  their  retreat.  Had  it  been  possible,  he  would  have 
done  it. 


For  notices  of  subordinate  commanders,  I refer  you  to  the  report  of 
Major-General  Maury,  herewith  inclosed,  and  the  letters  of  Colonel  Fer- 
guson, heretofore  forwarded. 

I am,  major,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  L.  STEVENSON, 

Major-  General,  Commanding. 


Maj.  B.  W.  Memminger, 

A.  A.  G.,  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana,  Jaclcson. 


456  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

No.  17. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Dabney  H.  Maury.,  C.  S.  Army,  commandiny  Division. 

Headquarters  Maury^s  Division, 

Viclcsbury,  March  21^  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  expedition  under  General 
Sherman  and  Admiral  Porter,  which  endeavored  to  penetrate,  by  way  of 
Steele’s  Bayou,  Black  Bayou,  Deer  Greek,  Bolling  Fork,  and  Sunflower 
Biver,  into  Yazoo  Biver,  has  been  defeated  and  driven  back.  Colonel 
Ferguson  now  occupies  Black  Bayou,  and  has  established  communica- 
tion with  General  Lee  at  Lower  Deer  Creek. 

So  soon  as  I was  informed  of  this  movement  of  the  enemy,  I ordered 
General  Featherston  to  proceed  with  a portion  of  his  brigade  to  re-en- 
force Colonel  Ferguson,  and  to  assume  command  of  his  forces.  I also 
gladly  availed  myself  of  General  Lee’s  oflcr  to  conduct  a force  from 
Haynes’  Bluff  up  Low^er  Deer  Creek,  and  ordered  him  to  attack,  if  possi- 
ble, the  enemy  on  Black  Baj  on.  These  measures  have  resulted  in  the 
complete  defeat  of  the  enemy. 

I cannot  too  highly  commend  Colonel  Ferguson’s  energy  and  daring. 
To  his  prompt  soldiership  we  are  indebted  for  the  arrest  of  the  progress 
of  the  expedition  until  such  re-enforcements  came  to  him  as  have  en- 
abled us  to  defeat  it.  He  has  been  in  the  advance  all  the  time,  contin- 
ually pressing  the  enemy  back.  His  only  fear  has  been  lest  the  enemy 
should  escape. 

It  is  again  my  pleasure  to  call  to  your  favorable  notice  Brig.  Gen.  S. 
D.  Lee,  who  volunteered  to  conduct  a force  by  Lower  Deer  Creek  to 
Black  Bayou,  and  has  been  most  energetically  overcoming  the  difficul- 
ties of  Ihat  route.  The  enemy  retreated  before  General  Lee  could  reach 
him. 

Not  having  yet  received  General  Featherston’s  complete  report  of  his 
operations,  I have  nothing  more  to  add  at  this  time. 

Very  respectfully,  major,  your  obedient  servant, 

DABNEY  H.  MAUBY, 

Major-  General. 

Major.  [J.  J.]  Beeve,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  18. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Winfield  S.  Featherston^  G.  S.  Army,  command- 
ing Brigade. 

Deer  Creek,  March  20,  1863. 

Sir:  We  arrived  here  to-day.  The  enemy  are  said  to  have  one  di- 
vision here  and  five  gunboats.  We  see  the  boats.  We  attacked  them 
this  evening,  and  drove  them  back  IJ  miles.  The  enemy  are  at  the 
junction  of  Deer  Creek  and  Bolling  Fork.  We  intend  to  take  the  boats 
to-night  or  early  in  the  morning.  Porter  is  here.  You  had  better  send 
me  all  the  balance  of  my  brigade.  We  want  Deer  Creek  blocked  or 
obstructed,  so  as  to  iirevent  them  from  getting  in  our  rear.  We  fear 
nothing  but  an  attack  from  the  rear.  We  will  hold  them  in  check  and 
drive  them  back,  but  do  not  like  the  idea  of  their  getting  in  our  rear. 

Very  respectfully, 

W.  S.  FEATHEBSTON, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Major-General  Maury. 


Chap.  XXXVI]  THE  STEELE’s  BAYOTJ  EXPEDITION,  ETC. 


457 


Saturday,  March  21,  [1863.] 

The  enemy  are  certainly  re-enforcing  heavily.  Commodore  Porter  is 
here.  Sherman  is  just  below.  They  have  nine  boats  here.  Four  thou- 
sand are  on  the  march  from  below  by  land.  I send  you  a dispatch  cap- 
tured last  night.  I submit  these  facts  for  your  consideration. 

W.  S.  FEATHERSTON, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 

Generals  Maury,  Stevenson,  and  Hebert. 

[Inclosure.] 

Friday  Evening. 

Admiral  David  D.  Porter: 

Dear  Admiral  : I have  about  1,000  men  here  now,  and  think,  with 
good  luck  and  hard  work,  I may  have  another  1,000  to-morrow  in  the 
night,  and  will  push  till  I get  all  of  Stuart’s  division  up.  I send  you 
three  Southern  papers  of  very  late  dates,  giving  the  names  of  the  ves- 
sels which  have  passed  Port  Hudson  on  their  way  up,  and  which  are 
referred  to  in  Grant’s  letter  to  me  as  being  below  Warrenton.  The 
gunboat  Linden  was  sent  back  by  Captain  Woodworth  for  the  coal- 
barge.  Work  on  Black  Bayou  progressing  well,  but  the  crooks  and 
turns  are  so  short  that  boats  cannot  navigate  it  with  speed.  Please 
write  me  by  bearer,  and  give  a receipt  for  the  papers,  as  I have  prom- 
ised to  pay  him  $50  if  he  reaches  you  and  returns  safely.  I have  no 
doubt  your  channel  will  be  obstructed,  but  no  large  force  can  assail  you. 
Nothing  from  below  to-day.  Scouts  and  spies  are  feeling  up  their  way 
from  Haynes’  Bluff,  but  I will  watch  them. 

Yours, 

SHERMAN. 


Deer  Creek,  March  22,  1863. 

General  : We  have  engaged  the  enemy  here  for  two  days,  and  driven 
them  back  about  5 or  6 miles.  We  have  been  fighting  their  boats. 
They  have  five  here.  We  are  now  out  of  ammunition  for  the  artillery, 
or  nearly  so.  They  were  re-enforced  yesterday  j infantry  marched  up 
by  land,  how  many  we  are  not  able  to  say.  Admiral  Porter  is  here  on 
the  fleet ; Sherman  is  below  on  Black  Bayou,  where  they  have  a strong 
force.  This  was  their  grand  effort  for  securing  the  Yazoo.  I sent  you 
their  dispatches  yesterday,  captured  the  night  before.  If  they  advance 
here  again,  this  place  cannot  be  held  without  a strong  force.  We  need 
boats,  we  need  ammunition,  and  will  need  more  men  if  they  advance. 
We  cannot  pursue  them  well  without  more  troops ; our  forces  are  worn 
out.  My  guns  are  one  3-inch  rifle  and  one  24-pounder  howitzer.  Have 
Deer  Creek  obstructed  below,  so  that  we  cannot  be  cut  off. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  FEATHERSTON, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 

P.  S. — We  need  intrenching  tools  and  wheelbarrows.  The  object  is 
to  construct  a levee  across  Deer  Creek. 


Deer  Creek,  March  23,  1863. 

General  : The  Sharp  has  arrived  with  the  Thirty-first  and  some  am- 
munition. We  engaged  the  enemy  all  day  yesterday;  sharpshooters 


458 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Ciiai*.  Xxxvi. 

attacking  the  boats.  About  2 p.  m.  we  met  their  re-enforcements  com- 
ing up,  when  a sharp  skirmish  ensued.  Sherman  arrived  yesterday 
evening.  Porter  has  conducted  the  fleet  all  the  time.  They  formed  a 
line  of  battle  late  yesterday  and  advanced  on  us  through  a field,  but 
fell  back  before  they  came  in  range  of  our  small-arms.  We  drove  them 
yesterday  about  2 miles.  We  have  not  advanced  to-day.  It  is  raining 
hard.  I learn,  u])on  reliable  information  from  eitizens,  that  they  have  on 
this  line  nearly  all  of  their  afiny  that  was  in  front  of  Vicksburg — from 
20,000  to  40,000  men.  This  was  their  route  for  taking  the  Yazoo  River, 
Mississippi,  and  Vicksburg.  It  is  no  small  expedition  of  theirs.  If 
they  do  not  abandon  it  now,  it  will  require  a heavy  force  to  defend  this 
place.  It  is  a hard  line  to  defend.  The  shortest  line  we  can  defend 
here  so  as  to  keep  them  from  cutting  off  supjdies  is  20  miles.  I have 
not  looked  at  the  rear  at  all  in  this  estimate.  They  can  run  their  boats 
in  Little  Sunflower ; also  in  Silver  Creek.  I cannot  tell  how  supplies  are 
above  here.  We  may  be  unable  to  get  them,  even  for  a small  force. 

I state  all  these  facts  that  you  may  judge  of  the  expediency  of  sending 
more  troops  here.  We  need  them,  many  more,  but  we  have  more  here 
now  than  we  could  get  away,  if  compelled  to  retire,  with  the  number  of 
boats  we  have  here.  We  need  more  boats.  The  Arcadia  runs  badly  in 
daylight,  and  cannot  run  at  all  at  night.  We  saw  nine  of  the  enemy’s 
gunboats  yesterday  evening.  If  they  do  not  turn  back  now,  this  is 
their  advance  upon  Vicksburg.  I shall  do  the  best  I can,  and  leave  the 
result  to  the  Almighty. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  FEATHERSTW, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Headquarters  Eeatherston’s  Brigade, 

Xear  Fort  Pemhertonj  Miss.,  April  3,  1863. 

Major  : In  obedience  to  orders,  I submit  the  following  report  of  the 
troops  under  my  command  on  Rolling  Fork  and  Deer  Creek  : 

About  3 a.  m.,  March  19,  I was  ordered  to  move  m\"  brigade  to 
Snyder’s  Bluff  as  rapidly  as  possible  5 to  take  two  regiments  from  that 
point  and  one  section  of  artillery,  and  ])roceed  up  Sunflower  River  and 
Rolling  Fork  to  the  junction  of  Rolling  Fork  and  Deer  Creek,  to  which 
point  the  enemy  was  said  to  be  directing  his  movements.  The  order 
was  promptly  obeyed,  and  on  Friday  (20th),  about  3 p.  m.,  we  arrived 
at  the  mouth  of  Rolling  Fork,  and  disembarked  the  troops,  who  had  to 
march  through  water  three  quarters  of  a mile  before  reaching  land. 
Colonel  Ferguson  had  preceded  me  from  near  Greenville,  Miss.,  with  his 
command,  consisting  of  a battalion  of  infantry,  six  pieces  of  artillery, 
and  a squadron  of  cavalry  some  40  or  50  in  number.  Colonel  Ferguson 
had  ])reviously  engaged  the  enemy  and  driven  back  his  advance  guard 
from  Dr.  Chaney’s  house,  immediately  in  the  fork  of  Rolling  Fork  and 
Deer  Creek.  ]\iy  artillery  and  infantry  were  moved  rapidly  from  the 
boat  landing,  a distance  of  some  6 or  7 miles,  to  the  head  of  Rolling 
Fork,  and  arrived  there  from  4.30  to  5 p.  m.  I immediately  assumed 
command  of  all  the  forces,  and  placed  them  in  i)osition  for  an  imme- 
diate attack.  The  battalion  of  infantry  was  i)laced  on  the  right,  extend- 
ing up  to  Deer  Creek.  The  Twenty-second  and  Twenty-third  Mississipi)i 
Regiments  were  ]>laced  on  the  left  in  the  nearest  strip  of  woods  to  the 
enemy,  and  extending  down  Deer  Creek  below  the  enemy’s  line  of  boats ; 


Chap.  XXXVT.l  THE  STEELe’s  BAYOU  EXPEDITION,  ETC. 


459 


the  artillery  on  the  more  elevated  position  in  the  center.  The  enemy’s 
boats  (five  in  number),  commanded  by  Admiral  Porter,  were  lyin^’  a few 
hundred  yards  below  the  junction  of  Polling  Fork  and  Deer  Creek,  sur 
rounded  by  an  open  field  from  one-half  to  a mile  wide,  and  near  a large, 
elevated  mound,  upon  which  he  had  planted  a land  battery  of  not  more 
than  two  guns.  The  infantry  were  ordered  to  throw  out  companies  of 
skirmishers  in  advance,  with  instructions  to  fire  at  every  man  who  made 
his  appearance  on  the  boats.  This  disposition  of  the  troops  having  been 
made,  a brisk  fire  was  opened  by  our  artillery  and  continued  until  dark. 
This  fire  was  responded  to  by  the  enemy’s  gunboats  as  well  as  their  land 
battery  until  night.  There  was  no  hope  of  boarding  the  boats  at  this 
time  by  the  infantry,  as  they  were  in  the  middle  of  the  stream,  and  could 
not  be  reached  without  passiug  through  water  from  10  to  20  feet  deep. 

The  troops  remained  in  position  during  the  night,  with  instructions 
that  if  the  boats  lauded  on  the  east  side  of  Deer  Creek  to  board  when- 
ever an  opportunity  offered.  During  the  night  their  laud  liattery  moved 
from  the  Mound  to  the  boats,  and  the  boats  commenced  moving  down 
stream. 

Next  morning  the  attack  was  renewed.  Skirmishers  were  thrown  for- 
ward to  the  nearest  points  of  woods  on  both  sides  of  the  creek,  and  a 
constant  fire  kept  up  during  the  day.  The  artillery  was  not  used  on  the 
second  day,  for  the  reason  that  the  supply  of  ammunition  was  nearly 
exhausted  by  the  firing  on  Friday.  The  country  from  the  head  of  Poll- 
ing Fork  down  Deer  Creek  to  Black  Bayou  is  nearly  a continuous  chain 
of  plantations,  cleared  on  both  sides,  and  but  few  points  of  woods  run- 
ning to  the  bank  of  the  stream  to  serve  as  a covert  and  protection  for 
sharpshooters.  Owing  to  the  high  stage  of  water  in  Deer  Creek,  their 
guns  could  be  sufficiently  depressed  on  the  boats  to  use  grape  and 
canister. 

On  Saturday  evening,  the  Fortieth  Alabama,  Lieut.  Col.  John  U. 
Higley  commanding,  arrived,  and  was  placed,  with  the  Twenty-second 
and  Thirty-third  Mississippi  Pegiments,  under  the  command  of  Col.  D. 
W.  Hurst,  Thirty-third  Mississippi  Pegiment,  who  had  prior  to  that 
time  had  the  immediate  command  of  the  Twenty-second  and  Thirty- 
third  Mississippi  Pegiments,  Colonel  Ferguson  retaining  during  the 
whole  time  the  immediate  command  of  his  own  forces.  The  enemy  con- 
tinued to  retire  down  the  creek. 

On  Sunday  morning  the  attack  was  continued  at  Moore’s  plantation, 
some  6 or  7 miles  below  the  head  of  Polling  Fork.  Two  regiments 
were  thrown  below  in  advance  of  the  boats  (Twenty-second  and  Thirty- 
third  Mississippi),  in  a point  of  woods  running  up  to  the  creek,  where 
it  was  thought  they  could  be  successfully  assailed.  The  Fortieth  Ala- 
bama and  artillery  ordered  to  open  a brisk  fire  on  them  until  it  had 
exhausted  its  supi)ly  of  ammunition.  This  order  was  promptly  obeyed, 
and  the  fire  of  our  guns  most  cordially  responded  to  by  the  guns  of  the 
enemy’s  boats.  The  two  regiments  thrown  below  wore  met  by  Sherman’s 
division  coming  up,  when  a sharp  skirmish  ensued.  While  this  skirmish 
was  going  on  between  the  two  regiments  below  and  Sherman’s  division, 
two  regiments  of  the  enemy  advanced  from  the  boats  immediately  to 
the  front,  evidently  with  a view  of  cutting  off  the  Twenty-second  and 
Thirty-third  Mississippi,  then  in  advance.  These  two  regiments  were 
ordered  back  to  a strong  position  then  held  by  the  Fortieth  Alabama 
and  artillery.  This  was  done  in  good  order  through  the  skirt  of  woods 
on  the  enemy’s  left.  The  enemy  advancing  some  half  a mile  through 
the  field,  and  finding  our  forces  united,  fell  back  to  the  boats.  I am 
satisfied,  from  reliable  information  received  from  citizens  as  well  as  a 


460 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

captured  dispatcli  from  General  Gherman  to  Admiral  Porter,  that  the  I 
enemy^s  force  could  not  now  have  consisted  of  less  than  eight  or  nine  ' 
regiments. 

On  Monday  [23d],  our  troops  were  not  moved,  for  the  reason  that  our 
artillery  was  out  of  ammunition  and  hourly  expecting  a supply  by  our 
boats,  and  the  men  were  without  rations,  and  had  been  scantily  and  | 
irregularly  supplied  up  to  that  time,  owing  to  the  fact  that  we  arrived  ! 
without  rations  and  without  transportation,  and  it  required  time  to  col- 
lect both.  , Tin 

On  Tuesday  morning  the  march  was  again  resumed,  but  the  artillery 
was  carried  but  a little  distance  until  the  roads  were  Ibund  impassable, 
and  it  was  left. 

On  Wednesday  [25th],  the  enemy  was  overtaken  on  Watson’s  farm, 
about  3 miles  above  Black  Bayou.  They  were  posted  in  a dense  cane- 
brake  and  woods,  from  which  they  retired  before  our  skirmishers,  the 
boats  having  preceded  them.  The  woods  were  occupied  by  our  troops 
that  (Wednesday)  night. 

On  Thursday  morning  our  troops  again  advanced  through  Fore’s  plan- 
tation, when  a skirmish  ensued  between  their  rear  guard  and  our  sharp- 
slioot0i*s 

On  Friday  morning,  when  preparing  to  advance  through  the  last  skirt 
of  woods  on  the  east  side  of  Deer  Creek,  before  reaching  Black  Bayou,  I 
learned  from  cavalry  scouts  sent  in  advance  that  the  enemy’s  boats  had 
gone  down  Black  Bayou  and  his  land  forces  retired. 

On  Monday  evening,  the  Thirty-tirst  Mississippi  Begiment,  Col.  J.  A. 
Orr  commanding,  arrived,  and  in  the  advance  on  Tuesday  and  Wed- 
nesday Colonel  Orr  had  the  immediate  command  of  the  Twenty-second, 
Thirty-third,  Thirty-first  Mississippi,  and  Fortieth  Alabama  Eegiments. 

On  Friday  night,  after  the  first  engagement,  the  cavalry  was  sent  sev- 
eral miles  below  to  fell  trees  into  the  stream  to  prevent  the  escape  of  the 
boats,  but  were  driven  from  their  work  at  an  early  hour  by  a body  of  the 
enemy’s  infantry  without  having  accomplished  much.  The  cavalry  did 
that  night  capture  a negro,  a bearer  of  a dispatch  from  General  Sher- 
man to  Admiral  Porter,  which  was  sent  to  you  at  Vicksburg.  The  cap- 
ture of  the  gunboats  could  only  have  been  accomplished  by  the  presence 
of  a land  force  strong  enough  to  have  moved  a part  of  it  boldly  to  the 
rear  of  the  boats,  and  taken  a position  where  the  succoring  land  torce  of 
the  enemy  might  have  been  held  firmly  in  check,  while  the  remaining 
part  might  have  felled  trees  and  otherwise  obstructed  the  stream  in  rear 
of  the  boats,  annoying  them  with  sharpshooters  and  compelled  their  sur- 
render from  absolute  stress  and  calamity  of  situation  after  their  ammu- 
nition, and  perhaps  provisions,  should  have  been  exhausted.  The  entire 
force  under  my  command  up  to  Monday  did  not  exceed  1,300  eifective 
men,  and  at  no  time  during  the  seven  days  did  it  exceed  2,500  men.  The 
visionary  absurdity  of  the  over-sanguine  expectations  of  capturing  gun- 
boats entertained  by  some  military  men  becomes  apparent  when  it  is 
considered  that  from  12  to  15  feet  depth  of  water,  with  a width  of  from 
G to  10  feet,  is  always  interposed  between  the  assailants  and  the  object 
assailed,  and  the  boats  well-nigh  incapable  of  entrance  when  boarded, 
and  each  arranged  with  reference  to  the  protection  of  the  other.  Tins 
entire  expedition  was  full  of  hardships  to  the  troops,  who  endured  them 
with  patience  and  fortitude,  and  were  always  cool  and  spirited  in  tbe 
presence  of  the  enemy. 

I not  only  feel  under  obligation  to  my  regular  staff* — Capt.  AV . F. 
Barksdale,  assistant  adjutant-general,  and  Lieut.  A.  N.  Parker,  aide- 
de-camp — but  also  to  Lieutenant  [W.  A.]  Drennan,  acting  ordnance 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  STEELe’s  BAYOU  EXPEDITION,  ETC. 


461 


officer,  and  Mr.  E.  M.  McAfee,  volunteer  aides,  who  were  efficient  in 
their  places.  Major  [E.  H.]  Cummins,  engineer  officer,  Major-General 
Maury ^s  staff,  accompanied  me  on  this  expedition,  and  had  charge  of 
all  defensive  works,  in  which  he  displayed  much  judgment  and  effi- 
ciency. 

Our  loss  in  the  slight  combats  of  this  expedition  was  smal],  not  ex- 
ceeding 2 killed  and  6 or  8 wounded.  The  enemy^s  loss,  as  learned 
from  released  citizens,  was  not  less  than  from  12  to  13  killed  and  from 
40  to  45  wounded. 

A shot  from  our  artillery,  whose  firing  was  admirable,  crippled  the 
United  States  tug,  and  took  off  the  leg  of  the  engineer,  whose  grave  we 
found  marked,  “ Engineer  United  States  tug  Dahlia  j died  March  22, 
1863.^^  The  success  of  the  expedition  consists  in  turning  and  driving 
back  the  enemj^,  who  in  a very  short  time  would  have  been  through 
Eolliug  Fork  into  Sunflower  Eiver,  and  had  the  uncontested  control 
of  the  Yazoo  Avaters. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  serv- 
ant, 

W.  S.  FEATHEESTOlSr, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Maj.^  D.  W.  Floweekee, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General,  General  Mauryh  Division. 


NTo.  19. 

Efjmrt  of  Brig.  Gen.  IStephen  D.  Lee,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Brigade, 

Yicksbueg,  Miss.,  March  30,  1863. 

Major:  In  the  absence  of  Major-General  Maury,  from  whom  I re- 
ceived orders,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  mj^ 
operations  on  Deer  Creek  during  the  last  week : 

The  enemy,  having  passed  up  Steele’s  Bayou  and  through  Big  Black 
Bayou  into  Deer  Creek,  were  endeavoring  to  reach  the  Sunflower  by 
passing  through  the  Eolling  Fork.  Brigadier-General  Featherston  and 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Ferguson,  having  met  the  enemy  at  the  Eolling 
Fork,  checked  his  further  progress. 

Major-General  Maury  directed  me  to  take  charge  of  an  expedition  and 
proceed  to  Wilson’s  plantation,  on  Lower  Deer  Creek,  to  obstruct  the 
creek,  throw  up  works,  and,  if  advisable,  make  a diversion  in  the  enemy’s 
rear,  with  a view  to  aid  General  Featherston,  and,  if  the  means  of  com- 
munication admitted,  he  would  furnish  me  with  troops  for  a heavy  attack 
on  the  enemy. 

I arrived  at  Wilson’s,  about  6 miles  from  the  mouth  of  Deer  Creek, 
on  the  24th,  with  the  Third  Louisiana.  The  First  Mississippi  Battalion 
was  already  at  that  point,  obstructing  the  creek  by  felling  trees. 

On  the  25th,  the  Third  Louisiana  commenced  a log  intrenchment,  the 
low  ground  not  admitting  of  digging  to  make  proper  works,  tbe  highest 
ground  not  being  over  IJ  feet  above  the  creek  and  overflow  from  the 
high  water. 

On  the  26th,  the  log  intrenchment  was  continued  by  the  Third  Loui- 
siana and  Twenty-sixth  Louisiana,  which  had  arrived  on  the  evening  of 
the  25th,  the  obstructions  being  continued  by  the  First  Mississipiii 
Battalion. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVT 


ciiAi-.  XXXVI.]  the  Steele’s  layou  expedition,  etc. 


463 


464  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chai*.  XXXVL 

On  the  27th,  about  2 a.  m.,  I received  a note  from  Colonel  Ferguson 
and  from  General  Featherston,  informing  me  that  the  enemy  had  re- 
treated through  Black  Bayou  and  made  their  escape.  The  Lower  Deer 
Creek  country  for  6 miles  above  Wilsoh’s  was  almost  entirely  under 
water  from  the  high  stage  of  water,  and  it  was  difficult  to  find  sufficient 
ground  even  at  Wilson’s  for  bivouacking  troops.  The  creek  not  having 
been  cleared  out,  the  small  steamer  could  only  get  up  about  3 miles 
from  the  mouth,  and  the  other  3 miles  troops  and  supplies  had  to  be 
transported  in  two  large  wood-boats  by  hauling  up  the  creek  by  the 
trees  and  bushes,  the  water  being  too  deep  for  poling  and  boats  not 
being  arranged  for  and  too  large  for  the  use  of  oars.  These  difficulties 
rendered  transportation  very  difficult.  The  number  of  skiffs  at  my 
control  being  very  few,  could  not  be  depended  on  for  furnishing  sup- 
iffies.  These  difficulties,  taken  in  connection  with  the  limited  supply 
of  rations  at  Snyder’s  Mill,  and  the  country  being  overflowed  in  my 
front,  prevented  my  making  any  serious  advance  on  the  enemy.  There- 
fore, I sent  a force  of  75  men  to  the  place  next  above  Wilson’s  (Har- 
dee’s), distant  from  the  pickets  of  the  enemy  about  7 miles.  This  de- 
tachment to  reach  its  post  had  to  wade  through  water  3 J feet  deep  for 
a mile.  The  enemy  having  retreated,  I immediately  commenced  re- 
embarking the  troops  for  Snyder’s  Mill. 

Heft  Wilson’s  place  on  the  29th,  and  arrived  in  this  city  the  same  date. 
A squadron  of  cavalry  was  left  on  Black  Bayou  to  picket  and  report  in 
case  the  enemy  should  return.  I consider  it  highly  improbable  that 
the  enemy  will  ever  attempt  to  reach  the  Yazoo  Eiver  through  Lower 
Deer  Creek.  The  creek  from  Hill’s  lower  place  (Kelsaw)  to  Paxton’s,  3 
miles  from  the  mouth,  has  never  been  cleared  out,  the  trees  generally 
overlapping.  The  water  is  deep  enough  for  steamers,  but  it  would  re- 
quire a great  deal  of  labor  to  make  it  practicable.  The  part  uncleared 
is  about  20  miles,  and  the  country  on  either  side  of  the  creek  overflowed 
except  a narrow  skirt  of  bank.  Should  the  enemy  attempt  this  route, 
it  will  be  necessary  to  establish  our  work  in  front  of  Wilson’s  place  (say 
at  Hardee’s,  the  place  beyond  Wilson’s),  as  the  communication  between 
Wilson’s  and  Hardee’s  by  land  is  impracticable,  and  by  the  creek  about 
9 miles.  The  route  by  Geary  [Greasy  ?]  Bayou  to  Hardee’s  will  have  to 
be  used.  By  this  route  the  steamer  can  go  to  within  3 miles  of  Hardee’s, 
and  from  the  steamer  large  flat-boats  can  go  through  the  overflow  to 
within  100  yards  of  Hardee’s.  All  that  is  necessary  to  be  done  by  this 
route  is  to  have  the  route  blazed  through  the  overflow.  To  operate  in 
this  creek,  it  will  be  necessary  to  have  a great  many  skiffs,  as  they 
really  afford  the  only  means  of  moving  about  until  Hill’s  Kelsaw  place 
is  reached,  from  which  there  is  a good  road  to  Black  Bayou,  about  G 
miles.  I discontinued  the  felling  of  trees  in  Deer  Greek,  as,  in  my  opin- 
ion, the  creek  was  more  obstructed  by  the  standing  timber  than  by  the 
timber  felled.  .The  timber  is  very  heavy,  and  on  being  felled  sinks  to 
the  bottom,  and  the  boats  can  generally  run  over  it,  or,  after  being  felled, 
it  can  readily  be  pushed  into  the  overflow  from  the  creek.  The  trees 
by  being  felled  make  clearing  or  road  for  the  boats,  so  the  felling  of 
timber  at  the  present  high  water  rather  assists  the  enemy  than  other- 
wise. The  water  is  now  rising,  and  the  higher  it  rises  the  more  the 
standing  timber  is  an  obstruction  to  boats.  The  timber  generally  is  not 
tall  enough  to  reach  across  the  creek,  or  sets  back  so  far  from  the  creek 
that,  when  felled,  the  limbs  only  reach  the  deepest  water. 

I would  respectfully  recommend  that  a number  of  skiffs  be  at  once 
constructed  for  service  on  Lower  Deer  Creek,  and  a small  force  (say  100 
men)  be  left  to  watch  the  enemy  above  Hardee’s. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  STEELE^S  BAYOU  EXPEDITION,  ETC.  465 


Geneml  [Louis]  Hubert,  at  Snyder’s  Mill,  bas  taken  charge  on  Deer 
Creek  since  my  return. 

Eespectfully  submitted. 


STEPHEN  D.  LEE, 

TXT..  • r T T T -r»  Brigadier-  General, 

Major  [J.  J.]  Eeeve, 

A,  A.  G.,  2d  Bist.,  Dept.  Miss,  and  E.  La.^  Viekshurg^  Miss. 
referen'^s  sketches  from  the  creek,  which  will  explain  the 


No.  20. 

Reports  of  Col.  Samuel  W.  Ferguson,  O.  S.  Army,  commanding  Fctach- 

ment. 

Mouth  of  Eollino  Pork,  March  20,  1863. 
Major  : I,  yesterday,  on  my  arrival  here,  dispatched  in  great  haste 
to  you.  Since  then  I have  advanced  with  infantry  and  cavalry,  -which 
marching  down  Deer  Creek  about  4 miles  up  Bolling 
getting  three  pieces  of  artillery  over  the 
bad  portion  of  the  road,  yesterday  deemed  impassable.  I Lve  been 
timber  into  Bolling  Fork  and  obstructing  it.  Already 
enough  has  been  done  to  detain  the  boats  two  or  three  days,  if  unoie 
posed.  If  re  enforcements  do  not  arrive  in  time,  and  I have \o  abandon 
l^ab  ^Snnfi  country  drained  by  Deer  Creek,  Bogue  Pha- 

boatsfn  these  Yazoo  unless  we  can  oppose  them  with  cotton- 

tw!  they  icached  Deer  Creek 

they  can,  by  going  down,  enter  the  Yazoo  above  Haynes’  Landing.  If 

to  ^rhin  °tTe-  r ’ ^ impossible  for  me  yet 

to  asceitain  their  force  in  this  section.  I know  of  seven  boats  nosi- 

ThCT  have  not  advance, 

ihey  have  not  yet  advanced  into  Bolling  Fork  by  boat. 

8 indL  belo7™  the  Emma  Bett  onBogue Phaliah,  abont 

8 miles  below  Falls’  Landing,  and  ordered  her  to  go  at  once  to  latter 

of  Bogue  \nd  taf”’  ammals  and  baggage  I had  left,  stop  at  mouth 
ot  bogue,  and  take  ou  section  of  artillery  there,  then  join  me  here  It 

hooi  * ’'^^rn  me  to  tiie  front.  Kept  the  Sharp  here  to  fall 

back  comes,  will  at  once  send  her  with  this  dispatch. 

Very  lespcctfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  W.  FEEGUSON, 

ivr  • T T T>  Bieutena7it- Colonel,  Co7nmanding. 

iviaj.  j.  j.  Eeeve,  Assistaott  Adjutant- General. 

ThL\~n^ot”.“®Emm|Tett  additional  news. 

JOHN  J.  EEEVE, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

,,  ^ ^ Deer  Creek,  March  30,  1863. 

For  ^ kave  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  17th  instant  a hot 

ffairkmorted^to  nm  [John  H.J  Mor- 

£J^)oited  to  me  on  Deer  Creek  at  my  camp,  about  40  miles  above 


30  R R. 


See  pp.  4C2,  4G3. 
-VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


MISSISSIPri,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


46  G 


Eolling  Fork.  Id  the  cours(i  of  that  night  I received  a dispatch  from 
some  citizens,  informing  me  tliat  about  30  Yankees  were  at  Watson’s 
place,  on  Deer  Greek,  about  15  miles  below  Kolling  Fork.  I at  once 
ordered  30  of  the  cavalry  to  oppose  them,  but  the  party  had  but  just 
started  when  another  express  from  the  citizens  informed  me  that  five 
gunboats  had  entered  Deer  Creek  from  Black  Bayou,  and  were  rapidly 
making  their  way  to  Bolling  Fork.  I instantly  ordered  the  rest  of  the 
cavalry  by  forced  marcli  to  the  latter  place,  to  obstruct  the  creek  and 
keep  tiie  enemy  in  check  as  long  as  possible.  1 hurried  the  artillery  and 
infantry  on  the  steamer  which  had  brought  the  latter,  and  proceeded  with 
all  dispatch  to  the  mouth  of  Kolling  Fork,  which  I fortunately  reached 
before  the  enemy,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  19th.  Here  the  prospect  was 
gloomy  enough  j a jule  of  saw-dust  the  only  landing  place,  and  the  first 
half  mile  of  the  road  was  overflowed,  with  two  bridges  afloat. 

By  the  morning  of  the  20th,  I succeeded  in  getting  one  sectiofi  of  ar- 
tillery to  the  dry  land,  and  at  once  attacked  the  enemy  and  drove  them 
in  on  their  gunboats,  at  that  time  detained  in  Deer  Greek,  about  one- 
quarter  of  a mile  below  Kolling  Fork,  by  some  trees  that  had  been  cut 
by  the  cavalry.  The  attack  was  x^iished  with  success  until  the  ammu- 
nition failed,  when  the  forces  were  withdrawn  from  range  of  the  gun- 
boats’ shells.  As  soon  as  the  rest  of  the  guns  could  be  brought  up  and 
the  limbers  rei:)lenished,  the  attack  was  renewed  with  the  same  result 
and  discontinued  for  the  same  cause. 

Just  at  this  time  Major  [H.  W.]  Bridges  reported  to  take  command  of 
the  sharpshooters,  and  informed  me  that  General  Featherston  was  near 
with  re-enforcements.  Turning  over  the  command  of  the  field  to  him,  I 
hastened  to  meet  General  Featherston,  to  inform  him  of  the  condition  of 
things,  and  to  urge  him  to  hurry  up  and  attack.  On  his  arrival  on  the 
field,  it  was  agreed  that  the  artillery  should  open  on  the  boats  and  keep 
up  a brisk  fire  until  his  infantry  should  debouch  from  the  woods  on 
our  left  and  rather  in  rear  of  the  enemy,  when  a rush  should  be  made 
for  the  boats.  The  artillery  opened  fire  as  directed;  my  sharpshooters 
drove  in  the  enemy,  and  one  section  of  my  artillery,  from  an  enfilading 
liosition,  drove  their  howitzers  and  men  in  confusion  to  the  boats.  Still, 
none  of  General  Featherston’s  infantry  appeared,  and  the  artillery  fire 
was  continued  until  darkness  put  an  end  to  the  conflict.  During  tlie 
night  I was  informed  by  General  Featherston  that  his  regiments  were 
in  rear  of  the  enemy,  close  to  the  creek  bank,  and  that  in  case  the  enemy 
attempted  to  retreat  during  the  night  they  would  attack  at  once ; other- 
wise that  we  would  all  attack  at  daylight. 

In  compliance  with  this,  1 made  an  attack  early  on  the  21st,  drove 
the  enemy  back,  and,  after  exhausting  all  my  artillery  ammimition,  con- 
tinued to  pursue  and  harass  him  with  sharpshooters,  expecting  at  every 
moment  to  hear  General  Featherston’s  regiments  open;  but  after  I had 
been  engaged  for  three  hours  or  more,  and  had  driven  the  boats  back 
about  2 miles,  I saw  the  forces  of  General  Featherston  in  rear  ot  the 
position  they  had  held  the  previous  afternoon,  entering  the  woods.  My 
sharpshooters  continued  to  harass  the  enemy  until  dark.  The  latter, 
.after  reaching  a position  on  the  plantation  of  Dr.  Moore,  halted  till 
.after  dark,  and  during  the  day  burned  every  building  on  the  x)lace  except 
one  small  stable. 

On  the  following  day  it  was  discovered  that  they  had  during  the  night 
continued  their  retreat,  although  re-enforced  by  one  regiment,  and  they 
were  still  getting  out  of  the  way  as  rapidly  as  possible.  General  Feath- 
erston  ordered  my  sharpshooters  to  press  them  on  the  right  bank,  two 
regiments  to  gain  their  rear  and  then  attack,  while  the  artillery  and  the 


Chap.  XXXVL]  THE  STEELE\S  BAYOU  EXPEDITION,  ETC. 


467 


Fortieth  Ahibamii  pressed  tliem  on  jBc  iefc  oaiik.  As  soon  as  the  enemy 
discovered  that  their  rear  had  been  gained,  they  halted  in  an  open 
country  and  fired  furiously  at  everything  which  could  be  seen,  but 
without  efiect.  Our  artillery  returned  the  fire  as  long  as  their  ammu 
nition  held  out.  The  regiments  in  the  rear  encountered  re-enforce 
ments  coming  up,  and  immediately  fell  back  after  slight  skirmishing. 
The  re-enforcements  arrived,  deployed,  run  in  our  skirmishers,  and 
marched  back  to  the  fleet.  We  remained  in  position  until  dark,  then 
fell  back. 

My  command,  having  been  engaged  for  three  successive  days  con- 
stantlj^,  was  then  held  in  reserve,  and  the  enemy  was  followed  at  too 
great  a distance  for  them  to  be  again  used,  except  the  cavalry,  under 
Captain  [G.]  Barnes,  to  whose  untiring  energy  and  gallant  conduct  on 
this,  as  on  every  other  occasion  since  he  reported  to  me,  much  i^raise 
is  due. 

The  artillery,  under  Lieutenant  [E.  L.]  Wood,  behaved  as  I expected 
men  who  fought  as  they  did  on  the  23d  ultimo.  Their  cool,  calm  cour- 
age and  good  shooting  was  a glad  sight  to  a soldier’s  eye.  I would  in- 
clude in  this  favorable  notice  the  section  under  Lieutenant  [A.  P.]  St. 
John,  temporarily  attached  to  the  command  of  Lieutenant  Wood. 

The  sharpshooters,  under  skillful  guidance  of  Major  Bridges  and  Cap- 
tain Morgan,  exhibited  that  reckless  disregard  for  shell  and  grape  which 
made  the  furious  cannonade  of  the  Yankees  seem  an  amusing  display  of 
t)yrotechnics. 

T*iie  expenditure  of  all  kinds  of  missiles,  from  a 13-inch  shell  to  a Minie 
ball,  on  every  point  where  it  was  thought  they  might  be  hid,  showed  the 
estimation  the  enemy  had  of  them.  Except  Private  Eeuben  Wilmore, 
of  Company  I,  Third  Mississippi  Volunteers,  who  fell,  gallantly  fighting, 
from  a grape-shot  wound  in  the  head,  none  of  my  command  were  touched 
by  their  artillery,  though  subjected  to  a constant  fire  for  three  days.  1 
regret  to  have  to  report  Privates  W.  A.  Swayze,  Company  C,  McBeecher, 
Company  11,  and  Samuel  Devereau,  Comi)any  E,  all  of  Third  Missis- 
sippi Volunteers,  wounded  by  Minie  balls,  and  Acting  Sergt.  Maj.  John 
[G.]  Poindexter,  Company  B,  and  Private  McKnight,  Company  E,  same 
regiment,  captured.  The  two  latter  had  particularly  attracted  my  at- 
tention by  skill  and  bravery. 

There  is  justsubjectforcongratulation  that  this  formidable  expedition, 
commanded  by  Admiral  Porter,  and  consisting  of  some  of  the  best  iron- 
clads and  mortar-boats,  was  successfully  repulsed  with  such  trifling  loss; 
but  1 must  express  the  belief  that  all  the  boats  should  have  been  cap- 
tured or  destroyed  by  a vigorous  attack,  and  the  infantry  re-enforcements 
destroyed  in  detail  as  they  came  up. 

I would  call  attention  to  the  burning  of  houses  and  cotton  and  iiillag- 
ing  done  by  Admiral  Porter,  in  direct  contradiction  of  the  notice  pub- 
lished by  himself,  an  official  copy  of  which  I forwarded  to  the  depart- 
ment. One  of  the  shells  from  this  valiant  hero  exploded  in  the  chamber 
of  an  invalid  woman,  in  which  ten  women  and  children  had  taken  refuge. 
Providentially,  but  one  negro  woman  was  Avounded  by  it.  She  iioav  lies 
at  the  x>oint  of  death.  A child  two  years  old  was  grieAmusly  burned. 
This  was  the  most  effective  shell  thrown  by  them.  We  caused  to  be 
destroyed  one  large  coal-barge,  and  captured  nine  launches  and  yawls 
and  several  small-arms  and  two  flags,  besides  cooking  utensils,  4&c. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  W.  FEEGUSON, 
Colonel^  Commanding  Detachments. 

jMaj.  D.  W.  Flowerree, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


468 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MARCH  15-16,  1863. — Skirmishes  near  Hernando,  Miss. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  R.  Chalmers,  G.  S.  Army. 

Panola,  March  18,  1863. 

A part  of  my  command,  under  Major  [G.  L.]  Blythe,  skirmished  with 
the  enemy  near  Hernando  on  Sunday  ; killed  1 man.  Again  on  Mon- 
day. Enemy’s  loss  reported  8 killed,  — wounded.  Our  loss,  1 killed. 

Another  skirmish  on  Coldwater,  8 miles  north  of  Holly  Springs. 
Captains  Mathews’,  Maxwell’s,  Johnson’s,  and  Mitchell’s  companies  en- 
gaged the  enemy. 

Our  loss,  1 killed,  1 wounded,  and  several  prisoners.  Enemy’s  loss 
reported  to  be  10  killed  and  wounded. 

JAMES  11.  CHALMERS, 

Brigadier- General. 

General  Pemberton. 


MARCH  16-18,  1863. — Expedition  from  Jackson  to  Trenton,  Tenn. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Daniel  H.  Brush,  Eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Eighteenth  Regiment  Illinois  Volunteers, 

Jachson,  Temi.,  March  18,  1863. 

Sir  : I hereby  report  that,  in  pursuance  of  orders  received  from  head- 
quarters of  District  of  Jackson,  on  the  evening  of  15th  instant,  I started 
at  6 o’clock  the  next  morning  Avitli  what  men  I could  mount,  and  pro- 
ceeded on  the  route  indicated.  In  approaching  Humboldt  on  the  west 
side  of  the  railroad,  when  within  3 or  4 miles,  we  came  near  to  the  mid- 
dle fork  of  the  Forked  Deer  River,  and  ascertained  that  it  was  impos- 
sible to  cross  that  stream  to  the  west,  owing  to  the  destruction  of  bridges 
and  the  highness  of  the  water,  and  learning  from  a man  direct  from 
Humboldt  that  no  armed  rebels  were  there,  ^ so  far  departed  from  the 
strict  letter  of  the  orders  as  to  cross  the  railroad  and  proceed  to  Hum- 
boldt qn  the  east  side.  We  had  to  make  a considerable  circuit  through 
a very  swampy  bottom  to  a ford,  where  we  crossed.  On  arriving  at 
Humboldt,  I had  the  town  surrounded,  but  found  nobody  there  except 
citizens  and  a company  of  Sixty-second  Illinois  Regiment.  I learned 
there  that  the  previous  afternoon  10  or  12  men,  armed,  supposed  to  be 
rebel  soldiers,  passed  through  the  town,  making  no  stop  and  doing  no 
damage  to  property  or  persons.  It  was  reported  that  they  had  come 
across  two  artillerymen  in  that  vicinity,  whom  they  took  prisoners  and 
paroled. 

From  Humboldt  I proceeded  to  Trenton,  going  up  on  west  side  of  the 
railroad.  When  we  reached  the  place,  I caused  it  to  be  surrounded, 
and  caused  a search  to  be  made,  but  no  rebels  were  discovered,  and  I 
could  not  learn  that  any  had  been  there  since  the  Union  troops  left; 
everything  seemed  peaceable  and  quiet.  I was  told  that  a Colonel 
McMurray,  formerly  in  the  rebel  service,  had  been  discharged  and  re- 
turned to  his  home,  some  8 miles  west  of  Trenton,  two  or  three  weeks 
since,  to  stay ; also  that  a young  man  named  Bell  liad  left  the  enemy 
and  gone  to  his  home  in  the  neighborhood.  I left  Trenton  about  6 p. 
ra.,  taking  the  road  toward  Jackson,  east  side  of  railroad,  and  camped 
for  the  night  5 miles  south  of  the  town.  Next  day  at  sunrise  we  started, 


469 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  PASSAGE  OF  GRAND  GULF  BATTERIES^' ETC. 

and  finding  the  bridges  across  the  middle  fork  of  the  Forked  Deer  had 
been  destroyed,  made  a detour  to  the  east  about  15  miles,  to  the  Spring 
Creek  road.  The  crossing  of  the  creek  there  was  quite  difficult,  the 
bridge  being  nearly  destroyed  and  the  ford  deep  and  muddy.  However, 
we  got  horses  and  men  across  safely.  It  was  reported  to  me  by  a man 
of  that  vicinity  that  on  last  Saturday  night  a squad  of  mounted  rebels 
passed  the  road  going  west,  and  passed  again  going  east  on  Sunday 
night.  The  man  who  told  me  had  not  seen  them,  but  said  it  was  the 
neighborhood  report ; that  some  horses  had  been  stolen  in  the  neigh- 
borhood, and  it  was  suiiposed  that  was  the  business  the  men  were  on. 
From  Spring  Creek  we  took  the  road  to  this  place,  where  we  arrived 
about  dark. 

During  the  trip  two  Government  mules  were  found  in  a man’s  stable 
and  brought  in,  to  be  turned  over  to  the  proper  officer.  The  man  stated 
he  had  taken  the  mules  up  on  the  road  a short  time  since,  intending  to 
keep  them  for  the  Government  until  he  could  deliver  them.  We  pro- 
cured feed  for  our  horses  of  three  different  men  on  the  trip,  to  whom 
statements  were  given  showing  the  facts. 

Eespectfully  submitted. 

D.  H.  BEHSH, 

lAeutenant-  Colonel,  Commanding. 

Capt.  T.  H.  Harris, 

■ Asskiant  Adjutant- General. 


MARCH  19,  1863. — Passage  of  the  Grand  Gulf  batteries  by  the  Hartford 

and  Monongahela. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  S.  Boicen,  G.  8.  Army. 

Headquarters  First  Brigade,  Second  Division, 

Grand  Gulf  March  10,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  gunboats  Hartford  and 
Monongahela  passed  by  this  morning  on  their  way  up  the  river.  Colo- 
nel [Wra.]  Wade,  commanding  the  Parrott  battery,  reserved  his  fire,  as 
directed,  until  the  vessels  were  nearly  opposite  his  guns.  The  Hartford 
kept  between  the  shore  and  the  gunboat.  As  soon  as  he  opened,  the  lat- 
ter made  tlie  best  possible  time  around  the  point,  and  all  the  fire  was 
directed  against  the  sloop  of  war.  The  firing  was  very  accurate,  and 
almost  every  shot  struck  the  mark,  but  with  what  effect  could  not  be 
perceived.*  They  answered  wdtli  heavy  guns,  but  harmed  nothing  ex- 
ce[)t  a battery  flag-staff. 

I have  been  anxiously  looking  for  the  Anna  Perette  all  day,  and  still 
hope  she  will  be  here  before  night.  The  guns  can  be  mounted  in  very 
short  order,  when  once  here,  and  I trust  to  bo  able  to  give  them  a better 
reception  on  their  way  down. 

I allowed  the  Grand  Era  to  go  on  down  to  Eed  Eiver  this  afternoon, 
there  being  no  danger  below.  The  Fulton  also  exhibited  orders  to  jiro- 
ceed  to  the  same  destination,  but  I retained  her  to  go  to  Hard  Times, 
3 or  4 miles  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  to  get  a thousand  or  so  sacks 


* Rear-Admiral  D.  G.  Farra^nt,  U.  S.  Navy,  reports  liis  casualties  as  2 men  killed 
and  G wounded.  See  Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  7,  1863, 


470 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVt 


of  corn,  wbicli  await  trausi)ortatioii  there.  Every  precaution  has  been 
taken  to  prevent  surprise,  and  the  boat  will  return  this  afternoon, 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 
Maj.  J.  J.  Eeeve,  Assistant  Adjutant  General. 


MARCH  21,  1863 — Guerrilla  attack  on  railway  train  between  Bolivar  and 

Grand  Junction,  Tenn. 

KE3PORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Mason  Brayraan,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Bolivar. 

No.  2.— Brig.  Gen.  James  R.  Chalmers,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Fifth  Military  Dis. 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Mason  Bray  man,  U.  iS.  Army,  coynmanding  at 

Bolivar. 

Bolivar,  Tenn.,  March  22,  18G3. 

Sir  : The  transactions  this  side  of  Grand  Junction  appear  substan- 
tially as  follows : 

Information  appears  to  have  been  sent  down  the  road  on  Friday  that 
on  yesterday  morning  the  road  paymaster  would  be  down  to  pay  the 
laborers.  This  information,  diffused,  of  course,  through  the  country, 
probably  induced  the  effort  to  capture  the  pay  train.  On  yesterday 
morning  the  wood  train  went  down  in  advance,  the  pay  train  following. 
At  8.30,  the  pay  train  came  up  with  the  wood  train.  A rail  had  been 
removed  on  the  outside  of  a sharp  curve,  3J  miles  this  side  of  Grand 
Junction,  in  a cut.  The  engine,  tender,  and  five  cars  had  run  off  the 
rails.  The  train  men  had  been  captured  and  carried  off.  The  enemy 
lined  the  banks,  a^id  approached  through  the  thick  woods.  The  engi- 
neer of  the  pay  train  reversed  his  engine.  As  it  paused  before  receding, 
the  guerrillas,  who  surrounded  the  car,  cheered  triumphantly,  supposing 
the  capture  accomplished.  The  gallant  fellow  stood  to  his  work,  put  on 
all  steam,  and  shot  backward.  Discovering  his  purpose,  they  poured  a 
liot  fire  upon  the  train,  striking  the  engine,  tender,  and  car,  several  balls 
striking  nelar  him  [the  engineer].  Sheltered  by  the  sides  of  the  engine, 
he  retained  control  of  it,  and  brought  his  train  to  Bolivar  in  safety. 
Two  persons — Mr.  [Carlos]  Dutton,  quartermaster,  and  Mr.  Cummings, 
from  the  machine-shop  at  Jackson — fearing  a collision  with  the  wood 
train  ahead,  jumped  off*  and  were  captured.  Through  the  negligence 
of  the  station  agent,  and  those  having  charge  of  the  escaped  train,  I 
was  not  advised  of  the  accident  until  noon,  some  two  hours  after  the 
return  of  the  train,  when  the  quartermaster,  Lieutenant  [William  W.] 
McFarland,  notified  me. 

At  1,  Colonel  Engelmann,  of  the  Forty-third  Illinois,  with  200  men, 
proceeded  by  train  to  the  scene  of  disaster.  Some  two  cars  had  been 
burned,  a fire  built  in  the  tender,  without  serious  in  jury,  the  wires  cut, 
and  the  track  somewhat  damaged.  The  damaged  cars  were  thrown 
from  the  track  ; the  engine  and  other  cars  replaced.  When  the  Jack- 
son  train  came  down,  I jdaced  upon  it  two  companies  of  the  One  hun- 
dred and  sixth  Illinois,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Campbell,  to  secure  the- 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


SCOUT  TO  SAULSBURY,  TENN. 


471 


safety  of  that  train,  and,  if  necessary,  aid  the  detachment  which  pre- 
ceded it.  Immediately^  on  receiving  intelligence,  I sent  detachments  of 
the  First  West  Tennessee  Cavalry,  who  scoured  the  country  along  the 
railroad  beyond  Middleburg,  toward  Somerville,  and  as  far  as  Whiteville, 
where  they  captured  G.  W.  Oashea,  of  Captain  ColteFs  company,  For- 
rest’s cavalry,  who  says  the  attacking  force  consisted  of  three  companies 
of  Forrest’s  and  a portion  of  Street’s  band,  about  100  strong.  1 am  in- 
formed that  on  the  occurrence  of  the  accident,  information  was  sent  to 
Grand  Junction,  and  the  forces  at  that  imint  placed  in  line  of  battle, 
standing  in  defensive  attitude  until  4 o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  about 
which  time  an  imposing  force  moved  out  to  where  the  trouble  occurred, 
finding  there  the  force  from  Bolivar,  and  the  damages  in  course  of  re- 
pair. The  scene  of  accident,  and  in  this  direction  (including  Hickory 
Valley  Station)  being  outside  my  command,  I am  not  advised  what 
forces  were  on  guard,  or  whether  any  further  casualties  occurred  than 
I have  mentioned. 

The  expedition  from  Bolivar  returned  safely,  having  performed  gal- 
lantly and  well  the  duty  assigned  them.  The  attacking  force  appears 
to  be  the  same  that  has  for  some  time  infested  the  neighborhood  south 
of  here,  and  were  probably  attracted  to  the  point  by  the  expectation 
of  capturing  a train  bearing  public  funds  and  feebly  defended.  I think 
they  fled  north  to  join  Eichardson,  not  even  waiting  to  do  serious  mis- 
chief after  the  iiay master  escaped  them. 

I think  proper  to  advise  you  that,  upon  reliable  information,  I con- 
clude that  Eichardson  is  now  stronger  than  last  week,  when  annihilated 
by  the  newspapers. 

Eespectfully,  yours,  &c.. 


Capt.  T.  H.  Harris, 

Acting  Adjutant- General. 


M.  BEAYMAN, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  R.  Chalmers^  G.  8.  Army.,  commanding  Fifth 

Military  District. 

Panola,  March  28, 18G3*. 

Caxits.  S.  G.  Street  and  Wilson,  with  80  men,  made  a gallant  dash 
behind  the  enemy  at  Grand  Junction ; threw  a construction  train  off 
the  track  within  5 miles  of  the  Junction,  and  burned  it;  captured  10 
white  prisoners  and  10  free  Americans  of  African  descent. 

JAMES  E.  CHALMEES, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


MARCH  21-22,  1863. — Scout  from  La  Grange  to  Saulsbury,  Tenn. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Reuben  Loomis,  Sixth  Illinois  Cavalry. 

La  Grange,  Tenn.,  Mar  eh  22, 1803! 
Colonel:  In  pursuance  of  your  orders  of  the  21st  instant,  I pro- 
ceeded with  the  effective  force  of  the  regiment  and  four  guns  of  the  bat- 
tery to  Grand  Junction,  Tenn.  There  I was  informed  by  the  officer  in 


472 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


cominaiicl  of  tlie  post  tba-t  tlie  depredatious  which  had  been  committed 
on  the  railroad  a few  miles  from  that  point  were  supposed  to  have  been 
done  by  [S.  G.]  Street  and  a certain  Captain  White,  of  guerrilla  notoriety, 
and  their  command  consisted  of  about  34  men.  Thinking  we  could 
manage  the  aforesaid  force  without  the  battery,  I ordered  it  back  to  La 
Grange,  to  report  to  you.  We  then  proceeded  on  the  State  Line  road 
in  the  direction  of  Saulsbury.  After  marching  about  2 miles,  1 divided 
my  command.  Captain  Sloan  taking  command  of  Companies  C,  I),  E,  F, 
G,  and  H,  and  proceeded  on  the  State  Line  road  in  the  direction  of  Sauls- 
bury^  with  instructions  to  scour  the  country  on  his  route  generally, 
and  to  make  connection  with  me  or  the  rest  of  the  command  at  Sauls- 
bury. 

I then  proceeded  to  the  railroad,  and  found  the  wreck  that  Street  had 
made  of  the  train.  My  object  in  going  to  this  point  was  that  I might 
possibly  get  the  direction  which  the  guerrillas  had  taken;  but,  after 
observation,  we  found,  after  the  rebels  had  left  the  railroad,  they  divided 
in  parties  of  some  four  or  five,  and  had  gone  in  all  directions.  I then 
took  up  the  march  in  the  direction  of  Saulsbury,  but  after  leaving  the 
railroad  about  one-half  mile,  I sent  Captain  Pierce,  in  command  of 
Companies  A and  B,  to  the  left,  whilst  I,  with  the  remainder  of  the 
command,  went  to  the  right.  We  scoured  the  country  throughout,  and 
met  at  Saulsbury  without  any  correct  report  or  definite  idea  as  to  where 
Street  was  or  had  gone.  We  remained  in  Saulsbury  some  two  hours, 
waiting  for  Captain  Sloan  to  make  connection,  during  which  time  we 
fed  our  horses,  and  sought  information  concerning  Street,  but  gained 
but  little.  Finally  Captain  Sloan  arrived.  He  had  been  somewhat  more 
successful  than  I had  been ; he  had  heard  of  Street,  but  he  was  some  six 
hours  ahead,  and  making  his  route  in  three  parties  through  the  woods 
and  fields.  One  of  said  parties  consisted  of  9 Union  prisoners ; another 
consisted  of  a gang  of  negroes  to  the  number  of  20  or  30;  whilst  the 
third  was  mounted,  and  seemed  to  be  a kind  of  an  advance  guard  or 
generally  lookers-out. 

The  enemy  having  so  much  the  start  of  us,  I considered  it  useless  to 
make  further  pursuit,  and  as  there  was  no  forage  in  the  immediate 
neighborhood,  I returned  to  camp,  where  we  arrived  about  1 a.  m. 

Hoping  this  may  prove  satisfactory,  I remain  your  most  obedient 
servant, 

E.  LOOMIS, 

Lieutenant-Colonel^  Commanding  Regiment. 

Col.  B.  H.  Grierson, 

Commanding  First  Cavalry  Brigade. 


.MARCH  24,  1863. — Skirmish  on  Davis’  Mill  road,  near  La  Grange,  Tenn. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Reuben  Loomis,  Sixth  Illinois  Cavalry. 

La  Grange,  Tenn.,  March  24,  1863. 

Colonel  : This  evening  I was  informed  that  the  Second  Iowa  pick- 
ets, standing  on  the  road  running  southeast  from  this  place,  had  been 
attacke<l  by  a })arty  of  guerrillas,  and  two  of  them  were  cai)tured.  I 
instantly  took  about  50  men  and  went  in  pursuit  of  them.  We  traveled 
about  15  miles  double-quick,  (aime  upon  them,  killed  3,  recaptured  our 
men,  and  took  3 prisoners.  We  stopped  at  a house  where  there  were 


Chap.  XXXVT.l  PASSAGE  OF  THE  VICKSBURG  BATTERIES. 


473 


4 or  5 men  wbo  called  themselves  citizens,  but  I am  under  the  impres- 
sion they  are  part  of  the  above-named  party. 

Herewith  I send  you  3 prisoners,  as  follows,  viz  : W.  L.  Barrett,  W. 
T.  Bowlend,  and  L.  W.  Mills,  whom  you  can  dispose  of  as  you  think 
best. 

Hoping  that  this  may  prove  satisfactory,  I remain,  very  respectfully, 
your  obedient  servant, 

R.  LOOMIS, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel. 

Col.  B.  H.  Grierson, 

Commanding  First  Cavalry  Brigade. 


MARCH  25,  1863. — Passage  of  the  Vicksburg  batteries  by  the  Switzerland, 
and  destruction  of  the  Lancaster. 

REFORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen  Alfred  W.  Ellet,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Mississippi  Marine 
Brigade. 

No.  2. — Col.  Charles  Rivers  Ellet,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  U.  S.  steam  ram  Switzer- 
land. 

No.  3. — Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Ellet,  U.  S.  Array,  commanding  U.  S.  steam  ram  Lan- 
caster. 

No.  4. — Maj.  Gen.  Carter  L.  Stevenson,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Vicksburg. 

No.  5. — Brig.  Gen.  Seth  M.  Barton,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  brigade. 

' No.  1. 

Reiwrt  of  Brig.  Qen.  Alfred  W.  Filet,  U.  S.  Army,  oommanding  Missis- 

sippi  Marine  Brigade. 

Flag-ship  Autocrat, 

Above  Yiclcsburg,  March  26,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  yesterday,  in  response  to  a 
request  made  by  Admiral  Farragut  for  two  rams  to  aid  him  in  main- 
taining possession  of  the  Mississippi  River  between  Vicksburg  and  Port 
Hudson,  and  to  destroy  the  enemy^s  communicatious  from  Red  River,  I 
ordered  the  Switzerland  and  Lancaster,  the  latter  in  command  of  Lieut. 
Col.  John  A.  Ellet,  the  former  commanded  by  Maj.  John  Lawrence,  the 
expedition  being  under  the  command  of  Col.  Charles  R.  Ellet,  who  was 
on  the  Switzerland  in  person,  to  pass  the  batteries  and  join  Admiral 
Farragut  below.  I regret  to  say  that  in  the  performance  of  this  order 
the  Lancaster  was  blown  up  and  totally  destroyed  by  the  terrible  lire 
from  the  enemy^s  batteries.  The  Switzerland  also  received  a 10-inch 
shell  in  her  boilers  when  opiiosite  the  center  of  the  enemy^s  line  of  de- 
fenses, totally  disabling  her.  She  floated  past,  and  Anally  escaped  with- 
out more  serious  inj  ury.  I have  now  on  board  a large  force  of  mechanics, 
who  will  have  her  repaired,  and  in  a few  days  again  ready  for  efAcient 
service. 

I inclose  a copy  of  the  letter  received  from  Admiral  Farragut,  which, 
taken  in  connection  with  my  own  knowledge  of  the  great  importance  of 
the  interest  involved,  induced  me  to  undertake  the  enterprise. 

1 deem  it  proper  in  this  report  to  call  your  special  attention  to  the 
great  gallantry  displayed  by  the  officers  and  men  composing  the  crews 
of  these  vessels  under  circumstances  of  the  most  imminent  ])eril.  When 


474 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CHAi’.  NXXVL 


I arrived  on  board  the  Switzerland,  wliicli  I did,  in  company  with  W. 
D.  Crandall,  assistant  acljiitant-geiieral,  as  soon  as  I discovered  that  she 
was  disabled,  I found  perfect  order  prevailing;  although  the  shot  were 
still  falling  fast,  not  a man  showed  the  slightest  trepidation,  and  a proud 
determination  was  expressed  never  to  lower  the  tattered  remnant  of  a 
dag  yet  dying,  which  had  been  run  up  by  their  colonePs  own  hands  in 
reply  to  the  enemy^s  wild  clamor  when  they  supposed  that  his  boat  was 
destroyed  by  seeing  the  escape  of  steam.  Of  Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Ellet, 
I must  make  special  mention,  who,  after  saving  his  own  crew  from  the 
sunken  Lancaster,  was  pulled  in  an  open  yawl  by  two  negroes,  through 
a terrible  fire  of  shell  and  grape,  for  a distance  of  near  2 miles,  to  offer 
his  assistance  to  the  crew  of  the  disabled  Switzerland. 

I inclose  the  separate  reports  of  Col.  Charles  R.  Ellet  and  Lieut.  Col. 
John  A.  Ellet. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 

ALFRED  W.  ELLET, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Seer et ary  of  War. 


[luclosure  Xo.  1.] 

U.  S.  Elag-ship  Hartford, 

Below  Vielcshurg,  Mareli  23,  18G3. 

Brig.  Gen.  Alfred  W.  Ellet, 

Commanding  Mississippi  Marine  Brigade  : 

General:  I have  written  Admiral  Porter  to  the  effect  that  I am 
most  desirous  of  having  an  iron-clad  gunboat  and  two  rams  below  Vicks- 
burg, to  maintain  the  control  of  the  river  between  this  place  and  Port 
Hudson.  The  Red  River  trade  is  now  the  only  resource  of  the  enemy 
Ibr  their  supplies  at  both  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson.  The  failure  of 
my  vessels  to  get  by  Port  Hudson  has  reduced  me  to  the  necessity  of 
asking  the  above  assistance  from  Admiral  Porter,  but  I am  unwilling 
to  interfere  with  the  admiral’s  command  in  any  way,  but  I feel  assured 
that  if  he  were  here  he  would  grant  the  assistance  I so  much  need  to 
carry  out  this  great  object.  I beg  to  assure  you  that  nothing  would  be 
more  gratifying  to  me  than  to  have  two  of  your  rams,  and  I remain, 
truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

1).  G.  EARRAGUT, 

Eear-Admiral. 


[luclosure  Xo.  2.] 

Headquarters  Mississippi  Marine  Brigade, 

Flag-ship  Autocrat,  March  24,  1803. 
Captain  Walke,  Commanding  La  Fayette: 

Captain  : I have  received  a written  communication  from  Admiral 
Earragut,  in  which  he  informs  me  that  he  had  requested  from  Admiral 
Porter  an  iron-clad  gunboat  and  two  rams,  to  enable  him  to  hold  the 
river  between  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson. 

In  consequence  of  the  failure  to  get  the  fieet  above  that  point,  he  is 
entirely  too  weak  to  accomplish  this  great  object  unaided.  It  is  my  pur- 
l)ose  to  send  past  the  batteries  to-night,  in  compliance  with  this  request, 
the  Switzerland  and  Lancaster,  and  shall  be  glad,  if  you  conclude  to 
send  a gunboat,  to  be  informed,  that  we  may  act  in  concert. 

Very  respectfully, 


ALFRED  W.  ELLET, 

Brigadier-  General. 


eiiAF.  XXXVI.]  pASSAGiE  OP  THE  VICKSBURG  BATTERIES. 


475 


[ruclosure  No.  3.) 


Headquarters  Mississippi  Marine  Brigade, 

Flagship  Autocrat^  above  Vichsburg^  March  24,  18G3. 


Col.  Charles  Kivers  Ellet^ 

Commanding  Bain  Fleet: 

Colonel  : You  will  iirocc.ed  in  coinmaiul  of  the  steam  rams  Switzer- 
land and  Lancaster  to  pass  the  batteries  at  Vicksburg  to-night,  and 
report  to  Admiral  Farragut  below.  Take  every  iirecaution  to  prevent 
lights  being  seen  on  your  boats  during  the  passage  dowu. 

Take  only  men  enough  to  run  the  boats ; have  the  yawls  on  the  star- 
board guards  for  instant  use  in  case  of  necessity,  and  hang  knotted  ropes 
from  either  side  to  the  water’s  edge,  to  which  men  could  hang  to  avoid 
steam. 

You  will  not,  in  the  event  that  either  boat  is  disabled,  attempt  under 
fire  of  the  batteries  to  help  her  off  with  the  other  boat,  but  will  run 
on  down,  it  being  of  primary  importance  that  one  boat  at  least  should 
get  safely  by. 

The  purpose  for  which  you  are  sent  below  is  to  assist  in  keeping  pos- 
session of  the  river  between  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson,  and  cutting 
off  the  enemy’s  communications  witli  and  supplies  from  Eed  Eiver  anil 
its  tributaries,  and  to  aid  in  repelling  the  rebel  rams  and  cotton-clad 
steamers  if  they  should  attack  Earragut’s  vessels. 

You  will  afford  all  the  aid  in  your  power  to  the  military  force  which 
will  attack  Warrenton  to-morrow. 

Eeport  to  me  by  every  convenient  opportunity. 

Very  respectfully, 


ALEEED  W.  ELLET, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 


[Inclosure  No.  4.1 

United  States  Mississippi  Squadron, 

Yasoo  River,  March  25,  18C3. 

Brig.  Gen.  Alfred  W.  Ellet, 

Commanding  Marine  Brigade,  Mississi][)pi  Squadron  : 

General:  Will  you  please  inform  me  by  what  authority  you  sent 
the  rams  Lancaster  and  Switzerland  past  the  batteries  at  Vicksburg, 
in  open  day,  and  without  taking  any  precaution  to  guard  their  hulls  ? « 
One  of  these  vessels  has,  in  consequence,  been  sunk,  and  the  other 
damaged  extensively,  Avhich  might  very  well  have  been  expected  under 
the  circumstances.  You  will  also  inform  me  who  were  the  commanders 
of  these  vessels,  and  all  the  circumstances  attending  this  unfortunate 
affair. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

DAVID  D.  POETEE, 

Acting  Rear-Admiral,  Commanding  Mississippi  Squadron. 

[Iiiclosuro  No.  5.] 

Headquarters  Mississippi  Marine  Brigade, 

Flagship  Autocrat,  above  Viclcsburg,  March  25,  18G3. 
David  D.  Porter, 

Acting  Rear-Admiral,  Mississippi  Squadron: 

Admiral  : In  compliance  with  your  instructions,  I would  respectfully 
report  that  the  Switzerland  and  Lancaster  were  sent  past  the  batteries 


470 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX vr. 


of  Vicksburg  by  order  this  moruiug,  in  consequence  of  receiving  an 
urgent  request  from  Admiral  Farragut  for  their  assistance  to  aid  him 
in  keeping  the  river  open  from  Vicksburg  to  Port  Hudson,  and  in  de- 
stroying the  enemy^s  communications  from  Eed  Eiver,  and  also  for  the 
purpose  of  passing  troops  over  the  river  to  Warrenton,  to  aid  in  the 
destruction  of  the  formidable  batteries  now  being  constructed  at  that 
point. 

The  boats  started  before  daylight.  You  have  been  misinformed  of  the 
passage  being  made  in  open  day.  It  is  true  that,  in  consequence  of  the 
injury  that  the  boats  sustained,  they  did  not  get  past  before  the  sun  had 
risen,  yet,  if  they  had  not  been  injured  and  obliged  to  float,  they  would 
have  made  the  passage  before  it  was  fully  light. 

The  Lancaster,  I regret  to  say,  is  a total  loss.  Her  boilers  were 
exploded,  and  beiug  a very  rotten  boat,  she  went  to  pieces  and  sank 
immediately.  She  was  commanded  by  Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Ellet.  The 
Switzerland  was  commanded  by  Col.  Charles  E.  Ellet  in  person,  who 
also  commanded  the  expedition.  She  received  a number  of  shots,  but, 
being  a stronger  boat,  was  not  much  injured.  Her  boiler  was  exploded 
by  a plunging  shot;  in  other  respects  the  damage  was  not  material. 
She  will  be  repaired  in  a few  days,  and  is  in  a position  where  I trust 
she  will  be  able  to  redeem  whatever  of  mishap  has  attended  the  passage 
of  the  Vicksburg  batteries. 

Very  respectfully, 

ALEEED  W.  ELLET, 
Brigadier-  Genera  /,  Commanding. 


Off  Elag-ship  Autocrat, 

Via  Cairo,  April  13,  1863 — 5.25  p.  m. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

/Secretary  of  War : 

I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  dispatch  of  this 
date. 

A detailed  report  of  the  loss  of  the  Lancaster  on  the  morning  of  the 
25th  instant  [ultimo]  before  Vicksburg  was  sent  to  you  by  mail  the  fol- 
lowing day,  together  with  a copy  of  the  letter  from  Admiral  Earragut 
asking  the  aid  of  two  rams  and  one  iron-clad  gunboat. 

Admiral  Porter  was  absent.  Captain  Walke  would  not  take  the  re- 
sponsibility to  respond,  not  having  yet  reported  to  Admiral  Porter,  and, 
conceiving  the  case  to  be  one  of  urgent  necessity,  I offered  to  take  the 
responsibility,  and  send  the  Lancaster  and  Switzerland.  Admiral  Ear- 
ragut gladly  accepted  the  offer,  and  the  boats  went. 

I do  not  conceive  that  I acted  against  orders,  not  having  yet  received 
any  orders  from  anybody,  except  those  emanating  direct  from  your  De- 
partment, to  report  to  Admiral  Porter  for  duty  as  soon  as  my  brigade 
was  formed. 

If  my  acts  meet  with  your  approval,  I shall  little  regard  any  efforts 
of  others  to  misrepresent  me. 

1 will  forward  you  immediately  duplicate  copies  of  my  report  and 
Admiral  Farragut’s  letter  by  mail. 

Very  respectfully. 


ALEEED  W.  ELLET, 

• Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Chai*.  XXXVL]  passage  OE  the  VICKSBURG  BATTERIES. 


477 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  Charles  Rivers  Rllet,  U.  S.  Army^  commanding  TJ.  S. 
steam  ram  Switzerland. 

U.  S.  Steam  Eam  Switzerland, 

Below  Yickshurg^  March  25,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  to  yon  that,  in  compliance  with 
your  instructions,  I started  before  daybreak  this  morning,  with  the  rams 
Switzerland  and  Lancaster,  to  pass  the  Vicksburg  batteries.  The  short 
time  which  I was  allowed  for  preparations,  and  the  necessity  of  taking 
in  large  quantities  of  stores  and  provisions,  delayed  our  departure  until 
it  was  nearly  light.  The  wind  was  extremely  unfavorable,  and,  not- 
withstanding the  caution  with  which  the  boats  put  out  into  the  middle 
of  the  stream,  the  puff  of  their  escape-pipes  could  be  heard  with  fatal 
distinctness  below.  The  flashing  of  the  enemy^s  signal  lights  from  bat- 
tery to  battery  as  we  neared  the  city  showed  me  that  concealment  wms 
useless.  The  morning,  too,  was  beginning  to  break,  and  I saw  that,  if 
we  were  to  pass  at  all,  it  was  to  be  done  at  once.  I ordered  my  pilots 
to  give  the  Switzerland  full  headway,  and  we  went  round  the  f)oint 
under  160  pounds  of  steam.  The  rebels  opened  Are  at  once,  but  the 
first  flfteen  or  twenty  shots  were  badly  aimed.  As  we  got  nearer  to  the 
guns,  however,  the  fire  became  both  accurate  and  rapid.  Shot  after  shot 
struck  my  boat,  tearing  everything  to  pieces  before  them.  A few  hun- 
dred yards  behind  us  the  Lancaster,  under  command  of  Lieut.  Col.  John 
A.  Ellet,  still  steamed  steadily  down,  but  I could  see  the  splinters  fly 
from  her  at  every  discharge.  When  about  three  quarters  of  a mile 
below  the  point,  and  full  in  front  of  the  enemy^s  heaviest  guns,  a 10-inch 
shell  plunged  through  the  boiler  deck  of  the  Switzerland  and  into  her 
center  boiler.  The  explosion  of  steam  which  ensued  was  very  severe, 
and  was  welcomed  by  the  traitors  with  shouts  of  exultation.  The  en- 
gines stopped  at  once,  and  even  the  pilot-house  was  filled  to  suffocation 
with  the  hot  steam,  but  the  pilots  stood  to  their  posts  like  men,  and,  by 
my  order,  kept  her  out  in  the  stream,  when  she  floated  down  with  the 
current.  The  enemy  relaxed  their  tire,  and  the  steam  had  scarcely 
cleared  away  from  the  Switzerland  when  I saw  the  Lancaster  blown 
up.  She  commenced  to  sink  rapidly,  and  in  a few  moments  went 
down,  bow  foremost. 

1 ordered  the  crew  of  the  Switzerland  into  as  secure  a position  as 
possible,  and  floated  past  the  remaining  batteries  without  any  loss  of 
life  or  material  damage  to  the  boat.  A few  moments  after  your  arrival 
on  board  with  Adjutant-General  Crandall,  and  when  opposite  the  mouth 
of  the  canal,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Ellet  came  alongside  in  a yawl,  having 
rowed  down  to  us  through  a fire  of  grape  and  shell,  to  offer  us  any  as- 
sistance in  his  power.  He  had  previously  set  ashore  his  own  crew  and 
wounded  men  and  fired  the  upper  works  of  his  boat.  When  out  of 
range,  the  Switzerland  was  met  by  the  Albatross  and  towed  into  shore. 

I cannot  conclude  this  report  without  referring  to  the  heroic  conduct 
of  the  ofticers  and  crew  of  the  Switzerland.  No  fear  or  lack  of  disci- 
pline was  exhibited  by  any  person  on  board,  and  although  we  were  within 
a pistol-shot  of  shore,  not  a man  attempted  to  desert  the  boat  or  to  leave 
bis  post  without  orders.  Among  those^  wTio  especially  distinguished 
themselves  by  their  resolution  and  courage  were  Maj.  John  W.  Law- 
rence, Pilot  Alexander  McKay,  Lieut.  Edward  C,  Ellet,  and  Third  En- 
gineer Granville  Eoberts.  This  is  the  second  time  that  the  three  last- 


478 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.- 


[Chav.  XXX VI. 


named  officers  have  passed  the  batteries  at  Vicksburg.  The  damage  to 
the  Switzerland’s  boilers  is  considerable,  but  will  be  repaired  in  a few 
days  by  the  machinists  now  on  board  ; her  engines  and  hull  are  in  good 
condition.  Her  loss  comprises  only  3 negroes  badly  scalded  5 1 man 
on  the  Lancaster  was  drowned,  another  severely  scalded,  and  Pilot  T. 
W.  L.  Kitson  lost  a foot.  The  very  limited  loss  of  life  on  both  boats  is 
due  to  the  extremely  small  number  of  men  who  were  selected  to  run  the 
boats  through.  The  remainder  of  the  crews  were  sent  across  by  land. 

I inclose  Lieutenant-Colonel  Ellet’s  report  of  the  Lancaster. 

Very  respectfully, 

CHAELES  EIVEES  ELLET, 

Colonel j Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Alfred  W.  Ellet, 

Commanding  Mississippi  Marine  Brigade. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  LJllet,  JJ.  S.  Army,  commanding  TJ.  S.  steam 

ram  Lancaster. 

Elag-ship  Autocrat, 

Ahore  Viclcshurg,  March  25,  1803. 

Colonel  : 1 have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  obedience  to  your  in- 
structions, I left  my  anchorage  above  the  mouth  of  the  canal  at  4.30 
o’clock  this  morning  on  board  the  U.  S.  steam  ram  Lancaster,  for  the 
purpose  of  running  the  enemy’s  batteries  at  Vicksburg.  The  lights 
were  all  extinguished,  and  every  precaution  taken  to  prevent  giving  any 
knowledge  of  our  approach.  I endeavored  to  conduct  the  movements 
of  my  vessel  as  silently  as  possible,  allowing  her  to  float  part  of  the 
time,  and  occasionally  righting  her  up  by  going  ahead  on  the  slow  bell. 
Unfortunately  the  escape  of  steam  from  her  smoke-stacks  was  very  loud. 
In  addition  to  this,  the  night  was  clear,  calm,  and  starlight,  with  a slight 
breeze  setting  from  us  directly  toward  the  rebel  batteries.  From  tlie 
character  orf  the  night  and  the  warmth  of  our  reception,  I am  led  to  be- 
lieve that  our  very  first  movements  were  heard  by  the  enemy.  Keep- 
ing the  distance  of  about  200  yards  between  my  vessel  and  tlie  Switz- 
erland, I approached  witliin  about  half  a mile  of  the  point  of  the  pen- 
insula very  slowly,  when  the  sudden  flashes  of  signals  along  the  whole 
line  of  the  enemy’s  works  gave  unmistakable  evidence  that  our  move- 
ments were  aiiprehended.  I then  ordered  on  a full  head  of  steam, 
expecting  every  moment  to  receive  the  enemy’s  fire.  When  within 
about  400  yards  of  the  point  of  the  peninsula,  the  enemy  opened  upon 
me  with  a brisk  fire  from  the  upper  batteries,  but  the  shot  fell  wide  of 
the  mark. 

Eounding  the  point,  I ordered  the  pilot  to  steer  well  to  the  starboard, 
to  prevent  following  immediately  in  the  wake  of  the  Switzerland.  When 
just  abreast  of  the  upper  batteries,  the  first  shot  struck  my  vessel,  pass- 
ing through  both  smoke-stacks.  The  fire  continued  almost  incessantly, 
but  without  serious  damage,  for  about  five  minutes  after  this  time,  when 
a heavy  shot  passed  through  the  vessel  immediately  under  the  pilot- 
house, carrying  away  the  steps  which  led  from  the  cabin  into  the  pilot- 
house, and  wounding  Mr.  T.  W.  L.  Kitson,  steersman,  whom  I had  placed 
at  the  foot  of  the  steps  to  be  in  readiness  to  take  the  wheel  should  my 


CiiAr.  XXXVI.]  PASSAGE  OF  THE  VICKSBURG  BATTERIES. 


479 


other  pilot  he  disabled.  We  Avere  now  just  opposite  the  water  batteries, 
and  they  poured  a a- cry  active  lire  upon  us,  striking  the  vessel  in  every 
part  but  a vital  one.  At  this  time  I entertained  the  most  sanguine  ex- 
pectations of  getting  my  vessel  past  in  safety.  This  thought,  howeA^er, 
Avas  speedily  dispelled  by  a heavy  shot,  Avhich  exploded  the  steam-drum, 
and  enveloped  the  entire  vessel  in  a terrible  cloud  of  steam,  driving  the 
engineers  and  firemen  from  their  posts,  and  compelling  every  one  upon 
the  lower  and  gun  deck  to  seek  the  boAV  of  the  boat  outside  of  the 
wooden  bulkhead,  when  a friendly  breeze  shielded  them  from  the  ex- 
cruciating tortures  of  the  hot  steam. 

About  this  time  a heaA^y  plunging  shot  struck  her  in  the  frailest  part 
of  her  stern,  passing  longitudinally  through  her,  and  piercing  the  hull  in 
the  center  near  the  boAv,  causing  an  enormous  leak  in  the  A^essel.  The 
pilot,  Mr.  Andrew  J.  Dennis,  remained  at  the  wheel,  giving  direction  to 
the  helpless  vessel,  until  the  Avheel  was  demolished  by  a shot,  from  the 
effects  of  Avhich  he  miraculously  escaped.  He  reported  the  damage  to  me, 
and  I sent  him  below  to  control  the  tiller-ropes  by  hand,  and  then  went 
down  myself  to  ascertain  the  condition  of  the  hull.  I found  her  sinking 
very  fast,  and  partly  turned  around  by  an  eddy,  so  that  her  starboard 
side  Avas  subjected  to  the  hottest  fire.  I therefore  ordered  the  two  yawls 
to  be  brought  from  the  starboard  side  to  the  larboard  quarter  of  the 
bow,  Avhere  the  hull  of  theA^essel  afforded  them  the  greatest  protection, 
and  then  ordered  my  men  to  take  to  their  boats,  first  piwiding  for  the 
wounded  and  scalded. 

The  Avater  Avas  by  this  time  running  over  the  decks,  and  I found  it 
would  be  impossible  to  secure  her  to  the  shore.  I therefore  set  her 
iqiper  Avorks  on  lire,  by  discharging  my  pistols  into  the  cotton.  This 
was  superlluous,  however,  for  in  a few  minutes  afterward  she  plunged 
into  the  flood,  bow  foremost. 

I had  an  abundance  of  room  in  my  two  yawls  for  e\^ery  soul  on  board, 
but,  unfortunately,  some  of  my  men  attempted  to  swim  ashore.  In  so 
doiug.  Orderly  Sergt.  William  [H.]  McDonald  was  drowned.  While  in 
our  yaAAds,  making  our  escape  from  the  sinking  wreck,  Ave  were  sub- 
jected to  a galling  fire  of  shot  and  shell.  As  soon  as  the  yaAvls  reached 
tlie  shore,  the  men  sought  shelter  in  the  neighboring  Avoods.  I ex- 
pressed my  determination  to  go  to  the  Switzerland,  and.  tAvo  faithful 
negroes  roAved  me  to  her. 

##**#** 

My  officers,  soldiers,  and  boatmen  behaved  Avith  the  utmost  coolness 
and  courage. 

There  are  some  instances  of  lieroic  daring  Avhich  deserve  sjiecial  men- 
tion. Among  these  Avere  George  W.  Lindsey,  first  master  ,•  Henry  S. 
BroAvn,  chief  engineer;  AndrcAA^  J.  Dennis,  pilot;  T.  W.  L.  Kitson, 
steersman;  George  W.  Andrews,  cari)enter,  and  Samuel  Weaver,  en- 
gineer. The  tAvo  latter  gentlemen  passed  the  Vicksburg  batteries  on 
a former  occasion  on  board  the  Queen  of  the  West.  It  is  extremely 
difficult  to  designate  individuals  Avhen  all  did  so  nobly,  without  doiug 
injustice,  but  these  men  came  under  my  own  personal  observation  and 
•challenged  my  admiration  by  their  great  gallantry. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHK  A.  ELLET, 

Lieutenant’ Colonel,  Commanding  Laneaster^ 

Col.  Charles  Hivees  Ellet, 

Commanding  Ram  Fleet 


480  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXYI. 

No.  4. 

Eeports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Carter  L.  Stevenson^  G.  S.  Army,  commanding  at 

Vicicsburg. 

Hdqrs.  Second  District,  Dept,  of  Miss,  and  E.  La., 

Vicksburg,  March  25,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  hoDor  to  report  that,  about  5.30  o’clock  this  morn- 
ing, two  boats  attempted  to  pass  our  batteries.  One  of  them  was  sunk 
about  2 miles  below  the  town,  with  almost  all  on  board  ; the  other  was 
seriously  disabled.  When  she  had  floated  out  of  range  of  our  batteries, 
the  gunboat  Albatross  (heretofore  called,  it  is  thought  by  mistake,  the 
Monongahela)  took  her  in  tow.  She  is  now  helpless,  and  it  will  appar- 
ently take  some  time  for  them  to  repair  her  damages.  During  the  en- 
gagement the  Hartford  moved  up  from  below  Warrentou,  engaging  the 
fort  there. 

She  approached  so  near  that  our  musketry  drove  the  gunners  from 
the  guns,  when  she  withdrew.  The  ofiicer  whom  I sent  to  Mobile  and 
Montgomery  has  succeeded  in  obtaining  a good  deal  of  powder  and 
projectiles  for  my  heavy  guns.  It  cannot  pass  either  Meridian  or  Jack- 
son  without  your  orders  ; please  give  such  that  will  secure  its  speedy 
arrival.  I send  you  on  the  train  to-day  two  Federal  deserters  and  a 
negro  taken  in  the  act  of  carrying  dispatches  for  the  enemy.  One  of 
the  deserters  is  an  intelligent  man,  and  some  information  can  perhaps 
be  derived  from  him.  I inclose  herewith  a list  of  the  ordnance  and 
ordnance  stores  sent  General  Loring.* 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  L.  STEVENSON, 

I Major- General j Commanding. 

Maj.  E.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant  General. 


Vicksburg,  March  25,  1863. 

The  boat  which  passed  this  morning  was  towed  ashore  just  above 
Brown  & Johnston’s  landing,  where  she  now  lies  apparently  a wreck. 
The  Hartford,  in  passing  up  to  her  assistance,  engaged  our  iron  case- 
mates at  Warrenton  for  some  twenty  minutes,  during  which  she  was 
roughly  handled,  being  struck  some  twenty-six  times.  \Ve  had  mounted 
four  Parrott  guns  in  the  casemate  since  she  went  down.  General  [S. 
D.]  Lee  is  advancing  slowly.  Nothing  from  Featherston.  A regiment, 
the  32-pounder  ammunition,  and  one-cotton  boat  went  to  General  Lor- 
ing to-day. 

C.  L.  STEVENSON, 

Major-  General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Seth  M.  Barton,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Brigade. 

Headquarters,  South, 

March  25,  1863 — 6 p.  m. 

Major  : All  remains  quiet.  The  enemy  is  still  hard  at  work  at  his 
repairs;  mine  are  finished.  I was  mistaken  in  saying  in  my  8 o’clock 


Omitted. 


CHAPr  XXXVI.]  EXPEDITIONS  FROM  LA  GRANGE,  TENN.'  ETC.  481 

dispatch  that  the  parapet  had  been  pierced  5 its  top  was  merely  raked. 
To-night  all  will  be  completely  covered  where  the  slightest  danger 
exists,  and  be  ready  for  the  fleet.  The  Hartford  must  have  suffered 
greatly ; every  shot  struck  her  (twenty-six  in  all)  5 some  went  entirely 
through.  She  was  driven  from  every  position  she  took.  A part  of  the 
iron  that  was  cut  off  slipped  down  and  covered  one  embrasure,  depriv- 
ing us  of  the  use  of  one  gun  from  the  beginning.  Some  steel  punch- 
headed shot  did  all  the  damage. 

Yery  respectfully, 

S.  M.  BAETON, 
Brigadier-  General. 

Maj.  J.  J.  Eeeve, 

Assistant  Adjutant- Ge^ieral. 


MARCH APRIL  1,  1863. — Expedition  to  Booneville,  Miss. 

Report  of  Col.  Patriclc  E.  Burlce,  Sixty-sixth  Illinois  Infantry. 

Camp  Davies,  Miss.,  April  1,  1863. 

The  expedition  to  Booneville  has  returned,  bringing  6 prisoners, 
among  whom  is  the  notorious  Sam.  White,  guerrilla,  robber,  and 
cotton-burner.  They  also  captured  a few  horses.  Billingsley  is  all 
right,  and  all  he  said  was  found  to  be  correct.  I regret  to  have  to 
state  that  the  failure  of  the  expedition  is  by  the  ofdcers  attributed  to 
the  timidity  or  gross  carelessness  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  [Charles  W.] 
Smith,  commanding  the  expedition.  The  enemy  vrere  completely  sur- 
rounded, except  where  the  infantr^^  were  expected  to  cover,  when  they 
were  unfortunately  halted  within  half  a mile  of  the  enemy  and  ordered 
to  make  coffee  and  take  breakfast.  I hope  the  official  reports,  when 
they  come  in,  will  brighten  the  gloomy  aspect  of  the  case.  Will  send 
full  particulars  to-morrow. 

P.  E.  BUEKE, 

Colonel^  Commanding. 

General  Grenville  M.  Dodge. 


MARCH  28-APRIL  3,  1863. — Expeditions  from  La  Grange  to  Moscow  and 
Macon,  and  action  near  Belmont,  Tenn. 

E,IG2?ORTS. 

No.  1. — Col.  Benjamin  H.  Grierson,  Sixth  Illinois  Cavalry,  commanding  First  Cav- 
alry Brigade,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

No.  2. — Lieut.  Col.  Reuben  Loomis,  Sixth  Illinois  Cavalry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  Benjamin  H.  Grierson^  Sixth  Illinois  Cavalry^  commanding 
First  Cavalry  Brigade.^  Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

La  Grange,  Tenn.,  April  4,  1863. 
Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  obedience  to  verbal 
instructions  received  from  Brig.  Gen.  W.  Sooy  Smith,  on  the  28th  of 
31  R R — VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


482 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAr.  XXX VL 


March  I dispatched  200  of  the  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry,  under  Major 
Nelson,  to  proceed  westward  toward  Moscow,  and  strike  the  trail  of 
the  party  who  had  attacked  the  train  near  Moscow.  I at  the  same  time 
sent  a force  of  200  men  of  the  Sixth  Illinois  Cavalry,  under  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Loomis,  to  proceed  toward  Somerville;  thence  westward,  with 
instructions  to  endeavor  to  intercept  the  enemy  with  prisoners  from  the 
train,  and  form  a junction  with  the  expedition  under  IMajor  Nelson. 

This  latter  officer  proceeded  westward,  struck  the  trail  of  the  enemy, 
and  followed  them  to  Macon,  where,  although  they  were  hut  a few  miles 
in  advance,  and  had  prisoners,  dismounted,  he  gave  up  the  pursuit, 
and  returned  to  camp,  failing  to  comply  with  his  instructions  to  form  a 
junction  with  Colonel  Loomis. 

The  expedition  from  the  Sixth  Illinois  Cavalry  proceeded  to  Somer- 
ville; thence  westward,  struck  the  trail  of  the  rebels,  overtook  and  skir- 
mished with  them,  killing  and  capturing  a number,  among  the  latter 
Captain  [K.]  Burrow. 

On  the  night  of  March  29,  they  were  attacked  while  in  biv^ouac  by  a 
superior  force,  under  Colonel  [R.  Y.]  Richardson,  and  although  they 
were  in  a manner  surprised  and  a number  killed  in  beds,  yet  they  ral- 
lied and  drove  the  enemy  from  the  field,  and  remained  in  full  posses- 
sion. For  full  particulars  of  this  expedition,  I refer  you  to  the  report 
of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Loomis,  herewith  inclosed. 

Too  much  honor  cannot  be  awarded  to  the  officers  and  men  present 
on  the  occasion  for  their  unprecedented  coolness  and  gallantry.  Among 
the  slain  was  First  Lieut.  Jesse  B.  Wilson,  of  Company  K,  Sixth  Illi- 
nois Cavalry,  whose  loss  to  the  country  and  his  friends  is  an  irretrieva- 
ble one. 

Colonel  Loomis  returned  to  camp  on  the  night  of  the  30th,  bringing 
the  first  intelligence  of  the  encounter.  I immediately  started  with  the 
effective  force  of  the  brigade,  about  550  strong.  Marched  all  night, 
and  arrived  at  the  scene  of  the  engagement  about  11  o’clock  on  the 
morning  of  the  30th.  Having  arrived  in  the  vicinity  of  the  place,  I 
sent  two  companies  forward  to  dash  into  the  place  and  endeavor  to 
capture  any  of  the  enemy  who  might  be  there.  Upon  their  approach, 
about  35  of  the  rebels  fled  precipitately.  We  followed  them  closely,  and 
succeeded  in  killing  3,  wounding  and  capturing  several  more. 

Having  buried  the  dead  and  i^roperly  disposed  of  such  of  the  wounded 
as  could  be  moved  in  the  ambulances,  we  proceeded  to  the  plantation 
of  Lewis  P.  Williamson,  and  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

The  following  morning  the  wounded  and  prisoners  were  sent  back 
under  proper  escort,  and,  dividing  the  rest  of  the  command  into  two 
parties,  we  proceeded  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy.  Major  Blackburn  i)ro- 
ceeded  to  Mason’s  Depot,  where  he  captured  a quantity  of  secesh  army 
clothing  and  trimmings,  which  were  destroyed.  With  the  rest  of  the 
force  I proceeded  westward,  scouting  the  country,  and  forming  a junc- 
tion with  Major  Blackburn  at  Concordia. 

After  feeding,  we  again  started  in  different  directions,  and  encamped 
for  the  night  at  the  plantation  of  Mr.  Montague,  north  of  the  Hatchie 
River,  where  we  found  a quantity  of  cavalry  saddles  and  a shop  for  the 
manufacture  of  the  same.  The  shop  and  saddles  were  destroyed,  and 
his  son,  who  was  engaged  in  the  business,  taken  into  custody. 

The  next  morning  I crossed  the  Hatchie  River  with  part  of  my  force 
at  Quin’s  Bridge,  and  sent  the  balance  eastward  to  cross  at  Cannon’s 
Bridge,  After  crossing  the  river,  the  forces  were  divided  into  small  par- 
ties, and  scattered  over  all  the  by-roads  and  lanes,  with  instructions  to 
meet  the  main  column  at  Macon.  The  whole  force  arrived  there  at 


483 


CiiAP.  XXXVI.]  EXPEDITIONS  FROM  LA  GRANGE,  TENN.,  ETC. 


almost  the  same  time,  having  succeeded  in  capturing  a number  of  pris- 
oners, among  whom  were  the  quartermaster  of  Kichardson’s  regiment 
a7)d  his  private  secretary,  with  a number  of  papers. 

While  in  Moscow  a portion  of  the  mail  captured  on  the  train  was 
retaken,  and  the  man  upon  whom  it  was  found  resisting  when  attempt 
was  made  to  capture  him,  was  killed.  He  was  a member  of  Porter^s 
guerrilla  band. 

Having  encamped  for  the  night  about  3 miles  southeast  of  Macon, 
Ave  returned  to  this  place,  via  Moscow,  on  April  3,  arriving  about  boon. 

The  expeditions  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Loomis  and  myself  suc- 
ceeded in  killing  about  20,  wounding  from  40  to  50,  many  of  them  mor- 
tally, and  capturing  about  50.  Our  loss  was  15  killed,  37  wounded,  and 
2 captured.  , ’ 

When  it  is  remembered  that  the  engagement  on  the  night  of  March 

did  not  last  over  ten  minutes,  the  desperation  of  the  conflict  can  be 
imagined. 

Kespectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 


Capt.  H.  Atkinson, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General, 


B.  H.  GEIEESOl^, 
Colonel^  Commanding  Brigade, 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Lieut,  Col,  Reuben  Loomis^  Sixth  Illinois  Cavalry, 

Headquarters  Sixth  Illinois  Cavalry, 

La  Grange,  Tenn,,  April  1,  1863. 

Colonel:  In  obedience  to  your  order  of  March  28,  received  at  11 
a.  m.,  1 started  at  12  m.  with  250  men,  with  one  day^s  rations,  in  pur- 
suit of  the  guerrillas  that  had  temporarily  captured  that  morning  a 
train  on  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Kailroad,  between  La  Fayette  and 
Moscow. 

Understanding  that  the  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry  was  to  proceed  direct 
to  the  place  of  capture  and  follow  the  trail  from  there,  I proceeded  at 
once  to  Somerville,  there  killing  1 and  capturing  some  15  suspicious 
characters  and  soldiers,  and  proceeded  toward  Memphis  about  5 miles 
and  encamped  for  the  night.  ^ 

On  the  morning  of  the  29th,  I detailed  Companies  B and  E,  under 
command  of  Captain  Lynch,  to  return  to  camp  with  the  prisoners.  A 
lew  soldiers  from  the  different  companies,  who  were  too  much  exhausted 
to  pursue  tlie  chase  farther,  accompanied  them,  amounting  in  all  to  50 
men.  I here  learned  that  the  prisoners  captured  from  the  train  had 
passed  through  Oakland,  7 miles  distant,  just  at  night  the  previous 
uay,  and  proceeded  immediately  in  pursuit,  passing  through  Oakland 
and  continuing  our  course  to  Hickory  Wythe  j thence  north  to  Mur- 
ray's Bridge,  on  the  Loosahatchee,  where  we  found  some  15  of  Colonel 
Kichardson’s  command  endeavoring  to  destroy  the  bridge;  but  as  we 
had  been  in  close  pursuit  for  miles,  and  had  ridden  very  fast,  they 
liad  not  time  to  do  it  any  damage.  Charging  upon  them  at  once,  after 
a race  ot  some  5 miles,  we  captured  7.  We  then  proceeded  about  2 
miles  larther  in  the  direction  of  Colonel  Bichardson’s  camp,  when  Ave 
^a,me  upon-  Captain  Burrow,  in  command  of  a large  part  of  Colonel 
uichardson’s  force,  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle,  aAvaiting  our  approach. 


484 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai*.  XXXVL 


intending  to  give  ns  battle,  having  notified  a citizen  living  near  to  re- 
move bis  family,  a s “ they  were  about  to  have  a fight  there.”  As  usual, 
they  only  awaited  the  approach  of  our  advance  guard,  when  they  turned 
and  fled,  giving  our  weary  horses  another  chase,  resulting  in  the  cap- 
ture of  Captain  Burrow  and  several  men,  and  wounding  several  others. 

We  then  proceeded  to  Colonel  Eichardson^s  camp  of  the  previous  day, 
destroying  the  buildings  used  for  their  purposes,  and,  after  feeding  and 
resting  our  horses  a short  time,  proceeded  on  in  a northeast  course,  still 
hoping  to  recapture  the  train  prisoners.  I was  still  expecting  that  the 
Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry  would  overtake  me  at  every  moment,  not  hav- 
ing heard  from  it  since  leaving  camp.  We  encamped  for  the  night  on 
the  plantation  of  Mr.  Eives,  2 miles  southwest  of  Belmont. 

Knowing  our  close  proximity  to  Colonel  Eichardson^s  superior  force, 
I posted  stronger  pickets  than  usual,  having  about  dne-half  of  my  force 
on  guard  as  picket,  camp,  and  prisoner  guards,  leaving  but  about  100 
weary,  hungry,  and  sleepy  men  to  rest,  who  had  ridden  50  miles  that 
day,  with  nothing  to  eat  bnt  meat,  and  who  had  been  up  most  of  the  pre- 
vious night  on  guard.  Yet,  notwithstanding  all  these  precautions,  our 
camp  was  attacked  at  midnight  by  Colonel  Eichardson’s  force  of  from 
400  to  600,  who  had  eluded  the  pickets  by  dismounting  and  approach- 
ing under  cover  of  a small  ravine  until  within  a few  yards  of  our  camp, 
when,  at  a preconcerted  signal,  they  poured  a murderous  fire  on  my 
command,  who,  aroused  thus  suddenly,  arose,  arms  in  hand,  and  re- , 
turned  their  fire  with  such  obstinate  firmness  and  dreadful  effect  that ' 
within  five  minutes  from  the  time  the  attack  commenced  they  were 
repulsed  with  heavy  loss,  leaving  us  in  complete  possession  of  the  field, 
which  we  held  until  about  9 a.  m.  on  the  31st,  attending  to  the  killed ; 
and  wounded  on  both  sides,  when  we  started  for  camp  with  our  prison- ! 
ers  and  all  of  our  wounded  that  could  ride,  which  we  reached  at  about 
7 p.  m. 

Our  loss  was  52  killed  and  wounded  j Colonel  Eichardson’s  supposed 
to  have  been  far  greater,  himself  wounded,  his  major  wounded  and  cap- 
tured, his  adjutant  killed,  and  several  other  officers,  whose  names  I have 
not  got,  killed,  wounded,  or  captured. 

Inclosed  I hand  you  a complete  list  of  the  killed  and  wounded  of  my 
command.*  A close  examination  of  the  same,  together  with  the  sit- 
uation of  the  parties  engaged,  will  enable  you  to  realize  the  character 
of  the  conflict  while  it  lasted. 

It  would  be  invidious  for  me  to  designate  the  names  of  any  in  par- 
ticular where  all  have  done  so  nobly,  yet  among  the  fallen  I cannot 
forbear  to  mention  the  name  of  Lieut.  Jesse  B.  Wilson,  of  Company  K, 
who  was  among  the  first  to  fall  while  gallantly  cheering  his  men  on, 
telling  them  to  stand  firm,  but  to  screen  themselves  as  much  as  possible 
behind  fences,  &c.,  himself  openly  standing  amid  the  thickest  of  the  con- 
flict, doing  so  much  to  encourage  his  men.  In  his  fall  the  regiment  loses 
one  of  its  best  officers,  the  company  its  leader,  and  his  friends  at  home 
a worthy  relative  and  noble  citizen. 

All  of  which  is  most  respectfully  submitted. 

Your  most  obedient  servant. 


E.  LOOMIS, 

Lieutenant  Colonel^  Commanding. 


Col.  B.  n.  Grierson, 

Commanding  First  Brigade. 


* List,  omitted,  shows  1 officer  and  12  men  killed,  4 officers  and  34  men  wounded, 
and  1 man  missing. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


AFFAIR  AT  MOSCOW,  TENN. 


485 


MARCH  29,  1863.~Affair  at  Moscow,  Tenn. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen,  Stephen  A.  Hurlbnt^  U.  S.  Army. 


Memphis,  March  30,  18G3. 

Sir  : Yesterday  a disgraceful  incident  occurred.  The  passenger  train 
was  seized  about  2 miles  this  side  of  Moscow  by  12  guerrillas,  although 
it  had  on  board  25  soldiers,  armed,  and  3 or  6 ofQcers,  who  yet  made  no 
attempt  to  defend  themselves  and  the  public  property.  The  engineer 
when  he  discovered  the  guerrillas  started  his  engine  with  such  sudden- 
ness as  to  break  the  coupling,  ran  up  to  Moscow,  took  down  100  sol- 
diers, and  saved  the  train. 

The  passengers  were  robbed,  and  the  officers  and  soldiers  carried  off 
north.  If  they  are  returned  under  parole,  I do  not  intend  to  receive 
them. 

Pursuant  to  directions  received  in  January  from  General  Grant,  I am 
now  preparing  a list  of  ten  families  of  secessionists  to  be  sent  outside 
the  lines,  selecting  the  most  wealthy  and  prominent  in  position. 

A scout  whom  1 sent  out  a few  days  since  to  Panola  has  just  come  in. 
Brigadier-General  Chalmers  commands  the  two  tiers  of  northern  coun- 
ties in  Mississippi.  He  has  at  Panola  a battery  of  six  guns : another 
at  or  below  the  Tallahatchee  railroad  bridge  (Memphis  and  Charleston 
Railroad)  j no  infantry.  He  is  gathering  in  and  organizing  the  irregu- 
Jd/rs« 

Falkner’s  cavalry  has  come  up  there  from  Oxford,  about  500  strong. 
He  may  be  able  to  concentrate  1,200  or  1,500  men.  Every  person  is 
tols  ^ They  have  ammunition,  but  few  arms,  except  pis- 


It  is  unquestionably  their  intention  to  make  a dash  on,  some  point 
of  the  railroad  near  Moscow  or  La  Fayette  as  soon  as  organized— say, 
in  a week  or  more.  Their  movements,  however,  depend  on  the  success 
or  failure  of  the  Yazoo  Pass  elpedition,  of  which  I regret  that  I receive 
QO  information. 


I not  know  if  it  will  be  possible  to  throw  a force  into  his  rear  and 
cut  on  his  battery  from  Helena.  It  is  too  long  a move  from  here  They 
would  be  off  before  I had  gone  15  miles. 

From  Corinth  I am  informed  that  Brigadier-General  [S.  A.  M.l  Wood, 
ivith  about  4,000  men  and  two  batteries,  is  at  Tuscumbia ; advance 
pmets  on  Bear  Creek.  I think  it  a corps  of  observation  only. 

Ihe  enemy  appeared  yesterday  at  Savannah,  seized  all  carpenters 
inu  carpenters  tools,  and  threw  a few  shell  across  the  river  at  our  cav- 
ilry  scouts. 

Humors  are  that  they  propose  to  cross.  I think  this  doubtful,  but 
»hey  are  closely  watched.  ’ 

General  Dodge  deserves  great  credit  for  his  vigilance  and  activity. 

I shall  send  a regiment  of  cavalry  to  stay  with  Richardson’s  men,  who 
«e  banding  again.  I have  their  muster-rolls. 

The  city  is  quiet. 

' Your  obedient  servant. 


Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


S.  A.  HURLBUT, 

Major-General, 


486 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX VL 


MAECH  31,  1863. — Engagement  at  Grand  Gulf,  Miss. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  8.  Boivenj  C.  S.  Army. 

HDQRS.  1st  BRiaADE,  2d  DIVISION,  ArMY  OF  MISSISSIPPI, 

Grand  Gulf  3Iiss.,  April  1,  18G3. 

Major  : I Lave  tiie  honor  to  report  that  the  enemy’s  boats,  three  in 
number,  passed  down  the  river  yesterday  evening  at  8.15.  There  liaving 
been  reports  of  their  approach  during  the  day,  everything  had  been 
lield  in  readiness,  the  men  at  their  guns  and  a regiment  in  the  trenches. 
Night  coming  on,  a detail  was  left  at  the  guns  (enough  to  manage  them) 
and  the  infantry  bivouacked  in  position.  Owing  to  the  negligence  of 
the  signal  corps  stationed  over  the  river  at  Hard  Times,  and  who  should 
have  been  able  to  give  timely  notice,  no  warning  was  given  during  the 
afternoon,  and  at  night  no  Socket  was  sent  up  to  apprise  us  of  their 
approach.  They  were  perceived  by  the  sentinel  at  the  upper  battery 
as  they  rounded  the  point  and  immediately  opened  upon.  About  twenty 
shots  were  fired  from  the  heavy  guns,  twenty-one  from  the  field  pieces, 
and  twenty-one  from  the  Parrotts  of  Wade’s  battery.  The  vessels  were 
struck  repeatedly.  Seven  heavy  shells  were  seen  to  take  effect,  one 
raking  the  Hartford  from  stem  to  stern.  The  firing  from  the  field  bat- 
teries was  excellent,  the  shrapnel  bursting  over  the  decks;  but  1 have 
no  means  of  discovering  what  damage  was  inflicted  on  the  ships,*  but 
the  steam  ram  which  passed  the  Wcksburg  batteries  was  struck  once 
amidships,  swung  round  broadside  to  the  current,  and  floated  down 
thus,  firing  a lee  gun,  which  could  only  have  been  a signal  of  distress. 

All  the  vessels  lay  about  10  miles  below  during  the  night  and  passed 
on  down  this  morning. 

I regret  to  report  that  one  of  the  20-pounder  Parrott  guns  burst  at 
the  fourth  fire,  killing  2,  mortally  wounding  1,  and  wmunding  7,  besides 
some  scratches.  I append  a list.f  I entered  the  battery  just  as  the  gun 
exploded,  and  it  affords  me  pleasure  to  bear  testimony  to  the  gallant 
conduct  of  the  men  there.  Though  many  were  knocked  down,  besides 
the  wounded,  only  an  imperceptible  pause  in  the  firing  was  occasioned, 
the  men  sprung  up  and  to  the  other  guns  so  quickly.  The  lieutenant 
of  the  burst  gun  replaced  No.  1 of  the  next  piece,  who  wms  killed,  and 
it  would  not  have  been  possible  for  the  enemy  to  have  discovered  the 
accident  from  any  slackening  of  the  fire. 

The  firing  from  the  upper  battery  (Captain  [ J.  B.]  Grayson’s)  was  ex- 
cellent. The  lower  battery,  where  the  accident  occurred,  was  manned 
by  Wade’s  and  Guibor’s  companies  of  light  artillery. 

I inclose  a report  on  the  circumstances  attending  and  the  causes  of 
the  bursting  of  the  gun. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 

Maj.  K.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

* Rear-Admiral  Farragut,  U.  8.  Navy,  reported  that  the  Albatross  was  not  struck; 
that  the  Hartford  was  struck  once,  killing  1 man;  and  that  the  Switzerland  was 
struck  twice,  hut  received  no  damage. 

t Nominal  list,  omitted,  reports  2 men  killed  and  1 officer  (Capt.  Henry  Guibor)  and 
1 man  wounded,  of  GuiboFs  battery^  1 officer  (Lieut.  John  Kearney)  and  5 men 
wounded,  of  Wade’s  battery. 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]  SCOUT  TO  MOUTH  OF  DUCK  EIVEE,  TENN. 


487 


[In  closure.] 

Headquarters  First  Brigade,  Second  Division, 

Grand  Gulf,  April  1,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I have  examined  the  fragments, 
and  inquired  into  the  circumstances  attending  the  loading  and  firing  of 
the  20-pounder  Parrott  gun  which  burst  during  the  action  last  night, 
and  believe  the  cause  of  the  disaster  was  the  bursting  of  a shell  in  the 
gun,  there  being  no  fuse  or  an  imperfect  fuse  in  the  shell.  I was  to  the 
right  and  rear  of  the  piece,  about  30  yards  distant,  at  the  time  of  the 
explosion,  and  saw  distinctly  its  effect.  The  cascabel  was  blown  to  the 
rear,  the  lower  band  entire,  the  center  band  broken.  The  chase  and 
muzzle  were  blown  to  the  front,  and  the  right  fragments  of  the  re-enforce 
to  the  “right  and  rear  ”5  the  left  fragments  to  the  “left  and  front.” 
The  right  wheel  was  entirely  demolished,  the  left  and  stock  badly 
broken.  The  upper  wrought-iron  band  was  broken  and  nearly  straight. 

There  is  no  apparent  flaw  in  any  of  the  metal,  the  fractures  present- 
ing the  usual  crystalline  surface,  devoid  of  any  seam  or  crack.  Parts 
of  the  shell  were  found  among  the  fragments,  and  no  separate  explo- 
sion of  the  shell  was  noticed  by  any  one.  If  it  had  burst  after  the 
piece,  it  certainly  would  have  been  seen.  I am,  therefore,  satisfied  that 
the  shell  was  ignited  and  exploded  before  reaching  the  chase,  thus  con- 
fining the  gases  and  bursting  the  piece. 

The  fragments  of  the  re-enforce  will  weigh  from  5 to  30  iiounds. 

Very,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  S.  BOWEK, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  E.  W.  Memminger,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


MARCH  31-APRIL  3,  1863. — Scout  from  Lexington  to  mouth  of  Ruck 

River,  Tenn. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Thomas  Saylor,  Third  Michigan  Cavalry. 

No.  2. — Capt.  Frederick  C.  Adamson,  Third  Michigan  Cavalry.  I 

Is^o  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Thomas  Saylor,  Third  Michigan  Cavalry. 

Lexington,  Tenn.,  April  3,  1863. 

Captain:  On  the  receipt  of  the  order  from  headquarters  Cavalry 
Division,  date  March  30, 1 immediately  moved  my  command  to  Lexing- 
ton ; and  although  I had  reliable  information  relative  to  the  state  of 
affairs  this  side  of  the  Tennessee  River  that  did  not  agree  with  the  re- 
port received  by  General  Hurlbut,  I,  on  the  morning  of  the  31st  instant, 
sent  Captain  Adamson  with  Companies  C and  B to  "scout  the  country  in 
the  neighborhood  of  the  mouth  of  Duck  River,  as  per  instructions.  The 
expedition  returned  to-day,  after  a successful  scout,  in  which  they  cai)- 
tured  14  prisoners,  the  most  of  whom  were  armed,  destroying  a number 
of  boats,  and  establishing  beyond  a doubt  the  falsity  of  the  report  of 
the  crossing  of  a large  body  of  the  enemy  to  this  side. 

I herewith  send  the  prisoners  captured.  For  their  names  and  cause 
of  arrest  I respectfull.y  refer  you  to  the  inclosed  report  of  Captain  Adam- 
son. To-morrow  I will  send  one  company  in  the  neighborhood  of  Hun- 


488 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


tingdon,  to  intercept,  if  possible,  McOlanalian  and  his  men  on  their  re- 
turn. I will  also  in  the  morning  send  one  company  in  the  vicinity  of 
Decaturville  and  Mathenes’  Ferry,  to  attend  to  the  small  parties  roving 
around  in  that  neighborhood. 

I succeeded  in  arresting  three  of  the  men  of  the  Second  West  Ten- 
nessee Cavalry,  as  per  order  by  the  man  Elliott.  I put  them  in  charge 
of  Captain  Hays,  with  the  assurance  from  him  that  he  would  be  respon- 
sible for  their  appearance  at  Jackson. 

I am  under  the  impression  that  the  rations  for  this  detachment  are 
far  below  the  allowances,  for,  after  the  greatest  economy,  they  fail  to 
hold  out  for  the  time  intended. 

The  Union  meeting  to-day  was  a success,  and  very  numerously  at- 
tended. In  connection  with  this  report,  I would  say  that  a private  of 
Company  F,  Eleventh  Illinois  Cavalry,  wlio  was  wounded  at  the  fight 
at  this  place  some  four  months  ago,  has  been  left  here  since,  and  has 
suffered  severely  for  the  want  of  proper  medical  treatment.  I think  he 
ought  to  be  removed  to  Jackson.  His  name  is  Thomas  Dungan. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  yours,  &c., 

THOMAS  SATLOE, 

Major,  Commanding. 

Capt.  T.  B.  Weir,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Capt.  Frederick  C.  Adamson,  Third  Michigan  Cavalry. 

Lexington,  Tenn.,  April  2,  1863. 

Sir  : Pursuant  to  your  instructions,  I left  Lexington  on  the  morning 
of  the  31st  ultimo,  with  Companies  C and  B,  commanded,  respectively, 
by  Lieutenants  Wirts  and  Bingham,  to  scout  the  country  in  the  vicinity 
of  the  mouth  of  Duck  Eiver,  and  ascertain  the  truth  of  the  report  as  to 
the  crossing  of  any  force  of  the  enemy  in  that  vicinity.  Passing  through 
Buck  Snort,  I reached  a point  on  the  Camden  road  some  8 miles  from  the 
river,  where  I learned  with  certainty  that  no  force  had  crossed  in  that 
vicinity;  but  ascertaining  that  McClanahan  had  crossed  near  Eock 
Quarry  with  some  30  men,  I proceeded  in  that  direction,  passing  through 
Howesville,  and  thence  east  to  the  house  of  a noted  secessionist  named 
Conrad.  I arrested  him  and  his  three  brothers  on  the  evidence  of  Dr. 
Ganess,  who  states  that  they  have  been  aiding  and  abetting  the  parties 
of  guerrillas  in  the  vicinity. 

In  the  morning  I proceeded  toward  the  river,  upon  reaching  which  I 
sent  parties  in  different  directions.  One  squad  of  4,  under  Corporal 
[Samuel  P.]  Harvey,  of  Company  C,  met  7 of  McClanahan’s  men,  well 
armed  with  pistols  and  carbines  (dismounted),  going  to  the  river  with 
the  intention  of  crossing.  The  corporal  succeeded  in  capturing  the  en- 
tire party.  We  also  discovered  three  large  flat-boats,  which  we  de- 
stroyed completely,  as  also  a small  skiff,  and  on  searching  some  houses 
in  the  vicinity  found  three  shot-guns,  two  rifles,  some  belts,  several  boxes 
of  caps,  &c.,  which  had  been  secreted  by  the  guerrillas.  The  men  cap- 
tured had  lieen  in  the  direction  of  Clarksburg,  with  McClanahan  and 
some  20  more.  The  rest  had  gone  to  Trenton,  with  the  intention  of 
conscripting  and  seizing  horses,  &c.,  as  McClanahan  had  received  au- 
thority to  raise  a regiment  from  General  Forrest.  All  those  captured 
had  left  their  horses  some  5 miles  east  of  the  Tennessee,  at  the  houses 
of  citizens. 


Chap/XXXVI:]  MILLIKEN'S  bend  to  new  CARTHAGE,  LA.  489 

I learned  from  reliable  sources  that  there  were  parts  of  two  regi- 
ments of  cavalry  (some  600  of  Van  Dorn’s  command)  at  Linden,  and 
scattered  in  small  parties  near  the  river,  consequently  I did  not  think 
it  best  to  run  the  risk  of  crossing  over  to  secure  the  horses.  Eeturning 
to  Conrad’s,  I found  that  Lieutenant  [Melvin]  Stillson,  whom  I had  left 
there  with  10  men  to  scout  that  vicinity,  had  met  a couple  of  guerrillas, 
and  after  a long  chase  captured  one,  with  complete  equipments,  and  the 
horse  of  the  other.  I then  moved  my  command  toward  Lexington,  on 
the  Broady’s  Ferry  road,  scouting  the  country  thoroughly  for  some 
miles  on  both  sides  of  the  road,  arresting  one  man  named  George  Moore, 
armed  with  rifle  and  pistol,  and  mounted?  I also  arrested  his  brother, 
James  Moore.  Both  of  the  men  bear  bad  characters,  and  are  strongly 
suspected  of  being  connected  with  the  guerrillas.  I staid  for  the  night 
at  the  house  of  Los.  Moore,  and  reached  Lexington  next  day  at  noon, 
according  to  instructions.  The  result  of  the  scout  is  the  ascertaining 
with  certainty  that  there  is  no  force  within  25  miles  of  the  vicinity 
scouted,  excepting  some  30  of  McGlanahan’s  men,  and  a squad  of  15 
who  had  been  robbing  in  the  vicinity  of  Decaturville  j the  capture  of 
9 guerrillas  and  5 citizens,  2 horses  and  saddles,  4 carbines,  4 revolvers, 
2 single-barreled  pistols,  5 shot-guns,  and  4 rifles.  I append  a list  of 
the  prisoners’  names.* 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  0.  ADAMSON, 
Captain  Third  Michigan  Cavalry, 
Maj.  Thomas  Saylor,  Third  Michigan  Cavalry. 


MARCH  31-APRIL  17,  1863.— Operations  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  Hew 

Carthage,  La. 

SXJNEJVrjYRY  OF  THE  EV^E^STTS.  . 

Matcli  31,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Richmond,  La. 

April  4,  1863.— Skirmish  at  Richmond,  La. 

5,  1863. — Skirmish  near  New  Carthage,  La. 

6,  1863. — Skirmish  at  James’  plantation,  near  New  Carthage,  La. 

7,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Dunbar’s  plantation.  Bayou  Vidal,  La. 

8,  1863. — Skirmish  at  James’  plantation,  near  New  Carthage,  La. 

15,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Dunbar’s  plantation.  Bayou  Vidal,  La. 

EEEOETS.t 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  P.  Joseph  Osterhaus,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Ninth  Division, 
Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

No.  2. — Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates,  assistant  adjutant-general  Thirteenth  Army 
Corps. 

No.  3. — Brig.  Gen.  John  S.  Bowen,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Grand  Gulf. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Oen.  P.  Joseph  Osterhaus^  TJ.  S.  Army,  commanding 
Ninth  Bivision,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

Hdqrs.  Advance  of  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

SmitWs  Plantation,  April  6,  1863 — 10  a.  m. 
General:  I just  returned  from  the  marine  expedition  to  New  Car- 
thage. I left  this  morning  after  sunrise  with  54  men  and  one  mountain  . 


Omitted. 


t See  also  McClernand’s  general  report,  p.  139. 


490 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


howitzer  5 the  latter,  with  25  men,  aboard  the  flat  which  I had  sided  up 
with  3-inch  plank  in  gunboat  style.  Another  party  of  infantry  went  in 
yawls  and  skiffs  around  the  crevasses.  We  reached  New  Carthage  at  7 
o’clock,  and  pushed  a picket  forward  on  the  Mississippi  levee  to  James’ 
plantation  (on  the  map  laid  down  as  Ton  lale  Tarlton’s),  where  they 
were  fired  upon  by  a small  squad  of  rebels.  I left  one  company  of  the 
Sixty-ninth  Indiana  at  New  Carthage,  with  their  pickets  at  James’.  They 
are  perfectly  secure,  as  only  the  levee  is  out  of  water,  and  they  cannot 
be  flanked.  The  enemy  left  yesterday  his  camp  at  Judge  Perkins’ 
])lantation  for  Saint  Joseph  Lake.  From  the  information  received  by 
Mr.  James,  the  battalion  of  Major  [Isaac  F.]  Harrison  numbers  four 
companies  mounted  men,  about  60  men  each,  and  one  battery  of  six 
smooth-bore  6-pouuder  guns.  There  is  a continued  levee  all  the  way 
from  New  Carthage  to  Saint  Joseph,  and  the  land  beyond  the  Bayou 
Yidal,  where  it  runs  up  to  Perkins’  plantation,  is  not  submerged. 

I have  not  the  remotest  doubt  as  to  the  practicability  of  the  Bayou 
Yidal  for  boating  purposes.  It  is  a deep,  straight  channel ; only  very 
light  obstructions  between  the  crevasse  and  the  Mississippi,  and  a few 
hours’  work  will  clear  them  away.  I intend  to  move  one  regiment  to 
James’  quarters.  In  this  case  Mr.  James  (an  old  gentleman)  wishes  to 
go  to  his  place  below,  where  his  negroes  are.  He  has  not  seen  anything 
of  our  forces,  and  I see  no  reason  why  [we  should]  not  let  him  go,  but 
would  not  act  before  having  your  advice.  Please  give  me  your  orders 
in  that  matter.  I also  wish  to  concentrate  the  whole  First  Brigade  (five 
battalions)  and  Lanphere’s  battery  around  this  camp,  and  shift  the  Sec- 
ond Brigade  to  and  around  Eichmond.  You  will  also  be  kind  enough 
to  let  me  know  if  you  agree. 

Yesterday  the  howitzers  shelled  the  enemy  out  of  their  refuges  be- 
yond the  bayou.  A few  made  their  appearance  toward  evening,’  and 
opened  fire  on  my  pickets.  They  replied,  and  killed  1 rebel  (shot 
through  the  breast  and  spinal  column  broken) ; nobody  hurt  here.  Mr. 
Patterson  will  report  about  Eoundaway  Bayou.  The  wreck  of  the 
Indianola  is  visible  at  New  Carthage,  one  wheel-house  standing  out  of 
the  water.  The  fight  where  she  was  lost  was  in  front  of  New  Carthage. 
The  plantations  of  Joseph  and  Jefferson  Davis  are  also  opposite — a 
very  tempting  view. 

I am,  general,  with  great  respect,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

P,  J.  OSTEKHAUS, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McClehnand, 

Commanding  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


Hdqrs.  Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

New  Carthage,  La.,  April  18,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  lay  before  the  major-general  com- 
manding the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  a short  resnmd  of  the  operations 
of  the  Ninth  Division  since  March  31. 

On  the  30th,  Colonel  Bennett  was  ordered  to  make  a reconnaisance 
to  Eichmond  with  his  own  regiment  (Sixty-ninth  Indiana  Infantry)  and 
some  cavalry  (Second  Illinois  Cavalry),  and  to  examine  into  the  prac- 
ticability of  a road  or  connection  between  Eichmond,  La.,  and  New 
Carthage,  La.,  on  the  Mississippi.  A copy  of  General  McClernand’s 
instructions  to  this  officer  is  annexed,  marked  A. 


491 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  MILLIKEN^S  BEND  TO  NEW  CARTHAGE,  LA. 

Colonel  Bennett  took  up  his  march  on  the  morning  of  the  31st  ultimo, 
and  arrived  at  Eoundaway  Bayou,  opposite  Eichmond,  about  2 p.  m., 
finding  the  enemy^s  cavalry  pickets  in  town.  While  our  men  opened 
fire  on  them,  some  of  the  cavalry  crossed  the  bayou  in  skiffs  and  boldly 
attacked  the  rebels  j these  fled  precipitately,  leaving  2 wounded  in  our 
hands  and  carrying  off  7 more. 

A i^ersonal  reconnaissance  on  April  1,  made  in  pursuance  of  instruc- 
tions from  corps  headquarters  (copy  of  which  is  annexed,  marked  B), 
convinced  me  of  the  necessity  of  a permanent  occupation  of  Eichmond, 
this  being  a point  by  which  the  most  necessary  subsistence  stores  were 
forwarded  to  the  besieged  garrison  at  Vicksburg,  the  very  rich  and 
fertile  regions  between  the  Mississippi  and  Tensas  Eivers  and  Bayou 
Macon  being  easily  reached  by  water  from  Eichmond.  This  reconnais- 
sance also  removed  all  doubts  as  to  the  main  object  of  the  expedition, 
viz,  the  practicability  of  a road  to  Eew  Carthage. 

General  McGlernand  sharing  my  ^opinion  as  to  the  importance  of 
Eichmond,  and  desirous  of  pushing  forward  the  expedition  to  New  Car- 
thage without  delay,  he  ordered  re-enforcements  to  be  brought  up. 

Accordingly,  on  the  2d  instant,  I sent  the  Forty-ninth  Indiana  In- 
fantry and  Twenty-second  Kentucky  Infantry,  with  one  section  of  the 
Seventh  Michigan  Battery,  to  Eoundaway  Bayou,  throwing  the  Sixty- 
ninth  Indiana  Infantry  and  one  company  of  cavalry  by  boats  across 
that  stream,  to  occupy  the  town  and  the  road  to  New  Carthage,  as  far 
as  StanbrougKs  plantation  (3J  miles  out),  commanding  at  that  point  a 
road  leading  to  Alligator  Lake,  and  said  not  to  be  submerged,  where  a 
force  of  the  enemy  was  said  to  be  encamped.  At  the  same  time  I di- 
rected a reconnaissance  to  be  made  by  cavalry  as  far  as  possible  toward 
New  Carthage.  These  movements  were  preparatory  to  an  expedition  in 
force,  intended  to  be  made  on  the  New  Carthage  road  as  soon  as  a bridge 
across  Eoundaway  Bayou,  which  the  general  had  ordered  Captain  Pat- 
terson to  build,  could  be  completed.  I therefore  ordered  the  remainder 
of  the  First  Brigade,  General  Garrard  commanding,  together  with  the 
remaining  two  sections  of  the  Seventh  Michigan  Battery,  and  a battal- 
ion of  the  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry,  with  four  mountain  howitzers,  for- 
ward from  Millikeffs  Bend  to  Eichmond,  at  which  latter  point  they 
arrived  on  the  afternoon  of  the  3d  instant.  The  cavalry  reconnaissance 
returned  the  same  day,  after  having  advanced  about  10  miles,  where 
their  farther  progress  was  stopped  by  a rebel  cavalry  force  at  Holmes’ 
plantation. 

The  bridge  across  Eoundaway  Bayou  having  been  completed  at  7 
p.  m.  on  the  3d  instant,  the  expedition  to  New  Carthage  was  ordered  for 
the  following  morning,  and  was  to  consist  of  detachments  of  the  Second 
and  Third  Illinois  Cavalry  and  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry,  amounting  to 
about  250  men,  and  four  mountain  howitzers,  besides  the  Forty-ninth 
and  Sixty-ninth  Eegiments  Indiana  Infantry,  the  occupation  of  Eich- 
mond and  Stanbrough’s  i)lantation  being  intrusted  to  General  Garrard 
and  the  remaining  troops. 

I crossed  the  bridge  at  5 a.  m.  on  the  4th  instant,  in  the  above  order, 
and.  arrived  at  Holmes’  plantation,  where  the  enemy’s  rear  guard  was 
seen  the  day  before,  at  9 a.  m. 

The  last  of  the  rebels  left  Holmes’  on  the  arrival  of  my  column,  and 
remained  all  day  at  a safe  but  observing  distance.  I marched  on  to 
Smith’s  plantation,  where  Eoundaway  Bayou  enters  Bayou  Vidal. 
Smith’s  place  is  about  2 miles  almost  due  iiorth  from  Carthage,  and 
the  road  totally  submerged,  the  only  possible  communication  being  by 
boats.  Seeing  the  enemy’s  pickets  still  in  my  front,  I concluded  to 


492  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XKXVl. 

march  past  Smith’s,  in  order  to  find  out,  if  possible,  the  locality  of  the 
rebel  camp. 

At  Montgomery’s  I halted  the  column,  pushing  a cavalry  patrol  far- 
ther on  to  Dunbar’s  plantation,  6 miles  below  Montgomery’s,  when  they 
saw  the  rebels  cross  Bayou  Yidal,  and  learned  that  their  main  camp 
was  on  a high  ridge  on  Judge  Perkins’  tract,  between  the  Mississippi 
Kiver  and  Bayou  Bridgeman,  6 miles  below  ISTew  Carthage  and  4 miles 
to  the  south  of  Dunbar’s  plantation. 

Further  inquiry  was  unnecessary,  volumes  of  water  separating  and 
protecting  me  from  them.  Leaving  a picket  of  observation  at  Dun- 
bar’s, where  the  rebels  crossed  Bayou  Vidal,  I encamped  the  detach- 
ment of  Third  Illinois  Cavalry  at  Montgomery’s,  stationing  at  the  same 
time  pickets  at  such  points  between  Montgomery’s  and  Dunbar’s  as 
could  control  the  enemy’s  approach.  The  main  body  of  the  expedition- 
ary column  I marched  back  to  Smith’s  plantation,  with  the  consent 
and  approval  of  Major-General  McClernand,  who  had  by  this  time 
joined  me. 

A reconnaissance  made  by  the  major-general  and  myself  across  the 
bayou  toward  New  Carthage  showed  that  the  water  was  over  all  the 
plantations  between  Smith’s  and  New  Carthage.  We  advanced  along 
the  levee  running  parallel  with  Bayou  Vidal,  and,  going  around  two 
breaks  in  the  levee,  we  found  our  farther  progress  stopped  by  the  fire 
of  a rebel  picket,  on  the  other  side  of  the  third  and  last  break.  We 
were  now  in  full  sight  of  the  inundated  town  of  New  Carthage,  and  it 
was  evident  that  communication  with  the  place  could  only  be  estab- 
lished by  boats. 

On  our  return  to  Smith’s,  I immediately  commenced  preparations  to 
secure  a foothold  at  New  Carthage.  The  enemy  had  secured  all  boats 
and  flats,  and  the  nearest  one  of  any  size  I could  hear  of  was  about  8 
miles  down  Bayou  Vidal,  below  Dunbar’s,  and  was  protected  by  a rebel 
picket.  This  information  I received  from  an  intelligent  negro,  who 
came  into  my  lines  with  4 of  the  same  complexion.  Finding  them  will- 
ing to  take  the  flat  from  the  enemy,  I ordered  Captain  Carnahan,  on 
the  5th  instant,  to  send  the  colored  party  and  20  men  from  the  Third 
Illinois  Cavalry  to  secure  the  boat. 

, They  started  at  once  and  got  possession  of  the  flat,  but  found  their 
return  to  Smith’s  plantation  disputed  by  about  50  of  the  enemy’s  cav- 
alry, on  the  east  side  of  the  bayou,  who  opened  on  the  party  in  the  flat 
at  once.  This  fire  was  returned  by  the  Third  Illinois  Cavalry  from  the 
other  side  of  the  stream  so  effectually  that  it  commanded  the  whole  at- 
tention of  the  rebels  and  the  flat  ran  the  blockade  without  injury.  The 
enemy  lost  1 killed  and  1 badly  wounded. 

Captain  Patterson,  who  had  arrived  the  same  day,  was  immediately 
put  to  work  to  arrange  the  flat-boat  so  as  to  give  protection  against 
musketry  fire,  and  to  receive  one  light  gun  and  the  requisite  infantry 
force,  for  the  purpose  of  taking  New  Carthage. 

Everything  was  completed  the  same  day  and  night,  and,  at  5 a.  m.  on 
April  6,  I started  on  the  boat  for'New  Carthage.  Our  advance  caused 
the  rebel  force  to  fall  back  down  the  Mississippi  levee. 

Having  disembarked  the  mountain  howitzer  and  the  two  companies 
of  infantry  (one  from  the  Forty-ninth  and  one  from  the  Sixty-ninth  In- 
diana), I followed  up  the  rebels  without  delay.  They  made  a stand  at 
the  gin  on  James’  plantation,  about  miles  below  New  Carthage.  It 
was  very  important  to  dislodge  them  from  this  point,  for  the  reason  that 
the  mansion,  quarters,  steam  gin,  grist,  and  saw  mills  of  James’,  cover- 
ing together  about  20  acres,  were  for  miles  the  only  dry  land  on  the  Mis- 


493 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  MILLIKEN’S  BEND  TO  NEW  CAETHAGE,  LA. 

sissippi  outside  of  the  levee,  and  this  levee  was  effectually  commanded 
by  the  gin.  I ordered  the  attack,  and  after  a struggle  of  about  an  hour 
the  rebels  were  driven  out  of  the  gin,  leaving  one  lieutenant  (Mr.  Eng- 
lish) dead  in  our  hands.  In  order  to  hold  this  important  place,  I moved 
the  whole  of  the  Sixty-ninth  Indiana  and  two  mountain  howitzers  to 
the  gin,  securing  that  place  against  an  attack  in  front  by  a system  of 
barricades,  and  by  cutting  a deep  and  wide  ditch  across  the  levee.  This 
seemed  necessary,  as  I had  learned  that  the  enemy  at  Perkins’  had,  in 
addition  to  700  to  900  cavalry,  a six-gun  battery,  and  had  been  on  the 
5th  instant  re-enforced  by  the  First  Missouri  Infantry,  Confederate 
forces,  while  it  would  have  been  indiscreet  on  my  part  to  risk  any  other 
artillery  than  the  mountain  howitzers  at  i7ew  Carthage  until  I had 
positive  information  that,  the  enemy’s  gunboats,  Webb  and  Queen  of 
the  West,  were  not  in  these  waters — a question  which  I could  not  get 
answered. 

In  order  to  keep  up  a secure  communication  with  Eichmond  and  Milli- 
ken’s  Bend,  and  to  protect  the  levees  and  roads  against  injury  by  the 
enemy’s  hands,  I made,  with  the  approbation  of  the  major-general  com- 
manding the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  the  following  disposition  of  the 
troops ; 

The  place  of  the  Sixty-ninth  Indiana  Infantry,  now  at  James’  (and 
leaving  only  the  Forty-ninth  Indiana  Infantry  at  Smith’s),  was  filled  by 
the  One  hundred  and  twentieth  Ohio  Infantry  and  Seventh  Michigan 
Battery;  the  Seventh  Kentucky  Infantry,  at  Surget’s,  and  the  One 
hundred  and  eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  at  Holmes’.  The  Second  Bri- 
gade, Col.  L.  A.  Sheldon  commanding,  was  to  be  left  at  Eichmond,  to- 
gether with  the  First  Wisconsin  Battery,  one  regiment  being  pushed 
forward  to ’sifiantation  and  another  to  Menott’s.  By  this  dispo- 

sition of  my  command,  the  line  of  retreat  was  completely  secured,  and 
the  position  of  the  enemy  was  threatened  in  front  by  the  force  at  James’, 
and  on  the  flank  by  the  cavalry  detachments  at  Dunbar’s.  The  latter 
were  very  annoying  to  the  enemy,  cutting  them  off  entirely  from  all 
their  resources  in  the  way  of  subsistence,  my  patrols  extending  over 
all  the  country  west  to  the  Tensas  Eiver,  and  securing  everything  avail- 
able for  our  own  benefit — so  much  so  that  my  command  lived  almost 
entirely  on  the  country.  For  these  reasons  the  rebels  kept  always  a 
large  force  opposite  Dunbar’s,  annoying  my  men  by  an  occasional  shot. 
To  stop  this,  I ordered  Major  [Bacon]  Montgomery,  of  the  Sixth  Mis- 
souri Cavalry,  to  bring  his  mountain  howitzers  to  the  above  point  on 
the  7th  instant  and  shell  them  at  daybreak.  This  order  was  executed, 
and  the  enemy  left  pell-mell. 

The  following  day  at  11  o’clock  the  enemy  attacked  my  position  at 
James’,  bringing  two  12-pounder  howitzers  within  800  yards,  and  can- 
nonading my  men  for  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour.  NTobody  hurt. 
The  enemy,  seeing  no  result,  and  afraid  to  come  within  range  of  my 
infantry,  left  for  their  camp  again. 

On  April  9,  Lieutenant  Stickel,  of  the  Second  Illinois  Cavalry,  whom 
I had  ordered  to  scour  diligently  all  the  country  in  front  of  the  cavalry 
in  a northwesterly  direction,  fell  in  with  a recruiting  party  of  the  enemy, 
consisting  of  2 lieutenant-colonels,  1 quartermaster-sergeant,  1 ser- 
geant-major, 1 private,  and  one  civilian.  Lieutenant  Stickel  captured 
them  all,  and  brought  them  in,  with  the  exception  of  a sergeant-major, 
who  attempted  to  run  away  and  was  badly  wounded,  and  afterward 
paroled. 

By  this  time  (April  10)  the  practicability  of  the  route  to  Kew  Carthage 
was  recognized  by  headquarters,  and  other  divisions  were  ordered  to 


494 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


follow  me ; therefore  my  line  was  concentrated  between  Holmes’  and 
Smith’s,  preparatory  to  its  final  transfer  to  the  Mississix^pi.  This  con- 
centration was  completed  April  12. 

The  importance  of  the  possession  of  New  Carthage  was  certainly  not 
underrated  by  the  enemy,  and,  on  April  15,  after  being  re-enforced  by 
three  more  infantry  regiments  from  Grand  Gulf,  he  attempted  a simul- 
taneous attack  on  our  front  at  James’,  and  on  our  cavalry  force  at  and 
near  Dunbar’s. 

At  4 a.  m.  a regiment  had  waded  Mill  Bayou,  a few  miles  west  of  Dun- 
bar’s, and  attacked  my  outpost.  These  had  to  fall  back  on  their  re- 
serves, who  immediately  adv^anced  to  their  supx^ort.  Further  re-enforce- 
ments  were  sent  to  them  at  once,  and  they  very  successfully  repulsed 
the  rebels  beyond  the  above-named  bayou.  . 

In  this  engagement  2 men  of  the  Second  Illinois  Cavalry  were 
wounded ; 1 fatally,  since  dead.  The  enemy’s  loss  I could  not  ascer- 
tain. We  took  2 of  them  prisoners. 

On  the  Mississippi,  in  front  of  James’,  large  numbers  of  the  enemy 
had  gathered,  but,  on  learning  the  bad  success  of  the  movement  on 
their  left  flank,  they  withdrew,  and  since  then  we  have  been  altogether 
unmolested  by  the  rebel  force. 

The  arrival  of  the  gunboats  on  April  17  x)laced  the  position  of  New 
Carthage  beyond  dispute. 

Independent  of  the  operations  narrated  above,  an  expedition  was  sent 
out  by  General  Garrard  toward  Delhi,  for  the  purpose  of  intercepting 
rebel  subsistence  stores  collected  at  that  point ; but  the  object  of  the 
expedition  was  frustrated  by  the  fact  that  the  enemy’s  force  was  largely 
increased.  The  report  of  the  commanding  oflicer  is  inclosed  herewith, 
marked  C.* 

I believe  that  these  operations  may  be  looked  upon  as,  on  the  whole, 
very  successful.  Outside  of  the  military  importance  of  the  positions 
gained,  the  enemy  must  feel  their  loss  severely.  It  cuts  him  off  from 
all  supplies  from  this  region,  the  resources  of  which  are  great — corn, 
molasses,  bacon,  and  beef  abounding  along  these  bayous — and  many 
cax)tured  letters  give  ample  evidence  of  the  importance  of  these  sup- 
plies to  the  enemy’s  garrison  at  Vicksburg.  From  the  last  information 
I can  collect,  I gather  that  over  1,000,000  pounds  of  beef-cattle  have 
been  sent  to  Vicksburg  from  this  vicinity.  All  these  advantages  were 
gained  by  the  loss  of  only  one  single  life. 

During  these  operations  the  division  not  only  subsisted  itself,  but  at 
the  same  time  secured  large  amounts  of  cotton  for  the  United  States 
Government.  About  1,000  bales  have  been  sent  by  the  quartermaster 
to  Milliken’s  Bend,  and  double  the  number  of  bales  can  be  forwarded 
as  soon  as  the  necessary  transportation  can  be  had. 

In  conclusion,  I have  only  to  remark  that  the  troops  under  my  com- 
mand deserve  the  highest  encomiums  for  their  alacrity,  zeal,  and  good 
discipline  during  these  trying  and  fatiguing  oi3erations.  The  military 
qualities  they  exhibited  kept  even  pace  with  their  sense  of  good  order. 
Not  a single  case  of  wanton  destruction  has  occurred  within  the  lines  of 
the  Ninth  Division. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  colonel,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTEEHAUS, 

Brigadier- General  TJ.  8.  Volunteers^  Comdg.  Ninth  Division. 

Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Dd(p's.  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


Not  found. 


495 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  MILLIKEN’s  BEND  TO  NEW  CARTHAGE,  LA. 

[Inclosure  A.] 

Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

March  30,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  Peter  J.  Osterhaus, 

Commanding  Ninth  Division: 

General  : You  will  order  one  regiment,  armed  and  equipped,  with 
40  rounds  of  ammunition  in  their  cartridge-boxes,  an  ammunition  wagon 
laden  with  suitable  ammunition,  their  camp  and  garrison  equipage,  and 
four  days’  prepared  rations,  to  report  opposite  these  headquarters  by  8 
a.  m.  to-morrow  for  further  orders.  I would  suggest  that  the  Sixty- 
ninth  Indiana,  Colonel  Bennett,  be  detached  for  the  service  contem- 
lilated. 

By  order  of  Muj.  Gen.  John  A.  McClernand: 

WALTEB  B.  SCATES, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Millihen’s  De7idj  March  30,  1863. 

Colonel  Bennett, 

Co7nmanding  JSixty-nmth  Indiana  Volunteers  : 

Colonel  : Besides  your  own  regiment,  you  will  have  command  of 
detachments  of  cavalry  and  pioneers  for  the  iiurpose  of  the  important 
expedition  with  which  you  are  charged.  The  main  purpose  of  the  ex- 
pedition is  to  open  a practicable  communication  for  our  forces  via  Eich- 
mond,  La.,  between  this  camp  and  New  Carthage.  Of  course,  the  short- 
est route,  whether  by  land  or  water,  all  other  things  being  equal,  would 
be  preferable.  It  is  certain  that  there  is  a navigable  communication 
between  Eichmond  and  New  Carthage  by  Eoundaway  and  Yidal  Bay- 
ous, and  it  is  also  believed  that  there  is  a road  along  the  bank  of  Eound- 
away Bayou  almost  the  whole  distance.  That  route  which  you  can 
make  available  for  the  iiassage  of  troojis  and  trains  with  the  least  labor 
and  in  the  shortest  time,  you  will  select,  and  make  available  at  the  ear- 
liest practicable  moment.  The  detachment  of  pioneers,  as  already  men- 
tioned, will  be  at  your  command  for  that  pur^iose,  and  Lieutenant 
[William  E.]  McComas,  aide-de-cami)  and  engineer,  on  my  staff,  will 
give  you  any  assistance  in  his  power. 

If  a practicable  route  be  found,  you  will  not  only  consider  it  with 
reference  to  passage,  but  also  with  reference  to  its  capability  of  defense, 
and  for  this  purpose  you  will  select  and  report  suitable  sites  for  posts 
or  garrisons  along  it.  If  no  practicable  route  can  be  found,  you  will 
immediately  report  that  fact. 

Starting  to-morrow,  you  will  march  to  Eichmond,  and,  upon  personal 
examination,  you  will  decide,  in  view  of  military  considerations,  whether 
you  will  encamp  on  this  or  the  other  side  of  Eoundaway  Bayou.  Upon 
reaching  the  bayou  at  Eichmond,  it  may  be  found  expedient  to  cross  the 
cavalry  first,  and  send  it  forward  rapidly,  under  orders  to  scour  the 
country  around  Eichmond  as  far  as  water  will  permit,  for  the  purpose 
of  capturing  hostile  parties,  preventing  the  destruction  of  cotton  and 
other  property,  verifying  the  names  and  political  antecedents  of  its 
owners,  and  bringing  in  beef-cattle.  All  cotton  abandoned  by  its  owners 
or  forfeited  by  treasonable  acts,  may  be  brought  in  and  condemned  by 
a provost-marshal  for  the  use  of  the  United  States,  in  which  case  the 
particular  lot  of  cotton  and  the  facts  relating  to  it  will  be  reported  to 
these  headquarters. 


496 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX 


You  Will  also  report  to  these  headquarters  daily  of  the  progress  of 
your  operations.  Any  re-enforcements  you  may  request  will  be  promptly 
forwarded. 

While  you  are  authorized  to  draw  provisions  and  forage  from  the 
country,  giving  receipts  to  owners,  payable  upon  satisfactory  proof  of 
their  loyalty  at  the  end  of  the  rebellion,  you  will  be  strict  and  prompt 
to  prevent  and  punish  marauding.  Let  nothing  be  taken  except  by 
your  order. 

Until  otherwise  ordered,  you  will  report  to  these  headquarters,  through 
your  division  commander.  Brigadier- General  Osterhaus. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  McCLEKNAND, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


[Inclosure  B.] 

Headqitaetees  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

M.'ill'iJceTf^ s Send,  .^^ril  1,  18G3. 

[General  Osterhaus, 

Commanding  Ninth  Division :] 

General  : Upon  the  arrival  at  Eichmond  of  the  re-enforcements 
ordered  forward  this  evening,  and  the  completion  of  the  bridge  in  pro- 
cess of  construction  there,  you  will  immediately  order  forward  a detach- 
ment of  infantry  and  cavalry,  accompanied  by  mountain  howitzers,  to 
reconnoiter,  as  far  as  practicable,  the  road  to  New  Carthage.  I think 
the  detachment  should  consist  of  two  regiments  of  infantry  and  all  the 
cavalry  you  can  make  available  without  withdrawing  your  mounted 
pickets  at  Eichmond.  If  you  can  provide  subsistence  for  them,  and 
should  deem  it  essential  to  protect  the  road  to  New  Carthage  from  in- 
terruption, you  will  leave  a detachment  behind  at  some  eligible  point, 
under  instructions  to  report  at  short  intervals  to  you,  through  the  com- 
manding officer  at  Eichmond. 

The  cavalry  party  reconnoitering  to-day  toward  New  Carthage  found 
a party  of  the  enemy.  You  will  order  all  such  parties  to  be  boldly  at- 
tacked, and  captured  or  dispersed. 

I think  it  expedient  that  you  should  personally  conduct  the  expedi- 
tion. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  McCLEENAND, 
Major-General,  Commanding. 


No.  2. 

Eej^ort  of  Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates,  Assistant  Adjutant- General 
Thirteenth  Army  Corjps. 

Smith’s  Plantation,  April  16,  1863. 
Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  early  yesterday  morning, 
about  4 o’clock,  the  pickets  at  Dunbar’s  plantation,  4 or  5 miles  below 
here,  on  Bayou  Vidal,  were  attacked  by  a superior  force,  and  compelled 
to  fall  back  upon  the  reserve,  which  promptly  came  to  their  support,  and 
charged  upon  the  enemy,  holding  him  in  check  until  re-enforced,  when 
the  enemy|returned,  wading  through  an  overflowed  field  up  to  the  thighs. 
The  attack  was  made  by  a full  regiment,  the  First  Missouri  rebel  vol- 
unteers, Colonel  [A.  C.]  Eiley  commanding. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  MILLIKEN^S  BEND  TO  NEW  CARTHAGE,  LA.  497 

General  Osterhaiis  learned  from  two  prisoners,  taken  by  our  forces, 
and  from  an  intelligent  negro,  who  made  his  escape  from  the  enemy, 
that  the  enemy  had  out  three  regiments  and  a battalion  of  450  cavalry, 
for  the  purpose  of  capturing  our  forces  at  James^  plantation,  on  the  Mis- 
sissippi, below  NTew  Carthage,  intending  to  take  the  picket  at  Dunbar’s 
by  surjirise  and  then  to  proceed  by  Smith’s  and  New  Carthage  and  into 
the  rear  of  our  forces  at  James’  place.  The  enemy  sent  a force  up  the 
levee,  from  below  James’,  which  waited  the  success  of  the  flanking  move- 
ment by  Dunbar’s,  but  his  repulse  defeated  the  whole  scheme.  The 
enemy  is  doubtless  much  annoyed  by  our  holding  possession  of  New 
Carthage  and  James’  plantation.  We  had  2 wounded,  1 mortally.  We 
are  unable  to  ascertain  the  casualties  on  the  enemy’s  side.  One  of  the 
prisoners  is  from  Pulaski  Countj^,,  Illinois.  They  were  sent  in  by  Gen- 
eral Osterhaus.  Three  or  four  men  who  were  suffered  by  the  ofiicer  of 
the  pickets  to  go  out  of  the  lines  to  sleep  are  missing,  and  are  believed 
to  be  captured  5 the  matter  is  under  investigation.  It  is  indispensable 
to  our  i^lans  to  hold  New  Carthage,  and  yet  it  would  place  it  and  the 
two  regiments  at  James’  plantation  in  imminent  peril  if  attacked  by  the 
enemy’s  gunboats. 

And  while  closing  this  communication,  I am  informed  that  a black- 
looking vessel,  supposed  to  be  a rebel  ram,  showed  herself  for  a mo- 
ment around  the  point  below  New  Carthage  this  evening.  This  makes 
it  vital  that  the  gunboats  should  afford  i)rotection  to  our  position  at 
New  Carthage  without  delay.  The  major-general  commanding  has  just 
learned  that  firing  is  heard  some  considerable  distance  below  New 
Carthage. 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

WALTER  B.  SCATES, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


No.  3. 

Rej^ort  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  S.  Bowen^  G.  8.  Army.,  commayiding  at  Grand 

Gulf. 


Grand  Gulf, 

Ajgril  15,  1863. 

Colonel  [F.  M.]  Cockrell  had  a skirmish  to-day,  killing  2,  wounding  3, 
and  capturing  4 of  the  enemy,  releasing  a major  and  a number  of  women 
and  children  held  in  their  lines;  also  retaking  over  100  negroes;  cap- 
tured 5 or  6 horses  and  equipage. 

No  loss  on  our  side. 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

Brigadier-  General, 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 

32  R R— YOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


498 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


APEIL  1-16, 1863. — Expedition  from  Jackson,  Tenn.,  to  the  Hatchie  River, 

and  skirmishes. 

REIPOE-XS. 

No.  1. — Col.  Michael  K.  Lawler,  Eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  commanding  First  Bri- 
gade, District  of  Jackson. 

No.  2. — Lient.  Col.  Daniel  H.  Brush,  Eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  Michael  K.  Lawler.,  Eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  command- 
ing First  Brigade,  District  of  Jaehson. 

Jackson,  Tenn.,  April  17,  18G3. 

Captain  ; I respectfully  submit  the  following  report  of  an  expedition 
to  the  Hatchie  River : 

On  the  morning  of  the  1st  instant,  I proceeded,  with  the  Eighteenth 
Illinois  Mounted  Infantry,  consisting  of  15  officers  and  285  men,  com- 
manded by  Lieut.  Col.  I).  H.  Brush,  to  Bolivar,  Tenn.  At  the  latter 
place  I received  an  additional  force  of  a detachment  of  11  officers  and 
175  men  of  the  First  West  Tennessee  Cavalry,  commanded  by  Col. 
Fielding  Hurst,  making  my  entire  command  26  commissioned  officers 
and  460  enlisted  men. 

At  noon  of  the  2d  instant,  I moved  down  the  Hatchie  by  three  roads, 
deploying  my  command  in  such  a manner  as  to  embrace  the  country 
lying  between  a line  drawn  through  Bolivar  and  Covington,  Tipton 
County,  and  the  Hatchie,  and  all  of  that  portion  of  country  lying  west 
of  Covington  and  Beaver  Creek,  to  the  Mississippi  River,  and  returned 
in  about  the  same  order,  but  by  different  routes,  arriving  at  Bolivar  on 
the  10th  instant.  This  move  resulted  in  a few  light  skirmishes  with  the 
enemy,  who  were  broken  into  small  bands  of  not  more  than  30  men,  nor 
did  I encounter  the  enemy  at  any  time  in  greater  force  than  above 
mentioned. 

My  command,  after  much  chasing,  captured  Lieutenant-Colonel  [J. 
U.]  Green,  Captain  [J.  H.]  Hazlewood,  2 lieutenants,  2 surgeons,  and 
28  men,  of  Colonel  Richardson’s  command,  and  110  horses  and  mules. 

I regret  to  announce  that  Capt.  C.  H.  Reed,  commanding  Company 
E,  Eighteenth  Regiment  Illinois  Volunteer  Infantry,  was  killed  bj^ 
guerrillas  in  ambush.  He  was  a gallant  and  noble  officer,  and  brave  to 
excess.  We  also  lost  1 enlisted  man,  prisoner. 

Not  being  satisfied  with  the  result  of  the  first  expedition,  I asked  of 
you  and  obtained  permission  to  scour  the  country  between  the  Loosa- 
hatchee  and  the  line  from  Bolivar  to  Covington  and  east  of  Beaver 
Creek,  but  with  less  favorable  results,  capturing,  from  roving  bands  of 
guerrillas,  1 lieutenant  and  8 privates,  and  75  horses  and  mules. 

I am  informed  by  reliable  citizens  of  Tipton  and  Haywood  Counties 
that  Richardson,  the  guerrilla  chief,  crossed  the  Mississippi  River  in 
a canoe,  with  a fortune,  robbed  of  citizens  of  Haywood,  Tipton,  and  the 
adjoining  counties.  Learning  that  a great  number  of  his  men,  mostly 
conscripts,  disgusted  with  his  mode  of  warfare,  desired  to  return  to  their 
homes,  I issued  a circular  that  all  citizens  and  all  members  of  Richard- 
son’s, [J.  J.]  Neely’s,  and  Wood’s  bands,  and  other  commands  styling 
themselves  partisan  rangers,  who  would  deliver  up  their  arms,  subscribe 
to  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  United  States  of  America,  and  return  to 


499 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  EXPEDITION  TO  THE  HATCHIE  KIVEE,  ETC. 

their  i)eaceful  pursuits,  would  he  protected  in  person  and  property,  and 
also  warned  them  that,  in  case  any  of  these  bands  were  reorganized  or 
new  ones  should  spring  up,  I would  hold  those  persons  who  had  not 
taken  the  oath  of  allegiance,  or  who  had  not  faithfully  observed  the 
same,  responsible  for  any  act  or  deeds  perpetrated  by  such  bands.  To 
enforce  the  said  circular,  I left  one  company  of  3 commissioned  officers, 
GO  men,  and  1 provost-marshal  at  Covington,  with  the  instructions  to 
remain  at  that  post  three  days,  and  then  to  move  to  Somerville,  remain 
there  the  same  length  of  time,  and  then  report  to  Bolivar.  I also  left  a 
company  of  the  same  number,  and  provost-marshal,  at  Stanton  Depot, 
to  remain  there  the  same  length  of  time,  then  to  proceed  to  Whiteville, 
remain  there  three  days,  and  then  rei)ort  to  Bolivar.  I then  returned 
with  the  balance  of  my  command  to  Jackson,  Tenn.,  April  IG,  18G3. 

I state  with  pride  that  the  officers  and  men  of  both  detachments 
under  my  command  conducted  themselves  in  the  most  soldierlike  man- 
ner, and  are  worthy  of  a better  foe. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient 
servant, 

M.  K.  LAWLEE, 

Colonelj  Commanding. 

Capt.  E.  D.  Mason, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


i^o.  2. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Daniel  H.  Brushy  Eighteenth  Illinois  Difaiitry. 

Hdqes.  Eighteenth  Eegiment  Illinois  Volunteers, 

JaehsoUj  Tenn.,  April  17,  18G3. 

Sir:  I hereby  respectfully  report  that  I arrived  in  camp  yesterday 
e'Vening,  with  the  remaining  portion  of  this  regiment  out  on  the  exjie- 
dition  to  Covington,  Tenn.,  and  vicinity,  with  the  exception  of  detach- 
ments under  command  of  Captains  Davis  and  Blackburu,  CO  men  each, 
which  were  left  in  that  region,  by  direction  of  Colonel  Lawler. 

The  casualties  of  the  trip  are  the  less  of  Capt.  C.  H.  Eeed,  Company 
E,  killed  by  guerrillas  near  Covington  on  the  5th  instant,  and  Private 
Bradford  Bardmess,  Company  A,  and  Corpl.  George  W.  Green,  Com- 
pany E,  taken  prisoners  near  Dancyville,  Tenn.,  on  the  3d  instant. 

The  command  has  captured,  while  absent,  about  80  head  of  horses 
and  mules,  not  taking  into  account  any  surplus  that  may  now  be  with 
the  aforesaid  detachments.  Mules  were  taken  from  the  regimental 
teams,  when  the  command  went  out,  to  mount  men  who  had  no  horses. 
Those  mules  have  been  returned  or  replaced. 

A considerable  number  of  the  horses  taken  from  here  by  the  men 
were  weak  and  pretty  much  broken  down,  and  soon  gave  outj  such 
have  been  left  on  the  way;  some  died.  Men  took  in  their  places  cap- 
tured horses. 

It  cannot  be  ascertained  with  certainty  until  the  absent  detachments 
come  back  how  many  animals  have  been  captured,  or  how  many  will 
be  on  hand  after  supplying  the  men  who  went  out  on  the  expedition 
with  a horse  eacli. 

Of  the  captured  horses,  I was  under  the  necessity  of  taking  one,  on 
account  of  the  horse  I Avas  riding  becoming  unfit  for  use  by  having  a 
sore  back.  Adjt.  S.  T.  Brush,  for  some  reason,  took  one  of  the  cap- 


500 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXYI. 


tured  liorses.  Both  of  said  horses  were  reported  to  General  Brayman, 
at  Bolivar,  when  we  found  we  were  to  go  back  toward  the  Mississippi 
Eiver  from  that  place,  were  ai)praised,  i^urchased  by  us,  and  paid  for, 
and  bills  of  sale  given  us. 

I respectfully  suggest  that  all  the  horses  and  mules  now  in  the  regi- 
ment belonging  to  the  Government,  either  in  use  by  the  line  officers, 
enlisted  men,  or  teamsters,  be  at  once  branded,  and  those  in  use  by  the 
officers  and  men  be  appraised,  as  also  the  equipments,  and  ordered  to 
be  charged  to  the  said  officers  and  men,  so  that  they  may  be  respect- 
ively held  accountable  to  the  Government  for  the  value  of  the  same. 
Such  a course  is  necessary  to  prevent  the  men  from  trading  off  and  ex- 
changing horses  and  fixtures,  and  to  make  them  take  care  of  such  as 
are  turned  over  to  them.  A board  of  appraisers,  in  my  opinion,  should 
be  at  once  appointed,  that  the  matter  may  be  speedily  attended  to. 

The  prisoners  taken  during  the  expedition  were  turned  over  to  the 
l)rovost-marshal  at  Bolivar,  by  order  of  Colonel  Lawler. 

Eespectfully  submitted. 

D.  H.  BEUSH, 

Lieutenant- Colonel^  Commanding  Regiment, 

Lieut.  J.  0.  Webber, 

Aeting  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


APRIL  2-6, 1863. — Scout  in  Beaver  Creek  Swamp,  Tenn. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Thomas  P.  Eerrich^  Seventh  Kansas  Cavalry. 

Germantown,  Tenn.,  April  G,  1863. 

Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  accordance  with 
the  order  of  General  Hurlbut,  I left  camp  at  daylight  on  the  morning 
of  the  2d  instant,  with  the  effective  force  of  the  Seventh  Kansas  Cav- 
alry, to  move  against  Eichardson’s  force,  then  supposed  to  be  in  the 
swamps  of  Beaver  Creek.  On  arriving  at  Hickory  Wythe,  I learned 
that  the  Second  Iowa  Cavalry  had  passed  through  that  place  an  hour 
before,  on  their  way  down  from  a scout  through  the  country  I was 
ordered  to  visit.  After  crossing  Loosahatchee,  I learned  that  immediately 
after  the  surprise  and  slaughter  of  our  men  near  Belmont,  on  Sunday 
night,  March  29,  Eichardson  had  disbanded  his  men,  fearing  so  large  a 
Federal  force  would  be  sent  into  the  country  that  his  command  would 
be  destro3"ed  if  he  attempted  to  keep  it  together.  I therefore  saw  that 
it  would  be  impossible  for  me  to  accomplish  what  was  evidently  expected 
from  the  expedition,  for  where  men  are  scattered  through  the  swamps 
it  is  only  by  chance  that  they  can  be  caught.  However,  I spent  two 
days  in  the  swamps  on  Beaver,  thoroughly  scouring  the  whole  country, 
from  the  head  of  East  Beaver,  5 miles  above  Mason’s  Station,  around 
to  Portersville,  on  the  west.  Probably  one- third  of  Eichardson’s  active 
force  was  scattered  through  this  stretch  of  country,  but  our  movements 
were  so  vigilantly  watched  and  so  faithfully  re^iorted  by  the  “peace- 
able  citizens,”  that  the  entire  population  anticipated  our  approach. 

Knowing  that  I would  meet  no  hostile  force,  I dejiloyed  the  men  by 
squadrons,  and  made  a hunt  instead  of  a march,  sending  them  in  lines 
of  skirmishers  through  swamps  and  fields  over  the  whole  country.  I 
had  some  hope  that  by  this  means  I might  find  Eichardson  himself,  who 
has  been  wounded,  and  is  said  to  be  concealed  somewhere  in  that  coun- 


Chap.  XXXVL]  EXPEDITION  TO  GREENVILLE,  MISS.,  ETC.  501 


try.  I tlieu  moved  down  Beaver  toils  junction  with  the  Loosahatchee, 
which  I recrossed  early  yesterday  morning?. 

On  Cypress  I captured  a few  prisoners,  and  found  that  many  more  of 
Eichardson^s  men  were  in  that  neighborhood  than  north  of  the  Loosa- 
hatchee. I was  anxious  to  spend  a couple  of  days  on  Cypress,  be- 
lieving I could  capture  a considerable  number  of  prisoners,  but  our 
subsistence  was  exhausted,  and  I had  no  permission  to  subsist  on  the 
country.  I therefore  returned  to  camp,  where  I arrived  last  night. 

I met  with  no  loss  except  that  about  20  of  our  poorest  horses  died  or 
had  to  be  abandoned  on  the  march.  I captured  enough  animals  belong- 
ing to  Eichardson’s  men  to  make  up  the  deficiency. 

I made  every  effort  to  communicate  with  Colonel  Lawler,  but  could 
neither  find  nor  hear  of  him. 

About  2 miles  southeast  of  Portersville,  in  Beaver  Swamp,  I found 
500  bushels  of  corn  in  gunny-sacks,  which  had  been  captured  by  Eich- 
ardson  near  Eandolph.  He  had  pressed  teams  in  the  vicinity  of  Por- 
tersville about  a month  since,  and  hauled  the  corn  to  this  hiding-place 
for  further  use.  I burned  it. 

On  Thursday  night,  after  we  had  crossed  Loosahatchee,  going  north- 
ward, the  bridge  below  Quinn’s  Mills  was  burned,  either  by  citizens  or 
guerrillas.  On  my  return,  I found  a report  circulating  among  the  people 
that  the  bridge  had  been  burned  by  my  men.  The  story  will  doubtless 
find  its  way  to  headquarters,  but  it  is  so  palpably  absurd  that  I trust 
it  will  not  need  contradiction.  General  Hurlbut’s  orders  were  strictly 
observed  in  every  respect. 

The  conduct  of  officers  and  men  was  praiseworthy,  and  I am  confident 
that  there  was  no  single  instance  of  improper  conduct  on  the  part  of 
any  man  in  the  expedition.  I send  herewith  triplicate  descriptive-rolls 
of  9 prisoners,  who  will  be  turned  over  to  you.  A lieutenant  named 
E.  P.  Graham  was  killed. 

Your  obedient  servant. 


T.  P.  HEEEIGK, 

Lieutenant- Colo7iel,  Gonvmanding  Seventh  Kansas  Cavalry, 


Lieut.  W.  M.  Emery, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


APRIL  2-14,  1863. — Expedition  to  Greenville,  Black  Bayou,  and  Deer  Creek, 
Miss.,  with  skirmishes,  April  7,  8,  and  10. 

E-ICIPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Frederick  Steele,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  expedition. 

No.  2. — Maj.  Gen.  Carter  L.  Stevenson,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Military  Dis- 
trict. 

No.  3. — Brig.  Gen.  Stcplien  D.  Leo,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  4. — Col.  Samuel  W.  Ferguson,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Fredericlc  Steele^  U.  S.  Army^  commanding  expedition. 

Hdqrs.  First  Division,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps, 

Greenville^  April  10,  1863. 

General:  My  command  lias  Just  returned  to  this  place,  having  pur- 
sued the  rebels,  under  Colonel  Ferguson,  about  43  miles  down  Deer 


502 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Creek.  Their  precise  strength  I could  not  ascertain,  but  they  had  six 
pieces  of  artillery,  and  from  GOO  to  1,000  cavalry  and  infantry.  At  Dr. 
Thomas’  plantation  they  received  re  enforcements  from  Boiling  Fork, 
including  two  10-pounder  Parrotts.  Here  they  drew  up  in  line  of 
battle  and  opened  on  us  with  their  artillery.  It  was  an  open  field  be- 
tween us,  and  I advanced  upon  them  in  line,  usin.g  all  my  artillery. 
They  fled  before  the  infantry  became  engaged.  My  troops  had  made  a 
fatiguing  march,  and  we  encamped  on  the  place  the  enemy  had  just  left. 

The  next  morning,  I sent  out  a force  to  ascertain  where  the  enemy 
were.  They  had  moved  toward  Boiling  Fork,  where  it  was  said  they 
were  to  receive  large  re-enforcements.  For  reasons  ’which  I will  ex- 
plain in  my  ofiScial  report  to  General  Sherman,  I then  started  back  to 
this  place,  bringing  about  1,000  head  of  stock,  horses,  mules,  and  beef- 
cattle.  There  are  also  a number  of  ox-wagons,  carts,  buggies,  &c.  A 
great  ma^iy  negroes  have  followed  the  command.  I wish  you  would 
send  up  six  boats  to  carry  the  stock,  &c.  I advised  all  the  negroes  that 
asked  my  advice  to  stay  on  the  plantations  where  they  belonged,  ex- 
cept two  engineers  and  a blacksmith.  Please  send  me  instructions  as 
to  what  shall  be  done  with  these  poor  creatures.  In  many  instances 
our  men  burned  up  everything  there  was  to  eat  on  the  plantations,  in 
spite  of  all  my  endeavors  to  prevent  it.  It  is  estimated  by  some  of  the 
officers  that  we  burned  500,000  bushels  of  corn.  There  were  25,000 
bushels  burned  at  Thompson’s,  which  the  negroes  said  were  destined  for 
Vicksburg.  We  have  lost  a considerable  number  of  stragglers,  some 
of  whom  were  taken  because  they  wished  to  be,  no  doubt.  One  man  of 
my  escort  was  killed,  and  one  other  cavalryman  wounded.  The  enemy 
made  his  appearance  on  our  rear  to-day  while  we  were  bridging  Black 
Bayou,  at  French’s  plantation,  but  were  soon  dispersed,  with  the  loss 
of  1 man  on  our  part.  We  have  1 lieutenant  and  2 privates  prisoners. 
I send  this  dispatch  by  Major  [B.  H.]  Peterson.  Please  send  me  orders 
in  regard  to  my  future  movements. 

I am  told  that  there  are  150  bales  of  cotton  7 or  8 miles  from  here, 
belonging  to  a Mr.  Miller,  rebel.  I could  probably  get  it  into  the  river 
if  it  would  be  proper  to  mark  it  S.  A.  Douglas. 

The  enemy  have  five  or  six  boats  on  Bogue  Phaliah  and  a landing 
about  2 miles  from  Deer  Creek,  high  up  j a good  road  leading  across 
and  several  bridges. 

Very  truly,  yours, 

FBED’K  STEELE, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Maj.  Gen.  IJ.  S.  Grant. 


IIo.  2. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Carter  L.  Stevenson^  C.  S.  Army.,  eommanding  See- 

ond  Military  JDistriet. 

Vicksburg,  April  8,  18G3. 

(Beceived  April  8.) 

The  enemy  are  in  force  against  Ferguson.  The  force  now  under  Lee 
is  six  regiments  and  battalion  light  artillery,  and  very  little  cavalry. 
He  needs  very  much  the  latter.  Please  order  back  two  companies  of 
Waul’s  Legion. 

C.  L.  STEVENSON, 

. Major-General. 

Li eut en an  t- Gen  oral  Pemberton. 


CHAI-.  XXXVI.]  EXPEDITION  TO  GREENVILLE,  MISS.,  ETC. 


503 


Vicksburg,  A^ril  8,  1863. 

Lee  will  secure  Eolliug  Fork,  aud  move  up  Bogue  Phaliali  to  get  in 
rear  of  the  enemy,  who  are  forcing  Ferguson  down  Deer  Creek. 

0.  L.  STEYENSOE, 

Major-  General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Vicksburg,  April  9,  1863. 

The  enemy,  some  eight  regiments  in  sight,  had  driven  Ferguson  on 
night  of  7th  nearly  to  Bolling  Fork ; re- enforcements  were  arriving.  I 
think  this  is  a formidable  expedition,  probably  to  co-operate  with  one 
from  Steele’s  Bayou.  I think  half  of  the  brigade  with  Maury  should 
go  at  once  to  Bolling  Fork,  the  other  to  Snyder’s,  to  operate  up  Lower 
Deer  Creek.  If  the  cotton-boats  are  not  needed  above,  they  had  better 
be  here. 


Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


C.  L.  STEVENSON", 

Major- General. 


Vicksburg,  April  9,  1863. 

Beport  from  Ferguson,  dated  11  a.  m.  yesterday.  He  had  made  a 
stand  16  miles  above  Bolling  Fork;  expected  to  be  re-enforced  that 
night.  Two  regiments  must  have  been  near  him  ; nothing  of  the  artil- 
lery heard  yesterday  afternoon.  Please  order  back  the  intrenching  tools 
taken  by  General  Featherston,  and  any  others  that  can  be  spared.  A 
sufficient  number  cannot  be  obtained  here.  Send  back  Captain  [D.] 
Wintter. 

C.  L.  STEVENSON, 

Major- General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Hdqrs.  Second  District,  Dept,  of  Miss,  and  E.  La., 

Vielcshurc)^  April  14,  1863. 

Major  : I send  you  herewith  reports  from  General  Lee  and  Colonel 
Ferguson.* 

I shall  direct  General  Lee  to  place  works  on  Sunflower  at  such  points 
as  he  may  think  proper,  and  will  cause  all  exposed  points  to  be  secured 
by  defensive  works. 

General  Lee  suggests  that  a cotton-clad  be  placed  on  Sunflower  as  a 
guard-boat  until  we  can  get  out  supplies.  General  Maury  thinks  the 
cotton-clads  are  too  unsafe  for  troops.  I will  provide  for  that  defense 
in  some  other  way. 

The  raft  has  been  strengthened  by  additional  chains.  I am  prepar- 
ing railroad  iron,  connected  by  links,  for  additional  security. 

It  would  be  dangerous  to  attempt  to  put  the  Yazoo  raft  below  Haynes’. 
The  current  is  too  strong.  If  it  should  become  unmanageable  and 
strike  the  drift,  it  would  be  very  apt  to  carry  away  the  main  raft.  At 
the  bend  at  Haynes’  it  can  be  turned  into  an  eddy,  prepared  and  swung, 
if  the  other  should  give  way,  but  even  there  it  should  not  be  placed  in 

* See  pp.  504,  507. 


504 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


the  current  until  there  is  an  absolute  necessity  for  it,  for  the  chances 
are  it  would  break.  This  is  the  opinion  of  all  who  have  examined  into 
it. 


Grant  and  Sherman  came  down  on  the  flag-boat  yesterday.  Their 
object  was  evidently  to  induce  the  belief  that  their  troops  were  here. 

I saw  a letter  from  Grant  to  Major  Watts,  in  which  he  referred  to 
Adjutant-General  Thomas  being  on  the  Mississippi. 

I am,  major,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  L.  STEVENSON, 

Major-  General.,  Commanding. 

Maj.  E.  W.  Memminger, 

A.  A.  G.,  Dept,  of  Mississijypi  a7id  Eastern  Louisia^ia,  Jackson. 


ADDENDA. 


Jackson,  April  9,  18G3. 

Capt.  I.  N.  Brown,  Yazoo  City: 

Move  down  river — say,  to  mouth  of  Sunflower — with  your  cotton- 
clad  boats,  to  operate  as  circumstances  may  require. 

j.  0.  PEMBEETON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  CommandUig. 


Jackson,  April  9,  1863. 

Major-General  Boring, 

Fort  Pemherton,  via  Grenada  aiid  Yazoo  City  {both  ways) : 

Send  [J.  C.]  Moore’s  brigade  immediately,  1,500  of  which  to  Eolling 
Fork,  and  the  remainder  to  Haynes’  Bluff  or  Snyder’s  Mill,  to  receive 
instructions  from  Major-General  Stevenson. 

J.  C.  PEMBEETON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


No.  3. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Stephen  D.  Lee,  G.  S.  Army. 

Willis’  Place,  Upper  Deer  Creek, 
Eighteen  miles  above  Rolling  Fork,  April  9,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  my  arrival  at  this  point  last  night. 
Colonel  Ferguson  halted  here  to  give  the  Yankees  battle,  but  yesterday 
evening  he  discovered  that  thej^  were  falling  back  rapidly,  destroying 
everything  eatable  before  them,  and  they  are  now,  or  were  last  night, 
at  midnight,  20  miles  above  this  point,  at  Taylor’s  place  (40  miles  above 
Eolling  Fork).  They  did  not  leave  a particle  of  anything  for  the  plant- 
ers to  subsist  on,  but  said  they  intended  to  destroy  everything  this  side 
of  Greenville.  I have  ordered  Colonel  Ferguson  to  follow  them  with 
his  force,  and  I will  be  ready  to  assist  him.  It  now  becomes  a serious 
matter  how  troops  are  to  be  subsisted  above  this  point,  and  the  colonel, 
after  discovering  further  of  the  movements  of  the  enemy,  will  be  di- 
rected to  return  at  least  to  this  point,  leaving  an  observing  squad  near 
Greenville. 

I will  now  turn  my  attention  to  the  nush])nckai>aw,  from  which  I have 
not  heard,  and  have  ordered  Captain  [B.  M.]  Uarrod,  with  Weldon,  to 


Chap.  XXXVL]  EXPEDITION  TO  GREENVILLE,  MISS.,  ETC. 


505 


go  on  a reconnaissance  to  select  a suitable  point  for  works,  and  a raft, 
as  near  the  mouth  of  the  Bogue  Phaliah  as  the  water  will  admit,  if  pos- 
sible at  the  mouth ; if  not,  to  go  up  till  a point  is  found,  and  I will  be 
prepared  to  move  with  three  regiments  and  a section  of  artillery  at  a 
moment’s  notice,  as  soon  as  their  report  is  received,  or  I hear  from  the 
expedition  now  there.  There  are  ample  stores  between  this  and  the 
Boiling  Fork  for  this  command  at  present. 

Colonel  Ferguson  day  before  yesterday  gave  the  enemy  such  a check 
with  his  small  force  that  they  were  deterred  from  a farther  advance. 
They  deployed  seven  regiments  of  infantry,  artillery,  and  cavalry. 
Their  command,  from  all  I can  learn,  consists  of  Steele’s  division  and 
the  Marine  Brigade,  not  to  exceed  6,000  men.  Their  object  was,  I think, 
to  destroy  provisions.  The  negroes  are  in  a pretty  bad  condition,  and 
a larger  force  of  cavalry,  say  a regiment,  is  needed  here,  as  only  cav- 
alry can  get  through  the  swamps.  But  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that 
corn  will  now  be  scarce,  and  the  general  had  better  delay  till  I hear 
through  Colonel  Ferguson  the  extent  of  their  destruction.  I will  let 
you  hear  further  this  evening. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

STEPHEN  D.  LEE, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 

Maj.  J.  J.  Eeeve,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Bolling  Fork,  April  13,  1863—9.30  a.  m. 

Major  : I have  delayed  my  dispatch  to  this  hour  to  hear  from  Colo- 
nel Ferguson,  near  Greenville,  but  have  received  nothing  from  him; 
but  as  the  Yankees  were  5 miles  from  Greenville  at  last  accounts,  I do 
not  expect  anything  important  from  him.  The  i)lanters  and  negroes 
are  much  demoralized  on  the  Mississippi,  and  from  all  1 can  learn  large 
cotton  crops  are  being  planted  by  men  who  were  regarded  above  sus- 
picion. On  some  of  the  places  the  negroes  are  almost  in  a state  of 
insurrection. 

Adjutant-General  Thomas,  D.  S.  Army,  on  the  9th  visited  Lake  Provi- 
dence, and  made  a speech  to  the  troops,  stating  that  all  the  negroes 
were  to  be  returned  and  the  men  conscripted.  Each  division  should 
have  three  negro  regiments,  to  be  officered  by  white  officers ; that  all 
the  rest  of  the  negroes,  men  and  women,  were  to  be  put  to  work  under 
overseers,  to  raise  cotton  and  corn  for  the  Government,  to  make  the 
war  self-sustaining.  The  United  States  authorities  at  Memphis  are 
seizing  all  the  cotton  for  the  Government.  Thomas  said  that  Vicksburg 
would  fall  within  thirty  days  without  the  firing  of  a gun.  The  report 
of  the  speech  comes  from  a reliable  source,  who  was  present  and  heard 
the  speech. 

The  Hope  returned  from  a point  60  miles  above  the  Bogue  yesterday 
evening,  that  being  the  lowest  point  where  obstructions  can  be  made 
with  sufficient  ground  for  fortifying.  I respectfully  urge  that  works  be 
commenced  at  the  point  indicated,  to  allay  any  uneasiness  in  the  future, 
and  that  at  least  four  long-range  guns  be  placed  in  battery  there,  pro- 
tected by  a suitable  force.  I send  a report  of  Captain  Harrod,  with  a 
sketch.*  The  Hope  heard  nothing  of  the  Arcadia  or  Dew  Drop  up  the 
Sunflower.  I send  the  Emma  Bett,  with  Colonel  [W.  E.]  Curtiss,  150 
men,  and  two  howitzers,  up  the  Sunflower  to  look  after  the  missing 


Not  found. 


506  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  IChap.  XXXVl 

boats.  I do  this,  as  I feel  some  uneasiness  about  them,  though  I think 
they  are  safe,  and  merely  loading  both  boats  with  corn  and  other  sup- 
plies above  the  Ilushpuckanaw.  * I do  not  think  the  route  practicable 
at  present,  as  the  water  is  falling,  and  the  delay  incident  to  transfer- 
ring the  load  from  the  Dew  Drop  to  the  Arcadia  will  account  for  the 
non-re  turn  of  the  boats.  The  people  up  the  Sunflower  seem  to  antici- 
pate no  advance  in  that  direction. 

I directed  Mr.  Weldon  to  prepare  for  constructing  the  raft  on  the 
Sunflower,  and  a man  is  now  getting  out  the  lumber.  I propose  putting 
a raft  in  Kolling  Fork  also,  and  Weldon  is  to  send  a man  to  do  it. 
These  rafts  are  to  be  ready  to  swing  across  the  river  in  case  of  alarm. 
The  work  (intrenchment)  at  this  point  is  progressing  well.  It  is  being 
constructed  of  cotton  bales,  with  a thickness  of  10  to  15  feet  of  earth  in 
front,  with  a banquette  raised  18  inches  above  the  general  surface. 

I have  sent  an  officer  to  Black  Bayou  to  look  at  the  obstructions  com- 
pleted there.  I do  not  anticipate  any  advance  from  that  direction,  nor 
do  I anticipate  any  trouble  here  until  the  water  falls,  when  the  enemy 
will  advance  from  Skipwith’s  and  other  points.  I will  not  send  any  of 
my  force  back  till  I hear  more  reliably  from  the  Hushpuckanaw,  about 
which  I am  tolerably  easy.  I am  holding  the  Golden  Age  here,  loading 
with  supplies,  and  will  have  her  to  move  up  the  Sunflower,  if  necessary. 
Occupying  a point  above  the  Bogue  Phaliah  would  necessitate  at  least 
a regimeut  in  small  boats  between  the  mouth  of  the  Bogue  and  Falls^ 
Landing  to  hold  that  stream,  and  I recommend  the  construction  of  the 
boats  at  once.  1 make  these  recommendations  now  in  anticipation  of 
high  water  in  June,  when  the  enemy  may  attempt  the  water  courses  in 
this  direction. 

A rumor  comes  pretty  straight  from  the  Mississippi  that  a captain  of 
one  of  the  gunboats,  quite  intimate  with  a Mr.  Duncan  (a  planter),  stated 
that  one  hundred  transports  would  be  down  in  a few  days.  It  was  not 
stated  whether  they  would  be  empty  or  not.  It  is  very  difficult  to  get 
reliable  information  from  the  river,  owing  to  the  demoralization  and  fear 
for  property. 

Kespectfully  submitted. 

STEPHEN  D.  LEE, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 

Maj.  J.  J.  Eeeve, 

A.  A.  G.j  2d  Bist,  Dept,  of  Miss,  and  E.  La.,  Viclcshurg,  Miss. 


Headquarters  Eolling  Fork, 

April  14,  1863 — 4 p.  m. 

Major  : Since  my  last  communication  to  you,  I have  received  addi- 
tional information  of  the  movements  of  transports  down  the  Mississippi, 
and  also  intelligence  of  the  removal  of  the  troops  from  Lake  Providence. 
As  these  movements  tend  to  indicate  an  attack  by  the  enemy  upon 
Vicksburg  or  vicinity,  I have  ordered  three  of  the  regiments  stationed 
here  to  embark  for  Haynes’  Bluff,  and  will  myself  leave  for  the  same 
point  this  evening.  I have  directed  Colonel  Ferguson  to  leave  a cav- 
alry force  in  the  vicinity  of  Greenville,  and  to  bring  his  infantry  force 
to  this  point.  I will  leave  here  the  Fifty-sixth  Georgia  Eegiment  and 
a section  of  howitzers,  as  an  addition  to  the  force  which  he  now  has 
with  him.  I have  advised  him  to  make  his  headquarters  in  this  vicin- 
ity for  convenience  of  communication.  Tlie  line  of  fortifications  which 


Chap.  XXXVL]  EXPEDITION  TO  GREENVILLE,  MISS.,  ETC.  507 

I am  erecting  will,  when  completed,  be  very  strong,  and  can  easily  be 
held  by  the  force  under  the  command  of  Colonel  Ferguson. 

Black  Bayou  is  pretty  well  obstructed,  and  so  is  Deer  Creek  between 
Black  Bayou  and  this  point.  These  obstructions,  in  conjunction  with 
the  fortifications,  will  detain  any  force  of  the  enemy  sufiQciently  long  to 
allow  re-enforcements  to  be  sent  in  large  numbers. 

Mr.  Hampton  has  just  arrived  here,  and  has  given  me  the  following 
information:  He  says  the  enemy  is  digging  a canal  from  Milliken’s 
Bend  into  Walnut  Bayou,  thence  into  ^idal  (he  thinks)  Bayou,  and 
from  there  into  Eoundaway  Bayou,  near  JS'ew  Carthage.  He  thinks 
their  object  is  to  carry  supplies  on  flat-boats  through  this  canal,  for  the 
purpose  of  making  an  expedition  up  the  Big  Black,  and  for  supplying 
boats  from  below. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

STEPHEN  D.  LEE, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 

Maj.  J.  J.  Eeeve, 

A.  A.  G.,  2d  Bisf.,  Dept,  of  3Iiss.  and  E.  La.,  Vicksburg,.  Miss. 


No.  4. 

Reports  of  Cot.  Samuel  W.  Ferguson,  C.  8.  Army. 

Ealls^  Place,  April  7,  18G3. 

Major:  I have  fallen  back  to  this  point,  and  will  continue  my  march 
down  the  creek  to-day  until  I find  a position  that  can  be  held  by  my 
force  against  the  advance  of  the  enemy.  The  latter  crossed  Black  Bayou 
yesterday,  near  General  French’s  place,  to  the  number  of  about  300,  and 
had  large  camp  and  a train  of  wagons  on  the  other  side,  ready  to  cross 
as  soon  as  they  could  get  a bridge  fixed.  General  Steele  seems  to  be  in 
command.  One  of  my  spies,  disguised  as  a negro,  had  a long  talk  with 
him.  He  said  he  intended  to  pick  me  up  at  Eolling  Fork  and  put  me 
on  his  boats.  This  may  be  only  a boast,  or  may  indicate  that  they  wish 
to  get  possession  of  the  country  from  Eolling  Fork  to  Black  Bayou,  and 
then  clear  Deer  Creek  of  obstructions.  Please  let  me  know  at  once 
what  to  do;  whether  to  hold  the  country  to  the  last  extremity,  await- 
ing re-enforcements,  or  shall  I endeavor  to  get  my  force  safely  out  of 
tlie  way  and  give  the  country  up  ? I got  positive  information  yesterday 
that  twenty-five  boats,  loaded  with  troops,  had  passed  Skipwith’s  Land- 
ing on  the  day  before,  going  up.  On  yesterday  sixteen  boats,  with 
troops,  were  being  disembarked  at  Greenville. 

Very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  W.  FEEGUSON, 
Colonel,  Commanding. 

Maj.  J.  J.  Eeeve, 

A ssistant  A djutan  t-  General. 


Deer  Greek,  Miles  arove  Eolling  Fork, 

April  7,  18G3 — 7 p.  m. 

Major  : I liave  fallen  back  to  this  point  before  the  superior  forces  of 
the  enemy.  Their  cavalry  was  last  night  about  14  miles  from  here.  1 
have  so  little  cavalry  that  I cannot  obtain  full  knowledge  of  their  move- 


608 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  X^XX V 1« 


ments.  They  were  busy  repairing  bridge  across  Deer  Oreeb,  near  Colo- 
nel Falls’.  This  may  be  for  the  purpose  of  reaching  Bogue  Phaliah,  and 
embarking  parties  on  small  boats  for  the  purpose  of  surprising  some  of 
our  steamers,  which  might  be  caught  without  troops  on  board.  I got 
4 deserters  yesterday ; they  represent  the  force  at  7,000  under  General 
Sherman  j General  Steele  was  their  brigade  commander ; this  estimate  j 
exclusive  of  the  Marine  Brigade.  I have  sent  three  dispatches  before 
this ; hope  they  went  through  rapidly.  My  situation  very  embarrassing 
until  I can  learn  whether  re-enforcements  are  to  be  sent  or  I am  to  make 
good  my  retreat  as  best  I may.  If  the  country  is  to  be  held,  more  cav- 
alry is  indispensable.  Please  send  me  instructions  at  once. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  W.  FEEGUSOIs^, 

Colonel j Commanding. 

Maj.  »T.  J.  Peeve, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Deer  Creek,  20  Miles  above  Rollino  Fork, 

Ajpril  7,  1863 — 7.30  p.  m. 

Major  : The  enemy  came  upon  me  to-day  at  the  point  I had  halted 
yesterday,  at  about  2 p.  m.  I repulsed  their  cavalry,  and  remained  in 
position  after  their  artillery  opened,  for  some  time,  until  seven  regiments 
(apparently)  of  infantry  advanced  in  line  of  battle.  I then  fell  back 
slowly,  repulsed  their  cavalry  again  with  rear  guard,  and  I am  now 
making  my  way  to  Polling  Fork,  as  I can  hcfar  nothing  as  yet  of  re-en- 
forcements or  of  boats  to  take  me  off.  If  they  are  not  there  when  1 ar- 
rive, I fear  the  greater  portion  of  the  command  must  be  sacrificed.  I 
shall  endeavor  to  get  some  of  it  down  Deer  Creek  to  Victor  Wilson’s 
place,  if  not  cut  off  at  Black  Bayou.  Please,  if  re-enforcements  have 
not  started  in  time,  have  some  transportation  ready  at  Lower  Deer 
Creek  as  well  as  at  Polling  Fork. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  W.  FEPGUSOl!!, 

Colonel^  Commanding. 

Maj.  J.  J.  Peeve, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Deer  Creek,  Captain  Willis’  Plantation, 

April  8,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 

Major  : Learning  that  re-enforcements  had  arrived  at  the  mouth  of 
Polling  Fork,  I have  determined  to  hold  this  position,  which  is  a strong 
one,  until  further  orders.  I have  not  yet  received  any  report  from  the 
commanding  officer  of  said  re-enforcements,  but  conclude  that  a suffi- 
cient force  will  be  sent  to  hold  this  approach  to  Vicksburg.  Your  dis- 
X^atches  of  the  5th  and  6th  instant  were  received  last  night  after  mine  to 
you  had  been  sent.  My  rear  guard  is  in  the  position  it  occupied  last 
night,  about  3 miles  higher  uj),  and  at  last  accounts  the  enemy  had  not 
advanced  through  tlie  canebreak  I held  until  sunset  yesterday.  With 
the  force  now  here,  I can  hold  the  point  until  to-morrow  at  any  rate. 

In  case  of  a severe  engagement,  my  artillery  ammunition  will  soon  be 
exhausted,  in  consequence  of  the  order  to  me  some  time  since  to  send 
back  a i)ortion  of  it.  JMy  guns  are  three  12-pounder  howitzers  and 


I 


Chap.  XXXVL]  EXPEDITION  TO  GREENVILLE,  MISS.,  ETC.  509 

three  3-iucli  rifles.  What  I need  most  are  shells  and  spherical  ease ; 
you  can  decide  on  the  necessity  of  their  being  furnished  in  time.  My 
requisitions  for  harness,  &c.,  have  not  been  filled,  and,  in  consequence, 
I can  only  use  four  horses  or  mules  to  some  of  the  caissons.  This  may 
eventually  prove  a serious  matter.  My  terrible  deficiency  in  cavalry 
has  prevented  my  driving  before  me  the  stock  of  the  country,  and  col- 
lecting the  wagons  and  teams,  so  a supply  of  food  and  transportation 
has  been  left  to  the  enemy,  in  spite  of  the  efforts  I have  made  to  pre- 
vent it. 

^ As  soon  as  I heard  on  Sunday  last  that  the  troops  were  landing  at 
Oreenville,  I sent  a party  to  Millar’s  Bend,  on  the  Mississippi,  to  cut  the 
levee  at  the  head  of  Black  Bayou.  The  chances  of  success  were  more 
than  doubtful,  but  if  it  is  accomplished,  in  about  ten  days  the  swamp 
they  have  crossed  on  a dry  land  road  will  all  be  overflowed,  and  their 
line  of  communication  very  seriously  obstructed.  A¥hen  they  reach 
Bolling  Fork,  they  will  have  marched  about  65  miles.  We  will,  there- 
fore, have  the  great  advantage  of  operations  on  an  interior  or  shorter 
line  by  water  communication.  Their  line  of  communication  may  be  cut 
by  small  parties  going  up  Bogue  Phaliah  in  skiffs  and  yawls,  such  as 
I captured  in  getting  through  the  o-verflow  to  the  vicinity  of  Deer 
Creek,  at  such  points  as  Falls’  Landing,  Taylor’s,  Buck’s,  and  the  place 
occupied  by  Dr.  and  Mr.  William  Blanton.  The  parties  could  also  give 
notice  of  any  similar  expedition  of  the  enemy  to  capture  by  surprise 
our  steamers.  The  men  for  such  an  expedition  should  be  selected  with 
regard  to  their  skill  with  the  oar. 

I yesterday  sent  Captain  [W.  A.  C.]  Jones,  of  the  Fortieth  Alabama,  to 
Bolling  Fork,  to  examine  the  practicability  of  putting  a levee  across  Deer 
Creek  at  the  head  of  Bolling  Fork,  in  order  to  turn  all  the  water  into  the 
latter,  which  would  cause  such  a fall  in  the  former  as  to  prevent  boats 
going  up  from  Black  Bayou.  The  water  is  so  much  higher  now  than  it 
was  when  the  last  expedition  came,  that  trees  then  thrown  in,  and  which 
rested  on  each  bank  and  formed  a good  blockade,  are  now  afloat  and  can 
be  easily  removed.  I inclose  his  report.*  If  the  plan  is  deemed  worthy  of 
adoption,  I would  suggest  that  engineers,  tools,  &c.,  be  at  once  ordered 
to  execute  it. 

1 have  burned  all  the  bale  cotton  as  I fell  back  before  the  enemy,  and 
destroyed  the  bridges,  to  keep  them  as  much  as  possible  to  our  side 
of  the  creek.  They  have  burned  several  fine  steam  gins  that  I know  of, 
and  probably  all.  I yesterday  hanged  a negro  man,  slave  of  William 
F.  Smith,  who,  mistaking  two  of  my  men  for  the  Abolitionists,  hailed 
them  across  the  creek,  and  volunteered  to  conduct  them  to  the  rebel 
camp,  so  as  to  surprise  itj  informed  them  of  my  strength  and  position, 
asked  for  a gun  to  kill  his  master,  and  said  that  he  would  knock  down 
and  rape  any  white  woman. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  W.  FEBGUSOII, 

Colonel^  Commanding. 

Maj.  J.  J.  Beeve,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Courtney’s  Plantation,  Deer  Creek,  Ajgril  12,  1863. 
General  : Your  letter  of  yesterday  received  this  a.  m.  I have  been 
Waiting  to  give  you  the  latest  news  from  the  river.  Some  of  the  enemy’s 
transports  lay  at  Greenville  all  yesterday.  Their  artillery  and  cavalry 


Not  found. 


510 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


seemed  all  to  have  embarked.  From  eitizens  who  went  on  board  to 
recover  stolen  property,  I learn  that  General  Steele  said  he  was  waiting 
orders  from  General  Grant.  I would  have  made  an  attack  with  artillery 
at  daylight  this  morning,  but  the  storm  last  night  prevented  the  trans- 
portation of  the  guns,  and  I am  afraid  of  tbe  bridge  in  my  rear  being 
washed  away,  the  bayou  is  rising  so  rapidly  from  the  cut  in  the  levee. 
In  regard  to  cutting  the  levees  in  this  section,  the  only  place  at  which 
anything  could  be  accomplished  would  be  at  the  head  of  Williams’ 
Bayou,  but  the  river  is  falling  so  rapidiy  I do  not  think  this  will  amount 
to  much,  and  will  cut  me  off  from  the  river  altogether,  leaving  a section 
of  country  in  the  condition  of  that  about  Lakes  Washington  and  Amer- 
ica. Upper  Deer  Greek  is  already  overflowed  from  the  cut  at  the  head 
of  the  creek.  A Mr.  Garter,  a planter  at  point  of  Millar’s  Bend,  reported 
yesterday  that  since  Saturday  last,  when  Steele’s  expedition  landed  at 
Greenville,  twenty-two  boats  loaded  with  troops  had  passed  his  place 
going  up  the  river.  Citizens  near  Greenville  do  not  confirm  this,  but  the 
boats  may  have  passed  during  the  night. 

I find  it  impossible  to  ascertain  positively  whether  the  boats  of  Steele’s 
expedition,  after  taking  the  troops  on  board,  went  up  or  down,  but  in- 
cline to  the  opinion  they  (6  of  them)  went  up  night  before  last.  Yester- 
day about  sunset  five  formidable  gunboats  passed  down  within  a half 
hour  of  each  other. 

Since  commencing  the  last  sentence,  a dispatch  from  Lieutenant 
Maughas,  who  is  keeping  watch  on  the  river  bank,  has  come  in.  I in- 
close it.*  He  is  reliable. 

I think  it  advisable  to  keep  my  force  here  for  the  present,  as  that 
infernal  expedition  under  Ellet,  who  burns  and  destroys  everything 
on  the  river,  has  lately  been  on  the  river  near  here.  He  might  land  to 
destroy  what  is  left.  He  cannot  get  between  us,  except  with  a little 
cavalry,  and  even  that  will  be  impossible  in  a few  days,  from  the  rise 
in  Black  Bayou. 

As  soon  as  I have  time  I wish  to  send  a full  report  of  the  burning 
and  destruction  of  private  property  by  General  Steele,  and  in  this  con- 
nection would  call  attention  to  the  5 prisoners  sent  down,  who  acknowl- 
edge that  they  had  been  led  to  the  east  bank  of  Deer  Greek  by  their 
captain,  to  steal  mules  and  horses  and  burn  everything.  They  were 
caught  on  stolen  animals,  and  had  in  their  possession  articles  of  private 
property  stolen  from  residences,  and  were  recognized  as  those  who  had 
set  fire  to  the  corn  on  Dr.  Hill’s  plantation.  Will  not  our  Government 
make  an  example  of  them  ? I found  in  the  Yankee  camp  at  this  place 
four  pairs  of  hand-cuffs  and  a long  chain,  all  linked  together,  which 
would  well  ornament  them.  I need  all  the  cavalry  I can  get. 

My  only  loss  so  far  is  Lieutenant  Dorsey,  of  the  sharpshooters,  cap- 
tured, and  2 men,  of  the  Fortieth  Alabama,  deserted  to  the  enemy. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  W.  FERGUSOJY, 
Colonelj  Commanding  Upper  Deer  CreeJe. 

Brig.  Gen.  Stephen  D.  Lee,  Commanding^  cfc. 


Courtney’s  Place,  Deer  Greek, 

April  13,  1863 — 10  a.  m. 

General  : I can  make  nothing  of  the  enemy’s  movements,  unless  I 
construe  them  to  indicate  the  purpose  of  establishing  a post  at  Green- 


Not  found. 


511 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  EXPEDITION  TO  GREENVILLE,  MISS.,  ETC. 

ville.  Yesterday  they  advanced  with  large  infantry  force,  drove  in  my 
cavalry  until  they  reached  the  spot  where  the  latter  had  bivouacked, 
then  fell  back  to  their  boats.  I thought  the  movement  meant  to  cover 
their  embarkation,  but  this  morning  Captain  [G.]  Barnes  sends  me  word 
that  tbeir  movements  indicate  an  advance.  That  was  about  two  hours 
ago.  I have  just  learned  that  they  yesterday  examined  Blantona,  the 
residence  of  Mrs.  Theobald,  with  the  view  of  converting  it  into  a hospital. 
They  also  commenced  pitching  tents  in  a clover  field  near  her  house, 
and  inquired  the  number  of  healthy  negro  women,  with  the  view  of 
making  of  them  nurses  for  small-pox  patients.  They  have  long  talked 
to  the  citizens  along  the  river  of  their  purpose  of  establishing  a post 
at  Greenville.  They  may  have  told  the  truth  for  once. 

Two  boats  landed  troops  yesterday  and  one  went  off.  Not  known 
whether  or  not  she  took  troops  with  her. 

The  water  is  rising  in  Black  Bayou  at  the  rate  of  about  6 inches  in 
twenty-four  hours.  If  this  continues,  it  will  soon  render  the  swamp  im- 
passable. I have  sent  this  morning  to  make  another  cut,  to  throw  the 
water  from  Deer  Creek  into  it,  which  will  also  overflow  the  road  from 
here  to  Choctaw  Bend. 

I am  quite  sick  and  barely  able  to  move  about ; wish  you  could  spare 
time  to  ride  up  here  and  look  for  yourself. 

Very  truly,  &c.,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  W.  FEEGUSON, 

Colonel^  Commanding, 

Brig.  Gen.  Stephen  D.  Lee, 

Commanding^  cfic. 


Courtney’s  Place,  Deer  Creek, 

April  14,  1863—2.30  p.  m. 

General  ; I have  delayed  sending  an  express  to  you  to-day,  until  I 
could  ascertain  something  positive  in  regard  to  the  enemy.  I have  just 
learned  that  there  are  at  present  thirteen  transports  at  Greenville  Land- 
ing. Constant  skirmishing  goes  on  between  their  pickets  and  ours. 
Two  transports,  one  very  large  and  one  small,  j^assed  down  j^esterday, 
loaded  with  troops,  without  stopping  at  Greenville.  Seven  transports 
loaded  with  troops,  wagons,  tents,  &c.,  passed  down  to-day,  without 
stopping.  One  gunboat  and  one  transport,  loaded  with  horses,  passed 
up  to-day. 

I sent  yesterday  to  Chickasaw  Bend  to  have  the  levee  cut.  The  party 
sent  reported  to  me  this  morning  no  water  against  the  levee,  and  that 
twenty  boats,  apparently,  from  the  noise,  loaded  with  troops,  passed 
that  point  during  the  previous  night.  I can  get  no  positive  information 
of  their  having  passed  Greenville,  although,  as  it  was  at  night,  and  I 
had  no  pickets  just  on  the  bank,  they  could  have  passed  without  its 
being  known.  The  Yankee  bridge  across  Black  Bayou  is  washed  away, 
and  my  pickets  now  have  to  swim  the  stream  to  get  near  the  Yankees. 
The  account  of  the  boats  passing  down,  which  I send  you,  includes  only 
those  of  which  I have  positive  knowledge  j others  may  have  passed 
without  my  knowing  it. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  W.  FEEGUSON, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  Stephen  D.  Lee, 

Commanding,  <&c. 


512  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chai-.  XXXVX 

APRIL  4,  1863. — Skirmisli  on  Nonconnah  Creek,  near  Memphis,  Tenn. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Stephen  A.  Hurlbut,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Sixteenth  Army 
Corps. 

No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  James  R.  Chalmers,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  district. 


No.  1. 


Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Stephen  A.  Eurlhut,  U.  8.  Army,  commanding  Six- 
teenth Army  Corps. 


Memphis,  Tenn.,  April  4,  1863. 

Sill:  Brig.  Gen.  L.  Thomas,  Adjutant-General,  is  here  on  a tour  of 
inspection.  I am  gratified  that  so  far  as  he  has  seen  or  expressed  an 
opinion  it  is  favorable. 

There  has  been  a small  picket  afiair  on  the  line  of  the  Nonconnah  to- 
day, not  yet  over.  Our  cavalry  pickets  (Second  Wisconsin)  were  struck 
about  daylight,  2 men  wounded  and  2 captured.  Colonel  Stephens  (Sec- 
ond Wisconsin),  with  about  100  men,  pursued,  crossed  the  Nonconnah, 
and  drove  their  pickets  6 miles,  when,  finding  the  enemy  in  force,  about 
from  COO  to  800  cavalry  and  dismounted  men,  and  hearing  of  a battery, 
he  fell  back.  I immediately  ordered  Bauman’s  First  Brigade  (four 
regiments  and  a battery)  forward,  and  pushed  two  battalions  of  the 
Fifth  Ohio  Volunteer  Cavalry  over  the  Nonconn  ah.  I have  not  yet 
heard  from  them,  nor  do  I think  the  enemy  will  wait  for  an  attack.  I 
think  it  was  a ruse  to  draw  a portion  of  our  cavalry  out  and  surround 
them.  If  they  come  in  before  the  boat  leaves,  I will  report  further,  but 
I think  this  is  all.  I scarcely  believe  that  Chalmers  would  venture  in- 
fantry and  artillery  so  near  us,  and  think  it  is  only  a dash  of  mounted 
men. 


Your  obedient  servant, 


S.  A.  HUBLBUT, 

Major-General. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Eawlins,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  R.  Chalmers,  C.  8.  Army,  commanding  Dis- 
trict. 

Sen  AT  OBI  A,  April  5,  1863. 

I hope  the  orders  will  not  take  Major  [W.  M.]  Inge  from  me.  He  is 
now  east  of  my  line,  but  about  ready  to  bring  his  command  here. 

We  drove  the  enemy’s  pickets  within  5 miles  of  Memphis.  Killed  1, 
wounded  several ; captured  2,  with  horses  and  equipments  complete. 
They  game  out  afterward,  but,  finding  us  ready,  did  not  advance. 

JAMES  it.  CHALMERS, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Lieutenant-General  Fembehton. 

[Indorsement.! 

Tell  General  Buggies  that  on  arrival  of  cavalry  regiment  from  Gen- 
eral Buckner,  Major  Inge  Avill  join  General  Chalmers.  Tell  Chalmers 
samK?. 

J.  C.  P.  [PEMBERTON.] 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  SCOUT  TO  EARLY  GROVE  AND  MT.  PLEASANT,  MISS.  513 
APRIL  5-6,  1863. — Scout  from  Grand  Junction  to  Saulsbury,  Tenn. 

Report  of  Capt.  Asa  W.  McDonald^  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry. 

La  Grange,  Tenn.,  April  11,  1863. 

Agreeably  to  directions,  50  men  from  Companies  F,  M,  and  H,  under 
my  command,  proceeded  on  a scout  to  the  vicinity  of  Saulsbury,  a ser- 
geant and  10  men  of  the  Sixth  Illinois  accompanying  as  guides.  We 
started  soon  after  3 o’clock,  and  proceeded  direct  to  Saulsbury,  where  we 
got  tidings  that  a party  the  evening  previous  had  passed  up  the  State 
Line  road  shortly  before  sunset.  We  proceeded  to  the  place  indicated, 
and  had  gone  but  a short  distance  when  I learned  that  a party  of  guer- 
rillas had  passed  direct  down  the  Ripley  road.  I made  some  inquiries 
after  returning  onto  the  Ripley  road,  and  found  the  information  I had 
received  was  correct,  as  34  guerrillas  had  passed  about  6 a.  m.  We  fol- 
lowed the  trail,  and  when  about  2 miles  south  from  Saulsbury  a large 
mound  was  discovered,  about  2 mijes  ahead,  and  whep  I had  arrived  at 
a short  distance  from  the  mound,  it  being  some  half  a mile  to  our  right, 
I discovered  something  which  I took  to  be  a picket,  and  moved  forward 
at  a brisk  pace.  I ordered  Lieutenant  Bn^eze  to  take  Company  F,  and 
advance  up  the  front  of  the  mound  and  engage  them  should  there  be  a 
force  there,  while  I moved  around,  endeavoring  to  get  in  their  rear;  but 
they  did  not  stand  to  receive  Lieutenant  Breeze,  but  retreated  imme 
diately,  Company  F giving  them  a few  shots,  and  then  charged  after 
them.  They  deserted  their  lead  mules,  having  2,  but  Company  F pushed 
them  so  close  that  2 of  the  3 prisoners  (citizens)  they  had  escaped,  and 
the  other  they  shot  dead.  1 came  on  the  trail  at  this  point,  and  pursued 
them  about  2 ndles  farther,  but  did  not  succeed  in  capturing  any,  as 
they  dispersed  in  squads  of  twos  and  threes  at  short  intervals. 

ASA  W.  McDOiSrALD, 

Captain  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry  Regiment^  Comdg.  Detachment. 

[Lieut.  George  A.  Root, 

Adjutant  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry.] 


APRIL  5-7,  1863. — Scout  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  Early  Grove  and 

Mount  Pleasant,  Miss. 

Report  of  Capt.  William  W.  Eaton.,  Second  lotva  Cavalry. 

La  Grange,  Tenn.,  April  7, 1863. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  accordance  with  orders  re- 
ceived at  4.30  p.  m.  on  the  5th  instant,  from  headquarters  First  Bri- 
gade, Cavalry  Division,  -‘for  one  battalion  to  proceed  immediately 
southward  to  Early  Grove,  thence  westerly  toward  Mount  Pleasant, 
and  return  by  way  of  Moscow,”  I started  with  the  Third  Battalion  at 
5.30  p.  m.,  and  moved  southward  on  the  main  Holly  Springs  road  to 
the  point  where  the  Early  Grove  road  leaves  it,  and  thence  on  the  Early 

Grove  road.  I encamped  for  the  night  on  the  plantation  of , 

about  9 miles  southwest  of  La  Grange,  and  6 miles  northeast  from  Early 
Grove.  No  information  could  be  gained  from  any  citizen  in  the  neigh- 
borhood as  to  the  i)osition  or  movements  of  the  enemy. 

At  4 a.  m.  on  the  6th,  started,  and  reached  Early  Grove  about  day- 
33  R R— VOL  XXIV;  PT  I 


514 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


light  5 thence  moved  southward  toward  the  Lamar  and  Mount  Pleasant 
road,  and  on  arriving  near  the  plantation  and  residence  of  Mr.  James 
Pool,  2 miles  from  Early  Grove,  my  advance  saw  some  men  about 
PooPs  house.  Three  men  were  sent  to  see  who  they  were,  when  the 
men  started  to  run,  but  were,  after  some  firing  on  both  sides,  captured. 
Two  men  were  foun3  in  the  house  of  Pool.  The  women  of  the  house 
refused  to  let  the  sergeant  in  command  of  the  advance  enter  the  house, 
denying  that  any  one  was  in  there.  The  sergeant,  though,  had  seen 
them  through  the  window,  and  insisted  on  searching  the  house,  when 
the  women,  placed  themselves  before  the  door  and  resisted  all  entrance, 
until  the  sergeant  threatened  to  burn  the  house  unless  they  allowed 
the  search,  when  they  stepped  aside  and  allowed  him  to  go  in,  where 
he  found  2 of  Mitchell’s  men,  armed — one  of  them  with  a Colt’s  carbine. 
The  party  proved  to  be  2-of  Waul’s  Legion — one  sergeant  and  one  pri- 
vate— and  3 of  Mitchell’s  men,  all  armed  and  equipped  as  cavalry. 

Fed,  got  breakfast,  and  at  9 a.  m.  started  for  Mount  Pleasant,  where 
we  arrived  at  12  m.  At  12.30  p.  m.  started  for  Moscow ; arriyed  at  3 
p.  m.,  seeing  or  learning  nothing  more  of  the  enemy.  Rested  one  hour 
at  Moscow,  and  returned  to  camp,  arriving  about  retreat  last  night. 
The  captures  were  as  follows,  viz:  Five  horses,  which  were  turned  over 
to  the  regimental  quartermaster;  two  Colt’s  revolvers,  navy  size;  one 
Colt’s  carbine,  and  two  shot  guns.  The  guns  were  destroyed  by  the 
men,  and  the  balance  turned  over  to  the  regimental  adjutant. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  W.  EATON, 

Captain  Company  L,  Second  Iowa  Cav.j  Comdg.  Third  Battalion. 

Lieut.  S.  L.  Woodward, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


APRIL  9,  1863. — Skirmish  near  the  Obion  River,  Term. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Alexander  Ashoth^  U.  S.  Army. 

Columbus,  Ky.,  April  15,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  pursuant  to  orders  com- 
municated in  my  report  under  No.  1178  to  search  the  house  and  neigh- 
borhood of  one  Henderson  Wright,  south  of  the  Obion  River,  in  order 
to  capture  the  rebel  Captain  Scales,  with  his  band.  Captain  Hutchens, 
commanding  Company  E,  Fifteenth  Illinois  Cavalry,  started  on  the 
morning  of  the  9th  instant,  and,  crossing  the  Obion,  after  a ride  of 
43  miles,  reached  the  plantation  of  Wright,  occupied  by  the  rebel  Cap- 
tain Scales  as  his  headquarters  in  his  organization  of  a battalion.  A 
body  of  cavalry  received  our  men  with  a volley  of  musketry,  but  Cap- 
tain Hutchens  ordered  a change,  resulting  in  the  death  of  4 of  the  rebels, 
and  capture  of  26  men  with  13  horses,  and  the  complete  dispersion  of 
the  band.  Among  the  prisoners,  a list  of  whom  is  herewith  inclosed,* 
are  Captain  Scales,  the  commander  of  a rebel  battalion,  and  Lieutenant 
Yoorhees,  tvith  their  appointments  as  ofi&cers  of  the  rebel  army  in  their 
pockets  ; also  Henderson  Wright,  a most  dangerous  rebel. 

From  positive  information,  I would  state  that  there  are  yet  several 
bodies  of  conscripts,  under  Captains  Parks,  Carter,  and  others,  ap- 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


SCOUT  TO  HUDSONVILLE,  MISS,  ETC. 


515 


pointed  by  Pillow  and  Forrest,  south  of  the  Obion,  and  I only  await  the 
return  of  my  informant  with  guides  to  make  a combined  cavalry- move- 
ment on  them,  as  the  Fourth  Missouri  Cavalry  has  arrived  and  will  be 
in  a few  days  ready  for  duty.  Ee viewing  the  presence  of  rebel  parties 
on  the  Obion,  at  Paris  and  Mussey,  Tenn.,  and  another  at  Dresden, 
Tenn.,  in  connection  with  the  avowed  and  published  intention  of  Pillow 
to  conscript  in  the  counties  of  my  district,  I must  regard  as  most  op- 
portune the  decision  of  the  Geueral-in-Ohief  in  permitting  the  Fourth 
Missouri  Cavalry  to  remain  in  this  district. 

Adjutant-General  Thomas,  on  his  late  visit  to  this  post,  also  admitted 
the  necessity  of  more  cavalry  here.  I therefore  respectfully  solicit  the 
exercise  of  your  influence  to  prevent  the  iirojected  removal  of  the  Fourth 
Missouri  Cavalry  to  the  Department  of  the  Cumberland ; and  as  it  is 
urgently  required  to  send  more  cavalry  to  Fort  Heimaii,  and  form  a con- 
necting chain  of  cavalry  posts  between  the  Mississippi  and  Tennessee, 
also  to  control  properly  the  railroad  and  telegraph,  I would  request 
that  an  additional  regiment  of  cavalry  be  ordered  for  duty  to  my  dis- 
trict. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

[ASBOTH.] 

Maj.  Gen.  Stephen  A.  Hurlbut. 


APRIL  10-11,  1863— Scout  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  Hudsonville,  Lock- 
hart’s Mills,  Mount  Pleasant,  and  Early  Grove,  Miss. 

Reports  of  Capt.  John  M.  Graham^  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry. 


Quarters  Company  E,  Seventh  Illinois  Yol.  Cay., 

La  Grange.,  Tenn..,  April  11,  1863. 

Sir  : In  pursuance  of  orders  from  the  colonel  commanding  the  brigade, 
I marched  from  this  place  at  2 p.  m.  on  the  16th  instant,  with  195  men, 
consisting  of  three  companies  of  the  Ilrst  and  the  whole  of  the  Second 
Battalion  5 pursued  the  Holly  Springs  road  until  we  arrived  at  Hudson- 
ville ; thence  west  on  the  road  to  LockharFs  Mills,  and  encamped  for 
the  night  IJ  miles  west  of  Hudsonville.  Resumed  the  march  at  7 a.  m. 
of  this  day;  crossed  Coldwater  at  Lockhart’s  Mills;  thence  to  Mount 
Pleasant,  and  returned  to  camp  by  the  way  of  Early  Grove,  and  arrived 
here  at  5 p.  m. 

I have  to  report  one  prisoner  taken  near  Mount  Pleasant,  a private  of 
Company  E,  Second  Arkansas  Cavalry,  James  Hoy  by  name ; he  had 
been  a prisoner  in  our  hands  a short  time  ago,  and  had  taken  the  oath 
of  allegiance  and  was  released;  and  one  Nathan  Baldwin,  a private  in 
Mitchell’s  company,  Chalmers’  regiment,  was  taken  3 miles  west  of  Early 
Grove.  I could  not  hear  of  any  force  this  side  of  the  Tallahatchee. 

Chalmers’  regiment  is  reported  at  Hernando,  600  strong.  We  also 
captured  3 cavalry  horses  and  equipments  and  1 mule.  We  had  no 
casualties. 

I am,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  M.  GRAHAM, 
Captain.,  Commanding  Expedition. 


Lieut.  George  A.  Root, 

Adjutant  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry. 


516 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


Quarters  Company  E,  Seventh  Illinois  Vol.  Cav., 

Cam^  at  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  April  12,  1863. 

Sir:  In  pursuance  of  Special  Orders,  JJIo.  84,  from  Major  Nelson, 
commanding  this  regiment,  I marched  from  this  place  at  2'p.  m.  on  the 
lOth  instant,  with  195  men  and  6 commissioned  officers,  consisting  of 
three  companies  of  the  First  and  the  Second  Battalion  of  this  regiment. 
Followed  the  Holly  Springs  road  to  Hudson ville  j thence  due  west  IJ 
miles,  and  encamped  for  the  night  on  the  road  leading  to  Lockhart’s 
]Mills.  Forty  men  of  Companies  G and  E)  were  placed  on  picket.  Lieu- 
tenant Gaston,  of  Company  G,  officer  of  the  picket,  placed  pickets  on 
all  the  roads  leading  from  camp,  four  in  number,  and  kept  patrols  con- 
stantly going  from  one  post  to  another  during  the  night;  the  men  slept 
on  their  arms  and  the  horses  were  not  unsaddled.  The  regiment 
marched  this  day  right  in  front. 

Eesumed  the  line  of  march  at  7 o’clock  the  next  mt  ruing,  taking  the 
road  to  Lockhart’s  Mills.  The  regiment,  marching  left  in  front,  crossed 
Coldwater  at  Lockhart’s  Mills;  the  stream  at  this  place  makes  quite  an 
elbow,  causing  us  to  make  a second  crossing.  At  the  first  crossing 
there  is  a very  passable  bridge ; bridge  destroyed  at  the  second  cross- 
ing ; road  barely  practicable  at  this  place  for  wagons  lightly  loaded. 
Still  following  the  Mount  Pleasant  road,  there  is  a plain  wagon  road 
taking  to  the  right  4 miles  from  Mount  Pleasant,  leading  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Early  Grove.  One  mile  south  of  Mount  Pleasant  we  crossed  a 
small  creek  (Little  Coldwater)  on  a poor  bridge ; the  stream  runs  south- 
west from  Mount  Pleasant.  We  took  the  Moscow  road  4 miles  from 
I^Iount  Pleasant;  road  forks  here.  We  took  the  right  hand,  leading  to 
Early  Grove ; crossed  a large  creek  (Clear  Creek ; this  creek  runs  north- 
west) on  a good  bridge.  One  mile  before  arriving  at  Early  Grove  there 
is  a very  plain  road  leading  from  Moscow  and  intersecting  the  road  we 
were  on  just  before  we  crossed  the  creek.  We  fed  our  horses,  however, 
before  arriving  at  the  creek,  3 miles  from  Early  Grove.  From  Early 
Grove  we  took  a direct  road  to  this  place,  where  we  arrived  at  5 p.  m. 
From  here  to  Hudsonville,  18  miles;  from  there  to  Lockhart’s  Mills, 
6 ; from  there  to  Mount  'Pleasant,.  8 ; to  Early  Grove,  11,  and  to  this 
])lace,  12  miles;  in  all,  55  miles. 

I have  also  to  report  2 prisoners,  3 horses  and  equipments,  and  1 mule 
captured ; one  James  Hoy,  a private  of  Company  E,  Second  Arkansas 
Cavalry  (this  man  was  captured  before  by  my  company  in  January  last, 
and  released  on  the  24th  day  of  that  mouth,  upon  his  taking  the  oath  of 
allegiance,  and  his  horse  and  equipments  returned  to  him),  and  one  Na- 
than Baldwin,  a priv^ate  of  Mitchell’s  company,  Qhalmers’  regiment  of 
cavalry.  He  states  that  the  number  of  the  regiment  or  the  letter  of 
his  company  has  not  yet  been  designated. 

I cannot  hear  of  any  force  this  side  of  the  Tallahatchee  River.  Chal- 
mers’ regiment,  500  or  600  strong,  is  reported  at  Hernando  and  at  Pa- 
nola, or  in  that  neighborhood. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

J.  M.  GRAHAM, 
Captain,  Commanding  Eoepedition. 

Lieut.  George  a.  Root, 

Adjutant  Seventh  Illinois  Volunteer  Cavalry. 


Chap.  XXXVL]  PASSAGE  OF  THE  VICKSBURG  BATTERIES. 


r)i7 


APRIL  16,  1863. — Passage  of  the  Vicksburg  batteries  by  gunboats  and 

transports. 

REI>OIiTS. 

No.  1. — Adjt.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Lieut.  Gen.  John  C.  Pemberton,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  3. — Maj.  Gen.  Carter  L.  Stevenson,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  4. — Maj.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith,  C.  S.  Army. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Adjt.  Oen.  Lorenzo  Thomas^  U.  S.  Army, 

Milliken^s  Bend,  La.,  April  17,  1863. 

I ran  down  to  Young^s  Point  and  took  a position  in  fall  view  of  Vicks- 
burg, about  4 miles  distant  in  a straight  line,  to  witness  the  passage  of 
Admiral  PortePs  fleet  of  seven  vessels,  with  three  transports  loaded 
with  rations.  The  naval  vessels  are  Benton,  La  Fayette,  Price,  Pitts- 
burg, Oarondelet,  Mound  City,  and  Tuscumbia ; * transports,  chartered 
steamers  Silver  Wave,  Forest  Queen,  and  Henry  Olay,  protected  with 
cotton  and  hay  bales. 

The  head  of  this  line  nearly  reached  the  upper  batteries  before  being 
discovered.  Fire  was  opened  on  them  at  11  o^clock,  and  continued  until 
2,  when  the  fleet  opened  heavily  on  Warren  ton.  The  entire  naval  fleet 
passed  with  but  little  damage  and  small  loss.  One  shot  penetrated  the 
Benton,  on  which  vessel  1 man  was  killed  and  3 slightly  wounded.  The 
Forest  Queen  early  received  a shot  in  the  hull  and  one  in  the  steam- 
drum. The  Henry  Clay-,  to  avoid  collision  with  her,  changed  direction, 
and  received  shot  in  the  stern.  The  captain  very  soon  took  his  men  in 
his  boats,  leaving  the  pilot,  who  would  not  desert  his  post.  She  caught 
fire,  and  being  then  helpless,  the  pilot  took  a plank  and  drifted  by  the 
burning  mass  nearly  four  hours,  when  he  was  picked  up.  The  boat  had 
on  board  50,000  rations. 

General  Sherman,  who  had  taken  a position  below  the  city  in  a small 
skiff’,  boarded  the  Benton  and  saw  the  admiral.  A full  half  hour  passed 
before  the  second  battery  made  its  appearance,  and  to  the  generaFs  hail 
the  answer  was,  “All  well.”  The  Tuscumbia  was  sent  back,  and  towed 
the  disabled  Forest  Queen.  The  rebels  burned  several  houses  in  Vicks- 
burg and  one  near  the  point  opposite,  which  lighted  up  the  whole  river. 
The  firing  from  the  rebels  was  not  near  so  heavy  as  I anticipated,  and 
but  few  shots  were  given  from  Warrenton.  The  effect  of  our  shot  is 
unknown. 

No  communication  received  as  yet  from  the  admiral.  It  is  a great 
success,  and  Captain  Ross,  who  takes  this,  will  remain  at  Cairo  twenty- 
four  hours  to  receive  any  reply. 

L.  THOMAS, 

Adjutant-  General. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton. 


^Also  the  Louisville.  For  reports  of  Actg.  Rear-Admiral  Porter,  Capt.  H.  Walke, 
Lieut.  Commanders  James  A.  Greer,  E.  K.  Owen,  James  W.  Shirk,  and  Byron  Wilson, 
and  Actg.  Lieuts.  W.  R.  Hoel,  J.  McLeod  Murphy,  and  S.  E.  Woodworth,  see  Annual 
Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  7,  1863. 


518  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  LChap.  XXXYL 

No.  2. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Oen.  John  G.  Pemberton.,  G.  S.  Army. 

Jackson,  April  17,  1863. 

(Received  April  18.) 

Upon  fuller  information,  it  is  ascertained  that  at  11.30  p.  m.  last  night 
eight  of  enemy\s  most  formidable  gunboats,  and  three  transports,  loaded 
with  commissary  stores  and  towing  barges  with  quartermaster’s  prop- 
erty, started  past  batteries  at  Vicksburg.  The  gunboats.  Admiral  Por- 
ter commanding,  passed  down ; damage  unknown.  Two  transports 
destroyed;  the  third  now  at  Brown  & Johnston’s,  apparently  a wreck. 
Believed  two  of  enemy’s  boats  badly  injured. 

J.  G.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Gommanding. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General,  Richmond. 


No  3. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Garter  L.  Stevenson,  G.  S.  Army. 


ViOKSBURO,  April  17,  1863. 

Have  just  taken  some  prisoners,  who  left  a boat  which  sank  opposite 
u])per  batteries.  The  result  of  action,  last  night  is  one  boat  sunk  (prob- 
ably two),  one  burned,  and  three  badly  damaged.  There  were  six  gun- 
boats— General  Price,  Benton,  Cincinnati,  Aleck  Scott,  Tuscumbia,  and 
La  Fayette : three  transports — Henry  CJay,  Forest  Queen,  and  Silver 
Wave.  The  Forest  Queen  is  now  at  Brown  & Johnston’s;  all  others 
])assed  down  in  the  night.  The  smoke  in  sight  this  morning  below 
Diamond  Bend. 


Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


0.  L.  STEYENSOi^, 

Major- General. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith,  G.  S.  Army. 

Vicksburg,  April  17,  1863. 

At  11.30  p.  m.  last  night,  eight  of  enemy’s  most  formidable  gunboats, 
and  three  transports,  loaded  with  commissary  stores  and  towing  barges 
with  quartermaster’s  property,  started  past  batteries.  The  gunboats. 
Admiral  Porter  in  command,  passed  down ; damage  unknown.  Two 
transports  were  destroyed ; the  third  now  at  Brown  & Johnston’s,  ap- 
parentlv  a wreck.  Believed  two  gunboats  badly  injured. 

M.  L.  SMITH, 

Major- General. 

Lieutenant  General  Pemberton. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  GRIERSON^S  RAID  FROM  LA  GRANGE,  TENN.  . 


519 


APRIL  17-MAY  2,  1863. — Grierson’s  Raid  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to 

Eaton  Rouge,  La. 

SUMMARY  OR  THE  RRIIN'CIRAL  EYEISTTS. 

April  18-19,  1863. — Skirmisli  at  New  Albany,  Miss. 

19,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Pontotoc,  Miss. 

21,  1863.— Skirmish  at  Palo  Alto,  Miss. 

24,  1863. — Skirmishes  at  Garlandville  and  Birmingham,  Miss. 

28,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Union  Church,  Miss. 

29,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Brookhaven,  Miss. 

May  1,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Walls  Post-Office,  La. 

Skirmishes  near  Greensburg  and  at  Williams’  Bridge,  La. 

2,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Roberts’  Ford,  Comite  River,  La. 

RERORTS. 

No.  1.— Maj.  Gen.  Stephen  A.  Hurlbut,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Sixteenth  Army 
Corps. 

No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  William  Sooy  Smith,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  La  Grange. 

No.  3. — Col.  Benjamin  H.  Grierson,  Sixth  Illinois  Cavalry,  commanding  expedition. 
No.  4, — Col.  Edward  Hatch,  Second  Iowa  Cavalry. 

No.  5. — Brig.  Gen.  John  Adams,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  6. — Col.  Wirt  Adams,  Mississippi  Cavalry. 

No.  7. — Lieut.  Col.  C.  R.  Barteau,  Second  Tennessee  Cavalry. 

No.  8. — Capt.  A.  B.  Biffle,  commanding  picket. 

No.  9. — Col.  Alexander  J.  Brown,  Fifty-fifth  Tennessee  Inffi  ntry. 

No.  10. — Capt.  B.  F.  Bryan,  Stuart’s  cavalry.  Miles’  Legion. 

No.  11. — Brig.  Gen.  A.  Buford,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  12. — Capt.  S.  B.  Cleveland,  Wirt  Adams’  (Mississippi)  regiment. 

No.  13. — Maj.  J.  De  Baun,  Ninth  Louisiana  Partisan  Rangers. 

No.  14. — Lieut.  Col.  George  Gantt,  Ninth  Tennessee  Cavalry  Battalion. 

No.  1.5. — Maj.  Gen.  Franklin  Gardner,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  16.— Maj.  W.  H.  Garland,  Mississippi  Cavalry. 

No.  17. — Maj.  Gen.  S.  J.  Gholson,  Mississippi  Militia. 

No.  18.— Maj.  Gen.  William  W.  Loring„C.  S.  Army. 

No.  19. — Col.  W.  R.  Miles,  Louisiana  Legion. 

No.  20. — Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.  Thomas  J.  Portis,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  21. — Col.  R.  V.  Richardson,  First  Tennessee  Partisan  Rangers. 

No.  22. — Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Ruggles,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  23. — Col.  John  M.  Simouton,  First  Mississippi  Infantry. 

No.  24. — Brig.  Gen.  Lloyd  Tilghman,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Stephen  A.  Hurlbut.,  U.  S.  Army^  commanding  Six- 
teenth Army  Corps. 

Headquarters  Sixteenth  Army  Corps, 

April  29,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  just  received  the  inclosed  telegram  : * 

Anticipating  a gathering  to  oppose  Grierson’s  return,  I had  mounted 
the  Sixth  Iowa  Infantry,  and  sent  them,  with  the  Second  Iowa  Cavalry 
and  Fourth  Illinois,  this  morning  toward  Okolona  to  relieve  Grierson. 


See  No.  2,  p.  521. 


520 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap,  XXXVI, 


1 think  he  will  come  in  above  Okolona  and  toward  Corinth.  I have 
full  faith  that  he  can  cut  through  any  force  they  can  raise. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

S.  A.  HUELBUT. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Eawlins. 


Hdqrs.  Sixteenth  Army  Corps,  Memphis^  Tenn.^  May  5,  1863. 

Colonel  : I consider  it  proper  to  report  directly  to  tire  General-in- 
Chief  the  transactions  in  this  army  corps  during  the  latter  part  of  April, 
because  the  recent  change  of  headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee 
isolates  me  from  my  immediate  commander. 

As  the  spring  opened,  I was  daily  more  and  more  impressed  with  the 
feasibility  of  a plan,  long  entertained,  of  pushing  a flying  colunin  of 
cavalry  through  the  length  of  Mississippi,  cutting  the  Southern  Eail- 
road.  By  consent  and  approval  of  General  Grant,  I prepared  a system 
of  movements  along  my  entire  line  from  Memphis  to  Corinth  for  the 
purpose  of  covering  this  cavalry  dash.  At  the  same  time  General  Kose- 
crans  proposed  to  me  to  cover  a movement  of  1,800  cavalry  from  Tus- 
cumbia  down  into  Alabama  and  Georgia.  This  did  not  interfere  with 
my  plan,  but  simply  required  extra  force  to  be  developed  from  Corinth. 
Delays  incident  to  combined  movements,  especially  from  separate  com- 
mands, kept  his  expeditionary  column  back  for  six  days. 

I commenced  the  movement  from  Corinth  on  the  15th ; force  as  stated 
in  report  accompanying. 

On  the  17th,  Col.  B.  H.  Grierson,  Sixth  Illinois  Cavalry,  with  his  own 
regiment,  the  Seventh  Illinois,  and  Second  Iowa,  moved  from  La  Grange, 
by  way  of  Pontotoc,  with  orders,  after  passing  Pontotoc,  to  proceed 
straight  down,  throwiug  one  regiment  to  the  left  toward  Okolona,  and 
to  push  for  and  destroy  the  Chunkey  Eiver  Bridge  and  any  others  they 
could  reach,  and  either  return,  or  proceed  to  Baton  Eouge,  as  might  be 
found  advisable. 

On  the  same  day,  April  17,  a column  of  infantry  1,500  strong,  aud 
one  battery,  moved  by  railroad  from  La  Grange  to  Coldwater,  with 
orders  to  push  rapidly  between  Coldwater  aud  the  Tallahatchee,  and 
take  Chalmers  in  flank  and  rear  while  attacked  in  front  by  three  regi- 
ments, a battery,  and  200  cavalry  from  Memphis,  which  left  here  on  the 
18th.  I considered  that  the  effect  of  these  movements  would  be  to 
])uzzle  the  enemy  and  withdraw  his  force  from  the  central  line,  which 
lias  proven  to  be  correct. 

Chalmers  was  attacked  at  Coldwater;  the  stream  found  to  be  unford- 
able,  but  was  held  there  until  Smith’s  column  from  his  rear  approached 
from  La  Grange,  when  he  broke  into  squads  and  disappeared.  After 
holding  the  ground  for  three  days,  gathering  400  horses  and  mules  and 
large  supplies  of  bacon  and  forage,  this  force  returned  with  small  loss. 

Grierson,  on  the  19th,  detached  the  Second  Iowa  below  Pontotoc, 
which  fought  its  way  gallantly  back  to  La  Grange  and  came  home  well 
mounted.  The  main  cavalry  column  (Sixth  and  Seventh  Illinois)  pro- 
ceeded, without  loss  or  engagement,  to  ISTewton,  on  the  Southern  Mis- 
sissippi Eailroad,  and  there  destroyed  bridges,  &c.  They  then  swept 
around  to  Hazlehurst,  on  the  New  Orleans  and  Jackson  road,  and  de- 
stroyed heavy  trestle.  I inclose  copies  of  Southern  re])orts  of  their 
progress.*  I have  no  doubt  they  are  before  this  at  Baton  Eouge,  or  have 
joined  General  Grant  at  or  below  Grand  Gulf. 


Not  louud. 


UHAP.  XXXVI.]  GRIERSON^S  RAID  FROM  LA  GRANGE,  TENN. 


521 


I desire  especially  to  call  the  attention  of  the  General-in-Ohief  to  this  j 
gallant  exploit  of  Colonel  Grierson,  one,  I think,  nnequaled  in  the  war,  1 
and  to  ask  snch  testimonial  of  approbation  from  the  Government  as  his 
services  deserve.  Streight’s  expedition  has  been  attacked,  but  the  at-  | 
tack  was  heavily  repulsed,  and  they  are  now  on  their  way,  with  good 
prospects  of  success. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  A.  HURLBUT, 

Major-  General. 

Col.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.^  Hdqrs.  of  the  Army.,  Washington.,  D.  C. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  William  ISooy  Smith,  TJ.  S.  Army,  commanding  at 

La  Grange. 

La  Grang’e,  April  29,  1863. 

A scout  by  the  name  of  Bell,  in  General  Veatcli’s  employ,  is  just  in 
from  Jackson,  Miss.  He  says  Grierson  has  destroyed  20  miles  of  the  ) 
Southern  road,  having  burned  thirteen  trestles  and  destroyed  one  tun- 
nel (or  culvert,  perhaps),  and  captured  three  trains  of  cars. 

Chalmers  left  Oxford  on  Sunday  evening  with  about  1,500  men,  des- 
tination said  to  be  Okolona,  to  close  in  on  Grierson. 

My  expedition  under  Hatch  left  at  4 o^clock  this  morning,  about  1,200 
strong,  with  orders  to  push  down  toward  Okolona  and  Columbus,  and 
aid  Grierson  to  the  utmost.  Cannot  a force  be  sent  from  Corinth  or 
Tuscumbia  toward  Okolona  with  all  haste,  to  co-operate  with  Hatch 
and  Grierson  ? If  they  can  all  get  in  at  the  death,  they  will  use  Chal- 
mers up. 

[W.  S.]  Featherston’s  brigade  is  at  or  near  Panola.  One  brigade  at 
Canton  and  one  at  Grenada. 

WM.  SOOY  SMITH, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Maj.  Gen.  Stephen  A.  Hdrlbut. 


No.  3. 

Reports  of  Col.  Benjamin  H.  Grierson,  Sixth  Illinois  Cavalry,  command- 
ing e.rpe(liUo7i. 


Headquarters  First  Cavalry  Brigade, 

Five  Miles  south  of  Pontotoc,  April  14,  1863. 

General  : At  3 a.  m.  I send  an  expedition,  composed  of  the  less 
effective  portion  of  the  command,  to  return  by  the  most  direct  route 
to  La  Grange.  Major  Lov^e,  selected  to  take  command,  will  hand  you 
this.  They  pass  through  Pontotoc  in  the  night,  marching  by  fours, 
obliterating  our  tracks,  and  iiroducing  tlie  impression  that  we  have  all 
returned.  I have  ascertained  tliat  the  bridges  on  the  Mississippi  Cen- 
tral Railroad,  over  the  Yockeney,  at  Water  Valley,  have  never  been  re- 
paired, and  I thought  the  forces  could  be  used  to  better  advantage 


622 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


rcHAP,  XXXVI. 


than  by  sending  a regiment  to  Oxford,  as  they  would  be  obliged  to  re- 
turn to  New  Albany  to  recross  the  Tallahatchee.  I have  ordered  a 
single  scout,  however,  to  go  from  Pontotoc  toward  Oxford,  strike  the 
railroad,  and  destroy  the  wires. 

I start  at  4 o’clock  in  the  morning,  and  on  the  night  of  the  20th  shall 
be  50  miles  below  here.  Everything  looks  exceedingly  favorable.  Best 
assured  that  I shall  spare  no  exertion  to  make  the  expedition  as  effect- 
ive as  possible.  I may  possibly  find  an  opportunity  to  communicate 
with  you  again  in  four  or  five  days,  but  do  not  wonder  if  you  should 
not  hear  from  me  in  thirty  days. 

We  have  yet  encountered  no  force  except  the  unorganized  cavalry 
scattered  through  the  country.  We  have  succeeded  in  killing  4 or  5, 
and  wounding  and  capturing  a number.  The  prisoners  return  with 
this  expedition. 

Eespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  H.  GRIERSON, 
Colonel^  Commanding  Cavalry  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Smith, 

Commanding  United  States  Foeres  at  La  Orange. 


Headquarters  First  Cavalry  Brigade, 

Baton  Bouge,  La. ^ May  5,  1863. 

Colonel:  In  accordance  with  instructions  from  Maj.  Gen.  S.  A.  Hurl- 
but,  received  through  Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Smith,  at  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  I 
left  that  place  at  daylight  on  the  morning  of  April  17,  with  the  effective 
force  of  my  command,  1,700  strong.  We  moved  southward  without  ma- 
terial interruption,  crossing  the  Tallahatchee  River  on  the  afternoon  of 
the  18th  at  three  different  points.  One  battalion  of  the  Seventh  Illi- 
nois, under  Major  Graham,  crossing  at  New  Albany,  found  the  bridge 
partially  torn  up,  and  an  attempt  was  made  to  fire  it.  .As  they  ap- 
proached the  bridge  they  were  fired  upon,  but  drove  the  enemy  from 
their  position,  repaired  the  bridge,  and  crossed.  The  balance  of  the 
Seventh  Illinois  and  the  whole  of  the  Sixth  crossed  at  a ford  2 miles 
above,  and  the  Second  Iowa  crossed  about  4 miles  still  farther  up. 
After  crossing,  the  Sixth  and  Seventh  Illinois  moved  south  on  the  Pon- 
totoc road,  and  encamped  for  the  night  on  the  plantation  of  Mr.  Sloan. 
The  Second  Iowa  also  moved  south  from  their  point  of  crossing,  and  en- 
camped about  4 miles  south  of  the  river.  The  rain  fell  in  torrents  all 
night. 

The  next  morning,  April  19, 1 sent  a detachment  eastward  to  com- 
municate with  Colonel  Hatch  and  make  a demonstration  toward  Ches- 
terville,  where  a regiment  of  cavalry  was  organizing.  I also  sent  an 
expedition  to  New  Albany,  and  another  northwest  toward  King’s 
Bridge,  to  attack  and  destroy  a portion  of  a regiment  of  cavalry  organ- 
izing there  under  Major  [A.  H.]  Chalmers.  I thus  sought  to  create 
the  impression  that  the  object  of  our  advance  was  to  break  up  these 
parties.  , 

The  expedition  eastward  communicated  with  Colonel  Hatch,  who  was 
still  moving  south  parallel  to  ns.  The  one  to  New  Albany  came  upon 
200  rebels  near  the  town,  and  engaged  them,  killing  and  wounding  sev- 
eral. The  one  northwest  found  that  Major  Chalmers’  command,  hear- 
ing of  our  close  proximity,  had  suddenly  left  in  the  night,  going  west. 

After  the  return  of  these  expeditions,  I moved  with  the  whole  force  to 
Pontotoc.  Colonel  Hatch  joined  us  about  noon,  reporting  having  skir- 


523 


CHAP,  xxxvi.i  Grierson’s  raid  from  la  grange,  tenn. 

mished  with  about  200  rebels  the  afternoon  before  and  that  morning, 
killing,  wounding,  and  capturing  a number. 

We  reached  Pontotoc  about  5 p.  m.  The  advance  dashed  into  the 
town,  came  upon  some  guerrillas,  killed  1,  and  wounded  and  captured 
several  more.  Here  we  also  captured  a large  mill,  about  400  bushels  of 
salt,  and  camp  equipage,  books,  papers,  &c.,  of  Captain  WeatheralPs  ' 
command,  all  of  which  were  destroyed.  After  slight  delay,  we  moved 
out,  and  encamped  for  the  night  on  the  plantation  of  Mr.  Daggett,  5 
miles  south  of  Pontotoc,  on  the  road  toward  Houston. 

At  3 o’clock  the  next  morning,  April  20,  I detached  175  of  the  least 
effective  portion  of  the  command,  with  one  gun  of  the  battery  and  all 
the  prisoners,  led  horses,  and  captured  property,  under  the  command  of 
Major  Love,  of  the  Second  Iowa,  to  proceed  back  to  La  G-range,  march- 
ing in  column  of  fours,  before  daylight,  through  Pontotoc,  and  thus  leav- 
ing the  impression  that  the  whole  command  had  returned.  Major  Love 
had  orders  also  to  send  off  a single  scout  to  cut  the  telegraph  wires 
south  of  Oxford. 

At  5 a.  m.  I proceeded  southward  with  the  main  force  on  the  Houston 
road,  passing  around  Houston  about!  p.  m.,  and  halting  at  dark  on  the 
plantation  of  Benjamin  Kilgore,  11^  miles  southeast  of  the  latter  place, 
on  the  road  toward  Starkville. 

The  following  morning  at  6 o’clock  I resumed  the  march  southward,  < 
and  about  8 o’clock  came  to  the  road  leading  southeast  to  Columbus, 

Miss.  Here  1 detached  Colonel  Hatch,  with  the  Second  Iowa  Cavalry 
and  one  gun  of  the  battery,  with  orders  to  proceed  to  the  Mobile  and 
Ohio  Railroad  in  the  vicinity  of  West  Point,  and  destroy  the  road  and 
wires ; thence  move  south,  destroying  the  failroad  and  all  public  property 
•as  far  south,  if  possible,  as  Macon;  thence  across  the  railroad,  making  a 
circuit  northward ; if  practicable,  take  Columbus  and  destroy  all  Gov- 
ernment works  in  that  place,  and  again  strike  the  railroad  south  of  Oko 
Iona,  and,  destroying  it,  return  to  La  Grange  by  the  most  practicable 
route. 

Of  this  expedition,  and  the  one  previously  sent  back,  I have  since 
heard  nothing,  except  vague  and  uncertain  rumors  through  secession 
sources. 

These  detachments  were  intended  as  diversions,  and  even  should  the 
commanders  not  have  been  able  to  carry  out  their  instructions,  yet,  by 
attracting  the  attention  of  the  enemy  in  other  directions,  they  assisted 
us  much  in  the  accomplishment  of  the  main  object  of  the  expedition. 

After  having  started  Colonel  Hatch  on  his  way,  with  the  remaining  . 
portion  of  the  command,  consisting  of  the  Sixth  and  Seventh  Illinois 
Cavalry,  about  950  strong,  I continued  on  my  journey  southward,  still 
keeping  the  Starkville  road.  Arriving  at  Starkville  about  4 p.  m.,  we 
captured  a mail  and  a quantity  of  Government  property,  which  we  de- 
stroyed. From  this  point  we  took  the  direct  road  to  Louisville.  We 
moved  out  on  this  road  about  4 miles,  through  a dismal  swamp  nearly 
belly-deep  in  mud,  and  sometimes  swimming  our  horses  to  cross  streams, 
when  we  encamped  for  the  night  in  the  midst  of  a violent  rain.  From 
this  point  I detached  a battalion  of  the  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry  under  ^ >> 
^ ^ H — , to  proceed  about  4 miles,  and  destroy  a large  tannery  and  shoe 
/ manufactory  in  the  service  of  the  rebels.  They  returned  safely,  having 
accomplished  the  work  most  effectually.  The^^  destroyed  a large  number 
of  boots  and  shoes  and  a large  quantity  of  leather  and  machinery;  in  all 
' amounting,  probably,  to  $50,000,  and  captured  a rebel  quartermaster 
from  Port  Hudson,  who  was  there  laying  in  a supply  for  his  command. 

We  now  immediately  resumed  the  march  toward  Louisville,  distant 

\ 


524  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

28  miles,  mostly  through  a dense  swamp,  the  Noxubee  Eiver  bottom. 
This  was  for  miles  belly-deep  in  water,  so  that  no  road  was  discernible.  ‘ 
The  inhabitants  through  this  part  of  the  country  generally  did  not 
know  of  our  coming,  and  would  not  believe  us  to  be  anything  but  Con- 
federates. We  arrived  at  Louisville  soon  after  dark.  I sent  a battalion 
of  the  Sixth  Illinois,  under  Major  Starr,  In  advance,  to  picket  the  town 
and  remain  until  the  column  had  passed,  when  they  were  relieved  by 
a battalion  of  the  Seventh  Illinois,  under  Major  Graham,  who  was  ordered 
to  remain  until  we  should  have  been  gone  an  hour,  to  prevent  persons 
leaving  with  information  of  the  course  we  were  taking,  to  drive  out 
stragglers,  preserve  order,  and  quiet  the  fears  of  the  people.  They  had 
heard  of  our  coming  a short  time  before  we  arrived,  and  many  had  left, 
taking  only  what  they  could  hurriedly  move.  The  column  moved 
quietly  through  the  town  without  halting,  and  not  a thing  was  disturbed. 
Those  who  remained  at  home  acknowledged  that  they  were  surprised. 
They  had  expected  to  be  robbed,  outraged,  and  have  their  houses 
burned.  On  the  contrary,  they  were  protected  in  their  persons  and 
property,^ 

After  leaving  the  town,  we  struck  another  swamp,  in  which,  crossing 
it,  as  we  were  obliged  to,  in  the  dark,  we  lost  several  animals  drowned, 
and  the  men  narrowly  escaped  the  same  fate.  Marching  until  midnight, 
we  halted  until  daylight  at  the  plantation  of  Mr.  Estes,  about  10  miles 
south  of  Louisville. 

The  next  morning,  April  23,  at  daylight  we  took  the  road  for  Phil- 
adelphia, crossing  Pearl  Eiver  on  a bridge  about  6 miles  north  of  the 
town.  This  bridge  we  were  fearful  would  be  destroyed  by  the  citizens 
to  prevent  our  crossing,  and  upon  arriving  at  Philadelphia  we  found 
that  they  had  met  and  organized  for  that  purpose ; but  hearing  of  our 
near  approach,  their  hearts  failed,  and  they  fled  to  the  woods.  We  moved 
through  Philadelphia  about  3 p.  m.  without  interruption,  and  halted  to 
feed  about  5 miles  southeast,  on  the  Enterprise  road.  Here  we  rested  until 
10  o’clock  at  night,  when  I sent  two  battalions  of  the  Seventh  Illinois 
Cavalry,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Blackburn,  to  proceed  immediately 
to  Decatur,  thence  to  the  railroad  at  Newton  Station.  With  the  main 
force  I followed  about  an  hour  later.  The  advance  passed  through 
Decatur  about  daylight,  and  struck  the  railroad  about  6 a.  m.  I arrived 
about  an  hour  afterward  with  the  column.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Black- 
burn dashed  into  the  town,  took  possession  of  the  railroad  and  telegraph, 
and  succeeded  in  capturing  two  trains  in  less  than  half  an  hour  after 
his  arrival.  One  of  these,  25  cars,  was  loaded  with  ties  and  machinery, 
and  the  other  13  cars  were  loaded  with  commissary  stores  and  ammuni- 
tion, among  the  latter  several  thousand  loaded  shells.  These,  together 
with  a large  quantity  of  commissary  and  quartermaster’.s  stores  and 
about  five  hundred  stand  of  arms  stored  in  the  town,  were  destroyed. 
Seventy-five  prisoners  captured  at  this  point  were  paroled.  The  locomo- 
tives were  exploded  and  otherwise  rendered  completely  unserviceable. 
Here  the  track  was  torn  up,  and  a bridge  half  a mile  west  of  the  station 
destroyed.  I detached  a battalion  of  the  Sixth  Illinois  Cavalry,  under 
Major  Starr,  to  proceed  eastward  and  destroy  such  bridges,  &c,,  as  he 
might  find  over  Chunkey  Eiver.  Having  damaged  as  much  as  possible 
the  railroad  and  telegraph,  and  destroyed  all  Government  property  in 
the  vicinity  of  Newton,  I moved  about  4 miles  south  of  the  road  and 
fed  men  and  horses.  The  forced  marches  which  I was  compelled  to  make, 
in  order  to  reach  this  point  successfully,  necessarily  very  much  fatigued 
and  exhausted  my  command,  and  rest  and  food  were  absolutely  neces- 
saiy  lor  its  safety. 


Chap.  XXXVI  ] GRIERSON’s  RAID  FROM  LA  GRANGE,  TENN.  525 

From  captured  mails  and  information  obtained  by  my  scouts,  I knew 
that  large  forces  had  been  sent  out  to  intercept  our  return,  and  having 
instructions  from  Major-General  Hurlbut  and  Brigadier  General  Smiih 
to  move  in  any  direction*  from  this  point  which,  in  my  judgment,  would 
be  best  for  the  safety  of  my  command  and  the  success  of  the  expedition, 
I at  once  decided  to  move  south,  in  order  to  secure  the  necessary  rest 
and  food  for  men  and  horses,  and  then  return  to  La  Grange  through 
Alabama,  or  make  for  Baton  Rouge,  as  I might  hereafter  deem  best. 
Major  Starr  in  the  mean  time  rejoined  us,  having  destroyed  most  effect- 
ually three  bridges  and  several  hundred  feet  of  trestle-work,  and  the 
telegraph  from  8 to  10  miles  east  of  Newton  Station. 

After  resting  about  three  hours,  we  moved  south  to  Garlandville. 
At  this  point  we  found  the  citizens,  many  of  them  venerable  with  age, 
armed  with  shot-guns  and  organized  to  resist  our  approach.  As  the 
advance  entered  the  town,  these  citizens  fired  upon  them  and  wounded 
one  of  our  men.  We  charged  upon  them  and  captured  several.  After 
disarming  them,  we  showed  them  the  folly  of  their  actions,  and,  released 
them.  Without  an  exception  they  acknowledged  their  mistake,  and 
declared  that  they  had  been  grossly  deceived  as  to  our  real  character. 
One  volunteered  his  services  as  guide,  and  upon  leaving  us  declared  that 
hereafter  his  prayers  should  be  for  the  Union  Army.  I mention  this  as 
a sample  of  the  feeling  which  exists,  and  the  good  effect  which  our  pres- 
ence produced  among  the  people  in  the  country  through  which  we  passed?, 
Hundreds  who  are  skulking  and  hiding  out  to  avoid  conscription,  only 
await  the  presence  of  our  arms  to  sustain  them,  when  they  will  rise  up 
and  declare  their  principles ; and  thousands  who  have  been  deceived, 
upon  the  vindication  of  our  cause  would  immediately  return  to  loyalty. 

After  slight  delay  at  Garlandville,  we  moved  southwest  about  10  miles, 
and  camped  at  night  on  the  plantation  of  Mr.  Bender,  2 miles  west  of 
Montrose.  Our  men  and  horses  having  become  gradually  exhausted,  I 
determined  on  making  a very  easy  march  the  next  day,  looking  more 
to  the  recruiting  of  my  weary  little  command  than  to  the  accomplish- 
ment of  any  important  object ; consequently  I marched  at  8 o’clock  the 
next  morning,  taking  a west,  and  varying  slightly  to  a northwest,  course. 
We  marched  about  5 miles,  and  halted  to  feed  on  the  plantation  of  Elias 
Nichols. 

After  resting  until  about  2 p.  m.,  during  which  time  I sent  detach- 
ments north  to  threaten  the  line  of  railroad  at  Lake  Station  and  other 
points,  we  moved  southwest  toward  Raleigh,  making  about  12  miles 
during  the  afternoon,  and  halting  at  dark  on  the  plantation  of  Dr. 
Mackadora. 

From  this  point  I sent  a single  scout,  disguised  as  a citizen,  to  pro- 
ceed northward  to  the  line  of  the  Southern  Railroad,  cut  the  telegraph, 
and,  if  possible,  fire  a bridge  or  trestle-work.  He  started  on  his  journey 
about  midnight,  and  when  within  7 miles  of  the  railroad  he  came  upon 
a*  regiment  of  Southern  cavalry  from  Brandon,  Miss.,  in  search  of  us. 
He  succeeded  in  misdirecting  them  as  to  the  place  where  he  had  last  seen 
us,  and,  having  seen  them  well  ou  the  wrong  road,  he  immediately  re- 
traced his  steps  to  camp  with  the  news.  When  he  first  met  them  they 
were  on  the  direct  road  to  our  camp,  and  had  they  not  been  turned  from 
their  course  would  have  come  up  with  us  before  daylight. 

From  information  received  through  my  scouts  and  other  sources,  I 
found  that  Jackson  and  the  stations  east  as  far  as  Lake  Station  had  been 
re-enforced  by  infantry  and  artillery ; and  hearing  that  a fight  was  mo- 
mentarily expected  at  Grand  Gulf,  I decided  to  make  a rapid  march, 
cross  Pearl  River,  and  strike  the  New  Orleans,  Jackson  and  Great 


526  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 

Korthern  Eailroad  at  Hazlehurst,  aud,  after  destroying  as  much  of  the 
road  as  possible,  endeavor  to  get  upon  the  flank  of  the  enemy  and  co- 
operate with  our  forces,  should  they  be  successful  in  the  attack  upon 
Grand  Gulf  and  Port  Gibson. 

Having  obtained  during  this  day  plenty  of  forage  and  provisions,  and 
having  had  one  good  night’s  rest,  we  now  again  felt  ready  for  any  emer- 
gency. Accordingly^,  at  6 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  26th,  we  crossed 
Leaf  River,  burning  the  bridge  behind  us  to  prevent  any  enemy  who 
might  be  in  pursuit  from  following ; thence  through  Raleigh,  capturing 
the  sheriff  of  that  county,  with  about  $3,000  in  Government  funds  j thence 
to  Westville,  reaching  this  place  soon  after  dark.  Passing  on  about .2 
miles,  we  halted  to  feed,  in  the  midst  of  a heavy  rain,  on  the  plantation 
of  Mr.  Williams. 

After  feeding.  Colonel  Prince,  of  the  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry,  with 
two  battalions,  was  sent  immediately  forward  to  Pearl  River  to  secure 
the  ferry  and  lauding.  He  arrived  in  time  to  capture  a courier  who  had 
come  to  bring  intelligence  of  the  approach  of  the  Yankees  and  orders 
for  the  destruction  of  the  ferry.  With  the  main  column,  I followed  in 
about  two  hours.  We  ferried  aud  swam  our  horses,  and  succeeded  in 
crossing  the  whole  command  by  2 p.  m. 

As  soon  as  Colonel  Prince  had  crossed  his  two  battalions,  he  was  or- 
dered to  proceed  immediately  to  the  ^ew  Orleans,  Jackson  and  Great 
Northern  Railroad,  striking  it  at  Hazlehurst.  Here  he  found  a num- 
ber of  cars  containing  about  500  loaded  shells  and  a large  quantity  of 
commissary  and  quartermaster’s  stores,  intended  for  Grand  Gulf  and 
Port  Gibson.  These  were  destroyed,  and  as  much  of  the  railroad  and 
telegraph  as  possible.  Here,  again,  we  found  the  citizens  armed  to  re- 
sist us,  but  they  fled  precipitately  upon  our  approach. 

From  this  point  we  took  a northwest  course  to  Gallatin,  4 miles ; 
thence  southwest  miles  to  the  plantation  of  Mr.  Thompson,  where  we 
halted  until  the  next  morning. 

Directly  after  leaving  Gallatin  we  captured  a 64-pounder  gun,  a heavy 
wagon  load  of  ammunition,  and  machinery  for  mounting  the  gun,  on  the 
road  to  Port  Gibson.  The  gun  was  spiked  and  the  carriages  and  am- 
munition destroyed.  During  the  afternoon  it  rained  in  torrents,  and 
the  men  were  completely  drenched. 

At  6 o’clock  the  next  morning,  April  28,  we  moved  westward.  After 
proceeding  a short  distance,  I detached  a battalion  of  the  Seventh  Illinois 
Cavalry,  under  Captain  Trafton,  to  proceed  back  to  the  railroad  at  Ba- 
hala  and  destroy  the  road,  telegraph,  and  all  Government  property  he 
might  find.  With  the  rest  of  the  command,  I moved  southwest  toward 
Union  Church.  We  halted  to  feed  at  2 p.  m.  on  the  plantation  of  Mr. 
Snyder,  about  2 miles  northeast  of  the  church.  While  feeding,  our  pick- 
ets were  fired  upon  by  a considerable  force.  I immediately  moved  out 
upon  them,  skirmished  with  and  drove  them  through  the  town,  wound-  ^ 
ing  and  capturing  a number.  It  proved  to  be  a part  of  Wirt  Adams’  ’ 
(Mississippi)  cavalry.  After  driving  them  oft‘,  we  held  the  town  aud  biv- 
ouacked for  the  night.  After  accomplishing  the  object  of  his  expedition. 
Captain  Trafton  returned  to  us  about  3 o’clock  in  the  morning  of  the 
29th,  havdng  come  upon  the  rear  of  the  main  body  of  Adams’  command. 
The  enemy  having  a battery  of  artillery,  it  was  his  intention  to  attack 
us  in  front  and  rear  at  Union  Church  about  daylight  in  the  morning,  but 
the  appearance  of  Captain  Trafton  with  a force  in  his  rear  changed  his 
purpose,  and,  turning  to  the  right,  he  took  the  direct  road  to  Port  Gib- 
son. From  this  point  I made  a strong  demonstration  toward  Fayette, 
with  a view  of  creating  the  impression  that  we  were  going  toward  Port 


CHAJ-.  XXXVI.]  GRIERSON^S  RAID  FROM  LA  GRANGE,  TENN.  527 

Gibson  or  i^atchez,  while  I quietly  took  the  opposite  direction,  taking 
the  road  leading  southeast  to  Brookhaven,  on  the  railroad. 

Before  arriving  at  this  place,  we  ascertained  that  about  500  citizens 
and  conscripts  were  organized  to  resist  us.  We  charged  into  the  town, 
when  they  tied,  making  but  little  resistance.  We  captured  over  200 
prisoners,  a large  and  beautiful  camp  of  instruction,  comprisiug  se^  eral 
hundred  tents,  and  a large  quantity  of  quartermaster's  and  commissary 
stores,  arms,  ammunition,  &c.  After  paroling  the  prisoners  and  de- 
stroying the  railroad,  telegraph,  and  all  Government  property,  about 
dark  we  moved  southward,  and  encamped  at  Mr.  GilPs  plantation,  about 
8 miles  south  of  Brookhaven. 

On  the  following  morning  we  moved  directly  south,  along  the  rail- 
road, destroying  all  bridges  and  trestle-work  to  Bogue  Ghitto  Station, 
where  we  burned  the  depot  and  fifteen  freight  cars,  and  captured  a very 
large  secession  flag.  From  thence  we  still  moved  along  the  railroad, 
destroying  every  bridge,  water-tank,  &c.,  as  we  passed,  to  Summit, 
which  place  we  reached  soon  after  noon.  Here  we  destroyed  twenty- 
five  freight  cars  and  a large  quantity  of  Government  sugar.  We  found 
much  Union  sentiment  in  this  town,  and  were  kindly  welcomed  and  fed 
by  many  of  the  citizens. 

Hearing  nothing  more  of  our  forces  at  Grand  Gulf,  I concluded  to 
make  for  Baton  Eouge  to  recruit  my  coqimand,  after  which  I could 
return  to  La  Grange,  through  Southern  Mississippi  and  Western  Ala- 
bama j or,  crossing  the  Mississippi  Eiver,  move  through  Louisiana  and 
Arkansas.  Accordingly,  after  resting  about  two  hours,  we  started 
southwest,  on  the  Liberty  road,  marched  about  15  miles,  and  halted 
until  daylight  on  the  plantation  of  Dr.  Spu'rlark.  ^ 

^ The  next  morning  we  left  the  road  and  threatened  Magnolia  and  : 
Osyka,  where  large  forces  were  concentrated  to  meet  us  5 but,  instead 
of  attacking  those  points,  took  a course  due  south,  marching  through  <i  L 
•'  woods,  lanes,  and  by-roads,  and  striking  the  road  leading  from  Clinton 
^ to  Osyka.  Scarcely  had  we  touched  this  road  when  we  came  upon  the 
Ninth  Tennesse^Oavalry  [Battalioi^,  posted  in  a strong  defile,  guarding 
the  bridges  over  Tickfaw  Eiver.  We  captured  their  pickets,  and,  at- 
tacking them,  drove  them  before  us,  killing,  wounding,  and  capturing 
a number.  Our  loss  in  this  engagement  was  1 man  killed,  and  Lieut. 

Col.  William  D.  Blackburn  and  4 men  wounded.  • 

I cannot  speak  too  highly  of  the  bravery  of  the  men  upon  this  occa- 
sion, and  particularly  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Blackburn,  who,  at  the 
head  of  his  men,  charged  upon  the  bridge,  dashed  over,  and,  by  un- 
daunted courage,  dislodged  the  enemy  from  his  strong  position.  After 
disposing  of  the  de^ud  and  wounded,  we  immediately  moved  south,  on 
the  Greensburg  road,  recrossing  the  Tickfaw  Eiver  at  Edwards’  Bridge. 

At  this  point  we  met  [W.  H.]  Garland’s  rebel  cavalry,  and,  with  one 
battalion  of  the  Sixth  Illinois  and  two  guns  of  the  battery,  engaged 
and  drove  them  off  without  halting  the  column. 

The  enemy  were  now  on  our  track  in  earnest.  We  were  in  the  viciiir 
ity  of  their  stronghold,  and,  from  couriers  and  dispatches  which  we 
captured,  it  was  evident  they  were  sending  forces  in  all  directions  to 
intercept  us.  The  Amite  Eiver,  a wide  and  rapid  stream,  was  to  be 
crossed,  and  there  was  but  one  bridge  by  which  it  could  be  crossed, 
and  this  was  in  exceedingly  close  proximity  to  Port  Hudson.  This  I * 
determined  upon  securing  before  I halted.  We  crossed  it  at  midnight, 
about  two  hours  in  advance  of  a heavy  column  of  infantry  and  artil- 
lery,  which  had  been  sent  there  to  intercept  us.  I moved  on  to  Sandy  ^ 
Creek,  where  Hughes’  cavalry  [battalion],  under  Lieutenant- Colonel  / 

■A  I / 


528  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [<^hap.  XXXVI. 

[C.  C.J  Wilbourn,  were  encamped,  and  where  there  was  another  main 
road  leading  to  Port  Hudson. 

W e reached  this  point  at  first  dawn  of  day ; completely  surprised  and 
captured  the  camp,  with  a number  of  prisoners.  Having  destroyed  the 
camp,  consisting  of  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  tents,  a large  quantity 
of  ammunition,  guns,  public  and  private  stores,  books,  papers,  and 
public  documents,  I immediately  took  the  road  to  Baton  Eouge.  Arriv- 
ing at  the  Oomite  Eiver,  we  utterly  surprised  Stuart’s  cavalry  [Miles’ 
Legion],  who  were  picketing  at  this  point,  capturing  40  of  them,  with 
their  horses,  arms,  and  entire  camp.  Fording  the  river,  we  halted  to 
feed  within  4 miles  of  the  town.  Major-General  Augur,  in  command  at 
Baton  Eouge,  having  now,  for  the  first,  heard  of  our  approach,  sent  two 
companies  of  cavalry,  under  Captain  [J.  Franklin]  Godfrey,  to  meet  us. 
We  marched  into  the  town  about  3 p.  m.,  and  we  were  most  heartily 
welcomed  by  the  United  States  forces  at  this  point. 

Before  our  arrival  in  Louisville,  Company  B,  of  the  Seventh  Illinois 
Cavalry,  under  Captain  Forbes,  was  detached  to  proceed  to  Macon,  on  j 
the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Eailroad ; if  possible  take  the  town,  destroy  the 
railroad  and  telegraph,  and  rejoin  us.  Upon  approaching  the  place,  he 
found  it  had  been  re-enforced,  and  the  bridge  over  the  Okanoxubee 
Eiver  destroyed,  so  that  the  railroad  and  telegraph  could  not  be  reached. 

He  came  back  to  our  trail,  crossed  the  Southern  Eailroad  at  Newton, 
took  a southeast  course  to  Enterprise,  where,  although  his  force  num- 
bered only  35  men,  he  entered  with  a flag  of  truce  and  demanded  the 
surrender  of  the  place.  The  commanding  officer  at  that  point  asked 
an  hour  to  consider  the  matter,  which  Captain  Forbes  (having  ascer- 
tained that  a large  force  occupied  the  place)  granted,  and  improved  in 
getting  away.  He  immediately  followed  us,  and  succeeded  in  joining 
the  column  while  it  was  crossing  Pearl  Eiver  at  Georgetown.  In  ordei*  | 
to  catch  us,  he  was  obliged  to  march  60  miles  per  day  for  several  con 
secutive  days.  Much  honor  is  due  Captain  Forbes  for  the  manner  in 
which  he  conducted  this  expedition. 

At  Louisville  1 sent  Captain  Lynch,  of  Company  E,  Sixth  Illinois  i 
^ Cavalry,  and  one  man  of  his  company,  disguised  as  citizens,  who  had  i 
gallantly  volunteered  to  proceed  to  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Eailroad  and 
cut  the  wires,  which  it  was  necessary  should  be  done  to  prevent  infor- 
• mation  of  our  presence  from  flying  along  the  railroad  to  Jackson  and 
other  points.  Captain  Lynch  and  his  comrade  proceeded  toward  Macon,  , 
but,  meeting  with  the  same  barrier  which  had  stopped  Captain  Forbes,  j 
could  not  reach  the  road.  He  went  to  the  pickers  at  the  edge  of  the  i 
town,  ascertained  the  whole  disposition  of  their  forces  and  much  other  | 
valuable  information,  and,  returning,  joined  us  above  Decatur,  having  ; 
ridden  without  interruption  for  two  days  and  nights  without  a mo-  ; 
ment’s  rest.  All  honor  to  the  gallant  captain,  whose  intrepid  coolness  : 
and  daring  characterizes  him  on  every  occasion. 

T " During  the  expedition  we  killed  and  wounded  about  100  of  the  enemy, 
.captured  and  paroled  over  500  prisoners,  many  of  them  officers,  de- 
stroyed between  50  and  60  miles  of  railroad  and  telegraph,  captured 
and  destroyed  over  3,000  stand  of  arms,  and  other  army  stores  and 
Government  property  to  an  immense  amount;  we  also  captured  1,000 
horses  and  mules. 

Our  loss  during  the  entire  journej^  was  3 killed,  7 wounded,  5 left 
on  the  route  sick ; the  sergeant-major  and  surgeon  of  the  Seventh 
Illinois  left  with  Lieutenant-Colonel  Blackburn,  and  9 men  missing,  : 
supposed  to  have  straggled.  We  marched  ov^er  600  miles  in  less  than 
sixteen  days.  The  last  twenty-eight  hours  we  marched  76  miles,  had 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  GRIERSON’S  RAID  FROM  LA  GRANGE,  TENN. 


529 


four  engagements  witli  the  enemy,  and  forded  the  Oomite  River,  which 
was  deep  enough  to  swim  many  of  the  horses.  During  this  time  the 
men  and  horses' were  without  food  or  rest. 

Much  of  the  country  through  which  we  passed  was  almost  entirely 
destitute  of  forage  and  provisions,  and  it  was  but  seldom  that  we  ob- 
tained over  one  meal  per  day.  Many  of  the  inhabitants  must  undoubt- 
edly suffer  for  want  of  the  necessaries  of  life,  which  have  reached  most 
fabulous  prices. 

Two  thousand  cavalry  and  mounted  infantry  were  sent  from  the 
vicinity  of  Greenwood  aud  Grenada  northeast  to  intercept  us;  1,300 
cavalry  and  several  regiments  of  infantry  with  artillery  were  sent  from 
Mobile  to  Maconj  Meridian,  and  other  points  on  the  Mobile  and  Ohio 
road  ; a force  was  sent  from  Canton  northeast  to  prevent  our  crossing 
Pearl  River,  and  another  force  of  infantry  and  cavalry  was  sent  from 
Brookhaven  to  Monticello,  thinking  we  would  cross  Pearl  River  at  that 
point  instead  of  Georgetown.  ' Expeditions  were  also  sent  from  Vicks- 
burg, Port  Gibson,  and  Port  Hudson  to  intercept  us.  Many  detachments 
were  sent  out  from  my  command  at  various  places  to  mislead  the  enemy, 
all  of  which  rejoined  us  in  safety.  Colton’s  pocket  map  of  Mississippi, 
which,  though  small,  is  very  correct,  was  all  I had  to  guide  me;  but 
by  the  capture  of  their  couriers,  dispatches,  and  mails,  and  the  inval- 
uable aid  of  my  scouts,  we  were  always  able  by  rapid  marches  to  evade 
the  enemy  when  they  w^ere  too  strong  and  whip  them  when  not  too 
large.  — 

Colonel  Prince,  commanding  the  Seventh  Illinois,  and  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Loomis,  commanding  the  Sixth  Illinois,  were  untiring  in  their 
efforts  to  further  the  success  of  the  expedition,  and  I cannot  speak  too 
highly  of  the  coolness,  bravery,  and,  above  all,  of  the  untiring  perse- 
verance of  the  officers  and  men  of  the  command  during  the  entire  jour- 
ney. Without  their  hearty  co-operation,  which  was  freely  given  under 
the  most  trying  circumstances,  we  could  not  have  accomplished  so  much 
with  such  signal  success. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  H.  GRIERSON, 

Colonel j Commanding  Brigade. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Col.  Edward  Hatch^  Second  Iowa  Cavalry. 

La  Grange,  Tenn.,  April  27,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  complying  with  orders 
from  Colonel  Grierson,  commanding  First  Cavalry  Brigade,  I left  camp 
with  my  regiment,  at  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  April  17,  and  marched  with 
brigade  to  the  neighborhood  of  Ripley,  Miss.,  and  camped. 

On  the  morning  of  the  18th  of  April,  by  order  of  Colonel  Grierson, 
marched  my  regiment  east  of  Ripley  3 miles,  thence  southeast  through 
Moliuo,  and  camped  5 miles  south,  of  that  place,  skirmishing  during  the 
day  with  Smith’s  regiment  of  Partisan  Rangers,  organized  near  there 
at  a place  known  as  Chesterville.  j 

34  R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


530  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  I^hap.  XXXVL  1 

Oli  the  19th,  marched  southwest,  forming  a junction  with  Colonel  | 
Grierson  5 miles  south  of  Pontotoc.  There  Major  Love,  of  my  regi-  J 
ment,  was  detached,  with  a portion  of  my  regiment,- to  return  to  La  T 
Grange,  reducing  me  to  about  500  men. 

On  the  morning  of  the  20th,  marched  with  Colonel  Grierson  13  miles  ‘ 
southeast  of  Houston,  and  camped. 

On  the  morning  of  the  21st  of  April,  complying  with  Colonel  Grier- - 
son’s  order,  was  ordered  to  move  in  the  rear  of  his  column  at  3 a.  m.,  , 
leaving  Grierson  at  the  junction  of  the  roads  leading  to  Louisville  and  ^ 
West  Point  and  Columbus,  thence  to  proceed  to  the  railroad  at  West  ■ 
Point,  destroying  the  railroad  bridge  over  the  Oktibbeha  Liver ; thence 
move  rapidly  southward  to  Macon,  destroying  the  railroad  and  Gov- 
ernment stores ; then  to  find  my  way  north  to  La  Grange  by  the  most . 
practicable  route. 

For  some  reason  unknown  to  me,  the  column  did  not  move  until  7- 
a.  m.  This  delay  in  time  in  the  following  report  will  show  it  was 
fatal  to  carrying  out  Colonel  Grierson’s  order.  At  the  point  Colonel 
Grierson  turned  south  from  the  direction  1 was  to  travel,  a detachment 
of  my  regiment  moved  with  him  4 miles,  then  marched  back  to  this 
point  to  obliterate  the  tracks  of  Colonel  Grierson,  going  south  with  the : 
Sixth  and  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry.  In  this  way  I was  delayed  three 
hours,  thus  enabling  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  which  had  been  concentrat- 
ing for  some  days  in  anticipation  of  a movement  on  Columbus,  to  tal4 
upon  me.  About  12  o’clock,  on  reaching  the  town  of  Palo  Alto,  I was 
attacked  in  rear  and  on  each  flank  by  a force  under  General  [S.  J.]  Ghol- 
son,  consisting  of  Smith’s  partisan  regiment,  [C.  E.]  Barteau’s  regiment, >; 
and  [W.  M.]  Inge’s  battalion.  In  my  front,  between  me  and  West* 
r . Point,  was  an^Alabama  regiment,  recently  from  Pensacola,  with  artil-; 

^ lery,  my  front  being  well  protected  by  the  Houlka  Eiver. 

^ ^ ,,  In  the  attack  made  by  the  enemy,  a company  in  the  rear  was  cut  off  and  < 
y nearly  all  taken.  The  enemy  then  closed  in  on  my  flanks,  and  advanced 
V,  \ ^ in  two  lines  on  my  rear,  with  two  flags  of  truce  flying,  enabling  him  to 

^ approach  very  close,  my  command  being  at  that  time  in  a lane,  witli^ 

high  fences  and  hedges  upon  either  side,  my  men  dismounted  and  well 
Cx  -y  /-  covered.  Changing  my  front  to  the  rear,  I waited  until  the  enemy 
were  close  upon  me,  and  opened  with  my  rifles  and  one  2-pounder  from 
the  front  and  with  carbines  on  the  flanks,  breaking  his  lines  and  driv- 
ing him  back,  pushing  the  enemy  about  3 miles,  capturing  arms  and 
horses,  and  retaking  the  company  lost  in  the  first  attack.  From  that 
time  until  dark  it  was  a constant  skirmish,  the  enemy  having  taken 
me  for  the  main  column.  Believing  it  was  important  to  divert  the 
enemy’s  cavalry  from  Colonel  Grierson,  I moved  slowly  northward, 
fighting  by  the  rear,  crossing  the  Houlka  Eiver,  and  drawing  their 
forces  immediately  in  my  rear. 

On  the  22d,  marched  north  near  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Eailroad,  the 
enemy  continuing  to  follow,  their  forces  augmented  by  all  the  citizens 
in  the  country,  armed  with  shot-guns  and  hunting  rifles,  firing  con- 
stantly on  our  flanks.  At  4 p.  m.  attacked  Okolona,  driving  out  the 
enemy’s  cavalry  and  State  forces,  burning  the  barracks  for  5,000  men, 
and  destroying  stores  and  ammunition.  I then  marched  northwest  5 
miles  and  camped.  j 

On  the  23d,  marched  north,  and  hearing  that  Chalmers’  forces  in- 
tended cutting  me  off‘,  I destroyed  the  bridges  over  the  Chiwapa  Creek, 
to  check  the  forces  following  me  in  the  rear.  Camped  that  night  near  ^ 
Tupelo.  I 


531 


Chap.  XXXVL]  GRIERSON'S  RAID  FROM  LA  GRANGE,  TENN. 

On  the  24th,  marched  north  through  Birmingham,  where  I was  at- 
tacked in  the  rear  by  what  I believe  to  be  Chalmers’  forces,  at  10  a.  m. 
My  ammunition  giving  out,  I retreated  slowly  toward  Molino,  stopping 
occasionally  to  repel  their  charges,  concealing  my  men  at  all  favorable 
points  with  the  2- pounder,  which  did  excellent  service.  I waited  until 
the  enemy  were  nearly  on  me,  when  I opened  a fire  at  short  range,  the 
enemy  suffering  terribly,  with  small  loss  to  me.  In  this  way  the  attack 
was  kept  up  for  6 miles,  when  the  enemy  were  evidently  tired,  and, 
with  the  exception  of  annoyance  from  guerrilla  parties,  we  were  not 
troubled  by  the  enemy  from  that  point  to  La  Grange,  where  I arrived 
on  the  26th. 

We  captured  about  three  hundred  shot-guns  and  rifles,  mostly  Enfield, 
which,  for  want  of  transportation,  were  destroyed,  and  have  had  but  10 
men  killed,  wounded,  and  missing.  I left  camp  with  70  rounds  of  am- 
munition, and  had  10  on  reaching  it.  I had  decided  on  reaching  Oko- 
lona  to  go  south,  but  upon  examining  my  ammunition  I had  but  21 
rounds  left,  which  did  not  warrant  the  movement. 

The  fight  at  Palo  Alto  gave  the  enemy  time  to  guard  the  railroad  at 
West  Point  and  prepare  for  an  attack  on  Columbus,  with  some  2,000 
State  troops,  under  General  Buggies. 

I left  camp  with  26ff  horses,  worn  out,  which  broke  down  at  the  end 
of  the  second  day,  and  mounted  my  men  upon  the  mules  from  my  train 
and  borrowed  mules.  I have  nearly  mounted  my  regiment,  returned 
the  mules  borrowed,  and  filled  up  my  train,  captured  50  prisoners,  and 
killed  and  wounded  not  less  than  100  of  the  enemy. 

The  fight  at  Palo  Alto,  and  diverting  the  enemy  from  Colonel  Grier- 
son, has  undoubtedly  given  him  thirty-six  hours’  start. 

Inclosed  I send  list  of  prisoners  captured  j also  duplicates  of  paroles 
given.*  The  prisoners  taken  near  Pontotoc  were  turned  over  to  Major 
Love,  of  my  regiment. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  HATCH, 

Colonel  Second  Iowa  Cavalry, 

Capt.  W.  H.  Harland, 

Adjt.  Gen.j  First  Division^  Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 


Ho.  5. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen,  John  Adams.^  G.  S.  Army, 

Lake,  April  25,  1863. 

Five  hundred  Federals  at  Hewton  Station  this  morning  at  2 o’clock ; 
have  certainly  gone  to  Enterprise.  Heavy  firing  heard  in  direction  of 
Meridian  this  morning.  One  regiment  of  Confederates  came  from  Me- 
ridian to  Hickory  Station  yesterday  without  ammunition.  They  went 
back,  so  General  Loring  must  know  of  the  enemy.  My  engine  has  just 
arrived  j report  another  heavy  column  of  cavalry  advancing  on  Newton 
Station  from  Decatur,  Miss.,  and  going  to  Enterprise.  Telegraph  oper- 
ator was  left  beyond  Newton,  putting  up  wire  to  Meridian.  Eleven  small 
bridges  burned  between  Newton  and  Meridian.  I await  further  orders. 

JOHN  ADAMS, 
Brigadier- General, 

General  Pemberton. 


Omitted. 


532 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Lake,  AjjHI  25,  1863 — 3 a.  m. 

Arrived  2.20  o’clock.  Sent  an  engine  with  dispatches  and  couriers 
to  communicate  with  Generals  Loriug,  Johnston,  and  Buckner.  Will 
‘ wait  until  engine  returns,  or  say  8 a.  m.  Report  says  enemy  300  strong 
left  Newton  Station  in  direction  of  Enterprise  at  4 p.  m. 

JOHN  ADAMS, 
Brigadier-  General. 

[General  Pemberton.] 


V' 


y 


Lake,  April  25,  1863 — 8.50  a.  m. 

Am  waiting  return  of  party  sent  to  open  coinmunication  with  Meri- 
dian. Engine  of  my  train  sent  with  party. 

JOHN  ADAMS, 
Brigadier  General. 

General  Pemberton. 

General:  Did  you  get  a dispatch  from  General  Adarns,  dated  3 
o’clock  this  morning'?  The  courier  being  absent  (delivering  a mes- 
sage) at  the  time  of  its  reception,  I left  it  by  his  bedside  with  lighted 
candle  near  it. 

OPERATOR, 
Jackson  Office. 


Lake,  April  25,  1863. 

Passengers  just  from  Meridian  report  no  enemy  at  Enterprise  at  12 
m.  to-day.  Enemy  supposed  to  be  moving  westward  and  between  us. 
Unless  otherwise  ordered,  shall  move  to  Morton  Station. 

JOHN  ADAMS, 
Brigadier-General. 

General  Pemberton. 


V 


Lake,  April  25,  1863. 

The  following  dispatches  were  sent  by  the  same  means  to  Generals 
Loring,  Buckner,  and  Johnston  : 


General  Loring: 

Retui’n  at  once  in  direction  of  Jackson  with  all  your  available  force. 
By  direction  of  General  Pemberton. 


General  Johnston  : , r»  i 

Railroad  communication  interrupted  above  this  point  by  enemy.  General  Pember- 
3n  directs  me  to  inform  you  he  is  sorely  pressed  on  all  sides,  and  urges  you  to  send  at 
nee  2,000  cavalry  to  fall  on  rear  of  enemy. 


General  Buckner  : ^ . 

1^  All  is  lost  unless  you  can  send  a regiment  or  two  to  Meridian.  General  Pemberton 
^ 1 directs  me  to  urge  you  to  send. 

JOHN  ADAMS, 
Brigadier- GeneraL 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton, 

Commanding. 


Chap.  XXXVL]  GKIERSON’S  RAID  FROM  LA  GRANGE,  TENN,  533 

No.  G. 

Reports  of  Col.  Wirt  Adams.,  Mississippi  Cavalry. 

Fayette,  April  29,  1863.  j/ 

Three  of  my  companies  from  Natchez,  marching  to  join  me,  met  and 
engaged  the  Federal  caviilry  force  last  evening  20  miles  above  this, 
making  a forced  march  of  20  miles  from  Port  Gibson,  with  two  com- 
panies and  two  mountain  piecess,  I passed  the  enemy’s  dank  last  night,  ^ 
and  formed  junction  with  the  three  companies  directly  in  enemy’s  front, 
intending  to  engage  him..  This  morning,  8 o’clock, found  he  had  marched 
rapidly  in  direction  of  Brook  haven.  Thinking  it  w as  his  intention  to 
reach  Bodney  or  Natchez,  1 marched  my  command  to  this  point,  where 
I have  been  joined  by  five  companies.  Shall  now  march  to  intercept 
his  movement  toward  Baton  Eouge. 

WIRT  ADAMS, 

Colonel.,  Commanding. 

General  Pemberton. 


Near  Fayette,  May  5,  1863. 

General:  I pursued  the  cavalry  to  a point  near  Greensburg,  in 
Louisiana,  near  which  place  they  forded  the  Amite  River,  and  made  ^ 
good  their  escape  to  Baton  Rouge.  Notwithstanding  1 marched  over 
50  miles  per  day,  and  moved  during  day  and  night,  yet  the  distance  1 
had  to  traverse  from  west  to  east  to  reach  the  line  of  their  march,  and 
owing  to  their  use  of  the  most  skillful  guides  and  unfrequented  roads, 

I found  it  impossible,  to  my  great  mortification  and  regret,  to  overhaul 
them.  During  the  last  twenty -four  hours  of  their  march  in  this  State, 
they  traveled  at  a sweeping  gallop,  the  numerous  stolen  horses  pre- 
viously collected  furnishing  them  fresh  relays.  I have  marched  as  rap- 
idly as  possible  on  my  return  to  this  point,  and,  in  the  absence  of  other 
orders,  shall  move  to-day  against  the  enemy’s  line  of  communication 
from  the  Mississippi  River  to  Port  Gibson.  I shall  annoy  and  harass 
him  on  his  rear  and  flank,  and  then  move  toward  his  front,  and  com- 
nuinicate  with  the  general  commanding  between  Port  Gibson  and  the 
railroad.  I venture,  general,  to  address  you  direct,  pending  this  diffi- 
culty of  communication  with  Major-General  Stevenson. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WIRT  ADAMS, 

Colonel^  Commanding. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton,  Jaclcson. 

P.  S. — The  wounded  lieutenant-colonel  and  associates  of  the  Federal 
cavalry  stated  that  their  object  had  been  to  take  Natchez  and  connect 
above  with  Grant’s  army,  and  that  it  had  been  defeated  by  the  check 
they  received  at  Union  Church  and  the  reports  they  received  of  my 
strength  in  their  front.  * 


No.  7. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  Col.  C.  R.  Barteau^  Second  Tennessee  Cavalry. 

Near  Palo  Alto,  on  West  Point  Road, 

April  22,  18G3 — 7 a.  m.  V 

General  : By  rapid  marches,  after  concentrating  our  forces  near  and 
above  Verona,  1 overtook  the  enemy  at  Palo  Alto  2 p.  m.  yesterday.  I ^ 


534 


MISSISKIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


LChap.  XXXVI. 


immediately  attacked  him  in  the  rear,  and  a fight  ensued,  which  lasted 
nearly  until  dark,  when  I again  got  in  his  rear,  between  the  enemy  and 
the  railroad.  I am  now  waiting  here  to  join  Colonel  [James]  Cunning- 
5 2 ham,  whose  arrival  from  Okoloua  is  expected.  The  enemy  last  night  re- 
treated from  Palo  Alto  up  the  Houston  road  2 miles,  and  was  re-enforced 
by  a column  which  had  been  sent  to  Starkville.  I do  not  know  whether 
we  can  succeed  in  gobbling  up  this  force,  as  I desire  to  do,  and  would 
suggest  that  if  Columbus  is  not  threatened  from  east  side  of  Tombigbee, 
you  immediately  mount  as  much  of  the  force  as  possible  at  Columbus, 
and  move  to  West  Point,  and  thence  to  Palo  Alto.  We  will  not,  if 
l)ossible,  allow  the  enemy  to  reach  the  railroad. 

Eespectfully, 

C.  E.  BAETEATJ, 
Lieutenant- Colonel^  Commanding. 

[General  Daniel  Euggles.] 


Okolona,  Miss.,  April  30,  1863. 

On  the  18th  instant,  I learned  from  my  scouts  that  a Federal  force, 
variously  estimated  in  strength,  was  advancing  from  the  direction  of 
Grand  Junction  toward  New  Albany.  It  reached  Cherry  Creek,  7 
miles  north  of  Pontotoc,  the  same  day,  and  encamped  there  that  night. 
Thinking  that  the  movement  might  be  to  break  up  the  camp  of  State 
troops  at  Chesterville,  I moved  my  regiment  to  that  place  on  the  19th 
instant. 

At  10  o’clock  that  night,  I learned  that  late  in  the  evening  the  force 
had  moved  down  to  Pontotoc.  I then  thought  the  raid  would  be  upon 
Okolona  and  Aberdeen  j so  I moved  at  12  o’clock,  with  Colonel  [J.  F.j 
^ Smith,  Major  [W.  M.j  Inge,  and  Captain  [T.  W.j  Ham,  with  four  compa- 
nies, to  the  Verona  and  Pontotoc  road,  my  object  being  to  intercept  the 
enemy  on  the  Pontotoc  and  Aberdeen  road.  For  this  pur[)ose,  at  day- 
light, I left  Garman’s  Mills,  2 miles  south  of  the  Pontotoc  and  Verona 
road,  and  at  8.30  a.  m.  entered  the  Pontotoc  and  Okoloua  road  8 miles 
above  the  latter  place.  I then  moved  immediately  on  to  Pontotoc,  in- 
tending, if  the  enemy  were  there,  to  attack  him  at  once  and  ascertain 
•his  strength.  Within  5 miles  of  Pontotoc,  I learned  that  the  enemy 
had  left  at  8 o’clock  on  the  Houston  road,  but  that  a portion  of  the  force  ! 
(which  I suppose  was  300)  was  sent  out  on  the  Oxford  road.  Arriving 
at  Pontotoc,  I learned  that  this  detachment  had  gone  back  toward  New  | 
Albany,  and  would  not  accompany  the  expedition  farther  south.  He 
was  three  hours  ahead  of  me,  and  traveling  at  a rapid  rate.  The  column 
which  moved  toward  Houston  was  925  strong,  with  four  pieces  of  artil- 
lery. I immediately  gave  pursuit,  and  that  night  rested  three  hours 
miles  north  of  Houston,  after  an  almost  continuous  march  of  67^  ! 
miles.  •The  enemy,  however,  encamped  the  same  night  at  Dr.  Kilgore’s, 
IIJ  miles  south  of  Houston,  on  the  Starkville  road.  ^ ^ 

— At  11  a.  m.  of  [April]  22d,  I was  at  Dr.  Kilgore’s,  and  the  enemy  two  " . 
hours  ahead  of  me.  After  moving  half  an  hour  longer,  my  advance  i 
guard  fired  upon  a party  of  20  of  the  enemy,  supposed  to  be  the  rear 
guard.  This  party  fled,  and  took  the  Starkville  road.  The  enemy  had 
divided,  200  going  to  Starkville  and  700  continuing  their  march  on 
the  West  Point  road,  and  at  2 o’clock  (having  taken  the  West  Point 
road)  I drove  in  their  rear  guard  2 miles  northwest  of  Palo  Alto.  The 
enemy  at  once  formed  and  drove  back  my  advance  guard ; but,  as  soon 
as  the  column  arrived,  1 charged  immediately  upon  the  enemy,  and 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  GRIERSON’S  RAID  FROM  LA  GRANGE,  TENN. 


535 


drove  him  back  half  a mile  into  a neck  of  woods  near  Palo  Alto  church. 
After  skirmishing  for  advantage  of  ground  for  two  hours  or  more,  and 
finding  that  the  enemy  would  not  come  out  from  his  position,  I placed 
Smith’s  regiment  and  Ham’s  four  companies  immediately  in  his  front, 
dismounted,  and,  protected  by  the  church,  a small  number  of  trees,  and 
the  brow  of  a slight  eminence,  I gave  instructions  that  should  the  enemy 
advance  on  them  to  reserve  their  fire  nutil  he  should  arrive  close  euougli 
to  make  it  destructive  and  deadly,  and  to  hold  the  position  until  a 
charge  should  be  made  fully  in  his  rearj  that  I would  move  the  Second 
Tennessee  and  Major  Inge’s  battalion  around  to  his  rear  and  make  the 
charge  as  soon  as  possible.  This  movement  was  being  executed,  but, 
before  arriving  at  the  proper  point  from  which  to  make  the  charge  on  his 
rear,  the  enemy  anticipated  this,  and  poured  a rapid  fire  upon  Colonel 
Smith’s  regiment  and  Captain  Ham’s  four  companies,  before  which  the 
men  retreated  in  the  utmost  disorder,  although  everything  was  done 
which  could  have  been  by  these  two  officers  to  make  them  stand  and  at 
least  give  the  enemy  one  fire.  The  enemy  immediately  rushed  upon 
these  two  commands,  pursuing  them  back  on  the  Houston  road.  I of 
course  moved  immediately  on  the  West  Point  road,  having  accomplished 
a part  of  my  object,  which  was  to  get  between  the  enemy  and  West 
Point 5 but  had  not  the  troops  given  way  so  soon  in  front,  I should  have 
cut  to  pieces  or  captured  the  entire  force  of  the  enemy.  Colonel  Smith 
and  Captain  Ham,  however,  acted  gallantly,  and  took  the  post  of  danger, 
endeavoring  by  their  example  to  inspire  confidence  and  insure  success. 

During  the  night,  the  enemy  turned  back  his  course  and  crossed  on 
Houlka  Creek  toward  Buena  Yista.  As  I pursued  him  in  the  morning  - 
following,  Lieutenant-Colonel  [James]  Cunningham  joined  me  3 miles 
from  Palo  Alto  5 Colonel  Smith  and  Captain  [T.  W.]  Ham  with  their 
commands  also.  The  re-enforcement  with  Lieutenant-Colonel  Cunning- 
ham’s command  was  too  late  to  be  of  any  service.  In  fact,  the  tardiness 
of  his  movements  allowed  the  enemy  to  reach  Okolona;  for  had  he  joined 
me  before  reaching  Palo  Alto,  we  should  have  routed  and  scattered  the 
enemy.  Had  he  remained  at  Okolona,  he  could  have  opposed  his  prog- 
ress, and  had  he  early  in  the  morning  of  the  22d  fallen  upon  the  enemy’s 
rear,  when  he  knew  that  he  was  retreating,  and  was  only  3 miles  from 
him,  the  enemy  could  not  have  reached  Okolona.  He  could  have 
marched  from  Okolona  several  hours  sooner  than  he  did,  and  have 
joined  me  at  Houston  or  at  Dr.  Kilgore’s.  Upon  his  late  arrival  he  de- 
sired to  assume  command,  which  I declined  to  grant  him,  and  remained 
in  command  of  the  forces.  If  I committed  an  error  in  this  respect,  I am 
subject  to  such  remedy  as  the  case  may  require. 

The  enemy  marched  from  Buena  Yista  to  Okolona  two  hours  ahead 
of  us.  After  following  the  Pontotoc  road  from  Buena  Yista  7 miles, 
he  turned  to  the  right,  and  crossed  Cluickatouclie  Creek  at  Cox’s  Bridge ; 
reached  Okolona,  I think,  at  4 p.  m.  Remained  but  a short  time ; burned 
the  hospital  building,  and  went  5 miles  out  on  the  Pontotoc  road,  and 
encamped  for  the  night.  From  Buena  Yista,  Major  luge.  Captain  Ham, 
and  Colonel  Smith  moved  directly  on  the  Pontotoc  road,  and  encamped 
on  that  roM.  The  Second  Alabama  and  Second  Tennessee  moved  out 

2 miles,  and  attempted  to  cross  Chuckatouche  Creek  and  reach  Okolona 
that  night,  but  there  being  no  bridge,  and  the  water  swimming  deep, 
were  compelled  to  remain  until  daylight  in  the  morning  of  the  23d, 
when  they  moved  to  Okolona;  thence  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy  on  the 
Pontotoc  road,  and  joined  wTth  the  three  other  commands  at  Bramlett’s, 

3 miles  from  Edwards  Mills.  The  euemyhad  crossed  Chiwapa  Creek 
at  Oarma.n’s  Mills  at  2 p.  in.,  and  de^stroyed  the  bridge,  having  turned 


536  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 

his  direction  from  Pontotoc  to  Verona.  He  encamped  4 miles  west  of 
Verona  for  two  hours;  moved  on  at  4 o^clock,  went  to  Harrisburg, 
turned  northward,  and  encamped  for  the  night  at  Shaurer’s.  The  bridge 
being  destroyed  at  Garman’s  Mills,  we  determined  to  make  the  pursuit 
by  crossing  at  Edwards  Mills.  But  before  marching  from  Bram left’s, 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Cunningham  informed  us  that  his  command  was 
exhausted  and  without  rations;  that  he  could  not  continue  the  pursuit. 
This  materially  reduced  our  strength,  for  many  of  our  men  had  to  be 
left  on  account  of  horses  broken  down  by  such  continuous  marching ; 
but  the  pursuit  was  made  with  the  Second  Tennessee,  Major  Inge’s 
battalion,  Colonel  Smith’s  regiment,  and  Captain  Ham’s  four  companies, 
with  not  exceeding  10  rounds  of  ammunition  to  the  man.  At  11.30 
a.  m.  we  overtook  the  enemy,  and  drove  in  his  rear  guard  1 mile  south 
of  Birmingham,  at  which  place  he  formed  to  receive  us.  We  fought  him 
there  about  two  hours  and  twenty  minutes,  driving  him  in  confusion 
across  Camp  Creek,  IJ  miles  from  Birmingham.  After  crossing  the 
creek,  the  enemy  destroyed  the  bridge,  and  our  ammunition  being  ex- 
hausted, the  pursuit  could  not  be  continued. 

In  the  fight.  Major  Inge’s  battalion.  Captain  Cole’s  company,  and, 
in  fact,  all  the  troops  engaged,  acted  very  gallantly.  As  it  was  not  ex- 
pedient to  continue  the  pursuit,  the  several  commands  returned  to  the 
camping  places  which  they  had  occupied  before  until  they  were  ordered 
to  rendezvous  at  Okolona. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  B.  BARTEAU, 

Lieutenant-  O^Hnel. 

Capt.  R.  M.  Hooe,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Ko.  8. 

Reports  of  Capt.  A . B.  commanding  piclcet. 

Camp  on  Plank  Road,  May  2,  1863. 

I saw  Lieutenant  [M.  C.]  Powers  this  evening.  The  Yankees  surprised 
Captain  [B.  F.]  Bryan,  and  captured  him  and  nearly  all  of  his  men. 
This  leaves  my  left  and  rear,  also  Clive  Branch,  exposed.  I cannot 
learn  where  they  came  from,  or  where  they  are  at  this  time. 
Respectfullv,  your  humble  servant, 

A.  B.  BIFFLE, 

Captain... 

Captain  [A.  G.  Cag-E.] 


Outpost  Picket, 

On  Plank  Road,  May  2,  1803. 

I have  reliable  information  from  one  that  I am  well  acquainted  with 
that  1,400  Yankee  cavalry  entered  Baton  Rouge  late  this  evening  from 
the  direction  of  Camp  Moore,  having  in  charge  150  C.  S.  Army  prison- 
ers, including  Captain  Bryan’s  company,  the  captain  being  in  comi)any. 
Our  left  and  rear  is  entirely  exposed.  I have  40  men  with  me. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  B.  BIFFLE, 

Captain,  Commanding  Piclcet  on  Plank  Road. 

C.  M.  elACKSON, 

Assista7it  Adjutant  General. 


Chap.  XXXVI.J  GEIERSON’s  RAID  FROM  LA  GRANGE,  TENN. 


537 


No.  9. 

Report  of  GoL  Alexander  J.  Broivn,  Fifty -fifth  Tennessee  Infantry. 

On  the  Eoad,  Six  Miles  from  Williams^  Bridge,  ^ 

May  2,  1863 — 9.30  a.  m. 

Sir:  A courier  from  Williams’ Bridge,  belonging  to  Captain  Taz 
well’s  [Terrell’s?]  company  of  cavalry,  is  just  in,  and  informs  me  the  en- 
emy, 1,500  strong,  crossed  the  bridge  last  night  between  12  and  1 o’clock. 
They  had  four  pieces  of  artillery.  The  detachment  at  the  bridge  cap- 
tured a few  prisoners. 

A refugee  from  Greenwell  Springs,  belonging  to  a detachment  of 
Hughes’  battalion  of  cavalry,  has  also  just  reported  to  me,  and  repre- 
sents the  enemy  at  Greenwell  Springs  this  morning  just  before  day. 
Our  cavalry,  about  75  in  number,  scattered  in  every  direction. 

While  writing,  a courier  from  Clinton  hands  me  your  dispatch  to 
Capt.  J.  B.  Walker  j unfortunately,  however,  about  ten  hours  too  late. 
Starting  at  the  hour  we  did,  it  was  impossible  to  have  intercepted  the 
euemy  at  Williams’  Bridge.  I go  on  to  the  bridge  and  await  further 
orders. 

With  great  respect,  I remain,  major, 

ALEX.  J.  BROWN, 

Col.  55th  Regt.  Tenn.  Vols.,  and  Comdg.  Farces  Williams'^  Bridge. 

Maj.  T.  F.  Willson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


, No.  10. 

Report  of  Capt.  B.  F.  Bryan,  Stuarf:'^  cavalry  [Miles'^  Legion]. 

Clinton,  May  10,  1863. 

Colonel  : On  the  morning  of  April  25, 1 received  an  order  from  Colo-  (/ 
nel  [George]  Gantt,  in  wdiich  he  directed  me  to  picket  the  Comite  River, 
relieving  Colonel  [C.  C.J  Wilbourn’s  command.  I immediately  pro-^ 
ceeded  to  carry  out  his  instructions  by  placing  a picket  at  what  is  called 
Haws’  Ford,  Roberts’  Ford,  Bogan’s  Ford,  and  Strickland’s  Ford,  on 
the  Comite  River  j also  one  at  the  Burlington  Ferry,  on  the  Amite  River, 
fixing  my  cami)  near  Roberts’  Ford,  on  the  Comite  River,  being  the 
most  central  point  between  the  different  fords  on  the  Comite  River 
and  7 miles  below  Burlington  Ferry,  and  on  the  morning  of  May  2, 
at  about  9 a.  m.,  1 was  surprised  by  a body  of  the  enemy,  under  com- 
mand of  Colonel  Grierson,  numbering  upward  of  1,000  men.  They 
made  a dash  and  surrounded  me  on  all  sides  before  I was  aware  that 
they  were  other  than  our  own  troops,  their  advanced  guard  being 
dressed  in  citizens’  garb.  Indeed,  1 could  not  think  it  possible  that  an 
enemy  could  approach  my  camp  without  my  being  notified  in  ample 
time  to  be  prepared  to  meet  them,  being  confident  that  either  Colonel 
Wilbourn’s  pickets  or  my  own,  at  Burlington  Ferry,  would  notify  me 
of  the  enemy’s  approach  in  that  direction.  Most  of  my  men  being  on 
picket,  and  having  only  about  30  of  them  immediately  in  camp,  there 
was  no  possible  chance  of  my  making  a stand;  and,  besides  this,  I had 
been  on  picket  up  to  the  eighth  day,  and  my  horses  had  had  but  one 
■feed  of  com  within  that  time,  and  1 necessarily  had  to  graze  them, 


538 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

heDce  their  capture.  Lieutenant  [Joseph]  Hinson  being  at  Greenwell 
Springs  on  the  morning  of  my  surprise,  and  hearing  the  report  of  fire- 
arms above,  at  what  he  supposed  to  be  Colonel  Wilbourn^s  camp,  im- 
mediately proceeded  to  notify  my  picket  at  Burlington  Ferry  of  the  fact, 
instructing  the  sergeant  to  send  a courier  on  road  to  my  camp  while  he 
liimself  went  another  way  to  reach  there,  and  both  the  lieutenant  and 
courier  were  cut  otf  and  captured. 

My  loss  in  men,  horses,  bridles,  saddles,  guns,  and  cooking  utensils, 
on  this  occasion,  1 beg  leave  most  respectfully  to  submit  in  the  following 
list: 

Lost— 38  men,  38  horses,  2 mules,  1 company  wagon  and  harness,  1 
borrowed  wagon,  38  guns,  37  pistols,  2,000  rounds  cartridges,  and  our 
cooking  utensils.  I would  state  that  I have  6 horses  left  by  the  enemy 
at  the  Comite  Bridge. 

All  of  which,  colonel,  I most  respectfully  submit. 

I am,  colonel,  most  respectfully,  yours, 

’ ’ B.  F.  BRYAN, 

Captain,  Commanding  Stnart^s  Camlry. 

Col.  W.  R.  Miles,  Miles’  Legion, 


No.  11. 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  A.  Bnford,  C.  8.  Army. 

Meridian,  April  25,  1863. 

About  12.30  to-day  the  enemy  demanded  the  surrender  of  Enterprise. 
General  fW.  W.j  Boring  arrived  in  time  with  re-enforcements.  The 
enemy  (reported  to  be  cavalry,  from  500  to  1,500  strong)  fell  back  from 
Euterprise  without  attacking.  I can  hold  this  place.  Nothing  lost 
or  destroyed  on  the  Mobile  road,  and  with  500  cavalry  could  capture 

[A.]  BUFORD,  . 

Brigadier- General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton,  Jackson. 


No.  12. 


Report  of  Capt.  8.  B.  Cleveland,  Wirt  Adams’’  {Mississippi)  regiment. 


Union  Church,  April  28,  1863- 


m. 


Notify  Colonel  [Wirt]  Adams,  Grand  Gulf,  General  [C.  L.]  Steven 
son  Vicksburg,  and  General  [Franklin]  Gardner,  Port  Hudson,  that 
the  enemy  are  at  Union  Church,  on  the  Natchez  and  Hazlehurst  road. 
Tell  the  operator  at  Natchez  they  may  look  out  for  them  there.  I have 
been  skirmishing  with  them  I’or  some  hours  this  evening.  Cannot  as- 
certain their  strength.  They  have  four  pieces  of  artillery.  I have  not 

.n„ve  than  100  men  in  line.  ^ ^ CLEVELAND, 

Captain,  Commanding  Detachment  Wirt  Adams’  Regiment. 

Operator,  Fayette. 


Chap.  XXXyi.]  GRIERSON’s  RAID  FROM  LA  GRANGE,  TENN.  539 

[Indorsement.! 

[April  29,  1863]— 1.15  a.  m. 

General  Pemberton  : 

Above  I respectfully  submit  a verbatim  copy  of  a message  whicli  was 
received  by  the  operator  at  Fayette,  and  has  been  transmitted  to  the 
parties  addressed  therein.  As  there  was  not  a copy  of  it  addressed  to 
you,  I have  taken  the  liberty  to  inclose  one. 

Respectfully,  &c., 

L.  B.  LINDSEY, 
Operator^  on  Ihiiy, 


No  13. 

Report  of  Maj.  J.  De  Baun^  Ninth  Louisiana  Partisan  Rangers. 

Near  Port  Hudson,  May  6,  1863. 

In  obedience  to  Special  Orders,  No.  1.20,  date  April  28.  1863, 1 imme-  2.  ^ 
d lately  proceeded  with  80  men  in  the  direction  of  Woodville,  Miss., 
which  place  I reached  on  Wednesday,  April  29,  1863,  at  1 o’clock,  when  Z.  9- 
I reported  by  telegraph  for  further  orders. 

On  the  morning  of  Thursday,  April  30,  I received  instructions  from  2 ^ 
headquarters  to  proceed  with  all  the  cavalry  to  Osyka,  Miss.,  and  report 
to  Colonel  [W.  E.]  Miles,  or  to  join  Lieutenant-Colonel  [George]  Gantt 
in  the  direction  of  the  enemy.  Before  leaving  Woodville,  I divided  ray 
command  into  two  companies  of  40  men  each,  one  commanded  by  Lieu- 
tenant [B.  B.]  Starns  and  the  other  under  Lieut.  J.  B.  Dunn,  of  Com- 
pany D,  the  whole  under  Captain  [B.  A.]  Scott,  senior  captain.  Find- 
ing at  Woodville  a detachment  of  35  men  under  Lieutenant 

, of  Company  A,  Gantt’s  cavalry,  I ordered  them  with  me.  This 

increased  my  force  to  115  men.  Not  being  able  to  ascertain  the  where- 
abouts of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gantt,  I proceeded  in  the  direction  of 
Osyka,  to  report  to  Colonel  Miles.  On  the  same  day  I reached  elohn 
Reeves’  farm,  30  miles  from  Osyka,  on  the  Osyka  and  Centreville  road, 
where  I encamped  for  the  night. 

Early  next  morning  (Friday,  May  1)  I resumed  my  line  of  march  in  * 
the  same' direction.  At  11.30  a.  m.,  the  men  and  horses  being  fatigued, 

I stopped  to  rest  at  Walls  Bridge,  8 miles  from  Osyka.  At  about 
11.45  a.  m.  a volley  in  the  direction  of  our  rear  guard  warned  me  that  the 
enemy  was  in  the  neighborhood.  I immediately  ordered  the  bridge  to 
be  dismantled  and  the  men  ambushed,  posting  men  at  the  bridge  to  de- 
stroy it  as  soon  as  the  rear  guard  would  have  reported.  Some  ten  min- 
utes had  now  expired,  and  the  rear  guard  not  reporting,  Capt.  E.  A. 

Scott  went  up  the  road  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  the  cause  of  the  delay.  I 
regret  to  say  that  he  was  captured  by  some  of  the  enemy  in  the  advance,  , 
wearing  our  uniform.  At  the  bridge  the  road  suddenly  turns  to  the  left, 
screening  the  road  so  the  enemy  could  not  be  seen  until  they  were  at  the 
bridge.  A few  minutes  after  the  departure  of  Captain  Scott,  the  enemy 
made  their  appearance  at  the  bridge,  delivering  two  volleys  at  the  men 
there  posted,  without  effect.  Immediately  my  men  opened  a deadly  fire 
^ upon  them,  lasting  some  ten  minutes,  killing  and  wounding,  by  their  own 
acknowledgment,  16  men  and  killing  15  horses.  Among  the  wounded 
were  Colonel  Prince  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Blackburn,  of  the  Sixth 
[Seventh]  Illinois  Cavalry.  Colonel  Prince  has  since  died.*  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Blackburn  is  a prisoner,  with  3 privates,  dangerously  wounded. 


An  error.  He  was  mustered  out  on  expiration  of  service,  October,  1864, 


540 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX VI. 


Besides  these,  5 prisoners  were  captured.  So  deadly  was  our  fire  that 
the  enemy,  who  had  succeeded  in  crossing  the  bridge,  were  compelled 
to  recross  it.  They,  however,  immediately  opened  upon  us  with  artil- 
lery, and  were  crossing  the  creek  on  our  right. 

My  command  being  small,  not  more  than  90  men  having  been  en- 
gaged, and  fearing  to  be  surrounded,  I ordered  a retreat  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Osyka,  which  was  executed  in  good  order. 

At  5 p.  m.  I reached  Osyka,  but  found  no  re-enforcements.  Not  being 
in  force  (the  enemy  being  at  least  1,000  strong  and  four  pieces  of  artil- 
lery), I was  unable  to  pursue  them. 

During  the  night  cavalry  re-enforcements,  under  Colonel  [R.  V.]  Rich- 
ardson, numbering  400  men,  reached  Osyka,  when,  at  2 a.  m.  May  2,  we 
started  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy  toward  Greensburg.  On  arriving  at  that 
place,  we  received  positive  information  that  the  enemy  had  traveled  all 
night,  crossed  Williams’  Bridge,  and  were  beyond  our  reach,  in  Baton 
Rouge.  My  men  and  horses  being  almost  exhausted  for  want  of  food 
and  rest,  I proceeded  to  Camp  Moore,  it  being  the  nearest  commissary 
depot,  and  I returned  to  camp  on  Tuesday,  May  5,  when  1 reported  in 
person. 

My  loss  is  1 captain,  1 lieutenant,  and  6 privates.  The  lieutenant  and 
men  belonged  to  the  rear  guard  ; all  captured. 

Too  much  praise  cannot  be  awarded  the  officers  and  men  composing 
the  detachment  for  the  bravery  and*  coolness  displayed,  the  officers 
fighting  with  their  revolvers,  and  all  showing  a disposition  to  punish 
the  daring  of  our  enemies. 

J.  DE  BAUN, 

Major,  Comynanding  Detachment 

Capt.  T.  F.  Willson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  14. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  George  Gantt,  Ninth  Tennessee  Cavalry  Battalion, 

Olive  Branch,  La.,  May  4*,  1863. 

Sir:  Upon  the  receipt  of  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton’s  dispatch 
announcing  the  possibility  that  the  raid  of  the  enemy  was  designed  to 
_ , Banks’  army,  and  to  send  out  all  the  available  spare  cavalry  in  the 

^ - direction  of  Tangipahoa,  1 immediately  sent  off  Colonel  [C.  C.]  Wil- 
bourn’s  battalion  and  Captains  [T.  R.]  Stockdale’s  and  [V.  L.]  Terrell’s 
companies  to  Tangipahoa,  with  instructions  to  intercept  the  eiiemj^  and 
keep  us  advised  of  all  information.  Upon  getting  dispatcli  from  you, 
stating  that  Hazlehurst  Station  had  been  captured  by  the  enemy,  I or- 
' dered  a company  at  once  to  Clinton,  La.,  with  instructions  to  send  out 
scouting  parties  on  all  the  approaches  to  the  northeast.  Soon  afterward 
I received  your  dispatch,  directing  me  to  send  a company  to  Clinton 
and  one  to  Woodville,  and  move  with  all  the  balance  of  the  cavalry 
not  needed  on  the  front  north  of  Clinton  in  the  direction  of  Woodville. 
The  company  was  sent  at  once  to  Woodville,  and  it  and  the  company 
at  Clinton  were  instructed  to  get  the  earliest  and  most  accurate  infor- 
mation by  means  of  scouts,  and  keep  the  major-general  and  myself  ad- 
vised. With  the  balance  of  the  spare  cavalry  (158  men  of  the  Ninth 
Battalion  Tennessee  Cavalry)  I mov^ed  u})  to  Clinton,  and  from  there  to 
the  northward  on  the  Liberty  road.  At  about  14  miles  from  Clinton  1 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  GRIERSON^S  RAID  FROM  LA  GRANGE,  TENN. 


541 


received  a dispatch  from  Colonel  Wilbourn,  stating  that  he  was  at  Osyka, 
the  enemy  at  Hazlehurst,  and  that  he  would  move  up  in  the  direction 
of  the  enemy.  I stopped  at  a point  between  Liberty  and  Woodville, 
so  that  I could  take  either  direction  as  circumstances  might  require. 
Being  informed  that  the  enemy  were  moving  in  the  direction  of  Natchez, 
I was  preparing  to  go  to  Oentreville,  15  miles  east  of  Woodville,  with 
the  view  of  being  in  the  near  direction  of  the  enemy,  and  keeping  up 
communication  with  Colonel  Wilbourn  and  the  forces  at  Woodville ; 
but  before  the  movement  was  made  I got  information  that  the  enemy 
was  at  Brookhaven.  I at  once  moved  to  Liberty.  There  the  dispatch 
of  Lieutenant  [W.  "S.]  Wren  announcing  the  capture  of  Brookhaven 
was  conclusively  shown  to  be  unfounded  at  the  time  the  dispatch  was 
sent,  by  a later  dispatch  from  him  stating  that  the  enemy  had  gone  in 
the  direction  of  Natchez.  Colonel  Wilbourn  got  both  of  these  dis- 
patches, and  they  caused  him  to  do  much  traveling  for  nothing,  and  to 
keep  him  so  perplexed  as  greatly  retarded  his  movements.  Not  being 
able  to  determine  from  the  contradictory  statements  what  was  the  en- 
emy^s  direction,  I dispatched  scouts,  who  returned  on  Thursday  night 
between  midnight  and  day,  and  brought  certain  information  that  the 
enemy  had  not  only  taken  Brookhaven,  but  moved  off  as  if  going  in  the 
direction  of  Natchez,  and  suddenly  reversed  his  course  and  captured 
Bogue  Chitto  and  Summit.  I prepared  at  once  to  move  to  Summit,  but 
soon  after  starting  learned  from  my  scouts  that  the  enemy  was  only  a 
lew  miles  off,  having  moved  12  miles  in  the  direction  of  Liberty.  I 
suspended  the  movement,  believing  that  the  enemy  was  making  his 
way  to  Woodville. 

About  the  same  time  I received  Major-General  [Franklin]  Gardner’s 
dispatch,  advising  me  that  the  enemy  had  landed  a force  below  Grand 
Gulf,  and  directing  me  to  gather  all  the  cavalry  and  attack  the  enemy 
in  the  direction  of  Brookhaven,  and  by  all  means  not  to  allow  the  enemy 
to  make  a junction  with  the  force  landed  below  Grand  Gulf.  In  view 
of  this  and  the  demonstration  in  the  direction  of  Liberty,  I took  up  the 
best  position  to  hold  the  enemy  in  check  with  a small  force,  and  sent 
couriers  to  Colonel  Wilbourn,  urging  him  to  move  speedily  in  the  direc- 
tion of  the  enemy,  and  advising  him  exactly  where  the  enemy  was.  At 
this  time  it  was  undoubtedly  the  enemy’s  purpose  to  go  to  the  force  below 
Grand  Gulf.  Colonel  Wilbourn,  receiving  my  dispatch,  moved  down  as 
promptly  as  he  could,  keeping  between  the  enemy’s  cavalry  and  the 
force  at  Grand  Gulf.  He  had  got  up  communication  also  with  Colonel 
[Wirt]  Adams.  As  soon  as  I heard  from  him,  and  through  him  from 
Colonel  Adams,  and  knew  that  they  were  advised  of  enemy’s  true  posi- 
tion, I moved  out  in  the  direction  of  Osyka,  encamping  in  a favorable 
position  to  resist  if  the  enemy  should  attempt  to  pass  out  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Liberty  or  Clinton. 

My  information  from  Colonels  Adams  and  Wilbourn  was  that  early 
Saturday  morning  they  would  be  in  close  proximity  to  the  enemy.  I 
had  also  what  I regarded  as  most  undoubted  evidence  that  on  Saturday 
the  enemy  would  attempt  to  take  Osyka,  and,  while  Colonels  Adams  and 
Wilbourn  attacked  them  from  the  direction  they  were  approaching,  [1] 
intended  to  attack  them  on  the  Osyka  and  Liberty  road.  Keceiving  in- 
telligence that  he  would  probably  be  attacked  as  indicated,  the  enemy 
suddenly  abandoned  the  idea  of  taking  Osyka  and  reaching  the  Missis- 
sippi above  Port  Hudson,  and  resolved  to  make  his  way  out  in  the  di- 
rection of  Baton  Eouge.  He  managed  so  as  to  completely  deceive  citi- 
zens and  our  scouts  as  to  his  purpose,  and  by  a march  of  almost  unpre- 
cedented rapidity  moved  off  by  the  Greensburg  road  to  Baton  Eouge, 


542 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Before  startiug,  he  traveled  for  some  distance  in  the  direction  of  Osyka, 
announcing  that  he  was  going  to  capture  that  place. 

' In  his  march  to  Baton  Rouge,  he  encountered  the  cavalry  of  Colonel 

V [J.  H.]  Wingfield  and  one  of  my  companies  that  had  been  ordered  from 
Woodville  to  Osyka  at  Walls  Bridge. 
f Our  men  behaved  with  great  spirit,  twice  repulsing  the  enemy,  and 
1 1 forcing  him  to  bring  up  his  artillery  to  dislodge  them. 

In  this  affair  he  lost  a major,  killed,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  [William 
^ 1).]  Blackburn,  severely,  if  not  mortally,  wounded,  besides  about  12 
privates  wounded. 

The  enemy’s  force  started  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  and  consisted  of 
three  regiments — Sixth  and  Seventh  Illinois  and  Second  Iowa — the  lat- 
ter of  which  left  them  east  of  Jackson.  It  was  their  wish  to  return  to 
the  point  from  which  they  started.  If  not  able  to  do  that,  then  .to  go  to 
the  Mississippi  above  Port  Hudson,  and,  if  they  could  do  no  better,  to 
pass  out  to  Baton  Rouge. 

Colonels  Adams  and  Wilbourn  and  myself  came  together  early  on 
Saturday,  and,  finding  that  the  enemy  had  passed  beyond  our  reach, 
gave  up  the  pursuit. 

I am,  major,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  GANTT, 

Lieutenant- Colonel^  Commanding  Cavalry. 

Major  [T.  F.J  Willson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  15. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Franldin  Gardner,  C.  S.  Army. 


Port  Hudson,  April  26,  1863. 

Telegram  from  Osyka  that  enemy  have  gone  toward  Enterprise.  Far- 
ragut  was  at  mouth  of  Red  River  last  night.  No  news  from  Banks. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major- General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


/ 


Port  Hudson,  April  28,  1863. 


I shall  send  a regiment  of  infantry  to  Clinton,  La. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major-  General. 


Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Port  Hudson,  April  30,  1863. 

(Received  May  1.) 

Enemy’s  laid  at  next  station  this  side  of  Brookhaven.  To-day  my 
cavalry  and  [M.  R.]  Clark’s  conscripts  will  meet  them  at  Summit.  Miles’ 
Legion  will  arrive  at  Magnolia  dav  after  to-morrow  or  next  day. 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major- General. 


General  Pemberton. 


543 


CfiAi'.  xxxvi.l  GKIERSON  S RAID  FROM  LA  GRANGE,  TENN. 


Headquarters,  Fort  Hudson^  La.,  May  5,  1863. 

Major:  1 have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  enemy^s  cavalry  raid 
(1,200  cavalry  and  one  battery)  passed  successfully  to  Baton  Rouge  on 
the  afternoon  of  the  2d  instant,  having  evaded  my  cavalry,  which  was 
all  out  after  them,  and  by  an  extraordinary  march  from  Summit  to 
Baton  Rouge,  between  the  afternoon  of  the  30th  [ultimo]  and  the  after- 
noon of  the  2d  [instant],  they  passed  before  the  arrival  of  infantry  and 
artillery  that  I sent  out  to  intercept  them.  The  enemy  came  suddenly  ' 
on  my  outposts  toward  Baton  Rouge,  destroyed  Wilbourn^s  camp,  and 
captured  a number  of  men  from  Captain  [B.  F.]  Bryan’s  company. 

I would  respectfully  urge  the  great  necessity  of  increasing  the  cav- 
alry force  in  this  district  and  giving  me  a good  cavalry  commander.  If 
it  could  be  deemed  expedient  to  abandon  the  post  at  Ponchatoula,  that 
would  Enable  me  to  concentrate  a larger  force  of  cav^alry  in  my  front. 

I also  respectfully  represent  that  the  very  limited  wagon  transportation 
at  this  post  greatly  interferes  with  any  movement  of  troops  and  also 
the  gathering  in  supplies. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

FRANK.  GARDNER, 

Major- General, 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  16. 

Report  of  Maj.  W.  H.  Garland,  Mississippi  Cavalry. 


About  Six  Miles  from  Greensburg,  May  1,  1863 — 8 p.  m. 

Major  : In  accordance  with  orders  from  Colonel  [George]  Gantt,  1 
moved  my  command  toward  Camp  Moore.  I traveled  as  rapidly  as  my 
jaded  horses  would  allow,”  and,  having  taken  a near  road,  I came  on 
the  Greensburg  and  Liberty  road,  and  there  met  the  Yankees  in  force. 
My  advance  and  the  enemy  exchanged  fire.  They  fired  six  shots  from 
cannon — I think  6-pounders.  They  have  marched  on  Greensburg  this 
evening.  They  stopped  at  a house  and  took  some  horses,  and  said  that 
they  were  on  the  way  to  Baton  Rouge.  If  such  be  the  fact,  they  will 
cross  at  Williams’  Bridge,  on  the  Amite  River.  If  a force  can  be  thrown 
there,  they  may  yet  be  cut  off.  Williams’  Bridge  is  about  16  miles  from 
Greensburg  and  about  14  miles  from  Clinton.  To  stop  them  at  Will- 
iams’ Bridge  is  the  last  chance. 

T have  lost  about  70  men,  and  the  horses  all  broke  down.  I write  in 
much  haste. 

Yours,  respectfully, 


Maj.  T.  F.  Willson,  Port  Hudson. 


W.  H.  GARLAND, 

Major,  Commanding. 


No.  17. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  iS.  J.  Gholson,  Mississippi  Militia. 

Okolona,  Miss.,  April  26,  1863. 

Enemy  that  were  here  have  been  driven  back.  Fought  at  Birming- 
ham and  defeated  them,  killing  some  20,  wounding  many  others ; among 


544 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


the  latter  is  their  colonel.  The  party  that  were  at  Kosciusko  are  now 
between  here  and  Stark ville,  advancing  north. 

S.  J.  GHOLSOK, 

Major  Gentral. 

Governor  [John  J.]  Pettus. 


No.  18. 

Reporiv  of  Maj.  Gen.  William  W.  Loring^  G.  S.  Army. 

Enterprise,  April  25,  1863. 

Enemy  appeared  here  at  1 o’clock  and  demanded  the  town.  They 
were  represented  as  1,500  sti  ong.  Colonel  [Edward]  Goodwin  was  here 
with  the  Thirty-fifth  Alabama,  who  defied  them.  I hastened  here  with 
two  regiments;  enemy  have  fallen  back  at  last  accounts  3 miles.  I am 
.now  on  the  road  pursuiug  them.  They  are  on  the  road  to  Paulding; 
think  they  will  endeavor  to  go  back  by  Newton  or  make  their  way  to 
Baton  Eouge.  Have  sent  back  to  burn  the  bridge  across  Swimming 
Stream,  between  Paulding  and  Newton.  Have  sent  two  companies  to 
guard  bridge  at  Quitman,  and  directed  bridges  to  be  burned  between 
Quitman  and  Paulding.  I telegraphed  to  send  force  from  Mobile  to 
guard  the  De  Soto  and  Quitman  bridges.  If  they  get  there  in  time,  and 
you  can  send  force  to  intercept  them  at  Newton,  it  will  force  them  to  go 
in  the  direction  of  Baton  Eouge.  Please  order  cavalry  to  intercept 
them  in  that  direction.  I have  no  hope  of  catching  them  on  foot. 

W.  W.  LOEING, 

Major-  General.,  Commanding . 

General  Pemberton. 


Enterprise,  April  25,  1863. 

I could  not  as  expected  intercept  the  enemy  here.  They  were,  when 
last  heard  from,  at  Garlandville,  about  1,500.  They  will  attempt  to 
cross  the  road  at  Newton,  or  some  point  between  Meridian  and  Jackson. 
I will  endeavor  to  prevent  their  doing  so  this  side  of  Newton. 

W.  W.  LOEING, 

Major- General. 

General  Pemberton. 


Meridian,  April  26,  1863. 

Colonel  [Edward],  Goodwin  reports  enemy  again  within  3 miles  of 
Enterprise.  He  thinks  from  their  returning  that  they  are  in  force. 

W.  W.  LOEING, 

Major-General. 

General  Pemberton,  JacJcson. 


Meridian,  April  27,  1863. 

Our  forces  are  from  Newton  to  Shubuta,  protecting  the  road  aud  try- 
ing to  prevent  the  enemy  from  recrossing. 

W.  W.  LOEING, 

Major-General. 


General  Pemberton,  Jackson. 


CiiAi*.  XXXVI.]  GKIEr.SON^S  EAID  FROM  IvA  GKANGE,  TENN. 


545 


Meridian,  April  27,  18G3 — 10  p.  ni. 

Westville  in  direction  of  Montrose.  Have  thought  they  Avould  go  ^ 
that  way,  striking  for  Baton  Eouge,  as  we  have  blocked  their  return  by 
the  way  they  came.  Ho  enemy  near  Enterprise.  It  is  probable  there 
was  a small  party  near  there,  but  ^lll  gone  now.  Think  ordnance  stores 
safe  here. 

W.  W.  LOEIHG, 

Major-  General, 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Meridian,  April  28,  18G3. 

I mounted  150  men  yesterday,  and  started  them  off  in  direction  of 
enemy. 

W.  W.  LOIGHG, 

Major-  General. 


General  Pemberton,  Jaeltson. 


Ho.  19. 

Report  of  Col.  R.  Miles,  Louisiana  Legion. 

Headquarters  Miles’  Legion, 

May  5, 1863. 

Captain  : In  obedience  to  Special  Orders,  Ho.  — , of  the  29th  ultimo, 

1 inarched  the  Legion  to  Clinton.  On  the  30th,  I received  a telegram 
from  Major-General  Gardner,  ordering  me  to  Osyka.  As  soon  as  ar- 
rangements could  be  made  for  wagons  and  rations,  I started,  and  made 
about  6 miles  the  same  eA^ening.  Eesumingthe  march  at  an  early  hour  ^ 
on  the  1st  instant,  I proceeded  Avith  all  possible  haste.  Arriving  at  the 
xAmite  Eiver,  I found  it  extremely  high,  the  bayou  in  the  opposite  swamp 
being  so  full  as  to  swim.  Captain  [ J.  V.]  Gallimard,  of  the  sappers  and 
miners,  at  once  commenced  the  construction  Of  a temporary  bridge,  and 
in  five  hours  we  were  across  with  the  artillery  and  trains.  Continuing 
the  march  rapidly,  we  arrived  Avithin  6 miles  of  the  Tickfaw  Eiver  about 
sunset.  At  this  place  we  learned  a skirmish  had  occurred  about  noon 
at  TickfaAV  Bridge,  and  that  the  enemy  had  encamped  at  a distance  of 
4 or  5 miles  in  front.  Halting  the  command,  I at  once  sent  out  scouts 
to  learn  the  position  and  strength  of  the  enemy.  They  returned  after 
some  hours,  bringing  intelligence  that  he  had  not  halted  after  the  skir- 
mish, but  had  pressed  on  with  great  raxiidity  toward  Greensburg. 

I found  on  the  roadside  5 of  the  enemy  Avounded,  including  1 lieu- 
tenant-colonel, and  learned  that  one  had  been  killed,  and  buried.  There 
Avere  with  the  wounded  a surgeon  and  nurse. 

I met  at  this  place  the  caA^alry  commands  of  Col.  Wirt  Adams,  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel [G.]  Gantt,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  [C.  C.]  Wilbourn, 
who  had  abandoned  pursuit,  learning  that  the  enemy  had  crossed 
Williams’  Bridge.  At  this  time  I received  a telegram  from  Colonel  [J. 

M.]  Simonton,  urging  my  presence  on  the  railroad  for  a day  or  two,  in 
consequence  of  Avhich  I marched  out  to  Osyka,  and  remained  until  the 
reception  of  your  note  of  the  2d  instant,  ordering  my  return  to  Port  L 
Hudson.  In  obedience  to  this  order,  I left  Osyka  yesterday  morning.  , 
While  halting  for  dinner,  I rcceiv^ed  Special  Orders,  Ho.  125,  ordering  me 
to  take  post  at  Olivo  Branch.  I Avill  reach  there  late  to-night  or  early 
to-morrow  morning. 

35  R R — YOL  XXIY,  PT  I 


546 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CHAr.  XXXVL 


If  1 could  have  started  one  day  sooner,  or  if  our  cavalry  had  hung 
upon  the  enemy’s  rear,  retarding  his  inarch.  Colonel  Grierson,  with  his 
command  of  Yankee  marauders,  could  have  been  hemmed  in  and  cap- 
tured. 

The ‘Legion  has  endured  its  exhausting  march  with  patience,  and  is 
ready  for  any  service  to  which  it  may  be  called. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  E.  MILES, 
Colonel^  Commanding  Legion, 
Capt.  T.  F.  Willson,  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


No.  20. 

Report  of  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.  Thomas  J.  Fortis,  G.  8.  Army. 

Hdqrs.  Fourth  Mil.  Dist.,  Dept,  of  Miss,  and  E.  La., 

JacJcson^  April  24,  1803. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  Brigadier-General  Adams 
left  the  depot  at  this  place  this  evening,  a few  minutes  before  4 o’clock, 
with  the  Twenty-sixth  Mississippi  Kegiment,  numbering:  Total,  420; 
aggregate,  456.  Seven  companies  of  the  Fifteenth  Mississippi  Kegi- 
ment : Total,  373  ; aggregate,  394. 

The  general  was  delayed  on  account  of  the  troops  not  being  supplied 
with  rations,  and  because  of  the  delay  on  the  part  of  the  artillery  com- 
pany and  the  want  of  transportation.  The  battery  arrived  at  the  depot, 
however,  before  the  general  left,  but  could  not  go  for  want  of  transpor- 
tation. 

Three  companies  of  the  Fifteenth  Mississippi  Eegiment  were  left  to 
go  with  the  battery.  Total,  111 ; aggregate,  123.  'I  hey  are  now  at  the 
depot,  awaiting  the  arrival  of  a locomotive  to  take  them  on. 

The  brigadier-general  directed  me  to  state  that  he  would  proceed  to 
Morton  Station ; there  await  the  arrival  of  the  battery  and  the  three 
companies  left  to  go  with  it.  He  also  directed  me  to  inform  you  that 
he  would  endeavor  to  connect  the  telegTaph  wires  at  Morton,  and  com- 
municate to  you  the  condition  of  things,  and  also  inform  you  as  to  what 
his  movements  will  be  from  that  point. 


recapitulation. 


Comm  and. 

1 

Total.  ! 

Aggregate. 

20th  Mississippi  Regiment 

420 

406 

1 5tli  Missi3si])pi  Regiment 

484 

517 

OniiipaTiy  A , Pointe  ConpAe  Battery. 

78 

Grand  total  and  grand  aggregate 

U79 

1,051 

Equipments  of  battery  consist  in  : Two  3 and  two  10  inch  rifled  guns, 
one  12-poimder  howitzeF,  one  G-xiounder  gun,  4 caissons,  and  53  head 
horses. 

I have  the  honor,  major,  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

THOS.  J.  POETIS, 
Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 

Maj.  E.  W.  Memminger,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


547 


Chap.  XXXVL]  GRIERSON’s  RAID  FROM  LA  GRANGE,  TENN. 


No.  21. 

Report  of  Col.  R.  V.  Richardson,  First  Tennessee  Partisan  Rangers. 

OSYKA,  May  3,  18G3. 

Dear  Sir  : In  obedience  to  Special  Orders,  No.  — , dated  April  28, 
1863, 1 repaired,  at  9 p.  in.  of  that  day,  to  the  depot  at  Jackson,  sup- 
posiiig  the  train  of  troops  to  accompany  me  was  ready  to  start.  When 
1 got  to  the  depot,  1 was  chagrined  and  surprised  to  find  that  the  three 
companies  of  the  Ibventieth  Mississijipi  Mounted  Infantry,  who  were  to 
constitute  a portion  of  the  forces  subject  to  my  orders  in  the  move- 
ment projected  against  the  enemy,  with  horses,  were  just  beginning  to 
be  placed  on  the  train. 

About  2.30  a.  m.,  April  29, 1863,  the  men  and  horses  were  all  aboard. 
I inquired  for  the  conductor,  and  learned  that  he  was  in  bed  at  his 
chamber.  I sent  him  an  order  to  get  up  and  proceed  with  his  train  im- 
mediately, or  I would  send  for  him  a file  of  men.  After  a short  time  he 
came.  He  then  inquired  of  the  engineer  whether  he  could  pull  the 
train,  who  replied  that  he  could  not,  because  there  were  too  many  cars 
in  the  train. 

The  conductor  and  engineer  then  said  that  three  cars  must  be  taken 
from  the  train.  This  was  done.  Now  they  said  they  had  not  wood 
enough  to  run  the  train  to  the  next  station,  and  they  had  no  lamps.  I 
inquired  whether  or  not  they  had  an  ax  to  cut  wood ; they  replied  they 
had  none.  About  daybreak  they  started  with  the  train,  and  did  not 
reach  H-azlehurst  until  11  a.  m.  In  spite  of  all  efforts,  these  men  were 
churlish,  and  seemed  to  be  laboring  to  defeat  as  far  as  possible  the  move- 
ment of  troops.  They  claim  their  privilege  of  exemption  from  military 
service  as  employes  of  the  railroad  company.  It  should  not  be  granted 
to  men  who  are  so  unmindful  of  the  public  interests. 

As  we  rolled  into  Hazlehurst,  a citizen  approached  us  in  an  excited 
manner,  and  said  1,000  Yankees  were  within  a quarter  of  a mile  of  the 
place,  approaching  it.  I did  not  much  believe  the  report,  but,  as  a meas- 
ure of  precaution,  I ordered  the  train  to  be  run  back  on  the  road  about 
a mile.  I then  ordered  the  men  to  form  on  each  side  of  the  railroad,  and 
20  horses  to  be  taken  from  the  train,  and  sent  out  a scout  in  the  direc- 
tion of  the  reported  advance  of  the  enemy.  The  scouts  returned  in  a 
half  hour,  and  reported  the  enemy  not  to  be  found  as  reported. 

I availed  myself  of  every  resource  to  get  information  as  to  the  position 
and  direction  of  movement  of  the  enemy.  He  was  reported  to  have 
been  that  Tuesday  morning  at  Union  Church,  and  to  have  engaged  Col. 
Wirt  Adams’  command  there;  also  that  he  was  making  his  way  for 
Natchez.  He  had  been  [seen]  the  previous  evening  af  Bahala,  by  a de- 
tachment of  120  men  which  had  gone  west  to  Union  Church.  So  far  as 
I could  judge,  he  was  leaving  the  line  of  the  railroad  and  was  going  to 
Natchez.  Colonel  Adams  seemed  to  be  close  after  him.  1 could  get  no 
information  of  the  locality  of  any  other  command  which  you  had  ordered 
to  report  to  me.  It  seemed  that  the  proper  direction  for  me  to  go,  both 
for  the  pur{)ose  of  reaching  the  enemy  and  gathering  any  portion  of  my 
command,  except  the  three  companies  of  the  Twentieth  Mississippi  Kegi- 
ment,  then  with  me,  was  Union  Church.  After  feeding  the  horses,  at  1 
o’clock  I started  on  the  Natchez  road  for  Union  Church.  I got  there  at 
9 o’clockthat  night,  and  learned  that  the  enemy  had  left  there  at  8 o’clock 
in  the  morning  for  Brookhaven,  and  that  Colonel  Adams  had  camped 
the  previous  night  within  3 or  4 miles  of  the  enemy,  but, had  gone  that 
morning  toward  Fayette,  believing  that  the  enemy  intended  to  go  to 
Natchez. 


548 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


I fed  my  horses  and  rested  my  men  for  two  hours,  and  started  for 
Brookhaven,  sending  a courier  to  Colonel  Adams,  advising  him  of  my 
design  to  follow  the  enemy,  and  advising  him  to  shape  his  march  so  as 
to  join  me  near  Liberty. 

T About  9 a.  m.  on  the  morning  of  the  30th,  on  my  way  to  Brookhaven, 

^ I overtook  Captain  Love  and  his  squadron.  We  reached  Brookhaven 
at  about  11  a.  m. ; fed,  and  rested  three  hours.  I ordered  Captain  Love  to 
n proceed  in  advance  to  Bogue  Chitto.  ordered,  at  Hazlehurst,  Colonel 
Miller,  who  had  kindly  consented  to  go  with  me  on  the  expedition,  to 
proceed  with  Captain  '[James  M.]  LiddelFs  company,  Twentieth  Missis- 
sippi, to  Bahala,  and  to  report  to  me  that  night  at  Union  Church,  unless 
he  found  the  enemy  proceeding  in  the  direction  of  the  railroad,  when 
he  was  to  send  me  a dispatch  at  Union  Church,  and  harass  the  enemy  as 
much  as  possible  5 also  to  inquire  for  and  notify  any  of  the  commands 
ordered  to  report  to  me,  found  on  his  line  of  march,  to  report  to  me  at 
Union  Church. 

When  I got  to  Brookhaven,  I found  Colonel  Miller  and  Captain  Lid- 
dell; they  had  gotten  in  the  neighborhood  of  Brookhaven,  and  had 
found  out  that  the  enemy  had  left  Brookhaven  the  previous  evening, 
and  had  camped  for  the  night,  at  a distance  of  6 miles  from  Brookhaven, 
in  the  direction  of  Bogue  Chitto  ; but  had  gone  to  Bogue  Chitto  that 
f morning,  Wednesday,  April  30.  After  I had  ordered  Captain  Love,  as 
my  advance,  to  proceed  to  Bogue  Chitto,  I received  information  that 
the  enemy  had  committed  his  depredations  there  in  the  forenoon,  and 
had  gone  to  Summit,  to  do  the  same  thing,  that  evening.  After  feed- 
ing, and  resting  three  hours,  I started  for  Sumrnit,  hoping  to  be  able  to 
find  the  enemy  encamped  there  or  in  the  vicinity,  and  determined  to 
make  a night  attack.  I sent  a courier  to  Bogue  Chitto,  ordering  Cap- 
tain Love  to  join  me  near  Summit,  and  proceeded  to  that  place.  Within 
3 miles  of  Summit,  Captain  Love  rejoined  me,  having  pursued  the  en- 
emy closely  to  that  place,  capturing  3 prisoners. 

All  preliminaries  were  made  for  .a  night  attack  and  surprise.  At  3 
/ o’clock  in  the  morning,  Thursday,  May  1,  we  entered  Summit,  and  learned 
7^  \ that  the  enemy  had  left  about  sunset  on  the  imevious  evening,  marching 

vV  on  the  road  to  Magnolia,  which,  running  ©*w^t  of  the  railroad  about  5 
miles,  thence  curving  eastward,  crosses  the  railroad,  and  at  a distance 
of  a mile  curves  westward  and  recrosses  the  railroad,  continuing  on  the 
west  side  of  the  railroad  to  Magnolia. 

I could  find  no  one  in  Summit  who  could  tell  me  anything  more  than 
that  the  enemy  had  left  the  previous  evening  on  the  road  to  Magnolia, 
saying  he  intended  to  go  to  that  place;  thence  to  Osyka,  Camp  Moore, 
&c.  The  commanding  officer  had  been  heard  to  ask  a negro  guide  if 
he  knew  the  v/ay  to  Magnolia,  and,  upon  an  affirmative  answer,  had 
ordered  him  to  take  the  lead. 

The  large  tanner^^,  the  hospital  and  stores  located  at  Magnolia,  all 
together  made  up  a state  of  fact  Avhich  pointed  to  the  conclusion  that 
he  was  then  on  his  way  to  that  place.  I learned  that  there  was  a plan- 
tation on  the  road  to  Magnolia,  running  east  of  the  railroad,  near  where 
it  intersected  the  railroad  the  first  time,  at  which  supplies  for  men  and 
horses  could  be  had.  I hoped  to  be  able  by  taking  a road  east  of  the 
railroad  to  get  in  his  front,  and  form  an  ambuscade.  1 imnaediately  re- 
/ sumed  the  march,  and  by  sunrise  formed  line  of  battle,  with  men  dis- 
mounted, under  cover  of  a thick  undergrowth  of  timber,  on  the  side  of 
the  curvature  of  the  road,  formed  by  its  crossing  to  the  east  and  re- 
crossing to  the  west  side  of  the  railroad  leading  from  {Summit  to  Mag- 
nolia. L immediately  sent  out  a scout  west  of  the  railroad  to  ascertain 


549 


Chap/ XXXVI.]  GRIERSON^S  RAID  FROM  LA  GRANGE,  TENN. 

the  position  of  the  enemy.  He  returned  about  9 o’clock,  informing  me 
that  the  enemy  had  marched  from  Summit  the'  previous  evening  on  the 
road  to  Liberty  and  camped  about  6 miles  from  Summit.  My  men  and 
horses  had  marched  all  night,  and  were  wearied  and  hungry.  I re- 
mained three  hours  to  feed  and  rest,  when  I marched  for  Magnolia, 
hoping  to  be  able  by  another  night  march  to  overtake  and  attack  the 
enemy  at  or  near  Osyka. 

About  10  o’clock,  I received  a courier  from  Colonel  Adams,  who  in- 
formed me  that  the  colonel  had  camped  the  previous  night  about  10  miles 
distant,  in  the  direction  of  Liberty.  I sent  the  courier  back  to  inform  the 
colonel  that  I should  follow  down  the  railroad,  and  would  unite  with  him 
at  Magnolia  or  any  other  place  lower  down  to  attack  the  enemy.  This 
courier  also  informed  me  that  the  enemy  had  turned  from  the  road  to 
Liberty  on  the  road  to  Osyka.  I resumed  the  march  to  Osyka  via  Mag- 
nolia. Here  I learned  from  Colonel  [J.  H.]  Wingfield,  who  had  just  re- 
turned from  a scout  near  the  enemy,  that  at  Walls  Bridge,  on  the  Osyka 
and  Liberty  road,  across  the  Tickfaw,  Major  He  Baun,  with  a detachment 
of  100  men  of  Colonel  [J.  H.]  Wiugfield’s  battalion  of  cavalry,  had  met 
the  enemy,  disputed  his  passage,  killing  2 and  wounding  14,  including 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Blackburn,  of  the  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry,  but, 
when  about  to  be  flanked  on  both  sides,  had  retired  from  the  field,  in  the 
face  of  overwhelming  numbers,  with  a loss  of  none  killed  or  wounded,  but 
probably  with  a loss  of  about  26  taken  prisoners.  Hrs.  Clark  and  Hern- 
tord  and  Colonel  Wingfield  gave  all  information  desired  with  great  zeal, 
the  last  tendering  his  services  with  a company  of  about  20  citizen  scouts, 
suddenly  raised  to  meet  the  advance  of  the  foe.  I resumed  the  march  to 
Osyka,  which  I reached  about  10  o’clock  at  night.  The  enemy  had  not 
approached  Osyka  nearer  than  Walls  Bridge,  but^had  gone  on  the  road 
to  Greensburg.  Here  Colonel  Wingfield  reported  a detachment  of  100 
of  his  battalion  (the  Hinlh  Louisana),  under  Major  [J.]  He  Baun,  the 
same  who  had  fought  the  enemy  at  12  m.  of  that  day  at  Walls  Bridge  j 
also  Captain  [G.]  Herren,  commanding  a detachment  of  50  men  of  the 
First  Eegiment Mississippi  Cavalry;  also  Captain  [T.  C.]  Ehodes,  com- 
mandant of  post  at  Osyka,  reported  30  men.  The  captain  had  been 
doing  all  in  his  power  to  protect  his  post  by  a judicious  disposition  of 
the  small  force  at  his  command,  but  was  anxious  to  take  a part  in  the 
pursuit  of  the  enemy.  The  safety  of  Osyka  is  indebted  to  him  for  a 
ruse  practiced  upon  the  enemy.  He  sent  his  second  lieutenant,  W.  S. 
Wren,  to  Summit,  while  the  enemy  was  there,  to  cause  it  to  be  reported 
that  he  had  two  regiments  of  infantry,  one  of  cavalry,  and  a battery  of 
artillery  at  Osyka. 

I fed  my  horses,  and  rested  my  men  three  hours,  when,  with  a force  of  o 
about  470  men,  I resumed  the  march  to  Greensburg.  I did  not  expect 
to  get  in  the  advance  of  the  enemy,  but  a dispatch  had  been  shown  me  / 
which  stated  that  Colonel  Adams  had  sent  Lieut.  W.  S.  Wren  to  burn 
Williams’  Bridge,  across  the  Amite  Eiver,  where  it  was  believed  the  • 
enemy  would  attempt  to  cross;  also  stating  that  he  would  proceed  to 
cut  off  the  enemy  about  that  place.  My  duty  was  evidently  to  follow 
the  enemy  and  press  him  in  the  rear.  I also  received  information  that 
Colonel  Miles,  with  his  Legion,  was  on  my  right,  following  the  enemy 
with  artillery.  Colonel  Adams  had  artillery  likewise,  as  I was  informed. 

I reached  Greensburg  at  9 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  2d  of  Maj^  » , 
where  I learned  that  the  enemy  at  great  speed  had  passed  the  previous 
evening  at  about  sunset,  and  had  crossed  the  Amite  Eiver  at  Williams’ 
Bridge,  which  had  not  been  destroyed.  I sent  a scout  on  his  track,  from 
whom  I learned  that  the  enemy  had  crossed  at  Williams’  Bridge  about 


560 


MISSISSIPPI,  IVEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


raidniglit  on  the  night  of  the  1st  May,  and  had  stopped  about  day  to 
feed  and  rest  at  Sandy  Greek,  15  miles  beyond  the  Amite,  and  had  gone 
on  the  road  to  Baton  Boiige. 

From  the  best  information  I could  get,  the  enemy’s  strength  consisted 
of  the  Sixth  and  Seventh  Illinois  Eegiments  of  Gavalry,  the  pride  and 
boast  of  the  United  States  Army,  numbering  in  all  about  1,100  picked 
men,  well  armed  and  mounted.  It  was  not  his  desire  to  fight.  He 
wanted  to  make  observations,  destroy  railroads  and  telegraphic  com- 
munications. It  is  said  he  pressed  horses,  the  best  he  could  find,  to 
mount  his  men  when  a horse  was  jaded.  He  also  captured  mules  and 
horses,  negroes,  forage,  subsistence,  and  stole  money  and  jewelry  from 
the  people  in  his  course.  He  has  made  a most  successful  raid  through 
the  length  of  the  State  of  Mississippi  and  a part  of  Louisiana,  one  which  I 
will  exhilarate  for  a short  time  the  fainting  spirits  of  the  Northern  war  J 
party. 

We  may  expect  a repetition  of  this  raid  on  a smaller  and  a similar 
scale.  We  had  forces  enough  to  have  captured  and  destroyed  him,  but 
his  movements  ivere  so  rapid  and  uncertain  of  aim  that  we  could  not 
concentrate  our  scattered  forces  or  put  them  in  concert  of  action.  You 
had  assigned  to  me  men  enough  to  have  whipped  him,  but  they  were 
so  scattered  that  I could  not  find  half  of  them  until  the  enemy  had 
entered  his  own  lines.  While  I had  to  pursue  him,  I could  not  do  more 
than  send  out  couriers  to  find  the  commands  ordered  to  report  to  me. 

I followed  him  two  days  and  nights  with  only  170  men,  one  day  and 
two  nights  with  270  men,  and  one  day  and  night  with  470  men. 

While  we  failed  to  capture  or  destroy  the  enemy,  the  movements  on 
our  side  saved  the  railroad,  telegraph,  and  Government  property  from 
Summit  to  PonchatouJa,  the  southern  extremity  of  our  lines,  and  drove 
him  from  the  country  with  a loss  on  his  part,  by  all  his  casualties,  of 
about  70  men.  Having  done  the  best  possible  for  me,  with  the  means 
at  my  command,  under  the  S^iecial  Orders,  No.  — , which  you  did  me 
the  honor  to  make,  I beg  leave  to  submit  the  above  report,  not,  however, 
without  saying  that  the  soldierly  qualities  of  Major  [W.  A.]  Borer,  his 
officers  and  men,  never  complaining,  always  ready  for  duty,  and  anxious 
to  meet  and  punish  the  foe,  won  my  admiration. 

^ B.  V.  BICHABDSON, 

Colonel.,  Commanding  Cavalry,  &c. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  G.  PembLrton, 

Comdg.  Department  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana. 


Bkookiiaven,  May  5,  18G3. 

Lieut.  G.  M.  Stewart  will  deliver  this  report  at  headquarters.  Jack- 

son,  Miss.,  and  report  to  me  at  Bahala. 

’ ’ ^ B.  V.  BIGHABDSON, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Cavalry. 


No.  22. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Buggies,  C.  S.  Army. 

Golumbus,  April  20,  18G3. 

The  following  telegrams  just  received  : 

Okoloxa,  Jjnil  20,  lbG3. 

I have  iiist  learned  from  onr  scouts  and  also  from  the  ]irovost-mar8hal  of  this  place, 
just  returned  from  scout,  that  the  enemy  passed  down  the  road  leading  to  Houston 


CIIAV.  XXXVI.]  grieeson’s  raid  from  la  grange,  tenn. 


551 


to-day,  and  will  probably  reach  that  place  to-nigbt.  Colonel  [C.  R.]  Barteau  is  in 
their  rear,  in  pursuit  of  them.  We  will  await  orders  here.  Enemy  reported  to  be 
6,000  strong. 

J.  CUNNINGHAM, 
Lieutenant-Colonel,  Comman di ng. 

Capt.  R.  M.  Hooe, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Okolona,  April  21,  18G3. 

Reliable  scout  reports  enemy  about  2,000  strong,  with  live  mounted  howitzers,  on 
Houston  road,  leaving  Okoloua  to  the  left.  Negroes  report  hearing  them  say  they 
were  going  to  the  Sontberu  road  or  Grenada. 

F.  INGATE.  ■ 


Capt.  R.  M.  Hooe, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


BANIEL  EUGGLES, 

' Brigadier-  General.,  Command  in  g. 


Columbus,  Ajjril  20,  1863. 

Just  returned  from  Verona  and  Chesterville.  Enemy  now  reported  v 
3,000  strong.  { / 1 ‘ 

Mounted  infantry,  with  six  guns,  at  Pontotoc  “Saturday  night, ,^ad- 
vancing.  My  troops  concentrating  before  him.  Xone  to  send  to  Colonel  ^ 
[P.  D.]  Eodciey. 

DANIEL  EUGGLES, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Columbus,  April  20,  1863. 

The  enemy  (some  2,000  mounted  men,  with  four  field  guns)  were  at 
Pontotoc  last  night.  My  cavalry,  with  three  guns,  are  moving  against 
him. 

I reported  this  at  2 p.  m.  Everything  rendered  possible  by  my  lim- 
ited resources  will  be  done^ 


Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


DANIEL  EUGGLES, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Columbus,  Miss.,  April  20,  1863. 

[James  M.]  Burton  reports  that  some  8,000  or  10,000  enemy’s  troops 
were  at  Burnsville  on  Thursday  night  with  artillery,  wagon  train,  and  ^ 
pontoon  bridges,  who  stated  that  they  would  cross  the  Tennessee  Eiver 
at  Eastport  to  join  Eosecrans.  There  is  evidently  some  formidable 
movement  in  that  direction. 


Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


DANIEL  EUGGLES, 

Brigadier- General. 


[CiiAr.  XX.X.Yt. 


552  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


Just  received  from  Okolona: 


Columbus,  April  21,  18G3. 


We  are  now  (1  o’clock)  15  miles  from  Sparta,  on  tlie  Houston  and  West  Point  road. 
I will  go  to  Sparta  to-uiglit,  where  I learn  the  enemy  are.  Cannonading  heard  in 
that  dfrection  about  12  o’clock. 


Lientenaiit-Geiieral  Pemberton. 


J.  CUNNINGHAM,  . 
Held cnant- Colonel,  Commanding.  ^ 

DANIEL  EUGGLES, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Columbus,  April  22, 1863. 

The  enemy  is  reported  2J  miles  northwest  of  Palo  Alto  with  his  main 
body.  Colonel  [C.  E.]  Barteau  had  skirmish  with  him  yesterday  even- 
ing near  CalverUs  plantation,  and  fell  back  to  the  junction  of  the 
lloustoa  and  Greenville  roads,  where  he  now  is.  Can  you  send  troops 
from  Grenada  to  etfect  a diversion  ? 


Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


DANIEL  EUGGLES, 

Brigadi  er-  General. 


Columbus,  April  23, 1863. 

Enemy’s  probable  strength,  2,000.  Eeported  falling  back  before  our 
cavalry. 

DANIEL  EUGGLES, 

Brigadier- General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Columbus,  April  25,  1863. 

Colonel  [C.  E.]  Barteau  reports  the  enemy  completely  routed  at  Bir- 
mingham ^msterday  evening.  The  destruction  of  a bridge  prevented 
pursuit. 

DANIEL  EUGGLES, 

Brigadier -General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Columbus,  April  26, 1863. 

Captain  [F.]  legate  reports  reliable  information  has  just  been  re- 
ceived that  the  enemy  were  passing  Houston  this  morning,  going  to- 
ward Pontotoc.  I suppose  that  tliis  may  be  the  force  reported  at 
Bankston’s  Mills.  TJie  reported  advance  on  Aberdeen  was  unfounded. 

DANIEL  EUGGLES, 

Brigadier-General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  GRIERSON’S  RAID  FROM  LA  GRANGE,  TENN. 


553 


Columbus,  April  29, 1863. 

The  enemy  in  his  recent  raid  came  south  from  the  Fifth  District,  enter- 
ing the  first  at  Pontotoc,  and  that  force  confronting  me  has  been  routed 
and  driven  back  by  my  troops. 

If  your  telegrams  to  me  on  that  subject  imply  censure,  I request  a 
more  explicit  written  statement. 

DANIEL  EDGGLES, 

Brigadier- G eneral. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


j 

■ No.  23. 


Report  of  Col.  John  M.  Simonton,  First  Mississipin  Irfantry. 


Headquarters  Troops, 

. Fonchatoula,  Miss.,  April  30,  1863 — 10  p.  m. 

Major:  Enemy  reported  at  Summit,  on  railroad,  advancing  on 
Osyka. 

I leave  this  place  at  12  o’clock,  or  about  then,  for  that  point,  with 
battery  of  artillery,  60  cavalry,  and  260  infantry.  My  object  is  to  pro- 
tect Government  propertj^  at  Osyka,  if  possible. 

All  quiet  in  my  front.  Our  scouts  well  advanced.  I make  this  move 
without  orders,  but  could  not  communicate  with  you.  Hope  the  move 
will  be  approved  by  the  general  commanding.  I leave  most  of  my  cav- 
alry force  behind,  with  orders  to  dispatch  me  if  any  move  is  attempted 
by  the  enemy. 

Enemy  above  reported  by  Captain  [Thomas  O.J  Ehodes,  commanding 
post  at  Osyka,  to  be  about  1,500  strong.  I will  save  them  if  possible. 

Don’t  know  what  has  become  of  our  cavalry  above  reported  gone 
west. 


I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  &c., 

JNO.  M.  SIMONTON, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

Maj.  T.  F.  Willson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Fort  Hudson. 


No.  24. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Lloyd  Tilghman,  C.  S.  Army. 

Canton,  April  2.4,  1863. 

^ Messenger  from  Carthage  again  reports  a regiment  of  cavalry  ap- 
proaching that  place. 

I have  started  Fifty-fourth  Alabama  and  section  of  artillery,  with 
orders  to  move  rapidly.  I have  Eighth  Kentucky,  about  100"  strong, 
and  a section. 

Might  effect  something  if  I had  more  force. 

Please  send  it  if  practicable.  I need  a few  cavalry. 

LLOYD  TILGHMAN, 

Brigadier-  G eneral. 


General  Pemberton. 


554 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


APRIL,  18-24,  1863. — Expedition  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  to  the  Coldwater, 
Miss.,  including  action  (18th)  at  Hernando,  and  skirmish  (19th)  at  Perry’s 
Ferry. 

REFOK-TS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Stephen  A.  Hurlbnt,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Sixteenth  Array  Corps. 
No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  William  Sooy  Smith,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  3. — Col.  George  E.  Bryant,  Twelfth  Wisconsin  Infantry. 

No.  4. — Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Rnggles,  C.  S.  Array,  commanding  First  District. 

No.  5. — Brig.  Gen.  James  R.  Chalmers,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Fifth  District. 


No.  1. 


Reports  of  Maj,  Oen.  Stephen  A.  Hurlbut,  JJ.  S.  Army,  commanding  Six- 
teenth Army  Corps* 


Headquarters  Sixteenth  Army  Corps, 

Meinphis,  Tenn.,  April  21,  1863. 

Sir  : I send  you  last  dispatch  from  Corinth,  also  written  reports  from 
Colonel  Bryant,  Twelfth  Wisconsin,  as  to  movement  on  Coldwater. 

The  river  at  Coldwater  Station  proved  impassable.  Our  troops  fell 
back  to  Hernando.  I have  just  had  verbal  report  from  Bryant.  Major 
Hayes,  Fifth  Ohio  Volunteer  Cavalry,  has  died  of  his  wound.  His  con- 
duct was  most  gallant.  With  40  men  he  captured  65  prisoners.  We 
have  80  in  all.  Fearing  that  Chalmers  might  be  re-enforced  from  Green- 
wood, I have  sent  this  morning  the  Fourteenth  and  Forty-sixth  Illinois 
and  one  battery,  with  orders,  if  they  hear  Smith’s  guns,  to  force  a pas- 
sage, by  bridging  or  otherwise,  and  join  him. 

I have  just  received  a dispatch  from  La  Grange  that  a woman  just  in 
from  Holly  Springs  reports  heavy  cannonading  south  of  Holly  Springs 
on  yesterday.  If  this  is  so.  Smith  has  run  across  some  other  band  or 
force,  for  Chalmers  has  not  moved  yet,  I think,  from  Coldwater. 

Smith  has  1,500  good  infantry  and  a good  battery,  and  although  I am 
somewhat  anxious  about  his  not  appearing  in  their  rear  at  or  about 
Senatobia  before  our  men  left  Coldwater  on  Monday  noon,  I think  he 
is  strong  enough  to  work  his  way  back  or  forward  against  anything  but 
a movement  in  force  from  below,  of  which  I have  no  intelligence. 

Dodge  is,  I am  satisfied,  careful  as  well  as  brave,  and  will  hold  the 
line  of  Bear  Creek  as  long  as  necessary. 

Your  obedient  servant. 


S.  A.  HUELBUT, 


Major-General. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Eawlins,  Assista7it  Adjutant- General. 


[Inclosure.l 

Headquarters  Fourth  Division, 

Rear  Memphis,  April  21,  1863 — 1 a.  m. 

[General  Stephen  A.  Hurlbut  :] 

General:  Inclosed  1 1 send  you  dispatches  just  received  from  Colo- 
nel Bryant.  You  will  notice  that  he  had  quite  an  animated  time  of  it, 
finding  the  rebels  in  force  intrenched  on  the  Coldwater,  which  he  could 
not  cross  for  reasons  stated.  IVIajor  Hayes  severely,  supposed  mortally, 
wounded ; two  officers  of  the  Thirty- third  Wisconsin  dead.  Our  force 


Sec  also  Grierson’s  raid,  &c.,  p.  519. 


t See  p.  55G. 


Chap.  XXXVL]  EXPEDITION  TO  THE  COLDWATER^  MISS.,  ETC.  555 

fell  back  on  the  Horn  Lake  road,  about  18  miles  from  Memphis,  where 
they  are  now  encamped.  They  are  encumbered  with  57  privates  and 
7 commissioned  officers  taken  prisoners.  If  they  remain  or  return,  they 
will  want  assistance  from  here  in  the  shape  of  ambulances  and  artillery 
horses,  besides  a sufficient  force  of  cavalry  to  relieve  Major  Hayes’  com- 
mand, which  is  played  out. 

What  has  become  of  General  Smith? 

Awaiting  your  orders,  I am,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  G.  LAUMA17, 
Brigadier- General, 


Headquarters  Sixteenth  Army  Corps, 

Memphis^  Tenn.^  April  25,  1863. 

The  expedition  against  Chalmers  suffered  the  misfortune  of  most  com- 
bined movements.  General  Smith  did  not  get  into  the  rear  in  time,  and 
from  high  water  in  Coldwater  Eiver,  and  the  slowness  and  extreme  cau- 
tion of  Colonel  Bryant,  of  the  Twelfth  Wisconsin,  who  led  the  force  from 
here,  that  part  of  the  expedition  did  not  force  the  passage  of  the  river. 
As  Smith  came  up  on  Wednesday,  Chalmers  broke  into  small  squads 
and  ran  off  to  Panola,  burning  all  bridges. 

I have  had  nothing  from  Bodge  for  three  days,  but  his  base  is  firm  at 
Eastport,  on  the  line  of  Bear  Creek. 

I sent  you  co])y  of  letter  from  Grierson,  near  Pontotoc.  I have  not 
heard  from  his  main  column  since. 

The  Second  Iowa  Cavalry  has  burned  Okolona,  destroyed  the  road  and 
barracks ; also  large  amounts  of  provisions,  &c.,  at  Tupelo,  either  by 
themselves,  or  by  the  enemy,  in  fear  of  them.  This  is  reported  by  two 
of  that  regiment,  who  were  cut  off  and  came  into  Corinth.  The  country 
cavalry  is  hanging  around  them,  but  I thiuk  they  will  work  their  way  in. 

There  is  nothing  else  here  of  news.  As  soon  as  I get  news  from  any 
of  these  expeditions,  I will  forward  it. 

Your  obedient  servant, 


Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Eawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


S.  A.  HUELBHT, 

Major-  General, 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  William  Sooy  Smithy  TJ.  S.  Army, 

Collierville,  April  23,  1803. 

I have  just  arrived  here,  having  marched  by  w^ay  of  Holly  Springs, 
Wyatt’s,  Cole’s  Cross-Eoads,  Sardis,  Senatobia,  Coidwater,  and  Byha- 
lia.  Chalmers  divided  up  his  force  and  ran  around  me,  and  escaped  hj 
way  of  Buck  Snort  and  Chulahoma.  I have  lost  perhaps  half  a dozen 
stragglers,  captured  ; have  captured  13  Confederate  soldiers,  and  have 
brought  out  about  255  horses  and  mules.  Will  report  as  soon  as  possi- 
ble by  letter. 

WM.  SOOY  SMITH, 

Brigadier -General.,  Commanding  First  Division, 

Major-General  Hukleut, 

Commanding  sixteenth  Army  Corps. 


556  MISSISSIPPI^  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXTL 

]S"o.  3. 

Reports  of  Col.  George  E.  Bryant^  Twelfth  Wisconsin  Infantry. 

Johnson’s  Farm,  Eighteen  Miles  from  Memphis, 

April  20,  1863. 

Captain:  We  commenced  skirmisliing  with  the  enemy  on  Saturday, 
2 miles  across  ISTonconnah,  and  pushed  him  to  Hernando.  He  had  a 
camp  18  miles  out  of  Memphis.  They  removed  their  tents  through  Her- 
nando on  Saturday  morning.  After  we  got  into  camp  at  Hernando,  at 
sundown,  600  rebels  attacked  us.  We  went  out,  met,  and  routed  them, 
and  captured  63  privates  and  7 commissioned  officers ; killed  and  wounded 
about  20  of  them.  I sent  out  the  ambulance  to  pick  up  their  wounded, 
and  they  fired  on  the  flag.  The  next  morning  we  reached  Coldwater 
Eiver  at  8 a.  m.,  skirmishing  with  the  enemy  8 miles  up  the  river.  We 
fought  them  from  8 a.  m.  till  4 p.  m.,  but  were  unable  to  cross  the  ferry, 
the  boats  of  which  the  rebels  shot  loose. 

Their  force  was  infantry,  Chalmers  having  been  re-enforced  by  two 
regiments  on  Thursday. 

Major  Hayes  was  badly,  and  I fear  mortally,  wounded  about  9 a.  m. 
He  was  so  weak  he  could  tell  me  nothing.  I posted  the  artillery  to  the 
front,  with  the  Forty-first  and  Thirty-third  and  three  companies  of  the 
Twelfth  Wisconsin,  leaving  the  balance  of  the  Twelfth  to  hold  the  hill. 
The  enemj^  was  fully  equal  to  us,  intrenched.  I sent  cavalry  up  the 
river  above  the  railroad,  but  they  could  find  no  place  to  cross.  At  4 p. 
m.  they  commenced  shelling  us  from  the  hill  beyond,  though,  of , course, 
they  did  not  have  our  range.  After  throwing  a few  shells,  they  appar- 
ently withdrew.  At  this  time  the  cavalry  on  my  right  commenced  to 
skirmish,  and  sent  me  word  they  had  met  the  enemy’s  advance.  Pre  • 
vious  to  this  I had  been  told  they  were  crossing  below.  I immediately 
took  the  battery  train  and  seven  companies  of  the  Twelfth  Wisconsin 
on  the  hill  in  rear,  and  soon  moved  the  whole  force  back,  and  filed  to  the 
right  of  the  Horn  Lake  road.  Here  I met  Major  Eastman.  On  this 
road  I camped,  and  this  morning  moved  into  Hernando.  I sent  cavalry 
back  to  the  river,  and  they  found  the  enemy  still  there.  I also  sent 
cavalry  toward  the  east.  Though  meeting  and  driving  the  enemy,  they 
found  no  place  to  cross,  and  could  hear  nothing  of  Smith’s  guns ; 500  or 
600  rebels  have  been  continually  in  our  rear;  attacked  and  captured  a 
pressed  ambulance,  with  Lieutenant  Major,  which  I recaptured.  On  con- 
sultation with  the  commanding  officers,  it  was  decided  to  fall  back  here 
and  communicate  with  you.  We  have  2 officers  of  the  Thirty-third  Wis- 
consin dead.  Major  Hayes  badly  wounded,  and  some  13  others  dead  and 
wounded.  The  rebels  have  torn  up  the  bridges  behind  us,  on  Hernando 
road,  compelling  us  to  come  this  way.  Several  of  the  battery  horses 
are  dead,  and  they  are  down  to  four  to  a gun,  and  they  played  out.  I 
wish  I could  hear  by  daylight.  I dislike  to  come  back;  still,  with  the 
prisoners,  rations  running  but,  and  ammunition  getting  a little  scarce,  I 
ask  for  instructions.  If  we  go  back,  we  shall  want  ambulances,  am- 
munition, and  bread.  What  has  become  of  Smith  ? Men  never  fought 
better.  I do  hope  I may  hear  by  daylight.  It  is  best  to  send  not  less 
than  50  men  with  this. 

GEOEGE  E.  EEYANT, 

Colonel. 


Capfc.  W.  H.  F.  Eandall, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  EXPEDITION  TO  THE  COLDWATER,  MISS.,  ETC.  557 

IIdqrs.  Twelfth  Wisconsin  Volunteer  Infantry, 

Mem'pliis^  Tenn.,  April  25,  18G3. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  on  the  morning  of  the  18th 
instant,  in  pursuance  to  orders  from  General  Lauman,  I moved  from 
Memphis,  on  the  Hernando  road,  with  the  Twelfth  and  Thirty-third  Wis- 
consin, Forty-first  Illinois  Volunteers,  and  the  Fifteenth  Ohio  Battery. 

At  the  Ntonconnah,  Major  Hayes,  with  265  men,  of  the  Fifth  Ohio  Cav- 
alry, reported  to  me.  Two  miles  south  of  NTonconnah  he  met  a picket  of 
10  men  of  the  enemy,  and  captured  5 of  them.  Seven  miles  north  of 
Hernando,  the  camp  of  Colonel  [W.  C.]  Falkner  was  broken  up.  A 
lar^e  amount  of  corn,  an  ambulance  wagon  and  4 horses  and  harness, 
loaded  with  ham,  were  captured  here,  belonging  to  the  C.  S.  Army. 

The  column  reached  Hernando,  Miss.,  25  miles  south  of  Memphis,  at 
6 p.  m.  [G.  L.  I Blythe,  with  300  men,  hovered  on  my  rear  and  flanks  all 
day,  twice  firing  on  the  flankers  thrown  out  from  the  column.  At  6.30 
]).  m.  the  pickets  on  the  south  of  the  town  were  attacked  by  Colonel 
[ W.  C.]  Falkner,  with  from  600  to  700  men  on  foot.  I immediately 
sent  Major  Hayes,  with  cavalry,  to  meet  them,  and  got  my  forces  in 
position  for  battle.  After  a sharp  engagement  of  thirty  minutes,  and 
killing  and  wounding  30  of  the  enemy,  the  enemy  fell  back,  leaving  in 
our  hands  72  prisoners,  including  7 commissioned  officers.  Among  the 
badly  wounded  were  two  commissioned  officers.  I immediately  sent  thci 
surgeons  of  the  command  with  their  ambulances  and  infirmary  corps  to 
look  after  the  enemy’s  dead  and  wounded,  but  they  were  fired  upon, 
and  returned  with  only  4 of  the  wounded.  In  this  skirmish  we  had  2 
men  slightly  wounded.  It  was  too  dark,  and  the  men  and  horses  too 
much  used  up,  to  pursue.  We  captured  seventy  stand  of  arms  and  ac- 
couterments. 

The  command  was  under  arms  at  3 a.  ra.  Sunday  morning,  and  at  / ‘ 
sunrise  started  for  the  Coldwater.  Met  the  enemy’s  pickets  2 miles 
south  of  Hernando.  The  column  moved  swiftly  on.  When  4 miles  out, 
our  rear  was  attacked  by  Blythe.  I sent  Companies  B and  K,  of  the 
Twelfth  Wisconsin,  with  18  cavalrymen,  to  repel  them,  and  they  soon 
scattered  them.  About  the  same  time  I received  a message  from  Major 
Hayes  that  he  had  reached  Perry’s  Ferry  and  driven  the  enemy  across ; 
that  he  was  badly  wounded,  and  the  men  getting  out  of  ammunition.  I 
immediately  put  the  battery  (Fifteenth  Ohio,  Captain  Spear),  the  two 
leading  regiments,  the  Thirtj^-third  Wisconsin,  Colonel  Moore,  and  the 
Forty-first  Illinois,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Nale,  upon  a very  swift  double- 
quick,  which,  through  mud  ankle-deep,  they  kept  up  for  4 miles.  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Poole,  with  the  Twelfth  Wisconsin,  in  rear  of  the  train 
with  prisoners,  was  instructed  to  move  steadily  on,  with  flankers  thrown 
out  on  either  side,  and  bring  forward  all  the  men  who  might  fall  out 
from  fatigue,  that  might  be  caused  by  our  rapid  advance.  Arriving  at 
the  river,  found  the  cavalry  dismounted  and  holding  the  ferry.  Captain 
Spear  immediately^  got  two  pieces  in  position,  and  shelled  the  thicket 
on  the  other  side.  Cur  cavalry  fell  back  to  their  ammunition  wagon, 
under  orders  to  be  ready  to  cross.  Falkner’s  men  retired  from  our 
range  ; the  firing  ceased,  and  Lieutenant  Picquet,  of  the  Thirty-second 
Illinois  Volunteers,  provost-marshal,  was  just  trying  to  get  across  the 
river  to  the  boat  tied  on  the  other  side,  when  the  rebels  returned,  re-en- 
forced by  two  regiments  of  mounted  infantry,  dismounted  (First  Mis- 
souri, and  Colonel  [Ik]  McCulloch’s  Arkansas  [Missouri]  regiment). 

In  the  mean  time  the  Thirty-third  Wisconsin  Volunteers  had  formed 
in  the  swamp  on  the  right  of  tlie  road,  and  the  Forty-first  Illinois,  with 
Companies  C,  H,  and  E,  of  the  Twelfth  Wisconsin,  on  the  left  of  the 


558 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


road,  close  by  tlie  river  bank.  The  enemy  advanced  nearly  to  the  brink 
of  the  river,  where,  under  cover  of  felled  trees  and  a gully,  they  poured 
in  a perfect  shower  of  balls.  The  brave  Captain  8pear,  as  they  ad- 
vanced’down  the  road  within  40  yards,  commanded,  ‘‘Cannoneers  to 
your  guns;  canister.’^  The  men  worked  with  a will,  and  it  was  only 
when  he  found  that  their  sharpshooters,  under  cover  of  large  cypress 
logs,  were  picking  off  his  men.  and  horses,  that  he  fell  back.  On  our 
side  was  a thick,  wooded  swamp,  which,  from  the  last  nighCs  rain,  was 
full  of  water.  The  two  regiments  and  three  companies  on  either  side 
remained  in  their  positions  from  9 a.  m.  till  5 p.  m.,  lying  flat  on  the 
ground,  and  keeping  their  sharpshooters,  five  companies  from  a regi- 
ment, close  to  the  bank,  under  cover  of  trees.  A continuous  fire  was 
kept  up  from  both  sides  all  day.  Seven  companies  of  the  Twelfth 
Wisconsin  guarded  the  prisoners  and  tlie  hill,  in  our  rear.  I posted 
the  cavalry  up  and  down  the  river,  to  find  another  crossing.  I sent 
cavalry  up  the  river  at  3 p.  m.,  who  crossed  the  railroad  at  the  burned 
bridge,  but  could  hear  nothing  of  General  Smith. 

At  4 p.  m.  the  enemy  were  again  re-enforced,  and  commenced  shell- 
ing us  from  the  hill  opposite,  to  which  we  replied  with  our  artillery,  but 
we  could  get  no  range  on  them.  The  ground  was  so  watery  that  we 
could  only  get  position  for  one  gun.  At  4.30  p.  m.  I moved  the  artil- 
lery train  and  the  Twelfth  Wisconsin  to  a strong  position  on  the  hill. 

At  5 p.  m.  my  cavalry  sent  word  they  had  met  the  enemy^s  pickets 
on  our  right.  I immediately  fell  back  2 miles,  and  moved  about  3 miles 
to  the  west  on  the  Horn  Lake  road,  to  prevent  their  flanking  me.  I am 
now  satisfied  that  there  was  nothing  there  except  Blythe’s  command. 
Here  Major  -Eastman,  with  100  men  of  the  Second  Wisconsin  Cavalry, 
reported  to  me.  Here  we  encamped  for  the  night.  During  the  night 
there  was  sharp  picket  firing,  and  we  were  in  line  of  battle.  One  man 
of  the  Thirty-third  Wisconsin  was  wounded. 

The  next  morning,  Monday,  I moved  up  to  Hernando,  and  sent  my 
cavalry  forward  again  to  Perry’s  Ferry,  Avhere  they  found  the  enemy 
still  in  position,  with  their  pickets  (which  they  drove  in)  thrown  out 
toward  Hernando.  I also  sent  the  cavalry  east  toward  Holly  Springs, 
to  the  river,  with  instructions  to  listen  for  Smith’s  guns.  At  3 o’clock 
I fell  back  to  Johnson’s  farm,  on  the  Horn  Lake  road,  and  sent  30  cav- 
alry to  Memphis  with  dispatches  for  you. 

At  8 o’clock  Tuesday  morning  I fell  back  G miles  to  the  junction  of 
the  Hernando  and  Holn  Lake  roads.  I here  received  notice  of  re-en- 
forcements, and  sent  the  ambulances  with  dead  and  wounded  to  meet 
those  you  had  sent  out.  While  this  was  being  done,  the  enemy  sent  in 
a flag  of  truce,  which  did  not  detain  us,  as  we  were  stopped  for  dinner. 
I marched  till  dark,  when  we  encamped. 

The  next  morning,  Wednesday,  we  moved  through  Hernando,  and 
crossed  my  cavalry  at  both  the  Holly  Springs  road  and  Perry’s  Feri  y. 
I was  convinced  that  General  Smith  could  not  be  below,  from  the  fact 
that  General  Chalmers  spent  Monday  night  2 miles  south  of  Hernando, 
and  was  all  day  Tuesday  with  his  wife  at  Hernando. 

Thursday  I returned  to  Horn  Lake  Creek,  and  Friday  to  camj)  at 
Memphis.  The  expedition  captured  80  prisoners,  200  horses  and  mules 
(100  of  them  good  cavalrj^  horses),  70  stand  of  arms,  12,000  i)ounds  of 
bacon,  10,000  pounds  of  which  were  destrojTd  ; also  a quantity  of  dry- 
goods,  medicine,  &c. 

The  Forty-first  Illinois  lost  1 man  killed  and  1 wounded.  The  Tliirty- 
third  Wisconsin  lost  2 commissioned  olficers  killed  and  3 men  wounded. 
The  Twelfth  Wisconsin  had  2 men  wounded  and  1 missing.  The  Fif- 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  EXPEDITION  TO  THE  COLDWATER,  MISS.,  ETC.  559 

teeutli  Ohio  Battery  lost  1 man  killed  and  2 wounded.  The  Fifth  Ohio 
Cavalry  lost  Major  Hayes,  killed,  and  Lieutenant  [Eobert]  Major  and  3 
men,  wounded. 

The  conduct  of  all,  both  officers  and  men,  was  excellent.  I know  of 
no  one  who  failed  to  do  his  whole  duty.  Under  a very  hot  fire  of  sharp- 
shooters, who  aimed  principally  at  officers  and  mounted  men,  during  the 
fight  of  Sunday,  the  different  corps  were  put  in  position  with  the  stead- 
iness and  good  order  of  veterans.  The  Fifteenth  Ohio  Battery,  Capt. 
Edward  Spear,  was  splendidly  handled,  under  a withering  fire,  at  not 
over  oO yards.  I cannot  refrain  from  mentioning  a gallant  act  of  Private 
Clayton  W.  Gonsanley.  Private  John  Maddox  was  struck  down  in  the 
act  of  ramming  a shell  home.  Gonsanley,  who  was  sponging,  imme- 
diately and  without  orders  sprang  across  the  gun,  seized  the  rammer, 
sent  home  the  shell,  and  continued  so  to  work  until  ordered  away,  only 
stopping  long  enough  to  move  Maddox  from  under  the  wheels  of  the 
gun.  Captain  Spear  showed  daring,  skill,  and  ability,  and  was  well 
seconded  by  Lieutenant  Burdick  and  all  the  men. 

The  cavalry  did  fine  service,  being  constantly  on  the  move,  and  espe- 
cially in  the  skirmishes  at  Hernando  on  Saturday  evening  and  Sunday 
morning  at  Perry’s  Ferry,  under  the  gallant  lead  of  Major  Hayes,  of  the 
Fifth  Ohio.  This  fine  officer  was  struck  through  the  pelvis  and  thigh 
by  a Minie  ball  at  about  8.30  a.  m.  on  April  19,  at  the  ferry,  and  died 
in  an  ambulance  on  Tuesday,  April  21,  at  about  noon.  All  was  done 
for  him  that  was  possible;  but  the  wound  was  of  such  a nature  that 
anything  but  smoothing  his  passage  to  the  grave  was  useless.  Bfe  is 
entitled  to  all  the  iiraise  that  an  able,  dashing,  and  brave  officer  can 
receive  from  his  companions.  His  loss  was  a severe  one  to  the  service. 
All  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  cavalry  did  their  duty  bravely  and 
promptly.  In  the  infantry  steadiness  and  coolness,  hard  and  veteran- 
like,  were  the  characteristics.  Two  officers  of  the  Thirty-third  Wiscon- 
sin, Capt.  Joseph  F.  Lindsley,  Company  H,  and  Lieut.  Henry  S.  Swift, 
commanding  Company  E,  were  killed  at  the  ferry  while  at  their  posts 
of  duty.  Their  fellows  bear  testimony  to  the  fact  that  they  were  two 
of  the  best  officers  in  the  regiment.  To  praise  the  living,  as  they  de- 
serve, by  special  notice,  would  be  to  name  and  praise  the  whole. 

I am  under  many  obligations  to  Lieutenant  Picquet,  of  the  Thirty- 
second  Illinois  Volunteers;  Lieutenant  Duncan,  of  the  Fifty-third  In- 
diana, and  Lieutenant  Harris,  of  the  Twenty-eighth  Illinois  Kegiment, 
Colonel  Johnson’s  aides,  who  accompanied  me;  also  to  my  acting  ad- 
jutant, Lieut.  J.  K.  Proudfit,  and  Lieutenant  [William  J.]  Norton,  of  the 
Twelfth  Wisconsin.  They  repeatedly  made  themselves  the  marks  of 
the  enemy’s  sharpshooters  in  carrying  orders  to  the  command  in  the 
swamp.  I also  thank  Colonel  Dornblaser  and  his  command,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Heath,  Major  Eastman,  and  Major  Wilson,  with  their  commands, 
who  re-enforced  my  command.  They  did  everything  in  their  power  to 
ease  the  labors  of  my  tired  and  foot-sore  soldiers,  and  ably  and  cheer- 
fully carried  out  all  orders  and  commands  after  they  joined  us. 

The  expedition  is  in  camp.  With  the  exception  of  1 man  missing  and 
those  struck  by  bullets,  it  is  as  intact  as  when  put  under  my  care.  In 
killed  and  wounded  I know  the  enemy  has  suffered  more  than  we  have, 
and  the  captures,  at  least,  are  clear  ])rofit. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

GEOEGE  E.  BEYANT, 

Colonel  Ticelfik  Wiseo^isin  Volunteer  Infantry. 

Capt.  W.  11.  F.  Eandall, 

AmMant  AtIjutanI  Qeneral. 


560  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  fCiiAv.  XXXVI. 

No.  4. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Buggies^  G.  /S'.  Army,  eommanding  First 

District. 

Okolona,  Miss.,  May  13,  1803. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  state,  for  the  information  of  the  lieutenant* 
p^enerat  commanding-,  that  being  informed  by  Brigadier-General  [S.  A.  M.J 
Wood,  from  Florence,  Ala.,  that  a raid  of  the  enemy  was  about  to  be 
made  from  Corinth  up  the  valley  of  the  Tennessee  Eiver,  and  requested 
to  harass  his  movements  in  every  possible  way,  I,  on  the  7th  ultimo, 
gave  orders  for  a portion  of  my  troops  to  be  in  readiness  to  march  into 
the  Bear  Creek  country,  on  the  line  of  the  enemy^s  movement.  Infor- 
mation received  soon  afterward  induced  the  belief  that  the  enemy’s 
force  at  Corinth  and  neighboring  stations  was  being  greatly  reduced, 
and,  to  be  able  to  strike  him  the  more  effectually  upon  his  base  of  oper- 
ations, should  opportunity  invite,  only  a scouting  party  was  sent  to  Bear 
Creek,  and  two  sections  (four  guns)  of  [J.  A.]  Owens’  light  battery  was 
ordered  from  Columbus  to  Aberdeen  on  the  13th,  and  sent  thence  with 
the  Second  Alabama  Cavalry  Begiment  to  Town  Creek,  0 miles  east  of 
Okolona.  Taking  the  field  at  the  same  time,  and  proceeding  to  Yerona, 
I soon  ascertained  that  a large  force  of  the  enemy  was  going  through 
Corinth  in  the  direction  of  Northern  xllabama  without  reducing  his 
strength  at  Corinth,  and  that  a considerable  force  was  also  accumulat- 
ing at  La  Grange  and  other  places  west  of  Corinth.  Believing  it  my 
special  duty  to  protect,  so  far  as  I could,  the  rich  country  along  the  line 
of  the  Mississippi  and  Ohio  Bailroad,  and  the  road  itself,  I deeified  it 
unsafe  to  move  so  far  to  the  north  and  east  as  would  have  been  neces- 
sary to  enable  me  to  harass  the  enemy  on  his  march  toward  Northern 
Alabama,  and  contented  myself  by  requesting  General  Gholson  to  send 
100  of  the  best  men  from  his  State  troops  to  break  up  the  Memphis  and 
Cincinnati  Bailroad  between  Grand  Junction  and  Corinth. 

Flavin g visited  all  my  troops,  as  well  as  the  State  troops,  at  Chester- 
ville,  established  lines  of  communication,  and  put  everything  in  the  best 
possible  state  of  readiness  for  whatever  might  occur,  I returned  toward 
Columbus ; but  when  within  14  miles  of  that  place,  on  the  20th,  was  in- 
formed that  a force  of  the  enemy,  rated  at  from  fifteen  hundred  to  as 
many  thousand  men,  with  artillery,  was  at  Pontotoc.  The  most  active 
measures  were  taken  to  resist  his  progress  by  the  concentration  of  all 
my  mounted  troops  to  the  west  of  the  railroad.  Capt.  L.  D.  Sandidge, 
assistant  adjutant  and  inspector  general,  with  two  guns  upon  platform 
cars,  and  Colonel  [Thomas  A.]  Burgin,with  apart  of  the  State  troops  at 
Columbus,  were  sent  to  reconnoiter  the  road  and  to  protect  the  railroad 
bridges  across  the  Tibbee  and  Noxubee,  and  the  public  stores  at  Macon ; 
and  Brigadier- General  [John  Y.]  Harris  was  instructed  to  order  all  the 
militia  at  and  in  the  vicinity  of  Macon  to  unite  with  them,  and  to  invite 
the  citizens  generallj-  along  the  railroad  line  to  organize  for  the  defense 
of  the  towns  and  railroad  bridges.  The  rapid  progress  of  th^  enemy 
from  Pontotoc  by  way  of  Houston  led  me  to  suppose  that  the  first  and 
principal  purpose  was  to  destroy  our  railroad  communication  by  burn- 
ing the  bridges  over  the  Tibbee  and  Noxubee,  and  it  was  not  until  he  had 
been  thwarted  in  this,  and  was  retreating  northward  after  the  attack 
u])on  him  at  Palo  x\lto,  did  I learn  that  whilst  we  were  confronting  the 
enemy  at  one  point,  another  column,  marching  to  the  westward,  had 
l)roceeded  to  the  Souther^  Bailroad,  between  Meridian  and  Jackson. 

This  information  was  obtained  by  me  at  West  Point,  about  5 p.  m. 


OuAP.  XXXVL]  EXPEDITION  TO  THE  COLDWATEE,  MISS.,  ETC.  561 


the  24th.  At  6 p.  m.  a dispatch  was  received  from  Major  [W.  A.]  Hew-  ^ ^ 
lett,  then  at  Aberdeen,  that  1,500  of  the  enemy’s  forces  were  between 
Okolona  and  Aberdeen,  threatening  an  immediate  attack  upon  the  latter 
place. 

Colonel  [J.  W.]  Eogers,  with  the  Ninth  Arkansas  Infantry,  was  sent 
to  Prairie  Station,  8 miles  from  Aberdeen,  with  instructions  to  make  a 
forced  march  that  night  for  its  relief.  This  report,  though  so  positively 
given,  was  without  foundation,  producing,  however,  much  disquietude 
for  a time,  as  did  the  report  received,  at  8 p.  m.  on  the  25th,  from  Lieut. 

J.  P.  Shaw,  at  Macon,  that,  from — 

reliable  source,  Bankston  Factory  was  burned  by  a large  force  of  Federals  that  morn- 
ing, said  to  be  20,000  infantry  and  6,000  cavalry,  making  their  way  to  Southern  road, 
via  Louisville  and  Kosciusko. 

And  which  on  investigation  proved  equally  false. 

The  retreat  of  the  enemy  from  Palo  Alto,  the  pursuit  and  attack  ui)on 
him  at  Birmingham,  with  other  matters  of  interest,  is  so  clearly  stated 
in  the  report  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  [C.  E.]  Barteau,  herewith  sent,*  that 
I specially  commend  it  to  your  attention.  Instructed  by  the  lieutenant- 
general  that  it  would  be  inexcusable  to  allow  the  enemy  to  escape  this 
way  from  the  Southern  Eailroad,  scouting  parties  were  sent  in  that 
direction,  and  orders  given,  on  the  25th,  stationing  all  my  mounted  1 V 
troops  so  as  to  intercept  him,  but  his  movement  to  another  quarter  re- 
lieving us  from  the  expected  return  this  way,  my  command  was  ordered 
to  positions  guarding  the  country  against  enemy  on  the  north,  at  which 
they  had  not  arrived  when  another  raid  of  the  enemy  approached  from 
the  direction  of  New  Albany. 

*Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DANIEL  EUGGLES, 
Brigadier-General^  Commanding  District, 

Maj.  E.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  5. 

Re;ports  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  E.  Chalmers^  G.  S.  Army,  commanding 

Fifth  District. 

COLDWATER  BRIDGE,  April  18,  18G3— 8 p.  m. 
Enemy  again  left  Hernando.  Their  statement  of  casualties  yester- 
day— 1 major,  1 captain,  1 lieutenant,  and  17  privates  killed ; between 
40  and  50  wounded. 

JAMES  E.  CHALMEES, 

Brigadier- General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


COLDW^ATER  DEPOT,  April  18,  18G3, 

Yia  Senatobia,  [April]  10. 

Enemy  reported  rebuilding  railroad  bridge  over  Nonconnah,  on  Mem- 
phis and  Tennessee  Eailroad,  and  advanced  within  4 miles  of  Hernando 

* See  Griersou’s  raid,  Bartcau’s  report,  p.  533. 

3G  R R — VOL  XX  tV;  PT  I 


5G2 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


to-day.  Eeported  advance  on  Holly  Springs  to-day,  and  repairing  rail-  ; 
road  as  they  advance.  I am  concentrating  my  force  here.  This  is  the 
provision  region.  Can  you  give  me  more  cavalry?  [J.  G.]  Stocks’  , 
regiment  and  [T.  IST.]  Waul’s  cavalry  did  not  come  with  McCulloch. 

JAMES  E.  CHALMEES, 

Brig  ad  ier-  General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pembeeton. 


COLDWATEB,  April  19,  1863. 

Enemy  in  Hernandodast  night— four  regiments  of  infantry,  six  pieces 
of  artillery,  and  800  cavalry.  In  the  skirmish  yesterday.  Col.  W.  0. 
Ealkner  lost  about  40  men  killed  j wounded  and  prisoners  not  defi- 
nitely known.  Major  [G.  L.]  Blythe  on  enemy’s  rear  with  seven  small 
companies.  [Eobertl  McCulloch  not  here  yet. 

JAMES  E.  CHALMEES, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pembebton. 


CoLDWATER,  VIA  Senatobia,  April  19,  1863—11  a.  m. 

Heavy  skirmishing  since  7 o’clock.  Enemy  have  not  yet  succeeded 
in  crossing  Coldwater.  His  artillery  commands  the  ferry.  I am  look- 
ing every  moment  for  one  piece  of  artillery.  If  it  comes  in  time,  I will 
hold  this  place.  The  enemy  has  advantage  in  position— bluff  bank  on 
north  side,  bottom  on  this  side.  Major  [Eobert  A.]  McCulloch,  with 
skirmishers,  has  just  charged  the  ferry,  and  driven  back  the  artillery 
and  cut  the  ferry-boat  loose. 

JAMES  E.  CHALMEES, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Coldwater,  via  Senatobia,  April  19,  1863. 
The  enemy  is  in  retreat  and  we  are  pursuing.  Our  loss,  1 killed  and 
6 wounded.  Enemy’s  loss  not  known  further  than  1 dead  left  at  the 
ferry.  The  odds  were  very  heavy,  and  my  men  behaved  well,  though 
manv  were  for  the  first  time  under  artillery  fire. 

JAMES  E.  CHALMEES, 

Brigadier- General. 


Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Panola,  April  19,  1863. 

The  enemy  have -crossed  Coldwater,  and  still  advancing.  Send  me 
20,000  musket  caps  and  20,000  sporting  caps  with  all  dispatch. 

’ JAMES  E.  CHALMEES, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


[Indorsement.] 

General  Chalmers’  officer  will  leave  for  his  post  to-morrow.  These 
above  will  be  forwarded  by  him.  He  has  to  wait  till  to-morrow  even- 
ing* for  harness.  If  necessarv,  order  an  officer  at  my  disposal  to  send 
these  caps  in  morning.  ^ 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  EXPEDITION  TO  THE  COLDWATER,  MISS.,  ETC.  563 

Bridge  over  Coldwater,  on  Holly  Springs  Eoad, 

Via  JSenatohia,  April  20,  18G3. 

Enemy  re-enforced  and  returned  to  Hernando.  Unless  I get  help,  I \ 
must  fall  back  to  Panola,  and  that  gives  up  the  provision  region.  My 
effective  force  is  only  C50,  and  about  150  more  in  Panola.  Can  you  send  ! 
WauPs  cavalry  and  a battery  to  Panola,  and  Stocks’  to  Abbeville? 

JAMES  P.  OHALMEES, 

Brigadier- General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Panola,  April  22,  1863. 

Enemy  advanced  from  Memphis  again  yesterday,  and  about  the  same 
time  I heard  of  the  advance  from  below.  I destroyed  the  bridge  and  ^ 

ferry  over  Coldwater,  and  fell  back  on  the  flank  of  the  same  force,  in- 
tending  to  attack  them  to-day,  when  I discovered  that  I had  but  fonr  ^ 

rounds  of  long-range  ammunition.  I fell  back,  and  the  enemy  (2,000 
strong)  passed  on  east,  after  plundering  the  country  of  horses  and 
mules. 


Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


JAMES  E.  CHALAIEES, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Panola,  April  23,  1863. 

Enemy,  after  passing  east  through  [toward]  Buck  Snort,  turned  back,  O 
and  came  within  6 miles  of  me  last  night.  Force  estimated  at  2,000, 
composed  of  cavalry  and  infantry,  mounted  on  stolen  mules  and  horses. 

Another  force,  reported  same  size,  from  Memphis,  at  Coldwater  Depot. 

I left  camp  at  12  o’clock  last  night,  and  arrived  here  at  10  o’clock.  ^ 

Believe  I can  hold  this  place  against  their  force,  and  feel  confident,  if 
[Leonidas]  Willis  and  Stocks  arrive  in  time. 

JAMES  E.  CHALMEES, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Panola,  Miss.,  April  23,  1863. 

Force  at  Coldwater  Depot  has  not  advanced  j force  at  Buck  Snort  ^ 
gone  east.  I can  strike  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Eailroad,  or  I can  ^ 
get  my  rifled  gun  to  Austin  and  destroy  transports.  Which  would  you  ^ / ‘y 
prefer? 

JAMES  E.  CHALMEES, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton, 

Jaclcson,  3£iss. 


[Answer.] 


First  strike  the  railroad,  if 
mode  or  injure  them. 


you  are  sure  you  can  seriously  iiicoin- 

J.  C.  P.  [PEAIBEETON], 

Lieutenant-General. 


564 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXYL 


Oxford,  April  25,  18G3. 

Advance  guard  arrived.  Column  10  miles  from  here.  Delayed  by 
rain,  darkness,  and  having  to  go  off  the  road  for  forage.  Will  camp  i 
here  to-night.  Any  news  from  the  enemy  ? 

JAMES.  K.  CHALMERS,  j 

Brigadier-  General,  j 

General  Pemberton.  | 


APRIL  19,  1863.— Skirmish  at  Trenton,  Tenn.  i 

Report  of  Col.  John  K.  Mizner,  Third  Michigan  Cavalry ^ Chief  of  Cav-\ 
airy.)  District  of  Jachson. 


Jackson,  Tenn.,  April  21,  18G3. 

Captain  : Capt.  T.  V.  Quackenbush,  with  23  men  of  the  Third  Mich- 
igan Cavalry,  came  upon  a party  of  rebels,  25  in  number,  at  Trenton,: 
on  Sunday  morning  (19th),  routing  them,  and  capturing  15  out  of  the  25.‘ 
He  was  attacked  in  return  by  a party  of  G3,  under  Captains  Blackmore, 
Sparks,  and  Thomas,  all  of  whom  he  successfully  repulsed,  and  drove, 
them  from  the  town,  holding  the  prisoners  captured,  only  1 escaping. 

Additional  cavalry  has  been  sent  to  re-enforce  Captain  Quackenbush. i 
Very  respectfully, 

J.  K.  MIZNER, 
Colonel  and  Chief  of  Cavalry. 

Capt.  E.  D.  Mason, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


APRIL  22,  1863.— Passage  of  the  Vicksburg  and  Warrenton  batteries  by 

transports. 

RET’ORXS. 

No.  1.— Adjt.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2.— Col.  William  S.  Oliver,  Seventh  Missouri  Infantry,  commanding  steamer 
Tigress. 

No.  3.— Capt.  Leander  15.  Fisk,  Forty-fifth  Illinois  Infantry,  commanding  steamer 
Anglo-Saxon. 

No.  4.— Capt.  George  W.  Kennard,  Twentieth  Illinois  Infantry,  commanding  steamei 
Horizon. 

No.  5. — Maj.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith,  C.  8.  Army. 

No.  6. — Col.  A.  Jackson,  jr.,  C.  S.  Army. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Adjt.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas^  TJ.  S.  Army, 

Young’s  Point,  La.,  April  23,  1863, 

Via  Memphis,  Tenn.,  April  25 — 1.30  p.  m. 
Last  night  six  steamers  and  twelve  barges  attempted  to  run  the  biff 
teries  at  Vicksburg,  about  llp.  m.,  when  the  moon  went  clown.  •Thi 
first  two  steamers  came  within  range,  when  heavy  firing  commenceu 
The  Tigress  received  fifteen  shots — one  in  the  stern  carrying  off  twe 


Chap.  XXXYl.]  PASSAGE  OF  BATTERIES  AT  VICKSBURGj  ETC.  565 


planks.  She  rounded  to  at  JolinsoiFs  plantation,  miles  below  Vicks- 
burg-, grounded,  and  sank,  breaking  amidsbips.  She  is  a total  loss. 
Crew  all  safe.  Colonel  Lagow,  on  this  steamer  and  in  charge  of  all  the 
boats,  and  the  pilot  then  went  on  the  Cheesemaii.  The  Anglo-Saxon 
passed  comparatively  safe.  The  Moderator  was  badly  cut  up  and  had 
several  wounded.  She  drifted  by  'VVarreuton  batteries  about  3 a.  m 
The  Horizon  passed  Warrenton  at  daylight.  The  Empire  City  was 
totally  disabled  at  Vicksburg,  and  was  lashed,  at  Johnson’s  plantation, 
to  the  Cheeseman,  both  of  which  were  seen  to  pass  Warrenton,  where 
tlie  fire  was  heavy,  shortly  after  daylight.  The  barges  designed  to 
carry  troops  are  supposed  to  have  all  passed.  One  pilot  was  mortally 
wounded  in  the  abdomen  and  another  person  in  the  thigh,  both  of  whom 
must  hav'e  died  shortly  after. 

General  Sherman  took  a position  at  Johnson’s  plantation,  with  medi- 
cal officers  and  six  large  boats,  to  render  assistance.  He  hailed  and 
boarded  the  steamers,  and  the  surgeons  did  what  they  could.  One 
wounded  man  was  landed,  but  it  was  thought  best  not  to  remove  the 
others.  Some  five  hundred  shots  were  fired,  and  discharge  of  musketry 
was  kept  up  along  the  bank  of  the  river  to  pick  off' the  men,  especially 
the  pilots,  some  of  whom,  to  avoid  being  injured  by  splinters,  had  their 
pilot-houses  taken  down  and  stood  exposed.  The  entire  crews  were 
taken  from  the  troops,  of  whom  about  500  volunteered,  when  the  crews 
of  the  boats  objected.  Large  fires  were  made  in  Vicksburg  and  on  the 
1)01  lit  opposite,  to  light  up  the  river. 


Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 


L.  THOMAS, 

Adjutant-  General. 


IS^o.  2. 

Jlepo')  t of  Col.  William  S.  Oliver^  Seventh  Missouri  Infantry,  commayid- 

ing  steamer  Tigress. 

Carthage,  La.,  Apn7'24, 1803. 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  as  com- 
mander of  the  steamer  Tigress,  flag-ship  of  the  fleet,  which  started  to 
pass  the  batteries  of  Vicksburg  and  Warrenton  on  the  night  of  April 

We  started,  as  ordered,  from  the  mouth  of  Yazoo  Liver  at  11.30  o’clock, 
the  li^gress  taking  the  lead,  but  had  not  run  more  than  2 or  3 miles  when 
t le  steamer  Empire  City  passed  us.  A few  moments  afterward  the 
enemy  fired  their  signal  guns  and  made  lights  by  setting  fire  to  two 
nouses  on  the  Louisiana  side,  so  that  when  opposite  the  city  it  was  as 
igiit  as  day  on  the  river,  and  we  could  see  the  men  at  their  batteries 
j m ^^treets  in  the  city  plainly.  We  arrived  opposite  the  court- 
nouse  at  12.20  o clock.  It  was  here  we  received  their  heaviest  fire : it 
was  most  terrific,  they  throwing  a shower  of  missiles  of  all  shapes  and 
s,  from  Minie  balls  to  200-pound  shot  and  shell : and  here  the 
mein\  burst  one  of  their  heaviest  guns  in  one  of  the  streets  near  the 
■1^1  while  firing  at  us.  As  we  passed,  their  fire  cut  the  ropes 

‘ ^ 8’WS  over  our  heads,  and  shot  away  our  extra  tiller  wheel, 

irn  ^ struck  the  cabin  and  texas,  throwing  splinters  all 

una.  As  we  heard  their  shots  come  crashing  through  our  timbers,  we 


566 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [CiiAr.  XXXVI. 


wondered  how  she  could  live  a moment  under  the  raining  fire  of  shot 
and  shell. 

At  this  point  we  found  that  the  barge  which  was  made  fast  on  the 
Vicksburg  side  was  drifting  us  with  the  eddy  close  to  the  batteries.  I 
therefore  ordered  Lieutenant  McBride,  acting  mate,  to  cut  her  loose, 
which  he  did,  with  the  aid  of  Corporal  Flanagan,  under  a most  terrific 
fire  of  musketry  and  artillery.  The  noble  Tigress  stood  all  well,  and 
we  thought  all  safe,  as  we  had  passed  nearly  all  the  batteries,  when  she 
received  a very  heavy  shot  in  the  stern,  which  knocked  away  three 
knees  and  two  planks,  making  an  opening  of  at  least  4 feet  in  her  hull, 
which  was  reported  to  me  by  Lieutenant  Smith,  who  had  charge  of  the 
men  in  the  hold,  who  were  stationed  there  to  put  cotton  bags  into  such 
holes  as  might  be  made  by  their  shot.  The  Tigress  received  in  all 
thirty-five  shots  (as  near  as  I could  judge),  fourteen  of  which  struck 
her  hull,  the  last  one  causing  her  to  fill  and  settle  fast. 

The  engineers  set  the  boiler  pumps  at  w^ork,  and  I ordered  the  pilot 
to  run  her  ashore  on  the  Louisiana  side,  which  we  reached  just  in  time, 
for  slie  went  to  the  bottom  a few  minutes  after  getting  our  line  ouf. 
NTot  a man  of  my  crew  left  his  post  until  ordered  so  to  do,  the  engineers 
and  firemen  being  in  water  up  to  their  knees  before  being  relieved.  I 
assembled  my  crew  on  the  hurricane  deck,  and  hailed  the  steamer  J.  W. 
Cheeseman,  which  came  alongside. 

As  ordered  by  you,  I removed  my  crew  on  board  of  her.  The  steamer 
Empire  City  also  came  alongside,  but  in  a helpless  condition,  having 
her  steam  pipe  cut.  By  the  time  I had  removed  my  crew  on  board  Eie 
Cheeseman,  day  began  to  break.  At  the  request  of  Captain  Harrison, 
and  also  of  yourself,  I took  command  of  the  Cheeseman,  with  the  Em- 
pire City  in  tow,  to  run  by  the  Warren  ton  batteries;  but  when  near 
Warrenton,  I found  we  could  not  control  our  boat  with  the  other  in  tow, 
and  was  therefore  forced  to  cut  her  loose  and  let  her  float.  Sixteen 
shots  were  fired  at  us  from  the  Warrenton  batteries,  three  of  which 
struck  the  boat,  but  doing  us  no  material  damage.  We  dropped  out  of 
range,  and  waited  for  the  Empire  City  to  float  by,  which  she  did  without 
injury,  we  towing  her  into  the  channel  from  time  to  time,  and  escorting 
her  down,  arriving  safely  at  New  Carthage  at  8 o’clock  on  the  morning 
of  the  23d,  having  run  by  the  batteries  at  Warrenton  in  daylight. 

I cannot  speak  too  highly  of  the  officers  and  crew  of  the  Tigress.  Not 
a man  left  his  post,  each  trying  to  excel  the  other  in  doing  his  duty. 
The  men  remained  where  placed,  and  three  times  promptly  extinguished 
the  fires,  which  caught  from  the  excessive  heat  near  the  fire  doors. 

The  following  are  the  officers  and  men  of  the  Seventh  Missouri  Vol- 
unteer Infantry  composing  the  volunteer  crew  of  the  steamer  Tigress : 

Col.  Clark  B.  Lagow,  aide  to  General  Grant,  commanding  fleet. 

Lient.  Col.  W.  S.  Oliver,  Seventh  Missouri  Infantry,  commanding  Tigress. 

George  Britton,  citizen  pilot. 

Sergt.  W.  T.  Followell,  Company  E,  Seventh  Missouri,  second  pilot. 

Capt.  P.  D.  Toomer,  Company  H,  Seventh  Missouri,  chief  engineer. 

Lient.  A.  P.  Cindel,  Company  D,  Seventh  Missouri,  first  assistant  engineer. 

Sergt.  Eohert  H.  Menagh,  Company  K,  Seventh  Missouri,  second  assistant  engineer. 

Lieut.  D.  W.  McBride,  Company  *E,  Seventh  Missouri,  mate. 

Lieut.  Henry  Smith,  Comxiany  E,  Seventh  Missouri,  second  mate. 


Crew  {Sevenili  Afissouri  Ivfanirn). 


Sergt.  J.  Fitzgerald,  Company  B. 
Jh-ivate  .loliu  Ward,  Company  B. 


Private  Henry  Ischc,  Company  C. 

t'l i.  "W^l w».i  1 <1.1 


Sergt.  Michael  Whealan,  Companj" 
Private  Nathaniel  Hurst,  Company  E. 
Private  Buford  Mullins,  Company  E. 


Private  Barney  Brady,  Company  B. 
Private  Daniel  liyan.  Company  B. 


CifAP.  XXXVL]  PASSAGE  OF  BATTERIES  AT  VICKSBURG,  ETC. 


567 


Private  Williain  Barnett,  Company  E. 
Private  Tho.i'fi*-  '''’Donnell,  Company  E. 
Private  Jamt  .-  ‘<.t  ily,  Company  E. 

Sergt.  E.  L.  Crauara,  Company  F. 

Sergt.  Robert  II.  Fiavell,  Company  F. 
Private  Dennis  McCarty,  Company  F. 
Private  George  Riffle,  Company  F. 
Private  Henry  O’Neil,  Company  F. 
Private  W.  E.  Pickerel],  Company  G. 
Private  James  P.  Green,  Company  G. 
Private  John  J.  Fail,  Company  G. 
Private  I.  N.  Kimberlin,  Company  G. 
Sergt.  Joseph  A.  Bowman,  Company  11. 

Respectfully  submitted. 


Corpl.  Patrick  Flanagan,  Company  IT. 
Private  .James  McGuire,  Company  H. 
Private  George  H.  Fairbanks,  Comi^anv  H, 
Private  Eugene  Sullivan,  Company  H. 
Private  Alexander  D.  Leal,  Company  II. 
Corpl.  Calvin  Hess,  Company  I. 

Private  John  Ingle,  Company  I. 

Private  Jeremiali  Fitzgerald,  Company  I. 
Private  Patrick  O’Neil,  Company  L 
Sergt.  J.  P.  Reed,  Company  K. 

Private  Thomas  Evans,  Company  K. 
Private  E.  H.  Cannon,  Company  K. 


W.  S.  OLIVER, 

Infantry^  Comdg.  Steamer  Tigress. 


Lieut.  Col.  Seventh  Missouri 

Col.  Clark  B.  Lagow, 

Commanding  Fleet. 


ADDENDA. 


Quartermaster’s  Dept.,  Transportation  Office, 

Headquarters  near  Vicksburg, 

Offiee  on  hoard  Steamer  H.  Yon  Fhnly  April  22,  1803. 

Captain  of  Steamer  : 

Sir  : You  will  have  your  boat  in  readiness  at  9 o’clock  this  evening, 
in  the  middle  of  the  river,  at  Young’s  Point,  ready  to  move  at  the  signal 
given  by  me.  1 will  be  alongside,  and  give  the  signal  in  person  to  each 
boat.  The  line  of  boats  will  be  as  follows:  Tigress  (flagship).  Empire 
City,  Moderator,  J.  W.  Cheeseman,  Anglo-Saxon,  and  Horizon.  You 
will  have  your  crew  in  their  proper  places,  with  instructions  to  remain 
at  their  posts.  This  is  an  important  movement,  and  I trust  every  officer 
and  man  will  do  his  duty.  ^ 

Col.  Clark  B.  Lagow,  aide-de-camp  to  General  Grant,  is  on  board  the 
Tigress,  and  will  take  charge  of  the  fleet  under  way. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

GEO.  W.  GRAHAM, 

Commanding  Fleets 
By  CHAS.  C.  CARROLL,  Jr. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Capt.  Jjeander  B.  Fish,  Forty  fifth  Illinois  Infantry,  command^ 
ing  steamer  Anglo-Saxon. 

Steamer  Anglo-Saxon, 

New  Carthage,  la. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  in  compliance  with  orders,  the 
steamer  Anglo-Saxon  running  the  Vicksburg  batteries  on  the  night  of 
the  22d  of  April,  18G3.  After  leaving  the  Yazoo  River,  we  floated  down 
until  near  the  upper  batteries  j then,  putting  on  all  the  steam  she  would 
allow,  we  passed  the  upper  battery,  receiving  a shot  in  her  bow,  cutting 
loose  the  barge,  whicli  caused  the  boat  to  sheer  to  the  Louisiana  shore, 
and  strike  the  bank  opposite  the  city.  We  then  cut  the  barge  loose 
from  the  stern  and  rounded  back  on  her,  and  headed  down  stream, 


568  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC*  [Cuav.  XXZVl. 

wlien  we  received  a shot  tlirougli  the  starboard  engine,  entirely  disabling 
it ; at  the  same  time  one  through  the  pilot-house,  knocking  the  pilot 
(Charles  Evans)  out  of  the  house,  stunning  him  considerably,  when  pilots 
J.  Kendall  and  H.  0.  Hess  took'the  wheel,  and  found  it  uncontrollable. 
The  boat  then  being  entirely  disabled,  we  let  her  float  by  the  batteries, 
receiving  about  thirty  shots  at  various  places.  The  jack-staff  and  gal- 
lows frame  was  shot  away;  also  one  shot  through  the  roof  and  chimney, 
one  carrying  away  chalk-bitts  line  and  chain,  one  through  the  office  and 
cook  house,  and  several  through  the  cabin.  We  also  received  shell, 
canister,  and  musket  shots.  When  opposite  our  pickets,  were  ordered 
to  round  to.  We  cast  anchor,  but  the  stocks  being  shot  away,  would 
not  hold  the  boat.  AVe  hailed  the  boats  lying  to  at  that  point  for  assist- 
ance, when  the  steamer  Horizon  was  sent  to  our  aid,  but  could  not  reach 
us  until  in  range  of  the  Warrenton  battery,  when  she  rounded  to  and 
left  us.  AA^e  floated  by  the  battery  (just  before  daylight),  receiving  but 
little  damage,  they  only  firing  six  shots  at  us. 

After  sunrise  we  were  overhauled  by  the  steamer  Horizon,  and  taken 
in  tow  untii  in  sight  of  Kew  Carthage,  when  we  were  cut  loose  and 
floated  until  taken  in  tow  by  the  Silver  Wave  and  landed  at  this  place, 
and  reported  to  Major-General  McClernand ; the  officers  and  men  all 
standing  firmly  to  their  posts  while  passing  the  batteries, 'with  bravery 
and  coolness.  * The  pilots  and  engineers  handled  the  boat  with  great 
skill  and  bravery,  none  leaving  their  posts  until  she  was  entirely  dis- 
abled, then  putting  out  all  the  fire  and  light.  Some  of  the  men  took 
the  yawl  for  shore,  fearing  the  boilers  would  burst  and  she  would  sink, 
all  of  whom  have  returned  but  two  ( J.  H.  Miller  and  A.  B.  Turner),  who 
are  supposed  to  be  drowned. 

Bespectfullv  submitted. 

L.  B.  EISK, 

Captain  Forty-fifth  Illinois  Infantry^  Commanding  the  Boat. 

• Col.  Clark  B.  Lagow, 

Commanding  the  Fleet. 


Ko.  4. 

Ficijort  of  Capt.  George  W.  Kennard,  Twentieth  Illinois  Infantry^  com- 
manding steamer  Horizon. 

Steamer  Horizon, 

Few  Carthage^  La.,  April  23,  18G3. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  compliance  with  Special  | 
Orders,  Ko.  Ill,  Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee,  the  steamer  | 
Horizon,  leaving  Milliken’s  Bend  at  9 p.  m.,  22d  instant,  steamed  down 
the  Mississippi  to  the  mouth  of  the  Yazoo  Biver,  where  she  remained  in 
the  channel  until  signaled  to  pass  the  Yicksburg  batteries,  then  steamed 
slowly  down  to  the  bend,  where  she  put  on  a full  head  of  steam.  In 
passing  the  first  battery  she  received  two  shots,  one  through  her  dei’- 
rick  and  one  through  her  smoke-stack,  larboard  side.  At  the  second 
battery  she  received  two  shots  through  her  bulkhead.  At  the  next  bat-  i 
tery  she  received  two  shots  on  hurricane  deck,  and,  in  all,  while  under  j 
fire  passing  Vicksburg  batteries,  about  fifteen  or  sixteen  shots,  all  for-  | 
wai'd  and  above  boiler  deck,  except  one  through  her  cabin  midships,  j 
AVhen  arriving  below  onr  ])ickets,  she  hailed  the  steamer  AToderator  and  , 


CiUr.  XXXVL]  PASSAGE  OF  BATTERIES  AT  VICKSBURG,  ETC.  569 

found  slie  was  disabled,  and  attempted  to  g’o  to  her  assistance,  but, 
being  unable  to  reach  her,  passed  down  to  within  2 miles  of  the  Warren- 
ton  battery,  and  landed  where  the  hag-ship  had  gone  down,  at  which 
time  the  Anglo-Saxon  was  seen  hoating  by  in  a disabled  condition.  The 
Horizon  being  ordered  to  bring  her  in,  followed  her  till  witliin  range  of 
Warrenton  battery,  drawing  their  hre,  while  the  Anglo-Saxon  hoated 
by  almost  unnoticed,  when  she  returned  to  the  Tigress,  and  was  ordered 
to  pass  Warrenton  battery  and  report  at  New  Carthage. 

At  daylight  the  Horizon  had  passed  the  battery,  it  bring  seventeen 
rounds,  none  doing  any  damage  except  the  last,  which  struck  the  wheel 
rudder,  larboard  side,  damaging  it  considerably.  When  out  of  range 
of  Warrenton  battery,  the  Horizon  came  up  with  the  Anglo-Saxon,  took 
her  in  tow,  and  hoated  down  within  signaling  distance  of  New  Carthage, 
and. having  given  the  proper  signals,  cut  loose  from  the  Anglo-Saxon, 
which  was  then  taken  in  tow  by  steamer  Silver  Wave,  sent  out  from  New 
Carthage.  The  Horizon  then  steamed  up  and  reported  to  General  J.  A. 
McClernand,  at  New  Carthage. 

The  only  casualty  on  board  the  Horizon  was  Private  [George]  Mc- 
Elvain,  Company  B,  Twenty-third  Indiana,  slightly  wounded  in  the  head. 

I am  pleased  to  saj  that  while  we  were  under  hre  every  man  was  at 
his  post  doing  his  duty.  Each  is  deserving  credit  for  coolness  and  good 
conduct.  I take  great  pleasure  in  recommending  to  you  for  favor  the 
names  of  Lieutenant  [James  D.]  Yernay,  Eleventh  Illinois  Infantry, 
Lieutenant  [Jesse]  Boberds,  Thirty-hrst  Illinois  Infantry,  Nathan  Col- 
lins, Second  Indiana  Cavalry,  and  James  H.  Curts,  Twenty-third  Indiana 
Infantry,  each  of  whom  stood  at  his  post  and  discharged  his  duties  while 
under  hre  with  a coolness  and  courage  which  deserves  much  praise. 
Pilots  Collins  and  Curts,  and  P.  Yancil,  Thirty-hrst  Illinois  Infantry 
(mate),  are  each  of  them  experienced  river  men,  and  are  also  trusty  and 
reliable. 

I am,  wery  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

G.  W.  KENNAED, 

Caj^tain  Twentieth  Illinois^  Oommanding  Steamer  Horizon. 

Col.  Clark  B.  Lagow,  Commanding  Fleet. 


No.  5. 

Rejgort  of  Maj.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith.,  C.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  Smith’s  Division, 

Viclcshurg,  Miss.,  April  25,  1803. 

Ma.ior:  I liave  the  honor  to  transmit  the  inclosed  report  of  Colonel 
[A.]  Jackson,  [jr.,]  with  indorsement  by  Brigadier-General  [S.  D.]  Lee, 
regarding  the  passage  of  our  batteries  by  the  enemy’s  boats  on  the 
night  of  the  22d  instant.  The  report  and  indorsement  embody  all  the 
positive  information  obtained.  The  pickets,  under  Captain  [C.  J.]  Pos- 
ter, Twenty-seventh  Louisiana  Volunteers,  and  three  men  from  the 
First  Tennessee  Artillery,  sent  across  the  river  to  fire  the  houses,  per- 
formed their  duty  with  great  daring  and  success. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  major,  very  respectf ally,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  L.  SMITH, 
Major-General,  Comm anding. 

Maj.  J.  J.  Peeve,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


570 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 

No.  6. 

Be^port  of  Col.  A.  Jackson.^  jr.,  G.  S.  Army. 


Headquaetees  Eivee  Batteeies, 

Yiclcshurg,  April  23,  1863. 


Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
passage  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  and  the  firing  of  the  batteries  under 
my  command  last  night: 

The  alarm  was  given  at  11.30  p.  m.,  and,  soon  after,  a boat  appeared 
rounding  the  point  above,  and  was  followed  by  five  others  at  short  in- 
tervals. The  first  two  cone  side- wheel,  the  others  stern -wheel  trans- 
ports, all  small,  light-draught  boats,  well  protected  at  the  sides  by 
barges  loaded  with  coal,  bales  of  hay,  or  cotton.  Their  boilers  and 
machinery  were  also  protected  by  cotton-bales.  Fire  was  opened  upon 
each  in  succession  as  she  came  in  view,  and  continued  with  spirit  and 
accuracy  until  they  were  out  of  range.  All  the  transports  were  riddled, 
and  the  escape  of  any  seemed  miraculous,  considering  the  number  of 
large  projectiles  sent  crushing  through  them.  One  of  them  ran  into 
the  Louisiana  shore  opposite  Wyman’s  hill  battery,  and  was  abandoned 
by  her  men,  and  floated  down  the  river  apparently  in  a disabled  con- 
dition; another  was  also  badly  damaged,  and  floated  down  with  the 
current.  The  atmosphere  was  hazy  and  close,  and  the  smoke  settled 
down  over  the  river,  often  completely  concealing  and  obscuring  the 
boats,  and  rendering  it  almost  imxiossible  to  fire  with  accuracy.  This 
was,  however,  in  a measure  obviated  while  houses  across  the  river 
were  burning.  The  10-inch  columbiad,  commanded  by  Captain  [J.  P.] 
Lynch,  jumped  the  pintle  at  the  twelfth  discharge,  but  was  remounted 
in  a short  time,  and  is  now  ready  for  action.  One  man  was  killed  and 
2 others  were  badly  wounded  by  a premature  discharge  of  Major  [F. 
N.]  Ogden’s  10-inch  columbiad.  This  accident,  it  is  thought,  was  oc- 
casioned by  the  inferior  cartridge-bags  furnished.  The  friction-tubes 
were,  as  usual,  a great  source  of  annoyance,  and  caused  much  delay  in 
firing  almost  every  shell,  frequently  five,  six,  and  eight  failing  in  suc- 
cession. 

There  were  three  hundred  and  ninety-one  shots  fired  in  all. 

Yery  respectfully, 


Capt.  J.  G.  Deveeeux, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


A.  JACKSON,  Je., 

Colonel^  Commanding. 


[Indorsement.] 

Eespectfully  transmitted. 

All  the  boats  were  struck,  and  repeatedly,  and  more  or  less  damaged. 
Oue  boat  is  visible  this  morning,  sunk,  her  smoke-stacks  and  the  npper 
])art  of  her  wheel-houses  being  visible.  Another  boat  is  believed  to 
have  been  sunk,  as  two  of  them  were  disabled,  their  machinery  having 
failed  before  passing  the  city.  The  river  was  well  lighted  up  by  the 
l)urning  houses  op])osite  the  city,  in  De  Soto.  The  firing  was  generally 
good,  though  much  interfered  with  by  the  smoke  of  the  guns  settling 
in  front  of  the  batteries. 


STEPHEN  D.  LEE, 

Bri fjadier- General^  Commanding. 


Chap.  XXXVL]  EXPEDITION  TO  HARD  TIMES  LANDING,  LA.,  ETC.  571 

APRIL  25-29,  1863. — Expedition  to  Hard  Times  Landing,  La.,  with  skir- 
mishes (26th)  at  Phelps’  and  Clarkes  Rayons,  and  (28th)  at  Choctaw 

Bayou,  or  Lake  Eruin. 

Report  of  Col.  James  Keigwm.,  Forty-ninth  Indiana  Infantry ^ command- 
ing Detachment  of  Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps.* 

Big  Black  Eiyer  Bridge,  Miss., 

May  30,  1803. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report: 

On  April  24,  I received  orders  to  be  in  readiness  to  command  a de- 
tachment of  the  Ninth  Division,  for  the  purpose  of  making  a reconnais- 
sance on  the  Lake  Saint  Joseph  road  to  a point  opposite  the  mouth  of 
Bayou  Pierre,  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  whether  a practicable 
road  could  be  found  at  or  near  that  point  that  would  let  us  in  position 
on  the  flank  or  in  rear  of  Grand  Gulf;  also  for  the  purpose  of  captur- 
ing or  dispersing  the  command  of  Major  [I.  F.]  Harrison,  which  was  on 
this  road. 

On  the  morning  of  the  25th,  at  6 o’clock,  I left  camp  at  Perkins’  plan- 
tation, La.  The  detachment  consisted  of  the  Forty-ninth  Indiana  Vol- 
unteers, Lieutenant-Colonel  Thornton  commanding;  One  hundred  and 
fourteenth  Ohio,  Colonel  Cradlebaugh;  a detachment  of  the  Second 
Illinois  Cavalry,  Major  Bush  commanding,  and  one  section  of  Captain 
Lanphere’s  Michigan  battery.  Lieutenant  Stillman  commanding.  We 
moved  on  the  Lake  Saint  Joseph  road  about  4 miles;  we  came  to  Holt’s 
Bayou,  and  found  that  the  rebels  had  burned  the  bridge.  I detailed  100 
men  from  each  of  the  infantry  regiments  to  assist  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Beekman,  of  the  One  hundred  and  twentieth  Ohio  Infantry,  who  had 
been  sent  with  us  for  the  purpose  of  building  bridges. 

We  soon  had  our  men  at  work,  and  in  a few  hours  had  a bridge  across 
the  bayou,  which  was  about  80  feet  wide.  I moved  the  cannon  across 
and  marched  about  1 mile,  and  came  to  Durossette  Bayou,  which  is 
about  120  feet  wide,  and  was  bank-full,  with  a stiff  current.  The  bridge 
having  been  burned  by  the  rebels  a few  days  before,  I detailed  Lieut. 
James  Fullyard,  of  the  Forty-ninth  Indiana  Volunteers,  to  superintend 
the  building  of  the  bridge,  which  I found  would  have  to  be  well  built, 
on  account  of  the  strength  of  the  current  and  width  of  the  stream,  and 
by  the  skillful  management  and  industry  of  Lieutenant  Fullyard  and 
his  men  he  completed  the  bridge  that  night  and  had  all  things  readj^ 
for  us  to  cross  next  morning. 

At  5 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  2Gth,  we  crossed  the  bridge  and 
moved  on.  I left  a guard  of  1 sergeant  and  10  men  at  each  bridge  to  pre- 
vent any  small  party  of  the  rebels  from  destroying  them.  We  marched 
about  5 miles  over  a beautiful  road,  and  came  in  sight  of  Phelps’ Bayou, 
where  we  found  the  bridge  had  just  been  burned,  and  a rebel  picket 
standing  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  bayou,  and  between  this  and  Clark’s 
Bayou,  which  was  onlj^  about  400  yards  distant,  on  the  opposite  side  of 
which  I discovered  Major  Harrison’s  command,  consisting  of  about  400 
cavalry  and  four  pieces  of  artillery.  My  advance  guard  fired  a few  shots 
at  the  rebel  pickets,  which  drove  them  from  the  neck  of  land  between 
the  two  bayous.  I ordered  my  artillery  forward,  and  threw  a few  shells 
into  the  rebel  camp,  which  caused  them  to  saddle  up  and  leave  in  the 
greatest  confusion.  They  left  a lew  dismounted  men  under  the  cover  of 
a hedge  near  the  bank  of  the  bayou,  who  kept  up  a fire  on  us  until  I sent 
two  companies  of  infantry  across  to  drive  them  away,  which  caused  quite 

* See  map  with  Tunica^s  report  (No.  8),  p.  188. 


572  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Cuap.  XXX VL 

a skirmisli,  lasting  about  one  hour.  The  two  comi)anies  of  infantry 
finally  succeeded  in  driving  them  from  their  cover,  with  a loss,  on  the 
part  of  the  rebels,  of  1 man. 

As  soon  as  the  skirmishers  were  over,  I immediately  prepared  to  build 
the  two  bridges,  which  I found  would  take  a great  deal  longer  than  it 
had  to  build  the  two  former  ones,  as  the  bayous  were  much  wider  and 
current  much  stronger.  I detailed  Captain  Peckinpaugh,  of  the  Forty- 
ninth  Indiana  Yolunteers,  to  superintend  the  building  of  these  bridges, 
and  I must  compliment  him  for  the  good  judgment  displayed  in  working 
his  men  to  the  best  advantage.  We  were  not  so  well  supplied  with  tools 
as  we  should  have  been  for  the  task,  and  had  not  a rope  or  anything 
necessary  for  building  the  bridges  after  they  were  put  in  the  stream.  1 
detailed  a few  men  from  the  cavalry,  who  in  a short  time,  from  their  ex- 
perience in  foraging,  had  a supply  of  ropes  and  tools.  It  required  all 
of  the  26th  and  27th  to  complete  these  two  bridges. 

I sent  Major  Hawhe,  with  two  companies  of  the  Forty -ninth  Indiana 
and  two  from  the  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Ohio,  to  cross  Glark^s 
Bayou  and  make  a reconnaissance  a few  miles  in  our  front,  which  he  did 
in  a successful  manner.  He  found  that  Harrison  had  left  the  road  to 
Hard  Times  Landing  and  crossed  Choctaw  Bayou,  which  empties  into 
Lake  Bruin  about  2 miles  from  the  road  that  we  were  to  march  on  the 
next  day. 

We  completed  the  bridges  on  the  27th,  and  I received  orders  from 
you  to  be  at  Hard  Times  Landing  early  the  next  day. 

I left  our  bivouac  on  the  morning  of  the  28th,  leaving  a sergeant 
and  10  men  at  each  of  the  bridges  as  a guard.  I sent  two  companies 
of  cavalry,  under  command  of  Major  Marsh,  to  leave  the  road  and  find 
out  whether  Harrison  was  still  in  the  position  he  held  the  evening 
previous.  I soon  received  word  from  him  that  he  had  found  the  enemy, 
and  that  he  could  not  move  him  from  the  point  he  held.  I immedi- 
ately sent  Major  Bush  in  that  direction.  He  had  not  been  gone  bat  a 
short  time  until  I heard  artillery  firing.  I left  the  road  with  my  com- 
mand, determined  to  drive  him  from  the  point  he  held,  for  I was  fear- 
tiil  that  as  soon  as  we  passed  he  would  recross  the  bayou  and  destroy 
the  bridges  we  had  just  built.  I moved  on,  and  soon  came  in  sight  of 
my  cavalry,  which  were  held  at  bay  by  the  enemy’s  artillery.  I halted 
my  command,  and  went  forward  to  reconnoiter  and  find  out  the  position 
of  the  enemy,  and  found  he  had  his  four  pieces  of  artillery  in  position. 
I found  that  Choctaw  Bayou  was  a small  stream  about  60  feet  wide. 
On  the  point  of  land  into  the  angle  where  the  bayou  connected  with 
Lake  Bruin  he  had  four  pieces  of  artillery  in  battery.  The  only  aj)- 
proach  I had  to  the  point  was  over  a field  that  was  open,  and  without 
stump  or  tree  that  would  cover  my  skirmishers,  with  Lake  Bruin  on 
my  left  and  the  backwater  from  the  bayou  on  my  right,  which  left  a 
strip  of  land  about  500  yards  wide  and  narrowing  down  to  about  200 
yards  at  the  point  and  on  the  opposite  side  from  the  enemy’s  battery. 
His  battery  was  supported  on  the  right  and  left  by  his  cavalry,  which 
made  quite  a formidable  appearance.  I found  that  I could  not  use  my 
infantry  or  cavalry  to  any  advantage.  At  first  I had  mj"  doubts  whetlier 
with  my  two  pieces  I had  that  I could  move  him  from  his  position.  I 
formed  my  two  regiments  of  infantry  in  column  of  divisions,  and  de- 
ployed four  companies  forward  as  skirmishers,  and  placed  one  ])iece  of 
artillery  on  the  bank  of  the  lake,  where  it  had  a fine  range,  and  in  oj)eu 
view  of  the  enen>y’s  battery.  TTie  other  piece  I posted  in  tlie  field, 
where  it  had  an  excellent  range.  I then  ordered  Lieutenant  Stillman 
to  open  fire  upon  them  with  his  artillery,  and  advanced  my  line  of  skir- 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  GRAND  GULF,  MISS.,  ETC. 


573 


misliers,  and  tlieeuemy  opened  fire  with  his  battery,  but  did  us  no  damage, 
his  shots  passing  over  my  command.  After  a few  shots  from  our  pieces, 
he  moved  his  cavalry  out  of  range  of  our  shells,  and  in  about  one  hour 
from  the  time  our  artillery  opened  on  him  he  limbered  up  and  left  the 
ground  in  a hurry.  We  followed  as  far  as  we  could  for  the  bayou  and 
then  halted. 

Having  no  orders  to  bridge  this  bayou,  and  it  being  oflf  of  our  line 
of  march,  and  from  all  appearances  the  enemy  had  fled  from  our  view, 
I returned  to  the  road  with  my  command,  and  there  bivouacked  for  the 
night.  I sent  the  cavalry  on  to  Hard  Times  Landing,  to  report  to  you, 
haviug  learned  of  your  arrival  during  the  day. 

On  the  morning  of  the  29th  instant  we  continued  our  march  to  the 
lauding,  arriving  there  at  8 a.  m.  There  I received  oMers  from  the 
general  to  send  the  section  of  artillery  to  General  Burbridge  and  the 
regiments  to  report  to  their  former  commanders,  which  they  did  in  a 
short  time,  and  were  on  board  the  transports,  ready  to  assist  in  the  at- 
tack on  Grand  Gulf. 

I cannot  speak  in  too  high  terms  of  all  the  officers  and  men  in  the 
detachment,  they  being  ever  ready  to  assist  in  all  the  labors  of  building 
bridges,  and  so  forth,  and  were  ever  ready  to  obey  any  command,  and 
all  seemed,  when  we  came  in  sight  of  the  enemy,  to  be  ready  for  any 
emergency.  I cannot  but  feel  indebted  to  Lieutenant  Stillman  and  his 
men  for  their  bravery  and  skill.  I scarcely  ever  witnessed  as  fine  artil- 
lery shooting. 

To  Captain  Peckinxiaugh  and  Lieutenant  Pullyard,  of  the  Porty-ninth 
Indiana,  I was  indebted  for  the  speedy  construction  of  the  bridges  across 
the  bayous  and  for  aiding  me  in  all  the  duties  I had  to  perform  on  the 
trip. 

I will  say,  in  conclusion,  that  a good  road  was  found  all  the  way 
around  to  near  the  mouth  of  Bayou  Pierre,  and,  as  I have  since  learned, 
the  most  of  the  army  that  crossed  the  river  after  us  marched  on  the 
road  and  bridges  we  had  constructed.  • 

I am,  sir,  vour  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  KEIGWm, 
Golonelj  Commanding  Detachment, 

Capt.  J.  W.  Thompson, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Ninth  Division. 


APRIL  29,  1863. — Bombardment  of  Grand  Gulf,  Miss.,  and  passage  of  the 

batteries. 

KEIPOI^TS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Ezra  P.  Jackson,  Fiftj^-eiglitli  Ohio  Infantry. 

No.  2. — Lieut;  Gen.  John  C.  Peniherton,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  3. — Maj.  Gen.  Carter  L.  Stevenson,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  4. — Brig.  Gen.  John  S.  Bowen,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Ezra  P.  Jaclcson^  Fifty-eighth  Ohio  Infantry. 

U.  S.  Ordnance  Steamer  Great  Western, 

Near  Viclcshurg,  May  22,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  that  the  following  companies 
of  this  command  were  in  action  in  the  bombardment  of  Grand  Gulf, 


574 


[Chap.  XXXTI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Miss.,  Ai)ril  29,  18G3 : Companies  A,  B,  D,  F,  G,  H,  and  K — being  at 
present  detaebed  to  service  on  the  gunboat  Ileet,  under  command  of 
Actg.  Bear- Admiral  1>.  D.  Porter,  as  follows: 

Companies  A and  B,  on  the  U.  S.  gunboat  Mound  City;  Company  D, 
on  the  U.  S.  gunboat  Carondelet;  Companies  F and  G,  on  the  U.  S.  gun- 
boat Benton;  Company  H,  on  the  F.  8.  gunboat  Pittsburg,  and  Com- 
pany K,  on  the  U.  8.  gunboat  Louisville. 

The  loss  of  the  different  companies  of  this  regiment  participating  in 
action  is  as  follows : * 

I have  the  honor  to  report  the  above  statement  as  correct.  Being  that 
this  regiment  is  at  present  on  detached  service,  reports  from  the  dif- 
ferent companies  are  not  received  v'ithout  some  delay,  which  is  the 
reason  for  not  sending  in  this  report  sooner. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  P.  JACKSO^t, 

Major,  Commanding. 

The  Adjutant- General  oe  the  Army, 

Washington,  D.  G. 


No.  2. 

Eeport  of  Lieut.  Gen.  John  C.  Femherton,  C.  8.  Army. 


Jackson,  Axnil  29,  [1863.] 

Six  gunboats,  averaging  ten  guns  each,  opened  a-terrific  fire  upon  our 
batteries  at  Grand  Gulf  at  7 a.  m.,  and  continued  without  intermission 
six  hours  and  a half,  when  they  withdrew.  Several  boats  apparently 
damaged;  one,  disabled,  lying  on  Louisiana  shore  below.  Our  loss,  3 
killed,  including  Colonel  [William]  Wade,  General  Bowen’s  chief  of  ar- 
tillery; 12  or  15  wounded.  Bepairs  are  being  made,  expecting  a renewal 
of  attack  to-morrow.  Transports  loaded  with  troops  in  sight,  but  in- 
active. 


General  8.  Cooper. 


J.  C.  PEMBEBTON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


No.  3. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Carter  L.  8tevenson,  C.  8.  Army. 

Vicksburg,  April  28,  1863. 

The  men  will  be  ready  to  move  i)romi)tly  to  cross  the  Mississipj)!. 
Both  gunboats  and  transports  must  pass  the  batteries  at  Grand  Gulf. 
Our  army  large  enough  to  defend  itself  on  this  side;  would  consume 
much  time  in  crossing. 

As  it  is  not  known  what  force  has  been  withdrawn  from  this  front,  it 
is  not  improbable  that  the  force  opposite  Grand  Gulf  is  there  to  lay 
waste  the  country  on  that  side,  and  a feint  to  withdraw  troops  from  a 
main  attack  here.  I venture  to  express  the  hope  that  the  troops  will 

^Noiniual  list,  omitted, shows  1 enlisted  man  killed;  1 officer  and  17  enlisted  men 
■ wounded. 


CuAr.  XXXVI.]  BOMBARDMENT  OF  GRAND  GULF,  MISS.,  ETC. 


575 


not  be  removed  far  until  further  develoiiments  below  render  it  eertain 
that  they  will  cross  in  force. 

C.  L.  STEVENSOl!^, 

Major-General. 

Lieuteuant-General  Pemberton. 


Vicksburg,  April  29,  18G3. 

The  line  to  Grand  Gulf  is  broken.  Heavy  firing  in  that  direction, 
under  tbe  circumstances,  has  induced  me  to  start  a re-enforcement. 
Eight  boats,  loaded  with  troops  from  our  front,  are  now  moving  up 
Yazoo.  The  display  made  in  moving  them  showed  a desire  to  attract 
our  attention. 

0.  L.  STEVENSON, 

Major-General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton,  Jaclcson. 


No.  4. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  8.  Boicen^  C.  8.  Army. 

Grand  Gulf,  April  29, 1863. 

Six  gunboats,  averaging  ten  guns,  have  been  bombarding  my  batter- 
ies terrifically  since  7 a.  rn.  They  pass  and  repass  the  batteries  at  the 
closest  ranges.  I cannot  tell  the  eftect  of  our  shots.  Six  transports  in 
sight,  loaded  with  troops,  but  stationary.  My  loss  as  yet  only  2 killed. 
The  batteries,  especially  the  lower  ones,  are  badly  torn  to  pieces.  I can- 
not tell  the  result,  but  think  that  re- enforcements  would  hardly  reach 
me  in  time  to  aid  in  the  defense  if  they  attempt  to  land. 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

Brigadier- General. 

General  Pemberton. 


Grand  Gulf,  April  29,  1863. 

After  six  hours  and  a half  of  continued  firing,  the  gunboats  have  re- 
tired. They  fired  about  3,000  shot  and  shell,  temporarily  disabling  one 
gun.  Our  loss  is  3 killed  and  12  oT  15  wounded.  Ax)parently  we  injured 
two  of  their  boats  j damage  unknown.  Col.  William  Wade,  of  the  ar- 
tillery, one  of  the  bravest  and  best  of  my  command,  was  killed  at  his 
post. 

The  men  behaved  like  veterans  (as  they  are),  and  are  now  hard  at 
work  preparing  for  another  attack. 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN,  ' 
Brigadier- General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Grand  Gulf,  April  29,  1863. 

One  disabled  gunboat,  after  endeavoring  unsuccessfully  to  go  up  the 
river,  now  lies  about  3 miles  below,  by  the  Louisiana  shore. 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


576 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[UIIAP.  XXX VI. 


Grand  Gulf,  Aj^ril  30,  18G3. 

Seud  me  cartridge-bags,  shot,  and  shell  for  Grayson’s  gun.  Also 
10-pounder  Parrott  ammunition.  Major  [G.  U.]  Mayo  knows  caliber. 
Wirt  Adams  has  met  the  cavalry  raid  near  Fayette  and  drove  them  to- 
ward Brookhaven.  Dispositions  for  the  morning  perfected.  Troops  in 
fine  spirits. 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 

• ADDENDA. 

Jackson,  A]gril  29,  18G3. 
Brig.  Gen.  John  S.  Bowen,  Grand  Gulf: 

In  the  name  of  the  army,’  I desire  to  thank  you  and  your  troops  for 
your  gallant  conduct  to-day.  Keep  up  the  good  work  bj^  every  effort 
to  repair  damages  to-night.  Yesterday  I warmly  recommended  you  for 
a major-generalcy.  I shall  renew  it. 

J.  C.  PEMBEBTOK, 
Lieutenant- General.,  Commanding. 


APRIL  29-MAY  1,  1863. — Demonstration  on  Haynes’  and  Drumgould’s 
Bluffs,  or  engagement  at  Snyder’s  Mill,  Miss. 

R-EFOrJ-XS-* 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman,  U.  S.  Army,  commaucliug  Fifteenth  Arnjy 
Corps. 

No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  Louis  Hdbert,  C.  S.  Army. 


Ko.  1. 

Eej)ort  of  Maj.  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman,  TJ.  S.  Army,  commanding 

Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 

On  Board  Flag-ship  Black  Hawk, 

Below  ILaynes^  Bluff,  May  1,  18G3. 

Dear  General:  Am  this  moment  in  receipt  of  yours  from  below 
Grand  Gulf.f  Have  sent  orders  for  Steele’s  and  Tuttle’s  divisions  to 
move  to  Perkins’,  and  shall  follow  to-morrow.  We  will  be  there  as 
soon  as  possible. 

Tuttle  will  move  by  the  new  road,  and  Steele  by  Eichmond. 

Yesterday  the  new  Choctaw,  followed  by  all  the  other  gunboats  and 
our  transports,  approached  the  Bluff.  We  kept  up  a heavy  fire,  which 
was  returned  by  the  enemy.  The  Choctaw  was  struck  fifty-three  times, 
but  her  injuries  are  not  in  any  vital  part.  Strange  to  say,  no  one  was 
hurt.  The  De  Kalb  also  was  uninjured.  The  Tyler  caught  one  shot 
on  her  water-line,  which  is  rei:>aired.  I disembarked  the  command  at 
Blake’s  negro  quarters,  and  made  disposition  as  for  attack,  which  was 
kept  up  till  after  dark,  drawing  heavy  fire. 

* See  also  Shermau’s  rex)ort  of  engagement  at  Jackson,  &c.  For  reports  of  Lieut. 
Commanders  K.  R.  Breeso,  James  M.  Pritchett,  Frank  M.  Ramsay,  and  Jolin  G. 
Walker,  U.  S.  Navy,  see  Annual  Report  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  December  7, 1803. 

tSoo  Grant  to  Sherman,  April  in  “ CoiTesi)ondence,  etc,’^  Part  III,  p.  240. 


577 


Chap.  XXXYI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  SNYDER’s  MILL,  MISS. 


To-day  I have  felt  all  the  paths  aud  levees, back,  the  ground,  except 
the  levees,  being  all  under  water  still;  and  at  3 p.  m.  we  will  open 
another  cannonade  to  prolong  the  diversion,  and  keep  it  up  till  after 
dark,  when  we  shall  drop  down  to  Chickasaw,  and  so  on  back  to  camp. 

To-morrow  I will  move  Blair’s  division  up  to  Milliken’s  Bend,  just 
below  your  headquarters,  and  with  Steele’s  and  Tuttle’s  divisions  will 
obey  your  order  and  reach  Perkins’.  I hear  the  enemy  has  crossed  over 
to  Biggs’  plantation  in  yawls,  doubtless  to  see  what  we  are  about.  They 
will  not  find  out  much.  The  road  to  Eichmond  cannot  be  reached  from 
Biggs’  on  account  of  the  overflow. 

All  our  regimental  wagons  must  be  on  the  road,  )vhich  will  leave  me 
without  wagons,  but  I will  get  to  Perkins’  somehow.  Steele  will  write 
you  all  of  interest  from  Milliken’s. 

All  well  with  us  here,  and  I do  not  apprehend  any  serious  loss  in  the 
cannonade  proposed  for  this  p.  m.  I want  to  prolong  the  diversion  as 
much  as  possible  in  your  favor. 

In  haste, 


SHERMAN. 


General  Grant. 


No.  2. 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Louis  Hehert,  G.  8.  Army. 


Hdqrs.  Second  Dist.,  Dept,  of  Miss,  and  E.  La., 

Viclishiirg.,  May  11,  1863. 


]\Iaj.  E.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General : 


Sir  : Herewith  I transmit  to  you,  with  my  approval,  the  report  of 
Brigadier-General  Hebert  of  the  engagement  with  the  enemy  at  Snyder’s 
3Iill,  April  30  and  May  1,  1863. 

1 am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  H.  FOENEY, 

Major- General.,  Commanding . 


[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters, 
Snyder’’ s Mill.,  May  4,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  April  20  a fleet  of  the 
enemy’s  gunboats  and  transports  descended  the  Yazoo  Eiver  as  far  as 
the  mouth  of  Chickasaw  Bayou. 

On  the  30th,  in  the  morning,  the  fleet  advanced,  and  by  10.15  a.  m. 
the  gunboats  engaged  our  batteries  and  commenced  shelling  our  lines  of 
works;  the  transports  in  the  mean  time,  landing  below  out  of  reach  of 
our  guns,  disembarked  infantry.  The  position  assumed  by  the  gunboats 
only  permitted  our  batteries  to  engage  the  leading  iron-clad  Choctaw  at 
a distance  of  about  2,000  yards.  At  2.30  p.  m.  this  boat  had  been  so 
injured  as  to  be  compelled  to  draw  out  of  the  fight  for  repairs,  and  our 
firing  against’  the  boats  ceased.  During  the  afternoon  the  enemy’s  in- 
fantry were  seen  to  advance  along  the  river  in  front  of  our  left.  A few 
shots  from  our  guns  on  our  left  wing  soon  made  them  desist,  and  although 
the  shelling  continued  until  dark,  the  enemy’s  troops  (with  the  excep- 
tion of  skirmishers)  fell  back  to  their  transi)orts,  and  all  became  quiet 
for  the  night.  As  the  boats  ascended  the  river,  our  pickets  had  fixllen 
37  R R~YOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


578 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAi*.  NXXVI. 


back  to  our  lines,  except  the  Third  Eegiineiit  Louisiana  Infantry,  which 
maintained  its  advanced  position  along  a cross  levee,  where  tliey  re- 
mained until  about  4 p.  m.,  having  left  a lieutenant  and  1)  men  on  the 
immediate  river  bank  until  the  leading  gunboats  had  passed  uj).  This 
small  party  opened  musketry  on  the  boat,  and  were  tinally  driven  back 
by  a body  of  skirmishers  lauded  from  her. 

In  this  skirmish  Lieutenant  [J.  K.]  Cottingham,  commanding  our 
small  parW,  was  severely  wounded  and  captured.  Two  privates  of  tlie 
Twenty-first  Infantry,  managing  the  heavy  batteries,  were  severely 
wounded  by  a shell,' one  losing  his  leg  by  after  amputation,  and  the 
other  having  two  ribs  broken  and  the  flesh  torn  from  liis  side.  Our 
batteries  snflered  no  injury  on  April  30.  , , ^ 

During  the  night  of  the  30th,  a few  additional  guns  were  added  to 
onr  batteries  on  the  left,  and  one  additional  gunboat  and  four  transports 
joined  the  enemy’s  fleet  by  111  in..  May  1.  During  the  forenoon  two 
reconnoitering  parties,  one  on  each  bank  ot  the  river,  approached  our 
batteries;  a few  well-directed  shots  drove  them  back.  At  3 j)*  the 
enemy  opened  a nipid  and  terrific  bombardment  on  our  batteries  on  the 
left  which  continued  without  abatement  until  7.30  p.  m.,  when  all 
firiiu’-  ceased.  The  shelling  of  the  enemy  was  at  times  general  along 
onr  entire  line.  For  some  Lme  our  guns  replied  and  with  good  eflect, 
forcing  all  the  boats  to  fall  back  and  the  transports  to  retire  out  of 


Idle  day’s  fight  resulted  in  no  casualties  on  the  Confederate  side. 
One  of  our  guns  was  slightly  injured  by  its  own  recoil,  but  was  easily 

reiiaired  in  the  night.  , i 

On  the  1st,  a deserter  rode  directly  from  the  enemy’s  line  through 
his  pickets  to  our  front,  and  delivered  himself  into  our  hands. 

In  the  night  of  May  2,  tiie  enemy  completely  withdrew,  and  by  day- 
light not  a\)oat  was  ‘left  in  the  Yazoo  Liver.  From  observation  and 
iirrormation,  the  enemy’s  armed  boats  consisted  of  the  gunboats  Choc- 
law,  Do  Kalb,  and  Black  Hawk,  three  of  the  musquito  fleet  (Kos.  1,  3, 
and  8),  and  three  mortar-boats.  The  transports  are  known  to  have 
been  over  twelve  in  number. 

During  the  bombardment  the  infantry  and  light  artillery  of  our  forces 
remained  near  their  respective  positions  in  the  intrenchments,  and 
awaited  with  eager  s])irjt  and  coolness  the  attack  of  the  foe.  Our  troops 
in  tlie  heavy  batteries  acted  with  all  commendable  gallantry.  Indeed, 
it  is  my  duty  to  report  my  complete  satisfaction  with  the  conduct  of  all 
the  oflicers  and  soldiers  of  my  command.  The  major-general  command- 
ing district,  while  present,  can  have  seen  that  there  existed  no  alarm  or 
even  trepidation  among  our  troops. 

Casualties.— Ueutiimmt  Cottingham,  Third  Louisiana  Infantry,  se- 
verely wounded  and  captured;  Corpl.  F.  Haggerty,  Company  D, 
Twenty-first  Louisiana  Infantry  (heavy  batteries),  loss  of  leg  by  wound 
and  aiiiputation;  Private  1).  Houston,  Company  C,  of  Twenty-lirst  Lou- 
isiana Infantry  (heavy  batteries),  severely  and  dangerously  wounded 
in  the  side. 

Herewith  please  find  reports  of  the  different  officers.* 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  . 

’ ^ LOUIS  111^1  BERT, 

Briaadkr- General. 


Mnj.  S.  C-EOOM, 

Asit.  Adjt.  Gen.., 


^Second  JHst.,  Ikpf.  of  j\[iss. 


and  E.  La. 


tJliAl'.  XXXVI.] 


SCOUT  INTO  NORTHERN  MISSISSIPPI. 


579 


APRIL  29«MAY  5,  1863.— Scout  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  into  Northern 

Mississippi. 

REIPORTS. 

No.  1.— Col.  Edward  Hatch,  Secoud  Iowa  Cavalry,  commaudiiij^  Cavalry  Brigade. 

No.  2.— Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Ruggles,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Military  District. 

No.  1. 

, Bei)ort  of  Col.  Edivard  Hatch.)  Second  Iowa  Cavalry^  commanding  Cav- 
alry Brigade. 

I La  Grange,  Tenn.,  May  5,  1803. 

; Captain  : Complying  with  Brigadier-General  Smith’s  orders,  left  La 
Grange  on  the  morning  of  April  29, 1803,  with  the  Second  Iowa  Cavalry, 
t Sixth  Iowa  Infantry  (mounted),  Fourth  Illinois  Cavalry,  four  10-pounder 
[ guns,  and  80  men  of  the  West  Tennessee  Cavalry — in  all,  an  effective  ; 
^ force  of  1,300  men — to  attack  the  forces  of  the  enemy  concentrating  at  j 
I New  Albany  and  Pontotoc,  to  intercept  the  supposed  return  of  Colonel  | 
r-  Grierson.  Alarched  38  miles,  and  camped  south  of  Eii)ley. 
t Learning  that  General  Chalmers  (Confederate),  with  a force  of  1,500 
[ men  and  one  piece  of  artillery,  had  encamped  at  New  Albany’,  and 
; would  dispute  the  passage  of  the  Tallahatchee,  passed  at  this  point  by 
two  bridges,  each  about  200  feet  in  length,  on  the  morning  of  the  30th, 

; threw  forward  a detachment  toward  the  bridges,  moving  with  the  main 
'•  body  to  the  crossing  at  Lee’s  Mills,  8 miles  above,  on  the  Tallahatchee. 

V.  Coming  upon  their  pickets  at  this  point,  captured  a lieutenant  and  1 
i private,  and  immediately  pushed  for  the  rear  and  flank  of  the  enemy. 

^ Coming  upon  the  trail  of  the  enemy,  I supposed  it  was  the  main  body 
;■  moving  toward  Okolona,  but  afterward  learned  that  a regiment  of  the 
i enemy  had  been  sent  to  Okolona  to  mislead  me,  while  the  main  body 
crossed  the  bridges,  going  north,  burning  them  and  King’s  Bridge,  G 
miles  below,  on  the  stream. 

On  May  1,  pushed  raindly  toward  Okolona,  through  Chesterville, 
coming  occasionally  upon  the  enemy,  and,  cai^turing  a few  prisoners, 
camped  south  of  Tupelo  that  night. 

May  2,  moved  toward  Okolona,  the  enemy  burning  bridges  in  our  ad- 
■;  vance,  until  we  reached  the  Chiwapa,  0 miles  from  Okolona,  which  was 
i'  so  impassable,  being  swollen,  and  the  bridge,  an  important  one,  destroyed, 
that  I was  obliged  to  move  up  the  stream  in  a northwestern  direction  12 
f miles,  to  effect  a crossing,  where  I camped,  throwing  out  detachments 
„ to  examine  the  crossings.  There  I learned  that  General  Chalmers,  the 
’ day  before,  had  moved  north  to  my  rear,  and  then  recrossed  the  Talla- 
• hatchee  at  Kocky  Ford,  going  south,  and  was  moving  on  Pontotoc.  I 
/ immediately  took  up  line  of  march  at  dark  toward  Pontotoc,  marching 
nearly  all  night  in  a rain-storm,  hoping  to  come  upon  him  at  this  point. 

; - When  within  G miles  of  Pontotoc,  my  scouts  informed  me  that  Chalmers 
bad  again  taken  flight  hurriedly  for  Grenada.  I 

Learning  there  could  be  no  doubt  of  Colonel  Grierson  having  moved  \ 
\ rapidly  to  Baton  Kouge,  on  May  3 took  up  my  line  of  march  toward  La  1 

! Grange,  arriving  here  on  the  5th  of  May,  bringing  in  about  400  captured 
stock  and  20  prisoners. 

I Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

■ EDWAED  HATCH, 

t'  Colonel.,  Commanding. 

r Capt.  AYilliam  H.  Morgan,  Assktant  Adjutant- General. 


580  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

No.  2. 

Report  of  BHg.  Gen.  Daniel  Buggies, ^ C.  S.  Army,  eommonding  First 

Military  District. 

Okolona,  Miss.,  May  13,  1863. 

Sir  ; I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  lieutenant- 
general  commanding,  that  during  the  night  of  the  1st  instant  I received 
information,  by  telegraph,  that  a raid  of  the  enemy  was  coming  from  the 
direction  of  New  Albany  toward  Okolona,  and  I proceeded  by  the  morn- 
ing train  to  that  point,  and,  on  arrival  (about  1 p.  m.),  information  re- 
ceived indicated  that  the  previous  reports  were  without  foundation.  I, 
however,  ordered  the  troops  in  the  vicinity  to  prepare  immediately  for 
the  field,  with  the  view  of  meeting  any  contingency.  The  previous  dis- 
position of  troops  had  been  made  with  the  special  object  of  intercepting 
the  enemy’s  return  from  his  raid  to  the  Southern  Kailroad. 

About  9 p.  m.  I received  information  that  the  enemy  were  actually 
in  tbe  district  north  of  the  Ohiwapa,  and  ordered  the  troops  to  be  in 
readiness  to  march  at  3 o’clock  on  the  following  morning.  This  direc- 
tion was  given  in  conformity  with  an  understanding  with  General  Ghol- 
son,  commanding  a few  State  troops,  then  some  2 miles  in  advance  ot 
Okolona,  that  he  would  join  me  if  my  troops  could  be  in  readiness  to 
march  at  that  time.  Of  this  there  was  reasonable  doubt,  on  account 
of  previous  harassing  marches  of  a portion  of  the  troops  separated  from 
their  supplies.  The  condition  of  the  troops  and  the  inclemency  of  the 
weather  prevented  the  assembling  and  the  execution  of  the  order  with 
the  required  promptitude.  In  the  mean  time  the  enemy  was  repre- 
sented as  moving  south  of  Verona,  toward  Oamargo,  a point  some  9 
miles  east  of  this  place,  with  the  supposed  purpose  of  attacking  either 
Aberdeen  or  Okolona  from  that  point,  which  rendered  it  necessary  to 
take  measures  of  precaution  before  moving  in  an  opposite  direction 
with  my  cavalry.  To  meet  this  requirement,  I caused  Colonel  [J.  W.] 
Kogers’  regiment  of  Arkansas  troops,  which  I brought  from  West  Point 
to  this  station,  to  disembark  from  the  train  for  the  defense  of  the  rail- 
road and  town,  although  then  under  orders  to  proceed  to  Meridian, 
which,  in  conjunction  with  Captain  Owens’  light  battery,  ordered  frorn 
Aberdeen,  was  deemed  a sufficient  protection.  This  arrangement  ef- 
fected with  my  troops,  I moved  before  daylight,  and,  joined  by  General 
Gholson  with  some  200  State  troops,  proceeded,  after  some  delay  await- 
ing the  arrival  of  Colonel  [J.]  Cunningham’s  regiment  and  expected  in- 
formation of  the  enemy,  to  the  northwest,  with  the  view  of  getting  upon 
the  enemy’s  flank  or  rear,  and  thus  cutting  off  his  retreat,  having  rea- 
sonable expectation  of  being  joined  during  the  day  or  succeeding  night 
by  Brigadier-General  Chalmers,  a direct  movement  on  the  shortest 
line  toward  the  then  supposed  position  of  the  enemy  being  hazardous, 
in  consequence  of  extensive  and  almost  impracticable  swamps  interven- 
ing and  in  his  immediate  front.  This  junction  was  deemed  desirable  on 
account  of  the  smallness  of  my  fighting  force,  with  its  inferior  arms  and 
the  reported  strength  of  the  enemy. 

After  having  marched  some  12  or  14  miles,  I received  intelligence,  at 
about  3 p.  m.,  that  the  enemy,  returning  from  the  direction  of  Camargo, 
had  retreated  precipitately  early  during  the  night  previous,  and  had 
already  so  far  advanced  as  to  preclude  the  hope  of  overtaking  him. 

The  enemy  was  believed  to  have  numbered  some  1,500  mounted  men, 
with  four  xVieces  of  artillery.  To  plunder  and  waste  the  country  was 
apparently  the  object  of  his  expedition. 


Chap.  XXX VI.] 


581 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 

On  the  following  morning,  I moved  my  forces  to  Verona,  Tupelo,  and 
ricinity,  having  sent,  the  evening  before.  Colonel  Eogers^  regiment  of 
Arkansas  troops  to  Meridian,  and  General  Gholson^s  State  troops  pro- 
ceeded toward  Chesterville. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DANIEL  KUGGLES, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding  District, 

Maj.  B.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  Geiieral, 


MAY  1,  1863. — Battle  of  Port  Gibson,  or  Thompson’s  Hill,  Miss. 

REPORTS.* 

No.  1.  —Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces. 

No.  2. — Col.  John  G.  Fonda,  One  hundred  aud  eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  First 
Brigade,  Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

No.  3. — Col.  James  Keigwin,  Forty-ninth  Indiana  Infantry. 

No.  4. — Maj.  Hugh  W.  Adams,  Seventh  Kentucky  Infantry. 

No.  5. — Col.  Marcus  M.  Spiegel,  One  hundred  and  twentieth  Ohio  Infantry. 

No.  6. — Col.  Lionel  A.  Sheldon,  Forty-second  Ohio  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade. 

No.  7. — Capt.  Charles  H.  Lanphere,  Seventh  Michigan  Battery. 

No.  8. — Lieut.  Charles  B.  Kimball,  First  Wisconsin  Battery. 

No.  9. — Col.  Theodore  E.  Buehler,  Sixty-seventh  Indiana  Infantry,  First  Brigade, 
Tenth  Division,  including  operations  April  14-May  22. 

No.  10. — Col.  Friend  S.  Rutherford,  Ninety-seventh  Illinois  Infantry,  Second  Brigade. 
No.  11. — Brig.  Gen.  Alvin  P.  Hovey,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Twelfth  Division,  in- 
. eluding  operations  since  April  14. 

No.  12. — Brig.  Gen.  George  F.  McGinnis,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Brigade. 

No.  13. — Col.  Daniel  Macauley,  Eleventh  Indiana  Infantry. 

No.  14. — Col.  James  R.  Slack,  Forty-seventh  Indiana  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade. 

No.  15. — Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  McLaughlin,  Forty-seventh  Indiana  Infantry. 

No.  16. — Lieut.  James  G.  Strong,  adjutant  Twenty-eighth  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  17. — Brig.  Gen.  Eugene  A.  Carr,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Fourteenth  Division, 
including  operations  April  12-May  22. 

No.  18. — Brig.  Gen.  William  P.  Benton,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Brigade. 

No.  19. — Col.  William  M.  Stone,  Twenty-second  Iowa  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade. 

No.  20. — Col.  Samuel  Merrill,  Twenty-first  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  21. — Maj.  Joseph  B.  Atherton,  Twenty-second  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  22. — Maj.  Gen.  James  B.  McPherson,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Seventeenth  Army 
Corps,  including  operations  April  18-May  19. 

No.  23.— Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Logan,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Division,  ijiclud- 
ing  operations  April  25-May  19. 

No.  24. — Col.  Manning  F.  Force,  Twentieth  Ohio  Infantry,  Second  Brigade. 

No.  25. — Brig.  Gen.  John  D.  Stevenson,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Brigade. 

No.  26. — Col.  James  J.  Dollins,  Eighty-first  Illinois  Infantry. 

No.  27. — Maj.  Gen.  William  W.  Loring,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  division. 

See  also  general  reports  of  Grant,  McClernand,  and  Pemherton  ; and  Bnrbridge’s 
report  of  engagement  at  Champion’s  Hill,  Part  II,  p.  30. 


582 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAr,  XXXVl 


No.  28.~Brig.  Gen.  JoLu  S.  Bowen,  C.  S.  Anuy,  comniantliug  Confederate  forces,  with 
corresx)oudcnce,  &c. 

No.  29. — Col.  Francis  M.  Cockrell,  Second  Missouri  Infantry  (Confederiite),  coiimiand- 
ing  First  Brigade,  Bowen’s  division. 

No.  30. — Col.  Eugene  Erwin,  Sixlh  Missouri  Infantry  (Confederate). 

No.  31. — Brig. -Gen.  Marlin  E.  Green,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Brigade, 
Bowen’s  division. 

No.  32. — Brig.  Gen.  William  E.  Baldwin,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Brigade, 
Smith’s  division. 

No.  33.— Col.  Isham  W.  Garrott,  Twentieth  Alahauia  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade,  Stevenson’s  division. 

No.  1. 

Betiirn  of  Casualties  in  the  Unioyi  forces  at  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson^ 
Thompson’s  Hill,  or  Magnolia  Church,  Miss.,  May  1,  1SG3. 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

j Enlisted  men  cap-  i 

1 tured  or  missing,  j 

Aggregate.  i 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

THIRTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McCo:rnand. 

NINTH  DIVISION. 

Prig.  Gen.  Petek  J.  Osteuiiaes. 

First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  TiiEoriliLUS  T.  Gakuard. 

) 1 Til  iirniQ  ... 

1 

1 

14 

1 

3 

4 

15 

12 

41 

8 

18 

17 

17 

59 

8 

22 

123 

4nfli  1 11(1  i. nil. a.  

1 

liOtli  IiidinTin.  . _ _ 

7tli  TCoiitiic.ky  

lio'tli  Oliio 

2 

2 

Tnt.nl  Eir.^t  P.riiT.ndft _ 

18 

8 

94 

3 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Lionel  A.  Sheldon. 

Tn<linnn.*  ....  . . . . . 

1C  iirlcy 

1 

2 

8 

39 

8 

3 

9 

59 

10 

1611)  Ohio 

1 

11 

2 

4‘^d  Ohio - 

1 

8 

IHlIl  Ohio  ....  . 

n’(dnl  Sof'ond  Piri'T.ndn..  

1 

14 

9 

57 

81 

Artillery. 

MifhijTnn  l.ioht,  ATt.illory  71h  Pn.Mory  

3 

3 

4 

f. 

4 

W'ispnnsin  T.itTht,  AiTilho'y  l.st,  lln.tto.Ty  

Tnlnl  .n.rfilli'ry  ... 

3 

7 

10 

Cavalry. 

'Ill  Tlliimia  f ioici  A ni^il  TC  * 

Total  Ninth  Diyiaion 



17  1 158 

3 

214 

No  loss  reported. 


CriAP.  XXXVL] 


583 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  Ml&S. 

Eeturn  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces,  —Continued. 


Command. 

• Killed. 

W ounded. 

Enlisted  men  cap-  ! 

tured  or  missing.  ] 

Aggregate 

EC 

sa 

o 

a 

(D 

a 

-g 

'a 

W 

<1) 

O 

O 

§ 

a 

TENTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Andrew  J.  Smith. 

First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Stephen  G.  Bdrdridge. 

2 

2 

67tli  Indiana 

2 

f> 

2 

3 

83d  Ohio 

96th  Ohio  * 

1 

1 

Total  First  Brigade 

8 

8 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  William  J.  Landeam. 

77th  Illinois  t 

97th  Illinois 

6 

1 

0 

5 

1 

8 

6 

2 

15 

108th  Illinois * 

130th  Illinois 

1 

1 

19th  Kentucky 

• 

2 

12 

48th  Ohiot : 

Total  Second  Brigade 

2 

2 

19 

8 

31 

Artillery. 

Illinois  Bifht  Artillery,  Ghica.rfo  "Mpronritno  Ba.ttory  f 

Ohio  Bight  Artillerv,  17th  Battery f 

Cavalry. 

4th  India, n.T  Cavalry,  Company  n f 

Total  Tenth  Division 

2 

2 

27 

8 

39 

TWELFTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Alvin  B.  Hovey. 

Escort. 

lat  Indiana,  Cavalry  Compnnvrif  

First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  George  F.  McGinnis. 

11th  Indiana 

1 

5 

6 

8 

10 

23 

18 

42 

35 

62 

3 

1 

25 

23 

51 

44 

75 

3 

24th  Indiana 

34th  Indiana 1..  

3 

1 

3 

46th  Indiana 

29th  Wisconsin 

Ohio  Bight  Artillery,  2d  P.a,ttory  

Ohio  Bight  Artillery,  16tli  Pntteryt  

Total  Fir.st  Brigade 

30 

7 

183 

1 

221 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  James  E.  Slack. 

47th  Indiana . . 

5 

1 

3 

6 

1 

20 

5 

14 

23 

1 

26 

6 

20 

36 

1 

24  th  low.'i, 

28tli  Iowa 

3 

7 

56th  Ohio . . 

2d  Illinois  Tiight  Artillery  Tta.tfery  A 

Ist  IVI issonri  Liiglit  Artilloi'yj Usittory  At • - 

Total  Second  Brigade - 

16 

62 

11 

89 



Total  Twelfth  Division. 

46 

T 

245~ 

iV 

3I0 

Detaclied, 


tNo  lo.ss  reported 


584 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXX 
Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces,  cfc. — Continued. 


Command. 


FOURTEENTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Eugene  A.  Carr. 
Escort. 

3d  Illinois  Cavalry,  Company  G* 

First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  William  P.  Benton. 

33d  Tllinois 

Doth  Illinois 

8tli  Indiana 

18th  Indiana 

1st  United  States,  Companies  A,  B,  C,  D,  H,  and  It. 
Indiana  Light  Artillery,  1st  Battery 

, Total  First  Brigade , 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  William  M.  Stone. 


21st  Iowa 

22d  Iowa 

23d  Iowa .'I 

Ilth  Wisconsin 

Iowa  Light  Artillery,  1st  Battery  . 

Total  Second  Brigade 

Total  Fourteenth  Division 

Unattached. 

2d  Illinois  Cavalry,  Companies  F,  G,  IT,  I,  and  K * 

3d  Illinois  Cavalry,  Company  L* 

Patterson’s  company,  Kentucky  infantry* 

Gth  Missouri  Cavalry,  Companies  B,  E,  F,  G,  H,  I,  and  K* 

Total  Thirteenth  Army  Corps 

SEVENTEENTH  AKMT  COUPS. 

Maj.  Gen.  James  B.  McPherson. 

Escort. 


Ohio  Cavalry,  4th  Compauj’-* 

THIRD  division. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Logan. 
Escort. 

2d  Illinois  Cavalry,  Company  A 

First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  E.  Smith. 

20th  Illinois 

.list  Illinois 

4rth  Illinois* 

124th  Illinois > 

23d  Indiana 

Total  First  Brigade 


Killed. 


W ounded 


g ® 

s a 

o 

OJrrt 

.22 

0-B 

w 


28 


13 


41 


124 


12 


38 


129 


81 


210 


640 


23 


23 


162 


101 


263 


826 


No  loss  reiiorted. 


tNot  in  action. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS.  585 

Return  of  Casuulties  in  the  Union  forces,  ^c. — Continued. 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Enlisted  men  cap- 

tured or  missing. 

Aggregate. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Elias  S.  Dennis. 

30fh  Dlinois 

2()th  OEio 

68Ui  Ohio ' 

78th  Ohio 

Total  Second  Brisade 





1 

2 

3 

Third  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  D.  Stevenson; 

8lh  Illinois 

1 

2 

1 

4 

? 

3 

5 

7th  Missouri 

3.'d  Ohio*  ..  

1 

1 

2 

Total  Third  Brigade 

1 

1 1 

7 

2 

11 

Artillery. 

Michigan  Light  Artillery,  8th  Battery. 

j 

2 

2 

Totflil  Ttircl  Division 

— 





6 

6 35 

2 

49 

EECAPITIJLATIOX. 


Thirteenth  Army  Corns  . . 

S6VGiit66ii'tli  A 'Tm V Corjis  ” - - - • 

1 

124 

G 

38 

G 

GIO 

35 

23 

2 

826 

49 

Grand  total. .. 

1 

130 

44 

675 

25 

875 

Officer  KiLLED.-Capt.  William  W.  Olds,  Forty-second  Ohio  Infantry. 


No.  2. 

and  eighteenth  Illinois  In- 
fantry, First  Brigade,  Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

Pout  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  2,  1863. 

Colonel  : In  comiiliance  with  orders  just  received.  I submit  the  fol. 

no'i s'lnfTiirrv\”ooh  f' liundred  and  eigliteeiith  Illi- 
nots  inhiiitrj  took  ni  tlie  engagements  of  yesterday : 

Iho  regiment  was  marched  to  the  field  with  the  bri'^ade  at  about  7 

«m^.:m;’;U'lro^e;.*^'r'’'^'^  coneMdtn'th: 

In  m 1 ! * * ^ Lanphere’.s  battery.  Gnc  company  wa.s  here  de- 

thrce.fouSi's'^of  an  L position  about 

Kitinn  .?t”^  I-  ® ^ ordered  to  move  forward  and  take  a po- 

^■on  .itatencein  front  of  the  battery,  the  One  liundred  and  twentieth 


No  loss  roj^orfed. 


586  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 

Ohio  Infantry  being  on  our  left.  After  r^aining  here  about  an  hour, 
I was  ordered  forward  to  relieve  the  Forty-second  Ohio  Infantry,  which 
was  then  engaged  around  the  point  of  timber<to  tiie  right.  I immedi- 
ately formed  my  men  in  rear  of  the  Forty-second  Ohio  Infantry,  and 
detached  one  company  from  the  right,  .and  deployed  it  on  the  right  of 
said  regiment,  and  one  company  to  fill  a vacant  space  in  the  center  of 
said  regiment.  Immediately  after  this  formation,  the  two  regiments 
charged  across  the  open  ground  in  face  of  the  enemy’s  fire.  -I  then 
moved  seven  companies  to  the  left,  and  opened  fire.  The  One  hundred 
and  Twentieth  Ohio  and  Sixty-ninth  Indiana  were  so  situated  that  it 
required  great  care  to  prevent  accident  by  firing  into  them.  I am  sat- 
isfied, however,  that  neither  regiment  was  fired  into  by  my  men. 

After  firing  from  this  position  until  about  11  a.  in.,  I moved  forward 
to  the  right,  my  men  being  much  exhausted,  and  receiving  no  order  nor 
any  relief,  I moved  still  farther  to  the  right  and  extreme  lower  end  of 
the  open  ground  spoken  of  above,  the  One  hundred  and  twentieth  Ohio 
being  on  my  left.  I here  rested  my  men  until  ordered  to  retire. 

In  making  the  first  movement  across  the  open  ground,  1 man  was 
killed ; during  the  day  15  others  were  severely  wounded ; several  others 
were  hit,  but  not  injured. 

I remain,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 
’ ' JOHN  G.  FONDA, 

(7ok,  Comdg.  One  hundred  and  eighteenth  Illinois  Vol,  Infantry. 

Col.  T.  T.  Gaeraed, 

Commanding  First  Brigade. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Col.  James  Keigivin,  Forty-ninth  Indiana  Infantry. 

In  Field,  near  Poet  Gibson,  May  2,  1803. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  herewith  submit  the  following,  as  a report 
of  the  part  taken  by  the  Forty-ninth  Pegiment  Indiana  Volunteer  In- 
fantry in  the  battle  at  Thompson’s  Hill,  on  the  1st  of  May,  1803 : 

We  were  ordered  from  our  bivouac,  at  0 o’clock  on  the  morning  or 
the  1st,  to  the  front  and  extreme  left  of  our  lines,  to  support  Captain 
Lanphere’s  battery.  We  followed  the  battery  to  the  old  barn  in  the 
rear  of  Shafer’s  house,  when  the  enemy  opened  on  us  from  his  battery, 
about  1,000  yards  distant.  I moved  my  regiment  to  the  left  of  Lau- 
phere’s  battery,  in  rear  of  some  small  timber,  where  I remained  coy 
ered  until  we  were  ordered  forward.  I caused  Company  A,  Captain 
McConahay,  Company  B,  Lieutenant  Bare,  and  Company  I,  Captain 
Alles,  to  deploy  as  skirmishers,  and  advanced  about  500  yards,  when 
my  skirmishers  found  those  of  the  enemy  in  a ravine  between  us  and 
the  enemy’s  battery.  I was  halted  at  this  point  by  an  order  from  Geii- 
eral  Osterhaiis,  and  remained  there  about  half  an  hour,  while  the 
lery  was  hotly  engaged.  I was  then  ordered  to  cross  over  to  the  right, 
anil  take  the  house  on  the  left  of  the  enemy’s  battery,  which  was  about 
200  yards  from  it.  After  1 had  crossed  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  and  was 
about  entering  into  the  woods  in  front  of  me,  the  battery  of  the  enemy 
opened  on  me  with  grape,  and  the  Thirty-first  Alabama,  which  was  in 
line  about  00  yards  distant,  opened  fire  upon  us  with  small-arms.  1 


Chap.  XXXYL] 


587 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


baited  my  command,  threw  them  in  battle  line,  and  commenced  firing, 
and  soon  drove  the  enemy  across  the  second  ravine  between  me  and 
their  battery,  which  was  not  over  400  yards  distant.  I kept  my  men 
firing  for  one  hour  and  ten  minutes,  when  I was  relieved  by  the  Forty- 
second  Ohio.  I then  ordered  my  men  about  50  yards  to  the  rear,  to  a 
secure  point,  and  rested  for  about  an  hour,  when  I was  ordered  to  the 
extreme  left.  I remained  here  several  hours,  when  I was  ordered  to 
support  Captain  Foster’s  battery,  on  the  right.  I remained  at  this 
point  for  some  time,  when  I was  ordered  to  the  front,  to  charge  the  old 
house,  where  the  enemy  had  been  posted  the  whole  day.  I formed  my 
line,  and  marched  in  good  order  until  I came  to  the  ravines  in  our  front. 
The  first  one  I passed  by  obliquing  the  three  right  companies,  but  I 
found  from  the  depth  and  roughness  of  the  second  that  I would  have 
to  pass  it  without  any  order.  T was  then  but  a short  distance  from  the 
house,  when  I gave  the  order  to  charge,  double-quick,  with  a yell,  and 
from  the  noise  that  was  made  I am  sure  that  every  officer  and  soldier 
obeyed  the  command.  We  got  to  the  house,  and  passed  to  the  rear  of 
it,  where  there  was  a high  fence.  Over  the  fence  about  30  yards  we 
found  the  Sixth  Missouri  (rebel)  Kegiment  coming  up  toward  us,  with 
bayonets  fixed,  but  we  were  about  one  minute  too  fast  for  them.  We 
had  the  advantage  of  the  hill.  As  soon  as  they  discovered  us,  they 
halted  and  fired  a volley,  which  x>assed  over  us  without  doing  us  any 
damage.  I then  ordered  my  men  to  fire,  when  the  rebel  regiment  broke 
and  fled  from  us,  and  we  poured  the  lead  into  their  backs,  much  to  our 
amusement  and  their  sorrow.  We  killed  and  wounded  a large  number 
of  them,  and  took  about  50  prisoners.  During  the  charge,  I did  not 
lose  a man.  I then  formed  a line  again,  and  sent  Companies  A and  E, 
Lieutenant  Evans,  Comi)any  E,  commanding,  to  General  Osterhaus, 
and  they  had  a race  after  the  retreating  enemy,  capturing  several  pris- 
oners. Stephen  Marshall,  a private  of  Company  E,  shot  a rebel  officer, 
and  captured  his  sword,  horse,  saddle,  and  bridle.  The  sword  was  taken 
by  some  staff  officer,  and  I would  recommend  that  it  be  given  to  the 
soldier  as  a trophy  for  his  gallant  conduct  during  the  day. 

I marched  my  regiment  to  within  1 mile  of  Port  Gibson,  and  there 
bivouacked  for  the  night.  During  the  day’s  fighting  my  regiment  was 
very  fortunate,  having  lost  but  1 man  killed  and  14  wounded.  Their 
names  and  ranks  are  as  follows.* 


W.  A.  Jordan, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[JAMES  KEIGWIN.] 


No.  4. 

Iie2wrt  of  Maj.  Hugh  IF.  Adams^  Seventh  Kcntuchy  Infantry. 

Black  Kiver  Bridge,  Miss.,  June  27,  18G3. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  your  request,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the 
lollowing  report  of  the  part  taken  by  the  Seventh  Regiment  E^entucky 
Volunteer  Infantry  in  the  action  at  Thompson’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  1 , 18G3’ : 

Dll  the  morning  of  May  I,  I8G3,  I was  ordered  to  move  forward  with 
iny  regiment  to  discover  ami  feel  of  the  enemy,  and  to  support  a section 


NoiJiinal  list  omitted. 


588  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  tENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXX Vl 

of  Captain  Lanphere’s  (First  Wisconsin)  [Seventh  Michigan]  battery. 
In  obedience  to  said  order,  1 advanced  with  my  regiment  and  took  posi- 
tion on  the  right  and  in  advance  of  said  battery,  when  the  enemy  opened 
fire  upon  the  regiment  and  battery,  and  a brisk  artillery  fight  ensued. 
I was  then  ordered  to  advance  with  my  regiment,  which  I did,  in  line 
of  battle,  to  a canebrake,  about  200  yards  in  advance  of  my  original 
position,  where  I halted  and  remained  about  one-half  hour,  and  then, 
by  order,  moved  to  the  rear  and  right. 

Eemaining  here  a short  time,  we  again  moved  forward  and  to  the 
right.  Sending  a company  of  skirmishers  forward,  we  took  position  on 
the  right  of  the  brigade  (First),  where  we  remained  during  the  day 
without  being  engaged  with  the  enemy,  except  with  skirmishers.  The 
loss  of  my  regiment  in  the  engagement  was  8 wounded,  one  of  whom 
has  since  died. 

H.  W.  ADAMS, 

Major  Seventh  Kentucky  Volunteer  Infantry^  Gomdg.  Regiment. 

General  T.  T.  Garrard. 


, Ko.  5. 

Report  of  Col.  Marcus  M.  Spiegel^  One  hundred  and  twentieth  Ohio  In- 
fantry. 

In  the  Field,  May  4,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  herewith  transmit  the  following  report 
of  the  part  taken  by  the  One  hundred  and  twentieth  Eegiment  Ohio 
Yolupteer  Infantry  in  the  action  of  Thompson’s  Hill,  on  the  1st  instant: 

About  5 o’clock  in  the  morning,  we  were  ordered  to  advance  and  take 
a position  on  the  right  of  Lanphere’s  battery,  which  was  accordingly 
done,  under  a severe  fire  of  the  enemy’s  shell,  in  which  position  we  re- 
mained about  half  an  hour,  when  we  advanced  to  the  edge  of  the  raviue, 
and  from  there  were  ordered  to  advance  and  form  a line  of  battle  in  a 
ravine  to  the  extreme  left  of  the  division.  Soon  after,  in  coujunctioii 
with  the  One  hundred  and  eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  we  advanced 
briskly  across  the  open  field,  taking  a position  behind  a fence  fronting 
the  enemy,  and  in  support  of  the  Forty-ninth  Indiana,  who  were  de- 
ployed as  skirmishers  on  the  edge  of  the  woods.  Soon  thereafter  Colonel 
Keigwin,  of  the  Forty-ninth  Indiana,  informed  me  that  he  had  been 
ordered  to  the  right  on  a line  with  his  position,  and  at  the  same  time  I 
received  orders  to  cover  the  front  with  my  skirmishers,  and  relieve  him. 
I then  advanced  Companies  A,  F,  and  K as  skirmishers,  and  D,  I,  and 
B in  support. 

At  7.30  I was  ordered  to  recall  all  but  one  of  my  companies.  I 
moved,  as  ordered,  to  the  right,  in  advance  of  our  line,  to  relieve  the 
Forty-second  Ohio.  While  passing  between  our  batteries  and  the  posi- 
tion of  the  Forty-second  Ohio,  the  enemy’s  shell,  grape  shot,  and  bullets 
flew  thick  and  fast  around  us,  but  the  brave  and  gallant  boys  moved 
briskly  and  bravely  on,  until  we  arrived  in  front  of  the  Forty-second 
Ohio,  close  to  a ravine  running  parallel  with  the  enemy’s  strongest  posi- 
tion. I then  engaged  the  enemy  about  twenty  minutes,  without  being 
able  to  do  him  much  harm,  he  being  completely  under  cover  on  the  op- 
posite bank  of  the  ravine.  I then  advanced  as  skirmishers  some  of  tbe 
best  shots  from  all  the  companies  down  into  the  ravine,  with  orders  to 


Chap.  XXXVI. ] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


589 


advance,  closely  supporting  them  with  the  remainder  of  the  regiment, 
and  keeping  up  a constant  fire  toward  the  top  of  the  opposite  bank. 
When  nearly  down  into  the  ravine,  I discovered  the  exact  position  of  the 
enemy^s  advance,  toward  the  left,  on  the  opposite  bank.  I then  charged 
upon  them  with  the  regiment,  and  quickly  drove  them  from  the  bank  to 
the  knoll,  where  they  rallied  and  made  a stand,  which  only  increased 
the  determination  of  my  brave  boys.  Eushing  up  the  bank,  we  drove 
them  pell-mell  from  behind  the  knoll,  taking  8 prisoners. 

When  I had  obtained  possession  of  the  knoll,  I did  not  deem  it  pru- 
dent to  pursue  them  farther,  being  at  least  300  yards  in  advance  of  any 
of  our  troops,  and  in  danger  of  meeting  the  enemy’s  entire  right  Aving 
massed  behind  a number  of  old  buildings  directly  in  front  of  me.  I de- 
ployed my  regiment  on  the  knoll,  in  order  to  punish  the  retiring  force 
and  hold  the  position  against  a more  formidable  attack.  As  soon  as 
the  retiring  enemy  had  rejoined  the  main  body,  the  attack  was  renewed 
with  redoubled  fierceness  and  energy,  but,  meeting  with  such  continued 
and  well-directed  volleys  from  us,  he  fell  back  under  the  cover  of  the 
houses  again.  I then  continued  to  fight  the  enemy,  who  was  concealed 
behind  logs,  fences,  and  houses,  and  some  perched  upon  the  tops  of 
trees,  until  my  ammunition  was  beginning  to  give  out  and  many  of  the 
guns  were  becoming  unfit  for  use,  when  I was  relieved  by  Col.  T.  W. 
Bennett,  of  the  Sixty-ninth  Indiana,  and  ordered  to  retire.  I then  fell 
back  to  the  second  ravine  in  my  rear,  replenishing  the  empty  cartridge- 
boxes  with  ammunition  from  the  boxes  of  the  comrades  whoVere  killed 
and  wounded.  I remained  in  that  position  until  late  in  the  afternoon, 
when,  seeing  the  charge  made  on  the  left,  I quickly  formed  my  regiment, 
marching  them  toward  the  charging  column,  in  order  to  support  them, 
il  necessary.  When,  however,  the  enemy  fled  in  confusion,  a glorious 
victory  won,  the  One  hundred  and  twentieth  had  nothing  more  to  do 
than  to  exult,  cheer,  and  be  merry,  and  that  I assure  you  was  done. 

I cannot  close  this  report,  general,  without  saying  that  the  men  of 
the  One  hundred  and  twentieth  Ohio  have  not  only  justified  their  for- 
mer reputation,  but  have  even  excelled  it.  They  displayed  a gallantry 
and  bravery  on  that  day  which  will  never  be  forgotten  by  their  country. 
To  the  line  officers,  all  of  whom  stood  bravely  up  to  the  work,  I am  in- 
debted much  for  their  aid  and  courage  in  carrying  out  every  order  given. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Beekman  has  shown  himself  an  officer  worthy  of  the 
position  he  holds.  While  promptly  assisting  in  maneuvering  the  regi- 
ment, his  encouraging  and  cheering  words  were  always  heard  along  the 
line.  * . o 

Major  Slocum,  while  with  me  in  the  morning,  showed  that  cook 
ness  and  courage  for  which  he  is  well  known  in  the  army,  and  while 
detailed  to  take  charge  of  the  skirmishers  of  the  left  flank  of  the  divis- 
ion, did  his  whole  duty  to  the  entire  satisfaction  of  the  general  com- 
manding the  division. 

Adjutant  Sherman,  though  young  in  years,  has  truly  shown  him- 
self a veteran  in  the  field.  Repossesses  all  the  elements  necessary  to 
qualify  him  for  the  position  he  holds  j brave  and  cool,  he  becomes  cour- 
ageous and  dashing  when  the  occasion  requires  it. 

Both  officers  and  men  have  my  sincerest  thanks  for  their  cheerful  co- 
pperation  on  the  field  of  Thompson’s  Hill. 

M.  M.  SPIEGEL, 

Colonel,  Commanding. 

General  T.  T.  Garrard, 

Commanding  First  Brigade. 


590  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 

6. 

Report  of  Col.  Lionel  A.  Sheldon,  Forty-second  Ohio  Infantry^  command- 
ing Second  Brigade. 

Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

May  3,  18G3. 

Sir  : The  following  report  will  show  the  part  taken  by  the  Second 
Brigade  in  the  battle  of  the  1st  instant : 

A few  minutes  after  sunrise,  the  brigade  moved  from  its  place  of  biv- 
ouac to  the  top  of  the  hill,  the  Fifty-fourth  Indiana  remaining  to  come 
up  with  the  First  Wisconsin  Battery.  At  about  7.30  a.  m.  the  Sixteenth, 
Forty-second,  and  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Ohio  and  Twenty-second 
Kentucky  were  formed  in  line  of  battle,  by  battalion  in  mass,  in  rear  of 
Lanphere’s  battery,  and  remained  for  half  ^n  hour  under  the  artillery 
lire  of  the  enemy,  which  did  but  slight  damage,  however.  In  the  mean 
time  the  Fifty-fourth  Indiana  came  up,  and  was  placed  in  support  of  one 
section  of  the  First  Wisconsin  Battery,  opposite  the  enemy^s  center. 

At  about  8 o’clock,  the  Sixteenth  and  Twenty-second  were  ordered  to 
the  center,  to  meet  any  movement  in  that  quarter.  They  advanced  to 
the  woods  and  formed  line  of  battle,  and  two  companies  were  deployed 
as  skirmishers  and  advanced  into  the  woods.  Ko  enemy  appeared,  and 
the  regiments,  pursuant  to  General  Osterhaus’  order,  were  moved  to 
the  left.  The  Fifty -fourth  Indiana  was  ordered  to  the  right  by  General 
McGlernand,  and  during  the  day  co-operated  with  the  troops  of  General 
Smith’s  division.  Ko  casualties  happened  to  the  regiment  during  the 
battle. 

At  8 o’clock,  the  Forty-second  Ohio  was  ordered  to  the  front,  and  made 
an  attack  on  the  enemy  at  the  house,  advancing  over  an  open  and  ex- 
posed piece  of  ground  in  very  gallant  style,  receiving  a severe  fire  from 
the  enemy. 

At  about  II  o’clock,  the  Sixteenth  and  Twenty-second  were  formed  in 
line  on  the  left  of  the  Forty-second.  Two  companies  of  skirmishers  were 
thrown  forward  to  the  brow  of  the  hill,  keeping  up  for  one-half  hour  a 
well-directed  fire  upon  the  enemy.  At  the  expiration  of  this  time,  an 
advance  of  the  three  regiments  was  ordered.  The  order  was  obeyed 
in  very  splendid  order.  The  Sixteenth  and  Twenty-second,  obliquing 
to  the  left,  entered  the  ravine  on  the  front  and  left  of  the  enemy’s  posi- 
tion, and  advanced  under  cover  very  near  the  enemy,  and  maintained 
their  position  until  near  night,  doing  considerable  damage  to  the  enemy 
by  the  continuous  and  well-directed  lire  they  kept  up.  The  Forty-sec- 
ond Ohio  advanced  directly  to  the  front  in  beautiful  line  on  tlie  double- 
quick  to  the  edge  of  the  ravine,  and  then  opened  on  the  enemy  a heavy 
tire.  It  was  soon  discovered  that  the  Sixty-ninth  Indiana  was  posted 
in  front  in  the  ravine,  a fact  before  not  understood  by  me.  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Pardee  reporting  the  fact  to  me,  I took  the  responsibility  to 
order  him  to  retire.  The  regiment  was  then  retired  and  moved  farther 
to  the  right,  where  it  continued  in  the  battle,  relieving  the  Sixty-niiitli 
Indiana  and  occupying  the  front  until  the  enemy  retired.  Three  com- 
panies, under  command  of  Major  Williams,  were  among  the  first  to 
enter  the  enemy’s  position  on  the  right,  and  joined  in  the  pursuit  for 
some  distance,  capturing  several  prisoners. 

The  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Ohio  at  about  0 o’clock  was  ordered 
to  take  a position  in  support  of  Foster’s  battery,  and  remained  in  that 
position  until  about  4 p.  m.,  when  it  was  ordered  forward,  and  partici- 
pated in  the  charge  on  the  left  center,  and  was  the  first  in  the  enemy’s 


Chap.  XXXVl.J  BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS.  591 

l)Ositioii,  pursuing  the  enemy  3 miles  and  capturing  many  prisoners. 
The  charge  made  by  it  was  in  a very  gallant  manner. 

Oapt.  E.  W.  Botsford,  commanding  Sixteenth  Ohio ; Major  Worth- 
ington, commanding  Twenty-second  Kentucky  5 Lieutenant-Colonel  Par- 
dee, commanding  Forty-second  Ohio,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Kelly, 
commanding  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Ohio,  all  behaved  ably  and 
gallantly.  It  is  but  just  to  say  that  all  of  the  officers  and  men,  with- 
out distinction,  bore  themselves  with  remarkable  coolness  and  courage. 

The  officers  in  the  brigade  injured  were  10  in  all,  9 from  the  Forty- 
second  Ohio  and  1 from  the  Twenty-second  Kentucky— First  Lieuten- 
ant Eobb  slightly,  Capt.  M.  L.  Benham  and  First  Lieut.  E.  B.  Campbell 
severely.  First  Lieuts.  C.  P.  Goodwin  and  J.  E.  Helman  slightly.  Sec- 
ond Lieut.  H.  C.  Jennings  dangerously.  Second  Lieuts.  William  L.  Wil- 
son, C.  E.  Henry,  and  Peter  Miller  slightly.  One  only  killed— Oapt.  W. 
W.  Olds,  of  the  Forty-second  Ohio.  He  was  an  accomplished,  patriotic, 
and  brave  young  man.  Complete  lists. of  the  killed  and  wounded  are 
herewith  transmitted.*  None  are  missing.  Total  casualties,  15  killed 
and  GG  wounded. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  A.  SHELDON, 
Golonelj  Commanding  Second  Brigade. 

Capt.  J.  W.  Thompson,  A.  A.  A.  G.,  Ninth  Division. 


-J ^^o.  7. 

Report  of  Capt.  Charles  H.  Lanphere.,  Seventh  Michigan  Battery. 

Headquarters  Seventh  Michigan  Battery, 

Port  Gibson.^  Miss.^  May  2,  18G3. 

Captain  : 1 have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
part  taken  by  the  Seventh  Michigan  Battery  in  the  engagement  of  yes- 
terday : 

About  7.30  a.  m.  I took  a position  immediately  in  front  of  and  about 
miles  from  the  enemy’s  battery,  and  opened  fire.  For  two  and  a half 
hours  my  battery  was  worked  here  under  a most  galling  fire  from  the 
enpiy’s  artillery,  their  guns  being  worked  with  great  skill.  At  this 
point  I had  2 men  killed  and  2 men  wounded. 

^ At  9.30  o’clock  I advanced  the  battery  100  yards,  taking  a j)osition 
50  yards  to  the  right  of  first  position.  Here  the  battery  was  less  ex- 
posed. At  11  a.  111.  advanced  three  pieces  100  yards,  taking  a position 
oO  yards  to  the  left  of  first  position,  from  ivliich  point  the  guns  were 
worked  with  great  efiect.  At  11.30  a.  m.  advanced  two  of  the  pieces 
100  yards  to  the  right,  but  01113'  put  one  piece  in  batter3’',  where  it  was 
worked  at  intervals  until  about  3 p.  m. 

It  afibrds  me  great  pleasure  to  say  that  my  officers  and  men  behaved 
tliemselves  with  great  gallantr3^ 

There  were  3 men  killed  and  3 wounded,  and  7 horses  killed  and  4 
disabled.  ’ 

I am,  cajitain,  vei\y  resi)ectfull3',  3'our  obedient  servant, 

C.  H.  LANPHEEE, 

Captain.,  Commanding  Seventh  Michigan  Battery. 

Capt.  J.  W.  Thompson, 

-I*  C..,  Ninth  Division^  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


Omitted. 


592  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 

No.  8. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Charles  B.  Kwiball,  First  Wisconsin  Battery. 

Headquarters  First  Wisconsin  Battery, 

Fort  Gibson^  Miss.,  May  2,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  below  the  part  taken  in  yesterday^s 
engagement  on  Thompson’s  Hill  by  the  First  Wisconsin  Battery,  which 
is  as  follows,  viz : 

The  battery,  under  command  of  Lieut.  Charles  B.  Kimball,  after 
marching  all  night,  received  orders  about  6 a.  m.  to  move  up  rapidly 
to  the  front,  and  was  placed  in  position  in  the  following  manner: 

• The  right  section  of  the  battery,  under  charge  of  First  Sergt.  Edward 
P.  Aylmer,  was  moved  to  the  extreme  left  of  the  line,  to  relieve  a sec- 
tion of  Captain  Lanphere’s  (Seventh  Michigan)  battery,  which  had  suf- 
fered severely  from  the  fire  of  two  brass  pieces  of  the  enemy,  xfianted 
on  an  opiiosite  hill,  about  miles  distant,  which  we  dismounted  shortly 
afterward.  This  position  it  occupied  all  day,  with  slight  changes  to 
the  right  or  left,  as  occasion  required. 

The  center  section,  commanded  by  Lieut.  E.  L.  Hackett,  moved  up 
to  a position  on  the  left  of  the  right  section,  and  opened  fire  on  some 
buildings  immediately  to  the  front,  occupied  by  rebel  forces,  where  it 
did  fearful  execution.  It  occupied  this  position  all  day,  and  late  in  the 
afternoon  shared  with  the  right  section  the  satisfaction  of  silencing  two 
guns  which  the  enemv  brought  to  bear  upon  us  with  great  efi^ect  from 
an  open  field,  about  a mile  off.  This  was  the  closing  scene  of  the  en- 
gagement. 

The  left  section,  under  command  of  Lieut.  Oscar  F.  Nutting,  took 
position  on  the  center  of  the  line,  but  was  ordered  by  General  Grant  to 
reserve  their  fire  until  further  orders  were  received  from  himself,  as  our 
supply  of  ammunition  was  very  limited.  This  position  it  held  all  day 
under  a galling  fire  of  musketry,  which,  as  ordered,  it  was  compelled  to 
face  in  silence. 

Each  section  was  planted  under  a galling  fire,  which  was  kept  up 
throughout  the  day.  Both  men  and  officers  did  their  duty  nobly,  and 
altliough  our  numbers  were  small  for  20-pounder  guns,  and  the  men 
greatly  fatigued  after  marching  all  the  previous  night,  not  a complaint 
was  heard,  but  each  man  spang  to  his  work  with  a right  good  will, 
forgetful  of  their  weariness  in  their  desire  each  to  do  his  duty. 

Casualties,  4 men  wounded. 

Hoping  that  our  future  engagements  will  be  crowned  with  equal  suc- 
cess, 1 have  the  honor  to  remain,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ■ CHAS.  B.  KIMBALL, 

First  lAeutenant,  Commanding  First  W'lsconsin  Battery. 

Capt.  J.  W.  Thompson,  A.  A.  A.  G.,  Mnth  Div.,  Thirteenth  A.  C. 


No.  9. 

Report  of  Col.  Theodore  E.  Buchler,  Sixty-seventh  Indiana  Infantry,  First 
Brigade,  Tenth  Division,  ineluding  operations  April  1^-May  22. 

Camp,  in  the  Field,  Siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss., 

’ May  25,  1863. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
movements  of  the  Sixty-seventh  Begiment  Indiana  Volunteer  Infiintry 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


593 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 

since  the  same  left  Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  on  Tuesday,  April  14,  as  also 
ot  the  part  taken  by  this  regiment  in  the  battles  on  Magnolia  Hills, 
Midway,  Black  Eiver,  and  in  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  to  the  present 
date ; 

Tbe  Sixty-seventh  Eegiment  Indiana  Volunteer  Infantry,  as  part  of 
your  brigade,  under  my  commpd,  left  Milliken^s  Bend,  La.,  at  3 p.  m. 
on  Tuesday,  April  14,  numbering  360  men,  rank  and  file,  marching  a 
distance  of  4 miles,  to  Berklin’s  plantation. 

Starting  again  at  daylight  on  the  15th,  we  reached  Holmes^  plantation, 
a distance  of  about  20  miles  from  the  Bend,  at  5 p.  m.,  where  we  en- 
camped until  the  24th,  drilling  and  preparing  for  active  compaign.  At 
8 p.  m.  we  left  for  Smithes  plantation,  a distance  of  about  G miles,  from 
where,  on  the  26th,  we  embarked  on  the  transport  Empire  City,  running 
down  the  bayou  into  the  Mississippi  Eiver,  arriving  at  Perkins^  planta- 
tion, La.,  the  same  night  at  9 o’clock,  during  a severe  storm. 

On  the  28th,  at  9 a.  m.,  leaving  all  transportation  behind,  we  went  on 
board  a hay  barge,  towed  by  the  transport  Silver  Wave,  to  a point  in 
Hard  Times  Bend,  La.,  opposite  Grand  Gulf.  Eemained  on  board  the 
barge  in  about  7 inches  of  stinking  water,  and  keeping  the  pumps  steady 
at  work  to  keep  the  barge  from  filling,  until  after  the  unsuccessful  at- 
tempt of  our  gunboats  to  silence  the  rebel  batteries  at  the  Gulf  on  the 
29th,  when  we  disembarked  about  4 p.  m.,  marching  3 miles  across  the 
Bend  to  a point  below  the  Gulf,  encamping  for  the  night. 

On  the  30th,  after  mustering  the  regiment,  re-embarked  at  2 p.  m.  on 
the  gunboat  Carondelet  for  Bruinsburg,  Miss.,  and  being  supplied  here 
with  six  days’  (two-thirds)  rations,  we  took  up  the  line  of  march,  with 
Hie  Sixteenth  Indiana,  Eighty-third  Ohio,  and  Twenty-third  Wisconsin 
Eegiments  and  Seventeenth  Ohio  Battery,  of  your  brigade,  at  about  11 
p.  m.  for  Port  Gibson,  Miss. 

Marching  steadily  all  night,  the  regiment  arrived  at  the  field  of  action 
by  8 a.  m.  May  1,  and  formed  line  of  battle  immediately  in  rear  of  and 
supporting  part  of  the  division  of  General  A.  P.  Hovey,  my  right  rest- 
ing on  the  Eighty-third  Ohio,  my  left  near  the  road  leading  to  Port 
Gibson.  Company  A,  of  my  regiment,  was  deployed  forward  as  skir- 
mishers. The  Second  Brigade,  Colonel  Landram  commanding,  arrived 
on  the  field  shortly  afterward.  I changed  position  to  the  right,  a rather 
uncomfortable  place,  the  balls  whizzing  in  unpleasant  proximity  to  our 
ears,  yet  I am  pleased  to  state  no  one  was  hurt  while  here. 

At  about  10  o’clock,  the  rebels  having  been  dislodged  from  their  first 
position,  I was  ordered  to  follow  our  advancing  columns,  and,  marching 
my  regiment  by  the  left  flank  to  the  front  for  a mile  or  more,  we  passed 
across  the  battle-field  of  a few  hours  previous  and  re-established  line  of 
battle  as  before  in  rear  of  the  advance  column  of  General  Hovey,  the 
Sixty-seventh  Indiana  on  the  right  of  the  brigade.  Here  we  remained 
until  1 p.  m.,  when  I received  orders  to  move  the  regiment  on  the  double- 
quick  to  the  extreme  right  of  the  corps.  This  order  was  executed  in 
admirable  style,  though  a number  of  officers  and  men  had  sunk  by  the 
load-side,  perfectly  exhausted  and  overcome  by  the  excessive  heat  of 
the  day.  By  far  the  largest  number  of  men  composing  the  regiment 
arrived  promptly,  and  formed  in  line  of  battle  long  in  advance  of  the 
other  regiments  of  the  brigade,  the  Sixt^'-seventh  again  forming  on  the 
right  of  the  brigade,  the  left  resting  on  the  Sixteenth  Indiana.  Cap- 
tain Blount  s battery  had  opened  fire  on  the  woods  and  hills  in  our 
iront.  We  remained  inactive  for  a short  time,  when  again  orders  were 
received  to  march  my  regiment  to  the  left,  and,  together  with  the  Six- 
teenth Indiana  and  Eighty-third  Ohio,  relieve  three  regiments  of  Colo- 
38  R R — VOL  XXIY,  PT  I 


594  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 

iiel  Laiidram’s  brigade,  then  holding  the  advanee  on  the  road  leading 
to  Port  Gibson. 

The  Sixty-seventh  Indiana,  again  taking  the  lead,  countermarched  by 
the  right  flank,  and,  marching  about  2 miles  to  the  left  of  our  former 
position,  relieved  the  Ninety- seventh  Illinois  Kegiment,  forming  on  the 
left  of  the  brigade,  the  rigiit  resting  on  the  Eighty-third  Ohio,  fronting 
a hill  densely  covered  with  cane  and  briars.  From  here  I advanced 
three  companies  of  skirmishers  to  the  brow  of  the  hill  in  front  and  to 
the  left,  ordering  the  other  companies  to  rest  in  place  from  their  fatigu- 
ing marches.  The  companies  deployed  were  F,  D,  and  I,  and  I was  in- 
structed to  be  ready  to  charge  up  the  hill  at  the  signal  of  clieering  ou 
my  left,  when  at  once  my  skirmishers  became  hotly  engaged  with  the 
enemy,  and,  under  a heavy  Are  of  musketry  and  artillery.  Companies  D 
and  I,  after  maintaining  their  ground  bravely,  and  contesting  it  inch  by 
inch,  commenced  falling  back,  sending  me  word  that  they  would  need 
support.  At  the  same  time,  without  waiting  orders,  a portion  of  iny 
regiment  and  the  Eighty-third  Ohio  Eegiment  had  opened  a fire  on  the 
brow  of  the  hill,  thus  exposing  my  skirmishers  in  front  of  my  right 
wing  to  a cross-fire,  so  I immediately  asked  and  obtained  your  permis- 
sion to  charge  up  the  hill  for  the  relief  of  my  skirmishers,  with  the 
promise  to  be  supported.  I immediately  gave  the  order  for  the  charge, 
and  am  proud  to  state  that,  though  exposed  to  the  fire  of  the  rebels 
while  forming  the  line,  the  Sixty-seventh  fulfilled  their  duty  nobly,  and, 
charging  up  the  hill  in  gallant  style,  we  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing 
the  rebels  running  down  the  hill  through  the  thickest  underbrush  hi 
every  direction,  leaving  2 of  their  dead  and  a number  of  prisoners  iu 

our  hands.  . ^ i i . 

Finding  my  regiment  very  much  exposed  to  the  fire  from  a rebel  bat- 
tery on  our  left,  which  wounded  2 men  of  Company  B at  the  first  fire, 
I ordered  my  men  to  lie  down,  and  deployed  Company  C as  skirmishers 
to  the  front.  Meanwhile  the  One  hundred  and  thirtieth  Kegiment  Illi- 
nois Volunteers  had  arrived  for  my  support,  but  one  of  our  batteries 
having  opened  a fire  of  shot  and  shell  on  the  valley  in  front  of  us,  I dis- 
patched a messenger  for  further  orders,  Avhen,  soon  afterward,  I received 
instruction  to  withdraw  the  regiment  down  the  hill  and  rest  for  the  night. 
Calling  in  my  skirmishers,  I marched  to  the  rear  by  the  right  flank, 
heavily  annoyed  by  the  rebel  shells,  yet  fortunate  enough  to  have  no 
more  wounded.  We  encamped  for  the  night  in  rear  of  and  supporting 
Captain  Blount’s  (Seventeenth  Ohio)  battery,  which  kept  up  firing  at 
the  rebel  battery  on  the  Fort  Gibson  road  until  after  sunset.  T here 
were  5 men  wounded  in  this  day’s  fight.  ^ 

Before  daylight  on  May  2,  the  regiment  was  ordered  to  fall  in  hue 
again,  in  order  to  advance  on  the  liill  occupied  by  the  rebel  battery  on 
the  Port  Gibson  road  the  night  previous.  We  were  promptly  in  hue,; 
the  right  resting  on  the  Eighty-third  Ohio,  our  left  on  the  Twenty-thiril 
Wisconsin  Eegiment  5 Companies  B and  G,  of  the  Sixty-seventh  Indiaua, 
deployed  in  my  front  as  skirmishers,  and  at  G a.  m.  we  took  up  line  01 
march  toward  Port  Gibson  as  the  advance  column  of  our  forces.  Meet- 
ing with  no  opposition,  and  finding  arms  and  clothing  scattered  in  ever} 
direction,  it  soon  became  evident  that  the  rebels  had  left  for  a healthiei 

clime.  1 T -1-  ^ -no 

AVe  reached  the  town  about  10  a.  m.,  the  Sixty-seventh  Indnyia  being 

the  third  regiment  in  the  place,  following  the  Eighty-third  Ohio.  Com- 
pany G,  of  the  regiment.  Second  Lieut.  George  T.  Poison  commaiionig. 
had  entered  the  town,  though,  as  skirmishers  long  in  advance  of  au\ 
other  troops. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GlIJSON^  MISS. 


595 


After  a few  iiionieiits’  rest,  the  Sixty-seventli  Iiidiaiia  again  pushed 
ahead  to  the  bridge  across  Bayou  Pierre,  winch  had  been  set  on  tire  by 
the. rebels,  and  on  reaching  it  were  sainted  by  a few  shots  from  rebel 
pickets  on  the  other  side,  which  passed  harmlessly  over  our  heads.  We 
were  ordered  to  save  the  bridge  from  entire  destruction,  and  though 
my  brave  boys  had  worked  harder,  marched  more,  and  rested  less  than 
any  in  the  brigade,  they  went  to  work  cheerfully,  until,  after  a few  hours 
ot  futile  labor,  the3"  were  ordered  to  desist,  and  enjoyed  a few  hours 
of  undisturbed  rest,  conscious  that  they  had  done  their  whole  duty,  to 
a man. 

Soon  after  daylight  on  the  3d  instant,  I again  received  orders  to  form 
the  regiment,  march  thence  to  the  court-house,  and  wait  for  the  rest  of 
the  brigade,  as  there  was  indication  of  the  enemy  moving  to  our  rear. 
Here  the  Sixty-seventh  was  again  ordered  to  take  the  lead,  and,  march- 
ing about  miles  to  the  rear  of  town,  Ave  formed  line  of  battle,  my 
regiment  on  the  left  of  the  brigade  and  Companies  A and  H skirmishing. 

After  Avaiting  here  in  vain  for  the  rebels,  we  countermarched,  the 
Sixty-seventh  having  the  advance,  and,  passing  through  Port  Gibson 
and  across  the  bridge,  we  marched  during  the  day,  under  excessive 
heat,  8 miles  to  Willow  Springs,  going  into  camp  here  at  G p.  m. 

Here  Ave  left  on  the  7th  instant,  marching  about  11  miles  to  a point 
beyond  Kocky  Springs,  where  Ave  rested  until  the  9th,  Avhen,  at  3 p.  m., 
we  marched  3 miles  farther  north,  encamping  on  Big  Sand  Creek. 

We  started  from  here  on  the  10th  about  1 p.  m.,  marching  to  Ca^mga, 
Miss.,  Avhero,  resting  on  the  llth,  General  Sherman’s  corps  Warmee 
l)assed  us. 

At  da3dight  on  the  12th,  we  Avere  ordered  to  countermarch,  and  arriv- 
ing at  Cajuiga,  taking  a road  leadingin  a westerly  direction,  Ave  marched 
about  10  miles,  encamping  for  the  night  in  line  of  battle  near  Pourteen- 
j\Iile  Creek,  and  within  G miles  of  Edwards  Station,  on  the  Jackson  and 
Vicksburg  Bailroad,  Avhere  the  rebels  Avere  reported  in  heavy  force. 

Next  morning  (13th),  at  8 o’clock,  we  again  received  marching  orders, 
and,  folloAving  the  Eighty-third  Ohio  Begiment,  we  marched  about  G 
miles  to  the  Jackson  road,  Avhere,  meeting  the  train  of  our  division,  aa^c 
tor  the  first  time  prided  ourselves  in  the  prospect  of  a change  of  linen 
since  we  left  Smith’s  plantation.  La.,  on  April  24.  Here  A\^e  rested 
during  the  14th. 

On  the  15th,  Ave  marched  to  Eaymond,  Miss.,  folloAving  General  Blair’s 
division  a distance  of  about  15  miles,  arriving  at  about  9 p.  m. 

At  daylight  of  the  IGth,  Ave  started  for  Edwards  Station,  on  the  Jack- 
son  and  Vicksburg  road ; marched  about  4 miles,  Avheii  heavy  firing 
on  our  right  indicated  the  close  proximity  of  rebel  forces.  We  Avere 
ordered  in  line  of  battle  on  the  left  of  the  road,  my  right  resting  on  the 
left  of  the  Eighty-third  Ohio  at  right  angles.  Company  A deployed  as 
skirmishers  on  the  left  of  the  brigade. 

lu’om  here  the  regiment  adv^’anced  by  the  right  Hank  Avith  the  Eighty- 
third  Ohio,  and  reformed  forward  into  line  as  soon  as  the  ground  Avouid 
admit  of  the  formation,  marching  about  1 mile  in  line  of  battle,  our 
skirinishcrs  driving  the  rebels  before  them,  when  a battery  opening  on 
our  right  flank,  and  rebels  being  visible  in  strong  force  marching  tOAV'ard 
our  left,  we  were  ordered  back  a short  distance,  selecting  a very  ad\uxn- 
tageous  position. 

After  some  delay  we  again  ad\^anced  in  line  of  battle  in  the  same 
order  for  about  2 miles,  Avhen  all  at  once  a battery  opened  fire  on  us 
with  grape,  canister,  and  shell  while  ascending  a hill  of  some  eminence. 
We  Averc  fortunately  i)rotccted  by  a cut  in  a road  in  front  of  us  at  this 


596 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI.] 


moment,  and  the  balls  mostly  passed  harmlessly  over  our  heads.  For 
about  three  hours  four  pieces  of  artillery  belched  forth  their  iron  mes- 
sengers of  death  with  the  utmost  rapidity,  while  my  skirmishers  reported 
them  supported  by  about  eleven  regiments  of  infantry,  hence  outnum- 
bering us  ten  to  one. 

My  skirmishers.  Company  H,  under  direction  of  Capt.  David  Kelly, 
had  held  their  ground  bravely,  but,  having  several  men  wounded,  I re- 
enforced them  by  Company  E,  which  harassed  them  [the  enemy]  ex- 
ceedingly, after  driving  their  cannoneers  from  their  pieces  and  keeping 
them  back,  while  the  ground  in  front  of  us  was  such  that  the  rebels 
could  not  advance  skirmishers  without  exposing  them  to  the  unerring 
aim  of  my  men.  Later  I relieved  Company  H by  Company  K,  and  the 
firing  having  ceased  about  dark,  we  were  ordered  to  sleep  on  our  arms, 
the  pickets  but  about  50  yards  in  front  of  us,  my  right  resting  on  the 
Seventeenth  Ohio  Battery. 

My  loss  in  this  day’s  engagement  was  5 men  wounded,  while  a large 
number  of  prisoners'^  were  taken  by  my  regiment,  Captain  Kelly  bring- 
ing in  13  at  one  time,  who  were  cut  oft*  by  our  rapid  advance.  The 
Sixty-seventh  Eegiment  here  again  held  the  left  of  the  brigade,*  sup- 
ported by  the  Twenty-third  Wisconsin. 

On  the  17th,  at  daylight,  we  again  advanced  in  line  of  battle,  well  pro- 
tected by  skirmishers,  but  soon  found  that  the  rebels  had  skedaddled  in 
a perfect  panic,  throwing  away  their  guns  and  accouterments  ; in  fiict, 
leaving  their  battery  behind.  *We  passed  undisturbed  through  Edwards 
Station,  marching  by  the  right  flank,  the  Sixty-seventh  Indiana  in  rear  of 
the  battery,  gathering  up  quite  a number  of  prisoners  as  we  proceeded. 

Arriving  within  about  3 miles  of  Black  Eiver  Bridge,  I again  received 
orders  to  form  my  regiment  in  line  of  battle  on  the  left  of  the  Eighty- 
third  Ohio,  the  Twenty-third  Wisconsin  Eegiment  supporting,  deploy- 
ing Company  A as  skirmishers  to  the  front.  We  advanced  by  the  right 
oblique  through  brush  and  bayous,  over  fences  and  hedges,  at  a rapid 
rate,  and  though  many  of  my  men  had  not  had  a bite  to  eat  since  the 
previous  night,  marched  and  fought  with  their  knapsacks  through  the 
oppressive  heat  the  day  previous,  and  two  companies  had  been  kept 
vigilant  all  night  on  picket,  at  this  moment,  in  sight  of  the  rebel  breast- 
works at  Black  Eiver,  all  fatigue  was  forgotten,  and,  with  a shout  uu- 
equaled,  forward  we  w^ent  on  the  double-quick,  over  plowed  fields  aud 
across  bayous,  to  receive  the  surrender  of  the  Sixtieth  Tennessee  (rebel) 
Eegiment.  The  flag  of  the  Sixty-seventh  was  the  first  on  the  breast- 
works. From  this  point,  marching  up  Black  Eiver  by  the  right  flank  for 
about  1 mile,  we  reached  Black  Eiver  Bridge,  resting  here  for  the  re- 
mainder of  the  day,  until  the  bridges  could  be  completed. 

On  the  18th,  at  11  a.  m.,  we  crossed  the  river,  your  brigade  taking 
the  extreme  advance,  my  regiment  following  the  Seventeenth  Ohio  BaL 
tery,  and  marching  by  the  right  flank  on  the  Jackson  road  toward 
Vicksburg,  encamping  for  the  night,  on  our  arms,  within  2 miles  of  the 
rebel  works  in  rear  of  Vicksburg.  , 

At  daylight  on  the  19th,  we  advanced  by  the  right  flank  to  withm  a 
mile  of  the  forts,  when  I was  ordered  to  form  line  of  battle  on  the  left 
of  the  brigade.  In  this  position  we  advanced  to  within  500  yards  ol 
the  forts,  skirmishing  as  we  proceeded.  The  Sixty-seventh  Indiana, 
advancing  on  the  Jackson  road,  all  at  once  found  itself  saluted  by  a 
shell  and  a volley  of  musketry  from  the  breastworks  just  when  the  lett 
wing  of  the  regiment  was  separated  from  the  right  by  a burning  build 
iug,  set  on  fire  by  the  rebels  early  in  the  morning.  ^ A lew  steps  mon 
and  my  regiment  must  have  been  exposed  to  the  enfilading  fire  of  loui 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


597 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 

different  forts.  I immediately  ordered  my  regiment  to  lie  down  behind 
the  brow  of  the  hill  which  we  had  been  ascending,  and  all  escaped 
unhurt. 

Being  in  advance  of  the  other  regiments  of  your  brigade,  which  had 
halted  prior  to  the  first  volley  being  fired  at  us,  and  finding  that  my 
right  wing  was  unnecessarily  exposed  to  the  fire  of  rebel  sharpshooters, 
I ordered  them  some  20  yards  to  the  rear  just  in  time  to  avoid  another 
volley  of  musketry  from  the  front  and  left.  This  position  I occupied 
with  my  regiment  for  the  rest  of  the  day,  and  on  the  morning  of  the 
20th,  my  men  advanced  carefully  to  the  brow  of  the  hill  and  behind 
the  chimneys  of  the  burned  buildings  in  our  front,  sending  balls  where- 
ever  a head  would  show  itself  above  the  breastworks.  At  one  time  a 
chimney  was  tumbled  over  them  by  a solid  shot  from  a rebel  battery. 
Nothing  daunted,  though  almost  buried  in  its  ruins,  they  crawled  to 
the  next  one,  and  again  commenced  their  firing. 

During  the  night  of  the  19th,  I advanced  two  companies  of  skirmish- 
ers to  within  about  300  yards  of  the  main  fort,  and  the  rest  of  the  regi- 
ment rested  on  their  arms  several  hundred  yards  in  advance  of  the  other 
regiments  of  the  division. 

Un  the  20th,  about  11  a.  m.,  I received  your  orders  to  prepare  to  ad- 
vance, and  formed  the  companies  immediately,  preparatory  to  the  move- 
ment. For  the  first  time  since  I had  the  honor  of  serving  my  country, 
I felt  the  heavy  responsibility  resting  on  my  shoulders  as  a commander  j 
that  the  lives  of  hundreds,  perhaps,  hung  on  my  order  then  and  there 
to  be  given.  I knew  my  duty  and  was  determined  to  execute  it  at  the 
nsk  of  my  own  life ; but  how  about  others  ? I had  carefully  exam- 
ined my  position,  and  was  convinced  that  a direct  advance  was  impos- 
sible without  charging  and  storming  the  fort,  while  to  do  the  latter  I 
must  have  had  support  on  my  right  and  left,  or  should  have  been  ex- 
posed to  a cross-fire  of  four  different  forts.  My  regiment,  to  some 
extent,  formed  the  center  of  the  division,  being  on  the  right  and  left  of 
the  Jackson  road.  Ascending  over  the  hill  that  now  protected  my 
men,  I was  exposed  to  the  aforesaid  fire  of  the  enemy,  unable  to  find 
shelter  for  them  anywhere  this  side  of  the  forts,  particularly  for  my  left 
wiiig.  All  the  other  regiments  of  the  whole  division  could  have  ad- 
vanced by  but  little  exposure  in  charging  over  the  hill  or  ridge  then  in 
their  front,  finding  protection  immediately  beyond  them  in  a ravine, 
protected  by  another  range  of  hills  centering  at  the  one  I then  occupied. 

My  regiment  had  advanced  to  a position  justifying  them  in  remain- 
ing, for  if  all  the  other  regiments  had  advanced  into  the  next  ravine 
they  would  have  been  but  on  a line  with  me,  and  no  nearer  the  forts 
than  the  Sixty-seventh  was  at  that  time.  I represented  the  case  to  you, 
general,  requesting  that  if  my  order  was  positive  to  advance,  to  have  the 
proper  support  on  my  right  and  left.  You  informed  me  that  the  order 
was  for  the  whole  division  to  advance,  and  I should  be  well  supported. 

Keturning  to  my  regiment,  I immediately  advanced  to  the  brow  of 
the  hill,  ready  to  go  over  first  as  soon  as  the  order  should  be  given ; 
but  finding  that  the  Eighty-third  Ohio  Kegiment,  which  was  to  support 
my  right,  had  returned  to  the  rear  several  hundred  yards,  and  having 
your  order  to  advance  with  the  Second  Brigade,  I at  once  took  advan- 
tageof  the  opportunity,  and  marching  my  right  wing  to  the  right  oblique 
across  the  hill,  ere  the  rebels  could  bo  prepared  for  us  1 advanced 
them  to  a safe  position  within  250  yards  of  the  fort.  Eeturning  again 
for  iny  left  wing,  I detached  three  companies,  leading  them  over  the 
hill  in  the  same  manner,  on  the  right,  and  leaving  two  companies  in  the 
rear  to  advance  with  the  Second  Brigade  (Nineteenth  Kentucky  Begi- 


598 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CIIAI'.  XXXVI. 


meiit),  which  had  formed  its  line  on  my  immediate  left.  The  Second 
Brigade,  instead  of  advanciog,  sent  one  company  of  skirmishers  to  the 
front.  The  Eighty-third  Ohio,  on  my  right,  also  sent  live  coraiianies  of 
skirmishers  to  support  my  right.  1 had  formed  my  regiment,  without 
any  serious  loss,  within  about  250  yards  of  the  fort,  and  my  uien  were 
doing  excellent  execution  in  keeping  the  rebel  sharpshooters  and  artil- 
lerists well  behind  their  intrenchments.  A few  hours  later  General 
Bentoifs  brigade  came  to  my  support,  and,  forming  in  my  rear  about 
100  yards,  I had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  my  regiment  relieved  by  two 
companies  of  the  Ninety-ninth  Illinois  Begiment.  Beturning  to  the  rear 
at  about  2 a.  m.  on  the  21st  instant,  rested  during  that  day. 

On  the  22d,  at  8 a.  m.,  I received  your  orders  to  prepare  for  a charge 
on  the  rebel  forts  at  10  a.  m..  General  Benton’s  brigade  to  take  the  ad- 
vance, our  brigade  to  support  and  assist  him.  I formed  iny  line  of  bat- 
tle a little  to  the  right  of  my  position  of  the  19th,  in  rear  of  the  chim- 
neys already  mentioned,  supported  by  the  Twenty-third  Wisconsin 
Begiment;  the  Eighty-third,  which  was  to  have  formed  on  my  right, 
more  than  100  yards  below,  in  a ravine.  At  the  proper  hour  General 
Benton’s  brigade  charging,  I advanced  my  regiment  with  terrific  cheer- 
ing across  the  hill  in  front  of  me,  and  up  to  the  brow  of  the  next  hill, 
wliere  I was  ordered  by  the  right  Hank  forward,  following  the  Eighty- 
third  Ohio  and  Sixteenth  Indiana  Begiments  through  a ravine  to  the 
front,  marching  some  150  yards,  w'hen  you  ordered  me  to  the  right  on 
the  double-quick,  to  protect  the  charging  column  from  a flanking  fire  on 
that  side.  1 immediately  faced  my  regiment  about,  and,  left  in  front, 
filing  to  the  left,  I ascended  a hill  on  your  immediate  right.  Checked 
for  but  a moment  by  a heavy  fire  of  musketry  in  our  progress,  we 
pushed  forward,  and  selecting  safe  positions  for  my  men,  I immediately 
ordered  them  to  fire  by  the  rear  rank,  soon  silencing  the  fire  in  front 
and  on  our  right. 

Shortly  afterward  I was  re-enforced  by  the  Eighty-third  Ohio,  which 
I directed  to  form  on  my  left,  and  some  companies  of  the  Twenty-third 
Wisconsin,  which  did  excellent  service  on  my  right,  and  soon  not  a 
rebel  would  show  the  tip  of  his  finger  above  the  fort.  Yet,  unfortunately, 
I received  orders  to  withdraw  my  regiment  and  also  the  TNventy-thild 
Wisconsin  for  the  support  of  our  Second  Brigade,  on  the  left  of  the 
Jackson  road.  Marching  down  the  hill  by  the  right  Hank,  I had  hardly 
proceeded  a hundred  steps  up  the  ravine  when  a shower  of  balls  hailed 
over  our  heads,  sent  after  us  from  the  forts  we  had  silenced;  yet  we  had 
our  orders,  and  on  we  went  until,  close  to  our  destination,  we  were 
ordered  back  to  our  former  position.  My  men  went  to  work  again  with 
tlieir  old  ardor,  but  the  rebels  had  got  bold,  and  not  being  supported  on 
my  left,  as  I should  have  been,  we  were  exposed  to  a damaging  cross- 
fire, losing  several  of  our  best,  men.  For  about  three  hours  the  musketry 
lire,  interspersed  witli  grape,  raged  incessantly  across  the  hill,  when 
at  last  the  Eifty-ninth  Indiana,  Colonel  Alexander  commanding,  came  to 
iny  su})j)ort.  I cannot  speak  in  too  high  terms  of  his  regiment.  They 
occupied  the  ])osition  of  the  Eighty-third  Ohio  Begiment,  and  though 
losing  about  50  men  in  less  than  half  an  hour  by  exposing  themselves 
too  much,  1 think  it  is  to  a great  extent  owing  to  their  assistance  and 
bravery  that  onr  retreat  and  that  of  other  regiments  on  our  left  was 
not  entirely  cut  off,  for  twice,  once  on  our  right  and  once  on  onr  left, 
carrying  the  Stars  and  Bars  with  them,  the  rebels  attempted  a charge, 
but  wer(‘.  rei)ulsed  instantly.  At  about  dusk,  Colone  1 Alexander  in- 
formed  me  that  he  had  orders  from  his  brigade  commander  to  withdraw 
his  regiment  as  (piickly  as  possible. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


599 


TJie  rebels  were  still  firiug  heavily,  and,  knowing  niy  inability  to  bold 
the  place  without  support,  my  guns  in  no  lit  condition  for  loading,  some 
of  my  men  having  fired  over  200  cartridges,  I requested  of  Colonel 
Alexander  the  favor  of  remaining  for  a short  time  until  I could  secure 
support  or  relief.  I hastened  back,  and  received  your  orders  to  with- 
draw my  regiment,  skirmishing.  Finding  it  was  the  last  to  leave  the 
field,  I gathered  all  the  stragglers  in  my  reach,  and  having  the  wounded 
carried  olf  in  front  of  me,  the  Sixty-seventh,  considerably  weakened  in 
numbers,  reached  their  old  camping  ground  of  the  20th,  once  more  to 
enjoy  a night’s  rest  after  the  hardest  day’s  work  any  of  us  have  ever 
witnessed  or  been  subjected  to. 

The  casualties  in  my  regiment  on  this  day,  out  of  230  men,  rank  and 
file,  were  6 killed  and  40  wounded  ; yet  I am  hap'py  to  state  that  of  the 
wounded  but  one  is  pronounced  beyond  recovery. 

AVhere  all  officers  and  men  acted  with  most  unquestionable  bravery,  I 
should  abstain  from  singling  out  instances  of  x^articular  merit;  yet  I can- 
not avoid  to  mention  Capt.  G.  E.  Sims,  of  Conqiany  D,  who,  constantly 
leading  his  men  where  the  most  danger  threatened,  had  14  of  his  men 
wounded  out  of  20  he  took  into  the  fight.  But  officers  and  men  of  the 
regiment  deserve  i)raise  for  the  braveiy  displayed,  their  indefatigable 
X^erseverance  and  endurance  without  a murmur,  their  coolness  in  the 
most  trying  hour  of  danger,  and  their  strict  attention  to  my  orders. 
Quite  a number,  though  wounded,  continued  on  the  field,  rendering  all 
the  assistance  in  their  x)ower,  and  by  their  examx^le  cheered  others  to 
renewed  action. 

All  my  officers  were  at  their  x)rox)er  x^osts,  and  rendered  efficient  serv- 
ice in  encouraging  their  men  when  hard  x^ressed ; they  could  not  have 
acted  better.  My  adjutant,  Lieut.  William  T.  Days,  discharged  his 
duties  with  bravery  and  dispatch,  and  is  deserving  of  my  csxiecial 
thanks  for  his  zeal. 

I am,  general,  most  resx)ectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THEODORE  E.  BUEIILER, 

Lieutenant- Colo7iclj  Comdg.  Sixty -seventh  Regt.  Indiana  VoL  Infty. 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  G.  Burbridge. 


No.  10. 

Report  of  Col.  Friend  S.  Rutherford.,  Ninety -seventh  Illinois  Infantry^ 

Second  Brigade. 

Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  2,  18G3. 

Dear  Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
l)art  this  regiment  took  in  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson  and  the  march 
tliereto : 

In  ])ursuance  of  orders,  this  regiment  took  up  its  line  of  march  in 
rear  of  the  Seventeenth  Ohio  Battery  from  Bruinsburg  Landing  at 
midnight  of  Axiril  30,  on  the  road  to  Port  Gibson.  From  the  best  in- 
formation I am  able  to  obtain,  the  distance  marched  was  18  miles.  When 
we  had  made  the  distance  of  15  miles,  1 received  an  order  from  your 
adjutant  to  move  forw^ard  with  a double-quick. 

We  arrived  on  the  battle  ground  at  8.30  o’clock  May  1,  falling  into 
lino  of  batt  le  on  the  riglit  of  the  road  and  on  the  left  of  the  First  Brigade, 
on  the  tox)  of  a ridge  running  at  rigid  angles  with  the  road.  We  had 
occupied  this  position  some  ten  oi-  lifteen  minut(‘s,  when  I received  an 


600 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  E TC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


order  from  your  aide  to  take  an  advanced  position  on  tlie  left  of  the  road. 
While  proceeding  to  obey  the  orders,  1 was  informed  by  Adjutant 
Tracy  that  I was  at  liberty  to  act  at  my  discretion  to  go  to  the  front  if 
I chose.  This  proposition  met  with  a hearty  response  from  my  men 
of,  ‘‘To  the  front  ; to  the  front!”  I received  orders  from  General  Me* 
demand  in  person  to  take  the  extreme  left,  and  move  forward  in  line 
of  battle.  I need  not  recount  to  you,  who  was  on  the  field  of  battle, 
the  difficulties  and  dangers  of  pressing  upon  the  enemy  through  the 
ravines  and  canebrakes  and  over  the  hills,  where  the  battle  of  Port 
Gibson,  or  rather  Magnolia  Hills,  was  fought. 

I may  be  permitted  to  say,  on  behalf  of  my  officers  and  men,  that 
their  endurance,  indomitable  labors,  and  patience  under  suffering  can 
be  exceeded  by  no  body  of  troops.  During  the  day  my  regiment  occu- 
pied a prominent  position  upon  the  battle-field,  and  by  your  orders 
withdrew  to  rest  for  the  night  when  it  was  no  longer  light  enough  to 
continue  the  contest. 

The  casualties  in  my  command  were  very  light  (being  G wounded, 
none  killed),  considering  that  we  were  so  much  exposed  to  the  enemy’s 
fire.  Near  the  close  of  the  day  we  were  exposed  to  the  enemy’s  battery 
of  two  guns  (not  to  exceed  300  yards  distance)  for  some  twenty  minutes. 

It  would  be  futile  to  discriminate  in  giving  praise  to  the  officers  and 
men  of  my  command  during  the  engagement ; every  one  did  his  duty 
faithfully.  Lieutenant  Martin,  though  just  from  a severe  attack  of 
illness,  was  on  active  duty  the  whole  day ; Major  Yifquain  was  also 
present,  and  showed  his  usual  energy  and  bravery.  Both  these  officers 
were  under  your  observation,  and  I need  not  recount  to  j’ou  their 
conduct. 

On  the  morning  of  May  2,  in  pursuance  of  orders  received  the  pre- 
vious night,  my  command  was  ready  to  fall  in  at  daylight.  At  about  7 
a.  m.  we  were  ordered  to  take  the  extreme  left,  and  support  the  Twenty- 
third  Wisconsin,  of  General  Burbridge’s  brigade.  We  formed,  and 
marched  in  line  of  battle  until  we  reached  the  bottom  of  the  valley,  im- 
mediately in  front  of  the  previous  day’s  battle-field,  on  the  left  of  the 
road  leading  to  Port  Gibson.  Here  a halt  was  made  until  skirmishers 
of  the  Twenty-third  Wisconsin  ascertained  that  the  enemy  had  retreated 
in  the  night,  when  my  command  filed  into  the  road  by  the  left  flank, 
and  marched  into  the  town  of  Port  Gibson,  this  regiment  beiug  the 
second  into  town,  the  Twenty-third  Wisconsin  being  the  first,  where 
we  halted  for  the  day. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  S.  EUTHEBFOBD, 

Colonel^  Commanding  Ninety -seventh  Regiment  Illinois  Volunteers, 

Gol.  W.  J.  Landram, 

Comdg.  2d  Brig.,  lOth  Div.^  13th  Army  Corps,  Army  of  the  Tenn. 


No.  11. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Alvin  P.  Hovey,  TJ.  S.  Army,  commanding  Twelfth 
IHvision,  including  operations  since  April  14. 

Hdqrs.  Twelfth  Div.,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

In  the  Field,  May  8,  18G3. 

Colonel  : 1 have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report,  com- 
mencing with  the  landing  of  the  Twelfth  Division  at  Milliken’s  Bend 


Chap.  XXXVI. ] 


601 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


on  the  14th  of  April,  and  terminating  with  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson, 
on  the  1st  day  of  May : ’ 

Marching  over  heavy  roads  from  the  Pend  on  the  16th,  under  orders 
to  leave  our  camji  and  garrison  equipage  behind,  we  arrived  at  Daw- 
son’s farm,  on  the  Eoundaway  Bayou,  on  the  second  day. 

On  the  18th,  marched  to  the  mouth  of  Gilbert’s  Bayou,  with  direc- 
tions to  make  a reconnaissance  in  the  direction  of  the  Mississippi  Eiver, 
and  ascertain  whether  a practicable  route  could  be  found.  Descending*- 
the  bayou,  I met  General  Osterhaus  coming  up  from  the  river  on  the 
same  business,  and  on  comparing  notes  the  route  was  deemed  practi- 
cable, and  so  reported  to  Major-General  McClernand. 

In  four  days  from  that  date  my  division,  with  the  aid  of  Captain 
Patterson’s  pioneers,  built  four  bridges  over  about  1,000  feet  of  water 
and  cut  2 miles  of  road  through  the  woods,  thus  opening  up  the  great 
military  route  through  the  overflowed  lands  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  the 
Mississippi  Eiver  below  Vicksburg.  During  this  severe  task  many  of 
my  men  worked  for  hours  up  to  their  necks  in  water,  and  I take  this 
occasion  to  thank  them  for  the  devotion  and  energy  there  displayed 
To  Capt.  George  W.  Jackson,  Thirty-fourth  Indiana,  and  his  pioneer 
corps,  praise  is  particularly  due  for  the  performance  of  this  herculean 
task. 

the  28th,  we  embarked  on  steamers  for  the  purpose  of  aiding  in 
the  attack  on  Grand  Gulf,  and  on  the  29th  witnessed  the  brilliant  as- 
sault by  the  gunboats  upon  that  place, 

As  it  was  supposed  at  the  time  that  a battle  would  take  place  at 
Drand  Gulf,  the  horses  of  all  officers,  except  those  commanding  divis- 
ions, and  all  kinds  of  transportation,  were  left  behind.  Subsequent 
events  made  this  very  onerous  upon  the  officers  and  upon  the  com- 
mand. ^ 


On  the  30th,  we  again  disembarked  at  Bruinsburg  Landing,  Miss., 
below  Grand  Gulf,  and  at  3 p.  m.  took  up  our  line  of  march  for  Port 
Gibson,  the  order  of  march  by  divisions  being  Carr’s  (Fourteenth), 
Osterhaus’  (Ninth),  Hovey’s  (Twelfth),  Smith’s  (Tenth). 

The  organization  of  the  Twelfth  Division  at  that  time  was 

First  Brigade^  General  George  F.  MeGinnis  commanding. —The  Twenty- 
lourth  Indiana,  commanded  by  Col.  W.  T.  Spicely ; Forty-sixth  Indiana 
commanded  by  Col.  T.  H.  Bringhurst;  Eleventh  Indiana,  commanded 
by  Lol.  Daniel  Macauley ; Twenty-ninth  Wisconsin,  commanded  by  Col. 
Charles  E.  Gill  j Thirty-fourth  Indiana,  commanded  by  Col.  E.  A.  Came- 
ron j Sixteenth  Ohio  Battery,  commanded  by  Capt.  J.  A.  Mitchell; 
becond  Ohio  Battery,  commanded  by  First  Lieut.  Aug.  Beach. 

iaecond  Brigade^  Col.  James  B.  SlacTc  commanding.— Twenty-fourth 
Iowa  commanded  by  Col.  E.  C.  Byam;  Twenty-eighth  Iowa,  com- 
r Connell ; Fifty-sixth  Ohio,  commanded  by  Lieut. 

lAiiTT  Forty-seventh  Indiana,  commanded  by  Lieut.  Col. 

Q*  1 ^ McLaughlin  ; First  Missouri  Battery,  commanded  by  Captain 
Fenton  ^^^ria  Light  Artillery,  commanded  by  Second  Lieutenant 


We  continued  our  march  through  the  night.  Near  2 o’clock  in  the 
lorning  oi  May  1,  cannonading  was  heard  in  our  front,  which  continued 
lor  several  minutes.  The  column  pressed  forward,  and  at  daylight 
reached  Center  Creek,  about  3 miles  west  of  Port  Gibson. 

this  point,  at  5.30  a.  m.,  my  division  was  ordered  to  take  position 
.yew  Jmndred  yards  in  advance,  upon  the  right  of  the  road,  on  the  crest 
01  two  hills  nearly  opposite  the  Shafer  larm-house,  at  that  time  the 


602 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAr.  XXXVI. 


lieadqiiarters  of  Major-Geoeral  McOlernaiid.  Tha  First  Brigade  occu- 
pied the  position  in  front  nearest  the  enemy’s  line  and  at  right  angles 
to  the  road,  and  the  Second  Brigade  on  a similar  ridge  in  the  rear  of 
the  First  Brigade. 

The  lines  of  each  brigade  were  formed  under  fire  from  the  enemy,  who 
were  being  engaged  by  Brigadier-General  Benton,  to  my  lelt  and  near 
the  center  of  the  line  of  battle. 

At  this  juncture  I received  orders  from  Major-General  McOlernand  to 
hold  my  division  as  a reserve  until  the  arrival  of  the  Tenth  Division, 
commanded  by  Brigadier-General  Smith,  at  which  time  my  whole  com- 
mand was  to  be  in  readiness  to  take  part  in  the  action. 

On  receiving  this  command,  I ordered  my  division  to  lie  down  under 
the  cover  of  the  brows  of  the  hills.  In  less  than  thirty  minutes  after- 
ward, General  Smith  arrived,  and  the  fact  was  announced  to  the  major- 
general  commanding.  In  tlie  mean  time  the  brigade  under  General 
Benton*  was  engaged  in  a severe  conflict  with  the  enemy  upon  our  left, 
and  gallantly  resisting  almost  overwhelming  numbers. 

About  7 a.  m.  an  aide  from  Major-General  McClernand  came  rapidly 
foi  ward,  with  orders  directing  me  without  the  least  delay  to  support 
General  Benton’s  line.  I immediately  ordered  Brigadier- General  Mc- 
Ginnis to  march  the  infantry  of  the  First  Brigade  in  line  of  battle  across 
a deei)  and  rugged  ravine  to  his  support.  All  concur  in  describing  this 
ravine  as  being  about  40  rods  wide,  and  filled  with  vines,  cane,  deep 
gulches,  and  exceedingly  difficult  of  passage.  Tlie  enemy,  no  doubt, 
regarded  it  as  impassable. 

As  soon  as  the  First  Brigade  had  commenced  moving,  I ordered  the 
Second  Brigade,  Colonel  Slack  commanding,  to  march  by  the  right  flank 
around  the  head  of  the  ravine,  in  support  of  the  forces  engaged  in  the 
center.  They  reached  their  proper  position,  in  line  of  the  division,  be- 
yond the  ravine,  about  the  same  time  tlie  left  of  the  First  Brigade  arrived, 
the  right  of  the  First  Brigade  being  still  engaged  in  working  through 
the  tangled  vines  and  underbrush  of  the  ravine.  As  I rode  down  the. 
• road  toward  tlie  front  and  middle  of  my  line,  1 met  Captain  Klauss, 
First  Indiana  Battery,  who  had  been  gallantly  fighting  the  rebel  bat- 
teries ; the  field  around  him  and  one  disabled  gun  testified  to  the  nature 
of  the  conflict.  He  at  once  pointed  out  the  position  of  the  rebel  battmy, 
the  guns  of  which,  with  a line  of  rebel  heads  in  their  rear,  were  plainly 
visible.  I immediately  rode  down,  under  cover  ot  the  brow  of  the  ravine, 
to  the  head  of  the  Second  Brigade,  where  Colonel  Slack  and  Colonel 
Cameron,  of  the  Thirty-fourth  Indiana,  were  standing.  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Baynor,  of  the  Fifty-sixth  Ohio,  who  had  been  supporting  Cap- 
tain Klauss’  battery,  here  joined  us.  Here  I attempted  to  communicate 
with  General  McGinnis,  wlio  was  in  the  rear  of  his  brigade,  but  the 
ground  was  impassable  for  my  aides  on  horseback,  and  my  voice  could 
not  be  heard  on  account  of  the  noise  around  him. 

I pointed  out  the  battery  first  to  Colonel  Cameron,  and  told  him  it 
must  be  taken.  Colonel  Slack  claimed  the  honor  for  his  command,  but 
I settled  the  matter  by  directing  Colonel  Cameron,  Thirty-fourth  Imbana 
Begiment,  to  make  the  charge,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Baynor,  IHtty- 
sixth  Ohio,  to  support  it.  I also  directed  Colonel  Slack  to  hold  his  bri- 
gade ready  to  move  forward  at  any  instant.  The  distance  of  the  rebel 
battery  from  the  ])oint  of  my  attack  could  not  have  exceeded  loO  yards. 

Ui)on  receiving  the  order  to  charge.  Colonel  Cameron  commanded  his 
battalion  to  leap  tlie  fence,  which,  with  the  Fifty-sixth  Ohio,  rushed, 
with  loud  shouts  and  fixed  bayonets,  toward  the  battery.  Their  advance 
was  met  with  grape  from  the  vebel  battery  and  a shower  of  ball  from 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


603 


BATTLE  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 

the  rebel  hues.  The  fire  became  iiiteuse  and  conceutrated,  and  both 
regiments,  to  shield  themselves,  fell  to  the  ground,  while  the  fire  con- 
tinued for  two  or  three  minutes  longer  on  both  sides.  At  this  juncture 
I gave  the  command  “forward  ” as  loud  as  I could,  and  had  the  grati- 
fication of  seeing  the  Thirty-fourth  and  Fifty-sixth  spring  to  their  feet, 
and,  with  two  companies  of  the  Eleventh  Indiana,  which  1 knew  by 
their  dress,  and  several  other  companies  from  my  division,  which  I could 
not  then  distinguish,  rush  forward  to  the  charge. 

Again  the  bright  bayonets  of  the  Twelfth  Division  were  glittering  in 
the  sun  ; again  a wild  shout,  a shout  of  triumph,  reverberated  through 
the  hills.  The  enemy  were  beaten  back,  between  200  and  300  taken 
prisoners,  and  1 stand  of  colors,  2 12-x^ounder  howitzers,  3 caissons, 
and  3 six-mule  teams,  loaded  with  ammunition,  was  the  reward  of  this 
chivalric  action. 

The  x^articular  men  or  comx)anics  who  seized  the  colors,  took  tlie  guns 
and  turned  them  ux^on  the  enemy,  surrounded  and  took  the  prisoners, 
I cannot  tell,  as  in  the  hot  contest  of  the  moment  nothing  but  moment- 
ary daguerrean  sketches  could  have  fixed  the  facts.  One  thing  is  cer- 
tain, the  honor  of  the  charge  belongs  to  tlie  Twelfth  Division.  I gave 
the  command,  my  men  obeyed,  and  made  the  charge,  manned  the  guns, 
discharged  them  at  the  enemy,  took  the  x^risoners,  and  have  the  battle- 
flag  of  the  battery  now  in  possession  of  the  gallant  Colonel  Eaynor. 
That  other  gallant  men  were  there,  after  the  incex>tion  of  the  charge, 
and  sustained  it,  may  be  so,  as  ofiicers-  and  men  of  this  corps  are  not 
only  ready  but  more  than  willing  to  do  their  duty;  but  that  any  organ- 
ized body  of  troox)S  from  any  other  division  participated  in  the  capture 
is,  I think,  contrary  to  the  x^osition  of  the  corx>s  at  the  time  and  the 
truth  of  history. 

Immediately  after  the  charge  was  made,  several  regiments  formed  on 
the  same  ridge  in  line  of  battle,  and  the  wildest  enthusiasm  prevailed 
as  Major-Generals  Grant  and  McClernand  rode  down  our  lines.  Gen- 
erals Grant  and  McClernand  commanded  me  to  x>i’ess  the  whole  line 
forward  immediately  and  drive  the  enemy  from  the  field  before  they 
could  be  re-enforced.  I gave  the  command  to  the  brigades  of  my  own 
division  and  to  the  gallant  Col.  William  J.  Landram,  commanding  the 
Second  Brigade,  Tenth  Division,  who,  with  my  division,  immediately 
marched  across  a ravine  in  the  direction  the  enemy  had  taken.  On 
reaching  the  x^l^iteau  or  ridge  beyond,  our  line  again  received  the  en- 
emy^s  fire  from  a long  woody  ravine  which  lay  at  the  base  of  the  ridge. 
Skirmishers  at  ditferent  points  ox^ened  a fire  ux)on  the  enemy  for  several 
minutes.  Passing  through  a slight  opening  in  this  ravine,  Colonel  Slack 
formed  the  Forty-seventh  Indiana  and  Fifty-sixtli  Ohio  in  line  of  battle 
and  opened  fire  on  the  enemy.  Being  severely  pressed,  he  was  subse- 
quently re-enforced  by  the  Twenty-fourth  Eegiment  Indiana  Yolunteers, 
Col.  W.  T.  Spicely  commanding,  and  Twenty-ninth  Wisconsin,  Colonel 
Gill,  and,  after  a hot  and  sxurited  contest  of  one  hour  and  a half  with 
about  equal  numbers,  they  forced  the  enemy  to  retire  before  them.  Here 
these  gallant  regiments  met  with  severe  loss. 

])nring  this  contest,  and  when  x)assing  down  our  lines  to  the  right,  I 
met  General  McGinnis,  who  informed  me  that  the  enemy  Avere  moving 
on  our  right,  with  the  X)robable  intention  of  Hanking  us.  lie  had  x)re- 
Auously  sent  to  the  right  three  companies  of  skirmishers  from  the  Elev- 
enth ami  Twenty-fourth  Indiana  and  Colonel  Cameron  with  tlie  Thirty- 
fourth.  As  we  jiassed  down  the  line,  my  aide,  LiiMit.  J.  P.  Pope,,  discov- 
ered jM‘(‘bel  battery  moving  in  th(‘.  sa!n(3  direetion,  supx)orted  by  a large 
force  of  infantry,  marching  x)artly  liidde.n  by  the  woody  ravine.  I plainly 


604 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXYI. 


saw  tlieir  lieavy  column  advancing-.  In  a few  minutes  the  rebel  battery 
Oldened  on  our  lines,  tiring  shell  and  shot  from  24  and  12  pounder  how- 
itzers. The  shell  and  shot  picked  up  on  the  field  demonstrated  their 
caliber.  As  my  infantry  were  already  in  close  supporting  distance,  I 
massed  ray  four  batteries  on  the  brow  of  the  ridge,  and  concentrated 
their  fire  into  the  ravine  in  the  direction  of  the  rebel  lines  and  battery. 

The  position  of  my  guns  and  infantry  at  this  time  is  shown  by  a sketch 
accompanying  this  report.*  I am  indebted  to  W.  11.  McOomas,  first 
lieutenant  and  aide  on  Major-General  McOleruaud’s  staff,  for  the  sketch 
and  other  similar  favors. 

The  fire  from  my  batteries  was  well  directed  and  continued  for  over 
one  hour,  and  drove  the  rebel  battery  and  infantry  from  that  part  of 
the  field.  The  honor  of  repulsing  the  enemy  at  this  point  unquestion- 
ably belongs  to  the  batteries  of  the  Twelfth  Division,  which  have  my 
sincere  thanks  for  their  efficient  service  during  the  day. 

When  the  fire  from  the  enemy  ceased  on  the  right.  General  McCler- 
naud  sent  orders  to  have  two  regiments  move  in  line  of  battle  from  our 
right  through  the  ravine  in  which  the  enemy  had  been  concealed. 
Colonel  Cameron,  being  on  the  extreme  right  at  this  time,  was  ordered, 
in  conjunction  with  one  regiment  from  General  Smith’s  First  Brigade, 
to  perform  this  duty.  The  length  of  the  ravine  was  nearly  1 mile,  with 
its  width  ranging  from  a few  yards  to  over  100.  About  equidistant 
from  its  ends  is  a narrow  neck,  through  which  the  hills  and  ground  be- 
yond are  plainly  visible.  To  this  neck  the  regiments  last  named  marched 
in  line  of  battle  through  the  lavine,  capturing  several  prisoners.  Skir- 
mishers from  the  Second  Brigade  continued  firing  for  some  time  in  the 
upper  end  of  the  ravine,  above  the  neck,  when  the  enemy  abandoned 
this  part  of  the  field  and  fled.  The  firing  continued  at  irregular  inter- 
vals along  the  line  for  some  time  afterward,  but  the  indications  plainly 
l)roved  that  they  were  only  covering  a rapid  retreat.  Thus  ended  the 
battle  of  Port  Gibson,  and  we  slept  upon  the  field  2 miles  in  advance 
of  the  moruing’s  contest. 

.It  will  be  impossible  for  me  to  particularize  each  movement  of  the 
respective  regiments.  Their  special  actions  are  clearly  described  in  the 
reports  of  their  commanders.  I have  no  fault  to  find  with  any  officer 
or  private  in  my  command.  If  any  faltered  I know  it  not.  Each  bri- 
gade was  handled  in  a masterly  manner,  and  too  much  praise  cannot 
be  bestowed  on  the  veteran  General  McGinnis  and  the  gallant  Colonel 
Slack,  who  commanded  them.  Faithfully,  nobly,  and  unfalteringly, 
they,  with  their  officers  and  men,  performed  their  full  duty  of  thorough 
soldiers.  Their  country  must  thank  and  reward  them. 

Throughout  the  day,  in  the  hottest  of  the  hail,  and  ou  almost  every  part 
of  the  field  where  man  or  horse  could  go,  Capt.  John  E.  Phillips,  assist- 
ant adjutant-general,  and  my  aides.  First  Lieuts.  John  T.  McQuiddy  and 
Joseph  P.  Pope,  were  carrying  orders  and  making  observations.  Their 
assistance  was  invaluable  to  me,  and  their  services  deserve  the  highest 
praise.  George  W.  Bownell,  private  of  Company  C,  First  Indiana 
Cavalry,  who  acted  as  my  mounted  orderly,  proved  himself  worthy  of 
promotion  for  his  fearless  bearing  and  services  throughout  the  day. 

To  Surg.  Bobert  B.  Jessup,  medical  director,  and  the  medical  corps 
who  co  operated  with  him,  the  command  is  under  great  obligations  for 
their  services  under  the  very  trying  difficulties  winch  surrounded  them. 
The  sick  and  wmunded  have  been  thoroughly  cared  for,  although  no 
ambulance  or  medical  w-agon  accompanied  my  division.  The  surgeons 


See  opposite  page. 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


605 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSOD,  MISS. 


GOG 


Mississirn,  west  Tennessee,  etc. 


[C11AI‘.  XXXVI. 


carried  all  ilieir  iriedical  stores  on  foot,  and  not  only  performed  tlieir 
whole,  duty  by  attending  to  the  noble  men  who  were  wounded  in  my 
command,  but,  like  the  good  Samaritan  of  other  days,  gave  balm  and 
bound  up  the  wounds  of  suffering  rebels  by  the  wayside. 

The  prisoners  taken  by  my  command  on  the  field  of  battle  cannot 
fall  short  of  400. 

My  casualties,  as  shown  by  accompanying  reports,  are:  Killed,  42 j 
wounded,  203,  and  missing,  3.  Total,  308.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALVIK  r.  UOYEY, 

Brig.  Gen.,  Comdg.  Twelfth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

Lieut.  Ool.  Walter  B.  Scates, 

A ssisiant  A dj u tant-  General. 


No.  12. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  George  F.  McGinnis,  IJ.  Army,  commanding 

First  Brigade. 

llDQRS.  First  Brigade,  Twelfth  Division, 
Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  Army  of  the  Tennessee, 

In  the  Field,  May  0,  1803. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  First  Brigade  in  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  on  the 
1st  instant : 

My  brigade  consisted  of  the  following  commands,  viz  : 

The  Eleventh  Indiana  Infantry,  Col.  Daniel  Macauley,  510  men; 
Twenty-fourth  Indiana  Infan trj^.  Col.  W.  T.  Spicely,  540  meti;  Thirty- 
fourth  Indian  a Infantry,  Col.  E.  A.  Cameron,  007  men;  Forty-sixth  In- 
diana Infantry,  Col.  T\  H.  Briughurst,  423  men ; Twenty-ninth  Wis- 
consin Infantry,  Col.  Charles  E.  Gill,  533  men;  Second  Ohio  Battery, 
First  Lieutenant  Beach  commanding,  100  men;  Sixteenth  Ohio  Battery, 
Capt.  J.  A.  Mitchell,  commanding,  111  men.  Total,  2,839. 

About  7 a.  m.  I received  an  order  from  Brig.  Gen.  A.  P.  Dovey,  com- 
manding our  division,  to  form  my  brigade  in  line  of  battle,  holding  two 
regiments  in  reserve.  The  order  was  immediately  executed.  My  first 
line  was  comiiosed  of  the  Twenty-fourth,  Thirty-fourth,  and  Forty-sixth 
Indiana;  my  second  of  the  Eleventh  Indiana  and  Twenty-nintli  Wis- 
consin, with  directions  to  hold  themselves  about  200  yards  in  the  rear 
and  act  as  support  to  the  first  line.  One  section  of  the  Second  Ohio 
Batter^^  was  all  the  artillery  I had  with  my  command  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  battle,  in  consequence  of  a lack  of  transportation  upon  our 
leaving  Perkins’  plantation.  La.  As  soon  as  our  lines  Avere  formed,  we 
advanced  about  three-fourths  of  a mile  over  a surface  of  country  which 
under  any  otlier  circumstances  would  have  been  xironounced  imx)assable. 
Iligli  hilis,  in  many  places  almost  periiendicular,  deep  ravines,  thickly 
covered  with  cane  and  vines,  interfered  very  much  with  our  advance. 
After  advancing  about  half  a mile,  at  the  request  of  General  Benton, 
commanding  First  Brigade,  Fourteenth  Division,  the  Twenty -fourth 
Indiana  Infantry  was  detached  from  my  brigade  for  the  purpose  of  sup- 
liorting  General  Benton’s  right,  which  brought  on  the  action,  and  had 


Cut  sec  revised  statciucut,  p.  583. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


607 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 

been  botly  engaged  for  some  time.  The  Twenty -fourth  moved  up  to  its 
position  in  gallant  style,  and  after  a short  but  very  shai*])  engagement 
the  eiiem^^  retreated  from  that  part  of  the  field,  upon  \Yhicli  the  Twenty- 
fourth  rejoined  the  brigade.  The  balance  of  my  brigade  moved  rapidly 
to  the  front,  and  were  soon  within  range  of  a rebel  battery,  supported 
by  a brigade  of  infantry.  The  Thirty-fourth  Indiana,  being  in  advance, 
was  ordered  by  General  Ilovey  to  charge  the  battery.  A gallant  effort 
was  made  to  execute  the  order,  but  such  a fearfully  destructive  fire  was 
poured  upon  them  that  Colonel  Cameron,  very  properly  and  with  much 
coolness  and  judgment,  halted  his  command,  and  i)rotected  them  from  the 
eiiemy^s  fire  behind  the  brow  of  the  hill.  At  this  juncture  the  Eleventh 
Indiana,  which  had^been  in  reserve,  moved  to  the  front  in  double-quick, 
and  as  soon  as  a iiortion  of  its  right  was  in  line  with  the  Thirty -fourth 
and  left  of  the  Eorty-sixth  Indiana,  another  gallant  charge  was  made 
uiion  the  battery,  ■j^hich  was  double-shotted  and  just  ui)on  the  point  of 
being  fired.  The  gunners  and  horses  were  shot  down,  and  the  brigade 
in  support  turned  their  backs  upon  us  and  tied  in  confusion  from  the 
field. 

The  result  of  this  gallant  dash,  in  which  the  Thirty-fourth,  Eleventh, 
and  Forty-sixth  Indiana  participated,  was  the  capture  of  2 12-pounder 
howitzers,  3 caissons,  3 wagons  loaded  with  ammunition,  3 stand  of 
colors,  several  horses,  and  over  200  prisoners.  Company  K,  of  the 
Eleventh  Indiana,  was  detailed  to  man  the  guns,  who  turned  them 
upon  the  enemy  and  delivered  a few  etiective  shots. 

After  a short  halt,  to  enable  all  to  rest  and  jirocure  water,  I received 
an  order  from  General  Ilovey  for  another  advance.  In  this  movement 
the  Thirty-fourth  and  Forty-sixth  Indiana  were  held  in  reserve  within 
supi)orting  distance  of  the  first  line.  After  advancing  about  1 mile, 
we  again  met  the  enemy,  who  had  been  re-enforced,  and  were  strongly 
posted  on  the  opposite  side  of  a deep  ravine. 

My  command  was  immediately  ordered  forward  to  support  the  Second 
llrigade,  Colonel  Slack,  and  took  up  a position  in  the  ravine  and  on  the 
brow  of  the  hill,  nnd  opened  their  fire  upon  the  enemy.  At  this  point 
the  contlict  was  terrific,  and  was  kept  uii  without  any  intermission 
whatever  for  an  hour  and  thirty-seven  minutes,  when  the  enemy,  find- 
ing that  they  could  not  driv^e  us  from  our  position,  retreated  in  dismay, 
and  made  no  further  resistance  on  that  part  of  the  field. 

During  this  last  engagement  I receiv^ed  information  that  the  rebels 
showed  signs  of  an  intention  to  attack  and  turn  our  right.  I immedi- 
ately directed  Colonel  Cameron,  of  the  Thirty-fourth  Indiana,  to  occupy 
and  hold  the  hill  to  the  right,  and  sent  to  his  assistance  one  section  of 
the  Sixteenth  Ohio  Dattery,  and  informed  General  Ilovey  of  what  I had 
done.  A concentrated  fire  from  sixteen  guns  of  the  division  continued 
for  over  an  hour,  dislodging  the  enemy  from  their  ])osition  and  driving 
them  from  the  field. 

After  this  engagement  had  been  continued  for  an  hour,  I received  a 
message  from  Colonel  Gill,  of  the  Twenty-ninth  Wisconsin,  informing 
me  that  his  regiment  had  sufiered  severely,  and  asking  to  be  relieved  for 
a short  time.  Having  no  regiment  of  my  own  command  unemployed,  I 
called  iqmn  General  Bc^nton  for  the  required  assistance,  who  generously 
tendered  the  services  of  the  galhpit  Eighth  Indiana,  Colonel  Shunk, 
and,  although  they  were  short  of  ammunition,  they  went  in  with  a will 
and  rendered  the  necessary  relief,  and  fought  gloriously  and  victoriously 
during  the  remainder  of  tlie  engagement. 

The  Twenty-fourth  Indiana  and  Twenty-ninth  Wisconsin  stood  the 


608 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap,  XXXVT. 


brunt  of  the  engagement,  occupying  the  front  and  most  dangerous 
position.  It  was  here  that  their  heaviest  loss  occurred. 

Owing  to  the  nature  of  the  ground  over  which  we  moved  in  the  early 
part  of  the  engagement,  it  was  utterly  impossible  for  the  section  of  the 
Second  Ohio  Battery,  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Guthrie,  to  follow 
us.  As  soon,  however,  as  he  could  get  his  guns  in  position,  he  opened 
upon  the  rebels  and  did  gallant  service  during  the  day. 

Two  sections  of  the  Second  Ohio  Battery,  First  Lieutenant  Beach 
commanding,  and  the  whole  of  the  Sixteenth  Ohio  Battery,  Captain 
Mitchell,  which  had  been  left  at  Perkins’  plantation,  for  reasons  before 
stated,  arrived  upon  the  battle-field  about  10  a.  m.  They  were  immedi- 
ately put  to  work,  and  did  good  service  during  the  balance  of  the  day. 

The  expressions  of  admiration  of  the  manner  in  which  the  two  bat- 
teries were  handled— the  precision  and  rapidity  with  which  they  fired — 
were  frequent  and  well  deserved.  Officers  and  men  are  entitled  to  much 
praise  for  their  good  conduct. 

At  about  4 p.  m.  my  brigade  was  again  ordered  to  advance,  in  sup- 
port of  a brigade  of  General  Smith’s  division.  After  advancing  a short 
distance,  we  were  ordered  to  halt,  and  soon  after  were  ordered  into  posi- 
tion for  the  night. 

When  all — officers  and  men,  and  the  different  commands  of  my  bri- 
gade-performed their  whole  duty,  it  would  appear  unjust  to  discrimi- 
nate. I cannot  refrain,  however,  from  special  mention  of  the  Twenty- 
ninth  Wisconsin,  not  that  they  fought  longer  and  more  gallantly  than 

others not  that  they  are  more  brave  or  better  disciplined — but  that  it 

is  a new  regiment,  and  this  was  the  first  time  that  they  had  been  en- 
o-aoed  with  an  enemv  or  that  any  of  their  men  had  ever  been  under  fire. 
They  fought  like  veterans,  and  suffered  severely,  as  their  report  of  cas- 
ualties will  show. 

Captains  Caven  and  Buckle,  of  the  Eleventh  Indiana,  are  deserving 
of  special  mention  for  gallant  conduct  in  the  charge  upon  and  taking  of 
a rebel  battery.  I regret  that  commandants  of  other  regiments  engaged 
in  that  affair  have  not  seen  proper  to  make  special  mention  of  the  prin- 
cipal actors  of  their  commands  engaged  in  it. 

To  Colonels  Spicely,  Cameron,  Macauley,  Gill,  and  Briughurst,  all  ot 
whom  were  on  foot,  like  myself,  in  consequence  of  an  order  prohibiting 
us  from  bringing  our  horses  across  the  river,  I am  much  indebted  for 
valuable  assistance,  and  the  prompt  and  energetic  manner  in  which  they 

executed  all  orders.  t tt  x • a 

I would  also  make  honorable  mention  of  Capts.  J.  H.  Livsey,  W.  o. 
Marshall,  and  Lieut.  D.  J.  Wells,  of  my  staff,  all  of  whom  were  very 
efficient  in  transmitting  orders,  more  especially  as  they  were  also  on  foot. 

My  command  moved  from  the  Mississippi  Biver  at  3 p.  m.  on  April 
30,  and  marched  until  Sam.  1st  instant,  carrying  their  knapsacks, 
four  days’  rations,  and  100  rounds  of  ammunition  per  man. 

I here#ith  transmit  the  reports  of  regimental  and  battery  commaiid- 


•s,  with  a list  of  killed  and  wounded. 

The  loss  of  my  command  is  as  follows  : * 

Yerv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ GEOBGE  F.  MCGINNIS, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding  First  Brigade. 


Capt.  John  E.  Phillips, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Ticelfth  Division. 


" Embodied  iu  revised  statement,  p.  583. 


Chap.  XXXVI.)  BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON^  MISS.  609 

Ko.  13. 

Report  of  Col.  Daniel  Macauley,  Eleventh  Indiana  Infantry. 

Near  Willow  Springs,  Miss., 

May  5,  1803. 

Sir  : The  following  report  of  the  part  taken  by  the  Eleventh  Indiana 
in  the  battle  of  May  1,  near  Port  Gibson,  is  respectfully  submitted : 

We  arrived  near  the  battle-field  at  6 a.  in.  on  that  day,  after  march- 
ing all  night,  and,  before  having  time  to  cook  breakfast,  were  sent  bj^ 
General  A.  P.  Hovey  to  the  field  to  report  to  General  G.  F.  McGinnis. 
On  an  order  from  him,  we  stacked  arms  in  shelter  of  a hill,  and  awaited 
the  ^‘advance.” 

About  8 a.  m.  1 received  General  McGinnis’  order  to  form  line  on  the 
right  of  the  Twenty-ninth  Wisconsin  Infantry,  and  advance,  as  supiiort, 
200  yards  in  the  rear  of  the  line  formed  by  the  Twenty-fourth,  Forty- 
sixth,  and  Thirty-fourth  Indiana  Kegiments.  A deep  ravine,  ehoked 
by  an  almost  impassable  canebrake  and  undergrowth,  was  before  us, 
through  which,  with  great  exertion,  we  succeeded  in  forcing  our  way. 
Two  more  of  like  character  were  passed,  wdien,  by  marching  by  the  left 
flank,  an  open  space  was  reached,  in  which  were  formed  the  remaining 
regiments  of  the  brigade. 

In  front  of  my  position  was  a ravine  running  diagonally  to  the  left 
and  rear,  on  the  far  side  of  it,  and  a little  to  the  right  was  stationed  a 
rebel  battery,  supported  by  a heavy  force  of  infantry.  I was  ordered 
to  cross  this  ravine,  making  a right  half-wheel,  and  attack,  in  company 
with  the  Forty-sixth  Indiana,  on  the  other  side.  The  ravine  was  imme- 
diately passed,  but  the  Forty-sixth  had  been  delayed  a little  in  crossing. 
I halted  and  waited  a moment  for  it.  We  were  formed  in  a road,  in 
front  of  which  was  the  Thirty-fourth  Indiana,  lying  downj  about  100 
yards  to  the  right  and  front  was  a large  house,  and  immediately  beyond 
it  the  rebel  battery.  Resolving  to  take  possession,  without  further 
delay,  of  a part  of  the  rising  ground  on  which  was  the  house  and  bat- 
tery, I moved  by  the  right  flank,  double-quick,  up  the  road,  then  by 
the  left  flank  over  the  fence,  and  with  a run  and  yell  the  position  and 
battery  were  ours. 

This  battery  seemed  to  be  a much-disputed  point  among  a number  of 
claimants  for  the  honor  of  its  capture.  I find  that  as  our  two  companies 
on  the  right  (E  and  G)  neared  the  guns,  the  rebels  endeavored  to  turn 
them  on  us,  but  a volley  from  the  companies  killed  a number  of  the 
cannoneers  and  prevented  it.  Possession  was  immediately  had,  and 
the  guns  turned  on  the  enemy. 

As,  however,  by  this  time  the  Forty-sixth  Indiana  was  in  the  field, 
and  the  Thirty-fourth  Indiana  also  moving  and  doing  good  service  so 
near  us,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  decide  which  of  them  did  not  partici- 
pate in  the  capture  of  the  battery.  The  Eleventh  in  the  mean  time  kept 
up  a constant  and  rapid  fire  on  the  enemy,  which  continued  till  he  had 
retreated  from  all  positions  in  range. 

After  a halt  here  of  half  an  hour,  I was  ordered  to  advance  with  the 
Twenty-fourth  Indiana  and  with  two  comiianies  thrown  out  as  skir- 
mishers. Ordering  Company  E,  Captain  Ruckle,  and  Company  G, 
Captain  Caven,  forward  on  that  duty,  we  advanced  about  half  a mile, 
when  rapid  firing  to  the  left  told  us  the  battle  had  again  commenced. 
We  remained  in  shelter  of  a hill,  on  the  right  of  Fenton’s  Peoria  bat- 
tery, till  ordered  forward  to  take  a position  on  a ridge  running  nearly 
perpendicular  to  our  present  one,  to  resist  an  attack  being  made  by  the 
39  R R — VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


610 


MISSISSIPPI, 


WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  IChai’.  XXXTI. 


eneniT  ifl  force.  This  was  about  11.30  a.  m.  Haviug  moyeO,  we  re- 
mained :i'  defense  of  that  ridge  till  about  5 p.  m.,  resisting  duriug  that 

*’'i'w*as  then^ordered  by  General  McGinnis  lo  move  forward  and  sup- 
nort  arattLk  being  made  by  General  A.  J.  Smith’s  division.  I at 
ODce  moved  down  in  the  bottom,  some  200  yards  to  tbe 
a chanS  to  get  in,  there  being  here  but  one  road,  and  it  filled  with 
troops  at  a halt.  Remaining  here  about  halt  an  hour,  the  legiments  to 
Ihe  front  tere  brought  back,  and  I was  ordered  to  my  recent  position 
on  the  ridge.  The  firing  in  front  soon  ceased,  and  we  Invouacked  loi 

*''lirconclusion,  I would  say  that  where  every  man  did  his  duty  so  thor- 
oiit^hly  anriought  with  so  much  energy,  it  is  difficult  to  single  out  any 
foi^ special  mention,  yet  the  gallant  conduct  of  Captains  Ruckle  and 
Caveu  in  the  capture  of  the  battery  deserves  more  than  a l»ass"'g  notice. 

The  regiment  entered  the  fight  with  401  enlisted  men  and  *.8 commis- 
sioned officers.  It  lost  1 killed,  1 missing,  and  23  wounded. 

Very  respectfully,  daRIEL  MACAULEY, 

Coloyiel  Eleventh  Indiana  Volunteers. 

Capt.  James  H.  Livsey, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


14, 

Report  of  Col.  James  R.  Slaclc,  Forty-seventh  Indiana  Infantry^  com- 
manding  Second  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  2d  Brigade,  12th  Division,  13th  Army  Corps, 

Wilhnv  Springs,  Miss.,  May  5,  Iboo. 

Sir  : 1 have  the  lioiior  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  forces  under  my  command  in  the  severely  contested  battle 
of  Port  Gibson  on  the  1st  instant : ’ \ 

My  command  consisted  of  the  Forty-seven th  Indiana  Infantry,  undei 
command  of  Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  McLaughlin ; Fifty-sixth  Ohio  Intan- 
try,  under  command  of  Lieut.  Co).  William  H.  Kaynor;  Twenty-lourth 
Iowa  Infantry,  commanded  by  Col.  Eber  C.  Byam  ; Twenty-eighth  lov  a 
Infantry,  commanded  by  Col.  dohn  Connell;  First  Missouri  Lattei.’^, 
Capt.  George  W.  Schofield  commanding,  and  the  Peoria  Battery,  com- 
manded by^Lieuf.  Frank  B.  Fenton.  I formed  the  infantry  on  the  crest 
of  Thompson’s  Hill,  to  the  right  of  the  Port  Gibson  road,  at  0 o clock 
ill  the  morning,  and  Schofield’s  battery  to  the  lett  ot  the  same  road, 
and  in  advance  of  the  first  line.  The  Peoria  Battery,  tor  want  ot  ti’aP^- 
portation  across  the  Mississippi,  did  not  reach  the  field  iintd  about  lo 
a.  m.  Duriug  the  formation  of  our  lines, ‘the  battle  opened  a short  dis-- 
tance  to  our  left  and  front,  and  continued  with  great  stubbornness  tor 
an  hour,  when  General  Ilovey  directed  me  to  put  iny  column  in  motion 
and  support  General  Benton,  whose  forces  Avere  being  hard  ])ressed  by 
overwhelming  numbers.  Tlie  wliole  column  Avas  immediately  tormed, 
and  moved  most  gallantly  to  the  point  indicated,  Avith  the  Forty-seventh 
Indiana  and  the  Fifty-sixth  Ohio  on  tlie  extreme  lelt  and  the  Iwenty- 
tburtli  and  Twenty-eighth  loAva  on  the  right. 

These  positions  were  respectively  taken  under  a sei'ere  lire  ot  nie 
enemy’s  infantry,  and  shell  and  canister  from  a avIloIc  battery  at  a dm- 


CiiAf.  XXXVJ.J 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


611 


taiice  of  about  200  yards,  yet  the  several  commands  took  their  position 
in  line  without  Oinehin^,  and  advanced  to  within  80  yards  of  the  enemy’s 
battery,  immediately  alter  which  General  Hovey  ordered  Colonel  Cain- 
eron,  of  the  Thirty-fourth  Indiana,  to  charge  and  take  the  battery,  and 
ordered  me  to  support  the  charge  with  the  Fifty-sixth  Ohio,  which  was 
immediately  to  the  left  of  the  Thirty-fourth  Indiana.  I at  once  gave 
the  command,  and  the  order  was  promptly  responded  to,  and  the  brave 
Fifty-sixth,  with  its  gallant  commander,  rushed  up  to  the  very  muzzle 
of  the  rebel  guns,  in  com])any  with  the  daring  Thirty-fourth,  drove 
them  from  their  battery,  killed  a number  of  the  cannoneers  and  troops 
supporting  the  battery,  and  captured  the  stand  of  rebel  colors,  which 
Colonel  Itaynor  now  has  in  his  possession,  a wmrthy  custodian  of  that 
rebel  trophy.  Immediately  after  the  guns  were  silenced.  Colonel  Ray- 
nor, with  his  command,  passed  on  beyond  the  battery,  and  captured 
220  prisoners.  In  the  charge  upon  the  battery,  three  companies  of  the 
Twenty-eighth  Iowa  also  supported  the  Thirty-fourth  Indiana.  Dur- 
ing the  whole  time,  the  Forty-seventh  Indiana,  under  command  of  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel McLaughlin,  was  hotly  engaged  with  a heavy  force  of 
rebel  infantry  on  the  extreme  left,  which  was  trying  to  reach  the  left 
flank,  but  was  re])ulsed  at  every  effort,  and  driven  back  with  terrible 
slaughter. 

During  this  engagement,  Schofield’s  battery,  under  the  personal  com- 
mand of  Captain  Schofield  and  Lieut.  Thomas  Mitchell,  dealt  most  ter- 
rible and  damaging  blows,  which  materially  contributed  to  our  success. 
Thus  terminated  the  contest  in  the  forenoon.  In  the  afternoon  the 
Twenty-fourth  and  T\venty-eighth  Iowa  were  ordered  to  the  rear  and 
extreme  left  of  the  line,  to  su^iport  Major-General  Logan’s  division, 
which  was  hotly  engaged,  and  there  continued  fighting  like  veterans, 
as  men  of  that  gallant  State  always  have  done,  until  the  enemj^  was 
driven  from  the  field  and  utterly  routed  at  every  point,  and  the  curtain 
of  night  closed  the  scene. 

About  1 p.  m.  the  Forty-seventh  Indiana  and  the  Fifty  sixth  Ohio 
changed  front,  and  occupied  position  about  1 mile  to  the  left  and  rear 
of  their  ])osition  in  the  forenoon.  I then  moved  the  column  forward, 
with  Comjiany  D,  of  the  Forty-seventh  Indiana,  under  command  of 
Capt.  James  R.  Brewer,  and  Company  B,  of  the  Fifty-sixth  Ohio,  under 
command  of  Lieut.  John  Jochem,  thrown  forward  as  skirmishers. 

After  moving  about  half  a mile  over  very  broken  ground,  and  across 
a ridge  covered  with  timber,  the  skirmishers  encountered  the  rebel  col- 
umn, with  their  sharx)shooters  in  advance,  under  cover  of  thick  brush 
and  a ravine.  After  a sharp  skirmish  they  were  driven  out,  the  column 
in  the  mean  time  advancing  over  a hill  to  the  support  of  the  skirmishers. 
Immediately  upon  their  rising  the  hill,  the  action  became  general,  but 
we  were  soon  compelled  to  retire  from  our  position,  by  re-enforcements 
of  the  enemy  in  large  numbers  approaching  over  the  crest  of  a hill  to 
our  right  and  rear,  and  form  our  line  on  the  slope  of  the  hill,  which  was 
quickly  executed  and  in  good  order. 

During  the  time  of  forming  this  line  with  the  two  regiments  of  my 
own  brigade,  the  Twenty-fourth  Indiana  Infantry,  of  the  First  Brigade, 
under  command  of  Col.  William  T.  Spicely,  came  down  the  hill  ami 
formed  to  the  right  of  the. Fifty -sixth  Ohio,  taking  their  ])Osition  in  the 
bed  of  a creek,  at  right  angles  with  the  line  of  the  Second  Brigades. 
These  lines  had  not  more  than  l)een  formed  when  three  rebel  regi- 
ments— two  Missouri  undone  Louisiana — came  down  at  a charge,  with 
terrific  yells,  and  could  ]iot  be  seen,  because  of  the  very  thick  growth 
of  cane,  until  they  reached  a ])oint  within  30  yards  of  my  line. 


612 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAr.  XXXVL 


The  Fifty-sixth  Ohio  and  Forty- seventh  Indiana  opened  upon  their 
line  in  front,  and  the  Twenty-fourtli  Indiana  on  their  flank,  a most  ter- 
rific and  jarring  fire,  which  arrested  their  charge  and  threw  them  into 
some  confusion,  but  they  soon  recovered,  and  returned  our  fire  with  great 
spirit  and  i)ertinacity  for  about  two  hours,  when  the  rebel  survivors  fled 
in  utter  confusion,  leaving  their  dead  and  wounded  upon  the  ground. 

During  this  engagement  the  two  batteries  in  my  command  located  on 
the  hill  to  our  right  and  rear  threw  shell  and  shrapnel  into  the  enemy’s 
ranks,  which  created  great  havoc.  In  this  engagement  the  Fifth  Mis- 
souri (rebel)  Kegiment  was  almost  totally  annihilated,  there  being  but 
19  of  them  left,  who  were  taken  prisoners.  With  this  contest  closed 
the  battle  on  the  right,  and  it  was  a fair,  square  fight  of  regiment  against 
regiment,  of  about  equal  numbers  and  equally  armed,  resulting  in  the 
complete  triumph  of  the  troops  of  Indiana  and  Ohio  over  the  chivalric 
braggarts  and  flower  of  the  Southern  Army. 

During  the  several  engagements  of  my  command  many  i^risoners  were 
taken,  but  they  Avere  sent  to  the  rear,  and  placed  in  charge  of  the  pro- 
vost-marshal, without  an}"  account  of  the  number  being  taken  thereof. 

The  rejiorts  of  the  various  commanders  of  my  brigade  are  herewith 
inclosed,  and  make  a part  of  this. 

To  the  cool  and  gallant  conduct  of  all  the  field  and  line  officers,  and 
the  iiersevering  determination  of  each  and  every  one  in  my  command,  I 
cannot  express  too  much  gratitude  and  admiration.  To  tliein  belongs 
the  glory  of  the  triumi)h,  every  officer  and  every  man  having  done  his 
whole  duty. 

My  acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  Lieut.  II.  G.  P.  Jennings,  of 
Cknnpany  G,  Forty-seventh  Indiana,  and  my  aide.  Lieutenant  [Theodore] 
Schaeffer,  of  Company  F,  Twenty-eighth  Iowa,  rendered  me  most  ad- 
mirable service,  carrying  and  executing  orders  during  the  Avhole  day. 

I would  call  special  attention  to  Private  George  Phillips,  Company 
K,  Fifty-sixth  Ohio  Infantry,  who,  acting  in  the  capacity  of  messenger 
for  me  during  the  whole  day,  was  constantly  with  me  when  not  absent 
temporarily  upon  some  duty,  never  flinching  from  danger  in  the  thickest 
of  the  battle,  collected  and  calm  j he  is  well  worthy  of  promotion. 

The  whole  number  of  casualties  are  : Killed,  16 ; wounded,  62 ; miss- 
ing, 11 — in  all,  89. 

I have  the  honor  to  bo,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  E.  SLACK, 

CoL,  Comdg.  tSecond  Brig.^  Twelfth  J)ii\,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

Capt.  John  E.  Phillips,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Ko.  15. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  McLaughlin^  Torty-seventh  Indiana  In- 
fantry. 

Hdqks.  Forty-seventh  Eegt.  Indiana  Vol.  Infantry, 

Willow  tSpringSy  Miss.y  May  5,  186.‘k 
Colonel  : In  compliance  with  orders,  I proceed  to  give  you  a detailed 
account  of  the  part  borne  by  the  regiment  under  my  command  (the 
Forty-seventh  Indiana  Volunteer  Infantry)  in  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson, 
Miss.,  outlie  1st  instant. 

At  about  6.30  a.  m.  we  formed  line  of  battle  on  the  extreme  right  of 
the  Second  Brigade,  where  the  battle  immediately  opened  upon  the  part 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


G13 


of  the  iiifautry.  At  about  7.30  a.  ni.  we  were  ordered  to  the  left  aud 
frout,  to  support  the  First  Missouri  Battery,  Captain  Schofield,  which 
position,  upon  the  height  to  the  left  of  the  road  leading  to  Port  Gibson, 
and  about  1 mile  in  advance  of  our  first  line  of  battle,  we  occupied  for 
more  than  two  and  a half  hours,  where  we  delivered  three  effective 
volleys  at  the  enemy  maneuvering  upon  our  right.  In  this  position  the 
enemy^s  bullets  fell  among  us  thfck  and  fast,  but  as  we  were  well  shel- 
tered under  the  brow  of  the  hill,  we  only  lost  1 man  from  Company  B 
and  1 man  belonging  to  the  ambulance  corps  of  the  Fifty-sixth  Ohio 
Volunteers,  both  killed. 

At  about  11  o’clock  we  were  ordered  to  the  front.  We  then  proceeded 
to  the  Port  Gibson  road,  up  which,  toward  Port  Gibson,  we  advanced 
about  2 miles,  and  crossed  to  the  right  of  said  road,  and  formed  in  line 
of  battle  upon  the  ciest  of  the  hills.  Gere  we  ordered  forward  Com- 
pany D,  of  the  Forty- seventh,  as  skirmishers,  and  advanced  to  the  ex- 
treme front  over  a ridge  and  across  Willow  Creek,  and  to  the  top  of 
the  hill  beyond,  where  we  formed  in  line  of  battle  in  the  open  field,  our 
skirmishers  being  engaged  in  front  with  the  Third  and  Fifth  Missouri 
(rebel)  Eegimeuts,  a rebel  battery  playing  upon  us  at  the  same  time. 
We  here  engaged  the  enemy,  who  opposed  us  hotly  for  half  an  hour. 
We  were  holding  our  own  to  good  purpose,  when  we  discovered  that 
the  rebels  were  advancing  in  line  at  double-quick  at  our  right,  and  in 
a position  favorable  to  taking  us  upon  the  right  flank  and  in  our  rear. 
As  we  were  a long  way  in  advance  of  our  main  body  when  we  took  this 
position,  and  sujiposing  ourselves  entirely  unsupported  at  our  rear, 
we  changed  position,  retiring  by  the  left  flank  along  the  ravine  through 
which  we  had  gained  the  summit  of  the  hill,  and  formed  in  line  of  battle 
at  right  angles  with  our  former  i)osition,  our  left  resting  upon  it,  and 
immediately  opened  a brisk  fire  upon  the  enemy’s  lines,  which  were  in 
full  charge  upon  us.  Here  the  battle  raged  furiously  for  over  two  hours, 
during  which  time  the  pieces  of  our  men  became  so  heated  from  rapid, 
continuous  firing  as  to  make  it  impossible  for  them  to  continue  firing 
longer  with  safety  to  themselves.  We  were  relieved  at  this  position  by 
the  Nineteenth  Kentucky,  the  Forty-seventh  retiring  a few  jiaces  to  the 
gully  formed  by  Willow  Creek. 

The  firing  having  entirely  ceased,  and  the  enemy  routed  at  this  iioint, 
the  Forty-seventh  stacked  arms  in  the  hollow  a few  paces  to  the  rear 
of  Willow  Creek,  and,  being  exhausted  by  the  previous  night’s  march 
and  the  heat  and  fatigues  of  the  day,  was  resting,  when  suddenly  a 
well-directed  volley  from  the  enemy,  who  had  skulked  up  under  cover 
of  the  bushes  upon  the  crest  of  the  hill,  informed  us  that  the  battle  was 
not  yet  over.  We  immediately  formed  a few  paces  to  the  rear,  under 
cover  of  the  ravine.  We  were  then  ordered  to  advance  to  the  same 
position  (the  bed  of  the  stream),  which  position  we  held  for  the  remain- 
der of  the  day  without  hearing  further  from  the  enemy. 

During  the  entire  day  the  conduct  of  both  officers  and  men  under 
my  command  was  most  admirable;  coolness  and  presence  of  mind  was 
that  of  veterans. 

Total  killed,  wounded,  and  missing,  27.* 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

JOHN  A.  McLxlUGGLIN, 

Lieut.  Col.,  Comdf).  Forty-seventh  Jier/t.  Indiana  lufantry. 

Col.  James  R.  Slack, 

Comdg.  Second  Brig.,  Twelfth  Div.,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

* Bnt  sec  revised  statement,  p.  583. 


G14 


ICIIAP.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Xo.  1 0. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Joseph  G.  hitrong^  adjutant  Ta'cntg-eighth  loira  In- 
fantry. 

Near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  28,  1SG.3. 

Dear  Sir  : It  affords  me  great  ])leasiire  to  be  able  to  report  to  yon 
tbe  part  taken  by  the  Twenty-eiglith  Iowa  in  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson, 
May  1,  18G3. 

On  the  evening  of  April  30,  we  were  landed  on  the  bank  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi, and  started  for  Port  Gibson.  At  1 a.  in  of  May  1 we  could 
liear  the  boom  of  artillery  in  our  advance.  We  quickened  our  pace,  and 
arrived  at  the  foot  of  Thompson’s  Hill  at  sunrise.  General  Hovaw?  our 
division  commander,  rode  up  and  said,  ‘‘Boys,  prejiare  your  breakfasts 
soon,  for  we  go  into  battle  in  half  an  hour.”  After  breakfast  we  formed 
in  line  of  battle  on  the  crest  of  Thompson’s  Hill,  where  we  remained  one 
liour  under  tire.  Three  companies  at  this  time  (B,  G,  and  K)  supported 
the  Thirty- fourth  Indiana  Infantry  in  a charge  on  a rebel  battery,  which 
was  taken,  together  vfith  about  300  prisoners.  After  this  contest  the 
regiment  was  reformed  and  ordered  to  the  extreme  left  (by  order  of 
General  McGlernand),  Vvdiich  was  at  this  time  vigorously  attacked  by 
the  enem3^  On  arriving  at  tliis  jioint,  we  found  that  the  enemy  had 
massed  a large  force  to  turn  our  left,  among  which  force  were  two  rebel 
(Missouri)  regiments  (the  Second  and  Fifth)  which  were  placed  directly 
in  front  of  us.  On  arriving  near  to  the  point,  we  immediately  formed  the 
regiment  in  a position  to  meet  them.  After  a hotly  contested  engage- 
ment of  about  two  hours,  the  enemy  fell  back,  and  we  succeeded  in 
])lanting  the  Eighth  Michigan  Battery  on  the  knoll  we  had  held  against 
their  charge,  which  battery  immediately  commenced  playing  upon  the 
enemy. 

At  about  4 p.  m.  they  again  appeared  in  force,  still  attempting  to 
turn  our  left,  but  after  a brislv  engagement  of  about  au  hour  they  retired 
in  confusion. 

A company  of  skirmishers  having  been  sent  out  to  the  left  and  front 
of  our  line,  discovered  a rebel  battery  which  had  command  of  the  Port 
Gibson  road  for  about  three-quarters  of  a mile.  Our  artillery  soon  got 
in  position  and  commenced  shelling  them.  We  lay  in  support  of  the 
batteries  until  they  had  silenced  the  enemy’s  guns.  By  this  time  it  was 
nearly  dark,  and  General  Stevenson  coming  up,  relieved  us  from  our  po- 
sition on  the  left,  and  we  rejoined  our  brigade,  which  was  encamped  for 
the  night  on  the  bloody  field.  Here  we  lay  on  our  arms  in  suppoi't  of 
the  Peoria  Battery  during  the  night.  I give  an  extract  of  Colonel  Con- 
nell’s report  in  regard  to  the  conduct  of  the  regiment : 

With  regard  to  tho  conduct  of  officers  and  men  dnrino-  the  action,  I can  only  speak 
in  terms  of  highest  connnendatioii.  Although  having  inarched  all  the  day  and  niglit 
])revioas  to  the  engagement,  carrying  three  days’  rations  and  100  rounds  of  cartridges 
to  ihc  man,  and  having  neA'<'r  before  been  under  tire  of  tlie  enemy,  they  y<*t  fought 
with  that  fearless  siiirit  and  determination  whicli  has  always  characterized  the 
American  s(ddier. 

I append  a list  of  the  killed  and  wounded.* 

Our  regiment  is  now  on  duty  in  the  rifle-])its  before  Vicksburg,  so 
you  will  see  that  I have  but  little  time  to  make  reports.  However,  I 
will  send  you  a report  of  the  jiart  (he  Twenty-eighth  took  in  the  battle 
of  Champion’s  Hill  before  long.  I will  only  state  that  we  lost  in  the 


Nominal  list  omit  ed.  8cc  p.  583. 


CriAP. 


BATl'Lt  01^  i’ORT  GlliSO^,  MISS. 


(ilf) 


battle  of  tlie  IGtli  over  100  leen.  1 will  send  you  reports,  &c.,  as  soon 
as  iny  field  desk  eoiiies  up.  It  is  at  Grand  Gulf,  where  it  has  been  for 
nearly  a nionth.  One  thini^-,  the  Twenty-eighth  has  added  new  laurels 
lo  tlie  noble  young  State  of  Iowa,  and  will  continue  to  do  so. 

I remain,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOSEPH  G.  STRONG, 


Adjutant 


N.  B.  Baker, 

Adjutant- General  State  of  loiva. 


'J’lven ti/  eiff I, tJi  Joica, 


m.  17. 

Beports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Eugene  A.  Carr.,  TJ.  S.  Army.,  commanding 
Fourteenth  I)ivisio7iy  including  operations  April  12-May  22. 

Headquarters  Fourteenth  Division, 

May  31,  18G3. 

Colonel  : In  obedience  to  a letter  dated  Headquarters  Thirteenth 
Army  Corps,  camp  near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  24,  18G3,  I have  the 
honor  to  submit  the  following  report : 

My  division  left  Millikeids  Bend  Ajiril  12,  and  proceeded  to  Perkins’ 
])lantation,  on  the  Mississipt)i,  below  Vicksburg,  where  it  arrived  on  the 
23J,  having  been  engaged  in  making  and  repairing  roads,  repairing 
levees,  making,  getting  together,  and  navigating  boats  of  different 
kinds.  Distance  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  Perkins’  plantation,  30  miles. 

On  fhe  night  of  April  27,  we  embarked  on  steamboats  and  barges, 
and  the  next  day  moved  down  the  river  and  disembarked  at  Hard 
Times.  That  evening  we  marched  2 miles  across  to  a point  on  the  Lou- 
isiana side,  below  Grand  Gulf. 

The  next  morning  (April  30)  we  re-embarked  and  moved  down  the 
river  to  Bruinsburg,  on  the  Mississippi  side,  where  we  landed,  and, 
after  drawing  three  days’  rations,  which  rvere  to  last  for  five,  we  moved 
out  on  the  road  to  Port  Gibson. 

At  1 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  May  1,  my  Second  Brigade,  being  in 
advance,  came  upon  the  enemy,  strongly  i)osted  with  artillery,  at  Mag- 
nolia Church,  about  12  miles  from  Bruinsburg  and  4 miles  from  Port 
Gibson.  The  enemy  opened  on  the  head  of  the  column  with  artillery, 
wliereupon  I formed  the  brigade  in  line,  brought  up  the  batteries,  the 
First  Iowa  (Griffiths’)  and  First  Indiana  (Klauss’),  and  after  firing  about 
two  hours  drove  away  and  silenced  the  enemy’s  guns.  In  the  morning 
the  enemy  opened  on  a road  coming  in  from  our  left  front,  when  four 
companies  of  the  Thirty-third  Illinois,  under  Major  Potter,  were  sent  out 
to  check  them  and  hold  them  at  bay  till  the  arrival  of  General  Oster- 
haus’  division,  which  was  assigned  to  contend  with  them  on  that  road. 

The  enemy  had  returned  to  his  i)osition  near  Magnolia  Church,  and 
at  G.3()  in  the  morning  Ave  again  attacked  him,  supported  by  Hovey’s 
division.  I kei)t  the  enemy  em])loyed  with  my  Second  Brigade  and 
the  two  batteries  on  the  left  of  and  in  the  road,  while  I sent  the  First 
Brigade,  Brig.  Gen.  AVilliam  P.  Benton  commanding,  through  ravines, 
canebrake,  and  tind)er  to  the  right  of  the  road,  to  jiress  on  his  left 
flank.  Some  of  the  regiments  of  General  Hovey’s  division  came  u]), 
and,  with  their  assistance,  the  First  Brigade  charged  and  routed  tlu? 
enemy,  capturing  two  guns,  a stand  of  colors,  some  ])risoners,  and 
small-arms.  The  enemy  retreated  about  2 miles,  and  took  uj)  a,  new 


616 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


]30sition.  Ill  conjuDctiou  with  the  other  troops,  we  pursued  and  con- 
tinued fighting  him  until  night,  when  he  retreated  across  Bayou  Pierre, 
destroying  the  bridges. 

My  loss  in  that  action,  of  which  I have  already  furnished  a more 
minute  report,  was  42  killed  and  222  wounded;  total,  264.* 

The  next  day  w^e  marched  into  Port  Gibson. 

The  next  day,  May  3,  we  wore  sent  to  the  railroad  crossing  of  Bayou 
Pierre,  3 miles,  and  subsequently  were  ordered  forward  on  the  road  to 
Willow  Springs,  11  miles  distant. 

On  the  7th,  at  3 a.  m.,  w^e  marched  on  the  road  to  Cayuga,  halting  at 
Big  Sandj^,  14  miles  distant. 

On  the  12th,  we  marched  by  w'ay  of  Cayuga  to  Pourteen-Mile  Creek, 
12  miles. 

The  next  day  we  marched  to  near  liaymond,  11  miles. 

The  next  day  we  marched  past  Eaymond  and  Mississippi  Springs  to 
Forest  Hill  Church,  6 miles  from  Jackson.  This  was  our  hardest  march. 
It  rained  all  day,  the  roads  were  very  bad,  and  part  of  the  division 
failed  in  getting  into  cam]).  The  distance  was  about  12  miles. 

The  next  day  we  moved  back  through  Eaymond,  and  encamped  across 
a road  leading  to  Edwards  Station ; distance,  10  miles. 

The  next  day.  May  16,  was  the  day  of  the  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill. 
My  division  was  in  reserve.  The  Tliirty- third  Illinois  was  moved  for- 
ward to  support  one  of  General  Osterhans’  brigades,  and  lost  1 killed 
nnd  2 wounded.  The  Second  Brigade  was  moved  forward  on  the  left, 
and  did  good  execution.  After  the  battle  was  over,  we  moved  forward 
in  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  and  pushed  on  as  far  as  Edwards  Station, 
which  we  reached  about  8 o’clock. 

During  the  pursuit  many  prisoners  were  taken,  who  were  simply  or- 
dered back  to  the  rear.  I made  it  a rule,  whenever  I was  in  front,  to 
dispose  of  prisoners  in  that  wa3',  thus  saving  m 3^  own  men  for  more 
important  duties,  and  being  satisfied  that  some  one  in  the  rear  would 
pick  up  and  secure  the  prisoners. 

At  Edwards  Station  my  men  exposed  themselves  freel3^  in  saving 
sonm  car-loads  of  i)rovisions  and  a^nmunition  attached  to  a train  w'hich 
the  enem3^  had  set  on  fire. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  we  moved  forward  at  5 o’clock  on  the 
road  to  Black  Eiver  Bridge,  12  miles  distant,  the  First  Brigade  leading, 
with  a part  of  the  Thirty-third  Illinois  as  skirmishers  and  advance  guard. 
We  drove  in  the  enemy’s  pickets  from  time  to  time,  and  captured  some 
prisoners,  which  were  dis])osed  of  as  before. 

Upon  nearing  Black  Eiver  Bridge,  Avliere  we  found  the  enem3^  in 
force,  the  First  Brigade  was  formed  in  line  across  the  road,  with  skir- 
mishers in  front  and  the  battery  in  the  center,  subsequently  re-enforced 
by  the  Chicago  Mercantile  Battery. 

The  Second  Brigade  was  moved  up  on  the  right,  with  directions  to 
j)ress  close  on  the  enem3"  and  charge  him  if  there  was  a good  opportu- 
nity. Ihwfis  supported  b3Mwo  regiments  and  two  20-pounder  Parrotts 
from  Osterhaus’  division. 

The  enemy’s  position  was  found  to  consist  of  a line  of  breastworks 
over  a ‘mile  in  length,  resting  on  the  Black  Eiver  at  each  extremity,  and 
with  a natural  ditch  or  slough  in  front  5 or  6 feet  dee])  and  miry  at  the 
bottom.  Most  of'  the  artillery  was  posted^on  the  right,  where  the  ground 
was  open  for  a considerable  distance  in  his  front. 

Brig.  Gen.  M.-K.  Lawler,  after  pressing  wtU  up  on  his  left,  and  firing 


Blit  see  revisoil  statement,  p.  1)84. 


Chap.  XXXV I. ] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


617 


a fe\Y  shots  with  the  Peori.T  Battery  and  the  20-poiiiiders,  formed  his 
brigade  into  column  of  attack  aud  charged  on  tlie  enemy ; the  Thirtj^- 
third  and  Ninety-ninth  Illinois  Kegiments,  of  the  First  Brigade,  also 
charging  as  soon  as  they  saw  the  Second  Brigade  start. 

The  enemy  were  completely  routed,  and  fled  in  confusion  across 
Black  River  with  a few  pieces  of  artillery,  leaving,  however,  18  guns, 
5 stand  of  colors,  1,421  small-arms,  and  1,751  i)risoners  in  our  posses- 
' sion. 

In  this  action  I lost:  Killed,  19;  wounded,  223;  missing,  1.  Total, 
243.* 

The  next  day  we  moved  on  8 miles,  to  within  4 miles  of  Vicksburg. 
The  next  day  we  moved  up  near  the  enemy^s  works.  My  division  was 
in  reserve,  but  got  near  enougli  to  suffer  some  casualties. 

On  the  20th,  my  division  relieved  that  of  General  Smith,  on  the  ad- 
vance. 

On  the  eveniog  of  the  21st,  we  were  ordered  to  attack  the  enemy  at 
10  o’clock  next  morning,  at  which  time  there  was  to.be  a general  charge 
along  the  whole  line. 

My  division  was  to  be  supported  by  that  of  General  Smith  ; Benton’s 
brigade  by  Burbridge’s,  and  Lawler’s  by  Landram’s.  General  Smith’s 
division  behaved  admirably,  and  did  all  that  men  could  do  to  achieve 
success.  The  One  hundred  and  thirtieth  Illinois  was  assigned  to  Law- 
ler’s brigade  in  i^lace  of  the  Twenty-third  Iowa,  dcdached  with  prison- 
ers. My  two  brigades  moved  forv/ard  promptly  at  the  appointed  time, 
and  planted  their  colors  on  the  outer  slopes  of  the  bastions,  which  they 
attacked,  but  were  unable  to  make  a lodgment  inside  the  enemy’s  works. 
They,  however,  with  the  two  brigades  of  Smith’s  division,  j^arts  of 
which  were  also  on  the  enemy’s  works,  held  their  position  under  a 
wasting  tire  for  nine  hours,  until  after  dark,  when  they  were  ordered 
to  retire. 

About  5 o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  two  brigades  of  General  Quinby’s 
division  were,  placed  at  my  disposal.  I sent  one  to  supj)ort  the  right, 
under  General  Burbridge,  who  was  sorely  pressed,  but  it  retreated  in 
confusion  as  soon  as  it  got  under  the  enemy’s  tire.  The  other,. under 
Colonel  Boomer,  was  sent  forward  with  the  hope  of  driving  the  enemy^ 
Irom  the  curtain  between  the  salients  attacked  by  my  two  brigades,  and 
thereby  gaining  a permanent  lodgment,  but  it  was  too  late ; the  enemy 
had  been  enabled  to  withdraw  forces  from  other  points,  had  seen 
Quinby’s  division  moving  in  this  direction,  and  was  so  strongly  re-en- 
forced that  he  had  three  lines  behind  his  works.  The  gallant  Boomer 
was  killed,  and  his  brigade  found  it  impossible  to  go  beyond  the  tirst 
ravine. 

In  this  action  I lost  109  killed,  559  wounded,  and  57  missing;  total, 
725. 

I would  respectfully  state  that  it  is  im])ossible  to  give  exactly^  the 
figures  required  in  the  letter  above  referred  to.  The  distances  marched 
on  different  days,  together  with  the  time  of  marching,  are  given  as 
nearly^  as  possible  in  the  body  of  the  report. 

The  numbers  of  killed  and  wounded  follow  the  account  of  each  battle. 
The  total  number  of  killed  is  171 ; wounded,  1,000;  missing,  58;  the  lat- 
ter being  mostly  wounded  and  taken  prisoners,  or  killed  and  not  i'ound 
during  the  last  contest. 

We  captured  a good  many  prisoners,  who  were  immediately  passed  to 
the  rear,  not  c'ounted.  We  captured  ammunition,  which  was  immedi- 


But  soo  ro.vi.sful  statoiiioiit,  j).  fiSl. 


618 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVt 


ately  used ; arms,  which  were  taken  by  the  men  in  exchange  for  their 
own;  cartridge-boxes  and  other  equipments,  provisions,  and  various 
articles  of  v/hich  there  was  no  time  to  take  an  account.  Account  was 
taken  of  1,751  prisoners,  G colors,  20  pieces  of  artillery,  1,421  snmll- 
arms,  and  5 car-loads  of  provisions. and  ammunition. 

In  conclusion,  while  all  have  done  their  duty,  and  many  are  entitled 
to  special  mention  of  whose  names  and  deeds  I am  not  yet  informed, 

1 would  respectfully  submit  the  following  list  of  ofhcers  and  soldiers, 
who,  from  personal  observation  and  official  reports,  I know  to  be  enti- 
tled to  favorable  notice : 

Brig.  Gen.  William  P.  Benton,  commanding  First  Brigade. 

Capt.  George  S.  Marshall,  assistant  adjutant-general,  First  Brigade. 

First  Lieut.  J.  P.  Wiggins,  aide-de-camp  to  General  Benton. 

Col.  David  Shunk,  Eighth  Indiana,  distinguished  in  all  three  of  the 
battles;  hit  in  the  leg  at  Vicksburg. 

Lieut.  Col.  0.  S.  Parrish,  Eighth  Indiana,  distinguished  at  Port  Gib- 
son, though  so  ill  he  could  hardly  stand. 

Mnj.  T.  J.  Brady,  Eighth  Indiana,  acting  ordnance  officer,  distin- 
guished in  all  the  battles,  commanded  skirmishers  in  advance  at  Port 
Gibson  and  Black  Eiver  Bridge. 

Col.  n.  D.  Washburn,  Eighteenth  Indiana,  distinguished  in  all  the 
battles,  and  well  worthy  of  promotion. 

Mnj.  J.  C.  Jenks,  Eighteenth  Indiana,  inspector-general  and  chief  of 
staff.  First  Brigade,  distinguished  in  all  the  battles,  mortally  wounded 
at  Vicksburg  \\iiile  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties. 

Col.  C.  E.  Lippincott,  Thirty-third  Illinois,  distiiiguishecl  in  all  the 
battles,  had  his  horse  shot  under  him  while  in  advance  in  pursuit  to 
Edwards  Station,  and  was  wounded  in  the  foot  at  Vicksburg. 

Lieut.  Col.  E.  B.  Poe,  Thirty-third  Illinois,  wounded  at  Vicksburg. 

Maj.  L.  H.  Potter,  Thirty-third  Illinois,  distinguished  in  all  the  battles. 

Coi.  G.  W.  K.  Bailey,  Ninety-ninth  Illinois,  distinguished  in  all  the 
battles  and  wounded  in  the  leg  at  Vicksburg. 

Lieut.  Col.  Lemuel  Park,  Ninety-ninth  Illinois,  distinguished  m the 
battles  of  Port  Gibson  and  Black  Piver  Bridge. 

Captain  Klauss,  First  Indiana  Battery,  distinguished  in  all  the  bat- 
tles ; lias  ex})loded  a great  deal  of  ammunition  for  the  enemy  during 
the  siege  of  Vicksburg.  , . 

Orderly  Sergt.  J.  AV.  Gerhardt,  First  Indiana  Battery,  distinguished 
in  all  the  battles,  and  well  worthy  of  promotion. 

Brig.  Gen.  M.  K.  Lawler,  commanding  Second  Brigade,  particularly 
for  his  gallant  charge  at  Black  Piver  Bridge. 

CapL  B.  AVilson,  assistant  adjutant-general.  Second  Brigade,  distin- 
guished in  the  last  two  battles. 

Col.  C.  L.  Harris,  Eleventh  AATscoiisin,  commanded  the  Second  Bri- 
gade most  of  the  time  before  the  arrival  of  General  Lawler,  and  is  en- 
titled to  credit  for  its  organization  and  disci])line.  Although  too  ill  to 
(‘omiiiand  his  brigade  at  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  he  was  on  the  field 
and  exposed  to  danger.  He  distinguished  himself  at  Black  Piver  Bridge 
and  ATcksburg,  and  is  well  worthy  of  ])romotioii. 

Lieut.  Col.  C.  A.  Wood,  Eleventh  AATsconsin,  now  acting  inspector- 
general,  provost-marshal,  and  chief  of  staff  for  the  division,  commanded 
the  regiment  at  Port  Gibson  and  distinguished  himself  in  all  the  battles. 
iAlaj.  Arthur  Platt,  Eleventh  AVisconsin,  showed  great  bravery  in  all 

the  battles.  • 

Capt.  L.  II.  AAliittlesey,  Eleventh  AVisconsin,  now  acting  division 
quartermaster,  was  acting  assistant  adjutant-general  of  the  Second  Bn- 


CiiAr.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OE  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


G19 


gade  at  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson  ; lias  distinguished  himself  in  all  the 
battles  and  during  the  whole  cainjiaign  by  bravery,  energy,  intelligence, 
and  untiring  industry.  He  is  well  worthy  of  iiroinotion. 

Col.  W.  M.  Stone,  Twenty-second  Iowa,  coiuinauded  the  Second  Bri- 
gade at  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  and  distinguished  himself  in  all  the 
battles;  was  wounded  in  the  arm  at  Yicksburg,  and  is  well  worthy  of 
promotion. 

Lieut.  Col.  Harvey  Graham,  Twenty-second  Iowa,  distinguished  him- 
self in  the  last  two  battles,  and  was  taken  prisoner  at  Yicksburg. 

Col.  Samuel  .Merrill,  Twcntj^-first  Iowa,  received  a contusion  from  a 
shell  at  Port  Gibson,  and  was  shot  through  both  legs  while  leading  his 
regiment  in  the  charge  at  Black  Biver  Bridge. 

Lieut.  Col.  C.  W.  Dunlap,  Twenty-first  Iowa,  was  wounded  in  the 
foot  at  Port  Gibson,  and  was  killed  in  command  of  his  regiment  at 
Yicksburg. 

Maj.  S.  G.  Yan  Anda,  Twenty-first  Iowa,  distinguished  himself  in  all 
the  battles,  and  commanded  his  regiment  at  Yicksburg  after  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Dunlap  was  killed. 

Col.  W.  H.  Kinsman,  Twenty-third  Iowa,  was  killed  at  the  head  of 
his  regiment  while  leading  the  charge  at  Black  Biver  Bridge. 

Lieut.  Col.  S.  L.  Glasgow,  Twenty-third  Iowa,  commanded  his  regi- 
ment at  Port  Gibson,  and  distinguished  himself  both  there  and  at  Black 
Biver  Bridge. 

Capt.  H.  H.  Griffiths,  First  Iowa  Battery,  was  with  us  at  Port  Gib- 
son, where  he  behaved  very  handsomely.  • 

Sergeant  Leibert,  First  Iowa  Battery,  behaved  very  handsomely,  and 
was  Avounded  on  the  same  occasion. 

Sergt.  Joseph  E.  Griffith,  Twenty-second  Iowa  Infantry,  distinguished 
himself  by  going  into  the  fort  attacked  by  the  Second  Brigade,  with  II 
men,  and  came  out  with  12  prisoners,  though  all  his  companions  had 
been  killed. 

My  staff  officers  Avere  Lieut.  Col.  C.  A.  Wood,  Eleventh  Wisconsin, 
assistant  inspector-general,  provost-marshal,  and  chief  of  staff*.  He 
commanded  his  regiment  at  Port  Gibson,  and  distinguished  himself  in 
all  the  battles. 

Maj.  T.  J.  Brady,  Eighth  Indiana,  acting  ordnance  officer,  has  been 
A'ery  actiA^e  and  successful  in  keeping  us  supi)lied  with  ammunition. 
He  distinguished  himself  in  all  the  battles,  commanding  the  skirmish- 
ers in  advance  at  Port  Gibson  and  Black  Biver  Bridge. 

Capt.  C.  H.  Dyer,  assistant  adjutant-general,  is  a faithful,  intelligent 
officer,  and  has  been  of  great  use  to  the  command.  He  distinguished 
himself  in  all  the  battles,  and  is  Avell  Avorthy  of  ])romotion. 

Capt.  L.  H.  Whittlesey,  Eleventh  Wisconsin,  acting  assistant  quar- 
termaster, has  been  most  untiring  and  successful  in  furnishing  ns  Avith 
supplies;  Avas  acting  assistant  adjutant-general  of  the  Second  Brigade 
at  the  battle  of  Port  (-ibson;  has  distinguished  himself  in  all  the  bat- 
tles and  during  the  Avhole  (annpaign  by  braAawy,  energy,  intelligence', 
and  untiring  industry.  He  is  Avell  Avorthy  of  promotion. 

Lieut.  John  E.  Phelps,  Third  U.  S.  Cavalry,  aide-de-canq),  showed 
his  usual  bravery  and  intelligence  in  all  the  battles.  He  Avas  the  hrst 
man  on  horseback,  and  the  hrst  man  at  the  guns  in  the  fortifications  at 
Black  BiA^er  Bridge.  He  is  Avell  Avorthy  of  ])romotion. 

Lieut.  A.  BoAvman,  Ninth  Iowa.  Infantry,  acting  aide-de-camp,  ex-  ’ 
posed  himself  freeing  as  usual,  in  the  transmission  of  orders  in  all  the 
battles.  His  braA^ny,  energy,  and  intelligence  entitle  him  to  i)romo- 
tion. 


620 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Lieut.  Charles  Meiuhokl,  Third  U.  S.  Cavalry,  niusteriug  officer  and 
acting  aide-de-camp,  showed  great  bravery  and  intelligence  in  all  the 
battles.  He  had  his  horse  killed  under  him  at  Vicksburg,  and  is  enti- 
tled to  great  credit,  and  well  worthy  of  promotion. 

The  medical  department  performed  their  onerous  duties  with  great 
assiduity  and  skill,  and  are  entitled  to  the  greatest  credit  for  relieving 
the  sufferings  of  the  wounded.  Their  names  are : Surgs.  H.  P.  Strong, 
acting  medical  director;  George  P.  Kex, ‘Thirty-third  Illinois;  W.  II. 
White,  Twenty-second  Iowa,  and  J.  H.  Ledlie,  operating  board;  Asst. 
Surgs.  O.  Peabodv,  Twenty-second  Iowa;  E.  Everitt,  Eleventh  AViscon- 
sin;  A.  E.  McKeal,  Ninety-ninth  Illinois,  and  J.  K.  Bigelow,  Eighth  In- 
diana, assistant  operating  board;  Surgs.  A.  P.  Daughters  and  G.  AV. 
Gordon,  Eighteenth  Indiana,  assistant  in  charge  of  primary  depots. 

Sergt.  J.  H.  Bussell,  Twenty-first  Iowa,  clerk  in  assistant  adjutant- 
general’s  office,  went  voluntarily  into  the  battle  at  Black  Biver  Bridge, 
and  was  wounded. 

Private  E.  P.  Hatch,  Thirty-third  Illinois,  clerk  in  assistant  adjutant- 
general’s  office,  went  out  as  a sharpshooter  and  did  good  service. 

I consider  it  a duty  to  bring  to  the  attention  of  the  maior-general 
commanding  and  the  Government  ^the  inferior  quality  ot  the  ammuni- 
tion, both  artillery  and  infantry,  furnished  for  the  use  of  the  troops. 
It  is  impossible  to  fire  shells  over  our  own  troops  without  the  greatest 
danger.  I have  lost  quite  a number  of  men  on  this  account,  pd  there 
is  one  deplorable  instance— Sergeant  [Charles  IT.]  Besse,  Thirty-third 
Illinois  Infantry,  both  of  whose  arms  were  blown  oft  by  a shell  from  one 
of  our  own  guns.  Persons  who  fabricate  the  ammunition  ought  to  be 
made  pecuniarily  responsible. to  the  sufferers,  and  in  penal- 

ties to  the  United  States,  for  this  most  careless  and  criminal  reckless- 
ness. Complaint  is  also  made  of  the  quality  and  quantity  of  the  powder 
ill  musket  and  rifle  cartridges.  The  rebel  cartridges  are  filled  with  the 
best  of  English  rifle  jiowder,  and  carry  their  balls  much  farther  than 
ours. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  A.  CABB, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

A DDENDA. 

General  Orders,  ) Headquarters  Fourteenth  Division, 

No.  32.  ] 

I desire  to  congratulate  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  this  division  on 
the  brilliant  and  successful  manner  in  which  they  xierlormed  their  duty 
in  the  different  conflicts  of  the  late  battle  near  Port  Gibson. 

At  the  end  of  a tiresome  night’s  march,  the  Second  Brigade,  under 
Colonel  Stone,  being  in  the  lead,  came  iqion  the  enemy  at  1 o’clock  in 
the  morning,  posted  in  a strong  position,  with  artillery ; immediately 
formed  into  line,  and  Captain  Griffiths,  First  Iowa  Battery,  with  the 
assistance  of  three  pieces  of  Klauss’  First  Indiana  Battery,  fought  him 
for  over  an  hour,  and  finally,  at  3 o’clock,  drove  him  away.  We  lay 
down  to  take  our  first  rest  since  3 o’clock  the  preceding  morning. 

At  G.3()  o’clock  we  renewed  the  conflict.  The  two  batteries  inade  ter- 
rible havoc  with  the  enemy.  The  First  Brigade,  under  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Benton,  was  deployed  in  the  ravine  and  underbrush  on  the  right, 
and  advanced  gallantly  to  flank  the  enemy  and  take  his  guns. 

AVhen  they  engaged  him  on  the  riglit,  the  Second  Brigade  engaged 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


621 


BATTLE  OF  POET  GIBSON,  MISS. 

him  on  the  leftj  the  Twelfth  Division  was  advanced  to  support,  and 
with  a rush  the  enemy  was  routed  from  his  position. 

The  Eighteenth  Indiana,  Col.  H.  D.  Washburn,  has  the  distinguished 
honor  of  capturing  a regimental  flag,  on  which  are  inscribed  the  names 
of  four  battle-fields,  and,  with  the  i^inety-ninth  Illinois,  Col.  G.  W.  K. 
Bailey,  and  some  of  the  Thirty-fourth  and  Eorty- sixth  Indiana,  of  cap- 
turing two  of  the  enemy^s  guns.  This  success  was  the  result  of  the 
splendid  fighting  of  the  whole  division,  which  provided  the  opportunity. 

After  the  enemy  took  up  his  new  position,  the  Second  Brigade  was 
very  severely  engaged  on  the  left  of  our  line  for  a long  time,  and  be- 
haved with  distinguished  gallantry.  It  subsequently  took  up  a position 
across  the  valley  in  the  timber,  very  near  the  enemy,  where  two  regi- 
ments (the  Twenty-first  and  Twenty-third  Iowa)  remained  until  after 
dark. 

The  First  Brigade  went  to  the  relief  of  General  McGinnis’  brigade, 
and  the  Eighth  Indiana  distinguished  itself  by  driving  the  enemy  from 
a strong  position  and  taking  it  for  themselves. 

Coming  from  Missouri,  where  you  had  endured  great  hardships  dur- 
ing the  last  winter,  you  were  honored  by  being  placed  at  the  head  of 
the  grand  Army  of  the  Mississippi,  and  you  have  proved  jmurselv^es 
well  worthy  of  that  honor.  You  have  encountered  and  defeated  the ' 
same  men  against  whom  we  have  so  long  contended  in  Missouri  and 
Arkansas,  and  you  have  added  another  wreath  to  those  you  won  at 
Blackwater,  Blackwell’s  Station,  Fredericktown,  Pea  Bidge,  Bound 
Hill,  Hartville,  Haynes’  Bluff,  and  Post  of  Arkansa^^,  and  I am  sure 
you  will  go  on  with  your  glorious  achievements  till  the  demon  of  re- 
bellion shall  be  destroyed,  and  our  land  shall  once  more  rejoice  in  the 
blessings  of  peace  and  prosperity. 

Wliile  we  mourn  our  fallen  comrades,  we  cannot  forget  that  they  have 
offered  up  their  lives  for  the  noblest  of  purposes — that  of  preserving  to 
their  country  a Government  at  once  free  and  stable,  which  shall  give, 
in  conjunction  with  the  largest  liberty  to  the  citizen,  the  greatest  secu- 
rity for  his  life  and  property.  To  their  friends  and  to  our  wounded 
comrades  we  tender  our  sympathies,  and  hope  that  time  and  thethonght 
ot*  what  they  suffer  for  will  soothe  their  pain  and  sorrow. 

The  loss  of  the  First  Brigade  was,  killed,  26:  wounded,  143;  that  of 
the  Second  Brigade,  killed,  15;  wounded,  79;  total,  263.  Tliis  com- 
prises only  men  put  liors  du  combat.  Scratches  not  reported. 

Where  all  have  done  their  duty  it  is  invidious  to  make  distinctions, 
but  the  conduct  of  some  individuals  seems  to  merit  special  mention,  even 
at  the  risk  of  leaving  out  deserving  men  whose  names  have  not  been 
reported  to  me.  These  shall  receive  their  due  credit  as  soon  as  I am 
informed  of  their  merits. 

Brig.  Gen.  William  P.  Benton  distinguished  himself  for  daring  gal- 
lantry and  good  management  during  the  whole  battle.  Indiana  con- 
tinues to  be  glorified  by  her  sons.  Col.  C.  L.  Harris,  Eleventh  Wiscon- 
sin, though  he  had  been  obliged  to  give  up  the  command  of  his  brigade 
on  account  of  illness,  was  on  the  field  and  shared  the  dangers.  Col. 
William  M.  Stone,  Twenty-second  Iowa,  who  succeeded  to  the  command 
of  the  Second  Brigade,  took  his  place  with  the  extreme  advance  guard 
at  night,  during  the  advance  on  the  enemy ; exposed  himself  freely,  and 
exerted  himself  so  much  that  he  became  completely  exhausted  in  the 
afternoon,  and  was  obliged  to  relinquish  the  command  to  Col.  Samuel 
Merrill,  Twenty-first  Iowa,  for  about  an  hour.  By  his  bravery  and 
admirable  management  of  his  brigade,  he  reflects  more  honor  on  his 
poble  State.  Capt.  George  S.  Marshall,  assistant  adjutant- general,  First 


622 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAr.  XXXVI. 


Brigade,  aud  Capt.  L.  H.  Whittlesey,  actiug  assistant  adjutant-general, 
Second  Brigade,  distinguished  themselves  through  the  whole  battle,  and 
exposed  themselves  freely. 

The  regiuients  aud  batteries  all  showed  great  gallantry,  and  their 
commanders  good  management. 

The  list  is  as  follows  : Eighth  Indiana,  Col.  David  Shuuk  ; Eighteenth 
Indiana,  Col.  II.  IX  Washburn  ; Thirty-third  Illinois,  Col.  C.  E.  Lippin- 
cott;  Ninety-ninth  Illinois,  Col.  G.  W.  K.  Bailey;  First  Indiana  Bat- 
tery, Captain  Klauss;  Eleventh  Wisconsiu,  Lieut.  Col.  C.  A.  Wood; 
Twenty-first  Iowa,  Col.  Samuel  Merrill,  first  in  battle  and  one  of  the  last 
to  leave  the  field  (Colonel  Merrill  received  a contusion  from  a shell) ; 
Twenty-second  Iowa,  MaJ.  J.  B.  Atherton;  Twenty-third  Iowa,  Lieut 
Col.  S.  L.  Glasgow,  with  its  gallant  young  commander,  behaved  ad 
mirably ; First  Iowa  Battery,  Capt.  II.  H.  Griffiths- 

Maj.  Thomas  J.  Brady  commanded  the  skirmishers  of  the  First  Bri- 
gade.* 

Private  Noah  C.  Haynes,  Company  K,  Eighth  Indiana,  made  a recon- 
uaissance  within  the  enemy’s  lines  in  the  night. 

Maj.  L.  II.  Potter,  with  four  companies  of  the  Thirty-third  Illiuois 
Infantry,  engaged  the  enemy  on  the  left  in  the  morning,  holding  him  in 
check  till  the  arrival  of  General  Osterhaus’  division. 

Cajit.  W.  S.  Charles,  Company  H,  Eighteenth  Indiana,  was  the  first 
man  to  jump  on  the  enemy’s  gnus. 

Lieut.  D.  E.  Adams,  adjutant  Eighteenth  Indiana,  passed  twice 
through  the  hottest  of  the  enemy’s  fire  to  conduct  re-enforcements. 

Private  Amos  Nagle,  Company  K,  Eighth  Indiana,  captured  color 
bearer  with  flag  bearing  inscription  of  four  battles. 

Capt,  J.  C.  Dinsmore,  Ninety-ninth  Illiuois  Infantry,  seized  one  of  the 
enemy’s  12  ponnder  howitzers,  turned  it,  and  fired  at  him  his  own  charge. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Dunlap,  Twenty-first  Iowa,  commanded  the  skir- 
mishers, and  Major  Van  Anda,  of  the  same  regiment,  commanded  the 
support  of  the  howitzer  in  advance  of  the  Second  Brigade. 

Company  B,  Twenty-first  lovfa.  Captain  Crooke,  received  the  first  fire 
of  the  rebel  pickets,  aud  returned  it  with  great  coolness. 

Sergt.  B.  Kirst,  Company  E,  Twenty-first  Iowa,  captured  a rebel  or 
derly,  carrying  dispatches. 

Sergt.  AVilliam  B.  Liebert,  First  Iowa  Battery,  vdio  was  mentioned 
fv)r  gallantry  and  good  conduct  at  Pea  Bidge,  was  (with  his  piece)  on 
advance  guard  during  the  night’s  march,  behaved  with  the  greatest 
coolness  and  spirit,  and  was  seriously  wounded. 

To  the  following-named  medical  staff  are  under  the  deepest  obli- 
gation. Barely  have  troops  in  battle  the  good  fortune  to  be  x)rovided 
with  such  an  abundance  of  professional  skill,  administrative  ability, 
patient  care,  and  industry : Surg.  U.  P.  Strong,  Eleventh  Wisconsin, 
medical  director;  Surg.  AVilliaui  II.  White,  Twenty-second  Iowa,  chief 
of  operating  corps ; Surg.  W.  L.  Orr,  Twenty-first  Iowa,  principal  of 
field  liospital;  Surg.  A.  P.  Daughters,  Eighteenth  Indiana,  principal  of 
X)rimary  hospital,  First  Brigade,  and  Assistant  Surgeon  Gordon,  Eight- 
eenth Indiana,  princii)al  of  i)rimary  hospital.  Second  Brigade. 

The  following  named  olficers  w’ere  wounded : Capt.  Judson  B.  Tyler, 
Comi)any  A,  Eighteenth  Indiaim,  severely ; First  Lieut.  Joseph  Ilut 
chinson,  Comi)any  I),  Eighteenth  Indiana,  slightly  ; First  Lieut.  Daniel 
S.  Place,  Company  G,  Eighteenth  Indiana,  severely;  First  Lieut.  J.  W. 
AVay,  Company  (i.  Eighth  Indiaim,  slightly;  Second  Lieut.  Allen  O. 
Neff,  Company  G,  Eighth  Indiana,  slightly ; Lieutenant-Colonel  Dun- 
lap, Twenty-first  lowm,  in  the  foot;  Lieut.  D.  P,  Ballard,  Comxiany  A, 


CIIAI-.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  POET  GIBSON,  MISS. 


623 


Tweuty-tbird  Iowa;  Capt.  AV.  E.  Henry,  Company  E,  Twenty-third 
Iowa ; Lieut.  D.  J.  Davis,  adjutant  Twenty-second  Iowa,  slightly;  Lieut. 
D.  Webb  Henderson,  Twenty-second  Iowa,  severely ; Lieut.  John  Fran- 
cisco, Twenty-second  Iowa,  severely,  and  Lieut.  W.  M.  De  Camp,  Twenty- 
second  Iowa,  severely. 

To  my  staff  too  much  praise  cannot  be  given.  They  exposed  themselves 
freely,  going  into  the  thickest  of  the  fight  whenever  it  was  necessary  and 
displayed  the  greatest  coolness  and  good  judgment.  Their  names  are: 
Muj.  Thomas  J.  Brady,  acting  ordnance  officer  and  commanding  ofiticer 
of  skirmishers  of  the  First  Brigade  (had  his  horse  shot  under  him) ; Capt. 
C.  II.  Dyer,  assistant  adjutant-general ; First  Lieut.  L.  Shields,  Fourth 
Iowa  Infantry,  aide-de-camp;  Second  Lieut.  A.  Bowman,  Ninth  Iowa 
Infantry,  aide-de-camp;  Second  Lieut.  JohnE.  Phelps,  Third  IJ.  S.  Cav- 
alry, acting  aide-de-camp,  and  Second  Lieut.  Charles  Meiuhold,  Third 
U.  S.  Cavalry,  acting  aide-de-camp,  assistant  commissary  of  musters. 

Capt.  E.  McPhail,  Third  Illinois  Cavalry,  was  not  allowed  to  bring  his 
company  on  account  of  lack  of  transportation,  but  volunteered  to  act  as 
my  orderly  during  the  battle,  and  displayed  great  activity  and  fearless- 
ness. 

In  conclusion,  I would  say  you  have  done  valuable  service  to  your 
country ; your  friends  at  home  will  be  proud  of  your  achievements,  and 
I expect  that  when  you  again  meet  traitors  in  arms  you  will  give  as 
good  an  account  then  as  you  did  on  the  field  near  Port  Gibson,  Miss. 

E.  A.  CAEE, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 


Galesbueg,  III.,  July  22,  1SG3. 

Colonel  : I find  in  the  Saint  Louis  Democrat  of  the  10th  instant 
(slip  inclosed)  what  purports  to  be  the  report  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  A. 
McClernand,  commanding  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  of  the  operations  of 
that  coriis  during  the  A^icksburg  campaign. 

Assuming  this  to  be  genuine,  I feel  it  to  be  my  duty,  both  to  the 
Fourteenth  Division  (which  I commanded)  and  to  myself,  to  protest 
against  some  of  the  statements  contained  therein. 

Deferring  to  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  the  report  states  as  follows; 

To  terminate  a sanguinary  contest,  wliicli  Lad  continued  for  several  Lours,  General 
Hovey  ordered  a cLarge,  wLicL  was  most  gallantly  executed,  and  resulted  in  tlie 
capture  of  400  prisoners,  two  stand  of  colors,  two  12-pounder  Lowitzers,  tLree  caissons, 
and  a cousideraLle  quantity  of  ammunition.  A portion  of  General  Carr’s  division 
joined  in  tlie  cLarge.’^ 

This  gives  to  General  Hovey’s  division  the  principal  credit  of  making 
the  charge,  and  taking  the  guns  and  colors.  My  division  had  fought 
for  about  three  hours.  My  First  Brigade,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen. 
W.  P.  Benton,  had  passed  through  obstacles  almost  insurmountable, 
consisting  of  ravines  with  precipitous  ascents  and  descents,  covered 
with  tangled  thickets  and  dense  canebrakes,  had  got  upon  the  left  flaidv 
of  the  enemy,  and  closed  u])  within  short  distance. 

It  was  my  plan  from  the  beginning  of  the  battle  to  get  close  to  the 
enemy’s  guns  in  that  manner  and  cai)tnre  them.  General  Benton  and 
the  whole  brigade  clearly  comprehended  the  movement,.weie  skirmish- 
ing heavily,  and  stood  ready  to  charge  when  the  supports,  which  had 
been  asked  for,  should  come  up.  Just  at  this  time.  General  Hovey’s 
division  came  n]),  and  the  impulsion  caused  by  the  re-enforcement 


Sec  1).  144. 


624 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


overwhelmed  the  enemy.  General  Hovey,  no  doubt,  ordered  his  men 
to  charge,  and  they  did  so  most  gallantly ; but  Benton’s  brigade,  coming 
from  the  timber  to  the  right  of  the  road,  was  first  at  the  guns. 

A member  of  the  Eighteenth  Indiana  (Benton’s  brigade)  took  a flag 
and  carried  it  in  his  bosom  during  the  day.  A member  of  the  Ninety- 
ninth  Illinois  (Benton’s  brigade)  turned  one  of  the  guns,  and  fired  the 
charge  the  enemy  had  left  in  it. 

My  men  were  first’  at  the  guns,  captured  a flag,  and  their  charge  from 
the  flank  prevented  the  enemy  from  carrying  the  guns  off. 

Referring  to  the  battle  of  Black  River  Bridge,  the  report  states  as 
follows:  * 

General  Carr’s  division,  having  entered  the  wood  mentioned,  was  immediately 
formed,  in  obedience  to  my  order ; General  Lawler’s  brigade  on  the  right,  resting  its 
dank  near  Big  Black,  and  General  Benton’s  brigade  on  its  loft  and  to  the  right  of  the 
railroad. 

General  McGlernand  gave  me  no  order  to  form  line,  nor  any  intima- 
tion how  or  where  to  form  it,  and,  as  far  as  I can  recollect,  he  did  not 
give  me  a single  order  of  any  kind  whatever  on  that  battle-field,  until 
after  the  enemy’s  works  were  taken.  I formed  line,  as  a matter  of 
course,  on  coming  in  contact  with  the  enemy,  and  made  the  best  dis- 
position I knew  how. 

General  McGlernand  did  not  come  to  the  front  till  the  commanding 
general  came  up,  which,  as  the  general  may  remember,  was  but  a few 
moments  before  the  charge. 

This  battle  was  fought  and  won  by  my  division,  with  the  following 
assistance : The  Chicago  Mercantile  Battery  and  two  pieces  of  the  First 
Wisconsin,  20-pounders,  actively  engaged,  and  two  regiments  from  Os- 
terhaus’  division,  passively  engaged  as  a support  to  Lawler’s  brigade, 
all  under  my  command.  Csterhaus’  division  was  formed  on  the  left  of 
the  road,  but  did  not  get  within  musket  range. 

I do  not  wish  to  take  from  the  well-earned  credit  of  other  divisions  or 
their  commanders,  but  have  in  my  report  taken  pains  to  mention  them 
with  praise  whenever  I could  find  an  appropriate  opportunity,  but  I 
must  stand  up  for  the  noble  troops  whom  I have  had  the  honor  to  com- 
mand, and  see,  as  ffir  as  I am  able,  that  their  services  are  duly  apiire- 
ciated.  In  spite  of  some  disagreeable  occurrences  in  my  military  inter- 
course with  General  McGlernand,  I have  always  tried  to  show  him  the 
respect  due  to  my  commanding  officer,  and  to  carry  out  his  orders  and 
views  in  good  faith  and  to  the  best  of  my  ability,  as  well  as  to  do  every- 
thing in  my  power  for  the  interest  of  the  service,  and  I cannot  understand 
why  he  should  show  partiality  to  other  commanders  or  troops,  who  cer- 
tainly need  no  borrowed  glory.  .Though  I was  the  senior  brigadier  in 
his  command,  and  second  in  rank  to  himself,  no  one  would  suspect  it 
from  the  order  in  which  divisions  and  generals  are  mentioned  in  various 
l)arts  of  the  report,  and  in  his  recommendations  for  promotion.  General 
McGlernand  places  me  second,  which  is,  I suppose,  intentional.  He  has 
a right,  of  course,  to  make  recommendations  of  whom  and  in  what  order 
he  pleases,  but,  having  performed  my  duty  to  the  best  of  my  ability.  I 
hope  that  the  deciding  authority  will  be  satisfied  with  my  conduct,  and 
not  think  it  best  to  promote  any  one  over  me. 

Very  respectfull.y,  your  obedient  servant, 

• E.  jiV.  GARR, 

Brigadier- General  U.  S.  Volunteers. 

Lieut.  Gol.  John  A.  Rawlins,  A.  A.  G.,  Hdqrs.  Dept  of  the  Tenn^ 

* See  p.  1:^2, 


CnAP.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS.  625 

Ko.  18. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  William  P.  Benton.^  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First 

Brigade. 

Bivouac  in  the  Field, 
AHssissippi^  May  5,  1863. 

biR : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  First  Brigade,  Fourteenth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army 
Corps,  Department  of  the  Tennessee,  in  the  engagement  on  the  night  of 
the  30th  ultimo  and  1st  instant,  near  Fort  Gibson,  Miss. : 

About  midnight  I received  the  order  of  the  general  commanding  the 
division  to  hasten  forward,  the  First  Indiana  Battery,  which  was  imme- 
diately executed  at  a full  run,  arriving  on  the  ground  in  a few  minutes. 
The  battery  was  at  once  placed  in  position,  and  opened  a vigorous  lire, 
which  was  cohtinued,  without  intermission,  till  3 a.  m.  of  the  1 st  instant, 
when,  the  enemy  having  ceased  his  fire,  we  laid  upon  our  arms,  await- 
ing the  tardy  coming  of  daylight.  In  the  mean  time  the  infantrv,  con- 
sisting of  the  Eighth  and  Eighteenth  Indiana  and  the  Thirty-third  and 
Ninety-ninth  Illinois  Eegiments,  had  come  on  the  field,  and  were  also 
sleeping  upon  their  arms,  in  support  of  the  battery.  At  the  earliest 
dawn,  all  were  on  the  alert,  eager  lor  the  coming  fray.  At  this  juncture, 
Major-General  McOlernand  came  dashing  to  the  front,  asking  a thou- 
sand questions  as  to  the  position  and  strength  of  the  enemy,  the  roads, 
and  the  general  topography  of  the  ground,  and,  with  matchless  energy’ 
proceeded  to  verify  every  statement  by  a personal  investigation. 

About  6 a,  m.  I was  ordered  to  jiush  four  companies  down  a road  turn- 
in^g  to  the  left  of  Shafer’s  house,  and  directly  in  the  rear  of  the  one  on 
v liich  the  previous  engagement  occurred.  1 accordingly  sent  the  gal- 
lant Major  Potter,  of  the  Thirty-third  Illinois,  with  four  companies  of 
that  regiment,  with  orders  to  feel  his  way  down  the  road  cautiously, 
and  hold  it  until  relieved  by  General  Osterhaus’  command,  which  had 
been  ordered  up,  and  then,  without  further  orders,  hasten  to  rejoin  his 
regiment.  In  a few  minutes  his  skirmishers  engaged  the  outposts  of 
the  enemy,  who  replied  sharjdy,  both  with  small-arms  and  artillery. 
Owing  to  the  promptness  of  General  Osterhaus,  the  major’s  fight,  though 
spirited,  was  of  short  duration,  and  he  in  turn  promptly  rejoiaed  his 
regimeilt,  and  shared  with  it  the  dangers  and  glory  of  the  fight  on  the 
extreme  right. 

General  Osterhaus  having  thus  secured  our  rear,  by  special  dii>ection 
ot  General  McOlernand,  I ordered  the  Thirty- third  Illinois,  commanded 
by  the  cool  and  fearless  Colonel  Lippincott,  to  move  forward  along  the 
high  ridge  to  the  west,  and  caretully  explore  the  ravines  intervening 
between  Shafer’s  house  and  our  intended  line  of  battle.  At  the  same 
time  Captain  Klauss  was  ordered  to  change  the  position  of  one  section 
ot  his  battery  to  the  high  ground  on  the  left  of  the  road,  and  open  fire 
with  his  whole  battery,  while  the  gallant  l\[ajor  Brady,  of  the  Eighth 
Indiana,  commanding  my  skirmishers,  consisting  of  one  company  jfrom 
each  regiment,  was  pressing  forward  under  orders,  and  the  Eighth  and 
Eighteenth  Indiana  formed  forward  into  line  of  battle.  The  Ninety- 
ninth  Illinois  was  also  ordered  forward  as  the  reserv^e  of  the  brigade. 

In  a very  short  time  the  battle  raged  with  great  fury.  Having  driven 
the  stubborn  enemy  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet  several  hundred  yards 
from  one  ravine  to  another,  and  completely  turned  his  left  flank,  I or- 
dered a change  of  front  forward  on  tenth  company,  which  was  accom- 

40  n R_V0L  XXIV,  FT  I 


626 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 


plislied  most  handsomely,  at  a doiible  quiek,  over  the  most  difficult 
o'rouud.  So  promptly  and  splendidly  was  the  movement  executed, 
under  a galling  fire  ot  shell  and  musketry,  that  I was  at  a loss  which 
most  to  admire,  their  valor  or  the  efficiency  of  their  dnlL 

In  the  mean  time  Old  Eough-and- Ready  ” Ro.  2,  Colonel  Baney,  com 
manding  the  Ninety-ninth  Illinois,  was  ordered  forward,  which  was  ex- 
ecuted with  cheer  on  cheer  at  a double-quick.  Our  new  line  was  formed 
with  the  Eighth  Indiana,  Col,  David  Shunk,  on  the  right;  the  Thirty- 
third  Illinois,  Colonel  Lippincott ; Ninety-ninth  Illinois,  Colonel  Bailey, 
and  the  Eighteenth  Indiana,  Colonel  Washburn,  whose  left  was  resting 
near  the  Magnolia  Church,  and  his  whole  regiment  immediately  in  trout 
of  the  enemy’s  battery.  Now  came  the  ‘‘tug  of  war”  in  good  earnest. 

I soon  found  that  the  odds  were  largely  against  us,  and  that  the  enemy 
were  making  the  most  desperate  efforts  to  turn  our  left  flank,  thus  cut- 
tin  o-  us  off  from  our  support.  I immediately  dispatched  Captain  Mar- 
shall for  re-enforcements,  and  did  all  in  my  power  to  stimulate  the  men 
to  heroic  action,  and  right  nobly  did  they  respond. 

For  at  least  two  hours,  single-handed,  the  First  Brigade  fought  three 
brigades  of  the  enemy,  giving  him  volley  for  volley  Avitli  intei;est.  Three 
times  did  he  form  to  charge  us,  and  as  often  was  he  hurled  back,  dis- 
comfited by  the  well-directed  aim  of  the  brave  lads  of  Illinois  and  Indi- 
an a.  We  had  already  driven  the  enemy  over  hill-top  and  through  ravine 
for  a full  quarter  of  a mile,  never  yielding  one  inch  ourselves.  At  length 
the  anxiously  looked  for  succor  came.  We  were  all,  officers  and  men, 
glad  to  know  that  it  was  composed  of  a part  of  the  veteran  tioops  or 
the  gallant  General  A.  P.  Ilovey’s  division,  and  the  sequel  proved  that 
we  were  not  mistaken  in  our  estimate  of  their  courage.  No  sooner  had 
they  come  upon  the  ground — before  I had  fully  completed  my  arrange- 
ments— than  some  one,  unknown  to  me,  gave  the  orden  “charge, 
which  was  executed  with  the  Avildest  enthusiasm,  the  men  of  iny  brigade 
vying  Avith  their  friends  of  Ilovey’s  division  AA’ho  should  first  reach  the 
0110113  V» 

The  result  of  this  splendid  charge  was  the  complete  rout  of  the  enemy, 
the  capture  of  the  two  12-pounder  howitzers,  and  at  least  one  flag,  llns 
was  not  the  work  exclusiA^ely  of  Generals  Carrs  or  IIoA^ey  s diAusions. 
It  was  the  joint  Avork  of  both,  and,  in  my  humble  judgment,  heiein  is 
"lorA^  enough  and  to  spare  for  both  divisions.  Our  whole  command  aie 
at  a^loss  for  words  to  express  their  admiration  for  the  noble  and  p,dant 
bearing  of  the  officers  and  men  of  General  HoA^ey’s  dnision.  io  borrow 
the  expression  of  another  ay hen  speaking  of  General  Ilovny , ineie  is 
no  discount  on  his  pluck,”  wliile  the  ])raises  of  General  McGinnis  am 
Colonel  Slack,  Colonel  Cameron,  of  the  Thirty-fourth  Indiana,  Colonel 
Macauley,  of  the  Eleventh  Indiana,  and,  in  a word,  all  of  them,  were 

upon  the  tongues  of  all.  ^ if 

At  the  same  time  it  is  due  to  the  truth  of  history  to  state  that  the  Eiglit- 
eenth  Indiana,  whose  mortality  list  is  larger  than  any  other  regimen 
eno-aged,  and  the  Ninety-ninth  Illinois,  were  in  the  charge;  that  CapLaiii 
CliarTes,  of  Company  II,  of  the  former,  was  the  first  to  .pimp  upon  one 
of  the  cannon  and  claim  it  as  Ids  trophy.  Amos  Nagle,  private,  of  Com 
Tiaiiy  K,  also  captured  the  color-bearer  ami  the  colors  of  the  Infceentli 
Arkansas,  inscribed  with  the  battle-fields  of  Oak  TIill,Elkhorn,  Corinth, 

and  Hatchie  Bridge.  . , , ^ t .f 

All  this  time,  from  first  to  last,  the  indefatigable  Imisl  Imliana  I>at 
terv  in  charge  of  the  bra  ve  Klauss,  was  iiouring  shot  and  shed  into  the 
ene^ny  firing,  in  all,  1,050  rounds  at  ])oint-b]ank  range.  Jhe  entiie 
line  of  my  Inagade  Avas  now  advanced  tinough  tlie  woods,  and,  moAung 


Cjiai'.  XXXVI.l 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


G27 


by  the  right  11a Ilk,  passed  up  the  road  iu  quick  ]>ursuit  of  the  lleeiug 
rebels.  Arriving  iii  front  of  the  second  position  taken  by  tlie  rebels 
we  were  halted  to  rest. 

During  tlie  afternoon,  at  tJie  request  of  General  McGinnis,  I ordered 
the  Eighth  Indiana  to  the  right  of  our  new  line,  to  support  the  Twenty- 
Wisconsin,  which  was  being  hotly  pressed  with  great  slaughter. 
\\ell  did  the  old  Eighth  sustain  its  high  reputation  under  the  lead  of 
the  veteran  Colonel  Shunk.  Forming  under  a heavy  fire,  withiii  75 
yards  of  the  enemy,  they  at  once  charged,  and  drove  the  enemy  from 
the  brow  of  the  hill,  completely  turning  the  tables  on  him,  and  punish- 
ing him  severely.  Indeed,  just  as  the  Eighth  had  exhausted  their  am- 
munition, they  drove  the  enemy  from  that  part  of  the  field.  In  the 
mep  time  the  remainder  were  ordered  forward  in  support  of  some  bat- 
teries on  the  hill.  Captain  Klauss,  having  had  two  pieces  disabled  ami 
exhausted  his  ammunition,  had  been  ordered  to  the  rear.  Thus  we  re- 
inained.till  late  in  the  afternoon,  when  an  order  was  received  to  ^^-o  to 
the  support  of  General  Osterhaus,  on  the  extreme  left. 

While  in  the  prompt  execution  of  this  order,  I encountered  one  from 
General  Grant,  to  remain  where  I was  for  the  iiresent.  General  Osfer- 
haus  having  driven  the  rebels.  Accordinglj^  the  men  had  just  lighted 
then  camp-fiies  to  prepare  some  supper,  when  still  another  order  cairns 
sending  us  back  on  the  field  of  battle,  where  we  slept  on  our  arms  dur- 
ing the  night. 

A\  hen  the  facts  are  stated,  that  after  two  Aveeks  dragging  through  the 
mud  and  crossing  bayous  in  old  scows  and  skiffs,  on  the  morninr»-  of  tlie 
50th  ultimo,  at  3 o’clock,  we  arose  from  a sleep  Avhich  had  been  dis- 
ttrn^ed  by  the  bursting  of  shells  from  Grand  Gulf,  which  vainly  endeav- 
ored to  sink  our  trpsports  as  they  detiantly  ran  the  blockade  ; and  in 
the  afternoon,  landing  below  on  the*  Mississippi  shore,  the  First  Brigade 
formed  at  once  and  pushed  4 miles  back  to  gain  and  hold  the  hills,  while 
the  rest  of  the  troops  stopped  to  draw  and  distribute  their  rations.  We 
had  left  a detail  who  carried  ours  upon  their  backs  4 miles  to  us.  To 
see  a stout-hearted  fellow  trudging  along  through  the  broiling  sun  Avith 
a box  of  crackers  on  his  shoulders,  Aveighing  100  pounds,  claimed  at 
once  your  admiration  and  sympathy. 

Not  Avaiting  for  all  of  our  rations  to  come  up,  Ave  again  took  up  our 
hue  of  march  till  about  midnight,  Avhen  the  enemv  oiiened  on  us  We 
fought  him  till  3 a.  m. 

At  0 o’clock  the  next  morning  we  Avent  at  him  again  and  fought  him 
all  day  long,  and  finally  Avhipped  him  most  handsomely. 

During  all  this  time  no  one  faltered,  nor  did  I hear  one  word  of  com- 
plaint, under  such  circumstances,  to  obey  the  order  literally.  To  men- 
tion all  Avho  distinguished  themselves,  I should  be  compelled  to  attach 
and  make  a part  of  this  report,  already  too  long,  the  muster-rolls  of  mv 
entire  brigade. 


iCnuly,  wlio  comiiianded  tlio  .skiritiislicrs,  eacli  .aiur  all  of  wlioni  arc 
prave  aiul  coiiipeteiit.  I am  deeply  indebted  to  my  staff  olfleers  for  tlieir 
."ite  ligeiit  bravery  and  promptness  in  bearing  my  orders  to  all  parts 
at  tlie  field  ; to  Oapt.  George  S.  Marsliall,  assistant  adjntant-general ; 
aeut.  Joseph  P.^Wiggins,  adjutant  Eighth  Indiana  and  acting  aide-de- 
-inip;  Lieut.  JiGvse  E.  ScoU,  Conijiany  0,  Kiglith  Indiana,  acting  quar- 
emaster,  and  Lieut.  William  B.  Irwin,  Comiiany  A,  Eighth  Indiana, 
ic  ing  commissary,  all  of  whom  Avere  under  lire  from  the  beginning  to 


628 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Uh,v!’.  XXXVI. 


the  end.  I am  also  indebted  to  the  gallant  Lieutenant  Hill,  Company 
B,  Eighth  Indiana,  for  acting  as  aide  temporarily. 

Our  list  of  killed  and  wounded  is  attached,  and  made  a part  of  this 
report.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient 
servant, 

WM.  P.  BENTON, 

Brig.  Gen..,  Comdg.  First  Brig..,  Fourteenth  Die..,  Thirteenth  A.  C. 

Capt.  0.  H.  Dyer, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Fourteenth  Division. 


No.  19. 

Rej)ort  of  Col.  William  M.  Stone,  Twenty-second  Iowa  Infantry,  com- 
manding Second  Brigade. 

Camp  near  Port  Gibson,  May  2,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  part  taken  by  the  Second  Bri- 
gade of  the  Fourteenth  Division— consisting  of  the  Eleventh  Wiscon- 
sin, commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Moore  [Wood*?];  the  Twenty- 
first  Iowa,  commanded  by  Colonel  Merrill;  the  Twenty-second  Iowa, 
commanded  by  Major  Atherton;  the  Twefity-third  Iowa,  commanded  by 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Glasgow,  and  the  First  Iowa  Battery,  commanded 
by  Captain  Griffiths— in  the  bloody  engagement  of  yesterday,  on  An- 
derson’s Hill. 

x\bout  10  o’clock  on  the  night  of  the  30th  ultimo,  when  the  Four- 
teenth Division  was  on  its  march  from  Bruinsburg  to  Port  Gibson,  the 
Second  Brigade  being  in  advance,  I was  called  u])on  to  take  command 
of  it,  and  went  immediately  to  the  front.  My  instructions  were  to 
reach  Port  Gibson  at  as  early  an  hour  as  possible,  and  occupy  the  sev- 
eral bridges  across  Bayou  Pierre  at  that  place.  Four  companies  of  the 
Twenty-first  Iowa  and  one  howitzer  from  Captain  Griffiths’  battery 
were  sent  forward  as  an  advance  guard.  Two  of  these  companies, 
under  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dunlap,  a brave  and  skilltid 
officer,  were  deployed  as  skirmishers,  and  the  other  two,  under  cc^- 
mand  of  Major  Yan  Anda,  to  whom  I am  under  great  obligations  for 
his  coolness  and  promptitude,  were  left  back  as  a support  to  the  how- 
itzer; the  balance  of  the  brigade,  the  Twenty-first  Iowa  leading,  moved 
in  column  in  supporting  distance  behind. 

The  road  over  which  we  marched  passed  through  a country  much 
broken  by  gorges  and  ravines,  and  thickly  covered  with  tall  timber, 
underbrush,  and  cane,  so  peculiar  to  the  Southern  country.  While 
moving  forward  in  this  order,  and  about  three-quarters  of  a mile  from 
Magnolia  Church,  our  skirmishers  were  fired  upon  by  a heavy  picket 
force  of  the  enemy,  posted  in  an  angle  of  the  road.  I immediately 
formed  the  advance  companies  in  line  on  the  right  and  left  of  the  road, 
and  ordered  Colonel  Merrill  forward  with  the  other  companies  of  his 
regiment.  I then  moved  them  slowly  forward,  covered  by  skirmishers, 
until  I became  satisfied  that  we  had  not  yet  reached  the  immediate  vi- 
cinity of  the  enemy’s  main  force.  We  then  moved  forward  in  column 
in  the  previous  order,  and  as  our  skirmishers  reached  the  head  of  the 
lane  in  front  of  Magnolia  Church  they  received  a tremendous  volley  ot 
musketry  from  the  enemy,  strongly  posted  on  tlie  right  and  left  of  the 


Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  584. 


CiTAP.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


629 


church.  I again  formed  the  advance  companies  in  line,  and  sent  an 
order  back  for  the  entire  brigade  to  move  forward  into  line. 

The  advance  howitzer  was  placed  in  position  in  the  lane,  but  while 
these  dispositions  were  being  made,  the  enemy  opened  a battery  upon 
us  at  short  range,  throwing  their  shell  all  around  us.  Finding  myself 
in  the  face  of  the  enemy,  in  a position  carefully  selected,  with  a perfect 
knowledge  of  the  ground,  1 concluded  at  once  that  we  had  reached  the 
place  where  the  battle  of  the  night  was  to  be  fought.  The  infantry 
were  formed  in  line,  and  the  batteries  ordered  in  position  on  the  ridg'e 
in  rear  of  our  advance.  In  the  mean  time,  the  howitzer  in  the  lane, 
commanded  by  Sergt.  William  E.  Leibert,  was  rei)lying  to  the  rebel  bat- 
tery with  great  spirit  and  apparent  accuracy.  Soon  our  entire  battery 
opened  upon  the  enemy,  in  conjunction  with  Captain  Klauss’  First  In- 
diana, and  continued  to  return  the  enemy^s  fire  with  great  rapidity 
until  2 o’clock  in  the  morning,  when  the  enemy’s  batteries  were  driven 
from  the  field  and  silenced,  and  our  men  lay  down  upon  their  arms  to 
arwait  the  coming  dawn,  when  they  were  to  meet  the  rebel  infantry  face 
to  face  in  bloody  combat. 

This  artillery  duel  was  one  loug  to  be  remembered  by  those  who 
witnessed  it.  The  fire  of  the  rebel  batteries,  on  account  of  their  knowl- 
edge of  the  ground,  was  quite  accurate,  and  many  of  our  men  and  horses 
were  disabled  by  them.  The  extreme  darkness,  the  screaming  and 
bursting  of  shells,  and  the  rattle  of  grape  through  fences  and  timber, 
conspired  to  render  the  scene  presented  by  this  ^Midnight  battle  one  of 
the  most  terrific  grandeur. 

Soon  after  sunrise  the  battle  was  renewed  by  the  enemy,  who  held 
their  position  during  the  night.  Their  batteries  opened  upon  us  with 
great  vigor,  and  their  infantry  moved  forward  to  the  attack.  My  com- 
mand was  promptly  in  line,  and  Captain  Griffiths  vigorously  returned 
their  fire  with  his  admirable  baftery.  Other  brigades  and  batteries 
were  soon  engaged  on  our  right  and  left,  and  the’two  contending  forces 
became  hotly  engaged.  Our  ])osition  being  in  the  center  of  our  line,  I 
was  ordered  by  General  Carr  to  hold  my  infantry  in  readiness  to  charge 
the  enemy’s  lines  when  the  decisive  moment  should  arrive,  though  we 
were  all  the  time  in  range  of  the  rebel  artillery  and  musketry. 

About  10  o’clock  it  became  evident  that  the  enemy  were  massing  their 
forces  upon  our  immediate  front,  as  their  musketry  was  increasing  in 
volume  and  rapidly  advancing  toward  us.  At  this  juncture  I moved 
iny  brigade  forward  in  double  lines  of  battalions,  for  the  purpose  of 
charging  upon  the  advancing  columns  of  the  enemy.  We  were  com- 
pelletl  to  cross  a deep  hollow,  thickly  covered  on  both  slopes  with  under- 
brush and  cane,  but  my  men  moved  forward  with  the  spirit  and  steadi- 
ness of  veteran  troops,  and  with  unbroken  lines.  When  the  thicket  was 
passed,  and  as  we  advanced  into  the  open  field  close  to  the  enemy’s  lines, 
we  opened  onr  fire  upon  them  with  such  rapidity  and  precision  that, 
unable  to  resist  it,  they  soon  broke  and  retreated  in  utter  confusion, 
lius  ended  the  battle  of  the  morning.  Our  victory  was  complete. 

I he  dead  and  w^ounded  of  the  enemy  lay  thickly  scattered  over  the 
ground,  while  hheir  jirisoners  and  small-arms  that  fell  into  our  hands 
were  counted  by  tlie  hundreds.  We  remained  but  a few  minutes  on  the 
'Victorious  field.  I moved  at  once  in  ])ursuit  of  the  retreating  foe,  and 
when  about  1 mile  from  the  late  field  my  advance  regiment,  the  Eleventh 
VYisconsin,  covered  by  two  companies  of  skirmishers  from  the  Twenty- 
third  Iowa,  was  fired  upon  from  the  timber.  I saw  at  once  that  the 
enemy  had  been  strongly  re-enforced  and  were  determined  to  make  an- 
other stand.  Their  position  was  well  chosen,  on  a high  hill  covered  with 


030  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [C"*''-  NXXVt 

timber,  aiul  commaudiiig  the  entire  .ground  over  wliicli  we  were  com- 

pell ed  to  approach.  _ . • 

]My  reaimeuts  were  soon  in  line,  with  Captain  Grilhths  batteiy  in 
position,  which  soon  opened  with  its  usual  spirit  upon  the  enemy. 
Simultaneouslv  with  this  the  rebel  batteries  also  opened  with  accurate 
rano-e,  and  for  about  half  an  hour  we  sustained  alone  the  coucentrated 
lire  of  their  infantry  and  artillery.  Finally  other  brigades  and  batteries 
became  engaged,  and  the  battle  raged  with  terrific  lury  along  our  lines. 
My  command,  howeyer,  remained  in  front  during  the  entire  engagement, 
and  all  the  time  under  the  enemy’s  fire.  They  retired  only  alter  the 
battle  had  ceased  and  the  enemy  had  again  retreated  Irom  the  held. 

During  these  fiye  hours’  hard  fighting  1 am  proud  to  say  that  the 
officers  and  men  of  this  brigade  acted  with  the  utmost  coolness,  and 
with  a determined  courage  that  would  liaye  done  honor  to  yeteran 
troops.  They  promptly  obeyed  eyery  command,  and  displayed  a degree 
of  heroism  which  nothing  but  the  influence  of  exalted  patriotism  could 

^'\o ^Colonel  Merrill,  of  the  Twenty-first  Iowa;  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Glasgow,  of  the  Twenty -third  Iowa;  Lieutenant-Colonel  IVIoore,  ood 
of  the  Eleyenth  Wisconsin,  and  Major  Atherton,  of  the  Twenty-second 
Iowa  Eegiments,  I am  under  great  obligations  for  the  coolness  and 
iiromptitude  with  which  they  obeyed  my  orders  in  the  yanous  mo\e- 
inents  on  the  field.  Their  associate  officers,  too,  are  entitled  to  great 
credit,  as  all  of  them,  so  far  as  I haye  been  able  to  learn,  pertormed 

their  duties  nobly.  , t ..ii 

To  the  dauntless  and  heroic  men  of  the  ranks  and  the  line  othcers  all 
honor  is  due.  Neyer  did  braye  men  endure  more  with  less  munnuring 
than  they  during  those  thirty  consecutiye  hours  of  hard  marching  and 
seyere  fighting;  but  when  the  history  of  this  war  is  fully  written,  the> 
will  be  numbered  among  the  bravest  defenders  of  the  republic. 

I desire  to  make  particular  mention  of  Capt.  L.  H.  Whittlesey,  of  the 
Eleyenth  Wisconsin,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  for  his  great  en- 
ergy and  activity  throughout  the  battle.  He  was  always  at  the  riglit 
place  at  the  right  time,  and  almost  constantly  on  the  hottest  portmn  ot 
the  field.  No  braver  man  or  truer  soldier  ever  entered  the  field  ot  bat- 
tle, and  I should  be  much  pleased  to  see  him  occupy  a position  where 
his  talents  and  bravery  could  be  more  successtully  emifloyed. 

Lieutenants  Jackson,  of  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin,  and  A\  aterbur^ , oi 
the  Twenty-third  Iowa,  acting  aides,  rendered  me  essential  service,  and 
they  both  displayed  great  coolness  and  bravery  in  conveying  ok  ers 
under  the  hottest  of  the  fire. 

I must  also  avail  myself  of  this  op])ortunity  to  express  niy  admiration 
of  the  gentlemanly  deportment,  the  coolness,  and  conspicuous  l)ra\  eo 
of  the  brigadier- general  commanding  the  division  during  all 
Inciting.  "llis  presence  on  the  field  during  the  heaviest  of  the  battle, 
and  the  clearness  and  self-possession  with  which  his  orders  were  given, 
contributed  much  to  enforce  confidence  among  all  who  were  under  in. 

command.  , ^ 

With  me  there  is  a higher  significance  attached  to  the  victor;^ 
terday  than  the  mere  defeat  and  ront  of  the  enemy.  M e lought  tne 
yeteran  troops  of  the  Confederacy,  who  gloried  in  the  laurels  v on  upo 
the  cmrlier  fields  of  the  war.  They  were  gatliered  from  several  States, 
and  were  led  by  a general  who  fought  us  at  the  meniorab.e  battle 
Shiloh  over  one  year  ago.  We  met  them  again  u])on  more  equal  terniy 
and  in  a contest  *as  fierce  as  Sliiloii,  considering  the  numbers  : 

[land  to  hand  we  fought  them,  and  demonstrated  the  fact  beyond  an 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  POET  GIBSON,  MISS.  631 

dispute  tluit  the  fiery  valor  of  the  Soutli  is  uo  match  for  the  cool  and 
stubborn  courage  of  the  Western  soldier. 

Ojieyear  ago  I passed  through  the  State  of  Mississippi  a prisoner  of 
war,  on  my  way  to  a Southern  XBison.  Now  1 am  marching  with  a vic- 
torious army,  with  n^v  former  captors  fleeing  before  us,  seeking  shelter 
beyond  the  reach  of  our  heroic  columns.  Such  is  the  change  that  has 
come  over  the  cherished  plans  and  bright  visions  of  the  men  who  are 
endeavoring  to  destroy  the  nationality  of  our  people. 

Fired  by  the  inspiration  of  victory,  the  brave  men  of  this  brigade  de- 
sire to  be  led  forward  to  complete  the  work  so  well  begun.  “Onward’^ 
is  their  watchword,  until  Vicksburg  shall  fall  and  the  Stars  and  Stripes 
shall  wave  in  triumph  over  every  square  acre  of  ground  in  this  rebel- 
lious State. 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  M.  STONE, 

Colonel^  Commanding  Second  Brigade. 

Capt.  0.  H.  Dyer, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


No.  20. 

Report  of  Col.  Samuel  Merrill,  Twenty-first  Iowa  Infantry. 

[May  — ,]  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  the  lale  battle  of  Port 
Gibson,  April  30  and  May  1,  we  lost  in  wounded  16  men,  including 
5 non-commissioned  officers.  The  officers  and  men,  with  two  or  three 
exceptions,  behaved  with  singular  courage  and  bravery. 

It  is  known  to  you  that  we  had  the  honor  of  being  the  leading  col- 
umn of  this  great  army,  and  of  drawing  the  first  fire  at  Port  Gibson. 
At  the  widow  Daniels’  plantation,  some  9 miles  from  Port  Gibson,  we 
were  ordered  by  General  Carr  to  take  the  advance.  1 ordered  Company 
A,  commanded  by  Capt.  A.  P.  Jones,  and  Company  B,  commanded  by 
Capt.  William  D.  Crooke,  as  advance  skirmishers,  commanded  by  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Dunlap,  supported  by  Companies  D and  P,  commanded 
by  Major  Van  Anda  ; next  was  a 12-pounder  field  piece  from  that  excel- 
lent battery,  the  First  Iowa;  all  supported  by  the  balance  of  my  com- 
mand. I am  happy  to  report  that,  in  the  skirmishing  of  those  compa- 
nies. singular  fortitude  and  bravery  were  exhibited  during  that  long 
and  tedious  night’s  march,  and  esiiecially  are  Companj"  B and  Captain 
Crooke  deserving  of  mention  as  having  received  the  first  fire  of  the 
pickets  and  returning  it  with  great  coolness.  Our  advance  was  fired 
upon  by  tlie  rebel  ])icket  about  1 mile  from  the  town  of  Port  Gibson. 
Our  column  was  rapidly  advanced,  and  soon  received  the  raking  fire  of 
tlie  eiiemy’s  batteries,  which  were  seven  in  number;  As  soon  as  the 
battery  of  the  First  Iowa  could  be  brought  to  bear.  Company  E,  com- 
manded by  Captain  Swivel,  was  ordered  to  its  supi^ort.  They  have  re- 
ceived the  commendation  of  all  for  their  faithfulness.  Sergt.  B.  Kirst, 
of  this  company,  captured  a rebel  orderly  while  carrying  dispatches. 
General  Carr  next  ordered  a company  to  stand  as  picket  guard.  Com- 
])any  G,  commanded  by  Captain  Benton,  performed  this  duty  till  morn- 
ing. Next  came  an  order  for  two  skirmishing  companies  to  deploy  in 
front  of  the  enemy,  and,  in  fact,  between  the  enemy  and  our  own  artil- 
lery firing.  I called  for  volunteers  from  my  four  remaining  conqianies. 


G32 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CnAi*.  XXXVI. 


Capt.  J.  M.  Harrison,  of  Comi)aiiy  C,  being  the  only  eoininissioned  offi- 
cer of  bis  company,  altboiigli  advanced  in  years  and  in  feeble  health, 
at  once  volunteered  to  take  the  advance,  and,  with  his  company  and 
Company  K,  commanded  by  Captain  Voorhees,  performed  this  dan- 
gerous duty  faithfully. 

Daring  the  severe  and  continued  firing  of  May  1,  so  generally  and 
heartily  were  my  orders  obeyed  by  officers  and  men  that  1 am  at  a loss 
to  give  particulars.  Captains  Boardman  and  Watson  have  my  warmest 
thanks.  They  are  cool  and  brave  officers.  I can  say  the  same  of  all 
the  other  officers  whose  names  have  been  mentioned.  Many  incidents 
of  courage  and  bravery  could  be  spoken  of,  but  it  would  render  this 
report  entirely  too  long. 

It  is  but  just  to  say  that  the  Twenty-first  remained  for  .two  hours  in 
the  rear  of  the  Eighty-first  Ohio,  to  support  that  regiment  in  making  a 
charge  on  the  enemy^s  batteries,  but,  for  some  reason,  I regret  to  say, 
abandoned. 

My  regiment  remained  on  the  field  after  all  had  retired,  and  it  was 
nearly  8 o’clock  before  we  camped  for  the  night,  thus  showing  that  Ave 
Avere  first  in  battle  and  last  to  leave  the  field. 

I am  under  many*obligations  to  my  field  officers  and  staff  for  their 
faithfulness  and  aid’. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Dunlap  received  a wound  in  the  foot.  My  own 
horse  was  shot  in  several  places,  and  a portion  of  my  saddle  shot  off. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

SAMUEL  MERRILL, 

Colonel  Twenty-first  Reqiment  Totca  Infantry. 

Col.  W.  M.  Stone, 

Tiventy-second  loiva,  Commmiding  Brigade. 


No.  21. 

Report  of  Maj.  Joseph  B.  Atherton^  Twenty -second  Iowa  Infantry. 

Camp  neap  Rocky  Springs,  Miss., 

May  7,  1863. 

Sir  : I herewith  report  to  you  the  action  of  the  Twenty-second  Iowa 
in  the  battle  before  Port  Gibson  on  the  1st  instant. 

You  having  been  called  upon  to  command  the  Second  Brigade,  to 
which  we  are  attached,  the  command  of  the  regiment  deA^oh^ed  upon 
me. 

On  the  eA^ening  of  the  30th  ultimo,  on  our  march  toward  Port  Gib- 
son, after  our  advance  guard  became  engaged  with  the  enemy,  I re- 
ceiA’-ed  an  order  from  you  to  hurry  my  regiment  forward  and  form  it  in 
line  on  the  left,  our  artillery  then  hotly  engaged  Avith  the  rebel  batter- 
ies. This  order  Avas  promptly  obeyed,  and  the  men  came  nj)  quickly 
and  in  good  order,  forming  at  the  point  designated.  We  Avere  then 
under  the  enemy’s  fire,  yet  my  men  manifested  great  coolness  and  self- 
possession.  We  remained  in  line  for  tAvo  hours,  in  support  of  the  bat- 
teries, until  the  battle  ceased  for  the  night,  and  Ave  laid  down  upon  our 
arms,  but  not  to  sleep,  as  we  were  in  momentary  expectation  of  a re- 
iiewal  of  the  combat. 

Soon  after  sunrise  Ave  Avere  again  in  line,  and  under  the  enemy’s  fire 
in  su])port  of  our  batteries  until  near  10  o’clock,  Avheu  Ave  were  led  for- 
ward to  charge  on  the  rebel  lines.  Tins  moAKunent  Avas  executed  with 


Chap.  XXX V^I.] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


G33 


alacrity  by  luy  regiment;  not  a man  faltered  or  fell  back.  Our  lire  was 
deli  veered  upon  the  enemy  witb  great  deliberation  and  accuracy,  and 
when  their  lines  were  broken  and  they  driven  in  rout  from  the  field  we 
were  the  first  to  occupy  the  ground. 

In  the  long  and  hotly-contested  fight  of  the  afternoon  my  regiment 
was  all  the  time  in  face  of  the  enemy  and  under  his  severest  fire..  Three 
several  times  we  were  ordered  against  the  rebel  infantry  and  under  the 
range  of  his  batteries.  Each  time  we  drove  them  from  the  field.  Late 
in  the  afternoon,  by  your  order,  we  charged  np  the  hill,  in  conjunction 
with  the  Twenty-first  Iowa  and  on  the  left  of  General  Burbridge/s  bri- 
gade, against  the  enemy’s  lines,  there  strongly  posted  in  almost  impen- 
etrable timber  and  underbrush.  Though  unable,  from  the  character  of 
the  ground  and  the  raking  fire  of  the  enemy’s  batteries,  to  reach  the  ex- 
treme summit  of  the  hill,  we  reached  the  point  to  which  I was  ordered 
and  remained  there,  receiving  and  returning  the  enemy’s  fire,  until  about 
sundown,  when,  by  your  order,  we  returned  to  our  former  position,  and 
remained  upon  the  field  until  the  firing  had  entirely  ceased  and  quiet 
reigned  along  our  whole  line. 

Throughout  these  series  of  engagements  the  officers  and  men  of  my 
regiment  behaved  with  great  coolness  and  gallantly.  I found  them 
always  ready  and  eager  to  obey  the  order  to  move  on  the  enemy. 

So  well  did  the  entire  command  acquit  themselves  that  I cannot,  with- 
out seeming  invidious,  enter  into  particulars.  It  is  sufficient  to  say  that 
they  acted  nobly,  and  well  sustained  the  honors  already  so  well  earned 
by  Iowa  soldiers. 

Great  care  was  taken  to  shelter  our  men  from  the  enemy’s  fire,  which 
the  unevenness  of  the  ground  enabled  ns  to  do  Avith  comparative  success; 
yet  the  loss  in  this  regiment  being  greater,  with  but  one  exception,  than 
any  other  regiment  in  the  brigade,  shows  clearly  where  we  were  in  this 
long  and  hotly  contested  engagement,  and  that  my  men  did  not  shrink 
from  their  duty. 

Too  much  praise  cannot  be  awarded  to  our  surgeons,  White  and  Pea- 
body. Their  department  was  conducted  with  skill  and  ability ; their 
attention  to  the  wounded  was  truly  commendable,  and  will  doubtless 
be  long  remembered  by  these  unfortunates. 

Very  respectfully. 


Capt.  L.  H.  Whittlesey. 


J.  B.  ATHEETOX, 
Major^  Commanding  Regiment. 


Eo.  22. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  James  B.  McPherson^  TJ.  S.  Army.,  commanding 
Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  including  operations  Jipril  IS-ALay  19. 

Headquarters  Seventeenth  Army  Corps, 

In  rear  of  Viclcshurg,  Miss.,  May  26,  1863. 
Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  opera- 
tions of  the  Seventeentli  Army  Corps  from  the  time  of  leaving  Milliken’s 
Bend,  La.,  until  our  arrival  before  tlie  land  defenses  of  Vicksburg : 

On  my  arrival  at  Milliken’s  Bend  from  Lalce  Providence  with  a i)or- 
tion  of  my  command  (the  Seventh  Division),  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 
Major-General  MciClernand  commanding,  had  moved  toward  New  Car- 
thage^ via  Eiclimond  and  Smith’s  plantation.  I was  ordered  to  move 


634 


[Chap.  XXXVT. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


forward  aud  take  tlie  ])laee  of  General  McClernand’s  troops  as  fast  as 
they  advanced.  In  ])ursLiance  ot  tlvis  object,  tlie  Second  Brigade,  Seventli 
Division,  was  moved  to  Bicliinond  on  April  18,  and  tlie  First  on  the  23d. 

On  April  24,  orders  were  received  from  department  lieadipiarters  to 
march  my  command  to  FTew  Carthage. 

Colonel  Boomer’s  brigade,  Seventh  Division,  was  ordered  to  march 
at  5 a.  m.  on  the  25th,  to  be  followed  by  the  Third  Division,  Major-Gen- 
eral Logan  commanding,  at  G a.  m.  same  day,  and  by  the  Sixth  Division, 
Brigadier-General  McArthur  commanding,  at  G a.  m.  the  day  following. 

Orders  were  at  the  same  time  sent  to  the  First  and  Second  Brigades 
at  Kichmond  to  move  toward  Smith’s  plantation,  3 miles  from  New  Car- 
thage, on  the  morning  of  the  25th. 

These  orders  were  promptly  executed  by  officers  and  men,  and  the 
whole  command  was  in  motion  at  the  appointed  times. 

The  Third  Division  bivouacked  on  the  road  near  Smith’s  plantation, 
and  the  Seventh  Division  at  a plantation  a short  distance  in  the  rear, 
on  the  evening  of  the  2Gth. 

At  Smith’s  plantation  (headquarters  of  the  department),  orders  were 
received  for  the  Third  and  Seventh  Divisions  to  march  to  Perkins’ plan- 
tation, on  the  Mississippi  Diver,  some  8 miles  below  New  Carthage,  and 
distant  from  Smith’s  plantation,  by  the  route  we  were  compelled  to  take, 
some  15  miles.  The  Sixth  Division  was  left  to  guard  the  lines  of  com- 
munication from  Milliken’s  Bend  to -Perkins’  plantation,  43  miles. 

Heavy  rains  had  rendered  the  roads  across  the  rich  alluvial  bottoms 
on  the  Louisianai  side  almost  impassable,  and  it  was  only  by  the  most 
strenuous  exertions  on  the  part  of  the  men,  aud  by  doubling  teams,  that 
the  artillery  aud  trains  could  be  got  along.  This  was,  however,  success 
fully  accomplished,  and  the  Third  Division  reached  Perkins’  xdantation 
at  1)  p.  m.  on  the  28th  instant. 

At  this  point  orders  were  received  to  march  to  Hard  Times  Landing,, 
nearly  opposite  and  a short  distance  above  Grand  Gulf.  At  12  o’clock 
the  same  night  the  division  started  on  the  march,  via  Lake  Saint  Joseph, 
and  reached  Hard  Times  Landing  at  4 p.  in.  of  the  20th,  bivouacked  for 
the  night,  and  at  5 a.  m.  of  the  30th  started  for  the  point  of  embarkation 
below  Grand  Gulf,  and  crossed  over  to  Brninsburg,  just  below  the  mouth 
of  Bayou  Pierre,  the  First  and  Third  Brigades,  Third  Division,  Brig. 
Gens.’^John  E.  Smith  and  John  D.  Stevenson  commanding,  and  the 
Eighth  Michigan  Battery,  Captain  De  Golyer  commanding,  immedi- 
ately after  General  McClerntind’s  command,  followed  as  rapidly  as  river 
trans])ortation  would  admit,  by  the  Second  Brigade,  Brigadier-General 
Dennis  commanding,  the  remainder  of  the  artillery,  ammunition  train, 
and  the  Seventh  Division. 

A most  unfortunate  collision  between  the  steamboats  Horizon  and 
Moderator,  about  3 a.  m.  May  1,  between  the  place  of  embarkation  and 
Brninsburg,  by  which  the  former  boat  was  lost,  together  with  Captain 
Sparrestrom’s  battery,  a few  horses,  and  3 men,  delayed  very  materially 
the  embarkation  of  the  Second  Brigade  and  the  remainder  ot  the  artil- 
lery of  the  Third  Division. 

immediately  after  disembarking,  the  First  and  Third  Brigades,  with  1 )e 
Golyer’s  battery,  were  pushed  out  toward  Port  Gibson  to  the  support  ol 
Major-General  McClernand,  who  had  already  engaged  the  enemy  near 
Port  Gibson,  under  command  of  ]\lajor-General  Bowen.  Heavy  and 
rapid  tiring  liad  been  heard  for  several  hours,  indicating  clearly’  that  a 
battle  was  in  progress,  and  the  men  moved  forward  with  promptness 
and  alacrity,  notwithstanding  the  intense  heat,  anxious  to  take  part  in 
the  contest.  On  reaching  the  ground,  Ma.j or- General  Grant  directed  me 


I 


i 


Chap.  :^XX;VI.] 


BATTLE  OF  BOUT  GIBSON,  MISS.  G35 

to  send  one  brigade  to  tlie  support  of  General  MeClernaiKBs  left  and 
one  to  the  support  of  bis  right.  As  1 bad  but  two  brigades  of  iny  eoin- 
niand  on  the  field — the  First  and  Third — the  First  Brigade,  General 
John  E.  Smith,  was  sent  to  the  left,  and  the  Third  Brigade,  General 
John  D.  Stevenson,  to  the  right.  Major-General  Logan,  comnianding 
division,  was  directed  to  go  Avitli  the  brigade  to  the  right  and  I went 
with  the  brigade  to  the  left. 

As  soon  as  the  position  of  the  enemy  could  be  definitely  ascertained, 
and  the  ground  reconnoitered,  the  brigade  was  thrown  in  on  the  left  of 
Brigadier-General  Osterhans’  division,  with  directions  to  advance  the 
left,  and,  if  jiossible,  outflank  the  enemy.  This  movement  was  perfectly 
successful,  though  the  impracticable  nature  of  the  country  (full  of  deep 
ravines  and  canebrakes)  retarded  the  movement  more  than  I could 
have  wished,  and  prevented  us  from  reaping  the  full  fruits  of  the  vic- 
tory. As  it  was,  however,  a gallant  charge  by  the  First  Brigade  on  the 
flank  and  Brigadier-General  Osterhaus’  division  in  front  soon  drove  the 
enemy  from  their  strong  position  on  the  left,  and  sent  them  back  in  a 
precipitate  retrgat  toward  Port  Gibson. 

The  Third  Brigade,  under  Brigadier-General  Stevenson,  on  the  right, 
was  equally  fortunate,  and  shortly"  before  sunset  the  rebels  were  routed 
on  all  parts  of  the  field.  A pursuit  was  immediately  ordered  on  the 
left-hand  road,  and  kept  up  by  Brig.  Gen.  John  E.  Smith’s  brigade  and 
one  regiment  of  Osterhaus’  division  until  after  dark,  when  the  command 
wms  halted  within  2 miles  of  Port  Gibson. 

At  an  early  hour  the  next  morning  the  command  was  put  in  motion, 
the  First  and  Second  Brigades,  Third  Division,  entering  Port  Gibson 
about  9 o’clock,  preceded  by  the  divisions  of  Generals  Carr  and  A.  J. 
Smith,  of  McClernand’s  corps.  The  town  had  been  evacuated  by  the 
enemy  during  the  night,  and  the  fine  suspension  bridge  across  the  south 
fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  on  the  Grand  Gulf  road,  destroyed. 

Measures  were  immediately  taken  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Wilson,  of 
Major-General  Grant’s  staff,  and  Captain  Tresilian,  engineer  of  the 
Third  Division,  assisted  by  the  pioneer  corps  of  the  division  and  troops 
from  General  McClernand’s  corps,  to  construct  a bridge  across  the  south 
fork  of  Bayou  Pierre. 

While  waiting  the  construction  of  a bridge.  General  Stevenson’s  bri- 
gade was  moved  down  near  the  crossing  of  Bayou  Pierre,  on  the  Grand 
Gulf  road,  to  engage  the  attention  of  the  enemy,  who  were  strongly 
posted  on  the  hills  on  the  northern  side.  In  the  mean  time.  Brig. 
Gen.  John  E.  Smith’s  brigade  and  that  of  Brigadier-General  Dennis 
were  marched  up  on  the  west  side  of  the  south  fork  of  Bayou  Pierre 
about  4 miles  to  a ford,  and  crossed  over,  moving  down  on  the  east  side 
in  a northeast  direction  until  they  reached  the  main  Jackson  road. 

At  4 p.  m.  the  bridge  was  completed,  and  the  Seventh  Division,  under 
the  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  M.  M.  Ci-ocker,  took  the  advance,  followed 
by  the  Third  Brigade  of  Logan’s  division,  and,  after  coming  up  with 
them,  by  the  First  and  Second  Brigades.  Marched  8 miles  to  north  fork 
of  Bayou  Pierre,  and  found  the  suspension  bridge,  a fine  structure,  par- 
tially destroyed,  the  fire  still  l>urning.  The  fire  was  put  out,  and  the 
bridge  repaired  during  the  night. 

At  daylight  the  next  morning  Logan’s  division,  in  the  advance,  crossed 
the  bridge,  followed  by  Crocker’s.  Shortly  after  crossing  the  bildge, 
and  near  Willow  Springs  Post-Office,  the  enemy  was  met  advantageously 
posted  on  a commanding  ridge,  and  o])ened  on  our  advancing  column 
with  artillery.  The  column  was  immediately  deployed,  a heavy  line  of 
skirmishers  thrown  forward,  and  (Jrockcr’s  division  hastened  a(a*ossthe 


GoG  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

river  as  a support.  Tliese  dispositions  having  been  made,  an  advance 
was  ordered,  when  the  enemy,  after  a sliglit  resistance,  fell  back  on  the 
road  to  Hankinson’s  Ferry,  and  the  cross-roads  at  the  post-office  were 
gained.  At  this  point  Logan’s  division  was  directed  to  take  the  road 
to  Grand  Gulf,  and  General  Crocker’s  division  to  pursue  the  retreating 
enemy.  The  latter  division  had  proceeded  but  a short  distance  before 
it  became  engaged  with  the  enemy’s  skirmishers,  who  seemed  disposed 
to  contest  the  ground  with  great  pertinacity.  The  face  of  the  country 
was  very  much  broken,  with  almost  impassable  ravines  filled  with  trees 
and  a dense  undergrowth,  and  narrow,  tortuous  roads,  offering  great 
facilities  to  the  enemy  to  cover  his  retreat,  and  of  which  he  availed  him- 
self to  the  best  advantage. 

The  skirmishing  was  kept  up  with  more  or  less  activity  until  4 p.  m., 
when  the  appearance  of  Logan’s  division  on  the  enemy’s  right  flank 
caused  him  to  move  precipitately  toward  the  ferry,  followed  closely  by 
the  Second  Brigade,  General  Dennis,  who  reached  it  just  as  the  last  of 
them  were  crossing,  and  in  time  to  capture  some  of  their  pioneer  tools 
and  prevent  the  destruction  of  the  bridge.  It  being  now  nearly  dark, 
and  the  enemy  driven  across  the  Big  Black,  the  pursuit  was  discontin- 
ued and  the  troops  disposed  in  the  best  defensive  position  for  the  night. 
The  command  remained  in  camp  at  Hankinson’s  Ferry  three  days,  from 
the  4th  to  the  Cth  inclusive,  the  time  being  employed  in  getting  up  sup- 
plies of  provisions  and  ammunition  and  in  reconnoitering  the  country. 
The  result  of  the  reconnaissances  demonstrated  that  the  main  portion 
of  the  enemy  retreated  across  the  river  at  this  point,  and  were  concen- 
trating at  Bovina  Station,  near  the  Big  Black,  on  the  Jackson  and 
Vicksburg  Bailroad. 

At  10  a.  m.  on  the  7th,  marched  to  Eocky  Springs,  Logan’s  division 
in  the  advance,  followed  by  Crocker’s,  and  remained  in  cami>  at  Eocky 
Springs  on  the  8th. 

On  the  9th,  marched  toward  Eaymond,  via  Utica,  and  encamped  at 
Utica  Cross-Eoads,  7 miles  from  the  latter  place,  Crocker’s  division  in 
the  advance.  The  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry,  Col.  Clark  Wright,  having 
reported  to  me  at  Hankinson’s  Ferry,  was  directed  to  push  forward  in 
advance  toward  Utica,  and  especially  to  scour  the  country  in  my  front 
and  on  my  right  flank,  and  ascertain,  if  possible,  if  there  was  any  move- 
ment of  troops  from  Port  Hudson.  Shortly  after  arriving  in  camp,  a 
report  was  received  from  Colonel  Wright  that  he  was  occupying  the 
town  of  Utica,  and  had  been  skirmishing  with  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  but 
would  hold  his  position. 

On  the  10th,  marched  to  Utica,  Crocker’s  division  in  the  advance,  and 
reached  the  town  about  12  m.  Found  Colonel  Wright’s  cavalry  there; 
but  nothing  indicating  any  material  force  of  the  enemy  in  the  imme- 
diate vicinity,  the  command  was  halted  one  hour  to  rest,  and  then 
moved  on  to  Weeks’  i)lantation,  where  we  encamped  for  the  night. 
Colonel  Wright  was  ordered  to  proceed  with  h is  cavalry  in  a ‘southeast- 
erly direction  across  Tallahala  Creek,  make  a detour,  and,  if  possible, 
ca])ture  IflO  rebel  cavalry  who  were  reported  to  be  at  the  bridge  across 
this  creek,  on  the  Gallatin  road,  and,  having  accomplished  this,  or,  at 
least,  driven  them  away,  with  the  main  portion  of  his  command  to  make 
a bold  push  and  cut  the  telegraph  and  railroad  near  Crystal  Springs, 
on  the  Uew  Orleans  and  Jackson  road,  both  of  which  were  successfully 
accomplished,  the  cavalry  returning  safely  to  camp  the  next  night, 
having  marched  over  50  miles  in  sixteen  hours  and  ])erformed  its  work. 

On  the  11th,  the  command  marched  to  Eoach’s  plantation,  at  the  cross- 
ing of  the  Gallatin  road,  Logan’s  division  in  the  advance.  At  this 


CiiAr.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


G37 


point,  my  escort  company,  Fourth  Ohio  Independent  Cavalry,  Captain 
Foster;  Logan’s  escort,  Company  A,  Second  Kegimeut  Illinois  Cavalry, 
and  Crocker’s  escort,  Company  E,  Second  Fegiment  Illinois  Cavalry, 
Captain  Tipton,  and  Company  C,  Fifth  liegiment  Missouri  Cavalry,* 
Lieutenant  Mueller,  were  organized  into  a battalion  of  cavalry,  under 
Captain  Foster,  and  performed  most  efficient  services  as  advance  guard 
and  flankers. 

On  the  12th,  at  3.30  a.  m.,  Logan’s  division  moved  toward  Eaymond, 
followed  by  Crocker’s  at  4 a.  m.  Soon  after  starting,  the  enemy’s  ve- 
dettes showed  themselves  frequently,  making  increase'd  vigilance  on 
our  part  necessary,  and,  after  inarching  some  3 miles,  two  regiments  of 
Dennis’  brigade  were  dejiloyed,  one  on  the  right  and  the  other  on  the 
left  of  the  road,  and  moved  forward  in  line  of  battle,  preceded  by  a 
strong  line  of  skirmishers,  and  followed  by  the  remainder  of  the  columns, 
the  cavalry  in  front  being  called  in  and  placed  on  the  extreme  flanks, 
with  instructions  to  explore  all  lateral  roads,  and  detect  any  movement 
of  the  enemy. 

About  11  a.  m.,  and  when  within  2 miles  of  Eaymond,  we  came  ui)on 
the  enemy,  under  the  command  of  General  Gregg,  and  4,000  or  5,000 
strong,  judiciously  posted,  with  two  batteries  of  artillery  so  placed  as 
to  sweep  the  road  and  a bridge  over  Avhich  it  was  necessary  to  pass. 
The  major  portion  of  the  infantry  were  posted  on  a range  of  hills  to 
the  right  of  the  road,  and  in  some  timber  and  ravines  in  their  front.  I 
was  soon  satisfied  that  the  fight  for  Eaymond  was  to  take  place  at 
this  point.  Orders  were  immediately  sent  back  to  move  all  our  trains 
out  of  the  road,  for  the  remainder  of  Logan’s  division  to  advance  as 
rapidly  as  possible,  followed  by  Crocker’s,  which  was  to  form  the 
reserve. 

As  soon  as  Smith’s  brigade  came  up,  it  was  formed  on  the  right  of 
Dennis’,  who  occupied  both  sides  of  the  road,  and  three  regiments  of 
Stevenson’s  were  thrown  in  on  the  right  of  Smith’s,  with  directions  to 
advance  his  right  as  much  as  possible.  De  Golyer’s  battery  was  placed 
in  position  in  the  road  near  the  bridge,  and  the  whole  line  ordered  to 
advance  into  a piece  of  timber.  Scarcely  had  the  advance  commenced, 
when  the  battle  opened  with  great  fury  on  the  center  and  left  center, 
where,  under  cover  of  the  woods  and  ravines,  the  rebels  seemed  to  have 
massed  a large  portion  of  their  force.  The  Eighty-first  Eegiment  Illi- 
nois Infantry,  of  Stevenson’s  brigade,  was  ordered  to  the  support  of  the 
center,  and  a portion  of  Sanborn’s  brigade,  Crocker’s  division,  but  be- 
fore the  latter  reached  the  ground,  the  enemy  were  handsomely  repulsed 
and  in  full  retreat. 

De  Golyer’s  battery,  which  at  first  was  in  position  on  the  road,  hav- 
ing been  moved  into  an  open  field  on  their  left,  played  on  their  flanks 
during  the  retreat  with  terrible  effect. 

One  attempt  of  the  enemy  to  charge  and  capture  the  battery  was 
met  by  such  a terrific  fire  of  grape  and  canister  that  they  broke  and 
fled  from  the  field. 

Pursuit  was  immediately  commenced,  and  the  town  of  Eaymond  was 
entered  by  our  troops  at  5 xi.  m.,  the  enemy  having  xiassed  through 
without  stoxiping,  toward  Jackson,  via  Mississipx>i  Springs.  In  this 
short  but  spirited  engagement  our  loss  in  killed  was  69,  and  among 
them  Colonel  Eichards,  of  the  Twentieth  Illinois,  a most  gallant  and 
able  officer,  who  Tvas  struck  down  at  the  head  of  his  men  while  nobly 
cheering  them  on  to  victory.  Our  loss  in  wounded  was  341 ; missing, 

* More  correctly,  Company  F,  Fourth  Missouri  Cavalry 


638 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI 


30.*  The  enemy’s  loss  was,  in  killed,  103 ; wounded  and  prisoners,  720  j 
two  pieces  of  cannon  disabled,  besides  a quantity  of  small-arms. 

Marched  on  the  13th,  at  G a.  m.,  for  Jackson,  via  Clintop,  Crocker  in 
the  advance.  Major-General  Sherman’s  command  arriving  before  mine 
had  left  the  town,  was  ordered  to  take  the  direct  road  to  Jackson. 
Moved  on  cautiously  toward  Clinton,  my  cavalry  being  ordered  to  keep 
well  out  on  my  left  flank,  and  entered  the  town  at  2 p.  m.  without  op- 
position. A.  regiment  of  infantry,  under  the  immediate  super\ision  of 
Capt.  A.  Hickenlooper,  Fifth  Ohio  Battery,  chief  engineer  of  the  corps, 
was  set  to  work  to  destroy  the  railroad  as  far  west  ot  Clinton  as  possi- 
ble that  night,  and  to  proceed  along  the  line  ot  it  the  next  day  during 
our  march  toward  Jackson,  tearing  it  up  wherever  x^i’^^cticable,  burn- 
ing the  ties,  bending  the  iron,  destroying  bridges,  culverts,  &c. 

On  the  14th,  Crocker  in  the  advance,  marched  toward  Jackson  at  5 a. 
m.,  Major-General  Sherman  moving  on  his  route  at  about  the  same  time. 
Engaged  the  enemy’s  pickets  about  5 miles  from  Jackson,  and  drove 
them  in  about  9 a.  m,,  and  pushed  on  until  within  2J  miles  from  the 
citv,  where  the  enemy  was  found  posted  in  strong  force,  under  the 
command  of  General  W.  H.  T.  Walker.  Some  of  the  troops  consisted 
of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia  regiments,  which  had  only  arrived  the 
evening  before,  and  had  been  immediately  marched  out  and  placed  in 
])ositiou  at  the  point  where  the  battle  took  place.  t • t 

The  position  of  the  enemy  was  carefully  reconuoitered,  and  Lieut.  J. 
W.  MacMurray’s  battery  (M),  First  Missouri,  of  Parrott  guns,  brought 
up  to  reply  to  their  artillery,  which  had  already  opened  on  our  lines. 
While  the  dispositions  for  the  attack  were  being  made,  a very  heavy 
shoAver  set  in,  which  delayed  the  attack  for  an  hour  and  a half,  the  ram 
coming  down  in  such  torrents  that  there  was  great  danger  ot  the  am- 
munition being  spoiled  if  the  men  opened  their  cartridge-boxes. 

The  time,  however,  was  well  employed  in  putting  the  troops  in  posi- 
tion and  bringing  up  Logan’s  division  as  a reseiwe.  The  enemy  occu- 
pied a semicircular  ridge  stretching  across  the  main  road,  his  GgAt 
holding  a iflece  of  woods,  and  his  center  and  left  commanding  rolling 
ground  in  his  front,  over  Avhich  it  would  be  necessary  to  pass  to  attack 
iiini.  Two  batteries  Avere  in  position,  one  covering  the  road  and  the 
other  near  his  left,  haAing  a good  range  across  the  open  held. 

The  disposition  of  my  troops  aauis  as  follow's  : Boomer’s  brigade  on  the 
left  of  the  road,  in  the  timber  ; Holmes’  brigade  on  his  right,  in  the  open 


Stevenson’s  briga.„  

directions  to  advance  and  gain  a road  which  entered  the  city  from  tlie 
nortliAvest ; L)ennis’  brigade  remained  a short  distance  in  rear,  to  guard 

the  trains.  , , , 

The  rain  having  partially  ceased,  at  11  o’clock  the  advance  Avas  or- 
dered, preceded  by  a heavy  line  of  skirmishers.  In  a short  time  they 
Avere  aa  armly  engaged ; droA^e  back  the  enemy’s  skirmishers  toAvard 
their  main  line  and  into  a raAune  tilled  Avith  avUIoavs.  Here  tlie  skir- 
niishers  halted  for  a few  moments,  and  the  enemy’s  fire  becoming  so 
heaA\y  they  could  not  advance  any  farther,  they  Avere  recalled  to  their 
regiments  and  a charge  ordered.  It  was  resjionded  to  with  cheers  aiid 
determination.  Istet  a man  faltered.  The  whole  line  swept  forwiml  in 
most  perfect  order,  drove  the  enemy  out  of  the  ravine  at  the  point  ot 

* Iliit  SCO  revised  statement,  p.  nSl, 


CiiAi*.  XXXVL] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


639 


tlic  bayoiiet,  and  charged  gallantly  up  the  hill.  The  enemy  did  not 
wait  to  receive  the  full  Ibrce  of  the  charge,  but  broke  and  fled  precipi- 
tately, followed  by  our  troops  for  1 J miles,  until  we  were  within  range 
of  the  artillery  from  the  defenses  at  d ackson.  MacMurray^s  and  Dillon’s 
batteries,  following  close  after  our  infantry,  were  wheeled  into  the  first 
advantageous  position,  and  opened  a well-directed  and  effective  fire 
upon  the  retreating  enemy.  Having  reached  this  point,  the  troops  were 
halted  and  lines  reformed,  as  they  had  become  somewhat  broken  march- 
ing over  the  rough  ground. 

Skirmishers  were  immediately  thrown  out  to  the  front,  and  ofiicers 
sent  to  reconnoiter  the  enemy’s  position  and  defenses,  who  in  a short 
time  returned,  reporting  the  works  evacuated.  The  troops  were  im- 
mediately moved  forward  into  the  defenses,  and  orders  sent  to  General 
Stevenson  to  i)ush  his  brigade  across  to  the  Canton  road,  if  possible, 
and  cut  oft  the  enemy’s  retreat.  This  was  about  3 p.  m.  Colonel  San- 
born was  directed  to  send  the  flag  of  one  of  his  regiments  which  had 
borne  itself  most  gallantly  in  the  battle  and  ifiace  it  on  the  caintol  of 
the  State  of  Mississippi,  and  shortly  before  4 o’clock  the  flag  of  the 
Fifty-ninth  Indiana  was  proudly  waving  from  the  dome.  Sherman’s 
command  entered  about  the  same  time  from  the  west  and  southwest. 

The  results  of  this  victory  were  the  capture  of  Jackson  with  seven- 
teen pieces  of  artillery,  the  destruction  of  the  railroads,  manufacturing 
establishments,  army  stores,  &c.,  and  a loss  to  the  enemy,  in  killed, 
Avounded,  and  prisoners,  of  845  men.  Our  loss  iu  killed  Avas  37  ; in 
Avounded  and  missing,  228. 

Crocker’s  division  encamj)ed  within  the  enemy’s  intrenchments  on  the 
night  of  the  14th,  and  Logan’s  division  between  the  b;ittle-field  and  the 
city. 

On  the  15th,  at  5 a.  in.,  Logan’s  dmsion  started  for  Bolton,  followed 
by  Crocker’s  at  7 a.  m.,  Avith  instructions  to  march  as  far  as  he  could 
by  4 p.  in.,  Avhenhe  Avould  select  a good  place  and  go  into  camj). 

Shortly  before  4 o’clock,  the  advance  came  up  Avith  Hovey’s  division, 
of  McClernand’s  corps,  and  went  into  camp  on  Baker’s  Creek,  tAvo 
brigades  on  the  west  side  and  one  on  the  east. 

Holmes’  brigade,  of  Crocker’s  division,  was  left  at  Clinton  for  the 
night,  and  the  remaining  tAvo  brigades  marched  on  and  Avent  into  camp 
2 jiiiles  east  of  Ijogan’s  division,  on  the  main  road. 

At  0 a.  m.  on  the  IGth,  Major-General  McClernand  notified  me  that 
the  enemy,  under  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton,  had  moved  out  in 
strong  force  from  Vicksburg  to  attack  us,  and  that  his  (McClernand’s) 
columns  were  already  in  motion  to  meet  him. 

Oi’ders  were  immediately  given  to  General  Logan  to  folloAV  Hovey, 
and  Crocker  was  directed  to  come  forAvard  as  rapidly  as  iiossible  Avith 
Ids  whole  division.  After  proceeding  about  5 miles,  and  Avhen  near 
Champion’s  Hill,  General  Hovey  sent  back  Avord  that  he  had  met  the 
enemy  in  force,  strongly  iiosted  on  the  EdAvards  Depot  road. 

The  road  at  this  point  bears  to  the  south,  passing  OA^er  a high  com- 
manding hill,  and  then  makes  a short  turn  to  the  Avest.  This  hill  Avas 
bald,  giving  the  enen»y^  a commanding  ])oint  for  his  artillery,  and  Avas 
really  the  ke.v  of  the  position. 

The  enemy’s  right  Avas  on  and  in  the  vicinit.y  of  this  hill,  his  center 
and  leit  bearing  off  in  the  direction  of  EdAvards  Depot  thi«)ugh  a piece 
of  Avoods  and  behind  a rail-fence  on  the  crest  of  a ridge,  Avith  Avoods  in 
his  rear  and  open  tields  in  front.  General  IIoAxy’s  division  Avas  imme- 
diately deplo.yed  in  line  of  battle  to  move  against  the  hill,  supported  on 
the  right  l)y  Leggett’s  (late  Dennis’)  and  Smith’s  brigades. 


640 


[Chav.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Dc  Golyers  battery  in  the  mean  time  opened  a well-directed  lire 
against  the  enemy  posted  behind  the  fence,  and  Rogers’  battery  of  24- 
poiinder  howitzers,  supported  by  Smith’s  brigade,  took  a position  to 
the  right  aiid  well  in  advance,  and  poured  in  a most  destructive  enfi- 
lading lire,  under  cover  of  which  the  line  advanced  and  the  crest  was 
gained.  A desperate  attempt  was  made  to  charge  andcai)ture  Rogers’ 
battery,  which  was  promptly  repelled  by  Smith’s  brigade,  which  drove 
back  the  enemy  with  great  slaughter,  and  captured  a large  number  of 
prisoners.  Stevenson’s  brigade,  with  the  right  refused,  was  advanced 
at  double-quick  into  a piece  of  woods  on  the  right  of  Smith,  upon  gain- 
ing which  he  was  ordered  to  throw  forward  his  right,  so  as  to  make  his 
line  of  battle  nearly  parallel  with  the  general  line,  and  to  move  forward 
and  drive  the  enemy  from  a hill  in  his  front,  where  batteries  were  being- 
placed.  This  movement  was  most  brilliantly^  executed. 

The  brigade  charged  across  the  ravines,  up  the  hill,  and  through  an 
open  field,  captured  seven  guns,  portions  of  two  batteries,  several  hun- 
dred prisoners,  and  swept  across  the  road,  thus  cutting  the  enemy  off 
fi  om  his  direct  line  of  retreat  to  Edwards  Depot.  In  the  mean  time 
Hovey,  Leggett,  and  Smith  were  hotly  engaged.  Two  regiments  of 
Sanborn’s  brigade  were  ordered  to  the  su])port  of  Hovey,  one  to  the 
su])port  of  Smith,  and  one  to  Leggett.  The  enemy,  discoveriag  that 
their  left  was  turned,  now  made  a most  desperate  attempt  to  turn  ours, 
precipitating  all  their  available  force  on  Hovey,  whose  division,  having 
been  fighting  for  three  and  a half  hours,  was  very  much  fatigued  and 
partially  out  of  ammunition. 

The  tide  of  battle  was  turning  against  us,  when  Boomer’s  brigade 
came  up,  and  with  its  able  and  heroic  commander  at  the  head  w^ent  gal- 
lantly into  the  contest,  checked  the  advance  of  the  enemy,  and  held 
him  at  bay  until  Holmes’  brigade  came  up,  when  a dashing  charge  was 
made,  the  enemy  rolled  back,  and  the  battle  won.  In  the  charge  the 
Seventeenth  Iowa  captured  the  colors  of  the  Thirty-first  Alabama  and 
Waddell’s  Alabama  battery  (four  pieces). 

As  soon  as  the  cartridge-boxes  could  be  filled  with  ammunition,  the 
inirsuit  was  ordered  and  kept  up  until  dark ; Stevenson’s  brigade  and 
De  Golyer’s  battery  in  advance,  followed  by  Carr’s  and  Osterhaus’  divis- 
ions, of  McClernand’s  corps,  then  by  Smith’s  and  Leggett’s  brigades,  and 
Crocker’s  division,  excejit  Holmes’  brigade,  which  was  left  to  guard  the 
wounded,  assist  in  burying  the  dead,  securing  the  spoils  taken  from  the 
enemy,  cS:c.,  the  troops  bivouacking  for  the  night  from  2 to  5 miles  in 
advance  of  the  battle  field. 

This,  by  far  the  hardest  fought  battle  of  all  since  crossing  at  Bruins- 
burg,  and  the  most  decided  victory  for  us,  was  not  won  without  the  loss 
of  many  brave  men,  who  heroically  periled  their  lives  for  their  country’s 
honor.  Their  determined  spirit  still  animates  their  living  comrades, 
who  feel  that  the  blood  i)oured  out  on  Champion’s  Hill  was  not  spilt  in 
vain.  Every  man  of  Logan’s  and  Crocker’s  divisions  was  engaged  in 
the  battle. 

Our  loss  was:  Killed,  ICO ; wounded  and  missing,  894.*  That  of  the 
enemy:  Killed, ; wounded  and  prisoners, ; jneces  of  can- 

non, two  stand  of  colors,  besides  quantities  of  small-arms  and  ammu- 
nition. . 

At  (>  a.  m.  on  the  17th,  started  for  Black  River,  Logan  in  the  advance, 
followed  by  Quinby,  who  had  arrived  and  assumed  command  of  his 
division,  and  reached  a point  on  the  river  about  3 miles  to  the  north 


Jliit  SCO  revised  statenient,  l^u't  II,  p.  1). 


CiiAr.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


641 


and  east  of  the  railroad  bridge.  Eansom^s  brigade,  of  McArtliiiFs  divis- 
ion, now  came  up,  and  was  ordered  to  construct  a bridge  across  the  Big 
Black  for  the  passage  of  his  brigade  and  Logan’s  division,  and  Quinby 
was  ordered  to  construct  one  for  the  passage  of  his  division.  Ransom’s 
was  a solid  raft  bridge  of  timber,  and  Quinby’s  was  built  of  timber  and 
cotton  bales.  Both  were  completed  at  an  early  hour  on  the  18th,  and 
the  command  crossed  over,  with  the  exception  of  Sanborn’s  brigade, 
which  was  directed  to  remain  and  guard  the  bridges  and  prisoners  until 
Holmes  came  up. 

After  crossing  the  river,  the  command  moved  in  a northwest  direction 
on  a plantation  road  uptil  the  Bridgeport  and  Vicksburg  road  was 
reached,  when  that  became  our  line  of  march,  following  Sherman’s  corps. 
Ransom’s  brigade  arrived  before  Vicksburg  just  after  dark,  and  took  a 
position  on  Sherman’s  left,  Logan’s  and  Quinby’s  bivouacking  on  the 
road,  where  there  was  water. 

The  next  morning  (the  19th)  they  came  up.  Logan  was  placed  on  the 
left  of  Ransom,  Leggett’s  brigade  in  reserve,  and  Quinby  on  the  left  of 
Logan,  Holmes’  brigade  in  reserve,  and  the  siege  of  Vicksburg  com- 
menced. 

In  bringing  this  report  to  a close,  I cannot  express  in  words  my  admi- 
ration of  the  officers  and  men  of  my  command  who  were  engaged  in  this 
short  but  active  and  brilliant  campaign.  Their  unswerving  patriotism, 
patient  endurance,  and  heroic  determination  have  carried  them  through 
without  a murmur,  and  won  for  them  imperishable  renown.  Marching 
for  a distance  of  over  200  miles  through  an  enemy’s  country  in  the 
short  space  of  eighteen  days,  without  tents,  and  barely  transportation 
enough  to  carry  ammunition,  the  major  part  of  the  time  without  rations 
except  such  as  could  be  procured  from  the  country,  fighting  or  taking 
part  in  five  distinct  battles,  besides  almost  daily  skirmishing,  they  have 
shown  what  soldiers  can  do  when  firmly  resolved  never  to  see  their 
country’s  flag  dishonored.  Where  all  did  so  well,  it  is  impossible  for 
me  to  discriminate. 

To  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Logan  and  Brig.  Gen.  M.  M.  Crocker,  com- 
manding divisions  5 Brig.  Gens.  John  E.  Smith,  John  D.  Stevenson,  M. 
D.  Leggett,  Elias  S.  Dennis,  and  Cols.  John  B.  Sanborn,  George  B. 
Boomer,  and  Samuel  A.  Holmes,  commanding  brigades,  I am  especially 
indebted  for  the  able  and  spirited  manner  in  which  they  performed  their 
duties. 

The  members  of  my  personal  stafi—Lieut.  Col.  William  T.  Clark,  as- 
sistant adjutant-general  and  chief  of  stafl*;  Lieut.  Col.  William  E.  Strong, 
assistant  inspector-general;  Maj.  L.  S.  Willard,  Capts.  G.  R.  Steele  and 
D.  H.  Gile,  aides-de-camp;  Lieut.  Col.  James  Wilson,  Thirteenth  Iowa 
Infantry,  provost-marshal;  Lieut.  Col.  A.  M.  Powell,  chief  of  ar cillery; 
Maj.  Daniel  Chase,  Thirteenth  U.  S.  Infantry;  Surg.  J.  H.  Boucher, 
medical  director;  Surg.  E.  Lloyd,  Sixteenth  Iowa  Infantry;  Capt.  A. 
Hickenlooper,  chief  of  engineers;  Lieut.  J.  W.  Mong,  Third  Ohio  Bat- 
tery, ordnance  officer;  Lieut.  K.  Knox,  Thirteenth  U.  S.  Infantry,  com- 
missary of  musters;  Lieut.  J.  D.  Vernay,  Eleventh  Illinois  Infantry, 
acting  aide-de-camp — all  distinguished  themselves,  and  deserve  the 
thanks  of  a grateful  people.  Zealous  and  earnest,  they  were  ever  in 
the  work  when  duty  required,  and  ready  to  share  the  post  of  danger. 

Signal  officers — Capt.  L.  M.  Rose  (chief  signal  officer).  Eleventh  Illi- 
<iois  Infantry;  Captain  \H.  W.  B.]  Hoyt,  One  hundred  and  thirteenth 
Illinois  Infantry;  First  Lieut.  G.  H.  McNary,  Tenth  Pennsylvania  Re- 
serve Corps;  First  Lieut.  T.  C.  Morris,  Comi)any  H,  Forty-fifth  Reg- 
iment Illinois  Infantry;  Second  Lieut.  T.  C.  Withers,  Company  H, 
41  R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


642 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX  vr. 


Twenty -four til  Regiment  Indiana  Infantry — rendered  most  important 
services  on  the  various  battle-fields,  watching  and  reporting  the  move- 
ments of  the  enemy,  and  freely  exposed  themselves  to  danger  when 
necessity  required. 

Capt.  A.  Hickenlooper,  Fifth  Ohio  Battery,  and  chief  engineer  of  the 
corps,  deserves  special  mention  for  his  ability,  untiring  energy,  and 
skill  in  making  reconnaissances,  maps  of  the  routes  passed  over,  super- 
intending the  repairs  and  construction  of  bridges,  &c.,  exposing  himself 
constantly  night  and  day,  and  merits  some  substantial  recognition  of 
his  services. 

Appended  xilease  find  tabular  statement  of  losses  in  the  various  en- 
gagements.* For  details,  reference  will  be  had  to  the  accompanying 
division  and  brigade  reports. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  B.  McPherson, 

Major-  General^  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen..,  Chief  of  Staff,  Dept,  of  the  Tennessee. 


No.  23. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Logan,  U.  8.  Army,  commanding  Third 
Division^  including  operations  April  25-May  19. 

Hdqrs.  Third  Div.,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps, 

Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

In  Field,  near  Yichshnrg,  Miss.,  May  26,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  as  the  part  taken 
by  my  command  in  the  several  marches  against  and  the  engagements 
with  the  enemy  since  leaving  our  cami)  at  MillikeiTs  Bend,  La.,  on 
April  25 : 

In  compliance  with  special  orders,  I left  Milliken’s  Bend  with  my 
command  on  the  morning  of  April  25,  marching  a distance  of  miles 
to  Richmond,  on  Boundaway  Bayou,  encamping  near  the  town. 

On  the  night  of  April  26,  my  command  encamped  at  Good  Hope 
plantation,  10  miles  distant  from  Richmond. 

I moved  forward  with  my  command  on  the  morning  of  the  27th,  a 
distance  of  10  miles  from  my  last  encampment,  in  a heavy  rain,  which 
(jontinued  all  day. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  28tb,  I again  moved  forward,  and  en- 
camped near  Hard  Times  Landing,  on  the  Mississippi  River,  below 
Vicksburg,  and  13  miles  from  the  camp  of  the  night  of  the  27th. 

At  1 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  29th,  in  pursuance  of  orders,  I 
moved  forward  on  the  road  to  Hard  Scrabble  Landing,  and  encamped 
near  that  place,  having  marched  on  that  day  19  miles. 

On  the  30th,  I moved  to  a point  on  the  west  side  of  the  river  below 
Grand  Gulf,  Miss.,  when,  on  tlie  afternoon  and  night  of  that  day,  the 
I'irst  and  Third  Brigades  of  my  division,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gens. 
John  E.  Smith  and  John  D.  Stevenson,  respectively,  were  taken  on 
transi)orts  and  landed  across  the  river  at  a landing  10  miles  below 
Grand  Gulf,  known  as  Bruinsburg.  The  Second  Brigade,  Brig.  Gen. 
Elias  S.  Dennis  commanding,  crossed  the  river  on  the  morning  of  May  1. 

* ^’lubodied  in  revised  statenienis,  i)p.  584,  705, 750,  and  Part  II,  p.  9. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


643 


I regret  the  necessity  of  having  to  announce  the  fact  that  during  the 
ferrying  of  my  command  to  Bruinsburg  a collision  occurred  between  the 
steamboats  Horizon  and  Moderator,  in  which  the  former  sunk  with  Bat- 
tery G,  Second  Illinois  Light  Artillery,  Captain  Sparrestrom  command- 
ing, on  board,  which  was  entirely  lost,  except  a small  number  of  horses. 
The  men  were  all  saved  except  two,  who  were  drowned. 

You  will  observe  that  a march  of  70  miles  was  made  by  my  command 
in  five  days,  over  the  worst  kind  of  roads,  the  axles  of  the  batteries  and 
wagons  often  scraping  the  ground.  During  the  march,  roads  and  bridges 
were  constructed,  under  the  direction  of  S.  E.  Tresilian,  division  engi- 
neer of  my  staff,  who  exhibited  a great  deal  of  energy  and  dispatch. 

I crossed  the  river  in  person  on  May  1,  and  hastened  forward  to  the 
head  of  the  two  brigades  which  had  crossed  the  evening  previous,  and 
had  been  ordered  by  General  Grant  to  move  forward  on  the  road  to 
Port  Gibson  early  on  that  morning  to  the  support  of  General  McOler- 
nand,  who  was  supposed  to  be  engaging  the  enemy  at  or  near  that 
place.  I directed  my  assistant  adjutant-general  to  remain  at  Bruins- 
burg and  come  forward  with  the  Second  Brigade  as  soon  as  it  should 
have  crossed  the  river. 

I arrived  with  the  First  and  Third  Brigades  at  Thompson’s  Hill 
(where  General  McClernand’s  corps  was  engaging  the  enemy)  at  or  near 
12  m.,  and  was  directed  to  immediately  form  General  Smith’s  (First) 
brigade  on  the  left  and  General  Stevenson’s  (Third)  brigade  on  the 
right  of  General  McOlernand’s  command.  General  Smith  immediately 
formed  his  brigade  on  the  left  of  General  Osterhaus,  who  was  being 
closely  pressed  by  a heavy  force  of  the  enemy  advantageously  posted. 
The  brigade  was  formed  in  two  lines,  the  Twentieth  and  Thirty-first 
Illinois  and  Twenty-third  Indiana  Infantry,  commanded  by  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Eichards,  Colonel  McCook,  and  Lieutenant- Colonel  Davis,  re- 
spectively, constituting  the  first  or  advanced  line,  and  the  Forty-fifth 
and  One  hundred  and  Twenty-fourth  Illinois  Infantry,  Colonel  Maltby 
and  [Col.  Thomas  J.  Sloan  *?]  commanding,  respectively,  forming  the 
second  or  reserve  line,  200  yards  in  the  rear. 

The  Twenty-third  Indiana  was  ordered  to  advance  as  skirmishers  in 
the  face  of  the  enemy,  and  after  a severe  fire,  in  which  the  entire  ad- 
vance line  participated,  succeeded  in  dislodging  him  from  his  position 
in  front  of  the  brigade.  A still  farther  advance  of  the  brigade  in  line 
pressed  the  enemy  back  upon  a bill,  when  he  essayed  a formidable 
stand.  To  dislodge  him  from  the  position,  General  Smith  caused  his 
command  to  charge  upon  his  entire  front.  Led  by  their  gallant  com- 
mander, the  charge  was  executed  with  a zeal  and  heroism  that  adds 
another  laurel  to  those  already  won  by  the  many  glorious  achievements 
on  the  bloody  fields  of  Belmont,  Donelsou,  and  Shiloh.  They  drove  the 
enemy  in  wild  disorder  from  the  field,  causing  his  total  rout,  and  com- 
pelling him  to  leave  his  dead  and  wounded  in  our  possession.  In  this 
engagement  the  First  Brigade  captured  one  piece  of  artillery  and  a 
number  of  prisoners. 

The  Third  Brigade,  General  Stevenson  commanding,  consisting  of  the 
Eighth  and  Eighty-first  Illinois,  Seventh  Missouri,  and  Thirty-second 
Ohio  Infantry,  commanded  by  Colonels  Post  and  Dollins,  Major  Wake- 
field, and  Colonel  Potts,  respectively,  was  ordered  to  the  left,  as  I be- 
fore stated,  where  it  was  formed  to  support  General  Burbridge,  of  the 
Thirteenth  Army  Corps.  The  line,  when  thus  formed,  filled  a vacancy 
in  General  McClernand’s  line.  The  enemy  in  front  of  this  brigade  was 
in  strong  force.  The  Eighth  Illinois  Infantry  was  ordered  to  support 
the  Eighth  Michigan  Battery,  which  opened  a destructive  fire  of  shell 


644 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


aud  canister  upon  the  enemy,  compelling  him  to  retire  under  cover  of 
brush  and  timber.  The  admirable  manner  in  which  this  battery  was 
handled  reflects  the  highest  credit  upon  Major  Stolbrand,  my  chief  of 
artillery,  and  Captain  De  Golyer,  commanding  the  battery. 

At  this  time  General  Burbridge  informed  General  Stevenson  that 
there  was  a gap  in  his  lines,  which  was  immediately  occupied  by  the 
Eighty-first  Illinois.  The  Eighth  Illinois,  with  their  front  well  pro- 
tected by  skirmishers,  was  ordered  to  advance  upon  the  enemy  and  dis- 
lodge him  from  the  strong  position  which  he  held  in  front  of  our  lines. 
The  order  was  executed  with  great  skill  and  bravery,  and  the  enemy 
was  driven  back  with  great  loss.  It  was  at  this  time  Colonel  Post,  of 
the  Eighth  Illinois,  on  the  plea  of  fatigue,  asked  permission  to  retire 
from  the  field,  although  unhurt.  The  Seventh  Missouri  Infantry  was 
ordered  to  form  on  the  right  of  the  Eighth  Illinois  Infantry  (their  right 
resting  on  the  left  of  General.Burbridge’s  line,  which  was  unsupported), 
under  a heavy  fire,  in  order  to  dislodge  the  enemy  in  our  front.  This 
was  done  after  a short  though  severe  contest. 

In  obedience  to  orders  from  superior  headquarters,  the  Third  Ohio 
Battery,  Captain  Williams  commanding,  and  Battery  L,  Second  Illinois 
Light  Artillery,  Captain  Bolton  commanding,  were  left  at  Hard  Times 
Landing.  The  scarcity  of  transportation  detained  Battery  D,-  First  Illi- 
nois Light  Artillery,  Captain  Eogers  commanding,  on  the  Louisiana 
side  of  the  river  until  a late  hour  in  the  afternoon  of  the  day  of  the  en- 
gagement. The  troops,  during  the  whole  time  engaged,  acted  with  the 
utmost  bravery,  driving  the  enemy  at  all  points. 

Near  nightfall  the  enemy  were  in  full  retreat,  and  I might  say  in 
total  rout.  The  Second  Brigade,  under  General  Dennis,  having  ar- 
rived near  the  close  of  the  fight,  was  formed  in  rear  of  General  Smith 
as  a support,  but  did  not  become  engaged.  As  soon  as  the  enemy  com- 
menced retreating,  I ordered  the  First  Brigade  in  pursuit,  which  was 
followed  by  the  Second  Brigade.  About  4 miles  from  the  field  of  ac- 
tion, the  enemy  fired  upon  our  advance,  without,  however,  doing  any 
injury  whatever,  although  they  were  posted  upon  the  crest  of  a hill  in  a 
splendid  position.  My  line  was  instantly  formed,  and  the  fire  returned, 
which  caused  the  enemy  to  again  retreat  precipitately. 

It  being  at  this  time  after  nightfall,  and  quite  dark,  my  command  was 
formed  in  line  on  the  crest  of  the  hill  where  we  had  received  the  fire, 
which  position  we  occupied  during  the  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  2d,  the  Third  Brigade  joined  the  remainder  of 
the  command,  and  we  moved  forward  to  Port  Gibson,  and  entered  the 
town  while  the  bridges  over  Bayou  Pierre  were  burning. 

At  about  8 o^clock,  the  First  and  Second  Brigades  w'ere  ordered  for- 
ward on  the  Vicksburg  road.  They  forded  the  bayou  a few  miles  above 
the  town,  and  moved  around  to  within  3 miles  of  the  place,  on  the  oj>- 
posite  side  of  the  bayou,  finding  no  enemy,  but  securing  a large  amount 
of  bacon,  which  was  used  by  my  command. 

On  the  night  of  the  2d,  we  bivouacked  on  the  north  fork  of  Bayou 
Pierre,  within  2 miles  of  Willow  Springs,  where  the  enemy  were  re- 
ported to  be  in  strong  force  behind  fortifications. 

After  repairing  the  suspension  bridge  which  the  enemy  had  set  on 
fire,  we  crossed  at  4 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  3d,  expecting  to  meet 
with  formidable  resistance.  The  enemy,  however,  i)rofiting  by  the 
lesson  we  had  given  him  on  May  1,  fired  only  a few  shots  from  a gun 
of  small  caliber  and  pursued  his  hasty  retreat. 

My  escort  company,  with  that  of  General  McPherson,  was  sent  for- 
ward to  pick  iq)  stragglers  from  the  retreating  foe,  and  pursued  him  sq 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  POET  GIBSON,  MISS. 


645 


closely  that  a sharp  skirmish  ensued  between  him  and  the  two  escorts, 
Captains  Foster  and  Hotaling  commanding,  and  the  advance  of  my 
division,  which  was  a portion  of  the  First  Brigade.  The  Second  Bri- 
gade was  thrown  in  advance,  and  continued  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy 
on  the  Grand  Gulf  road,  biking  154  prisoners  during  the  afternoon. 

Late  m the  afternoon  our  skirmishers  reached  Hankinson’s  Ferry, 
over  Big  Black  Eiver,  while  a working  party  of  the  enemy  were  in  the 
act  of  destroying  the  bridge.  The  reserve  skirmishers  and  advance 
guard  of  the  Second  Brigade,  commanded  by  Colonel  Force,  Twentieth  . 
Ohio  Infantry,  crossed  the  bridge  and  secured  many  working  imple- 
ments, which  the  enemy  was  forced  to  abandon  in  his  hasty  flight. 

On  the  morning  of  the  4th,  the  enemy  opened  an  artillery  fire  upon 
the  camp  of  the  Second  Brigade  from  the  opposite  side  of  the  river. 
They  would  no  doubt  have  effected  serious  injury  upon  us  but  for  the 
admirable  manner  in  which  Captains  De  Golyer,  Eogers,  and  Williams 
(who  had  joined  the  division  on  that  morning)  replied  to  them.  A few 
well-directed  shots  from  the  batteries  silenced  the  enemy^s  fire,  dis- 
mounting one  gun  and  killing  2 men. 

We  bivouacked  at  Hankinson’s  Ferry  three  days,  and  on  the  morning 
of  the  7th,  in  pursuance  of  orders,  I moved  on  the  Clinton  road  to  Eocky 
Springs,  where  we  remained  during  the  remainder  of  the  7th  and 
the  8th. 

At  12.30  p.  m.  on  the  9th,  we  moved  forward  in  the  direction  of  Eay- 
mond. . I continued  the  march  until  the  morning  of  the  12th,  halting 
at  night,  while  nothing  of  interest  occurred. 

On  the  morning  of  that  day  my  command  was  ordered  to  move  in 
advance  of  General  Crocker’s  division.  At  about  9 a.,  m.  the  advance 
of  my  column  discovered  the  advance  pickets  of  the  enemy.  General 
Dennis’  (Second)  brigade  being  in  advance,  I caused  it  to  be  formed  in 
line  of  battle  across  the  road,  and  ordered  General  Dennis  to  move  for- 
ward. The  First  and  Third  Brigades  moved  by  the  flank  on  the  road, 
in  easy  supporting  distance,  nearly  1 J miles,  to  a commanding  position 
upon  the  summit  of  a hill  about  2 miles  from  the  town  of  Eaymond.  1 
caused  the  command  to  halt. 

A reconnaissance  was  then  made  by  the  two  escort  companies  be- 
longing to  General  McPherson  and  myself,  which  proved  the  enemy 
was  in  force  in  my  immediate  front.  I caused  the  front  of  the  brigade 
in  line  to  be  well  protected  with  a line  of  skirmishers,  and  ordered  it  to 
move  forward  cautiously  and  ascertain  the  position  of  the  enemy.  Our 
skirmishers  soon  became  engaged  with  those  of  the  enemy,  driving 
them  beyond  the  creek  which  separated  our  line  from  that  of  the  enemy. 

1 was  soon  satisfied  that  the  enemy  were  formed  in  line  of  battle 
along  the  margin  of  the  creek,  under  the  cover  of  the  bank,  awaiting 
our  attack.  I caused  General  Smith’s  brigade  to  be  brought  forward 
and  formed  on  the  right  of  General  Dennis’  line.  I then  ordered  an 
advance  of  the  two  brigades  thus  formed,  and  the  engagement  soon 
became  general,  the  enemy  having  every  advantage  of  i)osition  and  a 
knowledge  of  the  ground  over  which  the  contest  was  to  take  ifiace. 
The  largest  portion  of  the  First  Brigade  was  compelled  to  advance  a 
distance  of  400  yards  through  an  open  field  under  a very  heavy  com- 
bined fire  of  infantry  and  artillery,  and  I am  delighted  to  say  that  every 
man  stepped  promptly  and  majesti(;ally  forward,  and  did  his  duty  as  a 
soldier.  Generals  Dennis  and  Smith  soon  gained  the  cover  of  a line  of 
fence  and  timber  q^uite  near  the  enemy,  and  kept  up  a continuous  fire 
upon  his  lines. 

The  Third  Brigade  was  ordered  forward,  and  placed  in  line  of  battle 


646 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  fCnAP.  XXXVI. 


on  the  right  of  General  Smith,  and  soon  became  hotly  engaged  witli  the 

At  the  commencement  of  the  engagement,  De  Golyer’s  (Eighth  Mich- 
igan) battery  was  placed  in  position  on  each  side  of  the  main  road  and 
near  a bridge  across  a ravine  in  which  the  infantry  of  the  enemy  was 
posted,  and  immediately  engaged  the  enemy’s  artillery,  which  was 
posted  on  rising  ground  about  800  yards  distant.  After  remaining  in 
this  position  about  an  hour,  this  battery  was  removed,  and  placed  in  a 
new  position  on  the  left  of  the  Second  Brigade  or  extreme  left  of  the 

division.  . 

The  engagement  raged  with  great  fury  for  at  least  two  hours,  during 
the  first  hour  of  which  the  enemy  seemed  to  be  concentrated  upon  the 
left  of  the  First  and  right  of  the  Second  Brigades.  During  the  engage- 
ment, the  Eighth  Illinois  Infantry  was  detached  from  the  Third  Brigade 
and  moved  to  the  support  of  the  Twentieth  Illinois  Infantry,  which  had 
penetrated  to  the  ravine,  w^here  they  charged  the  enemy  with  bayonets 
and  materially  aided  the  First  Brigade  in  dislodging  him.  Rogers’ 
battery  of  24-pounder  howitzers  was  placed  in  position  during  the  most 
severe  part  of  the  engagement,  and  did  some  most  splendid  execution, 
until  the  enemy  was  forced  to  retreat  before  the  superior  courage  and 
gallantrv  of  my  command.  Captain  Williams’  (Third  Ohio)  battery  was 
ordered  ^ to  a position  on  the  left  flank,  but  was  only  slightly  engaged. 
He  was  placed  in  that  position  to  prevent  any  flank  movement  which 
the  enemy  might  contemplate  in  that  direction.  . . t 

In  this  engagement  Colonel  McCook,  of  the  Thirty-first  Illinois  In- 
fantry, was  wounded  in  the  foot,  which  compelled  him  to  retire  from 
the  field.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Richards,  Twentieth  Illinois  Infantry, 
while  gallantly  leading  his  regiment  forward,  was  killed  by  a musket- 
shot  through  the  left  breast. 

It  is  impossible  for  me  to  give  too  much  credit  to  the  men  engaged  in 
the  terrible  conflict.  Every  ofiicer  and  soldier  did  his  duty  most  nobly. 
My  command  iiressed  the  enemy  back  under  a most  galling  fire,  and 
crossed  the  creek  over  which  we  had  beeu  fighting  by  wading  it.  The 
enemy  were  soon  in  total  rout.  I pushed  my  command  forward  as  rap- 
idly as  possible  into  Raymond,  l>ut  the  enemy  had,  by  taking  two  roads, 
escaped  only  about  twenty  minutes  before  my  advance  reached  the 
town.  We  then,  in  pursuance  of  orders,  went  into  camp  on  the  night 

of  May  12.  ^ x ^ i • 

On  the  morning  of  May  13,  in  obedience  to  orders,  I moved  forward  in 

rear  of  General  Crocker’s  division,  on  the  Jackson  road,  and  on  that 
ni«-ht  bivouacked  at  Clinton,  on  the  Vicksburg  and  Jackson  Railroad. 

My  command  moved  forward  on  the  next  morning  on  the  Jackson 
road,  and  in  rear  of  General  Crocker’s  division,  which,  when  near  that 
place,  became  engaged  with  the  enemy.  My  command  was  immediately 
formed  to  support  his  column,  which  was  advancing  in  line  of  battle. 
His  first  advance  repulsed  the  enemy,  and  gave  ns  possession  of  the  city 
of  Jackson.  My  command  was  not  engaged  that  day.  We  encamped 
that  night  on  the  west  side  of  the  city. 

On  the  morning  of  the  1 5th,  xiursuant  to  special  orders,  I leit  my  en- 
campment on  the  main  road.  2 miles  west  ot  Jackson,  and  marched  in 
the  direction  of  Clinton.  Leaving  the  J ackson  road  at  this  point,  I pro^- 
ceeded  on  what  is  known  as  the  Edwards  Depot  road  a distance  of  7 
miles,  and  encamped  on  Turkey  Creek,  with  my  right  and  left  resting 
on  the  road.  Here  my  advance  came  up  with  General  Hovey’s  division. 
The  Third  Brigade,  ^General  John  D.  Stevenson  commanding,  was 
brought  up  and  formed  upon  General  Hovey’s  left  at  a point  crossing 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


647 


tlie  railroad  leading  from  Kayrnond  to  Edwards  Depot,  where  strong 
lines  of  pickets  were  thrown  out  connecting  with  G-eneral  Hovey,  to 
avoid  any  flank  movement  of  the  enemy.  The  First  Brigade,  General 
John  E.  iSmith,  was  assigned  a position  on  the  right  of  the  road,  to  sup- 
])ort  the  Eighth  Michigan  Battery,  Captain  De  Golyer,  and  Company 
D,  First  Illinois  Light  Artillery,  both  of  which  were  placed  in  positions 
commanding  the  road.  The  Second  Brigade,  General  E.  S.  Dennis  com- 
manding, was  held  as  a reserve  in  the  rear  of  General  Stevenson. 

On  the  following  morning  (the  16th  instant),  at  5 a.  m.,  General  M.  D. 
Leggett,  by  the  expiration  of  his  leave  of  absence,  having  resumed  com- 
mand, vice  General  Dennis,  relieved  by  special  orders  and  required  to  ' 
report  to  General  Quinby,  commanding  the  Seventh  Division,  followed 
up  with  his  command  directly  in  the  rear  of  General  Hovey’s  division. 
Proceeding  a distance  of  2 miles,  I found  General  Hovey’s  command 
drawn  up  in  line  of  battle,  his  right  resting  on  the  left  of  the  main  road, 
the  enemy,  as  I learned,  having  been  discovered  in  force  strongly  posted 
on  a high  ridge  known  as  Champion’s  Hill,  and  apparently  well  sup- 
ported by  artillery.  I caused  the  Second  Brigade,  General  Leggett, 
with  the  Twentieth  Ohio,  Colonel  Force  commanding,  and  the  Thirtieth 
Illinois  Infantry,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Shedd  commanding,  constituting 
the  advance  line,  to  move  forward  and  form  on  the  right  of  General 
Hovey.  The  Eighth  Michigan  Battery,  Captain  De  Golyer  command- 
ing, having  been  previously  placed  in  position  200  yards  in  rear  of  Gen- 
eral Leggetfc,  Company  A,  of  the  Twentieth  Ohio,  and  Company  B, 
Thirtieth  Illinois  Infantry,  were  deployed  as  skirmishers.  This  order, 
under  a sharp  fire  from  the  enemy,  was  promptly  executed,  General 
Leggett  advancing,  as  directed,  across  a small  ravine,  and  forming  on 
General  Hovey’s  right.  The  First  Brigade,  General  Smith  command- 
ing, was  ordered  up  in  line,  with  the  left  resting  on  the  right  of  Gen- 
eral Leggett;  Company  D,  First  Illinois  Light  Artillery,  Captain 
Bogers,  occupied  the  right  of  General  Smith.  The  Third  Brigade,  Gen- 
eral John  D.  Stevenson  commanding,  was  brought  up  and  held  as  a re- 
serve in  the  rear  of  the  center  of  the  two -brigades,  remaining  in  that 
position  about  one  hour,  during  which  time  the  First  and  Second  Bri- 
gades engaged  the  enemy. 

The  Third  Ohio  Battery,  Captain  Williams,  formed  on  a commanding 
ridge  in  rear  of  my  lines,  acting  as  a reserve.  The  Second  Brigade, 
General  Leggett,  advanced  to  the  attack  in  two  lines,  two  battalions  in 
the  first  and  two  battalions  in  the  second  line,  the  second  line  200  yards 
in  the  rear  of  the  first  line. 

The  First  Brigade,  General  Smith,  also  advanced  in  two  lines,  three 
battalions  in  the  first  line  and  two  battalions  in  the  second  line.  The 
enemy  were  strongly  posted  in  the  outskirts  of  the  timber,  directly  in 
my  front,  and  were  discovered  in  force  behind  the  fence,  from  which, 
after  a spirited  resistance,  they  were  compelled  to  retire  into  the  woods. 
The  enemy  in  front  of  General  Smith’s  brigade  occupied  a ridge  over- 
looking a deep  ravine,  covered  with  thick  underbrush,  rendering  an 
advance  exceedingly  difficult.  The  engagement  became  general  along 
the  entire  line,  the  enemy  advancing  and  contesting  the  forward  move- 
ment with  great  obstinacy.  The  First  and  Second  Brigades  were 
directed  to  charge  upon  the  enemy,  which  order,  after  a spirited  engage- 
ment, was  successfully  carried  out,  causing  the  enemy  to  abandon  his 
chosen  position  and  retire  under  cover  of  a second  ridge.  During  tliis 
engagement  General  Stevenson’s  brigade  moved  up  on  General  Smith’s 
right,  advancing  across  a deep  ravine  to  prevent  any  flank  movement 
of  the  enemy.  By  this  time  a battery  had  been  planted  by  the  enemy 


648 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


on  a,  bigli  ])iece  of  ground  in  General  Stevenson’s  front,  for  the  purpose, 
as  I suppose,  of  subjecting  the  First  and  Second  Brigades  to  an  enfilad- 
ing fire.  To  counteract  this  movement,  General  Stevenson  was  ordered 
to  swing  aroun’d  his  right  and  charge  upon  the  enemy.  Crossing  an 
almost  impassable  hollow,  the  Third  Brigade,  with  the  Eighty-first  Illi- 
]iois  Infantry,  Colonel  J.  J.  Dollins  commanding^  and  the  Thirty-second 
Ohio  Infantry,  Col.  B.  F.  Potts  commanding,  forming  the  advance  line, 
moved  up  in  good  order,  made  a bayonet  charge  as  instructed,  drove 
the  enemy  from  their  guns,  capturing  the  entire  battery,  consisting  of 
five  guns. 

This  brilliant  movement,  and  the  glorious  results  which  followed  it, 
speak  volumes  for  the  commanding  general  and  his  men.  Too  much 
credit  cannot  be  awarded  for  such  an  exhibition  of  gallantry.  General 
Stevenson  having  turned  the  left  flank  of  the  enemy,  drove  them  into  a 
liosition  in  front  of  Generals  Smith’s  and  Leggett’s  brigades,  which  in 
the  mean  time  had  engaged  the  enemy  with  a determination  and  cour- 
age displayed  only  by  veteran  troops. 

The  result  of  this  engagement  was  the  capture,  by  the  Twentieth  and 
One  hundred  and  Twenty-fourth  Illinois  and  Twenty-third  Indiana  In- 
fantry, of  a battery  consisting  of  six  pieces  of  artillery  and  a large  num- 
ber of  prisoners.  The  action  of  the  First  and  Second  Brigades,  exposed 
to  a raking  fire  of  the  enemy,  protected  by  natural  defenses,  merits  my 
warmest  commendation.  During  the  action,  which  lasted  from  10  a.  m. 
until  late  in  the  afternoon,  the  Second  Brigade,  General  Leggett,  held 
its  position  on  General  Hovey’s  right,  although  repeated  efforts  were 
made  by  the  enemy  to  break  through  the  left.  The  point  occupied  by 
General  Leggett  was  selected  by  the  enemy  for  a grand  attack.  The 
coolness  and  unflinching  bravery  evinced  by  this  brigade,  and  the  suc- 
cessful manner  in  which  it  repulsed  a suiierior  number  of  the  enemy, 
cannot  be  too  highly  applauded.  The  contest  was  fiercely  waged  upon 
both  sides,  resulting  in  the  retreat  of  the  enemy.  The  respective  bat- 
teries commanded  by  Captains  De  Golyer,  Kogers,  and  Williams,  under 
the  personal  supervision  of  Major  Stolbrand,  rendered  incalculable  aid 
in  effectually  shelling  the  enemj^  wherever  directed.  The  Third  Brigade, 
General  Stevenson  commanding,  in  addition  to  the  guns  before  enumer- 
ated, captured  many  prisoners,  numbering  1,300  in  all,  who,  in  connec- 
tion with  those  taken  by  the  First  and  Second  Brigades,  were  turned 
over  to  the  provost-marshal  of  my  division. 

At  4 o’clock  I received  information  of  the  enemy’s  retreat.  General 
Stevenson’s  brigade,  with  De  Golyer’s  battery,  was  pushed  forward  in 
pursuit.  The  brigade  advanced  upon  the  double-quick  on  the  main  road 
leading  to  Big  Black  River  to  a point  2 miles  beyond  the  battle-field, 
shelling  the  enemy  and  spreading  great  consternation  in  his  ranks. 
Night  coming  on,  my  command  halted  on  the  main  road,  distant  3 miles, 
from  Big  Black  River  Bridge. 

To  Captain  De  Golyer  much  credit  is  due  for  the  energy  displayed  in 
performing  the  part  assigned  him  by  General  Stevenson. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  I moved  forward  a distance  of  2 miles, 
and  encamped  on  the  right  of  the  main  road,  1 mile  from  Big  Black 
River  Bridge.  Here  I was  detained  until  the  morning  of  the  18th.  A 
bridge  having  been  constructed  the  night  previous  across  Big  Black 
River,  I proceeded  with  my  command  on  a cross-road  intersecting  the 
main  Vicksburg  and  Bridgei)ort  road  at  a point  distant  3 miles  from 
Big  Black  River.  Was  detained  here  some  time  to  enable  the  rear  of 
General  Sherman’s  corps  to  pass,  it  having  been  assigned  the  advance 


chap.  XXXVI.l  BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS.  649 

Upon  Yicksburg.  Moving  forward  the  distance  of  10  miles,  I remained 
over  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  19th,  I resumed  the  advance  in  the  direction 
of  Vicksburg,  2 miles  in  the  rear  of  which  place  I arrived  with  my  com- 
mand at  10  a.  m. 

In  submitting  this  report,  which  is  hurried  and  somewhat  imperfect, 
I am  pained  to  record  the  loss  of  Oolonel  Eichards,  commanding  the 
Twentieth  Illinois  Infantry,  mortally  wounded  in  the  battle  of  Eaymond 
while  in  the  discharge  of  his  ofiQcial  duties ; an  efficient  officer,  the  loss 
will  be  keenly  felt  by  his  fine  regiment,  greatly  reduced  by  casualties 
incident  to  long  service  in  the  field. 

I am  also  grieved  to  announce  the  death  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Snook, 
commanding  the  Sixty-eighth  Ohio  Infantry,  killed  in  the  action  of 
Champion’s  Hill. 

To  particularize  numerous  instances  of  personal  valor,  where  all 
evinced  such  readiness  to  brave  the  danger  of  the  battle-field,  would  be 
unjust  to  the  general  good  deportment  manifested  by  the  officers  and 
men  of  the  Third  Division.  Exposed  to  unusual  hardships  in  an  ardu- 
ous campaign  of  thirty  days’  duration,  with  insufficient  transportation, 

' marching  a distance  of  200  miles,  and  actively  engaged  in  four  well- 
contested  battles  with  an  ambushed  enemy,  the  willingness  with  which 
all  orders  were  carried  out  affords  the  commanding  general  a conclusive 
proof  of  their  soldierly  qualities  and  strict  discipline. 

To  my  brigade  commanders,  upon  all  of  whom  weighty  responsibil- 
ities were  imposed,  the  fidelity  with  which  their  various  duties  w^ere 
discharged  contributed  to  the  success  wduch  has  attended  our  arms. 
All  of  them  gave  me  repeated  indications  of  the  coolness,  firmness,  and 
decision  of  character  so  essential  in  time  of  action. 

To  Major  Stolbrand,  my  chief  of  artillery,  I am  indebted  for  valuable 
aid.  To  Major  Townes,  assistant  adjutant  general;  Maj.  John  0.  Fry, 
provost-marshal ; Captain  Wheaton,  acting  assistant  in si^ec tor-general ; 
Captains  Holcomb  and  Hotaling,  Lieutenants  Moore,  Hoover,  and  Davis, 
aides-de-camp,  and  to  Captain  Wickizer,  assistant  quartermaster,  and 
William  H.  Holbrook,  acting  commissary  of  subsistence,  I am  indebted 
for  the  prompt  discharge  of  their  various  duties  on  the  various  marches 
and  the  several  fields  of  action,  rendering  me  incalculable  aid  through 
their  efficiency. 

The  following  is  a list  of  the  casualties  which  occurred  in  the  several 
battles  in  which  my  command  has  been  engaged  since  the  1st  instant : 

THOMPSON’S  HILL,  MAY  1. 


Command. 

Killed. 

ns 

<D 

2 

o 

Missing, 

Total. 

First  Brigade,  General  John  E.  Smith  commanding: 

Commissioned  officers 

4 

4 

Enl  i stftd  TTi  ftn  

5 

23 

28 

Second  Brigade,  General  E.  S.  Dennis  commanding: 

GnmTnissinnftd  nffimr.^ 

1 

1 

Enlisted  men.  ....  ..  .................... ....  ..  ..  ..... 

2 

2 

Third  Brigade,  General  John  D.  Stevenson  commanding: 

Commissioned  officers 

1 

1 

Enlisted  men  

1 

7 

2 

10 

Total  

46 

650 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap,  XXX  TL 


RAYMOND,  MAY  12. 


1 

Command. 

Killed.  1 

rS 

a 

o 

Missing.  1 

Total.  i 

First  Brigade,  General  John  E.  Smith  commanding; 

Commissioned  officers 

4 

33 

10 

163 

2 

73 

5 

82 

2 

, 23 

16 

219 

2 

83 

8 

104 

Enlisted  men  

Second  Brigade,  General  E.  S.  Dennis  commanding : 

Commissioned  officers 

Enlisted  men 

10 

3 

15 

Third  Brigade,  General  John  D.  Stevenson  commanding; 

Commissioned  officers ‘ 

Eidisted  men 

7 

Total 

432 

i 

CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MAY  16. 


First  Brigade,  General  John  E.  Smith  commanding; 

( InmTnissifvTied  f>ffieer.«i  . . 

13 

13 

Enlisted  men  

22 

91 

9 

122 

Second  Brigade,  General  M.  D.  Leggett  commanding; 

Commissioned  officers 

2 

14 

16 

Enlisted  men 

17 

172 

2 

191 

Third  Brigade,  General  John  D.  Stevenson  commanding ; 

Commissioned  officers 

4 

4 

Enlisted  men 

7 

32 

18 

57 

Total 

403 

The  entire  loss  in  the  artillery  of  the  Third  Division,  Maj.  0.  J.  Stol- 
brand  commanding,  in  the  three  engagements  enumerated  in  the  fore- 
going report,  was  as  follows:  De  Golyer’s  (Eighth  Michigan)  Battery, 
enlisted  men  killed,  2;  wounded,  3;  total,  5. 

RECAPITULATION. 


Thompson’s  Hill,  May  1 46 

Raymond,  May  12 *432 

Champion’s  Hill,  May  16 403 

Artillery  in  the  three  engagements 5 

Grand  total 886 


Kespectfully  submitted. 

JOHN  A.  LOGAN, 
Major-General  of  Yolnnteer^ 

Lieut.  Col.  W.  T.  Clark, 

Asshtant  Adjutant- Gener a f Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  24. 


Report  #/  Col.  Manning  F. 


ForeOj  Twentieth 
Brigade. 


Ohio  Infantry.,  Second 
, 1803. 


Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  Twentieth  Ohio  Yolunteer 
Infantry  arrived  on  the  field  in  front  of  Port  Gibson  on  the  morning  of 
the  1st  instant,  too  late  to  take  part  in  the  engagement  of  that  day. 

But  see  revised  statement,  p.  706. 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


651 


Ou  tbe  3d,  the  regimeDt,  marching  at  the  liead  of  the  brigade  on  the 
left  road,  following  a retreating  column  of  the  enemy,  picked  up  a num- 
ber of  stragglers  as  i)risoners.  The  skirmishers,  under  Captain  Hills, 
Company  D,  in  advance  of  the  regiment,  reached  the  temporary  bridge 
over  the  Big  Black  Ferry  while  a scouting  party  of  the  enemy  was  in 
the  act  of  destroying  the  bridge.  We  drove  them  off.  I crossed  the 
bridge,  and  found  their  implements — 14  axes,  2 spades,  1 adze,  1 augur, 
several  coils  of  rope  and  chains,  all  of  which  I had  brought  in  and  kept 
under  guard  till  relieved  by  a company  of  the  Thirtieth  Illinois  Volun- 
teer Infantry. 

There  are  no  casualties  to  report. 

The  fire  of  the  party  at  the  ferry  struck  one  man,  who  fell  into  the 
river,  and  is  supposed  to  be  killed  j another,  supposed  killed  (he  was 
carried  off'  by  his  comrades),  and  struck  a third. 

A statement  of  prisoners  taken  is  appended.*  The  continuous  forced 
march  for  nine  days,  with  loss  of  sleep  and  sore  feet,  together  with  the 
feeling  that  they  only  marched  while  others  fought,  told  severely  on 
the  men  ou  the  3d.  But  as  soon  as  the  word  was  given  that  an  enemy 
was  ill  front,  and  the  firing  of  skirmishers  was  heard,  every  eye  lighted 
up.  We  pushed  forward,  and  then  with  eager  alacrity  they  show^ed  the 
utmost  cheerful  fortitude,  which  NTapoleon  accounts  as  the  first  virtue 
of  a soldier. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  F.  FOECE, 

Colonel^  Commanding  Twentieth  Ohio  Volunteers, 

Lieut.  J.  C.  Douglass, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


No.  25. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen,  John  B.  Stevenson.^  TJ.  8.  Army,  commanding 

Third  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  Third  Brig.,  Third  Div.,  Seventeenth  A.  C., 

Crossing  Big  Blade  River,  3iississippi,  May  G,  1863. 

Major  : I herewith  submit  a report  of  the  part  taken  by  my  command 
in  the  recent  battle  of  Thompson's  Hill  and  the  skirmishes  of  the  sub- 
sequent days. 

On  the  night  of  the  30th  of  April,  having  crossed  to  the  east  bank  of 
the  Mississippi,  Bruinsburg,  I received  orders  to  move  with  all  speed 
in  the  direction  of  Port  Gibson  with  my  entire  command.  Accordingly, 
at  7 a.  m.  on  the  1st  instant,  I commenced  the  march,  my  command 
consisting  of  the  Eighth  Illinois  Infantry,  Eighty-first  Illinois  Infantry, 
Thirty-second  Ohio  Infantry,  Seventh  Missouri  Infantry,  and  De  Gol- 
yePs  Eighth  Michigan  Battery,  aggregating  1,850  infantry  and  four 
J ames’  rifles,  6-pounders,  and  two  12-pounder  howitzers.  The  day  being 
intensely  hot,  the  men  necessarily  suffered  much  on  the  march,  but  the 
continuous  cannonading  in  front,  distinctly  heard,  seemed  to  inspire 
the  entire  command,  so  that  a distance  of  15  miles  was  accomplished 
about  12  m. 

Eeporting  to  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Logan,  was  ordered  to  the  front, 
some  2 miles  distant,  to  report  to  Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McOlernand.  This 


A tot  al  of  56. 


652 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


2 miles’  march  was  much  impeded  by  stragglers  fi  om  the  field,  return- 
ing batteries,  &c.,  but  in  less  than  forty  minutes  we  were  on  the  field. 
I was  immediately  ordered  to  form  line  of  battle  on  the  left  of  Brigadier- 
General  Burbridge,  filling  up  a space  between  the  left  and  right  of  Gen- 
eral McOlernand’s  line,  before  placing  my  command  in  position,  I made 
a careful  reconnaissance  of  the  ground,  and  soon  discovered  a large 
force  of  sharpshooters  and  infantry  immediately  in  my  front,  occupying 
a natural  rifle-pit,  formed  by  a wash  in  the  main  road ; also  concealed 
behind  a long  line  of  fence  and  skirts  of  brush  and  timber.  This  force 
was  supported  by  a battery  of  four  24-pounder  howitzers,  in  a com- 
manding position  in  their  rear,  so  as  to  completely  rake  any  column 
or  line  that  might  be  advanced  against  their  infantry.  Finding  the 
enemy  thus  disposed,  I immediately  i ordered  the  Eighth  Illinois  In- 
fantry, under  command  of  Col.  John  P.  Post,  into  line  of  battle,  under 
the  crest  of  a hill,  about  200  yards  distant  from  the  advance  of  the 
enemy.  At  the  same  time  suggested  to  Major  Stolbrand,  chief  of  ar- 
tillery, and  Captain  I)e  Golyer,  to  place  his  guns  in  position  on  the 
crest  of  the  hill,  the  Eighth  Illinois  Infantry  acting  as  a support  to  his 
battery.  As  soon  as  this  disposition  was  made,  De  Golyer  opened  with 
canister  and  shell  upon  the  rebel  sharpshooters  and  infantry,  caus- 
ing considerable  commotion  among  them,  and  evidently  causing  them 
to  retire  under  their  cover  of  brush  and  timber.  So  soon  as  this  was 
effected,  the  firing  of  the  battery  ceased,  there  being  all  the  time  a 
spirited  fire  returned  from  the  rebel  sharpshooters,  resulting  in  the 
killing  and  wounding  of  a number  of  men  at  the  point  occupied  by  Be 
Golyer’s  guns. 

At  this  time.  General  Burbridge  informing  me  that  there  was  a gap 
in  his  line,  and  asking  for  a regiment  to  cover  the  ground,  I ordered 
Col.  James  J.  Dollins,  with  his  regiment,  Eighty-first  Illinois  Volunteers, 
with  his  front  well  covered  with  skirmishers,  to  immediately  occupy 
the  vacant  space,  which  order  he  obeyed  with  the  utmost  promptness. 
Discovering  immediately  in  advance  of  the  Eighth  Illinois  Volunteers, 
200  yards  distant,  that  there  was  a commanding  hill  held  by  the  rebels, 
which,  if  we  could  gain,  would  give  us  command  of  the  ground,  I or- 
dered the  Eighth  Illinois,  with  their  line  well  covered  with  skirmishers 
thrown  out  in  advance,  to  enter  a dense  canebrake  separating  them 
from  the  hill  I proposed  to  occupy.  They  ])romptly  moved  forward,  by 
the  flank  of  companies,  and,  after  a spirited  skirmish  with  the  advance 
skirmishers,  forced  the  enemy  to  retire,  and  occuifled  the  hill.  At  this 
point.  Colonel  Post,  of  the  Eighth  Illinois  Volunteers,  in  the  face  of  the 
enemy,  left  his  command,  and  came  to  where  I was,  some  200  yards  dis- 
tant, and  asked  x)ermission,  on  plea  of  fatigue,  to  turn  over  his  command 
to  his  junior  officer,  which  I instantly  assented  to,  and  did  not  see  him 
again  on  the  field.  I then,  finding  the  enemy  stronger  than  I appre- 
hended, ordered  the  Thirty-second  Ohio  Infantry,  Col.  B.  F.  Potts  com- 
manding, to  sui)port  the  Eighth  Illinois,  advancing  over  the  same 
ground,  which  movement  was  promptly  executed.  I then,  in  order  to 
dislodge  the  enemy  from  the  road  in  our  front,  ordered  the  Seventh 
Missouri  Infantry,  Maj.  Edwin  Wakefield  commanding,  to  occux^y  the 
ground  on  the  right  of  the  Eighth  Illinois,  their  right  resting  on  the 
left  of  General  Burbridge’s  line,  which  was  done  under  a heavy  fire 
from  the  enemy,  killing  1 man  and  wounding  a number  of  others. 

Having  made  this  disi)osition  of  my  command,  an  advance  of  the 
whole  line  was  then  ordered,  which  was  met  by  a spirited  fire  from  the 
enemy.  Finding  it  impossible  to  dislodge  the  enemy  with  infantry,  I 
caused  the  ground  under  the  crest  of  the  hill,  occui)ied  by  the  Eighth 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS.  653 

Illinois,  to  be  occupied  by  De  Golyer^s  battery,  they  being  effectually 
protected  by  the  infantry  on  their  flanks  and  rear.  As  soon  as  the 
guns  were  in  battery,  they  were  run  up  by  hand  to  the  crest  of  the 
hill,  and  a most  unexpected  and  terrible  fire  opened  upon  the  enemy, 
dispersing  their  infantry  from  the  ground  in  rapid  flight,  and  drawing 
upon  the  battery  the  fire  of  the  battery  of  the  enemy.  Then  there  com- 
menced one  of  the  fiercest  artillery  fights  of  the  day,  lasting  more  than 
an  hour,  and  resulting  in  the  complete  silencing  of  the  enemy^s  guns, 
their  whole  force  retiring  from  the  field,  leaving  whilst  my  attention 
was  directed  to  this  part  of  the  field,  which  terminated  the  battle  in  our 
front.  The  brigades  on  my  right  had  been  retired  to  a line  some  dis- 
tance in  the  rear,  leaving  the  Eighty-first  Illinois  and  some  Iowa  regi- 
ment (the  number  not  now  recollected)  entirely  unsupported.  Not  being 
advised  that  this  move  was  in  contemplation,  or  knowing  where  the  force 
was  retired,  I immediately  ordered  the  Eighty-first  and  the  other  regi- 
ment to  retire  to  a line  which  would  place  the  entire  command  in  the 
same  position  as  to  be  readily  and  advantageously  used.  Finding  the 
enemy  had  entirely  retired  from  the  field,  and  it  now  being  nightfall, 
the  entire  command  bivouacked  on  the  ground. 

During  the  entire  day  the  men  behaved  with  splendid  spirit,  and 
evinced  those  qualities  that  constitute  a truly  brave  and  reliable  soldiery. 
To  Colonels  Dollins  and  Potts,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sturgess,  and  Major 
Wakefield,  commanding  the  several  infantry  regiments,  the  utmost 
praise  is  due  for  the  promptness,  coolness,  and  courage  displayed  by 
each.  To  Major  Stolbrand,  chief  of  artillery,  and  Captain  De  Golyer, 
Eighth  Michigan  Battery,  and  every  man  in  the  battery,  the  highest 
meed  of  praise  is  due.  No  officer  in  the  field,  under  my  observation, 
evinced  more  skill,  caution,  and  courage  than  Captain  De  Golyer,  and 
he  and  his  men  are  worthy  of  special  notice. 

To  my  personal  staff — Adjutant  Whitehead,  Lieutenant  Callsen, 
Seventeenth  Illinois  Infantry,  aide-de-camp,  and  Lieutenant  Will- 
iams, Eighth  Illinois  Volunteers,  aide-de  camp — I am  indebted  for  the 
promptness  and  accuracy  with  wffiich  they  delivered  all  orders  during 
the  day,  passing  to  all  points  of  the  field  wherever  required. 

I herewith  transmit  the  reports  of  the  several  subordinate  command- 
ers, containing  accurate  statements  of  the  casualties  of  the  day.  Ee- 
gretting  the  necessity  of  reporting  any  loss,  I must  attribute  our  small 
loss  to  the  coolness  and  courage  of  the  officers  and  men  whilst  under  fire. 

At  daylight  on  the  2d  instant,  the  enemy  being  no  longer  in  our  im- 
mediate front,  I moved  my  command  on  the  main  road  in  the  direction 
of  Port  Gibson,  about  1 mile  from  the  town,  under  direction  of  Maj. 
Gen.  John  A.  Logan.  I changed  my  line  of  march  to  a point  on  Bayou 
Pierre,  where  the  enemy  were  in  force,  engaged  in  the  destruction  of 
road  and  railroad  bridges,  and  being  prepared  to  resist  our  farther 
advance.  Upon  caretul  examination  of  the  ground,  the  Seventh  Mis- 
souri Volunteers,  under  command  of  Lieut.  Col.  W.  S.  Oliver,  who,  during 
the  preceding  night,  had  come  up  with  the  command,  was  deployed  as 
skirmishers,  and  ordered  to  advance  to  the  edge  of  the  bayou  and  de- 
velop the  force  of  the  enemy.  This  order  was  executed  in  the  finest 
style,  and  resulted  in  ascertaining  the  i)resence  of  a large  force  of  the 
enemy,  protected  by  rifle-pits  and  with  twelve  pieces  of  artillery  in  posi- 
tion. A most  lively  fire  was  kept  up  by  our  whole  line  of  skirmishers, 
under  the  immediate  direction  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Oliver,  who  was 
at  all  points  of  his  line  during  the  day.  Einding  the  enemy  thus 
strongly  posted,  Major-General  Logan,  being  present,  caused  De  Golyer’s 
battery  to  be  posted  on  the  right  of  our  line  and  a battery  of  20-pounder 


654 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


Parrotts  on  the  left,  commanding  the  position  of  the  enemy.  The 
cannonading  on  our  side  continuing  for  at  least  an  hoar,  and  having 
effected  all  that  could  be  effected,  a bridge  in  the  mean  time  being 
constructed  at  the  town  of  Fort  Gibson,  the  batteries  and  skirmishers 
were  withdrawn,  and  the  whole  force  put  in  march  for  the  bridge ; cross- 
ing which,  we  have  continued  the  pursuit  of  the  retreating  enemy  to 
this  point  without  again  encountering  them.  At  the  skirmish  at  the 
bridge,  I regret  to  say  Lieutenant- Colonel  Oliver  received  a painful 
wound  in  the  foot,  causing  him  to  leave  the  field.  The  enemy,  I have 
every  reason  to  believe,  received  considerable  damage,  the  extent  of 
which  could  not  be  ascertained,  as  under  cover- of  night  the  whole  force 
retired. 

^11  of  which  I respectfully  submit. 

JOHN  D.  STEVENSON, 

Brig.  Gen.^  Gomdg.  Third  Brig.,  Third  Div.,  Seventeenth  A.  G. 

Maj.  E.  E.  Townes, 

Assistant  Adjutant' General. 


No.  26. 

Report  of  Got.  James  J.  JDollins,  Eighty -first  Illinois  Infantry. 

Near  Black  Eiver,  Mississippi, 

May  4,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  the  part  taken  by  my  regi- 
ment— Eighty-first  Illinois  Volunteer  Infantry — in  the  engagement  with 
the  enemy  near  Port  Gibson. 

On  the  1st  instant,  we  were  ordered  to  march  at  8 a.  m.  from  the  river, 
on  the  Port  Gibson  road,  and  arrived  at  the  battle-ground,  some  20  miles 
distant,  by  1 p.  m.,  where,  in  compliance  with  our  orders,  I caused  my 
regiment  to  unsling  knapsacks,  and  moved  up  and  took  my  position  in 
the  line  of  battle  assigned  me  by  Brig.  Gen.  John  D.  Stevenson,  my  left 
connected  with  the  Thirty-second  Ohio  Infantry,  of  General  Stevenson’s 
brigade,  and  the  right  with  the  left  of  General  Burbridge’s  brigade. 
Agreeably  to  orders,  I threw  forward  my  skirmishers  and  advanced  in 
line  of  battle. 

My  skirmishing  companies  (Company  B,  commanded  by  Capt.  Thomas 
Hightower,  and  Company  D,  commanded  by  Second  Lieut.  Henry  Miars) 
had  advanced  but  a short  distance  before  engaging  the  advance  of  the 
enemy  in  spirited  skirmishing.  I advanced  my  line  steadily  across  a 
ravine  to  my  front  and  up  a steep  hillside,  through  an  almost  impen- 
etrable canebrake.  On  reaching  the  summit  of  the  hill,  the  enemy 
poured  a severe  volley  of  musketry  into  our  ranks,  which  was  returned 
in  a spirited  manner,  and  resulted  in  driving  the  enemy  from  the  hill, 
with  the  loss  of  2 men  on  our  side,  either  killed  or  taken  prisoners,  and 
1 severely  wounded.  The  loss  on  the  rebel  side  could  not  be  definitely 
ascertained,  but  was,  doubtless,  much  greater  than  was  sustained  by 
my  regiment.  In  the  mean  time  brisk  skirmishing  was  kept  up  by  flank 
companies  directly  in  front  of  our  line,  resulting  in  every  instance  in 
driving  the  enemy. 

I advanced  my  line  forward  into  an  open  field  to  the  front,  and  within 
300  yards  of  the  enemy’s  line  of  both  infantry  and  artillery,  and  ordered 
my  men  to  lie  down  directly  under  the  brow  of  a hill  and  in  full  view 
of  the  enemy’s  field  artillery  j their  gunners  were  picked  off'  around  their 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS.  655 

guns  by  men  from  my  line.  They  rained  solid  shot,  shell,  grape,  and 
canister  at  us  for  an  hour  and  a half,  and  in  many  Instances  their  shot 
struck  in  advance  of  the  line  and  ricochetted  or  bounded  over  us  while 
in  position.  Captain  De  Golyer’s  battery  from  our  side  opened  upon 
the  battery  of  the  enemy  that  was  directly  in  our  front,  thus  placing 
us  directly  under  the  cross-fire  of  two  batteries  for  upward  of  an  hour. 
The  whistling  of  the  shots  over  us  was  indeed  sublime  and  musical,  but 
not  a man  of  us  was  hurt.  It  was  here,  and  at  that  time,  that  I re- 
ceived an  order  from  General  John  D.  Stevenson,  commanding  Third 
Brigade,  Third  Division,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  to  move  my  regiment 
back,  by  the  flank,  to  where  the  line  was  first  formed. 

I feel  truly  grateful  to  the  members  of  my  staff  for  their  good  behavior 
on  this  occasion  5 each  did  his  duty  well.  All  the  line  officers  and  men 
discharged  their  duty  as  good  officers  and  soldiers  always  do.  This  was 
the  first  engagement  my  regiment  was  ever  in,  and  1 must  be  permitted 
to  say,  in  justice  to  them,  that  their  gallantry  and  behavior  on  that 
occasion  was  only  equaled  by  old  and  well-tried  veteran  soldiers.  The 
names  of  the  2 men  that  were  killed  or  taken  prisoners  are  John  Coffey 
and  Julius  Dodson,  and  Claus  Stamps  was  severely  wounded,  all  pri- 
vates in  Company  D.  Second  Lieut.  Henry  Miars,  in  command  of  the 
right  skirmishing  company,  is  entitled  to  the  respect  of  his  superior 
officers  for  the  able  manner  in  which  he  commanded  his  company, 
lam,  adjutant,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

JAMES  J.  DOLLINS, 

Colonel^  Commanding  Eighty-first  Illinois  Volunteers. 

Lieut.  E.  Whitehead, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


NTo.  27. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  William  W.  Loring^  C.  S.  Army.,  commanding 

Division. 

Headquarters  Loring^s  Division, 

Bovina.,  Miss.j  May  6,  1863. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  my  con- 
nection with  the  army  recently  at  and  near  Grand  Gulf: 

Agreeably  to  instructions  from  the  lieutenant-general  commanding,  I 
left  Jackson,  Miss.,  on  Friday,  the  1st  instant,  and  moved  with  dispatch 
in  direction  of  Grand  Gulf,  via  Edwards  Depot,  taking  with  me  from 
Big  Black  Bridge  two  regiments  of  infantry  and  a battery  of  artillery  of 
Tilghman's  brigade.  Upon  reaching  Eocky  Springs,  about  18  miles 
from  Grand  Gulf,  we  learned  that  the  force  under  Brigadier-General 
[J.  S.]  Bowen  had  fallen  back  before  a largely  superior  force  from  the 
positions  in  the  direction  of  Port  Gibson  toward  Grand  Gulf.  Hearing 
that  the  enemy  were  approaching  the  Grindstone  Ford  with  the  view  of 
turning  our  force,  which  was  then  in  a cul-de-sac.,  we  ordered  the  two  reg- 
iments and  battery  to  move  as  rapidly  as  possible  to  the  ford  and  hold 
it  at  all  hazards,  and  then  hastened  to  the  command  of  General  Bowen, 
V Inch  we  found  in  the  position  reported  near  Grand  Gulf.  General 
Bowen  informed  me  that  his  force  was  about  7,000  men,  and  then  in 
position  opposite  the  enemy,  with  a bayou  between  them,  but  that  his 
force  was  wholly  inadequate ) besides,  that  he  had  but  one  day^s  bread- 
stufis  and  no  way  of  getting  more,  for  the  reason  that  the  enemy,  40,000 


656 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


to  50,000  strong,  were  marching  a column  of  20,000  to  turn  his  rear  by 
the  way  of  Grindstone  Ford,  on  the  Bayou  Pierre ; that  they  had  repaired 
the  bridges  across  the  intervening  streams  and  were  then  rapidly  ap- 
proaching. He  placed  in  my  possession  information  and  facts  to  satisfy 
my  mind  that  the  statements  were  undoubtedly  true.  He  further  informed 
me  that  he  was  fully  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  taking  the  army  out 
of  its  position,  and  had  put  off  doing  so,  hearing  that  I was  coming.  I 
approved  of  his  determination,  and  directed  it  to  be  done  at  once,  de- 
termined to  fall  back  to  a position  where  supplies  and  re-enforcements 
could  reach  the  army.  This  had  scarcely  been  determined  upon  when 
your  communication  was  received,  stating  that  the  army  had  fallen  back 
toward  Grand  Gulf,  and  ordering  it  to  move  at  once  out  of  its  position 
and  across  the  Big  Black  at  Hankinson’s  Ferry.  The  necessary  order 
was  given  for  the  movement.  General  [A.W.  ] Keynolds  being  sent  with 
all  possible  dispatch  to  Grindstone  Ford  with  his  brigade,  it  being  all- 
important  to  hold  that  position.  From  some  cause  or  other  this  brigade 
failed  to  reach  its  destination,  and  it  was  left  to  the  regiments  be- 
fore mentioned  to  hold  it,  and  soon  the  command  was  in  motion.  Sub- 
sequently we  heard  of  [S.  M.]  Barton’s  arrival,  it  being  the  first  infor- 
mation we  received  of  his  approach.  I placed  General  [Lloyd]  Tilgh- 
man  in  command  of  a brigade,  in  addition  to  the  two  regiments  and  the 
battery  referred  to,  with  which  he  held  the  enemy  in  check  and  drove 
him  back  after  he  had  crossed  the  Bayou  Pierre  with  an  advance  of 
some  fourteen  regiments,  with  large  amount  of  artillery.  The  force, 
with  its  baggage,  in  accordance  with  your  orders,  crossed  Big  Black 
and  there  remained  (the  other  instructions  having  been  carried  out),  its 
baggage  being  sent  to  the  rear  to  have  it  out  of  the  way  in  case  the  enemy 
appeared.  During  the  crossing,  and  after  a large  portion  of  the  com- 
mand was  over,  I learned  of  the  coming  of  Major-General  [0.  L.]  Ste- 
venson with  a brigade. 

On  the  following  morning,  Brigadier-General  [S.  D.j  Lee,  being  or- 
dered to  bring  up  the  rear,  was  left  for  that  purpose  at  the  crossing  of 
the  Big  Black,  and  kept  the  enemy  (which  proved  to  be  but  a recon- 
noitering  force)  from  coming  to  this  side  of  the  river,  or  in  any  way  dis- 
turbing our  march. 

The  next  morning  (Monday,  May  4)  I received  your  communication 
to  hasten  as  rapidly  as  possible  to  Big  Black  Bridge  and  Edwards  De- 
pot, it  being  feared  from  information  received  that  the  enemy  was  mov- 
ing rapidly  in  that  direction.  This  order  was  obeyed.  Subsequently 
an  order  was  received  dividing  the  army  and  sending  the  divisions  to 
different  positions.  This  was  done,  and  I reported  the  facts  to  your 
headquarters. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

W.  W.  LOKING, 

Major- General^  Commanding. 

Maj.  11.  W.  Memmingek, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  Boring’s  Division, 

Forest.,  Miss..,  August  27,  1803. 

Colonel  : I respectfully  state  that  I was  ordered  on  the  night  of  May 
1 to  move  with  two  regiments  and  a battery  from  Jackson  to  Port 
Gibson  by  the  way  of  Edwards  Depot. 

On  May  2,  while  passing  within  a few  miles  of  Grindstone  Ford,  on 


CiiAr.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


G57 


the  Bayou  Pierre,  we  learned  from  a citizen  that  General  [John  S.J 
Bowen,  in  commantl  of  a small  force,  had  disputed  the  road  to  Port 
Gibson,  and  was  repulsed  by  an  overwhelming  force  of  the  enemy,  with 
heavy  loss  in  killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners,  and  that,  after  crossing, 
he  had  destroyed  the  bridge  over  the  Bayou  Pierre  opposite  the  town. 
We  also  learned  that  the  enemy  was  advancing  toward  the  ford,  with 
the  view  of  cutting  off  Boweffs  retreat.  The  two  regiments  and  battery 
with  us  were  at  once  ordered  to  the  ford,  with  directions  to  hold  it.  The 
admirable  manner  in  which  Gol.  A.  E.  Keynolds  performed  this  duty 
prevented  the  success  of  the  flank  movement. 

Upon  arriving  at  General  Bowen’s  camp,  between  the  Bayou  Pierre 
and  Grand  Gulf,  we  learned  that  he  had  made  a gallant  defense,  but  was 
coinpelled  to  fall  back  as  stated ; that  his  re- enforcements  came  too  late 
and  in  too  small  numbers  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  landing,  and  after- 
ward advancing.  His  information  satisfied  him  that  they  had  a force 
of  nearly  50,000,  and  that  while  a portion  was  threatening  his  front  a 
large  command  was  marching  to  the  Grindstone  Eord  for  the  purpose 
of  turning  him.  I advised  an  immediate  movement  to  save  the  com- 
mand, then  about  5,000  strong.  General  Bowen  informed  me  that  in 
this  opinion  he  concurred,  and  had  deferred  the  movement  until  my 
arrival.  Time  being  all-important,  at  my  request  he  issued  orders  for 
a speedy  departure. 

During  the  night  I was  informed  that  a dispatch  had  come  directing 
what  had  already  commenced.  The  admirable  manner  in  which  the 
orders  were  executed  enabled  the  command  to  move  out  in  good  order 
with  its  baggage,  destroying  all  else  that  could  not  be  carried  away.  In 
the  course  of  the  early  morning  it  reached  the  cross-roads,  and  soon  after 
commenced  the  passage  of  Big  Black  Eiver,  in  accordance  with  orders. 

In  the  mean  time  the  enemy  was  at  the  ford  in  heavy  force,  the  com- 
mand placed  there  holding  them  in  check.  General  [Lloyd]  Tilghman, 
with  an  additional  brigade,  was  ordered  to  protect  the  column  in  its 
movement  to  the  river,  aided  by  General  [S.  D.j  Lee.  This  was  hand- 
somely done,  and  we  were  enabled  successfully  to  cross  it.  Near  here 
and  on  both  sides  of  the  river  we  found  the  remainder  of  [Garter  L.j 
Stevenson’s  division.  After  all  had  crossed,  my  division  was  ordered 
to  Bovina,  near  the  railroad,  where  it  arrived  on  May  4. 

With  respect,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  W.  LORING, 
Major-General^  Commanding^  dc. 

Col.  B.  S.  Ewell, 

Assistant  Adjutant  General. 


No.  28. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  tS.  Bowen,  C..  IS.  Army,  cornmanding  Con- 
federate forces,  icith  correspondence,  dc. 

Grand  Gulf,  April  30,  1803. 

Six  gunboats,  with  two  transports  lashed  to  them,  passed  my  batteries 
to-night  between  9 and  10  o’clock.  Enemy  on  Louisiana  shore,  be- 
low. Hurry  up  re-enforcements.  My  lines  very  much  extended. 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

Brigadier-  General. 

General  Pemberton. 

42  R R— VOL  XXIV,  FT  I 


658 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


fCriAP.  XXXVI. 


Grand  Gulp,  April  30,  1863. 

The  boats  have  moved  down  the  river.  The  last  are  now  in  sight, 
taking  mules  and  wagons  on  board. 

« JNO.  S.  BOWEN. 

General  Pemberton. 


Grand  Gulf,  April  30,  1863. 

General  [E.  D.]  Tracy  has  arrived.  Ilis  men  are  much  broken  down. 
I will  fight  them  the  other  side  of  Port  Gibson. 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Grand  Gulf,  April  30,  1863. 

Cam])  and  fleet  of  the  enemy  3 miles  below.  Their  troops  are  mov- 
ing. Cannot  tell  whether  they  will  attack  our  left  or  front.  When 
they  cross  again,  they  may  move  to  Kodney,  and  not  renew  the  attack 
to-day.  Will  keep  you  advised. 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

Brigadier- General. 

Lieutenan t-General  Pemberton. 


Grand  Gulf,  April  30,  1863. 

There  are  four  gunboats  in  Bayou  Pierre.  I have  no  guns  that  can 
check  them.  They  can  remove  obstructions,  and  may  destroy  the 
bridge,  cutting  my  force  in  two.  Shall  I remove  all  to  this  side,  sever- 
ing all  communication  by  telegraph,  or  make  the  best  of  it? 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Grand  Gulf,  April  30,  1863. 

Three  thousand  Eederals  were  at  Bethel  Church,  10  miles  from  Port 
Gibson,  at  3 p.  m.,  advancing.  They  are  still  landing  at  Bruinsburg. 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

Brigadier- General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 

(Same  to  Stevenson.) 


Grand  Gulf,  3£ay  1,  1863. 

General  [ W.  E.]  Baldwin  is  coming  up.  Please  answer  my  last  cipher 
dispatch. 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN. 

General  Pemberton. 


Grand  Gulf,  May  1,  1863. 

1 have  ])repared  for  defense  of  both  sides  Bayou  Pierre.  The  country 
and  the  jaded  condition  of  [Edw.  I)J  Tracy’s  and  [W.  E.]  Baldwin’s 


Chap.  XXXVI,] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


659 


men  forbid  an  advance.  If  it  can  be  done  to-day,  I will  do  it.  There  is 
no  raft  in  Bayou  Pierre.  I need  field  artillery  ammunition  badly  (10- 
pouuder  Parrott,  6-pounder,  and  12-pounder  brass).  Is  it  coming  from 
Hankinson^s?  Our  advance  has  been  engaged  with  theirs  4 miles 
south  of  Port  Gibson.  Loss  small  and  position  maintained.  I am  com- 
pelled to  keep  a brigade  at  the  Gulf,  fearing  a direct  attack. 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN. 

Brigadier- General j Commanding. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Grand  Gulf,  May  1,  1863. 

Prisoners  taken  this  morning  say  [John  A.]  McClernand  is  in  com- 
mand *,  that  three  or  four  divisions  are  landed;  one  took  a right-hand 
road  from  Eodney,  and  that  they  all  number  over  20,000  men.  I dis- 
believe the  report. 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

Brigadier- General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Port  Gibson,  May  1,  1863 — 9 a.  m. 

I am  vastly  outnumbered,  but  hope  to  hold  my  position — 3 miles 
south  of  Port  Gibson — until  General  [W.  E.]  Baldwin  gets  up.  He  is 
entering  Port  Gibson. 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 
Brigadier- General^  Commanding. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Near  Port  Gibson,  May  1,  1863 — 1.20  p.  m. 

We  have  been  engaged  in  a furious  battle  ever  since  daylight;  losses 
very  heavy.  General  [Edw.  D.]  Tracy  is  killed.  The  Virginia  battery 
was  captured  by  the  enemy,  but  is  retaken.  We  are  out  of  ammunition 
for  cannon  and  small-arms,  the  ordnance  trains  of  the  re-enforcements 
not  being  here.  They  outnumber  us  trebly.  There  are  three  divisions 
against  us.  My  whole  force  is  engaged,  except  three  regiments  on  Big 
Black,  Bayou  Pierre,  and  Grand  Gulf.  The  men  act  nobly,  but  the 
odds  are  overpowering. 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Port  Gibson,  May  1,  1863—3  p.  m. 

I still  hold  my  position.  We  have  fought  20,000  men  since  dawn, 
besides  skirmishing  last  night.  They  are  pressing  me  hard  on  the  right. 
My  center  is  firm  ; the  left  is  weak.  When  can  Loring  get  here  ? 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 
Brigadier- Genera^  Commanding. 


]jieuteiuint-Geueral  Pemberton, 


660 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Near  Port  Gibson,  May  1,  1863 — 5.15  p.  m. 

I still  hold  my  position.  I will  have  to  retire  under  cover  of  night  to 
other  side  of  Bayou  Pierre  and  await  re-enforcements.  The  bacon  is  all 
removed  out  of  Port  Gibson.  They  will  not  get  it. 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

. Brigadier -General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Port  Gibson,  May  1,  1863-— 5.30. 

I am  falling  back  across  Bayou  Pierre.  I will  endeavor  to  hold  that 
l)osition  until  re-enforcements  arrive.  I have  had  as  much  meat  carried 
over  as  I could.  The  rest  will  be  burned  to  night,  as  will  the  corn  stored 
here.  There  will  be  very  little  to  eat  here  for  my  own  command  or  the 
re-enforcements.  Want  of  ammunition  is  one  of  the  main  causes  of  our 
retreat.  The  men  did  nobly,  holding  out  the  whole  day  against  over- 
whelming odds.  The  town  will  be  iu  possession  of  the  enemy  in  a few. 
hours,  and  communication  cut  off. 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Vicksburg,  May  1,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  Bowen,  Grand  Gulf: 

The  Parrott  ammunition  has  gone  via  Hankinsoffs.  Six  and  12- 
pounders  will  be  sent  at  once.  I think  it  unnecessary  to  keep  a whole 
brigade  at  the  Gulf.  They  cannot  land  under  your  guns.  General 
Loring,  with  nearly  two  brigades,  has  started  from  Jackson  to  you. 
You  had  better  whip  them  before  he  reaches  you. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Vicksburg,  May  1,  1863. 

General  John  S.  Bowen,  Port  Gibson: 

I am  hurrying  re-enforcements;  also  ammunition.  Endeavor  to  hold 
your  own  until  they  arrive,  though  it  may  be  some  time,  as  the  distance 
is  great. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON. 

Vicksburg,  May  1,  1863—4.50  p.  m. 
General  John  S.  Bowen,  Port  Gibson: 

A brigade  from  here  will  reach  you  before  Loring. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant- General,  Commanding. 


Vicksburg,  May  1,  1863—7.30  p.  m. 
Brig.  Gen.  Bowen,  Port  Gibson:  \ 

Is  it  not  ])robable  that  the  enemy  will  himself  retire  to-night?  It  is  i* 
very  important,  as  you  know,  to  retain  your  present  position,  if  possi*  j 


Chap.  XXXYL] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


661 


ble.  Your  telegraphic  communication  will  be  cut  off,  and  enemy  will 
have  road  open  to  east.  You  must,  however,  of  course,  be  guided  by 
your  own  judgment.  You  and  your  men  have  done  nobly..  The  account 
of  the  bacon  is  very  gratifying. 

J.  C.  P.  [PEMBEPTOK] 


Vicksburg,  May  1,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  S.  Bowen  : 

In  case  the  bridge  is  destroyed,  how  far  up  before  you  could  form  a 
connection Is  the  river  navigable  to  the  bridge  “?  Is  not  the  river 
so  narrow  at  the  rafts  that,  with  Held  artillery  and  sharpshooters,  its 
destruction  could  be  prevented?  It  is  of  vast  importance  to  drive 
enemy  back  and  save  our  communications  with  Grand  Gulf  and  Port 
Gibson.  You  said  this  evening  you  would  fight  him  on  the  other  side 
of  Bayou  Pierre.  Why  have  you  changed  your  mind?  You  have  now 
about  9,000  men,  and  you  ought  to  attack  before  he  can  greatly  increase 
his  strength. 


J.  0.  PEMBERTOl^, 
Lieutenant- General^  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 

Grand  GulJ\  May  2,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  synopsis  of  the  battle 
of  Port  Gibson,  fought  by  a portion  of  my  command  on  May  1 : 

The  whole  of  the  night  before,  the  enemy  were  landing  troops  at  Bru- 
insburg,  just  south  of  the  mouth  of  Bayou  Pierre.  From  that  point  sev- 
eral roads  could  be  reached  by  the  enemy,  all  centering  at  Port  Gibson. 
General  [M.  E.]  Green  had  been  sent  out  on  the  Bruinsburg  road  the 
day  before  with  a force  of  about  1,000  men.  The  enemy  attacked  him 
at  1 a.  m.,  and,  after  a brisk  skirmish  of  two  hours  and  a half  duration, 
were  repulsed.  They  continually  received  fresh  trooi^s,  and  renewed 
the  attack  at  daylight  on  General  Green’s  position. 

In  the  mean  time  General  [E.  D.]  Tracy  had  arrived  and  taken  posi- 
tion. His  force,  nominally  2,200,  was  really  not  more  than  1,500,  and 
the  men  were  completely  jaded  and  broken  down  with  continuous 
marching.  The  enemy’s  attack  was  sustained  with  great  bravery  until 
between  9 and  10  o’clock,  when,  overwhelmed  by  numbers  and  flanked 
on  the  right  and  left,  General  Green  had  to  fail  back.  Courier  after 
courier  had  been  sent  for  General  [W.  E.]  Baldwin,  but  his  troops  were 
so  utterly  exhausted  that  he  could  not  get  up  in  time  to  prevent  this. 
General  Tracy’s  xiosition  on  the  right  was  maintained.  He  himself  was 
killed  early  in  the  action.  All  of  General  Green’s  artillery  ammunition 
was  exhausted  when  he  fell  back.  The  enemy  captured  two  pieces  of 
the  Virginia  battery,  on  General  Tracy’s  left  and  Green’s  right. 

Just  as  the  retreat  was  taking  xilace.  General  Baldwin  arrived.  I 
ordered  him  to  form  a new  line,  about  1 mile  in  rear  of  General  Green’s 
lirst  position,  and  sent  the  latter  to  the  right  to  assist  General  Tracy. 
General  Baldwin  had  no  artillery,  and  that  ordered  up  from  Grand  Gulf 
had  not  arrived.  Colonel  [F.  M.]  Cockrell,  with  three  Missouri  regi- 
ments, came  up  soon  after.  Two  were  sent  to  the  left  and  one  to  the 
right.  Ammunition  was  scarce,  especially  in  General  Tracy’s  command, 
their  ordnance  train  not  having  arrived.  I now  had  all  the  force  at  my 
command  on  the  field,  excepting  three  regiments  and  two  battalions, 
which  occui)ied  positions  which  I could  not  remove  them  from  until  the 


662 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap. 


last  moment.  I ordered  them  up  about  1 o’clock,  but  only  one  of  them 
arrived  in  time  to  cover  the  retreat  and  burn  the  bridges. 

Between  12  and  1 o’clock  I attempted,  with  two  of  Colonel  Cockrell’s 
regiments,  to  turn  the  enemy’s  right  flank,  and  nearly  succeeded.  They 
formed  three  brigades  in  front  of  a battery  to  receive  our  charge.  The 
first  was  routed,  the  second  wavered,  but  the  third  stood  firm,  and,  after 
a long  and  desperate  contest,  we  had  to  give  up  the  attempt.  I am  of 
opinion,  however,  that  this  attack  saved  the  right  from  being  over- 
whelmed, and  kept  the  enemy  back  until  nearly  sunset.  All  day  long 
the  fight  raged  fiercely,  our  men  everywhere  maintaining  their  ground, 
and  1 hoped  that  I could  hold  it  until  after  dark.  Just  before  sunset  a 
desperate  attack  was  made  by  the  enemy,  they  having  again  received 
fresh  troops.  My  right  was  forced  to  give  ground,  and  I was  reluctantly 
compelled  to  fall  back.  The  order  was  given  and  executed  without  con- 
fusion, General  Baldwin,  who  held  the  center,  bringing  up  the  rear.  The 
enemy  attempted  no  pursuit,  and  all  crossed  in  safety  to  this  side  of 
Bayou  Pierre,  destroying  the  bridges  behind  us.  General  Baldwin, 
misled  by  the  burning  of  the  railroad  bridge  and  by  rumors  that  it  was 
the  suspension  bridge,  took  the  road  due  north,  through  Port  Gibson, 
instead  of  the  Grand  Gulf  road,  and  unfortunately  destroyed  the  bridge 
over  the  north  fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  cutting  me  off  from  most  of  the 
meat,  which  had  been  sent  between  the  two  forks  for  safety.  I had  sent 
a train  around  to  bring  it  all  here,  and  some  of  the  wagons  were  cut  off*. 
They  are  coming  in,  however,  and  I expect  none  will  be  lost.  I am  en- 
deavoring to  get  it  over  a ferry  on  the  north  fork,  and,  if  I do  not  suc- 
ceed, shall  at  all  events  try  to  destroy  it.  I ordered  all  the  commissary 
stores  left  in  town,  mainly  corn,  to  be  burned. 

I can  give  no  estimate  of  losses,  returns  not  having  been  handed  in, 
but  they  must  be  severe.  A section  of  the  Virginia  battery  was  cap- 
tured by  the  enemy,  and  not  retaken  as  reported.  Two  more  pieces  had 
to  be  left  from  want  of  horses,  all  having  been  killed.  The  men  endeav- 
ored to  drag  the  pieces  off  by  hand,  but  had  to  leave  them.  The  Hud- 
son Battery  brought  off  all  their  pieces,  but  had  lost  so  many  horses 
they  were  compelled  to  abandon  their  caissons.  This  battery  suff'ered 
severely,  having'  20  men  wounded,  i^early  all  the  missing  of  the  whole 
command  can  be  considered  among  the  killed  and  wounded,  as  very  few 
prisoners  were  taken. 

The  enemy  have  refused  to  allow  me  to  bury  the  dead,  or  visit  the 
wounded  beyond  the  mere  sending  of  surgeons,  who  are  to  remain. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

JKO.  S.  BOWEN, 
Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 

Maj.  E.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

P.  S. — Since  writing  the  above,  I have  ascertained  that  the  enemy’s 
force  engaged  exceeded  20,000,  while  my  own  did  not  number  over  5,500. 

[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana, 

Vicksburg j Miss.,  May  4,  18G3. 

Eespectfully  forwarded,  with  high  commendation  upon  the  gallantry 
of  Brig.  Gen.  J.  S.  Bowen  and  command,  and  respectfully  urging  that 
he  be  promoted  to  the  rank  of  major-general. 

J.  O.  PEMBEETON, 
Lieutenant-  General,  Commanding. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


GG3 


Hdqrs.  Bowen’s  Division,  Army  of  Mississippi, 

Vicksburg,  Miss.^  June  4,  18G3. 

Sir:  I liixve  the  houor  to  submit  the  following  detailed  re])ort  of  the 
battle  of  Port  Gibson,  fought  near  that  place  on  the  1st  ultimo,  which 
has  been  delayed  until  this  time  for  want  of  sufficient  data  from  brigade 
commanders,  their  commands  having  been  ever  since  almost  daily 
engaged  with  the  enemy. 

On  or  about  April  20,  it  became  evident  from  the  movements  of  the 
enemy,  then  closely  watched  by  Major  [Isaac  F.]  Harrison  and  a portion 
of  my  brigade  in  Louisiana,  that  he  intended  to  pass  below  Vicksburg 
and  make  his  lodgment  in  Mississippi  at  or  near  Grand  Gulf.  I imme- 
diately dispatched  for  the  chief  engineer  of  the  department,  to  confer 
with  him  in  regard  to  our  position,  and  also  urged  the  lieutenant-gen- 
eral commanding  to  send  every  gun  and  every  man  that  could  be  con- 
centrated to  my  assistance.  The  engineer  officer,  after  a reconnaissance, 
fully  concurred  with  me  in  my  idea,  that  in  case  they  passed  my  bat- 
teries and  landed  at  Bruinsburg  or  Eodney,  I should  meet  them  south 
of  Port  Gibson  and  giv^  them  battle;  also  that  it  would  require  from 
15,000  to  20,000  men  to  insure  our  success. 

After  the  signal  failure  of  the  fleet  to  silence  my  batteries  at  Grand 
Gulf  on  April  29,  and  their  subsequent  passage  by  them  under  cover  of 
darkness  on  the  same  night,  I immediately  commenced  my  dispositions 
to  meet  their  army  on  the  south  side  of  Bayou  Pierre.  At  the  same  time 
my  water  front  was  so  extended,  and  presented  four  such  vulnerable 
points,  that  nearly  the  whole  division  under  my  command  was  required 
to  guard  it,  and  left  me  no  hope  to  fight  the  enemy  on  the  spot  selected 
unless  the  promised  re-enforcements  should  reach  me  in  time. 

Finding,  on  the  30th,  that  Grant’s  army  was  crossing  the  Mississippi 
and  landing  at  Bruinsburg,  near  the  mouth  of  Bayou  Pierre,  I sent  out 
Brigadier-General  Green  with  about  450  of  his  own  command  (the  re- 
mainder being  posted  on  Big  Black  and  Bayou  Pierre),  with  a section 
of  the  Hudson  Battery,  and  the  Sixth  Mississippi  Kegiment  (Colonel 
[Robert]  Lowry’s),  to  occupy  the  two  roads  leading  from  Bruinsburg  to 
Port  Gibson.  Tracy’s  brigade,  Stevenson’s  division,  arrived,  jaded  from 
a forced  march  and  without  provisions.  I ordered  them  to  halt  near 
town,  to  collect  stragglers,  cook  rations,  and  after  a short  rest  to  report 
to  Green,  who  would  point  out  their  position. 

During  the  afternoon  1 went  out  in  person  and  established  Green  in 
his  position  ; returned  to  Grand  Gulf  to  ascertain  what  demonstrations 
were  making  upon  the  positions  on  Big  Black,  Bayou  Pierre,  and  the 
river  front ; received  reports  of  approaches  being  made  on  every  one, 
and  determined  to  strengthen  the  one  on  Bayou  Pierre,  as  its  passage 
by  the  enemy  would  have  been  extremely  disastrous  to  us.  I ordered 
all  the  rifled  Parrotts  (four  10-pounders)  and  the  First  Missouri  Regi- 
ment to  this  point,  then  occupied  by  one  regiment  of  Green’s  brigade 
and  a section  of  6-pounder  pieces,  making  about  700  men  and  six  pieces 
of  artillery  in  all.  The  Second  Missouri  was  deployed  along  the  river 
below  the  batteries  to  prevent  a landing  at  points  beyond  the  range  of 
our  guns. 

Two  12-pounder  pieces  and  the  Second  [First  *?]  Confederate  Battalion, 
under  Lieutenant  Colonel  [George  H.]  Fornej^,  were  posted  at  Winkler’s 
Bluff,  to  prevent  the  /lestruction  of  the  raft  and  the  passage  of  Big 
Black  River  by  the  gunboats.  The  First  Missouri  Cavalry  (dismounted) 
and  [Ras.jvStirman’s  battalion,  with  [W.  E.]  Dawson’s  battery  (four  guns), 
held  the  position  on  Big  Black  known  as  Thompson’s  Hill,  where  the 
enemy  had  threatened  an  attack  for  some  days.  The  remainder  of  the 


6G4  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

command  (the  Third,  Fifth,  and  Sixth  Missouri,  GuiboFs  aud  one  sec- 
tion of  [John  0.]  Landis’  battery)  was  ordered  to  be  ready  to  move  at  a 
moment’s  notice.  These  dispositions  can  be  fully  seen  on  accompanying 
sketch,  marked  A.* 

About  1 o’clock  in  the  morning  the  enemy  advanced,  drove  in  Green’s 
pickets,  aud  attacked  with  infantry  and  artillery.  After  a sliarp  con- 
test of  an  hour  and  a half.  Green  repulsed  him,  driving  him  back  toward 
Bruinsburg.  At  sunrise  the  attack  was  renewed,  aud  soon  the  action 
became  general  along  our  entire  front.  The  enemy  were  gradually  ex- 
tending their  lines  and  threatened  completely  to  envelop  us,  but  the 
regiments  immediately  in  our  front  were  so  repeatedly  driven  back  that 
their  movement  was  materially  delayed.  Arriving  on  the  field  between 
7 and  8 o’clock,  and  finding  our  left  very  much  pressed,  I called  upon 
the  Sixth  Mississippi  to  charge  a battery  in  front  of  them,  to  which  tliey 
nobly  responded,  and  were  well  seconded  by  the  Twenty-third  Alabama, 
on  their  right,  but  not  by  the  Arkansas  troops,  to  their  left.  We  suc- 
ceeded, however,  in  forcing  them  back  some  distance,  and,  leaving  orders 
with  Green  to  hold  the  position  for  an  hour.  I rode  back  and  urged 
forward  Baldwin’s  brigade,  then  arriving,  to  nis  support.  I returned 
just  in  time  to  see  the  iiosition  lost.  Green  having  been  pressed  grad- 
ually back.  Ordering  Baldwin  to  take  a newline  on  the  Eodney  road, 
I sent  Green  to  the  right  to  re-enforce  Tracy,  then  severely  pressed  on 
the  Bayou  road.  The  three  reserve  regiments  from  Grand  Gulf,  with 
[Henry]  Guibor’s  battery  and  Landis’  section  of  24-pounder  howitzers, 
having  arrived,  one  regiment  (the  Sixth  Missouri,  Colonel  [Eugetm] 
Erwin)  was  sent  to  the  right  to  re-enforce  Green  and  Tracy,  Landis’ 
section  placed  in  Baldwin’s  line  (who  had  no  artillery),  and  the  remain- 
ing regiments  (the  Third  and  Fifth  Missouri)  moved  to  the  left  of  the  line. 

Finding  the  enemy’s  right  rapidly  deploying  and  occupying  a ridge 
that  gave  them  easy  access  to  the  Natchez  road,  I determined  to  check 
their  movement,  and  pushing  forward  with  the  Third  and  Fifth  Missouri — 
detaching  them  some  300  yards  from  Baldwin’s  left — we  charged  their 
extreme  right  division,  composed  of  one  six-gun  battery  and  twelve  regi- 
ments of  infantry.  The  first  line  (four  regiments)  was  routed ; the  second 
wavered  and  gradually  gave  way  ; the  third  held  its  place,  and  forced 
us,  after  a protracted  contest,  to  retire.  This  desperate  move,  carried 
out  with  a determination  characteristic  of  the  regiments  making  it,  saved 
us  from  being  flanked  and  captured,  and  gave  us  until  sunset  to  jirepare 
for  our  retreat.  About  10  a.  m.,  finding  that  no  real  attack  was  to  be 
made  on  Bayou  Pierre  or  Big  Black,  I sent  for  the  First  Missouri  Infan- 
try and  First  Missouri  Cavalry,  dismounted.  The  former  regiment  ar- 
rived in  time  to  cov^er  our  retreat  over  Bayou  Pierre  and  assist  in  destroy- 
ing the  bridges ; the  latter  (7  miles  distant)  did  not  come  up  until  night. 

Ammunition  was  very  scarce,  especially  in  Tracy’s  brigade,  whose  ord- 
nance train  had  not  arrived.  Nearly  all  my  field  artillery  had  been  left 
at  the  points  to  be  guarded  around  Grand  Gulf,  and  my  infantry  line 
was  much  extended,  as  may  be  gleaned  from  the  reports  of  brigade  com- 
manders, showing  that  companies  were  sent  to  re-enforce  assailed  points 


where  regiments  were  required. 

M}^  returns  show  the  following  force  engaged : 

Part  of  Green’s  brigade,  with  Sixth  Mississippi  and  section  of  Hudson  Batteiy . . 775 

Tracy’s  brigade  and  [Joseph  W.]  Anderson’s  (Virginia)  battery 1,51() 

Baldwin’s  brigade : 1 , G 14 

Part  of  Cockrell’s  brigade,  with  Guibor’s  aud  a section  of  Landis’  battery 1,259 


Total : 5, 164 


See  opposite  page. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


665 


666 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


We  had  thirteen  pieces  of  light  artillery.  The  enemy  had  landed 
30,000  men,  and  according  to  their  letter- writers  nearly  all  were  brought 
into  action  during  the  day.  They  had  certainly  five  major-generals,  in- 
cluding their  commander,  General  Grant,  present,  showing  that  the 
above  is  no  exaggeration  of  their  numbers.  My  command  held  this 
large  army  in  check  from  daylight  until  near  sundown,  often  repulsing 
them,  and  three  times  charging  and  breaking  their  lines. 

About  half  an  hour  before  sundown  the  order  to  retire  was  given. 
Green  was  then  slowly  falling  back  on  the  right.  Tracy’s  brigade  moved 
next,  followed  by  Cockrell,  from  the  left,  and  Baldwin,  who  occupied  the 
center,  brought  up  the  rear.  Passing  to  the  left  of  the  town  with  the 
leading  brigades,  we  crossed  the  bayou,  and,  having  formed  line  of  battle 
on  the  north  side,  destroyed  the  bridge.  The  enemy,  pressing  upon  our 
rear,  obtained  possession  of  the  road  leading  to  the  left  of  the  town,  and 
compelled  Baldwin  to  cross  through  the  town  and  over  the  forks  of  the 
bayou,  destroying  both  bridges.  Halting  a few  hours  to  rest  his  men, 
he  took  up  his  march,  and,  passing  around,  joined  me  the  following  day 
at  Grand  Gulf. 

Hoping  from  my  dispatches  that  Major-General  [W.  W.J  Boring,  with 
his  whole  division,  would  be  up  that  night,  I determined  to  hold  the 
position  on  the  Bayou  Pierre,  and  if  Boring  could  prevent  the  enemy 
from  crossing  the  two  forks  of  the  bayou  to  the  east,  and  thus  secure 
my  left  flank,  I felt  confident  of  whipping  them  in  front.  Finding  that 
only  one  small  brigade  of  his  was  en  route  to  join  me,  and  that  [A.  W.] 
Beynolds’  brigade,  of  [Carter  B.]  Stevenson’s  division,  had  not  yet  come 
up,  I determined  to  abandon  the  position. 

Major-General  Boring  and  Brigadier-General  [Bloyd]  Tilghman  ar- 
rived at  my  headquarters  about  11  o’clock  on  the  night  of  the  2d.  I 
explained  my  position  to  them,  and  stated  my  determination  to  retreat, 
but  told  General  Boring  that  the  order  had  not  yet  been  communicated 
to  any  one.  He  declined  to  assume  the  command  of  the  troops,  but 
concurred  in  my  belief  that  I was  compelled  to  abandon  the  post  at 
Grand  Gulf.  I then  ordered  the  evacuation,  the  time  for  each  command 
to  move  being  so  fixed  as  to  avoid  any  delay  or  confusion  when  the  sev- 
eral commands  from  their  respective  positions  should  meet  on  the  main 
road.  After  the  order  was  issued,  a dispatch  from  General  Pemberton 
ordered  the  abandonment  of  the  position,  adding  that  I was  to  abandon 
my  baggage,  which  I had  determined  to  and  did  save.  After  the  army 
was  clear  of  the  post,  magazines  destroyed,  and  the  order  of  march  fully 
arranged,  General  Boring  assumed  command,  keeping  me  with  him  as 
a staff  officer  until  we  crossed  the  Big  Black  Eiver,  when  I returned  to 
the  command  of  my  division. 

Too  much  praise  cannot  be  bestowed  upon  the  troops  who  shared  the 
perils  and  hardships  incident  to  this  battle.  By  referring  to  the  reports 
of  General  Baldwin  and  Colonel  [1.  W.]  Garrott  (commanding  Tracy’s 
brigade),  it  will  be  seen  that  these  brave  men  marched  over  100  miles, 
fought  for  twelve  hours  an  army  five  times  their  number,  and  all  in  the 
space  of  five  days. 

General  Green’s  handsome  repulse  of  the  enemy’s  advance  guard  the 
night  before  the  battle  is  worthy  of  special  commendation. 

In  addition  to  the  gallant  charge  made  by  the  Third  and  Fifth  Mis- 
souri (Colonels  [W.  K.]  Cause’s  and  [JamesJ  McCown’s  regiments)  on 
the  left,  I would  call  special  attention  to  the  cool,  daring,  and  deter-  j 
mined  conduct  of  Col.  Eugene  Erwin  and  the  brave  officers  and  | 

under  him,  of  the  Sixth  Missouri.  To  fully  understand  the  merit  of 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


battle  of  Tort  gibson,  miss. 


667 


this  officer  and  bis  re^iimeut,  I refer  to  bis  report,  herewith  inclosed,  and 
fully  substantiated  by  the  reports  of  General  Green  and  Colonel  Gar- 
rott.  The  remaining  regiments  of  this  brigade,  viz,  the  First  (Colonel 
[A.  C.]  Riley)  and  Second  (Lieutenant-Colonel  [Pembroke  S.]  Senteny 
commanding),  were  conspicuous  during  the  defense  made  at  the  Bayou 
Pierre  Bridge,  and  as  a portion  of  the  rear  guard  which  was  so  ably 
handled  by  Colonel  Cockrell  on  our  retreat  from  Grand  Gulf  to  Han- 
kinsoffis  Ferry. 

That  portion  of  the  artillery  engaged,  viz,  [J.  W]  Andersoffis  ( Virginia) 
battery,  one  section  of  the  Hudson,  and  one  section  of  Landis’  battery, 
commanded,  respectively,  by  Captain  [J.  W.]  Johnston, Lieutenant  [John 
R.J  Sweaney,and  Captain  Landis,  conducted  themselves  in  the  most  com- 
mendable manner.  The  officers  and  men  of  the  Anderson  and  Hudson 
Batteries  stood  to  their  pieces  under  the  most  withering  fire,  and  fought 
until  ammunition  was  exhausted  and  so  many  horses  killed  that  one 
[officer]  (Lieutenant  Sweaney)  had  to  leave  his  caissons,  and  the  other 
(Captain  Johnston)  four  of  his  pieces,  which  the  men  strove  hard  to 
drag  oft*  the  field  by  hand. 

Thanks  are  due  to  the  officers  of  my  staff,  who  displayed  their  usual 
zeal  and  courage  on  such  occasions. 

Our  loss,  it  will  be  seen  by  the  returns  heretofore  forwarded,  is: 
Killed,  68  J wounded,  380;  missing,  384.  That  of  the  enemy  is  estimated 
in  their  published  accounts  at  about  2,000  in  killed  and  wounded,  some 
placing  it  as  high  as  2,500. 

Among  our  gallant  dead  is  numbered  Brigadier-General  Tracy,  who 
fell  early  in  the  fight,  but  after  giving  signal  proof  of  his  ability  as  an 
officer  and  bravery  as  a man. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding  Division, 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger, 

Asst,  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana. 


[Indorsement.] 


Richmond,  March  6,  1865. 

These  papers,  to  wit:  Reports  of  Major-General  Bowen,  Brig.  Gen. 
M.  E.  Green,  Brig.  Gen.  W.  E.  Baldwin,  Col.  F.  M.  Cockrell,  Col.  E. 
Erwin,  and  Col.  I.  W.  Garrott,  have  only  been  found  by  me  within  the 
last  three  days  among  some  old  court-martial  papers.  I had  never  seen 
them  before,  but  was  informed  at  Demopolis,  Ala.,  in  August,  1863,  that 
they  had  been  sent  in  to  my  headquarters  during  the  siege  of  Vicks- 
burg. Captain  [R.  R.j  Hutchinson,  then  (formerly  assistant  adjutant- 
general  to  Bowen)  on  duty  with  me,  had  a search  made  for  them,  but 
ineffectually.  They  are  now  respectfully  forwarded  to  Adjutant  and 
Inspector  General’s  Office  for  file,  with  my  official  report  of  operations  in 
Department  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana. 

J.  C.  PEMBERTON, 

Lieutenant-  General,  &e. 


668 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXTl. 


ADDENDA  . 

Return  of  Casual  ties  in  the  Confederate  forces  (Brig.  Gen.  John  S.  Bowen  commanding) 
at  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  May  1,  1S63. 

[Compiled  from  brigade  reports.] 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

o 

H 

Bowen’s  division : 

First  Brigade  (Cockrell’s)  

13 

97 

96 

206 

Second  Brigade  (Green’s) 

17 

83 

122 

222 

Smith’s  division : 

First  Brigade  (Baldwin’s) 

12 

48 

27 

87 

Stevenson’s  division : 

Second  Brigade  (Tracy’s) 

18 

112 

142 

272 

Total 

60 

340 

387 

787 

Total  according  to  Bowen’s  report 

68 

380 

384 

832 

No.  29. 

Report  of  Col.  Francis  M.  Goclirell^  Second  Missouri  Infantry  (Confed- 
erate)., commanding  First  Brigade^  Bowen'^s  Division. 

Hdqrs.  1st  Brig.,  2d  Div.,  Army  of  Miss,  and  E.  La., 

Viclcsburg,  June  22,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  this  brigade  in  the  memorable  engagements  of  April  29  at 
Grand  Gulf  and  May  1 at  Port  Gibson,  and  the  subsequent  evacuation  : 

During  the  engagement  with  the  gunboats  on  April  29,  the  Third 
Missouri  Infantry,  under  Lieut.  Col.  F.  L.  Hubbell,  was  in  the  rifl6-pit 
supporting  the  batteries.  [William]  Waders  battery  and  GuiboPs  artil- 
lerymen, manning  heavy  guns,  were  in  the  works  at  their  post.  All 
nobly  did  their  whole  duty  during  this  fearful  strife. 

Our  loss  was  : Killed,  2 ; wounded,  18. 

On  the  morning  of  May  1,  the  Second  Missouri  Infantry,  under  Lieut. 
Col.  P.  S.  Senteny,  was  posted  on  the  river  front ; the  First  Missouri 
Infantry,  under  Col.  A.  C.  Bile3%  with  Wade’s  battery,  under  Lieuten- 
ant [R.  C.]  Walsh,  was  guarding  a crossing  on  Bayou  Pierre. 

In  obedience  to  orders,  at  about  8 a.  m.  the  Third  Missouri  Infantry, 
under  Colonel  [W.  R.]  Gause ; the  Fifth  Missouri  Infantry,  under  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel [R.  S.]  Bevier,  and  the  Sixth  Missouri  Infantry,  under 
Colonel  [Eugene]  Erwin,  and  Guibor’s  batterj^,  under  Lieutenant  [Will- 
iam] Corkery,  moved  in  quick  time  to  the  battle-field  near  Port  Gibson, 
about  6 miles  distant,  and  took  position  on  our  extreme  left,  except 
Colonel  Erwin,  who,  with  the  Sixth  Infantry,  was  ordered  to  the  sup- 
port of  Brig.  Gen.  M.  E.  Green.  The  Third  and  Fifth  Infantry  were 
moved,  by  the  order  and  under  the  personal  direction  of  General  Bowen, 
to  the  extreme  right  of  the  enemj',  and  forming  in  order  of  battle — the 
Fifth  in  front  and  the  Third  in  its  immediate  rear — charged  upon  the 
enemy  in  large  force  (outnumbering  these  two  regiments  at  least  five  to 
one),  supported  by  a battery  of  six  to  eight  guns.  The  enemy  immedi- 
ately began  to  change  their  lines  so  as  to  meet  our  troops,  and  the 


Chap.  XXXVL]  BATTLE  OF  POET  GIBSON,  MISS.  669 

Third  moviDg  to  the  left  to  unmask  the  Fifth,  these  regiments  dashed 
upon  and  engaged  the  enemy  at  very  close  range  for  some  forty  min- 
utes and  drove  back  in  confusion  the  line  first  engaging  us.  As  often 
as  one  line  was  driven  back,  another  of  fresh  troops  was  thrown  in  our 
front.  When  it  became  manifest  that  a continuance  of  the  engagement 
could  result  in  no  advantage  to  us,  these  two  regiments  fell  back  and 
took  their  original  position  on  the  extreme  left,  having  inflicted  on  the 
enemy  a heavy  blow  which  deterred  him  from  attempting  to  pursue. 

Captain  [John  C.]  Landis,  with  a section  of  24-pounder  howitzers,  and 
GuiboFs  battery  engaged  the  enemy,  and  gallantly  maintained  their 
position  until  all  their  ammunition  was  expended. 

Colonel  Erwin,  with  his  regiment,  was  hotly  engaged  and  acted  most 
praiseworthily,  and  I respectfully  refer  to  his  report,  accompanying  this, 
for  the  part  taken  by  his  regiment. 

Ketiringfrom  the  field  about  sundown,  and  arrivingat  the  bridge  across 
Bayou  Pierre,  Colonel  Kiley  rejoined  the  brigade,  and  the  First,  Third, 
and  Fifth  Infantry,  GuiboFs  battery,  and  a section  of  Captain  [J.  W.] 
Johnston’s  battery  took  position  to  prevent  a crossing  by  the  enemy, 
and  during  the  night  destroyed  the  bridge. 

On  the  morning  of  the  2d  instant,  the  enemy  advanced  and  deployed 
a regiment  of  skirmishers  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  bayou,  and  imme- 
diately began  and  kept  up  a brisk  fire  during  the  entire  day,  and  in  the 
afternoon  opened  on  us  with  two  batteries,  and  kept  up  a heavy  fire  for 
one  hour,  all  without  damage  to  us.  Our  skirmishers  replied  with  good 
effect.  At  12  m.  Colonel  Erwin  rejoined  the  brigade. 

Our  loss  in  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson  in  the  Third,  Fifth,  and  Sixth 
Infantry,  and  Landis’  and  Guibor’s  batteries  was : .Killed,  13,  wounded, 
97,  and  missing,  96.  For  lists  of  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  in  the 
diferent  regiments  and  batteries,  attention  is  respectfully  called  to  the 
accompanying  reports. 

Among  the  dead  we  mourn  the  irreparable  loss  of  Col.  William  Wade, 
of  artillery,  in  the  battle  of  Grand  Gulf,  and  Capt.  E.  G.  Stokely,  Com- 
pany A,  Fifth  Missouri  Infantry,  at  Port  Gibson,  both  efficient,  reliable, 
and  chivalrous  officers,  who  fell  at  the  post  of  honor  and  danger,  in  the 
full  discharge  of  their  whole  duty,  regardless  of  personal  safety,  gal- 
lantly cheering  their  men.  For  the  dead  we  shed  tears — the  true  test 
of  friendship ; in  our  hearts  we  cherish  their  memories,  and  by  our 
acts  we  will  avenge  their  deaths. 

In  the  evacuation  of  Grand  Gulf  this  brigade,  with  a section  of  12- 
pounder  guns,  under  Lieutenant  [John  M.]  Langan,  marched  in  the  rear, 
and  on  arriving  at  the  cross-roads  the  First,  Second,  and  Third  Infantry 
and  the  section  of  artillery  relieved  Brigadier-General  Tilghman’s  bri- 
gade, then  engaging  the  enemy  on  the  road  from  Grindstone  Ford  to 
Hankinson’s  Ferry,  and  became  engaged  immediately,  and  successfully 
checked  as  long  as  desired  every  attempt  of  the  enemy  to  advance,  and 
then  withdrew  across  Big  Black  Eiver.  Colonel  Erwin  and  Lieutenant 
Walsh,  with  three  Parrott  guns,  guarded  the  ferry  during  the  night  of 
the  3d  instant  and  a part  of  the  4th  instant,  and  then  marched  in  rear 
of  our  forces  to  Bovina.  ‘ 

Too  much  praise  cannot  be  bestowed  on  the  private  soldiers  of  this 
brigade  for  their  coolness,  discretion,  patient  endurance,  and  chival- 
rous bearing  during  all  these  memorable  events — under  the  fire  of  the 
enemy’s  iron  clads  at  close  range,  in  the  rapid  march  to  the  field  of  strife 
and  duty ; the  Third  and  Fifth  Eegiments  in  fearlessly  charging  a di- 
vision of  the  Federal  Army,  and  engaging  such  fearful  odds  so  long; 
the  Sixth  Eegimentin  cliargiiiganddriving  back  an  immensely  superior 


670 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai*.  XXXVL 


force,  aud  bolding  them  at  bay  until  almost  surrounded,  and  then  safely 
withdrawing,  and  all  in  the  rapid  and  long  marches  to  Bovina. 

All  the  officers  did  their  whole  duty  so  far  as  I could  ascertain,  and 
all  the  field  officers  were  particularly  distinguished  for  their  coolness, 
discretion,  efficiency,  and  fearless  bearing  amid  dangers. 

To  my  acting  adjutant  (J.  M.  Flanagan),  and  to  Kev.  J.  S.  Howard, 
chaplain  Second  Missouri  Infantry,  and  Capts.  tJ.  M.  Young  and  Kobert 
L.  Maupin,  who  accompanied  me  during  these  engagements  and  marches, 
I am  under  special  obligations  for  the  fearless  manner  in  which  they  so 
fully  discharged  every  required  duty. 

I have  the  honor,  captain,  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

F.  M.  COCKRELL, 

Colonel^  Comdg.  First  Brig.  Mo.  Vols.,  Bowerds  Division. 

Capt.  R.  R.  Hutchinson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No  30. 

Report  of  Col.  Eugene  Ericin^  Sixth  Missouri  Infantry  [Confederate). 

Camp  near  Bovina,  Miss.,  May  8, 1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken 
by  my  regiment  (the  Sixth  Missouri  Infantry)  in  the  battle  near  Port 
Gibson  on  May  1 : 

About  10  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  that  day,  my  regiment,  at  the  time 
being  in  the  ditches  at  Grand  Gulf,  was  relieved  by  the  Second  Missouri 
Infantry,  and  I received  an  order  from  Colonel  [F.  M.]  Cockrell  to  move 
as  rapidly  as  possible  with  my  regiment  to  the  scene  of  action,  8 miles 
distant.  This  march  was  accomplished  in  two  and  a half  hours.  I im- 
mediately reported  to  General  Bowen,  and  was  ordered  by  him  to  report 
to  General  Green,  who  ordered  me  to  take  position  immediately  upon  the 
left  of  General  Tracy’s  brigade,  which  formed  the  right  wing  of  our 
army.  In  order  to  reach  this  position  it  was  necessary  to  advance 
across  an  open  corn-field,  under  a heavy  fire  from  the  enemy’s  skir- 
mishers. This  movement  was  executed  at  double-quick  time,  in  good 
order,  and  with  but  little  loss.  The  position  thus  gained  was  about 
100  yards  in  advance  of  the  enemy’s  line,  and  immediately  under  the 
brow  of  a ridge  running  parallel  with  the  line  of  battle.  My  skir- 
mishers quickly  engaged  those  of  the  enemy,  and  we  remained  in  this 
position  about  an  hour,  when  it  became  evident  that  an  attempt  was 
being  made  to  turn  the  right  flank  of  Tracy’s  brigade,  their  skirmishers 
being  rapidly  driven  in,  and  it  was  apparent  that  unless  some  assist- 
ance was  afforded  them  they  would  be  driven  from  their  position.  I 
therefore  felt  that  as  prompt  action  was  necessary,  I would  be  justified 
in  making  an  advance  without  orders,  and  immediately  ordered  a charge 
at  double-quick  time,  and  rapidly  drove  the  enemy  before  me,  recap- 
turing a section  of  artillery  that  had  been  taken  by  the  enemy  before 
my  arrival.  I succeeded  in  driving  them  for  a quarter  of  a mile,  when, 
finding  that  there  had  been  no  advance  by  Tracy’s  brigade  on  my 
right,  I ordered  my  men  to  halt  and  take  a very  strong  position  under 
the  brow  of  a narrow  ridge,  which  separated  me  from  a line  of  the  en- 
emy’s reserves.  I here  fought  them  for  one  hour  and  a half,  occasion - 
^.lly  sending  messengers  to  Tracy’s  brigade,  requesting  them  to  com§ 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


671 


np  to  my  support.  But  it  seems  that  about  the  time  1. ordered  my  re^r- 
imeut  to  make  the  charge,  they  received  orders  to  withdraw,  which  they 
did  rapidly  and  without  my  being  aiiprised  of  it.  Consequently,  my 
messengers  never  reached  them.  I hejd  this  position  until  my  ammu- 
nition was  nearly  exhausted,  my  line  and  the  enemy^s  being  within 
20  yards  of  each  other,  when,  finding  that  the  enemy  had  flanked 
me  on  the  right  with  a brigade  of  fresh  troops,  I reluctantly  deter- 
mined to  withdraw  from  a position  which  had  been  so  gallantly  won 
and  perseveringly  maintained.  The  proximity  of  the  enemy  on  my 
front  rendered  this  a most  hazardous  undertaking.  I therefore  went 
to  each  captain,  and  notified  him  that  I intended  to  give  the  command 
fix  bayonets,”  so  that  the  enemy  could  hear  it,  and  make  a demonstra- 
tion as  if  I wcKe  going  to  charge  the  line  in  front  of  me ; but,  instead 
of  carrying  out  the  charge,  they  must  face  their  companies  to  the  left, 
and  withdraw  quietly  by  the  left  flank,  each  company  firing  a volley  as 
it  passed  a certain  point,  to  hold  them  in  check  and  prevent  them  from 
discovering  the  true  object  of  the  maneuver  until  our  escape  should  be 
effected.  This  movement  was  executed  with  such  precision  and  in  such 
good  order  as  to  induce  the  enemy  to  believe  that  we  were  moving  to 
their  right,  with  a view  of  charging  them  and  turning  their  right  flank, 
and  caused  them  to  change  their  front  to  receive  us,  during  the  execu- 
tion of  which  I caused  the  head  of  my  column  to  debouch  to  the  left 
and  take  advantage  of  a thickly  timbered  hollow  which  ran  in  the  di- 
rection it  was  necessary  we  should  go.  As  soon  as  they  discovered 
that  we  were  withdrawing,  they  advanced  their  lines  on  my  right,  and 
I again  formed  my  men  in  line  of  battle,  as  if  intending  to  give  them 
fight.  This  had  the  effect  to  check  them,  but  they  haviog  discovered 
the  smallness  of  my  force,  determined  to  completely  surround  me,  and 
were  making  disposition  of  their  forces  in  order  to  effect  it,  when  1 or- 
dered my  men  to  face  by  the  rear  ran^^  and  retire  at  double  quick,  which 
they  did  in  good  order,  under  fire  from  the  enemy’s  whole  line,  for  a 
distance  of  300  yards,  across  an  open  corn  field.  I again  halted  my 
men,  formed  them,  and  marched  off  in  the  direction  of  the  bridge  over 
Bayou  Pierre,  on  the  road  from  Port  Gibson  to  Grand  Gulf,  which  point 
I reached  a little  after  dark. 

My  regiment  was  the  last  to  leave  the  field,  and  had  Tracy’s  brigade 
joined  me  in  the  charge,  instead  of  withdrawing  at  that  time,  we  would 
have  completely  routed  their  left  wing. 

The  section  of  artillery  captured  in  the  early  part  of  the  charge  had 
to  be  abandoned,  as  the  horses  had  all  been  killed  but  two. 

I went  into  the  fight  with  400  men,  and  my  loss  in  killed,  wounded, 
and  missing  was  82,  as  will  be  seen  by  accompanying  report,  marked 
A.*  Thus  it  will  be  seen  with  one  regiment  1 charged  the  whole  left 
wing  of  the  Federal  army,  drove  them  for  a distance  of  a quarter  of  a 
mile,  fought  them  and  held  my  position  for  one  hour  and  a half  without 
support,  and  withdrew  in  good  order  under  fire  from  their  whole  line, 
with  a loss  of  only  82  men. 

My  officers  and  men,  without  exception,  did  their  duty  nobly,  and 
where  all  are  heroes  it  would  be  unjust  to  make  distinction. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

EUGENE  ERWIN, 
Colonel^  Commanding  SiMh  Missouri. 

Gapt.  J.  M.  Flanagan, 

Acting  Assistayit  Adjutant  General,  First  Brigade. 


Not  fox^nd. 


672 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 
No.  31. 


[Chap,  XXXV'L 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Martin  E.  Green.,  C.  8.  Army.,  commanding  Sec- 
ond  Brigade,  Bowen's  Division. 

Headquarters  Second  Brigade,  Second  Division, 

Big  Blade,  May  11,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  troops  under  my  command  in  the  battle  at  Union  Church, 
near  Port  Gibson,  on  May  1 : 

In  the  evening  of  April  29,  I received  an  order  from  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Bowen,  commanding,  to  send  a force  of  500  men  beyond  Port  Gib- 
son, to  take  position  and  picket  the  different  roads  leading  south.  I 
accordingly  sent,  under  command  of  Colonel  [J.  E.]  Cravens,  that  part 
of  his  regiment  (Twenty-first  Arkansas)  not  on  picket,  the  Fifteenth 
Arkansas,  and  Twelfth  Battalion  Arkansas  Infantry  (sharpshooters), 
making  in  the  aggregate  a little  over  400. 

About  1 a.  m.  on  the  30th  ultimo,  I received  an  order  from  the  briga- 
dier-general commanding  to  proceed  at  once  to  Port  Gibson  and  take 
command  of  the  forces ; also  stating  that  the  Sixth  Mississippi  Infantry 
and  Hudson  Battery  of  light  artillery  would  report  to  me  at  that  place. 
I accordingly  set  out  for  Port  Gibson  at  once,  accompanied  by  my  staff, 
the  balance  of  my  brigade  being  on  picket.  Upon  reaching  Port  Gib- 
son, about  3 a.  m.,  I found  the  command  was  posted  on  the  Natchez 
road,  about  IJ  miles  from  town.  I sent  for  it  and  had  it  marched  out 
on  the  Eodney  road,  and  took  position  at  the  junction  of  the  Eodney 
and  Bruinsburg  roads,  where  I was  joined  by  the  Sixth  Mississippi  and 
Hudson  Battery.  After  picketing  forward  on  the  different  roads,  I went 
forward  to  reconnoiter  the  country  and  choose  location  for  the  battle. 
I went  forward  several  miles  examining  the  different  locations,  and  was 
best  pleased  with  the  one  near  Union  Church,  where  the  b'attle  was 
finally  fought ; but  finding  the  enemy  was  advancing  on  both  roads,  I 
concluded  not  to  change  my  position  .at  the  junction  of  the  roads  until 
I could  get  re-enforcements.  In  the  evening  General  Bowen  came  up 
and  informed  me  that  Brigadier- General  Tracy,  with  his  brigade,  would 
soon  be  up.  A forward  movement  was  at  once  decided  upon.  General 
Bowen  went  forward  with  me  and  decided  to  take  the  position  previ- 
ously selected  by  myself.  General  Bowen  ordered  that  I should  place 
two  or  three  companies  on  the  Bruinsburg  road  and  the  main  force  on 
the  Eodney  road  ; but  after  General  Bowen  left  me,  a scout  that  I had 
sent  out  returned  and  informed  me  that  the  enemy  were  advancing  in 
force  on  both  roads.  This  information  caused  me  to  change  the  dispo- 
sition of  the  troops,  and  instead  of  two  or  three  companies  I sent  Gen- 
eral Tracy’s  entire  brigade  on  the  Bruinsburg  road,  I taking  position 
on  the  Eodney  road  near  Union  Church,  throwing  pickets  to  the  front 
about  a mile,  and  forming  my  line  on  the  crest  of  a hill  running  diago- 
nally across  the  road,  throwing  out  skirmishers,  and  ordering  the  men 
to  sleep  on  their  arms  and  be  ready  for  action  at  a moment’s  warning. 

About  12.30  o’clock  the  pickets  were  driven  in  by  the  enemy.  Soon 
the  skirmishers  of  the  enemy  and  mine  became  engaged,  and  in  a few 
moments  a six-gun  battery  of  the  enemy  opened  upon  us,  to  which  the 
Hudson  Battery  replied,  the  enemy  still  continuing  to  advance  slowly. 
At  times  the  musketry  was  very  warm,  extending  the  whole  length  of 
our  line.  The  Hudson  Battery,  though  in  a very  warm  place,  succeeded 
in  driving  the  enemy’s  battery  from  its  position.  This,  however,  was 
soon  replaced  by  another,  which  opened  upon  us  with  great  fury.  Our 


Chap.  XXXVL]  BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS.  673 

battery  replied  with  signal  success,  though  the  enemy’s  shells  and  balls 
fell  thick  around  them,  wounding  many;  yet  they  stood  by  their  guns 
and  kept  up  a regular  fire.  After  three  hours’  hard  fighting,  the  enemy 
ceased  firing  anjd  withdrew  a short  distance,  we  still  holding  our  posi- 
tion. 

At  daylight  the  enemy  could  be  seen  reconnoitering  in  force  in  every 
direction,  but  out  of  gun-shot  range.  Between  6 and  7 o’clock  the  en- 
emy’s skirmishers  again  moved  forward  and  engaged  mine.  This  soon 
brought  on  a general  engagement  by  both  artillery  and  infantry.  The 
enemy  were  pressing  heavily  upon  me,  and  the  ammunition  of  the  Hud- 
son Battery  having  been  expended,  I sent  to  General  Tracy  for  re-en- 
forcements. He  sent  me  the  Twenty-third  Alabama  Infantry  and  a sec- 
tion of  Anderson’s  battery  (12-pounders).  This  was  about  8.30  o’clock 
in  the  morning.  The  re-enforcements  came  up  under  a heavy  fire,  and 
took  position  and  fought  bravely.  We  held  this  position  against  a force 
of  at  least  eight  to  our  one,  and  double  our  number  of  pieces  of  artillery. 
The  Hudson  Battery  having  procured  some  ammunition,  Lieutenant 
[John  E.]  ISweaney  with  two  pieces  returned  to  the  field  and  took  his  old 
position.  We  were  compelled  to  quit  this  position  about  11  o’clock,  the 
enemy  having  flanked  us  with  a heavy  force  on  the  left.  We  fell  back 
in  order,  with  but  little  loss,  except  the  section  of  Anderson’s  battery. 
These  men  had  stood  manfully  to  their  guns  until  at  least  half  their 
number  were  either  killed  or  wounded,  and  were  compelled  to  leave 
their  guns  for  want  of  teams  to  bring  tti(im  off,  all  their  horses  except 
two  being  killed.  As  I fell  back,  I met  General  Baldwin’s  brigade  form- 
ing on  a hill  some  1 J miles  back.  I marched  to  the  rear  of  General  Bald- 
win’s brigade,  and  there  received  orders  to  take  my  command  and  Colo 
nel  [Eugene]  Erwin’s  regiment  (Sixth  Missouri  Infantry)  to  the  right 
wing  and  re-enforce  General  Tracy’s  brigade,  which  I did  as  speedily 
as  the  wearied  condition  of  my  men  would  admit.  On  arriving,  I found 
Colonel  [1.  W.]  Garr  ott,  in  command  of  Tracy’s  brigade,  fighting  against 
greatly  superior  numbers,  and  entirely  cut  off  from  the  balance  of  the 
command,  and  liable  to  be  outflanked  at  any  moment.  I threw  Colonel 
Erwin’s  regiment  on  the  left  of  Tracy’s  brigade,  relieving  one  of  Colonel 
Garrott’s  regiments,  which  was  thrown  to  the  support  of  his  right,  and 
formed  my  brigade  on  the  left  of  Colonel  Erwin.  I then  ordered  them 
to  press  the  enemj^,  knowing  that  unless  we  could  drive  him  back  we 
must  fall  back  to  prevent  being  cut  off,  as  we  were  at  least  IJ  miles  in 
advance  of  the  other  portion  of  the  army.  Colonel  Erwin  succeeded  in 
driving  the  enemy  in  front  of  him,  yet  the  other  portion  of  the  line, 
although  the  troops  fought  hard,  could  not  advance  the  lines. 

I received  an  order  from  General  Bowen  to  hold  my  position  until 
near  sunset,  and  by  that  time,  if  I could  not  advance,  to  retire.  Accord- 
ingly, after  we  had  fought  for  some  hours  in  this  position,  and  seeing 
my  right  was  about  being  outflanked,  and  were  falling  back,  I ordered 
them  to  face  by  the  left  flank  and  retire  from  the  field,  there  being  a 
ravine  through  which  we  could  escape  the  fire  of  the  enemy.  This  order, 
by  mistake,  was  communicated  to  the  right  before  the  left,  v hen  it  should 
have  been  delivered  to  the  left  first.  I at  the  same  time  ordered  a sec- 
tion of  [J.  W.j  Anderson’s  battery  to  open  warmly  upon  the  enemy,  in 
order  to  divert  his  attention  from  our  movements.  This  order  was  obeyed 
to  the  letter,  and,  had  it  not  been  for  the  miscarrying  of  the  order  to  the 
infantry,  all  would  have  gotten  off  the  field  before  the  enemy  could  have 
discovered  the  move.  Colonel  Erwin  was,  however,  warmly  engaged  at 
the  lime,  and  driving  the  enemy  before  him,  and,  nob  receiving  the 
order  in  time,  came  near  being  surrounded  by  the  enemy,  Colonel  fir- 
43  n n^YQh  VT  I 


674 


[Chap.  XXX VT. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


win,  in  his  advance,  recaptured  two  pieces  of  artillery  that  had  been 
captured  by  the  enemy,  but  the  horses  having  been  nearly  all  killed, 
and  he  having  to  fall  back  at  double  quick,  was  compelled  to  leave  them 
on  the  field. 

This  regiment  fought  bravely,  and  Colonel  Erwin  showed  great  cool- 
ness of  judgment  and  quick  perception  in  getting  out  of  this  difficulty. 
This  was  the  last  regiment  to  leave  the  field. 

My  force  when  attacked  by  the  enemy  did  not  exceed  800,  and,  after 
being  re-enforced  by  the  Twenty-third  Alabama,  did  not  exceed  1,100, 
and  with  this  force  I maintained  my  position  against  a force  of  the 
enemy  (as  subsequent  [events]  have  proven)  of  at  least  7,000  Irom  12.30 
o’clock  until  about  10.30.  My  men  becoming  exhausted,  and  being  out- 
flanked at  both  flanks,  were  compelled  to  fall  back.  In  this  engage- 
ment my  command  was  made  up  of  troops  irom  Arkansas,  Mississippi, 
and  Alabama,  and  each  seemed  to  vie  with  the  other  as  to  who  should 
carry  oft*  the  palm.  Without  any  distinction,  I have  simply  to  say,  all 
fought  well,  and  did  their  duty.  All  stood  at  their  posts  until  ordered 
to  leave 

Having  received  no  reports  from  the  Sixth  Mississippi,  Twenty-third 
Alabama,  or  either  of  the  batteries,  I am  unable  to  state  their  losses, 
but  from  the  length  of  time  they  were  under  a heavy  fire  they  must  be 
very  great.  The  most  of  these'troops  were  new  to  me,  yet  they  fought 
mok  gallantly  and  did  honor  to  the  States  they  represent,  and  will  do 
to  rely  upon  in  any  emergency. 

The  Alabama  regiment  and  Sixth  Mississippi  made  a gallant  charge 
ill  front  of  the  enemy’s  battery  under  a heavy  fire.  General  Bowen  lead- 
ing the  Alabama  regiment. 

Colonel  [Kobert]  Lowry,  of  the  Sixth  Mississippi,  desep^es  the  highest 
commendation  for  his  coolness  and  promptness  in  executing  every  order. 

The  Hudson  and  Anderson  batteries  did  all  that  the  most  sanguine 
could  expect. 

The  Arkansas  troops  were  exposed  to  the  heaviest  charges  made  by 
the  enemy,  yet  they  stood  like  heroes  at  their  jiosts,  repulsing  at  least  a 
dozen  heavy  charges,  each  charge  having  been  made  (as  I learn)  by  fresh 

troops.  ■ . . , • 

Our  loss,  without  including  that  of  the  batteries.  Sixth  Mississippi,  or 
Twenty-third  Alabama,  is  222,  as  follows: 


Doubtless  many  or  nearly  all  of  those  reported  missing  are  killed,  yet 
we  have  no  means  of  ascertaining  what  has  been  their  fate. 

Although  all  the  troops  under  my  command  stood  to  their  posts  and 
fought  with  a despecation  uneqiialed,  and  particular  mention  of  any 
might  be  thought  an  invidious  discrimination,  yet  I feel  it  my  duty  to 
mention  Capt.  Grift*.  Bayne,  commander  of  the  Twelfth  Battalion  Sliarp- 
shooters,  as  having  acted  iire-eminently  gallant,  and  after  skirmishing 
with  the  enemy  and  holding  liim  in  check  from  12.30  o’clock  until  about 


Chap.  XXXVI. J BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS.  675 

8 p.  m.,  fell,  severely,  if  not  mortally,  wounded.  I recommend  him  to  the 
favorable  consideration  of  the  Department. 

I cannot  refrain  from  mentionin,i^  the  conduct  of  the  Sixth  Missouri 
Infantry.  It  has  been  my  fortune  to  be  with  this  regiment  in  every  en- 
gagement in  which  it  has  participated  since  we  crossed  the  Mississippi 
Kiver,  and  on  each  occasion  have  1 been  struck  by  their  gallant  con- 
duct, and  in  this  engagement,  though  I expected  much  of  them,  they 
more  than  came  up  to  my  expectations.  Colonel  Erwin  was  notified  to 
march  at  10  a.  m.,  and  was  on  the  field  (8  miles  distant)  by  1 p.  m.  They 
went  into  the  fight  with  about  400  men  ; were  so  nearly  surrounded  as 
to  have  to  cut  their  way  out,  and  lost  only  82  men. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  E.  GREEN, 

Brigadier -General^  Second  Brigade,  Second  Division. 

Capt.  R.  R.  Hutchinson, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.^  Boweii’s  Division,  Army  of  the  3Iississippi. 


No.  32. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  William  B.  Baldwin,  G.  S.  Army,  commanding 
First  Brigade,  SmiWs  Division. 

Headquarters  First  Brigade,  SmitiFs  Division, 

Dr.  Naylorh,  Nine  3liles  Southeast  of  Vicksburg,  3Iay  9,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  respectfully  to  report  the  movements  of  my 
command  during  the  five  days  succeeding  the  night  of  the  29th  ultimo, 
and  also  the  part  taken  by  this  brigade  in  the  action  near  Port  Gibson 
on  the  1st  instant. 

In  compliance  with  orders  from  division  headquarters,  my  command, 
consisting  of  the  Seventeenth  Louisiana,  Colonel  [Robert]  Richardson  j 
Thirty-first  Louisiana,  Lieutenant-Colonel  [S.  H.j  Griffin  ; Fourth  Mis- 
sissippi Infantiy,  Lieutenant-Colonel  [T.  N.j  Adaire ; Forty-sixth  Mis- 
sissippi Infantry,  Colonel  [C.  W.j  Sears,  marched  through  Vicksburg, 
en  route  for  Hankinson’s  Ferry,  on  the  Big  Black,  on  Wednesday,  the 
29th  ultimo,  at  9 p.  m.  We  crossed  the  Big  Black  next  day  between 
the  hours  of  12  m.  and  2 p.  m.,  and  there  awaited  orders.  These  were 
received  soon  after  sunset  from  Brigadier-General  Bowen,  commanding 
at  Grand  Gulf,  who  directed  me  to  proceed  immediately  to  Port  Gibson, 
and  there  take  position  on  the  Rodney  road.  1 marched  until  midnight, 
and  then  halted  the  command  until  morning  at  the  suspension  bridge 
over  the  north  fork  of  Bayou  Pierre. 

Starting  soon  after  daylight  the  next  morning  (Friday,  the  1st  instant), 
we  had  marched  but  4 or  5 miles  when  the  sound  of  firing  was  heard  in 
advance.  The  pace  was  accelerated,  and  soon  couriers  arrived  in  quick 
succession,  announcing  that  our  troops  beyond  Port  Gibson  were  en- 
gaged with  the  enemy,  and  urging  our  speedy  arrival.  The  brigade 
passed  through  the  town  at  a rapid  ])ace,  and  thence  marched  in  double- 
quick  about  2 miles  southwest,  on  the  Rodney  road,  when  we  found  our 
troops  falling  back  from  all  points,  pressed  by  greatly’  superior  numbers. 
The  regiments  were  at  once  assigned  positions  to  check  the  advance  of 
the  enemy.  The  Seventeenth  Ijouisiana  Avas  directed  to  occupy  a wood 
on  the  left  of  the  main  road,  which  was  much  broken  by  ravines,  and 
formed  a salient  angle  with  our  general  line.  The  Thirty-first  Loui- 


676 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 

siana  was,  by  direction  of  Geueral  Bowen,  posted  on  the  extreme  right 
of  my  position,  on  a ridge  separated  from  the  remainder  of  the  command 
by  a deep  wooded  hollow.  This  regiment  was  not  actively  engaged 
during  the  day,  but  was  within  reach  of  the  enemy^s  artillery.  It 
maintained  its  position  until  thepommand  was  drawn  off.  The  Fourth 
Mississippi  was  ])laced  on  the  left  of  the  center,  its  right  forming  part 
of  the  defense  of  the  triangular  wood,  separated  from  the  Seventeenth 
Louisiana  by  a deep  ravine,  the  left  extending  along  a skirt  of  woods 
which  bounded  on  the  side  next  to  us  an  open  field,  forming  a re-enter- 
ing angle,  the  whole  front  of  the  regiment  covered  by  skirmishers.  The 
Forty-sixth  Mississinpi  was  posted  on  a hill  600  or  800  yards  in  rear  of 
the  front,  on  the  left  of  the  main  road,  as  a reserve,  and  to  support  a 
battery  placed  there.  The  Seventeenth  Louisiana  and  Fourth  Missis-  . 
sippi  were  soon  actively  engaged  with  the  enemy’s  skirmishers;  the  for- 
mer the  most  warmly,  as  it  occupied  the  key  to  our  position.  Two  pieces 
of  artillery  placed  upon  the  ridge  where  the  Forty-sixth  Mississippi  was 
stationed,  although  nearly  out  of  ammunition,  opened  upon  the  enemy’s 
advance  in  front  of  the  Fourth  Mississippi,  and^checked  their  progress. 
The  number  of  pieces  at  this  point  was  afterward  increased  to  six,  but 
their  fire,  though  accurate  and  effective,  was  necessarily  slow  and  at 
long  intervals,  from  scarcity  of  ammunition.  The  fire  was  kept  up  with 
but  little  intermission  along  our  front  until  between  3 and  4 p.  m.,  when, 
no  progress  having  been  made  by  the  enemy,  General  Bowen  directed 
me  to  make  an  effort  to  advance  and  try  their  strength. 

I therefore  placed  the  Forty-sixth  Mississippi  in  an  open  field  on  a 
hillside,  to  the  right  of  the  road  and  of  the  Seventeenth  Louisiana, 
covered  by  a company  of  skirmishers.  The  ground  was  too  much  in- 
tersected by  hollows,  woods,  and  deep  ravines  to  admit  of  simultaneous 
action ; but  I started  the  Fourth  Mississippi  across  the  open  field  in 
front  of  its  left,  covered  by  three  companies  of  skirmishers,  with  instruc- 
tions to  dash  across  the  space  to  the  woods  beyond,  and  seize  and  hold 
the  position.  The  Seventeenth  Louisiana  was  directed  to  debouch  from 
the  wood  in  the  same  manner,  but  their  position  was  so  much  cut  up  by 
ravines  and  other  irregularities  of  ground  that  no  line  of  battle  could 
be  formed,  and  companies  v/ere  compelled  to  act  independently.  The 
Forty-sixth  Mississippi  was  directed  to  rush  across  the  field  and  up  the 
slight  acclivity  on  which  they  were  placed,  and  possess  themselves  of 
the  woods  in  front.  Before  the  dispositions  could  be  entirely  completed, 
the  enemy  opened  a sweeping  fire  of  grape  and  shrapnel,  completely 
enfilading  the  road  and  covering  all  approach  from  my  center  and  right. 
Tfie  Fourth  Mississippi  had  commenced  the  movement  as  directed,  and 
started  across  the  field  under  a heavy  lire  of  musketry,  but  belore  the 
other  regiments  could  be  placed  in  motion  it  was  compelled  to  retake  its 
l)Osition,  having  found,  as  reported,  two  brigades  of  infantry  opposed 
to  its  left.  It  was  then  evident  to  mo  that  an  attempt  to  move  forward 
would  result  in  the  destruction  of  the  entire  command  without  accom- 
])lishing  the  object.  I therefore  reported  the  condition  of  affairs  to 
General  Bowen,  who  directed  me  to  relinquish  the  attempt.  The  Forty- 
sixth  Mississippi  was  then  returned  to  its  former  position,  but  after- 
ward, from  representation  from  Colonel  Bichardson  that  his  right  was  i 
menaced,  four  companies  of  this  regiment  were  sent  forward  to  the  right  i 
of  the  road  and  of  his  position,  where  they  remained  until  the  command 
was  about  to  be  drawn  off.  The  enemy  opened  at  this  time  a coiiceii-  ^ 
trated  fire  upon  our  battery  posted  on  tlie  hill.  Their  skirmishers  ad- 
vanced against  the  Fourth  Mississippi.  Our  batteries  checked  their  i 
advTince,  but  iff  ?o  doing  MM  md  wouffdeil  sevoml  of  our  own 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS. 


677 


which  compelled  the  Fourth  Mississippi  to  take  a position  a little  in 
rear  of  their  former  one,  to  avoid  the  tire  of  our  guns.  Everything  then 
remained  in  the  center  as  first  placed  in  the  morning,  when  I was  di- 
rected by  General  Bowen  first  to  fall  back  to  a commanding  ridge  about 
lialf  a mile  to  our  rear,  and  before  this  movement  was  completed  to  re- 
tire across  the  Bayou  Pierre,  designating  the  lower  bridge  across  the 
main  stream,  about  3 miles  below  the  tovui,  as  the  place  of  crossing, 
and  a road  which  led  directly  from  the  right  of  the  new  position  I was 
taking  as  the  route. 

In  falling  back,  the  Thirty-first  Louisiana,  on  my  right,  was  nearly 
intercepted.  The  troops  of  our  right  as  well  as  left  wing  having  been 
drawn  off,  the  enemy  occupied  the  road  I was  designated  to  take,  and 
were  at  least  1 mile  nearer  the  bridge  than  my  command.  The  regi- 
ments were  drawn  off  in  good  order  in  successive  echelons^  alternately 
facing  the  advancing  enemy,  the  artillery,  being  out  of  ammunition  (one 
section  having  only  three  rounds  left),  retiring  first. 

At  9 p.  m.  I passed  through  the  town  of  Port  Gibson ; crossed  the 
south  fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  and  followed  the  route  I had  come  in  the 
morning.  I was  induced  to  this  departure  from  the  route  suggested 
by  a conviction  that  the  other  course  would  involve  the  capture  of  my 
command.  The  enemy  pressed  closely  upon  our  rear  until  near  the 
town,  when  they  allowed  us  to  continue  our  march  undisturbed.  At 
midnight  I crossed  the  north  fork,  rested  two  hours,  and  believing  it 
to  be  the  policy  of  the  enemy  to  pursue  us  rapidly,  burned  the  bridge; 
then  continued  the  route,  turning  to  the  left  after  marching  3 miles,  and 
taking  the  shortest  road  to  the  position  occupied  by  General  Bowen,  on 
the  right  bank  of  Bayou  Pierre,  opposite  the  railroad  and  suspension 
bridges,  which  had  been  destroyed. 

I arrived  at  this  point  and  formed  a junction  at  9 a,  m.,  Saturday, 
having  marched  21  miles  since  we  left  the  battle-field.  At  this  point 
we  remained  all  that  day  in  position  and  until  2 o’clock  the  following 
morning,  Avhen  a retreat  was  ordered  to  the  Big  Black. 

The  command  reached  Vicksburg  at  5 o’clock  Monday  evening, 
having  in  less  than  five  days  marched  over  100  miles,  besides  being 
engaged  with  the  enemy  more  than  ten  successive  hours.  The  men 
marched  in  better  order  and  with  less  straggling  than  I ever  before 
observed  in  any  troops;  and  while  their  indomitable  steadiness  and 
courage  on  the  battle-field  is  worthy  of  all  commendation,  their  patient 
and  clieerful  endurance  of  fatigue  and  an  unusual  march  besp(‘aks  the 
liighest  quality  of  soldiers. 

It  would  be  a most  agreeable  duty  to  mention  individual  instances  of 
courage  and  gallantry  were  it  not  that  when  all  did  so  well  it  is  difii- 
cult  to  distinguish  without  doing  injustice  to  many.  To  the  reports  of 
regimental  commanders  I respectfully  refer  for  the  names  of  their  offi- 
cers whose  conduct  was  most  particularly  noticed.  I cordially  indorse 
their  favorable  mention. 

As  regiments,  the  Seventeenth  Louisiana,  Colonel  Bichardson,  and 
the  Fourth  Mississippi,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Adaire,  were  so  posted  as 
to  bear  the  severest  part  of  the  conflict,  especially  the  Seventeenth 
Louisiana,  which  was  constantly  and  fiercely  eiigaged  nearly  the  wliole 
of  the  time  we  were  in  ])osition.  The  regiments  both  deserve  the  high- 
est praise.  The  other  regiments  (Tliirty-first  Louisiana  and  Forty-sixth 
Mississippi)  also  performed  their  parts  well,  and  to  my  entire  satisfac- 
tion, but,  not  being  in  a position  to  engage  the  enemy  directly,  were 
not  tried  in  the  same  ordeal. 

Colonel  Bichardson,  Seventeenth  Louisiana,  deserves  esi)ecial  notice 


678 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 


for  bis  gallautry,  cooluess,  and  excellent  judgment  in  the  management 
of  bis  command  in  tbe  most  critical  position  during  tbe  entire  day. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Adaire,  commanding  Fourtb  Mississippi,  is  also 
entitled  to  bigb  commendation. 

Tbe  members  of  my  staff  also  merit  my  tbanbs  for  tbeir  promptness 
and  gallantry;  but  I must  especially  mention  Oapt.  S.  D.  Harris,  assist- 
ant inspector  general;  Lieut.  P.  Hamilton,  aide-de-camp,  and  Capt.  A. 
B.  Watts,  volunteer  aide,  wbo  were  frequently  exposed  to  tbe  hottest 
lire,  and  discharged  tbeir  duties  with  tbe  coolness  wbicb  belongs  to  vet- 
erans of  a bundred  battles.  Tbe  latter  (Captain  Watts)  bad  3 borses 
shot  under  bim,  and  was  bimself  severely  wounded  in  tbe  arm.  He 
merits  more  than  my  own  praise. 

Tbe  losses  in  tbe  brigade  were  as  follows:  Killed,  12;  wounded,  48; 
missing,  27.  Total  loss,  87  men. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  E.  BALDWIN, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  B.  E.  Hutchinson, 

Assistant  Adjntant-Oeneral,  General  Bowen’s  division. 


No.  33. 

Report  of  Col.  Isham  W.  Garroit,  Twentieth  Alabama  Infantry,  com- 
manding Second  Brigade,  Stevensonh  Division. 

Camp  near  Warrenton,  May  — , 1863. 

Sir:  By  order  of  Brigadier-General  Barton,  commanding  Stevenson’s 
division,  nine  companies  each  of  tbe  Twentietb,  Twenty-tbird,  Tbir- 
tietb,  and  Tbirty-first  Eegiinents  Alabama  Volunteers  left  camp,  near 
Warrenton,  about  7 p.  m.  on  tbe  evening  of  A])rii  29;  crossed  tbe  Big 
Black  at  Hankinson’s  Ferry  tbat  nigbt,  and  continued  tbe  march  next 
day  in  the  direction  of  Grand  Gulf.  When  we  arrived  witbiu  4 miles 
of  tbe  latter  place,  we  were  directed  to  move  toward  Port  Gibson ; 
crossed  Bayou  Pierre  on  tbe  suspension  bridge  between  Port  Gibson 
and  Grand  Gulf,  and  baited  a little  beyond,  where  the  men,  who  bad 
been  without  food  all  day,  obtained  raw  rations  and  immediately  pro- 
ceeded to  cook  tbein.  Before  the  cooking  was  done,  however,  the  order 
to  march  was  given,  and  tbe  troops  proceeded  down  the  bayou  to  a 
point  5 or  G miles  in  front  of  Port  Gibson,  where  we  were  formed  in 
line  of  battle  on  tbe  nigbt  of  tbe  30tb,  tbe  brigade  having  marched  40 
miles  in  twenty-seven  hours. 

Tbe  troops  slei)t  on  tbeir  arms  until  aroused  by  tbe  tire  of  artillery  on 
our  left  about  2 o’clock  next  morning,  when  they  promptly  fell  into  line. 
An  officer  sent  by  General  Green  stated  to  General  Tracy  tbat  General 
Green  bad  sent  bim  to^isk  at  least  one  regiment  and  one  section  of 
Cajffain  [J.  W.]  Jobnstmi’s  batteiy  to  re-enforce  bim  on  tbe  left,  strenu- 
ously urging  tbat  if  the  left  was  not  sustained  tbe  right  would  be  cut 
off’ from  all  chance  of  retreat,  and  stating  to  General  Tracy  tbat  it  was 
General  Green’s  oi)inion  that  be  could  not  sustain  bis  position  on  tbe 
left  bfteeu  minutes  unless  re-enforced.  General  Tracy  reluctantly  or- 
dered the  nine  companies  of  the  Twenty-tbird  Alabama  (then  on  tbe 
•field)  and  two  of  tbe  four  guns  of  Gai)tain  Johnston’s  battery  to  bis  re- 
lief. This  was  about  sunrise,  and  before  tbe  infantry  bad  become  en- 


CIIAP.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  PORT  GIBSON,  MISS.  679 

gaged.  The  balance  of  tlie  brigade  then  on  the  ground — consisting  of 
idne  companies  each  of  the  Twentieth,  Thirtieth,  and  Thirty-first  Ala- 
bama Eegiments — were  then  placed  in  the  position  for  battle  pointed 
out  by  General  Green,  who,  as  understood,  was  sent  by  General  Bowen 
to  discharge  this  duty.  The  battery  was  placed  on  the  ridge  about  the 
center  of  our  line  and  near  some  negro  houses.  The  Thirtieth  Alabama 
was  posted  on  either  side  of  the  battery.  The  left  wing  of  the  Twentieth 
Eegimeut  formed  line  on  their  right,  stretching  out  obliquely  to  the  front 
to  a skirt  of  woods  on  the  east  side  of  the  ravine,  which  is  west  of  the 
negro  houses.  Two  of  the  four  remaining  companies  of  the  Twentieth 
Eegiment  were  posted  at  very  long  intervals,  and  the  other  two  were 
deployed  as  skirmishers  to  protect  our  right  flank,  the  distance  between 
the  right  flank  of  our  little  force  and  Bayou  Pierre,  which  was  intended 
to  be  protected  by  these  four  companies,  being  not  less  than  800  yards. 
The  nine  companies  of  the  Thirt^^-first  Alabama  Eegiment  were  placed 
in  line  on  Colonel  [Charles  M.]  Shelley ^s  left,  in  a gorge  or  ravine  grown 
up  with  reeds,  bushes,  and  some  few  small  trees.  The  distance  between 
the  left  flanli  of  this  last  regiment  and  the  nearest  troops  on  its  left  was 
at  least  1 mile. 

The  battle  was  commenced  on  the  right  a little  before  7 o’clock  in  the 
morning,  the  enemy  first  attacking  the  center  of  our  brigade  with  artil- 
lery and  small-arms.  The  attack  was  coolly  and  promptly  met  by  the 
section  of  Captain  Johnston’s  battery  above  mentioned  and  the  Thirtieth 
Alabama  Eegiment.  The  contest  here  soon  became  warm  and  bloody. 
The  battery  was  in  range  of  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters,  and  in  a 
short  time  a number  of  the  ofificws,  men,  and  horses  had  been  killed  or 
wounded. 

A little  before  8 o’clock  our  brave  and  gallant  commander,  General 
Tracy,  fell  near  the  front  line,  pierced  through  the  breast,  and  instantly 
died  without  uttering  a word.  The  command  of  the  brigade  then  de- 
volved upon  the  undersigned,  and  the  fight  was  continued  by  our  troops 
with  unabated  ardor.  1 knew  nothing  of  the  plan  of  battle  except  what 
1 had  casually  learned  that  morning  from  General  Tracy,  the  substance 
of  which  is  hereinbefore  stated.  The  enemy  was  in  our  front,  and  I knew 
of  no  order  to  retire.  A messenger  was  imigiediately  sent  to  the  com- 
manding general  for  instructions,  who,  on  account  of  the  distance  to  be 
traveled,  did  not  return  until  about  11  o’clock,  when  he  brought  the  order 
tliat  our  ])tsition  was  to  be  held  at  all  hazards. 

In  the  mean  time  the  fire  of  the  enemy  had  become  much  heavier,  and  , 
tlie  Thirty-first  Alabama  and  the  left  wing  of  the  Twentieth  had  become 
engaged.  Skirmishing  had  also  been  for  some  time  ke))t  up  with  the 
detached  companies  on  the  right.  Two  other  ])ieces  of  Captain  John- 
ston’s battery  had  arrived  on  the  field,  and  had  been  ordered  to  relie v^e 
the  two  which  had  been  iflaced  in  ])osition  in  the  morning.  Two  of  the 
lour  i>ieces  had  by  this  time  been  disabled.  Lieutenant  [Philip]  Peters 
and  several  men  had  been  killed  and  others  had  been  wounded,  and  a 
considerable  number  of  the  horses  were  disabled.  Captain  Johnston  had 
exhibited  distinguished  gallantry,  and  his  command  had  bravely  stood 
by  their  guns ; but  by  10  o’clock  the  enemy’s  fire  of  artillery  ami  sharj)- 
shooters  had  become  so  deadly  that  it  seemed  impossible  for  them  to 
remain  longer  on  the  field  without  being  sacrificed,  and  I ordered  thein 
to  retire,  which  tluiy  did  with  the  only  two  ])ieces  capable  of  being  car- 
ried from  the  field.  The  enemy  had  massed  heavy  forces  in  Ifont  of  our 
center  and  of  the  left  wing  of  the  Twentieth  Eegiment,  and  they  had 
ibr  some  time  been  receiving  a deadly  fire.  The  enemy  had  even  at- 
tenix)ted  more  than  once  to  charge  this  position  in  heavy  force,  but  as 


680  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 

soon  as  they  emerged  from  their  cover  they  were  repulsed  by  a deliber- 
ate and  well-aimed  fire. 

Tlie  Forty-sixth  Alabama  Eegiment,  belonging  to  this  brigade,  after 
a most  exhausting  march  during  the  afternoon  of  the  preceding  day 
and  night,  had  arrived  on  the  field  by  8 o’clock  with  q^bont  ICO  efiective 
men,  and  formed  on  the  left  of  the  Thirty-first  Alabama  Eegiment. 

About  11  o’clock  heavy  columns  of  the  enemy  could  be  distinctly 
seen,  and  it  appeared  evident  that  if  they  could  be  brought  up  to  make  a 
charge  that  our  slender  force  would  be  overwhelmed  by  vastly  superior 
numbers.  The  ammunition  of  the  Thirtieth  Eegiment  was  now  becom- 
ing exhausted,  and  that  of  the  left  wing  of  the  Twentieth  was  grow- 
ing short.  Adjutant  [John  S.]  Smith,  of  the  Twentieth  Eegiment,  was 
then  dispatched  to  Brigadier-General  Bowen  to  advise  him  of  our  sit- 
uation, and  to  ask  for  instructions  and  re  enforcements,  and  that  ammu- 
nition might  be  sent  us.  The  general  being  on  a distant  part  of  the 
field,  the  adjutant  did  not  return  until  about  2 o’clock,  when  he  brought 
the  order  that  our  position  must  be  held  at  all  hazards  and  that  re- 
enforcements would  be  sent.  The  enemy  had  attempted  to  make,  u})  to 
this  time,  several  charges  on  our  center,  defended  by  the  Thirtieth  and 
left  wing  of  the  Twentieth  Alabama  Eegiments,  and  had  been  each  time 
heroically  repulsed.  The  Thirtieth  Eegiment,  commanded  by  the  cool, 
brave,  and  gallant  Colonel  Shelley,  and  the  five  left  companies  of  the 
Twentieth  Eegiment,  under  the  immediate  command  of  the  fearless  and 
chivalrous  Lieutenant-Colonel  [E.  W.]  Pettus,  had  obstinately  resisted 
every  effort  of  the  enemy  to  dislodge  them. 

Finding  that  the  enemy  were  advancing  in  the  direction  of  the  skirt  of 
woods  to  our  right  and  front,  Captain  [J.  McKee]  Gould  and  Lieutenant 
[J.  W.j  Parish,  of  the  Twentieth  Alabama  Eegiment,  with  their  com- 
])anies,  had  been  sent  forward  to  prevent  their  obtaining  possession  of 
this  wood,  and  well  and  bravely  did  Captain  Gould  and  the  said  com- 
panies discharge  this  duty.  Learning  after  12  o’clock  that  these  two 
companies  were  severely  pressed,,  Captain  [E.  H.j  Pratt,  of  the  Twen- 
tieth Alabama,  with  his  company,  was  sent  to  their  support,  and  they 
promptly  and  cheerfully  advanced  to  the  assistance  of  their  comrades. 
The  enemy’s  fire  on  the  center  not  being  at  all  diminished,  it  became 
necessary  to  order  one  company  from  the  right,  which  was  not  so 
heavily  engaged,  to  sustain  it,  and  Captain  [B.  D.]  Massingale,  with 
his  company,  was  ordered  on  this  duty,  and  advanced  in  good  order 
under  Mie  enemy’s  fire,  and  took  the  position  preriously  occupied  by 
Ca])tain  Pratt’s  company.  The  four  companies  on  the  right,  under  the 
immediate  command  of  Captain  [J.  K.j  Dedman,  after  the  death  of  Gen- 
eral Tracy,  had  resisted  all  attempts  of  the  enemy  to  flank  us  on  the 
right,  and  after  the  withdrawal  of  Captain  Massingale’s  company  still 
maintained  their  ground,  but  a little  after  3 o’clock  large  bodies  of  the 
enemy  could  be  distinctly  seen  advancing  on  our  slender  forces  on  the 
right,  our  center  being  still  heavily  i^ressed. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Sixth  Missouri  Eegiment  had  formed  near  the 
left  of  our  brigade,  and  the  Forty-sixth  Alabama  not  yet  being  engaged, 
no  alternative  was  left  but  to  be  overwhelmed  by  the  masses  of  the  en- 
emy or  re-enforce  the  center  and  right  with  that  regiment.  Five  com- 
panies were  therefore  ordered  to  re-enforce  the  extreme  right,  and  the 
other  five  the  center.  Colonel  [M.  L.j  Woods  being  jdaced  in  command 
on  the  right,  this  regimeiit,  thus  divided,  ])romptly  and  eagerly  advanced 
to  their  positions  under  a galling  fire  from  the  enemy.  Tiie  eiiefuy  hav- 
ing now  reached  the  woods  near  the  line  on  the  right.  Colonel  Woods, 
with  half  his  regiment,  Avas  posted  at  the  road  a little  beyond  the  gap 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  POET  GIBSON,  MISS. 


681 


near  the  bayon,  where  embankments  furnished  good  defense  against 
small-arms,  and  the  three  companies  of  the  Twentieth  Begiment  on  the 
right  were  directed  to  form  there  with  him,  which  they  promptly  did, 
having  retired  in  g(.:od  order  from  their  respective  former  positions, 
about  200  yards  in  front  of  this  place.  Thc‘,  enemy  advanced  in  great 
force  against  this  latter  position,  but  Colonel  Woods  and  his  command 
bravely  met  their  attack,  and  held  them  at  bay  until  ordered  to  retreat, 
as  hereafter  stated.  The  Thirty -first  Alabama  Begiment  had  well  sus- 
tained their  position  on  the  left  of  Colonel  Shelley,  and  resisted  every 
effort  of  the  enemy  to  advance  in  their  front. 

About  12  o'clock.  Colonel  [D.  B.]  Hundley,  having  ventured  too  far 
in  front  of  his  line  in  search  of  a better  position  nearer  to  the  enemy, 
was  severely  wounded,  and  the  command  devolved  on  Lieutenant-Colonel 
[T.  M.]  Arrington,  a copy  of  whose  re])ort  is  herewith  submitted.* 

In  order  that  no  means  should  be  spared  to  resist  the  advance  of  the 
enemy,  I sent  Adjutant  Smith  to  the  rear,  to  bring  up  the  two  pieces  of 
artillery  belonging  to  Captain  Johnston’s  battery,  which  had  been  or- 
dered to  retire,  as  before  stated.  Lieutenant  Peters  had  bravely  fallen 
while  at  his  post  in  the  desperate  fight  in  the  morning,  and  Captain 
Johnston,  who  had  with  undaunted  courage  and  true  lu  roism  skillfully 
managed  his  artillery,  had  been  borne  from  the  field  completely  ex- 
hausted. Adjutant  Smith  found  Sergeant  [Francis  G.]  Obenchain  in 
command  of  the  two  remaining  pieces,  delivered  to  him  the  order,  and 
caused  them  to  be  planted  on  a hill  some  600  yards  in  our  rear,  and 
directed  that  they  should  be  ready  for  any  emergency.  Sergeant  Oben- 
chain, who  had  in  the  forenoon  exhibited  uniform  coolness  and  unflinch- 
ing nerve,  promptly  brought  forward  what  was  left  of  his  command  and 
took  position  as  directed. 

Learning  from  Colonel  Shelley  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Pettus  that 
the  enemy  were  about  occujiying  a high  hill  to  the  right  of  our  center, 
from  which  our  men  had  been  driven  by  an  overwhelming  force,  they 
were  ordered  to  retire  with  their  commands  and  take  a new  and  strong 
position  behind  the  crest  of  the  ridge  on  which  our  line  of  battle  had 
been  formed  early  in  the  morning  so  soon  as  their  iiosition  became  un- 
tenable, on  account  of  an  enfilade  fire  of  small-arms  or  artillery.  Be- 
fore this  last  order  was  executed,  I met  Brigadier-General  Green  on  tlie 
field,  explained  to  liim  our  i)osition,  and  the  orders  under  which  the 
battle  was  then  raging.  He  declined  to  make  any  change,  and  stated 
that  he  expected  to  receive  an  order  from  General  Bowen  in  a short 
time,  and  would  send  it  to  me.  He  soon  afterward  (it  being  about  5 
o’clock)  did  send  an  order  to  retreat  by  the  left  flank,  which  was  imme- 
diately executed  as  rapidly  as  possible. 

By  this  time  great  numbers  of  the  enemy  had  advanced  into  the  woods 
in  our  front  and  occupied  the  high  hill  before  referred  to,  so  that  the 
open  ridge  over  which  the  Thirtieth  and  Twentieth  Begiments  were 
compelled  to  pass  in  falling  back  was  very  much  exposed  to  a concen- 
trated fire.  While  retreating  across  this  ridge,  the  brave  and  chivalrous 
Major  [A.  S.]  Pickering,  of  the  Twentieth  Begiment  Alabama  Volun- 
teers, fell,  it  is  believed  mortally  wounded,  while  nobly  discharging  his 
duty  in  sustaining  his  command.  Sergeant  Earle,  color-bearer,  liere 
also  fell  while  fearlessly  carrying  the  colors  from  the  field. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Pettus,  in  a most  daring  attemiit  to  bring  off  Cap- 
tain Pratt  and  a portion  of  his  company  from  their  front  position,  which 
they  yielded  with  great  reluctance,  was,  with  tliat  brave  captain  and 
his  equally  brave  men,  cut  off  and  cai)tured  by  the  enemy. 


Not  found. 


682 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


Sergeant  Obeocbaii]  and  Ins  intrepid  comrades,  by  a cool  and  skillfnl 
fire,  greatly  assisted  in  protecting  the,  retreat.  The  Twentieth,  Thir- 
tieth, Thirty-first,  and  Forty-sixth  Eegiinents  fell  back  into  the  road  in 
the  rear.  Sergeant  Obenchain  soon  brought  his  pieces  into  the  column, 
the  Thirty-first  Alabama  Eegiment  formed  in  the  rear  to  cover  the  re- 
treat, and  the  retreat  was  then  conducted  in  good  order  some  4 miles 
over  Bayou  Pierre  and  to  the  ridge  on  the  north  side,  where  the  troops 
went  into  camp. 

The  Sixth  Missouri  Eegiment  did  not  report  for  orders,  but  it  would 
be  unjust  to  them  not  to  state  that  they  courageously  met  the  vast  odds 
of  the  foe,  and  rendered  most  essential  service  in  checking  any  advance 
he  may  otherwise  have  been  disposed  to  make. 

Thus  for  about  eleven  hours  had  this  most  unequal  contest  continued. 
Column  after  column  of  the  enemy  had  been  seen  to  advance  against 
our  line.  Several  times  charges  were  ordered  and  attempted,  but  as 
soon  as  the  enemy  emerged  from  their  cover  a deliberate  and  deadly  fire 
invariably  drove  them  back.  From  what  was  seen  on  that  day  by  offi- 
cers of  the  command  who  occupied  good  positions  for  the  purpose,  and 
from  what  Colonel  Pettus  (who  after  his  capture  was  carried  across  the 
battle-field  in  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day)  saw  and  learned,  there  is 
. no  doubt  that  from  12,000  to  15,000  men  were  engaged  during  the  day 
with  the  i)art  of  our  brigade  which  took  x^art  in  this  action,  while  our 
own  number  did  not  exceed  1,400. 

Our  loss  was  18  killed,  112  wounded,  and  142  missing,  while  the  loss 
of  the  enemy  in  killed  alone  was  much  greater.  Colonel  Pettus,  who 
])assed  over  the  most  hotly  contested  part  of  the  field,  is  of  opinion  that 
the  enemy’s  loss  in  killed  was  nearly  equal  to  half  of  our  own  number 
engaged  in  the  battle. 

In  any  attempt  which  might  be  made  to  particularize  individual  merit 
injustice  may  be  done.  All — officers  and  men — did  their  whole  duty. 
It  seemed  to  be  impossible  for  men  to  behave  better;  but  certain  i)osi- 
tions  gave  some  better  opportunities  for  distinction  than  others.  This 
was  particularly  the  case  with  the  Thirtieth  Alabama  Eegiment  and 
the  companies  of  the  Twentieth  Alabama  immediately  on  their  right, 
" who,  under  the  cool,  courageous,  and  skillful  leadership  of  their  com- 
manders, fought  through  the  day  in  a hot  sun  with  the  most  obstinate 
and  unflinching  bravery. 

To  Sergeant-Major  [W.  K.]  McConnell,  of  the  Thirtieth  Eegiment, 
my  than’ks  are  due  for  the  prompt  and  intelligent  manner  in  which  he 
aided  me,  in  carrying  rejiorts  and  messages  to,  and  bringing  orders  and 
answers  from,  the  general  commanding.  Sergeant  Powers,  of  Company 
' I,  Twentieth  Eegim.ent,  rendered  most  essential  service  in  carrying 
orders  to  various  parts  of  the  field  and  bringing  back  information,  though 
exposed  to  a hot  fire  from  the  enemy.  To  Adjutant  Smith  I am  also  in- 
debted for  efficient  service  in  carrying  dispatches,  and  for  the  promiit 
manner  in  which  he  caused  the  artillery  under  Sergeant  Obenchain  to  be 
placed  in  position,  as  before  staled.  For  further  information  of  instances 
of  individual  merit,  I beg  leave  to  refer  to  accompanying  reports.* 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

I.  W.  GAEEOTT, 

Col.  Twentieth  Regt.  Ala.  Vols.,  Comdg.  Second  Brig,  on  1st  instant. 

Cajit.  [E.  E.]  Hutchinson,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

fP.  S.]. — There  was  no  pursuit  by  the  enemy. 


Not  fonud. 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]  SKIRMISH  ON  SOUTH  FORK  BAYOU  PINE,  MISS. 


683 


ADDENDA. 


Ordnance  and  Stores  lost  hy  Stevenson’s  Division  at  Port  Gihson,  May  1. 


Bronze  6-pouncler  gun 

Bronze  12-pounder  liowitzers 

Napoleon 

Caissons 

Sets  lead  harness 

* Sets  wheel  harness 

Small-arms 

Accouterments 


1 

2 

1 

5 

18 

9 

440 

440 


MAY  2,  1863. — Skirmish  on  the  South  Fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  Miss. 

Report  of  Col.  George  B.  Boomer.^  Third  Brigade.,  Seventh  Bivision^  Sev- 
enteenth Army  Corps,  ineluding  operations  April  25-May  4.* 

Hdqrs.  3d  Brigade,  7tii  Division,  17th  Army  Corps, 

Camp  on  Big  Black  River,  Miss.,  May  4,  1863. 

General:  Iu  obedience  to  orders  received  this  date  from  army  head- 
quarters, I submit  the  following  report: 

Under  orders  from  Major-General  McPherson,  I left  camp  at  Milliken’s 
Bend  with  my  command,  consisting  of  four  regiments  and  two  batteries, 
at  6 a.  m.,  April  2r>. 

I joined  my  division  near  Smith’s  plantation  the  evening  of  the  26th; 
remained  in  camp  the  following  da^^,  in  obedience  to  orders,  and  arrived 
at  Hard  Times  Landing  on  the  evening  of  the  30th, 

On  the  following  day,  crossed  the  Mississippi  Elver  with  the  division; 
landed  at  Bruinsburg;  moved  out  on  the  road  to  Port  Gibson,  and  at 
night  took  up  position  in  line,  covering  the  road  leading  to  Grand  Gulf 
by  Mr.  Smith’s  plantation. 

The  following  day  moved  at  3 a.  m.  in  advance  of  the  division ; ar- 
rived at  Port  Gibson  at  11  a.  m.,  and  halted  till  5 p.  m.,  waiting  the  con- 
struction of  a bridge  over  the  south  fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  and  moved 
in  advance  of  the  arm 3"  9 miles,  to  the  bridge  over  the  north  fork  of  the 
same  stream.  This  structure  we  found  fired  by  the  enem^^,  and  the  posi- 
tion apparently  just  abandoned.  The  advance  guard  extinguished  the 
lire,  and  I threw  a picket  across  the  stream  and  halted  for  the  night,  m3" 
command  having  been  nineteen  hours  on  the  road. 

The  following  da3",  pursuant  to  3’our  order,  I moved  forward  at  7 a.  m. 
in  rear  of  the  division,  and  was  only  brought  forward  at  3 ]>.  m.,  when 
I deplo3^ed  the  Fifth  and  Tenth  Iowa  Tnfantiy,  of  my  command,  on  the 
right  of  the  skirmishers  of  the  First  Brigade,  with  a view  of  flanking 
the  enemy’s  battery  and  line,  then  checking  our  advance.  I had  ad- 
vanced my  line  of  skirmishers  about  400  yards,  when  1 received  notice 
from  you  that  the  enemy  had  retired  from  his  position.  I then  re- 
sumed my  ])osition  in  the  line,  and  moved  forward  to  this  encam])- 
ment. 

1 have  moved  lit)  miles  with  m3^  brigade  in  nine  days,  over  ver3"  bad 
roads  a portion  of  the  distance,  crossed  the  Mississippi  Kiver,  and  ad- 
vanced three  days  of  the  time  in  the  presence  of  the  enem3".  1 started 
with  live  teams  to  a regiment;  have  crossed  this  transportation  over 
the  Mississippi  Eiver,  brought  forward  with  it  140  rounds  of  ammunition 


See  also  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  reports  of  Logon  and  J.  D.  Stevenson. 


684 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAr.  XXXVL 


per  man,  and  kept  my  command  supplied  with  rations,  and  have  now 
three  days’  on  hand. 

I have  this  day,  by  your  instruction,  ordered  Col.  H.  Putnam,  with 
five  companies  of  the  Ninety-third  Illinois  Infantry,  and  Maj.  0.  F. 
Brown,  with  the  Twenty-sixth  Missouri  Re.ciinent,  to  reconnoiter  the 
river  4 miles  above  and  below  this  point,  and  herewith  submit  their 
reports.* 

I am,  very  respectfully, 

GEOEGE  B.  BOOMEE, 

Colonel  Ticenty- sixth  Missovri  Infantry^  Commanding  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  M.  M.  Crocker, 

Co7nmanding  Seventh  Bivisioii. 


MAY  4,  1863.-— Engagement  at  Fort  De  Rnssy,  Red  River,  Louisiana.! 

Reports  of  Capt.  John  Kelso,  commanding  Confederate  gmihoats. 

Elao-ship  Grand  Duke, 

May  4,  1863. 

Major  : A ship  of  war  mounting  four  guns  on  a side  came  up  and 
opened  fire  on  us  this  morning.  Vv^e  have  some  wounded,  and  I think 
on  the  Cotton  some  lulled.  The  fire  lasted  about  sixty  minutes.  We 
had  to  temporarily  abandon  the  Cotton.  We  will  return  for  her,  as  the 
enemy  dropped  down,  as  1 thought,  to  secure  a flank  fire  on  us ; but  it 
is  likely  he  (the  enemy)  is  badly  damaged. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  major,  respectfully,  your  obedient  serv- 
ant, 

J.  KELSO, 

Captain,  Commanding  Gunhoat  Fleet. 

Maj.  E.  SURGET, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.  ' 

P.  S. — The  enemy,  three  in  number — the  picket  guard  reported  before 
we  left — had  all  gone  down  the  river  at  the  highest  rate  of  speed.  A 
boat  answering  tlie  description  of  the  Calhoun  laid  behind  the  woods  and 
assisted  in  the  attack.  She  put  two  or  three  shells  through  us.  We 
could  not  direct  our  attention  to  her,  as  it  could  not  be  exactly  discov- 
ered where  she  was  stationed. 

The  enemy  set  us  on  fire  repeatedly,  but  it  was  extiuguished  by  the 
energy  of  the  steamboat  men.  I will  shortly,  major,  make  a lull  report. 


Flag  SHIP  Grand  Duke, 

May  13,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  oper- 
ations of  this  fleet  since  the  1st  instant.  Continuous  fever,  conlining  me 
to  bed  during  a ])ortion  of  the  time  and  incapacitating  me  for  work  of 
any  sort,  has  delayed  the  submission  of  this  iei)ort  till  now. 

in  obedience  to  Special  Orders,  No.  106,  and  emanating  from  head- 


* Not  fomul. 

tEor  reports  of  Rear-Admiral  D.  G.  Earragnt  and  Lieut.  Commander  John  E.  Hart, 
U.  S.  Navy,  see  Annnal  Reimrt  of  the  Secretary  of  tlie  Navy,  December  7,  1863. 


Chap.  XXXVI.  1 ENGAGEMENT  AT  FORT  DE  RUSSY,  LA. 


685 


quarters  District  of  Western  Louisiana,  I proceeded  to  Fort  De  Eussy  on 
the  night  of  the  1st  iustant.  I immediately  made  afull  examination  upon 
my  arrival  at  the  fort  of  the  works  and  tile  position  of  the  submerged 
guns.  This  examination  was  made  after  eight  and  the  report  trans- 
mitted immediately.  I found  nothing  to  amend  upon  a renewed  exam- 
ination in  the  morning. 

In  twenty-four  hours  the  submerged  32-pounder  guii,  and  all  the  un- 
damaged public  property,  excepting  some  pieces  of  railroad  iron,  was 
recovered  and  placed  on  board  the  barge  ready  to  be  towed  to  Alexan- 
dria, La.  Just  as  this  work  was  completed,  an  advance  of  the  enemy^s 
gunboats  (three  in  number)  was  reported  by  the  pickets  under  command 
of  Lieutenant  [H.  A.]  Frederic,  of  the  signal  corps.  Oapt.  George 
Hite,  of  the  steamer  Countess,  was  immediately  ordered  by  me* to  take 
the  barge  in  tow.  This  he  did,  and  steamed  out  of  sight  and  danger  up 
the  river.  In  ten  minutes  after,  the  enemy  made  their  appearance.  The 
leading  ship  proved  to  be  a steam  propeller  with  two  masts,  mounting 
four  guns  on  a side,  and  a pivot  gun  of  heavy  metal  of  [on]  bow  and 
stern.  From  the  best  information  procurable,  and  the  report  of  the 
pieces,  the  broadside  guns  were  32-pounder  rifled  cannon.  This  vessel 
took  a position  at  about  500  j^ards  from  us.  The  remaining  vessels  of 
the  enemy^s  fleet  took  position  in  favorable  and  shelling  distances  be- 
hind the  woods  farther  down  the  river.  We  fired  on  the  leading  vessel 
twice  before  she  replied. 

The  engagement  now  became  general,  and  for  one  hour  the  contest 
was  hotly  disputed.  In  twenty  minutes  after  the  action  commenced  the 
Cotton,  under  the  command  of  Lieut.  E.  T.  King,  was  disabled  by  the 
cutting  of  her  steam-pipe.  Lieutenant  King,  however,  continued  to 
fight  his  boat  with  unflinching  coolness.  In  a very  short  time  after,  it 
was  reported  to  me  that  all  the  steering  apparatus  of  the  flag-ship  was 
shot  away.  In  fact,  all  the  mechanical  contrivances  by  which  commu- 
nication is  conveyed  from  one  part  of  the  boat  to  another,  bell-ropes, 
speaking  tubes,  &c.,  were  shot  to  pieces.  Captain  White  reported  to 
me  at  the  same  time  that  he  thought  his  boat  unmanageable.  The 
fight  continued,  however,  with  unabated  energy  until  the  leading  gun- 
boat of  the  enemy  withdrew,  apiiarently  uninjured.  This  gave  me  the 
impression,  and  it  was  equally  the  impression  of  Lieutenant  King,  that, 
having  divined  our  crippled  condition,  the  enemy  were  drifting  down 
the  river  in  order  to  secure  a position  from  which  they  could  deliver  the 
fire  upon  our  uui)rotected  flank.  I therefore  directed  an  examination 
to  be  made  of  our  condition.  This  resulted  in  ascertaining  that,  by  pass- 
ing the  word  from  man  to  man,  the  boat  might  be  handled  exclusively 
through  the  engines.  Upon  a brief  consultation  with  my  officers,  I de- 
termined to  run  up  the  river  a short  distance,  repair  damages,  and  re- 
turn. It  seeming  to  me  clear  that  should  the  three  boats  select  their 
positions — as  was  practicable  with  them,  owing  to  our  damaged  con- 
dition— that  our  destruction  would  be  probable.  We  therefore  ran  up 
the  river,  repaired  damages  as  rapidly  as  possible,  and  returned  to  the 
fort. 

In  the  midst  of  the  fight  I observed  with  indignation  and  regret  that 
the  barge  had  been  cast  off  from  the  Countess  and  had  floated  down 
against  the  raft.  The  Cotton,  it  was  ascertained,  could  not  be  repaired 
at  tlie  fort,  and  it  was  absolutely  necessary  to  save  the  barge  and  her 
valuable  freight.  I therefore  took  the  Cotton  and  the  barge  in  tow, 
and  proceeded  slowly  toward  Alexandria,  La.  The  Countess  made  her 
appearance  subsequently,  and  relieved  us  of  the  barge. 

The  Grand  was  s^t  on  flro  five  times,  but  owing  to  the  coolness 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


686  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

and  energy  of  Oapt.  J.  M.  White,  his  officers  and  men,  the  fire  was  each 
time  subdued.  ^ 

1 cannot  conclude  the  report,  major,  without  bearing  testimouy  to  the 
signal  good  conduct  of  the  officers  and  men  of  the  Orescent  Artillery. 
First  Lieut.  W.  Hervey  and  First  Junior  Lieut.  T.  H.  Handy  behaved  in 
a manner  to  excite  the  admiration  and  rivet  the  confidence  of  every  one 
who  witnessed  their  intrepid  conduct.  Sergt.  A.  Mordis  and  Sergeant 
[J.  J.]  Dalton  also  deserve  special  notice  for  their  admirable  deportment 
during  the  action.  When  the  alarm  of  fire  was  repeatedly  given,  I did 
not  observe  a man  relax  his  energies  at  the  pieces.  To  Lieut.  E.  T.  King 
too  much  credit  cannot  be  awarded.  He  discharged  his  duties  with  a 
fearlessness  and  composure  which  inspired  confidence  in  those  around 
him,  and  elicited  the  apifiause  of  all  whose  position  enabled  them  to 
observe  him. 

The  conduct  of  Lieut.  M.  Fogarty  is  reported  to  me  by  his  command- 
ing officer  as  deserving  of  high  praise. 

I beg  leave  to  refer  to  the  inclosed  list  of  wounded  and  missing  on 
both  boats. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  major,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  KELSO, 

Co7nmanding  Gunboat  Fleets  off  Grand  Fcore, 

Maj.  E.  SURGET, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.  * 

[Inclosurcs.] 

Station,  Grand  Ecore,  Gunboat  Cotton, 

^ May  12,  1863. 

List  * of  wounded  and  missing  of  Capt.  fE.  W.]  Fuller’s  company, 
Saint  Martin  Hangers,  May  4,  1863,  on  board  of  C.  S.  gunboat  Cotton, 
as  follows  : Wounded — officers,!;  enlisted  men,  6;  crew,  3.  Missing — 
enlisted  men,  1 : crew,  3. 

E.  T.  KING, 

Lieutenant^  Commanding  Gunboat  Cotton. 

J.  Gautreaux, 

Acting  Orderly  Sergeant. 

List*  of  wounded  of  the  Crescent  Artillery  on  board  flag  ship  Grand 
Duke,  May  4,  1863,  as  follows : Enlisted  men  wounded,  7. 

W.  HERYEY, 

First  Lieutenant^  Commanding  Crescent  Artillery. 

[Indorsement.  ] 

Headquarters  District  oe  Western  Louisiana, 

Natchitoches^  May  14,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  Captain  [J.]  Kelso,  in  command  of  the  gun- 
boats Grand  Duke  and  Cotton,  was  sent  down  to  Fort  De  Russy  to  re- 
move the  guns,  ordnance  stores,  and  other  public  property  left  at  that 
lioint,  which  was  successfully  accomplished,  and  the  enemy  delayed  in 
his  advance  up  the  river  for  forty-eight  hours. 

R.  TAYLOR, 

ilfajor- General,  Commanding.  - 


Nominal  list  omitted. 


Chap.  XXXYI.l  ATTEMPT  TO  PASS  TPIE  VICKSBUEG  BATTERIES,  687 


MAY  4,  1863. — Attempt  of  the  tug  George  Sturgess  to  pass  the  Vicksburg 

batteries. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Lieut.  Col.  Judson  D.  Bingham,  U.  S.  Army,  Chief  Quartermaster. 

No.  2. — Lieut.  James  Marquess,  Twenty-seventh  Missouri  Infantry. 


1^0.  1. 

Re])ort  of  Lieut.  Col.  Judson  D.  Bingham^  IT.  8.  Army,  Chief  Quar- 
^ termaster. 

Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  May  5,  1863. 
General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  your  instructions  of 
April  30  were  received  at  11  a.  m.,  May  1,  in  relation  to  sending  two 
tugs  with  four  barges  down  the  river.  I immediately  commenced  the 
execution  of  your  instructions,  and  at  7 a.  m..  May  2,  the  four  largest 
and  best  barges  that  I could  obtain  were  loaded  with  subsistence 
stores.  I made  a written  application  to  the  commander  of  the  troops 
here  (Major-General  Steele)  for  a detail  to  assist  in  loading  the  barges 
and  preparing  them  for  the  trip.  Captain  [William]  Gaster,  assistant 
quai termaster,  who  had  immediate  charge  of  the  preparation,  by  my 
direction,  also  made  an  application  for  a detail.  None  w^as  furnished, 
and  the  loading  and  preparations  were  made  by  the  mechanics  employed 
in  the  quartermasters  department  and  a few  negroes  that  I had  col- 
lected. The  force  was  so  small  that  it  was  compelled  to  work  night  and 
day  until  the  barges  were  ready.  • 

On  the  evening  of  May  2,  I heard  that  our  troops  had  evacuated 
Young’s  Point,  and  that  the  enemy  had  landed  near  the  abandoned 
camps.  I then  consulted  with  Major-General  Sherman,  who  advised  me 
to  wait  until  the  next  night  (3d),  and  he  would  send  a force  to  occupy 
the  Point,  to  prevent  the  capture  of  the  boats  from  the  Louisiana  shore 
in  case  the  tugs  were  compelled  to  laud  to  repair  any  damages  that 
might  be  sustained.  I followed  the  advice  of  General  Sherman,  and 
delayed  the  departure  of  the  boats  until  10  p.  m.  of  the  3d. 

On  the  morning  of  the  3d,  only  two  of  the  barges  were  in  condition 
to  start.  One  was  sunk  to  the  guards,  and  another  leaking,  and  would 
not  sustain  enough  hay  to  protect  the  tug.  I was,  therefore,  compelled 
to  send  only  one  tug  with  two  barges,  as  I could  not  prepare  another 
tow  in  time.  At  10  p.  m.  of  the  3d,  the  tug  with  two  barges  was  started 
down  the  river,  with  crew  complete  and  a detail  of  the  commissioned 
officers  and  15  armed  men  to  repel  boarders.  Soon  after  the  tug  rounded 
the  Point,  I saw  several  flashes  from  guns,  but  heard  only  two  or  three 
reports.  The  firing  did  not  seem  to  be  from  very  heavy  guns.  Soon 
after  the  firing  commenced,  I saw  a light,  which  I supposed  was  made 
by  the  enemy  on  the  Louisiana  shore,  but  it  passed  down  the  river  so 
rapidly  as  to  satisfy  me  that  the  barges  were  on  fire.  Our  troops  had 
possession  of  a portion  of  the  Point,  and  rescued  one  man  from  the 
wreck,  whose  statement  I inclose  herewith.* 

I am  now  preparing  two  large  barges,  and  can  send  them  down  the 
river  at  any  time,  but  do  not  consider  it  advisable  to  do  so  without 
further  instructions,  as  they  are  almost  sure  of  destruction  unless  we 

* Not  fonud.  Reference  is  probably  to  report  of  Lieut.  Janies  Marquess,  following. 


688 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap  XXXTI. 


can  send  them  on  a dark  night.  In  about  three  or  four  days  the  moon 
will  be  more  favorable  for  the  purpose.  I am  using  every  exertion  to 
forward  supplies  in  wagons,  and  have  sent  to  Memphis  for  more  trans- 
portation. It  should  be  here  in  a day  or  two. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  D.  BINGHAM, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  and  Chief  Quartermaster  Dept  of  Tenn. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Lieut,  James  Marquess,  Twenty-seventh  Missouri  Lnfantry. 

[May  — , 1863.] 

I volunteered  to  run  the  blockade  at  Vicksburg  on  the  steam  tug 
George  Sturgess,  with  two  barges  in  tow,  loaded  with  commissary  stores 
and  hay,  on  the  night  of  the  3d  of  May,  1863. 

We  left  the  steamboat  A.  H.  Hines  at  Young^s  Point,  La.,  about  1 
a.  m.  May  4.  Just  below  the  mouth  of  the  lower  canal,  the  enemy 
opened  fire  on  us  with  infantry  from  the  Louisiana  side  of  the  river. 
We  returned  the  fire,  but  could  not  see  that  they  were  making  any  at- 
tempt to  board  us.  The  musketry  fire  did  us  no  damage.  The  light 
guns  of  the  batteries  on  the  Mississippi  side  then  commenced  firing 
upon  us.  They  struck  us  frequently  with  solid  shot,  but  did  no  damage 
to  either  tug  or  barges.  We  were  under  a continual  fire  from  this  time 
until  we  reached  the  bend.  We  then  ran  under  the  range  of  a water 
battery.  This  battery  opened  fire  on  us,  firing  shells  principally.  The 
tug  was  struck  by  a shell  from  this  battery,  which  exploded  aud  blew 
her  up,  and  set  the  tug  and  both  barges  on  fire.  I am  under  the  im- 
pression that  tbe  shell  that  blew  the  tug  up  struck  her  on  top  of  the 
boiler  aud  exploded  there.  All  the  damage  was  done  immediately.  At 
the  time  the  shell  exploded  on  the  tug,  the  barge  on  the  Mississippi  side 
of  the  river  was  in  a sinking  condition.  The  barge  on  the  Louisiaua 
side  was  uninjured  up  to  the  time  of  the  explosion.  The  explosion  of 
the  shell  made  the  fire  general,  both  on  the  tug  and  barges.  We  were 
running  at  the  rate  of  about  4 miles  per  hour  when  the  first  fire  opened 
ui)on  us.  When  the  shell  exidoded,  we  were  running  at  the  rate  of 
about  6 miles  per  hour,  as  near  as  I can  judge. 

After  the  explosion,  the  tug  and  barges  being  enveloped  in  flames, 
the  men  on  board  generally  endeavored  to  make  their  escape  from  them. 
TJie  enemy  continued  their  fire,  striking  the  barge  next  Vicksburg  fre- 
quently. Their  batteries  appeared  to  play  heavier  at  this  time  than 
they  did  before  they  struck  the  barges  at  all.  Our  men  asked  for  no 
quarter  for  some  fifteen  minutes  after  the  explosion.  We  were  then 
in  talking  distance  of  the  enemy.  After  quarter  was  asked,  there 
was  none  given  for  probably  thirty  minutes,  as  near  as  I can  judge.  At 
the  time  quarter  was  asked  for,  1 was  swimming  toward  the  Louisiana 
shore,  having  made  my  escape  from  the  tug  on  a plank,  and  was  about 
50  yards  from  the  barges.  Some  of  the  men  were  on  the  barges  at  this 
time — cannot  state  how  many — aud  several  were  in  the  water,  swimming 
for  the  Louisiana  shore.  The  rebels  continued  their  fire  on  the  men  in 
the  water  after  they  had  left  the  barges. 

The  enemy  eventually  ceased  firing,  and  came  to  the  assistance  of 
tUe  men  m the  water  witU  two  skifts,  One  came  out  aud  picked  up  tU9 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


ACTION  AT  king’s  CREEK,  MISS. 


689 


men  who  were  in  the  water,  and  the  other  skitF  approached  tlie  barges. 
1 supposed  they  were  taking  oft  the  men  that  remained  there,  but  can- 
not state  whether  they  got  any  of  them  oft  the  barges.  I reached  the 
Louisiana  shore  on  a plank  just  above  the  mouth  of  the  canal.  When 
I reached  the  shore,  which,  I think,  was  about  two  hours  after  the  ex- 
plosion, the  barges  had  drifted  down  the  river  some  distance  toward 
the  Louisiana  shore.  When  I arrived  near  the  Louisiana  shore,  I found 
some  of  our  troops  there  (think  about  three  regiments),  some  of  whom 
assisted  me  on  shore  out  of  the  water.  I think  that  the  barges  and  tug 
were  entirely  consumed  by  lire.  The  last  1 saw  of  them  they  were  all 
enveloped  in  flames. 

JAMES  MAEQUESS, 

First  Lieutenant  Comj^any  G,  Ttcenty- seventh  Missouri  Volunteers, 


MAY  5,  1863. — Action  at  King’s  Creek,  near  Tupelo,  Miss. 

RKPOR'TS.* 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Ruggles,  C.  S.  Army.  * 

No.  2. — Lieut.  Col.  J.  Cunningham,  Second  Alabama  Cavalry. 

No,  3. — Maj.  VV.  A.  Plewlett,  Thirteenth  Alabama  Battalion,  Partisan  Rangers. 
No.  4. — Lieut.  Col.  C.  R.  Bartean,  Second  Tennessee  Cavalry. 


Eo.  1. 

Rejwrt  of  Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Ruggles.,  G.  iS.  Army. 

Okolona,  May  14,  18G3, 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  forward  the  following  report  for  the  infor- 
mation of  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  the  department: 

On  the  morning  of  the  5th  instant,  reports  reached  me  at  this  place, 
where  1 had  necessarily^  been  detained,  of  another  advance  of  the  enemy 
from  the  direction  of  Burnsville  with  a force  of  about  5,000  mounted 
men  and  six  pieces  of  artillery.  Toward  evening  I received  information 
from  Colonel  Bartean,  then  at  Yerona,  that  Major  [W.  M.]  Inge^s  bat- 
talion was  skirnishing  with  the  advance  of  the  enemy  near  Tupelo,  and 
that  his  main  body  was  believed  to  be  moving  down  east  of  Town  Creek, 
in  the  direction  of  Camargo.  For  the  ])urpose  of  impeding  his  march 
in  that  direction  and  to  prevent  his  crossing  Town  Creek,  I ordered  the 
ferry-boats  sunk  and  the  bridges  destroyed.  I had  received  as  a re- 
enforcement Major  [ W.]  Boyles’  battalion  of  Alabama  cavalry,  some  350 
strong,  and  immediately  on  the  reception  of  the  report  of  enemy’s  ad- 
vance prepared  for  movement  in  the  held.  Dispatched  to  West  Point 
for  the  return  to  this  station  of  four  companies  of  the  Third  Kentucky 
Eegiment  (mounted  men),  they  having  been  ordered  to  Jackson  by  the 
morning  J;rain.  These  troops  arrived  in  the  evening,  disembarked,  and 
were  ready  for  the  held  the  ensuing  morning  at  2 o’clock.  Taking  the 
two  battalions  already  named  and  a section  of  Owens’  guns,  under  Lieu- 
tenant [J.  F.]  Thompson,  proceeded  a distance  of  10  miles  to  Sanders’ 

*For  Union  reports,  see  Series  1,  Vol.  XXIII,  Part  I,  pp.  241-2(51. 

44  R R_vOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


690 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


I Chap.  XXXVI. 


Mills,  toward  Verona,  where  we  arrived  about  sunrise,  and  awaited  in- 
formation of  the  enemy  from  Colonel  [C.  K.]  Barteau,  who  had  been  in- 
structed to  communicate  with  me  at  that  point  and  from  other  sources. 

Previously  to  moving  from  Okolona,  I sent  a communication  to  Gen- 
eral Chalmers,  then  represented  as  near  Pontotoc,  giving  information 
received  respecting  the  enemy.  After  a brief  delay  at  Sanders’  Mills,  I 
obtained  information  from  Colonel  Barteau  that  the  enemy  had  been 
during  tlm  previous  night  at  Tupelo,  and  that  he  would  move  up  with 
his  troops  for  the  purpose  of  reconnoitering  him  to  ascertain  his  strength 
and  position,  and  would,  in  the  event  of  its  becoming  necessary,  fall 
back  upon  the  road  on  which  I was  advancing.  I then  pushed  forward 
rapidly,  and,  before  reaching  Verona,  received  a message-  indicating 
that  Colonel  Barteau  with  my  advanced  forces  was  then  at  Harris- 
burg, some  2 J miles  west  of  Tupelo,  and  I immediately  moved  in  that 
direction,  and  when  near  that  place  received  a dispatch  from  Colo- 
nel Barteau,  stating  that  the  enemy  had  retreated  precipitately  the 
})revious  night  along  the  railroad  toward  Corinth.  I ordered  a strong 
scout  of  two  companies  to  push  forward  immediately  in  pursuit  of  the 
enemy,  and  then  distributed  the  troops  in  new  positions,  sending  the 
four  companies  of  the  Third  Kentucky  (mounted  men)  to  Okolona, 
to  take  the  down  train  for  Meridian,  in  conformity  with  x)revious 
orders.  • 

Subsequently,  I learned  that  the  enemy  numbered  2,000  or  2,500  cav- 
alry, with  six  guns,  comprising  the  Tenth  Missouri,  Seventh  Iowa  [Kan- 
sas], and  Kinth  Illinois,  with  two  companies  of  mounted  infantry,  all 
under  the  command  of  Colonel  Quinine  [Cornyn]  j that  from  15  to  20 
were  killed,  and  from  30  to  40  wounded  in  the  previous  day’s  encounter; 
that  they  burned  some  transportation,  destroyed  supplies  and  camp 
equipage,  and  broke  down  the  bridges  in  their  precipitate  retreat. 

On  our  i^art,  as  near  as  I can  learn,  we  lost  5 killed  and  7 or  8 wounded 
(Confederate  troops),  and  of  the  State  troops  30  are  represented  to  have 
been  taken  prisoners. 

Previous  to  this  conflict,  on  account  of  unsettled  questions  of  rank, 
and  for  want  of  harmony  among  the  commanders  of  my  battalions  in 
advance,  I had  sent  verbal  instructions  that  they  should,  in  cases  of 
emergency,  obey  the  orders  of  the  senior  on  the  field,  and  even  in  coming 
in  contact  with  the  State  troops  in  my  absence,  out  of  courtesy  to  Gen- 
eral [S.  J.]  Gholson,  and  to  preserve  concert  of  action,  should  yield 
obedience  temporarily  to.  him  as  their  commander. 

I deem  it  expedient  to  observe  at  this  point  that  communication  be- 
tween Okolona  and  Verona  is  attended  with  many  difficulties,  on  ac- 
, count  of  four  intermediate  streams,  bordered  by  bottom  lauds  and 
morasses,  almost, impassable  .for  cavalry  during  the  rainy  season,  and 
,but  recently  found  practicable. 

tin  conclusion,  I respectfully  recommend  to  your  attention  accompapy- 
,ing  report  of  Lieut.  Col.  C.  B.  Barteau,  who,  vyitliTiis  command,  is  en- 
titled to  special  consideration  on  account  of  good, conduct  in  this  as. in 
some  previous  encounters  with  the  enemy. 

Major  Inge’s  battalion  (under  Captain  [P.  Ai]  Mann),  a portion  of 
Major  Hewlett’s  battalion,  and  two  companies  of  the  Second  Alabama 
regiment,  are  also  entitled  to  commendation  for  their  good  conduct. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DANIEL  KUGGLES, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding  District^ 

.Maj.  K.  W.  Memmtngee, 

Afisistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Chap.  XXXVL]  ACTION  AT  KING^S  CKEEK,  MISS.  691 

No.  2. 

Eeport  of  Lieut.  Col.  J.  Cunningham,  Second  Alabama  Cavalry. 

Near  Verona,  May  8,  18G3. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  my  opera- 
tions on  Tuesday,  the  5th  iustaut: 

Soon  after  my  arrival  at  this  place  on  Tuesday  morning,  I received  in- 
formation through  my  scouts  and  Colonel  [0.  11.]  Barteau  that  the  en- 
emy was  6 miles  east  of  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Railroad,  marching  in  the 
direction  of  Verona,  to  which  place  I hastened  with  all  possible  dispatch. 
While  there,  I received  orders  from  Maj.  Gen.  S.  J.  Gholson  to  proceed 
immediately  to  Tupelo.  On  my  way  to  the  latter  place,  my  advanced 
guard  came  upon  the  enemy.  As  my  scouts  had  on  that  morning  re- 
ported the  enemy  to  be  near  Miller’s  Mills,  and  as  I had  been  ordered 
to  Tupelo  without  any  warning  that  there  was  any  probability  of 
being  intercepted  on  my  way  thither,  1 must  state  that  my  coming  upon 
the  enemy  was  quite  unexpected.  Lieutenant  [G.  G.]  Dodd,  of  the  ad- 
vanced guard,  reported  the  enemy  in  line  on  my  right,  just  across  the 
creek,  about  half  a mile  this  side  of  Tupelo.  I accordingly  drew  up  my 
regiment  into  line  of  battle,  facing  to  the  right.  Lieutenant  Dodd  with 
the  advanced  guard  was  during  this  time  skirmishing  with  the  enemy, 
and  had  succeeded  in  capturing  10  prisoners,  who  were  sent  back  to  the 
rear  and  there  retaken  by  the  enemy.  As  soon  as  my  command  were 
formed  into  line,  the  enemy  opened  upon  me  a cross-tire  of  artillery  and 
musketry.  I then  discovered  that  I was  ambuscaded  on  the  right  and 
left,  and  I determined  to  extricate  my  command  as  soon  as  practicable. 

1 ordered  a countermarch  from  the  left,  but  as  Gompauies  B and  I had 
faced  to  the  rear  and  left  to  check  the  enemy  who  were  closing  in  upon 
my  rear,  they  did  not  receive  my  orders  and  were  left  on  the  field.  I 
])assed  on  with  the  rest  of  my  command  out  through  the  west  edge  of 
Tupelo,  and  took  the  road  to  Ghesterville,  where  I learned  General  Ghol- 
son was  at  the  time.  The  companies  wlio  were  left  behind  attempted 
to  rejoin  the  regiment,  but  Gaptain  [W.  H.]  Daniel,  who  was  in  com- 
mand of  them,  reports  that  he  was  entirely  cut  off  by  the  enemy  and 
forced  to  fall  back  toward  the  direction  of  Verona.  In  doing  so  he  kept 
up  a brisk  skirmish  with  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  who  were  endeavoring  to 
surround  him. 

In  this  engagement  my  loss  was : Killed,  2 men  and  3 horses  j wounded, 

2 horses ; missing,  3 men  and  3 horses. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  GUNNINGHAM, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Comdg.  Seco7id  Alabama  Cavalry  Uegt. 

Gapt.  Roy  Mason  IIooe, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  District  No.  1. 


No.  3. 

lieport  of  Ala  j.  IK  A.  Hewlett,  Tkirleenth  Alabama  Battalion,  Partisan 

Bangers. 

Okolona,  Miss.,  May  7,  18G3. 

Gaptain  : I have  the  honor  to  state,  for  the  information  of  the  brig- 
adier-general commanding  First  District,  Department  of  Mississippi 
and  East  Louisiana,  that  on  Thursday,  May  5,  at  about  11  a.  m.,  while 


692 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


encamped  about  4 miles  west  of  Yerona,  I received  orders  to  proceed 
at  once  to  Verona,  intelligence  having  been  received  that  the  enemy 
had  driven  in  Major  [W.  M.]  Inge’s  pickets  in  the  neighborhood  of 
Tupelo.  On  my  arrival  at  Yerona,  the  column  moved  toward  Tupelo, 
Colonel  [J.]  Cunningham  in  front.  My  command,  which  consisted  of 
detachments  of  four  companies  (about  140  in  all),  constituted  the  left 
wing.  The  enemy’s  pickets  were  driven  in  about  1 mile  from  the  scene 
of  action.  In  the  neighborhood  of  King’s  Creek;  one-half  mile  west  of 
Tupelo,  while  my  command  was  crossing  a large  corn-field,  Colonel 
Cunningham  drove  in  the  enemy’s  advance  guard,  and  immediately 
crossed  the  creek  and  proceeded  into  the  heavy  timber  on  the  opposite 
side.  My  command  followed  with  as  little  delay  as  possible,  consider- 
ing the  difficulty  of  fording,  and  proceeded  into  the  wood  about  100 
yards  in  the  rear  of  Colonel  Cunningham.  Colonel  Cunningham  pushed 
on  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy’s  advance  guard,  without  drawing  the  fire 
of  his  main  body,  which  was  in  ambush.  On  reaching  a ridge  about 
100  yards  from  the  creek,  I first  received  the  fire  from  the  enemy’s  left 
wing,  at  a distance  of  from  25  to  40  yards.  1 returned  the  fire  and  dis- 
mounted my  right  wing.  Several  of  the  horses  of  my  left  becoming 
unmanageable,  they  faltered.  The  enemy  raised  a yell  and  attempted 
a charge,  but  were  held  in  check  by  my  right  wing. 

At  this  time  Lieutenant-Colonel  [C.  It.]  Barteau  came  to  my  assist- 
ance on  the  right  5 poured  a volley  into  the  enemy,  driving  him  back 
about  200  yards,  to  a more  advantageous  position.  The  firing  then  com- 
menced from  their  whole  line,  with  three  pieces  of  artillery,  two  mak- 
ing a cross-fire  from  each  wing  and  one  from  the  center.  It  is  said  by 
those  at  a distance  they  fired  40  rounds  from  each  gun.  Just  before 
the  firing  ceased,  Colonel  Barteau  informed  me  that  two  regiments  were 
attemjiting  a flank  movement  on  the  left,  and  ordered  me  to  recross 
the  creek  and  form  on  the  opposite  side,  which  I did  under  a heavy  fire. 
I was  here  joined  by  two  rear  companies  of  the  Second  Alabama,  which 
were  cut  offi  After  crossing  the  creek,  the  firing  ceased  along  the  whole 
line,  and  Colonel  Barteau  came  out  a few  minutes  afterward.  I then 
moved  with  Colonel  Barteau’s  command  to  Chesterville,  miles  vvestof 
Tupelo,  and  continued  driving  in  the  enemy’s  pickets  and  skirmishing 
until  night. 

My  loss  is  1 killed,  3 wounded,  and  2 missing.  I also  lost  12  horses. 

Without  attaching  too  much  importance  to  the  affair,  I consider  it 
my  duty  to  mention  Capt.  Jacob  E.  Shepherd,  First  Lieut.  Samuel  E. 
Morrow,  and  First  Lieut  11.  H.  Bibb  as  worthy  of  praise  for  gallant  and 
meritorious  conduct. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  A.  HEWJ.ETT, 

Major j Comm  anding. 

Capt.  L.  D.  Sandidge, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Ko.  4. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  C.  R.  Barteau^  ISecond  Tennessee  Cavalry. 

Yerona,  Miss.,  May  8,  1863. 

Having  been  ordered  to  this  jdace  from  the  Pontotoc  and  Shannon 
road  on  the  morning  of  the  3d  instant,  I reached  here  at  10  a.  ni.  There 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  ACTION  AT  KING’s  CREEK,  MISS.  693 

was  then  no  reliable  account  of  an  advance  of  the  enemy,  as  rumored 
down  the  line  of  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  Eailroad,  but  in  the  evening  of 
the  4th  instant  I learned  that  a mounted  force  of  the  enemy  (strength 
not  known)  had  reached  Baldwyn  that  morning,  and  was  marching  rap- 
idly in  this  direction.  I considered  it  only  a reconnoitering  party,  and 
made  no  immediate  report;  but  at  12  o’clock  the  same  day  the  enemy 
drove  in  the  pickets  at  Guntown  and  advanced  toward  Saltillo.  The 
lieutenant  in  charge  of  scouts  at  Guntown  reported  the  force  to  be  three 
regiments  with  artillery,  and  a prisoner  whom  he  had  captured  and  sent 
in  stated  that  the  force  Avould  not  exceed  900. 

Late  in  the  evening  of  the  4th  [instant],  scouts  from  Inge’s  battalion 
were  fired  upon  between  Tupelo  and  Saltillo,  east  side  of  the  railroad. 
That  night  the  enemy  advanced  to  Priceville,  and  by  daylight  on  the 
5th  passed  that  place  toward  Plantersville,  with  the  evident  intention 
of  moving  down  between  Town  Creek  and  Tombigbee  Eiver,  to  cross  at 
Camargo,  threatening  Aberdeen,  on  Mobile  and  Ohio  Eailroad  below 
Okolona;  but  by  the  delay  of  the  enemy  near  Miller’s  Mills,,  north  of 
Plantersville,  I was  led  to  apprehend  that  his  intention  was  to  cross 
Town  Greek  at  Eeece’s  Bridge,  and  immediately  ordered  Inge’s  battal- 
ion to  that  point,  to  destroy  the  bridge  and  prevent  his  crossing.  Upon 
arriving  at  Eeece’s  Bridge,  Inge’s  battalion  was  confronted  by  a force  of 
the  enemy  which  it  could  not  successfully  contend  with,  and  fell  back 
to  Thomasson’s  farm,  miles  from  the  bridge. 

In  the  mean  time  Lieutenant-Colonel  [James]  Cunningham  arrived  at 
Verona  and  assumed  command  of  all  the  troops.  Eeceived  an  order 
from  Major-General  [S.  J.]  Gholson,  of  the  State  service,  to  join  him  at 
Tupelo.  Started  with  his  command  by  the  most  direct  route,  and  or- 
dered me,  with  Second  Tennessee  Cavalry,  to  go  by  way  of  Eeece’s 
Bridge.  I arrived  near  the  bridge;  found  that  the  enemy  had  crossed, 
and  that  Inge’s  battalion  had  fallen  back.  Moved  then  to  Thomasson’s 
farm,  where  I rejoined  Colonel  Cunningham,  en  route  for  Tupelo,  and 
followed  his  column  with  Inge’s  battalion  in  rear  of  my  regiment. 
Colonel  Cunningham  moved  immediately  forward  without  (so  far  as  my 
knowledge  extends)  reconnoitering  or  sending  out  flankers;  passed  into 
the  thick  woods  and  swamp  south  of  Tuiielo,  and  encountered  the  enemy 
in  ambush  just  before  arriving  at  the  Tupelo  and  Pontotoc  road.  A few 
shots  from  the  enemy  announced  his  presence,  and  he  reserved  his  heavy 
fire  until  the  column  had  passed  nearly  half  way  through,  and  then 
opened  with  small-arms  and  artillery  upon  both  flanks,  cutting  oft  two 
companies  of  the  Second  Alabama,  with  Hewlett’s  battalion  and  my  own 
command,  consisting  of  Second  Tennessee  Eegiment  and  Inge’s  bat- 
talion. The  advanced  portion  of  Colonel  Cunningham’s  command 
(l)robably  consisting  of  400  men)  passed  between  the  two  fires  of  the 
enemy  and  moved  to  his  rear.  The  enemy  then  immediately  closed  in 
upon  the  front  of  the  advancing  column  and  poured  a rapid  fire  upon 
us  from  three  directions.  The  lire  was  so  severe  that  all  of  Hewlett’s 
battalion  could  not  form  and  dismount,  as  directed ; hence  it  gave  way 
with  the  exception  of  two  companies,  which,  having  received  their  po- 
sition, remained  upon  the  ground  immediately  in  front  and  fought  gal- 
lantly. I at  once  ordered  the  Second  Tennessee  into  line  and  to  dis- 
mount, which  was  executed  promptly  and  in  good  order,  and  the  liorses 
sent  to  tlie  rear  out  of  reach  of  tlie  enemy’s  fire.  By  keeping  the  men 
close  to  the  ground  and  behind  trees,  taking  deliberate  aim  at  the  enemy, 
we  succeeded  in  the  course  of  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  in  driving  the 
enemy  some  500  yards  beyond  the  Tu])elo  and  Pontotoc  road.  The 
numoer  M killed  of  the  enemy  has  been  re})orted  by  prisoners  who  es- 


694 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


ciiped  from  bis  bands  and  citizens  of  Tupelo  to  have  been  20  or  more, 
and  tbe  wounded  many  times  as  great. 

Tbe  loss,  as  nearly  as  can  be  ascertained,  in  tbe  Second  Tennessee 
and  Inge’s  battalion  was  0 wounded  and  8 captured.  Several  borses 
were  killed  and  wounded. 

I then  withdrew  tbe  men  from  tbe  engagement  and  moved  to  Harris- 
l>urg,  tbe  enemy  still  remaining  at  Tupelo  in  line  of  battle,  awaiting 
anotbcr  attack.  I withdrew  to  \^erona. 

The  next  morning  moved,  under  orders  from  General  Gholson,  to 
Harrisburg,  and,  finding  that  during  tbe  night  previous  the  enemy  bad 
retreated  toward  Guntown,  pursued  2 miles  and  returned. 

It  may  be  well  to  state  that,  after  running  tbe  gauntlet  of  tbe  enemy’s 
fire  and  getting  in  bis  rear,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Cunningham  continued 
bis  march  to  Cbesterville  or  vicinity,  where,  finding  General  Gholson, 
be  returned  by  a circuitous  route  to  Yerona  at  9 p.  m.  Had  be  fought 
tbe  enemy  vigorously  in  bis  rear,  or  rejoined  the  troops  which  were  left 
in  tbe  ambuscade,  the  result  might  have  been  more  favorable  for  us. 
The  force  of  tbe  enemy  was  not  less  than  1,500,  with  six  pieces  of  artil- 
lery (6-pounder  guns).  Tbe  various  commands  of  tbe  enemy  were  Ninth 
Illinois  Regiment,  Seventh  Kansas,  Tenth  Missouri,  and  two  companies 
of  mounted  infantry,  commanded  by  Colonel  Quinine  [F.  M.  Cornyn]. 
The  force  which  I bad  engaged  did  not  exceed  500. 

I am,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  R.  BARTEAU, 

TAcntcnant-  Colonel. 

[Capt.]  Roy  Mason  Hooe, 

Assistant  A djutant-  General. 


MAY  10,  1863. — Skirmishes  at  Caledonia  and  Pin  Hook,  La. 

RPJPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gon.  Hngli  T.  Reid,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Brigade,  Sixth 
])ivision,  Seventeentli  Army  Corps. 

No.  2. — Maj.  William  Y.  Roherts,  First  Kansas  Infantry. 

No.  3. — Col.  Frajdv  A.  Barolett,  Beauregard  Regiment,  Lonisiana  Militia. 


No.  1. 

Ecjyort  of  Bri(j.  Gen.  ITngli  T.  Eeid^  U.  S.  Armu,  commanding  First 
Brigade.,  Sixth  J)i vision,  Seventeentli  Army  Corps. 

Providence,  La.,  May  12,  1863. 

I have  the  honor  to  re])ort  that  on  tbe  2d  instant  some  80  of  tbe 
enemy  crossed  over  Bayou  Macon  in  the  vicinity  of  Bissell’s  cut,  at 
Ashton,  and  carried  away  15  or  20  negroes.  Learning  this  fiict,  I made 
a reconnaissance  on  the  3d  instant  to  that  point  with  a conpniny  of 
mounted  infantry,  in  command  of  Major  Roberts,  of  the  First  Kansas, 
and  became  satisfied,  from  infoiination  received  from  reliable  sources, 
tliat  the  enemy  on  the  west  side  of  tbe  bayou  bad  concentrated  bis  forces 
in  tlie  vicinity  of  Caledonia  for  tbei)nrpose  of  making  raids  to  this  side. 
It  was  ])ra(*di cable  to  (;ross  tbe  l)ayou  in  that  vicinity,  and  there  were 
great  difficulties  in  tbe  way  of  crossing  it  at  any  otlier  point.  I there- 


Chap.  XXXVT.]  SKIRMISHES  AT  CALEDONIA,  ETC.,  LA. 


G95 


fore  determiued  to  withdraw  the  whole  of  the  First  Kansas  Mounted 
Infantry  from  the  plantations  below  Providence  and  concentrate  them 
on  Old  Kiver,  knowing  there  could  be  no  danger  to  the  plantations 
whilst  the  enemy  was  so  far  north. 

On  the  morning  of  the  8th,  Captain  Zesch,  with  six  companies  of  the 
First  Kansas,  succeeded  in  reaching  the  bayou,  and  crossed  some  20  of 
his  men,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Thompson,  on  a raft,  near  Cal- 
edonia. Here  he  found  the  enemy  in  too  great  force  and  too  strongly 
posted  to  risk  anything  more  than  a reconnaissance,  and  fell  back  to 
camp  on  Old  Kiver  to  await  re-euforcemeuts. 

On  the  evening  of  the  8th  instant,  I sent  Major  Eoberts  to  take  com- 
mand, and  sent  forward  100  men  from  the  Sixteenth  Wisconsin,  under 
Captain  Wheeler,  by  steamer,  to  Old  Kiver,  and  also  sent  forward  three 
additional  companies  from  the  First  Kansas,  leaving  one  company  at 
this  place. 

Major  Koberts  moved  from  Old  Kiver  with  the  command  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  9th,  and  built  a bridge  over  Bayou  Macon  during  the  day, 
and  crossed  over  on  the  morning  of  the  10th,  when  lie  met  the  enemy 
in  the  most  gallant  manner,  driving  them  from  their  iiositious  at  Cal- 
edonia and  pursuing  them  to  their  cover  in  log-houses  at  Pin  Hook, 
killing  4 of  their  men  and  taking  2 xirisoners,  besides  wounding  a num- 
ber. As  the  enemy  could  not  be  dislodged  without  artillery,  the  expe- 
dition returned  to  the  bayou,  and  remained  on  the  other  side  until  the 
afternoon  of  the  11th  without  further  encountering  the  enemy. 

The  First  Kegimeut  of  Arkansas  Volunteers,  of  African  descent, 
under  Colonel  Wood,  arrived  here  from  Helena  on  the  evening  of  the 
10th,  and  I moved  them  and  50  men  of  the  Sixteenth  Wisconsin  during 
the  night  to  Old  Kiver,  to  be  within  supporting  distance  in  case  the  fight 
should  be  continued  on  the  11th,  but  met  a dispatch  from  Major  Koberts 
which  rendered  it  unnecessary  to  move  them  farther. 

I crossed  Bayou  Macon  to  our  troops  on  the  other  side  of  the  bayou 
on  the  morning  of  the  11th,  and,  finding  that  nothing  more  could  be 
done  without  artillery,  recrossed  during  the  day,  destroyed  the  bridge, 
and  brought  the  troops  to  Providence,  except  four  companies  of  the  First 
Kansas,  left  at  Old  Kiver  to  watch  the  movements  of  the  enemy. 

Major  Koberts,  of  the  First  Kansas,  deserves  great  credit  for  the 
masterly  manner  in  which  he  executed  my  orders  in  this  attack,  having 
accomplished  everything  that  was  expected  of  him.  Captain  Zesch,  of 
the  same  regiment,  is  also  entitled  to  praise  for  the  skill  and  prudence 
with  which  lie  managed  liis  part  of  the  command.  Captain  Wheeler, 
of  tlie  Sixteenth  Wisconsin,  led  his  men  against  the  enemy  in  gallant 
style,  and  both  officers  and  men  of  these  two  regiments  acted  with 
great  bravery,  and  deserve  high  commendation.  For  further  details  I 
refer  you  to  the  reiiort  of  Major  Koberts,  herewith  inclosed.  The  jires- 
ent  disjiosition  of  the  troops  under  my  command  is  as  follows:  Four 
companies  First  Kansas  at  Old  Kiver;  two  companies  at  Wilton’s;  three 
at  Bass’  plantation,  4 miles  below  Providence,  and  one  at  this  jilace. 
Tlie  Sixteenth  Wisconsin,  First  Arkansas,  and  Eighth  Louisiana  Vol- 
unteers, of  African  descent,  at  this  place,  and  the  Tenth  Louisiana,  of 
African  descent,  at  Goodrich’s  Landing,  with  the  commissioners. 

The  Ihghth  Louisiana  has  been  mustered  into  the  service,  and  six, 
if  not  seven,  companies  of  the  Tenth  Louisiana.  Both  these  regiments 
are  improving  rapidly  in  drill,  and  are  ])artially  armed,  and  I hope  to 
have  them  fully  armed  and  e(]ui})])ed  in  a few  days,  as  reipiisitions 
liave  gone  forward.  1 have  also  sent  for  some  artillery,  Avhich  I hope 
to  get  from  Helena.  General is  said  to  be  in  command  at 


696 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Floyd,  and  to  liave  brought  up  from  Delhi  1,500  meu  and  some  artillery 
to  re-euforce  the  Thirteenth  Louisiana  Battalion,  with  which  we  had 
the  fight. 

The  rebels  claim  to  have  10,000  troops  at  Monroe,  brought  down 
from  Little  Bock  to  be  sent  to  Alexandria,  but  say  that  Banks’  army 
was  falling  back  from  Alexandria,  and  these  troops  were  not  sent  there. 
If  this  is  true,  these  troops  may  be  expected  to  operate  in  this  direction 
and  toward  Miliiken’s  Bend.  » 

The  negroes  and  much  property  west  of  the  bayou  are  being  run  oft 
to  Texas,  though  there  are  plenty  of  provisions,  such  as  corn  and  hogs, 
left.  The  secesh  hereabouts  say  that  if  Vicksburg  falls  the  war  is  at  an 
end  in  Louisiana.  I have  had  most  of  the  negroes  who  were  unemployed 
here  removed  to  the  commissioners  at  Goodrich’s  Landing. 

Since  writing  the  above,  I have  learned,  from  what  1 believe  to  be  a 
reliable  source,  that  no  troops  have  been  sent  from  Monroe  toward 
Bayou  Macon;  that  3,000,  instead  of  10,000,  came  from  Little  Bock  to 
Monroe;  that  these  troops  have  been  sent  to  re- enforce  Colonel  [General] 
Taylor  and  Kirby  Smith,  on  Bed  Elver,  who  were  retreating  before 
Banks’  army;  that  General  Hebert  is  at  Monroe,  in  command  of  only 
CO  men  (conscripts),  and  that  he  has  had  his  things  packed  up  for  the 
last  three  weeks  (in  two  wagons)  on  the  west  side  of  the  Washita  Biver, 
ready  to  run  on  the  approach  of  our  forces.  This  information  is  derived 
from  a Kew  Hamjishire  Yankee,  who  has  just  made  his  escape  from 
Monroe.  He  says  that  the  troops  are  to  be  withdrawn  from  this  side 
of  the  Washita,  which  I think  is  altogether  probable  from  the  move- 
ments we  know  to  be  going  on  west  of  the  bayou. 

H.  T.  BEID, 

Brigadier-  General^  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  J.  B.  McPherson, 

Commanding  Seventeenth-  Army  Corps. 


Ko.  2. 

Beport  of  Maj.  William  Y.  Eoberts^  First  Kansas  Infantry. 

Headquarters  First  Kansas  Mounted  Infantry, 

Camp  Butler.)  near  Lake  Providence^  La.,  May  11,  1863. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  your  orders,  I proceeded,  in  command  of  a de- 
tachment of  100  men  of  the  Sixteenth  Begiment  Wisconsin  Volunteer 
Infantry,  composed  of  detachments  from  Company  G,  Captain  Wheeler; 
Company  A,  Captain  Gallagher;  Company  1,  Captain  Stevens,  and 
Company  E,  Lieutenants  Vidal  and  Monroe,  to  Old  Biver,  for  the  ])ur- 
pose  of  co-operating  with  Captain  Zesch,  commanding  six  companies  of 
the  First  Kansas  Volunteer  (now  mounted)  Infantry,  sent  on  an  expe- 
dition wmst  of  Bayou  Macon. 

On  reaching  Old  Biver,  on  the  evening  of  the  8th,  I found  Captain 
Zesch  had  fallen  back  to  that  post  with  his  command  for  rations.  I at 
once  assumed  command  of  the  troo])S  at  Old  Biver,  consisting  of  Com- 
l)anies  A,  B,  F,  G,  II,  and  I,  of  the  First  Kansas,  and  the  above  detach- 
ment from  the  Sixteenth  Wisconsin,  and  marched  the  next  morning  at 
daylight  to  a point  on  Bayou  Macon,  near  Caledonia,  where  it  was  re- 
ported the  rebels  w^ere  posted  ^Yith  a force  of  about  800  men. 

On  reaching  the  bayou,  I found  it  impossible  to  cross  with  mounted 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  SKIRMISHES  AT  CALEDONIA,  ETC.,  LA. 


697 


troops  without  a bridge.  I detailed  Lieuteuant  Paetz,  Company  F,  First 
Kausas,  with  as  many  men  as  could  be  worked  to  advantage,  and  in- 
structed him  to  throw  a bridge  across  the  bayou  at  Old’s  Ferry.  I was 
here  joined  by  Company  C,  Captain  Peed;  Company  F,  Lieutenant 
Thompson,  and  Company  K,  Lieutenant  Hutt,  of  the  First  Kansas. 

At  sun-up  the  next  morning  Lieutenant  Paetz  reported  the  bridge 
finished,  and  in  twenty  minutes  the  whole  command  ])assed  over.  1 
found  the  enemy  strongly  posted  in  Caledonia,  at  a brick-kiln  to  the  left 
of  Caledonia,  and  three  other  points,  in  heavy  timber  and  negro  quarters 
on  the  bluffs  still  to  the  left,  extending  one-half  mile  below  the  bridge, 
and  presenting  a front  of  about  IJ  miles,  and  distant  from  the  bayou  1 
mile,  over  cleared  bottom  laud,  divided  in  the  center  longitudinally  by 
Ilill  Bayou.  I formed  a line  by  placing  Captain  Zesch’s  squadron,  com- 
])Osed  of  Companies  G and  I,  and  Lieutenant  Mack’s  squadron,  composed 
of  Companies  B and  E,  Captain  Howard’s  squadron,  composed  of  Com- 
panies A and  H,  on  the  right ; Captain  Peed’s  squadron,  composed  of 
Companies  C and  F,  on  the  extreme  left;  and  the  Wisconsin  infantry, 
commanded  by  Captain  Wheeler,  in  the  center,  leaving  Company  K, 
Lieuteuant  Hutt,  to  guard  the  bridge. 

I then  ordered  Cai)taiu  Wheeler  to  advance  through  a piece  of  de- 
tached woodland  to  dislodge  any  enemy  that  niiglit  be  concealed  there, 
and  to  advance  his  skirmishers  to  the  Pin  Hook  road  at  the  foot  of  the 
bluffs,  to  test  the  strength  of  the  enemy  in  front  of  my  center.  This 
order  was  promptly  obeyed,  and  the  skirmishers  of  the  enemy  were  driven 
from  the  road  back  upon  his  line  of  battle,  formed  at  the  edge  of  the 
timber,  and  his  whole  line  of  300  men  forced  into  the  woods  by  the 
skirmishers  of  the  glorious  old  Sixteenth  without  bringing  into  action 
any  other  i)ortion  of  the  detachment. 

Being  satisfied  that  Captain  Wheeler,  with  Company  K,  of  the  First 
Kausas,  could  defend  the  bridge  against  any  force  that  could  be  brought 
from  that  direction,  I ordered  Captain  Zesch  with  his  squadron  to  charge 
the  enemy  in  Caledonia,  and  to  turn  his  extreme  left  and  take  his  other 
positions  in  flank  and  rear.  This  movement  was  most  skillfull5^  and 
successfully  made,  and  sending  Lieutenant  Mack  to  his  assistance, 
the  two  squadrons  charged  boldly  over  ditches  and  levees,  made  for 
drainage,  but  forming  excellent  rifle-pits,  into  the  heavy  timber  on  the 
blufls,  studded  with  negro  quarters,  and,  coming  down  on  the  left  flank 
of  the  enemy’s  positions  on  the  blufl*  successively,  soon  dispersed  his 
whole  left  wing. 

Seeing  the  left  of  the  enemy  broken,  I ordered  Captain  Howard’s 
squadron  to  the  extreme  left,  fronting  the  Pin  Hook  road,  to  charge 
the  enemy  in  flank,  should  he  retreat  in  that  direction.  Captain  Peed 
dismounted  one  company  of  his  squadron,  and  Compauj^  E,  Lieutenant 
Cowan,  having  charged  down  the  ITn  Hook  road  to  the  right  of  Captain 
Wheeler’s  position,  1 ordered  these  two  companies,  together  with  Cap- 
tain Wheeler’s  command,  to  advance  in  the  timber  across  the  road  and 
force  the  enemy  from  this  strong  ])osition. 

This  order  was  most  satisfactorily  obeyed  by  the  lion-liearted  men 
and  brave  officers  in  command,  and  in  a few  moments  the  whole  force  of 
the  enemy  was  in  full  retreat  across  the  liill  country  in  the  direction  of 
Pin  Hook,  a place  distant  9 miles  from  Caledonia  and  3 miles  west  of 
the  bayou.  Understanding  from  ])risoners  that  the  enemy  expected  a 
re-enforcement  of  1,300  men  from  Delhi,  1 determined  to  make  a rapid 
dash  ubon  Pin  Hook,  and  to  reach  that  place,  if  possible,  before  tlie 
arrival  of  re-enforcements  and  before  the  scattered  forces  of  the  enemy 
could  rally  and  concentrate  there. 


098  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

With  this  view  I ordered  the  Sixteenth  back  to  the  bridge,  with  in- 
structions to  defend  it  5 sent  an  order  to  Captain  Zesch  and  Lieutenant 
Mack  to  follow  by  the  bayou  road,  and  sending  Captain  Reed  with  his 
squadron  by  a right-hand  road  leading  also  to  Pin  Hook,  I put  myself 
at  the  liead  of  Captain  Howard’s  squadron  and  Compan^y  E,  and  moved 
forward  at  a speed  equal  to  the  full  capacity  of  our  animals. 

Near  the  town  Captain  Reed’s  squadron  joined  the  leading  squadron, 
and  as  our  advance  guard  approached  the  town  we  received  a heavy  fire 
from  the  enemy,  posted  in  and  behind  log-houses,  by  which  Lieutenant 
Eord,  wlio  commanded  the  advance  guard,  and  2 men  of  his  command 
were  wounded. 

Tlie  two  squadrons  and  Comi>any  E dismounted  and  skirmished  with 
the  enemy  until  1 found  him  so  strongly  posted  that  he  could  not  be 
dislodged  Avithout  a larger  force  or  by  the  assistance  of  artillery. 

In  this  skirmish  Lieutenant  Dilworth,  a brave  and  promising  young 
officer,  was  unfortunately  killed.  I then  recalled  the  skirmishers,  hop- 
ing to  draw  the  enemy  from  his  position,  but  this  was  unsuccessful. 
After  remaining  some  time,  and  making  an  unsuccessful  effort  to  obtain 
a Avagon  to  remove  the  remains  of  Lieutenant  Dilworth,  I deposited  his 
body  in  a house  and  marched  back  to  the  bridge,  meeting  Captain  Zesch 
and  Lieutenant  Mack,  who  reported  that  they  had  fallen  into  an  am- 
buscade by  Avhich  3 men  of  Company  B .were  wounded  and  1 horse 
killed,  but  that  they  rallied  at  once,  charged  the  enemy  into  the  Avoods 
and  drove  them  before  them,  killing  1 and  wounding  a number.  I 
remained  at  the  bridge  during  the  night  of  the  10th,  and  sent  out  some 
scouting  parties  in  the  morning,  who  brought  in  a refugee  white  family 
a large  number  of  contrabands,  some  horses,  mules,  and  cattle.  We 
then  marched  back  to  our  camp  on  Old  River  and  at  this  place. 

Casualties:  Killed — First  Lieut.  George  M.  Dihvorth,  Company  H. 
Wounded — Lieutenant  Ford,  Company  A,  slightly  in  left  leg;  Sergts. 
G.  Smith  and  Patrick  Fitzgerald,  and  Corpl.  Thomas  Grady,  Com- 
pany B ; Privates  John  Dwyer,  Thomas  Williams,  and  Ixivi  W.  Til- 
lottson,  Company  E ; Private  Dennis  Hogan,  Company  G.  Missing — 
'Corporal  [Joseph]  SteAvart,  Company  B ; Sergeant  [John]  Woods,  Com- 
pany H ; John  Moore,  Company  G.  PriA^ate  Manley  Knowlton,  Com- 
pany D,  one  of  my  orderlies,  was  unfortunately  drowned  in  trying  to 
swim  a bayou  on  the  field  of  battle  while  carrying  a dispatch  from 
Captain  Wheeler  to  myself. 

The  loss  of  the  enemy  must  be  considerable  in  killed  and  wounded. 
Without  making  any  systematic  search,  we  found  4 dead  bodies.  We 
liave  2 prisoners. 

The  object  of  this  expedition  having  been  to  ascertain  the  strength 
of  the  enemy  west  of  Bayou  Macon,  I am  able  to  report  that  the  best 
information  I could  obtain  was  that  they  had  at  Caledonia  about  500 
men  of  the  Thirteenth  [Battalion]  Louisiana  Cavalry  and  perhaps  300 
irregular  troops,  and  that  he  had  at  Pin  Hook  and  in  that  Aucinity  about 
1,000,  and,  perhaps.  Captain  Williams’  battery.  The  resources  of  the 
hill  country  are  by  no  means  exhausted — corn,  cattle,  and  liogs  are 
abundant  for  a sparsely  settled  country. 

The  oflicers  and  men  under  1113^  command  all  deserve  your  commen- 
dation. 

I met  Avith  no  single  instance  of  coAvardice,  incai)acity,  or  insubordi- 
nation in  the  command,  and  if  any  one  excelled  in  the  manly  Aurtues  of 
a soldier  it  Avas  because  chance  threw  opportunities  in  Ids  Ava^'  that  were 
denied  to  otbers. 

You  Aviil  alloAV  me  to  mention  Captain  Zesch,  of  the  First  Kansas,  as 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  SKIRMISHES  AT  CALEDONIA,  ETC.,  LA. 


699 


a brave  aud  skillful  officer,  and  also  to  bespeak  your  thanks  to  Captain 
Wheeler,  the  senior  officer  of  the  detachment  from  the  Sixteenth  Wis- 
consin, for  the  very  excellent  manner  in  which  he  handled  his  tried  and 
brave  men.  I am  also  compelled  to  name  Lieutenant  Ford,  who  led  the 
advance  ^^uard  into  Pin  Hook,  as  an  officer  whose  bravery  has  been 
tested  and  found  to  hav^e  the  ring  of  the  true  metal.  I would  further 
beg  leave  to  call  your  attention  to  the  suxieriority  of  the  First  Kansas 
as  mounted  troops,  and  to  say  that  my  experience  in  this  exi)edition 
lias  strengthened  my  convictions  of  the  great  benefits  that  would  result 
from  arming  this  regiment  with  revolvers  and  attaching  to  it  a section 
of  light  artillery.  With  these  arms  the  regiment  would  be  invaluable 
as  scouts  j could  pass  with  celerity  and  ferret  out  and  break  ui)  the 
rendezvous  of  guerrilla  parties  and  give  quiet  and  jirotection  to  the 
country. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  yours  to  command, 

W.  Y.  EGBERTS, 

Maj.  1st  Kans.  Vols.^  Comdg.  Expedition  West  of  Bayou  Macon. 

Brig.  Gen.  H.  T.  Reid, 

Commanding  Post  at  Lalce  Providence,  La. 


m.  3. 

Report  of  Col.  Franh  A.  Bartlett,  Beauregard  Regiment,  Louisiana  MUitia. 

Headquarters  Forces  of  Bayou  Macon, 

Floyd,  La.,^May  12,  1862. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  late  on  the  evening  of  Sat- 
urday, the  9th  instant,  I received  information  at  Delhi,  La.,  that  the 
enemy  in  force  had  evstablished  themselves  at  Caledonia,  on  Williams’ 
plantation,  occupying  the  back  yard,  negro  quarters,  and  other  defen- 
sive positions.  1 xuoceeded  at  once  to  the  scene  of  action,  arriving  at 
noon  on  Sunday,  I learned  through  the  outposts  that  the  enemy  had 
divided  at  Caledonia,  and  were  marching  on  Pin  Hook  from  two  direc- 
tions in  columns  of  300  men  each.  Captain  [W.  11.]  Corbin,  commanding 
a small  force  of  some  130  men,  consisting  of  detachments  from  several 
companies,  learning  that  an  attempt  was  being  made  to  attack  him 
simultaneously  in  front  and  rear,  fell  back,  made  a circuit,  and  with  a 
part  of  his  command  ambushed  that  column  of  the  enemy  which  was 
marching  on  Pin  Hook  by  what  is  called  the  Hill  road,  running  along 
the  baidv  of  Bayou  Macon.  He  attacked  them  at  a suitable  x>oint, 
killing  12  or  13  and  wounding  as  many  more,  losing  but  1 man,  and 
driving  the  enemy  back  in  disorder.  Captain  [John]  McKoin,  command- 
ing the  remainder  of  Ca}>tain  Corbin’s  command — consisting  of  Captain 
McKoiii’s  company  and  a detachment  of  a comx)anyin  course  of  organi- 
zation under  Ca])tain  [John]  McNeil — aware,  from  the  nature  of  the 
country,  that  his  rear  was  exposed,  judged  it  expedient  to  fall  back 
tovvanl  Floyd.  1 directed  him  to  take  i)osition  at  Pin  Hook,  xirotectiiig 
his  rear  with  a strong  guard. 

Sliortly  afterward  tlie  enemy  appeared  in  force  apxu’oachingPin  Hook 
by  the  road  leading  from  Clijwnbliss’,  or  Lane’s  Ferry.  They  were  al- 
lowed to  approach  within  60  yards,  when  we  o])ene(l  fire  upon  them. 
They  retreated  in  disorder  about  half  a mile,  but  rallied,  deploying  skir- 
mishers on  each  side  of  the  road,  firing  briskly  for  about  three-quarters 


700  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVT. 

of  an  liour.  1 kept  our  men  coucealed  and  well  protected  by  trees  and 
bouses,  returning-  tbeir  tire  only  when  it  could  be  done  effectually,  and 
suffering  no  injury.  At  dark  the  enemy  drew  off*,  retiriug  in  some  con- 
fusion across  the  Macon.  They  have  since  made  no  demonstrations  of 
any  kind.  The  force  of  the  enemy  was  estimated  at  between  800  and 
1,000.  Ours  did  not  exceed  250  men. 

Our  loss  was  2 killed  and  2 captured.  That  of  the  enemy,  as  near  as 
1 can  ascertain,  was  near,  if  not  quite,  50  in  killed,  wounded,  and  miss- 
ing, among  whom  were  1 lieutenant  killed  and  1 wounded.  Three  pris- 
oners were  captured,  with  six  Belgium  rifles  with  equipments. 

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  be  able  to  speak  in  terms  of  praise  of  the 
skill  and  courage  displayed,  respectively,  by  Captains  Corbin,  McKoin, 
McNeil,  and  Johnson;  and  to  Capt.  John  B.  Williams,  whose  familiar 
acquaintance  with  the  country  and  prompt  action  was  of  great  ad- 
vantage to  me,  I am  largely  indebted  for  the  success  of  the  day.  The 
men  behaved  admirably,  obeying  orders  implicitly  and  exhibiting  an 
eagerness  for  the  work  before  them  and  a courage  in  it  highly  to  their 
credit. 

Since  the  above  was  written,  scouts  have  come  in  informing  me  that 
the  enemy  had  retired  across  the  Macon,  destroying  the  bridge.  But 
there  is  good  reason  to  apprehend  an  attack  lower  down  the  bayou,  and 
I am  preparing  to  meet  it.  Should  they  attack  in  force,  it  will  be  diffi- 
cult to  repel  them,  as  my  force  is  very  small  and  there  are  several  points 
to  guard,  making  it  necessary  to  divide  almost  into  companies. 

Very  respectfulljq  your  obedient  servant, 

FRANK  A.  BARTLETT, 
Colonel^  Commanding  Forces  on  Bayou  Macon, 

Capt.  Samub-l  Boyer  Davis, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


MAY  10,  1863. — Attack  on  Fort  Beauregard,  La. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  George  W.  Logan,  Chahnette  Regiment,  Louisiana 

Militia. 


Fort  Beauregard, 
Harrisonburg,  May  10,  1863. 

Captain  : Four  Federal  gunboats  came  up  this  morning  at  2 o’clock. 
They  anchored  at  the  mouth  of  the  Bushley,  and  immediately  sent  a flag 
of  truce.  I dispatched  Captain  Benton  and  Lieutenant  Blanchard  to 
meet  the  flag  and  state  that  I would  hold  the  fort  foreA’er.  Lieuten- 
ant [William  W.]  Fowler  represented  the  Federal  Government.  He  in- 
formed us  that  Commodore  [Selim  E.]  Woodworth  commanded  the  fleet, 
and  demanded  the  unconditional  surrender  of  the  fort  and  its  surround- 
ings. If  we  did  not  accede  to  the  demand,  they  would  give  us  one  hour 
to  move  the  women  and  children  out  of  the  town. 

Captain  Benton  responded  that  the  only  answer  he  could  give  was 
that  the  fort  would  be  defended  at  ail  hazards,  and  that  the  women  and 
children  were  already  moved. 

The  flag  of  truce  returned,  and  an  hour  afterward  three  of  the  gun- 
boats began  shelling.  They  have  tired  some  150  shots,  but  have  done 
no  damage,  only  knocking  up  some  of  the  parapet.  They  have  de- 
stroyed one  house  in  the  town. 


Chap.  XXXVL]  RAID  ON  RAILROAD  NEAR  CRYSTAL  SPRINGS,  MISS.  701 

We  have  fired  but  a few  shots,  as  they  are  a little  out  of  rauge,  and 
are  waiting  for  them  to  approach  us  to  give  them  their  deserts.  Our 
firing  is  accurate,  but  falls  short,  and  therefore  I shall  fire  no  more  until 
they  come  nearer.  Lieutenant  Carter  has  this  instant  been  seriously 
wounded. 

We  should  have  more  troops  between  here  and  Alexandria. 

I shall  hold  the  fort,  with  God’s  blessing. 

Your  obedient  servant,  in  haste, 

GEO.  WM.  LOGAN, 
Lieutenant- Colonel^  Commanding  Post. 

Capt.  Samuel  Boyer  Oavis, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Monroe^  La. 

P.  S. — 6.15  p.  m.  The  enemy  has  shelled  us  steadily  until  this  time, 
but  has  this  instant  retired;  I suppose  for  a little  rest. 


MAY  11,  1863. — Kaid  on  the  New  Orleans  and  Jackson  Railroad,  near 

Crystal  Springs,  Miss. 

Report  of  Col.  ClarJc  Wright.,  Sixth  Alissouri  Cavalry. 

Headquarters  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry  Volunteers, 

RoacPs  Plantation,  Alay  11,  1863. 

Colonel  : 1 left  this  place  at  6 a.  m.  this  morning,  and  by  a circuit- 
ous route  reached  the  Jackson  and  New  Orleans  Kailroad,  with  some 
200  men,  I J miles  north  of  Crystal  Springs,  distant  25  miles.  I at  once 
placed  one-half  of  the  command  in  the  best  position  for  defense  that  the 
circumstances  would  admit,  and  with  the  other  half  proceeded  to  destroy 
the  telegraph  line  and  railroad.  1 took  out  lA  miles  of  wire,  and  burned 
it  on  top  of  three  bridges  I destroyed.  I cut  the  road  by  tearing  up  the 
rails  at  three  points.  1 burned  out  one  culvert,  and  warped  tire  rails 
materially  at  two  points  by  building  large  fires  on  them.  In  the  aggre- 
gate, I'J  miles  of  road  is  destroyed,  and  will  require  at  least  five  or  six 
days  to  repair  it.  I burned  some  one  hundred  and  twenty-five  bales  of 
cotton,  marked  C.  S.  A.,  paroled  18  citizens,  and  captured  15  xirisoners 
and  a number  of  mules  and  horses  brought  to  camx).  I learned  that 
some  4,500  trooxis  had  passed  ux)  to  Jackson  from  Port  Hudson  within 
the  last  four  days,  on  the  railroad,  and  about  the  same  number  by  land, 
or  marching. 

Within  the  last  ten  days  they  have  called  in  all  the  forces  to  Jackson 
Irom  the  surrounding  country. 

I am  now  in  the  same  camp  I left  this  morning.  Have  marched  50 
miles  to  day,  in  addition  to  the  labor  x)erformed  and  above  specified. 
My  command  is  worn  down  by  incessant  labor  for  the  last  twenty  days 
and  nights,  and  would  resxiectfully  ask  pern)ission  to  rest  men  and 
horses  lor  one  day. 

1 am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CLARK  WRIGHT, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry  Volunteers. 

Lieut  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


702 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai\  XXX VL 


MAY  11-15,  1863. — Expedition  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  Panola,  Miss., 
and  skirmishes  (11th)  at  Coldwater  and  (Idth)  at  Walnut  Hill,  Miss. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Col.  Edward  Hatcli,  Second  Iowa  Cavalry,  commanding  Cavalry  Brigade. 
No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  JamcH  R.  Clialmers,  C.  S,  Army,  commanding  military  district,  of 
skirmish  (14th). 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  Edward  Hatch.,  Second  Iowa  Cavalry^  commanding  Cav- 
alry Brigade. 

La  Grange,  Tenn.,  May  16, 1863. 
Captain  : Complying  with  Brigadier- General  Smithes  order  to  pro- 
ceed with  my  command  to  the  neighborhood  of  Panola,  Miss.,  attack 
General  Chalmers^  (Confederate)  forces  if  found,  and  procure  all  the 
mules  and  horses  in  my  way,  and  not  to  be  absent,  if  possible,  more 
than  four  days,  moved  from  camp  at  La  Grange,  May  11,  with  500  of 
the  Second  Iowa  Cavalry,  350  of  the  Sixth  Iowa  Infantry,  aud  three 
2-pouTiders  of  the  First  Illinois  Artillery,  southwest  toward  Tallaloosa, 
at  the  same  time  sending  150  men  of  the  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry  south 
of  Ripley,  to  cover  any  llank  movement  from  Okolona.  Near  the  cross- 
ing of  Coldwater  came  upon  Major  [A.  H.]  Chalmers’  (Confederate)  bat- 
talion, which  my  advance  routed,  capturing  3 prisoners.  Camped  that 
night  5 miles  west  of  Holly  Springs. 

Marched  the  following  day  south,  and  camped  near  Chulahoma.  Learn- 
ing that  night  that  General  Chalmers  was  expected  at  Senatobia, 
marched  rapidly  on  the  morning  of  the  13th  to  that  place.  Found  there 
only  a company  of  the  enemy,  of  whom  we  captured  6 prisoners  and 
the  telegraph  operator  at  that  point.  Pushing  my  advance  to  the  neigh- 
borhood of  Sardis,  and  not  finding  the  enemy  in  force,  dispatched  parties 
in  all  directions  to  accumulate  animals.  By  3 o’clock  in  the  afternoon, 
having  brought  in  about  600  animals,  resumed  my  march  toward  La 
Grange,  camping  about  7 miles  from  Senatobia,  on  Jim  Wolf  Creek. 

About  2 o’clock  of  the  morning  of  tlie  14th,  the  enemy  made  an  at- 
tack upon  my  pickets,  evidently  intending  to  surprise  the  camp,  and 
were  handsomely  repulsed  by  the  jnckets.  At  daylight  tliey  again 
made  a more  spirited  attack,  but  our  pickets  having  been  strongly  re- 
enforced, drove  the  enemy  back ; and  supposing  this  was  the  last  attack, 
took  up  my  line  of  march  north,  drawing  in  the  pickets,  which  the  en- 
emy followed  up  (piickly  with  his  artillery,  shelling  the  swamp  my 
command  was  passing  through,  giving  me  considerable  annoyance. 
Moving  the  Second  Iowa  to  the  rear  to  fight,  I learned  the  enemy  was 
moving  north  on  a parallel  road  to  the  one  I was  on,  with  the  evident 
intention  of  getting  uj)on  my  left  fiank;  I moved  steadily  forward.  The 
enemy  again  attacked  me  at  Walnut  Hill,  striking  the  left  flank  of  my 
rear  guard,  charging  spiritedly  upon  two  companies  of  rifles  of  the  Sec- 
ond Iowa  Cavalry,  who  repulsed  the  enemy,  driving  them  out  of  the 
town.  When  near  the  crossing  of  the  Hecula,5  miles  north  of  Walnut 
Hill,  the  enemy  again  attacked,  having  pushed  up  three  pieces  of  artil- 
lery on  the  hills  commanding  the  swamp,  at  about  a mile  distance,  and 
began  shelling  the  command,  creating  a stampede  among  the  led  ani- 
mals and  negroes.  Leaving  one-half  of  the  command  to  take  care  of 
Jhe  led  animals,  I moved  rapidly  to  the  rear  to  fightj  deploying  on  the 


OnAP.  XXX 71.]  EXPEDITION  TO  PANOLA,  MISS.,  ETC.  703 

first  high  ground  toward  tlie  enemy,  opening  witli  two  of  the  2-pounders 
on  their  guns,  and  pushing  my  skirmishers  and  line  forward  to  a good 
position,  and  having  but  450  men  to  fight  (it  required  one-half  of  my 
command  to  take  care  of  the  animals)  against  from  what  I could  ascer- 
tain from  prisoners  was  from  1,000  to  *2,000  men.  One  of  the  enemy’s 
guns  getting  into  iiosition  in  a point  of  woods  on  my  right,  gave  me 
considerable  trouble  until  we  drove  it  from  its  position  with  the 
2-pounders  and  skirmishers.  I here  awaited  the  enemy’s  attack,  who 
continued  shelling  the  road  and  woods  in  the  swamp. 

An  hour  having  passed,  and  my  led  animals  having  crossed  the  stream, 
and  safe  from  the  enemy’s  shells,  and  the  enemy  declining  to  attack,  I 
crossed  the  bridge  and  did  not  destroy  it,  meaning  fo  allow  Chalmers 
to  cross  one-half  of  his  command  and  then  attack  him.  Waiting  some 
time,  and  finding  that  the  enemy  did  not  follow,  I pushed  rapidly  to 
the  Coldwater,  which  point,  I had  every  reason  to  believe,  the  enemy 
had  sent  a force  to  hold,  but  I hoped  to  crush  it  before  Chalmers  could 
come  up.  On  reaching  this  crossing,  there  was  evidence  that  the  force 
we  had  expected  to  contest  the  jiassage  had  decamped  hurriedly,  mov- 
ing west.  Camped  that  night  near  Coldwater.  During  tlie  night  many 
of  the  negroes,  for  some  reason,  either  from  the  fear  that  the  camp  would 
be  shelled  or  from  hunger — it  being  impossible  for  us  to  furnish  food — 
escaped  with  animals,  some  returning  south,  others  pushing  for  our 
lines.  I marched  to  La  Grange  on  the  15th.  We  ca])tured  about  GOO 
mules  and  horses.  The  weather  being  very  warm,  and  the  marches  long 
and  rapid,  nearly  100  of  our  old  horses  were  abandoned.  The  casualties 
are  2 men  missing,  one  of  them  i)robably  killed ; 2 seriously  wounded, 
and  5 horses  killed.*  My  skirmishers  punished  the  enemy  severely. 
The  command  marched  about  160  miles. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  HATCH, 

Colonel  Second  Iowa  Cavalry^  Commanding  Brigade, 

Capt.  William  H.  MoRaAN, 

Assistant  A djutant-  General, 


m.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  R.  Chalmers^  G.  S.  Armyj  commanding 
Military  District^  of  sldrmish  [lltli). 

Near  Looxaiioma,  Miss., 

ALay  IG,  18G5. 

After  making  a forced  march  Wednesday  night  (13th),  I overtook 
Hatch’s  force,  about  1,100  strong,  at  Temperance  Hall ; pursued  him  for 
512  miles  without  being  able  to  force  a general  engagement.  Captured  12 
, of  his  men  and  some  horses,  and  killed  and  wounded  a few.  At  2 o’clock 
.next  morning  moved  to  Cockrum’s  Cross-Roads,  where  the  Third  and 
Ninth  Illinois  (Cavalry,  with  two  12-pounder  howitzers,  were  c;imi)ed. 
They, left  before  my  arriv^ial.  1 followed  them  across  Coldwater  in  direc- 
tion of  Germantowii,  to  within  8 miles  of  tliJit  ifiace;  captured  4 and 
; killed  and  wounded  about  20. 

JAMES  R.  CHALMERS, 

Brigadier-  General. 

\ General  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  Canton. 


List  of  casualties  slio^vs  2 nien  \voun,ded  and  2 missing. 


704 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC, 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


MAY  12,  1863. — Engagement  at  Raymond,  Miss. 

REPORTS.* 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  James  B.  McPherson,  U.  S.  Army,  commanOing  Seventeenth  Army 
Corps. 

No.  2. — Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces. 

No.  3. — Brig.  Gen.  John  E.  Smith,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Brigade,  Third 
Division,  including  operations  May  1-June  4. 

No.  4. — Lieut.  Col.  William  P.  Davis,  Twenty-third  Indiana  Infantry,  including 
operation^  to  June  4. 

No.  5. — Col.  Manniug'F.  Force,  Twentieth  Ohio  Infantry,  Second  Brigade. 

No.  6. — Brig.  Gen.  John  D.  Stevenson,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Brigade, 
including  operations  May  4-July  4. 

No.  7. — Colonel  Franklin  Camphell,  Eighty-first  Illinois  Infantry,  including  opera- 
tions to  July  4. 

No.  8. — Brig.  Gen.  Marcellus  M.  Crocker,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Seventh  Division, 
including  operations  May  2-17. 

No.  9. — Col.  John  B.  Sanborn,  Fourth  Minnesota  Infantry,  commanding  First  Bri- 
gade, including  operations  April  21-May  23. 

No.  10. — Capt.  John  S.  Foster,  Fourth  Independent  Company  Ohio  Cavalry,  com- 
manding cavalry  battalion,  including  operations  April  25-May  23. 

No.  11. — Brig.  Gen.  John  Gregg,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Confederate  forces. 

No.  12.— Col.  C.  11.  Walker,  Third  Tennessee  Infantry. 

No.  13. — Lieut.  Col.  James  J.  Turner,  Thirtieth  Tennessee  Infantry,  commanding 
Tenth  and  Thirtieth  Tennessee. 

No.  14. — Col.  R.  Farquharson,  Forty-first  Tennessee  Infantry. 

No.  15. — Lieut.  Col.  T.  W.  Beaumont,  Fiftieth  Tennessee  Infantry. 

No.  1C.— Maj.  S.  H.  Colms,  First  Tennessee  Battalion. 

No,  17. — Col.  H.  B.  Granbury,  Seventh  Texas  Infantry. 

Ko.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  James  B.  McBherson.,  U.  8.  Army^  commanding 
Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 

PlEADQUARTERS  SEVENTEENTH  AKMY  CoRPS, 

Raymond.,  Aliss.,  May  12,  18G3. 

GENERAL:  We  met  tlie  enemy,  about  6,000  strong,  commanded  by 
Brigadier-General  Gregg,  at  a point  2J  miles  west  of  this  place,  where 
they  were  posted  and  fully  prepared  to  receive  us.  After  a sharp  and 
severe  contest  of  about  -three  hours’  duration,  in  which  Major-General 
Logan’s  division  was  chietly  engaged,  the  enemy  were  driven  back  and 
retreated  i)reeipitately,  passing  out  of  this  town  on  the  Jackson  road, 
Edwards  Depot  road,  and  Gallatin  road. 

The  rough  and  impracticable  nature  of  the  country,  filled  with  ravines 
and  dense  undergrowth,  prevented  anything  like  an  effective  use  of 
artillery  or  a very  rapid  pursuit.  Our  loss  has  been  pretty  severe  in 
General  John  E.  Smith’s  and  General  Dennis’  brigades,  though  I think 
250  will  cover  the  total  killed,  wounded,  and  missing.  The  loss  of  the 
enemy  is  fully  as  heav^",  if  not  more  so  than  ours.  There  are  over  80  of 
their  wounded  in  town,  besides  the  number  left  on  the  battle-field  and 

■^See  also  general  reports  of  Grant  and  Pemberton,  and  McPherson's  and  Logan’s 
reports  of  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson, 


CiiAr.  XXXVI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  EAYMOND,  MISS. 


705 


picked  up  by  our  men.  We  disabled  two  of  the  enemy ^s  guns,  one  by 
bursting,  which  fell  into  our  possession,  and  captured  about  100  pris- 
oners. We  have  to  mourn  the  loss  of  Colonel  Eichards,  of  the  Twen- 
tieth Illinois,  who  was  killed  while  gallantly  encouraging  his  men. 
Col.  Ed.  S.  McCook,  Thirty-first  Illinois,  was  wounded  in  the  foot. 
These,  as  far  as  I know,  are  the  only  casualties  of  the  field  ofQcers. 
As  soon  as  the  returns  are  in,  I will  give  you  full  particulars.  Two 
rebel  colonels  are  known  to  have  been  killed. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  B.  McPHEESOE, 

Major-  General. 

Maj.  Gen.  C.  S.  Grant. 


ISTo.  2. 


Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  engaged  at  Raymond,  Miss., 

May  12,  1863. 

[Compiled  from  uominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.] 


Command. 

Killed. 

W'ouuded. 

Captured 
or  missing. 

Aggregate. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Offieers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

SEVENTEENTH  ARMV  CORPS. 

Maj.  Gen.  James  B.  McPiieiiso:?i. 

Cavalry  Battalion. 

Capt.  John  S.  Foster. 

2d  Illinois  Cavalry.  Companies  A and  E * 

4th  Missouri  Cavalry.  Company  F 

1 

1 

2 

Ohio  Cavalry,  (4th  Company)  * 

Total  Cavalry  Battalion 

1 

2 

THIRD  DIVISION. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Logan. 

First  Brigade. 

Bi  ig.  Gen.  .John  E.  Smith. 

2()th  Illinois 



3 

14 

1 

4 

2 

2 

1 

C4 

4 

14 

0 

74 

1 

80 

7 

17 

10 

115 

3l8t  Illinois 

4.")th  Illinois 

1 

124th  Illinois 

1 

15 

2ud  Indiana 

1 

2 

2 

21 

Total  First  Brigade  

4 31 

10 

1(J5 

2 

23 

235 

Second  Brigade. 

Biig.  Gen.  Elias  S.  Dennis. 

30th  Illinois 

1 

50 

5 

11 

1 

08 

11 

20th  Ohio 

10 

2 

f)8th  Ohio 

78th  Ohio 

Total  Second  Brigade •. 

10 

2 

73 

85 

- 

* No  loss  reported. 
45’ R R — VOL  XXIY,  PT  I 


706  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

Meturn  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  engaged  at  Raymond,  Miss.,  ^’C.— Continued. 


Officers  killed. — Illinois:  Capt.  Frank  Leeper,  Eigktli  Infantry,  and  Lieut.  Col.  Evan  Eichards, 
Capt.  Victor  H.  Stevens,  and  Lieut.  William  S.  Sears,  Twentieth  Infantry.  Indiana:  Lieut.  Henry 
C.  I)eitz,  Twenty -third  Infantry.  Missouri:  Lieuts.  John  Lamb  and  John  W.  Barrett,  Seventh  In- 
fantry. 


No.  3. 

Be^port  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  E.  Smith,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First 
Brigade,  Third  Division,  including  operations  May  1-June  4. 

Hdqrs.  1st  Beicade,  3d  Division,  17th  Army  Corps, 

Before  Yickshurg,  Miss.,  June  23,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  First  Brigade  since  the  battle  of  Thompson’s  Hill,  near 
Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  on  the  1st  of  May,  1863  (a  report  of  which  I had 
the  honor  to  transmit  soon  after),  to  June  4,  1863 : 

On  the  2d  day  of  May,  about  10  a.  m.,  I received  orders  from  Ma^jor- 
General  Grant  to  move  out  with  my  command  an J cross  the  south  fork 
of  Bayou  Pierre,  at  the  ford  about  3J  miles  east  of  Port  Gibson,  and 
gain  the  main  road  from  Port  Gibson  to  Vicksburg,  which  I accom- 
plished about  2 p.  m.,  halting  near  the  residence  of  the  rebel  Col.  B. 
G.  Humphreys,  Twenty-first  Eegiment  Mississippi  Volunteers.  I found 
no  enemy,  but  discovered  in  store  about  7,000  or  8,000  pounds  of  bacon, 
which  was  secured  and  distributed  to  the  troops.  This  proved  a valu- 
able acquisition  to  our  limited  supplies. 

The  division  having  crossed  at  Port  Gibson,  now,  5 p.  m.,  moved  up. 

* No  loss  reported. 

t Held  mainly  in  reserve.  The  following-named  regiments  appear  to  have  been  the 
most  actively  employed:  Forty-eighth  and  Fifty-ninth  Indiana,  Tenth  Missouri,  and 
Eightieth  Ohio. 


Chap.  XXXVL]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  EAYMOND,  MISS.  707 

At  this  point  I fell  in  with  my  command  and  moved  with  it.  Biv- 
ouacked on  the  north  fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  near  the  Grindstone  Pord. 
The  suspension  bridge  at  this  place,  which  had  been  fired  and  nearly 
destroyed  by  the  enemy,  was  promptly  repaired,  through  the  energy  of 
the  division  commander,  and  made  ready  for  the  crossing  of  troops  by 
4 o’clock  of  the  moruing  of  the  3d,  at  which  time,  having  the  advance, 
I crossed  with  my  command.  We  moved  up  the  opposite  slope  by 
flank  until  we  reached  the  residence  of  an  intelligent  planter,  who  as- 
sured us  that  there  was  no  enemy  in  the  vicinity,  they  having  all  passed 
the  day  before.  I had  not  moved  far  before  a field  piece  posted  in  a 
commanding  position,  and  masked  by  the  heavy  woods  which  covered 
the  summit  of  the  hill,  opened  fire  with  shell.  I immediately  deployed 
into  line  on  both  sides  of  the  road,  throwing  forward  a heavy  line  of 
skirmishers.  While  in  line,  3 men  of  the  Twenty-third  Indiana  were 
wounded  by  a shell.  Cavalry  were  at  this  time  sent  forward  to  recon- 
noiter.  Eeceiving  orders,  I also  moved  forward  in  line  to  the  summit 
of  the  hill,  without  any  further  resistance. 

The  cavalry  returning,  reported  the  enemy  in  full  retreat.  A halt 
.was  now  ordered  to  rest  the  men,  who  were  exhausted  by  the  fatiguing 
march  in  line  up  a steep  ascent,  broken  by  deep  ravines,  and  in  many 
places  through  dense  growths  of  cane.  Having  thrown  out  pickets 
while  resting  my  command,  brisk  firing  was  heard  on  my  left,  in  the 
direction  of  the  post  stationed  on  the  road  leading  to  the  residence  of 
Alfred  Ingraham.  I ascertained  that  our  pickets  were  attacked,  and 
immediately  ordered  the  Thirty-first  Illinois,  Colonel  McCook  command- 
ing, to  their  support,  where  they  soon  became  sharply  engaged.  Being 
in  heavy  timber,  it  was  impossible  to  estimate  the  number  of  the  enemy, 
who  were  thought  to  be  in  force.  As  a precautionary  measure,  I ordered 
the  Forty-fifth  Illinois,  Colonel  Maltby,  on  the  left,  and  the  Twenty- 
third  Indiana,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Davis,  on  the  right,  to  the  support 
of  Colonel  McCook,  and,  after  a spirited  skirmish,  succeeded  in  dis- 
lodging the  enemy,  who  hastily  retreated  on  the  Grand  Gulf  and  Vicks- 
burg road,  leaving  their  dead  on  the  field.  Our  casualties  were  2 slightly 
wounded. 

We  halted  for  a short  time  near  the  residence  of  Professor  Ingraham, 
where  on  the  following  day  Major-General  McClernand  had  his  head- 
quarters. In  pursuance  of  orders  from  Major-General  McPherson,  I 
moved  toward  Grand  Gulf,  and  reached  the  intersection  of  the  main 
road  from  Grand  Gulf  to  Vicksburg,  where  I received  orders  to  join 
the  division,  moving  toward  Hankinson’s  Ferry,  on  the  Big  Black.  I 
arrived  there,  after  a fatiguing  march  of  19  miles,  at  11  p.  m. 

Bivoucked  near  Hankinson’s  Ferry  three  days,  giving  the  men  ample 
time  to  rest  and  clean  themselves,  which  they  needed  very  much  after 
the  severe  marches  in  the  heat  and  dust,  which  at  times  was  suffocat- 
ing. NTearly  one-third  of  the  command  at  this  time  had  no  shoes,  having 
worn  them  out  on  the  march,  and  in  consequence  were  very  foot-sore. 
This,  together  with  their  want  of  supplies,  which  at  times  were  very 
short,  were  subjects  of  pleasantries  with  the  men,  wlio  consoled  them- 
selves with  the  prospect  of  a fight  every  other  day  to  make  amends  for 
their  privations. 

In  compliance  with  orders,  when  about  3 miles  from  Eaymond,  about 
10  a.  m.  of  the  12th,  I formed  in  line  on  the  right  of  the  road,  moving  the 
Thirty-first  Illinois  by  the  flank  to  protect  the  right  of  the  brigade,  and 
throwing  forward  to  the  right  and  front  a heavy  line  of  skirmishers. 
The  enemy’s  advance  were  discovered  posted  in  a ravine,  protected  by 
the  dense  timber  and  undergrowth,  and  also  by  a branch  of  Fourteen- 


708  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXX VL 

Mile  Creek — at  times  a considerable  stream  with  steep  banks — but  now 
with  only  about  2J  feet  of  water,  and  affording  an  excellent  cover  for 
the  enemy.  With  all  these  advantages  of  position  in  his  favor,  our 
skirmishers  advanced  steadily  to  the  attack,  the  line  also  advancing  as 
follows : The  Twenty-third  Indiana  on  the  right,  the  Forty-fifth  Illinois, 
the  One  hundred  and  twenty- fourth  Illinois,  and  the  Twentieth  Illinois. 
The  Thirty-first  Illinois  was  still  marching  by  the  flank  on  the  right 
through  the  woods.  The  Twenty-third  Indiana,  being  in  advance  of 
the  line,  were  suddenly  attacked  by  the  unseen  foe. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Davis,  finding  his  command  exposed  without  sup- 
port, withdrew,  and  formed  on  the  right  of  the  Twentieth  Illinois.  The 
enemy,  rushing  forward,  encountered  the  Forty-fifth  Illinois,  thinking 
they  were  alone,  and  attempted  to  cut  them  off,  but  Colonel  McCook,  of 
the  Thirty-first,  had,  unperceived  by  the  enemy,  moved  upon  their  flank, 
and  opened  fire  upon  them  with  such  effect  that  they  were  driven  from 
the  right,  and  massed  their  forces  in  the  center,  evidently  endeavoring 
to  cut  through,  but  here  they  were  opposed  by  the  Twentieth  Illinois, 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Fichards  commanding,  on  the  left  of  the  brigade, 
and  the  Twentieth  Ohio,  Colonel  Force  commanding,  on  the  right  of  the 
Second,  who  maintained  their  positions  under  a galling  fire  nearly  two 
hours. 

Among  the  bravest  of  the  brave  who  fell  at  this  point  was  Lieut.  Col. 
E.  Fichards,  commanding  the  Twentieth  Illinois.  This  regiment,  their 
ammunition  nearly  expended,  and  one-third  of  their  number  killed  and 
wounded,  was  relieved  by  the  Eighth  Illinois,  who  proved  themselves 
worthy  successors  of  the  Twentieth  Illinois. 

The  line  from  the  Twentieth  Ohio,  on  the  right  of  the  Second  Brigade, 
to  my  right,  now  the  Thirty-first  Illinois,  sustained  the  attack  of  the 
whole  of  the  enemy’s  forces.  The  line  was  ordered  forward  and  charged, 
which  they  did  handsomely,  completely  routing  the  enemy,  who  fled 
])recipitately  through  Faymond,  leaving  their  dead  and  wounded  on  the 
field.  General  Gregg  sent  in  a verbal  request,  under  a flag  of  truce,  for 
permission  to  carry  off*  his  wounded,  which  was  not  granted.  I was  now 
ordered  to  form  column  by  regiments  and  move  to  Faymond  as  rapidly 
as  imssible.  Arriving  there,  we  were  halted. 

Too  much  praise  cannot  be  awarded  to  the  men  and  officers  of  the 
First  Brigade,  as  well  as  the  Twentieth  Ohio,  of  the  Second  Brigade, 
and  the  Eighth  Illinois,  of  the  Third  Brigade,  who  were  under  my  ob- 
servation, for  their  gallant  conduct  in  this  engagement. 

Among  the  many  brave  men  who  were  wounded,  I regret  the  loss, 
temporarily,  of  Colonel  McCook’s  valuable  services,  and  trust  that  he 
will  soon  be  able  to  resume  his  duties.  Colonel  Maltby,  of  the  Forty- 
fifth  Illinois,  although  so  unwell  that  he  was  obliged  to  ride  in  an  am- 
bulance, as  soon  as  the  enemy  was  known  to  be  in  force  to  dispute 
advance,  mounted  his  horse  and  assumed  command  of  his  regiment. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Davis,  of  the  Twenty-third  Indiana,  liandled  his 
regiment  admirably,  seconded  by  his  adjutant.  Lieutenant  Gleason. 

To  my  staff’,  Cai)tain  [Wimer]  Bedford,  assistant  adj utant- general ; 
Captain  [Milton  II.]  Lydick,  Lieutenants  [Syria  M.j  Budlong  and 
I Joseph  W.]  Miller,  I am  much  indebted  for  the  efficient  manner  in 
which  my  orders  were  executed. 

The  casualties  of  this  engagement  have  been  already  reported. 

Bivouacked  near  Faymond.  Moved  with  the  division  on  the  Idth, 
and  bivouacked  at  Clinton. 

On  the  14th,  moved  with  division  on  the  Jackson  road.  The  Seventh 
Division  became  engaged  with  the  enemy  near  Jackson,  and,  in  pursu- 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  RAYMOND,  MISS. 


709 


ance  of  orders,  I formed  my  brigade  in  column  by  regiments,  ready  to 
support  it.  They  having  repulsed  the  enemy,  I was  ordered  forward  on 
the  Canton  road,  and  had  proceeded  about  2 miles  when  the  order  was 
countermanded,  and  I went  into  a camp  designated  on  the  west  side  of 
the  city. 

On  the  15th,  moved  with  division  toward  Clinton. 

On  the  IGth,  moved  with  division,  and,  after  marching  about  3 miles, 
was  ordered  to  form  on  the  right  of  the  road,  to  the  right  and  rear  of  De 
Golyer^s  battery,  in  two  lines,  the  Twenty-third  Indiana,  Twentieth  Illi- 
nois, and  Thirty-first  Illinois  in  front,  and  the  Forty- fifth  and  One  hun- 
dred and  twenty-fourth  Illinois  in  second  line. 

In  pursuance  of  orders,  moved  forward  to  the  right  of  the  Second 
Brigade,  and  halted  near  a ravine  about  300  yards  from  the  crest  of  the 
hill.  Two  companies  of  skirmishers  were  deployed  to  the  right,  and 
ordered  to  take  possession  of  the  woods.  The  Forty-fifth  and  Twenty- 
third  Indiana  were  ordered  forward  to  support  Kogers’  battery,  posted 
near  the  edge  of  the  woods  on  the  ridge.  They  advanced  to  the  brow 
of  the  hill,  and  gained  cover  in  a ravine  in  front  of  the  enemy  and  on 
the  right  of  the  Second  Brigade,  where  they  did  good  service,  and  as- 
sisted materially  in  repulsing  the  attack  of  the  enemy  on  the  Second 
Brigade. 

I then  moved  the  Twentieth,  Thirty-first,  and  One  hundred  and  twenty- 
fourth  Illinois  to  the  right,  and,  discovering  the  enemy  in  the  ravine,  I 
ordered  a charge,  which  was  promptly  made  by  the  last-named  regi- 
ment, completely  routing  the  enemy^s  left,  who  fled  in  the  greatest  dis- 
order, leaving  about  1,100  prisoners  and  a battery  of  six  guns  in  our 
possession.  The  Forty-third  Alabama  and  Thirty-first  Georgia  were 
captured  nearly  entire. 

The  center  being  hotly  pressed,  I moved  my  command  uji  by  the 
flank  in  double  lines,  and  remained  in  position  until  the  enemy  were 
entirely  routed  on  the  right  and  center,  when  I was  ordered  to  take  a 
position  on  the  road  to  Edwards  Station. 

Where  all  did  so  well  it  would  be  hard  to  discriminate ; all  was  done 
that  bravery  could  accomplish.  My  staff  above  named  were  efficient 
and  cool  in  the  hottest  of  the  fight.  Bivouacked  near  BakeFs  Creek. 

On  the  17th,  moved  with  division,  and  bivouacked  about  1 mile  from 
Black  Eiver  Bridge,  and  assisted  in  building  a bridge  across  the  Big 
Black  Eiver.  Crossed  the  river  at  1 p.  m.  on  the  Bridgeport  and  Vicks- 
burg road.  Was  detained  by  General  Sherman’s  command,  which  was 
in  advance.  Marched  about  10  miles  and  bivouacked  on  the  roadside. 

On  the  19th,  moved  with  division  in  the  direction  of  Vicksburg,  and 
arrived  within  2 miles  about  11  a.  m.,  where  we  were  halted  and  ordered 
to  form  in  two  lines  on  the  left  of  the  road,  in  a deep  ravine.  We  re- 
mained here  a short  time,  then  advanced  and  took  possession  of  the 
road  in  our  front,  keeping  skirmishers  thrown  well  in  our  front.  Our 
next  position  was  across  the  road  to  the  right  of  our  first  position,  mov- 
ing by  the  flank,  to  avoid  a deep  ravine,  that  was  impassable.  Our  skir- 
mishers still  advancing,  gained  the  white  house  in  front  of  Fort  Hill. 
I was,  however,  ordered  to  close  the  line  on  General  Eansom’s  left,  and 
follow  his  command  to  the  next  ridge  above  the  white  house,  oui*  skir- 
mishers still  driving  the  enemy,  who  finally  retired  behind  their  intrench- 
ments.  Here  I remained  until  the  morning  of  the  20th,  when  I received 
orders  to  move  to  the  left  and  occupy  the  grounds  around  the  white 
house  in  front  of  Fort  Hill.  The  skirmishers  did  excellent  service  by 
keeping  the  rebel  guns  silenced,  and  keeping  down  their  sharpshooters. 
Our  guns  were  brought  forward  within  300  yards  of  the  rebel  works. 


710  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

and  Captain  De  Golyer,  by  Ms  daring  and  intrepidity,  put  one  of  his  guns 
in  position  within  150  yards. 

Lieut.  H.  0.  Foster,  Twenty-third  Indiana,  in  command  of  the  skir- 
mishers, was  untiring  during  the  siege.  Both  by  day  and  night  he  was 
at  his  post,  and  many  of  the  rebels  are  indebted  to  him  for  their  final 
account. 

At  10  a.  m.  of  the  22d  a general  assault  was  ordered.  In  compliance 
with  this  order  to  move  in  quick  time  with  fixed  bayonets,  and  not  to 
fire  until  the  enemy^s  works  were  reached,  at  10.15  a.  m.,  as  soon  as  the 
batteries  had  ceased  firing,  I ordered  the  Twenty-third  Indiana  and 
Twentieth  Illinois  to  move  down,  under  cover  of  the  wood,  by  the  flank, 
and,  when  the  salient  of  Fort  Hill  was  reached,  to  file  to  the  right,  under 
the  dead  space  of  the  parapet,  this  seeming  to  be  the  most  practicable 
way  of  reaching  the  rifle-pits.  But  the  Twenty-third,  after  filing  off 
the  length  of  the  regiment,  found  it  impossible  to  iiroceed,  owing  to  the 
nature  of  the  ground.  A deep  ravine  was  revealed  in  their  front,  cov- 
ered with  a heavy  abatis,  and  in  which  they  were  exposed  to  a galling 
fire,  which  they  were  not  permitted  to  return.  They  sheltered  them- 
selves by  the  inequalities  of  the  ground,  and  were  ordered  to  retire  by 
companies. 

Finding  this  way  impossible,  the  Twentieth  was  ordered  to  proceed  on 
the  road  and  gain  the  curtain  of  the  left  salient  on  our  front,  supported 
by  the  Forty-fifth  Illinois  in  reserve.  This  point  was  gained  under  a 
heavy  fire  from  the  enemy,  but  the  ditch  and  parapet  was  too  high,  and 
the  effort  was  ineffectual.  The  Twentieth  Illinois  was  ordered  to  get  un- 
der cover  of  a ridge  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  road  and  wait  for  further 
orders.  In  the  mean  time  the  assault  had  failed,  not  for  want  of  sup- 
l)ort  but  the  impossibility  of  getting  over  the  obstructions  on  the  right 
of  Fort  Hill,  and  the  ditch  and  parapet  in  front  on  the  road  being  too 
high,  which  would  have  kept  the  men  so  long  under  fire  that  they  would 
have  inevitably  been  sacrificed  without  accomplishing  the  object.  About 
2 p.  m.  the  same  day,  in  pursuance  of  orders  from  division  headquarters, 

I made  a second  attempt  to  assault  the  enemy’s  works  from  the  front, 
on  the  main  road.  Although  there  is  not  a regiment  in  the  brigade 
that  I have  not  the  fullest  confidence  in,  yet  as  the  Forty-fifth  Illinois 
had  not  been  under  fire,  and  knowing  that  they  would  go  wherever  I 
ordered  and  where  it  was  possible  to  go  (their  conduct  since  is  ample 
testimony),  I ordered  them  in  advance,  to  be  immediately  supported  by 
Colonel  Force,  Twentieth  Ohio,  of  the  Second  Brigade,  who  was  assigned 
to  me  for  that  duty  (under  the  previous  instructions,  to  move  forward 
with  fixed  bayonets,  and  not  fire  until  they  had  gained  the  enemy’s 
works).  The  order  was  given  to  advance,  and  they  were,  soon  exposed 
to  the  fire  of  the  whole  of  the  rebel  line,  killing  and  wounding  many  at 
the  head  of  the  column  (among  them  Maj.  L.  H.  Cowen,  who  was  in  com- 
mand of  the  regiment),  when  they  filed  off'  under  cover  of  the  ridge  oc- 
cupied by  the  Twentieth  Illinois.  The  Twentieth  Ohio  was  not  ordered 
forward,  as  I became  satisfied  that  the  obstacles  could  not  be  overcome 
without  sacrificing  probably  my  whole  command.  It  was  here  Captain 
Bedford,  my  assistant  adjutant-general,  was  severely  wounded  by  my 
side  while  assisting  me  in  the  discharge  of  my  duties.  The  Twentieth 
and  Forty-fifth  Illinois  remained  in  their  position  on  the  opposite  side 
of  the  road,  in  front  of  the  principal  curtain  of  the  fort,  twenty-four 
hours,  when  they  were  withdrawm.  Since  then  a regular  system  of  ap-  i 
proaches  has  been  commenced.  The  command  has  been  constantly  on 
duty,  when  not  in  the  rifle-pits,  throwing  up  works  to  be  used  for  attack  ; 
or  defense,  as  occasion  migJit  require.  I 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  RAYMOND,  MISS. 


711 


The  casualties  of  this  brigade  on  the  22d  were  8 killed  and  82 
wounded,  which  has  already  been  reported.  Since  and  up  to  the  14th 
instant,  the  Twenty-third  Indiana  has  lost  1 killed  and  7 wounded; 

the  Twentieth  Illinois, ; the  Thirty-first  Illinois,  1 killed  and  4 

wounded;  the  T'orty-fifth  Illinois,  1 killed  and  1 wounded;  and  the 
One  hundred  and  twenty-fourth  Illinois,  1 killed  and  2 wounded. 

The  patient  endurance  of  the  men  while  on  the  march,  their  un- 
daunted courage  in  battle,  the  unflinching  steadiness  and  unwavering 
determination  exhibited  by  them  when  under  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  can- 
not be  too  highly  commended.  The  patriotic  spirit  evinced  by  them  in 
all  their  actions  clearly  demonstrates  their  faith  in  the  justice  of  their 
cause,  and  renders  them  fearless  and  invincible. 

The  Federal  Union  should  congratulate  herself  that  she  has  in  the 
field  men  who,  in  many  hard-fought  battles,  have  proved  themselves 
as  soldiers  unsurpassed  in  intelligence  and  heroic  bravery,  men  who 
hold  their  lives  as  nothing  in  comparison  to  the  preservation  of  the 
Union  and  the  maintenance  of  the  supremacy  of  the  American  Consti- 
tution over  the  entire  land.  An  army  composed  of  such  material,  im- 
bued with  the  spirit  of  justice  and  liberty,  must  and  will  be  victorious. 

Eespectfully  submitted. 

JOHN  E.  SMITH, 

Brig.  Gen.,  Comdg.  1st  Brigade,  ^d  Division,  lltli  Army  Corps. 

. Maj.  E.  E.  Townes,  Assista^it  Adjutant- General. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  William  P.  Davis,  Tic eniy -third  Indiana  Infantry, 
including  operations  to  June  4. 

In  Eear  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  4, 18C3. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  Twenty- third  Eegiment  Indiana  Volunteers  in  the  battles 
of  Eaymond,  Champion’s  Hill,  Jackson,  and  Vicksburg,  up  to  the  present 
date : 

BATTLE  OF  RAYMOND. 

At  11  o’clock  a.  m.  of  May  12,  the  Twenty-third  Eegiment  Indiana 
Volunteers  was  ordered  to  take  position  upon  the  right  of  the  main 
road,  on  the  right  of  the  brigade.  Having  taken  this  position,  we 
moved  forward  in  line  of  battle,  across  open  fields,  to  the  edge  of  some 
timber,  distant  about  half  a mile.  The  regiment  was  here  halted  for 
a few  moments,  and  was  then  ordered  to  move  by  the  right  flank  into 
the  timber,  my  left  resting  on  the  edge  of  the  field.  This  position  being 
taken,  it  was  then  moved  forward  in  line  of  battle,  Company  G being 
thrown  out  as  skirmishers  in  front  and  upon  the  right  flank,  with  in- 
structions to  keep  constantly  in  si  gift  of  the  regiment.  I reached  a 
creek,  which  was  almost  impassable,  the  banks  being  nearly  perpendic- 
ular, and  covered  with  dense  undergrowth.  With  much  difficulty  the 
regiment  crossed  it  and  moved  forward  a short  distance.  I halted  about 
50  yards  from  the  base  of  a hill  in  my  front,  when,  not  seeing  the  balance 
of  the  line  upon  my  left,  I immediately  sent  to  ascertain  its  position. 

At  this  time  I received  your  order  for  the  skirmishers  to  be  thrown 
farther  to  the  right.  While  this  was  being  executed,  we  were  attacked 
upon  our  right  and  front  by  the  enemy  in  column,  consisting  of  four 


712 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CnAr.  XXXVL 


lines.  Owing  to  the  denseness  of  the  thicket,  our  skirmishers  were  ad- 
vanced but  a short  distance  before  the  enemy  was  upon  them,  advanc- 
ing rapidly  down  the  hill  in  our  front.  They  opened  fire  from  each  line 
in  succession,  and  at  the  same  time  that  portion  on  our  right  fired  a 
volley  and  charged.  Upon  our  first  discovery  of  them,  we  opened  fire 
and  continued  until  they  were  within  bayonet  reach.  Not  having  time 
to  fix  our  bayonets,  we  attempted  to  beat  them  back  with  our  muskets, 
but,  being  overpowered  by  numbers,  we  were  obliged  to  fall  back,  which 
we  did  in  good  order,  to  the  creek.  Here  the  same  difficulty  occurred 
as  before  in  crossing.  Upon  regaining  the  opposite  bank,  and  finding 
it  difficult  to  form  my  line,  I moved  out  of  the  woods  and  formed  on 
the  Twentieth  Illinois  Kegiment,  which  was  occupying  a position  in  the 
edge  of  the  field,  and  upon  which  we  had  previously  formed  our  line. 
We  remained  in  this  position,  sustaining  a heavy  fire,  for  about  one 
and  a half  hours,  when  the  enemy  began  to  fall  back. 

At  this  time  a portion  of  the  Third  Brigade  took  position  on  our 
right  and  charged,  we  joining  them  in  it,  the  enemy  hastily  leaving  the 
field.  Soon  after,  and  while  the  enemy  were  retreating  on  the  right- 
hand  road,  a section  of  Eogers’  battery  was  ordered  forward  to  fire 
upon  them.  The  regiment  was  then  ordered  to  a position  in  a skirt  of 
timber  on  the  left  of  and  to  support  the  artillery,  and  resting  upon  the 
left-hand  road.  The  brigade  being  shortly  afterward  formed  into  col- 
umn by  regiments,  my  command  took  its  proper  position  and  marched 
into  Raymond,  where  it  camped  for  the  night. 

BATTLE  OF  JACKSON. 

At  about  9 a.  m.  May  14,  we  reached  the  scene  of  action,  which  was 
about  3 miles  from  Jackson,  upon  the  Vicksburg  and  Jackson  road.  Soon 
after  our  arrival,  the  brigade  was  formed  into  column  by  regiments,  the 
Twenty-third  Indiana  being  on  the  right,  in  rear  of  and  acting  as  a sup- 
port to  the  Seventh  Division.  The  enemy  having  been  routed  by  the 
Seventh  Division,  we  were  ordered  in  pursuit  upon  the  Canton  road,  but 
had  only  proceeded  a short  distance  when  the  order  was  countermanded, 
and  we  bivouacked  at  8 p.  m.  near  the  Deaf  and  Dumb  Asylum. 

BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL. 

About  12  m.  May  IG,  I received  your  order  to  move  to  the  right  of 
the  main  road,  and  take  a position  about  a quarter  of  a mile  distant  in 
open  ground,  the  remaining  regiments  of  the  brigade  forming  column 
in  my  rear.  As  soon  as  they  obtained  their  positions,  we  moved  for- 
ward a short  distance  and  were  halted.  I then  threw  out  as  skirmish- 
ers my  right  company.  As  soon  as  they  were  in  position,  I received 
your  order  to  move  forward  by  change  of  direction  to  the  right,  one 
fourth  wheel,  then  forward.  Passing  through  a hollow,  we  were  halted 
on  the  side  of  an  opposite  hill,  in  order  to  fix  bayonets.  I soon  received 
orders  to  advance  my  regiment  and  take  position  on  the  right  of  the 
Forty-fifth  Illinois  Regiment,  wlTich  was  supporting  Captain  Rogers’ 
battery,  which  was  posted  upon  the  brow  of  the  hill.  This  jiosition 
being  greatly  exposed,  we  moved  forward  over  the  hill  into  timber,  de- 
scending into  a ravine  and  to  the  brow  of  a hill  opposite,  about  400 
yards  distant.  Here  we  found  the  enemy  in  force,  and  evidently  pre- 
paring to  advance.  We  immediately  opened  fire  upon  him,  and  kept  it 
up  for  nearly  two  hours,  when  he  commenced  falling  back.  AVe  were 
immediately  ordered  forward  over  this  hill,  across  a ravine,  and  to  the 
toj)  of  another  rise  in  our  front.  Here  we  remained,  keeping  up  a con- 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  RAYMOND,  MISS.* 


713 


stant  fire  for  about  an  hour,  when  the  enemy  retreated  from  the  field 
in  confusion,  and  soon  afterward,  by  your  order,  I moved  a short  dis- 
tance to  the  left  and  took  my  position  in  the  brigade,  which  was  formed 
in  double  lines.  After  resting  here  a short  time,  the  brigade  was  or- 
dered forward  upon  the  main  road,  arriving  at  a point  near  Baker’s 
Creek.  About  31  miles  from  Edwards  Station  we  bivouacked  for  the 
night. 

SIEGE  OE  VICKSBURG. 


I arrived  in  the  vicinitj^  of  the  enemy’s  works  at  8 o’clock  on  the  morn  • 
ing  of  May  19,  and  was  at  once  ordered  to  take  position  in  an  open  field 
on  the  left  of  the  main  Vicksburg  road.  As  soon  as  we  had  gotten  this 
position,  we  were  ordered  forward  across  the  field  through  a deep  ra- 
vine, and  to  the  top  of  a ridge  upon  the  opposite  side,  here  striking  the 
main  road  again,  which  at  this  iioint  had  made  a sharp  turn  to  the  left. 
Here  we  were  halted,  and  we  remained  in  line  till  2 p.  m.,  when,  by  your 
order,  1 moved  forward  over  an  open  field,  and  to  the  edge  of  a cane- 
brake,  halting  a moment  at  this  place  to  enable  other  regiments  to  take 
their  positions  j then  forward  across  another  field  and  through  a deep 
ravine  to  the  brow  of  a timbered  ridge,  distant  from  the  main  road  about 
one-quarter  of  a mile ; then  to  the  right  along  this  ridge,  descending 
into  a deep  ravine,  over  this  ravine  and  to  the  top  of  an  abrupt  hill, 
into  the  edge  of  another  field.  We  moved  over  this  field  to  the  right, 
and  were  halted  in  some  timber  on  a ridge  in  front  of  one  of  the  enemy’s 
forts,  about  300  yards  distant,  and  one-half  mile  from  the  main  road  at 
the  point  we  occupied  in  the  forenoon.  While  crossing  over  the  last  field, 
we  were  under  a severe  fire  from  the  enemy’s  batteries.  We  remained 
at  this  place  till  the  afternoon  of  the  20th,  when,  by  your  order,  we 
moved  to  the  left,  passing  along  under  the  brow  of  a ridge  which  ran 
nearly  parallel  to  the  enemy’s  works,  arriving  upon  the  main  road  run- 
ning to  the  city,  and  near  the  white  house.  We  remained  here  until 
10  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  22d,  when  we  received  your  order  to 
move  forward,  joining  in  a charge  upon  the  enemy’s  works,  which  lay 
upon  the  Vicksburg  road  and  about  300  yards  from  us,  my  regiment 
being  ordered  to  move  forward  by  the  right  flank  on  the  road  until 
within  about  100  yards  of  the  works,  then  file  right,  and  move  in  this 
direction  till  my  left  was  clear  of  the  road.  Filing  to  the  right,  we  were 
obliged  to  pass  over  a ridge  of  ground  which  brought  us  in  full  view  of 
the  enemy’s  rifle-pits,  from  which  a murderous  fire  was  opened  upon  us, 
killing  and  wounding  11,  among  them  the  commanding  officer  of  the 
right  company. 

Finding  it  impossible  to  get  my  position  by  this  direction,  I moved 
the  regiment  rai)idly  by  the  right  flank  a short  distance,  and  obtained 
shelter  from  the  enemy’s  fire  in  a shallow  ravine,  which  ran  parallel  to 
the  road.  We  moved  along  in  this  ravine  till  our  right  became  again 
exposed  to  the  fire  from  the  rifle-pits,  and  also  to  a fire  from  a battery 
which  was  posted  upon  our  right,  when  I halted  the  regiment  and  im- 
mediately informed  you  of  our  position,  and  soon  after  received  your 
order  to  withdraw  by  company,  it  being  extremely  hazardous  to  return 
in  regular  order  of  regiment.  Upon  the  companies  coming  out,  they 
formed  in  line,  and,  as  soon  as  the  regiment  was  formed,  I was  ordered 
to  stack  arms  ux)on  the  left  of  the  road  and  to  await  further  orders. 
About  5 p.  m.,  by  your  order,  1 again  moved  down  the  road,  and  after 
having  passed  about  the  length  of  the  regiment  beyond  where  we  filed 
to  the  right  in  the  morning,  was  halted,  and  in  a short  time  I was 
ordered  to  return  to  my  former  i^osition  upon  the  roadside,  where  I 


714 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


staid  till  the  27th,  when  we  moved  a short  distance  hack  upon  theri^ht 
of  the  road  to  a position  which  we  still  occupy. 

During  these  engagements  both  officers  and  men  have  behaved  with 
their  usual  bravery  and  coolness.  To  Maj.  H.  C.  Ferguson,  Oapt.  George 
S.  Babbitt,  and  Lieut.  Jesse  T.  Gleason,  acting  adjutant,  I am  especially 
indebted  for  their  promptness  in  the  execution  of  all  orders.  Sergt. 
Maj.  David  G.  McCann  has  shown  himself  worthy  the  position  he  now 
holds.  I cannot  let  the  opportunity  pass  without  speaking  of  the  ad- 
mirable manner  in  which  Sergt.  George  H.  Goad,  Company  H,  com- 
manding; Sergt.  Francis  M. .Tubbs,  Company  G,  commanding,  and 
Corpl.  William  Mix,  Compan.v  E,  commanding,  handled  their  respective 
companies  at  Champion’s  Hill.  They  proved  themselves  equal  to  the 
emergencies.  Company  I,  Capt.  B.  F.  Walter  commanding,  and  Com- 
pany E,  Lieut.  Henry  C.  Foster  (Company  B)  commanding,  were  de- 
ployed as  skirmishers  the  day  (19th)  of  our  arrival  here  (Vicksburg),  and 
are  now  (this  being  the  sixteenth  day)  occupying  a position  about  75 
yards  from  the  enemy’s  principal  fort  near  the  white  house.  These 
companies  deserve  special  i)raise  and  mention  for  their  daring  bravery 
and  incalculable  services  in  driving  the  enemy  from  this  point  and 
silencing  the  guns  within  the  fort. 

I respectfully  refer  you  to  reports  already  submitted  of  casualties  to 
May  23,  inclusive.  Inclosed  find  list  from  that  date  to  June  4,  inclusive. 

[WILLIAM  P.  DAVIS, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel.] 

Lieut.  S.  M.  Budlong,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  5. 


Report  of  Col.  Manning  F.  Force.,  Ticentieth  Ohio  Infantry,  Second 

Brigade. 


, 18G3. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  on  the  morning  of  the  12th  of 
May,  the  Twentieth  Ohio  marched  as  advance  guard  of  the  division,  on 
the  right  side  of  the  road  to  Eaymond,  with  four  companies  (first,  second, 
third,  and  fifth)  deployed  in  front  as  skirmishers  till  the  deployed  line 
reached  the  edge  of  the  timber  bordering  the  Fourteen-Mile  Creek ; there 
the  column  was  halted,  the  rebel  battery  on  a hill  beyond  the  creek 
throwing  shell  over  the  timber  into  the  open  field.  I brought  up  the 
reserves  upon  the  deployed  line  for  shelter.  The  First  Brigade  after- 
ward marched  over  the  field  to  the  shelter  of  the  woods,  and  rested  upon 
and  mingled  with  my  skirmishers. 

While  in  this  situation,  I received  orders  to  forward,  and  immediatel.y 
a hot  fire,  with  hurrahs,  was  heard  in  front.  All  the  companies  but  the 
first  and  second  quickly  formed  in  line,  advanced  to  a deep  gull.y,  and 
took  position  there.  The  second  company  (F,  Capt.  Harrison  Wilson) 
assembled  the  skirmishers,  formed,  and  marched  by  the  flank  under  a 
very  severe  fire  to  its  position  in  line,  as  quickly  as  if  on  parade.  Com- 
pany A,  Lieutenant  Weatherby  commanding,  was  so  separated  by  the 
intervening  brigade  that  it  was  impossible  for  it  to  form  with  the  regi- 
ment. Lieutenant  Weatherby  reported  to  Colonel  Dollins,  command- 
ing Eighty-first  Illinois,  and  fought  under  him.  Colonel  Dollins  gives 
emphatic  report  of  the  good  conduct  of  this  compan.y. 

The  fire  was  very  hot  and  close.  Private  [Levi]  Donaldson,  of  F,  had 
his  leg  shattered  by  a rifle  held  within  a foot  of  it.  The  enemy’s  fire 
being  silenced  in  about  an  hour,  I advanced  out  of  the  gully  across  an 


Chap.  XXXYL] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  RAYMOND,  MISS. 


715 


almost  impenetrable  tangle  of  logs  and  brush,  a run  waist-deep  in  some 
places,  and  a plowed  field,  up  the  bill  where  the  enemy’s  guns  had  been 
placed,  and  there  halted  and  reported.  I advanced  with  the  brigade 
to  Eaymond  in  the  evening,  and  marched  the  regiment  out  on  i)icket. 

The  Seventh  Texas,  which  boasts  that  it  never  before  gave  way,  was 
lying  in  ambush  when  the  Twentieth  Ohio  first  marched  into  the  woods. 
With  all  its  advantage  of  position,  this  regiment  was  slaughtered  and 
driven.  Twenty-three  dead  were  found  in  half  an  acre  in  front  of  the 
line  of  the  Twentieth ; 7 dead  were  found  behind  a log,  which  was  pierced 
by  seventy-two  balls.  One  tree  in  front  of  my  line  was  stripped  and 
hacked  near  the  root  by  balls,  though  not  a mark  was  found  more  than 
2 feet  above  the  ground. 

I cannot  speak  too  highly  of  the  behavior  of  officers  and  men.  Not- 
withstanding the  suddenness  of  the  attack,  the  severity  of  the  fire,  and 
the  necessity  of  maneuvering  to  form  line,  I did  not  see  a mistake  or 
any  hesitation,  nor  enough  excitement  to  interfere  with  immediate  obe- 
dience to  every  command.  If  admirable  performance  of  duty  under 
trying  circumstances  entitles  one  to  honorable  mention,  every  officer 
and  man  should  be  honorably  mentioned.  I can  name  Capt.  Abraham 
Kaga,  acting  as  field  officer  (two  field  officers  being  detached  on  staff 
duty),  and  First  Lieut.  J.  B.  Walker,  acting  adjutant,  for  their  very  effi- 
cient assistance  5 Capt.  Harrison  Wilson,  for  the  excellent  manner  in 
which  he  assembled  his  skirmishers  without  confusion  under  fire  and  in 
the  midst  of  a retreating  regiment  and  marched  them  to  position  in  line; 
Private  John  Canavan,  of  Company  E,  who  in  part  led  the  company, 
when,  by  the  wounding  of  Second  Lieut.  John  Stevenson  and  death  of 
First  Sergeant  [Byron]  Selby,  the  company  was  left  in  eommand  of  the 
fifth  sergeant  ([Osborn  H.]  Oldroyd),  lately  appointed ; Corporal  [Will- 
iam H.]  Borum  (B),  who  insisted  upon  remaining  in  the  ranks  with  a 

ball  lodged  in  his  throat,  and  Private , of  D,  who  returned  from 

the  hospital  after  his  wounds  were  dressed,  to  carry  Avater  for  the  men. 

I think  it  proper  also  to  mention  hospital  attendant  Lawrence  Green- 
man,  of  Company  D,  for  persistent  zeal  in  performance  of  his  duties 
under  fire.  Private  [Jacob]  Cauter,  of  Company  A,  seeing  a good  op- 
portunity for  a shot  after  the  regiment  with  Avhich  that  company  was 
serving  was  ordered  to  cease  firing,  asked  permission;  Lieutenant 
Weatherby,  walking  the  length  of  the  regiment,  obtained  i)ermission, 
and  Cauter  fired  his  shot,  the  only  one  fired  by  the  company  until 
order  was  given  to  resume. 

A list  of  casualties  is  appended. 

1 am,  sir,  A^ery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  F.  FORCE, 

Colonel^  Commanding  Twentieth  Ohio. 

Lieut.  J.  C.  Douglass, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  G. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  I).  Stevenson^  U.  S.  Army.,  commanding  Third 
Brigade.,  including  operations  May  ^-^uly  4. 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  7,  18G3. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  folloAviug  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  Third  Brigade  in  the  series  of  engagements  with  the  enemy 
from  the  4th  of  May  until  the  final  termination  of  the  siege  of  Vicksburg 


716 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


on  the  4th  instant,  referring  you  to  my  report  up  to  the  4th  of  May,  at 
which  date  we  were  encamped  near  Hankinson’s  Ferry,  on  the  Big 
Black  Eiver.  We  continued  in  that  position  until  the  9th,  when,  re- 
ceiving orders  to  march,  the  command  broke  camp  and  moved  in  the 
direction  of  Eaymond,  Miss. 

On  the  morning  of  the  12th  of  May,  the  division  being  on  the  march, 
the  Third  Brigade  being  in  the  rear  of  the  column,  I received  orders  to 
move  forward  with  all  possible  dispatch,  as  the  enemy  were  in  force  in 
our  immediate  front.  I caused  the  command  to  move  with  alacrity, 
coming  up  to  the  crest  of  a hill  in  full  view  of  the  field,  where,  by  order 
of  Major-General  McPherson,  P deployed  the  command  in  double  lines 
as  a reserve,  the  Seventh  Missouri,  Eighty-first  Illinois,  and  Thirty- 
second  Ohio  being  present,  the  Eighth  Illinois  being  detailed  as  rear 
guard.  I immediately  ordered  uj)  the  Eighth  Illinois  to  the  front.  The 
enemy  making  determined  resistance  to  our  advancing  lines,  and  indi- 
cating a disposition  to  flank  our  right,  I was  ordered  to  take  position 
on  the  right  of  our  line,  to  check  the  movement  of  the  enemy.  Whilst 
engaged  in  executing  the  command,  I received  orders  from  Major-Gen- 
eral Logan  to  send  one  regiment  of  my  command  to  take  position  on  the 
right  of  the  First  Brigade.  I immediately  ordered  the  Eighty-first  Illinois 
to  take  position.  Soon  afterward  I received  a second  order  from  Major- 
General  Logan  to  send  to  the  extreme  left  another  regiment  of  my  com- 
mand, as  the  enemy  were  pressing  at  that  point  in  force  and  with  great 
determination.  The  Eighth  Illinois  Eegiment,  under  command  of  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Sturgess,  having  arrived  on  the  ground,  was  immediately 
sent  to  the  point  indicated.  I then  ordered  the  Seventh  Missouri,  under 
Major  Wakefield,  to  take  position  on  the  right  of  the  Eighty-first  Illi- 
nois. I held  the  Thirty-second  Ohio  Yolunteers,  under  Col.  B.  F.  Potts, 
in  its  original  position  on  the  extreme  right.  Each  of  these  movements 
was  made  with  skirmishers  properly  deployed. 

On  the  extreme  right,  where  I was  in  person,  the  enemy  made  a dem- 
onstration as  if  for  a flank  movement,  with  a heavy  line  of  skirmishers, 
which  was  soon  driven  back  by  the  skirmishers  in  front  of  the  Thirty- 
second  Ohio  Yolunteers.  In  the  mean  time  the  fight  raged  with  great 
fierceness  on  the  left  and  center.  The  Eighth  Illinois  Yolunteers,  gal- 
lantly led  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sturgess,  charged  the  advancing  line 
of  the  enemy  with  its  usual  impetuosity,  and  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet 
dislodged  them  from  a strong  position  from  wdiich  they  had  poured  a 
most  destructive  fire  ux')on  our  lines. 

Soon  the  whole  line  advanced,  and  the  enemy  was  driven  from  the 
position.  In  this  advance  the  Eighty-first  Illinois  Yolunteers,  under 
command  of  Col.  4.  J.  Dollins,  behaved  with  signal  valor. 

The  Seventh  Missouri  Yolunteers,  under  command  of  Major  Wake- 
field, failing  to  unite  with  the  Eighty-first  Illinois  on  the  left,  advanced 
through  a dense  thicket  to  an  open  field  in  front.  The  regiment,  being 
at  the  base  of  a hill  held  by  tbe  enemy,  resolutely  advanced  to  take 
possession  of  the  hill,  and,  whilst  under  a most  terrific  fire,  was  ordered 
by  the  commanding  officer  to  retreat,  and  retired  in  great  disorder  and 
with  heavy  loss,  the  enemy  in  their  front  consisting  of  at  least  three 
regiments.  Learning  that  the  regiment  had  broken,  I immediately  pro- 
ceeded to  that  part  of  the  field,  rallied  the  regiment,  the  enemy  falling 
ill  and  forming  a new  line. 

Captain  Wiles,  of  the  pioneer  corps,  having  come  upon  the  field  with 
his  gallant  com])any,  and  desiring  to  share  the  work  and  dangers  of  the 
lield,  I jilaced  him  with  his  command  on  the  left  of  the  Seventh  Mis- 
souri. At  this  time  Major-General  McPherson,  having  strengthened 


Chav.  XXXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  KAYMOND,  MISS.  717 

t he  right  with  two  regiments  of  General  Crocker’s  division,  under  Colonel 
Holmes,  of  the  Tenth  Missouri  Volunteers,  I advanced  the  entire  line 
on  the  right,  the  enemy  retiring  rapidly  before  the  advancing  lines.  I 
imshed  my  advance  until  we  were  in  possession  of  the  to^n  of  Eaymond, 
the  enemy  being  in  full  retreat  by  different  roads  in  the  direction  of  Jack- 
son.  I regret  to  report  that  our  casualties  in  this  battle  were  large, 
embracing  in  the  number  Capt.  Frank  Leeper,  Eighth  Illinois  Volun- 
teers, who  Avas  mortally  wounded  in  the  front  of  his  command  in  their 
gallant  and  successful  charge. 

" On  the  night  of  the  12th,  we  bivouacked  in  the  outskirts  of  the  town 
of  Eaymond,  and  early  next  morning  moved  toward  Jackson,  by  way  of 
Clinton,  bivouacking  for  the  night  at  Clinton,  amidst  a violent  storm. 
Farly  in  the  morning,  in  a continuous  and  heavy  rain,  we  moved  toward 
Jackson,  making  a moist,  toilsome  march  through  mud  and  rain,  [arriv- 
ing] at  10  o’clock  near  the  city  of  Jackson.  The  division  of  General 
Crocker,  being  in  advance,  encountered  the  enemy  in  force.  We  were 
ordered  up  to  the  support  of  the  advance,  but  arrived  only  in  time  to 
witness  the  brilliant  and  successful  charge  of  the  Seventh  Division, 
driving  the  enemy  in  dismay  from  the  field. 

In  the  advance  upon  Jackson,  we  held  the  extreme  left  of  the  line, 
and  after  a toilsome  march  OA^er  a country  cut  uxi  by  creeks  and  ravines 
and  covered  with  thick  brush,  we  ajiproached  the  city,  and  finding  the 
enemy  had  retired  toward  Canton,  again  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  15th,  I moved  my  command  in  the  advance 
toward  Bolton,  making  a march  of  22  miles,  bivouacking  for  the  night 
at  that  place,  and  coming  up  with  the  command  of  Brigadier-General 
HoA^ey,  of  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  encamped  at  that  iioint. 

On  the  morning  of  the  16th,  moved  in  direction  of  Vicksburg,  General 
HoA^ey’s  division  having  the  advance.  After  a march  of  a few  miles,  I 
was  advised  of  the  presence  of  the  enemy  in  our  front  in  large  force. 
At  this  time  I could  distinctly  hear  the  firing  of  skirmishers  in  the 
front.  I received  an  order  from  Major-General  Logan  to  advance  with 
my  brigade,  consisting  at  the  time  of  the  Eighth  Illinois  Volunteers, 
Thirty- second  Ohio  Volunteers,  and  Eighty-first  Illinois  Volunteers 
(the  Seventh  Missouri  being  rear  guard),  and  take  position  in  the  rear 
of  De  Golyer’s  battery  as  a reserve,  Avhich  xiosition  I immediately  oc- 
cupied, holding  my  brigade  massed  in  column  of  battalions. 

On  the  extreme  left.  General  Hovey’s  division  was  in  line,  and  on  the 
right  and  center  the  brigades  of  Generals  Smith  and  Leggett.  Soon 
after  I arriA^ed  on  the  field  the  engagement  became  general,  our  entire 
line  adA^ancing  and  attacking  the  enemy  with  great  fierceness. 

As  the  line  advanced,  I was  ordered  to  move  my  command  to  the 
right,  and  deploy  my  column  so  as  to  let  my  left  rest  on  the  right  of 
General  Smith’s  brigade.  I occupied  this  under  coaw  of  a skirt  of  tim- 
ber, dex^loying  a heaA^y  line  of  skirmishers,  co Averin g my  entire  front  and 
extending  considerably  beyond  my  right  flank.  My  line  being  formed, 
the  Eighth  Illinois,  Lieutenant  Colonel  Sturgess  commanding,  on  my 
left,  the  Thirty-second  Ohio  Volunteers,  Col.  B.  F.  Potts  commanding, 
in  the  center,  and  the  Eighty-first  Illinois,  Col.  J.  J.  Dollins  command- 
ing, on  the  right,  my  skirmishers,  under  command  of  Col.  H.  Lieb, 
Ninth  Louisiana  Volunteers,  acting  volunteer  aide,  were  immediately  ad- 
vanced to  the  front,  and  the  whole  line  rax)idly  pushed  forward.  Pass- 
ing through  the  timber,  I found  myself  at  the  base  of  a considerable 
hill,  in  possession  of  the  eneni}",  and  upon  AA^hich  they  had  a battery 
planted.  As  our  line  advanced,  we  receiA^ed  seA^eral  discharges  of  graxie 
and  shell,  but  steadily  pushed  to  the  front. 


718 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


The  battery  of  the  enemy  was  taken  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet  by 
the  Eighth  Illinois  and  the  left  wing  of  the  Thirty-second  Ohio  Volun- 
teers. The  supports  of  the  battery  were  soon  driven  from  the  field. 
Finding  that  I was  upon  the  enemy’s  left  flank  and  had  completely  out- 
flanked them,  I pressed  my  whole  command  upon  them,  gaining  pos- 
session of  the  only  road  and  the  bridge  of  Baker’s  Creek,  and  capturing 
a number  of  prisoners,  together  with  several  abandoned  caissons  and 
guns.  Continuing  my  advance  with  vigor,  I was  peremptorily  ordered 
by  Major-General  McPherson  to  fall  back  with  my  command  and  form 
a new  line,  in  conjunction  with  Brigadier-General  Smith,  the  reason  al- 
leged being  that  the  enemy  were  driving  back  our  left.  I immediately 
ordered  the  several  regiments  to  fall  back  to  the  point  designated,  still 
holding  possession  of  the  road  and  bridge.  While  organizing  the  new 
line,  we  were  subjected  to  a heavy  fire  from  the  batteries  of  the  enemy, 
but  without  any  material  efiect  upon  the  command,  every  officer  and 
man  remaining  at  his  post.  At  this  time  I could  see  large  bodies  of  the 
enemy  moving  across  my  front,  out  of  range,  to  the  support  of  the  at- 
tack on  our  left.  I sent  twice  for  a battery  to  the  commanding  general, 
but,  failing  to  get  it,  was  powerless  to  impede  their  advance.  I then 
received  an  order  from  Major-General  McPherson  to  send  to  the  support 
of  the  left  one  of  my  regiments.  I immediately  detached  the  Thirty- 
second  Ohio,  under  Colonel  Potts,  they  moving  off  under  the  direction  of 
a staff  officer  of  General  McPherson,  leaving  of  my  command  two  regi- 
ments. Shortly  afterward  I was  ordered  to  move  my  entire  command 
to  the  left,  which  I did,  and,  being  halted  in  rear  of  our  batteries, 
availed  myself  of  this  opportunity  to  refill  the  cartridge-boxes  of  the 
command.  At  this  point  the  Seventh  Missouri,  under  command  of 
Capt.  Kobert  Buchanan,  reported  on  the  field. 

The  enemy  being  repulsed  on  the  whole  line,  I was  ordered  by  Gen- 
eral McPherson  to  occupy  my  old  ground  and  iiress  the  enemy.  I im- 
mediately moved  the  command  to  the  point  from  which  I had  been  re- 
called, and,  finding  the  enemy  in  the  timber  in  my  front,  I ordered 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Sturgess,  with  the  Eighth  Illinois  Volunteers,  to 
charge  the  woods,  which  was  immediately  done,  resulting  in  the  cap- 
ture of  one  gun,  a rifled  piece,  and  about  500  infantry.  Leaving  the 
Eighth  Illinois  Volunteers,  under  command  of  Lieutenant- Colonel  Stur- 
gess, I proceeded  along  the  road  in  the  direction  of  Vicksburg  with  the 
battery  of  Captain  De  Golyer,  which  had  been  sent  to  my  front,  and 
the  Seventh  Missouri  Volunteers  and  Eighty-first  Illinois  Volunteers  as 
a support,  and  vigorously  shelled  the  flying  enemy  for  a distance  of  sev- 
eral miles,  breaking  their  columns  and  dispersing  them  in  great  dis- 
order through  the  woods,  and  capturing  many  prisoners.  Night  alone 
put  an  end  to  the  pursuit  of  the  enemj^ 

This  was  unquestionably  the  great  battle  of  the  campaign,  and  I am 
proud  that  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  command  conducted  them- 
selves throughout  the  entire  day  with  the  utmost  valor  and  determina- 
tion, bivouacking  some  3 miles  from  the  battle-field. 

On  the  next  day  we  marched  to  Big  Black  Eiver,  and  at  this  point 
the  Seventeenth  Illinois  Volunteers,  commanded  by  Maj.  Frank  E. 
Peats,  reported  for  duty.  We  were  detained  here  until  the  next  morn- 
ing, bridges  having  been  erected  during  the  night.  We  then  moved 
in  the  direction  of  Vicksburg,  bivouacking  for  the  night  within  2 miles 
of  the  enemy’s  works. 

On  the  19th,  we  advanced  upon  the  works  of  the  enemy,  driving  in 
their  skirmishers  and  pressing  our  lines  close  to  the  works  of  the  enemy, 
at  night  occupying  the  ground  gained  during  the  day. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  RAYMOND,  MISS.  719 

On  the  20th,  we  had  driven  the  enemy  within  their  lines,  and  had 
gained  positions  for  our  batteries. 

On  the  21st,  we  strengthened  our  positions,  and  steadily  advanced 
our  skirmish  lines  until  they  were  within  300  yards  of  the  works  of  the 
enemy. 

On  the  22d  of  May,  Major-Oeneral  Grant  having  ordered  a charge  on 
the  enemy^s  works  of  the  entire  line  to  be  made  at  10  a.  m.,  the  attack 
to  be  made  with  loaded  muskets  and  fixed  bayonets,  no  shot  to  be  fired 
until  a foothold  was  obtained  in  the  works  of  the  enemy,  I moved  the 
Third  Brigade,  consisting  of  the  Seventeenth  Illinois  Volunteers,  com- 
manded by  Maj.  Frank  F.  Peats ; Eighth  Illinois  Volunteers,  commanded 
by  Lieutenant- Colonel  Sturgess  ; Eighty-firstlllinois  Volunteers,  under 
Col.  J.  J.  Dollins  y Thirty-second  Ohio,  under  Col.  B.  F.  Potts,  and  the 
Seventh  Missouri  Volunteers,  under  Oapt.  Eobert  Buchanan,  to  a point 
within  200  yards  of  the  strongest  work  of  the  enemy,  known  as  Fort 
Hill,  under  cover  of  a hill,  forming  the  command  in  the  ravine.  Hav- 
ing been  furnished  with  scaling  ladders,  I [divided]  my  command  into 
two  separate  columns,  the  left  column  consisting  of  the  Eighth  Illinois 
and  Thirty-second  Ohio  Eegiments,  and  the  right  column  consisting 
of  the  Seventh  Missouri  and  Eighty-first  Illinois,  the  Seventeenth  Illi- 
nois, under  Major  Peats,  in  conjunction  with  the  regular  skirmish  line, 
under  Col.  H.  Lieb,  being  deployed  on  the  crest  of  the  hill,  as  near  the 
works  of  the  enemy  as  possible,  to  cover  the  advancing  columns,  the 
scaling-ladders  being  distributed  between  the  two  columns. 

At  10  a.  m.  precisely,  the  order  to  advance  was  given.  The  right 
column,  led  by  Captain  Buchanan,  advancing  up  the  hill,  soon  came 
under  the  fire  of  the  enemy.  Volley  after  volley  was  poured  upon  them, 
deviating  the  head  of  the  column  to  the  left,  but  not  stopping  the  steady 
advance,  until  the  head  of  the  column  rested  upon  the  ditch  of  the  work. 
The  left  column,  led  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sturgess,  steadily  advanced 
under  a heavy  fire  until  it  reached  a point  near  the  works  of  the  enemy, 
when  I ordered  it  to  halt  and  form  a reserve,  to  support  the  right 
column,  now  resting  upon  the  edge  of  the  ditch.  I then  ordered  Cap- 
tain Buchanan  to  form  his  regiment  in  line  as  rapidly  as  possible,  and 
Colonel  Dollins  to  extend  his  regiment  in  line  on  the  left  of  the  Seventh 
Missouri.  This  evolution  we  performed  under  a very  destructive  fire 
of  both  small-arms  and  field  pieces,  involving  the  loss  of  a large  num- 
ber of  men.  Finding  the  fire  of  the  enemy  so  destructive,  I ordered 
the  men  to  lie  down  until  the  fire  of  the  enemy  would  slacken,  our  bat- 
teries having  opened  upon  the  enemy.  After  lying  down  some  time, 
the  fire  of  the  enemy  having  almost  ceased,  I ordered  the  command  up 
and  forward,  which  was  done  with  loud  cheers  and  great  vigor.  The 
enemy  relieved  their  ramparts  with  infantry,  and  opened  with  grape 
and  canister,  literally  sweeping  down  officers  and  men.  The  men  ad- 
vanced to  the  edge  of  the  ditch,  the  Seventh  Missouri  getting  into  the 
ditch  with  their  ladders  (which  were  found  unserviceable),  and  planted 
their  colors  in  the  ditch.  In  the  mean  time  the  fire  of  the  enemy  killing 
and  wounding  two-thirds  of  the  officers,  including  Colonel  Dollins, 
Eighty-first  Illinois,  and  many  of  the  men,  the  regiment  fell  back  in 
much  confusion.  Finding  the  Seventh  Missouri  had  sustained  equally 
as  heavy  loss,  and,  from  the  strength  of  the  work,  that  it  was  not  pos- 
sible to  make  a successful  assault  in  the  face  of  the  work,  I ordered  the 
officers  of  the  Seventh  Missouri  and  Eighty-first  Illinois  to  retire  with 
the  remnants  of  their  commands  to  the  rear  and  reform  them.  The  rest 
of  the  command  continued  to  hold  the  position  gained  until  finally 
ordered  to  their  camps  at  nightfall. 


720 


Mississirrij  west  Tennessee,  etc. 


[CiiAr.  XXXVI. 


This  assault,  though  unsuccessful,  demonstrated  that  the  command 
possessed  the  most  reliable  characteristics  of  soldiers,  implicit  obedience 
to  orders,  undaunted  courage,  and  great  endurance.  Not  a gun  was 
fired  during  the  entire  assault,  although  the  most  earnest  ai:>peals  were 
made  to  the  commanding  general  to  do  so,  and  when  at  length  the  com- 
mand was  ordered  to  retire,  the  men  did  so  under  the  control  and  direc- 
tion of  their  officers.  I regret  to  record  the  death  of  many  brave  offi- 
cers and  menj  among  the  number,  Col.  J.'J.  Dollins,  Major  Ward,  and 
Adjutant  Hammack,  of  the  Eighty-first  Illinois  Yolunteers.  They  are 
as  brave  and  gallant  soldiers  as  any  the  country  has  been  called  upon 
to  mourn. 

Many  instances  of  valor  occurred  during  the  assault.  Among  others 
I mention  the  numerous  color-bearers  of  the  Seventh  Missouri  Volun- 
teers. Six  successive  times  were  tbe  bearers  of  the  Irish  flag  shot 
down — of  the  number,  a Private  Kelley,  of  the  Eighty-first  Illinois, 
being  one.  Seeing  the  flag  go  down,  he  instantly  raised  it  to  its  iflace, 
to  be  himself  instantly  shot  down. 

Two  commissioned  officers  of  the  Seventh  Missouri  deserve  special 
mention  in  connection  with  the  flag.  Lieut.  Eobert  Porter,  who  was 
the  sixth  flag-bearer,  holding  and  waving  the  flag  aloft,  soon  fell  with 
a severe  wound.  Immediately  Lieut.  Joshua  W.  Bourne  seized  the  flag, 
held  it  in  its  position,  and  finally  bore  it  from  the  field. 

The  other  regiments  of  the  command  constituting  the  left  column 
were  all  the  time  exposed  to  a severe  fire,  involving  a heavy  loss,  but 
remained  firmly  in  their  i:)osition  until  ordered  off  the  field. 

The  Seventeenth  Illinois  Volunteers  and  their  officers  are  entitled  to 
special  mention  for  the  promi^t  manner  in  which  they  occupied  the 
ground  assigned  them,  and  the  efficient  services  rendered  in  protecting 
their  comrades  in  the  advances  and  especiall^^  for  the  hot  fire  pourecl 
into  the  enemy  as  the  column  retired. 

I regret  to  say  my  losses  in  this  assault  aggregate,  killed  and  wounded, 
272  officers  and  men. 

From  the  assault  of  the  22d  of  May  until  the  final  termination  of  the 
siege,  the  Third  Brigade  did  its  full  share  of  all  the  work  in  the  ap- 
proaches to  and  mining  of  the  enemy^s  works,  and  on  its  entire  front. 
From  the  time  of  the  assault,  so  well  did  each  regiment  do  its  duty  the 
entire  length  of  the  picket  line,  that  no  rebel  dare  show  himself  outside 
the  works  or  carelessly  expose  his  person  within,  unless  he  subjected 
himself  to  a fire  that  caused  his  instant  disappearance.  I do  but  sim- 
l)le  justice  to  the  Third  Brigade  when  I,  with  just  pride,  claim  for  them 
the  highest  qualities  that  mark  the  true  soldier,  evinced  by  their  long 
and  arduous  marches,  ui^on  short  rations,  without  tents  or  shelter,  in 
the  face  of  the  enemy,  with  repeated  battles,  continuous  victories,  and 
finally  the  culmination  of  the  great  campaign  in  the  possession  of  the  en- 
emy’s vaunted  impregnable  stronghold.  During  the  entire  campaign  I 
have  been  much  indebted  to  the  officers  of  my  staff — Captain  Whitehead, 
adjutant-general,  and  Lieutenants  Callsen  and  Eeynolds,  of  the  Seven- 
teenth Illinois  Volunteers.  To  each  of  these  officers  the  thanks  of  the 
country  are  due  for  fearless  i)ersonal  exposure  on  our  many  battle-fields, 
and  untiring  zeal  in  the  discharge  of  tbeir  many  duties.  To  Col.  II.  Lieb, 
Ninth  Louisiana  Volunteers  (African  descent),  I am  specially  indebted 
as  volunteer  aide.  I placed  him  at  the  commencement  of  the  campaign 
in  charge  of  my  skirmishers,  and  well  and  ably  on  every  occasion  did 
he  discharge  his  trust.  No  officer,  in  my  judgment,  excelled  him  in  un- 
tiring zeal  and  unflinching  courage.  I recommend  him  to  the  special 
notice  of  the  general. commanding. 


CiiAr.  XXXVI. J ENGAGEMENT  AT  KAYMOND,  MISS.  721 

I lierewitli  submit  tbe  report  of  my  subordinate  officers,  with  accurate 
lists  of  the  casualties  attending  the  campaign. 

Eespectfully, 

JOHN  D.  STEVENSON, 

Brig.  Gen..,  Comdg.  Third  Brig.,  Third  Biv.,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 

Maj.  11.  E.  Townes, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Franldin  Camphell,  Eighty-first  Illinois  Infantry, 
ineluding  operations  to  July  4. 

IlDQKS.  Eighty-fiest  Eegiment  Illinois  Volunteers, 

Yiehshurg,  Miss.,  July  9,  1803. 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  your  order  directed  to  me,  dated  July  7, 1863, 
I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  May  12  we  met  the  enemy  in  a ravine, 
about  1 mile  south  of  Eaymond.  The  Third  Brigade  was  thrown  out 
on  the  right  and  formed  in  line  of  battle,  the  Eighty-first  Eegiment  being 
placed  on  the  left  of  the  brigade,  and  in  this  position  we  marched  for- 
ward through  almost  impenetrable  brushwood  and  undergrowth.  YVe 
met  the  enemy  in  the  bottom  of  the  ravine  and  drove  them,  after  a short 
and  spirited  fight  of  thirty  minutes.  The  enemy  retreated  and  reformed 
on  the  top  of  the  hill  in  an  open  field,  being  protected  from  our  right 
partly  by  the  intervening  timber.  My  command  was  marched  by  the 
right  flank  until  it  came  to  the  opening  on  the  right,  where  the  enemy 
was  discovered  to  them.  Here  a sharp  fight  took  place,  which  lasted 
some  fifty  or  sixty  minutes,  and  resulted  in  driving  the  enemy  from  the 
hill,  and  then  commenced  the  final  retreat.  My  command  then  marched 
forward  in  connection  with  the  remainder  of  the  brigade  on  the  open 
ground  and  through  the  brushwood  to  the  town  of  Eaymond,  where  we 
encamped  for  the  night.  The  utmost  coolness  and  determined  bravery 
was  displayed  on  the  occasion  of  this  battle  by  the  men  and  officers  of 
this  regiment,  there  being  but  one  instance  of  objectionable  conduct — 
that  of  Capt.  Samuel  Pyle,  who  has  since  been  permitted  to  resign. 

On  May  14,  after  severe  marching,  our  army  met  the  enemy  at  Jack- 
son,  our  brigade  being  deployed  in  line  of  battle  on  the  left.  My  com- 
mand marched  in  this  position  for  several  miles  through  mud  and  rain 
and  almost  impenetrable  thickets  until  we  came  to  the  town  of  Jackson. 
We  did  not  meet  the  enemj^,  he  having  left  the  field  in  time  to  evade 
our  pursuit.  We  encamped  with  the  remainder  of  the  brigade  in  the 
suburbs  of  the  town. 

On  May  10,  we  again  met  the  enemy  at  Champion's  Hill,  or  Baker’s 
Creek,  our  regiment  being  on  the  right  of  the  brigade.  In  this  position 
we  marched  through  fields  and  over  ditches,  fences,  through  woods,  until 
we  met  the  enemy,  under  the  protection  of  their  batteries,  and,  while 
the  Eighth  Illinois  and  Thirty-second  Ohio  charged  and  took  a battery, 
my  command  charged  another  battery  still  farther  to  the  right,  and 
drove  it,  together  with  a strong  support  not  less  than  double  our  num- 
ber. After  about  an  hour’s  hard  fighting,  we  drove  them  from  the  field. 
W e were  then  ordered  to  fall  back.  Our  skirmishers,  with  an  additional 
squad  of  men  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant  Orammer,  Company 
B,  brought  the  batteries  taken  by  our  brigade  oil  the  field,  but  were 
again  put  in  line  of  battle  and  pursued  the  retreating  enemy. 

40  R R~VOL  XXIV,  FT  I 


722  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

On  May  19,  we  marched  in  front  of  the  enemy^s  works  at  Vicksburg, 
and  were  ordered  to  support  the  Third  Ohio  Battery,  which  we  did  under 
a galling  fire  of  grape,  shell,  and  canister  from  the  enemy. 

On  the  morning  of  the  20th,  we  took  position  near  the  enemy’s  works 
and  in  support  of  Bolton’s  battery. 

On  May  22,  we  were  ordered  to  support  the  Seventh  Missouri  in  an 
assault  upon  the  enemy’s  works,  which  order  was  partly  executed  by 
deploying  into  line  of  battle  in  shot-range  of  the  enemy’s  guns,  and 
within  full  view  of  the  enemy  behind  his  intrenchments.  At  the  order 
to  charge,  our  regiment  did  support  the  gallant  old  Seventh  Missouri 
until  the  fire  became  too  galling  to  bear.  Colonel  Dollins,  then  in  cooi- 
mand,  gave  the  order  to  about-face  and  march  around  a point  under 
the  protection  of  the  hill.  My  command  came  off  the  field  in  good 
order,  and  was  marched  into  camp,  where  it  reformed  and  marched  back 
to  the  field  of  battle,  and  there  remained  until  night  as  a reserve  force. 

Since  May  22,  my  command  has  been  continually  occupied  in  the  vari- 
ous and  arduous  duties  connected  with  the  siege,  participating  in  all  the 
dangers  and  labors,  being  the  whole  time  under  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s 
batteries  and  sharpshootei^s.  The  alacrity  and  zeal  with  which  both 
officers  and  men  of  my  command  have  ever  been  ready  and  willing  to 
perform  their  duties  cannot  be  too  highly  commended,  and  it  would  be 
almost  invidious  to  discriminate  between  the  actions  of  either  men  or 
officers  in  the  zealous  performance  of  duty  during  the  late  campaign, 
with  the  exception  of  the  case  previously  mentioned. 

F.  CAMPBELL, 

Colonely  Commanding. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  D.  Stevenson, 

Comdg.  Third  Brig.j  Third  Biv.,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  8. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Marcellus  M.  Crocher,  TJ.  S.  Army,  commanding 
Seventh  Division.,  including  operations  May  2-17. 

Hdqrs.  Seventh  Division,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps, 

Before  Yichshurg,  Miss.,  May  25,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  part  taken  by  the  Seventh  Divis- 
ion, Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  on  the  march  and  in  the  battles  occur- 
ring from  the  time  I assumed  temporary  command  of  it  at  Port  Gibson 
on  May  2,  until  relieved  by  Brigadier-General  Quinby  on  the  17th  in- 
stant. 

I assumed  the  command  of  the  division  at  Port  Gibson  at  noon  of 
May  2,  and  that  afternoon  had  the  advance  of  the  army  corps,  and 
marched  to  the  north  branch  of  Bayou  Pierre,  on  the  road  to  Vicks- 
burg. On  arriving  at  the  bayou,  we  found  that  the  bridge  had  been 
burned  by  the  retreating  enemy.  During  the  night  the  bridge  was  re- 
paired so  that  the  corps  could  cross,  and  the  next  morning  the  division 
crossed,  following  the  division  of  Major-General  Logan  to  Willow  Springs, 
at  which  point  the  division  of  General  Logan  was  directed  to  take  a 
road  to  the  left  of  the  main  road,  the  Seventh  Division  proceeding  on 
the*  main  road  toward  Hankinson’s  Perry,  on  the  Big  Black  Kiver. 
After  proceeding  a short  distance,  we  encountered  the  enemy’s  pickets, 
and  soon  discovered  the  enemy,  with  a battery  posted  in  the  woods  and 
hills  across  a small  creek.  A regiment,  the  Pifty-ninth  Indiana,  com- 
manded by  Colonel  Alexander,  was  deployed  as  skirmishers,  and  the 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  RAYMOND,  MISS. 


723 


two  otlier  regiments  belonging  to  the  same  brigade,  Colonel  Sanborn’s, 
were  formed  in  line  of  battle.  A 10-pounder  Parrott  gun,  under  direc- 
tion of  Captain  [Frank  C.]  Sands,  chief  of  artillery  for  the  division,  was 
placed  in  position,  and  soon  succeeded  in  forcing  the  enemy’s  battery  to 
retire  to  a less  exposed  position.  The  skirmishers  and  line  were  then 
advanced  across  the  creek,  and  the  whole  division  deployed  and  ordered 
to  advance,  when  I received  notice  that  the  enemy  had  broken  up  his 
formation  and  was  in  full  retreat  in  the  direction  of  Hankinson’s  Ferry. 
Their  retreat  from  our  front  was  doubtless  greatly  hurried  by  the  ad- 
vance of  the  division  of  General  Logan  on  their  right  flank. 

The  two  divisions.  General  Logan’s  and  the  Seventh,  were  united  at 
the  junction  of  the  roads  running  from  Grand  Gulf  and  Willow  Springs 
to  Vicksburg,  one  brigade  of  General  Logan’s  division  preceding  the 
Seventh  Division  on  the  march  from  there  to  Hankinson’s  Ferry. 

At  Hankinson’s  Ferry  the  division  remained  three  days,  bringing  up 
its  supplies  of  ammunition  and  provisions,  and  on  the  morning  of  May 
7 resumed  the  march,  following  General  Logan’s  division  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Utica.  The  march  was  continued,  with  slight  interruption  and 
without  incident,  until  May  12,  on  which  day  General  Logan,  having 
the  advance,  encountered  the  enemy  in  the  vicinity  of  Eaymond.  The 
Seventh  Division  was  hurried  into  position  to  support  the  division  of 
General  Logan.  Two  regiments  of  the  Second  Brigade,  under  Colonel 
Holmes,  were  sent  to  the  right  to  support  the  brigade  of  General  Ste- 
venson, and  the  First  Brigade,  under  Colonel  Sanborn,  formed  to  the 
left  and  rear  of  General  Smith’s  brigade,  supporting  the  Eighth  Michi- 
gan battery,  commanded  by  Captain  De  Golyer ; the  Third  Brigade, 
Colonel  Boomer,  held  in  reserve.  Soon  after  making  this  disposition  of 
the  troops,  the  enemy’s  whole  line  broke  and  fled  in  confusion,  and, 
resuming  our  march,  we  proceeded  without  interruption  to  Eaymond, 
where  we  encamped.  From  Eaymond  we  marched  to  Jackson,  via  Clin- 
ton, following  the  division  of  General  Logan  to  Clinton,  v/here  we  again 
encamped. 

On  the  14th,  we  proceeded  in  the  direction  of  Jackson,  the  Seventh 
Division  having  the  advance,  and  marched  without  interruption  until 
within  about  3 miles  of  Jackson,  when  we  encountered  the  enemy  in 
strong  position,  his  batteries  posted  so  as  to  command  the  road  and  his 
infantry  covered  by  woods  and  ravines.  The  division  was  at  once  de- 
ployed, the  Second  Brigade,  commanded  by  Colonel  Holmes,  occupying 
the  right  and  left  of  the  road  ; the  First  Brigade,  commanded  by  Colo- 
nel Sanborn,  on  the  right  and  rear  of  the  Second  Brigade  ,*  and  the  Third 
Brigade,  under  Colonel  Boomer,  to  the  left  and  rear  of  the  Second  Bri- 
gade, this  brigade  in  the  woods.  The  line  being  thus  formed,  was 
ordered  to  advance,  which  it  did,  followed  by  the  Sixth  Wisconsin 
Battery,  Captain  Dillon  commanding. 

The  advance  was  made  in  the  most  gallant  and  satisfactory  manner. 
Not  a man  wavered  or  faltered,  but  imoceeded,  under  the  most  galling 
fire,  to  drive  the  enemy  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet  from  his  strong 
position.  The  battery  advancing  with  the  line  of  infantry,  took  posi- 
tion, and,  when  the  enemy  broke  and  retreated,  xmured  into  the  fugitives 
an  effective  and  destructive  fire. 

The  enemy  having  abandoned  his  i)osition,  it  was  supposed  that  he 
would  make  a stand  in  his  works  before  Jackson,  but  our  skirmishers 
and  lino  steadily  advanced  into  their  works  and  into  the  town  without 
further  resistance,  taking  possession  of  the  works  and  seven  guns,  which 
the  enemy  in  his  haste  had  neither  injured  nor  attempted  to  carry  away. 

Captain  [Cornelius]  Cadle,  of  my  stall*,  and  Captain  Martin,  acting 


724  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Ciiai>.  XXXVI. 

assistant  adjutant-general  of  tlie  First  Brigade,  planted  the  Hag  of  the 
Fifty-ninth  Indiana  on  the  dome  of  the  capitol  of  the  State  of  Missis- 
sippi. 

On  the  morning  of  the  15th,  we  retraced  our  steps  in  the  direction  of 
Clinton,  General  Logan’s  division  taking  the  lead.  From  Clinton  we 
])roceeded  [on  the  IGth]  directly  toward  Vicksburg,  the  division  of 
General  Logan  still  having  the  lead.  Near  Edwards  Depot  we  came 
up  with  the  division  of  General  Hovey,  of  Major-General  McClernand’s 
command,  who,  having  the  advance,  encountered  the  enemy,  i)osted 
with  great  care  and  in  strong  force  across  Baker’s  Creek,  on  what  is 
called  Champion’s  Hill.  The  two  divisions.  Generals  Hovey’s  and 
Logan’s,  were  at  once  formed.  General  Logan’s  on  the  right  and  Gen- 
eral Hovey’s  on  the  left,  and  attacked  the  enemy  with  great  fury,  driv- 
ing him  on  both  flanks.  In  the  mean  time  two  brigades  of  the  Seventh 
Division  coming  up,  it  soon  became  apparent  that  the  enemy  in  front  of 
General  Hovey  was  being  re-enforced,  and  that  he  was  hard  pressed. 
The  Third  Brigade,  Colonel  Boomer,  was,  therefore,  ordered  to  proceed 
to  his  support,  which  he  did  in  the  most  gallant  style,  ascending  a hill, 
entering  a wood,  and  taking  imsition  in  front  of  an  enemy  of  three  times 
his  force.  The  First  Brigade,  under  Colonel  Sanborn,  moved  to  the 
right  to  support  the  batteries  iflanted  in  the  field. 

It  soon  became  apparent  that  the  critical  point  was  our  left.  As  Gen- 
eral Stevenson  had  been  entirely  successful  in  driving  their  left,  the 
enemy  seemed  determined  to  effect  the  same  with  ours  j two  of  the  reg- 
iments of  Colonel  Sanborn’s  brigade  were,  therefore,  ordered  to  the 
support  of  Colonel  Boomer.  Colonel  Boomer,  by  the  most  desperate 
fighting,  and  with  wonderful  courage  and  obstinacy,  held  his  i)Osition 
in  spite  of  the  continued  and  furious  assaults  of  the  enraged  and  baffled 
enemy;  but  it  was  apj)arent  that  he  sorely  needed  assistance,  and,  unless 
speedily  assisted,  his  position  was  in  danger. 

At  this  critical  moment  Colonel  Holmes  arrived  in  the  field  with  two 
regiments  of  the  Second  Brigade,  the  Seventeenth  Iowa  and  Tenth  Mis- 
souri, and,  being  informed  of  the  position  of  affairs,  proceeded  with  the 
greatest  alacrity  and  enthusiasm  to  the  front,  relieving  Colonel  Boomer, 
who  by  this  time  was  entirely  out  of  ammunition,  and  charged  the  en- 
emy with  a shout,  who  broke  and  fled  in  the  greatest  confusion,  leaving 
in  our  possession  the  regimental  flag  of  the  Thirty-first  Alabama,  taken 
by  the  Seventeenth  Iowa,  and  two  guns  of  his  battery.  This  ended  the 
fight.  Our  right,  under  General  Logan,  had  already  driven  them,  and 
when  they  broke  on  the  left  the  rout  was  complete.  That  night  we  en- 
camped near  the  battle-field. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  Brigadier-General  Quinby  having  re- 
turned, I was  relieved  of  the  temporary  command  of  the  division. 

During  the  time  that  I commanded  the  division,  the  loss  in  the  several 
engagements  was  as  follows: 


Engagemonts. 

cS 

s 

p 

o 

Killed. 

1 

Skinnisli  of  May  3 

2 

Cattle  of  Raymond 

2 

I’att.lft  of  .raokson  

227 

34 

Jlattlo  of  Clianipion’.s  TIill 

539 

123 

7G8 

159 

Total  wounded  aiid  killed  - 

927 

Chap.  XXXVI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  EAYMOND,  MISS. 


725 


Of  the  conduct  of  the  officers  and  men  of  the  division  I cannot  speak 
too  highly;  their  charge  at  Jackson,  seldom  if  ever  excelled  in  any 
campaign,  has  been  the  theme  of  universal  praise  ; the  stubbornness  and 
courage  with  which  they  fought  at  Jackson  and  Champion’s  Hill  have 
won  for  them  the  admiration  of  the  army. 

To  the  staff  of  General  Quinby  I return  my  especial  thanks  for  the 
zeal,  industry,  and  fidelity  with  which  they  discharged  their  difficult 
duties  during  the  march  and  on  the  battle-field.  I am  also  under  obli- 
gations to  Captain  Cadle  for  the  fidelity  with  which  he  discharged  his 
(iuties. 

Several  brave,  reliable,  and  valuable  officers  of  the  command  were 
killed  in  the  different  engagements,  whose  names  and  services  are  men- 
tioned in  the  reports  accompanying.  For  full  details  of  achievements 
of  the  respective  brigades  and  regiments  reference  is  respectfully  made 
to  the  reports  of  brigade  and  regimental  commanders  forwarded  here- 
with. 

Verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  M.  CEOCKEK, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding  Seventh  Division. 

Lieut.  Col.  W.  T.  Cl  auk. 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


1^0.  9. 

Report  of  Col.  John  B.  Sanborn.,  Fourth  Minnesota  Infantry.^  command- 
ing First  Brigade j including  operations  April  21-May  23. 

Hdqes.  1st  Brigade,  7th  Division,  17th  Army  Corps, 

Ca7n])  in  Field  before  Vichsburg.,  Miss..,  May  25,  18G3. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  marches  made  by  my  com- 
mand and  the  part  taken  by  it  in  the  battles  fought  during  the  cam- 
paign from  Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  to  this  camp. 

On  April  21,  I received  your  order  to  send  forward  one  brigade  to 
Eichmond,  La.,  immediately,  and  relieve  the  command  stationed  there. 
At  this  time  the  general  commanding  this  division  was  absent,  and  my 
command  consisted  of  the  Seventh  Division,  comprising:  First  Bri- 
gade— Fifty-ninth  and  Forty-eighth  Indiana,  Seventy-second  Illinois, 
and  Fourth  Minnesota  Eegiments;  Second  Brigade — Tenth  Missouri, 
Seventeenth  Iowa,  Eightieth  Ohio,  and  Fifty-sixth  Illinois  Eegiments ; 
Third  Brigade — Fifth  Iowa,  Twenty-sixth  Missouri,  Kinety-third  Illi- 
nois, and  Tenth  Iowa  Eegiments  ; and  Battery  M,  First  Missouri  Light 
Artillery,  Sixth  and  Twelfth  Wisconsin  Batteries,  Eleventh  Ohio  Bat- 
tery, two  companies  of  cavalry,  and  pioneer  corps  of  137  effective 
men.  The  pioneer  corps  was  already  detached  to  work  on  Walnut  and 
Eoundaway  Bayous,  and  did  not  come  up  during  the  time  I remained  in 
command  of  the  division.  This  order  was  immediately  complied  with, 
and  the  Fifty-sixth  Illinois  and  Seventeenth  Iowa  Eegiments  moved 
forward  to  Eichmond  the  same  day,  distance  12  miles,  and  the  remain- 
ing portion  of  the  Second  Brigade  moved  forward  to  Eichmond  the  fol- 
lowing day. 

On  April  23, 1 marched  with  the  First  Brigade  and  First  Missouri  and 
Eleventh  Ohio  Batteries  to  Eichmond,  and  moved  the  Third  Brigade 
and  remaining  batteries  forward  to  that  point  on  the  25th  instant,  and 
on  the  same  day  moved  the  Second  Brigade  on  to  Holmes’  plantation, 


726 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI, 


distauce  9 miles ; and  during  that  night  marched  the  First  Brigade,  with 
the  exception  of  the  Seventy-second  Illinois,  which,  pursuant  to  your 
order,  I left  in  command  of  Eichmond,  and  two  batteries,  up  to  the  same 
point. 

On  the  26th,  the  First  and  Second  Brigades  and  two  batteries  marched 
forward  to  Smith’s  plantation,  distance  9 miles,  and  bivouacked,  and 
the  Third  Brigade  and  remaining  batteries  moved  forward  to  within 
about  4 miles  of  that  point.  All  camp  and  garrison  equipage  had  been 
left  behind,  and  the  teams  sent  back  to  Milliken’s  Bend  to  bring  for- 
ward rations  to  keep  the  supply  up  to  ten  days  on  hand,  in  accordance 
with  Special  Orders,  No.  — , from  department  headquarters  j but  this 
train  was  seized  and  turned  over  to  an  ordnance  officer  to  bring  forward 
ammunition,  and  some  of  the  regiments  of  the  division  were  out  of 
rations  when  we  arrived  at  this  point,  and  ^vere  sup^died  with  bread  by 
the  post  commissary. 

On  the  27th,  the  division  did  not  move,  for  the  reason  that  General 
Logan’s  division  did  not  get  past  during  the  day,  the  roads  being  next 
to  impassable. 

On  the  28th,  the  whole  division  moved  together  at  6 o’clock,  and 
marched  only  about  4 miles  during  the  day.  I marched  in  the  rear  of 
General  Logan’s  division,  and  the  teams  and  batteries  nearly  all  had  to 
double  the  teams  and  go  over  the  road  twice. 

On  the  29th,  the  division  was  marched  to  Perkins’  plantation,  distance 
11  miles,  and  bivouacked,  and  a few  rations  were  obtained. 

On  the  30th,  the  march  was  continued  to  Hard  Times  Landing,  oppo- 
site Grand  Gulf,  distance  about  16  miles.  At  this  point  officers  and 
men  were  a little  disheartened  upon  learning  that  the  Navy  had  found 
it  impossible  to  reduce  the  Grand  Gulf  batteries,  and  that  we  must  still 
continue  our  march  down  the  river  past  this  point  before  we  could  cross 
over. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  1st  instant,  I marched  my  command  down 
the  river  to  the  point  of  embarkation  for  the  east  side.  About  the  time 
of  reaching  this  point,  the  rapid  reports  of  artillery  from  the  east  side  of 
the  river  announced  that  the  advance  of  the  army  had  come  upon  the 
enemy,  and  the  soldiers  were  eager  for  the  fray,  and  the  infantry  of  the 
whole  division  (with  the  exception  of  the  Fifty-sixth  Illinois,  which  was 
detailed  to  remain  in  command  of  Hard  Times  temporarily),  consisting 
of  about  5,000  men,  embarked  on  board  transports,  sailed  10  miles  down 
the  river  to  Bruinsburg,  and  disembarked  in  about  one  hour  and  a half, 
and  moved  forward  toward  the  front  line  of  the  army  before  the  brigade 
and  division  commanders  could  get  their  horses  across  the  river. 

After  marching  about  10  miles  from  the  river  toward  the  field  of  bat- 
tle, and  to  a point  within  about  3 miles  of  the  field,  and  before  the  divis- 
ion commander  and  staff  had  got  up,  an  order  was  received  from  the 
major-general  commanding  the  corps,  .by  Colonel  Holmes,  commanding 
the  leading  brigade,  to  fall  back  to  the  junction  of  the  Grand  Gulf  road 
with  the  Bruinsburg  and  Port  Gibson  road,  and  form,  so  as  to  resist  any 
advance  of  the  enemy  from  Grand  Gulf  by  that  road. 

Colonel  Holmes  had  disposed  of  the  Second  and  Third  Brigades  and 
one  battery  of  artillery  in  order  of  battle  w hen  I arrived  upon  the  ground. 
The  First  Brigade  and  remaining  batteries,  with  the  exception  of  one 
held  in  reserve,  were  disposed  in  order  of  battle  as  fast  as  they  came 
up,  and  in  such  manner  as  to  resist  any  attack  from  the  direction  of 
Grand  Gulf. 

These  batteries  did  not  arrive  so  that  the  disposition  could  be  com- 
pleted till  11  o’clock  at  night. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  RAYMOND,  MISS. 


727 


During  this  day  the  division  marched  11  miles,  and  embarked  on  trans- 
ports and  sailed  10  miles  and  disembarked,  and  was  carefully  drawn  out 
in  order  of  battle  at  night  at  1 o’clock. 

On  the  morning  of  the  2d  instant,  I received  the  order  of  the  major- 
general  commanding  the  corps  to  move  forward  my  whole  command  at 
3 a.  m.  to  the  field  of  battle.  I marched  accordingly,  and  at  sunrise 
reported  with  my  whole  command  on  the  field,  having  marched  6 miles. 

At  about  8 o’clock  I was  informed  that  the  enemy  had  retired  from 
the  field,  and  I was  ordered  forward  to  Port  Gibson,  at  which  place  I 
arrived  with  my  command  about  11  a.  m.,  distance  from  the  battle-field 
about  4 miles. 

At  this  place  the  division  remained  about  five  hours,  during  which 
time  the  pontoon  bridge  was  constructed  across  the  south  branch  of 
Bayou  Pierre,  and  during  this  time  Brigadier-General  Crocker  reported 
to  take  command  of  the  division,  which  marched  about  8 miles  to  the 
north  branch  of  Bayou  Pierre  before  halting  for  night,  making  19  miles 
that  the  division  marched  on  this  day. 

Dpon  Brigadier-General  Crocker  assuming  command  of  the  division, 
I assumed  command  of  the  First  Brigade.  One  regiment  (the  Fourth 
Minnesota)  was  detailed  on  fatigue  duty  during  the  night,  to  repair  the 
suspension  bridge  crossing  the  north  branch  of  Bayou  Pierre  that  the 
rebel  army  had  fired  and  partially  burned. 

During  the  time  that  I commanded  the  division,  I received  great  as- 
sistance from  Captain  Eochester,  assistant  adjutant-generalj  Capt.  L. 
B.  Martin,  temporary  aide-de-camp  ; Lieutenant  [Thomas  S.]  Camp- 
bell, aide-de-camp  ; Lieutenant  [Ogden]  Lovell,  ordnance  officer  j Cap- 
tain [Albert]  Stoddard,  judge-advocate  and  acting  aide-de-camp,  and 
Lieutenant  [Charles  L.]  White,  provost-marshal,  all  most  gallant,  effi- 
cient, and  capable  officers,  and  to  all  of  whom  I shall  feel  under  lasting 
obligattons. 

On  the  morning  of  May  3,  I crossed  the  north  branch  of  Bayou 
Pierre  with  my  brigade,  following  General  Logan’s  division  and  leading 
the  Seventh  Division.  The  enemy  opened  with  artillery  in  our  front 
earl»y  in  the  morning,  but  retired  rapidly  until  General  Logan’s  division 
led  off  to  the  left,  toward  the  Grand  Gulf  road,  and  the  Seventh  Division 
was  marching  in  advance  on  the  road  leading  from  the  Port  Gibson  and 
Jackson  road  to  Hankinson’s  Ferry.  When  about  5 miles  south  of  the 
ferry,  the  enemy  deployed  a long  line  of  skirmishers,  and  formed  a few 
regiments  of  infantry  and  put  in  position  a battery  of  artillery. 

Immediately,  in  obedience  to  your  orders,  I deployed  one  regiment. 
Fifty-ninth  Indiana,  as  skirmishers,  with  the  center  resting  on  the  road 
leading  to  the  Big  Black  Eiver,  and  crossing  said  road  at  right  angles. 
The  Fourth  Minnesota  was  ordered  forward  as  a support  on  the  right, 
and  the  Forty-eighth  Indiana  as  a support  on  th'e  left  of  the  road,  with 
instructions  to  keep  within  suiiporting  distance  of  the  skirmishers. 

When  the  skirmishers  had  advanced  about  1 mile  from  the  head  of 
the  main  column,  they  came  to  the  enemy’s  line,  with  two  pieces  of  ar- 
tillery in  such  position  as  to  command  all  the  open  ground  in  front, 
through  which  my  command  was  obliged  to  pass.  This  open  ground 
was  passed  in  the  order  above  mentioned,  under  a heavy  fire  from  the 
enemy’s  guns.  The  Fifty-ninth  Indiana  was  the  most  exposed,  but  did 
their  duty  most  manfully,  obeying  every  order  with  alacrity.  The 
Fourth  Minnesota  and  Forty-eighth  Indiana,  as  supports,  moved  up 
I)romptly  and  without  hesitation.  The  conduct  of  all  the  officers  and 
men  was  commendable  and  satisfactory.  The  enemy  was  driven  from 
his  first,  second,  and  third  positions,  when,  in  obedience  to  your  orders, 


728 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAr.  XXXVI. 


I called  ill  tlie  skirmishers  and  moved  on  with  my  command  to  the  cross- 
ing of  the  Big  Black  Eiver,  where  we  bivouacked,  near  Hankinson’s 
Ferry. 

In  this  skirmish  I have  to  report  the  following  casualties : Killed, 
Private  Eli  Faucette,  and,  mortally  wounded,  James  W.  Van  Slyke, 
Company  E,  Fifty-ninth  Indiana.  Several  of  the  officers  and  men  of 
all  the  regiments  sustained  slight  injuries,  which  scarcely  can  be  called 
wounds. 

While  my  command  remained  at  Hankiuson’s  Ferry,  the  greatest 
effort  was  made  to  procure  rations;  but  there  being  no  transportation, 
the  command  was  compelled  to  leave  with  only  two  days’  rations  on 
hand. 

On  the  9th,  the  brigade  moved  with  the  balance  of  the  division  to 
Utica  Cross-Koads,  a distance  of  12  miles,  without  opposition,  and  on 
the  10th  marched  10  miles,  through  Utica  and  along  the  Eaymond  road, 
and  on  the  following  day  moved  forward  miles,  and  formed  in  order 
of  battle  on  a ridge,  in  a favorable  position  for  defense.  My  command 
was  entirely  out  of  rations  at  this  time,  excei)t  what  could  be  gathered 
from  the  country,  and  so  remained  until  the  evening  of  the  17th,  at  which 
time  the  regimental  teams  came  uj)  from  Grand  Gulf. 

On  the  morning  of  the  12th,  my  command  marched  at  9 a.  m.,  leading 
the  Seventh  Division  and  following  General  Logan’s  division.  Shortly 
after  noon  heavy  cannonading  in  front  announced  that  the  advance  had 
fallen  upon  the  enemy.  My  command  was  kept  closed  up  as  closely  as 
possible  to  the  rear  of  the  Third  Division,  and  after  the  lapse  of  an  hour 
or  two,  I received  an  order  from  General  Crocker,  commanding  the  di- 
vision, to  move  forward  immediately  and  form  on  the  left  of  General 
Logan’s  division.  To  arrive  at  the  position  indicated  it  was  necessary 
to  pass  through  a dense  thicket  of  trees,  brush,  and  vines,  and  then  cross 
a clearing  about  100  yards.  It  would  seem  that  the  enemy  had  formed 
the  design  of  turning  the  left  of  our  line,  and  had  massed  his  infantr^^ 
accordingly,  and  had  planted  his  batteries  so  as  comxdetely  to  command 
this  thicket  and  clearing,  in  order  to  prevent  the  left  from  being  sup- 
ported. As  soon  as  my  command  commenced  moving  forward  to  form 
on  the  left,  the  enemy  opened  as  heavy  a fire  as  possible  with  his  artil- 
lery upon  me,  but  the  formation  was  made  in  double-quick  time,  and  my 
whole  line  moved  ux)  to  within  about  30  yards  of  our  front  line.  Kot 
more  than  a few  moments  elapsed  after  my  command  had  reached  this 
Xiosition  before  he  advanced  his  lines  of  infantry  ui^on  the  left,  but  Avas 
met  with  such  firmness  and  so  destructive  a fire  from  the  front  line  that 
he  almost  immediately  gave  way  and  fled  from  this  x)aTt  of  the  field. 
Immediately  upon  this  having  transxiired,  I received  the  order  from 
General  McPherson  to  move  two  regiments  to  my  right  in  support  of 
the  center  of  our  lines.  The  Fifty-ninth  and  Forty-eighth  Indiana  Eegi- 
ments  were  immediately  moved  forward  to  the  x^osition  indicated, 
and,  at  the  suggestion  of  General  Crocker,  I oflered  to  relieve  the  front 
line,  which  had  been  engaged  at  this  time  three  or  four  hours,  but  these 
officers,  among  whom  was  the  lamented  Colonel  Dollins,  declined  the 
offer,  and  said  he  felt  certain  that  he  could  hold  his  position  Avithout 
aid. 

The  enemy  by  this  time  appeared  in  broken  squads  in  front  of  the 
center,  and  in  half  an  hour  all  firing  had  ceased  and  the  enemy  had 
fled  in  confusion  from  the  field. 

The  only  casualty  in  my  command  in  this  action  was.  Forty- eighth 
Indiana,  1 enlisted  man  wounded. 

After  the  action  ceased,  the  command  marched  through  Eaymond  and 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  EAYMONE,  MISS.  729 

bivouacked  about  1 mile  north  of  the  town.  The  Eighteenth  Wisconsin 
Yolunteers  joined  my  brigade  at  this  place. 

On  the  morning  of  the  13th,  I marched  in  rear  of  the  Third  Brigade 
on  the  road  leading  to  Clinton,  and  passed  through  the  town  and  biv- 
ouacked 1 mile  east  of  it,  on  the  Jackson  road,  my  line  of  battle  this 
night  running  across  the  railroad  and  the  common  road ; distance 
marched  this  day,  9 miles. 

My  command  marched  from  Clinton  at  4 a.  m.  on  the  14tb,  along  the 
Jackson  road  toward  Jackson,  the  Second  Brigade  leading  the  division 
and  my  brigade  following  the  Second. 

The  enemy  was  found  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  in  a strong  position 
about  2 miles  west  of  Jackson,  his  line  of  battle  crossing  the  road  at 
nearly  right  angles. 

I received  orders  to  form  my  brigade  on  the  right  of  the  road,  the 
two  left  regiments,  the  Fourth  Minnesota  and  Eighteenth  Winconsin, 
in  reserve  for  the  Second  Brigade,  already  formed  across  the  road,  the 
other  regiments,  the  Eorty-eighth  and  Fifty-ninth  Indiana,  to  the  right 
of  the  Second  Brigade,  all  to  be  covered  from  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s 
artillery  as  much  as  possible.  This  disposition  was  immediately  made. 
The  troops  were  more  exi)osed  to  the  enemy’s  artillery  fire  than  was  at 
first  apprehended,  and  the  Fourth  Minnesota  was  immediately  ordered 
to  form  on  the  left  of  the  road,  and  as  a reserve  to  the  Seventeenth 
Iowa,  of  the  Second  Brigade.  The  other  three  regiments  were  moved 
close  up  under  cover  of  the  ridge  occupied  by  the  First  Missouri  Bat- 
tery. This  ridge  was  swept  by  the  enemy’s  fire,  but  as  soon  as  the 
skirmishers  deployed  from  the  Fifty-ninth  Indiana  had  advanced  far 
enough  to  ascertain  that  there  was  no  enemy  on  the  right  flank,  I or- 
dered the  brigade  forward  across  the  first  ridge,  with  instructions  to 
halt  when  the  line  should  reach  the  ravine  beyond,  which  was  about 
400  yards  distant.  This  order  was  executed  in  the  most  satisfactory 
manner.  The  regiments  crossed  the  ridge  in  perfect  line  at  a run,  and 
reached  the  second  ravine  with  the  loss  of  not  more  than  10  men. 
Shortly  after  reaching  this  position,  the  enemy’s  main  line  of  infantry 
was  ascertained  by  the  skirmishers  in  front  of  my  brigade  to  be  in  the’ 
next  ravine,  in  front  of  his  batteries,  and  soon  commenced  driving  back 
our  line  of  skirmishers.  I received  the  order  from  General  Crocker  to 
fix  bayonets  and  charge  through  the  ravine  and  all  the  way  to  the  en- 
emy’s batteries,  if  possible.  Tliis  order  was  immediately  communicated, 
and  the  whole  line  commenced  advancing,  and  moved  forward  irresist- 
ibly, until  the  whole  line  of  the  enemy’s  infantry  was  in  full  retreat 
and  his  batteries  taken  to  the  rear.  This  charge  was  one  of  the  most 
splendid  battle  scenes  that  could  ever  be  witnessed. 

The  whole  line,  with  banners  unfurled,  went  forward  at  double-quick 
and  with  more  regularity  than  at  an  ordinary  battalion  drill.  The  fleeing 
lines  of  the  rebels  in  front  j the  sharpshooters,  who  had  been  concealed 
behind  cotton  bales  and  in  an  old  cotton-gin  in  front  of  the  Fifty-ninth 
Indiana,  throwing  out  white  handkerchiefs  at  every  window  and  over 
every  cotton  bale,  taken  in  connection  with  the  novel  spectacle  pre- 
sented by  Captain  Dillon’s  battery  charging  forward  close  upon  the  line 
of  infantry,  made  up  a scene  that  can  never  be  effaced  from  the  mind 
of  any  who  witnessed  it,  and  can  never  be  properly  represented  on 
paper. 

Ko  language  can  do  justice  to  the  conduct  of  the  officers  and  men  of 
my  command  during  this  engagement.  All  seemed  to  seek  positions  of 
peril  instead  of  safety,  and  wliere  the  enemy  was  strongest  and  most 
secure  from  danger,  there  did  they  charge  the  fiercest  and  with  the 


730 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


greatest  determination.  After  this  charge  the  enemy  iaimediately  re- 
treated through  Jackson,  and  my  command  moved  into  the  city,  over 
the  enemy^s  works  and  artillery,  unmolested  by  a shot. 

Capt.  L.  B.  Martin,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general  on  my  staff, 
seized  the  flag  of  the  Fifty-ninth  Indiana,  my  leading  regiment,  and, 
going  far  in  advance  of  the  skirmishers  to  the  capitol,  raised  it  over  the 
dome,  where  it  remained  until  the  regiment  moved  from  the  town ; and. 
Lieutenant  Donaldson,  aide-de-camp  on  my  staff,  riding  also  far  in  ad- 
vance of  the  skirmishers  to  the  vicinity  of  the  prison,  seized  there  a 
Confederate  flag,  made  of  double  silk,  that  a cavalry  company  had  ap- 
parently abandoned  in  its  flight.  On  one  side  is  the  inscription",  “ Clai- 
borne Bangers 5’’  on  the  other,  “Our  rights.^^ 

The  prisoners,  eight  in  number,  taken  by  the  Fifty -nintb  Indiana  at 
the  cotton-gin,  who  were  sharpshooters  just  arrived  from  South  Caro- 
lina, were  immediately  sent  to  the  rear. 

My  loss  in  the  engagement  was  as  follows : 


% 

Command. 

Enlisted  men  killed. 

Wounded. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

48tli  Indiana 

2 

9 

59th  Indiana 

1 

3 

4th  Minnesota 

2 

18th  Wisconsin 

2 

18 

Total 

4 

1 

32 

During  the  night  of  the  14th,  I supplied  my  command  with  three  days’ 
rations  of  sugar,  bacon,  and  meal,  and  some  other  articles,  most  of 
which  my  quartermaster  obtained  from  the  penitentiary,  and  on  the 
morning  of  the  loth  my  command  marched  back  on  the  road  toward 
Clinton,  and  passed  through  that  place  and  bivouacked  4 miles  west  of 
it  that  night,  having  marched  about  14  miles. 

On  the  morning  of  the  16th,  I moved  my  command  at  an  early  hour 
along  tlie  road  toward  Bolton  and  Edwards  Depot,  following  the  Third 
Brigade  and  Logan’s  division.  I had  marched  but  an  hour  and  a half 
when  rapid  firing  of  artillery  in  front  again  announced  the  presence  of 
the  enemy. 

My  command  moved  forward  rapidl^^,  and  arrived  upon  the  field  about 
the  time  the  engagement  became  general. 

I formed,  as  ordered,  under  cover  of  the  woods,  at  the  right  of  De 
Golyer’s  battery,  and  almut  400  yards  distant.  During  this  formation 
I was  under  a light  fire  of  artillery  and  musketry,  from  which  I lost  a 
few  officers  and  men. 

As  soon  as  my  command  was  reformed,  I received  an  order  from  Gen- 
eral McPherson,  commanding  the  corps,  to  send  two  regiments  imme- 
diately to  the  support  of  De  Golyer’s  battery.  I ordered  forward  the 
Fifty-ninth  Indiana,  witli  instructions  to  form  on  the  left  of  the  battery, 
and  the  Fourth  Minnesota,  with  instructions  to  form  on  its  right. 

This  order  was  complied  with  in  double-quick  time,  and  about  the 
same  time  the  regiments  were  so  formed  the  enemy  commenced  falling 
back  at  this  point  (the  enemy’s  left),  and  the  regiments  advanced,  the 


Chap,  XXXVI.  ] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  RAYMOND,. MISS. 


731 


Fourtli  Minuesota  across  the  ravine,  capturing  118  prisoners,  and  the 
Fifty-ninth  Indiana  into  the  ravine,  bearing  farther  to  the  left,  and 
the  enemy’s  line  crossing  the  ravine  diagonally  at  this  point,  capturing 
here  the  colors  of  the  Forty -sixth  Alabama  Eegiment  (Sergt.  John  Ford, 
Company  C,  Fifty-ninth  Indiana,  captured  them)  and  many  prisoners. 
These  regiments  retained  their  positions  on  the  right  of  our  lines  till 
the  close  of  the  engagement,  about  three  hours. 

By  the  time  these  two  regiments  had  got  into  position  on  the  right 
and  left  of  the  battery,  I was  ordered  to  take  the  other  two  of  my  com- 
mand, the  Forty-eighth  Indiana  and  Eighteenth  Wisconsin,  about  100 
rods  to  the  east  of  the  battery,  and  form  there  in  the  edge  of  the  woods, 
in  support  of  what  seemed  to  be  General  Hovey’s  right. 

The  Forty-eighth  Indiana  Eegiment  immediately  went  into  position 
under  a most  galling  fire  of  musketry,  and  retained  it  for  at  least  three 
hours,  and  long  after  the  regiments  on  its  right  and  left  had  given  way, 
and  then  fell  back  by  my  order  a short  distance,  to  replenish  ammuni- 
tion, only  after  it  was  exhausted,  but  stood  like  a wall  of  adamant 
wherever  it  was  placed  till  the  close  of  the  engagement. 

The  Eighteenth  Wisconsin  was  moved  from  right  to  left  and  back  two 
or  three  times,  by  order  of  the  general  commanding,  as  the  attack  was 
made  more  fiercely  on  either  hand.  The  regiment  moved  with  great 
promptness,  and  held  every  position  firmly  until  removed  by  orders. 

After  this  engagement  ceased,  I moved  forward  on  the  Vicksburg  road 
about  3 miles,  and  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

My  loss  in  the  action  of  Champion’s  Hill  is  as  follows : 


Command. 

Enlisted  men  killed. 

Wounded. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

48t1i  Tndinnn, ..  ..... 

3 

33 

59th  Indiana 

1 

9 

4th  MinTip.Rntn, 

1 

1 

18th  Wisconsin 

1 

2 

3 

Total 

5 

3 

46 

Oh  the  morning  of  the  17th,  I moved  my  command  along  the  road 
toward  the  Big  Black  Eiver,  and  halted  at  the  river  about  noon,  and 
soon  after  commenced  the  construction  of  a pontoon  bridge  with  cotton 
bales  and  boards,  which  was  completed  the  following  morning,  my  bri- 
gade having  been  on  fatigue  duty  all  night  constructing  it. 

On  the  morning  of  the  18th,  my  command,  with  the  Third  Brigade, 
crossed  the  river  and  moved  forward  toward  Vicksburg.  When  about 
3 miles  west  of  the  river,  I was  ordered  to  return  to  the  east  side  of 
the  Big  Black  and  remain  there,  guarding  all  trains  coming  up  and  the 
bridge,  until  Colonel  Holmes  should  come  up  from  the  battle-field  with 
his  brigade.  I immediately  returned  and  bivouacked  my  command  on 
the  same  ground  left  in  the  morning,  and  remained  there  till  the  even- 
ing of  the  19th,  when  Colonel  Holmes  and  his  command  came  up,  and 
1 again  crossed  the  river  and  bivouacked  about  2 miles  west  of  it  that 
night,  and  on  the  20th  came  forward  to  the  rear  of  Vicksburg,  marching 
a distance  of  17  miles  with  a most  intense  heat  and  suffocating  dust  all 
day. 


732 


MISSISSIPPI;  WEST  TENNESSEE;  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXNVI. 


On  the  21st,  I moved  my  command  into  line  of  battle  in  front  of  the 
enemy’s  works  and  deployed  a line  of  skirmishers  in  front,  and  remained 
in  this  position  till  the  morning  of  the  22d.  A general  assault  having 
been  ordered  upon  the  enemy’s  works  at  10  a.  m.  this  day,  I spent  the 
night  of  the  21st;  in  connection  with  the  lamented  Colonel  Boomer,  com- 
manding the  Third  Brigade,  reconnoitering  for  the  best  approaches  for 
inhintry  to  the  enemy’s  works  in  our  front. 

It  was  ascertained  that  we  could  approach  to  within  about  80  yards 
under  cover  of  the  hills  and  form  without  great  exposure  to  the  men, 
and  early  on  the  morning  of  the  22d  I moved  my  command  into  this 
l)Osition,  and  formed  in  line  of  battle  on  the  left  of  the  Third  Brigade. 
Colonel  Boomer  had  some  doubts  as  to  his  ability  to  carry  the  works 
in  his  front;  and  as  the  works  left  in  my  front  could  not  be  held,  if  car- 
ried, while  those  on  my  right  were  in  possession  of  the  enemy,  I trans- 
ferred to  him,  for  the  purpose  of  this  assault,  the  Fifty-ninth  Indiana 
Kegiment,  and  deployed  the  Eighteenth  Wisconsin  along  our  whole  front 
as  skirmishers. 

These  dispositions  being  made,  the  commanders  of  regiments  were 
ordered  to  advance  upon  the  works  immediately  upon  the  movement 
commencing  on  our  right.  For  some  reason  the  troops  on  our  right  did 
not  move,  and  I retained  the  same  position  with  some  loss  till  about  3 
o’clock,  when  I received  an  order  from  General  McPherson,  through 
General  Quinby,  commanding  division,  to  move  at  once  and  vigorously 
upon  the  works.  A staff  officer  was  dispatched  immediately  to  the 
regimental  commanders  to  communicate  this  order,  but  before  he  had 
succeeded  in  doing  so  it  was  countermanded,  and  I was  ordered  to  move 
with  all  my  command,  not  deployed  as  skirmishers,  to  the  left,  to  sup- 
port Major-General  McClernaud.  I immediately  moved  my  command 
(with  the  exception  of  the  Eighteenth  Wisconsin,  deployed  as  skir- 
mishers) from  its  position,  some  2 miles  to  the  left,  and  was  there  or- 
dered by  General  Quinby  to  support  Burbridge’s  brigade,  then  engaged 
in  front  of  the  enemy’s  works.  I immediately  moved  forward  for  that 
purpose,  under  the  direction  of  a staff  officer,  and  was  led  up  through  a 
ravine  that  was  raked  to  a considerable  extent  by  musketry  and  artil- 
lery to  a point  a few  yards  in  rear  of  the  line  of  this  brigade.  I was  in- 
formed by  General  Burbridge  that  the  position  close  to  the  enemy’s 
works  was  not  so  exposed  as  the  ravine,  and  he  desired  me  to  form 
nearer  or  in  front  of  his  line.  I formed  my  brigade — Fifty-ninth  In- 
diana on  the  right,  Forty-eighth  Indiana  to  its  left,  and  the  Fourth 
Minnesota  to  the  left  of  the  Forty-eighth.  This  position  seemed  very 
much  exposed,  and  I lost  several  men  during  the  formation. 

My  command  was  exceedingly  exhausted,  having  had  no  rest  the  night 
of  the  19th,  marching  nearly  20  miles  the  20th,  moving  into  camp  the 
21st,  and  having  been  under  fire  or  marching  all  this  day  to  the  time  I 
moved  to  this  position,  and  one  or  two  of  the  regiments  having  already 
lost  30  men  during  the  day.  As  soon  as  my  line  was  formed.  General 
Burbridge’s  line  gave  way  and  his  troops  left  the  ground,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  one  regiment,  which  remained  in  sui^i^ort  of  the  Fifty-ninth 
Indiana. 

The  enemy  was  largely  re  enforced,  and  fired  rapid  and  destructive 
volleys  into  my  command,  which  were  promptly  returned,  but  the  enemy, 
having  so  high  and  strong  works  in  front,  it  cannot  bo  expected  with 
much  effect.  Once  or  twice  the  enemy  came  over  his  works  in  large 
numbers  and  formed  on  my  right,  with  the  evident  design  of  turning 
my  right  flank,  but  was  promptly  driven  back  by  my  command  with 
much  slaugliter. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  EAYMOND,  MISS.  ' 733 

I held  this  position  for  about  two  hours  and  until  dark,  and  having 
no  support,  and  seeing  no  reason  why  a position  should  be  held  at  such 
sacrifice  which,  if  lost,  could  be  recovered  at  any  time  by  a line  of 
skirmishers,  unless  the  enemy  should  choose  to  fight  us  outside  of  his 
works,  which  could  hardly  be  expected,  however  much  desired,  and 
there  being  no  general  officer  upon  the  ground,  I ordered  the  iiosition 
abandoned  and  my  command  to  march  back  to  the  hill  on  the  right  of 
the  railroad  bridge,  and  there  form  and  rest  for  the  night.  In  falling 
back.  Colonel  Tourtellotte,  Fourth  Minnesota,  took  from  the  ground  a 
piece  of  artillery  that  was  in  position  within  a few  yards  of  the  enemy’s 
works  when  my  command  went  upon  the  ground  and  left  there  by  the 
brigade  then  in  position. 

The  casualties  in  my  command  during  this  engagement,  as  the  official 
lists  will  show,  are  greater  than  in  all  the  balance  of  the  campaign,  and 
it  seems  to  me  all  for  no  good.  Success  was  no  better  than  defeat,  un- 
less an  assault  was  to  be  ordered,  and  I have  not  learned  that  such  a 
thing  was  thought  of,  and,  if  thought  of,  would  have  been  preposterous 
unless  made  by  both  brigades  and  in  a most  vigorous  manner,  and  I 
can  but  feel  that  there  was  official  misrepresentation  or  misconduct  that 
led  to  this  matter  which  requires  investigation. 

I am  impelled  to  say  this  much  in  my  report  of  this  engagement  by 
eloquent  voices  coming  from  the  tombs  of  many  of  the  most  brave  of 
my  command,  fallen  in  that  fruitless  struggle  under  the  enemy’s  works. 

The  following  are  the  losses  in  this  engagement: 


On  the  morning  of  the  23d,  I moved  my  command  forward  about  400 
yards,  and  formed,  with  one  regiment  on  my  left  in  rear  of  the  right  of 
General  Burbridge’s  brigade,  and  two  regiments  in  i)rolongation  of  his 
right,  which  position  was  occupied  but  a few  hours,  when  my  command 
moved  back  to  the  ground  it  left  on  the  morning  of  the  22d,  where  it 
now  remains. 

Accompanying  this  report  are  full  lists  of  the  casualties  of  my  com- 
mand in  the  several  and  respective  engagements  of  this  campaign. 

The  conduct  of  all  the  officers  and  men  of  my  command  during  the 
entire  campaign  has  been  more  than  satisfactory — it  has  been  most  gal- 
lant and  praiseworthy.  There  has  been  no  shirking  and  no  desire  to 
shirk  on  the  part  of  either  officers  or  men,  and  I have  not  found  or  even 
heard  of  a man  out  of  his  position  in  battle  or  on  the  march.  I know 
not  how  soldiers  could  do  more. 

Capt.  L.  B.  Martin,  assistant  adjutant-general,  and  Lieutenants  [John 
S.]  Akin  and  [James  H.J  Donaldson,  aides-de-camp,  have  conducted 
themselves  in  the  most  gallant  and  faithful  manner  and  deserve  siiecial 
mention. 


MISSISSIPPI;  WEST  TENNESSEE;  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


734 


The  liviug  are  rewarded  by  the  consciousness  of  having  done  all  that 
human  nature  is  capable  of  to  suppress  a most  wicked  rebellion  and  to 
preserve  order  and  good  government  for  themselves  and  posterity.  But 
alas,  for  the  patriotic  and  gallant  dead ; no  language  of  mine  can  do 
justice  to  their  virtues.  May  some  Macauley  or  Bancroft  recite  in 
interesting  narration  their  hardships,  endurance,  patriotism,  valor,  and 
achievements,  and  some  modern  Homer  or  Virgil  live  to  sing  them  in 
heroic  verse. 


JOHN  B.  SANBOEN, 

Colonel^  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  W.  T.  Clark, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  10. 

Report  of  Capt,  John  8.  Foster,  Fourth  Independent  Company  Ohio 

Cavalry,  commanding  Cavalry  Battalion,  including  operations  April 

25-ilfu?/  23. 

Hdqrs.  Major-General  McPherson’s  Escort, 

Before  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  24,  1863. 

Sir:  In  compliance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  92,  section  3,  I submit 
the  following  report: 

On  the  morning  of  April  25,  1863,  I left  camp  at  Milliken’s  Bend, 
La.,  with  20  men  of  the  company,  as  an  escort  for  General  McPherson. 
The  remainder  of  the  company,  being  left  behind  to  move  with  the 
headquarters  of  the  corps,  marched  to  Eichmond,  La.,  distance,  12 
miles,  and  encamped  for  the  night. 

On  the  26th,  marched  to  Smith’s  plantation,  on  Bayou  Vidal,  and  at 
that  time  the  headquarters  of  the  Department  of  the  Tennessee j dis- 
tance, 15  miles. 

On  the  27th,  marched  6 miles  farther  and  encamped. 

On  the  28th,  marched  to  Perkins’  Landing,  on  the  Mississippi  Eiver; 
distance,  10  miles. 

At  1 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  29th,  the  march  was  continued  to 
Hard  Times  Landing,  about  20  miles  below  Perkins’  Landing,  opposite 
Grand  Gulf,  Miss.,  where  we  arrived  that  evening. 

On  the  morning  of  the  30th,  we  moved  to  the  place  of  embarkation. 
Disembarked  12  miles  below  Grand  Gulf. 

After  crossing  on  the  morning  of  May  1 with  a part  of  the  coinpany 
and  moving  rapidly  forward  on  the  Port  Gibson  road  to  Thompson’s 
Hill,  where  a severe  fight  was  in  progress,  arrived  on  the  battle-field 
about  10  a.  m.  Here  all  my  men  were  detailed  as  orderlies  for  the  corps 
and  department  headquarters;  distance,  about  20  miles. 

On  the  morning  of  May  2,  entered  Port  Gibson,  and  during  the  day 
was  joined  by  that  portion  of  the  company  which  had  been  left  behind 
to  bring  forward  the  headquarters  train.  On  the  evening  of  the  same 
day,  moved  from  Port  Gibson  to  the  north  fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  dis- 
tance about  13  miles,  arriving  about  10  p.  m.,  and  was  occupied  until 
near  daylight  the  next  morning  with  an  officer  and  25  men  in  bringing 
in  the  stragglers  belonging  to  the  Third  and  Seventh  Divisions  of  the 
corps. 

At  6 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  3d,  crossed  the  bayou,  and  was 
sent,  with  my  company  and  General  Logan’s  escort,  to  reconnoiter  the 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  EAYMOND,  MISS.  735 

• 

front  of  the  line  of  inarch,  as  the  enemy  were  believed  to  bo  in  force. 
I sent  part  of  the  command  on  the  Willow  Springs  road,  and,  with  the 
remainder,  proceeded  on  the  Grand  Gulf  road.  Found  the  enemy  in 
considerable  force,  with  artillery,  infantry,  and  cavalry,  on  both  roads, 
but  evidently  retreating  in  the  direction  of  Hankinson^s  Ferry,  on  the 
Big  Black  Eiver.  I sent  part  of  the  cavalry  with  General  Grant  to 
Grand  Gulf,  and,  with  the  remainder,  accompanied  the  corps,  recon- 
noitering  the  front  and  flanks,  and  at  night  encamped  on  the  Big  Black 
at  the  above-named  ferry  j distance,  8 miles. 

The  next  day  was  occupied  by  me  in  reconnoitering  the  country  in  the 
direction  of  and  beyond  Kocky  Springs,  capturing  a number  of  horses, 
mules,  wagons,  and  commissary  stores,  which  were  turned  over  to  their 
respective  departments,  receiving  receipts  therefor. 

liemaining  in  camp  on  the  Big  Black  until  the  afternoon  of  May  7, 
moved  to  Eocky  Springs ; remained  till  the  morning  of  the  0th,  and 
took  the. advance  of  the  army,  reconnoitering  the  front  of  the  line  of 
march  until  the  army  arrived  within  8 miles  of  Eaymond,  Hinds  County, 
Mississippi,  having  considerable  skirmishing  with  tne  enemy  about  5 
miles  north  of  Utica  on  the  afternoon  of  the  10th,  encamping  for  the 
night  on  Weeks’  plantation,  and  23  miles  distant  from  Hankinson’s 
Ferry.  Here  a battalion  of  cavalry,  composed  of  my  company  and 
Companies  A and  E,  Second  Illinois  Cavalry,  and  Company  C,  Fifth 
Missouri  Cavalry,  was  formed,  in  obedience  to  orders  from  headquarters 
Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  to  the  command  of  which  I was  assigned,  the 
battalion  numbering  102  men  for  duty. 

The  11th  was  occupied  by  me  in  reconnoitering  the  roads  in  front,  to 
the  right  and  left  of  Weeks’  plantation,  for  a distance  of  5 or  6 miles, 
encamping  that  night  2 miles  in  advance  of  said  plantation. 

On  the  morning  of  the  12th,  1 i)roceeded  with  my  command  a*t  3.30 
a.  m.  on  the  Eaymond  road,  soon  meeting  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  and  com- 
menced skirmishing  with  them,  driving  them  within  2 miles  of  Eaymond, 
losing  Private  Philip  Wagner,  Company  C,  Fifth  Missouri,  killed,  and 
Herman  Fensky,  same  company,  wounded,  and  tound  the  enemy  in  force, 
who,  being  engaged  by  General  Logan’s  division,  I used  my  command 
in  watching  the  movements  of  the  enemy  on  the  right  and  left  of  our 
line  of  battle,  with  occasional  skirmishing.  After  the  enemy  was  routed, 
I started  in  pursuit,  following  them  until  after  dark  and  about  3 miles 
beyond  Eaymond,  capturing  a number  of  prisoners  ; returned,  and  en- 
camped in  the  latter  place  for  the  night ; distance,  9 miles. 

Moved  out  in  advance  of  the  column  on  the  morning  of  the  13th  on 
the  Clinton  road,  scouting  the  country  in  every  direction,  and  skirmish- 
ing all  day  with  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  encamping  for  the  night  in  Clin- 
ton, 10  miles  distant  from  Eaymond. 

On  the  14th,  reconnoitered  the  country  in  the  advance  and  flanks  of 
the  column,  on  the  Jackson  road,  meeting  the  enemy’s  pickets  about  5 
miles  from  Jackson.  The  enemy  being  engaged  by  General  Crocker’s 
division,  I used  my  cavalry  in  ascertaining,  if  possible,  any  movement 
on  the  part  of  the  enemy  to  flank  our  position ; also  to  communicate 
with  General  Sherman,  who  was  on  the  right  of  our  position.  At  the 
close  of  the  fight  moved  into  Jackson  and  encamped  for  the  night;  dis- 
tance, 10  miles. 

On  the  15th,  marched  back  on  the  Clinton  road,  passed  through  the 
town  of  Clinton,  in  the  direction  of  Bolton  Station,  on  the  Vicksburg 
and  Jackson  Eailroad,  reconnoitering  the  country,  encamping  for  the 
night  on  James’  plantation,  15  miles  from  Jackson. 

On  the  16th,  made  a reconnaissance  3 or  4 miles  to  the  right  of  Bol- 


736 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai*.  XXXVI. 


ton  Station,  visiting  the  plantation  of  Jefferson  Davis,  capturing  his 
overseer,  a lieutenant  of  the  Twentieth  Georgia  Mounted  Eifles  [?],  and  a 
number  of  other  prisoners,  together  with  a number  of  mules  and  negroes 
of  Davis’.  The  negroes  were  turned  over  to  the  pioneer  corps  of  the 
Third  Division,  and  the  mules  into  the  corral  of  the  same  division.  Ee- 
turning,  joined  the  army  during  the  severe  engagement  at  Champion’s 
Hill,  where  my  command  was  used  for  divers  purposes — a part  of  them 
for  orderlies,  some  for  driving  up  stragglers,  and  the  remainder  to  watch 
the  movements  of  the  enemy  on  the  right  of  our  line.  After  the  close 
of  the  engagement,  moved  forward  about  2 miles  and  encamped. 

On  the  17th,  moved  to  Big  Black,  6 miles  distant,  crossing  the  river 
on  the  morning  of  the  18th,  and,  reconnoitering  to  the  right,  came  up 
with  the  column  of  General  Sherman,  moved  on,  and,  after  a march  of 
17  miles,  encamped  before  Vicksburg. 

From  the  17th  up  to  the  23d  my  command  has  been  detailed  for  dif- 
ferent purposes,  such  as  escorting  wagon  trains,  &c. 

On  the  23d  instant,  I was  ordered  to  direct  my  command,  except  those 
already  detailed,  and  13  more,  to  remain  at  headquarters  Seventeenth 
Army  Corps,  to  report  to  Colonel  Johnson  at  Haynes’ Bluff,  where  they 
yet  remain  on  duty. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  S.  FOSTEE, 

Capt.  Fourth  Independent  Compa7iy  Ohio  Cav.^  Gomdg.  Battalion. 

Lieut.  Col.  W.  T.  Claek, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  11. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  Gregg.,  C.  8.  Army,  co^nmanding  Confederate 

forces. 

At  Camp  in  Madison  County,  Miss., 

May  20,  1803. 

Major  : While  in  camp  2 miles  east  of  Jackson,  Miss.,  at  3 a.  m.  on 
the  11th  instant,  I received  a dispatch  from  the  lieutenant-general  com- 
manding, directing  me  to  move  my  brigade  promptly  to  Eaymond,  and 
I was  directed  to  use  Wirt  Adams’  cavalry,  at  Eaymond,  for  advanced 
pickets. 

By  5 o’clock  the  entire  brigade  was  on  the  march,  and  at  4 p.  m.  we 
were  at  camp  near  Eaymond.  Upon  my  arrival  I found  the  people  in 
great  consternation,  being  under  the.  impression  that  the  enemy  were 
advancing  from  Port  Gibson.  I found  none  of  Colonel  Adams’  cavalry 
except  a single  sergeant  and  4 men.  There  was  a small  State  company, 
under  the  command  of  Captain  Hall,  who  were,  as  I was  informed, 
scouting  in  the  direction  of  Port  Gibson.  I immediately  sent  forward 
Sergeant  Miles  and  4 men  to  put  themselves  in  communication  with 
Captain  Hall,  and  bring  me  what  information  of  the  enemy’s  movements 
could  be  obtained.  I also  placed  strong  infantry  pickets  on  the  road 
leading  out  southwardly  and  to  the  west. 

In  the  mean  time  I had  dispatched  Colonel  Adams  to  mov^e  his  com- 
mand to  Eaymond,  unless  otherwise  ordered  by  Lieutenant-General 
Pemberton,  his  command  being  at  Edwards  Depot.  During  the  night 
Captain  [ W.  E.]  Luckett,  with  a squadron  of  50  men,  reported  to  me, 


Chap.  XXXVI.  ] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  RAYMOND,  MISS. 


737 


and  informed  me  that,  having  been  ordered  by  Colonel  Adams  to  picket 
the  road  leading  from  Raymond  to  Port  Gibson  and  commnnicate  with 
me,  he  had  attempted  to  pass  directly  from  Edwards  Depot  to  the  road 
below,  without  passing  through  Raymond,  but  had  met  the  enemy  at 
Dillon’s,  9 miles  distant  from  Raymond,  and,  being  nnable  to  pass,  had 
returned.  Fearing  that  it  might  be  the  purpose  of  the  enemy  to  tra  vel 
some  one  of  the  roads  leading  northeasterly  into  the  road  from  Ray- 
mond to  Jackson,  and  thus  intercept  my  line  of  retreat,  I ordered  Cap- 
tain I W.  S.]  Yerger,  who  had  now  come  up  and  assumed  command  of 
the  squadron,  to  picket  all  these  roads,  and  give  mo  early  inforjuation 
of  the  enemy’s  movements  in  that  direction. 

Early  next  morning  I was  informed  by  couriers  from  Captain  Hall 
that  the  enemy  were  advancing  rapidly  by  the  road  from  Utica.  Owing 
to  the  smallness  of  the  mounted  force  (Captain  Hall  having  but  40 
men,  and  these  mostly  youths  from  the  neighborhood),  I was  unable  to 
ascertain  anything  concerning  the  strength  of  the  enemy.  A dispatch 
from  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  intimated  that  the  purpose  of 
tlie  enemy  was  supposed  to  be  an  advance  upon  Edwards  Depot,  and 
I inferred  from  it  that  it  was  possible  that  the  force  in  front  of  me  was 
a brigade  on  a marauding  excursion.  I was  strengthened  in  this  opin- 
ion by  my  scouts,  who  reported  that  the  force  they  had  seen  was  about 
2,500  or  3,000.  It  was  absolutely  necessary  for  me  to  await  their  com- 
iug,  or  to  fall  back  without  knowing  whether  the  force  of  the  enemy 
was  suiierior  or  inferior  to  my  own. 

The  enemy  moved  up  rapidly,  and  commenced  an  artillery  fire  upon 
my  picket  post  at  10  o’clock. 

In  the  mean  time  I had  moved  the  Seventh  Texas  Regiment  (Colonel 
fH.  B.]  Granbury)  to  support  the  picket  at  the  junction  of  the  Port 
Gibson  and  Utica  roads,  and  had  moved  the  Fiftieth  Tennessee ’Regi- 
ment (Lieutenant-Colonel  [T.  W.]  Beaumont)  out  on  the  Lower  Gallatin 
road,  and  ordered  out  the  Tenth  and  Thirtieth  Tennessee  Regiments, 
consolidated  (Col.  R.  W.  MacGavock),  to  support  it.  I also  ordered  up 
the  Third  Tennessee  Regiment  (Col.  C.  H.  Walker),  a half  mile  out,  and 
])laced  it  in  iiosition  between  the  roads.  A single  held,  dotted  with 
spots  of  timber,  separated  the  Lower  Gallatin  and  Utica  roads,  and  the 
main  force  of  the  enemy  was  on  the  latter  road.  Finding  that  I would 
necessarily  be  driven  into  town  by  his  artillery  unless  I moved  up 
nearer,  and  believing  from  the  evidence  I had  that  his  force  was  a single 
brigade,  I made  my  dispositions  to  capture  it.  I moved  the  Fiftietli, 
Tenth,  aad  Thirtieth  Tennessee  across  a portion  of  the  held  into  the 
timber,  to  fall  upon  the  enemy  in  rear  of  his  battery,  with  instructions 
that  they  were  to  approach  the  enemy  as  near  as  possible  and  wait 
an  attack  by  our  right.  I placed  Captain  [H.  M.]  Bledsoe,  with  his 
three  pieces  of  artillery,  on  the  road  leading  to  Utica  and  Port  Gibson, 
near  their  junction,  directing  him  to  select  the  most  commanding  posi- 
tion. Near  the  artillery  I ])osted  the  First  Tennessee  Battalion.  I 
then  ordered  nj)  the  Third  Tennessee  into  the  open  held  to  the  right  of 
the  Tenth  and  Tldrtieth  Tennessee,  and  the  Seventh  Texas  I moved  by 
the  left  hank  behind  some  timber  to  the  right  of  the  Third  Tennessee. 

1 then  sent  back  an  order  to  the  Forty-first  Tennessee  (Colonel  [R.] 
Far(pdiarson)  to  move  his  regiment  to  the  iiosition  just  before  occupied 
by  the  Third  Tennessee.  1 then  ordered  forward  both  the  Seventli 
Texas  and  Tliird  Tennessee  into  th(‘,  timber  behind  which  the  enemy’s 
battery  was  ])()st(Ml,  tlie  enemy’s  skirmishers  having  already  been  living 
upon  them  from  tliat  wood.  Skirmisln'rs  being  advanced,  they  moved 
forward  in  gallant  style,  and  hardly  lost  a,  man  until  they  entered  the 
47  R R — VOL  XXTV,  PT  I 


738  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [CiiAr.  XXXVI. 

timber.  The  enemy  was  drawn  up  in  two  lines,  but  both  lines  were 
scattered  immediately  and  fell  back  in  a few  minutes,  but  the  enemy 
continued  to  re-enforce  with  fresh  troops.  The  firing  of  musl^etry  was 
raiiid  and  continuous  for  more  than  two  hours,  and  in  that  time  I 
learned  from  Colonel  Beaumont  that  no  attack  was  made  by  the  Fiftieth 
because  of  the  immense  force  which  extended  back  in  the  wood  as  far 
as  he  could  see,  and  because  the  enemy  were  advancing  a large  force 
on  his  left  flank. 

Owing  to  the  failure  of  the  Fiftieth,  Tenth,  and  Thirtieth  Tennessee 
to  attack,  the  enemy  were  enabled  to  place  a force  upon  the  left  flank 
of  the  Third  Tennessee.  I immediately  ordered  up  the  Forty-first  to 
relieve  the  left  of  the  Third  Tennessee.  Colonel  Farquharson  moved 
up  in  good  order  and  took  position  promptly.  By  this  time  the  superior 
force  of  the  enemy  had  driven  back  the  Seventh  Texas  and  Third  Ten- 
nessee, after  great  loss  from  both  these  regiments.  Their  retreat  was 
protected  by  the  Forty-first  Tennessee,  and  the  enemy  having  moved  up 
on  the  left  of  our  line,  and  having  engaged  the  Tenth,  Thirtieth,  and 
Fiftieth  Tennessee,  the  Forty-first  also  acted  as  a support  to  them. 

In  this  part  of  the  engagement  Col.  E.  AV.  MacGavock,  of  the  Tenth 
Tennessee  (commanding  the  consolidated  Tenth  and  Thirtieth),  was 
killed,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  [J.  J.]  Turner,  of  the  Thirtieth,  took 
command. 

Eeceiving  a dispatch  at  this  time  from  Colonel  Adams  stating  that 
the  enemy  had  a large  supporting  force  advancing,  I ordered  all  the 
regiments  to  withdraw,  which  was  effected  in  admirable  order.  Captain 
Bledsoe,  with  his  artillery  (one  of  the  pieces  of  which  burst  during  the 
(engagement),  continued  during  the  whole  day  to  keep  back  the  enemy 
from  advancing  either  through  the  open  field  or  by  the  road,  and  I have 
reason  to  think  did  great  execution  among  his  lines. 

During  the  engagement  I ordered  up  Major  [S.  H.]  Colms  with  Isis 
battalion  (First  Tennessee)  upon  the  right  of  our  line,  to  i)revent  the 
enemy  from  throwing  forward  any  part  of  his  force  between  my  own  and 
the  town,  and  he  here  engaged  the  enemy  also. 

After  the  retrograde  movement  was  commenced.  Colonel  [A.  P.J 
Thompson,  of  the  Third  Kentucky,  with  six  companies  of  mounted 
troops,  reported  to  me,  having  just  arrived  from  Jackson.  I immedi- 
ately placed  this  force  in  position,  together  with  Captain  Bledsoe  and 
Ids  two  remaining  pieces,  and  this  position  they  held  until  the  infantry 
had  moved  some  distance  in  the  direction  of  Jackson,  when  they  with- 
drew by  my  direction. 

I cannot  speak  in  terms  of  commendation  too  high  of  the  coolness 
and  judgment  manifested  by  the  commanders  of  the  different  regiments. 

Col.  E.  W.  MacGavock,  of  the  Tenth  Tennessee  (commanding  Tenth 
and  Thirtieth  Tennessee  consolidated),  was  killed  while  gallantly  urg- 
ing his  command  to  the  conflict.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Beaumont  was 
stricken  on  the  head  by  a rifle-ball,  and  for  a time  disabled  while  in  the 
midst  of  the  action. 

To  all  the  commanding  officers  of  regiments  and  battalions  my  thanks 
are  due  for  the  courage  and  skill  displayed  by  them  in  the  management 
of  their  commands,  and  I cannot  too  much  applaud  the  judgment  and 
coolness  with  which  their  efforts  were  seconded  by  the  other  field  and 
company  officers. 

Tlie  losses  Avill  be  seen  by  reference  to  tlie  reports  liereto  annexed. 
It  will  be  seen  that  they  were  severe,  especially  in  the  Seventli  Texas 
and  Third  Tennessee.  The  aggregate  of  killed  in  the  brigade  was  73  j 
wounded,  229;  missing,  201.  Of  this  number  there  were  killed  in  the 


CUAP.  XXXVL] 


ETOAGEME^^T  AT  RAYMOND,  MlSS. 


739 


Forty-first  Teunessee,  2 ; wounded,  7.  In  the  First  Tennessee  Battal- 
ion, killed,  3 ; wounded,  9.  In  the  Fiftieth  Tennessee,  killed,  4;  wounded, 
8.  In  the  Tenth  and  Thirtieth  Tennessee  (consolidated),  killed,  15; 
wounded,  59.  In  the  Seventh  Texas,  killed,  22;  wounded,  6G.  In  the 
Third  Tennessee,  killed,  27  ; wounded,  90. 

It  will  he  seen  that  the  Third  Tennessee  and  Seventh  Texas  were  in 
the  most  trying  i3art  of  the  engagement.  Prisoners  taken  by  the  enemy 
and  escaped  to  us  report  the  enemy^s  loss  at  150  killed  and  400  wounded. 
I consider  their  statements  reliable. 

Our  aggregate  engaged  was  2,500.  I have  ascertained  that  the  enemy 
had  in  the  field  three  divisions,  but  the  division  commanded  by  Major- 
General  Logan  was  the  one  particularly  engaged. 

My  command  was  encamped  for  the  night,  together  with  1,000  men 
brought  up  by  Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  T.  Walker,  5 miles  from  the  battle-field. 

Very  resiiectfully, 

JOHN  GREGG, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding  Brigade. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


ADDENDA. 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Confederate  forces  at  Raymond,  Miss.,  May  12,  1863. 


[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.] 


Commaud. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured  or 
missing. 

Aggregate. 

1 

Officers  killed. 

Of&cers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

3d  Tennessee 

2 

25 

5 

85 

70 

187 

Captain  [R.  T.]  Cooper  and  Lieu- 

tenant fW.  W.]  Rutledge. 

lOtli  Tennessee 

1 

7 

6 

31 

1 

6 

52 

Colonel  MacGavock  and  Lieut 

John  Ames  mortally  wounded. 

30tli  Tennessee  

7 

28 

1 

30 

♦1st  Tennessee  

1 

1 

7 

14 

23 

Capt.  Abner  S.  Boone. 

50tb  Tennessee 

4 

7 

5 

16 

Ist  Tennessee  Battal- 

3 

1 

8 

30 

42 

/ 

ion. 

7th  Texas 

1 

21 

8 

65 

3 

60 

158 

Capt.  W.  H.  Smith.  Lieut.  J.  C. 

Kidd,  J.  W.  Taylor,  and  A.  H. 

White  mortally' wounded. 

Total 

5 

68 

20 

-231 

4 

186 

5U 

No.  12. 

Report  of  Col.  C.  H.  Walher.,  Third  Tennessee  Infantry. 

Camp  near  Calhoun  Station,  Miss.,  May  IG,  18G3. 

I submit  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken  by  the  Third  Tennes- 
see Regiment  in  the  battle  near  Raymond,  Miss.,  May  12 : 

I was  posted  near  the  graveyard,  and  ordered  to  hold  myself  in  l ead- 
iness  to  move  in  any  direction  that  necessity  might  require.  At  about 
12  o’clock  I was  ordered  to  move  on  the  Lower  Gallatin  road  to  a field, 
where  I formed  a line  of  battle  in  a ravine  to  the  right  of  a scojie  of 
woods,  and  about  200  yards  in  front  of  another  body  of  timber  occupied 
by  the  enemy,  the  Seventh  Texas  being  on  my  right.  I was  ordered  by 
General  [John]  Gregg  to  advance  to  the  woods  in  line  of  battle,  with  skir- 


740 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


mishers  in  front,  ami  on  reacliing  the  woods  to  move  the  regiment  by  the 
right  of  companies  through  it  to  the  open  field  beyond,  where  the  enemy 
were  supposed  to  be  in  line.  I advanced  as  ordered  until  my  skirmish- 
ers reached  the  woods,  when  I discovered  that  the  enemy  were  in  strong 
force  near  its  edge.  I then  ordered  a charge,  which  was  made  in  the 
most  gallant  manner  under  a galling  fire,  driving  the  enemy  before  us. 
They  attempted  to  rally  behind  a deep  ravine,  with  almost  perpendicu- 
lar banks,  but  our  advance  was  so  rapid  (the  men  jumping  into  the  ravine 
and  climbing  up  the  opposite  side)  that  the  enemy  again  gave  way  and 
fied  out  of  the  woods  into  the  open  field.  There  they  planted  their 
colors  in  the  ground,  and  made  another  effort  to  rally  around  them,  but 
a sharp  volley  from  our  side  speedily  dispersed  them.  Upon  reaching 
the  edge  of  the  woods,  I received  a heavy  volley  into  the  rear  of  my 
left  flank.  Not  being  able  to  see,  on  account  of  the  thick  brush,  and 
supposing  that  the  Tenth  and  Thirtieth  Tennessee  were  there  for  my 
support,  as  General  Gregg  had  assured  me  would  be  the  case,  I did  not 
order  a change  of  position,  but  directed  the  whole  line  to  be  held  firm, 
until  I went  to  the  left  and  became  satisfied  that  the  enemy  was  in  the 
rear,  and  at  the  same  time  a new  column  made  its  appearance  in  front. 
On  discovering  these  positions  of  the  enemy,  I withdrew  the  regiment 
in  as  good  order  as  the  nature  of  the  ground  and  thick  undergrowth 
would  admit,  but  not  soon  enough  to  prevent  the  capture  of  many  of 
the  men,  who  were  in  the  most  advanced  positions.  I reformed  the  regi- 
ment to  the  rear  and  right  of  the  point  from  which  we  had  advanced 
into  the  woods,  and  again  formed  a line  on  the  same  ground  formerly 
occupied.  Here,  learning  that  the  enemy  were  still  flanking  my  left, 
r moved  by  the  left  flank  to  the  rear  of  the  scope  of  woods,  and  again 
formed  the  regiment  on  the  Lower  Gallatin  road.  While  at  this  point. 
Lieutenant  Gardin  reported  a probable  approach  of  a cavalry  force  on 
my  rear.  Not  knowing  the  position  of  any  other  of  our  regiments  ex- 
cept the  Seventh  Texas,  I moved  to  the  left  and  rear,  intending  to  join 
it,  when  I met  Captain  [T.  W.]  Hall,  assistant  adjutant-general,  who 
ordered  me  to  retire  slowly  toward  town,  concealing  my  movements  as 
much  as  possible. 

I cannot  speak  in  too  high  terms  of  the  conduct  of  the  officers  and  men 
of  my  command  during  the  action.  Every  one  did  his  duty.  J re- 
])roached  many  men  for  not  halting  and  firing  as  they  retired,  but 
learned  afterward  that  they  had  no  cartridges,  having  fired  the  last  one 
in  their  boxes  before  they  were  ordered  from  the  front.  I herewith 
append  a list*  of  casualties. 

0.  H.  AVALKEII, 

Colonel^  Commandmg  Third  Tcoine.ssee. 


No.  13. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  James  «/.  Turner.,  Thirtieth  Tennessee  Infantry., 
eommanding  Tenth  and.  Thirtieth  Tennessee. 

May  is,  1803. 

Captain  : I beg  leave  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken 
by  the  Tenth  and  Thirtieth  Tennessee  Ivegiments  in  the  fight  near  Ray- 
mond, Miss.,  on  Afay  12  : 

AVe  moved  out  on  the  Gallatin  road  about  0 a.  in.,  and  were  posted 

* See  p,  730. 


741 


Chai*.  XXXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  RAYMOND,  MISS. 

first  across  the  road,  about  1 uiile  from  town,  during  the  first  artillery 
. light.  While  thus  posted  we  were  ordered  to  move  forward  between 
the  Gallatin  aud  Utica  roads,  through  the  woods,  for  about  half  a mile, 
and  were  then  formed  in  line  of  battle  in  the  woods  in  frout  of  an  open 
field,  with  instructions  to  attack  the  enemy  when  the  Fiftieth  Tennes- 
see became  engaged,  but  as  they  made  no  attack  we  waited  for  further 
orders.  While  thus  posted,  the  artillery  was  still  eugaged,  aud  I could 
distinctly  hear  the  commands  of  the  Federal  officers,  some  400  yards  in 
o[ir  front,  forming  in  line  of  battle  and  also  moving  to  our  left  in  the 
direction  of  the  Gallatin  road.  After  remaining  there  for  some  fifteen 
minutes,  we  were  ordered  to  move  to  the  left  about  000  yards,  Avhich  we 
did  at  a double-quick,  and  we  then  formed  in  liue  iu  the  edge  of  a dense 
woods,  a large  field  being  in  our  rear.  I ordered  forward  a company  of 
skirmishers  in  our  front,  and  immediately  I heard  the  engagement  open 
between  the  enemy  and  the  Third  Tennessee  and  Seventh  Texas.  At 
this  Juncture  we  received  an  order  leaving  it  discretionary  whether  to 
attack  the  enemy  or  not.  After  waiting  a few  minutes  the  skirmishers 
were  Avithdrawn,  and  Ave  moved  rapidly  by  the  right  flaidc  for  about  500 
yards,  and  reached  a position  near  that  of  the  Third  Tennessee,  and 
after  seven  of  the  consolidated  companies  had  filed  into  the  field,  the 
Avhole  command  changed  direction  by  the  left  flank  and  moA^ed  forward 
ra])idly  in  line.  As  soon  as  those  in  the  field  reached  the  crest  of  the 
hill,  the  enemy  opened  upon  us  from  the  front  and  right,  and  Colonel 
MacGavock  ordered  a charge,  Avhicli  Avas  responded  to  Avith  alacrity  by 
all  the  command.  The  command  charged  foiAvard  gallantly,  cheering 
and  firing  as  they  AA^ent.  The  enemy,  being  on  our  right  flank  ami 
strongly  iiosted  in  the  woods  in  our  front,  iioured  into  our  ranks  a most 
destructive  fire.  We,  howeA^er,  drove  them  from  the  field  on  our  right 
Hank  aud  reached  the  Avoods,  but  were  forced  to  fall  back  to  the  top  of 
the  hill,  aud  I formed  them  immediately  in  rear  of  the  crest  of  the  hill, 
aud  ordered  them  to  lie  down  and  load  and  fire,  so  as  to  be  protcctecl 
from  the  euemy^s  fire,  which  continued  Awy  heavy.  The  three  consoli- 
dated companies  on  the  left  Aving  being  in  a dense  pine  Avoods,  could  not 
moA^e  as  fast  as  the  balance  of  the  command,  and,  seeing  the  right  fall 
back,  I ordered  the  left  to  halt  on  the  crest  of  the  hill,  anti  lie  doAvn  under 
coA^er  and  load  and  fire  to  the  right  and  front.  Colonel  MacGavock, 
in  a fcAV  seconds  after  ordering  the  charge,  Avhile  gallantly  leading  his 
men,  fell,  mortally  wounded,  aud  some  5 commissioned  officers  of'  the 
Tenth  Tennessee  AA^ere  Avounded  about  the  same  time.  The  firing  thus 
continued  for  about  half  an  hour  without  intermission  on  either  side. 

We  had  left  the  Fiftieth  Tennessee  on  our  left,  and  I understood  that 
they  were  to  remain  there  to  protect  that  flank,  but,  hearing  nothing 
from  them,  I became  ai)prehensive,  and  sent  out  Caiitain  [C.  S.]  Doug- 
lass Avith  a company  of  skirmishers  to  our  left,  who  came  back  in  a fcAv 
minutes  and  reported  that  the  enemy  had  advanced  a heaA^y  force  iii 
the  open  field  on  our  left  for  some  250  yards  in  rear  of  my  left  flaidv,  but 
separated  from  it  by  a dense  pine  undergrowth,  some  200  yards  Avide, 
Avhich  had  concealed  their  movement  from  my  vieAv.  The  enemy  being 
*in  full  force  in  my  frout,  and  SAveeping  around  on  my  left  Avith  superior 
numbers,  AAdth  the  evident  intention  of  gaining  the  Gallatin  road  and 
attacking  us  in  the  rear,  so  as  to  cut  off  our  retreat,  I at  once  saAv  that 
the  only  alternatiA^e  Avas  to  quietly  Avithdraw  from  the  front  and  attack 
those  on  our  left.  I about-faced  the  command,  and  moved  it  back  to 
the  holloAv  some  100  yards,  and  then  moA^ed  them  by  the. right  flank 
into  the  woods  near  the  field  Avhere  the  enemy  were,  and  ordered  the 
AAdiole  command  to  clieer  and  halloo  and  charge  the  enemy  at  a double- 


742 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


quick,  being  forced  to  do  so.  Faced  by  the  rear  rank,  the  order  was 
enthusiastically  responded  to  by  officers  and  men,  and  at  them  they 
went,  yelling  like  savages.  The  enemy  stood  till  we  came  near  the 
field,  and  delivered  one  volley  at  us,  and  then  broke  in  utter  confusion, 
and  attempted  but  once  to  rally  on  their  colors,  but  we  came  up  within 
30  steps  of  them  and  killed  their  color-bearer,  and  the  rout  was  com- 
plete. We  drove  them  in  all  some  600  yards  and  until  they  reached 
the  thick  woods,  and  where  they  had  a regiment  drawn  up  iii  reserve, 
and  fearing  to  advance  longer,  I ordered  back  the  command  to  the  crest 
of  the  hill,  and  formed  them  and  ordered  them  to  lie  flat  down.  I then 
posted  Captain  [John]  O’^eilPs  company  on  the  highest  point  of  the 
hill,  behind  some  houses  and  trees,  to  watch  the  enemy,  and  to  fire  on 
any  of  his  advance  or  skirmishers  that  came  in  range,  the  fire  being  kept 
up  all  the  time  by  the  sharpshooters  on  each  side.  In  about  twenty 
minutes  the  enemy  formed  in  line  in  the  edge  of  the  woods  about  250 
yards  in  our  front,  and  threw  forward  their  skirmishers  at  a run  to  a 
ravine  about  50  yards  from  us,  but  Captain  O’Neill’s  company,  and 
some  others  below  in  some  stables,  poured  into  them  a heavy  fire,  and 
they  were  forced  to  lie  flat  down  in  the  ravine  and  conceal  themselves, 
never  again  annoying  us.  While  posted  at.  this  position  I had  from 
the  cover  of  the  hill  a fine  view  in  front  and  on  either  flank,  and  I saw 
two  regiments  of  the  enemy  in  our  front  and  two  on  our  left,  moving 
in  the  direction  of  the  Gallatin  road,  and  who  were  fired  into  by  the 
skirmishers  of  the  Forty-first  Tennessee,  besides  some  cavalry  moving 
in  the  same  direction;  their  number,  however,  I could  not  estimate. 

We  fought  in  the  different  engagements  four  regiments  of  the  enemy 
without  any  assistance  from  artillery,  and  at  the  time  we  were  ordered 
to  retire  a large  number  were  without  ammunition,  and  had  we  remained 
much  longer  we  must  have  been  captured.  We  secured  and  sent  to  the 
rear  some  15  or  20  prisoners  in  the  last  engagement.  In  the  first  en- 
gagement I hav^e  no  accurate  means  of  knowing  the  loss  of  the  enemy, 
but  it  was  fully  equal  to  our  own,  however;  in  the  second  fight,  as  we 
passed  over  and  occupied  the  ground  fought  on,  I can  judge  of  their 
loss  with  considerable  accuracy,  and  I estimate  their  killed  and  wounded 
there  at  150;  20  were  counted  near  one  stable.  When  we  fell  back  to 
town  we  lost  3 wounded. 

The  men  and  line  officers  of  both  regiments,  with  but  few  exce[)tions, 
did  their  whole  duty,  and  it  would  be  invidious  to  mention  the  names 
of  any  without  giving  all. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  [William]  Grace  and  Major  [B.  G.]  Bid  well  were 
l)resent  all  the  time,  and  did  their  whole  duty  as  brave  and  gallant 
officers. 

Adjutants  [T.  E.]  Kelsey  and  [E.  T.]  Bush  were  prompt  in  carrying 
all  orders,  and  contributed  much  to  our  success  bj^  their  bravery  and 
gallantry. 

In  the  fall  of  Colonel  MacGavock  the  service  has  lost  a brave  and 
meritorious  officer,  and  society  an  educated  and  talented  gentleman. 

The  following  is  a list*  of  the  casualties  of  the  Tenth  and  Thirtieth, 
so  far  as  I can  learn  them. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

JAMES  J.  TUENEE, 

Lieut.  Col.  Thirtieth  Tenn.^  Comdg.  Tenth  and  Thirtieth  Tenn. 

[Captain]  Thomas  W.  Hall, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


^ See  p.  730, 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  RAYMOND,  MISS. 
No.  14. 


743 


Report  of  Col.  R.  Farqiiharson^  Forty-first  Tennessee  Infantry. 

^ Headquarters  Gregg^s  Brigade, 

Near  Mississippi  Springs^  May  13,  1863. 

In  the  engagement  yesterday  near  Eaymond,  my  regiment  (Forty-first 
Tennessee)  being  held  in  reserve,  all  the  companies  were  not  actively 
engaged  until  near  its  close;  but  in  changing  positions  the  regiment 
was  several  times  under  heavy  fire.  When  moving  from  near  the  center 
of  our  line  of  battle  to  the  extreme  left,  which,  judging  from  the  firing 
in  that  direction,  I apprehended  was  seriously  menaced,  I found  the 
enemy^s  skirmishers  or  sharpshooters  advancing  into  a skirt  of  timber 
which  partially  enveloped  our  extreme  left.  I immediately  threw  out 
Captain  [A.  S.]  Boone’s  company  as  skirmishers,  with  orders  to  clear 
the  woods  in  front,  and  then  moved  the  regiment  farther  to  the  left  to  a 

strong  position  on  the road,  thus  forming  as  well  as  covering  the 

extreme  left  of  our  line.  Our  skirmishers,  under  the  gallant  Captain 
Boone,  advanced  into  the  woods,  driving  the  enemy,  and  did  not  fall 
back  immediately,  although  met  by  a heavy  force  of  the  enemy,  but 
continued  to  advance  until  fired  upon  by  the  enemy’s  line.  Captain 
Boone  was  killed  at  this  discharge,  and  the  enemy  advancing  immedi- 
ately, occupying  the  ground,  I am  sorry  to  say  that  the  body  of  this 
gallant  officer  had  to  be  left  on  the  field.  The  enemy  made  no  farther 
advance  in  that  direction,  however,  and  we  continued  to  hold  our  posi- 
tion for  more  than  half  an  hour,  and  until  we  were  ordered  by  General 
Gregg  to  retire  slowly  from  the  field  in  rear  of  the  brigade,  which  we 
did  very  slowly  and  in  excellent  order. 

The  following  is  a list  of  casualties.* 

Eespeetfully  submitted. 

E.  FAEQUHAESON, 

Colonel  Forty  first  Tennessee. 

Capt.  Thomas  W.  Hall, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  15. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  T.  W.  Beaumont^  Fiftieth  Tennessee  Bifantry. 

May  16,  1863. 

Captain  : In  obedience  to  an  order  directing  me  to  forward  a report 
of  tlie  part  my  regiment  sustained  in  the  engagement  near  Eaymond 
on  Tuesday  last,  &c.,  I have  to  state  that  in  the  forenoon  of  Tuesday  I 
was  ordered  to  take  position  with  my  regiment  on  the  Lower  Gallatin 
road,  about  IJ  miles  from  Eaymond,  with  instructions  to  extend  my  line 
toward  the  left,  if  the  enemy  continued  to  move  in  that  direction.  Be- 
fore reaching  the  position,  the  battle  was  opened  by  the  artilleiy,  witli 
occasional  musketry.  It  was  not  long  before  General  [John]  Gregg  rode 
up  and  ordered  me  to  move  through  an  old  field  into  a woods  in  rear  of 
the  enemy’s  battery,  and  attack  the  battery  in  rear  unless  I should  find 
it  too  strongly  protected  by  infantry,  and,  in  the  latter  event,  to  fall 
back,  maintaining  as  good  order  as  possible.  The  Tenth  and  Thirtieth 

See  p.  739. 


744 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CuAr.  XXXVI. 


Tennessee  Eegiments,  under  Colonel  [R.  AV.]  MaeGavock,  were  ordered 
to  support  me  in  the  attack.  On  passing  the  picket  station  in  the  field, 
I was  informed  by  one  of  the  sentinels  that  the  enemy  had  possession  of 
the  woods,  and  that  the  commands  of  their  ofiicers  could  be  distinctly 
heard.  I deployed  skirmishers  in  advance  of  the  regiment  and  moved 
cautiously  into  the  woods.  Tlie  skirmishers  had  to  pass  over  a running 
stream  of  water,  with  steep,  abrupt  banks,  u})  which  they  pulled  them- 
selves by  the  roots  of  trees  and  bushes,  preserving  their  line  and  march- 
ing all  the  Avhile  in  admirable  order.  The  regiment  followed  at  proper 
distance,  observing  the  general’s  precaution  to  maintain  perfect  silence. 
Tliey  liad  just  crossed  the  creek  when  a rapid  firing  of  the  skirmishers 
indicated  the  presence  of  the  enemy.  I proceeded  at  once  to  the  front, 
and  found  that  the  fire  had  been  directed  on  a body  of  the  enemy’s  cav- 
alry. The  efiectof  the  fire  was  highly  satisfactory.  The  enemy  fled  in 
every  direction,  many  of  the  horses  without  riders,  and  many  of  the 
riders  without  horses,  while  a considerable  number  w^ere  left  dead  on 
the  field.  We  continued  to  fire  on  them  as  long  as  they  were  in  sight. 

On  recounoitering  the  position,  I found  that  the  battery  was  supported 
by  a line  of  infantry,  which  extended  as  far  as  I could  see  towuird  our 
right,  their  right  resting  in  the  wmods  in  which  we  were  standing.  On 
our  left  another  body  of  troops  w\as  seen,  but  their  strength  could  not 
be  estimated,  as  they  were  hidden  from  view,  with  the  exception  of  one 
regiment,  by  the  timber.  The  space  open  to  view  on  the  right  was  sufii- 
cient  to  contain  twm  full  regiments.  I was  satisfied  that  an  attack  would 
be  uninviting.  I therefore  ordered  the  regiment  to  withdraw  from  the 
woods,  and,  in  accordance  with  instructions  received  in  the  forenoon  from 
General  Gregg,  proceeded  toward  the  left,  to  prevent  the  force  which  I 
had  seen  in  that  direction  from  outflanking  us.  I sent  Major  [0.  W.| 
Robertson  to  inform  the  general  of  the  state  of  affairs  and  of  my  move- 
ments. lie  soon  rejoined  us,  stating  that  he  could  not  learn  wliere  the 
general  was  at  that  time.  I learned  from  him  that  Colonel  MacGavock 
was  in  the  same  part  of  the  field  with  myself.  I had  supposed  until 
then  that  he  was  farther  toward  the  right. 

The  enemy  continued  to  extend  their  line  toward  the  left,  and  in  en- 
deavoring to  keep  even  pace  with  them,  I passed  Colonel  MacGavock’s 
command.  From  him  I ascertained  that  it  was  the  general’s  intention 
to  attack  the  enemy’s  lines,  and  that  he  would  expect  us  to  advance  at 
once.  As  there  was  a wide  interval  between  the  Tenth  and  Thirtieth 
(now  again  on  our  right)  and  the  center  regiments,  I placed  myself 
under  Colonel  MacGavock’s  orders  to  insure  concert  of  action,  which  I 
considered  of  the  greatest  importance  to  the  success  of  the  attack.  He 
indicated  the  position  he  wished  me  to  occupy,  to  which  I proceeded, 
formed  line  of  battle,  and  sent  to  let  him  know  that  I was  ready  to  ad- 
vance as  soon  as  he  gave  the  word.  In  answer  to  my  message,  he  sent 
word  that  he  would  await  orders.  A short  time  afterward  he  moved 
his  regiment  toward  the  right  and  I lost  sight  of  him. 

Our  regiment  was  thus  left  entirely  alone.  I sent  scouts  and  skir- 
mishers to  the  front  and  to  both  flanks.  In  a few  moments  afterward 
I lieard  rapid  and  continuous  firing,  indicating  a hot  engagement  be- 
tween the  Tenth  and  Thirtieth  and  the  enemy,  and  my  scouts  returned 
with  information  that  Colonel  MacGavock  was  driven  from  his  position 
and  was  falling  back;  that  the  wmods  which  we  occupied  w^ere  full  of 
Yankees,  and  that  they  w^ere  advancing  in  large  force  in  front  of  us.  I 
had  scarcely  received  their  re])orts  before  a heavy  fire  was  poured  into 
my  right  flank,  and  the  skirmishers  of  the  enemy  w^re  advancing  rapidly 
in  my  front.  I withdrew  the  regiment  in  tolerable  order  and  proceeded 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  RAYMOND,  MISS. 


745 


to  the  road.  Here  we  received  another  tire  from  the  enemy,  who  oc- 
cni)ied  the  position  i)revionsly  vacated  by  Colonel  MacGavock.  We 
formed  line  of  battle  promptly,  and  returned  their  fire  with  the  effect  of 
driving  them  back,  and  without  further  annoyance  we  reached  the  posi- 
tion originally  held  by  ns  in  the  morning.  I learned  here  that  Colonel 
IMacGavock  had  not  tallen  back,*  my  scout,  having  no  knowledge  of  his 
change  of  position  as  above  stated,  sup])osed  when  he  found  he  was 
gone  that  he  had  abandoned  the  field.  The  engagement  between  his 
command  and  the  enemy  was  renewed,  and,  guided  by  the  sound  of  the 
guns,  we  advanced  to  his  support.  The  firing,  however,  ceased  before 
we  definitely  ascertained  where  tlie  battle  was  going  on,  but  we  con- 
tinued our  advance  in  the  same  direction.  In  crossing  the  field  inter- 
vening between  us  and  the  point  we  were  aiming  at,  we  met  the  Forty- 
first  Tennessee  Kegiment  on  their  way  to  the  extreme  left.  When  we 
reached  the  woods,  we  found  ourselves  on  tiie  right  of  the  Tenth  and 
Thirtieth.  The  firing,  Avith  the  exception  of  a little  sharpshooting,  Imd 
ceased. 

The  enemy  on  our  right  were  preparing  to  advance  to  the  road 
through  the  old  field  into  our  rear,  thus  cutting  off’  communication  with 
the  town  and  endangering  the  safety  of  the  Tenth  and  Thirtieth  and 
Forty-first  Eegiments.  We  marched  quickly  by  the  right  Hank  into  the 
field,  under  cover  of  a ravine  Avith  rather  steep  hills  on  each  side.  The 
enemy^s  skirmishers  were  deployed  in  our  front,  a little  to  the  right.  I 
])osted  my  line  of  skirmishers  behind  the  crest  of  the  hill  and  ordered 
them  to  fire.  The  fire  Avas  effectiA^e,  and  drove  them  back  in  considerable 
confusion  into  their  coA^er  in  the  Avoods.  When  they  reached  the  aa  oods 
Avhere  their  main  body  was  concealed,  they  opened  a feeble  fire  iqion 
us,  but  a single  volley  from  our  regiment  silenced  them  completely,  and 
as  long  as  Ave  remained  on  the  field  they  made  no  further  eff’ort  to  get 
into  our  rear  in  that  direction. 

After  this  we  were  requested  by  the  officer  commanding  the  Tenth 
and  Thirtieth  to  dispose  our  regiment  so  as  to  meet  a body  of  the  enemy 
then  advancing  as  if  to  attack  them  in  flank.  To  meet  this  movement 
it  was  necessary  to  march  by  the  left  flank  into  the  woods  again.  After 
posting  skirmishers  to  watch  the  movements  of  that  body  of  the  enemy 
Ave  had  just  engaged,  we  re-entered  the  woods,  and  disposed  the  regi- 
ment in  a way  to  meet  the  movement  of  the  enemy  in  either  direction 
on  the  right  or  left.  While  in  this  iiosition,  awaiting  developments 
and  resting  the  men,  I was  informed  that  the  Tenth  and  Thirtieth  and 
Forty-first  Eegiments  had  been  ordered  to  fall  back.  Having  ascer- 
tained that  this  information  was  correct,  and  having  no  orders  to  the 
contrary,  I also  Avithdrew  my  regiment,  as  their  falling  back  left  me  too 
much  exposed.  We  reached  the  road  in  time  to  take  i^osition  betAveen 
the  Tenth  and  Thirtieth  and  Forty-first,  and  in  this  order  marched  back 
to  town.  While  in  the  road,  the  enemy’s  artillery  kept  up  a vigorous 
shelling,  but  this  did  not  prevent  us  from  securing  our  knapsacks  and 
liaA^ersacks,  Avhich  had  been  left  on  the  roadside  as  Ave  AA^ent  out  to  tlie 
field. 

The  officers  and  men  of  the  regiment  behaved  exceedingly  Av^ell.  Some 
of  the  new  recruits  became  confused  in  some  of  the  maneuvers,  and  a 
feAv  of  them  fired  badly,  but  most  of  tliem,  eA^en  some  who  haA^e  since 
deserted,  fought  bravely. 

I am  indebted  to  the  officers  and  men  of  Companies  A and  E for  the 
manner  in  which  they  performed  their  duties  as  skirmishers.  Also  to 
Lieutenant  [E.  T.  | HeA\  ell.  Company  F,  employed  as  a scout,  for  prompt 
information  of  the  enemy’s  movements. 


74G 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


Major  Kobertson  was  consulted  in  almost  all  the  important  movements, 
;iih1  is  entitled  to  a full  share  of  whatever  credit  is  due  the  regiment. 

I must  be  permitted  also  to  express  my  acknowledgment  of  the  serv- 
ices of  Captain  Porter,  of  General  Johnston’s  staff,  who  volunteered 
in  my  regiment,  and  commanded  a company  during  the  engagement. 

Two  of  my  largest  companies  (D  and  G)  were  on  picket  duty  during 
the  engagement,  and  another  (Company  E)  was  escorting  a foraging 
train,  and  did  not  reach  the  field  until  the  battle  had  been  going  on 
several  hours.  I felt  their  absence  very  keenly. 

In  the  attack  on  the  enemy  in  the  old  field,  the  last  attack  we  made, 
I received  a slight  wound  in  the  head,  which  bled  profusely,  but  did  not 
disable  me. 

The  following  is  a list  of  casualties.* 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted  as  my  official  report  of  the 
part  sustained  by  the  Fiftieth  Tennessee  Eegiment  in  the  battle  of  Eay- 
mond. 

T.  W.  BEAUMONT, 
Lieutenant- Colonel^  Commanding  Regiment, 

Capt.  Thomas  W.  Hall, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


No.  16. 

Report  of  Maj.  S.  H.  Cohns,  First  Tennessee  Battalion. 

May  16,  1863. 

Sir  : On  Tuesday  last,  at  Eaymond,  I was  ordered  to  move  my  com- 
mand out  on  the  Port  Gibson  road,  which  was  done.  After  we  took  our 
position,  I was  ordered  to  support  Bledsoe’s  battery.  About  2 p.  m.  I 
was  ordered  to  occupy  a position  in  a skirt  of  woods  immediately  in 
front  of  the  enemy  and  on  the  north  side  of  the  Port  Gibson  road.  This 
position  was  scarcely  taken  until  I was  ordered  to  double-quick  and  take 
position  in  the  rear  of  Bledsoe’s  battery.  The  movement  was  nearly 
completed  when  I was  ordered  to  check  a flank  movement  of  the  enemy 
on  their  extreme  left.  I immediately  moved  my  command  forward,  and 
took  position  in  the  field  on  the  south  side  of  the  Port  Gibson  road,  under 
the  fire  of  the  enemy’s  batteries,  and  on  his  extreme  left,  Where  I found 
[formed]  my  line  of  battle  as  last  designated.  The  enemy  had  drawn  up 
in  line  two  regiments,  and  was  in  the  act  of  making  a flank  movement. 
As  soon  as  they  saw  us  in  line  on  their  left  flank,  they  fled  behind  a 
skirt  of  woods  on  the  south  side  of  the  field  and  disappeared.  During 
this  time  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters  and  their  batteries  were  keeping  up 
a most  terrific  fire  upon  us.  When  the  enemy  disappeared  from  our 
front,  I changed  my  position  to  the  road  on  the  left  of  Bledsoe’s  battery, 
and  then  again  by  order  still  farther  to  the  left,  under  the  brow  of  a hill 
in  the  field  to  the  left  of  the  road. 

In  this  action  we  suffered  severely  in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing,  a 
list  of  which  is  as  follows  : * 

S.  H.  COLMS, 

Major  First  Tennessee  Battalion. 

Capt.  Thomas  W.  Hall, 

Assistant  Adjutant  General. 


Seo  p.  739, 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  EAYMOND,  MISS.  747 

No.  17. 

Report  of  Col.  H.  B.  Granbiiry,  Seventh  Texas  Infantry. 

In  Camp  near  Calhoun  Station,  Miss., 

May  15,  1863. 

Captain:  On  Tuesday,  the  12th  instant,  about  9 a.  m.,  I received 
orders  from  Brigadier-General  [John]  Gregg  to  move  my  regiment  from 
its  position  in  camp  near  Eaymond,  Miss.,  to  a point  about  1 mile  south 
of  the  town,  near  the  fork  of  the  Port  Gibson  and  Utica  roads.  In  half 
an  hour  I was  in  position  in  a small  wood  on  the  left  of  the  road,  and 
about  100  paces  from  the  fork,  the  enemy’s  cavalry  being  then  in  view 
in  the  field  southward.  I sent  Captain  [T.  B.]  Camp,  of  Company  B, 
with  a small  detachment  of  iiicked  men  from  his  company,  and  Company 
A (armed  with  Enfield  rifles),  to  a bridge  on  the  Utica  road,  some  300  or 
400  paces  in  advance  of  the  position  then  occupied  by  the  regiment.  In 
a few  moments  he  w^as  engaged  with  the  enein j’s  cavalry,  and  he  reports 
3 unhorsed. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  enemy  had  a battery  in  position  about  600  yards 
in  advance  of  our  position,  and  opened  fire  on  Captain  [H.  M.]  Bledsoe’s 
battery,  then  being  planted  in  the  field,  on  the  right  of  the  road  and  a 
little  to  the  rear  of  my  position.  Private  [D.]  Kennedy,  of  Company  H, 
was  wounded  in  the  leg  by  a shrapnel  from  the  enemy’s  battery.  In 
the  course  of  three-quarters  of  an  hour  I moved  my  regiment,  by  the  gen- 
eral’s order,  diagonally  through  the  wood  to  an  open  field  to  the  left, 
forming  for  attack  at  a position  opposite  the  bridge,  at  which  Captain 
Camp’s  skirmishers  were  engaged.  The  Third  Tennessee  were  already 
in  line  of  battle  on  my  left.  I advanced  skirmishers  (leaving  Captain 
Camp’s  detachment  to  protect  my  right  flank),  under  Captains  [W.  H.j 
Smith  and  [J.  H.J  Collett,  the  line  following  at  a distance  of  100  paces. 
The  ground  was  open  to  the  top  of  the  hill  in  front,  and  from  there 
across  a creek  bottom  to  the  enemy’s  second  line  on  the  next  hill  was 
wooded. 

I should  have  remarked  that,  before  advancing.  Private  J.  L.  Gallo- 
way, of  Company  A,  was  severely  wounded  in  the  shoulder  by  a grape 
or  canister  shot,  the  enemy’s  battery  having  discovered  and  opened  fire 
on  us  while  forming. 

As  my  skirmishers  neared  the  wood  on  the  brow  of  the  hill,  the  enemy 
commenced  firing  from  their  first  line  of  infantry,  posted  near  the  base 
of  the  hill.  I ordered  my  regiment  to  advance  in  double-quick  time. 
The  men  obeyed  with  alacrity,  and,  when  in  view  of  the  enemy,  rushed 
forward  with  a shout.  So  near  were  the  enemy  and  so  impetuous  the 
charge,  that  my  regiment  could  have  blooded  a hundred  bayonets  had 
the  men  been  supplied  with  that  weapon.  As  it  was,  the  enemy  fled 
after  firing  one  volley,  leaving  a number  of  prisoners,  among  them 
Captain  Tubbs,  Twenty-third  Indiana  Infantry,  who  struck  at  Major 
[K.  M.]  Vanzandt  with  his  sword,  and  was  disarmed  by  Sergeant  [J.  M. 
C.J  Duncan,  of  Company  K. 

The  enemy  made  a stand  of  some  ten  minutes  at  the  creek,  when  we 
took  position  just  beyond  the  run  of  the  creek,  using  the  blulf  as  a 
breastwork.  After  holding  this  position  an  hour  and  a half  (during 
which  time  the  firing  was  uninterrupted  and  terrific),  I received  word 
from  Lieutenant-Colonel  [C.  J.]  Clack,  Third  Tennessee,  that  the  enemy 
were  outflanking  his  regiment  on  the  left.  I ordered  Lieutenant-Colo- 
nel [W.  L.j  Moody  to  withdraw  the  right  of  the  regiment,  and  I went 


748 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAr.  XXX VI. 


to  see  Major  Vanzamlt,  to  attend  to  the  left  and  center.  Keacliin^  the 
left,  I thought  we  could  still  hold  the  position,  and  reflecting  that  Gen- 
eral Gregg  had  told  me  that  the  Tenth,  Thirtieth,  and  Fiftieth  Ten- 
nessee Eegiments  were  to  attack  the  eneiny^s  right,  I dispatched  a run- 
ner to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Moody,  with  an  order  to  hold  his  position. 
The  messenger  was  killed  before  reaching  Colonel  Moody,  and  he,  fol- 
lowing the  original  order,  withdrew  about  three  companies  from  the 
right.  Upon  reaching  the  open  field  to  the  rear,  he  rallied  these,  witli 
some  stragglers  from  other  regiments,  and  seeing  the  Tenth  Tennessee 
going  into  action  on  the  left,  joined  them  Avith  the  remainder  of  the 
regiment.  I held  the  position  on  the  bluff  of  the  creek  until  the  men  had 
exhausted  their  own  ammunition  and  emptied  the  cartridge-boxes  of 
the  dead  of  the  enemy  and  of  our  own  killed  and  Avounded  ; besides,  the 
Third  Tennessee  huAung  previously  withdrawn,  the  enemy  had  doubled 
round  my  left  Hank,  and  Avere  pouring  a murderous  enfilading  fire  along 
my  already  shattered  ranks.  I then  ordered  a retreat. 

Captain  [W.  11.]  Smith  (Company  F),  after  acting  Avith  marked  gal- 
lantry, fell,  pierced  with  three  balls.  Captain  [ J.  W.j  Brown  was  woumled 
in  the  head  and  abdomen,  but  borne  from  the  field  and  saved.  Captain 
fJ.  IT.]  Collett  (Company  G)  Avas  Avounded  by  a grape-shot.  Captain 
[o.  F.]  Forrest  (Company  PI)  fell  in  the  retreat.  I do  not  know  the 
nature  of  his  injury.  Lieutenants  | J.  C.]  Ixidd  (Company  A),  [J.  W.] 
Taylor  (Company  IT),  and  [A.  II.]  White  (Company  I),  Avere  all  Avounded. 
Lieutenants  [J.  D.|  Miles  (Company  G)  and  [T.  S.]  Townsend  (Comx)any 
E)  were  slightly  Avounded.  Lieutenants  fW.  A.]  Collier  and  [J.  E.] 
Mon  in  (Company  I^)  wxre  at  the  creek  Avhen  the  retreat  Avas  ordered. 
They  are  among  the  missing.  All  these  officers  were  in  the  front  of  the 
fight,  and  behaved  Avith  the  soldier’s  best  courage. 

The  cool  braA^ery  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Moody,  on  the  right,  and  Major 
Vanzandt,  on  the  left,  sustained  the  regiment  for  so  long  a time  in  this 
unequal  combat. 

The  aboA'e  statement  of  facts  Avill  shoAv  that  all  the  officers  of  the  line 
and  the  men  did  their  whole  duty. 

My  loss  in  killed  is  known  to  be  so  many  as  22 ; in  wounded,  GG,  and 
missing,  70. 

The  woods  were  very  thick,  and  it  is  probable  that  many  of  the  miss- 
ing are  either  killed  or  wounded.  My  judgment  is  that  there  Avere  as 
many  as  30  or  40  of  the  enemy’s  killed  from  the  edge  of  the  Avood  to  the 
creek  and  in  the  run  of  the  creek.  What  their  loss  Avas  beyond  the  creek, 
where  Ave  did  the  greatest  execution  and  fought  the  longest,  is  a matter 
of  conjecture. 

My  regiment  went  into  action  with  an  aggregate  of  30G.  Total  loss 
in  killed,  Avonnded,  and  missing,  158. 

I omitted  to  state  that  Captain  [E.  T.]  Broughton,  Company  C,  Avas 
among  the  last  to  leave  the  creek,  haAdng  animated  his  men  throughout 
the  affair  Avith  his  presence  and  bearing.  He  is  among  the  missing. 

1 send  herewith  a memorandum  in  detail  of  the  casualties*  as  tar  as 
knoAvn. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  A^cry  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

n.  B.  GBANBUBY, 

Colonel  Seventh  Eegiment  Texas  Infantry. 

Capt.  Thomas  AV.  Hall, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


8eo  p.  739, 


CHAI-.  XXXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  A1  JACKSON,  MISS. 

MAY  14,  1863. — Engagement  at  Jackson,  Miss. 


749 


No.  1. — Return  of  Casualties  iu  the  Union  forces. 

No.  2. — Maj.  Geo.  William  T.  Sherman,  U.  S.  Army,  1 ifteentli  Army  Corps,  iuchni- 
iug  operations  Ai)ril  20-May  22. 

No.  3. — Brig.  Gen.  James  M.  Tuttle,  IJ.  S.  Army,  eommandiug  Tliird  DivisKm,  iuelud- 
iug  operations  May  2-22. 

No.  4. — Brig.  Gen.  Ralph  P.  Buckland,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Brigade, 
including  operations  May  2-22. 

No.  5. — Col.  DeWitt  C.  Thomas,  Ninety-third  Indiana  Infantry,  including  operations 
May  2- July  IG. 

No.  G. — Col.  William  L.  McMillen,  Ninety-fifth  Ohio  Infantry. 

No.  7. — Col.  Lucius  F.  Huhhard,  Fifth  Minnesota  Infantry,  Second  Brigade,  includ- 
ing operations  May  2-22. 

No.  8. — Brig.  Gen.  Charles  L.  Matthies,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Brigade,  in- 
cluding operations  May  2-22.  ^ 

No.  9. — Col.  Jesse  I.  Alexander,  Fifty-ninth  Indiana  Infantry,  First  Brigade,  Sev- 
enth Division,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  including  operations  May  3-24. 

No.  10. — Col.  Gabriel  Bouck,  Eighteenth  Wisconsin  Infantry,  including  operations 
May  13-July  G. 

No.  11. — Col.  Samuel  A.  Holmes,  Tenth  Mis.souri  Infantry,  commanding  Second  Bri- 
gade, including  operations  April  18-May  23. 

No.  12. — Col.  David  B.  Ilillis,  Seventeenth  Iowa  Infantry,  including  operations  April 
20-May  24. 

No.  13. — Maj.  Francis  C.  Deimling,  Tenth  Missouri  Infantry,  including  operations 
April  20-May  23. 

No.  14. — Brig.  Gen.  John  Gregg,*C.  S.  Army,  commanding  at  Jackson. 

No.  15. — Col.  Peyton  II.  Colquitt,  Forty-sixth  Georgia  Infantry,  commanding  Gist’s 
brigade. 


No.  1. 


Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  engaged  at  Jaclcson,  Miss.^  May 

14,  18G3. 


[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.] 


Commfind. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Enlisted  men  cap-  I 
tured  or  missing. 

1 

Aggregate. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

FIFTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS.t 

Maj.  Gen.  AVilltam  T.  Siikrman. 

'Cavalry. 

4th  Iowa  [ 

TITIUD  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  James  M.  Tuttle. 

First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Ralimi  P.  Buckland. 

114f.li  Tllinnia 

1 

3 

2 

7 

3 

10 

0:{(1  Indian.a 

^ See  also  general  reports  of  Grant  and  I’emberton  ; battle  of  Port  Gibson,  reporls 
of  Logan  and  McIMierson;  engjigement  .at  Raymond,  re])orts  of  Crocker,  S.iiiborn, 
.and  .1.  E.  Smith  ; battle  of  Chanq)ion’s  Hill  (Part  11),  Tourtellott(^’s  rciporl  : siege  ti[ 
Vicksburg  (Pei  t II),  Sampson’s  report, 
t Steele’s  (First)  Division  iu  reserve,  and  not  .actively  eng.aged. 

{No  loss  reported. 


750  MISSISSIPPI,  WIJST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XxrVl. 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  engaged  at  JacJcson,  Miss.,  ^'c. — Continued. 


(vommand. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Enlisted  men  cap- 

tured or  missing. 

' Aggregate.  | 

<£> 

O 

o 

g 

a 

<o 

CO 

'a 

W 

U 

u 

m 

o 

a 

a 

<u 

'a 

W 

First  Brigade— Continned. 

72(1  Ohio* 

95th  Ohio* 

4 

9 

13 

Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gren.  Joseph  A.  Mower. 

47th  Illinois 



tl 

3 

4 

5th  Minnesota* 

1 

5 

3 

9 

8th  Wisconsin* 

1 

1 

8 

3 

13 

Third  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Charuls  L.  Matthies. 

8th  Iowa* 

12th  Iowa* 

33th  Iowa 

1 

1 

1 

3 

Total  Third  Brigade 

1 

1 

1 

3 

Artillery. 

Iowa  Light,  2d  Battery 

1 

2 

1 

1st  Illinois  Light,  Battery  E 

Total  Artillery 

3 

3 

Total  Third  Division 

1 

5 

1 

4 

32 

SEVENTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS.* 

Maj.  Gen.  James  B.  McPherson. 

Cavalry. 

2cl  Illinois,  Companies  A and  E * 

4th  Missouri,  Company  F* 

6th  Missouri 

1 

2 

3 

Ohio  4th  Independent  Companv  * 

Tot.al  Cav.alry 

1 

2 

3 

seventh  division. 

Brig.  Gen.  Marcellus  M.  Crocker. 

First  Brigade. 

Col.  John  B.  Sanborn. 

48lh  Indiana 

2 

9 

3 

18 

11 

4 

2 

20 

59th  Indiana 

1 

4th  Minnesota 

I8fh  Wisconsin 

2 

Total  First  Bi’igade 

4 

1 

32  [ 

37 

* No  loss  reported. 

t Col.  John  N.  Cromwell ; killed  near  Jackson,  May  10. 
t Liogau’s  (Third)  division  in  reserv'o,  and  not  actively  engaged. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  JACKSON,  MISS.  751 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  engaged  at  Jaclcson,  Miss.,  ^ c. — Coutiuued. 


Command. 


Killed. 


Wounded. 


ga 


second  Brigade. 

Col.  Samuel  A.  Holmes. 


5Gth  Illinois* 

17th  Iowa 

10th  Missouri 

24th  Missouri,  Company  E . 
80th  Ohio 


Total  Second  Brigade. 


29 


12 


170 


Third  Brigade. 

Col.  George  B.  Boomer. 


93d  Illinois 

.'ith  Iowa 

10  th  lowat 

26th  Missouri  t 


Total  Third  Brigade , 


10 


Artillery. 

1 st  Missouri  Light  Artillery,  Battery  M t. 

Ohio  Light  Artillery,  11th  Battery  t 

Wisconsin  Light  Artillery,  6th  Battery  ... 
Wisconsin  Light  Artillery,  12th  Battery  t. 


Total  Artillery 

Total  Seventh  Division. 
Grand  total 


34 


13 


40  14 


2 

"ilT 

237 


80 


215 


2G5 

300 


Ofigcer  killed.— Lieut.  John  Tnskeep,  17th  Iowa  Infantry. 


Ko.  2. 

Report  of  Mag.  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman^  Fifteenth  Army  Corps.,  in- 
cluding operations  April  20-Map  22. 

Headquarters  Fifteenth  Army  Corps, 

Walnut  Mills,  Miss.,  May  24,  1803. 
Sir:  In  order  to  make  a connected  history  of  events  preceding  the 
final  issue  of  this  campaign,  I avail  myself  of  this  the  first  leisure  hour 
to  give  substantially  the  operations  of  the  Fifteenth  Army  Corps  since 
the  movement  began. 

General  Grant’s  orders  for  an  advance  by  way  of  Grand  Gulf  were 
dated  Axiril  20,  1863,  and  gave  McClernand’s  cordis  the  right,  McPher- 
son’s the  center,  and  mine  tlic  left,  the  movement  being  by  the  right 
Hank. 

I had  made  all  iireiiarations  for  the  movement,  when,  on  the  2()th,  I 


Detaclied, 


t No  loss  reported. 


752  ' MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [CnAr.  XXXVL 

received  General  Grant’s  letter  from  Smith’s  plantation,  near  Carthage, 
describing  the  road  as  so  very  difficult  that  he  ordered  me  to  delay  until 
the  roads  improved  or  the  system  of  canals,  then  in  jirocess  of  construe 
tion,  could  be  finished. 

Subsequently,  on  Ai^ril  28,  I received  his  letter,  fixing  the  time  wlien 
lie  ]>roposed  to  attack  Grand  Gulf,  and  saying  that  a simultaneous 
feint  on  tlie  enemy’s  batteries  on  the  Yazoo,  near  Haynes’  Jllutf,  would 
be  most  desirable,  iirovided  it  could  be  done  without  the  ill-etfect  ou 
the  army  and  the  country  of  the  appearance  of  a repidse.  Knowing  full 
well  the  army  could  distinguish  a feint  from  a real  attack  by  succeed- 
ing events,  and  assured  the  country  would  in  due  season  recover  from 
riie  effect,  1 made  the  necessary  orders,  and  embarked  on  ten  steamboats 
my  Second  Division  (Blair’s),  and  about  10  a.  m.  on  April  20  x)roceeded 
to  the  mouth  of  the  Yazoo,  where  I found  the  flag-boat  Black  Hawk, 
Ca])tain  Breese,  U.  S.  Kavy,  with  the  Choctaw  (just  arrived)  and  De 
Kalb,  iron-clads,  with  the  Tyler  and  several  smaller  wooden  boats  of 
the  fleet  all  ready,  with  steam  up,  prepared  to  co-operate  in  the  pro- 
posed demonstrations  against  Haynes’  Bluff.  Captain  Breese  fully 
comprehended  the  purpose  of  the  movement  and  managed  the  fleet 
admirably. 

We  at  once  iiroceeded  up  the  Yazoo  in  order,  and  lay  for  the  night 
of  April  29  at  the  mouth  of  Chickasaw,  and  early  next  morning  pro- 
ceeded up  within  easy  range  of  the  enemy’s  batteries.  The  Choctaw 
led,  followed  by  the  De  Kalb,  she  by  the  Tyler,  she  by  the  Black  Haw  k, 
.ind  the  fleet  in  order  behind. 

The  Choctaw  at  once  engaged  the  batteries  at  very  fair  range,  and 
the  De  Kalb  maneuvered  so  as  to  use  her  batteries  with  as  little  risk 
to  her  unarmored  part  as  the  circumstances  warranted.  The  Tyler  aud 
Black  Hawk  also  came  into  action,  and  for  four  hours  a very  pretty 
demonstration  was  kept  up,  when  the  boats  engaged  were  called  out  of 
range.  The  Tyler  had  received  one  shot  and  the  Choctaw  some  lifty, 
but,  strange  to  say,  no  men  were  hurt.  Waiting  till  toward  evening, 
I ordered  the  division  of  troops  to  disembark  in  full  view  of  the  enemy 
and  seemingly  prepare  to  assault,  but  I knew  full  w ell  that  there  w as 
no  road  across  the  submerged  field  that  lay  between  the  river  and  the 
bluff.  As  soon  as  the  troops  were  fiiirly  out  on  the  levee,  the  gunboats 
resumed  their  fire,  and  the  enemy’s  batteries  replied  with  spirit.  We 
could  see  them  moving  guns,  artillery,  and  infantry  back  and  forth,  and 
evidently  expecting  a real  attack.  Keeping  up  appearances  till  night, 
the  troops  were  re-embarked.  During  the  next  day  similar  movements 
were  made,  accompanied  by  reconnaissances  of  all  the  country  on  both 
sides  of  the  Yazoo. 

While  there,  I received  General  Grant’s  orders  to  hurry  forw  ard  to- 
ward  Grand  Gulf.  Dispatching  orders  to  the  divisions  of  Steele  and 
Tuttle  at  once  to  march  for  Grand  Gulf  via  Kichmond,  I prolonged  the 
demonstration  till  night,  and  quietly  dropped  back  to  our  camp  at 
Young’s  Point,  No  casualties  w^ere  sustained  save  a slight  w'ound  from 
a splintered  rail  by  a man  of  the  Eighth  Missouri. 

Beaching  Young’s  Point  during  the  night  of  May  1,  the  next  morning 
Blair’s  division  broke  camp  and  moved  up  to  Milliken’s  Bend.  At 
the  same  time  Steele’s  division  marched  from  Milliken’s  P>end  and  Tut- 
tle’s from  Duckport,  Blair’s  division  remaining  as  a garrison  till  reliev(‘d 
by  troops  ordered  from  Memphis. 

The  inarch  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  the  plantation  of  Hard  Times,  on 
the  west  bank  of  the  Mississippi,  4 miles  above  Grand  Gulf,  occiqiied 
until  noon  of  May  0,  distance  08  miles.  We  crossed  over  the  river 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


753 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  JACKSON,  MISS. 

(luring  the  night  of  the  hth  and  day  of  the  7th,  and  on  the  8th  inarched 
18  miles  ont  to  Ilankinson’s  Ferry,  across  the  Big  Black,  relieving 
Crocker’s  division,  of  McPherson’s  corps.  At  noon  of  the  lOth,  l)y 
order  of  General  Grant,  the  lloating  bridge  across  the  Black  was 
effectually  destroyed,  au(l  the  troops  marched  forward  to  Big  Sandy. 

On  the  11th,  we  marched  to  Auburn,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  12th, 
at  Fonrteeu-Mile  Creek,  first  met  opposition.  The  Fourth  Iowa  Cav- 
alry, Lieutenant-Colonel  Swan  commanding,  leading  the  advance,  was 
•fired  on  as  it  approached  the  bridge  across  the  creek.  One  man  was 
killed  and  the  horse  of  Major  Winslow  Avas  shot  under  him. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Swan  dismounted  the  men,  armed  with  carbines 
(about  100),  and  began  to  skirmish  with  the  enemy,  which  afterward 
])roved  to  be  Wirt  Adams’  cavalry,  but  the  bushes  were  so  deuse  that 
nothing  could  be  seen  but  the  pufi*s  of  smoke  from  their  guns.  The 
bridge  also  was  burning.  Arriving  at  the  head  of  the  column,  I ordered 
Landgraeber’s  battery  forward  to  give  the  bushes  a few  quick  rounds 
of  canister,  and  Woods’  brigade,  of  Steele’s  division,  to  cross  over,  its 
front  AT ell  covered  Avith  skirmishers.  This  disposition  soon  cleared  the 
Avay,  and  the  pioneer  company  was  put  to  work  to  make  a crossing  in 
lieu  of  the  burned  bridge. 

This  affair  delayed  ns  about  three  hours,  Avhen  Ave  crossed  OA^er  just 
in  time  to  see  the  enemy’s  caA^alry  disapjAear  oa  er  the  hill.  General 
Grant  in  person  was  with  my  (iolumn  at  the  time,  and  ordered  me  to 
encamp  there  one  division  (Steele’s)  on  the  Edwards  Depot  road  and 
the  other  (Tuttle’s)  toward  Baymond.  AVhile  there  we  heard  that  the 
enemy  haxl  met  General  McPherson  near  Kaymond  and  was  defeated. 

Next  morning  we  marched  to  Kaymond  and  i)assed  on  to  Mississippi 
Springs,  Avhere  Ave  surprised  a cavalry  picket,  capturing  them ; and  on 
the  following  day,  namely,  May  14,  pushed  on  to  Jackson  by  the  lower- 
road,  McPherson’s  corjrs  following  the  Clinton  road.  We  communicated 
during  the  night,  so  as  to  arrive  at  Jackson  about  the  same  hour. 

During  the  day  it  rained  in  torrents,  and  the  roads,  which  had  been 
very  dusty,  became  e(]ually  muddy  ; but  Ave  pushed  on,  and  about  10 
a.  m.  Avere  Avithin  3 miles  of  Jackson.  Then  Ave  heard  the  gnus  of  Mc- 
I'herson  to  the  left,  and  our  cavalry  advance  reported  an  enemy  to  our 
front,  at  a small  bridge  at  the  foot  of  the  ridge,  along  which  the  road 
we  traA^eled  led. 

The  enemy  opened  on  us  briskly  Avith  a battery.  Hastily  reconnoiter- 
ing  the  position,  I ordered  Mower’s  and  Matthies’  brigades,  of  Tuttle’s 
division,  to  deploy  forAvard  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  road,  and  Buck- 
land’s  to  close  up.  Waterhouse’s  and  Spoor’s  batteries  were  ifiaced  on 
commanding  ground  and  soon  silenced  the  enemy’s  guns,  Avhen  he  re- 
tired about  half  a mile  into  the  skirt  of  Avoods  in  front  of  the  intrench- 
ments  at  Jacdcson.  Mower’s  brigade  followed  him  u]),  and  lie  soon  took 
refuge  behind  the  intrench ments. 

Tlie  stream,  owing  to  its  preci])itous  banks,  could  only  be  jiassed  on 
the  bridge,  Wliich  the  enemy  did  not  attempt  to  destroy,  and  forming 
tlie  troo])s  in  similar  order  beyond  the  bridge,  only  that  MoAver’s  brigad(% 
from  the  (tourse  he  took  in  folloAving  the  enemy,  ocicupied  the  ground  to 
the  left  of  the  i*oad  Jind  Matthies’  brigade  to  the  right,  the  two  batteries 
in  the  center,  and  BiuLland’s  brigade  in  reseiwe. 

As  Ave  emerged  from  the  Avoods,  to  our  front  and  as  far  to  the  left  as 
Ave  could  see,  a,])])(nired  a line  of  intrenchments,  and  the  enemy  ke])t  u]) 
a ])retty  brisk  fireAvith  artilleiy  from  the  ])oints  that  enfilad(ul  our  road. 
In  ord(‘r  to  ascertain  the  natuic!  of  the  fianks  of  this  line  of  inti’en(4i- 
ments,  I directed  Cnjitain  I’ilzman,  mJing  (mgineei’,  to  take  a regiment 
48  ll  n — VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


754 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


of  the  reserve,  namely,  the  ^N^inety-fifth  Ohio,  and  make  a detour  to  the 
right  to  see  what  was  there.  While  he  was  gone,  Steele’s  division  closed 
up.  About  1 p.  m.  Captain  Pitzman  returned,  reporting  that  he  had 
found  the  enemy’s  intrenchments  abandoned  at  the  point  where  they 
crossed  the  railroad,  and  he  had  left  the  Muety-fifth  Ohio  there  in  pos- 
session. I at  once  ordered  General  Steele  to  lead  his  whole  division  into 
Jackson  by  that  route,  and  as  soon  as  I heard  the  cheers  of  his  men, 
Tuttle’s  division  was  ordered  in  by  the  main  road.  The  enemy’s  in- 
fantry had  escaped  to  the  north  by  the  Canton  road,  but  we  captured 
about  250  prisoners  with  all  the  enemy’s  artillery  (eighteen  guns),  with 
much  ammunition  and  valuable  public  stores. 

Disposing  the  troops  on  the  outskirts  of  the  town,  in  obedience  to  a 
summons  from  General  Grant,  I met  him  and  General  McPherson  at 
the  hotel  near  the  State-house,  and  received  orders  to  at  once  occupy 
the  line  of  rifle-pits,  and  on  the  following  day  to  destroy  effectually 
the  railroad  tracks  in  and  about  Jackson,  and  all  the  property  belong- 
ing to  the  enemy.  Accordingly,  on  the  morning  of  May  15,  Steele’s 
division  was  set  to  work  to  destroy  the  railroad  and  property  to  the 
south  and  east,  including  Pearl  River  Bridge,  and  Tuttle’s  division  that 
to  the  north  and  west.  This  work  of  destruction  was  well  accomplished, 
and  Jackson,  as  a railroad  center  or  Government  depot  of  stores  and 
military  factories,  can  be  of  little  use  to  the  enemy  for  six  months. 

The  railroads  were  destroyed  by  burning  the  ties  and  warping  the 
iron.  I estimate  the  destruction  of  the  roads  4 miles  east  of  Jackson, 
3 south,  3 north,  and  10  west. 

In  Jackson  the  arsenal  buildings,  the  Government  foundry,  the  gun- 
carriage  establishment,  including  the  carriages  for  two  complete  six- 
gun  batteries,  stable,  carpenter  and  paint  shops  were  destroyed.  The 
])enitentiary  was  burned,  I think,  by  some  convicts  who  had  been  set 
free  by  the  Confederate  authorities ; also  a very  valuable  cotton  factory. 
This  factory  was  the  property  of  the  Messrs.  Greene,  who  made  strong- 
appeals,  based  on  the  fact  that  it  gave  employment  to  very  many 
females  and  poor  families,  and  that,  although  it  had  woven  cloth  for  the 
enemy,  its  principal  use  was  in  weaving  cloth  for  the  people;  but  1 
decided  that  machinery  of  that  kind  could  so  easily  be  converted  into 
liostile  uses  that  the  United  States  could  better  afford  to  compensate 
the  Messrs.  Greene  for  their  property,  and  feed  the  poor  families  thus 
thrown  out  of  employment,  than  to  spare  the  property.  I therefore  as- 
sured all  such  families  if  want  should  force  them  they  might  come  to 
the  river,  where  we  would  feed  them  till  they  could  find  employment 
or  seek  refuge  in  some  more  peaceful  land.  Other  buildings  were  de- 
stroyed in  Jackson  by  some  mischievous  soldiers  (who  could  not  be 
detected)  which  was  not  justifled  by  the  rules  of  war,  including  the 
Catholic  church  and  Confederate  Ilotel — the  former  resulting  from 
accidental  circumstances  and  the  latter  from  malice. 

General  Mower  occupied  the  town  with  his  brigade  and  two  com- 
panies of  cavalry,  and  maintained  as  much  order  as  he  could  among 
the  mass  of  soldiers  and  camp-followers  that  thronged  the  place  during 
our  short  stay  there ; yet  many  acts  of  pillage  occurred  that  I regret, 
arising  from  the  effect  of  some  bad  rum  found  concealed  in  the  stores  of 
the  town. 

On  the  morning  of  the  IGth,  I received  a note  from  General  Grant, 
written  at  Clinton,  reporting  the  enemy  advancing  from  Edwards  Depot, 
and  ordering  me  to  put  in  motion  one  of  my  divisions  toward  Bolton, 
and  to  follow  with  the  other  as  soon  as  I liad  completed  the  work  of 
destruction  ordered. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  JACKSON,  MISS. 


755 


Steele’s  division  marched  at  10  a.  m.,  and  Tuttle’s  followed  at  noon. 
As  the  march  would  necessarily  be  rapid,  I ordered  General  Mower  to 
parole  the  prisoners  of  war,  and  to  evacuate  Jackson  as  the  rear  of  Tut- 
tle’s division  passed  out.  I paroled  these  prisoners  because  the  wounded 
men  of  McPherson’s  corps  had  been  left  in  a hospital,  in  charge  of  Sur- 
geon Hewitt,  to  the  mercy  of  the  enemy,  who  I knew  would  re-enter  J ack- 
son  as  we  left.  The  whole  corps  marched  from  Jackson  to  Bolton,  nearly 
20  miles,  that  day,  and  next  morning  resumed  the  march  by  a road 
lying  to  the  north  of  Baker’s  Creek,  reaching  Bridgeport,  on  the  Big 
Black,  at  noon.  There  I found  Blair’s  division  and  the  pontoon  train. 
The  enemy  had  a small  picket  on  the  west  bank  in  a rifle-pit  command- 
ing the  crossing,  but,  on  exploding  a few  shells  over  the  i>it,  they  came 
out  and  surrendered — a lieutenant  and  10  men.  The  pontoon  bridge  was 
laid  across,  under  the  direction  of  Captain  [H.  C.]  Freeman,  and  Blair’s 
and  Steele’s  divisions  passed  over  that  night,  Tuttle’s  following  next 
morning. 

Starting  with  the  break  of  day,  we  pushed  rapidly,  and  by  9.30  a.  m. 
of  May  18  the  head  of  the  column  reached  the  Benton  road,  and  we  com- 
manded the  Tazoo,  interposing  a superior  force  between  the  enemy  at 
Vicksburg  and  his  forts  on  the  Yazoo.  Besting  a suflicient  time  to  ena- 
ble the  column  to  close  up,  we  pushed  forward  to  the  point  where  the  road 
forks,  and  sending  forward  on  each  road  the  Thirteenth  Begulars  to  the 
right  and  the  Eighth  Missouri  to  the  left,  with  a battery  at  the  forks,  I 
awaited  General  Grant’s  arrival.  He  came  up  very  soon,  and  directed 
me  to  operate  on  the  right,  McPherson  on  the  center,  and  McClernand 
on  the  left.  Leaving  a sufficient  force  on  the  main  road  to  hold  it  till 
McPherson  came  up,  I pushed  the  head  of  my  column  on  this  road  till 
the  skirmishers  Avere  within  musket-range  of  the  defenses  of  Vicksburg. 
Here  I disposed  Blair’s  division  to  the  front,  Tuttle’s  in  support,  and 
ordered  Steele’s  to  follow  a blind  road  to  the  right  till  he  reached  the 
Mississippi.  By  dark  his  advance  was  on  the  bluff's,  and  earlj^  next 
morning  he  reached  the  Haynes’  Blufl;  road,  getting  possession  of  the 
enemy’s  outer  Avorks,  his  camps,  and  many  prisoners  left  behind  dur- 
ing their  hasty  evacuation,  and  had  his  pickets  up  within  easy  range 
of  the  enemy’s  new  line  of  defenses,  so  that  by  8 a.  m.  of  May  19  we  had 
compassed  the  enemy  to  the  north  of  Vicksburg,  our  right  resting  on 
the  Mississippi  Biver,  Avith  a plain  view  of  our  fleets  at  the  mouth  of 
the  Yazoo  and  Young’s  Point,  Vicksburg  in  plain  sight,  and  nothing 
separated  us  from  the  enemy  but  a space  of  about  400  yards  of  very 
difficult  ground,  cut  up  by  almost  impracticable  raAunes,  and  his  line 
of  intrenchments.  I ordered  the  Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry  to  proceed  rap- 
idly up  to  Haynes’  Bluff  and  secure  possession  of  that  place,  it  being 
perfectly  open  to  the  rear.  By  4 xi-  xu.  the  cavalry  was  on  the  high 
bluff  behind,  and  Colonel  Swan,  being  assured  that  the  place  had  been 
evacuated,  dispatched  Captain  Peters  to  go  in  and  secure  the  place. 

I inclose  Colonel  SAvan’s  report,*  with  one  from  Lieutenant  Clark,* 
from  which  you  will  see  that  the  Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry  first  got  posses- 
sion of  the  enemy’s  battery  (evacuated,  of  course,  when  we  were  in  full 
])ossession  of  the  Benton  road)  and  delivered  it  over,  with  its  guns, 
magazine  (filled),  and  material,  to  the  gunboat  De  Kalb,  at  the  time  (4 
I),  m.  May  19)  lying  2 miles  below  in  Y azoo  Biver.  Also  on  that  day  com- 
munication was  opened  with  our  fleet  at  Young’s  Point  and  the  mouth 
of  the  Yazoo,  and  bridges  and  roads  made  to  bring  up  ammunition  and 
])rovisions  from  the  mouth  of  ChickasaAv,  to  which  iioint  supply  boats 
had  been  ordered  by  General  Grant.  IJp  to  that  time  our  men  had 


Not  found. 


756 


MTSSISSIPPT,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


(Chap.  SiXXVt. 


literally  lived  upon  the  country,  liaviug  left  Grand  Gulf  May  8 with 
three  days’  rations  in  their  haversacks,  and  received  little  or  nothing 
till  after  our  arrival  here  on  the  18th. 

The  several  corps  being  in  position  on  the  10th,  General  Grant  or- 
dered a general  assault  at  2 p.  m.  At  that  hour  Blair’s  division  moved 
forward,  Ewing’s  and  Giles  Smith’s  brigades  on  the  right  of  the  road, 
and  Kilby  Smith’s  brigade  on  the  left  of  the  road  ; artillery  disposed  on 
the  right  and  left  to  cover  the  point  where  the  road  enters  the  enemy’s 
intrenchments.  Tuttle’s  division  was  held  on  the  road ; Buckland’s 
brigade  deployed  in  line  to  the  rear  of  Blair,  and  the  other  two  brigades 
in  the  road  under  cover. 

At  the  appointed  signal  the  line  advanced,  bnt  the  ground  to  the  right 
and  left  of  the  road  was  so  impracticable,  cut  up  in  deep  chasms,  filled 
with  standing  and  fallen  timber,  that  the  line  was  slow  and  irregular  in 
reaching  the  trenches.  The  Thirteenth  Kegulars,  on  the  left  of  Giles 
Smith,  reaching  the  works-first,  planted  its  colors  on  the  exterior  slope. 
Its  commander.  Captain  Washington,  was  mortally  wounded,  and  5 other 
ofiicers  were  wounded  more  or  less  severely.  Seventy-seven  out  of  250 
are  rei)orted  killed  or  wounded.  Two  other  regiments  reached  the 
same  position  about  the  same  time — the  Eighty- third  Indiana,  Colonel 
Spooner,  and  the  One  hundred  and  twenty-seventh  Illinois,  Colonel  El- 
dridge.  They  held  their  ground,  and  fired  upon  any  head  that  presented 
itself  above  the  parapet,  but  it  was  imi)ossible  to  enter.  Other  regi- 
ments gained  position  to  the  right  and  left  close  up  to  the  parapet,  but 
night  found  them  outside  the  works,  unsuccessful.  As  soon  as  night 
closed  in,  I ordered  them  back  a short  distance,  where  the  shape  of  tlie 
ground  gave  them  partial  shelter,  to  bivouac  for  the  night. 

The  20th  and  21st  instant  were  consnmed  in  perfecting  our  system 
of  supplies,  opening  roads,  and  putting  our  artillery  in  new  and  more 
commanding  positions,  but  we  could  see  the  enemy  similarly  employed. 
Buriug  these  days  our  pickets  were  kept  up  close,  and  the  enemy  was 
kept  uneasy  by  the  appearance  of  assault  at  several  points. 

On  the  21st,  General  Grant  issued  his  orders  for  a general  assault 
by  all  the  army  at  10  a.  m.  on  the  22d,  the  assault  to  be  rapid  by  the 
heads  of  columns.  I placed  Blair’s  division  at  the  head  of  the  road, 
Tuttle’s  in  sut)port,  and  left  General  Steele  to  make  his  attack  at  a point 
in  his  front  about  half  a mile  to  the  right.  The  troops  were  grouj)ed  so 
that  the  movement  could  be  connected  and  rapid.  The  road  lies  on  the 
crown  of  an  inferior  ridge,  rises  over  comparatively  smooth  ground  along 
the  edge  of  the  ditch  of  tlie  right  face  of  the  enemy’s  bastion,  and  enters 
the  parallel  at  the  shoulder  of  the  bastion.  Ko  men  could  be  seen  in 
the  enemy’s  works,  except  occasionally  a sharpshooter  would  show  his 
head  and  quickly  discharge  his  piece.  A line  of  select  skirmishers  was 
jdaced  to  keep  them  down;  also  a volunteer  storming  party  of  about 
150  men,  carrying  boards  and  ])oles  to  cross  the  ditch.  This,  Avith  a 
small  interval,  was  followed  by  Ewing’s  brigade;  his  by  Giles  Smith’s, 
and  Kilby  Smith’s  bringing  up  the  rear  of  Blair’s  division. 

All  marched  by  the  flank,  folloAving  a road  selected  the  night  before, 
by  which  the  men  were  partially  sheltered  until  it  Avas  necessary  to  take 
the  crown  of  the  ridge  and  expose  themseh^es  to  the  full  view  of  the 
enemy,  known  to  be  lying  concealed  behind  his  Avell-planned  ])arai)et. 
Atthe  A'ory  minute  namedin  General  Grant’s  orders,  the  storming  ])arty 
dashed  uj)  the  road  at  the  double-quick,  followed  by  Ewing’s  brigade, 
the  Thirtieth  Ghio  leading.  The  artillery  of  Wood’s,  Ilarrett’s,  AVat(‘r- 
house’s,  Si)Oor’s,  and  Hart’s  battinies  ke])t  a concentric  fire  on  the  bas- 
tion, Avhicii  Avas  doubtless  constructed  to  command  this  A’ery  approach. 


Chap.  XXX YI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  JACKSON,  MISS. 


757 


The  storiuiug  piiitj  reached  the  salient  of  the  bastion  and  passed  to- 
ward the  sally  port,  when  rose,  from  every  part  commanding  it,  a double 
rank  of  the  enemy,  that  poured  on  the  head  of  the  column  a terrific  fire. 
It  halted,  wavered,  and  sought  cover.  The  rear  pressed  ou,  but  the  lire 
was  so  terrific  that  very  soon  all  sought  cover. 

The  head  of  the  column  crossed  the  ditch  of  the  left  face  of  the  bastion 
and  climbed  upon  the  exterior  slope,  where  the  colors  Avere  planted,  and 
the  men  burrowed  in  the  earth  to  shield  themselves  from  the  flank  lire. 
The  leading  brigade  of  Ewing  being  unable  to  carry  that  point,  the  next 
brigade  of  Giles  Smith  was  turned  down  a ravine,  and  by  a circuit  to 
the  left  found  cover,  formed  line,  and  threatened  the  parapet  about  300 
yards  to  the  left  of  the  bastion,  and  the  brigade  of  Kilby  Smith  deployed 
ou  the  off  slope  of  one  of  the  spurs,  where,  with  Ewing’s  brigade,  they 
kept  up  a constant  fire  against  any  object  that  presented  itself  above 
the  parapet. 

About  2 p.  m., General  Blair  reported  to  me  that  none  of  his  brigades 
could  j)ass  the  point  Qf  the  road  swept  by  the  terrific  fire  encountered 
by  Ewing’s,  but  that  Giles  Smith  had  got  a position  to  the  left,  in  con- 
nection with  General  Kausom,  of  McPherson’s  corps,  and  Avas  ready  to 
assiiult. 

I ordered  a constant  fire  of  artillery  and  infantry  to  be  kept  up  to 
occui)y  the  attention  of  the  enemy  in  our  front.  Under  these  circum- 
stances Itansom’s  and  Giles  Smith’s  brigades  charged  up  against  the 
l)arapet,  but  also  met  a staggering  lire,  before  Avhich  they  recoiled  under 
cover  of  the  hillside. 

At  the  same  time,  Avhile  McPherson’s  Avhole  cori)S  was  engaged,  and 
having  heard  General  McClernand’s  report  to  General  Grant  read,  that 
he  had  taken  three  of  the  enemy’s  forts,  and  that  his  flags  floated  on 
the  stronghold  of  Vicksburg,  I ordered  General  Tuttle  to  send  directly 
to  the  assault  one  of  his  brigades.  He  detailed  General  MoAver’s,  and 
Avhile  General  Steele  was  hotlj"  engaged  on  the  right,  and  I could  hear 
heavy  firing  all  down  the  line  to  my  left,  I ordered  their  charge,  coA^ered 
in  like  manner  by  Blair’s  dhision,  deployed  on  the  hillside,  and  the 
artillery  jAosted  behind  parapets  within  point-blank  range. 

General  Mower  carried  his  brigade  up  bravely  and  well,  but  again 
arose  a fire  more  severe,  if  possible,  than  that  of  the  first  assault,  Avith 
exactly  a similar  result.  The  colors  of  the  leading  regiment,  the 
Eleventh  Missouri,  Avere  planted  by  the  side  of  that  of  Blair’s  storming 
party,  and  remained  there  till  Avithdrawn  after  nightfall  by  my  orders. 

. McClernand’s  report  of  success  must  haA^e  been  premature,  for  I sub- 
sequently learned  that  both  his  and  McPherson’s  assaults  had  failed  to 
break  through  the  enemy’s  line  of  intrenchments,  and  were  equally  un- 
successful as  my  oAvn. 

At  the  time  Ave  were  so  hotly  engaged  along  the  road.  General  Steele, 
with  his  division,  made  his  assault  at  a x)oiut  about  midway  from  the 
bastion  and  Mississippi  ItiA  er.  The  ground  over  which  he  passed  was 
more  open  and  exi)osed  to  the  flank  fire  of  the  enemy’s  batteries  in  posi- 
tion, and  Avas  deeply  cut  up  by  gullies  and  Avashes;  still,  his  column 
passed  steadily  through  this  fire  and  reached  the  i)arapet,  which  Avas 
also  found  to  be  Avell  manned  and  defended  by  the  enemy.  He  couhl 
not  carry  the  Avorks,  but  held  possession  of  the  hillside  till  night,  Avhen 
he  withdrew  his  command  to  his  present  position.  These  seA^eral  as- 
saults, made  simultaneously,  demonstrated  the  strength  of  the  natural 
and  artificial  defenses  of  Vicksburg,  that  they  are  garrisoned  by  a 
strong  force,  and  that  Ave  must  resort  to  regular  approaches. 

Our  loss  during  the  day  Avas  severe,  and  the  proportion  of  dead  to 


758 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap,  XXX 


wounded  exceeds  the  usual  ratio.  The  loss  in  my  corps  for  the  attack 
of  May  22  will  not  fall  much  short  of  600  killed  and  wounded. 

Our  skirmishers  still  remain  close  up  to  the  enemy’s  works,  while  the 
troops  are  retired  a short  distance  in  the  ravines,  which  afford  good 
cover.  Strong  working  parties  are  kept  employed  in  opening  roads  to 
the  rear  and  preparing  covered  roads  to  the  front.  By  taking  advan- 
tage of  the  shape  of  the  ground,  I think  we  can  advance  our  works  to 
within  100  yards  of  the  redoubt  which  commands  the  road,  after  which 
the  regular  sap  must  be  resorted  to.  Captain  Jenney,  engineer  of  my 
staff,  has  organized  the  parties,  and  will  set  to  work  immediately  at  two 
distinct  points,  one  in  Blair’s  and  the  other  in  Steele’s  front. 

Our  position  is  now  high,  healthy,  and  good.  We  are  in  direct  and 
easy  communication  with  our  supplies,  and  the  troops  continue  to  man- 
ifest the  same  cheerful  spirit  which  has  characterized  them  throughout 
this  whole  movement. 

I have  as  yet  received  no  detailed  reports  of  my  division  commanders. 
Indeed,  our  means  of  transportation  have  been  so  limited  and  our  thme 
so  constantly  employed  that  but  little  writing  has  been  done;  but  as 
soon  as  possible  I will  supply  ^ ou  with  accurate  reports  of  all  the  de- 
tails of  events  herein  sketched,  with  names  of  killed  and  wounded,  and 
the  names  of  such  officers  and  men  as  deserve  mention  for  special  acts 
of  zeal  and  gallantry. 

I have  sent  in  about  500  prisoners,  with  lists  of  their  names,  rank, 
regiments,  &c.,  and  now  inclose  the  papers  relating  to  those  paroled  at 
Jackson,  Miss.* 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 
Major-General^  Commanding, 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins,  A,  A.  (r.,  Dej^t.  of  the  Tennessee, 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  M.  Tuttle.^  U.  8.  Army.,  commanding  Third 
Division.,  including  operations  May  2-22. 

Hdqks.  Thihd  Division,  Fifteenth  Ahmy  Corps, 

Walnut  Hills,  3Iiss.,  May  23,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  part  taken  by  my  command 
in  the  movement  that  has  resulted  in  the  investment  of  Vicksburg  up 
to  the  present  time. 

We  left  our  camp  at  Duckport,  La.,  on  the  Mississippi  River,  on  the 
morning  of  May  2,  with  three  days’  rations,  and  i)roceeded  to  Rich- 
mond, La.,  by  way  of  the  new  road  down  Willow  and  AValnut  Bayous. 
Owing  to  the  bad  state  of  the  roads,  we  made  but  8 miles  the  first  day, 
and  bivouacked  on  the  margin  of  Willow  Bayou. 

May  3,  we  marched  15  miles  to  Richmond. 

May  4,  we  marched  to  Smith’s  plantation,  18  miles. 

May  5,  we  reached  Perkins’  plantation,  12  miles,  at  noon.  There  we 
drew  two  days’  rations  and  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

On  the  6th,  we  marched  13  miles,  and  bivouacked,  after  crossing  the 
pontoon  bridges,  at  the  outlet  of  Lake  Saint  Joseph. 


Omitted 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  JACKSON,  MISS. 


759 


May  7,  we  marched  7 miles,  to  Hard  Times  Landing,  and  during  the 
afternoon  and  night  crossed  the  troops  and  ambulances  on  transiiorts 
to  Grand  Gulf,  Miss. 

May  8,  we  left  Grand  Gulf,  without  transportation,  loaded  ail  the 
ambulances  with  what  ammunition  they  could  carry,  and  marched  15 
miles  to  Willow  Springs. 

May  9,  we  spent  the  forenoon  in  foraging,  finding  an  abundance  of 
beef-cattle,  sheep,  hogs,  corn,  molasses,  «&c.,  and  three  mills  in  the 
neighborhood,  which  we  immediately  put  in  operation,  grinding  corn 
for  the  troops.  At  4 p.  m.  we  marched  to  Eocky  Springs,  8 miles, 
where  we  bivouacked  until  the  morning  of  the  11th. 

May  11,  we  marched  13  miles  to  the  forks  of  the  road  where  the 
Clinton  road  bears  to  the  left.  On  that  day  Ave  passed  through  the 
camp  of  the  corps  which  had  preceded  us,  and  at  night  bivouacked 
with  the  First  Division  of  this  corps  in  the  advance. 

May  12,  we  marched  7 miles,  crossing  Fourteen-Mile  Creek. 

May  13,  this  division  taking  the  advance,  marched  via  Eaymond 
to  a plantation  1 mile  west  of  Mississippi  Springs,  where  we  encoun- 
tered the  enemy ^s  pickets.  After  a brisk  firing  for  a few  minutes 
between  them  and  my  advance  guard,  1 ordered  the  leading  brigade. 
General  Mower  commanding,  to  deploy  on  the  right  of  the  road,  and 
the  next,  General  Matthies  commanding,  on  the  left,  holding  the  other, 
General  Buckland's,  in  reserve.  In  this  x>osition  we  advanced  about 
one-fourth  of  a mile,  and,  finding  no  enemy  in  force,  biA'ouacked  for  the 
night,  my  advance  guard  occupying  Mississippi  Springs. 

May  14, 1 filed  the  troops  into  the  road  at  daylight,  and,  after  march- 
ing about  1 mile,  encountered  a small  party  of  the  enemy,  which  were 
driven  before  us  by  our  adA^ance  guard,  skirmishing  at  intervals  until 
we  w'ere  within  2^  miles  of  Jackson,  where  we  encountered  a heavier 
force  with  artillery,  which  immediately  opened  on  us.  I ordered  the 
Second  Iowa  Battery  into  a commanding  position,  with  General  AIow- 
eFs  brigade  to  support  it  on  the  right  of  the  road  and  Waterhouse^s 
battery  on  the  left,  with  General  Matthies’  brigade  to  support. 

After  a brisk  cannonading  for  half  an  hour,  the  enemy’s  battery  was 
silenced,  when  I ordered  an  immediate  advance  in  line,  General  Buck- 
land’s  brigade  in  reserve.  We  drove  the  enemy  before  us  until  the 
artillery  from  the  works  around  Jackson  opened  a brisk  fire  upon  us. 

After  reconnoitering  the  position  for  a short  time,  by  direction  of 
General  Sherman,  the  Einety-fifth  Ohio  Eegimeut  was  sent  to  recon- 
noiter  to  the  right,  and  entered  the  enemy’s  works  at  a point  where  the 
railroad  enters  the  town  j and,  after  waiting  for  General  Steele’s  ad- 
A'ance  to  come  up  to  the  same  point,  they  advanced  to  the  rear  of  the 
guns  that  were  playing  on  us  and  captured  ten  of  them,  together  with 
all  the  gunners,  about  150  in  number.  Wo  then  marched  into  the  toAvn 
Avithout  further  opposition. 

The  loss  of  this  division  up  to  this  time  was  5 killed  and  21  wounded. 

May  15,  in  accordance  with  directions  of  the  major-general  command- 
ing the  corps.  General  Mower’s  brigade  was  placed  on  duty  as  i)rovost- 
guard,  and  General  Mower  commanding  post.  General  Buckland’s 
brigade  wms  employed  in  destroying  the  railroad  running  Avest  and 
General  Matthies’  brigade  the  one  running  north  from  that  place. 

May  1C,  we  left  Jackson  at  12  m.  for  Vicksburg,  marching  to  Bol- 
ton, 20  miles,  the  rear  of  my  command  airiAung  there  at  2 a.  m.  next 
day. 

May  17,  we  started  at  4.30  a.  m.  and  marched  to  Bridgeport,  on  Big 
Black  Eiver,  13  miles. 


760  MISSISSIPPI,  AVEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVX 

May  18,  we  crossed  Big  Black  liiver  on  the  i>ontoou  bridge,  and  ar- 
rived at  night  near  the  position  now  occupied  by  my  command,  in  the 
rear  of  Vicksburg.  In  disposing  the  forces  of  this  corps,  my  command 
was  selected  by  the  major-general  commanding  as  the  reserve  division 
of  the  cori)s,  and  consequently  did  not  participate  in  the  attack  made 
on  the  19th  instant. 

May  20  and  21,  I occujiied  the  same  x)osition  as  at  the  present,  Avith 
the  exception  of  a reconnaissance  made  by  General  Matthies’  brigade 
on  the  19th  in  the  direction  of  Chickasaw  Bayou,  for  the  purj)ose  of 
opening  communication  with  the  Yazoo  Eiver.  Finding  no  force  of  the 
enemy  in  that  vicinity,  the  brigade  returned  on  the  morning  of  the  20th 
instant. 

In  the  charge  made  on  the  morning  of  the  22d  instant,  my  division 
took  no  i)art,  but  word  having  been  received  in  the  afternoon  that  the 
forces  on  the  left  were  in  the  enemy’s  works.  General  Mower’s  brigade 
was  ordered  to  charge  the  fortifications  in  our  front,  which  it  did  in  most 
gallant  style,  the  Eleventh  Begiment  Missouri  Volunteers  leading.  The 
ground  being  so  uneven,  and  the  fire  of  the  enemy  well  concentrated 
and  heavy,  they  were  compelled  to  fall  back  without  being  able  to  make 
a lodgment  in  his  works,  although  Colonel  Weber  and  quite  a number 
of  his  men  reached  the  ditches,  from  which  they  found  it  impossible  to 
drive  the  enemy.  The  brigade  was  withdrawn  at  night  in  good  order. 

The  officers  and  men  of  the  Eleventh  Missouri  and  the  Forty-seventh 
Illinois  Eegiments  behaved  with  signal  courage  and  gallantry,  these  two 
being  the  only  regiments  that  were  under  the  heaviest  fire. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  A.  Mower  led  the  charge  in  person,  and  displayed 
great  coolness  and-bravery.  Colonel  Weber,  of  the  Eleventh  Missouri, 
also  distinguished  himself  for  the  same  qualities,  leading  the  chargiug 
column.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Baker  also  behaved  gallantly. 

I wish  particularly  to  call  attention  to  the  conduct  of  Sergt.  John 
Watts,  of  Comimny  A,  Forty-seventh  Illinois  Eegiment,  who,  when  his 
captain  and  second  lieutenant  had  deserted  them,  rallied  the  men  as 
they  hesitated  under  a terrific  fire,  and  by  waving  his  hat  and  cheering 
succeeded  in  moving  them  forward  in  gallant  style,  himself  leading. 
I most  respectfully  recommend  that  the  captain  of  the  comxjany,  John 
T.  Bowen,  be  dismissed,  and  Sergeant  Watts  commissioned  to  fill  the 
X)lace. 

I tender  my  thanks  to  Brigadier-Generals  Buckland,  Mower,  and 
Matthies  for  the  zeal,  efficiency,  and  military  ability  displayed  by  them 
throughout  the  entire  march  ; also  to  my  personal  staff,  Maj.  J.  B.  Mc- 
Clure, chief  of  staff*;  Capt.  J.  B.  Sample,  assistant  adj utant- general ; 
Capt.  N.  T.  Spoor,  chief  of  artillery,  and  Lieut.  C.  J.  Dickey,  assistant 
commissary  of  musters  and  acting  aide-de-camp,  for  zeal  and  efficiency 
on  the  march  and  duriug  the  engagements.  I would  also  make  most 
honorable  mention  of  Capt.  A.  C.  Waterhouse,  Company  E,  First  Illi- 
nois Artillery ; Lieuts.  J.  E.  and  C.  F.  Eeed,  Second  loAva  Battery,  and 
the  other  officers  and  men  of  those  two  batteries,  for  coolness  and 
braA^ery  under  fire. 

The  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  of  this  command  to  this  date,  as 
X)er  my  official  statement  of  casualties,  are  as  follows : Killed,  27 ; 
wounded,  200,  and  missing,  43. 

I ha.ve  the  honor  to  be,  most  respectfullA',  Amur  obedient  servant, 

^ J.  M.  TUTTLE, 
Brujadicr- General^  Commanding. 

Cai)t.  E.  M.  Saavyeu, 

AHsktant  Adjutant- General.,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 


Chap.  XXXTI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  JACKSON,  MISS. 

LImlorsement.] 


761 


Headquarters  Fieteenth  Army  Corps, 

^Valnut  Hills,  Miss.,  June  8,  1863. 

In  forwarding’  this  report  of  General  Tuttle,  1 heartily  sanction  and 
indorse  his  specitic  recommendation  that  Capt.  John  T.  Bowen,  of  Com- 
])a,ny  A,  Forty-seventh  Illinois,  be  mustered  ont  of  service,  and  Sergt. 
John  Watts,  of  same  company,  be  commissioned  as  cai)tain.  Moments 
snch  as  existed,  when  General  Mower’s  brigade  charged  in  column 
across  the  exi)osed  ridge  develop  the  true  soldierly  qualities,  which  the 
sergeant  is  reported  to  have  signally  displayed  at  the  expense  of  his 
ca])tain. 

General  Tuttle’s  division  is  entitled  to  special  notice  lor  the  orderly 
behavior  of  his  men  on  the  march  and  the  promptness  with  which  all 
details  were  made  anil  orders  executed.  His  brigadier- generals.  Buck- 
land,  Mower,  and  Matthies,  were  always  noticed  by  me  during  the  march 
and  events  recorded  by  General  Tuttle,  and  I commend  them  all  for  the 
faithful  and  earnest  discharge  of  their  important  duties.  I feel  assured 
that  honors  and  labor  enough  await  them  in  the  events  still  to  occur 
before  this  campaign  closes. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major- General,  Commanding. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Ralph  P.  Bueldand,  U.  id.  Army,  commanding  First 
Brigade,  including  operations  May  2-22. 

Hdqrs.  1st  Brigade,  3d  Division,  I5tii  Army  Corps, 

Near  Yickshurg,  Miss.,  June  8,  1863. 

Sir  : In  pursuance  of  directions  from  division  headquarters,  I have 
the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  this  brigade  from  the  2d  to 
the  22d  of  May,  inclusive : 

As  this  brigade  was  not  separated  from  the  division  in  the  march 
from  Duckport  to  Jackson,  Miss.,  it  is  not  deemed  necessary  to  give  in 
detail  each  day’s  march. 

We  commenced  our  march  from  Duckport  at  10  a.  m.  May  2,  with 
two  teams  to  the  regiment,  taking  five  days’  rations  in  haversacks  and 
teams,. and  100  rounds  of  ammunition  per  man  in  cartouch-boxes  and 
teams,  leaving  tents,  baggage,  and  all  but  very  few  cooking  utensils 
behind.  We  reached  Hard  Times  and  crossed  over  to  Grand  Gulf  on 
the  7th,  but  were  not  able  to  cross  our  teams,  which  contained  all  the 
rations  we  had. 

During  the  night  word  was  sent  to  me  that  the  commissary  was  pre- 
l^ared  to  issue  rations  of  hard  bread,  &c.,  but  when  applied  for  early 
in  the  morning  all  the  hard  bread  had  been  issued  to  the  other  bri- 
gades, reserving  none  for  mine.  Notwithstanding  this  unjustiliable 
conduct  of  the  commissary,  when  the  command  “forward”  was  given, 
every  man  was  in  his  i)lace,  and  my  brigade  moved  promptly  forward, 
without  transportation  and  with  empty  haversacks,  not  knowing  where 
the  next  meal  was  to  come  from.  Other  troops  having  gone  before  us, 
it  was  difiQcult  to  procure  provisions  on  the  road.  Every  effort  was 
made  to  supply  the  deficiency,  but  inanj'  of  the  officers  and  men  suf- 
fered extreme  liunger. 

We  encamped  that  night  at  Willow  Springs,  where  we  remained 


762 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


until  4 p.  m.  the  next  day.  A plenty  of  fresh  meat  was  procured,  but 
very  little  meal,  not  enough  for  one-tenth  part  of  the  command.  Hav- 
ing no  cooking  utensils,  the  soldiers  cooked  their  meat  on  sticks  and 
as  best  they  could.  We  reached  Eocky  Springs  some  time  after  dark 
on  the  evening  of  the  9th,  where  we  remained  until  the  morning  of  the 
11th.  Here  the  commissary  brought  up  some  rations  of  hard  bread 
and  meat,  and  issued  three-fifth  rations  for  three  days.  This  scanty 
supply  of  hard  bread  was  a great  relief  and  a great  luxury  for  the  sol- 
diers, who  renewed  their  march  on  the  morning  of  the  11th,  refreshed 
and  in  fine  spirits. 

At  Cayuga  the  Ninety-fifth  Ohio,  Colonel  McMillen,  was  ordered  to 
Hall’s  Ferry,  on  the  Black  Eiver,  to  guard  that  crossing,  but  the  road 
the  colonel  was  directed  to  take  took  him  to  Baldwin’s  Ferry,  where  he 
found  a few  of  the  enemy’s  pickets,  which  he  drove  across  the  river. 
Colonel  McMillen  returned  to  the  brigade  with  his  regiment  on  the  even- 
ing of  the  13th,  having  made  about  12  miles  extra  marching,  which  was 
very  severe  on  his  men. 

May  14. — To-day,  according  to  the  regular  programme  of  the  march, 
my  brigade  was  entitled  to  lead,  but,  by  order  of  General  Sherman, 
General  Mower  took  the  advance  and  my  brigade  the  rear,  General 
Tuttle’s  division  being  in  advance  of  General  Steele’s.  On  the  march, 
Waterhouse’s  battery,  which  had  been  assigned  to  my  brigade,  was 
ordered  forward,  and,  when  the  advance  encountered  the  enemy’s  skir- 
mishers near  Jackson,  was  ordered  into  position.  My  brigade  was  or- 
dered into  line  of  battle  in  the  rear  of  the  Third  Brigade,  and  advanced 
in  line  across  an  open  field,  crossing  a ravine,  which  proved  to  be  deeper 
than  was  supposed.  After  crossing  the  ravine,  General  Sherman  or- 
dered the  brigade  to  follow  the  batteries  by  the  right  flank.  The  bat- 
teries being  again  ordered  into  position,  the  Seventy-second  Ohio  was 
ordered  to  take  position  on  the  right,  and  the  other  regiments  to  sup- 
port the  batteries  on  the  center  and  left.  This  ijoint  was  in  range  of 
the  enemy’s  batteries,  which  were  served  with  admirable  precision. 

Here  the  Ninety-third  Indiana  had  2 men  killed  and  8 wounded,  1 mor,- 
tally — since  dead ; the  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Illinois,  1 killed  and 
2 wounded  j Waterhouse’s  battery,  2 wounded.  This  was  the  first  time 
these  two  regiments  had  been  under  fire,  but  officers  and  men  behaved 
with  the  coolness  of  veterans.  Not  a man  left  his  post.  Colonel  Mc- 
Millen, with  the  Ninety-fifth  Ohio,  was  ordered  to  reconnoiter  the  en- 
emy’s position  on  the  right,  where  he  found  the  enemy’s  rifle-pits  unoccu- 
pied, and  thereupon  marched  into  the  city  and  to  the  rear  of  the  enemy’s 
batteries,  taking  them  by  surprise.  Colonel  McMillen  captured  G guns, 
1 captain,  3 first  lieutenants,  2 second  lieutenants,  and  40  enlisted  men. 
The  Ninety-fifth  Ohio  had  the  honor  of  being  the  first  to  enter  the  cap- 
ital of  Mississippi.  Having  marched  my  brigade  within  the  enemy’s 
works,  I was  ordered  to  encamp  in  a grove  near  the  road  leading  out 
of  the  city  westward.  We  went  into  camp,  and  the  men  had  got  pretty 
(comfortably  fixed  for  drying  their  clothes,  having  marched  most  of  the 
(lay  in  a drenching  rain,  when  I received  an  order  to  post  my  brigade 
along  the  rifle-ints,  in  iiosition  to  man  them  in  case  of  an  attack.  This 
was  pretty  hard  for  men  who  had  marched  all  day  in  the  rain,  with  very 
little  to  eat,  the  rain  still  continuing  at  intervals.  The  order  was  obeye(i, 
and  submitted  to  with  less  complaint  than  might  have  been  expccte(l 
under  the  circumstances.  The  next  morning  my  brigade  was  ordered 
(o  proceed  at  once  to  destroy  the  railroad  leading  irom  Jackson  to  Vicks- 
burg. We  had  not  a tool  of  any  description,  and  could  procure  none 
from  the  provost-marshal.  I borrowed  four  axes  of  Waterhouse’s  bat- 


Chap.  XXXVL]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  JACKSON,  MISS.  763 

tery,  oue  for-each  regiment,  and  took  up  my  line  of  march  in  accordance 
with  orders,  trusting  to  luck  for  tools  and  rations.  Passing  through  a 
rebel  camp  we  had  the  good  luck  to  find  five  or  six  axes  and  as  many 
picks,  and  with  these  we  commenced  the  work  of  destruction,  and  be- 
fore night  we  had  completely  destroyed  several  miles  of  the  road.  We 
encamped  that  night  about  4 miles  from  Jackson,  surrounding  our  camp 
with  a chain  of  pickets.  During  the  day  I sent  out  a foraging  party, 
wlio  collected  an  abundance  of  cattle  and  sheep;  but  we  had  no  bread. 
The  next  morning  we  renewed  the  work  of  destruction,  proceeding 
toward  Clinton,  which  point  we  reached  a little  afternoon,  and  awaited 
Ibe  arrival  of  the  division,  having  totally  destroyed  about  G miles  of 
railroad  by  piling  up  the  ties,  laying  the  rails  across,  and  burning  them. 
At  Clinton  the  regimental  teams  joined  the  brigade  with  ammunition 
and  a very  small  supply  of  hard  bread.  We  did  not  get  into  camp  that 
night  until  some  time  after  midnight,  and  were  ordered  to  be  ready  to 
march  at  daylight. 

We  arrived  in  the  vicinity  of  our  present  position  on  the  afternoon  of 
the  18th,  the  Ninety-third  Indiana,  Colonel  Thomas,  being  ordered  to 
take  a position  on  the  direct  road  to  Vicksburg,  and  hold  it  until  re- 
lieved by  the  advance  of  General  McPherson’s  corps.  Colonel  Thomas 
was  relieved  and  joined  the  brigade  during  the  night. 

At  2 p.  m.  on  the  19th,  I was  ordered  forward  to  support  General  Blair 
in  his  charge  upon  the  enemy’s  works.  I advanced  my  brigade  by  the 
right  flank,  according  to  orders,  the  Seventy-second  Ohio  leading,  the 
other  regiments  following  closely,  as  follows : Ninety-fifth  Ohio,  One 
hundred  and  fourteenth  Illinois,  Ninety-third  Indiana.  I was  directed 
by  a staff  officer  of  General  Blair  to  the  position  I was  to  occupy,  who 
directed  to  put  three  regiments  on  the  right  and  one  on  the  left  of  the 
road.  I advanced  with  the  head  of  my  column  along  the  road,  under 
a severe  fire  of  musketry  from  the  enemy,  to  the  position  indicated. 
Just  as  the  three  leading  regiments  had  got  over  to  the  right  of  the 
road.  General  Blair  sent  word  that  he  wanted  two  regiments  on  the  right 
and  two  on  the  left,  which  necessitated  the  crossing  of  the  One  hun- 
dred and  fourteenth  Illinois  over  to  the  left,  under  a heavy  fire  from 
the  enemy.  The  movement  was  made  by  Colonel  Judy  in  gallant  style, 
with  a loss  of  1 man  killed  and  9 wounded,  2 mortally — since  dead.  The 
Seventy- second  Ohio  had  1 man  killed  and  12  wounded,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Crockett,  commanding,  being  himself  slightly  wounded.  The 
Ninety-fifth  Ohio  had  2 men  wounded.  The  Ninety-third  Indiana,  on 
this  day,  had  1 man  killed  and  5 wounded. 

My  brigade  was  in  position  as  follows:  The  Seventy-second  Ohio 
along  tlie  ridge,  left  resting  on  the  road ; the  Ninety-fifth  Ohio  in  rear 
of  the  Seventy- second;  the  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Illinois  along 
the  ridge,  right  resting  on  the  road;  and  the  Ninety-third  Indiana  along 
the  ridge,  on  the  left  of  the  One  hundred  and  fourteenth. 

About  dusk.  General  Blair’s  troops,  in  advance,  retired,  leaving  no 
troops  in  the  advance  of  my  brigade.  I immediately  ordered  pickets 
and  guards  to  be  thrown  out  to  the  front. 

My  brigade  remained  in  this  position,  being  the  advance  at  this 
l)oint,  until  tbe  evening  of  the  21st,  when  my  brigade  was  withdrawn, 
except  the  Ninety-third  Indiana,  which  did  not  withdraw  until  the 
morning  of  the  22d. 

From  the  evening  of  the  19th  until  the  evening  of  the  21st,  my  brigade 
maintained  this  front  line,  keeping  up  a constant  fire  of  sharpshooters 
during  the  day  and  throwing  forward  guards  at  night,  and  having  several 
men  killed  and  wounded. 


764 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TEKN'ESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Oil  the  22tl,  my  brigade  was  again  ordered  to  support  the  troops  of 
General  Blair.  The  Seventy-second  Ohio  was  ordered  to  take  position 
on  the  left  of  the  advance  of  Col.  Kilby  Smith’s  brigade,  wdiere  it  re- 
mained until  evening,  when  it  rejoined  the  brigade,  which  had  taken 
imsition  on  the  same  ridge,  on  the  left  of  the  road,  previously  occupied 
by  the  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  and  Ninety-third. 

I send  herewith  a full  statement  of  the  casualties  of  my  brigade  at 
Jackson  on  the  14th,  and  at  Vicksburg  on  the  19th,  20th,  21st,  and  22d, 
showing  — 


Killed 9 

Wounded 01 

Missing 2 


Total 


72 


1 take  this  o|)portunity  to  express  my  sincere  thanks  to  Colonel  Me 
Millen,  Niuety-tifth  Ohio;  Colonel  Judy,  One  hundred  and  fourteenth 
Illinois;  Colonel  Thomas,  Ninety-third  Indiana,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Crockett,  Seventy-second  Ohio,  for  the  able  and  prompt  manner  in  which 
they  have  performed  their  duties,  and  through  them  also  to  the  officers 
and  men  under  their  command. 

I am  proud  of  my  brigade.  During  this  long  and  tedious  march 
not  in  a single  instance  has  any  regiment  been  behind  time.  My  thanks 
are  also  due  to  my  staff  officers  lor  the  faithful  iierformance  of  their 
duties. 

I must  here  say  a word  in  praise  of  the  line  officers  of  the  brigade. 
Deprived  of  all  transportation,  even  for  jirovisions,  they  have  endured 
fatigue  and  hunger  without  complaint,  setting  a noble  examiile  which 
has  had  a beneficial  influence  upon  the  conduct  of  the  men.  U])onthis 
subject  I refer  to  the  report  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Crockett,  Seventy- 
second  Ohio  Volunteers.  I venture  to  say  that,  owing  to  circumstances 
beyond  my  control,  my  brigade  suffered  more  from  the  want  of  food 
than  any  other  in  tliis  army  ; yet  I doubt  whether  any  reached  the  end 
of  the  march  in  better  condition  or  better  spirits.  I repeat,  I am  proud 
of  my  brigade. 

Kespectfully  submitted. 


B.  r.  BUCKLAND, 

Brigadier- General^  Commanding  First  Brigade. 


Capt.  J.  B.  Sample, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


No.  5. 

Eeport  of  Col.  DeWitt  C.  Thomas^  Ninety  third  Indiana  Infantry in- 
eluding operations  31ay  2- July  IG. 

Markham’s.  Blantation,  Miss., 

August  9,  1803. 

Gentlemen  : In  accordance  with  General  Orders,  No.  G4,  Ecadijuar- 
ters  Fifteenth  Army  Corps,  I herewith  submit  my  condensed  report  of 
the  different  engagements,  and  the  part  my  regiment  has  taken  in  them. 

1 left  Duckport,  La.,  on  the  2d  day  of  May,  with  five  days’  rations  in 
my  men’s  haversacks  and  wagons,  and  one  hundred  rounds  of  ammuni- 
tion per  man,  two  wagons  being  allowed  for  transportation.  I left 
Grand  Gulf  on  the  8th  of  May,  without  transportation  or  rations.  On 


Chap.  XXXVI.  1 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  JACKSON,  MISS. 


7G5 


the  third  day  after  leaving  Grand  Gulf,  I received  three-fifths  rations 
of  crackers  for  my  men  (having  been  four  days  without  bread).  From 
that  time  until  I arrived  at  Clinton,  on  our  return  from  Jackson,  I did 
not  receive  any  rations  from  the  Government,  but  had  to  rely  upon  the 
country  for  provisions,  which  you,  gentlemen,  have  a good  idea  as  to  the 
amount  we  received. 

We  arrived  at  Jackson  on  the  14th  day  of  May,  my  men  being  very 
much  fatigued  (it  having  rained  all  day  incessantly).  Our  brigade  (the 
Thirst,  General  Buckland  commanding),  being  in  the  reserve,  formed  line 
of  battle  in  the  rear  of  the  Second  (General  MoweFs).  When  we  re- 
ceived the  fire  of  the  enemy,  the  Second  Brigade  was  deployed  to  tlie 
right  and  left  of  the  road,  the  I'irst  Brigade  coming  up  in  the  center  to 
the  support  of  Waterhouse’s  battery.  My  regiment  being  in  column, 
and  in  direct  range  of  the  enemy’s  battery,  suffered  considerably  from 
the  shells.  Although  they  were  exploding  incessantly  for  over  an  hour, 
my  men  and  officers  stood  like  old  veterans,  the  shell  doing  execution 
at  every  explosion.  (I  make  this  remark  on  account  of  this  being  the 
first  fire  my  regiment  was  under.) 

My  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  in  this  engagement  was  3 killed  and 
7 wounded.  One  of  my  men  had  his  leg  taken  off  by  a shell,  and  w^as 
left,  at  Jackson,  and  is  now  at  Bichmond,  Ya. 

We  arrived  at  Vicksburg  on  the  evening  of  the  18th.  My  regiment 
took  position  on  the  main  Wcksburg  road,  and  held  the  position  until  I 
was  relieved  by  General  Eansom  (of  General  McPherson’s  corps)  at 
midnight. 

On  the  19th,  our  division  acted  as  a reserve  to  General  Blair’s  divis- 
ion. At  2 o’clock  we  moved  forward  on  the  road  leading  to  the  large 
bastion  in  front  of  the  Fifteenth  Army  Corps,  under  a very  heavy  fire 
of  musketry,  grape,  &c.  I took  position  on  the  crest  of  the  hill  next  in 
front  of  the  bastion  on  the  left  of  the  road,  and  on  the  left  of  the  One 
hundred  and  fourteenth  Illinois  Begiment,  its  right  resting  on  the  road, 
my  left  extending  to  the  right  of  General  McPherson’s  corps.  While 
getting  into  this  position,  1 had  1 man  killed  and  2 wounded. 

About  11  or  12  o’clock  the  night  of  the  19th,  I was  notified  by  an  offi- 
cer from  the  brigade  in  my  front,  belonging  to  General  Blair’s  division, 
that  they  were  moving  out,  and  ordered  me  to  place  outpickets  in  my 
front  next  the  intrenchments,  which  I did,  and  continued  so  to  do  until 
the  morning  of  the  22d,  when  I was  ordered  to  report  to  the  brigade  in 
the  rear,  it  having  withdrawn  the  evening  previous  from  my  riglit. 

On  the  morning  of  the  22d,  I again  moved  forward  immediately  in  a 
hollow  in  the  rear  of  my  position  on  the  19th.  Laid  there  one  night 
and  day,  when  our  brigade  was  moved  to  the  rear  of  Waterhouse’s  and 
Second  Iowa  Batteries^  when  I furnished  from  one  to  two  companies  a 
day  as  sharpshooters  and  150  men  as  diggers. 

My  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  at  Vicksburg  was  3 killed  and  13 
wounded. 

On  the  morning  of  the  22d  of  June,  I took  up  line  of  march  for  Little 
Bear  Creek,  and  on  the  4th  of  July  I was  again  on  the  move  for  Jack- 
son,  via  Messinger’s  Ford.  Crossed  the  river  in  the  evening  of  the  fit  h. 
My  regiment  was  sent  forward  as  skirmishers,  accompanied  by  two 
companies  from  the  brigade.  After  firing  a few  shots,  the  enemy  disa]>- 
l)earcd. 

Arrived  at  Jackson  on  the  10th.  Formed  a line  of  battle  in  an  o])en 
field  in  the  rear  of  Waterhouse’s  battery.  While  in  this  position  the  bat- 
teries in  the  large  bastion  on  the  Jackson  road,  and  especially  the  big 
gun,  troubled  us  a great  deal,  and  also  the  unexploded  shell  fired  at 


766 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  KXXVI. 


Waterhouse’s  battery,  by  striking  in  and  around  my  regiment,  but  the 
men,  as  before,  at  Jackson,  stood  firm  and  unflinching. 

1 held  this  position  until  the  evening  of  the  IStli,  when  the  First 
Brigade  was  ordered  to  relieve  a brigade  of  General  Osterhaus’  division 
on  the  right,  which  was  done  at  9 p.  m.  same  evening.  The  next  morn- 
ing General  Sherman  ordered  our  pickets  to  advance  on  the  enemy’s 
works,  he  having  information  that  the  enemy  were  evacuating.  We 
soon  found  that  this  was  not  the  case.  Company  E,  Captain  McGrayel, 
of  my  regiment,  participated  in  the  advance  and  acquitted  himself  with 
great  credit.  The  position  my  regiment  occupied  was  very  much  ex- 
posed, but  the  men  and  officers  sustained  themselves  as  heretofore  with 
great  credit. 

My  loss  at  this  figlit  at  Jackson  was  1 killed  and  3 wounded  ; making 
a total  since  crossing  the  Mississippi  of  30  wounded  and  7 killed. 

D.  C.  THOMAS, 

Colonel^  Commanding  Ninety-third  Indiana. 

General  EwiNa, 

Colonels  Williams  and  Blood. 


No.  G. 


Report  of  Col.  William  L.  MeMillen^  Ninety -fifth  Ohio  Infantry. 


• Jackson,  Miss.,  May  15,  18G3. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  Ninety-fifth  Ohio  Volunteers  in  the  engagement  at  this 
place  yesterday : 

We  reached  the  field  of  action  with  the  balance  of  the  brigade,  and 
deployed,  by  order  of  Colonel  Buckland,  on  the  left  of  the  road  leading 
into  Jackson.  We  advanced  in  line  for  some  distance,  and  then  by  tlie 
flank  to  within  a mile  of  the  city,  at  which  point  my  regiment  was  or- 
dered to  make  a reconnaissance,  under  the  direction  of  one  of  General 
Sherman’s  staff.  Deploying  one  company  as  skirmishers,  we  advanced 
to  the  right  of  our  line  until  we  struck  the  New  Orleans  Kailroad,  and 
then  along  that  road  toward  the  city,  taking  possession  of  a rebel  camp 
and  a long  line  of  rifle-pits,  both  of  which  we  found  deserted.  Here  I 
formed  in  line,  and  planted  my  colors  in  full  view  of  the  city.  Learn- 
ing from  a negro  who  came  to  me  that  the  place  had  been  evacuated, 
with  the  exception  of  a small  number  left  to  work  a battery  which  was 
playing  at  the  time  on  our  main  column,  and  ascertaining  from  him  also 
its  position,  I moved  my  regiment  rapidly  through  a street  in  the  sub- 
urbs and  gained  its  rear.  Deploying  one  wing  as  skirmishers,  and  form- 
ing the  other  in  line,  I advanced,  capturing  the  battery  (nine  i)ieces), 
52  prisoners,  consisting  of  1 captain,  3 first  lieutenants,  2 second  lieu- 
tenants, and  4G  non-commissioned  officers  and  privates,  and  about  40 
stand  of  arms. 

A list  of  the  prisoners  is  herewith  forwarded.  I am  happy  to  state 
tliat  I met  with  no  casualties,  and  cannot  speak  in  too  high  terms  of 
the  bravery,  gallantry,  and  endurance  displayed  by  every  officer  and 
man  of  my  regiment. 

T am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  L.  McMlLLEN, 
Colonel,  Commanding. 

Lieut.  E.  A.  Eawson, 


A.  A.  A.  (7.,  Ist  Brigade,  3d,  Blrision,  loth  Army  Corps. 


Chap.  XXXYL]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  JACKSON,  MISS.  767 

No.  7. 

Report  of  Col.  Lucius  F.  Suhhard,  Fifth  Minnesota  Infantry^  Second 
Brigade.)  including  operations  May  2-22. 

Walnut  Hills, 

Near  Vicksburg)  Miss.)  May  25,  18G3. 

Colonel  : I liave  tlie  honor  to  submit,  for  the  information  of  your 
•department,  the  following  details  of  the  part  sustained  by  the  Fifth 
Minnesota  Infantry  in  the  movements  of  the  late  campaign  in  this  de- 
partment, which  have  culminated  in  the  thorough  investment  of  the 
rebel  Gibraltar  and  its  garrison  at  Vicksburg: 

On  the  2d  instant,  the  Third  Division  of  the  Fifteenth  Army  Corps, 
of  which  the  Fifth  Minnesota  forms  a part,  left  camp  at  Duckport,  near 
Young’s  Point,  La.,  and  marched,  via  Itichmond,  to  Hard  Times  Land- 
ing, crossing  the  river  at  the  latter  place  to  Grand  Gulf,  Miss.,  on  the 
7th  instant.  From  thence  we  took  the  road  toward  Jackson,  arriving 
at  Eaymond,  12  miles  from  the  State  capital,  at  about  noon  of  the  13tli 
instant.  Here  the  Fifth  Minnesota  was  ordered  to  the  front,  with  in- 
structions to  skirmish  along  the  road  and  through  the  timber  uiion 
either  flank,  to  feel  for  the  enemy’s  outposts,  and  clear  the  way  for  the 
column  to  pass.  We  advanced  about  4 miles  before  meeting  obstruc- 
tions, when  a considerable  body  of  rebel  cavalry  was  encountered  ad- 
vantageously posted  in  a piece  of  woods  in  our  front,  from  whence  we 
received  a sharp  volley  of  musketry.  I here  deployed  the  entire  regi- 
ment as  skirmishers  upon  the  right  and  left  of  the  road,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Gere  commanding  the  left  wing.  The  enemy  retired  rapidly  as 
we  advanced,  ofiering  little  resistance  to  our  progress.  I moved  the  line 
of  skirmishers  forward  to  Mississippi  Springs,  1 J miles,  a point  where 
several  important  pikes  form  a junction,  and  where  I was  ordered  to 
halt,  picket  the  roads,  and  bivouac  for  the  night.  The  main  column 
had  halted  and  bivouacked  where  the  enemy  had  been  first  encountered. 

At  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  14th,  I was  ordered  to  continue  in 
the  advance,  and  push  forward  on  the  Jackson  road.  A considerable 
body  of  the  enemy  had  bivouacked  the  preceding  night  within  one-half 
mile  of  mjMine  of  pickets,  which  retired  as  we  moved  forward.  Owing 
to  the  broken  and  wooded  nature  of  the  country,  and  the  known  prox- 
imity of  the  enemy,  we  were  required  to  move  slowly  and  with  extreme 
caution.  For  a distance  of  more  than  5 miles  I was  required  to  keep  in 
front  of  the  column  a strong  line  of  skirmishers,  consisting  of  three 
companies,  which  frequently  encountered  and  exchanged  volle.^s  with 
the  skirmishers  of  the  enemy.  When  within  perhaps  2 miles  of  Jack- 
son,  a determined  stand  was  made,  and  a hot  fire  opened  upon  us  from  a 
full  battery  of  artillery,  supported  by  a strong  line  of  infantry.  At 
this  juncture  I was  ordered  by  Major-General  Sherman  to  deploy  the 
balance  of  the  regiment  as  skirmishers,  covering  the  column  while  it 
should  form  in  line,  and  penetrate  forward  as  far  as  possible  into  a 
piece  of  timber  in  which  the  enemy  was  posted.  As  soon  as  the  column 
had  deployed,  the  skirmishers  were  recalled,  and  the  regiment  took 
its  position  with  the  Second  Brigade  in  the  front  line  of  battle.  We 
then  advanced  and  charged  through  the  timber  at  double-quick,  the 
enemy  rai)idly  retiring  within  his  intrenchments  near  the  precinct  of 
the  town.  Here  he  made  another  stand,  and  obstinately  disputed  oiir 
farther  progress.  The  fight  continued  for  more  than  an  hour,  but  was 
confined  principally  to  artillery,  the  infantry  occu])ying  a position  of 
shelter.  At  about  5 p.  m.  the  order  ^Hbrward  ” was  given.  All  supposing 


768 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

we  were  about  to  assault  the  enemy’s  works  in  our  front,  with  bayonets 
fixed  and  with  exultant  shouts  the  line  moved  forward  at  a run.  It 
was  soon  discovered,  however,  that  the  enemy  had  evacuated,  and  that 
the  charge  would  be  a bloodless  one.  The  enemy  had  made  a imecipi- 
tate  exit  from  the  town,  leaving  all  his  artillery  to  fall  an  easy  capture 
into  our  hands. 

It  had  rained  furiously  all  day.  The  men  were  very  weary  and  tlior- 
oughly  wet,  having  been  not  only  exposed  to  the  storm  but  required  to 
wade  streams  and  penetrate  dense  thickets  through  almost  impassable 
swamps  Avhile  skirmishing  the  country  through  which  tlie  column  passed. 
They  had  also  been  almost  entirely  without  rations  tor  twenty -four 
hours ; yet  not  a man  straggled  to  the  rear,  nor  did  a syllable  of  com- 
plaint pass  their  lips.  Their  heroic  endurance  of  ])rivation  and  expos- 
ure and  unexceptionable  good  conduct  in  action  elicited  from  the  gen- 
eral commanding,  under  whose  immediate  eye  they  had  acted,  encomi- 
ums of  a most  flattering  character. 

The  Fifth  Minnesota,  with  the  balance  of  the  Second  Brigade,  was 
assigned  to  duty  as  i)rovost  guard  of  the  city  of  Jackson,  and  quarters 
assigned  tliein  in  the  Capitol  Square.  Each  individual  man  seemed  to 
feel  it  to  be  the  proudest  day  of  his  life  as  the  old  flag  of  our  regiment 
was  unfurled  to  the  breeze  in  the  capital  city  of  tlie  rebel  President’s 
own  State.  Even  the  tattered  and  faded  emblem  itself  seemed  to  feel 
inspired  b^"  the  occasion,  and  shook  its  folds  more  grandly  than  ever  as 
a response  to  the  scornful  glances  of  tlie  conquered  traitors  of  this 
rebellious  capital. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  10th,  Jackson  was  evacuated  and  the  column 
marched  toward  Vicksburg,  arriving  in  front  of  the  rebel  works  on  the 
19th  instant. 

We  here  lay  quietly  in  bivouac  until  the  morning  of  the  22d,  when 
a general  assault  was  ordered  upon  the  fortifications  of  the  place.  The 
regiment  was  exjiosed  to  a musketry  fire  for  several  hours  during  the 
fore  part  of  the  day,  but  fortunately  escaped  casualty.  At  about  4 p.  m. 
the  Second  Brigade  Avas  ordered  to  make  a charge  upon  a strong  point 
in  the  defenses,  Avhere  a similar  attempt  had  met  Avith  reiiulse  in  the 
morning. 

The  broken  nature  of  the  country  and  inaccessible  character  of  the 
]iosition  made  it  necessary  that  the  storming  column  should  move  by 
the  flank.  The  position  of  the  Fifth  Minnesota  was  upon  the  left  of  the 
brigade,  hence  Avas  the  fourth  regiment  in  the  column.  Tliis  circum- 
stance saved  the  regiment  from  a fearful  slaughter,  for  as  the  head  of 
the  column  emerged  from  the  cover  of  the  timber  and  jiassed  an  oiien 
sjiace  leading  to  the  Avork,  it  Avas  met  and  literally  melted  doAAUi  by  a 
terrific  fire  of  musketry  and  artillery,  the  latter  double-shotted  Avith  can- 
ister and  grape.  From  my  position,  Avithin  range,  along  the  Avhole  line 
of  defenses  a fire  aa  as  concentrated  u])on  this  point,  where  the  column 
must  pass. 

Within  jmobably  the  space  of  a minute  the  brigade  lost  upAvard  of  200 
men,  principally  sustained  by  the  leading  regiment.  The  Fifth  Minne- 
sota lost^but  2.  The  general  commanding  the  brigade  at  once  declared 
it  futile  to  attempt  to  move  the  column  on.  The  road  had  been  blocked 
up  Avith  the  dead  and  Avounded.  The  right  of  the  column  had  become 
shattered  and  A\'as  in  disorder.  The  ])arts  of  regiments  left  Avere  or- 
dered into  a raAune,  Avhere  they  rallied  under  c.oaut,  Avhile  the  Fifth 
Minnesota,  in  good  order  and  Avith  but  2 men  missing,  tiled  doAvii  the 
ravine,  Aviiere  the  nature  of  tlie  ground  aflbrded  comi)lete  shelter. 

Nothing  could  exceed  the  coolness  and  steady  courage  of  the  regi- 


Chap.  XXXVT.] 


769 


£NGAGEMP:NT  at  jackson,  miss. 

nieiit  as  it  marched  up  to  the  assault.  Noue  faltered  or  seemed  weak 
with  fear,  but  each  man’s  couuteiiaiice  bespoke  a determination  to  do 
or  die,  and  had  it  not  been  ordered  otherwise  1 believe  every  man  would 
have  passed  the  feaiful  i)lace  or  lain  his  body  ou  the  way. 

Great  credit  is  due  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Gere  and  to  the  officers  of 
the  regiment  generally,  both  at  Jackson  and  Vicksburg,  for  their  efforts 
in  preserving  order  among  the  men  and  for  their  examples  of  personal 
daring  and  gallantry  in  action. 

Very  respectfidly,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  F.  HUBBAKD, 

Colonel^  Commanding. 

Colonel  Malmros, 

Adjuta^it- General,  Minnesota. 


m.  8. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Charles  L.  Matthies,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third 
Brigade,  inchiding  o][)erations  May  15-22. 

IIdqrs.  3d  Brigade,  3d  Division,  15th  Army  Corps, 

Walnut  mils.  Miss.,  June  1,  1803. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  reports  : 

1.  From  the  day  the  brigade  left  Duckport,  La.,  until  the  day  of  the 
commencement  of  the  siege  of  Vicksburg. 

In  obedience  to  orders  of  division  headquarters,  this  brigade,  formed 
by  the  Eighth,  Twelfth,  and  Thirty-fifth  Eegiments  Iowa  Infantry,  left 
camp,  Duckport,  La.,  May  2,  at  9 a.  m.  Owing  to  the  bad  state  of  the 
road,  our  movement  was  much  delayed  that  day.  We  bivouacked  10 
miles  from  Richmond. 

Reached  Richmond  May  3,  at  4 p.  m.,  leaving  camp  on  the  4th,  at  6 
a.  m.  Nothing  impeded  our  march,  the  roads  being  good.  We  reached 
Hard  Times  Landing  May  7,  at  10  a.  m. 

After  a short  delay  at  that  place,  the  Eighth  Iowa  Infantry  was  trans- 
ported on  a gunboat,  and  the  Twelfth  and  Thirty-hfth  Iowa  on  a small 
transport  boat,  across  the  Mississipiii  River  to  Grand  Gulf,  Miss.  Re- 
mained in  camp  until  May  8,  at  11  a.  m.,  and,  after  drawing  three  days’ 
rations,  we  marched  without  interruption.  We  made  camp  10  miles 
from  Grand  Gulf. 

Advanced  to  Rocky  Springs  ou  May  0 ; rested  over  on  Sunday,  the 
loth  ; bivouacked  on  the  11th,  9 miles  from  Edwards  Depot ; bivouacked 
on  the  12th  in  line  of  battle;  passed  Raymond  at  4 p.  m. ; formed  line 
of  battle  3 miles  east  of  Raymond,  the  brigade  on  the  left  of  the  Sec- 
ond Iowa  Battery  ; advanced  in  the  whole  line  in  good  order,  and 
bivouacked  for  the  night  3 miles  west  of  Mississippi  Springs. 

May  14,  at  5 a.  m.,  the  brigade  advanced  toward  Jackson,  following 
the  Second  Brigade. 

The  most  drenching  rain,  which  poured  down  on  our  men  and  Hooded 
the  roads,  made  this  last  march  very  fatiguing.  Sharp  liring  was  heard 
during  this  march  toward  our  left.  The  men  felt  cheerful,  and  soon 
reached  an  elevation  3 miles  west  of  Jackson,  where,  by  order  of  Major- 
General  Sherman,  the  brigade  was  placed  on  the  left  of  Gaptain  Water- 
house’s  battery.  Ghanged  this  position  again,  by  order  of  General 

49  B B — VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


770 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chat*.  XXX V'I. 


Tuttle,  Jiiid  was  formed  on  the  left  of  the  Second  brigade,  which  was 
advancing  into  line  of  battle  on  one  of  the  main  roads  toward  Jackson. 
Here  the  brigade  was  halted,  and  was  ordered  by  Major-General  Sher- 
man into  line  on  the  right  of  the  Second  Iowa  Battery,  which  was 
placed  on  the  left  of  the  main  road,  near  the  enemyAs  works.  Skir- 
mishers thrown  out  to  the  front  soon  entered  the  rebel  ritle-pits,  and 
two  companies  from  the  Eighth  Iowa  Infantry  established  a connection 
with  the  Ninety-fifth  Ohio  Infantry,  which  occupied  the  rebel  rifle-pits 
on  my  left.  Several  shells,  which  were  thrown  from  the  rebel  works  over 
my  line,  endangered  the  lives  of  Major-Generals  Grant  and  Sherman, 
whose  headquarters  were  established  in  front  of  a small  cottage  in  the 
immediate  rear  of  ray  brigade. 

The  order  of  advance  was  given  by  General  Tuttle  to  move  on  the 
works.^^  We  only  proceeded  50  paces,  when  the  brigade  was  ordered 
to  march  by  the  right  flank  on  the  right  of  the  road  toward  town,  the 
enemy  having  evacuated.  The  brigade  was  then  ordered  by  General 
Tuttle  to  occupy  the  rifle-pits  on  the  southwest  side  of  the  town.  During 
the  afternoon  we  captured  12  rebel  prisoners. 

On  Monday  (15th),  in  obedience  to  orders  from  division  and  army  corps 
headquarters,  I moved  with  my  brigade  5 miles  on  the  railroad  leading 
north  out  of  Jackson,  and  destroyed  3 miles  of  that  road  so  thoroughly 
that  every  tie  was  burned  and  every  rail  bent,  so  it  Avill  require  new 
material  to  X)ut  that  part  of  the  road  in  operation  again.  At  8 o’clock 
we  returned  to  the  rifle-pits  southwest  of  the  town  with  15  prisoners, 
whom  I turned  over  to  the  provost-marshal  of  the  post. 

On  the  IGth,  at  11  a.  m.,  we  lell  Jackson,  and  reached  Bolton  on  the 
17th,  at  2 a.  m.  Left  camp  at  daylight;  bivouacked  at  Bridgeport; 
crossed  the  Big  Black  on  the  18th,  at  6 a.  m.,  and  arrived  on  the  rebel 
lines,  in  rear  of  Vicksburg,  at  4 p.  m. 

In  obedience  to  orders  from  Major-General  Sherman,  the  brigade 
moved  (May  10)  on  the  ])lantation  road  leading  north  from  the  white 
house  to  the  Chickasaw  Bayou  to  join  Major-General  Steele’s  forces  in 
that  neighborhood,  who  were  to  establish  a communication  between  the 
Yazoo  liiver  Landing  and  our  army. 

On  my  arrival  at  the  old  battle-grouml  at  the  bayou,  I was  ordered 
back  to  my  place  of  starting,  the  above  object  having  been  accom 
plished  by  Major-General  Steele  before  1 reached  him. 

The  brigade  captured  10  rebel  prisoners,  who  secreted  themselves  in 
a deserted  camp  below  the  blufls.  In  all,  37  prisoners  were  taken. 

Casualties  at  battle  ofJach  in. — Stephen  Keenan,  Company  E,  Thirty- 
fifth  Iowa,  killed  ; James  H.  Byers,  Company  G,  Thirty-fifth  Iowa, 
wounded ; Peter  Johnson,  Company  F,  Thirty-fifth  Iowa,  remov^ed  from 
ambulance  on  road  near  Jackson,  supposed  to  be  killed,  and  reported 
missing. 

Casualties  May  19,  rear  of  Viclsbury. — James  N.  Smith,  Company 
C,  Twelfth  Iowa,  killed ; F.  C.  Cromwell,  Company  A,  Twelfth  Iowa, 
wounded;  Daniel  E.  McCall,  Comi)any  C,  Twelfth  Iowa,  woundecl 
slightly  on  chin  while  on  ])icket  May  27 ; [Maj.  John  II.]  Stibbs,  Twelfth 
Iowa,  severely  wounded  by  accidental  discharge  of  pistol  May  13. 

2.  From  the  first  day  of  investment  of  Vicksburg  (May  22  to  June 
1)  this  brigade  remained  in  reserve. 

During  the  22d  was  orde’M  in  the  evening  of  that  day  to  occupy  the 
present  position,  in  the  rear  of  Waterhouse’s,  Spoor’s,  and  Wood’s  bat- 
teries; the  position  being  a natural  fortification,  which  was  improved 
with  much  labor  by  the  good  and  willing  men  of  the  Third  Brigade. 

The  time  from  the  23d  of  May  to  June  1 was  usefully  employed  to 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  JACKSON,  MISS.  771 

strengthen  these  works  and  to  dig  approaches  toward  those  of  the 
enemy. 

Sir,  I take  pleasure  in  mentioning  Lieutenant-Colonel  Edgington,  of 
the  Twelfth  Iowa  Infantry,  Major  Palmer,  of  the  Eighth  Infantry,  and 
Major  O’Connor,  of  the  Tliirty-lifth  Iowa  Infantry,  for  the  prompt  and 
energetic  manner  with  which  they  placed  their  skirmishers  into  the  rifle- 
pits  before  Jackson,  and  were  the  first  officers  from  our  army  corps 
which  entered  that  city.  The  cheerfulness  with  whicdi  officers  and  men 
of  this  noble  brigade  endured  fatigue,  and  marched  under  so  many  pri- 
vations, and  the  eagerness  with  which  they  faced  the  enemy,  cannot  but 
command  the  highest  ])raise  from  all  of  us. 

Casualties  May  22. — First  Lieut.  James  C.  Maxwell,  Company  C, 
Eighth  Iowa,  slightly  wounded  in  arm;  Corpl.  Tliomas  Harris,  Company 
B,  Eighth  Iowa,  severely  wounded  on  left  hip ; Corpl.  Amos  L.  Graves, 
Comiiany  K,  Eighth  Iowa,  severely  wounded  in  left  arm  ; William  Eddy, 
Company  G,  Eighth  Iowa,  severely  wounded  in  left  side  by  the  prema- 
ture explosion  of  one  of  our  own  shells,  and  John  A.  liowan.  Company 
B,  severely  w^ounded  in  the  left  leg  by  premature  bursting  of  one  of  our 
own  shells. 

Captain,  I remain  your  most  obedient  servant, 

C.  L.  MATTIIIES, 

Brigadier- General. 

Capt.  J.  B.  Sample, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


No.  9. 

Report  of  Col.  Jesse  I.  Alexander,  Fifty-ninth  Indiana  Infantry,  First 
Brigade.  /Seventh  Division,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  ineluding  opera- 
tions May  3-24. 


Camp  near  Vicksburg,  Miss., 

May  24,  18G3. 

I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  operations  of  my 
command  from  the  3d  instant  up  to  the  ])resent  date; 

I was  relieved  from  the  command  of  the  brigade  and  returned  to  my 
regiment  at  10  o’clock  of  said  day  near  Bayou  Pierre,  Miss.,  when,  in 
obedience  to  your  orders,  I moved  forward  with  my  regiment,  the  Fifty- 
ninth  Indiana  Volunteer  Infantry,  at  12  m.  on  the  main  road  leading  to 
the  Big  Black  Kiver.  After  advancing  about  1 mile  from  the  head  of 
our  main  column,  with  Companies  A and  K thrown  forward  as  skir- 
mishers, found  the  enemy  in  strong  position,  with  two  pieces  of  artillery 
so  posted  as  to  command  the  road  and  all  the  open  ground  in  his  front, 
his  line  of  skirmishers  thrown  forward  200  yards,  and  his  reserves  and 
artillery  support  formed  immediately  in  rear  of  his  guns.  I immediately 
deployed  the  remaining  eight  companies  of  my  regiment  as  skirmishers, 
my  line  crossing  the  road  at  right  angles  and  covering  a front  of  1,500 
yards.  The  line  advanced  steadily  under  a heavy  fire,  and  the  enemy 
was  driven  from  his  first,  second,  and  third  positions. 

Of  the  behavior  of  the  officers  and  men  under  my  command,  I will  not 
speak,  as  you  were  personally  on  the  ground  and  saw  for  yourself. 

I have  to  report  the  following  casualties  : Private  Eli  Faucette,  Com-  • 
pany  E,  killed;  Private  James  W.  Van  ISlyke,  Comi)any  E,  mortally 


772 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX V'L 


wounded  (since  died).  A number  of  enlisted  men  sustained  slight  in 
juries — hardly  to  be  called  wounds. 

In  the  evening  moved  up  and  encam[)ed  near  the  Big  Black  liiver, 
where  we  remained  from  the  4th  to  the  8th. 

On  the  9th,  marched  4 miles  east  of  Eocky  Springs,  and  encamped. 

C-n  the  10th,  marched  to  a point  3 miles  east  of  fjtica. 

On  the  11th,  moved  2 miles. 

On  the  12th,  mov^ed  in  the  direction  of  Eaymond,  when,  about  12  m., 
heard  heavy  hriug,  and  was  ordered  forward  at  a double  quick  to  the 
support  of  Logan’s  division.  Moved  up,  and  formed  in  rear  of  his  left 
under  fire  from  the  enemy.  The  enemy  were  soon  repulsed.  There 
were  no  casualties  in  my  command. 

On  the  13th,  encamped  1 mile  east  of  Clinton. 

On  the  14th,  marched  to  within  1 mile  of  Jackson,  when,  in  obedience 
to  your  order,  my  regiment  was  formed  on  the  extreme  right,  throvving 
forward  Companies  K,  A,  and  H as  skirmishers,  covwing  my  front  and 
right  flank,  when  we  joined  with  the  division  in  the  general  assault  on 
the  enemy’s  works.  The  enemy  was  driven  from  his  position,  leaving 
his  dead,  wounded,  and  guns  in  our  possession. 

At  this  point  Capt.  L.  B.  Martin  rode  up  and  asked  for  the  colors  of 
the  Fifty-ninth.  I ordered  them  given  to  him,  when  he  placed  our  colors 
on  the  dome  of  the  capitol,  where  they  remained  in  charge  of  niy  color- 
guard,  whom  I had'  ordered  to  guard  them  till  next  morning.  They 
were  the  first  and  only  colors  planted  on  the  capitol  of  Jackson.  We 
encamped  in  the  city.  Casualties,  4 wounded. 

On  the  15th,  left  Jackson  and  marched  4 miles  west  of  Clinton. 

On  the  16th,  marched  early  in  the  direction  of  Vicksburg.  At  11  a. 
m.  heard  heavy  firing  in  front.  Moved  forward  rapidly,  and  by  your 
order  was  formed  on  the  right  of  General  Logan  and  in  the  rear  of  the 
Fourth  Minnesota  ; was  ordered  to  the  left,  and  relieved,  under  the  per- 
sonal direction  of  General  Leggett,  the  Thirtieth  Illinois,  which  retired 
to  replenish  its  cartridge-boxes.  The  enemy,  mistaking  the  retiring 
Thirtieth  Illinois  for  a general  fiilling  back  of  our  lines,  made  a violent 
assault  on  my  command.  They  were  promptly  met  and  driven  back 
with  great  slaughter.  First  Sergeant  Ford,  of  Comi^any  C,  capturing  the 
colors  of  the  Forty-sixth  Alabama. 

In  the  mean  time  I had  advanced  my  command  and  sheltered  the  men 
in  a ravine,  which  position  we  held  to  the  end  of  the  battle.  Casualties : 
Killed,  2;  wounded,  8. 

On  the  17th,  marched  to  the  Big  Black  and  built  a bridge. 

On  the  18th  and  19th,  remained  in  camp. 

On  the  20th,  marched  20  miles,  and  rejoined  the  division  near  Vicks 
burg. 

On  the  21st,  moved  1 mile,  and  took  position  on  the  left  of  the  Third 
Brigade. 

On  the  22d,  in  compliance  with  general  orders  from  dei)artment  head- 
quarters for  the  general  assault,  I was  attached  to  the  Third  Brigade, 
Colonel  Boomer  commanding,  till  2 p.  m.,  when  we  were  ordered  to  tlie 
support  of  General  Burbridge’s  brigade. 

The  list  of  casualties  will  siifliciently  attest  the  dangers  we  encount- 
ered. 

JESSE  I.  ALEXANDER, 

Colonel  Fifty-ninth  Indiana  Volunteers, 

Capt.  L.  B.  Martin, 

Actmg  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XXXVI.J  ENGAGEMENT  AT  JACKSON,  MISS.  773 

No.  10. 

Report  of  Col.  Gabriel  Bouclc,  Eighteenth  Wisconsin  Infantry^  includmg 
operations  May  Vd-July  6. 

Headquarters  Eighteenth  Wisconsin  Volunteers, 

Vicksburg.,  Miss..,  August  7,  1863. 

Sir  : Eeceivecl  marcliing  orders  at  Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  to  report  to 
Major-General  McPherson,  May  13,  1863. 

Beported,  and  was  assigned  to  First  Brigade,  Seventh  Division,  Sev- 
enteenth Army  Corps.  Bivouacked  that  night  near  Clinton. 

On  the  morning  of  May  14,  we  marched  and  met  the  enemy  near 
Jackson,  Miss.  Gave  them  battle  and  whipped  them.  Loss,  23  killed 
and  wounded.  Bivouacked  in  Jackson  that  night. 

May  15,  marched  toward  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Bivouacked,  and  on  the 
morning  of  the  16th  took  up  our  line  of  march,  and  got  into  the  fight  at 
Champion’s  Hill.  Loss,  1 killed  and  4 wounded. 

About  9.30  a.  m.  on  the  17th,  marched  on  toward  Black  Eiver.  That 
night  assisted  in  constructing  a bridge  across  Black  Kiver. 

May  18,  marching  orders.  Went  3J  miles  toward  Vicksburg.  Our 
brigade  ordered  back.  Got  back,  and  regiment  went  on  picket. 

May  19,  relieved  from  picket,  went  to  camp,  and  in  the  afternoon  at 
4 o’clock  formed  line  of  battle.  Kemained  in  line  until  10.30  ]>.  m.,  when 
we  crossed  the  bridge  in  rear  of  all  our  transportation.  Bivouacked 
for  the  night,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  20th  took  up  line  of  march 
for  Vicksburg.  Arrived  at  our  works  or  lines  and  took  position  that 
evening  (21st)  in  camp. 

May  22,  ordered  out  skirmishing.  Ordered  in  again  at  10  a.  m.  Ad- 
vanced with  the  brigade  on  to  the  enemy’s  works.  The  Eighteenth 
Kegiment  ordered  out  skirmishing,  and  was  not  relieved  until  the  night 
of  May  23.  In  both  days  our  loss  was  13  killed  and  wounded. 

On  the  night  of  May  26,  ordered  into  line,  and  went  on  an  expedition 
to  Yazoo  River. 

Went  into  camp  at  Haynes’  Bluff  on  the  afternoon  of  May  31,  and 
got  back  to  old  position  June  4. 

Went  out  into  rifle-pits  June  6.  Remained  in  old  position  in  rear  of 
Vicksburg. 

June  19,  one  man  severely  wounded. 

Doing  picket  or  skirmish  duty  until  the  surrender  of  July  4,  when  we 
changed  position. 

July  6,  went  into  camp  inside  the  fortifications,  having  been  doing 
any  amount  of  duty  ever  since. 

GAB.  BOUCK, 

Colonel,  Coynmanding  Eighteeyith  Wisconsin  Volunteers. 


No.  11. 

Report  of  Col.  Samuel  A.  Uolmes,  Tenth  Mmouri  Infantry,  command- 
ing Second  Brigade.,  iyicluding  operations  Ajyril  i'^-May  23. 

IlDQRs.  Second  Brig.,  Seventh  Dtv.,  Seventeenth  A.  C., 

Before  Vul.^burg,  Miss.,  May  25,  1863. 

( 'ArTAiN : I herewith  submit  a,  detailed  report  of  tlH‘.  oj)erati()ns  of  my 
brigade*,  consist ing  of  the  T(*ntli  M issouri,  Sevent(*enth  Iowa,  Eiglitiefli 


774 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Ohio,  and  Fifty-sixth  Illinois  Infantry,  as  called  for  by  Special  Orders, 
No.  92,  Army  Corps  Headquarters,  of  this  date. 

The  brigade  disembarked  at  Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  on  the  morning  of 
April  18.  The  same  day  two  regiments,  the  Fifty-sixth  Illinois  and 
Eightieth  Ohio,  in  command  of  Colonel  Baum,  senior  officer,  were  sent 
to  occupy  Kichmond,  La.,  and  relieve  the  forces  at  that  point. 

On  the  2()th,  I followed  with  the  remainder  of  the  brigade,  with  in- 
structions to  collect  forage  there  for  the  passing  troops,  protect  the 
pontoon  bridge  over  the  Roundaway  Bayou,  explore  the  same,  recon- 
noiter  the  vicinity,  and  obtain  such  information  as  might  be  of  service. 

I remained  here  in  the  discharge  of  these  duties  until  the  25th,  wlien 
I moved  to  Holmes’  plantation,  10  miles.  The  next  day  to  {Smith’s 
])lantation,  8 miles,  wdiere  I remained  until  the  28th ; thence  with  the 
division  to  Fisk’s  plantation,  4 miles ; thence,  April  29, 12  miles,  to  Per- 
kins’ plantation  5 thence,  April  30,  some  20  miles  around  Lake  Saint 
Joseph,  to  a i)oint  about  3 miles  from  the  crossing  of  the  river. 

During  these  marches  nearly  all  the  cam])  and  garrison  equi])age  of 
the  several  regiments  was  left  behind  at  different  places  for  want  of 
transportation. 

On  the  morning  of  May  1,  the  guns  were  heard  from  the  battle-field 
of  Thomi)Son’s  farm,  or  Port  Gibson,  showing  a severe  engagement  in  . 
])rogress.  Leaving  the  Fifty-sixth  Illinois,  Colonel  Raum,  on  detail,  I 
moved  the  other  three  regiments  as  rapidly  as  possible  to  Hard  Times 
I^anding,  opi)osite  Grand  Gulf,  wdiere  they  embarked  on  board  guu- 
Iioats  and  transi)orts,  dropped  down  the  river  to  a place  called  Bruins- 
burg,  or  some  such  name,  and  immediately  took  up  the  line  of  march 
for  Port  Gibson.  When  within  about  3 miles  of  the  battle-field,  I re- 
ceived orders  to  that  effect,  and  fell  back  1 mile,  with  my  own  and  three 
regiments  of  the  Third  Brigade,  and  took  a position  for  the  night,  cover- 
ing a road  leading  from  Grand  Gulf. 

In  the  morning,  being  joined  by  the  whole  of  the  First  and  Third 
Brigades,  I moved  into  Port  Gibson,  passing  the  battle-field  of  the  day 
])revious,  and  resting  in  town,  awaiting  the  completion  of  the  pontoon 
over  the  Bayou  Pierre,  the  enemy  having  destroyed  the  other  bridge 
behind  them. 

About  4 o’clock  the  same  day,  I crossed  the  Bayou  Pierre  and  marched 
until  late  at  night,  and  encamped  near  the  bridge  over  the  north  branch 
of  the  Bayou  Pierre. 

During  the  night  this  bridge  wms  made  passable  by  a portion  of  the 
Third  Brigade,  and  in  the  morning  the  troops  crossed.  Advancing 
about  3 miles,  tlie  liead  of  the  column  encountered  a force  of  the  enemy 
with  artillery,  which  was  at  once  engaged  by  the  skirmishers  of  the 
First  Brigade,  Colonel  Sanborn,  and  a portion  of  the  First  IMissouri 
Batteiy,  Lieutenant  MacMurray.  I w^as  ordered  by  Brigadier-General 
Crocker,  commanding  division,  to  take  a position  on  the  left  of  the 
road,  which  I did,  the  Tenth  Missouri  Infantry,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Homey,  being  dei)loyed  as  skirmishers,  supported  by  the  Eightieth 
Ohio,  Colonel  Bartilson,  and  the  Seventeenth  Iowa,  Colonel  Ilillis,  in 
line  of  battle.  The  enemy  soon  abandoned  the  position,  and  the  ])ur- 
suit  w as  at  once  resumed  to  Black  River,  distant  0 miles. 

The  brigade,  with  the  division,  remained  bivouacked  at  tliis  point 
until  the  morning  of  IMay  9,  when  w^e  moved  out  on  the  Utica  road  10 
niiles,  and  encanq)ed. 

On  th(‘,  morning  of  the  lOth,  w'e  marcluMl  10  miles,  to  a point  2 miles 
beyond  Utica,  and  encamped. 

Again,  on  tlie  11th,  \v(\  march<*d  about  1 mile,  and  took  U])  a i)ositiou. 


Chap.  XXXVI.1 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  JACKSON,  MISS. 


775 


May  32,  we  .advanced  about  7 miles  toward  Raymond,  near  wliich 
place  we  found  Major-deneral  Lo!i>an’s  division  severely  enp^a^ed  with 
the  enemy.  The  bri^^ade,  by  direction  of  Brigadier-General  Crocker, 
was  at  once  formed  in  support  of  several  batteries  found  in  x)Osition  on 
the  left  of  the  road,  but  not  engaged. 

Remaining  here  a short  lime,  the  Eightieth  Ohio  and  Tenth  Missouri 
were  ordered  to  the  support  of  Brigadier-General  Stevenson,  })repara- 
tory  to  an  advance  into  town,  the  former  to.  liis  center  and  the  latter 
to  the  extreme  right  wing.  Having  taken  the  position  assigned,  the 
whole  line  of  battle  moved  forward  miles,  and  entered  the  place,  tlie 
enemy  evacuating  without  further  op])osition,  except  from  his  artillery, 
which  did  no  damage  to  those  of  my  command.  One  lieutenant  and  a 
few  ])risoners  were  captured  by  Company  A,  Tenth  Missouri. 

The  brigade  and  division  encamped  near  the  town,  and  marched 
again  on  the  morning  of  the  13th  to  Clinton,  without  opposition,  and 
eiKjamped  1 mile  east  of  that  place,  on  the  Vicksburg  and  Jackson 
Railroad. 

The  march  was  resumed  on  the  morning  of  the  14th  toward  Jack- 
son,  the  Second  Brigade  leading.  In  view  of  the  probability  of  soon 
meeting  the  enemy,  a heavy  force  of  skirmishers  from  the  Tenth  Mis- 
souii  was  thrown  forward  and  dejdoyed  with  supports.  Advancing 
about  3 miles,  the  enemy  was  discovered  in  force  on  both  sides  of  the 
road,  occupying  a commanding  position,  his  right  covered  by  a dense 
thicket  of  oak  bushes,  his  center  and  artillery  at  Wright’s  house,  with 
his  leit  on  the  continuation  of  the  ridge.  The  main  position  at  the 
house  was  also  covered  by  a line  of  infantry  formed  in  the  ravine  in 
his  immediate  front.  His  artillery  commanded  the  road  and  an  open 
country  of  undulating  ridges  for  IJ  miles  in  the  direction  of  our  ap- 
proach. Upon  discovering  the  enemy,  the  Second  Brigade  was  at  once 
deployed,  the  Tenth  Missouri,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Homey,  to  the  right 
of  the  road,  and  the  Eightieth  Ohio,  Colonel  Bartilson,  and  the  Seven- 
teenth Iowa,  Colonel  Hillis,  to  the  left.  The  First  Missouri  Battery 
was  now  taken  into  position  and  my  line  changed  so  as  to  support  it, 
with  the  Seventeenth  Iowa  on  the  left  of  the  road,  the  Eightieth  Ohio 
in  the  center  on  the  right  of  the  road,  and  the  .Tenth  Missouri  on  the 
right  of  the  line,  the  whole  supported  on  the  right  by  the  First  Brigade, 
Colonel  Sanborn,  and  on  the  left  by  the  Third  Brigade,  Colonel  Boomer. 
The  whole  line  advanced  in  a heavy  rain  and  under  a severe  lire  of 
artillery  and  skirmishers  to  within  500  yards  of  the  enemy’s  main  line, 
when  I halted  under  the  shelter  of  an  intervening  ridge,  preparatory 
to  the  final  charge.  Being  again  ordered  to  advance,  I commanded  my 
three  regiments  to  fix  bayonets,  and,  at  the  word,  to  move  at  double- 
quick  upon  the  enemy,  which  tliey  did  in  excellent  order,  sweei)ing 
everything  before  them  and  carrying  the  position.  The  Sixth  Wis- 
consin battery.  Captain  Dillon,  was  quickly  brought  to  tlie  front,  and 
oi)ened  a heavy  fire  upon  the  fleeing  enemy,  who  continued  his  retreat 
into  and  through  the  town  of  Jackson,  abandoning  his  artillery  as  he 
went. 

My  loss  in  this  battle — mostly  in  the  charge — amonnted  in  all  to  215 
killed,  wounded,  and  missing,  out  of  a force  of  about  1,000  actually 
engaged.  Lists  of  the  casualties  accom])any  this  report.* 

The  conduct  of  my  officers  and  men  in  this  action  was  worthy  of  all 
praise,  without  excepting  any. 

The  brigade  bivouacked  in  the  town  that  night,  and  in  the  morning 


Sec  j).  751. 


776 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  NXXVl. 


took  up  the  line  of  inarch,  with  the  rest  of  the  division,  for  Vicksburg. 
Marched  8 miles  to  Clinton,  wliere  I encamped,  with  orders  to  report 
to  Major-General  Grant  at  that  place,  which  I did,  the  remainder  of  the 
division  moving  on. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  IGth,  I received  orders  from  Major-Gen- 
eral Grant  to  move  immediately  to  join  the  division.  Heavy  firing 
being  heard  in  the  direction  of  Champion’s  Hill,  [ hurried  forward  with 
dispatch  toward  that  place,  distant  13  miles.  Arriving  within  about  3 
miles  of  the  field  of  battle,  I was  met  by  orders  to  leave  my  train 
parked  in  guard  of  a regiment.  The  Eightieth  Ohio,  Colonel  Bartilson, 
was  assigned  to  this  duty.  The  two  remaining  regiments,  the  Tenth 
Missouri,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Homey,  and  the  Seventeenth  Iowa,  Colo- 
nel Hillis,  continued  to  advance  by  the  main  road,  the  Seventeenth 
Iowa  leading,  until  engaged  with  the  enemy.  The  enemy  occupied  a 
strong  position  upon  a steep,  wooded  hill,  over  which  the  road  ran, 
flanked  by  deep  ravines.  This  point  had  been  sharpl3^  contested  through 
the  day,  and  at  the  time  of  the  arrival  of  the  regiments  of  the  brigade, 
was  in  the  act  of  being  retaken  by  the  enemy.  Colonel  Hillis,  Seven- 
teenth Iowa,  encountering  the  enemy’s  fire,  immediately  formed  for- 
ward into  line  and  gallantly  pressed  on.  I ordered  the  Tenth  Missouri 
into  line  in  the  same  manner  and  to  advance.  These  two  regiments 
drove  the  enemy  from  the  position. 

The  gallant  Lieutenant  Colonel  Homey,  commanding  the  Tenth  Mis- 
souri, while  moving  his  regiment  across-the  road  to  the  right  to  uncover 
the  Seventeenth,  fell,  pierced  by  several  balls,  and  the  command  de- 
volved upon  Maj.  Francis  C.  Deimling,  who  led  the  regiment  with  great 
bravery  through  the  rest  of  the  fight.  In  this  brief  but  fierce  contest 
four  ])ieces  of  artillery,  which  had  been  captured  l)y  our  forces  and  again 
retaken  by  the  enemy,  were  recaj)tured  by  the  Seventeenth  Iowa,  to- 
gether with  the  colors  of  the  Thirty  first  Alabama  (rebel)  Kegiment. 
The  position  being  taken  was  not  again  dis])uted.  I estimate  the  num- 
ber of  ])risoners  taken  by  my  brigade  at  not  less  than  300. 

My  loss  in  this  action,  in  the  two  regiments  engaged,  was  103  killed, 
wounded,  and  missing,  detailed  reports  of  which  are  annexed.* 

After  the  battle  my  brigade  was  ordered  to  remain  to  bury  the  dead, 
subject  to  the  orders  of  Brigadier-General  McGinnis,  detailed  with  his 
brigade  on  the  same  duty. 

On  the  10th,  I marched  to  Black  Fiver,  joining  Colonel  Sanborn,  with 
the  First  Brigade,  and  crossed  the  rivmr  during  the  night  at  the  upper 
crossing.  Before  leaving  Champion’s  Hill  I was  joined  by  the  Fiity- 
sixth  Illinois,  absent  on  detached  service  since  the  crossing  of  the  Mis- 
sissi{)i)i.  At  the  same  point  the  Eightieth  Ohio  was  detailed  to  guard 
l)risoners,  and  is  now  absent  on  that  duty. 

On  the  20th,  I moved  from  my  camp  near  Black  Fiver,  with  the  Tenth 
Mis.souri,  Seventeenth  Iowa,  and  Fifty-sixth  Illinois,  to  a position  in  th<^ 
rear  and  near  Vicksburg,  and  on  the  21st  to  the  position  in  front  of  the 
enemy’s  works  now  occupied  by  me. 

On  the  22d,  the  brigade  was  moved  to  the  front  as  supj)ortto  the  First 
and  Third  Brigades,  of  this  division,  in  the  general  assault  ordered  on 
that  day. 

Although  partially  under  fire  on  that  occasion,  I sustained  but  small 
lo'Ss,  a report  of  which  is  herewith  forwarded. f Later  in  the  evening  I 
was  mov(‘d  to  the  left  of  the  line,  to  report  as  support  to  Brigadier-Gen- 
eral Ovstmliaus.  Ui)on  my  arrival  I received  orders  to  move  to  the 


See  l*art  II,  p.  lU 


t See  Part  II,  p.  ini'). 


Chap.  XX:^VT.1 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  JACNSON,  MISS.  777 

• 

attack  of  the  enemy’s  works  in  his  front,  which  order  was  almost  imme- 
diately countermanded,  owing  to  the  laten-ess  of  the  hour. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  23d,  I took  up  a position  on  the  extreme 
left  of  our  line,  deploying  skirmishers  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  works 
and  to  my  left,  and  at  3 p.  m.  same  day  returned  to  the  position  1 now 
occui>y. 

In  concluding  this  brief  summary  of  the  operations  of  this  brigade 
throughout  so  long  and  active  a period,  I cannot  withhold  a just  tribute 
to  the  lamented  Lieut.  Col.  Leonidas  Ilorney,  commanding  the  Tenth 
Missouri  Infantry,  who  fell,  as  stated,  at  Champion’s  Hill.  He  was 
tr  uly  a ca})able  and  valiant  soldier,  and  his  loss  is  very  deeply  regretted. 
Colonel  Hillis,  Seventeenth  Iowa;  Colonel  Bartilson,  Eightieth  Ohio, 
and  Major  Deimling,  Tenth  Missouri,  as  will  be  seen,  have  rendered  dis- 
tinguished service  in  the  operations  of  the  brigade. 

I am  also  much  indebted  to  the  services  of  my  personal  staff,  Capt. 
W.  W.  McCammon,  acting  assistant  adjutant- general,  and  First  Lieut. 
H.  H.  Meredith,  aide  de-cami>. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAML.  A.  HOLMES, 

Colonel  Tenth  Missouri  Infantry^  Commanding. 
[Capt.  Montgomeey  Rochestee, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.] 


N-o.  12. 

Reports  of  Col.  David  B.  Hillis,  Seventeenth  Ioica>  Infantry,  including 
operations  April  20-May  24. 

Hdqes.  Seventeenth  Regt.  Iowa  Volunteee  Infantey, 

Camp  on  Champio^i’s  Hilly  May  17,  1863. 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  of  submitting  the  following  report  touch- 
ing the  part  borne  by  my  regiment  (Seventeenth  Iowa  Volunteer  In- 
fantry) in  the  engagement  beiore  Jackson,  Miss.,  on  the  14th  instant : 

In  compliance  with  your  order,  I first  formed  my  line  on  the  left  of 
the  railroad,  3 miles  west  of  Jackson,  my  right  resting  on  said  road,  on 
a parallel  with  the  Eightieth  Ohio,  which  was  formed  on  the  right  of 
the  road.  The  regiment  occupied  this  position  at  a halt  for  i)erhaps 
twenty  minutes,  when  you  ordered  me  to  move  by  the  right  flank  across 
to  the  right  of  the  road,  which  movement  I was  executing  when  I was 
ordered  by  General  Crocker  to  move  by  the  left  flank  to  the  front,  main- 
taining mj^  right  on  the  left  of  the  dirt  road,  on  a line  with  the  Eight- 
ieth Ohio  and  Tenth  Missouri,  they  being  on  the  right  of  said  road, 
which  I did.  Upon  this  line  I advanced  about  miles  before  encount- 
ering the  enemy. 

At  this  point  I met  his  skirmishers,  who  reluctantly  and  slowly  fell 
back  as  1 pressed  them  upon  their  first  line,  which  was  composed  of  the 
Twenty-seventh  [Twenty-fourth J South  Carolina  Sharpshooters,  imme- 
diately in  front,  and  another  regiment  on  their  right  (my  left),  the  name 
of  which  I have  forgotten,  formed  in  a ravine,  with  heavy  underbru.'-h 
between  my  line  ami  theirs,  at  about  150  yards  from  my  front.  At  this 
l)oint  the  line,  of  which  my  regiment  was  the  extreme  left,  was  halted. 
You  then  ordered  me  to  take  the  ravine,  which  I did  by  a bayonet  charge 
at  a double-quick,  breaking  the  enemy’s  line  and  ])ressing  him  uj)  am' 
over  the  crest  of  the  next  hill.  ILiving  reached  this  crest.  1 ordcuvd 
the  regiment  to  cease  fli  ing  and  commanded  a halt.  After  having  rested 


778  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXvL 

liere  some  twenty  minutes  or  more,  1 was  ordered  by  you  to  throw  for- 
ward one  company  in  front  of  my  line  of  skirmishers  at  a double  quick,  to 
investigate  the  brush  and  woods  in  advance.  This  duty  1 intrusted  to 
Company  II,  Captain  Craig,  which  they  did  skillfully,  discovering  no 
enemy,  as  he  had  fled  in  great  confusion,  abandoning  his  position  and 
camp,  fort,  containing  four  pieces  of  artillery,  which  the  captain  en- 
tered and  took  possession  of  anti  held  until  ordered  forward  into  Jack- 
son  by  General  McPherson.  The  captain,  therefore,  claims  the  honor 
of  having  first  entered  the  works  and  taken  possession  of  the  guns. 
Soon  after  this  it  was  announced  that  the  enemy  had  gone  and  that 
Jackson  was  occupied  by  our  troops.  This,  then,  ended  the  tight  of 
Jackson,  after  which  we  moved  forward  and  bivouacked  for  the  night 
upon  the  premises  of  a Mrs.  Clifton,  in  the  suburbs  of  the  city. 

I went  into  action  with  350  men,  and  lost  during  the  engagement  16 
kill'd,  60  wounded,  3 missing,  and  1 disabled  by  a shell,  making  an 
aggregate  of  80  men,  or  23  per  cent,  of  my  command.  The  principal 
loss  sustained  was  while  charging  the  enemy  down  the  ravine,  where 
my  left  wing,  being  unsupported,  was  exposed  to  a severe  cross-fire  from 
the  right  of  the  enemy’s  lines, 

I cannot  speak  in  too  high  terms  of  praise  of  the  gallantry  and  zeal 
displayed  by  the  entire  command.  So  well  did  all  do  their  part  that 
none  are  deserving  of  special  mention,  unless  it  be  Capt.  L.  W.  Huston, 
who,  while  suftering  from  a very  painful  and  severe  wound  through  his 
left  fore  arm,  away  from  all  assistance,  seized  a gun  from  one  of  three 
rebels  and  brought  the  three  into  the  hospital,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel 
M^ever,  and  Ca[>tain  Walden,  who  commanded  the  left  wing,  and  had 
his  horse  killed  under  him,  and  Adjutant  Woolsey,  to  all  of  whom  1 am 
indebted  for  their  coolness  and  assistance,  and  take  pleasure  in  com- 
mending. 

Eespectfully, 

D.  B.  HILLIS, 

Colonel^  Commanding  Seventeenth  Iowa  Volun'eer  Infantry. 

Col.  Samuel  A.  Holmes, 

Gomdg.  Second  Brig..,  Seventh  I)iv.^  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


Hdqrs.  Seventeenth  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry, 

Before  Vichsburg,  Miss.,  May  26,  1863. 

Captain  : In  compliance  with  Sjtecial  Orders,  No.  27,  from  your  head- 
quarters, of  date  May  24,  1863, 1 herewith  submit  a report  of  mai dies, 
battles,  and  other  operations  of  the  Seventeenth  Iowa  since  leaving 
Milliken’s  Bend  (April  20)  to  May  24. 

April  20,  the  regiment  left  Millikeu’s  Bend  at  0 a.  m.,  find  marched  12 
miles,  to  Ilichmond,  La.  Went  into  camj)  at  3 p.  m.,  and  remained  until 
April  25. 

At  9 o’clock  a.  m.,  marched  10  miles,  to  Holmes’  plantation,  and  biv- 
ouacked. 

April  26,  at  6 a.  m.,  marched  8 miles,  to  Smith’s  plantation,  and  biv- 
ouacked at  12  m.,  and  remained  until  A])ril  28. 

At  9 a.  m.  marched  4 miles  through  mud  from  4 to  6 inches  deeju  and 
bivouacked  near  Colonel  Fisk’s  (rebel)  |)lantation. 

A])ril  29,  marched  12  miles,  and  bivouacked  at  12  m.  at  Perkins’ j)lan- 
tation. 

April  30,  at  6 a.  m.,  marched  12  miles,  and  bivouacked  6 miles  from 
the  place  of  crossing  the  river. 


Chap.  XXXVI.  ] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  JACKSON,  MISS. 


779 


May  1,  marched  G miles  to  crossing;  the  regiment  crossed  in  a gun- 
boat by  2 o’clock,  and  immediately  marched  (9  miles)  out  to  re-enforce 
McClernand,  who  was  engaging  the  enemy  near  Port  Gibson. 

May  2,  at  G a.  m.,  marched  JO  miles  to  Port  Gibson,  and  halted  in  the 
town  to  await  the  reconstruction  of  the  bridge  across  Big  Bayou  Pierre, 
which  the  rebels  had  burned  in  their  retreat.  At  4 p.  m.  crossed  the 
bayou  and  marched  8 miles  by  8 o’clock,  and  bivouacked  in  a field. 

May  3,  marched  1 mile  to  bridge  across  Little  Bayou  Pierre  and 
awaited  the  repairing  of  it.  The  rebels  were  but  a short  distance  on 
the  other  side.  We  crossed,  and  shortly  afterward  our  brigade  was 
ordered  into  position  on  the  left  of  the  road  to  Big  Black  Liver,  the 
Seventeenth  and  Eightieth  in  line  and  the  Tenth  Missouri  in  advance, 
skirmishing;  but  not  finding  the  enemy,  we  were  shortly  ordered  for- 
ward, and  marched  4 miles,  and  went  into  camp  near  Big  Black  Liver, 
where  we  remained  (occasionally  capturing  a few  rebels  while  on  ])icket) 
until  May  9. 

At  5.30  a.  m.  same  day  marched  12  miles  on  Jackson  road,  and  biv- 
ouacked on  the  crest  of  a pine  ridge. 

May  10,  marched  10  miles,  and  bivouacked  in  a thick  underbrush 
3J  miles  west  of  Utica. 

May  11,  marched  2 miles  to  a more  comfortable  position. 

May  12,  marched  9 miles  to  within  2.J  miles  of  Laymond,  expecting 
to  join  in  the  engagement  which  was  progressing.  On  our  arrival  my 
regiment  (together  with  the  Tenth  Missouri  and  Eightieth  Ohio,  of  our 
brigade)  was  formed  iu  line  of  battle  on  the  crest  of  a hill  commanding 
the  valley  in  which  the  battle  was  raging.  While  here,  the  Tenth  and 
Eightieth  were  ordered  forward,  while  my  regiment  was  left  on  the  hill 
for  perhaps  fifteen  minutes,  when  it  was  ordered  forward  by  General 
Crocker  (commanding  Seventh  Division),  and  marched  3 miles  to  a point 
one-half  mile  northwest  of  Laymond,  and  bivouacked  at  9 ji.  m. 

May  13,  marched  10  miles,  and  bivouacked  2 miks  east  of  Clinton; 
stormy  weather. 

May  14,  marched  4 miles,  and  were  formed  in  line  of  battle,  my  regiment 
on  the  left  of  the  Jackson  road,  the  right  resting  against  said  road,  and 
were  ordered  forward  (through  a pelting  rain)  in  line  of  battle,  and  ad- 
vanced without  resistance  for  ])erhaps  IJ  miles,  when  I encountered 
the  enemy’s  skirmishers,  and  was  shortly  after  hotly  engaged,  losing  IG 
killed,  GO  wounded,  1 disabled  by  a shell,  and  3 missing;  making  an  ag- 
gregate uf  80,  or  23  per  cent,  of  the  number  engaged  (350),  as  ])er  offi- 
cial report. 

My  skirmishers  entered  the  fortifications  (containing  four  pieces  of 
artillery)  and  occupied  them  until  ordered  forward  into  the  city.  W^e 
encam])ed  in  the  suburbs  of  the  city  for  the  night,  and  procurecl  a snp- 
])ly  of  meal  and  bacon  for  my  boys,  who  had  been  for  some  days  on 
short  rations. 

May  15,  marched  8 miles  to  Clinton,  and  were  retained  (together  with 
the  Tenth  and  Eightieth)  while  the  rest  of  the  corps  moved  forward  to- 
ward Big  Black  Liver. 

May  IG,  manJied  12  miles  to  Chaminon’s  Hill,  where  a desperate  bat- 
tle was  being  fought;  were  double-quicked  through  dust  and  a burning 
sun,  and  immediately  formed  in  line  of  battle  on  the  left  of  the  Vicks- 
burg (dirt)  road,  from  which  point  1 cJiarged  the  (memy,  who  were  se- 
verely pressing  the  center  of  our  lines,  driving  him  in  (tonfusion  before 
me,  comidetely  routing  and  scattering  his  (icnter,  and  capturing  a stand 
of  colors,  175  ))risoners,  and  recapturing  four  ])ieces  of  artillery  which 
had  been  i)reviously  captured,  but  retaken  by  tlie  enemy. 


780 


MlSSlSSIl^PI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


fCiiAi'.  xxxn. 


After  tbe  battle  I rested  my  wearied  boys  on  tbe  roadsides  until  5 
o’clock,  when  we  were  ordered  into  camp. 

In  the  engagement  I lost  5 killed,  49  wounded,  1 missing,  and  2 dis* 
abled;  making  an  aggregate  of  57,  or  25  per  cent,  of  the  number  en- 
gaged (which  was  between  200  and  230),  as  per  official  report. 

May  17  and  18,  engaged  i-n  burying  the  dead  and  attending  to  the 
wounded. 

May  19,  marched  7 miles  to  Big  Black  Eiver,  and  were  formed  in 
line  of  battle  while  the  trains  were  crossing  the  pontoons,  after  which  I 
crossed  the  Big  Black  and  bivouacked  1 mile  beyond. 

May  20,  marched  19  miles  to  within  1 mile  of  our  lines  around  Vicks- 
burg, and  bivouacked  at  11  p.-  m.  in  a deep  ravine  with  the  First  Bri- 
gade of  our  division. 

May  21,  moved  out  and  took  i)osition  in  front  of,  and  about  half  a 
mile  distant  from,  the  rebel  forts. 

May  22,  at  9.30  a.  m.,  moved  forward  to  within  300  yards  of  the  forts. 
While  in  position  in  a ravine,  1 cap'tain  and  2 men  of  my  regiment  were 
wounded  and  carried  from  the  field.  At  about  3 p.  m.  we  moved  (3 
miles)  to  the  right  of  the  enemy’s  lines,  and  bivouacked  in  a ravine  on 
the  left  of  the  One  hundred  and  eighteenth  Illinois.  Here  we  received  a 
two  days’  supply  of  rations. 

May  23,  moved  out  and  took  position  at  8 a.  m.  in  a ravine  in  front  of 
the  center  of  the  enemy’s  right,  which  we  occupied  until  3 p.  m.,  when 
we  were  moved  back  (3  miles)  to  the  i)ositiou  occupied  on  the  21st,  where 
we  now  are. 

Total  distance  marched,  191t}  miles.  During  the  marches  from  Milli- 
ken’s  Bend  the  regiment  received  less  than  an  average  of  one-third 
rations,  but,  notwithstanding  this,  it  is  worthy  of  note  that  during  the 
whole  of  this  trying  but  brilliant  campaign  not  a murmur  was  heard 
in  the  ranks. 

Kespectfully, 


D.  B.  HILLIS, 


Colonel^  Commanding  Seventeenth  lotca  Volunteers. 
Cai)t.  WHELIAM  W.  McC AMMON, 

Aetg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  2d  Brig..,  1th  Biv..,  \lih  Army  Corps. 


is^o.  13. 

Report  of  Maj.  Franeis  C.  BeimUng,  Tenth  Missouri  Infantry,  includ- 
ing operations  April  20-Ma,y  23. 

Headquarters  Tenth  Eegiment  Missouri  Infantry, 

In  the  Field,  in  rear  of  Vichslnirg,  Miss.,  May  25,  1803. 

Captain:  In  compliance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  85,  Headquaiters 
Seventh  Division,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  I have  the  honor  to  make 
the  following  report  of  the  operations  of  this  regiment  from  the  time 
of  leaving  Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  up  to  and  including  the  24th  instant: 

It  is  necessary  to  state  that  iij)  to  the  JOth  instant  the  regiment  was 
under  the  command  of  Lieut.  Col.  Leonidas  Homey.  On  that  day  this 
officer  was  instantly  killed  on  the  battle-field  at  Champion’s  Hill,  ami 
consequently  the  duty  of  making  a report  of  the  movements  and  ac- 
tions of  the  regiment  while  under  his  command  has  devoured  ui)on 
myself. 

At  7 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  iNIonday,  A])ril  20,  the  regiment,  as 


Chap.  XXXVL] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  JACKSON,  MISS. 


781 


part  of  tbe  Second  Brigade,  Seventh  Division,  in  |/tirsnance  of  orders 
from  Major-General  McPherson,  marched  from  Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  ^o 
Kichmond,  La.,  about  12  miles  distant,  at  which  place  it  remained  en- 
camped until  the  morning  of  April  25,  when  it  marched  10  miles  to 
Holmes’  plantation. 

Sunday,  April  26,  marched  8 miles  to  Smith’s  plantation.  Weather 
very  hot,  causing  much  suffering  among  the  men.  Encamped  on  Bound- 
away  Bayou  near  its  junction  with  Bayou  Yidal,  at  which  place  we  re- 
mained until  8 a.  m.,  April  28,  when,  leaving  all  camj)  and  garrison 
equipage,  marched  over  very  bad  roads  from’  recent  rains  7 miles  to 
Fisk’s  plantation. 

Ai)ril  20,  marched  from  last-named  place,  crossing  two  bayous  by 
means  of  pontoon  bridges,  9 miles  to  a plantation,  name  unknown.. 

April  30,  drew  six  days’  rations,  three  of  which  were  issued  to  the 
command,  and  marched  22  miles  to  Perkins’  i)lantation,  on  Lake  Saint 
Joseph,  and  2 miles  from  Hard  Times  Landing,  on  the  Mississippi 
Kiver. 

May  1,  marched  2 miles  to  Hard  Times  Landing,  and  3 miles  down 
the  levee  to  Bruinsburg  Landing,  on  the  Mississippi  Kiver;  leaving  all 
public  and  personal  baggage,  embarked  on  board  the  gunboat  Caron- 
delet,  dropped  down  the  river  about  4 miles,  and  lauded  on  the  Missis- 
sippi shore. 

From  the  time  of  starting  on  this  day,  the  action  then  in  progress  at 
Baldwin’s  Hill  being  in  full  hearing,  the  regiment  was  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible hurried  forward  in  support.  Marched  10  miles,  and  at  8 p.  m. 
bivouacked  for  the  night. 

At  2 a.  m.  of  the  2d  we  marched  for  Port  Gibson.  At  9 a.  m.  passed 
over  the  battle-ground  of  the  previous  day,  and  at  2 p.  m.  entered  Port 
Gibson.  Eemained  there  two  hours,  and,  iiassing  over  a newly  made 
pontoon  bridge  across  the  bayou  at  town,  marched  8 miles  to  Bayou 
Pierre,  and  bivouacked  about  11  p.  m. 

May  3,  started  at  daybreak,  and  after  marching  1 mile  found  the  ad- 
vance, under  General  Logan,  checked  by  a force  of  the  enemy  posted 
on  the  hills  commanding  the  road  across  Bayou  Pierre.  After  some 
skirmishing  the  enemy  withdrew  his  forces,  and  the  regiment,  as  i)art 
of  the  division,  marched  about  3 miles,  when,  leaving  the  main  road  to 
the ’right,  it  turned  off  to  the  left  toward  Black  Kiver,  and  after  ad- 
vancing about  1 mile  the  head  of  column  was  checked  by  a force  of  the 
enemy,  consisting  of  the  First  Missouri  (Confederate)  Battery,  with  in- 
fantry supports.  The  regiment  was  formed  on  the  road  in  support  of 
the  First  Missouri  Battery,  U.  S.  Volunteers,  and  a brisk  artillery  skir- 
mish ensued. 

About  2.30  p.  m.,  by  order  of  Col.  S.  A.  Holmes,  commanding  bri- 
gade, the  regiment  was  deployed  as  skirmishers  to  the  left  of  the  road 

across Creek,  and  through  a heavy  timber  ravine,  the  Eightieth 

Ohio  and  Seventeenth  Iowa  Kegiments  being  formed  in  line  of  battle 
about  150  yards  to  the  rear  as  support.  The  skirmishers  were  cau- 
tiously advanced  until  the  right  rested  on  the  left  of  the  skirmishers  of 
the  First  Brigade  of  this  division,  and  within  300  yards  of  the  position 
of  the  rebel  battery.  Kemained  in  this  position  for  about  one-half  hour, 
when,  the  enemy  retiring,  the  regiment  was  reformed  and  marched  with 
the  brigade  and  division  in  pursuit  about  6 miles  to  Black  Kiver  and 
bivouacked. 

Kemained  until  the  9th  instant,  when.  General  Steele’s  division  arriv- 
ing, we  marched  10  miles  on  the  Utica  road  and  encamped. 

May  10,  marched  at  10  a.  m.  8 miles  to  a iioint  2 miles  beyond  Utica. 


782 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


May  11,  marched  1 mile  and  bivouacked. 

• May  12,  at  7 a.  m.,  marched  about  7 miles  toward  Raymond.  When 
within  2 miles  of  the  town  went  into  position  on  the  left  side  of  the  road, 
in  support  of  the  Eleventh  Ohio  Battery,  which  was  posted  on  a ridge 
about  50  yards  to  the  front.  Remained  in  this  position  about  thirty 
minutes,  the  enemy,  under  General  Gregg,  being  actively  engaged  by 
General  Logan’s  division,  when,  by  order  of  General  Crocker,  com- 
manding the  division,  the  regiment  was  marched  about  half  a mile  to 
the  front  and  right,  across  a small  creek,  and  moved  to  the  right  of  Gen- 
eral Stevenson’s  brigade,  of  General  Logan’s  division,  thus  occupying 
the  extreme  right  of  the  whole  first  line  of  battle.  Company  A was  de- 
ployed as  skirmishers  to  the  right  and  front,  and  the  regiment  advanced 
with  the  first  line  about  IJ  miles  to  the  southern  edge  of  the  town,  from 
which  the  enemy  retired,  leaving  his  dead  and  wounded,  the  skirmishers 
capturing  1 lieutenant  and  5 men  of  the  Tenth  Regiment  Tennessee 
Infantry,  C.  S.  Army.  Marched  through  town  and  bivouacked  about 
7 p.  m.  on  the  northwestern  side  of  the  same. 

May  13,  marched  9 miles  to  Clinton,  on  the  Vicksburg  and  Jackson 
Railroad,  and  bivouacked  1 mile  east  of  town,  near  the  railroad. 

May  14,  the  division  marched  at  6 a.  m.  on  the  Jackson  road,  the 
Tenth  Missouri  occupying  the  right.  At  the  crossing  of  the  Jackson 
road  by  the  railroad.  Company  A,  under  Capt.  C.  A.  Gilchrist,  was  de- 
ployed as  skirmishers  on  the  right  and  left  of  the  road,  at  5 paces’ 
interval,  with  Comi)any  D as  first,  reserve  on  the  road,  and  Company  I 
as  a second  reserve  on  the  same.  The  skirmishers  and  column  advanced 
about  2J  miles,  when,  at  9 a.  m.,  the  enemy  was  discovered  in  force, 
with  infantry  and  four  pieces  of  artillery,  posted  on  a commanding 
ridge  on  the  farm  of  O.  P.  Wright,  with  a line  of  skirmishers  deployed 
to  his  front.  The  regiments  of  the  brigade  were  here  deployed  into 
line,  the  Seventeenth  Iowa  Regiment  on  the  left  of  the  road,  their  right 
resting  on  the  road,  the  Eightieth  Ohio  on  the  right  of  the  road,  and 
the  Tenth  Missouri  Regiment  on  the  same  line  and  to  the  right  of  the 
Eightieth  Ohio.  The  rain-storm  which  had  been  falling  during  the  morn- 
ing now  increased  in  violence,  during  which  the  pieces  of  the  First  Mis- 
souri Artillery  were  placed  in  position,  three  to  the  right  of  the  house 
of  Mr.  Mann,  on  a ridge  and  to  the  left  of  a cotton-gin.  One  piece  of 
the  same  battery  was  placed  on  the  road  to  the  left  of  the  house  and 
garden  fence,  the  Tenth  Missouri  Regiment  being  moved  to  the  support 
of  the  above-named  three  pieces  on  the  right  and  about  40  paces  to  the 
rear,  the  First  Brigade  being  formed  in  a second  line  and  about  50  yards 
to  our  rear.  During  all  this  time  the  enemy  kept  up  a brisk  fire  with 
his  artillery  with  shell  and  solid  shot. 

At  about  11  a.  m.  the  whole  line  was  ordered  to  advance,  and  the 
skirmishers  soon  engaged  those  of  the  enemy,  gradually  driving  them 
on  their  supporting  line.  The  regiments  moved  forward,  under  a heavy 
fire  of  artillery,  about  400  yards  over  two  ridges,  and  formed  under  the 
crest  of  a third  ridge,  the  other  regiments  of  the  brigade  occupying 
their  same  relative  positions.  We  remained  here  about  fifteen  minutes, 
the  enemy  continuing  his  fire.  Col.  Samuel  A.  Holmes,  commanding 
the  Second  Brigade,  now  commanded  that  bayonets  be  fixed  and  a 
charge  be  made  upon  the  enemy.  The  order  was  obeyed.  The  troops 
moved  forward  at  double-quick,  cheering  wildly,  driving  in  first  the 
enemy’s  skirmishers  and  then  their  main  line,  passing  over  about  500 
yards,  under  a terrific  fire  of  shell,  canister,  and  musketry,  to  the  house 
of  O.  P.  Wright,  in  and  behind  which,  and  the  hedges,  fences,  and  trees 
surrounding  it,  the  rebels  were  hidden  and  protected.  Here  ensued  an 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  JACKSON,  MISS.  783 

almost  liand-to-liaiicl  conflict  with  the  Tweiitj^-fourth  Begiment  South 
Carolina  Volunteers,  tbe  Tenth  Missouri  suftering;  severely  from  the 
streams  of  lire  which  issued  from  behind  every  object  which  could  furnish 
a protection  to  the  enemy.  We  succeeded  Anally  in  dislodging  and 
driving  them  some  200  yards  to  tbe  left  and  toward  the  main  road  to 
Jackson^  when,  while  reforming  our  line,  a section  of  the  Sixth  Wis- 
consin Battery  was  rapidly  brought  upon  the  ground  (the  regiment 
forming  the  support  to  the  same  on  the  right)  and  completed  the  rout 
of  the  enemy. 

The  line  of  the  brigade  being  again  formed,  advanced  to  near  the 
brow  of  a hill  in  front  of  the  earthworks  on  the  outskirts  of  Jackson, 
from  which  works  a brisk  Are  of  artillery  was  kept  up.  Company  F, 
Tenth  Missouri,  under  command  of  Capt.  Joseph  Walker,  was  now 
deployed  as  skirmishers  to  the  front  of  the  regiment.  The  enemy  soon 
after  deserted  their  works,  leaving  four  pieces  of  artillery  unspiked,  and 
retreating  through  the  town,  destroying  stores,  &c.  The  regiment  ad- 
vanced in  line  of  battle  to  the  outskirts  of  the  town,  and  then  by  the 
flank  to  a deserted  camp  on  the  right  side  of  the  road,  where  it  biv- 
ouacked for  the  night. 

The  regiment  lost  in  this  action  10  killed  on  the  Aeld  and  74  wounded, 
several  of  whom  have  since  died,  a list  of  which  is  hereto  appended, 
marked  A. 

During  the  evening  such  rations  as  could  be  procured  were  issued  to 
the  men,  and  at  10  a.  m.  of  May  15  [the  regiment]  marched  back  to 
Clinton,  bivouacking  on  the  north  side  of  the  town. 

On  May  16,  at  7 a.  m.,  received  orders  to  march,  and  proceeded  west- 
ward on  the  Vicksburg  road,  heavy  Aring  being  heard  to  the  front. 
At  11  o’clock,  halted  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Edwards,  where  we  passed 
the  division  train,  the  Eightieth  Ohio  Eegiment  being  detached  from 
the  brigade  for  the  imrpose  of  rear  guard.  Kesumed  the  march,  the 
Are  becoming  heavier,  when,  about  2 p.  m.,  crossing  the  railroad  and 
approaching  Champion’s  Hill,  we  were  hurried  forward  to  participate 
in  the  action,  tbe  men  throwing  oh*  haversacks  and  knapsacks  on  the 
road.  Arriving  at  the  foot  of  the  hill,  we  rapidly  formed  line  of  battle 
to  the  left,  and  charged  up  the  hill  over  ground  of  the  roughest  and 
most  broken  character,  meeting  and  checking  the  enemy,  who  was 
driving  back  in  disorder  and  confusion  the  troops  in  our  advance.  We 
proceeded  forward  steadily  over  the  hills  and  ravines,  Aghting  the 
enemy,  who  contested  the  ground  closely,  until  we  arrived  at  a fence 
and  open  Aeld,  across  which  they  fled  into  the  woods  beyond,  endeav- 
oring to  form  there,  but  by  well-directed  volleys  we  dislodged  them, 
and  they  made  no  further  appearance  in  this  direction.  The  Seven- 
teenth Iowa  liegiment  having  all  this  time  engaged  the  enemy  in  the 
woods  on  our  right  and  across  the  Vicksburg  road,  the  regiment  was 
moved  by  the  right  flank  to  their  support,  and  in  executing  this  move- 
ment Lieut.  Col.  Leonidas  Homey,  Avho,  up  to  this  period,  had  been  in 
command  of  the  regiment,  was  instantly  killed,  falling  from  his  horse 
I)ierced  with  three  shots  in  the  breast  and  head.  The  command  now 
devolved  upon  myself,  as  the  only  remaining  Aeld  officer.  The  enemy 
at  this  time  were  advancing  up  the  ravine  on  our  now  left,  and  I di- 
rected the  Are  of  the  left  wing  upon  them,  checking  and  driving  them 
back.  The  right  wing  of  the  regiment,  under  the  direction  of  Capt. 
Charles  A.  Gilchrist,  of  Company  A,  had  advanced  down  the  slope  in 
support  of  the  Seventeenth  Iowa,  and  assisted  in  defeating  the  enemy’s 
intention  of  recapturing  and  removing  a battery  from  which  they  had 


784 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai*.  XKXVL 


been  driven  by  the  Elev  enth  Indiana  Eegiment,  who,  in  their  turn,  had 
been  forced  to  retire  and  abandon  the  guns.  The  rebels  retreating,  1 
formed  the  regiment  upon  the  Vicksburg  road,  and,  by  order  of  Colonel 
Holmes,  went  into  position  on  the  right  side  of,  and  at  right  angles  to, 
said  road,  deploying  skirmishers  to  the  front  and  right.  The  action 
ceasing,  the  regiment  was  marched  about  300  yards  to  the  rear  of  this 
position,  and  bivouacked  on  the  left  of  the  road  for  the  night. 

In  this  action  7 were  killed  on  the  field,  36  wounded,  and  3 missing, 
several  of  whom  subsequently  died,  a list  of  which  is  hereto  appended, 
marked  B.* 

The  brigade  being  ordered  by  General  Grant  to  remain  on  the  field 
and  assist  in  removing  the  wounded,  burying  the  dead,  and  collecting 
the  arms  and  accouterments  left  on  the  ground,  remained  at  this  i)lace, 
performing  said  duties,  until  Tuesday,  19th  instant,  at  12  m.,  when  it 
received  orders  to  march  to  Black  Eiver.  Marched  — miles  to  within 
1 mile  of  the  river,  where  the  regiment  was  posted  on  the  north  side  of 
the  Vicksburg  road,  on  the  right  of  and  supporting  a section  of  the 
Twelfth  Wisconsin  Battery,  to  cover  the  crossing  of  Black  River  by  the 
division  train  and  a large  body  of  {say  4,000)  prisoners.  This  was  ac- 
complished by  10  o’clock  that  night,  and  the  forces  on  the  east  side  were 
ordered  to  cross  to  the  west  side  of  the  river,  which  was  done,  and  the 
regiment  bivouacked  about  11  p.  m.  1 mile  west  of  the  pontoon  bridge, 
on  the  left  side  of  the  Vicksburg  road. 

May  20,  started  early  in  the  morning,  and  marched  about  10  miles  to 
a position  in  the  rear  of  Vicksburg,  and  in  a ravine  on  the  left  of  the 
road,  bivouacking  for  the  night. 

May  21,  moved  to  our  present  position,  1 mile  distant  from  the  last- 
named  bivouac,  and  in  the  evening  received  orders  to  issue  ammunition 
to  the  amount  of  100  rounds  per  man,  i)reparatory  to  storming  the 
enemy’s  works  on  the  morrow. 

May  22,  at  10  o’clock,  moved  to  the  front  a quarter  of  a mile  across  a 
ridge  swept  by  the  fire  from  the  rebel  forts  and  sharpshooters,  and  took 
a position  on  the  left  of  the  brigade,  which  was  the  reserve  of  the  divis- 
ion in  the  assault  ordered  to  be  made  by  the  whole  line  at  the  above- 
named  hour.  We  occupied  this  position  about  one  hour,  deploying 
skirmishers  to  the  left  and  front  on  the  next  ridge,  when  we  advance(l 
across  the  ridge  in  front  to  the  ravine  beyond,  and,  after  remaining 
about  the  same  length  of  time,  received  orders  to  retire  to  the  position 
last  occupied  by  us,  and  remained  there  about  one  hour,  when  orders 
were  received  for  the  First  and  Third  Brigades  to  charge  the  works, 
and  the  regiment,  with  the  others  of  the  Second  Brigade,  to  advance 
to  the  brow  of  the  hill  in  front,  and  repel  any  attack  which  the  besieged 
might  make,  should  the  assault  prove  unsuccessful ; but,  before  this 
movement  could  be  executed,  the  division  was  ordered  to  the  left,  to 
sui)port  tbe  army  corps  of  General  McOlernaud.  The  brigade  marched 
about  2 miles  to  the  left,  and  reported  to  General  Osterhaus,  and  biv- 
ouacked ill  a ravine  on  the  west  side  of  the  road  for  the  night. 

May  23,  at  7 a.  m.,  marched  about  three-quarters  of  a mile  southward 

to  a ravine, yards  from  the  works,  and  deployed  the  left  wing  as 

skirmishers  to  the  left  and  one  company  to  the  right  and  front.  Re- 
maiue’d  in  this  position  until  1 o’clock,  when,  under  orders  from  General 
Quinby,  the  regiment,  with  the  brigade,  marched  back  to  the  iiosition 
xt  now  occupies,  and  has  remained  here  since. 

The  only  casualties  during  these  two  days  were  2 men  wounded. 


Not  found ; but  see  Part  II,  p.  10. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


785 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  JACKSON,  MISS. 

In  all  the  actions  and  skirmishes  in  which  the  regiment  has  been  en- 
gaged during  the  i)ast  two  weeks,  the  officers  and  men  seemed  to  do 
everything  which  their  duties  as  soldiers  demanded.  It  might  seem  in 
vidious,  perhaps,  for  me  to  particularize  individuals,  but  justice  demands 
that  some  mention  be  made  of  several  officers  and  enlisted  men  whose 
services  deserve  special  notice. 

In  the  action  at  Jackson,  May  14,  Color  Sergt.  Calvin  E.  Lingle,  al- 
though weakened  by  disease,  displayed  undaunted  courage  and  deter- 
mination to  keep  the  flag  to  the  front,  and  only  resigned  it  on  the 
entrance  into  camp  at  Jackson.  At  the  action  at  Champion’s  Hill,  the 
colors  were  borne  by  Acting  Corpl.  Martin  C.  Carmody,  who,  although 
badly  wounded  in  tlie  face,  refused  to  resign  his  charge,  but  steadfastly 
maintained  it  and  his  position  in  the  ranks  until  the  tire  ceased.  The 
dauntless  courage  of  both  of  these  men  deserves  honorable  mention. 

At  the  action  at  Champion’s  Hill,  upon  the  death  of  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Homey,  Capt.  C.  A.  Gilchrist  assumed  command  of  the  right 
wing,  and  while  I was  engaged  on  the  left,  and  unaware  of  the  death 
of  the  lieutenant-colonel,  rendered  such  services  as  deserve  my  hearty 
thanks  and  approbation. 

In  the  actions  at  Eayinond,  Jackson,  and  Champion’s  Hill,  and  dur- 
ing the  operations  in  rear  of  Vicksburg,  the  services  rendered  and  cool- 
ness displayed  while  underfire  by  Adjt.  John  W.  Boyd,  jr.,  are  deserv- 
ing of  much  commendation. 

Surg.  O.  B.  Bayne,  as  heretofore,  was  indefatigable  in  his  care  and 
attention  to  the  wounded  of  the  regiment. 

Number  engaged  at  Jackson,  430 ; number  engaged  at  Champion’s 
Hill,  as  near  as  can  be  ascertained,  say,  325. 

Eespectfully  submitted. 

F.  C.  DEIMLlNCx,' 

Major,  Commanding  Tenth  Regiment  Missouri  Infantry. 

Capt.  William  W.  McCammon, 

Acfg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen-.,  2d  Brig.,  1th  Div.,  11th  Army  Corps. 


No.  14. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  Gregg,  C.  Army,  commanding  at  Jackson. 

In  Camp  neak  Verona,  Miss., 

June  22,  1803. 

Colonel  : I make  of  the  action  had  by  the  forces  under  my  command 
with  the  Federal  army  at  Jackson,  Miss.,  on  May  14,  ultimo  the  follow- 
ing rei)ort: 

It  being  evident  that  the  Federal  forces  advancing  upon  Jackson  were 
very  large.  General  [Josei)h  E.]  Johnston  instructed  me  that  the  city 
would  be  evacuated,  and  that  J should  take  commaml  of  the  troo[)S  and 
hold  the  enemy  in  check  until  Brig.  Gen.  John  Adams  should  have 
l)repared  his  train  and  set  out  upon  our  line  of  retreat — the  Canton 
road. 

Pursuant  to  this,  at  3 a.  m.  I ordered  Col.  1^.  IT.  Colquitt,  command- 
ing brigade,  to  move  his  troo])s  3 miles  toward  Clinton,  and  myself 
proceeded  toward  Clinton  and  instriudod  him  at  what  point  on  the  road 
R R— VOL  XXIY,  PT  I 


78G  Mississipri,  west  Tennessee,  etc.  [chai'.  xxxvi. 

lie  WHS  to  post  bis  coniinaiid.  I also  ordered  Brigadier-General  Walkei 
to  move  bis  brigade  to  witbiu  easy  sui)i)orting  distance  of  Colonel  Col- 
quitt, and  remain  until  it  became  necessary  to  render  bis  assistance  in 
order  to  prevent  Colonel  Colquitt’s  being  forced  back. 

As  a large  force  of  tbe  enemy  (since  learned  to  have  been  Sberman’s 
corps)  was  approaebing  by  tbe  road  from  Mississippi  Springs,  I ordered 
Colonel  [A.  P.]  Thompson,  of  tbe  Third  Kentucky  Mounted  Infantry,  to 
take  iiosition  on  this  road  2 miles  from  Jackson,  and  also  ordered  out 
to  bis  sujiport  tbe  battalion  of  sharpshooters  (Major  [A.]  Sbaaff  com- 
manding) belonging  to  Brigadier-General  Walker’s  brigade,  and  Cap- 
tain [B.]  Martin’s  battery,  belonging  to  tbe  same  brigade.  Colonel  [E.] 
Farqubarson,  commanding  tbe  brigade  formerly  commanded  by  myself, 
was  ordered  to  march  out  on  the  Clinton  road  miles,  and  thence 
move  by  tbe  right  bank  across  tbe  open  field  toward  tbe  Livingston 
road,  and  whenever  within  sight  of  tbe  enemy  make  such  demonstrations 
as  might  impress  him  with  tbe  idea  that  it  was  our  intention  to  fall  upon 
bis  left  flank. 

At  9 a.  m.,  the  enemy  came  up  by  the  Clinton  road  and  commenced 
tbe  attack.  In  a few  minutes  after,  tbe  attack  was  made  by  tbe  force 
on  tbe  road  from  Mississippi  Springs.  Owing  to  the  well-directed  fire 
from  Captain  [J.  A.]  Hoskins’  battery,  and  the  fire  of  Colonel  Colquitt’s 
skirmishers,  as  well,  I think,  as  tbe  fact  that  Colonel  Farqubarson 
showed  bis  command  in  line  of  battle  on  tbe  bills  to  Colonel  Colquitt’s 
right,  tbe  advance  of  the  enemy  was  very  cautious  and  slow.  His  move- 
ment by  tbe  road  from  Mississippi  Springs  was  retarded  in  tbe  same 
spirited  manner. 

Tbe  fighting  continued  on  both  roads  between  tbe  batteries  (Captain 
Martin’s  being  well  served  on  tbe  road  from  Mississippi  Springs)  and 
tbe  skirmishers  until  near  2 o’clock,  when  I received  notice  that  tbe 
trains  were  already  on  their  way.  I immediately  ordered  tbe  entire 
force  to  withdraw,  which  was  done  in  excellent  order,  our  troops  not 
having  permitted  tbe  enemy  to  press  them  back  at  any  point  until  tbe 
order  was  given. 

Tbe  utmost  good  order  prevailed,  and  during  tbe  fight  tbe  troops  en- 
gaged (Hoskins’  battery  and  Colquitt’s  brigade  on  the  Clinton  road, 
and  Thompson’s  Third  Kentucky  and  Martin’s  battery  on  the  road  from 
Mississippi  Springs)  behaved  with  tbe  most  determined  coolness  and 
courage. 

Brigadier-General  Walker’s  and  Colonel  Colquitt’s  commands  moved 
through  tbe  streets  of  Jackson  and  came  into  their  proper  places  from 
tbe  different  roads  without  interference  with  tbe  movements  of  each 
other.  Colonel  Thompson,  with  bis  mounted  infantry  and  Captain  fT. 
M.]  Kelson’s  com])any  of  cavalry,  brought  up  tbe  rear.  Colonel  Farqu- 
barson, by  my  order,  proceeded  obliquely  across  from  tbe  Clinton  to  tbe 
Canton  road  and  fell  into  tbe  column  at  bis  i)roper  place. 

Tbe  lists  of  casualties  in  Colonel  Colquitt’s  different  regiments  are  for- 
warded, but  I have  been  unable  to  obtain  a report  from  General  [W.  H. 
T.]  Walker,  though  I think  a few  casualties  occurred  in  bis  brigade. 
He  has  declined  to  make  a report. 

1 have  from  reliable  sources  that  tbe  enemy’s  loss  was  400  in  killed 
and  wounded.  Our  loss  in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  was  200. 

JOHN  GEEGG, 
Brigadier-  Gcturalj  Commanding. 

Col.  B.  8.  Ewell, 

Atinistaiit  Adj iitant-  Genera b 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  JACKSON,  MISS.  787 

ADDENDA. 


lieturn  of  CasHaUies  in  Gisl^s  Brigade  in  the  engagement  at  Jackson,  Mag  14,  1863. 
[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  <fcc.] 


]^o.  15. 


Report  of  Col.  Peyton  II.  Colquitt.,  Forty-sixth  Georgia  Infantry,  eom- 

nianding  Gisfs  Brigade. 

Headquarters  Gist’s  Brigade, 

Near  Calhoun,  Miss.,  May  10,  I8G3. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  luy  brigade — consisting  of 
a battalion  of  the  Forty-sixth  Georgia  Volunteers,  Oai)t.  T.  B.  Hancock 
coniinanding;  Twenty-fourth  Beginient  South  Carolina  Vobuiteers, 
Lieutenant  Colonel  [Ellison]  Capers coininanding;  battalion  Fourteenth 
Mississi])pi  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel  [W.  L.j  Doss  commanding, 
and  Captain  [J.  A.|  Hoskins’  battery  light  artillery — on  the  morning  of 
the  14th  instant  were  posted  on  the  Clinton  road,  3 miles  from  Jackson, 
with  instructions  to  hold  the  enemy  in  check,  then  approaching  in  heavy 
force.  He  made  his  appearance  at  9 a.  m.  The  aedion  began  soon 
after. 

At  2 p.  m.,  in  conformity  with  orders,  I withdrew  the  brigade,  not  a 
man  having  receded  an  inch,  and  having  resisted  successfully  the  col- 
umn of  the  enemy. 

All  behaved  well,  officers  and  men,  and  won  my  admiration  by  their 
coolness  and  bravery. 

The  following  is  a list  of  the  casualties  :f 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  very  resiiectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

P.  M.  COL(,)tJriT, 

Colonel,  Co'nimanding  Brigade. 

Capt.  Thomas  W.  Hall, 

Assistant  Adjutant  General. 


* Lieut.  A.  F*.  CiuiniiiglKiui  killed, 
t Six  lior.ses  killed. 

t Embodied  ia  tabular  statemeut  precediug. 


AI^TERNAT'E  E E S I G A T I O 1*^  S 


OF 

OECIANIZATIONS  MENTIONED  IN  THIS  VOLUME." 


Adaire’s  (T.  N.)  Infantry.  See  ^Ussissijypi  Troops^  Confederate,  Ath  Begimenf. 
Adams’  (Hiigb  W.)  Infantry.  See  Kottnckij  Troops,  Union,  7lh  Regiment. 

Adams’  (Wirt)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate. 

Adamson’s  (Frederick  C.)  Cavalry.  See  Mieliigan  Troops,  M Regiment. 
Alexander’s  (Jesse  I.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  7idth  Regiment. 

Anderson’s  (Joseph  W.)  Artillery.  See  Botetourt  Artillery. 

Anderson’s  (Robert  H.)  Cavalry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  Mli  Regiment. 

Appeal  Artillery.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Confederate. 

Atherton’s  (Josei)b  B.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  22d  Regiment. 

Bailey’s  (George  W.  K.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  99//i  Regiment. 

Barnes’  (George)  Cavalry.  See  Wirt  Adams^  Cavalry. 

Barrett’s  (Samuel  E.)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  l,s/  Regiment,  Battery  B. 
Barteau’s  (C.  R. ) Cavalry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate. 

Bartilson’s  (Matthias  II.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  8i)th  Regiment. 

Bayne’s  (Griff.)  Sharpshooters.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Confederate,  \2th  Battalion. 
Beach’s  (Augustus)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops,  2d  Battery. 

Beaumont’s  (T.  W.)  Infantry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate,  l)0tli  Regiment. 
Bennett’s  (Thomas  W.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  (idth  Regiment. 

Bevier’s  (R.  S.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate,  loth  Regiment. 

Bissell’s  (Josiah  W.)  Engineers.  See  Missouri  Troop)s,  Union. 

Blackburn’s  (G.  T.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  28th  Regiment. 

Blackburn’s  (William  ]).)  Cavalry.  See.  Illinois  Troops,  7th  Regiment. 

Bledsoe’s  (H.  M.)  Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate. 

Blount’s  (Ambrose  A.)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops,  \7th  Battery. 

Blythe’s  (G.  L.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Considerate. 

Bolton’s  (William  H.)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Regiment,  Battery  L. 
Botetourt  Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troops. 

Botsford’s  (Eli  W.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  16th  Regiment. 

Bouck’s  (Gabriel)  Infantry.  See  Wiseonsin  Troops,  18th  Regiment. 

Boyles’  (William)  Cavalry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  16th  Battalion. 

Bridges’  t (IT.  W.)  Sharpshooters.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Confederate,  12th  Battalion. 
Bringhurst’s  (Tlioinas  II.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  A6th  Regiment. 
Brookhaven  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate. 

Brown’s  (Charles  E.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  26th  Regiment. 

Brown’s  (William  N.)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  20th  Regiment. 

Brush’s  (Daniel  II.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  18th  Regiment. 

Bryan’s  (B.  F.)  Cavalry.  See  Miles''  Legion. 

Buchanan’s  (Robert)  Infantry.  8>iia  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  7 th  Regiment. 

Buehler’s  ('Tlieodore  E.)  Infantry.  S<h}  Indiana  Troops,  67th  Regiment. 

* References  are  to  index  following.  t Tenipoiarily  commanding. 

(789) 


790 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 


Burnet’.s  (James)  Infantry.  See  Texas  Troops. 

Bush’s  (Daiiiwl  P.,  ji*. ) Cavalry.  Illinois  Troops,  2(1  Beginient. 

Byani’s  (Eber  C.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  24lh  Iiegiment. 

Cameron’s  (Robert  A.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  ‘Mtlt  Begimenf. 

Campbell’s  (Franklin)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  81, s/  Beginient. 

Campbell’s  (George  H.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  106th  Begiment. 

Capers’  (Ellison)  Infantry.  See  iSonih  Carolina  Troops,  24th  Begiment. 

Chalmers’  (A.  H.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  18//)  Battalion. 
Chamberlain’s  (Edwin  W.)  Infantry.  See  Lonisiana  Troops,  Union,  llth  Begiment 
{Colored). 

Cherokee  Artillery.  See  Georgia  Troops. 

Chicago  Mercantile  Artillery.  See  Charles  G.  Cooley’s  Artillery. 

Clack’s  (C.  J.)  Infantry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate,  'id  Begiment 
Claiborne  Rangers,  Infantry.  See  Lonisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  I2th  Begiment. 
Cleveland’s  (S.  B.)  Cavalry.  See  TJlrt  Adams’  Cavalry. 

Cobb’s  (Robert)  Artillery.  See  Kentucky  Troops,  Confederate. 

Cole’s  Cavalry.  (Ofticial  designation  not  of  record.)  See  Captain  Cole. 

Coleman’s  (David  C.)  Infantry,  ^ee  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  8th  Begiment. 

Colms’  (S.  H.)  Infantry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Battalion. 

Connell’s  (John ) Infantry.  See  loiva  Troops,  28th  Begiment. 

Cooley’s  (Charles  G. ) Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops. 

Corbin’s  (W.  11.)  Cavalry.  See  Lonisiana  Troops,  Copfederate,  13th  Battalion. 
Corkery’s  (William)  Artillery.  See  Menry  Gu'ihor’s  Ai’tillery. 

Corput’s  (Max  Van  Den)  Artillery.  See  Cherokee  Artillery. 

Cowen’s  (Luther  II.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops.  43th  Beginient. 

Cradlebaugh’s  (John)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  114//?  Begiment. 

Cravens’  (Jordan  E.)  Infantry.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Confederate,  2\st  Begiment 
Crescent  Artillery.  See  Lonisiana  Troops,  Confederate. 

Cunningham’s  (James)  Cavalry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  2d  Begiment. 

Davis’  (William  P.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  2'3d  Begiment. 

Dawson’s  (W.  A.)  Cavalry.  See  F.  M.  Stewart’s  Cavalry. 

Dawson’s  (W.  E.)  Artillery.  See  Saint  Louis  Artillery. 

Dayton’s  (James  H.)  Infantry.  See  West  Virginia  Troops,  4th  Begiment. 

De  Baun’s  ( J.)  Cavalry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  (Confederate,  9th  Battalion. 

De  Golyer’s  (Samnel)  Artillery.  See  Michigan  Troops,  8th  Battery. 

Deimling’s  (Francis  C.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  10//?  Begiment. 
Dillon’s  (Ilenrj’)  Artillery.  See  JJIseonsin  Troops,  6th  Battery. 

Dollins’  (James  J.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  Sis/  Begiment. 

Dornblaser’s  (Benjamin)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  46th  Begiment. 

Doss’  (W.  L.)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  14//?  Begiment. 

Earl’s  (Seth  C.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  33d  Begiment. 

Eastman’s  (Harry  E.)  Cavalry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  2d  Begiment. 

Eaton’s  (William  W.)  Cavalry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  2d  Beginient. 

Eldridge’s  (Hamilton  N.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  121  th  Begiment. 

Emerson’s  (Daniel  M.)  Cavalry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Union,  6th  Begiment. 
Engelmann’s  (Adolph)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  43d  Begiment. 

Erwin’s  (Eugene)  Infantry.  See  hliseouri  Troops,  Confederate,  6th  Begiment. 
Falkner’s  (W.  C.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississqijh  Troops,  Confederate,  Isl  Begiment,  Parti- 
san Bangers. 

Farquharson’s  (Robert)  Infantry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate,  41s/  Begiment. 
Fenton’s  (Frank  B.)  Artillery.  Sec  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Begiment,  Buttery  A. 
Fisher's  (Cyrus  W.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  34lh  Begiment. 

Floyd’s  (W.  J.)  Cavalry.  See  Peach  Creek  Bangers. 

Fonda’s  (John  G.)  Infantry,  See  Illinois  Troops,  118//?  Begiment. 

Force’s  (Manning  F.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  20//*  Begiment. 


CiiAi’.  XXXYI.J 


ORGANIZATIONS  MENTIONED. 


71)1 


Forney’s  (Goor^o  II.)  Infantry.  Soc  Confederate  Tronpi^,  Rerjulars,  1st  BaiUtVton. 
Foster’s  (Jacob  T. ) Artillery.  Sco  JVisconsin  Troops,  1st  lUittery. 

Foster’s  (Jolin  S.)  Cavalry.  Sec  Ohio  Troops,  4th  Company. 

Fuller’s  (E.  W.)  Cavalry.  See  ISaint  Martin's  Rangers. 

Gantt’s  (George)  Cavalry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate,  0th  Battalion. 
Garland’s  (W.  H.)  Cavalry.  See  Afississippi  Troops,  Confederate,. 

Gause’s  (W.  R.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate.  M Regiment. 

Gill’s  (Charles  R.)  Infantry.  See  JVisconsin  Troops,  20th  Regiment. 

Glasgow’s  (SaiTiricl  L.)  Infantry.  See  lonm  Troops,  2M  Regiment. 

Goodwin’s  (Edward)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  Oiolh  Regiment. 

Graham’s  (Harvey)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  22d  Regiment. 

Graham’s  (John  M.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  7th  Regiment. 

Granbury’s  (11.  B.)  Infantry.  See  Texas  Troops,  7th  Regiment. 

Grayson’s  ( Jolin  B.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  Isi  Regi- 
nient. 

Giierson’s  ( Benjamin  H.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  i\th  Regiment. 

Griffin’s  (S.  H.)  Infantry,  ^ee  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  ?>Ut  Regiment. 
Griffith’s  (Henry  H.)  Artillery.  See  Iowa  Troops,  \st  Battery. 

Guibor’s  (Henry)  Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate. 

Guppey’s  (Joshna  J.)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  2‘M  Regiment. 

Guthrie’s  (Harvey,  jr.)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops,  2d  Battery. 

Hall’s  Cavalry.  (Official  designation  not  of  record.)  See  Captain  Uall. 

Ham’s  ( T.  W. ) Cavalry.  See  Mississipjn  Troop)S,  Confederate. 

Hancock’s  (T.  B.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  4V\th  Regina nt. 

Harrison’s  (Isaac  F. ) Cavalry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  Joth  Battalion. 
Hart’s  (Levi  W.)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  II. 

Hatch’s  (Edward)  Cavalry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  2d  Regiment. 

Hayes’  (Charles  S.)  Cavalry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  ^th  Regiment. 

Heath’s  (Thomas  T.)  Cavalry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  hth  Regiment. 

Herren’s  (Gadi)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment. 
Herrick’s  (Thomas  P.)  Cavalry.  See  Kansas  Troops,  7th  Regiment. 

Hervey’s  (W.)  Artillery.  See  Crescent  Artillery. 

Hewlett’s  (W.  A.)  Partisans.  See  Alabama  Troops,  1‘Mh  Cavalry  Battalion. 
Higley’s  (John  H.)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  AQth  Regiment. 

Hillis’  (David  B.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  17th  Regiment. 

Hogg’s  (William  N.)  Artillery.  See  Appeal  Artillery. 

Holland’s  (O.  S.)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Con  federate,  ?>7th  Regiment. 
Horney’s  (Leonidas)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  10th  Regiment.  , 
Hoskins’  (James  A.)  Artillery.  See  Broolliaren  Artillery. 

Hotaling’s  (John  R.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Regiment. 

Hubbard’s  (Lucius  F.)  Infantry.  See  Minnesota  Troops,  bth  Regiment. 

Hubbell’s  (F.  L.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate,  3d  Regiment. 

Hudson  Artillery.  See  Tettus’  Flying  Artillery. 

Hughes’  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Cavalry. 

Hurst’s  (Fielding)  Cavalry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Union,  6th  Regiment. 

Hutchens’  (William  D.)  Cavalry.  See  IllinoU  Troops,  16th  Regiment. 

Inge’s  (W.  M.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Tpoops,  Confederate,  12th  Battalion. 
Jackson’s  (Ezra  P.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  68ih  Regiment. 

Jackson’s  (W.  H.)  Cavalry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate. 

Johnson’s  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate. 

Johnson’s  (W.  H.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  28th  Regiment. 
Johnston’s  (J.  W.)  Artillery.  See  Botetourt  Artillery. 

Jones’  (Theodore)  Infantry.  See;  Ohio  Troops,  :H)ih  Regiment. 

Keigwin’s  (James)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  49///,  Regiment. 

Kelly’s  (John  H.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  114th  Regiment. 


792 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CUAV.  XXXVI. 


Kimball’s  (Charles  B.)  Artillery.  See  JVisconstn  Troops,  \at  Batlery, 

Kinsman’.s  (WTlliaoi  11.)  Infantry.  See  loira  Troops,  2‘.kl  lleglm*  nt. 

Klauss’ (Martin)  Artillery.  Hee  Ivdiaiia  Troops,  \st  Batter}!, 

Lan  IgTaeber’s  (Cieinens)  Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Fniou. 

Landis’  (John  C.)  Ajtillei'y.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate. 

Langan’s  (John  M.)  Artillery.  See  John  C.  Landis'  Ariillerij. 

Langley’s  (Ed  ward)  Artillery.  Maryland  Troops,  Confederate,  'Ad  Battery. 
Lanphere’s  (Clinrles  H.)  Artillery.  See  Michiyan  Troops,  7th  Battery. 

Lewer.s’  (James)  Cavalry.  See  Wirt  Adams'  Cavalry. 

L’Hommedieu’s  (S.  S.,jr. ) Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  S.'.d  Ileyiment. 

Lidell’s  State  Troops.  (Officiivl  designation  not  of  r<H;ord.)  See  Major  Lidtll. 
LiglUburn’s  ( Jo.seph  A.  J.)  Infantry.  See  West  Viryinia  Troops,  Ath  Beyirnent. 
Lippincott’s  (Charles  E.)  Infantry.  See  JUinois  Troops,  'AAd  Beyirnent. 

Lochbihler’s  (Christian)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union.  AMh  Beyirnent. 
Logan’.s  (John  A.)  Cavalry  Escort.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Beyirnent. 

Loomis’  (Reuben)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  Gfh  Beyirnent. 

Love’s  (R.  C.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  Ath  Beyirnent. 

Lowry’s  (Robert)  Infantry,  Sec  Alississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  iMh  Beyirnent. 
Lucas’  (Thonins  J.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  Wth  Beyirnent. 

Luckett’s  (W.  R.)  Cavalry.  See  Wirt  Adams'  Cavalry. 

Macauley’s  (Daniel)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  llth  Bey'inient. 

McClanahan’s  Cavalry.  (Official  designation  not  of  record.)  See McClanahan. 

McClure’s  (John)  Infantry,  See  Ohio  Troops,  With  Beyirnent. 

McCook’s  (Edwin  S.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  Alst  Beyirnent. 

McCown’s  (Janies)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate,  Ath  Beyirnent. 
McCulloch’s  (R.)  Cavalry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate,  2d  Beyirnent. 
McDonald’s  (Asa  W.)  Cavalry,  ^ee' Illinois  Troops,  7th  Beyirnent. 

MacGavock’s  (R.  W, ) Infantry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate,  lOth  andAOth  Be<ji- 
ments. 

McKoin’.s  (.John)  Cavalry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate.  lAth  Battalion. 
McLaughlin’s  (John  A.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  A7th  Atey intent. 

McMillen’s  (William  L.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  \Aoth  Beyirnent. 

MacMurray’s  (Jnnins  W.)  Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  ls(  Beyirnent,  Bat- 
tery M. 

McNeil’s  (John)  Cavalry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  lAth  Battalion. 
McPliail’s  (Enos)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  'Ad  Beyirnent. 

McPherson’s  (James  B.)  Cavalry  E.scort.  See  Ohio  Troops,  Ath  Company. 
Maloney’s  (Maurice)  Infantry.*  See  Union  Troops,  Beyulurs,  1st  Beyirnent. 

Maltby’s  (Jasper  A.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  AAth  Beyirnent. 

Mann’s  (P.  A.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  \2th  Battalion. 
Marsli’s  (Benjamin  E.,  jr.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Beyirnent. 

Martin’s  (Robert)  Artillery.  See  Georyia  l\oops. 

Mathew.s’  (Samnel)  Cavalry.  See  M'lssissippi  Troops,  Confediratc. 

Maxwell’s  (W.  C.)  Cavalry.  See  Miss'issippi  Troops,  Conjederaie. 

Merrill’s  (Samnel)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  2\st  Beyirnent. 

Miles’  (W.  R.)  Legion.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate. 

Mississippi  Rangers,  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Union. 

Mitchell’s  (James  A.)  Artillery.  See  Oh'io  Troops,  Wdh  Battery. 

Mitchell’s  (W.  R.)  Partisans.  See  M'lSsissippi  Troops,  Confederate. 

Montgomery’s  (Bac.on)  Cavalry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  (jth  Beyirnent. 

Moore’s  (.Jonathan  B.)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  'AAd  Beyirnent. 

Morgan’s  (.John  II.)  Sharpshooters.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Conj't  derate,  I2th  Battal- 
ion. * 


Serving  a.s  .siego  ai  tillery. 


Chap.  XXXVI.  1 


ORGANIZATIONS  MENTIONED. 


793 


Miidd’s  (John  J. ) Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Urgiynoit, 

Mueller’s  (Alexainler)  Cavalry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  Aih  Re(jinumi. 

Myers’  (Benjamin  H.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  S3J  llegiment. 

Nale’s  (John  H.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  Alsl  HcpinienL 
Neely’s  (J.  J.)  Cavalry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate. 

Nelson’s  (Horatio  C.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  1th  Repinieni. 

Nelson’s  (T.  M.)  Cavalry.  See  Georgia  Troops. 

Obenchain’s  (Francis  G.)  Artillery.  See  Botetourt  ArtiUenj. 

Oliver’s  (William  S.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  1th  Regiment. 

Orr’s  (J.  A.)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  '.Ast  Regiment. 

Osband’s  (E.  D.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  Ath  Regiment. 

Owens’  (J.  A.)  Artillery.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Confederate. 

Pardee’s  (Don  A.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  42d  Regiment. 

Parry’s  (Augustus  C.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  41  th  Jlegi men t . 

Patten’s  (W.  Thompson)  Artillery.  See  Margland  Troops,  Con  federate,  ‘3d  Battery. 
Patterson’s  (William  F.)  Engineers.  See  Kentucky  Troops,  Union. 

Peach  Greek  Rangers,  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate. 

Peats’  (Frank  F, ) Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  11th  Regiment. 

Peoria  Light  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Regiment,  Battery  A. 

Pettus’  (E.  W.)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  20th  Regiment. 

Pettus  Flying  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate. 

Pile’s  (William  A.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  33d  Reginunt. 

Pinson’s  (R.  A.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment. 
Pleisch’s  (Theodore)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  OOtli  Regiment. 

Pointe  Coupee  Artillery.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate. 

Poole’s  (Do  Witt  C.)  Infantry.  See  Wiscons-in  Troops,  12ih,  Regiment. 

Porter’s  (Edward  D.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  (Jonfederale. 

Post’s  (John  P.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  8th  Regiment. 

Potter’s  (Leander  H.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops, '.\3d  Regiment. 

Potts’  (Benjamin  F.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  ‘32d  Regiment. 

Prince’s  (Edward)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  1th  Regiment. 

Putnam’s  (Holden)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  if.ld  Regiment. 

Raum’s  (Green  B.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  3uth  Regiment. 

Raynor’s  (William  H.)  Infantry,  Sea*.  Ohio  Troops,  ITUh  Regiment. 

Rice’s  (Amerien.s  V.)  Infantry.  Se(}  Ohio  Troops,  31th  Regiment. 

Rice’s  (James)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops,  11  Ih  Battery. 

Richards’  (Evan)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2()th  Reginunt. 

Richardson’s  (Robert)  Infantry.  Sec  Louisiana  Troops,  Con  federate,  11  th  Regiment. 
Richardson’s  (R.  V.)  Cavalry.  Se(‘,  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate. 

Ridley’s  (S.  J .)  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment,  Bat- 
tery 

Riley’s  (A.  C.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment. 

Rogers’  (Henry  A.)  Artillery.  See.  fllinois  Troops,  Ist  Regiment,  Battery  1). 

Rogers’  (J.  W.)  Infantry.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Confederate,  3th  Regiment. 

Rorer’s  (W.  A.)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  2()th  Regiment. 
Rutherford’s  (F.  S.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  37th  Regiment. 

St.  John’s  (A.  P.)  Artillery.  See  77.  If.  Sengs! adds  Artillery. 

Saint  Louis  Artillery.  S(U)  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate. 

Saint  Martin’s  Rangers,  Cavalry.  8,0. a Louisiana  Troops,  Confediralc. 

Saylor’s  (Thomas)  Cavalry.  See  Michigan  Troops,  '.\d  Regiment. 

Schofield’s  (George  W. ) Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  1st  Regiment,  Bat- 
tery A. 

Scott’s  (Thomas  M.)  Infantry,  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  12th  Regiment. 
Sears’  (C.  W.)  Infantry.  Sec;  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  4f)lh  Regiment. 
Sengstak’s  (H.  H.)  Artillery.  See  Alabama  Troops. 


71U 


[CHAI-.  XXXVI. 


MTSkSTSSTPPT,  west  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Senteny’s  (Pombroko  S.)  Infantry.  So.o  Missonri  Troops,  Confederate,  2d  Reoiment. 
Shaaff's  (A.)  Sharpshooters.  Scii  Georgia  Troops,  Uf  liaftaHoi). 

Shedd’s  (Warren)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops, 'M)ih  Refjininit. 

Sheldon’s  (Charles  S.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  18th  Ref/iment. 
Shelley’s  (Charles  M.)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  Wth  Refjiment. 

Shunk’s  (David)  Infantry;  See  Indiana  Troops,  8th  Rajiment. 

Siber’s  (Edward)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  '37th  Refjiment. 

Slack’s  (James  R. ) Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  A7th  Repiment. 

Sloan’s  (’riiomas  J.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  12Mh  Refjiment. 

Slocomb’s  (C.  H. ) Artillery.  See  JVashinfjton  Artillery,  Mh  Battery. 

Smith’s  Conscripts.  (Official  designation  not  of  record.)  Seci  Captain  Smith. 
Smith's  (J.  F.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Reyimenl  (State). 
Sparrestrom’s  (Frederick)  Artillery.  S(h>  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Reyimenl,  Battery  G. 
Spear’s  (Edward,  jr.)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops,  IM.h.  Battery. 

Spicely’s  (William  T.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  2-ith  Reyimcnt. 

Spicer’s  Pioneers.  See  Kansas  Troops,  1st  Regiment. 

Spiegel’s  (Marcus  M.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  120t//  Regiment. 

Spooner’s  (Benjamin  J.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  83d  Regiment. 

Spoor’s  (Nelson  T.)  Artillery.  See  Iowa  Troops,  2d  Battery. 

Starr’s  (Mathew  H.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  (\th  Regiment. 

Stephens’  (Thomas)  Cavalry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  2d  Regiment. 

Stewart’s  (F.  M.)  Cavalry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate. 

Stillman’s  (George  L.)  Artillery.  See  Michigan  Troops,  7th  Jiattery. 

Stirman’s  (Ras)  Sharpshooters.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Confederate. 

Stocks’  (J.  G. ) Cavalry.  See  W.  H.  JacksoTs  Cavalry. 

Stockdale’s  (T.  R.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississijypi  Troops,  Confederate. 

Stone’s  (William  M.)  Infantry.  See  io?ra  Troops,  22d  Regiment. 

Street’s  (Solomon  G.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate. 

Strong’s  (James  G.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  28ih  Regiment. 

Sturgess’  (Robert  H.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  &ih  Regiment. 

Swan’s  (Simeon  D.)  Cavalry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  Ath  Regiment. 

Sweaney’s  (John  R.)  Artillery.  See  Pettns  Flying  Artillery. 

Tennessee  (Confederate)  Second  Cavalry.  See  C.  R.  Barteau's  Cavalry. 

Terrell’s  (V.  L.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate. 

Thomas’  (De  Witt  C.)  Infantry.  See  Ind'iana  Troops,  9Jd  Regiment. 

Thomas’  (J.  D.)  Infantry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate,  Jbsf  Regiment. 
Thompson’s  (A.  P.)  Infantry.  See  Kentucky  Troops,  Confederate,  ‘3d  Regiment. 
Thomp.son’s  (J.  F.)  Artillery.  See  J.  A.  Owens'  Artillery. 

Thornton’s  (Joseph  H.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  49ih  Regiment. 

Tippah  Rangers,  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Union. 

Tipton’s  (Samuel  P.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Regiment. 

Turner’s  (James  J.)  Infantry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate,  10th  and  '30th  Reg 
ments. 

Tweeddale’s  (William)  Engineers.  See  Josiah  IF.  BisselVs  Engineers. 

Vance’s  (Joseph  W.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  96lh  Regiment. 

Waddell’s  (James  F.)  Artillery.  See  Alabama  Troops. 

Wade’s  (William)  Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate. 

Wakefield’s  (Edwin)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  7th  Regiment. 
Walker’s  (C.  H.)  Infantry.  Sec  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate,  '.Id  Regiment. 
Walsh’s  (Richard  C.)  Artillery.  See  William  Wade's  Artillery. 

Washburn’s  (Henry  D.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  18th  Regiment. 
Washington  Artillery.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate. 

Washington’s  (Edward  C.)  Infantry.  See  Union  Troops,  Regulars,  13ih  Regiment. 
Waterhouse’s  (Allen  C.)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  E. 
Waul’s  (T.  N. ) Legion.  See  Texas  Troops. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


ORGANIZATIONS  MENTIONED. 


7 Of) 

Weatherall’s  Cavalry.  (Official  dcHignatiou  not  of  record.)  See  Capiain  Weath- 
er all. 

Weber’s  (Andrew  J.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  l\1h  Uegiment. 
Wheeler’s  (John  R.)  Infantry.  See  Wiseousin  Troojis,  16//t  Regiment. 

White’s  (Patrick  H.)  Artillery.  See  Charles  G.  Cooley's  Artillery. 

Wilbourn’s  (C.  C.)  Cavalry.  See  Hughes'  Caralry. 

Wiles’  (Greenberry  F.)  Pioneer.s.*  See  Greenlnrry  F.  Wiles. 

Williams’  Artillery.  (Official  designation  not  of  record.)  See  Captain  Williams. 
William.s’  (William  S.)  Aitillery.  See  Ohio  Troops,  3d  Battery. 

Wilson’s  (James  G.)  Cavalry.  See  JlUuois  Troops,  With  Regiment. 

Wilson’s  (Thomas  B.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate,  2d  Regiment. 
Wingfield’s  (J.  H.)  Cavalry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  9th  Battalion. 

Wood’s  Paitisans.  (Official  designation  not  of  record. ) See Wood 

Wood’s  (Charles  A.)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  Wth  Regiment. 

Wood’s  (Peter  P. ) Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  Isf  Regiment,  Battery  A. 

Wood’s  (R.  L.)  Artillery.  See  H.  M.  Rledsoe's  Artillery. 

Wood’s  (Robert  C.,jr. ) Cavalry.  See  Wirt  Adams’  Cavalry. 

Wood’s  (William  F. ) Cavalry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  1st  Regiment. 

Wood’s  (William  F.)  Infantry.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Union,  1st  Regiment  (Colored), 
Woods’  (M.  L.)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops.  46th  Regiment. 

Worthington’s  (William  J.)  Infantry.  See  Kentucky  Troops,  Union,  22d  Regiment. 
Wright’s  (Clark)  Cavalry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  6th  Regiment. 

Yerger’s  (W.  S.)  Cavalry.  See  Wirt  Adams’  Cavalry. 

Zesch’s  (Giistaviis)  Infantry.  See  Kansas  Troops.  1st  Regiment. 


Iniprovised. 


*|:  ■.-‘^■>  M>ftsi5..,#, ,»„  ^ i>  :;v./  . ■fe-^yH:''''^ 

“’C  ■ - • "■  •>»‘'%*r|'^'“v'^‘'4i^''S'%'i^\ '^'■'^  "^^'meM'”‘'-  '^-  '^:-¥- 


■ .A . /-. 


■■-s-i 


■ .\u'- 


' " • A.'‘  ^ - . ■'  i'  '** 

•:' A wv.v^-' 


■ft; 


‘1 

J 

I 


^v.(,-’  ,v.  . 


. '*'* 

’.  V*  ’v.  ^ ■ 

, 

f. 

r;-. 

S?/' 

■ -71 

' vO 

..  • ' '/I 

.■i.’‘;v*. 


INDEX 


Brigades,  Divisions,  Corps,  Armies,  cind  improvised  organizations  are  “ Mentioned  ” under  name  of  command- 
ing officer;  State  and  other  organizations  under  their  official  designation.  (See  Alternate  Designations, 
pp.  789-795.) 


Pn<xe. 


Adaire,  T.  N,  Mentioned 6/5,077 

Adams,  D.  E.  Mentioned 

Adams,  Hugh  W.  l\’e[>oi  t of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1,  1803 

Adams,  John. 

Correspondenei*.  ^vith 

Ibickner,  Simon  B 

Johnston,  .Joseph  E 

Lorin^-,  William  W 

Mentioned 210,  200,  .532,  540 

KejKuts  of  Glierson’s  Paid  to  Baton  Pouge,  La.,  Ajiril  17-May  2,  1<'503 53)1 

Adams,  Wirt. 

Mentioned 34,209,2.54, 

259,  203, 271,  343,  3.55,  304,  430,  520,  538,  541, 542,  545,  547-549,  570,  730 


078 

022 

587 


532 
532 
532 
, 785 
,532 

2.55, 

-738 


Pe ports  of 

Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Pong(^,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1803 533 

lmiia?ioIa,  U.  )S.  S.  Cai)tiire  of,  Feb.  24,  1803 370 

Adamson,  Frederick  C. 

AbMjtiomd 350,  357,  487 

Reports  of 

Clifton,  Tenn.  Exj)edition  from  Lexington  to,  Feb.  17-21,1803 356 

Duck  River,  Tenn.  Scout  from  Lexington  to  mouth  of,  March  31-Ai)ril 

3,  1803 488 

A.  D.  Hines,  Steamer.  Mentioned 088 


Adjutant-Generars  Office,  U.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with  U.  S.  Grant 157,158 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  .A. 

Correspondence  with 

Johnston,  Josei)h  E 214-210,  218-220,  225, 220,  229-235,  237,  239 


Pembeiion,  Jcdin  C 249-251,254,290,607 

Orders,  Special,  seaies  18(;2:  No.  275,  213. 

Orders,  Special,  series  18(i3 : No.s.  176,  184,  235. 

Agar,  Richard.  Mentioned .320 

Akin,  John  S.  Meaitioned * 7.33 

Alabama.  Military  departments  end)racing : 213,235 

Alabama  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 


Artillery,  Light — Batteries:  Sengstak’s,  4()7  ; Waddell’s,  318.040. 
Q-.\\ix\vy— Battalions : 13th,  09(1-093;  15  th.  089.  Regiments:  2d,  535,  536, 
5()0,  580,  090-093. 


luiirntry-Regiments : 20th,  078-082  ; 23d,  004,  073,074,078;  30th,  078- 
082  ; 31st,  580,040,078-082,724,770;  35th,  .544  ; 40th,  459,  400,  407,  510; 
43d,  709  ; 46th,  080,  082,  731,  772  ; 54th,  55:5. 


(797) 


798 


INDEX. 


Page, 

Albatross,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 65,67,477,480,486 

Alcorn,  J.  L.  Mentioned ' 373 

Aleck  Scott,  U.  8.  S.  Mentioned 518 

Alexander,  Jesse  I. 

Mentioned 598, 599, 634,  722 

Report  of  engagement  at  Jackson,  Miss,,  May  14,  1863,  including  opera- 
tions May  3-24 771 

Allen,  Robert.  Mentioned 26 

Alles,  John  J.  Mentioned 586 

Allyboy,  J.  R.  Mentioned 369 

Ames,  John.  Mentioned 739 

Anderson,  J.  W,  Mentioned 318 


Anderson’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of.  See  Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  1, 
1863. 


Andrews,  George  W.  Mentioned 479 

Anglo-Saxon,  Steamer  Mentioned 47, 77,  80, 82,  405,  565, 567, 5()9 

Anna  Perette,  Steamer.  Mentioned 469 

Arcadia,  Steamer.  Mentioned 458, 505,  506 

Arizona,  U.  S,  S.  Mentioned 107 

Arkansas,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 336 

Arkansas.  U.  S.  Grant  assigned  to  command  of  trooi>s  in 9 

Arkansas  Ti oops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries:  Appeal,  421  ; Owens’,  560,580.689. 

Infantry — Battalions:  12th  (Sharpshooters),  455,  465-467,  672,  674.  Begi- 
ments  : 9th,  561,580,581;  15th,  620,(572,674;  21st,  672,674;  Stirman’s 
Sharpshooters,  063. 

Arkansas  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Union.) 

Infantry — Regiments  : 1st  (Colored),  695. 

Arkansas  Post,  Ark.  Exjiedition  against  and  capture  of,  Jan.  4-11, 1803.  See 
report  of  Hallt  ck,  p.  5. 

Arms,  Ammunition,  etc.  See  Munitions  of  War. 

Armstead,  Captain.  Mentioned ^ 417 

Army  Corps,  13th. 

Congratulatory  orders.  McClernand 159 

McClernand,  John  A. 

Assumes  command  of 1 

Relieved  from  command  of 103, 164 

Ord,  E.  O.  C.,  assigned  to  command  of 103,  164 

Ordered  to  garrison  ])ost  of  Helena,  Ark 11 

Orders,  General,  series  1863:  Ho.  32  (I4th  Division),  620. 

Army  Corps,  16th.  Stephen  A.  tliirlhut  assumes  command  of 2 

Army  Headquarters.  Correspondence  with 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E 41 

Grant,  U.  S /J-12, 14,  17-20,  22-25,  27-32,  34-37,  39,  40,  42-44, 62,  63, 376 

Hurlbut,  Stephen  A 30 

McClernand,  John  A 165 

Army  Transportation.  S.upplies  of,  eic.  See  Munitions  of  IVar. 

Arrington,  T.  M.  Mentioned 681 

Asboth,  Alexander. 

Mentioned 63,92 

Reports  of 

Bloomington,  T(mn.  Skirmish  near,  Feb.  27,  1863  422 

Obion  River,  Tenn.  Skiimish  near  the,  April  9,  1863  514 


INDEX. 


799 


Papre 

Ashmead,  Samuel  W.  Mentioned 45ii 

Atchafalaya  River,  La.  Operations  on  the.  See  Red,  Atchafalaya,  and  Black 
Rivers,  La.  0})eratio7is  on  the,  Feh.  10-14,  18C3. 


Atherton,  Joseph  B. 

Correspondence  with  John  A.  McClernand 179 

Mentioned 022, 628, 660 

Keport  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1,  1863 632 

Augur,  Christopher  C.  Mentioned 528 

A.  W.  Baker,  Steamer. 


Capture  of,  Feb.  3,  1863.  See  Vickshury,  Miss.  Passaye  of  haiteries  at,  by 
U.  S.  S.  Queen  of  the  West,  Ftb.  2,  1863.  Reports  of 
Ellet,  Charles  Kivers.  Gardner,  Franklin.  Sibley,  Henry  H. 


Mentioned 338,3.39 

Aylmer,  Edward  P.  Mentioned... .592 

Babbitt,  George  S.  Mentioned 714 

Bailey,  George  W.  K.  Mentioned 618,  621,  622,  626,  627 

Baker,  A.  W.,  Steamer.  See  A.  W.  Baker,  Steamer. 

Baker,  Samuel  R.  Mentioned 760 

Baker’s  Creek,  Miss.  Battle  of.  See  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May 
16,  1863. 

Baldwin,  Nathan.  Mentioned 515, 516 

Baldwin,  William  E. 

Mentioned  ....  200,  231, 232,  257, 260,  271, 285, 293,  658,  659,  661,  662, 664, 666-668.  673 

Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1, 1863 675 

Baldwin’s  Ferry,  Miss.  Skirmish  at.  May  13,  1863.  Returns  of  casualties. 

(Union  troops) 158 


See  also  Jackson,  Miss.  Enyayement  at,  May  14,  1863.  Report  of  Buckl and, 
p.  761. 


Ballard,  D.  P.  Mentioned 622 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P. 

Co-operation  with  U.  S.  Grant 4,  9, 25, 28-30,  36,  39,  40,  49 

Mentioned 4,  7,  9, 10, 22, 25,  28-30,  33,  36,  38-45,  49,  62, 69  73,  87-89,  91, 

93, 95, 97. 104, 107, 112, 130, 142, 199, 228, 230, 234, 243, 253-255, 540,  542,  696 

Barclay,  J.  W.  Mentioned 294 

Bardness,  Bradford.  Mentioned 499 

Bare,  Thomas.  Mentioned 586 

Barksdale,  W.  R.  Mentioned 460 

Barnes,  George.  Mentioned 355,467,511 

Barnett,  William.  Mentioned 567 

Barney, . Mentioned 27 

Baron  De  Kalb,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned , 75, 

. 76, 246,  379,  380,  382,  383,  385, 38o,  391,  395-397,  407,  416, 576,  578,  752,  755 


Barron,  Samuel.  Mentioned 197,232 

Barrett,  John  W.  Mentioned 706 

Barrett,  W.  L.  Mentioned - 473 

Barteau,  C.  R, 

Mentioned 26,  214,  551, 552,  561, 689-692 

Reports  of 

Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  Ija.,  April  17-May  2,  1863 533,534 

King’s  Creek,  near  Tupelo,  Miss.  Action  at.  May  5,  1863  692 

Bartilson,  Matthias  H.  Mt  ntioned 774-777 

Bartlett,  Frank  A.  Report  of  skiiruishes  at  Caledonia  and  Pin  Hook,  La., 

May  10^  18()3  


699 


800 


INDEX. 


Pafie. 

Barton,  Seth  M. 

Mentioned 200,  2:)l,  232, 253, 293, 055,  078 

Keporfc  of  passage  of  batteries  at  Vicksbn«  g,  Miss,,  by  U.  8.  8.  Switzeriand, 

March  25, 1803  480 

Barton,  W,  S.  Meniioued 230 

Baskerville,  Charles.  Mentioned 290 

Baton  Rouge,  La.  Grierson’s  Raid  to.  See  Grierson's  liaid  to  Baton  Boikjc, 

La.,  April  Vi-Mmj  2,  1803. 

Bayard,  Steamer.  Mentioned 394,410,  4li 

Bayne,  Griff.  Mentioned 074 

Bayou  Pierre,  Miss. 

Skirmish  on  North  Fork  of,  May  3,  1803.  See  Jackson,  Miss.  Engagement 
at,  Mag  14,  1803.  lieporis  of 
Alexander,  Jesso  I.  Hillis,  David  B. 

Deiniling,  Francis  C.  Holtues,  Samuel  A. 

See  also  llagmoncl.  Miss.  Engagement  at,  Mag  12,  1803.  lleport  of  Smith, 
p.  700. 

Skirmish  on  South  Forlc  of,  May  2,  1803.  Ke])ort  of  George  11.  Boomer  ...  083 

See  also  reports  of  Grant,  pp.  33,  49;  I'emhertcm,  p.  2.58;  Logau,  i».  044; 
Stevenson,  p.  053. 

Also 

May  1,  1803.  Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of.  lieport  of  Cockrell,  j).  008. 

14,  180'.).  Jackson,  Miss.  Engagiment  at.  Peport  of  Holmes,  p.  773. 

Bayou  Tensas,  near  Lake  Providence,  La.  Skirmish  at.  May  9,  1803^ 3 

Beach,  Augustus.  M(‘ntioned 001,000,008 

Beaty,  Dr.,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 339,304-300 

Beaumont,  T.  W. 

Mentioned 737,738 

Re])ort  of  engagement  at  Raymond,  Miss.,  May  12,  1803 7i3 

Beauregard,  Fort,  La.  See  Port  Beanregard,  La. 

Beauregard,  G.  T.  Mentioned 49, 195,  200,  212,  214,  21.5,  220,  223,  224,  259 

Beaver  Creek  Swamp,  Tenn.  Scout  in,  April  2-0,  1803.  Report  of  Thomas 

P.  Herrick 500 

Bedford,  Wimer.  Mentioned 708,710 

Eeekman,  John  W.  Mentioned 571,589 

Bell,  John,  Steamer.  Mentioned 394,  397 

Bell, . (Confederate.)  Mentioned 408 

Bell, . (Union.)  Mentioned 521 

Bell,  W.  A.  Mentioned 4r0 

Belmont,Tenn.  Action  near,  March  29,  1803.  See  Xa  Grange,  Tenn.  Expedi- 
tions from,  March  2^- April  3, 1803.  Also  rejwrt  of  Dana,  p.  08. 

Benham,  M.  L.  Mentioned 591 

Bennett,  Thomas  W. 

Correspondence  with  John  A.  MeClernand 495 

Mentioned 139,  490,  491 , 495,  589 

Benson,  Berry  B.  Mentioned 09,420 

Benton,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 30, 75,  70,  82, 134, 517,  518,  .574 

Benton,  Thomas  O.  Mentioned • 700 

Benton,  Willard  A.  Mentioned (131 

.Benton,  William  P. 

Mentioned 138, 144,  150, 152, 155, 1 7.5, 

180,  182,  184,  185,  584,  ,598,  002,  000,  007,  010,  01.5-018,  020,  021,  023,  024,  020 
Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  M:iy  1,  1803 025 

circnmstiini ial  leporto  on  file. 


INDEX. 


801 

ra>;e. 


Berwick  Bay,  La.  Action  at,  June  23,  1863.  Communications  from 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 229 

Taylor,  Eichard 229 

Berwick  Bay,  Steamer. 

Capture  of,  Feb.  3,  1863.  See  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Passage  of  batteries  at,  by 
U.  S.  S.  Queen  of  the  West,  Feb.  2,  1863.  Reports  of 
Ellet,  Charles  Elvers.  Gardner,  Franklin.  Sibley,  Henry  H. 


Mentioned I 338,  339 

Besse,  Charles  U.  Mentioned 620 

Bett,  Emma,  Steamer.  Mentioned 354, 465, 505 

Bevier,  R.  S.  Mentioned 319,668 

Bibb,  H.  H.  Mentioned 692 

Bidwell,  B.  G.  Mentioned 742 

Biffle,  A.  B.  Reports  of  Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April  17-May  2, 

1863  536 

Big  Black  River,  Miss.  Skirmishes  at  the.  See  Hankinson^s  Ferry. 

Big  Black  River  Bridge,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  17,  1863. 

Casualties.  Returns  of. 

Confederate  troops 320 

Union  troops 6,59, 158 

Reports  of 

Cockrell,  Francis  M 267,268 

Gates,  Elijah 268 


See  also  Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of.  May  1,  1863.  Reports  of 


Buehler,  Theodore  E.  Carr,  Eugene  A. 

Also  reports  of  Halleck,  p.  5 ; Grant,  pp.  38,  53  ; Dana,  p.  86 ; McClernand, 
pp.  151,  160, 624  ; Tunica,  p.  189 ; Johnston,  pp.  222, 242 ; Pember- 
ton, 267.  Also  Part  II. 

Bigelow,  James  K.  Mentioned 620 

Big  Sandy  Creek,  Miss. 

Skirmish  at.  May  8,  1863* 3 

Skirmish  near.  May  9,  1863.  See  report  of  McClernand,  p.  146. 

Billingsley, . Mentioned 481 

Bingham,  Judson  D.  Report  of  attempt  of  tug  George  Sturgessto  pass  bat- 
teries at  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  4,  1863 687 

Bingham,  Oscar  H.  Mentioned 357,358,488 

Birmingham,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  April  24,  1863.  See  Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton 
Rouge,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1863.  Reports  of 


Barteau,  C.  K.  Hatch,  Edward. 

Gholson,  S.  J.  Ruggles,  Daniel. 

Bissell,  Josiah  W.  Mentioned 124 

Black  Bayou,  Miss.  Expedition  through.  See  Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition, 

March  14-27,  1863. 

Black  Bayou,  Deer  Creek,  and  Greenville,  Miss.  Expedition  to.  See  Green- 
ville, Black  Bayou,  and  Deer  Creek,  Miss.  Expedition  to,  April  2-14, 

1863. 

Blackburn,  John.  Mentioned 499 

Blackburn,  William  D. 

Mentioned 334, 482, 524, 527, 528, 539, 542, 549 

Reports  of 

La  Grange,  Tenn. 

Expedition  from,  to  Mount  Pleasant  and  Lamar,  Miss.,  Feb.  13-14, 

1863 


circumstantial  rei^ortson  file. 

51  li  R — VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


349 


802 


INDEX. 


Blackburn,  William  D. — Continued. 

Reports  of 

La  Grange,  Tenu.  Scout  from,  to  Hudsonville  and  Saleiu,  Miss.,  and 

Saulsbury,  Tenn.,  March  2-3,  1863  422 

Ripley,  Miss.  Scouttoward,  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  Jan.  28-30,  18G3-.  334 

Black  Hawk,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 432,  578,  752 

Blackmore,  Captain.  Mentioned 504 

Black  River,  La. 

Operations  on  the.  See  Bed,  Atchafalaya,  and  Black  Rivers,  La.  Operations 
on  the,  Feb.  10-14,  1863. 

Skirmish  near,  May  5,  1863.  See  report  of  Tunica,  p.  187. 

Blair,  Frank  P.,jr.  Mentioned 51-53,69, 

83,  85,  89-93,  148,  149,  151, 156, 162, 163, 184, 577,  595,  752,  755-758,  763-765 

Blanchard,  Assistant  Surgeon.  Mentioned 369 

Blanchard,  James  G.  Mentioned 700 

Blanton  [?],  Major.  Mentioned 63 

Bledsoe,  H.  M.  Mentioned 737,738 

Blessing,  P.  J.  Mentioned 293,320 

Bloomington,  Tenn.  Skirmish  near,  Feb.  27,  1863.  Report  of  Alexander 

Asboth 422 

Blount,  A.  A.  Corresi^ondence  with  John  A.  McClernand 181 

Blythe,  G.  L.  Mentioned 27, 468, 557, 562 

Boardman,  Elisha.  Mentioned 632 

Bolivar  and  Grand  Junction,  Tenn.  Guerrilla  attack  on  railway  traiu  be- 
tween, March  21,  1863.  Reports  of 

Brayman,  Mason 470 

Chalmers,  James  R 471 

Bolivar,  Tenn.,  and  Ripley,  Miss.  Scout  between,  Jan.  25,  li:63.  Report  of 

Daniel  M.  Emerson  331 

Bolton  Station,  Miss.  Skirmish  at  and  capture  of,  May  15,  1863.  See  report 
of  McClernand,  p.  148.  Also  Part  II. 

“Bolton,  William  H.  Mentioned • 644 

Bonaparte,  Napoleon.  Mentioned 63,651 

Bond,  H.  C.  Mentioned 320 

Boomer,  George  B. 

Mentioned 86, 155,  156,  164,  181,  403, 

405,  407,  408,  617,  634, 638, 640,  641,  723-726, 729-732, 751, 772, 774-776, 784 

Report  of  skirmish  on  South  Fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  Miss.,  May  2,1863,  in- 
cluding operations  April  25-x.^..y  4 683 

Boone,  Abner  S.  Mentioned 739,743 

Booneville,  Miss.  Expedition  to,  March April  1,  1863.  Re2)ort  of  Patrick 

E.  Burke 481 

Booth,  David  L.  Mentioned 344 

Borum,  William  H.  Mentioned 715 

Boston,  Robinson  & Co.  Mentioned 17 

Botsford,  E.  W.  Mentioned 591 

Botts,  Henry  T.  Mentioned 318 

Boucher,  J.  H.  Mentioned 641 

Bouck,  Gabriel.  Report  of  engagement  at  Jackson,  Miss.,  April  14,  1863,  in- 
cluding operations  May  13-July  6 773 

Bourne,  Joshua  W.  Mentioned 720 

Bowen,  John  S. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 256- 

2.58, 281, 282,  .303-305,  309, 313, 315, 316  487,  576,  660,  661 


INDEX. 


803 


Page. 

Bowen,  John  S. — Continued. 

Mentioned 33,  59,  73,  77, 114, 191,  192,  194, 195, 200, 

214, 217, 218,  231,  232, 239,  250, 251,  256-268, 271, 273, 274, 281, 283, 284, 292, 
295,  318,  320,  328,  330,  331,  634,  655,  657,  662,  667,  668,  670,  672-677, 679-681 

Reports  of 

Grand  Gulf,  Miss. 

Bopabardment  of,  and  passage  of  batteries,  April  29,  1863 575,576 

Engagement  at,  March  31,  1863  486 

Passage  of  batteries  by  U.  S.  S.  Hartford  and  Mouongahela,  March 

19,  1863 469 

New  Carthage,  La.  Operations  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to,  March  31- 

April  17,  1863  497 

Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of.  May  1,  1863 657-661,  663 

Bowen,  John  T.  Mentioned 760,761 

Bowers,  Theodore  S.  Mentioned 382 

Bowlend,  W.  T.  Mentioned 473 

Bowman,  A.  Mentioned 619,623 

Bowman,  Joseph  A.  Mentioned 567 

Bownell,  George  W.  Mentioned 604 

Boyce,  C.  M.  Correspondence  with  Theodore  Johnston 296 

Boyd,  John  W.,  jr.  Mentioned 785 

Bradford,  J.  D.  Mentioned 257,295 

For  correspondence  as  Assistant  Inspector-General,  see  John  C.  Pemberton, 

Bradley,  L.  D.  Mentioned 275 

Brady,  Barney.  Mentioned 567 

Brady,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 618,  619,  622, 623, 625, 627 

Bragg,  Braxton. 

Correspondence  with 

Davis,  Jefferson 192, 196, 206 

War  Department,  C.  S * 218 

Mentioned 6,  39-43, 90, 

96,  97,  104,  108,  110,  112,  192,  193,  195, 196, 193,  200, 203-^06,  208-213, 215, 
218-220,  223,  224, 221^  227, 232-235, 238,  243, 247, 250, 252,*278, 287, 283,  290 


Brand,  Frederick  B. 

Mentioned 365-367 

Reports  of  capture  of  U.  S.  S.  Indiauola,  Feb.  24,  1863 362,  363 

Brayman,  Mason. 

Mentioned 382,500 

Report  of  guerrilla  attnck  on  railway  train  between  Bolivar  and  Grand 

.Junction,  Teun.,  March  21,  1863 470 

Brazil,  Steamer.  Mentioned 405 

Breckinridge,  John  C.  Mentioned 41,  42,  95, 101, 104, 194,  201,  222, 242,  245 

Breese,  K.  Randolph.  Mentioned 435,576,752 

Breeze,  James.  Mentioned 513 

Brent,  J.  L. 

Mentioned 361-363,369 

Report  of  capture  of  U.  S.  S.  Indianola,  Feb.  24,  1863  364 

Brewer,  James  R.  Mentioned 611 

Brice,  J.  Mentioned 294 

Bridges,  H.  W.  Mentioned 455,466,467 

Bridges,  W.  M.  Mentioned 320 

Bright,  David.  Mentioned 428 

Bringhurst,  Thomas  H.  Mentioned 395,  398,  601,  606, 608 

Britton,  George.  Mentioned 566 

Britton,  W.  J.  Mentioned 303 


804 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Broadwell,  W.  A. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 289,291 

Mentioned 2*58-291, 299,  308 

Brookhaven,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  April  29, 1863.  See  Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton 
Rouge,  La.,  April  17 -May  2,  1863. 

Brown,  Alexander  J.  Report  of  Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April 

17-May  2,  1863  ,537 

Brown,  C.  F.  Mentioned 684 

Brown,  George.  Mentioned 2, 343, 361-364, 367 

Brown,  George  W.  Mentioned 373,376 

Brown,  Henry  S.  Mentioned 479 

Brown,  Isaac  N. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 504 

Mentioned 246,  385,  411 

Report  of  Yazoo  Pass  Expedition,  Feb.  24-April  8,  1863  421 

Brown,  Joseph  D.  Mentioned 425 

Brown,  J.  W.  Mentioned 748 

Brown,  William  N.  Mentioned 257,417 

Broughton,  E.  T.  Mentioned 748 

Bruce,  Rufus  J.  Mentioned 320 

Brush,  Daniel  H. 

Mentioned 498 

Reports  of 


Hatchie  River,  Tenn.  Expedition  from  Jackson,  Tenn.,  to,  April  1-16, 


1863  499 

Trenton,  Tenn.  Expedition  from  Jackson  to,  March  16-18,  1863  468 

Brush,  S.  T.  Mentioned 499 

Brusle,  Charles  A.  Mentioned 320 

Bryan,  B.  F. 


Mentioned 536 

Report  of  Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1863 537 

Bryan,  E.  H.  Mentioned 294 

Bryant,  George  E. 

Mentioned 554, 555 

Reports  of  expedition  to  the  Coldwater,  Miss.,  April  18-24,  1863 556,557 

Buchanan,  Robert.  Mentioned 718, 719 

Buckingham,  Samuel.  Mentioned 340 

Buckland,  Ralph  P. 

Mentioned 749, 750, 753, 756, 759-761,  765, 766 

Report  of  engagement  at  Jackson,  Miss.,  May  14, 1863,  including  operations 

May  2-22 ' 761 

Buckner,  Simon  B. 

Correspondence  with 

Adams,  John 532 

Pemberton,  John  C 302 

Mentioned 197, 232, 257, ‘512, 532 

Budlong,  Syria  M.  Mentioned 708 

Buehler,  Theodore  E. 

Mentioned 352 

Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1,  1863,  including  operations 

April  14-May  22  ..... . 592 

Buford,  Abraham. 

Mentioned 250-254,  264, 265 

Report  of  Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1863 538 


INDEX. 


805 


Patre. 

Bullitt,  Fanny,  Steamer.  Mentioned 445 

Burbridge,  Simon  C.  Mentioned 335 

Burbridge,  Stephen  G. 

Mentioned 138, 145, 

151-153, 155, 175,  573, 581, 583,  599,  617',  633,  643, 644,  652,  654, 732, 733, 772 
Report  of  expedition  to  Greenville,  Miss.,  and  Cypress  Bend,  Ark.,  Feb. 

14-26,  1863 349 

Burdett,  O.  S.  Mentioned 369 

Burdick,  James.  Mentioned 559 

Burgin,  Thomas  A.  Mentioned 560 

Burke,  Patrick  E.  Report  of  expedition  to  Boone ville,  Miss.,  March April 

1, 1863  481 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E. 

Correspondence  with  Army  Headquarters 41 

Mentioned 41,  42,  44,  96, 97, 196, 214, 227, 234 

Burrow,  Reuben.  Mentioned 68,426,482-484 

Burton,  James  M.  Mentioned 551 

Bush,  Daniel  B.,  jr.  Mentioned 147,171,571,572 

Bush,  E.  T.  Mentioned 742 

Butler,  George.  Mentioned 156 

Byam,  Eber  C.  Mentioned 601,610 

Byers,  James  H.  Mentioned 770 

Cabell,  William  L.  Mentioned 116 

Cadle,  Cornelius.  Mentioned 723,725 

Caledonia  and  Pin  Hook,  La.  Skirmishes  at.  May  10,  1863.  Reports  of 

Bartlett,  Frank  A 699 

Reid,  Hugh  T .• 694 

Roberts,  William  Y 696 

Calhoun,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 684 

Callsen,  Frederick  D.  Mentioned 653,720 

Cameron,  Allen.  Mentioned 320 

Cameron,  Robert  A.  Mentioned 378,601-604,606-608,611,626 

Cammack,  George.  Mentioned 291, 305, 306 

Camp  Sheldon,  Miss.  Affairs  near. 

Feb.  8,  1863.  Report  of  Charles  S.  Sheldon 340 

Feb.  10,  1863.  Report  of  Charles  S.  Sheldon 341 

Camp,  T.  B.  Mentioned 747 

Campbell,  E.  B.  Mentioned .591 

Campbell,  Franklin.  Report  of  engagement  at  Raymond,  Miss.,  May  12, 1863, 

including  operations  to  July  4 721 

Campbell,  George  H.  Mentioned 470 

Campbell,  J.  H.  Mentioned 336 

Campbell,  Samuel  F.  Mentioned 454 

Campbell,  Thomas  S.  Mentioned 727 

Canavan,  John.  Mentioned 715 

Cannon,  E.  H.  Mentioned 567 

Cantey,  H.  Mentioned  417 

Capers,  Ellison.  Mentioned 787 

Capers,  W.  C.  Mentioned  320 

Captured  Property. 

Communication  from  U.  S.  Grant : 62 

References  to 151,  348,  352 

Carl,  Steamer.  Mentioned 391,393,394,406 

Carmody,  Martin  C.  Mentioned  785 

Carnahan,  Robert  H.  Mentioned 492 


806 


INDEX. 


Pag*’. 

Carnes,  E.  E.  Meutioued 36S 

Carondelet,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 75,  444,  448,  452,  517,  574,  593,  781 

Carr,  Eugene  A. 

Congratulatory  orders 620 

Mentioned 48,  53, 54,  64, 67, 75, 77,  80,  81, 83, 99, 138, 141-149, 151-154, 

156,  158,  178,  180, 181, 184, 185,  392,  584,  601,  623,  624, 626, 629, 631,  635, 640 
Reports  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1,  1863,  including  operations 

Ajiril  12-May  22 • 615,623 

Carr,  Joseph  P. 

Correspondence  with 

Gardner,  Franklin 305 

Johnston,  Theodore 314, 315 

Mentioned 308,  310,  314,  315 

Carrington,  W.  C.  P.  Mentioned 318 

Carter,  Captain.  Mentioned 514 

Carter,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 701 

Carter,  Mr.  Mentioned 510 

Carter,  Samuel.  Mentioned 417 

Carter,  T.  M.  Mentioned 319 

Caruthers,  J.  S.  Mentioned 426 

Casey, . Mentioned 382 

Cashea,  G.  W.  Mentioned 471 

Catlin,  James  K.  Mentioned 398 

Cauter,  Jacob.  Mentioned 715 

Caven,  John  F.  Mentioned 608-610 

Chalmers,  A.  H.  Mentioned 522 

Chalmers,  James  R. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 251, 298,  303, 306,  307,  313,  ,563 

Mentioned 25,  27, 

251-254,  303,  485,  512,  520, 521,  530,  531,  554-556,  5.58,  579,  .580,  690,  702,  703 
Reports  of 

Coldwater,  Miss.  Expedition  to  the,  April  18-24, 1863 .561-.564 

Guerrilla  attack  on  railway  train  between  Bolivar  and  Grand  Junc- 
tion, Tenn.,  March  21, 1863 471 

Hernando,  Miss.  Skirmishes  near,  March  1.5-16, 1863  468 

Nonconnah  Creek,  Tenn.  Skirmish  on,  April  4, 1863  512 

Panola,  Miss.  Expedition  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to,  May  11-15, 1863..  703 

Chamberlain,  Edwin  W.  Mentioned 95,96 

Chambers,  William  R.  Mentioned 3.50 

Champion,  Steamer.  Mentioned 453 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of.  May  16, 1863. 

Casualties.  Returns  of. 

Confederate  troops 320 

Union  troops 6, 59, 151, 1.58, 650,  724, 731 

Communications  from 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 218 

Pemberton,  John  C 217 

Report  of  Carter  L.  Stevenson 265 

See  also 

May  1,  1863.  Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Baiile  of.  Reports  of 

Bueliler,  Theodore  E.  Logan,  John  A.  McPherson,  James  B. 

Carr,  Eugene  A. 

12.1863.  Rmfmond,  Miss.  Eiujadenient  at.  Reports  of 

Cainphell,  Franklin.  Davis,  WiHiani  P.  Stevenson,  John  D. 

Crocker.  Marcellus  M.  S.anhorn,  .7ohn  B. 


INDEX. 


807 


Page. 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863 — Continued. 

See  also 

May  14, 1863.  Jackson,  Miss.  Engagement  at.  Reports  of 

Alexander,  Jesse  I.  Hillis,  David  B.  Holmes,  Samuel  A. 

Deimling,  Francis  C. 

Also  reports  of  Halleck,  p.  5 ; Grant,  p.  52  ; Dana,  p.  86  ] Hoicard,  p.  136 ; 

McClernand,  p.  148;  Pemherion,pp.  263,  330.  Also  Grant  to  Hal- 
leek,p.  37 ; McClernand  to  Halleck,  p.  169  ; Penihcrton  to  Jolcnslon, 
p.  217;  Johnston  to  Cooper,  p.  218;  Johnston  to  Seddon,\).  222; 

Seddon  to  Pemberton,  x).  321  ; McClernand’s  order,  p.  159.  Also 
Part  II. 

Charles,  W.  S.  Mentioned 622,  626 

Charm,  Steamer.  Mentioned 291,  304 

Chase,  Daniel.  Mentioned — 641 

Cheeseman,  J.  W.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 47,77,397,565-567 

Chillicothe,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 64, 

65,  70,  379,  380,  382,  383,385,  388,  391,  395-399,  407,  410,  412,  415,  416 

Chipman,  Samuel  P.  Mentioned 446 

Choctaw,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 576-578,  752 

Choctaw  Bayou,  or  Lake  Bruin,  La.  Skirmish  at,  April  28, 1863.'  See  Hard 
Times  Landing,  La.  Expedition  to,  with  skirmishes,  Apr  it  1863. 

Chrisman,  J.  B.  Mentioned 315 

Cincinnati,  U.  S.  S. 

Engagement  between  Vicksburg  batteries  and,  May  27, 1863.  See  report 
of  Dana,  p.  90. . 

Mentioned 90,97,105,112,277,294,451,518 

Cindel,  A.  P.  Mentioned 566 

Citizen,  Steamer.  Mentioned 397 

City  of  Vicksburg,  Steamer.  Mentioned 336,337 

Clack,  C.  J.  Mentioned 747 

Claiborne,  P.  O.  Mentioned 319 

Clark,  Dr.  Mentioned 549 

Clark,  Alonzo.  Mentioned 755 

Clark,  M.  R.  Mentioned 257,  542 

Clark,  William  T.  Mentioned 641 

Clark’s  Bayou,  La.  Skirmish  at,  April  26,  1863.  See  Hard  Times  Landmg, 

La.  Expedition  to,  with  skirmishes,  April  25-29,  1863. 

Clay,  Henry,  Steamer.  Mentioned 30,  47,  75,  76,  517,  518 

Clayton,  H.  D.  Mentioned 233 

Cleveland,  S.  B.  Report  of  Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April 

17-May  2,  1863 538 

Clifton,  Tenn.  Expedition  from  Lexington  to,  Feb.  17-21,  1863.  Rex^orts  of 

Adamson,  Frederick  C 356 

Mizner,  John  K 356 

Clothing,  Camp  and  Garrison  Equipage.  Sux)plie8  of.  See  Munitions  of 
War. 

Cobb,  Captain.  Mentioned 423,424 

Cockrell,  Francis  M. 

Mentioned  . . . 200, 231, 232, 264-268, 280, 293,  318,  319,  497, 661, 662, 664,  6(56-668, 670 
Reports  of 

Big  Black  River  Bridge,  Miss.  Engagement  at.  May  17,  186.1 267,268 

Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Bat, tie  of.  May  1,  18(53  668 

Coffey,  John.  Mentioned 655 


808 


INDEX. 


Pag:e. 

Coldwater  River,  Miss. 

Expedition  from  Memphis,  Teiin.,  to  the,  April  18-24,  1863. 

Comm  uni  cations  from 

Lauman,  Jacob  G 554 

Mayo,  George  Upshur 562 

Pemberton,  John  C 563 

Shaw,  J.  P 561 

Reports  of 

Bryant,  George  E 556, 557 

Chalmers,  James  R 561-564 

Hurlbnt,  Stephen  A 554,555 

Rnggles,  Daniel 560 

Smith,  William  Sooy 555 

See  also  report  of  Pemberton,  p.  2o2. 

Skirmish  at  the.  May  11,  1863.  See  Panola,  Miss.  Expedition  from  La 
Grange,  Tenn.,  to.  May  11-15,  1863.  Report  of  Hatch,  p.  702. 

Skirmish  near,  Feb.  19, 1863  * 2 

Cole,  Captain.  Mentioned 536 

Coleman,  David  C.  Mentioned 432, 439 

Collett,  J.  H.  Mentioned 747,748 

Collier,  W.  A,  Mentioned 748 

Collierville,  Tenn. 

Expedition  from,  March  8-12,  1863.  Report  of  Martin  R.M.  Wallace 427 

Skirmish  near,  Jan.  28,  1863.  Report  of  Albert  L.  Lee 334 

Collins,  Nathan.  Mentioned 569 

Colms,  S.  H. 

Mentioned 738 

Report  of  engagement  at  Raymond,  Miss.,  May  12,  1863  746 

Colquitt,  Peyton  H. 

Mentioned 785,  786 

Report  of  engagement  at  Jackson,  Miss.,  May  14,  1863  787 

Comite  River,  La.  Skirmish  at  Roberts’  Ford,  on  the.  May  2,  1863.  See 
Roberts'  Ford,  La. 

Compton,  H.  M.  Mentioned  318 

Comstock,  Cyrus  B.  Mentioned 56,  101,103,  lOS,  111,  113 

Conduct  of  the  War. 

Communication  from  Joseph  E.  Johnston 201 

Resolution  of  C.  S.  Congress 237 

Confederate  Troops. 

Casualties.  Returns  of. 

Big  Black  River  Bridge,  Miss.  Engagement  at.  May  17,  1863 3‘.^0 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of.  May  16,  1863  320 

Fort  De  Russy,  Red  River,  La.  Engagement  at.  May  4,  1863 686 

Jackson,  Miss.  Engagement  at.  May  14,  1863 787 

Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of.  May  1,  1863  668,674 

Raymond,  Miss.  Engagement  at.  May  12,  1863  739 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of.  May  19-July  4,  1863 320 

Mentioned.  (Regulars.) 

Infantry — Battalions  : 1st,  252,  256,  663. 

For  Volunteers,  see  respective  States. 

Organization,  strength,  etc..  Department  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisi- 
ana  19.5,  .546, 664 


* No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


INDEX.  809 

Page. 

Congress,  C.  S. 

Message  of  Jefferson  Davis  to 189 

Resolution  of,  in  relation  to  conduct  of  the  war 237 

Conklin,  J.  E.  Mentioned 369 

Connell,  John.  < 

Mentioned 601, 610,  614 

Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1,  1863 614 

Conner,  Asgill.  Mentioned 338 

Conover,  Robert.  Mentioned 352 

Conrad,  . Mentioned 488 

Conrad,  C.  A.  Mentioned - 320 

Conrad,  F.  D.  Mentioned 301,305 

Conway,  C.  D.  Mentioned 47 

Conway,  J.  J.  Mentioned 293 

Cook,  Mattie,  Steamer.  Mentioned 375, 376 

Cooke,  A.  B.  Mentioned 294 

Coon,  DatusE.  Mentioned 340 

Cooper,  R.  T.  Mentioned 739 

Cooper,  Samuel.  Mentioned 189, 193, 194, 222, 237, 250, 251, 254, 290 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Adjutant  and  Inspector  Generals  Office,  C.  S.  A. 

Cooper,  Stephen.  Mentioned - 319 

Corbin,  W.  H.  Mentioned 699,700 

Corinth,  Miss.  Dodge’s  Expedition  from,  to  Courtland,  Ala.  See  Courtland, 

Ala.  Expedition  from  Corinth,  Miss.,  to,  April  15-May  2,  1863. 

Corkery,  William.  Mentioned 668 

Cornelison,  James.  Mentioned 334 

Cornelison,  William.  Mentioned 334 

Cornyn,  Florence  M.  Mentioned 690, 694 

Corput,  Max  Van  Den.  Mentioned 318 

Cosby,  George  B.  Mentioned 209 

Cottingham,  J.  R.  Mentioned 578 

Cotton.  Capture  and  destruction  of.  Communications  from 

McClernand,  John  A 495 

War  Department,  C.  S 233 

See  also  reports  of  Grant,  p.  28 ; Parry,  p.  452 ; Steele,  p.  501 ; Ferguson, 
p.  508. 

Cotton,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 684-686 

Council  of  C.  S.  Officers,  at  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Communication  from  L.  M. 

Montgomery 330 

Countess,  Steamer.  Mentioned 685 

Couper,  J,  M.  Mentioned 280,293,294 

Courtland,  Ala.  Dodge’s  Expedition  from  Corinth,  Miss.,  to,  April  15-May 

2,  1863’^ 3 

Courtney’s  Plantation,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  April  11,  1863t 3 

Covington,  Tenn.  Skirmishes  near,  March  9-10,  1863.  See  Collierville,  Term. 

Exjyedition  from,  March  8-12,  1863.  Also  La  Grange,  Tonn.  Ex- 
pedition from,  March  8-12, 1863. 

Cowan,  Joseph  H.  Mentioned 697 

Cowen,  Luther  H.  Mentioned 710 

Cox,  N.  N.  Mentioned  27 

Cradlebaugh,  John.  Mentioned 571 

Craig,  David  A.  Mentioned 778 


See  Series  I,  Vol.  XXIII,  Part  I,  p.  241. 


tNo  circumstantial  reports  on  tile. 


810 


INDEX. 


Pago. 

Crandall,  W D.  Mentioned 474,477 

Cravens,  J.  E.  Mentioned 672 

Crav/ford,  Frank  J.  Mentioned 444 

Crawford,  J.  Mentioned 369 

Creasman,  William  B.  Mentioned 246 

Crenshaw,  J.  T.  Mentioned 319 

Crocker,  Marcellus  M. 

Mentioned ! 52, 53, 85,  86, 134, 150,  635-641 , 645,  646, 

706,  708,  712, 717,  723, 727-729, 734, 735, 749-751,  753, 774, 775, 777, 779, 782 
Report  of  engagement  at  Raymond,  Miss.,  May  12,  1863,  including  opera- 
tions May  2-17 722 

Crockett,  Le  Roy.  Mentioned 763,764 

Cromwell,  F.  C.  Mentioned 770 

Cromwell,  John  N.  Mentioned 750 

Crooke,  William  D.  Mentioned 622,  631 

Crouch,  N.  Mentioned 332 

Crystal  Springs,  Miss.  Raid  near.  See  New  Orleans  and  Jackson  Bailroad. 

Raid  on  the,  near  Crystal  Springs,  Miss.,  May  11,  1863. 

Cullum,  George  W.  Mentioned 119 

Cumming,  Alfred.  Mentioned 200, 231, 232, 279,  293,  322,  325 

Cummings,  Mr.  Mentioned 470 

Cummins,  E.  H.  Mentioned 461 

Cuney,  R.  H.  Mentioned 288 

Cunningham,  A.  F.  Mentioned 787 

Cunningham,  James. 

Correspondence  with  Daniel  Ruggles .550,552 

Report  of  action  at  King’s  Creek,  near  Tupelo,  Miss.,  May  5,  1863 691 

Mentioned 5.34-.536,  692-694 

Curtiss,  W.  E.  Mentioned 319,505 

Curts,  James  H.  Mentioned 569 

Cushman,  Captain.  Mentioned 423, 425 

Cypress  Bend,  Ark.  Skirmish  at,  Feb.  19,  1863.  See  Greenville,  Miss.,  and 
Cypress  Bend,  Ark.  Expedition  to,  Feh.  14-26,  1863. 

Dahlia,  Steamer.  Mentioned 461 

Dalton,  J.  J.  Mentioned 686 

Dana,  Charles  A. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S 67,  75,  84, 93 

Mentioned 43 

Reports  of  operations  against  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  Jan.  30-July  4, 1863 63-76, 

78-81,83-102,104-114 

Daniel,  G.  W.  Mentioned 369 

Daniel,  W.H.  Mentioned 691 

Dare,  M.  Mentioned 340,341 

David  Tatum,  Steamer.  Mentioned 445,446 

Davis,  Private.  Mentioned 334 

Davis,  D.  J.  Mentioned 623 

Davis,  James  W.  Mentioned 649 

Davis,  Jefferson. 

Correspondence  with 

Bragg,  Braxton 192, 196, 206 

Johnston,  Joseph  E lSO-204, 206-212, 231 , 23(;,  238, 245, 246 

Pemberton,  John  C * V . 260, 274,  327 


War  Department,  C.  S 191 , 213>,  21 6, 231 , 236, 237 


INDEX. 


811 


Page. 

Davis,  Jefferson — Continuecl. 

Mentioned 157,209, 

219, 220,  223,  226, 231, 232, 236-238, 245, 246, 250, 259, 260, 272, 274,  321 , 327 

Message  to  C.  S.  Congress 189 

Davis,  John.  Mentioned ' 499 

Davis,  Joseph  R.  Mentioned 220 

Davis,  William  P. 

Mentioned 643,707,708 

Report  of  engagement  at  Raymond,  Miss.,  May  12, 1863,  including  opera- 
tions May  12-June  4 711 

Davis’  Mill  Road,  Tenn.  Skirmish  on,  near  La  Grange.  See  La  Grange, 

Tenn.  Skirmish  near,  March  24,  1863. 

Daughters,  A.  P.  Mentioned 620,622 

Dawson,  W.  A.  Mentioned 333,  335 

Days,  William  T.  Mentioned 599 

Dayton,  James  H.  Mentioned 450,  454 

Dean,  Thomas.  Mentioned 356 

De  Baun,  J. 

Mentioned  549 

Report  of  Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1863 539 

De  Camp,  W.  M.  Mentioned 623 

Dedman,  J.  N.  Mentioned 680 

Deer  Creek,  Miss. 

Expedition  through  See  Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  March  14-27,  1863. 
Expedition  to,  Jm.e — , 1863.  See  report  of  Dana,  p.  105. 

Sketches 462,463 

Skirmishes  on. 

Feh.  . 23,1863.  See  Greenville,  Miss.,  and  Cypress  Bend.,  Ark.  Ex- 

pedition to,  Feh.  14-26,  1863. 


March  22,  1863.  See  report  of  Dana,  p.  67.  Also  Steele’s  Bayou  Ex- 
pedition, March  14-27,  1863. 

April  7, 8, 10, 1863.  See  Greenville,  Black  Bayou,  and  Deer  Creek,  Miss. 
Expedition  to.  Reports  of 
Ferguson,  Samuel  W.  Steele,  Frederick. 

Lee,  Stephen  D.  Stevenson,  Carter  L. 


Deer  Creek,  Greenville,  and  Black  Bayou,  Miss.  Expedition  to.  Seo 
Greenville,  Black  Bayou,  and  Deer  Creek,  Miss.  Expedition  to, 

April  2-14, 1863. 

De  Ford,  J.  W.  Mentioned ‘ 131, 133, 134, 137 

De  Golyer,  Samuel.  Mentioned 634, 644, 645, 647, 648, 652, 653, 710, 723 

Deimling,  Francis  C. 

Mentioned 776, 777 


Report  of  engagement  at  Jackson,  Miss.,  May  14, 1863,  including  operations 

Apr i 1 20-May  23 780 

Deitz,  Henry  C.  Mentioned 706 

Deifczler,  George  W. 

Correspondence  with  U.  S.  Grant 15 

Mentioned '. 14,16 

De  Kalb,  Baron, U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 75,76, 

246, 379, 380, 382, 383,  385,  388, 391, 395-397,  407,  416, 576, 578,  752,  755 


Delahunty,  James.  Mentioned 348 

Dennis,  Andrew  J.  Meiftioned 479 

Dennis,  Blias  S.  Mentioned 9:?, 


Derby,  Hugh. 


95,  96,  ] 10, 114, 128,  .585, 638, 639,  641-647,  649, 650, 704,  705, 708,  709 
Mentioned .’ 369 


812 


INDEX. 


Pago. 

De  Russy,  Fort.  See  Fort  De  Eussy,  La. 

De  Soto,  Steamer.  Mentioned 342-347  . 

Devereau,  Samuel.  Mentioned 467 

Devereux,  J.  G.  Mentioned 320 

Dew  Drop,  Steamer.  Mentioned 505, 506 

Diana,  Steamer.  Mentioned 393, 394, 397 

Dicken,  James  L.  Mentioned 398 

Dickey,  C.  J.  Mentioned 760 

Dickey,  John  H.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 405 

Diligent,  Steamer.  Mentioned 431,432,434,438,443,445 

Dillon,  Edward.  Mentioned 288 

Dillon,  Henry.  Mentioned 723,  775 

Dilworth,  George  M.  Mentioned 698 

Dinsmore,  J.  C.  Mentioned 622 

Dismukes,  W.  H.  Mentioned 318 

Dobyns,  T.  J.  Mentioned 318 

Dockery,  T.  P.  Mentioned 293,318 

Dr.  Beaty,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 339, 364-366 

Dodd,  C.  C.  Mentioned 691 

Dodge,  Grenville  M.  Mentioned 25, 27, 67, 69, 92, 485, 554, 555 

Dodson,  Julius.  Mentioned 655 

Dollins,  James  J. 

Mentioned 87, 643, 648, 652, 653, 714, 716, 717, 719, 720, 722,  728 

Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1, 1863  654 

Donaldson,  James  H.  Mentioned 730,733 

Donaldson,  Levi.  Mentioned 714 

Donelson,  Fort.  See  Fort  Donelson,  Term. 

Donnellan,  George.  Mentioned 293 

Dornblaser,  Benjamin.  Mentioned 559 

Dorsey,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 510 

Doss,  W.  L.  Mentioned 787 

Dot,  Steamer.  Mentioned 266,310 

Douglass,  C.  S.  Mentioned 741 

Dowd,  W.  C.  Correspondence  with  Theodore  Johnston 296 

Drennan,  W.  A.  Mentioned 460 

Drew,  Harvey  L.  Mentioned 357,358 

Drover,  Steamer.  Mentioned 291 

Drumgould’s  Bluff,  Miss.  Demonstration  on,  April  29-May  1, 1863.  See  Sny- 
der^ s Mill,  Mias.  Engagement  at,  April  30- ATay  1,  1863.  Also  Jack- 
son,  Miss.  Engagement  at.  May  14,  1863.  Also  reports  of  Grant, 
p.  49;  Sherman,  p.  751. 

Duck  River,  Tenn.  Scout  from  Lexington  to  mouth  of,  March  31-April  3, 

1863.  Reports  of 

Adamson,  Frederick  C ’ 488 

Saylor,  Thomas 487 

Duff,  W.  L. 

Correspondence  with  U.  S.  Grant 15 

Mentioned 14, 15 

Dulin,  R.  S.  Mentioned 368 

Dunbar,  Daniel  H.  Mentioned 340 

Dunbar,  N.  Mentioned 369 

Dunbar’s  Plantation,  Bayou  Vidal,  La.  Skirmishes  near. 

April  7,  lb63.  See  Neio  Carthage,  La.  Operations  from  Milliken'a  Bend  to, 

March  \M- April  17,  1863.  Eeport  of  Oaterhaus,  p.  490.  Also  report 
of  McClernand,  p.  140. 


INDEX. 


813 


Page. 

Dunbar’s  Plantation,  Bayou  Vidal,  La.  Skirmishes  near — Continued. 

April  15,  1863.  See  New  Carthage,  La.  Operations  from  MilliJcen’s  Bend  to, 

March  31-April  17,  1863.  Reports  of 
Bowen,  John  S.  Osterhaus,  Peter  J.  Scates,  Walter  B. 

See  also  report  of  McClernand,  p.  140. 

Duncan,  Mr.  Mentioned 506 

Duncan,  Third  Master.  Mentioned 343 

Duncan,  Henry.  Mentioned 559 

Duncan,  J.  M.  C.  Mentioned 747 

Dungan,  Thomas.  Mentioned 488 

Dunlap,  Cornelius  W.  Mentioned 178, 182, 619, 622, 628, 631,  632 

157 

539 

470 

301 

698 


Dunlap,  James.  Mentioned. 

Dunn,  J.  B.  Mentioned 

Dutton,  Carlos.  Mentioned , 
Duvalde.,  J.  V.  Mentioned  . . 
Dwyer,  John.  Mentioned  ... 


Dyer,  C.H.  Mentioned 619,623 

Dyersburg,  Tenn,  Skirmish  at,  Jan.  30,  1863.  Report  of  Oliver  Wood 335 

Eagle,  Steamer.  Mentioned 432, 434, 438, 442-444, 447, 448, 450 

Earl,  Seth  C.  Report  of  affair  near  Moscow,  Tenn.,  Feb.  9,  1863 340 

Earle,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 681 

Early  Grove,  Miss. 

Scout  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  Hudsonville,  Lockhart’s  Mills,  Mount 
Pleasant,  and.  See  La  Grange,  Tenn.  Scout  from,  April  10-11, 

1863. 


Scout  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  Mount  Pleasant  and.  See  La  Grange, 
Tenn.  Scout  from,  to  Early  Grove  and  Mount  Pleasant,  Miss., 


April  5-7, 1863. 

Eastman,  Harry  E.  Mentioned 556,558,559 

East  Tennessee.  Threatened  invasion  of.  Communications  from 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 214 

War  Department,  C.  S 214 

East  Tennessee,  Department  of.  (Confederate.)  Merged  into  Department  of 

Tennessee 232,235 

Eaton,  David.  Mentioned 417 

Eaton,  J.  H.  Mentioned 334 

Eaton,  S.  A.  Mentioned 334 

Eaton,  William  W.  Report  of  scout  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  Early  Grove 

and  Mount  Pleasant,  Miss.,  April  5-7,  1863 513 

Eckley,  Ephraim  R.  Report  of  affair  near  Germantown,  Tenn.,  Jan.  27, 1863.  332 

Ector,  M.  D.  Mentioned 194, 222, 242 

Eddy,  William.  Mentioned 771 

Edgington,  Samuel  R.  Mentioned 771 

Edward  J.  Gay,  Steamer.  Mentioned 303. 

Edwards  Depot,  Miss.  Battle  near.  See  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of. 

May  16,  1863. 

Edward  Walsh,  Steamer.  Mentioned 405 

Eldridge,  Hamilton  N. 

Mentioned 443,756 

Report  of  Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  March  14-27,  1863 445 

Ellet,  Alfred  W. 

Correspondence  with* 

Ellet,  Charles  Rivers 475 

Farragut,  David  G 474 


S14 


' INDEX. 


Page. 

Ellet,  Alfred  W. — Continued.  ^ 

Correspondence  with 

Porter,  David  D 475 

Walke,  Henry 474 

War  Departuienl,  U.  S 476 

Mentioned 23, 25, 1)6, 102, 108, 132, 251, 277, 278,  336, 505, 508, 510 

Report  of  passage  of  batteries  at  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  by  U.  S.  S.  Switzerland, 

March  25,  1863 473 

Ellet,  Charles  Rivers. 

Correspondence  with 

Ellet,  Alfred  W 475 

Porter,  David  D 337,  344 

Mentioned 346, 347, 473, 474, 476 

Reports  of 

Red,  Atchafalaya,  and  Black  Rivers,  La.  Operations  on  the,  Feb.  10- 

•14,1863 •...  341 

Vicksburg,  Miss. 

Passage  of  batteries  at,  by  U.  S.  S.  Switzerland,  March  25,  1863 477 

Passage  of  batteries  at,  by  U.-  S.  S.  Queen  of  the  West,  Feb.  2, 

1863 336 

Warrenton,  Miss.  Passage  of  batteries  at,  by  U.  S.  S.  Queen  of  the 

West,  Feb.  3,  1863  337 

Ellet,  Edward  C.  Mentioned 477 

Ellet,  John  A. 

Mentioned 473, 474,  476-478 

Report  of  passage  of  Vicksburg  batteries,  and  destruction  of  U.  S.  S.  Lan- 
caster, March  25,  1863  * 478 

Elliott, . Mentioned 488 

Emerson,  Daniel  M.  Report  of  scout  between  Bolivar,  Tenn.,  and  Ripley, 

Miss.,  Jan.  25,  1863 331 

Emma,  Steamer.  Mentioned 373, 393, 395,  397 

Emma  Bett,  Steamer.  Mentioned 354,  465,  .505 

Empire  City,  Steamer.  Mentioned 47,77,565-567 

Engelmann,  Adolph.  Mentioned 470 

English,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 493 

Enoch,  John  H.  Mentioned 447 

Era  No.  5,  Steamer.  Mentioned 342-344,346-348 

Erwin,  Eugene. 

Mentioned 280,  319, 664, 666-669, 673-675 

Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1,  1863 670 

Evans,  Charles.  Mentioned 568 

Evans,  Hiram.  Mentioned 587 

Evans,  Nathan  G.  Mentioned 101,194,222,242 

Evans,  Thomas.  Mentioned 567 

•Everitt,  E.  Mentioned - 620 

Ewell,  Benjamin  S. 

Correspondence  with  G.  W.  C.  Lee 236 

Mentioned 193, 255 

Ewell,  Richard  S.  Mentioned 192 

Ewing,  Charles.  Mentioned 441 

Ewing,  Hugh.  ♦ 

Mentioned 436,  438,  453,  756, 757 

Report  of  Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  March  14-27,  1863  449 

For  correspondence  as  Adjutajit  and  Inspector  General,  Army  of  the  West, 
see  Joseph  E.  Johnsion. 


INDEX. 


815 


Fagan,  James  F.  Mentioned 116 

Fail,  John  J.  Mentioned  567 

Fairbanks,  George  H.  Mentioned 567 

Fay-play,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 359 

Falkner,  W.  C.  Mentioned 27,557,562 

Falls  City,  Steamer.  Mentioned 291 

Fanny  Bullitt,  Steamer.  Mentioned 445 

Fanny  Ogden,  Steamer.  Mentioned 451 

Farquharson,  R. 

Mentioned 737,738,786 

Report  of  engagement  at  Raymond,  Miss.,  May  12, 1863 743 

Farragut,  David  G. 

Correspondence  with  Alfred  W.  ElJet - 474 

Mentioned 5,  22,  23, 33,  65,  69, 233, 469, 473-476, 486, 684 

Farrell,  M.  Mentioned 257 

Faucette,  Eli.  Mentioned 728,771 

Faulkner,  W.  W.  Mentioned 27 

Fearn,  T.  C.  Mentioned 320 

Featherston,  Winfield  S. 

Mentioned 208, 254, 265,  420,  433,  455, 456,  461,  464,  466,  480, 503, 521 

Report  of  Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  March  14-27,  1863 456-458 

Fensky,  Herman.  Mentioned 735 

Fenton,  Frank  B.  Mentioned 601,610 

Ferguson,  H.  C.  Mentioned 714 

Ferguson,  Samuel  W. 

Mentioned 74,  350,  455, 456,  458, 459,  461, 464,  465,  501-507 

Reports  of 

Fish  Lake  Bridge,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  Feh.  23,  1863  353-355 

Greenville,  Black  Bayon,  and  Deer  Creek,  Miss.  Expedition  to,  April 

2-14,  1863 507-511 

Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  March  14-27, 1863 465 

Fern,  Steamer.  Mentioned 432 

Fish  Lake  Bridge,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  Feb.  23,  1863.  Reports  of  Samuel 

W.  Ferguson 353-355 

See  also  Greenville,  Miss.,  and  Cypress  Bend,  Ark.  Expedition  to,  Feh.  14- 
26, 1863.  Report  of  Burhridge,  p.  349. 

Fisher,  Cyrus  W. 

Mentioned ‘ 443 

Report  of  Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  March  14-27,  1863 447 

Fisher,  Hiram  G.  Mentioned 131 

Fisher,  W.  A.  Mentioned 319 

Fisk,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned. 368 

Fisk,  Clinton  B.  Mentioned 398 

Fisk,  Leander  B.  Report  of  passage  of  Vicksburg  and  Warrenton  batteries 

by  transports,  April  22,  1863 567 

Fitch,  Le  Roy.  Mentioned 356,  358,  359 

Fittrell,  Frank.  Mentioned 369 

Fitzgerald,  J.  Mentioned 566 

Fitzgerald,  Jeremiah.  Mentioned 567 

Fitzgerald,  Patrick.  Mentioned 698 

Flanagan,  John  M.  Mentioned 319,670 

Flanagan,  Patrick.  Mentioned 566, 567 

Flavell,  Robert  H.  Mentioned 567 

Fleitas,  J.  B.  Mentioned 320 


816 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Florida.  Military  departments  embracing 213 

Florida  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments : 1st,  3d,  4th,  201, 245. 

Floyd,  W.  J. 

Mentioned - 429 

Report  of  scout  to  La  Fayette  and  Moscow,  Tenn.,  and  skirmish,  March  10- 

16,  1863 429 

Flynn,  W.  O.  Mentioned 293,  320 

Fogarty,  M.  Mentioned 686 

Followell,  W.  T.  Mentioned -566 

Fonda,  John  G.  Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1, 1863 585 

Fontaine,  Lamar.  Mentioned 278,294 

Forbes,  Mr.  Mentioned 427 

Forbes,  Henry  C.  Mentioned 528 

Forbes,  William  S.  Mentioned 157 

Force,  Manning  F. 

Mentioned 645, 647,  708, 710 

Reports  of 

Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  1,  1863  650 

Raymond,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  12, 1863  714 

Ford,  Christopher  H.  Mentioned 698,699 

Ford,  John.  Mentioned 731,772 

Forest  Queen,  Steamer.  Mentioned 47,75-77,  517,  518 

Forest  Rose,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 374,  .376,  411 

Forney,  George  H.  Mentioned 663 

Forney,  John  H. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 281,  282, 577 

Mentioned 200,  231, 232,  261, 271, 273-276,  280, 281,  283,  293,  320,  328,  330 

Reports  of  Vicksburg,  Miss. 

Assault  cm.  May  22, 1863  275 

Siege  of,  May  19-July  4,  1863 280 

Forrest,  Nathan  B.  Mentioned 42,  210, 360,  471,  488, 515 

Forrest,  O.  P.  Mentioned 748 

Fort  Beauregard,  La.  Attack  on.  May  10, 1863.  Report  of  George  W.  Logan . 700 

Fort  De  Russy,  Red  River,  La.  Engagement  at.  May  4,  1863. 

Casualties.  Returns  of.  Confederate  troops 686 

Communications  from 

Hervey,  W 686 

King,  E.  T 686 

Taylor,  Richard 686 

Report  of  John  Kelso 684 

Fort  Donelson,  Tenn.  Attack  on,  Feb.  3,  1863* 1 

Fort  Pemberton,  Miss.  Engagements  at,  March  11,  13,  and  16,  and  April  2 
and  4,  1863.  See  Yazoo  Pass  Expedition,  Fob.  24-Jpril  8,  1863. 
Reports  of 

Loring,  William  W.  Prentiss,  Benjamin  M.  Ross,  Leonard  F. 

Maury,  Dabney  H.  Quin  by,  Isaac  F.  Wilson,  James  H. 

See  also  reports  of  Grant,  p.  45  ; Dana,  pp.  63,  64. 

Fort  PiUow,  Tenn. 

Expedition  from,  Feb.  27,  1863 1 2 

Scout  in  the  vicinity  of,  Feb.  6, 1863 1 1 

Forty  Hills,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  May  3,  1863  t 3 


* See  Series  I,  Vol.  XXIII,  Part  I,  p.  31.  t No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


INDEX. 


817 


Paco. 

Poster,  C.  J.  Mentioned 569 

Foster,  Henry  C.  Mentioned 710,714 

Foster,  Jacob  T.  Mentioned 152 

Foster,  James  P.  Mentioned 5yu,  583,  385,  390,  391,  397,  399,  407,  408,  430 

Foster,  John  G.  Mentioned 212,214 

Foster,  John  S. 

Mentioned 637,  645,  705 

Report  of  engagement  at  Raymond,  Miss.,  May  12,  1863,  including  opera- 
tions April  25-May  23  734 

Fourteen-Mile  Creek,  Miss.  Skirmish  at.  May  12,  1863.  Casualties.  Re- 
turns of.  Union  troops 6,  59,  158 

See  also  Jucfcsoa,  Miss.  Ungagenient  at,  May  14,  1863,  Report  of  Sherman, 
p.  751.  Also  reports  of  Grant,  i).  50;  MeClcrnand,  p.  146;  Pr/a- 
berton  to  Stevenson,  p.  260.  Also  report  of  Osterlians,  Piirt  II,  j).  12. 

Fowler,  William  W.  Mentioned 700 

Francisco,  John.  Mentioned 623 

Frank  Webb,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 18,343-34(5,301-370,493 

Frederic,  H.  A.  Mentioned 685 

Freeman,  Henry  C.  Mentioned 125,  1510,755 

French,  Samuel  G.  Mentioned 194,195,245 

Frith,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 5164 

Frolic,  Steamer.  Mentioned... 291 

Frost,  D.  M.  Mimtioned 116 

Frost,  G.  H.  Mentioned 320 

Fry,  John  C.  Mentioned 649 

Fuller,  C.  A.  Mentioned 201,202,294 

Fullerton,  E.  Mentioned , 417 

Fullyard,  James.  Mentioned 571,573 

Fulton,  Steamer.  Mentioned 410,411,469 

Gaines,  R.  H.  G.  Mentioned 295,318 

Gallimard,  J.  V.  Mentioned 545 

Galloway,  J.  L.  Mentioned 747 

Ganess,  Dr.  Mentioned 488 

Gantt,  E.  W.  Mentioned 97 

Gantt,  George. 

Mentioned 5517, 5519, 543, 545 

Report  of  Grierson’s  Raid  to  llaton  Rouge,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1863 540 

Garber,  Michael  C.  Mentioned 157 

Gardin,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 740 

Gardner,  Franklin. 

Correspondence  with 

Carr,  Joseph  P 305 

Johnston,  Theodore 297 

Pemberton,  John  C 298,  299, 5102, 5108,  315 

Mentioned 194, 

199;  200, 222,  227, 242, 243, 248, 250, 254, 255, 257, 259,  315,  370,  5518,  541, 545 

Reports  of 

Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  18  ^51 542,5451 

Queen  of  the  West,  IJ.  S.  S.  Capture  of  steamers  by,  Feb.  3,  18651  51519 

Garland,  H.  A.  IMentioned 319 

Garland,  'W.  H.  Rej)OJ  t of  Grie.rson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April  17-May 

2,  1863 543 

Garlandville,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  April24,  1863.  See  Griersoids  Raid  to  Baton 
Range,  La.,  April  11 -May  2,  1863. 

52  R R — VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


818 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Garrard,  Theophilus  T.  Mentioned 138, 143, 150, 152, 153, 184, 490, 491,  494,  582 

Garrott,  Isham  W. 

Mentioned 319,666,667,673 

Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1,  1863 678 

Garvey,  Mr.  Mentioned 342,343 

Gaster,  William.  Mentioned 687 

Ga.ston,  James  M.  Mentioned 516 

Gates,  Elijah. 

Mentioned 268,293 

Report  of  engagement  at  Big  Black  River  Bridge,  Miss.,  May  17,  1863 268 

Cause,  W.  R.  Mentioned 319, 668 

Gay,  Edward  J.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 303 

General  Hodge.s,  Steamer.  Mentioned  291 

General  Price,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned >.  21,  30, 46, 75, 82, 141, 142, 187, 434,  517,  518 

George  Sturgess,  Steamer. 

Attempt  of,  to  pass  Vicksburg  batteries.  See  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Attempt  of 
tug  George  Sturgess  to  pass  batteries  at,  Mag  4,  1863. 

Mentioned 688 

Georgia.  Military  departments  embracing 213,235 

Georgia  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries:  Cherokee,  318;  Martin’s,  786. 

Cavalry — Companies  : Nelson’s,  786.  Regiments : 5th,  218. 

Infantry— 5affa//o/7s;  Ist  {Sharpshooters),!  rV.  Regiments:  31st,  709;  4:6th, 

787;  47th,  201,245;  56th,  506. 

Gere,  William  B.  Mentioned 767,  7(i9 

Gerhardt,  J.  W.  Mentioned 618 

Germantown,  Tenn.  Affair  near,  Jan.  27,  1863.  Rei)ort  of  Ephraim  R. 

Eckley 332 

Gholson,  S.  J. 

Mentioned 530,  560. 580, 581, 690,  691,  693, 694 

Report  of  Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1863 r43 

Gibbs,  Edward  M!  Mentioned 340 

Gilchrist,  Charles  A.  Mentioned 782,783,785 

Gile,  D.  H.  Mentioned 641 

Gill,  Charles  R.  Mentioned 601,  603,  606-608 

Gillespie,  G.  L.  Mentioned 294,319 

Ginder,  H.  Mentioned 293 

Girault,  J.  F.  Mentioned 320 

Gist,  S.  R.  Mentioned 194,  216, 221,  222, 239, 240, 242,  270, 326,  329,  787 

Glasgow,  S.  L.  Mentioned 95, 619,  622, 628, 630 

Gleason,  Jesse  T.  Mentioned 708,714 

Gloster,  A.  W.  Mentioned 293 

Goad,  George  H.  Mentioned 714 

Godfrey,  J.  Franklin.  Mentioned 528 

Going,  William.  Mentioned 334 

Golden  Age,  Steajner.  Mentioned 506 

Gonsanley,  Clayton  W.  Mentioned 559 

Goodwin,  C.  P.  Mentioned 591 

Goodwin,  Edwin.  Mentioned 544 

Gordon,  G.  W.  Mentioned 620,  622 

Gorgas,  Josiah.  Mentioned 292 

For  correspondence  as  Chief  of  Ordnance,  see  Ordnance  Department,  C. 

S.  A. 

Gorman,  Willis  A.  Mentioned 


9, 10,  64,  .371, 374, 381,.3H6 


INDEX. 


819 


Gould,  J.  McKee.  Mentioned (WO 

Govette,  William.  Mentioned 8d3 

Grace,  William.  Mentioned : 742 

Grady,  Thomas.  Mentioned 698 

Graham,  E.  L.  Mentioned 567 

Graham,  George  W.  Correspondence  with  William  S.  Oliver 567 

Graham,  Harvey. 

Correspondence  with  John  A.  McClernand 178 

Mentioned 175,180-182,619 

Graham,  John  M. 

Mentioned 522, 524 

Keports  of  scout  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  April  10-11,  1863 515,516 

Graham,  R.  P.  Mentioned .501 

Grammer,  John  W.  Mentioned 721 

Granbury,  H.  B. 

Mentioned 737 

Report  of  engagement  at  Raymond,  Miss.,  May  12,  1863 747 

Grand  Duke,  Steamer.  Mentioned 345,  346, 685,  d*-!) 

Grand  Bra,  Steamer.  Mentioned 363-366,  369,  469 

Grand  Gulf,  Miss. 

Bombardment  of,  and  passage  of  batteries,  April  29,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Grant,  U.  S 32 

Pemberton,  J.  C 576 

Reports  of 

Bowen,  John  S ! 575,576 

Jackson,  Ezra  P 573 

Pemberton,  John  C 574 

Stevenson,  Carter  L 574,575 

See  also  Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  1,  1863.  Reports  of 
Boweu,  John  S.  Cockrell,  Francis  M. 

AIho  reports  of  Grant,  p.  48;  Dana,  pp.  81-83;  McClernand,  p.  142;  Grant 
to  Halleclc,  pp.  31,  32.  Also  report  of  Burhridge,  Part  II,  p.  30. 
Engagement  at,  March  31,  1863. 

Communication  from  John  S.  Bowen 487 

Report  of  John  S.  Bowen 486 

See  also  report  of  Pemberton,  p.  250. 

Passage  of  batteries  of,  by  U.  S.  S.  Hartford  and  Monongahela,  March  19, 

1863.  Report  of  John  S.  Bowen 469 

Grand  Junction,  Tenn.  Scout  from,  April  5-6,  1863.  See  Saiilsbury,  Tenn, 

Scout  from  Grand  Junction  to,  April  5-6,  1863. 

Grand  Junction  and  Bolivar,  Tenn.  Gueirilla  attack  on  railway  train  be- 
tween, March  21,  1863.  See  Bolivar  and  Grand  Junction,  Tenn. 

Grant,  U.  S. 

Assigned  to  command  of  troops  in  Arkansas 9 

Assumes  command  of  expedition  against  Vicksburg,  Miss 11 

Congratulatory  orders 35 

Co-operation  with  N.  P.  Banks 4, 9,  25, 28-30,  36,  39,  40,  49 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-General’s  Office,  U.  S.  A 157,158 

Army  Headquarters.  9-12, 14,  17-20, 22-25,  27-32, 34-37,  39,  4'),  42-44,  62, 63,  376 

Deitzler,  George  W 15 

Duff,  W.  L 15 

Howard,  Ocrau  II . . ^ ^ r r r t 


820 


INDEX, 


Page. 

Grant,  U.  S. — Contiuaed. 

Correspondence  Avitli 

Hiirlbut,  Siephen  A 26 

Lincoln,  Abraham  40,41 

McClernand,  John  A. . 12, 13,  56, 102, 103, 157, 159, 161, 162, 165, 166, 172, 173, 176 

McPherson,  James  B 163 

Pemberton,  John  C 59-61, 114-116, 276, 277, 283-285 

Porter,  David  D 409 

Prentiss,  Benjamin  M 401 

Sherman,  Willisim  T 162,761 

Mentioned 4-7, 9, 11, 12,  31, 41,  64, 65, 67-98, 100-110, 112, 

114-116, 126-128, 131, 132, 134, 136, 137, 143, 144, 147-149, 154, 155, 157,  l(il- 
163, 165-177, 180-187, 192-196,  201, 206, 207, 209-212, 219,  222-229, 233, 234, 
238-240, 243,  244,  246, 247, 250-252, 2-59,  270, 281-285, 287,  323,  324,  327,  329, 
331,  386-388,  404,  406,  432,  433,  435,  437, 457, 485,  504, 510,  520, 533, 576,  581, 
592,603,627,634,643,663.  666,  704,  706,719,735,749,751-757,770,776,784 

Reports  of  operations  against  Vicksburg,  Jan,  30-July  4,  1863 6, 

8,  44,  170, 173,  175,  182,  185 

Grave.s,  Amos  L.  Mentioned 771 

Grayson,  John  B.  Mentioned 319 

Green,  George  W.  Mentioned 499 

Green,  James  P.  Mentioned 567 

Green,  James  U.  Mentioned 426,498 

Green,  Martin  E. 

Mentioned.  - 6, 58, 202, 256, 264-268,  276,  295,  661, 663,  664,  666-668,  670, 678,  679,  681 

Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1,  1863  672 

Green,  T.  B.  Mentioned 319 

Greene,  Messrs.  Mentioned 754 

Greenmail,  Lawrence.  Mentioned 715 

Greensburg,  La.  Skirmish  near.  May  1,  1863.  See  Grierson's  Raid  to  Baton 
Rou(jc,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1863. 

Greenville,  Miss.  Skirmish  at.  May  12,  1863  4 

Greenville,  Black  Bayou,  and  Deer  Creek,  Miss.  Expedition  to,  April  2-14, 

1863. 

Communication  from  John  C.  Pemberton 504 

Reports  of 

Ferguson,  Samuel  W 507-511 

Lee,  Stephen  D 504-506 

Steele,  Frederick .501 

Stevenson,  Carter  L 502,503 

See  also  Grant’s  report,  p.  25. 

Greenville,  Miss.,  and  Cypress  Bend,  Ark.  Expedition  to,  Feb.  14-26, 1863. 

Report  of  Stephen  G.  Burbridge 349 

Greenwood,  Miss.  Engagements  at  Fort  Pemberton,  near.  See  Yazoo  Bass 
Expedition,  Fei).'2,A-April  S,  1863. 

Greer,  James  A.  Mentioned 82,517 

Gregg,  John. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 324 

Mentioned 50, 194, 216, 221, 223, 239, 240, 

257, 260, 270,  322,  324, 325, 329,  637,  704,  708, 739, 740,  743,  744,  747,  748, 782 

Reports  of 

Jackson,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  14,  1863 785 

Raymond,  Miss.  Engagement  at.  May  12, 1863 736 


No  circnnistautial  reports  on  file. 


INDEX, 


821 


Page. 

Grierson.  Benjamin  H. 

Meutioned - 5,27,33,34, 

58,  73, 91, 253-255,  422,  424,  427, 519-521,  529-531, 537,  546,  554,  555,  561,  579 
Reports  of 

Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Ronge,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1863  521,522 

La  Grange,  Tenn.  Expeditions  from. 

Marcli  8-12,  1863 1 423 

Mareh  28-April  3,  1863  481 

Grierson's  Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Cunningham,  J -• 550,  552 

Grant,  U.S 34 

In  gate,  F 551 

Lindsey,  L.S 539 

Reports  of 

Adams,  John 531, 532 

Adams,  Wirt 533 

Barteau,  C.  R 533,534 

Biffle,  A.  B.... 536 

Brown,  Alexander  J 537 

Bryan,  B.F 537 

Buford,  Abraham  .538 

Cleveland,  S.  B 538 

De  Baun,  J .539 

Gantt,  George .540 

Gardner,  Franklin 542,543 

Garland,  W.  H 543 

Gholson,  S.  J 543 

Grierson,  Benjamin  H 521,  .522 

Hatch,  Edward .529 

Hurlbut,  Ste[>hen  A 519,  520 

Loring,  William  W 544,545 

Miles,  W.  R ,545 

Portis,  Thomas  J..  ; 546 

Richardson,  Robert  V 547 

Ruggles,  Daniel ,550-.553, 

Simonton,  .John  M .'...  553 

Smith,  William  Sooy 521 

Tilghman,  Lloyd 553 

See  also  reports  of  Hallcck,  j).  5 ; Giant,  p.  33  ; Pemherton,  p.  254. 

Griffin,  S.  H.  Mentioned 675 

Griffith,  Joseph  E.  Mentioned 55,  1.54. 1.55, 170, 175, 176,  178-180, 18.2,  619 

Griffiths,  Henry  H.  Mentioned 619,620,022,628,629 

Groce,  John  H.  Mentioned 451 

Gryden,  Gustav  B.  Mentioned 134, 136 

Gaierrillas.  Expedition  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  against.  See  Memphis,  Tenn. 
Expedition  from,  ayainst  ynerrilhis,  Feb.  17,  1863. 

Guibor,  Henry.  Mentioned 486 

Guppey,  J.  J.  Mentioned 3.52 

Guthrie,  Harvey,  jr.  Mentioned 608 

Guyton,  C.  S.  Mentioned 319 

Hackett,  E.  L.  Mentioned ,592 

Haggerty,  F.  Mentioned  .578 

Hains,  Peter  C.  Mentioned 107, 130, 157, 186, 189 


822 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Hall,  Captain.  Mentioned 736,737 

Hall,  Mr.  Mentioned 422 

Hall,  T.  W.  Mentioned 740 

Halleck,  Mr.  Mentioned 120 

Halleck,  Henry  W. 

Mentioned 9, 11-13,  31,  40, 41,  43,  73, 76, 159, 166, 169, 376,  515,  520, 521 

Report  of  operations  in  Mississippi,  Nov.  10, 1862-Aug.  10,  1863  4 

For  correspondence  as  General-in-Chief,  see  Army  Headquarters. 

Hall’s  Ferry,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  May  13, 1863* 4 

Ham,  T.  W.  Mentioned 27,  340,  534, 535 

Hamilton  Belle,  Steamer.  Mentioned 371, 391 

Hamilton,  Charles  S. 

Correspondence  with  R.  M.  Sawyer 424 

Mentioned 28,423 

Hamilton,  P.  Mentioned 678 

Hammack,  Zebedee.  Mentioned 720 

Hampton,  Mr.  Mentioned 507 

Hancock,  T.  B.  Mentioned 787 

Handly,  William  H.  Mentioned 425 

Handy,  T.  H.  Mentioned 367,368,686 

Hankinson’s  Ferry,  Big  Black  River,  Miss.  Skirmishes  at. 

May  3, 1863.  Casualties.  Returns  of.  Union  troops 724 


See  also  Jackson,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  14,  1863.  Reports  of 

Alexander,  Jesse  I.  Deimling,  Francis  C.  Holmes,  Samuel  A. 

Also  Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of.  May  1,  1863.  Reports  of 

Force,  M.  F.  Loring,  'William  W.  McPherson,  James  B. 

Logan,  John  A. 


Also  Raymond,  Miss.  Engagement  at.  May  12,  1863.  Reports  of 

Crocker,  Marcellus  M.  Foster,  John  S.  Sanboin,  John  B. 

Also  reports  of  Grant,  p.  49  ; I'onrieUotte,  Part  II,  p.  60. 


May  4,  1863.  See  report  of  Logan,  p.  642. 

July  1, 1863.  See  report  of  Dana,  p.  113. 

Hardee,  William  J.  Mentioned 1 10, 209 

Hard  Times  Landing,  La.  Expedition  to,  with  skirmishes,  April  25-29,  1863. 

Report  of  James  Keigwin 571 

See  also  reports  of  Grant,  p.  47 ; Dana,  pp.  81,  83  ; McClcrnand,  p.  142 ; Pem- 
berton, p.  258.  Also  Pemberton  to  Johnston,  p.  257. 

Harriet  Lane,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 337 

Harris,  Charles  L.  Mentioned 618,621 

Harris,  John  V.  Mentioned 200, 231, 232, 271, 560 

Harris,  S.  D.  Mentioned 678 

Harris,  Thomas.  Mentioned 771 

Harris,  Washington  H.  Mentioned 559 

Hariis,  William  D.  Mentioned 334 

Harrison,  Captain.  Mentioned 426 

Harrison,  Burton  N.  For  correspondence  as  Private  Secretary,  see  Jefferson 
Davis. 

Harrison,  Isaac  F.  Mentioned 370,571,572,663 

Harrison,  J.  M.  Mentioned 632 

Harrison,  Monroe.  Mentioned .566 

Harrod,  B.  M.  Mentioned 320,412,504,505 

Hart,  John  E.  Mentioned 684 


No  circumstantial  reitorts  ou  tile. 


INDEX. 


823 

rage. 


Hartford,  U.  S.  S. 

Attack  on  Warrenton  batteries  by,  March  23,  1863  * 2 

Mentioned 65, 298, 469, 480, 481, 486 

Passage  of  Grand  Gulf  batteries  by.  See  Grand  Gulf  Batteries.  Passage 
of,  by  U.  S.  S.  Hartford  and  Monongahela,  March  19,  1863. 

Hartwell,  Captain.  Mentioned 130 

Harvey,  Samuel  P.  Mentioned 488 

Hatch,  Edward. 

Mentioned 339,  .521-523, 703 

Reports  of 

Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1863 529 

Northern  Mississippi.  Scout  from  La  Grange,  Teim.,  into,  April  29-May 


5,  1863 579 

Panola,  Miss.  Expedition  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to.  May  11-15,  1863.  702 

Hatch,  E.  P.  Mentioned (>20 

Hatch,  Reuben  B.  Mentioned 404 

Hatchie  River,  Tenn. 

Expedition  from  Jackson,  Tenn.,  to  April  1-16,  1863.  Reports  of 

Brush,  Daniel  H 499 

Lawler,  Michael  K 498 

Skirmish  near  Bloomington,  on  the.  See  Bloomington,  Tenn.  Skirmish  near, 

Feb.  27,  1863. 


Hawes,  J.  M.  Mentioned 95 

Hawhe,  Arthur  J.  Mentioned 572 

Hawkins,  J.  P.  Mentioned 93, 106 

Hayes,  A.  J.  Mentioned .*  428 

Hayes,  Charles  S.  Mentioned 554,556,557,559 

Haynes’  Bluff,  Miss. 

Demonstration  on,  April  29-May  1, 1863.  See  SnydeSs  Mill,  Miss.  Engage^ 
merit  at,  April  '^Q-May  1,  1863.  Also  Jackson,  Miss.  Engagement 
at.  May  14,  1863.  Report  of  Sherman,  p.  751.  See  also  report  of 
Grant,  p.  49. 

Expedition  from,  to  Satartia  and  Mechanicsburg,  June  2-8, 1863.  See  Grant 
to  Halleck,  p.  41 ; report  of  Dana,  p.  94. 

Haynes,  Noah  C.  Mentioned 622 

Haynie,  Isham  N.  Mentioned 382 

Hays,  Asa  N.  Mentioned 488 

Hays,  Charles  C.  Mentioned 425 

Hazen,  Levi  M.  Mentioned 446 

Hazlewood,  J.  H.  Mentioned 426,498 

Heath,  Thomas  T.  Mentioned 559 

Hebert,  Louis. 

Mentioned 200, 231, 232, 271, 275, 276, 293,  320,  465,  577,  696 

Report  of  engagement  at  Snyder’s  Mill,  Miss.,  April  30-May  1, 1863 577 

Hedden,  W.  H.  Mentioned 417 

Helena,  Ark.  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  ordered  to  garrison  post  of 11 

Helman,  J.  R.  Mentioned 591 

Henderson,  Steamer.  Mentioned 371,376,378,387 

Henderson,  D.  Webb.  Mentioned 623 

Henderson,  Samuel.  Mentioned 254 

Henderson,  Thomas. 

Correspondence  with  Joseph  E.  Johnston 225 

Mentioned 222,225,272 


No  circuinstJintial  reports  on  tile. 


824 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Hennerberry,  J.  Mentioned 417 

Henry,  C.  23.  Mentioned 591 

Henry  Clay,  Steamer.  Mentioned 50,47,75,76,517,518 

Henry,  R.  S.  Mentioned 419 

Henry,  W R.  Mentioned 623 

Hernando,  Miss. 

Action  at,  April  18,  1863.  See  Coldwafer,  Miss.  Expedition  from  Memphis, 

Tenn.,  to  the,  April  18-24,  1863. 

Skirmishes  near,  March  15-16,  1863.  Report  of  James  R.  Chalmers 468 

Hernford,  Dr.  Mentioned 549 

Herren,  Gadi.  Mentioned 549 

Herrick,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 320 

Herrick,  Thomas  P.  Reports  of 

Beaver  Creek  Swamp,  Tenn.  Scout  in,  April  2-6,  1863 500 

La  Fayette  and  Moscow,  Tenn.  Scout  lo,  March  10-16,  1863,  andskirmish..  429 

Herring,  Joseph  R.  Mentioned 339,340 

Herron,  Francis  J.  Mentioned 7,  42,  57,  59.  96-103,  106,  107,  111,  137 

Hervey,  W.  Mentioned 686 

Hess,  Calvin.  Mentioned 567 

He.ss,  H.  C.  Mentioned 568 

Hewell,  R.  T.  Mentioned 745 

Hewitt,  Henry  S.  Mentioned 755 

Hewlett,  W.  A. 

Mentioned 561 

Reijort  of  action  at  King’s  Creek,  near  Tuiielo,  Miss.,  May  5,  1863 691 

Hey  ward,  G.  A.  Mentioned 318 

Hickenlooper,  Andrew.  Mentioned 127, 130, 638, 641,  642 

Hicks,  J.  H.  Mentioned  426 

Higgins,  Edward.  Mentioned 271,277,293,319 

Hightower,  Thomas.  Mentioned 654 

Higley,  John  H.  Mentioned 459 

Hill,  Captain.  Mentioned 294 

Hill,  William  G.  Mentioned 628 

Hillis,  David  B. 

Mentioned 774-777 

Reports  of  engagement  at  Jackson,  Miss.,  May  14,  1863,  including  opera- 
tions April  20-May  24  777,  778 

Hills,  Velorus  T.  Mentioned 651 

Hinds,  Howell. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 313 

Mentioned 292 

Hine,  T.  D.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 291, 303,  307,  308 

Hines,  A.  D.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 688 

Hinson,  Joseph.  Mentioned 538 

Hipp,  Charles.  Mentioned 452 

Hite,  George.  Mentioned 685 

Hoadley,  F.  W.  Mentioned  319 

Hobart,  Edward.  Mentioned 320 

Hodges,  General,  Steamer.  Menfioued 291 

Hoel,  William  R.  Mentioned 517 

Hogan,  Dennis.  lilentioned 698 

Hogane,  James  T.  Mentioned 293 

Hoge,  George  B.  Rei)ortof  Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  March  14-27,  1863 440 

Hogue,  B.  J.  Mentioned 417 


INDEX. 


825 


Page. 

Hogue,  James.  Mentioned 275 

Holbrook,  William  H.  Mentioned 649 

Holcomb,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned 649 

Holland,  O.  S.  Mentioned 420 

Holmes,  Samuel  A. 

Mentioned 86,  407, 634,  638-641, 717,  723-726,  729,  731,  751,  775, 781, 782,  784 

Report  of  engagement  at  Jackson,  Miss.,  May  14,  1863,  including  operations 

April  18-May  23 773 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H.  Mentioned 219 

Hooe,  Roy  Mason.  For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Daniel  RiKjfjles. 

Hooker,  Joseph.  Mentioned 36 

Hoover,  John  S.  Mentioned 649 

Hope,  Steamer.  Mentioned 505 

Horizon,  Steamer.  Mentioned 47,  77,  565,  .567-569,  634,  643 

Homey,  Leonidas.  Mentioned 774-777,  780,  783,  785 

Hotaling,  John  R.  Mentioned 645,649 

Houston,  D.  Mentioned 7 578 

Hovey,  Alvin  P. 

Mentioned 48.  51-53,  74,  77,  81-83,  86, 96,  98,  99, 

108,  L26, 138, 141, 142, 144-151, 154-1.56, 158,  160,  183-187, 391, 583,  .593,  601, 
606,  607,  609-611, 614,  615,  621,  623.  624,  626,  639,  640,  646-648,  717, 724, 731 

Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1,  1863,  including  operations 

April  14-May  1 600 

Hovis,  L.  B.  Mentioned 334 

Howard,  J.  S.  Mentioned 670 

Howard,  Ocran  H. 

Correspondence  with 

Grant,  U.  S 132 

Rose,  L.  M 131 

Wilson,  J.  W 132 

Reports  of  operations  against  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  April  3-July  4,  1863  130.133 

Hoy,  James.  Mentioned 515,516 

Hoyt,  Henry  W.  B.  Mentioned 131,  136,641 

Hubbard,  Lucius  F.  Report  of  engagement  at  Jackson,  Miss.,  Ma}^  14,  1863, 

including  operations  May  2-22  767 

Hubbell,  F.  L.  Mentioned 319,668 

Hudsonville,  Miss. 

Scout  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  LockbarPs  Mills,  Mount  Pleasant,  Early 
Grove,  and.  See  La  Grange,  Tenn.  Scout  from,  etc.,  April  10-11, 

1863. 


Scout  to.  See  La  Grange,  Tenn.  Scout  from,  etc.,  March  2-3,  1863. 


Humphrey,  Thomas  W.  Mentioned 86 

Hundley,  D.  R.  Mentioned 681 

Hurlbut,  Stephen  A. 

Assumes  command  of  16th  Army  Corps 2 

Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 30 

Grant,  U.  S 26 

Lauman,  .Jacob  G 554 

War  Department,  U.  S 8() 

Mentioned 25,  .58,  63, 66,  68,  70,  92, 278,  487,  .500,  .501,  .522, 525 

Reports  of 

Coldwater,  Miss.  Expedition  to  the,  April  18-24,  1863  ,5, 54,. 5.55 

Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1863 519,520 


INDEX. 


82o 


Page. 


Hurlbut,  Stephen  A. — Coutiiiued. 

Reports  of 

Moscow,  Tenn.  Affair  at,  March  29,  18(53  485 

Nonconuah  Creek,  Tenn.  Skirmish  on,  April  4,  1863 512 

Hurst,  D.  W.  Mentioned 459 

Hurst,  Fielding.  Mentioned 498 

Hurst,  Nathaniel.  Mentioned 566 

Huston,  L.  W.  Mentioned 778 

Hutchens,  William  D.  Mentioned 514 

Hutchinson,  Joseph.  Mentioned 622 

Hutchinson,  R,  R.  Mentioned 667 

Hutt,  George  W.  Mentioned 697 

Hutton,  T.  H.  Mentioned 348,  368 

Huyett,  D.  H.  Mentioned 295 

Hyams,  K.  R.  Mentioned 368 

Ida  May,  Steamer.  Mentioned 397 

Ihrie,  George  P.  Mentioned 431 

Illinois,  Governor  of.  Correspondence  wi.th  Abraham  Lincoln 167 

Illinois  Troops.  Mentioned. 


Artillery,  Light — Batteries:  Cooley’s,  138,  155,  5>''3,  616,  624.  Regiments: 

1st,  702.  (Batteries),  A,  756,  770  ; B,  756  ; D,  640,  644-64.-^,  706.  7 00,  712  ; 

E,  750,  753,  756,  759,  760,  762,  765,  766,  769,  770 ; H.  756;  2d  (Batteries),  A, 

138,  583,  601,  605,  609,  610,  614,  617;  G,  634,  643;  L,  644,  722. 

Regiments:  2d,  139,  140,  142,  146,  147,  171,  351,  490,  491,  494,  571, 

584,  637,  644,  645,  705,  734,  735,  750;  3d,  138,  139,  491,  492,  582,  584,  623, 

703 ; 4th,  59,  332,  427,  428,  519,  579 ; 6th,  27,  423-425,  471-  473,  482-484, 

513,  520,  522-524,  527,529,  530,  542,  550;  7th,  334,  339,  340,  349,  422-425, 
482-484,  513,  515,  516,  520,  522-524,  526,  528-530,  542,  550,  702;  9th,  690, 

694,  703  ; 11th,  333,  33b ; 15th,  113,  514,  559. 

Infantry — Regiments:  8th,  585,  643,644,646,  651,  652,  706,  708,716-719,721; 

14th,  554  ; 17th,  718-720 ; 18th,  468,  469,  498-500 ; 20th,  584, 637,  643,  646, 
648,649,705,708-712;  28th,  201, 245 ; 30th,  585,647,  651,  705,772;  31st, 
584,643,705,707-709,711;  33d,  138,584,615-617,  622,  625,  626;  41st,  201, 
245,360,556-558;  43d,  470;  45th,  584,  643,  705,  707-712;  46th,  554,559; 

47th,  750,  760 ; 53d,  201, 245,  340,  341,  360 ; 55th,  437,  441 ; 56th,  725, 726, 
751,774,776;  62d,  468;  72d,  725,  726;  77th,  138,  155,  178,  179,  181,583; 

81st,  585,  637,  643,  644,  648,  651-655,  706,  716-719.  721,  722 ; 93d,  684,  725, 

75^  ; ^7th,  138, 583, 594, 599, 600 ; 99th,  138,  584, 598,  617, 621,  622,  624-626; 
106th,  470;  108th,  138,583;  109th,  68;  113th,  435,439-441;  114th. 
749,762-765;  116th,  432,435,437,439,  443,453;  118th,  138,  493,  582,  585, 
586,588,780;  124th,  584,643,648,705,  708,  709,  711;  127th,  125,  126,434, 
443-446,756;  128th.  68;  130th,  138,155,583,594,617. 

Indian,  No.  2,  Steamer.  Mentioned 291 

Indiana  Troops.  Mentioned. 

. Artillery,  Light — Batteries  : 1st,  138, 143, 584,  602,  615, 620,  622,  625-627, 629. 
Cavalry — Regiments:  1st,  138,360,583;  4th,  138,583. 

Infantry— /?e5r//ne/?fs  ; 8th,  138,  584, 607,  621,  622, 625-627  ; 11th,  138, 583, 601, 
603,606,607,609,610,784;  16th,  138,352,583,593,598;  18th,  138,584,621, 

622,  624-626 ; 23d,  584, 643,  648,  705, 707-714  ; 24th,  138,  583,  601,  603, 606, 
607,609.611,612;  34th,  138,583,601-003,606,607,609,  611,614,621:  46th, 

138, 397,  401,. 583, 601,  606,  607,  609,  621  ; 47th,  138.  .397,  583,  601,  603,  610- 
613 ; 48th,  706, 725, 727-7.33,  750 ; 49th,  138, 142,  491-493,  571 , 572,  .582,  .586- 
588  ; 54th,  1.38, 582,  590 ; 59th,  598,  639, 706, 722, 724,  725,  727-733,  750, 771, 

772;  60th,  138,3.52,583;  67th,  138,3.52,583,592-509;  69th,  138,  139,490- 
493,  495, 582, 586,  .590  ; 83d,  435,  436,442-447,7.56;  93d,  749,762-760. 


INDEX. 


827 


Page. 

Indiaiiola,  U.  S.  S. 

Capture  of,  Feb.  24,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Grant,  U.  S 18 

Taylor,  Richard 362,369 

Congratulatory  orders.  Taylor 3u2 

Reports  of 

Adams,  Wirt 370 

Brand,  Frederick  B 362,363 

Brent,  J.  L - 364 

Pemberton,  John  C 361 

Stevenson,  Carter  L 369 

Taylor,  Richard 361,362 

Mentioned 18, 19,  68,  343, 347, 361-370, 490 

Passage  of  Vicksburg  batteries  by,  Feb.  13,  1863^ 2 

Ingate,  F. 

Correspondence  with  Daniel  Ruggles 551 

Mentioned 552 

Inge,  W.  M.  Mentioned 512, 534, 535',  692 

Ingle,  John.  Mentioned 567 

Ingraham  Heights,  Miss.  Skirmish  at.  May  3,  1863  t 3 

Inskeep,  John.  Mentioned 751 

Iowa  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Ught— Batteries : 1st,  143,  584,  615,  620,  622,  628-631  ; 2d,  750, 

753,  756,  759,  760,  765,  769,  7/0. 

Cavalry— /?e^//ne/7fs  ; 2d,  472,  500,  513,  514,  519,  520,  522,  523,  529-531,  542, 

555,  579,  702 ; 4th,  106,  749,  753,  755. 

Infantry — Regiments:  3d,  360;  5th,  683,  725,  751 ; 6th,  519,  579,702;  8th, 

750,  769,  770;  10th,  683,  725,  751;  12th,  750,769;  16th,  181;  17th,  640, 

724,  725,  729,  751,  773-783;  21st,  13»,  178,  182,  584,621,  622,  628,  631-633; 

22d,  55,  138,  170,  175,  177-182,  584,  622,  628,  632,  633;  23d,  95,  96,  138, 

153,  584,  617,  621,  622,  628,  629;  24th,  138,  583,  601,  610,  611  ; 28th,  138, 

583,  601,  610,  611,  614,  615  ; 29th,  393;  35th,  750,  769. 

Jrish,  Dallas  C.  Mentioned 441 

Irvin,  Frank  A.  Mentioned 134,136 

Irwin,  William  R.  Mentioned 627 

Ische,  Henry.  Mentioned 566 

Ivy,  Edward.  Mentioned 320 

Jackson,  A.,jr. 

Mentioned - 319,569 

Report  of  passage  of  Vicksburg  and  Warrenton  batteries  by  transports, 

April  22,  1863 570 

Jackson,  C.  M.  Mentioned 216 

Jackson,  Ezra  P.  Report  of  bombardment  of  Grand  Gulf,  Miss.,  and  passage. 

of  batteries  at,  April  29,  1863 573 

Jackson,  George  W.  Mentioned 601 

Jackson,  J.  C.  Mentioned 332 

Jackson,  Riel  E.  Mentioned 630 

Jackson,  W.  H.  Mentioned 96,  102,  194,  195,  223,  224,  242,  245 

Jackson,  Miss. 

Engagement  at.  May  14,  1863. 

Casualties.  Returns  of. 

Confederate  troops 787 

Union  troops 6,59,724,730,749-751,770 

*Soe  Annual  Ilcport  of  tbe  Secretary  of  tlio  Kavy,  De  e.  7,  1FG:5.  tNo  cii  cumatantial  re])orta  on  file. 


828 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Jackson,  Miss.— Continued. 

Engagement  at,  Maj'  14,  1863. 

Commnni cat  ions  from 

Grant,  U.  S 30 

Sherman,  William  T i 701 

Reports  of  (including  operations  under  dates  noted) 

Alexander,  J^sse  I.  May  3-24 771 

Bonck,  Gabriel.  May  13-Jnly  6 773 

Bnckland,  Ralph  P.  May  2-22 701 

Colquitt,  Peyton  H 797 

Deimling,  Francis  C.  April  20-May  23 780 

Gregg,  John.. 7B5 

Hillis,  David  B.  April  20-May  24 777,778 

Holmes,  Samuel  A.  April  18-May  23 773 

Hubbard,  Lncins  F.  May  2-22 707* 

McMillen,  William  L 700 

Matthies,  Charles  L.  May  2-22  700 

Sherman,  William  T.  April  20-May  22 7.0I 

Thomas,  De  Witt  C.  May  2-Jnly  16 704 

Tuttle,  James  M.  May  2-22 7;j8 

See  also  Baymond,  Miss.  Engayement  at,  May  12, 1863.  Beports  of 
Cainpbell,  Franklin.  Davis,  William  P.  Sanborn,  John  B. 

Crocker,  Marcellus  M.  Foster,  John  S. 

Also  Port  Gihson,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  1,  1863.  Beports  of 
Logan,  John  A.  McPherson,  James  B. 

Also  reports  of  Balleck,  p.  5 ; Grant,  pp.  36,  .60  ; Howard,  p.  136  ; Mc- 
Clernand,  p.  147;  Johnston,  p.  239;  Pemherton,  j).  2()0.  Also  .John- 
ston to  Pemberton,  p.  270.  Also  report  of  Beed,  Part  11,  }).  284. 
Investment  and  capture  of,  July  10-17,  1863.  See  Jackson,  Miss.  Engage- 
ment at,  May  14,  1863.  Beport  of  Thomas,  p.  764. 

Jackson,  Miss,,  Campaign,  July  5-25,  1863.  Commuuications  from 

Davis,  Jefferson 200,201,208 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 200-202,  207-209, 245, 2'U) 

See  also  report  of  Johnston,  p.  245.  Also  Part  II, 

Jackson,  Tenn. 

Expedition  from,  to  Hatchie  River.  See  Hatchie  Biver,  Tenn.  Expedition 
from  Jackson,  Tenn.,  to,  April  1-16,  1863. 

Expedition  from,  to  Trenton,  Tenn.  See  Trenton,  Tenn.  Expedition  from 
.Jackson  to,  March  16-18,  1863. 

Janies,  Jo.shua.  Mentioned 490 

James’  Plantation,  near  New  Carthage,  La.  Slciinii.shes  at,  Ai)ril  6 and  8. 

See  Afcic  Carthage,  La.  Oj)era  lions  from  .MiUikods  Bend  to,  March 
'M-April  17,  1863.  A\^o  report  of  McClernand,  p,  140. 

Jayne,  Henry.  Mentioned 157 

Jenkins,  Henry  M.  Mentioned 334 

Jenks,  J.  C.  Mentioned 618 

Jenney,  William  L.  B.  Mentioned 119,121,758 

Jennings,  H.  C.  Mentioned 591 

Jennings,  H.  G.  P.  Mentioned 612 

Jessup,  Robert  B.  Mentioned 604 

Jews.  Revocation  of  order  expelling.  Communication  from  Army  Head- 
quarters   9 

J.  H.  Tucker,  Steamer.  Mentioned 304 


INDEX. 


829 


Page. 

Jocliem,  John.  Mentioned Oil 

John  Bell,  Steamer.  Mentioned 394,397 

John  H.  Dickey,  Steamer.  Mentioned 405 

John  Walsh,  Steamer.  Mentioned 380 

Johnson,  Captain.  Mentioned 700 

Johnson,  Colonel.  Mentioned 73G 

Johnson,  Peter.  Mentioned 770 

Johnson,  Samuel.  Mentioned 430 

Johnston,  Joseph  E. 

Assignment  to  geographical  command •. 213 

Command  of,  defined.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  GeueraPs  Office,  C.  S.  A 234,  235 

Davis,  Jefferson 202 

Correspondence  with 

Adams,  John 532 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  GeneraPs  Office,  C.  S.  A 214- 

210,218-220,  225,  226,  229-235,  237,  239 

Davis,  Jefferson 190-204,  200-212,231,236,238,245,240 

Henderson,  Thomas 225 

Mason,  A.  P 249 

Maury,  Dabney  H 234 

Pemberton,  John  C 39,  40, 193, 217, 238-241,  247, 251-253, 255, 

257, 259-203,  270,  272, 274, 275,  278-281,  280,  300,  311,  325-327, 329, 347, 412 

Taylor,  Eichard 229 

War  Department,  C.  S.  199, 203,  204, 209, 211,  215,  218-220,  223-235, 238,  243, 244 

Mentioned 5-7, 27, 36,  38,  40-44,  .50,  51, 55, 

57,  58,02,69,80,  87,90-95,  97,98,  100,101,104-108,110,112,  113,116,131, 
189, 191, 194-197, 202, 200, 213,  224, 236-238,  242,  250-253,  255, 257, 2.59-203, 
269, 270,  272, 274.  275,  277-283,  280, 287,  293, 294,  319,  321-331,  347, 532,  785 

Relieved  from  command  of  Department  of  Tennessee 232 

Report  of  operations  in  Department  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana, 

March  12-July  19, 1863  238 

Johnston,  J.  W.  Mentioned 318,  319,  007,  079,  681 

Johnston,  Theodore. 

Correspondence  with 

Boyce,  C.  M 290 

Cair,.J.  P 314,315 

Dowd,  W.  C - 296 

Gardner,  Franklin 297 

Meriwether,  W.  W 296 

Pemberton,  John  C 291, 290,  297, 299,  301-303,  30.5,  300,  310-314 

Mentioned •. 289,  291, 294, 299,  305-308,  319 

Johnston,  William  Preston.  For  corresi)ondence  as  A.  D.  C.,  see  Jeffemon 
Davis. 

Jones,  Mr.  Mentioned 177, 178 

Jones,  A.  R.  Mentioned O;}! 

Jones,  J.  H.  Mentioned 4:50 

Jones,  J.  P.  Mentioned 314 

Jones,  Paul,  Steamer.  Mentioned 370 

Jones,  Samuel. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 214 

Mentioned 214 

Jones,  Theodore.  Report  of  Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  March  14-27,  1803  ..  4.50 

Jones,  W.  A.  C.  Mentioned 509 


830 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Jones’  Cross-Roads,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  May  3,  1863* 3 

Jordan,  Mr.  Mentioned. (36 

Judd,  Edwin  D.  Mentioned 65,66,70,98 

Judy,  James  W.  Mentioned 763  764 

J.  W.  Cheeseman,  Steamer.  Mentioned 47, 77,  397,  565-567 

Kaga,  Abraham.  Mentioned 715 

Kansas  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Cavalry — Regiments  : 7th,  427-430,  500, 501 , 690,  694. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 1st,  124,  695-699. 

Kappner,  I.  G.  Mentioned 121 

Kean,  R.  G.  H.  For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  C.  S. 

Kearney,  John.  Mentioned 486 

Keenan,  Stephen.  Mentioned 770 

Keene,  Steamer.  Mentioned 421 

Keigwin,  James. 

Mentioned 142, 154, 156, 136-188, 588 

Reports  of 

Hard  Times  Landing,  La.  Expedition  to,  with  skirmishes,  April  25-29, 

1863  571 

Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of.  May  1, 1863 586 

Kelley,  John  B.  Mentioned 720 

Kelly,  David.  Mentioned 596 

Kelly,  James.  Mentioned  567 

Kelly,  John  H.  Mentioned 591 

Kelsey,  T.  R.  Mentioned 742 

Kelso,  John. 

Mentioned 686 

Reports  of 

Fort  De  Rnssy,  Red  River,  La.  Engagement  at,  May  4,  1863 684 

Red,  Atchafalaya,  and  Black  Rivers,  Lii.  Operations  on  the,  Feb.  10- 

14,1863 348 

Kelton,  J.  C.  For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Henry  W.  Halleck. 

Kemp,  T.  M.  Mentioned 251 

Kendall,  J.  Mentioned 568 

Kennard,  George  W.  Report  of  passage  of  Vicksburg  and  Warrenton  bat- 
teries by  transports,  April  22,  1863  568 

Kennedy,  D.  Mentioned 747 

Kentucky  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery,  Light—  Batteries  : Cobb’s,  201,  245. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 3d,  689,  690,  738, 786  ; 8th,  553. 

Kentucky  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Union.) 

Engineers — Companies:  Patterson’s,  126,584,601. 


Infantry — Regiments  : 7th,  138,  493,  582,  587,  588  ; 19th,  138,  583,  597,  613  ; 


22d,  138,  491, 582,  590, 591. 

Key  West,  No.  2,  Steamer.  Mentioned 393-395,  397 

Kidd,  J.  C.  Mentioned 739,748 

Kimball,  Charles  B. 

Mentioned 592 

Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1,  1863 592 

Kimball,  Milton  S.  Mentioned 398 

Kimball,  Nathan.  Mentioned 57,65,92-94 

Kimball,  William  H.  Mentioned 454 

Kimberlin,  I.  N.  Mentioned 567 


No  circum.“itai»tial  reports  on  tile. 


INDEX. 


831 


Page. 

King,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 364 

King,  B.  T.  Mentioned 685,686 

King’s  Creek,  near  Tupelo,  Miss.  Action  at,  May  5,  1863.  Keports  of 

Bar  tea  n,  C.R 692 

Cunningham,  James 691 

Hewlett,  W.  A 691 

Ruggles,  Daniel 689 

Kinsman,  William  H.  Mentioned 152, 619 

Kirby,  Dennis  T.  Mentioned 87, 440 

Kirst,  B.  Mentioned 622,631 

Kit!3on,  T.  W.  L.  Mentioned 478, 479 

Klauss,  Martin.  Mentioned 602,618,622,625-627 

Knowlton,  Manley.  Mentioned 698 

Knox,  Kilburn.  Mentioned 441,  641 

Koontz,  George  W. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 304 

Reports  of  operations  on  the  Red,  Atchafalaya,  and  Black  Rivers,  La.,  Feb. 

10-14,  1863 *. 347 

Kossak,  William.  Mentioned 119-121, 124-126 

Kuvish,  William.  Mentioned 369 

Lafayette,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 65,75,  82,  517,  518 

La  Fayette  and  Moscow,  Tenn.  Scout  to,  March  10-16,  1863,  and  skirmish. 

Reports  of 

Floyd,  W.  J 429 

Herrick,  Thomas  P 429 

La  Fayette  Depot,  Tenn.  Skirmish  at,  March  15,  1863.  See  La  Fayette  and 
Moscow,  Tenn.  Scout  to,  March  10-16,  1863,  and  shirmisli. 

Lagow,  Clark  .B.  Mentioned 31,403,565-567  . 

La  Grange,  Tenn. 

Expeditions  from. 

March  8-12,  1863. 

Communication  from  Charles  S.  Hamilton 424 

Reports  of 

Grierson,  Benjamin  H 423 

Loomis,  Reuben 424 

Prince,  Edward 424 

Richardson,  Robert  V 425 

March  28-April  3,  1863.  Reports  of 

Grierson,  Benjamin  H 481 

Loomis,  Reuben 483 

See  also  report  of  Dana,  p.  68. 

Expedition  from,  to  Mount  Pleasant  and  Lamar,  Miss.,  Feb.  13-14,  1863. 

Report  of  William  D.  Blackburn 349 


Expedition  from,  to  Panola,  Miss.  See  Panola,  Miss.  Expedition  from  La 
Grange,  Tenn.,  to.  May  11-15,  1863. 

Expedition  from,  to  Saulsbury,  Tenn.  See  Saulsbury,  Tenn.  Expedition 
from  La  Grange  to,  April  15,  1863. 

Grierson’s  Raid  from,  to  Baton  Rouge,  La.  See  Grierson's  Raid  to  Raton 
Rouge,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1863. 

Scout  from,  April  10-11, 1863.  Reports  of  JohnM.  Graham 515,516 

Scout  from,  to  Hudsonvilh^  and  Salem,  Miss.,  and  Saulsbury,  T(mn.,  March 

2-3,1863.  Report  of  William  D.  Blackburn 422 

Scout  from,  into  Northern  Missi.ssippi.  See  Northern  Mississippi.  Scout  from 
La  Grange,  Term.,  into,  April  2d-May  5,  1863. 


882 


INDEX. 


La  Grange,  Tenn. — Continued. 

Scout  from,  to  Early  Grove  and  Mount  Pleasant,  Miss.,  April  5-7,  1863.  Re- 
port of  William  W.  Eaton 

Scout  from,  to  Sanlsbury. 

March  21-22,  1863.  See  Saulsbury,  Tenn.  Scout  from  La  Grange  to, 
March  21-22,  1863. 

April  11,  1863.  See  Saulsbury,  Tenn.  Scout  from  La  Grange  to,  April 
11,  1863. 

Scout  from,  toward  Ripley,  Miss.  See  Ripley,  Miss.  Scout  from  La  Grange, 
Tenn.,  toward,  Jan.  28-30,  1863. 

Skirmish  on  Davis^  Mill  road,  near,  March  24,  1863.  Report  of  Reuben 
Loomis 


Page. 


513 


472 


Lake  Bruin,  La.  Skirmish  at.  See  Choctaw  Bayou,  or  Lake  Bruin,  La.  Skir- 
mish at,  April  28,  1863. 

Lake  Providence,  La.  Skirmish  at,  June  28,  1863.  See  report  of  Dana,  p.  113. 


Lake  Saint  Joseph,  La.  Expedition  to,  April  24,  1863"" 3 

Lamar,  Mis.s.  Expedition  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to.  See  La  Grange,  Tenn. 

Expedition  from,  to  Alouni  Pleasant  and  Lamar,  Miss.,  Feb.  13-14, 

1863. 

Lamar,  T.  B.  Mentioned 230 

Lamb,  John.  Mentioned 706 

Lament,  A.  Mentioned 378 

Lancaster,  U.  S.  S. 

Destruction  of,  March  25,  1863.  Report  of  John  A.  Ellet • 478 

See  also  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Passage  of  batteries  at,  by  U.  S.  S.  Switzerland, 
etc.,  March  25,  1863. 

Mentioned 23,  67,  473-478 

Landis,  John  C.  Mentioned 667,669 

Landram,  William  J. 

Correspondence  with 

McCleruaud,  John  A 177 

Smith,  Andrew  J 177 

Mentioned  ...  - 138, 145, 154-156, 181 , 1 82,  583,  593,  594, 597,  598,  603,  617 

Lane,  Harriet,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 337 

Langan,  John  M.  Mentioned 669 

Langley,  Edward.  Mentioned '. 362,368 

Lanphere,  Charles  H.  Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1,  1863..  591 

Lathrop,  William.  Mentioned 442,446 

Lauman,  Jacob  G. 

Correspondence  with  Stephen  A.  Hurlbut 554 

Mentioned 57,  67,  85,  86, 88,  92,  96-103, 108,  111,  512, 557 

Lavinia  Logan,  Steamer.  Mentioned. 395,397 

Law,  George  W.  Mentioned 268 

Lawler,  Michael  K. 

Correspondence  with  John  A.  McClernand 177 

Mentioned 54,86,  105,113, 

138, 146, 149, 151, 152, 154, 155, 178, 180,  182, 184,  382,  499-501,  ()16-(il8,  624 


Report  of  expedition  from  Jackson,  Tenn.,  to  the  Hatcbie  River,  April 


1-16, 1863 


498 


Lawrence,  John ^W.  Mentioned 473,477 

Lawson,  A.  J. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 251 

Mentioned 251 


No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


INDEX. 


833 


Page. 

Leal,  Alexander  D.  Mentioned 567 

Lebanon,  No.  2,  Steamer.  Mentlciicu. 395  397 

Ledlie,  J.  H.  Mentioned 620 

Lee,  Albert  L. 

Mentioned 148, 152-154, 332, 426, 428 

Report  of  skirmish  near  Collierville,  Tenn.,  Jan.  28, 1863  334 

Lee,  G.  W.  C.  Correspondence  with  Benjamin  S.  Ewell 236 

Lee,  Robert  E.  Mentioned 40  97 

Lee,  Stephen  D. 

Correspondence  with  Martin  L.  Smith 57O 

Mentioned 87, 104, 195, 200, 

231, 232, 271, 273, 275, 276, 293,  318, 319, 455, 456,  480, 502, 503, 569, 656, 657 
Reports  of 

Greenville,  Black  Bayou,  and  Deer  Creek,  Miss.  Expedition  to,  April 

2-14,  1863 504-506 

Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  March  14-27,  1863 461 

Leeper,  Frank.  Mentioned 706,717 

Leggett,  Mortimer  D.  Mentioned 639-641, 647, 648, 650, 717, 772 

Leibert,  William  R.  Mentioned 619,622,629 

Leonardson,  Oliver  C.  Mentioned 357 

Lewers,  James.  Mentioned 353,3.55 

Lewis,  James  M.  Mentioned 393 

Lexington,  Tenn. 


Expedition  from,  to  Clifton.  See  Clifton,  Tenn.  Ex]pedition  from  Lexington 
to,  Feh.  17-21,  1863. 

Scout  from,  to  mouth  of  Duck  River,  Tenn.  See  Diiclc  River,  Tenn.  Scout 
from  Lexington  to  mouth  of,  March  31-April  3, 1863. 


Lexington,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 353 

L’Hommedieu,  S.  S.,  jr.  Mentioned 351,352 

Liddell,  James  M.  Mentioned 543 

Lidell,  Major.  Mentioned 420 

Lieb,  Herman.  Mentioned 96, 717, 719  720 

Lightburn,  Joseph  A.  J. 

Mentioned 459 

Report  of  Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  March  14-27,  1863  454 

Lincoln,  Abraham. 

Correspondence  with 

Grant,  U.S 40,41 

Illinois,  Governor  of 167 

McClernand,  John  A 158,169 

Mentioned 9-14, 25, 28,  43, 74,  103,  158, 159,  165,  166,  168,  169,  186 

Linden,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 434  457 

Lindsey,  Daniel  W.  Mentioned 150-152,  156,184 

Lindsey,  George  W.  Mentioned 479 

Lindsey,  L.  S.  Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 539 

Lindsley,  Joseph  F.  Mentioned 559 

Lingle,  Calvin  R.  Mentioned 785 

Lioness,  Steamer.  Mentioned 410,411 

Lippincott,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 618,622,62.5-627 

Livsey,  J.  H.  Mentioned .’ 608 

Lloyd,  F.  Mentioned 641 

Lockett,  Samuel  H.  Mentioned 256,265,268,271-273,293 

53  R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  I 


834 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Lockhart’s  Mills,  Miss.  Scout  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to,  etc.  See  La 
Grange,  Tenn.  Scout  from,  to  Hudsonville,  Lockharfs  Mills,  Mount 
Pleasant,  and  Early  Grove,  Miss.,  April  10-11,  1863. 

Logan,  George  W.  Reiiort  of  attack  on  Fort  Beauregard,  La.,  May  10,  1863.  700 

Logan,  John  A. 

Mentioned 32, 33, 49, 53,  76, 78, 82-86, 99, 104, 114, 115, 

134, 136, 150, 160, 184-186, 403, 405, 584, 585, 611, 634-641, 651, 653, 683, 704- 
707,  716, 717,  722-724, 726-728, 730,  734, 735, 739,  749,  750,  772,  775,  781, 782 

Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1,  1833  642 

Logan,  John  L.  Mentioned 201,  246 

Logan,  Lavinia,  Steamer.  Mentioned 395,397 

Long,  Francis  M.  Report  of  affair  near  Moscow,  Tenn.,  Feb.  18,  1863 360 

Long,  Scott.  Mentioned 343 

Loomis,  Reuben. 

Mentioned 68, 69, 482, 483, 529 

Reports  of 

La  Grange,  Tenn. 

Expedition  from,  March  8-12,  1863 424 

Expeditious  from,  March  28-April  3,  1863  483 

Skirmish  on  Davis’  Mill  road,  near,  March  24,  1863  472 

Saulsbury,  Tenn.  Scout  from  La  Grange  to,  March  21-22,  1863 471 

Looney,  Robert  F.  Mentioned 428 

Loring,  William  W. 

Correspondence  with 

Adams,  John 532 

Pemberton,  John  C 418, 504 

Mentioned 34, 38, 53, 90, 100,  101, 108, 191, 192, 194, 

217, 218, 222, 223, 240-243, 245, 253, 254, 257,  258, 260-266,  268, 270, 271, 275, 
302, 307,  322, 325, 379,  381,  385,  413,  420,  421,  480, 531, 532, 538, 659, 660,  666 
Reports  of 

Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1863 544,545 

Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of.  May  1, 1863 655,656 

Yazoo  Pass  Expedition.  Operations,  Feb.  17-April  11,  1863,  during 

the 412-415,417-419 

Louis  d’Or,  Steamer.  Mentioned 291,346 

Louisiana,  Western,  District  of.  Orders,  General,  series  1863  : No.  20,  362. 
Louisiana  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery,  Heavy — Regiments:  1st,  486,576. 

Artillery,  Light— ^affer/es : Crescent,  686;  A,  Pointe  Coupee,  546; 
Washington,  5th,  245. 

Cavalry— ^affa//o/7S  ; 9th,  539, 540, 542, 549 ; 13th,  696, 698, 699 ; 15th,  84, 

105,  139,  366,  370,  490,  572.  Companies : Saint  Martin’s  Rangers,  686. 
Infantry — Regiments:  3d,  461,  578;  12th,  265,730;  17th,  675-677  ; 21st, 

578;  26th,  461 ; 31st,  675,  677. 

Miscellaneous — Miles’  Legion,  528, 536-538, 542, 543, 545, 546, 549. 

Louisiana  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Union.) 

Infantry — Regiments:  8th  (Co/ored),  695 ; 9th  (Colored),  96;  10th  (Colored), 

695 ; 11th  ( Colored),  95, 96. 

Louisville,  Steamer.  Mentioned 291 

Louisville,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 75,77,431,432,440,  443,445,454,517,574 

Love,  Hiram  W.  Mentioned 521,523,530,531 

Love,  R.  C.  Mentioned 548 

Lovell,  Ogden.  Mentioned 727 

Lovell,  W.  S. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 308,313 


INDEX. 


835 


Page. 

Lovell,  W.  S.— Continued. 

Mentioned 304 

Report  of  operations  on  the  Red,  Atchafalaya,  and  Black  Rivers,  La.,  Feb. 

10-14,  1863 345 

Lowry,  Robert.  Mentioned 674 

Lucas,  T.  J.  Mentioned 352 

Luckett,  William  F.  Mentioned 295,319 

Luckett,  W.  R.  Mentioned 736 

Luella,  Steamer.  Mentioned 374,375,394 

Lydick,  Milton  H.  Mentioned 708 

Lynch,  John.  Mentioned 483,528 

Lynch,  J.  P.  Mentioned 319,570 

Lynch,  Thomas  P.  Mentioned 295, 320 

McAfee,  E.  M.  Mentioned  /. 461 

McAlester,  Miles  D.  Mentioned Ill 

McArthur,  John.  Mentioned 51,55,56, 

65,  75,  78,  79, 81, 82, 85, 87-89,  155, 170, 172, 173, 176, 177, 180-182, 403, 634 

Macauley,  Mr.  Mentioned 301,306 

Macauley,  Daniel. 

Mentioned  . . .' 601 , 606,  608, 626 

Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1, 1863 609 

McBeecher,  Private.  Mentioned 467 

McBride,  D.  W.  Mentioned 566 

McCall,  Daniel  E.  Mentioned 770 

McCammon,  W.  W.  Mentioned 777 

McCann,  David  G.  Mentioned 714 

McCardle,  W.  H.  Mentioned 293 

For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  John  C.  Ftinhcrtov . 

McCarty,  Dennis.  Mentioned 567 

McClanahan, . Mentioned 488,489 

McClernand,  John  A. 

Assumes  command  of  13th  Army  Corps 1 

Congratulatory  orders 159 

Correspondence  with 

Army  Headquarters 165 

Atherton,  .Joseph  B 179 

Bennett,  Thomas  W 495 

Blount,  A.  A 181 

Graham,  Harvey 178 

Grant,  U.  S 12,  13,  56,  102,  103,  157,  159,  IGl,  162, 165,  166,  172,  173, 176 

Laiulram,  William  J 177 

Lawler,  Michael  K 177 

Lincoln,  Abraham 158,169 

Mason,  F.  H 180 

Osterhaus,  Peter  J 495, 496 

Rugg,  A.  H 179 

-Stone,  William  M 177 

War  Department,  U.  S 166,168,169 

Warmoth,  Henry  C 180 

Wilson,  James  H 126 

Mentioned 8,11,12,24, 

30,32,33.36,37,43,46,  48-58,  70-72,  74,  75,77-89,92,93,97-103,105-108, 
116, 126, 128, 134, 136, 138, 1.56-159, 161-168, 170, 171, 175-177, 179, 185, 187, 
210, 212, 247, 250, 257, 278, 326,  489-492,568, 569,  581,  582, 584, 585, 590,600- 
604, 614, 623-625, 633-635, 639, 643, 651,  652, 659, 732, 751,  755, 757, 779, 784 


836 


INDEX, 


Page. 

McClernaud,  John  A.— Continued. 

Relieved  from  command  of  13tli  Army  Corps 103, 164 

Reports  of 

Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  1,  1863  623 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations  against,  March  30-June  17,  1863  137 

Yazoo  Pass,  Miss.  Skirmish  near,  Ceb.  19,  1863 360 

Statement  of,  in  regard  to  assault  on  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  22,  1863 169 

Me  demand,  John  A.,  Mrs.  Mentioned 81 

McClintock,  J.  M.  Mentioned 131,133,134,136,137 

McClo-skey,  James.  Mentioned 365-369 

McClure,  J.  D.  Mentioned 760 

McClui  e,  John. 

Mentioned 443-445 

Report  of  Steele’s  Cayou  Expedition,  March  14-27,  1863  448 

McComas,  William  R.  Mentioned 157,495,604 

McConaha3r,  James  C.  Mentioned 586 

McConnell,  W.  K.  Mentioned 682 

McCook,  Edwin  S.  Mentioned 643,  646, 705, 707,  708 

McCown,  James.  Mentioyed 319 

McCown,  John  P.  Mentioned 42,101 

McCulloch,  Henry  E.  Mentioned 95,96,117 

McCulloch,  Robert.  Mentioned 562 

McCulloch,  Robert  A.  Mentioned 562 

McDonald,  Asa  W. 

Mentioned 425 

Report  of  scout  from  Grand  Junction  to  Saulsbury,  Tenn.,  April  5-6,  1863.  513 

McDonald,  PA.  Mentioned 320 

PAcDonald,  William  H.  Mentioned 479 

PAcDowell,  J.  R.  Mentioned 319 

IvIcElrath,  J.  E.  Mentioned 319 

McElvain,  George.  Mentioned 569 

McFarland,  John. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 307 

Mentioned 302, 303, 415 

McFarland,  William  W.  Mentioned 470 

MacGavock,  R.  W.  Mentioned 737-739,741,742,744,745 

McGinnis,  George  F. 

Mentioned 138, 144, 150, 583, 601, 602, 604, 609, 610, 621, 626, 627, 776 

Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1,  1863 606 

McGrayel,  Michael.  Mentioned 766 

McGuire,  James.  Mentioned 567 

McGuirk,  John.  Mentioned 27 

Mcllvain,  W.  P.  Mentioned 318 

Meinroe,  Charles.  Mentioned 294 

McIntyre,  PAichael.  Mentioned 357 

Mack,  Michael  H.  Mentioned 697,698 

McKay,  Alexander.  Mentioned 477 

iVIcKinney,  PI.  G.  Mentioned 319 

McKnight,  Private.  Mentioned 467 

PIcKuight,  George.  Mentioned 417 

McKcin,  John.  Mentioned 699,700 

PIcLaughlin,  John  A. 

Mentioned 398, 601,  610,  611 

Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1, 1863 612 


INDEX. 


837 


Page. 

McLeod,  J.  N.  Mentioned 430 

McMahon,  E.  W.  Mentioned 293 

McMillan,  Ccaptain.  Mentioned 47 

McMillen,  William  L. 

Mentioned 762,704 

Report  of  engagement  at  Jackson,  Miss.,  May  14,  1863 706 

McMullen,  N.  Mentioned 420 

MacMurray,  Junius  W.  Mentioned 774 

McMurray,  Lipscombe  Pendleton.  Mentioned 468 

McNair,  Evander.  Mentioned 194,222,242 

McNary,  George  H.  Mentioned 136,641 

McNeal,  A.  E.  Mentioned 620 

McNeil,  John.  Mentioned 1 699,700 

McPhail,  E.  Mentioned 623 

McPherson,  James  B. 

Corresj)ondence  with  U.  S.  Grant 163 


Mentioned  7, 18, 20, 22, 33, 36. 37, 45, 46, 

48-57, 63,  64, 70-72,  74-76,  78,  79,  81,  84-88,  91,  93,  95.  97, 99, 102, 104, 107- 
• 109, 111-115, 121, 128, 130, 134, 136, 141, 142, 147-150,  155, 158, 160, 162, 165, 

167, 170-177, 180, 182-186, 234, 240, 270,  278, 284, 584,  585, 645, 683, 704, 705, 
707, 716, 718,  728, 730,  732, 7.34,  749-751, 753-755,  757,  763,  765,  773,  778, 781 
Reports  of 

Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of.  May  1,  1863,  including  operations  April 


18-May  19 6.33 

Raymond,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  12,  1863 704 

Yazoo  Pass  Expedition,  Feb.  24-April  8,  1863 403 

McQuiddy,  John  T.  Mentioned : 604 

McRae,  Dandridge.  Mentioned  116 

Macon,  Tenn.  Expedition  to.  La  Grange,  Tenn.  Expeditions  from,  March 
'28-A2)ril  3,  1863. 

Maddox,  John.  Mentioned 559 

Madison  and  Tensas  Parishes,  La.  Sketches  of  portions  of 188 

Magenta,  Steamer.  Mentioned 421 

Magner,  William  C.  Mentioned 131, 134, 136 

Magnolia,  Steamer.  Mentioned 437 


Magnolia  Church,  Miss.  Battle  of.  See  Fort  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of.  May 
1,  1863. 


Magruder,  Sergeant.  Mentioned : 369 

Major,  Robert.  Mentioned 556,  .559 

Mallory,  S.  R.  Mentioned 233 

Maloney,  Maurice.  Mentioned 155 

Maltby,  Jasper  A.  Mentioned 643,707,708 

Mangum,  James  W.  Mentioned 368 

Mann,  P.  A.  Mentioned 690 

Mariner,  Steamer.  Mentioned 397 

Marmaduke,  John  S.  Mentioned 116 

Marmora,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 393,411 

Marquess,  James. 

Mentioned 687 

Report  of  attempt  of  tug  George  Sturgess  to  pass  batteries  at  Vicksburg, 

Miss.,  May  4,  1863 688 

Marsh,  Benjamin  F.,  jr.  Mentioned 142,572 

Marsh,  George.  Mentioned 369 

Marshall,  George  S.  Mentioned 618,621,626,627 


838 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Marshall,  Stephen.  Mentioned 587 

Marshall,  W.  S.  Mentioned G08 

Martin,  Lewis  D.  Mentiooed GOO 

Martin,  Lucien  B.  Mentioned 723,727,730,783,772 

Martin,  R.  Mentioned 78G 

Martin,  William  T.  Mentioned 190 

Maryland  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery,  Light— fiatter/es  ; 3d,  362,  3G8. 

Mason,  A.  P. 

Correspondence  with  Joseph  E.  Johnston 249 

Mentioned 242 

Mason,  F.  H. 

Correspondence  with  John  A.  McClernand 180 

Mentioned 157 

Massingale,  B.  D.  Mentioned 680 

Mather,  Thomas  S.  Mentioned 156 

Mathews,  H.  M.  Mentioned 233, 277, 295 

Mathews,  J.W.  Mentioned 318 

Matthies,  Charles  L. 

Mentioned 750, 753, 759-762, 770 

Report  of  engagement  at  Jackson,  Miss.,  May  14,  1863,  including  opera- 
tions May  2-22 769 

Mattie  Cook,  Steamer.  Mentioned 375, 376 

Matz,  Otto  H.  Mentioned 130 

Maughas,  L.L.  Mentioned 510 

Maupin,  Robert  L.  Mentioned 319,670 

Maury,  Dabney  H. 

Correspondence  with  Joseph  E.  Johnston 234 

Mentioned 214,233,  419,  455,  461,  503 

Reports  of 

Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  March  14-27, 1863 456 

Yazoo  Pass  Expedition.  Operations,  April  1-10,  1863,  during 420 

Maxey,  Samuel  B.  Mentioned 194, 221, 222, 239, 240, 242, 259, 263, 270,  326 

Maxwell,  James  C.  Mentioned 771 

May,  Ida,  Steamer.  Mentioned 397 

Mayo,  George  Upshur.  Mentioned 317,412,576 


Meade,  George  G.»  Mentioned 

Mechamc.sburg,  Miss. 

Expedition  from  Haynes’  Bluff  to  Satartia  and,  June  2-8,  1863.  See 
Haynes^  Bluff.  Expedition  from,  etc. 

Skirmish  at,  June  4,  1863.  See  Haynes'  Bluff.  Expedition  from,  etc. 

Meinhold,  Charles.  Mentioned 620, 

Melloy,  W.  Mentioned 


209 


623 

369 


Memminger,  Charles  G.  Mentioned 233 

Memminger,  R.  W.  Mentioned 293 

For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  John  C.  Pemberton. 

Memphis,  Tenn. 

Expedition  from,  against  guerrillas,  Feh.  17,  1863* 2 

Expedition  from,  to  the  Coldwater,  Miss.  See  Coldwater,  Mias.  Expedi- 
tion from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  to  the,  April  18-24,  1863. 

Skirmish  on  Nonconnah  Creek,  near,  April  4,  1863.  See  Nonconnah  Creek, 

Tenn. 

Menagh,  Robert  H.  Mentioned 566 


No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


INDEX. 


839 


Page. 

Meredith,  H,  H.  Mentioned 777 

Meriwether,  Minor.  Mentioned 415,417 

Meriwether,  W.  W.  Correspondence  with  Theodore  Johnston* 296 

Merrill,  Samuel. 

Mentioned 619, 621, 622, 628, 630 

Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1,  1863 631 

Merriman,  Clark  S.  Mentioned 428 

Messenger,  N.  C.  Mentioned 178 

Messinger’s  Ford,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  July  6,  1863.  See  Jackson,  Miss.  En- 
gagement at,  May  14,  1863.  Report  of  Thomas,  p.  764. 

Miars,  Henry.  Mentioned 654, 655 

Michigan  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light— ^affer/es : 7th,  138,  143,  490,  491,  493,  571-573,  582,  585, 

586,  588,  590-592 ; 8th,  585,  614,  634,  637,  640,  643-648,  650-653,  655,  706, 

709,  710,  717,  718,  723,  730. 

Cavalry — Regiments:  3d,  335,  356-358,  487-489,  564. 

Mickle,  Belton.  Mentioned 417 

Miles,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 736 

Miles,  J.  D.  Mentioned 748 

Miles,  W.  R. 

Mentioned 539,549 

Report  of  Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Ronge,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1863 545 

Military  Complications.  References  to  . . . 8, 9, 11-13, 40,  43, 75, 81, 102, 103, 157, 159, 
162, 164-166, 168-170, 175, 194-196, 198, 202, 209, 247, 269, 286, 321-330, 624 

Miller,  Colonel.  Mentioned  548 

Miller,  Mr.  Mentioned 502 

Miller,  Fred.  Mentioned 334 

Miller,  Henry.  Mentioned 368 

Miller,  J.  H.  Mentioned 568 

Miller,  Joseph  W.  Mentioned 708 

Miller,  Peter.  Mentioned 591 

Milligan,  Z.  Mentioned 369 

Milliken’s  Bend,  La. 

Engagement  at,  June  7,  1863.  See  report  of  Dana,  p.  95. 

Operations  from,  to  New  Carthage,  La.  See  New  Carthage,  La.  Operations 
from  MiUiken's  Bend  to,  March  Zl-April  17,  1863. 

Mills,  L.  W.  Mentioned 473 

Mims,  L. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 297,300,301,306-308,312 

Mentioned 251, 254, 293, 299,  300,  303 

Miner,  Charles  W.  Mentioned 333 

Minnehaha,  Steamer.  Mentioned 444,447 

Minnesota  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry— /?e^//77e/7fs  ; 4th,  725,  727, 729-733,  750, 772 ; 5th,  750, 767-769. 
Mississippi.  (See  also  Vicksburg.) 

Military  departments  embracing 213 

Operations  in,  Nov.  10,  1862-Aug.  10, 1863.  Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  Ge.neral’s  OOice,  C.  S.  A 220 

Bragg,  Braxton 218 

Chalmers,  James  R 251 

Davis,  Jefferson 236,  327 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 209, 

215, 216,  219, 220, 223, 224, 226-229, 233, 237,  325, 326,  329 
Pemberton,  John  C 250, 254, 255, 325, 327, 329 


840 


INDEX. 


Mississippi — Continued. 

Operations  in,  Nov.  10,  1862-Aug.  10,  1863.  Communications  from 

Stevenson,.  Carter  L 328 

War  Department,  C.  S 215,  218, 219, 223, 226, 236-238 

See  also  reports  of 

Dana,  Charles  A.  Johnston,  Joseph  E.  Prime,  Frederick  E. 

Grant,  U.S.  McClernand,  John  A,  Tunica,  Francis. 

Halleck,  Henry  W.  Pemberton,  John  C.  Wilson,  James  H. 

Howard,  Ocran  H. 


Mississippi,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 67 

Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana,  Department  of. 

Confederate  troops  in.  Organization,  strength,  etc 195,546,664 

Operations  in,  March  12-July  19,  1863.  Report  of  Joseph  E.  Johnston 238 

Operations  in,  April  4-July  4,1863.  Report  of  John  C.  Pemberton 249,327 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863  : No.  — , May  14,  1863,  262. 

Mississippi,’  Northern. 

Affairs  in,  generally.  Communication  from  Stephen  A.  Hurlbut 26 

Scout  from  La  Grange,  Tenu.,  into,  April  29-May  5, 1863.  Reports  of 

Hatch,  Edward 579 

Riiggles,  Daniel 580 

Mississippi  River. 

Opening  of  the.  See  report  of  Halleck,  p.  4.  Also  Halleck  to  Grant,  p.  63. 
Operations  on  the.  Communications  from 

Ellet,  Alfred  W 474-476 

Farragut,  David  G 474 

Porter,  David  D 475 

Mississippi  Springs,  Miss.  Skirmish  at.  May  13,  1863.  See  Jackson,  Miss. 
Engagement  at,  Mag  14,  1863.  Reports  of 
Hubbard,  Lucius  F.  Sherman,  William  T.  Tuttle,  James  M. 


Mississippi  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery,  Light— ^affer/es ; Brookhaven,  786,  787;  Pettus  Flying,  662- 
664,667,072,673,674.  Regiments:  1st  (Batteries),  A, ‘S18. 

Cavalry — Battalions  : Garland’s,  527,  543  ; Hughes’,  527,  537,  540,  545 ; 
12th,  530, 535,  536,  689, 690, 693. 094  ; 18th,  515, 510,  .522, 702.  Companies : 
Mitchell’s  Partisans,*  349, 468,514  ; Peach  Creek  Rangers,!  429,  430  ; 
Porter’s,!  483  ; Stockdale’s,  540  ; Terrell’s,  540.  Regiments  ; 1st  Par- 
tisan Rangers,  27,  485,  557;  Wirt  Adams’,  262,  329,  353,355,370,526, 
533,  538,  545, 736,  737,  753  ; 1st,  334,  549  ; 4th,  548  ; 28th,  355.  State. 
Battalions;  Blythe^s,  333, 558  ; Ham’s,  535, 530.  Companies:  Johnson’s, 
468;  Mathews’,  468;  Maxwell’s,  408;  Street’s,  332,  471.  Regiments: 
1st,  529, 530, 535, 530. 

Infantry— 5affa//o/7S  : 1st  (Sharpshooters),  461.  Regiments:  4th,  675-677  ; 
6th,  252, 256,  603,  ()64, 672,  674  ; 14th,  254,  787  ; 15th,  546  ; 20th,  254, 257, 
381,  389,  547,  548,  550;  22d,  458-460;  23d,  458;  26th,  546;  31st,  457, 
460;  33d,  459,  460;  37th,  421  ; 43d,  280 ; 46th,  381,  389,675-677. 
Mississippi  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Union.) 

Cavalry — Companies:  Mississippi  Rangers,  331,  332;  Tippah  Rangers, 
331,  .3.32. 

Missouri  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery,  Light— 5affer/es : Bledsoe’s,  467, 737, 738, 746, 747,781 ; Guibor’s, 
486, 064, 068, 669  ; Landis’,  263, 664, 607, 669 ; Saint  Louis,  663  ; Wade’s, 
486, 668. 


’^Subsequently  Co.  A,  18th  Battalion,  Mississippi  Cavalry. 
^Subsequently  Co.  H,  18th  Batt.nlion.  Mississippi  Cavalry, 
t Subsequently  Co.  B,  18th  Battalion,  Mississippi  Cavalry. 


INDEX. 


841 


Page. 

Missouri  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate) — Continued. 

Cavalry — Regiments : 1st,  663, 664 ; 2d,  557. 

Infantry— /?e^/>we/7ts : 1st,  493,496,557,663-665,667-669;  2d,  268,  614, 663, 
665,667-670;  3d,  613,  664,  666,668,669;  5th,  612-614,  664,  666,  668,  669; 

6th,  280, 587, 664, 666-671, 673-675, 680, 682. 

Missouri  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Union.) 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries:  Landgraeber’s,*  753.  Regiments:  1st  {Bat- 
teries), A,  138,  583,  601,605,  610,611,613;  M,  638,  639,  725,  729,  751,774, 
775,781,782. 


Cavalry — Regiments:  4th, t 515,  637,705,  735,  750;  6th,  83,  85,139,350-352, 

491. 584, 636, 701, 750 ; 10th,  690, 694. 

Engineers— e/7 fs : Bissell’s,  120,124-126,432. 

Infantry — Regiments : 6th,  432, 434, 436, 437, 439, 440, 443, 448 ; 7th,  566,  585, 

643, 644, 651-653,  706, 716-720, 722 ; 8th,  431,  432, 434,  435, 437,  439,  440, 443, 
448,752,755;  10th,  706,724,725,751,773-777,779-785;  11th,  750, 757, 760 ; 

12th,  17th,  45;  18th,  340, 341 ; 24th,  751;  26th,  684, 725, 751 ; 33d,  397; 

35th,  121, 122, 125. 

Mitchell,  J.  A.  Mentioned 601,606,608 

Mitchell,  Thomas.  Mentioned 611 

Mitchell,  W.  R.  Mentioned 429, 430 

Mix,  William.  Mentioned 714 

Mize,  Rufus  L.  Mentioned 357 

Mizner,  John  K.  Eeports  of 

Clifton,  Tenn.  Expedition  from  Lexington  to,  Feb.  17-21, 1863  356 

Trenton,  Tenn.  Skirmish  at,  April  19,  1863 564 

Moderator,  Steamer.  Mentioned 31, 47, 77, 397, 565, 567, 568, 634, 643 

Moffitt,  Hugh  C.  Mentioned 333,335 

Moldoon,  Hugh.  Mentioned 417 

Monarch,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 67,352,354 

Mong,  J.  W.  Mentioned ; 641 

Monin,  J.  N.  Mentioned 748 

Monongahela,  U.  S.  S. 

Attack  on  Warrenton  batteries  by,  March  23, 1863 1 2 

Mentioned 298,  469, 480 

Pa.ssage  of  Grand  Gulf  batteries  by.  See  Grand  Gulf  hatteries.  Passage  of, 
hy  U.  S.  S.  Hartford  and  Monongahela,  March  19,  1863. 

Montgomery,  Bacon.  Mentioned 350,352,493 

Montgomery,  L.  M. 

Memorandum  of  council  of  ofificers  in  Vicksburg  as  to  capitulation 330 

Mentioned 115,230,207,284,294 

Montrose,  P.  Mentioned 369 

Moody,  W.  L.  Mentioned 747,748 

Moon,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 417 

Moore,  Davidson  C.  Mentioned 649 

Moore,  Franklin.  Mentioned 422 

Moore,  George.  Mentioned 489 

Moore,  James  Mentioned 489 

Moore,  John.  Mentioned 698 

Moore,  John  C.  Mentioned 200, 231, 232, 260, 271, 273, 275, 276, 293, 414, 504 

Moore,  Jonathan  B.  Mentioned 557 

Mordis,  A.  Mentioned 686 

Morgan, . Mentioned 99 


*Became  Battery  F,  2(1  Artillery  in  September,  1863. 
t4th  and  .'itli  Cavalry  « <ni.solidatcd,  and  designated  4th. 
;No  circumstantial  reports  on  tile. 


842 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Morgan,  John  H.  Mentioned 465, 467 

Moro,  Steamer. 

Capture  of,  Feb.  3,  1863.  See  Vickshurg,  Miss.  Passage  of  'batteries  at,  bij 
U.  S.  S.  Queen  of  the  West,  Feb.  1863.  llejgorts  of 


Eliot,  CI:ailos  Kivcrs.  Gardner,  Franklin.  Sibley,  Henry  H. 


Mentioned 338, 339 

Morris,  Thomas  C.  Mentioned 134, 136,  641 

Morrison,  J.  H.  Mentioned 249, 266, 294,  346 

For  correspondence  as  A.  D.  C.,  see  John  C.  Pemberton. 

Morrow,  Samuel  P.  Mentioned 692 

Moscow,  Tenn. 

Affair  at,  March  29,  1863.  Report  of  Stephen  A.  Hiirlbut 485 

Affairs  near. 

Feb.  9,  1863.  Report  of  Seth  C.  Earl 340 

Feb.  18, 1863.  Report  of  Francis  M.  Long 360 


Expedition  to.  See  La  Grange,  Tenn.  Expeditions  from,  to  Moseow  and 
Macon,  Tenn.,  etc.,  March  28-April  3,  1863. 

Scout  to  La  Fayette  and.  See  La  Fayette  and  Moscow,  Tenn.  Scout  to,  and 
skirmish,  March  10-16, 1863. 

Skirmish  near,  March  16, 1863.  See  La  Fayette  and  Moscow,  Tenn.  Scout  to, 
and  skirmish,  March  10-16, 1863.  Reports  of 

Floyd,  W.  J.  Herrick,  Thomas  P. 


Motley,  Adolphus.  Mentioned 430 

Mott,  George  W.  Mentioned 419 

Mound  City,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 75, 82, 451, 517, 574 

Mount  Pleasant,  Miss. 


Expedition  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to.  See  La  Grange,  Tenn.  Expedition 
from,  to  Mount  Pleasant  and  Lamar,  Miss.,  Feb.  13-14, 1863. 

Scout  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  Early  Grove  and.  See  La  Grange,  Tenn. 

Scout  from,  to  Early  Grove  and  Mount  Pleasant,  Miss.,  April  5-7, 
1863. 


Scout  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  Hudsouville,  Lockhart’s  Mills,  Early  Grove, 
and.  See  La  Grange,  Tenn.  Scout  from,  etc.,  April  10-11,  1863. 

Mower,  Joseph  A.  Mentioned 89, 

92, 93, 96, 102, 163, 750, 753-755, 757, 759-762, 765, 768-770 

Mudd,  John  J.  Mentioned 148, 152, 153, 156, 351 

Muddy  Bayou,  Miss.  Expedition  through.  See  Steele's  Bayou  Expedition, 

March  14-27,  1863. 

Mueller,  Alexander.  Mentioned 637 

Mullins,  Buford.  Mentioned 566 

Mumford,  W.  T.  Mentioned 320 

Munitions  of  War.  Supplies  of,  etc.  Communications  from 

Eoyce,  C.  M 296 

Broadwell,  W.  A 291 

Cammack,  George 301 

Carr,  Joseph  P 305, 314, 315 

Dowd,W.  C 296 

Grant,  U.  S 39 

• Johnston,  Joseph  E 278 

Johnston,  Theodore 291, 296, 297,  301, 303,  310-312, 314 

Meriwether,  W.  W 296 

Pemberton,  John, C 289,290,297-318 

Stevenson,  Carter  L 289 

Wingate,  Walt.  S 309 


INDEX. 


843 

Page. 


Munitions  of  War.  Supplies  of,  etc.— Continued. 

See  also  reports  of  McClernand,  pp.  140, 151 ; Femherton,  pp.  252,  270,  271,  278, 
279,  287-292 ; Richardson,  j).  425  ; Steele,  p.  501 ; Gardner,  j).  543  ; 
Carr,  p.  615;  Bingham,  p.  687  ; Marquess,  p.  688.  Also  Halleck  to 
Grant,  pp.  19,  22;  Grant  to  Kelton,  pp.  28,  39  ; Johnston  to  Pember- 
ton, p.  40 ; Grant  to  Halleck,  p.  40;  Johnston  to  Seddon,  pp.  224,  225  ; 
Seddon  to  Johnston,  229 ; Bowen  to  Pemberton,  p.  660  ; Pemberton 


to  Bowen,  p.  660. 

Murdock,  George  G.  Mentioned 378 

Murphy,  Captain.  Mentioned 437 

Murphy,  J.  McLeod.  Mentioned 517 

Myers,  Benjamin  H. 

Mentioned 442,443,445 

Keport  of  Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  March  14-27, 1863 446 

Myrick,  John  D.  Mentioned 415,417 

Nabers,  Z.  L.  Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 309 

Nagle,  Amos.  Mentioned 622,626 

Nale,  John  H.  Mentioned 557 

Navy,  C.  S.  Co-operation  with  Army 361-370,503,504,684,686 

Navy,  U.  S.  Co-operation  with  Army 58, 


63,  336-339, 341-345, 358, 469, 473-481, 486, 517, 518, 573-578, 657, 658, 700 


See  also 

Jan.  30-July  4, 1863.  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations  against. 

March  14-27,  1863.  Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition. 

Neeley,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 335 

Neff, . Mentioned 425 

Neff,  Allen  O.  Mentioned 622 

Negroes.  See  Slaves  and  Slave  Property, 

Nelson,  Horatio  C.  Mentioned 425,482,516 

Nevins,  G.  Mentioned 86 

New  Albany,  Miss.  Skirmishes  at,  April  18-19,  1863.  See  Grierson’s  Raid 
to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April  V7-May  2,  1863.  Reports  of 
Giioi  soii,  Beujamin  H.  Hatch,  Edward. 

New  Carthage,  La. 

Operations  liotn  Milliken’s  Bend  to,  March  31-April  17,  1863. 

Communications  from  John  A.  McClernand 495,496 

Reports  of 

Bowen,  John  S 497 

Osterhaus,  Peter  J 489,  490 

Scates,  Walter  B 496 

See  also  reports  of  Grant,  pp.  26,  46 ; McClernand,  p.  139. 

Skirmish  near,  April  5,  1863.  See  report  of  Osterhaus,  p.  492. 

Newell,  Cicero.  Mentioned 356-359 

New  Orleans  and  Jackson  Railroad.  Raid  on  the,  near  Crystal  Springs, 

Miss.,  May  11,  1863.  Report  of  Clark  Wright 701 

Newsom,  J.  F.  Mentioned 356,358,359 

Newton  Station,  Miss.  Capture  of,  April  24,  1863.  See  Grierson’s  Raid 
to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1863.  Reports  of 
Adams,  John.  Grierson,  Benjaniin  11. 

Nina  Sims,  Steamer.  Mentioned 291 

Noble,  Henry  T.  Mentioned 398 

Nonconnah  Creek,  near  Memphis,  Tenn.  Skirmish  on,  April  4,  1863. 

Communication  from  John  C.  Pemberton 512 


844 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Nonconnah  Creek,  near  Memphis,  Tenn.  Skirmish  on,  April  4, 1863— Cont’cl. 


Reports  of 

Chalmers,  James  R 512 

Hurl  but,  Stephen  A 512 

Norris,  D.  E.  Mentioned 318 

Norris,  William.  Mentioned 236 

North  Carolina.  Military  departments  embracing 213,235 

Northern  Mis.sissippi.  See  Mississippi,  Northern. 


North  Fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  Miss.  Skirmish  on  the.  See  Bayou  Fierre, 
Miss.  Skirmish  on  the  North  Fork  of,  etc.,  May  3, 1863. 

Northrop,  Lucius  B.  For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Subsistence  Departmmt, 
C.  S.  A. 


Norton,  William  J.  Mentioned 559 

Nutting,  Oscar  F.  Mentioned 592 

Oakey,  Charles.  Mentioned 369 

Obenchain,. Francis  G.  Mentioned 681,682 

Obion  River,  Tenn.  Skirmish  near  the,  April  9,  1863.  Report  of  Alexander 

Asboth 514 

O’Connor,  Henry.  Mentioned 771 

O’Donnell,  Thomas.  Mentioned 567 

Ogden,  Fanny,  Steamer.  Mentioned 451 

Ogden,  F.  N.  Mentioned 320 

Ohio  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  F\g\\t— Batteries ; 2d,  138,  583, 601,  605,  606, 608;  3d,  644-648,  706, 

722;  11th,  725,  751,  782;  15th,  557-.559  ; 16th,  138,  583,  601,  605-608; 

17th,  138, 181,  350,  352,  583,  593,  594,  596,  599. 

Cavali'y— Co/n/7a/;/es  : 4th,  584,  637, 644,  645,  705,  734,  735,  750 ; 5th,  512, 555, 

557,  .559. 

Infantry— . 16th,  138,  582,  590,  591;  20th,  585,  647,  650,  651,  705, 

708,  710,  714,  715  ; 22d,  333,  335  ; 30th,  450,  451,  453,  756  ; 32d,  585,  643, 

648,  651,  652,  654,  706,  716-719,  721  ; 37th,  450-452;  42d,  138,  582,  586- 
588,  .590,  591;  47th,  438,  449,  450,  452-454;  48th,  138,  155,  583;  54th, 

435,  443,  445,  447,  448;  56th,  138,  583,  601-603,  610-613;  57th,  435,  443- 
445,  448,  449  ; 58th,  573,  574  ; 68th,  585,  705  ; 72d,  750,  762-764  ; 78th, 

585,  705;  80th,  706,725,  751,773-777,779,781-783;  81st,  632;  83d,  138, 

181,  351,  3.52,  .583,  593-598;  95th,  750,  754,  759,  762,  763,  766,  770;  96th, 

138,  352,  583  ; 114th,  138,  142,  571,  572,  582,  590,  591 ; 120th,  138,  493, 

582,  585,  586,  588,  589. 

Old  River,  La.  Skirmish  at,  Feb.  10,  1863"^ 1 

Oldroyd,  Osborn  H.  Mentioned 715 

Olds,  William  W.  Mentioned 585,  591 

Oliver,  William  S. 

Correspondence  with  George  W.  Graham 567 

Mentioned 566,653,051 

Report  of  passage  of  Vicksburg  and  Warrenton  batteries  by  transports, 

April  22,  1863 565 

O’Neil,  Henry.  Mentioned 567 

O’Neil,  Patrick.  Mentioned 507 

Ord,  Edward  O.  C. 

Assignments  to  command 103,  164 

Mentioned 7,  43,  97, 101-104, 100-109,  111,  113, 114,158, 159, 105, 166, 200,245 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pember- 
ton  316-318 


Xo  circumstaulial  reports  on  file. 


INDEX. 


845 

Page. 


Organization,  Strength,  etc. 

Confederate  troops 195^  54g^  gg4 

Union  troops ’ 

Orme,  Richard.  Mentioned ' ^94 

Orr,  J.  A.  Mentioned 4gQ 

Orr,  W.  L.  Mentioned q22 

Osband,  Embury  D.  Mentioned gg  3^0 

Osterhaus,  Peter  J. 

Correspondence  with  John  A.  McClernand 495  496 

-".'.-”'*.'.’'.'.*.’48,49,52, 

53,  74, 77,  79-81,  83,  85,  90, 106,  111,  124. 130, 133, 137-158, 181, 184-187, 496, 
497,  582,  586,  587, 590,  601,  615,  616,  622,  624,  625, 627,  635,  640, 643,  776,  784 
Reports  of  operations  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  New  Carthage  La.,  March 

31-April  17, 1863  439^  490 

Ould,  Robert. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.  S 231 

Mentioned 23 

Owen,  Elias  K.  Mentioned 449 

Paetz,  Frederick  W.  Mentioned ’597 

Palmer,  Frederick  S.  Mentioned 

Palo  Alto,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  April  21,  1863.  See  Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton 
Bouge,  La.,  April  ll-May  2,  1863.  Reports  of 
Bartcau.C.  11.  Hatch,  Edward.  Kugiiles,  Daniel. 

Panola,  Miss,  Expedition  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to,  etc  , May  11-15, 1863. 

Reports  of  ’ 

Chalmers,  James  R ^0^ 

Hatch,  Edward ’ 

Papendieck,  Lpuis.  Mentioned * 320 

Parallel,  Steamer.  Mentioned "397  421 

Pardee,  Don  A.  Mentioned 156  590*591 

Parish,  J.  W.  Mentioned ’ ’ gg0 

Park,  Lemuel.  Mentioned ’ * gjg 

Parke,  John  G.  Mentioned 44,  .57,  59, 98-101,  111,  234 

Parker,  A.  N.  Mentioned 4^0 

Parker,  W.  H.  Mentioned 390 

Parks,  Captain.  Mentioned ^44 

Parrish,  C.  S.  Mentioned g^g 

Parry,  Augustus  C. 

438.449,450.454 

Report  of  Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  March  14-27, 1863 452 

Parsons,  Moseby  Monroe.  Mentioned 116  117 

Patten,  Private.  Mentioned * ’ .^^4 

Patten,  W.  Thompson.  Mentioned .jg2 

Patterson,  William  F.  Mentioned 'l2«.'l';i9,’i53,'490-492 

Paul  Jones,  Steamer.  Mentioned 3^9 

Payne,  O.  B.  Mentioned ; _ _ ..g^^ 

Peabody,  O.  Mentioned g.,0  g^^.^ 

Peats,  Frank  F.  Mentioned 718*719 

-Peckinpaugh,  William  H.  Mentioned 572*573 

Pemberton,  Fort,  Miss.  See  Fort  Pemberton,  Miss. 

Pemberton,  John  C. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 249-251  254  290  667 

Bo^-en,  John  S ... . 25G-25S,  281 , 282,  303-305,  309, 31.3, 315,  310, 48?’  576,’  660^  661 


846 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Pemberton,  John  C. — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Broadwell,  W.  A 289,291 

Brown,  I.  N 504 

Buckner,  Simon  B 302 

Chalmers,  James  R 251, 298,  303,  306,  307, 313, 563 

Davis,  Jeiferson 260,274,327 

Forney,  John  H 281,282,577 

Gardner,  Franklin 298, 299,  302,  308, 315 

Grant,  U.  S 59-01,114-116,276,277,283-285 

Gregg,  John 324 

Hinds,  Howell  313 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 39,40,193,217,238-244,247,251-253,25.5,257, 

259-208, 270, 272, 274, 275, 278-281, 286, 300, 311,  325-327,  329, 347,  412 

Johnston,  Theodore 291, 296, 297, 299,  301-303,  305,  300, 310-314 

Koontz,  G.  W 304 

Lawson,  A.  J 251 

Lindsey,  L.  S 539 

Loring,  William  W 418,504 

Lovell,  W.  S 308,313 

McFarland,  John 307 

Mims,  L 297,300,301,306-308,312 

Nabers,  Z.L 309 

Ordnance  Department,  C.  S.  A 316-318 

Powell,  E 252,  308 

Rnggles,  Daniel 290 

Smith,  E.  Kirby 252 

Smith,  Martin  L 281,282 

Stevenson,  Carter  L 256,257,260,281,289,298,299,302-304,307,310,328 

Subsistence  Department,  C.  S.  A ! 314 

Taylor,  Richard 252,300 

Walker,  W.  H.  T 324,325 

War  Department,  C.  S 259, 289, 299,  321,  .322, 325,  347 

Wilson,  Victor  F 309,315 

Mentioned 6,50,51,57,59,84,  86,87,89,91,97, 108, 114, 115, 

190, 192-195, 199, 200,  202, 203, 205-208,  210-212, 214-218, 221-225, 227, 230- 
232,  237-249,  309,  313,  330,  331, 354,  387,  532,  540, 581, 639,  666,  704,  736,  749 

Reports  of 

Department  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana.  Operations  in,  April 

4- July  4,  1863 249,327 

Grand  Gulf,  Miss.  Bombardment  of,  and  passage  of  batteries,  April 

29,  1863 574 

Indianola,  U.  S.  S.  Capture  of,  Feb.  24,  1863  361 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Passage  of  batteries  at,  by  gunboats  and  transports, 

April  16,  1863  518 

Perette,  Anna,  Steamer.  Mentioned 469 

Perry’s  Ferry,  Coldwater  River,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  April  19,  1863.  See 
Coldwater,  Miss.  Expedition  from  Memphis  to  the,  April  18-24, 

1863.  lieports  of 

Bryant,  George  E.  Chalmers,  James  E,.  Hurlbut,  Stephen  A. 

See  also  (irierso7ds  lUiid  to  Baton  Bonge,  La.,  April  YI-Mag  2,  1863.  Beport 
of  Hurlbut,  p.  520. 

Peters,  John  H.  Mentioned 755 

Peters,  Philip.  Mentioned  679,681 


INDEX. 


847 


Page. 

Peterson,  B.  H.  Mentioned 502 

Petrel,  Stcniner.  Mentioned 410,411 

Pettus,  E.  W.  Mentioned 275,319,680-682 

Pettus,  John  J.  Mentioned 197,  201. 210, 254, 290 

Phelps’  Bayou,  La.  Skirmish  at,  April  26,  1863.  See  Hard  Times  Landivg,  La. 
Exjx'dition  to,  with  skirmishes,  April  25-29,  1863. 

Phelps,  John  E.  Mentioned 619,623 

Phillips,  George.  Mentioned 612 

Phillips,  John  E.  Mentionecl ' 604 

Pickerell,  W.  E.  Mentioned 567 

Pickering,  A.  S.  Mentioned .l 681 

Pickett  [?].  Mentioned 100 

Picquet,  Xavier.  Mentioned 557,559 

Pierce,  Alonzo  D.  Mentioned 472 

Pierce,  Charles  J.  Mentioned 366,368,369 

Pile,  William  A.  Mentioned 397,398 

Pillow,  Fort.  See  Fort  Pillow,  Teini. 

Pillow,  Gideon  J.  Mentioned 515 

Pin  Hook,  La.  Skirmish  at.  See  Caledonia  and  Pin  Hook,  La.  Skirmishes  at, 

Mag  10,  1863. 

Pitman,  W.  P.  Mentioned., 319 

Pittsburg,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 75,454,517,574 

Pitzman,  Julius.  Mentioned 118, 121, 136, 435, 753,  754 

Place,  Daniel  S.  Mentioned 622 

Platt,  Arthur.  Mentioned 618 

Pleisch,  Theodore.  Mentioned 352 

Poindexter,  John  G.  Mentioned 467 

Polk,  Leonidas.  Mentioned 110 

Pollard,  H.  M.  Mentioned 319 

Poison,  George  T.  Mentioned 594 

Pontotoc,  Miss,  fckirmish  at,  April  19,  1863.  See  Grierson’s  Paid  to  Baton 
lionge.  La.,  April  ll-Mag  2,  1863.  Reports  of 

Bartean,  C.  B.  Hatch,  Edward.  Buggies,  Daniel. 

Grierson,  Benjamin  II.  llurlbut,  Stephen  A. 

Poole,  De  Witt  C.  Mentioned 557 

Pope,  Joseph  P.  Mentioned 603,604 

Porter,  Captain.  Mentioned 746 

Porter,  David  D. 

Correspondence  with 

Ellet,  Alfred  W 475 

Ellet,  Charles  Rivers 337,344 

Grant,  U.  S 409 

Sherman,  William  T 436,457 

Mentioned 2,  4,  5,  8, 9, 17, 19-26, 28-30.  32,  33,  46, 

47,  58, 65-68, 72-83, 88,  93,  100, 105, 108, 112, 128, 131, 133, 136, 141, 274,  336, 
361,  370,  38t),  430,  432-436,  439,  441,  442,  455-460,  467,  474,  476,  517,  518,  574 

Porter,  Robert.  Mentioned 720 

Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of.  May  1, 1863. 

Casualties.  Returns  of. 

Confederate  troops 668,674 

Union  troops 6,  59, 158,  582-585,  649 

Communications  from 

Grant,  U.S 34,35 

Pemhertpn,  John  C 660-662,667  . 


848 


INDEX. 


Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  1,  1863— Continued. 
Congratulatory  orders. 

Carr,  Eugene  A 

Grant,  U.  S 

List  of  ordnance  and  stores  lost  at 

Reports  of  (including  operations  under  dates  noted) 

Adams,  Hugh  W 

Atherton,  Joseph  B 

Baldwin,  William  E : 

Benton,  William  P 

Bowen,  John  S 

Buehler,  Theodore  E.  April  14-May  22 

Carr,  Eugene  A.  April  12-May  22 

Cockrell,  Francis  M 

Connell,  John... 

Dollins,  James  J 

Erwin,  Eugene 

Fonda,  JohuG 

Force,  Manning  F 

Garrott,  Isham  W 

Green,  Martin  E 

Hovey,  Alvin  P.  April  14-May  1 

Keigwin,  James 

Kimball,  Charles  B 

Lanphere,  Charles  H 

Logan,  John  A 

Loring,  William  W 

Macauley,  Daniel 

McClernand,  John  A 

McGinnis,  George  F 

McLaughlin,  John  A 

McPherson,  James  B.  April  18-May  19 

Merrill,  Samuel 

Rutherford,  Friend  S 

Sheldon,  Lionel  A 

Slack,  James  R 

Spiegel,  Marcus  M 

Stevenson,  John  D 

Stone,  William  M 

Strong,  James  G 

Sketches 

See  also  Jackson,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  Mag  14, 1863.  Beporis  of 


Page. 


620 

35 

683 

587 

632 

675 

625 

657-661,663 

592 

....  615,623 

668 

614 

654 

670 

585 

650 

678 

672 

600 

586 

592 

591 

642 

....  655,656 

609 

623 

606 

612 

633 

631 

599 

590 

610 

588 

651 

628 

614 

....  605,665 


Hillis,  David  B.  Holmes,  Samuel  A. 

Also  Bagmond,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  Mag  12,  1863.  Eeport  of  Foster,  p.  734. 
Also  reports  of  Halleck,  p.  5;  Grant,  p.  48 ; McClernand,  p.  143  ; Tunica,  j).  186; 

Pemberton,  p.  257.  Also  Grant  to  Halleck,  p.  32;  Johnston  to  Cooper, 
p.  214  ; Pemberton  to  John«ion,  p.  239;  McClernand's  order,  p.  159. 
Also  Part  II,  reports  of  Bnrbridge,  p.  30;  Strong,  p.  58. 

Port  Hudson,  La. 

Siege  of,  May  21-July  8,  1863.  Communications  from 


Army  Headquarters 62 

Grant,  U.  S 41 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 227 


• Surrender  of,  July  8,  1863.  Communication  from  Joseph  E.  Johnston 201 

See  also  reports  of  Dana,  i).  91 ; Johnston,  p.  242. 


INDEX, 


849 


Page. 

Portis,  Thomas  J.  Report  of  Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Ror.ge,  La.,  April 

17-May  2,  1863  546 

Post,  John  P.  Mentioned 643,644,6.52 

Potter,  Leander  H.  Mentioned 615, 618, 622, 625 

Potter,  William.  Mentioned 425 

Potts,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned 643, 648, 652,  653, 716-719 

Powell,  Albert  M.  Mentioned 89,641 

Powell,  E. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 252,  308 

Mentioned 252 

Powers,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 682 

Powers,  M.  C.  Mentioned 536 

Prather,  Acting  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 368 

Pratt,  R.  H.  Mentioned 680,681 

Prentiss,  Benjamin  M. 

Correspondence  with  U.  S.  Grant 401 

Mentioned 65, 153,  381,  384,  390, 392,  404,  405,  409 

Reports  of  Yazoo  Pass  Expedition,  Feb.  24-Anril  8,  1863 391,392 

President,  C.  S.  See  Jefferson  Davis. 

President,  U.  S.  See  Abraham  Lincoln. 

Price,  General,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioxied 21, 30, 46, 75, 82, 141, 142, 187,  434, 517, 518 

Price,  Sterling.  Mentioned 73,111,116,117,219 

Pride,  G.  G.  Mentioned 20,  44,  71,  73,  74,  77,  78, 123-125 

Prima  Donna^  Steamer.  Mentioned 406 

Prime,  Frederick  E. 

Mentioned ‘ 5,44,56,72,85,111 

Reports  of  operations  against  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  Jan.  30-May  4, 1863.  117, 119-125 
Prince,  Edward. 

Mentioned 429, 526, 529, 539 

Reports  of 

Expedition  from  La  Grange,  Tenu.,  March  8-12,  1863 424 

Reconnaissance  in  the  vicinity  of  Saulsbury,  Tenn.,  Feb.  2-5,1863 339 

^’risoners  of  War.  Treatment,  exchange  of,  etc.  Communications  from 

Davis,  Jefferson 202 

Grant,  IJ.  S 62 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 230 

War  Department,  C.  S 231, 232 

Pritchett,  James  M.  Mentioned 576 

Private  Property.  Action  touching.  Communications  from 

Grant,  U.  S 115,116 

McClernaiid,  John  A 495 

Proudfit,  J.  K.  Mentioned 559 

Public  Property.  Destruction  of.  Communication  from  War  Department, 

C.  S 233 

Pudic,  Private.  Mentioned 295,318 

Putnam,  Holden.  Mentioned 684 

Pyle,  Samuel.  Mentioned 721 

Quackenbush,  Tunis  V.  Mentioned 335,564 

Queen  of  the  West,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 18,  65,  301 , 361.-370,  493 

Queen  of  the  West,  U.  S.  S. 

Capture  of  steamers  by,  Feb.  3,  1863.  Reports  of 

Gardner,  Franklin 339 

Sibley,  Henry  11 339 

H R R— VOL  XXIV,  I^T  I 


850 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Queen  of  the  West,  U.  S.  S.— Continued. 

Capture  of,  Feb.  14,  1863.  See  lied,  AtchafaJaya,  and  Black  Elvers,  La. 

' Operations  on  the,  Feb.  10-14, 1863. 

Men  tion  336-330 , 342-o4 8 , 4 79 

Passage  of  Vicksburg  and  Warrenton  batteries  by.  See  Vicksburg,  Miss. 

Passage  of  batteries  at,  Feb.  2,  1863. 

Quinby,  Isaac  F. 

Mentioned 21,  4o, 

49,  53,  56, 64-66,  68,  72, 75, 78,  81, 82,  85, 92, 155, 156, 164, 171, 173, 174, 176, 
177, 180, 182, 185, 385,  392,  398, 400, 403,  617, 640,  641 , 647, 722, 724, 732, 784 
Report  of  operations,  March  9-28,  1863,  during  the  Yazoo  River  Expedi- 
tion   404-408 

Rains,  G.J.  Mentioned 193,200,220,316 

Ramsay,  Frank  M.  Mentioned 

Randal,  Horace.  Mentioned 95,117 

Randall,  E.  Mentioned 417 

Randolph,  George  W.  Mentioned 

Rankin,  R.  S.  Mentioned 

Ransom,  Thomas  E.  G.  Mentioned 

53, 86, 103, 104, 113, 149, 404, 441, 641 , 709, 757, 765 

Raum,  Green  B.  Mentioned 181,  //4 

Rawlins  John  A.  Mentioned 130,144,382,384 

For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  U.  S.  Grant. 

Ray,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 42o 

Raymond,  Miss.  Engagement  at.  May  12, 1863. 

Casualties.  Returns  of. 

739 

Confederate  troops 

Union  troops  6,59,650,705,706,724 

Communication  from  U.  S.  Grant - 

Reports  of  (including  operations  under  dates  noted) 

Beaumont,  T.  ^43 

Campbell,  Franklin.  May  12- July  4 

Colms,S.  :*•  J46 

Crocker,  Marcellus  M.  May  2-17 

Davis,  William  P.  Mayl2-Jnne4 

Farquharsou,  ^4^ 

Force,  Manning  '^4 

Foster,  John  S.  April  25-May  23 '-^4 

Granbury,  H.  '47 

Gregg,  John 

McPherson , J anms  * ^ 

Sanborn,  John  B.  April  21-May  23 

Smith,  John  E.  May  1-June  4 

Stevenson,  John  D.  May  4-July  4 ^4o 

Turner,  James  J ^4^ 

Walker,  C.  H - - 

See  also  Jackson,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  14,  1868.  Reports  of 

AlexaDder,  Jesse  J.  Hillis,  David  B.  Sherman,  William  T. 

Deimling,  Francis  C.  Holmes,  Samuel  A. 

Also  Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of.  May  1,  1863.  Eejwrts  of 

Logan,  John  A.  McPherson,  James  B. 

Also  reports  of  TTalleck,  p.  5 ; Grant,  pp.  36,  50;  Hoivard,  v-  1-^4;  McCler- 
iHind,  p.  147;  Johnston,  p.  239;  Pemberton,  p.  260.  Also  Johnston 
to  Seddon,  p.  215  ; McClernand's  order,  p.  159. 


INDEX. 


851 


Page. 

Raynor,  William  H.  Mentioned 601-603,610  611 

Red,  Atchafalaya,  and  Black  Rivers,  La.  Operations  on  the,  Feb.  10-14, 

1863.  Reports  of 

Ellet,  Charles  Rivers 

KeJso,  John 343 

Koontz,  George  R 34^ 

Lovell,  W.  S 345 

Taylor,  Richard 34^ 

See  also  reports  of  Grant,  pp.  17,18. 

Red  Chief,  Steamer.  Mentioned 

Reed,  C.  F.  Mentioned 

Reed,  C.  H.  Mentioned 


760 

567 

303 


291,305,300 

760 

498,499 

Reed,  James.  Mentioned 697  698 

Reed,  Joseph  R.  Mentioned 

Reed,  J.  P.  Mentioned 

Reed,  T.  B.  Mentioned 

Reeve,  J.*J.  Mentioned _ 3j^g  3^^ 

Reid,  Hugh  T.  ’ 

Mentioned ^13 

Report  of  skirmishes  at  Caledoaia  and  Pin  Hook,  La.,  May  10,  1863 694 

Renfroe,  B.  P.  Mentioned 335 

Rex,  George  P.  Mentioned (joq 

Reynolds,  A.  E.  Mentioned 257  419  657 

Reynolds.  A.  W.  Mentioned 200,  231,  232,  258,  266,  293,’  656^  666 

Reynolds,  William  S.  Mentioned ■720 

Rhodes,  Thomas  C.  Mentioned *549  533 

Rice,  Americas  V.  ’ 

Montioued 435,436,441,  442,444,447-449,453 

lieports  of  Steele’s  Bayon  Expedition,  March  14-27,  1863 443,  444 

Rice,  H.  A.  Mentioned ’3^3 

Rice,  James.  Mentioned 3f^.2 

Richards,  Evan.  Mentioned 637,  643,  646,  649,  705,  :06,  708 

Richardson,  Robert.  Mentioned 

Richardson,  Robert  V. 

Correspondence  with  C.  M.  Stewart 559 

Mentioned 27,68,69,254,  423,  427,  428,  471,  482,  481^498,500,  501,  540 

Reiiorts  of 

Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1833 .547 

La  Grange,  Tenn.  Expedition  from,  March  8-12,  1863 425 

Richmond,  La. 

Skirmish  at. 

March  31,  1863.  See  Kew  Carthage,  La.  Operations  from  MiUiken^s  Bend 
to,Marchi\.-April\7,  1863.  Also  report  of  McClernand,  p.  139. 

April  4,  1863.  See  New  Carthage,  La.  Operations  from  Milliken's  Bend  to, 

March  ‘il-April  17,  1763. 

June  15,  1863.  See  report  of  Dana,  p.  102. 

Skirmish  near,  Jan.  29,  1863* 

Ridley,  S.  J.  Mentioned 

Riffle,  George.  Mentioned 

Rigby,  John  W.  Mentioned 

Riggin,  John,  jr.  Mentioned 


1 

318 

.567 

63,  64, 127,  130 
94 


Riley,  A.  C.  Mentioned 319,490,607-669 


No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


852 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Ripley,  Miss.  Scout  from  La  Grange,  Teun.,  toward,  Jau.  28-30,  1863. 

Communication  from  Edward  Prince 334 

liei^ort  of  William  D.  Blackburn 334 

Ripley,  Miss.,  and  Bolivar,  Term.  Scout  between.  See  Bolivar,  Tenn.,and 
Ripley,  Miss.  Scout  hetweev,  Jan.  25, 1863. 


Robb,  Francis  C.  Mentioned 501 

Roberds,  Jesse.  Mentioned 560 

Robert.?,  Cyrus  M.  Mentioned 134,  136 

Robert.?,  Granville.  Mentioned 477 

Roberts,  William  Y. 

Mentioned 604,605 


Report  of  skirmishes  at  Caledonia  and  Pin  Hook,  La.,  May  10,  1863 606 

Roberts’  Ford,  Comite  River,  La.  Skirmish  at.  May  2,  1863.  See  Grierson's 
Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April  Vi -May  2,  1863.  Reports  of 
BifBe,  A.  B.  Bry.an,  B.  F.  Gardner,  Franklin. 


Robertson,  C.  W.  Mentioned 744,  746 

Robinson,  Mr.  Mentioned 218 

Robinson,  Powhatan.  Mentioned 203,310,417 

Rochester,  Montgomery.  Mentioned 727 

Rocky  Ford,  Tallahatchee  River,  Miss.  Skirmish  near,  June  20, 1863.  Com- 
munication from  Joseph  E.  Johnston 220 

Roddey,  P.  D.  Mentioned , 27,  211, 253,  320,  .551 

Roe,  E.  R.  Mentioned 618 

Roertz,  John  H.  Mentioned 447 

Rogers,  Henry  A.  Mentioned 644,645,647,648 

Rogers,  J.  W.  Mentioned 561 

Rolling  Fork,  Miss.  Expedition  to.  iiiOQ,  Steele's  Bayou  Expedition,  March  lA- 
27, 1863. 

Romeo,  Steamer.  Mentioned 411 

Rorer,  W.  A.  Mentioned 550 

Rose,  John.  Mentioned 331 

Rose,  L.  M. 

Correspondence  with  Ocran  H.  Howard 131 

Mentioned 131-134, 136, 137,  641 

Rosebery,  John.  Mentioned 319 

Rosecrans,  William  S.  Mentioned 22, 

25,  27, 35, 63,  68,  69,  87, 91, 99, 195, 208, 211, 236,  238, 250, 251,  381, 520, 551 

Ross,  Alexander.  Mentioned 116,117 

Ross,  Leonard  F. 

Correspondence  with  James  H.  Wilson 394,396 

Mentioned 45,  46, 63,  64, 379-382, 384,  385,  388,  390-393,  403,  405-407 

Reports  of  operations,  March  2-April  8,  1863,  during  Yazoo  Pass  Expedi- 
tion   393-398 

Ross,  Orlando  H.  Mentioned 517 

Rowan,  John  A.  Mentioned 771 

Ruckle,  Nicholas  R.  Mentioned 608-610 

Rugg,  A.  H. 

Correspondence  with  John  A.  McClernand 179 

Mentioned 176 

Ruggles,  Daniel. 

Correspondence  with 

Cunningham,  James 550,  .552 

Ingate,  F ...... ^ . 551 


INDEX. 


Pago. 

Ruggles,  Daniel — Continued. 

Correspondence  with 

Pemberton,  John  C 290 

Shaw,  J.  P 

Mentioned 229, 253, 254, 290,  309, 512, 531 

Reports  of 

Coldwater,  Miss.  Expedition  to  the,  April  18-24,  1803  500 

Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1803 550-553 

King’s  Creek,  near  Tupelo,  Miss.  Action  at,  May  5, 1803  089 

Northern  Mississippi.  Scout  from  La  Grange,  Teuu.,  into,  April  29- 

May  5,  1803  . 530 

Russell,  D.  R.  M'eutiouod 417 

Russell,  J.  H.  Mentioned ' g.20 

Rust,  Albert.  Mentioned 250  251 

Rutherford,  Friend  S.  Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1, 1803..  599 

Rutledge,  W.  W.  Mentioned 739 

Ryan,  Abraham  H.  Mentioned 397  393 

Ryan,  Daniel.  Mentioned ’ggg 

St.  John,  A.  P.  Mentioned 457 

Saint  Louis,  Steamer.  Mentioned 395  397 

Saint  Mary’s,  Steamer.  Mentioned 411,421 

Salem,  Miss.  Scout  to.  See  La  Grange,  Tenn.  Scout  from,  etc.,  March  2-3, 

1803. 

Salomon,  Frederick. 

Mentioned • 39^ 

Report  of  Yazoo  Pass  Expedition,  Feb.  24-April  8,  1803  400 

Sample,  J.  B.  Mentioned 7g0 

Sample,  Samuel  S.  Mentioned.... 434  435  437 

Sampson,  Ezekiel  S.  Mentioned ’ ’749 

Sampson,  Jacob  P.  Mentioned 434  435  437 

Sanborn,  John  B.  ’ ’ 

Mentioned ,75 

155,  400,  033,  034,  037-041,  093,  723-720,  749,  750,  773-770,  780-782,  784 
Report  of  engagement  at  Raymond,  Miss.,  May  12,  1803,  including  opera- 
tions April  21-May  23 725 

Sanders,  Captain.  Mentioned .. ....  ...... .... ......  ..  279  294 

Sandidge,  L.  D.  Mentioned ’ooo 

Sands,  Frank  C.  Mentioned 723 

Sanford,  R.  A.  Mentioned * 423 

Satartia  and  Mechanicsburg,  Mi.ss.  Expedition  from  Haynes’  Bluff  to.  See 
Hai/nes’  Blnff.  Expedition  from,  etc.,  June  2-8,  1803. 

Saulsbury,  Tenn. 

Expedition  from  La  Grange  to,  April  15,  1803  3 

Reconnai.ssance  iu  vicinity  of,  Feb.  2-5,  1803.  Report  of  Edward  Prince..  339 
Scout  from  Grand  Junction  to,  April  5-0,  1803.  Report  of  Asa  W.  Mc- 
Donald   543 

Scouts  from  La  Grange  to. 

March  2-3,  186.1.  La  Grange,  Tenn.  Scout  to  Hudsonrille,  etc.,  from. 

March  21-22,  1803.  Report  of  Reuben  Loomis 471 

April  11,1803^ 3 

•.  Mentioned 244  280 

Mentioned 294 

Correspondence  with  Charles  S.  Hamilton 424 


Saunders, 

Saunders,  J.  S. 
Sawyer,  R.  M. 


No  circumstautiul  rcpoi  t.s  on  file. 


854 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Saylor,  Thomas. 

Meutioued *. 359 

Report  ofycont  from  Lexington,  Tenu.,  to  mouth  of  Duck  River,  March  31- 

April  3,  1863  487 

Scales,  Thomas.  Mentioned 514 

Scates,  Walter  B. 

Mentioned 156 

Report  of  operations  from  Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  to  New  Carthago,  March 

31-April  17,  1863  496 

For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Johyi  A.  McClernand. 

Schaeffer,  Theodore.  Mentioned 612 

Schaller,  Frank.  Mentioned 209 

Schofield,  George  W.  Mentioned 113,601,610,611 

Schofield,  John  M.  Mentioned 7, 227 

Scholar,  Charles.  Mentioned 368 

Schultz,  William.  Mentioned 452 

Schwander,  Peter.  Mentioned 417 

Scott,  Aleck,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 518 

Scott,  E.  A.  Mentioned 5.39 

Scott,  Eli  F.  Mentioned ' 446 

Scott,  Jesse  E.  Mentioned 627 

Scott,  Thomas  M.  Mentioned 265 

Sears,  C.  W.  Mentioned 675 

Sears,  William  S.  Mentioned 706 

Sebastian,  William  K.  Mentioned 98 

Seddon,  James  A.  Mentioned 189, 

194-199, 203-207, 209, 210, 213, 216, 224, 236-238, 243, 259, 289 
For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  C.  S. 

Selby,  Byron.  Mentioned ' 715 

Seiph,  C.  McRae.  Mentioned 294 

Senteney,  Pembroke  S.  Mentioned 319,667,668 

Shaaff,  A.  Mentioned 786 

Sharp,  Steamer.  Mentioned 421,457,465 

Shaw,  J.  P. 

Correspondence  with  Daniel  Ruggles 561 

Mentioned 561 

Shedd,  Warren.  Mentioned 647 

Shelby,  M.  T.  Mentioned 358, 359 

Sheldon,  Charles  S.  Reports  of  affairs  near  Camp  Sheldon,  Miss. 

Feb.  8, 1863  340 

Feb.  10, 1863  *341 

Sheldon,  Lionel  A. 

Men  tioned 138, 143,  490, 493, 582 

Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1, 1863  590 

Shelley,  Charles  M.  Mentioned 679-681 

Shelton,  Mr.  Mentioned 216,218 

Shepherd,  Jacob  R.  Mentioned 692 

Shepperd,  F.  E.  Mentioned 385 

Sherfy,  William  H.  Mentioned 134, 136 

Sherman,  Henry  S.  Meutioued 589 

Sherman,  William  T. 

Correspondence  with 

Grant,  U.  S 162,  761 

Porter,  David  D 436, 457 


INDEX. 


855 


Page. 

Sherman,  William  T.— Continued. 

Mentioned 4,5,7,8,11,21,22,24,28,36, 

37,43,  44,  46,  49-58,  62,  65-69,72,  74,  76,  79,84-88,90,  91,  93-95,99-102, 
104, 106-113, 116, 126, 134,  136, 141,  142,  147, 155, 158, 160,  165, 167,  170,  171, 
173,  175-177,  182,  183,  200,  208-210,  212,  221,  239,  241,  245-247,  261,  278, 
325,  326,  330,  437-440,  442-444,  447,  448,  455-460,  502,  504,  508,  517,  565, 
576,  595,  638,  639,  641,  648,  687, 709,  7.35,  736, 749, 759,  762,  766,  767,  769,  770 
Reports  of 

Jackson,  Miss.  Engagement  at.  May  14,  1863,  includiug  operations 

Apri  1 20-M ay  22 75  [ 

Snyder’s  Mill,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  April  30-May  1,  1863  576 

Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  Marcli  14-27,  1863 431,432,434 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Assault  011,  May  22,  1863  I75 

Shields,  L.  Mentioned (523 

Shirk,  James  W.  Mentioned 58,63,517 

Shoup,  Francis  A.  Mentioned 200, 231,  232, 271,  276,  293 

Shunk,  David.  Mentioued 607, 618, 622, 626, 627 

Siber,  Edward. 

Mentioned 45Q 

Report  of  Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  March  14-27, 1863 451 

Sibley,  Henry  H. 


Mentioned 


339 


Report  of  capture  of  steamers  by  U.  S.  S.  Queen  of  the  West,  Feb.  3,  1863.  339 

Silver  Moon,  Steamer.  IVIeutioned 4;-)4 

Silver  Wave,  Steamer.  Mentioned 47 

75,  77,  4.32,  4.34,  438,  442,  443,  445,  446,  450,  451,  453,  517,  518,  568,  569,  593 

Simmons,  John  Neville.  Mentioned 520 

Simonton,  John  M. 

Mentioued 

Report  of  Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1863 5.53 

Sims,  G.  R.  Mentioned r,()Q 

Sims,  Nina,  Steamer.  Mentioned 291 

Sketches. 

Deer  Creek,  Miss 462,463 

Madison  and  Teusas  Parishes,  La.  Portions  of 18.j 

Operations  of  Signal  Corps  in  vicinity  of  Vicksburg,  Miss I55 

Point  opposite  Vicksburg,  Miss jjg 

I’ort  Gibson,  Miss.  Baltie-tield  of. 

Position  of  Bowen’s  commaml 

Position  of  Hovey’s  command (;q5 

Yazoo  Pass  Expedition 372  377  3gy 

Slack,  James  R. 

Mentioned 138, 144, 1.50, 1.54, 1.56,  .395,  397,  398.  .583,  601-604,  607,  611, 612,  626 

Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1,  1863 610 

Slaves  and  Slave  Property.  Action  toucliing.  Communications  from 

Dana,  Charles  A jq 

Deitzler,  George  W ’ j- 

Grant,  U.  S * 

See  also  rejwris  of  BiirbrUhje,  ]).  350;  Ihiveri,  ]).  497;  .Sicele,  p.  501;  Lee,  p. 

• .505;  L'erfjuso)!,  ]>.  ,508;  AV/d,  j).  694. 

Sloan,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 

Sloan,  William  G.  Mentioned 4^.2 

Slocum,  Willard.  Mentioned r^gy 

Smith,  Captain.  Mentioned 34Q 


18,  30 


643 


856 


INDEX, 


Page. 

Smith,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 294 

Smith,  Andrew  J. 

Correspondence  with  William  J.  Landram 177 

Mentioned 48, 74,  75, 77, 80-83, 99, 104, 106, 114, 115, 138, 141, 142, 144-149, 

151-154, 156, 158, 180-182, 184, 261, 284, 583, 590,  601,  602,  608,  610,  617,  635 

Smith,  Ashbel.  Mentioned 416 

Smith,  Charles  W.  Mentioned 481 

Smith,  E.  Kirby. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 252 

Mentioned 42,44,73, 

97, 105,  111,  117, 198, 219,  225, 228, 229,  244, 2.52, 256,  280, 281, 286, 300, 696 

Smith,  Frank.  Mentioned 369 

Smith,  G.  Mentioned 698 

Smith,  Giles  A. 

Mentioned 163, 431,  433-437,  442,  443, 447-449, 453, 756, 757 

Keport  of  Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  March  14-27,1863 438 

Smith,  Henry.  Mentioned 566 

Smith,  James.  Mentioned 427,428 

Smith,  James  N,  Mentioned 770 

Smith,  J.  F.  Mentioned 534,535 

Smith,  John  E. 

Mentioned 49, 65, 92, 128, 143, 

144, 185,  323, 403, 584, 634,  635, 637-650, 704, 705,  708,  714, 716-718, 723, 749 
Report  of  engagement  at  Raymond,  Miss.,  May  12,  1863,  including  opera- 

t ous  May  1-June  4 706 

Smith,  John  S.  Mentioned • 680-682 

Smith,  Martin.  Mentioned 334 

Smith,  Martin  L. 

Correspondence  with 

Lee,  Stephen  D 570 

Pemberton,  John  C 281,282 

Mentioned 110,  200, 231, 232, 261, 27V  273-276, 281, 293,  320, 330,  331,  668 

Reports  of 

Vicksburg,  Miss. 

Assault  on,  May  22, 1863 276 

Passage  of  batteries  at,  by  gunboats  and  transports,  April  16, 

1863  518 

Vicksburg  and  Warrenton  batteries.  Passage  of,  by  transports,  April 

22,  1863  569 

Smith,  Thomas  E.  Mentioned 16 

Smith,  Thomas  Kilby. 

Mentioned 102,  4.34,  436,  439-442,  444,  447,  448,  756,  757,  764 

Report  of  Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  March  14-27,  1863  441 

Smith,  Watson. 

Mentioned 379, 380,  382,  383,  385,  390,  391,  393,  395,  399,  400,  409,  430 

Reports  of  operations,  March  3-7,  1863,  daring  Yazoo  Pass  Expedition. ..  409,  411 

Smith,  W.  H.  Mentioned 739,  747,  748 

Smith,  William  Sooy. 

Mentioned 57,  68, 92, 95,  98,  4S1,  520,  .522,  525,  554-556, 558, 579, 702 

Reports  of 

Coldwater,  Miss.  Expedition  to  the,  April  18-24, 1863 555 

Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1863 521 

Smy the,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 340 

Snook,  John  S.  Mentioned 049 


INDEX. 


857 

Page. 


Snyder’s  Mill,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  April  30-May  1,  1863. 


Communication  from  John  H.  Forney 577 

Reports  of 

Hubert,  Louis 577 

Sherman,  William  T 576 


See  also  Jackson,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  14,  1863.  Also  report  of 
Grant,  p.  49. 

Somerville,  Tenn.  Skirmish  at,  March  28,  1863.  See  expeditions  from  La 
Grange,  Tenn.,  etc.,  March  3,  1863.  lieport  of  Loomis,  p. 

483. 

Southard,  R.  R.  Mentioned 293 

South  Carolina  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments : 24th,  777,  783,  787. 

South  Fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  Miss.  Skirmish  on  the.  See  Bayou  Pierre,  Miss. 

Skirmish  on  the  South  Fork  of,  May  2,  1863.  See  also  Part  II,  re- 


port of  Burhridge,  p.  30. 

Spangler,  Norval.  Mentioned 318 

Sparks,  Captain.  Mentioned 5()4 

Sparrestrom,  Frederick.  Mentioned 643 

Spear,  Edward,  jr.  Mentioned -557-559 

Spencer,  David  B.  Mentioned 425 

Spicely,  W.  T.  Mentioned....- 601,603,606,608,611 

Spicer,  Newell  W.  Mentioned 124 

Spiegel,  Marcus  M.  Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1, 1863 588 

Spooner,  Benjamin  J.  Mentioned 442, 446,  756 

Spoor,  Nelson  T.  Mentioned 760 

Sprague,  Sturges.  Mentioned 293,294 

Stafford,  F.  M.  Mentioned 293 

Stamps,  Claus.  Mentioned *. 655 

Stanmyer,  C.  Mentioned 368 

Stanton,  Edwin  M.  Mentioned 9, 12-14, 28, 43, 169, 186 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  U.  S. 

Starlight,  Steamer.  Mentioned 291,305 

Starns,  B.  B.  Mentioned 539 

Star  of  the  West,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 380,415 

Starr,  Mathew  H.  Mentioned 524,525 

Steele,  Frederick. 

Mentioned 7,29,71,74,79,83,85,86,88,90,92,105,107,  * 

109, 115, 163,  433,  505,  507, 508,  510, 576,  577,  687,  749,  752-759,  762,  770,  781 
Report  of  expedition  to  Greenville,  Black  Bayou,  and  Deer  Creek,  Miss., 

April  2-14, 1863  501 

Steele,  G.  R.  Mentioned 641 

Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  March  14-27,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Porter,  David  D 436 

Sherman,  William  T 437,457 

Co-operation  of  U.  S.  Navy  with  Army 431-435,  439,  440,  455-460,  465-467 

Reports  of 

Eldridge,  Hamilton  N 445 

Ewing,  Hugh 449 

Featherston,  Winfield  S 456-458 

Ferguson,  Samuel  W 465 

Fisher,  Cyrus  W 447 

Hoge,  George  B 440 


858  • 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  March  14-27,  1863  -Continued. 

Reports  of 

Jones,  Theodore 4.50 

Lee,  Stephen  D 4G1 

Lio-hthurn,  Joseph  A.  J 454 

McClure,  John 448 

Maury,  Dabney  H 456 

Mj  ers,  Benjamin  H 446 

Parry,  Augustus  C 452 

Rice,  Americus  V 443,  444 

Sherman,  William  T 431, 432,  434 

Siber,  Edward 451 

Smith,  Giles  A 438 

Smith,  Thomas  Kilby 441 

Stevenson,  Carter  L 455 

Stuart,  David 437 

Sketches  of  Deer  Creek,  Miss 462,  463 

See  also  Giant  to  Halleck,  pp.  20,  22;  Grant  to  Kelion,  p.  28.  Also  reports  of 
Grant,  p.  46  ; Dana,  pp.  65,66, 68. 

Stephens,  Thomas.  Meutioued 512 

Sterling,  Robert.  Mentioned 319 

Stevens,  Victor  H.  Mentioned 706 

Stevenson,  Carter  L. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 256, 

257, 260, 281, 289, 298, 299, 302-304,  307,  310,  328 

Mentioned 33, 193, 200,  217, 218, 231, 232, 241, 

251, 252, 256,  257, 260-266, 269,  271, 273-276,  279, 281, 283, 289, 293, 299,  302, 
303,  312,  318-320,  322, 325,  328, 330, 331, 364, 504, 533, 538, 656, 657,  668,  683 
Reports  of 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of.  May  16,  1863  265 

Grand  Gulf,  Miss.  Bombardment  and  passage  of  batteries,  April  29, 

1863  : 574,575 

Greenville,  Black  Bayou,  and  Dcci-  Creek,  Miss.  Expedition  to,  April 

2-14,  1863 502,503 

Indianola,  TJ.  S.  S.  Capture  of,  Feb.  24,  1863 369 

Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  March  14-27, 1863  455 

Vicksburg,  Miss. 

Assault  on.  May  22,  1863 275 

Passage  of  batteries  at,  by  gunboats  and  transports,  April  16,  1863.  518 
Passage  of  batteries  at,  by  U.  S.  S.  Switzerland,  March  25,  1863...  480 

Stevenson,  John.  Mentioned 715 

Stevenson,  John  D. 

Mentioned 87, 145, 185, 

585,  614,  634, 635,  637-650,  654, 655, 683, 706, 712, 719, 720, 723, 724, 775, 782 

Reports  of 

Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of.  May  1,  1863  651 

Raymond,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  12,  1863,  including  operations 

May  4-July  4 715 

Stewart,  C.  M. 

Correspondence  with  Robert  V.  Richardson 550 

Mentioned 550 

Stewart,  F.  M.  Mentioned 332 

Stewart,  Joseph.  Mentioned 698 

Stibbs,  John  H.  Mentioned  770 


INDEX. 


859 


Page. 

Stickel,  Isaiah.  Mentioned 140,146,493 

Stickney,  Clifford.  Mentioned 136 

Stillman,  George  L.  Mentioned 571-573 

Stillson,  iS^elvin.  Mentioned 489 

Stingly,  John.  Mentioned 341 

Stirling,  B.  F.  Mentioned 417 

Stith,  F.  Mentioned 332 

Stocks,  J.  G.  Mentioned 563 

Stockton,  Philip.  Mentioned 194 

Stockton,  Richard.  Mentioned 369 

Stoddard,  Albert.  Mentioned 727 

Stokely,  R.  G.  Mentioned 669 

Stolbrand,  Charles  J.  Mentioned 644,648-650,652,6.53 

Stone,  William  M. 

Correspondence  with  John  A.  McClernaud 177 

Mentioned 143, 144, 156, 182,  584,  615, 619-621 

Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1,  1863  628 

Street,  Sole mon  G.  Mentioned 334,340,349,471,472 

Streight,  Abel  D.  Mentioned -521 

Strong,  H.  P.  Mentioned 620,622 

Strong,  Joseph  G.  Report  of  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  1,  1863 614 

Strong,  William  E.  Mentioned 641 

Stuart,  David. 

Mentioned 65,  432,  433,  436,  437,  442,  450,  454,  4.57 

Report  of  Steele’s  Bayou  Expedition,  March  14-27,  1863  437 

Sturgess,  George,  Steamer.  See  George  Siurgess,  Steamer. 

Sturgess,  Robert  H.  Mentioned 653,716-719 

Subsistence  Department,  C.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton.  314 
Subsistence  Stores.  Supplies  of.  See  Munitions  of  JVar. 

Sullivan,  A.  T.  Mentioned 318 

Sullivan,  Eugene.  Mentioned 567 

Sullivan,  Jeremiah  C.  Mentioned 78,85,93,382 

Sunny  South,  Steamer.  Mentioned 451 

Superior,  Steamer.  Mentioned 405 

Surget,  E.  Mentioned 346 

For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  liicliai  d Taylor. 

Sutherland,  E.  W.  Mentioned 350,  352, 354 

Swallow,  Steamer.  Mentioned 453 

Swan,  Simeon  D.  Mentioned 753,755 

Swayze,  "W.  A.  Mentioned 467 

Sweaney,  John  R.  Mentioned 667,673 

Swift,  Henry  S.,  jr.  Mentioned 559 

Switzerland,  U.  S.  S. 

Mentioned 23, 67,  68,  473-479,  486 

Passage  of  Vicksburg  batteries  by.  See  Vicksburg,  Aliss.  Passage  of  bat- 
teries at,  by  U.  S.  S.  Switzerland,  Alarch  25,  1863. 

Swivel,  Jacob.  Mentioned 631 

Taggart,  Grantham  I.  Mentioned 157 

Taliaferro,  William  H.  Mentioned 190,192 

Tank,  Caotain.  Mentioned 368 

Tappan,  J.  C.  Mentioned 116,117 

Tatum,  David,  Steamer.  Mentioned 445,446 

Taylor,  Mr.  Mentioned 344 

Taylor,  J.  C.  Mentioned 294 

For  correspondence  as  A.  D.  C.,  see  John  C.  Pemberton. 


860 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Taylor,  J.  W.  Mentioned 739,  748 

Taylor,  Richard. 

Congratulatory  orders 362 

Correspondence  with 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 229 

Pemberton,  John  C 252,300 

Mentioned 33, 105, 107, 

110, 117, 199,  200, 228, 229, 231, 243, 244,  252, 280, 286, 291,  345,  346,  369,  696 

Reports  of 

Indianola,  U.  S.  S.  Capture  of,  Feb.  24,  1863  361,  362 

Operations  on  the  Red,  Atchafalaya,  and  Black  Rivers,  La.,  Feb.  10-14, 

1863  345 

Taylor,  Thomas  H.  Mentioned 209, 293, 294 

T.  D.  Hine,  Steamer.  Mentioned 291,303,307,308 

Tennessee.  Military  departments  embracing 213,235 

Tennessee,  Army  of  the.  (Union.)  Organization,  strength,  etc.,  June  17, 

1863  138 

Tennessee,  Department  of.  (Confederate.) 

‘Department  of  East  Tennessee  merged  into 2.32,235 

Johnston,  Joseph  E.,  relieved  from  command  of 232 

Limits  defined  and  extended 235 

Tennessee,  Department  of  the.  (Union.) 

McClernand,  John  A.,  relieved  from  command  of  13th  Corps 103, 164 

Ord,  E.  O.  C.,  assigned  to  command  of  13th  Corps 164 


Orders,  General,  series  1863:  No.  13,  11 ; No.  32,  35.  Corps:  13th  (14^/t 
Division,  Carr),  No.  32,  620;  No.  72  {McClernand),  159. 

Orders,  General  Field,  series  1863:  No. — , May  21,  171. 

Onleis,  Special,  series  1863:  No.  164,  103,  164. 

Tennessee  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery,  Heavy — Regiments  : 1st,  569. 

• Cavalry — Battalions  : 9th,  527,  539-542,  545.  Regiments : Barteau’s,  530,  533- 
536,  692-694;  Jackson’s,  562,  563  ; Neely’s,  498  ; Richardson’s,  333,  360, 
425-428,  483-485,  498, 500,  501 ; Stewart’s,  333,  335. 

Infantry — Battalions:  1st,  737-739,746.  Regiments:  3d,  737-741,747,  748; 
10th,  737-745,  748,  782;  30th,  7.37-745,748;  31st,  362,368;  41st,  737-739, 
742,  743,  745  ; 50th,  7:i7-7'S9,  741,  743-746,  748;  60th,  596. 

Tennessee  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Union.) 

Cavalry— /?e^//ue/?fs ; 6th, ^ 331,  332,  471,  498  ; 7th, t 357, 488,  579. 


Tensas  and  Madison  Parishes,  La.  Portions  of.  Sketch 188 

Texas,  Steamer.  Mentioned 291,304 

Texas  Troops.  Mentioned. 


Infantry — Battalions  : Burnet’s  {Sharpshooters),  362,  368.  Regiments  : 2d, 

276,  381,  389;  7th,  715,  737-741,  747,  748. 

Miscellaneous — Waul’s  Legion,  253,  271, 273, 275, 276,  320, 389,  416,  .502, 514, 

562, 563. 

Thomas,  Captain.  Mentioned .564 

Thomas,  De  Witt  C. 

Mentioned 763,764 

Report  of  engagement  at  Jackson,  Miss.,  May  14,  1863,  including  operations 

May  2-July  16 *764 

Thomas,  Lorenzo. 

Mentioned 31 , 74,  78,  81 , 82, 2.52,  504, 505,  512, 515 


Called  also  1st  West  Tennessee  Cavaliy 


t Called  also  2d  We.st  Tennessee  Cavalry. 


INDEX.  861 

Page. 

Thomas,  Lorenzo — Continued. 

Reports  of 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Passage  of  batteries  at,  by  gunboats  and  transports, 

April  16,  186.3 517 

Vicksburg  and  Warrenton  batteries.  Passage  of,  by  transports,  April 

22, 1863  564 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Adjuiant-GeneraVs  Office,  U.S.A. 

Thomas,  S.  M.  Mentioned 364 

Thompson,  A.  P.  Mentioned 738, 786 

Thompson,  Jacob.  Mentioned 200,231,293 

For  correspondence  as  Inspector-General,  see  John  C.  Pemberton. 

Thomp.son,  James  D.  Mentioned 342,343 

Thomp.son,  J.  F.  Mentioned 689 

Thompson,  Shubial  P.  Mentioned 695,697 

Thompson’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of.  See  Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May 
1,  1863. 

Thornton,  Joseph  H.  Mentioned 571 

Tift,  Edward  W.  Mentioned 425 

Tigress,  Steamer. 

List  of  volunteer  officers  and  crew  of 566 

Mentioned 31,  47,  77,  79, 564-567,  569 

Tilghman,  Lloyd. 

Mentioned 6,  58, 151, 218, 251, 

254, 257, 258, 260-262, 264, 265, 324, 326, 379, 381, 412, 417, 655-657, 666, 669 

Report  of  Grierson’s  Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1863 553 

Tillott.son,  Levi  W.  Mentioned 698 

Tipton,  Samuel  P.  Mentioned 637 

Todd,- Colonel.  Mentioned 382 

Toomer,  P.  D.  Mentioned 566 

Torpedoes,  etc.  Communication  from  War  Department,  C.  S 220 

Tourtellotte,  John  E.  Mentioned 733,7.49 

Townes,  R.  R.  Mentioned 649 

Townsend,  Captain.  Mentioned 95 

Townsend,  T.  S.  Mentioned 748 

Tracy,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 600 

Tracy,  Edward  D.  Mentioned 6, 

58. 257,  258, 658, 659, 661, 663, 664, 666-668, 670-673, 678-680 

Trafton,  George  W.  Mentioned 526 

Transportation.  (Railroad  and  Water.)  Communications  from 

Carr,  Joseph  P 305 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 208,235 

Johnston,  Theodore 310-312 

Pemberton,  John  C 298,302-315 

War  Department,  C.  S ‘232 

See  also  rejwrts  of  Pemberlon,  pp.  253,290;  Smith,  i).  521;  McPherson,  p.  633 ; 
Birujham,  p.  687. 

Traphagen,  Peter  S.  Mentioned 425 

Travis,  Henry.  Mentioned 67 

Trene,  Elijah.  Mentioned 369 

Trent,  Steamer.  Mentioned 291,301,305 

Trenton,  Tenn. 

Expedition  from  Jackson  to,  March  16-18, 1863.  Report  of  Daniel  II.  Brush . 468 

Skirmish  at,  April  19,1863.  Report  of  John  K.  Mizner 564 

'Tresilian,  Stewart  R.  Mentioned 33, 87, 130, 635,  643 


862 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Tubbs.  Alonzo.  Mentioned 747 

Tubbs,  Francis  M.  Mentioned 714 

Tucker,  J.  H.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 304 

Tunica,  Francis, 

Mentioned 130, 188,  571 

Eeport  of  operations  against  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  April  17-May  24, 1863 186 

Tupelo,  Miss.  Action  at  King’s  Creek,  near.  See  King’s  Creek,  near  Tupelo, 

Miss.  Action  at.  May  5, 1863. 

Tupper,  H.  C.  Mentioned 294 

For  correspondence  as  A.  D.  C.,  see  Jolm  C.  Pemberton. 

Turner,  A.B.  Mentioned 568 

Turner,  James  J. 

Mentioned 738 

Keport  of  engagement  at  Raymond,  Miss.,  May  12, 1863  740 

Tuscumbia,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 58, 63,  75-77,  82,  517,  518 

Tuthill,  John  L.  Mentioned 343 

Tuttle,  Janies  M. 

Mentioned 83,  85, 175, 576, 577, 749, 750,  752-757, 761,  762, 767,  770 

Report  of  engagement  at  Jackson,  Miss.,  May  14, 1863,  including  operations 

May  2-22 758 

Tweeddale,  William.  Mentioned 74,121,124,125 

Tyler,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 576,7.52 

Tyler,  Judson  B.  Mentioned 622 

Ulifers,  Herman  A. 

Corresimudence  with  James  H.  Wilson 126 

Mentioned 16, 130 

Union  Church,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  April  28, 1863.  See  Griersons  Paid  to  Baton 
Bonge,  La.,  April  17 -May  2,  1863.  Reports  of 
Cleveland,  S.  B.  Grierson,  Benjamin  H, 


See  also  report  of  Pemberton,  p.  255. 

Union  Troops. 

Casualties.  Returns  of. 

Baldwin’s  Ferry,  Miss.  Skirmish  at.  May  13,  1863  158 

Big  Black  River  Bridge,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  17, 1863 6,59, 158 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16, 1863  6,59, 151, 158,650,724,731 

Fourteen-Mile  Creek,  Miss.  Skirmish  at.  May  12, 1863 6,  59, 1.58 

Hankinson’s  Ferry,  Big  Black  River,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  May  3, 1863  ..  724 

Jackson,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  14, 1863 6, 59, 724,  730, 749-751,  770 

Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of.  May  1, 1863  6, 59, 158,  582-585,  649 

Raymond,  Miss.  Engagement  at.  May  12, 1863 • 6,  .59,  650, 705, 706,  724 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of.  May  19-July  4,  1863 6,  .59, 156, 158,  733,  770 

Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 1st,  138, 155, 178, 179, 584 ; 13th,  435,  439, 440,  441, 

446,  755, 756. 


For  Volunteers,  see  respective  States. 

Organization,  strength,  etc.,  of  Army  of  the  Tennessee.  (Portion  of  13th 

Army  Corps) 138 

Utica,  Miss.  Skirmishes  at  and  near.  May  9-10,  1863.  See  Port  Gibson,  Miss. 

Battle  of.  May  1,  1863.  Report  of  McPherson,  p.  633. 

Utt,  Levi  H.  Mentioned 429 

Van  Anda,  Salue  G.  Mentioned 619,622,628,631 

Vance,  John  L.  Mentioned 438 

Vance,  J.  W.  Mentioned 352 

Vancil,  P.  Mentioned 569 


INDEX. 


863 

Page. 


Van  Dorn,  Earl. 

Death  of,  announced 

Mentioned 

Van  Slyke,  James  W.  Mentioned 

Vanzandt,  K.  M.  Mentioned 

Vaughn,  John  C.  Mentioned 

Ventch,  James  C.  Mentioned 

Vernay,  James  D,  Mentioned 

Vicksburg,  Miss. 

Assanlts  on. 


214 

27, 69, 190, 210, 214, 247,  255, 288,  334,  359,  489 

728,771 

747,748 

200, 231, 232,  251,  261, 266-268, 293,  326 

521 

569,641 


May  19, 1863.  Communications  from  John  C.  Pemberton 193,274 

See  also  JacJcson,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  Afay  14, 1863.  Reports  of 
Buckland,  Ralph  P.  Sherman,  William  T. 

Also  Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  1,  l-''63.  Report  of 
Buehler,  Theodore  E. 

Also  Raymond,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  12,  1863.  Report  of 
Stevenson,  John  D. 


See  also  reports  of  Halleck,  p.  6;  Grant,  p.  54;  Dana,  p.  86;  McClernand, 
p.  153;  Tunica,  p.  189.  Also  Sherman  to  Rawlins,  p.  162.  Also 
Part  ir. 

May  22,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Atherton,  Joseph  B 179 

Blount,  A.  A Igl 

Graham,  Harvey 17g 

Grant,  U.  S 37;  154^  171-173, 277 

Landram,  William  J 477 

Lawler,  Michael  K. 477 

McClernand,  John  A 56, 168, 169, 172, 173, 176 

Mason,  F.  H 4«q 

Pemberton,  John  C 276 

Ruffg,  A.  H 479 

Stone,  William  M j77 

W arraoth,  Henry  C 4gQ 

Reports  of 

Forney,  John  H 275 

Grant,  U.  S 47O,  473^  475^  432,  4B5 

Sherman,  William  T 175 

Smith,  Martin  L 276 

Stevenson,  Carter  L 275 

See  also  Jackson,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  22,  1863.  Reports  of 

Alexander,  Jesse  I.  Hillis,  David  B.  Sherman,  William  T. 

Buckland,  Ralph  P.  Holmes,  Samuel  A.  Tuttle,  James  M. 

Deimling,  Francis  C.  Hubbard,  Lucius  F. 


Also  Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of.  May  1, 1863.  Reports  of 
Bueliler,  Theodore  E.  Carr,  Eugene  A. 

Also  Raymond,  Miss.  Engagement  at.  May  12, 1863.^  Reports  of 

Campbell,  Franklin.  Sanborn,  John  B.  Stevenson,  John  D. 

Davis,  AVilliam  P.  Smith,  John  E. 

See  also  reports  of  Halleck,  p.  6;  Grant,  p.  55;  Dana,  p.  86;  McCler- 
nand, p.  151;  Tunica,  i).  189;  Pemberton,  p.  275.  Also  Grant  to 
Ualleck,  p.  37 ; AlcPkerson  to  Grant,  p.  163;  McClernand  to  Stanton, 
p.  166;  McClernand  to  Halleck,  p.  169.  Also  Part  II. 


864 


INDEX. 


Vicksburg,  Miss.— Continued. 

Attempt  of  tug  Sturgess  to  pass  batteries  at,  May  4, 1863.  Reports  of 

Binajliam,  Jiulson  D 687 

Marquess,  Janies 688 

See  also  report  of  Pemherton,  p.  259. 

Condition,  etc.,  of  troops  in.  Communications  from 

Bowen,  John  S 282 

Forney,  JohnH 282 

Smith,  Martin  L 282 

Stevenson,  Carter  L 281 

Grant,  U.  S.,  assumes  command  of  expedition  against 11 

Operations  against,  Jan.  30-July  4,  1863. 

Casualties.  Returns  of. 

Confederate  troops 320 

Union  troops 6, 59, 156, 158,  733,  770 

Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 9, 10, 12, 17, 19, 22, 25,  27,  36,  63 

Bowen,  John  S 256 

Bragg,  Braxton 192 

Davis,  Jetferson 190-196,198,216 

Deitzler,  George  W 15 

Duff,  W.  L 15 

Grant,  U.  S 10, 11, 13, 14, 17-19, 23-25, 29-32, 35, 102 

Henderson,  Thomas 225 

Hiirlbut,  Stephen  A 86 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 190- 

197, 214-21(;,  225, 22»,  239-241, 247, 261,  263, 270, 272 

McClernand,  John  A 1‘2,  13,  103,  157,  165,  166,  1(;8 

Maury,  Dabney  H 234 

Pemberton,  John  C 239-242,  251-253,256-262,  322,  324,  325 

Porter,  David  D . 337,  344 

Rose,  L.  M 131 

Ulffers,  Herman  A 126 

Wilson,  James  H 126, 132 

War  Department,  C.  S 321 

War  Department,  U.  S 12,  67,  75,  84,  93,  169 

Congratulatory  orders.  McClernand 159 

Communications  in  regard  to,  from 

Grant,  U.  S 158,  159 

McClernand,  John  A 161,  162 

McPherson,  James  B 163 

Sherman,  William  T 162 

Co-operation  of  U.  S.  Navy  with  Army 5, 

14, 19,  23,  29,  72,  74-76,  79,  81,  90,  93,  96,  105,  141,  256 
Reports  of  (including  operations  under  dates  noted) 

Dana,  Charles  A 63-76,  78-81,  83-102, 104-114 

Grant,  U.  S 6,  8,  44,  170, 173, 175, 182,  185 

Howard,  Ocran  H.  April  3-July  4 130,  133 

McClernand,  John  A.  March  30-June  17 137 

Prime,  Frederick  E.  Jan.  30-May  4 117,  119-125 

Tunica,  Francis.  April  17-]May  24 186 

Wilson,  James  IT.  April  24-May  11 126 

Sketches. 

Portions  of  Madison  and  Tensas  Parishes,  La 188 

Signal  Corps  operatiops 135 


INDEX. 


865 


Vicksburg,  Miss. — Continued. 

See  also 

Feb.  2-  3,  1863.  Vicksburg  and  Warrenton  batteries,  etc.  Passage 
of  the. 

10-14,  1863.  Red,  Atchafalaya,  and  Black  Rivers,  La.,  etc. 
Operations  on  the. 

14-26,  1863.  Greenville,  Miss.,  and  Cypress  Bend,  Ark.  Ex- 
pedition to,  etc. 

19,  1863.  Yazoo  Pass,  Miss.  Skirmish  near. 

24,  1863.  Indianola.  Capture  of  U.  S.  S. 

24-April  8,  1863.  Yazoo  Pass  Expedition. 

March  14-27,  1863.  Steele's  Bayoii  Expedition. 

19.1863.  Grand  Gulf  batteries.  Passage  of  the. 

25,  1863.  Vicksburg  batteries.  Passage  of  the. 

31,  1863.  Grand  Gulf,  Miss.  Engagement  at. 

Richmond,  La.  Skirmish  at. 

April  2-14,  1863.  Greenville,  Black  Bayou,  and  Deer  Creek,  Miss. 
Expedition  to. 

4,  1863.  Richmond,  La.  Skirmish  at. 

5,  1863.  JYetv  Carthage,  La.  Skirmish  at. 

6,  1863.  James' plantation,  near  New  Carthage,  La.  Skir- 

mish at. 

7,  1863.  Dunbar's  plantation.  Bayou  Vidal,  La.  Skir- 

mish near. 

8,  1863.  James'  plantation,  near  New  Carthage,  La.  Skir- 

mish at. 

15,  1563.  Dunbar's  plantation,  Bayou  Vidal,  La.  Skirmish 

near. 

16,  1863.  Vicksburg  batteries.  Passage  of,  by  gunboats 

and  transports. 

17-May  2,  1863.  Grierson's  Raid  to  Baton  Rouge,  La. 

22,  1863.  Vicksburg  and  Warrenton  batteries.  Passage  of, 
by  transports. 

25-29,  1863.  Hard  Times  Landing,  La.  Expedition  to,  etc. 

29,  1863.  Grand  Gulf,  Miss.  Bombardment  of,  and  pas- 
sage of  the  batteries. 

1)  1863.  Port  Gibson,  or  Thompson's  Hill,  Miss.  Bat- 
tle of. 

2,  1863.  South  Fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  Miss.  Skirmish  on 
the. 

4,  1863.  Vicksburg  batteries.  Attempt  of  tug  George  Stur- 

gess  to  pass  the. 

5,  1863.  King's  Creek,  near  Tupelo,  Miss.  Action  at. 

10,  1863.  Caledonia  and  Pin  Hook,  La  Skirmishes  at. 

Fort  Beauregard,  I.a.  Attack  on. 

11,  1863.  New  Orleans  and  Jackson  Railroad,  near  Crystal 

Springs,  Miss.  Raid  on  the. 

11-15,  1863.  Expedition  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  Panola, 
Aliss.,  and  skirmishes  (llth)  at  Coldwater  River 
and  (14th)  at  Walnut  Hill,  Aliss. 

12.1863.  Raymond,  Miss.  Engagement  at. 

14.1863.  Jackson,  Aliss.  Engagement  at. 

16. 1863.  Champion's  Hill,  or  Baker's  Creek,  Miss.  Battle 

of.  (Part  11.) 

55  R R— VOL  XXIY,  PT  I * 


866 


INDEX. 


Vicksburg,  Miss.— Continued. 

See  also 

May  17, 1863.  Big  Blade  Eiver  Bridge,  Miss.  Engagement  at.  (Part 
IL) 

Bridgeport,  Miss.  Skirmish  near.  (Part  II.) 

18. 1863.  Island  No.  8*2,  above  Greenville,  Miss.  Skirmish  near. 

(Part  II.) 

Horn  Lake  Creek,  Tenn.  Skirmish  on.  (Part  II.) 

19.1863.  La  Grange,  Tenn.  Scouts  from.  (Part  II.) 

19-July  4, 1863.  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of . (Part  II.) 

See  also  reports  of  Halleck,  p.  4 ; Grant,  p.  6. 

Also  Jackson,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  14, 1863.  Reports  of 


Page. 


Alexander,  Jesse  I. 
Bouck,  Gabriel. 
Buckland,  Kalpli  P. 
Deimling,  Francis  C. 

Also  Port  Gibson,  Miss, 
Buebler,  Theodore  E. 


nillis,  David  B. 
nolmes,  Samuel  A. 
Hubbard,  Lucius  F. 
Mattbies,  Charles  L. 

Battle  of,  May  1,  1863. 
Carr,  Eugene  A. 


Sherman,  William  T. 
Thomas,  De  Witt  C. 
Tuttle,  James  M. 

Reports  of 
Logan,  John  A. 


Also  Raymond,  Miss.  Engagement  at.  May  12,  1863.  Reports  of 

Campbell,  Franklin.  Sanborn,  John  B.  Stevenson,  John  D. 

Davis,  William  P.  Smith,  John  E. 

See  also  Part  II. 

Passage  of  batteries  at. 

By  gunboats  and  transports,  April  16, 1863. 


Communications  from  U.  S.  Grant 30 

Reports  of 

Pemberton,  John  C 518 

Smith,  Martin  L 518 

Stevenson,  Carter  L 518 

Thomas,  Lorenzo 517 


See  also  reports  of  Grant,  pp.  30, 47 ; Dana,  pp.  74-76;  Pemberton,  p. 
252.  Also  Pemberton  to  Cooper,  p.  251. 

By  transports,  April  22,  1863. 


Communications  from 

Graham,  George  W 567 

Grant,  U.S 31 

Lee,  Stephen  D 570 

Reports  of 

Fisk,  Leander  B 567 

Jackson,  A.,  jr 570 

Kennard,  George  W 568 

Oliver,  William  S 565 

Smith,  Martin  L 569 

Thomas,  Lorenzo 564 


See  also  reports  of  Grant,  p.  47;  Dana,  pp.  78,79.  Also  Grant  to  Hal- 
leck, p.  31. 

By  U.  S.  S.  Indianola,  Feb.  13,  1863.  See  Indianola,  U.  S.  S. 

By  U.  S.  S.  Queen  of  the  West,  Feb.  2,  1863,  and  capture  of  steamers, 
Feb.  3,  1863.  Reports  of 


Ellet,  Charles  Rivers 336 

Gardner,  Franklin 339 

Sibley,  Henry  H 339 


See  also  report  of  Grant,  p.  14. 


INDEX. 


867 


Also  report  of  Dana,  pp.  67, 68. 


Vicksburg,  Miss.— Continued. 

Passage  of  batteries  at. 

By  U.  S.  S.  Switzerland,  March  25, 1863.  Reports  of 

Barton,  Seth  M 

Eilet,  Alfred  W 473 

Ellet,  Charles  Rivers 477 

Eilet,  John  A 4'j-0 

Stevenson,  Carter  L 40q 

See  also  Grant  to  Halleck,  p.  23. 

Siege  of,  May  19-July  4, 1863. 

Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 40  43 

Grant,  U.  S 37^  39.43^  OO 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 39, 40, 199, 224, 243, 244, 279-281, 286 

Lincoln,  Abraham 40 

Pemberton,  John  C 59,243,272,275,278,279,281 

War  Department,  C.  S 224  227-229 

List  of  captures.  Communication  from  U.  S.  Grant 62 

Report  of  John  H.  Forney 280 

See  also  Jackson,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  14,  1863.  Reports  of 

Deiruling,  Trancis  C.  Matthies,  Charles  L, 

HiUis,  David  B.  Tuttle,  James  M. 

Also  Pm't  Gihson,  Miss.  Battle  of.  May  1,  1863.  Report  of 
McPherson,  James  B. 

Also  Raymond,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  12, 1863.  Reports  of 
Campbell,  Franklin.  Smith,  John  E. 

Davis,  "William  P.  Stevenson,  John  D. 

Also  reports  of  Halleek,  pp.5,6;  Grant,  p.  54;  McClernand,  p.  153.  Also 
Part  11. 

Sketch  of  point  opposite  .......... ... 

Surrender  of,  July  4, 1863. 

Communications  from 

Davis,  Jefferson ^9^ 

Grant,  U.  S 283-285 

Johnston,  Joseph  E ^ ^ ^ ^ _ 199  230  231 

Pemberton,  John  C ’ 283-285 

* War  Department,  C.  S 230 

Memorandum  of  council  of  C.  S.  officers  as  to 33O 

See  also  reports  of  Halleck,  p.  6;  Grant,  p.  57  ; Dana,  p.  114;  Pemhei'ton, 
p.  283.  Also  Grant  to  Halleck,  pp.  44,62,63;  Pemberton  to  Grant, 
pp.  59-61,  283-285;  Grant  to  Pemberton,  pp.  60,  61,  114-il6,  283- 
285 ; Johnston  to  Seddon,  pp.  199,  230,  231 ; Seddon  to  Johnston, 
p.  230  ; Pemberton  to  Stevenson,  et  al.,  p.  281.  Also  Part  II. 

Terms  of  surrender.  Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters ^2 

Grant,  U.  S 00, 61, 114-116 

J OllDStOD  y J OSCpll  E ^ 231 

Pemberton,  John  C 60  114-116 

Vicksburg  and  Warrenton  Batteries.  Passage  of.  See  Vicksburg.  Passage 
of  batteries  at,  by  transports,  April  22,  1863. 

^^i^ksburg,  City  of.  Steamer.  Mentioned ,,  336  337 

Victor,  Steamer.  Mentioned ' ’^25 

Vifquain,  Victor.  Mentioned 600 


118 


868 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Vigo,  Steamer.  Mentioned 313^ 

Virginia  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light— ^after/es : Botetourt,  318,  659,  661,  662,664,667,669,673, 

674,678, 679,681,682. 

Volunteer,  Steamer.  Mentioned 397 

Voorhees,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 514 

Voorhees,  Alexander.  Mentioned 632 

Voorhies,  A.  H.  Mentioned - 413,41' 

Vowles,  Henry  C.  Mentioned 357 

Waddell,  James  F.  Mentioned 318,319 

Waddell,  O.  A.  Mentioned 319 

Wade,  William.  Mentioned 257,469,574,575,669 

"Wadley,  William  M.  Mentioned 290,298 

Wagner,  Philip.  Mentioned...; ^35 

Wakefield,  Edwin.  Mentioned 643, 652, 653, 716 

Walden,  John  F.  Mentioned '^78 

Waldraup,  P.  B.  Mentioned 436 

Walke,  Henry. 

Correspondence  with  Alfred  W.  Ellet 474 

Mentioned 476, 517 

Walker, . Mentioned 278 

Walker,  C.  H. 

Mentioned 50,737 

Report  of  engagement  at  Raymond,  Miss.,  May  12,  1863  739 

Walker,  E.  G.  Mentioned 294 

Waker,  J.  B.  Mentioned 537,715 

Walker,  John  G.  (C.  S.)  Mentioned 95 

Walker,  John  G.  (U.  S.  N.)  Mentioned 380, 383, 390, 391, 397, 399, 430, .576 

Walker,  Joseph.  Mentioned "^^3 

Walker,  Samuel.  Mentioned 402 

Walker,  W.  H.  T.  ^ ^ 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 324, 32o 

Mentioned....  89, 90, 94, 96, 102, 190-192, 194, 216, 239, 240, 243, 245, 324, 638, 739, 786 

Wall,  J.  Q.  Mentioned... 416,417 

Wallace,  Martin  R.  M. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  expedition  from  Collierville,  Tenn.,  March  8-12,  1863  427 

Walls  Bridge,  Tickfaw  River,  La.  Skirmish  at,  May  1,  1863.  See  Grier- 
son’s  liaid  to  Baton  lioiujc,  La.,  April  17-May  2,  1863.  Beports  of 
De  Baun,  J.  Grierson,  Benjamin  H.  Richardson,  Robert  V. 

Gantt,  George.  Miles,  W . R. 

Walnut  Hill,  Miss.  Skirmishes  at  and  near.  May  14,  1863.  See  Panola, 

Miss.  Expedition  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to,  May  11-15,  1863. 
Beports  of 

Chalmers,  James  R.  Hatch,  Edward. 

Walsh,  Edward,  Steamer.  Mentioned 405 

Walsh,  John,  Steamer.  Mentioned 380 

Walsh,  R.  C.  Mentioned 668,669 

Walter,  B.  F.  Mentioned 

Walton,  Mr.  Mentioned 

War  Department,  C.  S.  Correspondence  with 

Bragg,  Braxton 

Davis,  Jefferson 494, 213, 216, 231, 236, 237 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 199,  203,  204,  209, 211,  215,  218-220,  22.3-235,  238, 243,  244 


INDEX. 


861) 


Page. 

War  Department,  C.  S. — Continued.  Correspondence  with 

Jones,  Samuel .» 214 

Quid,  Eobert 231 

Pemberton,  John  C 259, 289,  299, 321,  322,  325,  347 

War  Department,  U.  S. 

Correspondence  with 

Dana,  Charles  A 67,  75,  84, 93 

Ellefc,  Alfred  W 476 

Hurlbut,  Stephen  A 86 

McCleruand,  John  A 166, 168, 169 

Orders,  series  1862  : Oct.  21, 12. 

Ward,  Cornelius  S.  Mentioned 720 

Ward,  John.  Mentioned 566 

Ward,  J.  W.  Mentioned 430 

War  Eagle,  Steamer.  Mentioned 15 

Warmoth,  Henry  C. 

Correspondence  with  John  A.  McClernand 180 

Mentioned 156,157 

Warren,  William  F.  Mentioned 132 

Warrenton,  Miss.  Passage  of  batteries  at,  by  U.  S.  S.  Queen  of  the  West, 

Feb.  3,  1863.  Report  of  Charles  Rivers  Ellet 337 

Warrenton  and  Vicksburg  Batteries.  Passage  of.  See  Vickslurg.  Passage 
of  hatteries  at,  hij  transports,  April  22,  1863. 

Warrenton  Batteries.  Attack  on,  by  U.  S.  S.  Hartford,  March  23,  1863.  See 
Hartford,  U.  S.  S. 

Washburn,  Cadwallader  C. 

Mentioned  57, 94-96, 100, 104, 137, 361, 374-376, 378, 387, 401 

Reports  of  Yazoo  Pass  Expedition,  Feb.  24-April  8,  1883 401,  402 

Washburn,  Henry  D.  Mentioned 618,  621, 622, 626, 627 

Washington,  Edward  C.  Mentioned 435,441,  756 

Waterbury,  Stephen.  Mentioned 630 

Waterhouse,  Allen  C.  Mentioned 760 

Watson,  Joseph  M.  Mentioned 632 

Watts,  Major.  Mentioned 504 

Watts,  A.  B.  Mentioned 678 

Watts,  John.  Mentioned 760,761 

Waul,  T.  N.  Mentioned 200, 231, 232, 259, 293, 320, 381, 412, 416 

Way,  J.  W.  Mentioned 622 

Weatherall,  Captain.  Mentioned 523 

Weatherby,  Peter.  Mentioned 714,715 

Weaver,  Samuel.  Mentioned 479 

Webb,  Frank,  C.  S.  S.  Mentioned 18,  .343-346, 361-370, 493 

Webb,  Howell.  Mentioned 318 

Webb,  W.  H.  Mentioned 294 

Weber,  Andrew  J.  Mentioned 760 

Webster,  Joseph  D.  Mentioned 26,70 

V/eldon,  Thomas.  Mentioned 252,  307, 415, 504, 506 

Welle.s,  Gideon.  Mentioned 2, 9, 336, 341, 361, 430,  469, 517, 576, 684 

Wells,  D.  J.  Mentioned 608 

Wemple,  Mindret.  Mentioned 429 

Western  Louisiana,  District  of.  See  Louisiana,  Western,  District  of. 

West  Virginia  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Inianivj— Regiments : 4th,  438, 450, 454. 

Wetherly,  Thad.  J.  Mentioned 364 


870 


INDEX. 


Wever,  Clark  R.  Mentioned 

Wheadon,  J.  J.^  Mentioned 

Whealan,  Michael.  Mentioned 

Wheatley,  W.  S.  Mentioned 

Wheaton,  Lloyd.  Mentioned 

Wheeler,  John  R.  Mentioned 

Whipple,  Lawristou  W.  Mentioned 

White,  Mr.  Mentioned 

White,  A.  H.  Mentioned 

White,  C.  H.  Mentioned 

White,  Charles  L.  Mentioned 

White,  Dow.  Mentioned 

White,  J.  M.  Mentioned 

White,  Norman.  Mentioned 

White,  Patrick  H.  Mentioned 

White,  Raleigh  R.  Mentioned 

White,  Sam.  Mentioned 

White,  William.  Mentioned 

White,  William  H.  Mentioned 

Whitehead,  Frederick.  Mentioned 

Whitehead,  James  N.  Mentioned 

Whitfield,  George.  Mentioned 

Whitfield,  J.  W.  Mentioned 

Whitfield  [N.  H.?].  Mentioned 

Whittlesey,  L.  H.  Mentioned 

Wickeland,  H.  Mentioned 

Wickizer,  John  H.  Mentioned 

Wiggins,  Joseph  P.  Mentioned 

Wilbourn,  C.  C.  Mentioned 

Wilcox,  Cadmus  M.  Mentioned 

Wiles,  Greenberry  F.  Mentioned 

Wilkerson,  Harris.  Mentioned 

Willard,  L.  S.  Mentioned 

Williams,  Captain.  Mentioned 

Williams,  Cephas.  Mentioned 

Williams,  Edwin  L.  Mentioned 

Williams,  Frederick  A.  Mentioned 

Williams,  John  B.  Mentioned 

Williams,  Thomas.  (General.)  Mentioned 

Williams,  Thomas.  (Private.)  Mentioned 

Williams,  William  S.  Mentioned 

Williams’  Bridge,  La.  Skirmish  near,  May  1,  1863. 

Baton  Bouge,  La.,  April  11-May  2,  1863. 

Willis,  Leonidas.  Mentioned 

Wilmore,  Reuben.  Mentioned 

Wilson,  Captain.  Mentioned 

Wilson,  Scout.  Mentioned 

Wilson,  B.  Mentioned 

Wilson,  Byron.  Mentioned 

Wilson,  Harrison.  Mentioned 

Wilson,  Henry  S.  Mentioned 

V/ilson,  James.  Mentioned 

Wilson,  James  G.  Mentioned 


Page. 

778 

290,314 

566 

417 

649 

695,697-699 

,378 

108 

7.39,748 

369 

727 

357 

685,686 

.369 

155 

472 

481 

136 

620,622,633 

653,720 

335 

293 

225,226 

320 

618,619,622,630 

320,417 

649 

61 S,  627 

528,541,542,545 

190,191,194 

716 

294 

641 

698 

441 

653 

590 

700 

5, 44 

698 

644-648 

See  Grierson’s  liaid  to 
Eeport  of  Brown,  p.  537. 

.563 

467 

471 

225 

618 

517 

714,715 

382 

641 

559 


INDEX. 


871 

Page. 


Wilson,  James  H. 

Correspondence  -witli 

McClernand,  John  A 126 

Ross,  Leonard  F 394, 396 

Ulfiers,  Herman  A 126 

Mentioned 10, 14, 17, 18, 33, 52, 56, 77, 115, 146, 184, 392, 394-396, 398, 399, 635 

Reports  of 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations  against,  April  24-May  11, 1863 126 

Yazoo  Pass  Expedition,  including  operations,  Feb.  1-April  9,  1863 371,* 

373, 375, 376, 378-380, 382, 385, 386, 390 

Wilson,  Jesse  B.  Mentioned f 69,482,484 

Wilson,  J.  W. 

Correspondence  with  Ocran  H.  Howard 132 

Mentioned 132 

Wilson,  Thomas  B.  Mentioned 268 

Wilson,  Victor  F.  Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 309,315 

Wilson,  William  E.  Mentioned 591 

Willow  Springs,  Miss.  Skirmish  at.  May  3,  1863’^ 3 

Willson,  T.  F.  For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Franklin  Gardner. 

Wingfield,  J.  H.  Mentioned 549 

Winona,  Steamer.  Mentioned 394, 405 

Winslow,  Edward  F.  Mentioned 753 

Wintter,  D.  Mentioned - 293,503 

Wirts,  J.  Moore.  Mentioned 488 

Wisconsin  Trccps.  Mentioned. 


Artillery,  Light— 5after/es  ; 1st,  138, 143, 152, 189, 493, 582, 587, 590, 592, 624 ; 

6th,  150,639,723,725,729,751,775,783;  12th,  725,751,784. 

Cavalry — Regimenis:  2d,  512,558,559. 

Infantry — Regiments:  8th,  750;  11th,  138,  178,  182,  584,  622,  628,  629; 
12th,  556-558 ; 16th,  695-699 ; 18th,  729-733,  750,  773 ; 23d,  138,  350, 
352, 583, 593, 594, 596, 598, 600 ; 28th,  394  ; 29th,  138,  583,  601, 603, 606-609, 


627;  33d,  360, 554, 556-559. 

Wise,  G.  D.  Mentioned 279, 294, 318, 319 

Withers,  Thaddeus  C.  Mentioned 136,641 

Withers,  W.  T.  Mentioned 1 110, 294 

Wolfe,  Edward  H.  Mentioned 422 

Wood, . Mentioned 498 

Wood,  C.  A.  Mentioned 618,619,622,628,639 

Wood,  Oliver.  Reports  of 

Dyersburg,  Tenn.  Skirmish  at,  Jan.  30,  1863 335 

Yorkville,  Tenn.  Skirmish  near,  Jan.  28, 1863 333 

Wood,  Robert  C.,  jr.  Mentioned 370 

Wood,  R.  L.  Mentioned 467 

Wood,  S.  A.  M.  Mentioned 26,485,560 

Wood,  William  F.  Mentioned 360,402,695 

Woodlief,  Ed.  D.  Mentioned -• J20 

Woods,  Captain.  Mentioned 301,306 

Woods,  Charles  R.  Mentioned 112,753 

Woods,  E.  Mentioned 369 

Woods,  John.  Mentioned C98 

Woods,  M.L.  Mentioned 680,681 

Woodson, . Mentioned 230 

Woodward,  G.  A.  Mentioned 302 


Xo  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


872 


INDEX. 


Page. 

V/oodwoitli,  Selim  E.  Mentioned 434, 457,  .517, 700 

Woolsey,  Fletcher.  Mentioned 778 

Worthington,  William  J.  Mentioned 591 

Wren,  W.  S.  Mentioned 541,549 

Wright,  Clark.  • 

Mentioned 84, 85,  351, 352, 636 

Report  of  raid  on  New  Orleans  and  Jackson  Railroad,  near  Crystal  Springs, 

Miss.,  May  11,  1863 701 

Wright,  Henderson.  Mentioned 514 

Yandell,  D.  W.  Mentioned 223 

Yates,  Richard.  Mentioned*. 81,169 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  I'Hnois,  Governor  of. 

Yazoo  City,  Miss.  Expedition  from  Vicksburg  to,  July  12-21,  1863.  See  re- 
2)ort  of  Johnston,  p.  246.  Also  Part  II. 

Yazoo  Pass,  Miss. 

Skirmish  at,  Feb.  16,  1863'^ 2 

Skirmish  near,  Feb.  19,  1863.  Report  of  John  A.  McClernand 360 

Yazoo  Pass  Expedition,  Feb.  24-April  8,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Army  Headquarters 22 

Grant,  U.  S 20, 22, 23, 28, 376 

Pemberton,  John  C 412,418 

Porter,  David  D 409 

Prentiss,  Benjamin  M 401 

Wilson,  James  H 379, 380,  394, 396 

Co-operation  of  U.  S.  Navy  with  Army 17, 

20-23, 28, 46, 65, 376,  378-386, 388, 390, 391, 393-400, 407-418 
Reports  of  (including  operations  under  dates  noted) 

Brown,  Isaac  N C ..  421 

Loring,  William  W.  Feb.  17-April  11 412-415,  417-419 

McPherson,  James  B 403 

Maury,  Dabney  H.  April  1-10 420 

Prentiss,  Benjamin  M 391,392 

Quin  by,  Isaac  F.  March  9-28 404-408 

Ross,  Leonard  F.  March  2- April  8 4l * 393-398 

Salomon,  Frederick 400 

. Smith,  Watson.  March  3-7  409,411 

Washburn,  Cadwallader  C 401,402 

Wilson,  James  H.  Feb.  1-April  9. . 371, 373, 375, 376, 378-380, 382, 385, 386, 390 

Sketches 372,377,369 

See  also  reports  of  Grant,  pp.  17, 20-26, 28, 45, 46 ; Dana,  pp.  63-66, 68 ; Femher- 
ton,  p.  249.  Also  Grant  to  Halleek,  i:>p.  23,  24. 

Yerger,  W.  Mentioned 320 

Yerger,  William  S.  Mentioned 221, 329, 737 

York,  Z.  Mentioned 338 

Yorkville,  Tenn.  Skirmish  near,  Jan.  28,  1863.  Report  of  Oliver  Wood 333 

Young,  U.  M.  Mentioned 319, 670 

Zesch,  Gustavus.  Mentioned - 695,696,698 

Ziegler,  George  M.  Mentioned 454 


*^0  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 

c 


/ 


•A.  '4^ 


r 


•24  24«PTciw 

-28  973  ♦ 74^<-U<»N3» 


81 


CLOTH 


V.24t.l-)( 

..  “T  DMERBG-W*  REBIND 


STX2 

HEIGHT 

09  :{./4 


;^^^^eHARGING  INFORMATION 

HEIGHT 

PICA 

WRAP 

ST  ^ 

FRONT  COVER 

' 

/ 

H/  i/ 

NO  TRIM 

THR  y 

PAGES  LAMINATED 

THRU  SEW  OMTAPE 

EXTRA  THICKNESS 

HAND  ADHESIVE 

MAP  POCKET  PAPER 

LENGTHWISE 

MAP  POCKET  CLOTH 

: SPECIAL  WORK  AND  PREP. 

FOREIGN  TITLE 

SPECIAL  WORK 

LINES  OF  LETTERING 

1 1 

f 


