«****»&?* 


& s rw'w 


t 

MAR  1?  1991 

MAY  0 3 199.7 


write  new  due  date  below 


When  renewing  by  phone, 
previous  due  date. 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
University  of  Illinois  Urbana-Champaign 


https://archive.org/details/warofrebellion242unit 


DP-2 


.4 


HERTZBERG  - NEW  METHOD,  INC.  EAST  VANDALIA  ROAD, 

JACKSONVILLE,  ILL.  62650 

1'  TITLE  NO. 

^ 4 * 0995 

ACCOUNT  NO. 

07200-06 1 

CM 

LOT  AND  TICKET  NO. 

05-  2^# 

42-1 1 U,S*  k-  \4W 
E * REBELLION  * 


* DEPARTMENT  * 43-16  WA; 
< 7200  > 


f H 


3-24  24*FT*2* 

^•28 


973  r'4*U&N3« 


SER  <•  1 ><*0  * 24 1 2*tf 

CLOTH  COLOR 


iH) 


CHARGING  INFORMATION 

STUBBING 

FRONT  COVER 

HAND  SEW 

NO  TRIM 

THRU  SEW 

PAGES  LAMINATED 

THRU  SEW  ON  TAPE 

EXTRA  THICKNESS 

HAND  ADHESIVE 

MAP  POCKET  PAPER 

LENGTHWISE 

MAP  POCKET  CLOTH 

FOREIGN  TITLE 

SPECIAL  WORK 

LINES  OF  LETTERING 

1 □ 

HEIGHT 


y. 


SIX  2 

HEIGHT 

09  1/4 


SPECIAL  WORK  AND  PREP. 


863181653 


f 


J 

REMOTE  STORAGE 

THE 


WAR  OF  THE  REBELLION: 


A COMPILATION  OF  THE 

OFFICIAL  RECORDS 

OF  THE 


UNION  AND  CONFEDERATE  ARMIES. 


PREPARED,  UNDER  THE  DIRECTION  OF  THE  SECRETARY  OF  WAR,  BY 

The  late  Lieut.  Col.  ROBERT  N.  SCOTT,  Third  U.  S.  Artillery. 

PUBLISHED  PURSUANT  TO  ACTS  OF  CONGRESS. 


SERIES  I— VOLUME  XXIV— IN  THE  EE  PARTS. 

PART  II— REPORTS. 


WASHINGTON: 

GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE 

1 SS  9. 


REMOTE  STORAGE 


Ser.  I 
A 2- 


t 


CHAPTER  XXXYI, 


OPERATIONS  IN  MISSISSIPPI  AND  WEST  TENNESSEE, 

INCLUDING  THOSE  IN  ARKANSAS  AND  LOUISIANA  CONNECTED 
WITH  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG. 


January  20-August  10,  1863. 


PART  II. 

REPORTS— May  16-Augiast  1©.* 


SUMMARY  OE  THE  PRINCIPAL  EVENTS. t 

May  16,  1863.— Battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  or  Baker’s  Creek,  Miss. 

17,  1863. — Engagement  at  Big  Black  River  Bridge,  Miss. 

Skirmish  near  Bridgeport,  Miss. 

Scout  from  La  Grange,  Tenn. 

18,  1863.— Capture  of  Haynes’  Bluff,  Miss. 

Skirmish  near  Island  No.  82,  above  Greenville,  Miss. 

Skirmish  on  Horn  Lake  Creek,  Tenn. 

19,  1863.— Scouts  from  La  Grange,  Tenn. 

19-July  4,  1863. — Siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss. 

20,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Salem,  Tenn. 

Skirmish  at  Collierville,  Tenn. 

20- 23,  1863.— Expedition  to  Yazoo  City,  Miss.,  and  skirmish  (23d)  at  Liverpool 

Landing. 

21- 26,  1863.— Expedition  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  Senatobia,  Miss.,  and  skir- 

mish (23d). 

23,  1863.— Skirmish  at  Haynes’  Bluff,  Miss. 

23-24,  1863. — Expedition  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  to  Hernando,  Miss. 

23  — , 1863. — Expedition  from  Helena  to  Napoleon,  Ark.,  and  skirmish  near 
Island  No.  65. 

^ For  the  “ General  Reports”  embracing  this  period,  see  Part  I. 
t Of  some  of  the  minor  conflicts  noted  in  this  11  Summary,”  no  circumstantial  reports 
are  on  file. 

(3) 


2>b%\\ 


4 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

May  24,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Mechanicshurg,  Miss. 

Skirmish  near  Austin,  Miss. 

Skirmish  at  Mound  Plantation,  near  Lake  Providence,  La. 

24-31,  1863. — Expedition  up  the  Yazoo  and  Big  Sunflower  Rivers,  Miss. 

26,  1863. — Expedition  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  toward  Hernando,  Miss. 

26-29,  1863. — Expedition  from  Bolivar  to  Wesley  Camp,  Somerville,  and  An- 
tioch Church,  Tenn.,  and  skirmishes.  9 

26-31,  1863. — Expedition  from  Corinth,  Miss.,  to  Florence,  Ala.* 

26-June  1,  1863. — Scout  from  Fort  Heiman,  Ky.,  into  Tennessee. 

26-June  4,  1863. — Expedition  from  Haynes’  Bluff  to  Mechanicshurg,  Miss., 
and  skirmishes. 

27,  1863. — Engagement  between  U.  S.  S.  Cincinnati  and  the  Vicksburg 

batteries. 

Attack  on  Union  gunboats  near  Greenwood,  Miss. 

Skirmish  near  Lake  Providence,  La. 

Scout  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  toward  Hernando,  Miss. 

28,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Austin,  Miss. 

Scout  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  toward  Hernando,  Miss. 

June  2-  8,  1863. — Expedition  from  Haynes’  Bluff  to  Satartia  and  Mechanicshurg, 
Miss. 

3, 1863. — Engagement  near  Simsport,  La. 

3-17,  1863. — Transfer  of  Ninth  Army  Corps  from  Kentucky  to  vicinity  of 
Vicksburg. 

3-July  10,  1863. — Operations  in  Northern  Louisiana. 

7,  1863. — Expedition  from  Jackson,  Tenn.,  across  Tennessee  River. 

5,  1863. — Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Parke,  U.  S.  Army,  resumes  command  of  the 
Ninth  Army  Corps. 

8-  9,  1863. — Expedition  from  Pocahontas,  Tenn.,  to  Ripley,  Miss. 

9,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Macon  Ford,  Big  Black  River,  Miss. 

10,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Edwards  Station,  Miss. 

11,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Smith’s  Bridge,  near  Corinth,  Miss. 

Skirmish  at  Burnsville,  Miss. 

12- 14,  1863. — Expedition  from  Pocahontas,  Tenn.,  to  New  Albany  and  Ripley, 

Miss.,  and  skirmishes. 

13- 22,  1863. — Operations  in  Northeastern  Mississippi,  including  skirmishes 

(19th)  at  New  Albany  and  (20th)  at  Mud  Creek. 

15,  1863. — Affair  near  Trenton,  Tenn. 

15- 25,  1863. — Operations  in  Northwestern  Mississippi. 

16,  1863. — Scout  from  Memphis  to  the  Hatchie  River,  Tenn. 

16- 24,  1863. — Expedition  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  Panola,  Miss. 

17- 18,  1863. — Operations  on  Mississippi  River,  near  Memphis,  Tenn.,  and  attack 

on  transports. 

17-22,  1863. — Expedition  from  Pocahontas,  Tenn.,  toward  Pontotoc,  Miss. 

18,  1863. — Affair  at  Birdsong  Ferry,  Big  Black  River,  Miss. 

19,  1863. — Maj.  Gen.  E.  O.  C.  Ord  supersedes  Maj.  Gen.  J.  A.  McClernand 

in  command  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

22,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Jones’  Plantation,  near  Birdsong  Ferry,  Miss. 

Action  at  Hill’s  Plantation,  near  Bear  Creek,  Miss. 

Skirmish  on  Big  Black  River,  Miss. 

23-26,  1863. — Union  raid  on  Brookhaven,  and  skirmish  at  Rocky  Creek,  near 
Ellisville,  Miss. 

24,  1863. — Skirmishes  at  Mound  Plantation  and  near  Lake  Providence,  La. 

25,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Milliken’s  Bend,  La. 


See  Series  I,  Vol.  XXIII,  Part  I,  p.  349. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  SUMMARY  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  EVENTS. 


Jane  25-July  1,  1863. — Expedition  from  Snyder’s  Bluff  to  Greenville,  Miss. 

29,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Lexington,  Tenn.* 

29-30,  1863. — Skirmishes  at  Messinger’s  Ferry,  Big  Black  River,  Miss. 

July  1,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Edwards  Station,  Miss. 

3,  1863. — Scouts  from  Memphis,  Tenn. 

4,  1863.— Skirmish  at  Messinger’s  Ferry,  Big  Black  River,  Miss. 

5-25,  1863. — The  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign. 

7,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Ripley,  Miss. 

Action  at  Iuka,  Miss. 

8,  1863. — Scout  from  Germantown,  Tenn. 

10,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Bolivar,  Tenn. 

Capture  of  outpost  at  Union  City,  Tenn.t 
12-21,  1863. — Expedition  from  Vicksburg  to  Yazoo  City,  Miss. 

13,  1863.— Skirmishes  on  Forked  Deer  River,  and  at  Jackson,  Tenn. 

Occupation  of  Natchez,  Miss.,  by  Union  troops. 

14,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Iuka,  Miss. 

15,  1863. —Skirmish  on  Forked  Deer  Creek,  Tenn. 

Skirmish  near  Jackson,  Tenn. 

16-20,  1863. — Scout  from  Germantown,  Tenn. 

18,  1863. — Capture  of  Union  pickets  near  Germantown,  Tenn 

Skirmish  near  Memphis,  Tenn. 

19,  1863. — Scouts  from  Danville,  Miss. 

19- 29,  1863.— Operations  iu  the  vicinity  of  Trenton,  Tenn. 

20- 21,  1863. — Scouts  from  Memphis,  Tenn. 

22-27,  1863.— Expedition  from  Clinton,  Ky.,  in  pursuit  of  Biffle’s,  Forrest’s, 
and  Newsom’s  cavalry. t 

23,  1863.— Expedition  from  Memphis  to  Raleigh,  Tenn. 

26-30,  1863. — Expedition  from  Natchez,  Miss. 

29,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Fort  Donelson,  Tenn.§ 

30,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Grand  Junction,  Tenn. 

31,  1863.— Skirmish  at  Saint  Catharine’s  Creek,  near  Natchez,  Miss. 

-4ug.  3,  1863.— Scout  from  Fort  Pillow,  Tenn. , and  skirmish  near  Denmark,  Tenn. 

Skirmish  at  Ripley,  Miss. 

3-  8,  1863.— The  Ninth  Army  Corps  re-embarks  at  Haynes’  Bluff  for  Kentucky. 

5,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Mount  Pleasant,  Miss. 

7,  1863.— The  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  ordered  to  the  Department  of  the 

Gulf. 

8,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Rienzi,  Miss. 

10,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Bayou  Tensas,  La. 

10-23,  1863.— Expeditions  from  Big  Bla#k  River,  Miss.,  and  La  Grange,  Tenn.r 
to  Grenada,  Miss. 


* See  Series  I,  Vol.  XXIII,  Part  I,  p.  628. 
tSee  Series  I,  Vol.  XXIII,  Part  I,  p.  822. 
t See  Series  I,  Vol.  XXIII,  Part  I,  p.  827. 
$ See  Series  I,  Vol.  XXIII,  Part  I,  p.  844. 


6 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Ciiap.  XXXVL 


MAY  16,  1863.— Battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  or  Baker’s  Creek,  Miss. 

REPORTS.* 

No.  1. — Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces. 

No.  2. Brig.  Gen.  P.  Joseph  Osterhaus,  commanding  Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth 

Army  Corps,  including  operations  May  2-23. 

No.  3.— Col.  James  Keigwin,  Forty-ninth  Indiana  Infantry,  First  Brigade,  includ- 
ing Engagement  at  Big  Black  River  Bridge. 

No.  4.— Lieut.  Col.  John  Lucas,  Seventh  Kentucky  Infantry,  including  engagement 
at  Big  Black  River  Bridge. 

No.  5.— Col.  Daniel  W.  Lindsay,  Twenty-second  Kentucky  Infantry,  commanding 
Second  Brigade,  including  operations  to  May  23. 

No.  6.— Capt.  John  L.  Campbell,  Third  Illinois  Cavalry. 

No.  7.— Lieut.  Charles  B.  Kimball,  First  Wisconsin  Battery,  including  engagement 
at  Big  Black  River  Bridge. 

No.  8.— Brig.  Gen.  Stephen  G.  Burbridge,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Brigade, 
Tenth  Division,  including  operations  April  13-May  24. 

No.  9.— Col.  Frederick  W.  Moore,  Eighty-third  Ohio  Infantry,  including  operations 
April  14-May  22. 

No.  10. — Col.  Joshua  J.  Guppey,  Twenty-third  Wisconsin  Infantry,  including  opera- 
tions to  May  22. 

No.  11.— Col.  Friend  S.  Rutherford,  Ninety-seventh  Illinois  Infantry,  Second  Brigade. 
No?  12. — Brig.  Gen.  Alvin  P.  Hovey,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Twelfth  Division,  in- 
cluding operations  May  2-20. 

No.  13. — Brig.  Gen.  George  F.  McGinnis,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Brigade. 

No.  14. — Col.  William  T.  Spicely,  Twenty-fourth  Indiana  Infantry. 

No.  15.— Col.  James  R.  Slack,  Forty-seventh  Indiana  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade. 

No.  16.— Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  McLaughlin,  Forty-seventh  Indiana  Infantry. 

No.  17.— Lieut.  Joseph  G.  Strong,  adjutant  Twenty-eighth  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  18.— Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  F.  Quinby,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Seventh  Division, 
Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  including  operations  April  20-May  20. 

No.  19.— Lieut.  Col.  John  E.  Tourtellotte,  Fourth  Minnesota  Infantry,  First  Brigade, 
including  operations  April  23-May  22. 

No.  20.— Col.  David  B.  Hillis,  Seventeenth  Iowa  Infantry,  Second  Brigade. 

No.  21.— Col.  Holden  Putnam,  Ninety-third  Illinois  Infantry,  commanding  Third 
Brigade,  including  operations  May  9-22. 

No.  22.— Maj.  Samuel  H.  Lockett,  C.  S.  Engineer  Corps,  Chief  Engineer  Department 
of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana,  including  operations  April  30-May  17. 
No.  23.— Maj.  Gen.  William  W.  Loring,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  division. 

No.  24. Col.  A.  E.  Reynolds,  Twenty-sixth  Mississippi  Infantry,  commanding  First 

Brigade. 

No.  25.— Brig.  Gen.  Abram  Buford,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Brigade. 

No.  26.— Col.  Edward  Goodwin,  Thirty-fifth  Alabama  Infantry. 

No.  27.— Col.  Thomas  M.  Scott,  Twelfth  Louisiana  Infantry. 

No.  28.— Brig.  Gen.  Winfield  S.  Featherston,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Brigade. 
No.  29. — Maj.  Gen.  Carter  L.  Stevenson,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  division. 

* See  also  general  reports  of  Grant,  McClernand,  and  Pemberton  ; battle  of  Port 
Gibson,  reports  of  Buehler,  Logan,  and  McPherson ; engagement  at  Raymond,  reports 
of  Campbell,  Crocker,  Davis,  Sanborn,  John  E.  Smith,  and  John  D.  Stevenson;  engage- 
ment at  Jackson,  reports  of  Alexander,  Bouck,  Deimling,  Hillis,  and  Holmes  (Part  I.) 
Engagement  at  Big  Black  River  Bridge,  report  of  Lawler;  and  siege  of  Vicksburg, 
reports  of  Blair,  Fisher,  Fonda,  Lucas,  Sampson,  and  T.  K.  Smith. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS.  7 

No.  30.— Brig.  Gen.  Seth  M.  Barton,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Brigade. 

No.  31.— Brig.  Gen.  Stephen  D.  Lee,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Brigade. 

No.  32. — Brig.  Gen.  A.  Cumming,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Brigade. 

No.  33. — Col.  A.  W.  Reynolds,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Fourth  Brigade. 

No.  34. — Col.  Francis  M.  Cockrell,  Second  Missouri  Infantry,  commanding  First 
Brigade,  Bowen’s  division,  including  engagement  at  Big  Black  River 
Bridge. 

N(^,  35. — Col.  Thomas  P.  Dockery,  Nineteenth  Arkansas  Infantry,  Second  Brigade. 
No.  36.— Col.  Elijah  Gates,  First  Missouri  Cavalry  (Confederate). 

No.  37. — Statements  of  Confederate  staff  officers. 


No.  1. 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  at  the  battle  of  Champion’s 
Hill , or  Baker’s  Creek , Miss.,  May  16,  1863. 

[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.] 


Command. 


THIRTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McClernand. 
Escort. 

3d  Hlinois  Cavalry,  Company  L* 

NINTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Peter  J.  Osterhaus. 
First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Theophilus  T.  Garrard. 


118th  Hlinois 

49th  Indiana  . . . 
69th  Indiana  ... 
7th  Kentucky . 


Total  First  Brigade 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Daniel  W.  Lindsey. 


22d  Kentucky . 
16th  Ohio  ...A. 

42d  Ohio 

114th  Ohio 


Total  Second  Brigade 

Artillery. 


Michigan  Light,  7th  Battery* 
"Wisconsin  Light,  1st  Battery 


Cavalry. 

3d  Illinois,  Companies  A,  E,  and  K 
Total  Ninth  Division 


Killed. 


14 


Wounded. 


42 


14 


40 


82 


Captured 
or  missing. 


12 


13 


13 


25 


61 


130 


No  loss  reported. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


# MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  at  the  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  #c.—  Cont’d. 


Command. 


TENTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Andrew  J.  Smith. 
First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Stephen  G.  Burbridge. 

16th  Indiana 

67th  Indiana 

83d  Ohio 

23d  Wisconsin - 

Total  First  Brigade 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  William  J.  Landram. 

77th  Illinois 

97th  Illinois 

108th  Illinois* 

130th  Illinois* 

19th  Kentucky* 

48th  Ohio* 

Total  Second  Brigade 

Artillery. 

Illinois  Light,  Chicago  Mercantile  Battery 

Ohio  Light,  17th  Battery* 

Cavalry. 

4th  Indiana  Cavalry,  Company  C * 

Total  Tenth  Division - 

TWELFTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Alvin  P.  Hovey 
Escort. 

1st  Indiana  Cavalry,  Company  C* 

First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  George  F.  McGinnis. 

llth  Indiana 

24th  Indiana 

, 34th  Indiana 

46th  Indiana 

29th  Wisconsin 

Ohio  Light,  2d  Battery* 

Ohio  Light,  16th  Battery 

Total  First  Brigade 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  James  K.  Slack. 

47th  Indiana 

24th  Iowa 

28th  Iowa 

56th  Ohio 

1st  Missouri  Light  Artillery,  Battery  A 


Killed. 


Wounded. 


Captured 
or  missing. 


16 


16 


25 


25 


100 


100 


28 


120 

155 

59 

58 


479 


87 

116 

61 


200 


26 


...!  17 

...j  34 

1 13 

1 27 


167 

201 


84 

113 


636 


352 


2 I 91 


117 


140 

189 

9. 

138 

2 

566 

1,  202 


Total  Second  Brigade  . . 
Total  Twelfth  Division 


No  loss  reported. 


9 


'Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS. 

Beturn  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  at  the  battle  of  Champion's  Hill , #c.-Cont’d. 


Killed. 

1 

Wounded. 

1 

Captured 
or  missing. 

j Aggregate, 

Command. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

FOURTEENTH  DIVISION.* 

Brig.  Gen.  Eugene  A.  Carr. 

1 

2 

3 

1 

2 

3 

UNATTACHED. 

2d  Illinois  Cavalry  (seven  companies)  t . 

2 

1 

6th  Missouri  Cavalry  (seven  companies).. 

— 

o 

1 

3 

14 

217 

46 

941 

3~ 

142 

~1,~363 

FIFTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 

SECOND  DIVISION. t 

Maj.  Gen.  Frank  P.  Blair. 

SEVENTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 

Maj.  Gen.  James  B.  McPherson. 

CAVALRY  BATTALION. 

Capt.  John  S.  Foster. 

4th  Missouri,  Company  Ft 

THIRD  DIVISION. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Logan. 

First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  E.  Smith. 

2 

5 

4 

11 

3 

1 

6 

3 

12 

18 

19 

28 

14 

8 

25 

23 

24 

45 

18 

1 

Total  First  Brigade 

22 

13 

91 

9 

135 

58 

30 

62 

60 

Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Mortimer  D.  Leggett. 

2 

1 

1 

7 
1 
1 

8 

5 

2 

4 

5 

44 

26 

56 

47 

ontii  ntiiA  ... ...... ... .......... 

Total  Second  Brigade 

4 

17 

16 

173 

210 

Third  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  D.  Stevenson. 

2 

3 

1 

6 

11 

3 

15 

12 

29 

81st  Illinois 



2 

3 

7 

4 32 

18 

61 

*Held  mainly  in  reserve.  tNo  loss  reported.  t In  support ; no  loss  reported. 


10  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  ' [Chap.  XXXVI. 


Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  at  the  battle  of  Champion's  Hill , <fc.  Coutd. 


Killed. 


Command. 


Artillery. 

Maj.  Charles  J.  Stolbrand. 


1st  Illinois  Light  Artillery,  Battery  D * 
2d  Illinois  Light  Artillery,  Battery  L* 
Michigan  Light  Artillery,  8th  Battery. 
- ■ ' Artillery,  ? ’ " j — M 


Ohio  Light  Artillery,  3d  Battery* 

Total  Third  Division 

SEVENTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Marcellus  M.  Crocker. 
First  Brigade. 

Col.  John  B.  Sanborn. 


48th  Indiana 

59th  Indiana  . . - 
4th  Minnesota 
18th  Wisconsin 


Total  First  Brigade 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Samuel  A.  Holmes. 


S6th  Hlinoist 

17th  Iowa 

10  th  Missouri 

24th  Missouri,  Company  E . 
80th  Ohio* 


Total  Second  Brigade 

Third  Brigade. 

Col.  George  B.  Boomer. 


47 


Wounded. 


33 


93d  Illinois  . . 

5th  Iowa 

10th  Iowa 

26th  Missouri 


Total  Third  Brigade 

Artillery. 


1st  Missouri  Light,  Battery  M * . 

Ohio  Light,  11th  Battery  * 

Wisconsin  Light,  6th  Battery  . . . 
Wisconsin  Light,  12th  Battery*. 


Total  Seventh  Division 

Total  Seventeenth  Army  Corps 


Captured 
or  missing. 


296 


27 


1 

~407 


46 


11 


103 


13 


119 

166 


*8 


81 


107 

72 

125 


370 


499 

~795 


H 


10 


56 


10 


103 


162 

94 

167 

87 


510 


671 
1,  078 


RECAPITULATION. 


nn  hif  toontli  A r*TYiYr  P/Orus  . . 

14 

217 

46 

941 

3 

142 

1,  363 

X iliriccDlil  Alin)  Vy'Ui  jjo 

Seventeenth  Army  Corps 

13 

166 

62 

795 

1 

41 

1,078 

27 

383 

108 

1,  736 

4 

1 183 

2,  441 

1 

No  loss  reported. 


t Detached. 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS. 


11 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


OFFICERS  KILLED. 


ILLINOIS. 


Capt.  James  R.  Wilson,  30tli  Infantry. 
Capt.  James  Burnet,  30th  Infantry. 
Capt.  David  Lloyde,  93d  Infantry. 


Capt.  Alexander  W.  Geddes,  118th  In- 
fantry. 

Lieut.  Thomas  B.  White,  118t'h  Infantry. 


INDIANA. 

Capt.  Felix  G.  Welman,  24th  Infantry.  I Lieut.  James  F.  Perry,  47th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Joel  Ferris,  46th  Infantry.  j 


IOWA. 


Lieut.  Samuel  B.  Lindsay,  5th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Jerome  Darling,  5th  Infantry. 
Capt.  Stephen  W.  Poage,  10th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  James  H.  Terry,  10th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Isaac  H.  Brown,  10th  Infantry. 


Capt.  Silas  D.  Johnson,  24th  Infantry. 
Capt.  William  Carbee,  24th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Chauncey  Lawrence,  24th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Benjamin  F.  Kirby,  28th  Infantry. 
Li^ut.  John  J.  Legan,  28th  Infantry. 


KENTUCKY. 


Capt.  Thomas  Wilson,  7th  Infantry. 


MISSOURI. 


Lieut.  Col.  Leonidas  Horney,  10th  In- 
fantry. 


Maj.  Charles  F.  Brown,  26th  Infantry. 
Capt.  John  Welker,  26th  Infantry. 


OHIO. 


Capt.  James  A.  Mitchell,  16th  Battery. 
Lieut.  Presley  McCafferty,  20th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  George  W.  Manring,  56th  Infantry. 


Lieut.  Augustus  S.  Chute,  56th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Col.  John  S.  Snook,  68th  Infantry. 


DIED  OF  WOTJNDS. 


ILLINOIS. 


Lieut.  George  E.  Meily,  30th  Infantry. 

INDIANA. 


Lieut.  James  H.  Baldwin,  24th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Jesse  L.  Cain,  24th  Infantry. 

Asst.  Surg.  T.  W.  C.  Williamson,  24th  In- 
fantry. 


Lieut.  Col.  William  Swain,  34th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  William  A.  Andrew,  46th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  George  W.  Cole,  47th  Infantry. 


IOWA. 


Lieut.  John  Buchanan,  28th  Infantry. 


MISSOURI. 

Lieut.  Thomas  M.  Lee,  26th  Infantry. 


OHIO. 


Capt.  John  Cook,  56th  Infantry. 


| Lieut.  James  T.  Caldwell,  78th  Infantry. 


12  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

No.  2. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen . Peter  J.  Osterhaus , commanding  Ninth  Divisioii , 
Thirteenth  Army  Corps , including  operations  May  2-23. 

Headquarters  Ninth  Division, 

Bn/  Blade  River  Railroad  Bridge , Mississippi , ilia?/  26,  1863. 

Part  1.— The  day  after  this  battle  [Port  Gibson,  May  1]  the  Ninth 
Division,  together  with  the  Tenth,  Twelfth,  and  Fourteenth  Divisions, 
of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  marched  to  Port  Gibson,  waiting  there 
for  the  construction  of  a bridge  across  Bayou  Pierre. 

On  May  3,  the  line  of  march  was  taken  up  again  for  Willow  Springs, 
and  the  corps  went  into  camp  at  the  forks  of  the  roads  to  Jackson, 
Vicksburg,  and  Grand  Gulf. 

On  the  morning  of  the  5th,  my  command  was  ordered  to  proceed  on 
the  Jackson  road.  Being  in  the  front,  the  Second  Illinois  Cavalry  was 
attached  temporarily  to  it.  We  had  passed  Bocky  Springs  and  Big- 
Sandy  Creek  when  my  advance  was  halted  by  a fire  from  a rebel  picket. 
I ordered  the  Second  Illinois  Cavalry  to  attack,  which  they  did  boldly, 
Lieutenant  Stickel  dashing  on  the  enemy,  who  proved  to  be  in  number 
superior  to  his  company ; but  his  attack  was  so  energetic  and  quick 
that  the  rebels  could  not  find  time  to  form.  The  lieutenant  and  his  men 
were  among  them  with  drawn  sabers  and  drove  them  tor  5 miles,  kill- 
ing and  wounding  12  and  taking  some  30  prisoners. 

This  is  without  doubt  one  of  the  most  brilliant  cavalry  engagements 
of  the  war,  and  Lieutenant  Stickel  deserves  the  highest  praise  for  skill 
and  bravery  shown. 

My  division  encamped  on  both  sides  of  the  Big  Sandy  Creek,  cov- 
ering all  the  roads  leading  to  the  Big  Black  Biver  ferries  and  to  the 
enemy’s  line  in  front  and  flank. 

The  whole  army  corps  came  up  during  the  next  few  da^Ts,  and  after 
having  had  the  honor  of  a review  by  Generals  Grant  ancf  McClernand 
on  May  9,  we  again  moved  forward  on  the  10th  toward  the  enemy’s 
lines.  The  whole  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  marched  on  the  Jackson  road, 
and  when  on  Five-Mile  Creek  was  ordered  into  bivouac,  the  Forty- 
ninth  and  Sixty-ninth  Indiana  being  thrown  forward  as  advance  guard 
beyond  Auburn  (old)  to  the  fork  of  the  roads  to  Edwards  Station  and 
Baymond.  My  scouts  brought  information  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  ap- 
pearing near  Fourteen-Mile  Creek,  and  we  consequently  marched  for 
that  point  on  May  12,  General  Hovey’s  division  leading.  This  general’s 
approach  compelled  the  rebel  force  to  yield  their  position  to  us.  They 
fell  back  on  the  Edwards  Station  road,  while  our  corps  received  the 
general’s  order  for  the  next  morning  to  march  toward  Baymond,  but, 
if  possible,  on  a road  hiding  this  movement  of  the  corps  from  the  ob- 
servation of  the  enemy.  Such  a road  was  found  and  made  practicable 
by  the  corps  of  pioneers  attached  to  the  army  corps.  Soon  after  mid- 
night my  division  was  at  Baymond,  where  I received  orders  to  garrison 
the  place.  I took  such  measures  as  secured  it  against  any  surprise  of 
the  enemy.  All  the  other  United  States  forces  concentrated  here  ad- 
vanced farther  on  the  Jackson  road. 

I had  to  remain  at  the  post  of  Baymond  only  until  4 a.  m.,  May  15, 
when  the  general  commanding  the  army  corps  ordered  my  division, 
except  two  regiments — the  Fifty-fourth  Indiana  and  the  One  hundred 
and  twentieth  Ohio  Infantry,  which  were  to  be  left  as  garrison — to 
march  toward  Bolton  Station,  on  the  Jackson  and  Vicksburg  Bailroad. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS.  13 

At  8 o’clock  Captain  Campbell,  of  tbe  Third  Illinois  Cavalry,  captured 
that  place,  destroying  the  bridges  on  the  railroad  and  on  the  public 
roads  leading  to  it,  and  took  some  prisoners. 

All  reports  and  information  obtained  here  confirmed  the  fact  that 
large  bodies  of  rebel  forces  were  within  a few  miles  of  us  and  prepared 
to  give  us  battle.  They  were  formed  east  of  Edwards  Station,  defend- 
ing all  the  roads  converging  at  that  important  railroad  station.  In 
order  to  take  up  the  position  assigned  to  me  in  the  order  of  battle  by 
the  general  commanding  the  army  corps,  I left  Bolton,  marching  back 
on  the  Raymond  road  about  3 miles,  where  I took  a road  branching  off 
there  for  Edwards  Station,  and  bivouacked  on  the  same  ground  which 
the  enemy’s  cavalry  had  just  left.  Cavalry  vedettes  and  patrols  thrown 
forward  developed  the  enemy  in  immediate  vicinity.  His  pickets  fell 
back,  but  a large  body  of  mounted  infantry  appeared  soon  after  and 
pressed  into  the  line  of  my  infantry  pickets.  The  regiment  in  reserve, 
Forty-second  Ohio,  advanced  at  once  to  support  these  pickets,  and 
after  a lively  engagement  the  enemy’s  forces  retired  and  left  us  without 
further  annoyance  for  that  evening. 

The  plan  of  attack  for  the  next  morning  placed  me  in  the  center  of 
our  line;  General  Hovey,  Twelfth  Division,  on  my  right,  on  the  direct 
Bolton  and  Edwards  Station  road;  General  Smith,  Tenth  Division,  on 
my  left,  on  the  Raymond  and  Edwards  Station  road;  and  General  Carr, 
Fourteenth  Division,  following  me  as  reserve  on  the  same  road  I was 
marching  on. 

I left  camp  on  the  morning  of  May  16,  precisely  at  6 o’clock,  with  all 
those  safeguards  in  front  and  Hank  which  the  enemy’s  vicinity  rendered 
indispensable.  Captain  Campbell,  who  had  the  advance,  pushed  vig- 
orously forward.  By  7.30  o’clock  the  report  of  cannon  on  my  left  was 
heard,  and  cavalry  patrols  which  I had  sent  out  in  that  direction  re- 
ported that  General  Smith  had  engaged  the  enemy  on  the  Raymond 
road.  In  order  to  co-operate  with  him,  I advanced  rapidly  to  a point 
where  the  road  leaves  the  open  fields  and  enters  a very  broken  section 
of  timbered  land,  behind  which  the  enemy  was  formed,  apparently  in 
very  strong  numbers. 

Part  II. — The  casualties  on  May  1 and  the  garrisoning  of  Raymond 
reduced  my  division  as  follows  : 

First  Brigade , General  T.  T.  Garrard  commanding. — The  Seventh  Ken- 
tucky Infantry,  Lieutenant- Colonel  Lucas  commanding;  Forty-ninth 
Indiana  Infantry,  Col.  James  Keigwin  commanding;  Sixty-ninth  In- 
diana Infantry,  Col.  Thomas  W.  Bennett  commanding;  One  hundred 
and  eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  Col.  J.  G.  Fonda  commanding. 

Second  Brigade , Col.  JD.  W.  Lindsey  commanding. — The  Sixteenth  Ohio 
Infantry,  Captain  Botsford  commanding;  Forty-second  Ohio  Infantry, 
Major  Williams  commanding;  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Ohio  In- 
fantry, Colonel  Cradlebaugh  commanding;  Twenty-second  Kentucky 
Infantry,  Lieutenant-Colouel  Monroe  commanding. 

Artillery. — The  First  Wisconsin  Battery,  six  20-pounder  Parrotts ; 
Seventh  Michigan  Battery,  six  10-pounder  Rodman. 

Cavalry. — Companies  A,  E,  and  K,  Third  Illinois  Volunteers,  Captain 
Campbell  commanding. 

Infantry,  2,386;  artillery,  218;  Cavalry,  100.  Total,  2,704. 

With  this  force  of  2,704  men,  I entered  upon  one  of  the  most  difficult 
terrains  (grounds)  for  the  passage  of  troops  which  can  be  imagined. 
A chaos  of  ravines  and  narrow  hills,  sloping  very  abruptly  into  sink- 
hole-like valleys,  diverge  in  all  directions.  All  is  covered  densely  by 


14 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


trees  and  brush,  except  the  public  road,  which  winds  its  track  in  bizarre 
curves,  and  follows  the  hills  and  valleys,  without  permitting  at  any 
point  an  open  view  of  more  than  50  or  100  yards.  This  very  broken 
terrain  has,  on  the  south  side  of  the  road,  a general  tendency  to  slope 
off,  being  about  1 mile  wide.  It  terminates  at  a narrow  little  creek. 
Passing  over  this  stream,  the  land  becomes  smoother  again,  and  opens 
on  large  fields,  which  extend  all  across  from  the  creek  to  the  road  direct 
from  Eaymond  to  Edwards  Station,  on  which  General  Smith’s  division 
was  marching.  The  space  between  the  road  occupied  by  me  and  the 
Bolton  and  Edwards  Station  road,  on  my  right,  on  which  General 
Hovey’s  division  was  advancing,  is,  from  its  described  nature,  utterly 
impracticable  for  any  military  movements,  except  in  a dispersed  and 
loosely  connected  line  of  skirmishers. 

From  General  Hovey’s  division  I was  about  1 mile  off,  while  General 
Smith’s  column  was  at  least  4 miles  separated  from  me  to  my  left  and 
to  the  rear.  His  progress  was  checked  more  vehemently  than  that  of 
General  Hovey’s  and  my  own. 

To  the  First  Brigade,  General  Garrard  commanding,  I gave  the  order 
to  advance.  Only  one  section  of  Lanphere’s  battery  I took  along  with 
the  brigade,  as  there  was  hardly  any  prospect  for  artillery  to  be  used  on 
the  ground  before  us. 

To  prepare  against  any  attack  by  the  enemy  on  my  flank,  or  his  break- 
ing out  from  any  point  which  in  this  very  difficult  terrain  might  have 
escaped  my  notice,  I deployed  the  Second  Brigade,  with  two  sections  of 
the  Seventh  Michigan  Battery  and  the  First  Wisconsin  Battery,  on  an 
open  and  commanding  ridge  in  the  field  which  the  advancing  First 
Brigade  was  leaving  behind. 

The  Third  Illinois  Cavalry,  commanded  by  Captain  Campbell,  led  the 
way  carefully,  and,  supported  by  the  skirmishers  of  the  Seventh  Ken- 
tucky, we  advanced  into  the  timber  and  against  the  enemy,  who  had 
again  selected  one  of  his  favorite  positions  in  the  brush  to  give  us  bat- 
tle. The  ground  now  became  so  rough  that  I had  to  withdraw  the  cav- 
alry (Third  Illinois),  and  afterward  employed  it  in  finding  my  connec- 
tions with  General  Smith  on  my  left,  and  in  watching  the  enemy’s 
movements  toward  that  flank  of  my  position.  I have  derived  a great 
deal  of  good  from  the  captain’s  zeal. 

The  Seventh  Kentucky,  with  the  Forty-ninth  Indiana  Infantry  and 
one  section  of  Lanphere’s  battery,  formed  the  advance,  and,  driving  the 
enemy’s  skirmishers  from  one  ravine  to  another,  they  advanced  slowly 
against  his  main  position,  about  1 mile  beyond  the  position  occupied  by 
the  Second  Brigade  in  the  field.  I found  a comparatively  good  range 
for  the  section  of  artillery,  and  concluded  to  place  it  in  battery  there, 
supported  by  two  companies  of  infantry,  and  keeping  them  in  readiness 
for  any  emergency,  the  pieces  loaded  with  canister,  in  order  to  secure  a 
rallying  point  in  case  my  advancing  infantry  had  to  fall  back.  The 
Seventh  Kentucky  on  the  right  and  the  Forty-ninth  Indiana  on  the 
left  of  the  road  advanced  about  1 mile  beyond  this  section  of  artillery, 
when  the  fire  and  resistance  of  the  enemy  became  very  fierce.  1 dis- 
patched immediately  the  Sixty-ninth  Indiana  and  One  hundred  and 
eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry  to  deploy  on  the  left  of  the  road  to  re-enforce 
these  regiments.  Gallantly  the  line  so  strengthened  advanced,  forcing 
several  of  the  enemy’s  positions  by  their  impetuous  charges  up  and 
down  the  hills. 

By  this  time  General  Hovey  was  also  engaged,  and  apparently  the 
main  forces  of  the  enemy  were  concentrated  against  his  and  my  posi- 
tions. The  artillery  played  heavily  on  us,  but  without  any  injury  to  the 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION?S  HILL,  MISS.  15 

troops,  the  very  broken  ground  and  thick  timber  exposing  them  only  to 
very  short  range  of  infantry. 

We  advanced  until  we  came  to  a clearing  again  in  the  timber.  Here 
the  road  on  which  General  Hovey  was  advancing  runs  into  the  road 
I was  fighting  on,  and  here  the  enemy  made  a most  desperate  attempt 
to  prevent  the  junction  of  the  divisions.  We  could  see  his  columns 
advancing  in  great  numbers,  and  I considered  it  prudent  to  strengthen 
my  line  by  adding  the  Forty-second  Ohio  Infantry  to  the  First  Brigade, 
and  the  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Ohio  Infantry  (both  of  the  Second 
Brigade)  to  support  the  artillery  (one  section)  in  lieu  of  two  companies 
of  the  Forty-ninth  Indiana,  which  I ordered  to  join  their  regiment  in 
front. 

Fearing  the  enemy  might  try  to  benefit  by  the  open  ground  on  my 
left  flank,  described  above,  and  the  backward  position  of  General  Smith, 
I made  a reconnaissance  in  that  direction,  and  found  large  numbers  of 
them  (infantry  and  artillery)  massed  on  a commanding  elevation,  ap- 
parently in  expectation  of  General  Smith’s  attack.  Occasionally  the 
enemy  threw  shell  in  the  direction  of  their  march. 

In  order  to  secure  my  flank,  and  co-operate  with  General  Smith,  I 
ordered  Colonel  Lindsey,  with  the  two  remaining  regiments  of  his  bri- 
gade (Sixteenth  Ohio  and  Twenty-second  Kentucky  Infantry),  to  take 
a position  in  the  edge  of  the  timber  and  open  fire  against  the  enemy’s 
position.  These  two  regiments  were  by  no  means  adequate  to  repel  or 
resist  the  numerous  force  of  the  enemy,  and  I therefore  applied  to 
Major-General  McClernand  for  re  enforcements  from  General  Carr’s 
division,  which  was  in  my  rear,  and  on  the  ground  occupied  until  lately 
by  the  Second  Brigade.  A regiment  wras  ordered  to  the  support  of 
Colonel  Lindsey,  and  this  excellent  officer  deployed  his  line  and  at- 
tacked the  enemy  vigorously.  Debouching  from  the  timber,  he  charged 
the  retreating  infantry  to  the  very  muzzle  of  the  battery  covering 
them. 

The  promised  support  was  not  yet  on  hand  to  follow  up  this  attack $ 
therefore  the  colonel  ordered  his  regiments  to  fall  back  into  the  timber 
again  and  await  re-enforcements. 

I refer  to  the  colonel’s  report,  and  take  great  pleasure  to  commend 
the  action  of  that  meritorious  officer.  The  direction  of  the  enemy’s 
retreat  on  that  flank  was  such  that  he  fell  (rather  unexpectedly  to 
both  parties)  on  the  left  of  the  First  Brigade,  which  was  advancing  and 
fighting  on  the  main  road  under  General  Garrard.  Though  I had  ad- 
vised this  officer  of  the  operations  on  the  left,  the  information  could  not 
be  communicated  in  time  to  the  troops  on  his  left,  therefore  the  ap- 
pearance of  the  enemy  on  their  flank  stopped  for  some  time  the  ad- 
vance of  our  troops. 

General  McClernand,  who  saw  the  effect  of  this  presumed  flank  at- 
tack, immediately  strengthened  General  Garrard’s  position  by  two  regi- 
ments of  General  Carr’s  division.  At  the  same  time  General  Lawler’s 
brigade  (also  of  General  Carr’s  division)  was  ordered  to  support  Colonel 
Lindsey.  The  enemy,  becoming  convinced  of  the  small  force  under  the 
colonel,  had  opened  a raking  artillery  fire  on  him.  A few  rounds  from 
General 'Lawler’s  artillery  were  enough  to  silence  his  guns  and  compel 
him  to  remove  them  to  safer  quarters.  Thus  strengthened  on  all  sides, 
the  whole  line  advanced,  and  after  a short  but  very  brisk  fire  tile  en- 
emy, already  nearly  broken  by  the  severe  assaults  made  by  my  troops, 
yielded  his  position. 

The  main  army  of  the  enemy  made  for  Big  Black  Kiver  Bailroad 
Bridge,  but  a large  body  of  his  right  wing  tried  to  make  good  its  retreat 


16 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


in  another  direction.  They  were  perseveringly  followed  by  Colonel 
Lindsey  and  General  Smith,  whose  division  fell  in  with  Colonel  Lind- 
sey’s brigade  during  the  pursuit.  Thousands  of  the  enemy  were  found 
scattered  everywhere,  and  fell  into  our  hands  as  prisoners  of  war.  In 
one  instance,  Colonel  Lindsey,  with  the  Sixteenth  Ohio  and  Twenty- 
second  Kentucky  Infantry  alone,  took  more  prisoners  than  the  whole 
number  of  his  brigade  combined  ; also  a number  of  cannon  and  small- 
arms  became  ours.  We  pressed  the  enemy  to  Ldwards  Station,  where 
our  army  corps  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

At  4 o’clock  next  morning  (May  17)  the  line  of  march  was  taken  up 
again,  General  Carr’s  division  leading.  Our  onward  march  was  not  in- 
terfered with  until  the  head  of  the  column  debouched  from  a piece  of 
timber  land,  about  2 miles  east  of  the  Big  Black  River  Eailroad  Bridge. 
General  Carr’s  division  at  once  deployed  on  the  right  of  the  road,  while 
I executed  the  order  to  deploy  my  division  on  the  left  of  the  road,  con- 
necting with  General  Carr.  I ordered  Colonel  Lindsey  (Second  Bri- 
gade) forward,  and  he  deployed  into  line  as  soon  as  the  terrain  per- 
mitted this  maneuver  to  be  executed,  while  the  First  Brigade  (General 
Garrard’s),  deployed  by  battalion  in  mass,  formed  the  second  line.  Ad- 
vices from  the  left  informed  me  that  large  numbers  of  the  enemy  were 
on  that  flank,  and  I accordingly  had  the  First  Brigade  change  front  to 
the  left,  so  that  it  formed  an  obtuse  angle  to  the  line  of  the  Second  Bri- 
gade. Skirmishers  thrown  out  in  front  and  flank  engaged  the  enemy 
at  once.  We  advanced  over  the  open  ground  to  within  500  yards  of 
the  enemy’s  works  protecting  the  Big  Black  River  Railroad  Bridge. 
Before  attempting  a farther  advance  against  the  fortifications,  which 
appeared  to  be  very  extensive  and  very  strongly  garrisoned,  I ordered 
the  First  (Foster’s)  Wisconsin  Battery  forward.  My  first  intention  was- 
to  plant  it  at  the  salient  point  formed  by  the  lines  of  the  Second  and 
First  Brigades,  but  a closer  survey  of  the  grounds  and  the  enemy  s 
works  caused  me  to  bring  this  heavy  battery  to  the  right  of  the  Second 
Brigade,  and  near  the  railroad,  where  it  had  a direct  fire  on  the 
strongest  part  of  the  enemy’s  works,  and  on  that  point  where  the  great- 
est masses  of  the  enemy  appeared  to  concentrate. 

My  movements  must  have  attracted  the  attention  ol  the  enemy.  Lie 
opened  a heavy  fire  on  us  before  we  had  the  pieces  in  battery,  and  while 
I was  directing  Captain  Foster  where  to  plant  his  first  piece,  the  first 
shell  exploded  in  our  midst,  disabling  Captain  Foster  and  mjseli  and 
exploding  the  limber-box  of  the  piece.  I was  now  able  to  remain  on 
the  field  but  a short  time,  during  which  the  gallant  men  of  Foster  suc- 
ceeded in  bringing  their  pieces  in  position,  while  the  enem^  placed  on 
them  most  terribly.  I was  compelled  to  yield  the  command  ot  the 
Ninth  Division  to  General  A.  L.  Lee,  and  it  is  to  his  report  I relei  or 
the  part  taken  by  the  command  in  the  storming  and  taking  ot  the  ihg 
Black  River  fortifications,  with  all  their  cannon,  ammunition,  and  sev- 


eral thousand  prisoners.  , j , 

For  the  number  of  killed  and  wounded  for  these  two  days  (loth  a 
17th)  I refer  to  the  nominal  list  accompanying  this  report.* 

Fart  III.— Elated  by  these  glorious  victories,  the  men  hastily  threw 
a bridge  over  the  Big  Black  River  in  the  evening  and  night  ot  the  1 7th, 
and  early  in  the  morning  the  Ninth  Division  crossed  the  river  and  fol- 
lowed the  enemy,  who  had  gained  more  than  twelve  hours  time  over 
us  by  burning  the  railroad  bridge,  and  thus  causing  our  delay  until  a 
new  one  could  be  built.'  Every  step  forward  showed  the  utter  conlu: 


* Embodied  in  revised  statements,  pp.  7,  128. 


CHAr.  XXXVI.  J BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS.  17 

sion  of  liis  retreat 5 the  road  was  literally  strewn  with  the  debris  of  the 
dissolved  army. 

The  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  left  at  Mount  Alban  the  main  Jackson 
and  Vicksburg  road,  turning  south,  and,  marching  over  several  planta- 
tion roads,  reached  the  road  leading  from  HalPs  Ferry  to  Vicksburg. 
On  this  avenue  we  approached  the  city,  and  at  nightfall  we  came  within 
sight  of  its  extensive  fortifications.  Numerous  flags  floating  over  the 
works  proved  that  the  persisting  leaders  of  the  enemy  would  try  a last 
attempt  to  rally  their  men  to  fight  again,  and  to  save,  if  possible,  the 
stronghold  of  rebeldom  on  the  Mississippi  River.  We  bivouacked  on  a 
very  narrow  little  creek,  about  2 miles  from  the  line  of  fortifications. 

Orders  received  on  May  19  placed  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  on  the 
left  wing  of  the  army,  which  prepared  to  invest  the  city.  My  division 
was  to  form  the  extreme  left,  and  General  Smith’s  the  right  of  our  first 
line,  while  General  Carr,  deploying  his  di  vision  in  the  center  of  us,  took 
the  second  line.  Such  were  our  instructions. 

Notwithstanding  I was  hardly  able  to  move  about  on  horseback,  I 
considered  the  circumstances  imperative  for  me  to  take  command  of 
the  division  again.  Assigning  to  General  Lee,  who  had  reported  to  me 
for  permanent  duty,  the  command  of  the  First  Brigade,  lately  under 
General  Garrard,  which  officer  was  ordered  to  a command  at  Helena, 
Ark.,  I at  once  proceeded  to  make,  as  far  as  possible,  a reconnaissance 
of  the  grounds  which  were  to  be  the  field  of  operations  for  the  Ninth 
Division. 

At  the  little  creek  we  had  bivouacked  on,  the  ground  on  the  left  of 
the  road  rises  gradually,  and,  forming  a plateau  sloping  from  west  to 
east,  is  converted  into  fields  planted  with  corn.  At  the  west  end  of  the 
plateau  it  abruptly  sinks  into  a deep  valley  again.  At  the  margin  of 
this  valley  the  plateau  reaches  its  highest  elevation,  and  runs  almost 
parallel  and  on  the  same  lead  with  that  ridge  in  front  (west)  which  the 
enemy  had  covered  with  his  fortifications.  The  distance  between  the 
plateau  and  the  fortifications  does  not  exceed  1,500  yards,  but  the  in- 
terval is  very  broken  indeed.  The  main  figures  of  this  intermediate 
ground  are  two  ridges  running  almost  parallel  with  the  fortified  line 
and  with  the  west  side  of  the  plateau,  but  hardly  on  any  point  high 
enough  to  mask  these  from  each  other.  The  ridges  are  very  steep, 
creating  three  narrow  valleys,  in  each  one  of  which  is  a small  running 
stream.  These  hills  and  valleys  are  by  no  means  regular,  but,  on  the 
contrary,  variously  intersected  by  cross  valleys  and  gorges,  making  a 
passage  over  them  very  difficult.  To  go  straight  forward  over  them 
with  artillery  is  out  of  the  question,  except  by  pulling  them  up  and 
down  by  hand;  though  on  the  south  end  of  that  section  of  terrain  where 
the  described  three  valleys  converge,  the  slopes  appeared  to  offer  some 
practicability  for  military  movements,  and  I was  informed  that  I could 
find  there  a plantation  road  which  connected  the  Hall’s  Ferry  and  the 
Warrenton  and  Vicksburg  roads. 

The  main  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road,  on  which  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps 
was  approaching,  turns  on  the  highest  ridge  of  the  plateau  to  the  right, 
and,  following  the  undulations  of  the  ground,  enters  the  line  of  the  en- 
emy’s fortifications  in  front  of  the  position  assigned  to  General  Smith’s 
division.  Preparatory  to  further  movements,  I ordered  my  division  to 
advance  in  the  following  order : 

The  First  Brigade,  under  General  Lee,  deployed  into  line  of  battle  to 
the  edge  of  the  valley  (west  end  of  the  plateau),  with  one  section  of  20- 
pounder  Parrotts  (Captain  Foster’s  battery)  on  the  right,  and  two  sec- 
tions of  the  same  on  the  left.  The  Second  Brigade,  under  Col.  D.  W. 

2 R R— - VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


18 


f 

MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

Lindsey,  deployed  into  line,  by  battalions  in  mass,  in  the  rear  of  the 
First  Brigade.  Being  placed  on  the  extreme  left,  I ordered  a strong 
line  of  pickets  thrown  out  on  that  flank,  supported  by  the  left  battalion 
of  the  Second  Brigade,  in  order  to  prevent  any  surprise  from  that  side. 
Lanphere’s  battery  was  kept  in  reserve,  supported  by  the  cavalry.  The 
right  section  of  Foster’s  battery  was  opened  by  10  o’clock  on  a battery 
in  front  of  General  Smith,  where  we  could  see  a party  of  the  rebels  at 
work.  The  distance  was  at  least  2,500  yards,  but  the  projectiles  from 
these  superior  guns  reached  the  object  and  dispersed  the  working  party. 

All  the  forts  in  my  front  were  fully  manned,  and  a number  of  guns 
were  in  view,  but  they  did  not  fire  even  when  Foster’s  battery,  on  the 
left  of  General  Lee’s  brigade,  to  find  their  range,  threw  several  shells 
among  them.  Their  guns  remained  silent.  I ordered  General  Lee  to 
advance  his  line  into  the  valley,  leaving  only  a support  to  the  batteries, 
and,  as  far  as  he  found  no  resistance  with  skirmishers,  feeling  the  way 
carefully.  The  general  descended  into  the  valley  and  marched  up  the 
next  ridge,  passed  the  next  valley,  and  was  debouching  from  a small 
strip  of  timber  in  order  to  ascend  the  second  line  of  hills.  Here  his 
troops  came  in  view  of  the  enemy,  who  then  opened  with  shot  and  shell, 
though  without  doing  any  injury.  The  general  halted  under  the  shelter 
of  the  many  ravines.  Colonel  Lindsey’s  brigade  followed  this  forward 
movement,  under  orders  to  support  and  strengthen  any  part  of  General 
Lee’s  line  if  necessary. 

Shortly  before  this,  I received  orders  from  corps  headquarters  to  pre- 
pare everything  for  a general  assault  at  2 p.  m.  After  having  advised 
my  brigade  commanders  of  this  order,  Captain  Lanphere’s  battery  was 
brought  forward  to  support  the  assault,  and  unlimbered  on  an  eminence 
on  the  left  of  Foster’s  battery  (four  guns).  Both  batteries  were  to  open 
fire  on  the  enemy’s  works  and  wherever  he  should  show  himself.  The 
forward  movement  of  the  infantry  had  left  the  batteries  without  an  ef- 
fective support  in  case  of  a flank  attack,  and  I therefore  ordered  Cap- 
tain Campbell’S  cavalry  to  proceed  on  the  plantation  road  mentioned 
above,  leading  to  Warrenton  and  Hall’s  Ferry,  scour  all  the  country 
south,  and  apprise  me  of  anything  that  might  transpire  in  that  direction. 

At  2 o’clock  all  the  batteries  fired  three  volleys,  and  the  infantry 
began  the  advance.  They  climbed  the  steep  hills  before  them  in  most 
brilliant  style,  and  marched  over  the  brow  of  the  ridge  through  a most 

raking  fire.  . . . , „ 

The  extremely  irregular  ground  and  the  situation  ot  the  objects  ot 
attack  made  the  direction  of  the  advance  of  the  First  Brigade  bear  to 
the  left,  and,  of  course,  it  created  a gap  in  the  line  of  attack  between 
mine  and  General  Smith’s  command,  on  my  right.  Under  my  orders 
and  instructions,  Colonel  Lindsey,  commanding  the  Second  Brigade,  at 
once  inserted  his  brigade  in  this  opening,  and  the  whole  division  now 
advanced  steadily  and  gallantly  against  a most  fearful  fire  irom  the 
enemy’s  rifle-pits  and  batteries,  which  commanded  (mostly  by  cross-nrc) 
every  hill,  every  ravine,  gully,  and  gorge  leading  to  the  fortifications. 

Many  a brave  man  sank  down  under  the  hail-storm  of  iron  and  lead, 
and  among  them  that  most  gallant  officer,  General  A.  L.  Lee,  who,  so 
shortly  connected  with  the  division,  had  shown  so  many  militaiy  vir- 
tues, was  wounded:  but  the  victors  at  Port  Gibson,  Champion  s Hill, 
and  Bi0*  Black  Biver  marched  forward  and  held  the  ground  gamed. 
They  came  within  300  or  350  yards  of  the  enemy’s  works,  and,  availing 
themselves  of  every  swell  and  nook  of  the  ground,  opened  now  on  their 
part  a murderous  fire,  compelling  the  rebel  gunners  very  soon  to  leave 
their  guns. 


Chaf.  XXXVI.  ] 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS. 


19 


By  the  wounding  of  General  Lee  the  command  of  the  First  Brigade 
devolved  on  Col.  James  Keigwin,  Forty-ninth  Indiana  Infantry. 

The  artillery,  from  its  position  described  above,  supported  movements 
of  the  infantry  with  a well-directed  fire;  but  in  order  to  bring  the  bat- 
teries to  a more  effective  range,  I selected  a hill  at  least  500  yards 
nearer  the  rebel  works  for  a battery,  and  at  once  ordered  one  section  of 
Lanpliere’s  battery  to  be  brought  forward.  The  pieces  had  to  be  drawn 
up  the  very  steep  hill  by  hand,  and  as  soon  as  one  piece  was  in  position 
it  was  opened  on  the  enemy. 

The  feasibility  of  establishing  a battery  on  the  steep  hill  being  thus 
demonstrated,  I ordered  a breastwork  to  be  built  during  the  night  on 
the  same  spot  for  two  sections  of  Lanpliere’s  battery.  I laid  the  faces 
of  this  work  out  so  that  we  could  rake  every  battery  in  our  front. 

After  nightfall  a strong  force  of  sharpshooters  and  reserves  were 
detailed  to  occupy  and  hold  the  ground  gained  by  our  first  attack  on 
Vicksburg.  The  other  troops  were  withdrawn  and  bivouacked  in  the 
valleys  and  along  the  little  streams  of  water  in  them,  carefully  hiding 
their  camp-fires. 

On  next  morning,  May  20,  I had  the  pleasure  to  witness  the  opening 
of  the  battery  which,  by  the  energy  of  Captain  Lanphere  and  the  zeal 
of  his  men  and  the  pioneers,  was  completed  during  the  night.  It  was 
the  first  battery  constructed,  and  the  farthest  in  advance.  The  brilliant 
practice  of  the  gunners  kept  all  the  enemy’s  guns  silent. 

During  the  night  one  section  of  Captain  Foster’s  battery  was  ordered 
to  take  position  in  General  Smith’s  line  by  Major-General  McClernand. 

In  the  early  part  of  the  morning  the  infantry  had  formed  again  in 
their  respective  places  they  occupied  yesterday,  but  behind  the  line  of 
sharpshooters,  who  kept  up  a very  lively  fire  with  the  enemy  in  the 
rifle-pits. 

It  appeared  very  desirable,  after  the  successful  construction  of  the 
battery  last  night,  to  have  also  the  20-pounder  Parrott  guns  of  the  First 
Wisconsin  Battery  brought  forward.  In  my  efforts  to  find  a suitable 
site  for  this  battery,  I was  assisted  by  Colonel  Keigwin,  and  on  his 
suggestion  I ordered  it  placed  on  a high  ridge  to  the  left,  and  a little 
in  advance  of  the  Lanphere  battery.  A pioneer  detail  prepared  the 
necessary  earthwork.  Notwithstanding  the  rebel  sharpshooters  main- 
tained a fire  of  great  precision  on  the  spot  all  day,  the  four  guns  opened 
from  this  second  battery  before  night  in  masterly  style. 

On  May  21,  the  fire  was  kept  up  by  both  batteries  at  intervals  and  by 
the  skirmishers,  the  masses  of  infantry  being  kept  out  of  the  enemy’s 
range  and  view. 

While  we  were  at  work  to  advance  our  lines,  the  enemy  did  not  lose 
any  chance  to  strengthen  and  enlarge  his  works  and  repair  damages. 
Guns  either  disabled  or  withdrawn  from  the  forts  one  day  reappeared 
on  the  next  morning,  either  on  their  old  or  new  fortifications.  They 
opened  them  ordinarily  at  early  morning,  when  the  prompt  and  precise 
fire  from  our  guns  soon  forced  them  to  their  usual  quiet  and  silence  again. 

Our  skirmishers  advanced  over  this  difficult  ground  slowly  but 
steadily,  so  that  on  the  evening  of  May  21  they  were  at  no  place  more 
than  300  yards  from  the  enemy’s  works,  and  at  some  points  within  200 
yards  of  them.  This  variation  in  intervals  was  exclusively  owing  to 
the  ground,  which,  after  passing  the  valley  separating  us  from  the  for- 
tifications, became  more  rough  and  rugged  than  before.  The  slope 
which  was  immediately  before  my  men  was  almost  perpendicular,  and 
promiscuously  cut  up  by  ravines  and  water-drains,  some  of  which  were 
not  more  than  6 or  7 feet  wide  and  10  or  15  deep.  All  timber  was  cut 


20 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XJtXVI. 


down  and  converted  into  the  most  intricate  abatis  and  extending  almost 
all  along  my  immediate  front.  Besides  these  natural  and  artificial  im- 
pediments, the  enemy’s  rifle-pits  and  forts  were  so  skillfully  arranged 
that  their  fires  defended  every  approach,  exposing  an  assaulting  party 
to  a front  and  flank  fire  at  murderous  ranges. 

By  6 p.  jn.  (May  21)  an  order  from  headquarters  of  the  army  corps  ad- 
vised me  officially  of  a general  assault,  to  be  made  on  the  next  morning 
(May  22)  at  10  o’clock  by  the  whole  line.  In  obedience  to  this  order,  1 
immediately  met  my  brigade  commanders,  to  come  to  a thorough  un- 
derstanding as  to  the  anticipated  attack.  After  subjecting  all  the 
ground  to  a very  minute  survey,  in  order  to  ascertain  and  agree  upon 
the  best  point  of  attack  (this  very  puzzling  choice,  according  to  the 
order,  having  been  left  to  every  division  commander),  I selected  the 
very  steep  acclivity  directly  in  front  of  Captain  Lanphere’s  battery  as 
the  point  of  my  attack  for  sundry  reasons,  viz:  There  was  a well-cov- 
ered approach  to  it,  where  the  storming  columns  could  form,  and  the 
obstructions  appeared  less  than  at  any  other  point  on  my  front ; further- 
more the  point  selected  was  in  supporting  distance  of  General  Carr,  who 
had  relieved  General  Smith,  on  my  right.  Another  prominent  and 
principal  feature  seemed  to  be  that  the  slope  was  here  divided  by  spurs, 
running  out  and  dividing  the  terrain  into  three  sections,  and  thus  afford- 
ing some  shelter  to  the  troops  while  they  made  the  escalade. 

I ordered  columns  of  divisions  at  half  distance  to  be  formed  for  the 
attack,  in  order  to  have  the  necessary  pressure  and  connections  on  the 
point  of  attack,  without  the  danger  of  the  lines  being  broken,  which 
deployed  lines  in  this  terrain  could  not  have  avoided.  The  intervals 
and  fronts  of  the  columns  were  to  be  well  covered  by  sharpshooters. 
The  columns  were  formed  as  follows : 

First.  Right  Column. — The  Twenty-second  Kentucky  Infantry  and 
the  Forty-second  Ohio  Infantry. 

Second.  Center  Column. — The  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Ohio  In- 
fantry and  Forty-ninth  and  Sixty-nintli  Indiaua  Infantry. 

Third.  Left  Column. — The  Seventh  Kentucky  Infantry  and  One  hun- 
dred and  eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry. 

The  Sixteenth  Ohio  Infantry  was  deployed  as  skirmishers. 

The  One  hundred  and  twentieth  Ohio  Infantry  was  retained  as  the 
extreme  left,  with  orders  to  deploy,  at  the  hour  of  attack,  a very  strong 
line  of  skirmishers  on  that  wing,  and  open  a heavy  fire,  and  make  all 
such  demonstrations  which  could  divert  the  enemy’s  attention  from  the 
point  of  our  main  attack.  The  artillery  kept  up  a heavy  fire  on  the 
enemy’s  works  since  early  daybreak,  preparatory  to  the  assault. 

Precisely  at  10  a.  m.  the  column  moved  forward,  breaking  over  all 
obstructions  at  the  foot  and  in  the  slope  of  the  hills,  and  against  a ter- 
rific fire  from  all  the  rifle-pits  and  forts.  The  Seventh  Kentucky,  lead- 
ing the  left  column,  advanced  to  the  top  of  the  hill,  and  marched  over 
the  naked  brow  of  it  through  murderous  fire  from  the  great  redoubt  on 
the  left.  They  suffered  heavily.  All  the  columns  reached  the  top  of 
the  hill,  and  came  within  so  short  a distance  from  the  works  that  all 
orders  and  commands  given  on  the  enemy’s  side  could  be  distinctly  un- 
derstood by  our  men.  The  officers  and  men  acted  most  courageously, 
but,  finding  that  new  obstacles  not  seen  before  would  impede  their  far- 
ther advance,  the  column  halted  to  rest,  availing  themselves  of  the 
irregularities  of  the  ground  for  shelter.  The  sharpshooters  and  leading 
divisions  of  the  columns  maintained  a very  well-directed  fire  against 
the  enemy,  causing  their  gunners  to  leave  their  guns,  and  preventing 
their  infantry  from  showiug  themselves,  except  for  moments. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


21 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPIONS  HILL,  MISS. 

Under  the  most  scorching  sun,  our  men  kept  their  dangerous  position 
all  day.  Several  attempts  made  to  push  farther  on,  and,  if  possible, 
reach  the  enemy’s  line,  only  developed  more  and  more  the  exceedingly 
difficult  task  before  us.  By  the  result  being  the  same  all  along  the 
whole  line,  it  was  demonstrated  that  the  feasibility  of  taking  the  forts 
by  assault  was  more  than  doubtful.  The  troops  of  my  division  held 
the  ground  gained,  and  when  night  came  on  were  withdrawn,  leaving, 
though,  strong  pickets  and  a line  of  sharpshooters  on  the  most  advanced 
points. 

Colonel  Cradlebaugh,  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Ohio  Infantry ; 
Major  Finley,  Sixty-ninth  Indiana;  Captain  Barber, Forty-second  Ohio 
Infantry,  and  many  other  officers  and  men  were  wounded  or  killed  on 
this  eventful  day.  I refer  to  the  list  of  casualties  annexed  for  the 
details  of  losses.*  They  are  heavy. 

With  May  22,  my  operations  before  Vicksburg  came  to  a close,  as 
I received  orders  on  the  next  day  to  proceed  with  a part  of  my  com- 
mand and  some  cavalry,  temporarily  attached,  to  Big  Black  Biver  Kail- 
road  Bridge,  as  the  enemy  were  making  some  efforts  to  collect  a new 
army,  under  General  Johnston,  with  the  spoken-out  intention  to  raise 
the  siege  of  Vicksburg. 

In  recapitulation  of  the  narrative  of  three  weeks’  work — from  May  2 
to  May  23 — I state  that  the  Ninth  Division,  most  all  the  time  in  front 
and  within  feeling  distance  of  the  enemy,  marched  over  125  miles,  took 
a prominent  part  in  the  great  battles  of  Champion’s  Hill  and  Big  Black 
Eiver,  and  since  then  was,  without  being  relieved  an  hour,  in  the  front 
line  of  the  army  investing  Vicksburg,  and  on  all  these  memorable  occa- 
sions never  flinched  from  their  severe  duty,  but  were  always  ready  to 
strike. 

To  enumerate  those  who  distinguished  themselves  is  impossible,  when 
every  man  showed  himself  willing  to  die  for  our  cause.  In  mentioning 
the  names  of  General  Lee  and  Colonels  Lindsey  and  Keigwin,  my  bri- 
gade commanders,  and  those  of  Colonels  Bennett,  Sixty-ninth  Indiana; 
Fonda,  One  hundred  and  eighteenth  Illinois ; Spiegel,  One  hundred  and 
twentieth  Ohio;  Cradlebaugh,  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Ohio,  and 
Lieutenant-Colonels  Pardee,  Forty-second  Ohio;  Monroe,  Twenty-second 
Kentucky ; Lucas,  Seventh  Kentucky,  and  Major  Hawhe,  Forty-ninth 
Indiana  Infantry,  the  regimental  commanders ; Captain  Lanphere,  Sev- 
enth Michigan  Battery ; Lieutenants  Nutting  and  Hackett,  of  the  First 
Wisconsin  Battery,  and  Captain  Campbell,  Third  Illinois  Cavalry,  I en- 
deavor to  express  the  greatest  obligations  I feel  to  them  for  their  great 
zeal,  promptness,  and  courage  exhibited  in  executing  orders.  The  hearty 
and  brave  assistance  of  these  and  all  secured  us  victory. 

The  wounded  sufferers  were,  under  the  circumstances,  promptly  and 
kindly  cared  for.  The  arrangements  for  field  hospitals  and  the  ambu- 
lance corps,  under  Lieutenant  [Joseph  D.]  Moody,  were  perfect,  and  it 
is  again  my  duty  and  pleasure  to  thank  Dr.  [JoelJ  Pomerene  and  the 
surgeons  of  the  division  most  sincerely. 

In  conclusion,  I am  compelled  to  state  that  almost  all  the  artillery 
rifled  ammunition  was  very  inferior.  At  moments  of  the  highest  im- 
portance the  batteries  would  have  to  cease  firing,  for  our  deficient  mis- 
siles were  more  dangerous  to  our  own  men  than  to  the  enemy ; also  in- 
fantry ammunition  can  bear  improvement. 

I annex  some  sketches  prepared  by  tb^  topographical  engineer,  F. 
Tunica,  attached  to  the  Ninth  Division : No.  1,  showing  the  whole  route 
made  by  command  since  leaving  Carthage,  La.,  to  our  position  in  the 


See  revised  statement,  p.  161. 


22 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CnAP.  XXXVI. 


rear  of  Vicksburg,  Miss;*  No.  2,  topography  of  the  battle-field  of  Big 
Black  River  Bridge,  May  17.* 

I hope  to  be  able  to  procure  also  topographical  sketches  of  the  battle- 
field of  Champion’s  Hill  and  the  scene  of  the  operations  of  the  Ninth 
Division  in  the  rear  of  Vicksburg,  Miss. 

Submitting  all  this  to  you,  1 am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  most 
obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTERHAUS, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates,  A.  A.  G.,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Col.  James  Keigwin , Forty -ninth  Indiana  Infantry , First 
Brigade , including  engagement  at  Big  Black  River  Bridge. 

In  the  Field,  May  18,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  as  a report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  Forty-ninth  Regiment  Indiana  Volunteer  Infantry  in  the 
engagements  with  the  enemy  on  the  16th  instant  at  Champion’s  Hill 
and  at  Big  Black  Bridge  on  the  17th  instant: 

On  the  morning  of  the  16th,  we  were  ordered  from  our  bivouac,  and 
formed  a part  of  the  advance  guard  of  the  division.  After  a march  of 
about  4 miles,  we  came  upon  the  enemy’s  line  of  skirmishers,  and  were 
ordered  to  form  on  the  left  of  the  Seventh  Kentucky.  Our  skirmishers 
advanced  and  were  soon  hotly  engaged.  I advanced  the  regiment  a 
short  distance,  and  soon  met  the  enemy  in  our  front,  when  I opened  fire 
on  him,  and  drove  him  back  a short  distance.  The  ground  being  very 
rough,  I halted  for  a short  time  to  reconnoiter  the  ground  in  my  front. 
While  at  this  point,  I received  an  order  from  General  Osterhaus  to  push 
forward ; that  he  wanted  to  gain  another  position.  I moved  on,  and  soon 
found  that  I was  getting  so  far  in  advance  of  the  brigade,  that  I might 
be  cut  off.  I halted,  and  found  that  the  regiments  to  my  right  and  left 
were  about  500  yards  to  my  rear.  I did  not  remain  here  but  a short 
time,  when  I was  ordered  back  to  the  battery,  to  my  position  in  the  bri- 
gade. As  I fell  back,  the  enemy  followed  a short  distance  and  halted. 
We  remained  here  a short  time,  when  the  brigade,  with  the  Forty-second 
Ohio,  was  moved  forward  to  the  attack.  We  moved  forward  until  we 
came  in  sight  of  the  open  field  and  got  our  line  formed,  when  we  dis- 
covered the  enemy  approaching  across  the  field.  They  soon  drove  our 
skirmishers  in,  and  commenced  the  attack.  The  Forty-second  Ohio,  on 
my  right,  from  some  cause,  gave  way,  which  left  my  left  flank  exposed, 
when  the  enemy  came  down  on  it  and  charged  into  the  flank,  and  some 
of  them  got  to  my  rear.  My  men  stood  up  bravely,  and,  after  passing  a 
few  blows  with  the  butts  of  their  pieces,  were  forced  to  retire.  I halted 
them  on  a small  elevation  and  fired  a few  rounds,  when  the  enemy 
broke  and  went  back  faster  than  they  had  approached.  This  ended 
the  fighting  for  the  day.  We  then  moved  on  to  Edwards  Station  and 
bivouacked  for  the  night. 

My  men  during  the  day  fought  bravely,  and  I cannot  speak  in  too 
high  terms  of  the  gallant  bearing  of  both  officers  and  men.  I only  had 
seven  companies  engaged  in  the  fight,  and  they  were  small,  numbering 
only  260  men.  The  other  three  were  detailed  in  the  morning  to  sup- 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS. 


23 


port  one  section  of  Captain  Lanpliere’s  battery.  Major  Hawke  and 
Adjutant  Biddle  deserve  great  credit  for  tkeir  cool  and  efficient  aid  ren- 
dered me  during  tke  day.  And  my  line  officers  were  ever  in  tkeir  places, 
urging  tkeir  men  to  do  tkeir  duty. 

Tke  following  is  a list  of  casualties  during  tke  day:  Killed,  G; 
wounded,  14 ; missing,  1. 

On  tke  morning  of  tke  17tk  instant,  we  left  our  bivouac  and  marcked 
in  tke  rear  of  our  division  on  tke  road  toward  Big  Black  Bridge.  We 
kad  only  marcked  about  2 miles  wken  tke  firing  commenced  in  front. 
We  followed  on  to  a point  wkere  tke  Ninth  Division  turned  off  tke  road 
to  tke  left.  At  tkis  point  I was  ordered  by  General  McClernand  to 
move  with  my  regiment  on  tke  rigkt  of  tke  road,  and  form  a line  in  tke 
rear  of  General  Lawler’s  brigade,  wkick  was  hotly  engaged.  I remained 
at  tkis  point,  wken  General  Carr  ordered  me  to  support  liis  division, 
wkick  was  [engaged]  witk  tke  enemy  in  kis  works  at  tke  bridge.  I re- 
mained at  this  point  for  some  time,  wken  General  Lawler  ordered  me 
up  to  support  a charge  he  was  preparing  to  make  on  tke  enemy’s  works. 
I kad  not  my  line  in  position  wken  tke  rigkt  regiment  of  kis  brigade 
charged  across  tke  open  field  toward  tke  enemy.  Tke  general  rode  up 
to  me  and  ordered  me  to  charge  at  tke  same  time,  wkick  I did,  and  I 
don’t  think  it  was  anything  but  tke  daring  bravery  of  the  officers  and 
men  wkick  ended  tke  contest  so  quickly,  for  we  had  within  100  yards  of 
tke  works  a bayou  to  cross,  witk  a heavy  abatis,  wken  tke  enemy  com- 
menced putting  cotton  on  tkeir  ramrods  and  showing  a willingness  to 
surrender.  My  men  charged  into  tke  bayou,  and  my  regiment  was 
second  in  tke  works,  although  they  kad  farther  to  charge  and  deeper 
water  to  wade  through  than  three  others  that  started  in  advance  of  us. 

Captain  McConakay,  of  Company  A,  was  tke  only  man  I kad  wounded 
in  tkis  engagement,  wkick  was  the  poorest  fight  I ever  saw  tke  rebels 
make.  After  Captain  McConakay  fell,  Sergt.  [William]  Wesley  Ken- 
dall, who  is  one  of  the  bravest  of  the  brave,  and  always  proved  himself 
suck  in  every  engagement,  led  tke  company  in  tke  fight,  and  was  one  of 
the  first  in  the  works.  I would  recommend  kirn  to  the  commanding 
general  for  promotion  for  tke  gallant  conduct  he  has  displayed  in  every 
skirmish  and  battle  tke  regiment  has  been  engaged  in  since  its  organi- 
zation. 

JAMES  KEIGWIN, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

W.  A.  Jordan,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  John  Lucas,  Seventh  Kentucky  Infantry , including 
engagement  at  Big  Black  River  Bridge. 


, 1863. 

On  the  morning  of  tke  16tk  of  May,  1863,  being  in  command  of  tke 
Seventh  Begiment  Kentucky  Volunteer  Infantry,  I was  ordered  to  move 
forward  with  said  regiment  to  the  front  of  tke  First  Brigade,  wkick  was 
then  on  tke  road  leading  from  Kaymond,  Miss.,  to  Edwards  Depot,  on 
tke  Vicksburg  and  Jackson  Bailroad,  about  — miles  from  Baymond. 
In  obedience  to  said  order,  I advanced  witk  my  regiment  as  prescribed, 
preceded  by  one  company  of  tke  Third  Illinois  Cavalry,  and  throwing 
forward  a few  vedettes  and  Companies  A and  F,  of  my  regiment,  as  skir- 
mishers, advanced  about  2 miles,  wkere  tke  cavalry  finding  tke  enemy’s 


24 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


pickets,  we  halted,  and  after  a short  reconnaissance  resumed  the  advance, 
and  proceeded  about  1J  miles  farther  on  said  road,  where  we  found  the 
enemy  in  force.  My  regiment  took  position  on  the  right  of  said  road, 
first  throwing  Companies  A,  F,  and  D forward  as  skirmishers,  and  after- 
ward the  remainder  of  the  regiment  moved  forward,  and,  driving  the 
enemy’s  skirmishers  from  their  position,  the  regiment  was  ordered  by 
General  Garrard  to  fall  back  and  resume  its  original  position  in  line  of 
battle.  Sending  forward  Company  G as  picket,  remained  in  position 
until  — o’clock,  when  I was  ordered  with  my  regiment  to  advance  with 
the  brigade,  and  engaged  the  enemy,  and  after  a short  and  very  severe 
engagement,  was  ordered  to  fall  bade  a short  distance,  and  were  not  en- 
gaged any  more  during  the  day,  as  the  enemy  commenced  a precipitate 
retreat  to  Black  River  Bridge. 

On  the  evening  of  the  16th,  we  proceeded  to  Edwards  Depot,  where 
we  halted  for  the  night  (having  followed  in  rear  of  General  Benton’s 
brigade).  Before  leaving  Champion’s  Hill  for  Edwards  Depot,  I was 
ordered  not  to  get  my  regiment  into  line,  from  the  fact  that  General 
Garrard  had  received  orders  to  follow  in  the  rear  of  General  Benton’s 
brigade.  I heard  the  order  delivered  to  General  Garrard,  and  think  it 
was  by  one  of  General  McClernand’s  aides. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th  May,  1863,  we  resumed  the  pursuit  to  near 
Black  River  Bridge ; took  position  on  the  left  of  the  brigade.  I then  sent 
Companies  A and  B forward  as  skirmishers,  and  advanced  upon  the 
enemy’s  right,  where  they  were  strongly  intrenched.  My  regiment  was 
on  the  extreme  left  of  the  First  Brigade,  and  advanced  over  an  extensive 
open  plain  for  nearly  1 mile.  This  plain  is  intercepted  by  a slough,  which 
is  about  500  or  600  yards  from  the  enemy’s  works.  My  regiment  entered 
the  intrenchments  about  150  yards  to  the  left  of  the  enemy’s  artillery, 
without  opposition.  The  intrenchments  are  located  below  and  near 
Black  River  Bridge,  running  nearly  north  and  south. 

The  loss  of  my  regiment  in  the  actions  of  Champion’s  Hill  and  Black 
River  Bridge  is  as  follows : 

champion’s  hill. 

Killed: 

Commissioned  officers 1 

Enlisted  men 2 

Wounded : Enlisted  men 14 

Missing  : Enlisted  men 5 


Total  loss 22 

Died  since  of  wounds 2 


No  loss  at  Black  River  Bridge  whatever. 

JOHN  LUCAS, 

. Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Seventh  Kentucky  Infantry. 
Brig.  Gen  T.  T.  Garrard. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Col.  Daniel  W.  Lindsey , Twenty-second  Kentucky  Infantry , 
commanding  Second  Brigade , including  operations  to  May  23. 

Headquarters  Second  Brigade,  May  21,  1863. 
Captain:  In  compliance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  121,  Paragraph  II, 
from  division  headquarters,  I have  the  honor  to  submit,  through  you, 
to  the  general  commanding  the  following  report: 

On  the  morning  of  the  16th  instant,  in  accordance  with  orders, 


25 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS. 

marched  in  the  rear  of  First  Brigade,  in  the  following  order:  One  hun- 
dred and  fourteenth  Ohio,  Twenty-second  Kentucky,  First  Wisconsin 
Battery,  Sixteenth  and  Forty-second  Ohio.  After  moving  some  3 or  4 
miles  on  the  road  leading  from  Mrs.  Jones7  to  Edwards  Station,  I was 
notified  that  the  enemy  was  in  our  front.  I was  then  ordered  by  the 
general  commanding  division  to  send  four  companies — two  deployed  as 
skirmishers,  and  the  other  two  as  their  support — into  the  woods  on  the 
right,  to  press  the  enemy,  and,  if  possible,  ascertain  their  position  and 
strength.  The  execution  of  this  order  was  assigued  to  Major  Lynch,  of 
the  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Ohio,  with  four  companies  from  his 
regiment.  I was  then  ordered  to  place  the  remainder  of  the  brigade, 
with  the  First  Wisconsin  and  two  sections  of  the  Seventh  Michigan 
Battery,  in  position  to  repel  an  attack,  my  front  and  flanks  to  be  well 
protected  by  skirmishers.  Having  executed  this  order,  we  soon  heard 
the  skirmishers  of  the  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Ohio,  and  the  First 
Brigade  opened  upon  the  enemy,  who  apparently  gave  way.  In  this 
position  we  remained  something  like  one  and  a half  hours,  when  I was 
ordered  to  advance  two  regiments,  leave  one  in  column  on  the  road  at 
a point  where  a plantation  road  turns  off  to  the  left,  and  with  the  other 
to  turn  off*  upon  the  last-mentioned  road,  and  advance  until  the  regi- 
ment in  column  should  reach  the  opposite  edge  of  the  woods,  immedi- 
ately in  front  of  my  first  position,  and  from  there  throw  skirmishers  to 
the  front.  The  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Ohio  was  left  at  the  point 
above  mentioned  in  the  road,  the  four  companies  under  Major  Lynch 
having  been  previously  ordered  in,  and  the  Twenty-second  Kentucky 
was  advanced  in  the  woods.  Judging  from  the  little  I could  observe 
of  our  line  on  my  right  that  I would  soon  receive  the  order  to  advance 
the  Twenty- second  Kentucky,  I asked  to  be  allowed  to  strengthen  it  by 
either  the  Forty-second  or  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Ohio.  Lieu- 
tenant [Jacob]  Swigert,  one  of  my  aides-de-camp,  returned  with  the 
information  that  both  of  the  regiments  sent  for  had  been  ordered  by 
General  Osterhaus  into  action  on  the  right,  but  that  the  Sixteenth  Ohio 
would  report  to  me  in  front  immediately,  and  that  a brigade  from  Gen- 
eral Carr’s  division  would  advance  with  me. 

As  soon  as  the  Sixteenth  could  move  to  the  front,  the  two  small  regi- 
ments there  under  my  command,  numbering men,  companies  from 

each  having  been  left  with  the  artillery,  were  formed  in  line,  awaiting 
the  advance  of  the  brigade  on  our  right,  which  had  formed  some  dis- 
tance to  our  right  and  rear,  and  alsor  the  order  for  me  to  move  forward. 
The  latter  soon  came,  to  the  effect  that  I should  move  forward  and  take 
the  woods  to  our  right  and  front,  which  had  the  appearance  of  being  a 
point  at  which  the  enemy  were  rallying  and  reforming  such  of  his  broken 
columns  as  had  been  driven  back  on  the  right. 

At  command  the  line  moved  forward  in  very  good  order,  until  it  came 
to  a very  large  drain,  running  through  the  open  field  over  which  we 
were  moving.  Here  they  became  somewhat  broken  ; but  the  fire  of  the 
enemy  was  so  severe  that  I did  not  deem  it  prudent  to  halt  sufficiently 
long  to  reform  entirely,  but,  as  soon  as  the  bulk  of  the  men  were  over, 
ordered  them  to  advance.  From  this  point  to  the  woods  we  moved  very 
rapidly,  the  Sixteenth  Ohio  moving,  however,  too  far  to  the  left  to  reach 
the  woods  in  time  for  the  Twenty-second.  The  latter  regiment  went 
into  the  skirt  of  the  woods,  but  was  very  soon  driven  back  a little  over 
the  brow  of  the  hill.  Here  they  were  halted  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Mon- 
roe, commanding,  and  the  Sixteenth  coming  up,  both  regiments  again 
charged  into  the  woods. 

This  position,  which  we  held  for  about  half  an  hour,  we  were  com- 


26 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Ciiap.  XXXVI. 


pelled  to  retire  from,  the  enemy  having  brought  up  a battery  to  rake 
the  woods,  with  a much  stronger  infantry  force  than  my  own  to  support 
it.  I regarded  my  advance  as  an  important  one,  and  regret  exceedingly 
my  inability  to  maintain  it.  Immediately  on  returning  to  the  position 
from  which  we  had  made  the  charge,  the  regiments  were  reformed,  and 
the  line,  both  upon  the  right  and  left,  advancing,  we  moved  forward 
also.  The  enemy  rapidly  retired,  our  skirmishers  only  getting  an  occa- 
sional shot.  After  advancing  some  2 miles,  the  greater  portion  of  the 
distance  through  a dense  woods,  and  capturing  more  prisoners  than  we 
had  men,  our  skirmishers  were  fired  upon  by  a battery  upon  our  left. 
Knowing  that  we  had  forces  upon  our  left,  I sent  a staff  officer  to  com- 
municate with  them,  and  at  the  same  time  changed  my  front  a little  to 
the  left  and  advanced  my  skirmishers.  On  the  approach  of  the  latter 
the  enemy  retired  his  battery,  leaving  a wagon-load  of  ammunition  on 
the  ground. 

At  this  point  Lieutenant-Colonel  Pardee  brought  me  an  order  from 
General  McClernand  to  move  with  my  command  to  Edwards  Station. 
Waiting  a short  time  for  the  return  of  my  aide-de-camp  (Lieutenant  Ris- 
don),  who  had  gone  to  communicate  with  Generals  Blair  and  Smith,  on 
the  left,  I ordered  the  ammunition  destroyed  (in  the  execution  of  which 
order  Captain  Thomas,  of  the  Twenty-second  Kentucky,  a most  gallant 
and  efficient  officer,  was  severely  burned  by  the  explosion),  marched  to 
Edwards  Station,  and  bivouacked  at  12  o’clock  at  night. 

The  action  of  the  Forty- second  and  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Ohio, 
from  the  time  they  were  taken  from  my  immediate  command,  I suppose 
will  appear  from  the  reports  of  other  officers. 

The  casualties  were  as  follows  : 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing,  j 

i 

1 

5 

15 

2 

12 

7 

3 

32 

7 

- 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  just  at  daylight,  having  together  again 
four  regiments  of  my  brigade,  took  up  line  of  march  to  Black  Biver, 
immediately  in  rear  of  General  Carr’s  division.  Came  in  sight  of  the 
enemy,  posted  behind  strong  works  on  the  southeast  side  of  the  river, 
about  8.30  a.  m.  According  to  orders,  deployed  the  brigade  into  line 
on  the  left  of  the  railroad,  forming  a junction  with  General  Carr  on 
the  right.  Having  been  ordered  to  advance,  we  moved  forward  with  a 
strong  line  of  skirmishers  to  the  front  some  300  yards,  under  a severe 
fire  of  grape  and  canister,  when  we  were  ordered  to  halt,  lie  down,  and 
await  the  advance  of  the  line  on  the  right.  While  in  this  position,  re- 
ceived an  order  from  General  Osterhaus  that  he  was  wounded,  and 
that  General  Lee  would  assume  command  of  the  division. 

Seeing  the  enemy  moving  in  their  works  toward  our  left,  sent  two 
companies,  under  command  of  Captain  Hutchins,  of  the  Forty-second 
Ohio,  as  skirmishers,  well  advanced  to  the  front,  to  protect  our  left. 
About  10  o’clock  the  whole  line  advanced,  and  the  enemy’s  left  giving 
way,  we  had  no  trouble  in  possessing  the  works  in  our  immediate  front, 
embracing  five  batteries,  four  of  which  contained  two  guns  each  and 
the  fifth  three. 


27 


CITAP.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS. 

Iii  this  advance  the  skirmishers  under  Captain  Hutchins,  in  conjunc- 
tion with  those  of  the  Seventh  Kentucky,  to  my  left,  compelled  the  sur- 
render of  a regiment  of  the  enemy,  the  colors  of  which  in  some  way 
were  taken  possession  of  by  two  mounted  officers  from  General  Smith’s 
command. 

The  casualties  were  as  follows  : 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

1 fiMi  Ohio _ _ _ _ 

3 

6 

22d  Kentucky 

2 

4 

42d  Ohio ‘ 

2 

3 

1 

114th  Ohio 

3 

1 

Total 

10 

14 

1 

During  the  night,  with  heavy  details  from  each  of  the  regiments, 
threw  a bridge  across  the  river,  and  about  8 o’clock  on  the  morning  of 
the  18th  marched  over  5 bivouacked  for  the  night  some  3 miles  from 
our  present  position. 

On  the  morning  of  the  19th,  marched,  reaching  the  corn-field  in  our 
rear  about  11  o’clock ; formed  the  brigade  in  line,  contiguous  columns 
of  divisions,  at  deploying  intervals.  At  1 o’clock  received  orders  to 
form  line  of  battle,  in  ravine  in  the  front.  At  2 o’clock  was  ordered  to 
advance,  which  was  done  (the  enemy  showing  complete  range  with  his 
artillery  of  every  ravine  and  hill-top)  in  most  excellent  order  for  the 
ground  over  which  we  were  moving ; reached  a position  commanding 
the  enemy’s  guns  immediately  in  our  front,  and  which  were  very  soon 
silenced.  Night  coming  on,  a strong  line  of  skirmishers  was  left  on  the 
ground,  and  the  brigade  taken  back  to  bivouac  where  we  had  formed 
to  move  forward  at  2 o’clock.  In  the  advance  of  this  day,  Lieut.  O. 
0.  Kisdon,  Forty-second  Ohio,  acting  aide-de-camp,  was  so  severely 
wounded  in  the  left  arm  as  to  compel  his  leaving  the  field. 

The  casualties  were  as  follows : Killed — Sixteenth  Ohio,  1.  Wounded  — 
Sixteenth  Ohio,  85  Twenty-second  Kentucky,  2;  Forty-second  Ohio, 
12,  and  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Ohio,  10.  Total,  1 killed  and  32 
wounded. 

Morning  of  20th,  moved  the  brigade  forward  to  position  occupied  the 
evening  before,  immediately  behind  the  line  of  skirmishers,  and  at  night 
returned  again  to  bivouac. 

The  casualties  were  as  follows : Sixteenth  Ohio,  1 killed  and  1 wounded  5 
Forty-second  Ohio,  3 wounded,  and  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Ohio, 
1 killed.  Total,  2 killed  and  4 wounded. 

May  21,  a repetition  of  the  day  previous. 

The  casualties  were  as  follows:  Wounded — Sixteenth  Ohio,  3,  and 
Twenty-second  Kentucky,  1.  Total,  4. 

On  the  morning  of  the  22d,  was  ordered  to  shift  my  line  of  skirmish- 
ers to  the  right,  and  prepare  to  advance  up  the  ravine,  immediately  in 
front  of  the  Seventh  Michigan  Battery,  at  10  a.  in.,  at  which  hour  a gen- 
eral assault  was  to  be  made  upon  the  entire  line  of  the  enemy’s  works. 
In  conjunction  with  the  First  Brigade,  formed  three  columns  of  attack. 
The  Twenty-second  Kentucky  and  Forty-second  Ohio,  forming  the  right 
column,  were  ordered  to  move  up  the  ravine  to  the  right  of  the  abatis, 
the  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Ohio  and  Forty-ninth  Indiana,  with  the 
Sixty-ninth  Indiana  as  support ; the  center  were  to  go  up  the  left  ra- 


28 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

vine,  and  the  remaining  regiments  of  the  First  Brigade  to  form  the  left 
column,  and  to  move  over  the  ridge  upon  the  left.  The  Sixteenth  Ohio 
was  deployed  as  skirmishers  to  cover  the  front  of  the  three  columns. 

At  the  appointed  hour  the  advance  was  made ; we  crossed  the  abatis 
on  the  right,  under  fire  from  the  right,  left,  and  front.  Here  finding 
shelter,  I ordered  a halt  to  rest  the  men.  On  examining  the  ground,  I 
found  it  utterly  impossible  to  reach  the  enemy’s  works  at  the  point  I 
was  ordered  to,  and  so  reported  to  the  general.  We  maintained  this 
position,  frequently  relieving  the  lines  of  skirmishers,  who  were  actively 
engaged  in  keeping  the  enemy’s  artillery  silent,  until  night,  when  we 
were  ordered  to  retire,  holding  the  advance  made  by  a strong  picket. 

The  casualties  were  as  follows:  Killed — Sixteenth  Ohio,  4;  Twenty- 
second  Kentucky,  3 ; Forty-second  Ohio,  1,  and  One  hundred  and  four- 
teenth Ohio,  6.  Total,  14.  Wounded — Sixteenth  Ohio,  5 ; Twenty- 
second  Kentucky,  14 ; Forty-second  Ohio,  21,  and  One  hundred  and 
fourteenth  Ohio,  23.  Total,  G3. 

May  23. — Before  daylight,  advanced  the  brigade  to  position  occu- 
pied the  evening  previous ; skirmishers  engaged  rather  actively  on  the 
right  of  my  line ; retired  to  bivouac  after  dark  to  avoid  drawing  the 
enemy’s  fire. 

The  casualties  were  as  follows : Wounded — Sixteenth  Ohio,  3 ; Twenty- 
second  Kentucky,  2 ; Forty-second  Ohio,  1,  and  One  hundred  and  four- 
teenth Ohio,  6.  Total,  12. 

My  entire  command,  both  officers  and  men,  have  exhibited  an  alacrity 
and  promptness  in  the  execution  of  all  duties  assigned  them  truly  grati- 
fying to  me.  Although  worn  clown  and  but  scantily  fed  during  the 
period  embraced  by  this  report,  each  and  every  one  of  them  has  my 
sincere  thanks. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  stating  my  obligations  to  my  staff, 
Capt.  G.  W.  Stein,  acting  assistant  adjutant- general,  and  Lieuts.  O.  O. 
Bisdon  and  Jacob  Swigert,  aides-de-camp,  for  their  untiring  zeal  at  all 
times  in  carrying  out  my  instructions. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  W.  LINDSEY, 
Colonel , Commanding  Second  Brigade. 

Capt.  J.  W.  Thompson, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General , Ninth  Division. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  L.  Campbell , Third  Illinois  Cavalry. 

Camp,  Detachment  Third  Illinois  Cavalry, 

Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

May  26,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  of  reporting  that  at  9 a.  m.  on  the  16th 
instant  my  little  command,  consisting  of  Companies  A,  E,  and  K,  Third 
Illinois  Cavalry,  the  former  commanded  by  Lieutenant  Bierce;  Company 
E by  Lieut.  Thomas  B.  Vaughn,  and  Company  K by  Lieutenant  Zim- 
merman, comprising  some  90  men,  met  the  enemy’s  vedettes  and  drove 
them  back  to  their  skirmishers,  where  I dismounted  a portion  of  my 
command  and  skirmished  with  them,  driving  them  over  1 mile  along  the 
back  brow  of  Champion’s  Hill.  The  road  was  enfiladed  by  deep  canons, 
heavily  timbered.  The  enemy  yielded  their  ground  with  great  reluc- 


Chai\  XXXVI.]  battle  of  champion’s  hill,  miss.  29 

tance,  contesting  every  inch  of  it.  Company  E had  the  advance  on  this 
occasion,  and,  of  course,  had  to  bear  the  brunt  of  the  enemy’s  fire. 

While  waiting  for  the  infantry  to  press  the  enemy,  orders  came  for  the 
cavalry  to  charge  them,  which  was  promptly  executed.  Company  E 
was  led  by  Lieutenant  Vaughn,  supported  by  Lieutenant  Hargrave. 
Companies  A and  K were  gallantly  led  by  their  company  commanders 
in  support  of  Company  E. 

The  head  of  the  column  passed  through  the  enemy’s  skirmishers  and 
reached  a point  within  75  yards  of  the  enemy,  drawn  up  in  three  lines 
of  battle  on  each  side  of  the  road,  with  a battery  in  the  road  directly  in 
our  front.  They  poured  into  us  a galling  enfilading  fire  from  their 
small-arms  and  a plunging  fire  from  their  battery.  As  no  cavalry  could 
long  live  in  this  fire,  a retreat  was  ordered  and  promptly  executed. 

Lieut.  W.  B.  Hargrave,  of  Company  E,  was  wounded  in  the  right  arm 
slightly ; 3 horses  were  killed  and  4 wounded  in  the  charge. 

I am  happy  to  be  able  to  say  that  the  entire  command  did  their  duty. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  L.  CAMPBELL, 

Captain , Commanding  Detachment  Third  Illinois  Cavalry. 

Brig.  Gen.  Peter  J.  Csteriiaus, 

Comdg.  Ninth  Div .,  Thirteenth  A.  (7.,  Dept,  'of  the  Tennessee. 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Charles  B.  Kimball , First  Wisconsin  Battery , including 
engagement  at  Big  Black  River  Bridge. 

Headquarters  First  Wisconsin  Battery, 

May  30,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  to  you  the  following  report  of  the 
part  taken  in  the  two  engagements  of  May  16  and  17  by  the  First 
Wisconsin  Battery,  under  my  command: 

May  16,  coming  upon  the  enemy  strongly  posted  in  thick  timber  of 
Champion’s  Hill,  I placed  my  battery  in  line  of  battle,  which  was 
formed  in  the  following  order : One  section  I caused  to  be  placed  in 
battery  to  the  front,  covering  also  a deep  ravine  in  front  and  to  the 
right  of  our  line.  The  remaining  two  sections  of  the  battery  I placed 
in  position  covering  the  front,  and  also  a deep  ravine  on  the  left  of  our 
line,  the  whole  being  supported  by  three  regiments  of  infantry  of  the 
Second  Brigade.  In  this  position,  with  but  slight  change,  I remained 
until  3 p.  m.  without  firing  a single  round,  when  I was  ordered  to  move 
forward  and  join  the  First  Brigade  at  Edwards  Depot,  where  it  had 
halted  for  the  night,  after  pursuing  the  enemy  until  a late  hour.  I did 
so,  arriving  at  11  p.  in.,  where  I also  encamped  for  the  remaining  hours 
of  the  night. 

May  17,  moved  forward  at  4 a.  m.,  coming  upon  the  enemy  at  9 a.  m., 
strongly  intrenched  near  Big  Black.  Captain  Foster  being  present,  or- 
dered the  center  section,  under  Lieutenant  Hackett,  into  position  on 
the  west  side  of  the  railroad,  where  it  soon  opened  fire  upon  the  enemy, 
but  was  shortly  after  relieved  by  the  right  section,  on  account  of  one 
of  its  pieces  being  partially  disabled  by  the  explosion  of  the  limber- 
chest.  The  left  section  I placed  in  position  on  the  right  of  the  line,  in 
which  position  it  did  some  execution ; but,  as  the  enemy  soon  after 
retreated,  but  a few  rounds  were  fired. 


30 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE, 


ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


At  2 p.  m.,  having  been  victorious,  I got  my  command  together  near 
the  enemy’s  works,  where  I remained  until  0 p.  m.,  when  I received 
orders  to  encamp  for  the  night.  During  the  engagement  the  piece  of 
which  William  McKeith  is  gunner,  and  had  had  its  limber-chest  blown 
up  by  one  of  the  enemy’s  shells  bursting  in  it  early  in  the  engagement, 
was  successful  in  dismounting  one  24-pounder  gun  for  the  enemy. 

List  of  casualties  during  the  day  was  as  follows : One  limber-chest  and 
contents,  including  45  rounds  of  20-pounder  ammunition,  completely 
destroyed  by  being  blown  up  by  one  of  the  enemy’s  shells  bursting  in 
it;  Capt.  Jacob  T.  Foster,  wounded  in  the  left  shoulder;  Cannoneer 
Charles  Withee  seriously  wounded  by  being  burned  and  bruised  by 
explosion  of  limber-chest;  and  Drivers  Dedrick  and  J.  Castles  slightly 
wounded  by  being  thrown  from  their  horses  and  afterward  run  over. 

Hoping  this  may  be  satisfactory  to  you,  I remain,  captain,  your 
obedient  servant, 

CHAS.  B.  KIMBALL, 

First  Lieutenant , Commanding  First  Wisconsin  Battery. 

Capt.  J.  W.  Thompson, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  8. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Stephen  G.  Burbridge , U.  S.  Army , commanding 

First  Brigade , Tenth  Division , including  operations  April  13-May  24. 

Hdqrs.  First  Brig.,  Tenth  Diy.,  Thirteenth  A.  C., 

Camp,  Bear  of  Vicksburg , Miss .,  May  24,  1863. 

In  compliance  with  an  order  from  division  headquarters,  I herewith 
submit  the  following  report  of  the  proceedings  of  my  brigade  since 
leaving  Milliken’s  Bend,  La. : 

On  April  13,1  received  orders  to  have  my  brigade  prepare  two  days’ 
cooked  rations  and  be  ready  to  march  at  a moment’s  notice. 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th,  received  orders  to  march,  and  by  4 p.  m. 
was  ready  for  the  road,  and  marched  to  Oak  Grove  plantation,  where 
we  encamped  until  next  morning. 

On  the  15th,  resumed  our  line  of  march,  and  proceeded  as  far  as 
Holmes’  plantation,  about  15  miles  from  last  camp.  Here  we  remained 
until  Friday  evening,  April  24,  when  we  moved  to  Smith’s  plantation, 
distant  about  7 miles,  arriving  there  about  11  p.  m.,and  remained  there 
until  about  2 p.  m.  on  Sunday,  the  26th,  when  we  embarked  on  board 
transports  in  Koundaway  Bayou,  the  course  of  which  we  followed  until 
we  finally  entered  the  Mississippi Biver  opposite  Carthage;  thence  pro- 
ceeded down  the  river  to  Perkins’  plantation,  arriving  there  about  9 
p.  m.,  during  a very  severe  storm. 

On  Tuesday,  April  28, 1 received  orders  to  embark  four  of  my  regi- 
ments and  the  Seventeenth  Ohio  Battery  on  transports  and  barges,  to 
proceed  to  a point  as  near  Grand  Gulf  as  practicable,  to  act  under 
Brigadier-General  Osterhaus,  commanding  Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth 
Army  Corps,  and  as  a reserve  to  his  division.  1 accordingly  took  with 
me  the  Sixteenth  and  Sixty-seventh  Indiana,  Eighty- third  Ohio,  and 
Twenty- third  Wisconsin  Regiments,  and  embarked  upon  barges  and 
transports,  leaving  transportation  of  every  description,  even  my  own 
and  field  officers’  horses,  and  proceeded  to  Hard  Times  Landing,  oppo- 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS. 


31 


site  and  above  Grand  Gulf,  and  remained  during  tbe  unsuccessful  at- 
tempt of  the  gunboats  to  reduce  Grand  Gulf  on  Wednesday,  April  29. 

Being  personally  on  the  gunboat  General  Price,  which  had  in  tow  a 
transport  containing  two  of  my  regiments,  we  stood  out  in  the  stream 
in  constant  readiness  to  avail  ourselves  of  any  advantage  which  might 
be  gained  by  the  gunboats. 

The  attempt  to  reduce  the  principal  batteries  proving  a failure,  we 
disembarked  and  marched  across  the  Bend,  to  a point  below  Grand  Gulf, 
where  we  encamped  for  the  night. 

On  the  30th,  we  re-embarked  (the  gunboats  and  transports  having  run 
the  blockade  during  the  night)  and  proceeded  to  Bruinsburg,  where  we 
drew  six  days  (two-thirds)  rations,  and  about  11  p.  m.  took  up  our  line 
of  march  for  Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Marched  steadily  all  night,  and  about 
sunrise  heard  heavy  and  rapid  cannonading  in  front,  and  shortly  after- 
ward learned  that  our  advance  was  warmly  engaged  with  the  enemy. 

Pressing  vigorously  on,  we  reached  the  scene  of  the  engagement  about 
7 o’clock,  when  I immediately  formed  in  line  of  battle  in  rear  of  Gen- 
eral Hovey’s  division,  our  division  constituting  the  reserve. 

The  part  taken  by  my  brigade  in  the  battle  of  that  day,  while  it  did 
not  lead  to  much  loss,  was  very  exhausting  from  the  necessity  of  rapidly 
shifting  ground  with  a part  or  the  whole  of  the  brigade,  as  the  weak 
points  of  our  lines  successively  presented  themselves. 

I continued  thus  supporting  the  line  until  ordered  with  my  brigade 
farther  to  the  left,  to  relieve  the  Second  Brigade,  under  Colonel  Lan- 
dram,  who  had  fought  desperately  through  the  day,  when  we  advanced 
farther  to  the  front  than  any  other  troops,  driving  the  enemy  from  the 
hill.  Night  putting  an  end  to  that  day’s  tight,  our  men  sank  exhausted 
upon  the  ground.  They  had  marched  all  night  and  fought  all  day  under 
a burning  sun,  and  without  having  had  a mouthful  to  eat  since  the  pre- 
vious evening. 

Next  morning,  May  2,  by  order  of  General  McClernand,  I took  the 
advance  with  my  brigade,  and  proceeded  cautiously  into  Port  Gibson, 
where  I had  the  pleasure  of  raising  the  Stars  and  Stripes  to  their  wonted 
place  of  honor.  The  rear  guard  of  the  enemy  were  retreating  out  of 
town,  having  fired  the  bridge  over  South  Fork  of  Little  Bayou  Pierre. 
I had  the  Seventeenth  Ohio  Battery  to  open  upon  them,  but  they 
succeeded  in  making  good  their  retreat,  as  we  had  no  means  of  pursuit. 

We  remained  at  Port  Gibson  until  the  morning  of  the  3d  instant, 
when  I was  ordered  to  take  my  brigade  to  the  hills  back  of  the  town, 
as  there  were  symptoms  of  the  enemy  coming  in  on  our  rear.  Remain- 
ing in  that  position  until  I was  satisfied  there  was  no  enemy  near,  I 
took  up  my  line  of  march  toward  Willow  Springs.  Late  in  the  after- 
noon we  crossed  Big  Bayou  Pierre  and  went  into  camp  at  this  place 
until  the  morning  of  the  7th  instant,  when  we  marched  to  a point  half 
a mile  beyond  Cayuga,  where  we  remained  until  the  morning  of  the 
12th  instant,  when  we  countermarched  to  Cayuga ; thence  bearing  left 
in  a westerly  direction  for  about  10  miles,  where  we  encamped  for  the 
night  in  line  of  battle  near  Fourteen-Mile  Creek,  6 miles  from  Edwards 
Station. 

Next  morning  (13th)  we  marched  back  to  the  Jackson  road,  a dis- 
tance of  about  6 miles. 

Here  we  remained  until  the  15th,  when,  following  General  Blair’s 
division,  we  marched  to  Raymond,  about  15  miles,  getting  into  camp 
at  9 p.  m. 

At  daylight  on  the  16th,  we  marched  out  on  the  Vicksburg  road  to- 
ward Edwards  Station,  my  brigade  being  in  the  advance.  About  6 


32 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAr.  XXXVI. 


miles  out  from  Raymond  we  came  upon  the  enemy’s  pickets,  when  our 
line  of  battle  was  quickly  formed,  with  heavy  skirmishing  parties  in 
front.  The  batteries  were  thrown  into  position  and  shelled  the  enemy’s 
forces  very  successfully.  We  skirmished  along  gradually,  driving  the 
enemy  before  us,  while  our  main  force  followed  along  the  road  until  we 
reached  a water-course,  across  which  the  bridge  had  been  broken  down 
by  the  retreating  enemy.  Finding  the  enemy  was  in  retreat  but  a short 
distance  ajiead,  and  apprehending  they  might  avail  themselves  of  some 
prominent  hills,  from  which  they  could  sweep  the  plain  we  were  in,  I 
pushed  my  brigade  rapidly  ahead  until  the  skirmishers  began  to  find 
it  a hot  contest,  and  as  we  rose  to  the  crest  of  the  hill  had  abundant 
reason  to  congratulate  myself  upon  my  speed,  as  the  enemy  had  rallied 
and  planted  their  battery  on  the  second  hill,  not  having  had  time  to  form 
on  the  first.  They  poured  in  a most  terrific  fire  of  shot,  shell,  grape, 
and  canister,  but  my  men  were  well  protected  by  the  crest  of  the  hill, 
and  my  sharpshooters  kept  the  enemy  so  much  annoyed  they  had  to 
abandon  some  of  their  guns.  After  repeated  application  to  General 
Smith  for  re-enforcements,  both  of  infantry  and  artillery,  I finally  suc- 
ceeded in  obtaining  the  Nineteenth  Kentucky  and  Seventy-seventh 
Illinois,  of  Colonel  Landram’s  brigade,  who  were  ready  and  impatiently 
awaiting  orders  to  move  forward.  I also  obtained  four  guns  of  the 
Seventeenth  Ohio  Battery,  which  had  been  preceded  by  part  of  the 
Chicago  Mercantile  Battery,  both  of  which  did  admirable  execution. 

Receiving  orders  from  General  Smith  through  one  of  his  staff  to  halt, 
I did  so,  holding  the  position  I had  gained.  It  was  my  conviction  at 
the  time,  confirmed  by  all  I have  learned  since,  that,  properly  sup- 
ported by  General  Blair’s  division,  we  could  have  captured  the  whole 
rebel  force  opposed  to  us,  and  reached  Edwards  Station  before  sunset. 

From  prisoners  taken  next  day,  we  learned  that  after  the  loss  of  Gen- 
eral [L.]  Tilghman,  who  was  killed  by  a shot  from  our  batteries,  they  had 
attempted  to  run  off  their  artillery;  but  failing  to  do  so,  abandoned  it, 
since  which  time  we  have  obtained  the  guns,  twelve  pieces.  Also  the 
whole  rebel  force  retreated  in  great  disorder,  it  being' impossible  for  the 
officers  to  again  form  their  men  into  line. 

The  night  after  the  battle  the  men  lay  upon  their  arms,  hourly  ex- 
pecting an  attack.  The  night  passed  quietly,  however,  and  at  daylight 
we  moved  on  in  line  of  battle,  but  soon  had  abundant  evidence  that  the 
rebels  had  skedaddled  most  hurriedly,  leaving  arms,  ammunition,  &c., 
strewn  by  the  roadside.  Forming  again  in  column,  we  moved  on  through 
Edwards  Station  without  further  interruption. 

As  we  approached  Big  Black  River,  heavy  firing  became  very  audi- 
ble, and  I received  orders  from  General  Smith  to  move  rapidly  forward 
and  take  position  on  the  left  of  General  Osterhaus’  division.  This  done, 
we  were  ordered  forward  in  line  of  battle.  Arriving  at  the  edge  of  the 
forest  through  which  we  had  advanced,  I found  we  could  not  advance 
across  the  open  field  without  changing  front,  as  the  enemy  would  have 
an  enfilading  fire  upon  my  line.  I rapidly  changed  front,  so  that  my 
left  would  cover  the  enemy’s  works  on  the  left  of  the  cotton-gin.  I 
then  ordered  a charge  across  the  field,  which  was  gallantly  executed. 
When  my  skirmishers  arrived  within  200  yards  of  the  enemy,  a white 
handkerchief  was  displayed  on  their  intrenchments,  upon  which  Lieu- 
tenant Conover,  my  acting  assistant  adjutant- general,  and  Captain 
Keigwin,  acting  aide,  who  were  in  advance  of  the  skirmishers,  rode  for- 
ward and  received  the  surrender  of  the  forces  and  colors  of  the  Sixtieth 
Tennessee  Regiment  (rebel),  under  command  of  Lieutenant- Colonel  [N.J 
Gregg,  and  reported  them  to  me.  About  the  same  time  our  forces  took 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS.  33 

possession  of  the  whole  line  of  the  enemy’s  works,  they  retreating  across 
the  Big  Black  Biver  and  setting  fire  to  the  bridge. 

As  it  now  became  necessary  to  build  a bridge  before  we  could  cross, 
we  remained  encamped  in  the  enemy’s  works  until  the  next  day,  Monday, 
May  18,  when  we  moved  forward  at  about  11  a.  m.,  my  brigade  again 
taking  the  advance.  We  proceeded  very  cautiously,  apprehending  an 
attack  every  moment,  never  dreaming  the  enemy  could  have  abandoned, 
without  another  effort,  the  exceedingly  advantageous  position  and 
fortification  afforded  by  the  natural  conformation  of  the  ground. 

We  soon  learned  from  negroes  there  was  no  enemy  between  us  and 
Mount  Alban,  a small  place  about  half-way  between  Black  River  and 
Vicksburg,  which  information  we  found  correct.  About  half  a mile 
beyond  Mount  Alban  we  found  a bridge  so  burned  and  broken  as  to  be 
impassable.  Examination  showed  it  would  cause  considerable  delay  to 
repair  it  so  that  artillery  could  pass  over  in  safety.  We  therefore  made  a 
considerable  detour  to  the  left,  taking  a route  through  the  country  which 
in  the  course  of  a couple  of  miles  struck  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road,  which 
was  the  route  we  were  seeking.  Proceeding  slowly  and  cautiously,  we 
encamped  that  night  about  2j  miles  from  the  enemy’s  works  in  rear  of 
Vicksburg. 

Tuesday  morning,  May  19,  we  again  moved  toward  the  fortifications, 
until,  when  within  1J  miles,  their  skirmishers  began  to  appear.  I im- 
mediately formed  my  four  regiments  in  line  of  battle  on  the  right  of  the 
Vicksburg  road,  the  Sixteenth  Indiana  and  Eighty-third  Ohio  in  front, 
supported  by  the  Sixty-seventh  Indiana  and  Twenty-third  Wisconsin, 
and,  covered  by  the  crest  of  the  hill,  the  Seventeenth  Ohio  Battery.  I 
threw  out  a heavy  force  of  skirmishers  under  command  of  Major  Red- 
field,  Sixteenth  Indiana,  who  gradually  drove  back  the  enemy’s  skir- 
mishers until  finally  I advanced  my  brigade  to  a ravine  running  at  right 
angles  with  the  railroad,  and  in  the  rear  of  the  hill  on  which  is  the  cot- 
ton-gin. As  the  enemy  were  driven  farther  in,  we  advanced  until  within 
about  400  yards  of  the  forts. 

On  the  20th,  received  orders  to  be  in  readiness  to  charge  the  enemy’s 
works  at  2 p.  m.  At  the  given  signal  the  brigade,  with  tremendous 
cheering,  rushed  over  the  crest  of  the  hill  in  front  of  them,  and,  taking 
a moment’s  breathing  time,  commenced  the  ascent  of  the  next  hill. 
Finding  it  unadvisable  to  advance  in  line  of  battle,  on  account  of  the 
greater  exposure,  I ordered  the  regiment  forward  by  companies  as  skir- 
mishers, in  which  way  we  succeeded  in  finally  driving  the  greater  part 
of  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters  within  the  entrenchments,  my  men  lying 
immediately  under  the  works,  and  effectually  silencing  the  enemy’s  ar- 
tillery. We  maintained  that  position,  keeping  up  a constant  fire  at 
every  head  that  showed  itself,  until  10  o’clock  at  night,  when  we  were 
relieved  by  General  Benton’s  brigade.  It  was  fully  2 a.  m.  on  the  21st 
before  I succeeded  in  withdrawing  all  my  men.  During  all  that  day 
(21st)  my  men  rested,  occupying  themselves  in  putting  their  arms  in 
thorough  order. 

On  the  morning  of  the  22d,  I received  orders  to  prepare  for  an  assault 
on  the  enemy’s  works  at  10  a.  m.,  to  support  General  Benton’s  brigade. 
At  the  hour  designated  I had  my  four  regiments  arranged  in  order,  the 
Sixty-seventh  Indiana  occupying  the  road  passing  down  the  hill  to  the 
right  of  the  burnt  chimneys ; the  Twenty-third  Wisconsin  immediately 
in  its  rear ; the  Sixteenth  Indiana  on  the  hillside  of  the  ravine  to  the 
right,  and  in  front  of  said  road,  supported  by  the  Eighty-third  Ohio.  I 
advanced  the  regiments,  with  a yell  and  a rush,  over  the  hill  into  the 
last  ravine,  and  immediately  commenced  advancing  up  the  hill,  upon 
3 r r — VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


34  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  I^hap.  XXXVI. 

which  is  the  fort  we  were  attacking,  three  regiments  of  my  command, 
the  Sixteenth  Indiana,  Eighty-third  Ohio,  and  Sixty-seventh  Indiana  on 
the  right  of  General  Benton’s  brigade,  my  left  resting  on  the  road,  and 
the  right  extending  along  the  crest  ot  the  hill  and  in  front  of  the  fort, 
and  not  more  than  20  steps  from  it. 

By  10.30  a.  m.  we  had  silenced  their  batteries  to  a great  extent,  and 
the  regiments  had  their  colors  flying  against  the  walls  of  the  fort.  There 
being  some  symptoms  of  an  attempt  to  turn  our  flanks,  I sent  four  com- 
panies of  the  Twenty-third  Wisconsin  to  support  the  Sixty-seventh  In- 
diana on  the  right,  and  the  remaining  six  companies  to  the  left,  in  sup- 
port of  the  Sixteenth  Indiana. 

While  this  was  being  done  I received  orders  from  General  Smith  to 
send  two  regiments  of  my  command  to  support  General  Benton’s  left ; 
but  as  this  would  reduce  my  force  one-half,  and  leave  my  front  terribly 
exposed,  1 immediately  sent  to  General  Smith  representing  these  facts. 
His  answer  was,  “It  is  an  order  from  General  Carr,  and  must  be 
obeyed.”  I again  sent  an  aide  to  urge  the  state  of  the  case,  and  received 
permission  from  General  Smith  to  retain  my  position,  but  shortly  re- 
ceived an  inquiry  from  General  Carr  why  the  regiments  were  not  forth- 
coming. I then  went  myself  to  see  General  McClernand,  and  repre- 
sented to  him  that  it  would  be  the  destruction  not  only  of  my  regiments, 
but  of  the  whole  front.  General  McClernand,  while  assenting  to  my 
statements,  referred  me  to  General  Carr,  who  commanded  the  advance. 
Notwithstanding  my  representations,  General  Carr  renewed  his  order 
concerning  the  regiments,  and  telling  him  I obeyed  his  order  under  pro- 
test, 1 returned  to  my  command,  and  with  a heavy  and  foreboding  heart 
gave  the  requisite  orders  for  the  Twenty-third  Wisconsin  and  Sixty- 
seventh  Indiana  to  withdraw  from  the  ground  which  had  been  gained 
with  so  much  labor  and  maintained  with  so  much  valor,  thus  leaving 
my  two  remaining  regiments,  Sixteenth  Indiana  and  Eighty-third  Ohio, 

unsupported.  _ _ . . 

As  I had  anticipated  and  feared,  the  rebels,  finding  the  fire  slack- 
ened and  the  line  weakened  in  their  front,  opened  a most  destructive 
fire.  On  consultation  with  General  Benton,  I determined  to  take  the 
responsibility  of  replacing  my  regiments  without  delay,  but  the  work 
was  now  most  difficult,  as  the  rebels  had  the  advantage  and  seemed 
determined  to  keep  it.  Just  as  I had  ’ordered  my  regiments  back,  a 
message  came  from  General  Carr,  telling  me  to  use  my  discretion  about 
withdrawing  my  regiments.  Such  a message  ten  minutes  before,  or 
such  consent  when  I pleaded  for  it,  would  have  saved  a hundred  lives. 

After  repeated  applications,  I succeeded  in  getting  permission  to 
carry  a piece  of  artillery  to  my  front  line.  Accordingly,  a gun  from 
the  Mercantile  Battery  was  taken  by  a squad  of  the  Twenty-third  Wis- 
consin close  up  to  the  point  held  by  the  Sixteenth  Indiana,  and  sup- 
ported by  the  latter  regiment  not  more  than  25  or  30  feet  from  the  fort, 
against  which  it  did  admirable  work.  By  this  time  the  guns  ot  iny 
command  had  become  so  foul  by  constant  firing  that  I was  compelled 
to  use  caliber  .54  in  place  of  .58,  the  caliber  of  the  arms.  A brigade 
was  sent  us  from  General  Quinby’s  division,  but,  owing  to  their  incau- 
tious manner  of  approaching,  drew  from  the  enemy  a most  galling  fire 
of  musketry  and  artillery,  followed  by  an  attempt  of  the  enemy  to 
charge,  probably  with  the  view  of  capturing  the  gun  we  were  using  so 
effectively.  The  brigade  re-enforcing  us  broke  and  retired  in  great 
disorder.  My  brigade,  now  greatly  reduced  in  strength,  manfully  held 
its  ground,  and  the  Sixteenth  Indiana  prepared  with  fixed  bayonets  to 
receive  the  threatened  charge,  which,  however,  did  not  come.  It  was 


Ciiap.  XXXVI.] 


35 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS. 

now  niglit,  and  hostilities  for  the  most  part  ceased.  We  drew  off  our 
men,  after  having  maintained  the  ground  for  nearly  ten  hours’  contin- 
uous fighting. 

I am  of  the  opinion  that,  had  we  been  re-enforced  at  12  m.,  or  the 
demonstration  kept  up  along  the  line  to  our  right,  thus  preventing  the 
enemy  from  massing  directly  in  our  front,  we  could  have  gained  a lodg- 
ment in  the  enemy’s  works. 

Since  that  time  to  the  present  date  (May  24),  nothing  has  transpired, 
the  men  quietly  resting  on  the  days  succeeding  the  fight. 

The  Seventeenth  Ohio  Battery,  attached  to  my  brigade,  in  the  actions 
of  the  20th  and  22d  was  almost  entirely  detached  from  my  infantry,  and 
heuce  they  have  not  been  hitherto  mentioned  as  frequently,  perhaps, 
as  was  their  due,  and  I take  this  opportunity  to  bear  willing  testimony 
to  the  brilliancy  of  their  work.  Being  frequently  at  the  batteries  with 
them,  I repeatedly  observed  the  unwavering  assiduity  with  which  the 
officers  watched  for  a chance  to  injure  the  enemy  and  the  promptitude 
and  enthusiasm  with  which  the  men  responded  to  every  call  made  upon 
them. 

1 cannot  close  without  commending  with  highest  praise  the  gallantry 
of  my  staff  officers — Lieutenant  Conover,  acting  assistant  adjutant- 
general  5 Captain  Keigwin  and  Lieutenant  [Thomas  J.]  Elliott,  aides- 
de-camp,  and  Lieutenant  [George  W.]  Bichardson,  acting  inspector- 
general — who,  through  this  long  series  of  actions,  have  rendered  effi- 
cient aid  and  service  in  the  fatiguing  duties  of  the  field,  or  the  more 
exciting  but  more  dangerous  scenes  of  the  battle. 

Lieutenant  [Joshua  W.]  Tolford,  acting  ordnance  officer,  with  untiring 
energy  kept  not  only  my  brigade  but  the  whole  division  fully  supplied 
with  ammunition,  and  has  since  received  merited  promotion.  Lieutenant 
[George  W.J  Friedley  filled  the  double  capacity  of  acting  quartermaster 
and  acting  commissary  of  subsistence  with  entire  satisfaction,  even  in 
those  places  where  it  was  difficult,  almost  impossible,  to  obtain  supplies. 

Where  every  officer  and  man  acted  with  such  bravery,  it  is  difficult 
to  particularize,  and  I can  only  mention  some  instances  of  individual 
gallantry  which  came  under  my  personal  observation.  Colonel  Lucas, 
Sixteenth  Indiana,  showed  distinguished  courage  in  all  the  fights,  more 
particularly  on  the  22d,  when,  notwithstanding  he  was  wounded  three 
times,  he  continued  to  cheer  on  his  men  with  unabated  vigor.  For  cool, 
resolute  courage,  Major  Bedfield,  of  the  Sixteenth  Indiana,  has  stood 
conspicuous  throughout  the  campaign.  Colonel  Guppey,  Twenty-third 
Wisconsin,  worked  with  the  skill  of  a thorough  soldier  and  the  bravery 
of  a man  who  does  not  know  fear.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Buehler,  Sixty- 
seventh  Indiana,  remained  with  his  men  in  the  hottest  of  the  fierce 
carnage  of  the  22d,  and,  in  fact,  the  officers  of  all  the  regiments  he- 
roically did  their  duty.  I am  largely  indebted  to  Major  Montgomery 
and  Captain  Be  Gress,  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry,  the  latter  of  whom  was 
wounded  while  carrying  messages  for  me  during  the  assault  of  the 
22d ; also  Lieutenant  Kensler,  Sixteenth  Indiana,  wounded  while  act- 
ing aide-de-camp  on  the  same  day. 

I have  had  the  honor  heretofore  to  forward  a report  of  the  killed  and 
wounded  of  my  brigade,  a copy  of  which  is  appended  as  part  of  this 
report  ;*  also  a report  of  the  prisoners  captured  during  this  campaign.! 

I am,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  G.  BURBBIDGE, 

Brig.  Gen.,  Comdg.  First  Brig.,  Tenth  JDiv.,  Thirteenth  A.  G. 

Capt.  J.  Hough,  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Tenth  Division. 


Not  found ; but  see  revised  statement,  p.  161 


t Omitted. 


36  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 

No.  9. 

Report  of  Col.  Frederick  W.  Moore , Eiglity-third  Ohio  Infantry , includ- 
ing operations  April  14 -May  22. 

Hdqrs.  Eighty-third  Regt.  Ohio  Yol.  Infantry, 

Camp  before  Vicksburg , Miss.,  May  25, 1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit,  according  to  instructions  of  this 
date,  a condensed  statement  of  the  movements  of  my  command  since 
its  last  departure  from  Milliken’s  Bend,  La. 

On  April  14,  the  Eighty-third  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry,  with  the  re- 
mainder of  the  First  Brigade,  marched  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  Oak 
Grove  plantation. 

On  the  15th,  marched  through  Richmond,  La.,  to  Holmes’  plantation, 
and  went  into  camp  at  that  point  on  the  16th. 

On  the  22d,  this  regiment  proceeded,  under  special  orders,  to  Smith’s 
plantation  (5  miles  farther  south),  and  reported  to  Maj.  Gen.  John  A. 
McClernand,  commanding  Thirteenth  Army  Corps.  Was  there  employed 
on  provost  and  police  duty  until  April  27,  when  it  rejoined  the  First 
Brigade,  and  was  transported  to  Perkins’  plantation,  8 miles  below  New 
Carthage,  La. 

On  the  28th,  re-embarked,  and  moved  down  the  Mississippi  River 
within  sight  of  Grand  Gulf,  bivouacking  on  the  Louisiana  shore. 

On  the  29th,  marched  by  land  below  Grand  Gulf,  after  the  failure  of 
the  gunboats  to  silence  the  batteries  at  that  point. 

On  the  30th,  were  transported  by  gunboat  to  the  Mississippi  shore, 
below  Bayou  Pierre,  and  shortly  after  midnight  marched  toward  Port 
Gibson  without  halting.  Took  post  for  action  to  support  the  right  wing 
of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

May  1,  maneuvered  all  day  without  getting  under  fire  until  near  2 
p.  in.,  when  Companies  A and  F,  as  skirmishers,  supported  by  the  re- 
mainder of  the  regiment  in  line,  drove  the  Fifth  Missouri  (rebel)  Regi- 
ment from  a wooded  hill  in  our  front,  and  made  a demonstration  on  a 
heavy  howitzer  battery,  which  turned  its  fire  upon  them  for  about  two 
hours  without  inflicting  any  damage.  For  want  of  support  on  the  right, 
the  regiment  (and  the  brigade  at  the  same  time)  afterward  fell  back, 
having  sustained  no  greater  loss  than  3 men  very  slightly  wounded, 
and  having  taken  10  or  12  prisoners,  who  were  immediately  sent  to  the 
rear. 

On  the  2d,  at  daybreak,  I advanced  skirmishers,  the  regiment  follow- 
ing in  line  on  the  left  of  the  Sixteenth  Indiana,  and  entered  the  town  of 
Port  Gibson  without  resistance. 

On  the  3d,  advanced  to  the  bridge  over  Bayou  Pierre,  near  Willow 
Springs,  on  the  Vicksburg  road. 

On  the  7th,  advanced  beyond  Rocky  Springs. 

On  the  9th,  advanced  to  Big  Sandy  Creek. 

On  the  10th,  advanced  beyond  Cayuga,  Miss. 

On  the  12th,  made  a detour  to  the  left,  and  drove  in  the  enemy’s  pickets 
on  Fourteen-Mile  Creek,  about  6 miles  from  Edwards  Depot. 

On  the  13th,  moved  again  to  the  right,  and  bivouacked  on  Burrows’ 
plantation,  about  8 miles  from  Utica. 

On  the  15th,  marched  toward  Raymond,  and  maneuvered  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Edwards  Depot  until  about  9 a.  m.  of  May  16,  when  the  enemy 
appeared  in  force  at  Midway  Hill. 

My  regiment  immediately  formed  line  on  the  left  of  the  Sixteenth  In- 
diana, on  a commanding  eminence,  supporting  Blount’s  (Seventeenth 


Chap.  XXX YI.] 


37 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS. 

Ohio)  battery,  before  which  the  enemy  fell  back.  My  command  ad- 
vanced with  the  brigade  slowly,  but  securing  ground  as  it  went,  until 
checked  by  artillery  commanding  the  road  directly  in  front,  strongly 
supported  by  infantry.  A rapid  and  heavy  fire,  principally  directed 
upon  my  regiment  by  reason  of  its  position,  was  kept  up  for  several 
hours,  though  my  skirmishers,  by  their  spirited  and  effective  fire,  pre- 
vented any  movement  of  the  enemy’s  infantry  upon  my  front.  Avail- 
ing myself  of  the  crest  of  a ridge,  I was  able  to  protect  my  men  so  suc- 
cessfully as  to  lose  but  3 men  in  the  course  of  several  hours  under  grape, 
canister,  and  shell,  at  short  range.  Among  these,  however,  I regret  to 
name  Sergeant  [Ernest]  Warden,  of  Company  F,  a brave,  intelligent, 
and  faithful  soldier,  whose  skull  was  crushed  by  a fragment  of  shell 
and  whose  loss  is  much  to  be  deplored. 

The  enemy,  though  superior  in  numbers,  fell  back  during  the  night, 
and  we  advanced  on  the  morning  of  the  17th  at  the  best  speed  of  which 
the  man  were  capable,  passing  through  Edwards  Depot,  and  reaching 
Black  River  in  season  to  charge  the  left  of  the  enemy’s  intrenchments 
at  the  time  they  were  being  most  heavily  driven  on  the  right,  and  par- 
ticipating in  the  capture  of  the  Sixteenth  [Sixtieth]  East  Tennessee 
(rebel)  Regiment  and  some  100  stragglers  besides,  who  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  First  Brigade.  With  renewed  satisfaction  I am  able  to 
say  that  this  success  was  bloodless,  not  costing  us  a man. 

Sleeping  that  night  in  the  intrenchments,  we  crossed  Black  River 
about  9 a.  m.  of  May  18,  and  moved  directly  upon  Mount  Alban,  the 
lenth  Division  in  advance.  Finding  that  point  unoccupied,  we  moved 
by  a circuitous  route  to  the  left,  and  bivouacked  that  night  (18th)  about 
2 miles  from  the  main  forts  covering  the  Vicksburg  and  Jackson  Rail- 
road. 

Advancing  on  the  morning  of  the  19th,  the  line  of  battle  was  formed 
within  half-musket  shot  of  the  rebel  pickets,  in  an  orchard  on  the  left 
of  the  Jackson  Railroad,  and  by  steady  advances  gained  nearly  a mile 
to  the  front  with  severe  skirmishing,  in  which  my  regiment  had  to  sus- 
tain a loss  of  20  in  killed  and  wounded,  part  of  which  was  by  artillery 
from  the  forts.  J J 

On  the  20th,  the  fighting  was  confined  to  the  pickets,  and  but  one  or 
two  slight  casualties  occurred,  General  Benton’s  brigade  taking  the  front 
to  relieve  our  tired  men.  In  the  evening  of  that  day  [21st?]  it  was  offi- 
cially announced  to  me  that  a general  assault  was  ordered  for  10  o’clock 
the  next  morning,  May  22,  in  which  the  Tenth  Division,  being  in  re- 
serve, would  merely  support  General  Carr,  and  I was  ordered  to  hold 
the  men  m readiness  accordingly.  At  the  appointed  time  I detached 
the  several  companies  of  my  command  from  each  other  as  much  as  pos- 
sible, to  avoid  drawing  the  enemy’s  fire  while  passing  over  the  ridge 
between  me  and  General  Benton,  two  companies  moving  around  it  by 
the  right  flank.  Having  closed  on  the  new  line  without  loss,  my  regi- 
ment occupied  the  center  of  the  brigade,  the  Twenty-third  Wisconsin 
in  support. 

Almost  immediately  upon  the  advance  of  General  Benton  to  the 
assault,  several  staff  officers  came  to  demand  re-enforcements,  and 
within  a very  few  minutes  my  regiment,  being  ordered  to  advance, 
acl  closed  upon  the  enemy’s  works  under  a destructive  fire,  planted 
heir  colors  on  the  glacis  of  the  fort  nearest  them,  and  maintained  the 
same  line  with  the  Eighteenth  Indiana,  the  foremost  of  Benton’s  bri 
gade,  and  immediately  on  their  left.  By  a vigorous  fire  they  for  a time 
prevented  any  serious  reply  from  the  enemy  in  front,  but  five  companies 
being  moved  to  the  right  to  watch  the  rifle-pits  on  that  side,  were  soon 


38 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Ctiat\  XXXVI. 


exposed  to  an  enfilading  artillery  fire  from  the  forts,  both  to  the  right 
and  left,  and  suffered  from  it  to  a considerable  extent,  though  not  so 
much  as  some  other  regiments  which  seemed  less  expert  in  taking  ad- 
vantage of  the  ground  for  cover.  This  position  was  maintained — indeed, 
there  could  be  no  retreat — until  dark,  when  I was  ordered  to  retire  to 
the  ravine  occupied  by  me  in  the  morning,  which  was  accomplished  in 
safety,  bringing  off  my  colors  and  such  of  my  wounded  as  had  not  pre- 
viously been  removed.  Most  of  my  dead  were  also  brought  off,  though 
in  a few  cases  this  was  impossible. 

My  loss  in  this  affair  was  24  killed  and  wounded. 

All  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  W.  MOORE, 

Colonel  Eighty -third  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry. 

Lieut.  R.  Conover, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  First  Brigade. 


m.  10. 

Report  of  Col.  Joshua  J.  Guppey , Twenty-third  Wisconsin  Infantry , 
including  operations  to  May  22. 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-third  Regiment  Wisconsin  Vols., 

Near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  25,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  this  regiment  in  the  battles  that  have  taken  place  since  the 
army  landed  in  the  State  of  Mississippi : 

On  May  1 last,  the  regiment,  after  marching  the  entire  night  preced- 
ing, was  formed  as  a part  of  the  reserve  in  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson. 
In  the  forenoon,  by  order  of  General  Burbridge,  it  supported  Foster’s 
Wisconsin  battery  and  Sheldon’s  brigade,  General  Osterhaus’  division, 
in  several  advances. 

In  the  afternoon  it  rejoined  the  brigade  and  took  the  advance  on  the 
right  of  the  line. 

Later  in  the  day  it  was  deployed  as  skirmishers,  drove  the  enemy 
from  the  woods  toward  Port  Gibson,  took  20  prisoners,  and  destroyed 
a large  quantity  of  small-arms. 

On  the  morning  of  May  2,  the  regiment  was  in  line  of  battle  at  2 
a.  m.,  and  at  daylight  took  the  advance  toward  Port  Gibson,  having 
the  honor  of  being  the  first  regiment  which  entered  the  city,  and  which 
gave  the  first  cheer  for  our  national  flag,  raised  over  it  by  General  Lur- 
bridge.  During  the  day  the  regiment  did  duty  as  provost  guard. 

On  May  16,  the  regiment  was  engaged  in  the  battle  of  Midway  Hill. 
In  the  evening  five  companies  were  deployed  as  skirmishers,  and  after- 
ward two  companies  were  added  to  them.  They  did  most  efficient  serv- 
ice in  driving  the  enemy’s  skirmishers  and  gaining  knowledge  of  his 
position.  Captains  Greene  and  Bull,  who  each  commanded  parties,  dis- 
played excellent  conduct  and  judgment,  and  are  entitled  to  great 
credit  for  their  skill  and  bravery.  Two  companies  of  the  enemy’s  skir- 
mishers were  literally  cut  to  pieces,  if  the  account  of  prisoners  after- 
ward taken  may  be  believed. 

In  the  afternoon  the  regiment  was  placed  in  reserve  and.  did  little, 
except  make  an  advance  under  a heavy  fire  from  the  enemy’s  artillery , 


Chai\  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS.  39 


to  support  tbe  Eighty- third  Ohio  and  Sixty -seventh  Indiana.  1 believe 
the  advance  was  made  in  a manner  which  met  the  approval  of  the  gen- 
eral commanding. 

On  May  17,  the  regiment  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Black  River  Bridge, 
and  constituted  the  reserve,  when  the  Sixtieth  Tennessee  Regiment  sur- 
rendered to  the  brigade ; three  hundred  and  sixty  stand  of  arms  cap- 
tured, the  destruction  of  which  was  assigned  to  this  regiment,  and  they 
were  accordingly  destroyed  under  my  supervision. 

I have  little  to  say  of  the  affairs  which  took  place  under  the  walls  of 
the  forts  near  this  city  on  the  20th  and  22d  instant.  Whatever  name 
may  be  given  to  them,  they  were,  in  reality,  nothing  more  than  recon- 
naissances in  force,  and  should  be  so  regarded. 

On  the  20th,  my  whole  regiment  was  deployed  as  skirmishers,  and  did 
their  duty  most  gallantly.  Lieut.  A.  J.  McEarlane  wras  wounded  se- 
verely while  leading  his  men  against  the  enemy,  who  were  concealed  in 
the  fallen  timber  in  front  of  one  of  their  forts.  Later  in  the  day  Lieu- 
tenant Bull  was  wounded. 

On  the  22d,  the  brigade  aided  in  shutting  up  a large  number  of  the 
enemy  in  one  of  their  forts  so  closely  that  they  could  neither  discharge 
their  cannon  nor  their  small-arms.  Here  Lieutenant  Starks  was  wounded, 
and  Sergeants  [Judson  A.]  Lewis,  Company  C,  and  [Daniel]  Eder,  Com- 
pany D,  were  killed.  Our  gallant  soldiers  seemed  determined  to  get 
inside  the  fort  by  some  means.  Rot  being  able  to  scale  its  walls,  they 
tried  to  dig  them  down,  and  not  succeeding  in  this,  they  hailed  with 
cheers  the  cannon  which  had  been  ordered  up,  and  two  of  the  companies 
of  my  regiment  (B  and  E)  dragged  it  up  the  hill  to  the  walls  of  the  fort, 
where  it  was  most  vigorously  served.  It  was  too  late  in  the  day,  how- 
ever, to  accomjdish  the  desired  result.  Heavy  re-enforcements  poured 
in  to  aid  the  enemy,  and  all  that  we  could  do  was,  with  the  aid  of  a 
covering  brigade,  to  retire  in  good  order.  The  fire  of  musketry  was  the 
hottest  that  I have  ever  seen,  and  the  bravery  of  our  soldiers  under  it 
is  beyond  all  praise. 

All  of  my  officers  behaved  with  distinguished  gallantry.  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Vilas  and  Major  Hill  proved  themselves  to  be  brave  and 
skillful  leaders,  and  handled  the  mem  intrusted  to  their  charge  with 
much  skill. 

Being  in  command  of  the  reserve,  my  work  principally  consisted  in 
guarding  against  attempts  of  the  enemy  to  turn  our  right  flank,  several 
of  which  were  made,  and  all  of  which  failed. 

Our  total  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  in  these  engagements  were : 


Engagements. 

<C 

3 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

A f Port  (xilt)snii  May  1 _ ............ 

1 

A t,  Midway  Hill  May  16  ----- ...... 

3 

At,  THflp.R  "River  Bridge  IVTay  17  . . ........... 

1 

1 

At,  Vicksburg  TVTa,y2ft  . __  ..  

3 

14 

At  Vicksburg,  May  22.  - 

2 

28 

2 

Total ..  . 

5 

47 

3 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  J.  GUPPEY, 

Colonel , Commanding. 


Lieut.  R.  Conover, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


40  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVt. 

No.  11. 

Report  of  Col.  Friend  S.  Rutherford , Ninety -seventh  Illinois  Infantry , 

Second  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  Ninety -seventh  Regt.  Illinois  Volunteers, 
Champion’s  Hilly  near  Edwards  Depot , Miss.,  May  17,  1863. 

Dear  Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
part  my  command  took  in  the  battle  commonly  known  as  Champion’s 
Hill: 

During  the  early  part  of  the  day  little  was  done  save  to  change  posi- 
tion, in  pursuance  of  orders,  as  emergency  seemed  to  demand,  part  of  the 
time  in  front  and  part  of  the  time  in  reserve.  Near  3 p.  m.,  when  the 
advance  was  ordered,  my  command  was  directed  to  support  the  Chicago 
Mercantile  Battery.  My  regiment  was  placed  in  the  rear  of  the  bat- 
tery, on  a sloping  hill,  exposed  to  the  enemy’s  battery,  which  fired  rico- 
chet shot.  The  battery  was  ordered  to  change  its  position ; but  no 
orders  were  communicated  to  me  to  withdraw,  and  my  command  was 
for  three  quarters  of  an  hour  exposed  to  the  enemy’s  fire  without  being 
able  to  do  the  enemy  any  harm.  When  our  position  was  made  known 
to  General  Smith,  we  were  ordered  to  withdraw  and  take  a less  dan- 
gerous position. 

Our  loss  on  this  occasion  was  4 wounded. 

Permit  me  to  say,  on  behalf  of  my  men,  that  I look  upon  their  con- 
duct under  this  hail  of  cannon-shot  as  a severe  test  of  their  bravery. 
Not  a man  left  the  ranks,  save  the  wounded,  until  by  my  orders. 

Most  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  S.  RUTHERFORD, 

Colonel , Comdg.  Ninety-seventh  Regiment  Illinois  Volunteers. 

Col.  W.  J.  Landram, 

Comdg.  Second  Brigade , Tenth  Div .,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  12. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Alvin  P.  Hovey , TJ.  S.  Army,  commanding  Twelfth 
Division , including  operations  May  2-20. 

Hdqrs.  Twelfth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Before  Vicksburg , Miss.,  May  25,  1863. 

Colonel:  In  compliance  with  an  order  from  Major-General  McCler- 
nand,  I herewith  send  you  a report  of  the  action  of  my  division  from 
the  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  on  the  1st  instant,  to  the  date  of  my  arrival 
at  the  works  before  Vicksburg,  on  the  20th  instant. 

The  night  after  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson  we  slept  upon  the  field ; 
arrived  in  the  town  and  bivouacked  on  the  second  day,  and  assisted  in 
building  a bridge  over  Bayou  Pierre.  We  marched  for  Willow  Springs 
on  the  3d,  arriving  there  the  same  evening. 

On  the  6th,  encamped  at  Rocky  Springs.  On  the  7th  instant  at  Big 
Sandy,  where  we  remained  until  the  10th,  on  which  day  we  marched  to 
and  encamped  upon  Five-Mile  Creek. 

On  the  12th,  we  marched  for  Fourteen-Mile  Creek,  on  the  Edwards 
Station  road.  Here  my  division,  being  in  front,  encountered  the  enemy’s 
pickets,  who  were  encamped  at  Edwards  Station  in  considerable  force. 
We  had  marched  from  4 o’clock  in  the  morning  over  a rugged  country, 


(3hai>.  XXXVt.] 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPIONS  HILL,  MISS. 


41 


with  little  or  no  water,  and  our  only  hope  was  to  force  the  enemy  back 
beyond  Fourteen-Mile  Creek.  A sharp  skirmish  ensued,  and  we  drove 
the  enemy  back  and  encamped  on  both  sides  of  the  creek  for  the  night. 
Our  men  enjoyed  both  the  skirmish  and  the  water. 

On  the  13th,  I received  orders  to  cover  the  flank  and  rear  of  the  Thir- 
teenth Army  Corps  in  its  march  on  Jackson.  The  enemy  lay  in  strong 
force  near  the  line  of  our  march,  and  there  was  danger  of  an  attack,  as 
we  marched  by  the  flank  a short  distance  from  their  encampment.  The 
Ninth,  Tenth,  and  Fourteenth  Divisions,  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 
had  just  passed,  and  when  in  the  act  of  moving  my  division  my  pickets 
were  again  attacked  by  what  seemed  to  be  a strong  picket  guard.  I 
ordered  Colonel  Slack,  commanding  Second  Brigade,  to  bring  back  the 
Forty-seventh  Indiana,  Twenty-eighth  Iowa,  and  Fifty-sixth  Ohio,  and 
force  the  enemy  back.  Another  brisk  skirmish  ensued,  the  enemy  flee- 
ing before  the  Twenty-eighth  Iowa,  the  Fifty-sixth  and  Forty-seventh 
being  held  in  reserve,  faced  to  the  flanks  of  the  Twenty-eighth,  to  meet 
any  emergency.  In  the  mean  time  I had  ordered  my  division  forward, 
so  as  not  to  have  my  column  delayed  in  its  march  on  Jackson.  Our 
losses  in  these  skirmishes  were  4 slightly  wounded. 

On  the  same  night  we  encamped  beyond  Fourteen-Mile  Creek,  at 
Dillon’s  Cross-Roads,  on  the  field  of  a conflict  a few  days  previous  by 
forces  under  the  command  of  Major  General  Sherman. 

On  the  14th,  we  marched  through  Raymond  in  a severe  storm,  the 
roads  in  places  having  to  be  drained  by  the  labor  of  my  pioneers  be- 
fore our  wagons  could  pass,  and  encamped  near  a creek  about  4 miles 
distant  from  Clinton. 

Learning  at  Raymond  that  Jackson  had  fallen  and  was  in  possession 
of  our  forces,  our  direction  was  again  changed  toward  Vicksburg,  and 
on  the  15th  we  marched  to  a point  near  Bolton  Station,  and  encamped 
for  the  night. 

On  the  16th,  my  division  moved  in  the  direction  of  Midway,  or 
Champion’s  Hill,  on  the  extreme  right  of  the  corps,  Generals  Oster- 
haus’,  Carr’s,  and  Smith’s  divisions  moving  in  the  same  direction,  on 
other  roads  still  farther  to  the  south  and  left.  My  route  lay  on  the  Clin- 
ton and  Vicksburg  road,  nearest  to  and  on  the  south  of  the  railroad. 

During  the  morning  I had  thrown  forward  a part  of  my  escort,  under 
First  Lieut.  James  L.  Carey,  First  Indiana  Cavalry,  to  make  recon- 
naissances in  front  of  the  advance  guard  and  skirmishers  of  General 
McGinnis’  brigade. 

On  arriving  near  Champion’s  Hill,  about  10  a.  m.,  he  discovered  the 
enemy  posted  on  the  crest  of  the  hill,  with  a battery  of  four  guns  in  the 
woods  near  the  road,  and  on  the  highest  point  for  many  miles  around. 
At  the  time  I was  marching  between  the  First  and  Second  Brigades, 
so  as  to  be  ready  for  an  attack  on  either  flank.  I immediately  rode  for- 
ward and  ordered  General  McGinnis  to  form  his  brigade  in  two  lines, 
three  regiments  being  in  the  advance  and  two  in  the  reserve.  Before 
my  arrival,  General  McGinnis  had  formed  his  three  advanced  regiments 
in  line  of  battle,  and  had  thrown  out  skirmishers  in  the  front  and  flank 
of  his  command. 

The  Second  Brigade,  Col.  James  R.  Slack  commanding,  was  imme- 
diately formed  on  the  left  of  the  First  Brigade,  two  regiments  in  ad- 
vance and  two  in  reserve.  Skirmishers  were  at  once  sent  forward,  cov- 
ering my  entire  front,  and  had  advanced  to  within  sight  of  the  enemy’s 
battery.  They  were  directed  not  to  bring  on  the  action  until  we  were 
entirely  ready. 

At  this  point  I attempted  to  communicate  with  Brigadier-General 


42 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Ciiai\  XXXVI. 


Osterhaus,  but  my  messengers,  not  knowing  the  country  nor  his  exact 
locality,  were  unable  to  find  his  division.  In  the  mean  time  Major- 
General  Grant  had  arrived,  and  with  him  Major-General  McPherson, 
with  his  command.  Before  proceeding  further,  it  is  necessary  that  the 
topography  of  the  field  should  be  described. 

Midway,  or  Champion’s  Hill,  is  equidistant  from  Jackson  and  Vicks- 
burg, and  is  near  the  Midway  Station,  on  the  Vicksburg  and  Jackson 
Railroad.  It  is  a high  promontory,  some  60  or  70  feet  above  the  com- 
mon level  of  the  country,  and  covered  with  woods,  the  Vicksburg  and 
Clinton  road  leading  over  the  crest.  To  the  right  and  northeast  of  the 
hill  are  undulating  fields,  and  on  the  left  a woody  tangled  ravine, 
through  which  troops  might  pass  with  great  difficulty.  (See  map  ac- 
companying this  report.*)  About  half  a mile  from  the  point  of  the  hill, 
General  McPherson  formed  his  line  of  battle  in  the  open  field,  facing 
toward  the  side  of  the  hill,  a distance  from  the  hill  of  about  400  yards, 
his  front  and  the  main  front  of  my  division  being  nearly  at  right  angles. 
As  my  division  ascended  the  hill,  its  line  conformed  to  the  shape  and 
became  crescent-like,  with  the  concave  toward  the  hill.  As  soon  as 
General  McPherson’s  line  was  ready  to  take  part  in  the  contest,  about 
10.30  a.  m.,  I ordered  General  McGinnis  and  Colonel  Slack  to  press 
their  skirmishers  forward  up  the  hill,  and  follow  them  firmly  with  their 
respective  brigades.  In  a few  minutes  the  fire  opened  briskly  along 
the  whole  line,  from  my  extreme  left  to  the  right  of  the  forces  engaged 
under  Major-General  McPherson,  and  at  11  o’clock  the  battle  opened 
hotly  all  along  the  line.  The  contest  here  continued  for  an  hour  by 
my  forces.  For  over  600  yards  up  the  hill  my  division  gallantly  drove 
the  enemy  before  them,  capturing  11  guns  and  over  300  prisoners,  under 
fire.  The  Eleventh  Indiana,  Colonel  Macauley,  and  Twenty-ninth  Wis- 
consin, Colonel  Gill,  captured  the  four  guns  on  the  brow  of  the  hill,  at 
the  point  of  the  bayonet.  Colonel  Bringhurst,  with  the  Forty-sixth 
Indiana,  gallantly  drove  the  enemy  from  two  guns  on  the  right  of  the 
road,  and  Colonel  Byam,  with  his  brave  and  eager  Twenty -fourth  Iowa, 
charged  a battery  of’five  guns  on  the  left  of  the  road,  driving  the  enemy 
away,  killing  gunners  and  horses,  and  capturing  several  prisoners. 

At  this  time  General  McGinnis  requested  me  to  permit  him  to  take 
one  section  of  the  Sixteenth  Ohio  Battery,  commanded  by  Captain 
Mitchell,  up  the  hill.  The  section  was  taken  up,  and  after  fighting 
gallantly  and  firing  16  rounds  was  withdrawn,  the  danger  of  capture 
being  imminent.  Captain  Mitchell,  who  fell  during  this  attempt,  will 
prove  a great  loss  to  his  friends  and  country.  First  Lieutenant  Mur- 
dock acted  very  gallantly  during  this  affair,  and  deserves  much  praise 
for  his  coolness  and  bravery. 

In  the  mean  time  the  enemy,  being  rallied  under  cover  of  the  woods, 
poured  down  the  road  in  great  numbers  upon  the  position  occupied  by 
my  forces.  Seeing  from  the  character  of  the  ground  that  my  division 
was  likely  to  be  severely  pressed,  as  the  enemy  would  not  dare  advance 
on  the  open  ground  before  General  McPherson,  who  had  handled  them 
roughly  on  the  right,  I ordered  our  captured  guns  to  be  sent  down  the 
hill.  A short  time  afterward  I received  a request  to  send  support  to 
General  McGinnis,  on  the  right.  At  this  time  my  whole  division,  in- 
cluding reserves,  had  for  more  than  one  hour  been  actively  engaged,  and 
my  only  hope  of  support  was  from  other  commands.  Brigadier-General 
Quinby’s  division,  commanded  by  General  Crocker,  was  near  at  hand, 
and  had  not  yet  been  under  fire.  I sent  to  them  for  support,  but  being 
unknown  to  the  officers  of  that  command,  considerable  delay  (not  less 


On  opposite  page. 


Chap.  XXXVI  ] BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION  S HILL,  MISS. 


43 


44 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXX FI. 

than  half  an  hour)  ensued,  and  I was  compelled  to  resort  to  Major- 
General  Grant  to  procure  the  order  for  their  aid.  Colonel  Boomer, 
commanding  Third  Brigade,  of  Quinby’s  division,  on  receiving  the 
command  from  General  Grant,  came  gallantly  up  the  hill;  Colonel 
Holmes,  with  two  small  regiments,  Tenth  Missouri  and  Seventeenth 
Iowa,  soon  followed.  The  entire  force  sent  amounted  to  about  2,000 
men. 

My  division  in  the  mean  time  had  been  compelled  to  yield  ground 
before  overwhelming  numbers.  Slowly  and  stubbornly  they  fell  back, 
contesting  with  death  every  inch  of  the  field  they  had  won.  Colonel 
Boomer  and  Colonel  Holmes  gallantly  and  heroically  rushed  with  their 
commands  into  the  conflict,  but  the  enemy  had  massed  his  forces,  and 
slowly  pressed  our  whole  line  with  re- enforcements  backward  to  a point 
near  the  brow  of  the  hill.  Here  a stubborn  stand  was  made.  The  irreg- 
ularity of  our  line  of  battle  had  previously  prevented  me  from  using 
artillery  in  enfilading  the  enemy’s  line,  but  as  our  forces  were  compelled 
to  fall  slowly  back,  the  lines  became  marked  and  distinct,  and  about 
2.30  p.  m.  I could  easily  perceive,  by  the  sound  of  fire-arms  through  the 
woods,  the  position  of  the  respective  armies.  I at  once  ordered  the 
First  Missouri  Battery,  commanded  by  Captain  Schofield,  and  the  Six- 
teenth Ohio  Battery,  under  First  Lieutenant  Murdock,  to  take  position 
in  an  open  field,  beyond  a slight  mound  on  my  right,  in  advance  of,  and 
with  parallel  ranges  of  their  guns  with,  my  lines.  About  the  same 
time  Captain  Dillon’s  Wisconsin  battery  was  put  in  position  ; two  sec- 
tions of  the  Sixteenth  Ohio  Battery  on  the  left,  the  Wisconsin  battery 
in  the  center,  and  Captain  Schofield’s  battery  on  the  right.  Through 
the  rebel  ranks  these  batteries  hurled  an  incessant  shower  of  shot  and 
shell,  entirely  enfilading  the  rebel  columns. 

The  fire  was  terrific  for  several  minutes,  and  the  cheers  from  our  men 
on  the  brow  of  the  hill  told  of  the  success.  The  enemy  gave  back,  and 
•our  forces,  under  General  McGinnis,  Colonel  Slack,  Colonel  Boomer, 
and  Colonel  Holmes,  drove  them  again  over  the  ground  which  had  been 
hotly  contested  for  the  third  time  during  the  day,  five  more  of  the 
eleven  guns  not  taken  down  the  hill  falling  a second  time  into  our  pos- 
session. 

I cannot  think  of  this  bloody  hill  without  sadness  and  pride.  Sadness 
for  the  great  loss  of  my  true  and  gallant  men;  pride  for  the  heroic 
bravery  they  displayed.  No  prouder  division  ever  met  as  vastly  supe- 
rior foe  and  fought  with  more  unflinching  firmness  and  stubborn  valor. 
It  was,  after  the  conflict,  literally  the  hill  of  death ; men,  horses,  cannon, 
and  the  debris  of  an  army  lay  scattered  in  wild  confusion.  Hundreds 
of  the  gallant  Twelfth  Division  were  cold  in  death  or  writhing  in  pain, 
and,  with  large  numbers  of  Quinby’s  gallant  boys,  lay  dead,  dying,  or 
wounded,  intermixed  with  our  fallen  foe.  Thus  ended  the  battle  of 
Champion’s  Hill  at  about  3 p.  in.,  and  our  heroes  slept  upon  the  field 
with  the  dead  and  dying  around  them. 

I never  saw  fighting  like  this.  The  loss  of  my  division,  on  this  field 
alone,  was  nearly  one-third  of  my  forces  engaged.  Of  the  Twenty- 
ninth  Wisconsin,  Twenty-fourth  and  Twenty-eighth  Iowa,  in  what 
words  of  praise  shall  I speak  ? Not  more  than  six  months  in  the  serv- 
ice, their  record  will  compare  with  the  oldest  and  best  tried  regiments 
in  the  field.  All  honor  is  due  to  their  gallant  officers  and  men;  and 
Colonels  Gill,  Byam,  and  Connell  have  my  thanks  for  the  skill  with 
which  they  handled  their  respective  commands,  and  for  the  fortitude, 
endurance,  and  bravery  displayed  by  their  gallant  men. 

It  is  useless  to  speak  in  praise  of  the  Eleventh,  Twenty-fourth, 


CHAr.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS.  45 

Thirty-fourth,  Forty-sixth,  and  Forty-seventh  Indiana  and  Fifty-sixth 
Ohio.  They  have  won  laurels  on  many  fields,  and  not  only  their  coun- 
try will  praise,  hut  posterity  be  proud  to  claim  kindred  with  the  pri- 
vates in  their  ranks.  They  have  a history  that  Colonel  Macauley, 
Colonel  Spicely,  Colonel  Cameron,  Colonel  Bringhurst,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  McLaughlin,  and  Colonel  Baynor,  and  their  children’s  children 
will  be  proud  to  read. 

My  brigades  could  not  have  been  managed  with  more  consummate 
skill  than  they  were  by  Brigadier-General  McGinnis  and  Col.  James  B. 
Slack.  Their  services  deserve  the  highest  reward  that  a soldier  can 
claim. 

My  staff,  as  usual,  did  their  whole  duty.  Capt.  John  E.  Phillips,  as- 
sistant adjutant-general,  and  First  Lieuts.  J.  T.  McQuiddy  and  J.  P. 
Pope,  my  aides,  were  untiring  during  the  whole  day,  and  by  their  cool- 
ness, promptitude,  and  energy  aided  me  in  every  trying  emergency.  I 
am  also  much  indebted  to  First  Lieuts.  George  Sheeks,  acting  assistant 
quartermaster,  and  W.  H.  Sherfy,  and  Second  Lieut.  T.  C.  Withers,  of 
the  signal  corps,  for  valuable  services  throughout  the  day. 

It  is  no  easy  task  to  specify  individual  gallantry,  where  the  field  is 
filled  with  deeds  of  fame,  but  I cannot  forbear  giving  the  full  meed  to 
those  who  have  suffered.  The  division  lost,  in  killed  and  wounded,  54 
officers — 29  in  the  First  Brigade  and  25  in  the  Second. 

Col.  W.  T.  Spicely,  of  the  Twenty -fourth  Begiment  Indiana  Volun- 
teers, conspicuous  for  his  daring  gallantry  throughout  the  day,  was 
wounded,  but  remained  upon  the  field  until  the  victory  was  ours. 
Col.  Daniel  Macauley,  Eleventh  Indiana,  was  wounded  through  the 
thighs  near  the  close  of  the  fight,  while  leading  his  noble  regiment 
through  the  hottest  part  of  the  field.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Barter, 
Twenty-fourth  Indiana,  while  bearing  the  colors  of  his  regiment  for- 
ward, was  severely  wounded.  Lieutenant- Colonel  Swain,  Thirty-fourth 
Indiana,  was  severely  wounded  while  cheering  his  men  and  encouraging 
them  in  the  performance  of  their  duty.  Maj.  Bradford  Hancock, 
Twenty -ninth  Wisconsin,  was  severely  wounded  while  nobly  discharg- 
ing his  duty.  The  true  and  trusted  Majs.  L.  H.  Goodwin,  Forty-sev- 
enth Indiana,  and  Edward  Wright,  Twenty-fourth  Iowa,  were  severely 
wounded,  in  the  thickest  of  the  fight. 

Among  the  dead  of  the  Second  Brigade  are  the  honored  names  of 
Capt.  Silas  D.  Johnson,  Twenty-fourth  Iowa;  Capt.  William  Carbee, 
Twenty-fourth  Iowa ; First  Lieutenant  [Chauncey]  Lawrence,  Twenty- 
fourth  Iowa;  First  Lieut.  James  F.  Perry,  Forty-seventh  Indiana; 
Second  Lieut.  George  W.  Manring,  Fifty-sixth  Ohio;  Second  Lieut. 
A.  S.  Chute,  Fifty-sixth  Ohio ; Second  Lieut.  J.  J.  Legan,  and  First 
Lieut.  Benjamin  F.  Kirby,  Twenty-eighth  Iowa. 

Of  the  First  Brigade,  Capt.  Felix  G.  Welman  fell  on  the  outer  edge 
of  the  field  while  being  pressed  with  overwhelming  numbers.  He  rose 
from  the  ranks,  was  gallant  and  good,  and  beloved  by  all  who  knew 
him.  Second  Lieut.  Jesse  L.  Cain,  of  the  same  regiment,  fell,  mortally 
wounded,  at  the  same  time,  and  died  in  a few  hours  afterward.  A 
better  man  sleeps  not  upon  that  bloody  field.  First  Lieut.  J.  Ferris, 
Forty-sixth  Indiana,  died  like  a true  soldier,  with  his  face  to  the  foe. 
A complete  list  of  the  killed  and  wounded  accompanies  this  report.* 

The  effective  force  of  my  division,  at  the  commencement,  was  as  fol- 
lows: First  Brigade,  2,371;  Second  Brigade,  1,809,  making  a total  of 
4,180.  Of  this  number  our  casualties  were  211  killed,  872  wounded,  and 


See  revised  statement,  p.  8. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


46 


119  missing  5 total,  1,202.  When  it  is  considered  that  this  loss,  being 
more  than  28.7  per  cent.,  took  place  in  less  than  four  hours,  it  is  be- 
lieved that  few  parallels  can  be  found  in  the  history  of  the  present  war. 
The  greatest  loss  per  cent,  took  place  in  the  Twenty -fourth  Indiana, 
being  over  40  per  cent.,  201  being  their  casualties  out  of  less  than  500 
engaged  in  the  action. 

My  division  captured  in  the  field  over  300  prisoners,  under  fire,  and 
400  after  the  conflict  ceased,  making  a total  of  700;  besides  this,  Gen- 
eral McGinnis  paroled  sick  and  wounded  prisoners  and  nurses  amount- 
ing to  569,  and  buried  221  rebel  dead.  Colonel  Slack  also  paroled  189 
wounded  rebels  and  nurses,  making  a grand  total  as  follows : 


Prisoners  taken  by  division 

Wounded  paroled  by  General  McGinnis  .... 
Nurses  (rebel)  paroled  by  General  McGinnis 

Rebels  buried  by  General  McGinnis 

Rebels  paroled  by  Colonel  Slack 


700 

455 

114 

221 

189 


Total 


1,679 


Eleven  guns  were  captured  before  we  received  support  from  Quinby’s 
division,  and  two  of  them  brought  oft  the  field.  The  second  capture 
of  the  remaining  five  guns  was  the  joint  labor  of  my  division  and  the 
re-enforcements  sent  to  me  from  General  Quinby’s  division.  Colonel 
Macauley  has  the  battle  flag  of  Fowler’s  battery. 

By  the  aid  of  Dr.  Robert  B.  Jessup,  medical  director  of  my  division, 
and  the  untiring  labor  of  Capt.  George  W.  Jackson,  with  his  famous 
pioneers,  comfortable  bowers  were  made,  and  the  wounded  well  provided 
with  every  necessary  and  luxury  that  could  be  found  within  their  reach. 

The  medical  corps  of  my  division  have  again  distinguished  them- 
selves, and  deserve  special  mention.  Dr.  T.  W.  C.  Williamson,  Twenty- 
fourth  Indiana,  was  severely  wounded  while  fearlessly  attending  to  his 
duties  on  the  field.  Dr.  J.  W.  H.  Vest,  Twenty-eighth  Iowa,  rendered 
most  efficient  service  in  rallying  the  men  in  his  command  at  a critical 

moment.  . __  — 

Chaplain  Simmons,  Twenty-eighth  Iowa,  and  Chaplain  Robb,  horty- 
sixth  Indiana,  were  found  where  good  men  should  be— among  the 
wounded  and  dying,  rendering  all  the  consolation  and  aid  in  their  power. 

On  the  17th,  my  Second  Brigade  marched  to  Edwards  Station,  the 
First,  under  General  McGinnis,  remaining  to  care  for  the  dead,  wounded, 

and  prisoners.  _ , ... 

On  the  19th,  the  First  Brigade  arrived  at  Edwards  Station,  and,  with 
the  division,  marched  to  Black  River  Bridge. 

On  the  20th,  the  First  Brigade  marched  to  the  Vicksburg  fortifica- 
tions, the  Second  Brigade  remaining  at  Black  River  to  guard  the  bridge. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALVIN  P.  HOVEY, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates, 

Asst . Adjt.  Gen.  on  Major-General  Me  demands  Staff. 


ADDENDA. 

Hdqrs.  Twelfth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

June  8,  1863. 

Colonel  : Inclosed  I send  you  an  extract  from  what  purports  to  be 
an  ofticial  report  of  the  battle  of  Baker’s  Creek  or  Champion’s  Hill. 
If  this  be  official,  or  even  semi-official,  I respectfully  request  that  it  be 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS.  47 

at  once  corrected.  I was  not  succeeded  by  Boomer’s  and  Holmes’  bri- 
gades, or  by  any  other  brigade  or  command,  but  remained  upon  the 
field  and  helped  fight  the  battle  to  victory.  Those  commands  were  re- 
enforcements sent  to  my  support.  If  there  be  the  shadow  of  a doubt 
upon  this  point,  let  a court  of  inquiry  be  at  once  convened.  The  truth 
is,  that  the  final  repulse  given  to  the  enemy  on  the  brow  of  the  hill  is 
to  be  attributed  almost  entirely  to  the  enfilading  fire  of  sixteen  pieces 
of  artillery,  described  in  my  report. 

I herewith  send  you  copies  of  my  report  and  the  reports  of  General 
McGinnis  and  Colonel  Slack,  with  the  parts  marked  which  bear  upon 
the  question.*  I feel  confident  that  neither  Major-General  Grant  nor 
Major-General  McClernand  would  intentionally  do  me  the  injustice  that 
this  dispatch  contains. 

Trusting  and  believing  that  justice  will  be  done  to  all,  I have  the 
honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALVIN  P.  HOVEY, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Twelfth  Division. 

Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Inclosure.] 

Official  report  of  the  tattles  of  Baker’s  Creek  and  Black  River  Bridge. 


Washington,  May  24. 

The  following  official  details  of  the  battle  of  the  Black  Biver  Bridge 
have  been  received : 


E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War : 


In  the  Rear  of  Vicksburg, 

May  20 — a.  m. 


Grant  won  a great  and  momentous  victory  over  the  rebels,  under 
Pemberton,  on  the  Jackson  and  Vicksburg  Railroad,  at  Baker’s  Creek, 
on  the  16th  instant.  Pemberton  had  a most  formidable  position  on  the 
crest  of  a wooded  hill,  over  which  the  road  passed  longitudinally.  He 
had  about  25,000  men.  The  battle  began  about  11  a.  m.,  and  was  gained 
at  4 p.  m.  The  brunt  was  borne  by  Hovey’s  division,  of  McClernand’s 
corps,  and  Logan’s  and  Crocker’s  divisions,  of  McPherson’s  corps. 
Hovey  attacked  the  hill,  and  held  the  greater  part  of  it  until  2 p.  m., 
when,  having  lost  1,600  men,  he  was  succeeded  by  Boomer’s  and  Holmes’ 
brigades , of  Crocker’s  division , by  which  the  conflict  was  ended  in  that  part 
of  the  field.  Boomer  lost  500  men.  Logan  operated  on  the  right  and 
cut  off  the  enemy’s  direct  retreat,  so  that  he  was  compelled  to  escape 
by  his  right  flank  through  the  woods.  Logan  lost  400  killed  and 
wounded.  We  took  about  2,000  prisoners. 

On  the  17th,  advancing  to  the  Big  Black,  we  fought  Pemberton  again 
at  the  bridge,  and  captured  3,000  more  prisoners.  He  fought  in  rifle- 
pits,  protected  by  a difficult  bayou  full  of  abatis.  Lawler’s  brigade,  of 
McClernand’s  corps,  charged  the  rifle-pits  magnificently,  and  took  more 
prisoners  than  their  own  number.  He  lost  500  killed  and  wounded. 

McPherson,  who  holds  the  center,  lost  but  little,  as  did  McClernand, 
who  holds  the  left. 


Nothing  marked  on  either  of  these  reports  on  file. 


48 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


The  gunboats  kept  the  enemy  alert  during  the  night,  and  the  town 
will  probably  be  carried  to-day.  There  are  from  15,000  to  20,000  of 
Pemberton’s  army  in  it. 

[0.  A.  DANA.] 

[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Battle-field , near  Vicksburg , June  9,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  IT.  S.  Grant,  Commanding: 

General:  The  inaccuracy  of  the  accompanying  newspaper  slip  leads 
me  to  believe  it  is  not  official;  yet,  as  it  purports  to  be,  I have  deemed  it 
proper  to  refer  it,  together  with  the  accompanying  letter  from  General 
Hovey  and  the  reports  of  his  brigade  commanders,  to  you,  as  affording 
reliable  means  for  all  needful  correction  in  the  premises. 

That  General  Hovey’s  division,  of  my  corps,  bore  the  brunt  at  Cham- 
pion’s Hill;  that  both  it  and  the  re-enforcement  from  General  McPher- 
son’s corps  were  temporarily  forced  back ; and  that  General  Hovey’s 
artillery,  which  had  been  massed  for  that  purpose,  aided  by  Captain 
Dillon’s  Wisconsin  battery,  of  General  McPherson’s  corps,  retrieved 
and  secured  the  fortune  of  the  day  in  that  part  of  the  field,  is  suscepti- 
ble of  the  clearest  and  most  conclusive  proof. 

After  the  above,  I hardly  need  say  that  I am  not  the  author  of  the 
newspaper  slip  referred  to. 

I am,  sir,  with  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  A.  McCLEENAND, 
Commanding  Thirteenth  Army  Corps . 


No.  13. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  George  F.  McGinnis , JJ.  8.  Army , commanding 

First  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  First  Brig.,  Twelfth  Diy.,  Thirteenth  A.  C., 

Champions  Hill , Miss.,  May  19,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  First  Brigade  in  the  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  on 
the  16th  instant: 

We  left  our  encampment,  near  Bolton,  at  7 a.  m.  on  the  16th  instant, 
and  moved  toward  Edwards  Depot,  at  which  point  the  enemy  were 
supposed  to  be  in  force.  Receiving  an  order  from  Brigadier-General 
Hovey  to  advance  rapidly  and  cautiously  (a  portion  of  Company  C, 
First  Indiana  Cavalry,  being  ordered  to  the  front  by  General  Hovey, 
with  instructions  to  scour  the  country  and  report  any  appearance  of  an 
enemy),  I ordered  forward  three  companies  of  the  Twenty-fourth  In- 
diana Infantry  as  an  advance  guard,  and  deployed  two  companies  of 
the  Forty-sixth  Indiana  Infantry  as  flankers  on  either  side  of  the  road. 
After  advancing  about  5 miles  and  arriving  near  the  foot  of  Champion’s 
Hill,  I was  informed  by  the  cavalry  advance  that  they  had  discovered 
one  of  the  enemy’s  batteries  in  position  on  the  road,  and  about  800 
yards  in  front  of  us.  My  command  was  immediately  halted  and  formed 
in  line  of  battle,  skirmishers  thrown  out  in  front  and  on  both  flanks, 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS.  49 

and  a messenger  dispatched  to  inform  General  Hovey  of  the  position 
of  affairs. 

After  halting  some  time  and  seeing  no  signs  of  the  enemy,  and  fear- 
ing that  there  might  be  some  mistake  in  regard  to  the  battery,  I deter- 
mined to  satisfy  myself  by  personal  observation,  and  under  direction 
of  Sergt.  David  Wilsey,  of  Company  0,  First  Indiana  Cavalry,  who 
had  been  in  the  advance,  moved  up  the  road  some  600  yards,  to  a point 
from  which  could  be  distinctly  seen  one  section  of  artillery.  Several  of 
the  cavalry  occupied  a position  in  the  neighborhood,  and  informed  me 
that  they  had  fired  several  shots  at  the  battery  without  exciting  a reply. 

Being  satisfied,  I returned  to  my  command.  In  a short  time  our  cav- 
alry began  to  fall  back  slowly,  and  in  the  course  of  an  hour  I received 
orders  from  General  Hovey  to  advance  my  line  and  feel  the  enemy. 
The  order  to  advance  was  given,  and  almost  immediately  sharp  and 
rapid  firing  was  commenced  between  the  skirmishers.  When  the  order 
to  advance  was  given,  the  Thirty-fourth  Indiana  was  in  reserve. 

The  whole  line  having  advanced  about  500  yards,  the  rebel  battery 
opened  upon  us  with  volley  after  volley  of  grape  and  canister.  The 
men  were  ordered  to  lie  down  until  we  had  time  to  inform  ourselves 
more  accurately  in  regard  to  the  enemy’s  position  and  the  nature  of 
the  ground  over  which  we  had  to  move.  The  positions  occupied  by  the 
different  regiments  of  my  command  were  as  follows  : Eleventh  Indiana 
on  the  left  of  the  road,  the  Twenty-ninth  Wisconsin  on  the  right  of 
the  road,  and  the  Twenty-fourth  Indiana  on  the  right  of  the  Twenty- 
ninth  Wisconsin.  The  Forty-sixth  Indiana,  which  had  commenced  the 
movement  in  line  of  battle  with  the  balance  of  the  command,  owing  to 
the  unevenness  of  the  ground  over  which  we  moved,  had  been  crowded 
clear  out  of  its  position  and  in  rear  of  the  line.  I directed  Colonel 
Bringhurst  to  hold  his  right  in  reserve,  to  support  the  Eleventh  and 
Twenty-ninth.  The  Thirty-fourth  Indiana  was  yet  in  reserve,  support- 
ing the  right  wing.  The  rebel  battery  was  immediately  in  front  of  the 
right  of  the  Eleventh  Indiana  and  the  left  of  the  Twenty-ninth  Wis- 
consin. 

After  a short  halt,  another  advance  was  ordered.  The  whole  line 
moved  forward,  with  bayonets  fixed,  slowly,  cautiously,  and  in  excel- 
lent order,  and  when  within  about  75  yards  of  the  battery  every  gun 
was  opened  upon  us  and  every  man  went  to  the  ground.  As  soon  as 
the  volley  of  grape  and  canister  had  passed  over  us,  the  order  was  given 
to  charge,  when  the  whole  line  moved  forward  as  one  man,  and  so  sud- 
denly and  apparently  so  unexpected  to  the  rebels  was  the  movement, 
that,  after  a desperate  conflict  of  five  minutes,  in  which  bayonets  and 
butts  of  muskets  were  freely  used,  the  battery  of  four  guns  was  in  our  pos- 
session, and  a whole  brigade  in  support  was  fleeing  before  us,  and  a 
large  number  of  them  taken  prisoners.  The  Forty- sixth  Indiana  was 
immediately  ordered  upon  the  left;  they  moved  up  in  gallant  style, 
double-quick,  and,  almost  before  they  knew  it,  had  driven  the  rebels 
from  a three-gun  battery  in  their  immediate  front. 

The  rebels  were  driven  about  600  yards,  when,  being  strongly  re- 
enforced, they  turned  upon  us  and  made  a most  determined  stand.  At 
this  point  occurred  one  of  the  most  obstinate  and  murderous  conflicts 
of  the  war.  For  half  an  hour  each  side  took  their  turn  in  driving  and 
being  driven.  Seeing  that  we  were  largely  outnumbered,  having  every 
confidence  in  the  valor  of  the  First  Brigade,  and  yet  fearing  they  would 
be  overwhelmed,  I started  messengers  to  General  Hovey,  informing  him 
of  the  state  of  affairs  and  asking  for  assistance.  I at  the  same  time 
4 R R— VOL  XXIY,  PT  II 


50 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


ordered  the  captured  artillery  to  be  hauled  off  by  hand.  Two  pieces 
were  thus  hauled  off,  and  others  spiked,  so  as  to  render  them  useless 
to  the  enemy  in  case  they  should  recapture  them. 

With  the  consent  of  General  Hovey,  I had  ordered  up  one  section  of 
the  Sixteenth  Ohio  Battery,  under  Capt.  J.  A.  Mitchell,  who  asked,  as 
an  especial  favor,  that  he  might  be  permitted  to  put  it  into  position. 
He  advanced  well  to  the  front,  and  after  pouring  a few  effective  shots 
into  the  enemy,  he  saw  that  his  pieces  were  in  danger  of  being  captured 
should  he  remain  longer  in  that  position,  when  he  gave  the  command, 
“limber  to  the  rear,”  which  was  his  last  order,  as  at  that  moment  he 
received  a mortal  wound,  from  the  effects  of  which  he  died  in  a few 
hours.  He  fell  at  his  post,  nobly  and  gallantly  performing  his  duty. 

In  the  mean  time  the  contest  went  on.  In  reply  to  my  third  message 
for  assistance,  1 was  informed  that  a brigade  would  be  sent  to  us  soon ; 
it  was  fifteen  minutes  behind  time,  but  was  being  urged  forward  as 
rapidly  as  possible. 

Frequent  messengers  had  been  sent  for  the  Thirty-fourth  Indiana, 
but  it  could  not  be  found,  having  been  ordered,  without  my  knowledge, 
to  occupy  and  hold  a certain  position,  and  had  been  constantly  engaged 
from  the  beginning  of  the  general  engagement  doing  most  gallant  serv- 
ice. Having  driven  the  enemy  before  us,  and  fought  over  the  same 
ground  three  different  times,  after  having  been  engaged  in  a continual 
conflict  for  nearly  three  hours,  our  ammunition  being  nearly  exhausted, 
many  of  the  men  being  entirely  out,  having  fired  80  rounds,  and  rely- 
ing upon  what  they  could  get  from  the  boxes  of  the  dead  and  wounded, 
and  being  overwhelmed  by  numbers,  the  First  Brigade  began  to  fall 
back,  not  in  disorder  and  confusion,  but  in  good  order,  step  by  step,  con- 
testing every  inch  of  ground.  As  we  neared  the  ground  upon  which  the 
batteries  had  been  captured,  and  from  which  the  enemy  had  been  driven 
in  the  morning,  just  as  it  appeared  to  every  one  that  the  guns  would 
again  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  rebels,  we  were  greeted  by  the  shouts 
of  the  long-promised  re-enforcements,  and  one  brigade,  under  command 
of  Colonel  Boomer,  came  looming  over  the  hill,  immediately  followed  by 
another,  under  command  of  Colonel  Holmes,  of  the  Tenth  Missouri. 
They  passed  down  the  line  to  the  front  and  went  gallantly  into  action. 

The  rebel  advance  was  momentarily  checked,  but  they  came  down 
upon  us  in  such  immense  numbers  that  in  a short  time  the  whole  line, 
re-enforcements  and  all,  were  compelled  to  give  ground.  Soon,  how- 
ever, our  artillery  stationed  on  the  right  opened  an  enfilading  fire  upon 
the  rebel  masses,  which  effectually  checked  their  progress,  and  in  a short 
time  they  gave  way  and  fled  in  much  confusion,  leaving  our  gallant 
troops  in  peaceable  possession  of  the  battle-ground. 

The  artillery  that  was  captured  in  the  morning  was  all  left  in  our 
possession,  and  the  victory  was  complete. 

Were  I to  attempt  to  do  justice  to  the  daring,  endurance,  and  gal- 
lant conduct  of  the  officers  and  men  of  the  First  Brigade,  I should 
fail.  Their  actions  speak  for  them;  in  proof  of  which  let  facts  be  sub- 
mitted. 

The  Twenty -fourth  Indiana,  although  not  engaged  in  an  immediate 
charge  upon  a battery,  was  heavily  engaged  for  over  three  hours  against 
immense  odds.  Forty  per  cent,  of  the  command  were  either  killed  or 
wounded.  Among  the  wounded  are  Col.  W.  T.  Spicely  and  Lieut.  Col. 
R.  F.  Barter,  who,  while  gallantly  bearing  the  colors  of  his  regiment, 
was  severely  wounded.  Nine  officers  were  wounded,  and  1 (Captain 
Welman)  was  killed.  The  regiment  went  into  the  battle  with  an  aggre- 
gate of  500  men.  Their  loss  was  201. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPIONS  HILL,  MISS. 


51 


The  Thirty -fourth  Indiana  was  detached  from  the  brigade  in  the  early 
part  of  the  engagement,  and  appear  to  have  fought  on  their  own  ac- 
count during  the  day.  They  fought  with,  and  completely  annihilated, 
the  Forty-sixth  Alabama,  making  it  so  hot  for  them  that  their  colonel 
(M.  L.  Woods)  was  compelled  to  surrender.  He  stated  that  his  com- 
mand consisted  of  over  300  men  when  he  went  into  the  battle,  and  that 
all  had  been  killed  or  wounded  except  the  70  whom  he  surrendered, 
including  the  lieutenant-colonel,  major,  and  6 line  officers.  The  brave 
Lieutenant- Colonel  Swain,  who  was  in  command  of  the  regiment,  and 
who  had  been*  in  very  feeble  health  for  several  days,  was  severely,  it 
is  feared  mortally,  wounded  while  cheering  and  encouraging  his  men  in 
the  performance  of  their  duty. 

Of  the  Eleventh  and  Forty-sixth  Indiana  and  the  Twenty-ninth  Wis- 
consin it  is  unnecessary  to  speak  further.  The  fact  that  they  captured 
two  batteries,  driving  the  enemy  before  them,  speaks  more  loudly  in 
their  praise  than  anything  that  I could  say. 

Of  the  noble  and  chivalrous  Colonel  Macauley,  of  the  Eleventh,  the 
brave  and  daring  Lieutenant-Colonel  Barter,  of  the  Twenty-fourth,  and 
the  gallant  Major  Hancock,  of  the  Twenty-ninth,  all  of  whom  were 
severely  wounded  in  the  thickest  of  the  fight,  nobly  doing  their  duty  j 
of  Colonel  Gill  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Greene,  of  the  Twenty-ninth ; 
Major  Jones,  of  the  Thirty-fourth ; Colonel  Spicely,  of  the  Twenty- 
fourth  j Lieutenant-Colonel  Darnall,  of  the  Eleventh ; Colonel  Bring- 
hurst  and  Major  Flory,  of  the  Forty-sixth,  too  much  cannot  be  said  in 
praise.  They  are  deserving  of  all  honor  for  their  endurance  and  bravery 
and  the  complete  control  which  they  exercised  over  their  respective 
commands.  To  speak  of  the  gallantry  of  many  officers  of  the  line  would 
require  too  much  time  and  space,  and  I leave  that  duty  for  their  re- 
spective regimental  commanders. 

I regret  that  Col.  R.  A.  Cameron,  of  the  Thirty-fourth  Indiana,  in 
consequence  of  partial  blindness,  was  wholly  unable  to  take  part  in  the 
battle,  knowing  that  he  would  have  given  a good  account  of  himself 
could  he  have  been  engaged. 

Owing  to  the  nature  of  the  ground,  which  rendered  it  impossible  for 
artillery  to  maneuver,  the  Second  Ohio  Battery  was  not  engaged  during 
the  day,  and  but  one  section  of  the  Sixteenth  Ohio  was  brought  into 
action. 

Our  total  force  engaged  was  2,371.  The  per  cent,  of  losses  are  as 
follows : Eleventh  Indiana,  36  per  cent. ; Twenty -fourth  Indiana,  40 
per  cent. ; Thirty-fourth  Indiana,  11  per  cent. ; Forty-sixth  Indiana,  24 
per  cent.,  and  the  Twenty-ninth  Wisconsin,  23  per  cent.,  making  an 
average  per  cent,  of  the  whole  infantry  force  engaged  26A. 

The  following  is  the  loss  of  my  brigade  in  killed,  wounded,  and 
missing : 


52  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXYI. 

I herewith  transmit  the  reports  of  the  regimental  commanders,  with 
their  lists  of  killed,  wounded,  and  missing. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEOEGE  F.  McGINNIS. 

Capt.  John  E.  Phillips,  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen .,  Twelfth  Division . 


Hdqrs.  First  Brio.,  Twelfth  Div.,  Thirteenth  A.  0., 

Near  Vicksburg , Miss.,  May  27,  1863. 

Sir  : In  addition  to  my  report  of  the  part  taken  by  the  First  Brigade 
in  the  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  I would  respectfully  submit  the  fol- 
lowing : 

In  obedience  to  an  order,  dated  Headquarters  Army  in  the  Field, 
Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16, 1863,  directing  me  to  u remain  with  my 
brigade,  and  one  from  Crocker’s  division,  in  possession  of  the  battle- 
field, to  bury  the  dead  of  both  sides,  collect  all  arms  and  material, 
receive  and  guard  all  prisoners  left  behind,  whether  wounded  or  as 
nurses  to  wounded  prisoners,”  I have  the  honor  to  report  as  follows : 


Number  of  rebels  buried . 221 

Number  of  rebel  wounded  paroled 455 

Number  of  rebels  paroled  as  nurses  (advised  by  Surgeon  Mills) 114 

Number  of  rebel  prisoners  enrolled 1, 097 


Total 1,887 

Arms  and  material  were  collected  as  follows : 

Small-arms,  serviceable 2, 976 

Small-arms,  unserviceable 448 


Total 3,424 

12-pounder  bronze  howitzer 1 

6-pounder  iron  smooth-bore  gun 1 

12-pounder  iron  howitzer 1 

12-pounder  bronzed  smooth-bore  guns 4 

Caissons  complete 7 

Caissons  without  limbers 2 

Rounds  of  artillery  ammunition 832 


In  obedience  to  further  orders  from  Headquarters  Department  of  the 
Tennessee,  dated  Black  Eiver  Bridge,  May  17,  1863 ; also  near  Vicks- 
burg, Miss.,  May  19,  1863,  being  informed  by  Surgeon  [Madison]  Mills 
that  the  wounded  were  collected  and  cared  for,  I moved  with  my  com- 
mand at  12  m.  19th  instant,  and  reported  to  Brigadier-General  Hovey 
at  Edwards  Depot.  I there  received  an  order  from  General  Hovey  to 
move  my  command  beyond  Black  Eiver. 

On  the  morning  of  the  20th  instant,  all  prisoners  in  my  charge  were 
forwarded  under  a safe  guard  to  Haynes’  Bluff. 

The  arms  and  material  were  turned  over  to  Lieutenant  [C.  C.]  Chaffee, 
ordnance  officer,  and  forwarded  under  his  charge,  receipt  being  taken  for 
the  same.  I herewith  inclose  copy  of  receipts  for  arms,  material,  &c.* 

I would  state  that  a large  amount  of  captured  artillery  ammunition 
was  turned  over  to  officers  of  General  Logan’s  division  on  the  night  of 
'the  16th  instant,  no  receipts  being  taken  therefor. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEOEGE  F.  McGINNIS. 

Capt.  John  E.  Phillips,  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Twelfth  Division . 


Omitted. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS.  53 

No.  14. 

Report  of  Col.  William  T.  Spicely,  Twenty -fourth  Indiana  Infantry . 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  17, 1863. 

Sir  : In  pursuance  to  orders,  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  part 
taken  by  the  Twenty-fourth  Eegiment  Indiana  Volunteers  in  the  battle 
of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  on  the  16th  day  of  May,  1863. 

On  the  16th  instant,  at  6 a.  in.,  we  moved  from  our  camp  near  Bolton 
Depot,  4 miles  distant  from  the  battle-ground,  in  the  direction  of  Ed- 
wards Depot,  at  which  point  the  enemy  were  reported  to  be  in  force. 

My  command  being  in  advance,  I was  ordered  by  General  McGinnis, 
commanding  brigade,  to  move  three  companies  of  my  command  to  the 
front.  I immediately  sent  Companies  C,  F,  and  I to  the  advance,  and 
again  resumed  the  line  of  march. 

At  about  10  o’clock  in  the  morning,  as  we  approached  the  hills,  we  were 
apprised  by  our  cavalry  advance  that  the  enemy  were  posted  in  force 
in  front,  on  Champion’s  Hill.  General  McGinnis  then  ordered  me  to 
form  my  line  of  battle  on  the  right  of  the  road  leading  to  Edwards 
Depot.  At  10.30  a.  m.  our  line  of  battle  as  a brigade  was  formed,  and 
ready  for  action.  A few  minutes  after,  I was  informed  by  a signal  officer 
that  there  was  a force  of  the  enemy  maneuvering  to  the  right.  I im- 
mediately sent  Companies  A and  K to  the  right,  and  Company  G in 
support  of  the  skirmishers  in  front.  They  had  hardly  deployed  in  line 
before  firing  commenced  on  our  right,  the  enemy  making  an  effort  to 
turn  it. 

At  11.30  a.  m.  I was  ordered  to  advance  in  line  of  battle,  and  by  2 
o’clock  my  command  was  in  close  contest  with  the  enemy,  whose  force 
exceeded  ours  by  more  than  five  times  our  numbers.  Our  line  advanced 
from  where  it  was  first  formed  nearly  60  rods,  across  the  timber,  when 
I discovered  the  enemy  in  large  force  moving  to  my  right,  and  making 
an  effort,  as  I supposed,  to  capture  our  batteries,  stationed  in  the  field 
to  the  right.  I at  once  halted  my  command  and  poured  a galling  oblique 
fire  into  his  flank.  This,  with  the  destructive  fire  of  the  artillery,  checked 
for  a time  their  advance. 

By  this  time  the  action  became  general  along  the  whole  line,  and  very 
severe.  From  the  edge  of  the  timber  we  drove  the  enemy,  step  by  step, 
for  nearly  800  yards,  over  deep  ravines  and  abrupt  hills.  At  this  time 
the  rebels  were  heavily  re-enforced,  and  again  the  struggle  commenced, 
the  most  desperate  and  destructive  of  the  day.  While  engaged  actively 
with  the  enemy,  I received  notice  through  Captain  [John  F.]  Caveu  to 
come  to  the  support  of  the  center  of  our  line,  which  was  sorely  pressed 
by  the  left  flank,  and  in  a few  minutes  became  again  engaged  with  the 
enemy  in  strong  force.  This  point  I contested  against  superior  numbers 
for  nearly  an  hour,  under  the  most  galling  fire  I ever  witnessed.  Again 
the  enemy  massed  their  forces  and  threw  their  whole  weight  upon  the 
right  and  center  of  our  line,  and  here  my  men  fell  by  scores,  but  yet 
with  determined  bravery  held  the  enemy  in  check,  and  again  it  became 
necessary  for  me  to  change  my  position,  as  the  enemy’s  fire  was  con- 
verging  upon  my  lines.  I moved  to  the  rear  about  75  yards,  and  again, 
opened  fire  upon  the  rebels,  who  were  still  pressing  forward. 

Here  we  stood  before  a destructive  fire  fifteen  minutes,  when  I was 
compelled  to  change  my  position,  and  again  for  twenty  minutes  we 
fought  ten  times  our  number.  At  this  time  word  came  to  me  that  the 
left  of  the  division  was  giving  way,  and  that  our  troops  to  the  right 
were  overwhelmed,  or  nearly  so.  I again  fell  back  and  formed  a line, 


54 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


returning  tlie  enemy’s  fire,  which  was  kept  up  for  a considerable  time. 
Here  it  was  that  our  colors  fell.  The  gallant  Lieutenant-Colonel  Barter, 
believing  that  the  bearer  was  wounded,  rushed  forward,  seized  them, 
and  waved  them  with  cheers  in  the  very  face  of  the  enemy.  The  flag- 
staff was  shattered  and  Lieutenant- Colon  el  Barter  severely  wounded. 
Being  entirely  out  of  ammunition,  and  overwhelmed  in  front,  my  com- 
mand fell  back  nearly  300  yards,  and  here  the  Eleventh  and  Twenty- 
fourth  formed  a new  line,  replenished  their  cartridge-boxes,  and  again 
advanced  to  the  field.  By  this  time  we  were  sufficiently  re-enforced, 
and  in  less  than  an  hour  the  enemy  gave  way,  leaving  our  gallant  troops 
in  full  possession  of  Champion’s  Hill. 

But  amid  our  rejoicing  over  this  great  victory  we  are  called  upon  to 
mourn  the  gallant  dead.  Capt.  Felix  G.  Welman,  of  Company  B,  Second 
Lieut.  Jesse  L.  Cain,  of  Company  A,  and  27  others  of  my  command  fell 
at  their  post,  nobly  and  gallantly  performing  their  whole  duty.  Let 
their  names  be  inscribed  in  the  hearts  of  our  people,  and  their  memories 
revered  as  noble  patriots  and  gallant  soldiers. 

I shall  feel  the  loss  of  these  men,  together  with  the  loss  to  the  service 
of  the  gallant  Lieutenant-Colonel  Barter  and  Lieut.  J.  H.  Baldwin,  who 
are  so  severely  wounded  as  to  leave  me  without  the  benefit  of  their  val- 
uable assistance  for  a considerable  time.  I desire  also  to  make  mention 
of  Capt.  1ST.  F.  Bolton,  Lieut.  Daniel  Smith,  Lieut.  Frederick  T.  Butler, 
and  Asst.  Surg.  T.  W.  C.  Williamson,  who  were  severely  wounded  while 
engaged  in  the  gallant  performance  of  their  duty.  Adjt.  S.  R.  Hender- 
son and  Capt.  Hugh  Erwin,  Lieutenant  Smith,  Company  C ; Capt.  F. 
M.  Downey,  Lieut.  Frank  M.  Robbins,  commanding  Company  F after 
Lieutenant  Baldwin  fell  5 Capt.  Charles  S.  Jenkins,  Capt.  John  B. 
Hutchens,  Capt.  Benjamin  J.  Summers,  and  Captain  Redburn,  with 
their  subordinate  officers,  are  deserving  special  notice  for  the  ability 
and  zeal  with  which  they  performed  their  duty. 

The  men,  without  exception,  did  gallant  service,  and  stood  up  to  the 
galling  fire  of  an  overwhelming  force  for  three  hours  and  twenty  min- 
utes like  veterans,  and  Indiana  and  the  country  generally  may  well  feel 
proud  of  the  gallant  men  engaged  in  the  greatest  battle  of  the  war. 

My  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  was  207  out  of  a force  of  less  than  500 
men. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  T.  SPICELY, 

Colonel , Commanding  Twenty-fourth  Indiana  Volunteers. 

Capt.  Joseph  H.  Liysey, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  15. 

Report  of  Col.  James  R.  Slack,  Forty-seventh  Indiana  Infantry , com- 
manding Second  Brigade . 

Hdqrs.  Second  Brio.,  Twelfth  Diy.,  Thirteenth  A.  C., 

Camp  at  Edwards  Depot , Hinds  County , Miss .,  May  18,  1863. 
Sir  : I herewith  submit  a report  of  the  part  taken  by  the  Second 
Brigade  of  the  Twelfth  Division,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  A.  P.  Hovey, 
Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  on  the  16th  instant,  at  Cham’pion’s  Hill,  on  the 
Vicksburg  and  Jackson  Railroad,  in  Hinds  County,  Mississippi. 

My  command  consisted  of  the  Forty-seventh  Indiana  Infantry,  com- 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS.  55 

manded  by  Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  McLaughlin ; Fifty-sixth  Ohio  Infantry, 
commanded  by  Lieut.  Col.  William  H.  Raynor ; Twenty -fourth  Iowa 
Infantry,  commanded  by  Col.  Eber  C.  Byam ; Twenty-eighth  Iowa  In- 
fantry, commanded  by  Col.  John  Counell;  and  the  First  Missouri  Bat- 
tery, commanded  by  Capt.  George  W.  Schofield. 

On  the  night  of  the  15th,  we  encamped  on  the  Jackson  and  Vicksburg 
Railroad,  near  Bolton  Station. 

In  the  morning  we  left  camp  about  6 o’clock,  and  moved  east  about  7 
miles,  when  we  approached  very  nearly  to  the  enemy,  drawn  up  in  line 
of  battle. 

In  pursuance  of  orders  of  Brigadier-General  Hovey,  I formed  the  Sec- 
ond Brigade  in  two  lines  to  the  left  of  the  road,  in  the  field  of  one  Cham- 
pion, with  the  artillery  in  advance.  Soon  thereafter  I placed  my  lines 
of  battle  in  advance  of  the  artillery,  and  ordered  Companies  B and  G,  of 
the  Forty-seventh  Indiana,  under  command  of  Capt.  John  F.  Eglin ; two 
companies  (A  and  F)  of  the  Fifty-sixth  Ohio,  under  command  of  Capt. 
Manring,  and  two  companies  of  the  Twenty-fourth  Iowa,  under  com- 
mand of  Captain , as  skirmishers,  who  covered  the  whole  front 

of  the  line  and  advanced  toward  -the  enemy.  Skirmishing  soon  began, 
and  continued  for  about  one  hour,  when  I advanced  the  whole  line,  with 
the  Forty-seventh  Indiana  on  the  right  and  the  Twenty-eighth  Iowa 
on  the  left.  The  thick  growth  of  underbrush  and  vines,  ravines,  and 
hills  made  it  very  difficult  to  advance,  but  it  was  accomplished  with 
little  disorder,  until  we  reached  the  crest  of  the  hill,  where  we  found 
the  enemy  in  very  heavy  force  about  200  yards  in  front  of  us,  and 
und$r  cover  of  a wood  beyond  a field. 

Then  the  battle  began  with  great  fury,  our  troops  advancing  for  the 
purpose  of  driving  the  enemy  from  the  cover  of  the  woods,  which  was 
done  at  double-quick  and  in  a most  gallant  manner,  the  men  loading 
and  firing  as  they  advanced,  and  unfalteringly  receiving  a most  deadly 
fire  from  the  enemy;  yet  they  pressed  forward,  as  men  only  can  do  who 
are  prompted  by  intelligent  motives  of  patriotic  devotion  to  a common 
country,  until  the  rebel  force  was  driven  from  the  covering  and  forced 
to  fall  back  a distance  of  200  yards,  with  terrible  loss,  the  ground  being 
literally  covered  with  dead  and  wounded  rebels. 

In  this  daring  and  determined  charge  all  the  regiments  lost  most 
severely.  The  Twenty-fourth  Iowa  most  gallantly  charged  upon  a rebel 
battery  of  five  guns,  and  took  it  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet,  killing 
many  of  the  cannoneers  and  driving  the  remainder  from  their  guns  and 
some  50  yards  to  the  rear,  when  a new  rebel  line,  which  had  not  been 
in  action,  appeared  in  treble  our  force,  and  opened  a most  murderous 
fire  upon  our  lines,  which  the  unflinching  and  determined  braves  of  the 
Twenty-fourth  resisted  for  fifteen  minutes,  but,  because  of  the  over- 
whelming force  brought  to  bear  upon  them,  reluctantly  retired  from  the 
battery,  but  kept  the  rebel  re- enforcements  at  bay  by  their  incessant 
fire  and  stubborn  resistance.  This  battery  was  subsequently  retaken, 
and  is  now  in  our  possession. 

During  this  terrific  charge,  Maj.  Edward  Wright,  of  the  Twenty- 
fourth,  was  wounded  in  the  abdomen,  immediately  after  which  he  cap- 
tured a stalwart  rebel  prisoner  and  made  him  carry  him  off  the  field. 

The  Forty-seventh  Indiana,  Fifty-sixth  Ohio,  and  Twenty-eighth  Iowa 
were  all  engaged  at  the  same  time  against  most  powerful  odds,  which 
seemed  to  me  to  be  five  times  their  number,  and  held  them  in  check 
for  at  least  two  hours,  re-enforcements  not  reaching  us. 

Our  ranks  being  badly  depleted,  1 directed  the  whole  command  to 
retire  gradually  from  the  field  and  take  position  near  the  crest  of  the 


56 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX-VI. 


liill  where  the  rebel  lines  were  first  formed,  which  was  done  in  good 
order,  at  which  time  a re-enforcement  of  one  brigade  came  to  our  sup- 
port, and  after  a few  well-directed  volleys,  with  the  aid  of  the  batteries, 
which  General  Hovey  had  massed  on  the  extreme  right,  the  enemy  was 
routed,  and  fled  in  great  confusion  and  disorder  from  the  field. 

During  this  engagement,  Capt.  George  Wilhelm,  of  Company  F,  Fifty- 
sixth  Ohio,  was  badly  wounded  by  a shot  through  the  left  breast,  and 
was  taken  prisoner.  After  being  removed  about  6 miles  from  the  field, 
he  was  left  in  charge  of  a rebel  soldier  as  a guard.  The  rebel  laid  down 
his  gun,  for  the  purpose  of  taking  some  observations,  when  Captain 
Wilhelm  grabbed  hold  of  it  and  took  his  guard  prisoner,  marched  him 
into  camp,  and  delivered  him  over  to  the  provost-marshal. 

The  battery  under  command  of  Captain  Schofield  could  not  be  brought 
into  action  until  about  3 p.  m.,  because  of  the  enemy  occupying  a suc- 
cession of  positions  where  no  command  could  be  obtained  of  his  lines, 
at  which  time  our  advance  was  made  and  the  enemy  driven  from  cover 
and  in  range  of  the  battery,  which  dealt  him  so  many  terrible  and 
damaging  blows  simultaneously  with  our  fire  and  the  fire  of  the  re- 
enforcements that  utter  annihilation  could  only  be  prevented  by  a pre- 
cipitate flight. 

Thus  ended  this  unequal,  terrible,  and  most  sanguinary  conflict, 
which,  in  point  of  terrific  fierceness  and  stubborn  persistency,  finds  but 
few  parallels  in  the  history  of  civilized  warfare.  For  two  long  hours 
my  brigade  held  in  check  fully  three  times  their  number,  and  I hesi- 
tate not  in  saying,  had  they  not  so  gallantly  and  determinedly  resisted, 
the  fortunes  of  the  day  might  have  been  greatly  damaged,  if  not  our 
glorious  triumph  turned  into  a defeat.  During  the  progress  of  the 
battle  my  command  took  a large  number  of  prisoners,  which  were 
handed  over  to  the  provost-marshal  without  any  account  being  taken 
of  them. 

Of  the  field  and  line  officers  I cannot  speak  in  terms  of  too  high  com- 
mendation, each  and  every  one  discharging  his  duty  with  that  degree 
of  cool,  determined  valor  which  inspired  the  men  to  deeds  of  daring 
and  wild  enthusiasm  which  scarcely  knew  what  resistance  meant.  To 
each  and  every  one  are  the  thanks  of  a grateful  country  due.  Maj.  L. 
H.  Goodwin,  of  the  Forty-seventh  Indiana,  and  Maj.  Edward  Wright, 
of  the  Twenty-fourth  Iowa,  while  gallantly  leading  their  men,  were 
wounded  quite  seriously,  but  I am  more  than  grateful  to  know  they  are 
both  rapidly  recovering,  and  will  soon  be  able  to  resume  their  respective 
positions. 

To  those  brave  officers  and  men  who  fell  in  that  sanguinary  conflict, 
and  who  resolved  to  do  or  die  in  defense  of  and  for  the  perpetuation  of 
the  best  Government  ever  known  to  civilization,  we  cannot  do  more 
than  assure  their  friends  at  home  that  they  fell  with  their  faces  to  the 
foe,  in  defense  of  the  Constitution  of  a common  country. 

To  my  acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  Lieut.  H.  G.  P.  Jennings, 
of  the  Forty-seventh  Indiana,  and  to  my  aides,  Capt.  H.  E.  Jones  and 
Lieutenant  Gates,  of  the  Fifty-sixth  Ohio,  and  Lieutenant  [Theodore] 
Shaefter,  of  the  Twenty-eighth  Iowa,  are  my  thanks  especially  due  for 
their  bravery  and  efficiency. 

Again  would  I call  attention  to  the  daring  and  chivalric  conduct  of 
my  orderly,  Private  George  Phillips,  of  Company  K,  Fifty-sixth  Ohio. 
His  bravery  and  efficiency  were  the  admiration  of  all  who  observed  his 
conduct.  Promotion  is  justly  his  due. 

I herewith  inclose  the  reports  of  the  several  commanders,  giving  in 
detail  the  part  taken  by  the  respective  commands. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OP  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS.  5? 


The  whole  number  of  casualties  (detailed  lists  of  which  I herewith 
inclose*}  is  as  follows: 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

Total. 

47th  Indiana  - --  - - 

32 

20 

35 

21 

91 

90 

120 

62 

2 

17 

28 

34 

14 

140 

138 

189 

97 

2 

fifif.h  Ohio  

94t,h  Tnwfi.  ..... 

28th  Iowa 

1st  Missouri  Battery - 

Total 

108 

365 

93 

566 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  R.  SLACK, 

Col.,  Comdg.  Second  Brig.,  Twelfth  Div .,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

Capt.  John  E.  Phillips, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  16. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  McLaughlin , Forty-seventh  Indiana  In- 
fantry. 

Hdqrs.  Forty-seventh  Regt.  Indiana  Volunteers, 

Edwards  Depot , Miss.,  May  18,  1863. 

Sir  : I respectfully  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part  borne  by 
the  Forty-seventh  in  the  engagement  of  the  16th  instant  on  Midway 
Hill  : 

About  9 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  16th,  I was  ordered  to  form 
in  line  of  battle  on  the  left  of  the  road  leading  from  Clinton  to  Edwards 
Depot.  After  forming,  it  being  on  Champion’s  plantation  and  in  rear 
of  the  houses,  the  line  was  ordered  to  be  advanced  beyond  the  houses 
about  100  yards,  where  the  regiment  was  halted,  and  Companies  G and 
B were  thrown  forward  as  skirmishers,  covering  the  entire  front  of  the 
line  occupied  by  the  regiment,  when  the  whole  moved  forward  slowly 
and  cautiously  for  a distance  of  about  200  yards,  when  a brisk  fire  was 
opened  on  the  left  of  our  skirmishers.  The  enemy  fell  back,  when  the 
two  companies  as  skirmishers  were  relieved  by  Company  A,  soon  after 
which  word  was  received  that  the  enemy  were  attempting  to  flank  us 
on  the  left.  I immediately  changed  the  line  of  battle,  and  threw  the 
three  left  companies  forward,  but  failing  to  meet  the  enemy  after  ad- 
vancing a short  distance,  I was  ordered  to  move  to  the  support  of  the 
Eleventh  and  Forty-sixth  Indiana  Regiments,  which  were  engaged  upon 
our  right  on  the  road.  I ordered  in  the  companies  that  were  out  at  the 
time,  and  immediately  moved  by  the  right  flank  in  double-quick  time, 
crossing  the  road  under  a galling  fire  from  the  enemy,  and  formed  on 
the  crest  of  the  hill,  within  50  yards  of  the  enemy,  who  were  sheltered 
behind  a dwelling-house  and  out  buildings  and  heavy  timber,  which 
gave  them  decided  advantage,  and  enabled  them  to  pour  a heavy  fire 
upon  us.  Yet  our  position  was  maintained  and  the  fire  returned,  lasting 


Nominal  lists  omitted. 


58 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


about  one  hour,  when,  by  reason  of  overwhelming  numbers,  they  were 
enabled  to  flank  us  upon  the  right  and  left,  which  rendered  our  position 
difficult  to  hold  longer,  in  consequence  of  which  we  fell  back  about  200 
yards  to  the  crest  of  the  hill,  near  a corn-field,  and  formed  in  line  of 
battle  at  right  angles  with  our  former  position,  which  was  held  about 
two  hours,  until  re-enforcements  were  received,  when  the  enemy  were 
repulsed  and  driven  back  and  the  ground  reoccupied,  after  which  the 
regiment  retired  to  the  corn-field,  in  rear  of  the  field  of  battle.  The  men 
exhausted,  we  rested  and  reorganized  our  shattered  ranks,  and  the 
men  filled  their  cartridge-boxes. 

After  resting  about  one  hour,  we  were  ordered  to  move  forward  in 
support  of  the  column  that  was  driving  the  enemy.  We  marched  about 
2 miles,  when  we  were  ordered  into  camp  for  the  night. 

Taking  into  consideration  the  length  of  time  we  were  engaged,  the 
overwhelming  numbers  to  contend  with,  and  the  loss  sustained,  is  sat- 
isfactory evidence  of  the  gallantry  and  courage  shown  by  the  officers 
and  men  under  my  command.  They  did  their  whole  duty. 

Sir,  in  regard  to  number  and  names  of  killed,  wounded,  and  missing 
of  the  regiment  under  my  command,  you  are  referred  to  special  report. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant. 

By  order  of  John  A.  McLaughlin,  lieutenant-colonel  commanding 
Forty-seventh  Indiana  Infantry : 

WM.  VANCE, 

A djutant. 

Col.  James  B.  Slack, 

Comdg.  Second  Brig .,  Twelfth  Div.,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  17. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Joseph  G.  Strong,  adjutant  Twenty-eighth  Iowa  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Twenty-eighth  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry, 

Near  Vicksburg , May  30,  1863. 

Dear  Sir  : It  affords  me  great  pleasure  to  send  you  a report  of  the 
part  taken  by  the  Twenty-eighth  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry  in  the  battle 
of  Champion’s  Hill,  May  16, 1863. 

Champion’s  Hill  is  situated  about  9 miles  (on  the  railroad)  east  of 
Big  Black  Biver,  and  about  half-way  between  Bolton  and  Edwards 
Stations. 

We  had  been  making  a feint  on  Edwards  Station  on  the  12th  and 
13th,  so  as  to  give  General  McPherson  a better  chance  to  enter  Jack- 
son,  and  on  the  15th  we  marched  on  the  Jackson  road  as  far  as  Clinton, 
where  we  turned  on  the  Vicksburg  road  and  marched  as  far  as  Bolton 
Station,  where  we  encamped  for  the  night  (our  division  being  in  the 
advance). 

The  next  morning,  after  marching  about  3 miles,  we  came  up  with 
the  enemy’s  pickets  at  Champion’s  buildings,  and  drove  them  in.  Here 
the  Twelfth  Division  formed  in  line  of  battle,  our  regiment  taking  posi- 
tion on  the  left  of  the  Forty-seventh  Indiana,  in  the  Second  Brigade. 
At  10  a.  in.,  after  a short  delay,  the  word  a Forward!”  was  given,  and 
we  moved  nearly  a mile  by  the  front,  firing  becoming  brisk.  Company 
B,  of  our  regiment,  was  sent  out  as  skirmishers,  and  found  the  enemy 
in  force  on  our  front  and  left.  We  then,  by  order  of  Colonel  Slack,  of 
the  Forty-seventh  Indiana,  commanding  brigade,  passed  to*  the  left  of 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS.  59 

the  Fifty-sixth  Ohio  (which  placed  us  on  the  extreme  left  of  the  divis- 
ion), and  engaged  the  enemy,  our  left  resting  on  the  north  of  the  Ray- 
mond road.  There  we  found  the  enemy  in  large  force,  ready  to  receive 
us.  After  a few  minutes  of  hard  fighting,  it  became  evident  that  the 
enemy  were  trying  to  turn  our  left,  particular  attention  being  paid  to 
that  particular  point.  We  succeeded  in  driving  them  back.  About 
this  time  the  enemy  appeared  to  be  largely  re-enforced,  and  we  were 
compelled  to  fall  back  on  account  of  the  murderous  flanking  fire  on  our 
right,  to  which  we  were  at  this  time  exposed.  We  then  moved  to  the 
right  and  formed  on  the  Clinton  road,  where  we  held  them  in  check 
until  re-enforcements  arrived,  when  we  drove  them  from  the  field  in 
confusion. 

As  to  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  the  officers  and  men  conducted  them- 
selves like  veterans. 

Our  loss  in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  was  severe.  Four  compa- 
nies of  the  regiment  came  out  of  the  fight  without  a commissioned 
officer.  Lieut.  John  J.  Legan,  of  Company  A (Captain  Shutts  acting 
as  major),  was  killed  while  gallantly  leading  his  men  on ; Capt.  Benja- 
min F.  Kirby,  of  Company  I,  was  also  killed  while  doing  his  duty 
nobly ; Lieut.  John  Buchanan,  of  Company  H,  lost  his  arm;  Capt. 
John  A.  Staley,  of  Company  F,  was  taken  prisoner  while  crossing  the 
field  north  of  the  Raymond  road,  gallantly  disputing  the  advance  of 
the  enemy.  Our  greatest  loss  was  while  we  were  charging  across  an 
open  field  between  the  Raymond  and  Clinton  roads,  and  while  we  were 
falling  back.  Our  regiment  fell  in  in  good  order,  considering  the 
ground,  and  rallied  around  the  old  flag  at  the  first  call,  and  on  the  sec- 
ond charge,  together  with  the  Seventeenth  Iowa,  the  boys  raised  the 
Iowa  shout  and  drove  the  enemy  from  the  field  in  confusion. 

I append  a list  of  the  killed,  wounded,  and  missing.*  . 

I remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOSEPH  G.  STROKG, 

First  Lieutenant  and  Adjutant  Twenty-eighth  Iowa. 

H.  B.  Baker,  Adjutant- General  of  Iowa. 


Ho.  18. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  F.  Quinby , U.  S.  Army , commanding  Sev- 
enth Division , Seventeenth  Army  Corps , including  operations  April 
20-May  20. 

Hdqrs.  Seventh  Division,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps, 

Rear  of  Vichsburg , Miss.,  May  26,  1863. 
Colonel  : Herewith  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  the  reports  of  the 
several  battery,  regimental,  and  brigade  commanders  of  this  division 
of  the  operations  in  which  their  respective  commands  have  participated 
since  they  left  Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  on  and  after  the  20th  ultimo,  up 
to  and  including  the  20th  instant,  when  the  whole  of  the  division  had 
reached  its  position  in  rear  of  Vicksburg. 

On  the  return  of  the  division  from  the  Yazoo  Pass  expedition,  the 
state  of  my  health,  in  the  opinion  of  the  surgeons,  rendered  a change 
of  climate  necessary,  and  the  major-general  commanding  the  corps 
granted  me  a leave  of  absence  for  twenty  days. 

I was  unable  to  rejoin  my  command  until  the  morning  of  the  16th 


Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  8. 


60 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


instant,  just  as  it  was  about  to  perform  its  part  in  the  battle  of  Cham- 
pion’s Hill.  It  was  deemed  inexpedient  to  relieve  Brigadier-General 
Crocker,  then  commanding,  and  assign  me  to  the  command  of  the  divis- 
ion at  the  moment  it  was  engaging  the  enemy.  Besides,  my  still  feeble 
condition,  and  the  exhaustion  consequent  upon  a ride  of  16  miles  before 
the  ground  was  gained,  incapacitated  me  for  the  command.  I remained 
on  the  field,  however,  until  the  battle  was  ours. 

The  Second  Brigade,  Colonel  Holmes,  Tenth  Missouri  Infantry,  com- 
manding, was  ordered  to  remain  on  the  field  to  assist  in  bringing  off 
and  caring  for  the  wounded,  collecting  abandoned  arms  and  other  prop- 
erty, and  burying  the  dead.  The  First  Brigade,  Colonel  Sanborn, 
Fourth  Minnesota  Infantry,  and  the  Third  Brigade,  Colonel  Boomer, 
Twenty-sixth  Missouri  Infantry,  commanding,  moved  forward  on  the 
road  toward  Vicksburg,  and  encamped  for  the  night  on  Baker’s  Creek. 

The  following  morning  I resumed  the  command  of  the  division,  and 
pushed  forward,  with  the  First  and  Third  Brigades  and  my  artillery,  to 
a point  on  the  Big  Black,  about  3 miles  above  the  railroad  bridge. 

During  the  night  the  First  Brigade,  under  the  direction  of  an  engi- 
neer officer  of  the  corps,  threw  a floating  bridge  in  front  of  its  position 
over  the  Big  Black,  and  at  9 a.  m.  on  the  18th,  the  troops  began  to 
cross  by  it.  The  passage  of  troops,  artillery,  and  the  wagon  train  oc- 
cupied nearly  the  whole  day.  The  First  Brigade  and  Twelfth  Wiscon- 
sin Battery  were  left  as  a guard  for  the  bridge,  while  the  Third  Brigade, 
with  the  Sixth  Wisconsin  and  Eleventh  Ohio  Batteries,  and  Company 
M,  First  Missouri  Light  Artillery,  moved  on  toward  Vicksburg,  reach- 
ing its  rear  on  the  morning  of  the  19th,  and  were  placed  in  position 
against  the  enemy’s  works,  the  Third  Brigade  on  the  left  of  Major- 
General  Logan’s  division. 

On  the  20th  instant,  the  First  and  Second  Brigades,  with  the  Twelfth 
Wisconsin  Battery,  crossed  the  Big  Black,  destroyed  the  bridge,  and 
on  the  afternoon  of  that  day  were  also  assigned  to  their  positions  about 
Vicksburg. 

I cannot  conclude  this  brief  sketch  of  the  operations  of  this  division 
without  bearing  testimony  to  the  coolness  and  unmurmuring,  patient 
endurance  of  privations  and  hardships  of  both  officers  and  men,  and 
will  add  that  I am  proud  to  command  a body  of  troops  whose  numbers 
have  been  so  greatly  reduced  in  this  brilliant  campaign,  but  who  are 
still  strong  enough  to  add  to  their  already  imperishable  reputation. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

I.  F.  QUHSTBY, 

Brigadier - General , Commanding  Division . 

Lieut.  Col.  W.  T.  Clark, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


FTo.  19. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  John  E.  Tourtellotte , Fourth  Minnesota  Infantry , 
First  Brigade , including  operations  April  23-May  22. 

In  Camp  near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  23,  1863. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  April  23  last,  my  regiment, 
together  with  other  parts  of  the  army,  started  from  Milliken’s  Bend, 
La.,  on  an  expedition  to  the  rear  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  where  we  are  now 
lying.  To  reach  this  place  we  marched  via  Bichmond,  Hard  Times 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS.  61 

Landing,  La.  (where  we  crossed  and  went  down  the  stream  of  the  Mis- 
sissippi River  10  miles,  landing  on  the  Mississippi  side  at  Bruinsburg), 
Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  Hankinson’s  Ferry,  on  the  Black  River,  Rocky 
Springs,  Utica,  Raymond,  Clinton,  Jackson,  Champion’s  Hill,  near 
Bolton,  Edwards  Station,  crossing  the  Black  River  near plan- 

tation, and  arriving  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  works  in  rear  of  Vicks- 
burg, on  May  21.  To  accomplish  this  we  have  marched  a distance  of 
more  than  200  miles.  At  Smith’s  plantation,  some  25  miles  from  Milli- 
ken’s  Bend,  all  of  my  regimental  teams,  six  in  number,  excepting  one, 
were  ordered  back  to  Milliken’s  Bend,  from  which  place  they  were  used 
in  carrying  ammunition  for  the  use  of  the  Seventeenth  Army  Corps, 
and  were  so  employed  for  several  days.  When  relieved  from  such  duty 
they  were  for  some  days  unable  to  cross  the  Mississippi  River,  so  that 

during  the  entire  march  from  Smith’s  plantation,  La.,  April  26,  to 

plantation,  on  the  Black  River,  May  17,  the  only  Government  trans- 
portation of  any  kind  with  the  regiment  was  2 ambulances,  1 medicine 
wagon,  and  1 six-mule  team.  The  men  carried  their  knapsacks,  blankets, 
rations,  and  60  rounds  of  ammunition.  The  six-mule  team  carried  a few 
boxes  of  ammunition,  the  blankets  and  provisions  of  officers,  and  such 
supplies  for  the  men  as  the  regimental  quartermaster  was  able  to  se- 
cure along  our  route.  On  said  march  we  have  drawn  rations  from  Gov- 
ernment as  follows:  We  took  with  us  five  days’  rations  from  Milliken’s 
Bend.  On  or  about  May  1 we  drew  four  days’  rations  of  hard  bread 
alone.  May  4 we  drew  three-fifth  rations  of  hard  bread,  sugar  and  tea 
for  five  days,  beyond  which  time,  up  to  May  17,  all  rations  used  by  the 
regiment,  and  all  forage  used  by  regimental  horses  and  mules,  were  se- 
cured by  the  regimental  quartermaster  in  the  country  through  which  we 
passed.  The  rations  procured  by  the  quartermaster  for  the  regiment 
consisted  chiefly  of  sugar,  molasses,  salt,  corn  meal,  and  bacon. 

On  May  17,  the  five  regimental  teams  left  behind  overtook  us,  bring- 
ing five  days’  part  rations  of  hard  bread,  flour,  sugar,  and  coffee. 

May  23,  we  drew  full  rations  for  the  first  time  since  leaving  Milliken’s 
Bend. 

We  met  the  enemy,  for  the  first  time  on  this  expedition,  on  the  3d 
instant,  about  10  miles  from  Port  Gibson,  on  the  road  to  Hankinson’s 
Ferry.  Here  the  regiment  was  formed  in  line  of  battle  on  the  right  of 
the  road,  and  advanced  in  this  manner  for  some  distance  under  a brisk 
fire  of  the  enemy’s  artillery.  The  regiment  received  no  injury.  The 
enemy  hastily  retiring,  we  advanced  by  the  flank  to  Hankinson’s  Ferry, 
on  the  Black  River,  remaining  at  that  place  for  several  days. 

May  12,  we  heard  heavy  firing  in  front,  and  on  arriving  near  the  town 
of  Raymond,  the  regiment  formed  in  line  of  battle  on  the  left  of  General 
Logan’s  division,  which  was  already  in  line.  In  this  position  we  re- 
mained an  hour,  as  support  for  a battery  of  artillery,  under  a rapid  and 
well-directed  fire  of  a rebel  battery.  That  evening  we  passed  through 
and  encamped  near  the  town. 

May  14,  on  the  road  from  Clinton  to  Jackson,  and  when  about  2 miles 
from  the  latter  place,  we  met  the  enemy  in  strong  force,  and  immediately 
formed  line  on  the  right  of  the  road.  Soon,  however,  the  regiment  was 
ordered  to  take  position  on  the  left  of  the  road,  with  its  right  resting 
thereon,  and  to  support  the  Seventeenth  Iowa  in  charging  the  rebel 
lines.  The  enemy  fled  before  the  charge,  and  the  regiment,  with  the 
others  of  General  Quinby’s  division,  entered  the  town.  Loss  of  the 
regiment  was  2 wounded. 

May  16,  at  Champion’s  Hill,  near  Bolton,  Miss.,  we  came  up  to  the 
line  formed  by  Generals  Hovey’s  and  Logan’s  divisions,  who  were 


62 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


already  engaging  the  enemy.  My  regiment  was  placed  on  the  right  of 
a battery  as  a support  therefor.  Almost  immediately,  however,  by  order 
of  General  McPherson,  my  regiment  was  ordered  to  hasten  forward  and 
assist  the  right  of  General  Logan’s  division,  which  was  reported  to  be 
hard  pressed.  The  men  threw  their  knapsacks  and  blankets  from  their 
shoulders  and  dashed  forward  in  the  direction  indicated  at  the  double- 
quick  step  up  the  hill,  into  the  woods,  and  upon  a body  of  the  enemy, 
of  whom  my  regiment  captured  and  sent  to  the  rear  118. 

Directly,  finding  myself  some  distance  in  front  of,  and  unsupported 
on  either  side  by,  the  line  formed  by  the  remainder  of  the  troops,  and 
findiDg  that  the  enemy  was  massing  a heavy  force  in  front,  I sent  my 
adjutant  to  General  McPherson  to  report  our  situation  and  ask  for  in- 
structions. Almost  at  the  same  time  the  enemy  opened  upon  us  with 
artillery.  I caused  the  men  to  lie  down,  where  they  remained,  shel- 
tered by  the  crest  of  the  hill,  until  I received  orders  to  draw  the  regi- 
ment back,  so  as  to  connect  with  the  right  of  such  troops  as  I found 
first  in  my  rear.  This  was  executed,  and  the  regiment  formed  on  the 
right  of  Colonel  Leggett’s  brigade,  of  General  Logan’s  division.  Here 
we  remained  about  an  hour,  when  the  line  of  march  to  the  front  was 
again  resumed,  when  I joined  my  regiment  to  the  balance  of  Colonel 
Sanborn’s  brigade. 

My  loss  in  the  regiment  was  Captain  Thompson  and  Private  [Michael] 
Dolan,  of  Company  E,  both  wounded,  the  captain  severely. 

May  21,  we  formed  line  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  works  in  rear  of  Vicks- 
burg. 

On  the  morning  of  the  22d,  at  10  o’clock,  by  order  from  General 
Grant,  an  assault  was  ordered  upon  the  fortifications  around  Vicksburg. 
My  regiment,  with  the  Forty- eighth  Indiana  for  reserve  and  support, 
was  ordered  to  charge  upon  one  of  the  enemy’s  forts  just  in  front  as 
soon  as  I should  see  a charge  made  upon  the  fort  next  on  my  right. 
All  preparations  were  made,  and  we  were  waiting  for  the  signal  to 
advance,  when  I was  directed  not  to  advance  until  further  orders. 

While  awaiting  such  orders,  our  brigade  was  directed  to  proceed  to 
the  support  of  General  Burbridge’s  brigade,  of  General  McClernand’s 
army  corps,  on  our  left.  The  Forty-eighth  Indiana  and  Fourth  Minne- 
sota Infantry  were  moved  into  position  in  front  of  the  rebel  works,  where 
General  Burbridge  was  already  engaged.  No  sooner  had  we  taken  such 
position  than  General  Burbridge  withdrew  his  brigade  from  the  action. 

Under  a direct  fire  from  the  fort  in  front,  and  a heavy  cross-fire  from 
a fort  on  our  right,  the  regiment  pressed  forward  up  to  and  even  on  the 
enemy’s  works.  In  this  position,  contending  for  the  possession  of  the 
rebel  earthworks  before  us,  the  regiment  remained  for  two  hours,  when 
it  became  dark,  and  I was  ordered  by  Colonel  Sanborn  to  withdraw  the 


IdgllAICULLi.  _ 

Noticing  a field  piece,  which  had  been  lifted  up  the  hill  by  mam 
strength,  and  had  apparently  been  used  by  General  Burbridge  in  attempt- 
ing to  batter  down  the  walls  of  the  fort,  but  which  he  had  left  behind 
when  he  withdrew  his  brigade,  I sent  Company  C to  draw  the  piece 
from  the  ground  and  down  the  hill.  This  being  safely  executed,  I 
moved  the  regiment  by  the  left  flank  from  their  position  and  down  the 
hill.  We  bivouacked  about  80  rods  from  the  place  of  action. 

In  this  action  the  regiment  suffered  severely,  losing  some  of  its  best 
officers  and  men— 12  were  killed  and  42  were  wounded.  A list  of  their 
names  is  hereto  attached.* 


* Omitted. 


chap,  xxxvi.] 


63 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS. 


The  next  morning  we  were  formed  in  line  to  support  the  right  of  Gen- 
eral Burbridge.  No  engagement  coming  on,  we  moved  in  the  afternoon 
to  the  position  occupied  on  the  21st. 

During  the  whole  of  this  expedition,  through  many  embarrassments, 
drenching  rains,  muddy  roads,  without  rations,  without  shelter,  carry- 
ing heavy  loads,  and  several  times  under  heavy  fire  from  the  enemy, 
the  regiment  have  deported  themselves  to  my  entire  satisfaction.  I 
hope  and  believe  that  their  conduct  has  been  satisfactory  to  yourself  and 
to  others  still  higher  in  authority.  I might  mention  worthy  names,  but 
that  would  be  clearly  wrong  when  all,  or  nearly  all,  have  attempted  to 


do  their  whole  duty. 

It  shall  be  a matter  of  pride  with  us  that  not  only  were  we  present, 
but  assisted  in  accomplishing  this  expedition. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J P .T.  E.  TOUBTELLOTTE, 


Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Regiment. 


Capt.  L.  B.  Martin, 

A.  A.  A.  G .,  First  Brig.,  Seventh  Div.,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  20. 

Report  of  Col.  David  B.  Hillis,  Seventeenth  Iowa  Infantry,  Second 

Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  Seventeenth  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry, 

Before  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  24, 1863. 

Captain  : In  compliance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  27,  from  your  head- 
quarters, I herewith  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken  by 
my  regiment,  Seventeenth  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry,  in  the  battle  of 
Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  on  the  16th  instant : 

I arrived  in  the  vicinity  of  the  hills  on  which  the  battle  was  being 
fought  about  2 p.  m.,  and  without  having  time  to  rest  my  men  (who  had 
that  day  marched  12  miles  through  dust  and  a burning  sun  with  knap- 
sacks on  their  backs)  was  ordered  forward  at  a double-quick.  I estab- 
lished my  line  at  a point  midway  up  and  on  the  north  side  of  the  hill, 
my  right  resting  on  the  left  of  the  Vicksburg  road,  in  the  rear  of  the 
Ninety-third  Illinois  (Colonel  Putnam),  which  was  severely  pressed  by 
the  enemy’s  massed  forces.  In  doing  this  my  men  suffered  from  the  fire 
intended  for  the  Ninety-third.  As  soon  as  my  line  was  formed,  Colonel 
Putnam  moved  his  regiment  out  by  the  right  flank,  and  left  me  fronting 
the  enemy  direct,  some  40  or  50  yards  only  intervening.  This  position 
I held  under  a well-directed  fire,  which  my  gallant  fellows  returned  with 
interest,  for  about  fifteen  minutes,  when  I ordered  an  advance,  which 
was  executed  with  a heroism  that  I am  proud  of.  This  caused  the 
enemy  to  give  way,  but  he  soon  rallied,  and  again  gave  way,  and  in  this 
way  I advanced,  driving  him  slowly,  inch  by  inch,  from  the  ravines  and 
ditches  in  which  he  had  effected  a lodgment,  up  one  declivity  and  down 
another,  and  finally  onto  the  summit  of  the  ridge  along  which  the  road 
runs,  and  charged  him  down  the  slope  on  the  other  (south)  side,  re- 
taking four  pieces  of  artillery,  [J.  F.]  Waddell’s  Alabama  battery.  This 
battery  had  been  taken  earlier  in  the  engagement  by  the  Eleventh  Begi- 
ment  Indiana  Volunteers,  but  this  splendid  regiment  had  again  to  yield 
it,  the  enemy  having  massed  his  forces  against  it. 

After  this  charge,  I commanded  a halt  and  rectified  my  line,  which 


64 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX VL 


had  been  somewhat  deranged.  All  being  quiet  at  this  moment  on  my 
front,  I ran  back  a short  distance  to  get  a horse  (mine  having  been  shot 
early  in  the  engagement),  but,  being  overcome  by  excessive  labor  and 
heat,  I fell  by  the  way,  and  by  the  time  I returned  to  my  regiment, 
which  was  in  a few  minutes,  it  had  made  another  gallant  charge,  under 
the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Wever,  routing  the  Thirty-first 
Alabama  Eegiment. 

In  this  charge  a great  many  prisoners  were  taken,  including  the  colors, 
color-bearer,  and  guard  of  that  regiment,  which  colors  are  now  in  my 
possession.  The  enemy  again  rallied,  but  by  this  time  the  gallant  Tenth 
Missouri  was  in  position  on  my  right,  and  we  gave  him  two  more  charges, 
which  put  him  in  perfect  rout.  This  then  ended  the  fight,  so  far  as  we 
were  concerned,  and,  I think,  entirely.  My  regiment  then,  wearied  and 
worn,  with  thinned  ranks,  rested  on  their  arms  until  ordered  into  camp. 
It  is  worthy  of  note  that  in  this  engagement  the  regiment  charged  the 
enemy  successfully  five  times,  under  the  most  galling  fire  from  musketry 
and  shell,  and  that  over  ravines  and  ditches  that  are  very  difficult  of 
passage,  and  which  afforded  him  excellent  protection. 

In  conclusion,  I feel  that  my  commaud  did  their  whole  duty,  and  are 
worthy  of  all  commendation.  To  my  lieutenant-colonel  (Wever)  and 
adjutant  (Woolsey)  I am  greatly  indebted  for  their  daring  and  assist- 
ance during  the  engagement.  Both  of  Miese  officers  had  their  horses 
shot  under  them  early  in  the  fight. 

I cannot  forbear  mentioning  in  this  connection,  specially  for  great 
bravery,  First  Lieut.  C.  W.  Woodrow,  Company  K;  Second  Lieut. 
George  W.  Deal,  Company  G ; Second  Lieutenant  Tower,  Company  B 
(whose  gallantry  resulted  in  the  loss  of  his  leg);  First  Sergeant  [Evan 
E.]  Swearngin,  Company  F,  and  Private  [Albert  G.]  Trussel,  Company 
G,  who  captured  the  colors  and  color-bearer  of  the  Thirty -first  Alabama. 
In  the  engagement  I had  but  nine  companies,  one  company  (E)  having 
been  left  back  at  Jackson  on  duty. 

My  loss  in  killed,  wounded,  &c.,  is  57  (25  per  cent,  of  the  number  en- 
gaged), as  per  list  of  casualties,  which  I send  with  this  report.*  We 
captured  175  prisoners,  mostly  Alabama  and  Missouri  troops. 

D.  B.  HILLIS, 

Colonel 3 Commanding  Seventeenth  Iowa  Volunteers. 

Capt.  William  W.  McC ammon,  A.  A.  A.  G .,  2 d Brig .,  7th  Div. 


No.  21. 

Report  of  Col.  Holden  Putnam , Ninety-third  Illinois  Infantry , com- 
manding Third  Brigade , including  operations  May  9-22. 

Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  Seventh  Division, 

In  the  Field , near  Vicksburg , Miss.,  May  25,  1863. 
Captain  : Pursuant  to  Special  Orders,  No.  85,  Headquarters  Seventh 
Division,  dated  May  24, 1863,  please  find  inclosed  copy  of  report  of 
Colonel  Boomer, f forwarded  at  Hankinson’s  Ferry,  on  the  Big  Black, 
May  4. 

May  9,  this  brigade  was  ordered  to  march,  and  moved  on  with  the 
division  through  Rocky  Springs ; also,  on  the  10th,  through  Utica,  and 
on  the  11th  moved  but  2 miles  on  the  road  toward  Raymond. 


* Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  10. 


t Not  found. 


Chav.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS.  65 

On  the  12th,  hearing  firing  in  front,  we  pushed  forward  rapidly,  and 
upon  coming  to  the  ground  was  ordered  to  remain  in  reserve,  and 
deployed  into  line  at  5 p.  m.  on  the  west  side  of  the  road,  in  good  posi- 
tion, supporting  two  batteries  there  in  position.  At  7 p.  m.  was  again 
ordered  forward  to  Raymond,  and  went  into  position  on  the  southwest 
side  of  the  town. 

At  11  a.  m.  on  the  13th,  was  ordered  forward  in  advance  on  the  road 
to  Jackson,  1 mile  north  of  Raymond  ; reached  the  forks  of  the  road  ; 
hearing  firing  on  the  road  turning  eastward,  reported  to  the  division 
commander,  who  ordered  this  brigade  forward  to  clear  the  road.  Moved 
up  briskly,  deploying  two  companies  of  the  Tenth  Regiment  Iowa  In- 
fantry as  skirmishers,  under  command  of  Major  McCalla,  who  pushed 
them  on  by  our  cavalry  pickets  and  opened  fire  on  the  enemy,  concealed 
in  the  timber,  crossing  the  road  200  yards  beyond  our  line ; at  the  same 
time  deployed  into  line  of  battle  two  regiments,  the  Fifth  Iowa  on  the 
left  of  the  road  and  the  balance  of  the  Tenth  Iowa  on  the  right,  the 
Ninety-third  Illinois  and  Twenty-sixth  Missouri  being  in  reserve.  Found 
nothing  but  a line  of  the  enemy’s  skirmishers,  who  fled  after  delivering 
their  fire.  At  this  moment  received  orders  from  division  commander, 
recalling  skirmishers  and  ordering  this  brigade  to  take  the  other  road 
bearing  more  northward,  which  was  done  immediately,  and  two  compa- 
nies of  the  Fifth  Iowa  Infantry  deployed  on  the  front  and  flanks.  We 
pushed  forward  rapidly,  passing  through  Clinton  at  3 p.  m.,  capturing 
several  prisoners,  telegraphic  dispatches,  rebel  mail,  &c.  Halted  about 
1 mile  northeast  of  town,  on  the  Jackson  road. 

On  the  14th,  was  again  ordered  to  move,  and  at  11  a.  m.was  ordered 
into  position  on  the  left  of  the  line  of  this  division,  formed  in  two  lines, 
the  Fifth  Iowa  on  the  right  in  the  first  line,  and  the  Ninety-third  Illinois 
on  the  left,  supported  by  the  Tenth  Iowa,  and  the  Twenty-sixth  Mis- 
souri supporting  the  Fifth  Iowa.  The  aggregate  effective  force  of  the 
brigade  was  then  1,700  men,  in  round  numbers.  Deployed  one  com- 
pany of  the  Ninety-third  Illinois  Infantry  on  the  left  and  front  as  skir- 
mishers, and  moved  forward  as  ordered,  receiving  a scattering  volley 
from  the  enemy,  who  were  immediately  routed  by  our  skirmishers  and 
fled  in  confusion.  Having  advanced  about  one-half  a mile,  we  were 
ordered  to  halt.  Our  skirmishers  here  brought  in  a few  prisoners  and 
passed  them  to  the  rear.  Resting  about  fifteen  minutes,  we  were  again 
ordered  forward,  and  pushed  on  steadily  into  the  city  by  3 p.  m.,  with- 
out delivering  our  fire,  the  line  being  gradually  wheeled  to  the  right  as 
we  moved,  crossing  the  railroad  track,  and  the  entire  brigade  line, 
flanking  the  enemy’s  earthworks,  was  halted,  with  the  right  resting 
upon  the  railroad  depot.  Was  ordered  to  bivouac  on  the  north  side  of 
the  railroad. 

The  loss  in  this  engagement  was  3 killed  and  4 wounded  in  the 
Ninety-third  Illinois,  and  4 wounded  in  the  Fifth  Iowa. 

The  command,  being  entirely  out  of  provisions,  was  ordered  to  forage 
in  the  town,  and  procure  three  days’  subsistence  that  night. 

On  the  15th,  was  again  ordered  to  march.  Turning  backward,  the 
brigade  was  marched  4 miles  west  of  Clinton,  on  the  Vicksburg  road. 
Thence,  on  the  16th,  we  pushed  steadily  onward  until  12  m.  Was 
ordered  into  position  by  the  division  commander  on  the  south  side  of 
the  road  at  Champion’s  Hill  and  in  the  rear  of  General  Hovey’s  divis- 
ion, then  fiercely  engaged  with  the  enemy.  We  moved  steadily  for- 
ward in  two  lines  about  700  yards,  when  orders  were  received  to  halt, 
and  move  by  the  right  flank  across  the  main  road  to  the  balance  of 
the  Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  which  was  being  done  when  the  orders 
5 R R— -VOL  XXIV,  PT  H 


66 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chat.  XXXVL 


were  again  countermanded,  and  Colonel  Lagow,  of  Major-General 
Grant’s  staff,  brought  orders  from  General  Grant  for  us  to  move  in- 
stantly to  the  support  of  General  Hovey’s  division,  then  being  forced 
back  by  a superior  force  of  the  enemy.  This  brigade  was  instantly 
faced  about,  and  moved  by  the  left  flank,  double-quick,  up  the  hill, 
through  a scorching  fire,  the  Ninety-third  Illinois  being  in  advance, 
followed  by  the  Tenth  Iowa,  Twenty-sixth  Missouri,  and  Fifth  Iowa. 
Pushing  forward  until  the  whole  line  was  on  the  summit  of  the  ridge, 
the  brigade  was  ordered  to  move  by  the  right  flank  and  commence  fir- 
ing, which  was  done  steadily,  the  Ninety- third  Illinois  and  Tenth  Iowa 
moving  down  into  the  hollow,  and,  having  the  men  of  General  Hovey’s 
division  constantly  passing  through  their  ranks,  became  exposed  to  the 
murderous  fire  from  the  left  flank,  which  was  turned  by  the  enemy. 
They  fell  back  slowly  to  the  brow  of  the  hill,  near  the  position  first 
taken,  and  held  it,  pouring  in  their  fire  until  their  cartridges  were 
exhausted  and  they  were  relieved  by  the  Seventeenth  Iowa. 

The  enemy  by  this  time  being  checked,  were  breaking  and  commenced 
their  retreat.  The  Twenty-sixth  Missouri,  upon  being  faced  to  the  front, 
commenced  firing.  They,  being  in  plain  view  of  the  enemy,  were  also 
exposed  to  the  flanking  fire,  and  were  ordered  to  change  front  to  the 
rear  on  first  company,  which  was  done  steadily,  and  gave  the  regiment 
a position  somewhat  sheltered  by  a gully  in  the  side  of  the  hill,  from 
which  they  kept  up  a constant  fire  upon  the  enemy,  materially  aiding 
the  two  regiments  of  our  left  in  checking  them.  Their  position  again 
becoming  exposed  to  a flank  fire,  they  were  ordered  to  fall  back  under 
the  crest  of  the  hill,  a few  yards  distant,  again  changing  front,  which 
position  they  held  until  their  cartridges  were  exhausted  and  they  were 
ordered  to  the  rear  for  ammunition,  and  formed  on  the  right  of  the 
Ninety-third  Illinois  and  Tenth  Iowa.  The  Fifth  Iowa,  upon  facing  to 
the  front,  charged  down  the  hill  and  up  to  the  crest  of  the  next  one  be- 
yond, from  which  position  they  poured  in  a constant  fire  at  short  range 
on  the  faltering  battalions  of  the  enemy,  when  Lieutenant-Colonel  Samp- 
son, commanding  the  regiment,  observing  that  our  left  was  being  turned 
by  the  enemy,  ordered  his  regiment  to  fall  back  to  the  crest  of  the  next 
ridge,  which  position  he  maintained  until  the  close  of  the  action  ; then 
withdrew  and  took  up  position  on  the  left  of  the  brigade,  replenishing 
cartridges.  Our  loss  in  this  action  was  very  severe. 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

. 

Aggregate. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

1 Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

| Officers. 

! Enlisted  men. 

93d  Minois 

37 

6 

107 

1 

10 

162 

g-fjjj  Iowa  _ .... 

2 

17 

3 

72 

94 

1 Ar.li  Tfiwn,  _ . 

3 

33 

6 

125 

167 

OAfli  Miflflonri 

2 

16 

3 

66 

87 

Total 

8 

1 

103 

18 

370 

1 

10 

510 

The  officers  and  men  of  this  command  all  behaved  with  extraordinary 
coolness  and  courage  under  circumstances  the  most  trying.  I cannot, 
therefore,  consistently  mention  the  names  of  one  before  another,  but 
was  greatly  indebted  to  all  the  regimental  commanders  for  their  assist- 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS. 


67 


ance  in  this  terrible  ordeal.  We  took  150  prisoners  from  the  enemy 
and  turned  them  over  to  the  provost-marshal.  At  G p.  m.,  the  enemy 
being  routed,  we  again  moved  forward  3 miles  and  halted  for  the  night. 

On  the  17th,  moved  forward  again  at  8 a.  m.,  and  reached  Big  Black 
River  about  noon. 

On  the  18th,  crossed  the  river,  and  pushed  on  toward  Vicksburg  6 
miles. 

On  the  19th,  moved  on  again  and  took  position  at  noon  in  front  of 
the  enemy’s  works,  the  right  of  this  brigade  touching  the  left  of  Gen- 
eral Logan’s  division ; advanced  at  2 p.  m.  under  a terrible  storm  of 
shell  from  the  enemy’s  batteries,  and  took  position  half  a mile  nearer 
their  works,  losing  but  2 men  of  the  Twenty-sixth  Missouri  killed  and 
3 of  the  Ninety-third  Illinois  wounded. 

On  the  20th,  this  brigade  moved  forward  in  line  three  quarters  of  a 
mile,  occupying  a new  position  immediately  in  front  of  our  former  posi- 
tion, to  the  left  of  and  supporting  De  Golyer’s  battery. 

On  the  21st,  pushed  a strong  force  of  skirmishers  in  advance  a quarter 
of  a mile,  covering  our  line  and  joining  right  and  left  with  our  supports. 
Lost  there.  1 man  killed  and  2 wounded,  from  the  Twenty-sixth  Mis- 
souri Regiment,  our  whole  line  being  constantly  exposed  to  the  enemy’s 
fire. 

On  the  22d,  a charge  was  ordered  by  the  whole  line  at  10  o’clock. 
This  brigade  moved  forward  about  a quarter  of  a mile  at  8 a.  m.,  formed 
in  the  hollow,  slightly  protected  from  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  each  regi- 
ment in  column,  closed  by  division,  the  Ninety-third  Illinois  on  the  right, 
Tenth  Iowa  next,  Twenty-sixth  Missouri  next,  and  the  Fifth  Iowa  on 
the  left.  At  10  o’clock  we  pushed  forward  to  the  crest  of  the  next  hill, 
but  were  met  by  a terrible  storm  of  grape,  canister,  and  musketry,  and 
the  ground  being  almost  impassable  from  gullies,  covered  by  a heavy 
abatis  of  fallen  trees,  underbrush,  vines,  &c.,  the  whole  position  enfi- 
laded by  the  guns  of  the  enemy,  the  brigade  commander  ordered  a halt 
for  a few  moments.  In  gaining  this  position  our  loss  was:  Fifth  Iowa, 
1 killed  and  2 wounded,  and  Tenth  Iowa,  2 men  killed  and  1 officer 
and  13  men  wounded.  Total,  3 killed  and  1G  wounded. 

Receiving  renewed  orders  to  charge,  preparations  were  immediately 
made  and  the  charge  ordered,  when  an  aide  from  the  division  commander 
arrived,  countermanded  former  orders,  and  ordered  us  to  the  support 
of  General  McClernand’s  corps  ou  the  left.  Arriving  at  4 p.  m.,  this 
brigade  was  ordered  to  report  to  General  Carr,  which  it  did,  and  he  im- 
mediately ordered  the  brigade  to  charge  the  enemy’s  intrenchments  on 
the  third  range  of  hills  in  our  front  and  about  120  rods  distant.  The 
brigade  was  formed  in  two  lines  parallel  with  each  other  and  about  50 
yards  between,  Fifth  Iowa  on  the  right  and  front,  Ninety-third  Illinois 
on  the  left  and  front,  supported  in  rear  by  the  Tenth  Iowa,  Twenty- 
sixth  Missouri  supporting  the  Fifth  Iowa.  The  advance  was  immedi- 
ately ordered,  and  the  line  moved  steadily  forward  at  common  time,  all 
the  while  exposed  to  a most  deadly  fire  from  the  whole  line  of  the  enemy’s 
works — right,  left,  and  front.  We  passed  the  first  and  principal  ridge 
and  halted  in  the  hollow  beyond,  partially  under  cover  of  the  second 
ridge,  to  correct  alignment,  and  the  position  of  the  Fifth  Iowa  was 
changed  by  the  left  tiank  to  the  left  of  the  Ninety-third  Illinois,  for  the 
purpose  of  being  more  central  to  the  position  to  be  charged.  At  this 
moment  the  brigade  commander,  Col.  George  B.  Boomer,  was  instantly 
killed  by  a musket  ball  from  the  enemy,  and  Col.  Holden  Putnam,  of 
the  Ninety-third  Regiment  Illinois  Infantry,  assumed  command,  and 
immediately  ordered  the  advance  made,  as  we  had  approached  the 


68 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


works  thus  far.  At  this  moment  Major  McCalla,  of  the  Tenth  Iowa, 
said,  in  the  presence  of  the  troops,  that  Colonel  Boomer’s  last  words 
were  to  let  the  rifle-pits  alone.  As  I was  acting  directly  under  orders 
from  Colonel  Boomer,  and  had  received  orders  from  no  other  com 
mander,  also  perceiving  that  the  enemy  had  advanced  on  my  left  and 
torn  down  a flag  of  ours,  previously  placed  upon  their  works,  I deemed 
it  advisable  to,  and  did,  send  Lieutenant  Stoddard,  aide-de-camp,  to  Gen- 
eral Carr,  to  know  if  he  wished  me  to  move  upon  the  works,  and  after- 
ward received  orders  from  one  of  General  Carr’s  aides  to  remain  in 
position  until  dark,  and  then  withdraw  to  the  position  where  we  first 
formed  our  line.  After  dark  we  withdrew  our  troops  in  good  order  and 
brought  away  our  killed  and  wounded. 

The  loss  in  this  brigade  was  as  follows : 


During  the  night  we  held  the  position  where  the  line  was  first  formed, 
and  remained  in  that  position  under  a heavy  tire  of  the  enemy  until  the 
23d,  at  3 p.  m.,  when  we  were  ordered  to  return  to  the  position  now  occu- 
pied, forming  the  left  of  the  Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  the  men  being 
nearly  exhausted  by  the  hard  fighting  of  the  22d  and  watchfulness  of 
the  following  nights. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

HOLDEN  PUTNAM, 
Colonel , Commanding  Brigade. 

Capt.  Robert  C.  Crowell, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


recapitulation  of  losses. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS.  69 

No.  22. 

Report  of  Maj.  Samuel  E.  Lockett , C.  & Engineer  Corps , Chief  Engineer 

Department  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana , including  operations 

April  30 -May  17. 

Gainesville,  Ala.,  23, 1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  herein  to  submit  my  report  of  engineer  oper- 
ations during  the  period  included  between  the  dates  May  2 and  May 
18,  comprehending  the  events  immediately  preceding  the  siege  of  Vicks- 
burg. 

Having  returned  from  an  examination  of  the  works  at  Grand  Gulf  on 
April  30, 1 received,  at  Jackson,  an  order  to  join  the  lieutenant-general 
commanding  at  Vicksburg,  which  I did  on  May  2.  The  enemy  having 
effected  a landing  at  Bruinsburg,  Miss.,  and  forced  the  evacuation  of 
Grand  Gulf  on  April  30,  it  became  evident  that  immediate  steps  would 
have  to  be  taken  to  meet  him  on  all  available  approaches  to  the  city  of 
Vicksburg.  The  several  ferries  across  the  Big  Black  River  and  the 
railroad  bridge  became  points  of  great  strategic  importance.  I accord- 
ingly dispatched  an  engineer  officer  to  each  of  these  points  with  the 
view  of  establishing  works  for  resisting  a passage  of  the  river  by  the 
enemy. 

On  examination  it  was  found  that  at  Baldwin’s,  Hall’s,  and  Hankin- 
son’s  Ferries  the  bluffs  abutted  against  the  river  on  the  east  bank,  leav- 
ing wide  bottoms  on  the  west,  so  that  at  each  of  these  crossings  it 
became  necessary  to  construct  a tSte-de-pont  or  to  relinquish  the  idea  of 
taking  the  river  as  a line  of  defense.  These  tStes-de-pont  were  ordered, 
but  before  anything  could  be  done  the  army  of  Grand  Gulf,  under 
Major-General  Boring,  had  crossed  the  river  at  Hankinson’s  Ferry,  leav- 
ing the  east  bank  in  possession  of  the  enemy.  During  this  time  I had 
gone  myself,  by  the  direction  of  the  lieutenant-general,  to  the  railroad 
bridge  and  Edwards  Depot,  to  establish  works  to  defend  the  railroad 
and  preserve  this  very  important  line  of  communication.  Having  exam- 
ined the  ground,  I directed  Gapt.  D.  Wintter,  commanding  corps  of 
sappers  and  miners,  to  take  charge  of  the  construction  of  a tete-de pont 
to  cover  railroad  bridge,  and  telegraphed  to  Gapt.  P.  Robinson,  of  the 
engineers,  at  Grenada,  to  report  to  me  at  Edwards  Depot  with  all  his 
assistant  engineers.  Captain  Robinson  reported  on  the  9th,  and  leaving 
him  in  charge  of  the  works  at  the  bridge,  and  directing  him  to  make 
thorough  reconnaissances  of  the  country  in  the  vicinity  of  Edwards 
Depot  and  to  the  southward,  I returned  to  Vicksburg  with  Captain 
Wintter,  and  put  him  in  charge  of  all  the  works  around  the  city,  to  make 
necessary  repairs  and  put  everything  in  good  condition.  The  tete-de- 
pont  at  the  railroad  bridge  was  pushed  ahead  rapidly,  and  finished  by 
the  15th,  and  at  the  same  time  a bridge  was  made  across  the  Big  Black 
by  swinging  the  steamer  Dot  across  the  stream  and  removing  her  ma- 
chinery. 

On  the  12th,  the  army  was  ordered  across  the  Big  Black  to  Edwards 
Depot,  and  I went  to  the  latter  place  to  conduct  the  division  command- 
ers to  the  positions  assigned  to  them  by  the  lieutenant-general  com- 
manding. 

On  the  15th,  orders  were  received  to  march  upon  the  enemy,  and  I 
took  with  me  in  accompanying  the  lieutenant-general  the  following  as- 
sistant engineers,  viz:  Second  Lieut.  George  Donnellan,  engineers; 
Capt.  J.  M.  Couper  and  Sergt.  S.  McD.  Vernon,  acting  assistant  en- 
gineers, leaving  Captain  Robinson  and  three  assistants  in  charge  of  the 


70 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


works  at  the  bridge.  No  engineer  operations  were  found  necessary  on 
the  march,  and  the  army  reached  its  destination  on  the  Raymond  road 
about  midnight  on  the  15th,  the  head  of  the  column  being  halted  beyond 
Mrs.  Ellison’s  house,  some  6 miles  from  Edwards  Depot. 

THE  BATTLE  OF  BAKER’S  CREEK,  MAY  16.* 

At  6.30  a.  m.  on  the  16th,  a courier  from  General  Johnston  arrived, 
bringing  information  to  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  which  made 
a countermarch  necessary.  I was  directed  by  the  lieutenant-general  to 
inform  the  division  commanders  that  such  a move  would  be  made  im- 
mediately, and  communicated  his  instructions  to  Major-General  Steven- 
son and  Brigadier-General  Bowen.  I returned  to  headquarters  at  Mrs. 
Ellison’s  about  7.30,  and  heard  as  I reached  the  house  the  enemy’s 
artillery  open  on  the  head  of  our  column  on  the  Raymond  road.  I was 
then  directed  by  thelieutenant  general  to  inform  Major-General  Steven- 
son that  it  would  be  necessary  to  form  his  division  in  line  of  battle  on 
the  cross-road  from  the  Clinton  to  the  Raymond  road,  with  his  left  flank 
covering  the  former.  Having  communicated  these  instructions,  I sent 
Sergeant  Yernon  to  get  a pioneer  company  from  General  Cummin g’s 
brigade,  and  directed  him  to  throw  a bridge  as  soon  as  possible  across 
Baker’s  Creek,  on  the  main  Raymond  road,  where  the  county  bridge 
had  been  washed  away.  This  bridge  was  constructed  and  the  banks 
of  the  creek  cut  down  leading  to  it  by  2 p.  m.  From  8 a.  m.  until  about 
11, 1 was  engaged  with  my  assistants  in  communicating  orders  from  the 
lieutenant-general  commanding  in  regard  to  the  formation  of  the  line 
of  battle,  which  was  formed  on  a commanding  ridge,  and  so  disposed  as 
to  cover  all  approaches  from  the  front. 

About  noon  the  battle  opened  with  considerable  vigor  on  the  left,  and 
the  enemy  making  an  attempt  to  turn  our  left  flank,  rendered  a corre- 
sponding movement  necessary  on  our  part.  This  movement  opened  a 
considerable  gap  between  the  divisions  of  Generals  Stevenson  and  Bowen, 
and  I carried  an  order  from  the  lieutenant-general  to  General  Bowen 
to  keep  the  interval  closed  between  himself  and  General  Stevenson,  and 
to  General  Loring  to  the  same  effect  in  reference  to  his  and  General 
Bowen’s  divisions.  Between  this  and  3 p.  m.  I carried  an  order  to  Gen- 
eral Loring  to  hold  his  whole  division  in  readiness  to  move  to  the  left, 
and  to  move  his  left  brigade  (General  Buford’s)  at  once  to  join  upon  the 
right  of  General  Bowen’s  command.  Between  4 and  5 o’clock  the  enemy 
had  succeeded  by  his  vastly  superior  numbers  in  completely  turning  our 
left,  and  our  troops  began  to  break  and  fall  back  in  considerable  dis- 
order toward  the  main  Raymond  road.  I was  then  directed  by  the 
lieutenant-general  to  inform  General  Tilghman  that  the  position  he  oc- 
cupied was  one  of  vast  importance  in  securing  our  retreat,  and  that  he 
must  hold  it  at  all  hazards.  I found  General  Tilghman  had  moved  his 
brigade,  and  was  marching  along  a by-road  toward  our  left.  On  receiv- 
ing the  above  order,  he  halted  his  command,  and,  facing  about,  returned 
to  the  Raymond  road,  and  took  a position  on  a ridge  some  600  yards  in 
rear  of  his  first  [position],  and  just  in  front  of  the  by-road  above  men- 
tioned, along  which  our  army  finally  retreated.  . 

In  connection  with  this  day’s  operations,  I beg  leave  to  mention  es- 
pecially Capt.  J.  M.  Couper,  one  of  my  assistants,  who  displayed  great 
coolness,  gallantry,  and  judgment  in  communicating  instructions,  and 
Sergeant  Yernon,  for  his  energy  and  skill  in  constructing  the  bridge 
across  Baker’s  Creek  above  mentioned. 


For  sketch,  see  opposite  page. 


CHA1\  XXX VI.] 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS, 


71 


72 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC, 


[Chat.  XXXVI. 


SAMUEL  H.  LOCKETT , 

Maj.  and  Chief  Engineer, 
Dep’t  Miss,  and  E.  La. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS.  73 

THE  FIGHT  AT  BIG  BLACK  BRIDGE,  MAY  17.* 

Our  army  having  fallen  back  to  the  iutrenchments  covering  the  rail- 
road and  boat  bridges,  the  lines  were  found  about  completed,  and  were 
manned  by  General  [J.  0.]  Vaughn’s  brigade  and  part  of  Bowen’s  di- 
vision. The  enemy  opened  early  on  the  morning  of  the  17th  with  artil- 
lery at  long  range,  and  soon  came  up  with  their  infantry  and  took  pos- 
session of  a copse  of  wood  in  front  ol  our  left.  I repaired  to  the  bridges 
between  7 and  8 o’clock  to  examine  their  condition,  and  seeing  signs 
of  unsteadiness  among  our  troops,  I sent  Lieutenant  Donnellan  to  the 
lieutenant-general  for  instructions  in  regard  to  the  destruction  of  the 
bridges,  should  the  enemy  succeed  in  forcing  our  position.  Having 
received  the  necessary  instructions,  I made  preparations  for  firing  the 
railroad  bridge  by  piling  rails  and  loose  cotton  at  intervals,  and  had  a 
barrel  of  turpentine  prepared  on  the  boat  bridge.  At  about  9 a.  m.  our 
troops  on  the  left  were  stampeded,  and,  leaving  the  trenches,  came  pell- 
mell  toward  the  river.  I stationed  an  officer  at  each  bridge,  and  after 
seeing  that  all  our  men  were  across,  I gave  a signal  to  apply  the  torch. 
In  a few  moments  both  bridges  were  in  flames,  and  were  quickly  and 
thoroughly  burned. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

SAML.  H.  LOCKETT, 

Major  and  Chief  Engineer  Dept,  of  Miss,  and  E.  La. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana. 


No.  23. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  William  W.  Loring , C.  S.  Army , commanding 

Division. 

Headquarters  Loring’s  Division, 

Near  Crystal  Springs , May  17,  1863. 

General  : You  have  probably  learned  that  General  Pemberton  was 
compelled  yesterday  to  fall  back  before  a large  force  of  the  enemy.  I 
was  ordered  with  my  command  to  hold  the  rear,  to  enable  the  army  to 
make  good  its  retreat.  Soon  after  the  order  was  given,  the  enemy  moved 
in  heavy  force  against  us.  We  had  a bridge  and  ford  to  pass  to  make 
good  their  retreat.  A brigade  was  placed  at  the  bridge  and  one  at  the 
ford  to  protect  the  crossing,  while  my  division  was  in  the  position  indi- 
cated. General  Bowen,  in  command  of  the  ford,  sent  word  to  me  that 
he  would  hold  it,  and  was  requested  by  me  to  do  so  and  I would  sup- 
port him,  and  had  ordered  a brigade  for  the  purpose.  He  also  sent  me 
word  that  the  bridge  was  safe.  Contrary  to  the  expectation  of  General 
Bowen,  he  was  forced  suddenly  to  fall  back  in  the  direction  of  Edwards 
Depot,  consequent  upon  the  enemy’s  crossing  the  bridge.  The  enemy 
immediately  moved  to  a position  commanding  the  ford  in  my  front. 
Upon  hearing  of  Bowen’s  movement,  my  command  was  ordered  to  fall 
back,  the  enemy  at  the  same  time  moving  upon  my  right  flank  and  rear. 
There  was  nothing  to  prevent  their  soon  having  commanding  positions 
on  both  sides  of  the  ford.  These  movements  necessarily  forced  me  to 
look  to  a ford  lower  down  the  creek,  and  to  reach  it  had  to  pass  through 


For  sketch,  see  opposite  page. 


74 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


fields  and  swamps.  We  lost  what  artillery  we  had  with  us  for  the  want 
of  a road  and  bridges.  Before  reaching  the  lower  ford,  I learned  (he 
whole  force  of  the  enemy  had  moved  to  Edwards  Depot,  and  that  a large 
command  had  passed  that  day  to  Big  Black.  I endeavored  to  get  a 
competent  guide  we  had  to  carry  us  between  the  enemy’s  forces  to  the 
bridge,  but  he  said  it  could  not  be  done ; it  was  hazardous  in  the  ex- 
treme to  attempt  the  ferries  in  the  face  of  a large  force  there.  My  only 
means  of  preventing  my  division  from  being  overwhelmed  was  to  force 
my  way  through  the  enemy’s  lines  under  cover  of  night  and  join  my 
forces  to  yours.  We  have  no  baggage-wagons  or  cooking  utensils,  and 
but  40  rounds  of  ammunition.  The  wagons  of  this  division  were  sent 
back  to  Edwards  Depot. 

I hear  that  the  enemy  have  left  Jackson.  Upon  learning  its  truth,  I 
shall  move  a short  distance  to-morrow  after  crossing  Pearl  Diver. 

With  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  W.  LORING, 

Major - General , Commanding. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston. 


Headquarters,  - 
Camp  Forrest , Miss.,  August  28,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  forward,  through  you,  a detailed  state- 
ment of  the  operations  of  my  division  at  the  battle  of  Baker’s  Creek  and 
my  movements  consequent  upon  it. 

On  May  13,  Major-General  Bowen;  in  command  of  his  division,  hav- 
ing reported  the  enemy  advancing,  I was  ordered  to  re-enforce  him  with 
my  division.  General  Stevenson  soon  after  coming  up  with  his  divis- 
ion, a very  strong  position  was  selected  about  1 mile  south  of  Edwards 
Depot,  our  left  resting  on  the  railroad  and  the  right  not  far  from  Baker’s 
Creek. 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th,  General  Pemberton  ordered  a council  of 
war,  in  which  he  read  a dispatch  from  General  [Joseph  E.]  Johnston, 
which  stated  in  substance  that  the  enemy  (two  or  three  divisions)  was 
at  Clinton,  9 miles  from  Jackson,  and  (if  General  Pemberton  thought 
it  practicable)  advised  a movement  in  connection  with  him,  saying  that 
time  was  all-important.  In  the  council  of  war  there  was  great  diversity 
of  opinion ; two  generals  were  for  moving  at  once  upon  the  road  to  Clin- 
ton ; two  or  three  were  for  remaining  or  moving  back;  three  were  for 
striking  at  the  communications  of  the  enemy,  keeping  our  own  open 
with  the  bridge  over  Big  Black  River,  and  fighting  or  not  in  a position 
of  our  own  choosing,  as  would  seem  best.  I understood  the  opinion  of 
the  general  commanding  to  be  that  he  did  not  approve  the  move  pro- 
posed by  General  Johnston,  but  coincided  with  those  who  were  for 
moving  to  the  enemy’s  rear. 

It  was  determined  by  the  general  to  move  at  8 o’clock  in  the  morn- 
ing (15th  instant),  the  army  intending  to  cross  Baker’s  Creek  at  a ford, 
which  was  prevented  by  its  swollen  condition.  It  was,  however,  put  in 
motion  about  3 or  4 p.  m.,  crossing  the  creek  upon  a bridge  a short  dis- 
tance above  the  ford.  A map  was  furnished  marking  the  road  upon 
which  the  army  was  to  march,  my  division  being  in  the  advance.  After 
moving  4 or  5 miles,  we  were  joined  by  Major  [Samuel  H.]  Lockett,  chief 
engineer,  who  directed  the  column  to  take  a cross-road  leading  to  Mrs. 
Ellison’s  house,  on  the  middle  Raymond  road.  At  this  place  the  army 
was  to  have  encamped,  it  having  been  discovered  that  the  road  which 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


75 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS. 


it  was  intended  the  entire  force  should  follow  was  wrongly  laid  down 

upon  the  map  furnished.  „ , , 

About  dark  my  division  reached  Mrs.  Ellison  s,  and  found  a great 
scarcity  of  water.  This  information  was  at  once  communicated  to  yen  - 
eral  Pemberton,  so  that  he  might  make  some  other  disposition  of  the 
forces  which  were  following.  After  dark  it  fortunately  happened  that 
the  other  divisions  were  still  upon  the  road  leading  from  the  bridge  and 
encamped  along  it  in  their  line  of  march.  It  was  still  more  fortunate 
that  mv  command  was  upon  the  middle  Kaymond  road,  which  led  im- 
mediately to  the  ford  at  which  the  army  was  to  have  crossed  in  the 
morning.  Upon  this  road  the  enemy  was  in  large  force  within  a tew 
miles  of  my  camp.  Being  satisfied  of  this  from  prisoners  taken  and 
from  observations  of  several  of  my  staff  sent  in  advauce,  very  large 
picket  forces  were  placed  in  my  front,  rear,  and  right  flank.  Complet- 
ing my  dispositions,  I soon  after  met  General  Pemberton,  to  whom  in- 
formation of  the  near  proximity  of  the  enemy  in  large  force  was  given. 
Additional  information  was  subsequently  given  him,  establishing  the 


fact  that  he  was  in  our  immediate  front. 

This  was  the  condition  of  things  until  7 or  8 o’clock  next  morning 
(16th),  when  the  general  informed  us  that  he  had  a note  from  General 
Johnston,  advising  a junction  with  him  in  the  direction  of  Brownsville, 
his  force  having  fallen  back  from  Jackson.  This  necessitated  a move- 
ment toward  Edwards  Depot,  The  general  then  gave  an  order  for  the 
train,  which  had  not  come  up,  to  retrace  its  steps.  Pending  this,  it  is  said 
the  enemy  was  in  line  of  battle  preparing  to  attack  us.  Moving  rapidly 
upon  my  pickets,  he  opened  a brisk  cannonade.  I suggested  to  General 
Pemberton  that  the  sooner  he  formed  a line  of  battle  the  better,  as  the 
enemy  would  very  soon  be  upon  us.  He  at  first  directed  me  to  form  Tilgli  - 
man’s  brigade  in  a line  of  battle  upon  the  ground  it  then  occupied,  but 
soon  thought  it  untenable,  and  ordered  it,  with  Featherston’s  and  Bu- 
ford’s brigades  (my  whole  division),  into  a line  of  battle  on  a ridge 
about  three-quarters  of  a mile  in  the*  rear  and  across  a small  creek. 
This  line  was  almost  immediately  changed  for  a ridge  still  farther  back, 
where  my  artillery  was  advantageously  posted  on  both  sides  ot  the  road, 
the  field  to  the  front  being  entirely  open  as  far  as  Mrs.  Ellison’s  house. 
He  also  directed  the  division  to  occupy  the  road  and  the  country  to  the 
right  of  it,  and  in  orders  conveyed  to  me  at  different  times  during  the 
day  he  instructed  me  to  hold  my  position,  not  attacking  the  enemy  un- 
less he  attempted  to  outflank  us.  Bowen’s  command  was  extended  so 
as  to  join  mine  on  the  road.  Soon  a series  of  orders  came,  specifically 
and  with  great  particularity,  for  two  of  my  brigades  to  move  to  the 
left,  closing  the  line  as  often  as  Bowen  moved,  and  we  in  this  manner 


followed  him. 

During  this  time  I received  an  order  to  retire,  also  one  to  advance, 
both  of  which  were  countermanded.  My  whole  division,  including  re- 
serves, was  strung  out  in  line  of  battle,  mostly  in  thick  timber.  The 
enemy  during  these  movements  remained  steadily  in  front  in  heavy 
force,  being,  apparently,  a full  corps,  occupying  a series  of  ridges, 
wooded,  and  commanding  each  other,  forming  naturally  a very  strong  it 
not  impregnable  position,  throwing  forward  a heavy  line  of  skirmishers, 
and  showing  every  indication  of  an  attack  in  force  upon  my  position, 
both  in  front  and  upon  the  right  flank.  General  Bowen  also  informed 
me  that  he  thought  the  enemy  was  moving  to  the  right. 

While  these  movements  were  going  on  (all  of  which  were  brought  to 
the  general’s  attention),  desultory  firing  was  heard  on  the  extreme  left, 


76  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

and  General  Bowen  was  summarily  ordered  in  that  direction,  without 
warning  either  to  myself  or  to  General  Buford,  commanding  a brigade 
of  my  division  next  to  him.  Not  long  after,  I was  ordered  to  send  a 
brigade  to  the  left,  and  General  Buford  went  at  double-quick.  While 
passing  Bowen,  two  regiments  were  detached  and  went  into  the  fight 
with  that  command,  Buford  continuing  on  to  the  left  (see  his  report 
annexed).  In  a half  to  three-quarters  of  an  hour  one  brigade  was 
ordered  to  be  left  on  the  road,  and  the  other  to  be  taken  by  myself  to 
the  left.  This  was  most  earnestly  requested  to  be  done  by  Colonel 
[W.  T.]  Withers,  in  command  of  the  artillery,  who  feared  the  capture 
of  his  guns.  He  tells  me  that  he  was  gratified  in  being  able  to  state 
that  my  force  arrived  sooner  than  he  expected,  and  in  time  to  save  his 
artillery.  But  for  our  prompt  arrival,  every  piece  would  have  been 
lost,  as  the  whole  sustaining  force  had,  except  a few  bold  skirmishers, 
been  driven  back. 

Upon  the  approach  of  [W.  S.]  Featherston’s  brigade,  in  rapid  march, 
a considerable  force  of  the  retreating  army  having  been  rallied  behind 
him,  the  enemy,  who  was  advancing  upon  the  artillery,  fell  back  in 
great  disorder,  Colonel  Withers  pouring  in  a most  destructive  fire  upon 
him.  It  was  here  that  we  witnessed  a scene  ever  to  be  remembered, 
when  the  gallant  Withers  and  his  brave  men,  with  their  fine  park  of 
artillery,  stood  unflinchingly  amid  a shower  of  shot  and  shell  the  ap- 
proach of  an  enemy  in  overwhelming  force,  after  his  supports  had  been 
driven  back,  and  trusting  that  a succoring  command  would  arrive  in 
time  to  save  his  batteries,  and  displaying  a degree  of  courage  and 
determination  that  calls  for  the  most  unqualified  admiration. 

Upon  my  arrival  upon  this  part  of  the  field,  I found  the  whole  country, 
on  both  sides  of  the  road,  covered  with  the  fleeing  of  our  army,  in  many 
cases  in  large  squads,  and,  as  there  was  no  one  endeavoring  to  rally  or 
direct  them,  I at  once  placed  my  escort  under  an  efficient  officer  of  my* 
staff,  with  orders  to  gather  up  the  stragglers  and  those  in  retreat  away 
from  the  road.  This  duty  was  performed  with  great  energy  and  success. 
It  was  also  determined  that  under  these  circumstances  it  was  necessary, 
in  order  to  save  large  numbers  of  men  and  guns,  as  well  as  to  be  able,  in 
case  the  emergency  should  arise,  to  retire  the  army  in  safety  and  good 
order  to  the  ford  over  Baker’s  Creek,  along  the  only  road  open  to  it, 
that  a vigorous  and  well-directed  attack  should  be  made  upon  the  en- 
emy. At  this  moment  I met  General  [S.  D.]  Lee  and  Colonel  Withers, 
and  was  satisfied,  from  information  obtained  from  them,  that  by  such 
an  attack  upon  the  enemy’s  right  during  the  panic  which  had  befallen 
his  center  we  could  overwhelm  it,  retrieve  the  day,  certainly  cut  him  off 
from  the  bridge  on  our  extreme  left  (of  which  it' was  highly  important 
we  should  hold  possession),  and  save  our  scattered  forces.  Dispositions 
were  at  once  made  for  the  attack,  in  which  General  Lee  lent  a cordial 
and  able  assistance.  This  fine  officer,  with  General  [M.  E.]  Green  and 
portions  of  their  gallant  brigades,  we  found  fighting  the  enemy  where 
all  others,  except  the  brave  Withers,  had  been  driven  back,  and  con- 
testing every  step  of  the  enemy’s  advancing  columns,  Green  declaring 
he  never  would  have  been  driven  back  but  for  the  fact  that  he  had  not 
a cartridge  left.  While  thus  engaged,  I received  an  order  for  the  forces 
to  fall  back,  and  my  assistant  adjutant- general,  who  had  been  dispatched 
to  General  Pemberton  for  orders,  returned  stating  that  the  general  said 
that  the  movement  must  not  be  made ; that  I must  order  a retreat  and 
bring  up  the  rear.  Officers  were  immediately  sent  to  advise  those  not 
yet  informed  to  retire,  and  as  rapidly  as  possible,  in  the  direction  of 


CnAP.  XXXVI.] 


77 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS. 

the  ford,  that  being  the  only  road  left  open.  As  soon  as  the  enemy 
realized  that  we  were  leaving  the  field,  he  rallied  and  moved  forward  in 

heavy  force.  . ...  , 

Xn  the  mean  time  Featherston’s  brigade  was  put  into  position  to  pro- 
tect the  rear  of  the  retreating  forces  and  to  cover  the  falling  back  ol 
Buford’s  brigade.  This  duty  was  ably  and  gallantly  executed.  This 
latter  brigade  (Buford’s)  about  this  time  met  a charge  of  the  enemy 
(infantry,  cavalry,  and  artillery),  and  repulsed  him  m splendid  style 
with  great  slaughter,  the  heavy  fighting  being  done  byJ;h$  twelfth 
Louisiana,  a large  regiment,  under  the  able  and  daring  [T.  M.J  bcott. 
This  and  the  gallant  [Edward]  Goodwin,  Thirty -fifth  Alabama  Regi- 
ment, had  also  distinguished  themselves  in  the  charge  upon  the  enemy  s 
center,  and  about  this  time  the  brave  Alpheus  Baker,  of  the  Fifty- 
fourth  Alabama,  was  severely  wounded  in  another  part  of  the  field. 

During  this  time  Tilghmao,  who  had  been  left  with  his  brigade  upon 
the  other  road,  almost  immediately  after  our  parting,  met  a terrible  as- 
sault of  the  enemy,  and  when  we  rejoined  him  was  carrying  on  a deadly 
and  most  gallant  fight.  With  less  than  1,500  effective  men  he  was  at- 
tacked by  from  6,000  to  8,000  of  the  enemy  with  a fine  park  of  artillery ; 
but  being  advantageously  posted,  he  not  only  held  him  in  check,  but 
repulsed  him  on  several  occasions,  and  thus  kept  open  the  only  line  ot 
retreat  left  to  the  army.  The  bold  stand  of  this  brigade  under  the 
lamented  hero  saved  a large  portion  of  the  army. 

It  is  befitting  that  I should  speak  of  the  death  of  the  gallant  and  ac- 
complished [Lloyd]  Tilghman.  Quick  and  bold  in  the  execution  of  his 
plans,  he  fell  in  the  midst  of  a brigade  that  loved  him  well,  after  re- 
pulsing a powerful  enemy  in  deadly  fight,  struck  by  a cannon-shot.  A 
brigade  wept  over  the  dying  hero ; alike  beautiful  as  it  was  touching. 

I had  some  time  before  this  sent  an  adjutant  to  General  Pemberton 
•and  subsequently  another  to  ascertain  how  his  retreating  forces  were 
progressing,  but  having  left  the  field  it  was  impossible  to  communicate 
with  him.  The  officer  on  his  return  informed  me  that  he  had  met  Gen- 
eral Bowen  at  the  ford,  who  had  requested  him  to  say  to  me,  “For  God’s 

sake,  hold  your  position  until  sundown  and  save  the  army.”  He  could 
hold  the  ford  and  the  bridge  was  safe.  I had  scarcely  received  this 
message  when  General  Bowen  sent  me  a written  communication,  stating 
that  the  enemy  had  crossed  the  bridge  and  had  outflanked  him  j that  he 
had  been  compelled  precipitately  to  fall  back,  and  that  I must  do  my 
best  to  save  my  division.  I also  received  a note  from  Lieut.  Col.  Jacob 
Thompson  to  the  same  import.  We  at  once  made  a movement  toward 
the  ford,  there  being  no  other  road  of  retreat.  There  being  none  on  my 
left  that  I could  use,  and  being  wholly  unacquainted  with  the  country— 
my  only  guide  having  been  taken  by  General  Pemberton  to  direct  him 
to  Big  Black  Bridge— my  first  determination  was  to  force  my  way 
through  by  the  ford,  and  rode  rapidly  to  reconnoiter.  Arriving  there, 
it  was  found  that  our  troops  were  gone,  some  of  whom  having  been 
driven  back  upon  us.  The  enemy’s  skirmishers  were  advancing,  and  a 
heavy  force  occupied  the  commanding  ridge  across  the  creek,  his  ar- 
tillery playing  upon  the  crossing.  The  enemy  upon  our  right  flank  and 
rear  had  been  re-enforced,  so  that  we  were  enveloped  upon  three  sides, 
leaving  no  road  to  move  upon.  Not  far  from  my  place  of  observation  I 
met  Dr.  Williamson,  a highly  respectable  gentleman  of  Edwards  Depot, 
who  said  he  knew  the  whole  country,  and  thought  he  could  take  me  to 
a ford  on  Baker’s  Creek,  3 or  4 miles  below. 

By  this  time  darkness  was  approaching.  I at  once  decided  upon  this 


78 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL. 


move.  By  a well-concerted  movement  we  eluded  the  enemy  upon  three 
sides,  and  to  his  astonishment  made  our  flank  march  from  between  his 
forces  across  the  fields  to  a given  point  in  the  woods  skirting  Baker’s 
Creek.  The  night  being  dark  and  the  trail  a blind  one,  it  was  found  im- 
possible to  get  through  by  following  the  creek.  It  was  then  determined 
to  move  across  to  another  road  and  reach  the  ford  in  that  direction.  My 
command,  being  compelled  to  move  back  upon  the  ground  where  the 
battle  was  fought,  passed  the  enemy’s  camp-fires,  and  at  times  our  small 
parties  were  near  enough  to  hear  them.  The  unused  plantation  roads 
upon  which  we  moved  were  in  such  bad  condition  as  to  render  it  im- 
possible to  carry  our  artillery  over  them,  and  we  were  obliged  to  destroy 
that  which  we  had  with  our  commands,  bringing  the  horses  and  harness 
with  us,  the  balance  having  gone  with  the  army  into  Vicksburg.  Soon 
after  striking  the  timber,  we  discovered  Edwards  Depot  and  Withers’ 
gin-house  on  fire,  which  convinced  us  that  our  forces  had  passed  those 
points;  but  as  we  were  led  to  believe  that  we  could  reach  the  lower  ford 
in  3 or  4 miles,  it  was  hoped  that  we  could  pass  in  between  Edwards 
Depot  and  Big  Black  Bridge  and  rejoin  the  army.  Instead  of  3 or  4 it 
was  10  or  12  miles  before  my  command  reached  the  lower  Raymond 
road  which  led  to  the  ford,  and  then  it  was  after  midnight.  My  guide 
(Dr.  Williamson)  informed  us  that  it  was  impossible  to  guide  the 
division  to  Big  Black  Bridge  with  the  enemy  in  possession  of  Edwards 
Depot,  which  we  were  convinced  he  had  held  for  several  hours,  but 
referred  us  to  a gentleman  by  the  name  of  Vaughan,  who  lived  within 
1 mile  of  the  road.  I went  to  his  house  and  brought  him  to  the  col- 
umn to  consult  with  my  generals,  and  proposed  that  he  should  take 
us  to  Big  Black  River.  He  declared  that  it  was  impossible,  as  all  the 
lower  fords  over  Baker’s  Greek  were  swimming,  and  that  to  Big  Black 
Bridge  he  could  not  take  us  without  moving  through  the  enemy’s  lines 
at  Edwards  Depot.  He  also  informed  us  that  a large  force  of  the  enemy 
had  that  day  passed  by  his  house.  It  was  known  that  the  enemy  had 
troops  at  all  ferries  over  Big  Black  below  the  mouth  of  Baker’s  Creek, 
and  that  the  river  was  a deep  and  difficult  stream  to  cross.  The  con- 
dition of  the  command  was  also  taken  into  consideration  $ being  with- 
out artillery,  with  but  few  rounds  of  cartridges;  having  no  implements 
for  immediate  construction  of  a bridge  or  ferry ; our  entire  train  having 
gone  into  Vicksburg,  and  being  without  supplies  of  any  kind;  also  the 
distance  to  the  river  was  so  great  that  it  would  have  been  impossible 
to  have  reached  it  until  late  next  day,  when  the  enemy  was  sure  to  have 
been  posted  to  prevent  crossing.  After  a full  consultation  with  my  brig- 
adiers, all  of  us  were  of  the  opinion  that  it  was  impossible  to  attempt 
the  passage  of  Big  Black  at  any  point,  and  in  doing  so  the  entire  divis- 
ion would  certainly  be  lost.  Subsequent  events  have  fully  shown  that 
we  were  right  in  this  determination.  It  was  then  determined  to  force 
the  rear  of  the  enemy  between  Raymond  and  Utica. 

On  the  evening  of  the  17th,  my  command,  after  a hard  march,  reached 
Crystal  Springs,  a village  on  the  New  Orleans  and  Jackson  Railroad, 
25  miles  south  of  Jackson. 

On  the  19th,  reached  Jackson  with  my  entire  division,  few  lingering 
by  the  way,  and  immediately  reported  to  General  Johnston,  who  ex- 
pressed his  gratification  that  my  command  had  safely  arrived. 

Of  Generals  Featherston  and  Buford  and  Col.  A.  E.  Reynolds,  com- 
manding brigades,  whose  reports  are  herewith  annexed,  too  much  can- 
not be  said  in  commendation.  The  rapidity  and  skill  with  which  they 
executed  their  orders,  and  the  boldness  with  which  their  gallant  com- 


Chap.  XXXYI.J 


79 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS. 

mands  met  and  successfully  repulsed  the  powerful  attacks  of  the  enemy, 
delaying  the  Yankee  army  and  securing  a safe  retreat  to  that  of  ours 
across  the  ford,  entitles  them  to  the  highest  praise ; and,  finally,  in  lend- 
ing themselves  a sacrifice,  enveloped  as  they  were  upon  three  sides 
(front,  right  flank,  and  rear),  undismayed,  with  a proud  consciousness 
of  having  done  their  whole  duty,  they  withdrew  in  good  order  from 
under  fire  in  face  of  the  enemy,  and  thus  we  were  enabled  to  make  the 
dangerous  but  successful  movement  to  the  left. 

My  staff — Oapt.  Henry  Eobinson,  assistant  adjutant-general ; Captain 
[A.  A.]  Bursley,  chief  of  artillery;  Captain  [Belton]  Mickle,  assistant 
quartermaster;  Capt.  John  D.  Myrick;  Lieut.  [ J.]  Hanson  Thomas,  aide- 
de-camp;  Captain  [William]  Sykes,  aide-de  camp;  Capt.  Henry  de 
Veuve,  assistant  engineer;  Henry  Taylor  and  William  McFarland,  vol- 
unteer aides;  Captain  Eussell  and  Dr.  Williamson,  guides — were  con- 
tinually under  fire,  and  bore  themselves,  as  in  other  fields,  with  courage 
and  ability. 

With  respect,  I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  W.  LOEING, 
Major-General , Commanding , &c. 

Col.  B.  S.  Ewell, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


No.  24. 

Report  of  Col.  A.  E.  Reynolds , Twenty-sixth  Mississippi  Infantry , com- 
manding First  Brigade. 

Headquarters  First  Brigade,  First  Division, 

Rear  Jackson , Miss May  27,  1863. 

Major  : In  obedience  to  orders,  I beg  leave  to  submit  the  following 
report  of  the  part  taken  by  this  brigade  in  the  battle  of  Baker’s  Creek 
on  the  16th  instant : 

At  9 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  that  day,  Brigadier-General  Tilghman, 
commanding  brigade,  received  orders  to  move  it  from  just  beyond  Elli- 
son’s house,  where  it  had  bivouacked  Friday  night,  to  a ridge  about  half 
a mile  in  our  rear.  The  order  was  immediately  obeyed,  and  in  the  for- 
mation of  the  line  of  battle  its  proper  position  (the  right  of  the  division) 
was  assigned  it. 

From  this  time  up  to  about  12  m.,  nothing  of  importance  occurred.  At 
that  time  the  whole  division  changed  position  by  the  left  flank,  Brigadier- 
General  Buford  moving  to  the  support  of  Brigadier-General  Bowen,  on 
his  left ; Brigadier- General  Featherston  closing  up,  so  as  to  be  in  sup- 
porting distance,  and  Brigadier-General  Tilghman,  with  his  brigade  and 
two  batteries — the  [J.  J.]  Cowan  battery  (six  guns),  of  Withers’  regiment 
of  artillery,  and  the  McLendon  battery  (four  guns),  of  Ward’s  battalion — 
by  direction  of  the  major-general  commanding  division,  taking  position 
on  the  Eaymond  and  Edwards  Depot  road,  to  prevent  a flank  movement 
of  the  enemy  down  it  on  our  right.  At  the  same  time  he  was  told  to  hold 
himself  in  readiness  to  move  up  to  the  support  of  the  other  brigades  of 
the  division  should  it  become  necessary. 

About  1 o’clock  this  order  was  received  from  Lieutenant-General  Pem- 
berton. In  anticipation  of  the  movement,  Lieutenant  [William]  McFar- 
land, of  the  major-general’s  staff,  had  some  time  before  been  sent  to  Brig- 


80  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

adier- General  Tilghman  to  point  out  the  road  by  which  he  should  move. 
Captain  [P.]  Ellis  [jr.],  the  assistant  adjutant-general  of  General  Tilgh- 
man, accompanied  Lieutenant  McFarland  far  enough  to  have  it  shown 
him.  But,  upon  making  the  move,  and  going  beyond  the  point  to  which 
Captain  Ellis  had  been  carried  by  Lieutenant  McFarland,  the  route 
was  found  to  be  impracticable  for  artillery.  As  soon  as  this  became 
evident,  General  Tilghman  countermarched  the  brigade,  and,  moving 
down  the  Baymond  and  Edwards  Depot  road  about  a quarter  of  a mile, 
took  a new  right-hand  road,  which  communicated  with  our  left  wing, 
intending  to  join  Major-General  Loring  by  this  route  5 but  after  pro- 
ceeding only  a few  hundred  yards,  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  met 
the  brigade  and  ordered  it  back  to  a position  on  the  main  road  we  had 
just  left,  informing  General  Tilghman  at  the  same  time  that  an  order 
countermanding  the  one  to  move,  and  directing  him  to  retain  his  posi- 
tion, had  been  sent  to  him  nearly  an  hour  before.  While  conversing 
with  him,  Major  [S.  H.]  Lockett,  chief  engineer  of  the  department,  rode 
up  with  the  order,  and  informed  General  Pemberton  that,  owing  to 
the  breaking  down  of  his  horse,  he  had  been  unable  to  reach  General 
Tilghman. 

At  the  time  of  the  movement  from  our  first  position,  on  the  Baymond 
and  Edwards  Depot  road,  and  before  the  rear  of  the  brigade  had  crossed 
that  road,  a heavy  column  of  the  enemy  was  seen  advancing  in  line  of 
battle  out  of  the  woods,  immediately  around  Ellison’s  house.  Col.  B. 
Lowry,  of  the  Sixth  Mississippi  Begiment,  who  was  in  the  rear,  was  at 
once  directed  to  throw  out  a heavy  line  of  skirmishers  to  protect  the 
movement.  Upon  the  brigade  countermarching,  this  line  of  skirmish- 
ers (composing  nearly  one-half  of  the  regiment),  moving  too  far  to  the 
left,  became  separated  from  the  brigade,  and,  uniting  itself  with  the 
left  wing  of  the  army,  fell  back  with  it — first  to  Big  Black  Bridge,  and 
thence  to  Vicksburg,  where  it  is  at  present  under  the  command  of  Major 
[J.  B.]  Stevens. 

Soon  after  the  formation  of  the  second  line  of  battle  (at  1.30  o’clock), 
Major-General  Loring  came  up  with  the  other  two  brigades  of  the  divis- 
ion, and  formed  them  immediately  on  the  left  of  the  First  Brigade.  He 
informed  General  Tilghman  that  the  left  wing  of  the  army  was  retreat- 
ing to  the  Big  Black,  and  that,  in  order  to  cover  the  movement,  General 
Pemberton  had  directed  him  to  maintain  his  position  at  all  hazards 
until  sundown.  The  enemy  having  taken  possession  of  the  hill  aban- 
doned by  us,  a continuous  fire  from  both  artillery  and  skirmishers  was 
kept  up  until  dusk. 

At  5.20  o’clock,  Brig.  Gen.  Lloyd  Tilghman,  who  up  to  that  time  had 
commanded  the  brigade  with  marked  ability,  fell,  killed  by  a shell  from 
one  of  the  enemy’s  guns,  and  the  command  devolved  upon  me  as  the 
senior  colonel  present.  I cannot  here  refrain  from  paying  a slight  trib- 
ute to  the  memory  of  my  late  commander.  As  a man,  a soldier,  and  a 
general,  he  had  few  if  any  superiors.  Always  at  his  post,  he  devoted 
himself  day  and  night  to  the  interests  of  his  command.  Upon  the  bat 
tie-field  cool,  collected,  and  observant,  he  commanded  the  entire  respect 
and  confidence  of  every  officer  and  soldier  under  him,  and  the  only  cen- 
sure ever  cast  upon  him  was  that  he  always  exposed  himself  too  reck- 
lessly. At  the  time  he  was  struck  down  he  was  standing  in  the  rear  of 
a battery,  directing  a change  in  the  elevation  of  one  of  the  guns.  The 
tears  shed  by  his  men  on  the  occasion,  and  the  grief  felt  by  his  entire 
brigade,  are  the  proudest  tribute  that  can  be  given  the  gallant  dead. 

From  the  time  of  my  assuming  command  of  the  brigade  until  I was 
ordered  off  the  field,  the  fire  of  the  enemy  was  very  warm.  Cowan’s  bat- 


CHAf.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS. 


81 


tery  had  several  men  wounded,  and  had  nearly  used  up  all  its  ammuni- 
tion, and  yet  from  orders  received  by  me  had  to  be  kept  in  position. 
The  McLendon  Battery  lost  several  men  and  horses,  and  were  exposed 
to  such  a heavy  fire  as  to  render  the  use  of  their  guns  exceedingly  haz- 
ardous. I sent  Capt.  T.  B.  Sykes,  the  assistant  inspector-general,  to 
inform  Major-General  Loriiig  of  the  state  of  affairs,  and  learned  through 
him,  on  his  return,  that  both  Generals  Buford’s  and  Featherston’s  bri- 
gades were  moving  off  to  the  rear,  and  that  I was  directed  to  bring  off 
my  brigade  in  the  rear  of  General  Featherston’s.  The  enemy  were  press 
ing  us  closely  at  the  time,  so  that  I deemed  it  best  to  move  off  by  the 
left  flank  through  the  fields  rather  than  by  the  right  down  the  road,  and 
by  so  doing  induced  the  enemy  to  believe  that  I was  moving  to  the  left. 

I thus  deceived  the  enemy  and"  avoided  any  serious  pursuit.  After  mov- 
ing a little  more  than  a mile,  I received  an  order  from  the  major-general 
to  leave  my  artillery,  move  out  of  the  regular  line,  and  take  position 
in  front  of  General  Featherston’s  brigade.  The  march  was  continued 
in  this  order  for  the  next  twenty-four  hours,  during  which  time  we  made 
about  40  miles. 

It  is  proper  to  mention  that  in  assuming  the  second  line  of  battle, 
about  1.30  o’clock,  one  section  of  the  McLendon  Battery  was  ordered  to 
the  rear,  as  there  was  no  position  for  it,  and  that  Lieutenant  [F.  W.] 
Merrin,  commanding,  made  his  way  with  it  first  across  Baker’s  Creek, 
and  finally  with  that  portion  of  the  army  on  the  left  to  Vicksburg.  The 
guns  of  the  other  section  under  Capt.  Jacob  Culbertson,  as  well  as  those 
of  Cowan’s  battery,  were  abandoned,  by  order  of  the  major-general  com- 
manding, during  the  first  night’s  march,  owing  to  the  impossibility  of 
taking  them  over  the  roads  we  were  forced  to  follow. 

Captain  Culbertson  brought  off  his  horses,  harness,  and  men  ; Captain 
rj.  J.]  Cowan  did  the  same,  but  on  the  march  he  aud  all  his  men  left 
the  command  and  have  not  been  heard  from  since.  The  forced  march 
from  the  battle-field  to  Crystal  Springs,  to  Rimes’  Ferry,  and  thence  to 
Jackson,  was  over  rough,  stony  roads,  and  made  by  men  much  worn 
down  by  fatigue  and  many  of  them  barefooted. 

Under  these  circumstances  it  is  not  at  all  surprising  that  many  of 
them  broke  down,  straggled,  and  some  doubtless  were  picked  up  by 
the  enemy. 

Accompanying  this  report  you  will  find  a paper,*  marked  A,  contain- 
ing a list  of  the  killed,  wounded,  and  missing. 

In  closing  my  report,  I cannot  omit  my  commendation  of  the  way  in 
which  the  officers  and  troops  of  this  brigade  behaved.  The  officers,  one 
and  all,  behaved  well,  so  much  so  that  I cannot  particularize  any  with- 
out being  invidious.  The  troops  were  in  fine  spirits,  and  I have  never 
seen  any  more  anxious  to  meet  an  enemy. 

I am  much  indebted  to  Captains  Ellis  and  Sykes,  the  adjutant  and 
inspector  general  of  General  Tilghman’s  staff,  for  the  prompt  and  effi- 
cient aid  given  me  on  the  field,  who,  notwithstanding  the  gloom  cast 
over  them  by  the  death  of  their  chief,  promptly  reported  themselves  to 
me  for  duty,  and  by  their  gallant  conduct  are  entitled  to  the  gratitude 
of  their  country. 

Bespectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  REYNOLDS, 
Colonel , Commanding  Brigade. 

[Maj.  George  McKnight, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.] 

* Not  found. 

6 R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


82 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chai*.  XXXVI. 

Return  of  Casualties  in  Tilr/hman’s  brigade,  Col.  A.  E.  Reynolds  commanding,  in  the 
battle  of  Baker's  Creek,  May  16,  1863. 


[Compiled  from  nominal  lists.] 


No.  25. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Abraham  Buford , C.  JS.  Army , commanding  /Second 

Brigade. 

Headquarters  Buford’s  Brigade,  Loring’s  Division, 

June  16,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  op- 
erations of  my  brigade  (the  Third  Brigade  of  the  division)  in  and  around 
Edwards  Depot,  on  Saturday,  May  16,  and  on  the  march  from  Baker’s 
Creek  to  Jackson,  Miss.: 

My  brigade  consisted  of  the  following  regiments:  Twelfth  Louisiana 
Regiment,  Col.  Thomas  M.  Scott  commanding;  Fifty-fourth  Alabama 
Regiment,  Col.  Alpheus  Baker  commanding;  Seventh  Kentucky  Regi- 
ment, Col.  Ed.  Crossland  commanding;  Ninth  Arkansas  Regiment,  Col. 
1.  L.  Dunlop  commanding;  four  companies  Third  Kentucky  Regiment, 
Maj.  J.  H.  Bowman  commanding;  Thirty-fifth  Alabama  Regiment,  Col. 
Edward  Goodwin  commanding;  Snodgrass’  Alabama  regiment,  Col. 
John  Snodgrass  commanding,  and  Twenty  seventh  Alabama  Regiment, 
Col.  James  Jackson  commanding,  mak;ng  an  aggregate  of  3,005  effect- 
ive men.  The  Pointe  Coupee  artillery,  consisting  of  two  companies  (A 
and  C,  four  guns  each),  was  also  attached  to  my  brigade,  under  com- 
mand of  Captain  [Alcide]  Bouanchaud.  The,  Eighth  Kentucky  also 
belonged  to  my  command,  but,  having  been  mounted  two  days  previous, 
were  detached.  We  were  encamped  at  Mr.  Ratliff’s,  about  half  a mile 
in  rear  of  Mrs.  Ellison’s,  on  the  Raymond  road. 

On  the  evening  of  May  15,  the  Thirty  fifth  Alaba  ma  Regiment  was 
detailed  for  picket  duty,  and  was  in  advance  some  2 miles. 

About  8 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  May  16,  the  report  of  artillery  an- 
nounced that  the  enemy  were  advancing  immediately  in  front  of  the  di- 
vision, which  formed  the  right  wing  of  the  army,  my  brigade  being  on 
the  left  of  the  right  wing.  Dispositions  were  at  once  made  to  meet  the 
advance,  and  I was  ordered  to  form  a line  of  battle  on  the  ground  on 
which  I had  bivouacked,  it  being  a covered  position,  approached  through 
an  open  field,  and  quite  defensible.  My  right  rested  on  the  road,  and 
my  left  extended  to  an  open  field  through  which  the  cross-road  passed 


*Not  reported. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS.  83 

on  which  we  had  marched  the  evening  previous.  My  line  was  scarcely 
formed  when  1 was  ordered  by  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  to  ad- 
vance and  occupy  the  ground  on  which  Brigadier-General  Green,  of 
General  Bowen’s 'division,  had  formed  his  brigade,  which  was  in  my 
front  and  to  the  left.  Informing  you  of  the  order,  I advanced  from  the 
covered  position  I held,  and  formed,  as  ordered,  on  a commanding  emi- 
nence in  the  middle  of  a field,  and  over  which  the  enemy  must  advance. 
The  position  was  a very  strong  one  and  tenable.  My  line  had  not  been 
entirely  rectified  when  I received  orders  to  fall  back  with  my  brigade 
some  half  a mile  and  establish  a line  beyond  the  junction  of  the  military 
road  with  the  road  leading  to  Raymond  by  Mrs.  Ellison’s,  my  right  to 
rest  on  the  road  and  extending  to  the  right  of  General  Bowen’s  division. 

I was  here  joined  by  the  Thirty-fifth  Alabama  Regiment,  which  had 
been  ordered  to  fall  back  before  the  enemy.  I formed  the  line  as  di- 
rected, which  enabled  me  to  hold  one  regiment  in  reserve.  This  posi- 
tion was  in  the  midst  of  a dense  timber,  opening  on  a grove  around 
the  residence  of  Mr.  Ratliff.  My  artillery  was  placed  in  position  on  the 
right  and  left  of  the  road  by  Captain  [A.  A.]  Bursley,  chief  of  artillery 
of  division,  and  was  detached  from  my  command  during  the  day.  I 
here  received  a request  irorn  General  Bowen  so  to  alter  my  line  by 
moving  to  the  left  as  to  unite  with  his  right,  as  he  had  moved  to  the 
left  to  join  General  Stevenson’s  right.  Informing  you  of  the  request, 
I was  ordered  to  comply  therewith,  which  I did,  extending  my  line  some 
600  yards,  and  throwing  forward  into  line  the  regiment  I had  intended 
to  hold  in  reserve. 

In  about  twenty  minutes  I received  information  from  General  Bowen 
that  he  had  advanced  half  a mile  to  the  left  and  front,  followed  by  an 
order  from  General  Pemberton  to  throw  my  line  forward,  so  as  to  rest 
on  the  right  of  General  Bowen’s  position.  Transmitting  the  order  to 
you  for  information,  I promptly  complied  with  the  same,  my  new  posi- 
tion being  about  100  yards  in  rear  of  my  first  one,  on  a line  with  the 
skirmishers  of  the  First  and  ‘Second  Brigades,  my  own  skirmishers 
(whom  I had  placed  under  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  [J.  W.] 
Rogers,  of  the  Ninth  Arkansas)  being  some  500  yards  in  advance. 

I here  remained  until  about  3 p.  m.,  when,  from  the  heavy  firing  in  the 
direction  of  the  left,  it  was  evident  that  the  enemy  had  massed  his 
forces  and  was  throwing  them  on  the  left  wing  of  the  army.  About 
that  time  I was  informed  that  General  Bowen’s  division  had  been  moved 
still  farther  to  the  left,  and  I was  ordered  by  you  to  proceed  without 
delay  to  the  left  of  General  Bowen’s  division.  I placed  my  brigade  at 
once  in  motion  by  the  left  flank  and  at  the  double-quick.  My  command 
double-quicked  the  distance  (about  2 miles)  under  a scorching  sun, 
through  corn  and  rye  fields,  in  about  half  an  hour,  when  I arrived  about 
the  rear  of  the  right  wing  of  General  Bowen’s  division,  which  was  fall- 
ing back  in  disorder  before  an  overpowering  force  of  the  enemy.  I was 
ordered  by  General  Pemberton  to  hold  the  road  immediately  in  rear  of 
General  [S.  D.]  Lee’s  brigade,  at  a point  about  half  a mile  from  the 
negro  cabins. 

Across  this  road  our  men  were  hastening  in  wild  disorder  and  in  con- 
sternation before  a very  heavy  fire  of  the  enemy.  I immediately  entered 
the  road,  and  was  advancing  on  it  in  column  when  my  front  (the  left) 
was  brought  under  a most  galling  fire  from  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters, 
and  their  line,  some  200  yards  distant,  posted  in  a heavy  thicket  of  tim- 
ber and  undergrowth,  unexposed  to  view.  I found  that  the  enemy  held 
possession  of  the  road,  and  that  I must  retake  it  in  order  to  comply  with 
the  command  of  General  Pemberton,  ft  would  have  been  a wanton 


84 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

destruction  of  life  to  have  formed  a line  of  battle  with  my  brigade  in 
its  then  position,  marching  as  it  was  by  the  left  flank  on  the  road,  and 
a portion  of  which  had  already  changed  direction  to  the  left,  in  order  to 
enter  it,  under  the  heavy  fire  of  the  enemy  hidden  from  view,  exposed, 
too,  to  an  enfilading  fire  from  a battery  which  had  been  established  by 
the  enemy  on  a commanding  eminence  at  short  range,  and  at  the  same 
time  my  column  was  continually  brokeu  by  men  of  other  brigades,  who, 
driven  back,  were  rushing  pell-mell  from  the  scene  of  action  and  resist- 
ing all  attempts  made  to  rally  them. 

My  command  being  thus  fully  exposed  to  the  enemv,  I changed  direc- 
tion of  the  head  of  the  column  to  the  left,  about  150  yards  from  the  crest 
of  the  rise  in  the  road  occupied  by  the  enemy,  to  a covered  position,  and 
formed  the  brigade.  Two  of  my  strongest  regiments  were  detached  from 
the  rear  of  my  brigade  as  it  passed  the  cabins— one  by  order  of  General 
Pemberton,  the  other  by  order  of  General  Bowen.  The  strength  of  my 
brigade  at  this  critical  moment  was  thus  unceremoniously  and  materi- 
ally reduced,  this  being  done  without  my  knowledge,  and  without  any 
report  being  made  to  me  of  the  fact  by  the  generals  who  gave  the  orders. 
I waited  the  approach  of  the  enemy,  who  must  advance  through  an  open, 
clear  space.  The  enemy,  however,  halted  in  the  road  and  established  a 
battery.  To  have  charged  him  from  my  position,  with  my  brigade  re 
duced  in  strength  and  over  an  open  space  of  several  hundred  yards, 
would  have  cost  it  half  its  numbers.  I therefore  moved  the  brigade  by 
the  right  flank  to  a position  protected  by  timber  to  the  ground  occupied 
by  the  enemy,  with  the  view  of  moving  against  the  position  held  by  him 
in  the  road.  I had  not  completed  the  disposition  of  my  command  when 
I discovered  that  the  enemy  were  rapidly  turning  both  the  right  and  left 
flanks  of  the  position  I held,  as  well  as  that  occupied  by  him,  against 
which  I proposed  to  move.  In  all  probability  I might  have  taken  the 
position  at  a great  sacrifice,  but  it  would  be  untenable,  and  I would  have 
been  forced  to  have  given  it  up  almost  immediately,  besides  running  the 
risk  of  having  my  entire  brigade  .captured,  as  I was  entirely  without 
support,  my  strength  reduced  nearly  one- third  by  the  regiments  being 
detached,  and  as  all  the  troops  of  our  center  and  of  the  left  wing  were 
leaving  the  field  in  great  disorder.  I therefore  threw  my  brigade  back 
about  a quarter  of  mile  from  the  negro  cabins,  and  in  the  direction  of 
Edwards  Depot,  on  a commanding  position,  where  I joined  you  with 
General  Featherston’s  brigade. 

I was  ordered  to  move  my  brigade  into  position,  so  as  to  move  against 
the  enemy’s  right  and  pierce  his  line,  and  thus,  by  a vigorous  and  well- 
directed  attack,  force  him  to  abandon  the  field,  it  having  been  reported 
that  his  center  was  falling  back,  and  thus  retrieve  the  day.  I was  joined 
here  by  the  Twelfth  Louisiana  and  Thirty  fifth  Alabama  Regiments,  and 
moved  rapidly  forward,  and  was  forming  in  position,  when  I was  in- 
formed by  one  of  my  staff  officers  that  you  had  received  positive  orders 
to  withdraw  the  forces  from  the  field,  and  had  commenced  retiring.  I 
immediately  ordered  the  brigade  to  march  by  the  left  flank,  and  re- 
joined you  then  on  the  retreat  toward  Baker’s  Creek.  Being  informed 
that  a section  of  artillery,  with  a support  of  infantry,  had  been  de- 
tailed as  a rear  guard,  I moved  forward,  but  was  soon  informed  that  the 
enemy  was  pressing  on  my  rear  both  with  cavalry,  infantry,  and  artil- 
lery, and  that  one  piece  of  the  Pointe  Couple  Battery  had  been  aban- 
doned, as  the  horses  were  killed  by  the  sharpshooters,  so  as  to  render 
it  an  impossibility  to  remove  it.  This  battery  had  been  brought  from 
its  original  position  to  the  left,  and  ordered  by  Colonel  [W.  T.]  Withers, 
chief  of  artillery  of  department,  to  send  four  pieces  to  Vicksburg,  and 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS.  85 

follow  in  retreat  in  rear  of  the  brigade  with  the  remainder,  but  had  not 
as  yet  reported  to  me.  The  artillery  and  infantry  ordered  to  protect 
the  rear,  after  allowing  a portion  of  my  brigade  to  pass,  had,  for  some 
reason  unknown  to  me,  moved  forward,  and  thus  left  my  rear  exposed. 

I immediately  posted  the  Twelfth  Louisiana  Regiment,  with  a section 
of  artillery  from  the  Pointe  Couple  Battery,  in  line,  with  orders  to  repel 
the  advance  of  the  enemy,  and  made  dispositions  to  support  them.  The 
enemy  charged  forward,  but  were  met  by  the  fire  of  the  Twelfth  Lou- 
isiana and  the  artillery,  which  effectually  checked  the  ardor  of  his  pur- 
suit, and  caused  him  to  follow  our  immediate  rear  with  great  caution. 

I was  then  ordered  to  move  to  the  rear  of  General  Featherston’s  bri- 
gade, which  had  been  placed  in  position  to  meet  any  advance  of  the 
enemy,  and  form  in  his  rear,  to  support  Cowan’s  battery,  of  Withers’ 
artillery,  which  was  engaging  a battery  of  the  enemy  and  protecting  the 
retreat  of  Tilghman’s  brigade. 

General  Tilghman  having  gallantly  lost  his  life  in  directing  the  fire  of 
his  artillery,  I would  offer  my  tribute  of  respect  to  his  gallant  bearing, 
and  his  noble  devotion  and  untiring  energy  in  behalf  of  our  cause,  alike 
on  the  field  of  battle  and  in  the  private  circle. 

I formed  a line  in  rear  of  the  battery  on  a commanding  position  (here 
losing  several  wounded,  and  Captain  [W-  A.]  Isbell,  of  the  Twenty- 
seventh  Alabama  Regiment,  killed),  ordering  the  Twelfth  Louisiana 
Regiment  to  proceed  to  my  rear  and  form  at  right  angles  to  the  road, 
and  hold  it,  so  that  we  could  gain  the  ford,  now  about  a mile  distant. 

A message  was  brought  from  General  Bowen  that  he  had  been  forced 
to  abandon  his  position  at  the  ford,  as  the  enemy  were  flanking  him  and 
were  between  him  and  Edwards  Depot.  I was  ordered  to  proceed  to 
the  ford  and  support  General  Bowen  while  he  drew  off.  The  Twelfth 
Louisiana  Regiment,  which  had  been  ordered  to  form  in  my  rear,  as 
stated  above,  had  received  orders  from  General  Stevenson  to  move  for- 
ward to  the  ford  in  advance  of  my  brigade,  and,  as  I learned  several 
days  afterward,  had  already  crossed  the  creek  under  a heavy  fire  of  ar- 
tillery. From  the  firing  on  our  right  it  was  evident  that  the  enemy 
had  obtained  possession  of  the  bridge  across  the  creek  on  the  upper 
road,  and  was  endeavoring  to  reach  Edwards  Depot,  and  thus  cut  off 
our  retreat.  General  Bowen  had  retired,*  and,  when  near  the  ford,  it 
was  clearly  perceptible  that  the  enemy,  with  his  artillery,  was  raking 
the  same,  and  at  the  same  time  advancing  his  columns  in  that  direction. 
Finding  that  it  was  impossible  to  cross  the  creek  under  the  fire  of  the 
enemy  and  the  dispositions  of  his  infantry,  you  ordered  me  to  turn  my 
column  to  the  left,  and,  by  going  through  a plantation,  seek  a ford 
lower  down.  Sending  for  the  Twelfth  Louisiana  Regiment  to  rejoin  the 
brigade  immediately,  and  by  no  means  to  attempt  to  cross  the  ford,  as 
the  enemy  was  in  possession  thereof,  I turned  the  column  to  the  left, 
passed  through  the  plantation,  and  endeavored  to  find  the  ford,  but 
could  not.  It  was  then  determined  to  try  to  reach  a ford  still  lower 
down,  distant  2J  miles,  and  under  the  guidance  of  Dr.  Williamson, 
whom  I had  secured,  moved  forward.  To  his  knowledge  of  the  country 
and  the  plantation  roads  we  are  largely  indebted  for  our  safe  deliver- 
ance. 

As  the  enemy  were  pressing  us  in  front,  in  rear,  and  on  the  flank,  it 
became  necessary  to  move  with  great  caution,  and  only  over  neighbor- 
hood roads  and  paths  long  unused.  It  soon  became  evident  that  the 
artillery  could  not  travel  over  the  paths  which  necessity  forced  us  to 
take.  Some  of  the  pieces  were,  therefore,  abandoned  after  using  all  pos- 
sible means  of  saving  them  which  the  retreat,  nature  of  the  ground,  and 


86 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


the  presence  of  the  enemy  permitted.  They  were  abandoned,  however, 
only  after  rendering  them  useless  to  the  enemy. 

We  moved  until  near  the  ford  we  sought,  and  to  gain  which  we  had 
marched  10  or  12  miles  instead  of  2 or  3,  and  to  a point  where  we  had 
information  that  we  could  secure  a guide.  From  him  we  learned  that 
the  ford  was  impassable,  and  that  he  could  not  pilot  us  during  the 
darkness  of  the  night  to  the  fortifications  near  Big  Black  Bridge  without 
crossing  the  lines  of  the  enemy.  The  large  fires  on  our  right  evidenced 
that  the  Yankees  were  at  their  usual  work  of  arson  in  and  around  Ed- 
wards Depot. 

A consultation  was  called  by  you  and  the  facts  laid  before  us.  I 
expressed  the  opinion  that  to  reach  Vicksburg  we  must  cross  the  Big 
Black  River  at  some  of  the  lower  ferries,  undoubtedly  in  presence  of 
the  enemy,  and  to  reach  even  the  nearest  ferry  we  would  have  to  march 
during  the  entire  night,  and  if  we  crossed  in  safety  would  be  in  danger 
of  being  cut  off.  Our  men  were  somewhat  demoralized,  our  artillery 
abandoned,  the  troops  intensely  fatigued;  we  had  but  a few  rounds  of 
ammunition,  the  greater  part  of  which  would  be  ruined  by  swimming 
the  river,  as  we  had  no  means  to  build  a bridge  or  boat.  We  had  in- 
formation .that  the  enemy  was  crossing  the  river  at  several  of  the  lower 
ferries,  and  the  guide  had  declared  it  was  impossible  to  pilot  us  to  the 
fortifications  without  penetrating  the  lines  of  the  enemy ; hence  our 
only  feasible  way  of  escape  and  to  save  the  division  was  to  move  to  the 
rear  of  the  enemy  and  pass  on  his  flank  in  the  direction  of  the  Jackson 
and  New  Orleans  Railroad. 

By  neighborhood  roads  we  moved  during  the  night,  passing  the  flank 
of  the  enemy,  hourly  expecting  an  attack,  hearing  the  enemy  conversing 
as  we  passed  along,  and  crossing  ravines  and  creeks,  which  proved  the 
impossibility  of  moving  artillery,  and  about  3 a.  m.  Sunday  morning 
reached  Dillon’s,  on  the  road  from  Grand  Gulf  to  Raymond,  and  but  a 
few  miles  distant  from  the  battle  field.  We  thence  marched  to  Crystal 
Springs,  on  the  Jackson  and  New  Orleans  Railroad,  near  which  we 
camped  on  Sunday  night. 

We  had  marched  steadily  for  twenty-four  hours,  a distance  of  40  miles, 
stopping  but  short  intervals  to  rest,  and  without  provisions.  The  men 
were  so  exhausted  that  they  fell  as  they  came  into  camp,  and  nature 
sternly  demanded  rest  and  sleep. 

On  Monday  we  moved  toward  Pearl  River,  and  thence  continued  the 
march  to  Jackson,  which  we  reached  on  Wednesday,  May  20.  The  troops 
of  this  brigade  bore  the  march  with  great  fortitude,  making  little,  if 
any,  complaint. 

My  entire  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  during  the  engagement  of  Sat- 
urday was  11  killed  and  49  wounded.  Among  the  former  were  Capt. 
W.  A.  Isbell,  Company  G,and  Lieut. T.S. Taylor,  of  Company  1,  Twenty- 
seventh  Alabama  Regiment,,  and  Lieut.  George  C.  Hubbard,  acting  as 
first  lieutenant  of  Company  F,  Thirty-fifth  Alabama  Regiment.  The 
latter  officer,  being  on  a visit  to  the  regiment,  was  assigned  temporarily 
to  duty  by  request  of  the  captain.  These  officers  are  worthy  all  com- 
mendation as  such,  and  their  loss  is  felt. 

Among  the  wounded  was  Col.  A.  Baker,  commanding  Fifty-fourth 
Alabama  Regiment,  who  was  wounded  early  in  the  engagement  near 
the  negro  cabins. 

I would  call  attention  to  the  accompanying  report  of  Colonel  Scott, 
commanding  Twelfth  Louisiana  Regiment;  of  Colonel  [Edward]  Good- 
win, commanding  Thirty-fifth  Alabama  Regiment;  and  of  Captain 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS. 


87 


[Alcide]  Bouancbaud,  commanding  Pointe  Coupee  Artillery.*  These 
were  detached  from  my  command  during  the  greater  portion  of  the 
engagement.  These  officers  sustained  the  high  reputation  they  have 
won  on  other  fields.  For  particular  mention  of  officers  under  their  com- 
mands I refer  to  the  reports. 

The  other  regiments  were  directly  under  my  immediate  observation 
during  the  whole  day,  and  I was  more  than  gratified  at  the  gallant  bear- 
ing of  the  commanding  officers,  as  well  as  that  of  the  other  field  and 
company  officers.  To  say  that  I am  proud  to  command  the  brigade 
evinces  but  slightly  the  high  regard  and  estimation  I have  for  the  troops. 
Their  quickness  of  motion,  their  ardor,  powers  of  endurance,  and  steadi- 
ness exhibited  during  the  engagement  of  Saturday  and  on  the  retreat 
are  worthy  of  mention. 

In  conclusion,  I would  mention  in  a grateful  manner  the  obligations 
I am  under  to  the  members  of  my  staff  for  their  efficiency  and  prompt- 
ness in  carrying  out  my  orders. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  BUFORD, 

Brigadier-  General , 

Major-General  Loring,  Commanding  Division. 


No.  26. 

Report  of  Col.  Edward  Goodwin , Thirty -fifth  Alabama  Infantry. 

Camp  near  Jackson,  Miss.,  May  28,  1863. 

Captain  : In  accordance  with  an  order  from  brigade  headquarters,  I 
most  respectfully  beg  leave  to  submit  the  following  as  a report  of  the 
operations  of  the  Thirty-fifth  Regiment  Alabama  Volunteers  on  the  night 
of  May  15;  also  on  May  16: 

At  deep  dusk  on  the  evening  of  the  15th  instant,  I received  an  order 
directly  from  General  Buford  in  person  to  report  with  my  command  to 
the  headquarters  of  Major-General  Loring,  which  were  established  about 
1 mile  in  advance  of  the  division,  on  the  upper  Edwards  Depot  and 
Raymond  road.  General  Loring  ordered  me  to  move  the  regiment  abon  t 
1 mile  in  advance  of  his  quarters,  and  to  picket  the  road  at  the  point 
which  his  engineer  should  select.  On  reaching  this  point,  I detailed 
Company  F to  picket  several  hundred  yards  in  advance  of  th#  regi- 
ment, and  from  this  place  I threw  out  vedettes,  giving  to  each  the  in- 
structions I had  received  from  the  generals.  The  Twenty-second  Mis- 
sissippi Regiment,  Lieutenant-Colonel  [H.  J.]  Reid  commanding,  was 
sent  out  to  support  me.  During  the  night  an  occasional  gun  was  fired 
by  the  cavalry  pickets  of  each  army. 

In  the  morning  of  May  16,  the  skirmishing  between  our  cavalry 
pickets  and  that  of  the  enemy  became  very  brisk.  About  7 o’clock  I 
rode  to  the  front,  both  with  a view  to  confer  with  Colonel  [Wirt]  Adams, 
and,  if  possible,  to  ascertain  the  strength  of  the  foe.  The  Federal  cav- 
alry were  drawn  up  in  an  open  field,  at  intervals  of  40  or  50  yards,  and 
were  slowly  advancing,  driving  in  our  vedettes.  Behind  this  cavalry 
I discovered  a long  battle-line  of  infantry,  and  I also  discovered  that 
they  were  moving  their  skirmishers  to  the  right.  I hastened  back  to 
my  regiment,  and  prepared  to  contest  every  inch  of  ground  with  them 
back  to  our  army.  I had  scarcely  formed  my  line  of  battle  before  the 
enemy  began  to  shell  me  from  a battery  which  he  had  planted  a short 


Bouanchaud’s  report  not  found. 


88  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  xxXVI. 

distance  to  my  right.  Notwithstanding  the  shell  hurst  over  and  about 
my  command  in  every  direction,  yet  they  stood  firm,  ready  to  meet 
the  advancing  foe.  From  this  shelling  the  Twenty-second  Mississippi 
had  2 men  very  severely  wounded.  I threw  out  a company  of  skir- 
mishers (Company  B),  who  soon  engaged  the  Federal  sharpshooters. 
About  8.30  o’clock  I received  an  order  from  General  Boring  to  fall  back 
in  good  order  to  the  main  army.  I then  fell  back  till  I came  to  Colonel 
Beid’s  regiment.  Being  the  senior  officer,  I ordered  Colonel  Beid  to 
fall  back  100  yards  and  reform  his  line  of  battle.  I reformed  upon  the 
grouud  he  lelt.  Company  B,  Thirty  filth  Alabama  Begiment,  and  a 
company  from  the  Twenty-second*  which  I had  ordered  to  be  sent  to 
the  support  of  my  company,  were  engaging  the  enemy  vigorously. 
Knowing  that  they  were  trying  to  outflank  me,  T kept  vedettes  on  my 
flank.  I thus  continued  my  retreat  slowly  until  I received  a second 
order  from  General  Lormg  to  bring  the  regiments  in  immediately.  I 
then  promptly  rejoined  the  brigade. 

On  being  moved  from  the  right  to  the  left  of  our  general  line  of  battle 
in  the  afternoon,  as  the  brigade  was  passing  near  the  negro  cabins,  Gen- 
eral Bowen  rode  up  to  me,  inquiring  of  me  what  regiment  that  was.  I 
told  him,  whereupon  he  ordered  me  to  follow  him.  Placing  me  under 
the  guidance  of  an  aide,  who  conducted  me  directly  to  the  front  100 
yards,  I was  ordered  to  move  straight  forward  until  I met  the  foe. 
Pausing  long  enough  to  fix  bayonets,  I moved  in  the  direction  indicated 
by  General  Bowen’s  aide  until  I came  up  with  General  [M.  E.]  Green, 
who  ordered  me  to  move  to  the  right  to  the  support  of  the  First  Mis- 
souri Battery,  which  was  in  great  danger.  This  I did  promptly,  form- 
ing in  the  rear  of  the  battery.  The  battery  men,  being  reassured  by 
the  appearance  of  the  regiment,  rushed  with  enthusiasm  to  their  guns, 
and  for  an  hour  worked  them  with  a celerity  and  a daring  that  I believe 
never  has  been  surpassed  during  this  war.  The  enemy  poured  volley 
after  volley  of  shot,  shell,  grape,  and  canister  upon  us,  but  owing  to  a 
fortunate  position  I lost  only  1 man  (Lieut.  George  C.  Hubbard)^  who, 
being  on  a visit  to  the  regiment,  was  assigned  to  temporary  duty  as 
first  lieutenant  in  Company  F,  by  request  of  the  captain.  The  enemy 
being  driven  off,  the  battery  retired  from  the  field,  having  exhausted 
its  ammunition.  Just  as  the  battery  drove  off,  the  enemy  had  moved 
around  to  the  left,  and  were  giving  me  an  enfilading  fife.  I therefore 
changed  my  front  to  meet  him,  in  the  mean  time  sending  a courier  to 
General  Green  for  further  orders. 

At  this  time  our  friends  gave  way  and  came  rushing  to  the  rear  panic- 
stricken.  I rushed  to  the  front,  and  ordered  them  to  halt,  but  they 
heeded  neither  my  orders  nor  those  of  their  commanders.  I brought 
my  regiment  to  the  charge  bayonets,  but  even  this  could  not  check 
them  in  their  flight.  The  colors  of  three  regiments  passed  through 
the  Thirty-fifth.  Both  my  officers  and  my  men,  undismayed,  united 
with  me  in  trying  to  cause  them  to  rally.  ' We  collared  them,  begged 
them,  and  abused  them  in  vain.  At  length  I received  orders  from 
General  Green  to  follow  the  battery.  I accordingly  moved  out  in  rear 
of  the  Twelfth  Louisiana,  and  at  my  urgent  solicitation  was  permitted 
to  rejoin  the  brigade. 

Hoping  this  report  may  prove  satisfactory  to  the  general,  I am,  verv 
respectfully, 

EDWABD  GOODWIN, 

Colonel  Thirty -fifth  Regiment  Alabama  Volunteers. 

Capt.  Thomas  M.  Crowder, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Chap.  XXXVI  ] BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS.  89 

No.  27. 

Report  of  Col.  Thomas  M.  Scott , Twelfth  Louisiana  Infantry. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  May  28,  1863. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  16th  instant,  about 
1 p.  in.,  I was  detached  from  your  command,  by  order  of  Lieutenant- 
General  Pemberton,  to  go  to  the  right  of  General  Green’s  brigade  (then 
engaged)  and  attack  a Federal  force  then  attempting  to  turn  General 
Green’s  right  flank.  Upon  arriving  on  the  ground,  I found  General 
Green’s  brigade  (or  at  least  the  right  of  it)  retiring  from  the  field  in  great 
confusion.  I immediately  formed  my  line  at  right  angles  to  the  liue 
occupied  by  General  Green’s  forces,  and  ordered  my  men  forward.  We 
were  soon  greeted  with  a heavy  fire,  which  was  returned  with  spirit.  1 
ordered  my  men  to  fire,  advancing,  which  they  did  with  great  steadiness 
and  precision.  I advanced  to  within  40  or  50  yards  of  a line  of  two 
regiments,  when  they  retreated  and  formed  on  another  line  of  three 
regiments  posted  in  a strong  position  on  the  crest  of  the  hill.  They  all 
soon  opened  a heavy  fire  on  me,  when,  finding  that  the  contest  was  too 
unequal,  1 determined  to  try  cold  steel.  I caused  the  firing  to  cease, 
bayonets  to  be  fixed,  and  ordered  my  men  to  make  a steady  advance  in 
line  without  yelling,  that  they  might  hear  my  commands;  and  never 
was  an  order  more  implicitly  obeyed.  We  charged  the  entire  brigade 
and  caused  them  to  flee  in  great  confusion.  I held  the  ground  until 
ordered  by  you  to  join  the  brigade. 

I here  lost  5 killed  and  34  wounded. 

I did  not  consider  it  prudent  to  pursue  the  enemy,  as  a heavy  line 
was  advancing  on  my  left  flank — the  same  force  that  General  Green  had 
engaged.  The  sharpshooters  had  commenced  firing  on  me  from  the  left 
flank,  when  I changed  front  to  rear  on  my  first  company,  intending  to 
fight  the  enemy  if  pursued.  They  did  not  move  on  me  at  all;  so  1 joined 
your  brigade  without  any  further  engagement,  bringing  my  wounded  to 
a field  hospital  which  afterwards  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

You  allowed  me  to  rest  my  men  some  fifteen  or  twenty  minutes,  after 
which  I moved  at  the  head  of  the  brigade  in  the  direction  of  Edwards 
Depot.  We  had  not  proceeded  more  than  three-fourths  of  a mile  when 
I heard  firing  in  the  rear.  You  ordered  me  to  form  a line  at  right  angles 
to  the  road,  in  an  excellent  position,  and  the  remainder  of  the  brigade 
retired  to  the  rear  of  my  line.  They  were  hotly  pressed  by  a force  of 
the  enemy’s  cavalry,  preceded  by  dismounted  skirmishers.  I had  my 
men  concealed  behind  the  crest  of  the  hill,  and  allowed  them  to  come 
within  range,  when  I fired  by  rank  upon  them  with  great  effect,  causing 
them  to  retire  precipitately. 

1 was  now  ordered  by  you  to  proceed  to  the  main  road  leading  to  Ed- 
wards Depot,  and  take  a good  position,  and  hold  it  until  you  arrived 
with  the  brigade.  I selected,  but  did  not  occupy,  the  position,  as  Major- 
General  Stevenson  ordered  me  to  push  on  and  cross  Baker’s  Greek,  some 
half  a mile  west  of  me.  Upon  arriving  with  my  command  at  the  creek 
I found  General  Stevenson,  who  told  me  that  it  was  impossible  to  reach 
Edwards  Depot,  as  it  was  in  possession  of  the  enemy,  and  that  my  com- 
mand would  have  to  pass  under  a heavy  fire  from  the  enemy’s  batteries, 
then  shelling  us,  but  over-shooting,  and  ordered  me  to  join  my  brigade. 
1 had  proceeded  but  a few  yards  when  he  called  to  me  to  push  through, 
as  he  had  just  heard  that  the  enemy  had  not  possession  of  Edwards 
Depot.  I immediately  started  for  that  point,  crossed  Baker’s  Greek, 
and  went  half  a mile  in  good  range  and  under  heavy  fire  of  at  least  six 


90 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX  VI. 


pieces  of  the  enemy’s  artillery ; but  they  over-shot  us  invariably,  not 
one  shot  taking  effect.  After  going  from  three-fourths  to  1 mile  west  of 
Baker’s  Creek,  I was  overtaken  by  a courier  from  you  ordering  me  to 
join  the  brigade  immediately.  I retraced  my  steps  under  a fire  of  sev- 
eral pieces  of  artillery.  The  enemy  also  opened  a battery  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Edwards  Depot,  and  were  moving  a heavy  column  of  infantry 
toward  the  bridge.  The  skirmishers  commenced  firing  upon  our  strag- 
glers immediately  in  the  rear  of  my  regiment.  This  was  alter  sunset. 
My  regiment  was  the  last  command  to  cross  Baker’s  Creek,  and  no  other 
could  ha  ve  crossed  without  heavy  fighting  under  disadvantages,  as  the 
enemy  held  the  hills  commanding  the  crossing,  with  a heavy  force  within 
supporting  distance  between  Edwards  Depot  and  Baker’s  Creek.  I 
found  your  brigade  moving  to  the  south.  I joined  it  some  three-fourths 
of  a mile  from  the  creek.  With  its  future  movements  you  are  familiar. 

I cannot  close,  general,  without  paying  a just  tribute  to  the  gallantry 
and  unflinching  courage  of  my  officers  and  men.  Where  all  did  well 
special  attention  was  only  attracted  by  those  holding  conspicuous  posi- 
tions. Among  those  deserving  honorable  mention  are  Lieut.  Col.  Noel 
L.  Nelson,  Maj.  Thomas  C.  Standifer,  Sergt.  Maj.  H.  Brunner,  and  Color- 
Sergt.  Eli  Cole. 

I am,  sir,  tery  respectfully, 

THOS.  M.  SCOTT, 

Colonel  Twelfth  Louisiana  Regiment . 

Brigadier-General  Buford, 

Commanding  Brigade. 


No.  28. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Winfield  8.  Feather ston,  C.  8.  Army , commanding 

Third  Brigade. 

Headquarters  Featherston’s  Brigade, 

May  28,  1863. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  the  order  of  Major-General  Loring  of  this  date, 
I beg  leave  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  operations  of  my  bri- 
gade on  Baker’s  Creek,  near  Edwards  Depot,  on  the  15th  and  16th  of 
this  month : 

On  Friday,  the  15th,  about  3 o’clock  in  the  morning,  the  troops  on 
the  south  side  of  Big  Black  Biver,  encamped  around  Edwards  Depot, 
were  marched  in  the  direction  of  Clinton,  on  the  road  leading  from  Ed- 
wards Depot  to  Clinton.  Major-General  Boring’s  division  was  in  front, 
forming  the  right  wing  of  the  army.  My  brigade  formed  a part  of  this 
division.  We  were  moved  some  4 miles  on  this  road  in  the  direction 
of  Clinton,  crossing  Baker’s  Creek  on  a bridge  and  then  turning  directly 
to  the  right  on  a cross-road  leading  to  the  main  thoroughfare  from  Ed- 
wards Depot  to  Ray  mond.  After  reaching  the  main  road  from  Edwards 
Depot  to  Raymond,  Boring’s  division  was  halted  for  the  night  and  biv- 
ouacked on  the  sides  of  the  road.  One  regiment  and  five  companies 
from  a second  were  placed  on  picket  duty  from  my  brigade  during  the 
night.  The  divisions  of  Generals  Stevenson  and  Bowen  were  in  the 
rear  of  General  Boring’s,  and  bivouacked  for  the  night,  one  on  the  Clin- 
ton and  Edwards  Depot  road,  and  the  other  between  that  and  the  Ray- 
mond and  Edwards  Depot  road.  The  distance  between  these  roads 
where  our  troops  encamped  was  about  3 miles. 


Chap.  XXXYI] 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS. 


91 


About  8 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  10th,  one  of  the  enemy’s  bat- 
teries opened  fire  on  our  regiments  on  picket  duty.  This  battery  was 
planted  on  the  Raymond  road,  about  2 miles  from  where  our  troops 
were  bivouacked,  in  the  direction  of  Raymond.  My  brigade  was  im- 
mediately put  in  line  of  battle  on  the  right  of  the  Raymond  road,  and 
General  Buford’s  brigade  on  the  left.  This  was  done  in  obedience  to 
an  order  from  General  Boring.  General  Pemberton  rode  up  while  the 
line  of  battle  was  forming  and  approved  the  movement.  Our  batteries 
were  placed  in  position  on  an  eminence  near  the  road,  just  in  front  of 
the  infantry.  At  this  time  General  Loriug  rode  up  from  the  front,  and 
ordered  the  line  of  battle  to  be  changed  to  a high  hill  or  continuous 
ridge  some  600  yards  in  rear  of  our  line  as  then  established.  Upon 
this  ridge  or  hill  Boring’s  division  was  placed  in  line  of  battle — Tilgh- 
man’s  brigade  on  the  right  of  the  division  and  on  the  right  of  the  Ray- 
mond road;  my  brigade  on  the  left  of  Tilghman’s  and  on  the  right 
of  the  Raymond  road ; Buford’s  brigade  on  the  left  of  mine  and 
on  the  left  of  the  Raymond  road.  General  Buford’s  left  wing  con- 
nected with  General  Bowen’s  right,  in  the  direction  of  the  Clinton  road. 
Very  soon  after  this  line  was  formed  (about  11  o’clock  in  the  forenoon), 
the  enemy  made  their  appearance  in  our  front,  sending  forward  a line 
of  skirmishers  on  foot  as  well  as  one  on  horseback.  Tfcfbse  skirmishers 
were  met  by  our  line  of  skirmishers  in  our  front,  and  very  soon  fell  back 
to  the  woods  from  which  they  emerged.  General  Pe m berton  was  present 
when  this  line  of  battle  was  formed,  and  then  went  to  the  center  or  left 
of  the  line.  In  this  position  our  division  remained  until  about  12  o’clock, 
when  an  order  came  from  General  Pemberton,  directing  General  Buford 
to  be  moved  farther  to  the  left,  in  the  direction  of  the  Clinton  road, 
that  he  might  take  the  position  of  General  Bowen’s  division,  which  had 
been  ordered  to  the  support  of  General  Stevenson’s  division,  on  the 
Clinton  road.  I was  ordered  to  move  my  brigade  to  the  left  at  the  same 
time,  and  take  the  position  vacated  by  General  Buford’s  brigade.  This 
order  was  promptly  obeyed  by  General  Buford  arid  myself.  My  bri- 
gade remained  in  this  position  until  2 or  3 o’clock  in  the  evening,  within 
hearing  of  the  guns  on  our  left,  where  the  battle  was  pr ogressing.  Up 
to  this  time  no  other  demonstration  had  been  made  by  the  enemy  on 
the  Raymond  road  except  the  one  already  mentioned. 

About  2 or  3 o’clock  in  the  evening  I received  an  order  from  General 
Pemberton,  through  General  Boring,  to  move  my  brigade  to  the  left,  to 
the  Clinton  road,  to  the  support  of  Generals  Bowen  and  Stevenson,  then 
engaging  the  enemy  at  that  place.  This  order  was  promptly  obeyed ; 
General  Boring  and  myself  rode  at  the  head  of  the  column.  We  had  a 
guide,  who  carried  us  the  nearest  way.  We  traveled  through  the  woods 
and  over  very  rough  ground  a distance  of  about  2 miles  before  reach 
ing  the  scene  of  conflict.  The  march  was  as  rapid  as  possible  under 
the  circumstances;  the  troops  moved  at  a double-quick  the  most  of  the 
way.  Upon  arriving  on  the  field,  we  found  a large  number  of  strag- 
glers going  to  the  rear  in  great  confusion.  General  Buford’s  brigade 
had  arrived  on  the  field  some  thirty  minutes  in  advance  of  mine.  My 
brigade  was  halted  near  the  Clinton  road,  and  near  where  General 
Buford  had  formed  a line  of  battle.  Here  we  found  no  one  to  give  us 
directions  or  to  tell  us  what  to  do.  Geueral  Pemberton  was  not  there, 
and  no  one  present  could  tell  us  where  he  was.  Neither  of  the  major- 
generals  who  had  been  conducting  the  battle  was  present  on  this  part 
of  the  line.  General  S.  D.  Bee  came  up  with  a part  of  his  brigade,  and 
attached  them  to  the  left  of  mine.  The  troops  on  this  part  of  the  line 
were  then  all  placed  in  line,  and  ordered  by  General  Boring  to  move 


92 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

on  the  enemy  in  front.  After  this  line  was  formed,  and  before  the  ad- 
vance was  made,  an  order  came  from  General  Pemberton  to  General 
Loring,  as  I learned  from  the  latter,  informing  him  that  he  had  ordered 
his  troops  to  fall  back  to  Edwards  Depot,  and  directing  General  Lor- 
ing  to  protect  his  retreat  with  his  division.  General  Lee  was  ordered 
to  move  with  his  brigade  as  rapidly  as  practicable  to  the  ford  on  Baker’s 
Creek,  where  the  road  from  Baymond  to  the  depot  crosses  it.  I was 
ordered  soon  after  to  place  my  brigade  in  line  of  battle,  so  as  to  hold 
the  enemy  in  check,  and  to  hold  my  position  until  our  troops  had  all 
passed  me  in  the  direction  of  the  depot.  This  order  was  obeyed;  the 
regiments  were  placed  in  line  so  as  to  cover  the  different  avenues  of 
approach.  Three  pieces  of  artillery  were  held  in  the  rear,  and  kept 
playing  upon  the  enemy,  who  were  cautiously  advancing  in  our  rear, 
as  well  as  on  our  right  and  left  flanks.  As  our  army  advanced  in  front, 
my  brigade,  with  the  artillery,  was  moved  to  the  front  and  placed  in 
new  positions.  This  was  done  twice.  In  our  last  position  the  enemy 
advanced  on  our  rear,  as  well  as  on  the  right  and  left  flanks,  and  a brisk 
skirmish  ensued,  in  which  they  were  held  completely  in  check  until  the 
brigade  and  artillery  were  withdrawn  slowly  and  in  good  order. 

During  this  skirmish,  and,  in  fact,  the  entire  day,  my  brigade  be- 
haved well.  All  orders  were  promptly  obeyed,  and  an"  eagerness  to 
meet  the  enemy  was  manifested  during  the'  engagement  by  the  whole 
command.  The  three  pieces  of  artillery  used  by  me  to  protect  the  re- 
treat belonged  to  Captain  [Alcide]  Bouanchaud’s  battery.  They  were 
well  served ; both  skill  and  courage  were  shown  by  the  officers  and  men 
attached  to  these  guns. 

My  last  position  on  the  field  was  not  abandoned  until  I was  ordered 
by  General  Loring  to  do  so,  and  move  my  command  toward  the  depot 
as  rapidly  as  practicable.  I moved  my  command  to  the  Baymond  road, 
and  turned  toward  the  ford  on  Baker’s  Creek,  but  found  on  going  some 
half  mile  in  that  direction  that  the  head  of  our  column  (Loring’s  divis- 
ion) had  turned  to  the  left,  leaving  the  main  road,  and  were  then  pass- 
ing southeast  through  an  open  field  in  a direction  down  Baker’s  Creek. 
I followed  the  column  with  my  brigade.  General  Buford’s  brigade  was 
in  front.  I rode  to  the  head  of  the  column,  and  learned  from  General 
Loring  that  the  enemy  were  in  possession  of  the  ford  on  Baker’s  Creek, 
where  we  expected  to  cross  on  the  Baymond  road.  This  occurred  about 
sunset  or  perhaps  a little  later.  I learned  from  General  Loring  that  he 
had  procured  the  services  of  Dr.  Williamson  as  a guide,  and  intended 
to  find  a crossing  somewhere  below  on  Baker  Creek,  and  then  endeavor 
to  cross  Big  Black  at  the  railroad  bridge,  or  some  place  south  of  that, 
and  join  the  main  body  of  our  troops  on  the  other  side.  Dr.  Williamson 
was  an  old  citizen  of  the  country,  living  at  Edwards  Depot,  and  knew 
well  the  character  of  the  country  and  the  fords  and  ferries  on  Big  Black 
and  Baker’s  Creek.  He  was  intelligent  and  reliable.  As  our  column 
moved  off  from  the  Baymond  road  to  the  southeast,  we  discovered  a 
little  after  sunset  a large  fire  at  the  depot,  which  was  supposed  to  be 
the  depot  buildings  fired  by  the  enemy.  Dr.  Williamson  led  the  column 
by  a blind  path  through  a very  rough  country  down  Baker’s  Creek  to 
Mr.  Harvey’s,  near  the  ford,  on  the  road  leading  from  Edwards  Depot 
to  Auburn.  Here  we  halted,  and  consulted  with  Mr.  Harvey  as  to  the 
propriety  of  crossing  Baker’s  Creek  at  this  ford.  Mr.  Harvey  informed 
General  Loring  that  sixty  regiments  had  passed  down  the  creek  that 
day  or  the  day  before.  Harvey  was  unwilling  to  pilot  our  column  from 
Baker’s  Creek  to  Big  Black.  He  professed  not  to  be  able  to  do  so.  Dr. 
Williamson  was  unable  to  pilot  us  beyond  this  point,  and  thought  it 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS.  93 

impossible  for  us  to  get  through  the  swamp  on  this  side  of  Big  Black 
so  as  to  strike  the  stream  anywhere  below  the  bridge,  unless  we  went 
as  low  down  as  Baldwin’s  Ferry.  At  this  ferry  we  had  no  means  of 
crossing  the  stream  provided  we  could  reach  it  without  encountering  a 
heavy  column  of  the  enemy.  Upon  consulting  with  General  Buford  and 
myself,  General  Loring  determined  to  take  the  road  to  Crystal  Springs 
and  thence  to  Jackson  as  the  safest  and  surest.  Such  seemed  to  be  the 
opinion  of  all  that  were  called  into  the  consultation.  The  column  was 
then  moved  forward  all  night  on  Saturday  and  all  day  on  Sunday, 

Sunday  night  it  was  halted  near  Crystal  Springs  and  rested  until  10 
o’clock  on  Monday,  when  the  march  was  continued  by  easy  advances  to 
this  place.  The  march  from  the  battle-field  to  Crystal  Springs  running 
through  the  entire  night  and  day  was  a very  hard  and  laborious  one, 
but  borne  by  the  troops  with  fortitude  and  determination.  I was  then 
and  am  now  of  the  opinion  that— this  division  having  been  thrown  in 
the  rear  and  held  there  protecting  the  retreat  until  the  enemy  had 
gained  possession  of  the  ford  on  the  Raymond  road  and  of  the  bridge 
on  the  Clinton  road — the  only  direction  in  which  we  could  move  so  as 
to  save  the  division,  or  at  least  to  prevent  great  loss,  was  the  road  taken 
to  Crystal  Springs.  To  have  attempted  to  march  into  our  lines  at  Big 
Black  without  a guide,  and  without  the  means  of  crossing  Big  Black 
when  we  reached  it,  would  have  been  very  hazardous. 

List  of  casualties  in  Featherstou’s  brigade  in  the  engagement  on 
Baker’s  Creek  on  the  16th  instant : John  McCrossen,  Company  D, 
Twenty-second  Mississippi  Regiment,  mortally  wounded  $ John  Berry, 
Company  F,  Twenty-second  Mississippi  Regiment,  slightly  wounded ; 
Captain  [R.  H.]  Crozier,  Thirty-third  Mississippi  Regiment,  captured 
and  paroled. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  FEATHERSTON, 

Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 

Maj.  George  MoKnigiit, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  29. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Garter  L.  Stevenson,  G.  8,  m Army,  commanding 

Division. 

Headquarters  Stevenson’s  Division, 

Demopolis , Ala.,  July  29,  1863. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  op- 
erations of  my  division  from  its  advance  from  Vicksburg  to  the  capitu 
lation  of  the  city.  It  has  been  delayed  to  this  time  by  the  constant 
occupation  of  myself  and  my  subordinate  commanders  during  the  siege 
of  Vicksburg  and  by  the  march  which  followed  its  capitulation. 

At  about  5 p.  m.,  on  May  15,  my  division,  being  the  rear  of  the  army, 
left  its  position  in  line  of  battle  near  Edwards  Depot,  with  the  view  of 
cutting  the  enemy’s  line  of  communication  with  his  depot  of  supplies 
and  forcing  him  to  give  us  battle  on  our  own  ground.  We  reached  the 
head  of  the  column  in  bivouac  on  the  Raymond  road  at  3 o’clock,  and 
there  halted  for  the  night. 

At  sunrise  I was  summoned  to  appear  at  headquarters,  where  I was 
informed  by  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  that  he  had  received 


94 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


instructions  from  General  Johnston  to  join  him  near  Canton  as  soon  as 
possible,  and  that  he  had  decided  to  move  at  once,  in  pursuance  thereto, 
toward  Brownsville,  on  the  north  of  the  railroad,  by  the  route  as  far  as 
the  railroad  by  which  we  had  advanced  the  previous  night.  He  directed 
me  to  move  the  trains  as  rapidly  as  possible  to  a point  at  least  3 miles 
beyond  the  Jackson  road,  and  there  halt  them,  arranged  to  the  light 
and  left  of  the  road  in  such  a manner  as  would  afford  an  uninterrupted 
passage  to  the  infantry  and  artillery.  I immediately  caused  the  trains 
to  be  turned,  and,  in  charge  of  my  Fourth  Brigade  (Colonel  [A.  W.] 
Reynolds),  to  be  moved  rapidly  to  the  rear,  in  accordance  with  the 
instructions  I had  received.  Colonel  Reynolds  was  directed  to  place 
one  regiment  in  front  of  the  train,  and  to  form  the  remainder  of  his 
brigade  in  line  of  battle,  covering  the  Clinton  and  Raymond  roads,  there 
to  remain  until  relieved  by  the  next  brigade  in  his  rear.  It  was  in- 
tended to  hold  these  roads  by  the  brigades  as  they  successively  arrived 
until  the  passage  of  the  entire  army  could  be  effected.  The  success  ol 
this  movement  depending  mainly  on  the  speedy  relief  of  the  road  from 
the  obstruction  caused  by  the  presence  of  the  train,  X dispatched  two 
of  my  staff  officers  (Majors  [Howell]  Webb  and  [J.  W.]  Anderson)  to 
superintend  the  operations  of  those  in  charge  of  the  train.  About  9.30 
a.  m.  the  latter  reported  that  the  road  was  open,  the-  trains  having  been 
placed  as  ordered,  and  free  for  the  passage  of  the  troops.  This  fact  1 
immediately  communicated  to  the  lieutenant-general  commanding. 

About  9 a.  m.,  Lee  relieved  Reynolds  on  the  Raymond  and  Clinton 
roads,  and  in  a very  short  time  his  skirmishers  were  engaged  by  those 
of  the  enemy.  A brisk  skirmish  of  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  de- 
veloped our  position  to  the  enemy,  who  at  once  changed  his  direction 
by  the  right  flank,  with  the  view  of  turning  our  left.  My  three  brigades 
(the  fourth,  Colonel  Reynolds,  having  moved  off  with  the  train)  were 
immediately  drawn  up  in  order  of  battle,  Barton  on  the  right,  Cumming 
in  the  center,  and  Lee  on  the  left,  as  previously* stated.  The  line  of  the 
march  was  a cross  road  from  the  Clinton  to  the  Raymond  road,  inter 
secting  the  former  nearly  at  right  angles  (see  diagram*).  It  was  at  this 
fork  that  my  left  rested.  The  enemy,  in  columns  of  divisions,  moved 
steadily  around  our  left,  forcing  it  to  change  direction  to  correspond, 
and  their  movement  was  so  rapid  as  to  keep  my  line  (a  single  one)  in 
constant  motion  by  the  left  flank.  Of  this  fact  I informed  the  lieuten 
ant-general  commanding,  and  from  time  to  time  every  apparent  increase 
of  force  or  additional  movements  by  the  enemy  was  promptly  reported. 
Finding  that  they  were  about  to  concentrate  on  the  left  with  the  larger 
part  of  their  force,  still  moving  a column  to  the  flank,  as  I had  no  re 
serve,  I moved  General  Barton  (my  right  brigade)  by  the  rear  to  the 
extreme  felt.  At  the  time  this  order  was  given  the  lieutenant-general 
commanding  was  notified  of  the  fact,  and  was  informed  that  the  enemy 
had  massed  a large  force  on  the  left,  which  would  doubtless  be  the  main 
point  of  attack.  My  line  had  now  been  moved  to  the  left,  until  two  regi- 
ments of  the  center,  now  the  right  (the  Fifty-sixth  Georgia,  Colonel  [E.  P.j 
Watkins,  and  the  Fifty-seventh  Georgia,  Colonel  [William]  Barkuloo). 
occupied  the  Raymond  and  Clinton  roads,  with  an  interval  of  300  yards 
between  them  and  the  remainder  of  their  brigades.  This  separation  was 
necessary  to  protect  the  right  and  rear  of  the  new  line,  now  threatened 
by  these  roads.  This  new  line,  upon  which  the  attack  was  made,  was 
formed  as  follows;  The  right  rested  at  the  angle  of  the  original  line,  com- 
posed of  three  regiments  (the  Thirty-sixth  Georgia,  Colonel  [Jesse  A.] 


Not  found. 


Chai\  XXXVI.] 


95 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS. 

Glenn 5 the  Thirty-fourth  Georgia,  Colonel  [J.  A.  W.]  Johnson,  and  the 
Thirty-ninth  Georgia,  Colonel  [J.  T.]  McConnell),  of  Cumming’s  brigade. 
Lee’s  brigade  (the  Twentieth  Alabama,  Colonel  [Isham  W.]  Garrott; 
the  Twenty-third  Alabama,  Colonel  [F.  K.J  Beck;  the  Thirtieth  Ala- 
bama, Colonel  [Charles  M.]  Shelley;  the  Thirty-first  Alabama,  Lieuten 
ant-Colonel  [T.  M.]  Arrington)  occupied  the  center,  and  Barton’s  brigade 
(the  Fortieth  Georgia,  Colonel  [Abda]  Johnson;  the  Forty-first  Geor- 
gia, Colonel  [William  E.J  Curtiss;  the  Forty  second  Georgia,  Colonel 
[R.  J.]  Henderson;  the  Forty  third  Georgia,  Colonel  [Skidmore]  Harris, 
and  the  Fifty-second  Georgia,  Colonel  [C.  D.]  Phillips)  the  left,  the  left 
resting  on  Baker’s  Creek,  near  the  bridge.  A portion  of  Captain  [dames 
F.]  Waddell’s  battery  was  posted  at  the  angle  of  the  lines  to  defend  the 
approaches  by  the  Clinton  and  Raymond  roads,  and  the  remainder,  with 
two  pieces  of  Captain  [J.  W.]  Johnston’s  battery,  on  the  left  of  Cum 
ming’s  brigade.  Captain  [S.  J.]  Ridley,  with  a portion  of  his  battery, 
was  on  the  left  of  Barton,  as  was  also  Captain  [Max.  Yan  D.]  Corput’s 
battery.  My  line,  as  will  thus  appear,  was  necessarily  single,  irregular, 
divided,  and  without  reserves.  Under  the  supposition  that  the  army 
was  to  move  forward  in  pursuance  of  the  instructions  given  in  the  morn- 
ing,  this  ground  was  not  reconnoitered  with  a view  to  taking  up  a posi- 
tion for  battle  until  we  were  on  the  move  facing  the  enemy. 

At  about  10.30  a.  m.  a division  of  the  enemy, 'in  column  of  brigades, 
attacked  Lee  and  Gumming.  They  were  handsomely  met  and  forced  back 
some  distance,  when  they  were  re  enforced,  apparently  by  about  three 
divisions,  two  of  which  moved  forward  to  the  attack  and  the  third  con- 
tinued its  march  toward  the  left,  with  the  view  of  forcing  it.  The  enemy 
now  made  a vigorous  attack  in  three  lines  upon  the  whole  front.  They 
were  bravely  met,  and  for  a long  time  the  unequal  conflict  was  main- 
tained with  stubborn  resolution.  But  this  could  not  last.  Six  thousand 
five  hundred  men  could  not  hold  permanently  in  check  four  divisions, 
numbering,  from  their  own  statements,  about  25,000  men;  and  finally, 
crushed  by  overwhelming  numbers,  my  right  gave  way  and  was  pressed 
back  upon  the  two  regiments  covering  the  Clinton  and  Raymond  roads, 
where  they  were  in  part  rallied.  Encouraged  by  this  success,  the  enemy 
redoubled  his  efforts  and  pressed  with  the  utmost  vigor  along  my  line, 
forcing  it  back. 

At  this  time  (about  2.30  p.  m.)  Bowen’s  division  of  Missouri  and  Ar- 
kansas troops,  General  Green  on  the  right  and  Colonel  [F.  M.]  Cockrell 
on  the  left,  arrived,  gallantly  charged  the  enemy,  supported  on  the  left 
by  a portion  of  Cumming’s  and  Lee’s  brigades,  and  drove  them  back  be- 
yond the  original  line. 

In  the  mean  time  the  enemy  had  continued  his  movement  to  our  left, 
and  fell  upon  Barton  in  overwhelming  numbers.  He  charged  them 
gallantly,  but  was  forced  back,  and  the  enemy,  following  up  his  advan- 
tage,  cut  him  off  entirely  from  the  rest  of  the  division. 

It  was  here  that  the  lamented  Major  [Joseph  W.]  Anderson,  my  chief 
of  artillery,  fell,  in  the  fearless  discharge  of  his  duty.  In  the  very  front 
of  battle  the  brave  soldier,  the  noble  gentleman,  met  his  death. 

Here,  too,  the  gallant  Ridley,  refusing  to  leave  his  guns,  single-handed 
and  alone  fought  until  he  fell,  pierced  with  six  shots,  winning  even  from 
his  enemies  the  highest  tribute  of  admiration. 

Nothing  could  protect  the  artillery  horses  from  the  deadly  fire  of  the 
enemy.  Almost 'all  were  killed,  and  along  my  wThole  line  the  pieces, 
though  fought  with  a desperation  on  the  part  of  both  officers  and  men 
which  I cannot  praise  too  highly,  almost  all  fell  into  the  hands  of  the 
enemy.  In  this  manner  the  guns  of  Corput’s  and  Johnston’s  batteries 


96 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXYI. 


and  Waddell’s  section  were  lost.  Double-shotted,  they  were  fired  until 
in  many  instances  the  swarms  of  the  enemy  were  in  among  them.  Offi- 
cers and  men  stood  by  them  to  the  very  latest  moment  that  they  could 
be  served,  and  to  Captains  Corput  and  Johnston  and  Lieutenant  [T. 
Jeff.]  Bates,  their  subordinate  officers  and  men,  I desire  to  return  the 
thanks  which  their  gallantry  has  made  their  due.  On  the  extreme 
right  the  guns  under  the  immediate  command  of  Captain  Waddell  were 
fought  and  lost  in  the  same  manner,  but  retaken  by  the  Missourians. 
This  brave  officer,  assisted  by  Lieut.  G.  D.  Wise,  ordnance  officer, 
fought  one  of  them  with  his  own  hands  until  Bowen,  too,  retired. 

Early  in  the  day  the  Forty- second  Regiment  of  Georgia  Volunteers 
(Colonel  [R.  J.]  Henderson,  of  Barton’s  brigade)  had  been  sent  to  hold 
the  bridge  over  Baker’s  Creek.  Barton  now  moved  to  this  point,  held 
it  for  a time,  and  finally  crossed  and  took  up  position  near  Edwards 
Depot,  which  he  held  until  nearly  dark.  Here  he  was  joined  by  many 
officers  and  men  of  Cumming’s  brigade,  who,  when  driven  from  their 
position  by  the  overwhelming  numbers  of  the  enemy,  had  retired  by 
the  same  route  he  took. 

The  two  regiments  of  Cumming’s  brigade  which  I have  before  men- 
tioned were  kept  on  the  Clinton  and  Raymond  roads;  and,  thus  sep 
arated  from  their  brigade,  joined  Green’s  brigade  of  Bowen’s  division  in 
the  charge  upon  the  enemy,  and  remained  with  them  until  they  retired. 
When  re-enforced  by  Bowen’s  division  and  the  enemy  were  being  driven, 
I informed  the  lieutenant-general  of  the  fact,  and  asked  that  Boring’s 
division  might  be  sent  up  at  once. 

The  attack  of  Bowen’s  division  upon  the  enemy  was  made  about  2.30 
p.  m.  During  the  attack  of  the  Missourians,  and  when  the  enemy  were 
pressing  back  our  left,  thus  re-enforced,  I met  the  lieutenant-general  on 
the  field,  and  stated  to  him  that  unless  Boring’s  division  was  brought 
up  we  could  not  hold  the  field.  He  replied  that  it  had  been  repeatedly 
ordered  to  come  forward,  and  that  he  would  go  in  person  and  hasten 
their  movement. 

About  4 p.  m.  Buford’s  brigade,  of  Boring’s  division,  arrived,  but  not 
until  the  enemy  had  taken  possession  of  the  Raymond  road  and  turned 
upon  him  two  captured  batteries.  Several  pieces  of  Withers’  artillery 
from  a ridge  nearly  opposite  opened  a brisk  fire  and  soon  silenced  them. 
About  this  time  I received  orders  from  the  lieutenant-general  command 
ing  to  withdraw  the  troops  in  order  to  Big  Black  Bridge.  I dispatched 
this  order  to  my  brigade  commanders,  and  seeing  that  our  right  and 
rear  were  exposed,  I immediately  went  in  that  direction  in  order  to 
ascertain  if,  as  had  been  reported  to  me,  the  enemy  were  making  a move- 
ment to  cut  us  off  by  the  route  which  we  were  about  to  take.  On  my 
return  I found  that  Major-General  Boring  had  arrived,  and  that  the 
troops  were  retiring  in  good  order — Bee  with  his  brigade,  and  tha  t por- 
tion of  my  division  which  had  not  been  forced  to  move  by  the  bridge, 
followed  by  the  two  brigades  of  Loring,  Bowen  having  passed  by  a 
route  a short  distance  to  the  right. 

On  my  arrival  (about  sunset)  at  the  ford  on  Baker’s  Creek,  I found 
that  the  enemy  had  crossed  the  bridge  above,  and  were  advancing  ar- 
tillery in  the  direction  of  the  road  on  which  we  were  moving.  One  bat- 
tery had  already  taken  position  and  was  playing  on  the  road,  but  at 
right  angles  and  with  too  long  a range  to  prevent  the  passage  of  troops. 
Here  I found  on  the  west  side  the  brigades  of  General  Green  and  Colo- 
nel [F.  M.]  Cockrell,  of  Bowen’s  division,  who  had  there  halted  and 
taken  up  position  to  hold  the  point  until  Loring’s  division  could  cross. 
I found  Colonel  [Thomas  M.]  Scott,  of  the  Twelfth  Louisiana  Regiment, 


CIIA1’.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS. 


97 


of  Boring’s  division,  baited  about  one-half  a mile  from  the  ford  on  the 
east  side,  and  directed  him  to  cross.  I there  addressed  a note  to  General 
Loring,  informing  him  of  what  I had  done,  telling  him  of  the  change  I 
had  caused  Colonel  Scott  to  make  in  his  position,  stating  that  with  the 
troops  then  there  and  others  that  I could  collect  I would  hold  the  ford 
and  road  until  his  division  could  cross,  and  urging  him  to  hasten  the 
movement.  To  this  note  I received  no  answer,  but  in  a short  time  Colo- 
nel Scott  moved  off  his  regiment  quickly  in  the  direction  of  his  original 
position,  in  obedience,  I was  informed,  to  orders  from  General  Loring. 
Inferring  from  this  that  General  Loring  did  not  intend  to  cross  at'  that 
ford,  he  having  had  ample  time  to  commence  the  movement,  I suggested 
to  General  Green  and  Colonel  Cockrell  to  move  forward  to  the  railroad 
bridge.  My  command  reached  that  point  at  about  1 o’clock  that  night- 
and  bivouacked  near  Bovina. 

In  the  action  of  the  next  morning  my  command  took  no  part.  After 
the  enemy  had  made  their  successful  attack  upon  the  intrencliments 
upon  the  east  side  of  the  river,  I received  orders  from  the  lieutenant- 
general  to  place  one  of  my  brigades  in  position  on  the  heights  of  the 
west  bank,  to  cover  the  crossing  of  the  troops  who  had  occupied  the  in- 
trenchments.  This  duty  was  assigned  to  and  executed  by  the  command 
of  Brigadier-General  Lee. 

At  about  10  a.  m.  I received  orders  to  take  command  of  the  army  and 
conduct  its  retreat  to  the  fortifications  around  Vicksburg.  The  brigade 
of  Brigadier-General  Baldwin,  of  Smith’s  division,  was  assigned  to  the 
duty  of  bringing  up  the  rear.  Just  before  getting  into  the  works,  1 was 
joined  by  the  brigade  of  Colonel  Reynolds,  to  whom,  as  I before  stated, 
had  been  intrusted  the  charge  of  the  trains  of  the  whole  army.  He  had 
crossed  the  Big  Black  after  much  difficulty  and  delay,  occasioned  by  the 
absence  of  any  facilities  for  so  doing,  at  Bridgeport.  By  a mistake  in 
the  transmission  of  the  order,  the  regiment  of  Colonel  Beck  (Lee’s  bri- 
gade) remained  at  the  river, resisted  the  attempts  of  the  enemy  to  cross 
until  11  o’clock  that  night,  and  only  withdre^r  upon  the  receipt  of  a 
peremptory  order.  The  retreat  was  conducted  in  a leisurely  and  orderly 
manner,  and  the  troops  entered  the  line  of  fortifications  about  3 p.  m. 

As  censure  has  been  cast  upon  my  division  for  not  having  fully  main- 
tained their  position  at  the  battle  of  Baker’s  Creek,  it  is  due  to  them  and 
myself  that  I should  here  record  facts  connected  with  other  parts  of 
this  army  which,  in  my  opinion,  contain  the  explanation,  in  part  at 
least,  for  this  failure. 

My  division  started  early  on  the  morning  of  the  battle,  under  the  sup- 
position that  the  army  was  about  to  retrace  its  steps  to  join  General 
Johnston  north  of  the  railroad,  and  with  that  view  was  weakened  by 
sending  one  brigade  to  the  rear  in  charge  of  the  whole  baggage  train. 
Knowing  that  this  movement  exposed  our  flank  to  the  enemy  for  sev- 
eral miles,  I presumed  the  army  would  move  quickly  as  soon  as  the  road 
was  free  of  trains,  and  accordingly  gave  my  attention  (until  the  en- 
gagement commenced)  solely  to  the  roads  herein  referred  to,  which  were 
the  only  ones  by  which  the  enemy  could  strike  us.  At  9.30  o’clock  the 
road  was  open,  but  I was  directed  to  retain  my  three  brigades  in  line 
of  battle  until  further  orders. 

The  enemy  engaged  us  at  about  10.30  o’clock.  Binding  that  the  main 
attack  was  upon  me  and  in  vastly  superior  force,  I dispatched  that  in- 
formation to  the  lieutenant-general  commanding,  and  from  time  to  time 
repeatedly  asked  for  re- enforcements.  The  three  divisions  composing 
our  army  occupied  a line  of  not  exceeding  2 miles,  one  of  them  (Bowen’s), 
at  least,  being  within  hearing  of  the  musketry  of  the  enemy  in  my  front. 

7 R R— VOL  XXIY,  PT  II 


98 


[Chai*.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Be-en  forcemeats  (Bowen’s  division)  arrived  at  about  2.30  p.  m.  Lor- 
ing’s  division  did  not  arrive  in  time  to  engage  the  enemy.  The  three 
brigades  of  my  division  engaged  were  about  G,50Q  strong.  The  strength 
of  the  enemy,  according  to  their  statements,  was  more  than  four  times 
that  number.  The  non -arrival  of  re-enfpreements  for  my  division  early 
in  the  day,  in  my  opinion,  was  mainly  the  cause  of  our  failure.  As  to 
the  reason  therefor  it  is  not  for  me  to  express  an  opinion  here.* 

* * # # # # # . 

It  was  the  fortune  of  Brigadier-General  Lee  to  open  and  bear  the 
brunt  of  the  battle  of  Baker’s  Creek,  on  which  occasion  he  had  three 
horses  shot  under  him,  and  give  the  splendid  repulse,  which  he  did,  to 
the  only  decided  assault  of  the  enemy  upon  my  line  at  Vicksburg.  To 
Colonel  Keynolds,  as  I have  before  stated,  was  intrusted  the  duty  of 
carrying  off  the  trains  of  the  entire  army  on  the  day  of  the  battle  of 
Baker’s  Creek— a charge  which  he  performed  with  the  efficiency  and 
fidelity  which  was  to  be  expected  of  an  officer  of  his  skill  and  experience. 
Without  an  exception,  during  the  bloody  day  of  Baker’s  Creek  and  dur- 
ing the  memorable  siege  of  Vicksburg  the  field  officers  of  my  command 
behaved  with  a gallantry  and  zeal  which  won  my  unqualified  admiration 
and  esteem. 

It  is  with  deep  regret  that  I record  the  loss,  in  the  battle  of  the  16th, 
of  Col.  Skid.  Harris,  Forty- third  Georgia  Begiment.  He  was  killed  at 
the  head  of  his  regiment. 

X am  under  obligations  to  Maj.  H.  Evans,  Capt.  E.  B.  Smith,  and 
Lieut.  George  D.  Wise  (who,  by  the  recent  change  of  commanders  in 
their  brigades,  were  temporarily  without  assignment)  for  their  services 
on  the  field  of  Baker’s  Creek.  Much  against  their  wishes,  Maj.  H.  M. 
Mathews,  ordnance  officer,  and  B.  Orme,  assistant  quartermaster,  of 
my  own  staff,  were  left  in  Vicksburg  when  the  division  advanced  to 
Baker’s  Creek,  as  their  services  as  the  chiefs  of  their  respective  depart- 
ments could  not  be  dispensed  with  there. 

Pre-eminently  distinguished  throughout  the  action  of  Baker’s  Creek, 
especially  for  his  indefatigable  efforts  in  rallying  the  broken  regiments 
and  taking  them  again  into  action,  was  my  chief  of  staff,  Maj.  J.  J. 
Beeve.  For  his  active  assistance  to  me  on  that  occasion,  and  the  gal- 
lant and  intelligent  discharge  of  his  duties  day  and  night  during  the 
siege  of  Vicksburg,  I am  greatly  indebted  to  him. 

Major  [H.]  Webb,  my  inspector- general,  rendered  most  important 
services  in  superintending  the  removal  and  securing  the  safety  of  the 
large  train  that  followed  the  army  to  the  creek. 

Capt.  J.  W.  Mathews,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general;  Chief  Surg\ 
H.  M.  Compton,  and  Lieutenant  [Henry  T.j  Botts,  aide-de-camp  (whose 
horse  was  shot  under  him  at  Baker’s  Creek),  were  prompt,  daring,  and 
energetic  in  the  discharge  of  their  duties. 

Col.  G.  A.  Hayward,  aide-de-camp,  has  my  sincere  thanks  for  the  many 
important  services  he  has  rendered  me.  Always  ready  lor  the  discharge 
of  duty,  he  was  distinguished  for  his  gallantry  on  the  field  of  Baker’s 
Creek,  and  after  the  investment  of  the  city  bore  important  information 
to  General  Johnston,  by  whom  he  was  retained  until  the  capitulation. 

Mr.  D.  E.  Eorris,  telegraph  operator,  and  Private  A.  T.  Sullivan,  my 
secretary,  accompanied  me  upon  the  field  of  Baker’s  Creek  and  rendered 
important  services. 

Accompanying,  please  find  a tabular  statement  of  the  casualties  of 
my  division  in  the  different  actions,  &c.,  in  which  it  participated  up  to 

* Portion  of  report  here  omitted  appears  under  the  “ Siege  of  Vicksburg,”  pp.  343- 


CuAr.  XXX Y.J 


99 


BATTLE  OE  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS. 

June  1G.  The  absence  of  subordinate  officers  renders  it  impossible  foi 
me  to  give  my  whole  loss  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg. 

I am,  major,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

0.  L.  STEVENSON. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Inclosure.] 


Return  of  Casualties  in  Stevenson’s  Division  at  the  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill , or  Baker’s 

Creek , May  16, 1863. 


Ordnance  and  Stores  at  Baker’s  Creek,  [ captured ] May  16. 

10-pounder  Parrotts  complete 

12-pounder  iron  howitzers  complete 

6-pounder  "bronze  guns  complete 

3-inch  rifled  guns  complete 

Caissons 

Sets  lead  harness 

Sets  wheel  harness 

Small-arms 

Accou  Lerments 

Rounds 


2 

2 

5 

2 

8 

28 
19 
2,  834 
2,  834 
12, 000 


No.  30. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Seth  M.  Barton , C.  S.  Army , commanding  First 

Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  1st  Brig.,  Stevenson’s  Oiv.,  Vicksburg , June  18,  1803. 
Major  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
borne  by  this  brigade  in  the  action  of  the  16th  ultimo  : 

I was  directed  early  in  the  day  to  detach  a regiment  and  section  of 
artillery  to  hold  the  bridge  over  Baker’s  Creek,  some  2 miles  to  the  left 
and  rear  on  the  line  of  inarch.  [Col.  R.  J.]  Henderson’s  Forty‘Second 
Georgia  and  Lieutenant  [A.  M.]  Sharkey’s  section  of  Company  A,  First 
Mississippi  Artillery,  were  selected  and  posted. 


* Maj.  Joseph  W.  Anderson  killed. 

t Col.  S.  Harris,  Forty-third  Georgia,  and  Lieut.  E.  Ellis,  adjutant  Forty- first 
Georgia,  killed. 

+ Lieut.  William  E.  C.  Wilson,  Thirty-si xtli  Georgia,  Lieut.  J.  M.  Brotherton, 
Thirty-ninth  Georgia,  and  Lieuts.  Thomas  J.  Dyson,  Washington  Hobbs,  and  V.  C. 
Manning,  Fifty-seventh  Georgia,  killed.  Lieuts.  J.  M.  Bates,  Thirty-ninth  Georgia, 
and  S.  T.  Moore,  Fifty-sixth  Georgia,  died  of  wounds. 

§ Including  losses  (12)  at  Big  Black. 


100 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Tlie  remainder  of  the  brigade  remained  inactive,  save  an  occasional 
change  of  position,  till  near  noon,  when  it  was  ordered  to  the  left,  to  sup- 
port General  [S.  D.]  Lee,  then  pressed.  The  distance  (about  1J  miles) 
was  passed  at  double-Quick,  troops  formed  in  line  of  battle  on  Lee’s 
left,  and  advanced  as  rapidly  as  the  nature  of  the  ground  would  admit. 
[M.  Y.  D.]  Corput’s  battery  (four  rifles)  was  posted  near  the  road,  about 
600  yards  from  the  bridge,  my  left  resting  on  it  and  my  right  on  Lee’s 
left.  The  position  was  not  a good  one  ; the  country  much  broken  and 
covered  in  most  part  with  dense  woods.  The  enemy  having  turned  Lee’s 
left  flank,  were  already  in  the  timber,  pressing  vigorously  forward.  W ith 
impetuous  gallantry  the  Fortieth,  Forty-first,  and  Forty-third  Georgia 
Regiments  dashed  upon  the  enemy’s  line,  broke  it,  and  drove  it  back 
about  300  yards.  It  was  here  re-enforced  by  his  second  and  third  lines, 
and  my  farther  advance  was  checked.  I had  reserved  the  Fifty-second 
Georgia  on  the  left  to  protect  that  flank ; it  was  now  moved  up  rapidly, 
and  in  handsome  style  engaged  a brigade  that  was  turning  the  left. 
The  troops  on  the  right  now  gave  way,  and  my  right  flank  was  soon 
turned  and  overwhelmed.  The  left  was  in  like  manner  enveloped  and 
a heavy  fire  poured  in  from  the  rear.  Having  vainly  endeavored  to 
cover  the  left  with  the  Forty- second  Regiment,  brought  forward  for  the 
jiurpose,  I was  compelled  to  fall  back.  The  enemy  had  so  nearly  sur- 
rounded the  whole  brigade  that  this  movement  was  necessarily  accom- 
panied with  some  confusion . The  Fortieth  and  Forty-second  Regiments, 
however,  came  out  with  unbroken  ranks.  The  brigade  had  been  terribly 
handled. 

Corput’s  battery,  posted  near  the  road  on  the  left,  was  beautifully 
served.  Its  horses  and  many  men  were  killed  ; and,  finding  it  impos- 
sible to  save  the  guns,  they  were  fired  with  double  canister  to  the  last, 
and  abandoned  only  when  they  could  be  no  longer  used. 

I retired  across  Baker’s  Greek,  posting  the  few  troops  remaining  so  as 
to  command  the  bridge,  and  held  that  position  till  all  had  crossed  at  the 
ford  below,  about  4 p.  m.  I then  fell  back  to  Edwards  Depot  (2  miles), 
and  covered  the  approach  to  that  place  till  dark.  The  enemy,  who 
crossed  immediately  on  our  withdrawal  from  the  bridge,  followed  and 
attacked  at  this  place,  but  failed  to  dislodge  us.  All  of  our  troops  hav- 
ing passed,  and  all  property  at  the  depot  [having  been]  removed  or  de- 
stroyed, I took  up  the  line  of  march  at  nightfall,  and  joined  the  army  at 
Big  Black  Bridge  at  1 a.  m.  on  the  17th. 

I take  pleasure  in  naming  the  following  officers  for  marked  and  dis- 
tinguished gallantry : Colonels  [Skidmore]  Harris,  Forty-third  (wounded 
and  a prisoner)  ,•  [William  E.]  Curtiss,  Forty-first;  [C.  D.]  Phillips,  Fifty- 
second  (missing) ; Henderson,  Forty-second;  [Abda]  Johnson,  Fortieth 
(sick  and  unable  to  command,  but  present  and  cheering  his  men) ; Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel [Robert  M.]  Young,  commanding  Fortieth  Georgia ; 
Majors  [Raleigh  S.]  Camp,  Fortieth ; [William  H.]  Hulsey,  Forty-sec- 
ond ; [M.  S.]  Nall,  Forty-first;  Captain  [Max.  Van  D.]  Corput,  Capt.  J. 
W.  Johnston,  and  Lieutenant'  Sharkey,  of  the  artillery ; Captain  [A.  C.] 
Thom,  my  assistant  adjutant-general;  Lieutenant  [T.  B.]  Lyons,  aide- 
de-camp ; R.  F.  Patterson,  W.  Norcom,  and  C.  L.  Thompson,  acting 
aides-de-camp. 

The  heavy  loss  of  the  brigade  (over  42  per  cent.)  is  the  best  evidence 
I can  give  of  the  good  behavior  of  the  men. 

1 am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  M.  BARTON, 

Brigadier- General . 

Maj.  J.  J.  Reeve,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS. 


101 


No.  31. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Stephen  1).  Lee , G.  S.  Army , commanding  Second 

Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Brigade,  Stevenson’s  Division, 

JDemopolis , Ala.,  July  25,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  tlie  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken 
in  the  battle  of  Baker’s  Greek,  on  May  16,  by  the  Alabama  brigade— Sec- 
ond Brigade,  Stevenson’s  division— consisting  of  the  following  com- 
mands, viz  : Twentieth  Alabama  Begiment,  Col.  I.  W.  Garrott ; Twenty- 
third  Alabama  Begiment,  Col.  F.  K.  Beck ; Thirtieth  Alabama  Begiment, 
Col.  C.  M.  Shelley]  Thirty -first  Alabama  Begiment,  Lieut.  Col.  T.  M. 
Arrington]  Forty-sixth  Alabama  Begiment,  Col.  M.  L.  Woods,  and 
Waddell’s  battery,  Capt.  J.  F.  Waddell. 

On  the  evening  of  May  15,  the  army,  under  the  command  of  Lieuten- 
ant-General Pemberton,  commenced  moving  toward  the  enemy  from 
Edwards  Depot  in  the  direction  of  Baymond,  my  brigade  occupying  in 
the  line  of  march  the  second  position  from  the  rear.  The  army  marched 
during  the  greater  part  of  the  night,  halting  a short  time  before  day- 
light at  a point  about  6 miles  from  Edwards  Depot. 

Soon  after  daylight  on  the  16th,  the  army  commenced  a retrograde 
movement  over  the  same  route  it  had  taken  on  the  preceding  night, 
for  the  purpose  of  forming  a junction  on  the  north  side  of  the  railroad 
with  the  forces  under  command  of  General  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  Gen- 
eral Johnston  having  evacuated  Jackson  and  moved  toward  Canton. 

About  6 a.  m.  Major-General  Stevenson  ordered  me  to  move  rapidly 
with  my  brigade  and  relieve  Colonel  [A.  W.]  Beynolds’  brigade  on  the 
Edwards  Depot  and  Clinton  road,  which  was  done  at  about  7.30  a.  in.] 
skirmishers  from  Beynolds’  brigade  being  at  that  time  engaged  with 
those  of  the  enemy  on  two  roads,  one  leading  from  Clinton  and  the  other 
from  Baymond. 

By  8 o’clock  my  brigade  was  in  line  of  battle  and  skirmishing  on  both 
roads,  the  position  occupied  by  the  brigade  being  on  the  extreme  left 
of  our  line.  At  about  9 o’clock  it  was  discovered  that  the  enemy  was 
massing  troops  on  the  left,  evidently  for  the  purpose  of  turning  our  left 
flank  and  getting  between  our  army  and  Edwards  Depot.  My  brigade 
was  at  once  marched  (under  fire)  by  the  left  flank  for  the  purpose  of 
checking  the  enemy,  and  information  of  his  movements  and  the  corre- 
sponding change  of  my  line  was  immediately  sent  to  the  major-general 
commanding,  with  the  request  that  the  gap  on  my  right  should  be  filled 
by  other  troops.  Similar  movements  on  my  part  were  frequently  made 
under  fire  throughout  the  day  until  about  2 p.  m.,  the  major-general 
commanding  being  in  each  case  notified  of  my  change  of  position,  and 
of  the  continued  efforts  of  the  enemy  to  turn  our  left.  Captain  Wad- 
dell’s battery,  which  had  been  placed  in  position  on  the  Baymond  road, 
and  a section  of  Johnston’s  battery,  which  had  been  posted  on  the  Clin- 
ton road,  had  during  the  earlier  part  of  the  day  been  supported  by  my 
brigade,  but  in  consequence  of  my  continuous  movements  to  the  left 
these  guns  were  left  to  the  right  of  my  brigade,  and  were  subsequently 
supported  by  General  Cumming’s  brigade. 

As  early  as  10  o’clock  in  the  morning  it  became  evident  that  the  enemy 
was  in  heavy  force  and  determined  on  battle,  as  his  skirmishers  were 
bold  and  aggressive,  and  several  divisions  of  his  troops  were  visible  in 
front  of  our  left. 

At  about  2 p.  m.  he  advanced  in  force  on  my  center  and  left,  but  was 


102 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Ciiai\  XXXV I. 


handsomely  repulsed  by  the  Forty-sixth,  Thirtieth,  and  Twenty-third 
Alabama  Begiments,  the  last  regiment,*  under  the  gallant  Colonel  [F. 
K.]  Beck,  having  moved  forward  under  a heavy  tire  and  driven  back  a 
battery  of  the  enemy  which  had  been  placed  within  400  yards  of  our 
line. 

Having  checked  the  enemy  on  my  center  and  left,  and  having  ordered 
the  regiments  last  mentioned  to  hold  their  respective  positions,  my  at- 
tention was  called  to  the  very  heavy  fire  on  my  right.  Upon  proceeding 
there,  I found,  that  Cumming’s  brigade  had  been  driven  back  by  the 
enemy,  and  that  the  Twentieth  and  Thirty-first  Alabama  Begiments, 
of  my  brigade,  had  been  compelled  to  retire,  their  right  flank  having  be- 
come exposed  and  the  enemy  having  gained  their  rear.  At  about  the 
same  time  the  enemy  had  advanced  rapidly  on  my  left,  and  had  almost 
gained  the  Edwards  Depot  road,  half  a mile  to  the  rear  of  my  line. 
Under  these  circumstances  I ordered  the  Forty-sixth,  Thirtieth,  and 
Twenty-third  Alabama  Begiments  to  retire  about  600  yards  to  the  rear, 
where  my  second  line  was  formed. 

These  three  regiments  behaved  with  distinguished  gallantry,  retain- 
ing their  position  against  heavy  odds. 

I at  this  time  went  to  the  road,  about  600  yards  in  rear  of  my  line, 
and  found  it  filled  with  stragglers,  and  hearing  that  Bowen’s  division 
was  re-enforcing  on  myT  right,  and  that  Barton’s  brigade  was  going  on 
my  left,  I again  returned  to  my  second  line,  carrying  with  me  about 
400  stragglers,  most  of  them  from  the  Thirty-fourth  Georgia  (Colonel  [J. 
A.  W.]  Johnson),  whom  I placed  on  the  left  of  the  Thirtieth  Alabama 
Begiment  (Colonel  Shelley). 

With  these  re- enforcements,  the  enemy  were  broken  in  some  confusion, 
observing  which  Colonel  Woods,  Forty-sixth  Alabama,  made  a most 
gallant  charge  with  his  regiment,  moving  up  almost  to  his  original  posi- 
tion in  the  line  of  battle.  Soon  afterward  Bowen’s  division,  on  my  right, 
and  Barton’s  brigade,  on  my  left,  having  retreated,  and  the  enemy 
having  crossed  the  Edwards  Depot  road  with  at  least  three  regiments, 
I ordered  Col.  D.  C.  Stith,  of  my  staff,  to  recall  the  Thirtieth  Alabama 
(Colonel  Shelley)  and  the  Forty-sixth  Alabama  (Colonel  Woods').  The 
order  was  delivered  to  Colonel  Shelley,  but  the  enemy  having  advanced 
very  rapidly  upon  the  right,  the  Forty-sixth  Alabama  could  not  be 
reached,  and  I regret  to  say  that  this  excellent  regiment,  under  its  gal- 
lant field  officers  (Colonel  Woods,  Lieutenant-Colonel  [O.]  Kyle,  and 
Major  [James  M.]  Handley),  was  captured. 

My  brigade  was  then  rallied  about  half  a mile  from  the  Edwards 
Depot  road  and  in  rear  of  Buford’s  brigade,  Loring’s  division,  which 
had  just  arrived  on  the  field  at  about  3.30  p.  m.  Major-General  Loring 
soon  after  came  up  with  Featherston’s  brigade,  and  recognizing  him  as 
the  senior  officer  on  the  field,  and  not  seeing  my  division  commander 
(Major-General  Stevenson),  I reported  to  him  for  orders,  and  was  placed 
on  the  left  of  Featherston’s  brigade.  General  Loring  soon  afterward 
informed  me  that  he  had  received  orders  to  retire,  and  directed  me  to 
commence  at  once  the  movement  toward  the  ford  on  Baker’s  Creek. 
The  retreat  was  conducted  with  order,  and  we  arrived  at  the  ford  at 
about  6 p.  m.,  where  my  brigade  was  halted.  During  the  retreat,  General 
Loring  sent  repeated  messages  to  me  to  hasten  my  movements,  which 
was  done.  On  crossing  Baker’s  Creek,  I found  that  General  Loring  had 
not  followed  my  brigade,  but  had  halted  on  the  opposite  side.  I at  this 
time  received  an  order  from  General  Pemberton  to  move  to  the  bridge 

* Copy  sent  to  the  Archive  Office  by  General  S.  I).  Lee  implies  that  the-three  regi- 
ments named  were  all  commanded  by  Col.  F.  K.  Beck. 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS. 


103 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 

on  the  Clinton  road,  and  support  the  cavalry  at  that  point  under  com- 
mand of  Colonel  [Wirt]  Adams  ; hut  before  arriving  there  I found  that 
the  enemy  already  held  the  bridge  with  a large  force,  and  I accordingly 
retreated  toward  the  Big  Black  Bridge,  where  the  brigade  arrived  about 

Notwithstanding  the  defeat  at  Baker’s  Creek,  there  were  many  oxhibi- 
tions  of  personal  bravery  on  the  part  of  officers  and  men  of  my  command. 

I would  particularly  mention  the  conduct  of  Colonels  Garrott,  Beck, 
Shelley,  and  Woods;  of  Lieutenant-Colonels  Kyle  (Forty-sixth  Ala- 
bama), [E.  W.]  Pettus  (Twentieth  Alabama),  and  [J.  B.]  Smith  (Thir- 
tieth Alabama) ; Majors  Handley  (Forty-sixth  Alabama)  and  [Thomas 
H.]  Patterson  (Thirtieth  Alabama);  Captains  Waddell  and  [J.  W.J 
Johnston  (commanding  batteries),  and  [David  M.]  Anderson  (Thirtieth 
Alabama),  who  was  killed  while  gallantly  performing  his  duty ; Adju- 
tant Houston  ( Alabama).  Sergeant-Majors  [W.  W.]  Garrard 

(Thirty-first  Alabama  Regiment)  and  [W.  K.]  McConnell  (Thirtieth 
Alabama  Begiment)  also  particularly  attracted  my  attention. 

The  above  names  are  those  of  the  persons  who  came  under  my  per- 
sonal observation.  Other  instances  of  gallantry  are  mentioned  in  the 
reports  which  are  inclosed. 

Of  my  personal  staff  I would  particularly  mention  Capt.  William 
Elliott,  my  assistant  adjutant-general,  for  his  conspicuous  gallantry. 
During  the  latter  part  of  the  day  he  bore  the  colors  of  the  Thirty-fourth 
Georgia,  which  he  brought  out  of  the  action,  the  gallant  color-bearer 
having  been  killed.  Col.  D.  C.  Stith  acted  with  coolness  and  gallantry ; 
also  Lieut.  H.  N.  Martin,  acting  aide-de-camp,  and  Capt.  J.  R.  Curell 
and  Lieutenant  [S.  M.]  Underhill,  volunteer  aides-de-camp. 

List  of  casualties  has  already  been  sent  in. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

’ STEPHEN  D.  LEE, 

Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

Maj.  J.  J.  Reeve, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Stevenson’s  Division. 


No.  32. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  A.  Gumming , C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third 

Brigade. 

Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  Stevenson’s  Division, 

Enterprise , July  22,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  operations 
of  this  brigade,  commencing  with  the  battle  of  Baker’s  Creek  and  ter- 
minating with  the  capitulation  of  Vicksburg: 

On  tli  e afternoon  of  May  15,  the  brigade  left  the  line  of  battle  for 
the  two  days  previous  established  in  front  of  Edwards  Depot,  and  pro- 
ceeded in  the  direction  of  Raymond,  crossing  Baker’s  Creek  at  the  bridge 
over  that  stream.  A short  distance  beyond  the  bridge  the  line  of  march 
led  from  the  Raymond  road  into  a neighborhood  road  passing  to  the 
right,  and  at  about  a mile  distant  from  the  point  of  separation  of  the 
two  roads  the  brigade  was  halted,  bivouacked  for  the  remainder  of  the 
night  along  with  two  other  brigades  of  the  division,  no  line  of  battle 
being  here  established. 

Shortly  after  sunrise  on  the  morning  of  May  16,  orders  were  given 
to  his  division  by  Major-General  Stevenson  to  retraverse  a portion  of 


104 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


the  route  passed  over  the  previous  night.  This  division,  being  the  left 
of  the  army,  the  movement  was  commenced  by  its  left  brigade  (fS. 
I).]  Lee’s),  in  rear  (right)  of  which  followed  the  Third  Brigade.  The 
regiments  were  promptly  brought  into  position  and  the  line  established, 
moving  by  the  left  flank.  When  the  brigade  had  proceeded  about  two- 
thirds  of  the  distance  toward  the  Raymond  road,  its  left  being  about 
500  yards  from  that  road,  it  was  halted  by  order  of  the  major-general. 
The  brigade  line  was  established  on  a succession  of  slight  ridges  overlook- 
ing a clear  field.  Strong  parties  of  skirmishers  were  at  once  thrown  out 
beyond  this  field,  with  directions  to  penetrate  the  woods  on  the  other 
side  and  engage  and  hold  in  check  those  of  the  enemy.  This  they  did 
under  the  efficient  management  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  [J.  F.  B.]  Jack- 
son  (Thirty-ninth  Georgia)  commanding.  Shortly  after  these  dispositions 
were  made,  word  was  sent  me  by  General  Lee  that, in  consequence  of  the 
passage  of  the  enemy  toward  his  left,  he  was  extending  his  line  in  that 
direction,  coupled  with  the  request  that  I would  move  by  the  flank  to 
preserve  the  interval  between  us.  The  major-general  (present  with  me) 
directed  this  to  be  done,  and  I moved  on  the  required  distance.  After 
making  two  or  more  of  such  moves  (my  left  having  by  this  time 
crossed  the  Baymond  road),  I was  informed  by  the  major-general  that 
Lee  had  bent  the  left  of  his  line  toward  the  rear,  the  two  branches 
making  an  angle  more  or  less  obtuse,  and  was  directed  to  accord  my 
movements  with  his. 

Haying  sent  forward  an  officer  of  my  staff  to  notify  the  officer  com- 
manding the  skirmishers  of  the  change  of  direction  of  the  line,  and  to 
direct  him  to  nffike  their  movements  to  correspond,  I at  once  proceeded 
from  the  center  to  the  extreme  left  of  my  brigade,  to  superintend  the 
change.  The  directions  above  referred  to  were  communicated  to  the 
officers  in  command  of  the  skirmishers,  but  owing  to  the  distance  of  this 
line  in  advance,  the  inability  in  a wooded  country  of  determining  the 
point  at  which  the  change  of  direction  should*be  made,  and  especially  to 
the  fact  that  they  were  unable  to  keep  up  communication  with  the  skir- 
mishers of  Lee’s  brigade,  they  were  unable  to  follow  up  the  movement, 
and  later  in  the  day  were  forced,  after  a gallant  contest,  in  which  they 
suffered  severely,  to  retire  toward  the  right. 

In  its  movement  by  the  left  flank  the  brigade  had  entered  a wood 
rather  open  for  the  first  few  hundred  yards,  but  gradually  becoming 
denser.  Arrived  at  the  point  where  the  brigade  on  my  left  had  filed  to 
the  left,  it  was  found  that  the  angle  formed  by  the  two  branches  of  the 
line  was  nearly  a right  angle.  Here  my  left  regiment  (the  Thirty-ninth 
Georgia)  was  promptly  turned  into  the  new  direction.  The  whole  of 
this  regiment  and  four  companies  of  the  next  (the  Thirty-fourth  Georgia) 
had  succeeded  in  getting  upon  what  may  be  termed  the  second  front  of 
the  square,  when  the  halting  of  Lee’s  brigade  necessitated  the  same  on 
my  part. 

It  should  here  be  stated  that  the  three  left  regiments  (the  Thirty- 
ninth,  the  Thirty -fourth,  and  the  Thirty-sixth)  had  each  three  companies 
at  the  front  as  skirmishers,  in  addition  to  which  the  Thirty-fourth  and 
Thirty- sixth  had  each  one  company  absent  on  detached  service,  thus 
leaving  only  six  companies  of  these  regiments  in  line.  A halt  having 
been  made  as  above  stated,  and  the  two  sides  of  the  square  faced  out- 
ward, notice  was  at  this  moment  given  me  that  Lee  (whose  brigade  was 
concealed  from  my  observation  by  the  density  of  the  wood)  was  mov- 
ing forward.  I immediately  advanced  the  second  front,  with  a view  to 
keep  abreast  with  the  supposed  movement.  The  brigade  had  advanced 
but  a few  paces  when  I was  informed  that  the  reported  movement  by 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  IIILL,  MISS. 


105 


Lee  had  not  been  made.  A halt  was  at  once  called,  and  the  line,  some- 
what disordered  as  [by]  the  broken  and  wooded  character  of  the  ground 
traversed,  rectified.  In  this  position  the  second  front  of  the  brigade 
was  drawn  up  on  a succession  of  ridges  and  knolls  heavily  timbered, 
beyond  which,  at  a distance  generally  of  about  50  yards,  the  ground  fell 
off  abruptly.  While  thus  engaged  in  rectifying  the  line,  the  battle 
broke  upon  us,  and  without  previous  intimation  received,  the  skirmish- 
ers having  been  unable  for  the  reasons  hitherto  given  to  keep  pace 
with  the  movement  of  the  line,  and  being  no  longer  interposed  between 
it  and  the  enemy,  though  of  this  I was  not  informed  until  afterward. 

Favored  by  the  broken  and  wooded  character  of  the  locality,  the  enemy 
advanced  two  very  full  regiments  (the  Seventh  and  Eleventh  Illinois) 
upon  that  portion  of  my  line  forming  what  I have  termed  its  second  front. 
Each  of  these  regiments  would  seem  to  have  been  formed  into  a double 
column,  occupying  a half  regimental  front,  and  their  whole  line  to  have 
extended  from  the  point  of  the  angle  to  about  the  right  of  the  Thirty-ninth 
Georgia.  Approaching  unseen  to  within  a distance  of  less  than  50  yards, 
the  enemy  poured  in  a very  heavy  and  destructive  volley,  which  was  at 
once  replied  to  with  effect.  About  the  same  moment  the  enemy  appeared 
in  front  of  and  opened  fire  upon  the  first  front  of  my  line  (a  brisk  and 
effective  fire),  but  not  so  near  and  destructive  as  that  on  the  second  front. 
On  this  (second)  front  the  portions  of  the  regiments  engaged  held  for  a 
time  their  position  against  the  greatly  superior  force  of  the  enemy,  in- 
cited by  the  encouragement  and  example  of  their  respective  command- 
ers—Colonels  McConnell  and  Johnson— the  former  of  whom  fell  here, 
severely  wounded.  But  apprised  now  of  the  exact  position  occupied  by 
a section  of  Captain  Johnston’s  battery  (to  which  had  been  added  a 
piece  from  Waddell’s  battery),  which  position  was  about  opposite  the 
left  of  the  Thirty-fourth  Georgia,  the  enemy’s  right  regiment,  by  an  ob- 
lique movement",  placed  itself  in  rear  of  the  regiment  already  confront- 
ing the  Thirty-fourth  Georgia,  and  the  two  united  bore  down  upon  this 
regiment  and  the  right  of  the  Thirty-ninth.  The  position  of  the  Thirty- 
fourth  Georgia  on  the  new  direction  was  upable  to  withstand  the  charge 
of  g|0  overpowering  a force,  and  it,  together  with  the  right  (Thirty-ninth 
Georgia),  was  compelled  to  give  way.  Throwing  myself  at  the  point 
at  which  the  break  had  been  made,  efforts  were  made  to  rally  the  broken 
line;  but  the  enemy  having  obtained  possession  of  the  batteries  and 
following  up  closely  their  advantage,  these  efforts  proved  unsuccessful, 
and  the  whole  of  the  second  front  fell  back.  By  this  retrograde  move- 
ment, the  right  of  the  Thirty-fourth  Georgia  and  the  Thirty-sixth  Georgia 
Begiments,  which  had  in  the  mean  time  been  engaged  with  the  enemy  in 
their  front,  were  uncovered,  and  the  colonel  of  the  latter  regiment  ([Jesse 
A.]  Glenn),  finding  that  the  enemy  had  penetrated  in  his  rear  as  far  as 
his  colors,  gave  the  order  to  fall  back.  This  regiment  was  rallied  and 
held  its  position  against  the  enemy,  advancing  in  its  front,  till,  threat- 
ened with  being  flanked  on  its  right,  it  was  again  compelled  to  fall  back 
to  a new  position.  In  a similar  manner  the  two  right  regiments  (Fifty- 
sixth  Georgia,  Colonel  [E.  P.]  Watkins,  and  Fifty-seventh  Georgia,  Colo- 
nel [William]  Barkuloo)  were  compelled  in  succession,  by  the  uncover- 
ing of  their  left  and  the  pressure  of  the  enemy  on  their  front,  to  fall 
back,  which  they  did,  holding  the  enemy  in  check  at  various  points, 
when  they  were  able  to  make  a stand.  In  this  movement  Colonel  Wat- 
kins, who  had  left  his  sick-room  at  Vicksburg  to  take  command  of  his 
regiment  in  the  fight,  was  severely  wounded. 

With  these  operations  ends  what  maybe  termed  the  first  phase  of  the 
battle  so  far  as  concerns  this  brigade. 


106  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

Barton's  brigade,  originally  on  my  right,  had  in  the  mean  time  been 
moved  toward  the  extreme  left,  thus  leaving  my  right  entirely  exposed. 
This  compelled  the  two  right  regiments,  when  they  finally  fell  back,  to 
proceed  as  far  as  the  farm  house  in  front  of  our  first  position  before  com- 
mencing their  reorganization.  The  other  regiments  of  the  brigade  fell 
back  and  reformed  on  the  Baymond  road,  the  two  left  regiments  (the 
Thirty-ninth  and  Thirty-fourth  Georgia)  making  no  stand  till  they 
reached  that  road.  Here  portions  of  my  three  left  regiments  were  rai- 
ded, together  with  portions  of  one  or  more  of  Lee’s  regiments,  and  a line 
was  formed  along  this  road.  While  engaged  in  forming  this  line  we 
were  not  pressed  by  the  enemy,  who  would  seem  to  have  been  similarly 
occupied. 

About  this  time  a Missouri  brigade  approached  the  battle-field  from 
the  right,  and  went  in  on  the  ground  previously  occupied  by  the  extreme 
right  ol  my  brigade.  As  soon  as  they  had  completed  their  reorganiza- 
tion, the  Fifty-seventh  Georgia  Begiment,  and  shortly  afterward  the 
Fifty-sixth,  now  commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  [J.  T.]  Slaughter, 
accompanied  this  movement,  and  went  in  on  the  right  of  the  Missouri- 
ans. These  regiments  here  hotly  engaged  the  enemy,  and,  particularly 
in  the  movement  which  drove  him  for  a time,  advanced  considerably 
beyond  the  line  on  which  they  had  first  encountered  him  in  the  morning. 
They  only  withdrew  on  the  general  order  being  given  to  this  effect. 

The  three  regiments  which  formed  on  the  Baymond  road  as  their 
second  line  having  been  brought  into  some  kind  of  order,  and  Barton’s 
brigade,  on  the  left,  having  gone  in  and  engaged  the  enemy,  these  regi- 
ments immediately  thereupon  advanced  into  the  wood  in  their  front, 
and  formed  abreast  with  Barton,  engaging  the  enemy  on  ground  near 
that  originally  held  by  Lee.  The  contest  here  was  sharp  and  severe 
for  a time,  but  of  short  duration.  The  enemy,  flushed  with  his  pre- 
vious success,  and  in  number  much  superior  to  ours,  drove  our  men 
apparently  along  the  whole  division  front;  slowly  at  first,  afterwards 
more  rapidly,  till  on  reaching  the  road  the  flight  became  precipitate. 
On  this  occasion  scattered  bands  of  them  crossed  the  road  in  close  pur- 
suit of  the  fugitives.  After  this  it  became  impossible  to  rally  them 
again,  though  strenuous  efforts  were  made  to  do  so  several  hundred 
yards  from  the  road.  In  this,  as  in  the  first  and  more  successful  effort 
to  rally,  I was  greatly  assisted  by  Captain  Johnston,  whose  battery  was 
lost  in  the  first  action.  The  flight  was  continued  toward  the  lower 
bridge  over  Baker’s  Creek,  at  which  point  the  greater  portion  of  the 
army  crossed.  Crossing  with  several  members  of  my  staff  and  officers 
of  artillery  at  a point  between  the  bridges,  I repaired  to  the  upper 
bridge  and  reported  to  General  Barton,  whom  I found  there.  Bemain- 
ing  there  until  nearly  sunset,  the  bridge  was  then  destroyed,  or  par- 
tially  so,  and  we  fell  back  toward  Edwards  Depot.  Here,  with  por- 
tions of  two  brigades  assembled,  the  enemy’s  advance  was  held  in  check 
till  the  train  was  destroyed  and  the  army  had  nearly  passed  the  depot 
by  the  other  road.  We  then  continued  the  retreat  unmolested  to  the 
other  side  of  Big  Black. 

I received  valuable  assistance  from  the  members  of  my  staff,  who  were 
all  at  different  times  in  the  hottest  parts  of  the  fight. 

The  regimental  commanders  and  field  officers,  though  their  efforts 
were  unsuccessful,  without  an  exception  acted  with  great  courage  and 
judgment,  as  did  also,  as  a general  thing,  the  company  officers. 

The  list  ot  casualties  has  hitherto  been  given.  To  recapitulate,  I make 
the  following  statement : 

The  brigade  went  into  action  about  2,500  strong.  Its  losses  are  as 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS.  107 

follows:  Killed,  142 5 wounded,  314;  missing,  539;  total,  995.  Of  the 
number  reported  missing  it  is  probable  about  200  were  killed  or  wounded. 

This  brigade  took  no  part  in  the  battle  of  Big  Black.  Leaving  Bovina 
on  Sunday,  it  entered  Vicksburg  the  same  evening  (May  17). 

On  the  morning  of  the  18th,  it  moved  into  the  trenches,  where  it  re- 
mained without  relief  for  forty-seven  days,  until  the  capitulation  of  the 
city  on  July  4.  Its  right  rested  on  and  included  the  HalPs  Ferry  road, 
its  left  extending  to  the  square  fort  held  by  General  Lee’s  right.  No 
assault  was  made  by  the  enemy  along  the  brigade  front  during  the  con- 
tinuation of  the  siege.  An  almost  unremitting  fire  of  sharpshooters 
was  kept  up  during  all  hours  of  daylight  during  the  whole  time,  varied 
by  occasional  brisk  cannonading.  The  enemy’s  rifle-pits  in  time  were 
so  extended  as  to  almost  entirely  envelop  the  brigade  front,  and  were 
generally  about  150  yards  distant.  At  the  redoubts  on  the  Hall’s  Ferry 
road,  however,  they  had  approached  much  nearer,  and  were  in  posses- 
sion of  the  foot  of  the  slope  on  which  one  of  the  redoubts  was  con- 
structed, about  70  yards  distant,  at  which  point  they  were  shielded  by 
the  configuration  of  the  ground  from  the  fire  of  the  work. 

Sorties  were  made  upon  this  point  at  two  different  times,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  [C.  S.]  Guyton,  Fifty-seventh  Georgia,  commanding  on  each 
occasion,  and  on  each  a degree  of  success  was  attained,  in  the  second 
the  enemy  being  badly  beaten,  leaving  8 or  10  dead  on  the  field,  and 
losing  about  the  same  number  (one  a lieutenant-colonel)  in  prisoners. 
It  was  finally  deemed  advisable,  however,  to  leave  the  point  to  be  occu- 
pied by  them. 

At  the  time  of  the  capitulation  they  had  commenced  to  mine  at  this 
point,  as  also  at  another  in  front  of  the  Fifty-sixth  Georgia.  At  the 
first  named  of  these  points  we  were  constructing  a counter-mine. 

The  list  of  casualties  has  been  heretofore  given.  They  are  as  follows : 
Total  killed  and  wounded,  171,  of  which  number  about  43  were  killed. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

A.  GUMMING, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Third  Brigade. 

Assistant  Adjutant-General,  Stevenson's  Division. 


No.  33. 

Report  of  Col.  A.  W.  Reynolds , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Fourth  Brigade. 

Headquarters  Fourth  Brigade, 

Demopolis , Ala.,  July  27,  18G3. 

Major:  In  compliance  with  instructions  from  the  headquarters  of 
Major-General  Stevenson,  commanding  division,  to  report  the  part  taken 
by  my  brigade  in  the  action  at  Baker’s  Creek  and  siege  of  Vicksburg, 
I have  the  honor  respectfully  to  report  as  follows: 

My  brigade — consisting  of  the  Forty-third  Tennessee  Regiment,  CqIo- 
nel  [J.  AV.]  Gillespie;  Thirty-first  Tennessee  Regiment,  Colonel  [W.  M.] 
Bradford;  Third  Tennessee  Regiment  [P.  A.],  Colonel  [N.  J.]  Lillard; 
Fifty -ninth  Tennessee  Regiment,  Colonel  [W.  L.]  Eakin,  and  the  Third 
Maryland  Battery,  Capt.  F.  O.  Claiborne — left  Edwards  Depot,  on  the 
Southern  or  Jackson  Railroad,  at  12  o’clock  on  the  night  of  May  15,  as 
the  rear  guard  of  the  army  commanded  by  Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pember- 
ton, then  marching  in  the  direction  of  Raymond. 

The  rear  of  the  train  and  my  command  reached  the  junction  of  the 
Clinton  and  Raymond  roads  about  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  16tli, 


108 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


at  which  point  the  trains  and  brigade  were  halted  for  further  orders. 
At  6 a.  m.  the  train  was  ordered  to  move  to  the  rear  as  rapidly  as  pos- 
sible. At  6.30  a.  m.  I was  directed  to  form  my  brigade  in  line  of  battle 
on  the  Clinton  road,  fronting  the  road  leading  in  direction  of  Raymond, 
which  order  was  promptly  obeyed,  throwing  out  a line  of  skirmishers 
in  my  front  some  500  or  600  yards.  My  skirmishers  had  been  posted 
but  a short  time  when  they  engaged  the  skirmishers  of  the  enemy  on 
the  Raymond  road. 

Such  was  the  condition  of  affairs  when  I was  relieved  by  Brigadier- 
General  [S.  D.]  Lee’s  brigade  about  8 a.  m.,  orders  having  been  sent  to 
me  to  take  charge  of  and  guard  the  trains  to  a point  on  the  Brownsville 
road,  2^  miles  from  the  junction  of  that  road  and  the  road  leading  to 
Edwards  Depot.  I received  further  directions  to  so  arrange  my  com- 
mand as  to  give  the  train  proper  protection,  as  I would  alone  be  held 
responsible  for  its  safety.  I immediately  moved  rapidly  to  the  rear, 
overtook  the  train,  and  disposed  of  my  troops  as  follows:  A detachment 
in  front,  one  regiment  on  the  right  flank,  and  the  remainder  of  the  in- 
fantry and  the  battery  in  rear. 

In  this  order  I reached  the  point  designated  at  11  a.  m.,  when  I parked 
the  train  and  formed  my  line  of  battle,  facing  toward  the  enemy  and 
in  front  of  the  train.  My  battery  was  placed  in  position  to  protect  my 
front  and  flanks. 

The  position  taken  by  me  was  held  until  about  3 o’clock,  when  a mes- 
sage was  received  by  courier  from  Brigadier-General  Barton,  informing 
me  that  his  line  had  been  broken,  and  directing  me  to  dispatch  the  train 
to  the  rear  across  the  Big  Black,  and  re-enforce  him  with  all  my  available 
force  as  early  as  practicable.  I immediately  put  the  train  in  motion, 
leaving  two  regiments  and  a section  of  artillery  to  protect  it,  and  moved 
rapidly  with  the  remainder  of  my  force  to  the  support  of  General  Barton. 
On  arriving  at  a point  near  the  Baker’s  Greek  Bridge,  I observed  the 
troops  of  General  Barton’s  command  had  fallen  back  toward  Edwards 
Depot.  I at  once  sent  a courier  to  General  Barton,  asking  further  in- 
structions, who  returned  with  orders  to  fall  back  with  my  command  to 
Edwards  Depot.  It  was  now  after  4 p.  m.  By  this  time  the  enemy 
had  discovered  and  opened  upon  me  a fire  of  artillery,  and  were  moving 
with  a heavy  force  to  cut  me  off  from  the  depot,  i directed  my  artil- 
lery to  rejoin  the  section  left  on  the  Brownsville  road  as  quickly  as  pos- 
sible, and  I moved  with  the  infantry  toward  the  junction  of  the  roads. 
The  enemy  (about  one  division)  had  already  crossed  the  bridge  and  had 
gained  a point  nearer  the  depot  than  my  troops  had  succeeded  in  reach- 
ing. My  safety  now  depended  in  out-maneuvering  him.  I marched  in 
parallel  lines  with  him  for  at  least  the  half  of  a mile.  Taking  advantage 
of  a dense  wood,  I changed  my  direction  to  the  right,  and  by  a rapid 
movement  joined  the  other  troops  of  my  command,  and  made  for  Bridge- 
port— a point  on  the  Big  Black  1 J miles  above  the  bridge — where  our 
main  army  had  crossed.  At  Bridgeport  I found  a light  pontoon  bridge, 
over  which  I passed  two  regiments  and  one  piece  of  artillery.  In  at- 
tempting to  throw  over  a caisson,  the  bridge  gave  way,  carrying  down 
the  caisson.  I extricated  myself  from  this  dilemma  by  cutting  out  one 
of  the  boats  forming  the  bridge,  and  by  it  I crossed  my  entire  command 
by  3 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  17th. 

I remained  at  Bridgeport  until  near  daylight,  when  I destroyed  the 
boats  there  and  at  a point  1 mile  above,  and  moved  toward  Bovina, 
sending  an  officer  forward  to  inform  the  lieutenant-general  of  my  where- 
abouts. I received  instructions  from  the  lieutenant-general  to  proceed 
to  Vicksburg  by  the  nearest  route  and  there  await  orders. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS. 


109 


I reached  Vicksburg  at  5 p.  m.  on  the  17th,  and  encamped  in  rear  of 
the  intrenchments  near  the  J ackson  road.  The  trains  which  were  placed 
under  my  charge  arrived  in  safety,  with  the  exception  of  one  ordnance 
wagon,  which  broke  down  crossing  the  Big  Black  Swamp. 

In  conclusion,  I beg  leave  to  say  that  in  the  arduous  marches  and 
perilous  positions  in  which  my  troops  have  been  placed  they  performed 
all  their  duties  with  cheerfulness  and  courage. 

All  the  officers  and  men  behaved  well.  I would  particularly  call  the 
attention  of  the  major-general  to  the  universal  good  conduct  and  prompt- 
ness of  Colonel  Gillespie,  of  the  Forty-third  Regiment ; Colonel  Lillard, 
of  the  Third  Regiment,  and  Colonel  Bradford,  of  the  Thirty-first  Regi- 
ment ; also  to  Major  [ J.  C.]  Boyd,  of  the  Third  Regiment,  always  active 
and  prompt  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties. 

To  Lieut.  William  A.  M.  Patton,  my  aide  and  acting  [assistant]  adju- 
tant-general, lam  under  many  obligations  for  meritorious  services  ren- 
dered. Captain  Claiborne,  of  the  Third  Maryland  Battery,  and  his  first 
lieutenant  (Lieutenant  [J.  B.]  Rowan),  performed  their  duties  admira- 
bly and  gallantly. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

1 A.  W.  REYNOLDS, 

Colonel , Commanding  Fourth  Brigade . 

Maj.  J.  J.  Reeve, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Stevenson’s  Division , Demopolis , Ala. 


No.  34. 

Reports  of  Col.  Francis  M.  Cockrell , Second  Missouri  Infantry , com- 
manding First  Brigade , Boweris  Division , including  engagement  at  Big 
Black  River  Bridge. 

Demopolis,  Ala.,  August  4,  1863. 
Major:  Herewith  I send  you  my  official  report  of  the  battles  of 
Baker’s  Creek,  Big  Black,  and  the  siege  of  Vicksburg.  I beg  the 
leniency  of  the  lieutenant-general  for  not  having  sent  it  sooner.  1 hope 
it  is  in  time  yet.  It  is  very  difficult  to  make  out  reports  extending 
through  so  long  a space  of  time.  The  movements  of  the  First  Brigade 
(Missouri  Volunteers)  during  this  siege  from  point  to  point,  and  portions 
of  it  being  thrown  to  the  support  of  every  brigade  occupying  a line  of 
trenches,  and  the  many  varied  incidents  connected  therewith,  would 
alone  make  a large  volume.  I have  condensed  as  much  as  I could. 

In  my  reports  of  Baker’s  Creek  and  Big  Black  I have  been  more  par- 
ticular in  stating  in  full  various  matters,  such  as  the  manner  of  bivouack- 
ing the  night  previous  to  the  battle ; the  movements  of  the  enemy  in  my 
front  next  morning  up  to  the  time  I was  ordered  to  re-enforce  General 
Stevenson;  my  call  for  re- enforcements,  and  answer  of  the  lieutenant- 
general  as  to  what  troops  were  expected  to  re-enforce  my  line,  and  the 
affair  at  the  crossing  of  Baker’s  Creek,  and  my  delay  there  until  the 
gaining  of  the  road  by  the  enemy,  causing  me  to  travel  my  course  alone 
for  some  distance.  I did  this  because  I felt  it  to  be  my  duty  toward  the 
lieutenant-general.  I have  prepared  the  whole  report  in  a great  hurry, 
and  send  it  to  you  as  soon  as  completed. 

I have  the  honor,  major,  to  be,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  soldier, 

F.  M.  COCKRELL, 

Colonel. 

[Maj.  Li.  W.  Memminger,  Assistant  Adjutant- General.] 


110 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


[Inclosure.] 

Pemopolis,  Ala.,  August  1,  1863. 

Major:  In  consequence  of  the  deatli  of  my  gallant  and  lamented 
division  commander,  Maj.  Gen.  John  S.  Bowen,  I respectfully  beg  leave 
to  submit  to  you  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken  by  the  First  Bri- 
gade (Missouri  Volunteers),  Bowen’s  division,  composed  of  the  follow- 
ing-named infantry  regiments,  to  wit : The  First  Missouri  Infantry,  com- 
posed of  the  First  and  Fourth  Begiments,  consolidated ; the  Second  Mis- 
souri Infantry ; the  Third  Missouri  Infantry:  the  Fifth  Missouri  Infantry; 
the  Sixth  Missouri  Infantry;  Captain  [Henry]  Guibor’s  battery;  Captain 
[John  C.]  Landis’  battery,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  [John  M.]  Lan- 
gan,  and  the  Wade  Battery,  under  Lieutenant  [Bichard  C.]  Walsh,  in  the 
battles  of  Baker’s  Creek  and  Big  Black,  and  during  the  siege  of  Vicks- 
burg. 

This  brigade  bivouacked  near  the  battle-field  of  Baker’s  Creek  on  the 
night  of  May  15  last,  and  immediately  threw  forward  to  the  distance  of 
over  100  yards  a strong  line  of  pickets,  and  early  on  the  morning  of  the 
16th  instant  changed  position  to  the  front  and  left  of  the  first  line,  and 
threw  forward  far  in  advance  of  the  battlevline  five  companies  of  skir- 
mishers : Captain  [Martin]  Burke’s  company  (D),  First  Missouri;  Captain 
[T.  B.]  Wilson’s  company  (G),  Second  Missouri;  Captain  [Patrick]  Can- 
niff’s  company  (F),  Fifth  Missouri;  Captain  [W.  C.]  Adams’  company 
(G),  Third  Missouri,  and  Captain  [ Jepthah]  Duncan’s  company  (E),  Sixth 
Missouri,  all  under  command  of  Lieut.  Col.  F.  L.  Hubbell,  of  the  Third 
Missouri  Infantry.  Our  cavalry  soon  engaged  the  enemy  a mile  or  more 
in  front  of  this  brigade,  and  slowly  retired  to  the  rear  through  my  line. 
Soon  after  this  a line  of  the  enemy  appeared  about  1,200  yards  in  my 
front,  when  Lieutenant  Langan  and  Lieutenant  Walsh  opened  on  them 
and  drove  them  from  the  field,  and  immediately  the  enemy  brought 
forward  a battery,  and  replied  lively  to  our  batteries,  disabling  one  of 
Lieutenant  Langan’s  12-pounder  guns  and  killing  4 men  by  the  ex- 
plosion of  one  shell,  and  very  soon  afterward  disabling  the  other  12- 
pounder  gun.  Both  these  disabled  guns  were  carried  safely  from  the 
field.  The  enemy’s  battery  soon  withdrew,  and  we  remained  in  the  same 
position  unengaged  with  the  enemy  until  about  or  after  1 p.  in.,  when  I 
received  an  order  directly  from  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton  to  move 
and  re-enforce  Brigadier-General  [S.  D.]  Lee,  on  the  left  of  Major-General 
Stevenson’s  line.  I moved  in  quick  and  double-quick  time  toward  the 
designated  line,  but  before  arriving  there  I received  another  order  to 
move  to  Major-General  Stevenson’s  right,  and,  moving  by  file  right,  I 
attempted  to  gain  that  portion  of  his  line ; but  in  consequence  of  his 
troops  giving  way,  and  the  exposure  of  my  line  moving  by  the  left  flank 
to  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  rapidly  advancing,  I immediately  on  the  left,  by 
file  into  line,  formed  the  brigade  in  line  of  battle  under  a heavy  fire,  rest- 
ing the  right  of  the  Fifth  Infantry  on  the  left  of  General  Cumming’s 
brigade,  which  had  been  giving  way,  but  had  apparently  rallied  behind 
a cut  in  the  road  near  Captain  [James  F.]  Waddell’s  battery,  then  rapidly 
firing,  and  moving  to  the  left  of  my  line  to  place  the  Second  Missouri 
Infantry  in  position.  And  before  having  completed  this  I received  in- 
formation from  Captain  [B.  L.]  Maupin,  acting  on  my  staff,  that  the 
right  of  the  brigade  was  falling  back,  and  hastening  thither  I found  that 
this  brigade  on  my  right  had  almost  wholly  disappeared,  and  that  the 
enemy  had  captured  Captain  Waddell’s  battery  and  were  occupying 
the  ground  and  road  just  previously  occupied  by  this  brigade  of  Major- 
General  Stevenson’s  division,  and  were  firing  a most  destructive  enfilad- 
ing fire  into  the  brigade  from  right  to  left,  hnd  that  in  consequence  of 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS.  Ill 

this  fearful  fire  portions  of  the  Third  and  Fifth  Missouri  Infantry  Regi- 
ments had  fallen  back  a short  distance.  I ordered  them  to  regain  their 
first  line,  which  was  quickly  done.  Then  I ordered  the  brigade  to 
charge  the  heavy,  strong  lines  of  the  enemy,  rapidly  advancing  and 
cheering,  flushed  with  their  success  and  the  capture  of  our  guns 5 and 
in  the  most  gallant,  dashing,  fearless  manner,  officers  and  men  with 
loud  cheers  threw  themselves  forward  at  a run  against  the  enemy’s 
hitherto  victorious  lines.  And  just  at  this  time  the  First  Missouri  In- 
fantry, coming  up,  was  placed  on  the  extreme  right,  and  most  gallantly 
charged  a very  superior  force  of  the  enemy  immediately  in  their  front, 
at  the  same  time  being  exposed  to  such  a destructive  raking  fire  from  the 
enemy  on  their  right — all  the  troops  on  the  right  having  fallen  back — 
that  Colonel  [A.  C.]  Riley  had  to  change  the  front  of  his  two  right  com- 
panies. Soon  the  enemy’s  lines  in  front  of  this  brigade  were  checked, 
and  after  a very  stubborn  resistance  and  a very  destructive  fire  from  my 
whole  line,  firing  continuously  in  its  rapid  advance,  they  were  severely 
repulsed  and  driven  back.  At  this  time  Lieutenant- Colonel  Hubbell, 
with  the  before-named  five  companies  of  skirmishers,  who  withdrew 
from  the  front  of  my  former  position  after  the  brigade  had  moved,  came 
up,  and,  forming  in  rear  of  center  of  the  brigade  line,  most  cheeringly 
joined  in  the  charge  and  overtook  our  lines. 

Fresh  troops  of  the  enemy  were  rapidly  thrown  in  front  of  our  lines, 
and  were  immediately  engaged  and  repulsed.  This  fearful  strife  was 
kept  up  uninterruptedly  for  two  and  a half  hours.  The  soldiers  of  this 
brigade  fired  away  the  40  rounds  of  ammunition  in  their  cartridge- 
boxes,  and  instead  of  abandoning  the  field  took  from  the  cartridge-boxes 
of  their  fallen  and  wounded  soldiers,  and  even  stripped  the  slain  and 
wounded  of  the  enemy,  with  whom  the  ground  was  thickly  strewn,  of 
all  their  cartridges,  many  of  them  firing  75  to  90  rounds.  Captain 
Waddell’s  battery  was  recaptured,  and  this  gallant,  fearless  officer  im- 
mediately, with  the  assistance  of  one  or  two  men,  opened  his  battery 
on  the  fleeing  enemy.  A battery  of  the  enemy  attempted  to  check  the 
impetuous  advance,  and  was  quickly  charged  and  captured,  but  could 
not  be  brought  off  on  account  of  the  horses  being  killed.  When  all  the 
ammunition  in  cartridge-boxes  and  that  gathered  from  the  slain  and 
wounded  of  friend  and  foe  was  exhausted,  the  troops  gradually  began  to 
fall  back. 

In  the  early  part  of  the  engagement,  I sent  two  of  my  staff  officers  for 
ammunition,  but  the  ordnance  train  could  not  be  found.  Colonel  [ J arnes] 
McCown,  of  the  Fifth  Missouri  Infantry,  sent  his  major  after  ammuni- 
tion, but  he  likewise  failed.  Col.  A.  C.  Riley,  of  the  First  Missouri  In- 
fantry, in  his  official  report  to  me,  states  that  his  ordnance  sergeant 
started  to  him  to  supply  ammunition  fired  away  by  his  men,  but  was 
ordered  across  Baker’s  Creek  by  General  Stevenson.  Captain  Guibor’s 
battery,  under  Lieutenant  [William]  Corkery,  was  placed  in  position  on 
the  left  of  the  brigade,  and  did  effective  service  in  saving  the  left  of  the 
brigade  from  being  flanked.  Lieutenants  Langan  and  Walsh,  with  their 
batteries,  did  good  service  on  the  right  of  the  brigade  in  checking  the 
enemy  in  his  attempt  to  gain  the  rear  of  our  right  flank. 

At  this  time  I received  notice  through  Captain  [W.  B.]  Pittman,  of 
Brigadier-General  Green’s  staff,  that  there  was  an  order  to  retreat,  which 
I delayed  communicating,  hoping  that  Major-General  Loring’s  division 
might  still  arrive  in  time  to  push  forward  the  successes  and  advantages 
so  gallantly  and  dearly  won,  having  met  with  and  been  informed  by  the 
lieutenant-general  commanding,  in  answer  to  my  request  for  re-enforce- 
ments, that  he  had  pot  a m&n  until  General  Loring  should  arrive. 


112 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


In  the  mean  time  the  enemy  were  rapidly  advancing  on  the  right,  in 
order  of  battle  almost  perpendicular  to  our  own,  and  I was  thus  forced 
to  withdraw,  which  was  done  in  good  order.  Retreating  to  and  crossing 
Baker’s  Creek,  I there  received  an  order  from  General  Bowen  to  remain 
in  position,  so  as  to  protect  the  crossing  and  enable  General  Boring’s 
division  to  cross  over,  and  then  to  move  on  to  Big  Black.  While  delay- 
ing here,  the  enemy,  having  crossed  the  creek  above  us,  advanced  and 
placed  a battery  in  position  to  command  the  road  from  this  crossing  to 
Edwards  Depot,  and  immediately  a brisk  fire  was  opened  from  this 
battery. 

A short  time  after  this  battery  began  to  fire;  I heard  commands  given 
to  troops  at  the  crossing,  indicating  that  they  were  marching  back.  I 
immediately  hastened  to  the  crossing,  and  found  Major-General  Steven- 
son and  staff*  and  Colonel  [T.  M.]  Scott’s  Twelfth  Louisiana  Regiment 
going  back  with  the  belief  that  the  enemy  had  gained  the  road  and  cut 
them  off.  I informed  General  Stevenson  that  this  brigade  was  there 
and  what  my  orders  were.  He  and  Colonel  Scott’s  regiment  immedi- 
ately crossed  over,  and  Colonel  Scott  moved  on.  After  this  regiment 
passed,  seeiug  no  other  troops  coming  to  cross  (not  even  stragglers), 
and  believing  that  the  enemy  probably  occupied  the  road  to  Edwards 
Depot,  I moved  the  brigade,  leaving  the  road  to  Edwards  Depot  to  my 
right,  and  after  marching  under  cover  of  darkness  through  plantations, 
along  and  across  ravines,  and  leaving  Edwards  Depot  to  my  right,  I in- 
tersected the  road  from  Edwards  Depot  to  Big  Black,  and  then  marched 
inside,  and  by  direction  of  Brigadier-General  Vaughn  bivouacked  in 
rear  of  the  defenses  south  of  the  railroad.  Soon  after  leaving  my  posi- 
tion at  the  crossing  of  Baker’s  Creek,  I saw  Colonel  Scott’s  regiment 
marching  back,  and  was  informed  that  General  Boring  had  ordered  this 
regiment  back  to  his  division,  south  of  Baker’s  Creek.  I ordered  the 
batteries  of  this  brigade  not  to  halt  at  the  crossing,  but  move  rapidly 
to  Big  Black,  and  not  a gun  was  lost. 

In  this  battle  this  brigade  suffered  heavy  losses  in  killed,  wounded, 
and  missing,  as  will  appear  by  the  following  statement : 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

Total. 

1st  Missouri 

29 

94 

52 

175 

2d  Missouri 

10 

35 

38 

qq 

3d  Missouri 

13 

63 

44 

oo 

190 

5th  Missouri 

4 

49 

37 

90 

Gth  Missouri 

5 

49 

67 

321 

Wade  Battery 

2 

2 

4 

Landis’  battery 

4 

1 

Guibor’s  battery 

2 

2 

Total 

65 

293 

242 

COO 

Among  the  killed  and  wounded  were  many  of  our  best  officers.  All 
the  killed  fell  at  their  post  in  the  full  and  fearless  discharge  of  their 
whole  duty. 

Among  the  slain  of  this  well-embattled  field  must  ever  be  held  in 
lively  remembrance  the  brave  and  fearless  Captains  [W.  C.  P.]  Carring- 
ton and  [Norval]  Spangler  and  Lieutenant  [T.  J.]  Dobyns,  of  the  First 
Missouri  Infantry,  and  Captain  [William  P.]  Mcllvane,  of  the  Third 
Missouri  Infantry ; and  among  the  wounded  (who  afterward  died),  Lieut. 
Col.  F.  L.  Hubbell,  of  the  Third  MissQuH,  commanding  five  companies. 


Chap.  XXXVI.  ] 


BATTLE  OF 


champion’s  HILL,  MIIS. 


113 


Of  skirmishers,  and  Captain  [H.  G.]  McKinney,  of  the  Fifth  Missouri 
Infantry,  and  Lieutenant  [R.  8.]  Rankin,  of  the  First  Missouri  Infantry. 

I cannot  speak  with  too  much  praise  of  the  gallantry,  coolness,  and 
dashing,  fearless,  and  even  reckless  impetuosity  shown  by  the  ofhcers 
and  soldiers  of  this  brigade  in  forming  their  line  ot  battle  under  heavy 
fire,  with  the  troops  on  their  right  and  left  falling  back  past  them  in 
disorder  and  confusion,  and  an  enemy  greatly  outnumbering  them  rap- 
idly advancing,  cheering  and  flushed  with  their  hitherto  successful 
charges  and  their  capture  of  the  guns,  and  then,  in  the  midst  of  these, 
in  throwing  themselves  into  the  breach  with  continued  cheers^and  clriy- 
ing  the  enemy  back  500  to  600  yards,  and  recapturing  Captain  Waddell  s 

battery  and  a battery  of  the  enemy.  . , 

With  special  commendation  I mention  the  names  of  Colonel  Riley  ana 
Lieutenant-Colonel  [Hugh  A.]  Garland,  of  the  First  Missouri  Infantry, 
and  Lieutenant- Colonel  [Pembroke  S.]  Senteny  and  Major  [T.  M.J  Car- 
ter, of  the  Second  Missouri  Infantry,  and  Colonel  [W.  R.]  Gause  and 
Major  [J.  K.1  McDowell,  of  the  Third  Missouri  Infantry,  and  Cokmel 
McCown,  Lieutenant-Colonel  [R.  S.]  Bevier,  and  Major  [O.  A.]  Wad- 
dell, of  the  Fifth  Missouri  Infantry,  and  Major  [Stephen]  Cooper,  com- 
manding the  Sixth  Missouri  Infantry.  _ _ ' 

Capt.  IJpton  M.  Young,  acting  with  me,  was  severely  wounded  at  the 

post  of  duty  and  danger.  • 

My  acting  adjutant  (J.  M.  Flanagan)  and  my  acting  aide  (R.  L.  Mau- 
pin)  merit  special  mention  for  their  coolness  and  discretion  amid  dangers. 


BATTLE  OF  Bid  BLACK. 

On  the  morning  of  May  17,  I received  an  order  from  General  Bowen 
that  his  division  would  remain  on  the  east  side  of  Big  Black.  I com- 
municated with,  and  reported  to,  Brigadier-General  Vaughn,  and,  bv 
his  direction,  I relieved  all  that  portion  of  his  line  or  brigade  in  the  rifle- 
pits  south  of  the  railroad  and  as  far  toward  our  right  as  the  bayou. 
This  was  early  in  the  morning,  and  the  brigade  was  at  once  placed  in 
this  line.  Brigadier-Generals  Vaughn  and  Green  occupied  the  rifle-pits 
north  of  the  railroad,  General  Green’s  brigade  being  on  the  left.  The 
battery  horses  on  my  line  were  all  sent  back  to  the  river,  not  by  my 
order  (the  guns  being  in  position  when  I moved  into  the.  trenches),  but 
by  whose  order  they  were  sent  so  far  to  the  rear  1 do  not  know.  The 
enemy  soon  appeared  in  my  front,  advancing  a line  of  skirmishers  and 
opening  on  us  with  two  batteries,  and  soon  a line  of  the  enemy’s  in- 
fantry began  to  move  toward  my  line,  when  the  batteries  opened  on 
them  and  drove  them  back  in  confusion.  After  a lively  skirmish  fire 
had  been  kept  up  for  some  time  along  our  whole  front,  I saw  the  line 
between  the  railroad  and  the  first  skirt  of  timber  north  of  the  railroad 
beginning  to  give  way,  and  then  running  in  disorder.  I watched  this 
disorderly  falling  back  a few  moments,  when  I saw  that  the  enemy  had 
possession  of  the  trenches  north  of  the  railroad,  and  were  rapidly  ad- 
vancing toward  the  bridge,  our  only  crossing  and  way  of  escape,  the 
enemy  now  being  nearer  this  crossing  than  my  line.  I therefore  or- 
dered the  brigade  to  fall  back,  and,  moving  rapidly,  gained  the  bridge, 
crossed  over,  and  reformed  on  the  west  bank  of  the  river  north  of  the 
railroad.  A portion  of  my  command  being  cut  off  from  the  bridge, 
swam  the  river  and  rejoined  their  command. 

In  crossing  the  bridge  I lost  2 men  killed  by  the  enemy’s  shell.  Cap- 
tain Guibor’s  and  Lieutenant  Walsh’s  batteries  were  necessarily  aban- 
doned. Lieutenant  Langan’s  battery  not  being  in  the  trenches,  was 

8 R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


114 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Ciiap.  XXXVL 


saved,  and  the  section  of  24-pounder  howitzers  being*  posted  on  the  west 
bank  of  the  river,  did  valuable  service  in  checking  the  enemy  until  we 
crossed.  Soon  I received  orders  to  march  to  Vicksburg,  which  was  done 
the  same  evening. 

Ca.pt.  T.  B.  Wilson,  of  the  Second  Missouri  Infantry,  Company  G, 
claiming  to  have  been  exhausted,  did  not  go  with  his  company  into  the 
battle  of  Baker’s  Creek,  and,  having  made  .his  way  to  Big  Black,  joined 
his  company  in  the  rifle-pits  early  on  the  morning  of  the  17th  instant, 
and,  when  his  company  was  ordered  to  fall  back,  abandoned  his  com- 
pany and  remained  lying  in  the  rifle-pits,  and  was  captured  by  the 
enemy,  and  while  a prisoner  stated  to  Col.  Elijah  Gates,  of  the  First 
Missouri  Cavalry  (who  was  also  a prisoner),  that  he  (Captain  Wilson) 
intended  to  take  the  oath  and  then  go  to  fighting  the  enemy  as  a guer- 
rilla. Such  conduct  merits  a dismissal  in  disgrace,  and  such  an  officer 
should  not  remain  in  the  way  of  gallant  and  efficient  officers  now  com- 
manding his  company.* 

* # # * # 

I have  the  honor,  major,  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

F.  M.  COCKRELL, 

Colonel , Commanding  First  Brigade  Missouri  Volunteers. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General  to  Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Headquarters  Missouri  Brigade, 

November  21,  1863. 

Colonel  : Your  favor  asking  information  in  regard  to  the  battle  of 
Baker’s  Creek  is  at  hand,  and  I hasten  to  give  you  what  information  I 
possess. 

On  May  15,  the  army  moved  from  its  position,  south  of  Edwards 
Depot,  back  to  Edwards  Depot,  and  thence  eastward  near  the  railroad 
track,  and  crossed  Baker’s  Creek  on  a bridge  near  and  south  of  the  rail- 
road track,  and  moved  eastward  a short  distance,  and  then  moved  to 
the  right  and  south  of  the  railroad.  I was  then  colonel  commanding 
First  Brigade,  in  Bowen’s  division.  We  bivouacked  that  night  between 
9 and  10  o’clock  near  where  the  battle  w^as  fought  next  day,  and  while 
bivouacking  discovered  a number  of  lights,  which  I supposed  to  be  the 
camp-fires  of  the  enemy.  This  was  the  general  conversation  among 
officers  and  men  of  my  brigade,  that  these  lights  were  the  enemy’s  camp- 
fires, and  were  supposed  to  be  in  the  direction  of  and  to  the  south  of 
Clinton,  Miss.  I had  no  official  information  in  reference  to  them. 

About  7 a.  m.  16th  instant,  a brisk  cannonade  began  between  our  cav- 
alry (Col.  Wirt  Adams’  regiment,  I believe)  and  the  enemy,  about  1 
mile  in  front  of  my  brigade,  on  the  road  toward  Raymond,  Miss.  Bowen’s 
division  formed  the  center  of  line,  Major-General  Boring’s  division  the 
right,  and  Major-General  Stevenson’s  the  left,  and  I presume  Major- 
General  Stevenson’s  division  covered  and  protected  the  bridge  across 
Baker’s  Creek,  over  which  our  army  had  just  passed. 

On  the  morning  of  the  16th,  then,  we  had  this  road  and  bridge  across 
Baker’s  Creek,  and  the  ford  on  Baker’s  Creek  leading  from  Edwards 
Depot  to  Raymond,  Miss.,  which  was  in  rear  of  and  covered  from  right 

*For  portion  here  omitted,  see  “Siege  of  Vicksburg,’7  pp.  414-418, 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  HILL,  MISS.  115 

wing,  and  over  which  we  retreated  that  evening  after  our  defeat,  Gen- 
eral Stevenson’s  division  having  been  driven  from  the  bridge  referred 
to  on  his  left.  After  about  one  hour’s  cannonading  between  the  cavalry 
and  enemy  above  referred  to,  this  cavalry  retired  through  my  line,  and 
about  10  a.  m.  a line  of  the  enemy  appeared  in  my  front,  distant  about 
half  a mile,  and  I opened  on  them  with  two  of  my  batteries,  and  soon 
engaged  and  drove  away  a battery  of  the  enemy.  This  was  the  first 
cannonading  between  our  lines  and  the  enemy,  except  the  cavalry  skir- 
mish referred  to,  and,  in  fact,  the  opening  of 7 the  battle.  The  enemy 
never  advanced  farther  in  my  front.  Between  11  and  12  o’clock  the 
firing  began  on  General  Stevenson’s  front,  skirmishing  and  cannonad- 
ing as  I judged  from  the  sound,  and  I suppose  it  was  nearly  12  m.  before 
General  Stevenson’s  line  became  hotly  engaged.  About  1 p.  m.  I was 
ordered  to  his  support. 

After  the  defeat  we  crossed  over  Baker’s  Creek  at  the  ford  referred 
to,  General  Tilghman’s  brigade  holding  the  enemy  in  check  on  our  right 
till  we  crossed,  Loring’s  division  excepted.  After  the  defeat  our  army 
(except  Loring’s  division)  crossed  over  Baker’s  Creek,  and  I would  say 
that,  in  my  opinion,  our  whole  army  could  safely  have  crossed  back  over 
Baker’s  Creek  after  the  cannonading  between  the  cavalry  referred  to 
and  even  after  the  engagement  beween  my  batteries  and  the  enemy  re- 
ferred to.  After  crossing  Baker’s  Creek,  there  could  have  been,  in  my 
opinion,  no  trouble  in  reaching  Edwards  Depot  (only  a short  distance), 
and  with  Baker’s  Creek  then  between  us  and  the  enemy. 

I had  no  official  information  as  to  the  nearness  of  the  enemy  on  the 
evening  of  the  5th  instant  (the  evening  before  the  battle),  and  can  only 
give  my  own  observations.  As  to  the  time  the  battle  began,  I only 
speak  from  recollection,  but  think  I am  very  nearly  correct ; and  as  to 
whether  the  army  could  have  reached  Edwards  Depot  by  returning  as 
soon  as  the  presence  of  the  enemy  was  discovered,  I can  only  give  my 
own  opinion  from  my  knowledge  of  the  position  of  our  own  lines  and 
the  two  crossings  referred  to. 

I have  the  honor,  colonel,  to  be,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

E.  M.  COCKEELL, 

Brigadier - General. 

Col.  B.  S.  Ewell, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


No.  35. 

Report  of  Col.  Thomas  P.  Dockery , Nineteenth  Arkansas  Infantry , Sec- 
ond Brigade. 

Headquarters, 
Enterprise , Miss.,  July  29,  1863. 

Sir  : Although  not  the  ranking  officer,  yet,  in  obedience  to  the  order 
of  the  lieutenant-general  commanding,  I submit  the  following  as  the 
report  of  the  action  of  the  Second  Brigade,  Bowen’s  division,  in  the 
battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  or  Baker’s  Creek,  on  May  16  last : 

On  May  12,  the  brigade  was  ordered  into  position  in  the  ditches  at 
Big  Black,  Colonel  [Elijah]  Gates,  with  his  regiment  (the  First  Missouri 
Cavalry)  and  a section  of  artillery,  being  on  picket  near  Edwards  Depot. 


116 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


At  3 a.  m.  on  the  13th,  the  brigade  was  ordered  to  move  to  Edwards 
Depot,  and  take  a strong  position  about  a mile  from  town,  on  the  Port 
Gibson  road,  and  hold  it  to  the  last.  Accordingly,  the  brigade  moved 
out  and  reached  Edwards  Depot  about  daylight,  and  proceeded  out  on 
the  Port  Gibson  road.  After  marching  about  2J  miles,  General  Bowen 
joined  General  Green.  At  this  point  the  First  Battalion  Arkansas  Cav- 
alry (dismounted),  sharpshooters,  was  deployed  as  skirmishers,  and  the 
brigade. ordered  to  countermarch.  It  moved  back  about  three-quarters 
of  a mile,  and  formed  in  line  of  battle  on  the  left  of  the  Port  Gibson 
road.  About  noon  General  Boring  sent  an  order  to  General  Green  to 
advance  his  skirmishers  and  feel  of  the  enemy.  The  skirmishers  and 
pickets  were  thrown  forward,  and  soon  engaged  those  of  the  enemy  near 
Fourteen-Mile  Creek.  After  a few  minutes7  skirmishing,  the  enemy  fell 
back.  All  attempts  to  draw  him  out  from  the  creek  proved  fruitless. 

At  2 p.  m.  on  the  15th,  the  brigade  was  ordered  to  move  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Eaymond,  on  the  military  road.  The  brigade  moved  back  to 
Edwards  Depot ; from  thence  across  Baker’s  Creek  on  the  Clinton  road. 
After  crossing  the  creek,  the  brigade  moved  on  a right-hand  road,  cross- 
ing a plantation,  and  about  11  p.  m.  bivouacked  for  the  night  in  line  of 
battle,  the  right  of  the  brigade  resting  on  the  Eaymond  road. 

About  sunrise  on  the  morning  of  the  16th,  the  pickets  being  engaged, 
the  brigade  was  ordered  to  move  back  about  200  yards  to  the  crest  of 
the  hill,  and  there  form  line  of  battle.  After  remaining  in  this  position 
about  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  General  Buford  took  the  ground  occu- 
pied by  the  division,  and  the  brigade  was  ordered  to  move  to  the  rear, 
to  be  held  in  Reserve.  Accordingly,  it  was  moved  in  line  of  battle  about 
three-quarters  of  a mile,  when  the  line  was  again  formed.  As  soon  as 
done,  the  brigade  was  ordered  to  advance,  bearing  to  the  left.  Heavy 
skirmishing  was  heard  on  our  left  wing.  After  some  maneuvering,  the 
brigade  recrossed  the  plantation  and  halted  in  the  timber  on  a ravine. 
The  battle  at  this  time  was  raging  with  great  fierceness  on  the  left  wing, 
and  the  brigade  was  ordered  to  move  rapidly  by  the  left  flank  to  its 
support.  After  moving  about  a mile,  the  division  of  Major-General 
Stevenson  was  met,  having  been  repulsed,  and  closely  pursued  by  the 
enemy.  The  troops  were  formed  between  our  retreating  forces  and 
the  advancing  foe,  and  charged  the  enemy.  The  fighting  now  became 
desperate.  The  enemy  finally  gave  way. 

The  formation  of  the  country  was  such  that  the  troops  could  scarcely 
advance  faster  than  a walk,  and  many  of  the  hills  were  ascended  with 
great  difficulty;  notwithstanding,  the  command  pushed  impetuously  for- 
ward, driving  back  in  confusion  the  many  fresh  lines  formed  to  meet  our 
gallant  troops.  The  enemy  had  been  driven  over  a mile,  all  the  artillery 
captured  from  Major-General  Stevenson’s  division  recaptured,  and  sev- 
eral pieces  taken  from  the  enemy.  I notified  General  Green,  command- 
ing brigade,  that  my  ammunition  was  about  exhausted.  He  replied  that 
the  ordnance  train  had  been  ordered  from  the  field,  and  it  would  be  im- 
possible to  refill  the  cartridge-boxes ; that  the  men  must  use  the  ammu- 
nition of  our  and  the  enemy’s  killed  and  wounded ; that  the  enemy  must 
be  driven  as  long  as  it  were  possible  to  advance  the  lines,  if  it  had  to  be 
done  with  empty  guns.  About  this  time  the  enemy  began  to  flank  us 
on  the  right.  A battery  soon  opened  upon  them. 

Here  1 would  mention  and  most  favorably  recommend  to  the  notice  of 
the  lieutenant-general  commanding  Sergt.  E.  H.  G.  Gaines,  of  Company 
K,  Twenty -third  Alabama  Infantry,  of  General  [S.  D.]  Lee’s  brigade, 
who,  unassisted,  used  with  good  effect  a 12-pounder  howitzer  on  the 
flanking  column.  This  sergeant  alone  fired  about  12  or  15  rounds,  when, 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPIONS  HILL,  MISS.  117 

being  noticed  by  General  Green,  4 volunteers  were  obtained  from  the 
regiment  supporting  a battery  a little  to  the  right  (I  think  it  was  a 
Georgia  regiment),  who  gallantly  assisted  Sergeant  Gaines  in  working 
the  piece,  causing  the  enemy  to  stop  their  advance  on  that  particular 
point.  The  volunteers  (whose  names  I have  not  been  able  to  learn) 
deserve  great  credit  for  their  bravery. 

The  enemy  continued  the  flank  movement,  bearing  farther  to  the  right. 
Captain  [ W.  B.l  Pittman,  assistant  adjutant-general,  was  sent  to  the  lieu- 
tenant-general commanding  to  notify  him  of  the  movement  and  ask  tor 
re-enforcements  to  check  it,  and  also  to  strengthen  the  right  of  the  bri- 
gade. The  Twelfth  Louisiana  was  sent  to  the  support  of  tlie  right.  JN  o 
troops  having  been  sent  to  oppose  the  flanking  force,  the  movement  was 
completed,  and  the  brigade,  when  it  was  driving  everything  in  its  front 
from  right  to  left,  and  was  within  400  or  500  yards  of  the  enemy's  ord- 
nance train,  was  ordered  to  fallback  to  prevent  being  entirely  cut  oft. 
Slowly  and  reluctantly,  although  terribly  cut  to  pieces,  the  brigade  fell 
back,  and  moved  to  the  ford  on  Baker’s  Creek,  leaving  our  dead  and 
wounded  on  the  field,  the  ambulances  and  many  of  the  surgeons  having 
been  ordered  off  previous  to  the  commencement  of  the  battle. 

At  Baker’s  Creek  General  Bowen  directed  that  the  troops  take  posi- 
tion and  hold  the  crossing  until  the  other  troops  had  crossed.  Before 
the  troops  could  get  into  position  or  be  Supplied  with  ammunition,  the 
enemy  crossed  the  creek  above  the  ford  with  a battery  and  an  infantry 
force,"  and  opened  a heavy  fire  upon  us  with  the  artillery,  at  the  same 
time  moving  the  infantry  toward  the  road,  threatening  to  cut  off  the 
command  from  Edwards  Depot.  The  Third  Missouri  Cavalry  (dis- 
mounted) was  deployed  as  skirmishers  on  the  creek.  General  Gieen 
moved  the  brigade  as  rapidly  as  possible  toward  Edwards  Depot,  leav- 
ing the  road  to  the  right  and  going  around  the  force  attempting  to  cut 
him  off.  The  enemy’s  infantry  came  down  between  the  brigade  and  the 
Third  Missouri  Cavalry  and  cut  it  off,  with  the  exception  of  one  com- 
pany and  a few  stragglers  who  made  their  way  to  the  brigade.  The 
commander  of  the  battalion  finding  himself  cut  off,  made  his  way  to 
Maior-General  Boring.  The  command  reached  Edwards  [Depot]  at 
dusk,  and  proceeded  to  the  camp  at  Big  Black,  where  it  arrived  about 
midnight,  completely  exhausted,  and  at  daylight  next  morning  was  or- 
dered into  the  trenches  at  Big  Black  Bridge,  the  report  of  which  en- 
gagement was  forwarded  by  Brigadier-General  Green  previous  to  his 

death.  , . 

Lieutenant-Colonel  [William  H.]  Dismukes,  of  the  Nineteenth  Arkan- 
sas, and  Lieutenant-Colonel  [H.  G.]  Robertson,  of  the  Twentieth  Arkan- 
sas Infantry,  fell  while  gallantly  charging  the  enemy’s  batteries,  the 
former  mortally  wounded  and  the  latter  killed. 

I desire  to  call  the  attention  of  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  to 
the  pre-eminently  gallant  conduct  of  Private  Pudic,  of  the  Nineteenth 
Arkansas,  who,  during  the  entire  engagement,  although  frequently  re- 
called by  his  company  commander  as  well  as , kept  at  least  20  or 

30  yards  in  advance  of  his  regiment,  using  his  gun  with  good  effect. 

I have  as  yet  been  unable  to  procure  accurate  lists  of  the  killed  and 
wounded.  They  will  be  forwarded  as  soon  as  obtained. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

TOM  P.  DOCKERY, 

Col.  mil  Arkansas  Infty .,  2 d Brig .,  2d  Biv .,  Army  of  Miss. 

Major  [R.  W.]  Memmingee, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept.  of  Mississippi  and  Bast  Louisiana. 


118 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


No.  36. 

Reports  of  Col . Elijah  Gates , First  Missouri  Cavalry  ( Confederate ). 

Headquarters  Second  Division, 

Demopolis , AZ<x.,  Aiq/wst  1,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor,  in  obedience  to  the  instructions  of  the  lieuten- 
ant-general commanding,  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  action  of 
the  Second  Brigade  at  the  battle  of  Baber’s  Creek  on  May  16  last : 

About  11  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  May  12,  the  forces  of  the  enemy 
attacked  my  pickets — composed  of  three  companies  of  infantry  and  a 
section  of  artillery,  commanded  by  Major  [W.  0.]  Parker — some  4 miles 
south  of  Edwards  Depot.  The  enemy  opened  upon  us  with  skirmishers 
and  artillery.  I had  possession  of  the  creek  where  the  road  crosses 
leading  to  Port  Gibson.  1 held  them  in  check  at  this  point  for  an  hour 
or  more,  when  we  had  to  fall  back  slowly  to  the  reserve  (in  order  to 
keep  them  from  flanking  us),  which  wras  some  2 miles  south  of  Edwards 
Depot.  There  I put  my  infantry  and  artillery  in  position,  and  tele- 
graphed to  General  Bowen  my  idea  of  the  enemy’s  movements.  Gen- 
eral Bowen  dispatched  me  to  hold  the  enemy  in  check,  if  possible,  until 
night,  then,  if  I could  do  no  more,  to  burn  the  commissary  stores  then 
at  the  depot,  and  fall  back  to  the  bridge  on  Big  Black.  I called  upon 
General  Bowen  for  the  wagon  trains  of  both  brigades,  and  I would  save 
the  stores  that  night.  He  did  .so,  and  by  daylight  next  morning  we 
had  everything  out  of  the  depot — about  seventy-five  wagon  loads.  At 
the  time  General  Bowen  started  the  wagons  to  me  he  telegraphed  me 
to  hold  my  position;  that  General  Green  would  be  ordered  to  my  sup- 
port at  once.  Accordingly,  at  daylight  General  Green  arrived,  followed 
by  Colonel  [F.  M.]  Cockrell’s  brigade,  also  Generals  Boring’s  and  Ste- 
venson’s divisions.  They  formed  line  of  battle  2 miles  south  of  Edwards 
Depot. 

About  12  o’clock,  General  Boring  ordered  me  to  take  a battalion  of 
sharpshooters,  then  commanded  by  Captain  [W.  S.]  Catterson,  move  to 
the  front  and  press  the  Federal  pickets,  and  ascertain  whether  or  not 
the  enemy  were  there  in  force.  I did  so,  and  drove  in  the  enemy’s  pick- 
ets, but  soon  had  to  fall  back  myself,  lor  I was  satisfied,  from  the  force 
they  brought  up,  that  their  whole  force  was  there.  I reported  the  same 
to  Generals  Green  and  Bowen. 

About  12  o’clock  on  the  15th,  we  were  ordered  to  move  out  on  the  road 
leading  from  the  depot  to  Clinton.  We  followed  the  Clinton  road  until 
after  crossing  Baker’s  Creek.  We  then  took  a neighborhood  road 
through  some  plantations,  and  about  11  p.  m.  bivouacked  for  the  night 
and  threw  out  skirmishers. 

About  sunrise  the  16th,  a skirmish  commenced  with  General  Grant’s 
and  General  Pemberton’s  troops.  I was  ordered  by  General  Green  to 
call  my  men  in  line  and  move  by  the  right  companies  to  the  rear,  which 
we  did,  first  and  last,  to  the  distance  of  about  a mile.  We  halted,  about- 
faced,  and  moved  to  the  front  some  600  yards  and  halted  in  the  timber. 
I occupied  the  right  of  Green’s  brigade.  General  Green  sent  me  word 
that  General  Boring  was  preparing  for  a charge,  and  did  not  want  his 
brigade  to  be  behind  in  the  charge.  We  remained  in  this  position,  I 
suppose,  about  an  hour.  By  this  time  the  enemy  had  attacked  General 
Stevenson,  on  our  left.  We  were  then  moved  by  the  left  flank  at  a 
double-quick  nearly  three-fourths  of  a mile ; wrere  then  put  in  line  of  bat- 
tle and  moved  to  the  front  200  or  300  yards  before  we  commenced  firing. 
There  Colonel  Cockrell  met  me  with  his  saber  in  hand,  and  exclaimed  he 


Chap.  XxXvi.J  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPIONS  HILL,  MISS.  119 

was  very  glad  to  see  me,  for  he  had  been  under  a desperate  fire.  I im- 
mediately ordered  a charge,  which  my  men  obeyed  as  promptly  as  I ever 
saw  troops  in  my  life.  We  drove  the  enemy  about  a half  or  three-quar- 
ters of  a mile  through  a corn-field  and  across  some  deep  ravines  before 
they  brought  us  to  a stand.  This  was  under  a desperate  fire.  They 
occupied  one  ridge  and  I another,  with  a deep,  narrow  ravine  between 
us.  There  they  shot  my  horse  three  times,  and  he  lay  down  and  died 
like  a soldier.  Three  times  I tried  to  drive  them  from  their  position, 
but  my  men  were  not  able  to  ascend  the  hill  on  which  the  enemy’s  line 

was  formed.  i ^ ^ 

At  different  times  my  adjutant  came  to  me  to  know  what  we  were  to 
do  for  ammunition.  I told  him  to  take  the  ammunition  from  the  dead 
and  wounded  that  lay  on  the  field.  My  loss  here  was  upward  of  100 
men. 

We  held  our  position  until  we  were  forced  for  the  want  ot  ammuni- 
tion to  fall  back.  This,  I think,  was  about  3 o’clock.  I then  saw  Gen- 
eral Green.  He  said  that  the  orders  were  to  fall  back  beyond  Baker’s 
Creek,  below  the  bridge  over  which  we  had  crossed  in  going  out  the  night 
before.  We  did  so,  and  formed  in  an  open  field,  to  hold  the  crossing 
until  General  Loring  could  cross.  The  enemy  crossed  the  creek  above 
where  we  did,  and  commenced  a heavy  cannonade  upon  us,  and  soon 
drove  us  from  our  position,  though  in  the  mean  while  we  replenished  our 
ammunition.  We  then  took  the  road  toward  Edwards  Depot  and  Big 
Black  Bridge.  I got  there  about  11  o’clock,  and  crossed  the  river  to  my 
wagon  train. 

Just  after  sunrise  the  17th,  I was  ordered  by  General  Green  to  put  my 
men  under  arms  and  be  ready  to  move  to  the  east  side  of -the  river.  In 
a few  minutes  I started.  General  Green  accompanied  me.  The  firing 
was  then  going  on  between  the  men  who  occupied  the  ditches  that  night 
and  the  enemy’s  skirmishers.  We  crossed  over  the  bridge  and  moved 
up  the  river  about  half  a mile.  Here  General  Green  halted  and  ordered 
me  to  move  400  or  500  yards  higher  up  the  river,  and  take  my  position 
in  some  rifle-pits  next  to  the  river,  on  the  left  of  the  line  of  battle,  which 
we  did  at  once.  We  commenced  a heavy  skirmish  with  the  enemy. 
Here  my  horse  received  a very  bad  wound  in  the  face,  which  brought 
fiim  to  the  ground.  I then  went  in  the  ditches  myself.  We  skirmished 
with  the  enemy  for  about  an  hour  before  they  made  the  charge.  They 
formed  their  men  on  the  river  in  the  timber  where  we  could  not  see 
them.  They  brought  their  men  out  by  the  right  flank  in  column  of  fours 
about  140  yards  in  front  of  my  regiment  at  a double-quick,  Colonel  [W. 
H.]  Kinsman’s  regiment  (Twenty-third  Iowa,  General  Lawler’s  brigade) 
leading  the  charge.  I then  opened  a most  terrific  fire  upon  them,  and 
kept  it  up  until  the  brigade  had  passed  out  of  my  sight  behind  a grove 
of  timber  that  stood  immediately  on  my  right.  They  moved  so  as  to 
strike  the  ditches  occupied  by  General  Vaughn’s  brigade,  so  I am  in- 
formed. I do  not  know  whose  troops  were  there,  but  it  was  immedi- 
ately on  the  right  of  Green’s  brigade.  After  they  had  passed  me,  I 
listened  for  our  men  to  open  a heavy  volley  on  my  right  and  drive  the 
enemy  back.  Upon  not  hearing  any  firing  on  the  right,  I directed  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel [George  W.]  Law  to  mount  his  horse  and  go  to  General 
Green  and  know  whether  the  center  were  holding  their  position  or  not. 
Colonel  Law  returned  in  a few  minutes,  and  said  that  General  Green 
ordered  me  to  fall  back.  I did  so  at  once.  After  I had  got  back  below 
the  bend  of  the  river,  I discovered  that  they  had  crossed  the  ditches  and 
were  between  me  and  the  bridge.  My  lieutenant-colonel,  being  mounted, 
thought  he  could  make  his  escape,  and  did  so  with  the  loss  of  the  left 


120  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [CiiAt.  XXXVL 

arm.  I told  my  men  to  swim  the  river.  They  all  took  the  river  except 
about  90  officers  and  men.  One  or  two  of  my  men  were  drowned  in 
trying  to  swim  the  river.  The  officers  and  men  who  could  not  swim 
pleaded  so  hard  for  me  to  stay  with  them  that  I gave  way  to  them,  and 
we  were  all  captured.  I remained  with  the  enemy  three  days  and  made 
my  escape.  I cannot  give  any  account  of  anything  that  transpired  after 
this  until  after  the  fall  of  Vicksburg. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ELIJAH  GATES, 
Colonel  First  Missouri  Cavalry. 

Major  [R.  W.]  Memminger. 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana. 


Gainesville,  Ala.,  August  15, 1863. 

Sir  : The  number  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  of  Bowen’s  division 
is  as  follows : 

At  Baker’s  Creek:  Killed,  16  officers  and  115  enlisted  men,*  wounded, 
64  officers  and  366  enlisted  men ; missing,  7 officers  and  300  enlisted  men. 

At  Big  Black  Bridge:  Killed,  1 officer  and  2 enlisted  men ; wounded, 
9 enlisted  men ; missing,  46  officers  and  427  enlisted  men. 

At  Vicksburg:  Killed,  24  officers  and  166  enlisted  men;  wounded, 
35  officers  and  469  enlisted  men  ; missing,  74  enlisted  men. 

The  report  of  the  Twenty-first  Arkansas  (Second  Brigade)  cannot  be 
found ; supposed  to  have  been  destroyed  with  other  papers  at  the  time 
of  the  surrender.  All  field  and  most  of  line  officers  captured  at  Big 
Black,  which  makes  about  59  officers  and  480  enlisted  men  missing  at 
that  place. 

ELIJAH  GATES, 
Colonel , Commanding  Division. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Ko.  37. 

Statements  of  Confederate  staff  officers. 

Demopolis,  Ala.,  August  20,  1863. 

Sir:  Your  telegram  has  been  received.  In  compliance  with  your  re- 
quest, namely,  that  I shall  give  you  a written  statement  of  the  orders 
carried  by  me  in  the  battle  of  Baker’s  Creek,  I make  the  following  state- 
ment : 

The  first  order  I carried  to  Major-General  Loring  in  the  forenoon  was 
that  you  had  not  given  any  orders  in  relation  to  his  ordnance  wagons. 

The  second,  to  Major-General  Loring,  was  later  in  the  day,  about  1 p. 
m.,  as  well  as  I could  judge.  The  order  was  that  he  (Loring)  should 
hold  himself  in  readiness  to  re-enforce  Stevenson. 

The  third  order  carried  by  me  was  at  the  time  that  you  had  rallied 
the  Fifty-sixth  and  Fifty-seventh  Georgia  Regiments,  who  were  in  the 
corn-cribs,  and  you  were  leading  them  into  action.  This  order  was  that 
I should  go  and  bringLoriug  to  that  point;  that  Stevenson’s  right  was 
very  hard  pressed,  and  to  hurry  up  as  soon  as  possible.  On  my  way  to 
his  headquarters,  I met  General  Buford  on  his  way  to  the  front.  To  my 
inquiries  as  to  the  whereabouts  of  Loring,  I was  told  he  was  in  the  rear. 
When  quite  near  his  headquarters,  I was  informed  that  he  had  gone  on, 
and  that  I must  have  met  him ; whereupon  I retraced  my  steps.  In 


CnAP.  XXXVI.] 


121 


BATTLE  OP  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS. 

answer  to  my  repeated  inquiries,  I was  informed  tliat  he  had  followed 
alon"  a fence  in  a westerly  direction  and  at  right  angles  to  the  road 
over'' which  I had  traveled.  I followed  his  trail  a half  mile  or  so,  when 
I overtook  him  and  delivered  your  order ; whereupon  he  halted  (he  was 
at  the  head  of  Featherston’s  brigade)  and  asked  me  the  road.  1 told 
him  he  was  on  the  wrong  road  and  going  in  the  wrong  direction ; instead 
of  going  north,  he  was  going  west.  He  then  asked  that  I should  lead 
the  way  and  he  would  follow  me.  To  which  I replied  that  I was  un- 
acquainted with  the  roads,  with  the  exception  of  the  one  over  which  I 
had  traveled.  He  then  gave  the  word  “ forward,”  and  continued  in  a 
northwesterly  direction,  but  in  a short  time  turned  in  a northeastern 
course  and  came  up  to  the  extreme  left  of  Stevenson’s  division.  At 
this  point  we  were  met  by  Mr.  Taylor,  who  delivered  a more  recent 
order  from  you.  At  this  time  and  point  I left  him  (Loring),  and  did  not 
see  him  again.  This  was  the  last  order  which  I carried  on  the  field. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  H.  BRYAN. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Mobile,  Ala.,  July  30,  1863. 

General:  In  obedience  to  your  request,  conveyed  through  General 
[T.  H.l  Taylor,  I have  the  honor  to  send  you  the  following  extracts  from 
my  diary.  1 would  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  I always  wiote 
the  orders  I delivered  in  my  book  as  soon  as  they  were  delivered,  and 
cannot  be  mistaken  either  as  to  the  time  of  their  delivery  or  the  language 
of  the  orders.  I carried  several  unimportant  orders  during  the  morning 
before  10  o’clock : 

* * * The  enemy  were  hard  pressed  at  first,  but  about  Z o clock 

General  Stevenson  sent  for  re-enforcements.  General  Pemberton  sent 
me  with  this  order  to  Generals  Loring  and  Bowen : 


Tell  General  Bowen  to  move  np  at  once  to  assist  Stevenson,  and. tell  Loring  to  move 
his  division— leaving  Colonels  [T.  M.]  Scott  and  Adams’  cavalry  at  the  ford— also  to 
the  assistance  of  Stevenson,  and  crush  the  enemy. 

The  order  was  carried  to  each.  General  Bowen  rode  up  himself,  and 
reported  that  the  enemy  were  in  heavy  force  in  his  front,  and  General 
Loring  sent  a major  on  his  staff  to  report  that  the  enemy  were  m his 
front,  moving  in  heavy  columns.  At  this  time  the  enemy  were  driving 
back  General  Stevenson,  and  General  Pemberton  sent  me  with  an  order 
to  General  Bowen  to  move  one  brigade  to  Stevenson’s  left,  and  added, 
‘‘  Tell  General  Bowen  to  follow  it  up  with  another  brigade.”  After  1 
returned  from  General  Bowen,  General  Pemberton  sent  me  to  General 
Loring  to  tell  him  that  there  were  no  troops  between  his  left  and  Ste- 
venson’s right,  and  not  to  let  the  enemy  come  in.  General  Loring  left 
Tilghman’s  brigade  on  his  right,  and  closed  up  the  gap  with  Butords 
and  I^atlierston’s  brigades. 

******* 


I forgot  to  sav  that  General  Pemberton,  in  answer  to  the  reports  from 
both  Generals  Bowen  and  Loring  that  the  enemy  were  moving  m their 
front,  had  sent  me  with  an  order  for  them  to  move  at  them  at  once  and 
crush  them,  and  then  return  to  the  assistance  of  Stevenson..  Tliis  brought 
the  remark  from  General  Loring,  which  he  had  communicated  to  Gen- 
eral  Bowen,  that  he  would  seize  the  proper  moment  and  attack  the 


enemy. 

* * * 


* 


[Chap.  XXXVt 


122  Mississippi,  West  Tennessee,  etc. 

The  above,  general,  is  all  that  I can  say  in  regard  to  the  orders  I 
carried  during  the  day.  I gavo  a full  copy  of  my  diary  for  the  day  to 
Lieutenant-Colonel  [L.  M.l  Montgomery,  who  has  left  it  with  his  papers 
in  Demopolis. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  McBAE  SELPH, 
Assistant  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General . 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton. 


Demopolis,  Ala.,  July  29,  1863. 

After  line  of  battle  was  formed,  I went  forward  to  line  of  skirmishers 
(cavalry),  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  on  what  point  the  enemy  was  moving 
his  heaviest  force.  Colonel  [Wirt]  Adams,  commanding,  thought  the 
main  attack  would  be  on  our  left,  but  seemed  not  to  be  confirmed  in 
this  belief.  The  skirmishing  was  equally  severe  on  the  right  and  left, 
and  no  definite  conclusion  could  be  formed  as  to  which  was  the  ad- 
vance of  the  bulk  of  the  enemy’s  force.  A second  time  I went  to 
Colonel  Adams,  conveying  the  order  for  him,  when  forced  to  retire,  to 
fall  back  with  his  whole  command  in  front  of  the  strongest  column  of 
the  enemy. 

At  this  time  (I  should  think  about  9 a.  m.)  I found  Colonel  Adams 
with  all  his  cavalry  about  retiring  on  a by-road  just  to  the  left  of  the 
Eaymond  road.  The  infantry  skirmishers  in  this  road  and  on  its  right 
I ordered  to  retire,  as  their  flank  was  exposed  on  the  left  by  the  with- 
drawal of  the  cavalry. 

My  next  message  of  importance  was  to  General  Stevenson — after  the 
skirmishing  had  become  very  fierce  on  his  front,  and  when  the  enemy 
seemed  to  be  wavering  and  the  fire  there  somewhat  receding — to  ad- 
vance at  once  if  the  enemy  faltered  and  push  him  vigorously.  This,  I 
should  judge,  was  at  12.30  o’clock. 

General  Bowen  (in  the  center)  and  General  Loring  (on  the  right)  were 
ordered  to  advance  together  on  the  force  in  their  front  and  drive  them 
from  the  position.  This  order  I carried  myself  to  General  Bowen,  and 
heard  it  sent  several  times  by  different  staff  officers  to  General  Loring. 
We  were  looking  every  moment  for  the  advance,  not  comprehending  why 
there  was  delay,  until  after  some  time  (say  three-fourths  of  an  hour) 
since  the  order  had  been  first  sent.  General  Bowen  rode  up  and  said 
he  was  merely  waiting  to  see  the  left  of  General  Boring’s  division  ad- 
vance to  put  his  command  in  motion  (this  explanation  he  had  before 
sent  by  an  officer),  and  seemed  to  feel  confident  of  his  ability  to  drive 
the  enemy  before  him,  and  said  further,  that  he  understood  from  Gen- 
eral Loring  that  the  enemy  seemed  so  strong  in  his  (General  Boring’s) 
front  that  he  would  wait,  hoping  that  they  would  advance  and  attack 
him  in  his  position— a strong  one. 

Meanwhile  Stevenson  (on  the  left)  w'as  hard  pressed,  and  called  for  re- 
enforcements.  Bowen  was  ordered  to  his  support,  and  Loring  to  move 
to  the  left  with  two  brigades  to  take  Bowen’s  position  in  the  center ; this 
about  1.30  or  2 o’clock.  This  important  order  I heard  urgently  and  re- 
peatedly sent,  and  two  or  three  of  General  Boring’s  staff  officers  who 
rode  up  meantime  were  sent  immediately  back  with  these  instructions. 
There  seemed  to  be  great  delay  in  obeying  this  order.  No  movement 
was  made  from  the  left  to  the  center,  which  was  very  much  exposed 
during  this  interval.  I was  then  absent  from  General  Pemberton  for,  I 
suppose,  two  hours,  urging  the  troops  to , the  advance,  and  endeavoring 


Chai?.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPIONS  HILL,  MISS.  123 

to  pusli  up  the  stragglers.  When  I returned,  finding  him  near  the  cen- 
ter of  the  line,  I learned  that  our  extreme  left  had  been  driven  bach, 
and  that  we  were  about  being  heavily  flanked  there.  The  order  to  re- 
treat was  given.  To  convey  this  to  him,  I sought  General  Loriug,  who, 
I was  informed,  was  making  his  movements  to  the  left  by  a rear  road, 
and  found  him  with  his  troops  in  motion  near  the  position  I last  saw 
occupied  by  General  [S.  D.]  Lee,  who  commanded  the  left  brigade  of 
Stevenson’s.  A staff  officer  (I  think  Colonel  [W.  T.]  Withers)  rode  up 
when  I had  delivered  my  order  and  said  that  a force  was  advancing  on 
what  had  been  our  center,  and  would  cut  off  some  of  Stevenson’s  troops 
unless  combatted.  General  Loring  said  he  would  move  to  that  point. 

After  Bowen’s  and  Stevenson’s  forces  had  crossed  the  creek,  General 
Loring  covering  their  retreat,  General  Bowen  took  position  to  cover 
the  ford,  and  General  Lee,  with  the  remnants  of  three  brigades,  started 
up  to  the  bridge  for  its  defense. 

After  giving  these  instructions  from  General  Pemberton,  I left  the  field 
to  rejoin  him,  which  I did  at  the  fortifications  at  Big  Black  Bridge. 

Very  respectfully, 

J.  C.  TAYLOB, 

Aide- de- Gamp. 


Montgomery,  Ala.,  July  31,  1863. 

Sir  : In  pursuance  of  orders,  I beg  leave  to  make  the  following  state- 
ment of  orders  carried,  and  what  else  I did  by  your  command  on  May 
16,  at  the  fight  designated  as  Baker’s  Creek,  and  also  on  May  17,  at  the 
Big  Black : 

The  first  order  given  to  me  was  to  see  that  the  troops  were  all  drawn 
up  in  line  of  battle ; after  which  the  wagons  were  ordered  to  return  to 
Edwards  Depot,  so  as  to  take  the  road  to  Clinton.  General  Stevenson 
was  then  ordered  to  move  back  toward  same  place,  moving  along  with 
wagons.  I Was  then  sent  with  an  order  to  Brigadier- General  Buford 
(whose  men  were  in  line  of  battle  in  a peach  orchard)  to  fall  back  to 
the  hill  in  his  rear  about  8 o’clock,  so  as  to  make  a continuous  line  with 
the  balance  of  Major-General  Boring’s  division.  Then  I was  sent  to 
halt  General  Stevenson,  as  the  appearances  were  at  that  time  that  the 
attack  would  come  from  more  toward  the  right.  This  was  done,  and 
General  Stevenson  formed  his  line  of  battle  on  the  crest  of  a hill  in  a 
large  field.  I think  this  line  was  formed  about  9 o’clock.  About  10 
o’clock  I was  sent  by  yourself  to  place  advance  skirmishers  in  front  of 
General  Stevenson’s  division,  which  was  done.  By  this  time  the  skir- 
mishing between  our  pickets  and  the  enemy’s  was  increasing,  and  from 
the  direction  appeared  to  be  moving  toward  General  Stevenson’s  left, 
or  Lee’s  brigade.  Between  11.30  and  12  o’clock  the  attack  began  in 
earnest,  and  was  evidently  to  be  on  our  left.  The  first  order  I carried, 
I believe — except  of  those  given  to  General  Stevenson,  almost  in  your 
presence,  to  move  his  brigades  (Barton’s  and  Cummin g’s)  still  to  the 
left — after  the  attack  was  one  to  General  Bowen  to  send  one  of  his 
brigades  at  once  to  the  support  of  General  Stevenson.  General  Bowen 
returned  with  me  to  you,  and  told  you  that  he  was  threatened  and  was 
afraid  to  weaken  himself.  In  a short  time  I again  carried  an  order  for 
one  of  his  brigades  and  moved  it  up,  reporting  the  fact  to  General  Bowen. 
About  this  time  (2.30  o’clock)  our  men  commenced  straggling  back  in 
large  numbers,  and  you  sent  me  with  your  couriers  to  rally  them.  This 
1 did  for  some  time,  until  it  was  useless  to  try  any  longer.  I then  re- 
turned to  you,  and  was  sent  to  hurry  General  Loring  up  and  to  see  where 


124  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 

he  had  gone.  I went  to  the  left,  in  company  with  Colonel  [J.]  Thomp- 
son, and  found  that  General  Loring  had  moved  to  the  left.  This  was 
told  us  by  his  couriers,  who  were  posted  across  the  old  field  to  stop 
stragglers.  We  then  returned  to  let  you  know,  and  found  the  army  all 
falling  back  in  great  confusion.  I tried  for  some  time  to  gather  the 
men  together,  but  without  success $ some  were  too  much  exhausted  to 
do  anything,  and  others  would  not.  I then  got  some  twenty  couriers  and 
went  to  join  you.  After  getting  to  Edwards  Depot,  I was  ordered  by 
you  to  stop  the  troops  and  to  hold  the  road  where  the  road  crosses  the 
railroad  to  Eaymond.  This  I did,  stopping  the  troops  and  turning 
them  over  to  their  different  commands.  Generals  Barton  and  Cum- 
ming  kept  this  place  until  ordered  back.  I then  went  back  to  ioin  you 
at  the  Big  Black. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  after  an  early  breakfast,  you  ordered  me 
back  to  the  bridge  (was  then  at  Bovina),  and  to  place  four  pieces  of 
artillery  in  position.  This  I did,  placing  two  Napoleon  guns  and  two 
G-pounders.  Other  guns  were  afterward  brought  up  by  Colonel  [W.  T.] 
Withers,  chief  of  artillery,  who  then  took  charge  of  the  whole.  By  this 
time  our  troops  had  broken  and  run  from  the  works  on  the  east  side  of 
the  Big  Black,  and  were  crossing  in  great  confusion.  Again  was  the 
attempt  made  to  rally  the  troops,  but  in  vain.  After  trying  to  get  them 
formed  in  some  order  on  the  bluff,  I returned  to  where  the  artillery  was 
firing,  and  remained  until  the  order  came  to  fall  back.  I then  returned 
with  the  troops  into  the  lines  of  the  city  of  Vicksburg. 

This  is  as  near  as  I can  now  recollect  the  amount  of  orders  carried  by 
me  on  the  fields.  There  were,  perhaps,  some  unimportant  ones  I do  not 
now  remember. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  H.  TAYLOR, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton. 


Enterprise,  July  21,  1863. 

Until  very  lately  I was  not  aware  that  you  expected  those  members 
of  your  staff  who  were  with  you  in  the  military  movements  in  front  of 
Vicksburg  to  furnish  you  a statement  of  the  part  they  bore  in  the  same. 
I seize  the  first  opportunity  to  comply  with  your  request,  so  far  as  ob- 
servations and  experiences  enable  me  to  do  so. 

After  the  landing  of  the  enemy  at  Bruinsburg  and  the  battle  of  Gen- 
eral Bowen  at  Port  Gibson,  and  the  falling  back  of  our  troops  to  Big 
Black  at  the  railroad  bridge,  and  across  that  stream  below  the  bridge, 
you  resisted  persistently  the  desire  expressed  in  various  quarters  of  the 
army  to  cross  the  Big  Black  River  and  to  give  him  battle.  For  several 
days  it  was  believed  very  generally  that  the  enemy  would  attempt  to 
cross  the  Big  Black  River  at  what  are  known  as  the  lower  ferries,  and 
move  upon  Vicksburg  from  the  south  with  their  gunboats,  attacking 
Warrenton  on  one  side,  the  column  moving  on  Edwards  Depot  or  the 
railroad  bridge  on  the  other.  The  almost  total  want  of  cavalry  not  only 
kept  you  in  ignorance  of  his  movements,  but  deprived  you  of  all  means 
of  annoying  or  retarding  him  in  his  movements. 

About  May  11,  information  was  received  that  at  least  one  corps  of 
the  enemy’s  forces  was  moving  on  Raymond,  and  the  probability  was 
(though  I do  not  think  it  was  certainly  known)  that  a division,  if  not  a 
corps,  was  moving  on  Edwards  Depot. 

On  the  evening  of  the  12th,  you  left  Vicksburg  for  Bovina,  having 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION’S  HILL,  MISS.  125 

previously  ordered  Major-Generals  Loring  and  Stevenson  to  bring  all 
of  their  divisions  to  Edwards  Depot.  I accompanied  you  to  Bovina,  and 
we  reached  there  on  the  night  of  May  12. 

The  next  day  the  troops,  consisting  of  Loring’s,  Stevenson’s,  and 
Bowen’s  divisions,  were  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  in  front  of  Edwards 
Depot.  They  remained  all  the  13th  in  line,  and  nothing  was  seen  of  the 
enemy. 

On  the  14th,  a communication  was  received  from  General  [J.  E.]  John- 
ston, then  at  Jackson,  informing  you  of  the  presence  of  the  enemy  in 
Clinton,  and  indicating  a forward  movement  as  desirable.  Immediately 
a council  of  war  was  called,  consisting  of  all  the  general  officers.  I was 
present  at  that  council,  and  heard  your  views  and  those  of  the  different 
officers  expressed.  You  stated  at  great  length,  and  to  my  mind  with 
great  force,  that  the  leading  and  great  duty  of  your  army  was  to  defend 
Vicksburg  ; the  disposition  and  numbers  of  the  enemy  and  your  forces; 
the  bad  effect  of  a defeat,  and  the  probability  of  such  result  if  you 
moved  forward.  After  canvassing  it,  there  was  not  a voice  in  favor  of 
moving  on  Clinton.  But  inasmuch  as  the  enemy  had  moved  in  force  on 
Jackson,  leaving,  as  was  supposed,  only  a single  division  on  the  Big 
Black,  it  was  first  suggested  by  General  Loring,  and  afterward  ac- 
quiesced in  by  all  the  other  officers,  that  it  would  be  wise  and  expedient 
to  move  the  next  day  on  the  southern,  or  Baymond,  road  to  Dillon’s, 
which  was  on  the  main  leading  road  by  which  the  enemy  carried  on  his 
communication,  give  battle  to  the  division  left  in  the  rear,  and  then 
effectually  break  up  the  enemy’s  communications.  In  this  council  it 
seemed  to  be  taken  for  granted  by  all  the  officers  that  the  enemy  was 
then  engaged  in  an  effort  to  reduce  Jackson,  and  was,  therefore,  too  far 
removed  to  participate  in  the  expected  fight.  You  gave  in  to  the  views  of 
the  officers  with  reluctance,  and  expressed  yourself  as  doing  so  against 
your  convictions.  But  being  present  and  hearing  everything  said,  I did 
not  see  how  you  could  have  done  otherwise  with  any  expectation  of 
retaining  your  hold  upon  the  army.  It  had  been  intimated  to  me  again 
and  again  (yet  I am  frank  to  say  I can  trace  the  remark  to  no  particular 
or  responsible  source)  that  you  were  averse  to  a fight  w7ith  the  enemy, 
and  that  everybody  believed  the  time  for  active  operations  had  come. 
Though  possessed  of  your  views  and  concurring  in  them,  yet  this  feel- 
ing had  so  great  an  influence  on  me  that  I believed  at  the  time  that  a 
fight  was  inevitable,  and  so  expressed  myself  to  you. 

On  the  14th,  a heavy  rain  fell  and  raised  the  waters  of  Baker’s  Greek, 
over  which  we  had  to  pass  in  going  to  Dillon’s,  so  that  it  could  not  be 
crossed  without  swimming.  This  necessitated  the  delay  for  the  con- 
struction of  a bridge.  Before  this  was  completed,  General  Loring  came 
to  you  and  suggested  that  a bridge  was  standing  on  the  middle  Bay- 
mond road  over  which  the  troops  could  pass,  and  that  beyond  the 
bridge  there  was  a fair  road  leading  into  the  road  it  was  intended  to 
take.  The  suggestion  was  adopted,  and  the  troops  immediately  put  in 
motion.  General  Loring’s  division  moved  in  front,  General  Bowen’s  in 
the  center,  and  General  Stevenson’s  in  the  rear. 

That  night  (15th)  all  troops  crossed  the  bridge  over  Baker’s  Creek, 
and  General  Loring  reached  the  lower  road,  General  Tilghman’s  bri- 
gade being  thrown  forward  of  Mrs.  Ellison’s  house,  on  the  lower  Bay- 
mond road.  About  10  o’clock  at  night  the  troops  bivouacked  on  the 
road  connecting  the  two  Baymond  roads.  We  spent  the  night  of  the 
15th  at  Mrs.  Ellison’s. 

Bex t morning  about  7 o’clock  a courier  arrived  from  General  J ohn- 
ston,  bringing  the  information  that  he  had  evacuated  Jackson  and  had 


126  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

withdrawn  in  the  direction  of  Canton,  and,  as  I understood,  desiring  you 
to  move  in  a direction  to  unite  your  forces  or  to  enable  you  to  co-operate 
with  him.  This  led  to  an  order  forthwith  to  countermarch  and  move 
in  the  direction  of  Brownsville.  About  the  time  the  army  was  ready  to 
take  up  the  line  of  march,  firing  commenced  in  front,  and  soon  it  was 
ascertained  that  the  force  was  too  large  to  be  long  resisted  by  our  picket 
force.  The  whole  train  moved  on  the  countermarch,  preceded  by  the 
brigade  of  Colonel  [A.  W.]  Reynolds,  which  now  became,  under  the  new 
order,  the  advance  guard.  General  Boring’s  brigade  was  drawn  up  in 
line  of  battle  first  in  the  lower  road.  He  fell  back  then  a half  mile,  and 
reformed  in  the  rear  of  the  entrance  of  the  military  road  with  the  Ray- 
mond road.  For  some  time  it  was  doubtful  whether  the  main  attack 
would  be  in  the  middle  Raymond  road,  on  which  our  left  (Stevenson’s 
division)  rested,  or  on  our  right,  held  by  Boring’s  division.  Our  posi- 
tion along  which  our  lines  were  formed  was,  in  my  judgment,  a favorable 
one.  It  soon  became  evident,  however,  that  the  main  attack  was  going 
to  be  on  the  left,  and  the  fighting  had  not  continued  long  before  infor- 
mation was  received  from  General  Stevenson  that  he  was  hard  pressed. 
Your  headquarters  having  been  selected  to  the  left  of  the  center  of  the 
line,  ready  access  was  had  to  the  whole  line.  While  the  fighting  was 
progressing  in  great  fierceness  on  the  left,  a demonstration  was  made  on 
the  center,  which  was  soon  checked  by  a few  well-directed  shots  from  a 
battery  of  Bowen’s  division.  Soon  after  you  ascertained  that  the  main 
assault  would  be  made  on  the  left,  orders  were  sent  to  Bowen  to  fall  on 
the  left  with  all  his  force.  His  division  came  up  at  a double-quick,  and 
charged  on  the  enemy  in  fine  style,  driving  him  back  for  more  than  half 
a mile.  At  the  same  time  orders  were  sent  to  General  Boring  to  follow 
up  the  movement  of  General  Bowen.  When  there  was  some  delay  at 
his  coming,  you  directed  me  to  carry  the  order,  which  I did  at  the  full 
speed  of  my  horse.  The  order  I delivered  was  that  “ General  Pember- 
ton desires  you  to  come  immediately  and  with  all  dispatch  to  the  left, 
to  the  support  of  General  Stevenson,  whatever  may  be  in  your  front.” 
General  Boring  replied  by  asking  me  if  General  Pemberton  knew  that 
the  enemy  was  in  great  force  in  his  front.  I replied  I did  not  know 
whether  General  Pemberton  knew  the  fact  or  not,  but  I knew  I repeated 
the  order  correctly,  and  if  he  did  not  comply  with  it  the  responsibility 
was  his,  not  mine.  I returned  to  your  headquarters  and  repeated  the 
conversation.  Soon  after  it  was  discovered  that  some  two  regiments 
had  broken,  and  I went  to  endeavor  to  rally  them.  You  soon  came  up, 
and  by  a few  appropriate  words  addressed  to  them,  closing  by  proposing 
to  lead  them  back  yourself  if  their  officers  did  not,  the  regiments  rallied, 
and  the  officers  petitioned  you  to  let  them  lead  them,  which  they  did. 
We  then  moved  along  in  their  rear  far  into  the  front,  and  on  finding  the 
enemy  was  making  a flank  movement  to  our  left,  the  inquiry  was  made 
again,  “Where  is  Boring?”  and  some  of  the  stall  were  sent  to  hunt  him. 
On  returning  to  headquarters,  General  Buford,  with  his  brigade,  was 
met,  and  after  you  had  pointed  out  to  him  the  position  he  was  to  take, 
you  again  directed  me,  if  possible,  to  find  General  Boring.  General  T. 
H.  Taylor  and  myself  undertook  to  do  so.  We  were  gone  for  some  time 
before  we  ascertained  where  he  was;  but  finding  he  had  gone  on  a road 
we  did  not  know  to  the  left,  we  returned  to  report  the  fact  to  you.  Upon 
our  return  we  met  with  General  Stevenson,  who  informed  us  you  had 
gone  in  the  direction  of  the  late  headquarters  of  General  Boring.  As 
the  enemy  was  reported  to  us  to  have  got  in  between  where  we  sup- 
posed you  to  be  and  ourselves,  we  moved  in  what  we  believed  to  be  a 
direct  line  to  the  lower  bridge.  In  this  we  had  no  guide,  and  struck  the 
creek  some  distance  above  it,  and  found  it  most  difficult  to  get  across. 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]  BATTLE  OF  CHAMPION^  IIILL,  MISS.  127 

We  succeeded,  however,  and  I joined  you  at  Edwards  Depot.  After 
making  the  necessary  arrangements  to  protect  your  rear,  you  then  re- 
turned to  the  intrenchments  in  front  of  the  railroad  bridge,  and  after 
remaining  there,  awaiting  General  Loring,  for  several  hours,  making 
the  necessary  dispositions  for  the  contemplated  attack  the  next  day,  at 
a late  hour  of  the  night  wre  reached  Bovina. 

The  next  day  (Sunday,  17th)  we  returned  to  Vicksburg,  when  immedi- 
ately the  different  portions  of  the  fortifications  were  manned  by  our 
troops. 

Being  near  your  person  throughout  three  several  days  of  trial,  I was 
struck  with  admiration  at  the  prompt  manner  in  which  you  discharged 
every  duty  devolved  upon  you  in  your  responsible  position. 

I am,  with  great  respect,  vour  obedient  servant, 

J.  THOMPSON, 
[Assistant]  Inspector- General. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton. 


, Headquarters, 

Demopolis , Ala.,  July  29,  18G3. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  part  taken  by  myself  in  the 
battle  of  Baker’s  Creek,  on  May  16. 

Soon  after  the  skirmishing  commenced  near  Mrs.  Ellison’s  house,  I 
was  ordered  to  report  to  General  Loring  that  you  had  been  informed 
that  a large  column  of  the  enemy  were  approaching  on  his  right.  About 
an  hour  after  this  I was  ordered  to  direct  General  Loring  to  collect  all 
the  spades  and  picks  and  cut  down  the  sides  of  the  banks  of  the  ford 
at  Baker’s  Creek,  on  the  road  leading  from  Mrs.  Ellison’s  to  Colonel 
Withers’  plantation*  About  10  or  11  a.  m.  I was  directed  by  you  to 
order  General  Stevenson  to  halt  his  command  until  further  orders.  I 
found  General  Stevenson  at  the  houses  about  200  yards  to  the  left  of 
your  headquarters  in  the  field,  and  the  order  was  immediately  executed. 

Soon  after  the  skirmishing  began  in  front  of  General  [S.  D.]  Lee,  I 
was  sent  forward  to  ascertain  if  he  could  maintain  his  position,  or  if  he 
needed  re-enforcements.  His  reply  was,  “he  thought  he  could  hold 
his  position  for  the  present.”  His  skirmishers  were  at  that  time  falling 
back,  but  soon  afterward  went  forward  again.  Soon  after  this  I was 
ordered  to  order  up  one  brigade  of  General  Bowen’s  division  to  re- 
enforce General  Stevenson.  Just  before  the  command  was  ordered  to 
fall  back,  and  just  after  you  had  seen  General  Stevenson,  where  the 
battle  was  raging  most  terribly,  I was  directed  by  you  to  indicate  the 
line  of  battle  for  Brigadier-General  Buford,  who  came  up  with  his  bri- 
gade. I directed  him  to  go  forward  to  the  road  in  which  you  saw  Gen- 
eral Stevenson  at  the  time  he  informed  you  there  were  between  60,000 
and  80,000  men  in  his  front.  When  you  and  staff  were  retiring  from 
the  field,  you  ordered  me  to  direct  General  Tilghman  to  halt  his  com- 
mand, and  I had  just  given  the  order  when  you  rode  up.  I gave  no 
more  orders  until  you  and  staff  arrived  at  the  bridge  which  crosses  the 
railroad  at  Edwards  Depot,  where  you  were  informed  by  Major  [How- 
ell] Webb,  adjutant  and  inspector  general  to  Major-General  Stevenson, 
that  two  brigades  were  approaching  Edwards  Depot,  on  the  road  run- 
ning parallel  with  the  railroad  from  Edwards  Depot  (the  road  taken  by 
the  command  in  marching  out  toward  Clinton),  one  of  these  commanded 
by  Brigadier-General  Barton;  the  other  commander  I do  not  remember. 
You  then  directed  me  to  order  General  Barton  to  form  a line  of  battle, 
with  his  right  resting  on  the  railroad  in  such  a manner  as  to  protect 
the  depot.  Immediately  after  you  left  for  the  intrenchments  at  Big 


128 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Black,  Major  Webb  informed  me  that  this  was  a mistake;  that  no  troops 
of  ours  were  on  this  road. 

About  this  time  an  officer  in  command  of  six  companies  of  the  Twen- 
tieth Mississippi  (mounted)  reported  to  me  that  he  had  been  sent  to 
Edwards  Depot  to  guard  the  wagon  trains,  which  were  at  that  time 
retreating  across  Big  Black.  I directed  this  officer  to  deploy  his  men 
as  skirmishers,  and  keep  the  enemy  in  check  as  long  as  possible.  I 
then  rode  to  the  intrenchments  at  Big  Black,  and  informed  you  what  I 
had  done. 

This  includes  the  verbal  orders  conveyed  by  me  on  the  16th.  I car- 
ried none  on  the  17th. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  O.  TUPPER, 

Aide-de-Camp. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


MAY  17,  1863. — Engagement  at  Big  Black  Biver  Bridge,  Miss. 

REPORTS.* 

No.  1. — Return  of  Casualties  in  tlie  Union  forces. 

No.  2.— Col.  Thomas  S.  Mather,  Second  Illinois  Light  Artillery,  Chief  of  Ordnance 
Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  of  ordnance  captured. 

No.  3.— Brig.  Gen.  Albert  L.  Lee,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Ninth  Division,  Thir- 
teenth Army  Corps. 

No.  4.— Brig.  Gen.  Michael  K.  Lawler,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Brigade, 
Fourteenth  Division,  including  operations  May  2-22. 

No.  5. — Lieut.  Col.  Cornelius  W.  Dunlap,  Twenty-first  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  1. 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  engaged  at  Big  Blade  River 
Bridge , Miss.,  May  17,  1863. 


[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.] 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured 
or  missing. 

' 

Aggregate. 

I 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

m 

CJ 

o 

o 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

THIRTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McClernand. 

Escort. 

NINTH  DIVISION. 

(1.)  Brig.  Gen.  Peter  J.  Ostehiiaus.! 

(2.)  Brig.  Gen.  Albert  L.  Lee. 

Staff 

1 

i 

i 

1 

— 

. ~ 1 — * 

*See  also  general  reports  of  Grant,  McClernand,  and  Pemberton;  battle  of  Port 
Gibson,  reports  of  Buehler,  Carr,  and  Fonda  (Part  I);  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill, 
reports  of  Burbridge,  Cockrell,  Gates,  Guppey,  Keigwin,  Kimball,  Lindsey,  Lucas, 
and  Osterhaus;  siege  of  Vicksburg,  reports  of  Lanpkere,  Lee,  and  Giles  A.  Smith, 
t No  loss  reported.  t Wounded. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  BIG  BLACK  RIVER  BRIDGE,  MISS.  129 
Belurn  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces,  <fc. — Continued. 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured 
or  missiDg. 

Aggregate. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

{ Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Theophilus  T.  Garrard. 

1 

1 

Total  First  Brigade 

1 

1 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Daniel  W.  Lindsey. 

2 

3 

2 

2 

4 

3 

2 

1 

3 

1 

1 

1 

Total  Second  Brigado 

1 

9 

4 

10 

1 

25 

Artillery. 

Wisconsin  Light,  1st  Battery 

1 

3 

4 

Cavalry. 

Total  Ninth  Division 

1 

9 

7 

13 

1 

31 

TENTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Andrew  J.  Smith. 

First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Stephen  G.  Burbridge. 

16th  Indiana* 

QQ/1  Ohio* 

1 

1 

2 

Total  First  Brigade 

1 

1 

2 

Tfjtol  TpTitli  T)ivi<drm 

— 

— 

— 

1 

12 

8 

1 

2 

13 

9 

2 

FOURTEENTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Eugene  A.  Carr. 

First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  William  P.  Benton. 

33-1  111 inois ...  

1 

1 

99  vh  Illinois ...... ...... ............ ...... 

Indiana  , - .. 

1 

1 

Total  First  Brigade 

1 

2 

20 

24 

* No  loss  reported.  t Detached. 

9 R R — VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


130  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 


Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces,  <fc. — Continued. 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

J Captured 
or  missing. 

Aggregate. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Michael  K.  Lawler. 

51  at,  Town  

13 

3 

67 

2 

86 

32 

83 

2 

101 

35 

22d  Iowa  .....  ...................... ...... 

23d.  Iowa 

2 

11 

1 

2 

2 

11th  Wisconsin  .... ....... ...... ....... 

Total  Sftdnrul  Hrignflfl  



2 

25 

7 

187 

221 

Artillery. 

Illinois  Light,  Chicago  Mercantile  Battery* 

2d  Illinois  Light,  Battery  A* 

Indiana  T/icrht,,  1st  Ratlery. ...  

1 

1 

Total  Fourteenth  Division 

Total  Thirteenth  Army  Corps 

iT 

27 

9 

207 

1 

246 

279 

3 

36 

16 

221 

3 

OFFICERS  KILLED. 

IOWA. 

Col.  William  H.  Kinsman,  ‘23d  Infantry.  | Capt.  Richard  L.  McCray,  23d  Infantry. 

OHIO. 

Lieut.  Reuben  Kennedy,  114th  Infantry. 

OFFICERS  MORTALLY  WOUNDED. 

IOWA. 

Lieut.  Henry  H.  Howard,  21st  Infantry.  I Lieut.  Sylvester  G.  Beckwith,  23d  In- 
Lieut.  John  D.  Ewing,  23d  Infantry.  | fantry. 

WISCONSIN. 

Capt.  Daniel  E.  Hough,  11th  Infantry. 


:no.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  Thomas  S.  Mather , Second  Illinois  Light  Artillery , Chief 
of  Ordnance  Thirteenth  Army  Corps , of  ordnance  captured. 

Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

May  26,  1S63. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Eawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General : 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  a copy  of  the  partial  report  of 
Col.  T.  S.  Mather,  chief  of  artillery  and  ordnance,  Thirteenth  Army 
Corps,- in  relation  to  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  captured  by  the 


No  loss  reported. 


Chai\  XXXVI]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  BIG  BLACK  RIVER  BRIDGE,  MISS.  131 

Thirteenth  Army  Corps  at  the  battle  of  Big  Black  Bridge,  May  17, 1863. 
Orders  have  already  been  issued  to  collect  stragglers,  negroes,  and 
mules,  and  it  is  being  done  in  this  army  corps. 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

WALTER  B.  SCATES, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Big  Black  River  Bridge,  Miss.,  May  17,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  invoice  of  ord- 
nance and  ordnance  stores  captured  by  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  in 
the  engagement  this  morning  : 

Guns. — Six  12-pounder  bronze  howitzers ; three  12-pounder  bronze 
guns  (Napoleons),  one  disabled ; three  6-pounder  bronze  guns ; six 
10-pounder  Parrott  rifled  guns  (iron) ; aggregate,  eighteen  guns,  with 
limbers  and  caissons  complete,  except  two,  the  caissons  of  which  had 
been  previously  captured.  , 

The  following  ordnance  stores  were  found  on  the  carriages  of  the 
above-mentioned  pieces:  Three  hundred  and  twenty-four  rounds  of 
12-pounder  howitzer  canister;  578  rounds  of  12-pounder  howitzer  shells 
(fuse);  11  rounds  of  6-pounder  howitzer  canister;  175  rounds  of 
6-pounder  howitzer  shells;  8 rounds  of  12-pounder  solid  shot;  112 
rounds  of  10-pounder  Parrott  fuse-shells ; 120  rounds  of  10-pounder 
(the  Famous)  canister;  97  rounds  of  10-pounder  (Reed  projectile)  solid 
shot;  35  port-fires,  and  10  6-pounder  cartridges,  three  fourths  pound 
charge. 

In  addition  to  the  above,  the  following  ammunition  was  captured  in 
some  cars  at  Edwards  Station  : Eighty-eight  thousand  rounds  of  rifle 
musket  ammunition,  calibers  .54,  .58,  and  .69 ; 30  rounds  of  6-pounder 
shell. and  canister  ; 10  rounds  of  6-pounder  spherical  case;  110  rounds 
of  12-pounder  howitzer  canister  (fixed) ; 100  rounds  of  3-inch  Reed 
shot;  116  stand  of  small-arms  of  various  patterns,  and  2 boxes  of  blank 
cartridges  for  3-inch  guns. 

The  small-arms  captured  in  the  battle  of  to-day  will  amount  to  sev- 
eral thousand,  but  as  they  have  not  yet  been  collected,  no  definite 
report  can  as  yet  be  made. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  S.  MATHER, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Ordnance , Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

Col.  Walter  B.  Scates, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Albert  L.  Lee , TJ.  S.  Army,  commanding  Ninth 
Division , Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

Hdqrs.  First  Brig.,  Ninth  Diy.,  Thirteenth  A.  C., 

May  22,  1863. 

Captain:  I have  respectfully  to  report  that  on  the  morning  of  the 
17th  instant  I was,  by  order  of  Major-General  McClernand,  command- 


132 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXYI. 


ing  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  placed  in  command  of  the  Ninth  Division, 
General  Osterhaus  being  by  a wound  temporarily  incapacitated  to 
command. 

I found,  on  reaching  the  field,  just  east  of  the  Big  Black  Elver,  the 
Second  Brigade  of  the  division  deployed  in  line  before  the  enemy’s 
works.  Two  regiments  of  the  First  Brigade  were  on  its  left  and  rear; 
a section  of  Foster’s  battery  was  on  the  right,  playing  on  the  enemy’s 
works.  Two  regiments  of  the  First  Brigade  had  been  directed  by 
General  McClernand  to  the  right  of  the  division  to  support  General 
Carr,  who  was  in  position  at  that  point. 

In  front  of  us  was  a lcng  line  of  earthworks,  filled  with  guns,  a.nd 
distant  from  our  deployed  line  a quarter  of  a mile.  Between  our  line 
and  the  works  was  a slough  or  bayou,  12  or  15  feet  across  and  difficult 
of  passage.  An  advance  over  this  ground,  level  and  everywhere  com- 
manded by  the  enemy’s  guns,  was  almost  impracticable. 

I deployed  two  companies  of  the  Second  Brigade  as  skirmishers,  di- 
recting their  advance  through  a point  of  wood  some  distance  to  our  left, 
to  reconnoiter  the  left  flank  of  the  works  opposed  to  us.  At  the  same 
time  I brought  forward  the  two  regiments  cf  the  First  Brigade,  direct- 
ing their  advance  behind  this  flanking  line  of  skirmishers.  At  this 
time  General  Burbridge,  of  Smith’s  division,  came  up  with  his  brigade 
to  support  our  left,  and  advanced  rapidly  behind  and  to  the  left  of  the 
First  Brigade. 

Soon  a determined  attack  was  made  by  Carr  on  the  enemy’s  left,  his 
troops  carrying  their  works.  At  the  same  time  I ordered  a general  and 
rapid  advance,  and  the  Second  Brigade  entered  the  works  just  as  the 
enemy  was  leaving  them.  The  two  companies  of  skirmishers  deployed 
on  my  left  had  meanwhile  advanced,  and,  as  our  line  moved  forward, 
charged  at  double-quick,  cutting  off  an  entire  regiment  of  the  enemy, 
who  laid  down  their  arms  and  surrendered.  As  this  surrender  was  | 
being  made,  some  mounted  officer  from  Smith’s  division  rode  through 
our  line  and  received  it  from  the  rebel  colonel.  The  credit  of  this 
happy  capture,  however,  clearly  pertains  to  these  companies,  which,  by 
their  daring,  energy,  and  activity,  effected  it. 

The  works  of  the  enemy  were  held  by  this  division.  The  enemy  had 
abandoned  eighteen  pieces  of  light  artillery,  with  caissons,  ammunition, 
&c.,  and  retreated  rapidly  over  the  Big  Black  Eiver,  burning  the  fort 
and  railroad  bridge. 

During  the  remainder  of  the  day,  a portion  of  the  Second  Brigade 
engaged  the  sharpshooters  of  the  enemy,  who  lined  the  west  bank  of 
the  stream. 

During  the  afternoon  and  night,  by  order  of  the  commander  of  the 
corps,  this  division  constructed  a floating  bridge  over  the  Big  Black, 
and  at  8 a,  m.  the  day  following  commenced  the  passage  of  the  stream. 
Captain  Patterson  and  his  pioneer  corps  rendered  efficient  service  in 
the  construction  of  the  bridge. 

The  stream  beiug  crossed,  General  Osterhaus  resumed  command  of 
the  division. 

During  the  day  of  the  17th,  I judge  that  this  division  captured  1,500 1 
prisoners. 

I am,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  L.  LEE, 
Brigadier - General. 

Capt.  J.  W.  Thompson, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-  General,  Ninth  Division. 


CHAr.  XXXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  BIG  BLACK  RIVER  BRIDGE,  MISS.  133 

No.  4. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Michael  K.  Lawler,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second 
Brigade , Fourteenth  Division , including  operations  May  2-22. 

Hdqrs.  2d  Brigade,  14th  Division,  13th  Army  Corps, 

Camp , in  rear  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  2G,  1S63. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  field  report  of  the 
operations  of  my  brigade  from  the  date  I assumed  command  of  it  at 
Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  May  2,  18G3,  to  the  present  time.  In  it  I have  in- 
cluded the  distances  marched,  the  time  in  which  the  march  was  made, 
the  battles  fought,  the  number  killed  and  wounded,  the  number  ot 
prisoners  taken,  the  number  of  cannon,  small-arms,  and  other  stores, 
with  kind  and  quantity  of  all  property.  For  a report  of  the  operations 
of  the  brigade  from  the  date  of  its  departure  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to 
May  2,  1863,  you  are  respectfully  referred  to  the  report  of  Col.  C.  L. 
Harris,  Eleventh  Wisconsin  Volunteers,  accompanying  this,*  and  to  the 
able  report  of  Col.  William  M.  Stone,  Twenty-second  Iowa  Volunteers, 
which  is  already  in  your  possession. 

On  May  2,  at  Port  Gibson,  Miss.,  in  accordance  with  General  Orders 
No.  15,  from  division  headquarters,  I assumed  command  of  the  Second 
Brigade,  composed  then  of  four  infantry  regiments  and  a battery,  viz, 
the  Twenty-first,  Twenty-second,  and  Twenty-third  Iowa,  and  Eleventh 
Wisconsin  Volunteers,  and  the  First  Iowa  Battery,  with  an  aggregate 
effective  force  of  2,300  men.  The  brigade,  with  the  exception  of  the 
Eleventh  Wisconsin  Volunteers,  marched  for  Willow  Springs  early  May 
3,  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin,  Col.  C.  L.  Harris  commanding,  having  been 
left  behind  to  hold  Port  GibsQn  until  further  orders. 

On  arriving  at  the  south  fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  I received  orders  to 
discontinue  my  march  to  Willow  Springs,  and  was  instructed  by  the 
brigadier-general  commanding  the  division  to  report  my  brigade  at  the 
crossings  of  Bayou  Pierre,  to  watch  the  line  of  the  bayou,  the  new  bridge 
constructed  over  it,  to  protect  the  rear  of  and  hold  the  town  of  Port 
Gibson,  with  all  of  which  I fully  complied.  Posting  two  regiments,  the 
Twenty-second  and  Twenty-first  Iowa  Volunteers,  and  two  pieces  of  ar- 
tillery at  the  railroad  and  suspension  bridges  over  the  bayou,  and  the 
Twenty-third  Iowa,  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin  Volunteers,  and  four  pieces 
of  artillery  in  the  town  of  Port  Gibson,  we  remained  in  quiet  occupation 
of  the  above  line  until  Monday  [Tuesday],  May  5,  subsisting  upon  the 
country.  In  the  mean  time  our  army  transportation  was  pushed  forward. 

The  rebel  wounded  at  Port  Gibson  and  near  the  battle-field  were  pa- 
roled, and  our  own  wounded  removed  to  the  general  hospital.  When 
everything  had  been  brought  up  from  Bruin sburg,  I moved  with  my 
command,  in  obedience  to  orders,  to  join  the  division  on  the  Willow 
Springs  road,  bringing  up  with  me  all  the  stragglers  from  the  advance 
army  corps,  over  one  thousand  stand  of  small-arms  and  fifteen  barrels 
of  powder,  a portion  of  the  spoils  of  victory  at  Thompson’s  Hill.  The 
brigade  reached  Willow  Springs  at  9 p.  in.,  and  encamped  at  the  cross- 
roads. 

On  the  Gth,  orders  were  received  to  send  a regiment  back  to  Port 
Gibson  to  protect  our  ambulance  corps  from  a raid  of  rebel  cavalry 
reported  in  that  vicinity.  Accordingly,  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin  Volun- 
teers, Colonel  Harris,  was  started  at  once  on  the  road  to  Port  Gibson ; 
but  before  reaching  that  place  the  colonel  learned  that  our  ambulances 
were  coming  up,  and  that  there  was  nothing  on  that  road  in  their  rear 


Not  found. 


134 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chav.  XXXVI. 

to  tempt  an  attack  from  the  enemy.  He  therefore  returned,  rejoining 
the  brigade  in  the  afternoon  of  the  day  he  started. 

May  7,  the  brigade  marched  for  Big  Sandy  Creek,  4 miles  beyond 
Rocky  Springs,  on  the  Jackson  road,  arriving  there  by  10  a.  m.  We 
immediately  took  position  in  a cleared  field  on  the  hills  above  the  creek, 
on  the  right  of  the  main  road  and  on  the  left  of  the  First  Brigade, 
throwing  out  a strong  picket  force,  and  making  every  preparation  for 
an  attack. 

Here  we  remained  in  camp  until  10  o’clock  May  10,  when  we  aban 
doned  our  position  on  Big  Sandy,  and  marched  for  Five- Mile  Creek,  on 
the  Cayuga  road,  arriving  there  at  noon  of  that  day.  We  encamped 
and  remained  until  May  12. 

May  12,  we  moved  to  Fourteen-Mile  Creek,  on  the  Auburn  and 
Edwards  Station  road,  arriving  shortly  after  the  pickets  and  a small 
party  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  had  been  routed  by  the  advance  of  Hovey’s 
division,  and  driven  over  that  stream.  In  anticipation  of  an  attack 
from  the  enemy  in  force,  we  went  into  position  on  the  left  of  our  line,  in 
the  edge  of  the  cleared  field  next  the  creek,  which  position  we  held  un- 
disturbed during  the  night. 

On  the  13th,  making  a flank  movement  to  the  right,  we  marched 
toward  Raymond,  encamping  for  the  night  within  4 miles  of  that  place, 
and  near  the  battle-field  of  the  day  previous. 

May  14,  we  moved  through  Raymond  to  within  7 miles  of  Jackson, 
Miss. 

May  15,  Jackson  having  been  occupied  by  our  troops  the  evening 
before,  we  countermarched  through  Raymond,  in  the  rear  of  Edwards 
Station,  halting  and  occupying  a strong  position  for  the  night  at  Haw- 
kins’ plantation,  3 miles  this  side  of  Raymond,  where  we  held  ourselves 
in  readiness  to  march  to  the  support  of  Osterhaus’  division  in  case  it 
should  be  attacked,  of  which  there  was  some  apprehension. 

Nothing  unusual,  however,  occurred,  and  on  the  16th,  early  in  the 
morning,  the  brigade  resumed  its  march  for  Edwards  Station.  This 
day  our  army  fought  and  won  the  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill. 

I submit  below  the  official  report  of  the  Second  Brigade,  Carr’s  divis- ! 
ion,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  in  the  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill. 

At  10  a.  m.  heavy  artillery  and  skirmish  firing  was  heard  in  our  front,  i 
The  Ninth  Division,  General  Osterhaus’,  and  the  Tenth,  General 
Smith’s,  came  upon  the  enemy  strongly  posted  on  a range  of  hills  bor- 
dering Baker’s  Creek.  Osterhaus’  division  drew  up  in  position  in  the 
first  large  cane-field  on  the  east  side  of  the  hills ; Carr’s  division  was  j 
posted  as  a reserve,  close  column  by  division,  a few  hundred  yards  to 
the  rear  in  the  same  field $ Benton’s  brigade  on  the  right,  and  my  brigade 
on  the  left  of  the  road.  Here  we  remained,  resting  on  our  arms  during 
the  forenoon  and  until  2 o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  when  orders  were 
received  to  move  up  to  the  corner  of  the  field,  leaving  one  regiment, 
the  Eleventh  Wisconsin  Volunteers,  as  a support  to  the  First  Wisconsin 
and  Seventh  Indiana  [ Michigan  J Batteries,  which  were  in  position  in 
the  center  of  the  clearing. 

Shortly  after  this  I was  ordered  to  move  forward  my  command  and  j 
occupy  the  ground  between  the  left  of  the  First  Brigade  and  General 
Smith’s  right,  my  right  resting  at  the  forks  of  the  road.  Instructions 
were  given  me  to  open  communication  with  General  Smith,  keep  it  open 
during  the  engagement,  and  to  anticipate  any  movement  the  enemy 
might  make  with  a view  to  turn  our  left.  To  communicate  with  Gen- 
eral Smith  a company. of  skirmishers  were  sent  forward,  who  soon  suc- 
ceeded in  reaching  his  right. 


CHA1\  XXXVI.]  engagement 


AT  BIG  BLACK  RIVER  BRIDGE,  MISS.  135 


Shortly  afterward,  the  enemy  engaged  the  Sixteenth  Kentucky  [.  | and 
one  other  regiment,  belonging  to  Osterhaus’  division,  which  had  been 
sent  out  as  skirmishers  in  advance  of  my  brigade.  The  firing  was 
spirited  from  both  artillery  and  infantry,  and  compelled  these  regwnents 
to  give  way  and  fall  back  toward  a small  field  on  our  extreme  letu. 

To  support  these  regiments  and  to  check  the  enemy’s  advance,  1 
moved  my  whole  command  down  to  the  field,  sending  forward  the 
Twenty-second  Iowa  (Colonel  Stone)  in  the  advance  to  annoy  the 
enemy  and  attract  his  attention  while  the  remainder  of  the  brigade 
was  getting  into  position.  As  we  emerged  from  the  woods  into  the 
field,  the  enemy  opened  fire  upon  us  with  musketry  and  a battery 
posted  on  a hill  near  the  farm-house,  subsequently  used  as  a hospital, 
bursting  several  shells  inclose  proximity  to  the  head  of  the  column, 
but  doing  no  damage.  The  Peoria  Battery  was  quickly  brought  tor- 
ward  to  the  rising  ground  in  the  center  of  the  field,  and,  having  opened 
on  the  enemy,  soon  silenced  his  battery  and  compelled  him  to  withdraw 
it  in  haste.  An  advance  of  my  whole  line  was  then  made,  upon  which 
the  rebels  broke  and  fled,  pressed' by  the  brigade  as  rapidly  and  closely 
as  a proper  precaution  and  the  conformation  of  the  ground  would 

^ The  two  skirmishing  companies  of  the  Twenty-second  Iowa,  and  those 
also  of  the  Twenty-first  and  Twenty -third  Iowa  Eegiments,  succeeded 
in  capturing  and  bringing  in  large  numbers  of  prisoners  and  small-arms 


in  abundance.  ' , . , , . , , 

The  enemy,  after  his  flight  commenced,  did  not  attempt  to  make  any 
determined  stand;  but  while  our  skirmishers  were  advancing  through 
the  cleared  field  in  the  rear  of  the  hospital,  he  opened  fire  upon  them  with 
two  pieces  of  artillery,  posted  on  a high  hill  to  our  left  and  in  General 
Smith’s  front.  Immediately  ordering  up  the  Peoria  Battery,  it  took 
position  in  the  field,  and  opened  a fire  on  the  rebel  guns  so  accurate 
and  severe  that  it  again  silenced  them,  killing  the  horses  of  one  piece, 
and  as  our  advance  was  close  upon  them,  they  were  compelled  to  aban- 
don it,  and  it  was  soon  after  taken  possession  of  by  the  Eighth  Illinois, 
Stevenson’s  brigade,  Logan’s  division.  We  continued  in  pursuit,  with- 
out further  incident  of  importance,  until  we  received  orders  from  you 
to  abandon  it  and  move  up  on  the  Edwards  Station  road  to  join  the 
First  Brigade,  which  we  did,  overtaking  it  at  the  station,  and  going  into 

camp  there  for  the  night.  . 

Although  my  brigade  was  not  permitted  to  take  a very  prominent 
part  in  the  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  still,  enough  was  done  to  enable 
me  to  prove  my  men  and  satisfy  myself  thoroughly  of  their  valor  and 

soldierly  qualities.  „ t . n 

Lieutenant  Fenton,  of  the  Peoria  Battery,  and  his  men  deserve  credit 
for  the  good  service  they  rendered  in  twice  silencing  the  enemy’s  guns. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17tli,  by  3.30  a.  in.,  Carr’s  division  was  again 
on  the  road  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  Benton’s  brigade  having  the  ad- 
vance. _ , , , 

We  came  upon  the  enemy  at  Big  Black  Bridge,  strongly  posted  be- 
hind skillfully  constructed  rifle-pits,  extending  across  a neck  of  land 
formed  by  the  Big  Black  Eiver,  his  flanks  well  protected  by  this  stream, 
and  having  in  his  front,  in  addition  to  the  rifle-pits,  a bayou  filled  with 
brush  and  fallen  trees.  This,  combined  with  the  fact  that  there  were 
cleared  fields  of  from  400  to  600  yards  in  width  along  his  whole  front 
from  bend  to  bend  of  the  stream,  rendered  his  position  really  formi- 
dable and  difficult  of  approach,  subjecting  a Clearing  party,  it  would 
seem,  to  almost  certain  destruction  at  the  commencement  of  the  contest. 


136 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

To  support  Benton’s  brigade,  orders  were  received  to  form  the  bri- 
gade in  two  lines  on  both  sides  of  the  road,  the  artillery  in  the  center. 
Shortly  afterward  I received  orders  to  change  position,  and  by  an  ob- 
lique movement  to  the  right  occupy  the  ground  on  the  right  of  Benton’s 
brigade,  and  meet  a movement  the  enemy  were  reported  to  be  making 
in  that  direction  with  a view  to  flank  us. 

This  order  having  been  executed,  I was  instructed  by  the  brigadier- 
general  commanding  the  division  to  move  forward  slowly  and  cautiously 
with  my  command,  and  develop  and  press  back,  if  possible,  the  enemy’s 
left. 

Accordingly,  I ordered  Col.  G.  L.  Harris,  Eleventh  Wisconsin  Volun- 
teers, who  held  the  left  of  our  new  position,  to  move  his  regiment  for- 
ward  through  the  woods  in  his  front,  his  skirmishers  covering  his  ad-  ! 
vance,  and  the  Twenty-third  Iowa,  Colonel  Kinsman,  to  follow  him  at 
a distance  of  100  yards  as  a support.  At’  the  same  tiipe  I advanced  the 
Twenty-first  Iowa  Volunteers,  Col.  Samuel  Merrill,  into  the  cleared  field 
skirting  Big  Black  Biver,  with  instructions  to  move  forward  on  a line 
with  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin.  The  Peoria  Battery  was  left  in  position 
on  the  rising  ground  in  the  edge  of  the  field,  and  the  Twenty-second  Iowa 
in  rear  as  a reserve  and  support. 

Meanwhile  there  had  commenced  a spirited  artillery  engagement  be- 
tween the  battery  of  Benton’s  brigade  and  the  enemy’s  cannon  in  posi- 
tion behind  their  works.  The  skirmishers  of  the  First  Brigade  were 
actively  engaged,  and  those  of  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin  Volunteers, 
which  regiment  advanced  steadily  forward  through  the  timber  to  the 
field  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  works,  and  distant  from  them  about  400  j 
yards.  Here  I ordered  it  to  halt,  and  move  down  to  the  right  through 
the  field  skirting  the  river,  and  take  position  in  the  woods  and  brush 
lining  this  stream.  This  movement  Colonel  Harris  promptly  executed, 
reaching  the  position  designated  without  serious  loss,  though  exposed 
to  a heavy  fire  from  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters. 

The  Twenty-third  Iowa,  Colonel  Kinsman,  having  come  up  after  tne 
Eleventh  Wisconsin,  was  ordered  to  make  a similar  movement  to  the 
right,  and  to  move  up  under  cover  of  the  river  bank  and  take  position 
on  the  right  of  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin  and  as  close  as  possible  to  the  j 
enemy’s  works,  and  the  Twenty-first  Iowa,  Colonel  Merrill,  to  take  posi- 
tion on  the  bank  between  these  two  regiments.  I also  directed  the  Peoria 
Battery  to  take  position  in  the  open  field  in  front  of  the  left  of  the  enemy 
and  to  open  an  enfilading  fire  on  their  center  batteries,  with  which  the  I 
battery  of  Benton’s  brigade  was  engaged.  At  the  same  time  the  Twenty- 
second  Iowa,  Colonel  Stone,  was  ordered  to  move  forward  on  the  left 
of  the  field  to  within  supporting  distance.  These  orders  were  quickly 
responded  to,  and  the  position  thus  occupied  by  the  brigade  continued 
to  be  held  without  material  variation. 

.During  the  greater  part  of  the  forenoon  heavy  but  ineffectual  mus- 
ketry firing  was  kept  up  by  the  enemy  upon  my  men,  briskly  responded 
to  by  our  sharpshooters.  Late  in  the  forenoon,  finding  it  impossible  to 
press  farther  forward  along  the  river  bank  toward  the  enemy,  as  I had 
intended,  Colonel  Kinsman,  Twenty-third  Iowa  Volunteers,  proposed 
to  charge  at  once  the  enemy’s  works  and  drive  them  out  at  the  point  of 
the  bayonet,  and  asked  my  consent  to  the  same. 

Foreseeing  that  a charge  by  a single  regiment,  unsustained  by  the 
whole  line,  against  fortifications  as  formidable  as  those  in  his  front,  could 
hardly  be  successful,  at  the  same  time  I gave  my  consent  to  his  daring 
proposition  I determined  that  there  should  be  a simultaneous  move- 
ment on  the  part  of  my  whole  command.  Accordingly,  the  Twenty-first 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  BIG  BLACK  RIVER  BRIDGE,  MISS.  137 

Iowa  Volunteers,  Colonel  Merrill,  was  ordered  to  charge  with  the  Twenty 
third,  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin  Volunteers  following  close  upon  them  as 
a support,  and  the  Twenty-second  Iowa,  Col.  William  M.  Stone— which 
had  in  the  mean  time  crossed  the  field  and  taken  position  on  the  river 
bank  on  the  right  of  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin— were  ordered  to  move  out 
into  the  field  and  act  as  a reserve  force.  Two  guns  of  the  Peoria  Bat- 
tery and  one  20-pounder  Parrott,  belonging  to  the  First  Wisconsin  Bat- 
tery, were  in  position  in  the  field,  actively  at  work  upon  the  enemy  and 
doing  good  service.  In  addition,  orders  had  been  sent  to  the  Forty- 
ninth  and  Sixty-ninth  Indiana  Volunteers— two  regiments  which  had 
been  sent  from  Osterhaus’  division  to  my  support  early  in  the  forenoon— 
to  send  forward  at  once  two  companies  as  skirmishers  to  attract  the  at- 
tention of  the  enemy  from  the  movement  on  the  right,  and  as  soon  as 
the  charge  should  be  commenced  to  move  promptly  forward  to  its  sup- 
port. Orders  were  further  given  that  the  men  should  reserve  their 
fire  until  upon  the  rebel  works. 

Finally  the  regiments  that  were  to  lead  the  charge  were  formed,  with 
bayonets  fixed,  in  the  edge  of  the  woods  on  the  river  bank.  All  things 
being  in  readiness,  the  command  “ forward”  was  given  by  Colonel  Kins- 
man, and  at  once  his  noble  regiment  sprang  forward  to  the  works. 
The  Twenty-first,  led  on  by  Colonel  Merrill,  moved  at  the  same  instant, 
the  Eleventh  Wisconsin,  Colonel  Harris,  closely  following.  Through  a 
terrible  fire  of  musketry  from  the  enemy  in  front  and  a galling  fire 
from  his  sharpshooters  on  the  right,  these  brave  men  dashed  bravely  on. 

Kinsman  fell,  dangerously  wounded,  before  half  the  distance  was  ac- 
complished. Struggling  to"  his  feet,  he  staggered  a few  paces  to  the 
front,  cheered  forward  his  men,  and  fell  again,  this  time  to  rise  no  more, 
pierced  through  by  a second  ball. 

Colonel  Merrill,  the  brave  commander  of  the  Twenty-first  Iowa,  fell, 
wounded  early  in  the  charge,  while  gallantly  leading  his  regiment 
against  the  enemy. 

Immediately  Lieutenant-Colonel  Glasgow  placed  himself  at  the  head 
of  the  Twenty- third,  and  Major  Van  Anda  led  on  the  Twenty- first. 
Undismayed  by  the  loss  of  their  colonels,  and  by  the  perfect  hail- storm 
of  bullets  poured  into  them  with  destructive  effect,  the  men  of  the 
Twenty- third  and  Twenty-first  Iowa  and  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin  Vol- 
unteers pressed  onward^  nearer  and  nearer,  to  the  rebel  works,  over 
the  open  field,  500  yards,  under  a wasting  fire,  and  up  to  the  edge  of 
the  bayou.  Halting  here  only  long  enough  to  pour  into  the  enemy  a 
deadly  volley,  they  dashed  forward  through  the  bayou,  filled  with  water, 
fallen  timber,  and  brush,  on  to  the  rebel  works  with  the  shout  of  vic- 
tors, driving  the  enemy  in  with  confusion  from  their  breastworks  and 
rifle-pits,  and- entering  in  triumph  the  rebel  stronghold. 

Hurrying  forward  the  Forty-ninth  and  Sixty-ninth  Indiana  and 
Twenty-second  Iowa  Volunteers,  I sent  the  two  Indiana  regiments  to 
the  support  of  my  left,  and  ordered  the  Iowa  regiment  to  move  against 
the  extreme  left  of  the  enemy’s  works,  where  they,  several  hundred 
strong,  still  held  out,  while  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin  Volunteers  was 
directed  to  occupy  the  ground  between  the  enemy  and  the  bridge,  and 
thus  cut  off  their  retreat.  The  movement  was  successful.  The  rebels 
broke  and  fled  before  the  Twenty-second  Iowa,  and  fell  an  easy  prey 
into  the  hands  of  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin  Volunteers.  Those  of  the 
rebels  who  were  not  captured  hastened  to  make  good  their  retreat  over 
the  bridge.  As  the  result  of  this  successful  charge,  we  may  with  jus- 
tice claim  that  it  gave  our  army  entire  possession  of  the  enemy’s  ex- 
tended lines  of  works,  and  with  them  their  field  artillery  (eighteen 


138 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX YL 


pieces  in  all),  a large  quantity  of  ammunition,  thousands  of  small-arms, : 
and  3,000  prisoners. 

By  our  brigade  were  captured  1,460  small-arms,  several  hundred  ac- 
couterments, chiefly  collected  by  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin  Volunteers, 
1,120  prisoners,  and  4 stand  of  colors. 

It  is,  perhaps,  worthy  of  remark  that  more  men  were  captured  by  my 
brigade  than  I had  men  in  the  charge;  but  this  brilliant  success  was 
not  accomplished  without  considerable  loss;  14  killed  and  185  wounded 
in  the  space  of  three  minutes,  the  time  occupied  in  reaching  the  enemy’s 
works,  attest  the  severity  of  the  fire  to  which  my  men  were  sub- 
jected. An  official  list  is  herewith  submitted,  and  also  a drawing  of 
the  ground  over  which  the  charge  was  made.* 

Officers  and  men,  almost  without  exception,  behaved  with  the  greatest 
gallantry ; their  conduct  reflects  credit  upon  themselves  and  the  noble 
cause  in  which  they  are  engaged.  Among  the  many  who  behaved 
efficiently  and  bravely  I take  pleasure  in  mentioning  the  following : 

Col.  O.  L.  Harris,  Eleventh  Wisconsin  Volunteers,  led  his  regiment 
gallantly  during  the  whole  battle,  and  by  his  coolness  and  good  judg- 
ment rendered  valuable  service. 

Col.  Samuel  Merrill,  Twenty-first  Iowa  Volunteers,  deserves  particular 
mention  for  his  bravery  and  the  gallant  manner  in  which  he  led  his  regi- 
ment to  the  charge. 

Col.  William  M.  Stone,  Twenty-second  Iowa  Volunteers,  though 
suffering  severely  from  disease,  was  present  in  the  field,  sharing  its 
dangers,  and  has  my  thanks  for  the  promptness  with  which  he  moved 
his  command  against  the  left  of  the  enemy’s  works. 

Lieut.  Col.  S.  L.  Glasgow,  of  the  Twenty- third  Iowa  Volunteers,  and 
Maj.  S.  G.  Van  Anda,  of  the  Twenty-first  Iowa  Volunteers,  who  assumed 
command  of  their  respective  regiments  after  the  fall  of  their  colonels, 
deserve  the  highest  praise,  and  are  entitled  to  great  credit  for  the  ac- 
tivity, courage,  and  skill  which  they  displayed  during  the  hottest  part 
of  the  engagement.  They  had  the  honor  of  leading  their  regiments 
into  the  enemy’s  works. 

Maj.  Arthur  Platt,  Eleventh  Wisconsin  Volunteers,  Major  Atherton, 
Twenty-second  Iowa  Volunteers,  and  Major  Clark,  of  the  Twenty-third 
Iowa  Volunteers,  freely  exposed  themselves  and  did  their  duty  nobly. 

The  line  officers  of  the  different  regiments,  almost  to  a man,  displayed  | 
great  personal  courage,  and  handled  their  companies  with  much  ability;  | 
their  good  conduct  greatly  assisted  the  charge. 

Captain  Houston,  Company  A,  Captain  Brown,  Company  I,  and  Lieu-  j 
tenant  Bawlings,  Company  F,  of  the  Twenty-third,  with  their  commands,  ; 
broke  the  enemy’s  line  in  a swamp  at  the  edge  of  the  timber,  and  poured  i 
an  enfilading  fire  into  the  ditches  that  routed  the  rebels  in  confusion,  j 
Lieutenant  Bawlings,  Company  F,  Twenty-third  Iowa,  captured  the  I 
colors  of  the  Sixty-first  Tennessee,  wresting  them  from  the  rebel  color- 1 
bearer.  Captain  Houston,  of  Company  A,  Twenty-third  Iowa,  captured  i 
the  colors  of  the  Twenty-first  Arkansas. 

Corpl.  John  W.  Boone,  color-bearer  of  the  Twenty- third,  fell,  severely  ) 
wounded ; Corpl.  J.  T.  Shipman  grasped  them  [the  colors]  and  bore 
them  gallantly  to  the  front  and  through  the  whole  charge. 

Captains  Crooke,  Harrison,  Boardman,  Swivel,  Watson,  Voorhees,  and  l 
Jones,  of  the  Twenty-first  Iowa,  gallantly  led  their  companies  against  I 
the  enemy’s  intrenchments.  Lieutenant  Howard,  Twenty-first  Iowa, 
acting  adjutant,  was  among  the  first  in  the  charge,  and,  while  manfully  | 
doing  his  duty  and  cheering  on  his  men,  fell,  mortally  wounded.  Lieuts.  | 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  ENGAGEMENT  AT  BIG  BLACK  RIVER  BRIDGE,  MISS.  139 

W.  A.  Roberts,  [George  H.]  Childs,  [Jr.]  Dolson,  McDonald,  Bolton, 
Dickinson,  and  Bates,  of  the  Twenty-first  Iowa,  were  conspicuous  in  the 
fight  and  behaved  in  a manner  worthy  of  all  praise. 

Capts.  D.  E.  Hough,  Company  A,  and  Chrystie,  Company  H,  and 
Lieutenant  Freeman,  Company  A,  of  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin  Volun- 
teers, were  dangerously  wounded  while  engaged  in  skirmish  duty  be- 
fore the  charge.  All  the  officers  and  men  of  this  gallant  regiment 
behaved  nobly,  and  are  brave  and  reliable.  Wisconsin  may  well  be 
proud  of  her  Eleventh  Regiment. 

The  Peoria  Battery,  Lieut.  Frank  B.  Fenton,  did  good  service.  Lieu- 
tenant Fenton  and  his  men  deserve  much  praise  for  the  cool  and  effect- 
ive manner  in  which  they  served  their  guns,  and  for  the  promptness 
with  which  they  moved  their  battery  up  to  the  enemy’s  works  and  opened 
on  them  as  soon  as  their  retreat  commenced. 

Special  and  honorable  mention  should  be  made  of  A.  M.  Lyon,  esq., 
sutler  of  the  Twenty-third  Iowa,  a brave  old  man,  who  took  a gun  at 
the  commencement  of  the  battle,  went  into  the  ranks,  fought  nobly,  and 
fell,  mortally  wounded. 

The  death  of  Colonel  Kinsman,  of  Ihe  Twenty-third  Iowa  Volunteers, 
whose  brave  and  gallant  conduct  is  the  theme  of  universal  praise,  fills  the 
hearts  of  all  who  knew  him  with  poignant  sorrow.  A splendid  soldier, 
a perfect  gentleman,  and  a finished  scholar,  endowed  in  the  highest 
degree  with  the  noblest  qualities  of  true  manhood,  his  loss  cannot 
prove  less  to  his  State  and  country  than  a public  calamity  to  the  officers 
and  soldiers  of  his  command,  who  had  learned  to  love  and  respect  him 
with  an  earnestness  and  devotion  rarely  equaled.  His  loss  is  irrepa- 
rable, but  he  fell  as  the  true  soldier  wishes  to  fall — in  the  moment  of 
victory,  when  his  country’s  flag  waved  in  triumph  over  the  stronghold 
of  rebel  treason,  and  died  as  the  true  soldier  wishes  to  die,  with  Christian 
resignation  and  fortitude. 

To  my  staff  much  praise  is  due  for  the  promptness  they  displayed  in 
carrying  my  orders  to  different  parts  of  the  field  during  the  progress 
of  the  battle. 

Capt.  E.  G.  White,  Twenty-second  Iowa  Volunteers,  assistant  in- 
spector-general of  the  brigade,  deserves  special  praise  for  his  coolness 
and  bravery,  and  for  valuable  services  rendered  in  reconnoitering  the 
enemy’s  position. 

Capt.  Bluford  Wilson,  assistant  adjutant-general,  and  First  Lieut. 
R.  E.  Jackson,  Eleventh  Wisconsin  Volunteers,  acting  aide- de  camp,  ex- 
posed themselves  freely  and  rendered  me  good  service. 

Finally,  I cannot  close  this  report  without  expressing  my  admiration 
for  the  brave  men  in  the  ranks,  to  whose  steadiness  and  determined 
courage  is  in  a great  measure  due  the  glory  of  the  brilliant  and  decisive 
victory  of  Big  Black  Bridge.  To  them  I return  my  warmest  thanks. 
A grateful  country  will  see  that  their  services  are  appropriately 
rewarded. 

The  remainder  of  the  17th  instant  and  the  day  after  the  battle  was 
spent  in  collecting  up  the  arms  and  accouterments  left  on  the  battle- 
field by  the  enemy,  in  taking  care  of  our  wounded,  burying  our  dead, 
and  in  recruiting  our  broken  ranks.  The  Twenty-third  Iowa  Volun- 
teers, which  had  borne  so  distinguished  a part  and  suffered  so  severely 
in  the  charge,  was  placed  as  a guard  over  the  captured  prisoners,  and, 
by  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant,  has  since  gone  north  with  them, 
thus  losing  to  me  for  the  time  being  the  services  of  this  command. 

On  the  evening  of  the  18th,  all  transportation  belonging  to  the  army 
in  front,  captured  small-arms,  and  artillery  having  passed  over  Big 


140 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI 


Black,  I crossed  tlie  brigade,  and  sending  forward  the  Twenty  second 
Iowa  Volunteers  as  a protection  to  the  advance  of  the  train,  I encamped 
with  the  remainder  of  my  commend  on  the  bank  of  the  river  for  the 
night. 

Marching  early  the  10th  instant,  I arrived  in  the  rear  of  Vicksburg 
and  rejoined  the  division  in  the  afternoon  of  that  day.  During  the 
remainder  of  the  19th  instant  and  all  day  of  the  20th,  my  brigade  acted 
as  a reserve  to  the  troops  of  Smith’s  division,  operating  against  the  for- 
tifications of  Vicksburg. 

At  night  of  the  20th,  orders  were  received  to  move  forward  and  take 
the  advance,  relieving  Landram’s  brigade,  of  Smith’s  division,  which 
was  quietly  and  quickly  done  under  cover  of  the  darkness.  As  soon 
as  I had  taken  the  advance,  to  protect  my  ranks  from  the  enemy’s  sharp- 
shooters rifle-pits  were  put  in  course  of  construction. 

This  work  progressed  favorably  during  the  21st.  Two  pieces  of  ar- 
tillery, belonging  to  the  Peoria  Battery,  were  also  brought  up  and 
planted  on  our  right,  in  line  with  the  pits. 

Late  in  the  evening  of  the  21st,  orders  were  received  to  charge  the  i 
enemy’s  works  at  10  a.  m.  on  the  22d  instant,  this  to  be  a part  of  a j 


simultaneous  movement  of  our  whole  army  upon  the  rebel  fortifications. 


For  an  account  of  the  operations  of  this  brigade  on  May  22,  you  are 
respectfully  referred  to  the  official  report  of  the  Second  Brigade,  Four- 
teenth Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  May  22,  1863. 

By  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  22d  instant,  my  brigade,  consist- 
ing of  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin  and  the  Twenty-first  aud  Twenty-second 
Iowa  Volunteers,  had  moved  forward  and  occupied  the  ravine  immedi-  J 
ately  in  front  of  and  about  100  yards  from  the  rebel  fortifications.  The 
Ninety-seventh  Illinois,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Martin,  placed  temporarily 
under  my  command,  was  stationed  in  the  ravine  in  the  rear  of  the 
Eleventh  Wisconsin  Volunteers.  Here  they  were  sheltered  by  the 
brow  of  the  hill,  on  the  top  and  a little  to  the  rear  of  which  the  enemy’s 
works  were  constructed. 

This  position  they  continued  to  occupy  without  change  until  the  hour 
(10  a.  m.)  appointed  for  the  charge  arrived.  Promptly  at  the  hour  my 
line  was  formed  for  the  assault,  the  Twenty-second  Iowa,  Col.  Will- 
iam M.  Stone,  occupying  the  right;  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin,  Colonel 
Harris,  the  left,  with  the  Twenty-first  Iowa,  Major  Van  Anda,  support 
ing  the  Twenty -second,  and  the  Ninety-seventh  Illinois  the  Eleventh 
Wisconsin.  Colonel  Stone  led  his  regiment  against  the  enemy’s  fort 
directly  in  our  front;  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin,  Colonel  Harris,  charged 
toward  the  rifle-pits  to  the  left  of  the  fort,  the  two  supporting  regiments 
closely  following.  As  soon  as  they  reached  the  crest  of  the  hill,  a terri- 
ble fire  from  the  enemy  in  front  and  on  both  flanks  swejfl  the  ground 
and  did  fearful  execution.  Officers  and  men  fell  on  every  side;  but,  with 
a courage  that  could  not  be  daunted,  the  Twenty-second  and  Twenty- 
first  Iowa  on  the  right,  and  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin  and  a portion  of 
the  Ninety-seventh  Illinois  on  the  left,  moved  upon  the  enemy’s  works. 
Beaching  them,  the  width  and  depth  of  the  ditch  in  front  of  the  works, 
combined  with  the  heavy  fire  poured  into  them  by  the  rebels,  checked 
the  main  advance  of  the  Twenty-second  and  Twenty-first  Iowa;  a few^ 
brave  men,  however,  leaping  into  the  ditch,  clambered  up  the  sides  of 
the  fort,  rushed  into  it,  engaging  in  a hand-to-hand  conflict  with  the 
rebels  occupying  the  outer  wing  of  the  fort,  overcame  them,  killing 
many  and  compelling  the  remainder  to  surrender.  Thus  a portion  of 
their  works  were  in  our  possession,  with  the  flag  of  the  Twenty-second 
Iowa  planted  upon  the  walls.  Those  men  of  the  Twenty-first  and 


-CHAP.  XXXVI.]  engagement  at  big  black  river  bridge,  miss.  141 

Tw™ tv-second  who  (lid  not  go  into  the  fort  sheltered  themselves  in  the 
ditch  in  its  front  and  the  gullies  washed  on  the  sides  of  the  hill,  and 
oDened  a vigorous  and  effective  fire  upon  the  rebels.  . 

P0„  the  left,  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin  Volunteers,  Colonel  Harris,  with 
nortions  of  the  Twenty-second  and  Twenty-first  Iowa  Volunteers,  which 
had*  become  detached  from  their  commands,  and  Ninety-seventh  Illinois, 
succeeded  in  crossing  the  brow  of  the  hill,  under  shelter  of  "Inch  their 
line  had  been  formed;  but,  unfortunately,  between  them  and  the  ene- 
mv’s  pits  in  their  front  was  a deep  and  hitherto  concealed  ravine,  filled 
with  abatis.  Into  this  Colonel  Harris  moved  with  his  command,  but 
beyond  it,  owing  partly  to  the  difficulty  of  the  ravine  itself,  partly  to  the 
concentrated  fire  of  the  enemy,  and  partly  to  a want  ot  sufficient  sup- 
port he  found  it  impossible  to  advance.  Disposing  o his  men  in  the 
bottom  and  along  the  sides  of  the  ravine  as  best  he  could,  he  halted  and 

b'jSehS' UraeXndram’s  brigade  had  moved  forward  to  my  sup- 
nort  and  as  it  came  up  into  the  ravine  the  Nineteenth  Kentucky  was 
ordered  to  move  over  the  bill  to  the  assistance  of  the  Eleventh  Wis- 
consin Volunteers,  which,  under  the  leadership  of  the  major  command- 
ing they  promptly  did,  losing,  however,  many  men  in  the  passage, 
among  whom,  I regret  to  say,  was  their  gallant  major. 

The  Seventy-seventh  Illinois  moved  up  to  the  right  to  the  support  of 
the  Twenty-second  and  Twenty-first  Iowa.  Facing  the  fire  of  the 
enemy,  they  advanced  upon  the  rebel  fort,  anil  pianted  their  banner 
on  its  waits  beside  those  of  the  Twenty-second  Iowa.  The  Of  hun- 
dred and  thirtieth  Illinois  halted  in  the  ravine  as  a reserve ; but  while 
my  command  was  being  strengthened,  as  above,  the  enemy  were  not 
idle.  Heavy  re-enforcements  had  been  drawn  from  their  n^ht  and 
massed  in  my  front  behind  their  works.  , 

As  my  men  were  already  much  exhausted,  and  as  the  re-enforcements 
sent  them  were  light,  farther  advance  under  the  circumstances  was 
deemed  impracticable,  and  orders  were  accordingly  issued  directing  the 
men  of  the  two  brigades  to  hold  the  ground  already  gained,  and  this 
with  the  hope  that  re-enforcements  might  soon  be  forwarded,  with 
whose  aid  they  might  assault  the  rebel  works  with  a certainty  ot  suc- 
cess. No  re-enforcements,  however,  could  be  spared  us  during  the 
forenoon,  and  until  late  in  the  afternoon  our  position  remained  the 
same  as  in  the  morning.  All  the  efforts  of  the  enemy  to  dislodge  or 
drive  us  back  were  unavailing.  At  sunset,  however,  a determined 
rush  was  made  by  the  rebels  to  regain  possession  of  their  work,  winch, 

’ in  consequence  of  the  exhaustion  of  the  men  holding  it,  was  successful. 

Falling  back  a few  rods  from  the  rebel  works  until  they  obtained  the 
protection  of  the  crest  of  the  hill,  my  men  halted  and  opened  such  a fire 
upon  the  enemy  as  effectually  checked  their  advance  and  compelled  them 
to  remain  close  under  the  protection  of  their  works.  A heavy  fire  was 
kept  up  from  both  sides  until  dark,  when,  by  mutual  consent,  it  ceased. 

At  8 p.  m.  I received  orders  to  withdraw  my  men  and  occupy  the 
same  ground  I held  the  evening  before  the  charge,  which  was  promptly 
done,  after  bringing  off  all  my  wounded,  with  the  exception  ot  those  in 

the  ditch  immediately  under  the  rebel  works. 

The  loss  of  the  brigade  in  the  course  of  the  day’s  fighting  was  very 
heavy.  Out  of  the  three  regiments  composing  it,  375  were  killed, 

wounded,  and  missing.  An  official  list  is  herewith  submitted. 

Among  the  killed  I regret  to  name  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dunlap,  ot 
the  Twenty-first  Iowa,  who,  though  quite  lame  from  a wound  m the 


* Not  found;  but  sec  revised  statement,  p.  161. 


142  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVX 

foot  received  in  the  battle  near  Port  Gibson,  still  managed  to  make  his 
way  to  the  advance  of  his  regiment  soon  after  the  charge,  where  he  j 
was  almost  immediately  killed  by  a shot  through  the  head. 

Among  the  wounded  was  Col.  "William  M.  Stone,  of  the  Twenty -sec- 
ond Iowa,  who  received  a ball  through  the  arm  soon  after  the  flag  of 
his  regiment  was  planted  on  the  walls  of  the  rebel  fort ; ’also  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Graham,  of  the  same  regiment,  who  was  wounded  and 
taken  prisoner  with  several  others  in  the  evening,  when  the  enemy 
regained  possession  of  their  works. 

It  is  useless  to  undertake  to  make  mention  of  all  who  distinguished 
themselves  for  bravery  and  gallant  conduct.  All  officers  and  men  did 
their  duty  nobly,  and  by  their  coolness  and  courage  added  new  honors 
to  those  won  at  Port  Gibson,  at  Champion’s  Hill,  and  Big  Black. 
Sergt.  Joseph  E.  Griffith,  Company  I,  Twenty-second  Iowa  Volunteers, 
distinguished  himself  particularly  in  the  charge  on  the  fort,  and  is  the 
only  survivor  but  one  of  the  men  who  took  it  in  the  morning. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  K.  LAWLER, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding. 

Capt.  C.  H.  Dyer,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Cornelius  W.  Dunlap,  Twenty -first  Iowa  Infantry. 

In  Camp  near  Black  River,  Mississippi, 

May  18,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  position  of  the  Twenty-first 
Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry,  in  the  memorable  battle  of  Black  River,  May 
17,  1863. 

The  Twenty-first  was  formed  in  line  of  battle  on  the  right,  and  im- 
mediately in  front  of  the  enemy’s  fortifications,  with  the  gallant  Twenty- 
third  Iowa  Regiment  on  our  right.  Important  maneuvering  and  skir- 
mishing took  place  from  this  position  until  late  in  the  forenoon,  when 
orders  were  received  to  charge  and  carry  the  enemy’s  intrenchments  at 
the  point  of  the  bayonet.  The  order  was  obeyed.  The  right  moved 
out  of  the  woods  in  good  order  and  charged  on  the  run  across  the  open 
plain  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  works,  a distance  of  about  800  yards,  driv- 
ing the  enemy  in  utter  confusion  from  their  breastworks  and  rifle-pits 
and  entering  in  triumph  the  stronghold  of  the  rebels.  The  enemy  was 
strongly  posted  on  our  right,  as  well  as  in  front.  The  bullets  came  in 
showers  from  the  flanks,  and,  combined  with  those  coming  from  the 
horde  of  rebels  in  the  rifle-pits  in  front,  made  an  awful  hail  storm, 
through  which  it  seemed  a miracle  that  a single  man  passed  uninjured. 
Colonel  Merrill,  commanding  the  regiment  in  the  first  part  of  the  charge 
with  devotion  and  bravery,  fell,  severely  wounded,  while  gallantly  lead- 
ing his  regiment  against  the  enemy. 

The  Twenty-first  captured  a great  many  prisoners.  This  brilliant 
charge  proved  very  destructive  to  the  regiment,  and  our  loss  was  very 
heavy.  An  official  list  is  herewith  transmitted.*  Officers  and  men, 
with  but  one  or  two  exceptions,  behaved  coolly  and  bravely,  and  their 
conduct  reflects  great  credit  upon  themselves  and  their  State,  and 
creates  a feeling  of  pride  and  gratitude  on  the  part  of  their  friends. 


See  revised  statement,  p.  130. 


Chaiv  XXXVI.] 


SKIRMISH  ABOVE  GREENVILLE,  MISS. 


143 


I cannot,  of  course,  make  mention  of  all  those  who  distinguished  them- 
selves on  that  battle-field,  as  that  would  be  to  copy  the  roll  of  all  present 
Maj.  S.  G.  Van  Anda  received  the  highest  credit  for  the  coolness  and 
bravery  with  which  he  conducted  the  charge,  the  left  being  in  front, 
through  the  storm  of  leaden  hail.  Much  ot  the  .success  of  the  charge 
is  owing  to  his  gallant  conduct  and  daring  example.  Captain  Harrison 
was  one  of  the  first  officers  on  the  enemy’s  yrorks.  Captains  Swivel, 
Yoorhees,  Watson,  Boardman,  and  Crooke  behaved  with  great  coolness. 
Lieutenants  Roberts,  Childs,  and  Dolson  received  the  praise  of  all  who 
saw  their  bravery.  Lieutenant  Howard,  of  Company  B,  acting  adjutant, 
received  a mortal  wound  while  gallantly  performing  his  part  in  this 
gallant  charge. 

We  lost  many  of  our  bravest  men,  but  it  was  a great  undertaking, 
and  the  object  accomplished  was  the  most  important  of  the  war. 

To  Captain  Wilson  and  Lieutenant  Jackson,  of  the  staff,  too  much 
praise  cannot  be  given.  Their  conduct  was  brave  and  noble,  and  they 
are  held  in  the  highest  respect  by  every  officer  and  soldier  of  the  com- 
mand for  the  faithful  manner  in  which  they  performed  their  duties. 

I am,  captain,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

C.  W.  DUNLAP, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  Tiventy  first  Iowa. 

Captain  Wilson,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


MAY  17,  1863.— Skirmish  near  Bridgeport,  Miss. 

Report  of  Col.  Clarlc  Wright , Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry. 

Bridgeport,  Miss.,  May  17,  1863. 

Colonel  : I engaged  General  [A.  W.]  Reynolds  this  morning  3 miles 
from  this  place.  He  had  one  brigade  and  two  batteries.  In  my  first 
charge  his  lines  broke  and  he  retreated  precipitately  toward  this  place, 
when  I came  up  and  fought  him  three  hours,  until  General  Blair  came 
up.  He  succeeded  in  getting  most  of  his  command  across.  I captured 
some  160  prisoners,  two  wagons  and  teams  with  provisions,  and  a num- 
ber of  mules.  General  Blair  relieved  me,  and  I sent  the  command  out 
to  first  plantation  to  feed  men  and  horses,  they  having  had  nothing 
since  yesterday  morning.  General  Sherman  has  arrived  here.  As 
soon  as  I rest,  I will  cross  at  this  point  and  join  you  at  the  earliest 
opportunity. 

I am,  respectful! v,  your  obedient  servant, 

CLARK  WRIGHT, 

Colonel. 

W.  T.  Clark,  Col.  and  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


MAY  18,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Island  25b.  82,  above  Greenville,  Miss. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Jacob  G.  Lauman , U.  S.  Army. 

Hdqrs.  Fourth  Division,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps, 

On  Board  Steamer  Luminary , May  19,  1863. 
Colonel  : When  we  arrived  within  15  miles  of  Greenville  by  way  of 
river,  and  7 across  the  land,  our  advance  boat,  the  Crescent  City,  was 


144 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CnAr.  XXXVI. 


fired  into  several  tiroes  from  the  Mississippi  side,  wounding  9 men  se- 
riously and  5 slightly  of  the  Third  Iowa. 

We  immediately  landed  all  of  our  troops,  and  pushed  forward  our  cay- 
alry  to  the  point  from  which  we  noticed  the  battery  had  been  planted, 
but  when  the  cavalry  came  up  the  battery  had  fled. 

We  immediately  started  in  pursuit,  and  chased  them  about  9 miles, 
but  could  not  keep  up  with  them,  not  knowing  the  country  as  well  as 
they  did,  and  finally  were  compelled  to  give  up  the  chase  without  ac- 
complishing the  purpose  of  our  landing. 

There  are  several  points  above  Greenville  which  the  enemy  have 
pierced,  making  embrasures,  and  from  one  of  these  he  made  his  attack 
on  us.  If  a strong  force  of  cavalry  could  be  sent  to  land  above  Green- 
ville, I think  there  would  be  no  difficulty  in  taking  this  battery,  but 
they  are  so  well  mounted  that  it  is  folly  for  infantry  to  pursue  them. 
They  had  four  pieces  of  artillery.  We  have  just  arrived  at  Young’s 
Point,  and  are  awaiting  orders.  We  are  now  proceeding  to  Grand 
Gulf. 


Very  respectfully,  yours, 


J.  G.  LAUMAN, 
Brigadier-  General. 


Lieut.  Col.  Henry  Binmore, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


MAY  18,  1863. — Skirmish  on  Horn  Lake  Creek,  Tenn. 

Report  of  Capt.  Arthur  M.  Sherman,  Second  Wisconsin  Cavalry. 

Camp  Second  Wisconsin  Cavalry, 

. May  18, 1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  this  my  report  of  the  result  of  the 
expedition  under  my  command,  which  left  our  camp  at  1 p.  in.  to  report 
to  brigade  commander,  Colonel  Moore,  Twenty-first  Missouri  Infantry. 

I received  instructions  to  proceed  upon  the  Hernando  road  10  or  12 
miles  with  75  men,  and  dispatch  25  men  by  the  Pigeon  Roost  road  to 
intersect  the  Hernando  road  and  form  a junction  with  me  again,  and, 
if  the  enemy  were  discovered  in  any  force,  to  hold  them  in  check,  and 
report  the  fact  to  brigade  headquarters. 

After  proceeding  some  4 miles  beyond  Honconnah,  the  advance  dis- 
covered two  pickets  and  gave  chase.  After  running  half  a mile,  one  of 
them  abandoned  a United  States  horse  and  saddle  and  fled  into  the 
woods,  the  horse  falling  into  our  hands.  We  proceeded  then  near  unto 
Horn  Lake  Creek,  and  discovered  a picket  of  some  8 or  10  men,  who 
seemed  reluctant  to  abandon  their  post ; whereupon  I halted  my  com- 
mand, without  showing  its  strength,  and  advanced  Lieutenant  Sho  I 
waiter,  with  20  men,  for  the  purpose  of  charging  them,  after  becom-j 
ing  convinced  they  had  no  reserve  to  support  them  ; but,  if  such  should! 
be  the  case,  to  feint  being  unsupported,  and  fall  back  and  draw  themjl 
out.  He  advanced  upon  them,  they  retreating  beyond  Horn  Lake  Creek.  | 
He  discovered  at  this  time  a squad  on  his  right  and  left,  which  he  im-  j 
mediately  engaged,  they  as  soon  giving  way,  and  returning  into  the 
timber.  He  immediately  communicated  to  me  the  facts  of  his  engage- 
ment, whereupon  I advanced  with  one-half  of  the  50  men  I had  left,  the 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


145 


SCOUTS  FROM  LA  GRANGE,  TENN. 

25  sent  by  the  Pigeon  Roost  road  not  yet  having  overtaken  us.  About 
the  time  or  a little  before  my  arrival  to  the  front,  the  enemy  had  all  fled 
and  abandoned  their  post. 

It  being  now  nearly  dark,  and  my  men  without  either  food  or  blankets, 
I decided  to  return  to  camp. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

A.  M.  SHERMAN, 

Captain , Commanding  Company  L,  Second  Wisconsin  Cavalry. 
Lieut.  Col.  Levi  Sterling. 

P.  S. — I met  one  of  our  spies  coming  in  from  Hernando,  who  reported 
General  Chalmers’ presence  there  with  400  men,  and  that  Major  [G.  L.j 
Blythe  is  this  side  with  300  men. 


MAY  19,  1863. — Scouts  from  La  Grange,  Tenn. 

Report  of  Col.  Hdward  Hatch , commanding  Cavalry  Brigade. 

* Headquarters  Cavalry  Brigade, 

La  Grange , Tenn.,  May  19,  1863. 

Captain:  The  colonel  commanding  directs  me  to  say  that  he  has  the 
honor  to  submit  the  following  report  from  the  scouts  this  day : 

One  company  Second  Iowa  Cavalry  found  on  Ripley  road,  10  miles 
south  of  this,  a party  of  rebel  cavalry  of  60  to  100  men.  Had  quite  a 
.sharp  skirmish,  in  which  two  of  our  men  were  quite  severely  ^wounded. 
Rebel  loss  unknown,  but  supposed  to  be  much  greater  than  ours.  The 
rebels  retired  to  the  southwest.  Patrols  followed  but  a short  distance 
farther. 

One  company  (Second  Iowa  Cavalry)  found  about  70  of  the  rebels, 
supposed  to  be  Mitchell’s  men,  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  in  a field  on 
the  right  and  three-fourths  of  a mile  distant  from  the  road,  13  miles 
from  this  place,  on  Salem  road,  2 miles  this  side  of  Salem.  On  our  men 
deploying  as  skirmishers,  the  rebels  withdrew  at  the  trot,  not  firing  a 
shot,  in  a westerly  direction.  The  officer  in  command  of  this  com- 
pany reports  sending  to  your  headquarters  a prisoner  just  from  Jack- 
son. 

About  100  of  the  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry  went  to  Mount  Pleasant  by 
the  way  of  Early  Grove.  They  saw  nothing.  Heard  of  6 men  passing 
one  hour  in  advance  of  them  through  Early  Grove,  but  found  or  heard 
nothing  of  them  at  Mount  Pleasant.  They  got  rumors  of  200  rebels  at 
Alexander’s  Mills,  on  the  Coldwater,  south  of  Mount  Pleasant,  but 
nothing  reliable. 

No  other  forces  or  movements  of  the  enemy  are  reported. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  SCOTT  BELDEN, 

Lieutenant  and  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

Captain  Harland, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  First  Division , Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

10  R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


I 


146 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 
MAY  19- JULY  4,  1863.— The  Siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss. 


REPORTS.* 

No.  1.— Organization  of  the  Union  forces  operating  against  Vicksburg,  Maj.  Gen. 

Ulysses  S.  Grant,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding,  May  18-July  4. 

No.  2.— Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  engaged  at  Vicksburg,  May  19. 

No.  3. — Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  in  the  assault  on  Vicksburg, 
May  22. 

No.  4.— General  Summary  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  during  the  operations 
against  Vicksburg,  May  1-July  4. 

No.  5.— Capts.  Frederick  E.  Prime  and  Cyrus  B.  Comstock,  U.  S.  Corps  of  Engi- 
neers, Chief  Engineers  Army  of  the  Tennessee. 

No.  6.— Lieut.  Peter  C.  Hains,  U.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers,  Chief  Engineer  Thirteenth  j 
Army  Corps. 

No.  7.— Capt.  William  L.  B.  Jenney,  additional  aide-de-camp,  U.  S.  Army,  Acting  i 
Engineer  Officer  Fifteenth  Army  Corps,  including  operations  since  May  9. 
No.  8.— Capt.  William  Kossak,  additional  aide-de-camp,  U.  S.  Army,  Acting  Engi- 
neer Officer. 

No.  9. — Capt.  Henry  C.  Freeman,  additional  aide-de-camp,  U.  S.  Army,  Acting  En- 
gineer Officer  Fourth  Division,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

No.  10.— Capt.  Andrew  Hickenlooper,  Chief  Engineer  Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  in- 
cluding operations  since  April  17. 

No.  11.— Capt.  Stewart  R.  Tresilian,  Engineer  Officer  Third  Division,  including  opera- 
tions since  April  25. 

No.  12.— Maj.  Gen.  Edward  O.  C.  Ord,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Thirteenth  Army 
Corps. 

No.  13.— Brig.  Gen.  Peter  J.  Osterhaus,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Ninth  Division. 

No.  14— Capt.  Charles  H.  Lanphere,  Seventh  Michigan  Battery,  including  operatious 
May  16  and  17. 

No.  15.— Lieut.  Oscar  F.  Nutting,  First  Wisconsin  Battery. 

No.  16.— Brig.  Gen.  Albert  L.  Lee,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Brigade. 

No.  17.— Col.  James  Keigwin,  Forty-ninth  Indiana  Infantry,  commanding  First  Bri- 
gade. 

No.  18.— Col.  John  G.  Fonda,  One  hundred  and  eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  includ-  « 
ing  operations  May  16  and  17. 

No.  19.— Col.  Thomas  J.  Lucas,  Sixteenth  Indiana  Infantry,  First  Brigade,  Tenth  j 
Division,  including  operations  since  April  13. 

No.  20.— Col.  Peter  J.  Sullivan,  Forty-eighth  Ohio  Infantry,  Second  Brigade,  includ-  |> 
ing  operations  since  December  20, 1862. 

No.  21.— Brig.  Gen.  Alvin  P.  Hovey,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Twelfth  Division. 

No.  22.— Maj.  Salue  G.  Van  Anda,  Twenty-first  Iowa  Infantry,  Second  Brigade,  Four-  j 
teenth  Division. 

No.  23.— Maj.  Joseph  B.  Atherton,  Twenty-second  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  24.— Capt.  Charles  N.  Lee,  Twenty-second  Iowa  Infantry,  including  operations 
since  May  1. 

No.  25.— Maj.  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Fifteenth  Army 
Corps. 

No.  26.— Lieut.  Col.  Simeon  D.  Swan,  Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 

* See  also  the  general  reports  of  Grant,  Johnston,  McClernand,  and  Pemberton;  1 
battle  of  Port  Gibson,  reports  of  Buehler  and  Carr ; engagement  at  Raymond,  reports 
of  Davis,  Campbell,  Sanborn,  John  E.  Smith,  and  John  D.  Stevenson;  engagement  at 
Jackson,  reports  of  Alexander,  Bouck,  Buckland,  Deimling,  Hillis,  Holmes,  Hubbard,  J 
Matthies,  Sherman,  Thomas,  and  Tuttle  (Part  I) ; and  engagement  at  Champion’s 
Hill,  reports  of  Bur  bridge.  Guppey,  Lindsey,  Osterhaus,  and  Putnam.  Also  Appen- 
dix, pp.  689-698. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  147 

No.  27.— Col.  Charles  R.  Woods,  Seventy-sixth  Ohio  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade,  First  Division,  including  operations  since  May  2. 

No.  28. — Col.  David  Carskaddon,  Ninth  Iowa  Infantry,  Third  Brigade,  including 
operations  since  December  29,  1862. 

No.  29. — Maj.  Gen.  Frank  P.  Blair,  jr.,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Division,  in- 
cluding operations  since  May  7. 

No.  30. — Capt.  Samuel  E.  Barrett,  Battery  B,  First  Illinois  Light  Artillery. 

No.  31. — Col.  Giles  A.  Smith,  Eighth  Missouri  Infantry,  commanding  First  Brigade, 
including  operations  since  May  16. 

No.  32.— Col.  Thomas  Kilby  Smith,  Fifty-fourth  Ohio  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade,  including  operations  since  May  6. 

No.  33. — Col.  Oscar  Malmborg,  Fifty-fifth  Illinois  Infantry,  including  operations  since 
May  5. 

No.  34. — Lieut.  William  C.  Porter,  Fifty-fifth  Illinois  Infantry. 

No.  35. — Col.  Hamilton  N.  Eldridge,  One  hundred  and  twenty-seventh  Illinois  In- 
fantry. 

No.  36. — Lieut.  Col.  Cyrus  W.  Fisher,  Fifty-fourth  Ohio  Infantry,  including  operations 
since  May  6. 

No.  37. — Lieut.  Col.  Samuel  R.  Mott,  Fifty- seventh  Ohio  Infantry,  including  opera- 
tions since  May  4. 

No.  38. — Brig.  Gen.  Hugh  Ewing,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Brigade. 

No.  39. — Maj.  Charles  Hipp,  Thirty-seventh  Ohio  Infantry. 

No.  40.— Lieut.  Joseph  R.  Reed,  Second  Iowa  Battery,  Third  Division. 

No.  41. — Lieut.  Col.  Jefferson  Brumback,  Ninety-fifth  Ohio  Infantry,  First  Brigade. 

No.  42. — Col.  James  L.  Geddes,  Eighth  Iowa  Infantry,  Third  Brigade. 

No.  43. — Brig.  Gen.  Jacob  G.  Lauman,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Fourth  Division, 
Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

No.  44. — Col.  Aaron  Brown,  Third  Iowa  Infantry,  First  Brigade,  including  operations 
May  18. 

No.  45.— Col.  Benjamin  Dornblaser,  Forty-sixth  Illinois  Infantry,  Second  Brigade. 

No.  46. — Maj.  Charles  J.  Stolbrand,  Second  Illinois  Light  Artillery,  Chief  of  Artillery 
Third  Division,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 

No.  47. — Brig.  Gen.  Mortimer  D.  Leggett,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Brigade. 

No.  48. —Col.  Manning  F.  Force  Twentieth  Ohio  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade. 

No.  49. — Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  E.  G.  Ransom,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Brigade, 
Sixth  Division,  including  operations  since  April  26. 

No.  50.— Col.  Thomas  W.  Humphrey,  Ninety-fifth  Illinois  Infantry. 

No.  51. — Col.  William  Hall,  Eleventh  Iowa  Infantry,  commanding  Third  Brigade. 

No.  52. — Maj.  Charles  Foster,  Eleventh  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  53. — Maj.  William  A.  Walker,  Thirteenth  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  54. — Col.  William  W.  Belknap,  Fifteenth  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  55.— Lieut.  Col.  John  M.  Hedrick,  Fifteenth  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  56. — Capt.  Romulus  L.  Hanks,  Fifteenth  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  57. — Lieut.  Col.  Addison  H.  Sanders,  Sixteenth  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  58. — Capt.  John  H.  Smith,  Sixteenth  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  59.— Maj.  Edward  J.  Wood,  Forty-eighth  Indiana  Infantry,  First  Brigade,  Sev- 
enth Division. 

No.  60.  Lieut.  Col.  John  E.  Tourtellotte,  Fourth  Minnesota  Infantry. 

No.  61.  Col.  Green  B.  Raum,  Fifty-sixth  Illinois  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade. 

No.  62. — Maj.  John  F.  Walden,  Seventeenth  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  63.— Lieut.  Col.  E.  S.  Sampson,  Fifth  Iowa  Infantry,  Third  Brigade,  including 
operations  since  April  25. 


J 48 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


No.  64.— Maj.  Gen.  Francis  J.  Herron,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  division. 

No.  65. — Col.  George  W.  Clark,  Thirty-fourth  Iowa  Infantry,  First  Brigade. 

No.  66. — Col.  John  McNulta,  Ninety-fourth  Illinois  Infantry,  Second  Brigade. 

No.  67.— Lieut.  Col.  Daniel  Kent,  Nineteenth  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  68.— Col.  Henry  Bertram,  Twentieth  Wisconsin  Infantry. 

No.  69.— Capt.  Martin  Welfley,  Battery  B,  First  Missouri  Light  Artillery. 

No.  70.— Consolidated  statement  of  prisoners  of  war  captured  and  paroled,  &c. 

No.  71,— Organization  of  the  Confederate  Army  of  Vicksburg,  Lieut.  Gen.  John  C- 
Pemberton  commanding,  July  4,  1863. 

No.  72.— Summary  of  the  Casualties  in  the  Confederate  forces  during  the  siege  of 
Vicksburg. 

No.  73.— Maj.  Samuel  II.  Lockett,  C.  S.  Engineers,  Chief  Engineer. 

No.  74.— Col.  William  T.  Withers,  First  Mississippi  Light  Artillery,  Chief  of  Light 
Artillery. 

•No.  75.— Col.  Edward  Higgins,  C.  S.  Artillery,  commanding  river  batteries. 

No.  76.— Lieut.  Col.  D.  Beltzhoover,  First  Louisiana  Artillery. 

No.  77.— Maj.  Gen.  Carter  L.  Stevenson,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  division. 

No.  78.— Brig.  Gen.  Stephen  D.  Lee,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Brigade. 

No.  79.— Capt.  A.  C.  Roberds,  Twenty-third  Alabama  Infantry. 

No.  80.— Maj.  George  W.  Mathieson,  Thirty-first  Alabama  Infantry. 

No.  81.— Capt.  George  E.  Brewer,  Forty-sixth  Alabama  Infantry. 

No.  82.— Col.  A.  W.  Reynolds,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Fourth  Brigade. 

No.  83.— Col.  T.  N.  Waul,  Texas  Legion. 

No.  84— Maj.  Gen.  John  H.  Forney,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  division. 

No.  85.— Brig.  Gen.  Louis  Hdbert,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  brigade. 

No.  86.— Brig.  Gen.  John  C.  Moore,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  brigade. 

No.  87.— Col.  Ashbel  Smith,  Second  Texas  Infantry. 

No.  88.— Maj.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  division. 

No.  89.— Brig.  Gen.  W.  E.  Baldwin,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Brigade. 

No.  90.— Brig.  Gen.  F.  A.  Shoup,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Brigade. 

No.  91.— Maj.  Gen.  John  S.  Bowen,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  division. 

No.  92.— Col.  Francis  M.  Cockrell,  Second  Missouri  Infantry,  commanding  First 
Brigade. 

No.  93.— Brig.  Gen.  Martin  E.  Green,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Brigade. 

No.  94.— Col.  Thomas  P.  Dockery,  Nineteenth  Arkansas  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade. 

No.  95.— Capt.  James  W.  Barclay  and  Lieut.  H.  Wilkerson,  First  Missouri  Cavalry, 
and  letters  of  congratulation. 

No.  96. — Surg.  Benjamin  D.  Lay,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  97.— Abstract  from  morning  report  of  sick  and  wouudefl  of  the  Confederate  Army 
at  Vicksburg,  July  4, 1863. 

2*0.1. 

Organization  of  the  Union  forces  operating  against  Vicksburg,  Maj.  Gen. 
Ulysses  8.  Grant , U.  S.  Army , commanding , May  18 -Jvly  4.  1803. 

ARMY  OF  THE  TENNESSEE. 

Maj.  Gen.  Ulysses  S.  Grant, 
escort. 

4th  Illinois  Cavalry,  Company  A,  Capt.  Embury  D.  Osband. 

ENGINEERS. 

1st  Battalion  Engineer  Regiment  of  the  West,  Maj.  William  Tweeddale. 


Chap.  XXXVi.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

NINTH  ARMY  CORPS.* 

Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Parke. 


149 


FIRST  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Welsh. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  Henry  Bowman. 

3Gth  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  John  B. 
Norton. 

17th  Michigan,  Lieut.  Col.  Constant  Lnce. 
27th  Michigan,  Col.  Dorus  M.  Fox. 

45th  Pennsylvania,  Col.  John  I.  Curtin. 


Third  Brigade. 

Col.  Daniel  Leasure. 

2d  Michigan,  Col.  William  Humphrey. 
8th  Michigan,  Col.  Frank  Graves. 

20th  Michigan,  Lieut.  Col.  W.  Hunting- 
ton  Smith. 

79th  New  York,  Col.  David  Morrison. 
100th  Pennsylvania,  Lieut.  Col.  Mathew 
M.  Dawson. 


Artillery.  • 

Pennsylvania  Light,  Battery  D,  Capt.  George  W.  Durell.  t 


SECOND  DIVISION. 

Bri<r.  Gen.  Robert  B.  Potter. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  Simon  G.  Griffin. 

6th  New  Hampshire,  Lieut.  Col.  Henry 
H.  Pearson. 

9th  New  Hampshire,  Col.  Herbert  B. 
Titus. 

7th  Rhode  Island,  Col.  Zenas  R.  Bliss. 


Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Edward  Ferrero. 

35th  Massachusetts,  Col.  Sumner  Carruth. 
11th  New  Hampshire,  Lieut.  Col.  Moses 
N.  Collins. 

51st  New  York,  Col.  Charles  W.  Le  Gen- 
dre. 

51st  Pennsylvania,  Col.  John  F.  Ilart- 
ranft. 


Third  Brigade. 

Col.  Benjamin  C.  Christ. 

29th  Massachusetts,  Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  H.  Barnes. 

46th  New  York,  Col.  Joseph  Gerhardt. 

50th  Pennsylvania,  Lieut.  Col.  Thomas  S.  Brenholtz. 

Artillery. 

2d  New  York  Light,  Battery  L,  Capt.  Jacob  Roemer. 
artillery  reserve. 

2d  United  States,  Battery  E,  Lieut.  Samuel  N.  Benjamin. 

THIRTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McClernand.  \ 

Maj.  Gen.  Edward  O.  C.  Ord. 

escort. 

3d  Illinois  Cavalry,  Company  L,  Capt.  David  R.  Sparks. 
pioneers. 

Kentucky  Infantry  (Independent  Company),  Capt.  William  F.  Patterson. 

* Joined  from  the  Department  of  the  Ohio,  June  14  to  17. 
t Transferred  from  Second  Division  June  25. 
t Relieved  June  19. 


150 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[ClliVP.  XXXVI. 


NINTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Peter  J.  Osteriiaus. 


First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Albert  L.  Lee. 

Col.  James  Keigwin.* 

118tli  Illinois,  Col.  John  G.  Fonda. 

49th  Indiana : 

Maj.  Arthur  J.  Hawhe. 

Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  H.  Thornton. 
69th  Indiana : 

Col.  Thomas  W.  Bennett. 

Lieut.  Col.  Oran  Perry. 

7th  Kentucky : 

Lieut.  Col.  John  Lucas. 

Col.  Reuben  May. 

120th  Ohio,  Col.  Marcus  M.  Spiegel. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Daniel  W.  Lindsey. 

54th  Indiana,  Col.  Fielding  Mansfield. 
22d  Kentucky,  Lieut.  Col.  George  W. 

Monroe. 

16th  Ohio : 

Capt.  Eli  W.  Botsford. 

Maj.  Milton  Mills. 

42d  Ohio: 

Lieut.  Col.  Don  A.  Pardee. 

Col.  Lionel  A.  Sheldon. 

114th  Ohio : 

Col.  John  Cradlebaugh. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  H.  Kelly. 


Cavalry. 

2d  Illinois  (five  companies),  Lieut.  Col.  Daniel  B.  Bush,  jr. 
3d  Illinois  (three  companies),  Capt.  John  L.  Campbell. 

6th  Missouri  (seven  companies),  Col.  Clark  Wright. 


Artillery. 

Capt.  Jacob  T.  Foster. 


Michigan  Light,  7th  Battery,  Capt.  Charles  H.  Lanphere. 
Wisconsin  Light,  1st  Battery,  Lieut.  Oscar  F.  Nutting. 


TENTH  DIVISION. 


Brig.  Gen.  Andrew  J.  Smith. 

Escort. 

4th  Indiana  Cavalry,  Company  C,  Capt.  Andrew  P.  Gallagher. 


First  Brigade. 


Second  Brigade. 


Brig.  Gen.  Stephen  G.  Burbridge. 


Col.  William  J.  Landram. 


16th  Indiana : 

Col.  Thomas  J.  Lucas. 

Maj.  James  H.  Redfield. 

60th  Indiana,  Col.  Richard  Owen. 
67th  Indiana,  Lieut.  Col.  Theodore 
Buehler. 

83d  Ohio,  Col.  Frederick  W.  Moore. 
96th  Ohio,  Col.  Joseph  W.  Vance. 

23d  Wisconsin  : 

Col.  Joshua  J.  Guppey. 

Lieut.  Col.  William  F.  Vilas. 


E. 


77th  Illinois,  Col.  David  P.  Grier. 
97th  Illinois : 

Col.  Friend  S.  Rutherford. 
Lieut.  Col.  Lewis  D.  Martin. 
130th  Illinois,  Col.  Nathaniel  Niles. 
19th  Kentucky : 

Lieut.  Col.  John  Cowan. 

Maj.  Josiah  J.  Mann. 

48th  Ohio : 

Lieut.  Col.  Job  R.  Parker. 
Col.  Peter  J.  Sullivan. 


Artillery. 


i 


Illinois  Light,  Chicago  Mercantile  Battery,  Capt.  Patrick  II.  White. 
Ohio  Light,  17th  Battery  : 

Capt.  Ambrose  A.  Blount. 

Capt.  Charles  S.  Rice. 


Assumed  command  May  19. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


151 


TWELFTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Alvin  P.  Hovey. 

Escort. 

1st  Indiana  Cavalry,  Company  C,  Lieut.  James  L.  Carey. 


First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  George  F.  McGinnis. 

Lltli  Indiana,  Lieut.  Col.  William  W. 
Darnall. 

S-H.li  Indiana,  Col.  William  T.  Spicely. 
34th  Indiana : 

.Col.  Robert  A.  Cameron. 

Maj.  Robert  B.  Jones. 

Col.  Robert  A.  Cameron. 

46th  Indiana,  Col.  Thomas  H.  Bringhurst. 
20th  Wisconsin : 

Col.  Charles  R.  Gill. 

Lieut.  Col.  William  A.  Greene. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  James  R.  Slack. 

87th  Illinois,  Col.  John  E.  Whiting. 

47th  Indiana,  Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Me 
Laughlin. 

24th  Iowa : 

Col.  Eber  C.  Byam. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  Q.  Wilds. 

28th  Iowa,  Col.  John  Connell. 

56th  Ohio,  Col.  William  H.  Raynor. 


Artillery. 

1st  Missouri  Light,  Battery  A,  Capt.  George  W.  Schofield. 
Ohio  Light,  2d  Battery,  Lieut.  Augustus  Beach. 

Ohio  Light,  16th  Battery,  Lieut.  Russell  P.  Twist. 

FOURTEENTH  DIVISION. 


Brig.  Gen.  Eugene  A.  Carr. 


Escort. 

3d  Illinois  Cavalry,  Company  G : 
Capt.  Enos  McPhail. 

Capt.  Samuel  S.  Marrctt. 


First  Brigade. 

(1.)  Brig.  Gen.  William  P.  Benton. 
(2.)  Col.  Henry  D.  Washburn.* 

(3.)  Col.  David  Shunk.I 

33d  Illinois,  Col.  Charles  E.  Lippincott. 
99th  Illinois: 

Col.  George  W.  K.  Bailey. 

Lieut.  Col.  Lemuel  Parke. 

8th  Indiana. 

Col.  David  Shank. 

Maj.  Thomas  J.  Brady. 

18th  Indiana : 

Col.  Henry  D.  Washburn. 

Capt.  Jonathan  H.  Williams. 

1st  United  States  (siege  guns),  Maj. 
Maurice  Maloney. 


Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Michael  K.  Lawler. 
21st  Iowa : 

Lieut.  Col.  Cornelius  W.  Dunlap. 
Maj.  Salue  G.  Van  Anda. 

22d  Iowa  : 

Col.  William  M.  Stone. 

Lieut.  Col.  Harvey  Graham. 

Maj.  Joseph  B.  Atherton. 

Capt.  Charles  N.  Lee. 

23d  Iowa,  Col.  Samuel  L.  Glasgow. 

11th  Wisconsin : 

Col.  Charles  L.  Harris. 

Maj.  Arthur  Platt. 


Artillery. 

2d  Illinois  Light,  Battery  A : 

Lieut.  Frank  B.  Fenton. 

Capt.  Peter  Davidson. 

Indiana  Light,  1st  Battery,  Capt.  Martin  Klauss. 


Assumed  command  May  31. 


t Assumed  command  June  27. 


152 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

FIFTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 

Maj.  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman. 


[Ciiai>.  XXXY1. 


FIRST  DIVISION. 

Maj.  Gen.  Frederick  Steele. 


First  Brigade. 

(1.)  Col.  Francis  H.  Manter. 
(2.)  Col.  Bernard  G.  Farrar.* 

13th  Illinois,  *Col.  Adam  B.  Gorgas. 
27th  Missouri,  CoJ.  Thomas  Curly. 

29th  Missouri,  Col.  Janies  Peckham. 
noth  Missouri,  Lieut.  Col.  Otto  Scliadt.. 
3 1st  Missouri : 

Col.  Thomas  C.  Fletcher. 

Maj.  Frederick  Jaensch. 

Lieut.  Col.  Samuel  P.  Simpson. 
32d  Missouri,  Maj.  Abraham  J.  Seay. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Charles  R.  Woods. 

25th  Iowa,  Col.  George  A.  Stone. 

31st  Iowa  : 

Col.  William  Smyth. 

Maj.  Theodore  Stimming. 

3d  Missouri,  Lieut.  Col.  Theodore  Meu- 
raann. 

12tli  Missouri,  Col.  Hugo  Wangelin. 

17th  Missouri : 

Col.  Francis  Hassendeubel. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  F.  Cramer. 

76th  Ohio,  Lieut.  Col.  William  B.  Woods. 


Third  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  M.  Thayer. 


4th  Iowa : 

Col.  James  A.  Williamson. 
Lieut.  Col.  George  Burton. 

9th  Iowa: 

Maj.  Don.  A.  Carpenter. 

Capt.  Frederick  S.  Washburn. 
Col.  David  Carskaddon. 

26th  Iowa,  Col.  Milo  Smith. 

30th  Iowa : 

Col.  Charles  H.  Abbott. 

Col.  William  M.  G.  Torrence. 


Artillery,  t 

Iowa  Light,  1st  Battery,  Capt.  Henry  H.  Griffiths. 

2d  Missouri  Light,  Battery  F,  Capt.  Clemens  Landgraeber. 

Ohio  Light,  4th  Battery,  Capt.  Louis  Hoffmann. 

Cavalry. 

Kane  County  (Illinois)  Independent  Company,  Lieut.  Thomas  J.  Beebe. 

3d  Illinois,  Company  D,  Lieut.  Jonathan  Kershner. 

SECOND  DIVISION. 

Maj.  Gen.  Frank  P.  Blair. 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Thomas  Kilby  Smith. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  A.  J.  LiGiiTBURN.t 

55th  Illinois,  Col.  Oscar  Malmborg. 
127th  Illinois,  Col.  Hamilton  N.  Eldridge. 
83d  Indiana,  Col.  Benjamin  J.  Spooner. 
54th  Ohio,  Lieut.  Col.  Cyrus  W.  Fisher. 
57tli  Ohio : 

Col.  Americus  V.  Rice. 

Lieut.  Col.  Samuel  R.  Mott. 


* Assumed  command  June  13. 

tMaj.  Ezra  Taylor,  chief  of  the  corps  artillery. 

+ Assumed  command  May  24. 


lirst  Brigade . 

Col.  Giles  A.  Smith. 

113th  Illinois: 

Col.  George  B.  Iloge. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  W.  Paddock. 
116th  Illinois,  Col.  Nathan  W.  Tupper. 
6th  Missouri: 

Lieut.  Col.  Ira  Boutell. 

Col.  James  II.  Blood. 

8th  Missouri,  Lieut.  Col.  David  C.  Cole- 
man. 

13th  United  States,  1st  Battalion: 

Capt.  Edward  C.  Washington. 
Capt.  Charles  Ewing. 

Capt.  Charles  C.  Smith. 


CiiAr.  XXXVI.  ] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 
Third  Brigade. 


153 


Brig.  Gen.  Hugh  Ewing. 

30th  Ohio : . 

Lieut.  Col.  George  H.  Hilclt. 

Col.  Theodore  Jones. 

37th  Ohio: 

Lieut.  Col.  Louis  von  Blessingh. 

Maj.  Charles  Hipp. 

Col.  Edward  Siber. 

47tli  Ohio,  Col.  Augustus  C.  Parry. 

4th  West  Virginia,  Col.  James  H.  Dayton. 

Artillery. 

1st  Illinois  Light,  Battery  A,  Capt.  Peter  P.  Wood. 

1st  Illinois  Light,  Battery  B : 

Capt.  Samuel  E.  Barrett. 

Lieut.  Israel  P.  Rumsey. 

1st  Illinois  Light,  Battery  H,  Capt.  Levi  W.  Hart. 
Ohio  Light,  8th  Battery,  Capt.  James  F.  Putnam. 

Cavalry. 

Thielemann’s  (Illinois)  Battalion,  Companies  A and  B, 
Capt.  Milo  Thielemann. 

10th  Missouri,  Company  C : 

Capt.  Daniel  W.  Ballou. 

Lieut.  Benjamin  Joel. 


THIRD  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  James  M.  Tuttle. 


First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Ralph  P.  Buckland. 
Col.  William  L.  McMillen.* 

114tli  Illinois,  Col.  James  W.  Judy. 

93d  Indiana,  Col.  De  Witt  C.  Thomas. 
72d  Ohio: 

Lieut.  Col.  Le  Roy  Crockett. 
Maj.  Charles  G.  Eaton. 

95th  Ohio : 

Col.  William  L.  McMillen. 

Lieut.  Col.  Jefferson  Brumback. 


Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  A.  Mower. 

47th  Illinois,  Lieut.  Col.  Samuel  R.  Baker. 
5th  Minnesota,  Col.  Lucius  F.  Hubbard. 
11th  Missouri : 

Col.  Andrew  J.  Weber. 

Lieut.  Col.  William  L.  Barnurn. 
Sth  Wisconsin,  Col.  George  W-  Robbins. 


Third  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Charles  L.  Matthies. 

Col.  Joseph  J.  Woods. t 

Sth  Iowa,  Col.  James  L.  Geddes. 

12tli  Iowa : 

Col.  Joseph  J.  Woods. 

Lieut.  Col.  Samuel  R.  Edgington. 

35th  Iowa,  Col.  Sylvester  G.  Hill. 

Artillery , 

Capt.  Nelson  T.  Spoor. 

1st  Illinois  Light,  Battery  E,  Capt.  Allen  C.  Waterhouse. 
Iowa  Light,  2d  Battery,  Lieut.  Joseph  R.  Reed. 

unattached  cavalry. 

4tli  Iowa,  Lieut.  Col:  Simeon  D.  Swan. 


Assumed  command  June  22. 


t Assumed  command  June  ’i. 


154 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

SIXTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 
(Detachment.) 

Maj.  Gen.  Cad  wall  ader  C.  Washburn. 

FIRST  DIVISION.* 

Brig.  Gen.  William  Sooy  Smith. 


Escort. 

7th  Illinois  Cavalry,  Company  B,  Capt.  Henry  C.  Forbes. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  John  M.  Loomis. 

26th  Illinois,  Maj.  John  B.  Harris. 

90th  Illinois,  Col.  Timothy  O’Meara. 
12th  Indiana,  Col.  Reuben  Williams. 
100th  Indiana,  Lieut.  Col.  Albert  Heath. 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Stephen  G.  Hicks. 

40th  Illinois,  Maj.  Hiram  W.  Hall. 

103d  Illinois,  Col.  Willard  A.  Dickerman. 
15th  Michigan,  Col.  John  M.  Oliver. 

46th  Ohio,  Col.  Charles  C.  Walcutt. 


Third  Brigade. 

Col.  Joseph  R.  Cockerill. 

97th  Indiana,  Col.  Robert  F.  Catterson. 
99th  Indiana,  Col.  Alexander  Fowler. 

53d  Ohio,  Col.  Wells  S.  Jones. 

70th  Ohio,  Maj.  William  B.  Brown. 

Fourth  Brigade. 

Col.  William  W.  Sanford. 

48th  Illinois,  Lieut.  Col.  Lucien  Great- 
house. 

6th  Iowa,  Col.  John  M.  Corse 


Artillery. 

Capt.  William  Cogswell. 

1st  Illinois  Light,  Battery  F,  Capt.  John  T.  Cheney. 

1st  Illinois  Light,  Battery  I,  Lieut.  William  N.  Lansing. 
Illinois  Light,  Cogswell’s  Battery,  Lieut.  Henry  G.  Eddy. 
Indiana  Light,  6th  Battery,  Capt.  Michael  Mueller. 


FOURTH  DIVISION,  t 

Brig.  Gen.  Jacob  G.  Lauman. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  Isaac  C.  Pugh. 


Second  Brigade. 
Col.  Cyrus  Hall. 


41st  Illinois,  Lieut.  Col.  John  II.  Nale. 
53d  Illinois,  Lieut.  Col.  Seth  C.  Earl. 

3d  Iowa,  Col.  Aaron  Brown. 

33d  Wisconsin,  Col.  Jonathan  B.  Moore. 


14th  Illinois : 

Lieut.  Col.  William  Cam. 

Capt.  Augustus  II.  Cornman. 

15th  Illinois,  Col.  George  C.  Rogers. 

46th  Illinois,  Col.  Benjamiu  Dornblaser.  i 
76th  Illinois,  Col.  Samuel  T.  Busey. 

53d  Indiana,  t Col.  Walter  Q.  Gresham. 


Third  Brigade. 


Col.  George  E.  Bryant. 

Col.  Amory  K.  Johnson.^ 

28th  Illinois,  Maj.  Hinman  Rhodes. 
32d  Illinois: 

Col.  John  Logan. 

Lieut.  Col.  William  IJuuter. 
12th  Wisconsin : 

Lieut.  Col.  De  Witt  C.  Poole. 
Col.  George  E.  Bryant. 


* Joined  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  June  12. 

t Joined  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  May  13  to  20.  Temporarily  attached  to  the  Thir- 
teenth Corps. 

t Transferred  to  Third  Brigade  June  22. 

$ Assumed  command  June  9. 


155 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OP  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


Cavalry. 

15th  Illinois,  Companies  F and  I,  Maj.  James  G.  Wilson. 
Artillery. 

Capt.  George  C.  Gumbart. 

2d  Illinois  Light,  Battery  E,  Lient.  George  L.  Nispel. 

2d  Illinois  Light,  Battery  K,  Capt.  Benjamin  F.  Rodgers. 
Ohio  Light,  5th  Battery,  Lieut.  Anthony  B.  Burton. 

Ohio  Light,  7th  Battery,  Capt.  Silas  A.  Burnap. 

Ohio  Light,  15th  Battery,  Capt.  Edward  Spear,  jr. 

PROVISIONAL  DIVISION.* 


Brig.  Gen.  Nathan  Kimball. 


Engclmann's  Brigade. 

Col.  Adolpii  Engelmann. 

43d  Illinois,  Lieut.  Col.  Adolph  Dengler. 
Gist  Illinois,  Maj.  Simon  P.  Ohr. 

106th  Illinois,  Maj.  John  M.  Hurt. 

12th  Michigan,  Col.  William  H.  Graves. 


Richmond’s  Brigade. 

Col.  Jonathan  Richmond. 

18th  Illinois,  Col.  Daniel  II.  Brush. 

54th  Illinois,  Col.  Greenville  M.  Mitchell. 
126th  Illinois,  Maj.  William  W.  Wilshire. 
22d  Ohio,  Col.  Oliver  Wood. 


Montgomery's  Brigade. 


Col.  Milton  Montgomery. 

40th  Iowa,  Col.  John  A.  Garrett. 

3d  Minnesota,  Col.  Chauncey  W.  Griggs. 

25th  Wisconsin,  Lieut.  Col.  Samuel  J.  Nasmith. 
27th  Wisconsin,  Col.  Conrad  Krez. 


SEVENTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 

Maj.  Gen.  James  B.  McPherson, 
escort. 

4th  Company  Ohio  Cavalry,  Capt.  John  S.  Foster. 
THIRD  DIVISION. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Logan. 

Escort. 


2d  Illinois  Cavaliy,  Company  A,  Lieut.  William  B.  Cummins. 


First  Brigade . 

Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  E.  Smith. 

Brig.  Gen.  Mortimer  D.  Leggett.! 

Brig.  Gen.  Mortimer  D.  Leggett. 
Col.  Manning  F.  Force.! 

20th  Illinois,  Maj.  Daniel  Bradley. 

31st  Illinois: 

Lieut.  Col.  John  D.  Rees. 

Maj.  Robert  N.  Pearson. 

45th  Illinois,  Col.  Jasper  A.  Maltby. 

124th  Illinois,  Col.  Thomas  J.  Sloan. 

23d  Indiana,  Lieut.  Col.  William  P. 
Davis. 

30th  Illinois,  Lieut.  Col.  Warren  Shedd. 
20th  Ohio : 

Col.  Manning  F.  Force. 

Capt.  Francis  M.  Shaklee. 

68th  Ohio,  Col.  Robert  K.  Scott. 

78th  Ohio,  Lieut.  Col.  GreenberryF. Wiles. 

* Composed  of  the  First  and  Second  Brigades  of  the  Third  Division  and  four  regi- 
ments from  the  Sixth  Division.  Joined  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  June  3. 
t Assumed  command  June  3. 


156  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Ciiap.  XXXVI. 

Third  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  D.  Stevenson. 

8th  Illinois,  Lieut.  Col.  Robert  H.  Sturgess. 

17th  Illinois,  Lieut.  Col.  Francis  M.  Smith. 

81st  Illinois: 

Col.  James  J.  Dollins. 

Col.  Franklin  Campbell. 

7th  Missouri : 

Capt.  Robert  Buchanan. 

Capt.  William  B.  Collins. 

32d  Ohio,  Col.  Benjamin  F.  Potts. 

Artillery. 

Maj.  Charles  J.  Stolbrand. 

1st  Illinois  Light,  Battery  D : 

Capt.  Henry  A.  Rogers. 

Lieut.  George  J.  Wood. 

Capt.  Frederick  Sparrestrom. 

2d  Illinois  Light,  Battery  . G:  * 

Capt.  Frederick  Sparrestrom. 

Lieut.  John  W.  Lowell. 

2d  Illinois  Light,  Battery  L,  Capt.  William  H.  Bolton. 

Michigan  Light,  8th  Battery  : 

Capt.  Samuel  De  Golyer. 

Lieut.  Theodore  W.  Lockwood. 

Ohio  Light,  3d  Battery,  Capt.  William  S.  Williams. 

SIXTH  DIVISION. 


Brig.  Gen.  John  McArthur. 
Escort. 


11th  Illinois  Cavalry,  Company’  G,  Lieut.  Stephen  S.  Tripp. 


First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Hugh  T.  Reid. 

1st  Kansas,  Col.  William  Y.  Roberts. 
ICth  Wisconsin,  Col.  Benjamin  Allen. 

Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gon.  Thomas  E.  G.  Ransom. 
11th  Illinois  : 

Lieut.  Col.  Garrett  Nevins. 
Lieut.  Col.  James  H.  Coates. 


Second  Brigade—  Continued. 

72d  Illinois,  Col.  Frederick  A.  Starring. 
95th  Illinois : 

Col.  Thomas  W.  Humphrey. 
Lieut.  Col.  Leander  Blanden 
Col.  Thomas  W.  Humphrey. 

14th  Wisconsin,  Col.  Lyman  M.  Ward. 
17th  Wisconsin : 

Lieut.  Col.  Thomas  McMahon. 
Col.  Adam  G.  Malloy. 


Third  Brigade. 


Col.  William  Hall. 

Col.  Alexander  Chambers. t 

11th  Iowa  : 

Lieut.  Col.  John  C.  Abercrombie. 
Col.  William  Hall. 

13th  Iowa,  Col.  John  Shane. 

15th  Iowa,  Col.  William  W.  Belknap. 

16th  Iowa,  Lieut.  Col.  Addison  H.  Sanders. 


* By  the  collision  of  two  steamers  May  1, 1863,  near  Grand  Gulf,  Miss.,  this  battery 
lost  all  its  guns,  and  was  sent  to  Memphis  to  refit.  It  rejoined  the  army  at  Vicksburg 
June  30.  Meantime  Captain  Sparrestrom  had  been  assigned,  J uue  16,  to  flic  command 
of  Battery  D,  First  Illinois  Light  Artillery, 
t Assumed  command  June  6. 


IllAP.  XXXYI.  ] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


157 


Artillery. 

Maj.  Thomas  D.  Maurice. 

2d  Illinois  Light,  Battery  F,  Capt.  John  W.  Powell. 
Minnesota  Light,  1st  Battery  : 

Lieut.  Henry  Hurter. 

Capt.  William  Z.  Clayton. 

1st  Missouri  Light,  Battery  C,  Capt.  Charles  Mann. 
Ohio  Light,  10th  Battery  : 

Capt.  Hamilton  B.  White. 

Lieut.  William  L.  Newcomb. 


SEVENTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  F.  Quinby. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  E.  Smith.* * * § 

Escort. 

4th  Missouri  Cavalry,  Company  F,  Lieut.  Alexander  Mueller. 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  John  B.  Sanborn. 

48th  Indiana,  Col.  Norman  Eddy. 

.39th  Indiana,  Col.  Jesse  I.  Alexander. 

4th  Minnesota,  Lieut.  Col.  John  E.  Tour- 
tellotte. 

18tli  Wisconsin,  Col.  Gabriel  Bouck. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Samuel  A.  Holmes. 

Col.  Green  B.  Raum.1 

56tli  Illinois : 

Col.  Green  B.  Raum. 

Capt.  Pinckney  J.  Welsh. 

17th  Iowa : 

Col.  David  B.  Hillis. 

Col.  Clark  R.  Wever. 

Maj.  John  F.  Walden. 

10th  Missouri,  Maj.  Francis  C.  Deimling. 
24th  Missouri,  Company  E,  Lieut.  Daniel 
Driscoll . 

80th  Ohio : 

Col.  Matthias  H.  Bartilson. 

Maj.  Pren  Metham. 


Third  Brigade. 

Col.  George  B.  Boomer. 

Col.  Holden  Putnam,  t 

Brig.  Gen.  Charles  L.  Mattiiies.  § 

93d  Illinois : 

Col.  Holden  Putnam. 

Lieut.  Col.  Nicholas  C.  Buswell. 

Col.  Holden  Putnam. 

5th  Iowa : 

Lieut.  Col.  Ezekiel  S.  Sampson. 

Col.  Jabez  Banbury. 

10th  Iowa,  Col.  William  E.  Small. 

26th  Missouri,  Capt.  Benjamin  D.  Dean. 

Artillery. 

Capt.  Frank  C.  Sands. 

Capt.  Henry  Dillon. || 

1st  Missouri  Light,  Battery  M,  Lieut.  Junius  W.  MacMurray. 
Ohio  Light,  11th  Battery, i[  Lieut.  Fletcher  E.  Armstrong. 
Wisconsin  Light,  6th  Battery : 

Capt.  Henry  Dillon. 

Lieut.  Samuel  F.  Clark. 

Wisconsin  Light,  12th  Battery,  Capt.  William  Zickerick. 


* Assumed  command  June  3. 

t Assumed  command  June  10. 

t Assumed  command  May  22. 

§ Assumed  command  June  2. 

||  Assumed  command  June  6. 

If  Temporarily  attached  to  Kimball’s  division,  Sixteenth  Corps,  June  6. 


158 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[C::ai\  XXXVI 


HERRON’S  DIVISION.* 

Maj.  Gen.  Francis  J.  Herron. 


First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  William  Yandever. 

37th  Illinois,  Col.  John  C.  Black. 

26th  Indiana,  Col.  John  G.  Clark. 

20th  Iowa,  Col.  William  McE.  Dye. 

34th  Iowa,  Col.  George  W.  Clark. 

38th  Iowa,  Col.  D.  Henry  Hughes. 

1st  Missouri  Light  Artillery,  Battery  E, 
Capt.  Nelson  Cole. 

1st  Missouri  Light  Artillery,  Battery  F, 
Capt.  Joseph  Foust. 


Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  William  W.  Orme. 

94th  Illinois,  Col.  John  McNulta. 

19th  Iowa,  Lieut.  Col.  Daniel  Kent. 

20th  Wisconsin,  Col.  Henry  Bertram. 

1st  Missouri  Light  Artillery,  Battery  B 
Capt.  Martin  Welfley. 


UNATTACHED  CAVALRY. 

Col.  Cyrus  Bussey. 


5tb  Illinois,  Maj.  Thomas  A.  Apperson. 

3d  Iowa,  Maj.  Oliver  H.  P.  Scott. 

2d  Wisconsin,  Col.  Thomas  Stephens. 

. 


DISTRICT  NORTHEAST  LOUISIANA. 


Brig.  Gen.  Elias  S.  Dennis. 

detached  brigade. 

Col.  George  W.  Neeley. 

63d  Illinois,  Col.  Joseph  B.  McCown. 

108th  Illinois,  Lieut.  Col.  Charles  Turner. 

120th  Illinois,  Col.  George  W.  McKeaig. 

131st  Illinois: 

Col.  George  W.  Neeley. 

Maj.  Joseph  L.  Parvis. 

10th  Illinois  Cavalry,  Companies  A,  D,  G.  and  K,  Maj.  Elvis  P.  Shaw. 

AFRICAN  BRIGADE. 

Col.  Isaac  F.  Shepard 

Post  of  Millilcen’s  Bend , La. 

Col.  Hiram  Scofield. 

8th  Louisiana,  Col.  Hiram  Scofield. 

9th  Louisiana : 

Col.  Herman  Lieb. 

Maj.  Erastus  N.  Owen. 

Lieut.  Col.  Charles  J.  Paine. 

11th  Louisiana : 

Col.  Edwin  W.  Chamberlain. 

Lieut.  Col.  Cyrus  Sears. 

13th  Louisiana,  Lieut.  H.  Knoll. 

1st  Mississippi,  Lieut.  Col.  A.  Watson  Webber. 

3d  Mississippi,  Col.  Richard  H.  Ballinger. 

Post  of  Goodrich’s  Landing , La. 

Col.  William  F.  Wood. 

1st  Arkansas,  Lieut.  Col.  James  W.  Campbell. 

10th  Louisiana,  Lieut.  Col.  Frederick  M.  Crandall. 


* Joined  from  the  Department  of  the  Missouri  June  11. 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  159 

Ho.  2. 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  fortes  engaged  at  Vicksburg,  May 

19,  1803. 

[Compiled  from  nominal  list  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.'; 


Command. 


Killed. 


THIRTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 


General  staff  officers 

97th  Illinois 

118th  Illinois  

130th  Illinois 

16th  Indiana 

49th  Indiana 

67th  Indiana 

69th  Indiana 

7th  Kentucky 

22d  Kentucky 

16th  Ohio  - - 

42d  Ohio 

83d  Ohio 

114th  Ohio 

120th  Ohio 


Total  Thirteenth  Army  Corps 


FIFTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 


55th  Illinois 

113th  Illinois 

114th  Illinois 

116th  Illinois 

127th  Illinois 

1st  Illinois  Light  Artillery,  Battery  B 

83d  Indiana 

93d  Indiana 

4th  Iowa 

9th  Iowa. 

12th  Iowa 

26th  Iowa - 

30th  Iowa 

6th  Missouri 

8th  Missouri f 

12th  Missouri 

80th  Missouri 

31st  Missouri 

30th  Ohio 

37th  Ohio 

47th  Ohio 

54th  Ohio 

57th  Ohio 

72d  Ohio 

95th  Ohio 

4th  West  Virginia 

13th  United  States 


Total  Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 


SEVENTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 


11th  Illinois 

72d  Illinois 

93d  Illinois 

95th  Illinois 

26th  Missouri . . 
14th  Wisconsin 
17th  Wisconsin. 


10 


Wounded. 


124 


10 


16 


147 


11 


88 


Captured 
or  missing. 


50 


10 


65 


521 


30 


103 


712 


100 


26 

7 

12 

71 

40 

2 

56 

6 

13 
16 

a 

14 
7 

28 

26 

4 

7 

3 

9 

49 

59 

15 
18 
14 

2 

137 

70 


713 


129 


942 


Total  Seventeenth  Army  Corps 
Grand  total 


160 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


■JClIAJL*.  xxxvi. 


OFFICERS  KILLED. 

ILLINOIS. 

Lieut.  Levi  Hill,  55tli  Infantry.  | Lieut.  Hiram  McClintock,  127th  Infantry. 

INDIANA. 

Capt.  Metellus  Calvert,  83d  Infantry.  | Capt.  John  M.  Cresswell,  83d  Infantry. 

MISSOURI . 

Capt.  Charles  Denny,  12th  infantry.  | Lieut.  Celestien  M.  French,  30th  Infantry. 

OHIO. 

Lieut.  Gustav  A.  Wintzer,  37th  Infantry.  I Lieut.  Edward  N.  Bernard,  47th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Sebaldus  Hassler,  37th  Infantry.  j 

WEST  VIRGINIA. 

Maj.  Arza  M.  Goodspeed,  4th  Infantry. 

OFFICERS  DIED  OF  WOUNDS. 

ILLINOIS. 

Capt.  John  S.  Riddle,  127th  Infantry. 

OHIO. 

Lieut.  Jonathan  Casto,  47th  Infantry. 

WEST  VIRGINIA. 

Lieut.  Finley  D.  Ong,  4th  Infantry.  | Lieut.  Justus  A.  Boies,  4th  Infantry. 

REGULARS. 

Capt.  Edward  C.  Washington,  13th  Infantry., 


No.  3. 


Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  in  the  assault  on  Vicksburg, 

May  22,  1863.* 

[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.] 


Command 


THIRTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 
Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McClernand. 

.NINTH  DIVISION. 

Prig.  Gen.  Peter  J.  OsterhaITs. 
First  Brigade. 

Col.  James  Keigwin. 


118th  Illinois  ... 
49th  Indiana  . 
GO t h Indiana 
7th  Kentucky 
120th  Ohio  


Total  First  Brigade 


Killed. 


Wounded. 


Captured 
or  missing. 


15 


5 

15 

12 

09 

1 

102 


* Only  such  organizations  as  reported  losses  are  embraced  in  this  return. 


Chap.  XXXVL]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  161 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  in  the  assault  on  Vicksburg,  May  22, 1863 — ContM. 


Command. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Daniel  W.  Lindsey. 


22d  Kentucky 

16th  Ohio 

42d  Ohio 

114th  Ohio 


Total  Second  Brigade 
Total  Ninth  Division. 


TENTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Andrew  J.  Smith. 
First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Stephen  G.  Burbridge. 

16th  Indiana 

67  th  Indiana 

83d  Ohio 

23d  Wisconsin 


Total  First  Brigade 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  William  J.  Landram. 


77th  Illinois 

97th  Illinois 

130th  Illinois 

19fh  Kentucky. 
48th  Ohio 


Total  Second  Brigade 

Artillery. 

Ohio  Light,  17th  Battery 

Total  Tenth  Division 


FOURTEENTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Eugene  A.  Carr. 
First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  William  P.  Benton. 

33d  Illinois 

99th  Illinois 

8th  Indiana 

l£t,h  Indiana 

1st  United  States 


Total  First  Brigade 


Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Michael  K.  Lawler. 

21st  Iowa 

22d  Iowa 

11th  Wisconsin 


Total  Second  Brigade. 


Artillery. 

Indiana  Light,  1st  Battery 


Total  Fourteenth  Division 

Total  Thirteenth  Army  Corps 

11  R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


Killed. 


10 


14 


29 


Wounded. 


14 


10 


42 


56 


50 


107 


192 


Captured 
or  missing. 


18 


24 


17 


16 


33 


59 

"l39 


76 


192 


271 


256 


80 

112 

77 


269 


1 

~526~ 


1 


78 


180 


98 


130 

14 

41 

64 

35 


30 


284 


32 


385 


72 

102 

117 

47 

3 


341 


113 

164 

91 


28 


368 


35 


1 

"710 


68  I 1,275 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


162  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


Eeturn  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  in  the  assault  on  Vicksburg,  May  22, 186*3— Cont’d. 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured 
or  missing. 

| Aggregate. 

Command. 

2 

© 

© 

o 

Enlisted  men. 

2 

<D 

O 

£ 

o 

Enlisted  men. 

CB 

§ 

O 

sa 

o 

Enlisted  men. 

FIFTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 

Maj.  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman. 

FIRST  DIVISION. 

Maj.  Gen.  Frederick  Steele. 

First  Brigade. 

Col.  Francis  H.  Manter. 

f 

1 

1 

i 

2 

3 

2 

1 

Total  First  Brigade - 

1 

1 

5 1 

7 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Charles  R.  Woods. 

5 

3 

3 

22 

1 

4 

1 

7 

26 

15 

11 

75 

5 

5 

37 

22 

18 

108 

5 

3 

4 

Total  Second  Brigade 

4 

33  j 13 

132 

8 

190 

Third  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  M.  Thayer. 

2 

16 

4 

11 

5 

4 

2 

55 

19 

34 

78 

27 

50 

2 

1 

Total  Third  Brigade 

4 

31 

11 

108 

1 

155 

Artillery. 

1 

1 

Total  First  Division 

SECOND  DIVISION. 

Maj.  Gen.  Frank  P.  Blair. 

First  Brigade. 

Col.  Giles  A.  Smith. 

9 

65 

24 

246 

9 

353 

7 

2 

1 

1 

4 

18 

7 

12 

36 

27 

9 

15 

51 

1 

2 

10 

1 

Total  First  Brigade 

1 

19 

8 

73 

1 

102 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Thomas  Kilby  Smith. 

5 

3 

1 

12 

7 

10 

4 

10 

18 

10 

10 

5 

• 13 

1 

2 

1 

11 

2 

43 

56 

- 

Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  163 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  in  ilw  assault  on  Vicksburg,  May  22, 1863— Cont’d. 


Command. 

Fulled. 

Wounded. 

Captured 
or  missing. 

£ 

<D 

§ 

a 

a) 

B 

■d 

s 

03 

a 

a 

W 

m 

Fh 

<D 

0 

1 

3 

B 

d 

© 

73 

H 

GO 

fH 

<D 

S3 

o 

a 

© 

B 

d 

© 

1 

H 

© 

CS 

bC 

© 

bB 

be 

Third  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Hugh  Ewina. 

30th  Ohio 

1 

5 
10 

6 
3 

6 

1 

2 

1 

37 

30 

24 

15 

2 

51 

41 

33 

19 

37th  Ohio 

47th  Onio 

1 

4th  West  Virginia 

Total  Third  Brigade 

1 

24 

10 

106 

3 

144 

Artillery. 

1st  Illinois  Light,  Battery  B 

2 

2 

Total  Second  Division 

2 56 

20~ 

1 222 

4 

304 

THIRD  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  James  M.  Tuttle. 

First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Ralph  P.  Buckland. 

114th  Illinois 

93d  Indiana 

2 

2 

1 

4 

j 

2 

2 

1 

4 

1 ZU.  OHIO 

95th  Ohio 

Total  First  Brigade 

9 

9 

Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  A.  Mowkb. 

47th  Illinois 





5 

2 

7 

2 

2 

31 

1 

83 

15 

38 

10 

92 

42 

5th  Minnesota 

7 

11th  Missouri 

2 

2 

8th  Wisconsin 

1 

22 

Total  Second  Brigade 

1 

16 

6 

130 

— 

29 

182 

Third  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Charles  L.  Matthies. 

8th  Iowa 

1 

4 

5 

Total  Third  Brigade 

1 

4 

5 



Artillery. 

1st  Illinois  Light,  Battery  E 

Iowfli  T/itrhfc 

1 

1 

3 

2 

3 

xi  a juigu  t,  4U.  DdiltOI  V 

Total  Artillery 

1 

4 

1 

5 

| 

Total  Third  Division 

1 

17 

7 

147 

29 

201 

Total  Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 

12 

138 

51 

615 

42 

858 

. 

SEVENTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 

Maj.  Gen.  James  B.  McPherson. 

THIRD  DIVISION. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  Logan. 

First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  E.  Smith. 

20th  Illinois 

31st  Illinois 

3 

2 

2 

21  . 

19  . 

23 

24 

20th  Illinois. 
31st  Illinois. 


164  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  in  the  assault  on  Viclcslmrg,  May  22,  1863  Cout’d. 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured 
or  missing. 

j Aggregate. 

Command. 

CG 

U 

o> 

© 

a 

o 

a 

© 

a 

■■d 

© 

'a 

2 

<D 

a 

o 

a 

© 

a 

•d 

© 

« 

la 

H 

GO 

© 

© 

o 

a 

© 

a 

© 

.2 

13 

First  Brigade — Continued. 

1 

19 

2 

7 

2 

22 

2 

10 

1 

2 

Total  First  Brigade 

2 

sj 

4 

68 

2| 

81 

Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Mortimer  D.  Leggett. 

68th  Ohio 

6 

6 

6 

6 

Third  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  D.  Stevenson. 

— 

4 

3 

14 

9 

1 

1 

8 

5 

18 

22 

72 

88 

23 

23 

26 

98 

102 

23 

4 

Total  Third  Brigade 

4 

30 

15~ 

223  

272 

Total  Third  Division 

6 

35 

19 

297 

i .. 

2 

359 

SIXTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  McArthur. 

Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  E.  G.  Hansom. 

1 

2 

2 

1 

2 

18 

16 

13 

2 

2 

4 

5 
5 

28 

67 

78 

74 

12 

9 

5 
8 
4 

6 

42 

96 
109 

97 
20 

Total  Second  Brigade 

Third  Brigade. 

Col.  William  Hall. 

6 

51 

16 

259 

1 32 

364 

1 

1 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

3 

Total  Sixth  Division - 

6 

52 

17 

260 

32 

367 

SEVENTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Isaac  F.  Quinby. 

First  Brigade. 

Col.  John  B.  Sanborn. 

8 

10 

11 

5 

1 

4 

7 

2 

23 

95 

35 

9 

1 

• 1 

33 

111 

54 

16 

1 

1 

Total  First  Brigade 

2 

34 

1 14 

-1 

| 162 

- * — 

2 

214 

Chap.  XXXYI.J  THE  SIEGE  OE  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  165 

lie  turn  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  in  the  assault  on  Vicksburg,  Mag  22,  1863— Cont’d. 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured 
or  missing. 

Aggregate. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

\ 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Samuel  A.  Holmes. 

56tli  Hlinois 

1 

1 

2 

5 

3 

4 

5 
3 

17th  Iowa 

10th  Missouri 

Total  Second  Brigade 

1 

1 

10 

i 

12 

• 



Third  Brigade. 

(1.)  Col.  George  B.  Boomer.* 

(2.)  Col.  Holden  Putnam. 

93d  Hlinois 

4 

3 

2 

4 

1 

50 

18 

24 

5 

55 

21 

28 

10 

5th  Iowa 

10th  Iowa 

2 

26th  Missouri 

1 

Total  Third  Brigade  . . : 

1 

13 

3 

97 



114 

Total  Seventh  Division 

3 

48 

18~ 

269~ 

2~ 

340 

Total  Seventeenth  Army  Corps 

15 

135 

54 

826 

36 

1,066 

EEC  APITUL  ATION. 


Thirteenth  Army  Corps 

10 

12 

15 

192 

138 

135 

68 

51 

54 

936 
615 
• 826 

1 

68 

42 

36 

Fifteenth  Armv  Corps * 

Seventeenth  Army  Corps 

Grand  total  Army  of  the  Tennessee 

37 

465 

173 

2,  377 

1 

146 

OFFICERS  KILLED. 


ILLINOIS. 


Lieut.  Col.  Garrett  Kevins,  1 lth  Infantry. 
Maj.  Luther  H.  Cowen,  45th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Henry  C.  Mowry,  72d  Infantry. 
Lieut.  James  A.  Bingham,  72d  Infantry. 
Col.  James  J.  Dollins,  81st  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Zebedee  Hammack,  81st  Infantry. 
Lieut.  William  L.  Farmer,  81st  Infantry. 


Lieut.  Hugh  Warnock,  81st  Infantry. 
Capt.  Jason  B.  Manzer,  95th  Infantry. 
Capt.  Gabriel  E.  Cornwell,  95th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Thomas  J.  Kinman,  99th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Nathan  W.  Wheeler,  116th  In- 
fantry. 

Capt.  William  M.  Colby,  130th  Infantry. 


INDIANA. 

Capt.  Andrew  O’Daniel,  8th  Infantry.  Lieut.  Christian  G.  Zulauf,  23d  Infantry. 
Capt.  Frederick  S.  Wysong,  8th  Infantry.  Lieut.  Marcus  B.  C.  Tripp,  59tli  Infantry 
Capt.  Hiram  T.  Vandevender,  8th  In-  J 

fantry. 


IOWA. 

Lieut.  Edward  Tyrrell,  9th  Infantry.  I Capt.  James  Robertson,  22d  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Jacob  Jones,  9tli  Infantry.  Lieut.  Matthew  A.  Robb,  22d  Infantry. 

Lieut.  Col.  Cornelius  W.  Dunlap,  21st  In-  Col.  Charles  H.  Abbott,  30th  Infantry. 
fantry. j Lieut.  James  P.  Milliken,  30th  Infantry. 


Killed. 


166 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


KENTUCKY. 

Maj.  Morgan  V.  Evans,  19tli  Infantry. 

MINNESOTA. 

Lieut.  George  G.  Sherbrooke,  4th  Infantry. 

MISSOURI. 

Maj.  Gustavus  Lightfoot,  12th  Infantry.  [ Lieut.  George  Eggart,  12th  Infantry. 
Capt.  Christian  Andel,  12th  Infantry.  Col.  George  B.  Boomer,  26th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Charles  L.  Kasten,  12th  Infantry.  | Lieut.  William  Robinson,  31st  Infantry. 

OHIO. 

Capt.  Thomas  Hayes,  30th  Infantry. 

WISCONSIN. 

Lieut.  Willard  D.  Chapman,  8th  Infantry.  I Lieut.  Colin  Miller,  14th  Infantry. 

Lieut.  Hiram  E.  Smithy  11th  Infantry.  | 


OFFICERS  DIED  OF  WOUNDS. 
ILLINOIS. 


Capt.  Horace  L.  Bowyer,  31st  Inf antry. 
Lieut.  Col.  Joseph  C.  Wright,  72d  In- 
fantry. 

Capt.  Cornelius  S.  Ward,  81st  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Abraham  L.  Lippincott,  81st  In- 
fantry. 


Capt.  Edward  J.  Cook,  95th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  James  E.  Sponable,  95th  Infantry. 
Capt.  Eli  R.  Smith,  99th  Infantry. 

Lieut.  William  Gray,  99th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Gusten  F.  Hardy,  116th  Infantry. 


INDIANA. 

Maj.  John  C.  .Tenks,  18th  Infantry.  I Maj.  John  H. Finley,  69th  Infantry. 

Lieut.  John  L.  Low#es,  18th  Infantry.  | Lieut.  *Henry  Stratton,  69th  Infantry. 

IOWA. 


Capt.  Florillo  M.  Kelsey,  9th  Infantry. 
Capt.  Frederick  S.  Washburn,  9th  In- 
fantry. 

Lieut.  Leonard  L.  Martin,  9th  Infantry. 
Capt.  Henry  Newton,  17th  Infantry. 


Lieut.  Samuel  Bates,  21st  Infantry. 
Lieut.  William  A.  Roberts,  21st  Infantry. 
Lieut.  David  Letner,  30th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Robert  Anderson,  31st  Infantry. 


KENTUCKY. 


Lieut.  Thomas  Buchanan,  7th  Infantry. 

MINNESOTA. 


Lieut.  Clark  Turner,  4th  Infantry. 


MISSOURI. 

Lieut.  Charles  H.  Brookings,  11th  Infantry. 

OHIO. 

Lieut.  Hiram  J.  Davis,  30th  Infantry.  j Lieut.  Willis  C.  Ferguson,  114th  Infantry. 
Maj.  Virgil  H.  Moats,  43th  Infantry.  I 


WISCONSIN. 

Cant.  Stephen  Estee,  8th  Infantry.  I Lieut.  James  Law,  11th  Infantry. 

Capt.  Alfred  J.  Peaslee,  11th  Infantry.  | Lieut.  William  H.  Alban,  18tli  Infantry. 


CnAr.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS, 

No.  4. 


167 


General  Summary  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  during  the  opera- 
tions against  Vicksburg,  May  1 -July  4 , 1863. 

[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.] 


Engagements,  &o. 


Battle  of  Port  Gibson,  Thompson’s  Hill,  or  Magnolia 
Church,  May  1. 

Skirmish  on  the  South  Fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  May  2 

Skirmishes  on  the  North  Fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  at  Willow 
Springs,  Ingraham’s  Heights,  Jones’  Cross-Roads,  Forty 
Hills,  and  Hankinson’s  Ferry,  May  3. 

Engagement  at  Raymond,  May  12 

Skirmish  on  Fourteen-Mile  Creek,  May  12 

Engagement  at  Jackson,  May  14 

Battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  or  Baker’s  Creek,  May  16 

Engagement  at  Big  Black  River  Bridge,  May  17 

Skirmish  at  Bridgeport,  May  17 

Skirmishes  about  Vicksburg,  May  18, 20,  and  21 

Assault  on  Vicksburg,  May  19 

Assault  on  Vicksburg,  May  22 

Siege  of  Vicksburg,  May  23-July  4 

Skirmish  at  Liverpool  Landing,  near  Yazoo  City,  May  23*. 

Skirmish  at  Mechanicsburg,  Mav  24 

Skirmish  at  Mechanicsburg,  May  29 

Skirmish  at  Mechanicsburg,  June  4 

Skirmish  at  Birdsong  Ferry,  June  12 

Skirmish  at  Birdsong  Ferry,  June  18 *’*’ 

Action  at  Hill’s  Plantation,  near  Bear  Creek,  June  2*2 
Skirmish  at  Edwards  Station,  July  1 


Total 


Killed. 


130 


59 

6 

40 

383 

36 


40 

147 

465 


10 


1,  416 


Wounded. 


17 


14 

108 

16 


14 

65 

173 

20 


474 


675 


322 

24 

237 

1,  736 
221 

1 

180 

712 

2,  377 


6,  921 


Captured 

ormissing. 


10 


25 


35 


7 

183 


2 

7 

146 


443 


875 


442 
30 
300 
2,  441 
279 
1 

239 
942 
1, 199 
530 

4 

1 

4 

12 

1 

2 

47 

2 


Officers  killed  in  skirmishes  May  18,  20,  and  21, 1863.— Capt.  Henry  M.  Kellogg,  Thirty- 
tin  rd  Illinois  Infantry  ; Lieut.  Alexander  C.  Atchison,  Ninety-seventh  Illinois  Infan- 
try ; Capt.  Theodore  Weller,  Seventeenth  Missouri  Infantry. 

Officers  died  of  tvounds  received  May  18,  20,  and  21,  1863.— Capt.  James  W.  Lavigne, 
Thielemann  s Battalion,  Illinois  Cavalry ; Lieut.  Andrew  J.  McFarlane,  Twenty-third 
Wisconsin  Infantry. 

Officers  died  of  wounds  received  at  Hill’s  Plantation,  June  22, 1863.— Lieut.  Joshua  Gard- 
ner, Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry. 


OFFICERS  KILLED  DURING  THE  SIEGE. 

(May  23-July  4,  1863.) 


5 4 X 


ILLINOIS. 


Capt.  Enos  McPhail,  3d  Cavalry. 

Capt.  'Henry  A.  Rogers,  Battery  D,  1st 
Light  Artillery. 

Capt.  George  W.  Bradley,  15th  Infantry. 


Capt.  Leander  B.  Fisk,  45th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Andrew  E.  Walbriglit,  56th  In- 
fantry. 

Lieut.  Julius  A.  Pratt,  124th  Infantry. 


MISSOURI. 


Lieut.  Daniel  W.  McBride,  7th  Infantry. 


OHIO. 


Lieut.  Charles  Luther,  76th  Infantry. 


168  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

. DIED  OF  WOUNDS  RECEIVED  DURING  THE  SIEGE. 

ILLINOIS. 

Lieut.  James  M.  Moore,  17th  Infantry.  1 Lieut.  Col.  Melancthou  Smith,  45th  In- 
Lieut.  Col.  John  D.  Kees,  31st  Infantry.  fantry. 

Capt.  Levi  B.  Casey,  31st  Infantry.  Lieut.  Peter  J.  Williams,  76th  Infantry. 

1 Lieut.  Henry  Miars,  81st  Infantry. 

INDIANA. 

Capt.  William  M.  Darrough,  23d  Infantry. 


MICHIGAN. 

Capt.  Samuel  De  Golyer,  8th  Battery. 
MISSOURI. 

Col.  Andrew  J.  Weber,  11th  Infantry. 

Col.  Francis  Hassendeuhel,  17th  Infantry. 

REGULARS. 

Lieut.  Charles  Wilkins,  1st  U.  S.  Infantry. 


No.  5. 

Reports  of  Capts.  Frederick  F.  Prime  and  Cyrus  B.  Comstoelc,  U.  S.  Corps 
of  Engineers , Chief  Engineers  Army  of  the  Tennessee .* 

New  York  City,  November  29,  1863. 

The  undersigned  have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of 
engineer  operations  at  the  siege  of,  Vicksburg: 

On  May  19,  the  troops  under  the  command  of  Major-General  Grant 
invested  the  city  of  Vicksburg  thoroughly  on  the  northern  and  eastern 
sides  and  incompletely  on  the  south,  Sherman’s  corps  occupying  the 
right,  McPherson’s  the  center,  and  McClernand’s  corps  the  left.  Sher- 
man’s corps  occupied  the  same  position  till  near  the  close  of  the  siege, 
when  a division  was  moved  toward  the  Big  Black  River  to  form  part  of  a 
covering  force  against  Johnston.  McArthur’s  brigade,  of  McPherson’s 
corps,  was  at  first  posted  on  the  extreme  left,  resting  on  the  Missis- 
sippi, to  cover  our  depots  at,  and  communications  with,  Warren  ton, 
but  was  replaced  by  Lauman’s  division,  brought  from  Haynes’  Bluff, 
and  then  took  post  as  reserve  to  McPherson’s  corps,  in  rear  of  Logan’s 
division,  furnishing  working  parties  to  assist  Ransom  and  occasionally 
Logan.  Lauman  was  to  have  been  relieved  by  Parke’s  corps,  which 
started  for  Warrenton  for  that  purpose,  and  Lauman  to  take  position 
on  the  left  of  Hovey’s  division,  of  McOlernand’s  corps,  Hovey’s  front 
being  diminished,  as  he  had  too  much  ground  to  cover,  and  Herron,  on 
his  arrival,  to  take  post  between  the  two. 

This  arrangement  was  altered  by  Parke’s  corps  going  to  Haynes’ 
Bluff,  Herron’s  division  taking  the  extreme  left  on  its  arrival,  and  Lau- 
man moving  to  Hovey’s  left.  The  front,  covered  by  Herron’s  and  Lau- 
man’s divisions,  could  not  be  so  well  invested  as  under  the  previous 
arrangement,  from  the  diminished  number  of  troops.  McClernand’s 

* Prime  was  chief  engineer  Army  of  the  Tennessee  from  July  18,  1862,  to  June  27, 
1863,  and  was  succeeded  by  Comstock. 


Ciiap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


1(59 


corps  was  further  diminished  by  Osterliaus’  division  being  withdrawn 
from  Hovey’s  left  and  sent  to  guard  the  crossings  of  the  Big  Black  by 
the  railroad  and  Jackson  road.  This  doubled  the  front  covered  by 
Hovey. 

At  the  close  of  the  siege  the  position  of  the  troops  investing  the  city 
was,  from  our  right,  first,  Sherman’s  corps,  diminished  by  a division  ; 
second,  McPherson’s,  diminished  by  a division ; third,  McOlernand’s 
(now  Ord’s)  corps,  also  diminished  by  a division ; fourth,  Lauman’s 
division  ; fifth,  Herron’s  division. 

The  investment  was  close  only  after  the  arrival  of  Herron’s  division, 
being  previously  weak  from  the  weakness  of  our  force,  and  was  made 
on  the  northern  instead  of  the  southern  side  of  the  city — first,  to  be 
near  our  depot  of  supplies  at  Chickasaw  Bayou,  on  the  Yazoo  River,  and 
to  cover  that  depot ; secondly,  to  be  in  such  a position  that  a relieving 
force  could  not  by  a rapid  movement  effect  a junction  with  the  garri- 
son of  the  city  before  we  could  attack  that  force. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  siege  the  enemy’s  defenses  were  essentially 
the  same  as  at  its  close,  making  the  place  an  intrenched  camp  4 miles 
long  and  -2  miles  wide,  the  line  of  defense  not  following  its  windings, 
being  7 miles  long  and  well  adapted  to  the  ground. 

DESCRIPTION  OF  GROUND. 

Perhaps  the  best  idea  of  the  ground  around  Vicksburg  may  be  ob- 
tained by  supposing  that  originally  a plateau,  having  from  200  to  300 
feet  elevation,  here  reached  the  Mississippi ; that  the  fine  soil,  which, 
when  cut  vertically,  will  remain  so  for  years,  has  gradually  been  washed 
away  by  rains  and  streams  till  the  plateau  has  disappeared,  leaving  in 
its  place  an  intricate  net  work  of  ravines  and  ridges,  the  latter  every- 
where sharp,  and  the  former  only  having  level  bottoms  when  their 
streams  become  of  some  size.  It  has  already  been  said  that  the  soil 
when  cut  vertically  will  remain  so  for  years.  Por  this  reason  the  sides 
of  the  smaller  and  newer  ravines  were  often  so  steep  that  their  ascent 
was  difficult  to  a footman  unless  he  aided  himself  with  his  hands.  The 
sides  of  the  ravines  were  usually  wooded,  but  near  the  enemy’s  line  the 
trees  had  been  felled,  forming  in  many  places  entanglements  which 
under  fire  were  absolutely  impassable.  At  Vicksburg  the  Mississippi 
runs  nearly  south,  and  the  streams  which  enter  it  from  the  east  run 
southwest.  One  such  stream  enters  the  river  5 miles  below  the  city, 
and  the  dividing  ridge  which  separates  two  of  its  branches  was  that  on 
which  the  defensive  line  east  of  the  city  was  placed.  This  line  on  the 
northern  side  of  the  city  was  on  a dividing  ridge  between  two  small 
streams,  which  enter  the  Mississippi  above  Vicksburg. 

DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  ENEMY’S  LINE. 

It  may  be  said,  then,  that  the  enemy’s  line  of  defense,  leaving  the 
river  on  the  north  side  of  the  city  where  the  bluff  strikes  the  river, 
was  generally  on  a dividing  ridge,  this  ridge  being  as  high  or  higher 
than  the  ground  in  its  vicinity;  that  in  two  places  the  line  crossed  the 
valleys  of  small  streams,  reaching  the  river  bluff  again  2 miles  below 
the  city,  at  a point  where  the  bluff  has  receded  to  a distance  of  1 mile 
from  the  river,  and  then  following  the  bluff  up  the  river  for  a mile,  to 
give  fire  toward  the  river  or  any  troops  that  might  attempt  an  attack 
trom  the  south  by  moving  up  between  the  bluff  and  the  river  along  the 
river  bottom.  This  line  was  well  located  for  seeing  the  ravines  in  its 


170 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chav.  XXXVI. 


front,  and  consisted  of  small  works  ou  commanding  points,  necessarily 
irregular,  from  the  shape  of  the  ridges  on  which  they  were  situated;  in 
only  one  case  (that  of  a redoubt  30  yards  square)  closed  at  the  gorge; 
of  weak  profile;  placed  at  distances  varying  from  75  to  500  yards  from 
each  other,  and  connected  by  lines  of  simple  trench  or  rifle-pit. 

Vicksburg  was,  then,  rather  an  intrenched  camp  than  a fortified 
place,  owing  much  of  its  strength  to  the  difficult  ground,  obstructed  by 
fallen  trees  in  its  front,  which  rendered  rapidity  of  movement  and  en- 
semble in  an  assault  impossible. 

REASONS  FOR  AN  ASSAULT. 

The  army  within  Vicksburg,  differing  slightly  in  numbers  from  that 
commanded  by  Major-General  Grant,  had  been  demoralized  by  defeat. 
Its  strength  was  underestimated.  Our  own  troops,  buoyant  with  suc- 
cess, were  eager  for  an  assault,  and  would  not  work  well  if  the  slow 
process  of  a siege  was  undertaken. 

Accordingly,  at  2 p.  m.  May  19,  an  assault  was  attempted,  but  only 
partially  carried  out  before  nightfall.  Sherman’s  troops  reached  the 
enemy’s  works  near  the  northeast  angle  of  their  line,  but  tailed  to  enter, 
and  were  withdrawn  at  nightfall. 

ASSAULT  OF  MAY  22. 

On  May  22,  a general  assault  was  made  at  10  a.  m.  Steele’s  division, 
of  Sherman’s  corps,  attacked  on  the  north  side  at  a point  about  half- 
way between  the  river  and  the  northeast  angle  of  the  enemy’s  line ; 
Blair’s  division,  of  Sherman’s  corps,  near  this  angle ; McPherson’s  corps 
near  the  Jackson  road,  and  McClernand’s  corps  near  the  railroad. 

These  attacks  were  gallantly  made,  men  from  each  of  the  corps 
reaching  the  enemy’s  line,  and  in  one  instance  entering  one  of  the 
enemy’s  works ; but  the  fire  both  of  artillery  and  musketry  from  the 
enemy’s  line  was  so  heavy,  and  the  loss  in  moving  over  the  rough  and 
obstructed  ground  so  severe,  that  the  assault  failed  at  all  points.  The 
troops* took  the  nearest  cover,  in  some  places  under  the  parapet  of  the 
enemy’s  work,  on  which  our  flag  was  flying,  and  waited  for  night  to 
enable  them  to  fall  back  without  further  exposure  to  the  murderous 
fire.  The  question  as  to  the  practicability  of  carrying  the  place  by  as- 
sault without  previous  preparation  was  now  settled  for  men  as  well  as 
for  officers.  Before  such  an  assault  could  again  be  attempted  with  a 
reasonable  prospect  of  success,  the  enemy’s  artillery  must,  so  far  as 
practicable,  be  disabled  by  our  fire,  and  means  used  to  cover  our  troops 
until  close  to  the  enemy’s  work  from  the  fire,  long-continued  exposure 
to  which  had  caused  the  failure  of  the  first  assault.  Preparations  were 
accordingly  made  for  the  construction  of  batteries,  opening  trenches, 
&c.,  and  the  siege  was  commenced. 

ENGINEER  ORGANIZATION. 

The  engineer  organization  here,  as  in  all  our  armies,  was  very  defi- 
cient,  if  we  judge  either  from  the  practice  of  nations  wiser  in  the  art  of 
war  than  ourselves  or  from  results.  Thirty  officers  of  engineers  would 
have  found  full  employment.  When  the  siege  commenced  there  were 
with  the  army  two  engineer  officers  doing  engineer  duty.  Superintend- 
ence at  any  particular  point  was  impossible,  without  neglecting  the 
more  important  general  superintendence  of  the  whole  line.  A tew 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


171 


officers  had  been  detailed,  either  from  a list  of  additional  aides-de-camp 
or  from  the  line,  for  engineer  duty ; these  were  assigned  to  the  head- 
quarters of  corps  or  divisions.  Several  divisions  had  pioneer  companies 
attached  to  them  ; these  were  used  as  engineer  soldiers  in  the  construc- 
tion of  gabions,  fascines,  in  building  batteries,  and  in  saps,  and,  notwith- 
standing their  rawness  at  first,  toward  the  close  of  the  siege  became  in 
some  divisions  very  effective. 

With  so  deficient  an  engineer  organization  was  the  siege  to  be  carried 
on ; more  engineer  officers  could  not  be  obtained,  so  that  the  rate  of 
progress,  of  an  approach  or  even  its  position,  often  depended  on  the 
energy  and  engineering  skill  of  the  division  or  brigade  commander  who 
furnished  the  working  party  for  it. 

APPROACHES. 

The  following  were  the  principal  approaches  made  during  the  siege, 
beginning  at  our  own  right,  some  of  them  being  begun  after  the  siege 
was  half  over,  viz:  1st,  Thayer’s:  2d,  Ewing’s ; 3d,  Giles  A.  Smith’s;  4th, 
Bansom’s;  5th,  Logan’s;  6th,  A.  J.  Smith’s;  7th,  Carr’s;  8th,  Hovey’s; 
9th,  Lauman’s;  10th,  Herron’s. 

These  approaches  derived  their  names  from  the  brigade  or  division 
commanders  who  furnished  the  guards  and  working  parties.  The  2d 
of  these  was  along  what  was  called  the  Graveyard  road ; the  5th  along 
the  Jackson  road;  the  6th  along  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road;  the  7th 
along  the  railroad ; the  9th  on  the  Hall’s  Ferry  road,  and  the  10th  on 
the  Warrenton  road.  The  2d,  or  Ewing’s  approach,  was  directed  against 
the  northeast  angle  of  the  enemy’s  line,  where  that  line,  bending  around 
the  ravines  at  the  head  of  a small  stream,  takes  the  form  of  a bastion. 
This  approach,  early  begun,  was  the  principal  one  in  front  of  Sherman’s 
corps,  and  with  collateral  work  was  that  on  which  he  expended  most 
labor. 

On  the  Jackson  road,  where  it  enters  the  enemy’s  line  of  defense,  is 
a commandiug  hill,  quite  strongly  salient,  which  had  on  it  a redan  for 
several  guns.  The  ridge  along  which  the  Jackson  road  runs  offered  fair 
ground,  and  along  it  McPherson  pushed  his  main  approach — the  one 
earliest  begun  and  on  which  his  corps  did  most  work.  A.  J.  Smith  and 
Carr  pushed  approaches  toward  salient  works,  called  by  the  Confeder- 
ates Forts  Pulaski  and  Beauregard,  one  to  the  right,  the  other  to  the 
left  of  the  railroad.  Hovey’s  approach  on  the  square  redoubt  was  not 
begun  until  late  in  the  siege.  The  three  last  approaches  were  in  front 
of  McClernand’s  (afterward  Ord’s)  corps. 

There  was  another  approach  begun  by  Colonels  Woods  and  Manter 
to  the  right  of  Thayer’s,  and  near  the  river.  After  the  work  had  been 
energetically  pushed  by  these  officers,  it  met  a deep  ravine,  precluding 
farther  progress.  As  this  approach  would  not  have  been  used  in  an 
assault,  it  has  not  been  mentioned  in  the  previous  enumeration.  A 
brief  history  of  the  approaches  above  mentioned  may  be  of  some  in- 
terest. 

THAYER’S  APPROACH. 

This  approach  commenced  near  the  crest  of  a ridge,  ran  down  the 
slope  which  was  toward  the  enemy,  and  then  up  the  opposite  slope  of 
the  ravine,  toward  the  ridge  on  which  the  salient  approached  was  situ- 
ated.  As  it  was  difficult  to  defile  this  approach,  blinding  was  resorted 
to.  Fascines  made  of  cane  were  used;  these,  being  placed  across  the 


172 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chaf.  XXXVI. 


trench,  which  was  about  (3  feet  deep,  formed  a roof  which  hid  the  move- 
ments of  our  men,  and,  where  well  constructed,  was  impenetrable  to 
musket  balls.  Artillery,  of  course,  would  have  soon  destroyed  it,  but 
the  enemy  did  not  use  this  arm  against  it.  This  approach  was  sharply 
resisted  by  the  enemy,  who  came  outside  of  their  line,  and  had  to  be 
driven  from  the  ground  they  occupied  before  the  work  could  be  pushed 
forward.  When  near  the  salient  approached,  the  officer  in  charge  of 
the  approach  thought  he  heard  the  enemy’s  miners  at  work.  Accord- 
ingly, work  in  the  sap  was  stopped,  and  a mine  begun,  which  was  not 
yet  complete  when  the  place  surrendered.  This  approach  was  under  the 
superintendence  of  Captain  [Herman]  Klostermann,  who  commanded 
the  efficient  pioneer  company  of  Steele’s  division. 

EWING’S  APPROACH. 

This  approach,  in  front  of  Blair’s  division,  of  Sherman’s  corps,  con- 
sisted in  places  of  two  or  three  approaches  (Ewing’s,  Lightburn’s,  and 
Buckland’s),  and  was  the  most  important  one  in  Sherman’s  front.  It 
was  pushed  forward  until  the  enemy  annoyed  the  sappers  very  seriously 
with  grenades  and  mines,  the  grenades  being  6 or  12  pounder  loaded 
shells,  with  short,  lighted  fuses.  We  then  resorted  to  mining,  and  as 
the  explosion  of  the  enemy’s  mines,  crushing  our  first  gallery,  had  shat- 
tered the  earth  for  30  feet  around,  a detour  was  made  to  avoid  this 
shaken  earth.  The  mine,  a heavy  one,  was  completed  just  before  the 
surrender  of  the  place,  but  was  not  charged.  (See  Appendix  A.#) 

This  approach  was  at  first  in  charge  of  Lieutenant  [Emmett]  Head- 
ington,  of  General  Ewing’s  staff,  then  of  Lieut.  C.  C.  Chaffee,  ordnance 
corps,  till  forced  to  leave  by  illness,  and  afterward  in  charge  of  Capt. 
W.  Kossak,  aide-de-camp,  assisted  by  Lieutenant  Lochbihler,  Thirty- 
fifth  Missouri  Begiment.  Lieutenant  Chaffee  and  Captain  Kossak  de- 
serve special  notice  for  their  zeal  and  energy.  Lieutenant  Lochbihler 
and  his  pioneer  company  did  good  service. 

GILES  A.  SMITH’S  APPROACH. 

This  approach  was  200  yards  to  the  south  of  Ewing’s,  and  pushed 
forward  from  a ravine  parallel  at  this  point  to  the  enemy’s  line,  which 
gave  cover  near  that  line.  It  was  directed  on  a salient  of  the  enemy’s 
line,  and  was  close  to  it  when  the  city  surrendered.  Captain  Kossak 
had  general  charge  of  this  work  toward  the  close  of  the  siege. 

ransom’s  approach. 

This  approach,  in  front  of  McPherson’s  right,  started  from  the  same 
ravine  as  the  preceding,  and  at  the  surrender  was  close  upon  the  en- 
emy’s line.  It  being  in  a re-entrant  of  that  line,  had  to  give  cover 
against  fire  from  both  flanks,  which  was  quite  freely  used  by  the  enemy, 
making  the  work  difficult.  This  approach  would  have  been  very  im- 
portant in  an  assault,  as  the  ground  here  in  rear  of  the  enemy’s  line 
was  seen  by  our  artillery,  and  it  would  have  been  difficult  for  him  to 
mass  troops  to  resist  an  assault.  General  Hansom  gave  immediate  and 
personal  attention  to  this  approach ; Capt.  A.  M.  Powell,  artillery  vol- 
unteers, in  charge. 

* See  paragraphs  10-12  of  Kossak’s  report,  pp.  190,  192. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  173 

LOGAN’S  APPROACH. 

This  was  the  approach  in  front -of  McPherson’s  corps,  on  which  most 
work  was  done.  It  followed  the  ridge  along  which  the  Jackson  road 
runs,  and  approached  a high,  commanding  salient,  called  by  us  Fort 
Hill,  which,  if  once  in  our  possession,  would  have  made  this  part  of  the 
enemy’s  line  untenable.  The  enemy  resisted  our  approach  here  more 
strongly  than  at  any  other  point,  burning  sap-rollers,  using  mines,  and 
throwing  grenades.  Counter-mines  (see  extract  from  Captain  Hicken- 
looper’s  report,  Appendix  B*)  were  used  by  us,  one  heavy  one  being  fired 
June  25,  destroying  a part  of  the  enemy’s  parapet.  An  attempt  was 
made  to  hold  the  crater,  but  after  heavy  loss  from  the  hand-grenades* 
which  the  enemy  threw  into  it,  the  attempt  was  abandoned.  Another 
mine  was  begun,  and  was  to  have  been  fired  when  the  place  was  as- 
saulted, but  the  enemy’s  miners  being  heard  at  work  near  it,  and  it 
being  feared  that  they  might  crush  our  galleries,  which  were  not  lined, 
the  mine  was  loaded  and  fired  July  1,  destroying  the  enemy’s  parapet 
at  this  point,  and  giving  a crater  30  feet  in  diameter,  the  charge  being 
about  1,800  pounds,  a portion  of  it  damaged  powder.  It  was  after- 
ward ascertained  that  this  explosion  crushed  the  enemy’s  galleries  and 
disabled  about  25  men — indeed,  half  a dozen  men  were  blown  into  our 
works. 

No  attempt  was  made  to  occupy  this  crater,  as  a similar  attempt  of 
June  25  had  failed  with  severe  loss. 

The  enemy’s  salient  here  being  too  high  for  our  men  to  be  able  to 
return  the  grenades  which  they  threw  upon  us  so  freely,  and  having  no 
Cohorn  mortars,  Mr.  Tresilian,  civil  assistant  engineer,  had  some 
wooden  mortars  made  by  shrinking  iron  bands  on  cylinders  of  tough 
wood,  and  boring  them  out  for  6 or  12  pound  shells.  These  mortars 
stood  firing  well,  and  gave  sufficiently  good  results  at  100  or  150  yards 
distance.  (See  extract  from  Mr.  Tresilian’s  report,  Appendix  C.f) 

We  afterward  learned  that  the  enemy,  lying  closely  packed  in  the 
salient,  suffered  severely  from  this  fire.  Captain  Hickenlooper,  of  Gen- 
eral McPherson’s  staff,  assisted  by  Captain  Merritt  and  Mr.  Tresilian, 
was  in  charge  of  this  approach. 

A.  J.  SMITH’S  approach. 

This  approach  followed  generally  the  line  of  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road 
injudiciously  leaving  it  in  one  place  to  avoid  hard  digging.  When  this 
approach  reached  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  salient  on  which  it  was 
directed,  its  progress  was  much  impeded  by  the  enemy’s  artillery  fire 
grenades,  &c.  The  enemy  also  attempted  to  blow  up  the  sap-roller  with 
a mine,  but  failed  by  underestimating  the  distance  and  using  too  feeble 
a charge.  They  succeeded  in  burning  one  sap-roller  by  lodging  a fire- 
ball against  it.  The  work  was,  however,  pushed  forward,  and  a mine 
had  been  commenced  when  the  place  surrendered.  (See  Appendix  D.f) 

CARR’S  APPROACH. 

This  approach,  beginning  on  the  railroad,  followed  its  cut  for  100 
yards,  and  was  directed  to  a work  just  to  the  left  of  another  deep  cut. 

* See  June  ‘25-28,  of  his  report,  p.  202. 

j See  events  of  July  1,  in  his  report  dated  August  17,  1863,  p.  208. 

f See  events  of  June  19-July  1,  in  Hains’  report,  pp.  183-186. 


174 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CIIAI*.  XXXVI. 


When  within  60  yards  of  the  enemy’s  line,  a parallel  was  made,  from 
which  the  salient  might  have  been  stormed. 

On  July  4,  this  approach  was  within  about  10  yards  of  the  enemy’s 
ditch. 


hovey’s  approach. 

This  approach,  directed  on  a redoubt,  was  not  begun  till  late,  although 
the  ground  gave  cover  here  to  within  a short  distance  of  the  enemy’s 
line. 

This  was  one  instance  among  many  where  the  lack  of  engineer  offi- 
cers was  shown.  With  a proper  number  of  officers,  the  ground  in  all 
its  details  would  have  been  thoroughly  reconnoitered,  and  the  best 
positions  for  approaches  chosen,  instead  of  wasting  work,  as  in  this 
case,  when  the  best  approaches  were  selected  after  the  siege  was  half 
over. 

A.  J.  Smith’s,  Carr’s,  and  Hovey’s  divisions  were  in  McClernand’s 
(afterward  Ord’s)  corps,  and  their  approaches  were  generally  under 
charge  of  Lieut.  P.  C.  Hains,  engineer,  who  took  immediate  and  special 
charge  of  A.  J.  Smith’s  and  Carr’s  work.  He  deserves  high  praise  for 
his  untiring  energy  and  devotion  to  his  work. 

latjman’s  approach. 

This  approach,  in  front  of  Lauman’s  division,  was  at  first  begun  on  a 
ridge  which  runs  out  from  the  enemy’s  line  300  yards  east  of  the  Hall’s 
Ferry  road,  and  a good  deal  of  work  had  been  expended  on  it,  when  it 
was  decided  to  abandon  it  for  an  approach  along  the  Hall’s  Ferry  road, 
ravines  there  giving  cover  within  300  yards  of  the  enemy’s  line,  the 
approach  being  directed  on  a work  very  salient,  and,  therefore,  weak. 
The  enemy,  conscious  of  this,  made  repeated  sorties,  driving  off  work- 
ing parties  and  taking  a few  prisoners.  (See  extracts  from  Captain 
Freeman’s  report,  Appendix  E.* ) 

In  one  case,  June  22,  they  filled  up  50  yards  of  our  trench  and  began 
a counter-trench,  from  which  they  were  driven  the  following  night  with 
some  loss. 

Capt.  H.  C.  Freeman,  aide-de-camp,  was  in  immediate  charge  of  the 
work  performed  in  front  of  this  division. 

HERRON’S  APPROACH. 

General  Herron’s  division  did  not  arrive  till  June  11,  and  the  approach 
of  his  division  along  the  Warrenton  road  was  slow.  Little  was  done, 
besides  driving  in  the  enemy’s  pickets  and  erecting  three  batteries,  till 
June  24,  when  a parallel,  to  cover  supports,  was  begun  at  200  yards 
distance  from  the  enemy’s  line.  The  portion  proposed  was  finished 
and  an  approach  run  forward  to  within  100  yards  of  a salient  of  the 
enemy’s  line,  when  the  place  fell. 

Captain  [Arnold]  Hoeppner,  aide-de-camp,  was  in  charge  of  the  work 
done  in  front  of  this  division. 

The  preceding  list  includes  the  approaches  which  might  be  used,  if 
desired,  in  an  assault. 

Work  had  been  done  on  others,  but  it  was  to  these  mainly  that  atten- 
tion was  directed. 


* See  events  of  June  22  and  23,  and  July  3,  of  his  report,  pp.  195,  196. 


Chap.  XXXVI.-] 


175 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

REASONS  FOR  ANOTHER  ASSAULT. 

On  July  1 the  approaches  were  in  the  condition  described  above. 
The  hand-to-hand  character  of  the  fighting  now  showed  that  in  the 
closer  approaches  little  farther  progress  could  be  made  by  digging  alone: 
the  enemy’s  works  were  weak,  and  at  ten  different  points  we  could  put 
the  heads  of  regiments  under  cover  within  from  5 to  100  yards  of  his 
line.  The  assault  would  be  but  little  easier  if  we  waited  ten  days  more, 
and  accordingly  it  was  decided  to  assault  on  the  morning  of  July  6. 

Orders  were  at  once  issued  to  prepare  the  heads  of  approaches  for 
the  easy  debouch  of  troops,  to  widen  the  main  ones,  so  that  the  troops 
could  move  easily  by  fours  and  artillery  could  pass,  and  to  prepare 
planks  and  sand-bags,  stuffed  with  pressed  cotton,  for  crossing  ditches. 
These  preparations  were  in  progress  when  the  place  surrendered,  July  4. 

CHARACTER  OF  THE  ENEMY’S  DEFENSE. 

At  the  assaults  of  May  19  and  22,  the  enemy  used  artillery  fire  freely. 
Afterward,  as  our  batteries  were  built  and  opened,  their  artillery  fire 
slackened,  until  toward  the  close  of  the  siege  it  was  scarcely  used  at 
all,  the  enemy  contenting  himself  with  occasionally  running  a gun  into 
position,  firing  two  or  three  rounds,  and  withdrawing  it  again  as  soon 
as  our  fire  was  concentrated  on  it.  A 10-inch  mortar  was  fired  a good 
deal  at  first  from  a ravine  behind  the  enemy’s  line,  in  McPherson’s  front 
and  afterward  from  a work  in  Herron’s  front,  but  did  little  damage. 

On  the  surrender  of  the  place  their  artillery  was  found  to  be  consid- 
erably injured  ; nevertheless,  if  at  almost  any  point  they  had  put  ten 
or  fifteen  guns  in  position,  instead  of  one  or  two  to  invite  concentration 
of  our  fire,  they  might  have  seriously  delayed  our  approaches.  We 
attributed  during  the  siege  the  silence  of  their  artillery  to  the  lack  of 
ammunition,  but  on  the  surrender  of  the  place  over  40,000  rounds  of 
captured  artillery  ammunition  were  reported  to  the  chief  of  ordnance 
. . ^neral  Grant  s army.  (See  Appendix  F.)  A small  portion  of  this, 
judiciously  used,  would  have  rendered  our  approach  much  slower.  As  it 
was,  we  had  little  besides  musketry  fire  to  contend  with  in  the  distant 
approaches  and  parallels,  and  even  this  was  used  sparingly  in  compari- 
son with  our  own,  probably  from  a deficiency  of  percussion- caps.  The 
mines  used  by  the  enemy  were  feeble  ones,  their  charges  always  light 
and  rarely  doing  other  damage  than  making  the  ground  where  they  had 
been  exploded  impracticable  for  our  own,  as  we  did  not  use  gallery 
frames  or  sheeting.  Indeed,  their  active  defense  was  far  from  being 
vigorous,  the  object  seeming  to  be  to  wait  for  another  assault,  losing  in 
the  mean  time  as  few  men  as  possible.  This  indifference  to  our  approach 
became  at  some  points  almost  ludicrous.  We  were  accustomed  to  cover 
the  front  of  our  night  working  parties  by  a line  of  pickets  or  a cover- 
ing party,  and  the  enemy,  while  we  were  not  nearer  than  100  yards  to 
their  line,  would  throw  out  their  pickets  in  front  of  it. 

On  one  occasion,  in  front  of  Ord’s  corps,  our  pickets,  in  being  posted 
became  intermixed  with  the  enemy’s,  and  after  some  discussion  the 
opposing  picket  officers  arranged  their  picket  lines  by  mutual  compro- 
mise, these  lines  in  places  not  being  more  than  10  yards  apart.  (See 
extract  from  Lieutenant  Hains’  report,  Appendix  I),  June  20.*)  As  the 
enemy  could  have  stopped  our  work  by  remaining  in  his  lines  and  firing 
an  occasional  volley,  the  advantage  of  this  arrangement,  novel  in  the 
art  Qt  war,  was  entirely  on  our  side,  and  was  not  interfered  with.  In 


* See  p.  184. 


176  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

Lauman’s  and  Herron’s  front  the  enemy  was  not  so  courteous  ; in  Lau- 
man’s front  especially  they  made  sorties  several  times,  resulting  in  loss 
of  men  and  retardation  of  work  to  ourselves.  (See  Appendix  E.*) 

SIEGE  MATERIAL  AND  WORKS. 

The  larger  part  of  the  fascines,  gabions,  and  sap-rollers  was  prepared 
by  the  pioneer  companies  of  the  different  divisions.  Material  for  the 
wattling  of  gabions  was  abundant,  grape-vines  being  chiefly  used, 
though  these  made  gabions  that  were  inconveniently  heavy,  from  the 
fact  that  vines  of  too  large  size  were  taken.  Captain  Freeman,  aide- 
de-camp,  experimented  with  cane  as  material  for  wattling,  and  found 
by  crushing  the  joints  with  a mallet  the  rest  of  the  cane  was  split  suf- 
ficiently to  allow  it  to  be  woven  between  the  stakes  of  the  gabion  and 
yet  be  strong,  making  a good  and  very  neat  gabion.  (See  Appendix 
E.)  For  fascines  the  cane  was  largely  used,  it  being  found  in  abun- 
dance and  making  excellent  and  light  work.  Some  difficulty  was  expe- 
rienced at  first  in  making  sap-rollers  which  should  be  impervious  to 
Minie  balls  and  not  too  heavy  for  use  on  the  rough  ground  over  which 
the  saps  ran.  The  difficulty  was  obviated  by  Lieutenant  Hains,  engi- 
neers, who  caused  two  barrels  to  be  placed  head  to  head  and  secured, 
and  the  sap-roller  to  be  built  up  of  cane  fascines  around  this  hollow  core. 

The  aggregate  length  of  our  trenches  was  12  miles ; eighty-nine  bat- 
teries were  constructed  during  the  siege,  the  guns  from  those  in  rear 
being  moved  forward  as  the  siege  advanced,  there  being  two  hundred 
and  twenty  guns  in  position  on  June  30,  according  to  the  reports  to  the 
chief  of  artillery.  These  guns  were  mainly  siege  or  field  guns,  a few 
heavy  ones,  however,  being  obtained  from  the  Navy,  one  battery  of 
these  guns,  on  the  right,  in  front  of  Woods’  brigade,  being  manned  and 
officered  by  the  Navy.  These  batteries  were  sometimes  constructed 
under  the  supervision  of  the  pioneers  of  the  division  to  which  the  bat- 
tery belonged,  and  sometimes  by  the  officer  who  was  to  command  the 
finished  work. 

The  style  of  work  was  very  varied,  both  reveting  and  platforms  de- 
pending on  the  materials  which  could  be  obtained  at  the  time.  In  some 
cases  they  were  well  and  neatly  reveted  with  gabions  and  fascines,  and 
furnished  with  substantial  plank  platforms,  while  in  others  reveting  of 
rough  boards,  rails,  or  cotton  bales  was  used,  and  the  platforms  were 
made  of  boards  and  timber  from  the  nearest  barn  or  cotton-gin  house. 

From  the  feebleness  of  the  enemy’s  artillery  fire,  our  parapets  often 
were  not  more  than  6 or  8 feet  thick.  In  all  close  batteries  the  gunners 
soon  found  the  necessity  of  keeping  the  embrasures  closed  against  rifle- 
balls  by  plank  shutters,  sometimes  swung  from  a timber  across  the  top 
of  the  embrasure;  sometimes  merely  placed  in  the  embrasure,  and 
moved  when  firing.  Whenever  an  approach  gave  opportunity  for  fire, 
loop-holes  were  either  formed  in  the  parapet,  made  by  using  sand-bags, 
or  in  a timber  laid  along  the  parapet.  These  timbers  were  rarely  dis- 
placed by  the  enemy’s  fire ; they  would  have  been  dangerous  if  that 
artillery  fire  had  been  heavy. 

In  close  approaches  the  sap  was  reveted  with  gabions,  empty  barrels, 
or  with  cotton  bales,  or  sometimes  left  unreveted,it  being  difficult  to  pre- 
vent the  working  parties  from  sinking  the  sap  to  the  depth  of  5 or  even 
6 feet  when  the  enemy’s  fire  was  heavy,  and  reveting  then  was  unnec- 
essary. Indeed,  when  the  enemy’s  grenades  were  most  annoying,  it 
was  impossible  to  keep  detailed  working  parties  at  their  posts,  and  it 


See  extracts  from  Captain  Freeman’s  report,  p.  193. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG.  MISS. 


177 


was  necessary  to  depend  on  the  pioneers  already  referred  to  for  this 
dangerous  work.  The  compactness  of  the  alluvial  soil  making  lining 
for  mining  galleries  unnecessary,  these  galleries  were  formed  with  ease^ 
as  mines  could  not  make  an  easier  way  into  the  enemy’s  line  than  ex- 
isted already,  their  only  use  was  to  demoralize  the  enemy  by  their 
explosion  at  the  moment  of  an  assault.  Three  were  completed  and 
several  others  begun  during  the  siege.  More  importance  was  attached 
to  them  by  officers  and  men  than  they  deserved. 

The  labor  in  the  trenches  was  done  by  men  of  the  pioneer  companies 
of  divisions,  by  details  from  the  line,  or  by  negroes.  Several  of  the 
pioneer  companies  had  negroes  attached  to  them,  who  had  come  into 
our  camps.  These  negroes  were  paid  $10  per  month,  in  accordance 
with  law,  and  proved  to  be  very  efficient  laborers  when  under  good 

The  labor  performed  by  details  from  the  line,  as  is  usual  in  such 
cases,  was  very  light  in  comparison  with  that  done  by  the  same  num- 
ber  of  pioneers  or  negroes.  Without  the  stimulus  of  danger  or  pecu- 
niary reward,  troops  of  the  line  will  not  work  efficiently,  especially  at 
affcer_ novelty  of  the  labor  has  worn  off.  The  amount  of  night 
work  done  by  a given  detail  depends  very  much  on  the  discipline  of  the 
command  from  which  it  is  taken  and  on  the  energy  of  its  officers. 
Under  average  circumstances,  such  details  do  not  in  a given  time  ac- 
complish halt  the  work  of  which  they  are  capable. 

The  want  of  officers  of  engineers  has  already  been  referred  to,  there 
being  at  no  time  more  than  three  on  engineer  duty.  Over  a line  so  ex- 
tended and  ground  so  rough  as  that  which  surrounds  Vicksburg  only 
a general  supervision  was  possible,  and  this  gave  to  the  siege  one  of  its 

thcwnrt  ,namely’ th,at  many  times,  at  different  places,' 

the  work  that  should  be  done,  and  the  way  it  should  be  done,  depended 
on  officers,  or  even  on  men,  without  either  theoretical  or  practical  knowl- 
edge  of  siege  operations,  and  who  had  to  rely  upon  their  native  good 
ingenuity  Whether  a battery  was  to  be  constructed  by  men 
who  had  never  built  one  before,  a sap-roller  made  by  those  who  had 

and6  affer1^  W 0r  a shiP’?  §'un-carriage  to  be  built,  it  was  done, 

and,  after  a few  trials,  was  well  done.  But,  while  stating  the  power  of 
adaptation  to  circumstances  and  fertility  of  resources  which  our  men 
possess  m so  high  a degree,  it  must  be  recollected  that  these  powers 
were  shown  at  the  expense  of  time,  and  while  a relieving  force  was 
gathering  in  our  rear.  Officers  and  men  had  to  learn  to  be  engineers 
while  the  siege  was  going  on.  6 6 

The  assault,  which  was  to  have  been  made  July  6,  would  probablv 

Mav  ^fto  Utd/n  thiS  CaS®  th®  Siege  wouId  have  lasted  fr°m 

May  2^  to  July  6.  That  time  was  too  long:  we  might  have  been  as 

cient^unnl  V nfT1* tw0  or *hree  weeks  earlier,  if  there  had  been  a suffi- 
cient supply  of  engineer  officers  to  watch  that  no  time  was  lost  or  use- 

neaSrer°Po  fnT5  J°  S6.P  that  e™y  shovelM  of  earth  ^own  ^0^® 
nearer  to  the  end,  and  personally  to  push  and  constantly  supervise  the 
special  works  to  which  they  were  assigned.  pervise 

tha^the^efi^o^f ] QSt?n,,s  r<?lieving  f°rce  was  strengthened  so  slowly 
that  the  delay  cost  us  billy  time,  not  the  raising  of  the  siege.  * 

LIST  OF  OFFICERS. 

the  sie^oTSeer  duty^ eDSineer  °ffiCerS  ^ WMe PI'eS6nt  during 

Capt.  P.  E.  Prime,  chief  engineer,  forced  by  severe  illness  to  leave 

R R — YOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


178 


MISSISSIPPI,  ‘WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai\  XXXVI. 


June  28;  Gapt.  C.  B.  Comstock,  joined  June  15;  Capt.  M.  D.  McAles- 
ter,  joined  June  28  ; First  Lieut.  P.  0.  Hains,  present  during  the  whole 
siege.  Captain  Comstock,  on  reporting,  was  assigned  to  the  charge  of 
operations  in  front  of  McClernand’s  corps  and  Lauman’s  and  Herron’s 
divisions.  Captain  McAlester,  on  reporting,  relieved  Captain  Com- 
stock, the  latter,  by  Captain  Prime’s  departure,  becoming  senior  en- 
gineer. Lieutenant  Hains  was  in  immediate  charge  of  the  work  in  front 
of  McClernand’s  (afterward  Ord’s)  corps  during  the  siege.  Lieut.  C.  C. 
Chaffee,  Ordnance  Corps,  was  detailed  on  engineer  duty  with  General 
Sherman,  and  remained  till  compelled  to  leave  by  illness.  Lieutenant 
Hopkins,  Third  Infantry,  was  also  detailed  on  duty  with  the  chief  en- 
gineer for  a few  days.  Capts.  W.  L.  B.  Jenney,  H.  C.  Freeman,  and 
A.  Hoeppner,  additional  aides-de-camp,  were  assigned,  respectively, 
to  Sherman’s  corps  and  Lauman’s  and  Herron’s  divisions,  as  engineer 
officers.  Capt.  W.  Kossak,  aide-de-camp,  as  also  Lieutenant  Lochbihler 
and  his  pioneer  company,  were  under  the  control  of  the  chief  engineer. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servants, 

FEEDEEICK  E.  PEIME, 

Captain  of  Engineers, 

C.  B.  COMSTOCK, 

Captain  of  Engineers, 

Lieut.  Col.  T.  S.  Bowers, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Military  Division  of  the  Mississippi. 


APPENDIX  P. 


Eeference  has  already  been  made  to  the  feebleness  of  the  enemy’s 
artillery  fire.  The  numbers  below,  from  the  report  of  Lieut.  J.  H.  Par- 
ker, Ordnance  Corps,  will  show  that,  while  not  having  a large  supply 
of  artillery  ammunition,  they  yet  might  have  seriously  annoyed  our 
approaches,  and  still  retained  enough  to  meet  an  assault. 

The  following  artillery  and  material  was  captured  at  Vicksburg: 


Field  guns  (smooth-bore) 

Field  guns  (rifled) 

Field  howitzers 

Siege  guns  (smooth-bore) 

Siege  guns  (rifled) 

Siege  howitzer 

Siege  mortar 


50 

31 

22 

46 

21 

1 

1 


Total 

Artillery  projectiles 

Artillery  powder  (pounds) 
Artillery  cartridges 


172 

38. 000 

58. 000 
4,800 


Much  of  the  field  ammunition  was  fixed.  Among  the  siege  guns 
were  fifteen  10-inch  columbiads,  ten  9-inch,  twenty  32-pounders,  six 
24-pounders ; while  of  rifled  guns  there  were  one  8-inch,  two  7^-inch, 
two  32-pounders,  and  four  5-inch  guns. 


Office  Chief  Engtneer,  Dept,  of  the  Tennessee, 

# September  7,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  en- 
gineer operations  at  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  from  June  27,  1863,  the 
date  at  which  the  departure  of  Captain  Prime,  chief  engineer,  on  ac- 
count of  severe  illness,  left  me  in  charge,  till  the  surrender  on  July  4, 

1863 : , , . . 

Ou  the  27th  of  June  the  ..following  approaches,  beginning  at  oil 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


179 


right,  gave  cover  to  within  from  10  feet  to  200  yards  of  the  enemy’s 
works,  viz:  1,  Thayer’s;  2,  Ewing’s;  3,  Giles  A.  Smith’s;  4,  RansomV 
5,  Logan's,  on  the  Jackson  road  ; 6,  A.  J.  Smith’s,  on  Baldwin’s  Ferrv 
road;  7,  Oa,iT’s,  on  railroad;  8,  Hovey’s;  9,  Lauman’s,  on  Hall’s  Ferry 
road,  and,  10,  Herron’s,  on  the  Warrenton  road. 

From  this  date  till  July  1 the  work  was  steadily  pushed  forward  when 
approaches  Nos.  1 and  9 were  within  30  yards  or  less  and  No.  10  within 
120  yards  of  the  enemy’s  ditch,  while  Nos.  2,  4,  5,  and  6 were  up  to  or  in 
t e ditch.  In  the  closer  approaches  the  enemy  now  seriously  annoyed 
our  working  parties  with  hand-grenades,  making  it  difficult  to  keep  them 
at  work,  and  causing  the  progress  to  be  slow.  The  want  of  Cohorn 
mortars  was  severely  felt,  and  Mr.  Tresilian,  civil  assistant  engineer, 
made  some  wooden  mortars  for  6 and  12  pound  shells,  which  were  very 
effective  at  from  100  to  150  yards.  Mines  had  been  constructed  from 
approaches  Nos.  2,  5,  and  6,  which  it  was  proposed  to  explode  immedi- 
ately before  an  assault.  The  enemy’s  counter-mines,  however,  made  it 
necessary  to  fire  one  m front  of  No.  5 on  July  1,  the  charge  being  about 
1,800  pounds.  The  explosion  completely  destroyed  the  enemy’s  parapet 
at  the  point,  making  a crater  of  30  feet  diameter,  and  blowing  some 
half  dozen  of  the  enemy  into  our  lines,  one  of  them  alive.  A mfne  had 
been  exploded  near  this  place  the  25th  of  June,  and,  after  suffering 
heavily  our  men  were  forced  to  retire  from  the  crater.  No  attempt 
was  made  to  occupy  this.  The  enemy  used  mines  at  several  points,  but 
they  were  feeble,  doing  no  damage  beyond  crushing  some  galleries. 

] ^ter  °f  the  n£htin8  in  the  closer  approaches 
now  showed  that  little  farther  progress  could  be  made  by  digging  alone 
The  enemy’s  works  were  weak,  and  at  ten  different  points  we  could  put 
the  heads  of  regiments  within  from  5 to  120  yards  of  the  enemy’s  line ; 
the  assault  would  be  little  easier  if  we  waited  ten  days  more.  Accord- 
mgkv,  on  July  1,  it  was  decided  to  assault  on  the  morning  of  the  6th  of 

Orders  were  at  once  issued  to  widen  where  necessary  the  main  ap- 
proaches, so  as  to  permit  the  movement  of  troops  by  fours  with  ease 
and  to  permit  artillery  to  move  along  some  of  them  ; to  prepare  planks’ 
and  sand-bags  stuffed  with  pressed  cotton,  for  crossing  ditches,  and  to 
arrange  the  heads  of  saps  for  the  easy  debouch  of  troops.  These 
preparations  were  in  progress  when  the  place  surrendered,  on  the  4th 
oi  July,  looo. 

Au  examination  of  the  enemy’s  line  showed  that  it  consisted  of  a 

ST.a  WOriS  for  artlllery>  0,1  prominent  points,  connected  by 
small  trenches  or  rifle-pits,  thus  forming  a continuous  line.  The  forms 
° i,-  hK  I01'1'!  fo^  artillery  depended  usually  on  that  of  the  ridge  on 
which  they  stood,  only  one  being  a closed  work.  The  cross-section  of 
the  trench  or  rifle  pit  was  4 feet  wide  by  3 feet  deep.  In  a few  places 
stockading  was  used,  and  in  front  of  several  salients  there  were  feeble 
attempts  at  the  construction  of  obstacles,  such  as  abatis,  telegraph 
wire  woven  among  stakes,  sharpened  sticks  stuck  in  the  ground,  and 
inclining  to  the  front  and  2 or  3 feet  high.  * 

ti  Une  WIlS  we!l  locate<1>  being  nearly  always  on  a dividing  ridge, 
diLTr  ravme*m  lts  lro,rJt  ,m  mail.V  Places  so  steep  as  to  make  it 
o'w!/  tn??,n  to  ascend  them,  both  slopes  and  bottoms  being 
often  covered  with  fallen  timber.  The  ground  over  which  our  ap” 
proaches  ran  was  a net- work  ot  ridges  and  ravines,  the  only  level  ground 

wit^very  steeplideT  °‘  ^ nWineS’  WhiCh  Wero  often  100  feet  deep, 
Although  the  enemy  had  over  one  hundred  and  thirty  guns  of  all 


180 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


calibers  within  his  defenses,  he  made  but  slight  use  of  artillery  fire  in 
delaying  our  approaches,  the  defense  being  almost  entirely  by  musketry. 
Lack  of  ammunition  was  assigned  as  the  reason  for  this  by  some  ol  the 
Confederate  officers,  but  we  captured  over  40,000  rounds  of  artillery 
ammunition,  as  reported  to  the  Chief  of  Ordnance. 

Night  sorties  were  made  on  our  left  by  the  enemy,  with  some  loss  to 
ourselves  and  interruption  to  the  work ; while  in  front  of  the  Thirteenth 
Army  Corps  great  friendliness  prevailed  at  night,  the  enemy’s  pickets 
and  our  guards  for  working  parties  being  within  10  yards  of  each  other 
at  times,  without  a shot  being  fired  during  the  night.  On  one  occasion, 
indeed,  in  the  anxiety  of  each  party  to  get  all  the  ground  possible,  the 
opponents  became  completely  intermixed,  and  the  lines  were  only 
arranged  after  quite  a discussion  on  mutual  rights,  by  the  opposing 

officers.  , . , 

From  the  lack  of  educated  engineer  officers,  the  approaches  and  par- 
allels were  in  some  places  badly  located  and  much  unnecessary  work 
done.  The  boyaus  were  often  sunk  to  the  depth  of  5 or  even  6 feet 
where  the  enemy’s  fire  was  heavy,  largely  increasing  the  amount  of 


labor.  i _ ... 

The  sap-roller  was  used  in  all  close  approaches,  one  ol  cane  witn  a 
central  cavity  being  found  best.  Canes  with  their  joints  crushed  were 
found  to  make  good  material  for  the  wattling  of  gabions. 

The  aggregate  length  of  our  trenches  was  12  miles  \ number  ol  bat- 
teries, 89,  with  220  guns  in  position  on  June  30,  as  stated  by  the  chief 

of  artillery.  , . „ , , 

Batteries  were  usually  reveted  with  gabions,  and  also  portions  oi  the 

approaches.  ^ _ 

After  Captaiu  Prime’s  departure,  the  only  officers  of  engineers  pres- 
ent on  engineer  duty  were  Capt.  M.  D.  McAlester  and  First  Lieut.  P. 
C.  Hains.  Captain  ^McAlester  reported  June  28,  and  was  assigned  to 
the  charge  of  operations  on  the  left,  where  he  rendered  efficient  assist- 
ance till  relieved  on  July  5. 

Lieutenant  Hains  was  in  immediate  charge  of  the  engineer  operations 
©f  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  during  the  siege,  and  deserved  the 
highest  praise  for  his  untiring  energy  and  devotion  to  his  work. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  M.  WILSON, 

Captain  of  Engineers. 
For  C.  B.  COMSTOCK, 

Captain  Corps  of  Engineers . 


Brig.  Gen.  John  A.  Rawlins. 


No.  6. 


Report  of  Lieut.  Peter  C.  Hains , U.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers , Chief  En- 
gineer Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


Hdqrs.  Engineer  Dept.,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Vicksburg , Miss.,  July  30,  1863. 


Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  concerning  the 
engineering  operations  performed  under  my  charge  in  front  of  the  Thir- 
teenth Army  Corps  : 

The  corps  arrived  in  front,  or  in  rear  of,  Vicksburg,  as  it  is  sometimes 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  181 

called  on  May  19,  from  which  time  to  the  22d  instant  every  effort  was 
made  to  determine  by  reconnaissances  the  weakest  points  of  the 

possible  lme’  aUd  t0  °btam  as  accurate  information  of  the  ground  as 

1®  Thirteenth  Army  CorPs  made  an  assault  on 

tack tw in,6’  -th6  sa h.e.nts  B and  0 belnS  tbe  principal  points  of  at- 
tack.  The  storming  parties  succeeded  in  scaling  the  parapet  of  C it 

hai  mg  been  battered  considerably  by  the  fire  from  the  30-pounder  bat- 
near  the  crossing  of  the  wagon  road  over  the  railroad.  The  as- 
saiilt  failed,  andori  the  23d  instant  it  was  announced  in  orders  from 
headquarters  of  the  army  that  the  place  would  be  invested  at  once,  and 
a siege  by  regular  approaches  commenced. 

I immediately  had  as  accurate  a survey  of  the  ground  in  front  made 
as  was  possible  with  the  assistance  at  hand.  The  salients  B,  0 and  I) 
imfof rife ' ted  aS  the1points  °/  a*tack,  one  point  of  attack  for  each  divis- 
enPlading  °PeU  the  flrSt  parallel  and  estaWisl> 

I had  previously,  on  the  night  of  the  19th,  selected  the  hill  near  the 
crossing  of  the  railroad  and  wagon  road  for  a battery  of  two  30-pounders 

o dbIrS,^D;^;1  °Vhe  T the other  ^0-pounder  wasmounted 
ou  tne  right  ot  the  road.  A small  parapet  was  thrown  ui>  in  front  of 

each  gun  to  protect  the  cannoneers  from  the  enemy’s  riflemen  This 
battery,  which  was  commanded  by  Major  Maloney,  of  the  First  Infantry 
l . S.  Army , was  increased  in  caliber  during  the  latter  part  of  the  siee-e  * 

Dahlgren  guns,  procured  from  Admiral  Por- 
’ th  \ and  movmS  the  20-pounders  closer  to  the  works 
Requisitions  were  made  at  once  on  the  chief  quartermaster  of  tho  pnmo 
and  the  chief  of  artillery  for  the  necessary  InSenehi^  ^s  amUbr 
proper  siege  materials,  heavy  guns,  mortars,  &c.  Cohorn  mortars  were 
particularly.  No  mortars  could  be  obtained,  and  only  three  24- 
pounders  (siege)  and  two  8-inch  Dahlgrens,  in  addition  to  the  three 
3(t pounder  Parrotts  belonging  to  the  corps.  “ 

that  Th^,!fotternParti-0fi.the  siege  the  want  of  mortars  was  so  severely  felt 
at  I gave  orders  to  have  wooden  mortars  made,  to  be  used  with  small 
charges  of  powder  and  light  shells  (6  and  12  pounds).  Some  nival  hand 
grenades  were  also  procured,  but  from  their  peculiar  foZcould no‘  be 
thrown  any  considerable  distance.  Even  when  the  approaches  ^cre 

» .c. “s  S'.  *“  »•» 

few  that  could  be  gathered  together  around  camp  and  from  the  pio- 

ilfdi/  29  and  30. — More  tools  were  procured  and  large  details  worked 
The  opening  of  the  first  parallel  commenced.  S ° te<L 

serve  asl  depot’for  thetoe/S. ^ e“emy’s  works>  Tbis  point  wiu 
®?laH  trench  was  pushed  forward  from  General  Hovev’s 
durin’o-  thlPav^and^ve  tl  blll tbat  is  occupied  by  our  sharpshooters 

place  by  davl&ht  d nrt,.tha“l  b,etter  cover>  as  wel1  as  a passage  to  the 
OAA  ^ ^ Other  details  were  employed,  varying  from  200  to 

?3ln  strengthening  the  batteries  which  had  to  be  thrPwn  uo 


182  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

sometimes  not  firing  a single  shot  during  the  whole  day.  The  30- 
pounders  do  good  service  whenever  the  enemy  open  an  artillery  lire. 

June  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  and  7. — Details  were  employed  along  the  first  par- 
allel to  finish  it,  making  it  wide  enough  for  artillery  to  pass  through. 
At  the  same  time  the  approaches  to  the  salients  in  front  of  Generals 
Smith’s  and  Carr’s  divisions  were  commenced,  the  ravine  on  the  right 
of  the  wagon  road  was  taken  advantage  of  as  an  approach  to  the  salient 
B,  seeing  much  labor  could  by  this  means  be  avoided.  The  ground 
along  the  road  was  so  hard  that  to  approach  by  boyaus  there  would  be 
a difficult  piece  of  work,  especially  as  we  have  no  sappers  and  depend 
entirely  on  the  troops  of  the  line  for  every  shovelful  of  dirt  thrown  up. 
The  railroad  cut  affords  facilities  to  approach  C that  are  at  once  taken 
advantage  of.  From  the  bottom  of  the  ravine  to  the  right  of  the  wagon 
road  a rifle-pit  was  thrown  up  for  sharpshooters  some  days  ago.  This 
has  been  widened  to  a regular  trench.  It  is  intended  to  connect  this 
with  the  second  parallel  of  Carr’s  division  as  soon  as  he  reaches  the 
hill  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  ravine,  in  his  front. 

In  General  Hovey’s  front  two  24-pounder  siege  guns  were  mounted 
(Battery  No.  5).  In  front  of  General  Carr’s  division,  a two-gun  battery 
(No.  6)  was  constructed  for  the  20-pounder  Parrotts  to  the  left  of  the 
wagon  road  and  about  300  yards  from  B.  The  battery  is  intended  to 
counter  B and  enfilade  the  left  face  of  C,  at  least  what  appears  to  be 
the  left  face  of  C.  The  exact  form  of  the  work  cannot  be  ascertained. 
The  distance  to  the  enemy’s  works  from  this  battery  is  so  short  that 
blinds  had  to  be  arranged  in  the  embrasures  to  protect  the  cannoneers 
from  the  enemy’s  riflemen.  This  was  done  here,  as  in  several  other 
batteries,  by  a door  swung  on  a horizontal  axis  at  the  throat  of  the  • 
embrasure.  In  some  cases  a bag  stuffed  tightly  with  cotton  has  been 
tried,  and  proved  to  be  effectual  resistance  to  a Minie  ball  at  from  300 
to  400  yards.  In  other  cases  a heavy  wooden  collar  has  been  used 
around  the  breach  of  the  gun,  with  a narrow,  vertical  opening  in  it, 
the  opening  in  the  collar  being  parallel  and  close  to  the  vertical  open- 
ing in  the  pendulum  hausse,  causing  no  inconvenience  in  sighting  the 
gun. 

In  General  Smith’s  front  two  guns  were  mounted  in  Battery  No.  7, 
on  the  extreme  right ; also  two  more  in  the  ravine,  to  sweep  the  two 
ravines  in  front,  in  case  the  enemy  made  a sortie  in  that  direction. 
These  guns  were  not  put  here  by  my  instructions.  In  General  Carr’s 
front  a two-gun  battery  (No.  8)  was  constructed  and  guns  mounted. 
The  position  is  a commanding  one,  and  the  fire  of  the  guns  can  enfilade 
the  right  face  of  C.  There  has  been  but  little  firing  along  the  enemy’s 
line  the  last  few  days  from  their  artillery. 

June  8. — An  important  advance  was  made  in  General  Smith’s  front, 
to  the  right  of  the  ravine  that  runs  parallel  to  the  road.  A battery 
(No.  9)  was  commenced  for  two  guns  on  the  right  of  the  ravine.  It  has 
an  enfilading  view  of  one  of  the  faces  of  B ; 12-pounder  howitzers  will 
be  mounted  there,  to  use  small  charges  of  powder,  with  high  degrees  of 
elevation.  No  mortars  can  be  obtained,  and  the  want  of  them  is  severely 
felt.  Other  guns  have  been  mounted  near  the  road,  on  the  hill  once  oc- 
cupied by  a dwelling-house,  commonly  known  as  the  “ burnt  chimneys.” 
Captain  Jackson,  of  General  Hovey’s  division,  has  a detail  employed  in 
building  magazines  $ one  a general  supply  magazine,  the  others  for  the 
batteries. 

June  9. — On  the  right  a detail  was  employed  to  work  on  the  second 
parallel,  but  does  not  progress  so  rapidly  as  desirable.  The  ground  is 
very  hard,  and  complaints  already  begin  to  be  made  of  being  worked 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


183 


hard.  The  weather  is  very  warm.  This  retards  the  work  more  than 
anything,  else.  The  men  cannot  work  at  all  during  the  middle  of  the 
day.  General  Carr’s  details  were  at  work  pushing  forward  the  railroad 
approach,  and  the  other  to  the  left  of  Battery  No.  8.  General  Hovey’s 
details  still  work  at  widening  of  the  trenches  and  making  the  batteries 
in  his  front  stronger.  The  24-pounders  have  been  moved  farther  to  the 
right  of  Battery  No.  10.  They  are  used  daily  in  trying  to  destroy  the 
mill,  where,  it  is  said,  the  enemy  grind  all  their  corn. 

June  10,  11,  and  12. — Owing  to  the  heavy  rain  on  the  11th,  no  work 
was  done  that  night.  In  front  of  General  Smith  1 made  a reconnais- 
sance to  the  head  of  the  ravine,  in  front  of  the  second  parallel.  I 
placed  a detail  at  work  at  75  yards  from  B.  They  only  worked  at 
night,  however.  The  ravine  will  be  used  itself  as  an  approach.  The 
boyaus  to  the  left  of  Battery  No;  8 have  nearly  reached  the  bottom  of 
the  ravine,  after  whicli  they  will  be  under  perfect  cover.  A detail  was 
also  employed  in  throwing  up  Battery  No.  11  for  two  30-pounder  Par- 
rotts, to  be  moved  from  their  present  position  as  soon  as  the  two  8-inch 
Dahlgrens  arrive,  which  are  daily  expected,  and  will  take  their  place. 

June  13.— The  approach  that  was  started  from  the  head  of  the  ravine, 
near  B,  was  run  a short  distance  last  night.  The  enemy  allow  us  to 
work  at  night,  but  not  during  the  day.  " The  approach  had  a branch 
started  to  the  right.  On  the  left  of  the  road  an  underground  arrange- 
ment has  been  pushed  forward  some  80  or  90  feet.  The  boyaus  to  the 
left  of  Battery  No.  8 reached  the  bottom  of  the  ravine,  in  front  of  Gen- 
eral Carr.  General  Hovey’s  advanced  trenches  are  still  being  worked 
at.  I gave  directions  for  sapping  materials  to  be  prepared  and  be  ready 
when  the  approaches  cannot  be  made  without  cover. 

June  14.— General  Smith  continues  his  work  on  the  advanced  sap  at 
the  head  of  the  ravine.  A demi-parallel  has  been  partially  completed 
to  the  right  of  it.  A detail  was  employed  also  in  arranging  loop-holes 
on  the  top  of  the  parapet  with  sand-bags,  to  enable  our  riflemen  to  keep 
down  those  of  the  enemy  without  exposure.  The  left  approach  in  Gen- 
eral Carr’s  front  was  advanced  across  the  ravine  and  up  the  hill  a short 
distance. 

June  15.— The  advanced  trenches  were  pushed  forward  along  the 
whole  line.  General  Smith  is  now  so  close  that  every  movement  has 
to  be  made  with  the  greatest  caution.  The  ground  in  his  front  is  still 
too  rough  to  use  a sap-roller.  This  morning  the  enemy  opened  one  gun 
from  the  work  on  the  right,  to  test  the  strength  of  the  parapet.  They 
did  no  damage  whatever,  their  shells  passing  through  the  parapet, 
scarcely  leaving  a trace  in  it  of  their  passage.  General  Carr’s  advance 
reached  the  top  of  the  hill  nearest  the  enemy’s  works.  General  Hovey 
has  advanced  his  left  some  200  yards  and  opened  a second  parallel.  On 
General  Smith’s  right  a new  battery  (No.  12)  was  constructed. 

June  16,  17,  and  18. — General  Smith’s  approaches  to  Fort  B were  ad- 
vanced a short  distance ; the  one  on  the  left  of  the  ravine  reached  the 
opposite  side  of  the  road.  The  ground  is  very  hard,  however.  Gen- 
eral Smith  had  details  at  work  farther  to  the  right,  finishing  up  his  ad- 
vanced trenches  at  that  point.  In  front  of  General  Carr’s  division  the 
railroad  approach  was  pushed  forward  some  50  yards.  From  the  left 
boyaus  the  second  parallel  has  been  commenced,  which  will  run  along 
the  ridge  near  the  enemy’s  line,  and  join  the  second  parallel  of  General 
Smith’s  across  the  railroad.  General  Hovey,  in  addition  to  the  advances 
he  is  making,  is  preparing  furnaces  for  heating  shot  for  the  24-pounders, 
to  burn  the  mill.  ’ 

June  19. — Very  little  tiring  to-day.  They  gave  a few  rounds  from  a 


184 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

gun  in  a new  work  tliey  liave  thrown  np  behind  their  main  line.  All  our 
batteries  opened  on  it,  and  in  a few  minutes  it  was  silenced.  The  ap- 
proaches of  Generals  Smith  and  Carr  are  closing  up.  General  Hovey 
a little  backward.  Three  sap-rollers  were  finished  to-day.  The  ground 
in  front  of  General  Smith  is  such  now  that  they  can  be  used.  The  first 
sap-roller  was  made  of  solid  cane  and  of  the  usual  dimensions,  but  was 
found  too  heavy  to  use.  The  second  was  of  the  usual  dimensions,  but 
made  with  an  interior  gabion.  This  was  crushed,  of  its  own  weight,  in 
being  rolled.  The  third  was  made  by  taking  two  barrels,  placing  them 
head-to-head,  bracing  them  well  inside,  and  lashing  one  row  of  fascines 
around  the  outside  by  means  of  wire.  This  one  could  be  used,  but  the 
ground  is  of  such  a character  that  a heavier  one  cannot  be  worked  with 
facility.  To  make  the  gabion  roll  easily,  the  space  between  the  outside 
fascines,  on  the  circumference,  was  filled  with  smaller  bundles  of  cane, 
and  well  lashed  together  with  telegraph  wire.  Major-General  McCler- 
nand  relieved  from  command  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps.  General 
Ord  takes  his  place. 

June  20.— The  approaches  in  front  of  General  Smith  progressing 
slowly.  The  enemy’s  pickets  in  front  of  General  Carr’s  division  have 
entered  into  an  agreement  with  the  latter’s  pickets  not  to  fire  on  each 
other  at  night.  They  allow  our  men  to  work  in  full  view,  and  make 
no  attempts  to  stop  it.  Last  night  tl^e  picket  officer  was  directed  to 
crowd  his  pickets  on  the  enemy’s,  to  allow  the  working  party  to  push 
on  the  second  parallel.  The  two  lines  of  pickets,  the  enemy’s  and  ours, 
were  then  not  more  than  7 or  8 yards  apart,  and  in  full  view  of  each 
other.  A working  party  was  then  stretchecbout  in  rear  of.  our  line,  and 
the  work  begun.  The  enemy’s  pickets  could  see  it  all,  but  did  not 
offer  to  molest  us.  By  this  means  a trench  was  opened  within  60  yards 
of  their  salient  C:  It  is  a matter  of  wonder  how  they  allowed  us  this 
ni ght  to  approach  so  close  without  offering  any  resistance.  Although  it 
is  not  customary  to  allow  an  enemy’s  pickets  so  close  to  the  operations 
of  a siege,  it  was  a great  benefit  to  us,  as  the  ground  was  such  in  some 
places  as  to  have  rendered  it  difficult  to  have  carried  on  the  work  in 
any  other  way.  The  enemy  do  not  allow  the  work  to  be  carried  on  in 
this  manner  at  any  other  point  along  the  line.  An  advance  of  about 
100  yards  was  made  in  General  Hovey’s  front.  Other  details  were  em- 
ployed in  the  trenches  already  commenced.  Battery  No.  13  was  begun, 
in  which  to  mount  two  20-pounder  Parrotts,  taken  from  the  four-gun 
20-pounder  Parrott  battery.  It  will  enfilade  one  of  the  faces  of  the 
salient  D,  and  also  a part  of  the  line  to  the  right.  The  work  D seems 
to  be  a redoubt.  It  appears  so  from  the  fact  that  they  have  to  cross  a 
bridge  to  enter  the  work.  This  battery  will  destroy  the  bridge  in  a 

short  time.  , 

June  21.— On  the  right,  in  addition  to  the  sap  on  the  left  oi  the  road, 
another  was  commenced  to  the  right,  to  gain  the  eminence  on  the  flank 
of  the  salient  B.  The  want  of  sappers  is  now  at  this  point  more  felt 
than  heretofore.  A different  detail  goes  to  work  every  day,  who  know 
nothing  of  what  is  to  be  done,  and  much  valuable  time  is  lost  in  repeat- 
ing instructions.  The  enemy  caused  some  annoyance  by  throwing  hand- 
grenades.  The  distance,  however,  was  rather  too  great,  and  conse- 
quently they  did  little  or  no  damage.  In  front  of  General  Carr’s  division 
the  details  were  employed  principally  on  the  second  parallel. 

June  22  and  23.— The  second  parallel  in  front  of  Carr’s  division  reached 
the  railroad.  The  enemy  opened  with  artillery  on  the  heads  of  the  ad- 
vanced saps  in  front  of  General  Smith.  Several  shells  were  put  through 
the  sap-rollers.  They  did  not  damage  them  materially,  each  shell  pass- 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  185 

ing  through,  wedging  itself  as  it. were,  cutting  comparatively  few  canes. 
A great  many  canes  have  been  cut,  however,  by  Minie  bullets.  The 
artillery  fire  caused  the  workmen  all  to  leave,  but  they  were  returned 
at  once.  No  one  was  hurt. 

June  24.— Battery  (No.  14)  to  the  left  of  the  20-pounder  battery,  for 
the  purpose  of  demolishing  a bridge  across  the  railroad  cut,  in  the  rear 
of  the  enemy’s  works.  It  is  their  only  means  of  communication  alono’ 
the  tront  line  of  works,  and  in  case  of  an  assault  it  will  be  of  service  to 
destroy  it,  as  it  will  cause  any  re-enforcements  to  either  side  of  the  rail- 
road to  pass  by  a much  longer  and  circuitous  route.  General  Hovey 
has  completed  his  second  parallel,  and  commenced  his  approaches  to 
hort  IX  The  enemy’s  pickets  were  pushed  back  some  distance  and 
an  advance  of  90  feet  made.  Eippty  barrels  are  used  to  revet  the 
interior  slope  of  the  trenches.  Battery  No.  15  was  also  built. 

June  25.-— In  General  Smith’s  front  both  saps  were  advanced  a short 
distance.  The  one  on  the  right  of  the  road  works  much  easier  than  the 
other.  The  latter  passes  over  ground  almost  like  rock.  Other  details 
were  employed  in  arranging  loop-holes,  with  sand-bags  along  the  top  of 
the  parapet.  Many  of  the  batteries  need  repairs  also.  The  siege  bat- 
tery (No.  1)  has  been  nicely  re veted  with  sand-bags.  In  General  Carr’s 
a??P  was  stfrted  from  the  second  parallel,  to  run  to  the  left  face 
ol  C.  The  second  parallel  is  not  yet  finished,  but  is  being  pushed  to 
the  railroad,  to  join  the  second  parallel  of  General  Smith. 

June  26,  27,  and  28. — A battery  (No.  16)  has  been  thrown  up  for  two 
guns,  and  blinds  made  to  cover  the  gunners  from  the  enemy’s  riflemen 
1 he  approaches  progress  slowly;  weather  very  warm.  The  enemy  are 
mining  from  the  counterscarp  of  the  ditch  at  B.  They  are  very  shv 
about  it,  however.  J J 

On  the  28th,  they  sprung  a small  mine  in  front  of  the  sap-roller 
doing  no  damage  whatever.  ’ 

2^and  30-— In  general  Smith’s  front  the  saps  are  now  about  as 
close  as  they  can  get  without  first  clearing  the  rebel  works  in  front  bv 
means  of  mortar  shells.  Cohorn  mortars  would  be  invaluable  at  the 
present  time.  We  now  occupy  a portion  of  the  crater  made  by  the 
explosion  of  the  enemy’s  mine.  J 

®n  i!le  28tb  (yesterday),  the  enemy  put  two  more  shots  through  the 
1'°  damage  done,  however,  to  the  sap-roller. 
Ihe  sap  on  the  left  had  some  five  or  six  shots  put  through  it,  but  did  not 

is  now  ahmifl  Tf  Stil!lUS®it-  Tbe  ,eft  aPProaoh  of  General  Smith 
s now  about  15  feet  from  the  ditch.  I made  a novel  reconnaissance  of 

the  enemy  s ditch  this  morning,  by  means  of  a mirror  attached  to  a pole, 

?S/red  above  the  sap-roller,  and  a little  to  the  rear,  and  then  in- 

taineH  T 'v  t -perfecfc  view  of  tlie  ditch  was  by  this  means  ob- 
bottom  t'i  d'tCh  f ^“arrow,  and  not  more  than  6 feet  on  the 
PnS„;i|h  i n°nd  parfllels  Lavc  now  been  joined  in  front  of  Gen- 
the  1 ,d  <rJ,aiT’  ay1  are  now  continuous.  On  this  parallel,  near 

for  thr?e  ^msd,HhaJe  dlrectfeda  new  battely  (No.  17)  to  be  constructed 
en  .n  i ? tig  ’ ?ior  countering  any  new  batteries  the  enemy  may 
open  m the  rear  of  their  line  and  also  to  Battery  B.  The  other  gun  en 

the^salierfi  V thR  f?feS  °S  aTbe  battery  is  only  about  150  yards  from 
ne  salient  B.  Battery  No.  18,  on  the  line  of  the  second  parallel  was 

someLoT  -nMs  batt/ry  wib  clear  tbe  ditch  of  C,  which  is 

sometimes  filled  with  men,  from  which  they  frequently  fire.  They 

anTfrom1*!6!  at  W01|  Sere’  whei‘iiiig  hand-barrows  along  the  left  face, 

nfn^  a imllerv  fUnd8fIhat  are  heard’it  is  hiSllll.v  probable  they  are  run- 
ning a galleiy  from  the  counterscarp  of  the  ditch,  for  the  purpose  of 


186  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

exploding  a mine  near  us.  1 have  directed  a listening  gallery  to  be 
run  out  in  the  direction  they  appear  to  be,  and  change  the  direction  of 
the  sap  slightly.  In  General  Hovey’s  front  we  have  approached  to 
within  about  20  yards  of  D.  The  rebels  seem  to  be  at  work  in  this 
ditch  also. 

July  1.— General  Smith’s  approaches  to  B were  pushed  forward  a 
short  distance.  The  one  on  the  right  of  the  road  has  nearly  reached 
the  top  of  the  hill.  I shall  at  once  establish  a place  of  arms  just  in  the 
rear  of  it.  On  the  left  of  the  road  the  crater  made  by  the  explosion  of 
the  mine  has  been  occupied.  The  sap-roller  has  been  very  much  cut 
up  by  the  enemy’s  fire,  and  was  of  no  further  use.  I had  just  given 
directions  to  have  it  covered  at  once  with  earth,  and  to  establish  a 
trench  cavalier  at  that  point,  when  the  enemy  threw  a fire-ball,  which 
lodged  under  the  edge  of  the  sap-roller.  They  then  threw  hand-gren- 
ades into  the  fire  made  by  the  spreading  of  the  inflammable  fluid  which 
it  apparently  contained ; bursting,  threw  pieces  all  around  it,  tearing 
it  considerably;  at  the  same  time  they  kept  up  an  incessant  fire  of 
musketry  on  it.  In  about  one-half  hour  it  was  entirely  destroyed,  ex- 
posing to  their  view  a portion  of  the  treuch.  The  one  on  the  right  had 
been  destroyed  in  a similar  manner  only  an  hour  before.  In  Iront  of 
the  salient  C the  sap  was  moved  forward  a few  yards,  and  a short  dis- 
tance made  with  the  listening  gallery.  The  enemy  appear  to  work  in 
a direction  from  us  that  leads  me  to  think  that  they  are  deceived  as  to 
the  direction  we  intend  to  take. 

In  front  of  General  Hovey’s  division  a sap  has  been  started  from  the 
nearest  point  of  his  advanced  trench,  to  reach  the  counterscarp  of  the 
ditch,  at  a point  not  apparently  enfiladed. 

July  2.— In  front  of  B little  was  done,  owing  to  the  burning  of  the 
sap-roller,  which  exposed  a portion  of  the  trench  to  full  view . I directed 
the  head  of  the  sap  to  be  filled  up  to-night  with  sand-bags,  and  the  cav- 
alier commenced  a little  to  the  rear  of  the  point  first  intended.  This 
will  close  the  head  of  the  sap,  but  still  we  will  be  only  about  12  feet 
from  the  ditch.  I directed  a mine  to  be  started  to  the  ditch  at  the  left 
face.  It  has  been  found  desirable  to  use  hand-grenades  to  clear  the 
Fort  B altogether,  but  the  distance  and  height  of  the  parapet  are  a little 
too  great  for  6-pounder  shells,  though  not  too  great  for  them  to  throw 
at  us.  In  order  to  have  some  means  of  throwing  our  shells  into  the 
fort,  I have  directed  Captain  Patterson,  of  the  pioneer  corps,  to  con 
struct  spring-boards  for  this  purpose.  I learned  that  General  McPher- 
son was  using  mortars  made  of  trunks  of  trees  (gum  trees  being  the 
best)  to  throw  6 and  12  pound  shells,  and  directed  him  to  make  some 
of  these  also,  shrinking  about  three  iron  bands  around  the  mortar. 
These  mortars,  which  are  said  to  work  admirably  tor  about  100  rounds, 
will  be  finished  and  stuck  in  the  ground  in  the  advanced  trenches,  so 
they  will  only  have  to  throw  the  shells  about  50  or  75  yards.  In  com- 
pliance with  orders,  the  trenches  are  being  prepared  to  allow  easy 
passage  of  troops  over  them  for  an  assault.  In  order  to  cross  the 
ditches  of  the  works  at  the  point  of  attack,  grain  sacks  are  being  pre- 
pared, filled  with  cotton,  well  stuffed.  Planks  18  feet  long  are  being 
prepared  to  throw  across  the  ditch,  to  allow  the  passage  of  an  assault-  j 
ing  column. 

July  3. — As  the  sap-roller  in  front  of  General  Carr  still  continued  to  j 
move  forward,  the  enemy  endeavored  to  stop  it  by  blowing  us  out;  but,  j 
as  in  the  other  case,  the  mine  was  fired  too  soon,  and  no  damage  what- 
ever was  done.  Nothing  was  done  but  the  preparation  of  the  trenches 
for  an  ass-ault  in  front  of  Generals  Smith  and  Hovey.  A flag  of  truce 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  187 

from  the  enemy,  and  cessation  of  hostilities  till  10  p.  m.,  caused  all  work 
to  stop. 

July  4.— All  operations  ceased;  Vicksburg-  surrendered.  The  map  of 
the  front  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  will  show  the  position  of  such 
batteries  as  are  not  mentioned  in  the  report,  and  the  work  done  in  the 
trenches.  In  front  of  the  Thirteenth  Corps,  the  nearest  approach  was 
only  about  10  feet  from  the  ditch;  the  second  about  30  feet,  and  the 
third  about  35. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  C.  HAINS, 

First  Lieutenant , U.  S.  Engineers. 

[Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.] 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Capt.  William  L.  E.  Jenney,  additional  aide-de-camp , TJ.  8. 
Army , Acting  Engineer  Officer  Fifteenth  Army  Corps,  including  opera- 
tions since  May  9. 


Headquarters  Fifteenth  Army  Corps, 

Black  River,  Miss.,  September  22,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  en- 
gineer works  to  which  I was  assigned  during  the  final  campaign  against 
Vicksburg: 

On  the  evening  of  May  9,  received  orders  from  Brigadier- General 
Sullivan,  commanding  post  of  Milliken’s  Bend  and  Young’s  Point  to 
proceed  from  Milliken’s  Bend  by  steamboat  with  one  regiment  of  in- 
fantry and  a small  detachment  of  the  pioneer  company  of  the  First  Hi- 
vision,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps,  to  Young’s  Point,  and  rebuild  the  road 
across  the  point  to  Bowers’  Landing,  below  the  Warrenton  batteries,  a 
distance  of  about  8 miles,  over  which  supplies  could  be  taken  to  the 
boats  on  the  Mississippi,  below  the  enemy’s  batteries,  and  thus  greatly 
shorten  the  land  transportation.  (The  road  previously  used  from  Milli- 
ken  s Bend  to  point  opposite  Grand  Gulf  was  nearly  40  miles  in  length.) 

On  the  next  day,  at  noon,  commenced  work  on  the  road.  On  the  fol- 
lowing morning  Major  Tweeddale  reported,  with  three  companies  of  the 
Engineer  Regiment,  and  also  Captain  Ashmead  with  the  pioneer  com- 
pany of  the  Second  Division,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps,  to  assist  in  build- 
ing the  road,  which  was  so  far  completed  by  10  o’clock  on  the  12th  that 
the  wagon  trains  were  able  to  pass.  Nearly  1J  miles  of  this  road  lay  in 
a swamp  from  which  the  water  had  just  run  off  sufficiently  to  render  the 
building  of  the  road  practicable.  It  was  necessary  either  to  bridge  or 
corduroy  the  entire  distance,  in  many  places  the"  water  being  2 feet 


Continued  work  on  this  road  until  May  14,  when  I left  with  General 
of7afksongade  -Fifteenkh  Army  Corps,  then  in  the  vicinity 


Reported  to  General  Sherman  on  the  evening  of  the  18th. 

On  the  19th,  made  reconnaissance  for  a road  to  communicate  with 
tne  Johnston  Place  Landing,  on  the  Yazoo  River,  and  conducted  the 

^ head  of  Chickasaw  Bayou,  to  cross  which  would  require 
some  300  feet  of  bridge. 


188 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai\  XXXYI. 


May  20,  with  Captain  Klosterman’s  pioneer  company  and  the  Eighty  i 
third  Indiana  Infantry,  commenced  a road  along  Thompson’s  Lake  I 
which,  on  examination  made  by  Captain  Klosterman  early  in  the  morn 
ing,  showed  to  be  of  far  easier  construction  than  the  main  road  along 
Chickasaw  Bayou,  which  crossed  several  small  bayous,  and  was  ob 
structed  by  fallen  trees,  cut  by  the  enemy  since  December  last.  By  11 
a.  m.  the  road  was  so  far  completed  as  to  admit  the  passage  of  the  wagons 

On  the  22d,  the  main  road  was  ready  for  use.  On  this  road  I had  th< 
assistance  of  Major  Tweeddale,  with  parts  of  three  companies  of  hit 
battalion. 

On  the  23d,  received  orders  to  report  with  all  the  pioneer  force  at  th< 
headquarters  of  the  Fifteenth  Army  Corps,  to  assist  at  the  siege  o 
Vicksburg.  Afterward  detachments  from  the  two  companies,  with  th< 
negro  force  from  that  of  the  Second  Division,  were  returned,  to  keep  ii 
order  the  roads  of  communication.  Approaches  were  commenced  b; 
each  brigade  wherever  such  seemed  practicable,  as  follows : 

By  General  Giles  A.  Smith  (on  the  extreme  left  of  the  corps),  Genera 
Ewing,  General  Lightburn,  and  by  Captain  Young,  commanding  pionee  t 
company  of  the  Third  Division,  in  front  of  General  Buckland.  On  th 
right  of  the  corps  (General  Steele’s  division)  Captain  Klosterman,  com 
manding  the  pioneer  company  of  that  division,  took  charge  of  a long  an< 
somewhat  difficult  approach  in  front  of  General  Thayer’s  brigade,  am 
Captain  Ashmead,  commanding  pioneer  company  of  the  Second  Divkl 
ion,  of  the  roads  of  communication  between  the  different  brigades  ol 
that  division.  The  pioneer  companies  were  also  employed  in  makin: 
siege  material  for  their  own  work  and  for  the  different  brigades,  and  ii 
building  numerous  batteries,  particularly  in  front  of  the  First  Division 
of  the  corps. 

On  May  31,  Lieut.  C.  C.  Chaffee,  TJ.  S.  Ordnance,  took  charge  of  Gei  l 
eral  Ewing’s  approach,  on  the  Graveyard  roaclj  he  was  afterward  re 
lieved  by  Captain  Kossak. 

On  June  6,  finished  a bridge  some  250  feet  long  across  the  Chickasaw  I 
Bayou,  to  give  a second  road  to  Johnston’s  Landing,  on  the  Yazoo  Rivei  i 
from  which  the  entire  army  received  its  supplies. 

On  the  8th,  commenced  a third  road  to  the  Yazoo  River,  immediate! 
to  the  rear  of  General  Steele’s  division,  crossing  Chickasaw  Bayou  nea  1 
its  head,  where  it  was  but  a small  creek.  As  soon  as  it  was  practicablj 
to  do  so,  the  pontoon  bridge  over  Chickasaw  Bayou,  on  the  main  roa( :jj 
was  replaced  by  a permanent  bridge ; nevertheless,  the  superstructuri  i 
of  the  pontoon  bridge,  over  which  the  entire  supplies  of  the  army,  tel 
gether  with  the  siege  guns,  had  passed,  was  so  much  injured  that  abou 
one-half  of  it  was  rendered  worthless. 

When  the  place  surrendered,  on  the  morning  of  July  4,  the  differen 
approaches,  with  one  exception,  were  within  a very  few  yards  of  th  i 
enemy’s  ditch — so  near  that  for  the  last  few  days  the  enemy  had  throw  J 
lighted  shells  from  their  works  upon  our  heads  of  sap. 

The  approach  in  front  of  General  Buckland,  after  mounting  the  hi 
upon  which  were  the  enemy’s  works,  reached  impracticable  ground,  an  ] 
was  finished  by  a parallel  furnished  with  sand-bag  loop-holes  for  ou 
sharpshooters ; distance  about  40  yards  from  the  enemy’s  line  of  fire,  i 

Being  ordered  from  Vicksburg  on  July  5,  and  engaged  in  sending  fo] 
ward  the  pontoon  train  to  General  Sherman,  on  Black  River,  on  the  4tl 
I have  not  been  able  to  take  any  measurements,  or  even  visit  the  wor 
since  the  surrender. 

I would  beg  leave  to  state,  in  explanation  of  the  delay  in  sending  fo 
ward  this  report,  that  immediately  after  the  surrender  I was  ordered  t 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


189 


accompany  General  Sherman  on  the  expedition  to  Jackson,  and  that 
on  my  return,  after  finishing  the  maps  of  that  vicinity,  I was  taken  sick, 
so  as  to  be  entirely  unable  to  write,  and  have  but  just  returned  to  duty 
from  sick  leave. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  L.  B.  JENNEY, 

Captain  and  Aide-de-Camp , on  Engineer  Duty. 

Capt.  0.  B.  Comstock,  JJ.  8.  Engineers , Vicksburg , Miss. 


Xo.  8. 

Report  of  Capt.  William  Kossak , additional  aide-de-camp , JJ.  S.  Army , 
Acting  Engineer  Officer. 

Camp  at  Vicksburg,  Miss., 

Near  City  Hospital , July  13,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  to  you  the  following  report : 

According  to  copy  of  orders,  annexed  to  this  report,*  I took  charge 
of  the  trenches  on  and  along  the  Graveyard  road  on  the  night  of  June  19. 

A part  of  the  pioneer  detachment  of  the  Second  Division,  Fifteenth 
Army  Corps,  under  command  of  Captain  Ashmead,  furnished  my  saps 
with  sap-rollers,  gabions,  fascines,  and  sap-faggots.  Company  I,  Thirty- 
fifth  Missouri  Volunteer  Infantry,  Lieut.  C.  Lochbihler  commanding, 
acted  as  sappers  and  miners,  and  an  infantry  detail  of  50  men,  for  day 
and  night,  constituted  the  force  that  I used  in  the  approach  against  the 
main  bastion  in  front  of  Brigadier-General  Ewing’s  brigade. 

To  my  right  lay  Brigadier- General  Lightburn’s  work,  in  charge  of 
Colonel  Malmborg,  commanding  Fifty -fifth  Illinois,  attacking  a stockade 
with  advanced  rifle-pits,  situated  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  lelt;  re-enter- 
ing angle  of  the  main  bastion  attacked  by  me. 

To  my  left  was  Col.  Giles  A.  Smith’s  work,  commanding  Eighth  Mis- 
souri Volunteer  Infantry,  whose  approach  was  directed  to  a more  retired 
and  smaller  bastion  on  the  enemy’s  right. 

When  I took  charge  of  the  work  approaching  the  main  bastion,  I 
found  the  work  advanced  within  20  feet  of  the  enemy’s  counterscarp, 
with  such  obstructions  in  front  of  the  sap-roller  as  to  make  it  impos- 
sible to  move  the  roller  one  inch  without  having  the  party  engaged  in 
the  moving  killed  outright.  I therefore  branched  off  to  the  right  and 
left,  trying  to  raise  trench  cavaliers  parallel  to  enemy’s  counterscarp 
and  get  a plunging  fire  into  his  ditch.  The  sap-roller  I left  in  its  posi- 
tion, crowning  it  with  gabions  and  sand-bags,  so  as  to  offer  the  pickets 
supporting  working  party  a proper  shelter.  These  trench  cavaliers  I 
built  during  the  20th  and  21st  of  June,  when  I discovered,  by  the  dull, 
deep  sound  of  tamping  to  the  left,  that  the  enemy  was  mining  to  blow 
up  the  head  of  my  sap.  Immediately  after  this  discovery  I had  counter- 
ditches dug  at  the  reverse  slope  of  the  ditch  of  my  trench  cavaliers,  at 
right  angles  to  the  direction  of  the  mines  of  the  enemy,  hoping  to  strike 
either  their  chambers  or  their  powder-hole.  This  work  took  up  the 
23d  of  June,  day  and  night. 

I found  now  that  I could  not  strike  the  enemy’s  mines,  having  gone 
already  to  a depth  of  10  feet  below  the  natural  surface,  where  the 
enemy’s  mines  could  not  be,  his  entrances  lying  much  higher.  I there- 
fore started  two  counter-mines — one  to  the  right,  the  other  to  the  left 


Omitted,  as  unimportant. 


190 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai\  XXXVI. 


of  tlie  sa]>roller — in  the  trench  cavaliers.  This  work  took  the  24th  and 
25th  and  the  night  of  the  26th  of  June,  when,  early  in  the  morning  of 
26th,  the  enemy  sprung  two  mines  near  my  counter-mines,  crushing  in 
the  roofs  badly.  Some  gabions  in  the  trench  cavaliers  were  thrown 
down  5 but  the  charge  of  the  mines  was  too  small  to  throw  up  any  crater 
which  we  might  have  taken  advantage  ot.  The  mines  acted  a let  ca- 
mouflet,  Vhich  was  probably  the  enemy’s  intention.  They  anyhow  filled 
our  mines  and  disintegrated  the  soil  around  to  such  an  extent  that  fur- 
ther mining  at  that  point  was  out  of  the  question. 

All  the  time  we  worked  in  this  sap  the  working  parties  were  harassed 
by  shells  thrown  over  into  our  saps,  but  fortunately  nobody  lost  his 
life.  Even  the  springing  of  the  enemy’s  mines  did  not  injure  anybody 
particularly,  as  nobody  was  inside  the  mines  at  the  time.  A few  men 
were  covered  by  earth  and  gabions  falling  on  them  from  the  parapets, 
but  they  extricated  themselves  without  material  injury.  During  the 
time  that  this  work  was  going  on  in  the  immediate  front  I had  con- 
structed small  traverses  {a  a)  in  the  main  approach,  and  under  their 
shelter  started  a new  sap-roller  into  the  sap  (T2).  The  intention  was 
to  mislead  the  enemy,  making  him  believe  that  we  had  abandoned  the 
work  in  his  immediate  front  and  retired  to  start  something  else.  At 
the  same  time  the  sap  (T2)  would  have  increased  the  facilities  of  a 
storming  column,  it  acting  as  an  additional  sally-port. 

The  infantry  details  I always  employed  in  widening  the  trenches  m 
my  rear,  forming  communications  to  the  works  on  my  right  and  left 
flank,  carrying  siege  material  to  the  front,  and  making  general  im- 
provements in  the  trenches,  such  as  strengthening  weak  points,  &c. 
All  the  fire  of  the  enemy  during  the  nights  we  always  returned  promptly 
with  hand-grenades  from  our  trench  cavaliers,  and  the  howitzer  battery 
in  our  rear  and  left,  acting  in  accordance  with  me,  shelled  the  enemy 
handsomely  in  his  ditches. 

Early  on  June  26,  I received  Special  Orders,  No.  166  (annexed  here 
in  copy).*  To  continue  the  work  in  front  was  out  of  the  question, 
for  reasons  previously  stated.  I therefore  started,  after  constructing 
traverse  a1  and  increasing  the  height  of  traverses  a a , so  as  not  to  be 
looked  into  from  top  of  enemy’s  parapet  (a  main  gallery  designated  in 
dotted  lines  on  the  annexed  sketch).! 

I knew,  from  the  information  drawn  from  a deserter  (an  engineer 
soldier  of  the  enemy,  who  had  worked  at  the  bastion  in  my  front),  that 
the  enemy  had  some  more  mines  ready  and  charged  in  my  front  besides 
those  which  he  sprung,  as  previously  stated,  and  I therefore  went  on  a 
circuitous  route,  to  keep  even  out  of  their  radius  of  rupture,  away  under 
the  main  ditch  under  the  enemy’s  parapet.  Proceeding  according  to 
the  distances  laid  down  in  the  previous  sketch,  with  a fall  of  1 foot  in 
every  3 feet  advance,  I ran  60  feet  right-oblique  down  to  the  hollow  on 
the  right  side,  where  I had  to  run  out  an  air-hole  obliquely  to  the  rear, 
the  candles  being  extinguished  by  the  extreme  heat  and  foulness  of 

the  air.  , ' , 

After  running  16  feet  farther,  I arrived  at  the  bottom  ot  the  hol- 
low, and  went  out  cautiously  17  feet  (rise  1 in  3),  landing  behind  a 
large,  heavy  log  lying  across  the  gully.  Here  I established  a new  dump 
(d1)?  the  old  dump  in  the  sap  (at  d)  becoming  too  inconvenient  on  ac- 
count of  distance  of  wheeling.  This  new  dump  and  air  hole  brought 
plenty  of  circulation  of  air  into  the  mine,  and,  making  a direct  turn  at 
almost  right  angles  against  the  enemy’s  works,  I proceeded  *0  feet, 


' Omitted,  as  unimportant. 


t See  opposite  page. 


C1IA1-.  XXXVI.I 


the  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


191 


OF 

BASTION  IN  FRONT  OF  BRIG.  GEN.  EWING. 


192  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

passing  the  ditch  and  approaching  under  the  parapet.  The  shape  of 
this  gallery  was  4 feet  6 inches  high  in  the  clear,  3 feet  clear  at  bottom, 

2 feet  6 inches  in  clear  at  the  top.  Mining  frames  set  at  4 feet  from 
center  to  center,  and  top-sheeting,  our  location  being  so  deep  that  the 
enemy,  who  would  have  had  to  descend  enormously,  could  only  crush 
our  tops. 

Here  I worked  day  and  night,  with  six-hour  reliefs,  up  to  10.30  a.  m., 
July  4,  the  miners  suffering  "much  from  the  extreme  heat  and  want  of 
air,  when  I received  verbal  orders  from  Maj.  Gen.  TJ.  S.  Grant  to  stop 
all  work,  the  place  having  surrendered. 

I had  175  feet  of  powder-hose  made  and  filled,  and  the  proper  casings ; 
also  the  sand-bags  ready  for  tamping,  and  the  necessary  cross-braces.  ! 
The  charge  of  powder,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  soil,  I had  calcu- 
lated to  be  2,200  pounds,  as  I had  to  blow  27  or  28  feet  of  solid  ground 
overhead,  at  the  same  time  destroying  all  mining  around  that  front.  My 
main  attention  being  paid  to  the  bastion  on  Brigadier-General  Ewing’s 
front,  I was  only  able  to  pay  one  visit  daily  to  Col.  Giles  A.  Smith,  on 
my  left,  or  Colonel  Malmborg,  on  my  right.  Both  of  these  saps  have 
gone  ahead  in  good  manner,  particularly  that  of  Colonel  Malmborg  i 
(General  Lightburn’s  brigade),  Fifty-fifth  Illinois  Volunteer  Infantry, 
who  was  constantly  out  on  his  work  in  person.  He  approached  the 
enemy’s  stockade  within  25  feet,  and  was  shelled  severely  by  them  dur- 
ing the  nights  of  June  30  and  July  1 and  2.  On  the  night  between  July 

3 and  4,  I advised  Colonel  Malmborg  and  Colonel  Smith  to  stop  their 
sap-rollers  pud  go  to  mining.  Both  of  them  could  not  advance  any  more 
very  well  with  their  saps.  Colonel  Smith’s  sap-roller  was  faced  by  a 
rifled  gun  (6-pounder)  located  in  the  enemy’s  ditch,  and  was  perforated 
three  times,  and  Colonel  Malmborg  was  served  with  hand-grenades  so 
copiously  that  he  had  to  cover  in  the  head  of  his  sap.  As  I had  no 
miners  to  spare  for  these  two  points,  I called  for  General  Ewing  to 
furnish  me  16  men  from  the  Fourth  West  Virginia  Volunteer  Infantry, 
whom  I knew  to  be  old  coal  miners.  These  men  started  two  mines  on 
the  night  between  the  3d  and  4th,  one  at  Colonel  Smith’s,  and  the  other  j 
at  Colonel  Malmborg’s  sap. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  July  4,  Colonel  Malmborg  sent  to  me  a note,  j 
stating  that  he  believed  he  was  countermined  by  the  enemy,  and  ask- 
ing my  advice.  I went  out  immediately,  and  ascertained  that  the  enemy 
was  working  in  gallery  on  his  right  flank,  8 feet  distant,  on  the  same 
horizontal  plane.  I instructed  the  colonel  to  head  the  enemy’s  counter- 
mine by  turning  and  crushing  him.  I sent  the  colonel  200  pounds  of 
powder  and  the  necessary  safety-fuse.  Half  an  hour  later  the  place 

was  surrendered.  . ..  , T • n 

In  closing  my  report,  I have  to  recommend  especially  hirst  Bieut.  O. 
Lochbihler,  commanding  Company  I,  Thirty-fifth  Missouri  Volunteer 
Infantry,  on  engineer  duty,  and  also  his  whole  company,  for  their 
promptness  and  the  interest  they  took  in  all  the  arduous  tasks  they 
had  to  undergo.  Second  Sergt.  Max  Fraude  excelled  in  mining,  and 
generally  proved  such  a good  engineer  soldier  that  if  any  promotions 
take  place  in  the  above-mentioned  company  he  ought  to  be  considered. 
All  the  details  that  have  been  furnished  to  me  from  Major-General 
Blair’s  division  have  done  their  duty  according  to  orders. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ J WM.  KOSSAK, 

Captain  and  Aide-de-Camp , on  Engineer  Duty. 

Capt.  C.  B.  Comstock, 

Chief  of  Engineers , Department  of  the  Tennessee , 


CiiAr.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  193 

No.  9. 

Report  of  Capt.  Henry  G.  Freeman , additional  aide-de-camp , U.  8.  Army 
Acting  Engineer  Officer  Fourth  Division , Sixteenth  Army  Corps.  ’ 

Headquarters, 
Vicksburg , Jim., , 1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  in  relation  to  the  siege  of  Vicks- 
burg as  follows : 

By  order  of  Capt.  Frederick  E.  Prime,  dated  May  25, 1 was  to  report 
in  person  to  Brigadier-General  Lauman  as  early  as  convenient.  I re- 
ported the  next  morning,  and  immediately  commenced  a reconnaissance 
ot  the  ground  in  front  ot  his  position,  and  toward  the  enemy  as  far  as 
his  pickets  would  allow.  The  division,  commanded  by  General  Lau- 
man, then  occupied  the  ground  north  of  Big  Bayou,  between  HalFs 
Ferry  road  and  the  Vicksburg  and  Warrenton  road,  extending  their 
pickets  to  the  right  of  the  Hall’s  Ferry  road,  but  leaving  a gap  uncov- 
ered between  them  and  General  Hovey’s  command  of  about  a mile,  and 
extending  on  the  left  into  the  Mississippi  bottom,  to  a swamp  a short 
distance  from  the  bluff.  Positions  for  three  field  gun  batteries  of  two 
guns  each  were  selected,  one  on  the  river  bluff,  one  on  the  Warrenton 
road,  and  one  in  the  timber,  about  150  yards  to  the  right  of  the  War- 
renton road.  All  of  these  positions  were  about  600  yards  from  the 
enemy’s  line  of  works.  The  left  battery,  on  the  bluff,  and  the  battery 
on  the  road  were  constructed  during  the  night  of  May  27.  The  first 
had  a bearing  upon  the  southwest  battery  of  the  enemy,  and  enfiladed 
part  of  his  river  front  along  the  bluff.  The  battery  on  the  road  covered 
the  road,  and  also  bore  on  the  salient  to  the  right.  The  battery  in  the 
timber  on  the  right  of  the  road  bore  on  the  same  points  as  the  one  on 
the  road,  and  was  finished  May  29. 

By  order  from  department  headquarters,  on  May  30  the  division 
moved  to  the  other  side  of  Big  Bayou,  crossing  the  Hall’s  Ferry  road 
and  mostly  on  the  easterly  side.  The  picket  guard  line  was  joined  with 
that  of  General  Hovey’s  division.  From  this  position  the  advance  was 
made  upon  the  enemy’s  lines,  commencing  upon  the  right  and  moving 
up  the  valley,  as  a covered  way,  that  leads  to  Batteries  Nos.  6 and  7, 
upon  the  accompanying  map.* 

By  May  30,  the  pioneer  corps  of  the  division  had  opened  a good  road 
through  the  valley  of  Big  Bayou  from  the  Vicksburg  and  Warrenton 
road  to  General  Hovey’s  left,  following  the  route  indicated  on  the  map 
as  the  Telegraph  road ; also,  a road  farther  to  the  east,  up  another 
branch,  making  two  direct  lines  of  communication  with  General  Hovey, 
and  affording  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  a direct  road  to  Warrenton 
for  drawing  supplies.  A road  had  also  been  opened  to  the  left  of  the 
Telegraph  road  up  another  branch. 

Huring  the  night  of  the  30th,  with  the  aid  of  the  pioneer  corps,  a 
load  and  covered  way  was  opened  from  the  head  of  this  branch  around 
as  far  as  the  position  of  Battery  No.  7,  and  the  terre-plein  for  the  two 
guns  on  the  right,  in  that  battery,  was  excavated.  The  next  day  two 
field  guns  were  placed  in  the  battery.  The  pioneers  continued  work- 
lng  up  the  valleys  to  the  left,  as  advances  were  made  during  the  siege, 
always  having  a road  ahead,  connecting  with  the  valley  roads  in  the 
rear,  until  a complete  system  of  communication  was  open  in  front  and 
rear  to  the  right  and  left. 

On  May  31,  at  night  the  work  for  the  left  section  of  Battery  No.  7 was 


* Not  found. 

13  R R — YOU  XXiy,  PT  II 


194 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CHAr.  XXXVI. 


laid  out.  The  enemy  appeared  in  small  force,  and  obtained  cover  within 
100  yards,  causing  annoyance  and  delay.  They  were  driven  off  about 
midnight,  and  the  work  continued  rapidly. 

June  1. — Continued  surveys  in  front  of  the  division.  At  night  con- 
tinued the  work  on  Battery  No.  7,  and  commenced  Battery  No.  G,  200 
yards  to  the  left. 

June  2. — Continued  surveys  of  front  and  enemy’s  works.  Capt.  Carl 
Kostmann,  of  Third  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry,  reported  as  assistant 
engineer.  At  night  Batteries  Nos.  6 and  7 were  finished. 

june  3.— At  night  took  possession  of  the  crest  of  the  first  ridge  in 
front  of  Batteries  Nos.  G and  7,  and  commenced  intrenching. 

June  4. — At  sundown  an  advance  was  made  from  the  Hall’s  Ferry  road, 
near  the  buildings,  to  the  left  and  rear  of  Battery  No.  3.  The  enemy 
were  driven  back,  and  the  crest  of  the  ridge  gained  on  the  left  of  Hall’s 
Ferry  road.  The  enemy  retired  across  the  valley  after  a sharp  skirmish, 
in  which  some  of  our  men  were  wounded.  The  advanced  line  was  se- 
cured by  intrenching  in  rifle-pits  during  this  and  the  following  night. 

June  5.—  Being  much  exposed,  little  work  was  done  in  trenches  during 
the  day.  At  night  continued  work  in  the  trenches  in  front  of  Batteries 
Nos.  G and  7,  and  threw  up  a battery  for  one  field  gun  on  the  Hall’s  Ferry 
^oad,  at  a position  wh  ich  the  enemy  had  occupied  by  a barricade  of  tence- 
rails,  noted  on  the  map  as  Battery  No.  3.  Also  commenced  construction 
of  two-gun  battery  in  front  of  Battery  No.  7,  and  noted  on  the  map  as 
Battery  No.  8.  . 

June  G. — Engaged  in  taking  notes  for  triangulation,  to  determine  the 
enemy’s  line  of  works.  At  night  was  prostrated  with  fever,  and  not  on 
duty  again  until  the  15th,  Captain  Kostmann  in  the  mean  time  attending 
to  all  the  work. 

June  8. — An  advance  was  made  at  dusk  on  the  right,  the  enemy’s 
advance  guard  driven  into  their  works,  and  the  head  of  the  valley  at 
Battery  No.  9 secured.  During  the  night  rifle-pits  were  made  between 
Battery  No.  8 and  the  head  of  the  valley,  and  to  the  right  of  the  valley 
along  the  crest  of  the  ridges  to  secure  the  position.  Considerable  work 
was  done  each  night  during  a week,  enlarging  and  connecting  those  pits 
near  to  Battery  No.  8. 

June  15. — At  night  commenced  to  enlarge  the  left  section  of  Battery 
No.  7,  to  mount  two  siege  guns  in  place  of  the  field  guns. 

June  1G. — Laid  out  the  work  for  Battery  No.  4,  on  Hall’s  Ferry  road, 
and  commenced  construction. 

June  17. — Selected  positions  for  guns  on  the  right,  at  the  head  of  the 
ravine,  and  noted  on  the  map  as  Battery  No.  9.  Work  commenced  at 
night.  In  this  battery  the  terre-plein  for  each  gun  was  cut  down  through 
solid  earth  to  a depth  of  7 feet,  and  no  revetment  used ; the  dirt  thrown 
to  the  rear.  The  embrasures  were  cut  through  in  a similar  manner,  and 
reveted  only  at  the  end  next  the  muzzle  of  the  guns  with  sand-bags. 
Battery  No.  4,  on  the  Hall’s  Ferry  road,  nearly  completed. 

June  18. — Continued  triangulation  of  the  enemy’s  front.  At  night.  | 
continued  the  work  on  Battery  No.  9. 

June  19. — Same  as  18th,  continued. 

June  20. — At  night  laid  out  work  for  Battery  No.  2 for  two  guns,  and  [ 
pioneers  commenced  constructing  it.  When  ready  to  commence  this  i 
work  the  enemy  attacked  our  picket  guard  at  the  advanced  post  on  j 
Hall’s  Ferry  road.  Being  in  the  line  of  fire  of  the  musketry,  work  was 
suspended  for  two  hours,  until  the  firing  ceased,  the  men  being  obliged  |i 
to  lie  down  for  safety.  There  was  very  lively  artillery  firing  at  the  same 
time  by  the  enemy  along  the  whole  front  of  this  division,  to  which  our 
guns  responded  freely.  The,  enemy  seemed  to  fear  an  attack. 


CnAi\  XXXVI.  1 


tiie  siege  of  vickseukg,  miss. 


, 195 

June  21.— At  night  completed  Battery  No.  2,  and  made  covered  way 
from  it  to  valley  in  the  rear,  to  permit  communication  during  the  day. 
At  dusk  the  line  in  front  of  Batteries  Nos.  G and  7 was  advanced,  and 
took  position  for  opening  the  third  parallel,  to  connect  with  Hall’s  Ferry 
road  on  the  left  and  second  parallel  on  the  right.  Work  was  com- 
menced on  the  spurs  of  the  ridges  running  down  from  Hall’s  Ferry  road 
and  enemy’s  salient.  This  line  crossed  the  spur  on  which  the  enemy’s 
nearest  work  was  situated,  at  a distance  of  85  yards  from  salient.  At 
11.30  p.  m.  enemy  made  a sortie  upon  this  party.  Colonel  Moore,  com- 
manding working  party  and  the  guards,  very  gallantly  met  the  charge 
and  drove  them  back,  when  the  work  was  resumed,  after  an  interrujition 
of  two  hours,  and  continued  until  daylight.  It  was  then  sufficiently 
advanced  to  afford  the  men  cover  during  the  day.  This  partv,  includ- 
ing the  guards,  numbered  170  men.  Two  of  the  men  were  wounded. 

June  22. — At  night  125  men  at  work  on  trenches  right  and  left  of 
Battery  No.  0,  and  commenced  zigzag  sap  5 Lieutenant-Colonel  Cam,  of 
the  Fourteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  in  command  of  guards  and  working 
party  in  third  parallel,  about  350  strong.  He  received  instructions  to 
mo\e  immediately  at  dusk  to  relieve  the  men  in  the  trench,  and  com- 
mence enlarging  the  work  already  opened,  until  further  orders.  At  11.30 
p.  m.  I visited  the  trench,  found  no  guards  in  front,  in  accordance  with 
instructions 5 the  men  in  the  trench;  no  work  going  on,  and  nothin" 
done.  Went  forward  with  Lieutenant-Colonel  Cam,  to  show  him  vhere 
and  how  to  extend  the  work  and  to  dispose  his  force  for  enlarging  that 
already  opened.  In  five  minutes  from  the  time  I came  upon  the  ground 
the  enemy  fired  a volley  and  made  a sortie,  rushing  down  the  ridge  in 
the  same  place  and  manner  as  on  the  previous  night.  The  troops  did 
not  hold  the  line,  but  retired  hastily  and  in  disorder.  Lieutenant-Colo- 
nel Cam  and  5 men  captured,  1 killed,  and  several  wounded.  Enemy 
tilled  up  all  our  work  along  that  line.  About  half  an  hour  after  this 
sortie  they  made  another  down  the  Hall’s  Ferry  road  upon  our  advance 

guard,  but  were  three  times  repulsed,  when  they  retired  inside  their 
works. 

June  23.— Pioneers  making  road  to  connect  Hall’s  Ferry  road  with  the 
valley  road,  on  the  right.  No  work  done  on  the  third  parallel. 

June  24.— Excavated  terre-plein  for  one  gun  in  Battery  No.  5 at  ad- 
vanced post  on  Hall’s  Ferry  road,  about  300  yards  from  flank  of  enemy’s 
salient.  During  the  night  before  the  enemy  had  opened  about  90  yards 
ot  trench  as  a counter- work,  running  down  the  ridge  from  salient  to 
our  third  parallel.  The  Forty-first  Begiment  Illinois  Infantry  was 
moved  up  and  encamped  in  the  valley,  in  rear  of  Battery  No.  9,  and  the 
Seventy-sixth  Illinois  Infantry  encamped  in  the  head  of  the  ravine  on 
the  right  of  the  Hall’s  Ferry  road,  in  rear  of  Battery  No.  5.  The  ar- 
rangements  were  made  during  the  afternoon  to  recover  our  position  on 
the  third  parallel  and  stop  the  enemy’s  work.  Lieutenant-Colonel 
f2ve11’  ®f  th®  Thirty- third  Wisconsin  Infantry,  was  detailed  as  field 
officer  of  the  trenches,  and  took  charge  of  the  organization  of  the  move- 
ments tor  recovering  our  position.  The  position  was  recovered  by  ad- 
vancing with  a bayonet  charge,  and  the  enemy  routed  from  his  own 
trench,  m which  was  captured  twelve  muskets  and  some  blankets.  Sev- 
fw-Tf  meii  were  yowled.  The  work  was  reopened  and  extended 
mat  night,  and  a portion  of  the  enemy’s  trench  filled.  The  balance  was 
n^'L8o?ne(L  , Be®ldes  opening  the  old  trench,  the  working  party 

pftra  1 oTu8  °f  n(^w  trencl1'  2 feet  wide  and  2 feet  deep.  Near 
-battery  JSo.  9 the  trenches  were  further  enlarged,  to  give  cover  to  the 
men  supporting  the  guards  of  the  working  party  in  the  sap 


196 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 


June  25.— On  the  right  the  pioneers  were  at  work  at  night  on  the  cov- 
ered way  in  the  valley  to  the  right  of  Battery  No.  7.  The  working  party 
on  the  right  were  enlarging  the  sap  and  excavating  for  Battery  No.  9. 
In  the  third  parallel  40  yards  of  new  trench  were  opened,  220  yards 
widened  and  deepened,  and  the  trench  connected  with  covered  way  on 
the  Hall’s  Ferry  road.  The  enemy  commenced  counter-works  from  the 
ditch  of  their  salient.  Commenced  sap-running  from  third  parallel  to 

the  enemy’s  salient.  . . ,.  , ^ 

June  26.— Pioneers  at  work  on  covered  way  m valley  leading  to  Hall  s 
Ferry  road,  at  junction  with  third  parallel.  At  night  pioneers  at  work 
on  covered  wav  in  valley,  to  right  of  Battery  No.  7.  Working  party 
for  the  night  numbered  500  men,  75  at  work  on  sap  near  Battery  iso.  J, 
and  enlarging  trenches  on  each  side  ; 425  men  at  work  in  third  parallel, 
which  was  extended  on  the  right,  and  the  work  previously  opened  en- 
larged. Pioneers  at  night  constructed  the  work  for  right  gun  m Bat- 
tery No.  5. 

june  27. Pioneers  at  work  on  covered  way  in  valley  leading  from 

Hall’s  Ferry  road,  at  junction  with  third  parallel.  Working  party  260 
men  : 50  of  these  were  on  the  right,  working  on  Battery  No.  9,  and  in 
the  sap  during  the  night.  On  third  parallel  100  men  employed  during 
the  day,  and  110  men  at  night.  Sap  from  third  parallel  extended  to 

40  yards : 3J  feet  deep,  4 feet  wide. 

June  28— Working  party,  267  men.  At  night  42  men  employed  on 
sap  near  Battery  No.  9,  and  on  trenches  each  side.  The  third  parallel 
was  enlarged  in  the  old  work  to  7^  feet  wide  and  3 feet  deep  ; 200  yards 
new  trench  opened,  1J  feet  wide  and  2 feet  deep. 

June  29. — Pioneers  at  work  on  covered  way  leading  to  Halls  Terry 
road,  at  junction  with  third  parallel.  At,  night  Battery  No.  1 com- 
menced by  pioneers.  Disturbed  by  shells  from  the  enemy.  Continued 
work  most  of  the  night.  Working  party  for  the  trenches,  315  men.  On 
the  right  a little  work  done  in  the  sap  approach.  The  third  paradel 
was  extended  to  the  trench  on  right  of  Battery  No.  8,  and  that  portion 
before  opened  was  enlarged. 

June  30.— Pioneers  at  work  at  night  on  Battery  No.  1.  On  the  right 
work  was  continued  in  the  sap  and  on  Battery  No.  9.  Enemy  fired  sev- 
eral times,  as  on  the  three  previous  nights,  compelling  the  adoption  ol 
all  precautions  to  protect  the  workmen.  The  work  progressed  slowly. 
Third  parallel  widened  and  deepened ; sap  extended  from  parallel  oU 
yards,  6 feet -deep  and  4 feet  wide.  No  interruption.  Enemy  at  work 
in  front.  Working  party  for  trenches,  350  men.  . „ 

July  1. — Pioneers  at  night  finished  Battery  No.  1.  On  the  right  fin- 
ished  embrasure  for  right  guu  in  Battery  No.  9.  The  sap  was  extended 
a little.  On  the  third  parallel  the  state  of  the  work,  on  closing  this 
night’s  work,  was  as  follows,  commencing  at  Hall’s  Ferry  road,  dis- 
tances estimated : Thirty  yards,  8 feet  wide,  6 feet  deep ; 50  yards,  8 feet 
wide,  34  feet  deep ; 60  yards,  8 feet  wide,  4J  feet  deep  ; 8o  yards,  8 teet 
wide  34  feet  deep ; 20  yards,  5J  feet  wide,  3 feet  deep ; 80  yards,  7£ 
feet  wide,  3 feet  deep ; 90  yards,  3 feet  wide,  3 feet  deep;  2o  yards,  4£ 
feet  wide,  3 feet  deep  ; 300  yards,  2J  feet  wide,  3£  teet  deep.  Working 

party,  400  men.  . 

July  2— Pioneers  at  night  finishing  covered  way  leading  to  Hall  s 
Ferry  road,  at  junction  with  third  parallel,  and  finishing  terre-plein  tor 
left  gun  in  Battery  No.  5.  Work  going  on  in  third  parallel.  No  re- 


port  of  amount  done  or  number  of  working  party. 

July  3. — Pioneers  finished  at  night  the  work  in  Battery  No.  o. 


Some 


Chap.  XXXVJ.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  197 

work  done  in  third  parallel.  The  work  was  continued  all  night.  No 
report  of  men  or  work  done. 

Excepting  a little  of  the  work  on  Batteries  Nos.  5 and  9,  all  the  bat- 
teries were  constructed  at  night,  and  built  by  the  pioneer  corps  of  the 
division.  In  addition  to  this  and  the  covered  ways,  most  of  which  were 
constructed  by  them,  they  made  all  the  new  roads  shown  on  the  map. 
Ihey  also  made  350  gabions,  20  fascines,  and  2 sap-rollers.  The  gabions 
were  made  chiefty  of  grape-vines  and  were  heavy.  During  the  last  two 
days  the  experiment  was  tried  of  using  cane,  and  found  successful:  or- 
dinary light  pickets  of  woo'd  and  the  cane,  of  which  there  was  abundance, 
lor  wattling.  The  process  was  to  lay  the  green  cane  on  a block,  and 
with  ax  or  mallet  to  crush  the  joints  by  a blow  on  each.  This  would 
split  the  cane  without  breaking  it  across.  This  split  cane  made  a good 
an<^  ^e  resu^  was  a Beat,  light,  and  strong  gabion. 

This  report  is  necessarily  imperfect  in  some  details,  for  want  of  suffi- 
cient assistance  during  the  progress  of  the  work.  Besides  Captain  Kost- 
rnann,  who  rendered  very  efficient  services  as  assistant  engineer,  and 
als°  assistant  in  the  trenches,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lovell  acted  as 
held  officer  of  the  trenches  from  June  24  until  the  close  of  the  siege, 
July  4.  ’ 

Previous  to  obtaining  the  aid  of  these  two  officers  all  the  duties 
devolved  upon  myself,  both  in  general  and  in  detail. 

The  skeleton  map  accompanying  this  report  will  exhibit  all  the  bat- 
teries, the  old  roads,  and  the  roads  constructed  during  the  siege,  and 
other  works.*  ’ 

The  only  surveys  made  were  executed  with  a 2-inch  pocket  compass, 
as  no  other  could  be  obtained.  ? 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  C.  FREEMAN, 

Captain  and  Aide- de-C amp , on  Engineer  Euty. 

Capt.  C.  B.  Comstock,  Corps  of  Engineers . 


No.  10. 

Report  of  Capt.  Andrew  Hickenlooper , Chief  Engineer  Seventeenth  Army 
Corps , including  operations  since  April  17. 

Headquarters  Seventeenth  Army  Corps 

Vicksburg , Miss.,  October  23,  1863. 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  your  request,  I most  respectfully  submit 
the  following  journal  of  my  engineering  operations  from  April  17  to 
J uly  4,  1863  : A 

April  17.— Arrived  at  Milliken’s  Bend  with  Third  Division,  the  Seventh 
having  arrived  about  one  week  previous,  and  Sixth  Division  remaining 
at  Bake  Providence.  In  accordance  with  orders  received  from  maior- 

toeiHcahmouTand  Dg’  1 madC  a SUrV6y  0f  the  r0iUl  from  Milliken’s  Bend 

Eet,urned  from  Richmond  at  9 a. m.  Plat  and  report  sub- 
mitted  to  general  commanding. 

April  19. — In  accordance  with  orders  received  from  the  ma  jor-general 
commenced  building  a corduroy  road  from  Mitliken’s 
Bend  to  Lichmond.  One  regiment  (Thirtieth  Illinois  Infantry)  detailed. 


* Not  found. 


198 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


April  20. — Constructing  road.  Additional  regiment  (Twentieth  Ohio 
Infantry)  detailed. 

April  21.— Constructing  road.  Two  additional  regiments  (Sixty- 
eighth  and  Seventy-eighth  Ohio  Infantry)  detailed. 

April  22  and  23.— Constructing  road  with  four  regiments. 

April  24.— Eoad  completed  and  corps  moving ; Third  Division  en- 
camped at  Richmond.  The  road-bed  of  above-mentioned  road  was 
thrown  up  20  feet  wide  and  1 foot  high,  covered  with  rails  taken  from 
adjoining  fences,  upon  which  was  then  thrown  3 inches  ot  earth ; 
ditches  upon  each  side  3 by  3J  feet. 

April  25.— Returned  from  Richmond  to  select  landing  place  for  barges 
and  camping  ground  for  Sixth  Division,  on  Bushy  Bayou. 

April  26  to  30.— On  march  to  Hard  Times  Landing. 

May  1. — Crossed  the  river  and  disembarked  at  Bruinsburg ; Third 
Division  engaged  in  battle  at  Port  Gibson. 

May  2. — Entered  Port  Gibson,  and  in  afternoon  crossed  Bayou  Pierre 
on  raft  bridge,  constructed  under  personal  supervision  of  Lieutenant-  ' j 
Colonel  Wilson  and  Mr.  S.  R.  Tresilian.  Arrived  at  south  fork  of 
Bayou  Pierre  about  dark,  where  we  found  the  suspension  bridge  in 
flames.  The  fire  was  extinguished  and  bridge  repaired  by  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Wilson,  assisted  by  Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins  and  myself. 

May  3. — Command  commenced  moving  at  daylight.  Encamped  at 
Hankinson’s  Ferry,  Big  Black  River.  Here  the  pontoon  bridge,  con- 
sisting of  three  floats  or  barges,  had  been  destroyed  or  very  much 
damaged. 

May  4.— Made  a survey  of  road  from  Haukinson’s  Ferry  to  Rocky 
Springs.  Plat  and  report  submitted. 

May  5. — Copying  map,  repairing  bridge,  and  accompanied  Major- 
General  McPherson  on  reconnaissance  4 miles  beyond  Big  Black,  on 
Warrenton  road. 

May  G. — Staking  out  small  earthwork  at  Hankinson’s  Ferry. 

May  7.— Accompanied  advance  (Third  Division)  to  select  camping- 
ground  at  or  near  Rocky  Springs. 

May  8. — Made  survey  and  examination  of  lower  Utica  road  from 
Rocky  Springs  to  Meyer’s  plantation. 

May  9. — Corps  moved  forward  to  Meyer’s  plantation. 

May  10. — Made  a survey  of  road  from  Meyer’s  plantation  to  point 
3J  miles  beyond  Utica.  Command  moved  forward  to  point  4.J  miles 
northeast  of  Utica. 

May  11. — Made  survey  of  Raymond  road  to  point  6J  miles  southwest 
of  Raymond  and  Edwards  Depot  road  (4  miles),  as  also  a thorough  ex- 
amination of  all  side  and  connecting  roads.  Command  moved  forward 
a short  distance  and  encamped  at  Roach’s  plantation. 

May  12. — Battle  of  Raymond.  Skirmishing  commenced  about  10  a.  m. 
Enemy  repulsed  and  in  full  retreat  at  3 p.  m.  Encamped  in  and  around 
Raymond. 

May  13. — Accompanied  cavalry  advance  on  Clinton  road.  Confeder- 
ate cavalry  in  force  on  Mississippi  Springs  road.  Occupied  Clinton 
without  opposition. 

May  14. — In  accordance  with  orders  received  from  the  major-general 
commanding,  left  camp  at  2 a.  in  with  Seventh  Missouri  Inf&ntry,  for 
the  purpose  of  destroying  railroad  track.  Moved  along  the  railroad  | 
westwardly  about  2 miles,  tearing  up  the  track,  burning  cattle-guards, 
bridges,  &c.  Returning,  arrived  in  Clinton  about  7 a.  m.,  and  then 
moved  eastwardly  along  the  railroad  toward  Jackson,  tearing  up  the 
track,  burning  bridges,  cattle-guards,  &c.  About  10  a.  m.,  when  about 


Chat.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  190. 


4 or  5 miles  from  Jackson,  received  an  order  from  tlie  major-general 
commanding  to  report  the  Seventh  Missouri  Regiment  to  its  command 
and  report  in  person  to  him,  which  I did,  finding  the  general  in  Jack- 
son.  Accompanied  the  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry  about  4 miles  out  on 
Canton  road. 

M°y  15. — Commenced  retrograde  march  at  daylight,  passing  through 
Clinton.  Encamped  about  3 miles  east  of  Bolton  Station,  on  a branch 
of  Baker’s  Creek.  Made  survey  and  plat  of  road  from  Clinton  west- 
wardly  to  this  point. 

May  16.  Examined  roads  in  vicinity  of  Bolton  Station  and  from 
said  point  westwardly;  also  reconstructed  small  bridge  about  li  miles 
north  of  Bolton  Station,  recently  burned  by  General  McClernand’s 
command.  Commenced  survey  of  the  road  from  Bolton  westwardly, 
but  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill  commenced.  I pushed  on  and  arrived 
upon  the  field  at  10  o’clock.  After  repulse  of  Confederate  army,  accom- 
pamed  the  advance  in  pursuit,  arriving  at  Edwards  Station  about  8 p.  m. 

May  1 i.  Made  a survey  of  the  battle-field,  and  then  accompanied  the 
command  to  Big  Black,  arriving  there  about  2 p.  m.  Commenced  con- 
struction  of  cotton  bridge  about  dark,  composed  of  a frame-work  of  tim- 
ber,  filled  with  cotton  bales  (forty-seven  in  number),  and  covered  with 
boards  taken  from  an  adjoining  cotton-gin.  Bridge  110  feet  long  by  10 
feet  wide.  J 


May  18.  Bridge  completed  at  8 a.  m.  Command  commenced  moving 
at  same  hour.  Accompanied  the  advance.  We  moved  on  plantation 
road  due  north  to  Bridgeport  road,  and  then  on  Bridgeport  road  west- 
wardiy  toward  V icksburg.  Headquarters  about  1 mile  from  rebel  lines. 

May  19  —Opening  attack  on  Vicksburg.  Engaged  all  night  in  select- 
ing and  throwing  up  works  for  protection  of  batteries. 

May  20.— Moving  up  slowly.  Artillery  doing  well ; dismounted  three 
ot  the  enemy’s  guns. 

May  21  Engaged  all  night  in  throwing  up  works  beyond  white 
house  and  constructing  battery  for  30-pounder  Parrotts,  which  were 
placed  m position  to-day. 

May  22.— General  assault  ordered  at  10  a.  m.  Artillery  opened 
promptly,  under  cover  of  which  our  troops  advanced,  but  were  repulsed 
at  every  point.  1 

May  23.  Orders  issued  for  construction  of  regular  approaches. 

May  24._Captain  Powell  placed  in  charge  of  approaches  on  General 
Ransom  s front,  and  Captain  Sands  in  charge  of  construction  of  bat- 
teries on  General  Quinby’s  front.  I have  taken  personal  charge  of  cen- 
tral approach  along  Jackson  road. 

work^  ^ fruce  in,  in  consequence  of  which  we  did  very  little 


Same  number  went 


May  26.— Commenced  on  main  sap  with  300  men. 
on  and  relieved  day  detail  at  7 p.  m. 

l,2fS-27--Three  hundred  and  eighty  feet  under  cover.  Same  num- 
ber [ot  men]  engaged  in  deepening  and  widening  trench.  Made  survey 

L lf  lX  ' •f3SeW  if*1?1?  °.n  General  Ransom’s  front  completed,  and 
line  of  rifle-pits  south  of  Jackson  road  being  pushed  rapidly. 

nr/wf  ; ‘~7  ^8a&ed  in  making  sketch  of  our  front,  in  accordance  with 

treuph  S !°onihe  maJor:f eneral  commanding.  Detail  upon  main 
ced  *°  2?°  meil‘  hnemy  more  active  this  morning.  They 
p laced  a 6-pounder  in  position  on  Port  Hill,  which  was  silenced  by  our 
guns  m about  30  minutes. 

hons?  «wMaiV  trench  completed  up  to  a point  750  feet  beyond  white 
onse,  8 feet  wide  by  7 feet  deep,  with  beam  and  parapet. 


200 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


May  30. — In  compliance  with  orders  received  from  the  major-general 
commanding,  left  at  3 a.  m.  for  Big  Black  River,  accompanied  by  300 
detailed  men  from  General  Ransom’s  command  and  pioneer  company  of 
Third  Division.  Arrived  at  Bridgeport,  on  Big  Black  River,  at  11  a. 
m.  At  3 p.  ra.  commenced  moving  westwardly  along  Bridgeport  road, 
obstructing  the  road  by  felling  trees  across  same.  From  Tiffin  I sent 
the  pioneer  company  southwest,  on  Bovina  Station  road,  with  orders  to 
return  on  Hebron  road,  obstructing  said  roads  in  same  manner.  Burned 
the  bridges  across  Clear  Creek,  and  small  creek  next  west  of  Hebron 
road. 

June  1.— Commencing  at  Clear  Creek,  obstructed  the  road  westwardly 
to  our  rear  picket  line,  and  then  moved  on  into  Vicksburg,  arriving  at 
3 p.  m. 

June  2. — Engaged  on  main  trench.  Detail  reduced  to  150  men.  The 
Third  Division  pioneer  company  engaged  in  making  gabions,  fascines, 
&e. 

June  3. — Detail  on  main  trench  reduced  to  100  men.  Trench  finished 
up  to  and  through  advanced  battery,  with  side  rifle-pits,  &c. 

June  4.---Engaged  on  advanced  battery,  putting  in  embrasures,  revet- 
ments, &c.  This  work  is  irregular  in  shape,  of  3,000  square  feet,  two 
embrasures  on  north  and  one  on  west  face,  and  open  to  and  covered  by 
batteries  in  the  rear. 

June  5. — Advanced  battery  finished,  and  main  trench  carried  about 
20  feet  southwest,  with  lead-sap  down  to  the  road.  Detail  reduced  to 
75  men. 

June  6. — Two  24-pounder  howitzers  and  one  6-pounder  placed  in  ad- 
vanced battery,  within  100  yards  of  Fort  Hill.  Carried  the  main  trench 
down  to  and  lead-sap  across  the  road. 

June  7. — Have  a constant  detail  of  70  men,  under  immediate  charge 
of  General  Leggett  or  staff  officer.  Work  progressing  finely. 

June  8. — Captain  [Adoniram  J.]  Merritt  placed  on  duty  as  assistant 
engineer.  Placed  traverse  over  main  trench,  and  built  magazine  im- 
mediately south  of  advanced  battery. 

June  9. — Carried  lead-sap  across  the  road  last  night.  Am  confined 
to  my  bed  by  sickness  this  morning. 

June  10  to  13. — Si'ck  and  confined  to  bed. 

June  14. — Visited  the  work  this  morning.  I find  the  trench  was  not 
carried  far  enough  across  the  road  before  making  the  turn,  and  was 
then  run  too  far  to  the  right.  Corrected  it  by  cutting  away  south  side 
and  putting  up  two  traverses. 

June  15. — Work  progressing  as  usual.  Captain  PowelPs  (General 
Ransom’s  front)  work  being  pushed  forward.  He  commenced  advance 
work  on  hill  north  of  advanced  battery. 

June  16. — Detail  at  work  on  main  trench  and  rifle-pits  leading  from 
last  angle  south  along  crest  of  hill.  The  advanced  batteries  of  General 
Quinby  were  completed  to-day*  Began  another  trench  running  south, 
32  degrees  west,  along  front  of  curtain  of  Fort  Hill,  commencing  at  a 
point  on  main  trench,  about  25  yards  from  ditch  of  Fort  Hill.  Con- 
structing battery  for  9-inch  guns  near  General  Logan’s  headquarters. 

June  17. — Building  platforms  for  30-pounder  Parrotts  in  advanced 
battery,  the  enemy  having  opened  with  two  20-pounder  Parrotts  on 
Ransom’s  front.  Work  on  trench  and  rifle-pits  progressing  as  usual. 

June  18. — Sap-roller  burned  last  night.  The  working  party  leaviug 
it  alongside  cotton-bale,  the  rebels  threw  over  fire-balls,  setting  cotton 
on  fire,  which  communicated  to  sap-roller  before  it  could  be  removed. 
Detail  increased  to  150  men.  The  night  detail  was  taken  off  during  my 


Chap.  XXXVI.  1 THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  201 


202 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap  XXXVI. 


sickness,  and,  in  consequence  of  near  approach  to  enemy’s  works,  it  is 
not  considered  advisable  to  put  it  on  again. 

June  19. — Work  progressing  as  usual.  Captain  Merritt  in  charge  of 
working  party  of  left  sap,  which  is  a side  cut,  covered  by  our  guns  in 
the  rear,  and  running  almost  parallel  with  parapet  of  Fort  Hill. 

June  20. — Work  on  main  trench  progressing  as  usual.  Placed  new 
sap-roller  on  work  to-day.  In  evening  commenced  work  on  Navy 
(9-inch)  battery  with  a detail  of  100  men,  putting  up  heavy  parapet, 
with  embrasures  reveted  with  gabions.  The  enemy  have  opened  with 
a large  mortar  in  hollow  south  of  Fort  Hill,  with  which  they  are  shell- 
ing the  Navy  battery. 

June  21. — Work  on  trenches  progressing  as  usual.  The  enemy  are 
using  hand-grenades  (G  and  12  pound  shells)  with  effect.  Being  within 
a few  feet  of  the  ditch  of  Fort  Hill,  I made  a call  for  all  the  miners  in 
the  command  to  report  to  me  in  person.  General  Bansorn  has  com- 
pleted his  advanced  work,  and  General  Quinby  has  commenced  build- 
ing Battery  Archer  for  Navy  guns. 

June  22. — We  reached  the  rebel  fort  to-day  at  10  o’clock  with  main 
trench,  and  cleared  away  a place  to  commence  mining  operations.  Ex- 
perienced considerable  annoyance  to-day  from  rebel  hand-grenades 
thrown  among  the  workmen. 

June  23. — Thirty-five  miners  having  reported,  divided  them  into  three 
reliefs,  of  eight  hours  each  ; and  placing  them  under  charge  of  Lieuten- 
ant Bussell,  of  the  Seventh  Missouri  Infantry,  went  to  work  at  9 a.  m. 
Had  pushed  the  gallery  (3  by  4)  12  feet  under  Fort  Hill. 

June  24. — Captain. Merritt  sick  and  confined  to  his  tent.  Driving  the 
gallery  as  rapidly  as  possible.  Have  penetrated  to  a distance  of  40  feet, 
and  commenced  on  branch  gallery  to  left.  Can  hear  the  rebels  at  work 
on  counter-mine  very  distinctly.  Appear  to  be  above  and  to  the  left  of 
our  gallery. 

June  25. — Last  night  during  my  temporary  absence  the  miners  became 
frightened  at  noise  made  in  rebel  counter-mine  and  quit  work.  Had 
them  rush  it  ahead  this  a.  m.,  and  finished  it  before  9 o’clock.  Depos- 
ited 1,500  pounds  of  powder  in  three  different  branch  mines  (500  in  each), 
and  700  pounds  in  center;  2,200  pounds  in  all.  Fuses  so  arranged  as 
to  explode  them  all  at  the  same  instant.  Mine  tamped  with  cross-tim- 
bers,  sand  bags,  &c.,  and  all  ready  to  explode  at  1 p.  m.  As  per  order, 
the  mine  was  fired  at  3.30  p.  m.  Perfect  success.  Troops  rushed  in 
and  took  possession  of  crater,  and  detail  of  pioneer  troops  went  to 
work  under  my  direction  clearing  away  entrance  to  same. 

June  26. — Having  orders  to  arrange  crater  for  two  guns,  with  p roper 
protection  for  infantry  support,  commenced  construction  of  covered  gal- 
lery in  center  of  crater,  from  which  to  lead  mines  or  counter-mines,  as  the 
case  might  require.  Finished  it  before  dark,  with  a loss  of  7 of  pioneer 
company  wounded.  The  rebels’ hand-grenades  (G  and  12  pound  shells) 
being  very  destructive,  the  men  were  called  back  and  placed  behind 
rifle-pits,  thrown  up  across  center  of  crater,  where  they  were  perfectly 
protected  against  grenades  thrown  by  the  enemy,  and  still  be  able  to 
hold  the  crater. 

June  27. — Entire  force  at  work  on  left  trench.  Sent  the  detail  of 
miners  over  to  advanced  work  of  General  Bansorn.  Work  progressing 
lively  on  Battery  Archer,  and  small  work  for  howitzer  in  front  of  rebel 
mortar. 

June  28. — It  being  impossible  to  continue  work  on  crater  until  rebels 
are  driven  from  outer  face  of  said  work,  we  have  concluded  to  spring 
another  mine  under  parapet  to  left  of  crater,  for  the  purpose  of  uncov- 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


203 


ering  their  work.  Commenced  work  on  said  gallery,  running  northwest 
from  covered  gallery  in  crater. 

June  29  to  July  2. — Sick  and  confined  to  tent. 

July  1. — The  mine  under  left  curtain  of  Fort  Hill  was  fired  to-day  at 
1 o’clock.  Perfect  success,  blowing  some  7 or  8 rebels,  who  were  en- 
gaged in  countermining,  within  our  lines. 

July  3. — Flag  of  truce  in  ; no  work  done. 

July  4. — Vicksburg  surrendered  at  10  o’clock. 

For  a more  full  and  complete  understanding  of  engineering  operations 
of  corps,  I will  most  respectfully  refer  to  reports  and  plat  of  survey  of 
our  front  by  Mr.  Tresilian,  engineer  officer  of  Third  Division,  Seven- 
teenth Army  Corps,  and  which  have  been  forwarded  direct  to  chief  en- 
gineer of  the  department.  The  accompanying  sketch*  will  more  fully 
illustrate  the  operations  upon  main  or  central  approach. 

Very  respectfully, 


A.  HICKENLOOPEE, 

Captain , and  Chief  Engineer  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


Lieut.  Col.  James  H.  Wilson,  Insp.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  the  Tenn. 


FTo.  11. 

Reports  of  Capt.  Stewart  R.  Tresilian , Engineer  Officer  Third  Division , 
including  operations  since  April  25. 

Hdqrs.  Third  Division,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps, 

Camp  in  rear  of  Vichshurg,  Miss.,  June  1,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  work 
assigned  to  me  as  assistant  engineer  to  the  Third  Division,  Seventeenth 
Army  Corps,  and  performed  by  me  since  April  25 : 

I left  Milliken’s  Bead,  on  the  Mississippi  Eiver,  on  the  morning  of 
April  25  last,  with  2 sergeants  ot  the  pioneer  corps  and  30  negroes,  and 
traversed  the  margin  of  Bayous  Walnut  and  Eoundaway,  crossing 
Roundaway  at  its  junction  with  Bayou  Walnut  at  the  town  of  Richmond, 
in  the  parish  of  Carroll,  Louisiana.  Crossing  Bayou  Vidal  twice,  and 
arriving  at  Hard  Times  Landing,  near  the  confluence  of  Bayou  Vidal 
with  the  Mississippi,  at  8 o’clock  at  night  of  the  28tli,  we  replenished 
our  rations. 

During  this  part  of  the  march,  up  to  the  first  crossing  of  Bayou  Vidal, 
the  roads  having  been  newly  opened  through  cultivated  fields,  and 
scarcely  any  material  to  be  found  adjacent  enough  to  repair  them,  we 
laad  to  work  night  and  day  reconstructing  almost  every  drain  crossing 
from  Richmond  to  this  point.  Here  we  had  to  corduroy  on  both  sides 
if  the  bayou  three-fourths  of  a mile,  and  open  a new  road  through  the 
skirt  of  woodland  to  the  pontoon  bridge  at  the  south  crossing  of  Bayou 
^idal.  The  first  24-pounder  howitzer  of  the  McAllister  Battery,  at- 
:aclied  to  the  Third  Division,  submerging  the  third  pontoon  on  the  south 
md  of  the  bridge,  I had  to  stop  the  travel,  and,  lashing  two  long  beams 
ongitudinally  to  the  ends  of  the  two  boats  next  the  weak  point,  parallel 
0 tlie  roadway,  I forced  two  skiffs  under  the  beams,  and,  lashing  them 
securely,  gave  sufficient  buoyancy  to  the  bridge  to  sustain  not  only  the 
remaining  part  of  the  batteries  attached  to  the  division,  but  also  the 
10-pounder  Parrott  battery,  manned  by  the  First  XL  S.  Infantry. 

Leaving  Hard  Times  Landing  at  12  o’clock,  after  four  hours’  rest,  we 


Seo  p.  201. 


204  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

traversed  the  Mississippi  River  levee,  and  from  tlience  along  the  margin 
of  Lake  Saint  Joseph  ; halted  on  Bayou  Durossette,  having  overtaken 
the  Sixth  Division,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  Brigadier- General  Quinby 
commanding. 

At  daybreak,  when  the  Third  Division  was  put  in  motion,  Sparre- 
strom’s  battery,  Company  G,  Second  Illinois  Artillery,  submerged  the 
bridge  over  the  bayou.  I had  to  take  down  the  adjacent  houses  and 
use  the  weather-boarding,  one  half  inch  thick,  laying  it  down  both  trans- 
verse and  longitudinally,  layer  over  layer,  until  1 obtained  sufficient 
buoyancy,  and  converted  the  trestle  into  a floating  mass.  The  bottom 
of  this  bayou  is  a marly  quicksand,  and  very  unsafe  for  any  other 
structure  than  a flotilla  or  pontoon  bridge. 

At  about  a half  mile  in  advance  of  this  last-named  point,  Captain 
Moore,  of  General  Logan’s  staff,  constructed  a bridge  under  similar  cir- 
cumstances and  with  equal  success. 

I found  all  the  other  bridges  to  Hard  Scrabble,  below  Grand  Gulf,  on 
the  Mississippi,  sufficiently  safe  to  sustain  our  division,  arriving  at  said 
place  on  the  morning  of  April  30,  about  10  o’clock,  having  marched  over 
70  miles. 

The  general  features  of  the  country  are  similar  to  all  the  Mississippi 
bottom  which  I have  seen.  The  surface  soil  is  a bluish  retention  clay, 
underlaid  bv  a strata  of  hard-pan.  Generally  speaking,  the  timber 
easiest  to  be  found  along  the  bayous  is  that  most  valuable  for  the  con- 
struction of  bridges,  stockades,  block-houses,  &c.,  and  is  the  cypress, 
beech,  sycamore,  cottonwood,  holly,  and  water-oak. 

I crossed  the  Mississippi  on  the  morning  of  May  1,  and,  landing  at 
Bruinsburg,  advanced  on  the  Port  Gibson  road,  repairing  a bridge 
across  one  of  the  tributaries  of  the  Bayou  Pierre,  and  arriving  on  the 
battle-field  near  Port  Gibson  just  before  the  field  was  won  by  cur 

troops.  ^ . , 

At  11  a.  m.  I reached  Port  Gibson,  and  meeting  you  near  the  burned 
suspension  bridge,  across  the  south  fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  I accompanied 
you,  ’and  when  you  had  selected  the  site  for  the  new  bridge  you  instruc- 
ted me  to  try  and  procure  some  spikes,  &c.,  in  which  I succeeded,  and 
the  materials  were  on  the  ground  before  the  brigade  you  had  ordered 
from  General  McGlernand’s  command  had  reported.  Together  with 
Captain  Patterson,  in  charge  of  the  pioneer  corps  attached  to  General 
Carr’s  division,  and  my  own  pioneers,  in  charge  of  Sergeant  [William] 
Ross,  Seventy-eighth  Ohio  Volunteers,  we  commenced  operations,  and 
in  less  than  four  hours  the  whole  structure  was  completed  and  the  en- 
tire army  crossed  with  perfect  safety.  The  structure  was  166  feet,  with 
not  one  stick  of  timber  to  commence  operations  with  until  some  bouses 
in  the  vicinity  were  torn  down  and  carried  by  the  men  over  a distance 
of  100  yards.  # . , 

From  this  point  we  advanced  in  the  direction  of  Willow  Springs,  and 
at  dusk  arrived  at  the  suspension  bridge  across  the  north  fork  of  Bayou 
Pierre,  which  we  found  partly  destroyed.  The  bridge  having  been  re- 
constructed under  your  personal  supervision,  Captain  Hiekenlooper, 
chief  engineer  Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  and  myself,  the  army  passed 
safely  over,  meeting  with  but  slight  resistance  from  the  retreating  iorces 
of  Generals  Bowen  and  Loring. 

When  I arrived  at  Hankinson’s  Ferry,  on  the  Big  Black  River,  toe 
enemy  was  in  the  act  of  destroying  the  bridge,  under  the  supervision  ot 
General  Bowen  in  person.  The  skirmishers  of  the  Twentieth  Ohio  com- 
ing up,  they  fled,  leaving  the  pioneer  tools  and  General  Bowen’s  pistols, 
which  were  picked  up  by  a private  of  the  regiment. 


Chap.  XXXVI.J  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  205 

On  May  4,  I reconstructed  the  bridge,  which  was  badly  scuttled,  and 
constructed  a small  earthwork  overlooking  the  crossing. 

The  next  work  from  this  point  was  at  Bocky  Springs,  where  I recon- 
structed a bridge  30  feet  span,  and  another  at  Sandy  Creek,  50  feet  span. 
I had  to  crib  to  strengthen  the  stringers. 

At  Bocky  Springs  I w as  joined  by  Captain  (now  Lieutenant- Colonel) 
Wiles,  Seventy-eighth  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry,  with  the  mechanics  of 
the  corps  and  the  negroes  left  at  Milliken’s  Bend,  making  the  number 
of  my  effective  men  208. 

At  the  battle  of  Baymond,  on  the  12th,  Captain  Wiles  dre\\r  up  his 
mechanics  in  line  and  went  into  the  fight ; afterward  he  buried  the 
dead. 

The  next  wrork  of  importance  was  the  strengthening  and  reconstruct- 
ing in  part  of  the  bridge  over  Baker’s  Creek. 

Our  division  arriving  safely  in  Clinton  on  the  evening  of  the  15th, 
that  night  Captain  Hickenlooper  and  myself,  with  the  Seventh  Missouri 
Infantry,  destroyed  the  railroad  from  a point  2 miles  south  of  Clinton 
and  toward  Jackson,  which  we  completed  on  the  16th  to  the  State  cap- 
ital. 

Leaving  Jackson  on  the  17th,  and  passing  through  Clinton,  we  arrived, 
within  a short  distance  of  Edwards  Depot. 

Next  morning  I was  ordered  to  build  a bridge  on  the  road  leading 
from  the  depot  to  Bridgeport  (80  feet  span).  The  bridge  was  built  in 
six  hours,  and  by  order  destroyed  by  fire,  and  reconstructed  again  by 
myself. 

From  this  point  I advanced  to  Big  Black  Biver,  where  I received  an 
order  from  you  to  construct  a bridge  north  of  the  Bansom  Bridge,  and 
Captain  Hickenlooper,  chief  engineer,  and  myself,  succeeded  in  build- 
ing the  cotton  bridge,  over  which  the  Seventh  Division,  Seventeenth 
Army  Corps,  advanced. 

In  building  the  cotton  bridge,  the  following  method  of  construction 
was  observed,  the  span  being  102  feet,  the  water  30  feet  deep : 

A small  raft  was  first  built  of  sufficient  bouyancy  to  sustain  two  men, 
who  carried  the  end  of  the  shear  line  across  and  anchored  it.  The  span 
was  then  accurately  measured  on  the  shear  line.  Two  longitudinal 
stringers,  12  by  16,  and  34  feet  long,  were  laid  on  the  shore  10  feet  apart 
and  parallel  to  the  current  of  the  river,  and  strips  of  sheeting  1 inch 
thick  were  spiked  on  the  stringers  2 feet  6 inches  from  center  to  center, 
thus  tying  the  stringers  together.  An  end  piece,  the  depth  of  the  string- 
pieces,  was  then  spiked  on  the  shore  end  of  the  structure,  and  the 
whole  was  turned  upside  down,  presenting  the  appearance  of  a large 
scow.  Two  cotton  bales  were  then  rolled  in  on  the  flat,  and  a piece  of 
sheeting  nailed  in  front  of  them  transversely,  pressing  them  tightly 
against  the  end  piece.  The  same  was  repeated  until  the  section  was 
filled  with  cotton.  Upright  posts  of  scantling,  2 by  4,  were  now  spiked 
to  the  stringers  at  the  end  of  each  cotton  bale,  and  sawed  off  about  1 
inch  scant  of  the  height  of  the  cotton.  After  this,  pieces  of  sheeting 
were  spiked  from  upright  to  upright,  passing  over  the  center  of  the 
'cotton  bales.  Five  pieces  of  scantling,  2 by  4,  were  then  spiked  longi- 
tudinally, resting  on  the  sheeting  crossing  the  bales  of  cotton,  and  on 
these  were  nailed  the  flooring.  The  sections  were  then  floated  into  the 
stream  and  spiked  together.  Finally,  the  whole  structure  was  lashed 
to  the  shear  line  and  two  small  abutments,  constructed  of  rails  and 
bush.  I witnessed  the  crossing  of  the  division,  and  found  that  the  26- 
pounder  Parrott  sunk  the  structure  only  14  inches,  leaving  an  excess 
of  buoyancy  of  16  inches. 


206 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[C1IAI-.  XXXVI. 


I am  of  tlie  opinion  that  the  cotton  bridge  is  equal,  if  not  superior,  to 
the  pontoon,  being  much  steadier  and  easily  constructed. 

Leaving  this  point,  I arrived  in  rear  of  Vicksburg,  and  will  report  at 
a future  time. 

I am  under  many  obligations  to  Captain  Wiles,  while  he  was  con- 
nected with  the  pioneers.  He  is  one  of  the  most  efficient  and  practical 
men  I ever  met  with.  To  Lieutenant  [Alexander]  Scales,  his  successor, 
and  Sergeant  Ross,  who  had  charge  of  the  negroes,  I am  indebted  for 
their  indomitable  energy  and  perseverance  in  the  construction  of  work. 
I have  the  honor  to  remain,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  R.  TRESILIAN, 

Division  Engineer  Third  Division , Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 

Lieut.  Col.  James  H.  Wilson, 

First  Lieutenant  of  Engineers , Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


Hdqrs.  Chief  Engineer,  Third  Div.,  Seventeenth  A.  C., 

Vicksburg , Miss.,  August  17,  1863. 

Sir:  1 have  the  honor  to  report  the  part  taken  by  me  during  the  late 
siege  of  Vicksburg,  resulting  in  its  capitulation. 

On  May  19,  I arrived  at  the  junction  of  the  main  Jackson  and  War- 
renton  roads,  with  Major-General  Logan.  By  his  orders,  about  3 p.  m. 
I made  a reconnaissance  of  the  front,  and  communicated  with  Brig. 
Gens.  John  E.  Smith  and  Stevenson.  I found  General  Stevenson’s  com- 
mand under  the  crest  of  the  first  ridge,  on  the  left  of  the  Jackson  road, 
in  line  of  battle,  himself  in  advance,  near  the  cotton-gin,  which  stood 
on  the  left  of  the  ridge,  afterward  known  as  Logan’s  headquarters,  or 
Siege  Battery  Logan.  At  this  time,  to  the  rear  of  his  left  and  in  advance 
of  the  Warrenton  road,  a battery  was  being  put  into  position. 

I found  Brigadier-General  Smith’s  command  in  line  in  the  ravine  to 
the  left  of  the  point  afterward  occupied  by  General  Ransom’s  first  bat- 
tery, with  Brigadier-General  Ransom’s  command  on  his  right.  General 
Smith  I found  in  front,  taking  a sketch  of  the  enemy’s  position.  From 
these  two  points  of  observation  I obtained  a pretty  accurate  general 
outline  sketch  of  the  entire  front  of  the  Third  Division.  This  was  the 
first  position  occupied  by  the  division.  .... 

On  the  morning  of  May  20,  with  a portion  of  the  division  pioneer 
corps,  I constructed  a sunken  battery  and  platforms  for  two  30-pounder 
Parrott  guns,  which  were  put  into  position  the  afternoon  following,  and 
manned  by  a detachment  of  the  First  U.  S.  Infantry,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Captain  Offley.  At  the  same  time,  farther  to  the  left,  on  the 
same  ridge,  the  First  Missouri  Battery  of  10  pounder  Parrott  guns,  com- 
manded by  Lieutenant  MacMurray,  was  put  in  position. 

The  following  night  the  First  and  Third  Brigades,  of  the  Third  Divis- 
ion, were  advanced  to  the  ravine  in  front  of  this  position,  on  the  right 
and  left,  respectively,  while  Major  Stolbrand,  chief  of  artillery,  brought 
a portion  of  the  artiilery  forward  proportionately.  This  was  the  second 
position  of  the  division. 

On  the  morning  of  the  21st,  I made  a reconnaissance  of  our  left  trout. 
In  the  afternoon,  according  to  orders  received  from  Major-General  Mc- 
Pherson, I procured  suitable  lumber  from  a cotton-gin  and  the  palings 
about  the  Sherman  Hospital,  put  the  mechanics  ol  the  pioneer  corps 
at  work,  and  before  daylight  had  ready  for  use  forty  scaling-ladders, 
varying  in  length  from  16  to  22  feet,  light  enough  for  one  man  to  carry. 


CiiAr.  XXXYI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


207 


and  strong  enough  to  support  two  men,  when  used  in  a horizontal  posi- 
tion, across  a 10-foot  ditch.  To  one  end  of  each  of  these  ladders  was 
attached  a rope  three-fourths  of  its  length,  so  as  to  enable  the  men  to 
lay  them  on  the  ground  and  pull  them  after  them ; thus  the  enemy 
could  not  perceive  them  until  the  assault  was  made. 

On  the  22d,  I had  the  pioneer  corps  ready,  in  case  we  succeeded  in 
the  assault,  to  advance  immediately  and  open  a way  for  the  artillery. 
During  the  assault,  the  Forty-fifth  and  Twentieth  Illinois  Infantry,  hav- 
ing failed  to  storm  the  works,  retired  to  a point  about  30  yards  in  front 
of  the  redan,  to  the  left  of  the  redoubt,  on  the  Jackson  road,  holding 
that  position,  and  lying  down  under  a little  ridge. 

At  dusk  I advanced  half  of  the  pioneer  corps  to  that  point,  and,  in- 
trenching them  in  that  position,  commenced  to  sap  the  redan.  I suc- 
ceeded in  opening  the  sap  00  feet  and  the  mine  4 feet,  but  was  the  next 
day  driven  from  the  position  by  the  enemy’s  hand  grenades. 

The  next  night  I attempted  to  resume  the  work,  but  was  compelled 
to  abandon  it. 

In  justice  to  the  above-mentioned  regiments,  I must  say  that  they 
held  the  position  twenty-four  hours  when  it  was  inst  ant  death  to  show 
even  the  top  of  the  head  above  the  iutrenchments. 

On  the  night  of  May  25,  under  the  direction  of  Captain  Hickenlooper, 
he  having  ordered  a detail  of  300  men  for  this  purpose,  the  works  at  the 
white  house  were  commenced,  and  at  daylight  on  the  26th  the  battery 
of  24-pounder  howitzers,  known  as  McAllister’s,  was  in  position.  This 
battery,  together  with  a section  of  a captured  battery  (3-inch  rifled 
guns),  was  afterward  designated,  by  order,  “ White  House  Battery.” 
The  First  and  Third  Brigades  in  the  mean  time  having  taken  positions 
in  the  ravines  on  the  right  and  left  of  the  road,  respectively,  and  Bat- 
tery L,  First  Illinois  Light  Artillery,  the  Third  Ohio  Battery,  the  Eighth 
Michigan  Battery,  and  the  second  section  of  the  above-mentioned  cap- 
tured battery,  taking  positions  on  the  left  of  the  Third  Brigade,  formed 
the  third  and  final  position  held  by  the  division  during  the  siege. 

Within  the  two  following  days  I had  the  whole  line  intrenched  on 
the  right  and  left  of  the  white  house. 

June  19,  the  sap  then  having  been  constructed  to  the  point  where 
Coonskins  Tower  stood  and  the  redoubt  completed,  the  30-pounder 
Parrott  guns  were  removed  to  this  position  and  placed  under  the  com- 
mand of  Lieutenant  Branigan,  First  U.  S.  Infantry,  Battery  Logan 
being  occupied  by  two  9-inch.  Dahlgren  guns,  under  the  command  of 
Captain  Offley,  First  U.  S.  Infantry.  From  this  date  the  work  pro- 
gressed daily,  nothing  of  interest  occurring  until  the  explosion  of  the 
mine  under  the  main  redoubt  on  the  Jackson  road  on  June  25.  This 
mine  was  driven  by  Lieutenant  Bussell,  Company  D,  Seventh  Missouri 
Infantry.  Having  the  pioneer  corps  in  readiness,  I immediately  re- 
paired to  the  crater  and  began  to  fill  up  the  opening  through  which  the 
enemy  were  firing  volley  after  volley.  I was  supported  while  personally 
superintending  this  work  by  a company  of  the  Forty-fifth  Illinois  In- 
fantry, under  the  command  of  Colonel  Maltby,  his  lieutenant-colonel 
having  been  mortally  wounded  and  his  major  killed  a few  moments 
before  by  the  first  volley. 

Having  succeeded  in  putting  up  a timber,  loopholed  for  riflemen,  the 
enemy  seemed  disposed  to  come  over.  Perceiving  their  intentions,  I 
ran  to  the  nearest  battery,  and  bringing  back  three  10-pounder  Parrott 
shells,  put  in  five-second  fuses,  and  threw  them  over  one  after  the  other, 
compelling  the  enemy  to  retire.  Our  men  and  the  enemy  were  then 
bayonet  to  bayonet. 


208 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


* July  1,  the  second  mine  was  exploded.  Previous  to  this  time  I had 
constructed  three  wooden  mortars,  one  6-pounder  and  two  12  pounders, 
and  put  two  of  them  into  position  about  100  yards  from  the  main  redoubt. 
Immediately  after  the  explosion  I commenced  shelling  the  crater,  drop- 
ping nearly  every  shell  into  the  proper  place.  This  hre  I kept  up  at 
intervals  for  forty-eight  hours,  varying  the  direction  from  the  small 
redan  on  the  left  of  the  main  redoubt,  with  telling  effect.  The  enemy’s 
engineer  in  charge  of  these  works,  Captain  Kelly,  of  General  Hebert’s 
staff,  assured  me  that  21  men  were  killed  and  72  wounded  by  these 
shells.  During  these  forty-eight  hours  I fired  102  rounds  of  6 pounder 
and  366  of  12-pounder  shells. 

To  [Corpl.]  S.  W.  Dunning,  One  hundred  and  twenty-fourth  Illinois 
Infantry,  my  assistant,  I am  under  many  obligations  for  his  cool  de- 
termination and  gallant  courage  on  June  25  and  throughout  the  siege; 
also  to  Captain  Moore  and  Lieutenant  Hoover,  of  Major-General  Logan’s 
staff,  for  their  valuable  assistance  in  superintending  the  construction  of 
rifle-pits  and  roads.  During  the  siege  my  pioneer  corps  obtained  and 
used  370  wagon  loads  of  lumber,  built  three  magazines,  put  in  platforms 
for  all  the  heavy  batteries,  made  1,200  fascines,  650  gabions,  4 sap- 
rollers,  and  kept  in  repair  all  the  broken  trails  and  gun-carriages  of  the 
division. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

Your  obedient  servant,  h* 

S.  R.  TRESILIAN, 

Division  Engineer  Third  Division , Seventeenth  Army  Corps . 

Lieut.  Col.  James  H.  Wilson, 

Chief  Engineer  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


Ko.  12. 

Deports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Edward  O.  C.  Ord , U.  S.  Army , commanding 
Thirteenth  Army  Corps.* 

Okd’s  Headquarters,  June  23,  1863. 
Pretty  lively  firing  on  my  left,  as  if  a sally. 

I have  sent  to  Lauman  and  Hovey,  if  an  attack  occurs  on  either  side 
of  them,  to  re-enforce  the  point  attacked. 

E.  O.  C.  ORD, 

Major - General. 

General  Grant. 


Ord’S,  June  24,  1863. 

The  firing  last  night  was  a sortie  on  Lauman’s  front,  resulting  in  the 
loss  of  1 man  killed  and  4 slightly  [wounded].  The  enemy  was  driven 
back  and  the  work  continued. 

Ileport  just  come  in.  E.  O.  O.  OKD, 

Major-General. 

General  Grant.  

* See  also  McClernand’s  report,  Part  I,  pp.  137-186. 


Chaf.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  209 


Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

June  24,  1803. 

Colonel  Bush,  Second  Illinois  Cavalry,  reports,  “ Our  pickets  report 
that  the  rebels  were  at  work  at  Baldwin’s  Ferry  last  night.”  I shall 
ascertain  whether  it  is  true  or  not.  If  they  are  preparing  to  cross,  I 
will  send  notice. 


General  Grant. 


E.  O.  C.  OED, 

Major-General. 


Ord’s,  July  1,  1863. 

General  : I have  positive  intelligence,  from  cavalry  just  in  and 
from  the  report  of  Major  Wilson,  that  the  enemy  have  crossed  at  and 
near  Hankinson’s  Ferry.  I have  ordered  Lawler,  with  a brigade,  to 
move  down  east  of  Warrenton,  and  occupy  the  ground  between  Warren- 
ton  and  Hankinson’s  Ferry.  He  will  be  off  in  half  an  hour,  if  you  do 
not  direct  otherwise. 


General  Grant. 


E.  O.  C.  OED, 

Major - General. 


Orb’s,  July  1,  1863. 

Nothing  further  than  the  dispatch  from  Herron,  which  came  from 
Logan  and  Major  Wilson,  via  Warrenton.  Wilson  was  stationed  near 
Hankinson’s  Ferry.  I think  it  is  likely  the  enemy  has  shown  some 
force  there,  perhaps  as  a feint.  I have  two  brigades  ordered  to  be 
ready  to  march  for  the  country  between  Warrenton  and  Hall’s  Ferrv. 
Shall  I send  them  off? 


General  Grant. 


E.  O.  C&  OED. 


[Indorsement.] 

A cavalry  picket,  to  give  notice  if  crossing  is  attempted,  will  be  suf- 
ficient. Only  move  troops  after  it  is  known  there  is  a force  to  oppose. 

U.  S.  GEANT, 

. . Major-  General . 


No.  13. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Peter  J.  Osterhaus , U.  8.  Army , commanding 

Ninth  Division. 

• Headquarters  Ninth  Division, 

Big  Black  River  Railroad  Bridge , May  25,  1863. 
Colonel:  I arrived  with  the  First  Brigade  (two  sections  of  the 
becoud  Light  Artillery)  at  this  place  yesterday  morning,  and  relieved 
Colonel  Slack,  as  per  instructions.  Of  Colonel  Wright’s  command  I 
on  y found  two  companies,  numbering  to  50  men  in  the  aggregate. 
W hether  the  colonel  himself  and  the  balance  of  his  command  will  re- 
port here  or  not,  I am  unable  to  state $ but  from  the  fact  that  he  sent 
yesterday  night  for  the  above  50  men  only  three  days’  rations,  I am  in- 
ciined  to  infer  that  the  colonel  will  not  join  me  soon,  nor  the  balance 
of  his  command  either. 

14  R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


210 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


You  will  see  readily  that  with  the  above  very  small  force  it  is  utterly 
impossible  to  do  a great  deal  of  good.  I posted  vedettes  at  Bovina  aud 
the  Bridgeport,  HalPs,  and  Baldwin’s  Ferry  roads ; also  a picket  on  the 
Edwards  Station  road  5 had  all  these  roads  patrolled,  and  in  such 
manner  disposed  of  the  whole  number  of  cavalry  here  without  any  men 
left  to  relieve  to-day. 

If  Colonel  Wright  comes  up  to-day,  I will  make  such  arrangements 
as  to  keep  thoroughly  informed  of  all  movements  of  the  enemy  in  our 
rear. 

The  town  of  Raymond  was  taken  yesterday  morning  by  the  Eighth 
Kentucky  and  Twentieth  Mississippi  Regiments.  The  sick,  wounded, 
and  nurses  were  paroled.  From  the  statements  of  the  paroled  men,  the 
enemy  is  trying  to  collect  a large  force  at  or  near  Jackson,  to  operate 
against  us  in  a very  few  days.  I do  not  put  much  credence  in  such  re- 
ports ; but  the  fact  that  the  above-named  regiments  are  in  the  imme- 
diate vicinity  of  our  lines  makes  it  necessary  that  a considerable  cav- 
alry force  be  concentrated  here  to  stop  and  prevent  raids  as  that  into 
Raymond.  There  are  some  Confederate  troops  at  Clinton,  and  they 
will  undoubtedly  visit  our  hospitals  in  every  direction,  in  order  to  swell 
their  numbers  of  prisoners,  by  paroling  the  sick  and  attendants.  In 
connection  with  this  matter,  I beg  leave  to  inquire  where  the  Fifty-fourth 
Indiana  Infantry  is  stationed  now.  They  were  left  at  Raymond  with 
the  One  hundred  and  twentieth  Ohio.  The  latter  regiment  came  up 
since,  but  the  whereabouts  of  the  former  is  not  known  to  me.  The  reg- 
iment is  notin  Raymond  any  more,  but  I would  like  very  much  to  have 
it  rejoin  my  command  if  such  be  possible.  Only  two  sections  (6-pounder 
brass  guns)  of  the  Second  Ohio  Battery  are  with  me,  and  they  are  with- 
out any  ammunition  at  all  except  canister,  which  cannot  be  used.  The 
section  of  12-pounder  howitzers,  which  is  the  most  effective  in  the  pres- 
ent position,  is,  I believe,  with  General  McArthur’s  division.  Please 
have  them  ordered  forward,  and  also  cause  Colonel  Mather  to  send  us 
the  ammunition  for  the  pieces. 

I inclose  a letter  to  Lieut.  A.  Beach.  This  officer  was  left  at  your 
headquarters  to  await  the  arrival  of  the  ammunition  for  that  battery. 
Could  you  hasten  his  return  $ 

I send  an  order  to  Colonel  Wright  at  once  to  join  me,  but  not  being- 
in  possession  of  an  official  order  assigning  him  to  my  division  tempo- 
rarily, I am  in  doubt  whether  he  will  respect  my  order  or  not,  and  you 
would  be  very  kind  by  giving  this  important  matter  your  attention  ; J 
also,  from  a man  just  in,  I learn  that  all  negroes  are  to  be  collected  and 
sent  to  Jackson,  which  place  is  to  be  fortified  by  the  enemy. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTERHAUS, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


Headquarters  Ninth  Division, 

Big  Blaclc  River  Bridge,  Mississippi,  May  27,  1863. 
Colonel  : Colonel  Wright,  with  200  men,  has  reported  this  a.  m.,  and 
I have  commenced  executing  the  instructions  received  from  Generals 
McClernand  and  Grant.  I have  destroyed  all  the  railroad  bridges  from 
Big  Black  to  Bolton  Station ; burned  all  Confederate  stores,  railroad 
cars,  &c.  j collected  about  300  bales  of  cotton,  100  head  of  Confederate 


Chai\  XXXYL] 


211 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


States  beef-cattle,  and  100  sheep.  The  cotton  1 forwarded,  per  instruc- 
tions from  General  Grant,  to  the  river  landing;  .the  beef  and  sheep  will 
be  turned  over  to  the  commissary  of  subsistence  of  the  Thirteenth 
Army  Corps  in  the  morning. 

There  are  several  reports  of  Morgan’s  [f]  cavalry  approaching.  Cap- 
tain [Greene]  Durbin,  assistant  quartermaster,  who,  under  a ila^  of 
truce,  came  within  2 miles  from  Jackson,  met  there  Generals  Loring 
and  Morgan  [I]  with  a large  force,  not  less  than  7,000,  in  his  estimation. 
The  captain  could  not  ascertain  in  which  direction  the  column  was 
moving. 

A rebel  officer,  under  a flag  of  truce,  bearing  General  Loring’s  reply 
to  General  Grant’s  letter  by  Captain  Durbin,  is  at  my  pickets  at  this 
time.  -Not  desiring  that  he  enter  my  lines,  I sent  an  officer  of  my  staff 
to  leceive  the  rebel  dispatches,  and  leave  to  the  officer  bearing  them 
the  choice  to  either  stay  outside  my  picket  until  General  Grant’s  an- 
swer arrived,  or  return  and  leave  it  to  a flag  of  truce  from  our  side  to 
carry  that  answer  to  General  Loring.  I hope  this  Course  may  meet  the 
general’s  approval. 

The  large  number  of  wounded  at  Champion’s  Hill  expressed  the  de- 
sire to  be  removed  into  our  lines.  1 would  be  very  glad  to  respoud  to 
their  wishes,  if  adequate  means  of  transportation  were  at  my  disposal. 
Could ’you  not  cause  General  Hovey  to  send  his  ambulances  and  am- 
bulance corps  over  for  the  purpose,  if  the  transfer  is  approved  by  Gen- 
eral McClernand  ? Be  so  kind  and  give  me  your  opinion  in  regard  to 
this  matter  by  return  messenger. 

I am,  colonel,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTERHAUS, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  JNinth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Big  Blade  River  Railroad  Bridge , May  29,  1863. 

General  : Your  order  of  to-day  to  burn  the  railroad  bridges  and 
track  east  of  here  is  just  received,  and  I take  immediate  steps  to  exe- 
cute them  most  effectually. 

I had  the  honor  before  to  report  that  I had  almost  every  bushel  of 
corn  destroyed  along  the  railroad  line  and  the  public  road  as  far  as 
Bolton.  Since  then  I did  the  same  thing  as  far  north  and  south  of  the 
railroad  as  my  limited  means  allowed  it,  and  Colonel  Wright,  with  the 
Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry,  is  out  at  present  to  look  around  at  and  near 
Bridgeport. 

The  following  articles  of  contraband  were  collected  on  these  raids 
and  shipped:  To  Major  Garber,  assistant  quartermaster  Thirteenth 
Army  Corps,  53  mules  14  horses,  and  152  bales  of  cotton  ; to  commis- 
sary of  subsistence  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  118  head  of  beef-cattle, 
a lnt^f  T tbl®  Slde  rea,1-v  for  shipment  330  bales  of  cotton,  and 

Ka  !v, ° , W1-U  com.e  m th,s  al'ternoon.  Cotton  and  beef  will 

be  forwarded  to  the  river  with  all  dispatch. 

My  scouts  from  Edwards  Station,  Champion’s  Hill,  Hall’s  Ferry,  and 
.Ferry  report,  everything  quiet.  Ho  enemy  has  been  seen 
s°}-disant  paroling  of  the  wounded  at  Champion’s  Hill.  The 
CGr  there  only  took  a list  of  the  men,  without  their  giving  or 
‘ ]Plnb  the  parole.  Can  such  proceedings  stand  for  a parole  ? 


212 


MISSISSIPPI/  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai\  XXXYI. 


All  the  wounded  are  anxious  to  get  away,  hut  my  means  of  trans- 
portation are  not  adequate,  and,  besides,  I do  not  consider  myself  au- 
thorized to  cause  the  transfer. 

I hope  to  be  able  to  report  to  you  by  to  morrow  how  I succeeded  in 
the  work  of  laying  waste,  and  remain,  with  great  esteem,  your  most 
obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTERHAUS, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


Headquarters  Ninth  Division, 

Big  Black  River  Railroad  Bridge , Miss.,  May  30,  1863. 

Colonel:  In  pursuance  of  my  letter  of  yesterday  evening,  addressed 
to  Major-General  Grant,  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  long  rail- 
road bridge  is  burned  and  down  since  11  o’clock  last  night.  I keep  a 
strong  detail  at  work  to  destroy  the  railroad  beyond  the  bayou  (east  of 
the  fortifications),  but,  having  but  very  insufficient  tools,  they  could  only 
take  up  the  rails  and  ties  for  a little  over  a mile  beyond  the  bayou 
bridge.  The  ties  and  rails  are  most  effectually  destroyed.  Another 
party  is  detailed  to  continue  the  work  to-day,  and  if  I can  manage  to 
gather  cavalry  enough  to  protect  them  beyond  my  line  of  pickets,  I 
hope  to  have  the  gap  extended  from  the  river  to  Edwards  Station  by 
to-morrow. 

This  morning  I sent,  through  Quartermaster  [Absalom]  Finch,  of  the 
Second  Brigade,  Ninth  Divisiou,  200  bales  of  cotton  and  60  head  of  beef- 
cattle.  The  cattle  are  some  of  the  best  stock  I have  seen.  About  100 
more  bales  of  cotton  are  awaiting  shipment  on  return  of  my  trains.  Most 
of  the  cotton  was  taken  5 miles  southeast  from  here,  beyond  the  river. 
When  my  men  were  loading  the  last  wagons  yesterday  night,  the  cov- 
ering cavalry  patrols  reported  a rebel  picket  in  sight.  My  men  dashed 
on  them,  and  ascertaining  the  fact  that  there  was  a superior  force  within 
1 mile  of  them,  I immediately  sent  out  from  Colonel  Wright’s  (Sixth 
Missouri)  cavalry  several  patrols  to  feel  the  enemy  and  collect  all  in- 
formation about  him.  These  patrol  parties  just  returned  and  report  as 
follows : 

Patrol  No.  1 went  on  the  road  where  the  rebels  were  seen  in  the 
afternoon,  leading  from  our  Big  Black  River  hospital  (Smith’s  planta- 
tion) into  the  Raymond  road.  On  the  arrival  at  the  point  in  question, 
the  enemy  had  changed  his  position  and  had  moved  in  a northern 
direction.  They  were  about  300  strong,  under  a Colonel  or  Major  [H.  B.] 
Lyon,  and  all  of  the  Eighth  Kentucky.  This  regiment  left  Vicksburg 
600  strong  on  May  10,  and  marched,  by  way  of  Cayuga  and  Crystal 
Springs,  to  Meridian,  where  it  was  mounted  and  marched  back  by 
Jackson,  and  is  now  on  a patroling  and  cotton-burning  tour.  The  regi- 
ment does  not  number  over  300  now,  and  is  by  no  means  anxious  for  a 
fight. 

Patrol  No.  2 started  for  Edwards  Station,  and  thence  north  to  Green  s 
Hill  Church,  where  they  learned  that  Hall’s  cavalry  (three  companies) 
and  300  infantry  were  between  Brownsville  and  Birdsong  Ferry.  The 
latter  seems  to  be  of  importance  to  the  rebels. 

Patrol  No.  3 marched  to  Bolton,  where  they  burned  two  railroad 
cars  and  a depot,  which  were  not  destroyed  before,  and  an  going  out 
north  to  Brownsville  set  fire  to  about  1,500  bushels  of  corq.  In  coming 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  213 

back,  they  heard  of  the  Eighth  Kentucky  passing  in  the  immediate 
vicinity,  but  saw  no  rebels  whatever. 

The  above  detachments  appear  to  constitute  all  the  enemy’s  force  in 
our  immediate  vicinity;  but  from  corroborating  information  gleaned 
from  different  parties,  it  is  pretty  certain  that  General  Loring  was  night 
before  last,  with  5,000  or  6,000  men,  at  Jackson,  while  General  John- 
ston is  at  Canton  18,000  strong,  and  expecting  re-enforcements  within 
eight  days,  which  would  swell  his  army  to  about  40,000.  He  would 
not  commence  hostilities  until  these  troops  have  arrived,  and  his  attack 
would  be  directed  against  Haynes’  Bluff,  crossing  Big  Black  at  Morris’ 
Bluff.  I give  this  rumor  because  it  was  spread  among  the  knowing 
ones  to  some  extent,  either  for  keeping  up  the  sinking  hopes  of  the 
true  Southerners  or  because  it  is  founded  on  some  truth  and  probability. 

Allow  me,  colonel,  to  direct  your  attention  to  the  very  weak  number 
of  cavalry  at  this  point,  not  over  200  effective,  and  this  "number,  by  the 
very  hard  service,  is  pretty  much  run  down.  If  compatible  with  other 
necessities,  I would  like  to  have  the  force  strengthened,  not  only  to  give 
to  the  overworked  men  and  horses  a chance  to  rest,  but  to  look  a little 
closer  after  these  mounted  infantry  lurking  around  me.  On  this  occa- 
sion let  me  remember  the  Fourth  Missouri  Cavalry,  a splendid  regi- 
ment, now  at  Columbus,  Ky. 

Iam,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTEBHAUS, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Bawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  Headquarters. 


Headquarters  Ninth  Division, 

Big  Black  River  Railroad  Bridge,  June  1,  1863. 

Colonel  : Since  ray  last  letter  I am  at  work  in  destroying  the  rail- 
road track  east,  but  the  absence  of  the  proper,  or,  in  fact,  of  all,  tools, 
retards  the  job  considerably.  For  about  4 miles  the  ties  and  iron  are 
destroyed  by  fire,  besides  the  burning  of  all  wooden  structures  as  far 
out  as  Bolton.  The  last  patrols  coming  in  report  all  quiet.  They  only 
heard  of  some  forces  beyond  Brownsville.  The  various  parties  out 
yesterday  burned  825  bales  of  (Confederate  States  of  America)  cotton 
and  8,000  bushels  of  corn.  They  only  found  a few  horses  and  mules  ; 
they  are  getting  scarce. 

A negro  just  in  from  Jackson,  which  he  left  yesterday  morning,  saw 
no  troops  anywhere  this  side  along  the  railroad,  but  reports  General 
Johnston  with  a large  force  at  Jackson,  in  camp  on  both  sides  of  the 
river.  He  calls  the  force  three  divisions. 

On  Saturday  last  five  trains  with  troops  arrived  at  Jackson,  the 
troops  coming  from  Virginia  and  Carolina.  They  had  some  field  artil- 
lery with  them.  The  negro  heard  nothing  indicative  of  General  John- 
ston’s intentions,  except  that  he  would  re-enforce  Pemberton  and  give 
us  a severe  “ whopping.”  They  are  still  throwing  up  fortifications  at 
Jackson. 

I am,  colonel,  with  great  respect,  your  verv  obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTEBHACJS, 
Brigadier-  General,  Commanding . 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Bawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


214 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chat*.  XXXVI. 


Headquarters  Ninth  Division, 

Big  Black  River  Railroad  Bridge , Mississippi,  June  4,  1863. 

General  : 1 have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  ot  your  favor 
of  yesterday,  with  orders  and  instructions  relative  to  a rebel  force  at 
Grant’s  house.  I immediately  sent  all  the  available  cavalry  force  (three 
companies  Sixth  Missouri)  in  that  direction,  with  orders  to  proceed,  as 
far  as  practicable,  with  a view  to  make  a connection  with  Colonel  John- 
son’s column,  and  to  gather  all  the  information  in  regard  to  ferries  and 
fords  across  Big  Black,  and,  further,  in  regard  to  any  attempt  of  the 
enemy’s  advance. 

The  party  has  just  returned,  and  reports  that  the  rebel  Major  [ W.  A. J 
Borer,  with  the  Twentieth  Begiment  Mississippi  Infantry  (mounted), 
600  strong,  had  been  encamped  on  the  Benton  road  from  Vicksburg,  at 
the  bridge  across  Bear  Creek,  about  1 mile  east  of  where  General  Blair 
was  encamped,  at  Major  Hains’  place. 

From  Capt.  Tom  Jones  (a  dangerous  rebel,  who  is  my  prisoner,  and 
whom  I will  forward  to  the  headquarters)  we  learn  that  the  above  force 
was  the  only  one  in  the  immediate  vicinity,  and  that  it  was  the  same 
which  was  at  Grant’s  house. 

There  are  several  fords  north  of  the  Bridgeport  Ferry  which  are  now 
practicable ; one  ford  is  between  the  latter  and  the  Birdsong  Ferry,  the 
other  below  Bush  Ferry.  From  the  description  of  the  location  of  the 
above-mentioned  secesh  camp  and  the  situation  of  these  fords,  I am  in- 
clined to  think  that  the  Twentieth  Mississippi,  which  figured  a few  days 
ago  considerably  below  Baymond,  Bolton,  and  Brownsville,  crossed 
at  these  fords,  and  it  would  be  very  desirable  to  have  a flying  column 
established  between  Bush’s  Ferry  (Oak  Bidge)  and  Bridgeport  Ferry 
to  interrupt  such  raids.  . 

I am  also  informed  that  the  rebel  General  Walker  was  crossing  Ins 
division  yesterday  at  Kibby’s  Ferry  (I  believe  it  the  same  as  Coxs 
Ferry),  to  make  a reconnaissance,  but  that  Joe  Johnston  was  not  yet 
prepared  to  advance.  The  party  sent  out  yesterday  night  did  not  learn 
anything  of  Colonel  Johnson.  There  seem  to  be  a number  of  rebel 
squads  running  all  over  the  country  in  my  front  and  on  my  right  (acioss 

the  river).  . . , , 

Yesterday  a patrol  of  the  Third  Illinois  fell  in  with  about  a dozen 
men.  My  men  were  returning  from  Champion’s  Hill,  and  found  the 
rebels  on  the  road  east  of  Edwards.  They  fired,  and  the  rebels  turned 
north,  giving  my  men  the  road.  . _ 

Another  patrol,  under  Captain  Millert,  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry,  or- 
dered to  go  by  Edwards  to  Bridgeport,  met  about  25  rebels  mounted 
on  mules.  They  attacked  them  and  unsaddled  one,  bringing  in  mule 

and  saddle.  . ,, 

From  contraband  source  I heard  yesterday  that  a regiment  ot  Ten- 
nesseeans were  marching  toward  Baker’s,  or  Fourteen-Mile  Creek.  1 a 
once  sent  a company  of  cavalry  to  Baldwin’s  Ferry,  but,  on  returning, 
the  commander  reported  everything  quiet  in  that  direction. 

The  Eighth  Kentucky  (rebel),  under  Lyon,  marched  yesterday  morn- 
ing at  3 o’clock  through  Edwards,  taking  some  of  the  paroled  prisoners 


(re^oU  a.war 


Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 


VJuIJ  i U • O#  VJ4iAl>  JL  j 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


Chap.  V&XVL] 


the  siege  Of  Vicksburg,  miss. 


215 


Hdqes.  Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Btg  Blade  River  Railroad  Bridge,  Miss.,  June  6,  1863—10.30  p.  m. 

Colonel  : My  pickets  on  the  cast  side  of  Big  Black  liave  been  at- 
tacked this  evening,  and  after  a pretty  lively  fire  compelled  to  fall  back 
behind  the  bayou  bridge.  I made  the  necessary  preparations  to  repel 
any  attack  the  enemy  may  intend,  at  the  same  time  increasing  the  cav- 
alry detachments  on  the  Bridgeport  and  Hall’s  Ferry  roads* 

In  order  to  ascertain  whether  there  is  any  force  in  my  front,  I or- 
dered a strong  patrol  to  go  to  Edwards  by  3 a.  m.,  and  feel  the  enemy 
at  all  hazards. 

Since  this  morning  1 heard  different  contraband  rumors  of  the  ap- 
proach of  several  regiments ; but,  in  spite  of  all  vigilance,  I could  not 
get  any  reliable  information,  though  I feel  confident  that  there  is  some- 
thing about  to  happen.  You  will  kindly  remember  that  I have  five 
regiments,  in  the  average  not  Qver  250  men  each,  and  not  a very  for- 
midable torce  against  a real  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  enemy  to  cross 
the  river.  I learn  that  the  Second  Brigade  (Colonel  Lindsey)  is  also 
withdrawn  from  the  front.  Would  it  be  feasible  to  have  him  join  me 
here  ? For  many  reasons  it  would  be  very  desirable. 

The  ambulances  you  sent  yesterday  to  bring  over  Hovey’s  wounded 
from  Champion’s  Hill  are  still  here,  as  I considered  it  very  unsafe  to 
let  them  go  over  without  an  understanding  with  the  Confederate  States 
commander  in  that  region.  1 dispatched  a flag  of  truce  to  get  the  con- 
sent; the  officer  bearing  it  left  here  yesterday  after  dinner,  and  has  not 
yet  returned . I ordered  him  to  go  until  he  found  the  proper  officer,  and 
I am  expecting  the  flag  back  since  noon.  The  decision  in  the  matter  I 
will  report  at  once. 

Very  respectfully,  I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTEBHAUS, 
Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


Hdqrs.  Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Big  Blade  River  Railroad  Bridge , Miss.,  June  7,  1863. 

Colonel  : Yesterday  night,  by  9.30  o’clock,  my  pickets  beyond  the 
nver,  on  the  Edwards  Station  road,  were  attacked  by  some  rebel  force, 
mere  was  quite  lively  firing  for  some  time,  and  the  commander  of  mv 
picket  considered  it  prudent  to  fall  back  on  the  infantry  picket  at  bayou 
bridge  in  the  line  of  the  rifle-pits  on  the  other  side.  The  enemy,  which 
I found  out  since  was  the  Eighth  Kentucky  Mounted  Infantry,  did  not 
toilow  up,  and  this  morning  at  4 o’clock  my  cavalry  was  at  Edwards, 
and  report  that  they  were  in  camp  3 miles  beyond. 
io  Vnd<5f  inductions  of  Major-General  McClernand,  I sent,  on  Friday 
nftVaifla^°^rUCe  mt0  tbe  enem.Y?s  lines,  in  order  to  procure  from  the 
uontederate  States  commander  his  consent  to  remove  General  Hovev’s 
wounded  from  Champion’s  Hill  into  our  lines.  Lieutenant  Foster,  the 
bearer  of  the  flag,  returned  at  this  moment.  He  was  within  6 miles  of 
«Jackson  when  hrs  letter  was  taken  from  him,  to  be  taken  to  Jackson. 

promised61^111  ^ then  escorted  back’  and  an  earlV  reply to  my  request 

Foster  states  that  he  met  no  other  troops  this  side  of  the 

f Z 6 W3S  halt^d?  except the Ei^hth  Kentucky  (mounted) : but, 

nom  all  information  collected,  there  seems  to  be  a considerable  force  at 


216 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai\  XXXVI. 


Jackson,  under  General  Breckinridge,  wlio  either  superseded  General 
Loring  or  is  his  superior  in  rank. 

The  people  seem  to  be  in  high  glee,  and  sanguine  that  the  rebels  will 
soon  be  in  number  strong  enough  to  raise  the  siege.  Of  General  John- 
ston, I hear  that  he  is  still  at  Canton,  preparing  for  an  attempt  to  break 
off  our  river  communications  north  of  Vicksburg. 

I inclose  three  letters.  They  are  rather  sweet,  but  at  least  No.  3 is 
of  some  interest.  They  were  intercepted  by  an  orderly  of  my  staff,  and 
opened.  I believe  they  were  smuggled  out  by  some  member  of  the 
Eighth  Kentucky,  and,  as  appears  from  one  envelope  inclosed,  directed 
to  Yazoo  City. 

There  was  a rumor  near  Jackson  yesterday  that  an  official  telegram 
from  Richmond  had  arrived,  stating  that  General  Lee  had  crossed  the 
Rappahannock. 

I am,  colonel,  with  great  respect,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTERHAUS, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


Hdqrs.  Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Big  Blade  River  Railroad  Bridge , Miss.,  June  7,  1863. 

General  : Your  favor  of  this  morning  is  received.  You  will  please 
excuse  if  the  description  is  not  definite  enough  as  to  the  ground  where 
the  attack  was  made  yesterday  night.  Bayou  bridge  is  across  the  bayou, 
in  front  of  the  rebel  breastworks  beyond  Big  Black,  and  .the  bridge 
burned  on  the  17th  when  the  enemy  evacuated  the  works  was  re- 
constructed by  our  pioneers,  and  is  situated  in  the  line  of  the  works. 
From  information  collected  since,  it  was  the  Eighth  Kentucky  Mounted 
Infantry  which  ran  against  my  cavalry  pickets,  who  fell  back  on  the 
infantry  grand  guard  at  the  above  bridge,  which  post  was  at  once 
re-enforced  by  two  companies  of  reserves.  The  rebels,  finding  us  pre- 
pared for  them,  retired,  and  my  cavalry  followed  them  up. 

At  3 a.  m.  this  day  my  patrol  was  at  Edwards  Station  again,  and 
report  the  Eighth  Kentucky  still  falling  back,  probably  for  their  place 
of  rendezvous  near  Bolton.  This  information  is  substantiated  by  Lieu- 
tenant Foster,  the  bearer  of  the  flag  of  truce  which  I mentioned  yester- 

dariie  lieutenant  met  on  his  return  trip  the  Eighth  Kentucky  3 miles 

east  of  Edwards.  t • . , T , 

In  regard  to  the  result  of  the  expedition  of  Lieutenant  1 oster,  1 liave 
to  say  that  he  came  within  6 miles  of  Jackson,  where  his  dispatch  was 
taken  from  him  and  forwarded  to  headquarters  of  General  Breckinridge, 
who  now  commands,  and  is  at  Jackson  in  lieu  of  General  Loring.  After 
some  time,  Lieutenant  Foster  got  answer  that  the  general  commanding- 
division,  as  to  my  request  (the  removal  of  the  wounded),  would  be  made 
known  to  me  very  soon,  and  then  lie  was  escorted  back  to  our  lines^wheie 
he  arrived  a short  time  ago.  Lieutenant  Foster  met  only  the  Eighth 
Kentucky  this  side  of  Jackson.  He  found  the  people  sanguine  as  to  the  i 
result  of  the  threatened  attack  of  General  Johnston  on  our  army,  lhe 
latter  general  is  still  at  Canton,  evidently  having  and  collecting  a large 
force.  His  intention  is  said  to  be  to  break  off  our  river  connection  north 
of  Vicksburg.  There  was  a rumor  at  Jackson  of  an  official  telegram 
having  been  received  there  yesterday  to  the  effect  that  General  Lee  had 


Chai'.  XXXVI.j 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


217 


crossed  the  Rappahannock.  I keep  up  the  most  stringent  system  of 
guards  and  patrols  all  along  the  river  up  and  down,  and  I can  say  that 
there  is  no  vestige  of  any  other  enemy  than  the  Eighth  Kentucky. 

You  will  permit  me  to  repeat  my  opinion,  that  the  cavalry  force  at  my 
disposal  is  utterly  inadequate  to  guard  against  and  repel  any  attack 
the  enemy  might  attempt.  There  ought  to  be  a strong  force  established 
at  Bridgeport,  to  watch  and  defend  the  very  exposed  ferry  there  and 
three  practicable  fords  north  of  it.  I consider  an  attack  in  that  direc- 
tion more  likely  than  here,  because  all  roads  for  and  from  Vicksburg 
converge  there,  and  from  the  bend  in  the  river  its  left  flank  well  se- 
cured, and  its  lines  of  retreat  both  northeast  and  east  open,  there  being 
several  very  good  parallel  roads,  and  the  river  passable  by  the  three 
practicable  fords. 

I am,  general,  with  great  esteem,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTERHAUS, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 

John  A.  McClernand, 

Major-  General , Commanding . 


Hdqrs.  Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Big  Blade  River , Miss.,  June  7,  1863. 

General  : Since  writing  you  by  your  return  orderly,  Major  [Samuell 
Montgomery,  with  a detachm'ent  of  the  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry,  which 
1 had  sent  out  to  Edwards  to  feel  the  enemy,  has  returned.  He  found 
six  companies  of  the  rebel  Twentieth  Mississippi  (mounted)  on  the  place  * 
indicated,  i.  e.,  3 miles  beyond  Edwards  Station,  on  the  Raymond  road. 
Cn  the  approach  ot  the  Sixth  Missouri,  the  rebels  left  in  a southern 
direction,  and  Major  Montgomery,  learning  from  some  contrabands  that 
they  in  all  probability  would  take  the  Hall’s  Eerry  road,  immediately 
returned  to  Edwards  and  made  for  the  same  ferry.  This  being  a shorter 
cut,  our  men  soon  came  up  with  the  rebels,  and,  after  some  firing,  charged 
them,  breaking  their  line,  one  part  running  by  a by-road  toward  Hall’s 
Ferry,  the  other  toward  Utica. 

Two  prisoners  fell  into  our  hands,  whom  I will  forward  to  your  head- 
quarters to-morrow  morning.  The  major  (Montgomery)  says  that  he 
could  not  secure  more,  these  fellows  being  better  mounted  than  he  ex- 
pected. 

You  remember  my  statement  a few  days  since  that  some  rebel  cav- 
alry had  crossed  the  Big  Black  somewhere  north  near  General  Blair’s 
command.  This  is  substantiated  by  the  prisoners,  who  say  that  four 
companies  of  their  regiment,  under  Major  Rorer,  are  in  that  region.  If 
nothing  happens,  I go  to  Bridgeport  to-morrow  morning  in  order  to 
collect  some  information. 

With  great  respect,  I am,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTERHAUS, 
Brigadier-General , Commanding. 

Major-General  McClernand, 

Commanding  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


Hdqrs.  Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Big  Blade , Miss.,  June  7,  1863. 

Colonel:  A short  time  after  my  dispatch  of  this  morning  had  left, 
l received  reliable  information  that  the  Eighth  Kentucky  Mounted  In- 


218 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chat.  XXX  Vt. 


fantry,  which  attacked  us  last  night,  had  been  re  enforced  by  the  Twen- 
tieth and  Twenty-second  Mississippi  Mounted  Infantry,  and  that  they 
were  encamped  at  the  creek,  3 miles  beyond  Edwards  Station.  Large 
bodies  of  negroes  appeared  at  my  lines,  affirming  the  above  report  and 
speaking  of  more  troops  appearing. 

To  come  to  the  fact  in  these  informations,  I ordered  so  much  of  the 
cavalry  as  I could  make  available,  about  100  men  and  one  section  of 
mounted  howitzers,  to  march  to  Edwards  and  beyond,  and  feel  the 
enemy. 

They  left  here  by  noon,  under  Major  [Samuel]  Montgomery,  and  found 
at  the  place  indicated  a rebel  camp.  On  the  approach  of  my  troops,  the 
rebels  left  in  a southern  direction.  Contrabands  thought  they  would 
go  to  Baker’s  or  Fourteen-Mile  Creek,  toward  Hall’s  Ferry.  The  major 
(Montgomery)  at  once  returned  to  Edwards  Station,  and  took  then  a 
more  direct  road  for  Hall’s  Ferry.  He  soon  came  up  with  the  rebel 
force,  and  ordered  the  attack.  After  some  firing,  during  which  the 
rebels  tried  to  form,  the  Sixth  Missouri  charged,  and  ran  their  force  4 
miles,  when  the  Confederates  dispersed  in  two  parties,  one  taking  a 
by-road  for  Hall’s  Ferry,  the  other  the  Utica  road.  Finding  that  the 
fellows  were  better  mounted  than  anticipated,  the  major  halted  and 
returned. 

He  arrived  here  at  G.30  p.  m.,  with  2 prisoners.  They  say  that  there 
were  six  companies  (in  the  aggregate,  at  least  300  strong)  of  the  Twen- 
tieth Mississippi  Mounted  Infantry  in  to-day’s  skirmish  on  their  side, 
which  were  dispersed  by  100  of  the  Sixth  Missouri.  They  further  state 
that  the  Twenty-second  Mississippi  and  Eighth  Kentucky  Infantry 
were  in  their  vicinity,  but  that  the  four  companies  belonging  to  the 
Twentieth  Mississippi  were  detached  under  Major  Borer,  and  operat- 
ing west  of  the  Big  Black.  They  had  left  Canton  some  time  ago  for 
Benton  and  the  Yazoo.  You  will  remember  that  this  statement  cor- 
roborates the  information  transmitted  in  my.  letter  of  June  4.  The 
prisoners  could  or  would  not  tell  anything  relative  to  the  movements 
of  other  rebel  troops,  but  I will  try  again  to-morrow  morning  to  pump 
them. 

If  I had  a little  more  cavalry,  I have  no  doubt  that  the  surprise  and 
capture  of  a number  of  these  mounted  troops  were  feasible. 

Awaiting  your  orders,  I am,  with  great  esteem,  your  very  obedient 
servant. 

P.  J.  OSTERHAUS, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


Headquarters  Ninth  Division, 

Big  Black , Miss.,  June  7,  1803 — G p.  m. 

General:  Your  dispatch  of  1.45  o’clock  has  just  come  to  hand.  I 
sent  you  by  orderly  this  forenoon  all  the  news. since  yesterday  night’s 
attack.  The  orderly  must  have  tarried  somewhere,  as  the  letter  ought 
to  have  been  at  your  headquarters  by  dinner  time.  By  this  time  he  has, 
no  doubt,  delivered  my  letter. 

Colonel  Wright,  with  about  200  men,  is  with  me,  and  I had  the  honor 
to  report  his  arrival  some  ten  days  since. 

Since  I wrote  you  this  a.  m.  I received  further  and  reliable  news  from 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


210 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG;,  MISS. 

the  front.  Besides  the  Eighth  Kentucky  Mounted  Infantry,  which  1 
reported  this  morning  3 miles  beyond  Edwards  Station,  the  Twentieth 
and  Twenty-second  Mississippi  Mounted  Infantry  have  made  their  ap- 
pearance also  in  that  direction,  encamping  on  Baker’s  Creek.  One  de- 
tachment of  them  (five  companies)  came  within  3 miles  of  my  headquar- 
ters. They  proclaim  themselves  loudly  the  advance  guard  of  large 
bodies  of  infantry  on  their  march  for  this  point. 

To  ascertain  everything  more  perfectly,  I detailed  Colonel  Wright’s 
command,  with  two  howitzers,  to  proceed  at  once  to  Edwards  and  feel 
the  enemy.  I only  learned  since  he  left  that  he  got  as  far  as  Edwards, 
and  am  expecting  further  intelligence  momentarily.  I shall  not  fail  to 
inform  you  of  anything  I learn.  The  large  number  of  pickets  which 
is  necessary  to  guard  this  avenue  make  the  increase  of  my  infantry  and 
cavalry  most  desirable  $ the  duties  are  very  hard  on  the  command  here 
now. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTEEHAUS, 
Brigadier -General,  Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  A.  McClernand, 

Commanding  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


Hdqrs.  Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Big  Black , Miss.,  June  8,  1863. 

Colonel  : After  the  hard  ride  which  the  Twentieth  Mississippi  was 
compelled  to  take  yesterday  afternoon,  the  Eighth  Kentucky  made  its 
appearance  this  morning.  They  formed  in  sight  of  my  pickets  on  the 
Edwards  Station  road,  and  opened  fire;  but  being  unable  to  make  my 
vedettes  fall  back,  they  retired  on  their  part  again,  leaving  1 man  in  our 
hands.  He  gives  almost  verbatim  the  same  story  of  re-enforcements 
arriving  to  General  Johnston’s  army,  in  the  vicinity  of  Canton,  as  the 
prisoners  of  yesterday— in  fact,  as  everybody  does  coming  from  beyond 
Black  ; the  people  are  undoubtedly  fed  upon  that  hopeful  pros- 

The  present  informant  adds  that  an  attack  would  be  made  simulta- 
neously by  Johnston  on  Snyder’s  Bluff,  and  by  Breckinridge  on  the 
position  here,  and  that  it  was  to  be  looked  for  soon. 

This  morning  I visited  the  Bridgeport  Ferry  and  the  Macon  Ford, 
and  I can  say  that  an  access  from  that  direction  is  rather  difficult ; the 
roads  are  very  effectually  blocked.  There  is  no  ferry  and  no  chance  to 
cross  the  Big  Black  between  the  railroad  and  Bridgeport,  no  landing 
and  no  roads  leading  to  the  river  between  those  two  points.  Macon 
lord  is  about  1J  miles  north  of  Bridgeport.  I found  several  boats  and 
ropes  there,  which  I had  destroyed  and  taken  off.  The  road  leading 
to  the  ford,  beiug  beyond  my  rayon , is  pretty  good,  but  a working  party 
will  be  sent  out  this  night  to  destroy  it. 

With  great  respect,  I am,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTEEHAUS, 
Brigadier-General , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Eawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 

rm^  senf  to  Lieut.  Col.  W.  B.  Scates,  assistant  adjutant-general 
^Thirteenth  Army  Corps.) 


220 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


Hdqrs.  Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Big  Black , Miss.,  June  9,  1863 — 1 p.  m. 

Colonel  : Major  [Samuel]  Montgomery,  who  is  in  command  of  the 
detachment  of  cavalry  and  mountain  howitzers  sent  out  to  the  ford 
north  of  Bridgeport  (as  stated  in  my  dispatch  of  this  morning),  reports 
that  he  fell  in  with  a pretty  large  force  of  rebel  mounted  troops,  and 
that  he  took  a position  where  he  thought  he  could  hold  his  own.  About 
150  rebels  attempted  to  flank,  but  the  major  succeeded  in  repelling 
them.  He  sent  through  for  all  the  cavalry  left  here,  and  I complied 
with  his  request,  which  gives  him  not  over  150  men,  besides  his  two 
mountain  howitzers. 

At  the  same  time  I forwarded  one  regiment  of  infantry  to  the  Bovina 
Bridgeport  road,  and  took  the  necessary  steps  to  guard  against  an  at- 
tack on  my  left  flank. 

My  patrols  to  Edwards  just  returned.  Found  no  sign  of  any  enemy 
there,  and  it  strikes  me  that  the  concentration  of  the  mounted  rebel 
forces,  which  were  in  my  front  yesterday,  is  very  likely  at  the  fords, 
where  they  can  cross  the  river  without  molestation. 

A force  sent  out  from  Haynes’  Bluff  could  cut  ofl  the  retreat  of  any 
rebels  on  this  side  of  the  river. 

I am,  colonel,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ P.  J.  OSTEEHAUS, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Eawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


Headquarters  Ninth  Division, 

Big  Black,  Miss.,  June  9,  1863. 

Colonel  : Since  writing  you  this  morning,  I received  information 
that  a number  of  rebels  were  crossing  and  had  crossed  Big  Black  at 
Messinger’s  or  Macon  Fords,  some  miles  north  of  Bridgeport  Ferry, 
where  my  rayon  terminates  north.  I at  once  started  Major  Mont- 
gomery with  two  companies  of  cavalry  and  one  section  ol  artillery 
(mountain  howitzers)  to  re-enforce  my  pickets  in  that  direction,  and  just 
now  he  informs  me  that  he  fell  in  with  several  hundred  rebel  mounted 
troops.  The  major  took  a position,  which  the  enemy  tried  to  flank,  but 
he  succeeded  in  driving  him  back,  and  thinks  he  can  hold  his  position 
if  re-enforced  by  all  available  cavalry.  Without  any  delay  I started 
the  last  man  of  the  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry,  at  the  same  time  taking 
such  measures  to  receive  the  cavalry,  if  forced  to  lall  back,  and  to  secure 

my  left  flank.  , 

It  is  of  the  highest  importance  to  have  a permanent,  light,  and  very 
available  column  established  between  Bridgeport  and  Oak  Kidge  Fer- 
ries, where  the  river  is  fordable  at  many  places.  To  protect  these  points 
from  here  with  the  cavalry  at  my  disposal  is  impossible.  A cavalry 
force  moving  down  to  the  Messinger’s  Ford  from,  Haynes’  Bluff  would 
cut  off  every  rebel  on  this  side  of  the  Big  Black. 

I am,  colonel,  with  high  esteem,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

P.  j:  OSTEEHAUS, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding , 

Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


Chap.  XXX YL] 


221 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

Headquarters  Ninth  Division, 

Big  Black  River  Bridge , Miss .,  June  10,  1863. 

Colonel:  Your  dispatch  of  yesterday  was  received  in  due  time,  and 
I feel  very  much  obliged  for  your  kind  and  immediate  attention  to  my 
request. 

A small  detachment  of  the  Third  Illinois  and  one  company  of  the 
First  Indiana  (escort  companies)  arrived  in  the  night,  and  the  Second 
Illinois  Cavalry  is  reported  in  the  vicinity ; they  will  be  here  this  even- 
ing. 

Major  [Samuel]  Montgomery,  in  command  of  the  Sixth  Missouri,  sent 
out  in  pursuit  of  a rebel  force,  returned  just  now  (2  p.  m.),  and  reports 
that  they  were  the  same  companies  of  the  Twentieth  Mississippi  which 
were  at  Grant’s  house  and  in  the  Oak  Eidge  region  for  some  time. 
After  having  received  the  re-enforcements,  Major  Montgomery  ad- 
vanced and  followed  up  the  enemy  as  far  as  Birdsong  Ferry,  at  which 
crossing,  or  by  the  fords  near  by,  he  lost  sight  of  them.  The  major  is 
most  positive  that  there  is  no  rebel  left  on  the  west  side  of  the  river 
between  Birdsong  and  this  point. 

Of  course,  I ordered  the  escort  companies  mentioned  above  to  return 
to  their  respective  headquarters,  and  I feel  very  certain  that,  with  the 
addition  of  the  Second  Illinois  to  my  cavalry  force,  and  with  the  detach- 
ment of  General  Washburn’s  cavalry  north  of  Bridgeport,  we  are  per- 
fectly able  to  keep  the  rebels  on  the  other  side  of  the  Big  Black. 

The  information  brought  in  by  Major  Montgomery  is  that  General 
Johnston  is  not  moving,  and  not  even  expected  to  move  forward  soon  $ 
that,  on  the  contrary,  some  of  his  forces  had  be6n  withdrawn.  I be- 
lieve, though,  that  this  news  ought  to  be  received  cum  grano  salis. 

I inclose  a letter  brought  in  by  flag  of  truce.*  The  request  seems  to 
me  an  extraordinary  one,  and  I refused  to  grant  it,  promising,  though, 
to  lay  it  before  the  major-general  commanding  the  department,  for  his 
action.  In  doing  so,  I request  him  to  give  me  his  decision  for  commu- 
nication to  Colonel  [H.  B.]  Lyon,  if  the  general  should  not  approve  of 
my  denial. 

By  the  way,  I have  to  state  that  this  Colonel  Lyon  is  described  as 
overbearing,  and  toward  our  wounded  at  Champion’s  Hill  a very  rude 
character. 

I am,  colonel,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTERHAUS, 
Brigadier - General,  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

Big  Black  River  Bridge , Miss.,  June  12,  1863. 

Colonel  : I ordered  the  commander  of  my  picket  at  Bridgeport  this 
morning  to  communicate  with  the  cavalry  stationed  above  Bridgeport, 
n order  to  perfect  the  guarding  of  the  river.  Captain  Morris,  Sixth 
Missouri  Cavalry,  who  is  in  command  of  the  post  there,  just  now  re- 
ports as  follows : 

Sergeant  [Theodore  B.  ] Robinson,  in  charge  of  the  patrol,  went  to  the  Widow  Hill’s, 
J miles  from  this  point  (Bridgeport  picket  station).  He  heard  from  all  that  Colonel 
5wan  was  there  last  night,  blockading  the  road,  and  left  about  dark,  intending  to  go 
;o  camp  at  Haynes’  Bluif.  He  has  not  come  back  to-day. 


Not  found. 


222 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXYI. 


On  the  sergeant’s  return  lie  ran  into  a squad  of  about  15  rebels  at 
Birdsong  Ferry ; they  exchanged  shots,  and  the  rebels  retired  across  the 
river,  where  there  are  larger  forces.  The  sergeant  had  one  of  his  (9) 
men  slightly  wounded  and  took  2 prisoners.  1 will  send  them  to  your 
headquarters  to-morrow  morning,  as  they  are  very  talkative.  They  say 
that  General  Forrest,  with  his  rebel  cavalry,  is  at  Mechanicsburg,  and 
that  another  part  of  his  force  was  expected  to-day  to  form  a junction 
with  him  at  or  near  the  said  town.  The  whole  command  is  estimated 
at  4,000  men. 

The  prisoners,  of  course,  report  the  story  that  Johnston,  with  30,000, 
is  moving  on  Yazoo  Fiver.  Big  Black,  in  consequence  of  the  late  rains, 
wms  swollen  considerably,  but  is  receding  rapidly  again — so  much  so 
that,  in  the  opinion  of  Caxitain  Morris,  the  fords  at  Messinger’s  and  near 
Birdsong  Ferries  are  practicable  again.  Therefore,  I re  enforced  the 
captain  by  another  company,  in  the  expectation,  though,  that  some  of 
General  Washburn’s  cavalry  will  relieve  my  men  there  to-morrow. 

I hear  from  my  Edwards  Station  patrol  that  two  new  mounted  regi- 
ments, the  Sixteenth  and  Third  Mississippi,  are  in  the  vicinity  of  Bol- 
ton and  Raymond.  This  seems  to  corroborate  the  above  statement  that 
the  rebel  cavalry  force  had  been  increased. 

To  meet  emergencies,  I am  constructing  some  breastworks  defending 
the  crossing  of  the  river  here.  I shall  lay  the  plan  before  you  in  a day 
or  twro.  Having  but  a very  limited  number  of  contrabands  here  for 
that  kind  of  work,  I would  be  very  glad  to  have  about  100  more  negroes 
from  the  organizing  regiments  temporarily  detached  to  assist  my  work- 
ing party.  If  such  a ‘detail  could  be  granted,  the  men  would  have  to 
bring  tools  along. 

I am,  colonel,  with  great  esteem,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTERHAUS, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Ool.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


Hdqrs.  Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army.  Coups, 

Big  Blade  River,  Miss.,  June  14,  1863. 

Colonel:  Your  favor  of  yesterday  was  received.  The  men  reported 
to  have  been  found  in  the  swamps  betw  een  Mr.  Hines’  and  Mrs.  Stower’s, 
on  the  Hall’s  Ferry  (Vicksburg)  road,  are,  in  my  opinion,  the  same  men 
whom  my  patrols  had  seen  some  days  ago.  There  are  only  three  or 
four  of  them,  and  they  are  disconnected  from  any  rebel  command. 

Though  the  present  stage  of  the  river  is  such  that  the  greatest  vigi- 
lance is  necessary  to  protect  against  a sudden  attack  of  the  enemy,  it 
becomes  fordable  almost  at  any  place.  The  Hall’s  Ferry  (Mount  Alban 
and  Vicksburg)  road  does  not  belong  to  my  beat.  If  I understood 
your  instructions  correctly,  it  is  in  Lauman’s  care.  The  distance  from 
here  to  Baldwin’s  Ferry  is  fully  12  miles,  and  to  the  indicated  place 
near  Hall’s  Ferry  is  12  more.  For  the  small  force  of  cavalry  the  duty 
is  most  severe,  as  I have  still  to  send  my  pickets  north  far  beyond 
Bridgeport  Ferry,  being  in  that  direction  not  yet  supported  by  any 
of  Washburn’s  cavalry. 

On  the  12th,  a patrol  w ent  as  far  as  Birdsong  Ferry,  and  on  its  return 
ran  into  a secesh  squad.  They  exchanged  shots.  One  of  my  men  was 
slightly  wounded,  and  then  my  patrol  drove  the  rebels  into  the  river, 
taking  2 prisoners. 


Chat.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


223 


We  heard  that  increased  numbers  were  on  the  east  side  of  Big  Black 
A party  sent  out  yesterday,  under  one  of  my  aides,  went  10  miles  be- 
yond Bridgeport  Ferry,  and  found  the  above  statement  correct.  The 
regular  patrol  had  quite  a lively  skirmish  with  some  rebel  force  across 
the  river,  and  killed  1 man. 

The  prisoners  say  that  General  Forrest,  with  4,000  men,  is  in  com- 
mand across  the  river ; their  intended  point  of  assembly  in  Mechanics- 
burg.  At  present  (i.  e.,  on  the  12th)  the  cavalry  was  partly  stationed 
at  Bolton,  Clinton,  and  on  the  Canton  and  Bridgeport  road.  Some  were 
said  to  be  at  the  above  villages  already. 

You  undoubtedly  admit  that  this  complexion  of  things  makes  the  cav- 
alry duty  very  hard  indeed.  The  arrival  of  three  small  companies  of 
the  Second  Illinois,  under  Major  Marsh,  did  not  bring  much  relief,  and 
the  early  arrival  of  the  remainder  of  Lieutenant  Colonel  Bush’s  com- 
mand is,  therefore,  anxiously  expected. 

I am,  colonel,  with  great  respect,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTEBHAUS, 

T . , ^ w Brigadier- General,  Commandinq. 

Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Big  Black  River  Railroad  Bridge,  Miss.,  June  17,  1863. 
Colonel  : Since  my  last  the  complexion  of  things  on  my  front  has 
not  changed.  Bebel  cavalry  is  appearing  at  every  point  "permitting 
access  on  the  eastern  river  bank,  occasionally  exchanging  shots  with 
my  pickets.  Yesterday  a large  force  attempted  to  drive  in  the  vedettes 
on  the  Edwards  Station  road,  but  was  readily  repulsed  by  the  reserve 
pickets.  In  general,  there  is  no  menacing  attempt  made  as  yet.  This 
morning  a very  intelligent  contraband,  George  McCloud,  came  into  our 
lines,  who  had  left  Demopolis,  Ala.,  on  the  14th,  Meridian  on  the  15th 
and  arrived  in  Jackson  that  same  day.  Yesterday  morning  he  left  Jack- 
son  for  our  lines.  The  negro  was  employed  in  the  arsenal  at  Demo- 
pohs,  and  understands  the  making  of  all  wood  work  connected  with  the 
ordnance  department.  He  can  read  and  write.  This  man  states  that 
the  whole  force  at  Jackson  does  not  exceed  3,000  men,  and  the  army 
collected  and  collecting  by  Johnston  at  Canton  he  heard  estimated  bv 
leading  ?^cers  at  15,000  effective  men  at  the  outside,  with  no  prospect 
to  swell  it  beyond  20,000.  He  describes  the  people  and  soldiers,  includ- 
ing officers,  m very  low  spirits  as  to  the  success  of  the  Southern  cause, 
the  theme  of  raising  the  siege  of  Vicksburg  is  freely  discussed  on  all 
sides,  but  no  hopes  are  entertained  that  their  forces  will  be  in  condition 
)r  in  number  equal  to  meet  the  Federal  army.  Notwithstanding  these 
loubts,  the  negro  says  that  great  preparations  are  made  for  the  relief 
>1  General  Pemberton.  Large  quantities  of  ammunition  and  ordnance 
dores  were  forwarded  from  Demopolis  to  General  Johnston,  and  from 
lie  general,  run  of  conversation  he  thinks  that  an  attack  will  be  made 
within  a very  few  days  on  the  right  flank  of  our  lines,  with  a view  to 
pve  1 emberton  a chance  to  break  through  the  investing  army. 

1 will  send  the  negro  to  your  headquarters  to-morrow  morning,  deera- 
ng  him  an  interesting,  perhaps  a useful,  man— perhaps  a rogue.  I had 
elegraphic  communication  with  the  wires  to  your  headquarters  and 
11i1^  idady  for  the  expected  operator,  when  this  morning  some 
icer  another  corps,  passing  Mount  Alban  with  a squad  of  cavalry, 


224 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Ciiap.  XXXVL 


cut  down  the  wire  and  the  poles.  The  citizens  informed  the  officer  that 
the  telegraph  was  put  up  only  the  day  before  by  our  soldiers,  but  he 
would  not  listen  to  any  sucli  stuff.  I hope  to  have  the  line  up  again 
by  to-morrow  night.  The  railroad  track  between  here  and  Vicksburg 
is  al>o  repaired  again,  and  a flat  car  constructed  from  the  ruins  on  the 
east  side  of  the  river  is  put  on  the  track.  Four  mules,  in  lieu  of  loco- 
motive, form  an  essential  addition  to  my  transportation. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTERHAUS, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  the  Tennessee , Vicksburg,  Miss. 


Headquarters  Ninth  Division, 

Big  Black  River  Railroad  Bridge , Miss.,  June  21,  1863. 

General  : Favored  by  your  dispatch  of  yesterday,  I ordered  a strong 
patrol  to  scour  all  the  country  from  this  place  to  Hall’s  Ferry,  on  Big 
Black  River,  in  co-operation  with  Lieutenant-Colonel  Bush’s  party, 
which,  under  your  instructions,  will  search  the  lowlands  from  Hall’s 
Ferry  down  Big  Black,  and  up  the  Mississippi  to  Warrentou.  My 
patrol  will  visit  all  points  where  the  river  is  accessible  and  affords  any 
chance  of  crossing.  Immediately  on  its  return  I will  report  the  result. 
I keep  coustant  pickets  at  Baldwin’s  Ferry,  and  maintain  a system 
of  patrols  from  the  bridge  here  to  that  ferry,  and  thence  to  Hall’s  Ferry, 
where  Lieutenant-Colonel  Bush’s  battalion  is  ordinarily  stationed. 
From  the  information  1 regularly  receive  from  these  points,  I dare  say 
that  there  are  only  a very  few  straggling  rebels  on  the  Mississippi  side 
of  Big  Black,  if  any.  There  is  a force  somewhere  on  Fourteen-Mile 
Creek,  to  watch  the  southern  avenues  to  Vicksburg,  and  the  river 
being  fordable  in  many  places,  a few  men  may  venture  over,  but  no 
force  of  any  consequence  will  appear  on  the  west  side  of  the  stream. 

All  the  forces  of  the  enemy  in  my  front  are  mounted  infantry,  of  the 
Third,  Sixteenth,  Twentieth,  and  Twenty-second  Mississippi,  and 
Eighth  Kentucky,  under  Acting  Brigadier- [General]  Lyon,  exceediug, 
altogether,  not  2,500  men.  They  are  of  no  desperate  description,  but 
they  make  their  appearance  at  almost  any  point  from  Bridgeport  Ferry 
to  Baldwin’s  Ferry,  and  are  busily  engaged,  besides  so  watching  our 
movements,  in  collecting  negroes  and  articles  of  subsistence. 

Prisoners  taken  in  several  skirmishes  my  men  had  with  them  pretend 
a large  regular  cavalry  force  (4,000  or  5,000  men)  had  arrived  from 
Bragg’s  army,  and  was  encamped  near  Brownsville  or  Clinton,  but 
scouts  sent  out  in  these  directions  do  not  confirm  the  prisoners’  state- 
ment. In  relation  to  other  rebel  lorces,  I have  no  news  worthy  of  notice 
since  the  17tli  instaut.  General  Johnston  was  then  still  at  and  near 
Canton,  his  force  numbering  15,000  effective  men  at  the  outside.  He 
was  making  great  efforts  to  swell  his  numbers,  ordering  all  available 
troops  to  join  him.  At  Jackson  he  left  not  over  3,000  men,  but  there 
are  serious  doubts  if  he  can  collect  over  20,000.  The  cavalry  was  com- 
pelled to  disperse,  and  take  up  such  quarters  where  they  can  find  forage. 
The  intention  of  General  Johnston’s  army  to  attempt  an  attack  on  our 
Vicksburg  army  is  proclaimed  by  everybody,  but  even  the  most  decided 
rebels  do  not  appear  to  be  sanguine  of  his  success. 

I shall  take  great  pleasure,  general,  to  inform  you  instantly  of  any- 
thing which  may  happen  on  my  front.  I embrace  this  opportunity  to 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  225 


repeat  a request  made  some  time  ago,  namely,  to  order  the  Forty-sec- 
ond Ohio  and  Twenty-second  Kentucky,  now  m the  rear  of  Vicksburg 
and  the  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Ohio  Infantry,  now  at  Warren- 
ton,  all  belonging  to  the  Ninth  Division,  to  join  me  at  this  point.  From 
the  long  line  to  be  guarded,  and  from  the  nature  of  the  terrain,  the 
duties  for  the  infantry  here  are  very  severe.  The  regiments,  being  in 
themselves  very  small,  are  daily  reduced  in  number  by  sickness,  and 
an  addition  to  the  effective  strength  now  with  me  would  be  very  desi- 
rable. J 


I have  the  honor,  general,  to  be,  with  great  respect,  your  very  obedi- 
ent servant,  J 


Maj.  Gen.  E.  O.  0.  Ord, 
Commanding  Thirteenth 


P.  J.  OSTEKHAUS, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding . 

Army  Corps , Vicksburg,  Miss. 


Big  Black,  June  22,  1863. 

A dispatch  from  Bridgeport,  come  in  at  this  moment,  reports  that  125 
men  of  the  Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry,  stationed  near  Messinger’s,  were  at- 
tacked by  500  rebel  cavalry  and  badly  cut  up,  and  about  40  men  of  the 
Iowa  cavalry  were  either  killed,  wounded,  or  captured  $ also  one  small 
gun  was  taken  by  the  enemy.  Our  cavalry  were  blockading  the  road 
when  they  were  surprised. 


General  Grant. 


OSTERHAUS. 


Black  River,  June  22,  1863. 

The  commanders  of  the  different  pickets  have  just  reported  all  quiet 
on  the  Jackson  road.  My  patrol  found  a rebel  cavalry  squad  near 
Edwards  fetation  j fired  at  it  and  drove  it  to  Baker’s  Creek,  where  the 
officer  considered  it  prudent  to  desist  the  chase,  the  woods  being  re- 
ported full  of  rebels.  There  is  no  regular  camp  this  side  of  Champion’s 

Yesterday  a regiment  of  rebels  passed  Edwards  Station,  going  south. 
It  has  not  yet  returned.  It  is  undoubtedly  the  same  troops  which  were 
observed  by  my  patrols  on  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road,  on  east  side  of 
river.  Nobody  living  any  more  between  here  and  Champion’s  Hill 
who  could  give  any  information ; even  negroes  are  secesh. 

P.  J.  OSTERHAUS. 

Major-General  Grant, 

(Through  General  Ord.) 


Big  Black,  June  22,  1863. 

Colonel  Wright,  commanding  the  Missouri  cavalry  now  opposite 
Bridgeport,  [reports]  in  relation  to  the  fight  this  p.  m.  as  follows : 

The  fight  of  the  Fourth  Iowa  was  near  the  junction  of  Bridgeport  and  Vicksburg 
and  Jones  Ferry  roads.  Four  companies  of  Fourth  Iowa  were  blockading  Vicksburg 
and  Jones’  Ferry  road  when  some  600  or  800  rebels  charged  on  them.  The  rebels 
crossed  the  river  at  Joues’  or  Birdsong  crossing.  My  men  have  reconnoitered  2 miles 
ap  the  river,  and  found  all  quiet  at  present.  My  impression  is  that  the  rebels  have 
recrossed  the  river.  I anticipate  no  trouble  to-night,  but  may  have  to-morrow.  I 
mall  be  on  the  alert. 

15  R R— -VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


226 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXYL 


The  Forty-second  Ohio  and  four  companies  of  Twenty-second  Ken- 
tucky Infantry,  under  Colonel  Lindsey,  have  just  arrived. 

GSTERHAUS. 


Major-General  Grant, 

(Through  General  Ord.) 


Hdqrs.  Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

June  22,  1863. 

Captain  : Your  favor  of  this  p.  m.,  including  duplicate  telegram 
from  General  Grant,  is  just  received  (5.20).  My  telegram  in  relation  to 
a rebel  attack  on  some  four  companies  of  Iowa  cavalry  north  of  Bridge- 
port is  undoubtedly  received  by  you.  I sent  the  whole  of  the  Sixth 
Missouri  Cavalry  (200  strong)  to  Bridgeport  Ferry,  with  orders  to  re- 
establish connection  with  the  forces  north  of  that  point  and  with  the 
advancing  column  of  General  Sherman. 

Big  Black  is  fordable  now  at  many  places  between  Bridgeport  and 
Birdsong  Ferries,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  above-mentioned  rebel 
force  availed  itself  of  these  practicable  crossings  and  dashed  on  our 
small  force,  which,  perhaps,  had  not  taken  all  the  precautionary  meas- 
ures to  guard  against  such  surprise. 

It  will  be  very  important  to  have  the  now  broken-up  station  re-estab- 
lished by  another  stronger  force.  The  cavalry  at  Bridgeport  and  here 
is  too  small  to  withstand  an  energetic  attack  or  to  extend  still  more  the 
line  of  guard  assigned  to  me,  i.  e.,  from  Bridgeport  to  Baldwin’s  Ferry. 

The  patrol  sent  out  yesterday  to  connect  with  Colonel  Bush  have 
returned.  They  had  to  go  as  far  as  Hankinson’s  Ferry  before  they  found 
the  colonel.  They  did  not  meet  any  signs  of  an  enemy. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  GSTERHAUS, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Capt.  S.  8.  Seward, 

Aide-de-  Camp,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


A large  body  of  cavalry  appeared 
Black,  on  and  near  Smith’s  plantation. 


Big  Black,  June  23,  1863. 
in  front  of  position  across  Big 

GSTERHAUS. 


General  Grant. 


Big  Black,  June  25, 1863. 

All  quiet.  Scouts  from  the  east  side  of  river  -report  a picket  (60 
men)  near  Bridgeport,  and  a camp  2 miles  back  of  Messinger’s.  Other 
cavalry  is  stationed  at  Queen’s  Hill  Church,  and  north  and  south  of 
Bolton.  This  statement  is  corroborated  by  that  of  a deserter  of  the 
Sixth  Texas  Cavalry,  who  came  into  my  line  yesterday,  and  gives  the 
cavalry  force  in  this  vicinity  as  follows  : First  Texas  Legion,  160  strong; 
Third  Texas  Cavalry,  300  strong;  Sixth  Texas  Cavalry,  250  strong; 
Ninth  Texas  Cavalry,  250  strong;  total  960  men,  under  General  [J.  W.] 
Whitfield.  There  is  another  cavalry  brigade  (Mississippians),  about 
2.000  strong,  stationed  near  Big  Black,  on  the  direct  road  from  Canton 
to  Haynes’  Bluff.  Vernon  east  [north  ?]  of  this.  Two  brigades,  one  rifled 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


227 


6-pounder  gun  and  one  12-pounder  howitzer  with  it.  I don’t  anticipate 
attack  at  present.  The  section  of  artillery  has  reported,  and  is  sta- 
tioned at  Bovina. 

OSTEEHAUS. 

Geueral  Grant, 

(Through  General  Ord.) 

Hdqrs.  Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Camp  Keigwin , June  26,  1863. 

General  : In  receipt  of  your  favor  of  to-day.  I fully  appreciate  your 
opinion  relative  to  the  intentions  of  General  Johnston,  and,  notwith- 
standing there  is  no  sign  of  an  immediate  attack,  my  guards  and 
precautions  will  be  kept  up  as  strictly  as  possible,  to  give  me  timely 
warning  of  any  change  that  may  take  place. 

A few  minutes  ago  I returned  from  Baldwin’s  Ferry  and  from  the 
picket  beyond,  connecting  my  vedettes  there  with  those  at  Hall’s 
Ferry.  I found  everything  quiet,  and  the  arrangements  there  satisfac- 
tory. The  standing  pickets  and  vedettes  are  regularly,  and  at  least 
three  times  a day  and  night,  visited  by  a system  of  patrols  along  the 
river  bank  and  the  public  road. 

There  are  three  stationary  vedettes  north  of  the  bridge  here  to  Bridge- 
port Ferry — at  Brooks’,  Crooker’s,  and  Hooker’s  plantations,  and  be- 
sides a patrol,  under  a very  energetic  officer.  All  these  points,  and  all 
others  on  the  river,  are  visited  several  times  in  twenty-four  hours. 

The  blockade  is  getting  as  perfect  as  it  can  be  made.  I instructed 
Colonel  Wright,  at  Bridgeport  Ferry,  to  make  the  closest  connection 
with  the  Fourth  Iowa,  and  gave  him  a copy  of  such  parts  of  your  kind 
letter  as  will  enable  him  to  render  the  fullest  co-operation  to  execute 
your  instructions. 

If  you  have  a draughtsman  with  your  headquarters,  and  would  be 
kind  enough  to  have  me  a copy  made  of  a map  exhibiting  the  roads  and 
principal  points  in  the  section  north  of- Bridgeport,  it  would  be  a very 
great  help  to  me,  and  in  an  emergency  would  render  my  command  more 
effective. 

With  great  respect,  I am,  general,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTEEHAUS, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 

June  29,  1863. 

General  McArthur’s  [troops]  are  exchanging  shots  with  rebels  across 
the  river  at  Messinger’s  Ford,  and  my  pickets  at  Bridgeport  have  been 
also  fighting  since  10  a.  m.  No  attempt  made,  as  yet,  bv  enemy  to 
cross  the  river.  My  pickets  are  still  on  the  river  bank. 

OSTEEHAUS. 

Major-General  Grant, 

(Through  General  Ord.) 


Big  Black,  July  1,  1863. 

A mounted  infantry  patrol,  sent  out  this  morning  on  Edwards  Sta- 
tion road,  was  fired  into  near  that  place.  Men  dismounted  and  at- 
tacked (the  enemy  was  about  50  strong,  infantry  and  some  mounted 


228 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


men),  and  drove  them  beyond  Edwards  Station.  Lieutenant  Sample 
of  the  One  hundred  and  eighteenth  Illinois  Mounted  Infantry,  was 
severely,  and  two  men,  wounded.  The  enemy’s  loss  not  known. 

OSTERHAUS. 

General  Grant, 

(Through  General  Ord.) 


BiGr  Black  River,  July  3,  18G3. 
Colonel  Wright  reports  the  following : 


I caught  one  of  Breckinridge’s  men  to-day,  and  learn  from  him  that  Breckinridge 
arrived  at  Bolton  last  night,  with  7,000  troops  and  large  supply  train.  Johnston  is 
moving  from  above  to  form  junction  with  B.,  the  prisoner  thinks,  in  my  front,  and 
will  arrive  at  or  near  the  river  to-night.  Whitfield’s  cavalry  moved  from  Bolton  last 
night  as  Breckinridge  arrived.  The  prisoner  thinks  they  moved  to  the  right,  but 
does  not  know. 


General  Grant. 


P.  J.  OSTERHAUS. 


Hdqrs.  Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Big  Black , Miss.,  July  3,  1863. 

General  : I send  you  the  prisoner  whom  I mentioned  in  my  tele- 
graphic dispatch  of  this  p.  m.  He  was  a lieutenant  in  a Louisiana 
regiment,  and  was  to  be  mustered  out  in  consequence  of  the  consoli- 
dation of  his  regiment,  and  be  drafted  again  as  a private.  Such  is  the 
story  he  gives  for  the  cause  of  his  desertion. 

He  reports  Breckinridge  7,000  strong  (five  brigades,  each  with  one 
six-gun  battery).  Of  the  whereabouts  and  strength  of  Johnston’s 
army  he  knew  nothing  reliable.  Of  the  contemplated  attack  he  is 
also  ignorant. 

With  great  respect,  I am,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTERHAUS, 
Brigadier ■ General,  Commanding . 

General  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Tennessee , Vicksburg. 


Hdqrs.  Ninth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Big  Black,  Miss.,  July  3,  1863. 

General  : I give  you,  in  this  inclosure,  copy  of  a dispatch  just  re- 
ceived from  Colonel  Wright.*  I ordered  a picket  to  remain  for  this 
night  on  the  river  opposite  Crooker’s  Eerry.  There  may  be  a proba- 
bility that  it  was  that  picket  which  was  heard,  but  I have  no  means  to 
ascertain  as  yet.  Your  command  being  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of 
Colonel  Wright’s  position,  1 beg  leave  to  request,  in  case  of  an  emer- 
gency, your  kind  support.  I ordered  Colonel  Wright  to  apprise  you  of 
anything  that  may  transpire  on  his  front,  and  I will  do  the  same  from 
here.  I think  Vicksburg  will  be  ours  to-morrow  morning. 

With  great  respect,  I am,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTERHAUS, 

Br  igadier - General. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  McArthur, 

Commanding  Sixth  Division. 


See  Wright’s  dispatch,  above. 


Chai\  XXXYI.l 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


229 


No.  14. 

Report  of  Capt.  Charles  If.  Lanpherc,  (Seventh  Michigan  Battery  in 
eluding  operations  May  16  and  17. 

Near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  30,  1803. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following’  report  of  the  part  taken 
by  my  command  in  the  battles  of  May  10,  17,  19,  20,  21,  22,  and  23: 

At  the  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  on  the  10th  instant,  not  being  able 
to  get  a position  for  ray  guns,  my  battery  remained  in  the  rear.  I there- 
„ fore  have  no  report  to  make. 

At  the  battle  of  Big  Black  Biver,  at  9.30  a.  m.,  May  17,  I put  right 
and  left  sections  on  the  right  of  the  road,  about  800  yards  in  front  of 
the  enemy’s  works,  where  the  guns  were  worked  at  intervals  until  the 
enemy’s  works  were  carried.  The  center  section  I advanced  300  yards 
to  the  front  and  50  yards  to  the  left  of  the  right  and  left  sections,  where 
the  guns  were  worked  with  good  effect  until  the  enemy  were  driven 
trom  their  works,  when  I advanced  the  entire  battery  to  the  lagoons  in 
trout  ot  the  rifle-pits,  where  for  about  one  and  one-half  hours  we  shelled 
the  opposite  side  of  the  river.  No  casualties. 

May  19.— Moved  forward  at  9 a.  m.  At  11  a.  m.  arrived  within  sight 
of  the  enemy’s  works  in  the  rear  of  Vicksburg.  At  2 p.  m put  mv 
battery  into  position  upon  a bluff  1 mile  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  forts 
from  which  position  worked  two  hours,  when  I advanced  one  gun  within 
bOO  yards  of  the  enemy,  where  it  was  worked  with  effect  until  dark  the 
•remammg  flVe  gUDS  being  worked  at  the  same  time  from  the  first  posi- 

May  20.  Had  a small  breastwork  thrown  up  during  the  night  upon 
the  position  occupied  by  the  gun  advanced  to  the  front  last  evening,  in 
which  I placed  tour  guns.  Here  I have  the  range  of  twelve  of  the  enemy’s 
torts ; worked  these  guns  here  to-day  with  good  effect.  The  right  section 
v remained  in  the  position  occupied  yesterday.  One  man  wounded  to-day, 
a flesh  wound  through  the  thigh;  not  serious.  My  battery  worked  to- 
day  m position  occupied  yesterday,  firing  briskly  all  day 

t1he1work  upon  the  hill  last  night  and  placed  the 
right  section  with  the  balance  of  the  battery.  My  guns  were  worked 
briskly  until  12  m.,  and  slowly  during  the  afternoon. 

May  23.— Position  not  changed  to-day;  guns  worked  slowly.  Up  to 
the  present  time  the  enemy’s  artillery  has  subjected  me  to  but  little  in- 
convenience. No  casualties,  except  the  1 man  wounded  on  the  20th. 

1 am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

O.  H.  LANPHERE, 

Captain , Commanding  Seventh  Michigan  Battery. 
Capt.  J.  W.  Thompson, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Ninth  Division. 


No.  15. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Oscar  F.  Nutting , First  Wisconsin  Battery. 

Camp  in  rear  of  Vicksburg,  Miss., 

May  30,  1863. 

FiWPv^rIN:  1 liave  tbe  honor  to  report  the  part  taken  by  the 

Pirst  Wisconsin  Battery  in  the  engagements  of  May  19-23. 

About  II  a.  m.  on  the  19th,  the  battery,  under  the  command  of  Lieut. 


230 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Oscar  F.  Nutting,  was  ordered  into  position  on  the  extreme  left  of  the 
line,  coming  into  battery  and  opening  fire  immediately  on  the  works  of 
the  enemy,  about  1^  miles  to  the  west  of  us.  At  5 p.  m.  the  right  sec- 
tion of  the  battery,  under  charge  of  First  Sergt.  Edward  P.  Aylmer, 
was  ordered  to  move  to  the  right  and  three-quarters  of  a mile  to  the 
front,  where  it  again  opened  fire,  the  other  two  sections  remaining  on 
the  ground  they  had  occupied  during  the  day. 

On  the  20th,  the  right  section  moved  again  to  the  front,  the  center 
and  left  sections  of  the  battery  moving  up  also  to  their  front  about 
three-quarters  of  a mile,  keeping  up  a brisk  fire  until  dark. 

On  the  21st,  the  center  and  left  sections  moved  up  half  a mile  and 
opened  fire,  the  right  section  remaining  in  position  on  the  ground  it 
had  occupied  the  previous  night,  and  fired  almost  without  intermission 
£lll  (J^y 

Each  of  the  sections  remained  in  these  positions  on  the  22d  and  23d 
instant.  The  firing  was  kept  up  constantly  and  with  great  precision, 
doing  fearful  execution  on  the  enemy’s  works. 

On  the  22d,  the  right  section  succeeded  in  blowing  up  one  of  the 
enemy’s  caissons,  and  on  the  23d  the  center  and  left  sections  blew  up 
two  more.  These  explosions,  taking  place  within  their  fortifications, 
must  have  caused  fearful  havoc  among  their  men.  We  are  fortunate 
enough,  I am  happy  to  say,  to  have  no  casualties  to  report. 

During  these  five  successive  days  both  officers  and  men  behaved 
nobly.  Some  of  our  ammunition  was  very  poor,  and  worked  badly, 
exploding  in  the  guns;  but  our  present  supply  appears  to  be  much 
better 

I remain,  captain,  your  most  obedient  S^v^t’-NUTTI^G. 

Lieutenant , Commanding  First  Wisconsin  Battery. 

Capt.  J.  W.  Thompson, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


1nto.  16. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Albert  L.  Lee , U.  8.  Army , commanding  First 

Brigade. 


Hdqes.  First  Brig.,  Ninth  Bit.,  Thirteenth  A.  C., 

May  23,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  respectfully  to  report  that  on  the  morning  of  the 
19th  iustant,  in  accordance  with  directions  from  the  commanding  officer 
of  the  division,  I deployed  my  brigade  in  line  of  battle,  facing  and  dis- 
tant from  the  enemy’s  wrorks  near  Vicksburg  about  three-fourths  of 
mile.  A section  of  the  First  Wisconsin  Battery  was  planted  on  my 
left,  and  opened  on  a fort  in  plain  view.  Our  line  of  skirmishers  ad- 
vanced and  met  with  no  opposition.  I then  advanced  the  line  about 
one-half  mile,  over  a country  very  much  broken  in  character  and  dim- 
cult  for  the  passage  of  troops.  As  our  lines  passed  through  a slig  i 
fringe  of  wood  that  had  hitherto  concealed  us,  the  enemy  opened  his 
guns  with  shell  and  canister.  Sheltered  by  the  many  ravines,  we  es- 
caped much  damage,  and  rested  in  a deep  ravine.  At  this  time  (I 
p.  in.)  I received  an,  official  copy  of  order  from  the  corps  commander,  di- 
recting that  at  2 p.  m.  a simultaneous  charge  be  made  along  our  whole 
line  on  the  enemy’s  works.  At  that  hour  my  men  were  formed  in  line 


Chap.  XXX VI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


231 


of  battle  and  advanced  in  splendid  order.  As  our  line  appeared  on  the 
brow  of  the  hill  and  in  full  view  of  the  enemy,  he  opened  upon  us  a 
most  murderous  and  raking  fire  from  his  many  batteries  on  our  front 
and  flanks.  The  line  steadily  advanced,  however,  but  only  to  find  their 
way  anew  impeded  by  steep  gorges  and  almost  impassable  ravines. 

So  far  as  possible  I sheltered  the  different  regiments  behind  these 
irregularities  of  ground,  and  continued  the  advance,  always  under  a 
galling  fire.  Arrived  by  slow  approaches  within  300  or  400  yards  of 
the  line  of  forts,  our  advance  could  no  longer  be  regular,  but  rather  in 
small  bodies  of  skirmishers. 

At  this  point!  was,  unfortunately,  struck  by  a musket-ball,  the  ball 
entering  my  right  cheek  and  passing  out  at  the  back  of  my  neck.  This 
wound  disabled  me  and  I left  the  field,  turning  over  the  command  of 
the  brigade  to  Colonel  Keigwin,  of  the  Forty-ninth  Indiana  Begiment. 

In  conclusion,  I can  only  say  that  the  behavior  of  the  troops  of  this 
brigade  was  fine,  and  the  commanders  of  regiments  particularly  deserve 
from  me  the  highest  praise  and  commendation. 

I am,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  L.  LEE, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  First  Brigade , Ninth  Division . 

Capt.  J.  W.  Thompson, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Ninth  Division . 


No.  17. 

Report  of  Col.  James  Keigwin , Forty -ninth  Indiana  Infantry , command- 
ing First  Brigade. 

Headquarters  First  Brigade, 

May  30,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  as  a report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  First  Brigade  in  the  late  engagements  in  the  rear  of 
Vicksburg,  on  the  19th,  20th,  21st,  22d,  and  23d  instant : 

On  the  19th,  we  were  formed  in  line  of  battle  by  General  Lee,  who 
at  that  time  was  commanding  the  brigade,  in  the  following  order : The 
Forty-ninth  and  Sixty-ninth  Indiana,  One  hundred  and  eighteenth  Illi- 
nois, One  hundred  and  twentieth  Ohio,  and  Seventh  Kentucky.  Each 
regiment  was  ordered  to  deploy  one  company  forward  as  skirmishers, 
with  instructions  to  get  as  near  the  enemy’s  works  as  possible.  Our 
skirmishers  advanced  about  500  yards,  when  the  line  was  ordered  for- 
ward. We  moved  on  and  came  out  into  an  open  piece  of  ground,  when 
the  enemy  opened  fire  on  us  from  his  batteries.  We  were  halted  at 
this  point,  and  remained  here  for  about  one  hour,  when  we  were  ordered 
to  charge  the  enemy’s  works,  which  were  about  800  yards  in  front  of  us, 
and  the  ground  between  us  so  rough  that  it  was  almost  impossible  to 
move  with  any  order. 

Our  line  moved  forward  as  rapidly  as  possible,  the  nature  of  the 
ground  leading  us  all  into  one  ravine,  which  brought  all  five  of  the  regi- 
ments into  such  a mass  that  General  Lee  ordered  the  regiments  on  the 
right  of  the  brigade  to  move  by  the  right  flank,  in  order  once  more  to 
get  our  lines  in  order. 

During  this  move  the  enemy  poured  grape  and  canister  into  our  front 
and  shell  into  our  flanks,  which  disabled  quite  a number  of  our  officers 

and  men. 


232 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai>.  XXXVI. 


At  this  point  General  Lee  was  wounded,  while  gallantly  leading  his 
brigade  in  the  charge.  The  Forty-ninth  Indiana  moved  on  as  ordered 
by  General  Lee,  and  arrived  at  the  ravine  immediately  in  frout  of  the 
large  work,  and  the  other  regiments  were  moved  back  or  remained  j 
where  they  were  at  the  time  the  general  was  wounded.  As  soon  as  I 
got  to  the  point  in  front  of  the  fort,  I ordered  the  Forty-ninth  Indiana 
to  open  fire  on  the  enemy,  which  resulted  in  the  silencing  of  the  guns 
from  the  work. 

I remained  at  this  point  until  after  dark,  when  I posted  a company 
from  each  regiment  to  hold  the  ground  already  gained  during  the 
night,  and  had  the  Forty-ninth  to  retire  to  the  rear  for  rest. 

Agreeably  to  orders,  I moved  the  brigade  forward  before  daylight 
next  morning  to  our  line  of  pickets,  and  remained  during  the  day  at 
this  point,  skirmishing  with  the  enemy.  I ordered  a strong  picket 
to  remain,  and  had  the  brigade  to  .retire  for  the  night  for  rest  and 
rations. 

On  the  21st,  we  were  again  in  line  before  daylight,  and  skirmished 
with  the  Confederates  all  day.  In  the  evening  left  a strong  picket; 
retired,  and  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

On  the  22d,  we  were  ordered  to  prepare  our  columns  for  an  assault, 
which  was  done  in  the  following  order  : Colonel  Lindsey,  with  the  Sec- 
ond Brigade,  formed  the  right  column.  Immediately  on  his  left  I formed 
the  Forty-ninth  and  Sixty-ninth  Indiana  in  column,  doubled  on  the  cen- 
ter, which  formed  the  center  column  of  the  division.  The  left  column 
was  composed  of  the  Seventh  Kentucky  Infantry  and  One  hundred  and 
eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  doubled  on  the  center,  with  the  One  hun- 
dred and  twentieth  Ohio  as  a reserve. 

At  the  signal  the  three  columns  moved,  and,  judging  from  their  ap- 
pearance, every  officer  and  soldier  seemed  confident  of  success ; but  as 
we  neared  the  enemy  we  found  obstacles  which  were  more  in  our  way 
than  the  balls  of  the  enemy.  The  abatis  in  the  ravines  between  us  and 
the  enemy’s  works  were  almost  impassable.  The  Forty-ninth  Indiana 
passed  the  first  abatis  and  found  cover  behind  a small  hill  under  the 
works  of  the  enemy.  The  Sixty-ninth  Indiana,  on  the  left,  I ordered  to 
open  fire  on  the  enemy,  who  were  concentrating  a fire  on  us  from  three 
different  points.  They  opened  their  fire  with  telling  effect,  which  ma- 
terially assisted  the  Forty-ninth  in  crossing  the  first  abatis. 

The  Seventh  Kentucky  suffered  more  severely  than  any  of  the  rest  of 
the  regiments  in  the  command.  They  were  leading  the  charge  on  the 
left,  and  had  to  pass  over  a bare  hill,  when  the  enemy  poured  such  a 
heavy  and  destructive  fire  into  them  that  part  were  forced  to  retire,  and 
those  that  did  get  over  the  point  were  forced  to  remain  there  prisoners 
until  dark,  when  most  of  them  succeeded  in  making  good  their  escape. 

The  One  hundred  and  eighteenth  Illinois  charged  over  the  hill  on  the 
right  of  the  Seventh  Kentucky,  but  were  forced  to  retire,  as  the  fire  of 
the  enemy  was  too  hot  for  them  to  remain,  it  also  being  evident  that  the 
abatis  could  not  be  passed.  We  remained  at  the  points  gained  until 
after  nightfall,  when  I left  a strong  picket,  and  retired  to  our  former 
bivouac. 

On  the  23d,  1 ordered  two  companies  from  each  regiment  to  skir- 
mish with  the  enemy  in  the  front,  relieving  them  regularly  during  the 
day. 

Inclosed  I send  you  a list  of  the  casualties  in  the  brigade  from  the 
16th  instant  to  the  23d.# 


Embodied  in  revised  statements. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


233 


Id  conclusion,  I will  say  that  every  officer  and  soldier  in  the  command 
was  ever  prompt  in  obeying  all  orders  that  were  given  by  me  during 
the  time  1 was  in  command. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  KEIGWIN, 
Colonel , Commanding  Brigade. 

Capt.  J.  W.  Thompson, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Ninth  Division. 


No.  18. 

Report  of  Col.  John  G.  Fonda , One  hundred  and  eighteenth  Illinois 
Infantry , including  operations  May  16  and  17. 

Big  Black  River  Railroad  Bridge,  Miss., 

May  25, 1863. 

Captain  : In  compliance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  94, 1 have  the  honor 
to  report  a statement  of  the  part  the  One  hundred  and  eighteenth  Illi- 
nois Infantry  took  in  the  engagements  of  the  16th,  17th,  19th,  20th, 
21st,  22d,  and  23d.  ’ ’ ’ 

On  the  morning  of  the  16th,  the  regiment  marched  in  rear  of  Lan- 
phere’s  battery.  On  arriving  near  where  the  line  of  battle  was  formed 
an  order  was  given  by  General  Osterhaus  to  form  line  in  the  road  on  the 
kilL  Afterward  an  order  was  received  through  an  aide  to  move  down 
the  hill  and  form  in  the  timber,  on  the  left  of  the  Sixty-ninth  Indiana, 
with  orders  to  govern  my  movements  by  those  of  that  regiment. 

At  about  11  a.  m.  a forward  movement  was  made.  My  regiment  was 
thrown  into  a very  unfavorable  position,  and  received  a heavy  fire  from 
the  enemy.  The  company  of  skirmishers,  who  steadily  advanced,  had 
its  captain  killed  and  first  lieutenant  mortally  wounded : the  orderlv 
sergeant  and  one  private  were  also  wounded.  At  the  time  it  was  thought 
the  sergeant  was  mortally  wounded,  but  there  is  now  some  hope  of  his 
recovery.  I secured  a more  favorable  position  as  speedily  as  possible, 
and  shortly  after  the  brigade  moved  forward  again.  The  enemy  at- 
tacked us  here,  and  seemed  to  make  an  effort  to  break  through  our 
lines.  They  were  repulsed  and  the  position  held.  Shortly  there  was  a 
movement  of  the  regiments  on  my  right,  which,  as  I afterward  learned, 
was  caused  by  an  attack  on  the  extreme  right  of  the  brigade.  Rearing 
that  it  might  cause  some  excitement  among  my  men,  I kept  them  in 
line  until  the  other  regiments  had  changed  front,  when  I moved  my  men 

nn?m^an*eS  new  l)osi^on?  where  we  remained  until  3 o’clock. 

I he  total  loss  was  2 commissioned  officers  killed  and  3 enlisted  men 
severely  wounded.  We  encamped  that  night  at  Edwards  Station. 

Un  if?  we  moved  toward  Black  River,  and  at  8 o’clock  a.  in. 
iorrned  line  on  the  right  of  the  Seventh  Kentucky,  and  moved  steadily 
forward  toward  the  fortifications.  At  12  m.  we  entered  the  intrench- 
ments. 

On  the  19th,  the  regiment  was  formed  in  line  in  sight  of  the  fortifica- 
tions  at  Vicksburg,  with  the  Sixty-ninth  Indiana  on  the  right  and  One 
Hundred  and  twentieth  Ohio  on  the  left,  with  one  company  of  skir- 
er®  111  advance.  In  this  order  we  moved  forward  in  the  direction 
o tne  tortifications,  and  took  position  in  a ravine,  and  had  5 men 
wounded.  The  regiment  encamped  here  for  the  night. 

n the  afternoon  of  the  20th,  a forward  movement  was  again  made, 


234 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXYI. 


which  secured  the  last  height  in  front  of  tbe  rebel  works.  One  man  was 
here  killed.  At  night  the  regiment  was  moved  back  to  the  camp  of  the 
19th  instant. 

On  the  morning  of  the  21st,  moved  out  to  the  front  and  remained 
there  all  day,  and  returned  to  the  same  camp  at  night. 

On  the  22d,  an  order  was  received  to  charge  the  works  of  the  enemy. 
My  regiment  was  formed  in  column  by  division  in  the  rear  of  the  Sev- 
enth Kentucky,  with  orders  to  follow  it  over  the  hill.  That  regiment 
advanced  until  about  two-thirds  of  it  had  reached  the  top  of  the  hill, 
when  the  enemy’s  fire  became  so  severe  that  those  who  had  not  passed 
broke  back  and  did  not  pass.  No  further  attempt  was  made  to  pass  the 
hill,  for  the  reason  that  the  ground  beyond  was  so  cut  up  with  ravines 
and  covered  with  brush  that  it  was  impossible  for  troops  to  pass  over  it. 

I remained  at  the  top  of  the  hill  with  my  regiment  during  the  day, 
skirmishing  with  the  enemy  all  the  time.  Near  night  they  opened  a 
heavy  fire  upon  us  as  though  they  intended  to  drive  us  from  the  hill. 
A company  of  the  Twenty- second  Indiana  came  promptly  to  my  aid, 
and  they  were  repulsed.  At  dark  I was  ordered  to  withdraw.  The 
men  were  much  exhausted,  having  been  on  constant  duty  since  the 
morning  of  the  19th. 

The  following  casualties  occurred : * 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  G.  FONDA, 

Col.,  Comdg.  One  hundred  and  eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry  Vols. 

Capt.  W.  H.  Peckinpaugh, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  First  Brigade. 


No.  19. 

Report  of  Col.  Thomas  J.  Lucas,  Sixteenth  Indiana  Infantry,  First 
Brigade,  Tenth  Division,  including  operations  since  April  13. 

Camp  in  Field,  near  Vicksburg,  Miss., 

May  24,  1863. 

Sir  : On  April  13,  we  received  orders  to  cook  two  days’  rations  and 
prepare  to  march  at  a moment’s  notice.  The  day  passed  and  no  further 
orders  until,  next  morning,  the  14th  instant,  we  were  ordered  to  strike 
tents  and  be  ready  to  fall  in.  My  command  was  formed  at  4 o’clock, 
and  took  up  our  line  of  march  on  the  road  leading  from  Milliken’s  Bend 
to  Richmond,  La.  We  marched  out  4 miles,  and  encamped  for  the  night 
at  a place  called  Oak  Hill. 

Next  morning,  15th  instant,  we  took  up  our  line  of  march.  Traveled 
all  day  until  we  arrived  at  Holmes’  plantation,  a distance  of  about  15 
miles,  where  we  remained  in  camp  until  Saturday  evening,  April  21, 
when  we  again  took  up  our  line  of  march,  and  arrived  at  Smith’s  plan- 
tation about  11  p.  m.,  where  we  remained  until  2 p.  m.  next  day,  April 

22,  when  we  embarked  on  transports  in  Bayou and  ran  into  the 

Mississippi  River  opposite  New  Carthage.  We  then  ran  down  as  far  as 
Perkins’  plantation,  where  we  disembarked  and  encamped  for  the  night, 
remaining  there  until  Tuesday,  April  26,  when  we  received  orders  to 
embark  on  transports  and  barges  and  prepare  for  the  attack  on  Grand 

* Nominal  list,  omitted,  shows  2 officers  and  3 enlisted  men  killed  and  15  men 
wounded. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


235 


Gulf,  which  was  opened  upon  by  the  gunboats  early  on  Wednesday 
morning,  lasting  six  hours,  when  we  received  orders  to  disembark  and 
take  up  our  line  of  march  for  a plantation  4 miles  below.  Encamped 
for  the  night. 

The  next  day,  April  28,  about  noon,  we  re  embarked  on  the  gunboat 
General  Price,  and  ran  down  the  river  to  a plantation  10  miles  below, 
on  the  Mississippi  shore,  where  we  disembarked.  About  midnight  we 
took  up  our  line  of  march  for  Port  Gibson,  and  arrived  within  4 miles 
of  Port  Gibson  on  the  morning  of  May  1,  when  we  found  the  advance 
of  our  army  had  engaged  the  enemy.  We  were  immediately  ordered 
into  position,  which  was  the  reserve  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 
We  had  not  been  long  in  position  until  we  took  a prisoner,  he  being 
the  first  that  had  been  taken.  The  day  was  excessively  hot,  but,  not- 
withstanding, our  men  stood  it  bravely.  In  the  afternoon  we  advanced 
farther  than  any  other  command,  but  were  ordered  back  to  our  old 
position,  having  2 men  wounded.  Night  came  on,  and  we  were  ordered 
to  lie  on  our  arms. 

Next  morning  before  daylight  we  were  called  up  and  ordered  to  fall 
in  line  of  battle,  which  we  did,  and  remained  so  until  7 o’clock  of  the 
morning  of  May  2,  when  the  First  Brigade  was  ordered  in  the  advance, 
the  Sixteenth  Regiment  on  the  right.  We  marched  through  the  woods 
for  about  2 miles,  when  we  found  the  enemy  had  evacuated  the  town. 
Orders  were  given  to  march  the  command  by  the  right  flank,  but  owing 
to  some  misunderstanding  were  not  carried  out.  However,  our  brigade 
was  first  in  the  town,  and  planted  the  first  American  flag  on  the  court- 
house. We  found  the  enemy  had  destroyed  the  bridge  across  the 

Bayou . A detail  was  made,  and  before  four  hours  had  elapsed 

our  troops  were  crossing. 

Next  morning,  May  3,  about  7 o’clock,  we  received  orders  to  take 
up  our  line  of  march,  which  we  did,  and  arrived  at  the  bridge  over 
Bayou  Pierre,  which  the  enemy  had  tried  to  destroy,  but  failed.  We 
went  into  camp  about  7 o’clock  the  same  evening,  and  remained  until 
the  morning  of  May  6,  when  we  again  took  up  our  -line  of  march,  and 
arrived  at  Rocky  Springs  on  the  afternoon  of  the  6th,  where  we  re- 
mained until  the  afternoon  of  the  9th.  We  again  took  up  our  line  of 
march,  and  arrived  at  Big  Sandy,  encampiug  for  the  night. 

The  morning  of  the  10th,  we  started  for  Cayuga,  where  we  arrived 
at  about  8 p.  m.,  and  remained  until  the  morning  of  the  12th,  when  we 
took  up  our  line  of  march  for  Edwards  Depot,  and  arrived  within  5 
miles  ot  it,  when  we  drove  in  the  enemy’s  pickets  and  encamped  for 
the  night. 

Next  morning,  13th  instant,  we  were  ordered  back,  and  marched  to 
Auburn,  where  we  remained  until  the  morning  of  the  15th  instant,  when 
we  again  took  up  our  line  of  march  for  Raymond,  and  arrived  there 
about  9 p.  m.  Encamped  for  the  night. 

Next  morning,  16th  instant,  we  took  up  our  line  of  march,  and  came 
in  contact  with  the  enemy’s  pickets  about  6 miles  from  Raymond.  We 
immediately  got  into  position  and  opened  fire  on  them  with  the  artil- 
lery,  driving  them  before  us.  A general  engagement  ensued,  which 
resulted  in  driving  back  the  enemy. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th  instant,  we  were  ordered  to  advance.  We 
had  not  gone  far  when  we  found  the  enemy  had  fallen  back  on  Big 
Black.  We  passed  through  Edwards  Depot,  and  marched  on  to  Big 
Black,  where  we  arrived  at  about  12  m.  Formed  line  of  battle  this 
side,  and  was  ordered  to  advance j we  did  so.  Had  not  proceeded  far 
when  400  prisoners  surrendered  to  this  brigade.  The  enemy  crossed 


236 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI, 


Big  Black,  destroyed  the  railroad  bridge,  and  fell  back  to  within  3 miles 
of  Vicksburg,  where  their  works  commenced. 

On  the  morning  of  the  19th,  our  skirmishers  were  ordered  to  the  front, 
where  they  remained  all  night.  We  had  1 man  killed. 

On  the  morning  of  May  20,  the  Sixteenth  Regiment  was  ordered  out 
as  skirmishers.  We  advanced  within  300  yards  of  the  enemy’s  works. 
At  night  we  were  relieved  by  General  Benton’s  brigade,  General  Carr’s 
division. 

On  the  21st,  we  were  ordered  to  rest. 

On  the  morning  of  the  22d,  a circular  was  received  from  General  Bur- 
bridge,  stating  that  a simultaneous  charge  would  be  made  around  the 
whole  line ; that  General  Benton  was  to  charge  the  enemy’s  works  at  10 
o’clock  the  same  morning,  and  his  brigade  was  to  support  mine.  Ten 
o’clock  arrived.  The  troops  started  according  to  orders;  drove  the 
enemy  inside  of  the  fort,  and  held  them  there  in  check  until  6 o’clock  in 
the  evening,  when  General  Quinby’s  division  came  up  to  relieve  us.  We 
were  ordered  to  fall  back.  In  doing  so  the  enemy  came  out  of  their 
works  and  tried  to  flank  General  Quinby’s  division,  which  caused  some 
little  excitement.  Their  works  could  not  be  crossed.  We  fell  back  to 
our  old  position  held  in  the  morning,  and  remained  for  the  night. 

Our  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  I sent  to  your  headquarters,  which 
amounted  to  31  men  in  all. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  J.  LUCAS, 

Colonel , Commanding  Sixteenth  Indiana  Volunteers. 

Lieut.  R.  Conover, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


No.  20. 

Report  'of  Col.  Peter  J.  Sullivan , Forty-eighth  Ohio  Infantry , Second 
Brigade , including  operations  since  December  20,  1862. 

Hdqrs.  Forty-eighth  Regt.  Ohio  Vol.  Infantry, 

Vicksburg , Miss.,  August  4,  1863. 

Sir:  Pursuant  to  circular  dated  July  19,  1863,  from  Major-General 
Ord,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  followiug  report  of  the  part  borne 
by  the  Forty-eighth  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry  in  the  ever-memorable  and 
eventful  campaign  just  closed  with  the  fall  of  Vicksburg  and  Jackson  : 

This  regiment,  formerly  in  the  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman, 
was  attached  to  Brig.  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith’s  division  by  Special  Orders, 
No.  21,  from  Maj.  Gen.  S.  A.  Hurlbut,  dated  Fort  Pickering,  Tenn., 
December  19,  1862,  and  by  him  assigned  to  said  Second  Brigade,  com- 
manded by  Col.  W.  J.  Landram. 

About  this  time,  consequent  on  wounds  received  in  the  battle  of 
Shiloh,  and  a severe  fall  from  my  horse  near  Memphis,  fracturing  my 
right  arm  and  wrist,  while  I was  in  command  of  Fort  Pickering,  Tenn., 
I was  placed  on  detached  service  by  order  of  Maj.  Gen  W.  T.  Sherman, 
and  was  continued  on  said  service  by  a subsequent  order  (No.  25)  from 
Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant,  dated  January  25,  1863;  consequently  the  com- 
mand devolved  on  Lieut.  Col.  Job  R.  Parker. 

On  the  20th  of  December,  1862,  in  pursuance  of  orders,  this  regiment, 
numbering  379  enlisted  men  and  23  commissioned  officers  for  duty, 
under  command  of  said  Lieut.  Col.  Parker,  embarked  on  board  a trans- 


Chaj\  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


237 


port  at  Fort  Pickering,  Tenn.,  and  accompanied  the  expedition  down 
the  Mississippi  Biver,  under  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman. 

On  December  27,  1862,  we  landed  at  the  mouth  of  the  Yazoo  Biver 
and  were  immediately  advanced  with  the  rest  of  the  troops  some  6 miles 
toward  Vicksburg,  where  we  had  a successful  skirmish  with  the  enemy 
without  loss  to  this  regiment.  For  several  days  succeeding,  our  brigade 
was  placed  in  reserve,  and  on  January  2,  1863,  received  orders  to  re- 
embark at  2 a.  in.,  which  was  duly  effected  and  without  loss  to  the  regi- 
ment. From  the  Yazoo  Biver  we  were  conveyed  in  transports  to  White 
Biver,  thence  into  the  Arkansas,  and  on  January  10  were  landed  at 
Arkansas  Post  (Fort  Hindman),  which  was  by  our  forces  immediately 
closely  invested  by  land  and  water. 

January  31, 1863. — The  forenoon  was  occupied  in  making  dispositions 
of  the  United  States  troops  preparatory  to  an  attack  on  the  enemy. 
This  regiment  was  placed  in  reserve,  and  we  were  informed  by  the  bri- 
gade commander  that  he  did  not  much  expect  to  need  it.  Half  an  hour 
after  the  commencement  of  the  action  it  became  evident  that  the  whole 
force  would  be  required. 

The  Forty-eighth  Ohio  was  then  ordered  to  the  right  of  this  brigade, 
to  support  Brigadier-General  Burbridge’s  line,  which  it  did  with  prompt- 
ness and  in  good  order.  On  reaching  the  point  designated,  Brig.  Gen. 
A.  J.  Smith,  our  division  commander,  in  bold  and  commanding  language 
ordered  us  forward,  saying,  “Forty-eighth  Ohio,  go  right  in!”  The 
regiment  then  marched  forward  under  a galling  fire,  through  tangled 
brush  and  fallen  tree-tops,  to  the  top  of  a ridge ; thence  over  a fence  to 
an  open  field ; thence  by  the  right  flank  about  200  yards;  thence  by 
the  left  flank  in  line  of  battle,  until  we  came  within  150  yards  of  the 
main  fort  and  directly  in  front  of  it.  Here  we  were  ordered  to  halt  and 
lie  down,  and  immediately  afterward  to  rise  up  and  “forward,”  which 
we  did  until  we  came  within  a very  short  distance  of  the  fort,  keeping 
up  all  the  time  a most  severe  and  destructive  fire  on  the  enemv  until 
about  5 p.  m.,  when  he  hauled  down  his  colors  and  hoisted  the  white 
flag  m token  of  surrender.  We  then  rushed  in,  took  possession  of  the 
fort,  and  ours  was  the  second  flag  planted  on  the  main  fort. 

Colonel  Landram,  our  brigade  commander,  who  had  fought  gallantly 
by  our  side,  complimented  us  on  the  spot,  saying  the  Forty-eighth  Ohio 
was  the  best  old  regiment  out.  Lieut.  Col.  J.  H.  Hammond,  chief  of 
Maj.  Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman’s  staff,  also  complimented  the  regiment  for 
its  usual  dashing  bravery. 

Our  loss  in  this  engagement  was  but  2 killed  and  14  wounded:  there 
were  no  casualties  among  the  commissioned  officers,  except  a slight  flesh- 
wound  which  Lieut.  Col.  Job  B.  Parker,  of  said  regiment,  received  at 
long  range  in  his  left  forearm,  just  as  the  regiment  was  marching  up  to 
its  position  and  before  it  was  engaged  in  the  action.  He  immediately 
retired  from  the  field,  and  Captain  Peterson,  of  Company  K,  then  took 
command  and  led  the  regiment  into  the  action.  A few  days  after  he 
was  so  wounded,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Parker  went  home  on  a twenty 
days  leave  of  absence,  and  did  not  again  rejoin  his  regiment  until  the 
^ . ot  April,  1863.  Soon  after  this  engagement,  Captain  Peterson 
resigned,  and  Captain  Lindsey,  of  Companv  B,  took  command  of  the 
regiment. 

We  remained  at  Arkansas  Post  until  January  17,  when  we  again  em- 
barked  on  board  our  transports,  and  the  expedition  steamed  down  into 
the  Mississippi  Biver,  landing  at  Young’s  Point,  La.,  January  23.  Here 
the  regiment  was  engaged  for  some  time  in  digging  the  canal.  The 
weather  became  so  wet  that  our  camps  were  in  many  places  overflowed, 


238 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX VL 


and  the  privations  and  sickness  of  our  troops  in  many  regiments  [became] 
so  serious  that  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps  was  ordered  to  Milliken’s 
Bend,  La.,  a more  healthy  and  drier  locality,  where  we  landed  March  9. 

Here  the  troops  rapidly  recovered  their  health.  That  of  this  regi- 
ment, I am  happy  to  say,  however,  had  been  invariably  good  since  we  left 
Fort  Pickering,  but  one  or  two  deaths  from  disease  having  occurred 
during  this  time,  and  the  regimental  hospital,  under  the  charge  of  Dr. 
Willis,  never  having  more  than  three  or  four  patients  in  it  at  a time, 
notwithstanding  the  extremely  severe  privations  undergone  by  the  men. 
This  is  owing  in  a great  degree  to  the  care  which  was  paid  to  the  clean- 
liness of  the  men  and  the  fine  sanitary  condition  of  the  camp.  The 
credit  of  this  is  mainly  due  to  Captain  Lindsey,  who  was  then  in  com- 
mand of  the  regiment;  to  Adjutant  McGill  and  to  Dr.  Willis,  who  were 
indefatigable  in  their  efforts  to  maintain  a proper  police  and  sanitary 
condition.  The  company  commandants,  too,  cheerfully  aided  in  this 
good  work. 

April  15,  in  pursuance  of  orders,  we  moved  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to 
the  lower  landing  below  Hard  Times,  where  we  arrived  April  29,  en- 
camping on  the  way  at  Richmond,  Roundaway  Bayou,  Holmes’,  Smith’s, 
and  Rossel’s  plantations,  Red  del’s  Bayou,  Perkins’  and  Elliot’s  planta- 
tions, and  Hard  Times,  a distance  of  62  miles. 

April  30,  we  crossed  the  Mississippi  River,  landing  at  Bruin sburg, 
Miss.,  and  next  morning,  after  a march  of  15  miles,  we  met  and  engaged 
the  enemy  at  Magnolia  Hills,  and  kept  driving  him  back  all  day. 

Next  day  (May  2)  we  marched  into  Port  Gibson,  a distance  of  about  2 
miles,  without  meeting  the  enemy,  he  having  retreated  during  the  night. 

From  Port  Gibson  we  marched,  via  Bayou  Pierre,  Willow  Springs, 
Rocky  Springs,  Big  Sandy,  Cayuga,  Old  Auburn,  New  Auburn,  and 
Raymond,  to  Champion’s  Hill,  near  Edwards  Station,  Miss. 

Here  there  was  a severe  and  bloody  engag*ement  with  the  enemy. 
During  this  engagement  our  regiment  was  detailed  to  act  in  reserve  and 
guard  the  trains,  and,  after  the  enemy  was  defeated,  we  moved  on  the 
17th  to  Black  River ; crossed  it  the  next  day,  and  marched  to  within  5 
miles  of  Vicksburg,  a distance  of  65  miles  from  Port  Gibson  and  from 
Milliken’s  Bend  123  miles. 

On  the  19th,  we  advanced  and  drove  the  enemy’s  pickets  out  of  their 
rifle-pits  into  their  fortifications. 

May  22,  we  engaged  in  the  charge  on  the  enemy’s  fortifications  in  rear 
of  Vicksburg,  and,  after  a most  sanguinary  and  bloody  engagement, 
succeeded  in  planting  our  bullet-riddled  flag  on  the  enemy’s  fort  nearly 
in  front  of  us,  where  it  remained  till  evening,  when  the  enemy  massed 
his  forces  in  vastly  superior  numbers  to  ours,  and  regained  possession  of 
the  fort.  Perceiving  his  intention,  we  saved  our  flag  before  the  charge 
was  made. 

At  10  p.  m.  we  were  ordered  to  fall  back.  The  Forty-eighth  was 
never  driven  back  from  its  position  near  this  fort  until  ordered  to  fall 
back,  as  above  stated.  There  were  none  with  our  flag  while  planted  on 
this  fort  save  the  color-guard,  the  regiment  being  a little  to  the  left  of 
the  fort  during  the  time. 

Our  casualties  in  this  engagement  were,  so  far  as  I have  been  able  to 
ascertain,  32  enlisted  men  killed,  wounded,  and  missing ; also  Major 
Moats,  one  of  the  bravest  and  truest  of  men,  was  mortally  wounded, 
and  has  since  died.  Captain  Gunsaullus,  of  Company  F,  a gallant  and 
deserving  officer,  was  severely  wounded,  bub  is,  I am  happy  to  say,  fast 
recovering.  Lieut.  Col.  Job  R.  Parker,  by  some  means  or  other,  received 
a very  slight  flesh  wound  on  the  cheek-bone,  merely  breaking  the  skin. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


239 


He  shortly  after  retired  from  the  field,  and  on  May  31  went  home  on  a 
twenty  days’  leave  of  absence.  He  has  never  since  returned  to  his  regi- 
ment nor  reported  to  these  headquarters. 

Fired  with  the  determination  of  aiding  in  the  reduction  and  capture 
of  Vicksburg,  at  my  own  special  request  I was  released  from  detached 
service  at  Memphis,  and  on  the  evening  of  June  22  last  I rejoined  my 
regiment,  then  in  rear  of  Vicksburg,  and  on  the  next  day  resumed 
command. 

Our  troops  in  the  mean  time  were  digging  their  zigzag  way  up  to  the 
epemv’s  breastworks.  Gradually  we  closed  in  upon  him  till  July  3,  when 
General  Pemberton  opened  negotiations  with  Major-General  Grant, 
which  ended  in  the  surrender  of  this  great  stronghold  to  the  United 
States  forces  on  July  4.  This,  indeed,  was  a glorious  triumph  for 
liberty  and  humanity. 

Early  the  next  morning  we  marched,  among  50,000  chosen  troops, 
under  command  of  Maj.  Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman,  in  hot  pursuit  of  General 
Joe  Johnston  and  his  forces,  and  after  four  days’  march,  hungry,  thirsty, 
and  sunburned,  we  came  up  to  him  at  Jackson,  Miss.,  where  we  found 
him  strongly  intrenched,  with  formidable  breastworks  and  forts  in  his 
front  and  flanks,  and  the  Pearl  River  and  an  impassable  swamp  in  his 
rear. 

During  the  siege,  which  lasted  eight  days,  we  were  almost  continually 
on  the  alert,  and  gradually  and  steadily  advancing  upon  the  enemy 
until  the  night  of  July  16,  when,  after  severe  fighting,  he  stole  away 
aad  fled  from  the  veteran  Sherman  and  his  gallant  and  well-disciplined 
troops,  who  love  him  as  a child  would  a fond  father.  Our  casualties 
here  were  but  2 men  wounded. 

In  the  memorable  campaign  just  closed  with  the  fall  of  Vicksburg 
and  Jackson,  the  Forty-eighth  Regiment  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry  has 
had  but  11  men  killed,  38  wounded,  and  1 missing:  in  all, 50,  including 
officers  and  men. 

By  the  circular  above  alluded  to,  I am  ordered  to  mention  the  weak- 
kneed  and  chicken-hearted  as  well  as  the  brave  and  true  officers  and 
men  of  the  regiment.  This  regiment,  with  but  a very  few  exceptions, 
has  been  celebrated  for  its  good  order  and  discipline,  as  well  as  for  its 
dashing  and  gallant  bravery  on  the  field  of  battle. 

The  accompanying  paper,  marked  A,*  contains  the  names  of  those 
gallant  officers  and  men  who  deserve  to  be  kindly  remembered  and  re- 
warded by  their  country. 

McGill>  who  has  Just  resigned,  on  account  of  bad  health; 
Drs.  Willis  and  Wiles,  surgeons  of  the  regiment,  and  Captain  Lindsey, 
deserve  special  mention  for  their  untiring  efforts  to  preserve  the  good 
health  of  the  men,  and  to  enforce  good  order  and  discipline  on  all  occa- 
sions. Those  are  tried  and  true  men.  Lieutenant  Lynch,  acting  quar- 
termaster of  the  regiment,  is  also  entitled  to  credit  for  the  execution  of 
his  duties. 

Those  brave  fellows,  the  color-guard,  who  were  in  the  charge  on  the 
enemy  in  rear  of  Vicksburg  on  May  22,  ought  to  be  remembered  and 
Reid  up  as  true  heroes  by  the  brave  and  the  true.  Their  names  are 
David  L.  Vore,  Company  E,  color  sergeant;  Isaac  H.  Carmin,  corporal 
Company  A ; Isaac  Scott,  corporal  Company  B ; Metcalf  Bell,  corporal 
Company  F;  Jesse  Ellis,  private  Company  D ; Allen  Pierce,  corporal 
Company  D;  Albert  FT.  Shumard,  corporal  Company  G;  James  D. 
Wolf,  private  Company  K.  7 


* Not  found. 


240 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  IChap.  XXXYL 


The  health  of  the  regiment,  with  but  a few  exceptions,  is  good. 
The  strength  of  the  regiment  is,  present  and  absent,  362  enlisted  men 
and  27  commissioned  officers.  Of  this  number  there  are  present  for  duty 
269  enlisted  men  and  17  commissioned  officers. 

Should  time,  health,  and  circumstances  permit,  I will  make  a more 
extended  and  minute  report  of  the  part  which  my  regiment  has  taken 
in  this  struggle  between  liberty  and  anarchy  since  its  action  in  the 
battle  of  Shiloh  up  to  the  fall  of  Vicksburg  and  Jackson.  My  feeble 
health  compels  me  to  abridge  this  report,  yet  I trust  I have  fulfilled  all 
the  requirements  of  the  said  circular. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J PETEE  J.  SULLIVAN, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

First  Lieut.  0.  O.  Tracy, 

A.  A.  A.  G .,  Second  Brig.,  Tenth  Div.,  Thirteenth  A.  C. 


No.  21. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen . Alvin  P.  Hovey , U.  S.  Army , commanding  Twelfth 

Division. 

Hdqrs.  Twelfth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Vichsburg , Miss.,  July  5,  1863. 

Colonel  : In  compliance  with  orders,  I have  the  honor  to  make  the 
following  report  of  the  operations  of  the  forces  under  my  command 

before  Vicksburg : ^ . . 

My  first  brigade,  commanded  by  Brigadier-General  McGinnis,  arrived 
before  the  outer  works  of  Vicksburg  on  the  20th  day  of  May.  On  the 
22d,  that  brigade  was  ordered  by  Major-General  McClernand  to  support 
General  Osterhaus’  division  on  the  extreme  left,  in  an  attack  upon  the 
city,  which  was  to  be  simultaneous  along  the  whole  line.  I was  per- 
sonally ordered  to  take  charge  of  the  batteries  in  front  of  Osterhaus’ 
and  my  own  command.  Those  placed  in  battery  were  Captain  Foster’s 
20-pounder  Parrotts  (First  Wisconsin),  Lanphere’s  10  pounder  Eodmans 
(Seventh  Michigan),  and  the  Second  Ohio,  under  command  of  First 
Lieut.  Augustus  Beach,  and  Sixteenth  Ohio  Battery,  under  command  of 
First  Lieutenant  Twist.  During  the  attack  these  batteries  did  admi- 
rable execution,  and  fully  sustained  their  part  of  the  charge.  The 
position  of  the  defenses,  with  abatis  filling  the  approaches,  prevented 
General  Osterhaus’  forces  from  making  a successful  charge,  and  my 
brigade,  supporting  his  forces,  was  not  seriously  engaged.  The  brigade 
at  this  time,  owing  to  the  sickness  of  General  McGinnis,  was  commanded 
by  Col.  William  T.  Spicely. 

On  the  24th  of  May,  my  second  brigade,  under  command  of  Col. 
James  E.  Slack,  arrived  from  Black  Eiver  Bridge,  having  been  relieved 
by  Brigadier-General  Osterhaus.  Colonel  Lindsey,  of  the  Ninth  Divis- 
ion, with  his  brigade,  was  temporarily  assigned  to  my  command.  At 
that  date  I commanded  the  extreme  left  of  the  continuous  line  of  our 
forces.  Colonel  Lindsey’s  brigade  on  my  right,  Colonel  Slack’s  in  the 
center,  and  General  McGinnis’s  brigade  on  the  extreme  left. 

Eeceiving  orders  on  the  23d  to  prepare  for  a siege,  my  forces  com- 
menced the  work  with  spirit,  and  during  the  whole  period  prosecuted 
their  labors  with  success,  pressing  our  rifle-pits  to  within  a few  yards 
of  the  enemy’s  fortifications.  During  this  period,  Capt.  George  W, 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


241 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

Schofield  placed  his  battery  (First  Missouri)  iu  position,  and  with  much 
labor  succeeded  in  procuring  four  24-pounder  siege  guns  from  Haynes’ 
Bluff,  which  did  great  execution  during  the  siege.  The  strain  upon  my 
forces  was  extreme.  For  more  than  forty  days  they  were  under  con- 
stant fire,  casualties  happening  daily  in  the  midst  of  their  camps;  men 
were  killed  and  wounded  in  their  beds,  at  the  table,  in  the  rifle-pits, 
and  yet,  during  all  this  long  period,  there  was  no  murmur,  no  complaint. 
They  were  veterans  and  determined  to  succeed. 

On  the  4tli  day  of  July,  1863,  the  city  surrendered,  and  on  the  5th, 
without  time  for  a glimpse  at  the  prize,  my  division  was  ordered  by 
Maj.  Gen.  E.  O.  0.  Ord,  who  had  succeeded  to  the  command  of  the 
Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  to  pursue  the  retreating  forces  of  General 
Johnston. 

Officers  and  men  displayed  great  firmness,  coolness,  and  bravery  dur- 
ing this  ever-memorable  siege,  and  I cannot  discriminate  among  them. 
####*## 

Killed,  19;  wounded,  76  ; total,  95. 

No  report  having  been  received  from  Colonel  Lindsey,  1 am  unable 
to  report  his  casualties. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALVIN  P.  HOVEY, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding . 

Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  22. 

Report  of  Maj.  Salue  G.  Van  Anda , Twenty -first  Iowa  Infantry , Secona 
Brigade , Fourteenth  Division. 

Battle-field,  near  Vicksburg,  Miss., 

May  25,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  action  taken  by  the  Twenty- 
first  Regiment  Iowa  Volunteers  in  the  battle  on  the  22d  of  May,  1863, 
in  the  rear  of  Vicksburg. 

The  Twenty -first  Regiment  received  orders  to  be  ready  to  charge  on 
the  enemy’s  works  at  10  a.  m.  At  the  hour  precisely,  I formed  the  regi- 
ment in  the  rear  of  the  gallant  Twenty-second  Iowa,  within  20  rods  of 
the  enemy’s  rifle-pits.  In  this  position  we  were  partially  covered  from 
the  enemy’s  fire  by  the  hill  immediately  in  front  of  their  works.  I then 
gave  orders  to  fix  bayonets,  and  charge  by  the  left  flank  over  the  bill 
and  into  the  enemy’s  rifle-pits.  During  this  charge,  the  fire  of  the 
enemy  from  both  flanks,  as  well  as  the  front,  was  terrific.  Many  of  our 
officers  and  men  fell  on  every  side,  but  with  a determination  that  knew 
no  fear,  the  enemy’s  works  were  gained,  and  they  were  routed  from  their 
stronghold.  This  position  we  held  till  after  dark,  pouring  continually 
a destructive  fire  into  their  ranks.  Being  unable  to  hold  our  position 
longer,  we  withdrew  under  cover  of  darkness,  carrying  with  us  many 
ot  our  killed  and  wounded.  The  loss  of  our  regiment  in  this  terrible 
struggle  was  severe ; many  of  our  officers  were  either  killed  or  wounded. 
An  official  report  is  herewith  furnished  you.* 

Lieut.  Col.  C.  W.  Dunlap  was  shot  through  the  head  and  instantly 
killed.  He  was  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson  and  was  unable 

* See  revised  statement,  p.  161. 

16  R R — VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


242 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai*.  XXXVI. 


to  keep  up  with  the  regiment,  but  came  up  after  the  charge.  In  the 
death  of  this  brave  soldier  and  gallant  officer  the  regiment  has  sus- 
tained an  irreparable  loss.  Our  total  loss  is  12  killed,  80  wounded,  and 
13  missing — supposed  to  be  killed  or  taken  prisoners.  Of  the  officers 
and  men  of  my  command  in  this  terrible  charge,  I can  only  say  that 
every  man  did  his  duty.  Capt.  J.  M.  Harrison,  of  Company  0,  was  se- 
riously wounded  while  at  the  head  of  his  company,  cheering  on  his  men. 
Lieut.  W.  A.  Eoberts,  acting  adjutant,  was  dangerously  wounded  while 
driving  the  enemy  from  their  works.  Lieut.  S.  Bates,  Company  1,  was 
left  on  the  field,  and  has  since  been  taken  prisoner.  Capt.  I).  Greaves 
was  seriously  wounded  while  leading  his  company  over  the  brow  of  the 
hill  in  the  face  of  the  enemy’s  fire.  Lieut.  G.  H.  Childs,  jr.,  was  wounded 
in  the  breast  at  the  head  of  the  regiment,  his  comjiany  being  on  the 
right.  Many  other  officers  were  wounded.  How  any  man  ever  returned 
alive  from  that  terrible  fire  I cannot  imagine. 

Company  A,  Captain  Jones,  and  Company  B,  Captain  Crooke,  were 
sent  out  as  sharpshooters,  and  did  effective  service. 

Hoping  the  conduct  of  the  Twenty-first  Eegiment  Iowa  Volunteers 
in  this  battle  will  meet  the  approbation  of  the  general  commanding  the 
brigade,  I remain,  captain,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  G.  VAN  ANDA, 

Major , Commanding  Twenty- -first  Reqiment. 

Capt.  B.  Wilson, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Second  Brigade , Fourteenth  Division. 


No.  23. 

Report  of  Maj.  Joseph  B.  Atherton , Twenty-second  Iowa  Infantry. 

In  the  Field,  near  Vicksburg,  Miss., 

May  27,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit  to  you  the  action  of  the  Twenty- 
second  Eegiment  Iowa  Volunteers  in  the  memorable  contest  with  the 
enemy  upon  their  defenses  in  the  rear  of  Vicksburg  on  the  22d  instant. 

At  4 a.  m.  the  regiment  took  position  opposite  the  enemy’s  works  pre- 
paratory to  the  charge,  where  we  were  sheltered  by  the  crest  of  a hill, 
and  Companies  A and  B deployed  as  skirmishers.  We  lay  upon  our 
arms  until  10  a.  m.,  the  appointed  hour  for  the  charge,  when  we  formed 
in  line  of  battle  on  the  summit  of  the  hill  and  immediately  pressed  for- 
ward. 

From  our  first  appearance  upon  the  hill  we  were  exposed  to  a terri- 
ble fire  from  the  enemy,  concealed  within  their  forts  and  rifle-pits.  The 
men  maintained  their  line  and  advanced  like  veterans  to  the  ravine  in 
front  of  the  enemy’s  works,  and  made  a charge  upon  the  fort  situated 
to  our  right. 

While  here,  we  were  exposed  to  a murderous  fire  from  the  front  and 
an  enfilading  fire  from  the  right  and  left,  the  enemy’s  works  being  so 
constructed  as  to  effect  this  result.  The  column  pressed  forward, 
stormed  the  fort,  took  possession  of  the  same  and  its  inmates,  and  held 
it  until  dark. 

We  maintained  our  position  during  the  day,  receiving  and  returning 
the  fire,  they  concealed  in  their  forts  and  other  defenses,  we  in  a great 
measure  without  any  shelter.  A continuance  of  the  contest  was  deemed 
unadvisable,  and  we  retired  under  cover  of  the  night. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


243 


All  the  officers  and  men  engaged  behaved  like  true  American  patriots, 
and  displayed  so  much  gallantry  that  it  might  seem  invidious  for  me 
to  mention  any  in  particular;  yet  1 cannot  refrain  from  mentioning  the 
daring  exploit  of  Sergt.  J.  E.  Griffith,  of  Company  I,  who,  with  12  men, 
scaled  the  enemy’s  works,  entered  the  fort,  and  killed  or  captured  all 
the  enemy  within,  and  then  escaped,  the  only  survivor  of  the  daring 
feat.  I present  his  conduct  for  your  consideration,  and  earnestly  rec- 
ommend his  promotion  as  a reward  for  his  valor. 

Our  loss  in  killed  is  severe,  and  1 have  to  regret  the  loss  of  Capt. 
James  Robertson  and  Lieut.  M.  A.  Robb,  who  fell  while  gallantly  lead- 
ing their  men  to  the  charge. 

All  discharged  their  duty  well  and  proved  themselves  worthy  of  being 
called  defenders  of  our  Union,  and  entitled  to  the  gratitude  of  the 
country.  Unsuccessful  through  no  fault  of  theirs,  they  showed  them- 
selves patriots,  obeyed  orders  with  alacrity,  and  rushed  into  the  storm 
of  deadly  missiles  without  faltering. 

Col.  W.  M.  Stone  was  wounded  in  the  early  part  of  the  charge,  and 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Graham  taken  prisoner  about  dark,  when  the  en- 
emy retook  the  fort.  I have,  therefore,  the  honor  of  making  this  re- 
port. 

A list  of  the  killed  and  wounded  is  hereto  attached.* 

Very  respectfully, 


Capt.  B.  Wilson, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


J.  B.  ATHERTON, 
Major , Commanding  Regiment. 


No.  24. 

Report  of  Capt.  Charles  N.  Lee , Twenty-second  Iowa  Infantry , including 
operations  since  May  1. 

Headquarters  Twenty-second  Iowa, 

Vicksburg , Miss.,  August  3,  1863. 

Sir:  In  compliance  with  your  order,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the 
following  report  of  the  part  taken  by  the  Twenty-second  Regiment 
Iowa  Infantry  in  the  late  campaign  in  this  State: 

In  the  battle  of  Port  Gibson,  on  May  1,  the  Twenty-second  Iowa 
played  a conspicuous  part  throughout  the  entire  engagement,  and  re- 
tired from  the  field  on  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  after  a hard-fought 
battle  of  twenty  hours  under  a burning  sun,  throughout  which  time  they 
were  exposed  to  the  fire  of  the  enemy ; and  notwithstanding  the  fatigues 
to  which  the  men  were  subjected  the  day  previous,  and  the  loss  of  sleep 
during  the  whole  night,  they  unflinchingly  bore  the  hardships,  and  gave 
true  evidence  to  the  world  of  their  gallantry,  endurance,  and  bravery 
on  the  field  of  duty.  When  it  was  announced  that  the  enemy  were 
retreating  and  falling  back  in  the  direction  of  Vicksburg,  the  Twenty- 
second  Iowa  was  among  the  first  to  march  forward  in  pursuit.  After  a 
long  and  tedious  march  through  dust,  mud,  rain,  and  the  extreme  heat, 
for  several  days  in  rapid  succession,  we  came  in  contact  with  the  enemy, 
posted  in  a strong  position  on  Champion’s  Hill,  where  on  that  memorable 
day  was  fought  the  bloodiest  battle  of  the  war,  ending  in  the  mostdis- 

* Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  161. 


244  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

astrous  defeat  of  the  rebel  army  under  General  Pemberton.  In  this  ! 
bloody  engagement  General  Carr’s  division,  of  which  the  Twenty-second 
Iowa  formed  a part,  was  in  the  reserve.  In  maneuvering  to  outflank  the 
enemy  and  cut  off  their  retreat,  we  captured  nearly  200  prisoners,  who 
were  compelled  to  fall  into  our  hands,  being  unable  to  follow  their  com- 
rades, who,  terror- strikeu  and  demoralized,  were  fleeing  in  every  direc- 
tion. 

On  the  next  day  we  came  in  contact  with  the  enemy,  posted  in  a well- 
fortified  position  near  Black  River  Bridge.  The  Second  Brigade,  com- 
manded by  General  Lawler,  made  an  assault  upon  their  works,  and  at 
the  point  of  the  bayonet  drove  them  from  their  position,  completely 
routing  the  flower  of  the  rebel  army  and  putting  them  to  flight. 

In  this  charge  the  Twenty-second  Iowa  held  a prominent  position,  the 
brigade  taking  nearly  3,000  prisoners,  and  ending  the  most  decisive 
battle  of  the  campaign.  As  soon.as  it  was  ascertained  that  the  main 
army  were  falling  on  to  Vicksburg,  we  crossed  the  river  and  advanced 
toward  the  city. 

The  next  day  we  came  in  contact  with  the  rebel  pickets,  drove  them 
into  their  works,  and,  after  a stubborn  artillery  fight  of  several  hours, 
we  laid  siege  to  the  rebel  stronghold. 

On  May  22,  in  accordance  with  an  order  issued  by  General  Grant, 
the  whole  line  made  an  assault  upon  the  enemy’s  works.  The  position 
to  be  gained  by  the  Second  Brigade  was  a strong  one — a fort  surrounded 
by  a ditch  10  feet  deep,  6 feet  wide,  the  walls  being  20  feet  high ; the 
front  subject  to  an  enfilading  fire  of  musketry  and  artillery  from  almost 
every  direction.  Taking  our  position  on  the  night  of  May  21,  we  lay 
on  our  arms  and  patiently  awaited  the  hour  to  come. 

At  10  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  22d,  when  the  appointed  time 
had  arrived,  the  Twenty-second  Iowa  deployed  two  companies  (A  and 
B)  as  skirmishers  and  advanced,  followed  by  the  other  regiments  of  the 
brigade,  to  the  front,  determined  to  dislodge  the  enemy  or  die  in  the 
attempt.  Onward  they  went  through  the  most  galling  fire  of  musketry, 
grape,  and  canister,  until  retarded  by  an  almost  impassable  abatis.  This 
obstacle  overcome,  they  gained  the  top  of  the  hill,  gathered  around, 
driving  the  enemy  from  the  rifle-pits  in  front,  and  planting  the  Stars 
and  Stripes  on  the  ramparts.  About  fifty  men  of  the  Twenty  second 
scaled  the  walls  and  entered  the  fort,  driving  the  enemy  before  them 
and  taking  15  prisoners.  There  being  a series  of  rifle-pits  in  the  rear, 
it  was  impossible  to  hold  it  with  such  an  inadequate  force  under  a ter- 
ribly destructive  fire,  and  they  withdrew,  with  a loss  of  nearly  half 
their  number  killed,  wounded,  or  captured.  Knowing  unless  we  would 
be  supported  properly  by  re-enforcements  we  would  have  to  fall  back, 
we  held  our  position  until  nightfall,  when,  failing  to  receive  re-enforce- 
ments, we  retired  under  cover  of  the  night,  with  a loss  of  164  killed, 
wounded,  and  missing. 

In  this  desperate  charge  the  Twenty-second  Iowa  had  the  advance, 
and  won  new  laurels  to  add  to  those  already  won  by  the  brave  soldiers 
of  Iowa.  It  would  be  with  seeming  injustice  that  I would  attempt  to 
make  any  distinctions  among  men  who  on  that  memorable  day  behaved 
so  nobly,  advancing  apparently  to  certain  destruction  or  death.  None 
faltered  in  their  duty,  but  exhibited  a degree  of  gallantry  unprecedented 
in  the  history  of  American  soldiery.  To  particularize  among  those  brave 
men  would  be  invidious. 

Again  we  took  our  position  in  front,  and  began  the  work  of  intrench- 
ing and  throwing  up  siege-works.  For  forty-seven  days  and  nights  we 
lay  in  the  rifle-pits,  during  which  time  we  had  approached  the  distance 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


245 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

of  half  a mile,  to  within  20  feet  of  the  rebel  works,  and  began  min- 
ing. We  could  not  advance  much  farther  without  bringing  on  a gen- 
eral engagement,  which  the  rebel  army  avoided  by  an  unconditional 
surrender  to  General  Grant  on  July  4. 

In  this  siege  the  Twenty-second  Iowa,  by  their  great  endurance  and 
undaunted  courage,  have  won  the  brightest  name  on  record.  Their 
works  in  the  rear  of  the  Gibraltar  of  the  Southern  Confederacy  will 
stand  not  as  the  monument  of  human  ambition,  but  of  never-dying 
fame,  to  the  brave  soldiers  of  Iowa. 

On  July  5,  we  marched  in  pursuit  of  Johnston’s  army,  at  Jackson, 
Miss.,  and,  after  a siege  of  nearly  two  weeks  of  that  place,  the  enemy 
evacuated,  and  we  returned  to  Vicksburg. 

Thus  ended  the  most  brilliant  campaign  in  modern  times;  the  most 
wrtant  iri  its  Fesults*  The  opening  of  the  Mississippi— the  Father 
or  Waters  from  its  source  to  the  Balize  to  the  commerce  of  the  world 
will  infuse  confidence  and  strength  in  the  American  people  that  will 
one  day  hurl  like  a mighty  avalanche  against  the  abettors  of  this 
cursed  rebellion,  and  their  hated  emblem  of  treason  will  trail  in  the 
dust. 

Bespectfully  submitted. 


Col.  W.  M.  Stone. 


C.  N.  LEE, 

Captain , Commanding  Regiment . 


No.  25. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman , U.  S.  Army , commanding 
Fifteenth  Army  Corps.* 

At  McCall’s,  June  23,  1863— 11  a.  m. 

Dear  General:  Parke,  with  Smith’s  division  and  one  brigade  of 
his  Yankee  troops,  is  on  the  river  road  from  Neily’s  to  Post  Oak  Itidge, 
with  orders  to  feel  forward  to  the  bridge  across  Bear  Creek,  6 miles 
beyond  Post  Oak  Bidge.  My  cavalry  is  now  down  at  Little  Bear  Creek, 
°n  t.be^ir,ds.on^  road-  Tuttle’s  division  is  close  up  to  the  cavalry,  and 
McArthurs  is  near  here,  and  we  are  waiting  for  his  troops  to  come  up. 
f wdI  th5m  on  the  Birdsong  road.  Parke  and  I can  communicate 
by  the  ridge  from  McCall’s  to  Neily’s.  After  nooning,  I propose  to  go 
forward  to  the  Big  Black.  I hear  nothing  of  Johnston  at  all ; no  trace 
ot  him  or  signs  of  his  approach.  The  country  is  ill-adapted  to  large 
masses.  It  is  cut  up  by  impracticable  ravines,  and  all  the  roads  are 
on  narrow  ridges,  where  a regiment  will  find  difficulty  in  forming  a 
Iront.  A small  force  can  oppose  a large  one,  and  as  to  getting  at  John- 
ston unless  he  crosses  to  this  side  of  Big  Black,  I think  it  cannot  be 
(lone.  It  he  crosses  Big  Black  and  comes  by  any  road,  I shall  of 
course,  meet  him  and  oppose  him,  calling  for  all  the  help  I may  deem 
necessary.  If  he  crosses  Big  Black,  I think  this  is  the  place  to  fight 
him  Order  Osterhaus  to  be  certain  to  blockade  all  roads  from  Big 
-black  toward  Vicksburg,  between  Clear  Creek  and  this  road.  After 
satisfying  myself  that  there  is,  or  is  not,  a purpose  on  his  part  to  cross 
over,  1 will  communicate  the  fact;  but,  no  matter  what  his  strength, 
he  must  come  by  narrow  roads,  and  I have  as  many  men  as  can  be 
handled  on  such  grounds.  If  I conclude  he  does  not  design  to  come  in 


See  also  the  Jackson  campaign,  Sherman’s  report  of  July  2 8,  pp.  532-542. 


246 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 


by  Birdsong  Ferry  or  the  ford  above,  I will  blockade  it,  so  as  to  force 
him  to  come  on  the  main  ridge  within  striking  distance  of  Haynes 
Bluff,  so  that  we  won’t  care  if  he  comes  or  not. 

Yesterday  four  companies  of  my  cavalry  (Fourth  Iowa)  had  gone  to 
Big  Black  'Fiver  on  the  road  to  obstruct  it.  They  had  felled  many 
trees,  and  must  have  been  off  their  guard  when  their  pickets  came  in 
from  three  directions,  giving  notice  of  the  approach  ot  the  enemy.  Quite 
a fight  ensued,  in  which  our  men  got  the  worst,  and  were  forced  to  lly. 
As  soon  as  the  news  reached  camp,  Colonel  Swan  went  to  the  ground 
with  his  regiment,  and  found  8 dead,  12  wounded,  and  about  ^0  missing. 
From  the  people  he  heard  the  attack  came  from  Wirt  Adams  cavalry, 
which  had  gone  off  in  the  direction  of  Mechanicsburg.  Colonel  Swan 
buried  the  dead,  and  brought  off  all  the  wounded  except  one,  who  was 
left  well  cared  for  at  a house.  He  could  hear  ot  but  about  12  prisoners 
in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  so  that  he  expects  some  8 more  will  have 
gone  down  to  Osterhaus,  and  will  come  in  to-day. 

The  party  lost  that  2-pounder  gun  we  captured  at  Jackson, but  before 
abandoning  it  they  disabled  it  by  taking  out  the  breech-pin.  The  fact 
of  our  coming  out  to  day  is  attributed  by  the  secesh  to  our  purpose  to 
punish  the  perpetrators  of  this  action. 

I will  send  you  positive  intelligence  to-night  if  J ohnston  be  coming  or 
not  this  side  of  Big  Black  Fiver.  On  the  best  evidence  now  procurable, 
he  is  not  coming  this  way,  or  at  this  time.  , ~ n v • 

I take  it  for  granted  you  do  not  want  me  to  attempt  to  follow  him 
across  that  river  unless  after  a defeat.  If  he  comes  to  this  side,  I can 
hold  him  till  re-enforced,  and  then  I know  we  can  whip  him.  In  the 
mean  time  look  out  toward  Baldwin’s  and  Hanldnson’s,  though  I do  not 
believe  he  will  put  himself  in  such  a pocket. 

Yours,  truly, 

W.  T.  SHEFMAN, 
Major-General , Commanding  Expedition. 

General  Grant. 


Headquarters  Fifteenth  Army  Corps, 

Bear  Creelc , J une  24. 

Not  the  sign  of  an  enemy  from  Post  Oak  Fidge  Post-office  to  Bird- 
son °’  Ferry.  Every  point  has  been  examined  to-day,  and  nothing  seen. 
No  sign  of  an  intention  to  cross  anywhere  near  Bear  Creek. . 1 hear 

Port  Hudson  is  taken ; please  telegraph  me  the  whole  truth-The  bearer 
of  this  note  will  wait  an  answer  at  the  Bluff.  I am  now  with  General 
Parke,  at  Post  Oak  Post-office,  but  will  return  to  my  extreme  right,  near 

Y0UDg’S-  W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major-General. 

Major-General  Grant. 


Headquarters  Fifteenth  Army  Corps, 

Camp  at  Bear  Creelc , June  27,  18b J. 

Sir  : It  was  my  purpose  to  have  come  to  headquarters  yesterday,  but 
the  importance  of  knowing  the  ground  in  this  quarter,  so  broken  an  ^ 
complicated,  induced  me  to  continue  what  I had  beS"”> 
my  exploration.  Big  Black  River  is  so  easily  passable  at  many  points 


CHAP.  XXXVI.] 


247 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

that  I am  forced  to  extend  my  lines  to  watch  all,  and  the  result  of  my 
personal  observations  is  contained  in  an  order  made  last  night,  which 
is  now  being  carried  into  effect.  I found  the  enemy  watching  with  cav- 
alry an  easy  ford  at  Messinger’s  house.  The  family  consisting  of  many 
women,  whose,  husbands  and  brothers  were  evidently  serving  an  easy 
purpose  of  keeping  up  communications,  so  I moved  them  all  by  force, 
leaving  a fine  house  filled  with  elegant  furniture  and  costly  paintings 
to  the  chances  of  war.  Also  the  family  of  Hill,  with  other  war  widows, 
at  a place  on  the  Birdsong  road,  is  removed  to  a harmless  place  within 
our  lines.  These  may  appeal  to  the  tender  heart  of  our  commanding 
general,  but  he  will  not  reverse  my  decision  when  he  knows  a family 
accessible  to  the  enemy— keen  scouts— can  collect  and  impart  more 
information  than  the  most  expert  spies.  Our  volunteer  pickets  and 
patrols  reveal  names  and  facts  in  their  innocence  which,  if  repeated  by 
these  women,  give  the  key  to  our  points. 

As  a general  thing,  the  valley  of  Big  Black  River  above  the  bridge 
has  a wide  fertile  valley  on  this  side,  the  hill  coming  down  rather  ab- 
rupt from  the  other.  The  ground  slopes  easily  and  gradually  from  the 
ridge,  marked  on  Wilson’s  map  from  Oak  Ridge,  Hetty’s!  McCall’s, 
Wixon’s,  and  Tiffintown.  Innumerable  roads  and  cross-roads  intersect 
the  country,  which  cannot  be  obstructed,  but  which,  running  on  narrow 
ridges,  with  narrow  corn-fields,  admit  of  easy  defense.  It  is  only  by 
familiarity  with  the  country,  its  ugly  ravines,  its  open,  narrow  ridges  ail 
coming  to  a common  spur,  that  a comparatively  small  force  can  hold  in 
check  a large  one. 

If  the  enemy  crosses  at  one  point,  he  must  take  some  days  to  get  over 
his  men  and  materiel , and  then  would  have  to  feel  his  way,  as  he  knows 
full  well  that  many  of  them  have  been  made  impassable  to  his  wagons 

m ai^fclilery* *  This  wiI1  give  us  time  to  fal1  011  him  or  await  his  attack, 
should  he  cross  at  several  points,  our  tactics  would  be  to  hold  small 
forces  in  obstruction  at  the  several  points  named  in  my  order,  and  a 
heavy  force  fall  on  one  or  other  of  his  detachments.  If  the  enemy 
forces  us  back,  Wixon’s  will  be  the  grand  battle-field,  or  somewhere  on 
Clear  Creek. 

I think,  unless  General  Grant  thinks  my  services  more  useful  else- 
where, I had  better  remain,  as  naturally  all  look  to  me  for  orders. 
Please  ask  the  general  to  read  the  inclosed  order*  carefully,  and,  if 
any  part  is  open  to  objection,  to  state  it,  that  I may  modify  in  time.  I 
sent  800  cavalry,  under  Colonel  Bussey,  up  the  Ridge  road  toward  Me- 
chanicsville,  last  night,  to  sweep  back  by  the  lower  Benton  road.  They 
went  to  Post  Oak  Ridge,  and  have  not  yet  reported. 

Yesterday  our  pickets  skirmished  a little  at  Messinger’s.  I was  there, 
and  did  not  see  more  than  15  or  20  men,  on  horseback,  as  curious  to 
watch  us  as  we  them.  One  man,  near  Hill’s,  was  shot  through  the 
head  by  a scamp  from  the  bushes,  who  could  not  be  found.  As  usual 
my  cavalry  are  not  bold,  but  the  infantry  go  in  without  any  hesitation! 

JNot  a sound,  syllable,  or  sign  to  indicate  a purpose  of  crossing  Big 
Black  River  toward  us,  but  I still  enjoin  on  all  that  our  enemy  is  too 
wary  to  give  us  notice  a minute  too  soon.  Every  possible  motive  exists 
lor  them  to  come  to  the  relief  of  Vicksburg,  and  we  should  act  on  that 
supposition  rather  than  the  mere  signs  of  movements  which  are  known 
only  to  Johnston,  and  will  not  be  revealed,  even  to  his  own  troops  'till 
the  last  moment.  ’ 

In  order  that  you  may  understand  any  future  communication,  mark 

* See  General  Orders,  No.  49,  June  29,  Part  III,  p.  449. 


248 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


your  map  as  follows:  One  and  a half  miles  east  of  Young’s,  where  the 
road  comes  in  from  Markham,  mark  Hill’s ; 1J  miles  southeast  of  Hill’s, 
Jones’ plantation ; 2 miles  below  Birdsong  Ferry,  Jones’  Ford  ; 1J  miles 
southeast  of  Cameron,  Messinger’s  plantation  and  Ford $ 1 mile  east  of 
Fox,  mark  Parson  Fox ; 3 miles  east  of  Tiffin,  on  the  Bridgeport  road, 
Brook.  All  these  points  may  become  of  note.  I still  regard  the  coun- 
try at  Tiffin,  Brant,  Cowan,  W.  Wixon,  and  Hardaway  as  the  key- 
points  of  this  region. 

I still  have  my  headquarters  by  the  roadside,  in  front  of  Tribbs’, 
where  the  road  forks  to  Young’s  and  Markham’s. 

When  this  letter  is  read,  please  send  it  to  my  adjutant,  to  be  copied 
in  my  letter-book,  and  returned  to  you  for  file. 

I am,  &c., 


Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


W.  T.  SHERMAN, 
Major-  General , Commanding. 


Big  Black,  June  30,  1863. 

I am  at  General  Osterhaus’,  on  a visit.  All  quiet  along  the  Big  Black 
River.  A cavalry  force,  under  Colonel  Bussey,  went  yesterday  15  miles 
up  the  ridge,  and  returned  along  Big  Black  River,  down  as  far  as  mouth 
of  Bear  Creek.  Saw  nothing  of  interest.  The  cavalry  of  the  enemy  can 
be  seen  opposite  Messinger’s,  but  quit  immediately  on  a few  rounds  of 
Parrott  shell.  All  the  troops  are  now  in  position.  Please  telegraph 
me  if  anything  new.  I feel  uneasy  about  the  affairs  about  Washington. 
Have  seen  the  Saint  Louis  papers  of  the  24th.  Have  you  anything 

1 ft  f PT* 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major - General. 

General  Grant. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

July  1,  1863. 

General:  I am  just  in  from  a circuit.  All  is  absolutely  silent  along 
Big  Black  River. 

One  of  your  best  scouts,  Tuttle,  is  just  in  from  Bolton,  where  I sent 
him  to  see  if  he  could  learn  if  any  part  of  Johnston’s  army  had  passed 
south  of  the  railroad $ Especially  to  watch  the  course  of  army  wagons. 
He  could  see  or  hear  nothing  to  show  that  a movement  south  was  in 
progress.  I will  send  him  out  to  Auburn  to-night. 

Osterhaus  watches  Baldwin’s  and  Hall’s  Ferries. 

It  might  be  well  to  send  a small  force  to  the  red  church,  between 
Warrenton  and  Hankinson’s,  to  make  a show.  My  troops  are  in  such  a 
position  that  they  could  reach  Noland  or  Whitaker  in  five  hours.  Big 
Bayou  should  be  made  impassable. 

I am  at  one  bridge,  as  high  up  as  possible,  shortening  the  neck  be- 
tween it  and  the  branch  (see  your  map),  and  I have  a good  road  to  run 
between  the  railroad,  via  Tiffin,  Bovina,  and  Noland.  I think  Johnston 
may  feint  to  the  south,  but  do  not  think  he  will  risk  chances  in  the 
pocket  of  Black  River.  Still,  we  must  watch  him  close.  I will  have  a 
scout  out  on  an  old  road  from  Rocky  Springs  and  Auburn,  and  can  tell 
quickly  if  anything  is  afloat. 


Chap.  XXXVI  ] 


THE  SIEGE  'OE  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


249 


Everybody  still  reports  a few  rebel  force  at  Mechanicsburg,  Vernon, 
Brownsville,  and  Bolton.  Militia  collecting  at  Jackson.  Johnston 
vibrating  between  Jackson  and  Canton. 

Ail  well. 

SHERMAN, 

Major- General. 

General  Grant. 


Oak  Ridge,  July  2,  1863. 

I do  not  believe  Johnston  will  come  in  by  Hankinson’s,  but  will  be 
ready  to  move  in  that  direction  on  short  notice.  My  scout  to  Auburn 
will  develop  the  truth,  and  I had  him  make  speed. 

SHERMAN, 

Major-  General. 

General  Grant. 


Oak  Ridge,  [July]  3,  1863. 

General  : I have  your  dispatch.  I have  sent  forces  to  make  a bridge 
at  Messinger’s  as  soon  as  the  surrender  is  certain.  Order  my  corps  to 
march  by  the  Bridgeport  road  to  Griffin  [Tiffin  I],  Ord’s  corps  to  the  rail- 
road crossing  at  railroad  bridge,  and  1 will  order  Parke’s  corps  to  cross 
at  Birdsong,  all  to  concentrate  north  of  Bolton,  to  move  direct  on  John- 
ston, wherever  he  may  be.  The  railroad  should  be  broken  east  to  Me- 
ridian and  north  to  Grenada.  Order  all  troops  to  move  light,  with  ten 
days’  rations  of  bread,  salt,  sugar,  and  coffee.  If  Rawlins  will  send  J. 
Condit  Smith  an  approximate  return  of  the  troops,  I think  he  will  have 
the  rations  provided  and  hauled.  I will  concentrate  at  Bolton  and 
strike  from  there. 

Pemberton  will  probably  have  advised  Johnston  of  his  purpose  to 
surrender.  The  enemy’s  pickets  on  the  other  side  are  shy,  but  are 
there.  I propose  to  bridge  at  once  to-night.  The  move  will  only  be 
made  in  force  when  I know  my  own  corps  and  Ord’s  are  crossing. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

_ Major-  General. 

General  Grant. 


No.  26. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Simeon  D.  Swan,  Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry , Fifteenth 

Army  Corps. 

Camp  near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  22,  1863. 

General  : Agreeably  to  your  orders,  I proceeded  with  my  command, 
on  the  afternoon  of  the  19th  instant,  toward  and  within  3 miles  of 
Haynes’  Bluff,  and  sent  forward  Capt.  J.  H.  Peters,  with  25  men,  to  re- 
connoiter. 

Arriving  there  at  4 p.  in.,  found  the  position  evacuated,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  7 men,  who  were  posted  as  guards  over  a magazine.  He 
took  them  prisoners,  with  their  arms,  and  signaled  the  gunboat  De 
Ealb,  which  was  about  2 miles  below  the  Bluff;  she  came  up,  and  he 
placed  the  prisoners  aboard.  On  arriving  at  the  Bluff,  Lieutenant 
Clark,  Company  B,  was  dispatched  below  the  Bluff  to  signal  the  gun- 
boat. His  signal  was  not  observed  by  those  on  board.  On  his  return 


250 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


to  the  Bluff,  Captain  Peters  hoisted  a signal,  and  the  boat  moved  up  the 
river.  He  also  proceeded  to  Snyder’s  Bluff,  and  found  the  place  evac- 
uated. The  enemy  left  nine  large  guns,  all  of  them  dismounted,  and  a 
considerable  amount  of  fixed  ammunition.  The  magazines  were  not 
disturbed.  He  also  found  a hospital  this  side  the  Bluff,  containing  about 
50  sick.  Most  of  the  enemy’s  tents  were  left  on  the  ground. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

SIMEON  D.  SWAN, 
Lieutenant- Colonel  Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry. 

Maj.  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  27. 

Report  of  Col.  Charles  R.  Woods , Seventy-sixth  Ohio  Infantry , command- 
ing Second  Brigade , First  Division , including  operations  since  May  2. 

Walnut  Hills,  Miss., 

Near  Vicksburg,  May  25,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  brigade  under  my  com- 
mand left  Grand  Gulf,  Miss.,  on  the  8th  instant,  and  marched  with  the 
rest  of  the  division  to  Hankinson’s  Ferry,  a distance  of  18  miles,  where 
we  took  position  to  cover  the  ferry,  and  remained  until  12  m.  on  the 
10th  instant,  during  which  time  the  pioneer  corps  of  the  division  de- 
stroyed the  boat  bridge  across  Big  Black.  Encamped  on  the  night  of 
the  10th  instant  on  Big  Sandy. 

About  10  o’clock  on  the  11th,  reached  the  crossing  of  Fourteen-Mile 
Creek,  where  the  cavalry  ran  into  an  ambuscade,  and  lost  several  men, 
killed  and  wounded.  Immediately,  by  order  of  Major-General  Sherman, 
moved  up  with  my  brigade,  five  regiments  of  infantry  and  the  First  Mis- 
souri Flying  Battery,  and  took  position  in  front  of  the  cavalry.  After 
throwing  five  or  six  shells  into  the  woods,  I ordered  the  Seventeenth  Regi- 
ment  Missouri  Volunteers,  Maj.  Francis  Romer  commanding,  to  cross 
the  creek  in  line  of  battle,  preceded  by  two  companies  as  skirmishers, 
on  the  right  of  the  road,  and  the  Third  Regiment  Missouri  Volunteers, 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Meumann  commanding,  and  Thirty-first  Regiment 
Iowa  Volunteers,  Col.  William  Smyth  commanding,  on  the  left  of  the 
road.  About  twenty  minutes  were  consumed  in  getting  the  regiment 
over  the  creek,  owing  to  the  difficulty  of  crossing.  By  this  time  the 
skirmishers  of  the  Seventeenth  Missouri  were  hotly  engaged  with  the 
enemy,  who  were  concealed  in  the  dense  underbrush.  The  Twelfth 
Regiment  Missouri  Volunteers,  Col.  Hugo  Wangelin  commanding, 
was  ordered  across  on  the  right  of  the  Seventeenth  Missouri,  to  sup- 
port it. 

The  skirmish  lasted  about  half  an  hour,  only  the  skirmishers  of  the 
Seventeenth  Missouri  being  engaged. 

Loss  of  the  Seventeenth  Missouri,  4 killed  and  5 wounded,  as  per 
inclosed  list;  Thirty-first  Iowa,  Christian  Jehl,  wounded;  Landgraeber’s 
Flying  Battery,  John  Bower  killed,  making  5 killed  and  6 wounded.  Of 
the  enemy,  2 killed  and  1 wounded  were  left  on  the  field.  Encamped 
about  2 miles  from  the  crossing  of  Fourteen-Mile  Creek. 

On  the  13th,  passed  4 or  5 miles  beyond  Raymond,  and  encamped  on 
the  Jackson  road. 

On  the  14th,  entered  Jackson,  Miss.,  and  encamped  on  the  edge  of 
the  city. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  251 

On  the  15th,  my  whole  brigade  was  engaged  in  destroying  the  Southern 
Railroad,  by  tearing  up  the  track  and  burning  the  iron  on  piles  of  ties. 
Some  5 miles  of  track  were  destroyed,  including  the  large  bridge  across 
Pearl  River,  twenty  barrels  of  tar  being  placed  upon  it  and  tired. 
Several  hundred  yards  of  trestle-work  and  a large  wooden  bridge  across 
a ravine  were  also  destroyed  on  the  west  side  of  Pearl  River;  also  a 
cotton  factory,  two  foundries,  and  an  extensive  work-shop,  used  by  the 
rebels  in  the  manufacture  of  caissons  and  gun-carriages,  together  with 
twelve  new  caissons,  and  a large  amount  of  Confederate  cotton. 

Left  Jackson  at  9 a.  m.  on  the  16th  instant,  and  encamped  at  Bolton 
Station,  on  Vicksburg  Railroad. 

On  the  17th  instant,  moved  forward  and  crossed  Big  Black  at  11 

p.  m. 

On  the  18th,  moved  forward  and  arrived  at  Walnut  Hills,  near  Vicks- 
burg, about  4 p.  in.,  and  found  the  enemy  (five  or  six  regiments,  with 
artillery)  strongly  posted.  My  brigade  was  deployed  on  the  right  of 
the  Third  Brigade,  General  Thayer,  and  skirmishers  thrown  forward, 
who  engaged  the  enemy  until  dark,  without  loss. 

On  the  morning  of  the  19th,  found  that  the  enemy  had  evacuated 
their  position  in  our  front,  and  fallen  back  toward  Vicksburg,  leaving 
their  camps  and  camp  equipage,  which  fell  into  our  hands.  I immedi- 
ately moved  forward  ray  brigade,  and  occupied  a hill  500  or  600  yards 
from  the  enemy,  a deep  and  broken  valley  intervening.  Found  the 
enemy  strongly  posted,  with  from  twelve  to  seventeen  siege  guns  in  po- 
sition, covered  by  strong  earthworks,  and  commanding  our  position. 
I ordered  the  Twenty-fifth  Iowa  on  to  the  brow  of  the  hill,  to  silence 
the  enemy’s  guns,  and  ordered  Landgraeber’s  flying  battery  (four  guns) 
to  move  forward  on  the  Ridge  road,  no  other  road  being  practicable  at 
the  time.  The  battery  came  over  in  most  gallant  style,  the  horses  at 
their  utmost  speed,  a distance  of  more  than  half  a mile,  under  a tre- 
mendous fire  from  the  enemy’s  batteries  on  our  left,  and  a galling  fire 
from  their  sharpshooters  in  the  rifle  pits,  with  a loss  of  only  4 horses 
killed.  The  battery  being  placed  in  position  behind  the  crest  of  the 
hill,  together  with  the  sharpshooters,  soon  drove  the  enemy  from  their 
guns.  On  the  night  of  the  20th,  having  procured  a few  spades  and 
shovels,  I ordered  the  Seventy-sixth  Regiment  Ohio  Volunteers,  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Woods  commanding,  to  throw  up  rifle-pits  on  the  brow 
of  the  hill,  to  protect  his  men,  which  was  done,  and  the  men  have 
been  constantly  employed  in  extending  and  strengthening  them.  The 
Twelfth  Missouri  also  moved  forward  and  took  possession  of  extensive 
rifle-pits  on  the  low  ground  on  our  right,  extending  to  the  Mississippi 
River,  driving  the  enemy  out,  with  1 officer  killed  and  several  enlisted 
men  wounded. 

On  the  21st,  continued  to  strengthen  my  position  on  the  hill,  the 
First  Brigade  relieving  me  in  the  occupation  of  the  rifle-pits  on  the  ex- 
treme right. 

Ou  the  22d,  was  ordered  to  the  left,  near  the  position  of  the  Third 
Brigade,  for  the  purpose  of  making  a charge  on  the  enemy’s  work, 
leaving  one  regiment  to  occupy  the  position. 

Owing  to  the  difficulty  of  moving  my  brigade  so  as  to  prevent  the 
enemy  from  seeing  our  movements,  several  hours  were  consumed  in 
reaching  our  position,  and  having  reached  the  rear  of  the  position 
where  the  charge  was  to  be  made,  it  was  necessary  to  press  over  several 
pieces  of  open  ground  within  close  range  of  the  enemy’s  rifle-pits,  part 
of  the  road  being  swept  by  artillery.  Fifty  or  sixty  men  and  officers  were 
killed  and  wounded  in  gaining  our  position.  The  Twenty-fifth  Iowa, 


252 


[Cn\p.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


Colonel  Stone  commanding,  being  in  the  advance,  suffered  severely,  but 
as  soon  as  it  gained  the  ravine  one  wing  was  thrown  forward  as  skir- 
mishers, and  succeeded  in  a great  measure  in  keeping  down  the  fire  of 
the  enemy. 

In  the  mean  time,  however,  the  Twelfth  Missouri  crossed  into  the 
ravine,  and  lost  heavily  in  killed  and  wounded.  The  other  regiments 
lost  but  few.  So  soon  as  the  troops  could  be  got  in  position,  the  charge 
was  ordered,  the  Twelfth  Missouri  leading,  preceded  by  the  Third 
Brigade  in  line.  The  ground  being  broken  and  obstructed  by  ravines, 
brush,  and  logs,  it  was  impossible  to  move  forward  with  any  regularity. 
The  Twelfth  Missouri,  Col.  Hugo  Wangelin  commanding,  moved  forward 
over  the  crest  of  the  hill  in  gallant  style,  exposed  to  a withering  fire, 
but  were  repulsed  before  the  other  regiments  of  the  brigade  could  reach 
the  top  of  the  hill.  The  four  right  companies,  having  more  favorable 
ground  to  move  upon,  reached  a covered  position  near  the  foot  of  the 
enemy’s  breastworks,  and  were  obliged  to  remain  until  dark  before 
they  could  be  recalled.  Company  F,  on  the  left  wing,  had  all  but  9 men 
killed  and  wounded.  The  regiment  went  into  the  charge  about  360 
strong,  and  lost  11  officers  and  97  men  killed  and  wounded  during  the 
day.  The  Twenty-fifth  Iowa,  deployed  as  skirmishers,  did  good  execu- 
tion and  lost  severely.  Inclosed  I send  a consolidated  list  of  killed  and 
wounded,  taken  from  the  regimental  reports  up  to  the  25th  instant.*  It 
is  due  to  the  men  of  this  brigade  to  say  that  during  all  the  hardships 
of  the  long  and  tedious  march  from  Grand  Gulf  to  Jackson,  and  thence 
to  our  position  in  rear  of  Vicksburg,  they  were  cheerful,  and  did  their 
duty  well,  although  a great  portion  of  the  time  they  were  without  ra- 
tions, and  had  to  live  on  meat  alone,  as  a considerable  portion  of  the 
hard  bread  issued  on  the  road  proved  to  be  moldy  and  unfit  to  eat. 
The  officers  and  men,  during  all  the  skirmishes  on  which  they  have  been 
engaged,  have  done  their  duty  well  and  faithfully,  and  deserve  the 
highest  praise. 

I have  to  regret  the  loss  of  Major  Lightfoot,  Twelfth  Missouri,  killed 
in  the  charge  of  the  22d,  whilst  gallantly  leading  his  men  into  action. 
Major  Lightfoot  was  a gentleman  of  high  attainments,  and  a brave, 
gallant,  and  faithful  officer.  Captain  Denny,  Captain  Andel,  Adju- 
tant Kasten,  and  Lieutenant  Eggart,  of  the  same  regiment,  all  brave 
and  gallant  men,  fell  whilst  in  the  discharge  of*  their  duty. 

Left  Milliken’s  Bend,  May  2,  and  reached  Hard  Times  Landing,  1 
p.  m.  on  the  6th  instant.  Crossed  over  to  Grand  Gulf,  Miss.,  on  same 
evening,  where  we  remained  during  the  7th,  and  left  for  Jackson  and 
Vicksburg  as  above  stated.  Nothing  of  importance  occurred  on  the 
march  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  Grand  Gulf. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

CHAS.  B.  WOODS, 

Colonel , Commanding  Brigade. 

Maj.  J.  W.  Paddock, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Walnut  Hills,  Miss.,  June  15,  1863. 
Major:  I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  about  11  o’clock  last 
night  a fleet  of  skiffs  passed  up  from  Vicksburg  around  the  point. 
Owing  to  the  darkness,  it  was  impossible  to  tell  how  many  there  were. 
As  soon  as  it  was  reported  to  me,  I sent  50  additional  men  over  to  the 


Embodied  in  revised  statements. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  253 

gunboat  Cincinnati,  and  opened  with  a 12-pouuder  howitzer  on  the 
point  opposite,  with  spherical  case  and  shell,  supposing  that  those  on 
watch  at  the  gunboat  and  mortars,  seeing  the  direction  of  my  fire  would 
be  en  the  lookout.  After  firing  five  shots.  I ordered  the  fire  to  cease 
After  waiting  about  ten  minutes,  a working  party  of  the  Twenty-fifth 
Iowa,  near  the  river,  commenced  firing  with  musketry.  I then  ordered 
the  entire  battery  of  Landgraeber  to  fire,  Colonel  Stone  from  near  the 
directing  the  fire,  which  was  kept  up  until  the  boats  got  out  of 
reach  m the  direction  of  Vicksburg. 

de^lvatnInLithn  en,emy’s  intention  was,  they  were  foiled,  as  they  evi- 
dently  turned  round  as  soon  as  I commenced  firing.  I think  the  object 
of  the  expedition  was  to  blow  up  the  Cincinnati,  as  the  enemy  kept  up 

fn  th^fw  fire  A,  °T  beavy  gnu  on  tbe  Cincinnati  from  3 o’clock 
m the  afternoon  until  about  11  o’clock,  at  which  time  the  skiffs  left 
Vicksburg,  and  then  turned  their  fire  on  the  mortar-boats.  Hereafter 

the  c|ecinna|nast Jfgh^eports^hat  theoffleer  of  Hie  fuaTthereffi0 
formed  him  that  three  large  boats  came  up  near  the  gZboTZln 

!i?  t fi,Jai.  e<l’  Vi"' rep  y was  that  “ they  belonged  to  the  mortar-boats”’ 
iba,t  tbe  b£ats  thereupon  kept  the  gunboat  between  them  and  the  guard’ 
and  struck  out  into  the  middle  of  the  river  and  in  the  direction  of 
b.it  ifi1?  be  tug  had  been  near  the  gunboat  earlier  in  the  evening 
river*!  d tlm6  bef°re  th®  approacb  of  these  three  boats  gone  up  the 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant 

CHAS.  B.  WOODS, 

Maj.  J.  W.  Paddock.  ’ Command™9  Second  Brigade. 

ShaH  ,0rder  tbe  guards  at  the  Cincinnati  to  fire  hereafter  at 
all  boats  approaching  at  night,  except  the  tug.  at 


No.  28. 

Report  of  Col.  David  Carskaddon,  Ninth  Iowa  Infantry , Third  Brigade 
including  operations  since  December  29,  1862.  J 1 

Big  Black  Biver  Bridge,  Miss., 

T i ...  August  11,  1863. 

I nave  the  honor,  m compliance  with  General  Orders,  No  64  dated 
Headquarters  Fifteenth  Army  Corps,  August  1,  1863,  to  report-’ 
lhat  since  the  first  attack  upon  the  defenses  of  Vicksburg  by  this 
?™ym  December,  1862,  the  Ninth  Iowa  Infantry  has  particfpated  in 

December^'Tsfiri  bard-foag bt  ba«les,  viz,  0h4asai-  Ba5  ou!^ 
cemoer  2 J,  1862 , Arkansas  Post,  Ark.,  January  11  1863  and 

burg,  Miss.,  May  18  to  July  3,  1863.  If  by  official  proof  to  substantia  te 

none®  so'far  as Tknow  ' ^tary.orders  is?ued  by  immediate  commanders, 
f-°i  as  f k“ow>  have  been  received  in  either  case. 

(G^nerlds  Thaver  IS  by  brigade  and  division  commanders 

ira  a?!  • AT  aud  Steele),  have  never  been  seen.  To  these  if  thev 
are  attainable,  I would  respectfully  refer.  ’ ^ 

further,  at  Vicksburg,  between  the  18th  of  May,  when  the  regiment 


254 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 


was  first  engaged,  till  July  3,  our  loss  was:  Officers  killed,  5;  severely 
wounded,  4:  enlisted  men  killed.  35;  wounded,  7o;  total  killed  and 
wounded,  119.  Out  of  less  than  300  engaged  78  of  this  number  tell  in 
the  terrible  charge  upon  the  enemy’s  works  May  22,  1863.  Our  nag 
failed  to  wave  from  the  enemy's  fort  only  after  the  last  one  of  the  four 
color-guards  had  fallen,  either  killed  or  severely  wounded,  in  the  heroic 
attempt  to  plant  and  maintain  it  there. 

At  Chickasaw  Bayou,  December  29,  1862,  the  regiment  was  ordered 
bv  General  Thayer,  commanding  the  brigade,  to  advance  and  take  po- 
sition to  the  left  of  the  line  which  had  just  charged  the  enemy  s works 
and  were  falling  slowly  back.  My  regiment  moved  up,  passing  them 
until  considerablv  in  advance  of  the  other  troops,  entirely  unsupported, 
and  suffering  from  a severe  and  raking  fire  from  the  enemy’s  artillery. 
Finding  it  certain  annihilation  to  advance  farther  alone,  or  to  remain,  we 
retired  a few  rods,  under  cover  of  some  logs  and  trees,  where  we  con- 
tinued picking  off  the  enemy’s  guards  and  sharpshooters  whenever  they 
appeared,  until  ordered  back  to  bivouac  for  the  night,  the  assault  hav- 
ing been  given  up.  Our  loss,  fortunately,  in  the  engagement  was 
inconsiderable,  there  being  but  9 wounded. 

At  Arkansas  Post,  the  regiment  was  placed  m very  much  the  same 
circumstances.  Being  held  in  reserve  at  first,  it  was  afterward  moved 
up  near  the  enemy’s  intrenchments,  formed  in  line,  together  with  sev- 
eral other  regiments,  in  rear  of  skirmishers,  preparatory  to  a final  and 
determined  assault,  the  regiment  having  been  ordered  for  this  purpose 
to  fix  bayonets  and  reserve  its  fire ; but,  before  the  word  “forward”  was 
given,  the  white  flag  from  the  enemy’s  fort  proclaimed  that  the  battle 
was  won.  Here  also  our  loss  was  not  heavy,  though  larger  than  before. 

Such  I deem  to  be,  in  brief,  the  facts.  My  report  must  necessarily 
be  meager  and  destitute  of  evidence,  not  having  been  m command  ot 
the  regiment  at  either  of  these  battles,  though  each  time  present.  Ot 
those  who  were  in  command,  one  was  mortally  wounded  while  leading 
the  regiment  in  the  assault  of  May  22,  1863,  and  the  other  is  now  be- 
yond the  limits  of  the  department.  This  much  I know,  that  the  offi- 
cers and  men  of  the  regiment  have  always,  on  every  occasion,  to  the 
best  of  their  knowledge  and  abilities,  obeyed  every  order  and  done 
their  whole  duty. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient^ervant,^^^ 

Colonel , Commanding  Ninth  Iowa. 

The  President  Board  of  Officers,  &c. 


No.  29. 


Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Frank  P.  Blair,  jr.,  U.  8.  Army , commanding 
Second  Division , including  operations  since  May  7. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Division,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps, 

Before  Vicksburg , Mss.,  May  24,  1863. 

General  : On  the  return  of  my  division  from  the  Yazoo  Biver,  or 
May  2,  after  making  the  feigned  attack  upon  Haynes  Bluff,  I was  or 
dered  to  remain  at  Milliken’s  Bend,  to  guard  that  post,  and  to  construct 
a new  road  across  the  peninsula  for  the  transportation  of  supplies  t( 
Grand  Gulf,  until  relieved  by  other  troops  from  Memphis.  I remains 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


255 


at  Million  s Bend  with  my  division,  performing  the  duties  assigned  me. 
until  the  morning  of  May  7,  when  I received  your  orders  to  march  with 
two  brigades  of  my  division  to  Grand  Gulf,  and  join  your  corps,  then 
marching  against  Jackson,  Miss.  p ’ 

I commenced  the  march  on  the  morning  of  the  7th,  with  the  First  and 
Second  Brigades,  commanded  by  Col.  Giles  A.  Smith,  of  the  Eighth  Mis- 

c°- ' T l0',iaS  Kilby  Smith>  of  the  Fifty-fourth  Ohiof  and  left 
Mi1i^h  ? BHg'fde,  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  Hugh  Ewing,  to  garrison 
Milliken  s Bend  and  to  complete  the  new  road  from  Young’s  Point  across 
the  peninsula  to  a point  on  the  river  below  Warrenton. 
i/f-r  at  ,Ira’,d  Tim®8’  opposite  Grand  Gulf,  at  1 o’clock  on  May 
’ by,*be  road’  of  63  miles.  1 had  great  difficulty  in  pro- 
curing transportation  across  the  river,  but  succeeded  in  crossing  both 
ngades  by  10  o clock  on  the  night  of  the  11th,  and  took  up  my  line  of 
march  on  the  morning  of  the  12th  for  Jackson.  1 ‘ 

lw'as  ordered  to  escort  a large  supply  train,  consisting  of  200  wagons, 

Ravmond  Tmt'i 'tn  °WD  Gain’  delayed  ,ny  march,  and  I did  not  reach 
Raymond  until  the  evening  of  the  15th.  I marched,  under  your  in- 
structions, from  Grand  Gulf,  by  the  road  to  Willow  Spriugsf  Rocky 
Springs,  Commissioner  s Creek,  and  Auburn,  to  Ravmond 
rc„"  e„  evening  of  my  arrival  at  Raymond,  [ received  orders  from 
wfn,  f’  Gran t to  m o ve,  with  General  A.  J.  Smith,  commanding  a divis- 
General  MeOiernand  s corps,  on  the  lower  road  to  Edwards  Depot, 
on  the  Vicksburg  and  Jackson  Railroad,  where  it  was  expected  that  we 

SmhL  toTake  theSci°rCe-  McCleruand  “rdered  General 

namedthoer,Th°Irng  •the*  I moved  with  “1  division,  at  the  hour 
w ndti?  th  1 Pe  “dicated,  and,  when  a short  distance  from  Raymond 
heard  the  report  of  General  Smith’s  guns,  who  had  come  in  contact  with 
I immediately  pressed  forward  to  his  support.  Both  divis- 
ions then  pushed  forward  against  the  enemy,  who  was  in  considerable 
whh®  mwtr  bent  and  on  the  right,  from  which  point  he  opened  on  us 
T,onmwaptery  heavy  guns,  to  which  we  replied  from  a section  of  10- 
pounder  Parrott  guns,  belonging  to  General  Smith’s  command. 

the  etw  twmWlt  ?“  ??der  reached  me  from  General  McClernand  to 
we  sbo*dd  not  bring  on  a general  engagement  until  we 

Genera?sfor  to6h  0rderS’i  o111  that  W6  should  open  communications  with 
Generals  Osterhaus  and  Carr,  commanding  divisions  in  the  Thirteenth 

bnm  nt°  Tfre  maFchiu8'  by the  wad  to  Edwards  Depot,  on  my 

General  °n . Kelvin g this  order,  my  own  division  and  that  of 

General  Smith  were  immediately  disposed  on  high  and  commanding 

cornffieted  lwfo ’ght  le?  tlie  road  > but  this  disposition  was  hardly 
?rs^d  ba-0r!  we  heard  the  report  of  musketry  and  heavy  guns  on 
GeneJd  A T 1 Wh  a,severe  engagement,  and,  upon  consultation  with 

thTd^ts  eng^L  reS°Wed  t0  m0V6  f°rWard  t0  th6  SUpport  of 

As  the  troops  were  being  put  in  motion,  a staff  officer  arrived  from 
General  McClernand,  informing  me  that  General  Hovey,  on  his  extreme 
right,  was  heavily  engaged  with  the  enemy,  and  ordering  me  to  throw 
and°tAebrlgare  t0  thought  to  connect  with  General  Osterhaus’ left, 

eral  A T°SrnUh"’aiid  th6  °thar  brjgade  in  supporting  distance  of  Gen- 
A-  J’  ® th»  Wih?  was  ordered  to  move  forward  by  the  road.  This 
Smith  ~XeCUf?d  by  throwing  out  the  First  Brigade,  Col.  Giles  A. 

moved’  win  ettlg  ’iWlle  tb<;Second  Brigade,  Col.  Thomas  Kilby  Smith, 
moved  with  the  column  of  General  A.  J.  Smith. 

As  soon  as  the  right  of  my  First  Brigade  reache4  the  left  of  General 


256 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Osterhaus’,  we  moved  forward  in  the  direction  of  Edwards  Depot,  and 
soon  ascertained  that  General  Hovey  was  driving  the  enemy  before  him. 
A portion  of  his  flying  columns  endeavored  to  make  good  their  retreat 
bv  crossing  my  front  and  that  of  General  A.  J.  Smith,  the  rear  guard 
making  a stand  at  different  points  to  check  our  advance  and  enable  the 
main  body  to  escape  with  the  artillery,  ammunition,  and  baggage.  Gen- 
eral A.  J.  Smith  pressed  forward  and  attacked  vigorously  by  the  road, 
and  my  First  Brigade,  under  Col.  Giles  A.  Smith,  moved  rapidly  inline 
of  battle,  driving  the  enemy’s  skirmishers  through  the  thick  forests  and 
over  very  broken  and  difficult  ground. 

About  dark  the  enemy  planted  a battery  in  front  of  my  First  Bri- 
gade, and  made  a stand.  He  had  previously  opened  fire  from  a battery 
in  front  of  General  A.  J.  Smith.  Col.  Giles  A.  Smith  then  ordered  Maj. 
Dennis  T.  Kirby,  of  the  Eighth  Missouri,  with  two  companies  of  infantry, 
to  make  a detour  to  the  left  and  endeavor  to  flank  the  enemy’s  battery, 
which  movement  was  soon  discovered,  and  the  enemy  fled  precipitately, 
leaving  his  caissons,  filled  with  ammunition,  and  five  or  six  wagons,  also 
filled  with  cannon  ammunition,  and  throwing  away  their  small-arms, 
and  a short  distance  beyond  he  abandoned  two  six-gun  batteries,  which 
fell  into  our  hands  the  next  morning,  having  been  found  by  Capt.  D. 
W.  Ballou,  of  the  Tenth  Missouri  Cavalry,  in  a swamp  or  morass  through 
which  the  enemy  attempted  to  escape.  I immediately  turned  over  these 
guns,  consisting  of  five  6-pounder  brass  guns,  five  12-pounder  brass 
howitzers,  two  12-pounder  iron  guns,  with  their  caissons,  and  five  wagon 
loads  of  cannon  ammunition  and  two  wagon  loads  of  small-arms,  to 
Capt.  E.  M.  Joel,  quartermaster  of  my  division,  with  orders  to  impress 
teams  and  bring  them  up,  which  order,  I am  happy  to  say,  was  promptly 
executed,  and  the  guns,  cannon  ammunition,  and  small-arms  turned 
over  to  Col.  J.  Condit  Smith,  chief  quartermaster  of  the  Fifteenth  Army 
Corps,  who  now  has  them  in  his  possession. 

We  captured  during  the  day  and  the  morning  of  the  17th  about  600 
prisoners,  a number  of  whom  surrendered  themselves  and  expressed 
great  satisfaction  at  having  an  opportunity  to  escape  from  the  brutal 
tyranny  of  the  rebel  service,  into  which  they  had  been  conscripted. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  17th,  I was  ordered  by  General  McCler- 
nand  to  move  forward  by  Edwards  Depot  to  the  Black  River  Railroad 
Bridge,  where  the  enemy  had  made  a stand ; but  upon  reaching  Edwards 
Depot  I received  an  order  from  General  Grant  to  proceed  to  Bridge- 
port and  join  the  other  two  divisions  of  your  corps  which  were  expected 
to  arrive  there  at  10  o’clock,  taking  with  me  a pontoon  train  for  the  pur- 
pose of  bridging  the  Black  River  at  that  point. 

I reached  that  point  soon  after  10  a.  m.,  found  that  the  bridge  of  boats 
had  been  destroyed  by  the  enemy,  who  had  left  a small  party,  strongly 
intrenched,  to  dispute  our  passage.  Captain  Wood’s  battery,  hirst 
Illinois  Artillery,  was  placed  in  position,  by  your  order,  and  opened 
fire,  when  the  enemy  displayed  a white  flag  and  surrendered  themselves. 
The  pontoon  bridge  was  then  laid  across  the  river,  and  my  division 
crossed  over  and  bivouacked  for  the  night  2 miles  from  the  river. 

On  the  morning  of  the  18th,  I took  the  advance  and  marched  to  the 
intersection  of  the  Jackson  and  Benton  roads,  which  was  regarded  as 
an  important  point,  and  held  it  until  the  other  two  divisions  of  your 
command  closed  up  with  my  rear,  and  then,  by  your  order,  1 again 
moved  forward,  and  after  slight  skirmishing  brought  up  to  the  enemy  s 
works  on  the  right  and  left  of  the  Graveyard  road.  The  pickets  of  the 
First  Brigade,  under  command  of  Capt.  Charles  Ewing,  Thirteenth  Regi- 
ment  U.  S.  Infantry,  pressed  forward  during  the  night  to  within  100 


Chap.  XX5VI.] 


257 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

yards  of  the  enemy’s  intrencliments,  driving  those  of  the  enemy  within 
the  line  of  his  fortifications. 

About  midnight  of  the  18th,.  the  Third  Brigade  of  my  division,  com- 
manded by  Brig.  Gen.  Hugh  Ewing,  joined  me  before  the  works  of 
Vicksburg,  having  marched  from  Grand  Gulf  (by  Raymond)  to  this 
place,  a distance  of  85  miles,  in  three  days.  General  Ewing’s  brigade 
was  assigned  position  on  the  right  of  *my  division,  his  right  resting  on 
the  left  of  General  Steele’s  division  (First  Division,  Fifteenth  Army 
Corps).  His  left  connected  closely  with  the  right  of  my  First  Brigade, 
commanded  by  Col.  Giles  A.  Smith,  who  held  the  center  of  my  line  and 
occupied  the  ground  in  front  of  the  stockade  near  the  bastion,  which 
commands  the  Graveyard  road.  The  Second  Brigade,  Col.  Thomas 
Kilby  Smith  commanding,  held  the  left  of  my  line,  the  right  resting  on 
the  left  of  the  First  Brigade,  and  its  line  of  battle  extending  across  the 
Graveyard  road. 

During  the  morning  of  the  19th,  the  entire  line  of  skirmishers  of  my 
division  was  pushed  forward,  with  a view  of  obtaining  a closer  position 
and  of  reconnoitering  the  ground. 

At  2 p.  m.  the  signal  was  given  for  an  assault,  and  my  whole  division 
dashed  forward,  and,  wherever  the  nature  of  the  ground  was  not  in- 
superable, reached  the  enemy’s  intrenchments,  and  in  several  instances 
planted  our  flags  upon  his  works.  Two  regiments  of  General  Ewing’s 
brigade,  the  Fourth  Virginia  and  Forty-seventh  Ohio,  succeeded  in  ap- 
proaching very  near  the  enemy’s  works.  The  Thirteenth  U.  S.  Infantry, 
Capt.  E.  C.  Washington,  and  One  hundred  and  sixteenth  Illinois  Vol- 
unteer Infantry,  Col.  N.  W.  Tupper,  of  the  First  Brigade,  Col.  Giles  A 
Smith  commanding,  pushed  forward  to  the  bastion.  The  One  hundred 
and  twenty-seventh  Illinois  Volunteer  Infantry,  Col.  Hamilton  K.  Eld- 
ridge,  and  Eighty-third  Indiana  Volunteer  Infantry,  Col.  Benjamin  J. 
Spooner,  of  the  Second  Brigade,  commanded  by  Col.  Thomas  Kilby 
Smith,  also  succeeded  in  reaching  the  same  ground,  but  the  heavy  fire 
of  the  enemy,  who,  not  being  pressed  in  any  other  quarter,  were  strongly 
re  enforced  in  our  front,  made  it  utterly  impossible  for  them  to  make  a 
lodgment  in  the  works.  They  held  their  positions,  however,  with  the 
utmost  tenacity  until  night,  when  they  withdrew. 

The  20th  and  21st  were  employed  in  skirmishing  with  the  enemy,  re- 
connoitering the  ground,  and  improving  our  position. 

On  the  22d,  I received  an  order  to  renew  the  assault  at  10  o’clock  in 
the  morning.  I massed  my  division  in  the  ravine  to  the  left  of  the 
Graveyard  road,  where  it  debouches  upon  that  road  as  it  passes  across 
the  valley  immediately  in  front  of  the  bastion.  A volunteer  storming 
party,  consisting  of  2 officers  and  50  men  from  each  brigade  of  the  divis- 
1 pUBWias  *9  Jead  the  assault  General  Ewing’s  brigade  and  the  brigades 
ot  Cols.  Giles  A.  Smith  and  Thomas  Kilby  Smith  were  to  follow  in  the 
order  m which  they  are  named,  and  to  charge  across  the  road  by  the 
flank.  J 

At  the  signal  the  volunteer  storming  party,  led  by  Capt.  John  H. 
Groce,  of  General  Ewing’s  brigade,  dashed  forward  in  gallant  style, 
and  planted  the  flag  of  the  Union,  which  was  borne  by  Private  Howell 
G.  lrogden,  of  the  Eighth  Missouri,  upon  the  bastion  of  the  enemv. 
Ihe  leading  regiment  of  General  Ewing’s  brigade,  the  Thirtieth  Ohio 
Volunteers,  went  forward  with  equal  impetuosity  and  gallantry,  but 
the  next  regiment,  the  Thirty-seventh  Regiment  Ohio  Volunteer  In- 
fantry , faltered  and  gave  way  under  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  which  was 
tar  from  being  severe  on  this  regiment,  and  was,  in  fact,  directed  upon 
the  head  of  the  column.  The  men  lay  down  in  the  road  and  behind 
17  R R — VOL  XXI^,  PT  II 


258  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

every  inequalitv  of  ground  which  afforded  them  shelter,  and  every 
effort  of  General  Ewing  and  Lieut.  Col.  Louis  von  Blessingli  to  rally 
them  and  urge  them  forward  proved  of  no  avail.  Both  of  these  offi- 
cers exposed  themselves  very  much  in  the  effort  to  encourage  this 
regiment,  and  they  were  seconded  in  their  efforts  by  the  officers  of  the 
regiment. 

Lieut.  A.  0.  Fisk,  aide-de-camp  to  General  Hugh  Ewing,  was  con- 
spicuous in  his  efforts  to  encourage  and  animate  them  to  go  forward  to 
the  assistance  of  their  gallant  comrades,  who  could  be  seen  already 
upon  the  very  intrenchments  of  the  enemy,  and  Sergt.  Maj.  Louis  Se- 
bastian, Thirty-seventh  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry,  went  along  the  whole 
line  of  the  regiment,  exposing  himself  to  the  heaviest  fire  of  the  enemy, 
exhorting  and  remonstrating  with  the  men  and  urging  them  forward; 
but  it  was  all  in  vain.  They  refused  to  move,  and  remained  in  the 
road,  blocking  the  way  to  the  other  regiments  behind,  and  I was  finally 
compelled  to  order  the  Forty-seventh  Ohio  and  Fourth  West  Virginia 
forward  by  another  route,  to  the  left  of  the  road.  These  regiments  ad- 
vanced with  commendable  spirit  and  alacrity,  and  reached  a position 
to  which  most  of  the  Thirtieth  Ohio,  so  long  unsupported,  had  been 
compelled  to  recoil  and  shelter  themselves,  and  which  was  less  than 
150  yards  from  the  bastion.  I then  ordered  the  brigade  of  Col.  Giles 
A.  Smith  forward  by  the  same  route,  to  the  left  of  the  road,  as  that 
taken  by  the  last  two  regiments  of  General  Ewing,  and  as  soon  as  this 
brigade  went  forward  it  was  followed  up  by  the  brigade  of  Col.  Thomas 
Kilby  Smith;  but  this  route,  while  it  was  better  covered  from  the  fire 
of  the  enemy,  led  through  ravines  made  almost  impassable  with  abatis 
of  fallen  timber,  and  did  not  admit  of  anything  like  a charge.  I there- 
fore directed  Col.  Giles  A.  Smith  to  go  forward  as  rapidly  as  the  nature 
of  the  ground  would  admit,  and  to  assault  whenever  he  found  it  prac- 
ticable to  do  so,  and  directed  Col.  Thomas  Kilby  Smith  to  follow  close 
up  and  support  any  movement  Col.  Giles  A.  Smith  should  make.  Col. 
Giles  A.  Smith  pushed  forward,  following  the  ravine  to  the  left  ot  the 
position  of  General  Ewing,  and  reached  a ridge  about  100  yards  from 
the  enemy’s  intrenchments. 

At  this  point  he  found  General  Bansom,  commanding  a brigade  of  the 
division  of  General  McPherson’s  corps,  who  had  approached  by  a ravine 
from  the  left  of  my  position,  and  who,  from  the  nature  of  the  ground, 
was  able  to  advance  his  brigade  under  cover  still  nearer  to  the  enemy’s 
works  than  that  of  Colonel  Smith.  General  Ransom  and  Colonel  Smith 
communicated  with  each  other,  and  determined  to  make  a simultaneous 
assault.  It  was  late  in  the  afternoon  before  these  brigades  were  able 
to  reach  the  positions  which  I have  referred  to,  so  difficult  and  toilsome 
was  the  nature  of  the  ground  over  which  they  moved,  rendered  still 
more  so  by  the  abatis  and  artificial  entanglement  thrown  across  it  by 
the  enemy.  Both  brigades  went  forward  with  a cheer  when  the  signal 
was  given  to  advance,  and  the  sharpshooters  from  Ewing’s  brigade  and 
our  artillery  opened  upon  the  enemy  at  the  same  time  with  considerable 
effect;  but,  after  reaching  the  face  of  the  works  of  the  enemy,  they 
encountered  a most  fatal  and  deadly  enfilading  fire  from  the  enemy’s 
guns  on  the  left,  which  came  crashing  through  the  ranks,  while  in  front 
they  were  met  by  an  obstinate  resistance  from  an  intrenched  foe,  and 
it  was  found  impossible  to  advance.  Both  brigades,  however,  main- 
tained pertinaciously  the  ground  they  had  won,  and  Col.  Giles  A.  Smith’s 
brigade  still  retains  it,  having  fortified  the  position,  and,  under  orders 
since  given  by  you,  the  position  has  been  materially  strengthened  and 
advanced. 


259 


Chap,  xxxvi.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


I cannot  speak  too  highly  of  the  courage  and  conduct  of  the  officers 
and  men  of  the  First  Brigade  in  this  desperate  assault,  which,  however, 
was  fully  equaled  by  that  of  General  Ransom’s  brigade,  of  which  I think 
it  proper  to  speak,  as  the  brigade  was  co-operating  with  one  of  my  own, 
and  was  separated  by  the  character  of  the  ground  from  the  corps  to 
which  it  belonged.  The  officers  and  men  of  both  brigades  displayed  a 
courage  and  coolness  which  could  not  have  failed  to  win  success  in  a 
less  unequal  struggle. 

The  active  operations  of  the  day  were  closed  by  an  impetuous  assault 
of  the  brigade  of  General  Mower,  of  General  Tuttle’s  division,  in  your 
army  corps,  which  rushed  forward  by  the  flank  on  the  same  road  which 
had  been  attempted  in  the  morning  by  the  brigade  of  General  H.  Ewing. 
The  attack. was  made  with  the  greatest  bravery  and  impetuosity,  and 
was  covered  by  a tremendous  fire  from  our  batteries,  and  by  the  sharp- 
shooters of  Ewing’s  and  Giles  A.  Smith’s  brigades,  and  its  failure  only 
served  to  prove  that  it  is  impossible  to  carry  this  position  by  storm. 

I have  omitted  to  mention  that  one  regiment,  the  Fifty-fifth  Regi- 
ment Illinois  Volunteer  Infantry,  from  the  brigade  of  Col.  Thomas  Kilby 
Smith,  participated  in  the  charge  made  by  the  brigades  of  Col.  Giles 
A.  Smith  and  General  Ransom,  and  that  the  balance  of  that  brigade 
gave  as  efficient  a support  to  the  movement  as  the  nature  of  the  ground 
admitted.  & 


I desire  to  mention  in  terms  of  the  highest  commendation  the  con- 
duct of  the  three  officers  commanding  the  brigades  of  my  division 
throughout  the  two  affairs  of  the  19th  and  22d,  and  the  almost  contin- 
uous fighting  which  intervened.  Col.  Giles  A.  Smith  deserves  to  be 
especially  distinguished,  and  his  thorough  soldiership  brought  to  the 
notice  of  the  Government  in  order  that  he  may  receive  promotion  for 
J11®  ^^^uished  gallantry  and  meritorious  conduct.  In  the  affair  of 
the  19th,  Col.  Giles  A.  Smith  received  a slight  wound  in  the  hip  from  a 
musket-ball.  He  remained,  however,  at  his  post  at  the  head  of  his 
brigade  throughout  that  day  and  the  ensuing  days  of  combat  up  to  this 
tlme>  leading  his  brigade  to  the  assault,  and  attending  to  every  detail 
ol  duty  under  circumstances  which  you  know  to  have  been  most  trying. 
I understand  that  Cql.  Giles  A.  Smith  has  heretofore  been  recommended 
tor  promotion  by  his  commanding  officers  on  account  of  his  gallantry 
and  good  conduct  in  the  field.  I take  this  occasion  to  renew  the  recom- 
mendation in  the  strongest  terms,  and  trust  that  you  will  do  this  officer 
the  justice  to  bring  his  conduct  to  the  notice  of  the  Government. 

I reier  also,  with  the  greatest  pleasure,  to  the  notices  which  have 
been  made  to  the  gallantry  and  good  conduct  of  the  following-named 
officers  and  men  of  the  First  and  Third  Brigades  of  my  division  by  the 
commanding  officers  of  those  brigades,  and  have  to  express  my  regret 
that  I have  received  no  detailed  report  from  the  commanding  officer  of 
the  Second  Brigade,  Col.  Thomas  Kilby  Smith,  which  would  enable  me 
to  do  similarjustice  to  the  brave  officers  and  men  of  that  brigade : Gol. 
Ceorge  B.  Hoge,  One  hundred  and  thirteenth  Illinois;  Col.  1ST.  W. 

1 upper,  One  hundred  and  sixteenth  Illinois ; Lieut.  Col.  David  C.  Cole- 

Lieut'  0oL  James  P-  B°yd>  °ue  hundred  and 
sixteenth  Illinois;  Maj.  Dennis  T.  Kirby,  Eighth  Missouri,  who  also  de- 
serves  especial  mention  for  his  gallantry  and  efficient  services  at  the 
battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  on  the  16th  instant ; Col.  Augustus  C.  Parry, 

T -0hl° ’ Co1- James  H.  Dayton,  Fourth  West  Virginia; 
Pieut.  Col  Loms  von  Blessingh,  Thirty-seventh  Ohio;  Lieut.  Col.  George 

Avd^T£lrt\eth°hi0;  Lieut  Oo1-  IraBoutoll,  Sixth  Missouri;  Maj. 
eorge  R.  Clarke,  One  hundred  and  thirteenth  Illinois;  Maj.  A.  Fro- 


260 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

man,  One  hundred  and  sixteenth  Illinois ; Maj.  Charles  Hipp,  Thirty- 
seventh  Ohio;  Capts.  E.  C.  Washington  and  Charles  Ewing,  Thir- 
teenth U.  S.  Infantry;  Lieut.  George  H.  Stockman,  Sixth  Missouri ; 
Lieutenant  Geschwind,  One  hundred  and  sixteenth  Illinois;  Lieut. 
Isaac  B.  Halsey,  acting  assistant  quartermaster  of  the  First  Brigade ; 
Capt,  John  H.  Groce  and  Lieut.  George  E.  O’Neal,  of  the  storming 
party;  Sergeants  [Joseph]  Brooks  [5th]  and  Davis,  Thirtieth  Ohio; 
Capts.  Gordon  Lofland,  Theodore  Voges,  J.  W.  Cornyn,  and  Lieuts.  A. 
C.  Fisk,  Henry  McIntyre,  James  H.  Odell,  and  Emmett  Headington,  of 
General  Ewing’s  staff,  and  Corporals  [Francis  M.]  Clendenin  and  [John 
W.]  Boley,  Fourth  West  Virginia,  and  Sergeant  Hilton  and  Private 
Trogden,  of  the  Eighth  Missouri. 

Of  the  bravery  and  efficient  services  of  the  above-named  officers  and 
men  I can  speak  in  the  highest  terms,  as  many  of  them  came  under  my 
personal  observation,  and  I cordially  indorse  the  recommendation  of 
their  respective  commanding  officers,  hoping  they  will  speedily  receive 
the  promotions  which  are  so  well  merited ; and  I would  recommend  that 
the  medal  of  honor  voted  by  Congress  be  presented  to  all  the  enlisted 
men  mentioned,  also  to  all  the  non-commissioned  officers  and  privates 
composing  the  storming  party  on  the  22d. 

I append  a recapitulation  of  the  casualties  in  my  command  to  date, 
full  lists,  giving  name,  company,  and  regiments  of  officers  and  men, 
having  been  forwarded  to  your  headquarters. 

I inclose  herewith  reports  of  brigade  and  regimental  commanders  as 

far  as  received. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J FRANK  P.  BLAIR,  Jr., 

Major-General , Commanding  Second  Division. 

Maj.  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 

P.  s._i  will  forward  a supplemental  report  as  soon  as  I have  re- 
ceived a detailed  report  from  the  commanding  officer  of  the  Second 
Brigade  of  my  division. 

Recapitulation  of  the  Casualties  in  the  Second  Division,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps,  in  the 
assault  on  the  works  near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  Mag  19  and  22,  lobd. 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

Command. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

1 Enlisted  men. 

co 

<D 

O 

£ 

o 

Enlisted  men. 

Aggregate. 

1 

1 

28 

210 

2 

294 

First  Brigade  ------  - --  --  - - --  --  - - --  --  - 

4 

37 

10 

149 

1 

201 

5 

69 

24 

282 

1 

6 

380 

2 

Company  A,  1st  Illinois  Light  Artillery 

1 

2 

1 

1 

3 

Company  B,  1st  Illinois  Light  Artillery 

Company  H,  1st  Illinois  Light  Artillery 

1 

1 

Theilemann’s  [Illinois]  cavalry 

Company  C,  10th. Missouri  Cavalry  Volunteers 

'T'f.+nl  

10 

163 

1 

65 

643 

9 

1 

890 

— 

Chap.  XXX VL] 


261 


THE  SIEGE  OP  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Fifteenth  Army  Corps, 

Camp,  Walnut  Hills , Miss.,  June  6,  18G3. 

In  reviewing  and  submitting  the  report  of  General  Blair,  I can  only 
say  the  facts  are  so  fully  and  clearly  stated  that  nothing  can  be  added. 
I take  great  pleasure  in  indorsing  all  he  says  of  the  conduct  of  his 
men  and  officers  during  both  assaults  of  May  19  and  22,  for,  from  my 
position  on  both  days,  I had  this  division  in  full  view.  If  any  troops 
could  have  carried  and  held  the  intrenchments  of  Vicksburg,  these 
would. 

I recoiamend  to  the  notice  of  the  President  the  names  enumerated 
by^G^neral  B1.air  as  wortby  of  promotion  in  their  line  of  profession: 
and  the  storming  party  that  volunteered  to  scale  the  works,  and  did  do 
so,  and  remain  on  the  exterior  slope  amid  that  fierce  conflict,  merit  not 
only  the  medal  of  honor,  but  more  substantial  reward. 

In  justice  to  Col.  T.  Kilby  Smith,  who  commanded  the  Second  Bri- 
gade, the  absence  of  whose  report  is  noticed  by  General  Blair,  I explain 
that  I know  he  prepared  a report,  and  showed  it  to  me  about  May  24, 
at  the  time  General  Blair  was  absent,  detached  toward  Yazoo  City,  and, 
now  that  General  Blair  has  returned,  Colonel  Smith  happens  on  de- 
tached duty  at  Milliken’s  Bend,  by  order  of  General  Grant,  His  report 
will  be  sent  in  to  department  headquarters  with  this,  if  Colonel  Smith 
can  be  heard  from,  and  the  officers  and  men  named  by  him  as  worthy 
ot  special  notice  will  be  entitled  to  the  same  honors  as  are  accorded  to 
those  of  the  other  brigades. 

4 special  mention  of  Col.  Giles  A.  Smith,  commanding  First 

Brigade,  I but  repeat  former  expressions  of  praise.  An  officer  who  is 
always  present  with  his  command,  who  carries  a severe  wound  without 
a nmch  or  the  loss  of  a minute’s  duty,  and  who  takes  a pride  in  study- 
ing his  chosen  profession,  deserves  the  special  notice  of  his  command- 
ers,  without  a just  cause  for  the  envy  of  any  other.  Being  in  command 
ot  a brigade,  and  worthy  of  it,  he  should  have  the  rank. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


No.  30. 

Report  of  Cap!  Samuel  F.  Barrett,  Battery  B,  First  Illinois  Light 

Artillery. 

Hdqrs.  Company  B,  First  Illinois  Light  Artillery, 

Walnut  Hills , Miss.,  May  25,  1863. 
Lieutenant:  I herewith  respectfully  submit  to  you  the  part  taken 
oy  my  command  in  the  series  of  engagements  lately  undertaken  for 
the  reduction  of  Vicksburg. 

Ur?Iyaba^ery  Bend,  La.  (marching  with  the  Second 

igade,  Second  Division),  on  the  7th  instant,  arriving  at  Hard  Times 

GutfMiss  9 ' 011  tllC  llth’  and  casing  the  same  afternoon  to  Grand 

On  the  12th  instant,  we  took  up  a line  of  march,  making  Eaymond, 
Miss.,  on  the  15th,  and,  proceeding  toward  the  Big  Black  Hirer,  on  the 
IMh  were  in  position  on  the  left  of  the  line  of  battle,  engaged  in  action 
r near  Chapel  [Champion’s]  Hill.  Toward  evening  of  this  day,  I 


262 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  TChap.  XXXVL 


was  ordered  by  Maj.  Gen.  F.  P.  Blair,  jr.,  commanding  division,  to  re- 
port to  Brig.  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith,  commanding  Tenth  Division,  Thirteenth 
Army  Corps,  with  my  battery,  but  was  not  brought  into  action. 

On  the  17th,  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy  was  commenced  at  an  early 
hour,  and  we  crossed  tlie  Big  Black  at  dusk,  encamping  about  2 miles 
west  of  that  stream  that  night.  . 

Marching  early  on  the  morning  of  the  18th,  we  came  in  sight  ot  the 
enemy’s  works  about  Vicksburg  at  4 p.  in.,  and  immediately  opened 
upon  them  with  three  guns,  firing  but  a few  rounds. 

On  the  19th,  I took  a new  position  near  the  rebel  intrenchments,  and 
at  11  a.  m.  commenced  firing,  expending  200  rounds  of  fixed  ammuni- 
tion during  the  day.  . . 

On  the  20th,  I was  ordered  to  put  two  of  my  pieces  m position  on  the 
right  of  the  Vicksburg  road,  the  rest  of  the  battery  (four  pieces)  re- 
maining in  the  position  occupied  on  the  previous  day.  Firing  was  kept 
up  at  intervals  during  the  day,  mostly  directed  at  the  enemy’s  fort 
opposite  us.  My  loss  on  this  day  was  1 man  killed  and  1 wounded. 

May  21. — During  the  forenoon  my  pieces  remained  in  same  position 
us  on  the  20th,  at  noon  the  two  pieces  on  the  right  of  the  Vicksburg 
road  rejoining  the  balance  of  the  battery  to  the  left,  firing  during  a 
part  of  the  day.  Casualties,  3 horses  wounded. 

At  3 a.  m.  of  the  22d,  in  obedience  to  orders  from  Major-General 
Sherman,  I moved  my  battery  to  the  next  ridge  in  our  front,  distant 
from  the  enemy’s  works  about  400  yards.  We  intrenched  ourselves  as 
well  as  possible,  and  during  the  day  were  engaged  in  action  for  a large 
portion  of  the  time.  Twice  during  this  day  the  works  of  the  enemy 
were  unsuccessfully  stormed  by  our  infantry,  and  my  practice  was  in  a* 
great  measure  directed  by  its  movements.  My  loss  this  day  was  1 man 
killed  by  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters. 

May  23  and  24,  remaining  in  same  position,  improving  our  detenses, 
and  firing  a few  rounds  at  nightfall  of  each  day. 

During  the  series  of  engagements  before  Vicksburg,  my  battery  ex- 
pended 1,400  rounds  of  fixed  ammunition.  My  casualties  thus  far  are 
2 men  killed,  1 wounded,  and  3 artillery  horses  disabled  by  the  enemy’s 
fire.  The  behavior  of  my  officers  and  men  under  fire  and  during  the 
fatiguing  labors  of  the  past  few  days  merits,  without  exception,  my 
entire  approbation. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

* 1 ’ SAMUEL  E.  BARRETT, 

Captain , Comdg.  Company  B,  First  Regt.  Illinois  Light  Artillery. 

Lieut.  G.  Moodie  White, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Second  Brig.,  Second  Biv.,  Fifteenth  A.  6. 


Ho.  31. 


Report  of  Col.  Giles  A.  Smith,  Eighth  Missouri  Infantry,  commanding 
First  Brigade,  including  operations  since  May  16. 


Hdqrs.  First  Brig., 


Second  Diy.,  Fifteenth  A.  C., 
Walnut  Hills,  Miss.,  May  26,  1863. 


General.  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
part  taken  by  the  brigade  under  my  command  in  the  different  actions 
near  Vicksburg,  from  the  16th  to  the  22d  instant : 

The  brigade  being  most  of  this  time  under  your  own  eye,  1 shall  out 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  CCF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


263 


briefly  allude  to  its  principal  and  most  important  movements.  Early 
on  the  morning  of  Saturday,  the  16th  instant,  I took  up  my  line  of 
march  in  conjunction  with  other  forces  of  your  command  from  Raymond, 
Miss.,  to  Edwards  Station,  on  the  Vicksburg  and  Jackson  Railroad. 
After  proceeding  some  9 miles  from  Raymond,  the  division  in  our  front 
(General  A.  J.  Smith’s)  encountered  the  enemy,  who  retired  from  one 
position  to  another  as  we  advanced  on  this  road. 

A road  from  Bolton,  a station  on  the  railroad  I have  mentioned,  in- 
tersects the  road  upon  which  I was  moving,  a few  miles  from  Raymond, 
and  troops  were  also  moving  upon  that  road  in  the  direction  of  Bolton. 
Sharp  skirmish  firing  was  heard  on  my  right  and  front  in  the  direction 
of  this  column,  which  soon  deepened  into  the  roar  of  heavy  volleys  of 
musketry.  Soon  afterward,  by  your  order,  I moved  my  brigade 
through  the  fields  on  my  right,  and  formed  on  the  left  of  General  Oster- 
haus’  division,  which  was  then  moving  up  to  engage  the  enemy.  As 
soon  as  this  position  wTas  reached,  I deployed  one  company  from  each 
regiment  as  skirmishers,  placing  Maj.  D.  T.  Kirby,  Eighth  Missouri  In- 
fantry, in  command  of  the  whole  line  of  skirmishers,  with  orders  to  ad- 
vance and  push  the  enemy  vigorously.  I then  moved  forward,  keeping 
my  brigade  in  close  supporting  distance,  the  line  of  skirmishers  steadily 
driving  the  enemy  from  every  position,  and  pressing  him  so  closely  as 
to  compel  him  to  abandon  caissons,  ammunition  wagons,  and  large 
quantities  of  camp  and  garrison  equipage.  The  pursuit  continued  until 
night,  when  tne  nature  of  the  ground,  being  broken,  cut  up  by  deep 
ravines,  and  covered  with  trees  and  dense  underbrush,  rendered  my 
larther  advance  impossible.  During  the  day  some  200  prisoners  were 
taken  by  my  command,  most  of  them  being  stragglers  from  the  enemy. 

At  daylight  the  next  morning  (17th),  I again  moved  forward,  the 
ground  everywhere  evidencing  the  haste  with  which  the  retreat  of  the 
enemy  had  been  made,  it  being  strewn  wTith  ammunition,  muskets, 
wagons,  caissons,  and,  in  a field  near  the  road,  eleven  pieces  of  artillery 
were  found,  which  had  been  abandoned  by  the  enemy. 

By  12  m.  I had  reached  Bridgeport,  12  miles  distant,  on  the  Black 
River,  on  the  road  leading  to  Vicksburg.  Here  a small  force  of  the 
enemy  had  intrenched  themselves  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  river  and 
opened  a sharp  fire  upon  my  advance.  I immediately  deployed  skir- 
mishers for  the  purpose  of  dislodging  them,  but  the  strength  of  their 
position  was  such  as  to  render  them  secure  from  sharpshooters.  Capt. 
1.1.  Wood,  Company  A,  First  Illinois  Light  Artillery,  then  placed 
two  pieces  in  position  on  the  bank  of  the  river,  and  close  to  their  in- 
trenchments,  and  opened  so  vigorous  a fire  upon  them  as  to  cut  off  their 
retreat  and  compel  them  to  surrender,  they  raising  the  white  flao\  the 
omcer  in  command  of  the  rebel  force  crossing  the  river  in  a dugout  and 
delivering  his  sword  to  Captain  Wood. 

A pontoon  bridge  was  immediately  constructed,  and  before  dark  I 
had  eifected  the  crossing  of  my  command,  which  I moved  out  some  2 
miles,  where  we  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

Early  the  next  morning  (18th),  I again  moved  forward,  and  by  5 
p.  m.  had  my  brigade  in  line  of  battle  before  the  works  of  Vicksburg, 
f 1 sent  Capt*  Charles  Ewing,  First  Battalion  Thir- 

eentn  U.  fe.  Infantry,  forward  with  skirmishers  to  reconnoiter  the 
ground  m my  front.  He  drove  in  the  enemy’s  pickets  and  reached 
withm  100  yards  of  the  line  of  intrenchments,  when  I ordered  them  to 
a Pq  Pefore  daylight  some  200  yards,  to  secure  cover  from  a hill. 

At  d p m.  (19th),  after  some  heavy  cannonading,  our  whole  line  was 
ordered  to  advance.  My  command  moved  in  the  following  order : The 


264  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXX 71. 

Sixth  Missouri  Infantry,  Lieutenant- Colonel  Boutell,  on  the  right;  the 
First  Battalion  Thirteenth  IL  S.  Infantry,  Captain  Washington,  on  the 
left;  the  One  hundred  and  Thirteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  Colonel  Hoge, 
on  the  right  center,  and  the  One  hundred  and  sixteenth  Illinois  In- 
fantry, Colonel  Tapper,  on  the  left  center,  with  the  Eighth  Missouri 
Infantry,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Coleman,  in  reserve.  The  ground  over 
which  I had  to  move  to  reach  the  enemy’s  intrenchments  was  a succes- 
sion of  deep  ravines  and  precipitous  hills.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Cole- 
man was  directed  to  open  a heavy  fire  from  the  crest  of  the  hill  next  to 
the  enemy’s  works,  while  the  other  regiments  were  crossing  the  ravine 
in  his  front. 

My  line  then  advanced  under  a heavy  fire  over  almost  impassable 
ground,  many  pushing  themselves  up  under  the  parapets  of  the  enemy’s 
works,  while  others,  becoming  entangled  in  the  brush  and  fallen  timber, 
took  such  shelter  as  the  ridges,  stumps,  and  logs  afforded,  and  persist- 
ently held  their  ground  until  darkness  closed  the  engagement. 

The  20th  and  21st  were  occupied  in  advancing  my  line,  throwing  for- 
ward sharpshooters,  with  instructions  to  intrench  themselves  as  they 
gained  ground.  Desultory  skirmishing  was  thus  kept  up  until  10  a.  m. 
of  the  22d,  when  my  brigade,  with  the  other  brigades  of  your  division, 
was  massed  in  a ravine  near  the  road,  several  hundred  yards  to  the  left 
of  our  former  position,  the  Third  Brigade,  General  Ewing,  being  in  the 
advance.  Fifty  men  from  my  command,  with  two  officers,  Lieut.  George 
H.  Stockman,  Sixth  Missouri  Infantry,  and  Lieut.  Nicholas  Gescliwind, 
of  the  One  hundred  and  sixteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  volunteered,  with  an 
equal  number  from  each  of  the  other  brigades  of  your  division,  as  a 
storming  party. 

Capt.  P.  P.  Wood,  Company  A,  First  Illinois  Light  Artillery,  having 
placed  his  battery  on  the  summit  of  a hill  near  the  enemy’s  works,  ren- 
dered great  assistance  by  opening  a heavy  fire  to  cover  our  movement. 
At  the  signal  given  the  storming  party  gallantly  advanced  to  the  works, 
but  found  it  impossible  to  surmount  them.  I was  then  ordered  to  form 
my  brigade  on  the  left  of  General  Ewing’s,  and  try  the  strength  of  their 
works  at  that  point.  In  conjunction  with  Brigadier-General  Bansom, 
commanding  a brigade  on  my  left,  I again  advanced,  but  met  so  severe 
a fire  from  my  front  and  left  by  both  musketry  and  artillery  that  I found 
it  absolutely  necessary  to  order  the  brigade  to  fall  back  behind  the  crest 
of  the  hill,  which  was  done  slowly  and  in  good  order,  and  where  we  still 
remain. 

My  command — officers  and  men — exhibited  the  greatest  daring  and 
bravery,  and  behaved  themselves  during  these  engagements  with  a 
spirit  and  courage  that  called  forth  my  highest  admiration.  As  I have 
not  received  the  reports  from  the  different  regiments,  I will  only  cite 
such  acts  of  individual  gallantry  and  bravery  as  came  under  my  own 
observation. 

Captain  Washington,  commanding  First  Battalion  Thirteenth  U.  S. 
Infantry,  was  twice  wounded  while  gallantly  leading  his  men  to  the 
assault.  The  command  then  devolved  upon  Capt.  Charles  Ewing,  who 
carried  the  colors  of  his  battalion  close  under  the  parapets  of  the  enemy 
after  three  color-bearers  had  been  successively  either  killed  or  wounded. 
He  was  himself  slightly  wounded  in  the  hand  and  received  another  bul- 
let through  his  hat.  Captain  Washington  is  a prisoner  in  the  hands  of 
the  enemy.  I earnestly  recommend  both  these  officers  for  promotion 
for-  gallantry  on  the  field  as  well  as  their  eminent  fitness  for  higher 
commands. 

Col.  George  B.  Hoge,  commanding  One  hundred  and  thirteenth  Illi- 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


265 


nois;  Col.  K W.  Tupper,  commanding  One  hundred  and  sixteenth  Illi- 
nois j Lieutenant-Colonel  Coleman,  commanding  Eighth  Missouri,  and 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Boyd,  of  the  One  hundred  and  sixteenth  Illinois, 
were  wounded  during  the  assault,  the  three  former  slightly  and  the 
latter  seriously.  They  were  all  conspicuous  for  their  gallantry  through- 
out. Two  color-bearers  of  the  One  hundred  and  sixteenth  Illinois  were 
killed,  2 of  the  One  hundred  and  thirteenth  Illinois  were  wounded— 
one  instantly  after  the  other — and  1 ([John  B.J  Bartholomew),  of  the 
Eighth  Missouri,  killed,  and  Sergt.  A.  E.  Hilton,  of  the  same  regiment, 
wounded,  after  which  the  colors  of  the  Eighth  Missouri  were  borne  by 
Maj.  D.  T.  Kirby,  whose  conduct  deserves  especial  mention. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Boutell,  commanding  the  Sixth  Missouri,  led  his 
regiment  with  great  credit.  Major  Clarke,  One  hundred  and  thirteenth 
Illinois,  and  Major  Froman,  One  hundred  and  sixteenth  Illinois,  were 
very  active  and  efficient.  Lieutenant  Stockman,  Sixth  Missouri,  and 
Lieutenant  Geschwind,  of  the  One  hundred  and  sixteenth  Illinois,  in 
command  of  a storming  party,  acquitted  themselves  with  great  honor, 
and  were  both  wounded.  Private  Howell  G.  Trogden,  Eighth  Missouri, 
one  of  the  storming  party,  was  appointed  color-bearer,  and  planted  his 
flag  on  the  berme  of  the  works,  where  it  floated  until  after  dark,  and  was 
brought  off  by  him,  being  perfectly  riddled  with  bullets.  Lieut.  Isaac 
B.  Halsey,  my  acting  assistant  quartermaster,  voluntarily  came  on  the 
field,  displaying  a total  disregard  of  danger,  and  rendered  me  the  great- 
est assistance.  He  was  twice  severely  wounded,  refusing  to  leave  the 
field  until  receiving  the  second  shot.  I earnestly  recommend  his  pro- 
motion to  assistant  quartermaster,  a position  he  is  in  every  way  compe- 
tent to  fill,  as  a reward  for  his  distinguished  services. 

Appended  you  will  find  a list  of  the  casualties  in  my  command  dur- 
ing the  engagements  I have  mentioned* * 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

~ 707  ™ GILES  A.  SMITH, 

Col.  8th  Mo.  Vol.  Infty .,  Comdg.  1st  Brig .,  2d  J)iv .,  1 5th  Army  Corps. 

Maj.  Gen.  E.  P.  Blair,  Jr., 

Commanding  Second  Division , Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 


Ko.  32. 

Report  of  Col.  Thomas  Kilby  Smith , Fifty  fourth  Ohio  Infantry  com- 
manding Second  Brigade , including  operations  since  May  6. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Brig.,  Second  Div.,  Fifteenth  A.  C. 

In  Camp  on  IF alnut  Bills , near  Vicksburg,  May  24,  1863. 

Major:  In  compliance  with  orders  of  even  date,  I have  the  honor 
to  make  the  following  report: 

The  Second  Brigade  is  composed  of  the  Fifty-fifth  Illinois,  com- 
manded by  Col.  Oscar  Malmborg ; Fifty -fourth  Ohio,  Lieut.  Col.  0.  W. 
Fisher : Fifty-seventh  Ohio,  Col.  Americus  Y.  Bice:  Eighty-third  In- 
diana,  Col.  Benjamin  J.  Spooner  : One  hundred  and  twenty-seventh 
Ilhnois,  Col.  H.  K.  Eldridge;  and  Company  B,  First  Illinois  Light 
Artillery  Capt.  S.  E.  Barrett,  a battery  of  four  6-pounder  brass  field 
pieces  and  two  12-pounder  howitzers. 

On  the  6th  instant,  at  Milliken’s  Bend,  I received  an  order  from 

* Nominal  list,  omitted,  embraced  in  revised  statements. 


266 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Ciiap.  XXXVI. 


General  Blair  to  break  up  camp,  and,  with  ten  days’  rations  and  am- 
munition, marching  light,  without  tents  or  baggage,  take  up  the  line 
of  march  for  Grand  Gulf. 

On  the  7th,  at  daybreak,  with  the  Fifty-fourth  Ohio,  the  Eiglity- 
third  Indiana,  and  battery,  we  were  on  the  road,  the  other  three  regi- 
ments having  been  detached  to  repair  roads  and  bridges  from  Milliken’s 
Bend  to  Bichmond  and  beyond.  These  were  picked  up  en  route , and, 
on  the  evening  of  the  7th,  the  whole  brigade  was  closed  in  due  order  of 
march,  with  transportation. 

On  the  evening  of  the  10th,  we  reached  Hard  Times  Landing,  G3 
miles. 

On  the  11th,  we  crossed  to  Grand  Gulf. 

On  the  12th,  resumed  march,  via  Willow  Springs,  Bocky  Springs, 
Cayuga,  and  Auburn,  and  arrived  at  Baymond,  53  miles,  on  the  15th, 
and  in  the  evening,  1 mile  from  Baymond,  on  the  road  to  Bolton,  biv- 
ouacked in  line  of  battle. 

On  the  morning  of  the  IGth  instant,  having  the  advance  of  the  di- 
vision, and  following  the  command  of  General  A.  J.  Smith,  I marched 
toward  Edwards  Station.  Firing  was  heard  in  front  as  early  as  8 
o’clock.  About  noon  I received  orders  to  hold  my  command  in  readi- 
ness for  an  engagement.  At  1 o’clock  I found  my  left  resting  on  the 
road,  and  shortly  afterward,  by  order  from  General  Blair,  moved  by  the 
left  flank  of  regiments,  but  without  artillery,  the  broken  and  woody 
nature  of  the  ground  rendering  the  transit  of  the  pieces  impossible.  I 
advanced  three-quarters  of  a mile.  Before  I had  changed  front,  a bat- 
tery from  the  enemy  opened  fire  upon  me,  and,  by  orders  from  General 
Blair,  I fell  back  to  near  my  first  position,  where  I placed  Captain  Barrett 
in  battery,  supporting  him  by  my  entire  brigade.  Here  we  remained 
some  two  hours,  when,  by  order  from  General  Blair  to  support  General 
A.  J.  Smith,  we  moved  forward  by  the  left  flank  on  the  road,  the  battery 
following  the  Fifty-fourth  Ohio,  till  we  reached  a portion  of  General  A. 
J.  Smith’s  command,  deployed,  and  under  fire  from  a battery,  within 
600  yards.  Here  I again  formed,  and  reported  to  General  A.  J.  Smith. 
Shortly  afterward  General  Blair,  in  person,  ordered  me  to  connect  my 
lines  with  those  of  the  First  Brigade,  Col.  Giles  A.  Smith,  which  had 
been  maneuvering  on  my  right  and  General  Smith’s.  This  was  done  by 
flank  and  forward  movement,  and  accomplished  by  10  o’clock.  The  men 
rested  upon  their  arms  till  daybreak,  when  we  marched  without  opposi- 
tion to  Edwards  Station,  the  enemy  having  precipitately  retired  under 
cover  of  the  night,  leaving  the  ground  strewn  with  small-arms  and  am- 
munition. I omitted  to  mention  that  we  captured  some  200  prisoners 
during  the  afternoon  and  night. 

We  crossed  the  Jackson  railroad  at  Edwards  Station  at  9 a.  in.,  and 
marched  to  Bridgeport,  where  we  joined  General  Sherman,  and  crossed 
Black  Biver  over  pontoons  at  twilight,  and  proceeded  2 miles  upon 
the  Yicksburg  road  and  bivouacked. 

On  the  morning  of  the  18th,  the  Second  Brigade  followed  the  First 
upon  the  road  to  Vicksburg,  until,  arriving  at  a point  where  the  road 
forked,  within  1 J miles  of  these  headquarters,  I was  ordered  by  General 
Sherman  to  press  forward  upon  the  Graveyard  road,  and  relieve  the 
Thirteenth  Begulars,  who  were  deployed  as  skirmishers.  About  4 
o’clock  I formed  in  line  of  battle  within  700  yards  of  and  opposite  to  the 
enemy’s  works,  then,  however,  veiled  from  my  view  by  the  thick  woods, 
and  deployed  seven  companies  of  skirmishers,  the  woods  in  front  being 
filled  with  the  enemy.  Shortly  afterward  General  Sherman  advanced 
in  person.  Within  brief  space  of  time  General  Steele’s  command  was 


Ciiap.  XXXVI.] 


267 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

ordered  upon  my  right,  and  my  line  of  skirmishers  connected  with  him 
and  the  forces  of  General  McPherson,  1 J miles  to  my  left.  Captain  Bar- 
rett was  placed  in  battery  by  Major  Taylor,  chief  of  artillery  of  the  Fif- 
teenth Army  Corps,  in  my  front  and  center,  supported  by  two  companies 
from  the  Fifty-fifth  Illinois. 

As  night  fell,  I ordered  the  Fifty-fourth  Ohio,  with  three  companies 
from  the  One  hundred  and  twenty-seventh  Illinois  as  a reserve,  to  deploy 
far  to  my  left,  with  a view  of  connecting  with  General  Ransom’s  picket. 
Col.  Giles  A.  Smith  meanwhile  had  advanced  and  relieved  my  pick- 
ets on  the  right.  Thus  we  remained  resting  on  our  arms  till  daybreak, 
when,  by  orders  from  General  Sherman,  I threw  the  pickets,  as  skir- 
mishers, forward  within  close  range  of  the  enemy,  advancing  the  brigade 
in  line  of  battle  on  either  side  of  what  is  called  the  Graveyard  road, 
leading  to  what  was  supposed  to  be  a sally-port  in  the  fortifications, 
the  right  wing,  Eighty-third  Indiana  and  One  hundred  and  twenty-sev- 
enth Illinois  with  its  left,  the  left  wing,  Fifty-fifth  Illinois  and  Fifty- 
fourth  Ohio  with  its  right,  upon  the  road  till  we  reached  the  crest  of  a 
hill,  fiCO  yards  from  the  enemy’s  works,  Company  B,  First  Illinois  Ar- 
tillery, Captain  Barrett,  in  position  in  front,  still  supported  by  details 
from  the  Fifty-fifth  Illinois. 

At  9 a.  m.,  the  signal  being  given  by  Battery  A,  five  shots  were  fired 
to  get  range,  when  a vigorous  fire  was  opened  along  the  line,  skirmish- 
ers and  sharpshooters  pouring  in  most  destructive  volleys  from  sheltered 
points  along  the  range  of  hills  and  close  under  the  parapets. 

At  11  o’clock  the  following  order  was  received  from  department 
headquarters,  viz : 

Corps  commanders  will  push  forward  carefully,  and  gain  as  close  position  as  possible 
to  the  enemy’s  works,  until  2 p.m.;  at  that  hour  they  will  fire  three  volleys  of  artil- 
lery from  all  the  pieces  in  position.  This  will  he  the  signal  for  a general  charge  of 
all  the  army  corps  along  the  whole  line.  When  the  works  are  carried,  guards  will  be 
placed  by  all  division  commanders  to  prevent  their  men  from  straggling  from  their 
companies. 

By  order  of  Major-General  Grant,  &c. 

At  1 o’clock  I assembled  my  pickets,  calling  in  the  Fifty-fourth  Ohio. 
A reconnaissance  of  the  ground  over  which  I should  pass  had  developed 
the  fact  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  advance  my  whole  brigade  in 
line  of  battle,  the  hills  and  knobs  being  exceedingly  precipitous,  in- 
tersected by  ravines  in  three  directions,  the  bottom  treacherous,  filled 
with  sink  holes,  concealed  by  dried  grass  and  cane ; the  whole  covered 
by  abatis  of  fallen  timber  from  a dense  forest  cut  six  months  or  more 
ago,  affording  spikes  and  cheveaux  de  frise  most  difficult  to  surmount. 
The  roadway  alluded  to  is  cut  and  filled,  slightly  winding  upon  a ridge 
nearly  perpendicular  to  my  line  of  battle,  and  at  its  point  of  intersection 
with  the  fortifications  makes  an  embankment  some  18  feet  high.  There- 
fore I placed  my  right  wing,  Eighty-third  Indiana  and  One  hundred 
and  twenty-seventh  Illinois,  in  command  of  Colonel  Spooner,  its  senior 
officer,  in  whose  ability  and  dauntless  courage  I repose  fullest  confidence, 
on  the  right  of  the  road,  with  instructions  to  x>ress  forward  as  rapidly 
as  possible,  and  in  such  order  as  he  could  best  get  over  the  ground.  1 
ordered  Captain  Kili,  of  Company  A,  Fifty-fourth  Ohio,  to  take  charge 
of  his  line  of  skirmishers,  and  Captain  Moore,  Company  D,  of  the  Fifty- 
fourth  Ohio,  brigade  officer  of  the  day,  to  aid  him.  I formed  the  Fifty- 
fifth  Illinois  with  its  right  upon  the  road ; the  Fifty-fourth  Ohio  online 
with  the  Fifty-fifth,  with  orders  to  guide  upon  it;  and  the  Fifty-seventh 
Ohio  immediately  in  the  rear  but  not  in  reserve. 

At  the  appointed  hour  the  signal  was  given,  and  at  the  command 


268 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Ciiap.  XXXW. 


“ forward”  the  troops  advanced  gallantly  and  without  hesitation.  It 
was  almost  vain  to  essay  a line,  owing  to  the  nature  of  the  ground,  yet 
three  times,  under  a most  galling  and  destructive  fire,  did  these  regi- 
ments halt  and  dress  upon  their  colors;  the  nerve  and  self-possession 
of  both  officers  and  men  perfect ; not  a man  flinched  from  his  post. 
Having  advanced  some  400  yards,  I discovered  that  the  men  were  thor- 
oughly exhausted,  and  halted  the  left  wing  under  the  crest  of  a hill, 
from  65  to  75  yards  from  the  ditch  and  parapet,  and  where  they  were 
comparatively  sheltered  from  the  small-arms  of  the  enemy.  Returning 
to  reconnoiter  the  position  of  my  right  wing,  hid  from  my  view  by  the 
embankment  of  the  road,  I perceived  their  colors  advanced  to  the  very 
base  of  the  parapet,  and  also  that  my' brigade  was  alone,  unsupported 
on  the  left  or  right,  save  by  a portion  of  the  Thirteenth  Regulars,  who 
had  advanced  to  a position  under  the  parapet,  near  the  Eighty-third 
Indiana  and  One  hundred  and  twenty-seventh  Illinois. 

To  the  left,  as  far  as  I could  see  (and  from  an  elevated  point  I had 
great  range),  not  a soldier  to  be  seen,  and  only  an  occasional  puff  of 
smoke  from  the  rifle  of  a sharpshooter,  concealed  far  away  among  the 
hills,  revealed  the  fact  that  we  had  friends  near  us  outside  of  our  di- 
vision. Therefore  I determined  to  halt  my  command,  report,  and  wait 
for  further  orders,  especially  as  from  the  position  my  left  wing  occu- 
pied (that  which  General  Ewing  is  now  fortifying)  great  execution  could 
be  done  by  my  men  upon  the  sharpshooters  of  the  enemy,  who,  from 
the  trees  close  behind  the  works,  were  picking  off  our  officers  with 
devilish  skill. 

Returning  to  the  front,  I sent  an  aide-de-camp  to  General  Blair  with 
report.  I received  in  answer  orders  from  General  Sherman  “to  get  my 
men  as  close  to  the  parapet  as  possible,  and  be  ready  to  jump  in  when 
they  began  to  yield,”  coupled  with  the  assurance  that  McPherson  was 
well  engaged,  and  that  General  Grant  was  on  the  ground,  and  that  the 
artillery  of  the  enemy,  which  began  to  enfilade  us,  would  be  silenced. 
I ordered  my  men  to  cease  firing  and  fix  bayonets,  with  intent  to  charge, 
when,  upon  closer  view,  I discovered  the  works  too  steep  and  high  to 
scale  without  proper  appliances ; a few  men  could  have  been  got  over 
by  the  aid  of  a ladder  of  bayonets  or  digging  holes  in  the  embankment, 
but  these  would  have  gone  to  destruction.  I could  not  make  a demon- 
stration with  my  isolated  command  that  would  have  resulted  perma- 
nently; therefore  I determined  to  maintain  the  position  and  await 
developments.  The  sequel  to  the  attempt  at  assault  is  my  guarantee 
for  the  course  I pursued. 

Meanwhile  details  were  ordered  back  and  ammunition  furnished  in 
abundance ; the  most  accurate  marksmen  were  thrown  forward,  with 
carte  blanche  to  select  the  best  cover.  Companies  were  advanced  from 
each  regiment  and  relieved  as  ammunition  gave  out  or  guns  became 
foul.  A most  deadly  fire  was  kept  up,  and  none  of  the  enemy  ventured 
his  head  above  the  wall  who  failed  to  pay  the  penalty.  At  the  same 
time  the  right  wing,  with  stern  determination,  maintained  their  ground. 
Their  loss  had  been  fearful,  falling  upon  their  best  line  and  non-com- 
missioned officers.  Captain  after  captain  had  been  shot  dead;  field- 
officers  were  falling;  still,  there  was  no  flinching.  I communicated 
through  my  aides. 

As  night  fell,  I received  a verbal  order,  through  an  unusual  source,  to 
fall  back  to  my  original  position.  This  order  was  in  immediate  conflict 
with  two  received  from  General  Sherman,  and  gave  me  no  little  sur- 
prise. I had  won  by  severe  loss  the  best  position  to  fortify  in  our  whole 
front.  Already  I had  made  arrangements  to  plant  batteries  upon  the 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


269 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

bill  I occupied.  Reluctantly  I left  the  command  with  Colonel  Rice 
Colonel  Malmborg,  senior  officer,  having  been  most  painfully  wounded 
in  the  eye,  and  went  back  in  person  for  report  and  explanation. 

At  General  Blair’s  headquarters  I received  the  following  written 
orders  : 

Brigade  commanders  will  collect  the  forces  of  their  respective  regiments,  and  occupy 
the  last  ground  from  which  they  moved  to  the  assault  to-day,  where  their  men  wiil 
he  well  covered,  advancing  a line  of  skirmishers  as  near  as  possible  to  the  enemy’s 
works,  for  the  purpose  of  occupying  his  attention.  They  will  bo  prepared  to  assault 
at  daybreak  in  the  morning. 

By  order  of  Maj.  Gen.  F.  P.  Blair,  &c. 

At  this  time  it  had  become  quite  dark,  when  suddenly  the  whole  scene 
was  brilliantly  lighted  by  the  flames  of  certain  wooden  houses  within 
the  works,  ignited  by  simultaneous  action  of  the  enemy  for  the  purpose 
of  discovering  our  change  of  movement.  This  purpose  had  been  an- 
ticipated by  Colonel  Spooner,  who,  with  skill  and  good  judgment,  with- 
drew from  the  ditch  beneath  the  parapet  to  shelter.  A few  moments 
later,  and  hand-grenades  and  the  grave  wTould  have  been  supper  and 
bed  for  his  men. 

In  pursuance  of  the  last  order,  I quietly  withdrew  my  command  by 
details.  At  3 o’clock  in  the  morning  they  were  in  their  old  position. 

Here  we  remained  till  the  morning  of  the  22d  instant,  when  orders' 
issued  to  all  the  army  corps  for  a simultaneous  attack  were  received 
My  instructions  were  to  march  by  the  right  flank  down  the  road  before 
mentioned,  following  the  First  Brigade,  the  right  of  the  division  being 
led  by  Brigadier-General  Ewing,  commanding  the  Third  Brigade,  by 
right  of  rank,  the  position  of  my  brigade  being  upon  the  left : a storm- 
ing party  of  150  men  to  precede.  Volunteers  of  50  were  called  from 
each  brigade,  and  promptly  furnished  pro  rata  of  regiments.  Of  these 
I shall  have  occasion  to  report  hereafter. 

As  soon  as  the  First  Brigade  had  formed,  I closed  behind  it  in  the 
following  order  of  regiments : Fifty-fifth  Illinois,  Eighty-third  Indiana, 
lifty-seventh  Ohio,  One  hundred  and  twenty-seventh  Illinois,  and 
1 iffy- fourth  Ohio,  moving  forward  through  a winding  and  covered  road- 
way, constructed  through  the  ravines  near  my  line  the  night  previous. 

As  we  emerged  upon  the  high  ground  from  the  cover  of  the  woods 
and  hills,  I discovered  that  the  programme  had  been  changed.  Instead 
of  a dense  column  marching  by  the  flank  down  the  road,  as  I had  ex- 
pected, the  ground  I had  passed  over  in  the  first  assault  on  the  19th 
instant  was  covered  by  scattered  masses.  The  flag  of  General  Ewin«- 
was  flying  from  the  hill  from  which  I had  been  withdrawn.  I reported 
m person  to  General  Blair,  and  received  an  order  to  support  Col.  Giles 
A.  bmith,  who  was  endeavoring  to  make  a position  somewhere  between 
General  Ewing  and  General  Ransom.  This  movement  I could  not  have 
anticipated.  Nevertheless,  discovering  cover,  and  knowing  the  ground 
well,  1 threw  the  brigade  in  column  of  regiments,  and,  by  regiments, 
moved  rapidly  over  the  brow  of  the  hill,  massing  them  as  best  I could 
under  cover  from  the  enemy’s  musketry  and  a Whitworth  gun,  waspish 
in  its  annoyance. 

They  went  over  under  heavy  fire,  but  fortunately,  owing  to  the 
promptitude  and  gallantry  of  the  men,  without  having  one  killed  or 
wounded,  the  volleys  in  each  instance  passing  over  their  heads, 
id  ' unCt  defil.m£>  down  a long  ravine  that  skirts  the  main  chain  of 
and  a£a*a  Biassed  by  column  of  regiments  in  the  rear 
he  Eighth  Missouri,  of  the  First  Brigade,  which  had  the  most  ad- 
vanced position.  Shortly  I threw  out  the  Fifty-fifth  Illinois  in  line  with 


270  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  xxxvl 

the  Eighth  Missouri,  and  communicated  with  Col.  Giles  A.  Smith  in 
person.  His  report  will  suffice  for  the  operations  of  that  afternoon. 

I maintained  the  position  till  10  o’clock  the  following  morning,  when, 
by  intimation  from  Col.  Giles  A.  Smith  that  orders  had  been  issued  to 
that  effect,  I fell  back  to  the  position  now  occupied  by  the  troops,  and 
reported  in  person  to  General  Blair  for  further  orders. 

I shall  make  no  apology  for  undue  length  of  my  report  nor  stint  with 
measured  praise  the  meed  of  the  officers  and  men  of  the  Second  Brigade. 
I only  regret  my  own  inability  in  language  to  do  them  full  justice. 
With  Colonel  Malmborg,  of  the  Fifty-fifth  Illinois,  I have  been  side  by 
side  in  seven  battles ; have  stood  with  him  literally  amid  heaps  of  slain. 
He  is  always  cool,  prudent,  and  of  dauntless  courage,  and  in  the  recent 
engagement,  although  wounded  twice,  and,  by  strange  fatality,  first  in 
the  right  and  next  in  the  left  eye,  displayed  these  qualities  with  the 
ardor  and  cheer  so  necessary  in  a charge. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Chandler  and  Major  Heffernan,.of  the  same  regi- 
ment, were  constantly  in  the  front  ranks,  doing  their  full  duty  with 
high  bearing,  setting  a brave  example  for  their  men. 

Colonel  Fisher,  ever  ready,  zealous,  and  watchful,  keeping  his  men 
well  in  hand,  led  his  charge  most  gallantly.  His  flag  was  foremost. 
He  sought  no  shelter  save  under  its  folds. 

Colonel  Rice  maintained  his  position  exactly  and  handled  his  regi- 
ment as  he  would  upon  review — calm,  collected,  but  full  of  daring. 
Should  his  severe  wound  prove  fatal,  as  is  feared,  the  service  will  suffer 
irreparable  loss. 

Colonel  Spooner  has  displayed  in  this  last  campaign  soldierly  quali- 
ties of  the  highest  order.  Indefatigable  in  his  zeal  for  the  welfare  of 
his  men,  he  fights  them  as  he  handles  them  upon  the  march.  Always 
alert  and  ready,  he  can  well  share  with  them  his  own  laurels.  What  I 
have  said  of  Colonel  Spooner  equally  applies  to  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Myers ; both  scorn  danger  and  both  have  skill  to  apply  their  courage. 

Colonel  Eldridge  won  for  himself  a conspicuous  place.  Among  so 
many  heroes  it  is  hard  to  be  distinguished ; yet  he  was  first  with  the 
foremost.  The  richest  honors  of  a grateful  country  should  be  showered 
upon  him. 

The  following  list  of  line  officers  I make  special  mention  of  for  cour- 
age, and  not  only  for  courage,  but  patient  fortitude  and  endurance  of 
horrible  heat  in  the  ravines  and  hillsides,  and  fatigue ; exposed  by 
night  and  day  on  pickets  and  with  advanced  companies  of  skirmishers, 
unmurmuring,  uncomplaining,  only  careful  that  their  soldiers  should 
suffer  as  little  as  possible.  I make  special  mention  of  Maj.  Frank  S. 
Curtiss,  of  the  One  hundred  and  twenty- seventh  Illinois,  who  exhibited 
courage  and  great  zeal  during  the  first  assault  particularly.  He  was 
ever  in  the  foremost  ranks,  and  even  exceeded  his  duty  in  assisting  sol- 
diers with  their  guns  when  from  frequent  firing  they  became  foul;  also  of 
Captain  Barrett  and  his  admirable  battery.  His  guns  were  splendidly 
served.  He  and  his  company  are  veterans,  and  have  won  imperishable 
honor  on  many  a hard-fought  field.  His  discipline  and  drill  are  perfect. 

Lieut.  Col.  Samuel  R.  Mott  took  command  of.  the  Fifty-seventh  Ohio 
after  Colonel  Rice  had  been  carried  wounded  from  the  field.  He 
handled  his  regiment  with  consummate  skill  and  daring,  proving  that 
he  was  well  worthy  of  his  recent  promotion. 

I desire  to  compliment  Capt.  G.  M.  White,  my  acting  assistant  adju- 
tant-general, and  my  aides-de-camp,  Lieuts.  John  Enoch,  of  the  Fifty- 
fourth  Ohio,  and  Edward  E.  Root,  of  the  Fifty-seventh  Ohio,  and  to 
express  my  obligations  to  Captain  Gillett,  of  the  One  hundred  and 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


271 


twenty-seventh  Illinois  Volunteers,  and  Lieutenant  Dorchester,  of 
Thielemann’s  cavalry,  who  were  my  volunteer  aides.  Each  one  of  these 
discharged  his  duty  with  the  utmost  promptness  and  gallantry.  Each 
one  is  intelligent,  brave,  and  meritorious.  I have  to  regret  that  I do 
not  possess  the  power  to  advance  them,  but  earnestly  recommend  their 
promotion,  and  ask  that  the  commanding  general  secure  it.  I also  men- 
tion the  names  of  my  orderlies,  James  L.  Sherer  and  Henry  Leibrandt, 
as  worthy  of  great  commendation  for  faithfulness  and  courage. 

Herewith  I submit  a list  of  the  casualties  in  battle,*  and  with  a request 
to  hereafter  make  a supplementary  report,  inasmuch  as  commanding 
officers  of  regiments  and  batteries  composing  my  brigade,  having  been 
ordered  from  the  battle-field  upon  the  march,  have  had  no  opportunity 
to  make  formal  report,  and  respectfully  calling  attention  to  the  reports 
of  commanding  officers  of  the  storming  party,  Colonel  Malmborg,  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonels Mott  and  Fisher,  now  filed. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  highest  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

THUS.  KILBY  SMITH, 

Col.,  Comdg.  Second  Brig .,  Second  Biv .,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 

Maj.  W.  D.  Green,  Asm tant  Adju tant- General. 


Ko.  33. 

Repot  t of  Col.  Oscar  Malmborg , Fifty  fifth  Illinois  Infantry , including 

operations  since  May  5. 

In  the  Field,  before  Vicksburg,  Miss., 

May  25,  1863. 

Sir  : I respectfully  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken  by 
the  Fifty-fifth  Regiment  Illinois  Volunteers  in  the  operations  against 
Vicksburg  since  leaving  Milliken’s  Bend,  La.: 

May  5,  the  regiment  marched  6 miles  to  a plantation,  where  it  remained 
m bivouac  thirty-six  hours.  Thence  it  marched,  having  been  joined 
by  the  rest  of  the  brigade  May  7,  to  Hard  Times  Landing,  where  it  ar- 
rived May  10  ; crossed  the  river  to  Grand  Gulf  in  the  afternoon  of  May 
11,  and  resumed  the  march  on  the  J ackson  road  the  next  day.  It  reached 
Raymond,  Miss.,  May  15,  and  in  the  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill  on  the 
16th  maneuvered  with  the  brigade,  being  for  a short  time  under  fire  of 
the  enemy  and  experiencing  no  loss. 

May  17,  the  regiment  crossed  the  Big  Black  on  the  pontoon  bridge, 
and,  leading  the  brigade,  on  the  following  day  marched  to  the  vicinity 
of  the  first  line  of  fortifications  around  Vicksburg,  skirmishers  being 
thrown  forward,  who  engaged  the  enemy  in  front. 

A general  assault  having  been  ordered  on  May  19,  at  2 p.  m.  the 
regiment  advanced  in  line  under  a heavy  fire  to  within  30  or  40  yards 
of  the  enemy’s  works,  when  the  Fifty-fourth  and  Fifty-seventh  Ohio 
Volunteers,  being  the  only  regiments  in  the  line  with  me,  were  halted 
by  command  of  the  brigadier.  In  this  position  they  held  their  ground, 
keeping  up  a constant  fire  until  dark.  At  3 a.  m.  of  May  20  they  were 
withdrawn  by  order  to  their  original  position. 

May  22,  the  regiment  again  took  part  in  the  assault,  supporting  the 
lurst  Brigade,  and  remaining  in  position  near  the  enemy’s  rifle-pits  until 
ordered  back,  on  the  morning  of  May  23.  Since  that  time  the  regiment 
has  remained  in  bivouac  in  its  present  position.  The  whole  number  of 

* Nominal  list,  omitted,  embraced  in  revised  statements. 


272  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Ciiai>. XXXVI. 

casualties  in  both  actions  was  42,  a full  report  of  which  has  been  be- 
fore forwarded  to  the  brigade  headquarters. 

With  three  or  four  exceptions,  which  will  hereafter  be  reported,  the 
regiment  has,  during  its  recent  marches,  fatigues,  and  assaults  upon  the 
enemy’s  works,  fully  sustained  its  well-earned  reputation.  I feel,  never- 
theless, constrained  to  mention  a few  particular  cases  of  skill  and  brav- 
ery on  the  part  of  officers  and  men  of  my  command. 

Maj.  James  J.  Heffernan,  who,  especially  during  both  assaults,  dis- 
played all  the  coolness,  bravery,  and  capacity  required  of  a field  officer 
on  such  important  occasions. 

Capt.  Jacob  M.  Augustin,  who,  during  all  our  advances  upon  the 
enemy,  and  especially  during  these  assaults,  with  coolness,  skill,  ajid 
discretion  covered  our  advance  with  his  company. 

Capt.  Francis  H.  Shaw,  who,  during  the  protracted  action  before  the 
enemy’s  works  on  the  19th,  did  all  an  officer  could  do  to  encourage  the 
men  and  increase  the  effect  of  their  fire.  In  regard  to  Capt.  N.  S. 
Aagessen,  I can  make  the  same  report. 

Sergt.  Maj.  Joseph  Hartsook  deserves  especial  praise  for  bravery  and 
constant  effort  to  encourage  the  men  during  action. 

The  following  non-commissioned  officers  and  privates  I have  also  to 
report  as  especially  deserving  honorable  mention  : 

Sergt.  W.  H.  Burnaugh,  color-bearer;  Corpls.  Joseph  Corby,  James 
Gay,  and  Henry  Hart,  of  tbe  color-guard ; Corpl.  Frank  Fisher,  of  Com- 
pany B ; Corpls.  Amos  Sanford  and  Jacob  Sanford,  of  Company  F ; 
Corpls.  John  Warden,  John  Smith  (wounded),  and  Christian  Leibun- 
garth,  of  Company  E ; Sergt.  J.  W.  Larabee,  of  Company  F (wounded) ; 
Corpls.  Robert  M.  Cox,  Robert  A.  Lower,  and  Jerome  Morford,  of  Com- 
pany K,  volunteers  in  the  storming  party. 

A full  report  of  the  conduct  and  casualties  of  the  12  men  composing 
the  contribution  of  the  Fifty-fifth  to  the  storming  party  of  the22d  has 
already  been  submitted  by  its  brave  and  daring  leader,  Lieutenant  Por- 
ter, Company  E,  whose  valuable  services  1 need  but  allude  to  here. 

Among  the  killed  who  distinguished  themselves  in  the  two  assaults, 
I feel  it  my  duty  to  the  friends  and  relatives  of  the  deceased  to  make 
particular  mention  of  Lieut.  Levi  Hill,  Orderly  Sergt.  John  C.  Glass, 
and  Sergt.  John  Burns,  of  Company  A ; Corpls.  Michael  Ainsbury  and 
R.  A.  Hamer,  of  Company  C;  Corpl.  James  W.  Curry,  of  Company  D; 
Sergt.  Richard  Haney  and  David  A.  Sullivan  (my  orderly,  killed  at  my 
side  in  the  charge  of  May  22),  of  Company  F;  Milton  Bellwood  and 
James  Donehue,  of  Company  K.  ^ 

The  wounds  I received  on  the  19th  and  22d  being  of  a slight  nature, 
I have  remained  with  and  in  command  of  the  regiment  without  inter- 

mptl°n*  O.  MALMBORG, 

Colonel , Commanding  Fifty-fifth  Illinois  Volunteers. 

Capt.  G.  Moodie  White,  _ . _ 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Second  Brig.,  Second  Div.,  Fifteenth  A.  C. 


Ko.  34. 

Report  of  Lieut.  William  C.  Porter,  Fifty  fifth  Illinois  Infantry. 

In  the  Field,  before  Vicksburg,  May  23,  18G3. 
Sir  : A call  for  volunteers  was  made,  to  act  as  a storming  party  in 
our  recent  charge  on  the  enemy’s  works.  The  call  was  made  in  our 


Chap.  XXX VI.] 


273 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

regiment  by  Col.  O.  Malmborg  (Fifty-fifth  Illinois  Infantry),  and  re- 
sponded to"  promptly  by  12  men  and  myself.  Being  the  ranking  lieu- 
tenant, I assumed  command  of  the  different  volunteer  detachments  from 

the  brigade,  and  reported  to  Captain , Thirtieth  Ohio  Volunteers, 

in  charge  of  the  storming  party.  At  10  a.  m.  precisely  we  started,  and 
proceeded  rapidly,  occupying  but  three  minutes  from  the  ravine  to  the 
bastion.  Just  as  we  entered  the  ditch,  a captain  and  a lieutenant  from 
the  Sixth  Missouri  were  shot  by  sharpshooters  on  our  flank,  severely 
wounding  both.  I immediately  assumed  command,  and,  with  the  colors 
firmly  planted  in  the  parapet  by  a private  of  the  Eighth  Missouri,  all  I 
could  then  do  was  to  prevent  the  rebels  from  carrying  them  in  (which 
they  tried),  and  wait  for  support,  which  we  did  not  succeed  in  get- 
ting. Some  men  of  Ewing’s  brigade  came  up,  but  not  sufficient  to 
warrant  my  thrusting  them  over  the  ramparts,  to  be  either  slaughtered 
or  taken  prisoners.  We  remained  in  this  position,  exposed  to  the  fire 
from  the  flanks  of  the  enemy,  and  a direct  fire  from  the  skirmishers  of 
the  First  Brigade,  till  4.30  p.  m.,  when  about  30  of  the  Eleventh  Missouri, 
with  their  colonel,  major,  and  2 lieutenants,  succeeded  in  reaching  us 
with  their  colors,  which  they  planted  alongside  of  ours.  The  bearing 
of  the  two  color-bearers  wms  all  that  bravery  and  true  courage  could 
do,  waving  their  colors  in  defiance  of  enemies  and  traitors,  marching 
straight  and  unwavering  to  the  fort  through  the  most  murderous  fire  I 
ever  experienced.  The  rebels,  in  trying  to  dislodge  us,  commenced  to 
use  12-pounder  shells,  burning  the  fuse  and  then  rolling  them  into  the 
ditch.  We  succeeded  in  throwing  back  three  with  our  bayonets,  which 
burst  on  the  inside,  causing  the  same  effect  they  intended  for  us.  One. 
shell,  however,  exploded,  killing  Sergt.  Bichard  Haney,  Company  F, 
Fifty-fifth  Illinois  Infantry,  and  wounding  4 privates  severely.  At  about 
7.30  p.  m.  I received  a verbal  order  from  Major-General  Blair  to  fall  back, 
which  we  did,  but  not  till  I had  all  my  wounded  safely  removed. 

Feeling  the  disappointment  that  all  naturally  felt  in  the  division  at 
our  ill-success  in  carrying  the  enemy’s  works,  I cannot  but  say  that  the 
assailing  party  was  in  no  way  attributable  for  its  failure.  All  the  men 
and  officers  behaved  gallantly  and  well,  save  one,  and  would  have 
cleared  the  ramparts  had  they  seen  one  particle  of  support.  -Not  being 
furnished  with  the  names  of  the  party,  I cannot  give  the  due  meed  of 
praise  to  those  who  distinguished  themselves  during  our  passage  to  the 
fort  and  during  the  time  we  remained  there. 

The  lieutenant  of  the  One  hundred  and  twenty-seventh  Illinois  In- 
fantry did  not  reach  us  till  dark,  remaining  about  4 rods  from  the  fort, 
on  the  road,  protected  by  its  high  banks,  without  attempting  the  march 
to  the  fort. 

I now  inclose  the  list  of  casualties  of  but  four  regiments,  the  One  hun- 
dred and  twenty- seventh  Illinois  Infantry  being  absent  on  detail,  and 
not  having  time  to  visit  the  other  regiments  in  the  division. 


18  R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


274  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXX VL 

The  report  of  casualties  is  not  complete,  as  it  was  almost  impossible 
to  get  through  the  ravines  and  hills  to  where  the  regiments  were. 

Hoping  our  services  and  efforts  are  appreciated,  by  our  commanding 
officers,  I remain,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  0.  POUTER, 

Second  Lieutenant  Fifty-fifth  Illinois  Infantry , Company  E. 

Oapt.  G.  Moodie  White, 

Assistant  Adjutant - General. 

P.  s. — i forgot  to  mention  that  the  lieutenant  of  the  One  hundred 
and  twenty-seventh  Illinois  Infantry  kept  back  from  the  assailing  party 
10  men,  who  remained  where  ho  did  during  the  entire  day  on  the  road. 


No.  35. 

Report  of  Col.  Hamilton  N.  Eldridge , One  hundred  and  twenty -seventh 

Illinois  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  127th  Regiment  Illinois  Volunteer  Infantry; 

Chichasaw  Bayou , Miss.,  May  28,  1863. 

Captain  : In  accordance  with  instructions  from  you,  I have  the  honor 
to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  operations  of  my  regiment  since 
crossing  the  Big  Black  River  on  the  17th  of  the  present  month : 

On  the  morning  of  May  18,  my  regiment  was  ordered  to  march  on 
the  main  road  to  Vicksburg,  which  was  said  to  be  about  16  miles  dis- 
tant. 

About  3 o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  musketry,  apparently  from  skir- 
mishers, wras  heard  in  the  advance,  and  soon  after  I was  ordered  to  halt 
and  throw  out  two  companies  of  skirmishers,  to  connect  with  the  line 
of  skirmishers  of  other  regiments  of  the  brigade.  I immediately  de- 
tached Companies  H and  I,  and,  under  the  direction  of  Adjutant  Keyes, 
they  made  the  connection  as  above  ordered,  and  moved  about  600  yards 
in  advance  of  the  main  body,  at  which  point  the  timber  was  cut  away, 
and  the  skirmishers  were  in  plain  view  of  the  enemy,  his  works  some 
300  yards  ahead.  Having  a good  position  to  observe  any  advance  of 
the  enemy,  my  skirmishers  were  ordered  to  remain  in  their  position  that 
night,  acting  as  a picket. 

On  the  19th,  about  noon,  orders  were  received  for  an  advance,  with 
the  intention  of  charging  and  carrying  the  enemy’s  works  by  storm. 

About  1 o’clock  the  skirmishers  were  called  in,  and  at  2.30  the  ad- 
vance was  ordered  in  line  of  battle  on  the  double-quick,  my  regiment 
following  the  Eighty-third  Indiana.  In  crossing  the  bro^v  of  the  hill, 
just  beyond  the  point  from  which  we  started,  we  received  a murderous 
fire  from  the  enemy,  which  killed  and  wounded  many  of  my  men.  The 
unevenness  of  the  ground,  added  to  the  fact  that  it  was  thickly  covered 
with  brush  and  fallen  trees,  soon  broke  our  lines  and  scattered  to  a 
considerable  extent  the  men.  The  most  of  them,  however,  worked 
their  way  up  close  under  the  enemy’s  works,  where  the  regiment’s  colors 
were  planted.  We  maintained  our  position,  under  a galling  fire,  until 
after  dark,  when  orders  were  received  for  us  to  fall  back,  which  I did 
without  losing  a man. 

I had  14  officers  and  202  enlisted  men  when  I advanced — one  com- 
pany (D)  of  36  men,  which  had  been  out  skirmishing,  not  having  re- 
turned in  time  to  advance  with  us — and  out  of  these  8 wTere  killed  and 
30  wounded. 


Ciiai\  XXXYI]  the  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  275 

Among  the  killed  I have  to  regret  the  loss  of  First  Lieut.  Hiram  Mc- 
Clintock,  of  Company  H,  a brave  and  meritorious  officer,  who  was  killed 
about  2.30  o’clock  in  the  afternoon,  and  Sergeant  [Jesse]  Curran,  of  Com- 
pany E,  a young  man  of  great  promise,  and  onO  of  the  most  competent 
non-commissioned  officers  in  the  regiment.  First  Sergeant  [Henry] 
Newby,  of  Company  H,  has  since  died  of  his  wounds,  another  brave 
and  excellent  officer.  Capt.  J.  S.  Eiddle,  of  Company  C ; Capt.  T.  W. 
Chandler,  acting  major ; Lieutenant  Sewell,  of  Company  G;  First  Ser- 
geant [Harvey  L.]  Mason,  of  Company  B;  First  Sergeant  [Ora  B.] 
Douglass,  Company  I,  and  Color-Sergt.  F.  S.  Shemmerhorn  are  among 
the  wounded. 

On  Friday,  the  22d,  another  advance  was  ordered.  Before  falling  in 
for  the  advance,  volunteers  to  the  number  of  11  were  called  for  from 
my  regiment,  to  form  a part  of  the  storming  party  which  was  to  pre- 
cede the  main  body  and  be  the  first  to  scale  the  works  of  the  enemy. 
It  would  have  been  an  easy  matter  to  have  raised  quadruple  the  num- 
ber called  for,  so  anxious  were  the  men  to  distinguish  themselves  and 
be  of  service  to  their  country.  The  names  of  these  brave  volunteers  I 
have  already  forwarded  to  you  in  another  report,  and  I would  most 
earnestly  suggest,  what  I have  no  doubt  will  be  done,  that  suitable 
notice  be  taken  of  their  gallant  action.  % 

At  2.30  a.  m.  the  order  came  for  us  to  advance ; this  time  by  the  right 
flank,  we  following  the  Fifty-seventh  Ohio.  We  advanced  this  time  to 
the  left  of  the  Vicksburg  road,  and  then  around  through  a sheltered 
ravine  to  a hill 'to  the  left  and  close  to  the  enemy’s  works,  where  we 
lay  until  the  morning  of  the  23d,  when  we  were  ordered  to  Chickasaw 
Bayou,  to  guard  the  commissary  stores  and  furnish  details  for  unload- 
ing boats.  My  loss  in  the  engagement  on  the  22d  was  slight — 3 men 
killed  and  8 wounded. 

In  both  engagements  officers  and  men,  with  very  few  exceptions, 
behaved  with  great  coolness  and  courage,  and,  I think,  fully  sustained 
their  reputation  as  Illinois  volunteers.  Where  all  did  so  well,  it  is 
impossible  to  discriminate. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  N.  ELDBIDGE, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Capt.  G.  Moodie  White, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Seco7id  Brigade. 


No.  36. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Cyrus  W.  Fisher , Fifty-fourth  Ohio  Infantry , in- 
cluding operations  since  May  6. 

Hdqrs.  Fifty-fourth  Keg.t.  Ohio  Vol.  Infantry, 

In  Bivouac,  before  Vicksburg  Works,  Miss.,  May  24,  1863. 

Captain  : In  obedience  to  Colonel  Smith’s  circular  of  to-day,  calling 
for  a report  of  the  movements  of  the  Fifty- fourth  Ohio  Volunteer  In- 
fantry since  it  left  Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the 
following  report: 

On  the  evening  of  the  6th  instant,  while  in  camp  at  Milliken’s  Bend, 
La.,  I received  an  order  from  Col.  T.  K.  Smith,  commanding  Second 
Brigade,  Second  Division,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps,  to  break  up  camp,  and 
with  two  days’  cooked  rations  in  haversacks  and  eight  days’  rations  in 
wagons,  to  march  on  the  7th  on  the  road  to  New  Carthage. 


276  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

Accordingly,  at  7 a.  m.  on  the  morning  of  the  7th,  the  regiment  vras 
on  the  road. 

On  the  evening  of  the  10th,  we  arrived  at  Hard  Times  Landing,  on 
the  Mississippi  River,  having  marched  63  miles  in  four  days. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  11th,  we  crossed  the  Mississippi  River  to  Grand 
Gulf  on  the  gunboat  Louisville.  Laid  in  bivouac  that  night. 

The  next  morning  we  were  again  on  the  march  on  the  road  to  Au- 
burn, Miss.,  arriving  at  the  latter  place  on  the  afternoon  of  the  15th 
instant,  having  marched  53  miles  in  three  days  and  a half. 

On  the  morning  of  the  16th,  I was  ordered  by  Colonel  Smith  to  follow 
the  One  hundred  and  twenty-seventh  Regiment  Illinois  Volunteers  on 
the  road  leading  to  Bolton,  bringing  up  the  rear  of  the  brigade.  Be- 
tween 8 and  9 a.  m.  we  heard  heavy  skirmishing  in  front  and  soon 
afterward  the  discharge  of  artillery.  About  12  m.  I received  an  order 
from  Colonel  Smith  to  deploy  the  regiment  on  the  right  side  of  the  road 
we  were  then  marching  on,  my  left  resting  on  the  road,  in  which  position 
we  remained  an  hour,  when  I received  an  order  to  march  on  the  road  as 
before,  except  that  I should  keep  to  the  right  of  the  road,  marching  by 
the  left  flank,  and  holding  the  regiment  in  readiness  to  change  front 
forward  on  the  left  company  and  at  a moment’s  notice.  In  this  order  I 
marched  the  regiment  nerhaps  three-fourths  of  a mile,  passing  on  the 
road  a brigade  belonging  to  General  A.  J.  Smith’s  division,  when  one 
of  the  enemy’s  batteries  fired  upon  us  at  a range  of  800  to  1,000  yards 
to  the  right  of  the  road.  Colonel  Smith  ordered  me  to  halt,  march 
back,  and  assume  the  position  I had  left  on  the  road  before  the  order 
to  move  by  the  left  flank. 

When  I had  reached  the  point  where  my  left  should  rest,  by  order,  I 
crossed  the  road  and  formed  the  line  perpendicular  to,  and  the  right 
resting  on,  the  road.  We  lay  in  this  position  until  about  4 p.  in.,  when, 
by  order  of  Colonel  Srpith,  I again  moved  down  the  road,  by  the  left 
flank,  about  1J  miles,  when  we  came  upon  the  division  of  General  A.  J. 
Smith  deployed  in  line  of  battle  and  under  a heavy  fire  from  the  enemy’s 
artillery.  1 immediately  formed  in  line  of  battle,  my  left  resting  on  the 
road,  and  ordered  the  men  to  lie  down  until  I should  receive  further 
orders  from  Colonel  Smith.  A short  time  afterward  Colonel  Smith 
ordered  me  to  move  by  the  right  flank,  and  then  forward  until  the  left 
of  the  regiment  should  join  with  General  Smith’s  right,  which  was  ac- 
cordingly executed,  a strong  line  of  skirmishers  having  been  in  the 
mean  time  deployed  to  cover  the  front  of  the  regiment.  At  dark  I 
ordered  the  regiment  to  lie  down  in  line  of  battle  on  their  arms.  Here 
we  remained  during  the  night. 

In  the  morning  the  enemy  had  disappeared  from  the  front.  At  an 
early  hour  on  the  17th,  we  were  again  on  the  march,  bringing  up  the 
rear  of  the  brigade.  About  10  a.  m.  we  crossed  the  Jackson  Railroad  at 
Edwards  Station,  and  took  the  road  to  Bridgeport,  where  we  arrived  at 
12  m.  At  8 p.  m.  we  crossed  Big  Black  River  upon  a pontoon  bridge, 
marched  2 miles  on  the  Vicksburg  road,  and  filed  into  an  open  field, 
stacked  arms,  and  lay  down  for  the  night,  no  fires  being  allowed  until 
day  dawn. 

At  an  early  hour  on  the  morning  of  the  18th,  the  regiment  was  on  the 
march,  bringing  up  the  rear  of  the  brigade,  on  the  main  road  to  Vicks- 
burg. Arrived  near  the  works  before  which  we  are  now  lying  late  in  the 
afternoon.  The  regiment  was  ordered  to  form  line  of  battle  on  the  lelt 
of  the  road  and  on  the  left  of  the  brigade.  Soon  after  the  regiment  was 
in  line,  I received  an  order  to  send  out  one  company  of  skirmishers,  and 
at  dusk  Colonel  Smith  sent  an  order  that  the  regiment  be  deployed  as 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


277 


skirmishers,  and  extend  the  left  until  the  right  of  General  McPherson’s 
line  should  be  found. 

The  regiment  was  deployed,  but  I could  not  find  the  line  sought  for 
until  early  in  the  morning  of  the  19th $ they  were  then  joined.  I was 
then  ordered  to  advance  the  line  as  far  as  possible,  which  was  accord- 
ingly done,  the  whole  line  resting  within  easy  musket  range  of  the 
enemy’s  works,  when  I received  an  order  to  assemble  on  the  right  of 
the  regiment,  which,  being  accomplished,  I was  ordered  to  form  in  line 
of  battle  on  the  left  of  the  Fifty-fifth  Illinois  Volunteers,  supporting  Bat- 
tery B,  First  Illinois  Artillery.  The  ammunition  having  been  nearly 
expended  in  skirmishing,  cartridges  were  furnished,  but  found  too  large, 
though  the  boxes  were  marked  .09  caliber. 

About  2 p.  m.  you  came  to  me  yourself  and  said  an  ordej*  was  to 
“ forward,”  and  be  governed  by  the  movements  of  the  Fifty-fifth  Illinois 
Regiment.  I so  instructed  the  color-bearer,  and  when  the  Fifty-fifth 
commenced  moving,  the  Fifty-fourth  promptly  moved  with  them,  aud 
kept  with  them  during  the  engagement.  I had  no  previous  notice  of 
the  forward  movement,  or  an  idea  that  the  regiment  was  the  front  of 
an  assaulting  column,  which  was  to  charge  through  fallen  timber,  over 
at  least  four  ravines,  very  steep  and  difficult  to  pass  over  under  the 
most  auspicious  circumstances.  The  line  halted  under  the  brow  of  a 
hill  150  or  200  yards  from  the  enemy’s  works,  breathless,  but  kept  up  a 
brisk  fire  on  the  parapet  for  a short  time,  when  the  company  commanders 
reported  to  me  that  the  cartridges  were  nearly  expended.  I ordered 
them  to  reserve  one  round  in  the  piece,  fix  bayonet,  and  lie  down  until 
ammunition  could  be  sent,  or  we  should  be  relieved.  I sent  Adjutant 
Saxton  to  Colonel  Smith  to  make  the  proper  statement.  Soon  after- 
ward the  Fifty-seventh  Ohio  Regiment  came  forward  and  relieved  the 
Fifty-fourth.  I withdrew  the  regiment  10  or  15  paces,  and  ordered  them 
to  lie  down  until  ammunition  could  be  furnished.  Lieutenant  Bell,  of 
the  Fifty-fourth  Regiment,  in  charge  of  the  ammunition  train,  upon 
notice,  promptly  supplied  us.  The  firing  soon  subsided  into  mere  skir- 
mishing, and  we  lay  down  upon  our  arms. 

A 2 a.  m.,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Rice,  Fifty-seventh  Ohio,  came  to  me 
and  said  Colonel  Smith  had  ordered  him  to  order  the  regiment  out  of 
there,  and  that  the  Fifty-fifth  Illinois  had  already  gone,  the  Fifty-seventh 
would  move  out  immediately,  and  the  Fifty-fourth  would  follow,  and 
regain  our  position  before  the  charge.  The  order  was  obeyed  by  send- 
ing out  one  company  at  a time.  • 

The  regiment  lost  in  the  engagement  of  the  19th  1 killed  and  13 
wounded. 

On  the  morning  of  the  20th,  I received  an  order  to  move  to  the  left, 
and  form  line  with  the  One  hundred  and  twenty-seventh  Illinois  Vol- 
unteers, supporting  two  guns  of  Hart’s  battery. 

Placing  the  men  under  cover,  we  lay  here  until  the  morning  of  the 
22d,  when  notice  was  given  that  the  enemy’s  works  were  again  to  be  as- 
saulted. The  regiment  was  called  upon  for  seven  volunteers  to  go  with 
the  storming  party  leading  the  head  of  the  column.  Eleven  men  offered 
their  services.  I think  it  fit  that  the  names  of  such  daring,  gallant  fel- 
lows should  be  named  in  the  official  report.  Their  names  were : First 
Sergt.  James  Jardine,  Company  F ; Corpl.  William  Kinsley,  Company 
H;  and  Privates  William  Radtke,  Company  A;  David  Jones,  Com- 
ply C;  Edward  Welsh,  Company  D;  Samuel  Crooks,  Company  E: 
Edward  McGinn,  Company  F;  John  Gardner,  Company  F;  Henry 
Buhrman,  Company  H ; Martin  Ford,  Company  H,  and  Jacob  Sweihei- 
mer,  Company  I.  Every  volunteer  who  accompanied  the  storming 


278  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

party  from  tlie  Fifty-fourth  Regiment,  except  Buhrman,  whose  gun  was 
broken  in  two  by  a grape-shot,  reached  the  top  of  the  enemy’s  works. 
William  Radtke  was  killed,  Edward  McGinn  severely  wounded,  as  many 
as  three  bullets  striking  him  in  the  head,  and  four  others  passiug  through 
his  hat.  I received  a circular  from  Colonel  Smith,  instructing  the  Fifty- 
fourth  Regiment  to  march  by  the  right  flank,  and  follow  the  One  hun- 
dred and  twenty- seventh  Illinois  Volunteers.  Some  time  after  11  o’clock 
I put  the  regiment  in  motion,  keeping  close  upon  the  One  hundred  and 
twenty-seventh  Illinois.  Filing  through  a ravine,  we  neared  the  crest 
of  the  hill  immediately  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  works,  and  over  which 
a perfect  storm  of  lead  and  iron  was  passing. 

I halted  the  regiment,  and  ran  to  the  top  of  the  hill  to  see  where  we 
were  going.  In  the  ravine,  50  yards  below,  I saw  the  other  regiments 
of  the  brigade  lying  down,  and,  as  I thought,  in  confusion,  to  increase 
which  I did  not  desire  to  rush  my  regiment  among  them.  1 so  reported 
to  Colonel  Smith,  who  was  standing  under  the  brow  of  the  hill.  He 
replied  that  I was  mistaken ; that  there  was  not  a man  in  the  ravine 
below.  I returned  to  the  brow  and  again  saw  the  regiments  as  before, 
and  again  reported  to  Colonel  Smith,  who  gave  no  answer,  but  gave  the 
order  to  rush  over  the  hill,  which  the  regiment  did  in  good  order.  As 
soon  as  we  were  over,  I discovered  that  the  enemy  had  a battery  oppo- 
site the  mouth  of  the  ravine,  completely  enfilading  the  position  in  which 
we  were  lying. 

I sent  such  word  to  Colonel  Smith  by  Lieutenant  Fisk,  aide-de-camp 
on  General  Ewing’s  staff,  but  I think  he  did  not  get  it.  Fortunately  for 
the  regiment  and  brigade,  the  enemy’s  fire  was  inaccurate,  and  passed 
over  us,  doing  no  damage.  In  a few  minutes  the  regiments  filed  down 
the  ravine  by  the  left  flank,  in  the  same  order  as  indicated  in  Colonel 
Smith’s  circular  of  that  morning,  i.  e.,  Fifty-fourth  Ohio  Volunteers 
following  the  One  hundred  and  twenty- seventh  Illinois  Volunteers, 
until  we  were  within  a very  short  distance  of  the  enemy’s  works,  when 
Colonel  Smith  ordered  me  to  form  the  regiment  in  line  of  battle  imme- 
diately behind  the  One  hundred  and  twenty-seventh  Illinois  Volunteers, 
on  the  side  of  a very  steep  hill. 

In  this  position  we  lay  until  about  2 o’clock  in  the  morning  of  the 
23d,  when  I received  an  order  to  withdraw  by  the  left  flank  down  the 
ravine,  filing  up  another  about  100  yards  to  our  left,  and  to  continue 
up  that  ravine  until  we  should  pass  the  rear  of  the  First  Brigade, 
which  had  been  withdrawn  during  the  night.  The  order  was  obeyed.  I 
moved  the  regiment  to  the  ground  now  occupied  by  the  regiment. 

While  taking  the  position  in  the  rear  of  the  One  hundred  and  twenty- 
seventh  Illinois  Volunteers,  Private  William  R.  McKibbin,  Company  D, 
was  killed,  and  Corporal  [Thomas]  Coddington  wounded,  which  were 
the  only  casualties  the  regiment  met  with  during  the  day. 

I desire  here  to  mention  the  names  of  Assistant  Surgeon  Baggs,  who 
accompanied  all  our  movements,  and  was  most  assiduous  in  the  care  of 
the  wounded  and  in  having  them  cared  for  at  the  earliest  moment  pos- 
sible, never  leaving  his  post  for  a moment,  and  Adjutant  Saxton,  who 
was  constantly  at  his  post  in  the  discharge  of  his  duty. 

Of  the  company  officers  I will  only  say  that  they  did  all  brave  men 
are  expected  to  do,  i.  c.,  obeying  all  orders  promptly  and  energetically. 

In  detailing  the  events  of  the  engagement  of  the  19th  instant,  I 
omitted  to  mention  the  fact  that  Sergt.  Alexander  Kuhl,  color-bearer  ot 
the  regiment,  was  the  first  man  on  the  brow  of  the  hill,  where  the  regiment 
was  halted.  In  every  engagement  he  has  been  eagerly  anxious  to  do 
all  he  was  called  on  to  do.  I hope  Colonel  Smith  will  mention  him  in 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBUKG,  MISS.  279 

his  official  report,  and  recommend  his  promotion  ; he  is  worthy  and 
competent. 

Col.  T.  Kilby  Smith  was  on  the  field  in  both  engagements,  and  dis- 
played the  same  reckless  personal  bravery  for  which  he  has  long  since 
distinguished  himself. 

Accompanying  this  report  you  will  please  find  a list  of  the  killed  and 
wounded  since  the  morning  of  the  19th  instant.* 

1 am,  sir,  respectfully,  &c., 

C.  W.  FISHER, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Fifty-fourth  Ohio  Volunteers. 
Capt.  G.  Moodie  White, 

Actg.  Asst . Adjt.  Gen .,  2d  Brig .,  2d  Div .,  1 5th  Army  Corps. 


No.  37. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Samuel  R.  Mott , Fifty-seventh  Ohio  Infantry , in- 
cluding operations  since  May  4. 

Hdqrs.  Fifty-seventh  Regiment  Ohio  Yol.  Infantry, 

In  Bivouac  before  the  Vicksburg  Works , May  24,  1863. 

Captain  : In  obedience  to  Col.  T.  K.  Smith’s  circular  of  to-day,  call- 
ing for  a report  of  the  movements  of  the  Fifty-seventh  Regiment  Ohio 
Volunteer  Infantry  since  it  left  Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  I have  the  honor, 
in  the  absence  of  Lieut.  Col.  A.  Y.  Rice,  then  commanding  the  regiment 
(since  wounded  in  an  assault  upon  the  enemy’s  works  before  Vicksburg 
on  the  22d  instant),  to  submit  the  following  report : 

On  the  morning  of  the  4th  instant,  while  in  camp  at  Milliken’s  Bend, 
the  colonel  received  an  order  from  Col.  T.  K.  Smith,  commanding  Sec- 
ond Brigade,  Second  Division,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps,  to  move  to  Rich- 
mond, La.,  a distance  of  12  miles,  with  two  days’  cooked  rations  in 
haversacks  and  three  days’  rations  in  wagons,  there  to  await  orders. 

Oil  the  afternoon  of  the  7th,  at  3 o’clock,  the  brigade  coming  up,  we 
were  ordered  to  move  forward  to  Kew  Carthage,  and  on  the  road  we 
received  orders  to  leave  Kew  Carthage  to  our  left  and  proceed  to  Hard 
Times  Landing,  on  the  Mississippi  River,  at  which  place  we  arrived  on 
the  evening  of  the  10th,  having  marched  a distance  of  51  miles  in  three 
days  and  a half. 

On  the  evening  of  the  11th,  we  crossed  the  Mississippi  River  to  Grand 
Gulf  on  the  steamer  Forest  Queen.  Laid  in  bivouac  that  night. 

The  next  morning  we  were  again  on  the  march  to  Auburn;  from 
thence  we  marched  to  Raymond,  Miss.,  arriving  at  the  latter  place  on 
the  afternoon  of  the  15th  instant,  having  marched  53  miles  in  three  davs 
and  a half. 

On  the  morning  of  the  16th,  we  were  ordered  to  follow  Captain  Bar- 
rett’s battery  on  the  road  leading  to  Bolton.  Between  8 and  9 a.  m. 
we  heard  heavy  skirmishing  in  front,  and  soon  after  the  discharge  of 
artillery. 

About  12  m.  we  were  ordered  to  form  line  of  battle,  with  the  right 
resting  on  the  Eighty-third  Indiana  Volunteer  Infantry. 

.At  1 p.  m.  the  regiment  was  ordered  to  march  by  the  left  flank,  file 
right,  and  move  perpendicular  from  the  line  of  battle.  Having  moved 
half  a mile,  we  came  in  contact  with  a masked  battery  of  the  enemy’s. 


* Nominal  li&t,  omitted,  embodied  in  revised  statements. 


280 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap,  XXXVL 


We  were  tlien  ordered  to  fall  back  to  where  our  line  of  battle  had  pre- 
viously been,  and  support  Captain  Barrett’s  battery,  in  which  position 
we  remained  until  sundown,  when  we  were  ordered  to  rejoin  the  bri- 
gade, which  we  did,  our  left  resting  on  the  One  hundred  and  twenty  - 
seventh  Illinois  Volunteer  Infantry,  where  we  bivouacked  for  the  night, 
the  men  lying  on  their  arms,  the  enemy  retiring  from  our  front  during 
the  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  we  resumed  our  march  for  Big  Black 
Biver.  About  10  a.  m.  we  crossed  the  Jackson  Itailroad  at  Edwards 
Station,  and  took  the  road  to  Bridgeport,  where  we  arrived  at  12  m. 

At  8 p.  m.  we  crossed  Big  Black  Biver  on  the  poutoon  bridge,  marched 
2 miles  on  the  Vicksburg  road,  and  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  I8th,  at  4 a.  m.,  we  resumed  our  march,  fol- 
lowing the  Eighty-third  Indiana  Volunteer  Infantry,  and  arrived  in 
front  of  the  enemy’s  works  about  3 p.  m. ; formed  line  of  battle  to  the  left 
of  the  road,  and  were  ordered  to  send  out  one  company  as  skirmishers, 
to  ascertain  the  position  of  the  enemy.  The  skirmishers  advanced 
within  easy  musket  range  of  the  enemy’s  works,  driving  in  the  enemy’s 
skirmishers. 

On  the  morning  of  the  19th,  we  received  orders  to  assault  the  enemy’s 
works,  which  was  promptly  executed  at  2 p.  m.,  Fifty-fifth  Illinois  Vol- 
unteer Infantry  leading,  followed  by  Fifty -fourth  and  Fifty-seventh 
Ohio  Volunteers.  The  charge  was  made  over  steep  hills  and  deep 
ravines,  which  are  difficult  to  pass  under  the  most  auspicious  circum- 
stances. The  line  halted  under  the  brow  of  a hill  100  or  150  yards  from 
the  enemy’s  works.  The  Fifty -fourth  Ohio  Volunteers  having  expended 
their  ammunition,  we  were  ordered  to  relieve  them,  which  was  immedi- 
ately done,  and  kept  up  a brisk  fire  upon  the  enemy’s  parapets  for  some 
time,  when  the  firing  subsided  into  mere  skirmishing. 

At  2 a.  m.  of  the  morning  of  the  20th,  we  received  an  order  to  retire 
to  the  position  we  had  advanced  from  to  make  the  assault.  This  order 
was  obeyed  by  sending  out  one  company  at  a time.  The  regiment  lost, 
in  the  engagement  of  the  19th,  5 killed  and  12  wounded. 

After  retaking  our  position  of  the  previous  morning,  we  again  formed 
line,  our  right  resting  on  the  Eighty-third  Indiana  Volunteer  Infantry, 
where  we  remained  until  the  morning  of  the  22d  instant,  receiving  an 
order  that  there  was  to  be  a second  attack  on  the  enemy’s  works,  and 
with  the  order  a call  for  9 men,  volunteers,  to  go  with  a storming  party 
in  advance  of  the  attacking  force.  Fourteen  men  at  once  responded  to 
the  call.  As  but  9 men  could  be  taken,  the  first  that  reported  were  ac- 
cepted until  the  number  was  completed.  I believe  it  to  be  prudent  in 
me  to  give  the  names  of  these  men,  and  but  an  act  of  justice  to  them 
that  it  should  be  done.  Their  names  are  as  follows: 

Company  A,  Sergt.  David  Ayers  and  Private  Marion  D.  Tate;  Com- 
pany D,  Privates  Joseph  Mitchell  and  David  Day;  Company  I,  Sergt. 
Peter  N.  Gabriel;  Company  K,  Sergt.  William  Kotestine  and  Oorpl. 
Joseph  I.  Smith;  Company  G,  Sergt.  Ezra  Hipsher  and  Corpl.  John  n. 
McKinley.  Of  the  number  which  accompanied  the  storming  party,  2 
were  killed  and  2 wounded.  Sergt.  Peter  K.  Gabriel  and  Private  Marion 
D.  Tate  were  killed.  Sergt.  Ezra  Hipsher  and  Corpl.  John  H.  McKinley 
were  wounded.  The  other  five,  by  the  aid  of  Divine  Providence,  returned 
to  their  comrades  and  regiment. 

At  10  a.  m.  we  were  ordered  to  fall  in  and  follow  the  Eighty-third 
Indiana  Volunteer  Infantry,  marching  by  the  flank  left  in  front,  which 
was  done  promptly.  When  we  had  advanced  50  yards  we  were  com- 
pelled to  halt  for  a moment,  the  ravine  through  which  we  had  to  pass 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


281 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

being  blocked  up  by  the  troops  in  our  front.  While  here,  the  gallant 
Colonel  Bice  received  a severe  wound  from  one  of  the  enemy’s  sharp- 
shooters. He  was  in  a half  sitting  position  at  the  time  he  was  struck, 
the  ball  entering  below  the  knee  and  passing  through  the  leg,  entering 
a second  time  above  the  knee,  ranging  upward,  lodging  near  the  abdo- 
men, thereby  rendering  it  impossible  for  him  longer  to  command  his 
regiment  ; consequently  I assumed  the  command  of  the  same.  We  were 
again  ordered  forward,  moving  as  before,  the  enemy  pouring  into  us  a 
most  terrific  fire  of  shot  and  shell.  When  within  easy  range  of  the 
works,  we  were  halted  and  ordered  to  return  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  which 
we  did ; remaining  there  in  line  until  the  following  morning,  when  we 
were  ordered  into  the  position  we  now  hold. 

The  regiment  lost  in  this  assault  15  in  killed  and  wounded— 3 killed 
and  12  wounded. 

Of  the  conduct  of  officers  and  men  I can  but  say  they  did  all  that 
officers  and  soldiers  could  do— their  whole  duty. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  most  respectfully,  your  obedieut  servant, 
m S.  B.  MOTT, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Comdg.  Fifty-seventh  Regt.  Ohio  Vol  Infantry. 

Ca.pt.  G.  Moodie  White,  • 

A.  A.  A.  G.,  Second  Brig.,  Second  Div.,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 


Ho.  38. 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Hugh  Ewing,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Bri- 
gade. 


Hdqrs.  Third  Brig.,  Second  Div.,  Fifteenth  A.  0., 

Battle  field,  near  Vichshurg,  Miss.,  May  27,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  march 
ot  my  brigade  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  this  field,  together  with  the  part 
taken  by  it  in  the  late  actions : 

We  moved  to  Sherman’s  Landing  the  9th,  assisted  in  making  a road 
Whence  to  Bower’s  Landing,  finished  it  within  two  days,  and  on  the 
loth,  being  relieved  by  fresh  troops,  marched  to  the  lower  landing* 
reached  Grand  Gulf  the  evening  of  the  15th,  and  encamped  on  the  Bav- 
in ond  road. 


oJ?n  17th,  at  noon,  at  the  junction  of  the  Gibson  road,  we  took 
2U5  prisoners,  captured  partly  by  the  head  of  my  column,  chiefly  by 
several  gentlemen  of  General  Sherman’s  staff,  Cols.  J.  Condit  Smith, 
Morton,  and  others.  They  were  stragglers  of  Loring’s  division,  which 
had  taken  the  Gibson  road  during  the  night.  Here,  receiving  orders 
irom  General  Sherman,  we  took  cross-roads  for  Bolton,  and  again,  on 
1 ailing  into  the  track  of  our  army,  changed  our  course  for  Edwards 
Station,  camping  at  night  on  the  battle-field  of  the  day  before.  During 
the  night  of  the  18th  we  rejoined  our  division. 

On  the  morning  of  the  19th,  we  took  position  on  the  right  of  the 
division  resting  on  General  Steele’s  left,  and,  at  the  signal,  at  2 p.  in., 
charged  the  works  of  the  enemy  in  line  of  battle,  the  Thirty-seventh 
Ohio  °p  the  right,  the  Forty-seventh  Ohio  on  the  left,  the  Fourth  West 
Virginia  in  the  center,  and  the  Thirtieth  Ohio  in  reserve.  The  left  of  our 
me,  under  Colonels  Parry  and  Dayton,  reached  the  enemy’s  intrench - 
meats,  and  the  colors  of  the  regiments  waved  near  them  until  evening, 
lhe  right,  on  account  of  obstacles,  was  unable  to  cross  the  ravine,  but 


282  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [CflAr.  XXX VX 

covered  the  left  in  its  advanced  position  by  a heavy  fire.  Later,  the  re- 
maining regiments  were  moved  to  the  left,  on  the  brow  of  the  hill,  pre- 
pared, on  the  agreed  signal  from  the  brigade  on  our  left,  to  move  over 
the  track  of  the  preceding  portion  of  the  brigade,  and,  joining  them,  re- 
new the  assault.  I instructed  the  artillery  to  open  on  the  works  when 
our  line  began  to  ascend  the  opposite  hill.  They,  however,  opened 
heavily  before  the  signal  was  given,  and  the  troops  already  over,  sup- 
posing the  fire  was  to  enable  them  to  retire  under  cover,  moved  back; 
and  the  signal  not  being  given,  the  charge  was  not  renewed.  From 
this  to  the  22d  my  front  skirmished  along  the  enemy’s  intrenchment. 

At  10.04  a.  m.  of  the  22d,  a storming  party,  composed  of  50  volunteers 
from  each  brigade  of  the  division,  bearing  the  colors  of  my  headquar- 
ters, and  followed  by  my  troops  in  column,  charged  down  a narrow,  deep- 
cut  road  upon  a bastion  of  the  enemy’s  works.  They  were  instructed 
to  bear  to  the  left,  and  cross  the  curtain  if  the  ditch  at  the  salient  could 
not  be  bridged.  They  made  a foot-path  at  the  salient,  by  which  Cap- 
tain [John  EL]  Groce,  commanding,  Lieutenant  O’Neal,  [Private]  Trog- 
den,  the  color-bearer,  and  others,  crossing,  climbed  half  way  up  the  ex- 
terior slope,  and  planted  the  flag  upon  it  unfurled.  The  Thirtieth  Ohio, 
next  in  order,  moved  close  upon  the  storming  party,  until  their  progress 
was  arrested  by  a front  and  double  flank  fire,  and  the  dead  and  wounded 
which  blocked  the  defile.  The  second  company  forced  its  way  over 
the  remains  of  the  first,  and  a third  over  those  of  the  preceding,  but 
their  perseverance  served  only  further  to  encumber  the  impassable  way. 
The  Thirty-seventh  Ohio  came  next,  its  left  breaking  the  column  where 
the  road  first  debouched,  upon  a deadly  fire.  After  the  check,  a few 
passed  on,  but  were  mostly  shot.  They  fell  back,  and,  with  the  remainder 
of  the  brigade  and  division,  came  over  a better  route. 

I formed  my  troops  as  they  came  up  on  the  brow  of  the  hill  running 
from  the  road  to  the  left,  parallel  to  and  70  yards  from  the.  intrench- 
ments.  Here  we  protected  our  advanced  men  and  wounded  until  they 
were  gradually  withdrawn,  and,  with  a heavy  and  well-directed  and 
sustained  fire,  covered  the  after  attempt  to  charge  over  the  intrench- 
ments  made  down  the  same  road  by  the  brigade  of  General  Mower. 

At  night  the  wounded,  dead,  and  colors  were  brought  70  yards  back 
to  the  hill,  where  the  brigade  remains,  intrenching  and  skirmishing  with 
the  enemy. 

I have  the  honor  to  call  your  attention  to  the  accompanying  reports 
of  regimental  commanders,  and  bear  testimony  to  the  bravery  of  the 
following  officers,  in  addition  to  those  mentioned  therein : Colonels  Parry 
and  Dayton,  of  the  Forty-seventh  Ohio  and  Fourth  West  Virginia ; 
Lieutenant-Colonels  von  Blessingh  and  Hildt,  of  the  Thirty-seventh  and 
Thirtieth  Ohio,  and  Major  Hipp,  of  the  Thirty-seventh. 

Lieutenants  [Emerson  P.]  Brooks  and  Davis,  of  the  Thirtieth  Ohio, 
badly  wounded  in  the  charge  of  the  22d,  deserve  especial  mention  and 
promotion. 

Captain  Hayes,  of  the  Thirtieth,  killed  near  the  intrenchments  at  the 
head  of  his  men,  was  the  model  of  a Christian  soldier.  He  fell  in  the 
front  rank  of  honor,  where  he  lived  and  still  lives. 

I inclose  a list  of  the  volunteer  storming  party  from  this  brigade,  and 
ask  that  Captain  Groce,  who  led  the  division  party  and  was  wounded 
on  the  parapet,  and. Lieutenant  O’Neal,  who  charged  by  his  side  and 
was  likewise  wounded,  receive  such  high  promotion  as  their  gallantry 
merits. 

I recommend  that  First  Ueut.  J.  H.  Balston,  of  the  Fourth  West 
Virginia  Infantry,  be  reduced  to  the  ranks,  for  absence  without  cause 


Chap.  XXXVI.;;  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  283 

on  the  clay  of  battle,  and  that  Corporals  Clendenin  or  Boley,  who  saved 
their  colors,  be  commissioned  in  his  stead. 

Dr.  [Joseph  B.]  Potter,  brigade  surgeon,  earned  high  commendation 
by  untiring  attention  to  the  wounded. 

Captain  [Theodore]  Yoges  was  completely  successful  in  forwarding 
ammunition  and  supplies. 

Captain  Lofland,  Lieutenants  Fisk,  McIntyre,  and  Odell  discharged 
their  duties  with  gallantry  and  energy. 

Captain  Cornyn  and  Lieutenant  Headington  I have  the  honor  to  rec- 
ommend for  promotion,  for  their  gallant  conduct  in  the  second  charge. 

The  brigade  reached  the  field  from  Grand  Gulf,  by  a forced  march  of 
85  miles  in  three  days,  the  midnight  before  the  battle. 

The  troops  bore  themselves  throughout  with  gallantry  and  spirit. 
Their  general  commanding  believes  that  nothing  but  the  broken  and 
entangled  nature  of  the  ground  over  which  they  charged,  with  a want 
of  previous  knowledge  of  its  condition,  prevented  them  from  success 
fully  entering  the  enemy’s  works. 

Our  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  is  as  follows  :* 


Engagements. 

Killed. 

® 

P 

o 

£ 

Missing. 

Battle  of  19th 

— 

50 

190 

(j 

Battle  of  22d 

24 

116 

Total 

74 

306 

6 

C3 

O 


H 


246 

140 

386  v 


A complete  list  of  the  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  in  action,  by 
name,  company,  and  regiment,  is  herewith  inclosed. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HUGH  EWING, 
Brigadier-  General. 

Maj.  W.  D.  Green, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Second  Division , Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 


Ho.  39. 

Report  of  Maj.  Charles  Hipp , Thirty  seventh  Ohio  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Thirty-seventh  Ohio  Yolunteer  Infantry, 

May  23,  18G3. 

Sir  : The  regiment  went  into  position  on  the  right  of  the  brigade  on 
the  morning  of  the  19th  day  of  May,  1863,  under  command  of  Lieut,  Col. 
Louis  von  Blessingh.  Three  companies,  Maj.  Charles  Hipp  command- 
ing, were  previously  detached  to  reconnoiter  on  the  right  flank  and 
form  connection  with  the  left  of  General  Steele’s  division,  near  the 
evacuated  barracks  of  the  enemy.  Major  Hipp,  with  his  detachment, 
rejoined  the  regiment  at  the  opening  of  the  fight,  when  the  assault  on 
the  enemy’s  works  was  in  progress.  The  regiment  was  then  formed  for 
the  assault,  with  skirmishers  in  front,  who,  by  order  of  the  general  com- 
manding, moved  forward  slowly,  when  the  Fourth  West  Yirginia  and 
Forty-seventh  Ohio  Begiments  rushed  forward,  carrying  with  them  some 


Nominal  list  omitted. 


284  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXYL 

of  our  skirmishers  and  others  on  the  left  of  the  regiment.  The  three  com- 
panies then  arriving,  with  Major  Ilipp,  were  ordered  to  deploy  on  the 
crest  of  the  hill,  the  balance  being  already  over,  and  all  were  ordered 
to  halt  and  open  fire  on  the  enemy.  The  regiment  remained  in  the  same 
position  the  whole  day,  constantly  firing,  withdrawing  after  night. 
The  loss  of  the  regiment  this  day  was  8 killed'  and  36  wounded. 

At  noon  of  the  20th,  the  regiment  opened  fire  again  from  the  crest  of 
the  hill  until  night,  when  it  was  relieved  by  the  Fourth  West  Virginia, 
The  loss  this  day  was  3 killed,  amongst  whom  were  2 officers,  and  3 
wounded. 

On  the  21st,  the  regiment  had  1 wounded ; since  dead. 

The  night  following,  two  companies  (G  and  C)  of  the  regiment  were 
on  picket  on  right  of  the  brigade  ground,  joining  the  left  of  General 
Steele’s  division,  and  Company  D and  part  of  Company  F on  fatigue. 
Leaving  these,  with  the  exception  of  Company  C,  to  occupy  the  enemy 
on  the  right,  the  rest  of  the  regiment  marched  with  the  brigade,  being 
the  second  in  front,  to  the  assault  of  the  enemy’s  works  on  the  left  of 
our  former  position,  commanded  by  Lieut.  Col.  Louis  von  Blessingli. 
The  progress  was  soon  retarded  by  some  of  our  men  of  the  first  three 
companies  blocking  up  the  way  with  some  men  of  the  previously  ad- 
vanced regiment.  The  following  companies  forced  their  way  over  them, 
and  came  forward  in  good  style $ then  deployed  on  the  crest  of  the  hill, 
next  to  the  enemy’s  works,  and  opened  fire  on  them,  which  was  kept  up 
during  most  of  the  day.  Lieut.  Col.  Louis  von  Blessingh  was  here 
wounded,  and  the  command  of  the  regiment  devolved  on  Maj.  Charles 
Hipp.  Our  loss  on  this  day  was  8 killed  and  31  wounded. 

The  gallant  conduct  of  the  13  men  who  volunteered  for  the  storming 
party  deserves  particular  mention.  Several  of  them  were  among  the 
first  to  the  enemy’s  works. 

The  conduct  of  the  officers  was,  without  any  exception,  praiseworthy 
and  brave,  and  they,  as  well  as  the  non-commissioned  officers  and  men, 
have  done  their  duty  to  my  entire  satisfaction. 

CHAKLES  HIPP, 

Major , Comdg.  Thirty -seventh  Regiment  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry. 

Lieut.  H.  J.  Votteler, 

Acting  Adjutant  Thirty  seventh  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry. 


No.  40. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Joseph  R.  Reed , Second  Ioioa  Battery , Third  Division. 

Headquarters  Second  Iowa  Battery, 

Camp  near  Bear  Creek,  Miss.,  July  27,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken 
by  the  Second  Iowa  Battery  in  the  campaign  just  ended: 

On  May  2,  I left  my  encampment  at  Duckport,  La.,  and  marched 
with  the  Second  Brigade,  Third  Division,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps,  to 
which  I was  then  attached,  to  Grand  Gulf,  where  I crossed  the  river 
and  moved  with  the  brigade  toward  Jackson,  Miss.  On  approaching 
that  place,  on  May  14,  being  near  the  head  of  the  column,  I was  or- 
dered by  General  Mower  to  move  to  the  front  and  engage  a battery  of 
the  enemy,  which  had  opened  from  a position  commanding  a bridge  and 
its  approaches.  I succeeded  in  getting  a commanding  position,  and 
engaged  the  enemy  briskly  for  twenty  minutes,  when  he  withdrew  his 


Chai\  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


285 


battery.  Advancing  immediately  in  rear  of  the  line  of  infantry,  I was 
ordered  to  place  the  battery  in  position  near  a house  on  the  right  of  the 
road,  and  from  this  position  I opened  a brisk  fire  in  the  direction  of  the 
town  of  Jackson,  which  I continued  but  for  a few  moments,  when  i 
ceased,  by  order  of  General  Tuttle.  I soon  afterward  moved  forward 
with  the  division  to  the  town,  where  I remained  until  the  16th  instant. 
In  this  affair  my  loss  was  1 man  severely  wounded. 

On  the  16th  instant,  I moved  back  with  the  division  in  the  direction 
of  Vicksburg,  and  on  the  20th  instant  I occupied  a position  near  the 
center  of  General  Blair’s  line.  This  position  I occupied  until  June  5, 
when  I was  advanced  to  another,  much  nearer  the  enemy’s  lines. 

On  May  21, 22,  and  23,  from  our  first  position,  a vigorous  fire  was  kept 
up  on  the  enemy’s  lines.  At  one  time  on  the  22d  I was  ordered  by 
Major  Taylor,  chief  of  artillery,  Fifteenth  Corps,  to  advance  two  of  the 
guns  to  a position  outside  of  the  intrenchments.  For  timely  and  vigor- 
ous assistance  in  getting  these  guns  to  this  new  position  (for  thev  had 
to  be  moved  by  hand)  I am  indebted  to  Colonel  Judy,  of  the  One"  hun 
dred  and  fourteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  who  gallantly  came  to  my  assist- 
ance with  a squad  of  his  men  at  a time  when  my  own  men  were  almost 
exhausted  with  their  exertions.  Soon  discovering  that  the  position  was 
very  much  exposed,  and  that  I could  accomplish  nothing  by  holding  it, 
I asked  and  obtained  permission  to  withdraw  my  guns. 

On  the  night  of  May  23,  by  order  of  Maj.  Ezra  Taylor,  chief  of  artil- 
lery Fifteenth  Army  Corps,  I detached  Second  Lieut.  Charles  F.  B(fed, 
with  one  section  of  the  battery,  to  accompany  the  brigade  of  General 
Mower  on  the  expedition  to  Mechanicsville.  He  was  absent  until 
June  3. 

On  May  27,  Major  Taylor  turned  over  to  me  and  ordered  me  to  man 
one  30-pounder  Parrot  gun.  With  this  gun  I was  enabled  to  do  a great- 
deal  and  very  effective  service.  I worked  it  until  June  22,  when,  with 
the  division,  I moved  to  the  vicinity  of  Big  Bear  Creek,  where  I re- 
mained until  July  4,  when,  with  the  division,  I moved  again  toward 
Jackson. 

In  the  siege  of  that  place  I took  no  very  active  part,  as  I only  got 
into  position  on  the  night  of  the  evacuation  by  the  enemy. 

I append  a list  of  casualties  in  the  battery  during  the  whole  cam- 
paign— 1 killed  and  6 wounded.* * 

I am,  sir,  with  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  E.  EEED, 

First  Lieutenant , Commanding  Second  Iowa  Battery. 
Lieut.  N.  E.  Duncan, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Third  Brig.,  Third  Div.,  Fifteenth  A.  C. 


Ho.  41. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Jefferson  Brumhaclc , Ninety -fifth  Ohio  Infantry , 

First  Brigade. 

Camp  near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  20, 1863. 
General  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  opera- 
tions last  night  on  the  picket  line  in  front  of  your  brigade : 

I had  under  my  command  four  companies,  two  from  the  Seventy- 


* Nominal  list  omitted. 


286  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

second  Ohio,  one  from  the  Ninety-fifth  Ohio,  and  one  from  the  Ninety- 
third  Indiana,  in  all,  about  100  men.  I attach  hereto  a very  rough 
pencil  sketch  of  so  much  of  the  ground  as  was  the  theater  of  the  prin- 
cipal operations,*  which  may  facilitate  the  understanding  of  this  report, 
and  aid  in  conveying  distinct  ideas  of  what  I was  ordered  to  do  and 
what  was  actually  done.  Just  before  night,  I was  ordered  to  take  pos- 
session of  the  rig’ht  hill,  on  the  left  of  the  road,  and  advance  the  picket 
line  to,  or  far  enough  beyond,  the  brick-pile  and  loose  board  shed  to 
cover  and  protect  the  fatigue  party  that  was  to  commence  throwing  up 
some  works  in  the  vicinity  of  the  brick  and  boards  about  10  or  11  o’clock 
at  night. 

From  the  base  of  the  hill  the  road  going  toward  the  works  of  the 
enemy  ascends  rapidly  to  the  turn  to  the  left,  from  which  point  the  as- 
cent is  more  gradual  to  the  level  of  the  brick  and  boards.  The  gully 
on  the  right-hand  side  of  the  road  at  the  turn  to  the  left  is  quite  deep. 
The  distance  from  the  crest  of  the  hill,  across  to  the  road  and  toward 
the  enemy,  at  the  narrowest  point  near  the  brick  and  boards,  does  not 
exceed  3 or  4 rods.  The  face  of  the  hill  toward  your  brigade  is  abrupt 
and  steep,  and  very  difficult  of  ascent  by  men.  From  the  highest  points 
of  the  hill,  beginning  just  beyond  the  large  green  tree  and  stretching 
off  to  our  left,  the  ground  descends  gradually  toward  the  road.  There 
is  growing  corn  on  the  top  of  the  hill,  in  the  bottom,  and  on  the  sides 
where  it  is  possible  to  cultivate  the  soil.  For  several  nights  back  our 
pickets  have  been  stationed  on  the  highest  points  of  the  hills  just  back 
of  the  brick  and  boards,  and  to  the  right  and  left.  There  has  also 
been  a strong  picket  on  the  road  at  the  turn  to  the  left,  with  two  or 
more  single  sentries  farther  in  advance  up  the  road.  Until  last  night 
no  effort  was  made  to  prevent  the  posting  of  our  pickets  at  these  points. 

I was  ordered  to  post  the  pickets  at  an  early  hour,  and  as  soon  as  it 
became  dark  enough  to  be  safe,  I moved  the  four  companies  by  the 
flank  to  the  foot  of  the  hill  on  the  left  of  the  road.  I sent  Captain 
Nuhfer’s  company  (Seventy-second  Ohio)  to  the  right,  to- picket  the  line^ 
in  the  valley  from  the  old  stump  to  the  left  of  the  line  of  pickets  ot 
General  Thayer.  The  company  of  the  Ninety-third  Indiana  I formed 
in  line  between  the  road  and  old  dead  tree,  directing  the  captain  to 
send  10  men,  under  charge  of  a lieutenant,  to  form  a picket  post  at  or 
near  the  turn  in  the  road,  advancing  a sentry  or  two  up  the  road,  if 
practicable,  the  residue  of  the  company  to  be  held  in  reserve  under 
charge  of  the  captain.  Captain  Stansbury’s  company  (Ninety-fifth  Ohio) 
and  Captain  Snyder’s  company  (Seventy-second  Ohio)  I then  moved  by 
the  left  flank  (Stansbury  in  advance)  from  the  road  to  the  left  along 
the  base  of  the  hill,  distributing  the  men  in  squads  of  5 or  G,  so  as  to 
be  properly  divided  for  picket  posts  when  we  reached  the  top  of  the 
hill.  My  left  squad  was  advanced  far  enough  to  pass  in,  advancing 
near  the  right  of  General  Lightburn’s  picket  line  when  posted. 

These  dispositions  being  made  simultaneously,  Stansbury  and  Snyder 
and  the  Ninety-third  Indiana  pickets  commenced  advancing,  the  two 
former  directly  up  the  steep  hillside,  the  latter  up  the  road.  As  my 
men  began  to  appear  cautiously  on  hands  and  knees,  and  lying  down, 
on  or  near  the  crest,  the  enemy  rose  up  a short  distance  in  front  and  in 
considerable  force,  and  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  fired  a volley.  As 
few  only  of  my  men  had  gained  the  top,  they  discharged  their  pieces 
and  then  slid  a short  distance  down  the  hill,  the  whole  of  the  two  com- 
panies resting  secure  just  under  the  brow  of  the  hill,  to  which  the  enemy 


Not  found. 


Chap.  XXXVI.  J 


287 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

did  not  advance.  At  the  same  time  the  advancing  picket  of  the  Ninety- 
third  Indiana  was  fired  on,  near  the  turn  of  the  road  from  their  left 
and  front,  and  compelled  to  fall  back  on  the  road  to  the  reserve. 

After  this  firing,  I passed  along  my  line  to  assure  myself  of  the  then 
position  of  my  command.  The  Ninety- third  Indiana  advanced  its  picket 
up  the  road,  but  not  so  far  as  the  turn  in  the  road.  It  was  surmised 
that  the  enemy  had  fallen  back  to  or  beyond  the  road  and  brick  and 
boards  after  delivering  their  first  fire.  Captain  Snyder,  with  5 or  G 
men,  was  then  directed  to  advance  cautiously  up  the  spur  to,  and  if 
practicable  beyond,  the  large  green  tree,  to  reconnoiter  and  ascertain 
whether  the  enemy  still  occupied  the  ground  just  beyond  the  crest. 
The  captain  and  two  or  three  of  his  men  reached  the  tree  and  crawled 
a few  feet  beyond,  very  nearly  to  a point  from  which  a view  of  the 
ground  sloping  beyond  could  be  commanded,  when  a number  of  the 
enemy  rose  up  to  their  left  and  front,  and,  advancing  rapidly,  delivered, 
as  they  came,  a volley.  The  captain  could  only  reply  with  three  or  four 
muskets,  and,  being  largely  outnumbered,  removed  his  men  a few  feet 
down  below  the  brow  of  the  hill,  under  cover,  where  they  remained. 
From  the  nature  of  the  ground  near  the  large  green  tree,  and  to  the 
.left  in  the  road,  it  was  impracticable  for  me  to  bring  enough  of  my  small 
command  into  action  at  these  points  to  dislodge  the  enemy,  and  I de- 
termined to  make  a demonstration  on  the  next  spur  on  my  left,  where 
the  ground  was  more  favorable  for  advancing  a number  of  men,  so  that 
they  could  co-operate  in  attack  or  defense. 

Up  to  this  point  none  of  the  men  under  my  command  had  been 
harmed,  though  I regret  to  state  that  Major  McClure,  of  General  Tut- 
tle’s  staff,  while  seconding  and  aiding  the  various  operations,  was 
wounded.  I then  collected  Captain  Stansbury’s  company  and  a portion 
of  Captain  Snyder’s  on  the  spur  on  my  left,  just  under  the  brow  of  the 
hill,  in  line.  The  whole  line,  in  loose  order,  with  bayonets  fixed,  was 
then  advanced,  the  men  moving  forward  on  their  hands  and  knees.  My 
object  was  to  turn  the  position  of  the  enemy,  if  possible,  and,  after  re- 
ceiving their  fire,  if  they  confronted  us  in  line,  to  return  it  and  charge 
if  there  was  any  prospect  of  success.  My  men,  without  opposition,  got 
to,  and  some  on,  the  crest;  but  at  this  point  the  enemy  rose  up  in  line 
a few  feet  in  front,  the  slight  rise  before  us  and  the  corn  having  con- 
cealed them  before  that  from  view,  and  in  numbers  apparently  exceed- 
ing my  force.  Each  side  fired  a volley  very  nearly  at  the  same  instant. 
The  fire  of  the  enemy,  delivered  at  such  short  range— the  muzzles  of 
opposing  guns  in  some  instances  nearly  or  quite  crossing  each  other- 
told  with  terrible  effect  on  my  small  force.  My  men  were  ordered  to 
and  did  fall  back  to  secure  places  just  under  the  brow  of  the  hill,  after 
which  my  attention  was  turned  to  the  wounded,  who  were  all  removed 
from  the  field,  as  it  is  thought.  It  w'as  now  evident  that  I did  not  have 
sufficient  force  to  take  the  top  of  the  hill  and  advance  my  line  to  the 
front  as  far  as  ordered.  I held  Captains  Stansbury’s  and  Snyder’s  men 
under  the  brow  of  the  hill,  and  at  no  time  did  they  descend  to  the  foot 
of  the  same  until  ordered  so  to  do. 

During  these  operations  officers  and  men  under  my  command  acted 
with  great  coolness,  courage,  and  bravery,  and  they  have  my  thanks 
for  the  hearty  manner  in  which  they  carried  out  my  orders.  A very 
few  panic-stricken  stragglers,  perhaps,  passed  to  the  rear,  where  they 
put  in  circulation,  it  may  be,  such  exaggerated  reports  as  only  this 
class  can  during  an  encounter  between  hostile  forces. 

During  these  operations  I kept  upon  the  road  a guard  taken  from  the 
Indiana  company  a short  distance  from  the  base  of  the  hill,  and  the 


288 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai*.  XXXVI. 


commanding  officer  of  the  reserve  was  always  advised  of  my  where- 
abouts and  contemplated  movements. 

About  3 o’clock  the  bulk  of  my  command  was  called  back,  only  a 
very  few  men  remaining  under  the  brow  of  the  hill,  because  they  did 
not — by  reason  of  being  misled  by  the  messenger — receive  the  order 
to  fall  back,  when  the  artillery  threw  a few  shells  at  the  enemy. 

The  list  of  casualties  is,  as  far  as  I can  now  ascertain  or  state,  as 
follows  : Eight  wounded,  2 badly,  and  1 missing  (it  is  feared  killed)  in 
Captain  Stansbury’s  company;  2 wounded,  1 severely,  in  Captain  Sny- 
der’s company.  From  cries  as  of  wounded  men  on  the  side  of  the  en- 
emy, it  is  supposed  that  they  also  suffered,  but  how  much  it  is  impos- 
sible to  guess. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  BRUMBACK, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Officer  of  the  Day , June  19. 

Brig.  Gen.  R.  P.  Btjckland. 


No.  42. 

Report  of  Col.  James  L.  Geddes , Eighth  Iowa  Infantry , Third  Brigade. 

In  Camp  near  Vicksburg,  Miss., 

May  30,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  general 
commanding  the  brigade,  the  number  of  casualties  in  the  Eighth  Iowa 
Infantry  from  the  6th  up  to  the  23d  of  May,  1863,  including  the  taking 
of  Jackson,  Miss.,  and  the  assault  on  the  rebel  works  in  the  rear  of 
Vicksburg  on  the  22d  instant.  Lieut.  James  C.  Maxwell,  Company  C, 
wounded  in  left  arm  slightly;  Corpl.  Thomas  Harris,  Company  B, 
wounded  in  left  hip  severely,  and  Corpl.  Amos  L.  Graves,  Company  K, 
wounded  in  left  arm  slightly.  The  cool,  unflinching  behavior  of  both 
officers  and  men  of  my  regiment  under  a very  heavy  artillery  fire,  both 
at  the  taking  of  Jackson  and  during  the  assault  on  the  22d,  was  wit- 
nessed by  our  commanding  general ; I shall,  consequently,  make  no  re- 
marks on  the  subject,  but,  trusting  to  his  just  appreciation  of  what 
constitutes  good  soldiers,  I remain,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient 
servant, 

J.  L.  GEDDES, 
Colonel  Eighth  Iowa  Infantry. 

Lieut.  N.  E.  Duncan,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  43. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Jacob  G.  Lauman , U.  S.  Army , commanding 
Fourth  Division , Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

Hdqrs.  Fourth  Division,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps, 

Near  Vicksburg , June  27,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  herewith  to  forward  list  of  casualties  in 
lay  command  on  the  nights  of  23d,  24th,  and  25th  ultimo, # when  the  en- 
emy came  out  of  his  works  and  attempted  to  drive  our  working  party 


* See  revised  statements  of  casualties. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


289 


from  our  trenches.  On  the  night  of  the  23d,  the  Fourteenth  Illinois  was 
driven  from  the  trenches,  and  the  enemy  captured  the  commanding  offi- 
cer (Lieutenant-Colonel  Cam)  and  5 men,  killed  4 and  wounded  5 of  our 
men,  besides  capturing  a number  of  our  spades  and  picks.  He  held 
possession  of  a small  portion  of  the  line  of  our  advanced  trenches  during 
the  night  and  all  day  on  the  24th,  but  the  Thirty-third  Wisconsin  at 
night  drove  him  from  there  with  a charge  and  a yell,  and  made  him 
seek  refuge  behind  his  works,  capturing  twelve  guns  and  a number  of 
cartridge-boxes.  Our  men  are  reported  to  have  charged  him  to  the 
very  ditch  of  his  works,  and  the  trench  officer  is  of  the  opinion  that  a 
force  could  have  gone  in  without  much  difficulty.  We  lost  on  the  night 
of  the  24th  1 man  killed  and  11  wounded.  Our  work  was  very  much 
advanced  during  the  night. 

The  enemy  on  the  night  of  the  23d  had  filled  up  the  portion  of  the 
trenches  he  captured,  and  when  this  was  retaken  by  the  Thirty-third 
Wisconsin,  our  working  party,  under  command  of  Colonel  Gresham,  of 
the  Fifty-third  Indiana,  cleaned  it  out  and  found  one  of  our  men  and  one 
of  the  enemy  buried  within  it,  who  had  been  killed  in  the  fight  on  the 
night  of  the  23d.  Our  working  party  were  permitted  to  proceed  on  the 
night  of  the  25th  without  molestation,  and  extended  our  line  of  trench- 
work  considerably,  as  will  be  shown  by  the  reports  of  our  engineer  offi- 
cer. They  were  fired  upon  by  the  enemy  from  behind  his  works  on  the 
night  of  the  25th,  killing  1 and  wounding  2 of  our  men,  but  the  firing 
did  not  seriously  interfere  with  the  work.  During  our  firing  on  the 
afternoon  of  the  25th,  we  dismounted  one  of  the  enemy’s  guns  with  a 
shot  from  our  siege  gun  on  the  right,  which  is  the  only  serious  damage 
we  know  our  firing  to  have  done.  For  the  gradual  approaches  we 
made  upon  the  enemy’s  works  from  night  to  night  and  the  amount  of 
work  we  accomplished,  I refer  you  to  the  report  of  Captain  Freeman, 
our  engineer  officer  ; to  Captain  Comstock,  engineer  officer. 

Very  respectfully, 

J.  G.  LAUMAK, 
Brigadier- General. 

Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Fourth  Division,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps, 

Near  Vicksburg , June  27,  1863. 

Colonel  : From  our  officer  of  the  trenches  we  learn  that  our  work- 
ing party  opened  the  trenches  heretofore  constructed,  of  about  280 
yards,  to  an  average  width  of  6 feet,  constructed  new  trenches  about 
100  yards,  2 feet  deep  and  about  2£  feet  wide,  making  the  work  contin- 
uous from  the  Hall’s  Ferry  road  to  the  right,  in  front  of  the  large  rebel 
works. 

Owing  to  the  deficiency  in  picks,  the  work  was  not  forwarded  as 
much  as  desired.  An  approach  to  the  rebel  work  was  commenced  and 
put  in  condition  to  be  prosecuted  during  the  day. 

The  casualties  of  yesterday  and  last  night,  as  far  as  ascertained  to 
this  time,  were  3 men  wounded  (one  fatally). 

Yery  respectfully, 

J.  G.  LAUxMAK, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

■ 19  R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


290  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

No.  44. 

Report  of  Col.  Aaron  Brown , Third  Iowa  Infantry , Firstf  Brigade , m- 
cluding  operations  since  May  18. 

Headquarters  Third  Iowa  Infantry, 

July  6,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
action  of  the  Third  Iowa  Infantry  on  board  the  steamer  Crescent  City, 
May  18,  1863,  with  guerrillas,  and  the  part  taken  by  it  during  the  siege 
of  Yicksburg: 

The  regiment  left  Memphis,  Tenn.,  May  17, 1863,  in  company  with  the 
other  regiments  composing  theFirst  Brigade,  Fourth  Division,  Sixteenth 
Army  Corps.  Nothing  of  interest  occurred  until  about  1 p.  m.  of  the 
18th, " when  we  were  fired  upon  by  guerrillas  from  the  left  bank  of  the 
river,  near  Island  No.  82,  and  about  3 miles  above  the  town  of  Green- 
ville, Miss.  The  Crescent  City,  on  which  the  regiment  was  embarked, 
was  at  the  time  about  1 mile  in  advance  of  the  fleet.  The  enemy  opened 
on  the  boat,  when  within  150  yards  of  the  shore,  with  three  pieces  of 
artillery  and  a heavy  fire  of  musketry.  Two  companies,  who  were  on 
guard  at  the  time,  promptly  returned  the  fire,  but  so  sudden  and  unex- 
pected was  the  attack,  and  so  short  its  duration,  that  the  regiment  had 
but  a poor  opportunity  to  do  much  execution  until  the  boat  had  got  be- 
yond musket  range.  We  had  one  section  of  [A.]  Schwartz’s  battery  on 
board,  one  piece  of  which  was  used  with  good  effect  on  the  battery  on 
shore.  We  were  at  the  time  under  the  convoy  of  one  of  the  boats  of 
the  Mosquito  fleet,  which  came  up  to  our  assistance,  but  not  until  the 
enemy  were  in  full  retreat.  In  this  affair  we  lost  14  men  wounded,  a 
list  of  whom  you  will  find  appended.  On  the  morning  of  the  19th,  the 
regiment  disembarked  at  Young’s-  Point,  and  started  toward  the  inte- 
rior, but  were  immediately  ordered  back  to  re-embark  for  Snyder’s  Bluff, 
where  we  landed  on  the  morning  of  the  20th.  Here  we  remained  until 
the  24th,  when  we  received  marching  orders,  and  with  the  rest  of  the 
brigade  proceeded  to  the  rear  of  Yicksburg,  and  took  position  on  the 
left  of  the  besieging  line,  and  became  part  of  the  investing  force.  From 
this  time  up  to  the  surrender  of  the  place,  on  the  4th  of  July,  the  reg- 
iment took  part  in  all  the  siege  operations  carried  on  in  our  front.  The 
duty  now  was  of  the  most  arduous  character,  and  calculated  to  put  to 
the  severest  test  the  bravery  and  fortitude  of  the  men.  I shall  only 
instance  a few  of  the  most  important  operations  in  which  the  regiment 
was  engaged  during  the  siege. 

On  the  night  of  the  1st  of  June,  Companies  F and  G were  support- 
ing a section  of  the  Fifth  Ohio  Battery,  which  had  been  posted  early 
in  the  evening  in  an  advanced  position.  The  enemy  had  detected  the 
movement,  and  about  11  o’clock  made  a sortie  in  considerable  force, 
to  capture  the  guns  and  their  small  support.  Our  men  were  on  the 
alert  for  them,  and  twice  repulsed  them $ the  last  time  when  they  had 
got  up  within  10  feet  of  the  guns,  which  played  havoc  in  their  ranks 
with  canister.  On  the  evening  of  the  4th  of  June,  a portion  ot  the 
regiment  on  picket  duty  on  the  left  of  the  brigade  line,  consisting 
of  parts  of  Companies  A,  B,  D,  F,  and  H,  with  20  men  and  1 com- 
missioned officer  of  the  Thirty-third  Wisconsin  Regiment,  numbering 
in  all  about  150,  were  ordered  to  advance  and  drive  the  enemy  from 
his  line  of  rifle-pits  on  the  crest  of  a ridge  south  of  the  Hall’s  Ferry 
road  and  about  300  yards  in  our  front.  At  the  signal,  the  men  rushed 
forward  with  a deafening  cheer,  under  a heavy  fire  of  musketry  and 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  291 

artillery,  ancl  in  less  than  fifteen  minutes  we  had  gained  the  crest  and 
driven  the  enemy  from  their  pits  and  into  their  works  beyond,  from 
which  five  pieces  of  artillery  continued  shelling  ns  for  about  half  au 
hour ; but  from  the  advantageous  position  we  had  gained,  their  missiles 
fell  harmless,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  enemy’s  aim  was  too  high. 
We  lost  but  2 men  wounded  in  the  engagement.  On  the  night  of  the 
24th  of  June,  200  men  of  the  regiment  were  sent  to  the  trenches,  under 
the  command  of  Maj.  G.  W.  Crosley,  as  a working  party.  On  their 
arrival  at  the  trenches,  about  10  p.  m.,  the  guards  were  stationed  in 
advance  of  the  rifle-pits  to  guard  the  working  party,  which  was  en- 
gaged in  digging  a sap  toward  the  main  fort  in  our  front.  The  night 
was  dark,  and  a slight  rain  falling  just  as  the  men  had  got  fairly  to 
work,  the  guard  in  front  were  fiercely  attacked  and  driven  in,  and 
tlie  enemy  advanced  in  force  and  demanded  a surrender.  Our  men 
seized  their  arms,  sprang  to  their  places  in  the  trenches,  and  delivered 
a terrific  fire,  causing  the  enemy  to  falter  and  then  fall  back  about  75 
yards,  from  which  they  continued  to  fire  with  both  musket  and  artillery 
for  about  three-fourths  of  an  hour,  our  men  responding  with  euergy, 
and  getting  the  last  shot.  Our  loss  was  1 man  killed  and  2 slightly 
wounded.  The  enemy’s  loss,  as  we  afterward  ascertained,  was  15 
killed  and  wounded,  including  the  colonel  commanding,  who  was  killed. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

AARCR*  BROWK, 
Colonel  Third  Iowa  Infantry . 

Ool.  N.  B.  Baker,  Adjutant-General  of  Iowa. 


ETo.  45. 

Report  of  Col.  Benjamin  Dornb laser,  Forty -sixth  Illinois  Infantry , 

Second  Brigade. 

In  the  Field,  June  7,  1863. 

Lieutenant:  In  compliance  with  orders  from  division  headquarters, 
with  reference  to  a capture  of  a portion  of  the  Forty-sixth  Illinois  In- 
fantry, I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  25th  of 
May,  the  regiment  was  detailed  to  relieve  the  Sixty-third  Illinois  In- 
fantry, on  picket  duty.  At  4 p.  m.  the  regiment  reported  at  brigade 
headquarters,  but,  owing  to  unavoidable  difficulties,  the  regiment  was 
not  fully  posted  until  alter  7 p.  in.  Five  companies,  a portion  of  which 
were  captured,  were  posted  by  Lieut.  Col.  John  J.  Jones,  of  my  regi- 
ment, under  the  guidance  of  the  major  of  the  Sixty-third  Illinois  In- 
fantry, and  upon  the  same  ground,  in  the  same  manner,  that  the  Sixty- 
third  was  posted  at  the  time  we  relieved  them,  which  line  extended 
from  and  near  a cotton-gin  on  the  Warrenton  road  westward  to  a 
swamp  which  we  supposed,  and  had  been  informed,  was  impassable. 
The  other  portion  of  the  regiment  was  posted  from  the  Warrenton  road 
eastward  to  the  pickets  of  the  First  Brigade,  by  myself,  but  owing  to 
the  lateness  of  the  hour  when  I arrived  at  the  center  of  our  lines,  and 
having  implicit  confidence  in  the  ability  and  skill  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Jones  and  other  officers  on  that  portion  of  the  line,  I deemed  it  entirely, 
unnecessary  to  visit  it. 

The  first  alarm  occurred  at  about  9.30  p.  m.  I heard  several  sharp 
volleys  of  musketry.  I immediately  strengthened  the  several  posts 
nearest  the  point  of  alarm,  and  proceeded  in  person  to  the  point  from 
whence  the  alarm  came,  to  discover,  if  possible,  the  cause.  I had  gone 


292 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXYI. 


but  a short  distance,  when  I discovered  a body  of  troops  moving  rap- 
idly along  a skirt  of  timber  toward  the  river,  which  proved  to  be  rebel 
soldiers.  Owing  to  the  extended  line  of  pickets,  I had  only  men 
enough  to  hold  that  portion  of  the  line  east  of  the  Warren  ton  road. 

Unable  to  hear  anything  from  the  pickets  on  the  west  side  of  the  road, 
and  fearing  some  disaster  had  befallen  them,  I immediately  deployed 
skirmishers  along  the  Warrenton  road,  which  afforded  them  a full  view 
of  the  ground  between  it  and  the  river  bluff,  in  order  to  guard  against 
a flank  movement  of  the  enemy  with  a view  to  cut  us  off  and  capture 
us.  At  the  earliest  opportunity  I notified  the  brigade  commanders, 
Colonel  Hall  and  Colonel  McCown,  commanding  brigades  in  General 
McArthur’s  division,  who  both  rendered  me  prompt  assistance. 

For  more  full  and  complete  particulars,  I refer  you  to  the  reports  of 
officers  of  my  command  inclosed  herewith. 

As  to  the  degree  of  vigilance  exercised  by  the  officers  and  men  of  my 
command,  I can  only  speak  of  those  under  my  own  control,  which  met 
with  my  entire  approbation ; and  from  the  known  character  of  the  offi- 
cers in  charge  of  the  captured  portion  of  the  regiment,  with  possibly  one 
exception,  which  I have  not  yet  sufficient  information  to  report,  I be- 
lieve the  disaster  to  be  more  attributable  to  the  injudicious  posting  of 
the  pickets  than  a lack  of  vigilance. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  DOBNBLASER, 
Colonel , Commanding  Regiment. 

Lieut.  L.  P.  Bourguin,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  46. 

Report  of  Maj.  Charles  J.  Stolbrand , Second  Illinois  Light  Artillery , 
Chief  of  Artillery  Third  Division , Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  16,  1863. 

Major  : In  obedience  to  orders,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  fol- 
lowing report  of  the  part  taken  by  my  command  in  the  siege  of  Vicks- 
burg from  the  19th  day  of  May,  when  it  commenced,  until  the  4th  of  July, 
when  it  terminated  in  the  capitulation  of-  the  garrison  and  the  city : 

To  follow  and  state  the  different  movements  and  stations  occupied 
by  my  command  and  parts  thereof  during  the  forty-seven  days,  men- 
tioned would  be  a very  laborious  task,  which,  I presume,  is  neither  nec- 
essary nor  expected.  I shall,  therefore,  confine  myself  to  a few  of  the 
most  important  facts. , At  about  3 o’clock  of  May  19,  I had  placed 
in  position  the  Third  Ohio  Battery,  Capt.  W.  S.  Williams  commanding, 
the  Eighth  Michigan  Battery,  Capt.  Samuel  He  Golyer  commanding, 
and  Battery  L,  Second  Kegiment  Illinois  Light  Artillery,  Capt.  William 
H.  Bolton  commanding,  at  about  2,500  yards  distant  from  the  rebel 
works.  The  batteries  opened  fire,  and  soon  thereafter  the  rebel  artil- 
lery in  their  works  modified  and  materially  slackened  fire.  About  two 
hours  afterw'ard,  having  previously  reconnoitered  the  ground,  and  re- 
ceived Major-General  Logan’s  assent,  I directed  Captain  De  Golyer’s 
two  howitzers  to  advance  about  1,800  yards  to  the  line  subsequently 
occupied  by  all  the  light  batteries.  Fire  was  immediately  opened  with 
good  effect,  vigorously  though  not  very  effectively  replied  to  by  the  rebel 
artillery  for  a short  space  of  time.  At  dark,  however,  these  pieces 
were  withdrawn  about  500  yards  to  the  rear,  owing  to  the  fact  that  no 
infantry  support  came  up  with  the  pieces.  In  the  morning  of  the  20th, 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


293 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


. 

the  batteries  above  mentioned  were  all  drawn  forward  to  the  ground 
occupied  the  evening  before  by  the  howitzers,  and  gradually  intrenched 
by  earth  thrown  up  in  front.  Battery  D,.  First  Illinois  Light  Artillery, 
was,  on  the  20th,  placed  in  battery  within  intrenchments  near  the  white 
house,  and  performed  during  the  siege  valuable  and  important  serv- 
ices at  different  places  and  stations  in  that  vicinity. 

The  siege  having  been  successfully  terminated,  I cannot  but  refer 
with  pleasure  and  gratification  to  the  willingness,  endurance,  and  zeal 
with  which  all  my  subordinates  submitted  to  all  the  hardships  incident 
thereunto.  Throughout,  from  the  captains  down  to  the  bugler,  the  same 
hearty  co-operation  met  me,  and,  were  it  not  for  a few  lamented  dead, 
I should  remember  with  pleasure  for  the  balance  of  my  natural  life  the 
devotion  to  the  national  cause  so  unmistakably  exhibited  by  my  men. 
The  untimely  death  of  the  truly  brave  Capt.  Henry  A.  Rogers  mars 
the  pleasantries  of  my  recollections  of  the  siege,  and  his  late  command 
will  long  mourn  his  loss. 

The  expenditure  of  ammunition  at  the  siege  has  been  as  follows : 


Battery  D,  First  Illinois  Light  Artillery  . 
Battery  L,  Second  Illinois  Light  Artillery 

Battery,  Third  Ohio 

Battery,  Eighth  Michigan 


Total  expended 49^ 

*****  * # 


Respectfully  submitted. 

C.  J.  STOLBRAND, 
Major , and  Chief  of  Artillery . 
Maj.  R.  R.  Townes,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hounds. 

5, 200 

2,  368 

3,  521 
2, 409 


No.  47. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Mortimer  J).  Leggett,  TJ.  8.  Army , commanding 

First  Brigade. 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  6,  1863. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  First  Brigade,  Third  Division,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps, 
consisting  of  the  Twenty-third  Indiana  Volunteer  Infantry,  Twentieth, 
Thirty-first,  Forty-fifth,  and  One  hundred  and  twenty- fourth  Illinois 
Volunteer  Infantry,  in  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  from  the  4th  of  June  (the 
date  at  which  I was  assigned  to  its  command)  to  the  4th  of  July,  1863, 
inclusive: 

Until  the  25th  of  June,  nothing  occurred  to  call  the  brigade  from  its 
regular  routine  of  duties— picketing,  sharpshooting,  and  working  the 
trenches  being  the  duties  to  which  it  was  assigned,  and  at  which  it 
was  engaged  night  and  day.  By  the  annexed  list  of  casualties,*  you 
will  see  that  I lost  only  an  occasional  man  while  in  the  discharge  of 
these  duties,  though  during  the  whole  time  bivouacked  within  short 
musket  range  of  the  enemy’s  works. 

As  the  trenches  progressed,  I advanced  my  sharpshooters,  thus  pro- 
tecting as  much  as  possible  those  at  work  in  the  trenches.  After  run- 
ning the  main  trenches  up  to  the  enemy’s  works,  1 was  ordered  to  with- 
draw 15  paces  and  open  a sap  to  the  left,  running  nearly  parallel  with 
the  enemy’s  works.  The  saps  and  trenches  were  constructed  under  the 
direction  of  Captain  Hickenlooper,  of  General  McPherson’s  staff. 


294 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

While  in  the  discharge  of  this  duty,  a mine  was  opened  at  the  mouth 
of  the  main  trench,  penetrating  the  enemy’s  fort,  known  as  Fort  Hill, 
and  on  the  25th  of  June  I was  ordered  to  hold  my  command  in  readi- 
ness to  charge  and  take  said  Fort  Hill  as  soon  as  the  mine  should  be 
sprung,  to  hold  the  breach  made  by  the  explosion  at  all  hazards,  and, 
if  practicable,  to  charge  over  and  drive  the  enemy  from  his  works. 

At  3.30  p.  m.  of  said  day  my  command  was  in  readiness,  the  Forty- 
fifth  Illinois  being  in  the  front,  supported  by  the  other  regiments  of  the 
brigade,  and  Lieut.  H.  0.  Foster,  of  the  Twenty-thirA  Indiana,  with  100 
men,  being  placed  in  the  left-hand  sap  before  spoken  of,  with  orders  to 
charge  with  the  Forty-fifth  Illinois,  provided  they  attempted  to  cross 
the  enemy’s  works.  At  4.30  o’clock  the  mine  was  sprung,  and  before 
the  dirt  and  smoke  was  cleared  away  the  Forty  fifth  Illinois  had  filled 
the  gap  made  by  the  explosion  and  were  pouring  deadly  volleys  into 
the  enemy.  As  soon  as  possible,  loop-hole  timber  was  placed  upon  the 
works  for  the  sharpshooters,  but  the  enemy  opened  a piece  of  artillery 
at  very  close  range  on  that  point,  and  the  splintering  timbers  killed  and 
wounded  more  men  than  did  balls,  and  I ordered  the  timbers  to  be  re- 
moved. Hand  grenades  were  then  freely  used  by  the  enemy,  which  made 
sad  havoc  amongst  my  men,  for,  being  in  the  crater  of  the  exploded 
mine,  the  sides  of  which  were  covered  by  the  men,  scarcely  a grenade 
was  thrown  without  doing  damage,  and  in  most  instances  horribly  man- 
gling those  they  happened  to  strike.  The  Forty-fifth  Illinois,  after  hold- 
ing the  position  and  fighting  desperately  until  their  guns  were  too  hot 
for  further  use,  were  relieved  by  the  Twentieth  Illinois.  During  this 
time  hand-grenades  were  freely  used  on  both  sides,  Private  William 
Lazarus,  of  Company  I,  First  U.  S.  Infantry,  being  detailed  to  throw 
them,  who,  after  thr®wing  about  twenty,  was  mortally  wounded,  after 
which  a detail  of  3 men  from  the  same  command  were  detailed  for  that 
duty.  The  Twentieth  Illinois  was  relieved  by  the  Thirty-first  Illi- 
nois, and  they  in  turn  by  the  Fifty-sixth  Illinois,  of  the  Third  Brigade, 
but  their  ammunition  being  bad  they  were  unable  to  hold  the  position, 
and  were  relieved  by  the  Twenty-third  Indiana.  The  Seventeenth 
Iowa,  of  the  Third  Brigade,  then  relieving  the  Twenty-third  Indiana, 
and  the  Thirty-first  Illinois  relieving  them,  held  the  position  until  day- 
light when  the  Forty-fifth  Illinois  relieved  them  and  held  the  position 
until’ 10  a.  m.  of  the  28tli.  The  One  hundred  and  twenty-fourth  Illinois 
then  relieved  the  Forty-fifth  Illinois,  and  held  the  position  until  o p.  m. 
of  the  same  day,  when  1 received  orders  to  withdraw  to  the  left-hand 
gap,  where  I maintained  the  position  until  the  surrender  on  the  4th  of 
July,  when,  by  order  of  Major-General  Logan,  my  brigade,  led  by  the 
Forty-fifth  Illinois,  was  honored  with  the  privilege  of  being  the  first  to 
enter  the  garrison,  and  the  flag  of  the  Forty-fifth  the  first  to  float  over 

the  conquered  city.  „ x . T , , . 

The  troops  under  my  command,  though  for  forty-eight  days  and 
nights  under  a harassing  fire  of  musketry  and  artillery,  aud  constantly 
subject  to  duty  the  most  exhausting  and  fatiguing,  bore  their  part  with 
a courage  and  patience  and  persistent  energy  never  excelled. 

I might  with  justice  and  truth  name  many  instances  of  great  personal 
bravery  upon  the  part  of  officers  and  men,  but  I should  not  know  where 
to  stop  naming  when  all  did  their  duty  so  bravely. 

It  is  proper,  perhaps,  that  I should  especially  name  Lieut.  J.  W. 
Miller,  of  the  Forty-fifth  Illinois,  who,  as  one  of  my  staff,  was  assigned 
to  the  immediate  command  of  the  pickets  and  sharpshooters,  and  in  the 
discharge  of  this  responsible  duty  was,  during  the  whole  siege,  m the 
most  exposed  position,  almost  without  sleep  or  rest,  exhibiting  a per- 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


295 


sonal  courage  and  physical  endurance  seldom  asked  for  or  found  in  any 
officer.  Inclosed  find  a tabular  list  of  the  killed  and  wounded.  I have 
the  satisfaction  of  reporting  none  missing. 

Very  respectfully, 

M.  B.  LEGGETT. 

Maj.  R.  R.  Townes,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Inclosure.] 


Command. 

Killed. 

<o 

'd 

a 

o 

o 

> 

Aggregate. 

20th  Illinois  - --  --  --  --  --  --  --  - 

2 

7 

9 

31st  Illinois  .... 

6 

23 

29 

45th  Illinois  ..... 

7 

61 

68 

124th  - ... ----- 

5 

47 

52 

9.3d  Indiana  

7 

24 

31 

Total  

27 

162 

! 

189 

No.  48. 

Report  of  Col.  Manning  F.  Force , Twentieth  Ohio  Infantry , command- 
ing Second  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Brig.,  Third  Biy.,  Seventeenth  A.  C., 

Vicksburg , Miss.,  August  10,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  Second  Brigade,  then 
under  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  M.  B.  Leggett,  took  position  in  front  of 
Vicksburg  on  May  19. 

In  the  morning  of  the  assault  of  May  22,  the  Twentieth  and  Seventy- 
eighth  Ohio  were  ordered  to  march  in  reserve  to  the  First  Brigade;  the 
Sixty-eighth  Ohio  and  Thirtieth  Illinois  in  reserve  to  the  Third  Brigade. 

In  the  afternoon,  the  Twentieth  and  Sixty-eighth  Ohio  and  Thirtieth 
Illinois  were  ordered  to  march  in  reserve  to  the  First  Brigade,  to  rush 
into  the  works  if  the  assault  should  succeed,  and,  if  it  failed,  to  keep  a 
firm  front,  and  hold  the  enemy  at  bay  until  the  First  Brigade  should  be 
withdrawn. 

The  companies  of  the  Twentieth  Ohio  in  turn  were  told  that  upon 
entering  the  enemy’s  works  a line  of  troops,  or  a second  line  of  works, 
would  be  found  close  at  hand,  which  must  be  promptly  charged.  They 
all  earnestly  promised  to  keep  closed  ranks  and  make  the  charge.  The 
other  regiments,  by  their  conduct,  manifested  the  same  spirit.  We  re- 
mained on  Fort  Hill,  close  to  the  parapets,  partly  in  the  road  leading  by 
the  white  house,  until  dusk,  when  the  force  was  withdrawn. 

At  12  p.  m.  of  May  26,  the  brigade  set  out  upon  an  expedition,  under 
command  of  Major-General  Blair,  to  Mechanicsburg,  45  miles,  to  re- 
connoiter  General  Johnston’s  position  and  force.  Mechanicsburg  was 
reached,  and  a small  force  of  the  enemy  dispersed  on  the  29th. 

Next  day  w^e  began  the  return,  by  way  of  Satartia,  reaching  Snyder’s 
Bluff  the  second  day.  After  a halt  of  a few  days,  the  brigade  marched 
to  the  old  position  in  rear  of  Vicksburg,  June  4. 

General  Leggett  was  that  day  transferred  to  the  command  of  the  First 
Brigade  and  I appointed  to  command  the  Second. 

On  June  22,  at  10  p.  in.,  the  brigade  moved  out  in  a division,  com- 
manded by  General  McArthur,  to  take  part  in  the  force  under  Major- 


296 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  xxxvi. 

General  Sherman.  General  Johnston  was  supposed  at  the  time  to  be 
crossing  Big  Black  with  30,000  men. 

We  bivouacked  on  the  23d  at  Straus7,  on  the  Birdsong  Ferry  road, 
and  moved  on  the  30th  to  Tiffin,  which  General  Sherman  called  a key- 1 
point,  where  earthworks  and  rifle-pits  were  constructed.  At  this  biv- 
ouac the  great  Fourth  shone  with  new  glory  upon  the  tidings  of  the  i 
surrender  of  Vicksburg. 

While  the  brigade  was  not  engaged  in  these  expeditions  it  took  its 
share  and  furnished  full  details  in  the  trenches,  pickets,  sharpshooters, 
and  all  fatigues  along  General  Logan’s  front.  Staff  officers  of  division 
and  corps  headquarters  remarked  that  the  working  parties  from  the 
Second  Brigade  were  conspicuous  for  their  assiduity  and  the  amount 
they  performed. 

During  the  siege  every  order  was  obeyed  with  alacrity,  every  duty j 
required  was  performed  with  prompt  cheerfulness,  and  privations  were 
turned  into  jests.  The  entire  brigade  is  actuated  by  an  earnest  and 
intelligent  desire  to  put  a final  end  to  the  rebellion. 

1 may  add  that  the  day  after  the  brigade  took  position  near  Jackson 
with  General  Sherman,  leaving  the  Seventy-eighth  Ohio  at  Clinton, 
information  was  received  of  a heavy  cavalry  force  having  been  sent  to 
cut  off  our  communications  with  Vicksburg.  The  brigade  was  ordered 
back  to  Clinton.  Part  of  this  cavalry  force  felt  Clinton  and  withdrew, 
after  skirmishing,  in  which  Lieutenant-Colonel  Wiles  handled  the  Sev- 
enty-eighth very  skillfully.  The  other  regiments,  by  a hasty  march, 
reached  Clinton  after  the  close  of  the  skirmish,  but  before  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Wiles  had  recalled  all  his  deployed  companies. 

A statement  of  casualties  is  annexed.* 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  F.  FOECE, 

Colonel  Twentieth  Ohio  Volunteers , Commanding  Brigade. 

Lieut.  Col.  W.  T.  Clark,  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen .,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  49.  ' 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  JE.  G.  Ransom , U.  S.  Army , commanding 
Second  Brigade , Sixth  Division , including  operations  since  April  26. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Brio.,  Sixth  Div.,  Seventeenth  A.  C., 

Near  Vicksburg , Miss.,  May  26,  1863. 
Colonel  : In  compliance  with  Paragraph  III,  Special  Orders,  No.  92, 
dated  Headquarters  Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  near  Vicksburg,  Miss., 
May  24,  1863,  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I moved  my  brigade  from 
Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  with  the  division  of  General  McArthur,  on  the 
26th,  and  encamped  at  Smith’s  plantation,  on  Bayou  Vidal,  on  the  28th 
ultimo,  where  I remained,  employing  my  troops  in  guarding  the  line  of 
communication  and  repairing  the  roads  from  Eichmond  to  Perkins’ 
plantation,  and,  with  the  aid  of  the  Sixth  Division  pioneer  corps, 
under  Captain  Bush,  Seventeenth  Illinois  Infantry,  constructed  a bridge 
across  Bayou  Vidal  and  a road  to  James’  plantation,  thus  shortening 
the  line  of  land  communication  10  miles.  While  lying  at  this  point,  I 
collected  and  forwarded  to  Grand  Gulf  a large  number  of  stragglers  and 
convalescent  soldiers,  and  gathered  up  and  forwarded  an  immense  quan- 
tity of  ammunition,  subsistence  stores,  camp  equipage,  and  intrenching 
tools,  cleaning  up  the  whole  debris  of  the  army  in  advance  of  me. 


Nominal  list,  omitted,  embodied  in  revised  statements. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


297 


On  tbe  lOtli  instant,  having  received  information  that  a new  line  of 
communication  from  Young’s  Point  had  been  opened,  and  that  the  route 
I was  protecting  was  abandoned,  I moved  my  brigade,  under  the  orders 
of  General  McArthur,  encamping  successively  at  Perkins’  plantation, 
Lake  Saint  Joseph,  Grand  Gulf,  Bower  Cieek,  Miss.,  Big  Sandy,  Pow- 
ell’s plantation,  and  reached  Eaymond,  Miss.,  at  8 a.  m.  on  the  1 6th  in- 
stant. I was  delayed  at  this  point  until  9 a.  m.  by  General  Blair’s 
division,  which  had  come  in  by  the  Cayuga  road  and  occupied  the  road 
north  of  me,  in  the  direction  of  Bolton.  At  Eaymond  I could  distinctly 
hear  the  tiring  at  Champion’s  Hill,  and  would  have  pressed  forward  in 
that  direction  as  soon  as  General  Blair  was  out  of  my  way,  but  was  de- 
tained until  near  1 p.  m.  by  the  orders  of  General  McArthur,  and  was 
then,  at  my  earnest  request,  iiermitted  to  move  forward,  on  leaving  the 
Fourteenth  Wisconsin  Infantry  to  strengthen  the  garrison  at  Eaymond, 
and  the  Eleventh  Illinois  Infantry  to  take  care  of  my  train,  reducing 
my  infantry  force  to  three  regiments.  With  my  remaining  force  I 
pressed  forward  in  the  direction  of  the  heaviest  firing,  and  arrived  at 
the  battle-field  just  at  the  close  of  the  desperate  fighting  which  had 
already  given  us  the  victory.  I reported  to  General  McPherson,  and 
moved,  under  his  orders,  with  the  Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  in  the  pur- 
suit of  the  retreating  enemy. 

At  noon  on  the  17th,  I reached  the  Big  Black  Eiver,  and  at  once 
commenced  the  construction  of  a floating  bridge,  which  I completed 
and  commenced  crossing  my  command  upon  at  8 o’clock  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  18th,  and  encamped  the  same  night  three-fourths  of  a mile 
from  the  earthworks  of  the  enemy  in  the  rear  of  Vicksburg. 

On  the  morhiug  of  the  19th,  I advanced  a strong  line  of  skirmishers, 
which  at  once  engaged  the  enemy’s  skirmishers,  and  drove  them  back 
to  their  works.  I then  cautiously  advanced  my  line,  under  cover  of  the 
ravines,  to  the  crest  of  a hill  within  500  yards  of  the  enemy’s  works, 
without  loss. 

At  2 p.  m.,  a general  assault  by  the  Seventeenth  Army  Corps  having 
been  ordered,  I advanced  my  brigade  in  two  lines  as  rapidly  as  possible 
toward  the  enemy’s  works,  under  a terrific  fire  of  musketry  in  my  front 
and  an  enfilading  artillery  fire  on  my  left  flank.  After  advancing  200 
yards,  with  severe  loss,  to  the  first  line,  I found  the  ravines  in  my  front, 
which  I had  not  had  time  to  reconnoiter,  impassable  for  troops,  and  the 
expected  support  on  my  flanks  failing  to  come  up,  I threw  my  troops 
under  cover  of  the  ravine  in  their  vicinity.  The  Ninety-fifth  Illinois, 
Colonel  Humphrey  commanding,  reached  a ridge  within  100  yards  of 
the  enemy’s  works,  and,  though  exposed  to  an  enfilading  fire  of  artillery, 
maintained  that  position  until  night,  when  I withdrew  them  to  a safer 
position. 

Early  in  the  action  Colonel  Humphrey  was  severely  wounded  in  the 
foot,  but  would  not  leave  the  field.  His  loss  was  much  heavier  than 
that  of  any  other  regiment  of  my  command.  I have  maintained  my 
command,  with  some  slight  changes,  on  the  ground  gained  on  that  day 
up  to  the  present,  constructing  rifle-pits  and  constantly  advancing  my 
sharpshooters  to  positions  where  they  can  harass  the  enemy. 

On  the  22d  instant,  in  compliance  with  the  order  for  a simultaneous 
assault  at  10  a.  in.,  I moved  my  command,  under  cover  of  my  sharp- 
shooters, through  a network  of  ravines  filled  with  fallen  timber  and 
canebrakes  to  a point  within  60  yards  of  the  enemy’s  works,  massing 
my  troops  as  well  as  the  nature  of  the  ground  would  admit.  Col. 
Giles  A.  Smith’s  brigade,  of  General  Sherman’s  corps,  took  position  at 
the  same  time  on  my  right,  and  the  two  brigades  moved  together  to  the 


298 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


charge.  The  enemy  had  in  the  mean  time  massed  troops  behind  their 
works  in  our  front,  and  poured  into  my  ranks  one  continuous  blaze  of 
musketry,  while  the  artillery  on  my  left  threw  enfilading  shot  and  shell 
into  my  columns  with  deadly  effect.  Almost  at  the  first  fire  two  of 
my  leading  colonels  fell,  Colonel  Kevins,  of  the  Eleventh  Illinois, 
killed,  and  Colonel  Humphrey,  of  the  Ninety-fifth  Illinois,  stunned  by 
the  concussion  of  a shell. 

Fearing  that  the  loss  of  their  leaders  might  prove  disastrous, 
I redoubled  my  efforts  to  press  my  column  forward,  ably  assisted 
by  Captain  Dickey  and  the  other  officers  of  my  staff.  They  moved 
onward,  and  planted  four  stand  of  colors  near  the  base  of  the  earth- 
works. 

The  Fourteenth  Wisconsin  Infantry  moved  with  the  greatest  rapidity, 
approached  nearest  the  works,  planted  the  first  flag  near  them,  and  held 
the  position  with  a determination  which  entitles  this  little  band  and  its 
gallant  commander  to  a most  prominent  notice  in  the  recorded  history 
of  this  contest.  The  contest  there  was  desperate  for  perhaps  twenty 
minutes,  when,  finding  that  I was  not  sufficiently  supported  to  enter 
the  works  under  the  raking  fire  of  artillery  and  in  the  face  of  a 
superior  force  of  the  enemy,  massed  behind  their  works  in  my  front,  I 
placed  the  Seventeenth  Wisconsin  Infantry  in  position  to  cover  my 
movements,  and  removed  my  command  in  perfect  order  to  the  cover  of 
the  ravine  about  40  yards  to  the  rear,  except  six  companies  of  the 
Fourteenth  Wisconsin  Infantry,  which  occupied  a position  of  compara- 
tive safety  directly  under  the  rebel  works,  and  from  which  it  was  unsafe 
to  move,  except  under  cover  of  the  night. 

Under  the  direction  of  General  McPherson,  leaving  a*  strong  picket 
on  the  ground,  I withdrew  my  command  to  the  position  I now  occupy, 
bringing  most  of  my  dead  and  all  of  my  wounded  from  the  field  under 
cover  of  the  night. 

On  the  19th  instant,  two  companies  of  the  Eleventh  Illinois  Infantry, 
one  company  of  the  Ninety-fifth  Illinois,  and  one  company  of  the  Seven- 
teenth Wisconsin,  under  the  command  of  Captain  McKee,  of  the  Eleventh 
Illinois  Infantry,  were  detached  as  skirmishers  and  sharpshooters,  and, 
as  such,  occupied  the  heights  in  front  of  the  large  white  house  to  my 
left,  commanding  the  large  fort  in  front  of  General  Logan’s  division, 
until  the  morning  of  the  22d  instant,  and  successfully  kept  the  guns  of 
that  formidable  work  almost  silent  during  that  time.  These  companies 
rejoined  their  regiments  just  in  time  to  participate  in  the  charge  of  the 
22d  instant. 

I desire  to  mention  in  terms  of  high  commendation  the  soldierly  con- 
duct of  the  troops  of  my  command.  Straggling  and  skulking  were 
almost  unknown.  Both  officers  and  men  in  every  regiment  of  my  com- 
mand moved  as  coolly  and  obeyed  orders  with  the  same  promptness 
and  alacrity  under  fire  as  in  ordinary  drill ; and  in  this  connection  I 
wish  especially  to  mention  Colonel  Kevins,  Eleventh  Illinois ; Capt.  L. 
D.  Waddell,  Eleventh  Illinois  Infantry ; Colonel  Humphrey,  Ninety- 
fifth  Illinois ; Lieutenant-Colonel  Wright,  Major  Stockton,  and  Adju- 
tant Whittle,  Seventy-second  Illinois;  Colonel  Ward  and  Captain 
Smith,  Fourteenth  Wisconsin  ; Lieutenant-Colonel  McMahon  and  Cap- 
tain McCauley,  Seventeenth  Wisconsin ; Major  Worden,  Fourteenth 
Wisconsin,  acting  aide,  who,  on  every  occasion,  regardless  of  personal 
danger,  pre-eminently  distinguished  themselves  and  rendered  much 
valuable  service. 

Captain  [Cyrus  E.]  Dickey,  Lieutenant  [Guyon  I.]  Davis,  and  Lieu- 
tenant [George  S.]  Doane,  aides,  performed  their  whole  duty. 


Chap.  XXXVI. J 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


299 


I herewith  submit  a list  of  the  casualties  in  my  command  for  the 
time  covered  by  this  report. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  E.  G.  RANSOM, 

Brigadier- General  of  Vols .,  Comdg.  Second  Brig.,  Sixth  Biv. 

Lieut.  Ool.  W.  T.  Clark, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


[Inclosure.] 


Summary  of  Casualties  in  the  Second  Brigade , Sixth  Division , Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  at 
the  siege  of  Vicksburg , up  to  the  evening  of  May  23,  1863. 


Command. 

Killed. 

Severely 

wounded. 

Slightly 

wounded. 

Missing. 

Aggregate. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

1 Enlisted  men. 

I Officers. 

j Enlisted  men. 

11th.  Illinois  - - 

1 

2 

28 

2 

11 

9 

53 

14th  W isc^n sin  - ------ 

1 

14 

2 

41 

3 

39 

4 

104 

17th  W i scon  sin  

5 

1 

14 

5 

28 

5 

58 

72d  Illinois  * 

2 

20 

3 

24 

2 

44 

5 

100 

95th  Illinois  --  - 

2 

23 

4 

45 

4 

75 

8 

161 

Total 

6 

64 

10 

152 

16 

197 



31 

476 

T.  E.  Gr.  RANSOM, 

Brigadier-General  of  Volunteers,  Comdg.  Second  Brig.,  Sixth  Biv.,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


Cyrus  E.  Dickey, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


No.  50. 

Report  of  Col.  Thomas  W.  Humphrey,  Ninety -fifth  Illinois  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Ninety-fifth  Regt.  Illinois  Yol.  Infty., 

Second  Brig.,  Sixth  Div.,  Seventeenth  A.  C., 

Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Natchez,  Miss.,  August  14*,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  at  11  a.  m.,  May  19,  when  about 
700  yards  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  works  at  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  I was 
shown  by  Brigadier-General  Ransom  a written  order  from  Major-Gen- 
eral McPherson,  ordering  a simultaneous  advance  upon  the  enemy  at 
2 p.  m.  I was  at  the  same  time  further  ordered  by  General  Ransom 
to  secure  a position  previous  to  that  hour  (2  p.  m.)  as  near  to  the  enemy 
as  possible  without  unnecessarily  exposing  my  command.  Accord- 
ingly, after  reconnoitering  as  much  as  time  and  circumstances  would 
permit,  I gained  without  loss  a position  in  rear  of  the  second  ridge  in 
front  of  the  enemy’s  works  (on  the  grounds  afterward  occupied  by  the 
Eleventh  Illinois  during  the  siege).  The  Seventeenth  Wisconsin,  Lieu- 
tenant Colonel  McMahon,  on  my  right,  started  on  the  charge  before  the 
Fourteenth  Wisconsin,  Eleventh  and  Seventy-second  Illinois  came  in 
sight. 

Although,  according  to  my  time,  the  appointed  hour  had  not  arrived 
by  seventeen  minutes,  yet  the  firing  was  so  continuous  as  to  render 


300 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

the  signal  of  the  volleys  uncertain,  and  as  the  Seventeenth  Wiscon- 
sin had  started  on  what  Lieutenant-Colonel  McMahon  deemed  correct 
time,  I deemed  it  my  duty  to  support  him,  and  ordering  my  command 
forward,  we  charged  across  the  first  ravine,  over  an  almost  impassable 
abatis  oh  felled  timber,  exposed  to  a direct  and  concentrated  fire  of  mus- 
ketry and  a murderous  enfilading  fire  from  the  enemy’s  batteries  of  the 
redan  on  our  right  front,  and  the  heavy  works  on  the  Jackson  road 
(erroneously  called  Fort  Hill)  on  our  left.  Being  unsupported,  I deemed 
it  rashness  to  proceed  farther,  but  held  my  position  with  colors  planted 
within  100  yards  of  the  enemy’s  lines. 

Informing  the  general  of  my  position,  I received  the  following-  dis- 
patch : & 

Hdqrs.  Second  Brigade,  Sixth  Division,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps, 

Colonel  Humphrey:  ^ a ^ ^ 

Colonel  : You  have  done  well,  nobly.  I desire  that  you  bold  your  position.  Do 
not  expose  your  men  or  waste  ammunition.  I occupy  the  rear  of'tbe  ridge  back  of 
you.  Will  move  forward  as  soon  as  we  can  be  supported  on  tbe  right  and  left.  I 
expect  to  bear  from  General  McPherson. 

T.  E.  G.  RANSOM, 

Brigadier-General. 

I accordingly  held  my  position  until  ordered  to  fall  back,  which  I did 
in  Rood  order  at  4 a.  m.,  May  20. 

My  loss  was,  killed,  7 ; wounded,  54.  Total  casualties,  61 — 15  per 
cent,  of  all  engaged. 

May  22,  in  accordance  with  orders  from  Brigadier-General  Bansom, 
1 formed  my  command  at  9 a.  m.,  moving  by  the  right  flank,  in  com- 
pany with  the  balance  of  the  brigade,  through  a network  of  ravines 
until  within  100  yards  of  the  enemy’s  works,  where,  under  the  partial 
C°m?5  °*  a r*c^e’  ^ formed  column  by  divisions  closed  in  mass. 

This  position  was  obtained  without  loss  at  11  a.  m.  The  Eleventh 
Illinois  was  similarly  formed  on  my  left,  the  Fourteenth  Wisconsin  on 
my  right,  and  the  Seventy-second  Illinois  still  farther  to  the  right,  with 
the  Seventeenth  Wisconsin  held  in  reserve.  The  brigade  remained  in 
nearly  this  position,  awaiting  support  on  the  right  and  left,  until  2.15 
p.  m.  Meantime  the  enemy  had  massed  under  cover  of  their  breast- 
works in  our  front,  and  within  short  convergent  range  of  a force  supe- 
rior to  the  assaulting  column. 

At  2.15  p.  m.  the  order  was  given,  u Second  Brigade,  forward.”  My 
command  simultaneously  advanced  to  the  crest  of  the  ridge,  when  they 
encountered  the  most  sweeping  and  destructive  fire  to  which  troops  wTere 
ever  exposed.  In  vain  did  those  brave  men  rally  to  the  charge:  to 
advance  was  but  to  meet  certain  death.  All  who  made  the  effort,  save 
two,  were  humbled  to  the  earth.  When  one  bullet  was  not  sufficient, 
two,  three,  four,  and  even  five  did  the  work,  until,  out  of  367  officers 
and  men  in  the  column,  upward  of  100  men  were  rendered  hors  de 
combat. 

Colonel  Humphrey  (supposed  to  be  killed)  was  so  far  in  advance  of 
his  regiment  as  to  be  unable  to  return  or  render  his  command  any  as- 
sistance. Maj.  William  Avery  was  severely  wounded;  Captains  Corn- 
well,  Company  K,  and  Manzer,  Company  C,  were  killed  ; Captain  Cook, 
Company  D,  mortally  wounded,  since  died. 

June  12.— Lieutenant  Sponable,  Company  A;  Lieutenant  Pierce,  Com- 
pany I,  and  Lieutenant  Smith,  Company  C,  wounded ; being  36  per  cent, 
of  the  commissioned  officers  and  28  per  cent,  of  the  enlisted  men  dis- 
abled. I cannot  speak  too  highly  in  commendation  of  the  conduct  of 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


301 


the  officers  and  men  of  my  command  during  those  trying  scenes;  not  a 
single  instance  of  fear  or  cowardice  was  manifested ; prompt  and  de- 
liberate obedience  to  orders  was  the  characteristic  of  the  day. 

All  of  which  is  most  respectfully  submitted. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

T.  W.  HUMPHBEY, 
Colonel , Commanding  Regiment. 


No.  51. 

Report  of  Col.  William  Hall , Eleventh  Iowa  Infantry,  commanding 

Third  Brigade. 

Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  Sixth  Division, 

Vicksburg , Miss.,  August  — , 1863. 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  159,  August  4,  1863, 
from  Headquarters  Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  1 have  the  honor  to  sub- 
mit the  following  report  of  the  operations  of  the  Third  Brigade,  Sixth 
Division,  from  the  commencement  of  the  siege  of  Vicksburg  to  the  date 
of  its  fall,  July  4 : 

The  Third  Brigade,  composed  of  the  Eleventh,  Thirteenth,  Fifteenth, 
and  Sixteenth  Iowa  Volunteers,  and  being  then  as  now  under  my  com- 
mand, was  at  the  time  of  the  investment  of  Vicksburg  stationed  at  Grand 
Gulf  as  the  temporary  garrison  of  that  post,  where  it  performed  much 
efficient  service  in  forwarding  supplies  to  the  army  then  investing  Vicks- 
burg. While  in  command  of  that  post  I also  caused  an  important  bridge 
over  the  Big  Black  Biver  to  be  destroyed,  in  order  to  prevent  any  sud- 
den incursion  of  the  enemy  from  that  point.  This  duty  was  executed 
by  the  Eleventh  Iowa  Volunteers,  under  command  of  Lieutenant-Colo- 
nel Abercrombie,  assisted  by  the  gunboat  Louisville. 

My  command,  previous  to  its  forming  the  temporary  garrison  of  Grand 
Gulf,  had  been  engaged  in  guarding  a portion  of  the  road  from  Milliken’s 
Bend  to  Hard  Times  Landing. 

In  compliance  with  orders  received  from  Brigadier- General  McArthur, 
commanding  the  Sixth  Division,  at  10  p.  m.  of  May  19, 1 embarked  my 
command  on  transports  at  midnight  of  the  same  day  and  proceeded  at 
once  up  the  river. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  20th,  I disembarked  at  a landing  on  the  Louis- 
iana shore,  2 miles  below  Vicksburg,  and  marched  to  Young’s  Point,  4 
miles  distant,  where  the  command  was  immediately  embarked  on  two 
transports. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  21st,  I proceeded  to  Haynes’  Bluff.  Be- 
maining  there  a few  hours,  in  obedience  to  orders  from  General  Mc- 
Arthur, I returned  to  Young’s  Point.  Disembarking  here,  and  being 
hastily  supplied  with  two  days’  rations,  I returned  to  the  landing  below 
Vicksburg  previously  mentioned.  From  thence  I proceeded  by  trans- 
ports to  Warrenton  ; disembarked ; marched  4 miles  on  the  road  toward 
Vicksburg,  and  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

Early  on  tfee  22d,  I moved  forward,  and  at  about  9 a.  m.  discovered 
the  enemy’s  pickets  on  the  extreme  right  of  their  defenses.  Five  com- 
panies of  the  Sixteenth  Iowa  Volunteers,  under  the  command  of  Cap- 
tain Smith,  were  detached  to  drive  them  in,  which  was  successfully  ac- 
complished, the  companies  remaining  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  batteries 


302 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXYI. 


and  being  eugaged  with  their  skirmishers  during  the  entire  day.  At  the 
same  time  I sent  the  remaining  five  companies  of  the  Sixteenth,  uuder 
the  command  of  Major  Purcell,  to  the  right,  to  cover  the  entire  front 
of  my  advance,  and  proceeded  along  the  direct  road  from  Warrenton 
to  Vicksburg,  which  runs  nearly  parallel  with  the  rebel  line  of  defenses. 

About  11  a.  m.  I took  up  my  position  within  range  of  four  rebel  bat- 
teries on  the  right  of  the  enemy’s  works.  Here  I remained  during  the 
day  under  fire  from  the  batteries,  and  with  companies  from  the  Eleventh, 
Thirteenth,  and  Sixteenth  Iowa  Volunteers  engaged  constantly  along 
the  lines  with  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters.  There  I succeeded  in  driving 
them  to  the  protection  of  their  works,  my  skirmishers  getting  within  40 
yards  of  the  batteries. 

The  evening  of  the  same  day,  in  consequence  of  orders  received,  I 
abandoned  the  position,  marched  4 miles  toward  the  center  of  our  lines, 
and  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

Early  on  the  23d,  moved  nearer  to  the  center,  and  at  noon  halted  near 
the  headquarters  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day  returned  to  the  position  on  the  left 
which  I had  occupied  on  the  22d.  Here  I performed  picket  duty  until 
the  26th,  in  a position  much  exposed  to  the  fire  of  both  the  enemy’s 
batteries  and  sharpshooters. 

On  the  2Gth,  being  relieved  by  troops  under  the  command  of  Briga- 
dier-General Lauman,  I again  moved  toward  the  center,  and  the  same 
evening  bivouacked  near  the  headquarters  of  the  Seventeenth  Army 
Corps. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  27th,  the  brigade  being  assigned  a posi- 
tion in  the  Black  River  Expeditionary  Corps,  under  command  of  Maj. 
Gen.  F.  P.  Blair,  the  line  of  march  was  taken  up,  and  I joined  the  ex- 
pedition at  Benton’s  Cross-Roads.  On  the  morning  of  the  29th,  arriv- 
ing at  Mechanicsburg  (my  brigade  being  in  advance),  I found  a detach- 
ment of  the  Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry,  which  had  just  been  engaged  by 
the  enemy  and  driven  into  town.  Passing  through  the  town,  I placed 
three  regiments  (the  Eleventh,  Thirteenth,  and  Fifteenth  Iowa)  in  line 
of  battle  (the  Sixteenth  Iowa  being  held  in  reserve),  and,  with  skir- 
mishers thrown  out  on  the  front  and  flanks,  advanced  up  the  hill  held 
by  the  enemy,  who,  after  a few  shots,  fell  back.  The  entire  brigade 
pursued  them  for  2 miles  beyond  Mechanicsburg,  the  enemy  making  re- 
peated stands,  but  always  giving  way  as  soon  as  a regiment  was  thrown 
into  line  of  battle  to  attack  them.  Having  followed  them  for  2 miles, 
they  made  a more  decided  stand  than  they  had  before  done,  and  brought 
up  a battery  to  their  assistance.  A section  of  artillery  (Company  C, 
First  Missouri  Light  Artillery)  which  accompanied  my  command  at 
once  opened  on  them  and  caused  them  to  retreat  very  rapidly.  Having 
no  cavalry,  we  pursued  them  no  farther,  but  bivouacked  on  the  field 
that  night. 

At  7 a.  m.  on  the  30th,  the  march  back  to  the  main  army  was  com- 
menced, and,  taking  the  Yazoo  Valley  road,  I reached  Snyder’s  Bluff 
late  in  the  evening  of  the  31st,  after  an  extremely  fatiguing  and  severe 
march. 

On  June  4,  I moved  to  a point  near  the  headquarters  of  the  Seven- 
teenth Army  Corps,  and  there,  on  June  G,  Col.  Alexander  Chambers, 
Sixteenth  Iowa  Volunteers  (having  returned  to  the  command  from 
leave  of  absence),  assumed  command  of  the  brigade.  The  command 
being  encamped  in  an  inconvenient  locality,  was,  on  the  11th,  moved 
back  about  a mile,  where  it  remained  until  the  23d,  sending  heavy  details 
of  both  fatigue  men  and  sharpshooters  into  the  trenches  both  night  and 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  303 

day,  where,  it  is  believed,  they  did  much  effective  service.  Nine  days 
of  this  time  the  Eleventh  Iowa  Volunteers  was  stationed  4 miles  in  the 
rear  of  the  brigade,  doing  picket  duty  on  the  Bridgeport  and  adjacent 
roads. 

On  June  20  (the  day  of  the  general  cannonading),  three  regiments  of 
the  brigade  (the  Thirteenth,  Fifteenth,  and  Sixteenth)  were  placed  on 
the  left  of  Brigadier-General  Ransom’s  brigade,  in  order  to  co-operate 
in  any  movement  that  might  be  required.  No  movement  of  the  in- 
fantry taking  place,  however,  the  command  returned  to  camp  in  the 
evening. 

On  the  23d,  the  brigade  moved  12  miles  to  the  rear,  near  Strauss’  plan- 
tation, on  the  road  to  Jackson,  one  regiment  (the  Thirteenth  Iowa)  being 
sent  4 miles  to  the  front,  to  picket  the  roads  leading  to  Messinger’s  and 
Birdsong  Fords. 

On  the  27th,  the  remainder  of  the  command  tnoved  to  Fox’s  planta- 
tion, 4 miles  distant  from  Messinger’s  Ford,  where  the  brigade  was  em- 
ployed in  doing  heavy  picket  duty  on  four  roads  leading  across  the  Big 
Black  River. 

Remained  there  until  the  evening  of  July  3 ; then  moved  to  Messin- 
ger’s Ford,  one  regiment  (the  Sixteenth  Iowa  Volunteers)  being  posted 
on  the  immediate  bank  of  the  river,  and  the  other  three  on  a hill  about 
half  a mile  back,  in  support  of  the  Tenth  Ohio  Battery,  then  attached 
to  the  command. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  July  4,  a detachment,  consisting  of  Company 
G,  Eleventh  Illinois  Cavalry  (General  McArthur’s  body  guard),  and 
four  companies  of  the  Sixteenth  Iowa  Volunteers,  crossed  Big  Black 
River  for  the  purpose  of  clearing  the  road  to  Cowan’s  house,  a point 
some  2 miles  from  the  river.  Half  a mile  from  the  crossing  they  en- 
countered the  enemy’s  skirmishers,  whom  they  drove  before  them  in  a 
slight  skirmish  until  they  reached  the  point  designated.  The  enemy 
now  retired  rapidly,  and  the  detachment  having  orders  to  proceed  no 
farther,  placed  pickets  on  the  two  roads  leading  from  Cowan’s,  and, 
with  the  main  body  near  the  house,  held  the  position  until  about  noon, 
when  the  enemy  appeared  in  force  with  artillery,  cavalry,  and  infantry, 
and  opening  fire  on  the  detachment,  compelled  them  to  fall  back  to  the 
river,  and,  finally,  in  the  afternoon  to  recross  it.  The  Tenth  )hio  Bat- 
tery opened  on  the  enemy  as  soon  as  the  detachment  fell  back,  and,  it 
is  thought,  did  considerable  execution.  On  the  evening  of  the  same 
day  we  received  the  news  of  the  surrender  of  Vicksburg,  and  at  the 
same  time  Brigadier-General  Lauman  relieved  the  brigade  with  his  own 
troops. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  bearing  testimony  to  the  alacrity, 
cheerfulness,  and  gallant  bearing  which  has  been  shown  by  the  officers 
and  men  of  the  command  through  all  the  various  and  trying  scenes  of 
the  late  campaign.  In  long  marches,  under  the  heat  of  a burning 
Southern  sun,  in  skirmishes  with  the  enemy  at  all  points  of  the  line  of 
investment,  and  with  Johnston’s  troops  at  the  rear,  in  the  rifle-pits  in 
front  of  Vicksburg,  either  with  rifle  in  hand  as  sharpshooters  or  with 
spade  throwing  up  additional  works,  but  one  feeling  appeared  to  animate 
them,  and  that  was  the  desire  to  do  their  whole  duty. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  HALL, 

Colonel  Eleventh  Iowa  Volunteers , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  W.  T.  Clark, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


304  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chai*.  XXXVI. 

No.  52. 

Report  of  Maj.  Charles  Foster , Eleventh  Iowa  Infantry. 

Gamp  Eleventh  Iowa  Infantry, 

Near  Fox’s  Plantation , June  29,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  the  following  report  of 
the  action  of  my  command  this  day  at  Messinger’s  Ferry : 

In  accordance  with  your  orders  and  instructions,  received  of  Col.  Alex- 
ander Chambers,  I marched  at  10  a.  m.  with  four  companies  Eleventh 
Iowa  Infantry,  viz,  Companies  F,  G,  H,  and  I ; a small  squad  of  the 
Eleventh  Illinois  Cavalry  (General  McArthur’s  body  guard  in  part), 
and  two  pieces  of  the  Tenth  Ohio  Battery,  under  Lieutenant  Newcomb, 
to  Big  Black  River,  near  the  old  Messinger’s  Ferry.  On  our  arrival  we 
found  the  enemy’s  cavalry  pickets  posted  behind  an  old  corn-crib  near 
the  crossing  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  river,  and  also  in  the  timber 
beyond  and  to  the  left  of  the  corn-crib,  in  numbers  nearly  equal  to  our 
own  force.  Our  cavalry  and  Company  F,  of  the  infantry,  were  deployed 
as  skirmishers  at  once  near  the  bank  of  the  river,  and  our  artillery 
planted  on  the  bill,  about  one-third  of  a mile  to  the  rear  of  the  infantry, 
and  after  some  skirmishing,  with  the  aid  of  well-directed  shots  from  the 
artillery,  we  drove  the  enemy  back  from  their  first  position,  and  I saw 
nothing  of  them  after  4 p.  m.  At  5 p.  m.  I sent  back  all  our  force, 
save  two  companies  of  infantry,  to  induce  the  enemy  to  cross  over  to 
us  if  possible,  having  first  concealed  the  two  companies,  but  in  vain. 
At  6 p.  m.  we  returned  to  camp  without  any  loss.  The  officers  and  men 
of  my  command  all  behaved  well. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHARLES  FOSTER, 

Major , Commanding. 

Lieut.  O.  D.  Kinsman, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Third  Brig.,  Sixth  Div.,  Seventeenth  A.  C. 


No.  53. 

Report  of  Maj.  William  A.  Walher,  Thirteenth  Iowa  Infantry. 

Camp  Thirteenth  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry, 

Fox’s  Plamation,  Miss.,  July  1,  1863. 

Sir  : As  commander  of  the  detachment  sent  out  by  order  of  Colonel 
Chambers  to  Messinger’s  Ferry,  at  Big  Black  River,  on  the  morning  of 
June  30,  I beg  leave  to  make  the  following  report,  &c. : 

The  detachment  consisted  of  four  companies  of  the  Thirteenth  Iowa, 
viz,  A,  B,  F,  and  H,  and  a section  of  the  Tenth  Ohio  Battery,  under  com- 
mand of  Lieutenant  Zane,  and  proceeded  as  follows:  An  advance  guard 
of  20  men  from  Company  A,  under  Lieuteuant  Platner,  and  a rear  guard 
of  15  men  from  the  same  company,  under  command  of  Lieutenant  Kepler. 

We  left  camp  at  1 a.  m.  After  passing  our  advance  pickets,  we 
moved  very  cautiously,  expecting  to  find  the  enemy  at  any  moment,  and 
arrived  on  the  hill  about  150  yards  beyond  the  second  creek  we  passed. 
I ordered  the  advance  guard  to  deploy  as  skirmishers  to  the  left  of  the 
road,  with  their  right  resting  on  the  same,  and  one  platoon  of  Company 
F to  the  right,  with  their  lett  on  the  road  and  connecting  with  skir- 
mishers on  the  left,  the  battery  remaining  at  this  point  to  prevent  the 


Chap.  XXX YL] 


305 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


rebels  from  hearing  us,  bad  there  been  any.  The  rear  guard  also  re- 
mained with  the  artillery.  The  skirmishers  moved  forward  slowly,  with 
the  main  force  following  at  a proper  distance,  until  we  arrived  on  the 
bluff  overlooking  the  river,  and  about  500  yards  from  it,  and  halted 
while  the  skirmishers  moved  on,  who,  not  seeing  anything  of  the  enemy 
took  up  their  position  on  the  banks  of  the  river.  I sent  Company  II  to 
the  road  on  our  left  as  pickets,  to  prevent  surprise  or  a flank  movement 
of  the  rebels  from  the  direction  of  Jones’  Ford.  The  battery  was  now 
brought  forward  and  planted  on  the  bluff  commanding  the  river  for  a 
mile  or  more  above  and  below  the  ford.  All  things  being  now  arranged 
and  it  just  getting  daylight,  we  proceeded,  in  accordance  with  orders  to 
throw  up  blind  earthworks,  consisting  of  a fort  of  a semicircular  form 
with  three  embrasures,  with  rifle-pits  extending  from  each  flank  about 
4 or  5 rods  each. 

Could  see  nothing  of  the  enemy  until  about  noon,  when  a small  squad 
made  their  appearance  on  the  hill  beyond  the  river,  the  distance  of  14 
miles  from  us,  and  then  disappeared,  not  making  any  demonstration 
whatever  toward  us.  We  saw  nothing  more  of  them  until  about  sun- 
down, when  we  could  see  two  or  three  watching  us  from  an  old  cabin 
beyond  the  river.  There  was  no  firing  done  all  day,  not  being  in  mus- 
ket range,  and  I did  not  deem  it  expedient  to  use  the  artillery  on  so 
small  a squad.  We  remained  until  after  dark,  and  then  withdrew 
without  accident. 

Very  respectfully, 


. _ . m7 . WM.  A.  WALKER, 

Major  Thirteenth  Iowa  Infantry , Commanding  Detachment . 

Lieut.  O.  D.  Kinsman, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Ko.  54. 


Reports  of  Col.  William  W.  Bellmap , Fifteenth  Iowa  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Fifteenth  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry 

Camp  near  Fox’s  Plantation , June  28,  1863. 
Sir:  In  obedience  to  orders  received  from  Col.  Alexander  Chambers, 

II,  h I Own.  Tnfqnfru  tv  * i r , , / 


at  that  point,  and  also  to  remove  within  our  lines  Mrs.  Messinger  and 
family,  together  with  all  other  persons  upon  the  place  not  too  ill  to  be 
moved.  On  arriving  at  Messinger’s,  Brigadier-General  McArthur,  who, 
with  Colonel  Chambers,  was  with  the  expedition,  sent  a portion  of  his 
escort  company  under  Lieutenant  Tripp,  across  the  river  to  examine 
the  country  and  disperse  a squad  of  rebel  cavalry  which  was  observed 

£812e’  *hTecrossiu8'  beh|g  protected  by  two  companies  of 
the  regiment  (D,  First  Lieutenant  Buchanan,  and  E,  Captain  Rogers! 
Company  K,  Captain  Hedrick,  being  at  the  same  time  sent  about  one  half 
’ aU(' po'opaoy  0,  Captain  Miller,  about  the  same  distance  down 
detail  ,r  The  f<'"i  rebe  s’50?'e  15  or  20>  as  far  a®  could  be  seen,  imme- 
f £dr  Pfaredi’ ^ D<  0,1  the  returu  of  Lieutenant  Tripp,  Company 

CaiUawf  w ^ B/c  -7af  ordered  t0  obstruct  the  ford,  Company  I, 

Captain  Reid,  being  detailed  to  protect  the  working  party.  The  bot- 

20  R R — VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


306 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


tom  of  the  river  being  extremely  soft,  and  there  being  no  trees  of  any 
size  for  some  distance  to  be  used  for  the  purpose,  the  obstruction  at  that 
point  was  deemed  impracticable,  especially  as  it  was  found  that  for  a 
long  distance  the  river  could  be  crossed  with  little  difficulty,  and  the 
working  party  was  withdrawn. 

Mrs.  Messinger  and  family,  together  with  four  other  families  of  white 
persons  on  the  place,  numbering  in  all  14  persons,  and  the  colored  peo- 
ple, were  removed  and  brought  within  our  lines,  the  rear  guard,  under 
Captain  Edwards,  leaving  there  only  3 black  persons,  who  were  unable 
to  travel;  four  wagon  loads  of  property  being  also  brought. 

On  the  departure  of  the  regiment  for  camp,  which  we  reached  about 
8 p.  m.,  a small  squad  of  rebels  again  made  their  appearance  on  the 
opposite  side. 

In  addition  to  this  report,  I inclose  herewith,  for  the  information  of 
the  brigade  commander,  a slip  from  the  Vicksburg  Sun,  of  May  4, 1861, 
which  paper  was  found  at  the  residence  of  Colonel  Messinger,  with  the 
extract  inclosed  marked. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  W.  BELKNAP, 

Colonel  Fifteenth  Iowa , Commanding  Expedition. 

Lieut.  O.  D.  Kinsman, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Third  Brig.,  Sixth  Div .,  Seventeenth  A.  C. 

[Inciosnre. — Extract.  ] 

Liberal  Patriotism. — Col.  George  Messinger,  a citizen  of  Warren 
County,  has  contributed  $5,000  to  uniform  and  equip  our  volunteer  com- 
panies, and  says  that  his  whole  estate,  worth  $1,000,000,  if  necessary, 
will  be  expended  to  maintain  Southern  rights,  honor,  and  independence. 
This  is  what  we  call  showing  a man’s  “faith  by  his  works.”  There  are 
a number  of  others  in  our  midst  who  will  do  likewise,  among  whom  we 
may  mention  the  name  of  another  millionaire,  who  resides  within  a few 
miles  of  our  city,  Stephen  Barefleld.  With  such  patriots  as  Captain 
Willis,  Colonel  Messinger,  and  Stephen  Barefield,  we  have  no  fears  of 
success  in  all  needful  financial  aid  lor  the  South. 

CITIZEN. 


Camp  near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  August  7,  1863. 

Sir  : In  accordance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  7,  Headquarters  Third 
Brigade,  I submit  the  following  report  as  to  the  operations  of  the  Fif- 
teenth Kegiment  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry  from  the  commencement  of 
the  siege  of  Vicksburg  to  July  4 : 

On  April  26,  the  regiment  moved  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  Holmes’ 
plantation,  Louisiana,  the  march  being  an  exceedingly  disagreeable  one. 

On  May  13,  we  arrived  at  Hard  Times  Landing;  thence  proceeded 
across  the  river  and  encamped  at  Grand  Gulf,  remaining  there  until  the 
night  of  May  19,  when  we  were  ordered  to  proceed  immediately  to 
Young’s  Point,  which  we  reached  at  about  12  m.  May  20. 

Marching  across  the  point,  the  regiment  embarked  on  the  Crescent 
City,  and  arrived  at  Haynes’  Bluff  on  the  21st,  remaining  there  until  3 
p.  m.,  when  we  returned  to  Young’s  Point,  and,  marching  to  a point 
nearly  opposite  Warrenton,  embarked  for  that  place;  upon  reaching 
which  a line  of  march  was  taken  up  for  the  rebel  lines,  and  at  about  10 
a.  m.  on  the  22d  we  arrived  in  front  of  the  rebel  works,  some  distance 
to  the  left  of  the  position  occupied  by  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


CHAP,  xxxvi.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  307 

Here  we  were  severely  shelled  by  the  enemy,  without  loss  on  our  part, 
a*?(Lthat  moved  toward  the  position  occupied  by  the  larger  portion 
of  Major-General  McPherson’s  corps,  and  on  the  23d  were  ordered  to 
resume  the  old  position  on  the  left. 

Pi  an  exposed  position  for  several  days,  on  the 
26th  the  Fifteenth  was  relieved  by  a regiment  of  General  Lauman’s 
division,  and  was  marched  to  General  McPherson’s  headquarters,  from 
which,  on  the  morning  of  the  27th,  it  moved  as  a part  of  the  expedition 

«on  of  Yazoo  OityWlllCh  ^ °rdered  to  scour  the  country  in  the  direc- 

Mechanicsburg  was  reached  at  noon  on  the  29th,  where  we  were  de- 
ployed in  line  of  battle  to  meet  the  enemy,  who  opposed  our  progress. 
The  enemy  retreating,  the  regiment  bivouacked  about  U miles  beyond 
the  town,  and  at  7 a.  m.  on  the  30th  we  moved  toward  Haynes’  Bluff 
severe  m^rch®  °"  theui«htof  May  31,  after  a wearisome  and  extremely 

On  June  4,  we  were  moved  to  a point  near  Major-General  McPherson’s 
headquarters,  where  we  remained  until  the  23d,  furnishing  heavy  details 
for  fatigue  parties  to  dig  rifle-pits  and  erect  fortifications,  and  every 
evening  sending  a detachment  of  sharpshooters  to  the  front,  who  fre- 
quently engaged  portions  of  the  enemy  with  much  effect. 

On  the  23d,  we  were  moved  12  miles  to  the  rear,  and  on  the  27th  to 
Fox’s  plantation.  This  regiment,  immediately  on  its  arrival  being  sen? 
Phi?  • Mefsinger’s  Ferry,  was  stationed  near  the  ferry  and  Black 
Kiver,  in  view  of  Johnston  s army  at  the  time  of  the  surrender  of  Vicks- 
ourg  on  July  4. 

The  men  of  this  regiment  have  endured  the  hardships  of  these  severe 

11?  “I  tf'f  tIla,  ‘s  of  the  campaign  without  a murmur.  Whether 
at  work  in  the  trenches  or  acting  as  sharpshooters,  they  have  evinced 
an  alacrity,  zeal,  and  courage  which  deserves  full  commendation,  and 

the  c?mnmnd?meilt  1 ^ th®  fuU  00  °Peration  of  every  officer  of 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

_ , , WM.  W.  BELKNAP, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Fifteenth  Iowa  Infantry. 
Lieut.  O.  D.  Kinsman, 

A.  A.  A.  6.,  Third  Brig.,  Sixth  Bio.,  Seventeenth  A.  G. 


No.  55. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  John  M.  HedricJc,  Fifteenth  Iowa  Infantry. 

Camp  Fifteenth  Iowa,  Third  Brigade,  Sixth  Div. 

Near  Big  Black  River,  Miss.,  July  5,  1863. 
Poll  nnfTthe  L/,inor  t0  reP°rt  in  accordance  with  orders  from 

gadeASixth  GbhAionlT?o“lhfIOWa  lnfant.ry>  J commanding  Third  Bri- 
Infantm  at  1 1 11  o,?°k  comPat>ies  from  the  Fifteenth  Iowa 
iniantrj,  at  o p.  m.,  the  3d  instant,  went  to  the  fortifications  on  the  hill 

onadrut™Dr?W  todtag  Company  G,  Fifteenth IwXLluy, 
on  duty  guarding  or  picketing  this  point.  From  there  moved  to 

ne^bffi  h°USe’  tlU',°Ile  hundred  and  fourteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  Colo- 

the  road  nnT, T noUf  a(rriviDg  at„the  *ame  From  there  patrolled 

tne  road  up  to  a point  at  or  near  Bear  Creek  Ford.  Darkness  overtak- 

g us  there,  I returned  with  the  command  by  way  of  Messinger’s  and 


308 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


the  fortifications,  relieving  Company  G,  Fifteenth  Iowa  Infantry,  and, 
taking  them  with  my  command,  reported  to  my  regiment  at  Bear  Creek, 
en  route  to  Messinger’s  Ford,  at  9.30  p.  m.  same  evening,  not  having 
seen  any  indications  of  the  enemy  on  the  entire  route. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  M.  HEDRICK, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  Fifteenth  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry . 

Lieut.  O.  D.  Kinsman, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Third  Brigade. 


No.  56. 

Report  of  Capt.  Romulus  L.  Hanhs , Fifteenth  Iowa  Infantry. 


Camp  Fifteenth  Iowa  Infantry, 

Fear  Messinger’s  Ford , Miss.,  July  4,  1863. 

Sir:  In  pursuance  of  an  order  received  from  Colonel  Chambers,  com- 
manding the  Third  Brigade,  on  July  2,  I left  camp  at  11.30  p.  m.,  with 
my  company  and  one  piece  of  the  Tenth  Ohio  Battery,  and  proceeded 
out  on  the  Messinger’s  Ford  road  about  3 miles,  to  within  one-half  mile 
of  the  ford,  and  there  remained  till  daylight,  when  I moved  down  to 
the  ford,  and  found  the  enemy’s  pickets  and  scouts  on  the  opposite 
bank.  I ordered  the  gun  to  give  them  a shell.  The  shell  had  the  de- 
sired effect,  sending  men  and  horses  flying— men  in  one  direction  and 
horses  in  another. 

The  piece  being  ordered  back  at  about  10  a.  m.  on  yesterday,  at 
about  3 a.  m.  the  enemy,  about  100  strong,  passed  up  the  river  on  the 
opposite  bank,  but  not  quite  in  range  of  our  muskets.  We  remained 
here  until  dark,  and  then  returned,  in  accordance  with  orders,  to  the 


regiment. 

Yery  respectfully, 

Captain  Company  G,  Fifteenth 


R.  L.  HANKS, 
Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry. 


Lieut.  O.  D.  Kinsman,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  57. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Addison  II.  Sanders , Sixteenth  Iowa  Infantry. 

Camp  near  Yicksburg,  August  7,  1863. 
Sir  : In  compliance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  7,  demanding  a report  of 
the  operations  of  this  regiment  u from  the  commencement  of  the  siege 
of  Yicksburg  to  the  date  of  its  fall,  July  4, 1863,”  I have  the  honor  to 
make  the  following  report : 

When  Yicksburg  was  first  invested  by  our  troops,  in  May,  the  Six- 
teenth Regiment  Iowa  Infantry  was  with  its  brigade  at  Grand  Gulf. 

May  19,  we  received  orders  to  embark  on  transports  to  go  up  the 
river,  our  supposed  destination  Yicksburg,  and  the  embarkation  was 
made  that  night.  At  this  time  Colonel  Chambers  was  absent  and  I 
was  sick  in  bed.  The  regiment  started  off*  under  the  command  of 
Major  Purcell.  It  went  to  Haynes’  Bluff,  and  afterward  returned  to 
Warreuton,  below  Yicksburg,  where  it  disembarked  on  the  night  of 

May  21.  _ _ . 

On  the  22d,  it  moved  out  and  occupied  a position  on  the  left  ot  the 


Chap.  XXX Y I.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  309 


investing  line.  That  day  the  regiment  was  engaged  in  continuous 
skirmishing  with  the  enemy,  and  was  complimented  on  having  per- 
formed brave  and  efficient  services,  fortunately  without  any  loss  of  men 
on  our  part. 

On  the  23d,  I joined  the  regiment,  finding  it  near  the  center  of  the 
line,  and  at  once  took  command.  That  afternoon  the  brigade  was 
moved  to  the  left,  at  one  time  on  the  march  subject  to  the  fire  of  a 
rebel  battery. 

We  remained  in  this  position  until  the  2Gth  instant,  always  expect- 
ing and  ready  for  action,  but  never  called  upon. 

On  the  morning  of  May  26,  the  brigade  started  toward  the  center 
again,  and  that  evening  encamped  near  General  McPherson’s  Seven- 
teenth Army  Corps  headquarters. 

Early  the  27th,  we  started  for  Mechanicsburg  with  the  understood  ob- 
ject of  intercepting  the  rebel  General  Johnston.  The  march  was  hot 
and  dusty. 

On  the  morning  of  the  29th,  we  arrived  at  Mechanicsburg,  the  enemy 
being  reported  a short  distance  beyond.  The  Sixteenth  Regiment  being 
m the  rear  in  this  day’s  march,  it  was  left  for  a time  at  Mechanicsburg 
as  a reserve,  while  the  other  regiments  proceeded  on.  We  were  soon 
ordered  to  join  them,  and  eventually,  with  them,  thrown  into  line  of 
battle;  but  no  enemy  appearing,  changed  our  position  and  went  into 
camp  2 or  3 miles  from  Mechanicsburg,  where  we  remained  till  next 
morning. 

On  the  30th,  we  started  on  our  return,  marching  through  the  Yazoo 
Valley,  and  arriving  at  Haynes’  Bluff  the  afternoon  of  the  31st.  Went 
into  camp  several  miles  beyond,  toward  Vicksburg. 

Remained  in  this  camp  till  June  4,  when  we  proceeded  to  join  our 
corps,  at  the  center  of  the  investing  forces,  encamping  that  afternoon 
on  a ridge  covered  with  a dense  canebrake. 

This  camp  proved  unhealthy,  and  on  the  12th  we  were  moved  about  a 
mile  farther  back  to  better  quarters.  During  this  interval  our  regi- 
ment did  heavy  fatigue  duty,  much  of  it  at  night  in  the  works.  All 
calls  upon  the  regiment  were  not  only  promptlv  but  cheerfully  responded 
to,  officers  and  men  exhibiting  hearty  and  patriotic  enthusiasm  in  the 
great  object  of  taking  Vicksburg.  But  they  were  not  called  on  while 
m this  camp,  or  at  any  other  time  during  the  investment,  to  actuallv 
engage  with  the  enemy. 

We  remained  in  the  rear  qamp  till  June  23,  employed  as  before,  at 
times  on  heavy  fatigue  duty. 

On  the  20th,  a general  bombardment  being  made  on  Vicksburg,  we 
were  marched  to  the  front,  and  took  a position  near  General  Hansom’s 
brigade,  but  our  services  not  being  called  for,  we  returned  to  our  camp 
that  p.  m.  1 

On  the  morning  of  June  23,  we  started  on  a march  in  the  direction 
o -big  black  River,  as  part  of  a force  to  repel  any  attempted  rebel  re- 
enforcements  to  Vicksburg.  March  hot  and  dusty,  but  men  in  excellent 


Remained  in  the  camp  we  made  that  evening  till  the  27th,  when  we 
moved  a few  miles  farther  on,  and  encamped  near  Fox’s  plantation,  about 
4 miles  from  Messinger’s  Ford,  on  Black  River. 

On  the  28tb,  our  regiment  was  ordered  to  proceed  to  Jones’  Ferry,  a 
couple  of  miles  above  Messinger’s,  to  destroy  the  ford,  &c.  They  had 
a little  skirmish  with  a small  body  of  rebels,  supposed  to  be  outposts 
° r\  larger  force  across  the  river,  and  returned  that  evening. 

On  the  night  of  July  3,  the  brigade  was  moved  to  Messinger’s  Ford. 


310 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


The  Sixteenth  being  iti  advance,  was  encamped  near  the  ford,  while  the 
other  regiments  took  a position  nearly  a mile  in  the  rear. 

On  the  morning  of  the  4th,  by  order  of  Colonel  Chambers,  command- 
ing brigade,  I sent  four  companies,  under  Captain  Smith,  senior  captain 
of  the  regiment,  and  a company  of  cavalry,  across  the  river,  with  direc- 
tions to  clear  a road  about  2 miles  back  to  a position  stated.  Major 
Purcell  shortly  afterward  joined  the  regiment,  and,  following  the  de- 
tachment across  the  river,  relieved  Captain  Smith  of  his  command. 
They  had  skirmishing  with  the  enemy,  and  were  finally  driven  back  to 
the  river.  During  the  afternoon  Major  Purcell  deemed  it  advisable  to 
recross  the  river  with  the  four  companies  of  infantry,  the  cavalry 
having  already  returned,  and  no  other  movement  from  our  camp  was 
made  that  day. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  4th,  we  received  the  gratifying  news  of  the 
surrender  of  Vicksburg. 

During  the  interval  covered  by  this  report  we  had  no  men  killed. 
Private  William  Von  trees,  of  Company  K,  was  shot  in  the  leg  by  a 
rebel  sharpshooter  while  with  others  viewing  a rebel  battery.  His  leg 
was  amputated,  and  he  afterward  died  in  the  division  hospital.  First 
Lieutenant  Purcell,  of  Company  C,  was  slightly  wounded  by  a piece  of 
shell  in  the  skirmish  of  May  22.  Have  no  men  to  report  as  missing 
during  this  interval. 

Verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ADD.  H.  SANDERS,  . 

Lieutenant-Colonel,  Commanding  Sixteenth  Iowa  Infantry. 

Lieut.  O.  D.  Kinsman, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Third  Brigade , < See. 


Ko.  58. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  H.  Smith , Sixteenth  Iowa  Infautry. 

Hdqrs.  Sixteenth  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry, 

June  28,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  the  result  of  the  expedition 
of  six  companies  of  the  Sixteenth  Regiment  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry  to 

Jones’  Ford.  , ,.  , , 

We  left  camp,  according  to  orders,  about  6 a.  m. ; marched  direct  to 
Messinger’s*  Ferry.  When  near  this  place,  I found  the  enemy  occupied 
the  opposite  side  of  the  river  with  a force  of  from  40  to  50  cavalry. 
The  negroes  on  the  Messinger  farm  reported  to  me  that  the  enemy  were 
making  preparations  to  plant  a battery  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river. 
I took  some  pains  to  satisfy  myself  as  to  this,  but  saw  nothing  that 
would  justify  such  a report.  I found  a negro  to  guide  us  to  Jones  I ord, 
and  marched  for  that  place,  leaving  one  company  to  keep  the  enemy 
from  crossing  at  Messinger’s  Ferry.  We  found  Jones’  Ford  about  2 
miles  above  Messiuger’s.  I found  that  we  could  do  nothing  in  the  way 
of  obstructing  this  ford.  It  is  not  possible  to  cross  this  ford  with  ar- 
tillery or  wagons  without  first  expending  such  an  amount  of  labor  as 
would  make  a crossing  anywhere  on  the  river  near  this  ford.  I there- 
fore ordered  my  command  back,  and,  when  we  arrived  at  Messinger  s 
place,  I found  that  during  my  absence  the  enemy  had  thrown  out  skir- 
mishers, and  opened  a brisk  but  harmless  fire  on  the  company  left  by 
me,  which  was  returned  with  spirit  by  this  company. 

Having  complied  as  nearly  as  possible  with  the  instructions  received, 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


311 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

I gave  orders  to  return  to  camp,  where  we  arrived  at  6 p.  m.  Justice 
to  my  command  makes  it  my  duty  to  report -to  you  that  parties  from 
other  commands,  under  command  of  commissioned  officers,  did,  daring 
the  day,  enter  the  Messinger  house  and  take  articles  of  furniture  and 
clothing.  Having  had  orders  not  to  allow  my  command  to  disturb  any- 
thing on  this  place,  I thought  it  best  to  inform  you  of  this,  so  that  you 
would  be  able  to  find  out,  if  necessary,  those  who  are  guilty. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  SMITH, 

Captain , Commanding  Sixteenth  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry . 

Col.  Alexander  Chambers, 

Commanding  Third  Brigade , Sixth  Division. 


No.  59. 

Report  of  Maj.  Edward  J.  Wood , Forty-eighth  Indiana  Infantry , First 
Brigade , Seventh  Division. 

Headquarters  Forty-eighth  Indiana  Volunteers, 

August  6,  1863. 

Sir:  In  compliance  with  Special  Orders,  No.  31,  Headquarters  First 
Brigade,  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  Forty-eighth  Indiana,  under 
command  of  Col.  Norman  Eddy,  participated  in  all  the  labors  and  duties 
incident  to  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  from  May  22  to  July  4.  The  regiment 
also  made  the  march  with  the  brigade  on  the  Black  Biver  expedition 
from  the  rear  of  Vicksburg  to  Mechanicsburg,  Miss.,  leaving  their  posi- 
tion in  the  investing  line  on  May  26  and  returning  on  June  4 without 
loss  or  casualty. 

I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  list  of  casualties  on  the 
skirmish  line  during  the  siege : May  24 — killed,  Private  Nathan  J.  Smith, 
Company  D.  June  13 — wounded,  Corpl.  James  Anderson,  Company  F; 
Private  Elijah  B.  Brown,  Company  I). 

The  regiment  not  having  been  under  my  command  during  any  of  this 
time,  must  be  my  apology  for  the  brevity  of  this  report. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  J.  WOOD, 

Major , Commanding  Forty-eighth  Indiana. 

Capt.  John  E.  Simpson,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  60. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  John  E.  Tourtellotte , Fourth  Minnesota  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Fourth  Minnesota  Volunteers, 

Camp  in  Vicksburg , Miss.,  August  1,  1863. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  in  obedience  to  Special  Orders,  No. 
31,  of  date  July  27,  1863,  from  your  headquarters,  that  on  May  26  we 
moved  from  our  position  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  works  around  Vicks- 
burg, and  proceeded  on  the  road  to  Mechanicsburg,  which  place  we 
reached  May  29.  Thence  we  marched  down  the  valley  of  the  Yazoo 
River,  passing  near  Satartia,  via  Haynes’  Bluff,  to  Snyder’s  Bluff,  when 
we  bivouacked  and  remained  three  days. 


312 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  TChap.  xxxvi.  | 

J une  4,  we  marched  into  a ravine  near  our  first  position  in  front  of  the 
enemy’s  fortifications  around  Vicksburg. 

Here  we  remained  until  after  the  surrender  of  Vicksburg,  when,  on 
July  6,  my  regiment  moved  inside  of  the  rebel  breastworks. 

^ On  July  25,  my  regiment  was  ordered  to  report  to  General  John  E. 
Smith  for  post  duty,  on  which  duty  we  still  remain. 

After  our  return  from  the  expedition  to  Mechanics  burg,  the  follow- 
ing-named persons  were  wounded  while  on  duty  in  front  of  the  rebel 
works,  viz:  Lieut.  I.  E.  Morrill,  Company  K,  slightly;  Private  [Or- 
lando] Lindersmith,  Company  E,  slightly;  Private  B.  V.  Eobinson, 
Company  C,  slightly;  and  Private  E.  A.  Wheeler,  Company  D,  slightly. 
Summary:  1 officer  and  3 enlisted  men  wounded;  total,  4. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  E.  TOUETELLOTTE, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding. 

Capt.  John  E.  Simpson, 

A.  A.  A.  G.,  First  Brig.,  Seventh  Div.,  Seventeenth  A.  C. 


Eo.  61. 

Report  of  Col.  Green  B.  Raum , Fifty -sixth  Illinois  Infantry,  command- 
ing Second  Brigade. 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  August  11,  1863. 

Colonel:  In  compliance  with  extract  7,  Special  Orders,  Eo.  159, 
from  your  headquarters,  1 have  the  honor  to  report  that  this  brigade 
(except  the  Eightieth  Ohio  Volunteers)  took  position  as  part  of  the  be- 
sieging force  against  Vicksburg  on  the  20th  day  of  May,  1863. 

During  the  assault  on  the  morning  of  the  22d  of  that  month,  this  bri- 
gade was  in  the  reserve,  and  was  not  immediately  engaged  with  the 
enemy ; a few  casualties,  however,  occurred.  Late  in  the  evening  of 
that  day  the  brigade  was  ordered  to  report  to  General  Osterhaus,  to  sup- 
port him  in  a movement  upon  the  enemy.  The  day  being  far  spent,  the 
position  to  which  he  assigned  the  brigade  was  not  taken  until  the  morn- 
ing of  the  23d.  At  1 p.  m.  of  that  day,  the  brigade,  in  pursuance  of 
orders,  returned  to  its  encampment  with  the  division. 

On  the  4th  day  of  June,  the  Eightieth  Ohio  Volunteers  rejoined  the 
brigade,  having  been  detached  to  escort  prisoners  to  Memphis.  From 
the  23d  day  of  May  until  the  capitulation  the  brigade  furnished  the 
advance  line  of  pickets  and  skirmishers  every  alternate  forty-eight 
hours.  Heavy  details  for  fatigue  duty  were  made  from  time  to  time  for 
the  construction  of  earthworks,  rifle-pits,  roads,  &c. 

On  the  25th  of  June,  in  pursuance  of  directions  from  General  Smith, 
commanding  the  division,  I had  the  Seventeenth  Iowa  and  Fifty-sixth 
Illinois  Volunteers,  under  command  of  Col.  Clark  E.  Wever,  to  report 
to  Major  General  Logan.  During  part  of  the  night  of  that  day  those 
two  regiments  occupied  the  partial  breach  made  in  the  enemy’s  works 
by  the  explosion.  The  two  regiments  lost  54  officers  and  men  killed 
and  wounded  on  that  occasion.  The  Eightieth  Ohio  Volunteers  during 
that  day  and  the  Tenth  Missouri  Volunteers  during  the  night  were  in 
position  at  Battery  Archer.  The  brigade  marched  into  the  city  on  the 
evening  of  the  capitulation,  and  the  Fitty-sixth  Illinois  Volunteers, 
Eightieth  Ohio  Volunteers,  and  two  companies  of  the  Tenth  Missouri 
Volunteers,  on  the  night  of  that  day,  composed  a part  of  the  guard  along 
the  rebel  works. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


313 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

In  conclusion,  I will  add  that  during  the  siege,  on  all  occasions,  the 
officers  and  soldiers  of  this  brigade  conducted  themselves  with  just  de- 
termination, and  have  reflected  credit  upon  themselves,  our  common 
country,  and  the  cause  which  we  have  espoused. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

GBEEN  B.  BAUM, 
Colonel , Commanding  Brigade. 

Lieut.  Col.  W.  T.  Clark,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  62. 

Report  of  Maj.  John  F.  Walden , Seventeenth  Iowa  Infantry. 

Before  Vicksburg,  Miss., 

June  26,  1863. 

Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
part  borne  by  the  Seventeenth  Iowa  Infantry  in  front  of  the  rebel  fort 
(Hill)  on  Jackson  road,  on  the  night  of  the  25th  of  June,  1863 : 

At  3 o’clock  of  that  day  I was  directed  by  Col.  Clark  B.  Wever,  com- 
manding detached  regiments,  to  place  my  regiment  in  the  gap  running 
parallel  with  the  enemy’s  line,  which  I accordingly  did,  and  remained 
in  this  position  till  10.30  p.  m.,  when  I received  an  order  from  Colonel 
Wever  to  relieve  a detail  of  the  Fifty-sixth  Illinois  Volunteer  Infan- 
try, then  occupying  the  breach  made  by  General  Logan  in  Fort  Hill. 
1 moved  my  regiment  through  the  gap  that  ran  from  the  white  house 
to  the  breach,  and  halted  when  my  right  was  within  a few  yards  of  its 
entrance.  I made  the  necessary  detail  of  70  men,  and  relieved  a small 
detachment  of  men  from  the  Thirty-first  and  Fifty-sixth  Illinois  Begi- 
ments.  It  was  then  11  o’clock,  and  I could  only  judge  of  the  position 
we  were  expected  to  take  by  the  glare  of  the  bursting  shells  which  were 
constantly  thrown  over  the  broken  parapet  by  the  enemy,  and  behind 
which  he  seemed  safely  lodged.  I put  as  many  men  as  could  fire  to 
advantage  upon  the  broken  wall  that  separated  me  from  the  enemy,  and 
directed  the  balance  of  my  men  to  load  for  them.  In  this  way  we  were 
enabled  to  keep  up  a constant  fire.  I relieved  this  detail  in  an  hour 
with  another  relief  of  70  men,  and  they,  in  their  turn,  were  relieved. 

During  the  three  hours  that  the  Seventeenth  Iowa  occupied  the 
breach,  the  entire  battalion  (by  relief)  were  engaged  in  successfully  foil- 
ing, with  musketry  alone,  the  rebels  in  their  attempts  to  occupy  the 
crater  of  the  blown-up  fort,  whilst  they  were  incessantly  throwing  gre- 
nades  (6  and  10  [pounder]  shells)  in  our  midst,  which,  instead  of  intimi- 
dating our  men,  served  to  make  them  fire  more  rapidly  and  fight  with 
greater  determination. 

At  2 a.  m.  of  the  26th,  we  were  relieved  by  the  Thirty-first  Illinois, 
and  returned  to  the  gap  first  occupied,  where  we  remained  until  12  m 
when  we  returned  to  camp. *  *’ 

Inclosed  find  list  of  casualties.* 

Very  respectfully, 

J.  F.  WALDEN, 

Major , Commanding  Seventeenth  Iowa  Infantry. 
Lieut.  M.  Nichelson, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Second  Brig.,  Third  Div.,  Fifteenth  A.  C. 

* Nominal  list,  omitted,  shows  3 men  killed,  and  3 officers  and  31  men  wounded. 


314  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

No.  63. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Ezekiel  S.  Sampson , Fifth  Iowa  Infantry , Third 
Brigade , including  operations  since  April  25. 

Headquarters  Fifth  Iowa  Infantry, 

Before  Vicksburg , Miss.,  May  25,  1863. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  submit,  through  you,  to  the  colonel 
commanding  this  brigade,  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken  by  this 
regiment  in  our  recent  marches  and  engagements  : 

On  the  25th  of  April,  1863,  we  left  Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  reaching 
Surget’s  plantation  after  two  days’  march,  a distance  of  30  miles,  where 
we  remained  one  day,  and  on  the  28th  resumed  the  march,  reaching 
Perkins’  Landing,  below  Carthage,  on  the  29th.  The  bad  condition  of 
the  roads  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  Perkins’  Landing,  and  our  limited 
means  of  transportation,  rendered  it  necessary  to  send  back  teams  each 
night  to  bring  forward  supplies,  which  we  were  compelled  to  leave  be- 
hind each  morning.  Marching  over  bad  roads,  under  a scorching  sun, 
and  with  heavy  knapsacks,  after  so  long  inactivity,  exhausted  many  of 
my  men,  whom  I also  managed  to  bring  forward  each  night  in  ambu- 
lances. 

On  the  30th,  we  marched  from  Perkins’  Landing  to  Hard  Times  Land- 
ing (distance  18  miles),  and  mustered  on  the  night  of  the  30th. 

On  the  1st  of  May,  I took  my  regiment  on  board  the  gunboat  Pitts- 
burg, crossed  the  Mississippi  River  to  Bruinsburg,  Miss.,  and  marched 
the  same  day  9 miles  into  the  interior,  in  the  direction  of  Port  Gibson, 
which  place  we  reached  at  noon  on  the  2d  of  May,  and  camped  on 
Willow  Bayou,  8 miles  distant,  same  night. 

On  the  3d,  after  crossing  Willow  Bayou,  our  advance  was  checked  by 
a battery  of  the  enemy  in  front.  Our  brigade  was  formed  in  line  of 
battle  on  right  of  the  road,  my  regiment  supporting  the  Tenth  Iowa 
Infantry,  deployed  as  skirmishers  in  our  front.  Intelligence  of  the 
flight  of  the  enemy  was  soon  brought  us,  and  we  resumed  our  line  of 
march,  reaching  Big  Black  same  night. 

On  the  5th,  made  reconnaissance  with  my  regiment,  in  company 
with  the  Tenth  Iowa  Infantry,  three  companies  of  cavalry,  and  two 
pieces  of  artillery,  the  whole  under  command  of  Colonel  Boomer.  My 
regiment  being  in  advance  after  crossing  the  stream,  I threw  out  two 
companies  as  skirmishers,  and  pushed  them  forward,  supported  by  my 
regiment,  some  5 miles  in  the  direction  of  Vicksburg,  until  I came  upon 
the  enemy  in  force,  occupying  a high  range  of  hills  in  our  front,  when 
1 was  ordered  to  fall  back,  and  recrossed  Big  Black  to  our  former  camp. 
The  reconnaissance  was  entirely  successful  and  satisfactory,  without  a 
single  casualty. 

On  the  9th,  we  resumed  the  march  in  the  direction  of  Jackson,  Miss., 
reaching  Raymond  on  the  12th. 

On  the  13th,  resumed  march  on  road  leading  through  Clinton,  and 
my  regiment  being  in  advance,  I threw  forward  four  companies  as  skir- 
mishers, who  in  a few  miles  came  upon  the  pickets  of  the  enemy,  and, 
after  a sharp  skirmish,  drove  them  from  their  position.  I continued  to 
advance  my  skirmishers  uutil  they  reached  and  occupied  Clinton,  about 
4 p.  m.,  when  we  halted  for  a few  hours,  and  camped  at  night  from  latter 
place  about  2 miles,  on  the  road  to  Jackson. 

On  the  14th,  marched  at  8 a.  m.,  and,  after  a few  miles’  march  in  a 
drenching  rain,  were  brought  to  a halt  by  the  enemy  in  front,  who  were 
found  in  force  occupying  the  height  about  3J  miles  from  Jackson.  Our 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


315 


brigade  was  in  a few  minutes  ordered  forward  into  position  under  fire 
of  the  enemy’s  guns,  and  formed  in  two  lines  of  battle  on  left  of  the 
road,  my  regiment  occupying  the  right  of  the  front  line,  the  Twenty- 
sixth  Missouri  in  my  rear,  and  the  Ninety-third  Illinois  on  my  left.  As 
soon  as  formed  we  were  ordered  forward,  and  advanced  in  perfect 
order,  under  a brisk  fire  from  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters,  until  they 
abandoned  their  position  and  fell  back.  We,  however,  continued  to 
advance  in  line  of  battle,  the  enemy  fleeing  before  us,  until  we  reached 
the  railroad  depot  at  Jackson.  I am  happy  to  bear  testimony  to  the 
universal  good  conduct  of  both  officers  and  men  in  our  advance  upon 
Jackson,  and  to  report  a loss  of  but  4 men  wounded. 

On  the  15th,  at  8 a.  m.,  we  took  up  our  line  of  march  in  the  direction 
of  Vicksburg,  making  15  miles  on  the  first  day,  and  on  the  16th,  at 
about  11  a.  m.,  had  our  advance  again  checked  by  the  enemy  in  force 
in  our  front.  Preparations  were  immediately  made  for  battle,  and  in 
a few  minutes,  everything  being  in  readiness,  we  awaited  the  advance 
of  the-  enemy  upon  our  line.  The  enemy,  however,  having  massed  a 
heavy  force  to  our  left,  caused  our  line  in  that  direction  to  give  way, 
and  our  brigade  was  ordered  with  all  possible  haste  to  their  support. 
We  came  up  to  the  immediate  scene  of  action,  marching  by  the  left 
flank  at  double-quick,  under  the  protection  of  a high  ridge,  over  which 
our  overpowered  forces,  with  broken  ranks,  were  already  retreating. 
The  imminent  peril  of  the  moment  caused  us  to  be  ordered  immediately 
forward  upon  the  enemy.  We  came  into  order  of  battle  on  the  run, 
and  poured  oyer  the  bridge,  shouting  defiance  to  the  enemy,  and  under 
a heavy  fire,  in  which  many  of  my  men  were  killed  and  my  horse  shot 
under  me,  owing  to  which  I was  compelled  to  abandon  him,  and  con- 
tinue the  remainder  of  the  day  on  foot.  We  planted  our  colors,  and 
took  our  position  rapidly  behind  the  crest  of  the  next  slight  eminence 
that  put  down  from  the  main  ridge  on  the  right,  forming  an  excellent 
parapet.  Here  we  fought,  loading  and  firing  rapidly,  every  officer  and 
soldier  at  his  post,  shouting  and  cheering  each  other,  and  almost  entirely 
silencing  the  fire  of  the  enemy  along  our  front.  He  then  moved  to  the 
left,  and  concentrated  his  force  and  fire  upon  the  more  exposed  portion 
of  the  line  higher  up  on  the  ridge,  and  succeeded  in  forcing  back  the 
regiment  on  our  left.  We  still  maintained  our  position,  every  man 
standing  firm.  In  a short  time  the  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  Ninetv- 
third  Illinois  (the  regiment  immediately  on  our  left)  succeeded  in  rally- 
ing a few  of  his  men,  and  returned  to  our  left.  Here  we  remained  fight- 
ing until  I was  informed  from  three  different  sources  that  the  enemy 
was  passing  completely  around  our  left.  I went  to  that  portion  of  the 
line,  saw  them,  and  ascertained  that  their  fire  would  very  soon  com- 
pletely command  our  position  from  the  flank  and  rear.  I then  ordered 
the  regiment  to  retire  to  the  next  ridge. 

In  falling  back,  the  bearer  of  the  banner  became  exhausted,  and  it 
became  separated  from  the  colors.  Captain  Tait,  of  the  left  company, 
placed  it  in  the  hands  of  a corporal  of  his  company,  and  not  seeing  the 
colors,  he  rallied  the  greater  portion  of  the  three  left  companies  under 
a galling  fire  from  the  flank,  moved  them  to  the  rear,  and  was  about  to 
rejoin  the  regiment,  when  a general,  not  of  our  division,  ordered  him 
to  the  support  of  a battery  farther  in  the  rear.  I moved  the  regiment 
a short  distance  to  the  rear,  refusing  the  left,  in  order  to  avoid  the  flank 
fire  of  the  enemy,  and  reformed  the  line.  Here,  although  the  enemy, 
encouraged  by  his  apparent  success,  pushed  forward,  we  held  him  at 
bay,  the  men  loading  and  firing,  while  their  comrades  were  continually 
falling  around  them,  with  a coolness  and  deliberation  almost  incredible, 


316 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


determined  to  yield  tlieir  position  only  with  their  lives.  Every  officer 
at  his  post,  some  cheering  the  men,  others  opening  the  cartridges  and 
tearing  them  to  facilitate  loading.  Here  our  ammunition  was  exhausted, 
and  some  fired  away  what  they  could  obtain  from  the  cartridge-boxes 
of  the  dead  and  wounded  lying  around  them.  I still  held  the  regiment 
about  thirty  minutes  after  being  unable  to  fire,  the  enemy  being  too 
much  exhausted  to  press  us.  I then  moved  back  into  an  open  field, 
where  General  Logan  had  a supply  of  ammunition  along  his  line,  and 
refilled  the  cartridge  boxes.  Before  this  was  completed,  our  artillery 
commenced  firing  grape  and  shell  over  our  heads,  and  we  were  unable 
to  return  without  being  in  immediate  range  of  our  guns.  But  we  soon 
saw  the  enemy  fleeing  from  the  field,  not  one  having  reached  the  line 
where  we  made  our  determined  stand. 

We  can  make  no  distinction  for  heroism  and  skill  among  officers  when 
all  were  so  conspicuous,  but  I cannot  forbear  to  remember  the  eminent 
assistance  I received  in  the  most  trying  moments  from  Adjutant  Mar- 
shall and  Captains  Lee  and  Pickerell. 

I went  into  this  battle  with  an  aggregate  of  350  officers  and  men,  and 
lost  19  killed  and  75  wounded. 

On  the  evening  of  the  16th,  after  the  battle,  we  marched  2 miles,  and 
camped  for  the  night;  on  the  17th  marched  5 miles,  and  camped  on 
Big  Black;  on  the  18th  crossed  Big  Black,  and  on  the  19th  arrived 
before  Vicksburg. 

We  were  soon  assigned  a position,  where  we  remained  for  the  day, 
and  on  the  20th  advanced  our  lines  nearer  the  enemy’s  works;  on  the 
21st  continual  skirmishing  was  kept  up  with  the  enemy,  and  on  the 
22d  again  advanced  to  the  range  of  hills  nearest  to  the  enemy’s  works, 
on  the  left  of  the  large  fort  commanding  the  entrance  to  Vicksburg,  my 
regiment  leading  and  clearing  the  way  to  the  latter  point,  where  we 
were  formed  in  line  of  battle,  my  regiment  occupying  the  right  of  the 
front  line,  the  Twenty-sixth  Missouri  in  my  rear.  Here  we  remained, 
beneath  a burning  sun,  and  exposed  in  a measure  to  the  fire  of  the 
enemy,  until  3 p.  m,,  in  readiness  to  charge  upon  the  works  of  the 
enemy,  during  which  time  skirmishing  was  continually  kept  up.  In 
this  position  I have  to  report  a loss  of  1 man  killed  and  2 wounded. 

At  3 p.  in.,  the  division  being  ordered  to  re  enforce  General  McCler-, 
nand,  on  our  left,  we  were  withdrawn  from  our  position,  and  with  our 
brigade  were  reported  to  General  Carr  at  5 p.  m.  Preparations  were 
immediately  made  by  the  brigade  to  charge  upon  the  intrenchments  of 
the  enemy  on  the  third  range  of  hills  in  our  front,  and  about  120  rods 
distant.  The  brigade  was  formed  in  two  lines  of  battle,  my  regiment 
again  occupying  the  right  of  the  front  line,  the  Twenty-sixth  Missouri 
in  my  rear  and  Ninety-third  Illinois  on  my  left.  In  a lew  moments  an 
advance  was  ordered,  and  in  the  most  perfect  order,  at  common  time, 
and  with  arms  at  a right  shoulder  shift,  and  exposed  to  a most  galling 
and  deadly  fire  from  the  whole  line  of  the  enemy’s  works — right,  left, 
and  in  front — we  passed  the  first  and  principal  range  of  hills,  halted 
in  the  ravine  beyond,  under  cover  of  the  second  range,  dressed  my 
lines,  and  were  in  readiness  for  a farther  advauce.  Here  a new  disposi- 
tion of  the  troops  being  found  necessary  by  the  brigade  commander  to 
enable  him  to  direct  his  march  to  the  point  desired,  my  regiment  was 
marched  by  the  flank  to  a new  position,  again  exposed  to  the  enemy’s 
fire,  where  I again  dressed  my  line,  and  was  in  readiness  to  advance. 
Just  at  this  juncture  our  noble  and  brave  brigade  commander,  Colonel 
Boomer,  was  shot  through  the  head,  and  instantly  expired.  This  cir- 
cumstance caused  a momentary  delay,  and  before  an  advance  was 


CHAr.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


317 


effected  we  received  orders  to  maintain  our  position  until  after  dark, 
and  return  to  our  original  position  under  cover  of  the  first  range  of 
hills,  which  was  accordingly  done.  In  this  advance  I have  to  report  a 
loss  of  2 killed  and  17  wounded,  out  of  an  aggregate  of  250. 

On  the  23d,  we  were  ordered  back  to  our  former  position  with  our 
own  army  corps,  where  we  still  remain. 

I cannot  close  this  report  without  bearing  testimony  to  the  uncom- 
plaining and  self-sacrificing  spirit  that  has  continually  manifested  itself 
among  the  men  of  my  command  during  all  of  our  marches,  trials,  and 
sufferings.  Many  of  them  without  shoes,  all  frequently  without  pro- 
visions, except  sugar  and  meat,  pushed  forward  through  rain  and  sun- 
shine, without  a murmur  or  complaint,  willing  to  endure  every  hardship 
and  peril  for  the  success  of  their  cause. 

Hoping  that  they  may  be  abundantly  rewarded  for  their  sacrifices 
and  labors,  I beg  leave  to  subscribe  myself,  very  respectfully,  your 
obedient  servant, 

E.  S.  SAMPSON, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Fifth  Iowa  Infantry . 

Robert  0.  Crowell, 

Capt.  and  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Third  Brigade,  Seventh  Division. 


No.  64. 

Reports  of  Map  Gen.  Francis  J.  Herron,  TJ.  S.  Army,  commanding 

Division. 


June  22,  1863. 

Have  pushed  my  left  farther  up,  and  occupy  a position  within  200 
yards  of  their  left  works.  Have  taken  two  rifie-pits  and  10  prisoners 
alive  and  1 wounded.  No  loss  on  our  side. 


General  Grant. 


HERRON, 

Major-General. 


Herron’s,  June  23,  1863—2  a.  m. 
Have  just  taken  another  rifle-pit  and  13  prisoners  in  moving  up  my 
right  line  of  skirmishers.  Will  be  ready  for  your  final  orders  to  move. 
I believe  I can  go  into  the  enemy’s  works  from  this  position  to-morrow 
night. 


Major-General  Grant. 


HERRON, 

Major-  General. 


Herron’s  Headquarters,  June  24,  1863. 

Nothing  of  special  importance  has  occurred  on  my  front  since  yester- 
day. I am  still  working  up  my  sharpshooters,  having  them  within  150 
yards  on  the  lelt.  This  morning  my  right  was  advanced  to  within  400 
yards  of  the  heavy  works.  We  are  constructing  deep  rifle-pits  at  every 
advance,  to  make  the  positions  perfectly  safe.  To-night  1 will  finish  a 
heavy  battery  within  400  yards  of  the  works. 

Major-General  Grant. 


E.  J.  HERRON. 


318 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Herron’s  Headquarters,  June  24,  1863. 

We  bad  a sharp  little  skirmish  this  evening  while  moving  farther, 
but  succeeded  in  gaining  the  desired  position,  and  captured  a lieutenant 
and  9 men.  Our  loss,  1 killed  and  1 wounded.  Several  of  the  enemy 
were  killed  and  wounded,  in  addition  to  those  captured.  The  enemy 
used  light  artillery  and  musketry  from  their  first  line  of  works. 

F.  J.  HERRON, 

Major-General. 

Major-General  Grant. 

Herron’s,  July  1,  1863. 

Nothing  especially  new  on  my  front  to-day.  I opened  this  morning 
with  my  advanced  battery  of  42-pounder  rifle  guns,  and  used  the  enemy’s 
works  badly.  The  enemy’s  mortar  was  fatally  brought  to  bear  on  the 
battery  and  exploded  one  shell  between  the  two  guns,  killing  2 and  badly 
wounding  4 men,  but  not  interfering  with  the  further  work  of  battery. 

F.  J.  HERRON/ 

Herron’s,  July  1,  1863. 

Colonel  Logan,  commanding  at  Warrenton,  informs  me  by  messenger 
that  Major  Wilson,  commanding  cavalry  pickets  on  Big  Black  River, 
has  just  come  in,  and  reports  that  he  was  attacked  by  60  of  the  enemy’s 
cavalry,  and  fought  them  some  time,  when  a force  of  about  200  infantry 
attempted  to  flank  him,  and  he  fell  back.  The  rebel  cavalry  crossed 
at  Hankinson’s  Ferry,  and  negroes  report  a force  of  2,000  men  with 
artillery  crossing  at  same  place.  Major  Wilson  also  states  that  the 
cavalry  sent  to  examine  the  crossings  between  Hankinson’s  Ferry  and 
Grand  Gulf  have  arrived,  and  report  no  signs  of  enemy  below.  Colouel 
Logan  desired  to  have  this  forwarded  to  General  Ord,  and  I also  send 
copy  to  you. 

F.  J.  HERRON. 

General  Grant. 


Headquarters  Herron’s  Division, 

Vicksburg , Miss.,  July  6,  1863. 

Colonel:  I have  the  hopor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
operations  of  my  command  since  coming  into  this  department: 

On  the  2d  of  J une  last,  I received  orders  from  Major-General  Schofield, 
commanding  Department  of  the  Missouri,  to  prepare  the  infantry  and 
artillery  of  the  Second  and  Third  Divisions  of  the  Army  of  the  Frontier, 
then  under  my  command,  for  immediate  transportation  to  Vicksburg. 
The  Third  Division  was  encamped  some  10  miles  from  the  railroad,  at 
Rolla,  Mo.,  and  the  Second  Division  at  Pilot  Knob.  The  latter  was 
directed  to  cross  the  country  to  Saint  Genevieve  and  embark,  while  the 
troops  of  the  1 bird  Division,  after  marching  to  Rolla,  went  to  Saint 
Louis  by  rail. 

During  the  night  of  the  4th  of  June,  all  the  troops  were  embarked  on 
transports,  and  at  once  started  down  the  river.  At  New  Madrid  I was 
joined  by  the  Thirty-eighth  Iowa  Infantry.  My  command  then  consisted 
of  the  First  Brigade  (Twenty-sixth  Indiana,  Thirty-seventh  Illinois, 
Twentieth,  Thirty-fourth,  and  Thirty-eighth  Iowa  Infantry,  with  Bat- 
teries E and  F,  First  Missouri  Light  Artillery),  commanded  by  Briga- 
dier-General Vandever,  and  the  Second  Brigade  (Twentieth  Wiscon- 
sin, Nineteenth  Iowa,  and  Ninety-fourth  Illinois  Infantry,  with  Battery 


319 


CIIA1'.  XXXVI.  ] THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

B,  First  Missouri  Light  Artillery),  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  W.  W. 
Orme. 

On  the  13th  of  June,  we  arrived  at  Young’s  Point,  where  T received 
orders  to  cross  the  river  below  Vicksburg  and  take  up  position  on  the 
extreme  left  of  the  investing  line. 

Owing  to  a want  of  transportation,  this  was  attended  with  a little 
delay,  but  on  the  morning  of  the  15th  the  troops  crossed,  and,  after 
recon noitering  the  enemy’s  works  and  driving  in  their  pickets,  my  lines 
were  established  within  1,200  yards  of  the  enemy’s  main  line  of  defense. 
The  first  parallel  was  opened  the  following  night  and  preparations  made 
for  conducting  the  siege  in  proper  form.  Considerable  difficulty  was 
experienced  in  collecting  engineer  tools,  and  also  in  obtaining  a supply 
of  ammunition  for  my  light  batteries.  It  is  only  just  to  say,  however, 
that  this  arose  from  the  caliber  of  the  guns  being  unsuited  to  the  am- 
munition in  the  ordnance  depot,  and  not  from  any  negligence  on  the 
part  of  the  officers  of  the  ordnance  department. 

The  ground  in  my  front,  as  you  are  aware,  was  unfavorable  for  siege 
operations,  being  a level  plateau  interspersed  with  ravines,  which  af- 
forded little  shelter  for  troops,  on  account  of  being  commanded  in  many 
places  by  the  guns  of  the  enemy’s  works.  The  trenches,  however,  were 
pushed  forward  as  rapidly  as  possible,  and  by  the  25th  were  within  600 
yards  of  the  enemy’s  line  of  forts.  In  front  of  my  left  center  I had  es- 
tablished a battery  of  42-pounder  rifle  guns,  which  were  loaned  from  the 
Navy.  This  battery,  under  the  command  of  Acting  Master  [J.  Frank] 
Reed,  of  the  Benton,  did  excellent  service,  and  I cannot  speak  too 
highly  of  the  bravery  and  energy  of  this  young  officer.  Indeed,  during 
the  whole  of  my  operations,  I received  valuable  assistance  and  a hearty 
co-operation  from  the  Navy.  During  the  siege  several  of  the  enemy’s 
rifle-pits  in  my  front  were  carried  by  assault,  and  quite  a number  of 
prisoners  taken.  These  have  been  forwarded,  as  directed,  to  depart- 
ment headquarters. 

On  the  evening  of  the  3d  instant,  I received  notice  that  terms  of  ca- 
pitulation were  being  considered,  with  orders  from  the  major-general  com- 
manding to  cease  firing,  but  to  be  extremely  guarded  against  a sortie, 
or  attempt  of  the  enemy  to  cut  his  way  out.  My  troops  were  under 
arms  during  the  night,  but  nothing  unusual  occurred,  and  at  9 o’clock 
of  the  morning  of  the  4th,  my  division  being  one  of  the  three  selected 
to  occupy  the  city,  and  the  signal  agreed  upon  having  been  displayed 
along  the  enemy’s  line,  I marched  in  and  took  possession  of  the  works 
in  my  immediate  front.  Several  of  these  were  well  built,  and  from  their 
strength  could  not  have  been  carried  by  assault  without  heavy  loss. 
Considering  the  unavoidable  delays  before  mentioned,  and  the  length 
of  my  line  (something  more  than  3 miles),  I have  reason  to  be  proud  of 
the  progress  made  by  my  troops  during  the  short  time  they  were  en- 
gaged in  the  siege.  Their  conduct  has  been  admirable  in  all  respects. 

I am  under  special  obligations  to  Brigadier-Generals  Vandever  and 
Orme,  commanding  brigades,  to  Captains  Comstock  and  Hoeppuer,  engi- 
neers in  charge  of  the  works,  and  to  the  several  officers  of  my  staff. 

I inclose  herewith  a list  of  casualties  which  have  occurred  during  the 
siege.* 

I remain,  colonel,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  J.  HERRON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawltns,  A.  A.  G.,  Dept,  of  the  Tennessee. 


List  not  found. 


320  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXX VL 

No.  65. 

Report  of  Got.  George  W.  Clark , Thirty -fourth  Iowa  Infantry , First 

Brigade. 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  9,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  Thirty-fourth  Infantry  in  the  late  siege  of  Vicksburg : 

Arrived  on  the  line  of  encampment  below  the  city  on  the  14th  day  of 
June,  1863.  Details  were  made  at  once  for  fatigue  and  picket  duty.  In 
these  details  from  day  to  day  consisted  the  principal  work  performed  by 
my  regiment.  One-half  my  men  who  were  able  for  duty  were  on  duty 
all  the  time,  and  not  unfrequently  I was  compelled,  in  order  to  till  the 
details,  to  send  men  who  had  just  been  relieved,  thus  keeping  the  same 
men  out  in  the  ditches  forty-eight  hours  without  rest.  They,  went  un- 
complainingly, and,  from  the  uniform  accounts  I have  had  of  their  con- 
duct, they  behaved  well  on  picket,  and  worked  faithfully  on  fatigue. 
Unaccustomed  as  they  were  to  such  duty  and  such  a climate,  and  having 
to  use  water  of  inferior  quality,  1 think  they  have  exhibited  powers  of 
endurance  seldom  surpassed  by  men  under  any  circumstances.  Sergeant 
[David]  Finley,  of  Company  E,  than  whom  I never  saw  a better  soldier, 
received  a sunstroke  when  on  duty,  from  the  effects  of  which  he  died 
this  morning.  Many  others  were  overcome  by  heat  and  heavy  duty, 
resulting  in  fever  and  other  diseases,  from  which  they  have  not  yet  re- 
covered. My  regiment,  as  such,  was  not  engaged  in  action  during  the 
siege,  but  was  frequently  taken  to  the  front  to  support  batteries  and 
prevent  sorties  from  the  enemy. 

On  the  29th  of  June,  by  order  of  Major-General  Herron,  I moved  my 
regiment  around  on  the  levee,  to  a point  immediately  on  the  bank  of  the 
river,  3 miles  below  the  city,  and  took  charge  of  the  picket  line  between 
the  river  and  the  Big  Bayou.  Rebel  deserters  were  brought  in  every 
day  in  large  numbers  by  my  pickets  and  sent  at  once  to  brigade  head- 
quarters. My  casualties  during  the  siege  were  4 killed  and  1 officer  and 
5 enlisted  men  wounded. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  W.  CLARK, 

Colonel , Commanding  Thirty  fourth  Iowa  Infantry 

Maj.  William  Hyde  Clark, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  66. 

Report  of  Col.  John  McNulta , Ninety  fourth  Illinois  Infantry , Second 

Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  Ninety-fourth  Regiment  Illinois  Infantry, 

Camp , Vicksburg , Miss.,  July  10,  1863. . 
General  : I respectfully  offer  I he  following  report  of  the  part  taken 
by  my  command  in  the  siege  of  Vicksburg  : 

We  marched  from  camp,  Lake  Springs,  Dent  County,  Missouri,  to 
Rolla,  a distance  of  13  miles,  on  June  3,  and  embarked  on  board  of  a 
train  on  the  Pacific  Railroad,  and  started  for  Saint  Louis  at  10  a.  m.  the 
same  day,  and  arrived  at  Saint  Louis  on  the  4th,  at  noon. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  321 

We  embarked  on  board  the  steamer  Minnehaha  May  5,  and  moved 
off  from  the  wharf  at  7 p.  m. 

Arrived  at  Young’s  Point  at  6 p.  m.  June  12 ; marched  across  the 
Point,  and  crossed  the  river  on  board  the  steamer  J.  W.  Cheeseman  on 
the  13th,  and  encamped  at  Warrenton,  Miss.,  that  night. 

Marched  up  near  the  enemy’s  works  on  the  14th,  and  went  into  camp 
south  southwest  of  the  court-house,  and  went  on  duty  June  15,  by  re- 
lieving the  Twentieth  Wisconsin  Infantry  from  picket  duty,  and  six 
companies  were  on  duty  every  third  day,  and  75  men  on  fatigue  twelve 
hours  out  of  each  thirty-six  during  the  remainder  of  the  siege,  and  in 
addition  to  which  was  detail  for  making  gabions,  camp  guards,  and 
fatigue  parties  for  digging  rifle-pits  and  shelter  for  the  pickets  and  re- 
serves, and  other  duties  that  were  very  laborious. 

My  command  was  relieved  on  the  morning  of  July  4,  when  it  was 
marched  to  this  camj). 

The  officers  and  men  of  my  command  behaved  with  great  courage 
and  coolness  throughout,  and  some  of  them  performed  some  very  gal- 
lant little  feats,  among  which  was  the  taking  of  a rifle  pit  on  the  after- 
noon of  June  24,  by  Oapt.  William  H.  Mann  and  10  men,  which  act  you 
witnessed.  Another  was  the  taking  of  a very  troublesome  work  of  the 
enemy,  which  was  afterward  used  to  place  the  new  position  of  Captain 
Foust’s  heavy  guns,  and  known  as  the  “ Cane  Pit.”  It  was  taken  with 
the  bayonet  on  the  night  of  June  15,  by  a volunteer  party  of  31  men, 
under  command  of  Lieut.  James  Butler,  of  Company  D,  accompanied 
by  Lieut.  David  Moore,  of  Company  EL  They  worked  their  way  between 
the  enemy’s  forts  and  rifle-pits,  and  took  one  of  the  latter,  with  4 pris- 
oners, without  firing  a shot. 

The  enemy  made  frequent  and  determined  efforts  to  dislodge  us  by 
shot  and  shell  from  the  advanced  positions  we  had  gained,  and  before 
the  completion  of  the  rifle-pits.  My  command  withstood  this  fire  with 
only  such  shelter  as  they  could  by  logs  and  irregularities  in  the  ground, 
but  never  lost  an  inch  of  ground  that  was  once  gained. 

On  June  24,  during  one  of  these  shellings,  we  lost  a brave  soldier, 
who  chose  rather  to  die  at  his  post  than  to  leave  if.  Frederick  Schlagel, 
of  Company  A,  was  struck  by  a piece  of  shell,  which  tore  away  his 
right  hip  and  part  of  his  bowels,  and  died  in  a few  hours — died  cheer- 
fully, like  a good  soldier  and  a brave  man.  Corpl.  William  Clark,  of 
Company  A,  was  upon  this  post,  and  again  displayed  that  courage  for 
which  I took  occasion  to  mention  his  name  in  my  report  of  the  last  battle. 

I herewith  give  the  casualties  of  my  command  from  June  15  to  July 
4,  inclusive : Killed,  1 ; wounded,  7.  Total,  8. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  McNULTA, 

Colonel , Commanding  Ninety -fourth  Illmois . 


No.  67. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Daniel  Kent , Nineteenth  Iowa  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Nineteenth  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry, 

July  5,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  the  part  taken  by  my 
regiment  in  the  late  siege  of  Vicksburg. 

We  landed  below  Young’s  Point,  La.,  on  the  11th  day  of  June,  1863; 

21  R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


322  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVi. 

marched  across  the  Point,  and  crossed  the  river  to  Warrenton,  Miss.,  on 
the  12th. 

On  the  13th,  we  marched  out  3 miles  and  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

On  the  14th,  we  were  assigned  position  on  the  right  of  our  (General 
Herron’s)  division,  and  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  works;  since  that  time 
we  have  been  actively  engaged  in  filling  details  for  picket  and  fatigue 
duty.  Our  picket  duty  was  mostly  performed  from  rifle-pits,  and  there 
was  constant  skirmishing  between  our  advance  and  that  of  the  enemy 
in  his  rifle-pits.  Under  cover  of  the  night  we  advanced  our  lines,  and 
prior  to  the  surrender  we  had  driven  the  enemy  from  his  advance  lines 
and  occupied  them. 

Our  fatigue  duty  consisted  in  digging  rifle-pits  and  planting  batteries 
and- siege  guns  to  bear  upon  the  enemy’s  works.  This  was  continued 
and  unremitting  (well  named  fatigue  duty)  until  the  morning  of  the 
ever- glorious  Fourth  Day  of  July,  when  the  glad  news  came  to  us  that 
Vicksburg  had  surrendered.  We  were  then  ordered  to  join  in  the 
march  of  the  triumphant  army,  which  we  did,  and  now  occupy  a part 
of  the  enemy’s  works. 

There  being  no  general  engagement,  our  casualties  were  few.  Pri- 
vate Thomas  Pender,  of  Company  I,  received  a slight  flesh  wound  in 
the  thigh. 

The  promptness  and  fidelity  with  which  the  officers  and  men  of  my 
command  performed  their  duties,  which  were  indeed  onerous,  is  worthy 
of  commendation,  especially  Major  Bruce,  whose  constant  and  untiring 
energy  is  worthy  of  emulation. 

I have,  general,  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  KENT, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel , Commanding  Regiment. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  W.  Orme, 

Comdg.  Orme’s  Brigade , Left  Division , Army  of  the  Tennessee. 


No.  68. 

Report  of  Col.  Henry  Bertram , Twentieth  Wisconsin  Lnfantry. 

Hdqrs.  Twentieth  Regiment  Wisconsin  Volunteers, 

Camp  near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  8,  1863. 

General:  In  compliance  with  General  Orders,  No.  10,  dated  Head- 
quarters Herron’s  division,  July  7,  I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  on 
June  15,  the  Twentieth  Regiment  Wisconsin  Volunteers  took  its  place 
in  line  of  investment  in  front  of  Vicksburg,  on  the  right  of  this  division, 
and  took  active  part  with  the  balance  of  the  division  in  picket  duty 
and  throwing  up  in  trench  in  ents,  erecting  batteries,  &c. 

On  the  night  of  June  22,  while  six  companies  of  this  regiment  were 
on  picket,  Captain  Gillett,  of  Company  D,  with  about  12  men  of  Com- 
panies D and  B,  charged  upon  a rifle-pit  of  the  rebels  in  front,  and 
captured  13  and  killed  1. 

The  casualties  of  the  regiment  during  the  investment  are  2 wounded. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  BERTRAM, 

Colonel , Commanding  Twentieth  Wisconsin  Volunteers. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  W.  Orme, 

Commanding  Brigade. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


323 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

No.  69. 

Report  of  Capt.  Martin  Welfley , Battery  B,  First  Missouri  Light  Ar- 
tillery. 

Camp,  Battery  B,  First  Missouri  Light  Artillery, 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  8,  1863. 

Captain  : In  pursuance  of  General  Orders,  No.  10,  Division  Head- 
quarters, I hereby  transmit  to  you  a brief  report  of  the  part  taken  by 
the  battery  under  my  command  in  the  siege  of  Vicksburg. 

On  June  14,  the  battery  arrived  in  our  lines  in  the  rear  of  Vicksburg 
and  encamped  on  a hill  on  the  main  road  leading  from  Warrenton  to 
Vicksburg. 

On  the  16th,  a position  was  selected  for  one  of  the  12-pounder  guns 
of  the  battery,  and  on  the  coming  night,  under  shelter  of  intense  dark- 
ness, a breastwork  was  thrown  up.  The  gun  was  in  position  at  2 a.  m. 
and  fire  opened  at  daybreak.  The  position  was  such  that  the  gun 
could  not  be  brought  to  bear  on  more  than  one  of  the  rebel  forts,  armed 
with  one  siege  gun.  At  the  second  shot  from  our  piece  this  rebel  gun 
was  withdrawn  without  having  fired. 

As  soon  as  the  enemy  ascertained  our  position,  which  was  hidden 
from  view  by  trees  and  branches,  he  opened  a well-directed  fire  from 
four  different  forts  or  batteries,  without  doing  any  execution.  Not  being 
able  to  bear  on  any  of  these  batteries,  our  fire  was  discontinued  after 
the  fifteenth  round,  the  12-pounder  remaining  in  its  position. 

On  June  18,  a more  favorable  position  was  selected  on  a hill  about 
800  yards  from  the  nearest  rebel  battery.  A fatigue  party  was  imme- 
diately set  to  work  digging  out  places  for  two  12-pouuders  and  one 
32-pounder  gun,  thereby  making  the  brow  of  the  hill  a natural  breast- 
work for  the  pieces. 

On  the  morning  of  June  21,  the  two  12-pounder  guns  of  the  battery, 
including  the  one  above  mentioned  and  one  32-pounder  gun  from  the 
gunboat  Benton,  were  in  position,  ready  for  action.  Meantime  one  of 
the  12-pounder  howitzers  of  the  battery  had  been  placed  in  the  position 
before  occupied  by  the  12-pounder  gun. 

At  daybreak  I opened  fire  with  the  four  pieces  in  position  under  my 
charge,  five  of  the  enemy’s  forts  and  batteries  being  within  range.  The 
enemy  first  replied  with  vigor,  but  was  finally  silenced. 

From  this  time  on  I always  awaited  orders  from  headquarters  or  the 
fire  of  the  enemy  before  opening  with  my  guns,  and  in  the  latter  was 
generally  successful  in  silencing  the  rebel  pieces.  Although  the  enemy’s 
shot  and  shell  fell  very  close,  the  latter  generally  explodingin  our  imme- 
diate front,  none  of  my  men  were  struck  and  no  damage  done  to  the 
pieces. 

On  1th?  morning  of  July  4,  the  welcome  intelligence  of  tho  surrender 
°1  V icksburg  was  received,  and  in  the  course  of  the  day  the  pieces  were 
withdrawn  to  the  camp  of  the  battery. 

The  total  number  of  rounds  of  ammunition  fired  by  the  pieces  under 
my  charge  is  910. 

The  coolness  and  energy  of  the  officers  and  men  under  my  command 
deserve  my  highest  compliments. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

„ , „ , T M.  WELFLEY, 

japt .,  (j omdg.  Battery  B,  First  Regt.  Missouri  Light  Artillery. 
Captain  Burr, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  (general. 


324 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

No.  70. 


Consolidated  statement  of  prisoners  of  war  captured  and  paroled , and  of 
prisoners  of  war  captured  and  sent  North,  by  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee , 
during  the  month  of  July,  1863,  by  Mag.  Gen.  TJ.  S.  Grant,  commanding. 


Command. 


RECAPITULATION  OF  THE  VICKSBURG  CAPTURE. 

Generals  and  staff 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton’s  escort 

Major-General  Stevenson’s  division : 

First  Brigade,  Brigadier-General  [S.  M.] 
Barton. 

Second  Brigade,  Brigadier-General  [S. 
D.J  Lee. 

Third  Brigade,  Brigadier-General  [Al- 
fred] Cumming. 

Fourth  Brigade,  Brigadier-General  [A. 
W.]  Reynolds. 

Waul’ s Legion,  Signal  Corps,  and  escort 
company. 

Major-General  Forney’s  division : 

First  Brigade,  Brigadier-General  [Louis] 
Hdbert. 

Second  Brigade,  Brigadier-General  [J. 
C.]  Moore. 

Major-General  Bowen’s  division : 

First  Brigade,  Colonel  [F.  M.l  Cockrell. 
Second  Brigade,  Colonel  [T.  P.]  Dockery. 

Major-General  Smith’s  division : 

First  Brigade,  Brigadier-General  [W.  E.] 
Baldwin. 

Second  Brigade,  Brigadier-General  [J. 
C.]  Yaughn. 

Third  Brigade,  Brigadier -General  [F. 
A.  ] Shoup. 

Officers  and  men  detached  from  their  com- 
mands. 

Officers  and  men  who  refused  to  take  paroles 
(sent  North). 

Officers  and  men  paroled  in  hospitals 

Total 

RECAPITULATION  OF  CAPTURES  BY  EXPEDI- 
TIONARY ARMIES. 

Prisoners  of  war  captured  at  Natchez,  Miss., 
by  Brig.  Gen.  T.  E.  G.  Ransom,  July,  1863 
(sent  North). 

Prisoners  of  war  captured  at  and  near  Jack- 
son,  Miss.,  by  ktaj.  Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman, 
July,  1863  (sent  North). 

Prisoners  of  war  captured  at  Yazoo  City, 
Miss.,  by  Maj.  Gen.  F.  J.  Herron,  July, 
1863  (sent  North). 

Prisoners  of  war  captured  and  paroled  at 
Yazoo  City,  Miss.,  by  Maj.  Gen.  F.  J.  Her- 
ron, July  13, 1863. 

Total 

RECAPITULATION  OF  PRISONERS  OF  WAR  CAP- 
TURED BY  THE  ARMY  OF  TENNESSEE. 

Vicksburg  capture 

Captures  by  expeditionary  armies. 


Lieutenant-generals. 

Major-generals. 

Brigadier-generals. 

Colonels. 

Lieutenant-colonels. 

Majors. 

Captains. 

First  lieutenants. 

Second  lieutenants. 

Third  lieutenants. 

Chaplains. 

Volunteer  aides. 

Cadets. 

1 

4 

10 

8 

6 

43 

49 

49 

10 

13 

1 

1 

1 

2 

1 

1 

3 

2 

3 

39 

37 

39 

25 

2 

4 

3 

4 

47 

43 

50 

25 

3 

1 

2 

41 

35 

33 

17 

4 

3 

3 

36 

40 

41 

33 

8 

9 

9 

6 

4 

2 

4 

44 

48 

44 

21 

8 

7 

4 

80 

95 

74 

36 

1 

* ' 

3 

2 

4 

27 

38 

36 

13 

2 

1 

1 

28 

25 

19 

2 

2 

3 

3 

40 

34 

33 

22 

3 

2 

5 

33 

30 

33 

19 

1 

2 

2 

36 

24 

28 

14 

1 

2 

4 

50 

33 

31 

g 

1 

3 

5 

29 

63 

32 

2 

1 

4 

10 

49 

37 

87 

588 

606 

513 

244 

3 

13 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

2 

5 

4 

2 

4 

2 

1 

2 

5 

10 

7 

1 

4 

10 

49 

37 

87 

588 

606 

513 

244 

3 

13 

1 

2 

5 

10 

7 

' 

>1 

4 

10 

49 

37 1 

89 

593 

616 

520 

244 

3 

ir 

I 

Total. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

Consolidated  statement  of  prisoners  of  war  captured , tfc.— Continued. 


325 


Command. 


CAPTURE. 
Generals  and  staff 


Major-General  Stevenson’s  division : 

First  Brigade,  Brigadier-General 
[S.  M.]  Barton. 

Second  Brigade,  Brigadier-Genera] 
[S.  D,]  Lee. 

Third  Brigade,  Brigadier-General 
[Alfred]  Camming. 

Fourth  Brigade,  Brigadier-General 
[A.  W.]  Reynolds. 

Ward's  Legion,  Signal  Corps,  and 
escort  company. 

Major-General  Forney’s  division : 

First  Brigade,  Brigadier-General 
[Louis]  H6bert. 

Second  Brigade,  Brigadier- General 
[J.  C.]  Moore. 

Major-General  Bowen’s  division : 

First  Brigade,  Colonel  [F.  M.] 
CockrellT 

Second  Brigade,  Colonel  [T.  P.] 
Dockery. 

Major-General  Smith’s  division : 

First  Brigade,  Brigadier-General 
[ W.  E.  | Baldwin. 

Second  Brigade,  Brigadier- General 
rJ.C.]  Vaughn. 

Third  Brigade,  Brigadier-General 
[F.  A.]  Shoup. 

Officers  and  men  detached  from  their 
commands. 

Officers  and  men  who  refused  to  take 
paroles  (sent  North). 

Officers  and  men  paroled  in  hospitals. . 


Total . 


RECAPITULATION  OP  CAPTURES  BY  EX- 
PEDITIONARY ARMIES. 

Prisoners  of  war  captured  at  Natchez, 
Miss.,  by  Brig.  Gen.  T.  E.  G.  Ransom, 
July,  1863  (sent  North). 

Prisoners  of  war  captured  at  and  near 
Jackson,  Miss.,  by  Maj.  Gen.  W.  T. 
Sherman,  July,  1863  (sent  North). 
Prisoners  of  w-ar  captured  at  Yazoo 
City,  Miss.,  by  Maj.  Gen.  F.  J.  Her- 
ron. J uly,  1863  (sent  North).  . 

Prisoners  of  war  captured  and  paroled 
at  Yazoo  Citv,  Miss.,  by  Maj.  Gen.  F. 
J:  Herron,  July  13, 1863. 


Total 


RECAPITULATION  OF  PRISONERS  OF  WAR 
CAPTURED  BY  THE  ARMY  OF  TENNES- 
SEE. 


Vicksburg  capture 

Captures  by  expeditionary  armies. 


Total , 


1 Non-commissioned  1 

o+oer 

First  sergeants. 

Sergeants. 

Corporals. 

. 2 

2 

t --- 

5 

2 

14 

23 

132 

99 

[ 16 

32 

143 

128 

10 

10 

103 

84 

10 

33 

148 

140 

3 

4 

38 

32 

21 

37 

182 

167 

32 

50 

280 

283 

14 

2 

123 

77 

| 23 

5 

78 

60 

11 

18 

115 

117 

15 

10 

119 

91 

8 

14 

95 

81 

26 

8 

73 

80 

3 

15 

15  ■ 

23 

6 

207 

165  • 

231 

252 

1,858  : 

L,  621  1 

1 

46 

30  - 

4 

2 

3 . 

.... 

1 

7 

3 - 

6 

55 

36  - 

531  2 

152  1 

,858  1 

,621  li 

6 

55 

36  .. 

531  2 

58  1 

,913  |l 

,657  14 

54 
1,  681 
1,952 
1, 427 
1,602 
477 

1,  611 
3, 388 

1, 199 
877 


1,336 
1,  216 
.- 11,170 
- - 1, 483 
--  675 

-.3, 084 


Total. 


13 


724 


115 


148 


96 


-.1,000 

j 


-|  1,000  - 
14|16  24,  233;5 


19 


115 


194 

6 

150 

176 

152 

160 

32 

167 

305 

123 

78 

137 

125 

97 

129 

1 

134 


a 

o 

pjxc 
qj  g 
'H  P, 

6 


5 

61 

1,952 

2,  271 

1,  634 

1,  933 
554 

2,  019 
4,  063 

1,  415 
1,  043 

1,  597 
1,451 
1,  368 
1,  671 
708 


199 

67 

2, 102 

2,  447 

1,  766 

2,  093 
586 

2, 186 
4,  368 

1,  538 
1, 121 

1,  734 
1,  576 
1,465 
1,  896 
709 


19  3,485  3,638 


22 


2,166  1115  127,230  29,491 


22 


26 


141 


24 


2, 166 
24 


115 


14 


124 


159 


1,  097 


27, 230 


17 


816 


154 


160 


1,147 


29,  491 


1,  097 1 1, 147 


2,190  |141  128,327  30,638 


Approved. 

L.  KENT,  Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Provost-Marshal- General. 
[Indorsement.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  Tenn.,  Vicksburg , Miss.,  August  6,  1863. 
Respectfully  forwarded  to  Headquarters  Army,  Washington,  D.  O. 

U.  S.  GRANT,  Major- General. 


326  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXX VI. 

No.  71. 

Organization  of  the  Confederate  Army  of  Vicksburg , Lieut.  Gen.  John 
C.  Pemberton  commanding , July  4,  1863.* 


STEVENSON’ 

Maj.  Gen.  C.  ] 

First  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  M.  Barton. 

40th  Georgia,  Lieut.  Col.  R.  M.  Young. 
4l8t  Georgia,  Col.  William  E.  Curtiss. 

42d  Georgia,  Col.  R.  J.  Henderson. 

43d  Georgia,  Capt.  M.  M.  Grantham. 

52d  Georgia,  Maj.  John  Jay  Moore. 
Hudson’s  (Mississippi)  battery,  Lieut. 

Milton  H.  Trantham. 

Pointe  Couple  (Louisiana)Artillery,  Com- 
pany A (section),  Lieut.  John  Yoist. 
Pointe  Couple  (Louisiana)  Artillery, Com- 
pany C,  Capt.  Alexander  Chust. 

Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Alfred  Cumming. 

34th  Georgia,  Col.  James  A.  W.  Johnson. 
36th  Georgia,  Maj.  Charles  E.  Broyles. 
39th  Georgia,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  F.  B.  Jackson. 
56th  Georgia,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  T.  Slaughter. 
57th  Georgia,  Col.  William  Barkuloo. 
Cherokee  (Georgia)  Artillery,  Capt.  M. 
Van  Den  Corput. 


s DIVISION. 

i.  Stevenson. 

Third  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  S.  D.  Lee. 

20th  Alabama,  Col.  Edmund  W.  Pettus. 
23d  Alabama,  Col.  F.  K.  Beck. 

30th  Alabama,  Capt.  John  C.  Francis. 
31st  Alabama,  Lieut.  Col.  T.  M.  Arring- 
ton. 

46th  Alabama,  Capt.  George  E.  Brewer. 
Alabama  Battery,  Capt.  J.  F.  Waddell. 

Fourth  Brigade. 

Col.  A.  W.  Reynolds. 

3d  Tennessee  (Provisional  Army),  Col. 
N.  J.  Lillard. 

39th  Tennessee,!  Col.  William  M.  Brad- 
ford. 

43d  Tennessee,  Col.  James  W.  Gillespie. 
59th  Tennessee,  Col.  William  L.  Eakin. 
3d  Maryland  Battery,  Capt.  John  B. 
Rowan. 


WauV8  Texas  Legion. 

Col.  T.  N.  Waul.  ' 

1st  Battalion  (infantry),  Maj.  Eugene  S.  Bolling. 

2d  Battalion  (infantry),  Lieut.  Col.  James  Wrigley. 

Cavalry  battalion,  Lieut.  Thomas  J.  Cleveland. 

Artillery  company,  Capt.  J.  Q.  Wall. 

Attached. 

1st  Tennessee  Cavalry  (Carter’s  regiment),  Company  C,  Capt.  R.  S.  Vandyke. 
Botetourt  (Virginia)  Artillery,!  Lieut.  James  P.  Wright. 

Signal  Corps,  Lieut.  C.  H.  Barrot. 


FORNEY’S  DIVISION. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  H.  Forney. 


Hebert’s  Brigade. 


Brig.  Gen.  Louis  Hebert. 


3d  Louisiana,  Maj.  David  Pierson. 

21st  Louisiana,  Lieut.  Col.  J.  T.  Platts- 
mier. 

36th  Mississippi,  Col.  W.  W.  Wither- 
spoon. 

37th  Mississippi,  Col.  O.  S.  Holland. 

38th  Mississippi,  Capt.  D.  B.  Seal. 


43d  Mississippi,  Col.  Richard  Harrison. 
7th  Mississippi  Battalion,  Capt.  A.  M. 
Dozier. 

2d  Alabama  Artillery  Battalion,  Com- 
pany C,  Lieut.  John  R.  Sclater. 
Appeal  (Arkansas)  Battery,  Lieut.  R.  N. 
Cotten. 


* The  commanders  are  given  as  indicated  by  the  paroles, 
t Paroled  as  the  Thirty-first  Regiment,  and  so  known  prior  to  June,  1863. 
X Assignment  uncertain. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


327 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


Moore's  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  C.  Moore. 


37 tli  Alabama,  Col.  J.  F.  Dowdell. 

40th  Alabama,  Col.  John  H.  Higley. 

42d  Alabama,  Col.  John  W.  Portis. 

1st  Mississippi  Light  Artillery,*  Col. 
William  T.  Withers. 

35th  Mississippi,  Lieut.  Col.  C.  R.  Jordan. 


40th  Mississippi,  Col.  W.  B.  Colbert. 

2d  Texas,  Col.  Aslibel  Smith. 

Alabama  battery,  Capt  H.  H.  Sengstak. 
Pointe  Coupde  (Louisiana)  Artillery, 
Company  B,  Capt.  William  A. 
Davidson. 


smith’s  division. 


Maj.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith. 


Baldwin's  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  E.  Baldwin. 

17th  Louisiana,  Col.  Robert  Richardson. 
31st  Louisiana,  Lieut.  Col.  James  W. 
Draughon. 

4th  Mississippi,  Capt.  Thomas  P.  Nelson. 
46th  Mississippi,  Col.  C.  W.  Sears. 
Tennessee  Battery,  Capt.  Thomas  F. 
Tobin.  • 

Vaughn's  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  J.  C.  Vaughn. 

60th  Tennessee,  Capt.  J.  W.  Bachman. 
61st  Tennessee,  Lieut.  Col.  James  G.  Rose. 
62d  Tennessee,  Col.  John  A.  Rowan. 


Shoup's  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Francis  A.  Shoup. 

26th  Louisiana,  Lieut.  Col.  William  C. 
Crow. 

27th  Louisiana,  Capt.  Joseph  T.  Hatch. 
28th  [29th]  Louisiana,  Col.  Allen  Thomas. 
McNally’s  (Arkansas)  battery,  Capt. 
Joseph  T.  Hatch. 

Mississippi  State  Troops,  t 

Brig.  Gen.  John  V.  Harris. 

5th  Regiment,  Col.  H.  C.  Robinson. 

3d  Battalion,  Lieut.  Col.  Thomas  A. 
Burgin. 


Attached. 

14th  Mississippi  Light  Artillery  Battalion,  Maj.  M.  S.  Ward. 
Mississippi  Partisan  Rangers,  Capt.  J.  S.  Smyth. 

Signal  Corps,  Capt.  Max.  T.  Davidson. 

BOWEN’S  DIVISION. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  S.  Bowen. 


First  ( Missouri ) Brigade. 

Col.  Francis  M.  Cockrell. 

1st  Missouri,  Col.  A.  C.  Riley. 

2d  Missouri,  Maj.  Thomas  M.  Carter. 

3d  Missouri,  Maj.  J.  K.  McDowell. 

5th  Missouri,  Col.  James  McCown. 

6th  Missouri,  Maj.  S.  Cooper. 

Guibor’s  (Missouri)  battery,  Lieut.  Cor- 
nelius Heffernan. 

Landis’  (Missouri)  battery,  Lieut.  John 
M.  Langan. 

Wade’s  (Missouri)  battery,  Lieut.  R.  C. 
Walsh. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  T.  P.  Dockery. 

15th  Arkansas,  Capt.  Caleb  Davis. 

19th  Arkansas,  Capt.  James  K.  Norwood. 
20th  Arkansas,  Col.  D.  W.  Jones. 

21st  Arkansas,  Capt.  A.  Tyler. 

1st  Arkansas  Cavalry  Battalion,  Capt. 
John  J.  Clark. 

12th  Arkansas  Battalion  (sharpshooters), 
Lieut.  John  S.  Bell. 

1st  Missouri  Cavalry,  Maj.  William  C. 
Parker. 

3d  Missouri  Cavalry,  Capt.  Felix  Lot- 
speich. 

3d  Missouri  Battery,  Capt.  William  E. 
Dawson. 

Lowe’s  (Missouri)  battery,  Lieut.  Thomas 
B.  Catron. 


Batteries  A,  C,  D,  L,  G,  and  I.  Battery  L (Vaiden  Artillery)  reported  in  Higgins’ 
command,  and  Batteries  B,  F,  and  K at  Port  Hudson.  La. 
t Under  Vaughn’s  command. 


328 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chat.  XXX VL 


RIVER  BATTERIES.* 

Col.  Ed.  Higgins. 

1st  Louisiana  Artillery, t Lieut.  Col.  I).  Beltzhoover. 

8th  Louisiana  Heavy  Artillery  Battalion, t Maj.  F.  N.  Oden 
22d  Louisiana,  $ Capt.  Samuel  Jones. 

1st  Tennessee  Heavy  Artillery,  ||  Col.  A.  Jackson,  jr. 
Tennessee  Battery,  Capt.  J.  B.  Caruthers. 

Tennessee  Battery,  Capt.  T.  N.  Johnston. 

Tennessee  Battery,  Capt.  J.  P.  Lynch. 

Vaiden  (Mississippi ) Battery,  Capt.  S.  C.  Bains. 

MISCELLANEOUS. 

54th  Alabama  (detachment),  Lieut.  Joel  P.  Abney. 

City  Guards,  Capt.  E.  B.  Martin. 

Signal  Corps,  Capt.  C.  A.  King. 


No.  72. 

Summary  of  the  Casualties  in  the  Confederate  forces  during  the  siege  of 

Vicksburg. 

[Compiled  from  the  reports,  and  incomplete.}  . 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded, 

Missing. 

Aggregate. 

8 

© 

© 

o 

d 

a 

© 

to 

'a 

H 

ts 

o 

H 

6 

© 

£ 

o 

§ 

a 

ns 

© 

a 

W 

3 

o 

EH 

00 

Sh 

© 

© 

© 

o 

a 

© 

a 

© 

.05 

'fl 

’i 

H 

Stevenson’s  division : 

Barton’s  brigade  

6 

6 

20 

20 

5 

5 

31 

Cnmming’s  brigade 

1 

21 

22 

*4 

70 

74 

96 

Lee’s  brigade 

3 

67 

70 

10 

137 

147 

1 

6 

7 

224 

A.  W.  Reynolds’  brigade. 

4 

10 

14 

25 

25 

1 

13 

14 

53 

Waddell’s  battery 

9 

9 

2 

28 

30 

39 

Texas  Legion 

10 

37 

47 

37 

153 

190 

1 

7 

8 

245 

Total 

18 

150 

168 

53 

433 

486 

3 

31 

34 

688 

Forney’s  division : 

Hubert’s  brigade 

25 

194 

219 

39 

416 

455 

21 

21 

635 

Moore’s  brigade 

8 

113 

121 

20 

284 

304 

425 

Total 

33 

307 

340 

59 

700 

759 

21 

21 

1, 120 

Smith’s  division : 

1 

Baldwin’s  brigade 

Vaughn’s  brigade 

Shoup’s  brigade 

12 

ill 

107 

11 

188 

199 

306 

Total 

12 

95 

107 

11 

188 

199 

306 

Bowen’s  division: 

l 

Cock i ell’s  brigade 

113 

446 

559 

Dockery’s  brigade 

""I 

| 

Total 

24 

166 

190 

35 

459 

494 

74 

74 

758 

Grand  total 

1,  938  j 

129 

2,  872 

1 

Remarks. 


> Stevenson’s  report.  If 

I 

1 

Waul’s  report. 


Nominal  list. 
Nominal  list. 


Not  reported 
Not  reported. 
Skoup’s  report. 


Cockrell’s  report. 
Not  reported. 

Pemberton’s  report. 


* The  troops  in  this  command  paroled  as  of  Moore’s  brigade, 
t Bond’s,  Bruce’s,  Butler’s,  Capers’,  Grayson’s,  Haynes’,  Lamon’s,  and  Bobertson’e 
companies. 

1 Barrow’s,  Grandpr^’s,  and  McCrory’s  companies. 

$ P.  A.  Gomez’s,  Marks’,  Morlot’s,  and  Theard’s  companies. 

I!  Dismukes’,  Neylaud's,  Norman’s,  and  Parks’ companies : Caruthers’,  Johnston’s, 
and  Lynch’s  companies  attached. 

U Covering  May  19-June  13. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


329 


OFFICERS  REPORTED  KILLED. 


Cumming’s  Brigade. — Thirty-ninth  Georgia,  Lieut.  J.  R.  Redmond, 
ice’s  Brigade.— > Twentieth  Alabama,  Col.  Isham  W.  Garrott ; Forty-sixth  Alabama, 
Lieuts.  J.  K.  P.  Cotton  and  J.  T.  House.  ’ 

Reynolds ’ Brigade.— Third  Tennessee,  Maj.  J.  C.  Boyd,  Capt.  B.  F.  Gaddis  and 
Lieut.  J.  H.  Cody  ; Forty-third  Tennessee,  Capt.  Sterling  T.  Turner,  Lieut.  Wilson 
Clepper,  and  Asst.  Surg.  W.  B.  Johnson;  Third  Maryland  Battery,  Capt.  F.  O.  Clai- 
borne. 


Waul’s  Texas  Legion. — Maj.  Allen  Cameron  and  Capts.  Samuel  Carter  and  J.  A.  Led- 
better. 

Hebert’s  Brigade. — -Staff,  Col.  Charles  H.  Herrick;  Third  Louisiana,  Capts.  J.  E. 
Johnson  and  John  Kinney  and  Lieut.  A.  S.  Randolph ; Twenty-first  Louisiana,  Capt. 
J . Ryan  and  Lieut.  G.  H.  Mann ; Twenty-second  Louisiana,  Capt.  F.  Gomez  and  Lieut. 
R.  E.  Lehman  ; Thirty-sixth  Mississippi,  Maj.  Alexander  Yates  and  Capt.  J.  S.  Tatom 
(Capt.  i . J.  Chrisman  and  Lieut.  A.  T.  MnrrA.ll  fl.A.ri  wnn n/-i u \ • . 


nw  n ,n;  £ i^IS811.881PPl  Battalion,  Capt.  S.  C.  Pearson  and  Lieut,  J.  C. 

C.  Weiborn  (Capt.  W.  T.  Baylis  died  of  wounds);  Appeal  Battery,  Capt.  W.  N.  Hootr 

lrtiik“-uloar)^tig„”?n,Je1’8  baMery’  Capt'  T‘  K' E— 1 ‘i  Puinte  C»«P^ 

Moore’s  Brigade.— Forty-second  Alabama,  Lieut.  Capers  W.  Bodie ; Thirty-fifth  Mis- 
sissippi, Capts.  S.  R.  CoOpwood  and  H.  M.  Walsh  and  Lieut,  G.  Moody  ; Fortieth  Mis- 
sissippi  Maj.  R.  B Campbell  ; Second  Texas,  Capt.  A.  F.  Gammell  and  Lieut.  Robert 
S.  Henry  (Lieut.  William  I.  Kirk  died  of  wounds). 

CaptwutamTtSi™rty'flrSt  L°"i8iana’  ^ H'  Griffl^ 

Vaughn’s  Brigade.— (No  report.) 

Slump's  Rri^e.-Staff,  Capts.  Louis  Florence  and  J.  F.  Spencer;  Twenty-sixth 
Louisiana,  Maj.  V.  W.  Martin,  Capt.  Felix  G.  Winder,  and  Lieuts.  M.  Arnaux  and 
Jeter  J enner ; 1 wenty-seventh  Louisiana,  Lieut.  Col.  L.  L.  McLaurin  and  Lieut, 
George  Harris  (Col.  L D.  Marks  mortally  wounded) ; Twenty-eighth  [Twenty-ninth! 
Louisiana,  Capt.  F.  Newman  and  Lieuts.  B.  F.  Millett  and  J.  G.  Sims  J J 

Cockrell’s  Brigade.- Second  Missouri,  Lieut.  Co].  P.  S.  Senteny  ; Sixth  Missouri,  Col. 
Eugene  Erwm  and  Lieuts.  John  T.  Crenshaw  and  John  Roseberrv 
Dockery’s  Brigade.— Brig.  Gen.  Martin  E.  Green.  * 


No.  73. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Samuel  E.  Lockett,  G.  S.  Engineers,  Chief  Engineer* 


Gainesville,  Ala.,  July  26,  1863. 

SiR : I herein  have  the  honor  to  submit  my  report  of  the  engineer 
operations  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg. 

Our  army  fell  back  to  the  city  on  Sunday,  May  17,  and  were  put  in  the 
trenches  in  the  following  order,  viz:  Major-General  Stevenson  occupied 
the  line  included  between  the  railroad  and  the  Warrenton  road,  on  the 
south,  General  Forney  the  line  between  the  railroad  and  the  Graveyard 
road  and  General  Smith  the  line  from  the  Graveyard  road  to  the  river 
tront,  on  the  north. 

On  the  18th,  I made  a careful  examination  of  the  entire  line,  and  made 
the  following  dispositions  of  the  engineer  officers  under  my  command, 
to  facilitate  the  operations  of  strengthening  and  repairing  the  works  : 
C aptain  [Powhatan]  Eobmson,  Engineers,  was  assigned  to  the  line  com- 
manded by  Major-General  Stevenson,  and  had  under  him,  as  assistants, 
the  following  officers,  viz  : Capt.  J.  J.  Conway,  Twentieth  Mississippi 
detailed  assistant  engineer;  Actg.  Lieut.  A.  W.  Gloster,  assistant  engi- 
neer;  Actg.  Lieut.  R.  E.  Southard,  assistant  engineer;  Capt.  James 

Donnellf^  ofn¥af r Lockett,  Captains  Robinson  and  Wintter,  Lieutenant 

Honnellan,  and  Messrs.  Gmder  and  Vernon,  being  covered  by  this  report,  are  omitted. 


330 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXYI, 


M.  Con  per,  commissary  Fourteenth  [Twentieth]  Mississippi,  acting  as- 
sistant engineer;  Mr.  B.  H.  Saunders,  office  assistant. 

Capt.  I).  Wintter,  commanding  company  of  sappers  and  miners,  was 
assigned  to  the  line  commanded  by  Major-Generals  Forney  and  Smith, 
and  had  under  him  as  assistants  the  following  officers,  viz  : First  Lieut. 
E.  McMahon,  company  sappers  and  miners;  Second  Lieut.  F.  Gillooly, 
company  sappers  and  miners;  Capt.  James  [T.]  Hogane,  acting  assistant 
engineer;  Actg.  Lieut.  S.  McD.  Vernon,  assistant  engineer,  and  Acting 
Lieut.  P.  J.  Blessing. 

Lieut.  William  O.  Flynn,  of  Captain  Wintter’s  company,  was  ordered 
to  report  for  engineer  duty  to  Col.  E.  Higgins,  commanding  the  heavy 
artillery. 

This  arrangement  gave  to  each  brigade  one  immediate  assistant,  whose 
duty  it  was  to  report  directly  to  the  brigade  commander,  and  to  each 
division  an  engineer  to  take  general  control. 

Lieut.  George  Donnellan,  engineer,  Provisional  Army  Confederate 
States,  I kept  m my  office  to  take  charge  of  the  procuring  and  distribu 
tion  of  materials.  Mr.  H.  Ginder  was  employed  as  draughtsman  and 
Mr.  G.  C.  Brower  as  clerk. 

The  working  force  under  my  control  was  as  follows  : 

Twenty-six  sappers  and  miners,  of  Captain  Wintter’s  company ; 8 
detailed  mechanics  and  foremen  ; 4 overseers  for  negroes  ; 72  negroes 
hired,  20  being  sick;  3 four-mule  teams,  25  yoke  of  draught  oxen. 

An  accurate  return  of  the  intrenching  tools  was  never  obtained,  from 
the  fact  that  they  were  always  employed  and  so  much  scattered.  The 
nujnber,  however,  was  not  far  from  500  of  all  kinds. 

The  work  on  the  lines  was  generally  done  by  fatigue  parties  detailed 
from  each  command  to  work  within  the  limits  of  its  own  line. 

The  line  of  defense  around  the  city  of  Vicksburg  consisted,  as  shown 
on  the  inclosed  map,*  of  a system  of  detached  works  (redans,  lunettes, 
and  redoubts)  on  the  prominent  and  commanding  points,  with  the 
usual  profile  of  raised  field-works,  connected,  in  most  cases,  by  rifle-pits. 
These  works,  having  been  made  during  the  fall  and  winter  of  last  year, 
were  considerably  weakened  by  washing,  and  needed  strengthening  and 
repairing.  Fatigue  parties  were  immediately  set  to  work  making  these 
repairs  and  completing  the  connection  of  rifle-pits  from  work  to  work. 

On  the  night  of  May  17,  and  the  morning  of  the  18th,  all  the  field 
guns,  Parrott  guns,  and  siege  pieces  at  our  disposal  were  put  in  position 
on  the  line,  and  platforms  and  embrasures  prepared  for  them. 

Between  the  18th  and  22d,  the  enemy  succeeded  in  establishing  their 
line  of  circumvallation  at  about  the  distance  of  800  yards,  extending 
from  our  extreme  left  to  in  front  of  the  square  redoubt  (Fort  Garrott)  on 
the  right  of  Brigadier-General  Lee’s  line.  The  fire  of  their  artillery  and 
sharpshooters  soon  became  quite  annoying,  and  showed  the  necessity  of 
erecting  numerous  traverses  to  prevent  enfilading  fires,  and  the  impor- 
tance of  having  covered  approaches  from  the  rear.  All  of  these  im- 
provements were  made  as  rapidly  as  possible  by  the  engineers,  with 
fatigue  parties  working  at  night. 

On  the  22d,  the  enemy’s  artillery  fire  was  very  heavy  along  their  whole 
line,  and  a determined  assault  was  made  on  the  Graveyard,  Jackson, 
and  Baldwin’s  Ferry  roads,  and  along  the  whole  of  General  Lee]s  front 
on  the  right  of  the  railroad.  A breach  was  made  in  the  redoubt  near 
the  railroad  (Fort  Pettus),  and  many  other  of  the  raised  works  were  con- 
siderably battered.  All  damages  were  repaired,  however,  at  night,  and 


* To  appear  in  Atlas. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  331 

the  morning  of  the  23d  found  our  works  in  as  good  condition  as  at  the 
beginning  of  the  enemy’s  operations. 

The  enemy,  being  apparently  satisfied  with  their  attempts  at  carrying 
our  works  by  assault,  now  commenced  their  regular  approaches,  and 
soon  had  possession  of  a line  of  hills  on  the  main  roads,  not  exceeding 
350  yards  distance  from  our  salient  points.  These  hills  they  crowned 
with  heavy  batteries  and  connected ’as  rapidly  as  possible  with  their 
second  parallel. 

On  the  24th,  some  of  the  enemy’s  sappers  crept  up  a ravine  to  within 
40  yards  of  the  work  on  the  Jackson  road,  and  started  a sap,  appar- 
ently with  the  intention  of  mining.  When  they  had  reached  within 
20  paces  of  our  work,  they  were  dislodged  by  hand-grenades,  and  re- 
linquished this  attempt  for  some  time. 

On  the  25th,  the  enemy  appeared  in  force  on  the  Warren  ton  road,  and 
commenced  establishing  batteries  in  Gett’s  field,  at  a distance  of  some 
600  yards  from  our  advanced  redoubt.  They  also  pushed  their  first 
parallel  on  toward  our  right,  and  crossed  the  Hall’s  Ferry  road  about 
1,000  yards  from  the  advanced  redoubt  on  this  road.  Their  line  of  cir- 
cumvallation  was  by  this  completed,  and  remained  unbroken  thencefor- 
ward. To  prevent  any  approach  of  the  enemy  up  the  river  flat,  I at- 
tempted to  construct  an  abatis  from  the  hills  to  the  river,  and  sent  out 
a working  party  under  Lieutenant  Donnellau  and  Mr.  Ginder  for  that 
purpose.  The  guard  for  the  working  party  was  driven  in  after  a skir- 
mish and  the  capture  of  100  of  the  enemy.  The  work  was  not  accom- 
plished.' On  this  day  rifle-pits  were  started  along  the  river  front  to 
connect  the  line  of  land  defenses  on  the  right  with  the  heavy  batteries. 

Along  the  rear  line  the  engineers  were  engaged  in  general  repairs* 
strengthening  the  parapets,  extending  the  rifle-pits,  placing  obstruc- 
tions m front  of  the  exposed  points,  consisting  of  abatis,  palisades, 
ditches,  and  entanglements  of  pickets  and  telegraph  wire.  Sand-bag 
loop  holes  were  also  made  along  the  whole  line  to  protect  our  sharp- 
shooters. These  sand-bags  were  made  from  tent-flies  and  old  tents 
turned  over  to  me  by  the  quartermaster’s  department,  and  from  the 
same  source  I obtained  a supply  of  material  during  the  whole  siege.  A 
32  pounder  was  moved  from  the  river  front  and  mounted  on  the  left  of 
General  ^mith’s  line,  a new  battery  for  three  guns  started  in  rear  of 
Genera!  [S.  D.]  Lee’s,  and  a new  battery  for  two  guns  built  on  the  left 
of  General  [J.  O.]  Moore’s. 

On  the  night  ot  the  26th,  the  usual  work  of  repairs  and  improvements 
went  on ; the  rifle-pits  on  the  river  front  were  pushed  ahead ; the  bat- 
tery in  rear  of  General  Lee  was  finished,  and  a 30-pounder  Parrott  put  in 
position.  On  this  night  the  enemy  for  the  first  time  fired  on  our  work- 
ing parties,  and  wounded  a lieutenant  commanding  a fatigue  partv. 

On  the  27th,  the  enemy  attacked  our  river  front  with  their  gunboats, 
without,  however,  doing  any  serious  damage.  They  were  driven  off 
and  the  Cincinnati  sunk  by  the  upper  battery.  This  battery  was  pro- 
tected by  traverses  from  an  enfilade  fire  from  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters 
on  the  hills  across  Mint  Spring  Bayou. 

On  the  28th,  the  artillery  fire  of  the  enemy  was  unusuallv  severe,  and 
several  of  our  works  were  considerably  damaged,  especially  the  works 
on  General  Lee’s  front,  and  on  the  Graveyard  and  Jackson  roads.  All 
damages  were  repaired  at  night,  and  a new  battery  made  in  rear  of 
General  Moore’s  line,  on  the  right  of  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road. 

On  the  29th,  the  usual  repairs  and  improvements  continued  along 
the  whole  line:  a new  battery  made  in  rear  of  the  line  left  of  Hall’s 
T erry  road ; the  new  battery  in  rear  of  General  Lee  improved,  and 


332 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chat.  XXXVI. 


“ Whistling  Dick”  (an  18-pounder  rifled  piece)  put  in  position,  and  a 
new  battery  started  in  rear  of  General  Moore’s  center,  but  the  work- 
ing party  was  driven  off  by  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters,  and  the  work 
stopped. 

On  the  30th,  but  little  work  was  done  on  the  line  under  Captain  Rob- 
inson’s charge,  excepting  along  General  Lee’s  front,  and  during  the 
whole  siege  our  works,  from  Fort  Garrott  to  the  right,  were  but  little 
injured,  the  enemy  being  kept  at  a considerable  distance  by  a line  of 
pickets  kept  in  protected  places  along  the  ridge  in  front  of  our  main  line, 
excepting  on  the  Hall’s  Ferry  road.  Captain  Wintter  and  his  assistants 
were  kept  constantly  busy  putting  obstructions  on  the  Yazoo  Yalley  and 
other  roads,  repairing  the  embrasures  of  batteries,  and  thickening  the 
parapets,  which  had  begun  to  show  the  effects  of  the  enemy’s  continual 
battering.  The  new  battery  in  rear  of  General  Moore’s  center  was 
commenced  by  running  a covered  approach  to  the  position  selected. 
On  this  day  I also  started  a number  of  excavations  on  the  Baldwin’s 
Ferry  road,  in  a deep  cut,  for  the  purpose  of  scattering  our  ammunition, 
which  was  much  exposed  to  the  enemy’s  fire  at  the  depot  magazine. 
These  excavations  were  put  under  the  charge  of  Mr.  Ginder,  with  a 
working  force  of  25  negroes  from  the  jail-gang,  and  were  finished  in 
about  a week. 

On  the  31st,  works  of  repair  continued  along  the  whole  line ; the  new 
works  continued,  and  a breach  in  the  redan  on  the  left  of  Jackson  road 
filled  up  and  parapet  repaired  with  sand-bags. 

From  June  1 to  the  4th  there  was  no  variation  in  the  engineer  opera- 
tions. By  the  4th,  the  enemy  had  succeeded  in  establishing  a third 
line  of  parallels  not  exceeding  150  yards  from  our  salient  works,  and 
then  commenced  several  double  saps  against  the  following  works,  viz, 
the  stockade  redan,  on  Graveyard  road,  the  Third  Louisiana  redan,  on 
left  of  Jackson  road,  and  the  lunette  on  right  of  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road. 
I had  some  thundering  barrels  and  loaded  shells  prepared  to  be  placed 
in  these  and  all  other  exposed  works,  to  be  used  in  case  of  an  assault. 
The  stockade  redan  and  the  stockade  on  its  left  beginning  to  suffer  a 
good  deal  from  the  enemy’s  artillery,  a new  line  of  rifle-pits  was  started 
in  front  of  the  stockade,  and  the  ditch  of  the  redan  was  prepared  for 
riflemen,  to  give  a double  line  at  this  point. 

The  enemy  continued  their  saps  against  this  and  that  of  the  Third 
Louisiana  without  much  interruption  until  the  night  of  the  8th,  when 
their  sap-roller  was  burned  by  firing  pieces  of  port  fire  and  cotton  balls 
steeped  in  turpentine  into  it  from  muskets.  Their  sappers  were  thus 
exposed,  and  forced  to  retire  and  recommence  their  operations  with  an- 
other roller  some  distance  back.  In  spite  of  all  our  attempts  to  stop 
them,  the  enemy  steadily  approached  with  these  saps  until  the  night 
of  the  13th,  when  they  had  reached  within  60  feet  of  the  stockade  redan 
and  within  40  yards  of  the  Third  Louisiana,  and  showed  very  evidently 
their  intention  to  attack  these  salients  by  mining.  I accordingly  or- 
dered counter-mines  to  be  started  from  the  ditch  of  the  former  to  oppose 
their  progress.  The  latter  work  having  no  ditch,  other  arrangements 
had  to  be  made.  This  work  had  also  become  considerably  battered  by 
this  time,  and  the  old  parapets  were  nearly  gone.  A new  one  was  ac- 
cordingly made  a few  feet  in  rear  of  the  firsthand  the  main  body  of  the 
work  was  still  preserved  entire,  and  our  men  protected  from  the  enemy’s 
fire. 

On  the  night  of  the  13th,  a 10-inch  mortar  was  placed  in  position  in 
rear  of  General  Moore’s  center,  and  a 20-pounder  Parrott  in  rear  of 
General  Green’s  left. 


Chap.  XXXVI.J 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


333 


On  the  night  of  the  14th,  a new  series  of  rifle-pits  was  begun,  running 
along  a couple  of  spurs  in  the  rear,  so  as  to  envelop  the  stockade  and 
its  redan,  as  a precaution  against  the  contingency  of  the  enemy’s  carry- 
ing this  point  by  assault,  or  rendering  it  untenable  by  his  mining  oper- 
ations. 

On  the  15th,  I discovered  that  the  saps  against  the  lunette  on  the 
right  of  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road  were  making  rapid  progress,  and  also 
the  one  against  the  railroad  redoubt.  Countermines  were  immediately 
ordered  and  commenced  from  the  ditches  of  these  works. 

From  this  time  till  the  end  of  the  siege  the  main  efforts  of  the  enemy 
were  directed  against  these  salient  works,  viz : The  stockade  redan,  the 
Third  Louisiana  redan,  the  lunette  on  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road,  the 
railroad  redoubt,  and  Fort  Garrott,  on  General  Lee’s  right,  and  later 
against  the  work  on  the  Hall’s  Ferry  road,  against  all  of  which  they 
ran  regular  double  saps,  and  our  principal  operations  consisted  in  en- 
deavors to  impede  their  progress,  and  in  preparations  to  meet  them 
when  practicable  by  countermining.  Retrenchments  were  also  made 
in  rear  of  all  the  threatened  points,  to  provide  against  the  possibility  of 
the  enemy’s  being  successful  in  their  attempts.  The  rest  of  the  line 
other  than  the  works  mentioned  above  was  but  little  damaged,  and  was 
easily  kept  in  repair  by  fatigue  parties  working  at  night.  The  Third 
Louisiana  redan,  being  on  a very  narrow  ridge,  had  no  exterior  ditch, 
and  I found  it  impossible  to  get  in  its  front  to  start  a counter-mine  with- 
out exposing  our  sappers  to  a terrible  fire  from  the  enemy’s  sharp > 
shooters  and  batteries,  not  more  than  150  yards  distant.  A shaft  was 
accordingly  started  from  the  inside  of  the  work,  but  before  it  was  com- 
pleted the  enemy  had  succeeded  in  getting  under  the  parapet  and  had 
prepared  their  mine  under  the  salient. 

This  mine  was  exploded  on  the  25th  instant,  but  did  no  material 
damage,  as  a^parapet  had  been  made  to  meet  such  an  event  some  15 
feet  back  of  the  salient.  Five  or  six  men  engaged  in  sinking  a shaft 
were  buried  by  this  explosion.  An  attempt  was  made  to  assault  the 
work  immediately  after  the  explosion,  but  our  men,  having  good  cover 
behind  the  new  parapet,  repulsed  the  assailants  with  considerable 
slaughter. 

On  the  night  of  the  same  day  two  of  our  mines  in  front  of  the  stockade 
redan  were  exploded,  and  completely  destroyed  the  enemy’s  sap-roller, 
filled  up  their  sap,  and  two  parallels  they  had  started  to  envelop  the 
redan.  Our  mines  were  about  35  feet  from  the  counterscarp  of  the 
redan,  and  the  enemy’s  sap-roller  was  several  paces  within  this  distance, 
so  that  they  received  the  full  effect  of  our  explosion.  The  charge  in  one 
mine  was  45  pounds,  in  the  other  80,  with  the  chambers  8 feet  under 
ground.  On  this  same  night  a 9-inch  Dahlgren  gun  was  put  in  position 
in  rear  of  General  Moore’s  center,  to  counterbatter  the  enemy’s  heavy 
works  on  the  Jackson  road,  and  the  10-inch  mortar  was  removed  to  the 
Warren  ton  road. 

On  the  28th,  we  sprang  another  mine  in  front  of  the  lunette  on  the 
Baldwin’s  Ferry  road,  but  unfortunately  the  explosion  was  premature, 
and  the  enemy’s  sap  was  hardly  near  enough  to  be  much  injured.  Their 
sap-roller  was,  however,  burned  at  night  by  fire-balls,  their  sappers 
driven  away,  and  their  progress  materially  interfered  with.  A new  mine 
was  immediately  started  and  was  soon  ready  for  explosion. 

On  the  30th,  the  enemy  succeeded  again  in  getting  under  the  Third 
Louisiana  redan,  and  had  covered  the  entrance  to  their  gallery  with  a 
timber  shelter,  to  protect  their  sappers  from  our  hand-grenades.  To  de- 
stroy this,  I had  a barrel  containing  125  pounds  of  powder  rolled  over  the 


334  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  IOhap.  XXXVI. 

parapet  and  exploded  witli  a time-fuse  of  fifteen  seconds.  The  effect  of 
the  explosion  was  very  severe,  and  fragments  of  sap-rollers,  gabions,  and 
pieces  of  timber  were  thrown  into  the  air,  and,  I think,  some  of  the 
enemy’s  sappers  must  have  been  burned  and  smothered.  They  con- 
tinued their  operations,  however,  and  established  another  line  on  July 
1,  and  exploded  it  about  1.30  p.  m.  The  charge  must  have  been  enor- 
mous, as  the  crater  made  was  at  least  20  feet  deep,  30  feet  across  in  one 
direction  and  50  in  another.  The  earth  upheaved  was  thrown  many  yards 
around,  but  little  of  it  hilling  back  into  the  crater.  I learned  from  the 
enemy’s  engineer  that  they  had  1,500  pounds  powder  in  this  mine.  The 
original  faces  of  the  redan  were  almost  completely  destroyed,  and  the 
explosive  effect  extended  to  a parapet  I had  made  across  the  gorge  of 
the  work,  making  in  it  almost  a practicable  breach  for  an  assault.  No 
assault  was  attempted,  however,  and  I went  to  work  immediately  to 
repair  damages  as  well  as  possible. 

Lieut.  P.  J.  Blessing,  who  had  been  in  charge  of  this  work,  was 
wounded  during  the  day,  and  I directed  Lieutenant  [W.  O.]  Elynn  to 
report  to  Captain  [D.]  Wintter  to  take  his  place. 

In  addition  to  Lieutenant  Blessing,  wounded  on  this  day,  Private 
Owen  and  7 negroes  engaged  in  sinking  a shaft  were  killed  by  the 
enemy’s  explosion. 

Captain  Wintter,  with  Lieutenant  Flynn  and  Sergeants  [D.  C.]  Ryan 
and  [Arthur]  McGinnis  and  Private  [Pascal]  St.  Yigne,  of  Captain 
Wintter’s  company,  worked  during  the  afternoon  and  night  succeeding 
the  explosion  with  an  energy,  zeal,  and  coolness,  under  a most  terrific 
fire,  worthy  of  all  praise,  and  by  daylight  the  next  morning  the  breach 
was  filled  and  the  redan  still  tenable. 

To  give  some  idea  of  the  difficulties  attending  this  work,  I will  state 
that  the  enemy  had  two  9-inch  Dahlgrens,  several  heavy  Parrotts  and 
field  pieces,  and  a Cohorn  mortar  playing  upon  this  redan,  in  addition 
to  as  heavy  a fire  of  musketry  as  I ever  witnessed,  to  be  so  long  continued. 
In  the  course  of  one  hour  that  I remained  in  the  work  at  least  a dozen 
of  its  garrison  were  killed  or  wounded  by  the  mortar  alone.  On  the 
same  night  one  of  the  enemy’s  sap-rollers  on  the  right  of  the  Jackson 
road  was  burned  and  their  sappers  driven  off  by  hand-grenades. 

On  the  night  of  the  2d,  Captain  Robinson  exploded  one  of  his  mines 
in  front  of  the  railroad  redoubt,  but  with  little  effect,  the  explosion  being 
premature.  On  this  night  we  had  prepared  the  following  mines,  viz: 
One  in  front  of  work  on  Hall’s  Ferry  road  ; two  in  front  of  Fort  Gar- 
rott  ; two  on  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road ; one  on  right  of  Jackson  road  ; two  in 
front  of  small  redan  on  General  Green’s  left,  and  three  on  General 
Shoup’s  line,  all  of  which  would  have  been  ready  for  the  enemy  by  the 
time  he  came  within  the  limits  of  their  effects.  These  mines  contained 
from  100  to  125  pounds  powder,  and  were  at  an  average  depth  of  be- 
tween 6 and  9 feet  under  the  surface  of  the  earth.  The  flag  of  truce, 
however,  on  the  3d,  stopped  all  operations  on  both  sides,  and  the  effi- 
ciency of  our  preparations  were  not  tested. 

The  following  is  a list  of  casualties  among  the  engineers  and  my  work- 
ing force:  Wounded  severely,  First  Lieut.  E.  McMahon,  company  sap- 
pers and  miners ; Acting  Lieutenant  Blessing,  assistant  engineer;  Will- 
iam R.  Goeble,  clerk  to  Captain  Wintter.  Killed,  Sergeant  [ W . N.]  Cole, 
company  sappers  and  miners;  Private  J.  Hardy  and  Private  Owen. 
Eight  negroes  wounded,  9 killed. 

In  concluding  this  report,  I beg  leave  to  call  the  attention  of  the  lieu- 
tenant-general commanding  to  the  fact  that  no  one  was  called  upon  to 
perform  more  arduous  and  continuous  duty  than  the  engineer  officers  and 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


335 


their  assistants,  and  none  more  steadily  and  cheerfully  endured  all  that 
their  duty  imposed  upon  them,  or  more  faithfully  discharged  every  ob- 
ligation demanded  by  the  difficulties  of  our  situation. 

Oapt.  D.  Wintter  deserves  especial  mention.  For  fifteen  months  he 
has  been  at  work  on  the  fortifications  in  and  around  Vicksburg,  always 
active,  intelligent,  and  full  of  energy,  as  the  result  of  his  labor  fully  tes- 
tifies. I most  respectfully  urge  that  he  be  recommended  to  the" War 
Department  as  a deserving  candidate  for  promotion.  The  lieutenants  of 
his  company— E.  McMahon,  F.  Gillooly,  and  William  O.  Flynn,  who 
have  been  his  assistants— deserve  great  credit  for  the  services  they  have 
performed. 

Captain  Robinson  and  his  assistants — Oapt.  J.  J.  Conway,  Capt.  James 
M.  Couper,  Acting  Lieuts.  A.  W.  Gloster  and  [R.  R.]  Southard— during 
the  whole  siege  were  always  at  their  posts,  and  for  forty- eight  days  and 
nights  were  seldom  off  duty  more  than  six  hours  out  of  the  twentv- 
four. 

Oapt.  James  [T.]  Hogane  and  Acting  Lieut.  S.  McD.  Vernon  were 
equally  as  tireless  and  full  of  zeal. 

Acting  Lieutenant  Blessing  was  wounded  while  examining  the  ene- 
my’s approaches,  and  was  continually  hazarding  his  life  in  attempting 
to  discover  the  enemy’s  intentions,  and  was  ever  active  in  his  endeavors 
to  thwart  them. 


I would  also  especially  mention  Private  St.  Vigne,  of  Captain  Wintter’s 
company,  who  was  more  than  once  distinguished  for  gallantry,  and,  in 
addition  to  performing  his  duties  as  sapper  and  miner,  served  as  an 
artillerist  and  sharpshooter  until  his  ceaseless  exertions  had  made  him 
sick.  ✓ 

My  office  assistants— Lieut.  George  Donnellan,  Mr.  Cinder,  and  Mr. 
Brower,  my  clerk— all  deserve  mention  for  their  strict  performance 
of  every  duty  imposed  upon  them. 

Mr.  Brower  asked  and  received  my  permission  to  take  every  spare 
opportunity  to  go  into  the  trenches,  and  did  fine  execution  as  a sharp- 
shooter. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

SAMUEL  H.  LOCKETT, 

Major , and  Chief  Engineer  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  East  La. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana. 


P.  S.— The  following  officers  deserve  particular  notice,  and  I hope 
will  be  rewarded,  for  their  meritorious  conduct  and  the  valuable  services 
they  have  performed : 


Capt.  D.  Wintter,  commanding  company  sappers  and  miners  ; First 
Lieut.  E.  McMahon,  company  sappers  and  miners  ; Second  Lieut.  Will- 
iam O.  Flynn,  company  sappers  and  miners;  Capt.  James  M.  Couper, 
formerly  commissary  Fourteenth  [Twentieth]  Mississippi;  Actiug  Sec- 
ond Lieutenant  Blessing,  employed  as  assistant  engineer;  Private  St. 
Wgne,  of  Captain  Wintter’s  company,  and  Private  George  C.  Brower, 
Wirt  Adams’  cavalry  (clerk). 

I also  beg  leave  to*  call  the  attention  of  the  lieutenant-general  com- 
mandfng  particularly  to  the  services  of  Col.  D.  H.  Huyett,  assistant 
engineer,  who,  on  the  night  of  May  17,  succeeded  in  passing  through 
the  enemy’s  lines,  and  carried  safely  to  the  Engineer  Bureau  all  my  most 
important  maps  and  papers. 


336  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

No.  74. 

Report  of  Col.  William  T.  Withers , First  Mississippi  Light  Artillery , 
Chief  of  Light  Artillery. 


Selma,  Ala.,  August  29,  1863. 

The  within  report  represents  the  number  of  guns  surrendered  at  Vicks- 
burg on  the  4th  of  July,  except  that  the  20-pounder  Parrott  gun  was  dis- 
abled by  the  enemy  springing  a mine  about  the  latter  part  of  June. 

W.  T.  WITHERS, 

Col.  First  Mississippi  Light  Artillery , and  Chief  of  Light  Artillery. 


[Inclosure.] 


June  18,  1863. 


W.  T.  WITHERS, 

Colonel , and  Chief  of  Light  Artillery , Army  of  Vicksburg. 


No.  75. 

Report  of  Col.  Edward  Higgins , C.  S.  Artillery , commanding  River  Bat- 
teries. 

Enterprise,  Miss.,  July  25,  1863. 
Major:  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  operations  of  the  river  bat- 
teries under  my  command  during  the  recent  siege  of  Vicksburg. 

The  line  of  batteries  extended  along  the  river  front,  commencing  at 
a point  above  Fort  Hill,  on  the  right  of  my  line,  to  a redoubt  which  ter- 
minated the  extreme  right  of  the  rear  lines  and  met  my  left,  a distance 
of  3 miles,  and  consisted  of  8 10-incli  columbiads,  1 9-inch  JDahlgren,  1 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


337 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


8-inch  columbiad,  1 7.44-inch  Blakely  gun,  1 7 inch  Brooks,  1 6.4-inch 
Brooks,  3 smooth-bore  42-pounders,  2 smooth-bore  32-pounders,  8 banded 
„ aild  un banded  32-pounder  rifles,  1 18-pounder  rifle,  1 2o-pounder  Par- 
rott, 1 Whitworth,  1 10-inch  mortar,  1 8 inch  siege  howitzer,  making  in 
all  31  pieces  of  heavy  artillery,  besides  13  pieces  of  light  artillery 
which  were  placed  in  position  to  prevent  a landing  of  the  enemy  on  the 
city  front.  These  batteries  were  divided  into  three  commands,  as  fol- 
lows: The  upper  batteries,  from  Fort  Hill  to  the  upper  bayou,  were 
worked  by  the  First  Tennessee  Artillery,  under  Col.  Andrew*  Jackson, 
jr.  The  center  batteries,  or  those  immediately  on  the  city  front,  were 
under  charge  of  Maj.  F.  FT.  Ogden,  Eighth  Louisiana  Artillery  Battal- 
ion, to  whose  command  was  attached  Oapt.  S.  0.  Barns’  company,  of 
Vaiden  Light  Artillery.  The  lower  batteries  were  in  charge  of  the  First 
Louisiana  Artillery,  under  Lieut.  Ool.  D.  Beltzhoover.  A portion  of  the 
Twenty-third  [Twenty-second]  Louisiana  Volunteers  was  joined  to  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Beltzhoover’s  command. 

On  the  evening  of  May  18,  the  investment  commenced  in  rear  of  the 
city.  At  the  same  time  five  of  the  enemy’s  gunboats  (four  of  which 
were  iron-clads)  came  up  from  below,  and  took  up  a position  in  the 
river  just  out  of  range  of  our  guns,  while  the  river  above  and  in  front 
of  the  city  was  guarded  by  three  gunboats,  thus  completing  the  in- 
vestment. 


On  the  evening  of  the  19th,  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters,  having  obtained 
possession  of  our  abandoned  line  of  outer  works,  opened  a fire  upon  the 
upper  four-gun  water  battery,  commanded  by  Maj.  F.  W.  Hoadley,  First 
Tennessee  Artillery,  thus  rendering  the  battery  temporarily  untenable. 
Advantage  was  taken  of  the  darkness  of  the  night  to  construct  traverses 
on  the  flank  and  in  rear  of  the  guns  of  this  battery,  and  at  daylight  there 
was  ample  protection  afforded  to  the  men  while  at  the  guns.  The  enemy 
also  commenced  feeling  our  batteries,  and  opened  a heavy  fire  from 
three  of  his  iron-clads  upon  Captain  [W.  C.]  Capers’  10-inch  columbiad,' 
on  the  left  of  my  line.  Their  fire  was  kept  up  for  several  hours,  but 
without  any  serious  damage. 

At  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  20th,  the  enemy  opened  fire  upon 
the  city  and  batteries  with  seven  mortars  placed  under  the  bank  of  the 
river  on  the  Louisiana  shore.  Three  iron-clads  also  shelled  the  lower 
batteries  at  long  range. 

a^  ^ a*  n?*’  ^our  iron-clads  and  one  wooden  gunboat  en- 
gaged the  lower  batteries,  and  after  an  engagement  of  one  hour  and  a 
half  were  repulsed.  Two  of  the  iron-clads  were  seriously  damaged 
This  engagement  was  creditable  to  the  First  Louisiana  Artillery,  who’ 
with  ten  guns,  mostly  of  small  caliber,  contested  successfully  against 
thirty-two  heavy  guns  of  the  enemy.  Our  casualties  were  only  2 
wounded  during  the  fight ; one  10-inch  columbiad  and  the  18-pounder 
rifled  gun  were  temporarily  disabled.  The  Blakely  gun  burst  at  the 
muzzle. 


On  the  23d,  eleven  of  the  light  pieces  on  the  river  front  were  ordered 
to  the  rear,  and  were  there  fought  by  detachments  from  my  command 
during  the  remainder  of  the  siege. 

o 24thrnt,°  26th>  mortars  kept  up  a steady  fire  upon  the  eitv 

batteries.  The  8-ineh  siege  howitzer,  one  smooth  bore  32-pounder, 
the  20-pounder  Parrott,  and  the  Whitworth  gun  were  removed  to  the 
rear  with  their  detachments. 

Soon  after  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  27th,  the  enemy's  iron-clad 
gunboat  Cincinnati,  mounting  fourteen  guns,  was  observed  approaching 
our  upper  batteries,  while  four  iron-clads  approached  the  lower  batteries. 

22  R R — VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


338 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


An  engagement  took  place,  which  resulted  in  the  complete  repulse  of 
the  enemy,  and  the  sinking  of  the  Cincinnati  in  front  of  our  guns,  after 
an  action  of  thirty  minutes. 

Great  credit  is  due  to  Captains  [J.  P.]  Lynch  and  [T.  N.]  Johnston,  of 
the  First  Tennessee  Heavy  Artillery,  for  the  handsome  manner  in  which 
their  guns  were  handled  during  the  engagement. 

The  enemy’s  loss  was  severe,  many  of  their  men  being  killed  in  the 
port-holes  by  our  sharpshooters.  As  the  river  fell,  attempts  were  made 
by  the  enemy  to  recover  the  guns  of  the  Cincinnati  by  working  at  night, 
to  prevent  which  fire  was  opened  on  the  sunken  boat  every  night  from 
one  or  two  of  my  guns  during  the  siege. 

On  the  28th,  the  18-pounder  rifled  gun  was  sent  to  the  rear  lines,  in 
charge  of  Capt.  L.  B.  Haynes’  company  (E),  First  Begiment  Louisiana 
Artillery. 

At  daylight  on  the  31st,  a tremendous  fire  was  opened  on  the  city  from 
the  enemy’s  guns  in  the  rear,  which  did  some  damage  to  the  works  of 
the  upper  batteries.  A battery  of  two  small  Parrott  guns  which  opened 
upon  my  left  at  the  same  time  was  silenced  by  Captain  Capers’  10-inch 
columbiad. 

June  1,  a large  fire  broke  out  in  the  city,  close  upon  the  magazine  of 
the  Whig  Office  battery,  which  was  at  one  time  in  great  danger.  The 
ammunition  was  taken  out  and  placed  in  a more  secure  position.  All 
the  men  of  my  command  that  could  be  spared  from  the  guns  were 
ordered  out  immediately  to  assist  in  arresting  the  progress  of  the  con- 
flagration. 

From  June  2 to  8,  the  enemy  kept  up  an  incessant  fire  from  the 
mortar  flats  on  the  city  and  batteries,  and  each  day  the  gunboats  below 
shelled  the  woods  and  lower  batteries.  Two  of  the  field  pieces  in  my 
command  were  turned  over  to  Maj.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith,  to  be  placed  in 
the  rear  defense. 

June  9 and  10,  the  fire  from  the  mortars  continued  at  irregular  inter- 
vals. The  enemy  succeeded  in  placing  sharpshooters  in  the  woods  on 
the  Louisiana  shore  opposite  the  city,  but  they  were  driven  off  by  a few 
well-directed  shots  from  one  of  the  light  field  pieces  of  Major  [F.  N.] 
Ogden’s  command. 

On  the  morning  of  June  11,  the  enemy  opened  fire  from  a 10-inch  gun 
placed  in  position  at  a point  about  a mile  above  the  bend  of  the  river, 
opposite  the  upper  batteries,  mortars  and  gunboats  still  keeping  up  a 
brisk  fire. 

June  12,  the  10-inch  mortar  was  ordered  to  our  works  in  the  rear,  and 
was  placed  in  Major-General  Forney’s  line.  It  was  manned  by  a detach- 
ment of  men  from  Company  G,  First  Louisiana  Artillery,  under  Lieut. 
C.  A.  Conrad. 

June  13  to  15,  a 30-pounder  Parrott  gun  opened  on  the  upper  bat- 
teries from  the  same  position  as  the  10-inch  gun  mentioned  previously. 
Several  of  the  mortars  dropped  down  the  river  some  500  yards,  and 
opened  a heavy  fire  on  the  upper  batteries.  The  two  Parrott  guns 
opened  again  on  Captain  Capers,  but  were  silenced  after  five  shots. 

June  16,  enemy  opened  fire  on  Captain  Lynch’s  battery  (upper  bat- 
teries) from  a new  work  between  Edwards’  negro  quarters  and  the  river, 
doing  considerable  damage  to  the  parapets,  traverses,  &c.,  but  not  in- 
juring any  of  our  men  or  guns. 

June  17,  18,  and  19,  mortars  still  keeping  up  an  irregular  fire.  The 
guns  on  the  Louisiana  shore  fired  very  rapidly  in  the  morning  and  even- 
ing. Our  batteries  replied  slowly.  The  Parrott  battery  opened  again 
on  Captain  Capers,  blit  never  fired  after  our  guns  opened.  Since  the 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  339 

surrender  it  has  been  ascertained  that  those  two  guns  were  totally  dis- 
abled by  Captain  Capers’  fire. 

June  20,  about  3 a.  m.,  the  enemy  opened  a heavy  fire  from  both  front 
and  rear  upon  the  city  and  batteries.  Firing  ceased  at  7.30  a.  m. 

June  21,  mortars  ceased  firing.  The  enemy  mounted  a 100-pounder 
Parrott  gun  on  the  Louisiana  shore,  under  the  bank  of  the  river,  at  a point 
about  500  yards  above  the  mortar-boats.  It  opened  upon  the  city  during 
the  evening,  doing  a great  deal  of  damage.  Captain  [R.  C.]  Bond,  in  the 
lower  batteries,  opened  fire  with  his  10-inch  columbiad  and  32-pounder 
rifled  gun,  when,  after  a few  shots,  the  enemy’s  gun  ceased  firing. 

June  22  to  27,  firing  from  the  guns  on  the  Louisiana  shore  was  kept 
up  on  the  city  and  batteries  with  great  vigor.  Our  guns  replied  slowly 
and  with  deliberation,  but  in  consequence  of  the  timber  on  the  Loui- 
siana shore  affording  ample  means  of  masking  batteries,  it  was  very 
difficult  to  arrive  at  any  satisfactory  results. 

On  the  26th,  the  mortars  resumed  their  fire  upon  the  city,  and  on  the 
same  day  numbers  of  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters  opened  upon  the  city 
from  the  brushwood  on  the  Louisiana  shore. 

June  28,  firing  still  kept  up.  The  10-inch  Brooks’  gun  in  the  upper 
batteries  burst  one  of  the  bands  and  also  at  the  breech.  At  4 p.  m.  the 
100-pounder  Parrott  gun  and  two  mortars  opened  upon  the  lower  bat- 
teries. 

J une  29  and  30,  heavy  firing  all  along  the  river  front.  The  gun- 
boats shelled  the  woods  around  Captain  Capers’  battery.  The  mortar 
was  brought  from  the  rear,  and  remounted  in  its  old  position  in  the  re- 
doubt on  the  extreme  left  of  my  line.  It  was  very  successfully  used  in 
driving  off  sharpshooters  from  that  point.  In  addition  to  the  other 
guns  on  the  Louisiana  shore,  the  enemy  opened  two  small  Parrott  guns 
close  to  the  bank  in  front  of  the  city.  Their  fire  was  very  slow  and  at 
irregular  intervals. 

July  1,  the  enemy  opened  fire  on  the  mortar  redoubt  from  his  lines. 
Our  works  were  somewhat  damaged  by  it.  The  mortar  replied,  and 
almost  immediately  afterward  the  enemy’s  fire  ceased. 

July  2 and  3,  heavy  firing  from  all  points.  At  4 p.  m.  on  the  3d,  I 
opened  fire  all  along  my  lines,  and  at  5 p.  m.  the  last  gun  was  fired  by 
the  river  batteries  in  defense  of  Vicksburg.  • 

J uly  4,  the  city  capitulated. 

During  this  long  and  tedious  siege,  I am  happy  to  say  that  the  offi- 
cers and  men  under  my  command  discharged  their  duty  faithfully  and 
with  alacrity.  Owing  to  the  weakness  of  our  infantry  force,  they  were 
called  upon  to  perform  other  duties  than  those  of  fighting  their  guns. 
They  formed  a portion  of  the  city  guard,  discharged  the  duties  of  fire- 
men in  case  of  fire,  policed  the  river,  &c.,  and  the  reliefs  were  almost 
nightly  under  arms  as  infantry  in  the  trenches. 

I have  not  yet  received  the  surgeon’s  report  of  our  loss  in  killed  and 
wounded.  It  will  probably  not  amount  to  more  than  30.  Among  the 
killed  was  Maj.  F.  W.  Hoadley,  First  Tennessee  Heavy  Artillery,  who 
commanded  the  upper  water  battery.  This  battery  was  exposed  con- 
stantly to  an  unceasing  fire  of  mortars,  Parrotts,  and  sharpshooters. 
The  gallant  major  was  always  at  his  post,  and  fell  with  his  face  to  the 
foe,  struck  in  the  breast  by  a fragment  of  a shell. 

The  officers  who  most  distinguished  themselves  by  their  gallantry  and 
unceasing  vigilance  during  the  siege  were : Colonel  Jackson,  First  Ten- 
nessee Artillery,  who,  with  his  gallant  regiment,  bore  the  brunt  of  the 
labors  and  dangers  of  the  siege,  and  was  alwavs  ready,  day  or  night, 
lor  any  duty  to  which  he  might  be  called ; Lieutenant-Colonel  [Robert] 


340 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Sterling,  Captains  [J.  P.]  Lynch  and  Johnston,  of  the  same  regiment; 
Maj.  F.  N.  Ogden,  Eighth  Louisiana  Artillery  Battalion,  and  Captains 
[T.  N.]  McCrory  and  [P.]  Grandprb,  of  the  same  battalion;  Capts.  W. 
C.  Capers,  B.  C.  Bond,  and  B.  J.  Bruce;  Lieuts.  B.  Agar,  E.  D.  Wood- 
lief,  and  C.  A.  Conrad,  First  Louisiana  Artillery. 

Capt.  W.  C.  Capers,  by  his  strict  and  indefatigable  attention  to  his 
duties  and  gallant  bearing,  won  my  admiration. 

Lieut.  0.  A.  Conrad,  in  command  of  the  10-inch  mortar,  behaved  with 
great  gallantry. 

Lieut.  W.  T.  Mumford,  adjutant  of  the  command;  Lieut.  W.  M. 
Bridges,  inspector-general ; Lieut.  W.  Yerger,  aide-de-camp ; Lieut.  B. 
G.  Knight,  volunteer  aide-de-camp,  and  Lieut.  W.  O.  Flynn,  engineer 
officer,  discharged  their  duties  to  my  satisfaction. 

It  is  but  an  act  of  simple  justice  before  closing  this  report  to  make 
known  the  good  conduct  of  Sergt.  Thomas  Lynch,  of  the  First  Louisi- 
ana Artillery,  who  was  in  command  of  the  picket  boats  and  chief  of  the 
river  police.  By  his  ceaseless  energy  and  his  close  attention  to  his 
very  arduous  duties,  he  made  himself  almost  invaluable,  and  I trust 
the  Government  will  reward  his  faithfulness. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWABD  HIGGINS, 

Colonel  of  Artillery , C.  S.  Army , 

Late  in  command  of  River  Batteries , Vicksburg . 

Maj.  B.  W.  Memminger,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

ADDENDA  . 

Hdqrs.  Dept.  Miss,  and  East  La.,  Vicksburg , May  27,  1863. 
Col.  Edward  Higgins, 

Commanding  River  Batteries  in  front  of  Vicksburg : 

Colonel  : It  affords  me  pleasure  to  offer  to  you,  and  through  you  to 
your  gallaut  artillerists,  my  grateful  acknowledgments  of  your  signal 
services  against  the  enemy  this  day  on  the  Mississippi  Biver.  In  the 
assurance  of  his  power,  the  enemy  threatened  our  city  of  Vicksburg 
with  five  of  his  monster  iron-clad  gunboats,  and  seven  of  his  powerful 
mortar  batteries.  You  manfully  worked  your  guns  of  the  upper  bat- 
teries against  his  force,  and  by  your  skill  sank  one  of  his  vaunted  cham- 
pions of  the  river — the  gunboat  Cincinnati,  carrying  fourteen  guns, 
turreted,  causing  the  small  surviving  crew  thereof  to  ignominiously  fly 
to  the  distant  shore  in  discomfiture.  You  drove,  too,  from  their  se- 
lected point  of  attack,  by  your  lower  batteries,  four  other  iron-clad  ves- 
sels, and  soon  after  you  caused  silence  to  reign  around  the  shore  of  our 
beleaguered  city.  By  your  gallantry  and  heroism  to-day  you  have  added 
to  the  garland  of  Vicksburg’s  victories  another  bright  chaplet.  May 
God  speed  you  in  your  good  work ! 

Your  friend  and  commander, 

J.  C.  PEMBEBTON, 
Lieutenant-  Genera  l , Commanding. 

[July  3 ?]. 

Having  no  hope  of  General  Johnston’s  relieving  the  garrison,  and 
believing  that  we  are  unable  to  cut  our  way  out,  I think  the  terms  of 
General  Grant,  as  modified,  are  the  best  we  can  hope  to  obtain. 

EDWABD  HIGGINS, 
Colonel , Commanding  River  Batteries , 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OP  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  341 

No.  76. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  D.  Beltzlioover , First  Louisiana  Artillery. 

Demopolis,  Ala.,  August  29,  1863. 
Sir  : As  near  as  I can  ascertain,  the  heavy  guns  lost  at  Vicksburg 
were  as  follows : 


Localities. 

10-inch  columbiads. 

9-inch  navies. 

8-inch  columbiads. 

10-inch  mortars. 

<u 

a 

p 

o 

Pi 

CJ 

32-pounder  rifles. 

32-pounder  smooth-bores. 

Brooks’.* 

Blakely’s,  t 

0-pounder  field  guns. 

Aggregate. 

Lower  garrison 

3 

1 

1 

2 

1 

3 

1 

1 

13 

City  front 

2 

1 

2 

5 

Upper  garrison 

3 

1 

1 

4 

1 

1 

11 

Total 

8 

1 

1 

1 

3 

5 

5 

2 

1 

2 

29 

I cannot  give  any  idea  of  the  ordnance  stores  lost,  because  I have  none 
of  the  reports  or  returns.  During  the  siege  the  commanders  of  garrisons 
had  nothing  to  do  with  the  ordnance  stores  further  than  to  see  that 
they  were  taken  care  of.  Ammunition,  &c.,  was  sent  to  the  batteries 
and  removed  from  them  without  our  knowledge.  Colonel  [Ed.]  Higgins 
and  all  his  staff  are  absent,  and  I get  no  better  information  than  that 
given  above. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

D.  BELTZHOOVER, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  First  Louisiana  Artillery. 

R.  R.  Hutchinson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  77. 

Reports  of  May.  Gen.  Carter  L.  Stevenson , C.  S.  Army , commanding 

Division. 


Headquarters  on  the  Right, 

Vicksburg , June  12,  3863. 

Major  : General  Barton  reports  that  the  enemy  are  crossing  troops 
at  Warreuton,  supposed  to  be  those  that  came  to  the  upper  landing  on 
yesterday  afternoon. 

Respectfully, 


Major  Memmingek, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


C.  L.  STEVENSON, 

Major-General. 


* Both  burst,  and  were  entirely  unserviceable, 
t Burst  at  muzzle,  but  was  cut  off  and  used  afterward. 


342 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Headquarters  on  the  Right, 

Vicksburg , June  13,  1863. 

Major  : An  effort  was  made  last  night  by  about  two  regiments  of 
Feds  to  take  our  picket  line  on  the  Hall’s  Ferry  road.  They  were  gal- 
lantly met  and  repulsed  by  the  pickets  of  Cumming’s  right  and  Rey- 
nolds’ left,  and  driven  back.  That  line  is  now  held  by  a strong  force  of 
pickets. 

A scout  ordered  out  from  my  extreme  right  reports  the  enemy’s  line 
complete  and  compact,  and  that  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  get 
through  it. 

Respectfully, 

C.  L.  STEVENSON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Major  Memminger, 

A.  A.  (r.,  Dept.  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana , Vicksburg. 


Headquarters,  June  17, 1863. 

The  enemy  made  several  efforts  on  yesterday  to  drive  the  pickets 
from  General  Barton’s  front.  They  finally  concentrated  on  those  of  the 
Fortieth  Georgia  and  drove  them.  I ordered  the  post  to  be  retaken 
last  night. 

The  within  is  the  reply  thereto. 

They  have  placed  some  guns  in  our  battery  opposite  the  canal,  near 
the  gin-house.  The  house  was  burned  on  yesterday. 

Respectfully  forwarded  for  the  information  of  the  lieutenant-general 
commanding. 

C.  L.  STEVENSON, 

Major-  General. 


[In  closure.] 


Headquarters  Right, 

June  17,  1863 — 7.30  a.  m. 

Major  : An  effort  was  made  last  night  to  retake  the  picket  posts  in 
front  of  the  Fortieth  Georgia,  but  the  enemy  was  found  in  so  great 
force  that  the  loss  which  must  have  ensued  in  forcing  the  point  would 
have  been  out  of  proportion  to  the  value  gained.  It  was,  therefore, 
abandoned,  and  other  posts  established,  which,  it  is  thought,  will  render 
the  first  untenable  by  the  enemy.  This  proves  to  be  the  case. 

A dash  was  made  on  the  extreme  outpost  of  the  Forty-second  Georgia 
last  night,  and  the  post  and  4 men  captured.  The  post  has  been  re- 
taken this  morning. 

An  effort  was  also  made  to  establish  a battery  opposite  the  Fifty- 
second  Georgia,  but  was  defeated. 

Very  respectfully, 


S.  M.  BARTON, 


Brigadier- General. 


[J.  J.  Reeve.] 


Headquarters  Forces  on  the  Right, 

June  24,  1863. 

Major  : The  firing  of  the  enemy  on  General  Barton  has  been  very 
severe  to-day.  They  kept  up  a fire  with  nine  pieces,  and  this  evening 
drove  in  one  of  his  pickets,  capturing  7 men.  General  Barton  seems 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


843 


to  apprehend  an  attack  on  his  right,  and  states  that  the  enemy  is  in 
much  greater  force  there  than  heretofore.  I have  sent  him  two  regi- 
ments. 

To-night  the  enemy  opened  with  grape  and  canister  on  the  position 
recently  taken  from  them  by  General  Cumming’s  brigade,  and,  moving- 
up  a force,  succeeded  in  recapturing  it.  Our  pickets  on  Lee’s  line  were 
met  by  an  officer  to-night,  sent  by  Grant  to  say  that  he  would  place  no 
more  pickets  in  front  of  that  line,  and  would  fire  on  ours.  Our  pickets 
were  consequently  withdrawn  to  the  immediate  front  of  the  works.  I 
have  one  regiment  in  reserve  in  rear  of  Cumming’s,  and  can  spare  no 
more  men  for  the  river  front,  as  the  loss  of  the  work  on  the  Hall’s  Ferry 
road  renders  that  position  very  weak,  and  I may  have  to  recall  one  of 
the  regiments  sent  to  the  river  front. 

I am,  major,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  L.  STEVENSON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant  General. 

P.  S. — I am  just  about  starting  for  the  lines  myself. 


Headquarters  Stevenson’s  Division, 

Demopolis , Ala.,  July  29,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  op- 
erations of  my  division  from  its  advance  from  Vicksburg  to  the  capitu- 
lation of  the  city.  It  has  been  delayed  to  this  time  by  the  constant 
occupation  of  myself  and  my  subordinate  commanders  during  the  siege 
of  Vicksburg  and  by  the  march  which  followed  its  capitulation.* 
*###### 

At  about  10  a.  m.  [May  17],  I received  orders  to  take  command  of  the 
army,  and  conduct  its  retreat  to  the  fortifications  around  Vicksburg. 
The  brigade  of  Brigadier-General  Baldwin,  of  Smith’s  division,  was  as- 
signed to  the  duty  of  bringing  up  the  rear.  Just  before  getting  into 
the  works,  I was  joined  by  the  brigade  of  Colonel  Reynolds,  to  whom, 
as  I before  stated,  had  been  intrusted  the  charge  of  the  trains  of  the 
whole  army.  He  had  crossed  the  Big  Black  after  much  difficulty  and 
delay,  occasioned  by  the  absence  of  any  facilities  for  so  doing,  at  Bridge- 
port. 

By  a mistake  in  the  transmission  of  the  order,  the  regiment  of 
Colonel  Beck  (Lee’s  brigade)  remained  at  the  river,  resisted  the  attempts 
of  the  enemy  to  cross  until  11  o’clock  that  night,  and  only  withdrew 
upon  the  receipt  of  a peremptory  order. 

The  retreat  was  conducted  in  a leisurely  and  orderly  manner,  and  the 
troops  entered  the  line  of  fortifications  at  about  3 p.m.f 

**#*### 

On  the  morning  of  May  18,  the  positions  to  be  held  by  each  of  the 
different  divisions  were  assigned  by  the  lieutenant-general  himself. 
The  portion  of  the  line  of  defense  which  was  assigned  to  my  division 
included  the  river  front  and  the  works  south  of  the  city  from"  the  river 
to  the  railroad,  a line  of  about  5 miles  in  length.  Barton  occupied  the 


* For  portion  of  report  here  omitted,  see  battle  of  Champion's  Hill,  pp.  93-99. 
t For  portion  here  omitted,  see  pp.  97,  98. 


344  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXYI. 

river  front  and  the  fortifications  on  tfie  right;  Eevnolds,  those  on  the 
right  center  to  the  Hall’s  Ferry  road ; Camming,  the  left  center,  and 
Lee,  re-enforced  by  Waal’s  Texas  Legion,  the  extreme  left.  Several 
sections  and  companies  of  artillery  not  properly  belonging  to  my  divis- 
ion were  posted  on  my  line.  Captain  [J.  W.]  Johnston,  Botetourt  Ar- 
tillery Company,  was  assigned  to  duty  as  inspector-general  of  light 
artillery  on  my  staff,  and  the  artillery  on  the  right  of  the  Hall’s  Ferry 
road  placed  under  the  command  of  Capt.  J.  B.  Grayson,  First  Louisiana 
Heavy  Artillery,  and  that  on  the  left  under  that  of  Capt.  J.  F.  Waddell, 
of  my  division. 

On  the  evening  of  the  18th,  the  enemy  made  his  appearance  in  front 
of  our  lines,  and  immediately  began  to  push  forward  his  sharpshooters. 
The  number  of  guns,  superiority  of  range  and  metal,  and  exhaustless 
supply  of  ammunition,  enabled  them  in  a very  short  time  to  plant  many 
batteries  in  such  commanding  positions  as  to  damage  our  works  ma- 
terially, and  inflict  a very  considerable  loss  among  the  men. 

On  the  morning  of  May  22,  many  indications  showed  that  they  con- 
templated an  assault  upon  the  line  of  General  [S.  D.]  Lee.  A tre- 
mendous artillery  fire  was  opened  and  kept  up  for  about  two  hours, 
while  the  fire  of  their  large  force  of  sharpshooters  was  heavy  and  in- 
cessant. 

At  about  1 p.  m.  a heavy  force  moved  out  to  the  assault,  making  a 
gallant  charge.  They  were  allowed  to  approach  unmolested  to  within 
good  musket  range,  when  every  available  gun  was  opened  upon  them 
with  grape  and  canister,  and  the  men,  rising  in  the  trenches,  poured 
into  their  ranks  volley  after  volley  with  so  deadly  an  effect  that,  leav- 
ing the  ground  literally  covered  in  some  places  with  their  dead  and 
wounded,  they  precipitately  retreated.  An  angle  of  one  of  our  redoubts 
had  been  breached  by  their  artillery  before  the  assault  and  rendered 
untenable.  Toward  this  point,  at  the  time  of  the  repulse  of  the  main 
body,  a party  of  about  60  of  the  enemy,  under  the  command  of  a lieu- 
tenant-colonel, made  a rush,  and  succeeded  in  effecting  a lodgment  in 
the  ditch  at  the  foot  of  the  redoubt  and  planting  two  flags  on  the  edge 
of  the  parapet.  The  work  was  constructed  in  such  a manner  that  this 
ditch  was  commanded  by  no  part  of  the  line,  and  the  only  means  by 
which  they  could  be  dislodged  was  to  retake  the  angle  by  a desperate 
charge,  and  either  kill  or  compel  the  surrender  of  the  whole  party  by 
the  use  of  hand-grenades.  A call  for  volunteers  for  this  purpose  was 
made  and  promptly  responded  to  by  Lieut.  Ool.  E.  W.  Pettus,  Twentieth 
Alabama  Regiment,  and  about  40  men  of  Waui’s  Texas  Legion.  A more 
gallant  feat  than  this  charge  has  not  illustrated  our  arms  during  the 
war. 

The  preparations  were  quietly  and  quickly  made,  but  the  enemy 
seemed  at  once  to  divine  our  intention,  and  opened  upon  the  angle  a 
terrible  fire  of  shot,  shell,  and  musketry.  Undaunted,  this  little  band, 
its  chivalrous  commander  at  its  head,  rushed  upon  the  work,  and  in  less 
time  than  it  requires  to  describe  it,  it  and  the  flags  were  in  our  posses- 
sion. 

Preparations  were  then  quickly  made  for  the  use  of  hand-grenades, 
when  the  enemy  in  the  ditch,  being  informed  of  our  purpose,  immedi- 
ately surrendered. 

From  this  time  forward,  although  on  several  occasions  their  demon- 
strations seemed  to  indicate  other  intentions,  the  enemy  relinquished 
all  idea  of  assaulting  us,  and  confined  himself  to  the  more  cautious  policy 
of  a system  of  gradual  approaches  and  mining. 

The  weakness  of  our  garrison  i>re vented  anything  like  a system  of 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS 


345 


sallies,  bat  from  time  to  time,  as  opportunities  offered,  and  the  enemy 
effected  lodgments  too  close  to  our  works,  they  were  made  with  spirit 
and  success.  Among  them,  I may  particularize  a night  sally  made 
under  the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  [C.  S.]  Guyton,  of  the  Fifty- 
seventh  Georgia  Regiment,  with  a portion  of  that  regiment  and  of  the 
Forty-third  Tennessee,  the  former  of  Curaming’s,  the  latter  of  Rey- 
nolds’ brigade.  The  enemy  had  intrenched  themselves  at  three  differ- 
ent points  on  and  to  the  left  of  the  Hall’s  Ferry  road.  The  command 
sallied  out,  charged  their  works  with  admirable  gallantry,  and  took 
them,  with  considerable  loss  to  the  enemy,  who  were  in  greatly  superior 
force. 

On  the  lines  occupied  by  General  Barton  and  Colonel  Reynolds,  the 
configuration  of  the  ground  favoring  it,  the  enemy  were  prevented  from 
making  any  close  lodgments  by  a judicious  system  of  picketing  and  a 
series  of  attacks;  and  although  they  sometimes  succeeded  by  force  of 
numbers  in  gaining  favorable  positions,  they  were  invariably  dispos- 
sessed by  the  daring  sallies  of  the  garrison.  A reconnaissance  made 
of  the  Warrenton  road,  under  Colonel  Curtiss,  Forty-first  Georgia,  re- 
sulted in  the  capture  of  107  of  the  enemy’s  pickets.  The  reconnais- 
sance was  conducted  in  a manner  which  reflects  credit  on  that  able 
officer. 

I cannot  find  words  sufficiently  strong  to  express  the  pride  and  grati- 
fication afforded  me  by  the  dauntless  spirit  with  which  officers  and  men 
encountered  all  the  dangers,  and  by  the  unmurmuring  endurance  with 
which  they  bore  up  for  forty-seven  sleepless  nights  and  days,  under  all 
the  hardships  incident  to  their  position.  Confined,  without  a moment’s 
relief  from  the  very  day  of  their  entrance  into  the  fortifications  to  that 
of  the  capitulation  of  the  city,  to  the  narrow  trenches ; exposed  without 
shelter  to  the  broiling  sun  and  drenching  rain ; subsisting  on  rations 
barely  sufficient  for  the  support  of  life  ; engaged  from  the  earliest  dawn 
till  dark,  and  often  during  the  night,  in  one  ceaseless  conflict  with  the 
enemy,  they  neither  faltered  nor  complained,  but,  ever  looking  forward 
with  confidence  to  relief,  bore  up  bravely  under  every  privation — saw 
their  ranks  decimated  by  disease  and  the  missiles  of  the  enemy — with  the 
fortitude  that  adorns  the  soldier  and  the  spirit  that  becomes  the  patriot 
who  battles  in  a holy  cause. 

It  was  thus  that  the  true  soldier  and  gifted  patriot,  Colonel  [Isham  W.] 
Garrott,  of  the  Twentieth  Alabama,  died,  as  did  the  brave  Captaip  [F. 
O.]  Claiborne,  of  the  artillery,  and  many  others  whose  names  I cannot 
mention  without  extending  this  report  to  too  great  a length.  The  regi- 
ment of  Colonel  Garrott  was  fortunate  in  having  for  his  successor  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel [E.  W.]  Pettus,  an  officer  who  deserves  and  is  competent 
to  fill  a higher  position. 

On  July  1,  I received  the  accompanying  confidential  communication, 
marked  A,  from  the  lieutenant-general  commanding.  I immediately  ad- 
dressed a circular  to  my  brigade  commanders  requiring  their  opinions 
on  the  points  suggested  in  the  note  of  the  commanding  general.  Having 
received  their  opinions  in  writing  (copies  of  which  are  appended,  marked 
B,  C,  D,  E),  I submitted  the  following  reply  to  the  lieutenant-general : 

Headquarters  Stevenson’s  Division, 

Vicksburg , July  2,  1863. 

General  : Your  confidential  note  of  yesterday,  requesting  me  to  inform  you  as  to  the 
condition  of  my  troops  and  their  ability  to  make  the  marches  and  undergo  the  fatigues 
necessary  to  accomplish,  a successful  evacuation  of  this  city,  was  duly  received,  and  I 
have  the  honor  to  state,  in  reply  thereto,  that  my  men  are  very  cheerful,  but  from  long 
confinement  in  the  trenches  and  short  rations  are  necessarily  much  enfeebled,  and  a 


346 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chat*.  XXXVI. 


considerable  number  would  be  unable  to  make  the  march  and  undergo  the  fatigues 
which  would  probably  be  necessary  in  a successful  evacuation  of  this  city.  If  pressed 
by  the  enemy,  and  it  should  be  necessary  to  place  the  Big  Black  in  our  rear  in  one 
march,  the  chances  are  that  a considerable  number  of  those  now  in  the  trenches 
could  not  succeed.  I believe,  however,  that  most  of  them,  rather  than  be  captured 
would  exert  themselves  to  the  utmost  to  accomplish  it. 

I respectfully  transmit  herewith  the  opinions  of  my  brigade  commanders  on  these 
points. 

I am,  general,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  L.  STEVENSON, 

Major-  General. 

A council  was  then  called  on  the  3d  instant  by  the  lieutenant-general, 
in  which  he  stated  that,  from  information  received  from  General  John- 
ston, all  hope  of  raising  the  siege  of  Vicksburg  must  be  abandoned,  and 
that  it  was  only  possible  to  save  the  garrison.  The  opinions  of  those 
present  were  then  asked  as  to  the  best  manner  of  accomplishing  it,  and 
it  was  their  unanimous  opinion  that,  rather  than  surrender,  the  garrison 
would  attempt  to  cut  its  way  out  under  all  circumstances,  but  that  if  an 
honorable  capitulation  could  be  eifected  it  would  be  the  best  and  wisest 
course,  considering  the  condition  of  the  men,  as  stated  at  that  time  by 
their  commanders,  and  it  was  suggested  that  a communication  should 
be  addressed  to  Major-General  Grant,  commanding  United  States  forces, 
asking  him  to  appoint  commissioners  to  meet  a like  number  of  ours  to 
agree  upon  terms.  It  was  consented  to  by  the  lieutenant-general  reluc- 
tantly, I think,  and  a communication  was  addressed  to  General  Grant, 
which  resulted  in  the  capitulation.  The  correspondence  between  the  two 
commanders  has  already  been  made  public.  A strong  argument  with  me 
in  favor  of  the  capitulation  was  that  we  would  march  the  army  out  in- 
tact ; that  they  would  be  exchanged  in  a very  short  time,  and  again  be 
armed  and  equipped  for  service. 

In  conclusion,  I desire  to  return  my  thanks  to  the  officers  and  men  of 
my  command. 

I have  to  thank  my  brigade  commanders,  Brigadier-Generals  Bar- 
ton, Cumming,  Lee,  and  Colonel  Reynolds,  as  also  Colonel  [T.  N.]  Waul, 
of  the  Texas  Legion,  to  whose  efficient  co-operation  I am  greatly  in- 
debted for  the  successful  defense  of  my  line  at  Vicksburg,  for  the  un- 
tiring energy  which  they  displayed  in  the  management  of  their  brigades, 
and  for  examples  of  devotion,  intrepidity,  and  coolness  under  every 
danger,  by  which  they  inspired  their  men.* 

. * # " # # * * * 

Maj.  G.  L.  Gillespie,  chief  of  subsistence,  is  deserving  of  special  com- 
mendation. To  his  energy,  zeal,  and  judicious  exertions  we  were  in- 
debted, in  my  opinion,  for  the  supplies  which  enabled  us  to  make  so 
protracted  a defense  of  Vicksburg. 

Capt.  J.  W.  Johnston,  inspector-general  of  light  artillery,  and  Cap- 
tains [James  F.]  Waddell  and  Grayson,  commanding  artillery  on  the 
left  and  right  of  the  Hall’s  Ferry  road,  respectively,  were  always  at 
their  posts,  and  by  the  intelligence  with  which  they  discharged  their 
duties  contributed  very  materially  to  the  defense. 

Captain  [Powhatan]  Robinson,  engineer  officer  in  charge  of  my  lines, 
performed  his  duties  promptly  and  efficiently. 

Major  [J.  E»]  McElrath,  acting  quartermaster  of  my  division  duriug 
the  siege,  has  placed  me  under  many  obligations  by  his  ready  anticipa- 
tion of  the  wants  of  the  command  and  his  untiring  energy  in  supplying 
them. 

Lieut.  G.  D.  Wise,  ordnance  officer  of  Cumming’s  brigade,  has  already 


For  portion  here  omitted,  see  p.  98. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


347 


been  especially  mentioned.  During  the  siege  he  was  selected  to  carry 
important  dispatches  through  the  lines  of  the  enemy,  and  the  duty  was 
successfully  performed.  I commend  him  to  the  notice  of  the  lieutenant- 
general  as  a bold  and  intelligent  officer,  and  one  who  deserves  a higher 
position. 

Accompanying,  please  find  a tabular  statement  of  the  casualties  of 
my  division  in  the  different  actions,  &c.,  in  which  it  participated  up  to 
June  16.* 

The  absence  of  subordinate  officers  renders  it  impossible  for  me  to 
give  my  whole  loss  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg. 

I am,  major,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

0.  L.  STEVENSON, 

Major-General. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


[Inclosure  A.] 

Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana, 

Vicksburg , Miss.,  July  1,  1863. 

General  : Unless  the  siege  of  Vicksburg  is  raised  or  supplies  are 
thrown  in,  it  will  be  necessary  very  shortly  to  evacuate  the  place.  I see 
no  prospect  of  the  former,  and  there  are  very  great,  if  not  insuperable, 
obstacles  in  the  way  of  the  latter.  You  are^  therefore,  requested  to 
inform  me,  with  as  little  delay  as  possible,  as  to  the  condition  of  your 
troops,  and  their  ability  to  make  the  marches  and  undergo  the  fatigues 
necessary  to  accomplish  a successful  evacuation.  You  will,  of  course, 
use  the  utmost  discretion  while  informing  yourself  through  your  sub- 
ordinates upon  all  points  tending  to  a clear  elucidation  of  the  subjects 
of  my  inquiry. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  0.  PEMBERTON, 
Lieutenant-  General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  C.  L.  Stevenson, 

Commanding  Division. 


[Inclosure  B.] 

Headquarters  First  Brigade,  Stevenson’s  Division, 

July  1,  1863. 

General  : In  reply  to  your  inquiry  as  to  the  “ ability  of  my  men  to 
march  and  undergo  the  fatigues  and  hardships  incidental  thereto,”  I 
have  the  honor  to  state  that  probably  half  of  them  are  fit  to  take  the 

field. 

The  command  suffers  greatly  from  intermittent  fever,  and  is  gener- 
ally debilitated  from  the  long  exposure  and  inaction  of  the  trenches. 
Of  those  now  reported  for  duty,  fully  one-half  are  undergoing  treat- 
ment. These  I think  are  unfit  for  the  field. 

Very  respectfully, 

S.  M.  BARTON, 
Brigadier-  General. 

Major-General  Stevenson, 

Commanding  Division. 


See  pp.  99,  328. 


348 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


fClTAl’.  XXX VI. 


[Inclosure  C.l 


Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  Stevenson’s  Division, 

July  1, 1863. 

General  : I am  in  receipt  of  your  communication,  inclosing  copy  of 
a note  from  the  lieutenant-general  commanding,  of  this  instant,  in  the 
former  of  which  I am  directed  to  give  my  opinion,  as  far  as  concerns 
my  brigade,  on  several  points  raised  in  the  latter. 

As  to  the  general  fact  that  the  troops  of  this  brigade  are  in  a condi- 
tion of  great  physical  debility  and  weakness,  it  needs  but  to  see  them 
in,  or  on  their  short  beats  to  and  from,  the  trenches,  to  be  able  to  bear 
testimony  to  it. 

Everything  beyond  this  assertion  of  the  general  fact  must,  of  course, 
be  mere  matter  of  opinion  and  conjecture.  After  much  reflection  upon 
the  subject,  based  upon  my  own  observations  and  the  remarks,  casual 
and  incidental,  of  the  regimental  commanders,  I would  state  the  fol- 
lowing as  the  conclusions  at  which  I have  arrived : 

From  shortness  of  rations,  and  greatly  more  from  a confinement  of 
forty-five  days  to  the  trenches,  under  the  summer  sun  of  a debilitating 
climate,  few,  if  any,  of  the  men  are  in  their  ordinary  health  and  vigor. 

I am  disposed  to  believe  that  perhaps  one  in  five  of  those  now  re- 
ported for  u duty  in  the  trenches  ” would,  under  different  and  favorable 
circumstances,  be  receiving  medical  treatment;  and  I have  less  hesita- 
tion in  declaring  it  as  my  opinion  that  of  this  number,  for  u duty  in  the 
trenches,”  50  per  cent,  would,  on  trial,  be  found  unfit  to  encounter  the 
fatigues  incident  to  the  life  of  the  soldier  in  the  field. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  GUMMING, 
Brigadier - General . 

Maj.  Gen.  C.  L.  Stevenson,  Commanding , &c. 


[Inclosure  D.] 


Hdqrs.  Second  Brigade,  Stevenson’s  Division, 

Trenches , July  3,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  note, 
inclosing  a copy  of  one  from  General  Pemberton,  relative  to  supplies, 
&c.,  and  on  the  two  points  involved,  as  far  as  my  brigade  is  concerned, 
will  state  that  I consider  my  brigade  in  tolerable  condition ; and  though 
they  are  weak  from  forty-five  days’  confinement  in  the  trenches  on  scant 
diet,  still,  I consider  them  equal  to  undergoing  the  fatigue  which  would 
be  incident  to  our  evacuation  of  this  city,  taking  in  view  its  importance 
and  the  interest  of  our  Confederacy. 

Yours,  respectfully, 


STEPHEN  D.  LEE, 

Brigadier - General. 

General  C.  L.  Stevenson,  Commanding  Division. 


[Inclosure  E.] 


Headquarters  Fourth  Brigade, 

July  1,  1863. 

General  : In  reply  to  your  inquiries  as  to  the  condition  of  my  troops 
and  their  ability  to  make  the  marches  and  undergo  the  fatigue  necessary 
to  accomplish  a successful  evacuation,  I have  the  honor  to  report  that 
the  condition  of -my  troops  is  not  good.  Owing  to  the  reduced  quantity 
and  quality  of  the  rations  on  which  they  have  subsisted  for  six  weeks 
past,  to  their  close  confinement  in  the  trenches,  constant  exposure  to 


Chap.  XXXYI.] 


349 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

the  intense  heat  of  the  snn  and  frequent  rains,  and  to  impure  water 
they  are  obliged  to  drink,  my  men  are  much  reduced  in  strength,  and 
in  many  instances  entirely  prostrated.  It  would  be  utterly  impossible 
for  most  of  them  to  make  a forced  march  of  any  distance.  Many  of  my 
men  are  in  the  hospital,  and  many  of  those  reported  for  duty  in  the 
trenches  are  extremely  weak  and  unable  to  undergo  the  slightest  fatigue. 
Perhaps  on  an  average  200  men  from  each  of  my  regiments,  animated 
by  patriotic  motives  and  a desire  to  be  free,  might  be  able  to  make  a 
march  of  10  or  15  miles  and  still  be  in  a condition  to  give  battle  to  the 
enemy,  but  hardly  more  than  this  number. 

The  spirits  of  my  men  are  good,  and  I believe  that  almost  to  a man 
they  would  be  willing  to  make  vigorous  efforts  and  to  strike  a blow  for 
freedom  ; but  I regret  to  say  that  two -thirds  are  unable  to  endure  a 
march  of  10  miles. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  W.  REYNOLDS, 
Colonel , Commanding  Fourth  Brigade. 

Maj.  Gen.  C.  L.  Stevenson,  Commanding  Division , &c. 


Ordnance  and  stores  at  Vicksburg. 


3-inch  rifled  guns,  complete 2 

6-pounder  bronze  guns,  complete 2 

12-pounder  iron  howitzers 3 

Caissons 9 

Traveling  forges 4 

Battery  wagons 4 

Sets  lead  harness 48 

Sets  wheel  harness 24 

Small-arms,  complete 8,  472 

Accouterments,  complete 8,  472 

Rounds  per  man 65 

Rounds  per  gun 100 


No.  78. 

Reports  of  Brig . Gen.  Stephen  D.  Lee,  C.  S.  Army , commanding  Second 

Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Brigade,  Stevenson’s  Division, 

May  22,  1863—11.45. 

Sir  : The  enemy  have  been  repulsed  along  my  front ; they  have  made 
a lodgment  in  the  ditch  of  left  work,  and  they  have  a stand  of  colors 
in  the  work.  The  work  is  full  of  our  men.  I can’t  reach  them  in  the 
ditch.  They  made  a gallant  assault,  and  have  lost  a great  many  men. 

STEPHEN  D.  LEE, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Major-General  Stevenson. 


Headquarters  Lee’s  Brigade, 

May  22,  1863. 

General:  The  angle  is  carried  and  the  enemy’s  colors  taken.  It 
was  a gallant  affair.  They  are  still  in  the  ditch  and  on  the  ridge. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

STEPHEN  D.  LEE, 

Brigadier-  General , 

General  Stevenson, 


350 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  1XX7I. 


Headquarters  Lee’s  Brigade, 

May  22,  1863. 

General  : I send  you  the  flag  taken  by  Texans,  under  the  lead  of 
our  gallant  Lieutenant-Colonel  [E.  W.]  Pettus,  Twentieth  Alabama 
Regiment.  It  was  as  gallant  an  act  as  I have  ever  seen  during  the  war. 
I have  pledged  myself  to  give  it  to  its  captors.  I beg  that  you  and 
General  Pemberton  will  bear  me  out. 

I send  this  by  the  gallant  Lieutenant  Martin,  who  has  been  wounded. 
Your  obedient  servant, 


General  Stevenson. 


STEPHEN  D.  LEE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


[Indorsement.! 


Respectfully  forwarded,  with  the  request  that  you  will  permit  the 
colors  to  be  retained  by  the  captors. 


C.  L.  STEVENSON, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Hdqrs.  Second  Brigade,  Stevenson’s  Division, 

JDemopolis , Ala.,  July  25,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken 
in  our  operations  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg  by  the  troops  under 
my  command,  consisting  of  the  Twentieth  Alabama  Regiment,  Col.  I. 
W.  Garrott ; Twenty  third  Alabama,  Col.  F.  K.  Beck  ; Thirtieth  Ala- 
bama, Col.  C.  M.  Shelley ; Thirty-first  Alabama  Regiment,  Lieut.  Col. 
T.  M.  Arrington ; Forty-sixth  Alabama  Regiment,  Capt.  George  E. 
Brewer;  Waul’s  Texas  Legion,  Col.  T.  N.  Waul;  Waddell’s  battery, 
Capt.  J.  F.  Waddell ; Drew’s  battery,  Lieut.  W.  J.  Duncan ; the  Hud- 
son Battery,  Lieutenant  [Milton  H.]  Trantham  ; Captain  Haynes’  com- 
pany (E),  First  Louisiana  Artillery,  and  a section  of  the  Yaiden  Artil- 
lery, Lieutenant  [Elbert  M.]  Collins : 

On  the  morning  of  May  17,  our  works  at  Big  Black  Bridge  haviug 
been  carried  by  the  enemy,  our  army  was  ordered  to  retire  to  our  in- 
trenchments  around  Vicksburg.  My  brigade  was  ordered  to  cover  the 
retreat  across  the  river  after  the  works  were  carried,  and  was  accord- 
ingly posted  along  the  banks  for  that  purpose,  where  it  remained  until 
relieved  by  Baldwin’s  brigade,  Smith’s  division,  which  brought  up  the 
rear. 

By  an  error  in  the  transmission  of  an  order,  the  Twenty-third  Ala- 
bama Regiment,  Col.  F.  K.  Beck,  remained  at  the  bridge  after  Bald- 
win’s brigade  had  been  withdrawn,  and  gallantly  engaged  the  enemy 
during  the  entire  day,  leaving  the  position  about  midnight  and  joining 
the  brigade  at  Vicksburg. 

The  city  of  Vicksburg  was  invested  on  May  18,  the  enemy  having 
regularly  surrounded  it  and  commenced  their  parallel  approaches.  The 
position  occupied  by  my  brigade  was  immediately  to  the  right  of  the 
railroad,  with  its  left  resting  on  that  road.  All  the  knolls  in  front  of 
my  line  were  at  once  seized  by  the  enemy  and  batteries  erected  thereon 
for  their  artillery,  their  sharpshooters  in  the  mean  time  keeping  up  a 
continuous  and  annoying  fire. 

On  May  19,  20,  and  21,  the  enemy’s  forces  were  massed,  under  cover 
of  their  artillery  and  sharpshooters’  fire,  in  the  ravine  a few  hundred 
yards  in  front  of  our  lines. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


351 


At  about  10  a.  m.  on  the  22d,  a gallant  assault  was  made  upon  our 
works  from  the  right  of  my  position  to  the  extreme  left  of  our  line  on 
the  river.  The  assault  upon  my  front  was  a determined  one,  but  was 
handsomely  repulsed,  with  a considerable  loss  to  the  enemy.  They  suc- 
ceeded, however,  in  carrying  an  angle  of  the  work  immediately  to  the 
right  of  the  railroad,  and  in  planting  two  colors  upon  the  parapet,  which 
remained  there  for  several  hours.  The  angle  was  finally  assaulted  and 
carried  by  a gallant  band  of  WauPs  Texas  Legion,  under  the  command 
of  the  intrepid  Lieut.  Col.  E.  W.  Pettus,  Twentieth  Alabama  Regiment. 
This  brave  officer,  assisted  by  Major  [O.]  Steele  and  Captain  [L.  D.J 
Bradley,  of  the  Legion,  and  the  heroic  Texans,  captured  the  colors  or 
the  enemy  and  about  50  prisoners,  including  a lieutenant-colonel.  A 
more  daring  feat  has  not  been  performed  during  the  war,  and  too  much 
praise  cannot  be  awarded  to  every  one  engaged  in  it. 

All  the  troops  under  my  command  behaved  well  during  the  assault, 
and  inflicted  severe  loss  upon  the  enemy.  WauPs  Texas  Legion  par- 
ticularly distinguished  itself,  under  its  brave  colonel,  by  its  coolness 
and  gallantry,  as  did  also  a portion  of  Colonel  [T.  P.]  Dockery’s  Ar- 
kansas regiment.  The  Twentieth,  Twenty-third,  and  Thirty-first  Ala- 
bama Regiments  attracted  my  attention  by  their  good  conduct  during 
the  day.  The  above-mentioned  commands  are  those  which  particularly 
came  under  my  personal  observation  during  the  assault. 

From  May  22,  the  enemy  seemed  to  have  abandoned  the  idea  of  car- 
rying our  works  by  assault,  and  from  that  time  commenced  pushing 
their  works  gradually,  but  industriously,  toward  ours,  up  to  July  4,  when 
the  city  was  surrendered,  at  which  time  their  trenches  at  several  points 
on  my  line  were  within  30  feet  of  our  works.  As  each  of  their  ditches 
was  completed,  it  was  filled  with  sharpshooters,  who  kept  up  a contin- 
uous fire  upon  our  lines.  The  enemy  had  also  from  fifteen  to  thirty 
pieces  of  artillery  in  front  of  my  line,  which  kept  up  a heavy  fire  dur- 
ing both  night  and  day.  The  fire  from  their  small-arms  commenced 
generally  about  half  an  hour  before  daylight,  and  continued  until  about 
dark  in  the  evening.  There  was  no  relief  whatever  to  our  men,  who 
were  confined  for  forty-seven  days  in  their  narrow  trenches  without 
any  opportunity  of  moving  about,  as  there  was  during  the  day  a per- 
fect rain  of  Minie  balls,  which  prevented  any  one  from  showing  the 
least  portion  of  his  body,  while  at  night,  in  consequence  of  the  proximity 
of  the  enemy,  it  was  impossible  for  the  men  to  leavh  their  positions 
for  any  length  of  time.  After  about  the  tenth  day  of  the  siege  the 
men  lived  on  about  one-half  rations,  and  on  even  less  than  that  toward 
its  cldse. 

During  the  whole  time  the  troops  under  my  command  exhibited 
cheerfulness  and  good  spirit,  feeling  confident  that  they  would  finally 
be  released.  Physically  they  were  much  weakened  by  their  arduous 
duties  and  poor  rations,  and  at  the  time  of  the  surrender  I did  not 
consider  more  than  one-half  of  my  men  able  to  undergo  the  fatigues  of 
the  field. 

The  officers  who  particularly  attracted  my  attention  were : Colonel 
[Isham  W.]  Garrott,  Twentieth  Alabama,  the  pure  patriot  and  gallant 
soldier,  who  was  killed  on  June  17  while  in  the  fearless  discharge  of  his 
duties.  Respected  and  loved  by  all  who  knew  him,  a more  attentive 
and  vigilant  officer  was  not  in  our  service.  Col.  T.  N.  Waul,  command- 
ing Texas  Legion,  by  his  dashing  gallantry  and  coolness,  inspired  every 
one  around  him  with  confidence,  and  handled  his  Legion  with  skill. 
Colonels  Beck  and  Shelley  were  particularly  brave  and  vigilant.  Colo- 
nel [E.  W.J  Pettus,  Twentieth  Alabama,  won  the  admiration  of  every 


352 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Ciiav.  XXXVI. 


one  by  his  daring  on  May  22,  and  by  his  uniform  good  conduct  during 
the  remainder  of  the  siege.  Lieutenant-Colonels  [J.  B.]  Smith,  Thir- 
tieth Alabama;  Arrington,  Thirty-first  Alabama;  [B.]  Timmons  and 

, of  WauFs  Legion ; Major  [George  W.]  Mathieson,  Thirty-first 

Alabama  ; Captains  [John  C.]  Francis,  Thirtieth  Alabama,  and  Brewer, 
Forty-sixth  Alabama,  and  Captains  Waddell  and  [L.  B.]  Haynes,  and 
Lieutenants  Duncan  and  Collins,  commanding  batteries  and  sections  of 
artillery,  were  gallant  and  vigilant. 

Maj.  John  J.  Beeve,  assistant  adjutant-general  of  the  division,  was 
with  me  on  the  lines  upon  several  occasions,  and  particularly  attracted 
my  attention  by  his  daring  and  coolness  during  the  assault  on  the  22d. 

Captain  [J.  J.]  Conway,  the  engineer  in  charge  of  the  works  on  my 
line,  was  active  and  energetic  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties,  and  was 
unceasing  in  his  efforts  during  night  and  day  to  check  the  approach  of 
the  enemy. 

Of  my  personal  staff  I would  mention  the  uniform  cool  and  gallant 
conduct  of  Capt.  William  Elliott,  assistant  adjutant-general,  who  was 
always  at  the  post  of  danger,  inspiring  confidence  by  his  example.  Capt. 
W.  H.  Johnson  and  Lieut.  H.  N.  Martin,  acting  aides-de-camp,  and 
Capt.  J.  R.  Curell  and  Lieutenant  [S.  M.]  Underhill,  volunteer  aides, 
behaved  with  gallantry  during  the  siege. 

I would  also  mention  Mr.  West,  who  was  serving  on  my  staff;  my 
orderly  (L.  B.  Murphy,  Forty-sixth  Alabama  Regiment),  and  my  cou- 
riers (Hill  and  J.  M.  Simpson),  who  were  always  gallant  and  at  their 
posts. 

A correct  list  of  the  casualties  in  the  different  regiments  and  com- 
panies cannot  yet  be  furnished,  as  the  reports  have  not  been  received 
from  their  commands. 

Very  respectfully, 


STEPHEN  D.  LEE, 


Brigadier - General , Commanding. 


Maj.  J.  J.  Reeve, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Stevenson’s  Division. 


ADDENDA. 

Vicksburg,  July  3, 1863. 

I do  not  think  it  is  time  to  surrender  this  garrison  and  post  yet.  Nor 
do  I think  it  practicable  to  cut  our  way  out.  When  it  is  time  to  sur- 
render, the  terms  proposed  by  Grant  are  as  good  as  we  can  expect- 
I still  have  hopes  of  Johnston  relieving  the  garrison. 

STEPHEN  D.  LEE, 

Brigadier-  General. 


No.  79. 

Report  of  Capt.  A.  C.  Roberds , Twenty-third  Alabama  Infantry. 

Enterprise,  Miss.,  July  21,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  May  17  the  Twenty- 
third  Alabama  was  ordered  to  take  position  on  either  side  of  the  rail- 
road on  west  bank  of  Big  Black  River,  and  hold  the  enemy  in  check 
should  they  attempt  to  cross.  At  this  time  the  bridge  was  burning. 
Owing  to  the  fact  that  the  regiment  did  not  receive  the  order  to  fall 


Chap.  -XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


353 


back  when  the  rest  of  the  army  retreated  toward  Vicksburg,  Colonel 
[F.  K.]  Beck,  commanding  Twenty-third  Alabama,  held  his  position 
during  the  whole  of  the  17th  under  a heavy  fire  from  the  enemy’s  artil 
lery  and  sharpshooters,  which  we  returned  with  effect. 

At  1 a.  m.  of  May  18,  we  took  up  the  line  of  march,  and  consequently 
did  not  reach  Vicksburg  until  late  in  the  morning  of  the  18th.  In  the 
afternoon  we  were  ordered  to  take  our  position  in  the  trenches  with  the 
rest  of  our  brigade,  the  Twentieth  Alabama  occupying  our  right  and 
the  Thirty-first  Alabama  on  our  left.  The  Twenty-third  Alabama  held 
the  position  assigned  it  during  the  siege  under  an  incessant  fire  from 
the  enemy  in  our  front.  The  artillery  fire  was  severe  during  the  whole 
siege,  with  occasional  brief  intermissions.  At  times  it  was  excessively 
heavy.  During  the  whole  time  the  men  and  officers  discharged  their 
duty  with  firmness  and  steadiness.  The  fire  from  our  trenches  upon  the 
enemy  was  slow  and  deliberate.  We  did  not  waste  our  powder,  but  no 
Abolitionist  could  show  his  head  without  danger  from  ball  or  buck- 
shot. The  necessity  for  constant  watchfulness  made  the  sentinel  duty 
at  night  heavy  and  wearing,  but  the  men,  with  a noble  devotion  to  the 
cause  in  which  their  hearts  are  enlisted,  stood  to  their  posts  with  pa- 
tience and  cheerfulness.  The  enemy,  much  to  the  regret  of  the  men, 
made  no  direct  attack  on  the  trenches  which  the  Twenty- third  Alabama 
held,  but  they  received  a heavy  and  effective  fire  from  us  as  they  came 
into  range  of  our  guns  in  their  attempts  on  the  left  and  right  of  our 
brigade. 

Owing  to  Colonel  Beck’s  having  his  leg  badly  broken  by  a kick  from 
a horse  on  the  inarch  from  Vicksburg  to  this  place,  the  duty  has  de- 
volved on  me,  as  the  senior  with  the  regiment  during  the  siege,  to  make 
this  report.  I regret  this,  as  our  gallant  colonel  would  doubtless  have 
had  a more  extended  report  to  make.  1 trust  he  will  see  fit  to  make  an 
additional  report  when  able,  that  honor  may  be  given  to  whom  honor  is 
due. 

Below  you  will  find  a statement  of  the  casualties  in  this  regiment  from 
May  17  to  July  4,  inclusive.  Casualties  in  Twenty-third  Alabama  dur- 
ing the  siege  of  Vicksburg  : Killed,  17 ; wounded,  15. 

Lieut.  M.  A.  Cobb,  an  efficient  and  gallant  officer,  was  severely  but 
it  is  hoped  not  dangerously  wounded  in  the  head.  Two  of  those  in- 
cluded in  the  wounded  have  since  died  of  their  wounds. 

Yours,  very  respectfully, 


A.  C.  KOBEKDS, 

Captain  Company  (7,  Twenty-third  Alabama . 


Capt.  William  Elliott, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Second  Brigade , StevensonJs  Division. 


Ko.  80. 


Report  of  May.  George  W.  Mathieson , Thirty-first  Alabama  Infantry. 


Enterprise,  Miss.,  July  21,  1863. 

Captain  : In  compliance  with  a circular  issued  from  brigade  head- 
quarters this  evening,  requiring  regimental  commanders  to  furnish  a 
report  oi  the  part  taken  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg  by  their  respect- 
ive commands,  and  as  I was  commanding  the  Thirty-first  Alabama  Kegi- 
23  R R— VOL  XXIV;  PT  II 


354 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


ment  the  greater  portion  of  the  time,  I have  the  honor,  very  respectfully, 
to  forward  you  this  as  my  report. 

On  May  IS,  we  took  our  position  in  the  trenches  on  the  right  of  the 
railroad,  occupying  the  third  redoubt,  with  Colonel  [F.  K.]  Beck’s  regi- 
ment (Twenty-third  Alabama)  on  my  right  and  Colonel  [Charles  M.J 
Shelley’s  (Thirtieth  Alabama)  on  my  left.  Nothing  occurred  during 
that  day  and  night  to  interrupt  us. 

On  the  19th,  about  12  o’clock,  the  enemy  began  to  take  a position  in 
my  frout,  and  opened  a severe  tire  from  his  sharpshooters.  During  the 
following  night  he  planted  several  pieces  of  artillery,  and  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  20th  began  a heavy  cannonade,  which  "continued  through- 
out the  day  and  a portion  of  the  ensuing  night.  It  annoyed  us  very 
much,  but  did  very  little  damage.  A continuous  tire  was  kept  up  by 
his  sharpshooters  and  cannoneers  until  the  day  of  May  22,  when  a 
heavy  column  of  infantry  appeared  in  front,  and  attempted  to  charge  my 
position.  The  men  of  my  command  poured  a heavy  fire  into  their  ranks 
for  about  an  hour,  when  the  main  body  retired,  but  continued  the  sharp- 
shooting and  cannonading  until  dark.  His  killed  and  wounded  lay  thick 
on  the  field,  and  he  was  evidently  badly  crippled.  I do  not  know  the 
precise  amount  of  his  loss,  but  think  it  must  have  been  150  or  200  in 
killed  and  wounded.  Our  loss  was  very  small.  We  had  1 man  killed 
near  the  redoubt.  In  the  redoubt  we  had  one  12-pounder  howitzer, 
which  did  good  service  during  the  charge.  The  enemy  permitted  his 
dead  and  wounded  to  remain  on  the  field  until  the  evening  of  the  25th, 
when  there  was  a truce  of  a few  hours  to  allow  his  dead  to  be  buried. 
A constant  fire  was  continued  from  day  to  day  until  the  morning  of  July 
4,  when  the  city  was  surrendered. 

The  officers  and  men  of  my  command  submitted  to  the  hardships  and 
privations  of  the  siege  with  great  endurance  and  patience.  The  strength 
of  the  regiment  during  the  time  we  remained  in  the  trenches  ranged 
from  220  to  250  men. 

Below  I give  you  a list  of  the  killed  and  wounded  in  the  command : 
Killed,  21 ; wounded,  37. 

Bespectfully  submitted. 

G.  W.  MATHIESON, 

Major , Commanding  Thirty -first  Alabama. 

Capt.  William  Elliott, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Second  Brigade. 


No.  81. 

Report  of  Capt.  George  E.  Brewer , Forty -sixth  Alabama  Infantry. 

Parole  Camp, 

On  march , July  21,  1863. 

Beport  of  siege  of  Vicksburg  for  the  Forty- sixth  Begiment  Alabama 
Volunteers  from  May  18  to  July  4 : 

After  the  defeat  at  Champion’s  Hill  (alias  Baker’s  Creek),  during 
which  fight  the  field  officers  and  part  of  the  staff  of  the  regiment  were 
either  killed  or  captured,  the  regiment  with  the  army  fell  back  to  Vicks- 
burg, where  they  were  closely  besieged  by  the  enemy. 

The  regiment  entered  the  trenches  on  May  18,  and  were  steadily  under 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


355 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 

fire  both  from  small- arms  and  artillery  from  May  19  till  July  4,  the 
day  of  the  surrender.  Their  position  was  in  rear  of  the  redoubt  upon 
the  immediate  right  bank  of  and  in  the  railroad,  and  upon  the  left  of  the 

I position  held  by  Major-General  Stevenson’s  division.  The  regiment  was 
commanded  during  part  of  the  siege  by  Capt.  George  E.  Brewer,  senior 
captain,  and  the  remainder  of  the  time  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  [E.  W.J 
Pettus,  of  the  Twentieth  Alabama,  until  the  death  of  Colonel  [Isham 
W.]  Garrott,  of  the  Twentieth  Alabama,  when  Captain  Brewer  again 
returned  to  the  command. 

The  enemy  made  a severe  assault  on  May  22  upon  the  portion  of  the 
works  habitually  held  by  the  regiment,  but  which  had  been  previously 
temporarily  relieved  from  duty  in  the  trenches,  but  were  brought  up 
during  the  charge  to  re-enforce  those  which  occupied  their  places. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Pettus,  who  commanded  at  the  time,  greatly  dis- 
tinguished himself  by  his  gallantry.  The  enemy  were  successfully  re- 
pulsed. The  regiment,  without  any  display  of  peculiar  bravery,  be- 
haved itself  well  and  endured  the  privations  of  the  siege  with  laudable 
patience. 

The  following  is  a list  of  the  casualties  in  the  different  companies 
composing  the  regiment  duiing  the  siege.* 

The  above  is  respectfully  submitted. 

GEO.  E.  BREWER, 

Captain , Commanding  Forty-sixth  Regiment  Alabama  Volunteers. 


No.  82. 

Report  of  Col.  A.  W.  Reynolds , C.  8.  Army , commanding  Fourth  Bri- 
gade.. 

SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG. 

On  the  morning  of  May  18,  my  brigade  was  assigned  its  position  on 
the  line  of  intrenchments,  on  the  left  of  General  Barton,  whose  brigade 
occupied  the  extreme  right,  my  left  resting  on  the  Hall’s  Ferry  road, 
and  on  the  right  of  General  Cummiug.  The  Thirty-first  Tennessee, 
Fifty-ninth,  and  five  companies  of  the  Third  Tennessee  Regiment,  were 
assigned  to  the  ditches;  the  Forty-third  Regiment  and  five  companies 
of  the  Third  Tennessee  Regiment  held  as  a reserve.  The  artillery,  con- 
sisting of  five  light  pieces,  under  Captain  [F.  O.]  Claiborne,  were  posted 
in  the  center  and  right  center— one  piece,  under  Captain  [Max.  Van  D.] 
Corput,  on  the  left  center;  one  section,  under  Lieutenant  [E.  L.]  Bower, 
on  the  right;  one  piece,  under  Sergeant  Hairston,  on  the  right  center, 
aud  one  18-pounder  siege  piece  on  the  left  center,  under  Lieutenant 
[George  P.]  Crane. 

In  taking  my  position,  I found  the  works  so  weak  and  easily  enfiladed 
that  it  was  necessary  to  fill  up  some  of  the  trenches  and  dig  others; 
consequently  I did  so,  and  erected  new  redoubts  on  the  line  for  my 
artillery. 

On  tiie  night  of  the  18th,  I threw  out  a line  of  skirmishers  or  pickets 
about  half  a mile  in  front  of  my  works.  Each  officer  and  soldier  was 
assigned  his  place  in  the  rifle-pits,  aud  my  reserves  in  proper  position. 

m*  Nominal  list  shows  2 officers  and  13  men  killed,  1 officer  and  44  men  wounded,  and 
1J  officers  and  298  men  surrendered. 


356 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Cuap.  XXXVI. 


The  precaution  of  throwing  out  pickets  at  some  distance  in  front  had 
the  effect  of  keeping  the  sharpshooters  of  the  enemy  at  a distance,  and 
prevented  my  line  being  annoyed,  as  those  on  the  left  of  me  had  been 
from  the  beginning,  besides  giving  me  the  opportunity  of  strengthening 
my  works  unmolested.  Notwithstanding  my  line  for  the  time  being  bat 
little  harassed  by  the  enemy  in  my  front,  it  was  greatly  annoyed  by  the 
shells  from  the  gunboats  and  mortars  established  on  the  peninsula  and 
in  the  river,  which  opened  daily  upon  our  rear. 

About  May  29,  the  enemy  by  a superior  force  drove  in  my  picket  line. 
After  nightfall  I attacked  them  in  turn  and  re-established  my  line. 

On  June  1,  the  enemy  established  a battery  about  800  yards  in  my 
front  and  opened  fire  upon  me.  This  gun,  however,  was  soon  silenced 
by  Captain  Claiborne’s  rifle  pieces. 

Cn  the  nights  of  June  3 and  4,  the  enemy  placed  in  position  four 
guns  of  heavy  caliber,  which  opened  on  the  5th  at  daylight.  These 
guns  continued  to  play  upon  my  works  incessantly  throughout  the  siege, 
except  at  night  and  a few  hours  during  the  heat  of  the  day. 

On  June  9,  several  20-pounder  Parrotts  were  mounted  within  400 
yards  of  our  line,  our  pickets  having  been  gradually  withdrawn,  those 
of  the  enemy  having  advanced  to  within  75  yards  of  our  line,  throwing 
up  works  much  stronger  than  those  occupied  by  our  troops.  These  iu- 
trenchments  were  continuous  along  my  entire  line.  The  sharpshooters 
were  numerous,  and  kept  up  such  a continual  fire  that  to  show  any  part 
of  the  body  above  the  parapet  was  almost  certain  to  be  struck.  Fre- 
quent sorties  from  my  line  were  made  at  night,  driving  the  enemy  from 
their  intrenchments  and  filling  them  up.  Owing  to  the  sux>erior  force 
of  the  enemy,  it  was  impossible  to  hold  the  position  gained.  The  fire  in- 
creased daily,  as  the  enemy  would  mount  additional  guns  and  increased 
their  number  of  sharpshooters.  This  incessant  firing  continued  until 
the  afternoon  of  July  3,  when  it  ceased,  and  the  garrison  capitulated. 

Early  in  the  siege  the  Forty-third  Tennessee  Regiment,  Colonel  [J. 
W.]  Gillespie  commanding,  re-enforced  General  [S.  D.]  Lee,  and  bore  its 
part  in  repulsing  the  charges  on  his  line.  During  these  forty- seven  days, 
under  the  terrific  fire  of  the  enemy’s  artillery  and  infantry,  the  officers 
and  men  of  the  brigade  bore  themselves  with  constancy  and  courage. 
Often  half  fed  and  illy-clothed,  exposed  to  the  burning  sun  and  soak- 
ing rains,  they  performed  their  duty  cheerfully  and  without  a murmur. 

During  the  siege  many  valuable  lives  were  lost.  Among  others  I 
would  mention  the  names  of  Capt.  F.  O.  Claiborne,  Third  Maryland 
Battery,  and  Major  [J.  C.]  Boyd,  Third  Tennessee  Regiment.  The 
former  was  killed  on  the  evening  of  June  24,  while  gallantly  fighting 
at  his  guns ; the  latter  died  from  exposure.  No  more  gallant  officers 
ever  gave  up  their  lives  for  their  country. 

The  officers  of  my  staff  performed  their  duties  faithfully  and  promptly. 
Major  [C.  W.]  Phifer,  my  assistant  inspector-general,  Capt.  W.  H. 
Claiborne,  my  acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  and  Lieut.  William 
A.  M.  Patton,  my  aide,  were  conspicuous  for  gallantry  and  good  con- 
duct throughout  the  siege. 

The  lists  of  my  killed  and  wounded  I have  already  forwarded  to  your 
headquarters. 

I am,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  W.  REYNOLDS, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Fourth  Brigade,  Stevenson's  Division. 

Maj.  J.  J.  Reeve, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Stevenson9 s Division. 


357 


Chai>.  XXXVI.]  the  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


No.  83. 

Report  of  Col.  T.  N.  Waul , Texas  Legion. 

Headquarters  Waul’s  Texas  Legion, 

Demopolis , July  30,  1863. 

Major  : In  obedience  to  the  orders  of  the  lieutenant-general  com- 
manding, I have  the  honor  to  report  the  part  taken  by  Waul’s  Texas 
Legion  in  the  defense  of  the  city  of  Vicksburg. 

The  portion  of  the  Legion  which  entered  the  city  on  May  17,  and  was 
present  during  the  siege,  consisted  of  eleven  companies  of  infantry,  one 
company  of  artillery,  a detachment  of  mounted  scouts,  and  a battalion 
of  Zouaves,  attached  to  the  command.  Captain  Wall’s  battery  of  artil- 
lery was  ordered  to  report  to  General  Forney,  under  whose  command 
it  remained  until  the  capitulation  $ the  rest  of  the  command,  placed  in 
reserve  by  order  of  the  lieutenant-general,  were  present  on  the  18th 
and  19th  at  the  different  points  on  Generals  Smith’s  and  Forney’s  line 
assaulted  by  the  enemy,  or  where  an  attack  seemed  imminent. 

In  the  afternoon  of  the  19th,  ordered  to  report  to  General  Stevenson, 
the  command  was  placed  in  the  rear  of  General  [S.  D.]  Lee’s  brigade, 
it  being  the  most  assailable  and  threatened  point  on  General  Steven- 
son’s line. 

On  the  morning  of  May  22,  the  enemy  opened  with  a fierce  and  in- 
cessant fire  of  artillery,  which  continued  for  two  hours.  After  the  can- 
nonading ceased,  the  enemy  moved  in  distinct  and  separate  columns 
against  each  of  the  salient  points  in  General  Lee’s  front,  their  forces 
massed  in  the  rear.  The  advance  and  supporting  columns  started  at  a 
double-quick,  with  division  front.  Two  companies  of  the  Legion,  under 
the  command  of  Major  [O.]  Steele,  were  sent  to  support  the  garrison 
in  the  left  redoubt.  The  remainder  were  ordered  to  the  front,  and  took 
an  active  part  in  the  defense  of  the  line  and  the  repulse  of  the  enemy. 
Unprotected  by  breastworks,  they  were  subjected  to  the  most  galling 
fire,  and  well  they  sustained  the  noble  cause  for  which  they  fought, 
never  relaxing,  but  [fighting]  with  increased  ardor,  until  the  last  of  the 
enemy  was  prostrated  or  driven  from  their  sight.  The  loss  was  very 
severe,  particularly  so  in  officers,  every  officer  of  the  staff  present  being 
either  killed  or  seriously  wounded.  Assistant  Adjutant- General  [Louis] 
Popendieck  and  Aide-de-Camp  Simmons,  after  exhibiting  the  most  gal- 
lant and  daring  conduct  in  extending  orders  under  the  incessant  stream 
of  shell  and  Minie  balls,  fell,  leaving  an  undying  record  of  their  courage 
and  dauntless  bearing. 

After  the  repulse  of  the  advance  columns  of  the  enemy,  it  was  per- 
ceived that  a party  more  daring  had  crossed  the  ditch  of  the  redoubt 
on  the  left,  planted  two  flags  upon  the  parapet,  entered  a breach  made 
by  their  artillery,  taking  a few  prisoners  and  driving  the  garrison  from 
the  angle  of  the  fort.  Alive  to  the  importance  of  the  position,  General 
Lee  issued  and  reiterated  orders  to  Colonel  [0.  M.]  Shelley,  command- 
ing the  Thirtieth  Alabama,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  [E.  W.]  Pettus, 
commanding  the  Twentieth  Alabama,  who  occupied  the  fort,  to  retake 
it  at  all  hazards,  offering  the  flags  to  the  command  capturing  them. 
After  several  vain  attempts,  they  refused  to  volunteer,  nor  could  the 
most  strenuous  efforts  of  their  chivalric  commanders  urge  or  incite  them 
to  the  assault.  General  Lee  then  directed  the  colonel  of  the  Legion  to 
have  the  fort  taken.  He  immediately  went,  taking  with  him  one  bat- 
talion of  the  Legion  to  aid  or  support  the  assailants,  if  necessary,  in- 
forming Captain  [L.  D.]  Bradley  and  Lieutenant  [J.j  Hogue,  who  re- 


358  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

spectively  commanded  the  companies  that  had  been  previously  sent  as 
a support  to  the  garrison.  These  gallant  officers  not  only  willingly 
agreed,  but  solicited  the  honor  of  leading  their  companies  to  the  assault, 
not  wishing  to  expose  a larger  force  than  necessary.  Captain  Bradley 
was  ordered  to  select  20  and  Lieutenant  Hogue  15  men  from  their  re- 
spective companies.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Pettus,  thoroughly  acquainted 
with  the  locality  and  its  approaches,  came,  musket  in  hand,  and  most 
gallantly  offered  to  guide  and  lead  the  party  into  the  fort.  Three  of 
Colonel  Shelley’s  regiment  also  volunteered.  With  promptness  and 
alacrity  they  moved  to  the  assault,  retook  the  fort,  drove  the  enemy 
through  the  breach  they  entered,  tore  down  the  stand  of  colors  still 
floating  over  the  parapet,  and  sent  them  to  the  colonel  commanding 
the  Legion,  who  immediately  transmitted  it,  with  a note,  to  General 
Lee.  This  feat,  considered  with  the  accompanying  circumstances — the 
occupation  by  the  enemy;  the  narrow  pass  through  which  the  party 
had  to  enter;  the  enfilading  fire  of  musketry  and  artillery  they  had  to 
encounter  in  the  approach ; the  unwillingness  of  the  garrison,  consist- 
ing of  two  regiments,  to  volunteer,  and  permitting  the  flags  to  float  for 
three  hours  over  their  parapets ; the  coolness,  courage,  and  intrepidity 
manifested — deserves  the  highest  praise  for  every  officer  and  man  en- 
gaged in  the  hazardous  enterprise.  The  enemy,  driven  from  the  fort, 
ensconced  themselves  behind  the  parapet  in  the  outer  ditch.  Two  com- 
panies were  immediately  ordered  to  the  fort,  to  aid  in  dislodging  the 
enemy.  Many  of  the  men  mounted  the  parapet  and  fired  into  the  ditch, 
subjecting  themselves  to  the  aim  of  its  occupants  and  the  concentrated 
fire  from  the  enemy’s  lines.  A few  shell  used  as  hand-grenades  burst- 
ing among  the  enemy,  soon  caused  them  to  surrender,  although  so  soon 
as  we  ceased  casting  missiles,  under  cover  of  the  approaching  darkness, 
more  than  half  of  the  number  escaped.  In  the  pursuit,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  [J.]  Wrigley,  of  the  second  battalion,  captured  the  other  stand 
of  colors  snatched  by  the  enemy  from  the  parapet,  but  dropped  in  his 
flight. 

During  the  remainder  of  the  siege  the  command  was  distributed  in 
the  rifle-pits  and  forts,  forming  nightly  scouting  parties,  parties  of  re- 
connaissance, and  supporting  our  working  parties  and  pickets. 

At  10  o’clock  of  the  day  of  the  capitulation  the  command  marched 
out  of  the  intrenchments  with  their  colors  flying  and  band  playing. 
Having  saluted  their  colors,  they  stacked  arms  and  returned — prisoners 
under  parole — into  camp. 

It  is  not  thought  necessary  to  enlarge  upon  the  privations  they  suffered, 
in  common  with  the  rest  of  the  garrison,  their  continued  vigils,  resolute 
and  unwavering  conduct  under  the  necessary  and  continued  exposure 
to  which  they  were  subjected,  their  desire  for  every  post  of  danger,  even 
when  more  than  one-third  of  their  number  were  killed  or  wounded,  the 
command  having  lost  more  officers  than  the  division  (by  far  the  largest 
in  the  army)  to  which  they  were  attached. 

The  casualties  were:  Officers  killed,  10;  wounded,  37 ; missing,  1. 
Enlisted  men  killed,  37;  wounded,  153;  missing,  7.  Total  number 
killed,  wounded,  and  missing,  245. 

During  the  siege  the  command  lost  many  of  its  ablest  officers.  Major 
[Allen]  Cameron,  Captains  [Samuel]  Carter  and  [J.  A.]  Ledbetter,  and 
many  others,*  who  nobly  fell  where  their  duty  called  them,  encouraging 
and  inspiring  their  men  by  their  own  example. 


* Names  of  the  other  officers  hilled  cannot  be  determined  from  the  official  records, 
there  being  no  company  rolls  between  December,  1862,  and  December,  1863. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


359 


I desire  to  acknowledge  [my  indebtedness]  to  both  officers  and  men  for 
their  prompt  and  willing  obedience  to  every  order.  The  ordinary  camp 
murmurings  against  commissaries  and  quartermasters  were  hushed. 
Scant  rations  w7ere  received  with  more  pleasure  than  the  most  abun- 
dant heretofore.  They  entered  fully  into  the  wishes  of  the  lieutenant- 
general  to  extend  over  the  greatest  length  of  time  the  provisions  on 
hand.  Actuated  by  the  sole  desire  to  hold  the  city  and  defeat  the 
enemy,  they  were  ready  to  obey,  and  with  eagerness,  any  command  that 
prudence  or  desperation  might  require. 

In  addition  to  those  already  mentioned,  Maj.  O.  Steele  greatly  assisted, 
by  his  vigilance  and  promptness,  in  sustaining  discipline  and  holding 
the  command  prepared  for  the  most  sudden  emergency. 

Capt.  H.  Wickeland’s  extensive  military  acquirements,  his  labors  in 
addition  to  the  command  of  his  company,  his  courage  and  self-possession 
amid  the  hottest  of  the  conflict,  recommend  him  as  a valuable  officer. 

Captain  [J.  B.]  Fleitas,  of  the  First  Louisiana  Zouaves,  prompt  and 
fearless,  with  his  brave  command,  rendered  essential  support  to  the 
Legion  through  the  eventful  progress  of  the  siege. 

I am,  respectfully, 


T.  1ST.  WAUL, 

Colonel , Commanding  WauVs  Texas  Legion. 


Maj.  B.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Bo.  84. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  II.  Forney , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Division. 

Headquarters  Forney’s  Division, 

May  19,  1863. 

General  : Three  regiments  and  one  battalion  of  General  Hebert’s  bri- 
gade repelled  the  attack  of  the  enemy  to-day,  commencing  at  2.30  p.  m., 
advancing  in  three  lines.  They  succeeded  in  getting  immediately  under 
the  parapet  of  the  battery,  in  position  on  the  Graveyard  road.  Two 
colors  were  left  wdthin  10  feet  of  the  works,  but  were  not  taken,  on 
account  of  the  very  severe  fire  of  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters,  and  were 
either  destroyed  or  taken  away  after  dark. 

Three  attacks  were  made.  In  the  first  they  were  driven  back ; in  the 
second  the  same  result,  and  in  the  third  they  reached  the  parapet,  as 
stated  above.  About  50  will  cover  the  losses  in  front  of  this  position, 
and  perhaps  one-fourth  of  these  fatally. 

Six  batteries  of  theirs  are  now  bearing  immediately  on  the  work  on 
the  Jackson  road,  and  others  on  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road;  one  at  the 
Ferguson  house ; another  this  side  of  the  Ferguson  house,  and  on  the 
right  of  the  railroad.  I think  they  are  moving  artillery  between  the 
two  roads.  These  batteries  have  kept  up  a continuous  fire  all  day  upon 
the  works  between  the  roads.  Our  losses  among  the  troops  between 
the  roads  will  amount  to  about  37. 

Their  pickets  to-night  are  advancing  to  the  right  of  the  Jackson  road, 
and  within  200  yards  of  our  lines,  and  a line  of  battle  was  discovered 
late  this  evening  in  rear  of  these  skirmishers.  Our  pickets,  concealed, 
heard  them  say,  u They  would  be  in  our  lines  in  five  hours.”  I have 
just  recalled  theFortieth  Mississippi,  sent  to  Graveyard  Hill  this  morn- 
ing, and  will  place  it  in  its  old  i>osition. 


360 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


The  Parrott  gun  taken  from  the  work  on  the  Jackson  road  to  the 
Graveyard  Hill  was  moved  by  General  Shoup  to  the  left.  I request 
that  the  chief  of  artillery  be  requested  to  examine  that  point.  Our 
men  are  at  work  throwing  up  traverses,  &c,,  makiDg  themselves  more 
secure.  The  two  guns  at  Graveyard  Hill  were  dismounted ; one  at 
least  is  reported  as  rendered  unserviceable;  there  is  some  doubt  as 
regards  the  other.  My  men  are  in  excellent  spirits,  and  will  behave  as 
they  should. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  H.  FORNEY, 

Major-General. 

Lieutenant-General  Pemberton. 


Headquarters  Division, 

May  22,  1863—12.15  [p.  in.]. 
Major:  This  is  just  received  from  General  Moore: 


Enemy  repulsed  from  my  right.  Attacking  again  or  advancing.  Captured  one 
stand  of  colors.  Seem  to  have  been  driven  out  by  Lee,  though  colors  were  in  his 
works.  Would  like  two  regiments  more. 

Enemy  attack  from  time  to  time.  Hebert  on  Jackson  road,  to  right 
and  left,  and  also  toward  Graveyard  road.  I cannot,  therefore,  re- 
enforce Moore  from  Hebert.  Green  was  sent  to  re-enforce  Lee.  We 
have  now  no  reserve. 


Have  sent  to  Generals  Smith  and  Bowen  for  re-enforcements. 

The  men  are  standing  to  the  work. 

Very  respectfully, 

JNO.  H.  FORNEY, 

Major-General . 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Division, 

May  22,  1863 — 2.45  p.  m. 

Enemy  have  been  repulsed  on  Jackson  road ; now  forming  against 
General  Hebert’s  left.  The  re-enforcements  from  General  Bowen  (one 
regiment)  are  there.  A regiment  from  General  Smith  is  near  the  point 
threatened.  1 cannot,  therefore,  send  any  troops  to  Generals  Moore  or 
Lee.  General  Moore  has  now  a portion  of  Green’s  brigade  with  him  ; 
one  regiment  left  with  General  Lee. 

I send  Major  [S.]  Oroom  in  with  the  answers  from  General  Moore 
and  Colonel  [A.]  Smith,  of  his  brigade. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully, 

JNO.  H.  FORNEY, 

Major-  General. 

Major  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


May  22,  1863 — 2 to  7 o’clock  [p.  m.]. 
General  Moore  has  repulsed  the  enemy  again  on  his  right.  This  has 
been  the  most  severe  fighting.  The  battery  of  the  enemy  has  nearly 
demolished  his  works.  He  will  attempt  at  once  to  take  the  battery.  I 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  361 


have  sent  him  the  Seventeenth  Louisiana  and  half  of  Twenty-eighth 
[Twenty-ninth]  Louisiana,  sent  me  by  General  Smith. 

We  have  also  had  hard  fightingon  my  left,  and  on  Jackson  road.  All 
quiet  at  these  points  now. 

Very  truly, 

JNO.  H.  FORNEY, 

Major-  General. 


Major  Memminger. 


[P.  S.] — General  Moore  is  again  hotly  engaged. 


Headquarters  Division,  May  23,  18G3. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  (briefly)  yesterday’s  operations. 
The  sharpshooters  and  artillery  of  the  enemy  opened  on  my  entire  front 
early  in  the  morning,  and  kept  up  an  incessant  Are  during  the  whole 
day.  Serious  attacks  were  made  and  repulsed  at  three  points  on  the 
line,  namely : 

1.  On  my  extreme  right  (General  Moore),  and  extending  toward 
General  Lee’s  front ; two  attacks ; the  first  at  11  a.  m.  and  the  second 
at  5 p.  m. 

The  enemy  succeeded  in  getting  in  the  ditch  of  the  work  on  right  of 
Baldwin’s  Ferry  road.  Shell  with  five-second  fuses  were  thrown  over  on 
them.  They  did  not,  however,  retire  till  after  dark.  The  Second  Texas 
(Col.  Ashbel  Smith)  held  this  work,  and  captured  a stand  of  colors, 
with  the  color-bearer.  The  road  in  front  of  this  position  was  left  cov- 
ered with  the  dead  bodies  of  the  enemy.  This  position  was  most 
vigorously  assailed,  and  the  last  assault  was  of  longer  duration  than 
the  assaults  at  the  other  points. 

2.  The  works  immediately  on  right  and  left  of  the  Jackson  road 
(General  Hebert)  were  twice  assailed.  The  troops  making  the  assault 
were  apparently  of  the  Irish  nation,  as  they  carried  the  green  flag,  with 
golden  harp  and  border,  of  that  people.  They  advanced  in  platoon 
front,  with  scaling  ladders.  The  enemy  also  succeeded  in  getting  into 
the  ditch  in  front  of  the  work  here,  but  were  soon  driven  out.  The 
enemy’s  loss  was  very  heavy,  and  ours  also  was  quite  severe,  particu- 
larly among  the  cannoneers. 

3.  On  my  left  (General  Hebert),  and  extending  to  General  Smith’s 
right,  on  the  Graveyard  road,  three  distinct  and  serious  assaults  were 
made.  Each  time  the  enemy  was  repulsed  with  great  loss.  The  enemy 
advanced  in  three  or  more  lines  of  battle.  The  first  advanced  as  sharp- 
shooters. This  line  kept  up  a constant  fire  over  the  parapets,  under 
cover  of  which  the  second  and  third  lines  advanced. 

The  fire  of  the  enemy’s  artillery  has  damaged  our  works  at  all  three  of 
thes6  points  considerably.  Two  of  the  20-pounder  Parrott  guns  on  this  line 
are  disabled,  and  the  24-pounder  siege  gun  on  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road 
was  disabled  early  yesterday  morning.  At  the  work  on  the  right  of  the 
Baldwin’s  Ferry  road  the  guns  have  been  removed  and  the  embrasures 
filled  up.  It  is  with  great  difficulty  that  we  can  procure  spades  and 
shovels  to  repair  the  damage  done  during  the  day.  New  works  will 
have  to  be  constructed  on  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road,  and  I earnestly 
request  that  spades  and  shovels  be  sent.  The  enemy  remains  in  force 
opposite  these  three  points. 

The  following  are  the  casualties  reported : In  Moore’s  brigade — killed, 
21 ; wounded,  56.  In  Hubert’s  brigade — killed,  Major  Yates,  Thirty-sixth 
Mississippi  Regiment;  Captain  Ryan,  Twenty-first  Louisiana  Regiment; 


362 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

Lieutenant  Lehman,  Twenty-third  [Twenty-second]  Louisiana  Regiment, 
and  18  enlisted  men.  Wounded,  2 lieutenants  and  37  enlisted  men. 
Total  in  the  division  killed,  42;  wounded,  117. 

Everything  is  unusually  quiet  along  the  lines  this  morning,  the  enemy 
only  firing  occasionally  with  artillery  and  a few  sharpshooters. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  H.  FORNEY, 

Major - General. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

P.  S.— The  troops  on  the  entire  line  are  in  fine  spirits.  Their  work 
will  be  well  done. 


Headquarters  Forney’s  Division, 

May  24,  18G3. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  as  the  result  of  yes- 
terday’s operations  along  my  line: 

On  my  right  everything  was  unusually  quiet.  On  the  left  there  was 
occasional  artillery  firing  and  some  sharpshooting,  which  was  somewhat 
annoying  and  injurious.  The  enemy  seem  to  be  posting  new  batteries 
both  on  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  and  Jackson  roads,  from  which  they  will 
probably  soon  open  a heavy  fire  on  our  works. 

The  following  are  the  casualties  reported:  In  Moore’s  brigade — 2 
killed  and  10  wounded.  In  Hebert’s  brigade — killed,  Captain  Graves, 
Thirty-eighth  Mississippi  Regiment ; Lieutenant  Murrell,  Thirty-sixth 
Mississippi  Regiment,  and  4 enlisted  men.  Wounded,  Captain  Baylis, 
Seventh  Mississippi  Battalion;  Lieutenant  Randolph, Third  Louisiana, 
and  20  enlisted  men.  Total  in  division— killed,  8;  wounded,  32. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  H.  FORNEY, 

Major-General. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Division, 

May  25,  1863. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  report  briefly  the  operations  of  yester- 
day along  my  line. 

At  dawn  the  enemy  commenced  his  usual  sharpshooting,  and  a little 
later  opened  from  his  batteries  also;  the  fire  from  both,  however,  was 
much  reduced.  On  the  left,  the  enemy  was  busy  throwing  up  intrencli- 
ments,  and  in  front  of  the  works,  on  the  Jackson  road,  they  pushed  a 
sap  to  within  20  feet  of  the  works.  A few  hand-grenades  made  them 
desist. 

The  Second  Texas  Regiment,  of  Moore’s  brigade,  had,  up  to  the 
morning  of  the  24th,  collected  from  its  front  eighty -three  stand  of  arms, 
and  the  Forty-second  Alabama  five.  Most  of  them  were  Enfield  rifles. 
They  also  obtained  about  9,000  rounds  of  cartridges  and  1,500  caps. 

Casualties, — In  Moore’s  brigade — wounded,  8 enlisted  men.  In  He- 
bert’s brigade — killed,  2 enlisted  men;  wounded,  1 officer  and  1 enlisted 
man. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully, 

JNO.  H.  FORNEY, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XXXVI.l 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBUEG,  MISS. 


36; 


Headquarters  Division, 

May  27,  18G3. 

Major  : I liave  the  honor  to  report  that  on  yesterday  the  enemy  con- 
tinued his  usual  sharpshooting  and  artillery  firing.  Casualties  in  the 
division,  1 killed  and  7 wounded.  The  enemy  is  making  gradual  ap- 
proaches upon  our  works  by  digging  trenches  and  throwing  up  breast- 
works and  traverses.  In  this  they  are  strongly  supported  by  columns 
of  infantry,  and  I do  not  see  that  it  is  practicable  for  us  to  attempt  to 
stop  them.  We  need  at  least  one  more  regiment  to  be  placed  in  the 
trenches  along  the  Jackson  road  and  between  the  two  works  on  that 
road.  There  is  a space  along  there  now  unoccupied  by  troops,  the  two 
regiments  intended  as  a reserve  for  that  point  having  been  removed. 
This  is,  in  my  opinion,  a matter  of  moment,  and  I wish  the  attention  of 
the  commanding  general  particularly  called  to  it. 

We  have  now  no  reserves  for  General  Hebert’s  position,  and,  indeed, 
none  for  General  Moore’s,  the  Seventeenth  Louisiana,  although  held 
in  reserve,  being  in  point  of  fact  guarding  two  points  now  unoccupied 
by  troops. 

General  Moore  reports  his  men  much  worn  in  the  trenches,  and  rec- 
ommends that  a portion  of  them  be  withdrawn  during  the  day  to  a short 
distance  from  the  trenches  for  rest.  I would  concur  in  this  recom- 
mendation were  it  not  that  the  enemy  is  so  close  at  hand. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully, 

JNO.  H.  FORNEY, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Headquarters  Division, 

Near  Vicksburg,  May  28,  18G3. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  yesterday’s  proceedings  along 
my  line. 

Before  the  works  on  Jackson  road  the  enemy  continues  to  work  on 
his  breastworks  and  trenches.  We  think,  however,  he  has  discontinued 
the  work  on  the  sap  or  mine  within  20  feet  of  the  work  on  Jackson 
road. 

I inclose  report  of  General  Moore  * in  relation  to  the  works  of  the 
enemy  on  his  right. 

Three  regiments  from  General  Bowen’s  division  arrived  yesterday 
evening,  and  are  posted  as  follows,  viz : One  in  the  trenches  "along  the 
Jackson  road,  and  between  the  main  works  on  either  side  of  that  road. 
The  other  two  in  reserve  in  Magazine  ravine,  between  Jackson  and 
Baldwin’s  Ferry  roads. 

The  sharpshooting  and  artillery  firing  of  the  enemy  slightly  slack- 
ened. 

Casualties. — Killed,  2 enlisted  men $ wounded,  8 enlisted  men,  all  of 
Hebert’s  brigade. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  H.  FORNEY, 

Major  General. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

* See  p.  380. 


364 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CHAP.  XXXVI. 


Headquarters  Division, 

May  29,  1863. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  casualties  in  my 
command  on  yesterday:  Hebert’s  brigade,  2 killed  j Moore’s  brigade, 
10  wounded.  Five  of  the  latter  casualties  were  caused  by  a shot  pass- 
ing through  the  parapet  and  exploding  an  ammunition  chest. 

I have  just  written  a note  to  the  engineer,  giving  him  the  following 
information,  viz : That  Colonel  [S.  D.]  Russell,  commanding  Third  Lou- 
isiana, reports  that  one  of  the  enemy’s  works  in  his  front  (Jackson  road) 
is  assuming  the  shape  of  a formidable  redoubt,  and  another  is  being- 
loop-holed  for  sharpshooters ; also  that  General  Moore  reports  his  para- 
pet too  slight  to  resist  the  enemy’s  shot,  and  makes  the  suggestion  that 
cotton  bales  be  placed  against  the  parapet  on  the  inside,  and  covered 
with  about  a foot  of  earth.  I have  asked  the  engineer  to  see  to  these 
two  positions  as  soon  as  possible. 

The  object  of  the  heavy  firing  of  the  enemy  on  General  Moore’s  posi- 
tion early  this  morning  (29th)  is  not  known,  as  the  shot  passed  entirely 
above  the  works. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully, 

JNO.  H.  FORNEY, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminuer,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Division, 

June  27,  1863. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  herewith  a copy  of  the  report 
of  Brigadier- General  Hebert,  of  the  operations  on  his  line  on  the  after- 
noon and  night  of  the  25th  instant.* 

The  enemy  has  now  retired  from  the  parapet,  which  he  had  blown  up, 
and  our  forces  reoccupy  it  this  morning,  the  sand-bags  which  the  enemy 
had  placed  there  serving  as  protection  to  our  men.  The  enemy  is  dig- 
ging again  outside,  probably  mining  again. 

The  report  of  Brigadier- General  Moore  for  the  same  time  shows  noth- 
ing of  particular  interest.  The  enemy  opened  upon  him  from  their 
trenches  a very  brisk  and  rapid,  but  ill-directed,  fire  of  small-arms,  with 
some  artillery,  which  did  but  little  damage.  This  was  continued  for 
about  two  hours  and  a half,  commencing  at  5 p.  m.  25th  instant. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  H.  FORNEY, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminuer,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Division, 

July  2,  1863. 

Major:  For  the  information  of  the  lieutenant-general  commanding, 
I make  the  following  synopsis  of  the  operations  along  my  line  during 
yesterday  and  the  day  before : 

In  General  Moore’s  line,  on  the  night  of  the  30th  ultimo,  Lieutenant 
[William]  Allen,  of  the  Second  Texas  Regiment,  succeeded  in  burning 
the  remaining  sap-roller  on  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road.  He  used  turpen- 
tine fire-balls.  At  first  the  enemy  pulled  away  the  balls  as  fast  as  they 


See  p.  371. 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


3G5 


i 


(i 


Chap.  XXXVI,] 


were  thrown  against  the  roller ; but  the  officer  threw  over  a loaded  shell 
wrapped  in  cotton,  saturated  with  turpentine,  which  exploded  the  mo- 
ment the  enemy  seized  it.  After  this  the  roller  was  soon  burned.  The 
other  sap  roller  had  been  previously  burned  by  Lieutenant  Burt,  of 
Withers’  artillery,  who  shot  a piece  of  fuse  into  it  from  a musket.  Since 
the  burning  of  the  sap-rollers  the  enemy  seems  to  have  given  up  ex- 
tending his  lines  left  of  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road,  and  have  begun  what 
appears  to  be  a mound,  at  which  he  is  working  industriously. 

Yesterday  they  opened  again  from  their  trenches  a brisk  musketry 
fire,  object  not  known.  On  General  Hubert’s  line,  at  1.30  p.  m.  yester- 
day, as  the  lieutenant-general  is  already  informed,  the  enemy  exploded 
a mine,  perhaps  two  simultaneously,  under  the  redan  on  the  left  of  the 
Jackson  road.  The  work  was  at  the  time  defended  by  the  Sixth  Mis- 
souri Begiment.  The  enemy  made  no  attempt  to  charge  after  the  ex- 
plosion. Perhaps  he  only  wished  to  destroy  life  and  weaken  the  posi- 
tion. In  this  he  has  succeeded  but  too  well.  The  redan  itself  is  entirely 
gone,  and  the  interior  line  considerably  weakened. 

Immediately  after  the  explosion,  the  enemy  opened  his  batteries  upon 
the  point  mined,  doing  considerable  damage.  He  also  opened  from  what 
is  supposed  to  be  a Cohorn  mortal-,  wTiich  throws  its  missiles  among 
the  men  with  great  accuracy,  killing  and  wounding  many,  and  tending 
much  to  dishearten  the  men.  At  the  time  of  the  explosion,  1 white  man 
(sapper)  and  8 negroes  are  reported  to  have  been  countermining  in  the 
redan,  who  were,  of  course,  lost.  Besides  these,  1 man  was  killed  and 
20  wounded  by  the  explosion  in  the  Third  Louisiana,  which  was  on  the 
left  of  the  Sixth  Missouri.  Also  4 men  of  [William  T.]  Batliff’s  battery 
wounded.  The  casualties  in  the  Missouri  regiment  must  have  been 
numerous.  They  were  not  reported  to  me. 

The  sap-roller  in  front  of  the  Thirty-eighth  Mississippi  Begiment,  on 
the  Jackson  road,  was  burned  last  night  by  Capt.  L.  B.  Taylor,  of  Gen- 
eral Hebert’s  staff,  by  means  of  fire-balls,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  one 
on  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road. 

Yesterday  bodies  of  infantry  and  artillery  were  observed  from  the 
Jackson  road,  moving  to  our  right.  There  was  nothing  to  indicate  their 
destination. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully, 

JNO.  H.  FOBNEY, 

Major-General . 

Maj.  B.  W.  Memminger,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Division  Headquarters, 

Enterprise,  Miss.,  July  21,  1863. 

Major  : In  compliance  with  instructions  from  the  lieutenant-general 
commanding,  of  this  date,  calling  for  report  of  battles  of  Baker’s  Creek 
and  Big  Black  Biver,  and  also  of  the  operations  during  the  siege  of 
Vicksburg,  I have  to  report  that,  on  or  about  May  4,  I relieved  Major- 
General  Stevenson,  in  command  of  the  Second  Military  District,  head- 
quarters at  Vicksburg. 

During  the  battle  of  Baker’s  Creek,  on  May  16,  my  command  con- 
sisted of  the  following  troops,  viz,  my  own  division  proper  (Hebert’s 
and  Moore’s  brigades),  Major-General  [M.  L.]  Smith’s  division  State 
troops,  under  General  Harris,  Colonel  [T.  N.]  W7aul’s  Texas  Legion,  and 
the  heavy  artillery,  Colonel  Higgins  commanding,  posted  as  follows: 
General  Hubert,  with  his  brigade,  occupied  the  line  along  the  Yazoo 


366 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


River,  from  Haynes’  Bluff:  to  Mississippi  River,  General  Moore,  with 
his  brigade  and  the  State  troops  attached,  guarding  river  front  at  War- 
ren ton  and  the  approaches  from  the  lower  ferries  on  Big  Black  River. 
One  brigade  of  General  Smith’s  division  was  posted  in  the  city,  guard- 
ing the  river  front.  With  the  other  two  brigades  of  his  division,  with 
Waul’s  Legion  attached,  General  Smith  guarded  the  approaches  to  the 
city  from  the  Hall’s  Ferry  road  around  to  the  railroad  bridge  on  the 
Big  Black  River;  the  heavy  artillery  at  the  batteries  in  town.  Beside 
these  troops  thus  posted  in  the  vicinity  of  Vicksburg,  there  was  also 
under  my  orders  Colonel  [S.  W.]  Ferguson,  on  the  Upper  Deer  Creek 
and  Sunflower  River,  with  a few  companies  of  infantry,  a section  of  ar- 
tillery, and  a small  force  of  cavalry.  None  of  these  troops  were  en- 
gaged in  the  battle  of  Baker’s  Creek.  A portion  of  General  Smith’s 
command  was  engaged  in  the  battle  of  Big  Black  Bridge.  The  part 
taken  by  them  in  that  engagement  will  doubtless  be  reported  through 
General  Smith. 

SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG. 

On  the  morning  of  May  17,  while  the  main  body  of  the  army  was 
falling  back  to  the  intrenchments  around  Vicksburg,  I reassumed  com- 
mand of  my  division  proper,  and,  in  pursuance  of  instructions  from  the 
lieutenant-general  commanding,  directed  General  Hebert  to  prepare  to 
evacuate  the  post  of  Snyder’s  Mill,  and  to  hurry  into  Vicksburg  all  com- 
missary stores  possible.  For  this  purpose  all  available  wagons  were 
sent  to  him.  In  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day,  I was  directed  to  place 
my  division  in  the  trenches.  Accordingly,  General  Moore’s  brigade 
was  brought  at  once  from  its  position  near  Warrenton,  and  placed  in 
the  intrenchments  on  either  side  of  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road.  General 
Hebert  was  directed  to  march  his  troops  to  Vicksburg,  bringing  with 
him  all  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  he  could  ; to  send  up  the  Yazoo 
all  boats  at  Haynes’  Bluff,  with  orders  that  they  should  be  fired  rather 
than  allowed  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy ; to  send  mounted 
men  to  watch  the  approaches  from  Bridgeport  and  the  railroad  bridge, 
and  to  leave  behind,  at  Snyder’s,  a few  companies  to  keep  up  a show  of 
occupation,  with  orders  to  destroy  the  heavy  guns  and  other  public 
property  (previously  prepared  for  destruction)  whenever  it  would  be- 
come evident  the  place  would  fall  into  the  possession  of  the  enemy,  and 
then  to  make  the  best  of  their  way  to  Vicksburg,  or  endeavor  to  escape 
across  the  Yazoo.  A report  of  the  proceedings  of  this  detachment  has, 
I presume,  been  made  to  the  lieutenant-general  commanding,  by  Gol. 
I.  W.  Patton,  who  was  by  him  sent  back  to  attend  to  the  matter. 

The  detachment  rejoined  its  command  in  Vicksburg  on  the  morning 
of  the  18th.  General  Hebert  arrived  in  Vicksburg,  with  his  command, 
before  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  18th,  having  succeeded  in  bring- 
ing with  him,  from  Snyder’s,  besides  all  the  light  pieces,  two  20-pounder 
Parrotts  and  a Whitworth  gun.  His  troops  were  soon  in  the  intrench- 
ments on  either  side  of  the  Jackson  road.  In  bringing  my  troops  from 
their  former  position,  I directed  them  to  drive  inside  of  the  fortifica- 
tions all  the  beef-cattle,  hogs,  and  sheep  that  had  been  collected  from  the 
surrounding  country,  and  squads  of  mounted  men  had  previously  been 
sent  out  for  this  purpose. 

On  May  18,  at  about  1 p.  in.,  Brigadier-General  Shoup,  of  General 
Smith’s  division,  reported  the  enemy  advancing  on  his  position,  and,  by 
direction  of  the  lieutenant-generel,  two  of  General  Hebert’s  regiments 
were  sent  from  his  right  to  re-enforce  his  left.  The  whole  of  the  division 
(the  effective  strength  of  which  was  about  4,700)  was  now  in  the  trenches, 


Chap.  XXX YL] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


367 


from  the  railroad,  on  the  right,  to  Graveyard  road,  on  the  left,  a distance 
of  about  2 miles  (Moore  on  the  right,  Hebert  on  the  left).  On  this 
line  there  were  twenty-seven  pieces  of  artillery,  most  of  which  w^ere 
field  pieces.  This  number  was  afterward  increased  by  three  or  four 
siege  guns  placed  in  rear  of  my  right.  Besides  my  own  troops,  Colonel 
Waul’s  Texas  Legion  was  also  assigned  to  me  and  held  in  reserve  be- 
hind Moore’s  brigade.  Brigadier-General  Lee’s  brigade,  of  Major-Gen- 
eral Stevenson’s  divison,  was  on  my  immediate  right;  Brigadier-General 
Shoup’s  brigade,  of  Major-General  Smith’s  division,  on  my  immediate  left. 

On  the  19th,  the  enemy  made  his  first  assault  on  my  extreme  left  and 
extending  along  Smith’s  division.  He  was  several  times  repulsed,  and 
finally  fell  back.  By  this  time  my  entire  division  front  was  completely 
and  closely  invested.  My  skirmishers  were  withdrawn,  and  skirmishing 
prohibited  (by  order),  in  order  to  husband  ammunition.  During  the 
next  day  the  enemy  kept  up  his  sharpshooting  and  artillery  fire,  but 
made  no  assault. 

On  May  22,  he  assaulted  three  points  on  my  line  as  follows:  Three 
times  on  my  extreme  left  and  extending  to  General  Smith’s  front,  twice 
on  the  Jackson  road,  and  twice  on  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road,  at  11  a.  m.  and 
5 p.  m.  These  assaults  were  made  by  larger  bodies  and  apparently  with 
greater  determination  than  those  of  May  19.  Colonel  Waul’s  Legion 
had  previously  been  sent  to  General  Stevenson  ; but  Green’s  brigade,  of 
Bowen’s  division,  was  in  reserve  behind  my  right,  and  assisted  in  repel- 
ling the  attack  at  that  point.  There  were  also  on  this  day  two  Loui- 
siana regiments,  of  Smith’s  division,  in  reserve  behincl  my  division.  The 
enemy  was  repulsed  in  each  of  his  attempts,  though  he  succeeded  in 
getting  a few  men  into  our  exterior  ditches  at  each  point  of  attack,  from 
which  they  were,  however,  driven  before  night.  Hand-grenades  were 
used  at  each  point  with  good  effect.  A color-bearer  and  two  stand  of 
colors  were  captured  by  the  Second  Texas  Kegiment,  of  Moore’s  brigade. 

On  this  day  the  casualties  in  my  division  were  42  killed  and  95 
wounded.  The  loss  of  the  enemy  must  have  reached  2,000. 

From  this  time  to  the  close  of  "the  siege  the  enemy  kept  up  an  inces- 
sant fire  of  sharpshooting  and  cannonading,  in  the  mean  time  planting 
batteries  and  continuing  his  approaches,  the  main  points  being  the  work 
on  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road,  the  one  on  the  Jackson  road,  and  a point 
midway  between  the  Graveyard  and  Jackson  roads.  Approaches  were 
also  made  on  my  extreme  left;  but  this  point  was,  properly  speaking, 
under  the  supervision  of  Major-General  Smith. 

On  or  about  J une  2,  my  line  was  contracted  by  closing  in  to  the  right, 
in  consequence  of  its  close  investment  and  the  reduction  of  its  numbers 
by  casualties,  my  left  now  resting  midway  between  the  Graveyard  and 
Jackson  roads.  The  approaches  a t all  the  above-mentioned  points  were 
brought  to  within  easy  hand-grenade  distance,  and  mines  were  pushed 
forward  under  the  works.  The  enemy  made  strenuous  efforts  to  possess 
himself  of  the  main  work  on  the  Jackson  road,  defended  by  the  Third 
Louisiana  Kegiment,  the  occupation  of  which  by  him  would  necessitate 
the  abandonment  of  our  trenches  for  a considerable  distance  to  the 
right  and  left,  as  it  would  give  him  an  enfilade  fire  either  way.  Op- 
posite this  point  he  planted  a number  of  heavy  siege  guns,  with  which 
he  made  a serious  breach  in  the  parapet  of  the  redan.  The  fire  of  these 
guns  was,  however,  in  a great  measure  diverted  by  the  fire  of  a 10-inch 
mortar,  which  we  had  planted  close  in  the  rear  of  our  lines.  We  were 
only  permitted  to  retain  this  mortar  a few  days,  when  it  was  again  re- 
moved to  the  right  and  its  place  supplied  by  a 9-inch  Dahlgren  gun, 
which  the  enemy  disabled  the  second  day  after  it  opened  fire. 


368  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

On  June  25,  at  about  5 p.  m.,  the  enemy  sprung  his  first  mine  under 
the  parapet  of  this  work.  The  explosion  effected  a breach  through  which 
the  enemy  immediately  attempted  to  charge,  bnt  was  promptly  and  gal- 
lantly repulsed.  The  Sixth  Missouri  Eegiment,  which  had  been  held  in 
reserve,  was  on  the  spot  immediately  after  the  explosion,  and  its  com- 
mander, Col.  Eugene  Erwin,  was  instantly  killed  while  attempting  to 
lead  a charge  over  the  works.  Six  men  of  the  Forty-third  Mississippi 
Eegiment,  who  were  in  a shaft  countermining  at  the  time  of  the  explo- 
sion, were  buried  and  lost.  At  dark  the  enemy  had  possessed  himself 
of  the  ditch  and  slope  of  the  parapet,  and  our  forces  retired  to  an  interior 
line  a few  feet  back.  This  point  was  now  re-enforced  by  a part  of  Colo- 
nel [F.  M.]  CockrelPs  brigade,  of  Bowen’s  division,  and  work  was  resume^! 
by  the  enemy  and  by  us,  they  mining  and  we  countermining,  until  July 
1,  at  about  1 p.  m.,  when  the  enemy  sprung  his  second  mine,  which  was 
much  heavier  than  the  first.  The  result  was  the  entire  demolition  of 
the  redan,  leaving  only  an  immense  chasm  where  it  stood.  The  greater 
portion  of  the  earth  was  thrown  toward  the  enemy,  the  line  of  least  re- 
sistance being  in  that  direction.  Our  interior  line  was  much  injured. 
Nine  men  who  were  countermining  were  necessarily  lost,  and  a large 
number  of  those  manning  the  works  were  killed  and  wounded.  The 
enemy,  however,  made  no  attempt  to  charge,  seeming  satisfied  with  hav- 
ing materially  weakened  the  position.  I understand  that  the  amount 
of  powder  used  by  the  enemy  in  this  explosion  was  one  ton. 

While  all  this  was  taking  place  on  the  Jackson  road,  the  enemy  was 
by  no  means  idle  at  other  points.  At  the  work  on  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry 
road  his  sappers  had  nearly  reached  the  ditch.  At  this  place  we  sprung 
a counter-mine,  which  was  unfortunately  a little  premature. 

The  artillery,  though  well  served,  was  of  but  little  advantage  to  us 
during  the  siege.  The  enemy  concentrated  a heavy  fire,  dismounting 
or  disabling  gun  after  gun.  To  this  fire  we  could  make  but  a feeble  re- 
sponse. Ammunition  was  scarce,  and  orders  forbade  its  use  except 
against  advancing  columns  of  infantry  or  batteries  being  planted.  The 
proportionate  loss  of  officers  and  men  of  the  artillery  was  unusually  great. 

On  July  1,  I received  a confidential  note  from  the  lieutenant-general 
commanding,  informing  me  that  unless  the  siege  of  Vicksburg  was  raised 
or  supplies  thrown  in,  it  would  be  necessary  very  shortly  to  evacuate 
the  place;  that  he  saw  no  prospect  of  the  former,  and  that  very  great, 
if  not  insuperable,  obstacles  were  in  the  way  of  the  latter,  and  calling 
for  a report  as  to  the  condition  of  my  troops,  and  their  ability  to  make 
the  marches  and  undergo  the  fatigues  necessary  to  accomplish  a suc- 
cessful evacuation.  I laid  the  matter  clearly  before  my  brigade  com- 
manders, and  they  in  turn  before  their  regimental  and  battalion  com- 
manders. It  was  their  unanimous  opinion,  in  which  I concurred,  that 
although  the  spirit  of  the  men  was  good,  their  physical  condition  and 
health  was  so  much  impaired  by  their  long  confinement  in  narrow 
trenches,  without  exercise  and  without  relief,  being  constantly  under 
fire  and  necessarily  on  the  alert,  and  living  upon  greatly  reduced  rations, 
that  they  could  not  make  the  marches  they  would  have  to  make  and 
fight  the  battles  they  would  have  to  fight  against  the  greatly  superior 
numbers  that  would  be  brought  against  them  in  making  the  attempt 
to  break  through  the  enemy’s  lines.  I therefore  favored  a capitulation 
rather  than  make  this  attempt,  attended,  as  I thought,  with  such  little 
hope  of  success. 

Finally,  on  July  4,  at  10  a.  m.,  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the 
capitulation,  my  troops  were  marched  by  regiments  over  the  intrench- 
ments,  their  arms  stacked  and  left  in  possession  of  the  enemy,  while 
they  returned  to  bivouac  in  rear  of  the  trenches. 


Chai*.  XXXYI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


369 


The  siege  of  Vicksburg  was  a contest  which  tried  more  the  endurance 
and  resolution  of  the  men  and  their  company  and  regimental  command- 
ers than  the  skill  of  their  generals. 

My  men  during  the  siege  did  their  duty  and  their  whole  duty  to  the 
entire  satisfaction  of  their  general,  and  I trust  of  their  country.  The 
patience  with  which  my  troops  submitted  to  the  many  privations  and 
hardships  to  which  they  were  subjected,  and  the  unabated  courage  and 
cheerfulness  which  they  sustained  throughout,  are  worthy  of  all  praise, 
and  merited  a better  fortune. 

The  casualties  in  my  division  during  the  siege  were  as  follows:  He- 
bert’s brigade— killed,  203 ; wounded,  480.  Moore’s  brigade— killed,  72 ; 
wounded,  385.  Total— killed,  275;  wounded,  865.* 

I inclose  herewith  the  reports  of  the  brigade  commanders. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  H.  FORNEY, 

Major-  General. 

Maj.  E.  W.  Memminger,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

ADDENDA. 


Return  of  Casualties  in  Forney’s  Division  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg  A 

[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.] 


Command. 


HObert’s  brigade: 

Staff 

3d  Louisiana . 

21st  Louisiana 

22d  Louisiana 

36th  Mississippi  ” 

37th  Mississippi 

38th  Mississippi 

43d  Mississippi 

7th  Mississippi  Battalion I ” * ' 

Appeal  Battery 

Emanuel’s  battery ] ” 

Pointe  Coup6e  Artillery II  ”.!!"*! ! 

Katliff’s  battery 

Ridley’s  battery 


Total 


Moore’s  brigade : 

37th  Alabama 

40th  Alabama 

42d  Alabama 

35th  Mississippi  ... 
40th  Mississippi  . . . 

2d  Texas  

Sengstak’s  battery 
Tobin’s  battery  .... 
Pioneer  company  . . 


Total 

Grand  total  § 


Killed. 


Wounded. 


25 


33 


194 


113 

IwF 


20 


109 

43 

22 

67 

50 
3-! 
33 

51 

4 
6 

5 

12 

2 


a 


416 


284 


21 


2 

175 

67 

37 

101 

80 

74 

58 

50 

9 

13 

9 

18 

2 


695 


54 

57 

27 

102 

50 

104 

11 

13 

7 


• | 425 


700 


21  1, 120 


* But  see  Addenda,  following. 

tlor  names  of  officers  killed  oi’  died  of  wounds,  as  far  as  they  can  he  ascertained 
ov  the  official  records,  see  p.  329. 

1 Deserters. 

§ But  see  Eornoy’s  report,  above. 

24  R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


370  MISSISSIPPJ,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


Report  of  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  lost  in  Forney7 s Division  during  siege  of  Vicksburg, 


[Indorsement.] 

Demopolis,  Ala.,  August  25,  1863. 

This  division  participated  only  in  the  fight  of  Snyder’s  Mill  and  the 
seise  of  Vicksburg.  The  above  report  is  from  the  most  reliable  data  on 
hand  Ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  were  lost  at  Snyder’s  Mill,  and 
the  officer  in  charge  (Colonel  [Isaac  W.]  Patton)  received  special  in- 
structions from  the  lieutenant-general  commanding.  His  report  has 
not  been  received  at  these  headquarters. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

OHAS.  P.  BALL, 

Major  and  Ordnance  Officer,  Forney’s  Division. 


No.  85. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen,  Louis  Egbert,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Brigade. 

Headquarters  Hebert’s  Brigade, 

May  21,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  as  far  as  can  be  ascertained,  the 
effect  of  to-day’s  engagement  on  the  line  of  my  brigade.  Soon  alter 
daylight,  the  enemy  opened  their  batteries  and  line  of  sharpshooters, 
and  kept  up  their  fire  with  rapidity  and  serious  effect  dunug  the  day,  to 
dark ; even  since  an  occasional  shot  is  fired  from  one  of  their  batteries. 
Besides  undergoing  the  fire  on  my  brigade  front,  my  extreme  right  has 
suffered  from  the  sharpshooters  on  the  left  of  Brigadier-General  Moore, 
and  very  severely  from  a battery  in  front  of  Brigadier-General  Moore. 
This  battery  has  been  very  effective  against  my  headquarters. 

The  enemy’s  sharpshooters  are  in  close  proximity,  and  their  batteries 
have  injured  much  of  our  parapets.  The  two  20-pounder  Parrotts  re- 
maining on  my  line  have  been  dismounted,  and  are  unserviceable.  One 

* The  detailed  statement  of  carriages,  limbers,  and  caissons,  and  of  artilkry  aml 
small-arm  ammunition,  omitted.  It  shows  38  carriages,  37  limbers,  5 36  cais^s, 
5,530  rounds  of  artillery  ammunition,  and  381,000  rounds  of  small-arm  ammuniti  n, 


CiiAr.  XXXVI.  1 THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  371 

12-pounder  howitzer  is  disabled,  though  it  may  yet  fire  a few  shots. 
Damages  will  be  repaired  as  far  as  practicable  to-night. 

Casualties. — Killed:  Captain  Gomez,  Twenty-third  Louisiana  In- 
fantry ; Captains  Chrisman  and  Tatom,  Thirty-sixth  Mississippi,  and 
3 enlisted  men.  Wounded:  Capt.  C.  A.  Brusle,  aide-de-camp,  and  12 
enlisted  men. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

LOUIS  HUBERT, 

Brigadier- General. 

Maj.  S.  Ceoom,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Hebert’s  Brigade, 

June  9,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  for  two  days  before,  the  en- 
emy had  been  advancing  their  works  on  the  Jackson  road,  under  the 
cover  of  cotton  bales  placed  on  a car,  which  car  was  moved  along  at 
will.  Yesterday  I directed  Lieutenant-Colonel  Russell,  of  the  Third 
Louisiana  Regiment,  to  make  an  attempt  to  destroy  this  cotton,  and,  if 
necessary,  I would  order  some  volunteers  to  dash  forward  and  fire  the 
cotton.  The  lieutenant-colonel,  however,  invented  a safer  and  a much 
simpler  course.  He  procured  spirits  of  turpentine  and  tow,  and,  wrap- 
ping his  musket-bails  with  the  same,  fired  them,  with  light  charges, 
into  the  cotton  bales.  His  attempt  succeeded  admirably.  The  cotton 
was  soon  burning,  and  our  sharpshooters,  having  been  well  instructed, 
prevented  the  fire  from  being  extinguished  or  the  cotton  rolled  away. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Russell  reports  that  the  car  and  over  twenty  bales 
of  cotton  on  it  were  destroyed.  He  says  that  the  car  was  composed  of 
the  platform  of  a freight  railroad  car,  and  the  wheels  apparently  iron. 
The  car  was  at  a distance  of  some  75  yards  from  our  YvTorks  when  de- 
stroyed, at  10  p.  in.  yesterday.  Lieutenant  Colonel  Russell  deserves 
commendation  for  his  success. 


I am,  major,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LOUIS  HUBERT, 

Brigadier - General. 

Maj.  S.  Croom,  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 

[Indorsement.] 


Division  Headquarters, 

June  9,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded  for  the  information  of  the  lieutenant-general 
commanding.  This  report  was  not  made  until  after  my  return  from 
Vicksburg  this  morning. 


JNO.  H.  FORNEY, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters  Hebert’s  Brigade, 

June  26,  1863. 

Major:  Kept  out  at  the  trenches  during  the  entire  night,  and 
afflicted  to-day  with  a fever,  I have  failed  to  this  time  to  hand  in  my 
usual  daily  report. 

: The  night  of  the  24th  passed  off  with  little  firing  on  my  line,  and  no 

! change  was  visible,  except  the  nearer  approach  of  saps  and  the  addition 
of  newly  thrown- up  earth  at  several  points, 


372 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


During  the  25th,  the  enemy  continued  his  labors,  but  no  movements 
of  troops  were  seen.  The  skirmishing  was  as  usual.  At  5 p.  in.  rapid 
musketry  firing  on  our  right  seemed  to  indicate  an  attack  on  the 
Baldwin’s  Ferry  road  and  farther  to  the  right.  Up  to  about  5.30  p.  m. 
there  was  no  indication  of  a projected  attack  on  the  Jackson  road.  At 
that  hour  the  enemy  sprang  his  mine  under  the  main  redan,  on  the  lett 
of  the  road,  and  advanced  to  the  assault.  His  attempt  was  a feeble 
one,  and  was  easily  defeated  $ but  few  of  his  men  could  be  brought  to 
mount  the  breach,  and,  with  the  exception  of  one  officer  (supposed  to  be  a 
field  officer,  leading  the  forlorn  hope),  evinced  [no]  determination.  He 
mounted  the  parapet,  waved  and  called  his  men  forward,  but  was  in- 
stantly shot  down.  After  his  repulse,  the  enemy  occupied  the  outer 
slope  of  our  works,  and  from  there  commenced,  accompanied  by  mus- 
ketry fire,  a terrific  shower  of  hand-grenades  upon  our  men.  We  re- 
plied with  grenades  and  sharpshooters,  and  this  species  of  combat  is 
still  going  on  this  morning.  Everything  indicates  that  during  the 
night  the  enemy  did  a great  deal  of  work,  and  is  likely  to  have  started 
new  mines.  At  any  rate,  he  has  given  shelter  in  our  outer  ditch  to  his 
men  by  throwing  up  sand-bags,  &c.  He  is  now  in  position  to  appear  in 
our  works  at  any  instant.  As  soon  as  any  indication  of  an  attack  became 
apparent,  Col.  Eugene  Erwin  moved  his  reserve  regiment  (the  Sixth  Mis- 
souri Infantry)  to  the  line.  At  the  assault,  he  gallantly  attempted  to 
lead  some  of  his  men  to  follow  him  over  the  parapet.  Whilst  on  the  top 
he  was  instantly  killed.  In  him  the  army  has  lost  a true  and  distin- 
guished soldier — one  who  promised  to  gain  high  rank  and  position. 

After  the  first  charge,  the  enemy  attempted  to  advance  by  covering 
himself  with  logs  and  pieces  of  timber.  He  was  made  to  fall  back  sev- 
eral times  by  the  rapid  and  well-directed  fire  of  a piece  of  our  artillery 
commanded  by  Lieutenant  [0.  C.]  Scott  (Appeal  Battery).  He  has, 
however,  in  the  night  succeeded  in  covering  his  men. 

Three  regimental  flags  alone  were  seen  at  any  time,  and  it  is  my  be- 
lief that  the  enemy  never  contemplated  but  an  assault  to  secure  the 
redan,  and  there  hold.  This  he  undoubtedly  thought  ot  doing  during 
the  confusion  that  would  exist,  as  he  conceived,  in  our  troops.  He 
was,  however,  quite  mistaken,  as  the  explosion  created  no  dismay  or 
panic  among  our  brave  officers  and  soldiers,  and  every  one  was  ready 
for  the  foe  before  he  appeared.  ^ 

At  the  time  of  the  explosion,  6 enlisted  men  of  the  Forty-third  Mis- 
sissippi .Regiment  were  at  work  in  the  shaft,  which  our  engineers  were 
digging  in  the  redan  to  meet  the  enemy’s  line.  These  soldiers  weie 
necessarily  lost.  Hot  another  man  was  injured  by  the  explosion.  This 
is  attributable  to  the  shaft  in  question,  which  served  as  a vent  upward 
to  the  force  of  the  blast,  and  thus  confined  the  breaking  up  of  the  soil 
to  a shorter  distance  in  the  direction  of  the  perpendicular  of  the  redan. 

At  10  p.  m.  Col.  James  McCown,  with  his  Fifth  Missouri  Regiment 
(infantry),  reported  as  re-enforcement.  He  was  ordered  by  me  to  take 
position  in  the  ravine,  where  the  Sixth  Missouri  has  been  camped,  in 
the  rear  of  the  Third  Louisiana. 

Colonel  Cockrell,  however,  soon  appeared  in  the  trenches  as  com- 
mander of  the  two  Missouri  regiments,  and  at  once  brought  the  Fifth 
to  the  line,  generously  relieving  three  companies  of  the  fatigued  Third 
Louisiana.  The  brave  Missourians  have  added  laurels  to  their  already 
glorious  renown.  As  to  my  own  troops,  I have  but  to  say  that  they 
have  done  their  duty  nobly.  . , 

In  the  list  of  casualties,  I deem  it  proper  to  include  the  Sixth  and 

Fifth  Missouri, 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

Casualties. 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Officers. 

fl 

© 

3d  Louisiana 

6 

2 

19 

3Gth  Mississippi 

3 

37th  Mississippi 

3 

38th  Mississippi 

1 

3 

43d  Mississippi 

6 

5 

Ti  ll  Mississippi  Battalion 

21st  and  23d  [22d]  Louisiana 

4 

7 

5th  Missouri 

1 

7 

Gth  Missouri 

2 

1 

2 

20 

Appeal  Battery 

1 

Emanuel’s  battery 

1 

Total 

2 

19 

5 

68 

Remarks. 


Major  [D.]  Pierson  and  Lieutenant  [W. 
P.]  Renwick,  Company  B,  wounded. 

Slightly  wounded. 

Six  buried  by  explosion  of  mine. 

Tlie  4 killed  and  6 of  the  wounded  are 
of  Captain  [J.  C.]  Theard’s  company, 
Twenty-third  Louisiana  Regiment. 

Colonel  Erwin  and  Lieut.  W.  S.  Lips- 
comb, Company  A,  killed ; Capt.  John 
D.  Parsons  and  Lieut.  James  R.  Har- 
per, Company  I,  wounded. 

Lieutenant  Scott  slightly  wounded. 


Total  killed  and  wounded  in  Hebert’s  brigade 01 

Total  killed  and  wounded  in  Fifth  and  Sixth  Missouri  Regiments 33 


Total 


1)4 


I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LOUIS  HUBERT, 

Brigadier- General. 

Maj.  S.  Oroom,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Hubert’s  Brigade,  July  1,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  at  about  1.30  p.  m.  the  en- 
emy  sprang  another  and  a larger  mine  under  the  main  redan  of  the 
work  on  the  left  of  the  Jackson  road,  this  time  destroying  the  parapet 
of  the  redan.  Our  interior  work  is  uninjured.  The  enemy  attempted 
no  immediate  charge  after  the  blast,  but  opened  a brisk  artillery  fire. 
The  change  occasioned  exposes  a portion  of  our  troops  heretofore  pro- 
tected, and  there  is  necessity  of  immediate  work,  both  to  strengthen 
our  interior  line  and  give  more  protection  to  exposed  points.  Lieuten- 
ant Blessing,  assistant  engineer  on  this  portion  of  the  line,  was  wounded 
a few  hours  since.  I earnestly  ask  that  some  other  officer  be  imme- 
diately sent  to  replace  him. 

I am,  major,  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

LOUIS  HUBERT, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Maj.  S.  Croom,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Division,  July  1,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded  for  the  information  of  the  lieutenant-general, 
and  with  the  request  that  an  engineer  officer  be  detailed  at  once  in  the 
place  of  Lieutenant  Blessing. 

JNO.  H.  FORNEY, 

Major- General. 


o74  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXV t 

Headquarters  Hebert’s  Brigade,  July  2,  1863. 
Major-General  Forney: 

General  : In  answer  to  your  note  of  this  date  giving  copy  of  a note 
to  you  from  the  lieutenant-general  commanding,  of  yesterday,  inquir- 
ing— 

into  the  condition  of  the  troops,  and  their  ability  to  make  the  marches  and  undergo 
the  fatigues  necessary  to  accomplish  a successful  evacuation — 

I respectfully  state  that,  with  the  permission  granted  by  your  note,  I 
have  consulted  with  and  obtained  the  opinions  of  my  most  trustworthy 
and  reliable  officers,  confidentially  placing  before  them  the  question  of 
cutting  out.  I asked  them  if  their  men  were  physically  able  to  “make 
the  marches  and  undergo  the  fatigues  necessary.”  Without  exception 
all  concurred  in  one  single  and  positive  opinion — that  their  men  could 
not  fight  and  march  10  miles  in  one  day  ; that  even  without  being  ha- 
rassed by  the  enemy  or  having  to  fight,  they  could  not  expect  their  men 
to  march  15  miles  the  first  day ; hundreds  would  break  down  or  straggle 
off  even  before  the  first  lines  of  the  enemy  were  fairly  passed.  This 
inability  on  the  part  of  the  soldiers  does  not  arise  from  want  of  spirit, 
or  courage,  or  willingness  to  fight,  but  from  real  physical  disability,  occa- 
sioned by  the  men  having  been  so  long  shut  up  and  cramped  up  in  pits, 
ditches,  &c.,  in  the  trenches ; many  are  also  in  ill-health,  who  still  are 
able  to  remain  in  the  works.  Tbe  unanimous  opinion  of  my  officers  I 
fully  concur  in,  and  I unhesitatingly  declare  that  it  is  my  sincere  con- 
viction that,  so  far  as  my  brigade  is  concerned,  it  cannot  undergo  the 
marches  and  fatigues  of  an  evacuation.  The  spirit  of  my  men  to  fight 
is  unbroken,  but  their  bodies  are  worn  out.  Left  to  their  choice  to  u sur- 
render” or  “ cut  their  way  out,”  I have  no  doubt  that  a large  majority 
would  say  “ cut  out.”  But  the  question  to  my  mind  for  me  to  answer 
is  not  between  u surrender”  and  u cutting  out ; ” it  is  are  my  men  able 
to  “cut  out.”  My  answer  is  No!  I believe,  general,  the  above  is  an 
answer  to  your  note,  but  I may  be  permitted  to  state  that  most  of  my 
brigade  are  Mississippians,  who  I am  confident  will  leave  the  ranks,  and, 
throwing  away  their  arms,  make  their  way  home  the  moment  we  leave 
our  works.  So  long  as  they  are  fighting  for  Vicksburg  they  are  as  true 
soldiers  as  the  army  has,  but  they  will  certainly  leave  us  so  soon  as  we 
leave  Vicksburg.  If  caught  without  arms  by  the  enemy,  they  will  be 
no  worse  off  than  other  prisoners  of  war.  If  they  succeed  in  getting 
home,  they  will  not  be  brought  back  to  the  army  for  months,  and  many 
not  at  all,  as  the  homes  of  many  are  within  Federal  lines.  I conclude, 
general,  by  repeating  that  I am  convinced  that  my  brigade  is  not— 

in  condition  to  make  the  marches  and  undergo  the  fatigues  necessary  to  a successful 
evacuation. 

And  I unhesitatingly  state  that  I could  not  expect  to  keep  together 
one-tenth  of  my  men  a distance  of  10  miles. 

I am,  general,  sincerely  yours, 

LOUIS  H^BEBT, 

Brigadier - General. 

Headquarters  Hebert’s  Brigade, 

Vicksburg , July  9,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  respectfully  to  submit  the  following  report: 

On  May  17  last,  I was  stationed  at  Snyder’s  Mill,  on  the  Yazoo  Biver, 
in  command  of  the  Confederate  forces  at  that  point.  This  position  I had 
occupied  since  January  2. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


375 


On  May  17,  at  11  a.  m.,  I received  orders  to  prepare  to  evacuate  the 
place  and  to  send  into  Vicksburg  tlie  commissary  stores,  and  to  have 
driven  in  all  the  cattle,  hogs,  and  sheep  that  could  be  gathered  in  the 
neighboring  country.  Having  but  a very  small  number  of  wagons  and 
but  a few  mounted  men,  I,  however,  commenced  carrying  out  my  in- 
structions as  far  as  practicable.  At  2.45  p.  m.  I received  orders  to  send 
to  Vicksburg  all  ordnance  stores,  and  to  prepare  to  spike  or  destroy  the 
heavy  guns.  All  remaining  wagons  were  loaded  with  ordnance  stores, 
and  Col.  Isaac  W.  Patton  put  to  work  to  prepare  the  guns  for  spiking 
or  destruction.  Colonel  Patton  was  the  commander  of  my  heavy  artil- 
lery. At  5.30  p.  in.  I received  the  orders  to  march  my  command  to  Vicks- 
burg, leaving  two  companies  at  Snyder’s  Mill,  under  an  efficient  offi- 
cer, to  keep  up  a show  of  occupation,  and  to  spike  or  destroy  the  guns 
and  destroy  remaining  stores  when  the  enemy  would  be  discovered  ap- 
proaching the  position.  At  the  same  time  I was  ordered  to  send  all 
our  transports  and  store-boats  then  at  Haynes’  Bluff  to  the  Upper 
Yazoo,  above  Fort  Pemberton.  All  the  boats  left  in  the  evening  and 
night,  carrying  off  such  stores  as  were  on  board  at  the  time.  Lieut. 
Col.  J.  T.  Plattsmier,  with  two  companies  of  his  regiment  (the  Twenty  - 
lirst  Louisiana),  was  assigned  to  the  duty  of  holding  the  place  and  of 
destroying  the  guns  and  stores  remaining  wben  the  necessity  for  so 
doing  occurred. 

Having  made  all  arrangements  possible  under  existing  circumstances 
with  reference  to  the  post  of  Snyder’s  Mill,  I moved  with  my  command 
at  7.30  p.  m.  by  the  Valley  road  to  Vicksburg,  where  I reported  myself 
at  2.30  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  May  18.  I was  immediately  ordered 
to  the  trenches,  with  instructions  to  occupy  the  line  commencing  with 
the  works  on  the  immediate  right  of  the  Jackson  road,  and  extending 
to  the  left,  so  as  to  occupy  the  main  redan  on  the  Graveyard  road. 
These  dispositions  were  all  made  by  8 o’clock  in  the  morning.  I found 
in  the  main  redan,  on  the  left  of  the  Jackson  road,  one  20-pounder 
Parrott  gun,  of  Waddell’s  artillery,  under  Lieutenant  [T.  Jeff.]  Bates. 
Early  in  the  day,  Col.  Isaac  W.  Patton  received  orders  directly  from 
the  lieutenant-general  commanding  to  return  to  Snyder’s  Mill  for  the 
purpose  of  disposing  of  the  guns  and  stores  left  there.  These  orders 
relieved  Lieutenant-Colonel  Plattsmier  of  the  charge  I had  assigned 
him,  and  I have  therefore  no  report  to  make  of  what  was  really  finally 
abandoned  at  Snyder’s  Mill. 

On  May  18,  soon  after  my  command  had  been  placed  in  the  trenches, 
the  enemy  made  his  appearance  in  front  of  my  line,  pressing  forward  on 
the  Graveyard  road,  as  if  intending  an  assault.  Taking  one  regiment 
and  one  battalion  from  my  right,  I sent  them  to  re-enforce  my  left.  After 
this  change,  and  up  to  June  2,  my  troops  were  disposed  as  follows: 
Commencing  with  my  right,  in  the  main  work,  on  the  immediate  right  ot 
the  Jackson  road,  Twenty -first  Louisiana  Regiment  (with  Companies  C 
1 and  D,  of  the  Twenty-third  [Twenty-second]  Louisiana  Regiment,  at- 
tached), Third  Louisiana  Regiment,  Forty-third  Mississippi  Regiment, 
Thirty-eighth  Mississippi  Regiment,  Thirty-seventh  Mississippi  Regi- 
ment, Seventh  Mississippi  Battalion,  Thirty-sixth  Mississippi  Regiment. 
The  artillery  was  distributed  along  the  line,  with  a few  pieces  kept  in  re- 
servo. 

At  about  3.45  p.  m.  on  the  18th,  the  enemy  opened  artillery  on  the 
Graveyard  road,  but  no  attempt  at  a charge  was  made,  as  had  been  an- 
ticipated. His  skirmishers  pressed  forward,  however,  and  by  night  our 
skirmishers  (by  direction  of  the  lieutenant-general  commanding)  were 
drawn  into  our  lines,  pickets  alone  being  put  out  for  the  night. 

By  the  morning  of  the  19th,  the  enemy  had  planted  several  batteries 


376 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX VI. 


along  my  front,  on  the  Jackson  and  Graveyard  roads,  and  his  strong 
line  of  sharpshooters  was  within  easy  musket  range  of  our  works.  He 
had  also  commenced  his  line  of  works,  and,  so  far  as  my  front  was  con- 
cerned, he  may  be  said  to  have  completed  his  investment.  The  peremp- 
tory orders  to  draw  in  onr  skirmishers,  not  to  use  our  artillery  except 
against  advancing  columns  of  infantry,  or  against  artillery  being  placed 
in  battery  (all  to  save  ammunition),  allowed  the  enemy  to  at  once  make 
his  investment  a close  one,  and  to  commence  his  trenches,  saps,  &c.,  in 
close  proximity  to  our  works.  From  that  time  our  entire  line  became 
subject  to  a murderous  fire,  and  nearly  every  cannon  on  my  line  was 
in  time  either  dismounted  or  otherwise  injured. 

At  about  10  a.  m.  on  May  19,  an  attack  was  made  on  the  Graveyard 
road,  extending  along  the  front  of  Major-General  Smith’s  right  and  the 
front  of  my  two  regiments  and  battalion  on  my  left.  Seeing  the  ad- 
vancing columns,  I directed  Lieutenant  Bates’  20-pounder  Parrott  and 
a 3-inch  rifle  piece  of  the  Appeal  Battery  in  the  work  on  the  Jackson 
road  to  open  upon  them.  This  was  done  with  very  good  effect.  The 
enemy,  however,  several  times  pressed  on  to  the  assault,  but  were  as 
often  repulsed,  notwithstanding  the  effort  of  the  officers.  Before  long 
he  fell  back  discomfited,  having  suffered  severely. 

On  the  21st  and  22d,  he  rapidly  pushed  on  his  works  in  intrenching, 
sapping,  constructing  batteries,  &c.,  under  cover  of  heavy  sharpshooting 
and  cannonading. 

On  the  22d,  he  again  advanced  to  the  assault,  and  apparently  with 
serious  and  strong  determination.  On  my  line  his  points  of  attack  were 
the  Jackson  and  Graveyard  roads.  He  charged  three  times  on  the 
Graveyard  road  and  twice  on  the  Jackson  road,  but  was  as  often  repulsed 
with  very  heavy  loss.  A small  number  only  succeeded  in  reaching  our 
exterior  ditch.  At  the  redan  of  the  Twenty-first  Louisiana,  a few  scal- 
ing-ladders reached  the  outer  ditch,  but  were  not  planted.  By  dark  the 
enemy  had  fallen  back,  severely  punished  and  discomfited.  From  that 
time  he  seemed  to  abandon  all  hope  of  taking  our  works  by  assault,  and 
applied  himself  assiduously  to  the  reduction  of  our  line  by  regular  and 
systematic  approach. 

On  June  2,  other  troops  having  been  ordered  to  occupy  the  works  held 
by  my  left,  I moved  the  Thirty-sixth  and  Thirty-eighth  Mississippi  Regi- 
ments and  the  Seventh  Mississippi  Battalion  to  the  right,  placing  them  as 
follows:  The  Thirty-eighth  along  the  Jackson  road,  between  the  Third 
and  Twenty-first  Louisiana;  the  Seventh  Battalion  on  the  right  of  the 
Twenty-first  Louisiana,  and  the  Thirty-sixth  Regiment  on  the  right  of 
the  battalion,  having  massed  the  Third  and  Twenty-first  Louisiana  more 
compactly  to  give  room  for  these  dispositions. 

In  this  order  my  troops  remained  until  June  25,  when,  moving  the 
Third  Louisiana  still  to  the  left,  room  was  made  for  the  Sixth  Missouri 
Regiment  (Col.  Eugene  Erwin)  between  the  Thirty-eighth  Mississippi 
and  Third  Louisiana. 

On  this  day  (June  25),  at  about  5.30  p.  m.,  and  before  the  Sixth  Mis- 
souri entered  the  trenches,  the  enemy  sprang  his  first  mine  under  the 
redan  of  the  Third  Louisiana,  and  made  an  effort  to  storm  the  breach 
effected.  He  was  promptly  met  and  signally  repulsed.  He,  however, 
occupied  our  exterior  slope  and  ditch,  and  till  late  in  the  night  a brisk 
fight  with  sharpshooting  and  hand-grenades  was  kept  up  on  both  sides. 
At  the  time  the  mine  was  exploded,  0 enlisted  men  of  the  Forty-third 
Mississippi  were  at  work  in  a shaft  sunk  in  the  terre-plein  of  the  redan 
for  the  purpose  of  countermining.  These  men  were  all  buried  and  lost. 
Col.  Eugene  Erwin  sprang  on  the  parapet  to  lead  a charge  against  the 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  377 

enemy  in  the  exterior  ditch.  He  was  shot  and  instantly  killed,  the 
service  thus  losing  a brave,  accomplished,  and  distinguished  officer. 

In  the  mean  time,  before  June  25,  the  enemy  had  placed  heavy  guns 
in  very  close  range  ou  the  Jackson  road  and  had  demolished  a large 
amount  of  oar  parapet.  He  had  also,  by  erecting  daily  new  batteries, 
approaching  and  elevating  his  sharpshooters,  compelled  us  to  work  in- 
cessantly night  and  day  repairing  our  parapets,  constructing  new  lines, 
digging  new  pits,  &c.  He  had  also  commenced  shelling,  with  serious 
effect,  from  a mortar  on  the  Jackson  road. 

From  June  25  to  July  1,  he  pressed  forward  his  works  and  continued 
his  telling  fire  on  our  line.  Ou  this  last  day,  at  about  1.30  p.  m.,  he 
sprang  his  second  mine  under  the  main  redan,  on  the  left  of  the  Jack- 
son  road.  He,  however,  made  no  attempt  to  storm  the  breach,  to 
the  disappointment  of  our  brave  soldiers,  who,  though  for  a moment 
stunned  by  the  fearful  shock  they  sustained,  were  instantly  ready  to 
meet  the  foe  and  once  more  teach  him  that  he  could  not  take  our  works 
by  assault. 

The  mine  was  a very  heavy  one.  The  entire  left  face,  part  of  the  right, 
and  the  entire  terre-plein  of  the  redan  were  blown  up,  leaving  ah  im- 
mense deep  chasm.  Our  interior  works  were  materially  injured.  One 
sapper  and  8 negroes,  of  the  engineer  department,  occupied  at  counter- 
mining, were  buried  and  lost,  and  the  Third  Louisiana  lost  1 killed  and 
21  wounded  and  the  Appeal  Battery  4 wounded  by  the  explosion.  The 
loss  of  the  Sixth  Missouri  by  the  mine  I cannot  state.  It  must  have 
been  serious. 

During  July  2 and  up  to  8 a.  m.  on  the  3d,  the  enemy’s  fire  was  kept 
up  as  usual,  our  troops  suffering  more  than  before  from  his  mortar  shell 
ing.  At  8 a.  m.  on  the  3d,  all  firing  ceased  by  the  sending  out  of  a flag 
ot  truce.  This  cessation  of  hostilities  continued  to  the  end  of  the  siege, 
the  next  day. 

On  July  4,  at  10  a.  m.,  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  capitulation 
and  orders  received,  my  command  stacked  their  arms  in  front  of  their 
lines,  evacuated  their  trenches,  and  were  marched  to  bivouac  in  the  rear 
of  our  works,  where  they  are  now  being  paroled. 

On  May  19,  Col.  Charles  [H.]  Herrick  reported  to  me  for  artillery  duty 
in  my  brigade.  He  was  at  once  assigned  as  chief  of  the  artillery  on  my 
line.  Proceeding  to  his  duties,  he  found  himself  at  the  Graveyard  road 
at  the  time  ot  the  assault  of  that  day.  Gallantly  joining  in  the  fight, 
he  fell,  mortally  wounded,  dying  a few  days  after. 

On  May  21,  Lieut.  Charles  A.  Brusle,  aide-de-camp,  received  a pain- 
ful  wound  in  the  shoulder  by  a Minie  ball. 

On  July  1,  before  the  explosion  of  the  mine,  Lieutenant  [P.  J.]  Bless- 
ing, assistant  engineer,  was  painfully  wounded  by  a sharpshooter.  This 
officer  had  been  unremitting  in  his  labors  night  and  day  during  the 
siege,  often  showing  a gallantry  and  devotion  worthy  of  reward. 

Casualties  in  the  different  regiments,  battalions,  and  companies  will 
appear  in  the  list  of  names  to  accompany  this  report. 

The  above  is  a brief  history  of  the  part  taken  by  my  brigade  in  the 
siege  of  Vicksburg,  terminated  by  the  capitulation  of  July  4,  18G3.  I 
will  not  cite  here  individual  acts  of  bravery  and  of  devotion.  I will  not 
pass  encomiums  on  officers  and  soldiers  by  name.  With  few,  very  few 
exceptions,  all  my  officers  and  soldiers  have  proven  themselves  worthy 
of  the  admiration  of  the  army  and  of  the  country.  Forty-eight  days  and 
nights  passed  in  the  trenches,  exposed  to  the  burning  sun  during  the  day, 
the  chilly  air  of  night ; subject  to  a murderous  storm  of  balls,  shells,  and 
w«ir  missiles  of  all  kinds ; cramped  up  in  pits  and  holes  not  large  enough 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


378  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

to  allow  them  to  extend  their  limbs;  laboring  day  and  night ; fed  on 
reduced  rations  of  the  poorest  kind  of  food,  yet  always  cheerful  al- 
ways ready  and  eager  that  the  foe  should  advance ; calm,  resolute,  their 
comrades  falling  around  them  at  every  instant  under  a tire  they  were 
forbidden  to  return.  Such  are  the  claims  my  noble  officers  and  soldiers 
have  upon  the  admiration  of  their  countrymen.  The  list  of  casualties 
sufficiently  attests  that  my  brigade  occupied  and  held  unflinchingly  one 
of  the  most  exposed  portions  of  the  defenses  of  Yicksburg.  .Many  a 
gallant  spirit  was  sacrificed ; let  their  memory  be  cherished  and  their 
names  be  honored. 

Recapitulation  of  Casualties . 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

j Officers. 

| Men. 

1 

Officers. 

Men. 

4 

4 

1 

3 

1 

2 

4 

2 

1 

...... 

"T 

41 

23 

16 

28 

20 

12 

25 

2 

6 

3 

’’3* 

6 

5 

6 

120 

68 

50 

36 

37 
32 
66 

6 

8 

13 

5 

2 

7 tli  Mississippi  Battalion 

4 

8 

1 

1 

Ratliff’s  battery *’ 

Lowe’s  battery 

Ridley’s  battery 

Brigade  headquarters 

...... 

24 

179 

37  443 

203 

Total  lulled  480 

Total  wounded 


Aggregate  killed  and  wounded 

Respectfully  submitted.  LOUIS  HUBERT, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Kote.— The  casualties  may  not  be  exactly  correct,  but  are  known  to 
be  nearly  so.* 

Maj.  S.  Croom,  , . . 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Forney's  Division. 


Headquarters  Hebert’s  Brigade, 

Camp  near  Demopolis , August  31,  I860. 

Sir  : In  answer  to  your  note  of  the  29tli  instant,  received  y^terdaj, 
I have  the  honor  to  transmit  a list  of  ordnance  left , by  me i a : 

Mill  when  ordered  thence  to  Vicksburg  on  May  1h1rap^-lpi  for  reasons 
bie  for  me  to  give  a list  of  ammunition  and  other  stores  left,  tor  reasons 
o ven  below  It  is  also  impossible  for  me  to  state  what  ordnance  ami 


But  see  statement  compiled  from  nominal  list,  appended  to  Forney’s  report,  p. 


369, 


CHAP.  XXXVI.  ] 


THE  SIEGE  OP  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


379 


ordnance  stores  were  lost  at  Snyder’s,  as  will  also  appear  by  this  com- 
munication. I will,  however,  state  that  I estimate  that  on  average  there 
were  about  200  rounds  of  ammunition  to  each  gun  at  Snyder’s  on  the 
morning  of  May  17  before  the  movement  for  evacuation  commenced. 
I quote  as  follows  extracts  from  my  report  after  the  capitulation  of 
Vicksburg,  dated  July  9 : 

On  May  17  last,  I was  in  command  at  Snyder’s  Mill.  On  the  same  day,  at  11  a.  m., 
I received  orders  to  prepare  to  evacuate  the  place,  and  to  send  into  Vicksburg  the  com- 
missary stores,  and  to  have  driven  in  all  the  cattle,  hogs,  and  sheep  that  could  he  col- 
lected in  the  neighboring  country.  Having  but.  a very  small  number  of  wagons  and 
but  a few  mounted  men,  I,  however,  commenced  carrying  out  my  instructions  as  far 
as  practicable.  At  2.45  p.  m.  I received  orders  to  send  to  Vicksburg  all  ordnance 
stores,  and  to  prepare  to  spike  and  destroy  the  heavy  guns.  All  remaining  wagons 
were  loaded  with  ordnance  stores,  and  Col.  Isaac  W.  Patton  put  to  work  to  prepare 
the  guns  for  spiking  or  destruction . Colonel  Patton  was  the  commander  of  my  heavy 
artillery.  At  5.30  p.  m.  I received  the  orders  to  march  my  command  to  Vicksburg, 
leaving  two  companies  at  Snyder’s  Mill,  under  an  efficient  officer,  to  keep  up  a show 
of  occupation,  and  to  spike  or  destroy  the  guns  and  destroy  remaining  stores  when  the 
enemy  would  be  discovered  approaching  the  position. 


Having  made  all  arrangements  possible  under  existing  circumstances  with  reference 
to  the  post  of  Snyder’s  Mill,  I moved  with  my  command  at  7.30  p.  m.  by  the  Valley 


road  to  Vicksburg,  where  I reported  myself  at  2.30  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  May  18. 
I was  immediately  ordered  to  the  trenches. 


Early  in  the  day  Col.  Isaac  W.  Patton  received  orders  directly  from  the  lieutenant- 
general  commanding  to  return  to  Snyder’s  Mill,  forthe  purpose  of  disposing  of  the  guns 
and  stores  left  there.  These  orders  relieved  Lieutenant-Colonel  [J.  T.  J Plattsmier  of 
the  duty  I had  assigned  him,  and  I have,  therefore,  no  report  to  make  of  what  was 
really  finally  abandoned  at  Snyder’s  Mill. 


Colonel  Patton,  Laving  received  Lis  orders  directly  from  tLe  lieuten- 
ant-general commanding,  made  me  no  report  on  Lis  return  to  Vicks- 
burg on  May  19.  I am  not  aware  tbat  Le  Las  made  any  report  to  de- 
partment Leadquarters. 

On  May  17,  several  wagon  loads  of  ammunition  were  sent  from  Sny- 
der’s Mill  to  Vicksburg.  TLe  amount  sent  in  was  known  by  my  chief 
of  ordnance,  but  this  officer  was,  unfortunately,  killed  before  Le  Lad 
sent  in  Lis  report.  I would  estimate  that  at  least  one-half  of  the  powder 
and  cartridges,  and  perhaps  one-half  of  the  fixed  ammunition,  were 
brought  into  Vicksburg.  1 Lave  reason  to  believe  that  the  two  30- 
pounder  Parrotts,  one  21-pounder  smooth-bore,  the  Whitworth  gun,  and 
the  two  12-pounder  howitzers  (field  brass  pieces),  given  in  the  list,  were 
brought  into  Vicksburg  by  Colonel  Patton  on  May  18  or  19.  I know 
of  no  ordnance  or  ordnance  stores  lost  of  my  command  during  the  siege 
of  Vicksburg,  and,  therefore,  have  no  statement  to  make  for  that  period 
of  time. 

I remain,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

LOUIS  HEBERT, 

Brigadier-  General. 

R.  R.  Hutchinson, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  Bast  Louisiana. 

P.  S. — It  may  be  proper  to  state  that  at  the  surrender,  on  July  4,  I 
stacked  on  my  line,  or  left  in  the  trenches,  about  2,075  serviceable  small- 
arms  and  five  pieces  of  serviceable  light  artillery.  One-fourth  of  the 
| enlisted  men  had  two  pieces  small-arms — one  musket  and  one  rifle.  All 
! other  artillery  was  at  the  time  unserviceable. 


380 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 


List  of  ordnance  left  at  Snyder’s  Mill,  May  17,  1863. 

10-iacli  columbiacls 

8-inch  columbiads 

42-pounder  smooth-bore 

32-pounder  rifles  (banded) 

32-pounder  rifles  (not  banded) 

32-pounder  smooth-bore 

32-pounder  Navy - 

30-pounder  Parrotts 

24-pounder  rifle 

24- pounder  smooth-bore 

Whitworth  gun 

12-pounder  howitzers,  without  caissons  (field  brass  pieces) 


3 

1 

2 

2 

1 

2 

2 

1 

1 

1 

2 


Total  number  of  guns... 
Respectfully, 

Respectfully  submitted. 
August  31,  1863. 


20 

JOHN  G.  KELLY, 
Assistant  Inspector-General. 

LOUIS  HUBERT, 

Brigadier - General. 


No.  86. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  C.  Moore , G.  S.  Army , commanding  Brigade. 


Headquarters  Moore’s  Brigade, 

May  21,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following  casualties  in  my  com- 
mand during  the  day : Killed,  6 ; wounded,  12. 

I had  four  guns  disabled  by  the  enemy’s  artillery,  viz : One  18-pounder ; 
one  James,  rifled;  one  Napoleon,  12-pounder,  and  one  Parrott,  10-pounder. 
I hope  to  be  able  to  have  the  two  first  mentioned  and,  perhaps,  the 
Napoleon  gun  in  working  order  by  to  morrow  morning.  The  enemy’s 
fire  has  been  exceedingly  galling  during  the  day;  in  some  instances 
their  shots  passed  entirely  through  the  parapets,  killing  and  wounding 
men  on  the  inside.  They  have  been  able  to  concentrate  the  fire  of  three 
batteries,  at  widely  distant  points,  on  the  same  work.  One  of  the  most 
important  works  on  my  line  has  been  without  a gun  in  working  condi- 
tion since  about  10.30  a.  m. 

The  enemy  has  indicated  no  design  of  assaulting  in  my  front  during 
the  day.  Yesterday  troops  were  massed  and  moved  forward  a short  dis- 
tance, but  seemed  deterred  by  a few  well-directed  shots.  I fear  the 
move  has  been  deferred  indefinitely. 

Very  respectfully, 

JNO.  C.  MOORE, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Major  Memminger,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Moore’s  Brigade,  May  27,  1863. 

Sir:  I hope  that  I am  not  an  alarmist,  yet  I cannot  help  feeling  un- 
easy about  the  right  of  my  line.  All  who  have  seen  the  position  must 
acknowledge  it  to  be  the  weakest  in  our  whole  line.  The  enemy  occu- 
pies with  his  artillery  a position  with  extended  works  as  strong  as  ours. 
He  has  thrown  up  works  for  some  twenty  or  twenty-five  guns,  all  bear- 
ing on  my  right.  Many  of  his  guns  are  of  much  heavier  caliber  than 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


381 


I Chai\  XXXYI.] 


ours.  If  an  assault  is  made  again,  I shall  expect  him  to  open  with  all 
his  pieces,  as  he  can  keep  up  the  fire  without  danger  to  his  own  troops 
until  they  come  almost  up  to  our  works.  I have  had  two  or  three 
works  thrown  up,  just  in  rear  of  my  line,  and  have  had  some  hope  that 
I would  get  guns  of  heavy  caliber  to  place  in  them.  I see  but  little 
prospect  of  getting  them.  If  it  is  intended  to  give  me  any,  I beg  that 
it  will  not  be  put  off  until  it  is  too  late.  The  troops  I have  now  are 
just  sufficient  to  fill  the  trenches. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  C.  MOORE, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Major  Groom,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Indorsement.] 


Headquarters  Division, 

Near  Vicksburg , May  28,  1863. 

With  our  present  means,  I do  not  see  that  anything  more  can  be  done 
to  support  General  Moore  than  has  already  been  effected.  The  Seven- 
teenth Louisiana  Regiment  is  now  occupying  the  trenches  recently 
thrown  up  on  either  side  u Cox  House”  battery,  and  two  regiments 
from  General  Bowen’s  division  are  in  reserve,  to  support  either  Bald- 
win’s Ferry  or  Jackson  roads.  As  to  the  position  of  the  batteries  re- 
cently erected  in  rear  of  the  original  works,  if  heavy  guns  cannot  be 
procured  for  them,  we  will  have  to  remove  the  light  guns  back  to  these 
batteries  so  soon  as  we  see  they  cannot  be  worked  in  the  advanced 
batteries;  besides,  the  enemy  is  getting  so  close,  our  light  guns  are 
j about  as  effective  as  heavy  ones. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JNO.  H.  FORNEY, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters  Moore’s  Brigade,  Forney’s  Division, 

Vicksburg,  July  8,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken 
by  my  brigade  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg: 

The  brigade  during  this  time  was  composed  of  the  Second  Texas, 
\ Thirty-fifth  and  Fortieth  Mississippi,  the  Thirty-seventh,  Fortieth,  and 
| Forty-second  Alabama,  Sengstak’s  and  Tobin’s  light  batteries,  and  a 
portion  of  Landis’,  Ridley’s,  Davidson’s,  and  Wall’s  batteries;  in  all. 
nineteen  guns.  An  18-pounder,  a 30-pounder  Parrott,  and  a Whitworth 
gun  were  placed  during  the  siege  in  rear  of  my  line,  and  commanded 
by  Captain  [J.  J.]  Cowan. 

On  the  evening  of  May  17,  we  were  ordered  to  fall  back  from  the 
position  we  occupied  with  the  brigade  and  two  batteries  on  the  War- 
renton  road,  and  took  position  in  tbe  trenches  near  Vicksburg,  the  right 
resting  on  tbe  Jackson  railroad  and  tbe  left  extending  to  near  what  is 
known  as  the  Jackson  road.  We  found  tbe  trenches  and  redoubts  in  a 
very  imperfect  state,  the  trenches  being  too  narrow  and  shallow.  By 
working  at  night  with  tbe  small  number  of  tools  in  our  possession,  we 
i soon  greatly  improved  them  ; also  constructed  approaches  which  seem 
1 to  have  been  overlooked  or  deemed  unnecessary. 

! On  the  morning  of  May  19,  the  enemy  engaged  and  drove  in  our 
pickets.  At  about  11  a.  m.  their  skirmishers  and  artillery  appeared  in 
front  of  our  intrench ments.  From  this  time  to  the  close  of  the  siege 
(forty-seven  days)  our  men  weie  confined  to  the  trenches  night  and  day 


382 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


under  a fire  of  musketry  and  artillery,  which  was  often  kept  up  during 
the  whole  night  as  well  as  the  day.  Only  those  who  were  a near  wit- 
ness of  the  siege  of  Vicksburg  will  ever  have  a true  conception  of  the 
endurance  and  suffering  of  these  men,  who  stood  at  their  post  until  over- 
powered, not  by  the  enemy,  but  by  the  wants  of  nature.  Those  who 
only  think  and  read  of  the  siege,  and  those  who  witnessed  and  shared 
its  trials,  may  perhaps  form  widely  different  conceptions  of  its  nature. 
Some  idea  may  be  formed  of  the  artillery  fire  to  which  we  were  exposed, 
when  I state  that  a small  party  sent  out  for  that  purpose  collected  some 
two  thousand  shells  near  and  in  rear  of  the  trenches  occupied  by  our 
brigade.  This  was  soon  after  the  siege  began,  and  was  but  a portion 
of  those  that  failed  to  explode. 

On  arriving  in  our  front,  the  enemy  began  at  once  to  place  their  guns 
under  cover  and  to  construct  rifle-pits. 

No  attempt  was  made  to  carry  our  lines  by  assault  until  May  22.  On 
the  morning  and  afternoon  of  that  day,  they  made  determined  assaults, 
but  were  gloriously  repulsed.  Their  greatest  efforts  ware  made  against 
that  portion  of  the  line  occupied  by  that  veteran  and  gallant  regiment, 
the  Second  Texas.  This  regiment  was  nobly  supported  by  the  Forty- 
second  Alabama,  occupying  the  trenches  on  their  right,  and  the  Thirty- 
seventh  Alabama  on  the  left.  Tobin’s  and  other  guns  did  good  service. 
They  were  easily  repulsed  in  the  morning,  but  in  the  afternoon  charge 
they  were  more  determined,  coming  up  and  even  into  the  outer  ditch  of 
the  Second  Texas  redoubt.  The  Second  Texas  captured  two  stand  of 
colors.  Having  failed  to  carry  our  works  by  assault,  the  enemy  now 
appeared  to  determine  not  to  attempt  it  again,  but  to  take  us  by  regular 
approaches,  or  by  starving  us  out,  which  latter  they  doubtless  regarded 
the  most  certain  and  agreeable  mode,  as  they  did  not  assault  again, 
even  after  they  had  constructed  three  lines  of  intrenchments  in  front 
of  a great  portion  of  our  line,  and  had  sapped  to  within  30  feet  of  the 
Second  Texas  work  and  constructed  rifle-pits  to  within  30  paces  of  the 
same. 

From  May  22  to  the  close  of  the  siege  (July  4),  the  history  of  each 
day  was  generally  but  that  of  the  preceding. 

I cannot  speak  too  highly  of  the  conduct  of  the  officers  and  men. 
None  ever  endured  such  hardships  with  more  cheerfulness.  When 
their  allowance  was  reduced  to  nearly  one-fourth  rations,  some  com- 
plaints might  have  been  heard,  not  that  more  was  not  issued,  but  that 
we  had  it  not  to  give.  By  this  time  their  minds  and  bodies  seemed  ex- 
hausted, and  many  remained  at  their  post  in  the  trenches  who  were  fit 
subjects  for  the  hospitals.  Only  those  who  have  tried  it  can  tell  the 
effects  produced  on  men  by  keeping  them  forty-seven  days  and  nights 
in  a narrow  ditch,  exposed  to  the  scorching  heat  during  the  day  and 
the  often  chilly  air  and  dews  of  night. 

In  compliance  with  instructions  received  during  the  early  part  of  the 
siege,  we  used  our  ammunition  with  a strict  regard  to  economy.  This 
enabled  the  enemy  to  approach  more  rapidly  and  with  greater  impunity 
than  they  otherwise  could  have  done.  They  had  two  or  three  times  as 
many  guns  as  we,  and  generally  of  much  heavier  caliber.  Many  of  their 
shots  passed  through  and  through  our  parapets.  Being  very  near  our 
works,  their  sharpshooters  and  artillery  rendered  itr  frequently  impos- 
sible to  fire  more  than  a few  rounds  during  the  day,  for  if  our  cannoneers 
were  not  shot  down  or  pieces  disabled,  their  artillery  soon  filled  the  em- 
brasures with  earth,  so  that  the  guns  could  not  be  used  until  night 
enabled  us  to  repair  the  work. 

Our  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  was  as  follows : Killed,  72 ; wouqdedj 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


383 


385 ; total,  457.*  A number  of  the  wounded  have  died  in  hospital 
and  are  not  included  in  the  killed  above  reported.  List  of  killed  and 
wounded  has  been  furnished. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  C.  MOORE, 

Brigadier - General. 

Maj.  S.  Croom,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

ADDENDA. 

Headquarters  Moore’s  Brigade,  Forney’s  Division, 

Vicksburg , July  2,  1803. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I have  consulted  with  my 
regimental  commanders  as  to  the  condition  of  their  troops  to  undergo 
the  fatigues  of  the  marches,  &c.,  necessary  to  a successful  evacuation. 
There  was  but  one  opinion  expressed,  which  coincides  with  my  own. 
Inclosed  you  will  find  a statement  of  that  opinion. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  C.  MOORE, 

Brigadier -General , Commanding  Brigade. 
Major  Croom,  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Forney's  Division. 


[Inclosnre.] 


Moore’s  Brigade, 

In  the  Trenches , July  2,  1863. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  0.  Moore, 

Commanding  Moore's  Brigade , Forney's  Division : 

General  : In  reply  to  your  inquiry  as  to  the  condition  ot  our  troops, 
and  their  ability  to  make  the  marches  and  undergo  the  fatigues  neces- 
sary to  accomplish  a successful  evacuation,  we  beg  leave  respectfully 
to  state  that  we  have  given  the  subject  the  most  careful  consideration. 

In  our  opinion,  the  physical  condition  and  general  health  and  strength 
of  our  men  are  not  such  as  to  enable  them  to  make  the  marches  and 
undergo  the  fatigues  necessary  to  accomplish  the  successful  evacuation 
of  Yicksburg.  We  do  not  deem  it  necessary  to  set  forth  the  causes  of 
this  condition  of  our  men  further  than  by  a simple  allusion  to  their  long 
confinement  and  cramped  inaction  in  the  trenches,  the  state  of  almost 
incessant  alert,  night  and  day,  in  which  the  men  have  been  since  the 
commencement  of  the  siege,  together  with  other  various  fatigues,  priva- 
tions, and  exposures  to  which  they  have  been  unavoidably  subjected. 

We  have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servants, 


WILLIAM  S,  BARRY, 

Colonel , Commanding  Thirty-fifth  Mississippi  Infantry. 

J.  F.  DOWDELL, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Thirty -seventh  Alabama. 
W.  B.  COLBERT, 

Colonel , Commanding  Fortieth  Mississippi. 
ASHBEL  SMITH, 

Colonel , Commanding  Second  Texas  Infantry. 

JNO.  H.  HIGLEY, 

Colonel,  Commanding  Fortieth  Alabama  Regiment. 

THOS.  C.  LANIER, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Comdg.  Forty-second  Regt.  Alabama  Vols. 


* $ut  see  statement  appended  to  Forney’s  report,  p.  369, 


384  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 

No.  87. 

Report  of  Col.  Aslibel  Smith,  Second  Texas  Infantry. 

City  of  Galyeston,  Tex., 

July  — , 1864. 

General  : It  lias  appeared  to  me  proper  to  address  the  accompanying 
copy  of  my  report  of  the  Second  Texas  Infantry  in  the  siege  of  Vicks- 
burg to  yourself  directly,  not  knowing  to  what  officer  of  your  staff  it 
should  at  this  time  be  directed  to  insure  its  reaching  you.  I have  had 
reason  to  believe  that  my  report  sent  to  Captain  [James  M.]  Loughbor- 
ough, assistant  adjutant-general  of  Moore’s  brigade,  never  reached  its 
destination.  I have,  accordingly,  on  advisement  with  Brig.  Gen.  J.  E. 
Slaughter,  chief  of  staff  of  Major-General  Magruder,  sent  copies  of  my 
report,  respectively,  to  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General  Cooper,  at  Rich- 
mond, to  yourself,  and  to  Brigadier-General  Moore.  I have  respectfully 
requested  General  Moore  to  make  on  the  copy  sent  him  such  indorsement 
as  he  may  think  proper,  and  to  forward  the  same  to  Richmond.  I very 
respectfully  ask,  general,  that  you  will  make  on  the  copy  herewith  sent 
your  indorsement,  and  to  forward  it  so  indorsed  to  Adjutant  and  In- 
spector General.  I shall  respectfully  request  General  Cooper  to  have 
your  indorsement  and  that  of  General  Moore  transferred  to  the  copy  of 
the  report  sent  to  Richmond,  and  the  same  to  be  there  properly  filed  in 
the  War  Department.  This  course  seems  to  be  rendered  necessary  that 
my  regiment  may  have  its  proper  status  and  repute  in  the  War  De- 
partment. 

I am,  general,  with  profound  respect,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

ASHBEL  SMITH, 

Colonel  Second  Regiment  Texas  Infantry. 

Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton,  &c. 

P.  S. — I reported  regularly  by  letter  to  your  inspector- general,  Colonel 
[Jacob]  Thompson,  at  Demopolis,  Ala.  I did  not  report  there  with  my 
regiment,  but  remained  in  the  Trans-Mississippi  Department,  in  obedi- 
ence to  orders  from  General  E.  Kirby  Smith,  commanding  Trans-Missis- 
sippi Department,  commanding  the  regiments  then  in  his  department 
belonging  east  of  the  Mississippi  River  to  report  to  his  headquarters 
for  orders.  I had  orders  to  the  same  effect  from  the  major-general  com- 
manding the  District  of  Texas. 

[Inclosure.] 

Vicksburg,  Mjss.,  July  10,  1863. 

The  Second  Regiment  Texas  Volunteer  Infantry,  recalled  from  the 
Tallahatchee,  near  Fort  Pemberton,  in  the  latter  jiart  of  April,  resumed 
its  former  camping  ground  on  Chickasaw  Bayou,  9 miles  above  Vicks- 
burg and  about  2 miles  from  Yazoo  River. 

On  the  — day  of  April,  the  regiment, was  moved  some  miles  up  the 
Yazoo,  to  the  neighborhood  of  Snyder’s  Bluff,  to  meet  the  enemy,  who 
were  ascending  the  Yazoo  in  transports  and  gunboats.  The  enemy, 
after  a heavy  cannonade  of  our  works  at  Snyder’s  Bluff  for  a part  of 
two  days,  and  landing  several  battalions  of  infantry,  re-embarked  the 
latter  and  returned  down  the  river.  From  the  strength  and  manner  of 
his  attack,  it  was  manifestly  a false  one,  and  designed  to  cover  some 
other  movement.  This  was  the  movement  of  his  forces  by  land  from 
his  position  on  the  west  side  of  the  Mississippi  River,  above  Vicksburg, 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


385 


to  a point  lower  down,  and  it  was  the  commencement  of  the  series  of 
movements  operating  first  against  Grand  Gulf  and  Port  Gibsou,  and 
thence  proceeding  up  the  valley,  on  the  east  side  of  the  Big  Black,  and 
terminating  in  the  investment  and  subsequent  operations  against  the 
city  of  Vicksburg.  The  enemy  withdrawiugfrom  the  Yazoo  River,  and 
his  purpose  of  a real  attack  below  being  now  developed,  the  Second 
Texas  Infantry  was  marched  back,  and,  after  a halt  of  three  days  at  its 
old  camp  on  Chickasaw  Bayou,  was  ordered,  on  May  2,  to  march  below 
Vicksburg,  and  take  position  2 miles  in  rear  of  the  abandoned  town  of 
Warrenton.  On  leaving  the  camp  on  Chickasaw  Bayou,  the  troops  were 
restricted  to  the  clothes  actually  worn  on  the  march,  with  one  extra 
shirt,  one  blanket  to  be  worn  in  a wisp,  and  no  knapsack.  Except  the 
ammunition  train,  the  transportation  was,  by  orders,  strictly  limited  to 
a few  indispensable  cooking  utensils,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  camp 
equipage  and  all  baggage  of  the  men  whatever.  The  camp,  with  all 
the  clothing  and  personal  effects  of  officers  and  men,  afterward  fell  into 
the  hands  of  the  enemy.  Arrived  near  Warrenton,  the  regiment  took 
its  turn  in  manning  a redoubt  in  the  town,  near  the  river,  and  in  picket- 
ing the  banks  of  the  river  above  and  below  the  town.  The  redoubt  was 
regularly  cannonaded  every  evening  by  a gunboat,  whose  business  ap- 
peared to  be  to  patrol  the  river  and  cover  the  movements  of  troops  on 
the  opposite  side.  No  one  in  the  redoubt  was  seriously  wounded. 

On  May  14,  the  regiment  was  ordered  to  take  a position  near  Mrs. 
Glass7  gin,  3 miles  below  Warrenton,  as  a strong, advance  guard  to  watch 
the  enemy's  movements,  and  hold  him  in  check  if  he  should  attempt  to 
advance  over  the  Big  Black  by  Hall's  or  Hankinson's  Ferries,  which 
are  near  the  debouchure  of  this  river  into  the  Mississippi,  and  some  12 
miles  distant  from  the  station  near  the  gin.  In  this  duty  of  advance 
guard,  the  regiment,  though  acting  strictly  under  general  orders  from 
the  brigadier-general  commanding,  nevertheless  acted  alone  and  not  in 
association  with  any  other  corps. 

As  the  forces  below  Vicksburg  fell  back  into  the  city,  the  Second 
Texas  Infantry  was  moved  back,  still  holding  its  relative  position  of 
advance  guard,  first,  to  its  former  bivouac  in  the  rear  of  Warrenton,  and 
successively  into  the  city  of  Vicksburg,  which  it  entered  on  Sunday, 
May  17.  It  was  first  posted  on  the  extreme  right  of  the  lines  adjoining 
the  Mississippi  River.  Later  in  the  evening  it  was  moved  to  a position 
on  our  lines  between  the  Baldwin's  Ferry  road  and  the  Jackson  Rail- 
road, occupying  its  proper  place  as  the  right  battalion  of  Moore's  bri- 
gade. Subsequently,  the  same  night,  an  hour  or  two  after  midnight,  the 
men  were  roused  from  their  bivouac  on  the  ground,  and  moved  out  of 
their  brigade  position,  and  changed  places  with  the  Forty-second  Ala- 
bama (a  gallant  regiment),  in  order  that  the  Second  Texas  Infantry 
might  man  the  fort  which  commanded  the  Baldwin's  Ferry  road  at  the 
very  point  where  the  road  traversed  the  lines  to  enter  the  city.  This 
was  the  assailable  point  of  our  lines  ; the  place  of  danger ; the  post  of 
honor ; the  key  of  this  portion  of  our  works  of  defense.  The  other  simi- 
lar point  was  where  the  Jackson  road  crossed  our  lines  to  enter  the  city, 
and  this  position,  for  a similar  reason,  appears  to  have  been  manned  by 
the  Third  Louisiana  Infantry,  a most  gallant  corps. 

Reverting  to  the  position  occupied  by  the  Second  Texas : The  ground 
is  so  irregularly  broken  here  that  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  give  by 
description  a clear  notion  of  its  configuration.  The  center  of  the  posi- 
tion on  the  lines  now  occupied  by  the  Second  Texas  was  a fort  situated 
on  a projecting  swell  or  mamelon  of  ground  well  in  advance  of  the  gen- 
eral outline  of  the  works.  The  Baldwin's  Ferry  road,  approaching  the 
25  R R — VOL  XXIV,  fT  II 


386 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


fort  from  the  right  and  front  obliquely,  came  up  to  its  right  salient,  ran 
along  its  front  at  the  foot  of  the  glacis,  and  wound  round  its  left  flank 
to  enter  the  city.  The  rifle-pits  connecting  with  the  retired  parts  of  the 
fort  on  the  right  receded  very  rapidly,  to  take  advantage  of  the  ground. 
For  a like  reason  there  was  an  interval  of  upward  of  100  yards  between 
the  left  of  the  fort  and  the  continuation  of  the  general  line  of  defenses 
to  the  left.  Through  this  interval  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road  entered  the 
city.  To  the  front  of  the  fort,  and  both  to  its  right  and  left,  the  earth 
is  most  irregularly  broken  into  large  and  deep  valleys,  more  or  less  per- 
fectly communicating  with  each  other,  and  affording  perfect  cover  for 
large  bodies  of  men.  Of  these  valleys  there  are  two  important  de- 
bouches into  the  road — one  debouche  with  a sharp  curve  into  the  road 
about  35  paces  to  the  right  of  our  right  salient ; the  other  debouch 6 is  by 
a long,  straight  valley  approaching  obliquely  and  terminating  at  the 
road  in  the  interval  between  the  left  of  the  fort  and  the  continuation  of 
our  lines  to  the  left.  Coming  up  this  latter  valley,  takes  the  front  of 
the  fort  in  enfilade  and  its  right  flank  and  rifle-pits  in  reverse.  Between 
these  two  debouches , in  front  of  the  fort  and  separated  from  it  by  the 
road,  which  here  runs  in  a deep  trench,  is  a sharp  elevation  of  the 
height  of  the  fort,  with  a rapid  declivity  from  us.  Everywhere,  from 
close  proximity  to  our  works  to  an  indefinite  distance  outward,  were 
crests  between  the  irregular  system  of  valleys  just  spoken  of,  some  of 
which  were  more  elevated  than  the  fort.  These  crests,  at  varying  dis- 
tances from  our  works  of  60  yards  to  a mile,  furnished  suitable  positions 
for  the  enemy’s  cannon,  and  protected  them  and  their  infantry  from  our 
fire  as  effectually  as  could  have  been  done  by  artificial  breastworks.  In 
short,  for  many  operations  in  the  progress  of  attack,  the  great  natural 
strength  of  this  district,  so  much  vaunted,  inured  as  much  to  the  ad- 
vantage of  the  besiegers  as  of  the  besieged. 

Our  fort  was  an  irregular  lunette,  with  no  flank  on  the  left ; or  it  may 
be  considered  a redan  with  a large  pan  coupti,  having  its  left  thrown  for- 
ward and  its  right  retired.  Its  left  having  no  flank,  its  interior  was  ex- 
posed to  an  enfilading  and  reverse  fire  from  the  enemy  approaching  by 
the  valley,  which  debouches  on  its  left.  Its  parapet  was  about  4J  feet 
high  on  the  inside,  its  superior  slope  about  14  feet  thick.  It  was  sur- 
rounded by  a ditch  in  front  nearly  6 feet  deep,  with  an  irregular  glacis 
made  by  the  natural  slope  of  the  earth  to  the  ferry  road.  There  were 
two  embrasures  for  cannon,  with  a traverse  between  them. 

The  men  of  my  regiment  were  stationed  as  follows : The  two  right 
companies  occupied  the  rifle-pits  tending  off  from  the  right  of  the  fort ; 
the  four  next  companies  manned  the  fort  5 the  four  remaining,  or  left, 
companies  occupied  the  lines  next  on  our.  left  separated  Irom  the  fort 
by  the  interval  of  upward  of  100  yards,  above  described.  In  addition 
there  were,  at  the  commencement  of  the  siege,  placed  in  the  fort  two  de- 
tachments, with  their  guns,  from  Captain  Tobin’s  battery. 

The  embrasures  were  subsequently  filled  up,  for  reasons  which  will  be 
hereafter  stated.  A flank  on  our  left  and  another  traverse  were  con- 
structed for  protection  against  a fire  up  the  left  valley.  A ditch  2 feet 
deep  was  dug  on  the  inside  of  the  parapet,  to  enable  the  men  to  stand 
erect  without  being  exposed  to  the  enemy’s  fire.  As  the  enemy’s  elon- 
gated shot  traversed  the  parapet  near  its  upper  slope  and  killed  several 
men,  the  parapet  was  strengthened  by  adding  to  its  interior  slope  in 
some  places  2 feet  to  its  thickness.  It  was  also  found  necessary  to 
deepen  the  trenches  and  strengthen  the  breastworks  of  the  rifle-pits  on 
the  right.  I was  also  obliged  to  construct  covered  ways  for  the  purpose 
of  safe  communication  with  the  sinks  and  wells  in  the  rear.  And  event- 


['  Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  387 

ually  it  was  deemed  prudent  to  construct  a strong  line  of  rifle-pits  across 
j the  gorge  of  the  fort  for  the  greater  security  of  our  rear,  and  to  be  used 
in  case  our  lines  should  be  breached  or  carried  by  assault.  After  all 
improvements,  the  interior  of  the  fort  was  swept  within  2 feet  of  the 
ground  by  the  enemy’s  Minies.  This  did  not  prevent  the  men  from 
bivouacking  at  night,  lying  flat  on  the  ground ; but  during  the  day  safety 
compelled  them  to  seek  the  protection  of  the  ditches  next  the  parapet 
and  traverses. 

In  the  night  of  May  17,  1863  (Sunday),  as  already  stated,  the  Second 
Texas  Infantry  took  its  position  on  the  lines. 

The  18th,  houses  were  burned,  trees  were  cut  down,  and  other  obstruc- 
tions were  removed,  and  dispositions  made  to  receive  the  enemy.  In  the 
evening  the  enemy’s  pickets  were  reported  on  the  ferry  road,  3 miles  in 
our  front. 

Early  the  19th,  I sent  forward  Captain  [William]  Christian  with  his 
company  to  observe  the  enemy,  and,  if  need  be,  to  deploy  as  skirmishers 
and  hold  him  in  check.  Soon  clouds  of  the  enemy’s  skirmishers  were 
seen  emerging  through  the  woods  on  the  hills  some  2 miles  distant,  and 
deploying  to  the  right  and  left.  Captain  Christian  met  them  about  a 
half  mile  in  our  front.  The  skirmishing  was  heavy.  I re-enforced  him 
with  Captain  [R.]  Debord’s  company,  and  Major  [G-.  W.  L.]  Ely  was 
ordered  to  the  command  of  the  detachment.  After  several  hours  of 
skirmishing,  the  detachment  returned  about  3 p.  m.,  being  obliged  to 
fall  back,  as  both  their  flanks  were  threatened,  having  been  left  uncov- 
ered by  the  retiring  of  our  skirmishers  of  other  regiments.  In  this  day’s 
skirmishing  we  lost  two  men,  who  were  killed  or  captured. 

All  this  day  (the  19th),  20th,  and  21st,  heavy  black  columns  of  the 
enemy,  or  clouds  of  dust  marking  their  movements,  were  seen  pouring 
through  the  timber  over  the  hills,  taking  positions  where  they  were  con- 
cealed by  the  irregularities  of  the  ground.  As  these  columns  came  up 
into  position,  they  opened  on  us  with  cannon  and  rifled  musketry,  which 
increased  hour  by  hour  with  their  augmenting  numbers,  untii  the  up- 
roar and  rattle  was  almost  incessant  and  very  grand.  We  returned  the 
tire  fiercely,  but  the  irregularities  of  the  ground  appeared  to  protect  the 
enemy  as  effectually  as  we  were  sheltered  by  our  breastworks.  On  the 
21st,  our  two  guns  had  become  disabled ; several  of  the  gunners  were 
killed  or  wounded  ; two  guns,  with  their  detachments  from  another  bat- 
tery, under  Lieutenant  Howard  [Harrod],  were  brought  into  the  fort 
to  supply  their  place.  The  investment  of  the  city,  as  afterward  ap- 
peared, was  this  day  (the  21st)  completed.  , 

At  an  early  hour  of  the  morning  of  Friday,  May  22,  the  enemy  opened 
a most  furious  cannonade  and  fire  of  musketry,  which  were  continued 
with  occasionally  varying  intensity  till  10  a.  m.  This  was  the  hour 
designated  in  the  enemy’s  orders,  as  afterward  appeared,  for  a general 
assault  on  our  lines  throughout  their  entire  length.  There  was  a sud- 
den, sullen  silence  of  the  enemy’s  artillery.  Hitherto  the  positions  of 
the  enemy  were  known  only  by  the  flash  of  their  guns  and  the  clouds 
ot  smoke  which  enveloped  their  heads.  Instantaneously — the  enemy 
springing  up  from  the  hollows  and  valleys  to  our  right  and  front — the 
, earth  was  black  with  their  close  columns,  and  ere  Private  Brooks  could 
well  exclaim,  u Here  they  come,”  they  were  surging  on  within  a few  paces 
of  the  foot  of  our  works.  The  assault  on  the  fort  and  lines  of  the  right 
of  the  Second  Texas  was  made  in  a column  of  five  regiments,  with  a 
regiment  front,  and  with  stormers  provided  with  tools  and  implements. 
Hashing  forward  in  good  order,  they  were  hurled  against  our  works 
with  the  utmost  fury  and  determination.  The  Second  Texas  was  ready  5 


388  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXYI. 

standing  up  boldly  on  the  banquette , and  exposing  their  persons  to  the 
fire  of  ten  times  our  numbers,  my  men  received  the  enemy  with  a most 
resolute  and  murderous  fire;  my  cannon  belched  canister;  my  men 
made  the  air  reel  with  yells  and  shouts  as  they  saw  the  earth  strewn 
with  the  enemy’s  dead.  One  of  the  enemy’s  regiments  staggered  and 
was  thrown  into  utter  confusion.  Our  men,  too,  fell  thick  and  fast ; the 
detachment  of  cannoneers  suffered  particularly.  The  enemy  still  rushed 
forward  boldly,  for,  reaching  the  foot  of  our  works,  they  were  in  security. 
Such  was  the"  profile  of  the  works  and  the  configuration  of  the  adjoining 
ground  in  front  that  the  fire  of  the  fort  could  not  reach  men  on  the  glacis 
or  in  the  road,  which  was  here  worn  into  a trench  at  its  foot.  Such, 
too,  was  the  outline  of  our  lines,  my  fort  being  thrown  so  farm  advance 
of  the  general  outline,  and  my  rifle-pits  on  my  right  receding  by  so  obtuse 
an  angle,  as  already  stated,  that  no  portion  of  my  front  or  left  was  com- 
manded by  any  other  portion  of  our  lines  ; in  a word,  I had  no  flanking 
arrangements.  This  secure  position  of  the  enemy  would  cover  some 
few  hundred  men,  and  communicated,  at  not  more  than  20  paces  dis- 
tance, with  the  deep,  irregular  valley  on  the  right.  From  this  and  other 
more  distant  positions  behind  the  crests  formerly  spoken  of,  the  enemy 
maintained  an  incessant  and  fierce  storm  of  Minies,  under  cover  of 
which  he  made  several  very  daring  attempts  to  carry  the  fort,  clamber- 
ing up  in  force  the  external  slope  of  the  parapet.  As  the  enemy  could 
not  be  seen  until  he  should  have  mounted  the  superior  slope  and  be 
ready  to  dash  in,  I ordered  the  front  rank  next  the  parapet  to  maintain 
the  fire,  and  placed  the  rear  rank  on  bended  knees,  with  guns  loaded 
and  bayonets  fixed  and  at  a charge,  ready  to  receive  the  enemy,  alter- 
nating "the  position  of  the  ranks  as  their  guns  became  heated.  Four 
paces  to  the  rear  I placed  a reserve,  lying  on  the  ground,  with  guns 
loaded  and  bayonets  fixed  in  like  manner.  This  reserve  was  obliged  to 
take  this  recumbent  posture,  for  the  central  space  within  the  fort  was 
terribly  searched  by  the  enemy’s  Minies  through  our  embrasures.  Be- 
sides several  abortive  attempts,  there  were  during  this  day  three  notable 
and  most  determined  movements  to  sweep  over  the  top  of  our  works 
and  dash  with  the  bayonet  into  the  fort. 

The  traverses  between  the  two  embrasures  were  made  in  part  with 
cotton  bags  ; the  embrasures  were  reveted  with  cotton  bags.  Early  in 
the  day  these  cotton  bags  were  displaced  and  uncovered  of  dirt  by  the 
enemy’s  artillery ; the  Minie  balls  playing  on  them  incessantly  bowed 
out  the  cotton  as  if  from  the  flue  of  a gin-stand,  and  scattered  it  all  over 
the  area  of  the  fort.  It  was  ignited  from  the  muzzles  of  the  enemy’s  rifles, 
the  air  was  filled  with  smoke,  and  the  fire  was  making  its  way  to  the 
ammunition  boxes.  The  middle  of  the  fort  was  swept  within  2 feet  of  ! 
the  ground  with  Minies.  Accordingly,  I ordered  men,  lying  flat  on 
the  earth,  to  brush  away  with  their  hands  the  burning  cotton,  and  thus 
prevented  the  ignition  and  explosion  of  the  ammunition.  One  of  my 
cannons  was  disabled  and  knocked  out  of  battery  early  in  the  day.  The 
other  could  not  be  depressed  so  as  to  reach  the  enemy  at  the  foot  of  the 
works.  The  detachment  was  so  weakened  by  the  dead,  wounded,  and 
missing,  that  there  were  scarcely  men  enough  to  serve  it.  It  remained  j 
idle  for  several  hours.  About  2 o’clock  I ordered  it  to  be  run  up  into 
battery  and  fired.  As  the  last  remaining  corporal  raised  himself  over 
the  trail  to  aim,  a Minie  ball,  within  15  inches  of  the  platform,  passed 
through  his  heart  and  he  rolled  over  dead. 

In  one  of  the  furious  assaults  the  enemy  mounted  the  parapet  to  near 
its  superior  slope.  Numbers  of  them  were  pouring  a murderous  fire 
through  our  right  embrasure,  amid  the  smoke  of  the  burning  cotton, 


Chat.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


389 


which  enveloped  and  almost  blinded  the  men  in  this  angle  of  the  fort, 
and  they  were  apparently  on  the  eve  of  dashing  in.  1 shouted,  “Vol- 
unteers to  clear  that  embrasure!”  Four  men  sprang  to  the  platform— 
; Sergeant  [William  T.]  Spence,  of  Company  B,  and  Privates  [T.  E.l  Bag- 
well,  [A.  S.]  Kittridge,  and  [J.  A.]  Stewart,  of  Company  C— and,  dis- 
charging their  guns  within  5 paces  of  the  muzzles  of  the  assailants, 
hurled  them  back  headlong  into  the  ditch  outside.  The  repulse  was 
decisive.  Bagwell  fell  dead  on  the  platform  ; Spence  fell  by  his  side, 
shot  through  the  brain.  He  lingered  a few  days.  To  clear  the  outside 
ditch,  spherical  case  were  used  as  hand-grenades,  and,  it  is  believed, 
with  good  effect.  After  the  repulse  of  this  assault,  which  was  about  3 
p.  m.,  there  was  for  an  hour  or  more  a great  slackening  of  the  enemy’s 
fire.  He  despaired.,  as  it  appeared,  of  being  able  to  carry  our  works  t>y 
an  unsupported  assault  in  front,  and  ordered  an  attack  to  be  made  on 
our  left.  A heavy  column  came  marching  up  the  valley  already  de- 
! scribed  as  debouching  in  the  interval  on  our  left. 

. Early  in  the  day  I had  observed  our  exposed  condition  on  this  side, 
and  had  asked  for  support  from  the  reserves.  It  was  now  at  hand  and 
opportunely,  for  my  numbers  were  so  reduced  by  killed  and  wounded 
that  I could  ill  spare  any  considerable  body  from  my  front.  It  was  now 
about  5 p.  m.  The  reserve,  some  Arkansas  and  Missouri  [troops],  under 
I General  Green,  hesitated  for  a moment,  and  allowed  a most  gallant 
lieutenant  to  get  some  20  paces  in  advance  of  his  company.  I ordered 
instantly  Captain  [J.  J.]  McGinnis’  company,  which  was  in  the  rifle-pits 
to  the  right,  to  march  to  the  left,  crossing  the  gorge  of  the  fort,  to  their 
aid,  but  as  this  company  was  coming  into  position,  the  Missourians 
dashed  forward,  and,  after  half  an  hour’s  sharp  fighting,  they  repulsed 
the  enemy  most  gallantly.  This  approach  of  the  enemy’s  column  on 
the  left  and  the  fighting  was  the  signal  for  the  renewal  of  his  attack  in 
| front.  The  firing  was  very  brisk,  but  the  assault  was  feeble  compared 
with  the  fierce  onslaughts  earlier  in  the  day.  The  day  was  now  drawing 
to  a close.  As  the  shades  of  the  night  were  setting  in,  the  enemy’s  fire 
slowly  and  sullenly  slackened.  It  ceased  with  the  dark.  The  enemy 
returned  to  their  covers  in  the  hollows  and  valleys. 

Our  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  is  set  forth  in  detail  in  the  appended 
statement  of  casualties.  To  these  should  be  added  the  killed  and 
wounded  of  the  section  of  batteries  serving  with  the  Second  Texas  In- 
fantry during  the  first  days  of  the  investment  and  assault,  as  also  of 
several  volunteers.  The  1’oss  of  the  enemy,  considering  the  numbers 
engaged  on  either  side,  was  enormous.  The  ground  in  our  front  and 
along  the  road,  and  either  side  of  the  road  for  several  hundred  yards 
way  to  the  right,  was  thickly  strewn  with  their  dead.  In  numbers 
of  instances  two  and  three  dead  bodies  were  piled  on  each  other. 
Along  the  road  for  more  than  200  yards  the  bodies  lay  so  thick  that 
one  might  have  walked  the  whole  distance  on  them  without  touching 
the  ground.  It  was  discovered  on  visiting  our  front  after  dark  that  the 
enemy  had  dug  numerous  holes  in  our  glacis  for  protection  against  our 
i fire.  Major  Fly  had  these  holes  filled,  and,  to  prevent  their  being 
opened  again  for  a like  purpose,  he  had  buried  in  them  27  Yankee  car- 
! passes.  During  this  night  and  tbe  following  one  the  enemy  were  busy 
in  wheeling  off  their  wounded  and  dead.  My  men  supplied  themselves 
with  Enfield  rifles $ we  had  upward  of  200  surplus  arms. 

On  the  25th,  there  was  a truce  for  burying  the  Yankee  dead  which 
had  not  been  removed.  More  than  100  dead  bodies,  by  count,  were 
buried  $ these,  including  the  27  buried  in  the  glacis  and  the  much  larger 
number  carried  off  by  night,  would  make  the  whole  number  killed  in 


390 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXYL 


front  of  the  Texas  lines  on  this  day  at  the  most  moderate  estimate  500 
men.  Major  [Isaac  H.j  Elliott,  of  the  Thirty-third  Illinois,  one  of  the 
columns  of  five  regiments,  has,  since  the  surrender  of  Vicksburg,  stated 
their  killed  at  000  and  their  wounded  at  1,200  on  this  day  in  front  of 
the  Texas  lines.  On  the  day  of  the  truce  the  ground  was  still  strewn 
with  guns  by  the  many  hundreds. 

The  morning  report  of  the  Second  Texas  Infantry  on  the  17th  ex- 
hibits an  aggregate  of  468.  The  artillery  detachments  and  volunteers 
will  about  balance  the  numbers  of  the  regiment  who  were  for  different 
reasons  absent  from  the  lines.  In  considering  all  the  circumstances,  it 
will  appear  that  the  Second  Texas  killed  more  than  their  whole  number, 
and  wounded  three  times  their  number  of  the  enemy  on  this  hard-fought 
day.  This  is  not  surprising  when  we  consider  the  determination  with 
which  the  enemy  fought  from  10  o’clock  in  the  morning  till  dark,  within 
from  20  to  400  paces  of  the  muzzles  of  our  rifles.  They  were  cheered 
on,  too,  by  seeing  a redan  of  ours  some  600  to  800  yards  to  my  right 
carried  by  their  soldiers  at  the  hottest  of  the  assault,  and  their  flag 
flaunting  triumphantly  on  its  parapet.  It  was  stated  to  me  by  their 
officers  on  the  day  of  the  truce  that  they  had  driven  our  men  at  Baker’s 
Creek  and  at  Champion’s  Hill  so  easily  and  furiously  before  them  that 
officers  and  men  came  up  to  our  works  with  the  utmost  confidence  of 
sweeping  over  our  lines  at  the  first  assault,  and  of  carrying  the  city  by 
the  first  coup  de  main  ; that  the  morale  of  their  army  was  perfect,  and, 
when  darkness  found  them  outside  and  repulsed,  they  were  as  much 
astonished  as  chagrined.  The  companies  of  my  regiment  in  the  fort 
and  rifle-pits  on  the  right  were  so  reduced  by  killed  and  wounded,  and 
our  room  being  somewhat  increased  by  the  removal  of  the  two  pieces  of 
artillery,  the  four  companies  first  posted  on  the  lines  of  the  left  were  on 
May  — moved  into  the  fort.  Failing  to  carry  the  city  by  assault,  the 
enemy  applied  himself  to  a siege  in  regular  form,  and  constructed  his 
earthworks  with  almost  incredible  diligence  and  activity.  Cannons 
placed  in  battery  soon  frowned  on  us  from  every  eminence,  and  rifle- 
pits  with  breastworks  bristled  everywhere  in  front  of  our  lines.  From 
the  commencement  of  the  siege  in  form  there  was  a fierce  cannonade 
once,  twice,  thrice,  or  even  oftener  in  the  twenty-four  hours,  with  oc- 
casional shots  at  irregular  intervals $ an  incessant  stream  of  Minies 
swept  just  above  the  upper  slope  of  our  parapet,  increasing  in  strength 
day  after  day,  as  rifle-pit  after  rifle-pit  was  constructed.  This  stream 
was  kept  up  from  dawn  till  dark,  whether  any  one  was  seen  on  our  works 
or  not.  Let,  however,  a head  appear,  and  the  whir  of  a hundred  Minies 
instantly  hissed  around  it.  This  constant  firing  rendered  the  position 
in  our  rear  unsafe ; several  men  were  there  wounded. 

On  May  29,  at  3 a.  m.,  it  being  yet  dark,  a sudden,  exceedingly  rapid, 
and  most  sublime  cannonade  burst  on  us.  The  hills  trembled  and 
flashed  with  flame — the  fuses  and  fragments  of  spherical  case  streamed 
with  fire  over  our  heads.  Wer  anticipated  an  assault.  I could  not  per- 
ceive any  evidence  of  one  being  attempted.  Was  this  cannonade  to 
demoralize  % Was  it  to  exhaust,  by  fatigue,  by  compelling  us  to  be  ever 
on  the  alert  ? The  immense  superiority  of  the  enemy  in  artillery  prac- 
tice, our  scarcity  of  ammunition,  and  the  searching  fire  through  the  em- 
brasures, as  well  of  Minies  as  of  shot,  induced  me  early  to  ask  permis- 
sion to  fill  up  and  obliterate  the  embrasures.  An  occasional  elongated 
ball  would  pass  through  the  upper  part  of  oar  parapet,  where  it  was 
scant  16  feet  thick,  and  brain  or  wound  men  within.  As  some  balls, 
after  traversing  the  parapet  lower  down,  lodged  against  the  weak  revet- 
ment of  the  interior  slope,  16  feet  of  earth  was  thus  seen  to  be  about 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


391 


the  measure  of  the  penetration  of  the  enemy’s  6-pounder  and  12  pounder 
elongated  shot.  For  better  protection,  I added  about  2 feet  to  the 
thickness  of  the  parapet.  In  general,  the  enemy’s  ball  and  shell  thrown 
into  our  parapet  buried  themselves  with  little  or  no  perceptible  dis- 
placement of  earth,  except  those  striking  the  superior  slope  scooped  out 
for  themselves  a passage,  throwing  heavy  masses  and  sometimes  strew- 
ing clods  of  earth  over  our  men.  My  men  were  neither  idle  nor  dis- 
spirited.  They  urgently  requested  permission,  as  far  as  our  inferiority 
in  numbers  would  enable  them,  to  return  shot  for  shot,  and  with  interest, 
but  I daily  received  orders  and  admonitions  to  husband  my  ammuni- 
tion, for  our  supply  was  small. 

At  diiferent  times  throughout  the  siege  the  enemy  made  abortive  at- 
tempts to  assault  our  fort.  His  men,  with  a furious  rattle  of  musketry, 
would  spring  to  the  top  of  their  works,  as  if  urged  to  dash  forward,  but 
the  prompt  response  of  the  rifles  of  the  Second  Infantry,  al  ways  on  the 
alert,  nipped  their  eagerness,  and  they  dropped  back.  Occasionally, 
too,  there  were  movements  on  the  enemy’s  lines  during  the  night,  which 
led  to  the  suspicion  that  a night  attack  was  contemplated.  This  appre- 
hension, and  the  daily  increasing  proximity  of  the  enemy’s  works  to  our 
lines,  made  it  prudent  to  keep  a portion  of  our  men  (sometimes  one- 
half,  sometimes  one-third)  under  arms  during  the  night  as  well  as  day. 
All  our  men  at  all  times  slept  on  their  arms,  and,  as  they  were  never 
relieved,  but  remained  at  all  times  at  their  post,  the  fatigue  was  very 
great.  They  did  their  duty  not  only  without  a murmur,  but  with  gaiety. 

June  — , about  midday,  ball  followed  ball  from  the  enemy’s  cannon 
with  such  rapidity  and  precision  that  a clear  breach  of  full  3 feet  in 
depth  was  effected  in  our  parapet  near  the  right  salient.  The  revetment 
was  torn  in  splinters.  It  was  repaired  without  delay  amid  the  fire  of 
the  enemy’s  Minies. 

Shortly  after  the  failure  of  the  general  assault  of  May  22,  it  was  ap- 
parent that  the  enemy  was  concentrating  his  operations  on  the  right 
against  the  entrance  into  the  city  by  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road,  and  from 
the  middle  of  June  through  its  close  and  the  first  days  of  July  the  con- 
test was  becoming  an  almost  hand-to-hand  fight. 

The  enemy,  having  completed  his  parallels,  pushed  forward  three 
saps  against  the  lines  occupied  by  the  Second  Texas,  two  of  them  di- 
rected against  the  fort.  Of  these,  one  advanced  toward  the  right  salient 
parallel  with  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road $ the  other  advanced  toward  the 
left,  ascending  obliquely  the  sharp  hill  heretofore  described  as  being 
situated  to  the  front  and  between  the  debouches  of  the  two  valleys. 
Large  sap-rollers  were  moved  along  the  head  of  each  sap  for  the  protec- 
tion of  his  sappers.  The  sap-rollers  were  cylinders  some  7 or  8 feet  long 
and  4J  in  diameter,  and  made  by  rolling  a matting  woven  of  wire  for 
the  warp  and  cane  for  the  filling  around  a central  core.  Six-[pounder] 
or  12-pounder  shot  did  not  materially  damage  them.  Various  attempts 
were  made  by  us  to  burn  them ; at  length  successfully.  The  sap  on 
the  right  was  now  within  18  feet  of  our  ditch.  Fire-balls  of  cotton 
soaked  in  spirits  of  turpentine  were  thrown  against  the  sap-roller. 
These  fire-balls  were  drawn  into  the  sap  and  extinguished.  At  length 
an  18-pounder  shell  wrapped  with  the  soaked  cotton  was  bowled  against 
the  sap-roller.  Its  explosion,  as  one  of  the  enemy  was  seizing  it,  made 
them  w^ary  of  our  fire-balls.  The  sap-roller  was  ignited  and  thoroughly 
consumed.  The  other  sap,  protected  by  its  roller,  was  pushed  within  20 
feet  of  our  left.  The  core  of  this  sap-roller  was  two  cotton  bales  placed 
end  to  end.  A fuse  fired  from  a smooth-bore  musket  ignited  one  end  of 
the  core  of  cotton.  An  incessant  shower  of  Minies  from  our  works  made 


392  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXYI. 

it  perilous  for  the  enemy  to  attempt  to  extinguish  it.  This  sap-roller, 
too,  was  wholly  consumed. 

This  was  the  state  of  things  the  last  days  of  June  and  first  days  of 
July.  At  this  time  I received  orders  to  husband  my  Enfield  cartridges, 
as  there  were  no  more  to  be  issued.  My  men  were  all  armed  with  En- 
fields.  I counted  my  ammunition;  we  had  54  rounds  to  a man,  all 
told.  The  condition  of  the  regiment  in  some  other  respects  deserves  to 
be  stated. 

On  May  2,  the  regiment  left  camp,  on  Chickasaw  Bayou,  without  a 
change  of  clothes  and  with  only  a single  blanket  to  a man.  Dirty  and 
ragged  the  men  must  needs  be.  During  the  siege  there  were  several 
showers  of  rain,  two  of  which  were  drenching.  The  loamy  soil  of  this 
region  was  rendered  a mire.  The  men  in  the  trenches  were  over  shoe 
in  mud.  With  only  a single  blanket,  they  were  obliged  to  bivouac  in 
the  mud.  A June  sun  soon  dried  it  up.  Nothing  could  daunt  these 
men,  impassive  to  fatigue  and  patient  to  endure.  My  chief  apprehen- 
sion was  lest  the  enemy  should  make  an  assault  when  our  guns  were 
wet,  knowing  that  he  was  furnished  with  every  appliance  for  comfort 
and  for  securing  his  arms  and  ammunition.  Early  during  the  siege 
large  numbers  of  animals,  chiefly  mules  and  horses,  were  killed  within 
our  lines  by  the  enemy’s  shot.  These  were  hauled  in  the  night  and 
thrown  into  the  Mississippi  Biver.  The  water  next  the  bank  teemed 
with  maggots,  so  as  to  be  unfit  for  any  use.  The  cisterns  in  the  neigh- 
borhood being  exhausted  or  forbidden,  my  men  were  soon  reduced  to 
the  sipe  water  got  from  shallow  wells  dug  in  the  hollows  immediately 
in  our  rear.  This  was  indifferent  in  quality  and  barely  sufficient  for 
our  scanty  cooking  and  drink.  Sentinels  were  placed  over  the  wells, 
that  none  might  be  wasted  for  purposes  of  cleanliness.  Our  rations  were 
reduced  to  little  more  than  sufficient  to  sustain  life.  Five  ounces  of 
musty  corn-meal  and  pea  flour  were  nominally  issued  daily.  In  point 
of  fact,  this  allowance  did  not  exceed  three  ounces.  All  the  unripe,  half- 
grown  peaches,  the  green  berries  growing  on  the  briars,  all  were  care- 
fully gathered  and  simmered  in  a little  sugar  and  water,  and  used  for 
food.  Every  eatable  vegetable  around  the  works  was  hunted  up  for 
greens.  Some  two  or  three  men  appeared  to  succumb  and  die  from  in- 
anition for  want  of  food,  but  the  health  of  the  men  did  not  seem  to 
suffer  immediately  from  want  of  rations,  but  all  gradually  emaciated 
and  became  weak,  and  toward  the  close  of  the  siege  many  were  found 
with  swollen  ankles  and  symptoms  of  incipient  scurvy. 

A fact  already  perhaps  sufficiently  established  was  illustrated — the 
power  of  earthen  embankments  to  resist  artillery,  and  the  ability  of  true 
soldiers,  protected  by  a parapet  and  ditch,  to  resist  for  a long  period 
numbers  which  would  be  otherwise  overwhelming.  From  the  assault 
of  May  22  till  the  surrender,  the  number  of  the  enemy  operating  directly 
in  front  and  directly  against  the  lines  manned  by  the  Second  Texas  was 
ten  times  greater  than  the  strength  of  this  regiment,  and  he  was  greatly 
superior  in  every  appliance.  When  the  enemy  took  possession  of  the 
lines,  after  the  surrender,  officers  and  men  expressed  their  unfeigned 
surprise  and  mortification  at  the  weakness  of  our  defenses.  The  spade  | 
is  a military  weapon. 

Another  matter  appears  to  me  deserving  consideration  in  connection 
with  the  Minie  rifle  in  the  hands  of  veterans : The  execution  of  the  rifle 
musket,  at  long  canister  range,  appears  to  me  superior  to  canister 
thrown  from  a 6-pounder  or  12-pounder  howitzer.  The  canister  may  be 
more  demoralizing  to  raw  troops. 

The  question  of  our  ability  to  cut  our  way  out  of  Vicksburg,  through 


Ciiap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  393 

the  enemy’s  lines,  has  been  raised.  What  may  have  been  practicable 
early  in  the  siege  and  at  another  point  is  unknown  to  me ; but  at  the 
time  it  was  understood  the  siege  could  not  be  raised ; from  without  the 
enemy  had  then  constructed  in  my  front,  and  for  miles  in  depth,  a 
tremendous  hornet’s  nest  of  lines  and  works,  bristling  with  cannon  and 
bayonets  and  crammed  with  soldiers.  An  attempt  to  cut  out  might 
have  been  successful ; it  would  surely  have  been  attended  with  a terrific 
slaughter  of  our  men. 

In  mentioning  individuals  who  distinguished  themselves,  I fear  I may 
omit  some  who  deserve  to  be  mentioned.  Major  [G-.  W.  L.]  Fly  was 
greatly  distinguished  for  his  zeal,  activity,  and  fearlessness ; Adjutant 
[B.  W.]  Lecompt  is  entitled  to  the  same  commendation ; Oapt.  William 
Christian  was  conspicuous  for  his  watchfulness,  zeal,  and  promptness. 
Placed  on  our  extreme  right,  Captain  Christian’s  watchful  attention 
enabled  him  to  signal  movements  of  the  enemy  which  could  not  be  seen 
from  the  fort. 

The  untiring  energy  of  Captain  [R]  Debord  was  worthy  of  all  praise. 
Captain  [A.F.]  Gammell  and  Lieutenant  [R  S.]  Henry,  who  fell  gallantly 
at  their  posts,  were  models  of  zealous  and  active  duty.  To  name  all 
the  officers  who  behaved  nobly,  and  also  the  enlisted  men,  would  be  al- 
most to  recite  the  rolls  of  the  regiment.  The  exceptions  to  this  com- 
mendation are  very  few  indeed. 

In  this  report  I have  attributed  a paramount  importance  to  the  posi- 
tion occupied  by  the  Second  Texas  Infantry,  and  to  their  conduct  and 
operations  during  this  memorable  siege ; it  is  because  they  deserve  to  be 
so  estimated.  The  brigadier-general  commanding  showed  his  true  ap- 
preciation of  the  importance  of  this  point  (the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road)  by 
moving  the  Second  Texas  out  of  its  place  in  brigade,  after  midnight  May 
17,  to  man  this  position.  Considering  the  entire  line  of  defenses  of 
Vicksburg  on  the  land  side  as  divided  into  two  portions,  a right  and 
a left,  the  fort  of  the  Second  Texas  was  the  point  of  the  right  portion  of 
our  lines  upon  which  the  enemy  concentrated  his  operations  and  attack 
after  the  failure  of  the  general  assault  of  May  22 ; the  defense  of  the 
entrance  into  the  city  by  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road  was  the  defense  of 
Vicksburg  on  the  right.  It  appeared  to  me,  as  well  as  I could  judge 
from  my  position,  that  there  was  in  like  manner  a similar  point  of  con- 
centrated attack  near  the  entrance  of  the  Jackson  road  on  the  left.  Up 
to  the  last  moment  of  the  siege,  the  men  bore  with  unrepining  cheerful- 
ness and  undaunted  spirit  the  fatigues  of  almost  continual  position 
under  arms,  of  frequent  working  parties  by  night  and  day,  the  broiling . 
of  the  midday  sun  in  summer  with  no  shelter,  the  chilling  night  dews, 
the  cramped  inaction  at  all  times  in  the  trenches,  short  rations,  at  times 
drenched  with  rain  and  bivouacking  in  the  mud,  together  with  the  dis- 
comforts inseparable  from  their  having  no  change  of  clothing  and  an 
insufficient  supply  of  water  for  cleanliness,  tired,  ragged,  dirty,  bare- 
foot, hungry,  covered  with  vermin,  with  a scanty  supply  of  ammunition, 
almost  hand  to  hand  with  the  enemy,  and  beleaguered  on  every  side, 
with  no  prospect  and  little  hope  of  relief — when  I think  of  their  cheer- 
fulness and  buoyant  courage  under  these  circumstances,  the  alacrity 
with  which  they  performed  every  duty,  it  appears  to  me  no  commenda- 
tion of  these  soldiers  can  be  too  great. 

We  laid  down  our  arms — want  of  subsistence  and  want  of  ammuni- 
tion. The  laying  down  of  our  arms,  the  surrender  of  nearly  30,000  men, 
is  a misfortune  which  words  cannot  extenuate,  but  it  was  not  a wholly 
unredeemed  disaster.  The  Second  Texas  Infantry  achieved  one  vic- 
tory— they  utterly  destroyed  any  prestige  which  the  enemy  might  have 


394 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


heretofore  felt  when  the  soldiers  they  should  encounter  should  be  Tex- 
ans. And  this  was  evincedin  the  marked  and  special  respect  with  which 
the  enemy,  officers  and  men,  after  the  surrender,  during  our  stay  in 
Vicksburg,  were  wont  to  treat  and  speak  of  the  members  ot  the  Second 
Texas  Infantry.  When  the  Second  Texas  Infantry  marched  through 
the  chain  of  the  enemy’s  sentinels,  the  spirits  of  most  ot  the  men  were 
even  then  at  the  highest  pitch  of  lighting  valor.  Released  from  the 
obligation  of  their  parole,  and  arms  placed  in  their  hands,  they  would 
have  wheeled  about,  ready  and  confident. 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

ASHBEL  SMITH, 

Colonel  Second  Regiment  Texas  Volunteer  Infantry. 

Oapt.  J.  M.  Loughborough, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


ADDENDA. 

Report  of  the  killed , wounded , missing,  and  died  of  disease  dr  privation,  of  the  Second 
Regiment  Texas  Volunteer  Infantry,  in  the  siege  of  Vicksburg. 


Strength  of  the  regiment,  May  17,  1863 

Killed 

Wounded 

Missing 

Died  of  privation  or  sickness 

Recovered  perfectly 

Recovered  permanently  disabled 

Died  of  wounds 

Total  dead 

Total  dead  and  permanently  disabled - --  - 

Total  dead,  permanently  disabled,  and  missing 


468 

38 

73 

15 

11 

45 

21 

4 

53 

74 

89 

B.  W.  LECOMPT, 

Adjutant. 


No.  88. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  M.  L.  Smith , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Division. 

Headquarters  Smith’s  Division, 

Vicksburg , May  23,  1863. 

Major:  The  enemy  made  three  assaults  on  my  right  yesterday 
(Shoup’s  brigade),  were  each  time  handsomely  repulsed,  and  with  ap- 
parently considerable  loss.  Brigadier-General  Baldwin  was  wounded 
rather  severely  about  12  o’clock,  and  left  the  field.  One  prisoner  was 
taken  last  night.  Other  parts  of  the  line  were  free  from  assaults,  but 
sustained  a continuous  fire  from  sharpshooters  and  light  batteries.  No 
report  of  casualties  yet  received.  The  Seventeenth  and  Twenty-eighth 
[Twenty-ninth]  Louisiana  Regiments  were  detached  to  the  support  of 
General  Forney  early  in  the  afternoon,  and  have  not  rejoined  the 
division. 

The  30-pounder  Parrott  burst  yesterday  while  firing  on  an  advancing 
column  of  the  enemy. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  L.  SMITH, 

Major-General. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Citap.  XXX YI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


39£ 


Division  Headquarters, 

Ticks  burg,  May  28,  1803. 

Major  : Since  my  report  of  the  27th,  the  enemy  seem  to  have  finished 
crowning  the  line  of  hills  in  my  front  with  rifle-pits  and  batteries.  The 
enemy’s  fire  was  very  brisk  from  both  sharpshooters  and  artillery  dur- 
ing the  engagement  with  the  gunboat  Cincinnati,  but  gradually  slack- 
ened off,  and  mainly  ceased  at  sundown. 

A 24-pounder  siege  gun  was  dismounted  during  the  day  by  a Parrott 
gun,  but  is  again  serviceable. 

The  inspection  report  for  the  27th  is  herewith  inclosed.* 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  L.  SMITH, 

Major - General , Commanding. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Division  Headquarters, 

June  G,  1863. 

Major  : Everything  was  unusually  quiet  on  my  left  during  the  5th 
until  evening,  when  the  line  was  shelled  for  a time.  In  front  of  my 
center,  artillery  firing  continued  during  the  day  and  night ; the  32- 
pounder  was  somewhat  damaged,  but  can  probably  be  repaired  during 
the  day.  Captain  Adaire,  field  officer  of  the  night,  was  killed  while 
making  his  rounds. 

On  my  right  there  was  the  usual  amount  of  firing  from  sharpshooters 
and  artillery,  it  being  kept  up  from  the  latter  all  night.  Parties  of  the 
enemy  working  in  the  vicinity  of  the  stockade  were  fired  upon  last  night 
by  our  men,  but  it  is  not  thought  that  they  were  entirely  driven  off. 

A new  one-gun  battery  opened  yesterday  in  front  of  the  center  from 
the  opposite  ridge.  . 

Yery  respectfullv.  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  L.  SMITH, 

Major-  General. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Division  Headquarters, 

June  12,  1863. 

Major  : There  was  rather  an  increased  artillery  fire  on  the  part  of 
the  enemy  along  my  front  yesterday  and  last  night,  but  their  works 
remain  about  the  same. 

My  right,  apparently  the  point  of  danger,  is  being  daily  strengthened. 
The  two  24-pounder  siege  guns  on  my  line  near  Point  Hill  are  perma- 
nently disabled,  each  having  a trunnion  cracked  nearly  off ; they  are 
kept  loaded  with  grape,  and,  in  case  of  an  assault,  will  be  fired  at  least 
once  more. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  L.  SMITH, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


*Not  found. 


396 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Ciiap.  XXXVI. 


Division  Headquarters, 

June  15,  1863. 

Major  : Nothing  unexpected  has  occurred  during  the  past  twenty- 
four  hours  along  my  front.  The  enemy  is  gradually  approaching  redan 
on  the  right  of  the  stockade  $ counter  works  to  meet  him  are  being  con- 
structed. Artillery  firing  on  my  right  has  been  heavy  since  12  m.  last 
night. 

Verv  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

M.  L.  SMITH, 

Major- General. 

Maj.  B.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Division  Headquarters, 

June  20,  1863. 

Major  : The  enemy  made  no  new  demonstration  on  my  front  yester- 
day. They  continue  work  in  the  vicinity  of  the  redan,  apparently  con- 
structing something  similar  to  a third  parallel.  It  was  the  intention  to 
explode  one  of  the  mines  last  night,  but  there  being  no  indications  of  the 
enemy  working  in  immediate  proximity,  it  was  deferred. 

The  pickets  in  front  of  the  center  report  that  the  long-roll  was  beaten 
in  the  enemy’s  camp  about  2 o’clock  this  morning ; also  that  the  sound 
of  wagon  or  artillery  carriage  wheels  was  heard  at  the  same  time. 
Heavy  cannonade  along  the  whole  line  commenced  at  daylight ; still 
continuing. 

It  is  probable  that  the  force  in  front  of  me  has  diminished,  but  I am 
unable  to  ascertain  with  any  certainty. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  L.  SMITH, 
Major-General , Commanding. 


Maj.  B.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Division  Headquarters, 

June  22,  1863. 

Major  : The  last  twenty-four  [hours]  have  passed  about  as  usual. 
Considerable  sharpshooting  on  my  right.  Casualties  rather  greater  in 
number  than  for  some  days.  An  attempt  was  made  to  spring  one  of 
our  mines  last  night,  which  failed  from  some  peculiarity  which  exists  in 
the  igniting  of  powder  in  tubes.  The  trains  are  being  reprepared.  No 
essential  progress  has  been  made  by  the  enemy  in  their  work  of  ap- 
proach that  can  be  perceived. 

I am,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  L.  SMITH, 

Major- General , Commanding. 

Maj.  B.  W.  Memminger, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  East  Jjouisiana. 


Division  Headquarters, 

June  27,  1863. 

Major  : Nothing  of  interest  has  transpired  along  my  front  during 
the  past  twenty-four  hours,  with  the  exception  that  the  mines  near  the 


Chap.  XXXYL] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


397 


stockade  were  sprung-  last  night  about  2 o’clock.  The  explosion  took 
the  proper  direction,  and  it  is  thought  the  enemy  suffered.  Our  works 
remain  perfect. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  L.  SMITH, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


Maj.  E.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Mobile,  August  9,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  a brief  report  of  the  operations 
of  my  division  during  the  recent  siege  of  Vicksburg. 

The  line  of  defense  surrounding  the  city  was  divided  into  three  com- 
mands, corresponding  with  the  army  division,  one  of  -which  was  assigned 
to  me,  and  constituted  the  left  of  the  line.  The  left  of  my  division  rested 
on  the  river  above  the  city  and  extended  to  the  right  about  1J  miles, 
where  it  touched  Major-General  Forney’s  command.  The  division  con- 
sisted of  three  brigades ; General  Shoup,  commanding  the  Twenty-sixth, 
Twenty-seventh,  and  Twenty-eighth  [Twenty-ninth]  Louisiana,  on  the 
right ; General  Baldwin,  commanding  the  Seventeenth  and  Thirty-first 
Louisiana,  the  Fourth  and  Forty-sixth  Mississippi,  occupying  the  center; 
General  Vaughn,  commanding  the  Sixtieth,  Sixty-first,  Sixty-second 
Tennessee,  and  Mississippi  State  troops,  under  Brigadier-General  Har- 
ris, together  with  a detachment  of  Loring’s  command,  on  the  left. 

The  works  occupied  by  me,  and  which  may  be  termed  my  front,  were 
aloug  a narrow  ridge,  and  consisted  of  a line  of  rifle  trenches,  with  points 
prepared  for  field  artillery.  This  point  was  rather  strong,  although 
parallel  with  it,  and  some  600  yards  distant,  ran  another  ridge  of  the 
same  elevation,  and  in  every  respect  similar,  which  was  occupied  by 
the  enemy,  and  afforded  excellent  positions  for  their  batteries  as  well 
as  sharpshooters,  and,  when  prepared  with  field-works  looking  in  our 
direction,  became  itself  as  difficult  to  assail  as  our  own  line.  Many 
advantages  would  have  resulted  from  occupying  this  parallel  ridge, 
and  it  was  included  in  the  system  of  defense;  but,  increasing  as  it  did 
the  length  of  the  entire  line  of  defense,  was  abandoned  for  want  of  suf- 
cient  force  to  occupy  it. 

The  enemy  made  his  appearance  before  the  works  on  my  right  early 
in  the  afternoon  of  May  18,  and  immediately  attacked  the  position 
with  artillery  and  infantry.  They  were  first  met  by  the  Twenty -seventh 
Louisiana,  subsequently  by  the  Seventeenth  and  Thirty-first  Louisiana 
and  Forty-sixth  Mississippi,  in  advance  of  the  line,  and  held  at  bay  until 
dark  terminated  the  attack.  During  the  night  of  the  18th,  my  troops 
and  artillery  were  all  withdrawn  within  the  main  lines,  and  placed  in 
positions  from  which  they  were  never  for  an  instant  dislodged  during 
the  entire  siege. 

On  the  19th,  the  enemy’s  main  forces  arrived,  and  proceeded  at  once  to 
make  a direct  assault  on  my  right.  The  first  effort  was  directed  against 
the  center  of  Shoup’s  brigade ; but  being  exposed  to  a heavy  and  well- 
directed  fire,  the  enemy  broke  and  fled.  Eeforming  again,  a second  ad- 
vance was  attempted  against  my  extreme  right,  and  a bold  effort  made 
to  rush  over  and  into  the  works.  The  assaulting  column  seemed  to  con- 
sist of  six  or  seven  regiments,  and  was  formed  behind  an  elevation,  con- 
cealing it  from  sight.  After  coming  into  view,  it  moved  confidently  and 
determinedly  forward.  The  Twenty-sixth  and  Twenty-seventh  Louisiana, 


398 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVX 


supported  by  the  First  Missouri,  in  reserve,  received  the  charge  with  a 
withering  fire,  and  after  the  second  volley  the  enemy  fled  in  confusion, 
leaving  five  colors  on  the  field,  and  the  ground  strewn  with  the  dead 
and  wounded.  One  or  two  feeble  attempts  to  rally  were  easily  repulsed, 
aud  the  day  closed  with  the  artillery  and  sharpshooters  keeping  up  a 
continuous  and  heavy  fire. 

The  20th  and  21st  were  spent  by  the  enemy  in  erecting  new  batteries 
and  keeping  up  from  daylight  till  dark  the  heaviest  possible  firing, both 
of  musketry  and  artillery. 

The  22d  passed  in  the  same  manner  until  about  2 p.  m.,  when  a column 
was  discovered  advancing  against  the  right  of  Shoup’s  brigade.  It  was 
immediately  driven  back.  Another  then  approached  on  the  right  of  the 
center.  This  was  dispersed  without  great  effort  and  with  considerable 
loss.  Again  the  enemy  appeared  in  increased  force  on  my  right  and 
Forney’s  left.  He  was  promptly  repulsed  with  heavy  loss.  This  termi- 
nated the  day’s  operations,  with  the  exception  of  the  same  heavy  fire  of 
musketry  and  artillery  kept  up  until  dark  along  my  entire  front.  After 
these  several  decided  repulses,  the  enemy  seemed  to  have  abandoned  the 
idea  of  taking  by  assault,  and  went  vigorously  at  work  to  thoroughly 
invest  and  attack  by  regular  approaches ; and  the  history  of  one  day  is 
pretty  much  the  history  of  all. 

For  the  more  particular  description  of  operations  you  are  respectfully 
referred  to  the  daily  reports  of  operations  handed  in  during  the  siege. 
While  the  opposing  force  was  running  new  parallels,  establishing  new 
works  for  heavy  guns,  and  gradually  nearing  our  lines,  we  were  strength- 
ening our  positions,  protecting  the  men  with  traverses  and  bomb-proofs 
from  the  terrific  fire  of  shot  and  shell  constantly  poured  in  upon  them, 
and  which  only  ceased  at  times  when  the  enemy  seemed  to  have  tempo- 
rarily exhausted  their  supplies  of  ammunition.  The  fire  of  the  enemy 
was  only  occasionally  replied  to,  except  when  there  were  indications  of 
an  assault,  or  it  became  necessary  to  retard  or  stop  operations  on  some 
particular  work.  The  limited  amount  of  ammunition  on  hand  rendered 
this  course  necessary,  though  I am  inclined  to  think  caution  in  this  re- 
spect was  pushed  rather  to  an  extreme,  and  that  a little  more  firing 
would  have  proved  beneficial. 

Toward  the  close  of  the  siege  the  attack  was  mainly  carried  on  by 
mining.  Along  my  front  the  enemy  exploded  no  mines  on  us.  On  the 
contrary,  counter  ones  were  prepared,  and,  when  their  galleries  ap- 
proached within  proper  distance,  were  charged  and  fired,  and,  it  is  be- 
lieved, with  all  the  desired  effect. 

The  good  conduct  of  both  officers  and  men  during  the  forty-seven  days 
in  the  trenches  is  worthy  of  special  praise.  Neither  one  nor  the  other 
could  have  behaved  better ; and  all  credit  is  to  be  accorded  the  briga- 
dier-generals and  their  staffs  for  their  vigilance,  activity,  and  heroic 
example  set  to  their  soldiers. 

Brigadier-General  Baldwin  received  a severe  wound  early  in  the  siege, 
but  reported  for  duty  before  its  close,  and,  together  with  General  Shoup, 
receives  my  special  acknowledgments  for  gallant  services. 

The  heaviest  and  most  dangerous  attack  was  on  the  extreme  right,  and 
nobly  did  the  Twenty-sixth,  Twenty- seventh,  Twenty-eighth  [Twenty- 
ninth],  and  Thirty-first  Louisiana  repel  and  endure  it.  The  casualties 
among  the  officers  of  these  regiments  indicate  the  nature  of  the  de- 
fense required.  In  the  Twenty-sixth  Louisiana,  Major  [ W.  W.]  Martin, 
1 captain,  and  2 lieutenants  killed;  Col.  W.  Hall  severely  wounded. 
In  the  Twenty-seventh  Louisiana,  Lieutenant-Colonel  [L.  L.]  McLaurin, 
I captain,  and  1 lieutenant  killed ; Col.  L.  D.  Marks,  dangerously, 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


399 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

Major  [A.  S.]  Norwood,  1 captain,  and  1 lieutenant  severely  wounded. 
In  the  Twenty-eighth  [Twenty-ninth],  1 lieutenant  killed  and  3 lieuten- 
ants wounded.  In  the  Thirty-first,  Col.  [S.  H.]  Griffin  killed. 

Circumstances  arising  out  of  Lieutenant  General  Pemberton’s  orders 
have  prevented  my  obtaining  reports  from  Brigadier-Generals  Baldwin 
and  Vaughn;  hence,  to  continue  the  enumeration  further  is  impossible 
at  present,  and  from  the  same  cause  my  report  is  probably  less  com- 
plete than  if — since  my  arrival  from  Vicksburg,  where  I was  detained 
until  the  1st  instant — time  and  opportunity  had  been  afforded  me  for 
hearing  from  my  division  brigadiers. 

Of  the  following-named  officers  composing  my  staff  I have  to  speak 
in  terms  of  unqualified  satisfaction;  all  did  their  duty  intelligently, 
fearlessly,  promptly,  and  efficiently : Lieutenant-Colonel  [Edward]  Ivy, 
chief  of  artillery;  Major  [J.  G.]  Devereux,  assistant  adjutant- general; 
Major  [J.  F.]  Girault,  inspector- general ; Major  [T.  C.]  Fearn,  division 
quartermaster;  Captain  [M.]  McDonald,  ordnance  officer;  Lieutenant 
[G.  H.]  Frost  and  Lieutenant  [B.  M.]  Harrod,  aides  de  camp,  and  Cap- 
tain [Edward]  Hobart,  volunteer  aide-de-camp.  Also  Surgeon  Whit- 
field, acting  division  surgeon. 

To  the  brave  Colonel  Marks  and  his  gallant  regiment  (Twenty- 
seventh  Louisiana)  belongs  the  distinction  of  taking  the  first  colors, 
prisoners,  and  arms  lost  by  the  enemy  during  the  siege.  The  conduct 
of  the  entire  division  was  most  exemplary,  and  its  courage  and  cheer- 
fulness increased,  if  possible,  from  day  to  day  under  the  hardships  and 
privations  of  the  siege. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

M.  L.  SMITH, 
Major-General , C.  8.  Army. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  89. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  W.  F.  Baldwin , G.  8.  Army , commanding  First 

Brigade. 

Headquarters  First  Brigade,  Smith’s  Division, 

Vicksburg , July  10,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  respectfully  to  report  the  operations  of  my 
command  immediately  preceding  and  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg, 
which  terminated  on  the  4th  instant.  The  brigade  consisted  of  the  fol- 
lowing regiments,  to  wit : The  Seventeenth  Louisiana  Infantry,  Colonel 
[Robert]  Richardson ; the  Thirty-first  Louisiana  Infantry,  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  [S.  H.]  Griffin;  theFourth  Mississippi  Infantry,  Lieutenant-Colo- 
nel [T.  N.]  Adaire ; the  Forty-sixth  Mississippi  Infantry,  Colonel  [C. 
W.]  Sears.  To  these  other  troops  and  artillery  were  temporarily  at- 
tached, which  will  be  noticed  in  their  proper  sequence. 

On  Monday  evening,  May  4,  the  brigade  had  returned  from  the  ex- 
pedition to  Port  Gibson,  which  formed  the  subject  of  a previous  report. 

Next  evening,  the  5th  instant,  in  compliance  with  orders  from  divis- 
ion headquarters,  I moved  the  command  about  5 miles  southeast  of  the 
city,  on  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road.  Here  we  remained  until  Friday  morn- 
ing, the  8th,  when  I was  again  directed  to  move  to  Dr.  Nailor’s,  10  miles 
from  Vicksburg,  on  the  Warrenton  and  Hall’s  Ferry  road.  The  com- 


400 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


mand  was  kept  all  the  time  in  readiness  for  an  immediate  movement, 
supplied  with  two  days’  cooked  rations  in  haversacks,  two  days’  rations 
in  regimental  wagons,  and  two  days’  supplies  in  hands  of  brigade  com- 
missary. 

On  the  11th,  I was  directed  to  send  a regiment  to  picket  the  crossing 
of  the  Big  Black  at  Hamer’s  Ferry,  and  sent  the  Thirty-first  Louisiana 
on  this  duty.  The  same  night  I was  ordered  by  Major-General  Steven- 
son, commanding  the  right  wing  of  our  army,  to  move  to  the  Vicksburg 
and  Hall’s  Ferry  road,  and  relieve  General  Buford,  who  was  directed  to 
move  east.  The  movement  was  made  immediately  that  night.  Lieu- 
tenant [0.  E.]  Hooker,  with  four  pieces  from  Kidley’s  battery,  Withers’ 
artillery,  reported  to  me  for  duty.  I made  my  headquarters  near  Mr. 

D.  Whitaker’s.  The  Thirty-  first  Louisiana,  left  on  picket,  was  returned, 
and  the  next  two  days  were  spent  in  reconnoitering  the  ground  in  my 
front  in  the  direction  of  Hall’s  Ferry,  and  in  making  dispositions  for 
defense. 

On  the  14th,  I received  a communication  from  Brigadier-General 
Tilghman,  whose  headquarters  were  at  Mr.  Hubbard’s,  on  the  Baldwin’s 
Ferry  road,  advising  me  that  his  command  was  ordered  to  Big  Black 
Bridge. 

On  the  15th,  orders  were  received  from  Major-General  Forney,  com- 
manding the  district,  directing  me,  in  compliance  with  instructions  from 
the  lieutenant-general  commanding,  to  move  to  Mount  Alban  and  uto 
guard  all  approaches  to  Big  Black  Bridge,  particularly  from  the  river;” 
that  I should  be  assigned  the  command  of  all  troops  guarding  the  Big 
Black  Bridge  and  its  approaches,  front  and  rear.  Colonel  [T.  NT.]  Waul, 
with  his  Texas  Legion,  had  reported  to  me  just  before  the  reception  of 
this  order.  I had  directed  him  to  occupy  the  position  just  vacated  by 
General  Tilghman,  but  on  the  receipt  of  this  order  I moved  at  once  to 
Mount  Alban,  leaving  Colonel  Waul  at  the  point  I had  just  left.  My 
command  reached  Mount  Alban  at  6 p.  m.,  when  I received  a dispatch 
from  Brigadier- General  Vaughn,  commanding  at  Big  Black  Bridge,  ad- 
vising me  that  one  regiment  of  his  command  had  been  ordered  to  Ed- 
wards Depot.  In  accordance  with  previous  instructions,  I forwarded 
Lieutenant  Hooker,  with  his  four  pieces  of  artillery,  to  report  to  General 
Vaughn,  and  went  myself  the  same  night  to  consult  with  the  latter  and 
ascertain  the  means  of  defense  at  this  point.  Lieutenant-Colonel  [W. 
FT.]  Brown,  Twentieth  Mississippi,  commanding  battalion  of  mounted 
men,  was  also  directed  to  report  to  me.  I ordered  him  to  leave  sufficient 
pickets  for  observation  at  Hall’s  and  Hankin  son’s  Ferries,  and  to  report 
to  me  with  the  remainder  of  his  command  at  Mount  Alban.  The  Fourth 
Mississippi  was  held  in  readiness  to  move  at  a moment’s  notice  to  sup- 
port General  Vaughn,  at  the  bridge. 

On  Saturday,  the  16th  instant,  on  receiving  information  from  General 
Vaughn  that  the  enemy  were  supposed  to  be  advancing,  I forwarded 
the  Fourth  Mississippi  to  him,  and  on  the  evening  of  the  same  day  marched 
with  the  Seventeenth  Louisiana  and  Forty-sixth  Mississippi  to  Bovina, 
leaving  the  Thirty- first  Louisiana  at  Mount  Alban.  That  night  rumors 
came  of  a disaster  to  our  troops  across  Big  Black  Bridge,  at  Baker’s  | 
Creek.  . 

Early  the  next  morning  (the  17th),  I received  verbal  directions  from 
the  lieutenant-general  commanding  to  concentrate  all  of  my  command 
at  Bovina,  including  the  Fourth  Mississippi,  at  the  time  detached  to  | 
support  General  Vaughn  at  the  bridge.  The  latter  could  not  be  brought 
off,  being,  when  the  orders  reached  General  Vaughn,  warmly  engaged 
with  the  enemy.  Before  the  last  order  could  be  entirely  executed,  I was 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


401 


directed  to  proceed  to  Big  Black  and  there  take  position  on  the  left  of 
the  bridge,  to  cover  the  crossing  of  our  troops  from  the  left  bank ; also 
to  place-  the  cavalry  at  my  disposal  above  and  below  the  bridge,  to 
watch  the  approaches  from  Haynes’  Bluff  on  the  left,  to  Baldwin’s  Ferry 
on  the  right.  I sent  Major  [W.  A.]  Borer,  Twentieth  Mississippi,  to  the 
left  with  three  companies,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Brown  with  seven 
companies  to  the  right.  Starting  immediately,  I had  proceeded  but  a 
short  distance  toward  the  bridge  when  further  instructions  were  brought 
by  Col.  Jacob  Thompson,  inspector-general,  to  cross  the  bridge  and  de- 
fend from  the  other  side  the  crossing,  which  was  already  attacked  by  a 
larger  force  of  the  enemy,  before  whom  our  troops  were  about  to  give 
way.  I hastened  to  march  in  the  quickest  time,  but  arriving  at  the 
river  found  our  troops  already  on  this  side,  having  been  compelled  to 
leave  in  disorder,  and  the  bridge  on  fire.  General  [S.  D.]  Lee’s  brigade 
was  being  posted  on  the  left  of  the  bridge.  I posted  my  command  on 
the  right,  collecting  the  scattered  remnants  of  the  Fourth  Mississippi, 
which  had  succeeded  in  crossing.  This  regiment  had  gallantly  held  its 
position  on  the  other  side  until  left  alone  by  other  commands  adjoining. 
The  enemy  opened  a brisk  fire  of  artillery,  which  was  returned  by  a few 
of  our  pieces  from  this  side.  After  the  lapse  of  about  two  hours,  an  order 
was  received  from  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  directing  me  to 
cause  all  troops  at  this  point  to  move  immediately  in  the  direction  of 
Vicksburg,  with  the  exception  of  my  own  command,  which  was  to  re- 
main until  all  had  moved,  and  bring  up  the  rear  “ in  good  order.”  This 
was  executed.  My  command  started  at  12  o’clock.  At  Bovina  I met 
Colonel  [H.  B.]  Lyon,  Eighth  Kentucky  Mounted  Begiment,  whom  I 
directed  to  cover  the  rear,  adopting  such  measures,  in  case  of  their  ad- 
vance, to  hold  the  enemy  in  check  as  circumstances  should  indicate.  I 
reached  Vicksburg  at  sunset,  and  was  then  directed  to  proceed  to  the 
Warrenton  road  and  take  position  in  the  defenses  of  our  extreme  right, 
looking  to  the  rear. 

On  Monday,  the  18th  instant,  at  10  a.  m.,  two  of  my  regiments  were 
moved  back  to  their  old  camping  ground  near  the  graveyard,  on  the 
north  of  the  city.  Two  hours  later  the  remainder  of  the  command  was 
directed  to  move  in  the  same  direction.  Between  the  hours  of  2 and  3 
p.  m.  I was  directed  by  Major-General  Smith  to  occupy  the  outer  line 
of  defenses  covering  the  left  of  the  main  works. 

My  command  had  scarcely  got  in  position  when  the  enemy  appeared, 
and  at  once  deployed  his  sharpshooters,  opening  a brisk  fire,  which  we 
were  unable  to  return  with  effect.  They  soon  placed  artillery  in  posi- 
tion, and  the  fire  was  vigorously  kept  up  until  night.  Two  pieces  of 
Ward’s  battalion  had  been  placed  on  my  extreme  left.  Two  more  pieces 
were  sent  to  me,  to  be  placed  behind  epaulements  erected  for  the  service 
of  guns  on  my  line,  but  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters  were  enabled  to  ap- 
proach so  closely  that  I was  confident  no  piece  could  be  served  longer 
than  ten  minutes.  Major  [ J.  W.]  Anderson,  chief  of  artillery  of  the  Sec- 
ond Brigade,  was  mortally  wounded  while  passing  around  a parapet  to 
select  a position  for  the  guns.  The  same  night.  I received  orders  to 
evacuate  the  outer  line  at  3 a.  m.,  and  occupy  the  inner  and  principal 
line  of  intrenchments,  my  right  resting  on  Biddle’s  house.  This  was 
done,  and  at  broad  daylight  my  command  was  in  the  new  position,  the 
right  wing  of  the  Seventeenth  Louisiana  (my  right)  being  on  the  right 
of  Biddle’s  house,  to  connect  with  General  Shoup’s  brigade.  Work  was 
immediately  commenced  strengthening  the  defenses  on  all  the  unpro- 
tected intervals.  Two  regiments  of  Mississippi  State  troops,  to  wit, 
Colonel  [H.  C.]  Bobinson’s  regiment  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  [T.  A.] 
26  R R — VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


402 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Ciiai*.  XXXYI. 


Burgin’s  battalion,  under  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  J.  V.  Harris,  of  the 
State  service,  also  a battalion  of  stragglers  from  General  Loring’s  divis- 
ion, commanded  by  Major  Stevens,  were  directed  to  report  to.me,  and 
were  placed  temporarily  in  reserve.  During  the  day  the  following  pieces 
of  light  artillery  were  placed  in  position  on  my  line : One  30-pounder 
Parrott  gun,  manned  by  a detachment  from  a Missouri  battery  (this  gun 
burst  on  the  evening  of  Friday,  and  was  replaced  by  a 32-pounder 
smooth-bore,  served  by  a detachment  from  Captain  [J.  P.]  Lynch’s  com- 
pany, First  Tennessee  Artillery)  ; one  Whitworth  gun,  which  also  burst 
the  first  day  5 one  24-pounder  howitzer,  two  12-pounder  howitzers,  two 
6-pounder  guns,  and  two  3-inch  rifled  guns,  served  by  Wofford’s  com- 
pany, Withers’  regiment  light  artillery,  and  three  6-pounder  guns,  served 
by  a detachment  of  Guibor’s  artillery  company,  the  whole  under  the 
immediate'  direction  of  Captain  [J.  L.]  Wofford  as  chief  of  artillery  tor 
the  brigade.  One  of  the  3-inch  rifled  pieces  was  disabled  by  a trunnion 
being  knocked  off  early  in  the  siege.  With  the  exception  named,  no 
other  damage  was  done  to  my  artillery  during  the  siege  except  such  as 
was  immediately  repaired. 

In  the  afternoon  of  the  19th  (Tuesday),  the  enemy  made  two  demon- 
strations upon  my  line,  one  upon  my  left  and  the  other  upon  my  ex- 
treme right,  both  "of  which  were  gallantly  repulsed  by  the  Seventeenth 
and  Thirty-first  Louisiana  Begiments.  Late  in  the  evening  of  the  same 
day,  Brigadier- General  Vaughn,  commanding  on  the  left,  sent  word  that 
the  enemy  were  massing  troops  opposite  his  position  and  desiring  re- 
enforcements. I immediately  hastened  to  his  support  a Missouri  regi- 
ment. of  Colonel  [F.  M.]  Cockrell’s  brigade,  which  was  temporarily  in 
reserve  in  my  rear,  and  Major  Stevens’  battalion.  The  latter  did  not 
return  to  my  command  during  the  siege.  The  same  night  I removed 
the  Thirty-first  Louisiana  to  my  extreme  right,  holding  them  there  as  a 
reserve,  replacing  them  in  the  trenches  by  Brigadier-General  Harris’ 
command  of  State  troops. 

The  next  morning  (Wednesday,  the  20th),  one  regiment  of  State 
troops  (Colonel  Robinson’s)  was  ordered  by  Major-General  Smith  to 
the  trenches  on  the  river  front  of  the  city,  the  Twenty-eighth  [Twenty- 
ninth]  Louisiana,  Colonel  [Allen]  Thomas,  being  directed  to  report  to 
me  in  their  place.  The  Seventeenth  Louisiana,  on  my  right,  being  too 
weak  to  occupy  fully  the  portion  of  the  line  assigned  to  them,  I relieved 
them  by  the  Thirty-first  Louisiana,  a larger  regiment,  placing  the  former 
in  reserve.  Nothing  of  interest  occurred  during  this  or  the  next  day. 
The  enemy  was  busy  erecting  batteries  and  placing  guns  in  position  in 
front  of  our  line,  keeping  up  an  incessant  fire  of  sharpshooters.  Our 
trenches  wdre  rapidly  completed  and  strengthened,  and  traverses 
erected  as  positions  subject  to  an  enfilading  fire  were  developed. 

On  Friday  evening,  the  22d,  a vigorous  attack  was  made  on  General 
Shoup’s  line  and  my  right,  which  was  gallantly  repulsed  with  heavy 
loss  to  the  enemy,  who  left  the  ground  in  our  front  covered  with  their 
dead.  In  the  early  part  of  this  day  I was  disabled  by  a wound,  and 
compelled  to  relinquish  the  command  until  June  13,  when  I returned 
to  duty.  The  command  during  the  interval  devolved  first  on  Colonel 
Thomas,  Twenty-eighth  [Twenty-ninth]  Louisiana,  but  his  regiment 
being  returned  to  General  Shoup’s  brigade  next  day,  Colonel  Richard- 
son, Seventeenth  Louisiana,  succeeded,  and  to  his  report,  which  will 
accompany  this,  respectfully  refer  for  details  of  operations  during  my 
absence. 

From  this  time,  with  but  few  exceptions,  the  daily  operations  were 
very  similar.  A constant  fire  of  artillery  was  kept  up  with  considerable 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


403 


Chap.  XXXYI.  ] 


briskness  early  in  tbe  morning  and  late  in  the  evening,  slackening  and 
sometimes  altogether  ceasing  during  the  seven  or  eight  middle  hours  of 
the  day,  and  kept  up  during  the  night  at  regular  but  longer  intervals. 
The  enemy’s  skirmishers  occupied  every  cover  in  our  own  front,  and 
opposite  my  right  were  enabled  to  approach  to  within  sight  or  within 
100  paces.  Upon  no  position  of  the  line  could  a head  be  exposed  a mo- 
ment above  the  parapet  without  being  a target  for  the  enemy’s  bullets. 

On  June  20,  at  daybreak,  the  enemy  opened  their  heaviest  artillery 
fire,  and  though  this  was  kept  up  incessantly  with  the  greatest  rapidity 
for  five  or  six  hours,  and  continued  with  a little  less  vigor  during  the 
entire  day,  but  little  damage  was  done  to  our  works,  and  our  casualties 
were  but  2 killed  and  5 wounded.  The  greater  portion  of  our  losses 
during  the  siege  was  caused  by  the  fire  of  small-arms.  The  enemy  had 
constructed  a covered  way,  connecting  his  batteries  on  the  hills  oppo- 
site the  left,  by  way  of  the  valley  in  our  front,  with  those  opposite  my 
right.  From  this  they  commenced  an  approach  opposite  the  right  of 
the  Thirty-first  Louisiana,  where  the  valley  was  narrowest,  ascending 
a spur  which  led  from  the  ridge  occupied  by  our  defenses.  To  obstruct 
their  approach  in  case  of  an  attempt  to  stornu  a row  of  palisades  had 
been  placed  some  20  yards  in  front  of  our  trenches  at  this  point,  and  a 
ditch  excavated  behind  these  to  shelter  an  advanced  line  of  sharp- 
shooters as  an  additional  obstacle.  Their  work  silently  progressed  with- 
out impediment  until  about  June  25;  then,  when  they  had  approached  to 
within  60  or  70  yards,  their  boldness  invited  our  attention.  Procuring 
a dozen  hunting  rifles,  these  in  the  hands  of  experienced  marksmen 
rendered  their  approach  very  slow  and  cautious.  The  3-iuch  rifle  piece 
was  brought  to  bear  at  700  }^ards’  distance  with  same  effect  on  their 
works,  and  afterward  a position  was  excavated  on  the  site  of  Kiddie’s 
house,  concealed  from  view,  for  the  24-pounder  howitzer,  which  was 
completed  on  the  night  of  the  3d  instant.  This  gun,  bearing  at  150 
yards  with  a plunging  fire  directly  on  their  work,  would  have  effect- 
ually destroyed  it  had  not  the  termination  of  our  defense  prevented  its 
being  used. 

On  the  night  of  the  3d  instant,  I was  summoned  to  a council  of  gen- 
eral officers  and  brigade  commanders,  to  consider  terms  of  capitulation 
offered  by  the  commander  of  the  Federal  forces.  The  result  of  this  de- 
liberation and  the  terms  obtained  next  day  require  no  report  from  me. 
My  command  marched  over  the  trenches  and  stacked  their  arms  with 
the  greatest  reluctance,  conscious  of  their  ability  to  hold  the  position 
assigned  them  for  an  indefinite  period  of  time. 

During  the  whole  siege  the  entire  command  had  exhibited  the  high- 
est degree  of  patience,  fortitude,  and  courage,  bearing  deprivations  of 
sufficient  food,  constant  duty  in  the  trenches  under  a broiling  sun  by 
day  and  heavy  fatigue  and^  picket  duty  at  night  without  a murmur, 
wiiling  to  bear  any  hardships,  confident  in  sustaining  the  brunt  of  any 
assault,  in  the  hope  of  anticipated  relief  and  ultimate  triumph.  The 
- command  was  daily  aroused  and  under  arms  at  3.30  a.  m.,  to  guard 
against  surprise,  and  nightly  our  pickets  were  in  advance  of  our  de- 
fenses and  nearly  contiguous  to  the  sentinels  of  the  enemy. 

All  the  regiments  of  my  command  and  the  artillerists  deserve  the 
highest  commendation  for  their  good  conduct  during  the  siege  and  the 
preceding  operations. 

The  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  was  severe.  Kot  being  able  to  give 
the  names  nor  the  exact  numbers  at  this  time  from  absence  of  reports 
of  regimental  commanders,  these  will  be  the  subject  of  a supplemental 
report. 


404 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXYI. 


On  May  20,  the  Seventeenth  Louisiana  had  to  mourn  the  loss  of  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel [Madison]  Rogers,  at  the  time  temporarily  in  command 
of  his  regiment.  He  was  a brave,  able,  and  efficient  officer,  and  a great 
loss  to  his  command  and  the  service. 

On  June  27,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Griffin,  commanding  the  Thirty-first 
Louisiana,  was  killed  while  watching  the  operations  of  the  enemy  from 
the  trenches.  One  of  the  best  field  officers  it  has  ever  been  my  good 
fortune  to  meet,  his  imperturbable  coolness  and  gallantry  on  all  occa- 
sions, his  watchful  vigilance  and  sound  judgment,  united  with  more 
than  ordinary  ability  as  a tactician  and  disciplinarian,  rendered  his  loss 
irreparable  to  his  regiment  and  a serious  blow  to  the  service. 

The  next  day  (June  28)  Lieutenant-Colonel  Adaire,  commanding  the 
Fourth  Mississippi,  was  severely  wounded.  He  displayed  during  the 
entire  operations  (until  disabled)  the  highest  qualities  of  a soldier,  and 
merits  especial  notice. 

Colonel  Richardson,  Seventeenth  Louisiana,  conducted  himself,  as 
usual,  with  great  j udgment,  discretion,  and  gallantry.  For  nearly  three 
weeks  in  command  of  the  brigade  during  the  most  critical  period,  I com- 
mend him  most  warmly  to  the  notice  of  the  major-general  commanding, 
who  was  personally  and  directly  cognizant  of  his  conduct  during  the 
time  mentioned. 

Colonel  Sears,  Forty-sixth  Mississippi,  merits  favorable  notice  for  his 
conduct  during  this  trying  time. 

Major  (afterward  Lieutenant-Colonel)  [W.  A.]  Redditt  and  Captain 
(afterward  Major)  [D.  W.]  Self,  Seventeenth  Louisiana;  Major  (after- 
ward Lieutenant-Colonel)  [J.  W.]  Draughon  and  Captain  (afterward 
Major)  [R.  D.]  Bridger,  Thirty-first  Louisiana  (officers  assigned  to  a 
higher  rank,  to  fill  vacancies  by  virtue  of  seniority) ; Lieutenant-Colonel 
[W.  K.]  Easterling  and  Major  [W.  H.]  Clark,  Forty-sixth  Mississippi, 
and  Captains  [J.  B.]  Moore  and  [T.  P.]  Nelson,  acting  field  officers  of 
the  Fourth  Mississippi ; also  Captain  Wolford,  of  Withers7  artillery, 
acting  chief  of  artillery  for  the  brigade,  all  merit  high  commendation 
for  courage,  faithfulness,  and  good  conduct  in  the  discharge  of  their 
respective  duties.  Other  officers  deserve  mention,  but  not  coming  so 
directly  under  my  personal  observation,  reference  is  made  to  reports  of 
regimental  commanders. 

The  members  of  my  staff  generally  deserve  to  be  mentioned  favorably: 
J.  W.  Benoit,  assistant  adjutant-general,  Capt.  S.  D.  Harris,  assistant 
inspector-general,  and  Maj.  H.  B.  Whitfield,  brigade  commissary,  had 
the  most  arduous  duties  to  perform,  which  were  executed  with  com- 
mendable diligence. 

Maj.  A.  G.  Scott,  brigade  quartermaster,  and  Lieut.  T.  A.  Burke, 
ordnance  officer,  performed  their  duties  faithfully. 

Lieut.  P.  Hamilton,  aide-de-camp;  Cadet  Thomas  Harrison,  acting 
aide-de-camp ; C.  A.  Withers,  J.  D.  Shute,  and  J.  M.  Clark,  volunteer 
aides,  were  always  on  the  alert  to  discharge  any  duty  and  to  encounter 
any  danger. 

Reports  of  regimental  commanders  comprising  minor  details,  with 
full  returns  of  the  strength  of  the  command  engaged,  with  lists  of  killed, 
wounded,  and  missing,  will  be  forwarded  so  soon  as  completed. 
Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  E.  BALDWIN, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding. 

Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux, 

Assistant  Adjutant ■ General. 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


405 


j Chap.  XXXVI.] 


A DDENDA. 


July  3,  1863. 

I object  to  a surrender  of  the  troops,  and  am  in  favor  of  holding  the 
position,  or  attempting  to  do  so,  as  long  as  possible. 

W.  E.  BALDWIN, 

Brigadier-  General. 


. 


Abstract  from  statements  of  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  lost  and  destroyed  in  the  First 
Brigade,  Smith’s  Division,  during  the  siege  at  Vicksburg. 


Ordnance  and  small-arms. 

Destroyed.* 

i 

Captured.t  | 

Total. 

Guns  and  howitzers : 

f 

30-pounder  Parrott 

1 

3-inch  rifles 

JL 

1 

1 

Whitworth  gun 

1 

1 

1 

2 

32-pounder  gun 

1 

24-pounder  howitzer 

1 

1 

1 

I2-pounder  howitzers 

1 

o 

1 

Q 

6-pounder  guns. 

& 

K 

Small-arms : 

o 

0 

Percussion  muskets,  caliber  .69 

1 467 

Enfield  rifles,  caliber  .57 

500 

A,  rH)  i 
kaa 

Mississippi  rifles,  caliber  .54 

50 

OUU 

Rifled  muskets,  caliber  .57 

ioi 

i*ji 

1 

No.  90. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  F.  A.  Shoup , G.  S.  Army , commanding  Third 

Brigade. 


Dalton,  Ga.,  April  11,  1864. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  transmit,  inclosed,  the  report  of  oper- 
ations of  my  brigade  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg.  Before  leaving 
Vicksburg,  I rendered  a report  to  Major  General  Smith,  which  was  lost. 
I was  directed  by  General  Pemberton  some  time  ago  to  make  another 
and  send  it  to  you  direct. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  A.  SHOUP, 

Brigadier - General. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General , G.  S.  Army. 

[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  Smith’s  Division, 

Vicksburg , Miss.,  July  8,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  operations 
of  my  brigade  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg  : 

On  May  18,  I was  ordered  to  send  a regiment  of  my  command  on  the 
Graveyard  road,  to  a point  near  Willis’,  to  cover  a foraging  party  col- 


; 30-pounder  and  Whitworth  hurst ; trunnions  knocked  off  3-inch  rifle. 
t Also  118,530  rounds  of  small-arms  ammunition. 


406 


-MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


lectin  g supplies  in  that  quarter.  Colonel  [L.  D.]  Marks’  regiment 
(Twenty-seventh  Louisiana)  was  accordingly  ordered  to  move.  I ac- 
companied the  regiment.  When  it  arrived  at  our  line  of  intrenchments, 
intelligence  was  brought  me  that  the  enemy  were  upon  us.  I at  once 
threw  forward  a strong  line  of  skirmishers  to  check  his  advance  and  to 
allow  us  time  to  occupy  the  trenches.  The  skirmishers  were  engaged 
before  they  had  advanced  300  yards  from  our  line  of  rifle-pits.  The 
trenches  to  the  right  were  partially  occupied  by  General  [Louis]  He- 
bert’s brigade.  I sent  to  ask  that  those  troops  be  extended  to  the  left, 
to  close  the  interval,  which  was  done.  Colonel  Marks’  regiment  rested, 
with  the  center  at  the  redan,  on  the  Graveyard  road.  I dispatched  a 
courier  at  once  to  inform  the  major-general  of  the  position  of  affairs. 
This  was  about  1 p.  m.  My  skirmishers  maintained  their  position.  The 
enemy  extended  his  forces  to  our  left.  After  a time,  Colonel  [Win- 
chester] Hall’s  regiment  (the  Twenty-sixth  Louisiana)  arrived,  and  was 
posted  in  the  gorge  at  that  point,  where  an  advanced  line  of  rifle-pits  on 
the  left  strikes  the  principal  line.  Other  troops  arrived  and  extended 
the  line  to  the  left.  Colonel  [Allen]  Thomas’  regiment  (the  Twenty- 
eighth  [Twenty-ninth]  Louisiana),  of  my  brigade,  was  temporarily  de- 
tached. 

Sharpshooting  was  maintained  all  along  my  front  till  dark.  In  the 
night  I was  advised  that  it  had  been  determined  to  abandon  the  ad- 
vanced line  on  the  left,  and  was  ordered  to  withdraw  Colonel  Hall’s  reg- 
iment as  soon  as  the  troops  of  that  line  had  fallen  back,  which  was  ac- 
complished quietly  at  dawn.  I caused  Colonel  Marks’  regiment  to  close 
to  the  right,  to  make  the  line  more  complete,  and  placed  Colonel  Hall’s 
regiment  on  its  left.  The  latter  regiment  found  its  position  almost 
without  intrenchments.  Few  tools  could  be  had,  but  in  a surprisingly 
short  time  a very  tolerable  cover  was  constructed. 

At  daylight  the  enemy  had  taken  possession  of  the  heights  abandoned 
a few  hours  before  by  our  troops,  from  which  position  he  soon  opened 
upon  us  with  artillery.  By  10  a.  m.  he  had  placed  his  batteries  in  our 
front,  as  well  as  to  the  right  and  left  of  my  position,  the  line  making  a 
very  decided  salient.  The  fire  from  artillery  and  sharpshooters  soon 
became  very  heavy.  We  made  little  reply,  waiting  for  further  develop- 

ments.  „ . „ , » 

About  1 p.  m.  the  enemy  debouched  in  force  from  a gorge  m iront  ot 
the  center  of  my  position.  We  opened  on  him.  He  broke  and  fled  to 
the  cover  of  the  hills.  After  a time  he  reappeared  in  greater  force  farther 
to  the  right,  in  front  of  redan  occupied  by  Colonel  Marks’  regiment. 
Our  fire  staggered  him,  but  the  fragments  of  several  regiments  succeeded 
in  gaining  the  cover  of  a ridge  in  ‘front  of  the  redan.  Here  he  remained 
some  time  almost  wholly  free  from  our  fire.  He  finally  made  a rush, 
with  the  intention  of  carrying  our  line,  but  was  met  by  a terrific  fire  in 
front  and  flank,  and  fled  in  utter  confusion,  leaving  many  dead.  Colonel 
[A.  C.]  Biley,  First  Missouri  Volunteers,  in  response  to  request,  moved 
promptly  to  support  the  point  attacked,  and  arrived  in  time  to  render 
valuable  assistance.  The  enemy  continued  a terrific  fire  until  dark. 

In  this  attack  the  enemy  lost  several  prisoners,  a stand  of  colors,  and 
many  stand  of  arms.  Our  loss  was  heavy. 

Colonel  Hall,  Twenty-sixth  Louisiana,  was  severely  wounded  while 
in  the  gallant  discharge  of  his  duty.  Capt.  Louis  Florence,  a volun- 
teer aide  for  the  occasion,  was  killed  early  in  the  action  ; he  had  borne 
himself  with  great  bravery.  Several  other  officers  were  killed  and 
wounded. 


407 


j Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

Too  much  praise  cannot  he  given  to  both  men  and  officers.  My 
thanks  are  expressly  due  to  Capt.  13.  L.  Moore,  acting  assistant  adju- 
tant-general, for  valuable  and  intelligent  service  during  the  day ; he 
displayed  the  most  marked  gallantry. 

May  20  and  21. — Continued  fire  from  the  artillery  and  sharpshooters 
of  the  enemy.  We  improve  every  moment  to  strengthen  our  line  and 
protect  ourselves  from  the  incessant  fire.  Our  artillery  is  almost  use- 
less, since  we  have  no  properly  constructed  protection.  Being  almost 
without  intrenching  tools,  we  can  do  little  to  repair  the  evil. 

May  22. — Fire  from  the  enemy  before  dawn ; keep  it  up  with  extreme 
vigor.  A little  after  noon  the  enemy  attempted  to  carry  my  position 
on  the  extreme  right ; another  failure.  A force  on  my  extreme  left  be- 
gins to  assemble.  Taking  advantage  of  the  gorge  in  front,  they  gain 
the  cover  of  the  steep  declivity  at  the  foot  of  ridge  running  down  from 
our  fine  into  the  gorge.  Several  regiments  are  finally  assembled. 
About  3 p.  m.  a very  heavy  force  discovers  itself  on  my  right  and 
General  Hubert’s  left.  It  moves  forward  to  assault  our  line  ; it  is  re- 
pulsed with  great  loss.  Many  of  the  enemy  are  killed  in  the  ditch 
of  redan  occupied  by  Third  Missouri  Volunteers.  A terribly  beautiful 
scene.  About  5 p.  m.  the  force  on  my  left  just  spoken  of  makes  a 
dash  at  my  line.  It  is  slaughtered,  and  flies  in  confusion.  The  troops 
behaved  most  admirably  ; mount  the  parapets  with  enthusiasm.  Colo- 
nel Marks,  Twenty-seventh  Louisiana ; Lieutenant-Colonel  [L.  L.]  Mc- 
Laurin,  Twenty-seventh  Louisiana;  Lieutenant-Colonel  [W.  C.]  Crow, 
Twenty-sixth  Louisiana ; Major  [W.  W.]  Martin,  Twenty-sixth  Louis- 
iana, and  Major  [A.  S.]  Norwood,  Twenty- seventh  Louisiana,  each  dis- 
play great  gallantry. 

May  23  to  31. — Enemy  intrenching  energetically  at  night,  keeping  up 
a continuous  fire  during  the  day.  He  has  an  almost  continuous  line  of 
circumvallation ; his  guns  are  thoroughly  protected  with  mantlets 
against  sharpshooters.  We  are  ordered  not  to  expend  ammunition. 
Colonel  Thomas7  regiment  rejoined  the  brigade  on  May  25,  and  was 
placed  in  the  center  of  my  position.  We  are  still  at  work  improving 
our  line.  A furious  cannonade  on  the  31st. 

June  1. — Enemy  has  established  a new  battery  opposite  the  center  of 
my  line;  also  some  additional  rifled  guns  opposite  redan;  do  our  works 
considerable  damage. 

June  3. — Fire  as  usual.  We  lose  a number  of  men  each  day.  Last 
night  enemy  was  at1  work  within  150  yards  of  redan.  Feel  the  want  of 
light-balls  ; have  no  means  of  lighting  up.  The  nature  of  the  ground 
being  very  broken,  permits  the  enemy  to  work  so  near  us ; are  not  strong 
enough  to  drive  him  away. 

June  4. — Enemy  opened  on  my  left  this  morning  at  10  o’clock  with 
artillery  and  musketry ; continued  above  an  hour.  He  has  quite  a com- 
plete parallel  in  front  of  redan.  It  extends  from  the  road  (Graveyard) 
about  150  yards  to  the  right,  and  is  only  distant  about  100  yards  from 
the  redan.  This  salient  is  very  weak;  we  are  doing  all  we  can  to 
strengthen  it;  have  urged  the  importance  of  it  to  the  major-general. 
We  are  constructing  rifle-pits  in  front  of  stockade  between  the  redan 
and  lunette  on  the  left. 

June  5. — During  the  night  the  enemy  kept  up  an  incessant  artillery 
fire  and  occasionally  musketry.  The  enemy  is  pushing  forward  his  ap- 
proaches on  the  Graveyard  road.  Last  night  he  constructed  a rifle-pit 
to  the  left  (our)  of  the  road  and  within  75  yards  of  redan  ; he  has  com- 
plete cover  to  it.  Sharpshooting  from  those  new  works  is  maintained 


408  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chai>.  XXXVI. 

with  great  activity  and  bitterness.  We  are  entirely  too  weak  to  drive 
him  out  of  these  works ; besides,  the  ground  is  very  unfavorable  for  such 
an  adventure.  Are  pushing  forward  work  on  our  post ; much  yet  to  be 
done.  We  fire  upon  his  parties  at  night,  but  cannot  altogether  stop  his 
work.  Have  recommended  the  construction  of  lines  of  retrenchments 
as  a precaution  should  the  enemy  carry  this  point.  We  are  using  cotton 
for  protection.  It  does  not  answer  very  good  purpcflse;  takes  fire  and 
has  to  be  pulled  down.  It  is  good  against  sharpshooters. 

June  6. — Enemy  fired  nearly  all  night  from  artillery;  otherwise  much 
as  usual. 

June  8. — Nothing  unusual  on  yesterday.  To-day  the  enemy  remark- 
ably quiet ; continuous  fire  during  the  night.  He  still  works  vigorously 
on  his  approaches.  Can  now  come  within  50  or  60  yards  of  the  redan  ; 
is  advancing  by  double  sap.  Call  attention  again  to  the  importance  of 
constructing  interior  works  to  command  redan  should  it  fall.  Pickets 
captured  a prisoner  (Ninth  Iowa)  last  night. 

June  9. — Last  night  the  enemy  fired  into  our  working  party  on  the 
left,  wounding  2 men.  We  are  constructing  a rough  stockade  at  that 
point,  to  prevent  a dash  from  the  enemy’s  works,  now  not  more  than  75 
yards  distant.  We  work  under  great  difficulties;  want  axes  and  in- 
trenchment  tools.  On  the  right  we  are  strengthening  ourselves  steadily 
and  surely ; are  making  in  the  ditch  and  in  front  of  the  redan  rough 
stockades  with  brush  and  wire  entanglements. 

June  10. — Rained  heavily  this  morning.  Everything  quiet  except  an 
occasional  shot. 

June  11. — More  rain  last  night.  No  unusual  movement  on  the  part 
of  the  enemy.  He  has  not  been  at  work  since  the  rain  began.  He  is 
running  a regular  zigzag,  using  gabions  and  sap-roller  in  front  of  redan. 
The  relief  of  the  redan  is  so  great  that  we  cannot  bring  a gun  to  bear  on 
his  sap-roller.  The  sharpshooters  are  extremely  vigilant,  and  are  within 
60  or  70  yards,  excellently  covered.  In  front  of  the  center  of  my  posi- 
tion the  enemy  is  constructing  approaches  to  gain  the  point  in  front  of 
lunette.  The  Twenty-sixth  Louisiana  is  securing  its  front  against  a 
dash  by  means  of  a picket  with  brush  entanglements.  Have  directed 
that  my  entire  line  should  be  protected  by  brush ; it  is  progressing 
rapidly. 

June  12. — Enemy  did  no  work  last  night  in  front  of  the  redan.  We 
finished  our  stockade  on  the  left  last  night ; shall  cause  a rifle-pit  to  be 
dug  immediately  on  its  rear.  Shall  complete  the  brush  protection  along 
my  line  to-night.  No  great  firing  yesterday. 

June  13. — Enemy  again  at  work  on  the  right.  Hid  little  last  night,  but 
something.  Again  urge  that  the  engineers  construct  inner  works.  No 
particular  change  observable  at  other  points.  This  morning  the  enemy 
is  unusually  active  on  the  right,  firing  on  the  redan ; has  cut  away  the 
parapet  very  considerably.  Sharpshooting  very  bitter.  Sharpshooters 
take  aim  at  exposed  points,  and  when  one  exposes  himself  in  the  least 
a number  of  guns  are  discharged  simultaneously. 

June  14. — Enemy  cut  down  parapet  of  redan  and  disabled  12-pounder 
gun  at  that  point.  He  made  no  perceptible  advance  with  his  sap  last 
night.  We  used  rampart  and  hand-grenades  on  his  sap  last  night  with 
good  effect.  Have  organized  my  artillerists  into  a hand-grenade  and 
thunder-barrel  corps,  since  our  guns  are  of  no  service.  The  Twenty- 
seventh  Louisiana  has  suffered  dreadfully  up  to  this  time.  It  was  re- 
lieved for  a few  days  by  a Missouri  regiment. 

June  15. — No  change  since  yesterday.  Sap  at  redan  very  close,  within 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


409 


10  paces  of  ditch.  We  are  using  hand-grenades  on  working  parties. 
Completed  our  rifle-pits  on  the  left  between  new  stockade  and  our  works. 
Since  12  in.  artillery  firing  has  been  very  heavy. 

June  17.— No  change  since  yesterday.  Two  men  deserted  from  the 
Twenty-sixth  Louisiana  last  night.  The  Twenty-seventh  Louisiana  has 
returned  to  its  position.  We  are  on  speaking  terms  with  the  enemy  at 
the  redan.  The  picket  parties  at  that  point  agree  upon  short  truces 
during  which  neither  party  is  to  fire.  Notes  are  thrown  across  from  one 
party  to  another.  Some  trading  going  on  in  coffee,  &c.  Have  forbid- 
den communications,  but  after  sundown  the  firing  ceases  and  there  is 
a good  deal  of  talk  going  on  between  the  enemy  and  our  own  people, 
but  principally  in  the  brigades  to  my  right  and  left.  I permit  it  only 
in  the  presence  of  the  officer  of  the  day.  Brothers,  relations,  anil 
friends  are  constantly  inquiring  after  each  other. 

June  19.— Day  passed  as  usual  yesterday.  The  enemy  has  constructed 
two  new  embrasures  on  the  left  of  my  line,  probably  to  attempt  to  cut 
down  the  stockade  at  that  point.  The  stockade  between  the  redan  and 
lunette  is  perfectly  riddled,  but  is  still  about  as  good  as  ever;  it  is  of 
poplar  timber.  The  enemy  seems  to  take  delight  in  firing  at  it.  He  is 
running  a double  sap  up  the  ridge  on  the  left,  but  he  can  accomplish 
nothing  with  it;  that  point  is  secure. 

June  20.  Furious  cannonading  began  at  daylight  and  continued  a 
good  part  of  the  day.  Enemy  was  at  work  again  in  front  of  redan. 
Think  he  is  constructing  a parallel  on  each  flank  for  his  sap.  There  are 
no  indications  that  he  is  yet  running  galleries.  He  seems  not  to  have 
worked  all  night. 

June  21.— Enemy  broke  new  ground  last  night  in  front  of  lunette ; is 
using  gabions  ; has  secured  cover  within  60  yards  of  works.  He  could 
reach  this  position  in  spite  of  us  ; think  he  only  wants  cover  for  sharp- 
shooters. Urge  the  importance  of  light-balls ; if  light-balls  proper  can- 
not be  had,  some  substitute  can.  Ask  for  more  hand-grenades ; fiiul 
that  they  work  excellently  well.  Lieutenant-Colonel  [L.  L.]  McLaurin, 
Twenty- seventh  Louisiana,  mortally  wounded ; he  was  an  excellent  and 
gallant  officer. 

June  22.— Maj.  W.  W.  Martin,  Twenty-sixth  Louisiana,  was  killed 
instantly  by  sharpshooters.  He  was  one  of  the  most  gallant  and  ex- 
cellent young  officers  of  the  command.  His  loss  is  a most  serious  one. 
Everything  much  as  usual. 

June  23. — We  are  constructing  galleries  from  several  points  in  the 
ditch  of  redan  against  the  enemy’s  works.  Cannot  hear  him  at  work 
yet.  Major  [A.  S.]  Norwood,  Twenty-seventh  Louisiana,  wounded.  The 
Twenty-seventh  Louisiana  is  now  without  a field  officer,  and  has  but  one 
captain  for  duty.  My  entire  command  is  sadly  reduced  in  officers. 

J une  24.— Comparatively  quiet.  Bained  during  the  night.  Think  the 
enemy  is  making  galleries.  An  attempt  was  made  to  spring  our  mines; 
failed.  The  train  was  laid  in  gas-pipes ; will  not  communicate.  Find 
by  experiment  that  powder,  when  confined  in  a long  tube,  when  ignited, 
will  burst  the  tube  a few  feet  from  the  end,  and  will  not  burn  farther. 

June  26.— Everything  much  as  usual  yesterday;  continuous  firing. 

June  27. — Our  mines  at  the  redan  were  sprung  last  night  with  suc- 
cess. The  wire  under  changed  mines.  No  damage  done  to  the  counter- 
scarp of  ditch.  It  is  still  perfect.  Must  have  done  the  enemy  much 
harm. 

June  28. — Enemy  fired  upon  and  drove  in  our  working  parties,  which 
were  attempting  to  construct  a picket  on  the  outside  of  lunette.  No 


410 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 


change  observable  in  the  enemy’s  doings.  Colonel  [L.  D.J  Marks,  Twen- 
ty-seventh Louisiana,  mortally  wounded.  He  was  a gallant  officer. 

June  29. — Enemy  seems  to  change  his  point  ot  attack.  Is  at  work  in 
front  of  stockade,  between  redan  and  lunette.  The  declivity  is  so  great 
that  we  can  do  him  little  harm.  Are  using  hand-grenades  on  him. 

June  30.— Enemy  discovered  to  be  approaching  rifle-pits  in  front  of 

stockade  on  the  right  with  sap.  - - -.  . . •»  . 

July  1. Enemy  drove  in  our  pickets  in  front  of  stockade  last  night, 

wounding  2 men.  Enemy  is  erecting  a gabionade  in  front  of  redan. 

Amounts  to  nothing.  0 ^ , , 

July  2.— Enemy  advancing  his  sap  in  front  ot  stockade.  .Protects 
himself  from  hand-grenades  by  covering  his  track  with  rails,  thus  mak- 
ing a sort  of  gallery.  We  are  running  a gallery  from  our  trenches  to 

blow  in  the  enemy’s  works.  , 

juh,  3 A truce  to-day.  We  can  now  see  more  clearly  what  the 

enemy  is  about.  He  has  abandoned  work  in  front  of  redan.  He  is  run- 
ning a gallery,  with  the  intention  of  blowing  up  the  stockade  between 
lunette  and  redan.  Is  hard  at  work  to-day.  We  follow  his  example. 
The  question  is,  which  shall  explode  first'?  A sad  accident  occurred 
last  night.  Lieutenant  [E.j  McMahon,  engineer,  was  mortally  wounded 
by  the  carelessness  of  our  own  men.  Lieutenant  McMahon  has  done 
most  excellent  service,  and  his  loss  is  greatly  to  be  deplored. 

July  4.— Capitulation  ordered.  At  10  a.  m.  we  moved  out  of  our 
trenches  by  battalion,  stacked  arms,  and  then  returned  to  our  old  quar- 
ters in  town.  The  men  were  full  of  indignation.  Though  they  have 
had  very  scant  fare,  and  had  been  exposed  to  a merciless  and  almost 
continuous  fire,  remaining  at  their  post  in  the  trenches  without  rebel, 
I have  rarely  heard  a murmur  or  complaint.  The  tone  has  always  been 
“This  is  pretty  hard,  but  we  can  stand  it.”  Too  much  praise  cannot  be 
given  to  officers  and  men. 

Detachments  from  the  following  batteries  were  posted  on  my  line, 
viz:  [J.  Q.]  Wall’s,  [William  E.]  Dawson’s,  [W.  T.]  Withers’,  [W.  N.] 
Hogg’s,  and  Francis  McNally’s.  . 1 ^ . , T • • • 0 

Lieutenant-Colonel  [W.  C.]  Crow,  Twenty-sixth  Regiment  Louisiana 
Volunteers,  bore  himself  with  marked  gallantry  throughout  the  siege. 
He  was  the  only  field  officer  remaining  in  his  regiment. 

Col.  Allen  Thomas,  Twenty-eighth  [Twenty -ninth]  Regiment  Louisiana 
Volunteers,  was  constantly  at  his  post.  He  was  vigilant  and  energetic. 

The  Twenty- seventh  Regiment  Louisiana  Volunteers  had  no  held, 
officer  remaining.  Two  were  killed  and  the  third  severely  wounoed. 
Captains  [E.  W.]  Robertson,  [R.  W.]  Campbell,  [C.  J.]  Foster  [Joseph 
T.]  Hatch,  [T.  C.]  Lewis,  [Alexander  8.]  Norwood,  and,  in  fact,  theentue 
regiment,  deserve  the  highest  commendations. 

My  thanks  are  due  to  the  following  officers,  who  rendered  me  excel- 
lent assistance  as  staff  officers:  Capt,  B.  L.  Moore,  acting  assistant 
adjutant-general;  Lieut.  Louis  Onion,  acting  inspector- general ; Capt 
O.' W.  Clarke,  acting  ordnance  officer;  Capt.  James  C.  Wiggs,  acting 
inspector  of  artillery  ; Mr.  Eugene  Hill,  volunteer  aide,  and  Dr.  Foster, 

volunteer  surgeon.  * 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  A.  SHOUF, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Maj.  J.  G.  Devekeux, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XXXYI.J  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 

, ADDENDA. 

Return  of  Casualties  in  Shoup’s  Brigade  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg. 
[Compiled  from  nominal  lists  of  casualties,  returns,  &c.] 


411 


Command. 


Brigade  staff 

2fith  Louisiana 

27th  Louisiana 

28th  [29th]  Louisiana 

Total 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

B 

a 

a 

a 

© 

W 

ns 

© 

© 

"oS 

So 

© 

o 

© 

o 

SB 

a 

'p 

to 

to 

o 

H 

O 

w 

<5 

2 

3 

2 

7 

4 

24 

o 

42 

72 

3 

55 

4 

92 

154 

3 

13 

3 

54 

73 

12 

95 

11 

188 

306 

Report  of  arms  and  ammunition  on  hand  in  Third  Brigade , Smith’s  Division , Brig.  Gen. 
F.  A.  JShovp  commanding , on  the  day  of  capitulation  of  Vicksburg,  July  4,  1863. 


The  total  amount  of  artillery  ammunition  on  the  field  was  800  rammers.  We  had  on  this  field  about 
100  hand-grenades,  60  rampart-grenades,  and  4 thunder-barrels. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

J.  G.  CLARKE, 

\ Lieutenant,  and  Acting  Ordnance  Officer  Third  Brigade. 

[Indorsement.] 

Approved.  One  Whitworth  gun  on  my  line  was  disabled  on  May 
19,  from  effect  of  its  own  shot.  The  two  howitzers  belonged  regularly 
to  my  brigade;  the  other  artillery  was  detached  from  other  commands. 

F.  A.  SEOUP, 

Brigadier- General. 

Demopolis,  August  31,  1863. 


No.  91. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  S.  Bowen , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Division. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Division,  Army  of  the  Mississippi, 

Vicksburg , May  28,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  state  that,  in  accordance  with  orders  from 
the  lieutenant-general  commanding,  I ordered  two  of  Colonel  Cockrell’s 
regiments  (the  First  and  Fifth  Missouri)  to  relieve  General  Green,  and 


412  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [CHAr.  XXXYL 

three  to  re-enforce  General  Forney.  One  of  these  regiments  (the  Sixth) 
was  assigned  to  a position  in  the  trenches,  which  had  become  intolerable 
on  account  of  dead  animals  near  by  and  the  filth  of  the  troops  who  for- 
merly occupied  it.  I sent  a letter  of  remonstrance  to  General  Forney, 
ashing  that  the  troops  who  formerly  occupied  the  position  be  made  to 
police  it,  which  he  declined.  Is  it  not  sufficient  that  when  a general 
finds  a weak  point  or  enfiladed  trench  that  he  withdraws  his  regiment 
and  calls  for  one  of  mine  to  occupy  it,  without  compelling  my  men  to 
clean  up  the  filth  they  leave  behind  them  ? 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

Brigadier-General , Commanding  Division. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant-General . 


Vicksburg,  June  5, 1808. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  General  Green’s  report 
from  scouts  of  his  brigade.* 

I have  also  the  honor  to  report  that  the  two  regiments  who  went  to 
General  Oumming’s  support  found  that  he  had  nearly  two  regiments 
in  reserve  already.  The  distance  to  General  Cumming’s  from  Cockrell’s 
position  is  about  1 mile,  requiring  about  twenty  minutes  to  reach  him. 

Respectfully, 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Second  Division,  Army  of  the  Mississippi, 

Vicksburg , June  6,  1863. 

Major:  General  Green  reports  no  change  on  his  front.  The  enemy 
endeavored  to  dig  a trench  nearer  our  lines,  but  were  prevented  by  sharp- 
shooters. He  lost  3 killed  and  9 wounded  in  the  last  twenty -four  hours. 
He  reports  that  he  is  badly  in  want  of  some  picks. 

Please  inform  me  if  the  necessity  still  exists  of  retaining  Colonel 
Cockrell’s  two  regiments  in  rear  of  General  Cumming. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Division. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Hdqrs.  Second  Division,  Army  of  the  Mississippi, 

Vicksburg , June  26,  1863. 

Sir:  The  inclosed  note  explains  itself.f  No  report  has  been  for- 
warded from  this  division,  because  none  could  be  obtained  from  the 
First  Brigade.  We  are  in  a different  position  from  any  other  command 


See  of  June  5,  No.  93,  p.  419. 


t Not  found. 


Chap.  XXXYI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


413 


here.  Our  men  are  constantly  moving  from  place  to  place,  and  some 
regiments  are  now  on  the  extreme  right,  some  in  the  center,  and  sev- 
eral engaged  yesterday  and  last  night. 

Under  these  circumstances  it  was  impossible  to  obtain  a morning  re- 
port. I send  that  of  the  Second  Brigade,  forwarded  yesterday.  I will 
send  the  other  when  I can  get  it.  It  can  hardly  be  expected  from  troops 
fighting  in  the  breach. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 
Major-General , Commanding  Division. 

Major  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Vicksburg,  June  26,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  First  and  Second  Mis- 
souri Kegiments  are  on  the  Warren  ton  road,  in  rear  of  Barton’s  brigade; 
the  Fifth  and  Sixth  at  the  breach  on  the  Jackson  road,  and  the  Third 
with  Shoup  at  the  redan  on  the  Graveyard  road. 

Colonel  [E.]  Erwin,  of  the  Sixth/was  killed  last  night  defending  the 
breach.  Cockrell  is  now  present  at  that  point,  by  my  order,  as  I feared 
Erwin’s  loss  (one  of  our  bravest  officers)  might  dispirit  his  men. 

Respectfully, 


Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

Major - General. 


Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  27,  1863. 

Major  : The  sad  duty  devolves  upon  me  of  announcing  the  death  of 
Brig.  Gen.  Martin  E.  Green,  commanding  the  Second  Brigade  of  this 
division. 

General  Green  was  shot  through  the  head  while  examining  the  position 
of  the  enemy  in  front  of  his  trenches  at  about  9.30  this  morning.  De- 
voted to  our  cause,  without  fear  or  reproach,  his  loss  will  be  deeply  felt 
by  his  entire  command. 

Very  respectfully, 


Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger. 


JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

Major-  General. 


Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  2, 1863. 

Major:  Our  position  on  the  Jackson  road  is  fast  becoming  more 
dangerous.  The  enemy  have  a Cohorn  mortar  and  our  exact  range. 
They  fire  shell  with  heavy  bursting  charges,  and  our  men  are  killed 
and  wounded  with  fearful  rapidity.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Senteny,  com- 
manding Cockrell’s  regiment,  was  killed  this  morning.  No  better  or 
braver  field  officer  is  or  ever  has  been  in  our  army.  Many  subalterns, 
conspicuous  for  their  gallantry,  have  also  been  killed  or  wounded. 

I would  urge  that  every  howitzer  that  can  be  brought  to  the  vicinity 
be  placed  in  position,  and  fired  at  its  greatest  elevation  with  quarter 


414 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


charges,  to  render  the  ground  in  the  rear  and  vicinity  of  their  sap  as 
untenable  as  possible.  No  time  is  to  be  lost. 

Respectfully, 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

Ma/jor- General . 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  92. 

Report  of  Col.  Francis  M.  Cockrell , Second  Missouri  Infantry , com- 
manding First  Brigade. 

Demopolis,  Ala.,  August  1,  1863. 

Major  : In  consequence  of  the  death  of  my  gallant  and  lamented 
division  commander,  Maj.  Gen.  John  S.  Bowen,  I respectfully  beg  leave 
to  submit  to  you  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken  by  the  First 
Brigade  (Missouri  Volunteers),  Bowen’s  division,  composed  of  the  fol- 
lowing-named infantry  regiments,  to  wit : 

The  First  Missouri  Infantry,  composed  of  the  First  and  Fourth  Regi- 
ments consolidated,  the  Second  Missouri  Infantry,  the  Third  Missouri 
Infantry,  the  Fifth  Missouri  Infantry,  the  Sixth  Missouri  Infantry,  Cap- 
tain Guibor’s  battery,  Captain  Landis’  battery,  under  command  of  Lieu- 
tenant [John  M.]  Langan,  and  the  Wade  battery,  under  Lieut.  Richard 
C.  Walsh,  in  the  battles  of  Baker’s  Creek  and  Big  Black,  and  during 
the  siege  of  Vicksburg.* 

# # # * * * * 

On  May  18,  1863,  began  the  siege  of  Vicksburg.  On  this  evening  I 
received  an  order  from  General  Bowen  to  move  out  on  the  Graveyard 
road  to  support  Major-General  Smith’s  division.  Reporting  to  General 
Smith,  in  obedience  to  his  order  I. occupied  a line  on  the  extreme  left, 
in  advance  of  the  main  line,  afterward  occupied  during  the  siege,  and 
was  fired  upon  by  the  enemy’s  skirmishers  before  gaining  my  position. 
Skirmishing  continued  till  darkness  closed  in.  This  evening  I had  1 
man  killed  and  8 men  wounded.  During  the  night  of  the  18th  instant, 
I withdrew  in  rear  of  our  main  line,  and  remained  in  reserve,  in  rear  of 
the  right  of  Brigadier- General  Baldwin’s  brigade. 

About  2 p.  m.  (19th  instant),  the  enemy  massed  a large  force  in  front 
of  Brigadier-General  Shoup’s  brigade  and  the  left  of  Brigadier- General 
Hebert’s  and  the  right  of  Brigadier-General  Baldwin’s,  and  made  a 
most  furious  and  determined  assault.  Seeing  this  concentration  of  the 
enemy’s  forces,  I immediately  moved  the  Filth  Missouri  Infantry,  under 
Colonel  McCown,  to  the  support  of  General  Hebert’s  left,  and  the  First 
Missouri  Infantry,  under  Col.  A.  C.  Riley,  to  the  support  of  line  at  the 
stockade  between  General  Hubert’s  left  and  Shoup’s  right,  and  the  Sec- 
ond Missouri  Infantry,  under  Lieut.  Col.  P.  S.  Senteny,  to  the  support 
of  the  Twenty-seventh  Louisiana  Regiment,  on  Shoup’s  right,  and  the 
Sixth  Missouri  Infantry,  under  Col.  Eugene  Erwin,  to  the  support  ot 
Brigadier -General  Vaughn’s  brigade,  on  the  extreme  left  (then  threat- 
ened), and  held  the  Third  Missouri  Infantry,  under  Col.  W.  R.  Gause, 
in  readiness  to  re-enforce  any  point.  The  enemy  in  large  masses,  with- 
out any  regular  lines,  pressed  forward  very  close  to  our  works,  but  were 
soon  severely  repulsed  and  driven  back  in  disorder;  and  every  subse- 
quent effort  was  likewise  repulsed. 

* For  portion  here  omitted,  and  letter  of  transmittal,  see  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill* 
pp.  109-ll.r>, 


CHA1>.  XXXVI.]  THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  415 

This  brigade,  with  General  Shoup’s  brave  Louisianians,  had  the  honor 
of  receiving  the  first  assault  of  the  enemy  and  repulsing  them — suffer- 
ing, too,  the  dangers  incident  to  such  clash  of  arms,  losing  8 killed  and 
02  wounded  in  this  engagement. 

The  brave  and  gallant  William  F.  Luckett,  ordnance  sergeant  Second 
Missouri  Infantry,  acting  with  me  as  aide,  while  bringing  up  ammuni- 
tion, was  mortally  wounded  and  afterward  died. 

The  brigade  remained  near  this  line  up  to  the  22d  instant.  On  this 
day,  about  2 p.  m.,  the  enemy,  preparatory  to  a charge,  moved  his  whole 
force  as  near  our  lines  as  could  be  done,  and  then  made  a most  desper- 
ate and  jirotracted  effort  to  carry  our  lines  by  assault.  This  assault  was 
preceded  by  a most  furious  fire  from  the  enemy’s  numerous  batteries,  of 
shell,  grape,  and  canister.  The  air  was  literally  burdened  with  hissing 
missiles  of  death.  During  this  terrific  clash  of  arms,  the  Fifth  Missouri 
Infantry  occupied  a line  on  the  right  of  the  Thirty-sixth  Mississippi  Begi- 
ment,  in  Hebert’s  brigade ; the  Third  Missouri  occupied  the  stockade 
and  the  redan  to  its  right ; five  companies  of  the  Second  Missouri  In- 
fantry occupied  a portion  of  the  line  of  the  Twenty-seventh  Louisiana 
Infantry,  and  the^other  five  companies  in  reserve  ; six  companies  of  the 
First  Missouri  Infantry  were  placed  in  the  trenches  with  the  Thirty- 
sixth  Mississippi  Begiment,  and  one  company  occupied  the  redan  to  the 
right  of  the  Thirty-sixth  Mississippi  Begiment,  and  the  remaining  three 
companies  were  moved  from  point  to  point,  and  the  Sixth  Missouri  In- 
fantry was  sent  to  re-enforce  Brigadier-General  Moore’s  line,  and  then 
General  Hubert’s  line,  north  of  the  Jackson  road.  Nobly  did  the  offi- 
cers and  soldiers  of  this  brigade  greet  every  assault  of  the  enemy  with 
defiant  shouts  and  a deliberately  aimed  fire,  and  hurled  them  back  in 
disorder.  The  enemy  gained  the  ditch  around  the  redan  to  the  right 
of  the  stockade  and  occupied  it  for  some  time.  Colonel  Gause,  of  the 
1 Third  Missouri  Infantry,  procured  some  fuse-shell,  and,  using  them  as 
hand-grenades,  threw  them  into  the  ditch,  where  they  exploded,  killing 
' and  wounding  some  22  of  the  enemy. 

This  day  the  brigade  lost  28  killed  and  95  wounded,  the  Third  Mis- 
souri suffering  fearfully,  losing  12  killed  and  52  wounded,  having  been 
: exposed  during  the  assault  to  an  enfilading  and  rear  fire  in  the  redan, 
against  which  there  was  then  no  protection  or  defense. 

From  this  day  until  June  25,  this  brigade  was  held  in  reserve  and 
’ ordered  from  point  to  point  of  our  whole  line,  accordingly  as  different 
points  of  the  line  were  threatened  or  became  endangered  by  the  near 
approach  of  the  enemy;  sometimes  on  the  extreme  left,  then  on  the 
extreme  right,  and  then  in  the  center,  working  day  or  night,  as  circum- 
stances required,  to  strengthen  our  defenses,  having  some  men  killed 
or  wounded  daily. 

On  June  26,  the  Sixth  Missouri  Infantry,  Col.  Eugene  Erwin,  was  in 
. reserve  in  rear  of  the  Third  Louisiana  Infantry,  which  occupied  the  redan 
north  of  the  Jackson  road.  About  4 p.  m.  this  day  the  enemy  exploded 
a mine,  blowing  up  the  outer  portion  of  this  redan,  and  immediately 
thereafter  attempted  to  carry  this  point  by  assault.  Colonel  Erwin,  as 
soon  as  the  explosion  occurred,  marched  to  this  point.  The  enemy  oc- 
cupied the  outer  slope  of  this  work,  and  Colonel  Erwin  and  the  Third 
Louisiana  Infantry  occupied  an  inner  cross-work  about  25  feet  from  the 
enemy,  and  in  this  position  a desperate  struggle  was  made  by  the 
enemy  to  carry  this  redan,  but  every  effort  of  the  enemy  was  success- 
fully repulsed. 

In  this  struggle,  Col.  Eugene  Erwin,  of  the  Sixth  Missouri  Infantry,  a 
most  fearless,  prudent,  and  meritorious  officer,  was  pierced  by  two  balls, 


416 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


and  poured  out  the  crimsoned  treasures  of  his  heart  on  his  country’s 
altar,  and  now,  among  the  lifeless  defenders  of  Vicksburg,  fills  a patriot 
soldier’s  grave. 

This  day  the  Sixth  Missouri  Infantry  lost  3 killed  and  26  wounded. 

On  the  night  of  the  25th  instant,  the  Fifth  Missouri  Infantry,  Colonel 
McCown,  was  ordered  to  this  point,  and  the  Second  Missouri  Infantry 
on  the  night  of  the  26th  instant. 

On  the  evening  of  the  26th  instant,  having  procured  a number  of  6 
and  12  pound  shell,  to  be  used  as  hand-grenades,  I caused  them  to  be 
thrown  into  the  midst  of  the  enemy,  and  thus  drove  them  from  their 
position  and  reoccupied  the  entire  redan. 

When  the  enemy  made  the  assault  on  the  25th  instant,  they  threw  a 
large  number  of  hand-grenades  into  our  lines,  doing  much  injury. 

On  the  evening  of  July  1,  the  enemy  exploded  a mine,  charged  with 
at  least  2,000  pounds  of  powder,  the  crater  making  a fearful  breach 
through  a portion  of  the  redan,  burying  Lieutenant  [John  T.]  Crenshaw 
and  killing  Lieutenant  [John]  Boseberry  and  several  privates  of  the 
Sixth  Missouri  Infantry,  some  of  whom  were  blown  high  up  into  the 
air  and  buried  in  the  wreck.  Eight  negroes  and  the  overseer  in  charge, 
working  a counter-mine,  were  also  killed.  A large  number  of  the  Sixth 
Missouri  Infantry  were  blown  up  and  thrown  over  the  brow  of  the  hill, 
and  quite  a number  severely  wounded.  Simultaneously  with  the  ex- 
plosion, the  enemy  opened  a terrific  fire  at  short  range  from  two  8-inch 
columbiads,  two  30-pounder  Parrott  guns,  and  one  12-pounder  howitzer, 
and  a mortar  throwing  12-pounder  shell  (afterward  ascertained  to  be  a 
wooden  mortar),  concentrating  their  whole  fire  on  this  one  point.  This 
mortar  did  us  great  damage,  having  exact  range  of  our  position  and 
throwing  shells  heavily  charged  with  powder.  The  force  of  this  terrific 
explosion  threw  the  officers  and  men  of  the  Sixth  Missouri  Infantry 
and  a portion  of  the  Third  Louisiana  Infantry  back  from  the  works  over 
the  brow  of  the  hill,  knocking  off  their  hats  and  their  guns  out  of  their 
hands,  bruising  and  wounding  quite  a number ; but  notwithstanding 
this,  these  gallant  soldiers  rallied,  seized  the  nearest  gun,  and  rushed 
back  to  the  works.  The  veterans  of  the  Third  Louisiana  Infantry  raised 
a cheer,  which  was  quickly  taken  up  by  our  troops.  Immediately  after 
the  explosion,  I ordered  up  the  Second  Missouri  Infantry,  under  Lieu: 
tenant-Colonel  Senteny,  to  this  point,  and  about  6 p.  m.  relieved  the 
Sixth  Missouri  Infantry  with  the  Second  Missouri.  The  fire  from  the 
enemy’s  batteries  was  kept  up  till  after  dark,  and  from  the  mortar 
during  the  entire  night. 

This  day  the  Sixth  Missouri  Infantry  lost  8 killed  and  48  wounded, 
and  the  Second  Missouri  Infantry  lost  3 killed  and  35  wounded ; many 
severely,  who  afterward  died. 

Among  the  killed  of  to-day  is  numbered  one  of  the  best  officers  in  the 
Missouri  army — Lieut.  Col.  Pembroke  S.  Senteny,  of  the  Second  Mis- 
souri Infantry — brave,  cool,  and  generous — a model  soldier  and  officer ; 
and  also  Lieutenants  Crenshaw  and  Boseberry,  of  the  Sixth  Missouri 
Infantry. 

On  this  evening  the  First  Missouri  Infantry  was  moved  to  this  point, 
and  these  four  regiments — the  First,  Second,  Fifth,  and  Sixth  Missouri 
Infantry — relieved  each  other  every  six  or  twelve  hours  thereafter.  The 
First  Missouri  Infantry  occupied  this  perilous  point  during  the  day  of 
the  2d  instant,  and  late  that  evening  was  moved  to  re-enforce  General 
Barton’s  line,  on  the  extreme  right. 

On  the  morning  of  the  3d  instant,  the  firing  ceased  pending  negotia- 
tions for  the  capitulation  of  the  garrison,  which  took  place  on  the  morn- 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


417 


in g of  the  4th  instant.  Not  having  guns  enough  for  the  artillerymen 
of  this  brigade  during  the  siege,  they  were  placed  in  charge  of  guns  at 
different  points  of  the  line,  and  all  did  good  service. 

During  the  siege  of  Vicksburg  this  brigade  lost  heavily  in  killed  and 
wounded,  as  will  appear  by  the  following  : 


Command. 

Killed. 

i 

nS 

a 

0 

O 

* 

Total. 

18 

70 

88 

17 

89 

106 

18 

83 

101 

20 

52 

72 

6th  Missouri  

33 

133 

166 

Landis’  battery  ............. 

4 

6 

10 

\y aae  b«3/tt©ry 

2 

9 

11 

Guibor’s  battery  

1 

4 

5 

Total  

113 

446 

559 

This  is  a loss  in  killed  and  wounded  of  over  one-third  of  the  whole 
brigade,  and  shows  that  this  brigade  was  almost  continuously  during 
the  entire  siege  exposed  to  the  enemy’s  fire,  and  at  no  time  during  this 
eventful  siege  did  these  troops  ever  waver  or  fail  to  go  to  or  occupy  any 
point,  regardless  of  its  exposure,  and  frequently  had  to  and  did  occupy 
points  on  the  line  so  exposed  that  other  troops,  although  on  their  own 
line,  would  give  them  up  for  these  troops  to  occupy.  They  endured  all 
the  dangers,  fatigues,  exposures,  and  the  weakness  consequent  on  the 
insufficient  rations,  with  a most  commendable  cheerfulness  and  soldierly 
bearing,  willing  to  endure  all  things  for  the  safety  of  the  garrison,  and 
desirous  of  holding  out  and  fighting  as  long  as  there  was  a cartridge  or 
a ration  of  mule  or  horse,  and  when  the  garrison  capitulated  they  felt, 
and  were,  disarmed,  but  in  no  wise  whipped,  conquered,  or  subjugated. 

I cannot  commend  too  highly  the  field,  staff,  and  line  officers  ol  this 
brigade  for  their  cool  daring  and  judicious  bearing  in  the  faithful  dis- 
charge of  their  whole  duty,  regardless  of  personal  safety  and  comfort ; 
and  I specially  commend  the  constancy  of  the  following-named,  officers 
in  remaining  with  their  respective  commands:  Col.  A.  C.  Riley  and 
Lieutenant-Colonel  [Hugh  A.]  Garland,  First  Missouri  Infantry ; Lieut. 
Col.  P.  S Senteny  and  Major  [T.  M.]  Carter,  of  the  Second  Missouri 
Infantry;  Major  [J.  K.]  McDowTell,  of  the  Third  Missouri;  Col.  James 
McCown  and  Maj.  O.  A.  Waddell,  of  the  Fifth  [Missouri]  Infantry; 
and  Major  [Stephen]  Cooper,  of  the  Sixth  Missouri.  All  the  company 
officers,  with  few  exceptions,  remained  constantly  with  their  commands, 
and  with  their  men  suffered  hardships,  exposures,  and  dangers;  but 
the  private  soldiers  justly  won  and  should  receive  the  fullest  meed  of 
praise. 

To  Capt.  R.  L.  Maupin,  actiug  as  my  aide,  I am  under  special  obliga- 
tions for  the  invaluable  services  rendered  me  during  this  entire  siege — 
the  very  bravest  of  the  brave;  cool,  prudent,  and  discreet.  A braver  or 
better  soldier  never  bared  his  bosom  or  raised  his  arm  in  defense  of 
constitutional  liberty.  He  justly  merits  the  gratitude  of  his  country. 

I have  the  honor,  major,  to  be,  most  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

F.  M.  COCKRELL, 

Colonel , Commanding  First  Brigade , Missouri  Volunteers. 

Maj.  R.  W.  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General  to  Lieut.  Gen.  J.  C.  Pemberton. 

27  R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


418 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


ADDENDA. 

Report  of  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  lost  at  Grand  Gulf,  May  3,  Big  Black  Bridge, 
May  17,  and  at  the  surrender  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.  [ July  4],  1863,  belonging  to  General 
Bowen’s  Division. 

[Extract.] 


12 


10 


12 


Ordnance,  &c. 


8-inch  shell  gun 

32-pounder  gun,  rifled 

6-pounder  guns,  smooth-bore 

12-pounder  howitzers 

12-pounder  Napoleon  guns,  bronze. 

12-pounder  gun  carriages 

24-pounder  howitzers,  bronze 

24-pounder  howitzer  carriages 

Caissons 

Battery  wagons 

Traveling  forges 


Total 


Respectfully  submitted  with  this  explanation,  that  the  guns  of  the 
Wade,  Dawson,  and  Lowe  batteries  were  all  lost  at  Big  Black,  May  17, 
and  also  two  guns  (one  6-pounder  smooth  bore  and  one  12  pounder 
howitzer)  of  the  Guibor  battery,  and  that  the  guns  of  the  Landis  and 
one  6-pounder  smooth-bore  and  one  12-pounder  howitzer  of  the  Guibor 
batteries  were  lost  by  the  surrender  of  Vicksburg,  July  4,  and  that  the 
8-inch  shell  gun  and  the  32-pounder  rifled  gun  of  the  Guibor  battery 
were  lost  at  Grand  Gulf  by  the  evacuation  of  that  place,  May  3,  1863. 

F.  M.  COCKRELL, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  BovoeiOs  Division. 


Report  of  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  lost  in  the  Second  Division,  Missouri  Volunteers, 
at  Grand  Gulf,  Baker’s  Creek,  Big  Black,  and  Vicksburg. 


[Extract.] 


Small-arms  and  ammunition. 

First  Missouri 
Brigade. 

i 

1 35  04 

I 35  .-  <D 

&d^  a 

,=;W  b a 

Ph 

Second  Missouri 
Brigade. 

1 j 

Total. 

Small  arms : 

Percussion-lock  muskets,  caliber  .69 

265 

175 

150 

300 

75 

450 

890 

150 
394 
1,  624 
356 
8 

Mississippi  rifles,  caliber  .54 

Minie  muskets,  caliber  .58 

94 

1,549 

6 

8 

Enfield  nfles,  caliber  .57 

British  muskets,  caliber  .75 

350 

Belgian  muskets,  caliber  .70 

Ammunition : 

Buck  and  ball  cartridges,  caliber  .69 

1,922 

700 

800 

3,  422 

8,  900 
15,  880 
60, 140 
100 
93,  740 

’7,  000 
50,  000 
29,000  i 
6,000  | 
92,  000  j 

15,  900 
65, 880 
89,  H0 
«.  100 
185,  740 

Minie  cartridges,  caliber  .58 

Enfield  cartridges,  caliber  .57 

Mississippi  rifle  cartridges,  caliber  .54 

Musket  caps 



Total 



178,  760 

184,000 

362,  760 



Respectfully  submitted. 


J.  M.  FLANAGAN, 
Assistant  Adjutant- General 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 
No.  93. 


419 


Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Martin  E.  Green , G.  S.  Army , commanding  Sec- 
ond Brigade. 


Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

May  30,  1863—12  o’clock. 


Captain:  I have  made  a full  reconnaissance  of  this  position  above 
my  command,  where  the  Seventh  [Seventeenth]  Louisiana  was  sta- 
tioned last  night.  There  is  none  to-day. 

If  it  is  necessary  to  protect  this  line,  there  should  be  some  troops 
sent  here.  My  command  is  scattered  very  thin,  and  does  not  cover 
the  ground  necessary  to  be  covered  next  to  General  Vaughn’s  brigade 
at  the  curve.  There  should  be  a regiment  permanently  stationed,  if 
the  river  line  should  be  abandoned.  The  enemy  can  take  those  upper 
guns,  under 'the  present  arrangement,  whenever  they  desire  it. 

I am,  sir,  &c., 


M.  E.  GREEN, 

Brigadier- General. 


Capt.  R.  R.  Hutchinson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

June  5,  1863. 

Captain  : Two  of  my  scouts  have  returned.  They  report  nothing  of 
great  importance.  As  far  as  they  went  along  the  lines,  which  was  as 
far  as  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry  road,  their  [the  enemy’s]  reserve  was  very 
light ) their  whole  force  in  front  that  could  be  seen  by  him  was  not  as 
strong  as  our  lines. 

He  was  told  by  Federals  that  they  had  another  camp  back  on  the 
next  creek,  but  he  was  not  able  to  get  sight  of  it.  They  have  not  got 
near  the  artillery  in  front  that  we  had  imagined.  They  have  a great 
many  places  fixed  for  guns,  but  no  guns  iii  them.  Everything,  accord- 
ing to  his  opinion,  looked  as  though  part  of  the  army  had  left.  I 
sent  one  out  last  night  that  I think  will  make  some  discoveries  before 
he  returns.  If  he  does  not  get  taken,  he  intends  staying  until  he  ascer- 
tains certain  what  is  going  on.  There  is  one  out  yet  that  went  out  last 
night. 

In  our  front  they  are  still  working  on  their  intrenchments.  We  had 
2 men  killed  and  3 wounded  yesterday.  Our  works  are  in  a better  con- 
dition than  they  were  when  we  came  here.  They  still  need  work.  We 
are  not  able  to  get  tools  sufficient  to  work  with  so  as  to  get  them  com- 
pleted. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  &c., 

M.  E.  GREEN, 

Brigadier-  Genera  l. 

Captain  Hutchinson, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


420  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

No.  94. 

Report  of  Col  Thomas  P.  Dockery , Nineteenth  Arkansas  Infantry , com- 
manding Second  Brigade. 

Headquarters  Second  Brigade,  Second  Division, 

Bemopolis , Ala.,  July  29,  1863. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  tbe  orders  of  the  lieutenant-general  commanding, 
I submit  the  following  as  the  report  of  the  part  taken  by  this  brigade  in 
the  defense  of  Yicksburg  : 

About  sunset  on  the  evening  of  May  17,  the  remnant  of  the  brigade 
(the  most  of  it  having  been  captured  at  Big  Black  Bridge)  reached  the 
city,  and  went  into  camp  near  the  cemetery. 

On  the  evening  of  the  18th,  it  was  ordered  to  take  position  in  rear  of 
Brigadier-General  Moore,  near  the  arsenal,  and  act  as  reserve,  and 
marched  to  the  support  of  different  points  on  the  line  without  doing  but 
little  or  no  fighting  until  the  morning  of  the  22d.  The  brigade  was  or- 
dered to  strengthen  the  lines  of  Brigadier-General  Moore.  While  on 
the  way  to  General  Moore’s  line,  a courier  from  Brigadier-General  [S. 
D.]  Lee  to  General  Green  reported  that  General  Lee’s  line  had  been 
broken  by  the  enemy.  The  brigade  was  moved  at  a double-quick  to 
the  support  of  General  Lee.  When  near  the  line  of  General  Lee,  his 
men  rallied  and  drove  the  enemy  from  their  works  ; at  least,  when  we 
arrived  at  the  works,  General  Lee’s  line  was  complete  and  no  enemy  on 
his  works,  yet  there  was  a considerable  force  in  a ditch  or  ravine  under 
General  Lee’s  works.  I was  ordered  by  General  Green  to  take  the  First 
Arkansas  Battalion  Sharpshooters  to  open  on  the  enemy  in  the  ditch, 
which  I did,  ayd  with  such  effect  as  to  soon  drive  them  from  their 
hiding  place.  At  1 p.  m.  I joined  the  rest  of  the  brigade,  which  had 
gone  to  the  support  of  General  Moore’s  lines,  on  the  Baldwin’s  Ferry 
road.  Here  the  Nineteenth  and  Twentieth  Arkansas  were  ordered  into 
the  fort  occupied  by  the  Second  Texas  Infantry,  the  enemy  occupying 
a position  in  the  ditch  and  a ravine  in  front  of  the  fort.  About  4.30 
p.  m.  the  First  and  Third  Missouri  Cavalry,  joined  by  the  First  Arkan- 
sas Cavalry  (all  dismounted),  sallied  from  the  fort,  and,  after  a short 
but  desperate  fight,  drove  the  enemy  from  the  position  with  heavy  loss. 

On  the  next  day  the  brigade  moved  back  to  its  bivouac,  near  the 
arsenal,  and  continued  in  reserve  until  the  morning  of  the  28th  instant, 
when  it  was  ordered  to  take  position  in  the  trenches  fronting  the  river 
below  the  city,  and  on  the  29th  was  ordered  to  take  position  in  front  and 
above  the  city,  to  support  the  heavy  batteries  and  be  ready  to  meet  any 
attempt  to  storm  the  city. 

The  brigade  occupied  this  position  until  the  evening  of  June  2,  when 
it  was  ordered  to  move  out  to  the  works  in  the  rear  of  the  city,  and  occupy 
permanently  a gap  between  the  divisions  of  Major-Generals  Smith  and 
Forney.  This  was  one  of  the  most  exposed  positions  on  the  line,  the 
enemy’s  guns  enfilading  the  works  from  right  to  left,  and  guns  of  heavy 
caliber  played  upon  the  enemy’s  works  from  the  front.  With  the  limited 
number  of  intrenching  tools  on  the  line,  it  took  all  night  to  repair  the 
damage  done  to  the  works  during  the  day. 

Too  much  praise  cannot  be  accorded  to  the  officers  and  men  for  the 
untiring  energy  and  perseverance  displayed  by  them  in  constructing 
and  strengthening  the  works. 

On  the  26th,  the  enemy  commenced  digging  an  approach  in  front  of 
the  fort  on  my  brigade.  General  Green  having  been  wounded  on  the 
day  before,  he  was  on  this  day  unable  to  visit  the  fortifications  and 
watch  the  movements  of  the  enemy. 


CHAr.  XXXYI.  ] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


421 


On  the  morning  of  the  27th,  he  was  in  the  ditches,  as  was  his  custom, 
reconnoitering  the  positions  of  the  enemy  along  his  front,  and  while 
looking  over  the  parapet  in  front  of  the  sap  of  the  enemy,  which  was 
only  about  60  yards  distant,  he  was  shot  through  the  head  by  a sharp- 
shooter and  almost  instantly  killed.  Here  permit  me  to  lay  my  humble 
tribute  on  his  tomb.  Missouri  has  lost  another  of  her  bravest  cham- 
pions—the  South  one  of  its  ablest  defenders.  It  was  my  fortune  to  be 
intimately  associated  with  him ; knew  him  well.  He  joined  the  army 
as  a private  soldier  when  the  tocsin  of  war  first  sent  its  notes  throughout 
the  West.  He  served  his  country  long  and  faithfully.  His  soldiers  re- 
garded him  with  that  reverence  due  a father,  and  many  a tear  was  shed 
at  his  fall.  He  was  a pure  patriot  and  a gallant  officer,  and  a true 
Christian,  divested  of  everything  like  a thirst  for  military  fame.  He 
acted  solely  from  a sense  of  duty  and  right  and  a pure  love  of  country, 
and  thus  inseparably  entwined  himself  not  only  around  the  hearts  of 
his  troops,  but  of  all  who  knew  him. 

The  command  devolving  upon  me,  I at  once  commenced  counter- 
mines to  that  of  the  enemy,  one  of  which  was  sprung  on  the  night  of 
July  2,  with  but  little  damage  to  the  enemy. 

A flag  of  truce  having  passed  out  of  the  lines  at  8 o’clock  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  3d,  there  was  a suspension  of  hostilities,  which  continued 
until  the  surrender  of  the  forces  at  10  a.  m.  on  the  4th,  in  obedience  to 
the  order  of  the  lieutenant-general  commanding.  The  troops,  up  to  the 
time  of  the  surrender,  were  cheerful  and  confident  of  success. 

Our  loss  was  very  heavy  in  killed  and  wounded  during  the  siege. 
Correct  lists  of  the  casualties  will  be  forwarded  as  soon  as  they  can  be 
made  out. 

My  thanks  are  specially  due  to  Capt.  W.  B.  Pittman,  assistant  in- 
spector-general, Capt.  H.  M.  Pollard,  assistant  adjutant-general,  and 
Lieut.  Thomas  B.  Green,  aide-de-camp  on  the  staff  of  General  Green, 
for  the  faithful  and  gallant  discharge  of  the  duties  devolving  upon  them 
during  the.  siege,  especially  after  the  fall  of  General  Green.  It  has  been 
my  pleasure  to  witness  the  conduct  of  these  officers  on  the  battle-field, 
and  it  is  with  pleasure  that  I bear  testimony  as  to  their  coolness  and 
pre-eminent  gallantry,  untiring  energy,  and  perseverance.  I earnestly 
recommend  them  to  the  favorable  consideration  of  the  lieutenant-gen- 
eral commanding. 

The  thanks  of  the  country  are  due  to  Captains  [J.  H.]  Neal  and  [J. 
W.]  Barclay,  and  Lieutenant  [Harris]  Wilkerson,  of  First  Missouri  Cav- 
alry, for  the  distinguished  service  rendered  by  them  in  making  numer- 
ous sorties  out  to  the  enemy’s  front,  examining  their  approach  and 
mines,  and  giving  much  valuable  information. 

I would  also  recommend  to  the  favorable  notice  of  the  lieutenant- 
general  commanding  Sergeant  [William  A,]  Fisher,  of  Lowe’s  battery, 
Missouri  Light  Artillery,  who  commanded  a gun  within  300  yards  of 
the  enemy’s  battery,  using  it  with  telling  effect,  tearing  down  their 
earthworks  and  knocking  out  of  position  their  gabions  or  sap-rollers. 
Frequently  the  enemy  would  open  an  entire  battery  and  line  of  skir- 
mishers upon  the  gun,  sometimes  almost  leveling  the  parapets;  yet  the 
men  stood  by  their  gun,  replying  with  good  effect,  and  at  night,  with- 
out any  assistance  from  the  infantry,  would  repair  the  damage  done  to 
their  works  during  the  day. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

TOM.  P.  DOCKEBY, 

Colonel , Commanding  Second  Brigade. 

Maj.  [B.  W.]  Memminger, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  Bast  Louisiana. 


422  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

No.  95. 

Report  of  Capt.  James  W.  Barclay  and  Lieut.  II.  Wilier  son,  First 
Missouri  Cavalry , and  letters  of  congratulation. 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  31, 1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  having  obtained  permission  to 
burn  the  sunken  gunboat  Cincinnati,  lying  above  the  city,  I left  the 
city  wharf  with  my  own  company  and  a few  volunteers  Irom  the  regi- 
ment and  Third  Missouri  Cavalry,  making  in  all  47  men — all  the  boats 
could  possible  carry— at  10.15  yesterday  evening.  I reached  the  wreck 
without  difficulty.  She  was  lying  about  25  or  30  yards  from  the  bank 
of  the  river.  She  was  a complete  wreck,  the  shots  from  our  batteries 
having  completely  riddled  her.  From  what  I could  see,  1 judge  her  to 
have  been  a magnificent  vessel.  Her  guns  were  all  under  water ; every- 
thing of  value  had  been  removed  from  the  upper  works  ; no  guns  in  the 
turrets.  The  river  appears  to  have  fallen  considerable  since  the  sinking 
of  the  boat,  and  she  is  careening  from  the  shore. 

Immediately  after  the  wreck  w as  fired,  a small  tug  started  from  the 
enemy's  fleet  toward  us,  and,  after  getting  below  the  mortar-boats  a 
short  distance,  returned.  A few  of  the  enemy  made  their  appearance 
at  the  point  of  the  peninsula  as  I returned,  but  did  not  fire  upon  us, 
although  I passed  within  about  100  yards  of  them. 

I returned  to  the  wharf,  having  accomplished  all  I had  undertaken, 
at  12.15  o’clock,  having  been  absent  only  two  hours.  The  boat,  I think, 
is  now  so  completely  destroyed  as  to  be  of  no  use  whatever  either  to 
ourselves  or  the  enemy.  The  men  under  m3'  command  all  deserve  great 
credit  for  their  gallantry. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ JAMES  W.  BARCLAY, 

Captain. 

H.  WILKERSON, 

Lieutenant , Commanding  Company  and  Volunteers. 

Capt.  H.  M.  Pollard, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

The  flag  of  the  gunboat  was  found  on  the  wreck,  and  is  transmitted 
herewith. 

[First  indorsement.] 

Approved,  and  respectfully  forwarded. 

M.  E.  GREEN, 

Brigadier- General,  Second  Brigade. 


Respectfully  forwarded. 


[Second  indorsement.] 

JNO.  S.  BOWEN, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Division. 

ADDENDA. 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana, 

Vicksburg , May  31,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  Bowen, 

Commanding  Division : 

General  : The  lieutenant-general  commanding  desires  to  tender  his 
thanks  to  Captain  Barclay,  Lieutenant  Wilkerson,  and  the  men  under 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JSIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


423 


tlieir  command,  for  the  successful  accomplishment  of  their  mission  in 
burning  the  gunboat  Cincinnati  last  night,  and,  as  a tribute  to  their  gal- 
lantry, he  has  great  pleasure  in  presenting  them  with  the  flag  captured 
on  the  occasion. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

W.  H.  McCARDLE, 

Assistant  Adjutant - General . 


Hdqrs.  Dept,  of  Mississippi  and  East  Louisiana, 

Vicksburg , May  31,  1863. 

Brigadier-General  Green, 

Commanding , &c. : 

General  : The  lieutenant-general  commanding  directs  me  to  say  that 
he  cheerfully  accedes  to  your  request,  and  has  presented  the  flag  cap- 
tured on  the  gunboat  Cincinnati  last  night  to  the  gallant  captors.  The 
necessary  instructions  have  been  issued  through  Brigadier-General 
Bowen,  commanding  your  division. 

In  reference  to  contemplated  expedition  below,  the  lieutenant-general 
instructs  me  to  say  that  he  will  decide  upon  it  after  he  has  seen  Lieu- 
tenant Wilkerson. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

W.  H.  McCARDLE, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


lSTo.  96. 

Report  of  Surg.  Benjamin  I).  Lay , C.  S.  Army . 

Citv  Hospital,  June  10,  1863. 

Sir:  It  becomes  my  painful  duty  to  inform  the  lieutenant-general 
commanding  that,  at  1.45  a.  m.  this  morning,  one  of  the  enemy’s  shells 
from  their  mortars  penetrated  my  main  building,  and,  descending  to  the 
floor,  blew  up  the  surgeons’  room  and  the  office  above,  destroying  the 
entire  stock  of  drugs,  except  some  morphine  and  quinine,  and  breaking 
the  leg  of  Surgeon  Bretts  so  badly  as  to  require  instant  amputation. 
It  also  blew  three  rooms  into  one,  besides  the  damage  to  the  roof  and 
floors. 

In  notifying  the  general  of  this  casualty,  it  is  proper  to  inform  him 
that  a removal  of  the  hospital  would  cause  more  deaths  than  the  enemy’s 
shells,  even  could  we  find  a safer  place,  or  one  where  the  patients  could 
be  provided  for,  as  we  have  not  less  than  75  whom  it  would  be  danger- 
ous to  remove,  and  about  20  to  whom  it  would  be  almost  certain  death. 

We  will  require  an  entire  outfit  of  drugs,  and.  the  use  of  a carpenter 
and  brick  mason  for  a couple  of  days. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully, 

BENJ.  D.  LAY, 

Surgeon-in- Charge  City  Hospital , Vicksburg. 

Major  Memminger, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


424  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

No.  97. 

Abstract  from  morning  report  of  sick  and  wounded  of  the  Confederate 
Army  at  Vicksburg,  July  4,  1863. 


Hospitals. 

Returned  to  duty. 

Sent  to  general 
hospital. 

Remaining  under  treatment. 

Officers  sick. 

Men. 

Officers  sick. 

Men. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Wounded. 

Sick. 

Wounded. 

Sick. 

Wounded. 

Sick. 

Aggregate. 

Wounded. 

M 

o 

33 

Aggregate. 

Stevenson’s  division.  .. 

50 

1 

1 

4 

37 

115 

152 

315 

1,  379 

1,  694 

Forney’s  division 

5 

20 

1 

2 

9 

48 

57 

119 

383 

502 

Smith’s  division 

3 

1 

16 

17 

47 

64 

270 

943 

1,  213 

Bowen’s  division 

7 

13 

12 

25 

- 182 

331 

513 

General  hospital 

2 

! 16 

58  ■ 

26 

84 

1,  093 

481 

1,574 

Total 

8 

3 

109 

| 

2 

1 

6 

134 

248 

382 

1,  979 

3,  517 

1 

5,  496 

* Yerv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  H.  BRYAN, 

Medical  Director. 

Major  Memmtngker, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


MAY  20,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Salem,  Tenn. 

Report  of  Col.  Edward  Hatch , Second  Iowa  Cavalry , commanding  Cav- 
alry Brigade , Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

Headquarters  Cavalry  Brigade, 

La  Grange , Tenn.,  May  20,  1863. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  scout  sent  out  this 
morning,  consisting  of  two  companies  Second  Iowa  Cavalry  and  two 
companies  Sixth  Iowa  Infantry,  found  the  enemy,  about  300  strong 
([W.  R.]  Mitchell’s,  Sol.  [G.]  Street’s,  and  others),  at  Salem.  A skirmish 
ensued,  and  the  enemy  fled,  and,  being  freshly  mounted,  got  away  from 
our  men.  One  horse  was  killed  on  the  rebel  side.  No  loss  on  ours. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ED  WARD  HATCH, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Capt.  W.  H.  Harland, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  First  Division,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


SKIRMISH  AT  COLLIERVILLE,  TENN. 


425 


MAY  20,  1863.— Skirmish  at  Collierville,  Tenn. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Col.  John  M.  Loomis,  Twenty-sixth  Illinois  Infantry,  commanding  brigade. 
No.  2.— Col.  R.  McCulloch,  Second  Missouri  Cavalry  (Confederate). 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  John  M.  Loomis , Twenty-sixth  Illinois  Infantry , com- 
manding Brigade. 

Collierville,  May  21,  1863. 

Sir  : The  attack  of  yesterday  evening  was  made  on  picket  post  Nos. 
4 and  5,  directly  in  our  front,  in  three  columns,  by  different  roads, 
and  of  larger  forces  than  I supposed  last  night.  Cavalry  and  infantry 
supports  arrived  at  the  line  before  the  enemy  were  out  of  sight  of  the 
next  post,  but,  as  they  scattered  in  the  woods,  our  cavalry  did  not 
overtake  them.  Neither  post  was  surprised.  The  guard  fought  well, 
and  held  their  posts  too  long  to  be  able  to  retire,  they  being  surrounded. 
My  force  at  these  two  posts  was  15  men  and  2 non  commissioned  offi- 
cers. My  loss  was  1 killed  and  9 missing.  The  balance  did  not  come 
on,  but  held  the  vicinity  of  their  post  until  they  were  re-enforced.  I 
am  not  aware  of  the  damage  to  the  enemy,  though  some  is  reported. 
I can  attach  no  blame  to  the  officers  or  men  of  the  guard.  All  were  at 
post,  and  in  proper  order.  They  discovered  the  enemy  at  once,  and 
made  such  disposition  as  the  officer  in  charge  thought  best.  Duration 
of  attack  probably  not  fifteen  minutes.  The  guard  fired  an  average  of 
three  rounds. 

The  lieutenant  in  charge  of  the  left  wing  of  the  picket  guard,  who 
spends  the  whole  tour  of  the  guards  on  its  line,  was  at  post  No.  3,  and 
saw  the  affair,  and  speaks  in  praise  of  the  conduct  of  the  men,  as  do 
the  citizens  who  saw  the  fight. 

JOHN  MASON  LOOMIS, 

Colonel , Commanding  Brigade. 

Lieut.  Col.  Henry  Binmore, 

. Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  B.  McCulloch , Second  Missouri  Cavalry  ( Confederate ). 

Senatobia,  Miss.,  May  21,  1863. 

General  : The  enemy  advanced  yesterday  from  Collierville,  1,000 
strong,  to  Coldwater ; returned  in  the  evening.  Captains  White  and 
[W.  H.]  Couzens  sent  Lieutenant  [Z.  D.]  Jennings  with  10  men  as  far 
as  Collierville;  here  the  lieutenant  killed  2 and  captured  10  Federal 
prisoners.  Arrived  here  this  [?J  evening. 

B.  McCULLOCH. 


General  [J.  B.]  Chalmers. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


42  6 


MAY  20-23. — Expedition  to  Yazoo  City,  Miss.,  and  skirmish  (23d)  at 

Liverpool  Landing. 

Report  of  Col.  Wirt  Adams , Mississippi  Cavalry. 

Near  Liverpool,  May  23,  1863. 

General  : I marched  my  command  on  yesterday  as  rapidly  as  the 
exhausted  condition  of  the  artillery  horses  would  permit,  crossed  the 
river,  and  by  dark  reached  a point  4 miles  distant  from  Liverpool.  Re- 
suming the  march  this  morning  at  5 a.  m.,  I hastened  on  to  Liverpool, 
and  posted  my  battery  near  the  river  bank  and  my  cavalry  dismounted 
within  a few  steps  of  the  river.  The  smoke  of  the  enemy’s  boats  de- 
scending the  river  was  plainly  visible  at  the  time  of  my  arrival,  and 
within  a few  minutes  after  taking  position  three  transports  and  two 
large  gunboats  appeared.  The  battery  at  once  engaged  them  as  they 
came  within  range,  and  as  they  passed  my  dismounted  men  poured  a 
rapid  and  effective  fire  through  the  port-holes  of  the  gunboats  and  all 
openings  of  the  transports,  driving  the  enemy  from  his  guns.  Taking 
position  below  the  town,  he  opened  a brisk  fire  of  shell,  grape,  and  can- 
nister,  with  but  little  injury  to  my  command,  I am  pleased  to  say.  The 
fleet,  after  an  hour’s  delay,  resumed  its  course  down  the  river,  and  has 
passed  Satartia.  The  transports  are  boarded  up  on  the  sides  and  cov- 
ered with  thin  iron  plates,  loopholed  for  small-arms,  and  armed  with 
six  field  pieces  each.  My  impression  is  the  fleet  has  gone  down  for  re- 
enforcements. The  force  left  in  Yazoo  City  is  estimated  by  my  scouts, 
who  have  just  returned  from  the  town,  at  from  800  to  1,200  men.  A 
cavalry  force  is  expected  by  the  enemy  at  Yazoo  City,  coming  by  the 
Valley  roadr  For  this  I am  now  watching. 

I find  that  Liverpool  is  the  only  point  where  the  battery  can  be  ad- 
vantageously posted  on  the  Yazoo  from  Snyder’s  to  Yazoo  City,  and  I 
think  it  doubtful  whether  the  enemy  will  give  me  another  opportunity 
at  that  point. 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WIRT  ADAMS, 
Colonel , Commanding , &e. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  Adams, 

Commanding  Brigade. 


[Indorsements.  ] 

Headquarters  Cavalry  Brigade, 

Camp  near  Vernon , Miss.,  May  23,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded  through  General  Gist’s  headquarters.  There 
appears  to  be  some  discrepancy  between  this  report  and  the  report  of 
Henderson’s  scouts.  But  Henderson’s  scouts  left  after  this  did  ; that 
is,  Henderson’s  scouts  left  Yazoo  City  later  than  the  scout  of  Colonel 
Adams. 

JOHN  ADAMS, 

Brigadier- General  Provisional  Army  C.  Commanding. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  If  this  is  true,  Brigadier-General  [W.  H.  T.] 
Walker  might  capture  the  force  at  Yazoo  City. 


S.  R.  GIST, 
Brigadier  General. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  EXPEDITION  TO  SENATOBIA,  MISS.,  ETC. 


427 


MAY  21-26,  1863.— Expedition  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to  Senatobia,  Miss., 

and  skirmish  (23d). 

REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Col.  Edward  Hatch,  Second  Iowa  Cavalry,  commanding  First  Cavalry  Bri- 
gade, Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

No.  2.— Col.  La  Fayette  MeCrillis,  Third  Illinois  Cavalry,  commanding  Second  Cav- 
alry Brigade. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Col.  Edward  Hatch , Second  Iowa  Cavalry , commanding  First 

Cavalry  Brigade. 

Near  Cold  water,  May  25,  1863. 
General  : I attacked  Chalmers’  command  in  the  Senatobia  Swamp 
on  the  morning  of  the  23d,  scattering  his  forces,  drove  the  main  body 
across  the  Tallaliatckee  into  Panola,  the  rest  escaping  toward  Helena. 
The  enemy  left  9 dead  on  the  field.  Chalmers’  forces,  I learn  from  the 
prisoners,  consisted  of  about  2,000  regular  troops  and  about  1,000  con- 
scripts. 

I am,  general,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  HATCH, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Mai.  Gen.  S.  A.  Hurlbut. 


La  Grange,  Tenn.,  May  31,  1863. 

Captain:  1 have  the  honor  to  report  that,  complying  with  orders  from 
General  Smith,  I left  camp  at  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  on  the  morning  of  May 
21, 1863,  to  carry  out  instructions  from  Major-General  Hurlbut,  to  beat 
up  the  rebel  General  Chalmers’  quarters  and  disperse  his  forces,  col- 
lecting stock  and  provisions  and  destroying  forage.  Proceeded  with 
the  Second  Iowa  Cavalry,  Sixth  Iowa  Infantry,  detachments  of  the 
Sixth  and  Seventh  Illinois  Cavalry,  three  2-pounder  guns  (First  Illinois 
Light  Artillery),  and  one  section  of  6-pounders  (Cooper’s  battery),  to 
Mount  Pleasant,  thence  2 miles  south  of  Byhalia  (Farmington),  where 
I was  joined  by  Colonel  MeCrillis’  Second  Brigade  of  cavalry,  with 
two  howitzers,  Colonel  MeCrillis  having  driven  the  enemy  out  of  By- 
halia two  hours  before.  There  I found  a store  had  been  fired  and 
burned.  I immediately  sent  my  adjutant- general  to  Colonel  MeCrillis’ 
command  with  the  order  that,  if  any  outrages  of  this  kind  were  com- 
mitted, I should  recommend  the  pay  of  the  troops  guilty  of  them  to  be 
stopped  against  them. 

Having  reasons  to  believe  the  enemy  would  offer  battle  at  Cockrum’s 
Cross-Roads,  on  the  morning  of  May  22  dispatched  Colonel  MeCrillis’ 
command,  by  a road  to  my  left,  to  take  the  enemy  in  flank  and  rear, 
while  I moved  the  balance  of  my  command  by  direct  road  to  Cockrum’s. 
The  enemy’s  pickets  disputed  the  ground  steadily  to  this  point,  doing 
us  little  damage,  except  occasionally  killing  a horse.  The  enemy  re- 
treated from  Cockrum’s  toward  Luxalioma.  Skirmishing  continued 
during  the  day.  Camped  that  night  near  Luxahoma,  on  Jim  Wolf 
Creek. 

At  daylight,  May  23,  the  enemy  attacked  my  pickets,  leading  me  to> 
believe  they  would  fight  at  Luxahoma. 

Marched  early  that  morning,  skirmishing  with  the  enemy,  to  Luxa- 
homa. At  this  point  I sent  Colonel  MeCrillis  to  feel  the  enemy  toward 


428  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

Senatobia,  and  inform  me  if  he  found  them  in  force.  I moved  the  main 
column  through  Luxahoma,  driving  an  inferior  force  south,  toward  Pa- 
nola. Colonel  McCrillis  reported  that  he  found  the  enemy  in  force  4 
miles  from  Luxahoma,  in  a very  strong  position,  in  the  swamps  of  Sen- 
atobia  Creek.  I immediately  sent  him  orders  to  press  the  enemy  slowly, 
while  I pushed  around  the  enemy’s  right  flank  to  his  rear.  The  road 
being  rough,  after  marching  6 miles,  I found  my  artillery  could  not 
move  rapidly.  Eetaining  the  Sixth  Iowa  to  support  it,  I pushed  all  my 
cavalry  rapidly  southwest  6 miles  farther,  reaching  the  main  Senatobia 
and  Panola  road,  6 miles  south  of  Senatobia.  Supposing  the  main  body 
of  the  enemy  had  not  escaped  from  Colonel  McCrillis,  I pushed  the  cav- 
alry rapidly  toward  Senatobia.  In  the  mean  time  the  enemy,  after  a 
sharp  skirmish  with  Colonel  McCrillis,  bad  broken  and  fled  rapidly, 
avoiding  the  movement  of  my  main  column,  of  which  they  were  ap- 
prised, retreating  toward  Helena,  and  on  a road  west  of  the  main  Panola 
road,  leaving  9 killed  in  the  fight  in  the  swamps  about  Senatobia  Creek. 
A few  moments  after  reaching  the  town  it  was  fired  on  the  windward 
side.  With  great  exertions,  a portion  of  the  stores  were  saved  aud  all 
the  dwelling-houses.  We  were  obliged  to  pull  down  five  stores  in  order 
to  save  the  town.  Although  active  inquiries  have  been  made,  so  far 
the  officers  have  failed  to  ascertain  the  perpetrators ; and  though  both 
men  and  officers  of  Colonel  McCrillis’  command  worked  resolutely  and 
cheerfully  to  extinguish  the  fire,  I am  under  the  impression  the  build- 
ings were  fired  by  men  of  his  command,  or  some  citizen  scouts  who 
happened  to  be  with  the  brigade  at  the  time.  Colonel  McCrillis  did  all  in 
his  power  to  extinguish  the  fire,  and  the  only  buildings  lost  had  been 
abandoned,  for  months. 

Great  credit  is  due  to  the  command  of  Colonel  McCrillis  in  driving 
the  enemy  out  of  the  swamp  at  Senatobia,  a very  strong  position, 

Camping  that  night  with  my  artillery  and  infantry  2 miles  south  of 
the  town,  I pushed  Colonel  McCrillis’  command  south  toward  Panola, 
and  detachments  of  the  Second  Iowa  Cavalry  west  to  the  Coldwater, 
in  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  who  had  gone  on  different  roads. 

May  24,  sent  the  artillery  to  Coldwater  Station,  10  miles  north  of 
Senatobia,  with  part  of  the  Sixth  Iowa  Infantry,  using  the  balance  of 
the  command  to  pick  up  stock  and  negroes,  most  of  which  has  been  run 
out  of  the  country.  Colonel  McCrillis  reported  the  following  day  at 
Coldwater  Station.  He  had  driven  the  detachments  of  the  enemy  going 
south  over  the  Tallahatehee.  The  detachments  sent  after  the  enemy 
toward  Coldwater  did  not  come  up  with  them,  and  learning  they  were 
retreating  in  small  parties,  returned,  reporting  the  following  day  at 
Coldwater  Station,  bringing  in  what  stock  they  could  find. 

The  next  day,  May  26,  broke  my  command  up  in  detachments,  send- 
ing one  column  by  the  way  of  Cockrum’s  Cross-Roads,  and  near  Holly 
Springs,  to  La  Grange,  one  by  the  way  of  Mount  Pleasant,  Collierville, 
and  La  Grange,  one  direct  to  Collierville,  and  one  to  Germantown,  with 
orders  to  scour  the  country  for  guerrillas.  The  weather  being  hot  and 
dusty,  I lost  many  animals,  which  I was  able  to  replace,  bringing  in 
about  400  mules  at  the  different  posts. 

The  casualties  in  this  scout  were  5 men  wounded.  The  cattle  driven 
in  by  the  command  \yere  turned  over  to  Colonel  McCrillis  at  Hernando. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  HATCH, 

Colonel  Second  Iowa  Cavalry , Commanding  Brigade. 

Capt.  W.  H.  Morgan, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General , Cavalry  Division. 


Chap.  XXX VI.] 


EXPEDITION  TO  HERNANDO,  MISS. 

No.  2. 


429 


Report  of  Col.  La  Fayette  McCrillis.  Third  Illinois  Cavalry,  commanding 
Second  Cavalry  Brigade. 

Germantown,  May  25,  1863. 

My  command  has  returned  and  are  in  camp.  I have  the  honor  to  re- 
port that  on  the  23d  instant,  at  12  m.,  2 miles  east  of  Senatobia,  on  Basket 
Creek,  I came  up  with  General  Chalmers7  rebel  forces,  1,500  strong, 
commanded  by  Colonel  [R.]  McCulloch, and  in  three  hours  whipped  him 
out  and  drove  him  into  Panola. 

Casualties : Killed  and  wounded,  none ; rebel  loss,  11  killed.  They 
admit  15  wounded. 

L.  F.  McCRILLIS, 

Colonel , Commanding  Second  Brigade  Cavalry. 

Maj.  Gen.  S.  A.  Hurlbtjt. 


MAY  23-24,  1863.— Expedition  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  to  Hernando,  Miss. 

Report  of  Col.  Thomas  Stephens , Second  Wisconsin  Cavalry. 

Memphis,  Tenn.,  May  25,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  to  report  that,  in  accordance  with  orders  received, 
I left  camp  at  daybreak  of  the  23d  of  May,  with  about  400  men  from 
the  Second  Wisconsin  Cavalry  Regiment,  Fifth  Ohio,  and  First  Mis- 
souri, and  moved  out  on  the  Hernando  road,  closely  reconnoitering  the 
country  for  an  enemy,  reaching  Hernando,  Miss.,  about  6 p.  in.,  where 
I camped  for  the  night. 

During  this  day’s  march  we  encountered  numerous  squads  of  the 
enemy,  belonging  principally  to  Captain  Manning’s  company,  attached 
to  [G.  L.]  Blythe’s  regiment  of  Mississippi  cavalry.  Of  these,  we  cap- 
tured 3,  and  1 man  of  the  First  [Seventh]  Tennessee  Cavalry,  and  also  a 
lieutenant  of  Chalmers’  battalion  of  sharpshooters.  A scout  of  General 
Chalmers  was  also  chased  and  killed. 

At  daybreak  of  the  24th,  we  moved  from  Hernando  to  Pounder’s 
Ferry,  on  the  Cohlwater  River,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  intelligence 
of  Colonel  Hatch’s  command.  Nothing  was  seen  of  him,  however. 
Citizens  stated  that  a large  Federal  force  was  at  a point  8 miles  from 
Coldwater  on  the  night  of  the  22d  of  May,  and  moved  in  a southerly 
direction  next  morning.  Chalmers  is  said  to  have  moved  south  from 
Panola  with  his  command.  I did  not,  therefore,  deem  it  necessary  to 
cross  the  Coldwater.  Blythe  has  crossed  the  Coldwater,  and  was  at 
Hickey  Haley  when  last  heard  from.  He  has  left  Captain  Manning 
with  one  company  in  the  country  between  Memphis  and  Hernando. 
This  company  was  discovered  by  our  advance— Squadron  H,  Second 
Wisconsin  Cavalry — on  our  return,  on  the  Horn  Lake  road,  near  Colonel 
Blythe’s  plantation,  drawn  up  in  line  in  the  brush  about  20  yards  from 
the  road.  The  advance  charged  them,  killing  3 and  scattering  the  re- 
mainder in  all  directions.  No  prisoners  were  taken,  on  account  of  the 
thickness  of  the  brush  giving  them  every  opportunity  to  escape.  We 
peached  camp  at  about  dusk  last  evening  without  loss  of  any  kind. 


430 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


The  following  is  a list  of  property  captured  : Nine  horses,  2 mules,  6 
saddles,  3 revolvers,  3 double-barreled  shot-guns,  1 rifle,  1 musket,  and 
1 saber. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOMAS  STEPHENS, 

Colonel  Second  Wisconsin  Vol.  Cavalry , Comdg.  Expedition. 

Capt.  F.  W.  Fox, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


MAY  23  to  — , 1863. — Expedition  from  Helena  to  Napoleon,  Ark.,  and 
skirmish  near  Island  No.  65. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates,  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 
Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Camp  near  Vicksburg , June  2,  1863. 

Colonel  : 1 have  the  honor  to  report  that  Maj.  Gen.  B.  M.  Prentiss, 
on  the  23d  ultimo,  sent  the  steamer  Pike  on  an  expedition  down  the 
river  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  recruits  for  the  Second  Begiment 
Arkansas  Volunteers,  of  African  descent,  under  command  of  Lieut.  Col. 
George  W.  He  Costa,  of  that  regiment,  with  detachments  of  the  First 
Indiana  Cavalry  and  Thirty  sixth  Iowa  Infantry,  and  25  men  of  the 
Second  Arkansas  Begiment,  with  one  howitzer. 

The  expedition  proceeded  to  a point  on  the  Arkansas  side  1 mile  from 
Napoleon,  Ark.,  and  returned  on  the  Mississippi  side,  making  frequent 
marches  into  the  country ; in  some  instances  to  a distance  of  6 or  7 
miles. 

General  Prentiss  bears  testimony  to  the  soldierly  conduct  of  the  sol- 
diers, both  white  and  black,  as  reported  by  the  commanding  officer. 

Near  Island  No.  65  the  Pike  was  fired  into  by  a party  of  about  150 
rebels,  and  brisk  firing  was  kept  up  for  some  time,  the  enemy  having 
two  pieces  of  artillery,  one  of  which  was  silenced  by  the  howitzer  on  the 
Pike. 

Captain  [Benjamin  J.]  Waters,  of  the  Second  Arkansas  Begiment, 
was  severely  wounded  in  the  leg,  and  2 colored  soldiers  were  mortally 
wounded. 

The  enemy  are  supposed  to  have  lost  10  or  15  killed  and  wounded. 

The  conduct  of  the  colored  soldiers  was  highly  creditable,  fighting  with 
hearty  good  will  and  doing  good  service. 

The  expedition  was  eminently  successful,  capturing  75  mules,  8 horses, 
and  subsistence  for  the  whole  force. 

The  colored  population  hailed  with  joy  the  appearance  of  the  colored 
soldiers.  One  hundred  and  twenty-five  recruits  were  obtained  on  the 
expedition.  The  regiment  is  rapidly  filling  up,  and  it  is  hoped  it  will 
be  full  in  a few  days. 

Your  most  obedient  servant, 

WALTEB  B.  SCATES, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  and  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Bawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


SKIRMISH  NEAR  AUSTIN,  MISS. 


431 


MAY  24,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Austin,  Miss. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Alfred  W.  Ellet,  commanding  Mississippi  Marine  Brigade. 

No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  James  R.  Chalmers,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  i. 

Report  of  Brig . Gen.  Alfred  W.  Ellet,  commanding  Mississippi  Marine 

Brigade. 

Helena,  Ark.,  May  25,  1863, 

Via  Cairo,  May  29. 

I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  as  my  command  was  descending 
the  river  from  Memphis  on  the  evening  of  May  23,  the  commissary  and 
quartermaster  boat  was  fired  into  from  the  Mississippi  side  by  a band 
of  the  enemy  with  two  pieces  of  artillery,  about  6 miles  above  Austin. 
I returned  yesterday  morning  to  Austin  and  landed  my  force.  The 
enemy  had  a few  hours  before  my  arrival  captured  a small  trading 
steamer,  and  burned  her,  taking  her  crew  captive  and  appropriating 
her  freight.  I could  obtain  no  intelligence  from  the  inhabitants  by 
which  to  guide  my  movements.  My  cavalry,  under  the  command  of 
Major  Hubbard,  200  strong,  came  up  with  the  enemy  1,000  strong,  all 
mounted,  8 miles  out.  The  fight  lasted  nearly  two  hours.  The  major 
was  compelled  to  take  shelter  in  a favorable  bottom,  where  he  succeeded 
in  repulsing  the  enemy,  and  finally  drove  them  otf  before  the  infantry 
could  come  to  his  relief.  Our  loss  was  2 killed  and  19  wounded,  mostly 
slight.  The  enemy  left  5 dead  upon  the  field  and  1 lieutenant  mortally 
wounded,  and  twenty -two  stand  of  arms.  We  captured  3 prisoners.  I 
burned  the  town  of  Austin,  having  first  searched  every  building.  As 
the  fire  progressed,  the  discharge  of  loaded  fire  arms  was  like  volleys  of 
musketry  as  the  fire  reached  their  hiding  places,  and  two  heavy  explo- 
sions of  powder  also  occurred.  Of  Major  Hubbard  and  his  battalion  I 
cannot  speak  too  highly.  They  are  deserving  all  praise.  Every  officer 
and  man  of  the  little  force  is  reported  to  have  acted  with  the  most 
distinguished  bravery  and  prompt  obedience  to  orders. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALFBED  W.  ELLET, 

Brigadier- General. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  R.  Chalmers , C.  S.  Army. 

Panola,  Miss.,  May  26,  1863. 

General:  Colonel  [W.  F.]  Slemons,  with  Second  iVrkansas  Cavalry 
and  Second  Mississippi  Partisans,  fired  on  transports  near  Austin  without 
effect.  The  enemy  landed  from  three  transports,  and  were  repulsed, 
leaving  18  dead  horses;  their  loss  unknown.  Ours,  1 captain  and  2 
men  killed,  12  wounded,  and  3 missing. 

JAMES  B.  CHALMERS, 

Brigadier-  General . 


General  Johnston,  Canton. 


432 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Panola,  Miss.,  May  26,  1863. 

I have  just  learned  that  the  force  that  fought  Slemons  was  Ellet’s 
Mounted  Marine  Brigade,  en  route  for  Vicksburg $ seven  transport 
loads. 

JAMES  R.  CHALMERS, 

Brigadier- General. 

General  Johnston,  Canton. 


MAY  26,  1863. — Expedition  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  toward  Hernando,  Miss. 

Report  of  Maj.  George  A.  Richmond , Second  Wisconsin  Cavalry. 

Camp  Second  Wisconsin  Cavalry, 

Memphis , Tenn .,  May  26,  1863. 

Captain:  In  accordance  with  instructions,  I left  camp  with  my  com- 
mand, 200  men  strong,  composed  as  follows  : One  hundred  men  from  the 
Second  Wisconsin  Cavalry,  50  men  from  the  Fifth  Ohio  Volunteer  Cav- 
alry, and  50  men  from  the  First  Missouri  Cavalry.  I proceeded,  as  di- 
rected, on  Horn  Lake  road  without  encountering  aught  worthy  of  notice 
until  I reached  Nonconnah  Creek,  at  which  point  the  advance  guard 
captured  a member  of  Captain  Manning’s  company.  About  3 miles 
south  of  Nonconnah  Creek,  on  Horn  Lake  road,  I turned  from  the  main 
road  to  the  left,  in  the  direction  of  Hernando  plank-road,  governing 
my  course  so  as  to  pass  the  plantations  of  Colonel  Blythe  and  Captain 
Manning. 

Nothing  occurred  of  importance  at  either  of  these  plantations.  At 
what  is  called  Horn  Lake  Crossing,  on  Hernando  plank-road,  I cap- 
tured a man  who  had  in  his  possession  a discharge  from  the  Confederate 
service,  and  who  is  now  in  charge  of  the  provost-marshal,  together  with 
the  first-named  prisoner.  At  this  point  I also  ascertained  from  citizens 
direct  from  Hernando  that  Colonel  Hatch  visited  that  place  yesterday 
with  a cavalry  force,  and  that  an  infantry  force  had  arrived  there  to  day, 
26th  instant.  I believe  this  information  to  be  reliable.  Judging  from 
intelligence  received  from  all  parties  with  whom  I conversed,  I do  not 
think  it  possible  that  any  rebel  force  is  north  of  Coldwater,  except  Cap- 
tain Manning’s  company,  about  30  strong. 

I captured  several  horses,  mules,  and  some  arms,  but  have  received 
no  report  of  precise  number  from  detachmeut  commanders.  I will  re- 
port all  captured  property  as  soon  as  possible.  I arrived  at  camp  at  5 
p.  m.,  after  enjoying  quite  a pleasant  scout. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  respectfully,  yours,  &c., 

G.  N.  RICHMOND, 

Major , Commanding  Expedition. 

Capt.  F.  W.  Fox,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


MAY  26-29,  1863. — Expedition  from  Bolivar  to  Wesley  Camp,  Somer- 
ville, and  Antioch  Church,  Tenn.,  and  skirmishes. 

Report  of  Col.  Adolph  Fngelmann , Forty-third  Illinois  Infantry. 

Bolivar,  Tenn.,  May  30,  1863. 

Captain  : On  the  evening  of  May  26,  General  Brayman  ordered  me 
to  proceed  to  Wesley  camp  ground  and  fall  upon  a body  of  the  enemy 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  EXPEDITION  TO  WESLEY  CAMP,  TENN.,  ETC.  433 

reported  to  be  tfiere,  175  strong,  said  to  be  but  recently  recruited,  and 
about  to  go  south  to  join  the  main  body  of  the  rebel  army. 

After  sunset  I left  camp  with  113  enlisted  men  and  a proportionate 
number  of  officers,  and  guided  by  Mr.  George  Reeves,  of  Carbondale, 
Jackson  County,  Illinois,  formerly  of  Fayette  County,  Tennessee,  I pro- 
ceeded out  on  tbe  Somerville  road  14.  miles,  where  we  turned  off  to  the 
right,  and  then  proceeded  by  neighborhood  roads  toward  Wesley  Camp. 
At  the  residence  of  a gentleman  named  B.  Springfield,  2£  miles  before 
coming  to  Wesley  camp,  we  surprised  and  captured  4 prisoners  and 
their  arms  and  horses.  B.  Springfield,  proprietor  of  the  house,  was  also 
taken  and  brought  to  this  place.  At  half  a mile  farther  southwest,  at 
a place  belonging  to  Mr.  Steinbeck,  Captain  Reid,  according  to  his  own 
statement,  of  Colonel  Neely’s  regiment  of  Confederate  cavalry,  with 
two  more  of  his  men,  was  taken,  the  men  first  captured  claiming  to  be 
also  of  Captain  Reid’s  men. 

Wesley  camp  and  church  having  been  completely  destroyed  last 
winter  by  the  Seventh  Kansas,  it  no  longer  affords  any  shelter,  and, 
although  I descended  upon  it  at  full  speed,  no  enemy  could  be  found. 
I here  obtained  information  that  Colonel  [J.  J.]  Neely,  with  a number 
of  his  officers  and  men,  was  encamped  at  Core’s  place,  2J  miles  south- 
west of  Wesley  camp. 

I started  immediately  for  the  reported  place,  hoping  still  to  be  able 
to  surprise  the  enemy  in  his  camp,  but  unfortunately  the  guide  here 
missed  the  road,  and,  after  going  out  of  our  way  some  4 miles,  we  ar- 
rived at  Core’s  place  with  our  horses  much  exhausted.  No  enemy  was 
found. 

I subsequently  learned  of  Mr.  Core  that  information  having  been 
received  of  our  approach,  being  on  his  way  to  Memphis  with  a lo  d of 
cotton,  he  stopped  his  team  and  returned  to  his  plantation.  I was  also 
informed  by  a negro  that  as  we  rode  up  to  Mr.  Core’s  residence  Colonel 
Neely  and  his  men  went  off  in  a southerly  course  across  the  farther 
portion  of  Core’s  plantation.  However,  as  we  first  rode  up  to  Core’s 
house,  he  presented  himself  as  a Union  man,  protesting  that  no  guerrillas 
were  ever  near  his  place ; showed  certificates  from  Generals  Denver  and 
Lawler,  and  Colonel  Hurst,  and  claimed  protection,  which  I accordingly 
agreed  to  afford  him  to  the  extent  possible,  it  being  necessary  that  my 
horses  and  men  should  be  fed,  and  Mr.  Core’s  being  the  only  place  within 
some  miles  where  this  could  be  done.  The  provisions,  however,  were 
rendered  with  but  poor  grace.  Two  guns,  two  lilies,  and  a can  of  powder 
were  found  concealed  in  the  weeds  of  the  garden,  and  on  my  learning 
that  the  place  had  for  a long  time  previously  been  the  haunt  of  guer- 
rillas, I had  the  powder  blown  up  and  Mr.  Core’s  horses,  guns,  and 
rifles  taken. 

From  Core’s  I went  to  Somerville,  scouring  the  country  on  both 
sides  of  the  road. 

I arrived  at  Somerville  after  dark,  and,  passing  through  the  place, 
encamped  on  the  north  side  of  the  Loosahatchee,  on  the  Whiteville 
road. 

Having  within  twenty-six  hours  traveled  nearly  60  miles  on  dusty 
roads,  by  great  heat,  and  water  for  the  horses  being  only  found  at  great 
intervals,  many  of  them  had  completely  given  out,  and  could  not  be 
used  on  the  next  morning. 

Before  daylight  I had  several  houses  in  the  neighborhood  searched, 
but  without  success. 

At  daybreak  I started  with  70  men  for  Antioch  Church,  where, 
according  to  information,  a large  body  of  guerrillas  were  in  camp. 

28  R R — VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


434 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Captain  Arosenius  was  left  in  charge  of  our  camp  on  the  Loosahatchee, 
with  40  men.  He  had  to  guard  the  prisoners,  picket  the  camp,  patrol 
Somerville,  and  it  being  deemed  important  to  occupy  the  bridge  across 
the  Loosahatchee,  on  the  Covington  road,  this  bridge  was  guarded  by 
6 privates  and  2 non  commissioned  officers. 

An  hour  after  I had  left  with  the  main  body  of  my  men,  the  guard  on 
the  Loosahatchee  was  charged  upon  by  Captain  Bell  and  17  of  his  men. 
They  came  on  shooting,  and  at  full  speed,  but  the  small  guard  bravely 
stood  its  ground,  repulsing  the  enemy,  killing  one  of  its  number  and 
wounding  another  in  the  knee.  Firing  was  kept  up  for  two  hours  before 
the  enemy  withdrew. 

The  expedition  to  Antioch  met  no  guerrillas,  although  the  country 
was  searched  in  every  direction.  The  white  residents  of  the  country, 
almost  to  a man,  denied  that  there  were  any  guerrillas  in  the  neigh- 
borhood, while  the  very  few  loyal  whites  we  met  and  the  negroes  on 
every  plantation  informed  us  that  bands  up  to  20  men  strong  were 
passing  daily,  and  stopping  at  farm-houses  or  lying  out,  as  occasion 
required. 

I am  confident  that  the  county  of  Fayette  is  at  present  infested  by 
several  hundred  guerrillas,  who  are  scattered  for  the  more  convenient 
feeding  of  themselves  and  horses,  and  only  uniting  when  some  great 
movement  is  to  be  made. 

Captain  Keid  informed  me  that  he  had  only  on  the  26tli  instant 
come  from  south  of  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Bailroad,  and  knew  of 
Chalmers’  defeat. 

At  1 a.  m,  on  the  morning  of  the  29th,  information  was  received  that 
3 guerrillas  were  at  the  residence  of  A.  F.  Gant,  4 miles  south  of 
Somerville.  Captain  Hoering  was  sent  with  30  men  to  start  for  them, 
and  instructed  on  his  return  to  Somerville  to  take  the  Bolivar  road. 
I soon  after  started  for  Bolivar,  proceeding  but  slowly,  searching 
suspected  houses  and  making  frequent  halts,  to  enable  Captain  Hoer- 
ing to  come  up. 

When  Captain  Hoering  arrived  at  Gant’s  house,  the  guerrillas  had 
left,  but  Gant  was  taken  and  brought  in. 

I arrived  at  Bolivar  at  10  a.  m.  on  the  29th.  Most  of  the  men  had 
hardly  been  out  of  their  saddles  from  the  time  of  our  departure,  on  the 
morning  of  the  26th,  and  all  were  very  tired,  but  in  excellent  health 
and  spirits. 

We  captured  1 captain,  6 privates,  2 citizens,  45  horses  and  mules, 
guns,  rifles,  and  pistols. 

I would  also  beg  leave  to  state  that  as  the  saddles  used  by  my  men 
have  either  been  taken  from  the  enemy  citizens,  or  are  such  as  have 
been  condemned  in  the  Tennessee  cavalry,  they  are  very  inferior,  and 
scald  the  horses’  backs  and  wear  them  out  much  sooner  than  good 
saddles  would. 

Information  is  just  received  that  on  Friday  102  Confederates  were 
in  Somerville  after  we  had  left,  pretending  to  be  in  pursuit  of  my 
force. 

I was  also  informed  that  Captain  [W.  W.]  Faulkner  was,  with  several 
hundred  men,  near  Mason  Station. 

Very  respectfully, 

ADOLPH  ENGELMANN, 

Colonel  Forty -third  Illinois. 

Capt.  M.  H.  Bailhache, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  EXPEDITION  TO  MECHANICSBURG,  MISS.,  ETC. 


435 


MAY  26-JUNE  4,  1863.— Expedition  from  Haynes’  Bluff  to  Mechanics- 
burg,  Miss.,  and  skirmishes. 


REPORTS. 

No.  1.— Maj.  Gen.  Frank  P.  Blair,  jr.,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  expedition. 

No.  2.— Brig.  Gen.  Nathan  Kimball,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  division. 

No.  3.— Capt.  James  H.  Greene,  Eighth  Wisconsin  Infantry. 

No.  4.— Maj.  Gen.  William  W.  Loriug,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  division. 

No.  5.— Brig.  Gen.  William  H.  Jackson,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Cavalry  Division. 
No.  6.  -Brig.  Gen.  John  Adams,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Cavalry  Brigade. 

NO.  1. 


Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Frank  P.  Blair , jr .,  U.  8.  Army , commanding 

expedition. 


Headquarters  Expedition, 

Mechanicsburg , May  29,  1863. 


General  : I am  just  in  receipt  of  your  communication  of  this  (late. 
I dispatched  10  cavalry  with  a dispatch  to  you  last  night  and  2 this 
morning  with  the  same  intelligence,  but  as  your  couriers  met  both  par- 
ties near  Vicksburg,  it  will  not  be  necessary  to  repeat  it  here.  I found 
no  enemy  on  my  way  here  of  any  consequence.  My  advance  came  up 
with  about  400  or  500  of  the  enemy  at  this  place  about  1.30  p.  m.  to- 
day, They  were  driven  back  after  a slight  resistance,  and  have  fled 
beyond  the  Big  Black  River.  Colonel  Johnson  has  scoured  the  country 
pretty  thoroughly  on  both  sides  of  the  route  and  along  the  Big  Black 
as  far  down  as  Cox’s  Ford,  but  finds  only  stragglers,  who  are  all  going 
over  the  river  and  concentrating  at  Canton,  where  Johnston  is  under- 


stood to  be. 

From  all  the  intelligence  I can  obtain,  it  appears  that  General  John- 
ston is  organizing  an  army  at  or  near  Canton,  and  I feel  pretty  well 
assured  that  no  considerable  force  is  on  this  side  of  the  Big  Black 
River.  The  route  I have  passed  over  contained  but  little  or  no  forage 
or  provisions,  but  such  as  there  was  I destroyed  or  seized. 

I shall  return  to  morrow  by  a route  which  the  bearer  will  name,  and 
on  which  I wili  be  free  from  any  flank  attack. 

I shall  seize  everything  on  the  road  necessary  for  my  troops  and  de- 
stroy the  residue. 

The  enemy  who  met  my  advance  to-day  crossed  the  Big  Black  at 
Kibbj’s  Ferry. 

Respectfully, 

FRANK  P.  BLAIR,  Jr., 
Major-General,  Commanding  Expedition. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps, 

Camp  at  DonnegalVs  Bluff,  May  31,  1863. 

General:  I arrived  here  this  evening  at  1 o’clock  with  the  head  of 
my  column,  by  what  is  called  the  Valley  road,  from  Satartia,  on  the 
Yazoo,  to  Haynes’  Bluff.  I received  your  order  to  return  here  just  as  I 
had  commenced  my  march  to  this  point  on  yesterday  morning. 

The  enemy  followed  ns  with  perhaps  20  or  30  cavalry  or  mounted 
infantry,  but  the  valley  was  so  opeu  and  clear  that  they  dared  not  ap- 


436 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


proach,  and  gave  us  no  annoyance  whatever.  When  they  fired  on  us, 
as  they  did  yesterday  and  to  day,  we  knew  exactly  what  force  was  nec- 
essary to  repulse  and  drive  them,  and  did  not  have  to  delay  our  march. 

The  valley  of  the  Yazoo  is  one  of  the  most  fertile  spots  I ever  saw, 
and  we  found  supplies  and  forage  sufficient  to  supply  Joe  Johnston’s 
army  for  a month,  if  he  has  40,000  men.  1 used  all  that  we  could  and 
destroyed  the  rest.  We  must  have  burned  500,000  bushels  of  corn  and 
immense  quantities  of  bacon,  most  of  which  was  concealed  by  its  own- 
ers, but  discovered  and  either  appropriated  or  destroyed  by  my  order. 

I destroyed  every  grist-mill  in  the  valley,  and  have  driveu  in  to  this 
I>lace  about  1,000  head  of  cattle.  I brought  with  mean  army  of  negroes, 
nearly  equal  to  the  number  of  men  in  my  command,  and  the  cavalry 
and  infantry  have  seized  and  brought  in  200  or  300  head  of  mules  and 
horses.  I also  ordered  the  empty  wagons  to  load  with  cotton,  and  I 
think  they  have  brought  30  or  40  bales.  I burned  all  the  balance  of 
the  cotton  I found,  except  a small  quantity  within  our  picket  lines, 
which  can  be  secured  for  the  Government  if  it  is  desired. 

Joe  Johnston  will  find  very  little  for  his  army  in  the  country  between 
the  Black  Biver  and  Yazoo,  for  45  miles  north  of  Yicksburg. 

I consider  Mechanicsburg  as  the  great  strategic  point  between  the  two 
rivers.  You  can  reach  it  by  three  different  and  parallel  roads  from 
Vicksburg,  and  you  can  supply  an  army  there  by  means  of  the  Yazoo, 
from  which  it  is  only  3 miles  distant,  at  the  town  of  Satartia.  It  is 
situated  at  tbe  narrowest  place  between  the  two  rivers,  and  commu- 
nicates by  good  and  direct  roads  with  Benton,  Yazoo  City,  Kibby’s 
Ferry,  and  Cox’s  Ferry,  on  the  Big  Black  Biver,  and  also  with  Bridge- 
port, on  the  Black  Biver. 

I have  no  doubt  that  Joe  Johnston  is  collecting  a considerable  force 
at  Canton  and  other  places  beyond  the  Black  Biver.  Every  man  we 
picked  up  was  going  to  Canton  to  join  him.  The  negroes  told  me  their 
masters  had  joined  him  there,  and  those  who  were  too  old  to  go,  or  who 
could  escape  on  any  other  pretext,  told  me  the  same  story.  1 consider 
it  very  certain  that  he  has  a considerable  force,  and  is  using  every  effort 
to  increase  it,  and  the  hope  of  relief  from  that  quarter  is  all  that  delays 
the  surrender  of  Vicksburg. 

Awaiting  your  further  orders,  I am,  respectfully,  yours, 

FBABK  P.  BLAIB,  Jr. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant. 

P.  S. — I wish  you  would  send  me  orders  here  to  turn  over  to  E.  M. 
Joel,  captain  and  assistant  quartermaster,  all  the  mules,  horses,  cattle, 
cotton,  &c.,  captured  by  this  command,  tor  the  use  of  the  Government. 
The  command  is  composed  of  officers  who  belong  to  so  many  different 
corps  that  I would  prefer  your  giving-  the  order  to  giving  it  myself, 
which  I shall,  however,  do  if  it  is  necessary. 


Bo.  2. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Nathan  Kimball , U.  3.  Army , commanding 

Division. 

Headquarters  Kimball’s  Provisional  Division, 

Satartia , Miss.,  Dine  4,  1863 — 4 p.  m. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I reached  here  at  11  a.  m.  to-day, 
and  found  General  Mower  just  moving  out  with  his  brigade.  I immedi- 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  EXPEDITION  TO  MECHANICSBURG,  MISS.,  ETC. 


437 


ately  debarked  the  troops  with  me  and  moved  out,  meeting  the  enemy 
in  force  on  the  hills  back  of  the  town.  They  fell  back,  skirmishing 
sharply,  until  at  Mechanicsbnrg  I found  them  drawn  up  in  line  of  bat- 
tle. I attacked  them  immediately  with  one  brigade,  and  drove  them 
from  their  position.  The  cavalry,  coming  up  just  at  this  time,  joined 
in  the  pursuit,  which  at  this  writing  is  continued. 

General  Mower  behaved  with  gallantry. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

NATHAN  KIMBALL, 
Brigadier - General , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

P.  S. — Send  me  more  artillery.  Johnston  is  massing  considerable 
force  at  Canton.  Please  send  my  remaining  infantry  forward.  We 
hold  Mechanicsburg.  I will  report  as  soon  as  possible. 


Headquarters  Kimball’s  Provisional  Division, 

8 'atartia,  Miss.,  June  5,  1863. 

General  : Yesterday  two  guns  were  placed  in  position  by  the  en- 
emy in  front  of  my  left,  and  dropped  a few  shot  among  the  transports, 
but  were  soon  silenced  by  the  gunboats.  They  had,  in  addition,  some 
500  cavalry. 

Three  regiments  are  now  here,  which,  until  the  country  is  more 
thoroughly  examined,  I shall  keep  here. 

I shall  be  with  you  before  noon. 

Bespectfully,  yours, 

NATHAN  KIMBALL, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

General  Mower. 


Headquarters  Kimball’s  Provisional  Division, 

Satartia , Miss.,  June  5,  1863. 

Colonel:  I find  the*  enemy  in  .force  at  Yazoo  City.  About  6 miles 
above  here  are  8,000,  at  Liverpool.  The  whole  force  on  this  (the  Big 
Black)  river  is  20,000  infantry  and  cavalry  and  twenty  five  guns.  The 
force  between  the  Yazoo  and  Black  Hi  vers  is  under  [W.  H.  T\]  Walker. 
Johnston’s  headquarters  are  still  at  Canton,  where  he  is  massing 
troops  ; rumor  says  60,000. 

My  cavalry  penetrated  to  the  Big  Black  River  yesterday,  and  burned 
the  ferries  east  of  this  place,  but  I find  it  impossible  to  go  farther  north 
on  the  Big  Black,  as  the  enemy  hold  the  country  in  force. 

General  Mower  is  occupying  Mechanicsburg,  and  I am  doing  every- 
thing possible  to  obstruct  an  advance  should  one  be  made  by  the  enemy. 
Should  it  be  desired  to  hold  this  place  in  such  a case,  more  force  will 
be  required  and  more  artillery.  Should  I not  be  able  to  beat  or  repulse 
them,  I shall  hold  to  the  very  last. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

NATHAN  KIMBALL, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Bawlins, 

k Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


438 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Headquarters  Yazoo  Expedition, 

Satartia , June  5,  1863. 

General:  Sinceelosing  dispatches  this  morning  I have  a prisoner  who 
left  Walker’s  command  at  Yazoo  City  yesterday.  He  says  Walker  has 
15,000  men  ; two  brigades  are  from  Bragg.  Breckinridge  is  at  Jackson. 
Johnston  has  40,000  at  Canton.  From  all  I can  gather,  Walker’s  com- 
mand is  all  between  Yazoo  and  Big  Black.  I leave  to  day  for  Haynes’ 
Bluff. 


Very  respectfully, 


NATHAN  KIMBALL, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 


Satartia,  Miss.,  June  6,  1863. 

Colonel  : There  is  in  front  of  me  a large  force,  of  which  I cannot 
ascertain  the  exact  amount,  but  which  is  not  less  than  15,000;  and  in 
yiew  of  the  fact  that  the  river  is  falling  rapidly,  and  gunboats  will 
soon  be  unable  to  recross  the  bar  below,  I shall  to-day  move  toward 
Haynes’  Bluff,  starting  as  soon  as  I can  get  ready. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

NATHAN  KIMBALL, 
Brigadier-General , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Bawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Copt.  James  H.  Greene,  Eighth  Wisconsin  Infantry. 

Near  Vicksburg-,  Miss.,  June  17,  1863. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  orders,  I submit  the  following  report  of  a skir- 
mish with  the  enemy  on  June  4 between  Satartia,  on  the  Yazoo  Biver, 
and  Mechanicsburg : 

When  our  brigade  moved  from  Satartia  (being  the  first  troops  that 
arrived  and  the  first  to  march  into  the  country  from  that  place),  three 
companies  of  the  Eighth  Wisconsin,  viz,  A,  F,  and  I,  were  detailed  as 
an  advance  guard.  From  one-half  to  three-fourths  of  a mile  out,  where 
two  companies  of  our  brigade,  one  from  the  Eleventh  Missouri  and  the 
other  from  the  Forty-seventh  Illinois,  were  on  picket,  I was  ordered  to 
halt  by  Captain  Stewart,  of  General  Mower’s  staff.  The  officers  of  the 
picket  guard  reported  the  enemy  in  the  near  neighborhood  in  considera- 
ble force,  and  in  a few  moments  there  was  brisk  firing  on  the  part  of 
the  advance  sentinels.  Company  A,  of  the  Eighth,  was  immediately 
deployed  as  skirmishers,  and  sent  forward  to  the  line  of  the  vedettes, 
and  the  other  companies  formed  in  line  in  a good  position,  with  skir- 
mishers thrown  out  to  the  right.  The  enemy  advanced,  firing  with  great 
rapidity,  but  were  checked.  At  the  same  time  they  advanced  on  our 
right,  but  were  repulsed  there,  as  another  company,  which  re-enforced 
us  at  that  moment  from  the  brigade,  was  deployed  in  that  quarter. 

Beceiving  orders  to  push  forward,  I advanced,  with  Companies  A 
and  F as  skirmishers,  as  rapidly  as  possible,  Companies  D and  I fol- 
lowing closely  as  reserve.  From  there  to  Mechanicsburg  (3  miles)  there 
was  constant  and  at  times  severe  fighting,  the  rebel  skirmishers  (five 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  EXPEDITION  TO  MECHANICSBURG,  MISS.,  ETC.  439 

companies  strong)  halting  and  making  a stubborn  resistance  behind  the 
crest  of  hills.  At  one  such  place  I sent  back  for  artillery,  when  one 
piece  of  Taylor’s  Chicago  battery  was  brought  up  and  threw  several 
shells,  dislodging  them  from  a strong  position. 

Arriving  in  sight  of  Mechanicsburg,  we  discovered  the  enemy  getting 
a gun  in  position  on  the  hill  between  the  town  and  us,  but  we  came  on 
them  so  suddenly  that,  without  firing,  they  withdrew  to  the  rear  of  the 
village,  and  opened  on  us  from  two  pieces  with  shell  and  grape.  Here 
I ordered  the  two  reserve  companies  to  the  front,  and  we  passed  through 
town,  driving  the  rebel  skirmishers  to  their  main  force,  estimated  at 
from  1,500  to  2,000,  under  command  of  General  Adams,  which  was  in 
line  of  battle  supporting  their  artillery.  In  the  ditches  in  the  rear  of 
town  we  held  the  ground  for  half  an  hour,  when  our  battery  came  up 
and  opened  on  the  enemy,  silencing  their  guns  and  starting  them  from 
their  position. 

Shortly  afterward  detachments  of  the  Fourth  Iowa  and  Fifth  Illinois 
Cavalry  arrived  by  another  road,  and  started  in  pursuit.  Generals 
Kimball  and  Mower  arrived  on  the  ground,  and  I was  ordered  to  call 
in  my  men  and  join  the  command  when  the  column  should  come  up. 

I had  only  2 men  severely  wounded  in  the  skirmish.  We  wounded 
3 and  captured  2 of  the  rebels  before  reaching  the  town,  and  several  on 
the  other  side  of  town. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

J.  H.  GREENE, 

Captain  Company  F,  Commanding  Advance  Guard. 

Lieut.  E.  T.  Sprague,  Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen..  Second  Brigade. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen. ' William  W.  Boring , C.  S.  Army , commanding 

Division. 


Headquarters,  34  Miles  West  oe  Big  Black, 

June  5,  1863. 


Major:  I send  you  three  dispatches,  which  explain  themselves.*  It 
looks  to  me  that  the  enemy  would  not  burn  and  destroy  if  they  intended 
to  advance  far.  I can  but  think  it  is  simply  a devastating  party.  The 
camp  here  is  scarce  of  water.  It  lies  in  pools;  ho  running.  I learn  that 
the  most  water  in  advance  of  this  is  6 miles,  to  Cypress  Creek,  to  which 
point  it  may  become  necessary  to  move  for  a supply.  I will  see  in  the 
morning  what  impression  the  command  makes  upon  the  pools  here. 

With  respect, 

W.  W.  BORING, 

Major - General. 


Major  [A.  P.]  Mason,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Inclosure.  1 

Headquarters  Division, 

June  5,  1863. 

General:  I send  you,  general,  a letter  from  General  Adams. t It 
will  explain  matters.  I hear  of  no  immediate  advance  upon  me.  I will 


* Walker  to  Loring,  following,  and  Adams’  reports  of  June  5 and  6 to  Robinson,  pp. 

441,  442. 

t See  of  June  5,  p.  441. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

keep  you  advised.  Have  ordered  General  Adams  to  do  so  likewise. 
-Nine  boats  in  all  came  up  to  Satartia.  Some  have  left.  Doubt  whether, 
on  account  of  the  river  falling  rapidly,  they  will  venture  up  this  high, 
lhe  enemy  may  take  a notion,  if  in  force,  [to  meet]  you  at  Benton. 
Very  respectfully, 

W.  H.  T.  WALKER, 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Major-General  Loring. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  William  H.  Jackson , C.  S.  Army,  commanding 

Cavalry  Division. 


Pritchard’s  Cross-Roads, 

June  7,  1863 — 10  p.  m. 

Major:  I sent  a brigade  very  early  this  morning  to  ascertain  all 
about  the  enemy’s  movements.  The  colonel  commanding  reports  that 
their  force  consisted  of  two  divisions  (Generals  Mower  and  Kimball) 
two  light  batteries,  six  guns  each,  and  two  pieces  with  the  cavalry  force 
(two  regiments),  estimated  from  8,000  to  10,000;  landed  at  Satartia  7 
a.  m.  the  4th.  Left  yesterday  morning  at  12  in.,  and  all  marched  to 
Snyder’s  Bluff.  Kimball’s  quartermaster  said  they  were  ordered  to 
fortify  and  defend  that  place  against  General  Johnston’s  army,  sup- 
posed by  them  to  be  advancing  from  this  direction.  Enemy  left  in  some 
confusion.  Colonel  [L.  S.]  Ross  destroyed  twenty-five  tents,  and  ob- 
tained a lot  of  pilot  bread  and  hams,  which  they  left  at  Satartia.  Enemy 
destroyed  property  of  every  description;  burned  sixteen  houses  in  Me- 
chanicsburg  and  several  on  the  road;  also  gin-houses;  destroyed  all 
bridges  behind  them.  I am  much  in  need  of  an  accurate  and  full  map 
of  this  country. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 


Maj.  A.  P.  Mason, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


W.  H.  JACKSON, 

Brigadier-  General. 


P.  S.— The  brigade  went  several  miles  below  Wesley  Chapel,  and 
sent  scouts  to  within  8 miles  of  Snyder’s  Bluff. 


No.  6. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  Adams,  C.  S.  Army , commanding  Ca,valry 

Brigade. 

Headquarters  Cavalry  Brigade, 

In  the  Saddle , Five  miles  from  Mechanicsburg , May  29,  1863 — 5 p.  m. 

Major:  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  your  letter*  of  the  28th  in- 
stant, expressing  surprise  that  I had  crossed  the  artillery  over  on  the 
east  side  of  Big  Black,  reached  me  in  the  saddle  on  the  west  side  of 
Big  Black  yesterday  evening,  the  28th  instant.  Two  days  previous  to 


* Not  found. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  EXPEDITION  TO  MECHANICSBURG,  MISS.,  ETC. 


441 


my  crossing  Big  Black  with  the  artillery,  I advanced  with  my  command 
to  the  support  of  Colonels  [W.]  Adams  and  [D.  R.]  Russell.  Being  in- 
formed, after  reaching  these  officers,  that  the  enemy  had  fallen  back  to 
Vicksburg,  none  being  nearer  than  25  miles,  and  the  battery  being  in 
bad  condition,  horses  poor  and  broken  down,  harness  old  and  badly  worn, 
and  it  having  been  fully  demonstrated  that  our  field  artillery  had  no 
effect  upon  the  enemy’s  gunboats  and  iron  clad  transports,  these  consid- 
erations influenced  me  to  recross  the  river  with  the  battery.  Knowing 
the  great  importance  of  procuring  supplies  for  the  army,  and  having 
learned  that  there  were  plenty  in  the  vicinity  of  Yazoo  City,  1 directed 
Lieutenant-Colonel  [R.  C.]  Wood  [jr.],  commanding  Wirt  Adams’  cav- 
alry, to  proceed  in  that  direction  and  collect  and  move  them  in  the 
direction  of  Vaughn’s  Station  as  rapidly  as  possible.  Learning  night 
before  last,  through  my  scouts  and  pickets,  that  the  enemy  were  again 
advancing,  I recrossed  Big  Black,  and  advanced  up  the  Dover  road  a 
few  miles,  in  order  the  more  speedily  to  concentrate  my  command  and 
communicate  with  Colonel  [S.  W.]  Ferguson.  Col.  Wirt  Adams  joining 
me  this  morning  before  day,  I advanced  with  my  main  column  to  within 
2 miles  of  Meehanicsburg.  My  skirmishers  engaged  the  enemy  1 J miles 
this  side  of  Meehanicsburg,  driving  them  back  steadily  beyond  the  sub- 
urbs of  the  town.  Learning  that  the  enemy  were  in  force — that  the 
cavalry  and  artillery  were  supported  by  infantry  about  5,000  strong — I 
determined  to  retire  slowly,  engaging  them  at  all  available  points.  The 
skirmishers  are  still  engaging  the  enemy,  they  shelling  the  woods  as 
they  advance. 

I am,  major,  yours,  very  respectfully, 

JOHN  ADAMS, 

Brigadier- General  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate  States. 

Maj.  A.  P.  Mason, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Cayalry  Brigade, 
Pritchard’s  Cross-Roads , June  5,  1863 — 6.15  a.  m. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  state  that  in  answer  to  dispatch  just 
received  (6.15  a.  m.),  which  was  in  answer  to  my  dispatch  of  yesterday 
morning,  dated  Meehanicsburg,  which  stated  that  -I  was  nearly  sur- 
rounded, I would  respectfully  reply  that  last  night,  7.30, 1 communicated 
to  you  all  the  facts  in  regard  to  the  enemy  and  my  movements — that  I 
was  compelled  to  fall  back  to  this  position.  Up  to  this  hour  no  infor- 
mation has  been  received  from  my  scouts  or  pickets  that  the  enemy  had 
advanced  farther  than  a few  miles  this  side  of  Meehanicsburg.  Large 
fires  have  been  seen  in  the  direction  of  Meehanicsburg.  Major  [H.  W.] 
Bridges,  with  his  command  (of  cavalry),  of  Colonel  Ferguson’s  com- 
mand, has  just  arrived. 

As  I stated  last  night,  there  were  six  or  seven  transports  and  two 
or  three  gunboats  at  Satartia,  making  nine  in  all.  The  troops  from 
the  transports  were  landed  rapidly  and  advanced  immediately  on  me, 
also  advancing  on  the  Ridge  road  and  Bear  Creek  road  in  large  force, 
making  two  forces  for  me  to  contend  with.  I checked  them  at  Me- 
chanicsburg  from  10  a.  m.  yesterday  until  2 p.  m.  On  account  of 
their  overwhelming  number,  fearful  of  losing  my  battery,  and  their 
nearly  surrounding  me,  I was  compelled  to  fall  back  to  this  position. 
My  first  intention  was  to  form  line  5 miles  this  side  of  Meehanicsburg, 
but  the  enemy’s  cavalry  pressed  me  so  closely  that  I had  to  fall  back 


442 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Ciiap.  XXXVI. 


here.  I have  all  the  roads  well  scouted  and  picketed.  Will  keep  you 
well  advised  momentarily  of  the  advance  or  retrograde  movements  of 
enemy. 

I am,  captain,  yours,  &c., 

JOHN  ADAMS, 

Brigadier- General  Provisional  Army  Confederate  State's , Comdg. 

Captain  [J.  B.]  Cumming,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

P.  S. — Enemy’s  force  is  perhaps  as  large  as  it  was  on  the  former 
occasion. 


Headquarters  Cavalry  Brigade, 
Pritchard7 s Cross-Roads , June  5,  1863. 

Captain  : The  enemy  is  advancing  on  the  Wire,  or  Ridge,  road.  They 
are  about  1J  miles  in  advance  of  the  place  marked  Ogden’s  on  the  map 
sent  you.  Ogden’s  is  about  20  miles  from  Yazoo  City.  Their  shortest 
route  will  be  to  turn  off  the  Wire  road  at  Mrs.  Spires’  (marked  on  the 
map),  and  thence  direct  to  Yazoo. 

With  Major  Bridges’  force,  and  the  force  I already  have  on  the  Wire 
road,  must  endeavor  to  check  them,  as  my  present  position  will  force 
me  to  move  around  through  Dover  and  thence  to  Wire  road,  some  4 
miles  from  Mrs.  Spires’. 

I lost  about  50  men  on  yesterday,  including  killed,  wounded,  and 
prisoners.  Several  horses  killed,  wounded,  and  captured.  Enemy’s 
loss  in  killed  and  wounded  think  largest,  though  I have  no  means  of 
ascertaining  the  number  killed  and  wounded  by  our  battery  or  skirmish- 
ers. I know  but  little  definitely  of  the  strength  of  the  enemy,  but  am 
convinced  ’tis  a large  force.  The  enemy  is  still  burning  mills,  gins, 
corn,  &c.,  taking  all  provisions  from  the  citizens  indiscriminately,  killing 
cattle,  hogs,  chickens,  and  so  on,  with  the  evident  intention  of  destroy- 
ing the  subsistence  and  forage  which  could  be  of  service  to  our  army. 

It  is  also  reported  that  they  have  obstructed  the  roads  below,  atiout 
Edwards  Depot  and  neighborhood,  by  felling  timber. 

I am,  caotain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  ADAMS, 

Brig.  Gen.  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate  States , Comdg. 

Captain  [Henry]  Robinson,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Cavalry  Brigade, 
Pritchard7 s Cross-Roads , Miss.,  June  6,  1863 — Midnight. 

Captain  : My  advance  is  at  Mechanicsburg.  The  enemy  have  all 
left — the  infantry  and  artillery  on  the  transports,  by  way  of  Satartia, 
for  Vicksburg  or  Haynes’  Bluff;  the  cavalry  and  light  artillery  went 
on  the  Wire,  or  Ridge,  road  to  Vicksburg. 

The  object  of  the  enemy  seems  to  have  been  a reconnaissance  in  force 
for  General  Johnston’s  army.  They  destroy  everything  like  forage  and 
provisions,  as  well  as  all  mills,  gins,  &c.,  expressing  their  object  to  be 
to  prevent  General  Johnston’s  army  from  advancing,  at  the  same  time 
expressing  a determination  to  lay  waste  the  State  of  Mississippi. 

I am,  captain,  yours,  very  respectfully, 

JOHN  ADAMS, 

Brig.  Gen.  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate  States , Comdg. 

Captain  [Henry]  Robinson,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


SCOUT  TOWARD  HERNANDO,  MISS. 


443 


MAY  27,  1863.— Attack  on  Union  gunboats  near  Greenwood,  Miss. 

Report  of  Gapt.  Isaac  N.  Brown , C.  S.  Navy. 

Greenwood,  Miss.,  May  28,  1863. 

General  : I have  to  report  for  your  information  that  three  of  the  ene- 
my7s  vessels  reached  the  obstructions  which  I had  placed  in  the  river 
below  Greenwood  on  the  evening  of  the  26th  instant.  They  burned  off 
the  upper  works  of  the  boats  there  sunk,  and  remained  near  by  during 
the  night.  At  daylight  they  were  attacked  by  Colonel  [S.  W.]  Fergu- 
son’s sharpshooters,  under  Captain  [J.  H.]  Morgan,  when  they  cut  their 
cables  and  fled  down  the  river,  firing  during  their  flight  grape  and  can- 
ister at  our  men,  none  of  whom  were  hurt.  The  enemy  acknowledged 
a loss  of  12  killed.  I hope  soon  to  hear  something  better  of  him,  as  on 
his  way  down  he  had  to  pass  the  torpedoes,  which  he  avoided  on  his 
way  up  by  coming  through  Tchula  River. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

ISAAC  N.  BROWN, 

Commander , G.  8.  Navy. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Commanding  Department  West  and  South , Jackson , Miss. 


MAY  27,  1863. — Scout  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  toward  Hernando,  Miss. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  John  T.  Price , First  Missouri  Cavalry. 

Camp  of  First  Missouri  Cavalry, 

Memphis , Tenn.,  May  27,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  in  accordance  with  instructions  from 
Major  Morgan,  of  General  Washburn’s  staff,  by  whom  I was  this  morn- 
ing ordered  on  a scout  toward  Hernando,  in  command  of  200  cavalry- 
men, that  nothing  worthy  of  particular  notice  occurred  during  the 
march. 

After  crossing  the  Nonconnah,  I sent  out  flanking  columns  at  the 
distance  of  1 or  2 miles  on  either  side  of  the  Hernando  road,  parallel 
to  the  main  direction  of  the  main  column,  but  finding  no  one  on  either 
route,  I changed  my  course  toward  the  Horn  Lake  Depot,  and  from 
there,  by  way  of  Major  [Green  L.]  Blythe’s  farm,  toward  the  west  of 
Hernando.  My  original  intention,  as  expressed  to  Major  Morgan,  was 
to  make  a detour  to  the  east  of  Hernando,  but  1 was  induced  to  change 
it  to  the  west,  on  account  of  information  received  from  citizens  that 
our  force  from  the  direction  of  La  Grange  had  only  a day  or  two  pre- 
viously thoroughly  scoured  that  country. 

After  marching  about  25  miles  southwest  of  Memphis,  we  halted 
and  fed  at  a Mr.  Solio’s,  where  three  or  four  guerrillas  on  picket  were 
chased,  and  a party  of  a dozen  were  reported  to  have  that  morning 
breakfasted. 

About  2 p.  m.  we  moved  off  west,  in  the  direction  which  the  pickets 
were  supposed  to  have  followed,  but  failing  to  find  anything  further, 
except  an  occasional  outpost,  we  turned  our  course  circularly  toward 
the  Horn  Lake  road,  upon  which  we  subsequently  came  into  camp. 


444 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


The  result  of  this  scout  may  be  briefly  summed  up  in  no  enemy,  the 
capture  of  7 horses,  4 mules,  2 able-bodied  negroes,  and  2 prisoners,  all 
taken  in  Mississippi. 

The  prisoners  and  the  negroes,  with  the  2 horses  and  2 mules  and  3 
saddles,  which  they  rode,  have  been  sent  by  me  under  guard  to  you. 
Two  horses  and  2 mules  remain  in  the  possession  of  the  Second  Wis- 
consin detachment,  commanded  by  Captain  Wood;  two  other  horses 
in  charge  of  the  Fifth  Ohio  Cavalry,  under  command  of  Captain  Rader. 

From  observation,  and  the  best  intelligence  that  I could  gain,  I do  not 
believe  that  there  is  now  any  force  of  consequence,  i.  e.,  sufficient  to 
resist  the  march  of  100  or  200  cavalrymen,  anywhere  in  the  neighbor- 
hood of  Hernando.  From  all  accounts  that  I could  collect,  my  opin- 
ion is  that  all  the  disposable  force  of  the  enemy  has  been  drawn  off 
in  the  direction  of  Vicksburg,  thereby  leaving  the  country  between 
this  and  the  Mississippi  Central  Railroad  open  to  the  incursions  of  our 
troops. 

I will  add  that  the  officers  and  men  of  my  command  behaved  remark- 
ably well,  and  kept  closely  up  in  ranks,  notwithstanding  the  dust  on 
, many  roads  was  so  thick  as  to  be  almost  suffocating. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  T.  PRICE, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  First  Missouri  Cavalry,  Commanding  Scout. 

Capt.  F.  W.  Fox, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  District  of  Memphis. 


MAY  28,  1863. — Scout  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  toward  Hernando,  Miss. 

Report  of  Maj.  John  J.  Joslyn , First  Missouri  Cavalry. 

Memphis,  Tenn.,  May  29,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  your  information,  that,  in  accord- 
ance to  instructions  from  headquarters  First  Cavalry  Division,  I pro- 
ceeded in  command  of  cavalry  detachments,  consisting  of  25  men  First 
Missouri  Cavalry,  50  men  Second  Wisconsin  Cavalry,  and  25  men  Fifth 
Ohio  Cavalry.  Left  camp  First  Missouri  Cavalry  at  daybreak  on  the 
morning  of  the  28th,  taking  the  Horn  Lake  road  across  Nonconnah  Creek. 
About  7 miles  south  of  the  Nonconnah  came  upon  a vedette,  who,  on 
our  approach,  fired  and  ran.  Near  the  residence  of  Colonel*  Blythe  we 
came  upon  a picket  of  some  6 men,  mounted.  We  exchanged  shots,  but 
at  too  great  a distance  to  take  effect.  In  crossing  from  Horn  Lake  to 
the  Hernando  road,  we  came  upon  another  squad  of  the  enemy,  num- 
bering about  15  men.  With  them  we  also  exchanged  shots,  but  effected 
nothing. 

We  proceeded  to  the  Hernando  road,  thence  to  camp.  I would  state 
that  the  men  composing  the  detachment  behaved  well.  I arrived  with 
the  command  at  camp  about  4.30  yesterday  evening.  No  property  of 
any  kind  was  taken. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  J.  JOSLYN, 

First  Missouri  Cavalry. 

Maj.  W.  H.  Morgan, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  First  Division  Cavalry. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  EXPEDITION  ACROSS  THE  TENNESSEE  RIVER.  445 


JUNE  3,  1863.— Engagement  near  Simsport,  La. 

Report  of  Capt.  Henry  Wallce , TJ.  8.  Navy. 

United  States  Gunboat  La  Fayette, 

Red  River , June  3.  1863. 

Sir:  This  morning  I sent  the  Switzerland  down  to  Simsport  to  make 
a reconnaissance,  in  compliance  with  your  request  of  the  30th  ultimo, 
and  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  after  1 heard  a brisk  firing  in  that 
vicinity,  when  I dispatched  the  Pittsburg  immediately  for  that  place, 
but  before  she  reached  Atchafalaya  the  Switzerland  met  the  Pittsburg, 
and  giving  information  of  her  engagement  with  two  batteries  of  light 
guns  and  a considerable  force  of  infantry,  they  both  returned. 

Colonel  Ellet  reports  that  four  or  five  pieces  of  light  artillery  opened 
fire  on  him,  with  about  a regiment  of  infantry,  wounding  3 of  his  men, 
1 dangerously. 

The  Switzerland  returned  the  fire  passing  below  the  batteries,  and 
also  on  her  return ; but  not  having  the  means  of  capturing  the  enemy 
or  his  guns,  and  his  steam  pipe  disabled,  he  returned. 

I have  sent  him  to  you  for  some  troops,  if  they  can  be  obtained,  so 
that  I can  make  an  attack  upon  the  enemy  and  capture  his  artillery  and 
some  of  his  troops,  perhaps,  by  landing  our  troops  immediately  after 
driving  them  from  their  guns. 

Colonel  Ellet  will  report  particulars. 

In  great  haste,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

H.  WALKE, 
Captain , TJ.  8.  Navy. 

Commodore  James  S.  Palmer, 

Commanding  Fiag-sliip  Hartford. 


JUNE  — to  7,  1863. — Expedition  from  Jackson,  Tenn.,  across  Tennessee 

River. 


Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Richard  J.  Oglesby , TJ.  8.  Army. 


Colonel:  Lieutenant-Colonel  Breckenridge,  First  West  Tennessee 
Cavalry,  just  returned  to  Jackson  from  expedition  across  Tennessee 
Biver.  Destroyed  a large  amount  of  property ; secured  and  put  on 
gunboats  three  thousand  sides  of  leather,  and  recrossed  without  any 
loss,  except  stragglers. 

Scout  in  to-day  reports  Chalmers  at  Panola  week  ago,  with  1,800 
infantry  and  one  battery.  Enemy  all  withdrawn  from  Mississippi 
swamps  and  encamped  14  miles  below  Yazoo  City.  On  the  26th  of  May, 
Johnston  had  around  Jackson  25,000.  Be-enforcements  constantly 
arriving. 

Three  deserters  confirm  reports  that  but  one  brigade  is  at  Port  Hud- 
son. 


Lieutenant-Colonel  Binmore, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


B.  J.  OGLESBY, 

Major-  General. 


446 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


JUNE  3-JULY  10,  1863. — Operations  in  Northern  Louisiana. 

SUMMAKY  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  EVENTS. 

June  4,  1863. — Affair  at  Lake  Saint  Joseph. 

6,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Richmond. 

7,  1863. — Attacks  on  Young’s  Point  and  Milliken’s  Bend. 

9,  1863. — Action  near  Lake  Providence. 

15,  1863. — Action  near  Richmond. 

30,  1863. — Attack  on  Goodrich’s  Landing. 

REPORTS.* 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Elias  S.  Dennis,  U.  S.  Army,  of  attack  (7th)  on  Milliken’s  Bend 
and  action  (9th)  near  Lake  Providence. 

No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  Hugh  T.  Reid,  U.  S.  Army,  of  action  (9th)  near  Lake  Providence 
and  attack  (30th)  on  Goodrich’s  Landing. 

No.  3. — Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  A.  Mower,  U.  S.  Army,  Second  Brigade,  Third  Division, 
Fifteenth  Army  Corps,  of  action  (15th)  at  Richmond. 

No.  4. — Col.  Lucius  F.  Hubbard,  Fifth  Minnesota  Infantry,  of  action  (15th)  at  Rich- 
mond. 

No.  5. — Actg.  Rear-Admiral  David  D.  Porter,  U.  S.  Navy,  of  attack  (7th)  on  Milli- 
ken’s Bend  and  action  (15th)  near  Richmond. 

No.  6. — Capt.  Abraham  E.  Strickle,  commissioner,  of  attack  (7(h)  on  Milliken’s  Bend. 

No.  7. — Maj.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor,  C.  S.  Army,  of  attack  (7th)  on  Young’s  Point  and 
Milliken’s  Bend. 

No.  8. — Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Walker,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  division,  of  attacks  (7th) 
on  Young’s  Point  and  Milliken’s  Bend,  and  operations  June  10- July  10. 

No.  9. — Brig.  Gen.  Henry  E.  McCulloch,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  brigade,  of  attack 
(7th)  on  Milliken’s  Bend. 

No.  10. — Brig.  Gen.  J.  M.  Hawes,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  brigade,  of  attack  (7th) 
on  Young’s  Point. 


No.  1. 


Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Elias  S.  Dennis , U.  S.  Army , of  attach  (7th)  on 
Millikeri’s  Bend  and  action  (9th)  near  Lahe  Providence. 


Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 

Near  Vicksburg , Miss.,  June  16,  1863. 

General  : Herewith  I have  tbe  honor  of  inclosing  Brig.  Gen.  E.  S. 
Dennis’  report  of  the  battle  of  Milliken’s  Bend,  La.,  fought  on  June  7, 
together  with  a list  of  casualties. 

In  this  battle  most  of  the  troops  engaged  were  Africans,  who  had  but 
little  experience  in  the  use  of  fire-arms.  Their  conduct  is  said,  how- 
ever, to  have  been  most  gallant,  and  I doubt  not  but  with  good  officers 
they  will  make  good  troops. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

U.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-General. 


Brig.  Gen.  Lorenzo  Thomas, 

Adjutant -General  of  the  Army. 


* See  Owen  to  Porter,  June  16 ; Grant  to  Taylor,  June  22  ; Taylor  to  Grant,  June  27 ; 
Grant  to  Taylor,  July  4;  Iialleck  to  Graut,  August  12;  Grant  to  Halleck,  August 
29;  Kent  to  Rawlins,  September  24,  in  Part  III,  Correspondence,  etc. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHERN  LOUISIANA. 


447 


[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Northeast  District  of  Louisiana, 

Young’s  Point , La.y  June  12,  1863. 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  report ' that,  in  accordance  with 
instructions  received  from  me,  Colonel  Lieb,  commanding  the  Ninth 
Louisiana,  African  descent,  made  a reconnaissance  in  the  direction  of 
Richmond  on  June  6,  starting  from  Milliken’s  Bend  at  2 a.  m. 

He  was  preceded  by  two  companies  of  the  Tenth  Illinois  Cavalry, 
commanded  by  Captain  Anderson,  whom  he  overtook  3 miles  from  the 
Bend.  It  was  agreed  between  them  that  the  captain  should  take  the  left 
side  of  Walnut  Bayou  and  pursue  it  as  far  as  Mrs.  Ames’  plantation, 
while  Colonel  Lieb  proceeded  along  the  main  Richmond  road  to  the  rail- 
road depot,  3 miles  from  Richmond,  where  he  encountered  the  enemy’s 
pickets  and  advance,  which  he  drove  in  with  but  little  opposition,  but, 
anticipating  the  enemy  in  strong  force,  retired  slowly  toward  the  Bend. 
When  about  half-way  back,  a squad  of  our  cavalry  came  dashing  up  in 
his  rear,  hotly  pursued  by  the  enemy.  Colonel  Lieb  immediately 
formed  his  regiment  across  an  open  field,  and  with  one  volley  dispersed 
the  approaching  enemy. 

Expecting  the  enemy  would  contest  the  passage  of  the  bridge  over 
Walnut  Bayou,  Colonel  Lieb  fell  back  over  the  bridge,  and  from  thence 
to  Milliken’s  Bend,  from  whence  he  sent  a messenger  informing  me  of 
the  success  of  the  expedition,  and  reported  the  enemy  to  be  advancing. 
I immediately  started  the  Twenty-third  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry  to 
their  assistance,  and  Admiral  Porter  ordered  the  gunboat  Choctaw  to 
that  point. 

At  3 o’clock  the  following  morning  the  enemy  made  their  appearance 
in  strong  force  on  the  main  Richmond  road,  driving  the  pickets  before 
them.  The  enemy  advanced  upon  the  left  of  our  line,  throwing  out  no 
skirmishers,  marching  in  close  column  by  division,  with  a strong  cav- 
alry force  on  his  right  flank.  Our  forces,  consisting  of  the  Twenty-third 
Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry  and  the  African  Brigade  (in  all,  1,061  men), 
opened  upon  the  enemy  when  within  musket-shot  range,  which  made 
them  waver  and  recoil,  a number  running  in  confusion  to  the  rear  ; the 
balance,  pushing  on  with  intrepidity,  soon  reached  the  levee,  when  they 
were  ordered  to  charge,  with  cries  of  u no  quarter  !” 

The  African  regiments  being  inexperienced  in  the  use  of  arms,  some 
of  them  having  been  drilled  but  a few  days,  and  tlie  guns  being  very 
inferior,  the  enemy  succeeded  in  getting  upon  our  works  before  more 
than  one  or  two  volleys  were  fired  at  them.  Here  ensued  a most  terri- 
ble hand  to-hand  conflict  of  several  minutes’  duration,  our  men  using 
the  bayonet  freely  and  clubbing  their  guns  with  fierce  obstinacy,  con- 
testing every  inch  of  ground,  until  the  enemy  succeeded  in  flanking 
them,  and  poured  a murderous  enfilading  fire  along  our  lines,  directing 
their  fire  chiefly  to  the  officers,  who  fell  in  numbers.  Not  till  they  were 
overpowered  and  forced  by  superior  numbers  did  our  men  fall  back  be- 
hind the  bank  of  the  river,  at  the  same  time  pouring  volley  after  volley 
into  the  ranks  of  the  advancing  enemy. 

The  gunboat  now  got  into  position  and  fired  a broadside  into  the 
enemy,  who  immediately  disappeared  behind  the  levee,  but  all  the  time 
keeping  up  a fire  upon  our  men. 

The  enemy  at  this  time  appeared  to  be  extending  his  line  to  the  ex- 
treme right,  but  was  held  in  check  by  two  companies  of  the  Eleventh 
Louisiana  Infantry,  African  descent,  which  had  been  posted  behind  cot- 
ton bales  and  part  of  the  old  levee.  In  this  position  the  fight  continued 


448  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

until  near  noon,  when  the  enemy  suddenly  withdrew.  Our  men,  seeing 
this  movement,  advanced  upon  the  retreating  column,  firing  volley  after 
volley  at  them  while  they  remained  within  gunshot.  The  guuboat 
Lexington  then  paid  her  compliments  to  the  fleeing  foe  in  several  well- 
directed  shots,  scattering  them  in  all  directions. 

I here  desire  to  express  my  thanks  to  the  officers  and  men  of  the 
gunboats  Choctaw  and  Lexington  for  their  efficient  services  in  the  time 
of  need.  Their  names  will  be  long  remembered  by  the  officers  and 
men  of  the  African  Brigade  for  their  valuable  assistance  on  that  dark 
and  bloody  field. 

The  officers  and  men  deserve  the  highest  praise  for  their  gallant  con- 
duct, and  especially  Colonel  Glasgow,  of  the  Twenty- third  Iowa,  and 
his  brave  men,  and  also  Colonel  Lieb,  of  the  Ninth  Louisiana,  African 
descent,  who,  by  his  gallantry  and  daring,  inspired  his  men  to  deeds 
of  valor  until  he  fell,  seriously  though  not  dangerously  wounded.  I 
regret  to  state  that  Colonel  Chamberlain,  of  the  Eleventh  Louisiana, 
African  descent,  conducted  himself  in  a very  unsoldierlike  manner. 

The  enemy  consisted  of  one  brigade,  numbering  about  2,500,  in  com- 
mand of  Genera]  [H.  E.]  McCulloch,  and  200  cavalry.  The  enemy’s  loss 
is  estimated  at  about  150  killed  and  300  wounded.  It  is  impossible  to 
get  anything  near  the  loss  of  the  enemy,  as  they  carried  the  killed  and 
wounded  off  in  ambulances.  Among  their  killed  is  Colonel  [R.  T.  P.] 
Allen,  Sixteenth  [Seventeenth]  Texas. 

Inclosed  please  find  tabular  statement  of  killed,  wounded,  and  miss- 
ing; in  all,  652.*  Nearly  all  the  missing  blacks  will  probably  return, 
as  they  were  badly  scattered. 

The  enemy,  under  General  [J.  M.]  Hawes,  advanced  upon  Young’s 
Point  while  the  battle  was  going  on  at  Milliken’s  Bend ; but  several 
well-directed  shots  from  the  gunboats  compelled  them  to  retire. 

Submitting  the  foregoing,  I remain,  yours,  respectfully, 

ELIAS  S.  DENNIS, 

Brigadier- General,  Comdg.  District  Northeast  Louisiana. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Rdqrs.  District  of  Northeastern  Louisiana, 

Young’s  Point , La.,  June  13,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  inform  you  that  an  attack  was  made 
on  Lake  Providence,  La.,  June  9,  1863,  by  a rebel  force  of  about  600 
strong- — the  Thirteenth  Texas  Infantry  [Cavalry]  and  200  mounted  men 
of  the  Thirteenth  Louisiana  Battalion.  They  were  met  by  two  compa- 
nies of  the  First  Kansas  Mounted  Infantry,  6 miles  from  town,  and 
skirmishing  kept  up  until  the  rebel  force  reached  Bayou  Tensas,  1 
mile  from  town,  where  they  were  met  by  General  Reid’s  entire  force, 
about  800  strong,  including  300  of  the  [Eighth]  Louisiana  Regiment, 
African  descent,  under  Colonel  [Hiram]  Scofield. 

The  mounted  companies  fell  back  behind  the  bayou,  destroying  the 
bridge,  when  the  enemy  formed  in  line  of  battle,  advanced  their  skir- 
mishers to  the  bayou,  and  planted  a 6-pounder  so  as  to  command  the 
bridge,  which  they  attempted  to  reconstruct,  but  were  prevented  by 
our  skirmishers.  A heavy  force  of  skirmishers  was  then  sent  forward 
to  meet  their  whole  line  on  the  bayou,  and,  after  a brisk  fire  of  an  hour 

* Or  11  officers  and  90  men  killed,  17  officers  and  268  men  wounded,  and  2 officers 
and  264  men  captured  or  missing. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHERN  LOUISIANA. 


449 


and  a half,  the  rebels  retreated  (it  being  dark)  to  Floyd,  leaving  only 
a small  force  near  the  bayou.  General  Reid  then  withdrew  the  skir- 
mishers and  ordered  the  Eighth  Louisiana  in  line  of  battle  up  to  the 
bayou.  They  fired  four  volleys  into  the  rebels,  which  forced  them  to 
retire. 

The  entire  force  of  the  enemy  was  commanded  by  Colonel  [Frank 
A.]  Bartlett,  of  the  Thirteenth  Louisiana  Battalion,  who  has  for  some 
time  past  been  stationed  west  of  Bayou  Macon. 

The  only  mischief  done  by  the  enemy,  so  lar  as  heard  from,  is  the 
destruction  of  a cotton-gin  at  Spencer’s  plantation. 

We  have  1 man  wounded.  The  enemy’s  loss  is  2 killed  and  5 wounded. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  yours,  &c., 

’ ELIAS  S.  DENNIS, 


Brigadier-  General. 


Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Hugh  T.  Reid , U.  8.  Army , of  action  (9th)  near 
Lake  Providence  and  attack  (30 fh)  on  Goodrich’s  Landing. 

Headquarters  Post  oe  Providence, 

Providence , La .,  June  10,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  an  attack  was  made  yes- 
terday afternoon  by  a rebel  force,  said  to  be  600  strong,  being  the  Thir- 
teenth Texas  Infantry  [Cavalry]  and  the  Thirteenth  Louisiana  Battalion 
(mounted  men),  with  one  piece  of  artillery.  They  were  met  by  two  com- 
panies of  the  First  Kansas  Mounted  Infantry,  at  Bayou  Baxter,  6 miles 
from  town,  and  skirmishing  kept  up  till  the  rebel  force  reached  Bayou 
Tensas,  a mile  from  town,  where  I determined  to  meet  them  with  my 
whole  force,  about  800  strong,  including  some  300  of  the  Eighth  Lou- 
isiana Volunteers,  of  African  descent,  under  Colonel  Scofield.  Our 
mounted  companies  fell  back  behind  the  bayou,  destroying  the  bridge, 
when  the  rebels  formed  in  line  of  battle  and  advanced  their  skirmishers 
boldly  up  to  the  bayou,  and  planted  their  gun  (a  6-pounder)  so  as  to 
command  the  bridge,  which  they  attempted  to  reconstruct. 

Our  skirmishers  from  the  First  Kansas  and  Sixteenth  Wisconsin  were 
advanced  from  our  main  body,  under  cover  of  the  bank,  to  within  close 
musket  range  of  their  gun,  and  soon  compelled  them  to  withdraw  it, 
after  firing  only  5 rounds  ; then  I sent  forward  a heavy  force  of  skir- 
mishers to  meet  their  whole  line  on  the  bayou,  and,  after  a brisk  fire 
for  an  hour  and  a half,  the  rebels  retreated,  it  being  dusk,  on  the  road 
leading  to  Floyd,  leaving  only  a small  force  of  skirmishers,  under  cover 
of  some  underbrush,  near  the  bayou.  . 

I then  withdrew  our  skirmishers  and  marched  the  Eighth  Louisiana 
Volunteers,  of  African  descent,  in  line  of  battle  up  to  the  bayou.  They 
fired  four  volleys  into  the  rebels,  which  cleaned  them  out,  and  greatly  en- 
couraged the  darkies.  We  had  1 man  wounded  ; they  had  2 men  killed 
and  5 wounded.  A rebel  deserter  says  the  rebels  were  under  command 
of  Colonel  [F.  A.]  Bartlett,  of  the  Thirteenth  Louisiana  Battalion,  which 
has  been  stationed  west  of  Bayou  Macon. 

The  Texas  regiment  was  commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  [A.  F.J 
Crawford  and  Major  [C.  R.]  Beaty,  and  is  a part  of  General  [J.  G.J 
Walker’s  division,  which  was  6,000  strong.  This  regiment  left  the 
29  R R — VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


450 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

division  at  Trinity,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Tensas,  came  to  Monroe,  from 
Monroe  to  Delhi  by  rail,  and  from  there  to  Floyd  by  marches,  where 
they  joined  Bartlett’s  command.  He  says  a bridge  was  built  at  Floyd 
across  Bayou  Macon;  but  the  force  marched  up  the  bayou  to  Caledonia 
where  they  built  another  bridge  and  crossed.  The  only  mischief  done 
by  the  rebels,  as  far  as  heard  from,  is  the  destruction  of  a cotton-gin  at 
the  Spencer  plantation,  7 miles  from  town,  where  a citizen  was  ginning 
some  cotton. 

It  is  out  of  the  question  to  give  adequate  protection  to  the  plantations 
along  the  river  without  having  sufficient  force  to  move  across  the  Bayou 
Macon  and  drive  the  rebels  beyond  Boeuf  Fiver,  and  artillery  is  abso- 
lutely necessary. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  T.  FEID, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  Post. 

Major  General  McPherson, 

Commanding  Seventeenth  Corps . 


Headquarters  Post  of  Providence, 

July  6,  1863. 

Colonel  : On  the  29th  ultimo,  the  rebels  from  the  other  side  of 
Bayou  Macon  came  in  near  the  Wilton  plantation,  at  the  Mounds,  and 
made  an  attack  there  and  at  Goodrich’s  Landing,  capturing  two  com- 
panies ot  the  First  Arkansas  Volunteers  (of  African  descent)  at  the 
Mounds  and  burning  every  gin-house  and  negro  quarter  od  their  way 
toward  this  point.  They  also  burned  many  of  the  dwelling-houses. 
Hearing  through  negroes  that  a fight  was  going  on  at  the  Mounds,  I 
sent  out  the  First  Kansas  Mounted  Fegiment  to  meet  them,  which  they 
did  5 miles  below  town,  in  the  woods,  but  found  them  too  strong,  and 
had  to  fall  back,  skirmishing  to  within  3 miles  of  town,  where  the  prog- 
ress of  the  enemy  was  stopped.  Soon  after  they  had  stopped  follow- 
ing our  men,  a fleet  of  transports,  with  two  gunboats,  came  in  sight 
from  above,  but  one  of  the  Marine  Brigade  boats  happened  to  be  in 
advance,  and  could  not  be  stopped  at  the  landing,  but  fired  one  of  its 
pop  guns  at  the  rebels,  which  frightened  them  off  at  once  and  prevented 
them  being  coaxed  into  town,  and  also  prevented  the  gunboats  getting 
a chance  at  them. 


In  the  skirmish  we  had  one  lieutenant  (Becker),  of  the  First  Kansas, 
killed,  Lieutenant  Thompson  severely  wounded  in  the  foot,  and  2 pri- 
vates wounded.  The  rebels  report  5 or  6 killed,  including  two  captains. 

We  have  had  for  some  time  a strong  fortification  on  the  river  in  front 
of  the  town  made  of  earthworks  and  cotton  bales,  and  if  we  had  any 
artillery  could  make  a defense  against  a large  force.  We  have  just 
received  a section  of  artillery,  and  have  had  a gunboat  here  for  two  or 
three  days. 

The  rebels  have  a force  on  the  west  of  the  bayou  variously  estimated 
at  from  5,000  to  9,000  men,  under  command  of  Major-General  [J.  G.l 
Walker,  of  Texas.  Part  of  the  force  is  lately  from  Price’s  army,  at 
Little  Fock,  and  it  was  a part  of  [W.  H.]  Parsons’  brigade  of  cavalry 
which  did  the  mischief  in  this  vicinity. 


H.  T.  FEID, 

Brigadier-  General , Commandina. 

Lieut.  Col.  W.  T.  Clark, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHERN  LOUISIANA 


451 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  A.  Mower , TJ.  8.  Army , Second  Brigade , 
Third  Divisions  Fifteenth  Army  Corps , o/  action  (15th)  near  Richmond. 


Hdqrs.  Second  Brig.,  Third  Div.,  Fifteenth  A.  C., 

Young’s  Point , X<z.,  June  17,  1S63. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  recent 
expedition  to  Bichmond,  La.,  in  compliance  with  orders  of  General 
Grant : 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th  instant,  I moved  out  from  this  place  on 
the  Duckport  road  with  my  brigade  and  Barrett’s  battery,  the  Sixty- 
third  Illinois,  and  a detachment  of  the  Tenth  Illinois  Cavalry,  under 
Major  Shaw. 

We  encamped  the  night  of  the  14th  on  the  plantation  of  Mrs.  Ames, 
about  6 miles  this  side  of  Bichmond. 

On  the  morning  of  the  15th,  we  moved  on,  and  at  about  6 a.  m.,  at  the 
junction  of  the  Duckport  and  Milliken’s  Bend  roads,  united  my  force 
with  the  Marine  Brigade,  under  Brigadier-General  Ellet.  The  pickets 
of  the  enemy  were  stationed  at  the  junction  of  these  roads,  but  retired 
without  opposition.  Moving  on,  when  within  about  2 miles  of  Bich- 
mond, the  enemy  were  found  to  be  in  position  on  the  plain  in  rear  of 
a hedge  of  willows  and  a wide  ditch,  with  their  skirmishers  in  their  ad- 
vance. The  advance  regiment  of  my  brigade,  the  Fifth  Minnesota,  was 
immediately  deployed  as  skirmishers,  and  the  other  regiments  formed 
in  line  of  battle  behind  them,  with  the  artillery  placed  in  intervals  in 
the  lines,  and  a section  on  the  left  flank.  These  dispositions  being 
made,  the  whole  force  advanced  in  the  same  order,  and  the  skirmishers 
opened  the  engagement.  The  enemy’s  skirmishers  were  driven  in,  and 
their  line  of  battle  poured  a volley  or  two  upon  our  skirmishers.  My 
artillery  then  opened,  and  in  a short  time  the  enemy  was  driven  back 
across  the  plain  and  the  bayou  to  the  turn,  where  their  second  position 
was  taken.  I then  advanced  my  line  to  the  willow  hedge  and  ditch. 
The  battery  of  the  enemy,  consisting  of  four  guns,  then  opened  upon 
us,  but  without  serious  effect.  My  battery,  in  conj unction  with  that  of 
the  Marine  Brigade,  replied,  and  a lively  artillery  engagement  was 
kept  up  between  the  forces  for  about  one  hour.  This  not  accomplish- 
ing the  object  desired,  I left  the  battery  in  position,  with  orders  to  fire 
at  intervals,  to  keep  the  enemy  engaged,  and  left  as  their  support  one 
regiment;  the  other  regiments  I moved  by  the  right  flank  into  the  woods 
that  bound  the  plain  on  the  west,  and,  throwing  forward  skirmishers, 
advanced  by  the  flank  along  the  edge  of  the  woods,  so  that  I might,  if 
possible,  dislodge  the  enemy  by  turning  their  left  flank.  We  proceeded 
with  no  opposition,  except  a few  shells  from  the  enemy’s  battery,  and 
my  skirmishers  reached  the  bayou,  about  three-quarters  of  a mile  west 
of  the  town,  and  found  no  enemy  within  view.  Moving  by  the  east,  by 
the  side  of  the  bayou,  we  came  to  town,  and  found  the  enemy  had  fired 
the  bridge  across  the  bayou  and  left.  The  destruction  of  the  bridge 
had  progressed  too  far  to  admit  of  crossing  the  artillery.  The  cavalry 
forded  the  stream  and  pursued  the  enemy  about  6 miles  on  the  road 
toward  Delhi,  and  brought  in  25  prisoners ; a small  quantity  of  stores 
was  found,  and  a few  arms. 

The  town  was  destroyed.  Several  hours  being  required  to  make  the 
bridge  passable,  and  the  enemy  being  already  so  far  on  the  retreat,  I 
deemed  an  attempt  at  further  pursuit  impracticable. 


452  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chai>.  XXXVI. 

My  loss  was  1 man  killed  and  8 men  wounded.  I inclose  a list  of 
their  names.* 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOS.  A.  MOWER, 

Brigadier - General. 

Capt.  J.  K.  Pierson, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General, 


IsTo.  4. 

Report  of  Col.  Lucius  F.  Hubbard , Fifth  Minnesota  Infantry , of  action 

(15tft)  at  Richmond. 

Hdqrs.  Fifth  Regiment  Minnesota  Yol.  Infantry, 

Young’s  Point , La.,  June  20,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
part  sustained  by  the  Fifth  Regiment  Minnesota  Volunteer  Infantry  in 
the  action  at  Richmond,  La.,  on  the  15th  instant : 

On  the  9th  of  the  month,  the  brigade  to  which  the  Fifth  Minnesota  is 
attached  w7as  ordered  to  move  from  Haynes7  Bluff  to  Young’s  Point,  with 
a view  of  strengthening  the  garrison  at  the  latter  place,  which  was  being 
threatened  by  a body  of  the  enemy  operating  from  the  interior,  and  that 
had  already  made  an  attack  at  Milliken’s  Bend.  The  re-enforcements 
thus  sent  induced  the  enemy  to  fall  back  to  Richmond,  20  miles  west, 
from  which  place  it  was  ordered  that  he  be  dislodged  and  driven  out. 

The  force  sent  out  for  this  purpose,  consisting  of  two  brigades,  left 
Young’s  Point  on  the  morning  of  the  14th,  and  bivouacked  that  night 
within  5 miles  of  Richmond. 

At  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  15th,  the  column  moved  forward, 
the  Fifth  Minnesota  being  in  advance.  The  first  picket  of  the  enemy 
was  encountered  within  2 miles  of  the  town,  but  a reconnaissance  dis- 
closed the  fact  that  there  was  a considerable  force  in  line  of  battle  near 
the  edge  of  a body  of  timber  less  than  a mile  to  the  rear  of  this  outpost. 

As  soon  as  the  probable  location  of  the  enemy  was  determined,  I 
was  ordered  by  General  Mower  to  deploy  six  companies  of  my  regi- 
ment as  skirmishers,  using  the  remaining  four  as  a reserve,  aud  move 
forward  to  ascertain  more  definitely  the  position  the  enemy  occupied  aud 
his  probable  strength.  The  approach  to  the  locality  in  which  the  enemy 
was  posted  led  across  a smooth,  open  field,  which  afforded  no  cover  for 
the  skirmishers  whatever;  hence  the  men  were  greatly  exposed  and  their 
movements  fully  apparent  to  the  enemy.  Through  this  open  field,  about 
half  a mile  in  front  of  the  main  body  of  the  enemy,  and  running  parallel 
with  my  line  of  skirmishers,  was  a deep  ditch,  skirted  by  a thick  growth 
of  bushes  and  small  timber,  undercover  of  which  the  rebel  skirmishers, 
supported  by  a regiment  of  infantry,  were  posted. 

When  within  30  yards  of  this  cover,  and  in  point-blank  range  of  the 
enemy’s  guns,  we  received  a heavy  volley  from  his  skirmishers  and  the 
regiment  in  reserve.  The  men  at  once  fell  flat  upon  the  ground,  the 
weeds  and  tall  grass  affording  them  partial  protection.  A sharp  skir- 
mish fight  ensued  of  perhaps  twenty  minutes’  duration,  during  which 
a charge  of  the  enemy,  made  with  a design  of  capturing  the  skirmishers, 
was  repulsed. 


Omitted. 


Chap.  XXXVT.]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHERN  LOUISIANA. 


453 

.By  this  time  our  main  column  bad  formed  line  of  battle  and  ad 
vanced  to  within  supporting  distance  of  the  position  we  occupied.  The 
rebel  skirmishers  now  retired  upon  their  main  body,  which  had  also 
fallen  back  and  taken  a position  on  the  opposite  bank  of  a bayou  that 
separated  us  from  the  town.  I again  advanced,  moving  in  the  face  of 
a tire  of  grape  and  canister  from  a battery  the  enemy  had  in  position 
on  the  bank  of  the  bayou,  and,  when  within  easy  range  of  his  sharp- 
shooters, halted.  Two'  batteries  of  artillery  were  now  brought  forward 
and  opened  upon  the  guns  of  the  enemy.  A sharp  artillery  fight  fol- 
lowed, lasting  more  than  an  hour,  during  which  the  enemy  effected  an 
evacuation  of  the  place,  retreating  on  the  road  to  Delhi.  He  had  burned 
the  bridge  across  the  bayou  and  obstructed  the  road,  rendering  an  im- 
mediate pursuit  impracticable. 

The  village  of  Richmond  was  destroyed  by  order,  and  the  following 
day  the  column  countermarched  to  Young’s  Point. 

The  regiment  bore  itself  with  its  usual  gallantry  and  much  to  the 
satisfaction  of  the  general  commanding. 

The  following  is  a list  of  the  casualties  the  regiment  sustained  in  the 
action  : 8 men  wounded.* 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  F.  HUBBARD, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Gol.  Oscar  Malmros, 

Adjutant- General,  Minnesota. 


No.  5. 

Reports  of  Actg.  Rear-Admiral  David  D.  Porter , U.  S.  Navy , of  attack 
(7th)  on  Millikeris  Bend  and  action  (15 th)  near  Richmond. 

June  7,  1863. 

The  enemy* attacked  Milliken’s  Bend;  commenced  driving  the  negro 
regiments,  and  killed  all  they  captured.  This  infuriated  the  negroes, 
who  turned  on  the  rebels  and  slaughtered  them  like  sheep,  and  captured 
200  prisoners.  I also  hear  they  captured  five  pieces  of  artillery.  The 
Choctaw  and  Lexington  were  there. 

DAVID  D.  PORTER, 

Admiral. 

General  Grant. 


United  States  Mississippi  Squadron, 

Flag-ship  Black  Hawk,  Jane  7,  1863. 

Dear  General  : Last  night,  or  early  this  morning,  the  rebels,  sup- 
posed to  amount  to  3,000  or  4,000  strong,  attacked  Milliken’s  Bend,  and 
nearly  gobbled  up  the  whole  party.  Fortunately,  I heard  of  it  in  time 
to  get  the  Choctaw  and  Lexington  up  there  just  as  the  attack  com- 
menced. The  rebels  got  into  our  camps  and  killed  a good  many  negroes, 
and  left  about  80  of  their  number  killed  on  the  levee.  Our  troops 
(mostly  negroes)  retreated  behind  the  banks,  near  the  water’s  edge,  and 
the  gunboats  opened  so  rapidly  on  the  euemy  that  they  scampered  oft*, 
the  shells  chasing  them  as  far  as  the  woods.  They  got  nothing  but 
hard  knocks. 


Nominal  list  omitted. 


454 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


The  moment  I heard  of  it,  I went  up  in  the  Black  Hawk  and  saw 
quite  an  ugly  sight.  The  dead  negroes  lined  the  ditch  inside  of  the 
parapet,  or  levee,  and  were  mostly  shot  on  the  top  of  the  head.  In  front 
of  them,  close  to  the  levee,  lay  an  equal  number  of  rebels,  stinking  in 
the  sun.  Their  knapsacks  contained  four  days7  provisions.  They  were 
miserable  looking  wretches.  I had  no  sooner  got  there  than  the  dis- 
patch boat  brought  me  a letter  from  the  general  commanding  here, 
informing  me  that  the  rebels  had  appeared  near  the  canal  in  force.  I 
hurried  back,  and  found  all  the  vessels  having  guns  ready  to  receive 
them,  and  heard  nothing  of  the  rebels.  It  was  a false  alarm,  but  the 
steamers  had  all  gone  off  for  Young’s  Point. 

There  are  about  300  troops  here  in  all,  not  counting  the  blacks.  I 
think  we  should  have  1,000  men  near  the  canal  and  at  Young’s  Point,  and 
I recommend  moving  everything  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  the  latter  place. 
We  can  defend  it  much  better.  Those  fellows  will  be  scouting  about 
here  for  some  time,  and  it  is  no  longer  safe  to  run  teams  across  to  the 
vessels  on  the  other  side.  I think  the  rebels  are  in  force  there.  When 
the  brigade  comes,  I will  land  them,  but  I hear  they  are  at  Memphis 
waiting  for  troops. 

The  Twenty-ninth  Iowa  (I  think  it  was)  behaved  well  to  day.  It 
stood  its  ground  against  great  odds,  and  kept  the  enemy  out  of  the 
camps  until  the  men  could  form  and  get  into  some  kind  of  order. 

I think  we  want  more  force  here,  and  everything  at  Young’s  Point 
moved  over  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  near  the  mouth  of  the 
Yazoo,  where  there  is  a good  landing. 

Very  truly,  yours, 


DAVID  D.  PORTER, 

Acting  Rear-Admiral, 


General  Grant. 


Mississippi  Squadron,  Flag-ship  Black  Hawk, 

June  16,  1863. 

Dear  General:  Rather  than  be  idle,  and  thinking  it  a good  plan 
not  to  let  the  rebels  be  enjoying  themselves  too  much  at  Richmond,  I 
dispatched  General  Ellet  to  the  commanding  officer,  to  see  if  he  would 
not  lend  a hand  to  drive  the  rebels  away.  So  they  started  yesterday 
morning  at  early  daylight,  with  about  2,000  men,  all  told,  and  found  the 
rebels  strongly  posted  at  Richmond,  with  4,000  men  and  six  pieces  of 
artillery. 

After  an  hour’s  fight,  in  which  nobody  was  badly  hurt  (I  believe)  on 
our  side,  the  rebels  cleared  out,  and  Richmond  was  burned  in  the  row. 
Eleven  prisoners  fell  into  our  hands.  From  them  we  learn  that  there  are 
6,000  men  at  Delhi,  but  without  transportation.  They  left  their  wagons 
in  Alexandria.  From  all  I can  learn,  they  expect  more  troops  to  join 
them,  more  field  pieces,  and  their  wagons. 

They  have  signals  going  on  all  around  here.  I have  the  names  of  a 
number  of  houses  where  the  signals  are  made  from,  and  Ellet’s  cavalry 
will  go  out  to-morrow  and  arrest  them  all.  My  idea  is  that  this  force 
is  intended  to  co-operate  with  Vicksburg  at  the  proper  time.  With  the 
boats,  flats,  and  coal  barges  they  have  they  can  transport  their  whole  force 
to  this  side  from  Vicksburg  in  six  hours,  and  if  this  party  should  sud- 
denly seize  the  Point  we  could  not  prevent  it.  I am  keeping  a strong 
force  of  gunboats  here,  and  shall  keep  the  brigade  ready  to  land  at  a 
moment’s  notice.  The  Benton  will  be  above  the  canal  every  night,  and 
the  other  boats  when  they  return  up  the  river.  I shall  also  have  the 


Chav.  XXXVI.]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHERN  LOUISIANA. 


455 


Osage  in  time  to  dash  down  amongst  them  if  they  try  anything  of  the 
kind  ; still,  with  all  that,  the  thing  can  be  done.  I do  not  know  what 
else  would  bring  these  fellows  here  in  such  a hurry,  and  why  they  avoid 
a fight  so.  They  lost  98  killed  at  Milliken’s  Bend,  according  to  their 
own  account,  and  a proportional  number  of  wounded;  also  some  horses. 
I tell  you  what  I suppose  to  be  their  plans;  you  may  see  something  else 
in  the  movement. 

I caught  a messenger  from  Vicksburg  night  before  last,  slipping  out 
in  a canoe.  I keep  a picket  boat  out  on  the  Mississippi  side,  above  the 
canal,  and  the  fellow  was  floating  by,  lying  down.  He  would  tell  noth- 
ing; we  only  know  that  he  threw  his  package  overboard,  and  we  could 
not  get  it.  He  says  there  are  sixty  days’  provisions  in  Vicksburg, 
which  we  know  cannot  be  so.  Says  we  have  killed  nobody  and  done 
no  damage,  which  is  bosh. 

I have  told  Captain  Walker  to  supply  32-pounder  guns,  if  you  want 
any,  at  Haynes’  Bluff.  Will  have  carriages  in  a day  or  two  for  those 
there  if  you  want  them,  though  the  guns  are  very  heavy,  and  will  be 
difficult  to  transport. 

Everything  is  quiet  up  the  river.  Hearing  that  Price  was  advancing 
on  Helena,  I sent  a force  of  gunboats  there. 

Very  truly,  yours, 

DAVID  D.  PORTER, 

Acting  Rear-Admiral. 

General  Grant. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Copt.  Abraham  E.  Strickle , commissioner , of  attack  (7th)  on 

Milliken’s  Bend. 

Headquarters  United  States  Commissioners, 

Milliken’s  Bend , Xu.,  June  9,  1863. 

General  : It  is  with  feelings  of  regret  that  we  have  to  communicate 
to  you  the  sad  intelligence  of  the  loss  of  at  least  100  of  our  white  and 
black  troops. 

But  while  it  is  painful  to  record  this  butchery,  it  is  a pleasure  to  know 
that  they  stood  firm  while  they  had  commanders,  and  that  three-fourths 
of  the  African  troops  that  were  slain  were  found  dead  in  the  ditch, 
where  they  were  ordered  to  make  their  stand.  It  is  not  our  purpose  to 
attach  blame  to  any  one,  or  to  eulogize  any  for  the  part  they  took  in 
this  fight,  or  the  military  sagacity  that  was  brought  to  bear  to  prepare 
for  this  occurrence.  You  will  recollect  that,  on  the  25th  ultimo,  we  ad- 
dressed you  a line  in  which  the  condition  of  affairs  so  far  as  protection 
to  the  district  of  country  from  Lake  Providence  to  Young’s  Point  is 
concerned,  and  you  very  generously  at  once  gave  us  what  we,  as  well 
as  yourself,  deemed  sufficient  for  the  adequate  protection  of  this  terri- 
tory. We  have  learned  from  the  results  following  the  orders  you  made 
on  that  occasion  that  all  that  the  commanding  general  can  do  for  our 
security  may  be  useless  if  the  instrumentalities  to  be  used  for  carrying 
out  such  orders  either  overrate  their  own  consequence  and  sagacity  or 
underrate  all  the  sources  of  danger  that  may  seem  perfectly  apparent 
to  others.  We  utterly  failed  to  convince  those  in  command  that  there 
was  any  necessity  to  prepare  in  season  for  the  raid  that  has  been  made 
upon  us ; and  even  when  it  had  been  commenced,  our  extreme  solici- 


456 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai*.  XXXVI. 


tude  for  tlie  lives  of  our  soldiers  in  the  condition  of  affairs  that  we  then 
found  them  has  been  misconstrued  for  officiousness. 

In  all  this  matter  we  feel  that  we  have  discharged  our  duty  in  trying 
to  prevent  an  unnecessary  effusion  of  blood. 

Whether  the  failure  on  the  part  of  those  in  the  military  command  to 
prepare  in  season  to  give  us  the  proper  protection  has  arisen  from  a 
want  of  capacity  to  perceive  the  danger  when  it  was  attempted  to  be 
shown  to  them,  or  a determination  to  persist  in  their  own  course  regard- 
less of  consequences,  we  do  not  pretend  to  say ; but  one  thing  is  certain, 
if  the  means  which  you  freely  and  generously  offered  to  furnish  us  for 
our  defense,  as  well  as  to  enable  us  to  follow  up  the  retreat  of  those 
who  might  make  an  attack,  had  been  procured  and  put  in  proper  posi- 
tion, we  would  have  not  only  repulsed  but  would  have  wiped  out  the 
force  that  made  the  attack. 

Why  those  in  command  failed  to  get  the  artillery  that  you  informed 
one  of  our  commissioners  should  be  furnished  on  request,  or  why  other 
officers  who  were  informed  of  your  readiness  to  furnish  such  for  our 
protection  have  not  procured  them,  are  questions  that  properly  belong 
to  others  to  answer,  and  not  to  us,  for  we  certainly  gave  them  the  in- 
formation that  it  was  your  desire  to  furnish  all  that  might  be  necessary 
to  protect  this  section  from  a successful  attack  of  the  enemy.  If  we 
have  committed  an  error,  it  has  been  in  troubling  you,  while  engaged 
in  taking  Vicksburg,  to  get  orders  to  make  the  military  department 
here  adequate  to  our  defense ; but  after  all,  from  some  cause  or  other, 
they  have  failed  to  avail  themselves  of  your  forethought  and  our  im- 
portunities to  make  the  service  here  sufficient  for  such  purpose. 

It  is  proper  here  to  say  that  Col.  Thomas  Kilby  Smith,  and  the  other 
members  of  the  court  of  inquiry  that  happened  to  be  here  engaged  in 
examining  the  case  of  Col.  I.  F.  Shepard,  have  rendered  essential  serv- 
ice ou  this  occasion,  and  had  their  counsel  been  heeded,  perhaps  many 
lives  would  have  been  saved,  and  nearly  an  entire  rout  of  the  enemy 
been  the  result.  Had  Colonel  Shepard’s  plans,  made  known  to  us  the 
day  previous  to  his  arrest,  been  carried  out,  we  have  no  doubt  but  that 
we  would  have  been  to-day  in  possession  of  a great  portion  of  the  forces 
that  made  the  attack  upon  us.  The  great  solicitude  that  we  have  mani- 
fested, to  you  as  well  as  to  others,  for  the  protection  of  the  agricul- 
tural and  commercial  interests  involved  in  this  region,  which  must  be 
apparent  to  all  of  reflection,  and  the  demoralization  of  the  African  troops, 
and  the  fatal  consequences  to  all  the  various  interests  concerned,  is 
our  reason  for  using  all  the  means  in  our  power  to  prevent  the  con- 
sequences that  have  resulted.  The  capacity  of  the  negro  to  defend  his 
liberty,  and  his  susceptibility  to  appreciate  the  power  of  motives  in  the 
place  of  the  last,  have  been  put  to  such  a test  under  our  observation  as 
to  be  beyond  further  doubt. 

The  other  two  commissioners  being  absent,  I take  the  responsibility 
to  send  you  this  letter,  hoping  that  the  same  may  be  satisfactory  to  you 
and  meet  with  your  approval. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  E.  STRICKLE, 
Captain  and  Commissioner. 

Maj.  Gen.  IJ.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 

P.  S. — Presuming  that  you  have  been  officially  informed  by  the  mili- 
tary department  of  the  losses  and  casualties  connected  with  this  battle, 
I have  deemed  it  my  duty  to  be  silent  ou  this  subject. 


CiiAr  XXXVI.  | OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHERN  LOUISIANA. 


457 


No.  7. 


Reports  of  May.  Gen.  Richard  Taylor , C.  S.  Army , of  attacks  (7th)  on 
Young’s  Point  and  Millikeri’s  Bend. 

Headquarters  Department  of  Trans-Mississippi, 

Shreveport , La .,  June  17,  1863. 

General  : I liave  the  honor  to  forward  herewith  Major-General  Tay- 
lor’s report  of  the  operations  of  his  forces  in  North  Louisiana  from  June 
3 to  8.  I respectfully  call  the  attention  of  the  War  Department  to 
the  ability  and  energy  displayed  by  that  gallant  officer  in  the  discharge 
of  his  duties  as  district  commander. 

Major-General  Walker’s  division,  Tappan’s brigade,  together  with  Colo- 
nel [Isaac  F.]  Harrison’s  and  Colonel  [Frank  A.]  Bartlett’s  commands 
of  cavalry,  are  still  in  the  country  opposite  Vicksburg.  Major-General 
Taylor,  with  his  forces  in  Lower  Louisiana,  is  personally  superintending 
the  operations  on  this  side  of  the  Mississippi  for  the  relief  of  Port  Hud- 
son. He  has  been  instructed  to  throw  provisions  into  Port  Hudson  and 
Vicksburg  whenever  it  is  possible  to  do  so.  Under  my  instructions,  he 
has  placed  himself  in  communication  with  General  Johnston,  and  he 
will  use  every  effort  to  co-operate  with  him  in  his  operations  for  the 
defense  and  relief  of  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  general,  your  obedient  servant, 

E.  KIRBY  SMITH, 
Lieutenant-  General , Commanding. 

General  S.  Cooper, 

Adjutant  and  Lnspector  General , Richmond , Va. 


[Indorsement.! 


Returned  to  Secretary  of  War. 
highly  commendable. 


The  operations  of  General  Taylor  are 
J.  D.  [JEFFERSON  DAVIS.] 


[In  closure.] 

District  of  West  Louisiana,  Richmond , June  8,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  events  of  the  past  few  days. 
As  soon  as  I learned  of  the  capture  of  Richmond  by  Captain  McLean,  of 
Harrison’s  battalion,  viz,  on  the  night  of  3d  ultimo  [instant],  I ordered 
General  [J.  G.]  Walker  to  push  on  a force  of  200  infantry  to  insure  hold- 
ing the  bridge,  adding  to  it  two  guns  of  Harrison’s  artillery.  This  force 
crossed  the  Tensas  in  a hat,  which  I had  secured  the  day  before,  and 
reached  Richmond  at  sunset  on  the  4th.  On  the  same  day  General 
Walker  encamped  3 miles  from  Dunlap’s,  on  Tensas.  I had  succeeded 
in  collecting  material  for  a bridge  (there  being  but  one  flat,  the  one 
above  mentioned,  on  the  river),  and  on  the  morning  of  the  5th  com- 
menced the  work,  superintending  it  in  person.  At  4 p.  m.  a substantial 
bridge  was  completed,  when  I pushed  on  to  this  point,  sending  notice 
to  General  Walker  of  the  completion  of  the  bridge.  Arriving  at  dusk, 
I soon  met  Major  [Isaac  F.j  Harrison  from  below.  He  reported  the 
parish  of  Tensas  and  Lower  Madison  clear  of  the  enemy.  One  of  his 
companies,  under  Captain  McCall,  attacked  on  the  morning  of  the  4th 
a negro  camp  on  Lake  Saint  Joseph.  He  found  them  some  90  strong. 
Killed  the  captain  (white),  12  negroes,  and  captured  the  remainder. 
Some  60  women  and  children  in  the  camp  were  also  secured.  Captain 
McCall  had  60  men.  Major  Harrison  brought  off  some  few  arms,  medi- 
cines, &c.,  from  Perkins’,  Surget’s,  Casin,  and  Carthage,  all  of  which 


458  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chai>.  XXXVI. 

points  he  found  abandoned  by  the  enemy.  At  several  places  much 
property  had  been  burned. 

To  finish  the  operations  of  Harrison’s  cavalry : On  the  morning  of  the 
6th,  while  awaiting  Walker’s  arrival,  the  enemy’s  cavalry  was  reported 
to  me  to  be  approaching  from  Milliken’s  Bend.  Major  Harrison,  with 
100  men,  advanced  to  meet  them.  Three  miles  distant  he  found  them 
drawn  up,  140  strong ; charged  them  at  once,  broke  their  line,  killing  8 
and  capturing  a lieutenant  and  24  privates,  and  pursued  them  until  fired 
upon  by  infantry  in  sight  of  the  Bend. 

I cannot  speak  too  highly  of  Major  Harrison  as  a cavalry  officer.  I do 
not  think  he  has  a superior  in  the  service.  Accordingly,  I have  ordered 
some  unattached  companies  to  report  to  him,  to  raise  his  command  to  a 
regiment.  If  furnished  with  anything  like  adequate  means,  he  will  pro- 
tect thoroughly  this  section  of  the  State. 

The  night  of  my  arrival  at  this  place,  viz,  the  5th,  was  spent  in  pro- 
curing intelligence  of  the  enemy’s  positions  on  this  side  of  the  river.  I 
found  that  this  line  of  transit  had  ceased  to  be  of  importance  to  the  en- 
emy, since  he  established  his  right  flank  on  the  Yazoo,  at  Haynes’  Bluff, 
and  almost  all  the  stores  had  been  removed.  Transports  in  large  num- 
bers were  plying  up  the  Yazoo.  At  Lake  Providence  the  enemy  had  a 
few  companies  (perhaps  four),  and  a large  number  of  negroes  arriving. 
Below  that  point  to  Milliken’s  he  had  a number  of  plantations  at  work 
under  the  new  system.  At  Milliken’s  there  was  a negro  brigade  of  un- 
certain strength  and  four  companies  of  the  Tenth  Illinois  Cavalry  (the 
force  encountered  by  Harrison).  There  was  a deadly  feud  between  these 
negroes  and  the  cavalry,  and  their  camps  were  considerably  separated, 
the  negroes  up  the  river.  Between  Milliken’s  and  Young’s  Point  (oppo- 
site the  mouth  of  the  Yazoo),  a distance  of  11  miles,  tents  were  scat- 
tered in  large  numbers,  most  of  them  empty  or  occupied  by  sick  and 
convalescents.  At  Young’s  were  some  500  or  600  men,  detachments 
and  convalescents.  Some  wagons  and  mules  were  immediately  on  the 
river  bank,  evidently  for  convenient  shipment  up  the  Yazoo.  Below 
Young’s,  around  the  point  to  opposite  Vicksburg,  and  across  by  the 
plank  road  to  Bedford,  there  were  a few  pickets  and  some  small  bands 
of  negroes.  Harrison  had  cleared  everything  below  Bedford. 

All  these  facts  were  completely  established  during  the  night  of  the  5th 
and  early  on  the  6th,  before  Walker’s  division  arrived  at  10  a.  m.  As 
the  enemy  knew  nothing  of  the  presence  of  so  large  a force,  believing 
Richmond  to  be  occupied  by  Harrison’s  command  alone,  I determined 
to  act  at  once.  Accordingly4,  General  Walker  was  directed  to  cook  two 
days’  rations  and  be  ready  to  move  at  6 p.  m.  The  distances  from  Rich- 
mond to  Young’s  and  Milliken’s,  respectively,  are  20  and  10  miles,  and 
the  road  is  common  for  5 miles  from  Richmond.  The  intense  heat  of 
the  weather  rendered  a night  march  desirable,  and  an  attack  at  early 
dawn  lessened  the  risk  of  annoyance  from  gunboats.  I instructed  Gen- 
eral Walker  to  send  one  brigade  to  Young’s,  one  to  Milliken’s,  and  hold 
the  third  in  reserve  at  a point  6 miles  from  Richmond.  Twenty  men 
from  Harrison’s  command,  acquainted  with  the  country,  were  selected 
to  accompany  each  of  the  attacking  columns.  My  signal  officer,  Lieu- 
tenant Routh,  with  a party  of  his  men,  was  ordered  to  accompany  the 
column  to  Young’s  and  make  every  effort  to  communicate  with  Vicks- 
burg, and  the  great  importance  of  so  doing  was  impressed  on  all.  The 
two  columns,  after  clearing  the  points  aimed  at,  were  to  march  up  and 
down  the  river,  respectively,  to  Duckport,  nearly  equidistant  from 
Young’s  and  Milliken’s,  where  a road  struck  off  from  the  river  and  fell 
into  the  Richmond  road,  near  the  point  of  divergence  mentioned  above. 


CiiAr.  XXXVX]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHERN  LOUISIANA. 


459 


Arms,  ordnance  stores,  medicines,  &c.,  were  ordered  to  be  saved,  and  all 
other  property,  for  which  transportation  could  not  be  provided,  was  to  be 
burned.  Major-General  Walker  and  his  brigade  commanders  appeared 
to  enter  heartily  into  this  plan,  and  as  no  troops  were  to  be  engaged  ex- 
cept their  division,  I deemed  it  proper  to  leave  the  execution  of  it  to 
them.  [Henry  E.]  McCulloch’s  brigade  was  selected  for  Milliken’s, 
Hawes’  for  Young’s,  and  [Horace]  Eandal’s  was  to  be  in  reserve,  at  the 
intersection  of  the  roads.  General  Walker  decided  to  accompany  this 
last. 

Despite  my  efforts,  the  troops  did  not  move  until  an  hour  after  the 
appointed  time.  McCulloch  reached  Milliken’s  about  dawn,  drove  in 
the  enemy’s  pickets,  and,  in  obedience  to  orders,  attacked  with  the  bay- 
onet. The  enemy,  after  a sharp  struggle,  was  driven  from  his  first  posi- 
tion (a  large  levee  covered  by  a hedge)  with  very  heavy  loss  in  killed. 
He  retreated  behind  a second  levee  and  under  the  bank  of  the  river  near 
a small  gunboat  and  two  or  three  transports.  Strict  orders  had  been 
given  to  drive  the  enemy  into  the  river,  so  as  to  permit  no  time  for  es- 
cape or  re-enforcements.  On  mounting  the  second  levee  in  pursuit,  our 
men  came  in  sight  of  the  gunboat  and  transports  (mistaken  by  them  for 
gunboats),  and  at  once  fell  back,  and  could  not  be  induced  to  cross  the 
levee.  Confusion  ensued,  and  the  gunboat,  which  at  the  beginning  had 
no  steam  up,  brought  her  one  gun  to  bear  in  the  direction  of  our  troops. 
McCulloch  dispatched  to  General  Walker,  4J  miles  distant,  for  assist- 
ance. Walker  moved  up  with  Eandal’s  brigade  and  some  artillery,  and 
found  that  McCulloch  had  withdrawn  out  of  reach  of  shells.  After  ex- 
amining the  position,  General  Walker  reported  to  me  that  three  addi- 
tional gunboats,  attracted  by  the  firing,  had  arrived ; that  he  could  find 
no  position  from  which  to  use  his  artillery,  and  that  the  prostration  of 
the  men  from  the  intense  heat  prevented  him  from  marching  down  to 
Duckport,  as  directed.  It  is  true  the  heat  was  intense,  the  thermometer 
marking  95  degrees  in  the  shade  ; but,  had  common  vigor  and  judgment 
been  displayed,  the  work  would  all  have  been  completed  by  8 a.  m. 

McCulloch’s  brigade  lost  some  20  killed  and  perhaps  80  wounded. 
A very  large  number  of  the  negroes  were  killed  and  wounded,  and,  un- 
fortunately, some  50,  with  2 of  their  white  officers,  captured.  I respect- 
fully ask  instructions  as  to  the  disposition  of  these  prisoners.  A num- 
ber of  horses  and  mules,  some  few  small-arms,  and  commissary  stores 
were  also  taken.  In  this  affair  General  McCulloch  appears  to  have 
shown  great  personal  bravery,  but  no  capacity  for  handling  masses. 

I turn  now  to  Hawes’  operations.  No  report  was  received  from  him 
till  late  in  the  evening  of  the  7th.  Lieutenant  [S.  M.]  Eouth,  signal 
officer,  returned  and  informed  me  that  General  Hawes  was  falling  back; 
that  he  had  asked  General  Hawes  if  any  attempt  was  to  be  made  to 
communicate  with  Vicksburg  (in  sight  with  a good  glass),  and  received 
a negative  reply.  Lieutenant  Eouth  then  attempted  to  make  his  own 
way  down  the  Point,  but,  meeting  some  armed  Yankees  and  negroes, 
was  forced  to  return.  Shortly  after  Lieutenant  Eouth’s  report,  a man 
of  the  signal  corps  arrived  with  some  memoranda,  which  General  Hawes 
directed  him  to  read  to  me.  From  these  it  appears  that  General  Hawes 
reached  the  rear  of  Young’s,  1 mile  distant,  at  11  a.  m.  on  the  7th  ; that 
he  had  consumed  seventeen  hours  in  marching  19  miles  over  a good 
road  without  impediments.  It  further  appears  that  a more  favorable 
condition  of  affairs  was  found  at  Young’s  than  General  Hawes  was  told 
to  expect,  for  late  as  he  arrived  he  surprised  the  enemy.  A number 
were  found  fishing  some  distance  from  camp,  and  two  or  three  were 
captured  at  this  peaceful  work.  Two  shots  were  fired  by  the  enemy, 


460  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

botli  taking  effect,  one  killing  a horse  and  the  other  severely  wounding 
in  the  arm  one  of  the  guides  of  Harrison’s  cavalry.  General  Hawes 
formed  his  line  of  battle,  advanced  in  the  open  field  to  within  half  a 
mile  of  the  enemy,  and  then  retired.  I quote  from  the  memoranda: 
“ He  was  satisfied  he  could  carry  the  position,  but  did  not  think  it 
would  pay.”  General  Hawes  then  returned  to  the  junction  of  the  roads 
in  less  time  than  he  had  taken  to  advance,  leaving,  as  General  Walker 
reported  to  me,  over  200  stragglers  behind.  Harrison’s  cavalry  was 
sent  to  bring  in  these.  They  were,  however,  in  no  danger,  as  the 
enemy  at  the  time  were  rushing  aboard  their  transports  and  burning 
stores.  General  Walker  desired  me  to  see  General  Hawes,  to  learn  the 
reason  of  his  conduct.  I declined,  directing  his  report  to  be  written 
out,  and  informing  General  Walker  that  I should  expect  him  to  indorse 
fully  and  freely  his  own  opinion  upon  it. 

Colonel  [Frank  A.]  Bartlett,  with  about  900  men,  was  ordered  to 
march  on  Lake  Providence,  with  instructions  to  break  up  the  camps  of 
negroes  in  that  vicinity  who  were  being  organized  and  drilled  by  the 
enemy,  and  thence  push  his  cavalry  down  to  Milliken’s  Bend,  breaking 
up  the  plantations  in  cultivation  by  agents  or  contractors  of  the  United 
States  Government. 

On  the  5th,  he  was  at  Floyd,  building  a bridge  across  the  Macon,  dis- 
tant about  25  miles  from  Lake  Providence.  Since  that  date  I have  re- 
ceived no  report  from  him.  If  he  succeeds  in  the  operations  intrusted 
to  him,  the  west  bank  of  the  Mississippi  Biver  from  the  mouth  of  Bed 
Biver  to  the  Arkansas  line  will  be  free  from  the  presence  of  the  enemy. 
I shall  use  every  exertion  by  placing  an  adequate  force  of  cavalry  and 
light  artillery  on  the  bank  of  the  river  to  annoy  and  interfere  with  the 
navigation  of  the  stream  by  transports,  upon  which  Grant  is  dependent 
for  his  supplies  by  way  of  the  Yazoo  Biver. 

As  soon  as  Tappan’s  brigade  can  reach  Bichmond,  I shall  withdraw 
Walker’s  division  to  operate  south  of  Bed  Biver.  An  additional  cav- 
alry force  is  needed  in  this  section,  and  I have  the  honor  to  request 
that  Captain  [L.  M.J  Nutt’s  company  of  mounted  men  may  be  imme 
diately  ordered  to  report  to  Colonel  [Isaac  F.]  Harrison,  in  accordance 
with  the  understanding  which  I have  with  the  lieutenant-general  com- 
manding on  this  subject. 

I regret  exceedingly  that  I am  unable  to  report  results  commensurate 
with  the  force  employed  on  this  expedition.  Much  greater  loss  ought 
to  have  been  inflicted  upon  the  enemy,  and  the  stores  which  he  burned 
ought  to  have  been  captured  for  our  use. 

I beg  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  to  believe  that  I used  every 
personal  exertion  in  order  to  insure  success.  Myself  and  staff  acted  as 
pioneers,  bridge-builders,  scouts,  quartermasters,  and  commissaries. 
General  Walker’s  division  was  suddenly  and  secretly  thrown  within  G 
or  8 miles  of  the  enemy’s  line  of  camps  on  the  Mississippi  Biver,  infor- 
mation of  the  most  reliable  character  furnished  to  it  of  the  enemy’s 
strength  and  position,  which  in  every  instance  was  fully  verified. 
Nothing  was  wanted  but  vigorous  action  in  the  execution  of  the  plans 
which  had  been  carefully  laid  out  for  it  to  insure  such  successes  as  the 
condition  of  affairs  would  admit;  besides,  the  division  commander  had 
weeks  before  expressed  to  the  lieutenant-general  commanding  his  ardent 
desire  to  undertake  this  or  a similar  expedition.  Unfortunately,  I dis- 
covered too  late  that  the  officers  and  men  of  this  division  were  possessed 
of  a dread  of  gunboats  such  as  pervaded  our  people  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  war.  To  this  circumstance  and  to  want  of  mobility  in  these 
troops  are  to  be  attributed  the  meager  results  of  the  expedition. 


Ciiai*.  XXXVI.]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHERN  LOUISIANA. 


461 


I leave  this  evening  for  Monroe  and  Alexandria,  to  look  alter  affairs 
in  the  southern  portion  of  the  State,  which  are  every  day  increasing  in 
interest. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  TAYLOR, 

Major - General , Commanding. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  R.  Boggs,  Chief  of  Staff. 


Headquarters  District  of  West  Louisiana, 

Alexandria 3 June  11,  1863. 

General  : I reached  this  place  last  night,  having  left  Richmond  forty- 
eight  hours  previously.  I shall  leave  in  a few  minutes  for  Morgan’s 
Ferry,  on  the  Atchafalaya  River.  As  Banks  is  reported  to  be  using  the 
west  bank  of  th,e  Mississippi  for  the  transportation  of  his  supplies,  &c., 
I deem  it  of  great  importance  that  the  most  vigorous  movement  should 
be  made  by  a portion  of  our  forces  against  the  enemy  opposite  Port 
Hudson,  and  it  is  necessary  that  I should  give  my  personal  supervision 
to  the  arrangements,  and  perhaps  take  command  of  the  expedition.  In 
my  report  of  operations  of  the  forces  in  the  parishes  of  Madison,  Tensas, 
and  Carroll,  dated  at  Richmond  on  the  8th  instant,  I gave  you  the  infor- 
mation which  had  been  gained  of  the  enemy’s  positions  in  that  section. 

As  it  was  pretty  well  cleared  of  the  enemy’s  troops,  I thought  that  Tap- 
pan’s  brigade  and  Harrison’s  cavalry  force  would  be  sufficient  to  open 
and  keep  up  communication  with  Vicksburg.  I instructed  Brigadier- 
General  [P.  O.]  Hebert  to  have  a supply  of  beef-cattle  ready  to  swim 
across  in  order  to  victual  the  troops.  If  General  Grant’s  position  on  the 
Yazoo  River  should  be  shaken  or  broken  by  General  Johnston,  and  the 
enemy  should  retreat,  as  they  would  have  to  do,  from  a point  below 
Vicksburg,  a considerable  force  could  be  highly  available  along  the  west 
bank  of  the  Mississippi.  If  the  Yazoo  is  used  as  his  line  of  retreat,  our 
light  batteries  could  only  be  used  against  his  transports.  I have  for  the 
present  suspended  the  withdrawal  of  Walker’s  division,  and  shall  hold  it 
in  its  present  position  until  the  enemy’s  movements  and  the  condition  of 
affairs  around  Vicksburg  are  more  fully  developed.  As  there  are  troops 
enough  in  the  lower  portion  of  the  State  for  the  expedition  against  the 
enemy,  who  is  opposite  Port  Hudson,  it  is  not  necessary  at  this  moment 
to  withdraw  General  Walker’s  division,  as  I contemplated  at  the  time 
of  my  report  from  Richmond.  I shall  either  take  command  in  person 
of  the  expedition  against  Banks’  army,  opposite  Port  Hudson,  or,  if 
the  enemy  attempts  to  cross  below  Vicksburg,  of  the  forces  in  Madison 
Parish.  My  experience  of  the  past  few  weeks  satisfies  me  that  it  is 
necessary  that  1 should  rely  upon  myself  not  only  to  devise  the  plans, 
but  also  to  execute  them,  in  order  to  insure  their  being  carried  out  vig- 
orously. 

On  my  arrival  here  I received  several  reports  from  Brigadier-General 
[Alfred]  Moutoh  (the  substance  of  which  has  been  communicated  to 
you  by  Major  [E.J  Surget),  which  are  exceedingly  unsatisfactory,  and 
indicate  that  no  movements  commensurate  with  the  forces  under  his 
command  have  been  made,  and  that  little  activity  has  been  displayed 
by  that  officer.  While  an  excellent  officer  on  the  field,  of  great  gal- 
lantry and  fair  qualifications,  he  is,  I fear,  unequal  to  the  task  of  hand- 
ling and  disposing  of  any  large  body  of  troops,  and  I shall,  therefore, 
at  the  earliest  practicable  moment,  give  my  personal  supervision  to  that 
command.  From  General  Mouton’s  reports  I am  quite  in  the  dark  as 


462 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

to  the  condition  of  affairs  on  the  Lower  Teche,  and  as  to  the  presence  or 
absence  of  the  enemy’s  troops  on  this  side  of  Berwick  Bay. 

I have  sent  one  of  my  staff  officers  to  communicate  in  person  with 
General  Johnston,  and  instructed  him  to  give  to  that  officer  a statement 
of  the  disposition  of  our  forces,  and  ascertain  in  what  manner  I could 
best  co-operate  with  him  from  this  side  of  the  river. 

I have  to-day  sent  a battery  of  light  artillery  to  Brigadier-General 
Hebert,  which  will  place  twelve  pieces  in  the  command  of  that  officer. 
I do  not  include  the  artillery  of  General  Walker’s  division. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  TAYLOR, 

Major-General , Commanding. 
Brig.  Gen.  W.  R.  Boggs,  Chief  of  Staff. 

[Indorsement.] 

Secretary  of  War:  . 

This  report  contains  a clear  statement  of  the  expedition  against  Mil- 
liken’s  Bend  by  General  Taylor,  which  awakened  so  much  hope,  and 
which  is  here  shown  to  have  been  abortive. 


Headquarters  District  of  West  Louisiana, 

Washington , October  15,  1853. 

General:  It  has  just  been  brought  to  my  attention  by  Maj.  Gen. 
J.  G.  Walker  that  the  language  of  my  report  touching  operations  near 
Milliken’s  Bend  reflects  on  him.  He  learns  this  from  one  of  his  staff 
just  from  Richmond.  As  I have  not  a copy  of  the  report  before  me  to 
verify  the  original  words  used,  I respectfully  ask  the  lieutenant-general 
commanding  to  convey  to  the  War  Department  the  statement  that 
nothing  in  the  report  was  intended  to  reflect,  directly  or  indirectly,  on 
General  Walker.  The  plan  was  mine,  and  the  position  held  by  General 
Walker  was  strictly  in  accordance  with  my  orders.  The  misconception 
existing  at  Richmond  is  calculated  to  injure  unjustly  a meritorious  offi- 
cer, and  I ask  that  this  communication  be  forwarded. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  TAYLOR, 

Major-  General. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  R.  Boggs,  Chief  of  Staff. 


No.  8. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  J.  G.  Walker , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Division, 
of  attacks  (1th)  on  Young’s  Point  and  Milliken’s  Bend , and  operations 
June  10  -July  10. 

Headquarters  Walker’s  Division, 

Richmond,  La .,  June  10,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  forward  herewith  the  reports  of  Brig.  Gens. 
H.  E.  McCulloch  and  J.  M.  Hawes  of  the  operations  of  their  respective 
brigades  in  this  vicinity.  In  regard  to  the  former,  nothing  could  have 
been  more  admirable  than  the  gallantry  displayed  by  officers  and  men, 
and  the  failure  of  complete  success  was  owing  principally  to  the  want 
of  local  knowledge  and  the  incompetency  of  the  guides.  The  great 
strength  of  the  position  and  the  extreme  difficulty  of  carrying  it  by  a 
coup  de  main  will  be  better  understood  by  referring  to  the  accompanying 
rough  diagram.* 


See  opposite  page. 


Chai>.  XXXVI.]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHERN  LOUISIANA. 


463 


3 

£ 

* 


A Bois  d’arc  hedges.  B Levees.  C Cross  levees.  L>  Town  of  Milliken’s  Bend.  E Enemy  in 
heavy  force.  F Enemy’s  camp.  G Abatis  of  logs  and  brush  between  the  hedge  and  levee.  H Gen- 
eral McCulloch’s  line  of  battle.  I Colonel  Flournoy’s  regiment.  J Farm  houses.  K Enemy’s  gun- 
boats. L Enemy’s  transports. 


464 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


As  soon  as  the  enemy’s  pickets  were  encountered,  it  seems  General 
McCulloch  formed  his  brigade  in  line  of  battle  and  advanced  upon  the 
enemy,  who  were  posted  behind  the  hedges,  so  as  to  fire  through  the 
openings.  IJpon  reaching  the  hedges  it  was  found  utterly  impracticable 
to  pass  them  except  through  the  few  openings  left  for  convenience  by 
the  planter.  In  doing  this,  the  order  of  battle  was  necessarily  broken, 
and  the  frequency  with  which  this  became  necessary  before  reaching  the 
first  levee,  behind  which  the  enemy  in  superior  force  was  found  posted, 
exposed  the  brigade  to  a galling  fire,  while  broken  in  column  in  order 
to  pass  through  the  openings  in  the  hedge.  Owing  to  these  frequent 
interruptions  in  the  advance  in  the  order  of  battle,  the  brigade  reached 
the  open  space  between  the  last  hedge  and  the  first  levee,  about  25 
paces  in  width,  in  some  confusion,  and  the  ensemble  of  the  movement 
upon  the  enemy’s  position  was  thus  necessarily  lost,  the  deficient  regi- 
ments having  reached  this  open  space  at  different  periods.  Notwith- 
standing the  galling  and  destructive  fire  of  the  enemy,  three  regiments 
were  formed  and  led  against  the  enemy,  securely  posted  behind  the  first 
levee,  drove  them  from  its  cover,  and  followed  them  across  the  open 
space  between  the  two  levees,  using  the  bayonet  freely.  At  the  second 
levee,  however,  our  men  encountered  the  main  force  of  the  enemy,  en- 
tirely covered  from  our  fire,  and,  after  a gallant  effort  to  carry  this  posi- 
tion, were  compelled  to  fall  back  behind  the  first  levee,  which  we  con- 
tinued to  hold  until  the  wounded  were  sent  to  the  rear,  and  the  men, 
exhausted  by  the  excessive  heat  of  the  day  and  want  of  water,  were 
withdrawn  in  good  order  by  General  McCulloch.  Randal’s  brigade, 
which,  by  General  Taylor’s  orders,  was  held  in  reserve  6 miles  from 
the  field,  was  hastened  forward,  upon  Brigadier-General  McCulloch’s 
request  for  re-enforcements,  but  did  not  reach  the  scene  of  action  until 
General  McCulloch,  having  several  times  failed  to  carry  the  second 
levee,  had  drawn  off  his  brigade. 

In  the  mean  time  the  enemy’s  gunboats  (four  in  number)  had  taken 
position  so  as  to  rake  the  open  space  between  the  second  levee  and  the 
river  with  grape  and  canister ; and  had  our  men  succeeded  in  gaining 
this  open  space,  the  enemy,  by  retiring  to  the  water’s  edge,  would  have 
given  their  gunboats  complete  command  of  the  position.  Under  such 
circumstances  it  would  have  been  folly  to  have  persisted  in  the  attack, 
which  could  only  have  resulted  in  a fearful  sacrifice  of  life,  and  after 
making  a personal  reconnaissance,  as  far  as  practicable,  and  otherwise 
gaining  the  best  information  possible,  I determined  not  to  order  another 
assault ; but,  having  sent  off  the  wounded  and  rested  the  troops  for  sev- 
eral hours  near  the  battle-field,  in  the  cool  of  the  evening  withdrew  the 
two  brigades,  sending  McCulloch’s  back  to  this  place  and  taking  post 
with  Randal’s,  4 miles  in  advance,  to  cover  the  road  along  which  Gen- 
eral Hawes’  brigade  would  return  from  Young’s  Point. 

In  regard  to  the  operations  of  the  brigade  of  the  last-named  officer,  I 
have  only  to  remark  that  my  orders  to  him  were  peremptory  to  attack 
the  enemy  at  Young’s  Point.  Our  information  of  the  strength  and  posi- 
tion of  the  enemy  at  that  place  was  so  recent,  and  was  thought  so  entirely 
reliable,  that  I did  not  think  it  necessary  to  attach  any  conditions  to  this 
order.  The  failure  to  carry  out  my  instructions  can  only  be  defended 
by  the  existence  of  circumstances  entirely  at  variance  with  those  sup- 
posed to  exist,  and  upon  which  the  order  was  based.  The  loss  of  several 
precious  hours  in  finding  a bridge,  which  would  have  brought  on  the 
attack  in  the  heat  of  an  excessively  hot  day;  the  exhausted  condition  of 
the  men,  who  would  have  gone  into  action  under  a burning  sun  after  an 
almost  continuous  march  of  nearly  30  miles ; the  strong  position  of  the 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHERN  LOUISIANA. 


465 


enemy,  defended  by  three  gunboats,  are  the  reasons,  assigned  by  Brig- 
adier-General Hawes.  I am  satisfied  that  the  conviction  must  have  been 
overpowering  that  the  attack  would  fail  after  a useless  sacrifice  of  life, 
or  he  would  not  have  taken  the  responsibility  he  did. 

In  conclusion,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  enemy,  behind  a Mis- 
sissippi levee,  protected  on  the  flanks  by  gunboats,  is  as  securely  posted 
as  it  is  possible  to  be  outside  a regular  fortification. 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  &c., 

J.  G.  WALKER, 

Major-  General. 


Maj.  E.  Suroet,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


[Indorsem  ents . ] 

Headquarters  District  of  West  Louisiana, 

Alexandria , June  27,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded,  with  accompanying  documents,  reports  of 
brigade  commanders,  and  diagram.  The  report  of  Brigadier-General 
Hawes  shows  that,  although  ample  time  was  given  for  his  command  to 
reach  the  enemy’s  point,  five  hours  were  lost  (from  11  p.  m.  until  4 a.  m.) 
in  finding  a bridge,  which  was  only  6 miles  distant,  while  guides  and 
mounted  men  were  furnished  who  could  easily  have  obviated  the  delay. 
The  failure  to  carry  out  positive  instructions  on  the  part  of  the  brigade 
commander  prevented  the  success  of  the  movement  against  Young’s 
Point.  Brigadier-General  McCulloch,  his  officers,  and  men  displayed 
great  bravery,  but  the  injudicious  handling  of  the  troops  prevented  the 
attainment  of  the  results  which  were  anticipated,  i am  satisfied  that 
if  the  plan  which  was  laid  out  had  been  executed  as  ordered,  the  move- 
ment would  have  been  a complete  success.  Nothing  appears  in  this 

report  to  alter  the  opinion  expressed  in  my  communication  of  the 

instant  to  the  lieutenant-general  commanding. 

R.  TAYLOR, 

Major-General , Commanding. 

This  report  and  the  indorsement  indicate  such  failure  to  execute 
orders  as  should  not  be  overlooked. 

J.  D.  [JEFFERSON  DAYIS.] 
September  9,  1863. 

Adjutant-General  : 

Should  there  be  a court  of  inquiry  or  a court-martial,  or  would  it  be 
better  simply  to  relieve  Brigadier-General  Hawes  ? 

J.  A.  S.  [SEDDON], 

Secretary. 

September  15,  1863. 

If  a court  is  to  be  ordered,  it  had  better  be  a general  court-martial  on 
charges  to  be  preferred  by  General  Taylor.  General  Smith  is  compe- 
tent to  order  such  court,  not  being  himself  the  accuser.  If  General 
Hawes  is  relieved  instead  of  reassigned  to  a brigade,  he  then  loses  his 
rank  as  brigadier-general. 

S.  COOPER, 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 

September  16,  1863. 

Wrote  to  General  Smith  either  to  relieve  or  order  it,  at  his  option. 

J.  A.  SEDDON, 

Secretary. 


30  R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


466 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Headquarters  Walker’s  Division, 

Delhi , July  10,  1863. 

Major  : Since  the  date  of  my  last  report  the  forces  under  my  com- 
mand have  broken  up  the  plantations  engaged  in  raising  cotton  under 
Federal  leases  from  Milliken’s  Bend  to  Lake  Providence,  capturing  some 
2,000  negroes,  who  have  been  restored  to  their  masters,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  those  captured  in  arms,  and  a few  the  property  of  disloyal  citi- 
zens of  Louisiana.  I consider  it  an  unfortunate  circumstance  that  any 
armed  negroes  were  captured,  but  in  the  cavalry  expedition  which  broke 
up  the  plantations  below  Lake  Providence,  Colonel  [W.  H.]  Parsons, 
commanding  two  cavalry  regiments  from  the  District  of  Arkansas,  act- 
ing under  my  orders,  encountered  a force  of  113  negroes  and  their  3 
white  officers  in  a fortified  position,  and  when  the  officers  proposed  to 
surrender  upon  the  condition  of  being  treated  as  prisoners  of  war,  and 
the  armed  negroes  unconditionally,  Colonel  Parsons  accepted  the  terms. 
The  position,  upon  a high  mound,  the  sides  of  which  had  been  scooped 
and  otherwise  strengthened,  was  of  great  strength,  and  wouldhave  cost 
many  lives  and  much  precious  time  to  have  captured  by  assault.  Under 
these  circumstances,  Brigadier-General  Tappan,  who  came  up  before- the 
capitulation  was  consummated,  approved  the  convention. 

This  was  on  the  30th  ultimo,  and  I had  made  all  my  arrangements  to 
push  the  next  day  toward  Providence  and  Ashton,  some  miles  above, 
where  I intended  to  establish  my  batteries  for  the  annoyance  of  the  en- 
emy’s transports.  That  night  I received  General  Taylor’s  instructions 
to  march  my  division  to  Berwick  Bay.  I immediately  returned  to  this 
point,  and  had  embarked  one  of  my  brigades  on  the  railroad  train,  when 
I received  instructions  from  Lieutenant-General  [E.  Kirby]  Smith  to 
remain  in  this  vicinity. 

On  the  5th  instant,  General  Smith  was  here  in  person,  and  directed 
me  to  proceed  to  Ashton,  on  the  Mississippi,  and  endeavor  to  blockade 
the  river  against  the  enemy’s  transports  and  supply-boats.  In  accord- 
ance with  these  instructions,  I marched  from  here  on  the  7th  instant. 
The  same  morning  Captain  James,  who  had  been  sent  with  a flag  of 
truce  to  deliver  a communication  from  General  Taylor  to  General  Grant, 
returned  and  reported  the  delivery  of  the  dispatch  to  the  enemy’s  pickets 
at  Young’s  Point.  He  brought  intelligence,  derived  from  sources  that 
I did  not  wholly  credit,  that  Vicksburg  had  capitulated  on  the  4th  in- 
stant. Hot  considering  this  entirely  certain,  I continued  my  movements, 
but  the  same  day  I received  the  intelligence  unfortunately  too  well  au- 
thenticated to  admit  of  a doubt.  At  the  same  time  I received  instruc- 
tions from  Lieutenant-General  Smith  to  return  to  this  point,  and  if  forced 
to  abandon  the  Washita  Valley  by  superior  numbers,  to  fall  back  on  Bed 


Biver  or  Natchitoches. 

I am  now  engaged  in  burning  all  the  cotton  I can  reach  from  Lake 
Providence  to  the  lower  end  of  Concordia  Parish,  and  shall  endeavor 
to  leave  no  spoil  for  the  enemy.  I have  also  instructed  the  cavalry  to 
destroy  all  subsistence  and  forage  on  abandoned  plantations  that  from 
its  proximity  to  the  river  may  give  the  enemy  facilities  for  invasion. 
When  this  destruction  is  effected,  I shall  withdraw  the  greater  portion 
of  my  forces  toward  the  Washita  Biver,  to  some  more  healthy  locality. 
The  ravages  of  disease  have  fearfully  weakened  my  force,  and  I con- 
sider it  essential  to  its  future  usefulness  that  it  should  be  removed  from 
here  as  early  as  practicable. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

’ ’ J.  G.  WALKEB. 


Maj.  E.  Surget,  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen .,  Alexandria , La. 


Chav.  XXXVI.]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHERN  LOUISIANA. 


467 


No.  9. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  H.  McCulloch , C.  S.  Army , commanding 
Brigade , 0/  attack  (7th)  on  Millikeri’s  Bend. 

Headquarters  McCulloch’s  Brigade, 

Richmond,  La.,  June  8,  1863. 

According  to  orders,  on  the  night  of  the  6th  my  brigade  took  up  the 
line  of  march  for  Milliken’s  Bend,  to  attack  the  Yankee  force  at  that 
place. 

We  advanced  to  within  about  1J  miles  at  2.30  a.  m.  on  the  7th  instant, 
when  the  enemy’s  pickets  fired  upon  my  cavalry  scouts  and  skirmishers. 
The  cavalry  scouts  fell  back  precipitately  upon  the  skirmishers,  amid 
the  fire  of  the  enemy,  which  led  the  skirmishers  to  suppose  them  a por- 
tion of  the  enemy’s  cavalry ; consequently  they  fired  upon  them,  killing 
two  of  their  horses  and  wounding  a third.  Fortunately  no  man  was  killed 
or  wounded  by  this  fire.  My  skirmishers  immediately  pressed  forward, 
driving  the  pickets  of  the  enemy  before  them.  We  advanced  but  a 
quarter  of  mile  farther  when  the  enemy’s  skirmishers  in  considerable 
force  opened  upon  us  under  cover  of  a thick  hedge.  A portion  of  the 
command  was  immediately  thrown  in  line,  moved  forward,  and  drove  the 
enemy  from  his  lurking  place  to  the  next  hedge,  about  600  yards  farther; 
and  thus  the  fight  or  skirmishing  continued  from  hedge  to  hedge  and 
ditch  to  ditch,  until  within  25  paces  of  the  main  levee  on  the  bank  of  the 
Mississippi  Fiver,  where  the  charge  was  ordered.  Here  we  encountered 
a thick  hedge,  which  could  not  be  passed  except  through  a few  gaps  or 
breaches  that  had  been  made  for  gates  and  pass- ways.  These  had  to 
be  passed  by  the  troops  the  best  they  could,  never  fronting  more  than 
half  a company,  before  a line  could  be  formed  to  charge  the  levee,  which 
was  the  breastwork  of  the  enemy,  10  feet  high,  and  in  several  places 
had  a layer  of  cotton  bales  on  top,  making  a very  formidable  and  secure 
work  of  defense.  The  line  was  formed  under  a heavy  fire  from  the 
enemy,  and  the  troops  charged  the  breastworks,  carrying  it  instantly, 
killing  and  wounding  many  of  the  enemy  by  their  deadly  fire,  as  well 
as  the  bayonet.  This  charge  was  resisted  by  the  negro  portion  of  the 
enemy’s  force  with  considerable  obstinacy,  while  the  white  or  true 
Yankee  portion  ran  like  whipped  curs  almost  as  soon  as  the  charge  was 
ordered.  There  were  several  instances  in  this  charge  where  the  enemy 
crossed  bayonets  with  us  or  were  shot  down  at  the  muzzle  of  the  mus- 
ket. No  charge  was  ever  more  gallantly  made  than  this,  and  the  enemy 
were  not  only  driven  from  the  levee,  but  were  followed  into  their  camp, 
where  many  of  them  were  killed. 

In  this  charge  Colonel  [Richard]  Waterhouse  with  his  regiment  dis- 
tinguished themselves  particularly,  not  only  by  a gallant  and  desperate 
charge  over  the  levee,  but  they  drove  the  enemy  (leaving  the  camp  cov- 
ered with  the  dead)  to  the  very  bank  of  the  river,  and  within  short  and 
direct  range  of  the  gunboats  of  the  enemy.  In  fact,  from  the  beginning 
to  the  end  of  the  engagement,  the  colonel  behaved  in  the  most  gallant 
manner,  and  his  officers  and  men  seemed  to  catch  the  enthusiasm  of 
their  commander,  and  did  their  duty  nobly  and  gallantly  upon  every 
portion  of  the  field. 

Colonel  [E.  T.  P.]  Allen’s  regiment  was  immediately  on  the  left  of 
Colonel  Waterhouse,  and  Colonel  [William]  Fitzhugh’s  regiment  (under 
the  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  [E.  P.J  Gregg)  was  immediately  on 
the  left  of  Colonel  Allen.  Both  of  these  regiments,  officers  and  men, 
conducted  themselves  in  the  most  praiseworthy  and  gallant  manner, 


468 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai*.  XXXVI. 


advancing  coolly  and  steadily,  forming  and  charging  in  the  most  gal 
lant  style  under  a heavy  and  destructive  fire  of  the  enemy,  during  all 
of  which  the  officers  distinguished  themselves  for  coolness  and  courage, 
and  their  men  for  a determination  to  conquer  or  die. 

Colonel  Allen  was  slightly  wounded,  but  never  left  his  post.  Lieut. 
Col.  Gregg  and  Major  [W.  W.]  Diamond,  of  Colonel  Fitzhugh’s  regi- 
ment, were  both  wounded  too  badly  to  admit  of  their  remaining  in  com- 
mand, which  left  the  regiment  without  a field  officer,  but  did  not  destroy 
their  usefulness  or  dampen  their  ardor ; upon  the  contrary,  seemed  to 
make  them  fight  the  more  fiercely;  and  under  the  command  of  Captain 
[J.  D.]  Woods  (senior  captain)  and  their  respective  company  command- 
ers, they  continued  to  fight  steadily  on  until  the  close  of  the  action. 

Colonel  [George]  Flournoy’s  regiment  was  not  in  the  principal  charge 
upon  the  enemy’s  works,  but  performed  good  service  afterward,  assisted 
by  small  portions  of  the  other  three  regiments,  in  driving  the  enemy 
from  an  angle  in  the  levee,  and  log  and  brush  barricade  which  commanded 
a considerable  portion  of  our  liue,  and  from  which  they  were  pouring  a 
heavy  fire  upon  us.  This  position  was  of  too  much  importance  to  the 
enemy  to  be  given  up  without  a desperate  struggle,  while  we  were  suf- 
fering too  much  by  its  occupation  by  them  to  allow  its  continuance ; 
hence  they  were  driven  from  it  by  assault  with  considerable  slaughter. 
During  the  balance  of  the  day  this  important  point  was  held  by  Colonel 
Flournoy’s  regiment,  and  although  they  were  more  exposed  to  the  fire 
of  the  gunboats  than  any  other  portion  of  my  command,  the  regiment 
behaved  itself  well  and  sustained  its  character  for  courage  and  gal- 
lantry. 

Major  [R.  D.]  Allen,  of  Colonel  Allen’s  regiment,  was  placed  in  com- 
mand of  the  skirmishers  during  the  advance,  and  as  his  command  and 
that  of  Colonel  Flournoy  was  not  under  my  immediate  observation  dur- 
ing the  whole  engagement,  I have  called  upon  them  for  official  reports, 
which  I respectfully  forward,  and  to  which  beg  leave  respectfully  to  call 
the  attention  of  the  major-general  commanding. 

There  were  too  many  instances  of  individual  coolness,  courage,  and 
gallantry  to  mention  in  this  report;  but  the  services  of  Captain  [G.  T.] 
Marold,  of  Colonel  Flournoy’s  regiment,  and  Private  [A.]  Shultz,  of  the 
band,  of  the  same  regiment,  deserve  notice.  During  the  engagement 
some  fears  were  entertained  by  a portion  of  the  officers  of  the  command 
that  the  enemy  would  or  were  attempting  to  turn  our  left  flank.  To 
quiet  this  apprehension  and  drive  some  negroes  from  some  houses  from 
which  they  occasionally  fired  a shot  at  us,  Captain  Marold  was  sent  out 
Avith  his  company  and  captured  19  negroes,  all  of  which  were  at  or  in 
the  vicinity  of  the  houses  from  which  we  had  been  several  times  fired 
at  by  negroes.  Some  of  them  fired  at  officers  of  my  staff  while  making 
reconnaissance  of  ditches,  hedges,  and  fields  in  and  about  our  battle- 
field. These  negroes  had  doubtless  been  in  the  possession  of  the  enemy, 
and  would  have  been  a clear  loss  to  their  owners  but  for  Captain  Marold ; 
and  should  they  be  forfeited  to  the  Confederate  States  or  returned  to 
their  owners,  I would  regard  it  nothing  but  fair  to  give  to  Captain 
Marold  one  or  two  of  the  best  of  them. 

Mr.  [A.]  Shultz  being  on  duty  with  the  surgeon’s  infirmary  corps,  he 
was  sent  with  Dr.  Cocke’s  horse  to  a house  for  some  cistern  water  for 
the  wounded.  When  he  arrived  at  the  house,  he  found  himself  sur- 
rounded by  a company  of  armed  negroes  in  full  United  States  uniform, 
commanded  by  a Yankee  captain,  who  took  him  prisoner.  The  captain 
asked  him  where  the  main  body  of  our  troops  were.  He  pointed  at 
once  to  the  southwest,  in  an  entirely  different  direction  from  where  we 


Chap.  XXXVI.}  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHERN  LOUISIANA. 


469 


were  then  engaged  with  the  enemy.  The  captain  then  observed  that, 
only  a portion  of  our  command  being  present,  it  might  be  possible  for 
him  to  get  through  our  lines  to  the  transports.  Shultz  told  him  he 
could  easily  do  so,  and  proffered  to  show  him  the  way  to  avoid  us.  The 
Yankee  suffered  himself  to  be  humbugged  by  our  German  youth,  or 
young  man,  and  he  led  him  and  his  entire  company  of  49  negroes 
through  small  gaps  in  thick  hedges  until  they  found  themselves  within 
60  yards  of  Colonel  Allen’s  regiment,  who  took  them  all  prisoners  with- 
out the  fire  of  a gun.  Thus  by  his  shrewdness  the  young  Dutchman 
released  himself  and  threw  into  our  hands  1 Yankee  captain  and  49 
negroes,  fully  armed  and  equipped  as  soldiers,  and,  if  such  things  are 
admissible,  I think  he  should  have  a choice  boy  from  among  these  fel- 
lows to  cook  and  wash  for  him  and  his  mess  during  the  war,  and  to  work 
for  him  as  long  as  the  negro  lives.  And  as  the  horse  of  Dr.  Cocke  was 
lost  in  the  praiseworthy  effort  to  procure  water  for  our  wounded,  an- 
other of  these  fellows  might  be  well  and  properly  turned  over  to  him  to 
compensate  him  for  his  loss. 

My  loss  in  this  engagement  was  44  killed,  130  wounded,  and  10  miss- 
ing. Several  of  the  wounds  are  mortal,  and  many  others  so  serious  as 
to  render  recovery  doubtful,  while  in  proportion  to  the  number  more 
are  severe  and  fewer  slight  than  I have  ever  witnessed  among  the  same 
number  in  my  former  military  experience.  This  makes  my  casualties 
184,  embracing  2 officers  killed,  viz,  Lieut.  Thomas  Beaver,  of  Colonel 
Allen’s  regiment,  and  Lieut.  B.  W.  Hampton,  of  Colonel  Fitzhugh’s 
regiment,  and  10  wounded,  viz,  Colonel  Allen,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Greerg, 
Major  Diamond,  Captains  [E.  P.]  Petty,  [S.  J.  P.]  McDowell,  aud  [J. 
H.j  Tolbert,  Lieutenants  [T.  H.]  Batsell,  [D.  M.]  Waddill,  [G.  A.]  Dick- 
erman,  and  [James  M.]  Tucker,  which  is  an  exceedingly  heavy  loss,  but 
nothing  to  compare  with  that  of  the  enemy.  It  is  true  that  no  certain 
or  satisfactory  estimate  could  be  made  of  the  loss  of  the  enemy,  but  I 
know,  from  the  dead  and  wounded  that  I saw  scattered  over  the  field  in 
the  rear  of  the  levee,  and  those  upon  and  immediately  behind  it,  it  must 
have  been  over  a thousand. 

My  full  strength  on  the  battle-field  did  not  exceed  1,500  men,  while 
that  of  the  enemy  must  have  been  over  twice,  if  not  three  times,  that 
number,  backed  by  three  gunboats  that  were  kept  constantly  playing 
shot  and  shell  upon  us  during  the  whole  engagement. 

The  attack  was  made  under  verbal  orders  from  Major-General  Taylor 
u to  engage  the  enemy  before  day  and  carry  his  works  at  the  point  of 
the  bayonet,”  which  orders  were  doubtless  based  upon  information  re- 
ceived which  led  him  to  believe  that  there  was  only  one  battalion  of 
Yankee  cavalry  and  one  of  negro  infautry  at  the  camp,  without  any 
batteries  of  field  artillery  or  gunboats,  while  I have  no  doubt  that  the 
enemy  were  fully  apprised  of  our  approach,  had  made  full  preparations 
to  receive  us,  and  had  received  are-enforcement  of  three  transport  loads 
of  troops  during  the  night  before.  I was  entirely  misinformed  by  our 
guide  with  regard  to  the  ground  over  which  we  had  to  advance.  In- 
stead of  finding  it  a smooth,  open  field  without  obstructions,  I found  the 
ground  exceedingly  rough,  covered  with  small  running  briars  and  tie- 
vines,  through  which  infantry  could  scarcely  march,  and  so  much  cut 
up  with  ditches  and  obstructed  with  hedges  that  it  was  impracticable 
to  make  any  well-regulated  military  movement  upon  it;  and,  under  all 
the  circumstances,  I would  not  have  been  the  least  surprised  if  we  had 
made  an  entire  failure  ; and  nothing  but  the  best  and  bravest  fighting, 
under  the  providence  of  God,  could  have  crowned  our  efforts  with  even 
partial  success 


470  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE;  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

During  this  engagement  the  officers  and  men  of  my  command  behaved 
most  gallantly,  deserving  the  gratitude  of  the  country  and  highest  com- 
mendation of  their  commanders ; and  I am  perfectly  satisfied  that  there 
is  not  a troop  in  the  Confederate  States  of  the  same  number  that  could 
have  done  better  fighting  under  the  same  circumstances. 

During  the  day’s  fighting  Captain  [Benjamin  E.]  Benton,  assistant 
adjutant-general,  and  Major  [J.  H.]  Earle,  brigade  commissary  and  act- 
ing aide-de-camp,  and  Maj.  W.  G.  King,  brigade  quartermaster,  of  my 
regular  staff,  rendered  me  great  service  5 and  Capt.  W.  D.  Mitchell, 
forage  master,  who  acted  as  volunteer  aide-de-camp,  also,  who  bore 
frequent  and  important  messages  for  me  during  the  day  to  different  por- 
tions of  the  field,  frequently  under  heavy  fire.  Captain  Benton  and 
Major  Earle  were  about  my  person  except  when  absent  under  orders, 
and  were  exposed  to  the  fire  of  the  enemy  from  beginning  to  the  close 
of  the  battle.  Both  of  these  officers  acted  with  great  gallantry  through- 
out the  day.  Captain  Benton  participated  in  every  forward  movement 
and  charge,  moving  amid  the  troops  on  horseback,  constantly  urging 
them  on  to  the  enemy. 

Great  credit  is  due  the  surgical  corps  of  the  brigade  and  Surgeon 
[E.  J.]  Beall,  of  the  division,  for  efficient  services  to  the  wounded;  espe- 
cially to  Dr.  [William  P.]  Head,  of  Colonel  Fitzhugh’s  regiment,  and  Dr. 
[Wiiliam  J.]  Cocke,  of  Colonel  Flournoy’s  regiment,  who  were  not  only 
the  most  active  and  energetic  in  their  attentions  to  and  operations  on 
the  wounded,  but  went  upon  the  field  at  the  beginning  of  the  fight,  and 
organized  their  respective  corps  and  put  them  in  operation.  My  thanks 
are  tendered  to  the  medical  officers  of  Colonel  Randal’s  brigade  for  the 
kind  and  efficient  services  rendered  my  suffering  companions  in  arms 
on  the  day  of  the  battle. 

Accompanying  this  report  will  be  found  a complete  list  of  the  killed, 
wounded,  and  missing,  made  from  the  reports  of  regimental  command- 
ers. My  loss  is  truly  deplorable,  and  my  very  heart  sickens  at  its  con- 
templation. But  the  scathing  ordeal  through  which  my  little  brigade 
was  compelled  to  pass  has  increased  my  confidence  in  and  love  for  them, 
and  makes  me  anxious  to  see  them  have  at  least  one  fair  chance  to  meet 
the  enemy  where  they  can  gain  a complete  victory  to  compensate  them 
for  the  gallant  fighting  they  have  done  and  always  will  do  when  called 
upon  to  meet  the  foe. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  E.  MCCULLOCH, 
Brigadier -General,  Commanding  Brigade. 

Maj.  R.  P.  Maclay,  Assistant  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General. 


Return  of  Casualties  in  McCulloch’ s brigade  in  the  engagement  at  MilliJcen’s  Bend , June  7, 

1863. 


Killed. 

1 

Wounded. 

Missing. 

© 

Command. 

Officers. 

j Men. 

Officers. 

Men. 

Officers. 

Men. 

ts 

M 

£ 

Ml 

M 

<1 

2 

5 

7 

1 n*  >.  TV-d-o  a*  _ . ...... ....... 

1 

20 

4 

61 

3 

92 

2 

18 

6 

11 

41 

1 

6 

19 

67 

16th  Texas  Cavalryt 

Total 

2 

42 

10 

121 

1 

9 

185 

* Lietat.  Thomas  Beaver  killed.  t Lieut.  B.  W.  Hampton  killed. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHERN  LOUISIANA. 


471 


No.  10. 

Report  of  Brig.  Ger,  J.  M.  Hawes , G.  S.  Army , commanding  Brigade , 
of  attack  (7th)  on  Young’s  Point. 

Headquarters  Hawes’  Brigade,  Walker’s  Division, 

In  Camp , near  Richmond , La.,  June  9,  1863. 

Major  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  obedience  to  verbal  instruc- 
tions from  the  major-general  commanding  division  to  proceed  with  my 
brigade  to  Young’s  Point,  on  the  Mississippi  River,  distant  20  miles ; 
make  an  attempt  on  the  Federal  camp  at  that  point $ send  oft  by  the  road 
on  which  1 advanced  all  the  captured  property  that  it  would  be  possible 
to  move  ; then  to  move  up  the  Mississippi  River  4 miles  to  Duckport ; 
establish  communication  with  Brig.  Gen.  Henry  E.  McCulloch  at  or  on 
the  road  from  Milliken’s  Bend,  and  retire  toward  Richmond  by  the  Duck- 
port  and  Richmond  road  until  a junction  was  made  with  the  general 
commanding  and  the  reserve  under  Colonel  [Horace]  Randal  on  said 
road,  I marched  at  7 p.  m.  on  the  6th  instant,  with  my  brigade,  consist- 
ing of  the  Eighth,  Twenty-second,  and  Eighteenth  Regiments  Texas  In- 
fantry, diminished  by  two  companies,  and  having  an  aggregate  strength 
of  1,403.  A cavalry  detachment  under  Lieutenant  Amos,  Major  [Isaac 
F.]  Harrison’s  battalion  of  Louisiana  cavalry,  was  attached  to  the  com- 
mand. Lieutenant  Amos  was  recommended  to  me  by  Major-General 
Taylor,  commanding  district,  as  a suitable  guide,  his  home  being  on 
Walnut  Bayou,  on  the  line  of  march,  and  about  11  miles  from  Young’s 
Point.  Two  other  men,  said  to  be  familiar  with  the  road  and  vicinity  of 
Young’s  Point,  were  with  the  detachment.  I found  these  guides  ineffi- 
cient and  useless  to  me. 

At  11.30  p.  m.  the  command  reached  Mrs.  Amos’  plantation,  11  miles 
from  Young’s  Point.  There  I found  the  bridge  over  Walnut  Bayou  de- 
stroyed. Lieutenant  Amos  told  me  there  was  no  other  way  and  no 
other  bridge  over  the  bayou.  Subsequently  I heard  of  a bridge  6 miles 
above  and  sent  officers  to  examine  it.  We  were  detained  until  4 o’clock 
on  the  morning  of  the  7th  in  getting  information  about  the  bridge  6 
miles  above  Mrs.  Amos,’  which  was  found  in  good  order. 

At  10.30  a.  m.on  the  7th,  I commenced  driving  in  the  small  picket  of 
the  enemy  stationed  If  miles  from  their  camp.  After  driving  the  pickets 
for  a short  distance,  formed  a line  of  battle  with  two  regiments,  keeping 
one  in  reserve,  and  advanced  toward  the  enemy’s  camp,  which,  from  the 
information  given  me  by  the  guide,  was  about  a mile  distant,  and  ap- 
proachable through  woods.  After  advancing  the  lines  a quarter  of  a 
mile,  crossing  two  small  bayous  and  one  large  one,  the  command  de- 
bouched on  to  a level  plain  (clearing),  destitute  of  trees  or  brush,  in  full 
view  of  a large  camp  of  the  enemy,  situated  below  Young’s  Point,  about 
1J  miles  distant  from  my  lines,  the  information  of  the  guides  that  the 
camp  of  the  enemy  was  approachable  through  and  near  to  woods  being 
entirely  incorrect.  I pushed  my  lines  on  to  this  plain  half  a mile,  mak- 
ing a reconnaissance  of  the  enemy’s  camp  and  the  Mississippi  River  as 
the  command  advanced.  Three  gunboats  of  the  enemy  were  in  position 
to  defend  the  camp.  The  enemy  re-enforced  the  camp  on  which  I was 
moving  with  what  appeared  to  be  three  regiments  of  infantry.  As  soon 
as  I became  satisfied  of  the  presence  of  the  gunboats,  orders  were  given 
to  retire  the  regiments  on  to  the  woods  to  my  left  and  rear,  and  opposite 
to  Young’s  Point.  While  this  movement  was  being  accomplished,  the 
enemy  moved  their  regiments  back  to  Young’s  Point,  and  soon  after- 
ward commenced  shelling  from  their  gunboats  the  woods  between  me 


472 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


and  Young’s  Point.  After  taking  the  position  in  the  woods,  I found 
about  500  of  my  men  were  rendered  unfit  for  duty  from  exhaustion,  oc- 
casioned by  the  excessive  heat.  About  200  of  these  500  had  to  be  car- 
ried to  the  rear.  Knowing  that  General  McCulloch  had  withdrawn  from 
Milliken’s  Bend  without  carrying  the  position,  and  had  asked  for  re- 
enforcements,  and  that  the  general  commanding  division  had  marched 
to  his  assistance  with  Colonel  Randal’s  brigade,  and  that  I could  not 
carry  the  camp  and  destroy  the  stores  there  without  a useless  sacrifice 
of  life,  I determined  to  retire  by  the  road  I came.  By  6 p.  m.  I halted 
my  command  at  the  bridge  over  Walnut  Bayou,  having  brought  all  my 
sick  to  that  point.  Soon  after  reaching  the  bridge,  instructions  were 
received  from  the  general  commanding  division  to  join  him  with  my 
brigade  at  the  point  on  Walnut  Bayou  where  the  Milliken’s  Bend  and 
Young’s  Point  roads  forked.  After  resting  my  command  from  6 p.  m. 
till  12  midnight,  the  brigade  marched,  and  made  the  junction  referred 
to  at  5 a.  m.  on  the  8th. 

It  is  useless  to  state  that  the  brigade  suffered  no  loss,  as  a portion  of 
my  sharpshooters  only  were  engaged  with  a small  picket  guard  of  {he 
enemy. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  M.  HAWES, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Maj.  E.  SuROrET,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JUNE  8-9,  1863. — Expedition  from  Pocahontas,  Tenn.,  to  Ripley,  Miss. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Jesse  J.  Phillips , Ninth  Illinois  Infantry. 

Pocahontas,  Tenn.,  June  9,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  to  report  that,  in  accordance  with  orders  from  the  head- 
quarters of  this  brigade,  I left  the  camp  of  this  regiment  at  8 a.  m.  of 
the  8th  instant,  with  six  companies  of  my  command,  and  after  reporting 
at  brigade  headquarters  was  joined  with  30  men,  in  charge  of  a lieuten- 
ant from  the  Engineer  Regiment,  with  10  wagons.  I moved  to  a point 
about  7 miles  from  Ripley,  Miss.,  and  returned,  bringing  in  10  wagons 
loaded  with  forage,  4 mules,  2 horses,  97  sheep,  and  38  head  of  cattle, 
which  wrere  turned  over  to  the  post  quartermaster  on  my  arrival  here 
at  this  post. 

Prom  information  received,  I do  not  believe  that  there  is  any  force 
near  Ripley,  except  [W.  C.]  Falkner’s  regiment,  which  I believe  is 
scattered  in  the  Hatchie  hills.  There  are  some  men  below  Ripley  be- 
longing to  Chalmers’  command,  who  are  a few  miles  distant  from  Rip- 
ley, though  not  in  strong  force. 

On  my  return  from  near  Ripley,  I was  followed  by  Sol.  [G.J  Street, 
with  between  20  and  30  men,  who  followed  us  to  within  5 miles  south 
of  this  place,  but  whenever  a party  was  sent  in  pursuit  they  would  take 
refuge  in  the  woods  adjoining. 

I am  of  opinion  that  there  is  no  force  of  any  consequence  within  40 
miles  of  this  post. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JESSE  J.  PHILLIPS, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel , Commanding. 

Lieutenant  Randolph,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Chap.  XXXVI.j  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHEASTERN  MISSISSIPPI.  473 

JUNE  12-14,  1863. — Expedition  from  Pocahontas,  Tenn.,  to  New  Albany 
and  Ripley,  Miss.,  and  skirmishes. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Jesse  J.  Phillips , Ninth  Illinois  Infantry. 

Pocahontas,  Tenn.,  June  16,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  to  report  that,  in  accordance  to  orders  from  the  head- 
quarters Second  Brigade,  Second  Division,  post  of  Pocahontas,  I left 
this  post,  with  my  command  and  one  section  of  TannratlPs  battery,  at 
12  m.  Friday,  the  12th  instant,  and  marched  20  miles  on  the  Ripley 
road. 

On  the  morning  of  the  13th,  moved  to  Ripley,  and  from  there  to  New 
Albany  j thence  toward  Ripley  6 miles,  camping  for  the  night.  At 
Orizaba  a slight  skirmish  took  place  between  my  advance  and  a small 
party  of  rebels,  in  which  we  captured  2 or  3 prisoners.  After  arriving 
at  New  Albany,  we  destroyed  several  blacksmith  and  wagon  shops  and 
one  store-room,  in  which  was  stored  a quantity  of  ordnance  stores,  in 
which  several  hundred  pounds  of  powder  was  stored. 

On  the  return  from  New  Albany  my  advance  met  another  small  party 
of  rebels,  when  another  slight  affair  took  place,  in  which  we  took  several 
prisoners.  During  the  expedition  we  captured  about  15  horses,  7 mules, 
and  brought  in  15  negroes. 

In  obedience  to  orders  received  at  my  camp  near  New  Albany,  I re- 
turned to  this  place,  arriving  at  8 p.  m.  on  the  14th  instant,  having 
marched  near  110  miles. 

I append  hereto  an  exhibit  (marked  A*)  list  of  prisoners.  Also  let- 
ter (marked  B f)  containing  information  of  forces  of  the  enemy,  where 
stationed,  with  a statement  of  means  of  information,  &c.,  and  also  for- 
ward herewith  a mail  which  was  captured,  in  charge  of  the  prisoner 
Boyd. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

JESSE  J.  PHILLIPS, 
Lieutenant - Colonel , Commanding. 

Lieut.  R.  K.  Randolph,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JUNE  13-22,  1863. — Operations  in  Northeastern  Mississippi,  including 
skirmishes  (19th)  at  New  Albany  and  (20th)  at  Mud  Creek. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Richard  J.  Oglesby,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Lieut.  Col.  Jesse  J.  Phillips,  Ninth  Illinois  Infantry,  commanding  expedition. 
No.  3. — Capt.  William  C.  Kueffner,  Ninth  Illinois  Infantry. 

No.  4.— Lieut.  Col.  Charles  S.  Sheldon,  Eighteenth  Missouri  Infantry. 

No.  5. — Maj.  Joseph  C.  Smith,  Fifth  Ohio  Cavalry. 

No.  6.— Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Ruggles,  C.  S.  Army. 

No.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Richard  J.  Oglesby , JJ.  S.  Army. 

La  Grange,  Tenn.,  June  22,  1863. 
General:  Colonel  Phillips  has  returned.  He  had  a severe  tight  on 
the  20th  instant  with  a heavy  force  of  the  enemy.  He  lost  28  killed  and 


* Exhibit  A,  omitted,  shows  5 soldiers  and  3 citizens  captured, 
t Exhibit  B (captured),  not  found. 


474  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chaf.  XXXYL 

wounded 5 Major  Smith,  Fifth  Ohio  Cavalry,  wounded.  The  forces  he 
met  were  marching  on  our  road.  The  men  fought  splendidly.  Will 
send  you  full  particulars  as  soon  as  I hear  from  Dodge.  Phillips  took 
30  prisoners,  1 a lieutenant-colonel. 

Buggies,  with  another  column  of  2,000  men,  on  the  Kelly’s  Mills  road, 
was  moving  up,  but  turned  back  after  the  fight.  As  soon  as  Mizner 
returns,  I will  look  after  them  again. 

B.  J.  OGLESBY, 

Major - General. 

General  Hurlbut, 

Commanding  Sixteenth  Corps. 


La  Grange,  June  22,  1863. 

Dodge  says  Spencer  has  returned.  He  met  [W.  M.]  Inge,  strongly  re- 
enforced, with  nine  battalions,  going  toward  Boddey.  Says  a force  is 
moving  north  from  Okolona,  and  thinks  a movement  is  being  made  on 
our  road  by  Biffle,  Boddey,  Buggies,  and  Chalmers. 

We  passed  through  Inge’s  column  after  night,  and  got  in  without  loss 
of  a man. 

Colonel  Phillips  reports  his  main  fight  at  Bocky  Ford.  Buggies  had 
2,000  infantry  and  1,000  cavalry.  Buggies’  infantry  line  was  800  yards 
long,  in  two  ranks.  He  drove  Phillips  back  with  1,000  cavalry  and  five 
pieces  of  artillery.  Phillips  says  we  may  look  out  for  a movement  on 
our  railroad  soon.  He  retreated  from  Fairview,  5 miles  west,  to 
Bocky  Ford,  and  found  it  blockaded,  so  that  he  had  much  trouble  to 
get  over.  Had  to  burn  his  wagons.  It  looks  very  much  like  a move- 
ment against  us.  If  this  be  so,  we  must  be  acting. 

B.  J.  OGLESBY, 

Major - General. 

General  Hurlbut. 

La  Grange,  June  23, 1863. 

General:  My  scout,  just  in  from  Bipley,  reports  the  enemy  did  not 
follow  Phillips  north  of  Bocky  Ford ; are  still  27  miles  southwest  of 
Bipley.  They  killed  7 and  wounded  90  of  Phillips’  men.  It  was  a very 
severe  fi  ght — 550  against  over  2,000.  Scout  says  they  only  acknowledge 
1 killed  and  several  wounded. 

Dodge  reports  a force  in  his  front  at  Booneville;  does  not  state 
amount.  I shall  send  out  all  the  companies  I can  spare  toward  Bipley 
to-day.  Think  they  have  gone  back,  or  gone  to  Booneville. 

B.  J.  OGLESBY, 

Major-  General. 

Major-General  Hurlbut. 


Ko.  2. 

Reports  of  Lieut.  Col.  Jesse  J.  Phillips , Ninth  Illinois  Infantry , com- 
manding expedition. 

Camp  Two  Miles  East  of  Bipley, 

June'  18,  1863. 

Colonel  : I reached  Bipley  at  11  a.  m.  Learned  that  a force  of  rebel 
cavalry,  1,500  strong,  with  four  pieces  of  artillery,  mountain  howitzers, 
had  moved  up  the  TallahatcheeBiver  and  then  down  the  Hatchie,  making 


Chaf.  XXXVI.]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHEASTERN  MISSISSIPPI. 


475 


for  Kelly’s  Mills,  which  is  9 miles  east  of  Ripley,  on  the  Guntown  road. 
I left  Ripley  and  moved  on  the  Middleton  road  northeast,  and  was  joined 
by  the  Fifth  Ohio.  Colonel  [M.]  Miller’s  force  has  not  yet  come  np.  This 
rebel  force  is  moving  toward  you  at  Pocahontas.  I will  check  them  if 
possible.  My  information  is  from  a very  reliable  source. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JESSE  J.  PHILLIPS, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel , Commanding. 

Colonel  Mersy,  Commanding. 

P.  S. — Half  past  three  o’clock;  Colonel  Miller’s  force  has  not  yet 
joiued  me.  I will  send  dispatch  when  he  arrives.  With  his  force  I can 
whip  them. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Brig.,  Second  Diy.,  Sixteenth  A.  C., 

Pocahontas , Tenn .,  July  2,  1863. 

Captain:  I herewith  transmit  Lieut.  Col.  J.  J.  Phillips’ formal  report 
of  his  late  expedition.  (Six  inclosures.) 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

AUG.  MERSY, 

Colonel  Ninth  Illinois  Infantry , Commanding  Brigade. 

Capt.  George  E.  Spencer, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Corinth. 

[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Left  Wing,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps, 

Memphis , Tenn.,  July  5,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded.  I will  state  that  this  expedition  was  ordered 
to  make  a demonstration  toward  Okolona,  whilst  Col.  J.  K.  Mizner 
moved  against  Panola  at  the  same  time,  and  that  the  expedition  was 
entirely  satisfactorv  and  produced  the  desired  result. 

R.  J.  OGLESBY, 

Major-  General. 

[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Ninth  Regiment  Illinois  Infantry, 

Pocahontas , Tenn.,  June  29,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  to  report  that,  in  accordance  with  orders  from  the  head- 
quarters of  the  Second  Brigade,  Second  Division,  I left  this  place  at  11 
p.  m.  on  the  17th  instant,  with  the  Ninth  Illinois  Infantry  and  one  sec- 
tion of  Tannrath’s  battery,  Company  I,  First  Missouri  Light  Artillery. 
I marched  all  night,  and  arrived  at  Ripley  at  11  a.  m.  on  the  18th  in- 
stant. I here  learned  that  a force  of  the  enemy,  estimated  at  1,500,  with 
four  pieces  of  artillery,  had  moved  up  the  Tallahatchee  River  and  then 
down  the  Hatchie  River  on  the  17th  instant,  and  were  supposed  to  be 
intending  to  move  toward  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  road. 

I left  Ripley  at  12  o’clock,  and  moved  east,  and  was  joined  by  a bat- 
talion of  the  Fifth  Ohio  Cavalry,  Major  Smith  commanding,  and  I then 
halted  and  awaited  the  arrival  of  a detachment  of  the  Eighteenth  Mis- 
souri Volunteers,  which  joined  me  at  3.30  p.  m.  With  this  force,  the 
Ninth  Illinois  Infantry  (mounted),  with  an  aggregate  of  275  men,  Cap- 
tain Kueffner  commanding;  battalion  of  the  Fifth  Ohio  Cavalry,  an 
aggregate  of  125  men,  Major  Smith  (commanding) ; the  detachment 
from  the  Eighteenth  Missouri  Infantry  (mounted),  with  an  aggregate 
of  180  men,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Sheldon  commanding,  and  one  section 
of  Tannrath’s  battery,  Lieutenant  Brunner  commanding. 


476 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

My  command  was  less  than  600  men.  My  train  consisted  of  four 
wagons  and  two  ambulances.  After  this  force  had  united,  I moved  to 
a point  east  of  the  poor-house  of  Tippah  County,  Mississippi,  about  7 
miles  east  of  Ripley.  A party  of  between  200  and  300  rebels  had  passed 
south  a few  hours  in  advance  of  me,  having  been  on  a reconnoitering 
expedition  toward  Pocahontas,  and  I sent  a squadron  of  cavalry  to 
reconnoiter  and  ascertain  the  direction  they  had  moved,  which  was 
reported  to  me  about  2 a.  m.  orf  the  19th. 

I marched  at  3.30  a.  m.,  passing  through  Ripley,  and  moving  on  the 
New  Albany  road.  Some  little  skirmishing  occurred  on  the  road,  until 
we  arrived  at  New  Albany,  when  a party  of  200  or  300  strong  attempted 
to  check  our  progress,  but  were  driven  back  1 mile  beyond  New  Albany. 
The  enemy  made  another  stand,  and  were  again  driven  from  their 
position  and  separated,  the  several  parties  taking  different  roads.  I 
moved  rapidly  on  the  Pontotoc  road,  some  12  miles  farther,  when  1 found 
a force  in  my  front  greatly  superior  in  numbers  and  in  position.  I 
halted  a short  time,  and  some  little  picket  skirmishing  ensued.  At 
dark  I moved  on  a cross-road  west,  toward  the  Pontotoc  and  Rocky 
Ford  road;  but,  through  the  ignorance  or  treachery  of  a guide,  was  led 
into  Octohatchie  Swamp,  and,  after  great  difficulty,  got  through  at  3 
a.  m.,  halted  two  hours,  and  arrived  on  the  Rocky  Ford  road,  and 
soon  entered  the  Mud  Creek  Bottom,  which  is  intersected  bv  two  or 
three  creeks  very  difficult  of  crossing,  and  over  two  of  which  cross- 
ings were  made  by  using  axes  and  spades. 

Soon  after  striking  Mud  Creek  Bottom,  a very  impetuous  and  fierce 
attack  was  made  on  the  battalion  Fifth  Ohio  Cavalry,  which  was  the 
rearguard,  by  a large  force  of  rebels.  I at  once  ordered  the  Ninth 
Illinois  Infantry  to  dismount,  and  sent  four  companies  to  the  rear  to 
support  the  Fifth  Ohio,  and  ordered  my  skirmishers  to  fall  back  to  the 
first  creek  which  we  struck  after  entering  the  bottom,  and  to  hold  that 
position  until  further  orders.  Several  attempts  were  made  by  the 
enemy  to  flank  us,  but  their  efforts  failed. 

Information  was  brought  me  that  a large  party  of  rebel  cavalry  was 
moving  on  my  right  flank.  I sent  au  order  to  Lieutenant-Colonel  Shel- 
don that  he  should  move  forward  and  get  possession  of  the  cross-roads 
3 miles  north,  and  should  reconnoiter  toward  Rocky  Ford,  as  I was 
satisfied  that  I should  have  to  retreat. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Sheldon  moved  with  all  but  two  companies  of  his 
command,  and  sent  me  information  that  he  had  accomplished  his  object. 

We  had  been  repelling  the  force  and  repeated  attacks  of  the  enemy 
for  nearly  two  hours.  I had  placed  one  gun  in  position,  which  fired  with 
great  accuracy.  The  enemy  had  been  firing  three  or  four  pieces  of  ar- 
tillery, one  a rifled  gun,  but  their  firing  was,  for  the  greater  part  of  the 
time,  very  inaccurate.  Owing  to  the  breaking  of  the  pintle-hook,  I 
was  compelled  to  abandon  the  hind  part  of  one  caisson,  and,  although 
repeated  efforts  were  made  to  bring  my  train  through,  I was  compelled 
to  abandon  my  wagons  (four  in  number)  and  one  ambulance ; this,  how- 
ever, I did  after  setting  fire  to  and  cutting  them  to  pieces,  and  after 
having  thrown  their  contents  in  the  bed  of  the  creek.  The  ammuni- 
tion in  the  caisson-boxes,  in  that  part  of  the  caisson  which  was  aban- 
doned, was  also  destroyed.  The  enemy  had  compelled  me  to  fall  back 
slowly,  and  to  abandon  my  train  at  this  time,  after  working  nearly  three 
hours,  was  a matter  of  necessity. 

I drew  my  skirmishers  across  Mud  Creek,  and  held  this  point  some 
time,  then  fell  back ; took  a position  with  my  artillery  on  high  ground, 
1,200  yards  therefrom.  I ordered  my  skirmishers  to  fall  back,  and  I 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHEASTERN  MISSISSIPPI.  477 

here  waited  for  them  to  renew  the  attack  ; but,  with  the  exception  of 
artillery  tiring,  nothing  was  done. 

I moved  then  to  Rocky  Ford,  thence  on  the  Ripley  road  until  I 
reached  the  Salem  road,  then  moved  on  Ripley  and  Holly  Springs  road 
until  we  crossed  the  Tippah  River,  and  from  thence  through  Salem, 
camping  9 miles  from  Ripley;  thence  to  this  place,  crossing  Big 
Muddy  at  Alexander’s  Bridge,  arriving  here  at  1 p.  m.  on  the  22d 
instant. 

I lost,  during  the  action  and  expedition,  10  men,  in  killed  and  miss- 
ing, from  the  Ninth  Illinois  Infantry,  and  11  wounded.  The  Fifth  Ohio 
lost  9 wounded. 

I append  hereto  the  reports  of  regimental  and  detachment  com- 
manders, marked  Exhibit  A,*  as  also  a list  of  killed,  wounded,  and 
missing,  marked  Exhibit  B.f  I append  hereto  a list  of  prisoners  taken 
during  the  expedition,  marked  Exhibit  O.f 

The  loss  of  the  enemy  must  have  been  greatly  superior  to  ours,  as 
they  were  the  attacking  party,  and  necessarily  more  exposed  than  my 
men,  and  must  have  sustained  a loss  of  over  100  in  killed  and  wounded. 

In  conclusion,  I desire  to  specially  mention  and  return  my  thanks  to 
Lieutenant  Oolouel  Sheldon,  whose  services  were  invaluable  to  me,  first, 
in  supporting  the  artillery,  then  getting  possession  of  positions,  which 
was  always  promptly  done  ; to  Major  Smith,  for  the  prompt  manner  in 
which  he  met  the  first  attack  and  made  disposition  of  his  battalion  ac- 
cordingly, although  wounded,  remaining  on  the  field  during  the  engage- 
ment; Captain  Kueffner,  who  did  the  heaviest  part  of  the  fighting, 
for  the  coolness  and  bravery  with  which  he  managed  the  line  of  skir- 
mishers, adding  to  his  already  well-earned  reputation  as  a brave  man 
and  efficient  officer,  I am  greatly  indebted.  I desire  also  to  mention 
Lieutenant  Overturf,  whose  coolness  and  bravery  inspired  his  men  with 
true  courage.  Lieutenant  Brunner,  owing  to  the  ground,  was  not  able 
to  use  both  his  guns  much  of  the  time,  but  the  management  of  his  gun 
was  creditable  to  him  as  an  artillery  officer. 

The  men  of  the  command  are  deserving  of  the  greatest  praise  for  the 
energy  and  fortitude  with  which  they  made  the  laborious  and  difficult 
march,  and  were  ever  ready  and  anxious  for  a fight,  and  always  did 
their  duty. 

The  dense  undergrowth,  the  nature  of  the  ground,  both  in  my  rear 
and  flanks,  rendered  it  impossible  to  use  but  a small  part  of  my  force 
at  a time. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JESSE  J.  PHILLIPS, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel , Commanding . 

Lieut.  R.  K.  Randolph,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Capt.  William  C.  Kueffner , Ninth  Illinois  Infantry. 

Camp  near  Pocahontas,  Tenn.. 

June  25,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  part  which 
the  Ninth  Regiment  Illinois  Infantry  took  in  an  expedition  toward  Pon- 
totoc, while  under  my  command  : 

The  regiment  having  left  Pocahontas  on  the  evening  of  the  17th 


See  reports  following. 


t Omitted. 


478  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 

instant,  it  marched  all  night,  in  spite  of  a very  severe  storm,  and 
reached  Ripley  in  the  forenoon  of  the  18th,  where  it  was  joined  by  other 
detachments,  and  you  taking  command  of  the  whole,  ordered  me  to 
take  command  of  the  Ninth.  Thence  the  regiment  moved  with  the  col- 
umn, camping  for  the  night  about  6 miles  in  an  easterly  direction  from 
Ripley,  and  reached  New  Albany  at  about  4 p.  m.  of  the  19th.  Here 
the  pickets  of  the  enemy  made  some  resistance  to  the  crossing  of  the 
Tallahatchee,  but  were  soon  driven  off  by  our  skirmishers.  After  cross- 
ing, you  had  the  whole  regiment  deployed  as  skirmishers,  and  the  coun- 
try explored  in  every  direction  ; but  no  enemy  being  found  anywhere 
in  force,  the  column  again  took  up  its  line  of  march  on  the  Pontotoc 
road  until  nearly  dark,  when  a short  halt  was  made.  Here  small  par- 
ties of  the  enemy  commenced  to  show  themselves  in  our  rear,  and  at- 
tacked and  killed  an  animal  of  Company  D,  of  the  Ninth,  then  picket- 
ing the  right  flank.  The  column  thence  turned  off  to  the  right,  making 
for  the  Pontotoc  and  Rocky  Ford  road,  marched  all  night,  and,  after 
crossing  an  almost  impassable  swamp,  encamped  shortly  before  day- 
break for  two  hours  to  feed  and  rest. 

The  march  having  been  resumed  on  the  20th,  the  column  moved 
briskly  and  without  interruption  until  nearly  10  a.  m.  At  this  time 
the  advance  guard  reached  a swamp,  in  which  several  small  bridges 
had  been  rendered  useless,  and  at  the  same  time  the  rear  guard,  com- 
posed of  the  Fifth  Ohio  Cavalry,  was  briskly  and  energetically  attacked 
and  rapidly  driven  in.  You  immediately  had  seven  companies  of  the 
Ninth  Illinois  Infantry  dismounted,  and  ordered  me  to  hold  a small 
bridge  at  the  entrance  of  the  swamp.  The  position  on  our  side  being 
unfavorable,  I ordered  portions  of  Companies  C,  G,  and  I to  recross 
and  form  on  the  other  side,  and  before  the  other  companies  could  be 
brought  into  position,  owing  to  the  thickness  of  the  underbrush,  the 
Fifth  Ohio  Cavalry  was  driven  across  the  bridge  and  an  overwhelming 
force  of  the  enemy  precipitated  upon  us.  The  rebels  charging  the 
bridge  with  a large  force,  a short  but  fierce  conflict  ensued,  which  re- 
sulted in  our  losing  possession  of  the  bridge,  in  spite  of  the  greatest 
personal  efforts  of  Lieutenants  Hughes  and  Rollmann,  the  former  of 
whom  was  here  wounded,  and  of  splendid  bravery  on  the  part  of  the 
men. 

The  losses  on  both  sides  here  were  heavy,  and  the  fight  nearly  hand- 
to-hand.  It  now  became  evident  that  the  enemy  was  in  largely  superior 
force,  outflanking  us  on  both  sides.  I therefore  formed  all  of  the  Ninth 
Illinois  who  were  at  my  disposal,  not  exceeding  100,  on  the  left-hand 
side  of  the  road,  while  the  Fifth  Ohio  and  a water-course  protected  the 
right  flank,  and  in  this  order  I fell  slowly  back  to  a more  favorable 
position,  indicated  by  you.  Here  repeated  and  determined  attacks  of 
the  enemy  were  several  times  repulsed,  and  he  so  severely  punished 
that  no  attempt  was  made  to  molest  our  retreat,  when,  after  more  than 
two  hours’  fighting,  you  ordered  me  to  rejoin  the  column. 

The  force  opposed  to  us  I judge  to  have  consisted  of  several  battal- 
ions and  of  a battery  of  rifled  field  pieces,  which  was  held  in  check 
for  just  so  long  as  you  deemed  it  necessary,  by  not  more  than  150  of  our 
men. 

The  enemy’s  artillery  did  not  do  much  damage,  but  our  loss  by  rifle- 
balls  was  quite  severe,  as  will  be  seen  by  the  list  of  casualties  which  is 
inclosed.* 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  20th,  a crossing  without  further  loss  was 


See  Lieutenant-Colonel  Phillips’  report,  p.  477, 


Chap  XXXVI.]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHEASTERN  MISSISSIPPI.  479 

effected  at  Rocky  Ford,  and  in  the  ensuing  night  the  Tippah,  with  much 
labor,  was  also  crossed. 

On  the  21st,  the  column  marched  via  Salem  to  a point  about  25  miles 
south  of  Pocahontas,  which  latter  place  we  reached  in  the  afternoon  of 
the  22d  instant. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WILLIAM  O.  KUEFFNER, 
Captain  Ninth  Regiment  Illinois  Infantry. 

Lieut.  Col.  J.  J.  Phillips, 

Commanding  Expedition. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Charles  S.  Sheldon , Eighteenth  Missouri  Infantry. 

Post,  Chewalla,  Tenn.,  June  23,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  part  taken  by  the  battalion 
of  the  Eighteenth  Missouri  Volunteers,  under  my  command,  in  the  re- 
cent scout  in  the  direction  of  Pontotoc. 

In  pursuance  to  orders  from  General  Dodge,  I left  camp  at  5.30  p.  m. 
of  17th  instant,  and  proceeded  7 miles,  where  I was  forced  to  halt  on 
account  of  the  darkness.  At  daybreak  the  next  morning  I moved  on, 
and  reported  to  you  in  the  course  of  the  afternoon. 

During  the  action  of  the  19th  [20th  ?J  instant  at  Mud  Creek,  my  com- 
ma ud  was  in  advance,  but  was  by  your  orders  detailed  to  support  the 
artillery  until  it  was  withdrawn  from  the  swamp.  The  subsequent 
movements  of  my  command  being  well  known  to  yourself,  it  will  be 
unnecessary  to  particularize. 

In  conclusion,  I desire  to  call  attention  to  the  general  good  behavior 
of  the  enlisted  men  under  circumstances  of  peculiar  hardship,  they  hav- 
ing been  almost  entirely  destitute  of  rations,  and  without  opportunity 
to  procure  an  adequate  supply,  and  to  return  thanks  to  yourself  for 
your  uniform  kindness  to  myself  and  men. 

I have  also  to  report  the  capture  of  4 prisoners  (now  here)  and  20 
horses,  which  were  used  to  replace  those  broken  down  on  the  trip. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHARLES  S.  SHELDON, 

Lieut.  Col.  Eighteenth  Missouri  Vols .,  Comdg.  Mounted  Battalion. 

Lieut.  Col.  J.  J.  Phillips, 

Commanding  Ninth  Illinois  Volunteers. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Map  Joseph  C.  Smith , Fifth  Ohio  Cavalry. 

In  Hospital,  Camp  Davis,  Miss.,  June  24, 1863. 

Colonel  : In  obedience  to  orders  from  headquarters  of  the  district, 
through  Col.  P.  E.  Burke,  commanding  the  post,  I left  my  camp  at  8 
p.  m.  of  the  17th  instant,  with  125  men  and  six  days’  rations,  under 
instructions  to  report  to  you  in  Ripley  at  daylight  18tii  instant.  Owing 
to  the  darkness  of  the  night,  and  a severe  storm  raging,  together  with 


480  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

the  difficulties  of  crossing  the  Hatchie  River,  I was  unable  to  reach  Kip- 
ley  until  12.30  p.  m.  18th  instant. 

Having  formed  a junction  with  your  command,  and  reported  that  a 
body  of  the  enemy,  estimated  by  the  people  to  be  300  strong,  had  passed 
down  the  Hatchie  Kiver  the  evening  before,  I acted  under  your  com- 
mand, camping  on  the  Troy  road,  near  the  Tippah  County  poor-house. 

At  daylight,  19th  instant,  with  Squadron  K of  my  battalion  as  ad- 
vanced guard,  we  moved  through  Ripley  and  south  on  the  main  Ponto- 
toc road.  At  New  Albany,  on  the  Tallahatchee  River,  we  encountered 
a small  body  of  rebels,  about  200  strong  ; a short  skirmish  ensued,  when 
they  fled.  I learned  that  General  Ruggles  had  left  that  point  on  the 
17th  instant,  with  about  2,000  men  and  four  pieces  of  artillery. 

We  again  marched  south  on  the  Pontotoc  road  to  within  12  miles  of 
Pontotoc.  Reaching  that  point  at  dark,  turned  thence  to  the  right,  to 
reach  the  Pontotoc  and  Rocky  Ford  road,  encountering  a very  difficult 
swamp,  which  detained  me  until  near  morning.  Halting  two  hours  to 
rest  and  feed,  we  again  started,  with  my  battalion  as  rear  guard,  Squad- 
ron H,  Lieut.  J.  E.  Overturf  commanding,  in  the  extreme  rear.  We 
reached  the  Pontotoc  road,  and  proceeded  on  that  a short  distance,  and 
struck  the  extensive  bottoms  of  Mud  Creek. 

Before  the  train  had  gotten  over  the  first  bayou  of  the  bottom,  we 
were  impetuously  attacked  by  a large  force  of  rebel  cavalry,  who  drove 
in  the  rear  vedettes,  but  were  gallantly  checked  by  Lieutenant  Over- 
turf, who  formed  his  squadron  and  was  returning  the  charge,  but  was 
compelled  to  retire  by  overwhelming  numbers.  I immediately  formed 
the  battalion.  The  rebels  had  dismounted,  and,  owing  to  the  dense  un- 
dergrowth and  the  black-jack  forests,  I could  not  charge  them,  and 
was  compelled  to  fight  them  under  the  disadvantage  of  being  mounted 
and  they  dismounted,  the  train  being  so  close  that  I had  not  time  to 
dismount  after  discovering  the  large  force  of  the  enemy,  which  I esti- 
mated at  600  men  and  four  pieces  of  artillery  engaged. 

By  pushing  them  gallantly,  my  men  drove  them  back  upon  their  main 
line.  When  learning  that  the  train  was  well  over  the  first  stream,  and 
the  infantry  dismounted,  I brought  my  men  back  over  the  stream  and 
dismounted  them,  forming  a line  on  the  right  flank  of  the  infantry. 
The  enemy  pressed  forward  to  within  15  paces  of  the  new  line,  being 
concealed  by  the  bushes,  when  a severe  fight  ensued,  and  he  was  re- 
pulsed from  the  whole  line. 

He  again  advanced,  and  was  repulsed  with  severe  loss  each  time, 
when  our  men  being  ordered  to  fall  back  to  the  second  creek,  did  so, 
cloSely  pressed  by  overwhelming  numbers.  The  enemy  were  again 
repulsed  from  the  whole  line.  He  in  the  mean  time  opened  with  his 
artillery,  but  did  no  execution. 

The  bridge  being  destroyed  over  the  main  creek,  and  the  pintle-hook 
and  trail  of  the  rear  caisson  being  broken  in  the  only  ford,  it  had  to  be 
abandoned.  The  wagons  and  one  ambulance  being  in  the  rear  ol  it, 
they  also  had  to  be  abandoned.  They,  together  with  their  most  valu- 
able contents,  were  pretty  effectually  destroyed. 

The  enemy  failed  to  press  any  farther  than  the  main  creek,  and  the 
column  being  reformed,  we  proceeded  in  the  direction  of  Rocky  Ford, 
which  place  we  reached,  and  crossed  the  Tallahatchee  River  without 
molestation. 

During  the  skirmish  at  Mud  Creek,  which  lasted  about  two  hours,  the 
casualties  to  my  command  were  as  follows:  Maj.  J.  C.  Smith  wounded 
through  calf  of  left  leg.  Company  E — Sergt.  A.  E.  Haseltine  wounded 
through  left  thigh ; Private  Elihu  Paxson  wounded  in  left  shoulder, 


Chap.  XXXVI.j  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHEASTERN  MISSISSIPPI. 


481 


and  Private  Patrick  Hinckey  wounded  in  arm.  Company  H — Sergt. 
J.  Clark  wounded  in  leg  and  Private  Jacob  Fox  wounded  in  right 
shoulder.  Company  I— Private  Jacob  Wiltman  wounded  with  buck- 
shot in  side.  Company  K— Private  Charles  A.  Hedges  buck-shot 
wound  in  head,  and  Private  Patrick  Dunican  wounded  in  side.  Five 
horses  were  killed,  besides  several  wouuded. 

My  officers  and  men  behaved  with  gallantry  and  coolness,  and  to  my 
entire  satisfaction. 

I desire  especially  to  mention  Second  Lieut.  Joseph  E.  Overturf,  of 
Squadron  H,  commanding  rear  guard,  and  Corporal  [Edward  I)  j Denny, 
ot  his  squadron,  who  commanded  the  rear  vedettes,  and  had  his  horse 
shot  dead  under  him.  By  their  coolness  and  bravery  1 was  enabled  to 
torrn  in  line  of  battle.  I also  desire  to  mention  Sergt.  E.  C.  Little,  of 
Squadron  K,  whose  coolness  and  great  bravery  gave  invaluable  assist- 
ance to  the  few  commissioned  officers  I had,  in  inspiring  my  men  with 
courage,  and  enabling  them  to  repulse  the  enemy. 

To  Captain  Murray,  who  commanded  the  men  after  they  were  dis- 
mounted, I also  return  my  thanks.  I respectfully  refer  you  to  his 
report  of  the  remainder  of  the  march,  as  to  the  part  taken  by  my  com- 
mand in  it. 

In  conclusion,  I congratulate  you  that,  in  view  of  the  disparity  of 
numbers  with  that  of  the  enemy,  the  great  disadvantages  of  the  posi- 
tion in  which  he  attacked  you,  and  the  difficult  roads  over  which  you 
had  to  travel  in  your  retreat,  you  succeeded  in  relieving  your  command 
with  comparatively  small  loss,  and  so  punishing  the  enemy  that  he  was 
afraid  to  follow  you. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  yours,  ever, 


Lieut.  Col.  J. 


J.  C.  SMITH, 

Major  Fifth  Ohio  Cavalry. 

J.  Phillips, 

Commanding  Expedition. 


No.  0. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  Buggies , C.  S.  Army. 

First  Military  District,  Dept,  of  Miss,  and  East  La., 

Headquarters  in  the  Field , Okolona , Miss.,  June  25,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  state,  for  the  information  of  the  gen- 
eral commanding  the  department,  that  on  the  4th  instant  I received 
official  notice  that  Governor  [John  J.]  Pettus  had  ordered  Col.  J.  F. 
Smith’s  regiment  and  Maj.  T.  W.  Ham’s  battalion  Mississippi  State 
troops  to  be  turned  over  to  the  Confederate  authorities,  and  an  in- 
spector was  immediately  ordered  to  inspect  them  preparatory  to  their 
reception.  Only  35  men  of  Ham’s  battalion  could  be  assembled,  and 
Smith’s  entire  regiment,  which  had  been  stationed  near  New  Albany, 
disbanded  on  the  9th  or  10th  before  any  inspection  could  be  made. 

To  cover  the  country  and  reassure  the  people,  on  the  13th  instaut  I 
marched  a portion  of  my  troops,  with  two  sections  of  J.  A.  Owens’  light 
battery  and  four  prairie  pieces,  to  the  locality  previously  occupied  by 
Smith’s  State  troops.  Arriving  at  Pontotoc  myself  after  dark  of  that 
day,  I very  soon  had  information  that  the  enemy,  with  a force  variously 
estimated  at  from  500  to  1,500  men,  with  artillery,  had  advanced  to 
New  Albany,  19  miles  distant,  and  burned  all  the  business  houses, 
31  R R-— VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


482 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


church,  and  some  private  dwellings  late  in  tlie  evening  of  the  same  day. 
At  midnight  I left  for  New  Albany,  reaching  the  place  about  0 o’clock 
the  next  morning  with  the  force  brought  from  near  Okoloi,  a,  except 
Owens’  artillery,  which  had  not  come  up.  Ascertaining  that  the  enemy 
numbered  only  some  500  men,  with  two  guns,  I sent  Col.  William  Boyles, 
with  400  men,  and  Col.  W.  C.  Falkner  (of  General  J.  B.  Chalmers’  com- 
mand, who  had  for  some  time  been  near,  and  who  joined  me  at  New 
Albany),  with  some  200  men,  in  pursuit,  accompanied  by  Col.  John  M. 
Sandidge  (one  of  my  staff  officers),  with  instructions  to  press  the  enemy 
and  attack  him  wherever  found.  The  enemy  having  retreated  in  the 
direction  of  Kipley,  the  troops  of  Colonels  Boyles  and  Falkner  pursued 
by  different  routes  to  that  place,  as  instructed,  with  the  hope  of  over- 
taking him  there. 

Arriving  at  2 p.  m.  the  14th,  Col.  William  Boyles  found  the  enemy 
had  left  at  9 a.  in.,  going  in  the  direction  of  Pocahontas.  Colonel  Boyles 
immediately  continued  the  pursuit,  leaving  a message  for  Colonel  Falk- 
ner (who  had  not  arrived)  to  join  him  at  a feeding  place  12  miles  out, 
intending,  if  he  could  not  overtake  the  enemy  during  the  night,  to 
attack  him  at  Pocahontas  at  daylight  the  next  morning.  At  11  o’clock 
;u  the  night,  being  informed  that  Colonel  Falkner  could  not  for  some 
reason  proceed  beyond  Bipley,  and  that  the  enemy  was  already  at 
Pocahontas,  Colonel  Boyles  reluctantly,  and  with  the  concurrence  of  my 
staff  officer,  abandoned  the  pursuit  and  purpose  of  attacking  Pocahontas, 
returning  to  New  Albany  the  next  day. 

It  is  believed  that  with  the  co-operation  o£  Colonel  Falkner  the  ex- 
pedition would  have  resulted  most  successful^. 

Bemaining  at  and  near  New  Albany  until  the  17th,  Capt.  Thomas  Pur 
year,  of  Colonel  [C.  B.]  Barteau’s  Second  Tennessee  Begiment,  withade 
rudiment  of  125  selected  men,  accompanied  by  the  staff  officer  already 
mentioned,  was  instructed  to  penetrate  the  enemy’s  lines,  if  practicable, 
near  Che  walla,  and,  passing  north  of  the  Mobile  and  Uhio  Bailroad,  break 
up  the  enemy’s  communications  on  all  the  railroads  in  that  section.  As 
the  success  of  this  expedition  depended  very  greatly,  if  not  entirely,' 
upon  its  passing  some  distance  beyond  the  enemy’s  lines  without  being 
observed  during  the  night  of  the  JL7th,  it  was  found  that,  after  a march 
of  42  miles  during  the  day,  there  was  still  20  miles  to  be  passed  over 
before  reaching  Chewalla.  Heavy  rains  late  in  the  evening  and  at 
night,  with  total  darkness,  made  it  impossible  to  accomplish  the  de 
wired  object,  and  the  troops  were  halted  about  midnight,  and  the  next 
morning  (the  18th)  turned  eastwardly  to  scour  the  country  in  front  of 
the  enemy’s  lines,  so  as  to  unite  with  the  main  body  of  my  forces, 
which  had  been  marched  the  day  before  from  New  Albany  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Gun  town,  to  watch  and  harass  the  threatened  raid  on  Atlanta, 
if  made. 

After  a short  march,  Captain  Puryear  got  into  the  rear  of  a party  of 
the  enemy’s  cavalry  moving  from  the  east  westwardly,  in  the  direction 
of  Bipley,  and  I was  informed  that  Captain  Puryear,  having  failed  in 
his  first  object,  would  follow  after  the  enemy,  then  three  hours  in  ad~ 
vance.  At  2 p.  m.,  when  within  4 miles  of  Bipley,  Captain  Puryear 
ascertained  that  the  enemy  he  had  been  pursuing  had  united  with  a 
much  larger  force  at  Bipley,  who  came  out  from  Chewalla  and  Poca- 
hontas with  artillery.  Maneuvering  upon  two  or  three  roads  near 
Bipley  in  such  manner  as  to  induce  the  enemy  to  believe  a large  force 
was  approaching  against  him,  he  retreated  from  the  place,  and  Captain 
Fury  ear’s  co  mmand  encamped  for  the  night  6 miles  distant,  on  the  road 
leading  to  N ew  Albany.  Ascertaining,  as  is  supp/isedr tb.e  real  strength 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHEASTERN  MISSISSIPPI. 


483 


of  our  weak  force  which  had  deluded  him,  the  enemy  moved  forward 
the  next  morning  (the  10th),  and  at  2 p.  m.  a lively  skirmish  commenced 
at  New  Albany,  Captain  Pury  ear’s  rear  guard,  in  command  of  Lieut.  A. 
H.  French,  with  20  men,  holding  them  in  check  for  three  hours,  killing 
and  wounding  several,  as  was  subsequently  ascertained. 

The  conspicuous  gallantry  of  this  lieutenant,  as  well  on  that  as  the 
succeeding  day,  when  he  was  wounded,  entitles  him  to  special  com- 
mendation. 

Sergt.  J.  D.  Carr,  of  Company  D,  and  Private  W.  W.  Thurmond,  Com- 
pany G,  Second  Tennessee  Eegiment,  also  deserve  special  praise  for 
gallant  conduct  at  New  Albany. 

On  reception  of  the  information  communicated  the  morning  of  the 
18th  by  my  staff:*  officer  with  Captain  Puryear,  that  they  were  in  pur- 
suit of  an  enemy  moving  toward  Eipley,  1 retraced  my  steps  from  near 
Guntown,  sending  the  Second  Alabama  Eegiment,  under  Captain  [E.  G.  | 
Earle,  to  New  Albany,  and  with  the  remainder  of  my  troops  and  guns 
took  the  road  to  Plenitude,  to  be  in  position  to  meet  the  enemy  and  cover 
Pontotoc,  should  he  advance  in  force.  Near  Plenitude  Captain  Puryear’s 
detachment  rejoined  the  command,  and  ascertaining  that  the  enemy, 
leaving  New  Albany  at  6 p.  m.,  were  encamped  on  the  Pontotoc  road,  5 
miles  from  the  latter  and  3 miles  from  the  former  place,  my  troops  were 
moved  to  the  right  during  the  night  to  be  in  communication  with  the 
Second  Alabama,  and  in  the  enemy’s  rear,  purposing  to  strike  him  at 
daylight.  The  enemy,  it  seems,  ascertaining  in  some  way  the  proximity 
of  a larger  force  than  he  expected  to  encounter,  left  his  camp  during  the 
night  (not  withdrawing  his  pickets),  taking  the  direction  of  Eocky  Ford, 
on  the  Tallahatchee  Eiver.  He  was  overtaken  by  the  advance  of  my 
troops,  under  Col.  C.  E.  Barteau  and  Capt.  E.  G.  Earle  (who  marched 
all  night),  and  attacked  in  the  canebrake  swamp  of  the  Ultchehubby- 
pathan  before  reaching  the  Tallahatchee.  Arriving  on  the  field  with 
the  main  body,  and  after  a conflict  of  three  hours,  the  enemy  was  en- 
tirely routed  and  driven  from  an  exceedingly  strong  position  in  dense 
swamps  and  behind  almost  impassable  creeks.  Nearly  50  of  his  killed 
have  been  found  in  these  thickets;  a few  are  prisoners ; the  remainder 
fled  in  confusion,  barely  saving  their  artillery,  losing  caissons  and  nearly 
all  of  his  baggage  and  ammunition  train.  The  pursuit  was  continued 
to  the  Tallahatchee,  at  Eocky  Ford. 

Colonel  [Jesse  J.]  Phillips,  in  command  of  the  enemy’s  troops,  had 
wTith  him  the  Ninth  Illinois,  Tenth  and  Eleventh  Missouri,  and  Fifth 
Ohio  Eegiments,  with  two  companies  Tories  (mounted  infantry  and  cav- 
alry, numbering  over  1,000  men),  one  Parrott  gun,  and  one  12-pounder 
howitzer,  and  had  moved  out  to  co-operate  with  other  forces  of  the 
enemy  near  the  Central  Eailroad. 

I was  much  gratified  with  the  conduct  of  officers  and  men,  who  en- 
gaged the  enemy  with  vigor  and  determination,  and,  after  final  dis- 
positions were  made,  gave  evidence  of  their  ability  to  drive  greater 
numbers  than  were  then  opposed  to  them  from  the  field. 

Col.  C.  E.  Barteau’s  Second  Tennessee,  Col.  William  Boyles’  First 
Alabama,  and  Capt.  E.  G.  Earle’s  Second  Alabama  Eegiments  of  cav- 
alry vied  with  each  other  in  pressing  the  enemy  home,  while  Capt.  J. 
A.  Owens’  light  battery  and  First  Lieut.  H.  C.  Holt’s  Williams’  guns 
swept  the  canebrakes  and  jungles  with  marked  effect. 

But  for  the  difficulty  in  obtaining  guides  in  the  dense  thicket  extend- 
ing some  miles,  a flank  movement  would  have  been  made  to  the  right 
by  which  the  enemy’s  rear  might  have  been  gained,  resulting,  unques- 
tionably, in  the  destruction  or  capture  of  his  entire  force. 


484  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  LChap.  XXXVI. 

We  have  to  regret  the  loss  of  2 killed  and  17  wounded  in  this  day’s 
conflict. 

My  thanks  are  especially  due  to  Maj.  F.  P.  Beck,  chief  quartermaster ; 
Capt.  L.  D.  Sandidge,  district  inspector  and  acting  assistant  adjutant- 
general  ; Maj.  Beverly  Matthews,  inspector  of  cavalry;  Col.  John  M. 
Sandidge,  volunteer  aide-de-camp ; Second  Lieut.  A.  B.  De  Saulles,  en- 
gineer, 0.  S.  Army,  aud  First  Lieut.  M.  B.  Buggies,  aide-de-camp,  for 
services  most  promptly  rendered  on  the  field  of  battle. 

Your  dispatch  of  the  19th,  from  Canton,  notifying  me  that  3,000  of  the 
enemy’s  mounted  troops  were  moving  against  General  Chalmers,  was 
received  on  the  battle  ground  at  1.30  p.  m.  the  20th,  and  I immediately 
sent  off  scouts  to  report  the  actual  position,  &c.,  of  the  enemy,  with  the 
view  of  assisting  in  his  expulsion,  but  the  defeat  of  one  of  their  columns 
by  the  troops  of  General  J.  B.  Chalmers,  and  the  retreat  of  theother,  as 
was  subsequently  ascertained,  made  it  inexpedient  to  march  my  troops 
westwardly  from  their  base  line  of  operations. 

Before  leaving  the  neighborhood  of  Guntownonthe  18th,  Maj.  W.  M. 
Jnge  was  ordered  from  Tupelo,  with  125  select  men,  to  be  joined  by 
Capt.  I.  G.  Warren,  who  had  been  sent  with  an  equal  number  to  scout 
along  the  enemy’s  line  eastwardly  from  Camp  Davis,  with  instructions 
to  repel  a small  raid  of  the  enemy  reported  moving  toward  Fulton,  which 
was  done  by  him  after  some  slight  skirmishing,  capturing  2 wagons, 
an  ambulance,  and  8 horses,  the  enemy  destroying  another  wagon,  in 
which  were  forty  or  fifty  long-range  guns  and  3,000  rounds  of  ammuni- 
tion taken  out  by  them  to  arm  some  Tories. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DANIEL  RUGGLES, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding  District.- 

Col.  B.  S.  Ewell, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Jackson , Miss. 


JUNE  15  25,  1863. — Operations  in  Northwestern  Mississippi. 

SUMMARY  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  EVENTS. 

June  16,  1863.— Skirmish  at  Quinn’s  Mills,  on  the  Cold  water. 

16-17,  1863. — Skirmishes  near  Holly  Springs,  Miss. 

17,  1863. — Attack  on  transports,  Mississippi  River,  near  Commerce,  Miss. 

18,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Coldwater  Bridge,  Miss. 

Skirmish  at  Belmont,  Miss. 

19,  1863. — Action  on  the  Coldwater,  near  Hernando,  Miss. 

19-20,  1863. — Skirmishes  near  Panola,  Miss. 

20,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Senatobia,  Miss. 

Skirmish  at  Matthews’  Ferry,  on  the  Coldwater,  Miss. 

21,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Hudsonville,  Miss. 

Skirmish  on  Helena  Road,  Miss. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Stephen  A.  Hurlbut,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Sixteenth  Army 
Corps. 

No.  2. — Maj.  Gen.  Richard  J.  Oglesby,  U.  S.  Army. 

No,  3.— Col.  John  K.  Mizner,  Third  Michigan  Cavalry,  Chief  of  Cavalry,  left  wing 
Sixteenth  Army  Corps, 


Chap.  XXXVI  ] OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHWESTERN  MISSISSIPPI.  485 

No.  4. — Col.  La  Fayette  McCrillis,  Third  Illinois  Cavalry,  commanding  First  Cav- 
alry Brigade. 

No.  5. — Col.  Edward  Hatch,  Second  Iowa  Cavalry,  commanding  Second  Cavalry 
Brigade. 

No.  6. — Lieut.  Col.  Gilbert  Moyers,  Third  Michigan  Cavalry. 

No.  7.— Lieut.  Col.  Bazil  D.  Meek,  Eleventh  Illinois  Cavalry,  commanding  Fourth 
Cavalry  Brigade. 

No.  8. — Col.  David  Moore,  commanding  Fourth  Brigade,  Fifth  Division,  Sixteenth 
Army  Corps. 

No.  9. — Capt.  Francis  T.  Moore,  Second  Illinois  Cavalry,  of  action  on  the  Cold- 
water. 

No.  10. — Brig.  Gen.  James  R.  Chalmers,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  district. 

No.  11. — Brig.  Gen.  J.  Z.  George,  Mississippi  Militia. 


No.  1. 


Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Stephen  A.  Hurlbut , TJ.  S.  Army , commanding 

Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 


Memphis,  Tenn.,  June  16,  1863. 

Colonel  : 'Nineteen  hundred  cavalry  left  La  Grange  this  morning 
to  go,  by  Wyatt,  south  of  Tallahatchee;  break  the  railroad  south  of 
Panola;  turn  on  Chalmers;  sweep  the  country  of  horses,  mules,  negroes, 
and  the  new  crop  of  wheat,  and  work  back  with  the  results.  Immedi- 
ately after  this  I shall  send  a force  to  Okolona  on  the  same  errand. 

Biffle  crossed  the  Tennessee  at  Cumberland,  and  has  broken  the  rail- 
road and  telegraph  wires  for  miles  beyond  Bolivar.  Cornyn  is  after 
him. 

The  late  expedition  of  Colonel  Cornyn  across  the  Tennessee  at  and 
near  Florence  was  very  brilliantly  successful  and  the  loss  inflicted  very 
heavy. 

I will  send  official  report  when  you  have  time  to  read  it. 

Your  obedient  servant, 


Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Bawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


S.  A.  HURLBUT, 

Major-  General. 


Headquarters  Sixteenth  Army  Corps, 

Memphis , Tenn.,  June  20,  1863. 

Colonel  : I wrote  some  days  since  of  my  intention  of  sending  a 
cavalry  force  below  the  Tallahatchee.  In  pursuance  of  this,  Colonel 
Mizner,  with  1,900  mounted  men,  left  La  Grange  on  Tuesday  [16th], 
with  instructions  to  cross  at  Wyatt,  break  the  railroad  below  Panola, 
sweep  round,  and  break  up  Chalmers’  forces  at  Panola  and  Belmont. 

Having  learned  on  Wednesday  that  a force,  with  two  pieces  of  artil- 
lery, had  moved  from  Panola  to  Commerce,  I ordered  Major  Henry, 
Fifth  Ohio  Volunteer  Cavalry,  to  proceed  with  about  400  cavalry  south 
on  Hernando  and  Cold  water,  to  divert  this  force  from  our  boats,  threaten 
their  lines,  and  communicate  with  Mizner,  if  the  country  was  clear. 
He  left  on  Wednesday;  since  that  time  I have  no  official  report  from 
him.  On  yesterday,  stragglers  from  the  command  came  in,  and  are 
still  coming,  who  report  that  Major  Henry  allowed  himself  to  be  sur- 
rounded and  surprised  in  camp,  3 miles  below  Hernando.  If  the  facts 


486 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chat’.  XXXVI. 


are  as  stated,  great  criminality  attaches  to  the  commanding  officer,  who 
went  deliberately  into  camp,  unsaddled,  and  acted  as  if  at  his  ease.  I 
fear  that  nearly  all  of  the  command  has  been  cut  off. 

I moved  out  infantry  last  night  15  miles,  to  form  a rallying  point  for 
the  broken  cavalry.  I have  not  strength  enough  to  pursue  them  farther 
and  keep  my  hold  on  Memphis. 

Owing  to  the  strange  apathy  of  Bosecrans,  my  entire  rear  and  left 
are  open,  and  the  rebel  cavalry  cross  the  Tennessee  almost  at  will. 
They  are  only  hindered  by  the  gunboats,  which  they  avoid. 

Dodge  and  Cornyn,  by  superhuman  exertions,  keep  their  range  of 
country  clear,  but,  with  the  force  about  Panola  and  near  Okolona,  it 
requires  about  all  we  can  do  to  keep  the  front  clear. 

These  bands  in  our  rear  are  picking  up  deserters,  conscripting,  and 
carrying  off  cattle  for  Bragg. 

I do  not  think  they  will  try  to  cross  in  force,  although  three  regi- 
ments and  a battery  are  reported  trying  to  cross  at  Double  Island. 

I will  do  the  best  I cau  under  these  circumstances,  but  cannot  repel 
or  punish  as  I would  raids  within  my  command,  which  must  be  looked 
for.  If  Mizner  has  been  successful,  it  will  go  far  toward  relieving  us 
for  a time. 

This  irregular  force  below  keeps  close  lines,  and  it  is  v6ry  difficult  to 
ascertain  the  movement  of  the  main  force  below.  I therefore  request 
that,  as  far  as  possible,  the  movements  of  General  Johnston,  looking 
north,  may  be  watched  from  your  force. 

I am,  colonel,  your  obedient  servant, 


S 


Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Kawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant  General. 


. A.  HUBLBUT, 

Major  - General. 


Headquarters  Sixteenth  Army  Corps, 

Memphis,  Tenn .,  June  23,  1863. 

Colonel  : Buggies,  Inge,  Boddey,  and  Biffle  are  endeavoring  to 
effect  a junction,  in  force,  from  Okolona  to  Bear  Creek,  either  to  attack 
the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Bailroad  or  for  some  other  purpose. 
They  will  have,  when  united,  about  fourteen  pieces  of  artillery  and 
probably  from  8,000  to  10,000  men.  Chalmers7  force  is  also  reported  to 
be  under  the  same  orders.  Colonel  Phillips,  with  700  men,  has  had  a 
severe  skirmish  with  them  below  Bocky  Ford. 

Mizner’s  command  crossed  the  Tallahatchee  at  Wyatt,  moved  down 
below  Panola,  burned  the  Yockeney  Bridge  and  all  the  trestles  to  Sena- 
tobia,  destroyed  the  ripe  grain  (wheat)  for  miles,  took  Panola,  destroyed 
all  public  (and  a good  deal  of  private)  property  there  and  at  Senatobia, 
and,  when  last  heard  from,  the  Second  Iowa  and  Third  Michigan  were 
in  sharp  pursuit  of  the  party  which  captured  Major  Henry  aud  75  of 
his  cavalry.  I trust  they  will  be  able  to  strike  a severe  blow  upon  this 
band.  Bo  final  report  has  been  had  from  them. 

In  the  peculiarly  exposed  condition  of  this  line,  I have  ordered  Gen- 
eral Oglesby  to  send  in  all  sick  from  La  Grange  to  this  place,  and  to 
make  Pocahontas  and  Moscow  his  points  of  concentration.  It  will  not 
be  possible  to  hold  La  Grange  against  an  attack  in  force.  The  bridges 
and  the  situation  of  the  country  make  the  points  selected  most  vital  to 
the  road. 

As  soon  as  the  men  are  rested  from  their  trip  south,  I shall  direct  an 


Chat.  xXxvi.l  OPERATIONS  IN  NOkTtl  WESTERN  MISSISSIPPI. 


487 


attack  to  be  made  by  the  entire  mounted  force,  supported  by  a brigade 
of  iiil’antry,  on  Okolona.  My  whole  reliance  now,  to  defend  the -road* 
is  upon  active  movements  of  cavalry.  1 am  weary  of  looking  to  Bose- 
crans.  I think  my  railroad  will  be  broken  up,  but  there  will  be  a com- 
fortable list  of  killed  and  wounded  when  the  thing  is  done*  I have 
repeatedly  mentioned  to  the  major-general  commanding  department 
that  I have  not  force  to  hold  the  line  intact.  I shall  do  my  best  and 
leave  the  consequences  where  they  belong. 

Your  obedient  servant, 

S.  A.  HUELBUT, 

Major-General. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Bawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Sixteenth  Army  Corps, 

Memphis,  Term.,  June  24,  1863 — 11  a.  m. 

The  enemy  still  keep  a heavy  force  of  cavalry  hovering  in  my  front 
from  Okolona  and  Panola.  I lost  near  Hernando  70  cavalry  prisoners 
and  5 killed  by  neglect  of  ordinary  precaution.  Mizner  has  been  at 
Panola  since,  with  1,800  cavalry,  and  destroyed  road  below^.  He  is  on 
his  return;  particulars  not  received.  Asbotli  sends  strange  reports 
from  Columbus;  they  must  be  very  extravagant.  I can  learn  of  no  or- 
ganized force  behind  him,  though  the  country  is  full  of  stragglers.  My 
line  of  railroad  is  not  tenable.  If  attacked  by  a respectable  force,  it 
must  be  broken,  and  troops  will  be  drawn  to  Corinth  and  Memphis. 
There  are  ninety  days7  provisions  at  Corinth.  I will  do  the  best  I can 
on  the  line  to  keep  it  up  and  repel  an  attack,  but  am  liable  to  be  cut  off 
by  river  or  railroad,  or  both,  at  any  time. 

S.  A.  HUELBUT, 

Major-General. 

H.  W.  Halleck, 

General- in-  Chief. 


Headquarters  Sixteenth  Army  Corps, 

Memphis,  Term.,  June  25,  1SG3. 

Colonel  : I forward  herewith  telegraphic  report*  of  Colonel  Miz- 
ner7s  expedition  south.  It  has  been  an  eminent  success.  By  breaking 
up  the  railroad,  destroying  crops,  and  bringing  off  horses  and  mules 
and  negroes,  he  has  succeeded  in  placing  a wider  belt  of  difficult  country 
between  the  head  of  the  railroad  and  my  line,  and  in  depriving  the 
enemy  of  large  supplies  of  wheat,  now  just  harvested.  The  only  mis- 
fortune attending  the  movement  was  the  loss  of  men,  horses,  and  arms 
of  the  party  from  Memphis  commanded  by  Major  Henry,  Fifth  Ohio 
Volunteer  Cavalry.  Colonel  Mizner  was  detained  one  day  in  crossing 
the  Tallahatchee,  or  he  would  have  prevented  or  punished  this.  As  it 
is,  Chalmers  barely  escaped  him  by  taking  to  the  swamps  and  bottoms 
near  Commerce.  I shall  move  them,  as  soon  as  the  weather  and  roads 
admit,  in  the  direction  of  Okolona.  By  the  terrific  rains  of  the  last 
two  days,  the  country  is  now  impassable.  All  the  streams,  ponds,  arid 
bayous  are  full  to  overflowing.  Asboth  reports  a force  across  the  Ten- 
nessee, and  is  very  much  disturbed  about  it.  He  is  in  direct  communi- 


* See  21.  489. 


488 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


cation  with  Washington,  and,  I think,  will  get  himself  into  serious 
trouble  as  an  alarmist.  General  Halleck  has  directed  that,  in  case 
of  a movement  in  force  on  New  Madrid,  Asboth  shall  throw  his  whole 
force  there,  even  to  the  abandonment  of  Columbus  and  Fort  Pillow.  I 
dread  to  trust  him  with  such  discretion.  He  has  very  little  judgment. 

In  the  endeavor  to  cover  the  line  of  the  Tennessee  as  well  as  my 
front,  I am  breaking  down  my  cavalry,  and  were  it  not  for  the  superior 
qualities  of  the  officers  charged  with  this  harassing  duty,  I should  not  be 
able  to  do  as  much.  I have  repeatedly  mentioned  the  singular  activity 
and  courage  of  Dodge,  ably  supported  as  he  is  by  Cornyn  and  Phillips. 

The  center  cavalry  brigade,  under  Mizner  and  Hatch,  is  doing  splen- 
didly, and  with  them  are  associated  on  all  heavy  expeditions  the  Third, 
Fourth,  and  Ninth  Illinois,  from  Germantown  and  Collierville.  The 
only  mode  in  which  I can  at  all  protect  this  road  is  by  cavalry  move- 
ments well  to  the  front,*  but  meantime,  by  the  inactivity  of  the  Army 
of  the  Cumberland,  my  rear  is  open,  ami  it  is  extremely  difficult  to 
cover  both  sides  with  the  lorce  I have.  However,  I am  weary  of  writ- 
ing about  Kosecrans,  as  it  does  no  good,  and  only  desire  by  this  repeti- 
tion to  put  it  distinctly  on  record  in  case  of  disaster. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  an  attempt  will  be  made  by  Price’s  force  on 
the  Arkansas  side,  and  such  force  as  can  get  over  the  Tennessee,  to 
close  the  Mississippi.  This  movement  I expect  to  be  made  near  Island 
No.  35. 


In  case  Asboth  should  abandon  Fort  Pillow  under  an  apprehension 
of  attack  on  New  Madrid,  without  positive  assurance  of  force  there,  it 
will  be  occupied,  no  doubt. 

It  is  of  prime  necessity  to  the  safety  of  your  supplies  that  three  gun- 
boats be  held  in  readiness;  one  to  cruise  from  Island  No.  10  to  Mem- 
phis, one  from  Memphis  to  Helena,  and  one  in  reserve  here.  Captain 
Penuock  will  do  nothing  without  orders  from  the  admiral. 

There  is  no  doubt  but  the  taking  of  Vicksburg  will  be  a virtual  aban- 
donment of  Mississippi,  and  will  be  followed  by  rapid  movements  by 
Johnston  toward  Bragg,  either  directly  north  or  by  falling  to  the  line 
of  the  Tombigbee  Biver. 

Your  obedient  servant, 


S. 


Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


A.  HURLBUT, 

Major-General. 


Headquarters  Sixteenth  Army  Corps, 

Memphis,  Tenn .,  June  25,  1863. 

Sir  : I inclose  herewith  a telegraphic  report*  of  Col.  J.  K.  Mizner’s 
expedition  south  of  Tallahatehee. 

The  force  consisted  of  the  Third  Michigan,  Second  Iowa,  Third,  Fourth , 
and  Ninth  Illinois  Cavalry,  and  part  of  the  Eleventh  Illinois.  It  has 
been  a complete  and  brilliant  success. 

As  soon  as  men  and  horses  are  recruited,  and  the  present  heavy  rains 
permit,  I shall  add  Cornyn’s  brigade  of  cavalry  from  Corinth,  and  throw 
them  below  Okolona,  with  a view  of  dispersing  forces  there,  destroying 
crops  and  railroad,  and  return  by  Bear  Creek,  there  to  join  infantry 
force  from  Corinth,  and  clean  out  the  line  of  that  stream. 


See  p.  489. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHWESTERN  MISSISSIPPI. 


489 


The  duty  devolving  on  my  cavalry  is  enormous  since  the  abandon- 
ment of  Jackson, 

I respectfully  repeat  that  it  is  of  importance  to  the  safety  of  my  line 
that  General  Rosecrans  disperse  the  cloud  of  cavalry  that  hangs  on  the 
north  and  east  side  of  the  Tennessee  and  threatens  my  rear  constantly. 
I am  not  safe  without  his  co-operation;  with  it,  I am. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

S.  A.  HURLBUT, 

Major-General. 

Col.  J.  C.  Kelton, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  2. 

# Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Richard  J.  Oglesby , JJ.  S.  Army. 

La  Grange,  Tenn.,  June  24,  1863. 

General  : Colonel  Mizuer  returned  to-day ; his  forces  are  now  all 
in;  have  brought  in  one  caisson,  forge,  and  battery  wagon ; printing 
press,  several  hundred  horses  and  mules,  and  any  number  of  negro 
men,  women,  and  children. 

Expedition  has  been  out  nine  days,  without  loss  or  injury  ; have 
traveled  from  200  to  300  miles ; destroyed  several  railroad  bridges, 
some  south  of  Panola;  drove  all  Chalmers’  forces  south  toward  Gre- 
nada, returning  north  across  Tallahatchee  to  Senatobia;  thence  west- 
ward on  Helena  road;  crossed  the  Cold  water  and  drove  all  cavalry  south ; 
finding  Chalmers  had  no  disposition  to  fight,  gave  up  the  pursuit;  killed 
8 and  wounded  a number  there ; was  within  3 miles  of  Mississippi 
River.  The  country  was  cleared  of  everything  an  enemy  could  subsist 
upon.  Returned  by  Hernando,  Olive  Branclq  and  Mount  Pleasant  to 
La  Grange.  Took  40  prisoners  and  paroled  20.  General  George  was 
in  command  at  Panola.  Chalmers  had  000  men  and  three  guns  north 
toward  Commerce.  The  expedition  has  made  a thorough  reconnaissance 
of  five  counties,  swimming  three  rivers.  No  considerable  force  is  now 
north  of  the  Tallahatchee.  Further  details  will  be  given  as  soon  as 
reports  are  received.  All  seems  to  be  quiet  to-day  south  of  our  lines. 

R.  J.  OGLESBY, 

Major-General. 

Maj.  Gen.  Stephen  A.  Hurlbut. 


No.  3. 

Reports  of  Col.  John  K.  Mizner , Third  Michigan  Cavalry , Chief  of 
Cavalry , Left  Wing  Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

La  Grange,  Tenn.,  June  24,  1863. 
Colonel  : Have  just  returned.  Broke  up  the  command,  under  Gen- 
eral George,  at  Panola  ; destroyed  railroad  bridge  at  the  Yockeney  aud 
trestle-work  just  beyond,  and  the  road  from  there  north;  crossed  the 
Tallahatchee  north,  and  pursued  Chalmers  beyond  Coldwater  on  the 
Helena  road.  He  made  for  the  Tallahatchee,  to  cross  at  the  mouth  of 


490 


jcnAP.  xxxVl 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

the  Cold  water ; killed  15  or  20  and  took  40  prisoners ; paroled  the  sick 
at  Panola  ; brought  away  and  destroyed  all  army  supplies,  work-shops, 
mills,  tanneries,  depots,  &c. : passed  north  within  3 miles  of  Austin  and 
Commerce,  destroying  an  immense  amount  of  forage  and  subsistence ; 
took  from  000  to  800  horses  and  mules  and  500  head  of  cattle ; sent  de- 
tachments north  and  northeast  from  Panola  to  destroy  or  bring  away 
all  subsistence,  forage,  horses,  and  mules,  &c.;  passed  through  five 
counties;  traveled  300  miles,  and  crossed  three  streams.  Chalmers  had 
with  him  [J.  G-.]  Stocks’,  [W.  F.]  Slemons’,  and  [G.  L.]  Blythe’s  men 
(900)  and  three  pieces  of  artillery.  The  remainder  of  his  force  (900) 
lied  south  from  Panola,  via  Charleston,  under  General  George.  De- 
stroyed ferries  at  Panola  and  Coldwater.  Lost  1 man  killed  and  5 
slightly  wounded.  No  reports  yet  received  from  Colonel  Meek’s  skir- 
mish near  Hudsonville. 

J.  K.  MIZNER, 

Colonel , dc. 

Lieut.  Col.  Henry  Binmore, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.  • 


Headquarters  Beet  Wing  Sixteenth  Army  Corps, 

Memphis , Tenn .,  July  5,  18G3. 

Herewith  I transmit  the  official  report  of  Col.  J.  K.  Mizner,  chief  of 
cavalry,  commanding  First  Division  Cavalry,  and  who  was  personally  in 
command  of  the  expedition  ordered  to  move  from  the  left  wing  against 
forces  of  the  enemy  posted  along  the  line  of  the  Tallahatchee ; also  in- 
closing reports  from  his  subordinate  and  brigade  commanders,  with  lists 
of  killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners,  and  property  captured  from  the  enemy. 
I regret  I have  not  the  means  of  doing  the  officers  of  this  expedition 
full  justice.  The  expedition  was  in  every  respect  a complete  success, 
and  Col.  J.  K.  Mizuer  is  entitled  to  much  praise  for  the  manner  in  which 
it  has  been  conducted.  Our  loss  was  nominal. 

R.  J.  OGLESBY, 

Major-  General. 

[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Chief  of  Cavalry, 

Left  Wing  Sixteenth  Army  Corps, 

La  Grange , Tenn .,  July  3,  1863. 

Sir  : J received  instructions  on  the  12th  ultimo  from  Maj.  Gen.  R. 
J.  Oglesby,  commanding  left  wing  Sixteenth  Army  Corps,  to  prepare 
my  whole  available  force  to  march  on  the  ensuing  Sunday  at  daylight, 
crossing  the  Tallahatchee  at  or  near  Wyatt,  and  from  that  point  to 
throw  a force  rapidly  southward  to  cut  and  destroy  the  railroad  befcw 
Panola,  and  move  with  the  main  body  of  my  command  direct  on  Panola, 
break  up  Chalmers,  destroy  his  stores,  capture  his  batteries,  if  possible, 
cross  the  river,  and  proceed  north,  taking  all  horses,  mules,  and  means 
of  transportation  ; destroy  and  bring  away  all  provisions  and  forage, 
and  to  make  the  work  thorough  and  complete,  crushing  out  and  dis- 
persing all  roving  bands  of  guerrillas,  and  rendering  it  impossible  for 
the  enemy  to  subsist  on  the  country.  These  instructions  to  move  were 
subsequently  temporarily  suspended,  by  order  of  Major-General  Hurl- 
but,  until  Tuesday,  the  16th.  I accordingly  proceeded  at  once  to  ar- 
range the  preliminaries  for  the  expedition,  directing  Colonel  McCrillis 
to  prepare  the  available  force  of  the  First  Brigade  and  to  move  at  day- 


}iiaf.  XxXvl]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHWESTERN  MISSISSIPPI.  491 

light  on  the  10th  southward  through  Byhalia  and  Chulahorna,  and  join 
the  main  column  at  or  near  Wyatt ; Lieutenant-Colonel  Meek,  command- 
ing Fourth  Brigade,  to  join  me  with  eight  companies  of  the  Eleventh 
Illinois  Cavalry  at  some  convenient  point  oh  the  Holly  Springs  road, 
south  of  La  Grange,  and  started  myself  with  the  Second  Brigade,  Colo- 
nel Hatch  commanding,  at  5 a.  m.  June  10,  from  La  Grange,  and,  mov- 
ing south,  camped  at  Betreat,  8 miles  southwest  of  Holly  Springs.  On 
the  following  day  the  entire  command  formed  a junction,  and  at  noon 
reached  the  Tallahatchee  at  Wyatt.  Here  the  stream  was  found  so 
wide  and  deep,  and  no  means  of  crossing  being  at  hand,  a boom  wTas 
constructed  from  timber  taken  from  a cotton-gin,  and  a raft  from  mate- 
rial found  in  an  adjacent  house.  The  Second  Brigade  commenced  cross- 
ing at  3 p.  in.,  and  by  great  industry  a large  portion  of  the  command 
was  thrown  over  that  night,  the  balance  crossing  between  daylight  and 
9 a.  m.  the  following  day. 

From  the  south  side  of  the  river  I moved  southwest  to  the  Oxford  and 
Panola  road,  thence  west  toward  Panola,  covering  the  movement  of  a 
detachment  of  six  companies  which  were  directed  to  push  rapidly  for- 
ward toward  Oakland,  striking  the  Mississippi  and  Tennessee  Eailroad 
at  the  crossing  of  the  Yockeney  Biver,  destroying  the  bridge  at  that 
point  and  the  railroad  north  to  Panola. 

The  operations  of  this  detachment  are  detailed  in  the  report  of  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Moyers,  herewith  transmitted. 

On  reaching  a point  some  8 miles  from  Panola,  I encountered  the  ene- 
my’s outpost  or  picket,  consisting  of  two  companies,  which  were  in- 
stantly routed  and  a portion  of  them  captured. 

Darkness  coming  on,  farther  advance  was  unadvisable,  and,  after  care- 
fully reconnoitering  the  surrounding  country,  the  command  encamped 
for  the  night.  Fearing  an  evacuation,  every  preparation  was  made 
during  the  night  to  attack  the  enemy  at  daylight,  on  the  first  approach 
of  which,  with  the  First  Brigade  in  advance,  followed  by  the  Second 
and  the  Fourth  Brigades,  forming  the  reserve  and  rear  guard,  in  whose 
charge  were  placed  all  means  of  transportation  and  supernumerary  ap- 
pendages, the  column  advanced  rapidly  upon  the  town,  which  was  en- 
tered without  the  slightest  opposition  at  7.30  on  the  morning  of  the  19th, 
the  enemy,  some  800  strong,  under  General  George,  having  evacuated 
during  the  night,  somewhat  hastily,  however,  leaving  their  sick,  a quan- 
tity of  guns,  ammunition,  and  camp  and  garrison  equipage,  also  two  cais- 
sons and  battery  wagons  and  battery  forge  behind,  which  were  secured 
by  the  Second  Brigade. 

Learning  that  Chalmers  had  gone  north  with  some  1,200  men,  and 
that  General  George  was  pushing  southwest  toward  Charleston  so 
rapidly  that  pursuit  would  be  useless,  I determined  to  cross  the  Talla- 
hatchee immediately,  and,  if  possible,  intercept  Chalmers  on  his  return. 

Having  dispatched  the  First  Brigade  and  several  detachments  to  scour 
the  country  in  all  directions  for  stock,  and  repaired  the  ferry-boat,  which 
had  been  but  partially  destroyed  by  the  affrighted  enemy,  1 began  cross- 
ing the  Second  Brigade  at  11  a.  m.  The  entire  force,  including  the  de- 
tachment from  the  Yockeney,  which  joined  me  at  near  sunset,  crossed 
before  dark  and  camped  some  G miles  north,  leaving  a strong  picket  at 
the  river,  which  were  fired  upon  by  a small  body  of  the  enemy  from  the 
opposite  bank  on  the  morning  of  the  20tli,  while  destroying  the  ferry- 
boat. Keceiving  a heavy  volley  from  our  men,  they  soon  disappeared, 
and  the  destruction  of  the  boat  was  completed  without  further  interrup- 
tion. Moved  north  until  reaching  a point  near  Sledgeville,  where  I 
issued  the  following  order,  detaching  my  command  so  as  to  sweep  the 


492 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


entire  country  from  the  Ooldwater  on  the  west  to  the  Mobile  and  Ohio 
Kailroad  on  the  east : 

General  Field  Orders,  ? Hdqrs.  Chief  of  Cavalry,  on  the  March, 

No.  1.  5 Near  Sledgeville,  Tenn.,  June  20,  1863. 

The  following  is  indicated  as  the  route  to  he  taken  by  this  command  on  the  return 
march  : 

The  First  Brigade  will  cover  ilie  country  from  the  Mississippi  and  Tennessee  Rail- 
road on  the  east  to  the  Coldwater  River  on  the  west,  passing  through  Hernando,  and 
thence  northeast  to  their  respective  stations  on  the  Memphis  and  Charleston  Railroad. 

The  Second  Brigade  will  cover  the  country  from  the  Mississippi  and  Tennessee 
Railroad  aud  the  Coldwater  River  southwest  to  the  Panola  and  Holly  Springs 
road,  passing  through  Byhalia  and  Mount  Pleasant,  and  thence  to  La  Grange. 

The  Fourth  Brigade  will  proceed  northeast  through  Tyro,  Chulahoma,  thence  by 
the  most  direct  and  practicable  route  to  La  Grange. 

Take  all  horses,  mules,  cattle,  and  means  of  transportation  ; destroy  or  bring  away 
all  subsistence  and  forage.  Fences  inclosing  flourishing  crops  will  be  burned  ; leave 
no  animals  behind;  if  any  give  out,  shoot  them.  Rout  and  capture  all  roving  bands 
of  guerrillas,  and  make  the  work  thorough  and  complete,  rendering  it  impossible  for 
the  enemy  to  subsist  on  the  country. 

By  order  of  J.  K.  Mizner,  colonel  and  chief  of  cavalry. 

JAMES  G.  BUTLER, 

Lieutenant  and  Aide-de-Camp. 

On  reaching  Senatobia,  I learned  that  Chalmers,  after  a successful 
engagement  with  a small  Federal  force  near  Hernando,  was  moving 
southwest  along  the  north  side  of  the  Coldwater,  and  resolved  to  change 
my  previous  plans,  and,  placing  the  train  and  led  animals  in  charge  of 
Colonel  McCrillis,  to  take  the  Second  Brigade  in  light  marching  order 
and  push  rapidly  west  on  the  Helena  road,  hoping  to  intercept  Chal- 
mers at  the  Coldwater.  My  advance  encountered  the  enemy  about  3 
miles  from  Senatobia  and  drove  them  steadily  forward,  skirmishing 
sharply  until  reaching  the  Coldwater,  where  they  were  found  in  con- 
siderable force.  Dismounting  a battalion  of  rifles,  and  pouring  a deadly 
fire  across  the  river  where  the  enemy  were  concealed,  I secured  and 
retained  possession  of  the  crossing  until  morning,  when  the  enemy  were 
dislodged,  and  the  Ninth  Illinois  having  joined  me,  the  command  began 
crossing  at  7 o’clock.  Moving  the  Third  Michigan  Cavalry  rapidly 
forward  to  Walnut  Lake,  where  they  found  Chalmers’  rear  guard,  who 
took  refuge  in  a block-house,  from  which,  however,  they  were  soon  glad 
to  escape  by  taking  up  the  floor  and  making  for  the  woods  in  their  rear, 
I found  that  Chalmers  had  broken  camp  on  the  west  side  of  Walnut 
Lake,  and  was  running,  with  the  intention  apparently  of  crossing  the 
Tallahatchee  at  the  mouth  of  the  Coldwater.  Abandoning  all  hopes 
of  getting  a fight  from  him,  I proceeded  northwest  till  within  a short 
distance  of  Austin ; then,  turning  north,  camped  within  3 miles  of  Com- 
merce, destroying  on  my  way  immense  amounts  of  forage,  and  taking 
a large  number  of  horses  and  mules  which  had  been  hid  in  the  bottoms. 
Proceeded  east  through  Hernando  and  Olive  Branch,  near  which  place 
I detached  four  companies  on  the  23d  in  pursuit  of  a considerable  num- 
ber of  the  enemy,  who  I learned  were  between  me  and  Collierville, 
lying  in  ambush  for  forage  trains,  but  on  the  approach  of  our  men 
suddenly  disappeared.  At  Mount  Pleasant,  on  the  morning  of  the  241  h, 
I received  a dispatch  from  the  major-general  commanding  informing 
me  that  La  Grange  was  threatened,  and  directing  me  to  move  forward 
at  once  to  protect  that  place. 

Accordingly,  I again  placed  the  larger  portion  of  the  Second  Brigade 
in  light  marching  order,  and  leaving  a battalion  in  charge  of  my  led 
animals  and  transportation,  with  the  fighting  strength  of  my  command 
made  a forced  march  through  a heavy  storm  of  rain,  and  over  almost 
an  impassable  road,  to  Moscow,  where  I learned  that  it  was  a false 


Chat.  XXXVl.j  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHWESTERN  MISSISSIPPI. 


493 


alarm,  and  proceeded  more  leisurely,  reaching  La  Grange  at  1 p.  in.  on 
the  24th  of  June.  Official  reports  from  Colonels  McCrillis  and  Hatch 
and  from  Lieutenant-Colonels  Meek  and  Moyers  are  herewith  trans- 
mitted for  the  further  information  of  the  commanding  general. 


SUMMARY. 


Killed  and  wounded  of  the  enemy 

Prisoners  captured 

Horses  captured  and  brought  in  (officially  rejjorted) 
Mules  captured  and  brought  in  (officially  reported) 
Cattle  captured  and  brought  in  (officially  reported) 


17 

46 

161 

401 

423 


PROPERTY  DESTROYED. 

6 

3 

2 

500,000 

And  large  amount  of  commissary  stores,  groceries,  and  Government 

cotton  : also  the  ferries  on  Tallahatchee  and  Coldwater,  and  bridge  and 

trestle-work  on  Yockeney. 

Casualties. — Killed,  1 ; wounded,  10 ; missing,  3,  not  including  report 
from  Colonel  Meek.  The  prisoners  were  turned  over  to  provost-mar- 
shals at  Germantown  and  La  Grange.  Paroles  of  10  of  Chalmers’  sick 
are  inclosed. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  K.  MLZNER, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Cavalry , Commanding. 

Maj.  S.  Wait, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


Mills - 

Tanneries 

Work-shops. . 
Bushels  grain 


Ko.  4. 

Report  of  Col.  La  Fayette  McCrillis,  Third  Illinois  Cavalry , command- 
ing First  Cavalry  Brigade. 

Germantown,  Tenn.,  Jidy  1,  1863. 

Colonel  : In  obedience  to  your  order,  by  telegraph,  of  the  15th  oi 
June,  my  command  was  in  the  saddle,  with  six  days’  rations  (light),  at 
5 a.  m.  of  the  16th  day  of  June,  1863,  consisting  of  four  companies  of 
the  Third  Illinois  Cavalry,  under  Captain  Kirkbride,  eleven  companies 
of  the  Fourth  Illinois  Cavalry,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Wallace,  and 
nine  companies  of  the  Kinth  Illinois  Cavalry,  under  Major  Gifford ; in 
all,  775  men. 

After  leaving  two  companies  of  the  Third  Illinois  at  La  Fayette, 
and  three  companies  of  the  Kinth  Illinois  Cavalry  at  Germantown,  for 
patrol  duty,  I proceeded  on  the  nearest  and  most  practicable  route  to 
the  Coldwater,  crossing  at  Quinn’s  Mills,  where  our  advanced  guard  en- 
countered a rebel  picket  of  20  men,  belonging,  as  stated,  to  the  Second 
Missouri  (rebel)  Cavalry.  The  advance  of  my  column  discovered  that 
the  bridge  across  the  Coldwater  had  been  lately  destroyed,  and  halted 
to  make  preparation  for  crossing,  when  the  enemy  fired  a volley  from 
the  rear  of  two  out  buildings  standing  within  40  feet  of  the  creek  bank, 
where  they  were  concealed.  Three  enlisted  men  of  Company  L,  Fourth 
Illinois  Cavalry,  were  wounded — 2 seriously  and  1 slightly.  As  soon  as 
possible  the  advance  was  crossed}  and  proceeded  after  the  fast-retreating 


^94  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

enemy,  capturing  5 prisoners.  After  some  little  preparation,  the  com- 
mand was  crossed  by  fording,  the  wounded  being  returned  to  Collier- 
ville in  ambulance,  with  one  company  for  guard,  with  instructions  to 
return  to  the  command  the  same  night.  My  column  advanced  steadily 
on  the  Byhalia  road,  the  advance  skirmishing  with  the  enemy,  he  hav- 
ing been  re-enforced  by  two  companies  from  Panola,  as  I learned,  that 
were  being  sent  to  relieve  the  rebel  picket  at  the  Coldwater. 

Arrived  at  Byhalia  at  2 p.  m.  of  the  same  day,  halting  my  command 
for  thirty  minutes  to  rest.  Prom  here  I proceeded  in  a southeasterly 
direction  on  the  Chulahoma  road. 

Arrived  at  Chulahoma  at  8.20  a.  m.  of  the  17th.  From  here  I pro- 
ceeded, on  Holly  Springs  road,  to  Cox’s  farm,  where  I took  the  Wyatt 
road.  Arrived  at  Wyatt  at  11  a.  m.,  where  I reported  to  you  in  person 
with  my  command. 

In  obedience  to  your  orders,  I directed  two  companies  to  cross  the 
Tallahatchee  Kiver  by  swimming,  being  Companies  H and  I,  Ninth 
Illinois  Cavalry  (Captains  Cameron  and  Harper),  who  were  ordered  to 
guard  the  opposite  side  while  preparations  were  being  made  to  cross 
the  command. 

During  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day,  Companies  F,  G,  H,  and  C, 
Ninth  Illinois  Cavalry,  were  crossed,  and  joined  the  two  companies 
above  mentioned,  being  all  that  I was  able  to  cross  before  dark,  owing 
to  the  crossing  of  Colonel  Hatch’s  command. 

At  daylight  the  following  morning  I finished  the  crossing  of  my  com- 
mand and  reported  to  you  for  orders.  Camping  with  the  Second  and 
Fourth  Brigades  the  same  night,  sending  one  staff  officer,  as  directed 
by  you,  for  orders  at  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  19th,  I then  pro- 
ceeded with  my  command,  as  directed,  on  the  Oxford  and  Panola  road 
toward  Panola.  Arriving  at  Panola  at  7 a.  m.,  I halted  my  command 
to  await  orders.  I detailed  one  company,  agreeably  to  your  orders,  for 
provost  guard  in  the  towu. 

I then  proceeded  south  on  the  Charleston  road,  as  directed  by  you,  a 
distance  of  5 miles,  halted  my  command,  and  sent  small  scouting  parties 
east,  south,  and  west  to  gather  horses  and  mules. 

Receiving  orders  from  you  to  move  my  command  back  to  Panola  by 
3 p.  m.,  1 proceeded  on  same  road  back.  Arrived  at  the  ferry  at  3.30 
p.  m.  Crossing  the  Tallahatchee  River,  I proceeded  with  my  command 
to  camp  7 miles  north  of  Panola,  on  the  Hernando  road.  Receiving 
orders  from  you  the  following  morning  to  the  effect  that  I should  fall  in 
rear  of  the  Second  and  Fourth  Brigades  with  my  whole  command,  I 
remained  in  camp  until  those  commands  came  up.  Arriving  at  Wal- 
lace’s farm,  I received  information  of  the  presence  of  about  100  rebel 
cavalry  3 miles  to  my  left,  proceeding  north.  I detached  seven  com- 
panies of  the  Ninth  and  two  companies  of  the  Third  Illinois  Cavalry, 
under  Major  Gifford,  Ninth  Illinois  Cavalry,  ordering  him  to  scour  the 
country  on  my  left  and  report  to  me  with  his  command  at  Senatobia. 
Failing  to  report  from  some  cause  at  that  place,  I proceeded  to  Cold- 
water  Station,  to  hold  the  crossing  of  the  Coldwater,  as  directed. 

Arriving  at  the  place  of  crossing,  I found  evidence  of  the  enemy  hav- 
ing crossed  in  small  force  some  two  or  three  days  previous,  going  north. 
The  bridge  (or  ferry-boat  answering  the  place  of  a bridge)  I found  was 
cut  loose  from  its  place,  and  that  an  attempt  had  been  made  to  sink  it. 
While  preparation  was  being  made  to  cross  the  command,  I received 
orders  from  you  to  send  the  available  force  of  the  Ninth  Illinois  Cav- 
alry to  report  to  you  that  night.  I immediately  dispatched  a staff 
officer  to  Senatobia  with  orders  to  Major  Gifford  to  report  with  his  com- 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHWESTERN  MISSISSIPPI. 


495 


mand  to  you  immediately,  on  the  Helena  road,  5 miles  west  of  Senatobia. 
I crossed  my  command,  and  proceeded  to  camp  5 miles  from  Hernando, 
leaving  one  company  at  the  crossing  of  the  Ooldwater  for  picket. 

Left  camp  next  morning  at  0 a.  m.  and  proceeded  direct  to  Hernando, 
where  I took  the  Olive  Branch  road. 

Not  being  able  to  find  the  enemy,  in  obedience  to  orders  received 
from  you  that  my  command  should  return  to  their  respective  stations, 
I proceeded  to  Olive  Branch,  where  I directed  the  Fourth  Illinois  Cav- 
alry to  take  the  Collierville  road,  also  the  two  remaining  companies  of 
the  Third,  arriving  at  Germantown  at  6.30  p.  m.  of  the  131st  of  June, 
1863. 

Captured  during  the  expedition  the  following  property,  viz : Forty- 
six  horses,  84  mules,  and  187  cattle. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

L.  F.  McCRILLIS, 

Colonel , Commanding  First  Brigade. 

Col.  J.  K.  Mizner, 

Chief  of  Cavalry,  Left  Wing , Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Col.  Edward  Hatch , Second  Iowa  Cavalry , commanding  Sec- 
ond Cavalry  Brigade. 

La  Grange,  Tenn.,  June  26,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  compliance  with  orders 
of  Colonel  Mizner,  commanding  cavalry  division,  I marched  from  La 
Grange  at  5 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  16th  of  June,  camped  8 
miles  southwest  of  Holly  Springs,  at  Sims’  plantation,  meeting  small 
squads  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry.  A patrol  of  the  Second  Iowa  Cavalry 
came  upon  a company  of  the  enemy  at  night,  having  2 men  wounded 
by  the  fire  of  the  rebels. 

On  the  17th,  marched  to  Wyatt’s  Ferry,  via  Cox’s  Cross-Roads,  throw- 
ing four  companies,  by  order  of  Colonel  Mizner,  toward  Chulahoma,  to 
open  communication  with  First  Brigade  of  cavalry  from  Germantown. 
Near  Wyatt’s  Ferry  joined  the  First  Brigade  of  cavalry;  crossed  the 
ferry  that  afternoon  and  night ; camped  5 miles  south  of  it. 

On  the  18th,  marched  with  the  cavalry  division  toward  Panola,  de- 
taching three  companies  of  the  Second  Iowa  Cavalry  and  three  com- 
panies of  the  Third  Michigan  Cavalry,  by  Colonel  Mizner’s  order,  to 
report  to  Major  Hudson.  From  Lieutenant-Colonel  Moyers’  report, 
herewith  inclosed,  I learn  that  Major  Hudson  left  the  main  column 
moving  toward  Panola,  marched  southwest  to  .the  Yockenej7,  driving 
the  enemy  from  the  railroad  bridge,  having  1 man  wounded,  captur- 
ing 2 prisoners,  and  killing  1 of  the  enemy.  Major  Hudson  destroyed 
the  bridge  and  trestle-work;  then  moving  north  toward  Panola,  burn- 
ing at  Pope’s  Station  one  flouring-mill,  one  saw  mill,  with  a large  amount 
of  stock,  50,000  bushels  of  grain,  and  400  bales  of  cotton,  joining  the 
command  at  Panola  on  the  night  of  the  19th.  On  the  afternoon  of  the 
18th,  the  Third  Michigan  Cavalry,  having  the  advance,  came  on  the 
enemy’s  outpost  at  Belmont,  8 rniies  northeast  of  Panola;  charged  and 
took  6 prisoners.  The  reserve  gave  way  and  tied  in  confusion,  leaving 
arms  and  blankets  ; camped  that  night  near  Belmont. 

On  the  morning  of  the  19th,  marched  to  Panola,  where  Company  E, 


496 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXYL 


Captain  Latimer,  sent  out  on  patrol  southeast  of  Panola,  came  upon 
the  enemy  in  force,  held  them  in  check  until  evening,  and  then  with- 
drew to  Panola.  At  1 2 o’clock  began  crossing  the  Tallahatchee  by  ferry, 
taking  with  me  1 caisson,  1 forge,  1 battery  wagon,  6 boxes  of  good 
Springfield  muskets,  and  a printing-press.  Camped  5 miles  north  of 
Panola. 

On  the  20th,  marched  to  Senatobia ; there  sent  four  companies  north 
with  horses,  mules,  and  cattle,  by  Colonel Mizner’s  order.  Then  marched 
to  Matthews’  Ferry,  on  the  Coldwater,  skirmishing  occasionally  on  the 
road,  reaching  that  point  at  dark.  The  enemy  contesting  the  crossing, 
opened  fire  with  part  of  the  Third  Michigan  Cavalry,  silencing  the  ene- 
my’s fire.  Camped  that  night  in  the  river  bottom. ' 

Ou  the  morning  of  the  21st,  the  Third  Michigan  raised  the  ferry-boat, 
partially  destroyed,  crossed  the  river  in  advance,  skirmishing  with  the 
enemy  on  the  Helena  road,  driving  one  party  out  of  a log  house. 
Marched  to  day  15  miles,  and  camped. 

On  the  22d,  marched  through  Hernando  toward  La  Grange;  camped 
6 miles  northeast  of  the  town. 

This  morning  Company  M,  of  the  Second  Iowa  Cavalry,  was  sent  to 
the  right  flank,  where  they  found  in  the  woods  a log  house  filled  with 
stores  (flour,  salt,  sugar,  candles,  boots,  shoes,  bacon,  &c.),  which  they 
destroyed. 

On  the  route  from  Panola  to  Hernando  immense  quantities  of  grain — 
in  buildings,  in  the  stack,  and  in  the  field — were  destroyed. 

On  the  23d,  two  companies  of  the  Second  Iowa  and  two  companies  of 
the  Third  Michigan  Cavalry  were  detached  south  of  Germantown  to 
look  for  the  enemy,  supposed  to  be  in  the  neighborhood. 

Marched  on  the  23d  to  the  neighborhood  of  Mount  Pleasant,  and 
camped. 

On  the  24th,  marched  to  camp. 

Many  grist-mills,  tanneries,  and  stores  were  destroyed  during  the 
march  from  Panola  to  Hernando. 

Annexed  please  find  list  of  killed,  wTounded,  and  missing  of  Second 
Cavalry  Brigade.* 

* * # # * # # 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  * 

EDWARD  HATCH, 

Colonel  Second  Iowa  Cavalry , Commanding  Second  Brigade , 

Capt.  Thomas  Weir, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Gilbert  Moyers , Third  Michigan  Cavalry. 

La  Grange,  Tenn.,  June  25,  1863. 
Sir  : In  relation  to  the  part  taken  by  this  regiment  in  the  recent 
scout,  I respectfully  submit  the  following  report : 

On  the  night  of  the  16th  instant,  Company  F,  Captain  Reese,  was 
sent  from  the  camp  of  the  Second  Cavalry  Brigade,  near  Holly  Springs, 
Miss.,  to  that  place  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  whereabouts  of 

* Nominal  list,  omitted,  shows  1 killed,  7 wounded,  and  3 missing,  all  enlisted  men, 


CHAP.  XXXVI. L OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHWESTERN  MISSISSIPPI. 


497 


the  Eleventh  Illinois  Cavalry.  Captain  Eeese  returned  on  the  follow- 
ing day,  and,  on  his  way  back,  came  in  contact  with  a party  of  rebel 
cavalry  numbering  about  20,  whom  a few  shots  served  to  repulse. 

Eariy  on  the  morning  of  the  18th  instant,  Maj.  J.  G.  Hudson,  of  this 
regiment,  with  three  companies  of  his  own  and  three  from  the  Second 
Iowa  Cavalry  Regiment,  left  camp  for  the  purpose  of  gaining  the  rear 
of  the  forces  at  Panola  and  cutting  oft*  their  retreat.  He  also  had  orders 
to  destroy  all  forage,  transportation,  and  other  property  that  could  be 
of  use  to  the  Confederate  Government.  The  major  destroyed  the  rail- 
road bridge  across  the  Yockeney,  one  flouring-mill,.one  saw-mill,  one 
tannery  containing  a large  amount  of  stock,  and  about  50,000  bushels 
of  grain;  also  about  400  bales  of  cotton. 

Major  Hudson  had  a sharp  skirmish  at  Coldwater  Bridge,  capturing 
2 prisoners  and  killing  1 of  the  enemy.  We  had  1 man  slightly 
wounded. 

Late  in  the  afternoon  of  the  19th  instant,  Company  C,  which  was 
leading  the  advance,  came  upon  the  enemy’s  outpost,  8 miles  north  of 
Panola,  charged  it,  and  took  6 prisoners.  The  reserve  gave  way  and 
fled  in  great  confusion,  leaving  arms,  blankets,  &c.,  behind  in  some  in- 
stances. 

On  the  20th,  Company  E,  sent  out  on  patrol  duty  to  the  east  of  Panola, 
came  upon  a strong  force,  whom  they  engaged,  but  our  force  having 
been  found  to  be  insufficient,  withdrew  without  loss. 

Id  the  afternoon  of  the  21st  instant,  Company  A,  which  was  in  ad- 
vance, came  upon  a force  of  rebel  cavalry  near  Senatobia,  Miss.;  shots 
were  exchanged,  and  2 privates  of  Company  A were  wounded. 

When  within  a few  miles  of  Matthews’  Ferry,  on  the  Coldwater. 
Company  1 was  sent  forward  rapidly  to  save  the  Jerry -boat,  if  possipie. 
When  they  had  reached  the  vicinity  of  the  river,  Lieutenant  Woodard 
directed  his  men  to  dismount  and  move  forward  cautiously  to  the  river 
bank. 

While  executing  this  order  they  were  opened  upon  from  the  opposite 
side  by  a large  force,  which  lay  concealed  near  the  stream.  Corporal 
Herrick,  of  Company  I,  was  killed.  Companies  H and  D were  imme- 
diately sent  forward,  and  opened  fire  upon  the  position  which  the  enemy 
was  supposed  to  occupy,  with  considerable  success.  Five  new  graves 
were  found  on  the  following  morning. 

On  the  following  morning,  Company  E was  sent  across  and  came  upon 
a considerable  force  on  the  Helena  road.  The  enemy  took  refuge  in  a 
log  house,  and  for  some  little  time  held  our  men  in  check,  but  when  they 
discovered  a force  moving  to  their  rear  they  fled  precipitately,  leaving 
1 dead  upon  the  field. 

At  Senatobia,  on  the  20th  instant,  Company  F,  Captain  Reese,  was 
sent  to  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  in  charge  of  extra  animals  and  contrabands, 
and  arrived  safely  at  this  place  on  the  22d  instant.  On  the  23d,  Cap- 
tain Caldwell,  in  command  of  L and  H of  my  regiment  and  two  [com- 
panies] of  the  Second  Iowa,  was  sent  from  near  Hernando  to  German- 
town. He  has  doubtless  reported  the  result. 

Otherwise  than  in  the  instances  above  cited,  the  Third  Michigan  Cav- 
alry was  constantly  with  the  Second  Brigade,  of  which  it  forms  a part, 
marching  in  the  advance  on  alternate  days,  from  the  10th  to  the  24th 
instant,  inclusive. 

Casualties : Killed,  1 ; wounded,  5 ; missing,  3.  Prisoners  captured 
from  the  enemy,  11.  Property  destroyed  : Mills,  3;  tanneries,  2;  grain, 
100,000  bushels.  Horses  captured,  57  ; mules  captured,  175.  Total,  232. 

Names  of  killed  : Corporal  [John  E.]  Herrick,  Company  I.  Names  of 

32  R R — vol  xxiv,  RT  II 


498 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


wounded:  Privates  [MartinO.]  Garver  and  [John]  Cummins,  Company 

A,  [James  C.J  Ellison,  Company  E>,  and  [Charles]  Credit  and  [Henry 

B. ]  Palmer,  Company  E.  Missing : Corporal  [John  M.]  Collins  and  Pri- 
vates [Charles]  Case  and  [Alfred  D.]  Williams,  Company  L. 

Very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

G.  MOYERS, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Third  Michigan  Cavalry. 

Lieut.  W.  Scott  Belden, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Bazil  T>.  Meeh,  Eleventh  Illinois  Cavalry , com- 
manding Fourth  Cavalry  Brigade. 

Saulsbury,  Tenn.,  June  25,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report : 

After  leaving  main  column  of  your  division,  in  accordance  with  orders, 
I proceeded  in  a northeasterly  direction,  passing  Homo  Station,  on  the 
Memphis  and  Grenada  Railroad ; thence  on  road  to  Tyro,  near  which 
place  I encamped  on  the  night  of  the  20th. 

Started  at  daylight  on  morning  of  21st,  on  the  Holly  Springs  road, 
by  way  of  Chulahoma,  scouring  the  country  thoroughly  for  horses  and 
mules.  We  captured  98  horses  and  mules,  burned  large  cribs  of  corn, 
wheat,  and  other  means  of  subsistence,  one  large  blacksmith-shop  and 
wagon-shop,  a large  number  of  wagons,  and  several  hundred  bales  of 
cotton,  receiving  to  our  force  90  contrabands  to  assist  in  bringing  up 
captured  horses  and  mules.  I pushed  forward,  making  good  the  work 
of  destruction  to  subsistence  and  transportation.  Passed  through 
Holly  Springs  at  about  4 p.  m. 

I left  the  Holly  Springs  road  near  Hudsonville;  struck  the  Hernando 
road  about  2 miles  from  Hudsonville,  where  1 stopped  to  feed.  About 
one  hour  after,  one  of  the  pickets  was  shot  by,  as  I supposed,  a guer- 
rilla, near  a mill  on  the  Hernando  road.  Not  liking  my  position,  I 
moved  forward  with  main  column  to  La  Grange  road,  sending  two  com- 
panies to  bring  in  wounded  man  and  ascertain  the  force  of  the  enemy, 
with  instructions  to  join  the  column  as  soon  as  possible,  the  rear  guard 
to  remain  and  assist  the  other  two  companies  in  rejoining  the  command. 
I moved  forward  very  slowly,  halting  after  I struck  the  La  Grange  road. 
I proceeded  on  that  road  about  2 miles,  when  an  orderly  from  the  rear 
overtook  me  and  informed  me  there  was  heavy  skirmishing  near  where 
we  fed. 

I immediately  sent  Major  Funke  back  with  one  company,  with  in- 
structions to  bring  forward  the  other  three  companies,  skirmishing  with 
the  enemy  until  we  could  get  a position  where  our  chance  would  be 
equal. 

The  major  pushed  back  (by  this  time  it  was  quite  dark)  to  Hudson- 
ville, where  he  ran  into  the  enemy,  thinking  it  our  own  men.  The  en- 
emy had  succeeded  in  bringingforward  a force  of  400  men  by  a by-road 
from  Holly  Springs,  on  the  Hernando  road,  near  Hudsonville,  cutting 
oft  our  three  companies  from  the  main  column. 

Our  men  fought  bravely  for  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  but  the  enemy 
being  in  such  overwhelming  numbers  our  men  had  to  charge  through 
their  lines. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHWESTERN  MISSISSIPPI. 


499 


Our  loss  was  1 killed,  2 wounded,  and  2G  prisoners.  The  enemy  lost 
2 men  prisoners,  1 killed,  and  18  wounded.  Almost  all  the  men  who 
fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  were  mounted  on  mules,  and  dis- 
mounted by  the  mules  at  the  discharge  of  musketry  by  the  enemy. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

B.  D.  MEEK, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Fourth  Cavalry  Brigade . 
Ool.  J.  K.  Mizner,  Chief  of  Cavalry. 


Ko.  8. 

Report  of  Col.  David  Moore,  commanding  Fourth  Brigade,  Fifth  Divis- 
ion, Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

Memphis,  Tenn.,  June  21,  1863. 

Captain:  In  compliance  with  orders  received  from  district  head- 
quarters, I moved,  with  infantry,  battery,  and  cavalry,  on  the  Horn  Lake 
road,  south,  to  relieve  Major  Henry,  commanding  cavalry  expedition. 
We  left  camp  at  1 p.  m.  After  marching  some  5 miles,  we  met  the  force 
which  had  been  engaged  in  the  morning,  who  reported  that  they  had 
been  surrounded,  and  that  Major  Henry  was  a prisoner.  We  continued 
the  march,  and  advanced  about  15  miles  from  camp,  where  we  were  over- 
taken by  Lieutenant  [Thomas  L.]  Hewitt,  aide-de-camp,  having  orders 
from  General  Yeatch  ordering  the  return  of  my  command.  We  cap- 
tured 1 prisoner,  with  officer’s  uniform,  but  he  states  that  he  was  a pri- 
vate. The  supposition  was  that  he  ranked  a major.  He  was  promptly 
sent  to  the  provost-marshal  on  our  return. 

After  our  receiving  orders  to  return,  we  marched  from  the  Horn  Lake 
road  to  the  Hernando  road  and  encamped  for  the  night.  Started  again 
at  daylight  for  camp,  and  returned  to  camp  at  12  o’clock. 

We  learned  that  the  enemy  was  in  force  near  Hernando. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

[DAVID  MOORE,] 
Colonel,  Commanding  Fourth  Brigade. 

Capt.  E.  W.  Fox, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Ko.  9. 

Report  of  Capt.  Francis  T.  Moore,  Second  Illinois  Cavalry , of  action 
(19 th)  on  the  Coldwater. 

Memphis,  Tenn.,  June  24, 1863. 

Sir  : 1 herewith  submit  a report  of  the  part  taken  by  the  battalion 
of  Second  Illinois  Cavalry  (consisting  of  detachments  of  Companies  B, 
D,  L,  and  M,  being  a portion  of  the  United  States  forces  under  com- 
mand of  Major  Henry,  Fifth  Ohio  Cavalry  Volunteers)  in  an  engage- 
ment with  tile  rebels  near  Coldwater  River  on  the  morning  of  Friday, 
June  19,  1863,  said  battalion  being  at  the  time  under  my  command. 


500 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI 


Arriving  at  the  Coldwater,  Major  Henry,  with  the  Missouri  and  vhio 
cavalry,  crossed  over.  I was  left  to  guard  the  bridge  and  await  Major 
Henry’s  return,  with  orders  to  hold  it  “ at  all  hazards.”  Major  Henry 
returned  in  about  two  hours.  At  the  Coldwater  our  advance  guard 
discovered  and  drove  off  5 mounted  men.  I did  not  see  them.  We  biv- 
ouacked that  night  about  half-way  between  Coldwater  and  Hernando. 
Just  as  we  halted  for  the  night,  our  advance  guard  (about  a quarter  of 
a mile  in  advance)  was  fired  on  by  a small  squad  of  mounted  men,  who 
immediately  turned  and  fled.  When  this  was  reported  to  Major  Henry, 
he  said,  “ It  is  only  a squad  of  guerrillas ; I apprehend  no  danger 
here,”  or  words  to  that  effect. 

Although  the  pickets  (our  pickets)  fired  frequently  during  the  night, 
the  soldiers  wrere  not  aroused.  When  I reported  to  Major  Henry,  very 
early  next  morning  (Friday,  19th),  he  said,  “There  are  200  rebels,  with 
two  pieces  of  artillery,  near  by,  waiting  for  us,  and  we  must  go  out  and 
whip  them.”  A very  dense  fog  was  prevailing  at  the  time  we  left  our 
bivouac,  which  continued  until  quite  late  that  morning.  We  marched 
about  one-half  a mile  toward  Memphis,  w^hen  our  advance  guard  was 
fired  on  by  two  small  cannons  or  howitzers,  throwing  canister,  which 
passed  over  our  heads. 

Being  then  in  a lane,  we  threw  down  the  fence  on  our  left,  and  formed 
line  of  battle  in  an  open  field,  my  command  on  the  right.  We  were 
ordered  to  keep  our  lines  unbroken,  and  not  to  fire.  In  a few  minutes 
a small  squad  of  the  enemy  appeared,  coming  out  of  the  woods  near 
our  right.  By  the  long  guns  they  carried,  I judged  them  to  be  mounted 
infantry.  They  fired  a few  shots,  mortally  wounding  1 man  and  1 horse 
of  my  command. 

We  were  now  marched  by  the  left  flank,  and  formed  on  three  sides  of 
a hollow  square,  my  command  fronting  on  a small  ravine,  which  I was 
ordered  to  “hold  at  all  hazards.”  The  Ohio  cavalry  were  posted  at 
right  angles  with  and  near  the  right  of  my  line. 

I could  not  see  the  enemy  for  the  fog,  but  could  plainly  hear  him  ad- 
vancing through  the  ravine.  1 threw  out  a platoon  of  skirmishers,  cov- 
ering the  whole  front  of  my  battalion,  who  dismounted  and  at  once 
briskly  engaged  the  enemy’s  skirmishers  at  short  range.  I held  my 
position  under  a heavy  fire  until  the  enemy  charged  with  a heavy  col- 
umn of  cavalry,  breaking  my  line,  and  for  an  instant  throwing  it  into 
confusion.  The  whole  force  then  retreated  through  the  timber  to  a 
large  open  field,  across  which  the  enemy  followed  us  closely.  On  the 
opposite  side  of  the  field  we  rallied,  turned,  and  charged  the  enemy 
across  the  field,  back  into  the  woods,  when  he,  receiving  re  enforce- 
ments, drove  us  again  from  the  field.  We  then  retreated  in  tolerable 
good  order,  although  closely  followed  by  the  rebels  for  several  miles, 
until  we  came  to  a bridge  over  a branch  of  Coldwater,  which  we  broke 
in  crossing.  It  was  here  that  we  suffered  our  greatest  loss.  The  enemy 
did  not  pursue  beyond  the  broken  bridge,  and  we  met  with  no  further 
molestation.  I saw  Major  Henry  in  the  field  where  we  made  the 
charge.  He  seemed  to  be  endeavoring  to  rally  his  men.  I never  saw 
him  afterward. 

The  following  is  a list  of  casualties  occurring  in  my  command.* 
******* 

Sergt.  C.  H.  Blessing,  commanding  Company  B;  Sergt.  James  Burke, 
commanding  Company  JL>,  and  Sergt.  Henry  Anglemire,  who  commanded 
Company  M after  the  loss  of  Lieutenant  Crawford,  are  all  deserving  of 


Nominal  list,  omitted,  shows  X killed  and  21  missing. 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHWESTERN  MISSISSIPPI. 


,r)0t 

great  praise  for  tlieir  cool  daring  and  the  efficient  manner  in  which 
they  commanded  their  companies.  The  men  also  did  all  that  men 
could  do  under  like  circumstances. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

F.  T.  MOORE, 

Captain  Company  L ,.  Second  Illinois  Cavalry. 
Maj.  T.  J.  L arison, 

Commanding  Battalion  of  Second  Illinois  Cavalry. 


Ko.  10. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  R.  Chalmers , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Dis- 
trict. 

Hdqrs.  Fifth  Mil.  Dis.,  Dept,  of  Miss,  and  E.  La., 

Panola , June  26,  18G3. 

Major  : Having  left  Brigadier-General  George  with  two  regiments  at 
Senatobia,  and  Colonel  [Robert]  McCulloch  with  parts  of  two  regiments 
near  him,  with  instructions  to  guard  Panola,  if  possible,  I left  on  the  15th 
instant  with  four  companies  of  the  First  [Seventh]  Tennessee  Cavalry, 
four  companies  Second  Arkansas  Cavalry,  two  companies  [W.  W.] 
Faulkner’s  Kentucky  Partisans,  and  three  pieces  of  artillery— an  ag- 
gregate force  of  about  400  men — for  the  Mississippi  River. 

On  the  17th,  we  reached  the  river  at  Dale’s  Point,  4 miles  above  Com- 
merce, and  in  a very  short  time  had  an  opportunity  of  tiring  into  some 
of  the  enemy’s  transports  going  up.  The  first  to  pass  was  the  Alice 
Dean,  a dispatch  boat.  We  fired  14  shots  at  her,  and,  as  was  after- 
ward stated  in  the  Memphis  papers,  struck  her  nine  times  and  injured 
her  badly.  Soon  after  the  Commercial  (a  side-wheeler)  and  the  Rocket 
(stern-wheeler)  came  up  lashed  together.  We  fired  33  shots  at  them,  of 
which  at  least  30  took  effect.  One  shot  struck  the  furnace  of  the  Rocket, 
scattering  the  fire  in  every  direction  ; another  tore  off  the  rudder  of  the 
Commercial,  and  a third  cut  her  steam-pipe.  When  last  seen  by  us  they 
were  moving  very  slowly,  and  jjersons  living  above  on  the  river  report 
that  one  of  the  boats  sank  and  the  other  was  abandoned  and  burned. 

Late  in  the  evening  I received  a dispatch  from  my  assistant  adjutant- 
general  (Captain  [W.  A.]  Goodman),  stating  that  the  enemy  were  ad- 
vancing on  Panola,  and  I immediately  started  to  its  relief.  We  marched 
4 miles  in  the  swamp  that  night,  and  the  next  day  (Thursday)  at  noon 
were  within  12  miles  of  Hernando,  when  I learned  that  a force  of  320 
picked  men  from  the  First  Missouri,  Second  Illinois,  and  Fifth  Ohio 
Regiments,  under  the  command  of  Major  [John]  Henry,  had  passed 
through  Hernando  that  morning  and  were  moving  toward  Panola.  We 
pressed  on  after  them,  and  found  them  encamped  at  Dr.  Atkins’  planta- 
tion, 3 miles  north  of  Coldwater.  Our  troops  were  got  in  position  by 
10  p.  m.,  and  before  daylight  in  the  morning  we  began  the  attack.  After 
skirmishing  for  some  time,  the  First  [Seventh]  Tennessee  Regiment 
(Colonel  [J.  G.]  Stocks  commanding)  was  ordered  to  charge,  which  it 
did  in  gallant  style,  driving  the  First  Missouri  before  it.  A general 
charge  was  then  ordered,  and  after  a short  struggle  the  enemy  Avere 
routed  and  fled  in  every  direction.  We  pursued  them  for  15  miles,  cap- 
turing the  major  commanding,  a lieutenant,  and  8.6  men.  The  ex- 
hausted condition  of  our  horses  alone  prevented  us  from  capturing  the 
whole  command. 


502  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVT. 

The  enemy’s  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  is  not  accurately  known,  but 
is  estimated  to  have  been  between  20  and  30.  Our  own  loss  was  1 man 
killed  and  10  wounded.  Among  the  latter  are  Oaptaiu  [W.  J.]  Tate  and 
Adjutant  [William  S.]  Pope,  of  tlie  First  [Seventh]  Tennessee  Regi- 
ment, and  Lieutenant  [H.  A.]  Tyler,  of  Faulkner’s  Kentucky  Partisans, 
all  of  whom  are  valuable  officers. 

On  that  night  I received  information  that  the  enemy  were  in  posses- 
sion of  Panola,  and  that  our  forces  had  fallen  back  toward  Grenada,  and 
being  encumbered  with  the  prisoners  I fell  back  through  the  bottom 
across  the  Yazoo  Pass,  intending  to  effect  a junction  with  them.  Having 
learned,  however,  that  our  forces  had  returned  to  Panola,  I sent  the 
prisoners  across  Tallahatchee,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Coldwater,  and  then 
hearing  a rumor  that  Grant  had  been  defeated  before  Yicksburg  and 
was  in  retreat,  I sent  Colonel  Stocks  with  the  command  to  the  river 
again,  with  instructions  to  fire  on  transports  and  annoy  the  enemy  as 
much  as  possible,  and  returned  to  Panola. 

During  my  absence,  General  George  and  Colonel  McCulloch,  having 
learned  on  Wednesday  (the  17th)  that  a force  of  2,200  men,  with  two 
pieces  of  artillery,  was  advancing  toward  Wyatt  with  the  intention  of 
crossing  the  river  there  and  flanking  this  place,  fell  back  across  the  river 
to  defend  it. 

Scouts  were  immediately  sent  out,  both  from  their  commands  and 
from  Captain  [Thomas]  Henderson’s  company  of  scouts,  but  as  they 
were  unfortunately  cut  off  by  the  enemy,  no  reliable  intelligence  could 
be  obtained  of  their  movements  until  late  on  Thursday  evening  (18tli), 
when  it  was  ascertained  that  a part  of  their  force  had  crossed  the  river, 
and  that  they  were  moving  down  on  both  sides  of  it;  and  it  was  also 
reported  from  Senatobia  that  a force  (numbers  not  given)  had  crossed 
Coldwater  and  were  moving  southward.  It  was  then  determined  to 
evacuate  the  town,  and  the  wagon  trains  were  sent  off  at  once,  with  in- 
structions to  cross  Yockeney  at  Eider’s  Ferry,  a small  force  having  in 
the  mean  time  been  sent  to  defend  the  railroad  bridge.  About  8 p.  m. 
our  pickets  at  Belmont  were  driven  in,  and  soon  after  intelligence  was 
received  that  the  enemy  had  sent  a detachment,  estimated  at  600  men, 
to  burn  the  bridge  over  Yockeney,  and,  as  was  supposed,  those  over  the 
Yalabusha  at  Grenada. 

Before  daylight  on  Friday  (19th),  our  forces  left  the  town,  and  as  on 
crossing  Yockeney  nothing  was  heard  of  the  advance  of  the  enemy,  they 
turned  up  to  the  railroad  bridge,  in  the  hope  that  they  might  be  in  time 
to  save  it,  but  they  were  too  late.  The  enemy  had  fallen  back  before 
they  reached  it,  after  destroying  a portion  of  the  bridge.  The  guard 
stationed  there  had  1 man  severely,  if  not  mortally,  wounded  in  defend- 
ing it. 

On  the  next  morning  our  forces  recrossed  the  Yockeney  and  followed 
in  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  and  on  the  same  day  Colonels  McCulloch  and 
[John]  McGuirk  recrossed  the  Tallahatchee  with  their  commands  and 
encamped  some  miles  beyond. 

On  the  day  following  (21st),  McGuirk  overtook  a retreating  column 
of  the  enemy,  which  he  pursued  to  Hudson vilie,  7 miles  north  of  Holly 
Springs,  where,  after  a slight  skirmish,  in  which  he  is  reported  to  have 
killed  and  wounded  about  20,  he  defeated  them  with  the  loss  of  27  pris- 
oners. Colonel  McCulloch  and  General  George  moved  forward  as  far 
as  Sardis  and  Coldwater  in  pursuit  without  being  able  to  overtake  the 
enemy.  The  only  public  property  which  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  en- 
emy was  a few  sacks  of  wheat  and  meal,  a small  quantity  of  corn,  and  a 
caisson  belonging  to  Kerr’s  battery,  which  was  left  by  the  officer  in 


Chap.  XXXVI  .]  OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHWESTERN  MISSISSIPPI. 


503 


charge.  While  in  possession  of  the  town  they  burned  a church,  the 
house  which  I had  occupied  as  my  headquarters,  and  some  buildings 
of  less  value.  On  their  return  through  the  country  they  carried  off  a 
considerable  number  of  negroes,  mules,  and  horses,  and  did  much  damage 
by  burning  corn-cribs,  gin-houses,  mills,  fences,  wheat  in  the  fields  and  in 
graneries,  and  in  a few  instances  dwelling-houses,  besides  beiug  guilty 
of  other  outrages. 

Lieutenant  Floyd,  of  Blythe’s  regiment  Mississippi  State  troops,  who 
was  in  command  of  a scouting  party,  and  other  parties  of  the  same  kind 
which  were  left  north  of  the  river  for  that  purpose  in  the  retreat,  did 
good  service  by  annoying  and  firing  into  them. 

The  whole  loss  of  the  enemy  from  scouts  and  others,  including  that 
mentioned  above,  could  not  have  been  much  less  than  200.  Their  force 
at  this  place,  as  counted,  was  over  2,100,  with  four  pieces  of  artillery, 
which  was  exclusive  of  the  force  of  300  sent  to  destroy  the  bridge  over 
Yockeney.  Our  force  here  did  not  exceed  900  effective  men. 

I am,  major,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  R.  CHALMERS, 

Brigadier- General. 

Maj.  A.  P.  Mason, 

A ssistant  A djutant-  Genera l. 


No.  11. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  J.  Z.  George , Mississippi  Militia. 

Hdqrs.  3d  Brio.,  5th  Mil.  Hist.,  Dept.  Miss,  and  E.  La., 

Gamp  near  Mer weather's,  4 miles  east  of  Senatobia , June  26, 1863. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
operations  of  my  command  for  the  last  ten  days : 

In  pursuance  of  orders  from  Brigadier- General  Chalmers,  I had,  on 
Sunday,  the  14th  instaut,  moved  my  brigade  to  Hickahaly  Creek  and 
encamped  on  the  road  to  Coldwater,  about  1J  miles  north  of  Senatobia. 

On  Wednesday  morning,  about  daybreak,  I received  information 
through  Henderson’s  scouts  that  the  enemy,  1,200  strong,  had  passed 
through  Byhalia  on  Tuesday,  and  had  advanced  on  a road  which  leads 
in  the  direction  of  Holly  Springs  and  Chulahoma,  and  that  they  would 
probably  encamp  at  Mrs.  McCraven’s,  a point  at  which  the  roads  lead- 
ing from  Holly  Springs  and  Chulahoma  unite.  I immediately  sent  a 
staff*  officer  to  Colonel  [Robert]  McCulloch  to  arrange  for  a disposition 
of  our  forces,  and,  in  accordance  with  Colonel  McCulloch’s  suggestion, 
I prepared  to  move  my  command  to  a point  1 mile  east  of  Senatobia, 
at  the  crossing  of  the  creek  of  that  name,  and,  on  consultation  with  my 
colonels,  concluded  to  advance  one  of  the  regiments  to  Dunn’s  Mills. 
This  disposition  would  have  enabled  Colonel  McCulloch  (who  was  near 
Luxahoma)  and  myself  to  unite  in  time  to  meet  the  enemy,  should  he 
develop  his  intentions  to  move  westward.  While  my  command  was  on 
the  march  to  the  new  destination,  as  above  stated,  I received  a note 
from  Colonel  McCulloch,  informing  me  that  a column  of  the  enemy  near 
Chulahoma  had  been  counted,  and  numbered  1,075,  with  two  pieces  of 
artilleiy,  and  that  there  was  another  column  of  about  the  same  size, 
and  expressing  the  fear  that  they  would  cross  at  Wyatt,  and  suggesting 
that  we  both  fall  back  south  of  the  Tallahatchee  River.  In  a few  min- 
utes after  this,  Colonel  McCulloch’s  aide  arrived,  stating  that  Colonel 


504 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chav.  XXXVI. 


McCulloch  had  already  started  hack  to  Panola,  and  requesting  me  to 
do  the  same.  I at  once  turned  the  head  of  my  column  in  that  direction, 
and  arrived  at  Panola  about  2 o’clock  the  next  morning.  The  train, 
however,  did  not  cross  until  about  noon,  owing  to  the  darkness.  Im- 
mediately on  my  arrival  I sought  Colonel  McCulloch,  and  it  was  then 
agreed  that  we  would  meet  the  enemy  that  morning  if  he  should  ap- 
pear, as  was  expected.  We  did  not  then  know  certainly  his  strength. 
Captain  [Thomas]  Henderson  had  sent  out  scouts  about  sundown  on 
Wednesday  evening  to  ascertain  the  movements  and  number  of  the 
enemy,  and  their  report  was  hourly  expected,  but  was  not  then  received. 

On  the  roads  which,  under  the  agreement  between  Colonel  McCulloch 
and  myself,  fell  to  my  lot  to  guard,  I sent  out  scouts  and  pickets,  but 
as  the  enemy  did  not  appear  on  either  road,  nothing  was  seen  of  him  by 
them. 

Information  was  received  on  Thursday  which  rendered  it  certain 
that  the  enemy  had  crossed  at  Wyatt  in  numbers  superior  to  ours, 
though  his  force  was  not  satisfactorily  ascertained.  It  was  agreed, 
upon  another  consultation  on  Thursday  evening,  that  McCulloch  should 
skirmish  with  the  enemy  on  his  approach,  and  I should  take  a position 
to  support  him,  and  that  we  would  make  a fight  at  Panola,  if  during 
the  skirmish  the  enemy  should  not  develop  a force  too  great  to  be  en 
countered. 

In  the  mean  time  we  concluded  to  .send  our  train  south  of  Yockeney 
River,  by  Rider’s  Perry.  About  9 o’clock  at  night  Henderson’s  scouts 
reported  that  the  enemy,  2,200  strong,  had  crossed  at  Wyatt,  and  were 
then  near  Belmont,  and  that  their  previous  failure  to  report  was  occa 
sioned  by  their  having  been  surrounded  by  the  enemy.  About  the 
same  time  Colonel  McCulloch’s  pickets  were  driven  in,  and  some  of 
them  captured.  About  12  o’clock  Colonel  McCulloch,  who  was  unwell, 
sent  for  me  to  visit  him.  On  my  arrival,  he  stated  that  our  information 
was  then  certain  that  the  enemy  greatly  exceeded  us  in  numbers,  and 
that  it  was  unnecessary  to  skirmish  with  him  to  make  him  develop  his 
strength,  and  that  we  had  better  withdraw  our  pickets  as  speedily  as 
possible,  and  follow  our  train  across  the  Yockeney.  As  this  suggestion 
accorded  exactly  with  my  own  views  of  what  was  right,  and  also  with  the 
views  of  Colonels  [G.  L.]  Blythe  and  [John]  McGuirk,  I at  once  expressed 
my  consent  to  it  and  prepared  to  carry  it  out. 

We  accordingly  left  Panola  about  2 o’clock  on  Friday  morning,  and 
crossed  the  whole  command  over  the  Yockeney  by  12  o’clock.  It  was 
our  intention,  if  pressed  on  the  retreat,  to  fall  back  on  Grenada,  the  point 
at  which  we  supposed  the  enemy  was  striking.  Our  united  force  did 
not  exceed  800,  and  we  were  destitute  of  artillery.  The  enemy’s  force 
was  three  times  as  great,  and  we  then  knew  they  had  two  guns  at  least. 
We  hoped,  too,  we  might  form  a junction  with  General  Chalmers  at  or 
near  Mitchell’s  Cross-Roads.  The  road  by  Rider’s  Ferry  could  not  be 
flanked  on  our  right,  and  for  these  reasons  it  was  selected  as  the  route 
for  our  retreat.  I sent  one  company  to  the  railroad  bridge  over  Yocke- 
ney, which,  I supposed,  was  sufficient  to  protect  it  against  any  small 
force  sent  to  burn  it.  Our  whole  command  would  have  been  insufficient 
to  protect  it  against  all  of  their  force. 

I may  as  well  remark  here  that  we  had  information  of  the  crossing  of 
Coldwater  by  that  column  which  was  afterward  met  and  dispersed  by 
General  Chalmers,  and  we  did  not  know  of  the  return  of  that  column 
until  it  recrossed  the  Tallaliatchee.  Finding  that  we  were  not  pur- 
sued, as  soon  as  we  crossed  the  Yockeney  we  concluded  to  move  up  to 
Yockeney  Bridge  with  the  double  purpose  of  saving  the  bridge  if  we 


CHAr.  XXXVI. j OPERATIONS  IN  NORTHWESTERN  MISSISSIPPI. 


505 


could,  and  keeping  between  the  enemy  and  Grenada  if  lie  should  ad- 
vance in  that  direction.  We  reached  the  neighborhood  of  the  bridge 
about  4 o’clock  that  evening,  and  learned  that  the  enemy  had  already 
been  there,  destroyed  a portion  of  it,  and  returned  to  Panola.  The  men 
had  been  up  two  nights  in  succession,  and  the  horses  had  been  saddled 
nearly  all  the  time  for  two  nights  and  three  days,  and  both  were  com- 
pletely exhausted,  and  it  was  necessary  to  restand  feed  while  the  enemy 
should  further  develop  his  intentions. 

The  next  morning  scouts  under  Major  [R.  A.]  McCulloch  were  sent  to 
Panola  to  ascertain  more  accurately  the  movements  of  the  enemy,  and 
soon  afterward  Colonel  McGuirk  was  ordered  to  advance  with  his  regi- 
ment in  the  direction  of  Panola,  and,  if  the  enemy  were  returning,  to 
follow  and  annoy  him.  Colonel  McCulloch’s  command  and  Blythe’s  regi- 
ment were  to  remain  near  the  bridge  for  further  developments.  In  a short 
time  it  appeared  to  be  probable  that  the  enemy  would  not  advance,  and 
McCulloch  and  Blythe  followed  and  overtook  McGuirk  some  8 miles 
north  of  Yockeney,  where  he  had  stopped  to  feed.  Before  this  it  had 
been  ascertained  that  the  enemy  had  recrossed  the  Tallahatchee,  and 
McGuirk  was  ordered  to  push  forward  and  annoy  and  harass  the  enemy 
as  much  as  possible.  This  order  he  has  executed  in  the  most  handsome 
style.  He  swam  that  evening  the  Tallahatchee  at  Belmont,  came  near 
the  enemy  at  Tyro,  and  pursued  him  to  Hudsonville,  where,  on  Sunday 
evening,  he  overtook  and  chastised  him  handsomely,  killing  and  wound- 
ing several,  and  capturing  27  prisoners  with  about  the  same  number  of 
horses  and  equipments.  This  is  an  extraordinary  achievement  when  it 
is  considered  that  his  command  were  in  the  saddle  nearly  all  day  Wed- 
nesday ; all  of  Wednesday  night  till  2 o’clock  ; was  in  line  of  battle  again 
by  daybreak  on  Thursday  morning,  and  remained  in  a state  of  watch- 
fulness and  preparation  for  battle  all  day  Thursday  ; were  in  the  saddle 
nearly  all  Thursday  night  and  Friday,  resting  Friday  night  on  the 
ground,  without  tents  and  with  insufficient  food,  and  that  the  distance 
from  Yockeney,  where  he  commenced  the  pursuit  on  Saturday  morning 
at  10  o’clock,  to  Hudsonville,  where  he  fought  the  enemy  on  Sunday 
evening,  is  near  80  miles. 

Blythe’s  regiment  was  with  McGuirk’s  until  the  latter  were  ordered  in 
pursuit  of  the  enemy.  The  former,  being  very  much  exhausted,  were 
allowed  to  bivouac  south  of  the  river  on  Saturday  night,  especially  as  the 
ferry-boats  were  understood  to  be  destroyed  and  no  ford  was  known. 

Early  next  morning,  however,  that  regiment  crossed  north  of  the  Tal- 
lahatchee River,  taking  the  road  to  Senatobia,  with  the  intention  of  en- 
gaging or  annoying  the  enemy  if  any  of  them  should  be  in  that  direc- 
tion. I accompanied  this  regiment,  and  when  we  arrived  near  Senato- 
bia we  learned  that  a party  of  the  enemy  were  2 to  3 miles  to  our  left. 
We  immediately  turned  in  that  direction  in  search  of  the  enemy,  but 
soon  ascertained  that  our  information  was  incorrect.  Hearing  of  no 
enemy  in  our  reach,  we  bivouacked  at  the  nearest  place  at  which  ra- 
tions and  forage  could  be  procured. 

The  next  morning  I moved  near  Coldwater  Ferry  with  a view  of 
crossing  the  river  and  cutting  off  a party  of  the  enemy  which  I learned 
were  in  the  habit  of  coming  from  Memphis  to  the  neighborhood  of  Her- 
nando. Learning,  however,  that  none  such  had  been  in  that  section 
since  General  Chalmers’  engagement  with  the  enemy  near  Dr.  Atkins’ 
on  the  19th  instant,  I moved  Blythe’s  regiment  yesterday  to  this  place, 
and  have  ordered  McGuirk’s  to  encamp  near  this  place.  He  will  arrive 
to-morrow. 

We  retreated  from  Panola  upon  the  information  that  the  enemy,  2,200 


506 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CIIAP.  XXXVI. 


strong,  with  two  pieces  of  artillery,  had  crossed  at  Wyatt,  and  that 
another  column  had  crossed  Ooldwater  near  the  depot  of  that  name 
in  time  to  reach  Panola  Friday  morning,  when  the  attack  would  have 
been  made.  We  did  not  know  where  General  Chalmers  was,  further 
than  he  went  on  the  preceding  Monday  to  the  neighborhood  of  Com- 
merce. 

Early  Wednesday  you  dispatched  a courier  to  General  Chalmers  with 
the  information  we  then  had.  You  did  the  same  on  Wednesday,  after 
we  concluded  to  return  to  Panola.  We  hoped  that  possibly  he  might 
get  to  Panola  by  Friday  morning,  though  we  did  not  much  expect  it 
From  prisoners  taken  since  recrossing  the  Tallahatchee,  I learned  the 
forces  sent  against  Panola  were  larger  than  we  estimated  them.  1 have 
examined  two  of  them  separately,  and  they  concur  in  the  statement 
that  there  wrere  nine  regiments  and  two  fractions.  They  gave  the  names 
as  follows,  to  wit:  Third  Michigan,  Second  Iowa,  Third  Illinois,  Fourth 
Illinois,  Ninth  Illinois,  Eleventh  Illinois,  Fifty-second  Wisconsin,  part 
of  First  Tennessee  and  part  of  Second  Tennessee,  Ninth  Illinois  Battery, 

1 wo  pieces  Second  Iowa  Battery,  and  two  pieces  Fourth  Illinois  Battery. 
These  two  prisoners  belonged  to  the  Third  Michigan,  and  did  not  re- 
member the  names  and  numbers  of  the  other  two  regiments.  Capt. 
James  E.  Matthews  informed  me  that  the  column  which  crossed  Cold- 
wrater  at  his  ferry  were  counted,  and  numbered  2,025.  It  is  known  that 
a considerable  number  did  not  go  in  that  direction.  I have  made  this 
statement  because  I have  heard  that  a good  deal  of  unfriendly  criticism 
upon  the  retreat  has  been  indulged  in  by  that  class  who  have  seen  proper 
to  take  no  other  part  in  this  war  than  to  remain  at  home  and  to  em- 
barrass the  operations  of  the  army  by  abuse  of  those  who  are  intrusted 
with  command.  I felt  great  doubts  as  to  the  propriety  of  retreating 
without  a contest,  because  I did  not  know  that  the  information  we  had 
wras  correct;  it  appeared  to  be  so  then,  and  has  been  since  confirmed. 

It  would  probably  have  been  better  had  we  retreated  by  the  road  lead- 
ing near  the  railroad  bridge  over  Yockeney.  If  we  had,  we  could  have 
saved  the  bridge  against  the  party  which  actually  destroyed  it;  but  if 
wre  had  gone  in  that  direction,  the  whole  force  of  the  enemy  would  have 
followed,  and  we  could  not  have  saved  it  from  them.  It  was  impossible 
to  save  our  train  by  any  other  route  than  the  one  by  which  we  sent  it. 
I will  further  add  that  I telegraphed  General  Johnston  the  route  over 
which  we  intended  to  retreat,  and  his  answer  did  not  disapprove  it.  I 
will  furthermore  add  that  I did  not  pretend  to  exercise  any  control  over 
the  Confederate  forces  under  Colonel  McCulloch;  that  he  and  I co-oper- 
ated as  if  each  had  entirely  independent  commands. 

The  track  of  the  enemy  iu  this  last  raid  is  marked  by  robbery  and 
arson.  They  stole  every  mule  and  horse,  buggy,  carriage,  and  wagon 
which  they  could  seize.  They  carried  off  every  valuable  slave  which  they 
could  entice  or  force  to  accompany  them.  They  burned  corn-cribs,  mills, 
gin-houses,  fences,  blacksmith-shops,  and  wheat  which  had  been  cut  and 
was  then  in  the  shock.  In  many  instances  they  robbed  the  citizens  of 
clothing  and  furniture. 

Unless  the  force  is  increased  in  this  section  I see  but  little  prospect  of 
preventing  a repetition  of  these  raids  and  their  bad  effects.  Property 
of  all  kinds  is  now  utterly  insecure  north  of  the  Tallahatchee.  I most 
respectfully  suggest  that  if  our  forces  be  not  increased  in  this  district, 
that  most  of  those  we  have  be  employed  as  guerrillas  as  far  as  practi- 
cable. That  mode  of  warfare  seems  to  be  more  effective  when  our  forces 
are  so  inferior  in  number  to  the  enemy  as  they  are  at  present. 

In  conclusion,  I will  add  that  I found  Colonel  McCulloch  active  and 


Chap.  XX XVI.]  OPERATIONS  ON  RIVER,  NEAR  MEMPHIS,  TENN.  507 


energetic,  easy  to  co-operate  with,  and  always  anxious  to  meet  the 
enemy  if  there  should  be  the  slightest  chance  of  doing  good.  His  sug 
gestions  were  generally  followed,  owing  to  his  greater  experience  in  the 
cavalry  service. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

J.  Z.  GEORGE, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Oapt.  W.  A.  Goodman,  Assistant  A djutant- General. 


JUNE  17-18, 1863. — Operations  on  Mississippi  River,  near  Memphis,  Tenn., 
and  attack  on  transports. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig;.  Gen.  Alexander  Asboth,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2. — Col.  Colton  Greene,  Third  Missouri  Cavalry  (Confederate). 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Alexander  Asboth , TJ.  S.  Army. 

Columbus,  Ky.,  June  18,  1863. 

The  steamer  Platte  Valley  was  bred  into  yesterday  15  miles  this  side 
of  Memphis  by  artillery,  5 balls  passing  through  the  boat,  killing  3 
men  and  wounding  several.  About  300  rifle  shots  also  struck  the  boat. 
The  steamer  Golden  Era  attempted  to  pass  the  battery  at  the  same 
time,  but  was  compelled  to  return  to  Memphis. 

No  boat  can  proceed  at  this  juncture  unless  under  convoy  of  a gun- 
boat. I applied  yesterday  for  a gunboat,  but  have  received  none. 
Ellet’s  Marine  Brigade  would  be  well  employed  between  here  and  Mem- 
phis. Dr.  Smith,  from  Dresden,  Tenn.,  reported  to  the  commander  at 
Clinton,  Ky.,  3,000  rebels  approaching  Feliciana,  Ky. 

Our  scouts  crossing  the  Obion  engaged  the  enemy,  but  had  to  fall 
back.  No  direct  report  received  from  the  two  captains  engaged  and 
in  command  of  the  scouting  parties.  I have  300  rebel  prisoners;  some 
officers  of  rank,  and  dangerous  characters.  A number  have  been  tried 
by  military  commission  and  sentenced  to  be  executed.  I desire  to  send 
those  who  are  under  sentence  to  Saint  Louis  or  Alton,  pending  the 
orders  of  the  general  commanding  on  proceedings  already  forwarded, 
and  request  your  approval.  The  800  men  promised  me  by  Major-Gen- 
eral Burnside  are  by  no  means  sufficient,  considering  my  large  river 
line,  much  reduced  force,  and  the  reported  near  approach  of  heavy  rebel 
forces.  Please  refer  to  my  telegrams  of  15th  instant. 

ASBOTH, 

Brigadier - General. 

Major-General  Halleck,  General-in-Chief. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Col.  Colton  Greene , Third  Missouri  Cavalry  ( Confederate ). 

Hdqrs.  Greene’s  Brig.,  Marmaduke’s  Div.,  June  19,  1863. 
Major:  On  the  17th  instant,  Colonel  [Leonidas  C.]  Campbell  moved 
down  to  the  river  and  fired  into  Memphis  several  times  without  reply 


5 08 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


from  the  enemy.  He  then  moved  above,  and  attacked  a large  transport 
during  the  night,  crippling  her  badly  and  doing  much  damage.  The 
boat  was  forced  to  the  other  bank,  where  she  moored,  being  too  much 
crippled  to  proceed.  During  the  day  he  attacked  the  large  steamer 
Ruth.  She  replied  with  a 12-pounder  rilled  piece,  and  then  withdrew  to 
the  east  bank  and  shelled  our  force  for  three  hours.  Soon  after  a gun- 
boat came  along  and  shelled  the  woods  for  several  miles.  Nobody  was 
hurt  on  our  side.  Colonel  Campbell  reports  that  our  guns  are  entirely 
too  light  to  do  much  damage.  The  boats  were  out  of  range  on  the  east 
bank  of  the  river.  It  is  his  opinion  that  with  12-pounder  pieces  the 
enemy  could  be  seriously  damaged.  He  reports  forage  and  subsistence 
in  abundance  in  Crittenden  County  for  a brigade  for  a month.  If  the 
enemy’s  communications  are  to  be  embarrassed,  we  must  have  heavy 
guns. 

My  pickets,  18  miles  above  Helena  on  the  river,  report  that  they  saw 
the  wreck  of  boats  on  the  17th  and  heard  heavy  firing  on  the  other  side 
for  live  hours,  supposed  to  be  by  General  Chalmers.  My  scouts  went 
within  4 miles  of  Helena  ou  the  17  th,  and  are  nowin  its  immediate 
vicinity.  They  report  that  Prentiss  had  gone  to  Vicksburg. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

COLTON  GREENE, 

Colonel , Commanding , &c. 

Maj.  Henry  Ewing, 

[Assistant  A djutant- Genera l.\ 


JUNE  18,  1863.— Affair  at  Birdsong  Terry,  Big  Black  River,  Miss. 

Report  of  Maj.  John  E.  Hammond , Assistant  Adjutant- General,  TJ.  8. 

Army. 

Headquarters  Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry, 

June  18,  1863. 

General:  I this  morniDg  started  for  Jones’  (Birdsong)  Ferry,  dis- 
tant 12  miles;  good  road,  but  hilly.  While  at  the  ferry  with  the  Major 
and  one  company,  120  rebels  came  from  the  swamp  above  Jones’  house, 
and  about  25  men,  an  advanced  guard,  exchanged  shots  with  them,  our 
main  body  being  out  of  sight  and  (he  small  party  threatened.  Major 
[Cornelius  F.]  Spearman,  senior  cavalry  officer,  ordered  a charge  from 
a favorable  position  on  the  right  flank. 

The  yell  and  rush  from  an  unexpected  quarter  alarmed  the  secesh, 
who  fled,  pursued  on  rear  and  flank.  Our  successful  pursuit  was  stopped 
by  a deep  gully,  over  which  but  half  a dozen  horses  were  able  to  pas&. 
The  two  advanced  companies  were  dismounted,  and  advanced  in  a very 
handsome  manner  into  the  timber,  expecting  to  find  the  enemy  in  the 
swamps  covering  the  ford,  which  is  now  deep,  although  good.  Find- 
ing that  it  was  a flight,  pursuit  wras  recommenced  and  continued  to  the 
Marley  Farm,  within  13  miles  of  Mechauicsburg,  where  many  scattered. 
Our  horses  being  tired,  and  we  getting  into  close  quarters,  we  withdrew 
and  returned  to  camp,  bringing  in  many  cattle  and  sheep.  I ordered 
Jones’  and  Harris’  corn  to  be  burned,  as  it  was  evidently  used  for  hos- 
tile purposes. 

I do  not  know  who  the  enemy  were.  They  moved  in  good  order,  were 
uniformed,  and  armed  with  carbines.  All  the  men  and  officers  who  came 
under  my  observation  behaved  as  well  as  men  could. 


Chat . XXXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  JONES’  PLANTATION,  MISS. 


509 


Last  Wednesday  200  rebel  cavalry,  of , passed  Big  Black  River 

at  Birdsong  Ford  ; yesterday  27.  There  is  a regular  picket  stand  at  the 
ford. 

There  are  three  other  fords  above  Big  Black  Bridge. 

To  morrow,  if  I am  well  enough  (my  horse  fell  into  a wash  in  the 
charge,  and  I was  knocked  down  and  run  over),  I will  go  over  all  the 
roads  between  here,  Markham’s,  and  Big  Black  Bridge,  hoping  to  jump 
a small  party.  As  the  horses  are  tired,  1 scarcely  expect  to  reach  camp 
to-morrow. 

This  regiment  has  100  more  men  for  duty  than  there  are  horses.  The 
100  picked  men  who  reported  to  Colonel  [Thomas]  Stephens,  Second 
Wisconsin,  have  not  returned.  General  Dennis  has  one  whole  com- 
pany for  body  guard  at  Young’s  Point.  I inclose  requisition  for  horses 
and  request  for  the  company. 

I inclose  also  a table  of  such  distances  as  I think  are  reliable.* 

I am,  general,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

J,  H.  HAMMOND, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 

Major-General  Sherman, 

Commanding  Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 


JUNE  22,  1863  —Skirmish  at  Jones’  Plantation,  near  Birdsong  Ferry,  Miss. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Lieut.  Col.  Simeon  D.  Swan,  Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry. 

No.  2. — Maj.  Alonzo  B.  Parkell,  Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry. 

No.  3. — Col.  Clark  Wright,  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry. 

No.  4. — Lieut.  Col.  Robert  C.  Wood,  jr.,  Wirt  Adams’  (Mississippi)  cavalry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Lieut . Col.  Simeon  D.  Swan , Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry. 

Camp  on  Big  Bear  Creek,  Miss., 

June  27,  1863. 

Captain  : Herewith  I transmit  the  report  of  Major  Parkell  of  a skir- 
mish which  took  place  on  the  22d  instant  between  a detachment  of  130 
men  under  that  officer  and  two  regiments  of  rebel  cavalry,  known  as 
Adams’  and  Starke’s. 

Immediately  upon  receiving  intelligence  that  our  men  had  been  en- 
gaged by  the  enemy,  I gathered  together  all  the  effective  men  of  my 
command  not  on  duty,  numbering  about  140  men,  and  started  to  the 
assistance  of  Major  Parkell.  Before  I proceeded  far,  however,  I found 
that  his  men  had  separated,  and  were  constantly  coming  into  camp, 
either  singly  or  in  small  squads. 

I pushed  forward  with  ambulances  to  the  point  at  which  the  skirmish 
had  been,  for  the  purpose  of  picking  up  our  dead  and  all  the  wounded 
who  had  not  been  taken  by  the  enemy,  as  well  as  to  retaliate,  if  oppor- 
tunity offered,  upon  him  for  the  mischief  he  had  done  my  regiment. 

When  I arrived  at  the  place  where  the  skirmish  occurred,  I learned 
that  the  rebels  had  been  gone  from  the  place  about  an  hour.  By  this 


Not  found. 


510 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


time  evening  was  well  advanced,  and  I deemed  it  useless  to  pursue 
them.  I gathered  up  G dead  bodies  and  3 wounded  men.  Onr  total 
loss  has  been  given  by  Major  Parkell. 

A rebel  surgeon,  who  was  attending  a major  who. was  wounded  in  the 
engagement,  says  that  there  were  GOO  of  the  enemy,  but  Mr.  Harris  and 
other  citizens  who  saw  them  pass  and  repass  estimate  their  number  at 
about  1,000. 

It  is  but  just  to  say  that  I think  our  men  acted  in  a manner  which 
reflects  credit  upon  themselves  and  their  regiment,  notwithstanding 
their  dispersion  and  retreat.  They  fought  obstinately  against  over- 
whelming odds,  with  no  avenue  for  organized  retreat  left  open,  and, 
when  compelled  at  last  to  separate,  they  acted  with  such  self-reliance 
and  decision  as  enabled  the  greater  number  of  them  to  escape. 

The  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  on  both  sides  is,  as  far  as  ascertained, 
about  equal,  and  the  only  particular  in  which  the  enemy  has  the  ad- 
vantage of  us  is  in  prisoners  and  the  fact  that  our  men  retreated. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  D.  SWAN, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry , Commanding  Regiment. 

Capt.  R.  M.  Sawyer, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  Alonzo  B.  Parkell , Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry. 

Camp  at  Wixon’s,  Miss., 

June  23,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report : 

On  the  morning  of  22d,  a detachment  consisting  of  130  men,  including 
officers,  were  sent  out,  under  my  command,  by  orders  from  headquarters 
Fifteenth  Army  Corps,  with  instructions  to  blockade  the  road  leading 
westward  from  Birdsong  Ferry,  on  Big  Black  River.  I ascertained  that 
the  river  was  fordable  for  some  distance,  and  that  it  would  be  impos- 
sible for  us  to  effect  a blockade  at  the  river.  I halted  the  column  on 
the  ridge  near  Jones7  plantation,  1 mile  west  of  the  river,  and  sent  30 
men  to  examine  tbe  ford  and  to  ascertain  whether  there  were  any  rebels 
in  the  vicinity.  Thirty  men  were  placed  on  picket  1 mile  north,  on  a 
road  leading  from  the  -Birdsong  Ferry  road  to  the  Benton  road  and 
Bush’s  Ferry,  while  the  remainder  commenced  blockading  the  road  near 
the  point  where  we  had  halted.  We  had  been  at  work  nearly  two  hours, 
and  bad  nearly  completed  the  blockade  at  that  point,  when  our  pickets 
on  the  north  road  were  attacked  by  a part  of  Adams’  and  Starke’s  cav- 
alry, numbering  nearly  1,000  men.  As  soon  as  the  tiring  was  heard,  my 
men  were  mounted  and  moved  forward  on  double-quick  to  the  support 
of  the  pickets,  but  had  not  proceeded  over  half  a mile  when  we  discov- 
ered our  pickets  falling  back,  with  tbe  rebels  close  upon  them.  We 
immediately  formed  in  line  of  battle,  disposing  of  our  little  force  to  tbe 
best  possible  advantage.  We  fought  the  rebels  nearly  an  hour,  they 
gradually  advancing  upon  us  in  front  and  on  our  right  flank.  We  were 
tinally  compelled  to  fall  back  and  take  a new  position  to  tbe  left  and  a 
little  in  rear  of  our  former  one.  Tbe  enemy  coming  upon  us  at  this 
time  with  overwhelming  numbers,  and  our  ammunition  being  exhausted, 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  SKIRMISH  AT  JONES7  PLANTATION,  MISS. 


511 


we  were  compelled  to  retreat.  We  were  at  this  time  7 miles  from  the 
Dearest  Federal  troops,  with  the  road  blockaded  in  our  rear,  Bear  Greek 
aud  a high  bluff  on  our  left,  and  the  enemy  in  front  and  on  our  right. 
Our  men  fell  back  gradually  a distance  of  about  half  a mile,  hard 
pushed  by  the  enemy,  who  were  firing  into  our  ranks.  Finding  that 
it  would  be  only  to  lose  all  my  men  to  longer  preserve  the  order  of 
march,  I allowed  the  men  to  separate,  some  taking  the  direction  of  our 
camp  and  some  toward  Bridgeport.  The  most  of  them  arrived  safely 
in  camp,  but  there  are  still  32  missing.  There  were,  however,  some  10 
or  12  of  these  taken  by  the  rebels,  most  of  them  wounded. 

We  lost  in  this  fight  8 men  killed  and  1G  wounded — 4 of  them 
wounded  mortally.  The  enemy  had  17  killed  and  15  wounded,  as  far  as 
ascertained  ; among  them  were  1 major  and  2 captains. 

Our  men  all  behaved  in  the  most  gallant  manner,  repulsing  the  enemy 
frequently,  and  holding  their  ground  until  compelled  by  overwhelming 
numbers  to  retreat. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  B.  PARKELL, 

Major  Fourth  Ioica  Cavalry. 

Lieut.  Col.  S.  D.  Swan,  Commanding  Fourth  Ioica  Cavalry. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Col.  Clark  Wright , Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry. 

Headquarters  Sixth  Cavalry  Missouri  Volunteers, 

Brooks ’ Plantation , June  23,  1863 — 7.30  a.  m. 

General  : All  quiet.  The  rebels  that  attacked  the  Fourth  Iowa  fell 
back  on  the  east  side  of  the  river.  The  loss  of  the  Fourth  Iowa  was  7 
killed,  13  wounded,  and  15  missing,  and  one  howitzer ; they  took  the 
breech-pin  out,  however.  The  loss  of  the  rebels  was  7 killed  (found  on 
the  ground)  and  some  12  wounded  (found).  The  party  sent  out  found 
General  Sherman  a short  distance  this  side  of  headquarters.  The  gen- 
eral sent  me  word  that  by  this  evening  a portion  of  his  command  would 
be  at  the  junction  of  the  roads  near  Birdsong  Ferry,  and  the  remainder 
on  Bear  Creek.  It  is  full  7 miles  from  here  to  camp  of  the  Fourth  Iowa. 
Immediately  on  the  river  above  is  unprotected,  except  our  forces  from 
here  to  Birdsong.  I have  all  the  roads  picketed  in  every  direction, 
and  with  the  remainder  of  command  am  patrolling.  The"  number  of 
rebels  in  yesterday’s  attack  was  600. 

I am,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CLARK  WRIGHT, 

Colonel  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry. 

Brigadier-General  Osterhaus,  Commanding  Ninth  Division. 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Robert  C.  Wood , jr.,  Wirt  Adams’  (Mississippi) 

Cavalry. 

Headquarters  Adams’  Cavalry, 

Near  Meclianicsburg , Miss.,  June  23,  1863. 
Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  pursuant  to  instructions,  at  8.30 
p.  m,  on  the  21st  instant,  with  a command  of  two  regiments  of  cavalry 


512 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXYI. 


(Adams’,  and  Starke’s  Twenty-eighth  Mississippi),  I moved  forward  in 
the  direction  of  the  enemy,  to  attack  any  cavalry  force  that  might  be 
found  in  the  vicinity  of  Birdsong  Ferry.  Moving  down  the  Bear 
Creek  road  10  miles,  i directed  the  march  toward  Big  Black  River,  and 
reached  Holloman’s  at  daylight.  Delaying  an  hour  to  feed  horses,  I 
moved  down  the  river  until  I struck  the  Bush  Ferry  road.  Following 
this  a short  distance,  I moved  across  the  country  and  came  into  the 
Bear  Creek  road,  near  its  junction  with  the  Birdsong  Ferry  road. 
Moving  forward,  my  advance  soon  came  in  contact  with  that  of  the  en- 
emy, which,  being  forced  back,  retired  to  the  junction  of  the  Bridge- 
port and  Birdsong  Ferry  roads.  Here  I found  the  enemy  (a  regiment 
of  cavalry  and  one  piece  of  artillery)  in  position.  His  gun  was  posted 
at  the  head  of  a narrow  lane,  with  a high  and  strong  fence  on  each 
side.  His  cavalry  (a  portion  being  dismounted)  was  posted  on  both 
sides  of  the  road,  and  partially  protected  by  the  crest  of  a hill.  The 
nature  of  the  country  being  such  as  to  prevent  any  movement  by  cav- 
alry on  either  flank,  X was  compelled  to  attack  immediately  in  front. 
A portion  of  my  command  being  dismounted  and  moved  forward  on 
either  flank,  to  offset  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s  dismounted  men,  a charge 
was  made  up  the  lane  for  the  gun,  gallantly  led  by  Captain  [S.  B.] 
Cleveland,  commanding  Adams’  cavalry,  and  Captain  [M.  B.]  Bowie, 
of  same  regiment,  whose  squadron  was  in  advance.  Not  being  able  to 
develop  any  front,  and  the  fire  being  very  severe,  it  required  the  great- 
est efforts  on  the  part  of  these  officers  to  gain  ground.  Officers  and 
men  repeatedly  charged  up  to  within  easy  pistol  range  of  the  gun,  but 
were  forced  back  by  canister-shot  and  small- arms,  not,  however,  once 
leaving  the  lane. 

During  this  struggle  the  dismounted  men  on  the  flanks  were  moved 
forward  and  became  warmly  engaged.  The  enemy  having  the  advan- 
tage of  position  and  a piece  of  artillery,  and  being  able  to  bring  more 
men  into  action  than  I,  owing  to  the  nature  of  the  ground,  it  was  with 
the  greatest  difficulty  we  could  make  any  headway.  Taking  advantage 
of  an  attempt  of  the  enemy  to  change  the  position  of  his  gun,  a general 
charge  was  made,  and,  after  a short  and  stubborn  resistance,  the  enemy 
gave  way.  Being  closely  pressed,  his  gun  was  captured  and  the  cav- 
alry utterly  routed,  fleeing  and  scattering  in  every  direction.  For  4 or 
5 miles  they  were  pursued,  their  dead  dotting  the  road. 

In  this  chase  my  men  were  enabled  to  use  their  repeaters  to  great 
advantage,  some  of  them  killing  or  capturing  as  many  as  5 of  the  enemy 
each. 

Our  loss  is  5 killed,  16  wounded,  and  1 missing.  That  of  the  enemy 
is  over  100  killed  and  wounded,  and  33  prisoners.  Among  our  wounded, 
I regret  to  say,  is  Capt.  W.  S.  Yerger,  Adams’  cavalry,  who  was  se- 
verely shot  while  gallantly  leading  his  company  in  the  attack.  My  loss 
in  horses  is  40. 

As  trophies  we  have  one  piece  of  artillery,  many  small-arms  and  ac- 
couterments, and  a number  of  horses.  The  small-arms  are  of  the  most 
approved  pattern. 

I take  pleasure  in  recording  the  great  gallantry  aud  elan  displayed 
by  Major  [J.  T.]  McBee,  commanding  Twenty-eighth  Mississippi,  Capt. 
S.  B.  Cleveland,  commanding  Adams’  cavalry,  aud  all  the  officers  and 
men  of  their  respective  commands.  Constantly  cheering  and  eager  to 
go  forward,  the  commanding  officer  had  but  to  direct,  with  the  cer- 
tainty of  being  promptly  obeyed. 

Many  instances  of  persoual  gallantry  have  been  reported  to  me  by 
company  commanders,  and  many  came  under  my  own  observation.  I 


'Ciiap.  XXXVI.  1 UNION  RAID  ON  BROOK1IAVEN,  MISS.,  ETC.  513 

will  forward  to  brigade  headquarters  the  names  of  those  whose  gallantry 
was  noticed  on  the  field. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ROBT.  0.  WOOD,  Jr,, 
Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding. 

Capt.  William  F.  Bullock, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JUNE  23-26,  1863. — Union  raid  on  Brookhaven,  and  skirmish  at  Rocky 
Creek,  near  Ellisville,  Miss. 

REPORTS, 

No.  1. — Lieut.  Col.  W.  S.  Lovell,  [Twenty-third  Louisiana  Infantry  ?]. 

No.  2. — Maj.  It.  S.  Carter,  Seventh  Mississippi  Infantry. 

No.  3. — Lieut.  W.  M.  Wilson,  Forty-third  Tennessee  Infantry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  W.  S.  Lovell , [Twenty -third  Louisiana  Infantry  ?]. 

Brookhaven,  June  24,  1863. 

Colonel  : As  I telegraphed  yesterday,  the  enemy,  about  40  strong, 
made  a dash  into  this  place  about  1 p.  m.  We  had  but  twenty  minutes’ 
notice  that  they  were  coming.  I sent  one  of  my  officers,  Captain  [John] 
Tonkin,  out  to  ascertain  the  locality  of  a number  of  deserters  that  had 
been  reported  to  me.  When  8 miles  from  this  place  he  was  captured  by 
the  enemy.  They  took  his  horse,  which  belonged  to  me,  and  gave  him 
one  broken  down  in  his  place.  Captain  Tonkin  made  his  escape  when 
the  enemy  brought  him  into  town.  He  reports  the  enemy  to  be  Fifth 
Illinois  Cavalry,  from  Grant’s  army.  The  Yankee  captain  told  Captain 
Tonkiu  the  balance  of  his  regiment  would  pass  through  Gallatin.  The 
enemy  burned  12  cars  : did  little  other  damage.  They  took  the  road  to 
Monticello,  and  are  evidently  making  for  that  point  As  soon  as  pos- 
sible I collected  a squad  of  22  officers  and  men,  and  sent  in  pursuit  of 
the  enemy.  I could  not  get  another  horse  or  mule.  I learn  that  some 
of  the  citizens  run  them  off.  I have  not  yet  beard  from  the  squad.  I 
also  telegraphed  to  Summit  for  arms  and  mounted  men.  Could  get 
none  in  time. 

I am,  colonel,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  S.  LOVELL, 
Lieutenant - Coloned. 

Col.  B.  S.  Ewell, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Rdqrs.  Dept,  of  the  West,  Jackson,  Miss. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Maj.  R.  S.  Carter , Seventh  Mississippi  Tnfantry. 

Headquarters  Post, 
Brookhaven,  Miss.,  June  26,  1863. 

I would  beg  leave  to  report  to  you  the  facts  of  the  late  raid  on  our 
town. 

At  about  1 o’clock  on  the  25th  instant,  a party  of  about  40  Federals 
]nade  a sudden  dash  upon  us  at  this  point.  We  had  no  warning  of 
33  R IG-VOU  NXiy,  PT  II 


514 


[Ciiap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


their  approach  until  they  were  on  us,  perhaps  some  fifteen  minutes  be- 
lore  they  were  in  our  town.  I was  at  dinner,  and  knew  nothing  of  their 
approach.  They  came  in,  of  course,  unmolested,  and  burned  12  cars, 
without  interrupting  any  Government  property  or  stores.  They  re- 
mained but  a few  minutes  and  then  moved  on  eastward.  1 immediatelv 
telegraphed  Major  [M.  11.]  Clark,  at  Enterprise,  that  they  were  going  in 
that  direction.  I did  not  telegraph  you,  as  Lieutenant-Colonel’ [W.  S.l 
Lovell  said  he  had  informed  you  of  the  fact.  The  citizens  were  gath- 
ered, and  a party  of  20  men  went  in  pursuit  of  them.  They  did  not  get 
off  uiitil  the  enemy  had  been  gone  about  four  hours,  reaching  Monti- 
eello,  23  miles  from  here,  after  the  enemy  had  crossed  Pearl  River  and 
destroyed  the  fiat. 

The  last  news  I had  from  them  they  were  still  going  east.  I had  4 
men  and  5 guns  without  ammunition.  I had  sent  for  ammunition,  but 
it  had  not  arrived.  With  20  well-armed  men  the  whole  party  could 
have  been  captured,  but  I did  not  have  them.  We  could  not  ascertain 
their  number  until  they  were  here  and  gone.  I have  some  few  men 
here  now,  and  have  sent  up  for  arms  and  ammunition.  By  getting  the 
citizens  to  join  us,  we  can  get  a nice  company.  I shall  not  trust  to 
the  militia  and  citizens  to  inform  me  of  the  approach  of  the  enemy.  I 
have  sent  out  a few  scouts,  and  would  have  sent  more*  but  failed  to  get 
hoises  to  mount  them,  as  all  the  horses  have  been  impressed  around 
here.  I shall  endeavor  to  avoid  being  surprised  again.  I have  been 
without  men  and  horses  until  now,  and  they  are  unarmed. 

Respectfully  submitted. 


Col.  B.  S.  Ewell,  Jackson,  Miss. 


R.  S.  CARTER, 
Major , Commanding  Post. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Lieut.  W.  M.  Wilson , Forty -third  Tennessee  Infantry. 

Jackson,  June  30,  1863. 

Colonel  : Last  Wednesday,  June  24,  the  enemy  made  a raid  upon 
_L»rookhaven,  burned  several  cars,  and  proceeded  on  toward  Monticello. 
As  soon  as  possible  after  their  passing  Brookhaveu,  a squad  of  22  men 
was  raised  by  Colonel  [W.  S.]  Lovell,  who  placed  me  in  command  of 
them,  with  orders  tp  make  all  haste,  and,  if  possible,  overtake  them 
before  they  did  any  more  damage  to  our  railroads.  My  orders  from  the 
colonel  were  to  fight  them  in  the  most  advantageous  manner.  At  the 
time  I left  Brookhaveu  the  enemy  had  some  four  hours  the  start  of  me. 
This  advantage  over  me  must  not  be  underestimated,  when  we  consider 
that  they  were  taking  all  the  fresh  horses  on  the  road,  pressing  along 
rapidly,  while  my  men  and  boys  were  badly  mounted  at  the  outset. 
Many  horses  gave  out  during  our  first  night’s  pursuit.  When  I ar- 
rived at  Monticello  the  enemy  had  just  three  hours  the  start ; but, 
having  turned  the  ferry-boat  loose,  I was  compelled  to  go  down  the  river 
6 miles  to  cross.  By  this  [time]  they  had  a sufficient  start  of  me  to  rest 
a portion  of  the  night,  while  my  men  and  horses  were  urged  along  to 
the  very  utmost.  At  this  point  I was  also  detained  to  re-enforce  my 
command,  as  many  of  those  who  started  with  me  returned  from  here. 
AVe  then  pursued  them  with  all  possible  speed  to  Williamsburg,  at 
which  place  we  were  necessarily  compelled  to  delay  again  for  the  pur- 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  UNION  RAID  ON  BROOKHAVEN,  MISS.,  ETC. 


515 


pose  of  recruiting  men  and  Lorses.  After  this,  again  pushed  on  as  rapidly 
as  possible  for  Ellisville.  A short  distance  from  Leaf  River  the  enemy 
destroyed  a bridge  over  a creek,  compelling  me  to  take  a different  road 
to  the  river,  crossing  the  ferry  below  them,  and  intersecting  the  road 
they  were  traveling  some  0 miles  from  the  river.  On  arriving  at  this 
point,  some  2 miles  from  Ellisville,  I discovered  they  had  not  yet  passed 
on.  1 immediately  destroyed  a bridge  on  Rocky  Creek,  dismounted  my 
men,  and  took  a position  to  receive  them.  In  an  hour  after  I arrived  at 
this  plaice  the  enemy  came  in  sight.  I allowed  them  to  come  within  a 
few  paces  before  tiring  upon  them,  the  first  and  only  tire  given  them. 
Four  fell  dead  and  5 wounded,  four  seriously.  The  remainder  scattered 
before  we  could  reload.  The  captain,  being  unhorsed,  fell  into  our  hands. 

In  about  an  hour  a flag  of  truce  was  sent  to  know  the  number  of  their 
dead  and  wounded,  which  I advised  them  of.  Another  flag  being 
granted,  after  some  preliminaries  the  entire  command  surrendered  un- 
conditionally. The  horses,  arms,  and  equipments,  number  unknown. 
As  my  command  was  composed  almost  entirely  of  citizens,  strangers  to 
me,  it  was  impossible  to  prevent  them  (and,  in  fact,  those  who  came  in 
afterward)  appropriating  to  their  use  both  horses  and  equipments.  It 
was  as  much  as  I could  possibly  do  to  keep  sufficient  order  to  guard 
my  prisoners.  The  horses,  arms,  and  equipments  are  chiefly  in  the 
hands  of  citizens  of  Lawrence,  Covington,  and  Jones  Counties.  Might 
possibly  be  collected,  but  it  would  require  a force  to  do  it.  As  much 
as  possible  I returned  the  horses  taken  from  the  citizens  by  the  enemy. 

The  entire  command  surrendered  to  me  was  37.  Four  were  so  badiy 
wounded  as  to  compel  me  to  leave  them  in  Jones  County.  Before  doing 
so,  I procured  medical  and  other  attention  for  them.  Two  of  these 
(Michael  O’Neil,  Company  C,  and  John  S.  Webster,  Company  A,  Fifth 
Illinois  Cavalry)  I paroled;  the  other  two,  being  taken  some  distance 

from  the  road,  I could  not  make  time  to  see  them.  The  balance  of  33 

31  non-commissioned  officers  and  privates  and  1 captain  and  1 first 
lieutenant — I turned  over  to  the  commandant  of  the  post  at  this  place 
yesterday. 

I pursued  them  86  miles  with  a force  of  35  men  and  boys,  composed 
of  2 soldiers  of  Company  F,  First  Mississippi  Light  Artillery,  a few  of 
Captain  fV.  L.]  Terrell’s  cavalry,  the  balance  old  men  and"  bovs,  and 
attacked  them  in  thirty-six  hours  from  the  time  I left  Brookhaven. 
One  of  my  men  was  seriously  wounded  by  a shot  from  one  of  my  guns. 
I left  him  at  Ellisville. 

Inclosed  please  find  orders  from  General  [C.  C.]  Washburn  to  Captain 
Mann,  showing  the  programme  laid  down  for  him  to  carry  out.* 

I am,  sir,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  M.  WILSON, 

L it  Lieut.  Company  B,  43 d Regt.  Tenn.  Vols .,  Comdg.  Detachment. 

Col.  B.  S.  Ewell, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Jackson , Miss. 

ADDENDA. 

Special  Orders,  » Headquarters  Cavalry  Forces, 

3.  j Snyder’s  Bluff,  June  21,  1863. 

******* 
a III.  The  commanding  officer  of  the  Fifth  Illinois  Cavalry  will  detail 
Captain  [Calvin  A.]  Mann  and  40  picked  men  to  report  at  General 

* Not  found,  but  sec  Addenda,  below, 


516 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Washburn’s  headquarters  at  5.30  a.  in.  to-morrow,  fully  armed  and  well 
mounted,  with  two  days’  rations  hard  bread  and  teu  days’  rations  of 
salt,  coffee,  and  sugar.  • 

By  order  of  Col.  Cyrus  Bussey,  commanding : 

H.  D.  B.  CUTLER, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JUNE  25- July  1, 1863.— Expedition  from  Snyder’s  Bluff  to  Greenville,  Miss. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Samuel  J.  Nasmith , Twenty  fifth  Wisconsin  In- 
fantry, commanding  expedition. 

Headquarters  25th  Wisconsin  Volunteer  Infantry, 

Snyder’s  Bluff , Miss.,  July  1,  1863. 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  orders  dated  Headquarters  Department  ot 
Tennessee,  June  25,  1863,  addressed  to  “commanding  officer  of  expedi- 
tion against  Greenville,”  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  following: 

I started  from  Snyder’s  Bluff*,  in  the  afternoon  of  June  25,  1863,  with 
the  following  troops,  to  wit:  Twenty- fifth  Wisconsin  Infantry,  600 
strong,  four  pieces  Fourth  Ohio  Battery,  and  three  companies  Fifth 
Illinois  Cavalry,  200  strong,  under  Major  Farnan,  and  proceeded  to 
Young’s  Point.  Here  I was  joined  by  three  gunboats  and  the  John 
Raines,  of  the  marine  fleet,  having  on  board  50  infantry  and  100  cavalry. 
The  boats  were  detained  till  noon  the  26th  to  coal,  when  I proceeded 
up  the  river.  Arriving  at  the  foot  of  Island  No.  82,  the  cavalry  disem- 
barked and  proceeded  by  land  to  Greenville.  Here  I disembarked,  and 
proceeded  with  the  cavalry  to  the  foot  of  Island  No.  84,  distant  21  miles 
by  land.  Searching  the  country  to  find  signs  of  the  enemy,  I arrived 
at  Carter’s  plantation  June  27,  evening.  The  transports,  with  the,  in- 
fantry and  artillery,  came  around  by  water.  Not  being  able  to  find  or 
hear  of  any  enemy  on  this  side  the" river,  I am  satisfied,  from  informa- 
tion received  from  reliable  sources,  that  there  has  been  no  enemy  near 
Greenville,  on  the  Mississippi  shore,  for  nearly  four  weeks  ; previously 
to  that  time  there  was  a small  force  encamped  on  Deer  Creek,  distant 
10  miles  from  Greenville.  We  found  at  the  foot  of  Island  No.  83  embra 
sures  cut  in  the  levee  for  three  guns,  and  across  the  point — 3 miles  dis- 
tant— for  two  guns ; that  a road  had  been  cut  across  the  point,  connect 
ing  the  two  places;  that  they  were  in  the  habit  of  running  the  guns 
across  the  point  while  the  boats  were  going  round,  and  firing  on  the 
same  boat  at  the  two  points. 

1 embarked  with  the  cavalry  June  28,  and  proceeded  across  the  river 
to  Spanish  Moss  Bend,  on  the  Arkansas  shore.  Arriving  there,  all  the 
troops  were  ordered  to  disembark,  and  did  so,  with  the  exception  of 
those  on  board  steamer  John  Raines.  Major  Hubbard,  commanding 
the  troops  on  the  boat,  did  not  obey  the  order.  I proceeded  at  1 p.  in., 
28th,  for  Gaines’  Lauding,  with  the  infantry,  artillery,  and  200  cavalry. 
I had  heard  firing  the  night  before  at  Gaines’  Landing,  and  supposed 
there  was  a force  on  the  bend  between  there  and  where  we  had  landed. 
The  distance  between  the  point  where  we  had  landed  and  Gaines’  Land- 
ing is  10  miles.  My  object  was  to  capture  the  force  between  us  and 
Gaines’  Landing,  on  the  bend.  We  had  proceeded  but  3 miles  when 
we  encountered  their  pickets.  Wefollowed  them,  skirmishing,  to  Gaines’ 
Landing,  where  they  changed  their  course,  proceeding  back  from  the 
river.  It  then  being  dark,  and  learning  from  various  sources  that  their 
force  was  largely  superior  to  mine,  having  no  guide  and  being  unable 


Chap.  XXXvL]  EXPEDITION  TO  GREENVILLE,  MISS.  517 

to  obtain  one,  and  there  being  several  roads,  cut  through  the  woods  from 
the  river,  in  our  rear,  my  force  not  being  large  enough  to  guard  the 
roads  and  attack  the  enemy  in  front,  I thought  it  prudent  to  retire  to 
our  transports. 

From  what  I deem  reliable  information,  the  enemy  had  at  Cypress 
Bend  and  Gaines’  Landing,  and  points  in  the  vicinity,  from  4,000  to 
5,000  troops,  with  eight  pieces  of  artillery,  to  wit,  two  pieces  9 pounder 
rifled  Parrott  guns,  two  10-pounder  rifled  brass,  two  12-pounder  brass 
howitzers,  one  6-pounder  rifled  brass,  and  one  6-pounder  smooth-bore. 
They  have  no  caissons  with  their  cannon.  They  have  two  full  reg- 
iments of  infantry,  and  the  balance  of  the  force  cavalry.  Their  main 
camp  is  back  of  Lake  Chicot.  Said  lake,  as  nearly  as  I could  ascertain, 
is  10  miles  back  and  up  the  river  from  Gaines’  Landing,  and  so  situated 
that  the  forces  at  Cypress  Bend  or  other  point  on  the  river  can  readily 
be  re-enforced  from  this  point.  The  distance  from  Gaines’  Landing  to 
Cypress  Bend,  by  land,  is  variously  estimated  at  from  15  to  30  miles ; by 
water,  it  is  50  miles.  I also  learned  from  good  authority  that  all  the 
forces  in  Arkansas,  under  Generals  Price,  Marmaduke,  and  other  com- 
manders, are  ordered  to  the  vicinity  of  Milliken’s  Bend,  and  that  on 
June  27  seven  regiments  passed  through  Monticello,  Ark.,  about  40 
miles  from  Gaines’  Landing.  The  forces  on  the  river  in  vicinity  of  Cy- 
press Bend  are  under  command  of  General  Gorman  [?]  or  Graham  [?], 
and  Colonels  Clark  and  [George  W.]  Carter,  of  Cape  Girardeau  notoriety. 

I caused  to  be  destroyed  on  Spanish  Moss  Bend  from  12,000  to  20,000 
bushels  of  corn,  one  mill  and  cotton-gin,  used  by  the  rebels  for  grinding 
corn. 

On  the  morning  of  the  30th,  I proceeded  down  the  river.  Hearing  in 
the  afternoon  that  they  were  lighting  at  Lake  Providence,  and  needed 
help,  I reported  myself  to  the  general  commanding,  who  wished  me  to 
lie  over  night,  fearing  another  attack  in  the  morning.  In  the  morning 
the  cavalry  marched  through  to  Goodrich’s  Landing,  seeing  no  enemy, 
but  noticing  the  effects  of  what  had  been  done  the  day  before,  the  en- 
emy having  gone. 

Major  Parnan,  commanding  the  cavalry,  reports  that  the  scenes 
witnessed  by  him  in  marching  from  Lake  Providence  to  Goodrich’s 
Landing  were  of  a character  never  before  witnessed  in  a civilized  coun- 
try, and  the  rebel  atrocities  committed  the  day  before  were  such  as  the 
pen  fails  to  record  in  proper  language.  They  spared  neither  age,  sex, 
nor  condition.  In  some  instances  the  negroes  were  shut  up  in  their 
quarters,  and  literally  roasted  alive.  The  charred  remains  found  in 
numerous  instances  testified  to  a degree  of  fiendish  atrocity  such  as  has 
no  parallel  either  in  civilized  or  savage  warfare.  Young  children,  only 
five  or  six  years  of  age,  were  found  skulking  in  the  canebreak  pierced 
with  wounds,  while  helpless  women  were  found  shot  down  in  the  most 
inhuman  manner.  The  whole  country  was  destroyed,  and  every  sign 
of  civilization  was  given  to  the  flames. 

The  cavalry  embarked  at  Goodrich’s  Landing,  and  the  expedition, 
except  the  marine  boat,  came  to  Chickasaw  Landing.  The  battery  was 
debarked  there  and  was  ordered  to  join  its  command.  The  two  boats, 
with  cavalry  and  infantry,  came  to  Snyder’s  Bluff,  and  to  camp.  The 
boats  were  ordered  to  report  to  master  of  transportation,  at  the  land- 
ing. 

Before  closing  this  report,  it  is  proper  that  I should  say  that  the  por- 
tion of  the  Marine  Brigade  which  accompanied  me  proved  to  be  entirely 
worthless.  At  no  time  were  my  orders  obeyed  willingly,  and  the  officer 
in  command  was  disposed  to  find  fault  and  cavil  when  any  real  service 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

was  required  of  them.  They  failed  me  altogether  when  most  wanted, 
and,  instead  of  being  any  assistance  to  me,  they  were,  to  use  no  harsher 
language,  a positive  injury  to  the  expedition. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  most  obedient  servant, 
r.  _ _ m , . SAMUEL  J.  NASMITH, 

Lieut.  Col.  Twenty -fifth  Wisconsin  Infantry , Comdg.  Expedition. 
Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JULY  3,  1863. — Scouts  from  Memphis,  Tenn. 

Report  of  Col.  David  Moore , commanding  Brigade. 

Hdqks.  Fourth  Brio.,  Fifth  Div.,  Sixteenth  A.  0., 

Memphis , Tenn.,  July  4,  1863. 

Captain  : I sent  heavy  patrols  out  last  night,  as  ordered,  on  Her- 
nando  and  Horn  Lake  roads.  The  patrol  on  Horn  Lake  road  went  out 
10  miles  and  returned,  reporting  no  enemy.  The  one  on  Hernando  road 
was  tired  upon  2 miles  south  of  Nonconnah  Creek.  The  fire  was  re- 
turned, killing  one  of  the  enemy’s  horses.  The  enemy  then  fled,  pur- 
sued by  the  patrol  to  within  2 miles  of  Horn  Lake,  when,  having  been 
ordered  to  go  but  10  miles,  they  returned,  bringing  no  prisoners.  The 
rebels  were  about  15  strong. 

1 have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
ser  van  t, 

JDAYID  MOORE, 

Colonel , Commanding  Fourth  Brigade. 

Capt.  F.  W.  Fox,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JULY  5-25,  1863. — The  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign. 

SUMMARY  OE  THE  PRINCIPAL  EVENTS. 

July  5,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Birdsong  Ferry. 

6,  1863. — Skirmishes  at  Jones’  and  Messinger’s  Ferries. 

7,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Queen’s  Hill. 

Skirmish  near  Baker’s  Creek. 

8,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Bolton  Depot. 

Skirmish  near  Clinton. 

9,  1863.— Skirmishes  near  Clinton  and  Jackson. 

10-17,  1863.— Investment  and  capture  of  Jackson. 

12,  1863. — Skirmish  near  Canton. 

16,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Clinton. 

Skirmish  at  Grant’s  Ferry,  Pearl  River. 

Skirmish  at  Bolton  Depot. 

17,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Bear  Creek,  near  Canton, 

18,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Brookhaven. 

19,  1863. — Action  at  Brandon. 

RETORTS.* 

^°*  !•  Maj.  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Union  forces,  in- 
cluding operations  since  June  22. 

No.  2.— Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces. 

* See  also  general  reports  of  Grant  and  Johnston,  Thomas’ report  of  engagement 
at  Jackson,  and  Sullivan’s  report  of  the  siege  of  Vicksburg.  Also  Appendix, *p.  699. 


Chap.  XXXVt.] 


TTTE  JACKSON  C A Mr  A TON. 


519 


No.  3. — Col.  Cyrus  Bussey,  Third  Iowa  Cavalry,  commanding  cavalry  forces. 

No.  4. — Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  Parke,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Ninth  Army  Corps. 

No.  5. — Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Welsh,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Division. 

No.  6. — Capt.  John  Edwards,  jr.,  Third  U.  S.  Artillery. 

No.  7. — Col.  Henry  Bowman,  Thirty-sixth  Massachusetts  Infantry,  commanding  First 
Brigade. 

No.  8. — Col.  Daniel  Leasure,  One  hundredth  Pennsylvania  Infantry,  commanding 
Third  Brigade. 

No.  9. — Col.  William  Humphrey,  Second  Michigan  Infantry. 

No.  10. — Brig.  Gen.  Robert  B.  Potter,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Division. 

No.  11. — Col.  Simon  G.  Griffin,  Sixth  New  Hampshire  Infantry,  commanding  First 
Brigade. 

No.  12. — Col.  Zenas  R.  Bliss,  Seventh  Rhode  Island  Infantry,  including  operations 
since  June  4. 

No.  13. — Brig.  Gen.  Edward  Ferrero,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Second  Brigade. 

No.  14. , Forty-sixth  New  York  Infantry,  Third  Brigade. 

No.  15. — Maj.  Gen.  Edward  O.  C.  Ord,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Thirteenth  Army 
Corps. 

No.  16. — Maj.  Hugh  Fullerton,  Second  Illinois  Cavalry,  commanding  cavalry. 

No.  17. — Brig.  Gen.  Peter  J.  Osterhaus,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Ninth  Division. 

No.  18. — Capt.  Charles  H.  Lanphere,  Seventh  Michigan  Battery. 

No.  19. — Lieut.  Oscar  F.  Nutting,  First  Wisconsin  Battery. 

No.  20. — Col.  James  Keigwin,  Forty-ninth  Indiana  Infantry,  commanding  First,  Bri- 
gade. 

No.  21. — Col.  John  G.  Fonda,  One  hundred  and  eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry. 

No.  22. — Col.  Daniel  W.  Lindsey,  Twenty-second  Kentucky  Infantry,  commanding 
Second  Brigade. 

No.  23. — Brig.  Gen.  Andrew  J.  Smith,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Tenth  Division. 

No.  24. — Col.  Richard  Owen,  Sixtieth  Indiana  Infantry,  commanding  First  Brigade. 

No.  25. — Col.  William  J.  Landram,  Nineteenth  Kentucky  Infantry,  commanding 
Second  Brigade. 

No.  26. — Brig.  Gen.  Alvin  P.  Hovey,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Twelfth  Division. 

No.  27. — Col.  William  T.Spicely,  Twenty-fourth  Indiana  Infantry,  commanding  First, 
Brigade. 

No.  28. — Col.  James  R.  Slack,  Forty- seventh  Indiana  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade. 

No.  29. — Col.  Isaac  C.  Pugh,  Forty-first  Illinois  Infantry,  commanding  Third  Brigade. 

No.  30. — Maj.  George  W.  Crosley,  Third  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  31. — Col.  Cyrus  Hall,  Fourteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  commanding  Fourth  Brigade. 

No.  32. — Col.  George  E.  Bryaut,  Twelfth  Wisconsin  Infantry,  commanding  Fifth 
Brigade. 

No.  33. — Brig.  Gen.  William  P.  Benton,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Fourteenth  Divis- 
ion. 

No.  34. — Lieut.  Philip  Nonweiler,  First  Indiana  Battery. 

No.  35. — Col.  David  Shunk,  Eighth  Indiana  Infantry,  commanding  First  Brigade. 

No.  36. — Capt.  Ira  Moore,  Thirty-third  Illinois  Infantry. 

No.  37. — Lieut.  Col.  Lemuel  Parke,  Ninety-ninth  Illiuois  Infantry. 

No.  38. — Capt.  Jonathan  H.  Williams,  Eighteenth  Indiana  Infantry. 

No.  39. — Col.  William  M.  Stone,  Twenty-second  Iowa  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade. 

No.  40. — Maj.  Leonard  B.  Houston,  Twenty-third  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  41. — Lieut.  Col.  Luther  H.  Whittlesey,  Eleventh  Wisconsin  Infantry. 

No.  42. — Col.  Charles  R.  Woods,  Seventy-sixth  Ohio  Infantry,  commanding  Second 
Brigade,  First  Division,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 

No.  43. — Brig.  Gen.  James  M.  Tuttle,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Division. 


tciiAr  xxxrt 


520 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


No.  44.— Col.  William  L.  McMillcn,  Ninety-fifth  Ohio  Infantry,  commanding  First 
Brigade. 

No.  45. — Capt.  Samuel  A.  J.  Snyder,  Seventy-second  Ohio  Infantry. 

No.  46.— Col.  Joseph  J.  Woods,  Twelfth  Iowa  Infantry,  commanding  Third  Brigade. 

No.  47.  Col.  James  L.  Geddes,  Eighth  Iowa  infantry. 

No.  48.— Lieut.  Col.  Samuel  E.  Edgington,  Twelfth  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  49.— Col.  Sylvester  G.  Hill,  Thirty-fifth  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  50.  Brig.  Gen.  William  Sooy  Smith,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First  Division, 
Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

No.  51.  Col.  John  M.  Loomis,  Twenty-sixth  Illinois  Infantry,  commanding  First 
Brigade. 

No.  52. — Lieut.  Col.  Eobert  A.  Gillmore,  Twenty-sixth  Illinois  Infantry. 

No.  53.— Col.  Timothy  O’Meara,  Ninetieth  Illinois  Infantry. 

No.  54.— Col.  Eeuben  Williams,  Twelfth  Indiana  Infantry. 

No.  55.  Lieut.  Col.  Albert  Heath,  One  hundredth  Indiana  Infantry. 

No.  56.  Col.  Stephen  G.  Hicks,  Fortieth  Illinois  Infantry,  commanding  Second  Bri- 
gade. ® 

No.  5/.  , Fortieth  Illinois  Infantry. 

No.  58.— Col.  Willard  A.  Dickerman,  One  hundred  and  third  Illinois  Infantry. 

No.  59.— Col.  Charles  C.  Walcutt,  Forty-sixth  Ohio  Infantry. 

No.  60.— Col.  Joseph  E.  Cockerill,  Seventieth  Ohio  Infantry,  commanding  Third  Bri 
gade. 

No.  61.— Col.  Eobert  F.  Catterson,  Ninety-seventh  Indiana  Infantry. 

No.  62.— Col.  Alexander  Fowler,  Ninety-ninth  Indiana  Infantry. 

No.  63.— Col.  Wells  S.  Jones,  Fifty- third.  Ohio  Infantry. 

No.  64.— Col.  William  W.  Sanford,  Forty-eighth  Illinois  Infantry,  commanding  Fourth 
Brigade. 

No.  65.— Lieut.  Col.  Lucien  Greathouse,  Forty-eighth  Illinois  Infantry. 

No.  66.  Col.  John  M.  Corse,  Sixth  Iowa  Infantry. 

No.  67.— Col.  Greenbury  F . Wiles,  Seventy-eighth  Ohio  Infantry,  Second  Brigade, 
Third  Division,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 

No.  68.  Brig.  Gen.  Charles  L.  Matthies,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Third  Brigade, 
Seventh  Division. 

No.  69.  Eeturn  of  Casualties  in  Breckinridge’s  (Confederate)  division  before  Jack- 
son. 

No.  70.— Capt.  C.  H.  Slocomb,  Washington  (Louisiana)  Artillery,  Breckinridge’s  divis- 
ion. 


No.  71.  Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  W.  Adams,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  brigade. 

No.  72.  Capt.  John  C.  Kimbell,  Thirty-second  Alabama  Infantry. 

No.  73.— Col.  W.  P.  Winans,  Nineteenth  Louisiana  Infantry. 

No.  74.— Lieut.  Charles  D.  Myers,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  French’s  divis- 
ion. 


No.  75.— Col.  H.  G.  Bunn,  Fourth  Arkansas  Infantry,  McNair’s  brigade. 

No.  76.— Brig.  Gen.  William  H.  Jackson,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding°Cavalry  Division. 
No.  77.  Brig.  Gen.  George  B.  Cosby,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  Cavalry  Brigade. 

No.  78.  Maj.  E.  S.  Carter,  Seventh  Mississippi  Infantry. 


^O.  1. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman,  TJ.  S.  Army , commanding 
Union  forces,  including  operations  since  June  22. 

Big  Black,  July  6,  1863. 

Troops  all  in  position,  but  somewhat  disordered  by  Vicksburg,  Fourth 
of  July , and  the  terrible  heat  aud  dust.  IVTy  new  bridges  interrupted 


(JrtAP.  XXXVl.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


521 


somewhat  by  a rise  of  4 feet  in  Big  Black  River,  making  ford  impass- 
able, but  I expect  to  cross  this  afternoon  and  move  out  almost  to  Ed- 
wards Station,  to  morrow  noon  at  Bolton,  and  next  day  Clinton,  by 
which  time  I will  knowr  the  purposes  ot’  the  enemy,  and  act  accordingly. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major- General. 

General  Grant. 


Headquarters  Expedition, 

Bolton , July  7,  1863. 

Sir:  The  Thirteenth  and  Fifteenth  Army  Corps  crossed  Big  Black 
River  yesterday  at  4 p.  m.,  and  moved  out  4 miles  ; to-day  marched  to 
Bolton.  Day  excessively  hot,  and  troops  suffered  exceedingly  from 
heat  and  dust.  From  some  inexplicable  cause,  the  Ninth  Corps  is  not 
yet  up,  and  I have  no  assurance  that  it  is  on  this  side  of  Big  Black 
River.  I send  to-night  to  General  Parke  to  stop  work  on  his  bridge 
and  follow  by  Messinger’s. 

From  evidence  collected,  it  appears  Johnston  intended  to  have  crossed 
Black  River  during  the  4th  or  5th  of  July,  with  400  wagons,  but  he 
heard  of  the  capitulation  on  the  3d.  He  was  in  person  opposite  Bird- 
song, with  one  division  ; three  divisions  were  opposite  Messinger’s,  and 
one  opposite  Bridgeport,  all  provided  with  pontoon  trains.  All  com- 
menced falling  back  toward  Jackson  yesterday.  Breckinridge  did  not 
leave  Bolton  until  midnight  last  night.  The  whole  country  is  marked 
with  their  encampments,  especially  Bolton. 

To-morrow  I will  feel  toward  Clinton  with  cavalry,  but  await  Parke’s 
arrival  before  moving  farther. 

I am,  with  respect,  &c., 


Major-General  Grant. 


W.  T.  SHERMAN, 
Major- General , Commanding. 


Headquarters,  Clinton , July  9,  1863. 

Sir  : Steele’s  advance  entered  Clinton  at  3 o’clock  last  night,  skir- 
mishing with  the  enemy’s  cavalry.  At  daybreak  this  morning  Ord’s  ad- 
vance arrived,  and  his  corps  now  (7  a.  in.)  is  jiassing  through  Clinton, 
on  the  main  road.  Generals  Steele  and  Parke  are  reconn oitering  for  a 
sejiarate  road  north  of  the  railroad,  and  parallel.  We  have  to  march 
at  night:  days  are  intensely  hot:  otherwise  all  well. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major - General , Commanding. 

Major-General  Grant. 


Headquarters  Expeditionary  Army, 

Near  Jackson,  Miss.,  July  11,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  my  forces  arrived  before  Jack- 
son  yesterday  forenoon,  General  Parke  moving  on  the  Canton  road, 
Steele  on  the  direct  Clinton  road,  and  Urd  keeping  south  of  the  Clinton 
road  and  reaching  the  Raymond  road.  The  heads  of  columns  are  all 
close  up.  I have  examined  the  position,  and  am  satisfied  Johnston’s 
whole  army  is  in  Jackson ; that  the  intrenchments  we  found  there  in 
May  have  been  extended  so  the  flanks  reach  Pearl  River.  They  have 
also  been  much  strengthened,  and  heavy  guns  mounted  at  the  salients. 


522 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.'  [Chai*.  XXXVI 

We  have  reserved  our  artillery  fire,  and  have  drawn  tlieirs,  whicli  con- 
sists mostly  of  field  guns,  but  some  heavy  rifled  G inch  guns.  I find  no 
attempt  has  been  made  to  repair  the  railroad  west  of  Jackson,  but  that 
the  north  and  south  has  been,  and  cars  running.  General  Parke  is 
now  in  possession  of  the  north  branch,  has  broken  the  telegraph  wires, 
and  will  at  once  destroy  this  railroad  for  miles.  I have  dispatched 
Bussey’s  cavalry  farther  to  the  north,  on  the  same  errand,  and  other 
cavalry  to  the  south.  I learn  that  Pearl  Biver  Bridge  is  not  repaired 
though  in  process  of  building.  Cars  cannot  pass  it  yet.  Two  common 
bridges  are  across  Pearl  Biver,  near  the  railroad,  which  connect  travel 
from  the  cars,  which  stop  a mile  east  of  Jackson,  transferring  freight 
and  passengers  to  wagons  and  carriages. 

All  the  families  are  away  from  their  houses  all  round  about  Jackson, 
and  everything  betokens  a strong  resistance.  I would  like  another 
division  on  the  road  from  Champion’s  Hill  to  Clinton,  to  guard  the  com- 
munications and  a depot  of  supplies  kept  at  the  railroad  bridge  on  Big 
Black  Biver.  By  our  former  trip,  and  the  demands  of  Johnston’s  army, 
the  country  is  stripped  of  food  and  forage.  I have  plenty  of  wagons. 

I am,  &c., 

W.  T.  SHEBMAN, 

r . Major-General , Commanding . 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Bawlins,  Assistant  Adjutant- General 


Headquarters  Fifteenth  Army  Corps, 

Camp  before  Jackson , July  12,  1863. 
General  Lauman,  in  taking  position  to-day,  got  his  line  uncovered  by 
skirmishers  too  close  to  the  enemy’s  lines,  and  suffered  considerably"; 
loss  not  yet  ascertained.  Colonel  Gresham  is  reported  killed.  Lieu- 
tenant Adams,  of  the  artillery,  was  killed  the  first  day,  and  Lieutenant 
Nielson,  of  the  Begulars.  The  ground  to  the  right  is  so  wooded  that 
General  Ord  has  been  unable  to  ascertain  Lauman’s  loss.  Johnston 
evidently  intends  to  make  a strong  fight  at  Jackson  behind  his  parapet. 
He  may  endeavor  to  operate  outside  with  cavalry.  With  plenty  ol 
rifle  ammunition,  I can  make  the  town  pretty  hot  to  live  in.  I have 
published  all  the  good  news  to  our  troops. 

W.  T.  SHEBMAN, 

^ Major-General 

Major-General  Grant,  Vicksburg. 


Headquarters  Fifteenth  Army  Corps, 

Before  Jackson , July  12,  1863 — 10  a.  m. 

I gave  the  enemy’s  line  and  town  an  hour’s  cannonading  this  morn 
ing  with  our  rifled  guns.  I have  the  Canton  road  (Parke),  about  U 
miles  from  State-house;  the  Clinton  road  to  the  hospital  (Steele),  and 
the  Baymond  road  and  railroad,  to  the  house  where  we  were  May  14. 
All  telegraphs  and  railroad  north  and  south  are  broken  good,  and  cav- 
alry is  out  extending  the  damage.  I am  now  maneuvering  on  the  Pearl 
Liver  to  reach  the  east.  Will  keep  troops  well  in  hand.  News  from 
all  quarters  glorious.  As  usual,  my  20-pounder  Parrott  guns  use  toe 
much  ammunition.  Please  send  to  Big  Black  Biver  Bridge  4,000  rounds 
20  pounder  Parrott  ammunition  ; 10,000  6-pounder  shells,  and  1,000,000 


* Captured,  not  killed. 


Chap.  XXXVI.1  THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN.  523 

musket  cartridges,  assorted,  to  be  sent  me  in  case  I call,  or  you  suppose 
me  in  want. 

Events  resemble  much  our  position  at  Vicksburg,  except  I have  not 
assaulted,  and  we  have  sustained  very  little  loss. 

Three  wagons,  gathering  forage  to  our  rear  yesterday,  were  captured 
by  guerrillas  and  burned.  No  other  losses  on  the  road. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 

General  Grant. 


Headquarters, 

Bifore  Jackson , Miss.,  July  12,  1863 — 12  m. 

Port  Hudson  being  ours,  and  Holmes  repulsed  at  Helena,  the  Mis- 
souri forces  should  be  pushed  to  Little  Rock  at  once.  Mobile  should 
be  attacked  also,  from  the  direction  of  New  Orleans,  and,  when  it  is 
taken,  we  could  move  on  Selma.  I fear  the  weather  is  too  hot  for  me 
to  march  to  Grenada.  Would  it  not  be  better  to  move  on  Grenada 
from  Memphis,  and  on  Columbus,  Miss.,  from  Corinth,  leaving  me  to 
fight  Johnston  according  to  circumstances,  and  to  destroy  the  Central 
road  as  far  as  Canton  and  Big  Black  River? 

Harrisonburg,  La.,  should  be  attacked  by  a brigade.  It  would  par- 
alyze the  Washita  country.  Can’t  Grierson  join  me  by  land  ? 

All  is  well  with  me  now.  I have  ten  days’  supplies.  Will  send  my 
supply  train  to  Black  River,  under  good  escort,  as  soon  as  unloaded. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major-General. 

General  Grant,  Vicksburg. 


Before  Jackson,  Miss.,  July  13,  1863. 

The  paroled  prisoners  will  go  to  Brandon  via  Raymond. 

Pemberton  wrote  to  General  Johnston  a letter  reporting  his  positiou 
and  line  of  march,  and  sent  a captain  to  bear  the  letter  to  Johnston, 
but  I would  not  let  him  pass  in,  but  sent  him  back  with  a short  note  to 
Pemberton  saying  I could  not  permit  it.  I have  already  broken  up  the 
ferry  where  that  road  crosses,  and  don’t  see  how  Pemberton  can  cross 
Pearl  River,  but  he  must  manage  this  as  he  best  can. 

Colonel  Gresham  was  not  killed  yesterday ; it  was  Colonel  Earl. 

Killed,  wounded,  and  missing  yesterday  amount  to  350,  nearly  all 
confined  to  Lauman’s  command,  wdio  got  his  line  too  close  to  the  enemy’s 
works. 

Ord  has  relieved  Lauman,  and  sent  him  to  Vicksburg.  I approve 
because  I want  the  corps  commanders  to  be  satisfied  with  their  division 
commanders. 

When  McArthur  comes  up,  I will  pass  the  right  and  reach  the  bridge 
across  Pearl  River.  The  army  inside  Jackson  lies  close  behind  its 
in  trench  ments. 


Major-General  Grant. 


W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major-  General. 


Before  Jackson,  July  13,  1863. 

All  well  with  us;  all  strengthening  their  battery  and  rifle-pits,  prioi 
to  a general  cannonade  as  soon  as  the  train  is  known  to  be  near  with  a 
resupply.  I will  continue  to  threaten  the  railway  beyond  Pearl. 


524 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [cSuap.  xNxVt 


Pemberton  is  crossing  with  bis  paroled  prisoners  about  10  miles  below 
o an k son. 

JgPJZ  ,etU!  T!L  H°  bun,,ed  two  locomotives  and  a dozen  cars, 
ntll  i !r  o 1 ? d t?r,e  up  rack  t0  Canton,  but  found  Canton  occiil 
beyond  gade’  and  deemed  ,f  imprudent  to  attempt  it  or  the  bridge 

to  do  ' t/ie  wnr?y  rail^oad.certivilb  but  the  cavalry  has  not  the  dash 
h , ^“"ot  Grierson  be  brought  up  here?  In  a month  he 

could  make  the  .State  of  Mississippi  forever  useless  to  the  rebels 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

General  Grant.  Major-General. 


Headquarters  Fifteenth  Army  Corps, 

Before  Jackson.  July  14,  1863—11  a.  m. 

If  you  have  not  made  other  arrangements,  I would  be  obliged  if  you 
would  give  my  corps  the  flank  of  Vicksburg,  in  front  of  my  old  line, 

’ . 7 “"*>  resting  on  the  river  above  town,  especially  the  hill  in 

trout  of  Woods’  brigade.  Order  all  the  hospitals,  quartermasters’ 
camp,  and  all  stragglers  and  persons  whatsoever  to  be  assembled  in- 
side and  under  command  of  some  officer,  to  guard  the  parapet  and  man 
the  guns.  This  arrangement  will  make  useful  a class  of  men  not  other- 
wise ot  any  account.  The  hospital  at  Chickasaw  Bayou  should  also  be 

IDOVeCl  1 1181(16. 

I tear  the  tilling  the  country  with  paroled  prisoners  will  do  us  no 
good,  out  I won’t  let  any  pass  into  Jackson. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major-General  Grant.  Major-General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters, 
Before  Jackson , July  14,  1863. 

Captain  Audenreid  is  here.  I will  answer  at  length  to-night.  I think 
have  troops  enough.  I don’t  think  Johnston  can,  under  present  cir- 
cumstances, get  any  more  re- enforcements,  and  with  plenty  of  ammu- 
nition I can  make  the  town  too  hot  to  hold  him.  In  the  mean  time  I 
am  destroying  the  railroad  north  and  south  most  effectually. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant,  j 

Comdg.  Department  of  the  Tennessee , Vicksburg , Miss. 


Headquarters, 

Army  before  Jackson , July  14,  1863 — 8 p.  m. 

General  : All  is  well  with  us.  I think  I have  troops  enough.  John- 
ston is  still  in  Jackson,  and  our  skirmishers  are  engaged  all  round  the 
lines,  and  but  little  execution  done  by  either  party.  Our  lines  of  invest- 
ment are  well  covered  by  rifle-trenches.  We  are  now  firing  every  five 
minutes  from  four  different  batteries  day  and  night,  and,  as  soon  as  the 
ammunition  train  is  up,  will  increase  the  fire.  We  now  reach  Pearl 
River  above  and  below  the  town.  I do  not  think  Johnston  is  receiving 
re-enforcements ) at  all  events,  he  has  manifested  no  intention  to  rally, 


Chak.  XXXVI. J 


THE  JAC  KSON  CAMPAIGN. 


525 


and  lias  permitted  us  to  surround  him  with  parapets.  A brigade  is 
breaking  railroad  both  ways,  and  as  soon  as  I know  our  ammunition 
train  is  coming  1 will  send  a good  brigade  and  artillery  and  cavalry  to 
complete  the  destruction  of  Canton  and  Big  Black  River  Bridge;  also  a 
cavalry  party  to  Brook  haven,  south. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 
Major-General , Commanding  Army. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant. 


Headquarters, 

Army  befoi  e Jackson,  July  14,  1863. 

Dear  General  : Yours  of  yesterday’s  date  is  received,  and  I avail 
myself  of  the  opportunity  to  describe  more  fully  than  1 have  hitherto 
done  the  operations  up  to  this  date,  and  the  present  attitude  of  affairs, 
that  you  may  give  me  orders  or  advice. 

The  first  hint  of  the  capitulation  of  Vicksburg  reached  me  from  you, 
by  telegraph,  on  the  3d  day  of  July,  when  I was  in  person  at  Trible’s 
place,  near  Bear  Creek,  with  troops  disposed  from  Haynes’  Bluff  to  the 
Big  Black,  at  the  railroad  crossing.  I immediately  concentrated  on  the 
three  best  points  for  passing  Big  Black  River,  viz,  at  the  railroad  cross- 
ing, at  Messinger’s  Ford,  and  at  Birdsong  Ferry.  At  the  two  latter 
points  I had  constructed  bridges,  and  by  the  Gth  of  July  the  Thirteenth 
Army  Corps  (General  Ord)  had  reached  the  railroad  crossing,  the  Fif- 
teenth Army  Corps  (General  Steele)  Messinger’s,  and  the  Ninth  Array 
Corps  (General  Parke)  Birdsong.  All  the  heads  of  columns  crossed 
Black  River  the  evening  of  the  Gth,  and  on  the  7th  marched  to  Bolton 
Depot,  each  keeping  different  roads.  The  weather  was  so  intensely  hot 
that  it  would  have  been  fatal  to  push  the  troops. 

During  the  evening  and  night  of  the  7th,  all  the  columns  marched 
opposite  Clinton,  where  we  rested  and  formed  the  columns  for  battle, 
all  the  evidence  being  that  General  Johnston,  in  strong  force,  was  in 
our  front,  determined  to  resist  our  entering  Jackson. 

Early  the  morning  of  the  9th,  all  moved  forward  in  close  supporting 
distance — Ord  on  the  right,  Steele  in  the  center,  and  Parke  on  the  left. 
The  enemy  had  cavalry  vedettes  and  small  guards  to  our  front,  but  they 
retired  rapidly  before  us,  and  by  9.30  a.  m.  of  the  9th  we  drew  the  ar- 
tillery fire  of  the  batteries  at  Jackson. 

I soon  satisfied  myself  that  General  Johnston  had  taken  refuge  in 
Jackson;  that  he  had  resolved  to  fight  behind  intrenchmeuts,  and  that 
his  intrenched  position  was  the  same  substantially  that  we  found  last 
May,  only  that  it  had  been  much  strengthened  aud  extended,  so  that 
its  flanks  reached  Pearl  River. 

The  works  were  too  good  to  be  assaulted,  and  orders  were  given  to 
deploy  and  form  lines  of  circumvallation  about  1,500  yards  from  the 
enemy’s  parapet,  with  skirmishers  close  up,  and  their  supports  within 
500  yards;  also  that  each  corps  should  construct  covered  batteries  for 
their  guns  and  trenches  for  their  men. 

All  the  troops  took  up  their  positions  with  comparative  ease  and  little 
loss,  save  the  division  commanded  by  General  Laurnan,  of  Ord’s  corps, 
which,  by  the  obscure  character  of  the  ground,  its  trees  and  bushes,  ad- 
vanced too  near  the  enemy’s  parapet,  without  proper  skirmishers  de- 
ployed, and  received  the  cross  fire  of  his  artillery  and  infantry,  causing 
considerable  loss  of  life.  The  exact  extent  of  this  loss  has  not  been 
reported,  but  will  not  fall  much  short  of  400.  General  Ord  has  relieved 
General  Laurnan  of  the  command  of  the  division,  and  1 deem  it  so  iin- 


526  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI 

portent  to  support  corps  commanders  in  their  authority  that  1 must 
sustain  General  Orel  for  the  time  being. 

wi^Z=Stf the  place,’ 1 ?rdeitd  Colonel  Bussey,  chief  of  cavalry, 
O.mtn  ,n  ■y/°r<f,’  numb1rlug  about  B000  effectives,  to  proceed  to 
twl  „ti  1 ‘ e'S  r‘,’y  tbf  cars,  locomotives,  railroads,  and  machine-shops 
there,  and  proceed  on  to  the  Big  Black  River  Bridge  and  destroy  that. 
i.1,.  bas  re  turned,  having  found  Canton  occupied  by  a force  too  large 
or  him  to  attack,  and  he  did  not  go  to  the  bridge  at  all,  as  he  deemed 
it  unsafe  to  pass  so  considerable  a force  by  the  Hank,  but  he  destroyed 
2 locomotives  and  14  box  cars  at  Calhoun  Station. 

At  the  same  time  the  cavalry  force  attached  to  General  Ord’s  corps 
were  dispatched  south.  This  party  has  also  returned,  haviug  burned 
hve  bridges  on  the  road  out  for  15  miles.  We  have  also  in  our  posses- 
sion here  about  -0  platform  cars,  which  will  be  completely  burned,  and 

north  ^ Sdf  fu  k?Bfc  0n1dailf  duty  burDin8'  the  railroad  ties  and  iron 
and  s°uth’  with  orders  to  completely  destroy  it  for  10  miles  each 
vay,  so  that  a very  fair  beginning  has  been  made  toward  the  destruc- 
tion of  this  railway ; but  I am  determined  that  it  shall  be  so  effectually 
destroyed  that  it  cannot  be  repaired  during  the  war. 

A force  of  500  cavalry,  with  four  guns  and  five  wagons,  will  start  to- 
morrow south  for  Brookhaven,  with  orders  to  destroy  the  road  at  many 
places,  especially  at  Gallatin  and  Brookhaven,  and  Colonel  Bussey’s 
cavalry  with  Woods’  brigade  of  infantry,  and  Landgraeber’s  battery 
of  light  artillery,  will  also  be  dispatched  again  to  Canton  to  destroy 
that  place,  with  all  its  machinery  and  railroads,  and  then  to  proceed  to 

nf ei  on14?’  n be‘yoad>  aud  bura  it-  Thus  I hope  to  make  a break 

10d  unles  m this  Great  Central  Railroad ; to  be  so  effectually  destroyed 
that  the  enemy  will  not  even  attempt  its  reconstruction.  General  Mc- 
Arthur s division  is  on  the  road,  two  brigades  at  Clinton  and  one  at 
Champion  s Hill,  so  disposed  as  to  insure  the  safety  of  our  trains  against 
the  enemy  s cavalry,  of  which  I can  learn  but  little.  There  is  a divis 
ion  of  cavalry  commanded  by  General  Jackson;  two  brigades,  com- 
manded by  Whitfield  and  Cosby,  containing,  I think,  about  3,000  men 
Cosby  is,  I suppose,  at  Canton  and  the  bridge,  and  Whitfield  is  east 
of  4 earl  River,  guardingthe  railroad  back  to  Meridian,  with  some  scat- 
tered squads  hanging  about  the  country.  Our  foraging  parties  now  go 
out  about  15  miles,  but  are  invariably  guarded  by  a regiment  of  infan- 
try. We  are  absolutely  stripping  the  country  of  corn,  cattle,  hogs, 
sheep,  poultry,  everything,  and  the  new-growing  corn  is  being  thrown 
open  as  pasture  fields  or  hauled  for  the  use  of  our  animals.  The  whole- 
sale destruction  to  which  this  country  is  now  being  subjected  is  terrible 
to  contemplate,  but  it  is  the  scourge  of  war,  to  which  ambitious  men 
have  appealed,  rather  than  the  judgment  of  the  learned  and  pure  tri- 
bunals which  our  forefathers  had  provided  for  supposed  wrongs  and  in- 
juries. therefore,  so  much  of  my  instructions  as  contemplated  destroy- 
ing and  weakening  the  resources  of  our  enemy  are  being  executed  with 
rigor,  and  we  have  also  done  much  toward  the  destruction  of  Johnston’s 
iirmy.  If  he  waits  a day  or  two,  I will  so  threaten  his  rear  that  he  will  be 
compelled  to  come  out  and  fight  or  run,  and  in  either  event  I feel  confi- 
dent  of  success.  I know  that  much  plunder  has  been  sent  by  him  to  the 
east  of  Pearl  River,  but  his  army  is  still  in  Jackson,  and  several  very 
heavy  guns  are  mounted  at  the  salients  and  reply  to  our  fire.  Their  para- 
pets are  also  well  manned,  and  our  sharpshooters  are  closing  nearer  and 
nearer,  and  becomiug  familiar  with  their  respective  fronts.  We  are  now 
ready  for  a sally,  and  if  he  attempts  to  escape  we  ought  to  detect  the 
movement  very  early,  and  will,  of  course,  take  atf  vantage  of  it.  Captain 


Ciiap.  XXXVI.) 


T11E  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


527 


Audenried,  of  your  staff,  is  here,  and  will  examine  our  lines  to-morrow 
and  carry  this  report  to  you,  with  a map  of  our  position,  compiled  from 
partial  surveys  and  all  other  available  sources.  I will  also  send  by 
him  all  the  lists  of  casualties  thus  far  sustained  that  I can  obtain  of 
corps  and  division  commanders.  The  field  labors  of  all  are  so  arduous 
aud  constant  that  I know  General  Grant  will  overlook  the  want  of  more 
accurate  detailed  reports  till  the  issue  of  this  campaign  is  reached. 

I am,  with  great  respect, 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major- General , Commanding. 

Major-General  Grant. 


Before  Jackson,  July  14,  1803. 

Good  for  Richmond.  I never  attached  much  importance  to  the  place, 
but  tell  me  the  fate  of  Lee’s  army  the  moment  you  hear.  If  that  can 
be  broken  up  and  destroyed,  with  our  successes  out  West,  it  will  make 
an  impression  on  rebeldom  and  the  world.  Tell  the  general  I have 
heard  of  his  appointment  as  major-general  in  Regular  Army.  Of  course 
1 congratulate  him,  and  hope  he  may  live  long  to  enjoy  the  ease  and 
luxury  of  the  position. 

I think  we  are  doing  well  out  here,  but  won’t  brag  till  Johnston  clears 
out  and  stops  shooting  his  big  rifle  guns  at  us.  If  he  moves  across 
Pearl  River  and  makes  good  speed,  I will  let  him  go.  By  a flag  of  truce 
to-day  l sent  him  our  newspapers  of  7th  and  8th  ; that,  with  our  cannon 
to  night,  will  disturb  his  slumbers. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major-  General. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins. 

Before  Jackson,  July  15,  1863. 

A deserter  just  in  reports  a heavy  cavalry  force  of 4, 000  having  crossed 
Pearl  River  from  the  east  to  the  west,  15  miles  north  of  us,  no  doubt  to 
operate  on  our  train.  If  Yazoo  force  moves  in  direction  of  Big  Black 
River  Bridge,  it  will  draw  off  this  force  from  our  roads. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major- General. 

General  Grant. 


Headquarters, 

Army  before  Jackson , July  15,  1863 — 8.30  p.  m. 

General  : Have  sent  a brigade  to  Clinton  to  protect  our  trains  on 
the  road.  Colonel  Woods’  brigade  and  Bussey’s  cavalry  will  move  up 
Pearl  River  at  daylight  to  reach  the  point  where  this  cavalry  has  crossed, 
and  will  push  up  to  Canton  and  Big  Black  River  Bridge.  Colonel  Woods 
is  notified  that  Herron  is  moving  out  from  Yazoo  City.  If  Johnston  is 
going  to  make  a retrograde  movement  I hope  to  detect  it  promptly,  al- 
though the  wooded  nature  of  the  outskirts  covering  the  interior  of  the 
city,  also  the  camp-fires  and  burning  of  railroad  ties  have  so  filled  the 
air  with  smoke,  that  we  can  see  but  little;  still,  I will  have  the  pickets 
notified  to  watch  closely  and  report  any  changes.  All  their  heavy  guns 
are  still  in  position. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major- General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant,  Comdg.  Dept,  of  the  Tennessee. 


528 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai\  XXXVI. 


Headquarters, 

Army  before  Jackson , July  17,  1863 — 6 a.  m. 

General  Johnston  evacuated  Jackson  last  night.  I will  occupy  it  with 
one  division  of  Steele,  and  hasten  the  enemy  on  his  way  east,  but,  in  the 
mean  time,  the  weather  is  too  hot  for  a vigorous  pursuit.  Railroad 
north  and  south  is  being  absolutely  annihilated. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major- General. 

Maj.  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Tennessee , Vicksburg > Miss. 


Jackson,  July  17,  1863 — 8 p.  m, 

I have  just  made  the  circuit  of  Jackson.  We  are  in  full  possession, 
and  Johnston  is  retreating  east,  with  30,000  men,  who  will  perish  by 
heat,  thirst,  and  disappointment.  The  place  has  been  well  fortified. 
We  have  the  heavy  guns  and  about  400  prisoners,  and  more  being 
picked  up  hourly.  I do  not  pursue,  because  of  the  intense  heat,  dust, 
and  fatigue  of  the  men ; but  1 will  perfect  the  work  of  destruction,  and 
await  orders.  Trains  all  safe.  I propose  to  break  railroad  10  miles 
south,  east,  and  north,  and  out  for  40  and  60  miles  in  spots.  We  are 
in  possession  of  some  50  cars,  which  will  be  burned.  What  more  shall 
I do  f 


General  Grant. 


W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major  General. 


Headquarters, 

Army  before  Jackson , July  17,  1863 — 9 p.  m. 

All  my  cavalry  is  off  at  this  time,  breaking  road  at  and  beyond  Can- 
ton to  the  north,  and  as  far  as  Brookhaven  south.  I doubt  the  policy 
of  holding  this  place  for  any  length  of  time.  All  the  divisions,  brigades, 
and  regiments  are  so  reduced,  and  so  many  officers  of  rank  are  sick  and 
wounded — determined  on  furloughs — that  I doubt  if  my  corps  will  keep 
ui>  to  8,000  men  if  kept  here.  Every  officer  and  man  is  an  applicant  for 
furlough.  At  Big  Black  River  we  could  better  mask  our  troops,  and 
sally  forth  when  the  time  comes.  Here  we  would  have  our  ranks 
counted  every  day.  In  three  days  I could  complete  the  destruction  of 
roads,  and  reach  Big  Black  River  without  renewing  supplies.  Johnston 
got  off  his  baggage  and  sick  by  cars. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major-General. 

General  Grant. 


Headquarters, 

Army  before  Jackson , July  17,  1863 — 9.30  p.  m. 

I will  order  General  Parke  to  march  to  Vicksburg  the  day  after  to- 
morrow. I will  feel  toward  the  east,  with  Ord’s  corps  and  my  own, 
await  the  return  of  one  detachment,  and  then  return  to  Big  Black 
River.  In  the  mean  time,  if  you  think  best,  I will  hold  Jackson, 
though,  as  I said  before,  I think  it  imprudent.  Ord’s  corps  is  very 
much  out  of  order,  and  mine  reduced  by  sickness,  casualties,  and  a de- 
sire for  rest.  General  W.  S.  Smith  is  really  quite  ill,  and  says  he  must 


Chai\  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


529 


go  liome.  Colonels  Giles  A.  Smith,  Tapper,  Judy,  and  others  are  urging 
their  claims  to  furloughs,  and  I repeat  that  all  the  army  is  clamorous 
for  rest.  The  constant  stretch  of  mind  for  the  past  two  months  begins 
to  tell  on  all. 


General  Grant. 


W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major- General. 


Headquarters,  Jackson , July  18,  1863. 

We  have  made  fine  progress  to-day  in  the  work  of  destruction.  Jack- 
son  will  no  longer  be  a point  of  danger.  We  destroy  much  cotton  used 
in  breastworks.  Some  heavy  artillery  and  a large  pile  of  shot  and 
shell  will  be  thrown  into  the  river.  Steele  will  be  at  Brandon  in  the 
morning,  and  I have  reason  to  believe  all  is  working  well  north  and 
south.  1 hope  it  will  rain  to-night,  in  which  case  I will  order  Parke’s 
two  divisions  to  march  for  Milldale,  via  Brownsville.  I will  hold  the 
balance  till  I accomplish  all  your  design.  The  enemy’s  cavalry  has 
retreated  from  Canton  across  Pearl  River,  so  that  I think  there  is  no 
body  of  the  enemy  west  of  Pearl  River.  We  have  500  prisoners,  aud 
more  are  being  brought  in  every  hour.  The  inhabitants  are  subjugated. 
They  cry  aloud  for  mercy.  The  land  is  devastated  for  30  miles' around. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major-  General. 

Major-General  Grant,  Vicksburg. 


Jackson,  July  18,  1863—11  a.  m. 

Have  just  returned  from  a long  ride.  Day  intensely  hot,  and  dust 
terrific.  Heard  of  Colonel  Woods’  expedition  near  Canton  last  night. 
He  had  met  opposition,  but  expected  to  enter  Canton  this  morning. 
General  Steele,  with  three  brigades,  will  move  out  to  Brandon  this  eve. 
As  soon  as  I hear  satisfactory  accounts  of  these  detachments,  I will 
dispatch  General  Parke  to  Milldale,  via  Brownsville,  and  as  soon  as  the 
detachments  are  back  and  rested,  I will  move  Ord  to  Big  Black  River 
Bridge,  via  Raymond,  and  Fifteenth  Army  Corps  and  cavalry  to  Mes- 
singer’s  and  Bear  Creek,  via  Clinton.  The  enemy  burned  great  part 
of  Jackson,  and  we  have  done  some  in  that  line.  The  place  is  ruined. 
I am  destroying  the  northern  and  southern  railroad,  but,  according  to 
your  orders,  spare  that  east  and  west,  with  the  cars.  Have  heard  from 
my  cavalry  south.  A prisoner  was  sent  in  with  a written  order  on  his 
person,  dated  Brook  haven.  He  states  the  place  contained  but  two  com- 
panies, aud  that  Grierson  was  reported  coming.  I do  hope  Grierson 
will  come  by  land  with  his  cavalry,  and  with  what  I have  I can  cleau 
out  all  Middle  Mississippi. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN. 

General  Grant. 


Jackson,  July  18,  1863—4  p.  m. 

Just  heard  from  Canton.  My  party  was  to  enter  at  daylight.  Gen- 
eral Herron  was  within  6 miles  of  Canton.  All  well. 

[W.  T.  SHERMAN,] 

Major  General, 

Major-General  Grant,  Vicksburg. 

34  R R— vol  xxiy,  PT  II 


530 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Ciiap.  XXXVI. 


Jackson,  July  19,  186.1. 

General  Parke  is  ordered  to  begin  liis  march  to-morrow  back  to 
Vicksburg,  unless  Steele’s  expedition  to  Brandon  develops  something 
unexpected.  A deserter  from  a South  Carolina  brigade  reports  that 
Fort  Sumter  is  in  possession  of  the  Yankees. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major-  General. 

General  Grant. 


[July  20,  1863.] 

General  Parke  started  in  with  two  divisions  this  morning.  General 
Ord  will  move  to-morrow,  and  I will  follow  only  when  order  and  sys- 
tem are  restored  to  this  distracted  country.  The  people  are  subdued, 
and  ask  for  reconstruction.  They  admit  the  loss  of  the  Southern  cause. 

Expedition  from  Canton  and  beyond  is  back,  having  done  their  task 
well,  whipping  Jackson’s  cavalry  at  Canton.  The  cavalry  is  also  in 
from  Brookhaven ; burned  four  locomotives  and  many  cars,  depots, 
tanks,  bridges,  &c.,  so  there  is  a break  of  100  miles  in  the  Great  Cen- 
tral road. 

Steele  was  at  Brandon  last  night. 

The  drought  is  terrible,  and  must  tell  terribly  on  the  enemy,  retreat- 
ing fast  to  the  east  through  a parched  and  desert  country. 

Our  march  back  will  be  slow  and  easy,  regulated  by  water. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major-  General. 

General  Grant,  Vicksburg. 


Jackson,  July  20,  1863 — 6 p.  m. 

Steele  is  back.  All  well.  He  drove  the  cavalry  of  the  enemy  beyond 
Brandon,  and  then  destroyed  depots  and  3 miles  of  road  there.  I will 
remain  to  morrow,  batter  down  the  Pearl  River  piers,  destroy  the  bridge 
we  have  built,  and  make  a good  finish  to  one  job. 

The  enemy  is  now  all  far  beyond  Pearl  River,  in  full  retreat,  and 
Jackson  is  utterly  destroyed  as  a military  point. 

If,  on  the  day  after  the  morrow,  no  change  occurs,  I will  move  my 
corps  slowly  back  to  Black  River,  camp  the  division  in  good  localities, 
and  then  report  to  you  in  person.  I ask  no  indulgence  for  myself,  but 
the  men  and  officers  need  a couple  of  months  of  rest  and  relaxation. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major -General*,  Commanding. 

General  Grant. 


Headquarters, 

Jackson , Miss.,  July  21,  1863 — 2 p.  m. 
We  have  desolated  this  land  for  30  miles  round  about.  There  are 
about  800  women  and  children  who  will  perish  unless  they  receive  some 
relief.  May  I promise  mayor  and  committee  of  citizens,  say,  200  barrels 
of  flour  and  100  barrels  of  salt  pork,  if  they  will  send  for  it  to  Big  Black 
Bridge  and  give  me  pledges  that  it  shall  be  devoted  to  pure  charity 
Judge  Sharkey,  Hr.  Poindexter,  and  Mr.  Yerger,  with  many  other 
very  intelligent  and  influential  men,  have  consulted  me  as  to  moving  in 
the  matter  of  organizing  the  State  to  submit  to  the  lawful  authority  of 
the  United  States.  They  admit  themselves  beaten,  subdued,  and  charge 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


531 


their  rulers  and  agitators  with  bringing  ruin  and  misery  on  the  State. 
Of  course,  I make  no  promises  or  pledges,  but  merely  state  that  I 
believe  such  a movement  would  be  received  with  favor. 

Since  Steele  went  to  Brandon,  a perfect  stream  of  negroes  has  been 
passing  toward  Vicksburg. 

I am  battering  down  the  railroad  piers  with  artillery. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 

General  Grant. 


Jackson,  July  21,  1863. 

I will  stay  here  another  day,  and  longer,  if  I can  do  any  good.  All  is 
working  admirably.  I believe  the  people  will  appreciate  the  liberal  gift 
of  provisions.  I have  been  compelled  to  supply  on  the  spot  hospitals’ 
and  asylums’  immediate  pressing  wants.  Would  I be  justified  in  mak- 
ing a distinct  proposition  to  the  people  that  if  Johnston  or  President 
Davis  will  agree  that  no  Confederate  soldiers  or  guerrillas  will  operate 
west  of  Pearl  River,  we  will  establish  at  Big  Black  River  railroad  bridge 
a kind  of  trading  depot,  where  the  people  of  Mississippi  may  exchange 
their  cotton,  corn,  and  produce  for  provisions,  clothing,  and  family 
supplies  ? This  would  throw  on  the  Confederate  Government  the  neces- 
sity of  relieving  the  wants  of  women  and  children  that  are  now  threat- 
ened with  starvation  and  suffering.  At  Brandon,  Canton,  and  Jackson 
all  act  as  though  the  thing  was  ended  unless  Lee  achieves  the  capture 
of  Baltimore  and  Washington,  which  they  are  taught  to  believe;  and 
such  men  as  Sharkey,  Yerger,  Poindexter,  and  others  of  good  reputation 
are  actually  at  work,  and  appeal  for  permission  to  build  up  a civil 
government,  even  the  old  Union,  as  they  style  it. 

I profess  to  know  nothing  of  politics^  but  I think  we  have  here  an 
admirable  wedge  which  may  be  encouraged  without  committing  the 
President  or  War  Department.  If  prominent  men  in  Mississippi  admit 
the  fact  of  being  subdued,  it  will  have  a powerful  effect  all  over  the 
South. 

All  the  army,  except  my  own  corps,  is  en  route  for  Vicksburg,  and 
having  completed  the  destruction  of  the  railroads  and  war  material,  I 
only  delay  here  to  encourage  the  people  to  rebel  against  a Government 
which  they  now  feel  is  unable  to  protect  them  or  support  them.  I 
cannot  learn  of  an  enemy  within  30  miles  of  me. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major- General . 

General  Grant. 


Jackson,  July  22,  1863. 

All  right  about  trade.  I will  not  promise  or  do  anything  except  to 
relieve  the  immediate  wants  of  suffering  humanity.  All  well.  Will 
ride  around  the  city  to  see  that  all  my  orders  are  executed,  when  I pro- 
pose to  go  to  Clinton ; next  day  to  Bolton ; next  to  Big  Black  River, 
and  then  to  report  to  you  in  person ; after  which  to  establish  healthy 
camps  of  instruction  for  my  corps. 

I want  10,000  conscripts  two  months,  and  the  Fifteenth  Army  Corps 
will  be  ready  for  Selma  and  Atlanta. 

Order  Major  Smith  down  to  help  me  drill  and  organize.  Also  I would 
like  to  have  a few  brigadiers  who  know  how  to  drill  and  instruct.  I 
also  want  authority  to  consolidate  two,  three,  or  even  four  regiments  of 
the  same  State  into  single  regiments. 


532 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


IOhal*.  XXXVI. 


The  mode  prescribed  by  tbe  War  Department  is  wrong,  as  it  would 
leave  us  with  little  battalions,  whereas  we  want  to  concentrate  the  ma- 
terials in  our  possession  into  simple  regiments  and  brigades. 

My  men  are  now  well  rested;  have  bathed  freely  in  Pearl  River. 
The  people  are  moving  from  the  terror  of  the.  cannonade,  and  we  can 
draw  behind  Big  Black  River  with  propriety. 

I still  think  it  would  be  imprudent  to  hold  Jackson  ; it  is  not  a strate- 
gic point  now  that  its  railroads  are  utterly  ruined  and  demolished,  and 
were  my  corps  to  remain  here  it  could  do  no  good,  whereas  a few  guer- 
rillas could  constantly  attack  our  trains  and  keep  us  uneasy  all  the  time. 
At  Big  Black  River  we  can  draw  our  lines,  exclude  everybody,  and  con- 
ceal our  strength,  plans,  and  purposes,  and,  when  you  give  the  word,  I 
can  in  a day  recover  Jackson,  or,  what  amounts  to  the  same  thing,  a 
good  crossing  over  Pearl  River. 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major-General. 

General  Grant. 


Headquarters  Fifteenth  Army  Corps, 

Vicksburg , July  26,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  arrival  of  my  corps  at  Big  Black 
River.  I have  ordered  the  divisions  to  be  disposed  as  follows : 

Steele’s  at  railroad  bridge;  Ewing’s,  late  W.  S.  Smith’s,  at  Messin- 
ger’s;  Tuttle’s  at  Bear  Creek,  near  Markham’s,  and  Blair’s  at  Fox’s. 

I will  make  my  headquarters  near  Fox’s,  and  will  extend  the  wires 
heretofore  constructed  so  as  to  place  me  in  telegraphic  communication 
with  Vicksburg,  Haynes’  Bluff,  and  the  railroad  bridge.  The  points  I 
have  selected  for  camps  are  believed  to  be  healthy,  near  good  water  for 
washing  and  bathing ; are  selected  to  cover  the  bridges  across  the  Big 
Black,  and  are  within  one  [day’s]  march  of  Vicksburg. 

Having  come  into  Vicksburg  for  a personal  interview  with  the  gen- 
eral-iu- chief,  I will  return  this  afternoon  to  my  post,  and  remain  with 
my  command,  ready  for  any  orders  or  to  labor  in  improving  the  organ- 
ization and  instruction  of  my  corps. 

I am,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Fifteenth  army  Corps, 

Camp  on  Big  Black , July  28,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  heretofore,  from  day  to  day,  kept  the  general  advised  of 
the  progress  of  events,  even  to  the  conclusion  of  the  campaign ; but,  that 
at connected  history  may  be  preserved,  I will  offer  a mere  narrative  of 
events,  beginning  with  the  22d  day  of  June,  when  I was  operating  with 
my  corps  (the  Fifteenth)  against  the  north  front  of  Vicksburg. 

General  Steele’s  division  (First)  was  threatening  the  enemy’s  extreme 
left,  known  as  Fort  Hill,  resting  on  the  Mississippi  River  above  Vicks- 
burg, and  General  Blair’s  division  (Second)  was  operating  against  the 
bastion  which  guarded  against  our  approach  on  the  Graveyard  road. 

Our  batteries  were  well  advanced  and  covered  with  good  earth- 


CttAP.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


533 


Works,  and  the  saps  and  parallels  for  infantry  were  up  to  the  very  ditch 
of  the  enemy,  and  a party  of  sappers  and  miners  were  engaged  in  mi- 
derininiug  the  chief  work  to  our  front. 

General  Tuttle’s  division  (Third)  was  divided.  One  brigade  (Mow- 
er’s) was  detached  on  duty  at  Young’s  Point*  the  other  two  were  push- 
ing an  approach  against  Vicksburg  between  Steele  and  Blair. 

Thus  matters  stood  on  the  22d  day  of  June,  when  I was  summoned  to 
General  Grant’s  headquarters,  and  received  orders  to  take  two  brigades 
of  the  Fifteenth  Army  Corps  and  three  brigades  of  the  Seventeenth 
Army  Corps,  proceed  to  Bear  Creek,  an  affluent  of  Big  Black,  an  d oppose 
the  crossing  of  General  Joe  Johnston,  then  believed  to  be  with  an  army 
of  adequate  size  about  to  cross  Big  Black  River  and  make  an  attempt  to 
raise  the  siege  of  Vicksburg.  1 immediately  put  in  motion  the  two  bri- 
gades of  General  Tuttle,  and  made  orders  for  the  march  of  the  three 
brigades  of  the  Seventeenth  Army  Corps,  commanded  by  General  Mc- 
Arthur. The  former  halted  the  first  night  near  Templeton’s,  and  the 
latter  at  Marshall’s,  on  the  Ridge  road.  At  the  same  time  General  Parke 
was  ordered  to  move  from  Haynes’  Bluff  toward  the  same  destination 
with  a part  of  the  troops  stationed  there.  That  night  I met  him  at 
Templeton’s,  and  directed  him  to  move  out  on  the  Ridge  road  to  the 
Oak  Ridge  Post-office,  leaving  a reserve  at  Neily’s,  whilst  I should  pro- 
ceed with  the  rest  of  the  command  toward  Birdsong  Ferry,  the  point 
where  it  was  supposed  Johnston  designed  to  cross  the  Big  Black.  On 
the  very  day  that  we  moved  out  from  Vicksburg,  one  battalion  of  the 
Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry,  employed  in  obstructing  this  road,  encountered 
Hie  enemy’s  cavalry  coming  from  the  direction  of  Mechanicsburg,  the 
result  of  which  has  been  already  fully  reported  in  the  letter  of  Major 
Parked,  under  date  of  J une  23.  This  cavalry  had  not  crossed  Big  Black 
River,  but  had  returned  north  toward  Mechanicsburg,  and  a reconnais- 
sance of  the  river  bank  demonstrated  the  fact  that  no  enemy  had  crossed 
over  in  any  force,  or  had  made  any  preparations  in  the  way  of  bridges, 
fords,  or  boats. 

Nevertheless,  from  scouts  and  citizens,  I became  satisfied  that  the 
enemy  was  on  the  east  side  of  Big  Black  River  in  considerable  force, 
and  that  his  policy  would  be  to  conceal  the  fact  of  crossing,  more  es- 
pecially the  points  of  crossing,  till  the  very  last  moment. 

1 made  all  the  necessary  dispositions  to  oppose  his  crossing,  but  gave 
preference  as  a line  of  defense  to  the  peculiar  spurs  and  ridges  which 
characterize  the  peninsula  between  Big  Black  and  Yazoo,  and  directed 
obstructions  and  rifle-pits  at  Oak  Ridge,  Neily’s,  at  McCall’s,  Trible’s, 
Tiffin,  aud  the  railroad  bridge,  thus  making  a strong  line  from  the  Yazoo 
at  Haynes’  Bluff  to  Big  Black  Bridge  that  would  have  cost  the  enemy 
dear  had  lie  attempted  to  force  it.  To  construct  this  line  I had  ordered 
General  Parke  to  bring  up  the  balance  of  the  Ninth  Army  Corps  which 
lmd  been  left  at  Milldale,  and  all  the  cavalry  was  united  under  Colonel 
Bussey  and  posted  on  Bear  Creek. 

Thus  matters  stood  when,  on  the  3d  of  July,  I received,  by  the  tele- 
graph, notice  from  General  Grant  that  commissioners  had  called  on  him 
from  Vicksburg  proposing  a capitulation,  and  giving  me  notice  to  be 
ready  to  cross  Big  Black  River  and  drive  Johnston  away,  &c.  I then 
indicated  the  troops  I should  need  for  the  purpose,  viz,  in  addition  to 
General  Parke’s  corps  (the  Ninth),  the  balance  of  my  own  corps  (the 
Fifteenth)  and  General  Ord’s  (the  Thirteenth). 

Vicksburg  capitulated  July  4,  and  the  same  night  the  troops  were 
ordered  to  march,  but  it  was  not  until  the  night  of  the  5th  that  they  all 
reached  Big  Black.  Bridges  were  constructed  at  once  at  Messinger’s 


534 


MISSISSIPPI,  Wfist  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 

and  Birdsong— one,  a floating  bridge,  already  existed  at  the  railroad 
crossing. 

On  the  evening  of  July  G,  General  Ord  crossed  with  his  corps  at  the 
railroad  bridge;  General  Steele,  with  the  Fifteenth,  crossed  at  Messin- 
ger’s,  and  General  Parke  at  Birdsong. 

On  the  7th,  all  marched  by  separate  roads  to  Bolton,  and  the  following 
day  to  Clinton.  The  weather  was  intensely  hot,  dust  stifling,  and  the 
enemy  made  no  serious  opposition  to  our  progress.  But  evidence  ac- 
cumulated at  each  step  that  Johnston’s  army,  composed  of  four  strong 
divisions  of  infantry,  viz,  Boring’s,  French’s,  Walker’s,  aud  Breckin- 
ridge’s, with  Jackson’s  division  of  cavalry  and  a large  proportion  of  field 
artillery,  was  falling  back  before  us  on  Jackson.  I first  expected  him 
to  fight  us  at  Clinton,  and  afterward  on  the  hill  in  front  of  Jackson,  the 
same  where  in  May  last  he  had  encountered  General  McPherson.  Our 
approach  was,  therefore,  cautious,  the  three  corps  moving  by  separate 
roads;  Ord  on  the  right,  Steele  center,  and  Parke  left. 

Nothing  worth  recording  occurred  till  the  head  of  Steele’s  column 
was  withiu  600  yards  of  the  enemy’s  line  on  the  Cliuton  road,  when  a 
heavy  6-inch  rifle  shot  warned  us  to  prepare  for  serious  work.  This 
was  about  8 a.  m.  of  July  9.  Generals  Parke  and  Ord,  having  to  move 
across  the  fields,  required  more  time  to  reach  their  positions,  and  had  to 
skirmish  pretty  briskly  to  drive  the  enemy  to  cover. 

Having  been  in  Jackson  during  our  former  movement  in  May,  I was 
somewhat  familiar  with  the  nature  of  the  ground,  and  on  a personal 
reconnaissance  saw  enough  to  convince  me  that  Johnston  was  in  Jack- 
son  with  his  whole  army,  and  that  he  had  anticipated  pursuit  and  a 
siege,  and  had  prepared  accordingly. 

The  parapets  we  had  found  in  May  last  had  been  enlarged  and  much 
strengthened,  and  on  the  Clinton  and  Canton  roads  two  heavy  6-inch 
rifled  guns  had  been  mounted  en  barbette , and  at  many  points  along 
the  parapet  were  well-constructed  embrasures  of  sod  and  cotton  bales. 
The  lines,  too,  had  been  much  extended,  so  as  to  rest  on  Pearl  Biver, 
and  trees  had  been  felled  to  afford  good  range  for  his  guns,  and  to  ob 
struct  our  movements.  A map  of  Jackson,  herewith  inclosed,*  com- 
piled with  great  care  and  labor  by  Captain  Jenney,  of  the  Engineers,  on 
my  staff,  conveys  a better  idea  of  the  place  than  any  description  I 
might  give. 

The  moment  I became  satisfied  that  the  enemy  had  taken  refuge  in 
Jackson  for  battle,  I determined  to  hold  him  there,  whilst  by  means  of 
cavalry  and  light  columns  of  infantry  I could  fulfill  the  second  part  of 
General  Grant’s  orders,  viz,  “destroy  the  Great  Central  Railroad  north 
and  south,  and  damage  the  enemy  as  much  as  possible” — not  alone  for 
the  present,  but  in  all  future  operations — and  at  the  same  time  gradually 
work  round  by  one  flank  or  the  other,  threaten  to  cross  Pearl  River,  and 
operate  on  the  enemy’s  only  line  of  communication  to  his  rear. 

General  Ord,  therefore,  extended  his  lines  to  the  right  so  as  to  cross 
the  railroad  and  threaten  Pearl  River,  and  General  Parke  his  left  so  as 
to  embrace  the  railroad  north  of  Jackson  and  approach  Pearl  River  on 
that  flank. 

Each  of  these  commanders  kept  one  brigade  constantly  employed  in 
breaking  up  railroad  track,  burning  the  ties,  and  bending  the  iron  so  as 
to  render  it  useless  in  making  future  repairs.  At  the  same  time  Colonel 
Bussey  was  dispatched  with  his  cavalry  north  as  far  as  Canton,  26 
miles,  to  destroy  cars  and  track,  and  the  cavalry  of  General  Ord’s  corps, 
under  Major  Fullerton,  to  the  south,  to  destroy  bridges  out  for  15  miles. 


To  appear  in  Afias. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


TTTE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


535 


At  the  same  time  all  the  troops  were  employed  in  constructing  para- 
pets of  earth  and  cotton  to  cover  the  guns  and  rifle-pits  and  stockades 
to  cover  the  men.  It  was  no  part  of  the  plan  to  assault  the  enemy’s 
works,  so  that  the  main  bodies  of  infantry  were  kept  well  in  reserve, 
under  cover,  whilst  the  skirmishers  were  pushed  forward  as  close  as 
possible,  leading  to  many  brisk  skirmishes,  which  usually  resulted  in 
the  enemy  taking  refuge  within  his  works. 

On  the  12th,  whilst  General  Bauman’s  division  was  moving  up  into 
position,  dressing  to  his  left  on  General  Hovey,  the  right  of  his  line 
came  within  easy  range  of  the  enemy’s  field  artillery  and  musketry  from 
behind  his  works,  whereby  this  division  sustained  a serious  loss,  amount- 
ing in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  to  nearly  500  men.  This  was  the 
only  serious  loss  which  befell  my  command  during  the  campaign,  and 
resulted  from  misunderstanding  or  a misinterpretation  of  General  Ord’s 
minute  instructions  on  the  part  of  General  Lauman. 

By  the  morning  of  the  13th  of  July,  the  enemy  was  completely  in- 
vested in  Jackson,  and  we  were  in  full  and  undisputed  possession  of  all 
the  roads  leading  to  the  place  on  the  west  bank  of  Pearl  Biver,  and  our 
artillery  was  within  easy  range  of  every  part  of  the  city,  with  the  State- 
house  in  plain  view,  but  the  enemy  exhibited  an  ample  force  at  all 
points  wherever  we  approached  his  parapet,  and  his  artillery  replied 
freely  to  ours.  On  starting  from  Big  Black  Biver  we  carried  with  us  a 
good  supply  of  ammunition,  sufficient  for  an  open  field  battle,  but  not 
for  a siege ; and  the  moment  I saw  that  a siege  was  inevitable,  I dis- 
patched Captain  McFarland,  of  my  staff,  back  to  Black  Biver,  to  bring 
up  a supply  for  such  an  event,  and  in  the  mean  time  our  batteries  were 
restricted  in  their  use  of  ammunition  so  as  to  reserve  at  all  times  a suffi- 
cient quantity  for  an  open  field  fight  or  a sally. 

During  the  12th  and  13th,  we  threw  into  Jackson  about  3,000  rounds, 
mostly  from  10  and  20  pounder  Parrotts  and  12-pounder  Napoleons,  all 
of  which  did  great  execution. 

General  McArthur’s  division,  of  McPherson’s  corps,  having  been  or- 
dered up  from  Big  Black  Biver,  at  my  request,  one  brigade  was  posted  at 
Cham] don’s  Hill ; the  other  two,  under  the  general,  reached  Jackson  on 
the  morning  of  the  14th.  I then  only  awaited  the  arrival  of  the  ammu- 
nition train  to  open  a furious  cannonade  on  the  town  from  all  points  of 
our  line,  when  I learned  that  the  enemy’s  cavalry  had  gone  up  Pearl 
Biver  on  the  east  side,  12  miles,  to  Grant’s  Mills,  and  crossed  over  to  the 
west  bank.  This  force  was  over  3,000  strong,  being  General  Jackson’s 
entire  division.  Suspecting  his  purpose  to  be  an  attack  on  our  trains, 
and  apprehensive  for  the  safety  of  our  ammunition,  I ordered  back  to 
Clinton,  during  the  night  of  the  14th,  General  Matthies’  brigade  to  re- 
enforce a regiment  already  stationed  there,  and  by  means  of  the  tele- 
graph, which  had  been  constructed  to  my  camp,  put  all  parties  along 
the  road  on  their  guard.  One  brigade  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  approached 
Clinton  on  the  morning  of  the  15th  [16th],  and  was  handsomely  repulsed 
by  General  Matthies.  The  other  brigade  made  its  appearance  at  Bolton, 
and  succeeded  in  capturing  8 wagons  belonging  to  a pioneer  company 
of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  with  83  men,  partly  stragglers  and 
partly  composing  this  company,  but  did  not  attempt  to  attack  the  prin- 
cipal train,  which  was  close  by,  well  guarded  by  Chambers’  brigade. 

On  the  morning  of  the  15th,  I dispatched  a good  brigade  of  infantry 
(Woods’),  Landgraeber’s  battery  of  four  light  guns,  and  Bussey’s  cav- 
alry toward  Canton,  partly  to  alarm  this  force  of  cavalry  operating  to 
our  rear,  but  more  especially  to  destroy  the  railroad  as  far  out  as  the 
bridge  across  Big  Black  Biver,  40  miles  north  of  Jackson.  They  en- 


536  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  fete.  JChap.  XXxVi. 

countered  Jackson’s  cavalry  in  front  of  Canton,  and  drove  him  through 
the  town  and  east  beyond  Pearl  River.  They  then  destroyed  cars,  loco- 
motives, turn-tables,  shops,  and  every  manner  of  thing  pertaining  to 
the  railroad  in  Canton,  with  3 miles  of  the  track,  and  the  cavalry  pro- 
ceeded to  the  bridge  and  destroyed  it  effectually. 

Whilst  this  was  in  progress,  the  cavalry  belonging  to  Ord’s  corps 
went  south  to  Gallatin  and  Brookhaven,  60  miles,  breaking  up  the 
road,  destroying  cars,  and  damaging  the  road  in  its  whole  extent.  For 
the  amount  of  damage  thus  done  I must  refer  to  the  reports  of  the 
officers  charged  with  the  work,  which  will  accompany  this  report. 

Whilst  these  expeditions  to  our  right  and  left  were  progressing,  the 
main  force  before  Jackson  was  strengthening  the  parapets  and  rifle-pits, 
and  preparing  for  a general  attack  as  soon  as  the  ammunition  train 
should  get  up  from  the  rear.  This  did  not  reach  camp  till  late  in  the 
night  of  the  16tli,  too  late  to  distribute  the  ammunition. 

During  the  night,  within  the  town  of  Jackson,  could  be  heard  the 
sound  of  wagons,  but  nothing  that  betokened  an  evacuation,  for  the 
picks  and  shovels  were  at  work  until  midnight ; but  at  dawn  of  day  it 
became  manifest  that  the  place  was  evacuated,  and  the  enemy  had  with- 
drawn across  Pearl  River.  The  place  was  simultaneously  entered  at 
several  points,  a brigade  of  Potter’s  division,  Parke’s  corps,  being  the 
first  to  reach  the  State-house  and  plant  its  colors  thereon.  Blair’s  divis- 
ion was  soon  on  hand,  and  to  it  I assigned  the  charge,  of  the  city.  All 
other  troops  were  kept  outside. 

The  enemy,  in  retreating,  had  burned  all  the  bridges,  and  had  placed 
loaded  shells  with  torpedoes  in  the  roads  leading  out  from  the  river. 
The  explosion  of  one  of  these  wounded  a citizen  severely,  and  another 
killed  a man  and  wounded  two  others  of  Lightburn’s  brigade.  The 
enemy  had  also  fired  a building  containing  commissary  stores,  which  ex- 
tended and  consumed  one  of  the  most'valuable  blocks  of  the  city.  He 
had  also  during  the  progress  of  the  siege  burned  many  handsome  dwell- 
ings outside  and  near  his  line  of  defenses.  Indeed,  the  city,  with  the 
destruction  committed  by  ourselves  in  May  last  and  by  the  enemy  dur- 
ing this  siege,  is  one  mass  of  charred  ruins.  I soon  became  satisfied 
that  General  Johnston  had,  by  means  of  the  railroad  to  his  rear,  re- 
moved in  advance  nearly  all  his  materiel  of  war  and  his  impedimenta , 
and  that  pursuit  across  the  reach  of  land  of  nearly  90  miles  in  extent 
between  the  Central  Railroad  and  the  Mobile  and  Ohio  road,  devoid  of 
water,  in  the  intense  heat  of  a July  sun,  would  be  more  destructive  of 
my  own  command  than  fruitful  in  results,  and  determined  to  let  him  go. 
We  had  driven  him  out  of  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi,  and  out  of  his 
intrenched  camp.  I then  ordered  all  ordnance  to  be  collected  and  de- 
stroyed, and  put  working  parties  to  make  more  perfect  and  complete 
the  destruction  of  the  railroads. 

Besides  the  breaks  at  the  north  and  south,  before  recounted,  12  miles 
north  and  south  of  the  town  were  absolutely  destroyed;  every  tie  burned 
and  every  rail  of  iron  warped  so  as  to  be  utterly  useless. 

About  20  platform  cars  and  about  50  box  and  passenger  cars  were 
burned  in  the  city,  and  all  the  wheels  broken.  About  4,000  bales  of 
cotton,  used  as  parapets,  were  burned.  Two  heavy  rifled  fl  inch  guns, 
with  an  immense  pile  of  shot,  shell,  and  fixed  ammunition,  were  de- 
stroyed and  cast  into  Pearl  River. 

General  Steele,  with  three  brigades  of  the  Fifteenth  Army  Corps,  was 
sent  forward  on  tbe  17th  to  the  town  of  Brandon,  13  miles,  where  lie 
encountered  Jackson’s  cavalry,  already  broken  down  by  its  long  cir- 
cuit to  our  rear  and  round  by  way  of  Canton,  and  drove  him  farther 


Chap.  XxXVI.]  THE  JACKfON  CAMPAIGN.  vo  i 

east.  He  then  broke  up  and  destroyed  a section  of  3 miles  of  the  track, 
embracing  an  important  culvert.  . 

Having  thus  driven  the  enemy  forth  and  ruined  the  mam  arteries  ot 
travel  and  communication  in  the  heart  ot  Mississippi,  in  pursuance  ot 
the  instructions  of  General  Grant,  I dispatched  on  the  20th  General 
Parke  back  to  Haynes’  Bluff,  the  point  from  which  he  had  started,  by 
way  of  Brownsville,  and  on  the  following  day  General  Ord,  with  the 
Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  to  Vicksburg,  by  way  of  Raymond.  I re- 
mained two  days  longer  with  my  own  corps  (the  Fifteenth),  to  complete 
the  destruction  of  the  railroad  piers  and  to  regulate  somewhat  the  dis- 
ordered and  shattered  condition  of  the  inhabitants,  whose  homes  had 
been  ruined  by  war,  and  whose  supplies  had  been  utterly  exhausted  by 
the  demands  of  two  hostile  armies.  We  shared  with  them  freely  our 
stock  of  provisions  on  hand,  and,  with  General  Grant’s  approval,  I gave 
a committee  of  respectable  gentlemen  an  order  for  200  barrels  of  hour 
and  100  of  pork.  The  condition  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  interior  ap- 
peals to  the  humane  feelings  of  all  who  have  beheld  the  utter  ruin  and 
destruction  which  has  befallen  their  country. 

There  being  no  enemy  within  reach,  and  no  good  military  reasons  for 
a longer  stay  at  Jackson,  I moved  back  quietly  to  Clinton  on  the  23d, 
when  again  the  utter  exhaustion  of  the  provisions  of  the  country  com- 
pelled me  to  supply  the  hospitals  of  our  enemy  as  well  as  the  country 
people.  We  left  in  charge  of  a responsible  committee  a reasonable  sup- 
ply for  thirty  days  for  500  persons.  In  all  such  cases  I took  obligations 
that  the  provisions  thus  bestowed  by  our  Government  should  be  held 
sacred  for  the  use  of  the  impoverished  inhabitants.  Herewith  I inclose 
the  bonds  and  agreements  referred  to. 

On  the  24th,  we  moved  to  Champion’s  Hill,  and  on  the  25th  recrossed 
the  Big  Black  and  went  into  camp  at  our  present  healthy  and  well- 
chosen  positions. 

In  reviewing  the  events  thus  feebly  described,  it  may  seem  superflu- 
ous to  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  great  mass  of  troops  thus  called 
on  for  action  were  on  the  4th  day  of  July  in  the  trenches  before  \ icks- 
burg,  where  for  nearly  two  months  they  had  been  toiling  in  a hot  sun 
in  close  and  stifling  rifle-pits,  and  without  stopping  to  indulge  for  a 
moment  in  the  natural  joy  at  the  great  success  which  had  there  crowned 
their  labors,  they  were  required  again  to  march  in  heat  and  dust  for  50 
miles,  with  little  or  no  water,  save  in  muddy  creeks,  in  cisterns  already 
exhausted,  and  in  the  surface  ponds,  which  the  enemy,  in  his  retreat, 
had  tainted  with  dead  cattle  and  hogs ; that  we  crossed  Black  River 
by  bridges  of  our  own  construction,  and  then  had  to  deal  with  an  army 
which  had,  under  a leader  of  great  renown,  been  formed  specially  to 
raise  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  far  superior  to  us  in  cavalry,  and  but  little 
inferior  in  either  infantry  or  artillery  ; that  we  drove  him  50  miles  and 
left  him  in  f ull  retreat ; that  we  have  destroyed  those  great  arteries  of 
travel  in  the  State  which  alone  could  enable  him  to  assemble  troops  and 
molest  our  possession  of  the  Mississippi  River,  and  that  we  have  so  ex- 
hausted the  land  that  no  army  can  exist  during  this  season  without 
hauling  in  wagons  all  his  supplies.  This  seems  to  me  a fit  supplement 
to  the  reconquest  of  the  Mississippi  River  itself,  and  makes  that  per- 
fect which  otherwise  would  have  been  imperfect. 

The  conduct  of  the  troops,  so  far  as  fighting  is  concerned,  was  all  that 
any  commander  could  ask,  and  the  sagacity  and  skill  displayed  in  exe- 
cuting the  works  before  Jackson  wras  a fit  sequel  to  the  lessons  learned 
before  Vicksburg;  but  there  was  and  is  too  great  a tendency  to  plun- 
der and  pillage,  confined  to  a few  men,  that  reflects  discredit  on  us  all. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Ciiai*.  XXX vx 


>38 


I would  like  to  speak  of  t he  particular  merits  of  many  of  the  officers, 
but  1 cannot  do  so  with  justice  and  fairness  to  others,  unless  in  posses- 
sion of  all  the  reports  of  subordinate  commanders,  which  I have  not 
yet  received.  We  came  together  suddenly  and  have  scattered  as  sud- 
denly, but  I will  endeavor  to  procure,  as  soon  as  possible,  all  the  details 
of  the  events  which  I have  only  attempted  to  sketch,  and  will  then  sub- 
mit them  with  my  indorsements. 

I have  already  sent  in  669  prisoners,  and  will  send  in  95  more,  with 
the  proper  lists. 

Our  aggregate  loss  in  killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners  will  fall  below 
a thousand,  whilst  the  enemy  has  lost  in  prisoners  alone  more  than  that 
number,  besides  those  killed  and  wounded  in  Jackson  ; and  I have  good 
information  that  the  divisions  of  Breckinridge  and  Loring,  in  their  re- 
treat beyond  Brandon,  had  scattered  and  were  straggling  to  the  right 
and  left  in  search  of  provisions  and  water. 

I doubt  if  the  presence  of  a hostile  army  will  again  compel  us  to  visit 
the  interior  of  this  State,  and  I know  that  many  of  the  best  inhabitants 
of  the  land  are  now  clamorous  for  peace  on  terms  perfectly  acceptable 
to  all  who  do  not  aim  at  the  absolute  destruction  of  this  part  of  the 
United  States. 

I am,  with  great  respect,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Ool.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General  to  General  Grant , Vielcsburg. 

[Inclosures.] 

Headquarters, 
Jacbson , Miss.,  July  14,  1863. 

Major-General  Sherman  : 

(Or  officer  commanding  United  States  forces.) 

Sir  : The  bodies  of  your  men  who  fell  on  our  south  front  day  before 
yesterday  are  still  uuburieds 

To  enable  us  to  bury  them,  I respectfully  propose  that  you  give  orders 
to  your  troops  not  to  fire  on  our  parties  so  engaged.  Should  you  in- 
form me  that  you  have  given  such  orders,  your  dead  shall  be  immedi- 
ately buried.  It  will  require  about  three  hours. 

Most  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 

General , C.  8.  Army. 

Headquarters, 

Army  before  Jaekson,  July  14,  1863 — 12  m. 
General  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  G.  S.  Army,  Jackson,  Miss. : 

General:  Your  letter  by  flag  of  truce  is  received.  I have  ordered 
firing  and  work  on  trenches  to  cease  till  4 p.  m.,  a flag  to  be  shown  on 
the  Clinton  road. 

At  4 p.  m.  the  flag  will  be  withdrawn  and  firing  resumed.  I thank 
you  for  the  offer  to  bury  the  dead  who  fell  on  the  south  front  day  be- 
fore yesterday, and  ask  that  two  or  three  subordinate  officers  be  allowed 
to  see  the  dead  collected,  to  recognize  and  record  their  names,  or,  it 
you  are  willing  to  cause  them  to  be  collected  at  any  point,  1 will  have 
them  removed  and  interred. 

I am,  very  respectfully’  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

M ajor-  G eneral , Com  nmnding. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


539 


Jackson,  July  14,  1863 — 2 p.  m. 
Maj.  Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman,  U.  S.  Army: 

General  : I have  just  had  the  honor  to  receive  your  letter  of  to- 

^ The  bodies  are  in  such  a state  of  decomposition  that  their  removal 
is  impossible.  I have  directed  that  they  be  buried  as  well  as  the  brief 
time  you  appropriate  to  the  purpose  will  allow.  I regret  that  my  prop- 
osition was  not  made  yesterday,  when  it  would  have  been  practicable 
to  accede  to  your  requests. 

Most  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  E.  JOHNSTON, 

General , C.  8.  Army. 


Headquarters,  Army  before  Jackson , July  16,  1863. 

William  Yerger,  W.  H.  Allen,  and  others, 

Jackson , Miss. : 

Gentlemen  : Your  communication  * is  received.  The  city  of  J ackson 
will  be  occupied  by  a division  of  troops,  commanded  by  General  Blair. 
His  orders  will  be  to  protect  private  property.  I can  make  no  terms, 
because  resistance  has  been  made  with  artillery  until  it  became  hope- 
less, and  terms  would  compromise  the  Government  of  the  United  States, 
but  I assure  you  that  all  citizens  acting  in  good  faith  will  be  respected 
by  me  and  my  command,  and  that  families  will  be  encouraged  to  get 
borne,  stay  there,  and  resume  their  peaceful  vocations. 

I am,  &c., 

W.  T.  SHERMAN. 
Major-General , Commanding. 

Headquarters  Fifteenth  Army  Corps, 

Jackson , Miss.,  July  21,  1863. 

C.  H.  Mansiiip,  Esq.,  Mayor  of  Jackson: 

Sir:  Yours  of  July  20 * is  received.  I will  cause  200  barrels  of  flour 
and  100  barrels  of  mess  pork  to  be  delivered  at  Big  Black  River  Bridge, 
to  the  order  of  any  committee  you  may  accredit  who  will  undertake  to 
distribute  the  same  to  people  in  want,  living  in  and  near  Jackson.  Let 
the  committee  be  appointed  at  once,  and  I will  furnish  them  a safe 
conduct  to  and  from  the  river. 

I am,  &c.,  W.  T.  SHERMAN, 

Major-General , Commanding. 

Jackson,  July  21,  1863. 

Maj.  Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman: 

Sir:  In  accordance  with  your  order  agreeing  to  furnish  supplies  to 
the  citizens  of  Jackson  and  vicinity  who  are  in  need  of  the  same,  I have 
appointed  a committee  to  distribute  the  same,  composed  of  the  following 
gentlemen,  to  wit:  Judge  William  Yerger,  D.  N.  Barrows,  esq.,  J.  H. 
Boyd,  esq.,  Dr.  Poindexter,  F.  S.  Hunt,  esq.,  Fulton  Anderson,  esq.,  J. 
A.  Kausler,  esq.,  J.  M.  Coats,  esq.,  and  Hon.  W.  L.  Sharkey. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

C.  II.  MANSHIP, 

Mayor. 


* Not.  fon ml. 


540 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


July  22,  1863. 

Whereas  Major-General  Sherman  has  agreed  to  furnish  to  those  in  need 
of  provisions,  in  Jackson  and  its  vicinity,  200  barrels  of  flour  and  20,000 
pounds  ol  pork,  or  its  equivalent  in  hard  bread  and  bacon,  we,  the  un- 
dersigned, a committee  appointed  by  the  mayor  to  receive  said  supplies, 
agree  to  receive  the  same,  and  to  distribute  the  same  fairly  and  equally 
among  the  inhabitants  needing  the  same,  in  proportion  to  the  numbers 
of  members  in  their  families. 

W.  YERGER. 

D.  N.  BARROWS. 

W.  Q.  POINDEXTER, 

F.  ANDERSON. 

W.  L.  SHARKEY. 

F.  S.  HUNT. 

J.  A.  KAUSLER. 

J.  M.  COATS. 

J.  H.  BOYD. 

Clinton,  July  23,  1863. 

We,  citizens  of  Clinton,  Miss.,  having  received  from  the  United  States 
fifteen  thousand  rations  for  subsistence  for  destitute  people  in  Clinton 
and  vicinity,  pledge  our  honor  that  the  same  shall  be  equitably  dis- 
tributed, and  that  none  of  the  stores  shall  be  convertible  to  the  use  of 
the  troops  of  the  so  called  Confederate  States. 

M.  TANNER. 

W.  W.  DUNTON. 

W.  HILLMAN. 

A DDENDA. 

Report  of  G.  Spencer,  scout. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston  has  not  to  exceed  22,000  men,  as  follows: 

Major  General  Loring’s  division,  about  5,000.  Boring’s  brigades  are 
commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  John  Adams,  Brigadier-General  Featherston, 
and  Brigadier-General  Buford.  Has  about  thirty  guns. 

Major-General  Walker’s  division,  about  5,000.  Walker’s  brigades  are 
commanded  by  General  Gist,  Colonel  Wilson,  Brigadier-General  Gregg, 
and  [M.  D.]  Ector.  Walker  has  about  thirty  guns. 

Major  General  French’s  division,  about  4,000.  French’s  brigades  are 
commanded  by  Brigadier-General  McNair  and  two  others.  As  near  as 
I could  learn,  but  three  brigades  composed  this  division.  French  has 
two  batteries — twelve  guns. 

Maj.  Gen.  John  C.  Breckinridge’s  division,  about  5,000.  Of  his  bri- 
gade commanders,  I am  not  well  informed.  He  has  a heavy  proportion 
of  artillery.  His  troops  are  mostly  Kentuckians  and  Tennesseeans,  and 
his  division  is  considered  the  best  in  Johnston’s  army. 

Brigadier-General  Jackson’s  cavalry  division  and  several  detached 
companies  will  number  about  3,000.  One  brigade  is  commanded  by 
General  Cosby;  the  other  by  General  Whitfield.  He  has  but  two  bri- 
gades, having  consolidated  his  command. 

The  disposition  of  the  enemy’s  (rebel)  force  in  their  fortifications  is 
as  follows: 

Loring  on  the  right,  next  Walker,  next  French,  and  last  (on  their  left) 
Breckinridge. 

The  cavalry  is  camped  in  the  rear  about  a mile,  in  order  to  afford 
protection  to  the  wagon  trains,  which  are  immense. 


Chat.  XXXVT.j 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


541 


The  rebels  have  pickets  at  every  crossing  on  Pearl  River  for  a dis- 
tance of  15  miles  above  and  10  miles  below  Jackson. 

All  the  wagons  are  concentrated  within  5 miles  ot  Jackson.  Ike 
rebels  are  rapidly  fortifying  their  position,  and  have  several  heavy  guns, 
which  they  intend  to  mount  on  their  works. 

Re  enforcements  to  the  number  of  10,000  men  are  expected  within  ten 


days.  , i . 

All  supplies  are  received  by  way  of  Meridian.  Supplies  are  very 
meager.  All  the  rolling  stock  of  the  Mississippi  Central,  New  Orleans, 
Jackson  and  Great  Northern  Railroad,  and  the  Mississippi  and  Tennes- 
see Railroad  has  been  sent  up  the  road,  probably  to  Grenada,  The 
locomotives  will  number  nearly  50  and  the  cars  over  200,  all  first  class 
stock.  Many  of  the  cars  were  loaded  with  machinery  and  railroad 

fixtures.  ...  . mi 

I have  traversed  nearly  the  whole  State  of  Mississippi.  There  are  no 
troops  of  consequence  in  the  middle  and  northern  portions  ot  the  State, 
except  the  commands  of  Johnston,  Chalmers,  Gholson,  and  Ruggles. 
Nearly  the  entire  population  is  in  arms,  and  but  few  men  are  at  home. 

For  the  disposition  of  Johnston’s  army,  see  the  diagram,*  which  is 
drawn  from  recollection. 

The  following  are  the  numbers  of  such  regiments  as  1 have  been  able 
to  obtain  and  note  down  : 

Kentucky. — Third , Fourth,  Fifth,  Sixth,  Seventh,  and  Eighth. 

Tennessee. — Third , Tenth,  Eighteenth,  Thirtieth,  Fortieth,  Fiftieth, 
and  Sixtieth. 

Arkansas. — First  and  Second  (dismounted)  Riflemen,  hirst  and  JNinth 
Infantry,  Fourth,  Twenty-fifth,  Thirty-second,  Tenth,  and  the  Fourth 
Arkansas  Battalion.  These  are  McNair’s  brigade. 

Texas  — Third,  Sixth,  Ninth,  and  Fifteenth  Texas  and  Whitfield’s 
First  Texas  Legion  (cavalry)  compose  Whitfield’s  brigade;  Seventh 


Infantry. 

Louisiana. — Fourth  Battalion  and  Fourth  Regiment. 

Mississippi. — Fourteenth,  Twenty-seventh,  Twenty-eighth,  and  the 
Fourth  Cavalry. 

Georgia. — Twenty-fifth  and  Twenty-seventh  Infantry. 

South  Carolina. — Twenty-fourth  aud  Twenty-ninth  Infantry,  in  Gist’s 
brigade. 

North  Carolina. — Thirty-eighth  Infantry. 


Report  of  Ordnance  and  Ordnance  Stores  captured  at  Jackson , Miss. 

Camp  on  Bio  Black  River,  Miss.,  July  29,  1863. 

Destroyed  by  Capt,  J.  D.  McFarland,  actiug  ordnance  officer:  21,000 
shot  and  shell,  425  muskets,  850  sets  infantry  accouterments,  1,620 
rounds  3J-inch  rifle-gun  ammunition,  and  125  rounds  6^-inch  rifle-gun 
ammunition. 

Destroyed  by  provost-marslial : 350  muskets  and  500  rounds  fixed 
ammunition  for  6 and  12  pounder  field  guns. 

Destroyed  by  chief  of  artillery : Two  32-pounder  siege  guns*  rifled 
(mounted  en  barbette). 

Turned  over  to  assistant  quartermaster  for  transportation:  621  mus- 
kets aud  one  2-iucli  bronze  rifled  gun  (breech-loading). 


Not  found. 


542 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAr.  XXXVI, 


The  32-pounder  guns  were  destroyed  by  burning  the  carriages  and 
knocking  off  the  trunnions. 

The  infantry  accouterments  destroyed  were  of  poor  quality,  being 
made  of  pasteboard,  covered  with  a light  oiled  cloth,  and,  with  our 
limited  transportation,  were  not  considered  of  sufficient  value  to  haul 
to  Vicksburg. 

The  muskets  destroyed  were  more  or  less  damaged  in  different  parts 5 
and  having  been  instructed  by  the  commanding  general  to  use  my  dis- 
cretion, I deemed  it  prudent  to  destroy  them  by  breaking  them  up  and 
throwing  them  into  sinks,  &c.,  rather  than  to  attempt  the  difficult  task 
of  finding  means  of  conveyance  for  them  to  Vicksburg. 

The  fixed  ammunition  destroyed  by  the  provost-marshal  was  not  dis- 
covered in  time  to  get  transportation  for  it,  the  train  having  left;  con- 
sequently I ordered  its  destruction  by  a detail  from  the  provost  guard. 

The  shot  and  shell  I ordered  to  be  thrown  into  bayous  and  branches, 
where  they  would  sink  into  the  mud.  Pearl  River  being  shallow  and 
clear,  they  could  be  easily  recovered  from  it. 

The  destruction  of  the  piers  of  the  railroad  bridge  across  Pearl  River, 
though  not  coming  under  the  head  of  ordnance,  may  be  mentioned  here, 
having  been  done  under  my  supervision.  I mention,  for  the  informa- 
tion of  the  commanding  general,  that  388  rounds  of  ammunition  were 
expended  in  effecting  their  destruction. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EZRA  TAYLOR, 

Maj.  First  Illinois  Light  Artillery , Chief  of  Artillery  Fifteenth  A.  C. 


No.  2. 


Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Jackson, 

Miss.,  July  10-16,  1863. 


Ch» v.  XXXVI.]  T1IE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


543 


Return  of  Casualties  in  t he  Union  forces  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Jaclcson,  Miss.,  J-c.— CouPd. 


Command. 


Third  Brigade. 

Col.  Daniel  Leasuee. 


2d  Michigan 

8th  Michigan 

20th  Michigan 

79th  New  York  — 
100th  Pennsylvania* 


Total  Third  Brigade. 


Artillery. 


Pennsylvania  Light,  Battery  D* 

3d  United  States,  Batteries  L and  M* 


Total  First  Division . 


SECOND  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Robert  B.  Potter. 
First  Brigade. 

Col.  Simon  G.  Griffin. 


6th  New  Hampshire* 
9th  New  Hampshire 
7th  Rhode  Island  . . . 


Total  First  Brigade 


Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Edward  Ferrero. 


35th  Massachusetts.. 
11th  New  Hampshire 

5lst  New  York 

51st  Pennsylvania  — 


Total  Second  Brigade 


Third  Brigade. 

Col.  Benjamin  C.  Christ. 


29th  Massachusetts 

4Gth  New  York 

50th  Pennsylvania . 


Total  Third  Brigade 


Artillery. 

2d  New  York  Light,  Battery  L*  . 
Total  Second  Division 


Artillery  Reserve. 
2d  United  States,  Battery  E* 


Killed. 


15 


Wounded. 


36 


61 


23 


35 


Captured 
or  missing. 


10 


10 


11 


96 


16 


24 


46 


No  loss  reported. 


544 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVJ 


Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Jackson , Miss.,  cfc. — Cont’d 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured 
or  missing. 

Aggregate. 

0Q 

S 

o 

d 

© 

a 

© 

co 

'a 

H 

(H 

© 

© 

m 

o 

a 

© 

a 

© 

a 

« 

CD 

V 

o 

m 

o 

a 

© 

a 

© 

'a 

w 

F1KST  DIVISION  (SIXTEENTH  AHMY  COUPS).* 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  Sooy  Smith. 

First  Brigade. 

Col.  John  M.  Loomis. 

l 

11 

2 

10 

5 

12 

3 

11 

5 

1 

1 

12th  Indiana 

100th  Indiana 

Total  First  Brigade 

1 

l 

Lj_- 

1 

28 

31 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Stephen  G.  Hicks. 

40th  Illinois 

s 

i 

12 

13 

103d  Illinois! 

15th  Michigan  t 

46th  Ohio 

i 

7 

8 

Total  Second  Brigade 

2 

19 

21 

Third  Brigade. 

Col.  Joseph  R.  Cockekill. 

97th  Indiana 

3 

1 

2 

28 

6 

9 

1 

! 

33 

l 

3 

99th  Indiana 

53d  Ohio 

70th  Ohio 

1 

1 

Total  Third  Brigade 

5 

2 

44 

1 

52 

Fourth  Brigade. 

Col.  William  W.  Sanford. 

48th  Illinois 

1 

2 

12 

15 

3 

8 

16 

27 

6th  Iowa 

2 

Total  Fourth  Brigade  

2 

3 

27 

11 

43 

Artillery. 

1st  Illinois  Light,  Battery  F 

1st  Illinois  Light,  Battery  T 

Illinois  Light  Cogswell’s  battery  . . 

- 

Indiana  Light,  6th  Battery 

Total  Artillery* 

Total  First  Division,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps 

CAVALRY.* 

Col.  Cyrus  Bussey. 

5tli  Illinois  

i 

11 

5 

118 

12 

147 

1 

1 

1 

3d  Iowa  (six  companies) 

1 

4th  Iowat  

2d  Wisconsin  (seven  companies)* 

Total  Cavalry 

1 I 

1 

2 

Total  Ninth  Artny  Corps} 

2 

32 

14 

215  j 3 

25 

291 

* Temporarily  attached  to  the  Ninth  Army  Corps, 
t No  loss  reported. 

t Including  troops  temporarily  attached. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


545 


Return  of  Casualties  in  the  JJniou  forces  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Jackson , Miss.^c. — Cout’d. 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured 
or  missing. 

Aggregate. 

00 

M 

o 

0 

1 

o 

Enlisted  men. 

E 

© 

© 

5S 

o 

Enlisted  men. 

00 

S 

o 

59 

o 

Enlisted  men. 

THIRTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 

Maj.  Gen.  Edward  0.  C.  Ord. 

NINTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Peter  J.  Osterhaus. 

First  Brigade. 

Col.  James  Keigwin. 

1 

2 

2 

4 

3 

13 

3 

9 

4 

16 

6 

13 

1 

1 

2 

9 

28 

39 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Daniel  IV.  Lindsey. 

2 

2 

4 

3 

6 

12 

3 

5 

10 

KJth  Oh*"  

1 

2 

A9rl  rUiin  

fiAAAn/1  "Rri  crni\  a _ _ 

2 

5 

18 

25 

Cavalry  Brigade. 

Maj.  Hugh  Fullerton. 

2d  Illinoi s (thrco  companies) * 

3d  Illinois  (three  conip^nies)  - - ......... 

1 

2 

3 

4tli  Indiana  (ono  company)* ........... ................ 

6th  Missouri  (seven  companies)  aa  T,^_ 

1 

4 

5 

Total  Cavalry  Brigade  

2 

2 

4 

8 

Mounted  Infantry. 

Col.  John  G.  Fonda. 

1 1 8th  Illinois  t . .......................  



4 

4 

1 

6 

Artillery. 

Capt.  Charles  H.  Lanphere. 

Michigan  Light  7th  Battery ..... .................... 

1 

6 

IV isconsin  Light  1st  Battery  .............. 

Total  Artillery 

7 

7 

Total  "N4nth  Division  ...  

6 

16 

57 

4 

83 

TENTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Andrew  J.  Smith. 

First  Brigade. 

Col.  Richard  Owen. 

16th  Indiana  - _ . 

1 

5 

4 

3 

5 

7 

1 

10 

4 

4 

8 

7 

34 

60th  Indiana  T 

2 

3 

R7t.li  Indiana,  _ . 

R3d  Ohio  

1 

2 

flfit.h  Ohin ...... 

1 

— 

2Sd  Wisconsin 

Total  First  Brigade  

3 

25 

1 

6 

1 

*No  loss  reported.  t Detached  from  First  Brigade,  July  12. 

35  R R-  VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


546  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 


Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Jackson , Miss.,  $c. — Cont’d. 


Command. 


Killed. 


Wounded. 


Captured 
or  missing. 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  William  J.  Landram. 


77th  Illinois 

97th  Illinois 

130th  Illinois 

19th  Kentucky.. 
48th  Ohio* 


Total  Second  Brigade 


12 


Artillery. 

Illinois  Light,  Mercantile  Battery. 
Ohio  Light,  17th  Battery 


Total  Artillery* 

Total  Tenth  Division 


37 


TWELFTH  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  Alvin  P.  Hovey.  t 
First  Brigade. 

Col.  William  T.  Spicely. 


11th  Indiana  — 
24th  Indiana  — 
34th  Indiana  — 
46th  Indiana  — 
29th  Wisconsin 


Total  First  Brigade 


Second  Brigade. 
Col.  James  R.  Slack. 


87th  Illinois . 
47th  Indiana 
24th  Iowa  — 
28th  Iowa  — 
56th  Ohio  .... 


Total  Second  Brigade 


Artillery. 


1st  Missouri  Light,  Battery 

Ohio  Light,  2d  Battery 

Ohio  Light,  16th  Battery 


Total  Artillery* 


Cavalry. 

1st  Indiana,  Company  C* 

Total  Twelfth  Division 


38 


16 


54 


18 


11 


52 


41 


19 


* No  loss  reported. 

t Also  in  command  of  the  Fourth  Division,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps,  from  July  12, 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN.  547 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Jackson , Miss.,  $c. — Cont’d. 


Command. 


FOURTEENTH  DIVISION. 

Bug.  Gen.  William  P.  Benton. 
First  Brigade. 

Col.  David  Shunk. 

33d  Illinois 

99th  Illinois* 

8th  Indiana 

18th  Indiana 

Indiana  Light  Artillery,  1st  Battery 

Total  Pirst  Brigade 

Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Michael  K.  Lawler. 

21st  Iowa 

22d  Iowa 

23d  Iowa 

11th  Wisconsin 

2d  Illinois  Light  Artillery,  Battery  A* 

Total  Second  Brigade 

Total  Fourteenth  Division 


Killed. 


FOURTH  DIVISION  (SIXTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS).! 

Brig.  Gen.  Jacob  G.  Lauman.J 
First  Brigade. 

Col.  Isaac  C.  Pugh. 


41  st  Illinois 

53d  Illinois 

3d  Iowa 

33d  Wisconsin*. 


Total  First  Brigade 

Second  Brigade. 
Col.  Cyrus  Hall. 


14th  Illinois. 
15th  Illinois 
46th  Illinois. 
76th  Illinois. 


Wounded. 


56 


10 


25 


11 


16 


Captured 
or  missing. 


125 

50 

51 


226 


120 


13 


18 


19 


37 


202 

126 

113 


441 


Total  Second  Brigade* 

Third  Brigade. 

Col.  George  E.  Bryant. 


28th  Illinois. 

32d  Illinois* 

53d  Indiana 

12th  Wisconsin* 


41 


Total  Third  Brigade. 


41 


ID 


20 


* No  loss  reported. 

t Temporarily  attached  to  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

I Superseded,  July  12,  by  Brig.  Gen.  Alvin  P.  Hovey.  Upon  assuming  command, 
General  Hovey  attached  the  Fourth  Division,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps,  to  the  Twelfth 
.V,1™011,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  and  designated  the  brigades,  respectively,  as  the 
Third,  Fourth,  and  Fifth  of  the  latter  division. 


548  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chat.  XXXVI. 

Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Jaclcson , Miss.,  ^c. — Cod  I’d. 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured 
or  missing. 

Aggregate. 

s 

s 

o 

m 

o 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Artillery. 

2d  Illinois  Light,  Battery  E* 

1 

1 

7 

9 

Ohio  Light,  7th  Battery* 

Ohio  Light,  15th  Battery* 

1 

1 

1 

7 

9 

Cavalry. 

15th  Illinois,  Companies  E and  I* 

Total  Fourth  Division,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps 

UNATTACHED  PIONEERS. 

' 

8 

60 

28 

274 

9 

140 

519 

8 

77 

49 

452 

9 

156 

751 

FIFTEENTH  ARMY  CORPS. 

Maj.  Gen.  Frederick  Steele. 

FIRST  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  John  M.  Thayer. 

First  Brigade. 

Col.  Bernard  G.  Farrar. 

IS+.h  Tllinms  

2 

2 

9.7fh  Missouri*  . 

90tVi  TVTissmrH*  - 

30th  Missouri*  - - - 

31st.  Vriss.mTri*  . 

32d  Missouri. ................ 

1 

1 

Total  First  Brigade 

3 

3 

Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Charles  R.  Woods. 

95th  Xowa  - - 







2 

1 

1 

4 

31st  Iowa  * 

3d  Missouri  - - - 

2 

2 

12th  Missouri  * 

17th  Missouri  * ... ...... ............................ 

*7 Ohio  * 

Total  Second  Brigade 

4 

1 

i ! 

6 

Third  Brigade. 

Col.  Milo  Smith. 

9th  Iowa 

26th  Iowa - 

30th  Iowa  

* No  loss  reported. 

t Including  Fourth  Division,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps,  attached. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN.  549 


Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Jackson,  Miss. , Jc. — Cont/d. 


Command. 

Killed. 

Wounded. 

Captured 
or  missing. 

Aggregate. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Officers. 

Enlisted  men. 

Artillery. 

Iowa  Light,  1st  Battery 

2d  Missouri  Light,  Battery  F 

Total  Artillery* 

Cavalry. 

Kane  County,  Illinois  (one  company) 

3d  Illinois,  Company  D 

Total  Cavalry* 

Total  First  Division 

4 

1 

1 

3 

9 

SECOND  DIVISION. 

Maj.  Gen.  Frank  P.  Blair,  Jr. 

. First  Brigade. 

Col.  Giles  A.  Smith. 

113th  Illinois* 

116th  Illinois 

3 

3 

6th  Missouri  * 

8th  Missouri 

1 

2 

1 

9 

13th  United  States 

1 

1 

5 

Total  First  Brigade 

— 

1 

6 

1 1 5 

13 

Second  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Joseph  A.  J.  Lightburn. 

55th  Illinois 

127th  Illinois* 

83d  Indiana* 

1 

1 

1 

3 

54th  Ohio* 

57th  Ohio 

2 

2 

Total  Second  Brigade 

3 

1 

1 

5 

Third  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  Hugh  Ewing. 

30th  Ohio 

37th  Ohio 

47th  Ohio 

1 

1 

2 

2 

2 

t 1 U1  VULIU  .......  ......  

4th  West  Virginia  * 

Total  Third  Brigade 

1 

1 

1 

4 

5 

Artillery. 

1st  Illinois  Light,  Battery  A 

— 

— 

1st  Illinois  Light,  Battery  B 

1st  Illinois  Light,  Battery  H 

Ohio  Light,  8th  Battery 

Total  Artillery  * 

Cavalry. 

Illinois,  Thielemann’s  Battalion 

1 0th  Missouri  Company  C 

Total  Cavalry  * 

Total  Second  Division 

5 

1 

IT 

1 

K 1 

===== 

tJ  £0 

No  loss  reported. 


550  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

'Return  of  Casualties  in  the  Union  forces  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Jackson,  Miss.,  $c. — Cont’d. 


Command. 


THIRD  DIVISION. 

Brig.  Gen.  James  M.  Tuttle. 
First  Brigade. 

Col.  William  L.  McMillen. 


114th  Illinois. 
93d  Indiana 
72d  Ohio  .... 
95th  Ohio*.. 


Total  First  Brigade 

Third  Brigade. 

Col.  Joseph  J.  Woods. 


8th  Iowa. 
12th  Iowa. 
35th  Iowa. 


Total  Third  Brigade 

Artillery. 


1st  Illinois  Light,  Battery  E . 
Iowa  Light,  2d  Battery  * — 


Killed. 


Total  Third  Division 

Total  Fifteenth  Army  Corps . 


10 


Wounded.  Captured 
or  missing. 


10 


15 


27 


RECAPITULATION. 


Ninth  Army  Corps 

Thirteenth  Army  Corps 
Fifteenth  Army  Corps.. 


Total  Expeditionary  Army. 


10 


29 


29 


37 


13 


34 


48 


32 

77 

10 

14 

49 

5 

215 

452 

27 

3 

9 

1 

25 

156’ 

37 

291 

751 

80 

119 

68 

694 

13 

218 

1, 122 

OFFICERS  KILLED. 
ILLINOIS. 


Capt.  James  A.  Dugger,  26th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Frederick  C.  Beckdoldt,  28th  In- 
fantry. 

Lieut.  John  McGorie,  28th  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Michael  Gapin,  28th  Infantry. 


Maj.  Francis  M.  Long,  41st  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Christopher  Cornealy,  41st  In- 
fantry. 

Col.  Seth  C.  Earl,  53d  Infantry. 

Capt.  Michael  Leahy,  53d  Infantry. 


IOWA. 

Lieut.  Edward  W.  Hall,  3d  Infantry. 

PENNSYLVANIA. 

Lieut.  Richard  Humphreys,  45th  Infantry. 


No  loss  reported. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


551 


OFFICERS  MORTALLY  WOUNDED. 

ILLINOIS. 

Maj.  William  J.  Stephenscm,  48th  In-  Lieut.  George  W.  Hemstreet,  53d  In- 
fantry. fantry. 

Capt.  James  E.  Hudson,  53d  Infantry. 

INDIANA. 

Lieut.  Jefferson  Poling,  34th  Infantry.  | Lieut.  William  F.  Jerauld,  97th  Infantry. 

IOWA. 

Capt.  John  L.  Ruckmau,  3d  Infantry.  Lieut.  Joseph  Ruckman,  3d  Infantry. 
Lieut.  Abner  H.  McMurtrie,  3d  Infantry.  I 

MICHIGAN. 

Lieut.  Harper  S.  Richardson,  27th  Infantry. 

NEW  HAMPSHIRE. 

Capt.  S.  Judson  Alexander,  9th  Infantry. 

OHIO. 

Lieut.  Hiram  E.  Totten,  120th  Infantry. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Col.  Cyrus  Bussey , Third  Iowa  Cavalry , commanding  cavalry 

forces. 

Headquarters  Cavalry  Forces, 

Near  Clinton , Miss .,  July  22,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
action  of  the  forces  under  my  command  during  the  expedition  against 
Jackson,  Miss. : 

In  obedience  to  orders  from  headquarters  Expeditionary  Army,  I left 
camp  near  Big  Black  River  on  the  morning  of  the  7th  instant,  and  moved 
down  to  Messinger’s  Ferry,  where  I found  the  Fifteenth  Army  Corps 
all  over  and  moving  forward  on  the  Bolton  road.  I moved  my  com- 
mand to  the  front  of  the  column,  and  pushed  forward  to  near  Jeff. 
Davis’  plantation,  when  my  advance  was  fired  on  by  a small  force  of 
rebel  cavalry.  Before  I could  ascertain  their  numbers,  they  disappeared. 
I reached  Bolton  at  1 p.  m.,  and  camped  for  the  night. 

On  the  evening  of  the  8th,  I was  ordered  forward  with  my  command 
on  the  road  to  Clinton.  I had  proceeded  about  2 miles,  when  my  ad- 
vance guard  (Third  Iowa  Cavalry,  under  Major  Noble)  encountered  the 
enemy.  I ordered  the  advance  to  charge  them,  which  they  did  in  fine 
style,  driving  them  3 or  4 miles. 

When  within  3 miles  of  Clinton,  the  enemy  were  discovered  in  force, 
strongly  posted  in  the  woods  and  behind  a fence.  I detached  a com- 
pany of  the  Third  Iowa  Cavalry  and  one  of  the  Fifth  Illinois  Cavalry, 
under  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Hammond,  to  move  to  the  right 
of  the  road  and  flank  the  enemy,  while  the  advance,  supported  by  Major 
Scott,  pressed  forward  on  the  main  road.  Colonel  Hammond  reached 
the  enemy’s  left  and  opened  fire,  which  was  returned.  He  then  pressed 


552 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

forward  to  a fence,  which  his  men  threw  down  under  a heavy  fire.  At 
this  time  the  advance  charged  the  enemy  with  success,  driving  him  from 
the  held. 

One  mile  farther  on  the  rebels  were  again  .found  in  line,  and  driven 
from  the  field  by  Major  Seley,  of  the  Fifth  Illinois  Cavalry.  Colonel 
Hammond  moved  forward,  at  some  distance  to  the  right  of  the  road,  to 
within  a mile  of  Clinton,  where  General  Whitfield’s  brigade,  of  Jack- 
son’s  cavalry  division,  was  strongly  posted  in  line  of  battle.  After 
severe  skirmishing,  the  enemy  retired,  and  were  not  pursued,  it  being 
already  dark.  I formed  my  men  in  line  in  the  edge  of  the  woods  and 
camped  for  the  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  9th,  I moved  out  on  the  Jackson  road  4 miles, 
where  I lound  the  enemy  in  position.  Skirmishing  was  kept  up  for 
several  hours,  until  the  arrival  of  the  Niuth  Army  Corps  on  right  flank 
of  the  enemy  caused  him  to  retire. 

On  the  10th,  I moved  to  the  Livingston  road,  thence  to  the  vicinitv 
of  the  insane  asylum,  where  the  enemy  were  found  in  force.  I sent 
forward  the  Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry,  under  Colonel  Winslow,  and,  after 
some  slight  skirmishing,  my  command  encamped  at  the  asylum.  Dur- 
ing this  clay  a party  was  sent  to  Pearl  Fiver,  which  destroyed  a portion 
of  the  railroad  track,  cut  the  telegraph  wires,  &c.,  and  returned. 

On  the  11th,  I left  camp  at  4 p.  m.  and  moved  out  on  the  Livingston 
road  6 miles,  thence  east  5 miles,  to  the  Japkson  and  Hew  Orleans  Bail- 
road,  which  point  I reached  at  10  p.  m.  I dismounted  the  Third  and 
Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry,  and  destroyed  a half  mtle  of  track.  At  12  o’clock 
we  proceeded  to  within  2 miles  of  Calhoun,  and  camped  at  2 a.  m. 

At  6 a.  m.  of  the  12th,  I arrived  at  Calhoun,  where  1 burned  2 locomo- 
tives,  25  cars,  the  depot  (containing  100  bales  of  cotton),  and  destroyed 
the  road  for  half  a mile.  I moved  on  toward  Canton,  and,  when  within 
^ miles  of  that  place,  encountered  the  enemy,  strongly  posted  in  thick 
woods  near  Bear  Creek.  After  a severe  skirmish,  during  which  I cap- 
tured several  prisoners,  I learned  the  enemy’s  force  was  much  larger 
than  my  own,  and  finding  his  position  very  strong,  I determined  to  give 
up  the  attempt  to  enter  the  town,  and  moved  to  Beattie’s  Ford,  on  Big 
Black,  where  I arrived  at  1 p.  m.  I rested  here  till  6 o’clock,  and  moved 
to  Yernon,  arriving  at  10  p.  m. 

On  the  13th,  I marched  at  3 a.  m.,  and  reached  my  camp  near  Jack- 
son  at  2 p.  m. 

On  the  14th,  I ordered  Major  Farnan,  with  the  Fifth  Illinois  Cavalry, 
to  Pearl  Biver,  to  examine  the  ferries  and  fords.  In  performing  this 
duty,  he  encountered  a picket  at  the  ferry,  which  retired  after  setting 
fire  to  the  boat. 

On  the  10th  instant,  I moved  out  on  the  Canton  road,  with  1,000  cav- 
alry and  Woods’  brigade  of  infantry,  with  four  pieces  of  artillery,  the 
whole  numbering  2,000  men.  We  proceeded  to  the  Grant’s  Mills  Ferry, 
where  we  found  a small  force  of  the  enemy,  which  retired  after  skir- 
mishing with  our  advance.  After  burning  a large  lot  of  lumber,  and 
destroying  the  ferry-boat  and  several  small  boats,  we  proceeded  in  the 
direction  of  Canton,  detaching  the  Fourth  Iowa  and  Fifth  Illinois,  under 
command  of  Colonel  Winslow,  to  destroy  a pontoon  bridge  over  Pearl 
Biver,  near  Madisonville,  while  my  main  force  proceeded  to  Calhoun. 
Colonel  Winslow  performed  the  duty  assigned  him,  and  reached  Cal- 
houn at  6 o’clock.  While  at  this  place,  Colonel  Woods’  brigade  de- 
stroyed a mile  of  the  railroad  and  burned  a bridge. 

On  the  17th,  we  left  Calhoun  at  5 a.  m.,  and  proceeded  to  within  2 
miles  of  Canton,  where  my  advance  guard,  commanded  by  Colonel 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


553 


Stephens,  Second  Wisconsin  Cavalry,  found  the  enemy  in  force.  The 
rebel  line  extended  from  Bear  Creek  west  on  the  Beattie’s  Bluff  road  as 
far  as  we  could  see — about  a mile — and  commanded  the  Canton  road. 
Two  regiments  of  infantry  and  one  section  of  artillery  of  Colonel  Woods’ 
brigade  were  ordered  forward,  and  took  position  in  the  open  fields  to 
the  right  and  left  of  the  road.  I soon  discovered  a large  force  of  the 
enemy  moving  to  onr  left  to  gain  our  rear,  with  the  evident  intention 
of  attacking  our  wagon  train,  which  was  not  yet  parked.  This  move- 
ment came  near  being  successful.  I ordered  one  piece  of  artillery  to 
the  point  threatened,  and  sent  forward  down  the  Livingston  road  a 
battalion  of  the  Fifth  Illinois  Cavalry,  under  Major  Farnan.  This 
movement  checked  the  enemy’s  advance  in  that  direction.  The  major 
opened  fire  at  short  range  and  emptied  several  saddles.  The  enemy 
continued  to  concentrate  within  400  yards  of  our  train,  throwing  down 
fences  and  preparing  to  charge  the  small  force  opposed  to  them.  At 
this  time  the  Third  and  Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry  formed  in  line  and  moved 
through  the  open  field  to  the  left,  while  I posted  the  piece  of  artillery 
in  the  road,  supported  by  the  Seventy-sixth  Ohio  and  Twenty-fifth  Iowa, 
and  opened  fire  with  shell  at  a short  range.  The  enemy  fell  back  in 
confusion  through  the  corn-field,  but  soon  rallied  and  again  advanced. 
I then  ordered  the  artillery  and  infantry  forward  into  the  field  to  the 
left  of  the  Livingston  road,  and  sent  forward  skirmishers,  who  soon 
encountered  the  enemy.  A few  shots  from  the  gun,  and  the  advance  of 
our  cavalry  on  the  extreme  left,  drove  the  enemy  from  the  field  in  great 
confusion.  He  suffered  a loss  of  a number  of  men,  as  his  ambulances 
were  distinctly  seen  by  myself  moving  out  toward  the  scene  of  the  en- 
gagement and  returning  to  the  Beattie’s  Bluff'  road. 

During  this  time  Colonel  Woods  advanced  his  infautry  to  the  road, 
cutting  off*  the  enemy’s  communication  with  the  force  posted  on  Bear 
Creek.  The  force  on  the  left  disappeared  on  a plantation  road  leading 
around  to  Canton.  I now  sent  forward  the  Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry,  Colonel 
Winslow,  to  support  the  flanks  of  Colonel  Woods’  infantry,  near  Bear 
Creek ; at  the  same  time  he  moved  one  battalion  on  the  main  road  to 
the  end  of  the  lane.  The  column  reached  the  bridge  near  the  thick 
brush  on  Bear  Creek,  when  the  enemy  opened  fire  on  the  column  from 
two  pieces  of  artillery,  one  6 and  one  12  pounder,  but  without  doing 
any  damage.  Our  column  moved  back  out  of  range,  and  the  infantry 
advanced  as  skirmishers  to  find  the  position  of  the  enemy.  Colonel 
Woods  drove  them  from  their  position,  which  was  found  to  be  a very 
strong  one.  They  destroyed  the  bridges,  and  retired  into  the  town  about 
6 p.  m.,  our  advance  being  within  1 mile  of  Canton.  I did  not  deem  it 
prudent  to  attempt  to  enter  at  so  late  an  hour ; we  therefore  encamped 
near  the  creek  and  cared  for  our  wounded.  • 

On  the  morning  of  the  18th,  I entered  the  town  of  Canton  without 
opposition,  the  enemy  having  retired  to  Pearl  Biver  during  the  night. 
Colonel  Woods  commenced  the  destruction  of  the  railroad  at  an  early 
hour,  and  continued  the  work  all  day,  destroying  several  miles  of  the 
track  of  the  New  Orleans  and  Jackson  and  Mississippi  Central  Bail- 
roads.  While  this  work  was  going  on,  I sent  a cavalry  force,  under 
Colonel  Winslow,  Fourth  Iowa  Cavalry,  to  the  railroad  bridge  over  Big 
Black,  which  he  burned.  He  also  burned  a mile  of  trestle-work  of  the 
road  and  the  depots  at  Way’s  Bluff.  At  Canton,  in  connection  with 
Colonel  Woods,  1 effectually  destroyed  the  Dixie  Works,  an  extensive 
manufacturing  establishment  used  by  the  Confederate  Government; 
also  thirteen  extensive  machine-shops  and  railroad  buildings,  with  a 
vast  quantity  of  machinery.  Five  locomotives  and  about  40  cars 


554 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


| Chap.  XXXVI. 


were  burned  and  broken  to  pieces,  and  about  100,000  feet  of  lumber, 
designed  to  be  used  by  the  Confederate  Government  in  the  construc- 
tion of  wagons,  gun-carriages,  and  other  purposes,  were  burned. 

Having  completely  destroyed  every  dollar’s  worth  of  public  property 
found  in  the  place,  1 retired  across  Bear  Creek,  where  we  camped  for 
the  night.  During  my  stay  in  Canton  I kept  a strong  guard  around  the 
town,  and  cavalry  patrol  through  the  streets,  which  effectually  pro- 
tected the  citizens  from  any  depredations  whatever.  My  cavalry  cap- 
tured and  turned  over  to  Colonel  Woods  about  15  prisoners  of  war. 
I also  paroled  about  50  convalescent  soldiers  found  in  the  town  and 
vicinity. 

On  the  19th,  I returned,  without  incident,  to  Jackson.  My  whole 
command  have  been  in  the  saddle  every  day  for  a month  past;  have 
endured-  many  privations  and  hardships  without  complaint. 

I take  great  pleasure  in  reporting  a decided  improvement  in  the  dis- 
cipline of  my  whole  command.  Regimental  and  company  officers  have 
been  attentive  to  their  duties. 

I cannot  make  distinctions  where  all  have  performed  their  duties 
well,  but  justice  requires  that  I acknowledge  the  important  service  ren- 
dered me  by  Lieut.  Col.  J.  H.  Hammond,  assistant  adjutant- general  on 
the  staff  of  General  Sherman,  in  the  engagement  with  Whitfield’s  bri- 
gade, on  the  8th.  Capt.  H.  D.  B.  Cutler,  acting  assistant  adjutant  gen- 
eral, and  Lieut.  D.  E.  Jones,  acting  assistant  quartermaster,  of  my  staff, 
also  deserve  mention  for  valuable  service  rendered  during  the  campaign. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

CYRUS  BUSSEY, 
Colonel , Commanding  Cavalry  Forces . 

Capt.  R.  M.  Sawyer, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General , Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  4. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  John  G.  F arize,  TJ.  S.  Army , commanding  Ninth 

Army  Corps. 

Headquarters  Ninth  Army  Corps, 

July  15,  1863. 

General  : A man  has  just  come  into  our  lines  from  the  rear,  named 
A.  Leroy  Carter,  representing  himself  to  be  of  the  Third  Iowa  Infantry, 
and  just  escaped  from  Jackson’s  cavalry.  This  man  states  that  he  has 
been  a prisoner  since  January  4,  and  detained  because  he  was  caught 
plundering.  He  has  since  been  kept  under  guard,  and  attached  to  the 
blacksmith  or  farrier’s  department  for  Jackson’s  division.  He  says  his 
regiment  is  in  Lauman’s  division,  and  recognized  some  of  his  old  friends 
prisoners  in  Jackson.  So  much  for  his  reliability.  Now  for  his  story. 
He  says  Jackson’s  division  of  cavalry  left  Jackson  last  night,  crossed 
the  river,  went  up  the  opposite  bank  about  14  miles,  and  recrossed  on  a 
trestle-bridge  about  4 miles  above  Grant’s  Eerry.  During  their  halt 
he  escaped  and  rode  into  our  lines.  He  says  Jackson  is  headed  this 
way,  and  the  idea  among  the  men  was  that  he  would  attack  our  rear, 
so  that  they  could  make  a sortie  simultanously  on  our  front.  Certainly 
a bold  scheme.  I have  had  one  or  two  reports  from  the  front  this 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


555 


morning  that  the  enemy’s  force  was  increasing.  Would  it  not  be,  well 
to  let  Bussey  and  the  brigade  hunt  this  party  up  ? 

He  gives  the  following  list  and  strength  of  regiments  ; Cosby’s  bri- 
gade— volunteer  regiment,  400 ; First  Mississippi,  400  ; Fourth  Missis- 
sippi, 200 ; Starke’s  regiment,  800 ; Wirt  Adams’,  1,000.  Ross’  detach- 
ment— Sixth  Texas,  350  5 Bridges’ battalion,  200.  Whitfield’s  brigade— 
Ninth  Texas,  300  5 Third  Texas,  400,  and  Texas  Legion,  180.  Total, 
4,230. 

Yery  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J JNO.  G.  PARKE, 

Major-  General. 

Major-General  Sherman. 


Headquarters  Ninth  Corps, 

July  16,  1863. 


General  : I had  my  line  of  skirmishers  to  advance  at  about  11  a.  m., 
and  they  found  the  enemy  in  force,  i.  e.,  their  skirmishers  with  strong 
reserves.  Along  and  near  the  railroad  the  enemy  was  driven  out  of  a 
piece  of  woods,  and,  as  our  men  emerged  into  a corn-field,  Colonel  Corse 
found  himself  confronted  by  a battery  of  eight  brass  pieces  and  he 
thinks  three  heavy  guns ; he  recognized  one  iron  piece.  His  command 
suffered  somewhat.  As  soon  as  I receive  detailed  reports  from  the  com- 
manders in  front,  they  will  be  forwarded.  I am  satisfied  that  the  enemy 
is  strongly  intrenched  in  front  of  our  position,  and  holds  his  line  obsti- 


nately. 

Yours,  respectfully, 


JNO.  G.  PARKE, 

Major-General. 


Major-General  Sherman, 

Commanding , &c. 


Headquarters  Ninth  Army  Corps, 

Milldale , Miss .,  July  31,  1863. 

Colonel:  In  pursuance  of  instructions  of  July  19,  1863,  I have  the 
honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  operations  of  the  troops 
under  my  command  while  serving  with  the  Expeditionary  Army  com- 
manded by  Maj.  Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman,  against  the  Confederate  forces 
under  General  Joseph  E Johnston  : 

My  command  consisted  of  the  First  Division,  Ninth  Corps,  Brig. 
Gen!  Thomas  Welsh  commanding;  Second  Division,  Ninth  Corps, 
Brig.  Gen.  R.  B.  Potter  commanding;  and  the  First  Division,  Sixteenth 
Corps,  Brig.  Gen.  William  Sooy  Smith  commanding. 

On  the  fall  of  Vicksburg  and  the  receipt  of  orders  to  move,  this  force 
occupied  the  line  extending  from  Oak  Ridge  Post-office  to  Briers’,  con- 
necting there  with  General  McArthur’s  command.  Batteries  and  rifle- 
pits  were  constructed,  covering  the  approaches  from  the  north  and  east- 
ward. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  4th  of  July,  the  command  moved  in  the  di- 
rection of  Jones’  Ford  and  Birdsong  Ferry,  reaching  those  points  in 
the  morning  of  the  5th.  We  found  the  enemy  occupying  the  opposite 
• bank,  and  our  skirmishers  were  immediately  engaged.  Owing  to  the 
configuration  of  the  ground,  and  the  heavy  timber,  with  thick  under- 
brush, the  enemy  was  enabled  with  a small  force,  completely  covered 


556  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

by  the  high  bank,  to  prevent  our  men  from  approaching  the  ford  or 
fording  for  the  purpose  of  making  any  examination  as  to  depth  of 
water  until  after  nightfall.  It  was  then  found  that  the  ford  was  im- 
practicable for  all  arms. 

On  the  6th,  a lodgment  was  effected  on  the  opposite  bank,  and,  by 
dint  of  constant  exertion,  a bridge  was  built,  and  the  two  divisions  of 
the  Ninth  Corps  were  crossed  on  the  7th.  In  the  mean  time  the  ferry- 
boat had  been  discovered,  raised,  and  put  in  working  order.  By  this 
means  General  Smith’s  division  crossed. 

On  the  evening  of  the  7th,  we  moved  out  from  Birdsong  Ferry,  and 
bivouacked  at  10  p.  m.  at  Robertson’s,  adjoining  Jeff.  Davis’ plantation, 
near  Bolton. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  8th,  we  moved  on  the  main  road,  but  finding 
that  we  came  in  contact  with  General  Steele’s  command,  we  took  a side 
road,  and,  making  a detour,  we  again  bivouacked  at  10  p,  m.  within  a 
few  miles  of  Clinton. 

On  the  9th,  we  made  an  early  start,  but  soon  came  up  to  the  rear  of 
Steele’s  column.  Finding  that  there  was  but  one  main  road  for  us 
north  of  the  railroad  leading  to  Jackson,  we  diverged,  and,  after  a good 
deal  of  labor,  cutting  through  timber,  we  succeeded  in  opening  a road 
through  the  plantations,  nearly  parallel  with  the  main  road.  Toward 
sundown  we  came  upon  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  when  some  skirmishing 
ensued,  in  which  both  the  enemy  and  ourselves  used  artillery.  Find- 
ing that  the  head  of  my  column  was  as  far  advanced  as  that  of  General 
Ord’s,  we  bivouacked,  and  started  on  the  morning  of  the  10th  over  a 
plantation  road,  that  brought  us  out  on  the  Livingston  and  Canton 
road,  5 miles  north  of  Jackson. 

As  we  neared  Jackson,  the  enemy’s  vedettes  and  pickets  were  driven 
in,  until  we  approached  the  insane  asylum  ridge.  This  ridge  was  re- 
ported occupied  by  the  enemy,  both  by  infantry  and  artillery.  Dis- 
positions were  made  for  taking  and  holding  this  ridge,  it  being  all- 
important  to  us  in  operations  against  the  town  of  Jackson. 

The  enemy  retired  as  our  line  advanced,  and  at  dark  we  occupied  a 
line  at  right  angles  to  the  Canton  road,  and  extending  from  near  Pearl 
River  over  to  the  Livingston  road,  crossing  the  railroad. 

On  the  morning  of  the  lit  h,  the  line  was  advanced,  driving  the  enemy’s 
skirmishers  and  reserves  within  their  intreuchments.  This  line  was  held 
by  our  troops,  although  a continuous  firing  was  kept  up  by  the  skir- 
mishers and  at  intervals  by  the  artillery.  We  found  the  enemy  posted 
behind  a continuous  line  of  rifle-pits,  with  batteries  at  intervals,  raking 
the  road  and  approaches.  Our  men  were  covered  and  protected  as 
much  as  possible,  and  epaulements  thrown  up  for  our  batteries  as  rapidly 
as  the  limited  supply  of  tools  would  admit. 

The  enemy  made  several  attempts  to  drive  our  skirmishers,  but  were 
as  often  repulsed. 

On  the  16th,  an  advance  of  my  whole  line  was  ordered,  with  the  view 
of  ascertaining  the  strength  of  the  enemy  and  the  position  and  number 
of  the  batteries.  This  advance  was  made  in  gallant  style,  but  with 
severe  loss,  particularly  in  General  Smith’s  division.  It  developed  the 
enemy  in  force  behind  his  intrenchments,  with  formidable  batteries, 
which  made  free  use  of  shrapnel,  canister,  and  shell. 

During  the  night  of  the  16th,  movements  of  the  enemy  were  reported. 
Early  in  the  morning  of  the  17th,  the  whole  line  advanced,  but  soon 
found  that  the  enemy  had  retired.  General  Ferrero,  commanding  bri- 
gade of  General  Potter’s  division,  moved  into  town,  and  immediately 
established  guards  and  patrols.  One  second  lieutenant  and  137  en- 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


557 


listed  men  were  taken  prisoners.  On  the  arrival  of  General  Blair’s 
division,  the  brigade  of  General  Potter’s  division  was  withdrawn.  The 
command  was  then  encamped  near  Pearl  River.  The  destruction  of  the 
railroad  north  of  Jackson  was  then  commenced,  and  by  the  evening  of 
the  19th  about  15  miles  of  track  were  rendered  totally  unfit  for  service. 


The  ties  were  burned  and  the  rails  bent. 

On  the  morning  of  the  20th,  I started,  with  the  two  divisions  of  the 
Ninth  Corps,  to  return  to  our  old  position  at  Milldale,  near  Snyder’s 
Bluff,  and  reached  our  camp  on  the  evening  of  the  23d,  when  I reported 
to  General  Grant. 

Herewith  I have  the  honor  to  transmit  the  reports  of  the  division 
commanders,  embracing  a list  of  casualties. 

Before  closing  this  report,  I take  great  pleasure  in  stating  that  the 
conduct  of  the  officers  and  men  throughout  the  campaign  fully  equaled 
my  highest  expectations,  although  the  excessive  heat,  dusty  roads,  and 
great  scarcity  of  water  tried  them  to  the  utmost. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  G.  PARKE, 

Major- General. 


Lieut.  Col.  J.  H.  Hammond, 

Chief  of  Staff, 


No.  5. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  Welsh , U.  S.  Army,  commanding  First 

Division. 

Headquarters  First  Division,  Ninth  Army  Corps, 

Jackson,  Miss.,  July  20,  1863. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  instructions  from  headquarters  Ninth  Army 
Corps,  I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  immediately  after  the  announce- 
ment of  the  capitulation  of  the  enemy’s  forces  in  Vicksburg,  this  division 
left  camp  near  Flower  Hill  Church,  Miss.,  July  4,  1863,  and  proceeded 
toward  the  Big  Black  River,  bivouacking  the  same  night  at  Young’s 
Cross  Roads,  and  marching  on  the  5th  to  within  2 miles  of  the  river. 

During  the  6th  and  part  of  the  7th,  the  First  Brigade,  Colonel  Bow- 
man commanding,  constructed  a bridge,  under  the  immediate  direction 
of  the  major-general  commanding  the  corps,  over  which,  during  the  day 
and  night,  the  infantry  and  artillery  of  the  division  passed  safely  (our 
supply  and  baggage  train  having  crossed  at  a point  lower  down  the 
river). 

During  the  8th  and  9th,  and  forenoon  of  the  10th,  the  division  moved 
toward  the  city  of  Jackson,  closely  following  General  Smith’s  division, 
also  attached  to  the  Ninth  Corps.  At  3 p.  m.  of  the  10th,  having  ar- 
rived within  3 miles  of  the  city  of  Jackson,  I received  orders  from  Major- 
General  Parke  to  prepare  my  division  for  battle,  and  advance  toward 
the  city,  with  a view  to  driving  such  portion  of  the  enemy  as  might  be 
discovered  between  the  Canton  road  and  Pearl  River. 

I immediately  formed  the  division  for  battle,  placing  the  First  Bri- 
gade, Colonel  Bowman  commanding,  on  the  right  (Second  Brigade  hav- 
ing previously  been  transferred  to  the  Second  Division),  and  the  Third 
Brigade,  Colonel  Leasure  commanding,  on  the  left.  The  Forty-fifth 
Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  Colonel  Curtin  commanding,  and  the  Sev- 
enty-ninth (Highlanders)  New  York  Volunteers,  Colonel  Morrison  com- 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


rji58 


man  ding,  were  thrown  forward  as  skirmishers.  I then  put  the  division 
in  motion.  My  skirmishers  soon  came  in  contact  with  the  vedettes  of 
the  enemy  near  the  railroad,  leading  from  Jackson  to  Grenada,  driving 
and  pursuing  them  rapidly  from  the  railroad  to  and  past  the  lunatic 
asylum.  It  being  now  nearly  dark,  my  line  greatly  extended,  and  some- 
what deranged  in  consequence  of  the  rapid  advance  over  rough  ground 
and  through  dense  woods,  I halted  the  division  for  the  purpose  of  re- 
constructing. 

I sent  the  First  Brigade  toward  the  left  and  drew  the  Third  Brigade 
toward  the  right,  so  as  to  connect  the  two  brigades  in  line,  the  right 
about  500  yards  to  the  front  and  left  of  the  asylum,  and  the  left  extend- 
ing toward  Pearl  River.  The  Seventy-ninth  New  York  was  relieved  by 
the  Second  Michigan,  Colonel  Humphrey,  as  skirmishers  in  front  and 
to  the  left  of  Leasure’s  brigade.  By  command  of  General  Parke,  we 
then  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

Returning  to  the  asylum,  I discovered  that  the  brigade  of  Brigadier. 
General  Smith’s  division,  supporting  my  right,  had  been  withdrawn- 
Deeming  it  of  the  utmost  importance  that  the  Canton  road  should  be 
well  guarded,  I requested  the  major-general  commanding  to  send  me 
one  or  two  regiments  for  that  purpose,  and,  in  accordance  with  my  re- 
quest, the  Forty-sixth  New  York  and  Fiftieth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers, 
under  Colonel  Gerhardt,  very  promptly  reported  to  me  for  that  duty, 
guarding  the  road  safely  during  the  night  and  the  following  day.  Dur- 
ing the  night  I received  orders  from  the  major-general  commanding  the 
corps  to  press  forward  early  in  the  morning  until  checked  by  the  en- 
emy’s artillery.  At  daybreak  of  the  11th,  the  division  again  started 
forward,  the  line  of  skirmishers  almost  immediately  encountering  those 
of  the  enemy,  and,  although  sustaining  a heavy  fire,  forced  the  enemy 
back  toward  the  city.  So  rapid  was  the  advance  of  my  skirmishers 
that  they  succeeded  in  driving  the  enemy’s  line  of  skirmishers,  as  well 
as  their  reserve,  back  to  their  main  supports;  charged  and  drove  their 
main  body  on  my  left  back  into  their  works.  The  enemy  having  opened 
with  his  artillery,  I caused  the  division  to  halt,  and  re-established  its 
line,  sheltering  the  troops  as  much  as  possible  from  the  shot  and  shell 
now  firing  from  the  batteries  located  on  the  Canton  road. 

The  Second  Michigan  Volunteers,  skirmishing  on  the  left,  having,  in 
their  gallant  routing  of  their  enemies,  advanced  too  far  for  support, 
Were  now  withdrawn  behind  the  ridge  facing  the  enemy’s  works,  re- 
tiring in  good  order  and  bringing  with  them  their  wounded  comrades. 

The  Forty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  skirmishing  on  my  right, 
advanced  within  500  yards  of  the  enemy’s  works,  also  driving  the 
enemy  into  their  works. 

The  division  maintained  this  advanced  position  during  the  day  and 
night,  and  were  relieved  on  the  morning  of  the  12th  by  the  Second  Di- 
vision of  the  corps,  commanded  by  Brigadier-General  Potter. 

During  the  12th  and  13th,  the  division  occupied  the  woods  to  the  left 
of  the  asylum. 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th,  the  division  again  relieved  General  Pot- 
ter’s command,  remaining  in  our  former  advanced  position  until  the 
morning  of  the  16th,  when  we  were  again  relieved  by  General  Potter’s 
command. 

On  the  17th  (the  enemy  having  abandoned  the  city  of  Jackson  during 
the  night  previous),  my  division,  in  obedience  to  orders  from  corps  head- 
quarters, moved  by  the  Canton  road  (north)  to  Grant’s  Mills,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  intercepting  the  enemy’s  cavalry,  which  it  was  supposed  would 
attempt  to  cross  the  Pearl  River  at  that  point.  No  enemy  appearing, 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


559 


on  the  1 8th,  I sent  a force  to  destroy  the  Jackson  and  Grenada  Kailroad, 
and  on  the  19th  returned  with  my  command  and  rejoined  the  corps  at 
this  place. 

In  the  various  and  arduous  duties  of  the  division  during  the  expedi- 
tion, I have  found  officers  and  enlisted  men  striving  to  perform  their 
every  duty.  In  the  heavy  skirmishing  before  the  city  of  Jackson,  the 
troops  of  the  division  have  sustained  their  well-earned  reputation.  The 
new  regiments  that  had  not  hitherto  been  in  action  fought  like  their 
veteran  comrades;  officers  and  men  alike,  from  the  different  States, 
striving  for  the  good  of  our  glorious  country. 

Our  wounded  heroes  deserve  the  highest  consideration  at  our  hands 
and  from  the  country  they  have  served  so  well. 

Where  all  have  done  so  nobly  it  would  be  wrong  to  particularize. 
My  entire  command  have  my  thanks  for  courage  and  good  conduct.  I 
was  ably  and  intelligently  assisted  by  my  staff. 

The  brigade  commanders  handled  their  brigades  skillfully  and  well, 
and  have  my  thanks. 

I submit  herewith  a separate  report  of  the  operations  of  Captain 
Edwards7  battery  during  the  action  before  Jackson,  presuming  that  a 
separate  report  of  the  operations  of  the  artillery  has  been  made  by  its 
chief  direct  to  corps  headquarters.  I also  submit  herewith  a table  of 
casualties.*  All  of  which  is  most  respectfully  submitted. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

THOS.  WELSH, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  First  Division. 

Lieut.  Col.  N.  Bowen, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  6. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  Edwards , jr..  Third  U.  S.  Artillery. 

Camp  near  the  Yazoo,  Mississippi, 

July  25,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  report  the  operations  of  Batteries  L and  M, 
Third  U.  S.  Artillery,  in  the  recent  movement  upon  the  town  of  Jackson, 
Miss. 

On  the  morning  of  the  11th  of  July,  while  the  infantry  was  advancing 
upon  the  wooded  ravine  to  the  left  of  the  Canton  road  and  near  the 
town,  the  battery  was  moved  to  the  height  east  of  the  insane  asylum, 
and  there  awaited  the  development  of  the  movement  of  the  infantry, 
preparatory  to  advancing.  The  works  of  the  enemy  having  been  dis- 
closed by  the  advance  of  the  infantry  skirmishers,  the  battery  remained 
on  this  commanding  height,  from  which  the  State  and  court  house  of 
the  town  could  be  seen,  as  also  the  enemy’s  works  upon  the  Canton 
road.  A solid  shot  (12-pounder)  from  the  latter  works  carried  off  one 
of  the  battery  horses  on  this  day.  At  night  a work  was  thrown  up  on 
the  same  height,  under  the  direction  of  Lieutenant  Sinclair.  The  guns 
were  placed  in  position  on  the  following  morning,  and  120  rounds  of 
shell  and  case-shot  were  fired.  The  fire  was  mainly  directed  upon  the 
town  in  the  direction  of  the  State-house.  A few  shots  were  thrown  into 
the  works  on  the  Canton  road. 


Embodied  in  revised  statement,  pp.  542,  543. 


560 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


On  the  14th,  137  rounds  of  shell  and  case  shot  were  fired,  directed  upon 
the  town  as  before.  No  damage,  save  the  loss  of  one  horse,  was  sufiered 
by  the  battery,  although  the  enemy  fired  a few  rounds  horn  a 32-pounder 
rifled  gun  and  20-pounder  Parrotts.  Some  of  his  shot  struck  in  Iront 
of  the  battery  and  ricochetted  beyond. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  EDWARDS,  Jr., 

Captain  Third  T7.  8.  Artillery , Commanding  Battery . 


No.  7. 

Report  of  Col.  Henry  Bowman , Thirty-sixth  Massachusetts  Infantry , 
commanding  First  Brigade. 

Mdqrs.  First  Brig.,  First  Diy.,  Ninth  Army  Corps, 

Near  Jachson,  Miss.,  July  19,  1863. 

Captain  : In  obedience  to  circular  from  headquarters  First  Division, 
Ninth  Army  Corps,  bearing  date  Grant’s  Mills,  July  18, 1863,  requesting 
a detailed  report  of  the  operations  of  this  brigade  on  the  expedition  from 
the  4th  to  the  17th  instant,  I have  the  honor  to  respectfully  submit  the 
following  report : 

On  Saturday  forenoon,  July  4,  three  regiments  of  the  brigade,  namely, 
Forty  fifth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  Seventeenth  and  Twenty -seventh 
Michigan  Volunteers,  then  in  camp  near  Oak  Ridge,  Miss.,  received 
orders  to  prepare  five  days’  rations,  and  to  be  in  readiness  to  march  at 
a moment’s  notice.  At  3 p,  m.  received  orders  to  move,  and  at  4 o’clock 
the  regiments  above  named  broke  camp  and  moved  upon  the  road  lead- 
ing to  Big  Black  River.  Marched  a distance  of  5J  miles,  and  bivouacked 
for  the  night  near  Young’s  Cross-Roads. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  5th,  the  Thirty-sixth  Regiment  Massa- 
chusetts Volunteers,  which  for  some  time  had  been  encamped  near  the 
junction  of  the  Benton  and  Milldale  roads,  joined  the  brigade. 

During  the  afternoon  of  the  5th,  the  brigade  advanced  about  2 miles, 
and  bivouacked  for  the  night  within  1J  miles  of  Big  Black  River. 

On  the  6th  instant,  marched  to  Big  Black  River,  and  the  brigade  was 
immediately  detailed  to  construct  a bridge  across  the  river. 

The  work  was  prosecuted  with  vigor  during  the  night,  and  also  during 
the  forenoon  of  July  7.  At  noon  the  bridge  was  completed  and  the 
brigade  effected  a crossing  at  once. 

Tbe  construction  of  this  bridge  was  attended  with  much  difficulty, 
owing  to  the  darkness  of  the  night,  the  depth  of  the  stream,  and  the 
height  and  steepness  of  the  banks.  Having  crossed  the  river,  we  con- 
tinued the  march,  which  was  followed  during  the  remainder  of  the 
afternoon. 

At  10  p.  m.  we  went  into  camp  in  the  midst  of  a violent  tempest  of 
thunder,  lightning,  and  rain.  The  men  were  completely  drenched.  Re- 
mained in  camp  until  the  afternoon  of  the  8th,  a strong  picket  being 
stationed  on  the  right  flank  of  the  division.  At  3 p.  m.  took  up  our  line 
of  march  in  rear  of  the  Third  Brigade.  Up  to  this  time  this  brigade  had 
the  advance.  The  Forty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  were  detailed  as 
a rear  guard  for  the  entire  corps,  but  were  relieved  during  the  next  day 
and  joined  the  brigade. 

We  marched  until  nearly  midnight  of  the  8th,  when  we  went  into  bivouac 
for  the  night  in  the  woods,  having  marched  a distance  of  10  miles.  A 
strong  picket  force  was  thrown  out  on  two  roads  leading'  from  the  point 


Chaf.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


561 


where  we  bivouacked.  At  6 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  9th,  we 
marched  again,  and  continued,  with  frequent  halts,  to  march  until  sun- 
down, when  we  arrived  at  Clinton,  a distance  of  10  miles.  Remained  at 
this  place  during  the  night.  Up  to  this  time  we  had  seen  no  enemy, 
although  occasional  cannonading  had  been  heard  in  advance.  Early  on 
the  morning  of  July  10,  we  received  orders  to  move  at  once  in  light 
marching  Older,  with  three  days’ rations.  Having  moved  on  a distance 
of  a mile,  the  corps  was  formed  and  marched  across  the  fields,  all  ready 
for  any  action  which  might  occur. 

The  advance  was  made  with  some  caution,  as  the  enemy  was  known 
to  be  in  our  immediate  front.  At  2.30  p.  m.  arrived  within  If  miles  of 
the  town  of  Jackson,  capital  of  Mississippi.  The  enemy  was  discovered 
to  be  posted  in  the  woods,  and  between  us  and  the  woods  lay  a plain  of 
about  three-fourths  of  a mile  in  width.  Not  knowing  the  strength  of 
the  enemy’s  position,  it  was  determined  to  ascertain  it,  and  accordingly 
a line  of  battle  was  formed,  with  the  Thirty-sixth  Massachusetts  Volun- 
teers on  the  right,  the  Seventeenth  Michigan  Volunteers  on  the  left, 
while  the  center  was  occupied  by  the  Twenty-seventh  Michigan  Volun- 
teers. The  Forty -fifth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers  were  thrown  out  as 
skirmishers,  to  connect  with  the  skirmishers  of  Brigadier-General  Smith 
, on  our  right,  and  those  of  Col.  D.  Leasure  (commanding  Third  Brigade) 
on  our  left.  The  skirmishers  of  the  entire  line  advanced,  supported  at 
a distance  of  about  400  yards. 

Sharp  firing  commenced  in  a corn-field  about  half-way  across  the 
plain.  Our  skirmishers  steadily  drove  those  of  the  enemy,  and  contin- 
ued the  advance  in  a fine  manner,  driving  the  rebels  into  the  woods. 

When  the  right  of  our  line  of  battle  entered  the  woods,  the  skirmishers 
of  General  Smith  were  nearly  100  yards  in  rear  of  us.  The  rebel  skir- 
mishers, who  proved  to  be  cavalry,  fled  on  our  entrance  to  the  woods. 

Our  skirmishers  took  possession  of  the  State  lunatic  asylum,  and 
the  colors  of  the  Forty -fifth  were  hung  from  the  cupola. 

Continued  to  advance  until  dusk,  when  we  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

^ n the  morning  of  the  11th,  commenced  to  advance.  Encountered 
the  rebel  infantry,  deployed  to  resist.  Brisk  musketry  firing  was  kept 
up  during  the  entire  day.  Advanced  until  we  discovered  a rebel  bat- 
tery to  our  right,  when  orders  were  received  to  halt,  but  to  hold  the 
position. 

At  10  a.  m.  it  became  necessary  to  re-enforce  the  skirmishers,  which 
was  done  by  two  companies  of  the  Thirty-sixth  Massachusetts  Volun- 
teers. Whilst  deploying  Company  F,  which  was  done  under  a severe 
fire,  it  had  the  misfortune  to  suffer  a loss  of  2 killed  and  6 wounded. 
The  brigade  was  drawn  up  in  the  woods,  but  was  all  day  exposed  to  a 
severe  fire  from  the  enemy’s  batteries,  which  threw  grape  and  shell 
very  rapidly  at  intervals.  At  4 p.  m.  the  Forty-fifth  and  two  compa- 
nies of  the  Thirty-sixth  were  relieved  by  the  Seventeenth  Michigan 
Volunteers.  At  sundown  the  enemy  made  a desperate  attempt  to  drive 
the  skirmishers  from  their  well-chosen  position,  but,  after  re-enforcing 
the  Seventeenth  with  two  companies  of  the  Thirty-sixth  Massachu- 
setts and  two  from  the  Twenty  seventh  Michigan,  we  were  enabled  to 
drive  back  the  enemy  and  maintain  our  position. 

On  the  morning  of  the  12th,  were  relieved  by  a portion  of  the  Second 
Division,  and  this  brigade  retired  to  the  rear. 

During  the  12th  and  13th,  lay  in  camp  in  the  woods,  in  rear  of  the 
asylum. 

On  the  14th  and  15th,  were  again  in  the  front,  and  occupied  rifle-pits. 

On  the  16th,  were  in  camp,  in  rear  of  the  asylum. 

36  R R — YOL  XXIY,  PT  II 


562 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXX VI. 


On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  received  marching  orders,  and  at  11.30 
the  brigade  moved  on  the  Canton  road.  Marched  until  1.30  p.  m.,  when 
we  halted  for  dinner.  Eesumed  our  march  at  3 o’clock,  and  arrived 
near  Grant’s  Mills  at  sunset,  having  marched  a distance  of  8 miles.  A 
strong  picket  was  stationed  at  several  points,  both  in  front  and  rear. 

During  the  skirmishes  in  which  the  brigade  has  been  engaged  dur- 
ing the  past  week  we  have  had  the  misfortune  to  suffer  a loss  of  34 
killed  and  wounded,  among  whom  was  Lieut.  Eichard  Humphreys, 
Forty-fifth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  who  fell  while  in  the  discharge  of 
his  duty  as  an  officer  and  a man. 

The  conduct  of  both  officers  and  men  was  so  universally  creditable 
that  I do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  particularize  all  the  parties  by 
name.  Suffice  it  to  say  every  man  in  the  command  seemed  imbued 
with  a spirit  of  determination  to  do  his  whole  duty. 

I herewith  inclose  a list  of  casualties.* 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HENEY  BOWMAN, 
Colonel , Commanding  First  Brigade. 

Capt.  George  A.  Hicks, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.y  First  Division , Ninth  Army  Corps. 


No.  8. 

Report  of  Col.  Daniel  Leasure , One  hundredth  Pennsylvania  Infantry , 
commanding  Third  Brigade. 

Grant’s  Mills,  Pearl  Eiver,  Mississippi, 

July  17,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  operations  of  this  command 
from  the  4th  day  of  July  until  the  16th,  both  inclusive,  for  the  informa- 
tion of  the  brigadier-general  commanding  the  division. 

On  the  4th  day  of  July,  this  command,  composed  of  the  Seventy-ninth 
Eegiment  New  York  Volunteers  (Highlanders),  Colonel  Morrison  com- 
manding; the  Second  Eegiment  Michigan  Volunteers,  Colonel  Hum- 
phrey commanding ; the  One  hundredth  Eegiment  Pennsylvania  Vol- 
unteers (Eoundheads),  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dawson  commanding ; the 
Eighth  Eegiment  Michigan  Volunteers,  Colonel  Graves  commanding, 
and  the  Twentieth  Eegiment  Michigan  Volunteers,  Lieutenant- Colonel 
Smith  commanding,  were  encamped  at  Flower  Hill  Church,  15  miles 
east  of  Vicksburg. 

The  enemy’s  forces  in  Vicksburg  having  surrendered  unconditionally 
to  the  forces  under  Major-General  Grant,  orders  were  received  at  these 
headquarters  to  break  camp  and  move  in  light  marching  order  toward 
the  Big  Black  Eiver  at  4 p.  m.  At  4 o’clock  we  marched,  and  biv- 
ouacked after  marching  8 miles. 

On  the  5th,  we  bivouacked  near  the  Big  Black,  and  on  the  6th  we 
crossed  that  river  and  marched  toward  the  city  of  Jackson,  the  capital 
of  the  State,  the  Ninth  Army  Corps,  Major-General  Parke  command- 
ing, forming  the  extreme  left  of  the  advancing  columns,  our  course  being 
such  as  to  throw  us,  with  the  left  of  our  line  resting  on  Pearl  Eiver, 
north  of  the  city. 

* Embodied  in  revised  statement  p.  542. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


563 


On  the  10th,  at  3 p.  m.,  we  arrived  on  the  Jackson  and  Brownsville 
road,  about  2 miles  from  the  State  insane  asylum,  which  is  situated  on 
the  Jackson  and  Canton  road,  about  a mile  from  the  city  limit  on  the 
north.  At  this  point  we  formed  line  of  battle,  threatening  the  city. 
The  First  Brigade  of  the  First  Division,  Col.  H.  Bowman,  Thirty-sixth 
Massachusetts  Volunteers,  commanding,  formed  with  its  right  resting 
upon  the  Brownsville  road.  The  Third  Brigade  (this  command)  formed 
on  his  left,  constituting  the  extreme  left  of  the  line,  with  its  left  extend- 
ing toward  Pearl  River.  My  instructions  were  to  throw  forward  skir- 
mishers to  a distance  of  from  200  to  400  yards  in  advance  of  my  line  of 
battle,  and  conform  the  movements  of  my  skirmishers  and  line  of  battle 
to  those  of  Colonel  Bowman’s  brigade.  About  5 p.  m.  we  commenced 
to  advance,  the  Seventy  ninth  Regiment  New  York  Volunteers,  Colo- 
nel Morrison  commanding,  being  thrown  forward  as  skirmishers.  At 
first  our  advance  was  through  an  immense  plain  of  tall  corn,  bordering 
upon  the  Jackson  and  Memphis  Railroad.  On  arriving  near  the  rail- 
road, we  encountered  the  enemy’s  advanced  line  of  skirmishers,  which 
were  rapidly  driven  by  my  line  of  skirmishers,  which  kept  up  a constant 
fire  as  it  advanced.  This  command  arrived  first  at  the  railroad,  where 
it  halted  until  the  entire  line  had  arrived  at  that  point.  We  now  en- 
countered a dense  chaparral  of  undergrowth,  so  that  I was  obliged  to 
advance  by  right  of  companies  to  the  front,  the  line  of  skirmishers 
meanwhile  thoroughly  beating  the  cover,  until  we  arrived  at  the  Jack- 
son  and  Canton  road,  where  the  line  was  again  formed,  and  we  awaited 
orders.  At  this  point  we  discovered  the  advanced  vedettes  of  a cavalry 
force  of  the  enemy  approaching  the  city  by  the  Canton  road.  The 
vedettes  fell  back,  and  it  was  afterward  ascertained  that  the  cavalry 
force  amounted  to  several  thousands.  We  saw  nothing  more  of  it. 
Again  we  advanced,  swinging  our  left  rapidly  round,  so  as  to  close, 
if  possible,  with  our  left  resting  on  Pearl  River,  north  of  the  city,  or  at 
least  near  enough  to  it  to  protect  our  left  flank  by  skirmishers.  At 
dark  we  arrived  upon  a road  leading  from  the  Canton  road  to  Pearl 
River,  and  as  this  was  parallel  with  our  line  of  approach,  and  farther 
progress  through  the  chaparral  imprudent,  I ordered  a halt,  with  my 
right  resting  near  the  left  of  Colonel  Bowman,  and  awaited  orders, 
which,  having  received,  I threw  out  pickets  and  lay  on  arms  till  day- 
light of  the  11th,  when  we  reformed  gnd  adjusted  our  line  of  battle. 

At  5 o’clock  the  whole  line  advanced  toward  the  city.  The  Second 
Regiment  Michigan  Volunteers  was  now  thrown  forward  as  skirmish- 
ers and  flankers  to  the  front  and  left.  My  orders  were  to  conform  to 
the  movements  of  Colonel  Bowman’s  lines  of  battle  and  skirmishers  on 
my  right,  and  to  advance  upon  the  city  until  I drew  the  fire  of  the  en- 
emy’s batteries,  then  put  my  troops  in  the  most  convenient  cover,  and 
await  orders.  We  now  crossed  an  open  space  of  nearly  a mile  in  front 
and  to  the  east  of  the  insane  asylum,  when  we  reached  a small  dry 
channel  of  a run,  from  which  there  was  a steep  ascent  to  a high  ridge 
in  our  front.  On  arriving  at  the  top  of  the  ridge,  I found  my  skirmish- 
ers receiving  and  returning  a rapid  fire  from  the  enemy,  who  was  drawn 
up  in  line  of  battle  behind  some  imperfectly  constructed  rifle-pits  im- 
mediately beyond  a small  ravine  that  intervened  between  the  high  pla- 
teau occupied  by  my  skirmishers  and  the  high  hill  bounding  the  city  on 
the  north,  and  commanding  it  as  well  as  the  approach  from  the  north 
and  northwest. 

Here  were  two  guns,  6 or  10  pounders,  field  pieces,  in  position  behind 
the  rifle-pits  and  partially  protected  by  an  unfinished  earthwork.  My 


564 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


right  was  about  200  yards  from  the  enemy’s  works  and  my  left  about 
500  yards,  while  my  skirmishers  were  about  100  yards  in  front  of  my 
line  of  battle.  Here  we  received  the  first  fire  from  the  enemy’s  artillery, 
and  halted  pursuant  to  orders.  Just  after  we  halted  a few  minutes,  an 
order  came  down  from  the  right  (by  whom  given  I do  not  know), 
“ Skirmishers  on  the  left,  forward,  double  quick,”  and  away  went  my  line 
of  skirmishers  toward  the  enemy’s  works.  Momentarily,  I waited  for 
the  order  for  the  line  to  move  rapidly  forward  to  support  the  skirmish- 
ers, but  it  did  not  come.  Meanwhile  my  skirmishers,  supposing  the  line 
to  be  right  after  them,  closed  to  half  distance,  dashed  through  the  en- 
emy’s camp,  which  was  in  the  tavine  in  front  of  their  rifle-pits,  drove 
their  skirmishers  into  and  then  out  of  their  rifle-pits  into  their  line  of 
battle,  which  also  receded  half-way  up  the  hill  without  any  more  than 
firing  a single  random  volley.  Here  my  skirmishers  looked  back  for 
support,  and,  seeing  it  was  not  coming,  slowly  fell  back  to  the  crest  of 
the  hill  in  front  of  my  line,  where  they  commenced  and  kept  up  during 
the  entire  day  and  night  following  a most  destructive  fire  upon  the  en- 
emy, who  had  returned  to  complete  his  works  and  mount  batteries.  At 
the  very  moment  when  the  gallant  Second  Michigan  Regiment  (my 
skirmishers)  were  entering  the  enemy’s  lines,  I received  an  order  to 
halt  where  I was,  as  General  Sherman  said  we  had  already  advanced 
farther  than  he  intended  we  should  at  that  time,  as  the  right  of  the  in- 
vesting army  had  not  yet  got  sufficiently  forward.  So  I rested  where 
I was.  I had  no  doubt  then,  nor  have  I now,  that  if  that  order  had  not 
arrived  at  that  moment,  in  twenty  minutes  the  First  Division  would 
have  been  in  the  city,  or  at  least  held  the  heights  that  command  it.  To 
all  intents  and  purposes  practical  opposition  to  our  advance  was  at  an 
end  at  that  point. 

During  the  day  and  succeeding  night  the  enemy  succeeded  in  per- 
fecting his  rifle-pits  and  batteries,  so  that  by  the  morning  of  the  12th 
his  works  were  formidable,  indeed,  and  about  8 o’clock  on  the  morning 
of  the  12th  the  First  Division  was  relieved  by  the  Second  Division, 
and  I withdrew  my  command  to  the  rear  and  in  support  of  Edwards’ 
battery,  which  was  our  most  advanced  battery  on  the  whole  line. 

During  the  day  and  night  of  the  11th,  the  Second  Regiment  Michi- 
gan Volunteers  sustained  the  hottest  skirmishing  fire  I have  ever  wit- 
nessed, which  they  returned  with  telling  effect,  as  was  afterward  well 
ascertained.  Indeed,  so  far  as  that  regiment  was  concerned,  it  was  a 
battle. 

This  gallant  regiment  sustained  for  twenty  hours  a continuous  fire 
of  infantry  and  artillery,  and  repulsed  several  attempts  of  the  enemy 
to  charge  on  them. 

The  accompanying  official  list  of  casualties  will  speak  for  the  truth 
of  the  above  tribute  of  just  praise. 

During  the  afternoon  and  night  of  the  11th,  and  the  morning  of  the 
12th,  the  entire  line  in  reserve  in  the  woods  to  rear  of  the  line  of  skir- 
mishers was  enfiladed  by  the  enemy’s  batteries,  throwing  solid  shot, 
shell,  grape,  and  canister,  from  heavy  guns  put  into  battery  during  the 
day  and  night. 

During  the  afternoon  of  the  12th,  General  Welsh  called  on  me  for  a 
regiment  to  proceed  up  the  Canton  road  for  the  purpose  of  protecting 
our  rear  and  left  flank  from  a threatened  attack  from  the  enemy’s 
cavalry,  who  were  reported  in  force  in  that  direction. 

I sent  the  One  hundredth  Regiment  Pennsylvania  Volunteers,  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Dawson  commanding,  and  the  regiment  remained  on 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


535 


that  duty  until  it  rejoined  the  command  on  the  17th,  on  the  march  up 
Pearl  Eiver. 

On  the  14th  and  15th,  1,200  men  of  this  command,  with  a like  num- 
ber from  Colonel  Bowman’s  brigade,  relieved  the  Second  Division  in 
the  front,  having,  during  the  intervening  two  days,  been  on  duty  as 
picket,  in  support  of  Edwards’  battery,  or  on  fatigue. 

On  the  16th,  a general  demonstration  was  made  all  along  the  line  of 
our  army,  and  this  command  was  in  position  for  some  hours,  but  the 
object  of  the  demonstration  having  been  accomplished,  I returned  to 
my  old  position,  after  having  sent  the  Seventy-ninth  Regiment  New 
York  Volunteers  to  make  a reconnaissance  to  our  left,  along  the  Pearl 
River,  which  was  most  satisfactorily  done.  During  the  night  of  the  16th, 
the  enemy  evacuated  Jackson,  and  the  period  of  active  operations  in 
the  field  was  at  a close. 

I deem  it  my  duty,  as  it  is  also  a great  pleasure,  to  bear  testimony  to 
the  gallant  conduct  of  every  officer  and  man  of  this  command  while  in 
the  face  of  the  enemy  and  in  action.  Where  all  did  their  duty  it  would  be 
invidious  to  mention  names  with  eulogy.  This  much  I may  say  for  the 
officers  and  men  of  the  Second  Michigan  Volunteers:  They  one  and  all 
proved  themselves  worthy  of  every  commendation,  and,  if  that  were 
possible,  all  deserve  promotion:  while  at  the  same  time  even  that  gal- 
lant corps  will  admit  that,  had  the  day  of  trial  and  of  honor  fallen  upon 
any  other  regiment  of  this  command,  it  would  no  doubt  have  proved 
itself  equally  true  to  duty  and  worthy  of  our  highest  esteem. 

Accompanying,  please  find  report  of  Colonel  Humphrey,  and  report 
of  casualties.* 

On  the  evening  of  the  10th,  Lieutenant  Gilmore,  adjutant  of  the 
Seventy-ninth  New  York  Volunteers,  was  taken  prisoner  by  a small 
party  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  while  going  to  the  rear  to  bring  forward 
the  company  cooks,  who  had  remained  behind. 

On  the  11th,  Lieutenant  Baker,  acting  quartermaster  Eighth  Regi- 
ment Michigan  Volunteers,  was  wounded  in  the  side  of  the  head  while 
standing  in  the  rear  of  our  line  of  battle  observing  the  progress  of  the 
fight. 

Recapitulation  of  casualties. — Killed,  wounded,  and  missing : Second 
Michigan  Volunteers,  59 ; Seventy-ninth  New  York  Volunteers,  1 ; 
Eighth  Michigan  Volunteers,  1.  Total,  61. 

I trust  it  may  not  be  deemed  out  of  place  in  this  report  to  speak  of 
the  fidelity  with  which  the  surgeons  of  their  commands  discharged 
their  duties  to  the  wounded.  To  their  untiring  efforts  I have  no  doubt 
we  are  largely  indebted  for  the  small  ratio  of  deaths  after  such  very 
serious  wounds  as  were  most  of  those  received  at  close  quarters  on  the 
11th  ; and,  further,  to  express  my  astonishment  and  regret  at  the  almost 
total  deficiency  of  necessary  medicines  and  stimulants  placed  at  their 
disposal. 

I have  the  honor  to  report  as  above. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DANIEL  LEASURE, 

Colonel , Commanding  Brigade. 

Capt.  George  A.  Hicks, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  543. 


566  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chav.  XXXVI. 

No.  9. 

Report  of  Col.  William  Humphrey , Second  Michigan  Infantry. 

Milldale,  July  24,  1863. 

Sib,  : Below  you  will  find  an  imperfect  report  of  the  operations  of  my 
regiment  on  the  1 1th  : 

At  5 a.  m.  I was  ordered  by  Colonel  Leasure,  commanding  brigade, 
to  deploy  my  regiment  as  skirmishers  on  the  left  of  the  skirmish  line  of 
the  First  Brigade,  to  keep  my  connection  with  it  perfect,  to  be  guided 
in  the  movements  of  my  line  strictly  by  those  of  the  regiment  on  my 
right,  and  to  advance  until  we  drew  the  fire  of  the  enemy’s  artillery. 

I at  once  deployed  my  regiTiient  and  moved  as  directed,  meeting  with 
only  slight  opposition  from  the  enemy  until  about,  6 o’clock,  when  a brisk 
fire  was  opened  along  the  whole  line.  We  had  come  up  to  the  enemy 
strongly  posted  in  front  of  my  right  iti  a deep  water  course,  and  of  my 
left  in  a thick  wood.  We  here  received  orders  from  the  right  to  ad- 
vance no  farther  for  the  present.  But  the  fire  was  kept  up  briskly,  and 
the  enemy  showed  a determination  not  to  yield  his  position. 

It  wTas  evident  they  were  near  their  support,  and  that  our  farther 
advance  would  be  warmly  contested. 

At  7 a.  m.  the  order  came  down  the  line  to  charge  double-quick. 
Tbe  regiment  at  once  advanced  with  a cheer,  drove  in  the  enemy’s 
skirmishers  on  to  their  reserves,  strongly  posted  in  a deep  ravine,  drove 
their  reserve  up  out  of  the  ravine  onto  their  main  support,  which  was 
drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  on  the  top  of  the  south  bank  of  the  ravine, 
charged,  under  a terrible  fire,  up  the  bank  on  the  main  body,  broke  its 
line,  and  drove  the  enemy  within  his  works. 

We  waited  now  for  our  support  to  come  up,  but  wTere  surprised  to 
find  that  we  had  none.  The  regiment  on  my  right,  for  some  reason  not 
known  to  me,  advanced  but  a short  distance,  and  then  fell  back  to  the 
line  it  had  left  but  a few  minutes  before.  By  some  mistake  the  three 
left  companies  of  the  regiment  (C,  H,  and  F)  did  not  move  with  the  rest 
in  this  charge,  which  was  made  with  less  than  200  men.  Fifty  of 
these  had  fallen.  The  enemy  were  being  re-enforced,  and  we  were 
entirely  without  support,  with  no  connection  on  our  right  and  no  troops 
on  our  left.  To  hold  the  ground  we  had  so  dearly  won  for  any  length 
of  time  was  impossible.  I therefore  put  my  men  under  cover  as  well  as 
possible,  and  held  the  ground  till  the  men  carried  the  wounded  men  to 
the  rear  (about  three-quarters  of  an  hour)  and  gathered  up  apd  brought 
out  their  accouterments,  and  then  fell  gradually  back  to  the  line  we  had 
left  an  hour  before.  The  regiment  remained  on  this  line  till  3 a.  m.  of 
the  12th,  when  it  was  relieved  by  the  Eleventh  New  Hampshire  Regi- 
ment,  and  soon  after  joined  the  rest  of  the  brigade. 

In  concluding,  I would  like  to  speak  of  some  of  the  officers  and  men 
of  my  regiment  for  their  gallant  conduct,  as  shown  on  this  occasion. 
But  where  all  behaved  well,  I could  not  do  so  without  injustice  to  others. 

Accompanying  this  I send  a list  of  the  killed,  wounded,  and  missing,* 
which  of  itself  will  attest  the  desperate  character  of  the  conflict.  It 
was,  in  some  parts  of  the  line,  a hand-to-hand  fight,  and  some  of  the 
men  fell  on  the  banks  of  the  enemy’s  rifle-pits. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  HUMPHREY, 

Colonel , Commanding  Second  Michigan  Infantry. 

Lieut.  J.  C.  Leasuke,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General.  


Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  543. 


Chap.  XXXVX] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


567 


No . 10. 


Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Robert  B.  Potter , TJ.  S.  Army , commanding  Second 

Division. 


Headquarters  Second  Division,  Ninth  Army  Corps, 

Near  Jackson , Miss.,  July  16,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  iu  accordance  with  verbal  or- 
ders from  Major-General  Parke,  I directed  an  advance  of  my  skir- 
mishers, at  11  a.  m.  to-day,  on  the  right  and  left  of  my  line,  my  center 
being  too  much  exposed  to  admit  of  such  a movement  until  covered  by 
the  wings. 

My  line,  nearly  a mile  in  length,  commences  on  the  Jackson  and  Can- 
ton road,  at  a point  where  rests  the  left  of  General  Smith’s  line : it 
runs  thence  along  the  crest  of  a hill  and  through  the  woods  in  a south- 
easterly direction.  At  the  end  of  the  wood  it  takes  an  easterly  course, 
running  for  nearly  a third  of  the  distance  along  a crest  wholly  free 
from  timber  or  brushwood ; it  then  turns  again  to  the  southeast^  and, 
the  ground  becoming  more  broken,  it  runs  through  woods,  and,  as  far 
as  practicable,  on  the  crest  of  the  hill  to  our  extreme  left,  which  rests 
in  an  extremely  thick  wood.  Rifle-pits  have  been  dug  in  all  the  cleared 
parts  of  the  line,  and  in  the  open  wood.  The  force  on  this  line  is  1,700 
muskets,  exclusive  of  details  for  water,  &c.,  and  the  usual  complement 
of  officers.  They  are  detailed  from  the  Second  and  Third  Brigades,  of 
this  division,  and  are  under  the  immediate  command  of  General  Fer- 
rero.  The  First  Brigade,  730  muskets,  was  held  in  reserve  at  the  di- 
vision camp.  Six  hundred  men  are  on  the  line  of  skirmishers,  and 
1,100  held  in  reserve. 

On  our  advance,  the  enemy’s  skirmishers  were,  without  much  diffi- 
culty, driven  into  their  rifle-pits,  which  were  well  filled,  and  a strong 
resistance  offered.  Behind  these  intrenchments  troops  could  be  seen 
drawn  up  in  line.  The  resistance  was  as  pertinacious  as  could  be  ex- 
pected on  the  advance  of  a strong  line  of  skirmishers,  and  was  suffi- 
cient, when  they  reached  the  rifle-pits,  to  repel  a very  considerable 
force.  At  this  point  some  shell  and  case-shot  were  thrown  into  my 
men  from  batteries  to  the  right  of  the  road.  Finding  that  any  further 
attempt  to  advance  would  be  attended  with  severe  loss,  and  the  position 
not  being  tenable,  the  force  retired  to  its  former  position. 

On  my  right  are  two  forts — one  an  earthwork  and  the  other  made  of 
cotton  bales — which  throw  shot  and  shell  into  my  lines,  causing  some 
loss.  In  front  of  my  center  a six-gun  fort  can  be  distinctly  seen ; this 
tort  did  not  fire,  but  the  guns  were  manned,  and  a large  number  of 
troops  could  be  seen  over  the  parapet.  On  the  left  are  indications  of 
an  earthwork,  intended  for  a battery,  and  connected  with  rifle-pits,  but 
we  couM  not  get  near  enough  to  make  this  out,  as  the  wood  is  thick. 
All  these  forts  seem  to  be  on  the  same  line,  and  are  inclosed  in  a line  of 
rifle  pits. 

When  the  advance  was  made,  a noise  as  of  a movement  of  a batterv 
was  reported  on  the  left. 

The  enemy  appear  fully  as  strong  in  my  front  as  at  any  time  since 
we  have  occupied  this  line. 

My  loss  was  2 killed  and  6 wounded. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ROBERT  B.  POTTER, 


Lieut.  Col.  N.  Bowen. 


Brigadier-  General. 


568 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Headquarters  Second  Division,  Ninth  Army  Corps, 

On  Canton  Road , near  Jackson,  Miss.,  July  18,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  troops  of  my  division 
relieved  General  Welsh’s  troops  on  the  morning  of  the  16th  instant. 
A report  of  a movement  to  feel  the  enemy’s  lines  on  that  day  has  here- 
tofore been  sent  in. 

About  11  p.  m.  of  the  16th,  it  was  reported  to  me  that  the  enemy 
was  in  motion.  I at  once  reported  the  same  to  headquarters,  and  got 
my  reserves,  consisting  of  Griffin’s  brigade  and  Durell’s  and  Roemer’s 
batteries,  ready  to  move.  I then  proceeded  to  the  front,  and  visited  the 
line  of  skirmishers.  I found  the  enemy’s  pickets  still  in  position,  but 
the  noise  of  the  enemy’s  movements,  reported  by  General  Ferrero,  had 
mostly  ceased.  I remained  here  until  1 a.  m.  of  the  17th.  General  Fer- 
rero was  to  relieve  his  pickets  and  skirmishers  at  2 a.  m.  I ordered 
him  to  have  everything  ready  to  move  at  daybreak,  and,  if  he  found  the 
enemy  were  not  in  force,  to  move  forward  on  their  works.  At  5 a.  m. 
he  reported  to  me  that  he  was  inside  the  enemy’s  works  and  advancing 
on  the  town,  which  he  occupied  at  6 a.  m.,  the  Thirty -fifth  Massachu- 
setts Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel  [ft.  Charlton]  Mitchell  [Fifty -first 
New  York],  having  the  advance.  I inclose  a copy  of  his  report,  together 
with  a list  of  the  casualties  in  my  command  on  the  16tli  and  17th  instant.* 

Commending  the  conduct  of  the  troops  engaged  to  the  general  com- 
manding, very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ROBERT  B.  POTTER, 
Brigadier - General,  Commanding. 


Headquarters  Second  Division,  Ninth  Army  Corps, 

Near  Jackson , Miss.,  July  19,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  this  command  moved  from 
McCall’s  at  5 p.  m.  of  the  4th  instant;  moved  about  5 miles  and  halted. 
On  the  5th  we  moved  on  to  Hill’s.  On  the  afternoon  of  the  7th,  two  bri- 
gades crossed  the  river  at  Birdsong  Ferry.  The  bridge  at  that  point 
giving  way,  the  First  Brigade  (Colonel  Griffin’s)  and  Roemer’s  battery 
were  obliged  to  pass  around  by  Messinger’s.  The  command  halted  at 
Manuel’s.  Moved  from  Manuel’s  at  4 p.  in.  of  the  8th,  leaving  Griffin’s 
brigade  and  Roemer’s  battery  to  cover  the  train  and  bring  up  the  rear, 
halting  at  Hall’s  Cross-Roads.  Moved  forward  about  12  miles  on  the  9thu 
On  the  10th,  moved  forward  to  the  crossing  of  the  roads  to  Brownsville 
and  Pearl  River.  Here  I disposed  my  men  to  cover  our  flanks  and  rear. 
Moved  forward  in  the  evening  to  a point  on  the  railroad  about  half  a 
mile  from  the  asylum,  leaving  Griffin’s  brigade  at  the  cross-roads,  and 
sending  two  regiments  to  the  assistance  of  General  Welsh. 

On  the  11th,  moved  forward,  placing  Christ’s  brigade  as  supports  to 
Edwards’  and  Benjamin’s  batteries,  sending  the  First  Brigade  to  sup- 
port General  Welsh,  and  deploying:  the  Fifty-first  New  York  as  skir- 
mishers on  the  extreme  left  of  ohr  line.  Griffin’s  brigade  was  also  em- 
ployed destroying  the  railroad  north  of  Jackson. 

I relieved  General  Welsh’s  entire  command  on  the  12th,  holding  the 
front  until  relieved  by  General  Welsh  on  the  14th,  when  I returned  my 
command  to  the  support  of  the  batteries. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  13th,  the  enemy  tried  to  drive  back  part  of 
my  line,  but  were  repulsed. 


Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  543. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


569 


On  the  15th,  I sent  out  a force  to  reconnoiter  between  our  left  and 
the  river. 

On  the  16th,  I again  relieved  General  Welsh  with  the  Second  and 
Third  Brigades,  under  General  Ferrero,  holding  the  first  in  reserve, 
having  that  day  quite  a sharp  engagement  with  the  enemy  in  trying  to 
advance  my  line. 

Advanced  on  the  enemy’s  works  at  daylight  of  the  17th  and  found 
them  evacuated,  and  entered  and  took  possession  of  the  town,  finding 
there  137  prisoners,  about  1,000  stand  of  small  arms,  and  some  stores  and 
ammunition.  One  heavy  siege  gun  was  left  mounted  on  the  works  in 
our  front.  My  command  was  relieved  by  a portion  of  General  Steele’s 
and  returned  to  camp  about  midday.  A complete  list  of  the  casualties 
in  the  command  has  been  furnished.*  I regret  that  it  included  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Brenholtz,  commanding  the  Fiftieth  Pennsylvania  Vol- 
unteers, dangerously  wounded  ; a most  gallant  and  efficient  officer. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EGBERT  B.  POTTER, 
Brigadier-  Genera  Z,  Commanding . 

Lieut.  Col.  N.  Bowen, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  11 

Report  of  Col.  Simon  G.  Griffin , Sixth  New  Hampshire  Infantry , com- 
manding First  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  First  Brig.,  Second  Div.,  Ninth  Army  Corps, 

Near  Jackson , Miss .,  July  19,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  my  brigade  in  the  recent  expedition: 

I left  my  camp  near  McCall’s,  Miss.,  on  the  afternoon  of  July  4,  and 
moved  in  the  direction  of  Birdsong  Ferry,  and  arrived  in  that  vicinity 
on  the  afternoon  of  the  5th.  Here  we  went  into  camp  (owing  to  the 
delay  in  building  the  bridge  across  the  Big  Black)  until  the  afternoon 
of  the  7th,  when  we  marched  to  the  river  bank. 

My  brigade,  with  Roemer’s  battery,  was  to  serve  as  rear  guard  of  the 
corps. 

Upon  my  arrival  at  the  river,  the  artillery  belonging  to  the  First 
Division  had  not  yet  crossed,  and  while  Durell’s  battery  was  crossing 
the  bridge  suddenly  broke  and  was  entirely  swept  away. 

It  was  now  night,  and  a severe  storm  arising,  I was  for  a time  unable 
to  commence  crossing,  and  the  only  means  of  transportation  was  a 
small  raft. 

At  midnight  I commenced  the  work,  and  by  8 a.  m.  of  the  8th  had 
crossed  with  the  infantry. 

At  daylight  I had  the  ferry-boat  at  Birdsong  Ferry  put  in  order  to 
transport  the  animals  and  ambulances  belonging  to  my  command.  The 
artillery  remaining  was  ordered  to  cross  at  Messinger’s. 

On  the  8th,  I marched  as  far  as  Dr.  Manuel’s,  in  the  direction  of  Jack- 
son,  where  I bivouacked  for  the  night.  Here  I was  joined  by  Roemer’s 
battery  and  one  section  of  Durell’s  battery. 


* Nominal  list,  omitted,  reports  6 men  killed,  2 officers  and  35  men  wounded,  and  2 
officers  and  1 man  missing. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


° MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Od  the  9th,  I marched  to  within  about  1 mile  of  the  town  of  Clinton, 
where  I bivouacked  for  the  night. 

On  the  10th,  I joined  the  division,  and  marched  to  a point  within  about 
S miles  of  the  city,  at  the  cross-roads  leading  to  Canton,  where  I was 
ordered  to  remain  and  guard  the  roads  in  that  vicinity. 

On  the  11th,  I sent  out  a party  under  Colonel  Bliss,  Seventh  Rhode 
Island  Volunteers,  to  destroy  the  railroad  running  north  from  Jackson. 
This  party  was  entirely  successful  in  completely  destroying  this  road  for 
over  three-quarters  of  a mile. 

On  the  morning  of  the  12th  (Sunday),  upon  being  relieved  by  troops  of 
General  Smith’s  division,  I was  ordered  to  the  front,  to  support  the 
Second  and  Third  Brigades  of  this  division ; and  on  the  morning  of 
the  13th,  my  brigade  was  posted  on  the  line  of  skirmishers,  where  it 
remained  until  it  was  relieved,  on  the  14th,  by  troops  of  the  First 
Division. 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th,  I was  ordered  to  encamp  at  my  present 
camping  ground. 

During  the  whole  expedition  the  officers  and  men  of  my  command 
behaved  equally  well. 

1 inclose  herewith  a list  of  the  casualties.  * 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

S.  G.  GRIFFIN, 

Colonel , Commanding  Brigade. 

Captain  Michels, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  12. 

Report  of  Col.  Zenas  R.  Bliss  7 Seventh  Rhode  Island  Infantry , including 

operations  since  June  4. 

Camp  near  Milldale,  Miss., 

July  28,  1863. 

General:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  opera- 
tions of  the  Seventh  Regiment  since  leaving  Kentucky : 

The  regiment  left  Crab  Orchard  June  4;  arrived  atNicholasville  June  * 
5,  and  proceeded  by  railroad  to  Cairo,  111.,  and  thence  by  steamboat  to 
Sherman’s  Landing,  near  Young’s  Point,  La. ; arrived  June  14.  The 
Ninth  Corps  was  ordered  to  take  position  on  the  left  of  our  line,  invest- 
ing Vicksburg,  but  while  the  corps  was  crossing  the  river  at  Warren- 
ton  the  order  was  countermanded,  and  we  returned  to  the  landing,  June 
16,  embarked,  and  were  transported  to  Snyder’s  Bluff,  on  the  Yasoo 
River,  and  remained  in  camp  near  there  until  July  4. 

June 24,  proceeded  to  the  junction  of  the  roads  to  Mechanicsburg  and 
Birdsong  Ferry,  and  held  that  point,  to  prevent  the  enemy  cutting  off 
a detachment  that  had  been  sent  to  the  Big  Black  j returned  to  camp 
the  same  night,  felling  trees  and  obstructing  road  as  we  returned. 

July  4,  started  on  the  expedition  to  Jackson. 

July  5,  arrived  at  the  Big  Black.  The  river  at  this  point  was  deep 
and  rapid,  and  was  much  swollen  by  the  rain  which  fell  during  the 
evening.  The  temporary  bridge  was  accidentally  destroyed  in  crossing 


* Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  543. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


571 


our  artillery,  and  this  brigade  crossed  during  the  night  on  a small 
raft,  capable  of  taking  but  6 men  at  a time.  We  arrived  near  Jackson 

July  10.  . 

On  the  11th,  I was  ordered,  in  command  of  the  Sixth  New  Hamp- 
shire and  Seventh  Rhode  Island,  to  proceed  to  the  Mobile  and  Ohio 
Railroad  and  destroy  as  much  of  it  as  possible.  We  destroyed  about 
500  yards  of  the  road,  burning  the  ties  and  bending  rails,  rendering 
them  unfit  for  use.  The  telegraph  was  also  cut  and  the  wire  burned. 
We  worked  till  dark  without  interruption,  though  the  enemy  showed 
themselves  in  small  parties  several  times  in  our  front.  We  returned  to 
camp  at  9 p.  m. 

On  the  12th,  we  were  ordered  to  the  front,  and  this  regiment  was 
doing  duty  during  the  day  and  night  as  a support  to  the  Thirty-fifth 
Massachusetts  on  picket. 

At  daylight  on  the' 13th,  the  Seventh  relieved  the  Thirty  fifth,  and  we 
took  posts  as  pickets  in  their  stead.  The  fire  during  the  day  was 
severe;  the  enemy  kept  up  an  almost  continuous  fire  of  musketry  from 
their  intrenchments,  and  our  position  was  frequently  raked  by  grape- 
shot  and  shell  from  their  batteries  opposed  to  us. 

At  2.30  p.  m.  the  enemy  made  a sortie  from  their  works,  and  attempted 
to  drive  our  line  from  the  position  we  held,  but  were  gallantly  repulsed, 
with  a large  number  killed  and  wounded.  About  11  p.  m.  a company 
was  called  to  re-enforce  a part  of  the  line  occupied  by  the  Seventh.  I 
sent  Lieutenant  Sullivan,  regimental  adjutant,  and  Lieutenant  [Fuller] 
Dingley,  with  a company  of  the  Twenty- ninth  Massachusetts.  They 
posted  the  company  as  directed,  and  started  to  return  to  headquarters. 
They  probably  lost  their  way  in  the  darkness,  and  walked  into  the  ene- 
my 7s  lines  and  were  captured.  We  learned  from  rebel  prisoners  that 
two  lieutenants  were  taken  prisoners  opposite  our  position  in  the  line, 
and  sent  immediately  to  Richmond.  The  regiment  was  relieved  on  the 
morning  of  the  14th. 

During  the  night  of  the  16th,  Jackson  was  evacuated,  and  we  were 
not  again  on  duty  there.  Our  position  during  the  siege  was  the  left  of 
the  Federal  lines. 

The  corps  left  Jackson  July  20,  and  arrived  at  present  camp  July  24. 

The  conduct  of  the  regiment  during  the  expedition  has  been  praise- 
worthy, and  credit  is  due  them  for  their  gallantry  in  repelling  the  sortie 
of  the  enemy  and  for  the  soldierlike  manner  in  which  they  have  sub- 
mitted to  the  many  privations  and  fatigues  they  have  been  obliged  to 
undergo.  Several  nights  in  succession  they  were  turned  out,  and  re- 
mained in  readiness  to  repel  the  attacks  of  the  enemy.  They  have 
suffered  severely  from  the  intense  heat  and  debilitating  effects  of  the 
climate.  Some  of  the  marches  were  long,  with  but  little  water,  and 
many  of  the  men  were  barefooted  and  without  proper  clothing,  and  at 
times  all  were  on  half  rations. 

The  loss  on  the  13th  was  1 first  sergeant  and  1 private  killed,  10 
privates  wounded,  and  2 lieutenants  prisoners. 

1 have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  orders  from  the  commander-in- 
chief, commander  of  the  expedition,  and  commander  of  the  Ninth  Army 
Corps.* 

I am,  general,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Z.  E.  BLISS, 

Colonel , Commanding  Seventh  Rhode  Island  Volunteers. 

General  E.  C.  Mauean,  Adjutant- General,  Rhode  Island. 


* Not  found. 


572  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chav.  XXXVI. 

No.  13. 

Report  of . Brig.  Gen.  Edward  Ferrero , U.  S.  Army , commanding  Second 

Brigade . 

Hdqrs.  Second  Brig.,  Second  Div.,  Ninth  A.  C., 

Jackson , ifes.,  18,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  at  3 a.  m.  on  the  16th  I 
relieved  General  Welsh’s  line  of  skirmishers  with  the  Second  and  Third 
Brigades  of  the  Second  Division,  1 having  been  placed  in  command  of 
the  line  by  an  order  of  General  R.  B.  Potter.  The  troops  of  the  Third 
Brigade  were  posted  as  skirmishers,  supported  by  the  Second  Brigade. 

At  11  a.  m.,  by  signal  from  battery,  I advanced  my  line  of  skirmish- 
ers for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  position  and  force  of  the  enemy. 

The  troops  advanced  until  the  enemy  was  driven  into  his  rifle-pits. 
Troops  were  seen  drawn  up  in  line  behind  the  works.  My  line  of  skir- 
mishers then  withdrew  and  occupied  their  old  line. 

At  about  9 o’clock  I received  reports  from  the  advanced  posts  along 
the  line  that  artillery  and  infantry  could  be  distinctly  heard  moving  in 
an  easterly  direction  through  the  town.  After  satisfying  myself  that 
these  reports  were  correct,  and  that  the  enemy  was  really  moving,  I 
communicated  the  fact  to  General  R.  B.  Potter  at  about  11  p.  m. 

At  2 a.  m.  of  the  17th,  the  skirmishers  of  the  Third  Brigade  were  re- 
lieved by  troops  from  the  Second  Brigade,  and  at  daylight  the  line  was 
advanced  to  ascertain  the  correct  position  of  the  enemy’s  skirmishers. 
No  enemy  was  found ; and,  after  proceeding  a short  distance  toward 
the  town,  a white  flag  was  seen  on  the  earthworks.  I then  ordered  a 
general  advance  of  my  line,  entered  Jackson  at  6 a.  m.,  placed  guards 
over  private  property,  and  sent  out  patrols  to  take  all  of  the  enemy  still 
remaining  in  town. 

There  were  left  in  town  by  the  retreating  forces  about  a thousand 
stand  of  arms  and  a large  quantity  of  ammunition.  On  the  earthworks 
was  left  one  32  pounder  rifled  gun.  My  patrols  captured  1 second  lieu- 
tenant and  137  enlisted  men. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  .respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDW.  FERRERO, 

Brigadier- General. 

Capt.  H.  R.  Mighels, 

Assistant  Adjutant - General. 


No.  14. 

Report  of  — , Forty-sixth  New  York  Infantry , Third  Brigade. 

Near  Jackson,  Miss.,  July  18,  1863. 

Colonel  : In  conformity  with  General  Orders,  No.  13,  Headquarters 
Second  Division,  I herewith  have  the  honor  to  bring  to  your  knowledge 
the  following  concerning  the  part  which  the  Forty-sixth  New  York  took 
in  the  engagement  before  Jackson,  and  also  its  movements  from  Mon- 
day, 13th,  to  this  date: 

During  the  13th  instant,  this  command  acted  with  the  Fiftieth  Penn- 
sylvania and  Twenty-ninth  Massachusetts  as  reserve,  supporting  the 
Thirty-fifth  Massachusetts,  which  was  then  in  the  rifle-pits  opposite 
Jackson.  Advanced  toward  8 p.  m.  some  500  yards,  and  at  7 a.  m.  on 
the  15th  marched  back  to  take  position  behind  Benjamin’s  battery, 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


573 


remaining  there  in  camp  until  the  16th  of  July,  at  2 a.  m.  No  casualties 
had  occurred. 

On  the  16th,  at  2.30  a.  in.,  the  Forty-sixth  New  York  left  camp, 
marched  to  the  outposts,  relieved  there  the  Thirty-sixth  Massachusetts, 
in  the  rifle-pits,  the  right  wing  communicating  with  General  Smith’s 
divisiou  and  the  left  touching  the  Fiftieth  Pennsylvania  Volunteers, 
and  till  9 a.  m.  kept  up  a pretty  strong  fire,  as  was  all  along  the  line, 
when  it  nearly  ceased.  One  man  of  Company  H was  instantly  killed 
by  a Minie  ball  from  the  enemy. 

Toward  12  a.  m.  two  signal  shots  fired  from  Edwards’  battery  in  our 
rear,  gave,  as  ordered  by  Brigadier-General  Ferrero,  the  signal  for  a 
cautious  advance  of  about  one-third  of  our  skirmishers  along  the  line, 
the  order  being  to  advance  slowly,  feel  the  enemy’s  position,  and,  in 
case  he  should  be  found  still  in  his  rifle-pits  in  force,  to  fall  back.  The 
skirmishers  of  the  Forty-sixth  New  York  advanced  at  once,  constantly 
firing,  driving  the  enemy,  who  had  strong  vedettes  thrown  out,  in  his 
rifle-pits,  when  the  latter’s  artillery  opened  upon  our  skirmishers  on  the 
right  and  heavy  volleys  in  front  from  the  rebels  received  them. 

This  engagement  lasted  an  hour,  and  as  information  about  the  posi- 
tion of  the  enemy,  its  strength,  &c.,  was  gained,  our  men  slowly  returned 
to  their  former  position  in  the  rifle  pits.  During  the  night  of  the  16th, 
a few  vedettes  of  us  advanced  to  some  50  yards  from  the  rebel  intrench  - 
ments,  and  at  10  p.  m.  reported  movements  of  artillery  and  train  on  the 
Jackson  main  road. 

At  2 a.  m.  on  the  17th,  the  Thirty  fifth  Massachusetts  relieved  the 
Forty-sixth  New  York.  At  dawn  of  the  day  a flag  of  truce  received  by 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Travers  reported  the  evacuation  of  Jackson  and  its 
works,  and  at  once  the  Thirty-fifth  Massachusetts  in  line  of  skirmishers 
and  this  regiment  in  column  entered  the  same,  the  latter  taking  some 
20  prisoners  and  a rebel  Texas  flag.  Two  men  severely  wounded  from 
the  Forty-sixth  New  York. 

At  12  a.  m.  the  Forty-sixth  New  York  left  Jackson,  returning  to  its 
former  camp,  behind  Benjamin’s  battery,  and  is  there  encamped  since. 

I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  that  during  the  whole  expedition 
both  officers  and  men  of  my  command  distinguished  themselves  by  faith- 
ful and  joyous  performance  of  their  duty,  and  especially  does  Capt. 
Alphonse  Serviere,  by  activity  and  energy,  deserve  to  be  honorably  men- 
tioned, he  having  taken  with  his  company  (the  aforesaid  Company  E) 
20  prisoners  on  the  17th  at  Jackson  and  to-day  30  additional,  with  a 
small  scouting  party  of  the  regiment,  near  the  Pearl  River. 

Since  the  evening  of  the  13th,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Travers  commanded 
the  Forty-sixth  Regiment  New  York  Volunteers,  while  Colonel  Gerhardt 
was  pro  tempore  in  command  of  the  Third  Brigade. 

[Not  signed.] 

Col.  B.  C.  Christ,  Commanding  Brigade. 


No.  15. 

Reports  of  Maj.  Gen.  Edward  O.  C.  Ord , TJ.  8.  Army , commanding 
Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

July  20,  1863. 

General  : The  advance  of  my  cavalry,  sent  to  Brookhaven,  reported 
a short  time  since,  Colonel  Fonda,  mounted  infantry,  in  command.  He 


574  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

stated  that  they  had  burned  4 locomotives  and  a large  number  of  cars; 
destroyed  depots,  tanks,  bridges,  &c.  The  detailed  reports  will  be  in 
soon  (I  suppose),  when  I will  forward  them.  I send  report  of  some 
very  bad  cases  of  wounded,  found  in  rebel  hospitals  beyond  Pearl  River. 
These  men  beg  to  be  carried  back,  but  it  is  reported  removal  will  kill 
some  of  them.  Please  direct  me  what  to  do.  I have  issued  an  order  to 
move  to-morrow  at  daylight,  via  Raymond. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

E.  O.  C.  ORD, 

Major-General , Commanding. 

Maj.  Gen.  William  T.  Sherman, 

Commanding  Army  of  Operations. 


Headquarters  Fifteenth  Army  Corps, 

Camp  at  Big  Black,  July  30,  1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  Department  of  the  Tennessee , Vicksburg  ; 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  herewith  to  inclose  General  Ord’s  report  of 
the  operations  of  his  corps  (the  Thirteenth),  and  to  invite  attention  to 
the  details  given  in  the  reports  of  his  division,  brigade,  and  regimental 
commanders.  I heartily  indorse  the  favorable  mention  of  many  officers 
therein  named,  and  forbear  to  discriminate  among  them,  as  our  associa- 
tions as  commander  and  commanded  were  too  short  for  me  to  do  so  with 
justice. 

These  reports  exhibit  a full  history  of  the  operations  against  Jackson, 
to  the  south  of  the  Clinton  road. 

I have  the  honor,  &c., 

W.  T.  SHERMAN, 
Major-General,  Commanding . 


[Inclosure.] 

Headquarters  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  27,  1863. 

Colonel:  In  pursuance  of  orders  received  on  the  evening  of  July  4, 
1863,  my  corps  (14,400  infantry,  440  cavalry,  and  sixty-three  pieces  of  ar- 
tillery) started  the  following  morning  from  the  trenches  before  Vicksburg 
for  Jackson,  Miss.  After  a hot  and  exhausting  march  of  four  days,  one 
day  being  spent  in  rebuilding  a bridge  and  crossing  Big  Black  River,  we 
arrived  near  J ackson,  via  the  Clinton  road.  En  route  from  Edwards  Sta- 
tion, the  advance  and  cavalry,  under  Osterhaus,  were  engaged  in  skir- 
mishing with  the  enemy,  who,  with  some  pieces  of  artillery  and  several 
hundred  cavalry,  occupied  the  woods  and  road,  and  opposed  our  prog- 
ress. Osterhaus  lost  7 men  killed  and  wounded  by  them,  but  regu- 
larly drove  them  before  him.  When  the  head  of  my  column  reached 
Jackson,  you  ordered  it,  on  the  10th,  to  occupy  the  right  attack,  next 
to  Steele’s  corps.  It  was  brought  up  and  placed  in  position  on  the  next 
day  (11th),  the  right  division  resting  its  left  on  the  railroad  from  Jackson 
to  New  Orleans,  all  threatening  the  enemy’s  works  with  skirmishers, 
and  supports  at  from  900  to  600  yards  from  them.  This  position  was 
not  gained  without  severe  lighting  and  loss  of  life,  especially  in  Hovey’s 
and  Benton’s  divisions,  on  the  right  and  left  center  of  my  corps.  Gen- 
eral Lauman  had  received  special  instructions  to  take  position  with  his 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


575 


division  on  the  extreme  right,  with  his  line  about  1,500  yards  from  the 
enemy’s  works,  his  skirmishers  as  near  as  they  could  get,  and  under 
cover,  his  supports  to  skirmishers  about  300  yards  in  rear  of  them. 

On  the  night  of  the  11th,  about  9 o’clock,  he  reported  his  division  in 
position,  stating  that  it  was  too  dark  to  find  sites  for  his  artillery,  which 
he  could  do  in  the  morning.  Next  morning,  without  orders,  and  di- 
rectly in  violation  of  the  instructions  as  to  the  position  he  was  to  take, 
he  advanced  upon  the  enemy’s  works  with  Pugh’s  brigade  and  one  reg- 
iment, about  1,000  men  in  all,  a battery  and  one  small  regiment  follow- 
ing. The  point  of  attack  was  not  selected  by  any  reconnaissance  or 
previous  examination.  The  attack  itself  was  unsupported  and  unknown 
by  other  division  commanders.  The  ground  to  be  passed  was  defended 
(I  was  satisfied  at  the  time)  by  several  thousand  of  the  enemy,  and  was 
open  to  an  artillery  front  and  flank  fire  for  600  yards  in  front  of  their 
works.  Of  the  880  men  in  Pugh’s  brigade,  the  loss  by  this  attack  was  465 
in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing,  besides  nearly  all  the  men  and  horses 
of  a section  of  artillery,  which  the  Fifty-third  Indiana  Infantry  brought 
off  by  hand,  and  three  stand  of  colors ; after  which  he  had  to  retreat 
in  haste,  leaving  all  his  dead  and  most  of  the  wounded  under  the  enemy’s 
guns.  1 knew  nothing  of  this  attack  and  disaster  until  it  was  reported 
to  me  about  one  hour  afterward  by  a member  of  your  staff,  Captain 
[James  C.]  McCoy,  who  had  been  sent  to  examine  the  position  taken  up 
by  the  division.  Captain  McCoy  stated  that  General  Lauman  told  him 
to  say  to  General  Ord,  UI  am  cut  all  to  pieces.”  I visited  his  division 
immediately.  He  then  reported  his  total  loss  about  100.  I found  the 
men  scattered,  except  that  part  which  had  not  been  with  him,  and  when 
I called  upon  General  Lauman  to  take  immediate  steps  to  put  the  rem- 
nant of  his  command  under  temporary  cover,  to  call  the  rolls  and 
gather  the  stragglers,  I found  he  did  not  know  how  to  do  it,  and  for 
fear  that  the  enemy  might  follow  up  their  advantage,  and  the  right 
flank  being  too  important  to  trust  in  such  hands,  I relieved  him,  and 
placed  his  division  under  the  command  of  Brig.  Gen.  A.  P.  Hovey,  who 
at  once  placed  the  cut  up  part  of  it  in  the  rear  in  good  position,  had  the 
scattered  regiments  collected,  rolls  called,  and  reported  casualties. 
The  hill  to  which  Lauman  had  retired  was  then  occupied  by  a fresh 
brigade,  who  that  night  erected  two  batteries,  which  secured  them  the 
position. 

A strong  party  was  by  your  order  pushed  to  the  river  on  the  15th, 
before  which  the  enemy  there  in  position  fled,  and  my  line  of  trenches 
and  the  line  of  skirmishers  were  from  this  day  pushed  forward,  fighting 
their  way  toward  the  enemy’s  works,  intrenching  and  placing  batteries 
as  we  advanced.  The  enemy  contested  every  move  we  made  forward, 
and  when  we  peared  their  intrenchments  our  skirmishers  were  contin- 
ually under  a sharp  and  destructive  fire,  and  our  artillerists  and  the 
officers  and  men  in  line  picked  off.  Sallies  were  made  by  the  enemy 
upon  Generals  Smith’s,  Benton’s,  and  Hovey’s  fronts,  and  the  right  of 
Osterhaus,  all  of  which  sallies  were  promptly  driven  back.  General 
Osterhaus,  under  orders,  placed  a battery  of  20  pounder  Parrotts  in 
good  position  early,  and  its  weight  of  metal  covered  his  advance,  and, 
with  the  determination  manifested  by  his  line  and  skirmishers,  soon  drove 
the  enemy  into  their  works  and  kept  them  there.  Our  artillery  fire  was 
slack  toward  the  last  of  the  attack,  batteries  being  short  of  ammuni- 
tion. Had  it  been  possible  to  have  obtained  a full  supply  when  we 
started  for  Jackson,  or  had  our  ammunition  train  arrived  before  the 
night  of  the  evacuation,  greater  damage  could  have  been  done  the  en- 
emy on  that  occasion. 


576 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Ciiap.  XXXYL 


The  enemy  having  had  his  skirmishers  driven  in  along  the  whole 
line,  except  in  two  or  three  places  where  the  spits  of  wood  or  gullies 
near  gave  them  special  cover,  and  our  ammunition  train  having  arrived 
that  night,  it  was  discovered  at  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  17th 
that  the  place  had  been  evacuated. 

My  loss  in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  from  the  time  I started  from 
Vicksburg  to  the  time  I started  from  Jackson  was — Smith’s  division : 
Killed,  6 ; wounded,  37 ; missing,  11 ; total,  54.  Lauman’s  division, 
total,  533.  Hovey’s  division  : Killed,  3 ; wounded,  57  ; total,  60.  Os- 
terliaus’  division:  Killed,  6;  wounded,  73;  total,  79.  Benton’s  divis- 
ion: Killed,  4;  wounded,  32;  total,  36.  Grand  total,  762. 

The  cavalry,  under  Major  Fullerton,  and  the  mounted  infantry,  under 
Colonel  Fonda,  were  engaged  during  nearly  the  whole  of  the  attack  in 
two  raids  south,  during  which  4 locomotives  and  52  cars  were  destroyed, 
a number  of  bridges,  the  depots  at  Byram,  Bahala,  Crystal  Springs, 
Gallatin,  and  Hazlehurst,  one  mill  and  a large  quantity  of  lumber  at 
Hazlehurst  and  Brookhaven,  70  hogsheads  of  sugar  and  about  one- 
half  mile  of  railroad  track  were  also  destroyed ; 22  prisoners  paroled,  and 
2 staff  officers  (a  major  and  captain)  and  15  prisoners  were  brought  in. 

The  infantry,  after  the  evacuation,  Were  set  to  work  destroying  the 
railroad  toward  Kew  Orleans,  10 J miles  of  which  were  torn  up,  the  ties 
burned,  and  all  the  rails  bent.  Several  hundred  bales  of  cotton  upon 
the  enemy’s  works  and  in  the  town  were  also  burned. 

On  the  21st,  the  corps  returned  to  this  place,  via  the  Raymond  road. 
While  engaged  in  the  attack  on  Jackson,  and  in  the  march  there,  we 
were  compelled  to  use  the  green  stagnant  water  found  in  pools,  and  to 
live  principally  on  green  corn  and  such  beef  or  pork  as  we  could  find. 
This,  with  the  heat  and  hard  marching,  caused  a rapid  increase  of 
sickness,  especially  in  regiments  which  had  been  serving  in  the  Missis- 
sippi bottoms,  and  were  predisposed  to  fevers,  so  that,  with  the  large 
number  of  wounded,  on  the  return  I had  to  make  two  trips  with 
all  my  ambulances,  and,  besides,  wagoned  3,200  sick  men  back  to  this 
place. 

For  more  complete  details  of  the  parts  taken  by  their  several  divis- 
ions, I refer  to  the  reports  of  division  commanders.  For  the  details  of 
the  action  of  General  Bauman’s  division  on  the  12th  of  July,  I refer  to 
the  reports  of  his  brigade  commanders.  For  special  accounts  of  cav- 
alry advance  and  raids,  I refer  to  reports  of  Colonel  Fonda,  mounted 
infantry,  and  Major  Fullerton,  Second  Illinois  Cavalry. 

The  men  and  officers  did  their  duty,  and  throughout  the  command 
zeal  and  confidence  prevailed.  I feel  the  inadequacy  of  any  praise  I 
could  offer  for  services  such  as  they  rendered,  for  quiet  submission  to 
privations  such  as  they  endured. 

I am,  sir,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  1 

E.  O.  C.  ORD, 
Major-General  of  Volunteers . 

Lieut.  Col.  J.  H.  Hammond, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

P.  S. — Ninety- one  prisoners  were  taken  ; 22  paroled  by  my  corps. 
A' map  showing  the  front  occupied  by  the  corps  and  the  works  of  the 
enemy  thereat  will  be  sent  in  in  a day  or  two. 

I am,  sir,  yours,  respectfully, 

E.  O.  C.  ORD, 

Major-General  of  Volunteers. 


Chai\  XXXVI.] 


TIIE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


577 


No.  1 G. 


Reports  of  Maj.  Hugh  Fullerton , Second  Illinois  Cavalry , commanding 

Cavalry. 

July  12, 18G3. 

General  : In  obedience  to  your  order  of  yesterday,  I started  last 
night  about  10  o’clock  with  all  the  cavalry  I could  raise  and  about  50 
mounted  infantry,  in  all  about  500  men.  I went  to  the  railroad  south 
of  this.  I went  to  Byram  Station,  about  11  miles  from  here;  there  1 
burned  a railroad  bridge  and  tore  up  some  of  the  track.  1 also  de- 
stroyed a ferry-boat  at  that  place.  • Crossing  Pearl  River,  I destroyed 
the  depot  and  water-tank  and  3 or  4-  freight  cars  and  a lot  of  molasses 
and  sugar.  I then  destroyed  a railroad  bridge  about  3 miles  below 
Byram  Station.  The  country  on  the  railroad  is  generally  level,  good 
farms,  and  fine  growing  crops  of  corn.  I had  to  travel  a little  to  the 
north  ot  the  railroad,  as  I could  not  travel  with  cavalry  cn  the  line  of 
the  road  but  very  little  of  the  way.  The  enemy  made  no  demonstra- 
tions on  going  out,  but  fired  a few  times  at  us  as  we  returned.  I tore 
up  but  little  of  the  track,  for  the  reason  that  I had  nothing  in  the  world 
to  do  it  with.  I burned  in  all  five  bridges  on  the  road. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

HUGH  FULLERTON, 

Major , Commanding  Detachment. 

General  E.  O.  C.  Ord, 

Commanding  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


Headquarters  Cavalry,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Near  Jackson , Miss.,  July  20,  1SG3. 

Colonel  : In  obedience  to  orders  of  the  16th  instant,  I did,  with  all 
the  cavalry  in  my  command,  and  a detachment  of  the  One  hundred  and 
eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  proceed  south  on  the  line  of  the  railroad, 
and,  after  about  18  miles,  we  halted  and  tore  up  and  destroyed  effectu- 
ally about  one-fourth  of  a mile  of  railroad  track.  We  found  it  very 
difficult  to  destroy  the  road  with  the  tools  we  had,  having  nothing  but 
axes  to  work  with,  and  the  bars  being  fastened  together  by  plates 
bolted  together  by  large  bolts  screwed  on. 

We  moved  early  next  morning  to  Hazlehurst.  We  there  destroyed 
the  depot,  the  switches,  and  a large  lot  of  lumber  belonging  to  the  com- 
pany. We  then  moved  on  rapidly  to  Bahala.  There  we  destroyed  the 
railroad  depot,  the  switches,  and  about  20  cars.  We  then  pushed  on 
to  Brookhaven,  where  we  found  4 locomotives  and  8 cars,  all  of  which 
we  destroyed  effectually.  We  also  destroyed  a large  amount  of  lumber 
and  70  hogsheads  of  sugar  and  three  switches,  the  depot  and  water- 
tank  having  been  destroyed  before  we  arrived  there.  We  captured  and 
paroled  23  prisoners  (I  captain  and  22  enlisted  men).  We  also  captured 
Maj.  George  McKnight,  assistant  adjutant-general  on  General  Boring’s 
staff,  and  Capt.  D.  C.  Stith,  aide-de-camp  to  General  Lee ; also  15  pri- 
vates, all  ol  whom  1 turned  over  to  Captain  [Joseph  B.J  Gorsuch,  pro- 
vost-marshal Thirteenth  Army  Corps.  We  then  returned  by  Gallatin 
and  Crystal  Springs,  where  we  destroyed  the  depot  and  switches  and 
4 railroad  cars. 

O i the  expedition  there  were  quite  a number  of  horses  and  mules  cap- 
37  R R — VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


578  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

tiirecl,  but  the  number  I am  not  now  able  to  give,  but  will  to-day  ascer- 
tain and  report. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HUGH  FULLERTON, 

Major , Commanding  Expedition. 

Lieut.  Col,  Walter  B.  Scates,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Headquarters  Cavalry  Brigade, 

Camp  near  Vicksburg , Miss.,  July  26,  1863. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  orders,  I send  this  report  of  the  part  the  cav- 
alry brigade  under  my  command  took  in  the  expedition  to  Jackson, 

Miss.,  and  return.  ^ , T„.  . 

On  July  6,  we  crossed  Big  Black  Bridge,  with  the  Second  Illinois 
Cavalry,  under  command  of  Major  Marsh,  and  detachment  of  the  Third 
Illinois  Cavalry  and  one  company  of  the  Fourth  Indiana  Cavalry,  under 
command  of  Major  Campbell,  of  the  Third  Illinois,  and  went  toward 
Edwards  Station.  Had  some  skirmishing  in  the  afternoon  of  that  day 
with  the  enemy. 

On  the  morning  of  July  7,  we  were  joined  by  a detachment  o±  the 
Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry,  under  command  of  Maj.  Bacon  Montgomery. 
We  marched  out  on  the  road  leading  to  Jackson,  traveled  about  6 miles, 
and  commenced  skirmishing  with  the  enemy.  We  drove  them  back  for 
about  3 miles,  where  a brisk  engagement  ensued.  In  this  engagement 
we  lost  1 man  killed  and  3 wounded,  all  belonging  to  the  Sixth  Missouri 
Regiment.  We  drove  them  from  their  last  position  on  that  day  about 
sundown.  We  then  went  into  camp  for  the  night. 

On  the  8th  instant,  we  broke  camp  early ; traveled  to  Clinton  without 
meeting  any  resistance.  About  2 miles  from  Clinton  the  enemy  again 
appeared  in  our  front,  and  heavy  skirmishing  commenced.  We  drove 
the  enemy  from  the  woods,  and  took  xiosition  in  an  open  field.  The 
enemy  there  soon  opened  upon  us  with  four  10-pounder  Parrott  guns. 
The  distance  was  out  of  the  range  of  the  howitzers  we  had  with  us  at 
the  time,  and  we  had  to  fall  back.  The  general  in  command,  of  the 
Ninth  Division  then  brought  forward  some  infantry  and  heavier  artil- 
lery, and  opened  upon  the  enemy,  driving  them  from  their  position. 
The  cavalry  soon  occupied  that  position.  The  enemy  again  opened 
upon  us  with  their  artillery  from  a position  in  the  northeast  direction. 
The  general  again  ordered  up  to  the  front  the  heavy  artillery  and  drove 
them  from  their  position.  We  here  went  into  camp  h>r  the  night. 

On  the  9th  instant,  we  broke  camp  early  and  started  for  Jackson. 
Skirmishing  soon  began,  and  we  drove  the  enemy  from  place  to  place, 
until  we  got  near  Jackson,  where  they  made  a stand.  The  general  then 
came  up  with  artillery  and  infantry,  and  then  placed  the  cavalry  on  the 
right  and  left,  placing  the  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry,  under  Major  Mont- 
gomery, and  the  Third  Illinois  Cavalry,  under  Major  Campbell,  on  the 
left,  and  the  fight  commenced.  Major  Montgomery,  with  his  command, 
charged  the  enemy  in  front  of  their  fortifications,  and  he  was  obliged 
to  fall  back.  In  this  charge  4 men  were  wounded  and  17  horses  killed 
and  wounded.  The  cavalry  in  my  command  was  then  ordered  to  the 
extreme  right  of  our  army.  The  cavalry  had  slight  skirmishing  in  the 
evening  of  that  day. 

On  the  10th,  we  were  placed  on  the  right,  to  guard  Pearl  River  tor 
a distance  of  5 miles.  Skirmishing  with  the  enemy  continued  for  this 
day.  Major  Campbell  and  Lieutenant  — , of  the  Third  Illinois  Cav- 


Chap.  XXX VI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


579 


airy,  were  wounded  ou  this  day.  Several  horses  in  the  command  were 
wounded  on  this  day. 

On  the  11th,  skirmishing  continued.  One  man  was  wounded,  belong- 
ing to  the  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry. 

On  the  12th,  all  the  cavalry  under  my  command  went  to  Byram 
Station,  10  miles  south  of  Jackson,  and  destroyed  a number  of  railroad 
bridges.  Destroyed  switches,  burned  water- tank  and  depot  at  Byram 
Station,  and  destroyed  the  ferry-boat  at  that  place  across  Pearl  Biver, 
and  returned. 

On  the  13th,  14th,  and  15th,  wo  were  engaged  principally  on  picket 
duty  and  destroying  railroad. 

On  the  17th,  I was  ordered  to  go  down  the  New  Orleans  and  Jackson 
Bailroad  so  far  as  Brookhaven.  We  started  with  all  the  cavalry  I could 
raise  and  a detachment  of  mounted  infantry  belonging  to  the  One  hun- 
dred and  eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  under  command  of  Colonel  Fonda, 
of  that  regiment.  We  were  gone  four  days.  Destroyed  about  one-half 
mile  of  railroad  track.  We  destroyed  a number  of  switches,  four  depots, 
between  40  and  50  railroad  cars  and  4 locomotives,  and  a large  amount 
of  public  stores. 

We  reached  Brookhaven  on  the  18th  instant,  had  slight  skirmishing 
on  entering  the  town,  and  drove  the  enemy’s  pickets  from  the  place, 
but  met  no  particular  force  at  this  place.  We  took  45  prisoners,  includ- 
ing 3 officers— 1 major  and  2 captains— and  returned  to  Jackson,  mak- 
ing a march  of  120  miles  in  four  days.  When  we  arrived  at  Jackson, 
we  were  ordered  to  return  to  this  place,  taking  a position  in  rear  of  the 
army  returning  from  that  place,  which  we  did,  and  arrived  here  on  the 
25th  instant. 

In  this  report  I must  call  your  attention  to  the  gallant  conduct  of  all 
the  officers  and  men  of  my  command.  During  all  the  time  we  were  out 
on  this  expedition  each  officer  and  man  in  the  command  obeyed  every 
order  with  promptness  and  zeal.  I must  particularly  commend  the  con- 
duct of  Major  Montgomery,  of  the  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry,  for  the  gal- 
lant, prompt,  and  efficient  manner  in  which  he  handled  his  command 
during  this  expedition;  also  Major  Campbell,  of  the  Third  Illinois  Cav- 
alry, who,  I am  sorry  to  say,  was  mortally  wounded.  In  fact,  the  con- 
duct of  both  the  officers  and  men  of  the  Second  Illinois  Cavalry,  the 
Third  Illinois  Cavalry,  the  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry,  and  one  company 
of  the  Fourth  Indiana  Cavalry,  all  under  my  command,  is  worthy  of  the 
highest  commendation  and  praise. 

Special  reports  of  the  casualties  on  this  expedition  having  been  fur- 
nished you  heretofore,  are  not  referred  to  in  this  report. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

HUGH  FULLEBTON, 

Major , Commanding  Cavalry , Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

Brig.  Gen.  Peter  J.  Osteehaus, 

Commanding  Ninth  Division , Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  17. 

Deport  of  Drig.  Gen.  Deter  J.  Osterhaus , IT.  8.  Army , commanding 

Ninth  Division. 

Hdqrs.  9th  Div.,  13th  A.  C.,  Vicksburg , Miss.,  July  25,  1863. 
Colonel:  On  the  morning  of  the  6th  of  July,  I received  your  orders 
to  prepare  the  Ninth  Division  lor  immediate  march,  as  a part  of  the 
Expeditionary  Army. 


580 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


The  effective  strength  of  the  Ninth  Division,  then  stationed  at  Big 
Black  Biver  railroad  bridge,  was  as  follows : 


First  Brigade. 

Col.  James  Keigwin. 


49tli  Indiana 307 

09th  Indiana 216 

7 th  Kentucky 199 

120th  Ohio 386 


1,108 


Second  Brigade. 

Col.  Daniel  W.  Lindsey. 


54th.  Indiana 245 

22d  Kentucky 266 

16th  Ohio 359 

42d  Ohio 434 


1,304 


Cavalry  Brigade. 

Maj.  Hugh  Fullerton. 

2d  Illinois,  2d  Battalion  (three  companies). 

3d  Illinois,  3d  Battalion  (three  companies). 

4th  Indiana  (one  company). 

6th  Missouri,  1st  Battalion  (seven  companies). 

Besides  the  brigade  of  cavalry,  there  were  about  100  men  of  the  One 
hundred  and  eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry  (mounted),  which  acted  with 
the  cavalry. 

Artillery,  Capt.  O.  H.  Lanphere  commanding:  First  Wisconsin  Bat- 
tery, six  guns,  20-pounder  Parrotts,  Lieutenant  Nutting  commanding; 
Seventh  Michigan  Battery,  six  guns,  10-pounder  Bodman,  Lieutenant 
Stillman  commanding. 

The  necessary  preparations  being  completed,  I crossed  Big  Black 
Biver  Bridge  at  2 o’clock,  the  advance  division  of  the  Thirteenth  Army 
Corps.  The  enemy’s  pickets  were  found  1 mile  beyond  my  line  of  out- 
posts and  vedettes,  and  slowly  fell  back  before  my  advancing  cavalry. 
At  the  bend  of  the  Big  Black  Biver,  where  it  changes  its  direction  from 
a north-south  to  an  east-wTest  course,  I eucamped  my  infantry  and  ar- 
tillery, while  the  cavalry  advanced  to  Edwards  Station,  with  strong 
parties  thrown  forward  on  the  different  roads  converging  at  that  place. 
Bebel  cavalry  were  felt  all  around,  but  offering  very  little  resistance, 
and  yielding  after  a few  shots. 

On  July  7,  I left  camp,  in  conformity  with  your  order,  at  G a.  in., 
advancing  on  the  main  Vicksburg,  Clinton,  and  Jackson  road,  which 
runs  almost  parallel  to  the  railroad.  Strong  cavalry  patrols  were  sent 
out  on  my  right  flank  as  far  as  Fourteen-Mile  Creek,  and  on  my  left  to 
connect  with  the  column  under  General  Steele,  which  was  moving  on  the 
Bridgeport  and  Jackson  road.  The  former  party,  under  Lieutenant  Zim- 
merman, fell  in  with  a squad  of  rebel  pioneers  belonging  to  General  Breck- 
inridge’s corps;  they  were  taken  prisoners.  About  2 miles  west  of  Bol- 
tou  my  cavalry  cclaireurs  found  a rebel  picket,  which  fired  upon  them. 
The  rebels  were  strong  enough  to  make  a short  stand,  but  my  support 
came  up  promptly  arid  drove  them,  taking  several  prisoners.  I aiitici- 
pated  a more  determined  stand  of  the  enemy  at  the  point  where  the 
Jackson  road  is  intersected  by  the  Baymond  and  Bolton  road.  I recol- 
lected that  point  from  former  observation  (May  15)  as  offering  a splendid 
position  for  defense.  The  junction  of  the  road  is  formed  on  the  brow  of  a 
ridge,  sloping  very  abruptly  toward  the  north  and  east  and  more  gradually 
toward  the  west.  The  corn-fields  on  the  western  slope  offered  fine  pro- 
tection to  sharpshooters.  I made  arrangements  to  meet  the  enemy  there, 
massed  my  cavalry,  and  brought  the  mountain  howitzers  of  the  Sixth 
Missouri  Cavalry  forward. 


Chai\  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


581 


The  advance  guard  soon  reported  and  confirmed  my  anticipations ; 
the  enemy  showed  himself  in  pretty  strong  numbers.  The  head  of  my 
column  was  at  the  time  in  a thickly  timbered  bottom,  and  a part  of  the 
Second  Illinois  Cavalry  was,  therefore,  ordered  to  dismount  and  advance 
as  skirmishers  through  these  woods.  At  the  same  time  I dispatched  a 
detachment  to  the  Raymond  road,  threatening  the  left  flank  of  the  rebels. 
The  advance  through  the  timber  was  well  disputed  by  the  enemy,  but 
the  demonstration  on  his  left  caused  him  at  last  to  fall  back  behind 
Baker’s  Creek,  giving  me  that  ground  for  my  camp  which  you  had  or- 
dered me  to  occupy  for  the  night.  On  a plantation  about  1 mile  be- 
yond the  bridge  across  Baker’s  Creek,  the  rebel  cavalry  formed  once 
more,  and  dashed  toward  my  pickets  at  the  bridge,  but,  ascertaining 
my  preparations,  fell  back;  my  cavalry  then  occupied  the  plantation, 
with  patrols  to  Raymond. 

At  4 p.  m.  on  July  8,  my  division  was  ordered  again  to  advance,  and 
found  the  rebel  cavalry,  which  we  learned  was  the  division  of  General 
Jackson,  under  his  own  command,  immediately  beyond  our  line,  defend- 
ing now  in  much  greater  force  every  point  available  for  that  purpose. 
My  cavalry  kept  very  close  to  them,  exchanging  a constant  running  fire 
with  them.  Several  times  the  mountain  howitzers  wTere  called  into  ac- 
tion before  they  would  yield.  When  arrived  at  a bend  in  the  road  which 
commands  it  completely,  the  rebel  cavalry  formed  again,  and  exhibited 
a long  front.  The  position  was  well  selected,  being  well  secured  against 
any  other  but  a front  attack.  Dismounted  skirmishers  advanced  toward 
their  front;  Major  Marsh,  with  a part  of  the  Second  Illinois  Cavalry, 
threatened  the  right  of  the  enemy,  and  the  mountain  howitzers  of  the 
Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry  were  unlimbered  and  opened  on  the  enemy’s  line; 
the  whole  of  the  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry  were  ordered  to  charge  the 
rebels.  Led  by  their  gallant  and  noble  Major  Montgomery,  they  darted 
down  and  up  the  hill,  and  advanced  in  a splendid  line  and  at  a furious 
gait  against  the  enemy,  who  did  not  dare  to  await  the  terrible  shock, 
and  cnly  offered  his  back  to  the  galling  fire  from  the  Sixth  Missouri. 
They  suffered  severely ; our  loss  was  light.  The  whole  of  the  cavalry 
massed  again  under  Major  Fullerton,  and  pressed  the  enemy  to  within 
3 miles  of  Clinton,  where  we  were  ordered  by  Major-General  Urd  to  pass 
the  night. 

Next  morning,  July  9,  we  marched  from  the  camp  at  4 o’clock  and 
arrived  at  5.30  at  Clinton.  Advancing  on  the  Jackson  road,  we  found 
the  rebel  cavalry  on  an  open  field,  about  1 mile  from  Clinton,  opposing 
us  when  debouching  from  a belt  of  timber.  Our  cavalry  dislodged  them 
only  after  a very  tenacious  stand  against  the  fire  from  the  Sharps’  rifles 
and  howitzers.  To  be  ready  for  all  emergencies,  I waited  the  arrival  of 
my  infantry  and  field  artillery,  and  deployed  them  a cheval  of  the  pub- 
lic road.  After  these  preparatory  steps,  the  cavalry  was  ordered  to  ad- 
vance. The  open  ground  from  which  the  rebels  were  just  compelled  to 
retire  is  on  the  east  closed  in  by  heavy  and  thick  timber.  Our  cavalry 
drove  the  rebels  rapidly  through  it,  killing  and  wounding  a consider- 
able number  of  men  and  horses ; but  on  emerging  from  these  woods,  they 
were  confronted  by  a far  superior  number  of  rebels  drawn  up  in  line  and 
evidently  offering  fight.  A section  of  mountain  howitzers  did  not  suc- 
ceed in  making  an  impression.  On  the  contrary,  a rebel  battery  was 
brought  forward  and  opened  heavily  upon  them  with  rifled  shot  and  12- 
pound  shell.  The  enemy  kept,  though,  at  a distance  bevond  the  range 
of  the  small  howitzers,  and  consequently  I ordered  them" back.  Giving 
the  general  commanding  the  army  corps  notice  of  the  situation  of  things, 
and  asking  his  leave  to  accept  the  fight,  I was  ordered  to  do  so.  At 


582 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai\  "XXXVI. 


once  one  section  of  the  Seventh  Michigan  Battery,  under  Lieutenant 
Stillman,  was  ordered  to  the  support  of  my  cavalry.  The  First  Brigade 
of  infantry  and  the  remainder  of  the  battery  advanced  also  in  support- 
ing distance  of  the  cavalry,  which  pushed  forward  gallantly  in  front  and 
on  the  right  flank. 

My  position  was  a good  one,  and  commanded  the  Jackson  road.  The 
enemy’s  force  was  in  full  view,  his  right  resting  on  that  road  where  the 
Bridgeport  and  Jackson  road  intersects  it,  and  extending  across  several 
corn-fields.  His  battery  played  from  an  elevated  position  in  or  near 
the  road. 

As  soon  as  my  infantry  had  come  up  and  was  deployed  in  line,  by 
battalions  in  columns  of  divisions  on  the  right  of  the  battery,  I ordered 
the  Second  Illinois  Cavalry  (the  cavalry,  except  the  Sixth  Missouri,  was 
massed  in  columns  on  my  right  wing)  to  advance  and  demonstrate 
against  the  enemy’s  left,  making  a feint  toward  the  Raymond  road. 
Infantry  sharpshooters,  together  with  a detachment  of  the  Sixth  Mis- 
souri Cavalry,  advanced  in  front,  and  the  advance  section  of  the  Sev- 
enth Michigan  Battery  opened  fire.  The  effect  was  complete.  The 
shells  burst  in  the  enemy’s  line,  causing  him  to  shift  repeatedly.  The 
two  other  sections  were  then  ordered  forward,  and  very  soon  compelled 
the  enemy’s  artillery  to  limber  to  the  rear.  Their  cavalry,  finding  itself 
threatened  in  front  and  rear,  followed  the  retrograde  movement  of  the 
artillery,  pursued  closely  by  the  Sixth  Missouri  and  Second  Illinois 
Cavalry. 

General  Steele’s  column  arrived  in  the  afternoon  from  Bridgeport  at 
the  junction  on  the  Jackson  road,  and  I consequently  received  your 
order  to  encamp  for  the  night,  also,  at  the  junction.  To  make  room 
for  General  Steele’s  column,  I received  orders  for  the  next  morning  to 
move  over  to  a road  running  south  of  the  Clinton  and  Jackson  road, 
and  advance  toward  Jackson,  together  with  the  Tenth  Division.  We 
left  camp  at  2 o’clock,  and  arrived  unmolested  within  2 miles  of  Jack- 
son,  where  we  found  rebel  forces  at  a bridge  across  Anderson’s  Creek. 
The  cavalry  drove  them  back,  and  reached  the  crest  of  a gradually 
sloping  field,  where  large  numbers  of  the  enemy  were  seen  advancing 
to  meet  us.  While  the  cavalry  and  mountain  howitzers  held  the  posi- 
tion, I hurried  my  infantry  and  artillery  forward,  and  opened  as  soon 
as  they  were  in  position.  The  general  attack  of  the  cavalry,  infantry, 
skirmishers,  and  artillery  made  the  rebels  fall  back  to  their  fortifica- 
tions and  under  cover  of  their  heavy  siege  guns.  I followed  them  as 
far  as  I could  prudently  do  it  without  exposing  unnecessarily  my  field 
artillery  to  heavy  losses.  The  road  on  which  I came  was  the  center  of 
my  position,  and  my  skirmishers  advanced  gallantly  on  both  sides  of 
it,  against  a heavy  fire  from  a formidable  battery  defending  the  road, 
to  within  250  yards  of  the  enemy’s  works. 

July  11, 1 was  ordered  to  shift  my  division  to  the  right  of  the  above 
road.  A part  of  my  artillery  constructed  temporary  breastworks.  By 
5.30  p.  m.  the  enemy  made  a sortie,  and  vehemently  attacked  my  right, 
but  was  gallantly  repulsed. 

On  July  12,  a cannonade  of  one  hour’s  duration  was  ordered  to  com- 
mence at  7 a.  m.  One  section  of  the  First  Wisconsin  Battery,  in  front 
of  the  above-mentioned  fort,  managed  on  the  occasion  to  dismount  a 
heavy  siege  gun  and  to  do  great  damage  generally. 

The  skirmishers  along  the  whole  line  were  ordered  to  advance  on 
July  13  as  far  as  practicable,  which  movement  was  well  executed  and 
supported  by  the  batteries.  The  right  wing  swung  around  considerably, 
the  skirmishers  advancing  several  hundred  yards,  followed  up  by  the 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


583 


main  line.  On  the  left  a squad  of  the  Fifty-fourth  Indiana  Infantry 
surprised  a rebel  picket,  stationed  at  a burned  house  on  the  road,  taking 
some  prisoners  and  gaining  thereby  a position  of  decisive  importance, 
within  150  yards  of  the  enemy’s  works. 

The  next  day  passed  off  comparatively  quiet]  only  while  relieving 
the  pickets  the  firing  was  more  extended.  Our  men  were  mostly  en- 
gaged in  the  construction  of  batteries  and  rifle-pits. 

On  July  16,  my  command  was  relieved  in  the  trenches  by  General 
Tuttle’s  division,  and  I took  a position  in  reserve,  in  the  center  of  the 
line  of  the  army  corps. 

After  the  evacuation  of  the  city  of  Jackson  by  the  rebels,  on  July  17, 
and  after  the  destruction  of  the  railroads  and  all  property  deemed  con- 
traband of  war,  the  division  took  up  the  line  of  march  again,  on  July 
21,  in  the  rear  of  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  via  Eaymond,  Turkey 
Creek,  and  Big  Black  River  Bridge,  arriving  at  Vicksburg  on  July 
24, 1863. 

The  expedition,  in  the  hottest  month  in  this  hot  climate,  was  very 
trying  on  the  men,  but  they  did  well,  and  I feel  under  many  obligations 
for  their  zeal. 

It  is  with  great  pleasure  and  pride  that  I mention  particularly  the 
brilliant  services  of  the  cavalry.  Always  in  immediate  contact  with  the 
enemy,  they  did  not  flinch  for  a second  from  the  most  arduous  duties. 
The  officers  deserve  the  highest  credit,  and  I feel  in  duty  bound  to  men- 
tion Major  Fullerton,  of  the  Second  Illinois  Cavalry,  commanding  cav- 
alry brigade,  and  the  gallant  commanders  of  battalions,  Majors  Mont- 
gomery, Sixth  Missouri,  and  Marsh,  Second  Illinois.  To  their  bravery 
and  skill,  and  to  the  stubborn  fortitude  of  the  men  of  their  commands 
(in  the  aggregate  not  over  600  men),  we  are  indebted  for  the  quick  and 
brilliant  advance  on  Jackson,  over  a road  guarded  by  a whole  division 
of  the  best  Southern  cavalry,  under  the  personal  guidance  of  a cele- 
brated general. 

I annex  a list  of  casualties  during  the  different  engagements,*  to 
which  I beg  leave  to  refer. 

I am,  with  great  respect,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

P.  J.  OSTERHAUS, 

Brigadier- General  of  Volunteers , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates, 

Asst  Adjt.  Gen .,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


Eo.  18. 

Report  of  Capt.  Charles  IT.  Lanphere , Seventh  Michigan  Battery. 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  26,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  my  battery  in  the  expedition  to  Jackson : 

July  5,  took  up  line  of  march  with  Twelfth  Division  at  5 a.  m.  En- 
camped to-night  2 miles  north  of  Big  Black  River  Bridge. 

July  6,  marched  at  4 p.  in.,  expecting  to  cross  Big  Black  River,  but 
the  road  being  blockaded  with  trains,  went  into  camp  upon  northwest 
bank  of  river. 

July  7,  marched  at  5 a.  in.,  arriving  at  Bolton  Station  at  0 p.  m. 
Went  into  camp. 


* See  revised  statement,  p.  545. 


584 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CnAP.  XXX  YL 


July  8,  ordered  to  report  to  General  Osterhaus.  Took  up  line  of 
march  at  4 p.  m.,  with  Ninth  Division.  Skirmishing  in  front  this  even- 
ing. One  section  of  the  battery  took  a position,  firing  about  30  rounds 
at  the  enemy.  Went  into  camp  upon  right  of  road  at  dark. 

July  0,  took  up  line  of  march  at  4 a.  m.  Skirmishing  in  front.  Put 
our  battery  into  position  upon  right  of  road,  firing  several  rounds  with 
good  effect.  Went  into  camp  about  5 o’clock. 

July  10,  marched  at  4 a.  m.  At  9 a.  m.  heavy  skirmishing.  Ad- 
vanced the  battery  and  took  position  upon  a hill  200  yards  to  the  left 
of  the  road,  from  which  position  we  threw  about  50  rounds  of  shell 
into  the  enemy’s  ranks  as  they  retired  toward  their  works.  At  11  9.  m. 
advanced  battery  to  within  1,000  yards  of  the  enemy’s  works,  where  we 
lay  in  reserve  the  remainder  of  the  day. 

July  11,  lay  in  reserve  until  4 p.  m.,  when  battery  was  ordered  to 
the  right  and  front.  Took  position  upon  high  grounds  900  yards  from 
the  enemy’s  lines,  and  commenced  firing,  but  with  unknown  effect,  as  the 
enemy’s  guns  were  out  of  sight,  being  masked  by  thick  brush  in  our 
front.  Their  firing  was  so  well  directed  and  sharp  that  I was  obliged 
to  change  my  position  to  the  left  and  front  within  forty  minutes.  One 
man  wounded  to-day;  wound  not  severe. 

July  12,  battery  occupied  position  taken  last  night.  Fired  about  180 
rounds  to-day ; could  not  determine  with  what  effect. 

July  13,  advanced  one  section  this  morning ; put  it  into  a small  work 
thrown  up  last  night  within  800  yards  of  the  enemy’s  works.  Battery 
did  but  little  firing  to-day. 

July  14,  changed  one  section  200  yards  to  the  left.  Fired  but  few 
rounds  to-day. 

July  15,  no  firing  to-day.  Position  of  battery  unchanged. 

July  1G,  went  into  reserve  1 mile  to  the  right  and  rear. 

July  17  and  18,  remained  in  camp. 

July  19  and  20,  still  in  camp. 

July  21,  took  up  line  of  march  for  the  rear  at  5 a.  m.  Marched  8 miles, 
and  went  into  camp  at  Mississippi  Springs  at  5 p.  m. 

July  22,  marched  at  4 a.  in.,  and  camped  at  dark  at  — Creek. 

July  23,  marched  at  4 a.  m.  Arrived  at  Big  Black  Biver  about  1 p.  ra., 
crossed,  and  went  into  camp. 

July  24,  took  up  line  of  march  for  Vicksburg  at  4 a.  m.,  arriving  in 
rear  of  city  at  2 p.  m. 

I am,  captain,  &c.,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

O.  H.  LANPHERE, 
Captain,  Commanding  Battery. 

Gapt.  J.  W.  Thompson, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  19. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Oscar  F.  Nutting , First  Wisconsin  Battery. 

Gamp  at  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  20, 1SG3. 

Captain:  Herewith  you  will  please  find  a report  of  the  part  taken 
by  this  battery  in  the  late  expedition  to  Jackson,  Miss. 

On  the  morning  of  the  5th  day  of  July,  the  First  Wisconsin  Battery, 
under  command  of  Lieut.  Oscar  F.  Nutting,  moved  out  of  park,  in  rear 
of  Vicksburg,  and  marched  to  Big  Black  River,  where  we  went  into 


Chap.  XXX VI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


585 


camp,  and  remained  till  the  next  evening,  when  we  moved  on  to  Big 
Black  Biver  railroad  bridge. 

On  the  7th,  we  marched  to  Bolton. 

On  the  8th,  the  battery  was  ordered  to  report  to  General  Osterhaus, 
and,  leaving  the  Twelfth  Division,  to  which  wre  had  been  temporarily 
attached,  joined  and  moved  on  that  evening  with  our  old  division. 

On  the  9th,  we  passed  through  Clinton,  and  the  advance  coming  up 
with  the  enemy’s  outposts,  we  were  ordered  into  camp,  and  remained 
there  till  the  next  morning,  when  we  moved  on  toward  Jackson  at  an 
early  hour. 

On  tbe  10th,  at  10  a.  m.,  the  center  section,  under  commaud  of  Lieu- 
tenant Hackett,  was  ordered  into  position  upon  the  road  on  which  we 
had  been  marching,  and  opened  fire  on  the  enemy’s  works,  about  1,000 
yards  distant.  Soon  after,  the  right  section,  under  charge  of  Sergt.  E. 
P.  Aylmer,  was  ordered  into  position  on  the  left  of  the  road,  in  some 
timber.  Here  they  opened  fire  on  the  rebel  breastworks,  which  was  re- 
plied to  by  them  from  half  a dozen  guns,  with  such  accuracy  that  it 
was  deemed  prudent  by  Lieutenant  Nutting,  after  half  an  hour’s  firing, 
to  withdraw.  During  that  time  the  enemy  had  disabled  one  gun,  and 
struck  both  in  many  places.  In  the  afternoon,  Lieutenant  Hackett 
moved  his  section  a short  distance  to  the  right,  where  they  succeeded 
in  dismounting  one  of  the  enemy’s  guns. 

On  the  11th,  the  left  section  was  planted  in  a work  thrown  up  for  it 
during  the  night  close  to  the  position  occupied  by  the  right  section  the 
previous  day.  Here  they  remained  during  the  seven  days  following, 
and  disabled  a large  siege  piece  which  was  in  position  ofi  their  works 
immediately  in  front  of  us. 

On  the  llith,  the  right  and  center  sections  were  ordered  to  report  to 
General  Hovey,  and  were  placed,  the  right  section  on  the  New  Orleans 
Bailroau,  and  the  center  section  a quarter  of  a mile  farther  east,  almost 
directly  south  of  Jackson.  In  these  positions  they  remained  until  that 
town  had  been  evacuated,  and  we  were  ordered  to  return  to  Vicksburg, 
when  the  right  and  center  sections  again  joined  the  Ninth  Division, 
and  marched  with  it  to  Big  Black  Biver,  via  Baymond  and  Edwards  Sta- 
tion, where  we  arrived  at  about  4 p.  m.  on  the  evening  of  the  23d  July, 
1863.  * & ‘ ’ 

Casualties:  Wounded,  9. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  captain,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

OSCAB  E.  NUTTING, 
[Lieutenant,]  Commanding  Battery. 

Gapt.  J.  W.  Thompson, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  20, 

Report  of  Col.  James  Keigwin , Forty-ninth  Indiana,  Infantry , command- 
ing First  Brigade. 

Udqrs.  First  Brig.,  Ninth  Div.,  Thirteenth  A.  O., 

July  19,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  as  a report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  hirst  Brigade  in  the  Jackson  expedition,  under  command 
of  Major-General  Sherman  : 

Ihe  brigade,  consisting  of  the  Forty-ninth  Indiana  Volunteers,  com- 


586  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Ciiap.  XXXVI. 

mantled  by  Maj.  A.  J.  Hawke;  Sixty-ninth  Indiana  Infantry,  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Perry  commanding;  One  hundred  and  twentieth  Ohio, 
Colonel  Spiegel  commanding;  Seventh  Kentucky,  Colonel  May  com- 
manding, and  the  One  hundred  and  eighteenth  Illinois  Infantry 
(mounted),  Colonel  Fonda  commanding. 

The  brigade  took  up  the  line  of  march  July  6,  1863,  at  2 p.  m.,  in 
advance  of  the  division,  and  marched  that  evening  to  Amsterdam.  Be- 
fore arriving  at  that  point,  I received  an  order  that  our  cavalry  were 
skirmishing  with  the  enemy  at  Edwards  Station,  and  that?  I should 
form  my  line  and  await  further  orders.  I received  an  order  in  a short 
time  after  that  we  would  remain  here  during  the  night,  and  posted  my 
regiments  so  that,  in  case  of  an  attack,  we  would  be  ready  at  a mo- 
ment’s notice  to  give  the  enemy  a warm  reception.  Bivouacked  for 
the  night. 

July  7,  we  resumed  the  march  in  the  same  order  of  the  day  before, 
and  marched  on  the  road  leading  through  Champion’s  Hill.  Our  cav- 
alry, we  learned,  had  some  skirmishing  in  front,  but  not  enough  to  re- 
tard our  march  until  about  4 o’clock  in  the  evening,  when,  near  Bolton, 
we  learned  that  quite  a force  of  rebel  cavalry  were  approaching.  I im- 
mediately formed  the  brigade,  with  one  section  of  the  Fifth  Illinois  Bat- 
tery [?],  into  position  on  a commanding  piece  of  ground,  and  awaited 
an  attack,  but  I soon  found  that  the  enemy  had  gone  in  another  direction. 
By  orders,  I then  moved  the  brigade  to  a point  in  the  woods,  with  my 
right  resting  on  the  Bolton  and  Eaymond  Bailroad  and  the  left  on  the 
Jackson  road,  where  we  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

We  remained  at  this  point  until  4 p.  m.  of  the  8th  instant,  when  we 
resumed  our  march  in  the  rear  of  the  Second  Brigade,  left  in  front.  We 
marched  until  about  7 p.  m.,  and  bivouacked  about  4 miles  from  Clinton. 

July  9,  we  left  our  bivouac  in  the  same  order  as  the  day  before,  and 
passed  through  Clinton  about  9 o’clock.  When  about  2 miles  from  Clin- 
ton, our  cavalry  had  quite  a skirmish  with  the  enemy.  I was  ordered 
forward,  and  deployed  the  brigade  by  battalions  in  mass  on  the  right 
of  the  road,  throwing  skirmishers  well  forward.  Captain  Lanpkere’s 
battery  followed  and  took  position  on  my  left.  We  had  not  advanced 
far  until  we  discovered  quite  a number  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  on  a hill 
in  front  of  us  and  in  a large  corn-field  on  our  right.  We  advanced,  and 
while  so  doing  the  battery  threw  a few  shells  amongst  them,  when  they 
beat  a hasty  retreat.  We  remained  at  this  point  the  remainder  of  the 
day,  and  bivouacked  for  the  night  about  5 miles  from  Jackson,  with 
orders  to  be  ready  to  leave  at  3 o’clock  of  the  following  morning. 

July  10,  did  not  leave  our  bivouac  until  6 o’clock,  and  marched  in  ad- 
vance. We  left  the  Clinton  road,  and  marched  through  the  woods  about 
1 mile  to  the  Eaymond  road. 

The  One  hundred  and  eighteenth  Illinois  was  ordered  to  move  through 
the  woods  on  our  left  as  flankers;  one  company  of  the  Forty-ninth  In- 
diana for  the  same  purpose.  We  did  not  go  very  far  on  the  Eaymond 
road  until  our  advance  found  the  enemy,  who  stubbornly  resisted  our 
advance,  I was  ordered  forward  with  the  brigade,  and  crossed  the 
creek,  when  I was  ordered  to  deploy  the  brigade  into  line  of  battle  and 
advance.  I deployed  the  Forty-ninth  on  the  right  of  the  road,  the 
Sixty-ninth  Indiana,  One  hundred  and  twentieth  Ohio,  and  Seventh  Ken- 
tucky on  the  left.  Throwing  my  skirmishers  well  forward,  we  advanced 
and  passed  the  cavalry,  and  when  within  about  1,000  yards  of  the  en- 
emy’s works,  I found  quite  a force  of  infantry,  who  were  posted  on  a 
ridge  in  front  of  their  works,  who  seemed  to  intend  to  stop  our  ad- 
vance. My  skirmishers  went  boldly  forwaid,  and  were  soon  hotly 


Chai*.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


587 


engaged.  I then  ordered  the  line  forward,  and  they  charged  up  the 
hill  and  into  the  houses  in  front  of  us,  driving  the  rebels  toward  their 
works.  The  enemy  then  opened  his  battery  on  us,  which  was  sheltered 
by  a strong  work  on  the  road.  I placed  two  pieces  of  Foster’s  First 
Wisconsin  Battery  in  position  on  the  right  of  the  road,  and  returned  the 
fire.  I also  posted  another  section  of  the  same  battery  on  the  left  of 
the  road,  in  the  timber,  and,  after  firing  about  a dozen  rounds,  I found 
it  to  be  too  close  to  the  enemy’s  works,  as  they  had  the  advantage  in 
position  and  the  number  of  pieces.  I ordered  it  to  the  rear,  after  a 
loss  of  3 men  wounded,  3 horses  killed,  and  one  of  the  pieces  almost 
disabled,  it  having  been  struck  twice  by  shells  from  the  enemy’s  works. 
We  remained  at  this  point  the  remainder  of  the  day,  keeping  two  com- 
panies from  each  regiment  skirmishing  with  the  enemy,  at  about  400 
yards  distant  from  his  works. 

July  11,  we  still  held  the  ground  gained  the  day  before,  until  about 
2 p.  m.,  when  we  were  ordered  to  change  our  position,  and  take  the  one 
held  by  General  A.  J.  Smith,  who  was  next  on  our  right,  he  having 
been  ordered  to  move  farther  to  the  right,  for  the  purpose  of  extending 
our  lines.  We  got  into  position  about  3 p.  m.,  when  I was  ordered  to 
advance  my  line,  which  I did  by  having  a brisk  little  skirmish  fight 
with  the  enemy’s  pickets,  who  were  several  hundred  yards  outside  of 
the  lines  of  their  works.  We  drove  them  back,  but  in  a short  time  they 
came  back  with  quite  a force,  and  charged  my  line  of  skirmishers,  who 
fought  them  so  stubbornly  that,  after  I ordered  up  one  section  of  Lan- 
phere’s  battery  and  threw  a few  shells  into  their  midst,  and  the  stub- 
born resistance  of  Captain  Holcroft’s  line,  of  skirmishers,  they  went 
back  to  their  works  on  the  double-quick,  with  a loss  to  themselves  of  2 
men  killed,  which  we  buried  for  them  the  next  day.  They  left  six  En- 
field rifles  on  the  ground  fought  over,  which  I suppose  belonged  to  their 
wounded,  taken  off  with  them.  Captain  Holcroft,  Company  H,  Forty- 
ninth  Indiana,  deserves  the  highest  praise  for  the  stubborn  resistance 
to  their  sortie.  We  remained  at  this  point  that  night,  the  men  sleeping 
with  their  arms  in  their  hands.  During  the  night  I had  works  thrown 
up  for  four  pieces  of  artillery,  which  were  put  into  position  before  day- 
light. 

July  12,  our  line  of  skirmishers  kept  up  a busy  fire  on  the  enemy  dur- 
ing the  day.  After  dark  we  obtained  a few  shovels  and  picks,  and  dug 
rifle-pits,  which  covered  our  entire  front. 

July  13,  our  skirmishers  kept  up  a brisk  fire  upon  the  enemy,  which 
was  answered  by  them  with  a great  deal  of  precision. 

July  14,  skirmishing  continued  all  day  without  any  loss  on  our  side, 
our  men  being  well  covered  with  pits,  dug  during  the  night. 

July  15,  skirmishing  along  the  line  until  we  received  orders  that 
there  would  be  a truce  until  4 p.  m.  We  were  relieved  at  10  p.  m.  by 
a brigade  of  General  Tuttle’s  division. 

July  1G,  moved  to  the  rear,  and  made  the  men  as  comfortable  as  pos- 
sible. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  learned  that  the  enemy  had  evacuated 
the  city.  The  One  hundred  and  eighteenth  Illinois  was  detached  from 
the  brigade  on  the  12th  instant;  have  made  no  report  to  these  head- 
quarters since  that  time.  The  regiments  in  the  brigade  suffered  a great 
(leal  on  the  expedition  from  sickness,  caused  by  the  heat  and  exposure, 
quite  a number  of  cases  of  sunstroke  having  occurred,  a few  only  prov- 
ing fatal.  A large  number  of  men  were  taken  with  chills  and  fever, 
and  were  of  no  service  to  the  brigade.  After  we  arrived  at  Jackson,  a 
large  number  had  to  be  transported  back  to  the  camps  at  Big  Black 


588 


[CiiAr.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

River.  The  surgeons  in  the  brigade  complained  that  they  could  not  get 
any  medicines  suitable  for  the  diseases  contracted  while*  on  the  march, 
and  asserted  that  one-lialf  of  the  men  who  were  disabled  by  chills  could 
have  been  kept  for  duty  if  they  had  had  quinine  to  have  given  to  them. 
It  would  be  useless  for  me  to  name  any  officers  or  men  under  my  com- 
mand for  gallant  conduct.  I can  but  say  that  all  acted  their  part  as 
well  as  they  have  ever  done  in  former  engagements.  We  had  quite  a 
number  of  officers  disabled.  Colonel  Spiegel  and  Lieutenant  Totten,  of 
the  One  hundred  and  twentieth  Ohio,  were  severely  wounded  by  a de- 
fective shell  from  one  of  Captaiu  Lanphere’s  guns.  I am  happy  to  say 
that  there  is  a prospect  of  their  speedy  recovery.  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Lucas,  of  the  Seventh  Kentucky,  was  wounded  by  a shell  from  the  ene- 
my’s guns  on  the  morning  of  the  10th  instant.  Lieutenant  Fullyard,  of 
the  Forty-ninth,  Captain  Miller,  of  the  Sixty-ninth  Indiana,  and  Lieu- 
tenant Bates,  of  the  Seventh  Kentucky,  all  received  honorable  wounds 
while  fighting  the  battles  of  their  country.  There  are  strong  hopes 
that  they  will  soon  recover,  and  be  ready  to  do  service  again  in  the 
good  cause. 

I feel  under  lasting  obligations  to  Maj.  A.  J.  Hawhe,  Forty-ninth  Indi- 
ana; Lieutenant-Colonel  Perry,  Sixty-ninth  Indiana;  Colonel  May,  of  the 
Seventh  Kentucky,  and  Colonel  Spiegel  and  Major  Slocum,  of  the  One 
hundred  and  twentieth  Ohio,  for  the  prompt  manner  in  which  they 
obeyed  every  order  sent  to  them,  and  for  the  skillful  maneuvering  of 
the  regiments  while  on  the  march,  and  in  the  several  days7  skirmishing 
while  in  front  of  Jackson.  My  thanks  are  due  to  Capt.  William  H. 
Peckinpaugh,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  for  his  valuable  as- 
sistance to  me  while  on  the  march  and  on  the  field. 

Inclosed  you  will  find  a list  of  casualties,*  with  the  name  and  rank, 
and  nature  of  wounds.  The  total  loss  in  the  brigade  amounted  to  2 men 
killed  and  2 who  have  since  died  of  their  wounds,  8 commissioned  offi- 
cers, 7 non-commissioned  officers,  and  22  privates,  making  a total  loss 
of  30  men. 

I am,  sir,  with  much  respect,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JAMES  KEIGWIK, 

Colonel  Forty-ninth  Indiana , Commanding  First  Brigade. 

Capt.  J.  W.  Thompson, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Ko.  21. 

Report  of  Col.  John  G.  Fonda , One  hundred  and  eighteenth  Illinois  In- 
fantry. 

Black  River  Bridge,  Miss., 

July  23,  1803. 

Colonel  : In  compliance  with  an  order  received  from  Major-General 
Ord,  I respectfully  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part  taken  by  my 
regiment  in  an  expedition  from  Jackson  to  Brookhaven  : 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  with  70  of  my  mounted  men,  I joined 
Major  Fullerton,  who  commanded  the  Sixth  Missouri  Cavalry,  Second 
Illinois  Cavalry,  and  three  companies  of  the  Third  Illinois  Cavalry. 

The  whole  force  proceeded  to  Ferry  Station,  on  the  Jackson  and  ISTew 


See  revised  statements. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


589 


Orleans  Eailroad,  15  miles  from  Jackson.  Here  the  command  halted  for 
dinner,  and  tore  up  half  a mile  of  railroad.  The  ties  were  piled  and 
burned,  the  rails  having  been  put  up  in  such  a way  as  to  be  bent  by  the 
heat.  The  command  left  this  place  at  about  5 p.  m.,  and  passed  through 
Crystal  Springs,  after  dark,  to  Miller’s  plantation,  33  miles  from  Jack- 
son.  At  this  place  we  were  informed  that  a train  of  cars  had  been 
there,  but  left  about  twenty  minutes  before  our  arrival. 

Next  morning,  the  18th,  about  8 o’clock,  we  passed  through  Hazle- 
hurst.  The  depot,  cars,  and  stores  were  here  burned,  and  at  Bahala, 
10  miles  from  Hazlehurst,  some  more  cars  were  burned. 

The  command  arrived  at  Brookhaven  about  noon.  At  this  place  two 
locomotives  were  burned,  besides  a number  of  cars.  Sometime  during 
the  afternoou,  Major  Fullerton  sent  two  companies  of  the  Third  Illi- 
nois Cavalry  back  on  the  road  we  came,  about  G miles,  to  burn  two  loco- 
motives. At  5 p.  m.  I was  informed  by  Major  Fullerton  that  be  was 
ready  to  return,  and  I was  afterward  informed  by  him  that  the  two  com- 
panies had  not  returned,  and  we  waited  until  7 p.  m.,  when  we  started 
back  on  the  same  road  we  came  in  on,  and  marched  about  10  miles,  and 
camped  at  Bahala. 

About  10  a.  m.  of  the  10th,  4 miles  before  reaching  Gallatin,  I took 
the  advance,  and,  in  compliance  with  General  Sherman’s  order,  marched 
as  rapidly  as  possible.  Four  miles  from  Gallatin,  the  advance  guard 
discovered  3 rebel  soldiers  and  fired  on  them,  but  they  made  their 
escape,  and  we  captured  one  of  their  horses.  I was  afterward  informed 
that  these  men  belonged  to  Logan’s  command,  having  been  in  the  neigh- 
borhood visiting  their  friends.  I was  also  informed  that  there  was  an 
artillery  officer  residing  in  the  same  neighborhood.  As  everything  had 
been  accomplished  contemplated  by  the  order,  and  from  the  reports  I 
heard  of  the  mounted  force  in  the  vicinity,  I deemed  it  imprudent  to 
leave  the  road  to  arrest  him.  We  continued  our  march,  and  passed 
through  Ferry  Station  at  9 p.  m.,  and  camped  opposite  Byram  Station. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  20th  instant,  we  marched  to  camp,  arriv- 
ing at  11  a.  m. 

This  report  is  necessarily  meager,  for  the  reason  that  Major  Fuller- 
ton commanded  all  the  forces  but  my  own,  I only  co  operating  with  him 
in  carrying  out  his  plans. 

I am,  colonel,  with  much  respect,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

JOHN  G.  FONDA, 

Col,  Comdg.  One  hundred  and  eighteenth  Illinois  Mounted  Infty. 

Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  22. 

Report  of  Col.  Daniel  W.  Lindsey , Twenty-second  Kentuchy  Infantry , 
commanding  Second  Brigade. 

Headquarters  Second  Brigade,  Ninth  Division, 

July  26,  1863. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  Special  Orders,  No.  188,  I have  the  honor  to 
submit  to  the  general  commanding  Ninth  Division  the  following  report 
of  the  movements,  &c.,  of  the  Second  Brigade  in  the  late  expedition  to 
Jackson : 

On  the  morning  of  the  6th,  in  conformity  with  orders,  we  took  up  line 


590  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Ciiap.  XXXVL 

of  march  for  Jackson,  Miss.  With  the  exception  of  the  great  scarcity 
of  water,  there  is  nothing  worthy  of  mention  on  the  march,  the  com- 
mand at  all  times  responding  promptly  to  all  orders  issued. 

On  the  morning  of  the  10th,  at  about  10  o’clock,  we  reached  the 
vicinity  of  the  enemy’s  works,  and  the  cavalry  engaged  his  skirmishers. 
Receiving  an  order  to  move  forward  with  two  regiments  and  form  on 
the  left  of  the  Seventh  Michigan  Battery,  I advanced  the  Twenty-sec- 
ond Kentucky  and  Forty-second  Ohio,  the  former  deploying  into  line 
on  the  left  of  the  battery,  and  the  latter  regiment  remaining  in  column 
of  divisions,  the  enemy  showing  cavalry  on  our  left  and  front.  Shortly 
after  taking  up  this  formation,  I received  an  order  to  advance.  Finding 
that  a portion  of  the  One  hundred  and  eighteenth  Illinois  was  deployed 
in  my  front  as  skirmishers,  I advanced  the  two  regiments  then  with  me 
in  column  of  divisions.  After  we  had  moved  some  200  yards,  we  came 
upon  the  skirmishers  of  the  One  hundred  and  eighteenth  Illinois.  The 
officer  in  command  reported  that  lie  had  orders  to  withdraw  his  men 
and  report  to  his  regiment.  I immediately  ordered  two  companies  to 
be  deployed  as  skirmishers,  one  from  each  regiment,  and  to  connect 
with  the  line  of  skirmishers  from  the  First  Brigade.  These  two  com- 
panies were  promptly  sent  forward  by  Major  Williams,  commanding 
Forty-second  Ohio,  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Monroe,  commanding  Twen- 
ty-second Kentucky,  and  we  continued  the  advance.  At  this  time, 
learning  that  the  First  Wisconsin  Battery  had  been  ordered  to  the  First 
Brigade,  I ordered  up  the  two  remaining  regiments  in  my  brigade,  the 
Sixteenth  Ohio  and  Fifty -fourth  Indiana. 

On  arriving  on  the  western  slojie  of  the  ridge,  immediately  this  side 
of  the  enemy’s  works,  my  infantry  skirmishers  took  the  place  before 
occupied  by  the  cavalry,  from  whom  I received  information  as  they  re- 
tired that  we  were  within  rifle  range  of  the  works.  Kot  deeming  it 
proper  to  advance  the  command  farther,  I ordered  a halt  until  the  skir- 
mishers could  report  what  was  in  front.  At  this  moment  the  general 
commanding  the  division  came  up,  and,  with  Captain  Lanphere,  com- 
manding Seventh  Michigan  Battery,  and  myself,  went  forward  to  select 
a position  for  the  artillery. 

We  finally  settled  upon  the  yard  of  Mrs.  Anne  Adams,  and  some  of 
the  guns,  with  two  regiments  from  my  command,  were  immediately  or- 
dered into  position. 

Being  directed  to  remain  as  I then  was,  I did  so,  but  under  a very 
severe  fire  from  the  enemy’s  artillery,  the  shells  from  which,  fortunately, 
passed  over  us  before  exploding. 

Aside  from  some  5 or  (3  men  being  disabled  from  the  extreme  heat,  I 
had  on  this  day  only  1 man  hurt,  Corpl.  Harris  H.  Stewart,  Company 
F,  Forty- second  Ohio,  slightly,  by  bullet. 

About  12  m.  on  the  11th,  i was  ordered  to  take  the  position  of  the 
First  Brigade,  with  my  left  resting  on  the road. 

The  regiments  were  placed  in  regular  position  en  echelon  from  the  right, 
the  Fifty-fourth  Indiana  resting  on  the  road,  the  Forty-second  Ohio  a 
little  in  advance  on  its  right,  &c.  My  skirmishers,  in  taking  up  and 
maintaining  their  line,  received  the  following  loss  :* 

On  the  morning  of  the  12th,  finding  it  impossible  to  keep  the  Fifty- 
fourth  and  Forty-second  in  position  without  driving  the  enemy’s  skir- 
mishers farther  back,  I ordered  an  advance  of  my  line  of  skirmishers, 
which  resulted  in  the  taking  by  the  Fifty-fourth  and  Forty-second  of 
the  walls  of  a burned  house,  from  which  they  greatly  harassed  the 


Nominal  list,  omitted,  shows  3 wounded. 


Chap.  XXXVI.  1 THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN.  591 

enemy,  being  only  about  150  or  200  yards  from  his  works.  On  this  day 
the  casualties  were  as  follows  :* 

On  this  day  the  enemy,  as  they  did  often  afterward,  made  a strong 
sally  to  get  possession  of  the  ruins  of  the  burned  house,  but  were 
promptly  met  by  the  skirmishers  of  the  Fifty-fourth  and  Forty-second, 
who  captured  2 of  their  number.  I am  satisfied  that  along  my  front, 
although  my  main  line  was  at  no  time  engaged,  I did  the  enemy  very 
great  damage. 

On  the  evening  of  the  15th,  we  were  relieved  by  General  Tuttle’s 
division,  and,  on  the  morning  of  the  16th,  retired  to  act  as  reserve. 

I would  here  speak  in  the  highest  terms  of  a few  drafted  men  of  the 
Sixteenth  Ohio,  who,  although  their  term  of  draft  expired  on  the  8th, 
continued  with  the  regiment,  and  acted  well  during  the  expedition  to 
Jackson. 

My  entire  command  acted  with  the  coolest  bravery,  and  I cannot 
speak  too  highly  of  all  the  regiments. 

I have  again  to  thank  Captain  [George  W.]  Stein,  acting  assistant 
adjutant-general j Captain  [James  G.]  Milligan  and  Lieutenant  [Jacob] 
Swigert,  jr.,  acting  assistant  commissaries  of  subsistence,  for  their 
bravery,  energy,  and  efficiency. 

On  the  21st,  we  took  up  our  line  of  march,  by  way  of  Eaymond,  for 
Big  Black  River,  where  we  arrived  without  accident  on  the  evening  of 
the  23d. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

D.  W.  LINDSEY, 

Colonel  Twenty -second  Kentucky , Commanding  Second  Brigade . 

Capt.  J.  W.  Thompson, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  23. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Andrew  J.  Smith , U.  S.  Army , commanding  Tenth 

Division. 

Hdqrs.  Tenth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Vicksburg , Miss.,  July  27,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the 
operations  of  the  Tenth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  from  the  5th 
to  the  23d  day  of  July,  in  the  expedition  to  Jackson,  Miss.,  and  its 
return  to  this  place  : 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  4th  instant,  I received  orders,  through  your 
headquarters,  to  have  my  division  in  readiness  to  march  early  on  the 
morning  of  the  5th.  The  division,  composed  of  eleven  regiments  and 
two  batteries,  with  little  transportation,  and  without  tents,  left  camp 
early  on  the  morning  of  the  5th,  to  bivouac  on  Clear  Creek,  near  Big 
Black. 

On  the  evening  of  the  6th,  we  crossed  Big  Black  and  camped  near 
the  crossing. 

On  the  7th,  camped  near  Bolton,  where  we  had  during  the  night  a 
violent  storm. 

Late  in  the  afternoon  of  the  8th,  moved  5 miles  toward  Clinton. 

On  the  9th,  halted  early  in  the  day  2 miles  beyond  Clinton.  From 

* Nominal  list,  omitted,  shows  2 killed  and  20  wounded. 


592  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

this  point  I was  instructed  to  command  tlic  Ninth  and  Tenth  Divisions 
to  [march]  to  the  right,  until  we  entered  the  Jackson  and  Raymond  road, 
and  then  to  move  along  that  road,  in  order  to  gain  a position  well  to 
the  right. 

From  the  description  given  me,  and  the  reconnaissance  made  on  the 
afternoon  of  the  9th,  in  addition  to  the  position  ascertained  by  onr 
guide,  General  Osterhaus  and  myself  felt  convinced  that  we  had  reached 
the  road  designated,  and  so  moved  on  in  the  direction  of  Jackson,  until 
our  cavalry  met  the  advance  pickets  of  the  enemy  and  drove  them  in. 

Immediately  after  crossing  a bridge,  about  1 j miles  from  the  city. 
General  Osterhaus  deployed  a portion  of  his  division  to  the  right  and 
front  of  the  road,  and  "advanced  to  the  brow  of  a ridge,  driving  in  the 
advance  guard  of  the  enemy.  Overlooking,  or  higher  than  the  ground 
between  us  and  the  main  works,  some  pieces  of  artillery  were  immedi- 
ately brought  in  position,  and  opened  on  the  force  in  front  and  on  the 
city. 

The  First  Brigade  of  my  division  advanced  along  the  road,  and  was 
deployed  to  the  right  and  front  on  the  same  ridge  with  General  Oster- 
haus, with  battery  in  position.  Learning  from  our  cavalry  pickets  that 
a heavy  cavalry  force  of  the  enemy  was  on  our  right,  and  endeavoring  to 
get  in  our  right  rear,  I threw  two  regiments  of  the  First  Brigade  per- 
pendicular to  our  line  of  battle  to  protect  the  right  flank,  and  the  whole 
of  the  Second  Brigade,  with  the  Mercantile  Battery,  were  formed  in 
line  of  battle  to  the  right,  between  the  creek  and  the  crest  of  the  hill 
then  occupied  by  our  troops.  My  division  was  then  on  the  extreme 
right,  and  I deemed  it  necessary,  from  the  reports  received,  to  look  well 
to  our  right  flank.  The  troops  formed  in  line  of  battle,  and  the  front 
were  skirmishing  during  the  day,  and  bivouacked  in  that  position  during 
the  night,  having  a strong  picket  well  in  advance. 

On  the  11th,  the  enemy’s  pickets  advanced  early  in  the  morning,  but 
were  driven  back,  and  the  brigade  maintained  its  position  during  the 
day.  Late  in  the  evening  the  Fourteenth  Division,  Brigadier-General 
Benton  commanding,  moved  to  our  right  flank,  and  occupied  the  front, 
perpendicular  to  the  line  of  battle. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  12tli,  my  line  was  advanced,  and  the  flank 
regiments  wheeled  into  line  of  battle,  when  the  men  went  immediately 
to  work  constructing  rifle-pits. 

The  establishing  of  this  line  was  strongly  resisted  by  the  enemy,  as 
it  drove  them  from  an  important  position  and  brought  within  our  lines 
an  abundance  of  good  water.  This  line  was  maintained  during  the  re- 
mainder of  the  siege  of  Jackson,  with  the  enemy’s  works  in  plain  view, 
and  our  pickets  so  far  advanced  as  to  compel  the  enemy  to  fall  behind 
their  trenches.  , 

During  the  13th,  14th,  15th,  and  IGth,  our  pickets  were  constantly 
skirmishing  with  those  of  the  enemy. 

On  the  11th  instant,  two  regiments  of  the  Second  Brigade  (Ninety- 
seventh  and  One  hundred  and  thirtieth  Illinois)  were  ordered  to  recon- 
noiter  well  to  our  right  flank,  and  found  a considerable  body  of  cavalry 
that,  after  several  well-directed  volleys  and  a handsome  charge  by  our 
troops,  were  driven  from  their  position.  Still  farther  to  the  right,  and 
within  the  timbers,  a heavy  body  of  infantry  was  discovered.  Our 
troops  returned  to  camp  without  the  loss  of  a man.  My  Second  Bri- 
gade, with  the  Mercantile  Battery,  during  the  siege,  was  ordered  to  be 
held  as  reserves,  and  was  placed  about  100  yards  in  rear  of  the  line  of 
battle,  doing  their  portion  of  advance  picket  duty. 

The  rebels  having  evacuated  the  city  and  their  strong  works  during 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN.  593 

the  lGtli  and  17th,  I was  ordered  and  moved  my  division  back  about  1 
mile,  for  the  convenience  of  camp  and  water. 

On  the  morning  of  the  21st,  I moved  my  division  to  the  rear,  with  all 
the  sick  and  wounded  belonging  thereto,  and  encamped  at  Mississippi 
Springs,  some  8 miles  from  Jackson. 

On  the  22d,  1 moved  to  Champion’s  Hill,  and  on  the  23d  reached  my 
old  camp,  in  rear  of  Vicksburg,  having  accomplished  the  march  from 
Jackson  to  Vicksburg  in  three  days. 

To  Colonel  Landram,  commanding  Second  Brigade,  and  from  the 
Clinton  road  to  the  13th  instant  commanding  the  division,  also  to  Colo- 
nel Owen,  commanding  First  Brigade,  1 am  under  many  obligations  for 
their  constant  vigilance  during  the  siege  of  Jackson  and  throughout 
the  march;  and  to  the  officers  and  men  of  the  several  regiments  and 
batteries  I tender  my  most  hearty  thanks  for  their  vigilance  and  their 
desire  to  meet  the  enemy  on  open  ground. 

To  Dr.  [John  S.]  McGrew,  who  alw'ays  looks  well  to  the  interest  of  his 
department  ; to  Major  L’Hommedieu,  assistant  inspector-general  of  this 
division  and  acting  aide-de-camp,  I have  my  thanks  to  offer;  and  to 
Lieutenant  [Frederick  | Van  Vliet,  mustering  officer  of  my  division  and 
acting  aide,  who  had  his  horse  shot  under  him  on  the  morning  of  the 
11th,  while  reconnoitering  for  a position  for  a battery,  I give  my  most 
hearty  thanks  for  their  constant  vigilance. 

From  the  5th  instant,  or  day  of  leaving  Vicksburg,  to  my  return  (23d 
instant),  I have  lost  G killed,  37  wounded,  and  11  missing  ; aggregate,  54. 

I have  the  honor  to  inclose  herewith  the  list  of  killed  and  wounded 
and  missing;*  also  the  report  of  the  brigade  commanders. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

A.  J.  SMITH, 

Brigadier- General. 

Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


v.  No.  24. 

Report  of  Col.  Richard  Owen , Sixtieth  Indiana  Infantry , commanding 

First  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  First  Brigade,  Tenth  Division,  Thirteenth  A.  C., 

July  25,  18G3. 

Sir:  In  obedience  to  orders  received  from  General  A.  J.  Smitb, 
commanding  the  Tenth  Division,  to  furnish  the  chief  details  connected 
with  the  movements  of  his  First  Brigade  during  the  expedition  to 
Jackson,  Miss.,  made  under  the  command  of  Major-General  Sherman,  I 
have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following : 

Up  to  the  night  of  7th  July,  from  23d  June,  18G3,  I had  been  tempo- 
rarily attached,  with  my  regiment  (the  Sixtieth  Indiana  Volunteers), 
at  Big  Black  Biver  Bridge,  to  General  Osterhaus’  division,  and  from  that 
point,  by  his  order,  supported  his  advanced  battery  until  we  reached 
Baker’s  Creek. 

On  the  morning  of  July  8,  being  placed  in  command  of  the  First 
Brigade,  I moved  it,  in  accordance  with  orders  from  division  headquar- 
ters, at  4 p.  m.  toward  Clinton,  Miss.;  and,  after  a march  of  5 miles, 
we  bivouacked  in  a field  adjoining  the  road,  late  in  the  evening  of  the 
same  day,  tents,  &c.,  having  been  left  behind,  as  ordered. 

* See  revised  statement,  pp.  545,  546. 

38  R R — VOL  XXIV  PT  II 


594  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVL 

Thursday,  July  9,  the  brigade  took  up  the  line  of  march  at  5 a.  in., 
and  camped  2 miles  east  of  Clinton,  on  the  Jackson  road. 

Next  morning  (July  10),  reveille  was  sounded  at  2 a.  in.,  and  the  bri- 
gade started  at  4 a.  m.  toward  Jackson,  Miss.,  following  the  Ninth 
Division,  and  arriving  at  a cross-road  within  about  a mile  of  the  city 
(although  detained  by  skirmishing  in  front)  soon  after  8 a.  m.  Here, 
the  Second  Brigade  being  held  in  reserve,  the  First  was  ordered  to  file 
to  the  right,  face  to  the  front,  and  move  forward  in  line  of  battle, 
throwing  out  skirmishers  in  advance.  By  order  of  General  Smith,  the 
Sixteenth  and  Sixty-seventh  Indiana  were  directed  to  support  the  bat- 
tery (Seventeenth  Ohio),  and  the  Sixtieth  Indiana  to  form  column  by 
division  on  the  extreme  right,  in  order  to  watch  that  flank  and  repel 
any  cavalry  diversion  on  the  part  of  the  enemy.  The  Ninety-sixth  Ohio 
advanced 'on  the  right  flank  (adjoining  the  Sixtieth  Indiana),  through 
an  open  field,  and  the  others  through  timber,  until,  arriving  in  a line 
with  the  battery,  we  entered  corn-fields,  and  were  ordered  to  remain  for 
a time. 

About  10.30  a.  in.,  after  some  artillery  firing  from  both  sides,  in  which 

1 man  from  the  Ninety-sixth  Ohio  was  killed  by  a solid  shot  from  the 
rebel  fort,  General  Smith  ordered  a farther  advance  (which  was  made 
by  the  brigade,  except  those  supporting  the  battery  and  the  regiment 
guarding  the  flank),  until  we  passed  a lane  and  fence,  and  entered  a 
rod  or  two  into  a corn-field,  where  the  general  of  division  ordered  a 
halt.  Here  somewhat  heavy  firing  occurred  between  our  advance  line 
and  that  of  the  enemy,  who  endeavored  several  times  to  force  back  our 
skirmishers ; but  as  this  line  was  re-enforced,  the  attack  was  without 
avail,  although  only  three  regiments  occupied  this  front.  In  these 
three  we  lost  on  this  day  1 killed,  5 wounded,  and  1 missing  in  the 
Ninety-sixth  Ohio,  Colonel  Vance  commanding,  which  was  on  the  right; 

2 wounded  and  1 missing  in  the  Eighty-third  Ohio,  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Baldwin  commanding,  which  occupied  the  center,  and  2 wounded  in  the 
Twenty-third  Wisconsin,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Vilas  commanding,  which 
was  in  an  open  road  and  house-yard  on  the  left,  beside  5 cases  of  sun- 
stroke, 2 of  which  proved  fatal.  Soon  afternoon,  haying  obtained  per- 
mission from  General  Smith,  I directed  these  three  regiments  to  protect 
themselves  by  the  fence,  a rod  in  the  rear,  and  showed  the  Twenty-third 
Wisconsin  where  they  could  obtain  material  to  form  a good  barricade 
or  parapet,  to  which,  by  direction  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Vilas  (who  ob- 
tained some  tools),  they  soon  added  earthworks  that  formed  consider- 
able protection  against  small-arms. 

The  Sixtieth  Indiana  meantime,  Major  Nash  commanding,  being  alone, 
on  an  extensive  front  which  commanded  our  right  flank,  although  they 
were  now  on  timber,  were  heavily  pressed,  and  lost  1 killed,  1 mortally 
wounded,  4 less  severely  wounded,  and  3 missing,  when  our  skirmish- 
ers were  forced  to  retire  temporarily  from  a house,  attached  to  which 
there  was  a good  cistern.  General  Smith,  however,  allowing  the  Sixty- 
seventh  Indiana  to  be  taken  from  the  battery,  I ordered  them  quickly 
to  sustain  the  Sixtieth  Indiana  and  to  throw  out  four  companies  from 
each  of  the  two  regiments.  Under  charge  of  Lieutenant- Colonel  Bueli- 
ler,  the  two  regiments  advanced  under  this  heavy  skirmishing  force, 
and  speedily  recovered  the  house  and  cistern  of  water,  so  essential  to 
our  pickets. 

Two  prisoners  were  taken  by  the  Eighty-third  Ohio  and  sent  to  divis- 
ion headquarters.  The  Sixteenth  Indiana,  Captain  Moore  commanding, 
in  supporting  the  battery,  had  1 wounded,  making  a total,  for  July  10, 
of  3 killed,  14  wounded,  and  5 missing.  This  night  we  slept  on  our 


Ciiai*.  XXX VJ.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


.595 


arms,  after  relieving  the  advance  pickets,  and  kept  one-half  of  each 
regiment  awake  at  a time. 

By  dawn  on  July  11,  every  man  was  aroused  and  at  his  post,  and 
skirmishing  was  kept  up  at  intervals  during  the  day  until  about  4 
p.  m.,  when  Colonel  Keigwin’s  brigade,  of  the  Ninth  Division,  being  or- 
dered to  occupy  our  position,  the  First  Brigade  was  moved  by  the  right 
flank,  and  the  six  regiments  being  now  thrown  into  their  normal  position 
in  brigade,  slept  in  the  woods  (occupied  previously  by  the  Sixtieth  and 
Sixty-seventh  Indiana),  still  retaining  their  arms  and  accouterments 
and  one-half  aw'ake  at  a time.  Casualties  of  this  day  in  Sixtieth  Indi- 
ana, 1 wounded  and  1 missing ; in  Sixty-seventh  Indiana,  2 wounded ; 
in  Twenty-third  Wisconsin,  4 w7ounded;  making  a total  for  July  11  of 
7 wounded  and  1 missing. 

Sunday , July  12. — The  First  Brigade  was  ordered  to  occupy  a new 
line,  nearly  at  right  angles  with  its  former  position,  throwing  out  skir- 
mishers in  front.  In  this  manner  the  left  pivot  still  remaining  closed 
on  the  Ninth  Division,  the  right  flank  was  moved  through  a quarter 
of  a circle,  and  halted  by  General  Smith  on  a woody  eminence,  which 
formed  a good  position  for  the  artillery,  and  the  regiments  immediately 
commenced  intrenching  themselves  by  means  of  rails,  logs,  and  earth. 
The  casualties  of  July  12  were  1 wounded  in  Sixty-seventh  Indiana. 
This  night,  by  the  general’s  directions,  the  camp  guard  to  arouse  the 
regiments  in  case  of  necessity  being  increased,  the  men  were  permitted 
more  repose. 

Monday , July  13. — Our  pickets  were  advanced  about  125  yards  and 
furnished  with  a lew  tools,  so  that  they  also  protected  themselves  par- 
tially by  temporary  earth-works.  This  move  was  not  made  without 
strong  opposition  on  the  part  of  the  enemy ; but  they  never  succeeded 
in  dislodging  the  pickets  of  either  brigade.  No  casualties  occurred  on 
this  day. 

Tuesday , July  14. — Nothing  especial  occurred  to  vary  the  regular  as- 
saults or  sorties  of  the  enemy  and  repulses  on  our  part  until  an  armis- 
tice of  four  hours  was  announced,  when  the  men  were  permitted  to  take 
off  their  accouterments  and  to  rest  until  about  4 p.  m.,  at  which  time 
the  firing  recommenced.  The  total  list  of  killed  and  wounded  for  this 
day  amounted  only  to  2 wounded,  viz,  1 in  Sixty-seventh  Indiana  and 
1 in  Twenty-third  Wisconsin. 

Wednesday , July  15. — As  our  rear  was  reported  threatened  by  a heavy 
cavalry  force,  we  were  ordered  to  be  particularly  w atchful  against  simul- 
taneous diversion  in  front,  but  although  the  firing  was  heavy,  it  was  not 
much  more  so  than  usual.  Casualty  of  this  day,  1 wounded  in  Sixty- 
seventh  Indiana. 

Thursday , July  1G. — Cavalry  raid  in  our  rear  continued,  and  watch- 
fulness in  front  enjoined.  The  men  never  left  the  breastworks  more 
than  to  go  a few  feet,  and  could  be  in  a few  seconds  at  any  time  in  posi- 
tion. They  were  called  out  during  the  night  at  the  ringing  of  the  fire- 
bells  in  Jackson.  No  casualties. 

Friday , July  17. — An  evident  change  in  the  enemy’s  position  was 
discovered  at  dawn  this  morning,  and  it  was  soon  ascertained  that  they 
had  evacuated  the  town  during  the  period  between  the  ringing  of  the 
fire-bells,  to  call  in  their  pickets,  as  we  afterward  learned,  and  the  dawn 
of  morning.  The  men  were  now  permitted  to  take  some  rest,  and  a few 
at  a time  to  visit  town. 

Saturday , July  18. — The  brigade  marched  back  2 miles  toward  Clin- 
ton, and  remained  encamped  until  the  night  of  the  20th,  during  which 
period  the  Ninety-sixth  Ohio,  Colonel  Yance  commanding,  was  ordered 


596 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

to  aid  in  destroying  the  railroad,  and  returned  about  midnight  on  the 
20th. 

On  the  21st,  taking  up  an  early  line  of  march,  the  brigade  made  the 
encampment  at  Mississippi  Springs,  on  the  22d  at  Baker’s  Greek,  and 
on  the  23d  of  July,  passing  via  Edwards  Station,  although  delayed  by 
two  other  divisions,  marched  20  miles,  and  camped  at  their  old  quarters, 
in  rear  of  Vicksburg. 

Throughout  the  entire  expedition,  officers  and  men,  with  rare  excep- 
tions, performed  their  duty  promptly,  faithfully,  and  cheerfully.  The 
regimental  commanders  above  named  were  zealous  in  encouraging  their 
men,  and,  although  on  the  march  some  straggling  occurred,,  in  conse- 
quence of  exhaustion,  sickness,  and  want  of  water,  the  route  being  very 
badly  watered  at  this  season,  with  occasional  wandering  aside  from 
motives  less  urgent  or  admissible,  yet,  upon  the  whole,  I rejoice  to  be 
able  to  testify  to  the  resoluteness  in  action  and  endurance  under  fatigue 
exhibited  generally  throughout  the  expedition  ; nor  should  I here  omit 
to  mention  that  my  two  staff  officers,  Lieut.  H.  P.  Owen,  acting  as- 
sistant adjutant-general,  and  Lieutenant  Richardson,  brigade  inspector, 
carried  frequent  messages  under  a galling  fire  with  promptness  and 
efficiency. 

I should  mention  that  during  the  several  days  of  the  above  period, 
General  Smith  being  in  command  of  the  center  column  of  advance,  I 
received  orders  through  Colonel  Landram,  then  in  command  of  the 
Tenth  Division,  who  kindly  afforded  every  facility  in  his  power,  and 
furnished  the  pickets  from  his  own  brigade  on  the  nights  of  the  14th 
and  16  th  of  July. 

The  total  casualties  in  the  First  Brigade  during  the  expedition  were 
36,  viz,  3 killed,  2 deaths  from  sunstroke,  25  wounded,  and  6 missing. 

Very  respectfullv,  your  obedient  servant, 

RICHARD  OWEN, 

Colonel  Sixtieth  Indiana  Volunteers , Commanding  First  Brigade . 

Maj.  S.  S.  L’Hommedieu,  Jr., 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  25. 

Report  of  Col.  William  J.  Landram , nineteenth  Kentucky  Infantry , 
commanding  Second  Brigade. 

Headquarters  Second  Brigade,  Tenth  Division, 

Vicksburg , Miss.,  July  26,  1863. 

Major  : On  the  5th  instant,  the  Second  Brigade,  composed  of  the 
following  regiments,  viz,  Nineteenth  Kentucky  Volunteer  Infantry, 
Lieut.  Ool.  John  Cowan  commanding ; Seventy-seventh  Regiment  Illi- 
nois Volunteer  Infantry,  Col.  D.  P.  Grier  commanding ; Ninety-seventh 
Illinois  Regiment  Volunteer  Infantry,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Martin  com- 
manding ; One  hundred  and  thirtieth  Regiment  Illinois  Volunteer  In- 
fantry, Col.  N.  Niles  ; Forty-eighth  Regiment  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry, 
Col.  P.  J.  Sullivan,  and  the  Chicago  Mercantile  Battery,  Capt.  P.  H. 
White,  the  effective  strength  of  the  infantry  being  1,600  men,  marched 
from  Vicksburg  in  the  direction  of  Jackson,  Miss.,  near  which  place  we 
arrived  on  the  10th  instant.  The  First  Brigade  having  the  advance, 
the  Second  acted  as  a reserve. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


597 


On  tlie  lltli  instant,  the  Ninety-seventh  and  One  hundred  and  thir- 
tieth Regiments  Illinois  Volunteers  were  ordered  to  make  a reconnais- 
sance toward  Pearl  River,  on  our  right  flank,  with  a view  of  determin- 
ing the  position  of  the  enemy  at  that  point.  The  One  hundred  and 
thirtieth  Illinois  found  the  rebel  cavalry  in  some  force,  posted  in  a corn- 
field, and  by  several  well-directed  volleys  and  a handsome  charge  drove 
them  from  their  position.  The  two  regiments  then  advanced  toward 
the  river,  where,  finding  the  infantry  of  the  enemy  posted  in  great 
force,  they  were  ordered  to  withdraw,  which  was  done  in  order,  and  the 
regiments  returned  to  camp  without  the  loss  of  a man.  The  Seventy- 
seventh  Illinois  assisted  in  destroying  the  railroad  leading  south  some 
15  miles,  and  the  Ninety-seventh  Illinois  guarded  a train  that  was  or- 
dered into  the  country  to  forage.  The  Second  Brigade  relieved  the 
pickets  of  the  First  on  the  third  or  fourth  day  after  our  arrival. 

Nothing  further  of  interest  transpired  after  this  until  the  enemy 
evacuated  the  city. 

I am  pleased  to  be  able  to  testify  to  the  good  conduct  of  officers  and 
men  of  this,  as  well  as  that  of  the  First  Brigade. 

Respectfully, 

W.  J.  LANDRAM, 
Colonel , Commanding  Brigade. 

Maj.  S.  S.  L’Hommedieu,  Jr., 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant  General. 


No.  26. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Alvin  P.  Hovey , TJ.  8.  Army , commanding  Twelfth 

Division. 

Hdqrs.  Twelfth  Division,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Vicksburg , Miss.,  July  24,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  action  of  the  forces  under 
my  command  in  our  march  upon  and  siege  of  Jackson,  Miss. 

After  the  surrender  of  Vicksburg,  on  the  5th  of  July  my  division, 
under  orders  from  Major-General  Ord,  marched  in  the  direction  of  Jack- 
son,  and  camped  on  Clear  Creek.  On  the  7th  reached  Bolton,  and  on  the 
8th  marched  to  a point  about  5 miles  west  of  Clinton.  On  the  9th  we 
marched  to  and  camped  beyond  Clinton,  and  on  the  10th  arrived  near 
the  fortifications  of  Jackson.  On  the  11th,  my  division  moved,  on  a road 
made  by  our  pioneers,  from  the  Clinton  road  to  Holloway’s  farm,  on  the 
Raymond  road.  Here  we  encountered  the  enemy’s  pickets,  and  a very 
sharp  skirmish  ensued.  By  the  aid  of  skirmishers  and  one  section  of 
the  Sixteenth  Ohio  Battery,  we  drove  them  back,  and  the  division 
bivouacked  for  the  night  between  the  New  Orleans  Railroad  and  the 
road  from  Jackson  to  Raymond,  the  right  of  the  First  Brigade,  Col. 
William  T.  Spicely  commanding,  resting  on  the  railroad,  and  the  left 
of  Colonel  Slack’s  brigade  on  the  Raymond  road.  This  skirmish  was 
very  spirited,  and  our  men  moved  down  over  the  open  fields  under  fire 
with  all  the  regularity  and  spirit  of  ordinary  drill.  On  the  12th,  I re- 
ceived orders  to  move  forward  so  as  to  bring  the  left  of  my  division 
near  the  enemy  and  to  the  right  of  General  Benton’s  command.  We 
commenced  the  movement  at  8 a.  m.,  my  line  of  battle  reaching  from 
the  Raymond  road  to  the  railroad,  with  three  regiments  in  reserve. 
Before  we  moved  forward,  I sent  and  informed  General  Lauman,  com 


598  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

manding  Fourth  Division,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps,  of  my  intention. 
The  skirmishing  soon  became  very  sharp,  and  for  an  hour  the  conflict 
was  entitled  to  the  name  ot  battle.  The  enemy  burned  several  houses 
in  our  front,  and  opened  upon  us  with  canister,  grape,  shell,  and 
musketry.  Slowly  and  steadily  we  drove  them  before  us  into  them 
works,  and  were  soon  enabled  to  plant  a section  of  the  First  Missouri 
Battery,  Lieutenant  Callahan  commanding,  on  the  Raymond  road, 
about  500  yards  from  the  enemy’s  battery.  In  about  one  hour  and  a 
half  after  the  commencement  of  this  affair,  we  had  occupied  the  woods 
beyond  the  open  ground  in  our  front  and  within  short  range  of  the 
enemy’s  works.  Here  I found  it  impossible  to  advance  farther  without 
exposing  my  right  to  a raking  fire  from  the  enemy’s  works,  which  were 
within  500  yards  of  my  line. 

During  this  time  General  Lauman  met  with  severe  loss  on  my  right 
from  a fire  from  the  batteries  and  rifle-pits  of  the  enemy.  Major-Gen- 
eral Ord  relieved  him,  and  I was  ordered  to  take  command  of  his  di- 
vision. At  the  time  I assumed  command,  I found  Colonels  Bryant’s 
and  Pugh’s  brigades  of  this  division  extending  in  a single  line  of  battle 
on  the  right  of  and  at  right  angles  with  the  railroad.  I moved  them  to 
a point  between  the  forks  of  the  Gallatin  and  Raymond  roads,  placing 
them  in  a more  compact  position — Colonel  Bryant’s  brigade  in  front 
and  Colonel  Pugh’s  in  the  rear,  leaving  one  regiment,  Twelfth  [Thirty- 
third!  Wisconsin,  Colonel  Moore  commanding,  to  guard  a high  promi- 
nence on  the  right  of  the  road,  until  Colonel  Hall’s  brigade  should  ar- 
rive. That  brigade  arrived  during  the  night,  and  at  4 o’clock  the  next 
morning  it  was  camped  on  the  intended  position. 

In  pursuance  of  orders,  on  the  morning  of  the  15th  1 ordered  Col. 
Cyrus  Hall,  commanding  Fourth  Brigade,  to  make  a reconnaissance  in 
force  to  Pearl  River.  The  enemy  had  been  discovered  on  the  opposite 
bank  in  considerable  force,  and  it  was  believed  we  might  chastise  them 
for  venturing  beyond  their  breastworks.  The  reconnaissance  was  suc- 
cessfully made,  but  the  enemy  fled  upon  the  approach  of  our  skirmish- 
ers. Colonel  Hall’s  report  gives  a more  full  description  of  this  move- 
ment. I cannot  but  regard  it,  with  the  line  of  works  made  in  that 
direction  on  the  next  day,  as  being  highly  conducive  to  the  evacuation 
of  Jackson.  The  enemy  perceived  our  intention  to  flank  them  on  the 
right,  and,  from  statements  made  by  rebel  prisoners,  this  had  a decided 
effect  in  causing  the  evacuation. 

During  the  siege  two  sections  of  Foster’s  battery,  one  commanding 
the  railroad  and  one  on  the  high  prominence  to  the  right  of  the  road, 
did  fine  execution  by  throwing  their  20-pound  shot  and  shell  into  the 
enemy’s  works  and  the  heart  of  the  city.  All  my  batteries,  in  turn,  did 
fine  execution,  and  the  officers  commanding  them,  as  well  as  their  men, 

deserve  praise.  . M inil.  . , , 

The  advanced  position  of  the  Twelfth  Division,  on  the  12th  instant, 
made  it  necessary  that  works  of  some  kind  should  be  thrown  up  lor 
their  protection.  Accordingly,  Colonels  Slack  and  Spicely  soon  placed 
their  commands  comparatively  out  of  danger,  by  erecting  high  breast- 
works, which  were  a complete  shield  against  their  fire  of  small -arms. 

For  six  days  the  fire  of  artillery  and  small-arms  was  incessant  along 
the  line.  On  the  lGth,  I was  informed  by  Colonel  Hall  about  midnight 
that,  from  indications  and  sounds,  he  believed  that  the  enemy  were  evac- 
uating their  works.  Colonel  Spicely  also  sent  me  the  same  information, 
which  was  immediately  sent  to  corps  headquarters. 

A little  before  sunrise  on  the  17th,  Colonels  Spicely  and  Slack  s pick 
ets  had  advanced  to  the  works  of  the  enemy  on  the  right,  and  took  pos- 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


599 


session  of  their  parapets.  My  command  was  eager  to  follow,  but  orders 
forbade  it,  and  they  remained  in  camp,  whilst  Blair’s  division  marched 
into  the  city. 

During  the  seven  days  of  this  siege  the  Twelfth  Division  was  under 
a continual  fire,  and  fully  returned  it. 

The  railroad  was  destroyed  for  more  than  5 miles  of  my  command, 
and  32  cars,  besides  a large  quantity  of  timber  and  machinery,  were 
burned. 

The  brigades  under  the  commands  of  Cols.  James  R.  Slack,  William 
T.  Spicely,  Cyrus  Hall,  George  E.  Bryant,  and  I.  C.  Pugh  were  ably 
managed,  and  they,  with  their  officers  and  men,  deserve  the  gratitude 
of  their  country. 

The  casualties  in  my  division  during  this  siege  were  3 killed  and  57 
wounded.  Total,  CO.  After  the  Fourth  Division  (General  Bauman’s) 
came  under  my  command,  it  met  with  no  loss.  The  loss  of  its  gallant 
men  who  fell  on  the  32tli  will  be  keenly  felt,  and  long,  kindly,  and 
fondly  remembered.  They  are  now  reported  to  me  as  follows  : In  Colo- 
nel Bryant’s  brigade,  killed,  wounded,  and  missing,  G8 ; in  Colonel 
Pugh’s  brigade,  4G5;  making  a total  of  casualties  in  that  division,  on 
the  12th,  of  533.  Many  of  the  heroes  sleep  near  the  rebel  works,  and 
their  graves  will  be  a record  of  their  gallant  daring. 

On  the  morning  of  the  21st,  my  command  commenced  its  march  to 
Vicksburg,  and  arrived  here  on  the  23d,  a distance  of  55  miles,  over  a 
country  almost  destitute  of  water. 

I herewith  transmit  reports  of  Col.  William  T.  Spicely,  Col.  James 
R*  Slack,  Col.  Cyrus  Hall,  Col.  I.  C.  Pugh,  and  Col.  George  E.  Bryant, 
commanding  the  respective  brigades  under  my  command. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALVIN  P.  HOVEY, 
Brigadier -General , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  27. 

Report  of  Col.  William  T.  Spicely,  Twenty-fourth  Indiana  Infantry , 
commanding  First  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  First  Brig.,  Twelfth  Div.,  Thirteenth  A.  C., 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  23,  18G3. 

Captain:  In  compliance  with  general  orders  from  division  head- 
quarters, I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  First  Brigade  in  the  Expeditionary  Army  in  the  movement 
against  Jackson,  Miss.: 

On  the  5th  of  July,  in  pursuance  of  orders,  the  First  Brigade  left  the 
outer  works  uear  Vicksburg,  moving  in  the  direction  of  Big  Black 
River  Bridge,  and  went  into  camp  on  Clear  Creek  the  same  day. 

On  the  6th,  in  the  evening,  we  again  took  up  the  line  of  march,  and 
encamped  the  same  day  on  Big  Black  River. 

On  the  7th,  early  in  the  morning,  we  again  resumed  the  line  of  march, 
and  after  a most  fatiguing  day’s  travel,  through  dust  and  heat,  without 
water  the  most  of  the  way,  we  arrived  at  Bolton  at  8 p.  m. 

On  the  evening  of  the  8th,  we  moved  in  the  direction  of  Clinton,  and 
at  32  o’clock  at  night  we  halted  on  the  roadside,  4 miles  from  Bolton. 


600 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  ICjap.  XXXVI 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  9th,  we  again  took  up  the  line  of  march, 
and  bivouacked  that  day  within  2 miles  of  Jackson,  Miss. 

On  the  11th,  the  First  Brigade  was  ordered  to  take  position  in  the 
line  of  investment  around  Jackson,  and  receiving  an  order  from  Gen- 
eral Hovey  for  a regiment  to  go  in  company  with  his  staff  to  make 
a reconnaissance,  I immediately  sent  the  Twenty-fourth  Indiana  In- 
fantry, under  command  of  Maj.  John  F.  Grill,  forward  in  performance 
of  that  duty.  On  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  the  remainder  of  the 
brigade  took  up  the  line  of  march  for  position  in  the  line  of  investment 
around  upon  the  Baymond  and  Jackson  road.  We  came  up  with  the 
Twenty-fourth  Indiana  and  Twenty-eighth  Illinois  Infantry,  who  re- 
ported the  enemy’s  skirmishers  posted  on  the  road  to  our  front  in  con- 
siderable numbers.  I immediately  formed  the  Eleventh  and  Twenty- 
fourth  Indiana  and  Twenty-ninth  Wisconsin  Infantry  in  line  of  battle 
across  the  road,  throwing  forward  a heavy  line  of  skirmishers  to  the 
front,  who  almost  immediately  engaged  the  skirmishers  of  the  enemy. 
Having  thus  made  disposition  of  the  forces  in  front,  I immediately  gave 
the  order  to  advance,  holding  the  Thirty-fourth  and  Forty-sixth  Indiana 
in  reserve. 

At  this  time  I received  orders  from  General  Hovey  to  bring  forward 
a section  of  artillery  to  the  front  line.  The  command  was  hardly  given 
when  the  gallant  Sixteenth  Ohio  Battery  reopened  by  placing  one 
section  to  the  front,  and  opened  a deadly  fire  upon  the  enemy’s  line. 

Again  my  line  advanced,  driving  the  enemy’s  skirmishers  back,  halt- 
ing for  a few  moments’  rest,  and  for  the  purpose  of  making  a reconnais- 
sance to  the  right  and  left,  to  ascertain  the  exact  position  of  General 
Benton’s  command,  who  was  seeking  position  to  our  left.  Failing  to 
hear  from  General  Benton’s  command,  we  again  advanced,  driving  the 
enemy  across  an  open  field  and  across  the  railroad.  Here  we  halted 
and  remained  for  the  night,  throwing  a strong  force  forward  for  the 
protection  of  our  front. 

On  the  12th,  early  in  the  morning,  I again  advanced  my  line,  the 
Eleventh  and  Forty-sixth  Indiana  and  Twenty-ninth  Wisconsin  com- 
posing the  first  line,  and  the  Twenty-fourth  and  Thirty-fourth  Indiana 
in  reserve.  We  drove  the  enemy,  with  sharp  and  severe  skirmishing, 
inside  their  fortifications,  my  command  closely  investing  their  works. 
At  this  point  we  halted,  after  throwing  a heavy  force  of  skirmishers  to 
the  front,  constantly  skirmishing  with  the  enemy. 

On  the  morning  of  the  13th,  I relieved  the  Twenty-ninth  Wisconsin 
and  Forty-sixth  Indiana,  of  the  first  line,  ordering  up  the  Twenty-fourth 
and  Thirty-fourth  Indiana  to  the  front,  holding  the  first  mentioned  in 
reserve. 

From  the  12th  to  the  16th  day  of  July,  my  command  was  under  a con- 
tinual fire  during  the  day  from  the  enemy’s  fortifications  and  skir- 
mishers. 

On  the  14th,  the  First  Brigade  commenced  work  throwing  up  fortifi- 
cations. With  but  few  tools  or  implements  to  labor  with,  the  men  with 
zeal  pushed  the  work,  and  soon  a line  of  breastworks  was  completed, 
affording  ample  protection  to  the  men  in  line. 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th,  I ordered  Company  E,  Second  Illinois 
Artillery,  Lieutenant  Nispel  commanding,  with  four  guns,  in  position  on 
the  road  leading  from  Jackson  to  Baymond.  This  command  deserves 
especial  thanks  for  the  admirable  manner  in  which  they  performed 
the  work,  fortifying  the  road  in  such  a manner  as  to  command  all  the 
approaches  to  the  front. 

On  the  16th  instant,  I ordered  the  Sixteenth  Ohio  Battery,  Lieuten- 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


601 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


ant  Twist  commanding*,  to  tlie  front,  relieving  the  command  of  Lieu- 
tenant Kispel,  putting  the  entire  battery  in  position  on  the  line. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  one  of  my  pickets  came  in  with  a de- 
serter, who  reported  that  the  rebel  force  entire  had  evacuated  during 
the  night,  pushing  across  Pearl  Eiver,  in  the  direction  of  Brandon. 

This  fact  I immediately  communicated  to  Brigadier-General  Hovey, 
and  upon  arriving  at  the  front  found  the  skirmishers  of  my  command  in 
possession  of  the  enemy’s  works,  the  enemy,  as  reported  by  the  de- 
serter, having  left  during  the  night,  and  with  this  ended  the  siege  and 
investment  of  Jackson. 

To  Colonel  Cameron  and  Major  Jones,  Thirty-fourth  Indiana;  Col.  T. 
II.  Bringhurst,  Forty-sixth  Indiana;  Lieut.  Col.  W.  W.  Darnall  and  Major 
Butler,  Eleventh  Indiana;  Lieutenant-Colonel  Greene,  commanding 
Twenty-ninth  Wisconsin,  and  Maj.  John  F.  Grill,  commanding  Twenty- 
fourth  Indiana,  especial  thanks  are  due  for  the  signal  ability  with  which 
they  handled  their  commands.  I am  greatly  indebted  to  them  for  their 
zeal  and  gallantry  on  this  occasion. 

I also  desire  to  call  your  particular  attention  to  the  gallant  Sixteenth 
Ohio  Battery,  and  to  the  officers  and  men  in  that  command,  and  while 
doing  so  I must  not  fail  to  make  honorable  ^mention  of  Company  E, 
Second  Illinois  Artillery,  whose  officers  and  men  were  ever  ready  and 
prompt  to  move  at  every  command. 

Captain  [John  F.]  Caven,  acting  assistant  inspector- general,  and 
Capt.  W.  S.  Marshall  and  Lieut.  D.  J.  Wells,  my  aides  on  this  expedi- 
tion, are  deserving  of  special  notice  and  honorable  mention  for  the  zeal 
and  ability  with  which  they  executed  every  order,  and  more  especially 
for  their  gallantry  in  the  skirmish  before  Jackson. 

Capt.  Joseph  H.  Livsey,  assistant  adjutant- general,  was,  unfortunately, 
left  in  camp  under  a severe  attack  of  illness.  I much  regret  the  loss 
of  his  assistance  on  this  occasion. 

When  I come  to  speak  of  the  men  of  my  command,  “language  limps 
along  the  line.”  The  gallant  First  Brigade  has  a record  for  gallantry 
and  bravery  on  every  field  of  battle  which  words  fail  to  describe.  All 
honor  to  the  men  of  the  First  Brigade. 

I herewith  submit  a list  of  casualties  in  this  command,  as  shown  by 
the  regimental  reports.  I also  append  a list  of  the  names  of  enlisted 
men,  under  your  order,  who  are  deserving  of  honorable  mention  and 
promotion  for  good  conduct  and  gallantry  upon  every  occasion. 

My  loss  before  Jackson  is  as  follows:  Killed,  1;  wounded,  40.  Ag- 
gregate, 41. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

W.  T.  SPICELY, 

Colonel , Comdg.  1st  Brigade , 12 th  Division , 13 th  Army  Corps. 

Capt.  John  E.  Phillips, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Ko.  28. 

Report  of  Col.  James  R.  Slack,  Forty -seventh  Indiana  Infantry , com- 
manding Second  Brigade. 

IIdqrs.  Second  Brig.,  Twelfth  Div.,  Thirteenth  A.  C., 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  24,  1803. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  march 
to  and  the  battle  at  Jackson,  Miss.,  by  the  brigade  under  my  command, 


602 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI 


consisting  of  the  Forty -seventh  Indiana  Infantry,  commanded  by  Lieut. 
Col.  John  A.  McLaughlin  ; Fifty- sixth  Ohio  Infantry,  commanded  by 
Col.  William  EL  Raynor;  Twenty-fourth  Iowa  Infantry,  commanded  by- 
Lieut.  Col.  J.  Q.  Wilds;  Twenty-eighth  Iowa  Infantry,  commanded  by 
Col.  John  Connell ; Eighty  seventh  Illinois  Infantry,  commanded  by 
Lieut.  Col.  John  M.  Crebs;  one  section  of  First  Missouri  Battery,  com- 
manded by  Lieut.  C.  M.  Callahan,  and  the  Second  Ohio  Batteryr,  com- 
manded by  Lieut.  A.  Beach : 

We  took  up  our  line  of  march  from  the  battle-field  at  Yicksburg  on 
the  5th  day  of  July,  the  day  after  the  surrender,  and,  after  a five  days’ 
very  fatiguing  march,  without  anything  particularly  marked  in  our 
course,  except  much  suffering  with  the  extreme  heat,  we  reached  the 
neighborhood  of  the  rebel  fortifications  at  Jackson. 

On  the  9th  of  July,  we  took  up  our  line  of  march  and  advanced 
toward  the  enemy’s  line.  When  within  2 miles  of  the  enemy,  the  ad- 
vance of  the  First  Brigade  encountered  the  rebel  pickets,  immediately 
after  which  the  action  commenced. 

General  Hovey,  commanding,  directed  me  to  form  my  brigade  to  the 
left  of  the  Raymond  road  and  forward  the  whole  column,  which  was 
speedily  executed,  and  we  advanced  to  Lynch’s  Creek.  Here  I advanced 
two  companies  of  the  Forty-seventh  Indiana  Infantry  as  skirmishers 
across  the  creek.  As  soon  as  they  crossed  the  creek,  the  enemy  opened 
fire  upon  them,  to  which  the  skirmishers  spiritedly  replied,  and,  after  a 
contest  of  about  thirty  minutes,  drove  the  enemy  from  the  field.  While 
the  skirmishers  were  contesting  the  ground,  I advanced  the  whole  com- 
mand over  the  creek  and  formed  directly  on  the  bank.  We  advanced 
no  farther  that  night,  the  men  lying  upon  their  arms  all  night,  with  a 
strong  picket  line  in  front. 

On  the  morning  of  the  10th  instaut,  I advanced  a line  of  skirmishers, 
consisting  of  one  company  from  each  regiment,  and  my  brigade  in  line 
•in  the  rear  across  a field,  but  met  no  obstacle  until  we  reached  the  high 
ground  through  the  woods  in  advance  of  the  field,  when  the  rebel  pickets 
were  again  encountered,  but,  after  a few  well-directed  volleys  from  my 
line  of  skirmishers,  the  enemy  was  sent  howling  behind  their  fortifica- 
tions. 

During  the  advance  of  the  line,  Lieutenant  Harper,  then  in  command 
of  the  Second  Ohio  Battery,  shelled  the  woods  in  our  front,  and  con- 
tributed greatly  to  drive  the  enemy  back.  The  whole  line  was  imme- 
diately advanced  to  within  500  yards  of  the  enemy’s  works,  where  we 
formed  a line,  threw  out  a liae  of  skirmishers  covering  my  whole  front, 
and  at  once  began  constructing  intreuchments.  In  the  afternoon  of  the 
advance  of  my  line,  in  pursuance  to  the  order  of  Brigadier-General 
Hovey,  I ordered  up  Lieutenant  Callahan,  with  his  section  of  artillery, 
who  took  position  in  the  Raymond  road,  and  opened  on  the  rebel  line 
with  very  fatal  effect. 

During  the  next  seven  days  the  siege  continued,  the  men  of  my  com- 
mand digging  and  intrenching,  the  sharpshooters  in  advance  striking, 
wounding,  and  killing  all  who  exposed  their  persons  to  the  unerring 
aim  of  our  riflemen,  until  the  morning  of  the  17th,  when  it  was  an- 
nounced by  our  pickets  that  the  rebels  had  evacuated  during  the  night. 
I sent  forward  a line  of  skirmishers,  who  soon  verified  the  truth  of  the 
conjecture  by  taking  possession  of  the  enemy’s  works  and  raising  the 
Stars  and  Stripes  tbereon.  * 

During  the  whole  time  of  the  siege  the  officers  and  men  conducted 
themselves  with  great  bravery  and  skill,  living  three  days  on  less  than 
fourth  rations.  They  endured  all  without  a murmur,  and  witnessed  the 


Chap.  XXX VI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


603 

culmination  of  their  hopes  by  the  surrender  of  the  last  fortified  city 
in  the  State  of  Mississippi  and  the  almost  literal  annihilation  of  the 
rebel  army  in  the  Southwest. 

The  whole  number  of  killed  and  wounded  is  as  follows  : Forty-seventh 
Indiana  Infantry,  1 killed  and  4 wounded;  Fifty-sixth  Ohio  Infantry, 
5 wounded ; Twenty-fourth  Iowa  Infantry,  1 killed  and  4 wounded ; 
Twenty-eighth  Iowa  Infantry,  1 wounded  ; Eighty-seventh  Illinois  Infan- 
try, 3 wounded  ; making  in  all,  killed  and  wounded,  19,  detailed  reports 
of  which  are  herewith  submitted. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

JAMES  R.  SLACK, 

Col.,  Comdg.  Second  Brig.,  Twelfth  Div.,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 

Capt.  John  E.  Phillips, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Ko.  29. 

Report  of  Col.  Isaac  C.  Pugh , Forty-first  Illinois  Infantry , commanding 

Third  Brigade. 

Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  Twelfth  Division, 

Near  Jachson , July  20,  1863. 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  orders  from  General  Hovey,  I herewith  send 
you  a statement  of  the  operations  of  the  First  Brigade,  Fourth  Division, 
Sixteenth  Army  Corps,  since  the  5th  day  of  July,  1863. 

I left  Vicksburg  on  the  morning  of  the  5th  of  July,  1863,  and  marched 
to  Clear  Creek  and  encamped,  from  which  place  we  marched  the  7th  to 
near  Bolton.  The  8th  we  marched  about  3 miles,  and  encamped  until 
the  morning  of  the  9th.  On  the  9th,  we  marched  to  the  town  of  Clinton, 
and  encamped  until  the  morning  of  the  10th.  On  the  10th,  we  arrived 
in  the  vicinity  of  Jackson,  and  on  the  11th  were  ordered  into  line  on 
General  Hovey’s  right. 

I encamped  on  the  night  of  the  11th  on  the  west  side  of  the  railroad 
running  south  from  Jackson,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  12th  my  bri- 
gade was  ordered  into  line  of  battle  on  the  east  side  of  the  railroad, 
my  left  resting  on  the  road  on  General  Hovey’s  right,  my  line  of  battle 
running  obliquely  southeast,  or  back  from  General  Hovey’s.  About 
10  o’clock,  General  Lauman  came  up  and  ordered  my  line  changed  so  as 
to  form  a square  or  right  angle  line  with  General  Hovey’s  right,  which 
order  I obeyed,  and,  after  some  artillery  firing,  Avas  ordered  forward  by 
General  Lauman.  My  line  consisted  of  the  following  regiments,  to 
wit:  the  Twenty-eighth  Regiment  Illinois  Volunteer  Infantry  (which 
had  been  ordered  to  report  to  me  for  duty)  on  the  right,  commanded 
by  Major  Rhodes ; the  Forty-first  Regiment  Illinois  Infantry  Volunteers 
on  the  right  center,  commanded  by  Lieut.  Col.  John  H.  Kale;  the  Third 
Regiment  Iowa  Infantry  Volunteers  on  the  right  left  center,  commanded 
by  Col.  Aaron  Browrn ; the  Fifty-third  Regiment  Illinois  Volunteer 
Infantry  on  the  left,  resting  on  railroad,  commanded  by  Col.  S.  C.  Earl. 
Col.  J.  B.  Moore,  of  the  Thirty-third  Wisconsin  Infantry,  was  ordered 
to  the  right  by  General  Lauman,  to  make  a reconnaissance  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Pearl  River. 

I was  ordered  by  General  Lauman  to  move  my  line  forward  cautiously, 


604 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


which  order  I obeyed.  After  passing  a small  creek,  lined  with  timber 
and  dense  underbrush,  my  command  arrived  in  the  open  field,  when  I 
halted  and  had  my  line  dressed  up.  I did  not  like  the  looks  of  the 
ground.  There  was  a corn-field  in  front,  beyond  which  there  was  a skirt 
of  timber,  and  beyond  that  the  timber  had  been  felled.  The  fences  had 
been  laid  down,  and  the  corn  cut  down,  except  a strip  immediately  in 
front  of  my  line.  I ordered  one  of  my  aides  to  request  General  Lauman’s 
presence  on  the  ground,  as  I did  not  like  the  appearance  of  the  field, 
and  I did  not  intend  to  advance  farther  without  orders.  During  the  time 
General  Laurnan  was  coming  up,  my  skirmishers  on  the  right  fell  back, 
and  when  the  general  came  up  he  ordered  the  skirmishers  to  be  pushed 
forward  to  the  distance  of  300  or  400  yards,  and  then  gave  the  order  to 
my  brigade  to  “ forward,”  which  order  was  obeyed.  As  soon  as  the  line 
had  crossed  the  field  and  had  got  fairly  into  the  timber,  the  enemy 
opened  a murderous  fire  on  my  whole  line,  but  the  men  and  officers 
pressed  forward  until  they  got  within  120  yards  of  the  enemy’s  breast- 
works, when  they  took  shelter  behind  the  fallen  timber,  but  the  fire  was 
so  murderous  that  what  officers  and  men  were  left  fell  back,  the  firing 
lasting  about  one  hour. 

I should  have  stated  that  the  Twenty-eighth  Illinois  Infantry  belongs 
to  the  Third  Brigade,  Fourth  Division,  and  I have  not  had  any  report 
from  the  commanding  officer  of  that  regiment. 

The  losses  of  the  regiments  are  as  follows,  to  wit:  Third  Iowa  In- 
fantry lost  114  men,  including  officers,  in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing; 
the  Forty-first  Illinois  lost,  men  and  officers  killed,  wounded,  and  miss- 
ing, 136 ; and  the  Fifty-third  Illinois,  total  loss,  134.  The  Fifth  Ohio 
Battery  was  brought  up  during  the  action,  and  lost  9 men  in  killed, 
wounded,  and  missing,  and  had  two  guns  disabled.  Colonel  Earl,  of 
the  Fifty-third  Illinois,  was  killed;  Colonel  Brown,  of  the  Third  Iowa, 
was  severely  wounded  in  the  thigh;  and  Lieutenant-Colonel  Nale,  Forty- 
first  Illinois,  was  stunned  by  a spent  ball,  and  had  to  leave  the  field.  I 
had  about  880  men  (including  officers)  engaged,  and  of  that  number  465 
were  killed,  wounded,  and  missing. 

Officers  and  men  behaved  very  gallantly.  No  troops  could  have 
done  better.  All  acted  nobly,  for  which  they  have  my  thanks  and  the 
thanks  of  a grateful  country. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  • 

I.  C.  PUGH, 

Gol.  41st  Illinois  Infty .,  Comdg.  1st  Brig.,  4t/t  Div .,  Wth  A.  G. 

Capt.  John  E.  Phillips, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  30. 

Report  of  Maj.  George  W.  Grosley , Third  Iowa  Infantry. 

Near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  26,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
conduct  and  loss  of  the  Third  Iowa  Infantry  in  the  assault  upon  the 
enemy’s  works  at  Jackson,  Miss.,  on  July  12,  1863: 

About  9 o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  12th,  the  Third  Iowa,  FortjT- 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


605 


first  and  Fifty-third  Illinois  Infantry,  and  the  Fifth  Ohio  Battery,  of 
six  guns,  crossed  the  New  Orleans  and  Jackson  Railroad  at  a point 
about  2 miles  south  of  Jackson  and  1 mile  from  the  enemy’s  works. 
After  crossing,  line  of  battle  was  formed,  skirmishers  thrown  out,  and 
the  line  ordered  forward.  After  advancing  about  one-fourth  of  a mile, 
the  line  was  halted,  the  battery  placed  in  position  100  yards  in  our  rear, 
opened  fire  with  shell,  and  continued  to  fire  rapidly  for  about  twenty 
minutes.  The  enemy  replied  promptly  with  two  guns,  getting  our 
range  the  first  shot.  As  soon  as  the  battery  ceased  firing,  the  line 
again  moved  forward.  We  advanced  half  a mile  through  timber  and  a 
dense  undergrowth,  our  skirmishers  meeting  with  no  opposition.  When 
we  came  to  the  edge  of  an  open  field,  tliq  line  was  again  halted.  Here 
we  were  joined  by  the  Twenty-eighth  Illinois  Infantry,  which  took  posi- 
tion on  our  right.  General  Lauman  now  came  up,  and  ordered  the 
line  forward,  the  skirmishers  keeping  well  advanced.  When  about  half 
way  across  the  field,  our  skirmishers  engaged  the  enemy’s  pickets. 
Soon  after,  their  picket  reserves  were  encountered  and  driven  in,  and  a 
moment  later  we  came  within  sight  of  their  works,  about  300  yards  dis- 
tant. The  enemy  now  opened  fire  with  twelve  pieces  of  artillery,  all 
bearing  directly  upon  our  line,  and  also  gave  us  a heavy  fire  of  mus- 
ketry. The  men  answered  this  greeting  with  a shout,  and  rushed  for- 
ward to  the  assault.  We  were  met  by  a perfect  storm  of  grape,  canister, 
and  musketry.  The  timber  and  brush  had  been  cleaned  away  in  front 
of  the  enemy’s  works,  and  an  abatis  formed,  which  broke  our  line  and 
threw  the  men  into  groups,  thus  giving  the  enemy’s  artillery  an  oppor- 
tunity to  work  with  the  most  deadly  effect.  Our  line  rapidly  melted 
away  under  this  terrible  fire,  and  after  getting  up  to  within  75  yards  of 
the  works,  we  found  ourselves  too  weak  to  carry  them  by  assault,  and, 
after  remaining  under  this  severe  fire  for  twenty  minutes,  we  were  com- 
pelled to  fall  back.  We  brought  off  our  colors  safely,  and  reformed  at 
the  point  where  we  had  last  halted  previous  to  advancing  to  the  as- 
sault. We  were  then  ordered  back  to  the  point  where  we  first  crossed 
the  railroad. 

The  regiment  went  into  action  with  223  enlisted  men,  15  line  and  3 
field  and  staff  officers,  making  an  aggregate  of  241  rank  and  file  en- 
gaged. Out  of  this  number  we  lost  114  killed,  wounded,  and  missing.* 
Part  of  our  wounded  and  all  our  dead  were  left  on  the  field.  An  at- 
tempt was  made  to  bring  off  our  killed  and  wounded  under  a flag  of 
truce,  but  it  was  unsuccessful.  After  the  evacuation  of  Jackson,  a few 
days  subsequent  to  the  fight,  we  recovered  part  of  our  wounded,  who 
had  been  left  in  the  hospital,  but  those  who  were  able  to  be  removed 
had  been  taken  away  as  prisoners  of  war.  Most  of  those  reported 
missing  are  known  to  be  wounded. 

Of  the  conduct  of  both  officers  and  men  during  this,  the  severest 
conflict  in  which  the  regiment  has  ever  been  engaged,  I cannot  speak 
too  highly.  All  did  their  duty  nobly,  and  it  is  impossible  to  make  spe- 
cial mention  of  any  one  without  doing  injustice  to  others. 

The  inclosed  list  of  killed  and  wounded  will  show  how  the  regiment 
fought  better  than  I have  been  able  to  describe  it. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  W.  CROSLEY, 

Major , Commanding  Third  Iowa  Infantry. 

Col.  N.  B.  Baker, 

Adjutant-General  of  Ioiua. 


But  see  revised  statement,  p.  547. 


606 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 
No.  31. 

Report  of  Col.  Cyrus  Hally  Fourteenth  Illinois  Infantry , commanding 

Fourth  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  Fourth  Brio.,  Twelfth  Div.,  Thirteenth  A.  C., 

Near  Jachson , Miss.,  July  20,  1SG3. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  as  follows  concerning 
my  operations  since  leaving  Vicksburg,  Miss. : 

On  the  5th  instant,  acting  under  orders  from  Brig.  Gen.  J.  G.  Lau- 
iuan,  we  started  at  8 a.  in.  in  the  direction  of  Black  River.  Nothing 
noteworthy  occurred  after  passing  Big  Black  River  on  the  7th  instant, 
until  the  12th,  when  I,  with  my  brigade,  having  been  on  duty  as  train 
guard  at  Dixon’s,  about  5 miles  west  of  Jackson,  was  ordered  to  report 
to  Brig.  Gen.  A.  P.  Hovey,  commanding  Twelfth  Division.  Thirteenth 
Army  Corps,  which,  you  are  aware,  I did  about  9 p.  m. 

On  the  13th  instant,  I was  ordered  into  position  on  the  ground  east 
of  the  New  Orleans  and  Jackson  Railroad.  My  command  here  was 
composed  of  the  Fourteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  Lieut.  Col.  John  J.  Jones ; 
the  Fifteenth  Illinois  Infantry,  Lieut.  Col.  James  Rany ; Forty-sixth 
Regiment  Illinois  Infantry,  Col.  Benjamin  Dornblaser ; Seventy-sixth 
Illinois  Infantry,  Col.  Samuel  T.  Busey;  Company  K,  Second  Regi- 
ment Illinois  Artillery,  Captain  Rodgers,  and  Seventh  Ohio  Battery, 
Capt.  Silas  A.  Burnap.  I immediately  prepared  a line  of  pits  in  my 
front,  cleared  the  ground,  and  made  every  arrangement  to  receive  any 
enemy  that  might  appear. 

On  the  morning  of  the  15th  instant,  I was  ordered  by  Brigadier- Gen- 
eral Hovey  to  send  a scouting  party  as  far  east  as  Pearl  River.  To 
this  ckity  I assigned  Lieutenant  Reid,  of  the  Fifteenth  Illinois  Infantry, 
by  whom  it  was  performed  in  a very  able  and  satisfactory  manner,  find- 
ing the  enemy  in  force  on  the  west  side  of  the  river,  with  one  company 
thrown  forward  to  the  edge  of  the  swamp  on  the  west  side.  After 
making  known  to  General  Hovey  the  facts  in  the  case,  I was  ordered  to 
take  three  of  my  regiments  and  make  a dash  upon  the  enemy.  I accord- 
ingly took  the  Fifteenth,  Forty-sixth,  and  Seventy-sixth  Illinois,  and 
made  a rapid  move  toward  the  river,  being  supported  by  the  Thirty- 
second  Illinois,  Fifty-third  Indiana,  and  Thirty-third  Wisconsin,  com- 
manded by  Colonel  Bryant,  of  the  Fifth  Brigade. 

The  movement1  was  made  with  great  rapidity,  but  not  sufficiently 
rapid  to  overtake  the  enemy,  his  pickets  having  notified  him  of  our  ap- 
proach. We  reached  the  river  in  season  to  see  the  last  of  the  pickets 
pass  out  of  sight  upon  the  opposite  bank. 

On  the  evening  of  the  16th,  it  became  apparent  to  some  of  the  offi- 
cers of  my  command  that  the  enemy  was  evacuating  Jackson,  which 
fact  I communicated  to  Brigadier-General  Hovey  about  10  o’clock. 

The  spirit  manifested  by  both  officers  and  men  during  the  short  siege 
was  highly  commendable,  obeying  with  alacrity  every  order  and  execut- 
ing the  work  assigned  them  with  zeal  and  enthusiasm. 

To  Col.  Benjamin  Dornblaser,  Forty-sixth  Illinois  Infantry,  Capt.  R.  P. 
McKnight,  assistant  adjutant-general  of  this  brigade,  and  Capt.  David 
S.  Pride,  division  picket  officer,  I am  indebted  for  valuable  information, 
obtained  by  reconnoitering  the  enemy’s  works.  Casualties,  none; 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CYRUS  HALL, 

Colonel y Commanding  Brigade , 

Capt.  John  E.  Phillips,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


C1IA1-.  XXXVI-1 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


GOT 


No.  32. 

Report  of  Col.  George  E.  Bryant , Twelfth  Wisconsin  Infantry , com- 
manding Fifth  Brigade. 

Headquarters  Fifth  Brigade,  Twelfth  Division, 

Near  Jackson , Miss.,  July  20,  18G3. 

Sir  : This  command  left  camp,  near  Vicksburg,  as  the  Third  Brigade, 
Fourth  Division,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps,  attached  to  the  Thirteenth 
Army  Corps,  the  division  being  commanded  by  Brig.  Gen.  J.  G.  Ban- 
man,  at  7 a.  m.  July  5,  18G3. 

The  command  of  the  brigade  was  passed  over  to  me  on  the  morning 
of  the  march,  on  account  of  sickness  of  Colonel  Johnson,  former  com- 
mander. 

Lieut.  Thomas  A.  Balston,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  was 
taken  sick  at  camp  near  Big  Black  Biver,  and  returned  to  Vicksburg. 

I detailed  Lieut.  James  K.  Proudfit,  adjutant  of  the  Twelfth  Wis- 
consin Infantry,  in  his  place,  who  has  acted  in  that  capacity  since. 

During  the  march  to  this  point  the  division  was  at  the  rear  of  the 
corps,  and  the  troops  wrere  largely  employed  in  guarding  trains.  The 
regiments  composing  this  command  were  separated  a good  deal  of  the 
time,  but  no  incidents  worthy  of  mention  occurred  until  after  the  arrival 
near  this  point. 

In  the  morning  of  the  11th  instant,  the  Fifty-third  Indiana  Infantry, 
Col.  W.  Q.  Gresham  commanding,  under  orders  from  General  Bauman, 
reconnoitered  and  op>ened  a road  from  the  Clinton  road  to  the  Baymond 
and  Gallatin  roads,  and  returned  to  the  brigade,  near  the  Clinton  road, 
about  10  a.  in.,  having  successfully  carried  out  its  instructions.  Soon 
after  (about  11  a.  m.),  the  Twenty-eighth  Illinois  Infantry,  Maj.  H.  Bhodes 
commanding,  under  orders  from  General  Bauman,  marched  upon  the 
road  opened  by  Colonel  Gresham’s  command,  and  took  position  on  the 
left  of  the  Southern  Kailroad,  a short  distance  to  the  front  and  right 
of  the  junction  of  the  Baymond  and  Gallatin  roads.  The  balance  of 
the  brigade  marched  about  2 p.  m.,  by  order  of  General  Bauman,  upon 
the  same  route,  the  Twelfth  Wisconsin  Infantry,  Capt.  Giles  Stevens 
commanding,  guarding  division  train.  The  brigade  halted  that  night 
near  the  present  division  hospital.  The  train  did  not  come  up,  and  the 
Twelfth  Wisconsin  remained  with  it.  The  Thirty-second  Illinois  In- 
fantry, Col.  John  Logan  commanding,  was  placed  upon  picket,  by  order 
of  General  Lauman,  from  the  Baymond  to  the  Gallatin  roads  in  rear  of 
the  position.  The  Fifty-third  Indiana  Infantry  and  Fifteenth  Ohio 
Battery  remained  where  the  command  halted. 

In  the  morning  of  the  12th  instant,  General  Lauman,  with  the  First 
E*rigade,  made  an  advance  upon  the  enemy’s  works,  taking  with  him 
the  Twenty-eighth  Illinois  Infantry,  which  wras  in  position  as  indicated 
above.  After  the  advance  was  commenced,  an  officer  of  General  Bau- 
man’s staff  sent  forward  the  Fifty-third  Indiana  Infantry  and  Fifteenth 
Ohio  Battery,  as  I suppose,  to  support  the  movement,  though  I am 
informed  that  their  only  orders  were  to  follow  the  First  Brigade. 

The  troops  advancing  on  the  enemy’s  wnrks  on  the  right  of  the  rail- 
road soon  came  under  a terrible  fire  of  shell,  grape,  canister,  and  mus- 
ketry. The  advance  was  over  nearly  level  ground,  covered  with  logs, 
slashed  brush,  stumps,  &c.,  and  perfectly  open  to  the  enemy’s  fire  for 
about  GOO  yards.  Brave  as  men  can  be,  the  troops  rushed  on  till  some 
arrived  within  75  yards  of  the  rebel  works,  or  less,  but  they  Were 
finally  forced  to  relinquish  the  hopeless  effort,  and  slowly  fell  back  to 


608 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


a ridge  on  the  right  of  the  railroad  nearly  opposite  the  position  occu- 
pied by  the  Twenty-eighth  Illinois  Infantry  the  night  before. 

At  this  point,  by  order  of  General  Lauman,  I brought  up  the  Thirty- 
second  Illinois  Infantry,  having  relieved  it  on  picket  by  five  companies 
of  the  Twelfth  Wisconsin  Infantry,  and  took  command  of  the  brigade, 
all  of  which  was  present,  except  the  Twelfth  Wisconsin  Infantry. 

During  the  day,  General  Lauman,  by  order  of  Major-General  Grd, 
commanding  the  Thirteenth  Army  Corps,  turned  over  the  command  of 
the  division  to  Brig.  Gen.  A.  P.  Hovey,  who  issued  orders,  upon  assum- 
ing command,  merging  the  division  in  the  Twelfth  Division  of  the  Thir- 
teenth Army  Corps,  and  naming  this  command  as  the  Fifth  Brigade. 

In  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day,  the  command  took  position,  by  order 
of  General  Hovey,  in  the  forks  of  the  Raymond  and  Gallatin  roads,  and 
on  the  16th  instant  took  position,  by  order  of  General  Hovey,  in  rear  of 
Fourth  Brigade. 

Since  the  affair  of  the  32th  instant,  a part  of  the  command  has  been 
daily  engaged  in  destroying  railroad  track  south,  and  the  remainder 
performing  ordinary  duties  of  troops  in  camp. 

The  command  is  in  excellent  condition,  as  brave  and  every  way  effi- 
cient as  any  troops  in  the  army. 

The  Twenty-eighth  Illinois  Infantry,  under  the  gallant  Major  Rhodes, 
true  to  its  ancient  record,  behaved  splendidly  on  the  12th  instant,  leav- 
ing some  of  their  dead  almost  in  the  rebel  ditch.  This  praise  applies 
to  officers  and  men  alike,  without  exception,  as  I believe.  It  lost  5 
officers  and  63  men  out  of  less  than  200  engaged.  This  bloody  fact  tells 
its  own  story  of  their  conduct. 

The  Fifty-third  Indiana  Infantry  gallantly  drove  off  from  the  field  and 
saved  tw  o guns  of  the  Fifth  Ohio  Battery,  whose  men  and  horses  were 
nearly  all  disabled.  Fortunately,  the  Fifty-third  Indiana,  though  much 
exposed,  lost  no  men.  No  other  troops  of  the  command  have  been  under 
fire  since  leaving  Vicksburg. 

The  command  consists  of  the  Twelfth  Wisconsin  Infantry,  Oapt.  Giles 
Stevens  commanding;  Twenty-eighth  Illinois  Infantry,  Maj.  Hinman 
Rhodes  commanding;  Thirty-second  Illinois  Infantry,  Col.  John  Logan 
commanding;  Fifty-third  Indiana  Infantry,  Col.  Walter  Q.  Gresham 
commanding,  and  Fifteenth  Ohio  Battery,  Capt.  Edward  Spear,  jr., 
commanding. 

I am,  captain,  very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

GEORGE  E.  BRYANT, 

Colonel  Twelfth  Wisconsin  Infantry , Commanding  Brigade. 

Capt.  John  E.  Phillips, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


No.  33. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  William  P . Benton , U.  S.  Army , commanding 

Fourteenth  Division. 

Hdqrs.  Fourteenth  Diy.,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps, 

Camp  near  Vicksburg , Miss.,  July  27,  1863. 
Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
operations  of  the  Fourteenth  Division  in  the  rout  of  the  rebel  General 
Joe  Johnston  from  Jackson,  Miss. : 

On  the  morning  of  July  5,  we  faced  by  the  rear  rank  and  marched  in 


Chap.  XXXYI.l 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


609 


tbe  direction  of  Jackson,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  which  we  arrived 
in  good  fighting  condition  on  the  morning  of  the  10th,  notwithstanding 
the  excessive  heat,  dusty  roads,  and  scarcity  of  water.  In  the  evening 
we  were  ordered  to  file  to  the  right,  in  the  direction  of  the  Raymond 
road,  and  report  to  General  A.  J.  Smith.  This  order  being  promptly  exe- 
cuted, General  Smith  ordered  me  to  form  on  his  right,  perpendicular 
to  his  line,  in  which  position  we  remained  till  morning,  when  General 
Lawler,  of  the  Second  Brigade,  threw  forward  a strong  line  of  skirmish- 
ers, feeling  the  woods  in  front,  which  resulted  in  a spirited  skirmish  with 
some  loss  on  both  sides. 

In  the  afternoon  we  changed  front  forward  on  the  tenth  company  of 
the  Fourth  Battalion  ot  the  Second  Brigade.  Early  on  the  morning 
of  the  12th,  after  opening  sharply  with  both  batteries,  the  entire  lines, 
covered  by  a cloud  of  skirmishers,  w ith  strong  supports,  were  advanced 
across  tbe  open  field  in  our  front  to  the  woods  occupied  the  evening 
before  by  the  enemy.  This  point  gained,  we  were  withiu  some  800 
yards  of  the  intrenchments  of  the  enemy  covering  Jackson.  It  now 
became  our  turn  to  employ  the  friendly  spade  and  pick,  which  we 
did  most  vigorously,  day  and  night,  till  within  forty-eight  hours  we 
were  quite  as  well  prepared  to  repel  a sortie  as  he  was  an  assault ; and, 
like  him,  secure  in  our  earthworks,  we  could  laugh  to  scorn  his  ineffect- 
ual fusilades  and  cannonades. 

Strengthening  our  works  and  steadily  advancing  our  line  of  skirmish- 
ers, protected  by  rifle-pits,  we  patiently  abided  our  time,  with  the  full- 
est confidence  in  our  commanders,  ready  and  willing  to  dig  or  assault 
as  they  might  choose  to  order.  On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  we  found 
the  works  in  our  front  abandoned,  and  by  daylight  our  pickets  had  ad- 
vanced and  occupied  them. 

In  obedience  to  orders,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  18th,  we  marched  5 
miles  out  on  the  Mississippi  Central  Railroad,  and  commenced  its  destruc- 
tion, which  the  men  did  with  a right  good  will,  and  most  thoroughly, 
leaving  nothing  but  the  road-bed,  upsetting  the  track  by  main  force  of 
muscle.  They  made  bonfires  of  the  cross-ties  and  roasted  the  rails.  By 
sunset  on  the  evening  of  the  19th,  the  road  was  thus  destroyed  to 
Byram  Station,  10  miles  south  of  Jackson.  On  the  20th,  we  retraced 
our  steps  to  the  vicinity  of  Jackson,  and  by  the  peep  of  day  on  the  fol- 
lowing morning  we  were  on  the  march,  heading  once  more  for  Vicks- 
burg, where  we  arrived  on  the  24th,  with  the  loss  of  1 man,  by  disease, 
4 killed  in  battle  and  32  wounded,  a full  list  of  the  names  and  rank  of 
whom  is  attached.* 

My  entire  command  was  the  veteran  survivors  of  Port  Gibson, 
Champion’s  Hill,  Big  Black  River  Bridge,  and  Vicksburg,  and  to  do 
their  whole  duty  as  officers  and  soldiers  was  matter  of  principle,  which 
first  transformed  them  from  citizens  to  volunteer  soldiers,  confirmed 
and  strengthened  by  discipline  and  habit.  Under  such  circumstances, 
it  is  not  only  a delicate  but  an  embarrassing  task  to  comply  with  orders 
directing  a special  mention  of  those  who  distinguished  themselves. 

Brigadier  General  Lawler,  commanding  the  Second  Brigade,  with  a 
clear  head  and  comprehensive  mind,  combined  with  the  tact  of  an  ex- 
perienced officer,  and  a stranger  to  personal  fear,  was  always  at  the 
post  of  duty. 

Col.  David  Shunk,  of  the  Eighth  Indiana  Volunteer  Iufantry,  com- 
manding First  Brigade,  was  particularly  distinguished  by  taking  the 
advance  of  his  line  of  skirmishers  and  himself  first  examining  the  con- 

* Omitted. 

39  R R — VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


610 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


tested  ground  over  which  he  proposed  to  take  his  men ; also  by  his 
sleepless  energy  in  constructing  earthworks,  with  a half  dozen  spades 
and  two  picks  and  one  foot  adze,  which  won  the  encomiums  of  both 
Generals  Ord  and  Sherman,  the  corps  and  expeditionary  commanders. 
In  my  judgment,  his  promotion  to  be  a brigadier  general  is  one  emi- 
nently lit  to  be  made,  and  has  been  abundantly  earned. 

I most  respectfully  refer  to  the  reports  of  brigade  and  regimental 
commanders  for  the  names  of  their  officers  and  men  who  distinguished 
themselves,  but  I cannot  refrain  from  adding  my  testimony  to  that  of 
Colonel  Shiink  in  behalf  of  Lieut.  Joseph  P.  Wiggins,  adjutant  of  the 
Eighth  Indiana  and  acting  adjutant  of  the  First  Brigade.  To  good 
business  habits  and  a methodical  mind,  patient  and  painstaking,  he 
adds  great  personal  gallantry.  It  would  require  a page  to  narrate  the 
acts  of  bravery  which  I have  seen  him  perform  since  this  army  crossed 
the  Mississippi  River.  His  promotion  to  assistant  adjutant-general 
would  be  a simple  act  of  justice  to  him  and  a valuable  addition  to  that 
department. 

Of  my  own  staff,  I can  only  speak  in  the  highest  terms.  Maj.  Thomas 
J.  Brady,  of  the  Eighth  Indiana  Infantry,  inspector-general  and  chief  of 
staff,  was  always  in  the  front  when  the  firing  indicated  that  work  was 
to  be  done.  Oapt.  C.  H.  Dyer,  assistant  adjutant- general,  did  his  whole 
duty ; so  also  did  Lieut.  Frank  Adams  and  Lieut.  George  H.  Eifer,  aides- 
de-camp.  Oapt.  William  R.  Irwin,  commissary  of  subsistence,  not  only 
abundantly  supplied  this  division,  but  was  able  to  help  our  neighbors, 
Generals  Osterhaus  and  Hovey,  out  of  difficulty ; while  the  quarter- 
master’s department,  under  Lieut.  Jesse  E.  Scott,  as  usual,  was  fully 
up  to  the  standard. 

I cannot  speak  in  terms  of  too  much  praise  of  the  medical  depart- 
ment, under  the  efficient  management  of  Hr.  [Oliver  P.]  Rex,  of  the 
Thirty-third  Illinois  Volunteers,  surgeon-in-chief. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  P.  BENTON, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  Walter  B.  Scates, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Thirteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  34. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Philip  Nonweiler , First  Indiana  Battery. 

Near  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  26,  1863. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  orders,  I herewith  submit  a detailed  report  of 
the  operations  of  the  First  Indiana  Battery  in  the  campaign  just  closed. 

The  battery  left  Vicksburg  July  5,  and  arrived  before  Jackson,  Miss., 
on  the  10th,  nothing  of  importance  transpiring  on  the  march. 

On  the  11th,  the  battery  was  placed  in  position  about  600  yards  from 
the  enemy,  and  ordered  to  shell  him  from  his  position  in  front  of  his 
works.  After  firing  an  hour,  the  battery,  in  conjunction  with  the  in- 
fantry of  the  brigade,  advanced  and  drove  the  enemy  inside  of  his  works. 
Position  was  then  taken  about  1,000  yards  from  the  line  of  intrench 
rnents  held  by  the  rebels,  and  strengthened  by  throwing  up  substantial 
earthworks.  Nothing  of  interest  to  the  battery,  except  occasional 
firing,  took  place  until  the  13th,  when  the  enemy  seemed  to  have  con- 
centrated the  fire  of  at  least  three  batteries  upon  my  command,  1 was. 


Ciiap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


611 


ordered  to  throw  a few  shells  into  the  woods  in  front,  to  drive  in  the 
enemy’s  skirmishers,  who  were  at  this  time  driving  in  our  sharpshoot- 
ers. No  sooner  did  t open  than  I received  the  tire  of  some  three  bat- 
teries from  the  front,  from  the  right,  and  from  the  left.  This  was  a most 
galling  fire,  lasting  nearly  an  hour,  and  the  shells  exploding  in  the 
midst  of  the  battery.  It  was  returned  by  us  in  gallant  style  and,  I be- 
lieve, good  effect. 

During  this  firing  Private  Louis  Maas  was  wounded  severely  in  the 
leg,  which  was  amputated.  I have  no  other  casualty  in  my  command 
to  report  during  this  campaign.  Nothing  lurther  of  interest  took  place 
until  the  morning  of  the  17th,  when  it  was  discovered  that  the  enemy 
had  evacuated  the  place. 

On  the  morning  of  the  21st,  we  took  up  the  return  march  to  Vicks- 
burg, where  we  arrived  on  the  24th. 

The  officers  and  men  of  the  battery  who  were  engaged  all  behaved 
with  great  intrepidity  and  coolness,  and  where  all  behaved  well  it 
would  be  injustice  to  mention  any  men  in  particular. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

PH.  NONWEILER, 

Second  Lieutenant , Commanding  First  Indiana  Battery . 

Lieut.  J.  P.  Wiggins, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  35. 

Report  of  Col.  David  Skunk,  Eighth  Indiana  Infantry , commanding 

First  Brigade. 

Headquarters  First  Brigade,  Fourteenth  Division, 

July  26,  1863. 

In  obedience  to  orders,  I herewith  send  you  official  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  First  Brigade,  Fourteenth  Division,  in  the  campaign  just 
closed. 

The  brigade  started  from  Vicksburg,  as  per  order,  at  5 a.  m.  on  the 
5th  of  July,  and  proceeded  toward  Jackson,  via  the  Clinton  road,  ar- 
riving in  the  vicinity  of  Jackson  on  the  10th. 

On  the  11th,  the  brigade  was  ordered  in  position  about  600  yards  in 
front  of  the  enemy’s  line  of  skirmishers.  After  shelling  the  woods  on 
the  opposite  side  of  a cleared  field  by  the  First  Indiana  Battery,  we 
advanced  a strong  line  of  skirmishers,  following  them  closely  with  the 
brigade  across  the  field.  The  enemy  in  the  woods  gave  way  and  left  us 
in  possession  of  the  woods.  We  then  took  position  about  1,000  yards 
distant  from  the  enemy’s  works,  with  our  right  resting  on  the  Raymond 
road,  where  we  constructed  rifle-pits,  and  kept  up  a continuous  skirmish 
with  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters,  frequently  receiving  severe  shelling 
from  the  enemy,  which  was  promptly  replied  to  by  the  First  Indiana 
Battery.  The  above  system  of  warfare  was  carried  on  by  our  brigade 
until  the  morning  of  the  17th  of  July,  when  the  enemy  evacuated  the 
place. 

On  the  18th,  we  marched  south  to  the  New  Orleans  and  Jackson 
Railroad,  and  commenced  tearing  up  the  track,  which  W0  did  success* 
fully  as  far  south  as  Byram  Station, 


612 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


On  the  20th,  we  marched  back  to  our  camp  near  Jackson,  and  on  the 
21st  started  for  Vicksburg,  which  place  we  reached  on  the  24th.  The 
entire  brigade  was  during  the  whole  time  without  tents  and  only  such 
cooking  utensils  as- could  be  carried  by  hand,  and  notwithstanding  the 
many  inconveniences  we  labored  under  for  want  of  water  and  scarcity 
of  cooking  utensils,  each  officer  and  private  in  the  brigade  performed 
every  duty  required  of  him  with  a hearty  good  will.  The  following  is  a 
list  of  casualties : * 

Total  casualties,  1 killed  and  17  wounded. 

Of  the  officers  and  men  who  deserve  favorable  mention,  1 present  you 
the  names  of  Lieut.  J.  P.  Wiggins,  aide-de-camp,  and  Major  Potter,  of 
the  Thirty-third  Illinois,  both  of  which  officers  offered  every  facility  in 
aiding  me  to  carry  out  orders.  For  others,  I would  respectfully  refer 
you  to  the  accompanying  reports  of  the  different  regiments  composing 
the  brigade. 

Kespectfully,  yours, 

DAVID  SHUNK, 

Col.  Eighth  Indiana  Infty .,  Comdg.  First  Brig.,  Fourteenth  Div. 

Capt.  C.  H,  Dyer, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


:No.  36. 

Report  of  Capt.  Ira  Moore , Thirty-third  Illinois  Infantry. 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  26, 1863. 

Lieutenant  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  Thirty- third  Illinois 
Infantry,  Col.  C.  E.  Lippincott,  left  camp#  in  rear  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  on 
the  morning  of  the  5th  of  July,  and  proceeded  with  its  division  toward 
Jackson.  Reached  Black  River  the  first  night,  when  the  colonel  was 
taken  sick  and  obliged  to  return,  the  command  devolving  on  Capt. 
X.  H.  Elliott.  Continued  by  easy  marches  toward  Jackson,  before  the 
rebel  defenses  of  which  the  regiment  arrived  on  the  morning  of  the 
10th,  and  the  same  evening  moved,  under  fire  from  the  enemy’s  guns, 
around  to  the  right  into  our  destined  position. 

On  the  morning  of  the  12th,  moved  forward  in  line  of  battle,  driving 
the  enemy’s  skirmishers,  with  little  resistance,  more  thau  one-quarter 
of  a mile'toward  his  works,  where  the  regiment  took  position,  detaching 
Company  G from  the  left  to  fill  a gap  between  the  two  brigades  of  the 
division.  Here  the  regiment  commenced  intrenching.  On  tbe  night  of 
the  12th,  the  regiment,  with  the  exception  of  Company  G,  was  ordered 
to  picket  the  front  of  the  brigade,  and  to  act  as  sharpshooters  the  en 
suing  day. 

Accordingly,  on  the  morning  of  the  13th,  Captain  Elliott  advanced  his 
skirmishers,  by  order,  driving  the  enemy  inside  his  works  with  loss,  he 
making  spirited  resistance,  and  soon  rallying  with  re-enforcements. 
Soon  the  skirmishers,  both  on  the  right  and  left  of  the  regiment,  fell  back, 
leaving  it  exposed  to  a sharp  cross-fire.  The  enemy  pressed  his  ad- 
vantage, but  gained  no  ground,  and,  notwithstanding  a severe  shelling 
was  added  to  the  efforts  of  his  sharpshooters,  night  found  us  in  pos- 
session of  the  ground  we  held  in  the  morning. 


Nominal  list  omitted. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


613 


The  conduct  of  both  men  and  officers  was  not  to  be  excelled.  In  such 
cases  it  is  hard  to  distinguish  individuals,  but  Captain  Elliott,  command 
iug,  particularly  notices  Captain  Pope,  of  Company  D,  who  here,  as  in 
all  previous  engagements,  exhibited  that  cool  courage  which  makes  him 
a model  officer;  also  Sergt.  Maj.  Charles  E.  Wilcox,  than  whom  there  is 
no  better  or  braver  soldier.  1 may  add  to  this  number  the  name  of  Cap- 
tain Elliott  himself,  whom  all  the  officers  and  men  under  his  command 
agree  in  specially  commending. 

Jackson  was  evacuated  on  the  17th  of  July. 

On  the  18th,  marched  out  5 miles  on  the  Mississippi  Central  Pail- 
road,  and,  with  the  rest  of  the  Fourteenth  Division,  tore  up  and  de- 
stroyed, by  burning,  5 miles  of  railroad  track. 

July  20,  returned  to  camp  near  Jackson,  and  the  21st,  started  on  the 
return  to  Vicksburg,  by  way  of  Raymond.  The  men  kept  well  in  ranks, 
notwithstanding  the  extreme  heat.  Arrived  at  Vicksburg  July  24.* 

IRA  MOORE, 

Captain  Thirty-third  Illinois  Volunteer  Infantry. 

Lieut.  J.  P.  Wiggins, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  37. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Lemuel  Parhe , Ninety-ninth  Illinois  Infantry. 

Vicksburg,  Miss.,  July  26,  1863. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  an  order  issued  from  headquarters  army  at 
Jackson,  1 hereby  send  my  report  of  the  campaign  just  ended. 

We  marched  with  the  army,  by  way  of  Black  River  Bridge,  Champion’s 
Hill,  and  Clinton,  to  Jackson,  which  we  reached  on  the  evening  of  the 
10th  instant,  and  filled  our  place  in  the  brigade  during  the  siege,  which 
ended  on  the  morning  of  the  17th. 

On  the  18th,  moved  camp  2J  miles  on  the  Paymond  road,  where  we 
halted  an  hour  or  two,  then  marched  down  the  Jackson  and  New  Orleans 
Railroad  and  destroyed  the  railroad  to  JByram  Station,  and  returned  on 
the  20th  to  our  camp  near  Jackson. 

On  the  21st,  we  took  up  the  line  of  march  for  Vicksburg,  which  we 
reached  on  the  24th. 

Our  regiment  has  no  casualties  to  report  during  the  entire  campaign. 

In  regard  to  the  conduct  of  our  men  and  officers,  I believe  they  have 
fought  with  gallantry  due  veterans  in  every  engagement  in  which  we 
have  had  the  privilege  of  taking  a part.  To  make  particular  mention 
of  anyone  would  do  injustice  to  the  rest  of  the  command;  therefore  I 
will  mention  none  but  the  color-bearers,  who  were  faithful  to  their  duty. 
One,  Thomas  J.  Higgins,  a sergeant  in  Company  D,  pressed  forward 
on  the  day  of  the  charge  at  Vicksburg  (May  22)  and  posted  his  standard 
on  the  fort,  and,  our  regiment  having  to  fall  back,  he  was  captured, 
colors  and  all;  and  William  B.  Sitton,  a sergeant  in  Company  C,  while 
pressing  forward  with  his  colors,  fell,  from  a shot  through  the  side ; not 
knowing  that  he  was  hurt  badly,  wanted  to  carry  the  colors,  but  he 
was  carried  off  the  field  and  the  colors  left.  So  he  also  lost  his,  but 
both  of  the  boys  certainly  deserve  special  credit.  And,  as  far  as  special 


Nominal  list  of  casualties,  omitted,  embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  547. 


614 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


reward  is  concerned,  our  men  and  officers  deserve  what  is  due  those 
faithful  supporters  of  their  country’s  cause. 

L.  PARKE, 

Lieutenant-  Colonel , Commanding. 

Lieut.  J.  P.  Wiggins, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  38. 

Report  of  Capt.  Jonathan  E.  Williams , Eighteenth  Indiana  Infantry. 

In  the  Field,  July  26,  1863. 

Colonel  : Pursuant  to  orders,  I beg  leave  to  report  the  part  taken  by 
the  Eighteenth  Regiment  Indiana  Volunteers  in  the  march  and  the 
attack  on  the  city  of  Jackson,  Miss. 

The  regiment  marched  at  5 a.  m.  on  the  morning  of  July  5,  1863,  by 
way  of  Clear  Creek ; and  on  the  6th,  crossed  Big  Black  River,  near  the 
ruins  of  the  bridge,  and  camped  near  Edwards  Depot ; and  on  the 
7th,  passed  Edwards  Depot  and  Champion’s  Hill  battle-ground,  aud 
encamped;  and  on  the  8th  of  July,  at  5 p.  m.,  marched  in  the  direction 
of  Clinton ; and  on  the  morning  of  the  9th,  passed  Clinton  ahd  en- 
camped; and  on  the  10th,  marched  on  the  road  leading  to  Jackson, 
and  encamped  on  the  right  of  the  divisions  of  Generals  Osterhaus  and 
Smith;  and  on  the  11th  of  July,  at  5 p.  m.,  advanced  to  the  front,  and 

on  the  right  of  the regiment,  Second  Brigade,  and  on  the  left  of 

the  Eighth  Regiment  Indiana  Volunteers;  and  on  the  12th,  at  9 a.  m., 
advanced  to  the  front  in  line  of  battle  to  and  within  some  600  yards  of 
the  enemy’s  line  of  works,  when  and  where  some  skirmishing  occurred; 
and  on  the  night  of  the  12th,  our  regiment  threw  up  rifle-pits  ; and  on  the 
evening  of  the  14th,  the  regiment  was  thrown  forward  some  300  yards  as 
an  advance  picket,  and  completed  an  advance  rifle  pit  commenced  by  the 
Ninety -ninth  Regiment  Illinois  Volunteers,  and  within  some  400  yards 
of  the  rebel  line.  While  in  this  position,  in  skirmishing  with  the  enemy, 
Moses  Simmons,  private  of  Company  E,  was  slightly  wounded  in  the  hip 
with  a.  Minie  ball;  and  on  the  16th,  Isaac  Langley,  private  of  Company 
H,  was  severely  wounded  by  a ball  from  a shell  from  the  enemy’s  guns ; 
and  on  the  same  day,  William  M.  Berry,  sergeant  of  Company  A,  was 
slightly  wounded  by  a Minie  ball.  On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  to  the 
surprise  of  our  men,  the  enemy  had  evacuated  the  city  and  their  line 
of  works ; and  on  the  18th,  the  regiment  marched  south  to  the  Missis- 
sippi Railroad,  and  commenced  destroying  the  same,  and  continued  as- 
sisting in  its  destruction  as  far  south  as  Byram  Station  ; and  on  the 
20th,  the  regiment  returned  to  the  camp  near  Jackson ; and  on  the  21st, 
at  6 a.  m.,  the  regiment  marched  by  the  Raymond  road,  and,  after  pass- 
ing Mississippi  Springs,  encamped  near  Raymond ; and  on  the  22d, 
moved  on  toward  Edwards  Depot,  and  encamped  on  Baker’s  Creek  ; and 
on  the  23d,  passed  Edwards  Depot  and  Big  Black  River  to  within  5 
miles  of  Vicksburg ; and  on  the  24th,  marched  to  the  present  camp  ; and 
during  all  this  time  the  officers  and  men  were  without  tents  or  cooking 
utensils,  except  what  they  carried  by  hand.  I cannot  close  this  report, 
imperfect  as  it  may  be,  without  saying  that  both  officers  and  men  of 
the  Eighteenth  Indiana  Volunteers  did  their  whole  duty. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J.  H.  WILLIAMS, 

Captain , Commanding  Eighteenth  Indiana  Volunteers. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


615 


No.  39. 

Report  of  Col.  William  M.  Stone , Twenty-second  Ioica  Infantry , com- 
manding Second  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Brigade,  Fourteenth  Division, 

Vicksburg,  July  26,  1863. 

Captain:  In  reporting  the  doings  of  this  brigade  in  the  recent  expe- 
dition of  onr  army  against  Jackson,  I shall  necessarily  be  confined  to 
the  time  I have  been  in  command  of  it.  Since  Saturday  morning,  the 
18th  instant,  up  to  this  time,  the  brigade  has  been  under  command  of 
Brigadier  General  Lawler,  who  on  that  morning  relinquished  the  com- 
mand to  me,  and  started  for  his  home  on  a leave  of  absence. 

For  information  as  to  the  action  of  the  brigade  prior  to  the  time  al- 
luded to,  I respectfully  refer  you  to  the  report  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Whittlesey,  of  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin,  herewith  transmitted. 

On  Friday  morning,  the  17th  instant,  it  was  ascertained  that  Jackson 
was  evacuated,  and  a portion  of  our  forces  marched  in  and  occupied  the 
city.  At  that  time  this  brigade  was  in  the  position  they  had  occupied 
for  several  days  previous,  near  the  enemy’s  fortifications  on  the  west 
side  of  the  city.  Here  we  remained  until  Saturday  morning,  when  we 
changed  our  camp  about  1 mile  to  the  rear.  In  the  afternoon  we 
marched  out  to  the  Mississippi  Central  Railroad,  south  of  the  city,  where, 
in  connection  with  the  First  Brigade,  we  succeeded  in  destroying  about 
5 miles  of  railroad.  This  feat  we  accomplished  by  Sunday  evening, 
when  we  laid  upon  our  arms  until  Monday,  and  then  returned  to  our 
camp  on  the  Raymond  road.  On  Tuesday  morning  we  started  for 
Vicksburg.  By  easy  marches,  we  reached  our  old  camp  in  the  rear  of 
the  city  on  Friday  morning,  where  we  rested  for  about  an  hour.  We 
then  received  orders  to  move  to  a. new  camp,  and  were  directed  to  go 
down  the  Warrentou  road  to  find  it.  After  marching  a distance  of 
about  10  miles,  over  a broken  country  and  under  a burning  sun,  we 
succeeded  in  reaching  our  present  camp  on  the  river  bank  in  front  of 
Vicksburg,  and  about  1J  miles  from  where  we  started  iu  the  morning. 

Thankful  that  it  is  as  well  for  us  as  it  is,  and  being  always  ready  to 
obey  orders,  and  to  do  our  full  share  “in  putting  down  this  unholy  re- 
bellion,” we  are  now  resting  contented  from  long  marches  and  months 
of  unremitting  toils  and  dangers. 

I herewith  transmit  reports  of  regimental  commanders  of  the  killed 
and  wounded,  which  embrace  all  the  casualties  in  the  brigade  in  our 
late  expedition. 

I am,  captain,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  M.  STONE, 

Colonel  Twenty-second  Iowa , Commanding  Brigade. 

Capt.  0.  H.  Dyer, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  40. 


Report  of  Maj.  Leonard  B.  Houston,  Twenty -third  Iowa  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Twenty- third  Iowa  Infantry  Volunteers, 

[July  24,  1863.] 

Left  Vicksburg  on  the  morning  of  July  5,  1863,  with  82  enlisted  men 
and  7 field,  staff,  and  commissioned  officers.  Encamped  on  Big  Black 


616 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai\  XXXVI. 


River,  14  miles  distant,  where  1 man  died  from  disease,  and  5 enlisted 
men  and  1 commissioned  officer  returned  to  Vicksburg  on  account  of 
sickness. 

July  6. — Proceeded  to  Edwards  Station,  having  frequent  skirmishes 
with  the  enemy,  and  encamped  for  the  night. 

July  7. — Proceeded,  with  frequent  skirmishing,  to  Clinton,  8 miles 
distant. 

July  8. — Took  up  line  of  march,  driving  the  enemy  before  us,  with 
frequent  skirmishes,  to  their  intrenchments  at  Jackson,  before  which 
place  we  camped  in  front  of  the  enemy. 

July  9.— Skirmishing  all  day  with  the  enemy,  with  the  loss  of  1 man 
wounded.  * 

July  10. — Skirmishing  as  before. 

July  11. — Advanced  near  the  works  of  the  enemy,  and  threw  up 
breastworks.  Heavy  skirmishing. 

July  12. — Constant  skirmishing  from  this  date  until  the  evening  of 
the  16th,  when  the  enemy  evacuated  Jackson. 

July  17. — We  entered  Jackson  and  took  possession  of  the  works. 

July  18. — Started  out  to  tear  up  the  track  and  destroy  bridges  on 
the  Jackson  and  New  Orleans  Railroad,  which  we  continued  until  the 
morning  of  the  20th,  when  we  commenced  our  return  to  Vicksburg, 
where  we  arrived  and  went  into  camp  July  24. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

L.  B.  HOUSTON, 

Major , Commanding  Twenty-third  Iowa  Infantry  Volunteers. 

First  Lieut.  W.  E.  Houston, 

Acting  Adjutant. 


No.  41. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Luther  H,  Whittlesey , Eleventh  Wisconsin  In- 
fantry. 

V icksburGt,  Miss.,  July  26,  1863. 

Lieutenant  : For  the  information  of  the  colonel  commanding  the 
brigade,  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  opera- 
tions of  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin  Infantry  in  the  late  march  and  attack 
on  Jackson,  Miss.,  aud  their  subsequent  movements  up  to  this  date : 

On  the  morning  of  July  5,  conformably  to  orders  issued  the  day  pre- 
vious, we  marched  from  our  old  camp  ami  trenches  in  rear  of  Vicksburg 
at  6 a.  m.  out  on  the  Jackson  road  to  Clear  Creek,  near  Black  River, 
marching  about  10  miles  that  day  under  a clear  burning  sun,  but,  for- 
tunately, finding  good  water  at  our  camp. 

July  6. — We  marched  at  4 a.  m.,  crossing  the  Big  Black  1J  miles  from 
our  camp  on  Clear  Creek,  and  proceeded  some  4 miles  to  a plantation 
near  Edwards  Depot,  where  we  lay  upon  our  arms  for  the  night.  The 
weather  was  very  hot,  which,  with  poor  water  combined,  caused  some 
suffering  among  the  troops. 

July  7. — We  broke  camp  at  7 a.  m. ; marched  about  8 miles,  camping 
near  the  forks  of  the  Raymond  and  Clinton  roads.  At  5 a.  m.  we  formed 
line  of  battle,  and  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

July  8. — We  marched  at  6 p.m.;  proceeded  4 miles  and  camped. 

July  9. — .Marched  at  6 a.m.;  passed  through  Clinton  to  within  8 miles 
of  Jackson. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


617 


July  10. — Marched  at  5 a.  m.,  and  arrived  before  Jackson  at  9.30 
a.  in.,  where  we  rested  till  evening*,  and  then  moved  into  position  in  the 
line,  about  1,600  yards  from  the  enemy’s  works. 

July  11. — Iu  the  morning,  Company  B,  of  the  Eleventh,  together  with 
one  company  each  from  the  Twenty-first  and  Twenty-second  Iowa  In- 
fantry, were  thrown  forward  as  skirmishers,  the  whole  under  the  com- 
mand of  Captain  Bemick,  Company  B,  Eleventh.  Advancing  across 
an  old  field,  some  300  yards  in  width,  they  came  to  the  woods  in  our 
front,  and  developed  a force  of  the  enemy,  estimated  at  about  800 
strong,  who  attacked  our  skirmishers  in  front  and  on  the  right  flank, 
and  repulsed  them  with  a loss  to  my  command  of  2 killed  and  1 severely 
wounded.  We,  however,  held  possession  of  a house  and  out-buildings 
between  our  front  and  the  enemy,  and  from  that  point  kept  his  skir- 
mishers well  back  under  shelter  of  the  woods  that  covered  the  ground 
between  us  and  the  enemy’s  works. 

July  12. — The  brigade  was  formed  for  an  advance  in  the  following 
order : A line  of  skirmishers  and  supports,  under  the  immediate  com- 
mand of  the  brave  Major  Houston,  of  the  Twenty-third  Iowa  Infantry  ; 
a line  of  battle,  composed  of  the  Eleventh  Wisconsin  and  Twenty  second 
Iowa,  under  my  command,  and  a third  line  of  reserves,  comprising  the 
Twenty-first  and  Twenty-third  Iowa,  under  command  of  Brigadier- 
General  Lawler.  The  object  of  the  advance  was  to  obtain  possession 
of  the  woods  in  our  front.  The  troops  moved  up  in  beautiful  order, 
and  obtained  possession  of  the  woods  without  resistance,  the  enemy 
retiring  at  our  advance.  We  thus  gained  a position  some  600  yards 
nearer  than  the  one  occupied  the  day  previous. 

July  13. — The  enemy  shelled  us  vigorously,  bursting  a number  of 
shells  just  in  rear  of  my  regiment,  but  without  damage,  except  the 
wounding  of  a couple  of  artillery  horses,  belonging  to  Captain  David- 
son’s battery,  which  was  posted  immediately  on  my  left. 

July  17. — I was  ordered  by  General  Lawler  to  move  forward  and  oc- 
cupy the  works  of  the  enemy  in  front  of  the  Second  Brigade,  he  having 
abandoned  Jackson  the  night  previous.  This  I did,  remaining  on  duty 
there  during  the  day  and  until  relieved  by  order  of  General  Lawler, 
when  I returned  to  camp. 

July  18.— Marched  at  7 a.  m.  to  a new  camp,  2 miles  distant,  and  at 
2 p.  m.  moved  down  to  the  railroad  near  Byram,  and  began  destroying 
the  track  of  the  Mississippi  Central  Bailroad,  as  ordered. 

July  19. — Destroyed  railroad  track. 

July  20. — Marched  from  our  bivouac,  near  Byram,  to  our  new  camp 
near  Jackson,  a distance  of  6 miles. 

July  21. — Marched  at  7 a.  m.  to  Baymond,  14  miles. 

July  22. — Marched  at  6 a.  m.  10 J miles,  camping  on  Baker’s  Creek. 

July  23. — Marched  at  5 a.  m.  to  within  7 miles  of  Vicksburg. 

July  24. — Marched  to  our  old  camps  in  rear  of  Vicksburg,  thence  to 
camp  just  below  the  city,  via  Warrenton  road,  a distance  of  about  10 
miles,  where  the  regiment  is  now  encamped. 

I append  herewith  a list  of  the  killed  and  wounded  of  my  command, 
before  referred  to.* 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted. 

L.  H.  WHITTLESEY, 
Lieutenant-  Colonel , Commanding . 

Lieut.  A.  Adams, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Nominal  list,  omitted,  shows  2 men  killed  and  1 wounded. 


618  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVt. 

No.  42. 

Reports  of  Col.  Charles  R.  Woods , Seventy-sixth  Ohio  Infantry , com- 
manding Second  Brigade , First  Division , Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Brig.,  First  Diy.,  Fifteenth  A.  C., 

Near  Jachson , ilfm.,  Jwfa/  20,  1863. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  pursuant  to  Special  Or- 
ders, No.  14,  Headquarters  Expeditionary  Corps,  July  14,  1863,  and 
written  instructions  from  the  major-general  commanding,  of  date  of 
July  15, 1863, 1 started  with  my  command  at  daylight  on  the  16th  in- 
stant, toward  the  Canton  road.  Having  struck  that  road,  I advanced 
about  10  miles,  to  near  Grant’s  Ferry,  on  Pearl  River,  where  Colonel 
Bussey,  with  his  cavalry,  overtook  me.  On  the  east  side  of  the  river, 
at  this  ferry,  the  enemy  had  a picket  post  of  20  or  30  men,  with  an  out- 
post on  the  west  side.  After  a little  firing,  the  outpost  withdrew  to  the 
east  side  of  the  river.  I advanced  some  skirmishers  to  the  ferry,  who 
soon  drove  off  the  enemy  ; whereupon  I caused  the  ferry-boat  and  two 
canoes  to  be  destroyed.  The  troops  then  proceeded  to  Calhoun  Station, 
on  the  Jackson  and  New  Orleans  Railroad,  about  16  miles  from  Jack- 
son,  having  first  struck  the  railroad  at  that  place.  Here  I caused  about 
1 mile  of  track  and  a bridge,  situated  1J  miles  south,  to  be  destroyed, 
piling  up  a good  portion  of  the  iron  on  the  ties,  and  setting  fire  to  them. 
Although  the  men  were  tired  and  worn  out,  I worked  them  until  9 p.  m., 
and  the  next  morning  from  the  earliest  dawn  until  6 a.  m. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  we  advanced  on  the  Canton  road  to  a 
point  about  3 miles  from  Canton.  A small  cavalry  force  was  here  seen 
on  our  left,  near  a road  leading  to  Livingston,  observing  our  movements  5 
and  at  the  same  time  clouds  of  dust  on  our  front  indicated  the  vicinity 
of  a large  body  of  cavalry.  In  connection  with  Colonel  Bussey,  I made 
dispositions  in  a good  position  on  a hill  facing  the  enemy,  to  meet  an 
attack  which  was  then  threatened  on  our  right.  While  this  was  doing, 
there  was  a rapid  movement  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry  in  the  direction  of 
the  Livingston  road  toward  our  left  and  rear,  with  the  apparent  inten- 
tion of  attacking  and  cutting  off  our  train.  This  was  met  by  the  prompt 
advance  of  the  Seventy-sixth  Ohio  Volunteers  (Lieut.  Col.  W.  B.  Woods 
commanding),  then  guarding  the  rear,  and  of  the  Twenty-fifth  Iowa 
Volunteers,  by  the  shifting  of  a piece  from  the  First  Missouri  Horse  Ar- 
tillery (Lieut.  Louis  Voelkner  commanding),  and  by  a flank  movement 
of  part  of  Colonel  Bussey’s  command.  A few  shells  turned  the  enemy’s 
advance  to  the  right-about.  In  the  mean  time  skirmishing  commenced 
on  our  right  and  center,  and  continued  till  the  enemy  withdrew.  There- 
upon I advanced  skirmishers  of  the  Thirty -first  Iowa  Volunteers  (Maj. 
Theodore  Stimming  commanding)  to  the  Canton  road,  on  our  right,  who 
took  possession  of  buildings  of  a plantation  near  the  junction  ot  the 
Beatty’s  Bluff  and  Canton  road.  Surmising  that  the  enemy  had  with- 
drawn the  greater  part  of  his  force  toward  Canton,  the  Twelfth  Missouri 
Volunteers  (Col.  Hugo  Wangelin)  and  a cavalry  force  were  sent  for- 
ward to  reconnoiter.  They  advanced  less  than  a mile  to  near  Bear 
Creek,  where  they  were  met  by  musketry  from  the  opposite  side  of  the 
creek  and  severe  fire  of  two  cannon,  one  a rifled  6-pounder  and  the 
other  a 12-pounder  smooth-bore,  posted  on  the  opposite  bank,  near  the 
end  of  the  bridge.  The  infantry  advanced  to  the  creek  bank,  but  could 
not  cross,  because  of  the  destruction  of  the  bridge  and  the  obstruction 
of  the  crossing.  Owing  to  the  steep  banks  and  the  mud  of  the  creek, 


Chap.  XXX VI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


619 


the  advance  was  delayed  for  some  time.  The  woods  were  so  dense  and 
the  ground  so  difficult  to  reconnoiter  that  I could  not  plant  my  cannon 
so  as  to  reach  and  silence  the  enemy’s.  Leaving  the  Twelfth  Missouri 
Volunteers  and  the  Seventeenth  Missouri  Volunteers  (Maj.  F.  Bomer 
commanding)  to  guard  the  front  and  occupy  the  enemy,  I threw  the 
Third  Missouri  Volunteers  (Lieut.  Col.  Theodore  Meumann  command- 
ing) through  the  woods  to  the  right,  with  directions  to  cross  the  creek 
by  any  practicable  mode  and  advance  as  skirmishers  to  the  road  occupied 
by  the  enemy.  I sent  the  Twenty -fifth  Iowa  Volunteers  (Col.  George 
A.  Stone)  to  support  the  Third  Missouri,  in  case  it  was  too  severely 
pressed.  The  latter  regiment  crossed  the  creek  and  soon  engaged  the 
enemy’s  skirmishers ; they  kept  advancing  through  a corn-field  toward 
the  road.  I then  ordered  the  Twelfth  Missouri  to  cross  by  wings  under 
and  to  the  right  of  the  bridge,  which  was  done.  They  enemy  fell  back 
as  the  Third  Missouri  advanced,  and  hastened  in  the  direction  of  Can- 
ton. I occupied  the  creek  bank  next  to  Canton,  and  caused  a bridge  to 
be  constructed.  This  was  finished  by  dark. 

I am  informed  that  the  enemy’s  force  was  2,000,  with  two  pieces  of 
artillery. 

In  the  skirmishing  in  forenoon,  2 men  in  the  Seventy-sixth  Ohio  Vol- 
unteers were  slightly  wounded.  The  Twelfth  Missouri  lost,  in  skirmish- 
ing on  Bear  Creek,  5 in  killed  and  wounded.  The  Third  Missouri,  in 
advancing  through  the  corn-field  on  the  Canton  side  of  Bear  Creek,  had 
2 men  mortally  wounded.  I append  a list  of  their  names,  &e.* 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  18th,  I moved  my  command  into  Canton. 
The  whole  infantry  force  was  occupied  during  the  day  in  destroying 
railroad  tracks,  iron,  buildings,  &c.  There  were  destroyed  5 locomo- 
tives, 30  cars  of  all  kinds,  2 turn-tables,  13  railroad  buildings,  including 
engine-house  for  7 engines,  with  repair  shops,  filled  with  fine  machinery, 
attached;  t machine-shop,  depots,  offices,  &c.;  300  feet  of  trestle  and 
bridge  work,  and  2 miles  of  rails  burned  and  bent.  Much  more  of  the 
track  was  torn  up. 

The  works  and  materials  in  the  Dixie  Works  were  effectually  destroyed, 
but  the  building  was  so  connected  with  a block  of  buildings  that  its 
destruction  would  have  involved  the  destruction  of  the  whole.  Colonel 
Winslow,  of  the  cavalry,  who  had  been  sent  out  with  part  of  the  cavalry 
force  to  destroy  the  railroad  bridge  over  Black  Biver,  returned  after 
night,  with  the  report  that  he  had  effectually  accomplished  that  work. 

At  7 p.  m.  the  troops  were  marched  out  of  Clinton  about  2 miles,  and 
bivouacked. 

On  19th,  marched  to  Grant’s  Ferry,  and  on  20th  returned  to  Jackson. 

During  the  expedition  12  prisoners  were  taken.  I attach  a list  of 
their  names,  regiments,  &c.#  I respectfully  request  that  some  disposi- 
tion may  be  made  of  them. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHAS.  K.  WOODS, 

Colonel  Seventy-sixth  Ohio  Volunteers , Commanding  Brigade. 

Capt.  B.  M.  Sawyer, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 

P.  S. — Some  sick  and  wounded  prisoners,  taken  in  the  town  were 
paroled  by  Colonel  Bussey. 

The  above  report  does  not  include  the  operations  of  the  cavalry,  con- 
cerning which  Colonel  Bussey  will  report  in  detail. 


Omitted. 


620 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXYT. 


Hdqrs.  Second  Brig.,  First  Div.,  Fifteenth  A.  C., 

Near  Messinger’s  Ferry,  July  25,  1863. 

Captain:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  5th  daj^  of  July, 
1863,  at  daybreak,  I started  from  camp  near  Vicksburg,  with  my  bri- 
gade, in  the  direction  of  Messinger’s,  on  the  Big  Black  River,  which 
we  crossed  about  dark  on  the  6th.  The  march  was  continued  toward 
Jackson,  via  Bolton  and  Clinton,  on  the  Bridgeport  road. 

We  arrived  in  the  neighborhood  of  Jackson,  and  rear  of  the  enemy’s 
works,  at  8.30  a.  m.  of  the  10th,  and  took  position  on  the  right  of  the 
road,  near ’s  house.  My  brigade  continued  to  occupy  this  posi- 

tion, which  was  the  second  line  of  the  Fifteenth  Army  Corps,  for  some 

daOn  the  32th,  during  a general  cannonading,  2 men  were  killed  and  2 
wounded,  all  of  the  Twenty-fifth  Iowa  Volunteers,  by  the  explosion 
of  a shell  in  camp. 

On  the  13th,  2 enlisted  men,  of  the  Third  Missouri  Volunteers,  were 
killed  in  camp  by  a solid  shot. 

On  the  16th,  1 marched  my  brigade  to  Canton,  Miss.,  returning  on 
the  26th. 

On  the  23d,  we  left  the  vicinity  of  Jackson,  and,  on  the  25th,  arrived 
at  Messinger’s  plantation,  on  the  west  bank  of  Big  Black  River. 

I annex  a list  of  the  killed  and  wounded  above  mentioned. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHAS.  R.  WOODS, 

Colonel  Seventy-sixth  Eegt.  Ohio  Vol.  Infantry , Comdg.  Brigade. 

Capt.  William  S.  Whitten, 

. Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  43. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  James  M.  Tuttle , U.  S.  Army , commanding  Third 

Division. 

Camp  on  Bear  Creek,  Miss., 

July  25,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  i^ouor  to  report  the  part  taken  by  my  command  in 
the  late  movement  on  Jackson  by  the  forces  under  Major  General 

Sherman.  , ___  , e T 

My  division  moved  from  before  Vicksburg  on  the  22d  day  of  June, 
1863,  and,  on  the  24th,  took  position  on  the  plantation  of  Mr.  Trible, 
near  Little  Bear  Creek,  on  the  roads  leading  to  Messmger  s and  Bird- 
song Ferries,  on  the  Big  Black  River,  advancing.one  regiment  on  each 
road  as  an  outpost,  and  threw  up  breastworks  on  the  high  ground  in 
Mr.  Trible’s  field  and  running  across  the  road.  We  remained  m this 
position  until  after  the  fall  of  Vicksburg,  on  the  4th  of  July.  On  the 
evening  of  that  day,  we  marched  to  Messinger’s  Ford,  and,  alter  build- 
ing a bridge  across  Big  Black  River,  succeeded  in  crossing.  About  4 
p.  in.  on  the  6th  of  July,  I crossed  my  division,  with  Colonel  McMillen  s 
brigade  in  advance.  On  reaching  the  high  ground,  we  were  met  by 
the  enemy’s  skirmishers,  but,  on  my  advancing,  they  gave  way  with 
but  little  opposition,  but  continued  light  skirmishing  all  the  way  from 
there  to  the  junction  with  the  Bridgeport  road,  3$  miles,  where  we 
bivouacked  for  the  night. 


Chav.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


621 


The  next  day  being  General  Blair’s  day  to  have  the  advance  of  the 
corps,  he  inarched  on  toward  Jackson,  before  which  place  we  arrived 
on  the  10th,  without  anything  particularly  worthy  of  note  transpiring. 

My  command  being  in  the  rear,  by  regular  succession,  on  the  day  of 
arrival  was  designated  as  the  reserve  division  of  the  corps,  in  which 
position  it  remained  until  the  15th,  when  I moved  to  the  front  and  re- 
lieved General  Osterhaus’  division,  where  we  remained  until  after  the 
evacuation,  on  the  17th.  During  the  last  few  days  of  the  siege  my 
skirmishers  were  severely  engaged  several  times,  in  which  they  be- 


haved well. 

After  the  evacuation,  I was  ordered  to  send  all  of  my  division  not 
otherwise  engaged  with  General  Steele  in  pursuit  of  Johnston,  and  to 
destroy  the  railroad  to  Brandon.  I accordingly  sent  four  regiments, 
under  command  of  Colonel  Geddes,  of  the  Eighth  Iowa,  whose  report 
is  inclosed.  I also  inclose  a list  of  casualties  in  the  two  brigades  that 
accompanied  me.  The  Second  Brigade,  having  been  detached  and 
sent  to  Young’s  Point,  was  not  with  the  division. 

I am,  &c., 

J.  M.  TUTTLE, 
Brigadier- General , Commanding. 


Oapt.  R.  M.  Sawyer, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


No.  44. 

Report  of  Col.  William  L.  McMillen , Ninety -fifth  Ohio  Infantry , com- 
manding First  Brigade. 

Near  Markham’s,  July  28,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  brigade  under  my  command  in  the  recent  expedition  to 
Jackson,  Miss. : 

The  First  Brigade,  consisting  of  the  Seventy-second  and  Ninety-fifth 
Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry,  the  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Illinois, 
and  Ninety  third  Indiana  Volunteer  Infantry,  and  Company  E,  First 
Illinois  Light  Artillery,  took  up  the  line  of  march  on  the  4th  of  July, 
at  4 p.  m.,  encamping  that  night  near  Messinger’s.  The  next  morning 
it  moved  to  Messinger’s  Ford,  and,  in  connection  with  the  division  pio- 
neer corps,  Captain  Young,  built  a bridge  over  the  Big  Black.  On 
the  morning  of  the  6th  instant,  four  companies  were  thrown  across 
the  river,  with  instructions  to  advance  as  skirmishers  to  the  foot  of 
the  hill  beyond.  About  3 p.  m.,  by  direction  of  the  general  com- 
manding the  division,  one  regiment  (the  Ninety  third  Indiana,  Colonel 
Thomas  commanding)  was  ordered  over  to  support  the  skirmishers,  with 
orders  to  advance  and  occupy  the  crest  of  the  hill,  the  remainder  of 
the  brigade  following  almost  immediately.  Some  opposition  was  made 
by  the  enemy’s  pickets,  but  the  point  was  gained  without  difficulty.  I 
then  marched  the  brigade  by  the  flank,  the  Seventy- second  Ohio  in  ad- 
vance, to  the  main  (Bolton)  road,  reaching  it  late  in  the  evening.  There 
was  almost  continuous  skirmishing  from  the  time  we  crossed  the  river 
until  we  reached  the  Bolton  road,  and  great  credit  is  due  the  compa- 
nies and  regiments  engaged.  Several  prisoners  were  taken  by  my  ad- 
vance. 


622 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai\  XXXVI. 


From  this  point  it  marched  with  the  army,  via  Bolton  and  Clinton,  to 
Jackson,  Miss.,  arriving  at  the  position  assigned  it  on  the  morning  of 
the  10th  instant.  It  remained  in  reserve  until  the  morning  of  the  15th, 
when  it  marched  to  the  front  and  relieved  a brigade  belonging  to  Gen- 
eral Qsterhaus’  division 

On  the  16th,  in  compliance  with  an  order  from  division  commander, 
I ordered  my  line  of  skirmishers  to  feel  the  enemy’s  works.  It  soon  be- 
came hotly  engaged,  and  was  obliged  to  halt,  fully  demonstrating  the 
fact  that  the  enemy  was  still  in  force.  In  this  attack  the  brigade  suf- 
fered a loss  of  1 killed  and  11  wounded.  Early  on  the  morning  of  the 
17th  instant,  I received  information  that  Jackson  had  been  evacuated, 
and  without  delay  advanced  my  skirmishers  and  occupied  the  enemy’s 
works  in  my  front,  being  among  the  first  to  reach  the  city. 

On  the  18th,  the  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Illinois  and  the  Seventy- 
second  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry,  with  Waterhouse’s  battery,  marched 
in  the  expedition  to  Brandon,  under  command  of  Colonel  Geddes,  of  the 
Eighth  Iowa,  who,  I suppose,  will  report  the  part  taken  by  them  in  the 
engagement  at  that  place. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Ninety-fifth  Ohio  was  used  as  a rear  guard  on 
the  main  Clinton  road,  and  the  Ninety -third  Indiana  were  destroying 
railroad  in  the  city. 

On  the  23d,  the  brigade  marched  with  the  corps  to  which  it  is  attached 
for  its  present  camp,  reaching  this  vicinity  on  the  evening  of  the  25th 
instant.  I cannot  speak  too  highly' of  the  endurance,  spirit,  and  cour- 
age of  the  troops  comprising  my  command,  officers  and  men  having- 
acquitted  themselves  nobly. 

I am,  &c., 

W.  L.  McMILLEN, 
Colonel , Commanding  First  Brigade. 

Capt.  J.  B.  Sample, 

Assistant  Adjutant  General. 


No.  45. 

Report  of  Capt.  Samuel  A.  J.  Snyder , Seventy-second  Ohio  Infantry. 

Near  Markham’s,  July  30,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  op- 
erations of  this  regiment,  which  composed  a part  of  the  brigade  under 
your  command,  in  the  expedition  to  Brandon,  Miss.,  July  19,  1863 : 

Making  no  mention  of  the  march,  I would  state  that  the  part  taken 
by  the  regiment  was  unimportant.  When  the  line  of  battle  was  formed, 
and  skirmishers  thrown  forward  from  the  Eighth  Iowa  and  One  hun- 
dred and  fourteenth  Illinois,  I was  ordered  forward  to  support  those 
regiments  on  the  left  of  the  road.  The  ground  over  which  my  command 
had  to  advance  in  battle  order  was  very  rough  and  traversed  by  deep 
cuts,  yet  the  advance  was  in  good  order  and  my  line  was  not  once  broken. 
After  advancing  in  support  for  about  1 mile,  I was  ordered  to  fill  the 
interval  between  the  Eighth  Iowa  and  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Illi- 
nois, when  the  line  again  advanced,  but  met  no  enemy,  he  having  taken 
advantage  of  a hard  rain-shower  to  retreat.  Upon  arriving  at  Brandon, 
my  regiment  was  thrown  forward  to  support  the  skirmishers  in  tite  C&St* 

era  limits  of  tbe  town,  wbeu  we  bivouacked  for  tbe  uight, 


Chap.  XXI VI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


623 


On  the  following  day,  the  20th,  in  accordance  with  your  orders,  1 pro- 
ceeded to  the  railroad  depot,  and  took  part  in  destroying  the  track. 
The  inarch  back  to  Jackson  was  very  severe  on  iny  men,  as  it  was  made 
in  the  heat  of  the  day  and  was  very  rapid.  Officers  and  men  of  my  regi- 
ment all  behaved  nobly  and  did  their  duty  to  the  letter.  There  were  no 
casualties  in  this  regiment. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  colonel,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

SAML.  A.  J.  SNYDER, 

Capt .,  Comdg.  Seventy- second  Regiment  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry. 

Col.  J.  L.  Geddes, 

Eighth  Iowa  Volunteers. 


No.  46. 

Report  of  Col.  Joseph  J.  Woods , Twelfth  Iowa  Infantry , commanding 

Third  Brigade. 

Camp,  Bear  Creek,  Miss., 

July  29,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  herewith  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
operations  and  casualties  in  the  Third  Brigade  in  the  campaign  to  Jack- 
son,  Miss.: 

We  left  our  camps  in  the  vicinity  of  Trible’s’ and  Young’s  July  4; 
crossed  the  Big  Black  River  at  Messinger’s  July  6,  following  the  First 
Brigade  at  supporting  distance.  We  continued  to  advance  until,  on  the 
10th,  we  halted  near  Jackson,  in  rear  of  our  batteries. 

On  the  11th,  Lieutenant  Dugan,  acting  assistant  quartermaster  of 
the  brigade,  while  out  with  a foraging  party,  was  attacked  by  the  ene- 
my’s cavalry  and  received  two  wounds,  and  most  of  his  party  were  cap- 
tured. We  remained  in  the  position  taken  on  the  10th  without  further 
casualties,  although  many  of  the  enemy’s  shells  fell  among  us,  until 
the  15th,  when  we  moved  to  the  right  and  front,  the  division  relieving 
the  division  of  General  Ostefhaus. 

On  the  following  day,  in  pursuance  of  orders,  we  advanced  our 
skirmishers  and  met  a warm  reception  from  the  enemy.  We  had  several 
wounded,  1 mortally.  The  following  night  we  labored  all  night,  placing 
the  Second  Iowa  Battery  in  position  and  in  improving  the  infantry 
defense. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  it  was  found  that  the  enemy  had  evacu- 
ated the  place,  and  that  afternoon  we  moved  north  of  the  Clinton  road. 

On  the  18th  and  19th,  the  Thirty  fifth  Iowa  was  engaged  in  destroy- 
ing the  railroad  in  Jackson  ; on  the  20th,  was  sent  as  guard  to  prisoners 
to  Clinton,  where  it  joined  the  brigade  on  the  23d. 

On  the  18th,  the  Eighth  and  Twelfth  Iowa,  under  Col.  J.  L.  Geddes, 
of  the  Eighth  Iowa,  in  conjunction  with  other  forces,  started  on  an  ex- 
pedition to  Brandon. 

On  the  19th,  they  had  a short  engagement  with  the  enemy,  in  which 
Sergeant  [John]  Duncan,  Eighth  Iowa,  was  killed  and  a few  men 
wounded.  They  assisted  in  destroying  several  miles  of  railroad  track 
and  the  railroad  buildings  in  Brandon,  and  returned  on  the  20th. 

On  the  23d,  the  brigade  took  up  its  line  of  march,  and  arrived  at  its 
present  camp  July  26. 

During  this  campaign,  as  always  heretofore,  Col.  J.  L.  Geddes,  Eighth 

Iowa,  showed  the  true  characteristics  of  the  soldier,  He  is  au  excel- 


624 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


lent  and  worthy  officer,  faithful  and  energetic  in  the  performance  of 
his  duties.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Edgington,  commanding  Twelfth  Iowa, 
was  prompt  and  efficient  in  the  performance  of  his  duties,  showing  he 
was  worthy  to  command.  Col.  8.  G.  Hill,  Thirty-fifth  Iowa,  was  at- 
tentive, and  showed  a determination  to  do  his  duty,  while  Lieutenant 
[David  W.l  Reed  was  always  on  hand  when  required.  Lieut.  N.  E. 
Duncan  acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  and  Lieutenant  [William 
A Morse,  acting  aide-de-camp,  were  always  prompt  in  the  discharge 
of  the  duties  devolving  on  them.  Without  further  particularizing,  the 
officers  and  men  performed  their  duties  in  a commendable  manner. 
Surgeon  [Sanford  W.]  Huff,  chief  surgeon  of  the  brigade,  was  always 
attentive  to  the  sick  and  wounded,  as  were  all  the  other  surgeons  con- 
nected with  the  brigade. 

. Yours,  very  respectfully,  &c.,  j.  j.  WOODS, 

Col. , Comdg.  Third  Brig .,  Third  Div .,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 

Capt.  J.  B.  Sample, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General^  Third  Division . 


No.  47. 

Report  of  Col.  James  L.  Geddes , Eighth  Iowa  Infantry. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  July  21, 1863. 

Captain  • I have  the  honor  to  report,  for  the  information  of  the  gen- 
eral  commanding,  tlie  part  taken  by  the  force  under  my  command  in 
the  expedition  to  Brandon,  Miss.,  which  left  Jackson,  Miss.,  July  lo, 
1863  consisting  of  the  Eighth  and  Twelfth  Iowa,  Seventy-second  Ohio, 
and  One  hundred  and  fourteenth  Illinois,  with  Captain  Waterhouses 

Crossing  Pearl  Kiver  on  the  night  of  July  18,  my  command  biv- 
ouacked about  O miles  from  the  river,  or;  the  road  to  Brandon. 

On  the  morning  of  the  19th,  I resumed  the  march,  forcing  the  ene- 
mv’s  pickets  to  retire  as  we  advanced.  On  arriving  within  3 miles  of 
Brandon,  and  as  the  head  of  column  was  debouching  from  a wood,  the 
enemy  opened  fire  from  a battery  of  three  guns  planted  immediately  in 
the  road  and  distant  about  I mile,  at  the  same  time  making  cavalry  de- 
monstrations on  my  flanks.  Forming  the  Twelfth  Iowa,  under  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Edgington,  on  the  right,  the  Eighth,  under  Major  Stubbs, 
and  the  One  hundred  and  Fourteenth,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  King, 
on  the  left  'of  the  road,  with  the  Seventy-second  Ohio,  under  Captain 
Snyder,  in  close  support,  I ordered  the  advance,  at  the  same  time  a, 
strong  line  of  skirmishers  was  deployed  well  to  the  front.  The  bri- 
gade moved  forward  for  half  a mile  under  a very  severe  and  continuous 

fir©  • 

Previous  to  the  advance  of  the  line,  I ordered  one  gun  of  Captain 
Waterhouse’s  battery  to  take  position  in  the  road,  and  another  in  a 
corn-field  on  the  right,  but  the  distance  was  so  great  that  their  fire  could 
barely  reach  the  point  where  the  enemy’s  battery  was  located,  while 
their  rifled  guns  threw  shot  and  shell  into  my  position  with  great  aecu- 
racv  The  deep  dikes  running  parallel  to  our  front  effectually  pre- 
vented the  advance  of  the  artillery  with  the  general  line,  consequently 
it  had  to  retain  its  first  position,  but  still  continued  a brisk  fire  on  the 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


Chai\  XXXVI.] 


625 


enemy’s  battery,  which  had  the  effect  of  dividing  their  fire  as  the  in- 
fantry advanced. 

The  advance  was  made  through  an  open  field  in  admirable  order;  not 
a man  wavered,  each  regiment  marching  in  line  of  battle  with  as  much 
precision  as  if  on  review,  and  the  coolness  and  efficiency  displayed  by 
regimental  commanders  on  the  occasion  renders  them  much  credit. 
After  engaging  the  enemy  nearly  two  hours,  they  were  driven  from 
their  position,  retiring  through  Brandon  in  an  easterly  direction,  with  a 
loss  of  31  killed  and  wounded  and  40  prisoners.  My  brigade  immedi- 
ately occupied  the  town. 

On  the  morning  of  the  20th,  the  brigade  was  ordered  to  take  part  in 
destroying  the  railroad  running  east  from  Jackson,  toward  Meridian. 
After  destroying  about  2 miles  of  the  track,  including  depot  and  a large 
quantity  of  cotton,  my  command  was  ordered  by  General  Steele  to  take 
up  line  of  march  back  to  Jackson,  which  place  we  reached  about  8 p.  ih., 
after  a very  severe  and  fatiguing  march. 

I am,  sir,  &c., 


J.  L.  GEDDES, 

Col.  8th  Iowa  Infty.,  Comdg.  Brigade  in  Expedition  to  Brandon. 


Gapt.  J.  B.  Sample, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  48. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Samuel  R.  Edgington , Twelfth  Iowa  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Twelfth  Iowa  Infantry  Volunteers, 

July  27,  1863. 

Sir  : Report  of  Twelfth  Iowa  Infantry  in  campaign  commencing  July 
4 and  ending  July  25,  1863 : 

July  4. — Marched  at  4 p.  m.  toward  Big  Black  River.  Halted  about 
a half  mile  from  Messinger’s. 

July  6.— Marched  at  4 p.  m.;  crossed  Big  Black  River  at  Messinger’s 
over  a bridge  constructed  by  our  troops.  Halted  about  4 miles  east  of 
Big:  Black  River  at  1 a.  m.  on  7th. 

July  7. — Marched  about  10  a.  m.  Halted  at  2 p.  m.  on  Jeff.  Davis’ 
plantation.  Marched  at  4 p.  m.,  and  halted  at  creek  near  Bolton  Sta- 
tion. Bivouacked  in  corn-field. 

July  8. — At  7 a.  m.  moved  about  a mile,  and  halted  at  4 p.  m.  Marched 
through  Bolton,  taking  road  east  of  railroad  for  Clinton.  Reached  Clin- 
ton at  1 a.  m.  on  the  9th. 

July  9. — Marched  at  9 a.  m.,  passing  north  of  Clinton.  Halted  about 
lp.m.,  and  bivouacked  about  4J  miles  from  Jackson  on  the  Clinton 

road. 

July  10. — Moved  to  within  2 miles  of  Jackson,  being  stationed  in 
reserve. 

July  11.— Sent  out  foraging  party.  Had  3 teams  and  9 men  captured 
by  rebel  cavalry  about  5 miles  from  camp.  One  man  escaped ; 2 of  the 
wagons  and  contents  were  burned,  1 wagon  being  recaptured  by  our 
force. 

July  12. — Twelfth  Iowa  ordered  out  as  guard  to  foraging  train  for 
army  corps,  consisting  of  about  50  wagons.  Returned  in  the  evening. 

July  13. — Moved  to  position  in  reserve. 

40  R R — VOL  XXIV,  PTlII 


626 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXX VI. 

July  15.— Marched  at  7 p.  m.  to  the  right  and  front,  taking  the  place 
of  Osterhaus’  division. 

July  16.— Skirmishing  in  front.  Regiment  formed  in  line  in  intrench- 
rnents.  Two  companies  out  as  skirmishers. 

July  17. This  morning  our  skirmishers  advanced  into  the  rebel 

works,  Jackson  being  evacuated.  In  the  evening  moved  to  new  posi- 
tion on  the  left,  near  the  deaf  and  dumb  institute. 

July  18.— Marched  about  6 p.  m.,  having  orders  to  proceed  to  Bran- 
don, Miss.,  on  the  railroad  from  Jackson  to  Meridian.  Crossed  Big 
Black  River  on  a pontoon  bridge.  Halted  about  1 mile  east  of  river. 

July  19.— Marched  at  7 a.  in.,  Twelfth  Iowa  in  advance  of  column. 
Company  B detailed  as  skirmishers.  About  5 miles  from  Brandon,  cav- 
alry fell  back  on  skirmishers.  Artillery  fired  couple  of  shells  in  the 
woods  in  advance,  when  we  again  moved  forward  to  an  open  clearing, 
corn-fields  on  each  side  of  the  road,  when,  after  proceeding  about  800 
yards,  saw  signs  of  the  enemy  in  front.  Regiment  formed  in  line  of 
battle  on  the  right  of  the  road,  the  Eighth  Iowa  on  the  left,  when  the 
enemy  commenced  firing  from  artillery  posted  in  and  near  the  road, 
other  regiments  coming  up  as  support.  The  Twelfth  moved  forward, 
Company  I being  detailed  as  skirmishers.  Moved  slowly  through  very 
difficult  ground,  the  field  being  intersected  by  deep  ditches,  which  were 
bordered  by  briars  and  bushes,  and  8 or  10  feet  deep.  Forced  to  halt,  as 
a heavy  rain-storm  fell,  drenching  the  men,  who  stood  in  ranks  till  it 
subsided,  when  we  again  advanced,  the  enemy’s  artillery  and  our  own 
exchanging  shots  over  us  as  we  advanced.  Coming  to  an  open  field, 
the  other  regiments  halted,  and  the  Twelfth  Iowa  advanced  to  a wood 
where  the  rebel  battery  had  been  planted,  and  passed  through  the  dense 
thicket  with  difficulty,  going  through  a rebel  camp  which  bore  marks 
of.  a hasty  retreat,  one  ambulance  being  left  behind  and  some  provis- 
ions in  their  camp.  . 

After  going  through  the  wood  about  half  a mile,  regiment  halted  in 
the  road  for  ten  minutes,  and  then  proceeded  to  Brandon,  which  our 
skirmishers  (Company  I)  had  already  entered  and  taken  possession  of. 
Found  the  town  deserted  by  the  rebels,  three  regiments  of  cavalry  and 
three  guns  being  reported  as  passed  through  in  advance  of  us.  Biv- 
ouacked in  Brandon. 

July  20. — Marched,  6 p.  in.,  and  proceeded  to  railroad  station,  where 
we  assisted  in  destroying  3 miles  of  railroad  and  railroad  buildings, 
after  which  marched  back  to  Jackson,  arriving  at  camp  about  9 p.  m. 

July  23.— Had  orders  to  march  at  3 p.  m.  to  Vicksburg.  Marched 
through  Clinton,  and  halted  about  2 miles  beyond,  about  9 a.  m. 

July  24.— Marched  about  daylight  $ passed  south  of  Bolton  Station, 
crossing  the  Champion’s  Hill  battle-ground.  Halted  on  Champion’s  Hill, 
near  Baker’s  Creek. 

July  25.— Marched  at  6 a.  in.,  going  north  of  railroad  and  crossing 
Big  Black  River  at  Messinger’s  Ford,  reachiug  camp  in  evening  between 
Markham’s  and  Young’s. 

All  of  which  is  respectfully  submitted.* 

By  order  of  Lieutenant  Colonel  Edgington,  commanding  Twellth 
Iowa : 

JOHN  D.  COLE, 

Acting  Adjutant. 

Col.  J.  J.  Woods, 

Commanding  Third  Brigade.  


Nominal  list  of  casualties  reports  8 men  captured. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


627 


No.  49. 

Report  of  Col.  Sylvester  G.  Hill , Thirty-fifth  Iowa  Infantry. 

Camp  near  Bear  Creek,  Miss., 

July  28,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  operations 
and  casualties  of  the  Thirty  fifth  Regiment  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry, 
from  July  4,  1863,  in  the  expedition  from  this  place  to  Jackson,  Miss., 
and  return : 

We  left  camp  at  Young’s  plantation  July  4,  at  3 p.  in.,  by  order  of 
General  Sherman.  While  the  regiment  was  resting,  at  5 p.  m.,  William 
B.  Everett,  private  of  Company  A,  was  shot  by  the  accidental  discharge 
of  a gun  in  the  hands  of  one  of  his  companions.  He  died  at  11  p.  m. 
of  the  wound.  We  crossed  Big  Black  River  at  Messinger’s  Ferry,  5 
p.  m.,  July  6,  with  the  Third  Division,  Fifteenth  Army  Corps. 

Arrived  near  our  batteries  while  they  were  engaging  the  enemy  at 
Jackson,  July  10,  1863.  Here  we  were  considerably  exposed  to  the  fire 
from  the  enemy’s  artillery,  but  fortunately  no  casualties.  Sergeant 
[John]  Phillips  and  9 men,  under  the  command  of  Lieut.  William  M. 
Dugan,  Company  K,  acting  assistant  quartermaster,  were  to-day  cap- 
tured, and  Lieutenant  Dugan  severely  wounded  by  the  enemy  while  4 
miles  away  from  camp,  foraging.  The  enemy  also  burned  two  of  our 
wagons  and  carried  off  the  mules. 

On  the  15th,  we  were  ordered  to  the  right,  to  relieve  part  of  General 
Osterhaus’  command. 

After  Jackson  was  evacuated,  we  encamped  near  the  fort  on  the  Clin- 
ton road,  and  were  engaged  destroying  the  railroad  in  Jackson  until 
the  20th.  At  4 p.  m.  we  started  for  Clinton  with  545  rebel  prisoners  in 
charge,  which  we  delivered  to  General  McArthur,  in  Clinton,  on  the 
21st.  Arrived  in  our  present  camp  July  25,  1863. 

List  of  casualties  in  the  regiment:* 

S.  G.  HILL, 

Colonel , Commanding  Thirty  fifth  Iowa  Volunteer  Infantry. 

Lieut.  N.  E.  Duncan, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  50. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  William  Sooy  Smith , TJ.  S.  Army , commanding 
First  Division , Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

Hdqrs.  First  Division,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps, 

Jackson , Miss.,  July  19,  1863. 

Sir  : I have,  the  honor  to  forward  herewith  the  report  of  Colonel 
Corse,  of  the  Sixth  Regiment  Iowa  Volunteers,  who  commanded  the 
skirmishers  of  the  First  Division  in  their  advance  upon  the  rebel  works 
near  this  city  on  the  16th  instant. 

The  report,  accompanied  by  a full  list  of  the  killed,  wounded,  and 
missing,  is  so  complete  as  to  leave  nothing  to  add,  except  an  expression 
of  pride  in  the  gallant  officers  and  men  of  the  several  regiments  engaged, 
who,  with  daring  that  could  not  be  excelled,  dashed  forward  under  a 


'‘Nominal  list,  omitted,  shows  1 officer  wounded  and  10  men  missing. 


628 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


heavy  fire  of  artillery  and  small-arms,  and  captured  rebel  prisoners 
under  their  very  guns.  The  conduct  of  Colonels  Corse,  Sixth  Iowa, 
Catterson,  Ninety-seventh  Indiana,  and  Sanford,  Forty-eighth  Illinois, 
deserves  especial  commendation. 

Major  Stephenson,  of  the  Forty-eighth  Illinois,  and  Captain  Minton, 
of  the  Sixth  Iowa,  both  severely  wounded,  behaved  with  conspicuous 
gallantry,  as  did  Lieut.  George  W.  Holmes,  Company  A,  Sixth  Iowa, 
who  went  forward  under  a murderous  fire  and  carried  Captain  Minton 
oft*  the  field. 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

WM.  SOOY  SMITH, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  First  Division. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Bowen, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General  and  Chief  of  Staff. 


Hdqrs.  First  Division,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps, 

Jackson , Miss.,  July  20,  1863. 

Sir:  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  the  First  Division,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps,  in  the  advance 
upon  Jackson,  and  the  operations  before  the  rebel  works  previous  to 
their  evacuation  by  the  enemy : 

On  the  4th  instant,  we  broke  camp  at  Oak  Ridge  Post-Office,  where 
we  had  previously  constructed  strong  intrench  in  ents,  in  anticipation  of 
the  advance  of  the  rebel  army  under  General  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  who 
was  reported  moving  to  the  relief  of  Vicksburg.  We  moved  forward, 
crossed  Bear  Creek,  near  Young’s,  and  encamped  near  Mrs.  Hill’s,  1 
mile  west  of  Big  Black  River,  advancing  a strong  picket  to  the  cross- 
ing of  the  river  at  Birdsong  Ferry. 

On  the  morning  of  the  5th  instant,  the  enemy,  concealed  under  thick 
cover  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  stream,  opened  a brisk  fire  upon  our* 
picket.  Supports  were  speedily  thrown  forward  and  placed  under 
cover,  and  a spirited  fire  opened  on  the  enemy,  which  was  kept  up 
during  the  whole  day  on  the  5th.  On  the  night  of  the  5th,  Colonel 
Sanford  was  sent  with  his  brigade  (the  Fourth)  to  effect  a crossing 
at  a ford  reported  practicable,  2 miles  below  Birdsong  Ferry.  After  a 
sharp  skirmish  with  the  enemy,  the  ford  was  reached,  but,  owing  to  a 
rise  in  the  river  of  4 feet,  it  was  found  entirely  impracticable.  Simul- 
taneously with  this  effort,  a battery  was  placed  in  position  and  fire 
opened  upon  the  enemy  at  a ford  half  a mile  above  Birdsong  Ferry. 
Our  infantry  then  advanced  to  this  ford,  which  was  also  found  imprac- 
ticable. 

On  the  6tli  instant,  a ferry-boat  was  found  3 miles  below  the  ferry 
that  had  been  scuttled  and  sunk.  This  we  raised,  and  brought  up  to 
the  crossing  during  the  day  and  night  of  the  6th. 

On  the  morning  of  the  7th,  our  forces  having  effected  a crossing  below 
at  Messinger’s,  the  enemy  suddenly  let  go,  and  offered  us  no  further 
resistance. 

During  the  7th  aud  8th,  we  ferried  over  my  entire  division,  infantry 
and  artillery,  together  with  our  ammunition  train.  Our  transportation 
and  supply  trains  moved  down  and  crossed  at  Messiuger’s. 

On  the  9th,  we  resumed  our  march,  and  reached  Robertson’s,  near 
Queen’s  Hill  and  Jeff.  Davis’  plantation. 

On  the  10th,  we  reached  a point  4 miles  northwest  of  Jackson,  where 


Chap.  XXXVI.  J 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


629 


we  had  a brisk  skirmish  with  one  of  the  enemy’s  outposts,  in  which  the 
good  conduct  of  Colonel  O’Meara  and  the  officers  and  men  of  his  regi- 
ment, the  Ninetieth  Illinois,  deserve  especial  mention. 

We  resumed  our  march  on  the  morniug  of  the  11th  instant,  and,  ar- 
riving in  front  of  Jackson  at  about  2 p.  m.,  moved  up  on  the  right  of 
the  Ninth  Army  Corps,  driving  the  rebel  pickets  and  skirmishers  within 
their  intrenchments,  where  they  were  closely  held  by  a hot  fire  of  our 
skirmishers,  who  were  advanced  to  within  effective  rifle  range  of  the 
rebel  works  and  well  supported. 

On  the  16th,  in  obedience  to  the  verbal  instructions  of  General  Parke, 
our  line  of  skirmishers  advanced  to  feel  the  enemy,  draw  his  fire,  and, 
if  practicable,  effect  an  entrance  into  his  works.  The  movement  was 
most  gallantly  performed,  under  the  direction  of  Colonel  Corse,  of  the 
Sixth  Iowa  Volunteers,  who  commanded  our  line  of  skirmishers  during 
all  our  operations  before  Jackson.  The  rebels  were  driven  from  some  of 
their  rifle-pits,  and  about  20  of  them  captured  under  their  very  guns. 

The  conduct  of  the  officers  and  men  who  participated  in  this  advance 
cannot  be  too  highly  commended.  For  the  particulars  of  the  movement, 
I beg  leave  to  refer  you  to  a special  report,  already  submitted,  accom- 
panied by  the  detailed  report  of  Colonel  Corse,  with  a full  list  of  casu- 
alties. 

While  our  skirmishers  held  their  ground  under  a hot  fire,  constantly 
kept  up  bv  the  enemy  from  his  line  of  works  and  from  rifle-pits  con- 
structed outside  of  them  for  the  shelter  of  his  skirmishers,  the  few  in- 
trenching tools  we  had  with  us  were  busily  employed  by  night  and  by 
day  in  the  construction  of  redoubts  for  our  batteries  and  rifle-pits  flank- 
ing those  redoubts,  for  the  proper  covering  of  infantry  supports.  Po- 
sitions for  sixteen  guns  were  thus  prepared  within  600  yards  of  the 
rebel  works,  and  a second  line,  for  purposes  of  defense,  was  well  in- 
trenched by  the  construction  of  redoubts  and  rifle-pits. 

On  the  12th  instant,  the  four  batteries  attached  to  my  division  opened 
upon  the  city  of  Jackson  and  the  rebel  works  surrounding  it,  apparently 
with  excellent  effect,  as  the  shot  and  shell  were  seen  to  fall  thick  and 
fast  within  the  intrenchments,  from  which  the  rebel  infantry  fled  for  a 
time  in  great  consternation.  Owing  to  the  shortness  in  our  supply  of 
ammunition  for  our  guus,  no  further  firing  was  done  by  our  artillery. 
We  waited  for  the  arrival  of  the  ammunition  train. 

The  positions  for  our  artillery  were  well  chosen  and  well  improved, 
under  the  direction  of  Captain  Cassell,  of  the  Twenty-sixth  Illinois  Vol- 
unteers, who  was  detailed  to  act  as  my  engineer  officer.  Great  credit 
is  due  him  for  his  industry,  gallantry,  and  skill. 

On  the  morning  after  the  advance  of  our  skirmishers,  it  was. discov- 
ered that  the  enemy  had  withdrawn  his  forces  from  Jackson. 

Throughout  the  advance  upon  the  city,  and  all  the  operations  that 
ensued,  Colonel  Loomis,  of  the  Twenty-sixth  Illinois  Volunteers,  com- 
manding the  First  Brigade,  and  Colonel  Cockerill,  Seventieth  Ohio  Vol- 
unteers, commanding  the  Third  Brigade,  distinguished  themselves  by 
their  untiring  vigilance,  their  valor,  and  their  skill.  They  were  con- 
stantly along  their  front  lines  and  exposed  to  a hot  fire,  and  much  of 
the  time  subjected  to  a fire  of  shot  and  shell  from  the  rebel  batteries. 
Their  handling  of  their  troops  commanded  my  highest  admiration. 

In  my  special  report,  already  referred  to,  I have  taken  the  liberty  to 
make  special  mention  of  the  gallant  and  meritorious  conduct  of  Colonels 
Corse,  Sanford,  and  Catterson  ; also  of  Major  Stephenson,  Captain  Min- 
ton, and  Lieutenant  Holmes.  I now  beg  to  add  to  the  list  the  names 
of  Capt.  T.  J.  Loudon,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general $ Captain  Clune, 


630 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


of  the  Sixth  Iowa,  division  inspector ; and  Lieutenants  Campbell  (Sev- 
entieth Ohio)  and  Neil  (Forty-sixth  Ohio),  aides-de-camp,  all  of  whom 
discharged  their  duty  with  great  gallantry,  bearing  my  orders  through 
the  thickest  of  the  fire,  and  frequently  remaining  in  the  most  dangerous 
and  exposed  positions,  to  report  anything  of  note  that  they  might  be 
able  to  observe. 

It  is  sufficient  praise  to  the  officers  and  men  of  my  command  to  say 
that,  when  pelted  with  shot,  shell,  canister,  and  bullets,  I have  never 
seen  either  officer  or  man  falter  or  quail. 

Please  find  herewith  inclosed  the  reports  of  brigade  and  regimental 
commanders,  accompanied  by  complete  lists  of  casualties.* 

Very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

WM.  SOOY  SMITH, 

Brigadier- General,  Commanding  First  Division. 

Lieut.  Col.  N.  Bowen, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


No.  51. 

Report  of  Col.  John  M.  Loomis , Twenty-sixth  Illinois  Infantry , com- 
manding First  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  First  Brig.,  First  Div.,  Sixteenth  A.  C., 

Bivouac  near  Jackson,  Miss.,  July  20,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  in  obedience  to  orders  from  the 
general  commanding,  this  brigade  marched  from  its  bivouac  atOakBidge 
at  5 p.  m.  on  the  4th  instant.  Crossed  Bear  Creek  that  evening,  and 
bivouacked  on  its  bank. 

On  the  night  of  the  5th  instant,  the  march  was  continued  to  the  Big 
Black,  to  support  the  Second  Brigade,  detailed  to  force  its  passage  in 
face  of  the  enemy.  The  passage  was  defeated  by  too  great  depth  of 
water. 

On  the  night  of  the  6th  and  day  of  the  7th,  we  completed  the  crossing, 
and  marched  to  Queen’s  Hill,  bivouacking  in  a heavy  rain-storm. 

On  the  8th,  continued  the  march  to  Hall’s  plantation. 

On  the  9th,  marched  toward  Jackson.  At  the  close  of  the  day  the 
skirmishers  of  the  Ninetieth  Illinois  Infantry  drove  in  the  enemy’s 
skirmishers  at  Lee’s  plantation,  and  the  brigade  bivouacked  in  line  of 
battle  on  the  field. 

On  the  10th,  moved  forward  to  Jackson,  taking  part  in  the  invest- 
ment of  that  place,  our  left  resting  on  the  Canton  road,  north  of  Jack- 
son. 

The  12th,  13th,  14th,  15th,  and  16th  instant  w.ere  occupied  in  con- 
structing offensive  works  and  in  u feeling  the  enemy.” 

On  the  16th,  the  Twenty-sixth  Illinois  Infantry  being  sent  to  occupy 
the  extreme  right  line  of  skirmishers,  was  required  to  seek  its  position 
under'  a heavy  cross  fire  of  artillery.  They  had  also,  before  getting 
position,  to  sustain  the  fire  of  the  advancing  rebel  brigade  in  line, 
who  were  checked  and  compelled  to  retire  to  their  works.  In  this  we 
lost  a brave  and  good  officer  (Capt.  James  A.  Dugger,  Company  C, 
Twenty-sixth  Illinois  Infantry),  killed  by  a cannon  shot  through  the 
breast.  We  buried  him  with  the  honors  of  war  in  the  cemetery  at  Jack- 


List  of  casualties  embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  544. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


631 


son.  I do  not  desire  to  discriminate  in  favor  of  the  Twenty-sixth  Illi- 
nois Infantry.  All  were  equally  ready  for  any  duty,  and  equally  brave 
and  devoted  in  the  discharge  of  all  trusts.  I cannot  in  too  high  terms 
praise  the  conduct  of  the  officers  and  men  of  the  brigade.  With  many 
discomforts  and  much  fatigue  to  endure,  short  of  water  and  food,  without 
change  of  clothing  for  three  weeks,  I have  not  heard  a word  of  com- 
plaint. All  are  cheerful,  and  eminently  devoted  in  all  their  conduct. 

I desire  to  recommend  for  promotion  for  constancy,  devotion,  fitness 
of  conduct,  cool  bravery,  and  high  capability,  the  following  officers  : 
Oapt.  Elbert  D.  Baldwin,  Twelfth  Indiana  Infantry  5 Capt.  Ruel  M. 
Johnson,  One  hundredth  Indiana  Infantry,  and  Oa^t.  James  P.  Davis, 
Twenty-sixth  Illinois  Infantry. 

My  staff  officers  have  been  constant  and  attentive  to  their  duties,  and 
have  ably  assisted  me.  Particularly  I desire  to  call  to  the  attention 
of  the  general  commanding  Capt.  Ira  J.  Bloomfield,  acting  assistant 
adjutant-general,  a brave,  energetic,  and  thoroughly  competent  officer, 
worthy  of  any  trust.  He  has  earned  promotion  by  his  constancy  and 
the  able  assistance  he  has  rendered  me.  I trust  that  amid  the  host  of 
brave  and  gallant  men  his  name  and  services  may  not  be  forgotten. 

Sadly  I have  the  honor  to  write  the  names  of  the  brave  who  have 
fallen.* 

I have  the  honor  to  transmit  the  reports  of  the  regimental  commanders 
of  the  brigade.  I am  proud  of  my  command  and  its  discipline,  trusting 
I have  discharged  my  duty  to  its  officers  and  men  at  least  faithfully. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

JOHN  MASON  LOOMIS, 

Col.  2 6th  Illinois  Infty .,  Comdg.  1st  Brig.,  1st  Div.,  1 6th  Army  Corps. 

Capt.  T.  J.  Loudon, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  First  Division,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  52. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Robert  A.  Gillmore , Twenty-sixth  Illinois  Infantry. 

Camp  before  Jackson,  July  19,  1863. 
Captain:  In  accordance  with  circular  from  headq  uarters,  I have  the 
honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  operations  of  this  regiment  and 
casualties  to  same  since  July  4,  1863  : 

We  left  our  bivouac  at  Oak  Ridge  July  4,  at  6 p.  m.  Marched  to 
Bear  Creek  ; night  intensely  dark. 

July  5. — Started  from  bivouac  about  10  p.  m.  Were  halted  about  1 
mile,  and  lay  on  arms  in  the  road. 

July  6. — At  10  p.  m.  moved  on  to  within  about  half  a mile  of  Big 
Black.  Sent  Company  K to  Birdsong  Ferry,  to  establish  a crossing. 
They  worked  all  night. 

July  7. — Started  about  5 a.  m.  Marched  to  Birdsong  Ferry,  where 
the  regiment  was  engaged  all  day,  and  until  about  11  p.  m.,  in  ferrying 
the  division  teams,  ammunition  wagons,  batteries,  and  ambulances. 
Started  immediately  on  as  rear  guard.  Came  up  with  brigade  about  9 
a.  m.  of  the  8th.  Marched  again  at  2 p.  m.,  regiment  being  deployed 
as  skirmishers  in  front  of  division.  The  last  three  days  the  regiment 

* Names  omitted ; casualties  embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  544. 


632  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXX VI. 

was  constantly  on  most  arduous  duty $ nevertheless  seemed  to  sustain 
the  march  equal  to  any. 

July  9. — Marched  to  within  2 miles  of  Jackson,  and  were  drawn  up 
in  line  of  battle,  and  lay  on  our  arms. 

July  11. — Marched  to  north  side  of  Jackson.  Changed  our  position 
to  Asylum  road,  and  about  1,000  yards  from  enemy’s  intrenchments. 
Here  we  lay  for  three  days,  constantly  engaged  in  digging  intrench- 
ments and  skirmishing  under  heavy  fire  from  enemy’s  artillery  and 
skirmishers.  Water  very  scarce  and  brackish. 

July  16.— Reported  with  regiment  to  Colonel  Corse,  of  Sixth  Iowa,  for 
picket  skirmishers.  At  3 p.  m.  each  company  was  sent  away  under 
direction  of  an  enlisted  man.  Before  they  had  their  positions  they 
were  attacked  by  a brigade  of  infantry,  covered  by  heavy  fire  of  artil- 
lery, along  our  whole  front.  Guides  became  confused,  and  we  had  to 
find  our  positions  ourselves,  which  we  did,  repulsing  the  enemy.  They 
kept  up  a heavy  fire  upon  us  during  the  early  part  of  the  night,  which 
slackened  up  about  midnight,  when  the  enemy  evacuated  Jackson. 

Our  officers  and  men  behaved  so  well,  could  hardly  make  exceptions 
by  singling  out  individuals  to  commend,  unless  to  the  memory  of  our 
brother  officer,  the  lamented  Captain  Dugger,  who  was  struck  down  by 
a shell  whilst  striving  to  gain  his  position  in  the  thickest  of  the  attack. 

List  of  casualties : * 

All  of  which  I have  the  honor  to  submit. 

I have,  captain,  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

R.  A.  GILLMORE, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Twenty -sixth  Illinois  Regiment. 

Capt.  Ira  J.  Bloomfield, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  First  Brigade,  Smith1  s Division. 


No.  53. 

Report  of  Col.  Timothy  O’Meara,  Ninetieth  Illinois  Infantry. 

In  the  Field,  near  Jackson,  Miss., 

July  20,  1863. 

Sir  : In  compliance  with  your  instructions,  directing  me  to  make  out 
an  official  report  of  the  service  and  duty  performed  by  my  regiment 
during  the  advance  of  our  forces  on  the  city  of  Jackson  and  subse- 
quently, I have  the  honor  to  state  that  my  regiment,  in  compliance  with 
orders  from  brigade  headquarters,  struck  camp  at  Oak  Ridge  on  the 
evening  of  the  4th  of  July,  and  marched  with  its  brigade  and  division 
in  pursuit  of  Johnston  and  his  forces. 

Nothing  of  importance  to  my  regiment  took  place  on  the  march  until 
the  evening  of  the  9th  instant,  it  being  in  advance,  and  within  about  4 
miles  of  the  city  of  Jackson.  The  two  companies  (0  and  I),  thrown  for- 
ward as  skirmishers,  engaged  the  enemy  on  Lee’s  plantation  and  drove 
them  very  handsomely. 

From  that  date  up  to  the  14th,  my  regiment  rested  day  and  night  on 
the  line  of  battle,  800  yards  distant  from  the  batteries  of  the  enemy, 
and  about  400  from  their  advance.  At  this  I lost  1 man  killed  and  2 
wounded. 


Nominal  list,  omitted,  embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  544. 


Chap.  XXXVI.  1 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


During  the  time  that  my  men  were  exposed  to  the  enemy’s  guns,  and 
up  to  the  evacuation  of  the  city,  they  performed  all  duty  required  of 
them  cheerfully  and  promptly.  The  firmness  and  determination  ex- 
hibited by  officers  and  enlisted  men,  under  very  trying  circumstances, 
have  proven  them  worthy  of  the  hopes  that  I entertained  of  them,  and 
worthy  defenders  of  the  glorious  cause  they  are  battling  for. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

TIM.  O’MEAEA, 

Colonel , Comdg.  Ninetieth  Regiment  Illinois  Infantry  Volunteers. 

Col.  John  M.  Loomis, 

Commanding  First  Brig.,  First  Div.,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  54. 

Report  of  Col.  Reuben  Williams , Twelfth  Indiana  Infantry. 

Camp  near  Jackson,  Miss., 

July  19,  1863. 

Sir  : In  pursuance  of  an  order  received  from  you  this  day,  I have  the 
honor  to  report  that  my  regiment  left  Oak  Eidge  on  July  4,  1863,  dis- 
tant about  35  miles,  and  arrived  at  this  place  on  the  10th  instant. 

Nothing  worthy  of  note  transpired  on  the  route. 

On  the  11th  and  12th,  we  took  position  in  front  of  the  enemy’s  works, 
and  were  under  fire  of  the  enemy  until  the  morning  of  the  14th. 

On  the  13th  and  14th,  my  regiment  was  on  picket  on  the  right  of 
our  division.  We  had  on  those  days  10  non-commissioned  officers  and 
soldiers  wounded  and  1 killed,  whose  names  are  as  follows,  viz  :* 

It  is  with  pleasure  that  I have  to  report  that  both  officers  and  soldiers 
of  my  command  have  during  the  whole  time  behaved  themselves  bravely 
and  done  their  duty  faithfully. 

Yours,  respectfully, 

EEUBEN  WILLIAMS, 

Colonel  Tivelftli  Regiment  Indiana  Volunteers. 

Col.  John  M.  Loomis, 

Commanding  Brigade. 


No.  55. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Albert  Heath,  One  hundredth  Indiana  Infantry. 

Near  Vicksburg,  Miss., 

July  18,  1863. 

Captain  : On  the  afternoon  of  the  4th  instant,  you  ordered  me  to 
march  in  light  marching  order.  At  5 p.  m.  we  moved.  After  marching 
about  8 miles,  we  bivouacked  upon  the  banks  of  Bear  Creek,  where  we 
remained  until  near  8 p.  m.  of  the  5th  instant,  when  we  again  marched 
about  10  miles,  to  a point  near  Big  Black  ftiver,  where  we  bivouacked, 
expecting  each  moment  to  be  called  upon  to  force  the  passage  across  the 


* Nominal  list  omitted. 


634  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

river,  but  the  water  being  deep  the  passage  of  the  river  was  not  at- 
tempted that  night.  Here  we  remained  until  the  evening  of  the  6th 
instant,  when  we  crossed  the  river  and  bivouacked  on  the  east  bank. 

On  the  7th,  we  marched  about  8 miles,  and  bivouacked  for  the  night 
without  shelter.  The  rain  poured  in  torrents  the  most  of  the  night,  but 
officers  and  men  endured  the  hardships  of  that  terrible  night  cheerfully 
and  without  complaint.  With  pain  I am  here  called  upon  to  communi- 
cate to  you  the  death  of  Maj.  Eobert  Parrett,  who  was  killed  by  the  fall- 
ing of  a tree  about  9 p.  m.  The  major  was  a good  officer,  beloved  and 
respected  by  officers  and  men. 

On  the  8th  and  9th,  we  marched  toward  Jackson,  and  bivouacked  in 
line  of  battle  on  the  9th,  4 miles  out  of  Jackson,  when  we  first  came 
upon  the  enemy’s  pickets. 

On  the  10th,  we  moved  around  to  the  left  and  north  of  Jackson,  and 
bivouacked  upon  the  plantation  of  the  late  Brig.  Gen.  E.  Griffith. 

On  the  morning  of  the  11th,  you  ordered  us  to  take  position  in  front 
of  and  in  musket-range  of  the  enemy’s  works.  About  12  o’clock  the 
enemy  commenced  shelling  the  woods,  several  of  which  exploded  over 
my  regiment,  the  pieces  falling  around  my  men,  fortunately  doing  but 
little  damage.  At  2 p.  m.  a shell  struck  the  foot  of  Private  Joseph 
Pardin,  Company  G,  inflicting  a painful  but  not  dangerous  wound. 

At  7 o’clock  in  the  morning  of  the  12th,  the  batteries  of  the  First  Di- 
vision, Sixteenth  Army  Corps,  opened  fire  upon  the  enemy.  Your  bri- 
gade was  in  front  of  the  batteries,  and  almost  equi  distant  from  Federal 
and  rebel  batteries.  Pieces  of  lead  from  our  own  rifled  shells  and  solid 
shot  from  the  enemy  fell  constantly  around  us.  At  10  a.  m.  Private 
Charles  A.  Minroe,  Company  E,  was  slightly  wounded  upon  the  thigh  by 
a shell,  and  Private  John  P.  Armstrong,  Company  K,  slightly  wounded 
in  leg  by  solid  shot.  The  enemy  continued  to  shell  us  constantly  on  the 
13th.  During  the  three  days  not  less  than  fifty  shells  exploded  in  my 
camp  and  around  my  men,  but,  providentially,  no  others  than  the  above- 
named  were  injured.  Solid  shot  would  strike  the  ground  in  front  of 
and  ricochet  over  my  men,  covering  them  with  earth.  My  men  were 
calm,  and  eager  that  you  should  receive  the  order  to  lead  them  into  ac- 
tion. I know  of  no  instance  where  either  an  officer  or  man  failed  to  be 
present  at  roll-call  or  failed  to  stand  by  his  gun  day  and  night.  As  an 
act  of  justice  to  my  regiment,  I will  add  that  this  has  been  the  first  time 
that  it  has  been  under  fire,  and  to  new  soldiers  there  can  be  nothing 
more  trying  than  to  be  exposed  for  a long  time  to  a severe  fire  with  no 
opportunity  to  return  the  fire. 

Nothing  further  of  moment  occurred  until  the  15th,  when  you  ordered 
my  regiment  to  relieve  the  Ninety-ninth  Indiana,  who  were  on  picket 
duty.  At  2.30  p.  m.  Private  William  Every,  Company  D,  was  mortally 
wounded  by  gunshot  through  the  lungs,  and  died  the  same  day  at  9 
p.  m.  He  was  a brave  young  man,  a good  soldier,  and  bade  fair  to  be 
one  of  the  regiment’s  brightest  ornaments.  While  on  picket  the  regi- 
ment was  in  short  musket  range  of  the  rebel  works.  The  men  kept  up 
a continual  and  deadly  fire  on  the  enemy,  which  was  sharply  returned 
by  him  at  intervals.  The  men  discharged  their  duty.  As  my  regiment 
was  being  relieved  on  the  morning  of  the  16th,  Corpl.  Oliver  S.  Davis, 
Company  A,  was  wounded  in  the  hand  by  gunshot,  causing  amputation 
of  the  right-hand  forefinger. 

In  conclusion,  allow  me  to  add  that  during  the  entire  march,  through 
the  excessive  heat,  and  while  before  the  enemy  at  Jackson,  officers  and 
men  displayed  coolness  and  courage,  cheerfully  bearing  all  hardships, 
and  by  their  conduct  proving  their  perfect  discipline. 


Chap.  XXXYl.j  THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN.  635 

Mortally  wounded,  since  died,  1 ; severely  wounded,  2 ; slightly 
wounded,  2. 

I am,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

ALBERT  HEATH, 

Lieut.  Col.,  Comdg.  One  hundredth  Regiment  Indiana  Volunteers. 

Ira  J.  Bloomfield, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  56. 

Report  of  Col.  Stephen  G.  Hichs , Fortieth  Illinois  Infantry , command- 
ing Second  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  Second  Brig.,  First  Div.,  Sixteenth  A.  0., 

Near  Jackson , Miss.,  July  21,  1863. 

Sir  : In  obedience  to  instructions  from  division  headquarters,  I have 
the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the  doings  of  m37  brigade 
from  the  4th  of  July  to  the  17th  of  July,  1863 : 

Brigade  marched  from  Oak  Ridge  the  evening  of  the  4th.  Marched 
8 miles,  and  camped  for  the  night  on  Hill’s  plantation,  2 miles  west  of 
the  Big  Black. 

On  the  morning  of  the  5th,  by  order  of  General  Smith,  moved  two 
regiments  to  the  Big  Black,  where  we  found  the  enemy  to  dispute  our 
crossing.  Skirmishing  during  the  entire  day,  resulting  in  the  killing  of 
1 man  and  wounding  10.  At  8 p.  m.,  by  order  of  General  Smith,  my 
brigade  moved  forward  for  the  purpose  of  crossing  the  river  at  Jones’ 
Ferry.  At  9 moved  forward,  One  hundred  and  third  Illinois  in  front. 
Finding  the  water  too  deep,  we  had  to  fall  back  under  cover  of  the 
timber.  Felled  timber  to  make  a crossing.  Failed  in  that,  and  rested 
until  morning. 

On  the  morning  of  the  6th,  constructed  a floating  bridge,  which  we 
completed  at  2 p.  m.  At  7 o’clock  the  Fifteenth  Michigan,  Fortieth 
Illinois,  and  Forty-sixth  Ohio  were  crossed,  and  moved  out  to  Bird- 
song plantation,  and  camped  for  the  night. 

On  the  evening  of  the  7th,  marched  in  direction  of  Jackson.  Arrived 
near  Jackson  the  evening  of  the  9th,  and  drove  in  the  enemy’s  pickets. 

On  the  evening  of  the  11th,  took  my  position  as  a reserve  in  rear  of 
the  First  and  Third  Brigades,  each  day  sending  one  regiment  to  the 
front  as  skirmishers  until  the  morning  of  the  16th,  when  General  Smith 
ordered  our  lines  advanced,  the  Ninety-seventh  Indiana,  of  Cockerill’s 
brigade,  and  Sixth  Iowa,  of  Sanford’s,  as  skirmishers,  with  the  Fortieth 
Illinois  and  Forty-sixth  Ohio,  of  my  brigade,  as  support.  The  Fortieth 
Illinois  was  pushed  forward  in  the  advance,  and  approached  within  400 
yards  of  the  enemy’s  fortifications  under  a most  galling  fire.  The  ut- 
most enthusiasm  and  gallantry  was  exhibited  by  all  the  officers  and 
men  in  my  brigade  that  were  under  the  fire,  and  I here  take  occasion 
to  congratulate  both  officers  and  men  of  the  entire  brigade  for  their 
noble  and  gallant  conduct  during  the  struggle,  from  the  time  we  ap- 
proached the  enemy’s  works  until  the  day  we  drove  them  from  their 
stronghold  and  forced  them  to  retire,  routed  and  demoralized. 

I am,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

S.  G.  HICKS, 

Colonel , Commanding  Second  Brigade. 

Capt.  T.  J.  Loudon, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


636  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

No.  57. 

Report  of , Fortieth  Illinois  Infantry. 

Neap  Jackson,  Miss.,  July  19,  1863. 

Sip  : In  accordance  with  your  directions,  I herewith  transmit  a de- 
tailed accouut  of  this  regiment  from  the  4th  of  J uly  instant  to  the  12th 
instant,  when  Lieut.  Col.  W.  Smith,  Forty-sixth  Ohio  Volunteers,  was 
detailed  to  take  command  of  the  regiment. 

On  the  4th,  the  regiment,  together  with  the  whole  brigade,  marched 
from  Oak  Ridge.  Arrived  at  Big  Black  on  the  morning  of  the  6th,  where 
two  companies  (A  and  H)  were  thrown  forward  as  skirmishers.  Found 
the  rebels  in  considerable  force  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river.  Those 
companies  were  relieved,  later  in  the  day,  by  Companies  I and  K.  The 
four  companies  kept  up  a busy  fire  all  the  time,  but  had  no  one  either 
killed  or  wounded.  During  the  day  the  regiment,  by  details,  was  en- 
gaged, under  direction  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Babcock,  in  building 
rafts  to  cross  the  brigade,  and  the  regiment  crossed  the  river  in  the 
evening  of  the  6th.  About  dark  of  the  same  day,  the  regiment,  to- 
gether with  the  Fifteenth  Michigan  and  Forty  sixth  Ohio,  marched  to 
Birdsong  plantation,  the  two  latter  regiments  in  advance.  However, 
this  regiment,  being  in  the  rear,  in  crossing  a deep  ditch  or  gully  got 
separated,  and  the  two  leading  companies  (B  and  G)  were  the  only  com- 
panies that  kept  with  the  advance  of  the  column.  Finding  that  they 
were  lost,  the  remaining  eight  companies  bivouacked  for  the  night  and 
rejoined  the  command  on  the  morning  of  the  7th.  On  the  afternoon 
of  the  same  day  the  regiment,  with  the  division,  took  up  the  line  of 
march,  and  arrived,  without  incident  worthy  of  note,  about  noou  in 
sight  of  Jackson. 

On  the  9th,  marched  in  line  of  battle,  and  encamped  at  night  near  the 
lunatic  asylum,  Companies  G and  H being  in  advance  as  skirmishers. 

On  the  evening  of  the  11th,  the  regiment  relieved  the  Sixth  Iowa, 
and  were  posted  in  a line  of  nearly  a mile  as  skirmishers,  where  it  re- 
mained until  the  evening  of  the  12th,  during  which  time  the  casualties 
were  as  follows : * 

The  regiment  was  relieved  on  the  evening  of  the  12th  by  the  Forty- 
sixth  Ohio.  _ 

On  the  13th,  we  again  went  upon  picket,  relieving  the  Ninety-seventh 
Indiana,  and  were  relieved  on  the  14th  by  the  Ninety-ninth  Indiana. 

During  the  afternoon  of  the  15th,  the  regiment  was  engaged  destroy- 
ing about  1 mile  of  the  Mississippi  Central  Railroad,  burning  the  ties 
and  heating  and  bending  the  rails. 

On  the  16th,  the  regiment  was  ordered  to  support  the  Ninety-seventh 
Indiana  in  an  advance  upon  the  rebel  works.  Advanced  about  200 
yards,  under  a murderous  fire  of  shot,  shell,  and  grape  from  three  or 
four  rebel  batteries,  firing  from  as  many  different  directions,  to  a tence, 
where  the  most  of  the  Ninety -seventh  Indiana  were  lying.  The  men 
were  all  ordered  to  lie  down,  while  the  rebels  continued  throwing 
shells,  &c.,  instantly  killing  Private  Isaac  W.  Jones,  Company  K.  The 
casualties  during  the  day,  beside  this  1 man  killed,  were:! 

(Not  signed.) 

Col.  S.  G.  Hicks, 

Commanding  Brigade. 


* Nominal  list  reports  6 men  wounded, 
t Nominal  list,  omitted,  shows  6 wounded. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


0 


637 


No.  58. 

Report  of  Col.  Willard  A.  Diclcerman , One  hundred  and  third  Illinois 

Infantry. 

Near  Jackson,  Miss.,  July  18,  1863. 

Colonel:  The  One  hundred  and  third  Regiment  Illinois  Volunteer 
Infantry  moved  from  Oak  Ridge  on  the  4th  of  July  at  5 p.  m.,  marching 
some  8 miles,  and  resting  for  the  night  on  the  hills  about  2 miles  from 
Black  River  (Company  C on  picket). 

Morning  of  the  5th,  at  7 a.  m.,  the  regiment  and  the  Fortieth  Illinois 
moved  to  the  ford  on  the  river,  having  four  companies  of  skirmishers 
in  advance  and  under  cover  on  the  bank,  skirmishing  with  the  rebels 
across  the  river  during  the  day,  two  companies  from  each  regiment 
supporting  them  on  the  road  some  100  yards  in  rear,  and  remainder  of 
the  two  regiments  in  line  on  each  side  of  road  in  edge  of  the  woods  (the 
bottom  timber  being  about  200  yards  wide).  At  9 p.  m.  an  attempt  was 
made  to  cross  the  ford,  the  One  hundred  and  third  leading  the  brigade. 
The  water  was  found  to  be  swimming  deep  (from  the  late  rains),  and  all 
were  obliged  to  retire.  From  11  p.  m.  until  2 a.  in.,  Major  Willison,  of 
the  One  hundred  and  third  Illinois,  and  50  men  were  engaged  in  felling 
trees  to  make  a crossing.  No  trees  could  be  made  to  reach  across,  and 
the  major  and  Joseph  Weston,  Company  I,  swam  the  river,  which  waked 
up  a rebel  fire;  kept  up  for  some  time;  no  one  hurt;  the  major  and 
Weston  playing  musk-rat,  and  returning  across  the  river  in  good  order. 

On  the  6th  instant,  the  whole  regiment  was  skirmishing  during  the 
day  along  the  river  bank,  with  the  loss  in  wounded  of  4 men : Miriam 
Stevens,  Company  F,  in  calf  of  leg;  George  W.  Beams,  Company  D,  in 
left  shoulder;  George  Hart,  Company  C,  two  wounds  in  right  leg,  and 
Thomas  K.  Smith  in  ankle  by  piece  of  shell.  The  regiment  ferried  the 
river  on  raft,  one-half  mile  above  ford,  at  10  p.  m.,  and  camped  on  bank 
for  the  night. 

At  daylight  on  the  7th,  moved  some  6 miles  to  a house  three-fourths 
of  a mile  from  Birdsong  Ferry,  where  we  remaiued  until  5 p.  m.,  and 
then  marched  (without  supper,  beef  and  coffee  having  to  be  left  as  it 
was  just  ready)  some  8 miles,  resting  on  north  side  of  road,  in  grove  of 
timber,  during  a most  terrific  thunder-storm. 

July  8. — At  3 p.  m.  ordered  forward,  and  marched  until  11.30  p.  m., 
resting -for  the  night  in  corn-field  on  roadside. 

July  9. — Moved  forward  at  7 a.  m.,  and  kept  up  line  of  march,  with 
continued  delays,  until  9.30  a.  in.,  when,  taking  by-roads  through  fields 
and  thickets,  moved  uninterruptedly  until  2.30  p.  in.,  when  halted  very 
opportunely.  The  extreme  heat  having  caused  8 or  10  men  to  fall  out, 
overcome  during  the  last  half  hour,  a rest  of  two  and  one-half  hours 
refreshed  the  command,  and  we  moved  forward.  Companies  D and  I, 
as  skirmishers,  under  Major  Willison,  met  the  rebels  about  sundown, 
keeping  up  a brisk  fire  for  a few  minutes.  A section  of  artillery  was 
brought  forward,  on  the  right  of  which  we  formed  in  line  aud  rested  for 
the  night. 

July  10. — Marched  at  7 a.  m.,  moving  slowly  over  the  fields  until  10.30 
a.  m. ; rested  fifteen  minutes,  then  moved  forward  until  12.30,  when  we 
formed  in  line  and  rested  for  dinner,  being  in  sight  of  the  dome  of  the 
lunatic  asylum,  north  of  Jackson,  Miss.  Formed  in  line  of  battle  at  4 
p.  m. ; moved  across  fields  at  6.30,  having  line  of  skirmishers  400  yards 
in  front  (Companies  A and  F skirmishers  from  the  One  hundred  and 
third  Regiment).  After  dark  halted  in  line  in  the  garden  of  Brigadier- 
General  Griffith,  C.  S.  Army,  for  the  night. 


638 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

July  11. — Moved  forward  150  yards,  at  7 a.  m.;  at  8.30  a.  m.  moved 
forward  short  distance;  at  0 moved  by  left  flank  about  1J  miles,  and 
stacked  arms  in  rear  of  Colonel  Hardeman’s  house;  10.30  a.  m.  moved 
forward  about  one-half  mile  into  a dense  thicket,  out  of  which  we  moved 
back  in  shelter  of  hill,  and  rested.  Had  quite  a shower  this  p.  m.  (Com- 
panies A,  F,  and  B yesterday  were  the  first  to  arrive  at  the  lunatic 
asylum,  and  put  guards  around  it).  At  dark  we  went  on  fatigue  in 
rifle-pits  until  12.30  midnight. 

July  12. — The  regiment  on  fatigue  duty  from  7 a.  m.  until  dark  to-day 
in  rifle-pits. 

July  13. — Regiment  in  line  of  battle  from  2 a.  m.  until  daylight;  only  a 
detail  of  one  company  on  duty  to-day  foraging. 

July  14. — Three  companies  on  duty  to-day  foraging.  At  5 p.  m.  regi- 
ment formed  in  line  and  moved  our  bivouac  150  yards  to  the  rear. 
Seven  companies  on  fatigue  to-night,  under  Major  Willison. 

July  15. — Eighty  men  and  officers  detailed  this  evening  under  Captain 
Wyckoff ; fatigue  duty  on  earthwork. 

July  16. — One  company  (I)  on  detail  at  division  hospital;  eight  com- 
panies One  hundred  and  third,  under  Lieutenant-Colonel  Wright,  on 
fatigue,  burning  Mississippi  Central  Railroad.  Noon  until  night  have 
1 officer  and  10  men  guarding  pond  of  water,  1J  miles  from  camp. 

July  17. — At  1 p.  m.  regiment  ordered  in  picket  at  forks  of  Canton 
road,  about  3£  miles  north  of  Jackson. 

July  18. — Regiment  on  picket  on  Canton  road. 

The  regiment  started  from  Oak  Hill  with  213  privates,  31  sergeants, 
38  corporals,  11  line  officers,  3 field  officers,  2 staff,  4 teamsters.,  5 musi- 
cians, 1 orderly;  total,  308. 

There  has  been  returned  to  the  bluff  4 wounded  and  12  sick,  from 
Big  Black  River.  There  have  others  joined  from  the  bluff,  making  the 
present  condition  of  regiment  in  muskets  308  enlisted,  14  line  officers,  5 
field  and  staff ; total,  327.  Of  these,  22  are  sick  or  unable  to  march.  It 
is  impossible  to  make  any  distinction  when  all  have  so  universally  re- 
sponded to  every  call  of  duty. 

In  obedience  to  your  request,  I most  respectfully  furnish  the  fore- 
going statement. 

Very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

W.  A.  DICKERMAN, 

Colonel  One  hundred  and  third  Regiment  Illinois  Infantry. 

Col.  S.  G.  Hicks, 

Comdg.  Second  Brigade , First  Division , Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  59. 

Report  of  Col.  Charles  C.  Walcutt , Forty-sixth  Ohio  Infantry. 

Near  Jackson,  Miss.,  July  20,  1863. 

Captain:  In  obedience  to  instructions  from  your  headquarters,  I 
have  the  honor  of  submitting  the  following  report  of  casualties  in  my 
regiment  since  the  4th  day  of  July,  and  mention  of  the  conduct  of  my 
men  before  Jackson : 

The  following  are  the  casualties  in  the  skirmish  at  Big  Black  on  the 
morning  of  the  5th  of  July*  and  before  Jackson  :f 


* Nominal  list,  omitted,  shows  1 killed  and  2 wouuded. 
t Nominal  list,  omitted,  shows  1 killed  and  7 wounded. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


639 


The  skirmishing  at  Big  Black  was  done  by  all  the  companies  of  the 
regiment,  operating  at  diiferent  times.  The  casualties  there  occurred 
early  in  the  morning,  while  the  men  were  badly  exposed  to  a hidden 
and  well-directed  tire  from  the  enemy.  Rifle-pits  were  made  soon  after, 
and  we  were  punished  no  more. 

July  12. — The  regiment  reported  to  Colonel  Corse,  Sixth  Iowa  In- 
fantry, then  in  charge  of  skirmishers  for  duty  in  the  front.  Here  the 
remainder  of  the  casualties  occurred,  with  the  exception  of  Sergeant 
[John  M.]  Case  and  Private  [William]  Sherman,  wounded  on  the  16th 
instant.  On  this  day  the  regimeut  proved  its  real  worth,  the  men  ex- 
hibiting excellent  judgment,  cooluess,  and  true  bravery.  The  regiment 
took  part  in  the  charge  on  the  16th  instant,  evincing  their  determina- 
tion in  the  cause,  with  the  loss  of  2 of  our  comrades. 

I can  mention  no  names ; the  conduct  of  each  and  every  officer  and 
man,  without  one  single  exception,  could  not  have  been  better.  I can 
say  now  that  I have  none  but  brave,  good,  and  true  men,  and  I feel 
proud  of  my  command. 

Verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

CHAS.  C.  WALCUTT, 
Colonel  Forty -sixth  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry . 

Capt.  T.  J.  Loudon, 

Actg.  Asst.  Adjt.  Gen.,  First  Division , Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 


No.  60. 

Report  of  Col.  Joseph  R.  Cocherill , Seventieth  Ohio  Infantry , command- 
ing Third  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  Third  Brig.,  First  Div.,  Sixteenth  A.  C., 

July  19,  1863. 

General  : I herewith  have  the  honor  to  report  to  you  the  operations 
of  this  brigade  on  the  march  from  Oak  Ridge  to  Jackson,  Miss. 

On  the  evening  of  July  4,  we  were  ordered  forward,  and  arrived  at 
Birdsong  Ferry,  on  Big  Black  River,  on  the  5th.  The  enemy  at- 
tempted to  interrupt  the  crossing,  and  fired  across  the  river  at  our 
advance  guard,  but  no  casualties  occurred.  We  found  an  old  ferry- 
boat, which,  after  some  labor,  was  made  available,  and  this  brigade 
was  crossed  over  by  3 p.  m.  of  the  6th,  and  took  position  on  the  east 
bank,  followed  by  the  Fourth  and  First  Brigades  of  this  division.  We, 
with  the  main  body  of  the  army,  arrived  in  front  of  Jackson  on  the 
10th,  and,  after  supporting  a brigade  of  the  Ninth  Army  Corps,  in  which 
the  troops  of  this  brigade  maneuvered  in  excellent  order,  encamped 
close  to  the  enemy’s  works. 

On  the  11th,  we  farther  advanced,  in  pursuance  of  your  order,  to  the 
front,  about  1,000  yards  from  the  works  of  the  enemy.  The  enemy  can- 
nonaded us  severely  in  the  evening,  but  with  small  loss  to  this  brigade. 
We  remained  in  this  position  until  the  13th,  when  the  fire  so  harassed 
us  that  I procured  a few  picks  and  spades  and  intrenched  the  entire 
front  of  my  brigade. 

On  the  14th,  I was  ordered  to  fall  back  about  1 mile  and  take  posi- 
tion with  the  other  troops  of  the  division.  Each  day  I sent  a regiment 
to  the  picket  line,  and  they  performed  their  duty  in  first-class  style. 

On  the  16th,  the  Ninety-seveuth  Indiana,  Colonel  Catterson,  was  or- 
dered on  picket  in  the  front  and  left  of  the  division,  and,  in  obedience 
to  orders  from  headquarters,  the  picket  line  was  advanced  to  feel  the 


640 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


enemy’s  front,  and  moved  forward  in  fine  style  across  an  open  field,  nearly 
to  the  works  of  the  enemy,  under  a most  terrible  fire  from  at  least  three 
of  their  batteries.  This  line  of  skirmishers  in  some  places  held  their 
new  ground,  and  in  others  was  compelled  to  fall  back  to  the  original 
position.  The  casualties  of  the  Ninety-seventh  Indiana  in  this  advance 
were  about  30  in  killed  and  wounded. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  Colonel  Catterson  went  forward  to  the 
enemy’s  works  and  planted  his  colors  on  the  redoubt,  the  enemy  hav- 
ing evacuated  the  place  during  the  night.  I believe  the  Ninety-seventh 
Indiana  was  the  first  regiment  in  Jackson.  In  all  the  trying  circum- 
stances under  which  this  brigade  was  placed,  for  six  days  exposed,  day 
and  night,  to  cannonade  aud  musketry,  I am  proud  to  record  the  gallant 
conduct  of  my  officers  and  men.  Every  officer  and,  I believe,  every 
soldier  stood  "to  his  place  with  the  most  heroic  courage,  and  never 
quailed  before  any  fire  of  the  enemy. 

I cannot  too  highly  commend  the  conduct  of  the  gallant  colonel  of  the 
Ninety-seventh  Indiana  and  his  brave  regiment,  who  were  placed  on 
the  16th  in  the  advance,  as  already  stated.  They  deserve  the  commen- 
dation of  the  country.  I desire  also  to  call  attention  to  Colonel  Jones, 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Fulton,  and  Major  Dawes,  Fifty-third  Ohio  Volun- 
teers ; Major  Brown  aud  Captain  Summers,  acting  field  officers,  Seven- 
tieth Ohio  Volunteers  ; Col.  Alexander  Fowler,  Lieutenant-Colonel  De 
Hart,  and  Major  Berkey,  Ninety-ninth  Indiana  Volunteers;  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Cavins,  and  Captain  Dean,  acting  field  officer  Ninety -seventh 
Indiana  Volunteers,  as  officers  who  have  distinguished  themselves  for 
courage,  perseverance,  and  skill,  and  are  competent  to  every  task  im- 
posed upon  them.  To  the  line  officers  of  the  brigade  and  the  gallant 
soldiers  of  each  and  every  regiment  I cheerfully  testify  that  all  per- 
formed their  duty  to  my  entire  satisfaction,  and  seemed  to  vie  with  each 
other  as  to  who"  was  the  bravest  and  best  soldier.  My  staff  officers, 
Capt.  H.  L.  Phillips,  acting  assistant  adjutant-general;  Lieutenants 
Eustace  H.]  Ball  and  [John  C.j  Nelson,  aides-de-camp,  and  Lieutenant 
Charles  K.]  Crumit,  brigade  inspector,  displayed  the  most  gallant  con- 
duct and  discharged  their  several  duties  in  the  most  satisfactory  man- 
ner. My  thanks  are  due  to  the  medical  department  for  their  care  and 
attention  to  the  wounded  and  sick  of  this  brigade. 

I trust  the  conduct  of  my  officers  and  men  will  meet  with  your  appro- 
bation. 

The  casualties  of  the  brigade  are  as  follows : Seven  enlisted  men  killed 
(one  by  accident),  2 commissioned  officers  and  35  enlisted  men  wounded, 
1 enlisted  man  taken  prisoner ; aggregate,  45. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

J.  R.  COCKERILL, 
Colonel , Commanding  Brigade. 

Brig.  Gen.  W.  S.  Smith,  Commanding  Division. 


No.  61. 

Report  of  Col.  Robert  F.  Catterson , Ninety -seventh  Indiana  Infantry. 

Near  Jackson,  Miss.,  July  20,  1863. 
Colonel  : As  to  the  part  taken  by  the  Ninety -seventh  Regiment 
Indiana  Volunteers  in  the  advance  upon  Jackson,  Miss.,  I have  the 
honor  to  submit  the  following  report : 

Up  to  the  morning  of  July  16,  the  Ninety-seventh  Regiment  had  borne 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


641 


an  unimportant  part,  with  the  exception  of  light  skirmishing  on  the 
picket  line,  which  resulted  in  the  killing  of  1 man  and  wounding  of  1 
officer  and  5 men,  all  of  which  came  under  your  immediate  notice,  and 
of  which  it  is  unnecessary  to  say  more  at  present. 

On  the  morning  of  the  16th,  pursuant  to  an  order  from  you,  I pro- 
ceeded with  my  regiment  to  relieve  the  One  hundredth  Indiana  Regi- 
ment, then  on  picket  duty  on  your  front,  and  posted  my  men  immedi- 
ately, my  right  occupying  a small  grove  near  the  railroad,  extending  my 
line  as  far  east  as  the  Canton  dirt  road,  thus  covering  a scope  of  coun- 
try nearly  three-quarters  of  a mile  in  extent.  At  10.30  o’clock,  I was 
notified  by  Colonel  Corse,  of  the  Sixth  Iowa  Regiment,  then  in  command 
of  all  pickets  on  our  division  front,  that  at  11  o’clock  there  would  bean 
advance  of  our  entire  line,  in  order,  if  possible,  to  ascertain  whether  the 
enemy  still  held  their  works  in  force,  at  the  same  time  notifying  me  that 
the  Fortieth  Illinois  Regiment,  under  command  of  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Smith,  of  the  Forty-sixth  Ohio  Regiment,  would  support  me.  As  I had 
but  half  an  hour  to  prepare  for  the  advance,  I proceeded  at  once  to  in- 
struct my  officers  in  the  signal  for  our  advance,  which  was  accomplished 
just  as  the  signal  was  given.  1 looked  around  me  for  my  support,  but, 
owing  to  the  brief  notice  Colonel  Smith  had  received,  it  was  not  there. 
But,  as  I said,  the  signal  had  already  been  given,  and  all  that  remained 
for  me  to  do  was  to  obey  my  orders  to  ascertain  if  the  enemy  still 
occupied  their  works  in  force.  How  well  that  was  done  let  the  sequel 
show. 

My  line  of  skirmishers,  as  now  posted,  were  about  700  yards  from  the 
rebel  fortifications,  with  a broad  open  field  in  front  of  my  right,  thus 
exposing  it  to  the  enemy’s  fire  at  the  first  step  forward.  In  front  of 
my  left  was  a thick  wood,  in  which  was  posted  the  Twentieth  Missis- 
sippi Regiment  as  sharpshooters,  thus  not  only  exposing  my  entire  line 
to  a murderous  fire  from  the  enemy’s  artillery,  but  to  the  continued  fire 
of  two  regiments  of  infantry,  posted  as  skirmishers  ; but  notwithstand- 
ing all  the  disadvantages  we  labored  under,  not  an  officer  or  man  wa- 
vered, but  moved  forward  under  the  galling  fire  of  six  batteries,  show- 
ering upon  us  a perfect  storm  of  grape  and  canister,  solid  shot,  and 
shell,  till  within  from  200  to  300  yards  of  the  enemy’s  works,  while  my 
extreme  left  was  within  less  than  100  feet  of  their  battery  on  the  left, 
from  which  point  they  were  able  to  completely  silence  two  of  their  guns. 
Having  proceeded  thus  far,  and  being  well  satisfied  that  the  object  of 
my  advance  had  been  accomplished,  and  that  to  proceed  farther  would 
be  death  to  every  man,  as  a continual  blaze  of  fire  was  streaming  from 
the  enemy’s  wmrks  all  along  their  line,  and  having  no  support  thus  far, 

I felt  that  I could  do  nothing  more  than  halt,  and,  if  possible,  hold  m37 
present  position.  At  this  time  I saw,  for  the  first  time,  my  support  com- 
ing in  on  my  extreme  right,  moving  forward  under  a most  terrible  fire, 
and  occupying  a ravine  near  the  railroad.  At  3 p.  m.  a heavy  force  of 
the  enemy  met  and  drove  back  the  force  on  the  west  of  the  railroad, 
thus  leaving  my  right  entirely  exposed  and  outflanked  by  nearly  200 
yards.  My  support  had  also  fallen  back  to  the  dirt  road  running  par- 
allel to  my  line,  and  as  my  ammunition  had  all  been  exhausted,  the 
right  wing  was  ordered  to  fall  back  to  the  road,  which  was  done  and  held 
permanently.  In  the  mean  time  the  left  wing  had  been  supplied  with 
ammunition,  and  advanced  still  nearer  the  enemy’s  works,  which  posi- 
tion they  left  only  to  occupy  the  enemy’s  work,  which  was  done  at  day- 
light on  the  morning  of  the  17th. 

During  the  entire  engagement  both  officers  and  men  behaved  with 
jlie  most  daring  gallantry,  and  to  enumerate  the  conduct  of  those  who 
41  B B — VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CiiAr.  XXXVI. 


642 


distinguished  themselves  on  this  occasion  would  be  to  name  in  detail 
every  officer  and  man  in  my  command.  I must  say,  however,  that  I 
cannot  find  words  to  express  my  admiration  of  the  conduct  of  Lieut. 
Col.  A.  G.  Gavins,  in  command  of  the  right  wing,  and  Captain  (Acting 
Major)  Dean,  who  was  wounded  while  so  gloriously  leading  the  left 
forward  through  a perfect  storm  of  iron  hail. 

Casualties  on  the  IGth  : * 

Killed  and  wounded  previous  to  the  IGth : t 
Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R„  F.  CATTERSON, 
Colonel , Commanding  Regiment. 


Col.  J.  R.  COCKERILL, 

Commanding  Brigade. 


No.  G2. 

Report  of  Col.  Alexander  Fonder , Ninety -ninth  Indiana  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Ninety-ninth  Indiana  Volunteers, 

July  18,  18G3. 

Sir  : My  regiment  marched  from  Oak  Ridge,  Miss.,  July  4,  18G3,  at  4 
p.  m.,  and  marched  until  10  p.  m.  of  the  same  day,  when  we  camped  on 
the  east  side  of  Bear  Creek,  2 miles  from  Big  Black  River ; we  lay  there 
until  10  a.  m.  of  the  5th,  when  we  advanced  and  formed  in  line  of  bat- 
tle on  the  right  of  the  Seventieth  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry,  where  we 
lay  inline  until  dark,  when,  with  one  company  deployed  as  skirmishers, 
under  command  of  Maj.  J.  M.  Berkjey,  I advanced  my  regiment  in  line 
until  the  skirmishers  rested  on  the  bank  of  the  river;  the  regiment  rest- 
ing 100  yards  to  the  rear.  We  lay  on  our  arms  during  the  night  and 
the  next  day  until  12  m.,  during  which  time  the  skirmishers  kept  a con- 
tinual tiring,  when  I marched  down  to  the  river  and  ferried  across,  fol- 
lowing the  Fifty-third  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry.  We  lay  on  our  arms 
m line  during  the  night,  and  the  next  day  (July  7),  after  drawing  three 
days’  rations,  marched  some  G miles,  where  we  went  into  camp  during 
t he  night. 

July  8,  we  started  in  the  afternoon  and  marched  until  8 p.  m.,  when 
we  camped  for  the  night. 

On  the  9th,  we  marched  early  in  the  morning,  resting  in  the  middle 
of  the  day.  In  the  afternoon,  when  we  came  in  hearing  of  the  enemy’s 
guns,  we  formed  in  line  on  the  left  of  the  Fifty-third  Ohio  Volunteer 
Infantry,  when  we  were  moved  forward  and  formed  in  the  same  order, 
in  an  open  field,  and,  throwing  a company  of  skirmishers  out  to  cover 
our  front,  we  lay  on  our  arms  during  the  night. 

July  10,  marched  some  2 or  3 miles,  when  we  marched  in  line,  my 
regiment  being  in  reserve  most  of  the  time.  Toward  evening  I formed 
on  the  left  of  the  Ninety-seventh  Indiana,  and  in  line,  resting  with  my 
left  wing  on  the  east  side  of  the  railway ; lay  on  our  arms  during  the 
night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  11th,  at  daylight,  my  left  being  very  much 
exposed,  the  enemy  opened  on  it,  and  I deemed  it  advisable  to  move 
them  to  the  rear  of  the  right  wing,  under  cover  of  the  timber.  In  doing 


* Nominal  list,  omitted,  shows  4 killed  and  23  wounded. 
tNonfin^l  fist,  omitted,  shows.  1 killed  and  5.  wounded.. 


(Jiiap.  XXXVJ.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


643 


so,  Private  F.  M.  McGraw,  of  Company  I,  was  killed.  Afterward  I moved 
my  regiment  to  the  left,  across  the  railroad,  and  took  my  position  in  the 
new  line,  having  thrown  one  company  out- as  skirmishers,  under  com- 
mand of  Lieut.  Col.  E.  P.  De  Hart,  who  had  command  of  the  skir- 
mishers of  the  brigade.  We  moved  to  the  front,  and  formed  a line  on 
the  left  of  the  Ninety- seventh  Indiana,  being  now  on  the  left  of  the 
brigade. 

During  the  next  day  (July  12)  we  lay  in  line  all  day,  and,  on  the 
13th,  we  moved  to  the  right  and  rear,  and  during  that  night  and  the 
next  morning  we  threw  up  earthworks  to  protect  the  men. 

July  14,  my  regiment  was  ordered  to  relieve  the  Fortieth  Illinois  on 
the  skirmish  line,  where  we  skirmished  until  10  a.  m.  of  the  15th,  when 
we  were  relieved  by  the  One  hundredth  Indiana.  As  soon  as  we  were 
relieved,  we  marched  back  and  took  our  place  in  the  brigade,  which 
had  moved  still  farther  to  the  rear,  where  we  lay  until  the  17th,  the 
day  of  the  evacuation. 

Between  the  12th  and  15th  my  regiment  was  continually  under  fire  of 
the  enemy’s  shell  and  grape.  Both  the  men  and  officers  behaved  well, 
with  the  exception  of  2,  whom  I will  bring  to  your  notice  in  another 
report. 

List  of  casualties:  Killed,  1;  severely  wounded,  1;  slightly  wounded,  5. 

ALEXANDER  FOWLER, 

Colonel  Ninety -ninth  Indiana  Volunteer  Infantry. 

Capt.  H.  L.  Phillips, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  63. 


Report  of  Col.  Wells  S.  Jones , Fifty -third  Ohio  Infantry. 


Near  Jackson,  Miss.,  July  21,  1863. 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  make  the  following  report  of  the  part 
taken  by  my  regiment  in  the  advance  on  Jackson: 

We  marched  from  Oak  Ridge  on  the  afternoon  of  the  4th  of  July,  ar- 
riving at  Big  Black  River  on  the  evening  of  the  following  day,  where 
three  companies  of  my  regiment  engaged  in  skirmishing  with  the  enemy 
that  night  and  the  following  day  in  the  afternoon,  when  we  crossed  the 
river.  Of  my  operations  from  that  time  until  we  arrived  immediately  in 
front  of  the  enemy’s  works  at  Jackson,  on  the  evening  of  the  10th,  you 
are  already  advised,  as  we  were  all  the  time  under  your  observation. 

From  the  evening  of  July  10  until  about  noon  on  the  16th,  my  regi- 
ment remained  all  the  time  within  range  of  the  enemy’s  guns.  During 
that  time  all  of  the  companies  were  thrown  forward  into  the  front  line 
of  skirmishers,  where  we  had  9 men  wounded.  About  noon  on  the  16th, 
in  obedience  to  your  order,  I rejoined  the  brigade,  which  had  two  days 
previously  retired  1,000  paces  to  the  rear. 

With  feelings  of  great  pleasure,  I announce  the  fact  that  every  officer 
and  soldier  in  my  command  have  performed  their  arduous  duties  cheer- 
fully. Their  patience  and  courage  well  deserve  the  admiration  of  their 
commanding  officers  and  the  gratitude  of  their  country. 

Very  respectfully, 


W.  S.  JONES, 
Colonel , Commanding. 

Col.  J.  R.  Cockerill,  Commanding  Brigade. 


644 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 
No.  64. 


[Chai*.  XXXVI. 


Report  of  Col.  William  W.  Sanford , Forty  eighth  Illinois  Infantry , com- 
manding Fourth  Brigade. 

Hdqrs.  4th  Brig.,  1st  Div.,  Detachment  16th  A.  C., 

Jachson , Miss.,  July  19,  1863. 

Sir  : I respectfully  make  the  following  report  of  the  operations  of  the 
Fourth  Brigade  since  leaving  Oak  Bidge,  Miss.,  on  the  evening  of  the 
4th  instant: 

On  the  evening  of  the  6th,  this  command  was  ordered  to  Jones’  Ford, 
on  the  Big  Black  Eiver,  to  effect  a crossing,  in  conjunction  with  other 
troops  of  the  division,  who  were  to  cross  higher  up.  I was  instructed 
that  the  stream  was  not  more  than  3 feet  deep,  and  that  infantry  could 
easily  cross  at  the  ford.  The  guide  sent  with  the  Sixth  Iowa,  having 
lost  the  road,  led  them  wandering  through  the  country,  and  they  did 
not  arrive  at  the  crossing  place  until  11.30  p.  m.,  having  marched  a dis- 
tance of  10  miles.  Upon  the  arrival  of  the  Sixth  Iowa,  preparations 
were  made  at  once  to  cross.  Men  were  immediately  sent  in,  and  dis- 
covered the  stream  to  be  so  swift  and  so  deep  that  not  only  was  it  im- 
practicable to  ford,  but  impossible  for  the  men  to  swim  across  carrying 
their  arms.  A couple  of  canoes  were  finally  discovered,  lashed  together ; 
3 men  were  placed  in  them  and  started  over.  The  stream  being  so 
swift,  and  they  not  having  oars  or  poles,  were  swept  down  the  stream, 
and  immediately  a fire  was  opened  upon  us  from  the  opposite  shore. 
The  command  then  fell  back  from  the  exposed  position,  and  two  com- 
panies from  the  Sixth  Iowa  thrown  along  the  shore  soon  silenced  the 
firing.  Deeming  the  crossing  to  be  impracticable  without  boats  or  pon- 
toons, I withdrew  the  Forty-eighth  Illinois  from  the  river,  and  they 
bivouacked  for  the  night.  Ordered  the  Sixth  Iowa  to  picket  the  river 
for  2 miles  up  and  down,  and  sent  word  back  to  the  general  command- 
ing as  to  what  disposition  I had  made  of  my  command.  During  the 
night  Colonel  Corse  undertook  to  get  some  men  across,  and  had  made 
three  successful  trips  when  the  squad  on  the  west  bank,  waiting  to  get 
into  the  boat,  were  discovered  by  the  enemy,  and  a fire  along  the  entire 
bank  opened,  in  which  the  Sixth  Iowa  suffered  some  loss.  We  con- 
tinued skirmishing  with  the  enemy  all  the  next  day,  thereby  keeping 
their  attention  from  above,  and  enabling  Colonel  Cockerill  to  effect  a 
crossing.  We  crossed  immediately  after  Colonel  Cockerill’s  brigade; 
bivouacked  that  night  about  2 miles  from  the  river,  near  Birdsong 
house. 

The  next  morning  the  command  was  ordered  to  the  front  about  2 
miles.  In  making  this  movement  we  discovered  a rebel  camp  near 
Queen’s  Hill,  from  which  they  had  fled  so  precipitately  as  to  leave 
nearly  all  their  camp  and  garrison  equipage,  a number  of  small-arms, 
their  stores,  and  sick.  A few  prisoners  were  captured. 

The  night  of  the  7th,  we  camped  at  Colonel  Bobinson’s,  on  the  Clinton 

road.  . ... 

On  July  10,  my  command  took  the  advance,  the  right  of  the  division. 
On  passing  around  to  the  north  of  Jackson,  the  brigade  was  ordered 
back  and  another  brigade  thrown  in  front,  and  when  within  3 miles  of 
Jackson  the  brigade  was  ordered  to  the  rear  as  a reserve.  At  about  4 
p.  m.  the  brigade  was  again  thrown  to  the  front,  and  formed  in  line  of 
battle,  the  Sixth  Iowa  occupying  the  right  of  the  line.  Two  companies 
of  the  Sixth  Iowa  were  deployed  as  skirmishers,  and  Colonel  Corse  took 
command  of  them.  The  lines  were  then  advanced  to  the  Jnvingston 


CUAr.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


G45 


road,  aud  tlie  remainder  of  the  Sixth  Iowa  were  then  deployed  as  skir- 
mishers to  cover  the  entire  front  of  the  division,  connecting  with  the  two 
companies  previously  deployed  on  the  left.  Colonel  Corse  then  assumed 
command  of  the  whole  line  of  skirmishers,  and  continued  in  command 
until  our  occupation  of  Jackson,  and  I respectfully  refer  you  to  his  re- 
port as  to  the  duty  performed  by  the  brigade  as  skirmishers. 

On  the  morning  of  the  16th  instant,  by  direction  of  Maj.  Gen.  J.  G. 
Parke,  the  skirmishers  were  ordered  to  advance  and  feel  strongly  the 
enemy’s  line  at  every  point  in  our  immediate  front.  The  Sixth  Iowa 
were  then  on  duty  as  skirmishers.  At  the  request  of  Colonel  Corse, 
commanding  line  of  skirmishers,  I placed  the  Forty-eighth  Illinois  to 
support  the  right  of  the  line,  aud  accompanied  them  myself.  At  the 
designated  signal,  the  Sixth  Iowa  pressed  forward  along  the  entire  line, 
capturing  some  prisoners,  killing  quite  a number,  and  driving  the  enemy 
into  their  works.  The  Forty-eighth  Illinois  followed  them  up  closely  on 
the  right,  ready  to  support  the  line.  On  getting  into  the  open  held, 
clear  of  the  timber,  we  were  opened  upon  by  a terrific  artillery  fire,  en- 
filading the  line,  and  also  by  three  regiments  of  infantry  in  the  enemy’s 
rifle-pits.  Seeing  it  was  impossible  to  make  the  enemy’s  works  without 
a stronger  line  and  support,!  ordered  the  right  to  fallback  to  the  cover 
of  the  timber.  The  left  of  the  line  (where  Colonel  Corse  was  in  person) 
also  about  this  time  fell  back  under  a heavy  and  galling  fire  of  artillery 
and  musketry.  The  entire  line  fell  back  'in  good  order,  and  held  the 
woods  until  relieved  by  the  Twenty-sixth  Illinois.  Too  much  praise 
cannot  be  accorded  the  officers  and  enlisted  men  of  this  command  for 
the  gallant  manner  in  which  they  advanced  and  held  the  line  under  the 
terrific  fire.  Every  officer  and  man  conducted  himself  so  well  that  it  is 
hard  to  particularize  them  by  name.  To  Col.  John  M.  Corse,  Sixth  Iowa 
Volunteer  Infantry,  great  credit  is  due  for  the  efficient  and  prompt 
movements  of  our  skirmishers.  He  was  constantly  moving'  along  the 
entire  line  from  the  first  day  we  advanced  on  Jackson  until  we  occupied 
the  place,  and  to  him  is  due  all  the  credit  for  pushing  forward  and  main- 
taining our  line  of  skirmishers  so  close  to  the  enemy’s  works.  Major 
Miller  and  Adjutant  Ennis,  of  the  Sixth  Iowa,  for  their  conduct  and 
support  at  the  different  times  they  participated  in  the  above  operations, 
merit  a great  deal  of  commendation.  Captains  Minton  anti  Bashore,  and 
Lieutenant  Holmes,  of  the  Sixth  Iowa,  are  particularly  mentioned  as 
being  worthy  of  notice  in  the  last  action.  To  Lieut.  Col.  Lucien  Great- 
house,  commanding  Forty-eighth  Illinois  Volunteers,  for  the  gallant 
manner  in  which  he  commanded  the  regiment,  I must  return  thanks: 
also  to  Maj.  W.  J.  Stephenson,  who  was  severely  wounded.  Captain 
Galbraith,  Lieutenants  Keneipp,  Walker,  Mercer,  and  Hemler,  of  the 
Forty-eighth  Illinois,  for  their  gallantry,  coolness,  and  excellent  man- 
agement of  thejr  commands  while  enduring  a scathing  fire  of  shot  and 
shell  from  the  enemy’s  batteries,  are  worthy  of  honorable  mention ; and 
to  the  entire  command,  both  officers  and  enlisted  men,  too  much  praise 
cannot  be  awarded  for  the  gallant  manner  in  which  they  conducted 
themselves  on  all  occasions. 

I append  herewith  a list  of  all  the  casualties  occurring  in  this  bri- 
gade.* 

Respectfully  submitted. 

' W.  W.  SANFORD, 

Colonel  Forty-eighth  Illinois  Vol.  Infantry , Comdg.  Fourth  Brig. 

Capt.  T.  J.  Loudon,  Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 

* Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  544. 


646 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 
Ho.  65. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Reports  of  Lieut.  Col.  Lucien  Greathouse , Forty -eighth  Illinois  Infantry. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  July  17,  1S63. 

Lieutenant:  In  accordance  with  orders  from  Col.  W.  AV . Sanford, 
commanding  Fourth  Brigade,  First  Division,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps, 

I have  the  honor  to  submit  to  you  the  following  report  of  the  march  of 
the  Forty-eighth  Illinois  Infantry  from  Oak  Bidge  to  Jackson,  Miss.: 

Begiment  left  Oak  Bidge,  Miss.,  July  4,  p.  m. ; arrived  at  8 p.  in.  near 
Big  Black  Biver,  and  bivouacked;  7 p.  in.,  July  5,  marched  to  join  the 
Sixth  Iowa  Infantry,  to  effect  a crossing  of  Big  Black  Biver.  The 
enemy  occupied  the  opposite  bank  in  some  force,  and  the  current  being 
too  strong  and  deep  for  this,  we  bivouacked  upon  the  bank,  and  re- 
lieved the  Sixth  Iowa  on  skirmish  duty  at  8 a.  m.,  July  6;  3 p.  in., 
same  day,  the  regiment  crossed  Big  Black  Biver  and  bivouacked  on 
opposite  side,  upon  the  bluff.  . 

July  7,  moved  in  advance.  Being  joined  by  the  column,  in  the  after- 
noon we  moved  forward  and  encamped  on  Queen’s  Hill. 

July  8,  p.  in.,  regiment  moved  from  Queen’s  Hill,  and  arrived  and 
bivouacked  at  a point  9 miles  from  Jackson,  Miss.,  whence  we  moved 
upon  the  right  of  the  road  and  occupied  the  Griffith  premises,  July 
9 d m 

’ July  *10,  moved  by  left  flank  in  the  vicinity  of  Potter’s  house,  where, 
and  at  other  points,  the  regiment  remained  skirmishing  with  the  enemy  s 
pickets,  and  living  on  very  moderate  quantities  of  hard  tack,  until  the 
a.  m.  of  July  16,  when  this  regiment  moved  with  others  of  the  First 
Division,  and  advanced  toward  the  enemy’s  works,  a report  of  which 
is  herewith  transmitted. 

Very  respectfully,  LTj0IE?  GREATHOUSE, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  Forty- eighth  Illinois  Infantry , Comdg.  Regt. 

Lieut.  E.  B.  Harlan, 

A ctin g A ssistant  A dj utant-  Genera l. 


Headquarters  Forty-eighth  Illinois  Infantry, 

Jachson , Miss.,  July  17,  1863. 

Lieutenant  : In  accordance  with  the  order  of  Col.  W.  W.  Sanford, 
commanding  Fourth  Brigade,  First  Division,  Sixteenth  Army  C°rps,  1 
have  the  honor  to  submit  to  you  the  following  report  of  tffe  part  taken 
by  the  Forty-eighth  Illinois  Infantry  in  the  skirmish  affair  of  the  16th 

instant:  . 

At  10.45  a.  m.  I was  ordered  to  move  my  command,  to  be  in  readiness 
at  11  a.  m.  to  support  the  right  of  the  line  of  skirmishers  of  the  kixtli 
Iowa  Infantry.  I formed  the  regiment,  and  moved  by  the  right  hank 
in  columns  of  wings,  and  arrived  at  11  o’clock  at  a point  m rear  of  the 
second  company  from  the  right  of  the  line  of  skirmishers  referred  to. 
Immediately  upon  my  arrival,  the  “advance”  was  sounded  on  the  left 
of  the  skirmish  line,  where  I imagined  Colonel  Corse,  Sixth  Iowa,  to 
have  been.  I formed  a line  of  battle  immediately,  parallel  to  the  skir- 
mish line,  under  an  infantry  fire  of  the  enemy,  and  moved  to  the  front 
to  support  the  skirmishers,  who  had  advanced  over  the  rifle-pits  occu- 
pied by  our  picket  line,  and  forward  through  the  space  formerly  inter- 


CriAt.  XXXVi.  ] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


647 


veiling  between  our  pickets  and  those  of  tbe  enemy,  over  several  ditches 
or  ravines,  and  a natural  abatis  of  fallen  timber.  Having  arrived  some 
distance,  probably  150  yards,  toward  the  front,  we  passed  the  line  of 
the  Sixth  Iowa,  commanded  at  that  point  by  Captain  Clune,  deeming 
it  impossible  for  the  skirmishers  to  take  a position  in  front  of  our  line, 
because  of  the  rising  formation  of  the  open  ground  in  front.  Captain 
Clune  said  to  me  that  he  was,  or  thought  he  was,  the  extreme  advance 
of  the  line  of  skirmishers,  which  statement  I am  convinced,  from  what 
I afterward  learned  of  Colonel  Corse,  was  very  correct.  Under  the  su- 
pervision of  Col.  W.  W.  Sanford,  the  brigade  commander,  we  moved  be- 
yond this  to  the  open  ground  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  Mississippi 
Central  Eailroad,  where  we  were  subjected  to  a galling  tire  of  musketry, 
shell,  round  shot,  and  grape  from  the  enemy  beyond  the  railroad  and 
within  their  works,  from  which  it  was  impossible  for  me  but  partially 
to  protect  the  men  by  having  them  lie  upon  their  faces.  This  position 
we  held  for  a quarter  of  an  hour,  awaiting  the  advance  of  the  skirmish 
line  and  the  coming  of  the  support  I was  ordered  to  expect,  but  which, 
for  some  reason  unknown  to  myself,  never  arrived  in  that  vicinity. 

During  our  occupation  of  this  point,  Major  Stephenson  was  severely 
wounded  while  gallantly  performing  the  duty  assigned  him  on  the  left 
of  the  battalion,  as  well  as  were  some  10  non-commissioned  officers  and 
privates,  the  wounds  of  two  or  three  of  which  will  probably  prove 
fatal. 

Deceiving  no  support,  and  not  discovering  that  any  advance  of  the 
skirmishers  was  being  made  or  contemplated,  I established  along  my 
front  aline  of  skirmishers,  and  threw  still  farther  to  the  right  and  front 
toward  the  enemy’s  works  a liue  of  vedettes,  when  I was  ordered  by 
Colonel  Sanford  to  retire  my  command  to  a position  50  yards  to  the 
rear,  and  somewhat  more  protected  than  the  position  we  then  occupied. 
I remained  some  time  afterward,  waiting  for  the  Forty-sixth  Ohio  to 
arrive,  which,  I am  informed,  they  failed  to  do  only  because  they  did 
not  receive  the  order  to  advance.  Receiving  again  a peremptory  order 
from  Colonel  Sanford  co  retire  to  the  position  indicated,  I moved  the 
regiment,  under  a very  severe  and  raking  fire  of  grape,  to  the  ravine, 
which  I afterward  ascertained  to  be  310  yards  from  the  enemy’s  rifle- 
pits,  about  the  center  of  which  were  three  pieces  of  artillery  that 
from  their  position  were  enabled  to  do  terrible  execution  all  along  the 
edge  of  the  timber,  and  so  placed  as  to  entirely  and  completely  com- 
mand the  railroad  and  all  the  approaches  to  the  enemy’s  rifle-pits  upon 
the  left.  Here  I had  a conference  with  Colonel  Corse  and  Major  Miller, 
Sixth  Iowa  Infantry,  who  then  advanced  their  skirmishers  some  dis- 
tance ahead  of  the  column.  Colouel  Corse  directed  me  to  hold  the 
ground  between  my  line  and  the  railroad  until  relieved  or  further  or- 
ders. I so  placed  my  vedettes  as  to  command  the  railroad,  and  threw 
out  flankers  beyond  and  to  the  right,  and  requested  Captain  Clune, 
Sixth  Iowa  Infantry,  to  supervise  and  regulate  the  position  of  those  of 
my  skirmishers  along  his  front,  which  he  did,  and  for  which  I render 
thanks. 

During  our  stay  at  this  point  we  were  subject  at  all  times  to  an  inces- 
sant fire  of  grape  and  canister,  that  did  quite  an  extensive  business — 
manufacturing  and  agricultural — in  the  way  of  plowing  the  ground 
and  making  scrub-brooms  of  the  timber.  I lost  in  killed  and  wounded 
at  this  poin:  by  grape  and  shell  5 men  from  the  guns  upon  the  right. 

At  3 o’clock  the  skirmishers  of  the  Sixth  Iowa  retired,  relieved  by 
others  that  took  position  on  the  old  line,  leaving  the  skirmishers  of  the 
Forty-eighth  alone  in  our  front.  At  3.15  o’clock,  the  Twenty-sixth  Illi 


648 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


nois  Infantry  reported  to  relieve  the  Forty-eighth  Begiment,  I assisted 
Captain  Dugger  to  put  his  men  along  the  front,  to  relieve  the  advance 
skirmishers,  and  retired  my  men  to  the  column.  Having  posted  his 
men,  I was  moving  with  Captain  Dugger  to  the  right  of  the  column 
when  he  was  struck  dead  by  a shell  that  exploded  over  us.  I mention 
this  fact  to  clear  any  doubt  that  may  have  existed  regardingthe  proper 
deportment  of  this  officer,  and  to  intimate  that  the  inability  of  his  men 
to  hold  the  ground  (for  I learn  that  it  was  reclaimed  by  the  enemy  during 
the  afternoon)  was  probably  due  to  the  death  of  Captain  Dugger,  whom 
they  thought  their  proper  commanding  officer. 

Being  properly  relieved,  I rehired  to  my  old  camp,  in  accordance  with 
orders  given  me. 

All  the  officers  and  men  under  my  command  conducted  themselves 
bravely  and  becomingly,  and  all  are  certainly  deserving  of  commenda- 
tion. I have  particularly  to  return  thanks  to  Lieutenant  Keneipp,  in 
charge  of  skirmishers,  and  Captain  Galbraith  and  Lieutenants  Walker, 
Mercer,  and  Hemler  for  their  gallantry,  coolness,  and  excellent  man- 
agement of  their  commands  while  enduring  a scathing  lire  of  shot  and 
shell  from  the  enfilading  batteries  upon  the  front  and  right. 

Hoping  that  this  may  prove  satisfactory,  I have  the  honor  to  be, 
lieutenant,  most  respectfully,  yours,  &c., 

LUCIEN  GEEATHOUSE, 

Lieutenant- Colonel  Forty-eighth  Illinois , Commanding  Regiment 

Lieut.  E.  B.  Harlan, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


Bo.  66. 

Reports  of  Col . John  M.  Corse , Sixth  Iowa  Infantry. 

Hdqrs.  Skirmishers,  First  Diy.,  Sixteenth  A.  C., 

Jachson , Miss.,  July  17,  1863. 

Captain  : On  the  16th  instant,  being  in  command  of  the  skirmishers 
of  the  First  Division,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps,  I was  ordered  by  Major- 
General  Parke,  commanding  Ninth  Army  Corps,  to  Avhich  this  division 
is  attached,  to  move  on  the  enemy’s  works  along  our  entire  front,  for 
the  purpose  of  ascertaining  their  strength,  position,  and  localities  of 
their  batteries. 

The  following  disposition  was  made  of  the  troops  under  my  com- 
mand: The  Sixth  Iowa  Infantry,  on  the  right,  deployed  as  skirmishers 
parallel  to  the  Jackson  and  Canton  Bailroad,  about  the  length  of  four 
companies  from  the  junction  of  the  Livingston  road  and  the  Jackson 
and  Canton  Bailroad,  then  making  an  acute  angle  with  the  Jackson 
and  Canton  Bailroad,  running  southwesterly,  the  right  resting  on  the 
Jackson  and  Vicksburg  Bailroad. 

The  Ninety-seventh  Indiana,  on  the  left,  deployed  as  skirmishers  along 
the  Livingston  road,  forming  a right  angle  with  the  line  on  the  Jackson 
and  Canton  Bailroad,  reaching  to  the  Canton  road.  The  entire  line 
was  supported  on  the  right  by  the  Forty-eighth  Illinois  Infantry,  on 
the  left  by  the  Fortieth  Illinois  Infantry,  and  in  the  center  by  the  Forty- 
sixth  Ohio  Infantry. 

At  the  signal  designated  at  11  a.  in.  by  the  general  commanding, 
Colonel  Catterson,  of  the  Ninety-seventh  Indiana,  whom  I placed  in  com- 
mand of  the  line  left  of  the  Jackson  and  Canton  Bailroad,  moved  for- 


Chap.  XXXVI.) 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


649 


ward  briskly  over  the  crest  behind  which  they  lay,  down  the  slope  of 
the  ravine  immediately  in  their  front,  and  up  the  crest  of  the  opposite 
slope.  The  whole  line  from  the  first  (the  ground  being  open  fields)  was 
exposed  to  a galling  fire  of  musketry  from  the  parapet  of  the  enemy’s 
works,  and,  when  fairly  exposed,  descending  the  first  slope,  the  batteries 
of  the  enemy  commenced  playing  with  terrible  effect.  The  Fortieth  Illi- 
nois, commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Smith,  of  the  Forty-sixth  Ohio 
Infantry,  observing  the  Ninety-seventh  Indiana  clearing  the  ravine, 
gallantly  followed  them  at  a close  supporting  distance,  and,  under  an 
intense  musketry  and  cannonading,  took  position  in  the  bottom  of  a 
ravine  along  a fence,  and  held  the  line  till  the  Ninety-seventh  Indiana 
were  compelled  to  fall  back  to  them  from  the  crest  they  had  gained. 
This  line  was  maintained  till  late  in  the  afternoon,  when  the  two  regi- 
ments, finding  that  the  enemy  were  trying  to  throw  several  regiments 
on  their  right  flank,  fell  back  to  their  old  line  along  the  Livingston 
road.  The  fire  to  which  both  of  these  regiments  were  exposed  was 
exceedingly  severe.  The  conduct  of  the  officers  and  men  commands  the 
highest  praise. 

The  end  accomplished  by  this  part  of  the  reconnaissance  was  the 
discovery  of  a two-gun  battery  between  Colonel  Withers’ house  and  the 
Canton  road,  a line  of  rifle-pits  about  200  yards  in  front  of  their  main 
works,  crossing  the  Canton  road  and  protected  by  a rough  abatis,  two 
guns  enfilading  the  Livingston  road,  and  a three-gun  battery  in  the 
northwest  salient  commanding  the  natural  glacis  or  slope,  extending 
from  their  main  work  to  the  intersection  of  the  Livingston  road  and 
Jackson  and  Canton  Kailroad. 

I assumed  command  of  the  line  formed  by  the  Sixth  Iowa  Infantry, 
and  at  the  designated  signal  the  men  dashed  forward  with  a shout,  met 
the  line  of  the  enemy’s  skirmishers  and  pickets,  drove  them  back,  cap- 
turing some  18  or  20,  and  killed  as  many  more.  Clearing  the  timber, 
they  rushed  out  into  the  open  fields,  across  the  railroad,  over  the  fence, 
up  a gentle  slope,  across  the  crest,  down  into  the  enemy’s  line,  where  two 
field  batteries  of  four  guns  each,  fronting  west,  opened  a terrific  can- 
nonading. The  enemy  were  driven  from  two  pieces  at  the  point  of  the 
bayonet,  our  men  literally  running  them  down.  In  rear  of  the  batteries 
two  regiments  were  lying  down,  supporting  the  gunners,  and  at  our  ap- 
proach they  opened  along  their  liue,  causing  most  of  the  casualties  that 
occurred  in  this  gallant  regiment.  With  such  impetuosity  did  the  line  go 
through  the  field,  that  the  enemy,  so  completely  stunned  were  they, 
would  have  precipitately  fled  had  they  not  been  reassured  by  a large 
gun  battery,  nearly  COO  yards  to  our  right,  which  enfiladed  the  railroad 
and  line  of  skirmishers.  Startled  at  this  unexpected  obstacle,  which 
was  now  in  full  play,  throwing  its  whirlwind  of  grape  and  canister  about 
us  until  the  corn  fell  as  if  before  an  invisible  reaper,  1 ordered  the 
bugler  to  sound  the  “lie  down.”  The  entire  line  fell  in  the  corn  rows,  and 
I had  an  opportunity  to  look  around,  knowing  my  men  were  safe.  On 
my  right,  extending  across  the  railroad,  the  enemy  had  a battery  of  three 
iron  guns.  I judged  them  to  be,  from  their  size,  32-pounders,  although 
they  may  have  been  only  10  or  20  pounder  Parrotts.  To  my  right  and 
front  I saw  two  more  guns  projecting  through  embrasures  in  direct 
range,  and  in  my  front  was  a field  battery  of  four  guns,  two  of  which  the 
gunners  had  fled  from  and  my  men  were  lying  around  them.  In  their 
rear  I saw  two  flags  and  a line  of  men,  I supposed  about  two  regiments; 
on  my  left  was  another  field  battery  and  another  line  of  men.  To  pass 
through  the  batteries,  cross  the  regiments  in  our  front,  ascend  the  hill, 
and  get  inside  of  their  main  works  was  more  than  I could  accomplish 


650 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


with  the  slender  but  gallant  line  lying  on  my  left  and  right,  and  feeling 
that  I had  obtained  all  the  information  I could,  I ordered  the  “rise  up” 
and  “ retreat,”  which  I must  confess  was  done  in  the  most  admirable 
manner  under  the  fire  of  at  least  three  regiments  and  seven  guns,  three 
of  those  enfilading  my  line.  But  few  of  those  who  had  so  gallantly 
charged  the  battery  got  back.  I cannot  speak  in  too  extravagant  terms 
of  the  officers  and  men  of  the  Sixth  Iowa  on  this  occasion.  They  obeyed 
my  commands  with  a promptness  and  rapidity  I hardly  could  have  ex- 
pected from  them  on  a parade.  If  they  challenged  my  praise  at  the  im- 
petuosity of  their  advance,  which  I found  so  rapid  as  to  cause  me  t’o  fear 
that  I could  not  keep  up  with  them,  they  awakened  the  profofindest  ad- 
miration at  the  coolness  with  which  they  retired,  returning  the  incessant 
firing  of  the  enemy  as  they  slowly  fell  back.  The  Forty-eighth  Illinois, 
commanded  by  Lieutenant- Colonel  Greathouse,  handsomely  supported 
the  right  of  the  line  and  held  the  ground  gained  at  a severe  loss.  Major 
Stephenson,  of  the  Forty  eighth,  was  severely  wounded  while  aiding  in 
securing  our  new  position. 

Colonel  Sanford,  commanding  the  Fourth  Brigade,  elicited  my  warmest 
praise  for  his  conduct  on  the  field  in  my  aid,  and  commands  my  thanks 
for  his  generous  conduct  in  invariably  assisting  me,  by  advice  or  re- 
enforcements from  his  gallant  command,  along  the  line  of  skirmishers 
since  our  arrival  before  Jackson. 

The  Forty-sixth  Ohio  Infantry,  commanded  by  Colonel  Waleutt,  failed 
to  get  the  notice  to  support  the  center  till  we  had  advanced.  He,  how- 
ever, hastily  advanced  and  arrived  on  the  field  as  we  were  retiring,  and 
generously  assisted  us  in  every  way,  relieving  our  tired  and  wounded 
men  and  covering  our  weakest  points. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  M.  CORSE, 

Col.,  Comdg.  Skirmishers , First  Division , Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 


Headquarters  Sixth  Iowa  Infantry, 

Jackson , Miss.,  July  18,  1863. 

Sir:  I respectfully  make  the  following  report  of  the  operations  of 
this  command  since  leaving  Oak  Ridge,  Miss.,  on  the  evening  of  the 
4th  instant,  and  our  arrival  at  Hill’s  house,  on  the  Big  Black : 

On  the  evening  of  the  htli  instant,  this  regiment  was  ordered  to 
Jones’  Ford,  on  the  Big  Black,  to  effect  a crossing,  in  conjunction  with 
the  Forty-eighth  Illinois  Infantry.  I was  instructed  that  the  stream 
was  not  more  than  3 feet  deep,  and  that  infantry  could  easily  cross. 
The  guide  sent  with  the  command,  not  knowing  the  route,  led  us,  from 
about  0 p.  m.  till  about  11.30  p.  in.,  through  field,  forest,  creeks,  over 
highland  and  lowland,  a distance  of  from  8 to  10  miles,  whereas  it  was 
but  2 miles,  and  that  by  a good  road  the  greater  portion  of  the  way. 
There  I met  Colonel  Sanford,  the  brigade  commander,  who  had  awaited 
our  coming  over  two  hours,  when  we  started  an  hour  before  and  should 
have  been  across  by  that  time.  He,  not  finding  us  there,  supposed  he 
had  been  misguided,  and  did  not  undertake  to  cross.  On  arriving,  we 
immediately  sent  some  men  in,  and  discovered  the  stream  to  be  so  swift 
and  so  deep  that  not  only  was  it  impracticable  to  ford,  but  impossible 
for  the  men  to  swim  across,  carrying  their  arms.  A couple  of  canoes 
were  finally  discovered,  lashed  together,  and  3 men  placed  in  them,  and 
started  over.  The  stream  being  so  swift-,  and  not  having  oars  or  poles, 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN- 


651 


they  were  swept  down  the  stream,  and  immediately  a lire  opened  upon 
us  from  the  opposite  shore.  The  command  fell  back  from  the  exposed 
position,  and  two  companies  thrown  along  the  shore  soon  silenced  the 
tiring. 

Colonel  Sanford,  deeming  the  thing  impracticable  without  boats  or 
pontoons,  withdrew  part  of  the  command,  sent  word  back  to  the  gen- 
eral commanding  to  that  effect,  and  ordered  me  to  picket  the  river  for  2 
miles  up  and  down  the  stream.  I had  the  boat  brought  up,  and  Private 
[William]  Miller,  Company  H,  volunteered  to  take  some  men  across,  and 
had  made  successfully  three  trips,  concealing  the  men  a short  distance 
below  our  position  under  the  opposite  bank.  The  squad  on  the  west 
bank,  waiting  to  get  into  the  boat,  to  cross,  were  discovered  by  the  enemy 
about  daylight,  and  a fire  along  the  entire  bank  opened.  I withdrew 
everything  from  that  point,  pushed  three  companies  above,  and  attacked 
them  so  as  to  cover  the  recrossing  of  my  men  on  the  other  side.  The 
ruse  succeeded.  Not  knowing  of  their  whereabouts,  the  enemy,  seeing 
us  fall  back,  and  hearing  the  fire  above,  followed  and  kept  up  an  inces- 
sant musketry.  While  this  was  continuing,  Private  Miller,  Company 
H,  went  back  and  forth  and  reconveyed  the  men  he  had  crossed,  with 
a very  slight  loss.  I withdrew  everything  but  a line  of  skirmishers, 
which  replied  so  well  to  the  firing  of  the  enemy  as  to  induce  them  to 
believe  we  would  endeavor  to  force  that  point,  and  caused  them  to 
withdraw  from  above,  and  permitted  our  forces  to  effect  a crossing. 

The  Forty-eighth  Illinois  relieved  us,  continued  to  attract  the  attention 
of  the  enemy,  and  in  the  afternoon  Colonel  Sanford  quietly  withdrew  the 
regiment,  and  the  brigade  went  above  and  crossed  on  a flat.  The  next 
morning  the  Fourth  Brigade  was  ordered  to  the  front,  and  this  regiment 
supported  the  Forty-eighth  Illinois  Infantry  in  driving  the  rebels  from 
their  camp,  near  Queen’s  Hill,  from  which  they  fled  so  precipitately  as  to 
leave  nearly  all  their  camp  and  garrison  equipage,  a large  number  of 
small-arms,  commissary  stores,  and  their  sick.  A few  prisoners  were 
captured,  belonging,  respectively,  to  the  Sixth  Texas  Cavalry,  Wal- 
ker’s [?]  cavalry,  and  Jackson’s  cavalry.  The  night  of  the  7th  we 
camped  between  Queen’s  Hill  and  Clinton.  The  8th  and  9th  instant  we 
marched  with  the  division  to  within  4 miles  of  Jackson  and  bivouacked. 
Friday,  July  10,  Sanford’s  brigade  took  the  advance,  and  this  regiment 
furnished  the  skirmishers  covering  the  right  of  the  division.  On  pass- 
ing  around  to  the  north  of  Jackson,  the  brigade  was  ordered  back,  the 
skirmishers  withdrawn,  and  another  brigade  thrown  to  the  front,  and 
again,  when  within  3 miles  of  Jackson,  the  brigade  was  ordered  to  the 
rear  as  a reserve,  and  about  4 p.  m.  the  brigade  was  moved  to  the  front 
again.  Two  companies  of  the  Sixth  were  ordered  by  Colonel  Sanford  to 
deploy  as  skirmishers,  and  I took  charge  of  them,  f pushed  them  across 
the  Jackson  and  Canton  Railroad,  by  direction  of  Colonel  Sanford,  so 
that  our  left  just  touched  the  lunatic  asylum,  and  then  I changed  direc- 
tion, and  moved  up  beyond  the  line  of  the  Ninth  Army  Corps,  about  a 
half  mile  toward  Jackson,  on  the  Canton  road. 

The  enemy  lay  in  ambush  north  of  the  Petrie  house,  but  were  driven 
out  by  the  skirmishers,  and  never  stopped  till  they  got  inside  their 
works,  which  were  visible  from  the  Petrie  house.  Here  I recei  ved  word 
that  a line  which,  protected  our  right  flank,  under  Major  Giesy,  had 
been  ordered  back  by  General  Smith,  and  I halted  the  men,  and  directed 
Adjutant  Ennis  to  take  command  and  hold  that  line  until  I could  see 
, Major  Giesy.  He  declined  remaining,  as  his  orders  were  peremptory, 
and  I sent  an  orderly  to  Adjutant  Ennis  to  fall  back  slowly,  and  I rode 
back  at  full  speed  to  get  permission  from  the  general  to  remain  where 


652 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXYL 


we  were.  I saw  him,  and  he  informed  me  that  Colonel  Sanford  had 
deployed  my  regiment  so  as  to  cover  the  front  of  the  division,  and  di- 
rected me  to  connect  the  line  left  of  the  Jackson  and  Canton  Kailroad 
with  that  on  the  right,  and  to  take  charge  of  the  skirmishers,  and 
that  the  several  brigades  would  support  me,  push  up  the  Jackson  and 
Canton  Railroad,  keeping  my  lines  at  right  angles  with  that  road. 

In  accordance  with  these  instructions,  I moved  the  line  until  the  enemy 
made  a stand  on  our  left,  when  I massed  Companies  D and  F and  charged 
them,  driving  them  through  the  woods  into  their  own  works.  They 
fired  several  houses  to  prevent  our  attacking  their  works.  Having  gained 
a good  position  on  the  left,  I halted  it  till  the  right  should  connect,  as 
we  had  separated  in  making  the  charge.  I found  the  right  had  been 
halted  by  order  of  Colonel  Sanford,  and,  connecting  the  two  lines  by 
pickets,  we  lay  in  that  position  till  the  next  morning,  when  we  received 
orders  to  advance,  changing  direction  to  the  left.  The  line  moved 
under  a very  sharp  fire,  until  I found  it  impossible  to  get  the  rebels  from 
in  front  of  our  center  without  massing  and  charging  again.  Companies 
K,  E,  and  B were  put  in  line,  and,  with  a yell  and  bayonets  fixed,  they 
drove  them  out  of  the  ditch  they  held,  killing  and  wounding  quite  a 
number.  The  ground  gained  was  held,  and  after  forty  hours  of  the 
most  arduous  labor  the  regiment  was  relieved  by  another  line. 

On  the  morning  of  the  16th  instant,  Major-General  Parke  directed  me 
to  assume  command  of  the  skirmishers  andpushthem  so  as  to  feel  strongly 
the  enemy’s  line  at  every  point  in  our  immediate  front.  The  left  I placed 
in  charge  of  the  colonel  of  the  Ninety-seventh  Indiana,  and  assumed 
command  of  the  line  formed  by  the  Sixth  Iowa,  supported  by  Sanford’s 
brigade.  At  the  designated  signal,  the  line  pressed  forward,  capturing 
some  prisoners  (so  impetuously  did  they  go),  killing  quite  a number, 
clearing  the  forest,  railroad,  fences,  corn-fields  in  their  front,  driving 
the  enemy  into  their  works.  On  arriving  about  100  yards  from  their 
main  works,  we  were  opened  upon  by  a battery  of  siege  guns,  enfilading 
our  line,  and  a battery  of  brass  howitzers  in  our  immediate  front,  sup- 
ported by  three  regiments  of  infantry.  Under  this  terrific  fire  it  was 
impossible  to  make  the  works,  so  I ordered  the  “lie  down”  to  be  sounded 
until  I could  reconnoiter  in  person. 

After  convincing  myself  that  the  works  could  not  be  captured — that 
I had  all  the  information  the  general  desired  from  this  reconnaissance— I 
ordered  the  men  to  rise  and  fall  back  jn  the  w^oods,  which  they  did  in 
good  order,  and  held  the  woods  till  next  morning,  when  the  line  entered 
the  place. 

To  Major  Miller  and  Adjutant  Ennis  I am  under  obligations  for  their 
conduct  and  support  at  the  different  times  they  participated  in  the  above 
operations.  Captains  Minton  and  Bashore  and  Lieutenant  Holmes  are 
particularly  worthy  of  notice  in  the  last  action,  and  there  is  no  officer  of 
my  command  but  that  in  some  way  has  rendered  himself  worthy  of 
honorable  mention  at  some  one  of  the  affairs  during  our  advance  on 
Jackson. 

Below  I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  casualties  of  the  command  since 
leaving  Oak  Ridge.* 

I am,  very  respectfully,  yours, 

,JNO.  M.  COE8E, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

Lieut.  E.  B.  Harlan, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant-General. 


Embodied  in  revised  statement,  p.  544. 


Ciiaf.  XXXYI.J 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


Go  3 


No.  G7. 

Report  of  Col.  Greenbury  F.  Wiles , Seventy- eighth  Ohio  Infantry , Second 
Brigade,  Third  Division , Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 

Clinton,  Miss.,  Jn/y  17,  1863. 

I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  on  the  night  of  the  15th,  I received 
a dispatch  from  General  Sherman  to  be  on  the  alert,  and  informing 
me  of  movements  of  the  enemy  under  command  of  Jackson  in  this 
direction.  . . 

I immediately  made  the  best  disposition  1 could,  with  my  limited 
forces,  to  give  the  enemy  a warm  reception.  I threw  out  vedettes  of 
mounted  infantry  and  cavalry  on  four  ditferent  roads.  The  road  on 
which  I thought  the  attack  would  be  made,  and  on  which  it  was  made, 
I doubled  the  picket  at  11  o’clock  at  night,  and  had  the  regiment  noti- 
fied to  be  ready  at  a moment’s  warning,  and  properly  patrolled,  to  get 
them  under  arms  without  delay. 

At  3.45  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  16th,  a lieutenant  and  5 men 
tried  to  capture  my  outposts,  but  were  in  turn  all  captured  and  sent  in. 
This  having  occurred  without  any  firing,  the  regiment  [enemy],  not 
knowing  of  their  capture,  advanced  in  battle  line  in  the  large  field  in 
front  of  the  picket  post.  Our  pickets  reserved  their  fire  until  the  enemy 
were  quite  close,  when  they  opened  on  them.  As  soon  as  this  occurred, 
I immediately  dispatched  Captain  Wallar,  with  Company  F,  to  support 
the  pickets.  "As  soon  as  he  found  our  pickets  being  driven,  lie  deployed 
forward,  and  immediately  engaged  them  and  checked  their  advance. 
The  enemy  then  undertook  to  flank  us  by  turning  our  left.  I threw 
forward  Company  G (being  one  of  my  largest  companies)  to  sustain 
that  point,  and  moved  with  the  balance  of  the  regiment  forward  to  sup- 
port all.  Fearing  the  pickets  on  the  Yicksburg  road  would  be  cap- 
tured, I dispatched  Captain  Wilson,  with  Company  A,  to  that  point. 
At  this  time  the  skirmishing  was  brisk. 

After  maintaining  our  position  for  over  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  I 
advanced  with  skirmish  line  and  drove  them  back  until  I regained  the 
position  I held  at  the  commencement.  I could  not  advance  any  farther, 
as  I had  no  troops  under  my  command  except  the  regiment  I com- 
manded, the  cavalry  force  left  for  my  use  by  General  McArthur  having 
been  sent  to  communicate  wifh  Colonel  Chambers  and  General  Mc- 
Arthur. 

The  enemy  thought  to  surprise  us,  and  failing  in  that,  and  re-en- 
forcements having  arrived,  after  cutting  the  telegraph  wires,  beat  a 
hasty  retreat,  carrying  off  their  dead  and  wounded.  The  force  of  the 
enemy  is  estimated  at  1,500.  We  have  prisoners  from  three  different 
regiments. 

We  have  no  casualties  on  our  side.  The  enemy  is  known  to  have  2 
killed. 

I wish  to  make  honorable  mention,  for  your  consideration,  of  Captain 
Wallar,  Captain  Munson,  and  Lieutenant  Stewart;  also  of  Private 
[Abirarn]  Johnson,  of  Company  F,  who  behaved  in  a gallant  manner 
at  the  picket  line  when  we  captured  their  advance. 

Respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

G.  F.  WILES, 

Lieut.  Col.,  Comdg.  Seventy -eighth  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry. 

Jfieut.  J.  B.  Walker, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


654 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 
No.  68. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Charles  B.  Matthies,  Third  Brigade , Seventh  Di- 
vision, Seventeenth  Corps. 

Headquarters  Third  Brigade,  Seventh  Division, 

Clinton , Miss.,  July  16,  1863 — 9.45  a.  m. 

Sir  : As  I informed  you  in  a former  dispatch,  the  enemy  advanced  in 
line  of  battle,  from  the  direction  of  Brownsville  and  Livingston,  in  force; 
after  a sharp  skirmish,  lasting  one  hour,  they  fell  back  toward  Browns- 
ville. We  have  captured  1 lieutenant  and  8 privates  from  them.  I 
learn  they  crossed  Pearl  Biver  night  of  14th  with  five  regiments  (cav- 
alry and  mounted  infantry)  and  two  pieces  artillery,  under  command  of 
Jackson,  the  aggregate  force  amounting  to  1,500  men.  They  lost  in 
this  skirmish  1 killed;  wounded  unknown,  and  the  prisoners  above 
mentioned. 

Shall  I not  send  a force  on  Vicksburg  road  to  meet  Colonel  Cham- 
bers ? 

C.  L.  MATTHIES, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Brigadier- General  McArthur. 

P.  S. — This  was  held  to  10.15  o’clock.  All  quiet. 


No.  69. 

Return  of  Casualties  in  Breckinridge’s  ( Confederate ) Division  before 

Jackson , Miss. 


[Compiled  from  nominal  list.] 


Killed. 

Wounded. 

Command. 

Officers. 

Men. 

} Officers. 

1 

d 

< V 

s 

to 

© 

tc 

<1 

Helm’s  brigado: 

41st  Alabama  -----  - - --  --  - 

i 

1 

9<1  If  pTitn  ekv  

i 

1 

4 tli  Kentucky  - --  --  --  --  --  - - --  --  --  --  --  - 

2 

2 

1 

1 

Cobb’s  (Kentucky)  battery  

2 

1 

6 

0 

Adams’  brigade: 

1 

1 

13th  and  20tli  .Louisiana 

1 

2 

3 

10th  and  25th  Louisiana  , . , 

2 

16 

18 

1 0th  Louisiana  - * 

1 

4 

5 

Austin’s  battalion ......  ...... ............ ...... .... 

3 

3 

Stovall’s  brigade : 

1st.  nnfl  Sri  "FMnrirla  .... 

1 

1 

2 

47th  Georgia  - _ . 

1 

1 

2 

nflth  ria.mlinn.  

2 

2 

Total . . _ _ . 

1 

6 

3 

40 

50 

No.  70. 

Report  of  Capt.  C.  H.  Slocomh , Washington  ( Louisiana ) Artillery , 

Breckinr  idge’s  Division . 

In  the  Field,  July  14,  1863. 

General  : Sunday,  the  12th  instant,  a force  of  the  enemy,  variously 
estimated  at  from  four  to  seven  regiments,  attacked  tfie  center  of  Gen- 


Ciiap.  XXXVI.] 


TIIH  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


655 


eral  Breckinridge’s  division.  Advancing  under  cover  of  the  woods,  they 
suddenly  appeared  marching  by  the  right  flank  across  the  railroad  at  a 
distance  of  1,000  yards,  and  thus  proceeded  until,  the  left  of  their  lino 
rested  on  the  railroad,  the  right  resting  on  a skirt  of  timber.  On  reach- 
ing this  position  they  advanced  steadily  toward  our  works. 

Meantime  our  artillery,  consisting  of  [Robert]  Cobb’s  battery  and  my 
battery  (Fifth  Company,  Washington  Artillery),  under  the  direction  of 
Major  [Rice  E.]  Graves,  opened  fire  upon  them.  The  enemy  continued 
to  advance  steadily  until  within  200  yards,  when,  no  longer  able  to  en- 
dure the  withering  fire,  principally  from  the  artillery,  they  broke  and 
retreated  in  disorder.  In  this  affair  my  company,  as  usual,  performed 
its  duty.  I have  1 man  slightly  wounded,  2 horses  and  1 mule  killed. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

C.  H.  SLOCOMB, 

Captain , Commanding  Battery. 

Brig.  Gen.  I).  W.  Adams. 

P.  S. — I have  just  picked  up  a sergeant’s  diary  belonging  to  the  Fifth 
Ohio  Battery,  a section  of  which  took  position  on  the  railroad  about  800 
yards  from  my  left  piece.  This  section  had  1 man  and  1 horse  killed  in 
the  engagement,  when  they  limbered  to  the  rear,  leaving  their  imple- 
ments, trail,  hand  spike,  and  four  rounds  of  ammunition,  which  are  now 
in  my  possession. 


Ro.  71. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Daniel  W.  Adams , C.  S.  Army , commanding  Bri- 
gade, Breckinridge’s  Division. 

Hdqrs.  D.  W.  Adams’  Brig.,  Breckinridge’s  Div., 

Trenches , Jackson , Miss,,  July  14,  18G3. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that,  on  the  occasion  of  the  en- 
gagement of  Sunday  last,  the  12th  instant,  I was  on  the  left  of  my  line, 
and  had  my  attention  called  to  an  advance  of  the  enemy’s  skirmishers 
about  10  a.  m.  They  advanced  rapidly,  and,  when  within  800  yards, 
were  fired  upon  by  our  sharpshooters  and  driven  in.  In  a few  mo- 
ments they  appeared  in  line  of  battle,  advancing  on  the  road  leading 
to  Jackson  on  my  front  from  Bailey’s  Hill,  covering  with  their  left  the 
left  of  the  Nineteenth  Louisiana  Regiment,  the  ground  occupied  by  the 
Fifth  Company  of  Washington  Artillery,  Capt.  C.  H.  Slocomb,  attached 
to  my  command,  and  also  that  occupied  by  the  Thirty-second  Alabama 
Regiment,  Lieut.  Col.  Henry  Maury  commanding.  Fire  was  immedi- 
ately opened  by  the  left  of  the  Nineteenth  Louisiana  Regiment,  the 
Washington  Artillery,  and  the  Thirty-second  Alabama  Regiment.  In 
a few  moments  the  enemy  commenced  obliquing  to  the  right,  toward 
the  right  of  General  Stovall’s  brigade.  After  a sharp  and  spirited  com- 
bat of  thirty  or  forty  minutes,  in  which  they  boldly  and  deliberately 
advanced  within  80  yards  of  our  line,  they  were  driven  back  in  great 
confusion  and  with  considerable  loss.  Observing  some  of  the  men  ad- 
vancing to  our  lines  with  handkerchiefs  waving,  indicating  a surrender, 
I ordered  the  artillery  and  infantry  of  my  command  to  cease  firing. 
Soon  after,  Major  [Rice  E.]  Graves,  General  Breckinridge’s  chief  of  ar- 
tillery, advanced  with  a part  of  Brigadier-General  Stovall’s  command, 
and  brought  in  the  prisoners,  and  also  three  or  four  stand  of  colors 
found  on  the  field  or  in  the  hands  of  some  of  the  men  who  had  crouched 


656 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


under  the  declivity  of  the  hill  to  avoid  the  heavy  fire.  I cannot  esti- 
mate their  force,  but  would  not  suppose  there  were  more  than  three  or 
four  regiments  in  front,  and  am  informed  they  composed  part  of  a bri- 
gade under  command  of  Colonel  [Isaac  C.]  Pugh. 

About  40  jirisoners  were  brought  through  my  command,  a number  of 
others  through  General  Stovall’s,  amounting  in  all  to  some  150,  and 
about  250  killed  and  wounded  that  were  left  upon  the  field.  The  loss 
in  my  command  was  only  1 slightly  wounded  in  Washington  Artillery. 

This  company,  and  the  two  pieces  of  Captain  [Robert]  Cobb’s  bat- 
tery, did  most  excellent  and  efficient  service.  The  three  left  companies 
of  the  Nineteenth  Louisiana  and  Thirty-second  Alabama — the  infantry 
force  of  my  command  engaged  in  this  affair — fought  most  gallantly,  and 
deserve  great  praise  for  their  bravery.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Maury,  of 
the  Thirty-second  Alabama,  was  subsequently  wounded. 

This  was  quite  a spirited  engagement,  evincing  a courage  and  deter- 
mination on  the  part  of  the  enemy  worthy  of  a better  cause,  but  which 
met  with  a severe  repulse. 

Inclosed  I send  detailed  reports. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

DANL.  W.  ADAMS, 

Br  i gadier - General , Commanding. 


Col.  J.  A.  Buckner, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Breckinridge1  s Division , 


No.  72. 

Report  of  Capt.  John  C.  Kimbell , Thirty -second  Alabama  Infantry. 

July  14,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  this  regiment,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Lieutenant- Col  on  el  [Henry]  Maury,  was  actively  engaged  in 
the  fight  on  Sunday  last,  beginning  at  about  0 o’clock.  The  enemy, 
after  driving  in  our  skirmishers,  advanced  to  charge  our  batteries. 
When  they  had  approached  to  within  200  yards  of  the  intrenchments, 
our  fire  began  upon  them  and  continued  but  a short  time,  when  the  en- 
emy retreated.  This  regiment  was  supporting  the  Washington  Artil- 
lery, and  officers  and  men  behaved  admirably,  sustaining  no  loss  at  all, 
either  in  killed  or  wounded. 

I regret  to  have  to  report  that,  after  going  through  the  engagement 
with  his  accustomed  gallantry,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Maury  was  seriously 
wounded  by  the  enemy’s  sharpshooters. 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JNO.  C.  KIMBELL, 
Captain , Commanding. 

Brigadier-General  [D.  W.]  Adams. 


No.  73. 

Report  of  Col.  W.  P.  Winans , Nineteenth  Louisiana  Infantry. 

In  the  Trenches,  July  14,  1863. 
Captain:  In  pursuance  with  orders  just  received,  I have  the  honoi 
to  report  that  just  before  9 o’clock  on  Sunday  morning,  the  12th,  the 


Ciiap.  XXXYI.J 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


657 


enemy,  from  batteries  planted  in  our  front  and  upon  our  right  flank, 
subjected  the  Nineteenth  Louisiana  Regiment  to  a cross  fire  of  shell  and 
shot  for  over  half  an  hour.  During  this  bombardment  1 man  in  Com- 
pany E (Captain  [James  B.]  Landers)  was  severely  wounded  by  a frag- 
ment of  shell,  cutting  a considerable  gash  and  fracturing  the  shoulder 
blade.  Soon  after  a cessation  of  the  shelling  the  enemy  in  large  force 
made  an  assault  upon  Slocomb’s  battery,  upon  my  left,  which  was  splen- 
didly repulsed.  Only  the  three  left  companies  of  my  right  were  per- 
mitted to  take  part  in  this  fight,  owing  to  the  topography  of  our  trenches. 

Your  obedient  servant, 


Capt.  E.  P.  Guillet, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


W.  P.  WINANS, 

Colonel. 


No.  74. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Charles  D.  Myers , Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Frenclds 

Division. 

[July  — ? 1863.] 

On  the  retreat  of  Johnston’s  army  from  the  Big  Black  River,  our 
division  fell  back,  and  reached  Jackson  in  advance  on  Tuesday,  July 
7,  about  1 p.  m. 

On  the  evening  of  the  8th,  the  enemy’s  artillery  was  heard,  forcing  in 
our  cavalry. 

At  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  9th,  the  troops  were  ordered  in 
position  at  the  trenches.  Our  right  extended  to  and  included  the  bas- 
tion battery,  covering  the  Clinton  road,  our  left  resting  on  Breckin- 
ridge’s right.  Captain  [Charles  D.]  Myers,  assistant  adjutant- general, 
found  Adams’  brigade,  of  Breckinridge’s  division,  occupying  the  ex- 
treme right  of  our  position.  This  caused  delay,  it  being  nearly  10 
o’clock  before  our  line  was  formed,  our  right  (Evans’  brigade)  resting 
on  the  Clinton  road,  and  our  left  (McNair’s  brigade)  touching  Breckin- 
ridge’s right  j [J.  F.]  Culpeper’s  and  [B.  A.]  Jeter’s  batteries,  of  four 
guns  each,  occupying  Evans’  front,  and  [C.  E.]  Fenner’s  battery,  of  six 
guns,  that  of  McNair.  Maxey’s  brigade  Avas  placed  under  cover  some 
500  yards  in  rear  of  the  works,  and  held  as  a reserve.  Our  headquar- 
ters were  then  established  immediately  in  rear  of,  and  about  50  yards 
from,  the  center  of  our  lines.  Skirmishers  were  thrown  forward  to 
await  the  enemy’s  approach. 

About  12  m.  on  Friday,  the  10th,  guns  were  in  position,  the  fire  from 
which  reached  our  lines.  Cur  skirmishers  were  then  strengthened. 

On  Saturday,  the  11th,  an  effort  made  to  force  in  E Alans’  skirmishers 
was  handsomely  repulsed  by  the  Holcombe  Legion.  Batteries  having 
been  placed  in  position  along  our  front,  there  was  some  artillery  firing 
on  both  sides. 

On  Sunday,  the  12th,  an  attack  was  made  on  Breckinridge’s  position, 
but  all  remained  quiet  along  our  lines. 

Ten  o’clock  on  the  morning  of  the  13th  (Monday)  witnessed  a heavy 
cannonade  on  both  sides.  About  12  m.  heavy  firing  along  McNair’s 
front,  our  skirmishers  advancing.  About  2 p.  m.  [James]  Burnet’s  bat- 
talion of  Texas  sharpshooters  Avas  thrown  out  to  strengthen  the  line. 
Adjutant  [R.  S.]  Dulin,  of  this  battalion,  a most  gallant  and  efficient 
42  K K — YOL  XXiy,  PT  II 


658 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


| Chap.  XXXVI. 


officer,  was  killed  about  4 o’clock  in  the  evening.  Just  before  dark, 
Major  [Rice  E.]  Graves,  Breckinridge’s  chief  of  artillery,  came  up  and 
reported  appearances  of  an  attack  on  our  and  Breckinridge’s  front. 
[John]  Waties’  battery  of  20 -pounders  was  placed  in  position  on  Mc- 
Nair’s extreme  left. 

Heavy  firing  nearly  all  the  morning  on  Tuesday,  14th  instant,  with 
brisk  skirmishing.  Evans’  line  advanced,  drove  back  the  enemy,  burned 
several  small  houses  which  afforded  position  and  protection  to  their 
sharpshooters,  and  then  fell  back,  contrary  to  orders,  to  their  original 
position.  In  the  afternoon  a flag  of  truce,  asking  suspension  of  hostil- 
ities for  burial  of  enemy’s  dead.  Yankees  crowding  up  to  our  lines 
were  ordered  off;  not  moving,  a few  shots  were  fired,  which  produced 
the  desired  effect.  After  dark  the  enemy  threw  several  shots  into 
Jackson. 

Wednesday,  the  15th  instant,  passed  without  the  occurrence  of  any- 
thing of  special  interest.  Some  artillery  firing  on  our  front  in  the 
morning,  and  in  the  evening  McNair’s  line  of  skirmishers  were  sharply 
engaged,  but  lost  no  ground. 

Artillery  opened  on  our  lines  about  9 a.  m.  on  Thursday,  the  16th. 
All  quiet  in  the  evening,  except  the  occasional  firing  of  sharpshooters. 
At  5 p.  m.  orders  were  received  and  issued  to  the  command  to  retire 
from  their  position,  the  movement  to  commence  immediately  after  night-, 
fall.  This  was  carried  into  effect,  and  by  1 o’clock  on  the  morning  of 
the  17th  the  rear  of  our  column  had  crossed  Pearl  River  in  safety. 

[OHAS.  D.]  MYERS, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 

General  S.  G.  French, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


[Indorsement.! 

July  16,  1865. 

This  report  was  made  by  Lieutenant  Myers  at  my  request,  and  a copy 
furnished  to  headquarters. 

S.  G.  FRENCH, 

Major-  General , Commanding. 


No.  75. 

Report  of  Col.  II.  G.  Bunn , Fourth  Arkansas  Infantry , McNairs 

Brigade. 

Gamp  Fourth  Arkansas  Regiment, 

Near  Morton , Miss.,  July  22,  1863. 

Captain  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  the 
action  of  the  Fourth  Arkansas  Regiment  in  the  recent  operations  of  the 
army  in  front  of  the  city  of  Jackson  : 

With  the  First  and  Second  Arkansas  [Mounted  Rifles]  Regiments 
[dismounted],  the  Fourth  Arkansas  acted  as  a reserve  for  the  brigade. 
These  regiments  were  habitually  on  skirmish  and  picket  duty. 

On  the  11th  of  July,  at  10  a.  in.,  I was  ordered  to  the  front  of  ^the 
intrenchments  on  the  Raymond  road,  to  support  Lieut.  Col.  D.  H.  Rey- 
nolds, commanding  the  First  Arkansas  Regiment,  having  been  specially 
charged  with  the  duty  of  determining  the  position  and  strength  of  the 
enemy  in  that  direction.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Reynolds  engaged  the 
enemy,  skirmished  in  the  evening  about  half  a mile  in  front  of  the  in- 
trenchments, and,  after  a spirited  charge,  drove  them  from  the  ground 


Ciiap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  JACKSON  CAMPAIGN. 


659 


and  gained  some  300  yards.  Occasional  skirmishing  was  kept  up  dur- 
ing* the  day.  Lieutenant-Colonel  Reynolds  retired  to  a position,  ex- 
tending bis  line  directly  in  front  of  the  Lynch  bouse,  and  about  100 
yards  distant. 

At  twilight  I deployed  my  regiment  and  relieved  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Reynolds,  and  remained  during  the  night  in  the  same  position  that  lie 
had  occupied.  I was  ordered  to  take  charge  of  the  three  regiments 
then  thrown  out  as  skirmishers,  namely,  the  Fourth  Louisiana  on  the 
right,  the  Fourth  Arkansas  in  the  center,  and  the  Second  Arkansas  on 
the  left,  with  orders  to  hold  the  ground  as  long  as  possible. 

On  the  12th  of  July,  heavy  skirmishing  was  kept  up  during  the  day. 
The  enemy  having  the  advantage  of  ground  in  many  respects,  con- 
tinued to  annoy  the  right  and  left  center  of  the  Fourth  Ar  kansas  Regi- 
ment, as  well  as  those  portions  of  the  Fourth  Louisiana  which  were 
most  exposed.  The  Second  Arkansas  was  not  engaged  during  the  day, 
no  enemy  appearing  in  its  front. 

I found  it  would  be  impossible  to  hold  my  position  in  front  of  the 
Lynch  house  unless  I could  drive  them  from  the  wood  in  front  of 
the  Fourth  Arkansas  Regiment.  I accordingly  ordered  that  regiment 
to  charge  the  enemy’s  skirmishers,  which  order  was  executed  promptly, 
gaining  200  yards.  Having  come  within  rifle  range  of  the  enemy’s  ar- 
tillery, I retired  to  my  original  position,  having  lost  1 officer  and  several 
men  killed  and  wounded.  I could  not  ascertain  the  loss  of  the  enemy. 

1 took  1 prisoner,  whom  I sent  to  you  immediately. 

Late  in  the  evening  the  line  of  skirmishers  on  my  extreme  right,  from 
some  cause,  retired  some  distance,  and  compelled  me  to  retire  my  line 
200  yards.  Failing  to  ascertain  the  cause  of  the  retrograde  movement, 
I advanced  my  lines  to  the  original  position,  not,  however,  without  a 
sharp  engagement  in  front  of  the  left  of  the  Fourth  Louisiana  and  the 
right  of  the  Fourth  Arkansas. 

At  twilight  I was  relieved  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Reynolds,  andafter- 
waid  retiied  within  the  intrenchments.  After  this  time  eomnanies 
were  detailed  as  skirmishers,  and  the  regiment,  as  a body,  was  not  on 
active  duty.  Concerning  the  action  of  the  detached  companies,  being 
more  immediately  under  your  supervision,  I deem  it  unnecessary  to 
make  any  report. 

The  following  is  a list  of  casualties  during  the  operations  in  front  of 
Jackson  :* 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

H.  Gr.  BUNN, 

Colonel , Commanding  Fourth  Arkansas  Regiment. 

Capt.  R.  E.  Foote, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General , McJVair^s  Brigade. 


No.  76. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  W.  H.  Jaclcson , C.  8.  Army,  commanding  Cavalry 

Division. 

Four  Miles  East  of  Brandon,  Homewood  Road, 

July  20,  [1.863]— 10  a.  m. 

Colonel  : [Fred.]  Steele’s  division  of  infantry  and  one  regiment  of 
cav  airy  entered  Brandon  about  dark  yesterday.  Scouts  report  no  other 


Nominal  list,  omitted,  shows  4 killed  and  10  wounded. 


660 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[CHA.P.  XXXYI. 


force  behind  them.  I think  this  force  is  merely  sent  to  occupy  Brandon 
for  a short  time.  No  advance  this  morning,  and  I do  not  think  they 
will  advance  beyond  that  place.  I may  be  mistaken  in  this  impression. 
They  burned  the  court-house  and  jail  in  Brandon  last  night.  I will  call 
and  see  the  general  in  person  during  the  day. 

Very  respectfully,  &c.,  your  obedient  servant, 

J W.  H.  JACKSON, 

Brigadier - General. 

Col.  B.  S.  Ewell, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  77. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  George  B.  Cosby , C.  8.  Army , commanding  Cav- 
alry Brigade. 

Headquarters  Cosby’s  Brigade, 

Jackson , Miss.,  July  16,  [1863.] 

Colonel  : I have  just  learned  that  the  enemy  attacked  my  pickets  at 
Grant’s  Ferry  about"  two  hours  after  sunrise  this  morning.  I had  a 
squadron  at  that  point  and  the  ford  just  below,  and  have  sent  another 
squadron  to  re  enforce  it  and  to  drive  the  enemy  back  in  case  they  at- 
tempt to  cross  the  river.  If  he  should  succeed  in  crossing,  and  is  sup- 
ported by  infantry,  I will  inform  you  as  soon  as  I learn  the  fact.  The 
ford  (Moore’s)  is  about  15  miles  from  here. 

G.  B.  COSBY, 

„ Brigadier- General. 

Colonel  [B.  S.]  Ewell, 

Assistant  Adjutant - General. 


Headquarters  Cosby’s  Brigade, 

Brandon , Miss.,  July  22,  1863. 

Lieutenant  : I send  with  this  35  Federal  prisoners,  captured  to-day 
about  6 miles  from  Jackson,  on  lower  Brandon  road,  by  Captain  [G  ] 
Herren’s  squadron,  composed  of  Herren’s  and  [W.  V.]  Lester’s  compa- 
nies, First  Mississippi  Cavalry  Regiment.  The  squadron  had  been  sent 
out  by  my  order  on  a scout. 

Captain  Herren  killed  4 of  the  enemy  and  wounded  6,  whom  he  brought 
in,  besides  the  35  I send  to  you.  The  wounded,  being  unable  to  travel 
farther,  have  been  sent  to  hospital.  Also  captured  5 wagons  and  mules 
and  the  arms  of  the  41  prisoners.  Only  2 of  the  wagons  were  brought 
off  the  field,  the  others  being  too  much  broken  during  the  fight  and  con- 
sequent stampede.  The  only  casualty  on  our  part  was  1 man  wounded, 
and  he  was  a scout  belonging  to  Twenty-eighth  Mississippi,  who  fell  in 
with  Captain  Herren’s  party  during  the  fight. 

Respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  B.  COSBY, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Lieut.  J.  H.  Martin, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General,  &c. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


ACTION  AT  IUKA,  MISS. 


G61 


Headquarters  Cosby’s  Brigade, 

Brandon , Miss.,  July  23,  1803 — 1.80  p.  m. 
Captain  : The  enemy’s  rear  guard  left  Jackson  about  11  o’clock  this 
morning  in  direction  of  Vicksburg.  I have  sent  a regiment  after  them 
to  pick  up  stragglers  and  press  rear  guard ; also  scouts  to  right  and  left. 
Respectfully, 

G.  B.  COSBY, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Captain  [George]  Moorman,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  78. 

Report  of  Maj.  R.  S.  Carter , Seventh  Mississippi  Infantry. 

Headquarters,  Monticello , Miss.,  July  25, 18G3. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  condition  of  affairs  at  the  present 
post  and  that  of  Brookhaven. 

On  the  evening  of  the  18th,  the  Federal  cavalry,  under  Major  Fuller- 
ton, 500  strong,  appeared  in  the  latter  place,  sacked  the  town,  burned 
113  hogsheads  of  sugar,  destroyed  the  post-office,  and  burned  2 engines 
and  all  the  rolling  stock,  and  left  at  9 p.  m.  for  Bahala.  I evacuated 
the  place  several  days  before  their  arrival,  securing  all  the  stores  in  my 
possession  save  300  bushels  of  corn,  the  most  of  which  has  since  been 
used  by  the  Government.  I have  had  a lengthy  conversation  with  Colo- 
nel [John  L.]  Logan,  and  he  advised  me  to  request  you  to  order  me  to 
re-establish  a post  at  this  point,  and  have  a company  of  cavalry,  con- 
sisting of  75  men  or  upward,  to  report  to  me,  with  which  1 could  cap- 
ture 2,000  or  3,000  deserters  and  return  them  to  their  commands.  The 
country  is  full,  and  they  are  still  coming  in  by  squads  of  10,  15,  and 
20,  who  will  resist  any  small  force,  or  even  double  that  of  their  own. 

I am  not  able  to  report  in  person,  being  sick  at  present,  and  will  re- 
quest you  to  return  me  orders  by  the  courier,  who  will  hand  this  to  you. 

I have  the  honor  to  remain,  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R,  S.  CARTER, 

Major , Commanding  Post. 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston, 

Commanding  Army  of  the  Mississippi. 


JULY  7,  1863. — Action  at  Iuka,  Miss. 

REPORTS. 

N°.  1.  Maj.  Gen.  Stephen  A.  Hurlbut,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  Sixteenth  Army 
Corps. 

No.  2.— Brig.  Gen.  Grenville  M.  Dodge,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  left  wiug  Six- 
teenth Army  Corps. 

No.  3.— Col.  Florence  M.  Cornyn,  Tenth  Missouri  Cavalry,  commanding  expedition. 

NO  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Stephen  A.  Hurlbut , U.  S.  Army , commanding  Six- 
teenth Army  Corps. 

Memphis,  Tenn.,  July  9,  1863— 4 p.  m. 
Chalmers  lias  been  re  enforced  by  two  regiments  of  cavalry  from  Jack- 
son,  Miss.  A portion  of  Bragg’s  cavalry  is  on  Bear  Creek.  Cornyn 


062  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.  XXXVI. 

hail  a sharp  engagement  with  about  2,000  of  them  at  Iuka  yesterday, 
and  drove  them  to  Bear  Creek.  Our  loss,  20  killed  and  wounded.  v>  e 
captured  part  of  their  battery.  A rebel  lorce  (strength  not  known) 
camped  at  Purdy  last  night,  and  were  joined  by  Biffle,  evidently  gather- 
ing for  a dash  on  the  railroad.  The  Okolona  force  is  increasing.  I need 
more  good  cavalry,  or  else  that  General  Bosecrans  detach,  a portion  ot 
his  to  Tuscumbia.  g A HUELBUT, 

Major-General. 


Maj.  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

General-in - Chief. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  Grenville  M.  Bodge , U.  S.  Army , commanding 
Left  Wing  Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

Corinth,  Miss.,  July  8, 1863. 

General  : Colonel  Cornyn  came  up  with,  rebel  forces  at  Iuka  yes- 
terday at  3 p.m.  Engaged  them,  and,  after  a severe  fight,  drove  them 
out  of  there  and  toward  Bear  Creek.  We  lost  20  men  killed  and 
wounded,  including  1 captain  killed.  We  captured  part  of  their  bat- 
tery. Their  force  was  estimated  at  about  2,000. 

The  force  under  Colonel  [J.]  Patterson  that  passed  with  the  column 
that  came  toward  Corinth,  camped  at  Purdy  last  night,  and  Biffle  has 
joined  them.  I expect  we  will  have  another  fight  on  Bear  Creek  to-day. 

I get  a great  many  reports  of  Bragg  being  in  Tuscumbia  Valley,  but 
can  trace  them  only  to  the  fact  that  part  of  his  army  retreated  by  way 
of  Huntsville.  I believe  that  the  force  north  is  picking  up  all  bands 
and  concentrating  for  a dash  on  the  railroad. 

G.  M.  HODGE, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Major-General  Hurlbut. 


Corinth,  Miss.,  July  12,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  herewith  forward  the  report  of  Col. 
E.  M.  Cornyn,  Tenth  Missouri  Cavalry,  commanding  Cavalry  Brigade, 
of  the  battle  at  Iuka. 

On  the  night  of  July  7,  the  enemy,  in  three  columns,  advanced  toward 
Corinth,  skirmishing  at  Glendale,  and  dashed  into  the  north  and  cap- 
tured a corral  of  broken-down  stock,  taking  28  of  the  guard  at  the 
corral.  The  stock  was  kept  out  of  town  to  prevent  our  animals  catching 
the  diseases  prevalent  among  the  unserviceable  stock  ; also  for  the  pur- 
pose of  grazing  the  animals,  thereby  saving  forage  to  the  Government. 
The  enemy  started  all  the  animals,  some  666,  but  succeeded  in  getting 
off  only  240.  I suppose  that  they  would  bring  to  the  Government  at 
sale  $20  per  head.  The  company  stationed  at  the  corral  were  surrounded 
by  about  500  cavalry ; they  fought  determinedly,  but  were  dispersed, 
and  28  captured.  The  enemy  lost  3 killed,  2 lieutenants,  and  10 
wounded.  Their  dead  and  part  of  their  wounded  were  left  on  the  field. 

When  the  attack  was  made  on  Glendale,  Colonel  Cornyn  was  ordered 
to  move  at  4 a.  m.  on  the  Burnsville  road,  to  develop  the  movement 


Chai\  XXxVL] 


ACTION  AT  IUKA,  MISS, 


663 


of  tho  enemy.  Through  some  reason,  as  yet  unexplained,  he  failed 
to  move  until  5.30.  Had  he  moved  at  the  time,  he  would  have  met  the 
enemy  approaching  the  corral,  surprised  them,  and  no  doubt  captured  a 
good  portion,  as  they  did  not  attack  until  4.30  a.  m.  We,  however, 
followed  them  up  and  gave  them  a severe  whipping,  taking  their  forge 
and  battery  wagon.  During  this  movement  of  the  enemy,  I was  in 
Memphis,  by  order  of  my  commanding  officer,  but  the  dispositions  made 
by  Capt.  G.  E.  Spencer,  my  assistant  adjutant-general,  were  such  that 
had  I been  present  I could  not  have  improved  them,  and,  had  they 
been  promptly  obeyed,  they  would  without  doubt  have  been  entirely 
successful. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  M.  DODGE, 

Brigadier- General. 

Lieut.  Col.  Henry  Binmore, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 


. [Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Sixteenth  Army  Corps, 

Memphis , Tenn .,  July  15,1863. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General , Department : 

Respectfully  forwarded  to  department  headquarters,  with  the  addi* 
tional  information  that  the  animals  have  since  been  retaken. 

S.  A.  HURLBUT, 

Major-General. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Col.  Florence  M.  Cornyn , Tenth  Missouri  Cavalry , command- 
ing Expedition. 


Hdqrs.  Third  Cay.  Brio.,  Left  Wing  Sixteenth  A.  C., 

Corinth , July  9,  1863. 

General:  On  the  morning  of  the  7th,  having  received  instructions 
to  proceed  with  my  brigade  out  on  the  Burnsville  road,  to  make  a re- 
connaissance in  force,  I left  Corinth  at  about  daylight,  with  the  Sev- 
enth Kansas  Cavalry,  Col.  T.  P.  Herrick ; eight  companies  of  the 
Tenth  Missouri  Cavalry,  Maj.  F.  W.  Benteen,  and  the  detachment  of 
the  Fifteenth  Illinois  Cavalry,  Lieut.  Col.  F.  T.  Gilbert,  in  all  about  750 
men,  and  moved  out  by  the  way  of  the  North  Farmington  road.  On 
reaching  the  corral  on  this  road,  we  found  that  the  enemy,  with  twelve 
companies  of  mounted  men,  had,  a short  time  before  our  arrival,  sur- 
rounded and  attacked  the  small  force  guarding  that  point,  and,  after 
overpowering  and  taking  the  most  of  them  prisoners,  had  decamped 
with  all  the  stock  that  was  in  the  corral. 

After  making  a few  inquiries  from  the  neighbors,  I started  in  pursuit 
out  by  the  said  road,  when,  finding  that  the  enemy  had  taken  a route 
by  the  way  of  the  Hamburg  road,  I concluded  to  pursue  him  by  that 
route.  His  traces  guided  us  by  by-roads,  through  swamps,  and  over 
hills,  until  we  reached  the  main  road  leading  from  Red  Sulphur  Springs 
to  Iuka,  which  road  he  had  taken  to  that  town. 

Taking  this  last-named  road,  we  came  upon  the  enemy  in  force,  posted 


664 


[Chap.  XXXV L 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

in  an  open  field,  on  both  sides  ot  the  road,  with  a dense  woods  in  his 
front,  and  about  U miles  from  Iuka,  He  opened  on  us  with  musketry, 
and  I immediately  threw  out  the  detachment  of  the  Fifteenth  Illinois, 
dismounted,  as  advanced  skirmishers,  with  the  road  as  the  center  ot 
mv  line  of  battle.  I ordered  the  Tenth  Missouri  to  deploy  to  the  right 
and  left  of  the  road  and  dismount,  which  was  quickly  executed,  with 
four  companies  on  the  right  and  three  on  the  left  hand  side.  The  mount- 
ain howitzer  battery  was  ordered  into  battery  on  the  road.  1 then  or- 
dered some  four  companies  of  the  Seventh  Kansas  to  dismount  and 
deploy  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  road,  in  line  of  skirmishers,  behind 
the  Tenth  Missouri  Cavalry,  thus  forming  a double  line  of  battle  in  the 
rear  of  my  advanced  skirmishers.  In  the  mean  time  a very  hot  lire  had 
been  kept  up  by  the  enemy,  the  skirmishers,  and  the  companies  of  the 
Tenth  Missouri  on  the  right  of  the  road,  and  I ordered  Lieutenant 
Joyce,  commanding  the  battery,  to  shell  the  enemy  vigorously.  That 
portion  of  the  Seventh  Kansas  not  dismounted  was  held  in  reserve. 

The  order  to  shell  the  enemy  was  obeyed  with  good  will,  the  men 
standing  to  their  guns  under  a heavy  fire  of  musketry  without  flinch- 
ing and  with  undaunted  coolness.  Much  of  this  courage  must  be  at- 
tributed to  the  daring  and  bravery  of  Lieut.  Peter  Joyce,  who  was 
everywhere  among  his  men,  encouraging  them  with  his  presence  and 
assuring  them  by  his  coolness.  First  Sergt.  TV  . P.  Edgar,  of  this  bat- 
tery, was  acting  lieutenant,  and  deserves  much  praise  for  the  efficient 
aid*  he  rendered  in  working  the  guns,  and  the  unsurpassed  bravery  he 
displayed.  I regret  to  say  that  he  met  with  a serious,  though  not  a 
dangerous,  wound,  a ball  passing  through  his  hand. 

Having  cannonaded  the  enemy  as  I considered  a sufficient  length  ot 
time,  I ordered  the  battery  to  cease  firing,  and  advanced  my  whole  line 
of  battle  up  the  hill  and  through  the  woods,  and  if  the  fire  had  been 
severe  before,  it  now  became  heavier;  and  no  sooner  had  my  men 
shown  themselves  on  the  summit  of  the  hill,  than  the  enemy  discharged 
upon  us,  along  his  whole  line,  a tremendous  and  destructive  volley  ot 
musketry,  as  severe,  for  the  time  it  lasted,  as  any  I have  ever  had  the 
fortune  to  witness.  Here  we  sustained  all  the  losses  that  befell  us  that 
day.  Capt.  H.  G.  Bruns,  of  the  Tenth  Missouri,  a young  and  dashing 
and  as  brave  a soldier  as  ever  wielded  a sword,  fell  at  this  point,  pieiced 
through  the  lungs  by  a musket-ball,  in  advance  of  his  men  and  cheer- 
ing them  on  to  victory.  Two  of  his  own  men  and  1 of  Company  E, 
Tenth  Missouri  Cavalry,  were  killed  at  this  place  and  almost  at  the 
same  time.  Several  men  were  wounded  here. 

From  this  time  on  it  was  evident  the  day  was  ours.  We  continued 
our  advance  through  the  woods,  when,  after  a few  wavering  volleys, 
the  enemy  fled  in  dismay,  leaving  us  the  victory  and  the  field. 

As  soon  as  the  enemy  began  to  fly,  I ordered  three  squadrons  of  the 
Seventh  Kansas,  under  Major  Jenkins,  to  pursue  him  as  far  as  iuka. 
He  followed  him  to  that  place,  captured  a battery  wagon  and  forge  and 
burned  them,  but  saw  nothing  of  the  enemy,  and  returned.  He  had  a 
battery  of  four  pieces  of  artillery,  with  which  he  mglonously  fled  to 
his  fastnesses  on  Bear  Creek. 

Having  proceeded  as  far  as  my  instructions  directed,  I made  inquiries 
as  to  the  enemy’s  numbers  and  position,  when  I learned  that  in  front  ot 
me,  toward  Bear  Creek,  his  force  was  some  2,500  strong,  while  there 
was  a large  force  on  either  of  my  flanks.  The  force  I had  encountered 
numbered  from  1,500  to  1,800.  . . , , 

As  to  the  enemy’s  loss,  I have  no  definite  means  of  ascertaining,  but 
am  told,  on  inquiry,  that  it  was  large.  Four  dead  bodies  of  rebel  sol- 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  ACTION  AT  IUKA,  MISS.  665 

diers  were  found  by  us  on  the  field,  and  the  traces  of  blood  around 
fully  corroborated  the  story. 

The  total  loss  to  my  command  will  be  found  in  the  recapitulation  at 
the  end  of  this  report. 

After  caring  for  my  wounded  and  placing  them  in  ambulances,  I 
brought  away  my  dead,  and  fell  back  some  (i  miles,  and  encamped  for 
the  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  8th,  we  took  up  our  line  of  march  for  Corinth, 
and  arrived  here  at  about  10.30  o’clock. 

Before  closing  this  report,  it  would  be  neglect  on  my  j>art  if  I did  not 
return  my  thanks  to  the  officers  and  men  under  my  command  for  the 
unflinching  coolness  with  which  they  met  danger  and  the  courage  with 
which  they  routed  a superior  force,  occupying  a position  chosen  by  its 
own  leaders. 

In  particularizing,  I do  not  desire  to  be  invidious,  but  the  officers 
hereinafter  named  came  more  particularly  under  my  notice.  Maj.  F. 
W.  Benteen,  commanding  the  Tenth  Missouri  Cavalry,  was  where  a 
leader  should  be,  in  the  front,  and,  by  his  coolness  and  great  tact  and 
skill,  did  much  toward  gaining  the  day.  Capt.  M.  H.  Williams,  of  the 
Tenth  Missouri,  acting  field  officer,  and  Lieut.  J.  F.  Young,  adjutant  of 
the  same  regiment,  were  foremost  in  the  line  of  skirmishers,  rallying 
and  urging  them  forward,  regardless  of  danger.  Capt.  David  Cain, 
acting  field  officer  of  the  Tenth  Missouri,  displayed  great  gallantry  and 
effected  much  in  the  direction  of  the  firing  of  the  battery.  Captains 
Keet,  Kaughton,  Underwood,  and  McGlasson,  of  the  same  regiment, 
also  deserve  particular  mention  for  their  gallantry  and  daring  in  lead- 
ing their  men  into  the  hottest  of  the  fight.  Lieut.  Col.  F.  T.  Gilbert 
and  Maj.  E.  Carmichael  acted  with  their  customary  devotion  to  the 
cause,  and  were  ever  foremost  in  the  path  of  danger.  Particular  men- 
tion will  not  be  undeserved  in  the  person  of  Captain  Ford,  of  that 
regiment,  who  bravely  led  where  his  men  dauntlessly  followed.  He 
received  a shot  from  the  enemy  in  the  scabbard  of  his  saber,  deeply 
indenting  it,  thus  avoiding  a serious  wound.  Col.  T.  P.  Herrick,  Major 
Jenkins,  and  Captains  Malone,  Thornton,  and  Gregory,  of  the  Seventh 
Kansas,  also  came  under  my  notice,  and  deserve  the  praise  due  to  brave 
and  devoted  soldiers.  Of  the  officers  of  the  battery  I have  already 
spoken,  but  too  much  praise  cannot  be  bestowed  upon  them. 

All  honor  and  praise  is  due  to  the  gallant  dead,  and  it  might  not  be 
amiss  to  mention  particularly  Capt.  H.  G.  Bruns,  Tenth  Missouri  Cav- 
alry. Beared  in  the  lap  of  luxury,  at  the  first  breaking  out  of  the  war, 
although  quite  young,  he  enlisted  in  the  Third  Missouri  Volunteer  In- 
fantry, and  served  in  that  regiment  through  all  the  battles  cf  Mis- 
souri— Boonville,  Wilson’s  Creek,  and  others.  He  was  with  his  regi- 
ment during  General  Curtis’  chase  of  the  rebel  Price  through  Missouri, 
and  participated  in  every  battle  of  that  eventful  campaign,  including 
the  hard-earned  field  of  Pea  Kidge.  He  received  a discharge  from  his 
regiment  only  to  accept  a commission  in  the  Tenth  Missouri,  and  has 
served  with  it  in  every  one  of  its  engagements  in  this  district.  Ere  yet 
in  the  first  dawn  of  manhood,  this  polished  gentleman  and  gallant  sol- 
dier has  been  cut  down,  one  among  the  many  victims  to  the  mad  am- 
bition of  Southern  traitors.  He  has  left  behind  him  an  unsullied  name. 
Fond  friends  shall  weep  for  him,  comrades  in  arms  shall  mourn  for  him, 
but  he  died  a martyr  to  a holy  cause,  sacrificed  upon  the  altar  of  his 
country.  He  fell  foremost  in  the  fight,  and  while  the  victorious  shouts 
of  his  comrades  rent  the  air,  u all  grew  dark,”  and  his  fearless  spirit 
winged  its  way  to  a brighter,  happier  land. 


666 


Mississippi,  west  Tennessee,  etc. 


[Chap.  XXX  VI. 


Lieuts.  John  W.  Rice  and  M.  McDonald,  serving  on  my  personal  staff, 
rendered  me  every  desirable  assistance,  carrying  orders,  regardless  of 
flying  balls,  to  all  parts  of  the  field. 

The  following  is  a list  of  tlie  killed  and  wounded  : * 

*###*#* 


Respectfully, 

FLORENCE  M.  CORNYN, 
Colonel  Tenth  Missouri  Cavalry , Commanding  Brigade. 


JULY  8,  1863. — Scout  from  Germantown,  Tenn. 

Report  of  Col.  La  Fayette  McCrillis,  Third  Illinois  Cavalry. 

Germantown,  July  8,  1863 — 10  p.  m. 

Scout  to-day  within  8 miles  of  Hernando.  Met  rebel  scout  of  10  men ; 
killed  a lieutenant  and  1 man;  took  1 man  prisoner.  No  rebel  force, 
but  a few  scouts  this  side  of  Coldwater.  No  other  force  heard  of  on 
our  south  front.  No  loss  on  our  side.  Negroes  report  [R.  V.]  Richard- 
son at  Hickory  with  400  men. 

L.  F.  McCRILLIS, 

Colonel , Commanding  First  Cavalry  Brigade. 

Major-General  Hurlbut. 


JULY  10,  1863.— Skirmish  at  Bolivar,  Tenn. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Brig.  Gen.  Grenville  M.  Dodge,  U.  S.  Army. 

No.  2.— Lieut.  Col.  James  F.  Drish,  One  hundred  and  twenty-second  Illinois  Infantry. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Grenville  M.  Dodge , TJ.  S.  Army. 

• Corinth,  Miss.,  July  11,  1863. 

General  : The  force  that  went  to  Bolivar  met  the  rebels  and  drove 
them  out,  killing  1 and  wounding  several,  taking  1 captain  and  several 
privates  prisoners.  The  force  that  went  north  to  Purdy  drove  the  rebels 
north  toward  Jackson.  Newsom,  Biffle,  and  Forrest  are  all  raising  regi- 
ments in  that  country.  Richardson  is  said  to  be  on  Hatchie,  near 

Denmark.  _ _ 

G.  M.  DODGE, 

Brigadier - General. 

Major-General  Hurlbut. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  James  F.  Drish , One  hundred  and  twenty-second 

Illinois  Infantry. 

Saulsbury,  July  10,  1863. 

Colonel  : The  Eleventh  Illinois  Cavalry,  sent  out  Irorn  here  this 
morning,  met  the  enemy  at  Bolivar,  and  engaged  them,  and  drove  them 

* Nominal  list,  omitted,  reports  4 killed  and  8 wounded. 


Chai\  XXXVI.] 


667 


EXPEDITION  TO  YAZOO  CITY,  MISS. 

across  tlio  Hatckie.  They  were  about  80  strong,  supposed  to  be  Rich- 
ardson’s  command.  We  killed  1,  wounded  several,  and  captured  1 cap- 
tain and  some  men.  There  is  no  force  of  the  enemy  on  this  side  of  the 
Hatckie.  Major  Funke  was  in  command  of  the  force  from  this  place. 
The  Second  Iowa  joined  after  the  fight  was  over. 

J.  F.  DRISH, 

Lieutenant- Colonel,  Commanding  Regiment. 

Col.  Aug.  Mersy. 


JULY  12-21,  1863. — Expedition  from  Vicksburg  to  Yazoo  City,  Miss. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Maj.  Gen.  Francis  J.  Herron,  U.  S.  Army,  commanding  expedition. 

No.  2. — Acting  Rear-Admiral  Dayid  D.  Porter,  U.  S.  Navy. 

No.  3. — Commander  Isaac  N.  Brown,  C.  S.  Navy. 

No.  4. — Lienfc.  Col.  William  B.  Creasman,  Twenty-ninth  North  Carolina  Infantry. 


No.  1. 

Report  of  Maj.  Gen.  Francis  J.  Herron , TJ.  8.  Army , commanding  Expe- 
dition. 

Headquarters  Herron’s  Division, 
Steamer  Chancellor , en  route  to  New  Orleans , July  25, 1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  on  the  10th  instant,  while 
in  camp  at  Vicksburg,  I received  orders  from  Major-General  Grant  to 
embark  the  troops  of  my  command  on  boats  for  Port  Hudson. 

On  the  morning  of  the  11th,  my  command  was  embarked  and  ready  to 
move,  when  news  of  the  surrender  of  that  place  was  received,  and  the 
orders  were  countermanded,  and  I was  directed  to  proceed  to  and  up 
the  Yazoo  River. 

As  this  change  of  orders  necessitated  a change  of  boats,  consuming 
much  time,  my  fleet  sailed  about  11  a.  m.  of  the  12th  instant,  convoyed 
by  the  iron-clad  gunboat  De  Kalb,  Captain  Walker  commanding,  and 
two  tin-clads. 

On  arriving  at  Haynes’  Bluff,  during  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day, 
I took  on  25  men  of  the  Second  Wisconsin  Cavalry,  under  Lieutenant 
Myers,  and  proceeded  up  the  river. 

About  noon  of  the  13th  instant,  I arrived  at  a point  about'  1J  miles 
below  the  city  of  Yazoo,  and  immediately  sent  the  gunboats  farther  up 
the  stream  to  engage  and  ascertain  the  strength  and  position  of  the 
enemy’s  batteries,  and  commenced  disembarking  my  troops.  Captain 
Walker,  with  the  De  Kalb,  proceeded  up  the  stream,  and  in  a very  few 
minutes  was  engaging  the  enemy.  Owing  to  the  river  being  so  narrow 
and  crooked,  he  was  able  to  bring  but  one  or  two  of  his  guns  to  bear  on 
their  works,  and,  finding  the  enemy’s  guns  were  posted  in  strong  posi- 
tions, in  well-constructed  earthworks,  and  ascertaining  their  exact  loca- 
tion, he  withdrew  after  firing  some  30  rounds. 

Previous  to  landing  my  troops,  I had  dispatched  the  cavalry  force  of 
25  men,  under  Lieutenant  Meyers,  from  a point  some  3 miles  below,  to 
proceed  up  the  west  side  of  the  river  to  the  rear  of  the  city,  and  prevent 
the  enemy,  if  possible,  from  removing  any  of  the  boats  reported  to  be 
there,  and  also  obtain  such  information  as  they  could  of  the  strength 


668 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


and  position  of  tlie  enemy.  Having  waited  some  little  time,  and  hear- 
ing nothing  from  my  scouting  parties,  I ordered  forward  three  regiments 
of  infantry  to  take  the  main  road  on  the  east  side  of  the  river  and  move 
directly  upon  the  enemy’s  works.  After  advancing  perhaps  half  a mile, 
they  discovered  the  bridge  crossing  a heavy  bayou  destroyed,  so  as  to 
be  unsafe  for  use,  and  the  stream  not  fordable.  Some  little  time  was 
consumed  in  repairing  this  to  enable  us  to  cross,  when,  on  pushing  rap- 
idly forward,  we  discovered  the  works  deserted  and  the  enemy  fled.  I 
immediately  sent  the  Twentieth  Wisconsin  Infantry,  Colonel  Bertram 
commanding,  in  pursuit.  He  followed  them  some  10  miles,  taking  quite 
a number  of  prisoners  and  some  arms,  compelling  them  to  leave  by  the 
roadside  a few  wagons  and  one  gun-carriage,  partially  disabled.  I then 
ordered  the  fleet  to  proceed  up  the  river  to  the  city,  and,  with  Major 
Clark,  of  my  staff,  went  on  board  the  gunboat  De  Kalb,  in  advance  of 
them.  The  De  Kalb  had  moved  up  to  a point  nearly  opposite  the  city, 
when  she  was  blown  up  by  a torpedo  (a  number  of  which  had  been 
placed  in  the  river  by  Captain  Brown,  of  the  Confederate  Navy),  which 
tore  away  some  2 feet  of  her  port  bow,  and  siuking  her  in  less  than  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  in  15  feet  of  water.  Fortunately  no  one  was  hurt; 
and  to  the  coolness  aud  efficiency  of  Captain  Walker  and  his  subordi- 
nate officers  may  be  attributed  the  fact  that  none  were  drowned,  as  she 
became  unmanageable  almost  immediately  after  being  struck  and  sank 
very  rapidly.  Captain  Walker  afterward  raised  and  brought  away  all 
her  guns  and  a large  portion  of  her  small -arms,  &e. 

My  troops  having  entered  the  city,  I placed  General  Orme  in  com- 
mand of  the  town,  with  his  three  regiments  of  infantry,  to  protect  the 
place  and  private  property  and  collect  in  all  captured  stores.  The  city 
had  been  garrisoned  by  the  Twenty-ninth  North  Carolina  Infantry,  with 
one  battery  of  light  artillery,  and  commanded  by  Colonel  Creasman. 
The  enemy  having  obtained  information  of  our  coming,  sent  their 
steamers  up  the  river,  but  my  cavalry  pursued  them  so  closely  they 
were  compelled  to  burn  five  of  them,  the  Magenta,  Prince  of  Wales, 
Magnolia,  Peutonia,  and  J.  F.  Fargo.  The  E.  J.  Gay,  Hennet,  Arcadia, 
and  Mary  Keane  escaped.  The  cavalry  captured  the  steamer  Saint 
Mary,  a small  side-wheel  boat  that  had  formerly  been  used  as  a light- 
draught  gunboat,  from  which  they  had  but  a short  time  previously 
removed  the  guns  to  place  in  the  works  at  Yazoo  City.  I found  mounted 
in  the  works  one  8-inch  coluinbiad,  four  30-pounder  Parrotts,  one  12- 
pounder  howitzer;  total,  six  guns,  with  about  200  rounds  of  arnmuni 
tion  for  guns,  and  captured  about  300  prisoners,  with  8 commissioned 
officers. 

On  the  morning  of  the  10th  instant,  I received  orders  from  you  to 
proceed  across  the  country  toward  Big  Black  River,  for  the  purpose  of 
protecting  the  flanks  and  rear  of  our  forces,  then  investing  Jackson. 
Owing  to  the  fact  that  I had  taken  no  transportation  of  any  kind  with 
me,  I was  compelled  to  press  into  the  service  teams  and  wagons  to  haul 
cooking  utensils  and  rations  for  my  men.  At  12  o’clock  noon  of  the  same 
day,  I left  Yazoo  City,  with  seven  regiments  of  infantry  and  a battery, 
and  proceeded  to  Benton  ; from  thence  I moved  to  and  crossed  the  Big 
Black  River  at  Moore’s  Ferry,  pushing  a portion  of  my  forces  into  Can- 
ton, arriving  at  3 o’clock  on  the  17th,  after  a very  fatiguing  march, 
owing  to  the  dust,  excessive  heat,  and  scarcity  of  water.  Having  sent 
out  my  mounted  force  to  scout  the  country,  I halted  for  the  night. 

On  the  morning  of  the  18th,  I received  a dispatch  from  Colonel  Bus- 
sey announcing  the  result  of  operations  at  Jackson,  and  that  he  was 
occupying  Canton,  and  on  the  same  evening  started  on  my  return  to 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


EXPEDITION  TO  YAZOO  CITY,  MISS. 


669 


Yazoo  City,  where  I arrived  at  noon  on  the  19th  instant.  1 immediately 
set  my  whole  command  at  work  with  such  wagons  as  they  could  pick 
up  through  the  country  in  bringing  in  the  captured  cotton,  horses,  and 
mules,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  21st  sailed  for  Vicksburg,  arriving  on 
the  evening  of  the  same  day.  1 found  in  store  at  Yazoo  a large  quantity 
of  mattresses  and  bedding  belonging  to  the  rebel  steamers,  which  I also 
took  possession  of  and  turned  over  to  the  medical  department  for  hos- 
pital use.  I also  destroyed  the  rebel  works  at  Yazoo  City,  blowing 
them  up  entirely.  I would  report  as  the  result  of  the  expedition  : 

1.  The  capture  and  destruction  of  the  works  at  Yazoo  City. 

2.  Three  hundred  prisoners,  including  8 commissioned  officers. 

3.  One  small  steamer  captured  and  five  burned. 

4.  Six  pieces  of  heavy  ordnance  and  a considerable  amount  of  ord- 
nance stores. 

5.  About* 250  stand  of  small-arms. 

6.  About  2,000  bales  of  cotton. 

7.  About  800  head  of  horses  and  mules. 

8.  Hospital  bedding,  mattresses,  sheets,  towels,  pillows,  and  blankets 
for  450  patients. 

All  of  which  have  been  turned  over  to  the  proper  officers  of  your 
staff. 

The  country  along  the  Yazoo  River,  and  as  far  back  as  I have  seen, 
is  full  of  corn,  beef,  hogs,  sheep,  and  necessary  supplies  of  that  char- 
acter for  the  subsistence  of  troops,  and  there  are  stored  in  the  woods 
and  valleys  immense  quantities  of  cotton,  property  of  the  Confederate 
States.  1 have  little  hesitation  in  saying  that  50,000  bales  can  be 
brought  away  by  transports  from  the  neighborhood  of  Yazoo  City 
alone.  Owing  to  the  constant  labor  to  which  my  men  have  been  sub- 
jected during  the  past  month,  the  change  of  climate,  and  the  impure 
water  used  on  this  trip,  many  of  them  are  sick,  though  no  deaths  or 
casualties  occurred  among  them. 

I desire,  colonel,  to  return  my  thanks  to  Brigadier-Generals  Vandever 
and  Orme,  my  brigade  commanders,  for  their  unceasing  efforts  to  carry 
out  all  my  plans  and  aid  in  the  success  of  the  expedition. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

F.  J.  HEREON, 

. Major-General , Commanding  Expedition. 

Lieut.  Col.  John  A.  Rawlins, 

Adjt.  Gen.,  Department  of  the  Tennessee. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Acting  Rear-Admiral  David  D.  Porter , TJ.  S.  Navy. 

United  States  Mississippi  Squadron, 
Flag-ship  Black  Dawk,  off  Vicksburg , Miss.,  July  14,  1863. 

Hearing  that  General  Johnston  was  fortifying  Yazoo  City  with  heavy 
guns  and  gathering  troops  there  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  supplies 
for  his  army  from  the  Yazoo  country;  also  that  the  remainder  of  the 
enemy’s  best  transports  were  there,  showing  a possibility  of  his  attempt 
to  escape,  Major-General  Grant  and  myself  determined  to  send  a naval 
and  military  expedition  up  there  to  capture  them.  The  Baron  De  Kalb, 
New  National,  Kenwood,  and  Signal  were  dispatched,  under  command 


670 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


of  Lieut.  Commander  John  G.  Walker,  with  a force  of  troops  number- 
ing 5,000,  under  Maj.  Gen.  Francis  J.  Herron.  Pushing  up  to  the  city, 
the  Baron  De  Kalb  engaged  the  batteries,  which  were  all  prepared  to 
receive  her,  and,  after  finding  out  their  strength,  dropped  back  to  notify 
General  Herron,  who  immediately  landed  his  men,  and  the  Army  and 
Navy  made  a combined  attack  on  the  enemy’s  works.  The  rebels  soon 
fled,  leaving  everything  in  our  possession,  and  set  fire  to  four  of  their 
fast  steamers,  that  ran  on  the  Mississippi  River  in  times  past.  The 
army  pursued  the  enemy,  and  captured  their  rear  guard  of  260  men,  and 
at  last  accounts  were  taking  more  prisoners.  Six  heavy  guns  and  one 
vessel,  formerly  a gunboat,  fell  into  our  hands,  and  all  the  munitions  of 
war.  Unfortunately,  while  the  Baron  De  Kalb  was  moving  slowly  along, 
she  ran  foul  of  a torpedo,  which  exploded  and  sunk  her.  There  was  no 
sign  of  anything  of  the  kind  to  be  seen.  While  she  was  going  down,  an- 
other exploded  under  her  stern.  The  water  is  rising  fast  in  the  Yazoo, 
and  we  can  do  nothing  more  than  get  the  guns  out  of  her,  and  then  get 
her  into  deep  water,  where  she  wili  be  undisturbed  until  we  are  able  to 
raise  her.  But  for  the  blowing  up  of  the  Baron  De  Kalb,  it  would  have 
been  a good  move.  Wre  have  generally  obtained  information  of  torpe- 
does from  negroes  and  deserters,  but  heard  nothing  of  this.  Many  of 
the  crew  were  bruised  by  the  concussion,  which  was  severe,  but  no  lives 
were  lost.  The  officers  and  men  lost  everything.  She  went  down  in 
fifteen  minutes.  WTe  must  have  her  up  again  as  soon  as  possible.  We 
have  much  to  contend  with  in  these  narrow  rivers,  and  cannot  guard 
against  these  hidden  dangers  while  an  enemy’s  flag  floats.  The  usual 
lookout  was  kept  for  torpedoes,  but  this  is  some  new  invention  of  the 
enemy,  which  we  will  guard  against  hereafter.  An  attempt  was  made 
by  the  perpetrator,  late  Lieut.  Isaac  N.  Brown,  to  plant  torpedoes  once 
before,  but  the  people  of  Yazoo  City  threatened  to  hang  him  if  lie  did 
so.  We  felt  sure  that  they  would  not  jiermit  it  on  this  occasion.  WThile 
a rebel  flag  floats  anywhere  the  gunboats  must  follow  up.  The  officers 
and  men  risk  their  lives  fearlessly  on  these  occasions,  and  I hope  the 
Department  will  not  take  too  seriously  the  accidents  which  happen  to 
the  vessels  when  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  them. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  yours,  very  respectfully, 

DAVID  D.  PORTER, 

Acting  Rear-Admiral,  Commanding  Mississippi  Squadron. 

Hon.  Gideon  Welles, 

Secretary  of  the  Navy. 


No.  3. 


Reports  of  Commander  Isaac  N.  Broivn,  C.  S.  Navy. 

Meridian,  July  20,  1863. 

We  repulsed  the  gunboats  at  Yazoo  City  on  Monday  last,  but  our  in- 
fantry force  retreated,  and  I had  to  abandon  my  guns.  We  destroyed 
our  steamboats.  The  iron-clad  De  Kalb,  of  thirteen  guns,  was  sunk 
by  torpedo.  I will  report  in  writing  from  Selma.  My  few  men  have 
gone  to  Mobile. 

ISAAC  N.  BROWN, 

Commander , C.  S.  Navy. 


General  Johnston. 


Chap.  XXXVI.  j 


671 


EXPEDITION  TO  YAZOO  CITY,  MISS. 

Selma,  Ala.,  July  21,  1863. 

General  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  enemy’s  gunboats, 
while  ascending  the  Yazoo  on  the  14th  instant,  p.  in.,  were  attacked  by 
the  heavy  battery  under  my  command  at  Yazoo  City,  and,  after  an 
hour’s  firing,  were  driven  back  out  of  sight  without  loss  on  our  side. 
While  waiting  for  a renewal  of  their  attempt  to  ascend  the  river,  I re- 
ceived a message  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  [William  B.j  Creasman,  com- 
manding the  Twenty-ninth  Regiment  North  Carolina  Volunteers,  saying 
that  he  had  abandoned  his  works  and  was  retreating  by  the  Benton 
road.  This  movement  left  no  force  between  my  gunners  and  the  land 
forces  of  the  enemy,  who  were  close  at  hand  and  advancing.  I had  then 
either  to  withdraw  or  suffer  the  capture  or  destruction  of  my  men.  We 
were  the  last  to  leave  Yazoo  City,  and  the  enemy  entered  it  soon  after 
we  marched  out.  It  is  my  opinion  that,  if  Colonel  Creasman  had  waited 
to  receive  the  enemy’s  attack,  our  whole  force  would  have  been  cap- 
tured or  destroyed. 

Without  doubt,  this  officer  will  have  submitted  to  you  a special  re- 
port of  the  conduct  of  Captain  [Robert]  Voigt,  commanding  a company 
of  Texans  of  Waul’s  Legion,  who  were  serving  as  heavy  artillerists  at 
Yazoo  City.  This  Captain  Voight  was  ordered  by  Colonel  Creasman  to 
join  his  command  on  the  retreat,  and  he  could  without  difficulty  have 
obeyed  the  order.  If  he  has  fallen  into  the  enemy’s  hands,  as  is  most 
probable,  it  has  been  because  he  wished  to  do  so. 

After  withdrawing  from  Yazoo  City,  I ordered  my  small  command, 
consisting  of  less  than  40  effective  men,  to  make  the  best  of  their  way 
to  Mobile,  Ala.  In  doing  this  I was  obeying  a provisional  order  of  the 
Navy  Department,  given  to  me  some  time  ago. 

It  gives  me  pleasure  to  add,  in  concluding  this  report,  that,  while 
the  enemy  failed  to  capture  our  transports  (which  we  destroyed),  they 
sustained,  besides  their  defeat  on  the  river,  the  loss  of  their  finest  iron- 
clad (the  De  Kalb,  of  thirteen  guns,  the  flag-ship  of  their  expedition), 
which  was  sunk  by  one  of  our  torpedoes. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  very  respectfully, 

ISAAC  N.  BROWN, 

Commander , C.  ,S.  Navy 

General  Joseph  E.  Johnston,  C.  S.  Army, 

Comdg.  Department,  &c.,  Headquarters  near  Jachson , Miss 


No.  4. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  William  B.  Creasman , Twenty-ninth  North  Caro- 
lina Infantry. 

July  25,  1863. 

Sir:  Being  informed  on  the  10th  instant  that  General  Cosby  was 
moving  from  Mechanicsburg  in  the  direction  of  Canton,  I immediately 
sent  out  pickets  on  the  different  roads  leading  to  Yazoo  City.  I also 
sent  4 of  Lieutenant  Johnson’s  cavalry  12  miles  below  the  city  on  the 
road  running  down  the  west  bank  of  the  river. 

About  7 p.  m.  on  the  12th  instant,  I received  information,  through  a 
citizen  living  25  miles  below  the  city,  that  there  were  three  gunboats 
coming  up  the  river,  and  immediately  gave  orders  for  the  command  to 
be  in  readiness  for  action.  A few  minutes  later  one  of  my  pickets  came 
in  from  below  and  reported  one  gunboat  within  12  miles  of  the  city. 
By  a little  after  dark  the  gunners  were  at  their  ;gnns  and  the  infantry 


672 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


in  the  redoubts  and  rifle-pits,  the  right  wing  of  my  regiment  resting  on 
the  Liverpool  road  and  the  left  on  the  Vicksburg  road,  1 mile  from  the 
city.  Captain  [James  A.]  Hoskins’  light  battery  was  planted — three 
pieces  on  the  Vicksburg  road  and  one  on  the  Liverpool  road. 

In  the  mean  time  the  baggage,  cooking  vessels,  &c.,  were  placed  on 
the  wagons  and  sent  2 miles  north  of  town.  About  10  p.  in.  I received  a 
dispatch  informing  me  that  General  Cosby  had  engaged  the  enemy  near 
Canton,  and  upon  receipt  of  this  information  I immediately  ordered 
the  wagons  and  baggage  on  the  boats,  believing  it  impossible" to  retreat 
across  the  country,  if  retreat  should  become  necessary.  Consequently 
I determined,  if  retreat  should  be  inevitable,  to  go  up  the  river  and  join 
General  Chalmers. 

Early  on  the  13th,  I called  on  Lieutenant  Johnson  for  four  reliable  cav- 
alrymen, whom  I posted  down  the  river,  5 miles  distant  from  each  other. 
About  10  a.  m.  one  of  these  came  in  and  reported  four  gunboats  and  six 
transports  passing  Liverpool  up  the  river.  Shortly  afterward  another 
picket  came  in  from  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  confirming  previous 
reports.  Lieutenant  Johnson  and  Adjutant  [John  E.]  Hoey  also  made 
a reconnaissance,  and  assured  me  the  boats  were  coming  up  the  river. 
About  12  m.  another  picket  came  in  and  reported  the  enemy  landing 
3 miles  below  the  city,  though  he  could  give  no  positive  information  as 
to  their  strength  or  the  number  of  transports  landing.  I immediately 
sent  Captain  Sanders  and  Lieutenant  Johnson,  with  about  20  men 
(mounted),  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  their  strength  and  movements. 
About  3 p.  m.  one  gunboat  appeared  in  sight  of  our  battery  of  heavy 
guns,  which  promptly  opened  fire  upon  her  at  a distance  of  1J  miles. 
She  halted,  replied,  and  a brisk  cannonade  ensued,  lasting  about  half 
an  hour,  when  she  ceased  firing  and  backed  out  of  sight  down  the  river. 
During  this  firing,  Lieutenant  Johnson  returned  and  reported  Captain 
Sanders  and  3 men  cut  off,  the  enemy  moving  up  Short  Creek,  endeav- 
oring to  turn  our  left  flank.  Soon  after  another  picket  from  the  Me- 
chanicsburg  road  reported  Captain  Sanders  and  1 man  captured  and  1 
horse  killed,  and  confirmed  Lieutenant  Johnson’s  report  as  to  the  en- 
emy’s direction.  Shortly  after,  a picket  from  up  the  river  reported  the 
Saint  Mary,  a small  picket-boat,  captured.  This  boat  was  up  the  river 
a distance  by  water  of  7 miles,  but  by  land  only  3 miles.  The  other 
boats  were  still  higher  up  the  river.  Those  which  were  wooded  moved 
up  the  river,  and  those  not  wooded  were  burned.  Captain  [W.  T.]  Ed- 
wards, acting  commissary  of  subsistence,  carried  the  commissary  stores 
off  on  those  boats  which  escaped.  One  hundred  beef-cattle  near  Benton 
I ordered  out  by  way  of  Lexington. 

About  5 p.  m.  1 determined  to  evacuate  the  place,  finding  I was  en- 
tirely overpowered  and  almost  surrounded.  I concentrated  my  forces 
at  the  redoubt  on  the  Canton  road,  half  a mile  from  town,  except  Cap- 
tain [Robert]  Yoigt,  of  Waul’s  Texas  Legion,  who,  refusing  to  obey  my 
orders  relative  to  the  evacuation,  was  with  his  company  (C)  captured 
by  the  enemy,  when  he  could  have  escaped  with  the  rest  of  the  com- 
mand. I considered  it  dangerous  to  send  after  him  when  I found  he 
refused  to  come  out,  the  enemy  being  then  in  sight  on  the  west  bank  of 
the  river.  I ordered  Captain  [Isaac  X.]  Brown,  C.  S.  Navy,  to  destroy 
or  render  useless  the  heavy  artillery,  which  he  failed  to  do,  informing 
me  afterward  that  he  did  not  have  time,  and  to  destroy  them  by  blow- 
ing up  would  have  given  the  enemy  notice  of  our  intention  to  evacuate 
and  thereby  endanger  our  retreat. 

I moved  the  command  about  7 p.  m.  toward  Lexington,  via  Benton, 
crossed  the  railroad  at  Goodman,  and  Pearl  River  at  Edwards  Ferry, 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  SKIRMISHES  ON  FORKED  DEER  RIVER,  TENN.,  ETC.  673 

arriving  at  Hillsborough  on  the  20th,  and  reported  to  you  on  the  22d.  i 
would  have  reported  at  an  earlier  moment  but  that  droves  of  cattle 
were  being  hurried  through  the  town,  and  men  and  officers  constantly 
passing,  who  reported  two  of  your  divisions  coming  upon  theHillsbor 
ough  road  and  your  entire  army  moving  toward  Meridian.  So  soon  as 
I found  the  army  was  still  near  Morton  and  Forest,  at  which  former 
place  I was  told  you  had  headquarters,  I reported  to  you. 

I am  reliably  informed  that  the  baggage  and  cooking  vessels  are  on 
the  road  to  Meridian  from  Winona  or  Louisville. 

I am,  colonel,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

WM.  B.  CREASMAN, 

Lieut.  Col.  29 th  N~.  C.  Regt .,  late  Comdg.  Post  at  Yazoo  City. 

Colonel  [B.  S.]  Ewell. 


JULY  13,  1863. — Skirmishes  on  Forked  Deer  River,  and  at  Jackson,  Tenn. 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Col.  Edward  Hatch,  Second  Iowa  Cavalry,  commanding  expedition. 

No.  2. — Lieut.  Col.  Jesse  J.  Phillips,  Ninth  Illinois  Infantry. 

No.  3. — Maj.  Datus  E.  Coon,  Second  Iowa  Cavalry. 

No.  4. — Lieut.  Col.  William  K.  M.  Breckenridge,  Sixth  Tennessee  Cavalry. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  Edward  Hatch , Second  Iowa  Cavalry , commanding 

Expedition. 

Headquarters  Second  Cavalry  Brigade, 

La  Grange , Tenn.,  July  19,  1863. 

Captain  : In  compliance  with  orders  of  Colonel  Mizner  to  proceed  to 
Jackson,  there  attack  and  disperse  the  Confederate  force  at  that  point, 
then  scour  the  country  in  that  vicinity,  returning  to  La  Grange  as  sobn 
as  possible,  left  camp  on  the  morning  of  the  12th  of  July,  with  360 
of  the  Third  Michigan,  300  of  the  Second  Iowa,  and  200  of  the  First 
West  Tennessee  Cavalry.  Marched  northeast  through  Bolivar,*  camped 
14  miles  from  there  on  the  Denmark  road,  and  was  joined  there  by  the 
Ninth  Illinois  Infantry,  300  strong.  Moved  on  the  morning  of  the  13th 
to  Denmark.  There  learning  the  enemy  were  concentrating,  and,  in 
compliance  with  the  order  of  Colonel  Biffle  (Confederate  commander), 
posted  through  the  country,  all  squads  and  companies  and  parts  of 
regiments  were  to  meet  at  Jackson  for  organization,  pushed  on  imme- 
diately by  the  Brownsville  road,  sending  Colonel  Hurst  with  the  First 
Tennessee  Cavalry  round  by  the  Woodville  road,  the  only  approach  to 
the  town  where  the  bridges  crossing  Forked  Deer  River  and  sloughs 
were  left  standing.  Companies  of  the  Third  Michigan  Cavalry,  com- 
manded by  Captains  Nugent  and  Dyckman,  carried  rapidly  in  a lively 
skirmish  all  the  bridges  but  the  three  nearest  the  town  (there  are  six- 
teen in  all).  The  enemy,  having  a very  strong  position,  held  the  last  three 
bridges  until  the  Ninth  Illinois  could  drive  out  the  enemy’s  skirmishers 
on  the  right,  and  two  companies  of  the  Third  Michigan  had  crossed  the 
stream  well  up  on  the  enemy’s  left.  As  soon  as  our  men  had  opened  on 
the  flanks,  and  one  of  the  Third  Michigan  guns  had  shelled  the  woods 
on  the  right  of  the  bridges,  I ordered  Captain  Nugent  and  Captain 
43  R R — VOL  XXIV;  PT  II 


674 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Latimer’s  companies,  of  the  Third  Michigan  Cavalry,  to  charge  and 
carry  the  bridges,  which  was  quickly  aud  gallantly  done.  Captain 
Reese  and  Captain  Lattimer,  of  the  Third  Michigan,  with  their  compa- 
nies, quickly  taking  possession  of  a log  house  on  the  enemy’s  left,  held 
them  in  check  until  the  howitzers  of  the  Third  Michigan  had  shelled 
the  woods  in  front.  Leaving  two  companies  to  guard  the  bridges, 
moved  my  lines  forward,  the  Ninth  Illinois  Infantry  on  the  left,  the 
Third  Michigan  in  the  center,  with  the  saber  companies  of  the  Second 
Iowa  on  the  right  flank,  and  the  Second  Iowa  Rifles  in  reserve,  our  skir- 
mishers driving  the  enemy  toward  town,  where  he  had  taken  a strong 
position,  holding  two  forts  on  the  south  side  of  Jackson  and  the  curtain 
connecting  them  with  dismounted  men,  with  mounted  men  on  the  left 
in  line  and  in  force  sufficient  to  overlap  my  right.  The  Ninth  Illinois 
had  approached  the  forts  within  300  yards  when  the  enemy  poured  in  a 
volley  too  high  to  do  any  hurt.  Colonel  Phillips  took  them  immediately 
in  a dash  so  rapid  that  the  rebels  had  not  time  to  reload,  many  throwing 
down  their  arms  and  flying  in  great  disorder.  At  the  same  moment  of 
Colonel  Phillips’  attack,  the  enemy’s  mounted  force  in  large  number 
threatening  a charge,  I charged  them  with  the  saber  companies,  riding 
down  and  breaking  up  their  line. 

The  enemy’s  flight  had  then  become  a thorough  rout,  our  mounted 
rifles  and  sabers  charging  them  in  every  direction.  Many  of  the  com- 
panies were  6 miles  east  and  north  of  town,  and  scarcely  had  the  Ninth 
Illinois  Infantry  rallied  on  the  northwest  side  of  Jackson,  and  collected 
its  men,  when  Biffle  (Confederate),  with  his  regiment  and  one  battalion 
of  Roddey’s  old  regiment,  in  all  800  strong,  approaching  on  the  Tren- 
ton road,  attacked  the  Ninth  with  great  spirit,  and,  by  constantly  out- 
flanking Colonel  Phillips,  compelled  him  to  fall  back.  Rallying  four 
companies  on  his  right,  of  the  Second  Iowa  and  Third  Michigan, 
drove  the  enemy  back,  holding  him  in  check  until  my  lines  could  form 
in  force  enough  to  whip  him.  Biffle,  with  his  Confederate  re-enforce- 
ments, had  gradually  concentrated  the  broken  forces  first  attacked 
and  scattered,  consisting  of  Colonels  [J.  A.]  Forrest’s,  [N.  N.]  Cox’s, 
and  [J.  F.]  Newsom’s  regiments,  with  a dozen  or  more  detached 
companies,  with  the  evident  determination  of  driving  us  back.  On 
my  right  were  six  companies  of  the  Michigan  and  Iowa  Rifles,  in  the 
center  the  Ninth  Illinois  Infantry  and  one  howitzer,  and  on  the  left 
six  companies  of  the  Second  Iowa  Rifles.  Colonel  Moyers,  with  a 
portion  of  the  Third  Michigan,  was  holding  in  check  a force  on  my 
right  and  rear.  At  the  moment  of  attack  I was  obliged  to  send  the 
First  Tennessee  Cavalry,  about  200  strong,  to  check  Roddey’s  battalion, 
which  attacked  my  left  and  rear.  The  enemy  then  attacked  with  great 
spirit,  coming  on  rapidly  in  the  face  of  sharp  firing,  forcing  the  left,  and 
the  Ninth  Illinois,  in  the  center,  back  to  a ridge  near  town.  Wheeling 
my  right  to  the  left,  I drove  out  the  enemy  pressing  the  Ninth  Illinois. 
I then  advanced  the  entire  line  rapidly,  driving  the  enemy  from  ridge 
to  ridge,  advancing  my  guns,  and  shelling  the  forts  and  rifle-pits  on  the 
north  side  of  the  town,  killing  many  of  the  enemy.  On  the  right  the 
enemy  were  broken  and  flying  before  Colonel  Moyers.  It  was  then 
nearly  dark.  I immediately  pursued  them  on  the  different  roads  from 
10  to  15  miles.  The  night  was  very  dark  and  foggy,  and  it  was  impos- 
sible for  me  to  ascertain  the  direction  in  which  the  enemy  had  fled — 
supposed  it  was  the  Trenton  road.  At  daylight  in  the  morning  learned 
they  were  retreating  in  detachments  toward  the  Tennessee  River,  and 
that  [R.  V.]  Richardson,  with  400  men,  was  crossing  the  Hatchie  at 
Estanaula.  Sent  the  First  Tennessee  Cavalry  eastward,  toward  Lex- 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  SKIRMISHES  ON  FORKED  DEER  RIVER,  TENN.,  ETC.  675 

ington,  with  orders  to  return  by  the  way  of  Mifflin,  Montezuma,  and 
Bolivar,  or  Montezuma  and  Purdy $ the  Ninth  Illinois  Infantry  by 
Bolivar,  to  Pocahontas;  the  Third  Michigan  by  way  of  Denmark 
Darcy  ville,  Wesley’s,  and  Somerville,  and  the  Second  Iowa  by  Esta- 
naula,  Whiteville,  and  Newcastle. 

The  women  of  Jackson,  previous  to  our  attack  on  the  town,  carried 
ammunition  for  the  enemy  in  a very  gallant  manner  under  fire. 

During  the  attack  on  the  town,  the  enemy  barricaded  the  streets  and 
fired  from  the  windows.  Lieutenant  Humphrey,  of  the  Second  Iowa 
was  wounded  severely  from  shots  from  a window.  'Jn  one  street,  how- 
ever, two  companies  of  flying  rebels  were  mistaken,  in  the  smoke  and 
dust,  for  our  men,  and  were  badly  handled  by  a party  of  the  enemy 
behind  a barricade. 

Our  men  having  found  thirty  barrels  of  whisky,  it  gave  me  as  much 
trouble  to  save  the  town  from  fire  during  the  fight  as  it  did  to  whip  the 
enemy,  and  from  the  same  cause  we  lost  a large  number  of  prisoners  I 
saved  the  town  from  burning  by  the  greatest  exertions,  and  protected 
all  the  private  dwellings.  The  stores,  I regret  to  say,  were  plundered 
by  negroes  and  stragglers  during  the  fight.  In  one  we  found  seventeen 
kegs  of  powder. 

The  companies  of  the  Third  Michigan,  who  gallantly  carried  the 
bridges,  are  deserving  of  great  praise.  Lieutenant  Wilson,  of  the  Third 
Michigan  howitzers,  shelled  the  rebels  out  of  a strong  position,  with 
credit  to  his  firing.  Colonel  Phillips  fought  his  men  spendidly,  advanc- 
ing at  a double-quick  3 miles,  driving,  killing,  and  wounding  many  of 
the  enemy.  The  saber  companies  of  the  Second  Iowa  Cavalry  charged 
with  the  greatest  boldness.  • After  we  had  obtained  a foothold  north  of 
the  river,  the  enemy  was  driven  so  rapidly  at  all  points  that  his  fire  was 
not  in  the  least  effective,  firing  whole  volleys  over  our  men. 

On  my  return,  Captain  Dyekman,  of  the  Third  Michigan,  with  three 
augers  and  four  axes,  constructed  a pontoon  at  Estanaula,  on  the  Big 
Hatchie  River,  175  feet  long,  in  four  hours,  over  which  we  crossed  the 
command,  our  artillery,  and  wagons  in  perfect  safety.  The  enemy  had 
4 captains,  3 lieutenants,  and  31  men  killed,  and  not  less  than  150 
wounded.  We  destroyed  300  stand  of  arms  and  captured  about  200 
horses.  The  conscripts  which  the  enemy  had  in  confinement  were 
allowed  to  go  before  we  entered  the  town,  and  escaped  to  their  homes  • 
said  to  be  from  300  to  400.  I inclose  list  of  casualties*  There  are 
from  ten  to  fifteen  slight  wounds,  not  disabling  the  men  from  duty.  I 
have,  therefore,  not  reported  these  men  as  wounded. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  HATCH, 

Colonel  Second  Iowa  Cavalry , Comdg.  Second  Cavalry  Brigade. 
Capt.  Thomas  B.  Weir, 

Asst.  Adjt.  Gen .,  Cav.  Div.,  Left  Wing  Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

[ Indonement.] 

Hdqrs.  Chief  of  Cav.,  Left  Wing  Sixteenth  A.  C., 

La  Grange , July  24,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded  for  the  information  of  the  general  command- 
ing left  wing  Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

The  high  degree  of  success  attained  by  this  expedition  and  the  great 

.*  Nominal  list,  omitted,  reports  1 man  killed,  3 officers  and  7 men  wounded,  and  3 
missing.  * 


676 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


gallantry  displayed  by  the  officers  and  men  of  Colonel  Hatch’s  com- 
mand entitles  them  to  high  commendations.  The  taking  of  the  bridges 
and  forcing  a crossing  by  the  Third  Michigan  Cavalry,  the  storming  and 
carrying  the  earthworks  by  the  Ninth  Illinois  Infantry,  and  the  charge 
of  the  Second  Towa  Cavalry,  gives  evidence  of  the  firmness  and  reliable 
character  of  these  troops. 

J.  K.  MIZNEB, 

Colonel  and  Chief  of  Cavalry , Commanding. 


No.  2. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  Jesse  J.  Phillips , Ninth  Illinois  Infantry. 

Pocahontas,  Tenn.,  July  16,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  to  report  that  in  compliance  with  orders  and  instructions 
from  Col.  Aug.  Mersey,  commanding  Second  Brigade,  Second  Division, 
left  wing  Sixteenth  Army  Corps,  I left  Pocahontas,  Tenn.,  at  11  a.  m. 
on  the  12th  instant,  with  my  command,  with  an  aggregate  of  330,  and 
marched  through  Bolivar,  thence  12  miles  north  through  Toone’s  Sta- 
tion, to  a point  on  the  Bolivar  and  Denmark  road,  where  I reported  to 
Colonel  Hatch  at  11  p.  m.  of  that  date,  and  halted  for  the  night. 

I moved,  as  the  Third  Battalion  in  order  of  march,  early  the  next 
morning,  until  we  arrived  at  the  South  Branch  of  Forked  peer  Biver, 
where  the  enemy  resisted  the  advance,  and  I was  ordered  to  the  front. 

I deployed  my  command  to  the  left  of  the  road,  and,  having  flanked 
the  enemy  on  their  right,  they  were  driven  from  their  position. 

In  accordance  with  the  orders  of  Colonel  Hatch,  I then  drove  the  en- 
emy through  the  fair  grounds,  then  from  the  field-works  on  the  south- 
west part  of  the  town.  Here  the  force  of  the  enemy  separated,  a part 
going  through  town  on  the  Lexington  road  and  another  part  of  their 
force  moving  out  on  the  Trenton  road. 

I followed  after  those  on  the  Trenton  road,  and  was  steadily  and  rap- 
idly driving  them,  when  they  were  re-enforced  by  the  Ninth  [Nineteenth] 
Tennessee  Cavalry,  Colonel  Biffle  commanding,  who  had  just  arrived 
on  the  Trenton  road. 

This  re-enforcemeDt  attacked  my  command  while  mounted,  and  I soon 
broke  their  ranks.  They  then  fell  back,  dismounted,  and  then  made  a 
very  fierce  and  impetuous  attack  on  me,  compelling  me  to  fall  back  a 
distance  of  about  300  yards,  where  I then  took  a position  and  drove  the 
enemy  back,  and  one  mountain  howitzer  belonging  to  the  command  of 
Colonel  Hatch  being  in  the  rear  of  me,  I ordered  the  gun  to  be  brought 
up,  placed  the  same  in  jiosition,  and,  after  a few  minutes  firing,  the 
enemy  retreated  very  rapidly  on  the  Trenton  road.  I then  moved  with 
the  command  7 miles  after  the  enemy. 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th  instant,  1 moved  with  the  column  on  my 
return  march  as  far  as  Denmark.  Leaving  the  cavalry  brigade  at  that 
place,  which  moved  to  the  right,  I was  ordered  to  Bolivar.  I arrived 
in  camp  at  this  place  at  1 p.  m.  of  the  15th  instant,  with  35  prisoners, 
who  were  placed  in  my  charge  by  Colonel  Hatch  at  Jackson,  Tenn. 

I also  captured  about  100  horses  and  mules  during  the  expedition, 
which  I turned  over  to  the  assistant  quartermaster  at  this  post.  I send 
herewith  a list  of  the  prisoners,  marked  Exhibit  A.* 

* Nominal  list,  omitted,  shows  35  prisoners  taken. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  SKIRMISHES  ON  FORKED  DEER  RIVER,  TENN.,  ETC.  677 

During  tli6  action  I sustained  a loss  of  7 men  wounded,  a list  of  whom 
I send  herewith,  marked  Exhibit  B.* 

1 am  much  indebted  to  Capt.  W.  0.  Knetlner,  Lieut.  E.  B.  Patterson, 
and  Lieut.  S..T.  Hughes,  of  my  command,  for  their  conduct  on  the  field 
and  the  assistance  I received  from  them  during  the  engagement.  The 
officers  and  men  of  my  command  did  all  that" could  be  done,  and  are 
deserving  of  much  credit. 

I am,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JESSE  J.  PHILLIPS, 

_ . Lieutenant- Colonel.  Commandinq. 

Lieut.  B.  K.  Eandolph. 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


No.  3. 

Report  of  Maj.  Datus  LJ.  Coon , Second  Iowa  Cavalry. 

La  Grange,  Tenn.,  July  17,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  to  report  the  following  in  regard  to  the  recent  scout  to 
and  skirmish  at  Jackson,  Tenn. : 

According  to  order  received  on  the  night  of  the  11th,  my  command 
(the  Second  Iowa  Cavalry)  was  in  the  saddle  at  4 a.  m.  of  the?  12th.  The 
two  3 2-pounder  howitzers  were  also  in  column  and  amply  provided  with 
all  necessary  ammunition.  Taking  the  Bolivar  road,  we  were  at  12  m. 
in  that  place,  a distance  of  22  miles.  After  a halt  of  a few  moments,  we 
moved  forward  northward,  when  we  soon  struck  the  Big  Hatchie  River 
and  on  crossing  discovered  the  railroad  bridge  across  the  same  and  the 
trestle-work  on  the  north  side  had  been  set  ou  fire ; the  bridge  entirely 
burned  down,  and  the  trestle-work  also  nearly  consumed.  On  inquiry 
learned  from  a negro  that  it  was  done  by  [R.  R.]  White’s  band  of  guer- 
rillas, which  was  then  encamped  some  8 miles  distant.  My  command 
having  the  advance, , I moved  forward  cautiously  for  some  7 miles,  when 
two  guns  were  fired  in  front,  and  the  advance  company  gave  chase  to  two 
soldiers  (a  patrol),  running  them  into  their  camp  before  they  could  give 
the  alarm.  The  company  in  pursuit  came  upon  them  at  Glover  Creek 
near  a church,  where  they  were  at  the  time,  some  30  in  number,  amus- 
mg  themselves  at  a game  of  cards.  The  scattering  of  hats,  boots,  coats, 
knapsacks,  &c.,  can  be  more  easily  imagined  than  described.  It  is  suf- 
ficient to  say  that  while  our  men  were  giving  them  two  or  three  shots 
each  from  their  revolving  rifles,  they  skedaddled,  some  bootless  and 
hatless,  others  guiding  their  horses  by  a simple  rope  halter.  We  camped 
that  night  at  Foon’s  plantation,  on  the  same  creek. 

On  Monday,  the  13th,  nothing  of  interest  transpired  until  orders  were 
received  to  move  three  saber  companies  to  the  front,  when  within  14 
miles  of  Jackson.  The  three  companies  ordered  up  were  E,  L,  and  M, 
Capt.  William  W.  Eaton  commanding. 

By  order,  I remained  some  ten  minutes  for  the  balance  of  the  com- 
mand, which  were  then  waiting  for  the  lead  horses  to  pass  a narrow 
defile  on  the  bridge.  As  soon  as  oyer,  my  rifles  were  formed  in  squad- 
ron column  on  the  right  of  the  Michigan  cavalry,  but  very  soon  there 
was  a general  strife  to  see  who  should  be  first  to  charge  the^town,  which 
was  fairly  done  by  the  three  companies  above  mentioned.  They  charged 
the  town  and  penetrated  it  in  almost  every  conceivable  direction.  In 


List,  omitted,  reports  1 officer  ami  (j  men  wounded,  i man  mortally. 


678  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chav.  XXX Y± 

one  instance  they  were  met  by  a superior  force,  and  the  street  block- 
aded, but  by  a flank  movement  to  the  right  and  left  they  succeeded  in 
capturing  some  20  of  the  enemy’s  cavalry.  In  one  place  the  conflict 
was  so  close  between  Company  M and  a superior  force  of  Forrest’s  men 
that  one  man,  named  H.  H.  Barner,  had  a hand-to-hand  fight  after  ex- 
hausting all  the  weapons  in  his  hands. 

At  this  time  Second  Lieut.  John  K.  Humphrey  was  very  seriously 
wounded,  and  taken  to  the  nearest  house.  While  this  was  being  enacted 
to  the  front,  the  left  flank  was  furiously  attacked  by  Colonel  Biffle’s 
regiment  (Ninth  [Nineteenth]  Tennessee  Cavalry),  and  on  my  arrival  at 
that  point  I sent  an  orderly  to  Lieutenant  Belden,  directing  him  to  say 
that  should  he  need  assistance  he  would  send  for  me  upon  that  street. 
At  this  time  the  enemy  was  pressing  two  companies  advanced  as  skir- 
mishers very  hard,  and  threatened  to  drive  in  our  entire  left  flank. 
Having  sent,  by  order  of  Colonel  Hatch,  two  rifle  companies  to  the 
front  to  support  the  three  carbine  companies,  I could  only  dismount 
two  companies  (B  and  F),  and  send  them  to  the  support  of  the  infantry, 
the  balance  of  my  regiment  having  been  detained  at  the  bridge  by  led 
horses  and  teams.  But  in  due  time  the  First  Battalion,  Capt,  Charles 
C.  Horton  commanding,  arrived,  when  I sent  them  to  the  left  of  the 
infantry,  that  I might,  if  possible,  drive  in  the  enemy’s  right.  About 
this  time  Lieutenant  Reed,  with  one  howitzer,  arrived,  I ordered  it 
planted  immediately,  which  was  done,  and  several  shells  were  thrown 
into  the  midst  of  a squad  at  a distance  of  near  600  yards.  The  effect 
was  good.  The  enemy  soon  left,  not  being  able  to  keep  steady  amid 
the  explosion  of  shell. 

Immediately  after  the  rebels  had  dispersed,  a white  flag  appeared  in 
the  road  running  north,  and  waved  there  for  some  five  minutes,  when  I 
directed  a mounted  orderly  to  advance  with  a white  handkerchief  and 
ascertain  the  cause.  In  a short  time  he  returned,  and  reported  that  the 
flag  was  displayed  to  protect  wounded  soldiers  in  a house  near  by. 

Colonel  Hatch  then  ordered  me  to  collect  my  men  and  pursue  as  fast 
as  possible.  In  a few  moments  all  were  up,  and,  throwing  out  heavy 
flanking  companies,  I moved  forward  as  fast  as  practicable  through  thick 
timber  and  undergrowth.  On  advancing  some  3 miles,  we  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  there  had  been  but  a small  squad  retreating  on  that  road ; 
but  owing  to  the  long  march  of  the  day,  besides  the  engagement,  which 
occupied  from  12.30  p.  m.  until  6.30  p.  m.,  we  halted  and  camped  for  the 
night  at  7 miles  distance  from  Jackson, 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  14th,  I moved  back  to  Jackson,  forming 
a line  of  battle  facing  the  east,  where  I remained  until  about  10  a.  m., 
when  I received  orders  to  move  toward.La  Grange,  on  the  road  we  came. 

On  the  15th,  my  men  assisted  in  building  a floating  bridge  over  the 
Big  Hatchie  at  Estanaula,  which  was  done,  and  the  command  crossed 
over  in  some  eight  hours. 

On  the  night  of  the  15th,  we  camped  24  miles  north  of  La  Grange, 
reaching  camp  at  the  same  place  some  time  before  sunset  of  the  16th. 

The  entire  casualties  of  this  engagement  were  Second  Lieut.  John  K, 
Humphrey,  Company  M,  wounded  by  musket  ball,  and  also  by  a spent 
ball  in  left  shoulder  blade,  and  Second  Lieut.  Frank  L.  Stoddard,  Com- 
pany B,  elbow  dislocated  by  being  thrown  from  his  mule  in  the  charge, 
and  2 men  only  missing. 

I am,  verv  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

HATUS  E.  COON, 

Major , Commanding  Second  Iowa  Cavalry . 

N.  B.  Baker,  Adjutant- General  State  of  Iowa. 


Cilu>.  XXXVI.]  SKIRMISHES  ON  FORKED  DEER  RIVER,  TENN.,  ETC.  679 

No.  4. 

Report  of  Lieut.  Col.  William  K.  M.  Breckenridge,  Sixth  Tennessee 

Cavalry. 

Grand  Junction,  Tenn.,  September  28,  1803. 

Our  regiment  was  in  the  rear,  and,  after  crossing  the  river,  1 was 
ordered  to  take  charge  of  all  the  wagons  and  led  horses,  as  the  men 
were  mostly  dismounted,  and  as  the  command  advanced  I moved  up 
the  led  horses  until  I arrived  at  the  edge  of  town.  I there  received  an 
order  from  an  orderly  to  take  charge  of  the  prisoners  and  picket  the 
town.  I then  rode  up  to  the  court-house,  where  the  prisoners  were,  and 
while  there  a citizen  came  to  me  and  reported  that  the  citizens  were  carry- 
ing out  whisky  by  the  bucket-full  and  giving  it  to  the  men,  and  I rode 
over  to  where  they  were  and  had  the  whisky" all  spilled  that  I could  find. 
I then  went  to  where  my  reserve  was,  and  sent  Lieutenant  Lewis 
with  10  men  to  destroy  all  the  liquor  they  could  find.  In  a short  time 
he  came  to  me  and  said  that  the  men  were  breaking  into  the  houses, 
and  I ordered  him  to  go  and  stop  them,  and  to  arrest  every  man  he 
found  in  a house.  He  then  went  off,  and  in  a short  time  returned  and 
told  me  of  Mrs.  A.  A.  Newman’s  millinery  shop  or  store,  and  I ordered 
him  to  put  a guard  over  the  house.  There  were  a good  many  strag- 
glers around  town,  and  after  dark  I and  another  officer  of  the  command, 
I do  not  know  his  name  or  regiment,  heard  a noise  at  a door,  and  started 
to  see  about  it,  and  on  the  way  I found  about  30  men,  I suppose,  in 
and  in  front  of  a store.  He  said  they  belonged  to  his  regiment,  and  I 
ordered  them  out,  and  the  owner  then  shut  the  door  and  we  went  on, 
and  in  a few  minutes  returned;  they  were  trying  to  get  in  again.  I 
sent  the  officer  to  send  them  off',  and  I spent  the  most  of  my  time  that 
night  in  running  from  place  to  place  trying  to  keep  everything  quiet 
and  seeing  to  the  wounded.  And  in  the  morning,  when  Colonel  Hatch 
returned  to  town,  the  men  broke  open  houses  and  took  all  they  wanted, 
and  took  buggies  and  wagons  and  loaded  them  with  goods  and  boots,  &c. 
I stood  in  the  court-house  yard  and  saw  a portion  of  his  command  pass, 
and  nearly  every  man  had  something  that  had  been  taken  out  of  the 
place. 

W.  K.  M.  BRECKENRIDGE, 
Lieutenant- Colonel  Sixth  Tennessee  Cavalry. 

A DDENDA. 

Statement  of  Lieut.  Samuel  Lewis , Sixth  Tennessee  Cavalry. 

Grand  Junction,  Tenn.,  October  4,  1863. 

I was  in  command  of  my  company,  and  was  held  back  in  charge  of 
some  prisoners.  When  the  regiment  advanced  I moved  up  into  the 
edge  of  town.  Colonel  Breckenridge  being  informed  by  a citizen  that 
the  citizens  were  giving  our  men  whisky,  Colonel  Breckenridge  ordered 
me  to  kike  some  men  and  proceed  to  all  suspicious  places  in  town  and 
destroy  all  the  whisky  I could  find;  and  while  I was  searching  for 
whisky,  I went  into  one  millinery  store  belonging  to  a widow  lady,  and 
found  her  very  much  excited  about  the  soldiers  carrying  out  her  goods. 
She  demanded  of  me  a guard.  I went  to  Colonel  Breckenridge  and  re- 
lated her  circumstances  to  him,  and  he  told  me  to  give  her  a guard.  I 
then  advanced  to  the  court-house  and  took  charge  of  the  prisoners, 
with  James  J.  Smith,  lieutenant  of  the  same  company.  I remained 


680 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


there  all  night,  writing  paroles  for  prisoners.  Next  morning  I went 
out  some  distance  north  of  the  court-house,  where  the  wounded  were, 
and  fell  in  company  with  Colonel  Hurst.  We  had  a conversation  about 
the  way  the  soldiers  were  treating  the  citizens.  He  ordered  me  to  go 
and  tell  my  men  not  to  interrupt  anything  in  town.  As  I was  return- 
ing to  my  command,  I saw  Colonel  Hatch’s  men,  of  the  Third  Michigan, 
or  the  Second  Iowa  Cavalry,  breaking  open  store  house  doors  and  carry- 
ing out  goods  of  almost  every  description. 

SAMUEL  LEWIS, 

Lieutenant  Company  A , Sixth  Tennessee  Cavalry  Volunteers. 

Statement  of  Lieut.  Edward  L.  Harden , Sixth  Tennessee  Cavalry. 

Grand  Junction,  Tenn.,  October  4,  1863. 

In  reference  to  Colonel  Hatch’s  fight  at  Jackson,  Tenn.,  on  the  14th 
of  July,  1863, 1 was  in  command  of  my  company  that  day,  and  was  held 
back  to  support  one  of  our  guns,  and  remained  there  until  the  fight  was 
over.  When  I was  ordered  back  to  town  it  was  getting  dark.  About 
the  time  I returned  to  town,  one  company  of  the  Third  Michigan  Cav- 
alry was  there,  and  was  breaking  open  houses  and  taking  what  they 
wanted.  I saw  them  taking  goods  out  of  the  houses  myself.  Colonel 
Breckeuridge  ordered  me  to  go  and  stop  them,  and  I went  and  ordered 
them  away,  and  they  went  off.  But  just  as  soon  as  I went  away  they 
went  back  to  breaking  open  others,  and  taking  what  they  could  carry. 
1 went,  then,  and  told  the  captain  commanding  them,  and  he  turned 
found  and  yelled  out  to  them  to  take  those  horses  away  from  the  doors, 
and  not  let  them  kick  them  down,  and  that  was  all  he  would  say  to 
them.  The  next  morning,  when  Colonel  Hatch  and  his  command  came 
through,  his  men  would  stop  all  along  the  line,  and  run  to  the  houses 
and  take  what  they  wanted ; and  at  Mrs.  A.  A.  Newman’s  millinery 
shop  I saw  the  Third  Michigan  Cavalry  carrying  the  things  out  and 
burning  them,  and  taking  what  they  wanted  with  them. 

EDWARD  L.  HARDEN, 
Company  F,  Sixth  Tennessee  Cavalry. 


JULY  13,  1863. — Occupation  of  Natchez,  Miss.,  by  Union  troops. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  E.  G . Ransom , TJ.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

Natchez , Miss.,  July  16,  1863. 

Colonel  : I have  the  honor  to  report  that  at  3 p.  m.  on  the  13th  in- 
stant, I landed  with  my  command,  and  occupied  this  city  without  oppo 
sition.  The  people  were  completely  surprised,  and  hardly  realized  our 
design  until  the  place  was  fully  occupied  and  picketed.  Some  20  rebel 
officers  and  soldiers  were  captured,  attempting  to  escape.  I at  once 
caused  all  the  approaches  to  be  recon noitered,  and  established  a strong 
provost-guard  in  the  city,  taking  possession  of  the  post  office,  with  a 
large  quantity  of  mail  matter,  the  telegraph  office,  and  court  house. 

The  mayor  and  council  met  me  proidptly  at  the  court  house,  when  I 
took  formal  jiossession  of  the  city,  and  communicated  to  the  citizens, 
through  the  mayor,  the  instructions  given  me  by  the  general  command- 
ing the  department. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


OCCUPATION  OF  NATCHEZ,  MISS. 


681 


I learned  that  within  a few  days  150  wagons  loaded  with  ordnance 
stores  for  Kirby  Smith  had  been  ferried  across  at  this  point  to  the  Lou- 
isiana shore,  and  that  beef-cattle  in  large  numbers  were  constantly 
being  driven  across  through  this  point,  as  previously  reported  to  Gen- 
eral Grant,  and  pastured  between  Natchez  and  the  Mississippi  Central 
Railroad,  and  that  a port  ion  of  them  were  still  in  the  county,  a few  miles 
east  of  me. 

By  3 a.  m.  of  the  14th,  I succeeded  in  mounting  200  infantry,  from  the 
citizens  of  the  place,  and  by  daylight  had  expeditions  to  the  country  on 
both  sides  of  the  river.  The  expedition  on  this  side  of  the  river  cap- 
tured a drove  of  5,000  Texas  beef-cattle,  in  excellent  order,  about  4 
miles  out  of  the  city.  A small  guard  of  rebel  cavalry  fled  at  our  ap- 
proach. I have  secured  the  cattle,  and  am  loading  them  on  transports. 

The  expedition  on  the  Louisiana  shore  returned  at  sunset,  having 
captured  a lieutenant  (with  the  inclosed  order  marked  A*  on  his  per- 
son) and  rear  guard  with  a portion  of  Kirby  Smith’s  ordnance  train, 
which  had  been  delayed  15  miles  out  on  the  road  to  Trinity,  bringing 
back  with  them  312  new  Austrian  muskets,  203,000  rounds  musket  car- 
tridges, and  11  boxes  of  artillery  ammunition,  and  destroying  268,000 
rounds  of  ammunition,  which  could  not  be  moved.  The  rest  of  the  train 
had  pressed  on  beyond  our  reach. 

Kirby  Smith  is  said  to  be  fortifying  at  Trinity,  on  the  Big  Black  Biver, 
and  that  a division  of  his  troops  are  in  that  vicinity.  1 hear  of  no  other 
force  of  the  enemy  in  this  region. 

I detained  the  transports  designed  for  General  Banks  and  am  loading 
them  with  beef-cattle.  Two  were  loaded  yesterday,  and  convoyed  down 
by  the  gunboat  Arizona.  I will  get  2,000  of  the  cattle  embarked  to- 
morrow. I have  sent  100  mounted  men  and  a regiment  of  infantry  this 
morning  to  Quitman’s  Landing,  10  miles  up  the  river,  to  intercept  a 
drove  of  cattle  reported  to  be  crossing  at  that  point. 

The  store-houses  in  the  city  contain  large  quantities  of  sugar  liable  to 
fall  into  the  hands  of  the  rebel  army  in  case  this  post  is  abandoned.  1 
have  detailed  a commission  to  inquire  into  its  ownership,  and  desire  in- 
structions as  to  whether  it  shall  be  seized,  if  it  is  private  property,  as  it 
will  probably  appear  at  least  to  be.  There  is  also  an  immense  quantity 
of  lumber  here,  about  the  disposition  of  which  I desire  instructions. 
Will  it  be  shipped,  destroyed,  or  allowed  to  remain  ? 

I am  disarming  the  citizens,  and  will  have  a large  quantity  of  assorted 
fire-arms  on  my  hands. 

The  country  about  Natchez  abounds  in  fine  horses,  mules,  cattle,  and 
other  stock.  All  the  plantations  are  planted  with  heavy  crops  of  corn. 
Old  corn  is  not  abundant.  Is  it  not  desirable  to  seize  enough  artillery 
horses  at  least  to  supply  the  batteries  in  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee  ? If 
this  is  not  done  soon,  the  best  stock  will  be  run  out  of  the  country,  and 
probably  be  used  against  us  by  the  rebel  army.  I also  desire  some  in- 
structions as  to  what  policy  1 shall  pursue  with  regard  to  the  negroes. 
Thev  flock  in  by  thousands  (about  1 able  bodied  man  to  6 women  and 
children).  I am  feeding  about  500,  and  working  the  able  bodied  men 
among  them.  I can  send  you  any  number  encumbered  with  families. 
I cannot  take  care  of  them.  What  shall  I do  with  them  ? They  are  all 
anxious  to  go ; they  do  not  know  where  or  what  for. 

My  troops  have  worked  hard — frequently  forty-eight  hours  on  duty — 
and  have  behaved  admirably.  Hardly  a case  of  pillaging,  or  even  of 
disrespectful  treatment  of  a citizen,  has  occurred,  and  the  people  con- 


Not  found. 


682 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC.  [Chap.xxxvl 


stantly  express  their  gratitude  and  happy  disappointment  in  their  treat- 
ment. 

I send  Lieutenant  Whittle,  Seventy -second  Illinois,  with  the  steamer 
Luminary,  in  charge  of  captured  prisoners,  arms,  cattle,  &c.  I also 
send  by  him  a curious  piece  of  cannon  manufactured  at  this  place  in 
1861,  and  found  concealed  near  the  city. 

The  original  object  of  this  expedition  will  be  fully  accomplished  in 
two  or  three  days  more,  and  I will  await  further  orders. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  E.  G.  RANSOM, 
Brigadier-  General  Volunteers. 

Lieut.  Col.  W.  T.  Clark, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General.  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


JULY  15,  1863. — Skirmish  on  Forked  Deer  Creek,  Tenn. 

Report  of  Col  Fielding  Hurst , First  West  Tennessee  Cavalry. 

La  Grange,  Tenn.,  July  20,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  of  submitting  the  following  report  : 

In  compliance  with  your  order  bearing  date  Jackson,  Tenn.,  July  15, 
1863,  I proceeded  with  the  regiment  to  Montezuma ; thence  to  Purdy 
and  Camden,  where  I ascertained  the  bridge  across  Big  Hatchie  River, 
near  Bolivar,  was  destroyed.  I then  moved  to  this  place,  by  way  of  Po- 
cahontas. On  leaving  Jackson  I marched  up  the  Forked  Deer  8 miles, 
and  found  the  trail  of  1,500  to  1,800  rebels,  under  Biffle,  Forrest,  and 
Newsom.  They  fled  before  us  in  great  haste,  destroying  all  the  bridges 
they  crossed  on,  giving  me  such  difficulty  in  crossing  streams  in  40  miles 
travel  that  I found  myself  10  or  12  miles  in  their  rear  without  any  hope 
of  overtaking  them  this  side  of  our  lines. 

We  took  about  20  prisoners ; paroled  8 and  brought  in  7.  Some  5 or 
6 fell  back  and  made  their  escape,  my  rear  guard  being  worn  out  with 
fatigue  from  hard  marching  and  crossing  streams  by  fording,  swim- 
ming, &c. 

I beg  leave  to  state  it  as  my  belief  that  the  entire  rebel  force  which 
we  met  at  Jackson  fled  by  way  of  Shiloh  in  a badly  torn  up  and  demor- 
alized condition,  and  could  have  been  easily  captured  by  a small  force 
if  thrown  out  from  Corinth. 

The  prisoners  all  concur  in  stating  that  they  were  out  of  ammunition 
and  low-spirited. 

I am,  sir,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

FIELDING  HURST, 

Colonel , Commanding  Regiment. 

Col.  Edward  Hatch, 

Commanding  Second  Cavalry  Brigade. 


JULY  16-20,  1863. — Scout  from  Germantown,  Tenn. 

Report  of  Col.  La  Fayette  McCrillis , Third  Illinois  Cavalry,  command 
ing  First  Brigade , Cavalry  Division. 

Germantown,  July  20,  1863. 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  I left  Germantown  on  the 
morning  of  the  16th  instant  with  250  men  and  two  howitzers  of  the  Ninth 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


SCOUT  FROM  GERMANTOWN,  TENN. 


683 


Illinois  Cavalry,  and  marched  to  Collierville.  Taking  with  me  150  men 
of  the  Fourth  Illinois  Cavalry,  I crossed  Wolf  River,  and  marched  to 
Hickory  Withe,  and  thence  north  toward  Quinn’s  Mills,  on  the  Loosa- 
hatchee.  About  2 miles  north  of  Hickory  .Withe,  I captured  a person 
just  conscripted  by  Richardson,  and  who  was  then  going  to  Galloway 
Switch,  where  he  was  ordered  to  report  that  day.  I immediately  forded 
the  Loosahatchee  at  Quinn’s  Mills,  and  pushed  on  to  Galloway  Switch, 
where  I captured  4 or  5 prisoners,  conscripts,  but  could  learn  nothing 
of  Richardson  or  any  part  of  his  force.  Parties  of  his  men,  numbering 
from  5 to  20,  had  been  seen  within  two  or  three  days,  but  I could  get 
not  the  least  information  from  any  one  as  to  where  any  of  Richardson’s 
could  be  found ; and  I will  here  state  that  of  all  the  men  who  have 
taken  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  United  States,  and  to  whom  protec- 
tion papers  have  been  given,  I could  find  none  to  give  me  any  informa- 
tion whatever. 

I camped  for  the  night  miles  west  of  Galloway’s  Switch,  near 
Lieutenant  [F.  M.]  Griffin’s  (of  Richardson’s)  command.  I took  two 
mules,  a light  wagon,  and  a two-wheeled  cart  from  him.  Lieutenant 
Griffin  was  out  in  command  of  a conscripting  party. 

At  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the  17th,  I divided  my  command,  and 
sent  a battalion  up  Beaver  Greek  Bottom  to  meet  me  at  Concordia, 
whither  I proceeded  with  the  balance  of  the  command.  I there  learned 
from  negroes  that  about  100  had  passed  toward  Covington  two  days 
before,  but  could  hear  of  none  in  the  neighborhood  any  later.  I thence 
crossed  to  Beaver  Ham,  and  turned  south  toward  Shelby  Depot,  but  at 
a cross-road  about  5 miles  from  Beaver  Dam  I struck  a cavalry  trail, 
leading  up  into  Beaver  Bottom,  and  was  informed  by  negroes  that  about 
150  of  Richardson’s  men  had  passed  in  the  night  previous.  I immedi- 
ately turned  up  the  creek  again,  but  lost  the  trail  completely  in  the 
bottom  before  I had  gone  2 miles,  but  I pushed  on  to  within  8 miles  of 
Covington;  thence  I proceeded  to  near  Mason  Depot,  and  camped  near 
the  plantation  of  a Mr.  Sherrod. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  18th,  I sent  Major  Wemple,  of  the  Fourth 
Illinois  Cavalry,  with  eight  companies,  toward  Covington.  He  went 
within  4 miles  of  Whitley’s  Ferry,  north  of  Covington,  and  learned  that 
Richardson’s  command  had  been  crossing  the  Big  Hatchie  in  squads  for 
two  or  three  days,  and  that  they  said  that  I was  after  them  with  twenty- 
five  pieces  of  artillery  and  3,000  or  4,000  men.  About  400  men  had 
gone  north  into  Lauderdale  County  with  Richardson.  About  100  were 
armed,  and  were  said  to  be  short  of  ammunition.  With  the  remainder 
of  my  command  I proceeded  east  to  Belmont,  thence  returned  to  Quinn’s 
Mills,  and  camped  about  one-half  way  between  the  mills  and  Hickory 
Withe,  where  Major  Wemple  rejoined  me. 

On  the  morning  of  the  19th,  I sent  out  two  companies  in  different 
directions  to  hunt  guerrillas,  and  marched  direct  to  Collierville  with 
the  main  portion  of  my  command.  My  scouts  heard  of  a few  scattering 
guerrillas,  but  could  find  none.  Arrived  at  Germantown  on  the  even- 
ing of  the  19th. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant,  • 

L.  F.  McCRILLIS, 
Colonel , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  Henry  Binmore, 

Assistant  Adjutant - General. 


684 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


JULY  18,  1863. — Capture  of  Union  pickets  near  Germantown,  Tenn. 

Reports  of  Col.  Phineas  Pease , Forty-ninth  Illinois  Infantry. 


Germantown,  July  — , 1863. 

A squad  of  rebels  captured  3 cavalrymen  within  half  a mile  of  my 
picket  line  on  the  west  this  evening.  Have  sent  out  cavalry  and  in- 
fantry in  different  directions  to  capture  them,  if  possible. 

P.  PEASE, 

Colonel  Forty -ninth  Illinois , Commanding . 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Binmore, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

Later.— Rebels  tore  up  track  2 miles  from  Germantown.  Will  be 
repaired  in  time  for  morning  train. 


Germantown,  July  18,  1863. 

The  squad  of  cavalry  have  overtaken  and  are  now  in  pursuit  of  the 
rebels  south  of  Nonconnah  Creek.  A detail  of  3 cavalry  have  returned 
with  1 rebel  and  our  3 captured  cavalry,  together  with  7 track  repair- 
ers, who  were  captured  at  the  same  time.  This  prisoner  reports  that  he 
belongs  to  [John]  McGuirk’s  command,  consisting  of  one  regiment,  en- 
camped north  of  the  Tallahatchee.  One  of  his  companies  at  Cockrum’s 
Cross-Roads $ two  at  Walnut  Hill ; one  at  Cox’s,  on  Holly  Spriugs  road, 
15  miles  north  of  the  Tallahatchee,  and  two  at  or  near  Holly  Springs. 
Blythe’s  and  George’s  regiments  at  or  near  Coldwater  Station.  Chal- 
mers still  at  Panola.  Have  no  more  cavalry  to  send  out. 

P.  PEASE, 

Colonel  Forty-ninth  Illinois , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  Henry  Binmore, 

Assistant  Adjuthnt- General. 


JULY  19,  1863. — Scouts  from  Danville,  Miss. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Grenville  M.  Dodge , U.  S.  Army. 

Corinth,  Miss.,  July  19,  1863. 

Scouting  parties  from  Danville  surprised  Captain  Carpenter’s  camp, 
and  took  10  prisoners  and  20  horses  and  arms.  Another,  under  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Sheldon,  Eighteenth  Missouri,  surprised  another  camp 
and  captured  12 — 1 captain  and  1 lieutenant,  together  with  their  outfits. 
Lieutenant  Colonel  Sheldon  reports  the  country  full  of  roving  bands, 
and  Ruggles,  with  1,500  men,  at  Orizaba,  and  Falkner,  with  400,  4 
miles  east  of  Ripley. 

G.  M.  DODGE, 

Brigadier-  General . 

General  Hurlbut,  Memphis. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


EXPEDITION  FROM  NATCHEZ,  MISS. 


685 


JULY  20-21,  1863. — Scouts  from  Memphis,  Tenn. 

Report  of  Col  David  Moore , Missouri  Infantry , commanding  Brigade. 

Memphis,  Tenn  , July  21,  1863. 

Captain:  l herewith  send  you  a synopsis  of  the  reports  of  the  de- 
tachments of  cavalry  that  were  out  yesterday  from  this  brigade.  One 
detachment  of  50  proceeded  on  the  Hernando  road  to  within  3 miles  of 
Hernando,  and  scoured  the  woods  in  that  vicinity.  They  found  none 
of  the  enemy,  and  could  hear  of  no  force  this  side  of  Coldwater,  except 
a small  party  of  rebel  cavalry,  numbering  from  15  to  20.  They  were 
informed  that  General  Chalmers  had  moved  south  with  his  entire  com- 
mand. Another  detachment  of  120  proceeded  on  the  Horn  Lake  road, 
about  24  miles  from  Memphis;  found  where  some  cotton  had  been  burned, 
and  were  fired  upon  by  a small  party  of  rebels,  whom  they  dispersed,  and 
returned  to  camp.  No  prisoners  were  taken. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  captain,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient 
servant, 

D.  MOORE, 

Colonel , Commanding  Fourth  Brigade. 

Capt.  F.  W.  Fox,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JULY  26-30,  1863. — Expedition  from  Natchez,  Miss. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  E.  G.  Ransom , TJ.  8.  Army. 

Headquarters,  Natchez , Miss.,  July  30,  1863. 

Colonel:  I have  the  honor  to  report  that  the  expedition  under 
Major  Worden,  of  350  mounted  men  and  one  piece  of  artillery,  sent 
out  into  the  back  country  on  Sunday  last,  returned  this  evening,  having 
passed  through  Kingston,  Liberty,  and  Woodville,  making  a circuit  of 
about  130  miles. 

Major  Worden  reports  no  armed  force  in  that  region.  He  discovered 
several  large  lots  of  C.  S.  A.  cotton,  estimated  at  5,000  bales;  cap- 
tured and  brought  in  with  him  1 lieutenant  and  9 enlisted  men  (rebel 
soldiers),  absent  from  their  command. 

At  Liberty  he  destroyed  the  following  army  stores:  Seventeen  hogs- 
heads sugar,  150  saddles,  1 artillery  carriage,  1 Government  wagon,  and 
60  stand  small-arms. 

At  Woodville  he  burned  a large  cotton  factory,  containing  forty  looms 
engaged  in  manufacturing  cloth  for  the  rebel  army;  14  freight  cars,  2 
passenger  coaches,  a railroad  machine-shop,  2 railroad  locomotives,  250 
barrels  C.  S.  A.  molasses,  a large  amount  of  army  clothing,  25  small- 
arms,  and  captured  and  brought  with  him  a beautiful  6 pounder  gun, 
French  manufacture,  and  said  to  have  been  used  by  General  Jackson 
at  New  Orleans.  He  reports  the  people  to  be  discouraged  with  the 
rebellion,  and  anxious  for  peace  on  any  honorable  terms. 

[J.  L.]  Logan  is  reported  to  have  gone  north,  on  the  east  side  of  Bayou 
Pierre,  and  1 have  since  heard  of  him  at  Port  Gibson,  and  headed  this 
way.  He  has  about  1,500  mounted  men  very  well  armed. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  E.  G.  RANSOM, 
Brigadier  General , Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  W.  T.  Clark,  Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


686 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVL 


JULY  31,  1863. — Skirmish  at  Saint  Catharine’s  Creek,  near  Natchez, 

Miss. 

Report  of  Brig.  Gen.  Thomas  E.  G.  Ransom , TJ.  S.  Army. 

Headquarters  United  States  Forces, 

Natchez , July  31,  i863. 

Colonel  : Yesterday  and  last  night  I received  information,  through  my 
scouts  and  through  negroes  and  others,  that  [ J.  L.]  Logan’s  mounted  men, 
about  1,500,  were  moving  on  Natchez,  and  would  probably  reach  here  this 
morning.  I made  every  preparation  to  receive  them.  They  approached 
about  sunrise  on  the  Washington  road.  My  advanced  pickets  had  been 
sufficiently  strengthened  to  check  their  advance.  I at  once  sent  Major 
Worden  with  his  mounted  men  to  reconnoiter  the  flanks,  sent  out  par- 
ties of  vedettes  on  all  the  roads,  and  moved  a regiment  of  infantry  and 
a section  of  artillery  to  the  support  of  the  mounted  men.  The  enemy 
fell  back  at  our  approach,  and  set  fire  to  two  bridges  over  Saint  Catha- 
rine’s Creek.  Major  Worden  forded  the  creek  at  another  point  and  com- 
menced skirmishing,  the  enemy  still  falling  back.  He  continued  to 
drive  them  slowly,  keeping  up  a desultory  fight  until  noon,  when  they 
made  a stand,  and  formed  line  of  battle  on  a rise  of  ground  about  11 
miles  out  and  in  a southeasterly  direction  from  Washington.  Major 
Worden’s  force  being  too  small  to  attack  them  in  their  position,  and 
discovering  an  attempt  of  the  enemy  to  turn  his  flank,  he  fell  back  half  a 
mile,  where  he  met  and  attacked  a party  of  about  100  men  who  had  been 
sent  to  his  rear,  routing  the  party  and  taking  prisoners  a lieutenant  and 
16  men.  He  then  fell  back  about  3 miles,  took  a good  position,  and 
waited  for  an  attack  several  hours. 

No  further  demonstration  being  made  by  the  enemy,  I drew  in  Major 
Worden’s  force. 

The  enemy  lost  Colonel  [Frank  P.]  Powers,  chief  of  cavalry  for  Logan, 
killed,  12  to  15  men  wounded,  and  45  prisoners.  Not  a man  of  ours  was 
lost,  and  but  2 slightly  wounded. 

Logan’s  command  is  now  in  camp  12  miles  from  here.  With  500  good 
cavalry  I could  capture  them  if  they  remain  in  the  country.  Prisoners 
report  that  Logan  was  ordered  back  here  to  collect  stock  and  negroes. 
He  is  now  engaged  in  driving  them  and  collecting  them  to  drive  out  of 
the  country. 

I have  the  honor  to  be,  sir,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

T.  E.  G.  RANSOM, 
Brigadier- General,  Commanding. 

Lieut.  Col.  W.  T.  Clark, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 


[Indorsement.] 

Headquarters  Department  of  the  Tennessee, 

Vicksburg , Miss.,  August  5,  1863. 

Respectfully  forwarded  to  headquarters  of  the  army. 

Cavalry  havagone  to  Natchez,  and  have  been  ordered  to  clear  the 
country  of  Login’s  cavalry  and  then  direct  their  attention  to  [Isaac  F.] 
Harrison’s,  on  the  Louisiana  side. 

TJ.  S.  GRANT, 

Major-  General. 


Chap.  XXXVI.]  SCOUT  FROM  FORT  PILLOW,  TENN.,  ETC.  687 

AUGUST  3,  1863. — Scout  from  Fort  Pillow,  Tenn.,  and  skirmish  near 

Denmark,  Tenn. 

Report  of  Brig . Gen.  Alexander  Asboth , U.  S.  Army , commanding  Sixth 
Division , Sixteenth  Army  Corps. 

Columbus,  Ky.,  August  9,  1863. 

Colonel  : I beg  to  give  below  an  extract  from  the  semi- weekly  report 
of  CoU  E.  H.  Wolfe,  Fifty-second  Indiana  Infantry,  commanding  at 
Fort  Pillow,  dated  6th  instant,  for  the  information  of  the  general  com- 
manding corps : 

The  five  companies  of  cavalry  and  three  companies  of  mounted  infantry  returned 
last  evening,  bringing  with  them  6 prisoners,  having  met  and  dispersed  the  rebel 
forces  under  Colonel  [James  U.]  Green,  numbering  250  men. 

The  enemy’s  loss,  besides  the  above  prisoners,  was  2 men  killed ; wounded  unknown. 
Our  loss  was  1 man  slightly  wounded  and  2 men  taken  prisoners. 

The  rebel  Colonel  Cheatham,  with  a supposed  force  of  700  men,  mostly  unarmed, 
was  reported  to  be  in  the  vicinity  of  Denmark,  near  Jackson,  where  the  fight  occurred. 
The  prisoners  I forward  to  Columbus,  Ky.,  under  guard. 

Colonel  Richardson,  with  his  force,  crossed  the  Hatchie  on  Saturday  last,  supposed 
to  be  making  his  way  into  Mississippi,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  arms  for  his  com- 
mand. 

The  country  back  of  Brownsville  and  south  of  Hatchie  abounds  with  guerrillas. 

Captain  Hencke,  Fourth  Missouri  Cavalrj’,  scouting  southward  from 
Union  City,  with  60  men,  fell  also  upon  a guerrilla  party  on  the  Obion 
Middle  Fork,  12  miles  north  of  Trenton,  but  was  unable  to  follow  and 
capture  the  marauders. 

I directed  the  commanders  at  Fort  Pillow  and  Union  City  to  operate 
continually  with  their  cavalry,  in  concert,  in  order  to  entirely  destroy 
Richardson’s  forces,  now  under  organization,  before  they  get  their  arms, 
and  I have  to  regret  that  Companies  B,  C,  D,  L,  and  M,  Second  Illinois 
Cavalry,  lately  returned  to  my  command,  are  ordered  by  Special  Orders, 
No.  181,  from  Headquarters  Sixteenth  Army  Corps,  to  Vicksburg,  thus 
considerably  reducing  my  hopes  for  success  regarding  the  above  com- 
bined cavalry  operations. 

It  will  take  longer  time  for  any  other  cavalry  to  be  so  efficient,  as 
those  companies  are  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  country  and  people 
between  the  Hatchie  and  Obion  Rivers. 

Very  respectfully,  colonel,  your  obedient  servant, 

ASBOTH, 
Brigadier-  General. 

Lieut.  Col.  Henry  Binmore, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


APPENDIX. 


Embracing  documents  received  too  late  for  insertion  in  proper  sequence. 


MAY  19- JULY  4,  1863.— The  Siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.* 

REPORTS. 

No.  1. — Col.  John  B.  Sanborn,  Fourth  Minnesota  Infantry,  commanding  First  Bri- 
gade, Seventh  Division,  Seventeenth  Army  Corps. 

No.  2. — Brig.  Gen.  John  C.  Vaughn,  C.  S.  Army,  commanding  brigade. 

No.  1. 

Report  of  Col.  John  B.  Sanborn , Fourth  Minnesota  Infantry , command- 
ing First  Brigade , Seventh  Division , Seventeenth  Army  Corps . 

Hdqrs.  First  Brig.,  Seventh  Div.,  Seventeenth  A.  0., 

Vicksburg , August  7,  1863. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  report  the  part  taken  by  my  command  in 
the  siege  of  Vicksburg. 

After  moving,  on  the  23d  of  May,  from  General  Smith’s  right  to  the 
position  we  left  on  the  morning  of  the  22d,  I continued  to  skirmish  con- 
stantly with  the  enemy,  who  all  the  time  remained  inside  his  fortifica- 
tions, until  the  evening  of  the  26th,  and  at  the  same  time  kept  large 
details  at  work  during  the  nights,  constructing  rifle-pits,  covered  ways, 
and  breastworks  for  batteries. 

On  the  evening  of  the  26th,  while  I had  one  regiment  on  fatigue  duty, 
I received  your  order  to  move  my  whole  command  immediately,  with 
seven  days’  rations,  in  the  direction  of  Mechanicsburg  and  Yazoo  City, 
and  report  to  Major  General  Blair  for  further  orders.  At  10  o’clock  in 
the  evening  I took  up  the  line  of  march,  and  marched  out  8 miles,  and 
bivouacked  at  1 o’clock  a.  m.,  and  at  sunrise  again  took  up  our  line  of 
march,  and  moved  on  15  miles  farther  toward  Mechanicsburg  that  day. 
This  march  was  continued  through  Mechanicsburg,  Satartia,  and  down 
the  Yazoo  to  Snyder’s  Bluff,  at  which  place  we  arrived  on  the  1st  day 
of  June,  having  learned  the  movements  of  the  enemy,  and  without  any 
loss  to  my  command. 

Having  remained  at  this  point  three  days,  and  furnished  the  com- 
mand shoes,  socks,  and  other  articles  greatly  needed,  I moved,  on  the 
4th  of  June,  again  into  the  line  of  the  forces  investing  Vicksburg,  and 
took  position  on  the  left  of  the  Seventh  Division,  being  the  left  of  the 

* See  pp.  146,  et  seq. 

(689) 


690 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Seventeenth  Army  Corps.  In  this  position  the  command  remained, 
having  out  a strong  line  of  skirmishers,  until  the  24th  of  June,  when 
the  Third  Brigade,  having  moved  to  the  rear  and  joined  the  forces  on 
the  line  of  circumvaliation,  I moved  my  command  on  to  the  ground 
evacuated  by  it  on  the  right  of  the  division,  and  in  this  last  position 
remained  until  the  surrender  of  Vicksburg,  on  the  4th  of  July,  when  my 
command  moved  into  the  city. 

During  the  entire  siege  the  health  and  morale  of  the  command  were 
excellent,  and  none  seemed  to  have  a desponding  thought  or  a doubt  as 
to  successful  result,  and  whether  called  upon  to  dig  rifle-pits,  throw  up 
intrenchments,  skirmish  with  the  enemy,  or  stand  to  arms  by  day  or  on 
dark,  stormy  nights,  all  was  done  with  the  greatest  alacrity.  Every 
man  of  my  command  seemed  determined  to  do  his  whole  duty.  The 
following  is  the  list  of  casualties  occurring  after  the  assault  and  during 
the  siege.* 

Respectfully  submitted. 

JNO.  B.  SANBORN, 

Colonel , Commanding. 

•Capt.  E.  M.  Rochester, 

Assistant  Adjutant  General , Seventh  Division. 


No.  2. 

Reports  of  Brig.  Gen.  John  C.  Vaughn , C.  8.  Army , commanding  brigade. 

May  30,  1863. 

Major  : The  usual  sharpshooting  from  the  enemy’s  lines  yesterday 
up  to  5 o’clock  p.  in.,  when  they  opened  tire  from  their  batteries,  and 
kept  up  a he.t  vy  artillery  lire  for  about  one  hour.  No  casualties  reported 
in  my  command.  The  men  are  at  work  every  night,  perfecting  their 
intrenchments  along  my  line. 

i am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 
Brigadier-  General , Commanding. 

Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


May  31,  1863. 

Major:  Heavy  artillery  firing  from  the  enemy  yesterday.  No  reply 
from  my  lines.  The  usual  sharpshooting  from  the  enemy;  an  occasional 
shot  from  my  front. 

Casualties:  2 killed  (Mississippi  State  troops),  in  town  -r  16  wounded 
(Mississippi  State  troops),  15  in  town  ; l wounded,  Sixty-second  Ten- 
nessee; 1 wounded,  Seventeenth  Louisiana  Regiment,  in  reserve. 

JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier-  General. 

[Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux.] 


Nominal  list  omitted ; 1 man  killed  ; 1 officer  and  10  men  wounded. 


Ciiaf.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


691 


June  1,  1863. 

Major  : Yesterday  morning,  at  about  3.30  a.  m.,  the  enemy  opened  a 
heavy  artillery  tire  on  my  lines,  continuing  about  one  hour.  At  8 o’clock 
one  of  the  enemy’s  guns  opened  on  the  32-pounder  on  my  extreme  right, 
to  which  it  replied ; but,  owing  to  some  deficiency  in  the  carriage,  it 
fired  but  a tew  shots.  Everything  unusually  quiet  during  the  remain- 
der of  the  day.  About  10  p.  m.  last  night,  I moved  a portion  of  Major 
Stevens’  command  on  the  line  occupied  by  the  Mississippi  State  troops, 
considerably  strengthening  that  part  of  the  line,  but  it  is  not  yet  strong 
enough  on  the  extreme  right. 

One  wounded,  Sixtieth  Tennessee;  one  wounded  (Mississippi  State 
troops),  in  town. 

Very  respectfully, 


Maj.  J.  O.  Devereux, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JNO.  0.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier-  General. 


June  2,  1863. 

Major  : I would  respectfully  submit  the  following  report  of  opera- 
tions on  my  iiue : 

About  9 a.  m.  yesterday,  the  enemy’s  battery  opened  fire  on  the  32- 
pounder  on  my  right,  which  was  replied  to,  for  the  purpose  of  trying 
the  range,  but  the  embrasure  was  too  high  to  admit  the  gun  being 
depressed  enough.  Some  sharpshooting  yesterday,  but  more  than  the 
usual  quiet  prevailed.  One  killed  and  3 wounded  at  32-pounder;  1 
wounded,  Third  Battalion  Mississippi  State  troops. 

JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier-  General. 

[Maj.  J.  G.  Oevereux.1 


June  3,  1863. 

Major:  I would  respectfully  submit  the  following  report  of  opera- 
tions on  my  line  yesterday  : 

About  1 a.  m.  the  enemy  opened  a heavy  artillery  fire  on  my  line. 
Everything  remained  quiet  thereafter  until  near  9 o’clock,  when  the 
battery  opposite  opened  tire  on  the  32-pounder  on  my  right,  which  was 
not  replied  to.  This  fire  was  kept  up  nearly  half  an  hour. 

With  the  exception  ot  an  occasional  shot  from  sharpshooters,  great 
quiet  prevailed  until  6.30  p.  m.,  when  the  enemy  opened  with  six  pieces 
ol  artillery  on  my  line,  and  continued  until  dark.  There  were  no  cas- 
ualties reported. 

Very  respectfully, 


Major  Devereux. 


JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier-  General. 


June  4,  1863. 

Major  : I would  respectfully  report  the  following  operations  on  my 
line  yesterday  : 

J he  usual  sharpshooting  kept  up  by  the  enemy,  with  an  occasional 
shot  from  my  lines.  About  8.30  a.  m.  the  32  pounder  naval  gun  opened 


692 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


on  the  enemy  to  get  range;  the  24-pounder  siege  gun  and  3-incli  rifle 
also  opened,  I having  given  orders  to  that  effect,  for  the  purpose  of 
attracting  the  enemy’s  fire,  and  drawing  it  from  the  32-pounder,  that  it 
might  work  undisturbed.  A desultory  fire  from  the  enemy  during  the 
day. 

Last  night  I gave  orders  for  the  24-pouuder  siege  guns  to  fire  during 
the  night,  should  any  attempt  be  made  to  bring  a piece  into  position  at 
Edwards’ house.  I see  no  indications  of  its  being  in  position  yet.  The 
enemy’s  sharpshooters  have  advanced  as  far  as  the  mound  near  Colonel 
Pitts’  former  headquarters. 

One  wounded,  Sixtieth  Tennessee  Regiment;  two  wounded,  Sixty- 
second  Tennessee  Regiment. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier  General. 

Major  Devereux, 

Assistant  Adjutant-  General. 


June  5,  1863. 


Major  : I have  the  honor  to  submit  the  following  report  of  operations 
on  my  line  yesterday : 

The  usual  sharpshooting,  interspersed  with  artillery  fire,  was  kept 
up  by  the  enemy  during  the  day.  Major  Stevens’  command,  near  the 
mouth  of  Mint  Spring  Bayou,  was  ordered  to  keep  up  a heavy  fire  on 
the  mound  during  the  night,  should  any  attempt  be  made  by  the  enemy 
to  throw  up  new  works  at  that  point,  which,  I think,  was  successful,  as 
no  new  works  can  be  discovered  at  that  point. 

One  wounded,  Sixtieth  Tennessee ; one  wounded,  Sixty-second  Ten- 
nessee; one  wounded,  Third  Battalion  Mississippi  State  troops, 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 


JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux, 

Assistant  A djutant-  General. 


June  6,  1863. 

Major  : Everything  unusually  quiet  on  my  line  yesterday  ; but  little 
sharpshooting,  and  no  artillery  fire  until  evening,  when  the  enemy 
shelled  my  line  for  a short  time. 

One  killed  in  Major  Stevens’  command ; one  wounded  in  Sixty-second 
Tennessee  Regiment. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier- General. 

[Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux.] 


June  7,  1863. 

Major:  I would  respectfully  submit  the  following  report  of  opera- 
tions on  my  line  yesterday : 

The  usual  sharpshooting  from  the  enemy  ; great  annoyance  from  those 


Chap.  XXXVI. l THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS.  G 93 

in  mound  in  front  of  my  left.  Heavy  artillery  fire  from  the  enemy  at 
intervals  during-  the  day. 

One  wounded  in  Third  Mississippi  State  troops. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier-  General. 

Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux. 


June  8,  1863. 

Major  : I would  respectfully  report  the  following  operations  on  my 
line  yesterday : 

Less  sharpshooting  than  usual,  and  but  a few  shots  from  the  enemy’s 
artillery.  Artillery  fire  kept  up  by  enemy  on  the  right  of  my  line  dur- 
ing the  night.  No  casualties. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 


[Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux.] 


JNO.  0.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier-  General. 


June  9,  1863. 

Major:  I beg  leave  to  submit  the  following  report  of  operations  yes- 
terday : 

The  usual  sharpshooting  early  in  the  day,  falling  off  toward  noon. 
The  enemy’s  artillery  opened  on  my  line  in  the  morning,  about  noon, 
and  in  the  evening,  and  a heavy  fire  was  kept  up  on  my  right  during 
the  night.  The  mortar-boats  threw  some  shells  on  this  part  of  the  line 
about  12  m.  No  casualties  reported.  Five  men  reported  as  deserters 
in  Sixty-first  Tennessee  Eegiment. 

Very  respectfully, 


Major  Devereux, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier- General. 


Headquarters  Second  Brigade, 

June  10,  1863. 

Major:  On  the  line  occupied  by  my  command,  the  usual  sharpshoot- 
ing from  the  enemy  yesterday.  A heavy  artillery  fire  from  the  enemy’s 
batteries,  mostly  directed  against  the ' water  batteries  and  the  left  of 
my  line. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 


Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier-  General. 


June  11,  [1863.] 

Major:  In  consequence  of  the  heavy  rain  yesterday,  but  little  sharp- 
shooting from  the  enemy.  No  artillery  fire. 


694 


[Chat.  XXXVi. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Five  men,  Sixty-first  Tennessee  Begiment,  deserted  on  night  of  the 
9th  : not  reported  until  after  report  was  forwarded  yesterday. 

JNO.  G.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier - General. 

[P.  S.] — Trenches  full  of  water,  and  cannot  be  occupied. 

[Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux.] 


June  12,  1863. 

Major:  The  usual  sharpshooting  from  the  enemy  yesterday,  which 
was  replied  to  by  my  command  for  the  purpose  of  discharging  the  guns 
that  were  exposed  to  the  rain  during  the  previous  day.  Some  cannon- 
ading during  the  morning,  resulting  in  the  disabling  of  one  24-pounder 
siege  gun. 

One  killed  in  Sixty  second  Tennessee  Begiment;  one  wounded,  Mis 
sissippi  State  troops. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 


[Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux.] 


JNO.  G.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier-  General. 


June  13,  1863. 

Major  : On  the  line  occupied  by  my  command,  the  usual  sharpshoot- 
ing kept  up  by  the  enemy  yesterday;  some  cannonading  in  the  even- 
ing. No  movement  discovered  in  the  forces  in  front  of  my  line. 

One  wounded  in  Third  Battalion  Mississippi  State  troops;  one 
wounded  in  Ward’s  Artillery  Battalion. 

Very  respectfully, 


[Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux.] 


JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier  General. 


June  14,  1863. 

Major  : The  usual  sharpshooting  from-  the  enemy  yesterday;  some 
cannonading  during  the  day. 

One  wounded  in  Sixtieth ; one  wounded  in  Sixty-second  ; one  wounded 
in  Loring’s  division. 

Very  respectfully, 


[Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux.] 


JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier- General. 


June  15,  1863. 

Major:  T would  respectfully  report  but  little  sharpshooting  on  my 
line  yesterday.  The  enemy’s  land  batteries  unusually  quiet  until  even- 
ing, when  they  opened  on  my  left.  The  enemy’s  water  battery  on  the 
Peninsula  threw  a few  shells  on  the  left  of  my  line,  but  the  proximity  of 
their  own  line  has  prevented  them  from  shelling  it  to  any  extent. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


695 


Last  night  the  enemy  opened  fire  from  the  land  batteries,  on  what  was 
supposed  to  be  some  boats  going  in  the  direction  of  the  gunboat  Cin- 
cinnati, with  what  result  could  not  be  ascertained. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 


Maj.  J G.  Devereux, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier-  General. 


June  16,  1863. 

Major:  The  usual  sharpshooting  on  my  line  yesterday.  The  artil- 
lery fire  was  directed  altogether  on  my  right.  The  enemy  are  strength- 
ening their  works  near  the  Edwards  house,  and  have  some  new  ones  in 
process  of  construction,  but  not  any  nearer  than  those  erected  some 
time  since. 

One  killed  in  Sixty  first  Tennessee. 

Very  respectfully, 


Major  Devereux, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JNO.  0.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier-  General. 


June  17,  1803. 

Major:  I would  respectfully  report  the  usual  sharpshootiug  along 
my  lines;  some  cannonading  in  the  evening.  The  enemy  opened  fire 
from  a new  position  in  front  of  my  left  near  Edwards*  negro  quarters, 
and  between  them  and  the  river. 

One  killed  in  Sixty-second  Tennessee  Regiment. 

I am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

[JNO.  C.  VAUGHN,] 

Brigadier- General. 

Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux. 


June  18,  [1863.] 

Major:  The  usual  sharpshooting  along  my  line  yesterday;  consid- 
erable cannonading  on  the  right  during  the  early  part  of  the  day  ; glso 
some  artillery  fire  on  my  left  *about  11  a.  m.  Everything  unusually 
quiet  during  last  [night]. 

One  killed  in  Sixty-second  Tennessee  Regiment. 

Very  respectfully, 


[Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux.] 


JNO.  C.  VAUGHN. 

Brigadier-  General. 


June  19,  [1863.] 

Major:  Everything  unusually  quiet  along  the  line  yesterday;  some 
sharpshooting  at  intervals  during  the  day.  About  10  o’clock  last 
[night]  the  enemy’s  artillery  in  front  of  my  left  opened  fire  in  the  direc- 
tion of  the  river  at  what  was  supposed  to  be  some  skills. 

One  killed;  one  wounded  in  Sixtieth  Tennessee. 

JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier-  General. 

[Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux.] 


696 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


June  20,  [1863.] 

Major:  The  usual  sharpshooting  from  the  enemy  in  front  of  my 
lines  yesterday.  In  the  evening,  the  3-inch  rifle  on  Fort  Hill  opened 
fire  to  get  the  range  of  the  enemy’s  works,  to  attempt  and  prevent  any 
work  being  done  during  the  night,  when  the  enemy  opened  a heavy  ar- 
tillery fire  on  my  left.  The  enemy  continued  to  strengthen  the  works 
on  the  hill  above  Edwards’,  and  are  also  constructing  new  ones  from 
the  river  in  the  direction  of  the  mound  at  Mint  Spring  Bayou. 

Very  respectfully, 


JNO.  <J.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier-  General . 


[Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux.] 


June  21,  [1863.] 

Major  : I would  respectfully  report  that  about  4 a.  m.  yesterday  the 
enemy  opened  a heavy  fire  of  artillery  and  sharpshooters  on  my  entire 
line,  which  was  kept  up  until  9 o’clock,  when  it  gradually  ceased.  The 
usual  sharpshooting  continuing  throughout  the  day.  A portion  of  my 
line  was  also  exposed  to  the  fire  of  guns  on  the  Peninsula. 

One  wounded  in  Ward’s  Battalion ; 3 wounded  in  Sixty-first  Ten- 
nessee. 

Very  respectfully, 


JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier-  Gemral. 


[Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux.] 


June  22,  [1863.] 

Major:  I would  very  respectfully  report  less  sharpshooting  than 
usual  along  my  front.  A few  shots  exchanged  with  the  enemy’s  lower 
battery  in  the  evening.  The  enemy  are  making  a line  of  intrenchments 
from  the  battery  recently  established  near  the  river  to  the  Valley  road ; 
it  may  be  designed  for  a rifle-pit,  or  as  a protection  to  get  in  and  out  of 
the  battery. 

One  killed  in  Sixty-second  Tennessee  Regiment. 

Very  respectfully, 

JNO.  C.  VAUGHN. 

[Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux.] 


June  23,  [1863.] 

Major  : I would  respectfully  report  sharpshooting  as  usual  yester- 
day, with  an  occasional  shell  from  the  artillery  until  about  8 p.  m.,  when 
the  enemy’s  sharpshooters  opened  a heavy  fire  on  my  center,  with  some 
artillery,  continuing  about  two  hours.  The  enemy  continue  to  work  on 
their  intrenchments  in  valley  near  abatis. 

No  casualties. 

Verv  respectfully,  &c., 

JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier- General. 


[Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux.] 


Chap.  XXXYI.l 


THE  SIEGE  OF  VICKSBURG,  MISS. 


697 


Major  : I would  respectfully  report 
day  ; but  little  cannonading  done. 

No  casualties. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 


June  24,  [1863.] 
the  usual  sharpsliooting  yester- 


JNO.  O.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier- General. 


[Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux.] 


June  25,  [1863.] 

Major  : 1 would  respectfully  report  sharpshooting  as  usual  on  iny 
line  yesterday,  with  an  occasional  shot  from  my  lines.  But  little  can- 
nonading. Everything  very  quiet  along  my  front  last  night. 

No  casualties. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

J * ' JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier-  General. 

[Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux.] 


June  26,  [1863.] 

Major  : The  usual  sharpshooting  yesterday  until  5 p.  in.,  when  the 
enemy  opened  a heavy  fire  of  artillery  and  sharpshooters  along  my  en- 
tire line.  All  quiet  along  my  front  last  night. 

One  hilled  in  Boring’s  division  ; 1 killed,  3 wounded,  Mississippi  State 
troops. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

JNO.  0.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier  General. 

[Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux.] 


June  27,  1863. 

Major:  I would  respectfully  report  everything  unusually  quiet 
along  my  lines  yesterday.  Some  sharpshooting. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier-  General. 

[Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux.] 


June  28,  [1863.] 

Major  : I would  respectfully  report  but  little  sharpsliooting  or  can- 
nonading yesterday  along  my  line. 

One  wounded  in  Third  Battalion,  Mississippi  State  troops. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier- General. 

[Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux.] 


698 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


June  29,  1863. 

Major  : I would  respectfully  report  everything  comparatively  quiet 
m front  of  my  lines  yesterday;  but  little  sharpshooting  or  cannonading 

Twentysixth  L-iUg’S 

Tennessee°UIlded’  Mississippi  State  trooPs  5 one  wounded,  Sixty-first 
Very  respectfully. 

JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

i-Tv/r  . T n n Brigadier- General 

[Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux.] 


June  30,  1863. 

Major:  I would  respectfully  report  but  little  sharpshooting  on  mv 
front  yesterday;  some  cannonading  in  the  evening 
One  wounded  in  Ward’s  Artillery  Battalion. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 


Mnj.  J.  G.  Devereux, 

Assistant  Adjutant  General. 


JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier- General. 


July  1, 1863. 

Major  : I would  respectfully  report  considerable  sharpshooting  and 
cannonading  on  the  morning  and  evening  of  yesterday.  A gentleman 
and  lady  attempted  to  pass  the  line  under  a flag,  but  the  enemy  would 
not  allow  them  to  enter  their  lines. 

Very  respectfully, 


Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux, 

Assistant  Adjutant- General. 


JNQ.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier  General. 


July  2,  1863. 

[Major:]  Sharpshooting  as  usual  along  my  line  yesterday;  some 
cannonading  about  3 p.  m. 

No  casualties. 

Very  respectfully,  &c., 

JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier-  General. 

July  3,  [1863.] 

Major  : But  little  sharpshooting  by  the  enemy  in  my  front  \ ester- 
day;  some  cannonading  in  the  evening. 

One  killed  (accident),  Sixty-second  Tennessee  Begiment;  one 
wounded,  Sixty-first  Tennessee. 

Very  respectfully, 


[Maj.  J.  G.  Devereux.] 


JNO.  C.  VAUGHN, 

Brigadier-  General. 


Chap.  XXXVI.l  THE  JACKSON,  MISS.,  CAMPAIGN.  699 

JULY  5-25,  1863. — The  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.* 

Report  of  Maj.  William  B.  Brown , Seventieth  Ohio  Infantry. 

Headquarters  Seventieth  Ohio  Volunteers, 

Near  Jackson , Miss.,  July  21,  18G3. 

Sir  : I have  the  honor  to  make  to  you  the  following  report : 

The  Seventieth  Regiment  Ohio  Volunteer  Infantry,  a part  of  the 
Third  Brigade,  First  Division,  detachment  Sixteenth  Army  Corps, 
marched  from  Oak  Kidge,  Miss.,  July  4,  1863,  aud  crossed  Big  Black 
Itiver  July  6,  at  Birdsong  Ferry,  having  had  a skirmish  with  theeuemy 
before  crossing,  and  arrived  in  front  of  Jackson,  Miss.,  and  was  in  the 
attack  made  on  that  place  July  10,  and  continued  in  front  line  under 
hre  from  the  enemy’s  works  live  days,  and  was  actively  employed  dur- 
ing the  entire  engagement  before  Jackson. 

Capt.  James  F.  Summers,  acting  field  officer;  Adjt.  A.  Urban  ; Asst. 
Surg.  Frederick  Jaeger;  Capts.  Charles  Johnson  and  Louis  Love; 
First  Lieuts.  B.  Cooper,  W.  R.  Stewart,  W.  S.  Cox,  James  Drennin,  and 
James  Brown;  Second  Lieuts.  M.  de  L.  Hare,  S’.  J.  Matticks,  R.  Mc- 
Kee, D.  A.  Dodds,  and  John  W.  Krepp,  were  present  during  the  entire 
engagement,  and  First  Lieut.  Townsend  Heaton,  assistant  quartermas- 
ter, who  was  with  the  train,  and  Capt.  Watson  Foster,  Lieuts.  William 
C.  Marlatt,  George  W.  Buesart,  who  had  been  left,  sick,  arrived  during 
the  engagement.  Capt.  W.  Foster  was  sent  to  hospital  next  day  after 
his  arrival,  on  account  of  sickness.  Both  men  and  officers  of  this  regi- 
ment behaved  themselves  in  the  most  gallant  manner  under  the  enemy’s 
heaviest  fire,  and  deserve  the  highest  praise  for  their  heroic  endurance 
in  behalf  of  their  country. 

The  casualties  were  2 killed,  1 wounded,  and  1 taken  prisoner. 

1 am,  very  respectfully,  vour  obedient  servant, 

WM.  B.  BROWN, 

Major , Commanding  Seventieth  Ohio  Volunteers. 

Capt.  H.  L.  Phillips, 

Acting  Assistant  Adjutant  General. 


See  also  pp.  518,  et  seq. 


ALTERNATE  DESIGNATIONS 


OF 

ORGANIZATIONS  MENTIONED  IN  THIS  VOLUME.* 


Abbott’s  (Charles  H.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  30 th  Regiment. 

Abercrombie’s  (John  C.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  11  th  Regiment. 

Abney’s  (Joel  P.)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  54 th  Regiment. 

Adaire’s  (T.  N.)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  Atli  Regiment. 

Adams’  (Wirt)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate. 

Alexander’s  (Jesse  I.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  59 th  Regiment. 

Allen’s  (Benjamin)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  1 6th  Regiment. 

Allen’s  (R.  T.  P.)  Infantry.  See  Texas  Troops , 17tli  Regiment. 

Appeal  Artillery.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Confederate. 

Apperson’s  (Thomas  A.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  5 th  Regiment. 

Armstrong’s  (Fletcher  E.)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops , 11th  Battery. 

Arrington’s  (T.  M.)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  31  st  Regiment. 

Atherton’s  (Joseph  B.)  Infantry.  S ee  Iowa  Troops,  2 2d  Regiment. 

Austin’s  (J.  E.)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate , 14 th  Battalion. 
Bachman’s  (J.  W.)  Infantry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate,  60th  Regiment. 
Bailey’s  (George  W.  K.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  99 th  Regiment. 

Bains’  (S.  C.)  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  L; 
also  Yaiden  Artillery. 

Baker’s  (Alplieus)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  54 th  Regiment. 

Baker’s  (Samuel  R.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  47 th  Regiment. 

Baldwin’s  (William  H.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  83d  Regiment. 

Ballinger’s  (Richard  H.)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Union,  3d  Regiment  ( Col- 
ored). 

Ballou’s  (Daniel  W.)  Cavalry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  10 th  Regiment. 
Banbury’s  (Jabez)  Infantry.  See  Ioiva  Troops,  bth  Regiment. 

Barclay’s  (James  W.)  Cavalry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment. 
Barkuloo’s  (William)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  57th  Regiment. 

Barnes’  (Joseph  H.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  29 th  Regiment. 

Barnum’s  (William  L.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  11  th  Regiment. 
Barrett’s  (Samuel  E.)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  Is*  Regiment,  Battery  B. 
Barrow’s  (R.  C.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  8th  Battalion. 
Barteau’s  (C.  R.)  Cavalry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate. 

Bartilson’s  (Matthias  H.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  80th  Regiment. 

Bates’  (T.  Jeff.)  Artillery.  See  James  F.  Waddell’s  Artillery. 

Beach’s  (Augustus)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops,  2d  Battery. 

Beck’s  (F.  K.)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  23 d Regiment. 

Beebe’s  (Thomas  J.)  Cavalry.  See  Kane  County  Cavalry. 

Belknap’s  (William  W.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  15 th  Regiment. 

Bell’s  (John  S.)  Sharpshooters.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Confederate,  12th,  Battalion. 
Beltzhoover’s  (D.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Reg- 
ment. 


References  are  to  index  following. 


(701.) 


702 


[Chap.  XXXYI. 


MISSISSiPPi,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Benjamin’s  (Samuel  N.)  Artillery.  See  Union  Troops , Regulars,  2d  Regiment , Bat- 
tery E. 

Bennett’s  (Thomas  W.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  69 th  Regiment. 

Benteen’s  (Frederick  W.)  Cavalry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  10 th  Regiment. 
Bertram’s  (Henry)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  20 th  Regiment. 

Biffle’s  (J.  B.)  Cavalry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate. 

Bissell’s  (.Josiak  W.)  Engineers.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union. 

Black’s  (John  C.)  Infantry  See  Illinois  Troops,  37th  Regiment. 

Blanden’s  (Leander)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  95th  Regiment. 

Blessingh’s  (Louis  von)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  ‘37th  Regiment. 

Bliss’  (Zenas  R.)  Infantry.  See  Rhode  Island  Troops,  7th  Regiment. 

Blood’s  (James  H.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  (5 th  Regiment. 

Blount’s  (Ambrose  A.)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops,  17 th  Battery. 

Blythe’s  (G.  L.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate. 

Bolling’s  (Eugene  S.)  Infantry.  See  T.  N.  WauVs  Legion. 

Bolton’s  (William  H.)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Regiment,  Battery  L. 

Bond’s  ^R,  C.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment. 
Botetourt  Artillery.  See  Virginia  Troops. 

Botsford’s  (Hi  W.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  1 6th  Regiment. 

Bouanchaud’s  (Alcide)  Artillery.  See  Pointe  Coupee  Artillery. 

Bouck’s  (Gabriel)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  1 8th  Regiment. 

Boutell’s  (fra)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  6th  Regiment. 

Bower’s  (E.  L.)  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  I. 
Bowman’s  (James  H.)  Infantry.  See  Kentucky  Troops,  Confederate,  '3d  Regiment. 
Boyles’  (William)  Cavalry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  15th  Battalion. 

Bradford’s  (William  M.)  Infantry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate,  31st  Regiment.* 
Bradley’s  (Daniel)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  20 th  Regiment. 

Brady’s  (Thomas  J.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  8th  Regiment. 

Breckenridge’s  (William  K.  M.)  Cavalry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Union,  6th  Regiment. 
Brenholtz’s  (Thomas  S.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  50th  Regiment. 
Brewer’s  (George  E.)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  4 6th  Regiment. 

Bridges’  ( H.  W. ) Cavalry.t  See  II.  W.  Bridges. 

Bringhurst’s  (Thomas  H.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  46th  Regiment. 
Brookhaven  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate. 

Brown’s  (Aaron)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  ‘3d  Regiment. 

Brown’s  (William  B.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  hoops,  70 th  Regiment. 

Brown’s  ( W.  N.)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops , Confederate,  20 th  Regiment. 
Broyles’  (Charles  E.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  ‘36th  Regiment. 

Bruce’s  (R.  J.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment. 
Brumback’s  (Jefferson)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  9 5th  Regiment. 

Brunner’s  (John  F.)  Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troops , Union,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  J 
Brush’s  (Daniel  H ) Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  18th  Regiment. 

Bryant’s  (George  E.)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  \2th  Regiment. 

Buchanan’s  (Robert),  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  7th  Regiment. 

Buehler’s  (Theodore  E.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  67 th  Regiment. 

Bunn’s  (H.  G. ) Infantry.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Confederate,  4th  Regiment. 

Burgin’s  (Thomas  A.)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  ‘3d  Battalion 
{State). 

Burnap’s  (Silas  A.)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops,  7th  Battery. 

Burnet’s  (James)  Sharpshooters.  See  Texas  Troops. 

Burton’s  (Anthony  B.)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops,  5th  Battery. 

Burton’s  (George)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  4th  Regiment. 

Busey’s  (Samuel  T.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  76 th  Regiment. 


* Designation  changed  to  39th  Regiment,  June,  1863. 
t Improvised. 


Chap.  XXXYI.  ] 


ORGANIZATIONS  MENTIONED. 


703 


BuslTs  (Daniel  13.,  jr.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Regiment. 

Buswell’s  (Nicholas  C.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  93d  Regiment. 

Butler’s  (E.G.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment. 
Byam’s  (Eber  C.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  24 th  Regiment. 

Callahan’s  (Charles  M.)  Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  1st  Regiment,  Bat- 
tery A. 

Cam’s  (William)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  1 4th  Regiment. 

Cameron’s  (Robert  A.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  34 th  Regiment. 

Campbell’s  (Franklin)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  81  st  Regiment. 

Campbell’s  (James  W.)  Infantry.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Union,  1st  Regiment  {Colored). 
Campbell  s (John  L.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  3 d Regiment. 

Capeias  (WC.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment. 
Carey’s  (James  L.)  Cavalry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  1st  Regiment. 

Carpenter’s  (Don  A.)  Infantry.  See.  Iowa  Troops,  9 th  Regiment. 

Carruth’s  (Sumner)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  35 th  Regiment. 
Carskaddon  s (David)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  9th  Regiment. 

Carter’s  (J.  E.)  Cavalry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate. 

Carter’s  (Thomas  M.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate,  2d  Regiment. 
Caruthers’  (J.  B.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate. 

Catron’s  (Thomas  B.)  Artillery.  See  Schuyler  Lowe's  Artillery. 

Catterson’s  (Robert  F.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  97 th  Regiment. 

Catterson’s  (W.  S.)  Cavalry.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Battalion. 
Chambeilain  s (Edwin  W.)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Union,  11th  Regiment 
(Colored). 

Cheney  s (John  T.)  Artillerjr.  See  Illinois  Troops,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  F. 

Cherokee  Artillery.  See  Georgia  Troops. 

Chicago  Mercantile  Artillery.  See  Charles  G.  Cooley's  Artillery. 

Chust’s  (Alexander)  Artillery.  See  Points  Coupee  Artillery,  Battery  C. 

Claiborne’s  (F.  O.)  Artillery.  See  Maryland  Troops,  Confederate,  3 d Battery. 

Clark’s  (George  W.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  'Jroops,  34 th  Regiment. 

Clark’s  (John.  G.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  2 6th  Regiment. 

Clark’s  (John  J.)  Cavalry.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Confederate,  ls<  Battalion. 

Clark’s  (Samuel  F.)  Artillery.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  (5th  Battery. 

Clayton’s  (William  Z.)  Artillery.  See  Minnesota  Troops,  1st  Battery. 

Clevelands  (Thomas  J.)  Cavalry.  See  T.N.  WauVs  Legion. 

Coates’  (James  H.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops , 1 Ith  Regiment. 

Cobb  s (Robert)  Artillery.  See  Kentucky  Troops,  Confederate. 

Cogswell  s (William)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops. 

Colbert’s  (W.  B.)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  40 th  Regiment. 

Cole’s  (Nelson)  Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troops , Union,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  E. 
Coleman  s (David  C.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  8th  Regiment. 

Collins’  (Elbert  M.)  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  iroops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment,  Bat- 
tery L.  ’ 

Collins  (Moses  N.)  Infantry.  See  New  Hampshire  Troops , 1 1 th  Regiment. 

Collins’  (William  B.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops , Union,' 7th Regiment. 

Connell’s  (John)  Infantry,  .'ee  Iowa  Troops , 28 th  Regiment. 

Cooley’s  (Charles  G.)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops. 

Coon’s  (Datus  E.)  Cavalry.  Sec  Iowa  Troops.  2d  Regiment. 

Cooper  s (Charles  S.)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops , 2d  Reginunt,  Battery  D. 
Cooper’s  (S.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate,  6 th  Regiment. 

Corkery’s  (William)  Artillery.  See  Henry  Gabor's  Artillery. 

Cornman’s  (Augustus  H.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  14th  Regiment. 

Corput’s  (Max  Van  Den)  Artillery.  See  Cherokee  Artillery. 

Corse’s  (John  M.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  6th  Regiment. 

Cotten’s  ( R.  N. ) Artillery.  See  Appeal  Artillery. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


704  MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Cowan’s  (J.  J.)  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops , Confederate,  Is/  Regiment,  Bat- 
tery Gr. 

Cowan’s  (John)  Infantry.  See  Kentucky  Troops,  Union,  19/7?  Regiment. 

Cox’s  (N.  N. ) Cavalry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate . 

Cradlebaugh’s  (John)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  114 th  Regiment. 

Cramer’s  (John  F.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  17//?  Regiment. 

Crandall’s  (Frederick  M.)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Union,  10 th  Regiment  {Col 
ored). 

Crane’s  (George  P.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regi- 
ment. 

Crawford’s  (A.  F.)  Cavalry.  See  Texas  Troops,  13th  Regiment. 

Creasman’s  (William  B.)  Infantry.  See  North  Carolina  Troops,  29 th  Regiment. 
Crebs’  (John  M.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  87th  Regiment. 

Crockett’s  (Le  Roy)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  72d  Regiment. 

Crosley’s  (George  W.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  3d  Regiment. 

Crossland’s  (Edward)  Infantry.  See  Kentucky  Troops,  Confederate,  7th  Regiment. 
Crow’s  (William  C.)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  26 th  Regiment. 
Culbertson’s  (Jacob)  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  14 th  Battalion, 
Battery  C. 

Culpeper’s  (J.  F.)  Artillery.  See  Palmetto  Artillery,  Battery  C. 

Cummins’  (William  B.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops , 2 d Regiment. 

Curly’s  (Thomas)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  27 th  Regiment. 

Curtin’s  (John  I.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  45 th  Regiment. 

Curtiss’  (William  E.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  41  st  Regiment. 

Darnall’s  (William  W.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops, 11th  Regiment. 

Davidson’s  (Peter)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Regiment,  Battery  A. 
Davidson’s  (William  A.)  Artillery.  See  Pointe  Coupee  Artillery,  Battery  B. 

Davis’  (Caleb)  Infantry.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Confederate,  15 th  Regiment. 

Davis’  (William  P. ) Infantry.  S ee  Indiana  Troops,  23 d Regiment. 

Dawson’s  (Mathew  M.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  100 th  Regiment. 
Dawson’s  (William  E.)  Artillery.  See  Saint  Louis  Artillery. 

Dayton’s  (James  H.)  Infantry.  See  West  Virginia  Troops,  4 th  Regiment. 

Dean’s  (Benjamin  D.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  26/7?  Regiment. 

De  Golyer’s  (Samuel)  Artillery.  See  Michigan  Troops,  8th  Battery. 

Deimling’s  (Francis  C.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops , Union,  10 th  Regiment. 
Dengler’s  (Adolph)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  43d  Regiment. 

Dickerman’s  (Willard  A.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  103d  Regiment. 

Dillon’s  (Henry)  Artillery.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  6 th  Battery. 

Dismukes’  (Paul  T.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regi- 
ment. 

Dockery’s  (Thomas  P.)  Infantry.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Confederate,  19//?  Regiment. 
Dollins’  (James  J.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  81s/  Regiment. 

Dornblaser’s  (Benjamin)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  46/7?  Regiment. 

Dowdell’s  (J.  F.)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  37 th  Regiment. 

Dozier’s  (A.  M.)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  7th  Battalion. 
Draughon’s  (James  W.)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops , Confederate,  31si  Regiment. 
Drew’s  (Newit  J.)  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment,  Bat- 
tery E. 

Driscoll’s  (Daniel)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  24 th  Regiment. 

Duncan’s  (W.  J.)  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment,  Bat- 
tery E. 

Dunlap’s  (Cornelius  W.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  21  st  Regiment.  • 

Dunlop’s  (Isaac  L.)  Infantry.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Confederate,  9th  Regiment. 
Dupeire’s  (St.  Leon)  Zouaves.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate. 

Durell’s  (George  W.)  Artillery.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  Battery  D. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


ORGANIZATIONS  MENTIONED. 


705 


Dye’s  (William  McE.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  20tli  Regiment. 

E akin’s  (William  L.)  Infantry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate,  59 th  Regiment. 
Earl’s  (Seth  C.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  53 d Regiment. 

Earle’s  (R.  G.)  Cavalry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  2d  Regiment. 

Eaton’s  (Charles  G.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  7 2d  Regiment. 

Eddy’s  (Henry  G.)  Artillery.  See  William  Cogswells  Artillery. 

Eddy’s  (Norman)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  48 th  Regiment. 

Edgington’s  (Samuel  R.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  V2th  Regiment. 

Edwards’  (John,  jr.)  Artillery.  See  Union  Troops,  Regulars,  3a  Regiment,  Batteries  L 
and  M. 

Eldridge’s  (Hamilton  N.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  127 th  Regiment. 

Emanuel’s  (T.  K.)  Artillery.  See  Alabama  Troops,  2d  Battalion,  Battery  C. 
Engelmann’s  (Adolph)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  43 d Regiment. 

Engineer  Regiment  of  the  West.  See  Josiali  W.  BisselVs  Engineers. 

Erwin  s (Eugene)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate,  6th  Regiment. 
Ewing’s  (Charles)  Infantry.  See  Union  Troops,  Regulars,  12th  Regiment,  1st  Battalion. 
Falkner’s  (W.  C.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  \st  Regiment,  Par- 
tisan Rangers. 

Farnan’s  (James)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  5 th  Regiment. 

Faulkner’s  (W.  W.)  Cavalry.  See  Kentucky  Troops,  Confederate. 

Fenner’s  (C.  E.)  Artillery.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate. 

Fenton’s  (Frank  B.)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Regiment,  Battery  A. 

Fisher’s  (Cyrus  W.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  54 th  Regiment. 

Fitzhugh’s  (William)  Cavalry.  See  Texas  Troops,  1 6th  Regiment. 

Fleitas’  (J.  B.)  Zouaves.  See  St.  Leon  Dupeire's  Zouaves. 

Fletcher  s (Thomas  C.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  31st  Regiment. 
Flournoy’s  (George)  Infantry.  See  Texas  Troops,  16/*  Regiment. 

Fonda’s  (John  G.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  118t7i  Regiment. 

Forbes  (Henry  C.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  7th  Regiment. 

Force’s  (Manning  F.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  20th  Regiment. 

Forrest’s  (J.  A. ) Cavalry.  See  A.  N.  Wilson’s  Cavalry. 

Foster’s  (Charles)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  lit*  Regiment. 

Foster  s (Jacob  T. ) Artillery.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  1st  Battery . 

Foster  s (John  S. ) Cavalry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  4th  Company. 

Foust’s  (Joseph)  Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  F. 
Fowler’s  (Alexander)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  99 th  Regiment. 

Fowler’s  (William  H. ) Artillery.  See  Alabama  Troops. 

Fox  s (Dorus  M.)  Infantry.  See  Michigan  Troops,  27 th  Regiment. 

Francis  (John  C.)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  20th  Regiment. 

Gallagher’s  (Andrew  P.)  Cavalry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  4tli  Regiment. 

Garretts  (John  A.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  46tli  Regiment. 

Garrott’s  (Tsham  W.)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  20th  Regiment. 

Gates’  (Elijah)  Cavalry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment. 

Gause  s (W.  R.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate,  ‘2d  Regiment. 

Geddes  (James  L.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  8 * Regiment. 

George’s  (J.  Z.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate. 

Gerhardt’s  (Joseph)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  4 6tli  Regiment. 

Gifford’s  (Ira  R.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  9th  Regiment. 

Gilbert’s  (Franklin  T.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  15 th  Regiment. 

Gill’s  (Charles  R.)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  29th  Regiment. 

Gillespie’s  (James  W. ) Infantry.  Sec  Tennessee  Troops , Confederate,  43 d Regiment. 
Gillmore’s  (Robert  A.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  26th  Regiment. 

Glasgow’s  (Samuel  L.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  2 2d  Regiment. 

Glenn’s  (Jesse  A.)  Infantry.  S«e  Georgia  Troops,  26th  Regiment. 

Gomez’s  (P.  A.)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  23 d [22 <t]  Regiment. 

45  B R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


706 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chai*.  XXX YI. 


Goodwin’s  (Edward)  Infantry.  Sec  Alabama  Troops,  35th Regiment. 

Gorgas’  (Adam  B.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  1 3th  Regiment . 

Graham’s  (Harvey)  Infantry.  See  Ioica  Troops,  22 d Regiment. 

Grandpre’s  (P.)  Heavy  Artillery  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  8th  Battalion. 
Grantham’s  (M.  M.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  43 d Regiment. 

Graves’  (Frank)  Infantry.  See  Michigan  Troops,  6th  Regiment. 

Graves’  (William  H.)  Infantry.  See  Michigan  Troops,  12 tli  Regiment. 

Grayson’s  (John  B.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regi- 
ment. 

Greathouse’s  (Lucien)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  48th  Regiment. 

Greene’s  (James  H.)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  8th  Regiment. 

Greene’s  (William  A.)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  29 th  Regiment. 

Gregg’s  (E.  P.)  Cavalry.  See  Texas  Troops,  16th  Regiment. 

Gregg’s  (N. ) Infantry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate,  60 th  Regiment. 

Gresham’s  (Walter  Q.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  53 d Regiment. 

Grier’s  (David  P.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  77th  Regiment. 

Griffin’s  (S.  PI.)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  31s(  Regiment. 

Griffiths’  (Henry  H.)  Artillery.  See  Ioica  Troops , 1st  Battery. 

Griggs’  (Chauncey  W.)  Infantry.  See  Minnesota  Troops,  3d  Regiment. 

Grill’s  (John  F.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  24 th  Regiment. 

Guibor’s  (Henry)  Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate. 

Guppey’s  (Joshua  J.)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  23 d Regiment. 

Guyton’s  (C.  S.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  57 th  Regiment. 

Hairston’s  Artillery.  Official  designation  not  of  record.  See  Sergeant  Hairston. 

Hall’s  Cavalry.  Official  designation  not  of  record.  See Hall. 

Hall’s  (Hiram  W.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  40th  Regiment. 

Hall’s  (William)  Infantry.  See  Ioica  Troops , lltli  Regiment. 

Halls  (Winchester)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  26th  Regiment. 
Ham’s  (T.  W.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate. 

Hanks’  (Romulus  L.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  15 th  Regiment. 

Harper’s  (William  H.)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops,  2d  Battery. 

Harris’  (Charles  L.)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  11th  Regiment. 

Harris’  (John  B.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  26th  Regiment. 

Harris’  (Skidmore)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  43d  Regiment. 

Harrison’s  (Isaac  F.)  Cavalry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  15th  Battalion. 
Harrison’s  (Richard)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  43 d Regiment. 
Hart’s  (Levi  W.)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  H.  ■ 
Hartranft’s  (John  F.)  Infantry.  See  Pennsylvania  Troops,  "51st  Regiment. 
Hassendeubel’s  (Francis)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  17th  Regiment. 
Hatch’s  (Joseph  T.)  Artillery.*  See  Francis  McNally's  Artillery. 

Hatch’s  (Joseph  T.)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  27th  Regiment. 
Hawhe’s  (Arthur  J.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Tfoops,  49 th  Regiment. 

Haynes’  (L.  B.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  1st  Regiment. 

Heath’s  (Albert)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  100(/i  Regiment. 

Hedrick’s  (John  M.)  Infantry.  See  Ioica  Troops,  15th  Regiment. 

Heffernan’s  (Cornelius)  Artillery.  See  Henry  Guibor’s  Artillery. 

Henderson’s  (R.  J.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  42 d Regiment. 

Henderson’s  (Thomas)  Scouts.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate. 

Herren’s  (Gadi)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment. 
Herrick’s  (Thomas  P.)  Cavalry.  See  Kansas  Troops,  7th  Regiment. 

Higley’s  (John  H.)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  40 th  Regiment. 

Hildt’s  (George  IT.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  30 th  Regiment. 

Hill’s  (Sylvester  G.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  35 th  Regiment. 

Hillis’  (David  B.)  Infantry.  See  Ioica  Troops,  17th  Regiment. ____ 


Temporarily  commanding. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


ORGANIZATIONS  MENTIONED. 


707 


Hipp’s  (Charles)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  3 1th  Regiment, 

Hoffmann’s  (Louis)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops,  4th  Battery. 

Hoge’s  (George  B.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  113 th  Regiment. 

Hogg’s  (W.  N.)  Artillery.  See  Appeal  Artillery. 

Holcombe  Legion.  See  South  Carolina  Troops. 

Holland’s  (O.  S.)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  '37tli  Regiment. 
Holt’s  (H.  C.)  Artillery.  Official  designation  not  of  record.  See  H.  C.  Holt. 
Hooker’s  (C.  E.)  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment,  Bat- 
tery A. 

Hoskins’  (James  A.)  Artillery.  See  Brookhaven  Artillery. 

Houston’s  (Leonard  B.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  2‘3d  Regiment. 

Hovey’s  (Alvin  P.)  Cavalry  Escort.  See  Indiana  Troops,  1st  Regiment. 

Hubbard’s  (James  M.)  Cavalry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union  ( Mississippi  Marine  Bri- 
gade), 1st  Battalion. 

Hubbard’s  (Lucius  F.)  Infantry.  See  Minnesota  Troops,  5th  Regiment. 

Hudson  Artillery.  See  Pettus  Flying  Artillery. 

Hughes’  (D.  Henry)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  38th  Regiment. 

Humphrey’s  (Thomas  W.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  95 'th  Regiment. 
Humphrey’s  (William)  Infantry.  See  Michigan  Troops,  2d  Regiment. 

Hunter’s  (William)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  32d  Regiment. 

Hurst’s  (Fielding)  Cavalry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Union,  6th  Regiment, 

Hurt’s  (John  M.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  106/Zi  Regiment. 

Hurter’s  (Henry)  Artillery.  See  Minnesota  Troops,  1st  Battery. 

Jackson’s  (Andrew,  jr.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate,  1st 
Regiment. 

Jackson’s  (James)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  27 th  Regiment. 

Jackson’s  (J.  F.  B.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  39 th  Regiment. 

Jackson’s  (W.  H.)  Cavalry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confeaei  ate. 

Jaensch’s  (Frederick)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  31st  Regiment. 

Jeter’s  (B.  A.)  Artillery.  See  Macbeth  Artillery. 

Joel’s  (Benjamin)  Cavalry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  10 th  Regiment. 

Johnson’s  Cavalry.  Official  designation  not  of  record.  See  Lieutenant  Johnson. 
Johnson’s  (Abda)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  40 th  Regiment. 

Johnson’s  (James  A.  W.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  34th  Regiment. 

Johnston’s  (J.  W.)  Artillery.  See  Botetourt  Artillery. 

Johnston’s  (T.  N.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate. 

Jones’  (D.  W.)  Infantry.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Confederate,  20 th  Regiment. 

Jones’  (John  J.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  14 th  Regiment. 

Jones’  (Robert  B.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  34th  Regiment. 

Jones’  (Samuel)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Conjederate,  23 d [22 eZ]  Regiment. 
Jones’  (Theodore)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  30 th  Regiment. 

Jones’  (Wells  S.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  53d  Regiment. 

Jordan’s  (C.  R.)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  35 th  Regiment. 
Joyce’s  (Peter)  Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union. 

Judy’s  (James  W.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  114th  Regiment. 

Kane  County  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops. 

Keigwin’s  (James)  Infantry.  . See  Indiana  Troops,  49 th  Regiment. 

Kelly’s  (John  H.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  114 th  Regiment. 

Kent’s  (Daniel)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  19 th  Regiment. 

Kerr’s  (J.  F.)  Artillery.  See  Quitman  Light  Artillery. 

Kershner’s  (Jonathan)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  3d  Regiment. 

Kimball’s  (Charles  B.)  Artillery.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  ls£  Battery. 

Kimbell’s  (John  C.)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  32 d Regiment. 

King’s  (JohnF.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  114th  Regiment. 

Kinsman’s  (William  H.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  23 d Regiment. 


708 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXYI. 


Kirkbride’s  (Andrew  B.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops , 3 d Regiment. 

Klauss’  (Martin)  Artillery.  See  Indiana  Troops,  1st  Battery. 

Knoll’s  (H.)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Union,  13th  Regiment  (Colored). 
Krez’s  (Conrad)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  27th  Regiment. 

Kueffner’s  (William  C.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  9th  Regiment. 

Lamon’s  (John  H.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Rcgi~ 
nient. 

Landgraeber’s  (Clemeus)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union. 

Landis’  (John  C.)  Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate. 

Langan’s  (John  M.)  Artillery.  See  John  C.  Landis'1  Artillery. 

Lanphere’s  (Charles  H.)  Artillery.  See  Michigan  Troops,  7th  Battery. 

Lansing’s  (William  N.)  Artillery.  Sec  Illinois  Troops,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  I. 
Lee’s  (Charles  N.)  Infantry.  See  Ioua  Troops,  2 2d  Regiment. 

Le  Gendre’s  (Charles  W.)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  51  st  Regiment. 

Lieb’s  (Herman)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Union,  9th  Regiment  (Colored). 
Lillard’s  (N.  J.)  Infantry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate,  3 d Regiment,  P.  A. 
Lippincott's  (Charles  E.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  33d  Regiment. 
Lochbihler’s  (Christian)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  35 th  Regiment. 
Lockwood’s  (Theodore  W.)  Aitillery.  See  Michigan  Troops,  8th  Battery. 

Logan’s  (John)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  32d  Regiment. 

Lotspeich’s  (Felix)  Cavalry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate,  3 d Regiment. 
Lowe’s  (Schuyler)  Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate. 

Lowell’s  (John  W.)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Regiment,  Battery  G. 
Lowry’s  (Robert)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  6 th  Regiment. 
Lucas’  (John)  Infantry.  Sec  Kentucky  Troops,  Union,  7th  Regiment. 

Lucas’  (Thomas  J.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops , Kith  Regiment. 

Luce’s  (Constant)  Infantry.  See  Michigan  Troops,  17 th  Regiment. 

Lynch’s  (J.  P.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate. 

Lyon’s  (it.  B.)  Infantry.  See  Kentucky  Troops,  Confederate,  8th  Regiment. 
McAllister’s  (Edward)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  D. 
McArthur’s  (John)  Cavalry  Escort.  See  Illinois  Troops,  1 1th  Regiment. 
Macauley’s  (Daniel)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  11th  Regiment. 

Macbeth  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops. 

McConnell’s  (J.  T.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  39 ill  Regiment. 

Me  Gown’s  (James)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate,  5 th  Regiment. 
McCown’s  (Joseph  B.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  63d  Regiment. 

Me Crory’s  (T.  N. ) Heavy  Artillery.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  8th  Battalion. 
McDowell’s  (J.  K.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate,  3d  Regiment. 
McGuirk’s  (John)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  3d  Regiment  (State). 
McKeaig’s  (George  W.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops , 120 th  Regiment. 
McLaughlin’s  (John  A.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  47 th  Regiment. 

McLendon’s  (J.  M.)  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  1 4th  Battalion, 
Battery  C. 

McMahon’s  (Thomas)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  17 th  Regiment. 

McMillen’s  (William  L.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  95 th  Regiment. 

MacMurray’s  (Junius  W.)  Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  1st  Regiment, 

Battery  M. 

McNally’s  (Francis)  Artillery.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Confederate. 

McNulta’s  (John)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops , 91th  Regiment. 

McPhail’s  (Enos)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  3d  Regiment. 

Malloy’s  (Adam  G.)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops , 17 th  Regiment. 

Malmborg’s  (Oscar)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  bbth  Regiment. 

Maloney’s  (Maurice)  Infantry.  See  Union  Troops,  Regulars,  1st  Regiment. 

Maltby’s  (Jasper  A.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  45/7t  Regiment. 

Mann’s  (Charles)  Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troops , Union,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  C. 


CfiAF.  XXX  VI.] 


ORGANIZATIONS  MENTIONED. 


709 


Mann’s  (Josiah  J.)  Infantry.  See  Kentucky  Troops , Union,  ldtli  Regiment. 
Manning’s  (T.  P.)  Cavalry.  See  G.  L.  Blythe's  Cavalry. 

Mansfield’s  (Fielding)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  54 th  Regiment. 

Marks’  (L.  D.)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  27th  Regiment. 

Marks’  (Washington)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate, 23d [22d~\  Regiment. 
Marrett’s  (Samuel  S.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Ttoops,  3d  Regiment. 

Marsh’s  ({lenjamin  F.,  jr.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Regiment. 

Martin’s  (E.  B.)  City  Guards.  Official  designation  not  of  record.  Sec  E.  B.  Martin. 
Martin’s  (Lewis  D.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  97 (h  Regiment. 

Mathieson’s  (George  W.)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  31  st  Regiment. 

Maury’s  (Henry)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  3 2d  Regiment. 

May’s  (Reuben)  Infantry.  See  Kentucky  Troops,  Union,  7th  Regiment. 

Mercantile  Artillery.  See  Charles  G.  Cooley's  Artillery. 

Merrill’s  (Samuel)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  21  st  Regiment. 

Metham’s  (Pren)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  SOtli  Regiment. 

Meumann’s  (Theodore)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  3 d Regiment. 

Mills’  (Milton)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  1 6tli  Regiment. 

Mississippi  Marine  Brigade.  See  Missouri. Troops,  Union. 

Mitchell’s  (Greenville  M. ) Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  6\ili  Regiment. 

Mitchell’s  (Janies  A.)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops,  16tli  Battery. 

Mitchell’s  (R.  Charlton)  Infantry.*  See  Massachusetts  Troops,  26th  Regiment. 
Mitchell’s  (W.  R. ) Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate. 

Monroe’s  (George  W.)  Infantry.  See  Kentucky  Troops,  Union,  22 d Regiment. 
Montgomery's  (Bacon)  Cavalry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  6th  Regiment. 
Montgomery’s  (Samuel)  Cavalry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  6th  Regiment. 
Moore’s  (Columbus)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops , 1 6th  Regiment. 

Moore’s  (Francis  T. ) Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Regiment. 

Moore’s  (Frederick  W.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  83d  Regiment. 

Moore’s  (Ira)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  33 d Regiment. 

Moore's  (John  Jay)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  52 d Regiment. 

Moore’s  (Jorrrflkan  B.)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  33 d Regiment. 

Morlot’s  (T.  P. ) Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  23 d [2 2d]  Regiment. 
Morrison’s  (David)  Infantry.  See  New  York  Troops,  79 th  Regiment. 

Mott’s  (Samuel  R. ) Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  57 th  Regiment. 

Moyers’  (Gilberf)  Cavalry.  See  Michigan  Troops,  3d  Regiment. 

Mueller’s  (Alexander)  Cavalry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  4 th  Regiment. 

Mueller’s  (Michael)  Artillery.  See  Indiana  Troops,  6th  Battery. 

Murdock’s  (George)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops,  1 6tli  Battery. 

Nale’s  (John  H.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  Alst  Regiment. 

Nash’s  (Jesse)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  60 th  Regiment. 

Nasmith’s  (Samuel  J.)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  25 th  Regiment. 

Neeley’s  (George  W.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  131sf  Regiment. 

Neely’s  (J.  J.)  Cavalry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate. 

Nelson’s  (Thomas  P. ) Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  Ath  Regiment. 
Nevins’  (Garrett)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  1 \th  Regiment. 

Newcomb’s  (William  L.)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops , 10 th  Battery. 

Newsom’s  (J.  F.)  Cavalry.  See  Tennessee"  Troops,  Confederate. 

Neyland’s  (William)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate,  ls<  Regi- 
ment. 

Niles’  (Nathaniel)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  130 th  Regiment. 

Nispel’s  (George  L.)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Regiment,  Battery  E. 

Noble’s  (John  W.)  Cavalry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  3d  Regiment. 

Nonweiler’s  (Philip)  Artillery.  See  Indiana  Troops,  1st  Battery. 

Norman’s  (H.  T.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Tennessee  Troops , Confederate,  ls£  Regiment. 

*Tenipoianlj  commanding. 


710 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


Norton’s  (John  B.)  Infantry.  See  Massachusetts  Troops , 36th  Regiment. 

Norwood’s  (James  Iv.)  Infantry.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Confederate,  19 th  Regiment. 
Nutt’s  (L.  M.)  Cavalry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate. 

Nutting’s  (Oscar  F.)  Artillery.  Si  e Wisconsin  Troops,  1st  Battery. 

Qffley’s  (Robert  II.)  Infantry.  See  Union  Troops , Regulars,  1st  Regiment. 

Ogden’s  (F.  N. ) Heavy  Artillery.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  8th  Battalion m 
Olir’s  (Simon  P.)  Infantry.  See  LUinois  Troops,  61st  Regiment. 

Oliver’s  (John  M.)  Infantry.  See  Michigan  Troops,  15 th  Regiment. 

O’Meara’s  (Timothy)  Infantry.  See  LUinois  Troops,  90 th  Regiment. 

Osband’s  (Embury  D.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  4 th  Regiment. 

Owen’s  (Erastus  N.)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Union,  9th  Regiment  {Colored). 
Owen’s  (Richard.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  60 th  Regiment. 

Owens’  (J.  A.)  Artillery.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Confederate. 

Paddock’s  (John  W.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  113//?,  Regiment. 

Paine’s  (Charles  J.)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Union,  9th  Regiment  (Colored). 
Palmetto  Artillery.  See  South  Carolina  Troops. 

Pardee’s  (Don  A.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  42 d Regiment. 

Parke’s  (Lemuel)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  99 th  Regiment. 

Parkell’s  (Alonzo  B.)  Cavalry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  4tli  Regiment. 

Parker’s  (Job  R.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  48th  Regiment. 

Parker’s  (William  C.)  Cavalry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment. 
Parks’ (William  P.)  H eavy  Artillery.  S ee,  Tenness(e  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment 
Parry’s  (Augustus  C.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  41ih  Regiment. 

Patterson’s  (William  F.)  Engineers.  See  Kentucky  Troops,  Union. 

Pearson’s  (Henry  H.)  Infantry.  See  New  Hampshire  Troops,  6 th  Regiment. 

Pearson’s  (Robert  N.  j Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  31  si  Regiment. 

Peckham’s  (James)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union  29th  Regiment. 

Peoria  Light  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Regiment , Battery  A. 

Perry’s  (Oran)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  69 th  Regiment. 

Pettus’  (Edmund  W.)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  20th  Regiment. 

Pettus  Flying  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate. 

Phillips’  (C.  D.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  52 d Regiment. 

Phillips’  (Jesse  J.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  9th  Regiment. 

Pierson’s  (David)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  3d  Regiment. 

Platt’s  (Arthur)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  lltli  Regiment. 

Plattsmier’s  (J.  T.)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  21st  Regiment. 
Pointe  Coupee  Artillery.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate. 

Poole’s  (De  Witt  C.)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  1 21  h Regiment. 

Portis’  (John  W.)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  42 d Regiment. 

Potts’  (Benjamin  F.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  32d  Regiment. 

Powell’s  (John  W.)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Regiment,  Battery  F. 

Purvis’  (Joseph  L.)  Infantry.  Sec  Illinois  Troops,  131st  Regiment. 

Putnam’s  (Holden)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  93 d Regiment. 

Putnam’s  (James  F.)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops,  8th  Battery. 

Quitman  Light  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops , Confederate. 

Rany’s  (James)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  15 th  Regiment. 

Ratliffs  (William  T.)  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment, 
Battery  A. 

Raum’s  (Green  B.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  56th  Regiment. 

Raynor’s  (William  H.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  56th  Regiment. 

Redfield’s  (James  H.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  1 6th  Regiment. 

Reed’s  (Joseph  R.)  Artillery.  See  Iowa  Troops,  2d  Battery. 

Rees’  (John  D.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  31st  Regiment. 

Reid’s  (H.  J.)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  22 d Regiment. 


Chap.  XXXVI.] 


ORGANIZATIONS  MENTIONED. 


711 


Reynolds’  (D.  H.)  Mounted  Rifles.  See  Arkansas  Troops , Confederate , 1st  Regiment 
Rifles. 

Rhodes’  (Hinman)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  '2.8th  Regiment. 

Rice’s  (Americus  V.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  57 th  Regiment. 

Rice’s  (Charles  S.)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops,  17th  Battery. 

Richardson’s  (Robert)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  17 th  Regiment. 
Richardson’s  (R.  V.)  Cavalry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate. 

Ridley’s  (S.  J.)  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment,  Bat- 
tery A. 

Riley’s  (A.  C.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate , 1st  Regiment. 

Robbins’  (George  W.)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  8th  Regiment. 

Roberds’  (A.  C.)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  23 d Regiment. 

Roberts’  (William  Y.)  Infantry.  See  Kansas  Troops,  1st  Regiment. 

Robertson’s  (William  B.)  Heavy  Artillery.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  1st 
Regiment. 

Robinson’s  (H.  C.)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  5th  Regiment  (Slate). 
Roddey’s  (P.  D.)  Cavalry.  See  Alabama  Troops. 

Rodgers’  (Benjamin  F.)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2 d Regiment,  Battery  K. 
Roemer’s  (Jacob)  Artillery.  See  New  York  Troops , 2d  Regiment,  Battery  L. 

Rogers’  (George  C.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  loth  Regiment. 

Rogers’  (Henry  A.)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  D. 

Romer’s  (Francis)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  17 th  Regiment. 

Rorer’s  (W.  A.)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  20ih  Regiment. 

Rose’s  (James  G.)  Infantry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate,  01  st  Regiment. 
Rowan’s  (John  A.)  Infantry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate,  62d  Regiment. 
Rowan’s  (John  B.)  Artillery.  See  Maryland  Troops,  Confederate,  3 d Battery. 
Rumsey’s  (Israel  P.)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  B. 
Rutherford’s  (Friend  S. ) Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  97th  Regiment. 

Saint  Louis  Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate. 

Sampson’s  (Ezekiel  S.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops , 5th  Regiment. 

Sanders’  (Addison  H.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  1 5th  Regiment. 

Schadt’s  (Otto)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  30 th  Regiment. 

Schofield’s  (George  W.)  Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troop*,  Union,  1st  Regiment,  Bat- 
tery A. 

Schwartz’s  (Adolph)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Regiment,  Battery  E. 
Sclater’s  (John  R.)  Artillery.  See  Alabama  Troops,  2d  Battalion,  Battery  C. 
Scofield’s  (Hiram)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Union,  8th  Regiment  (Colored). 
Scottfs  (C.  C.)  Artillery.  See  Appeal  Artillery. 

Scott’s  (Oliver  H.  P.)  Cavalry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  3 d Regiment. 

Scott’s  (Robert  K.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  58tli  Regiment. 

Scott’s  (Thomas  M.)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  12 th  Regiment. 
Seal’s  (D.  B.)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  '38th  Regiment. 

Sears’  (C.  W.)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  46 th  Regiment. 

Sears’  (Cyrus)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Union,  11th  Regiment  (Colored). 
Seay’s  (Abraham  J.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  3 2d  Regiment. 
Sengstak’s  (H.  H. ) Artillery.  See  Alabama  Troops. 

Senteney’s  (P.  S.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate,  2d  Regiment. 
Shaklee’s  (Francis  M.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  20 th  Regiment. 

Shane’s  (John)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  13 th  Regiment. 

Sharkey’s  (A.  M. ) Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment,  Bat- 
tery A. 

Shaw’s  (Elvis  P.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  10 th  Regiment. 

Sheed’s  (Warren)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  30 th  Regiment. 

Sheldon’s  (Charles  S.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  18t/i  Regiment. 
Sheldon’s  (Lionel  A.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  42 d Regiment. 


712 


[Chap.  XXXYI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Shelley  s (Charles  M. ) Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops , 30 th  Regiment. 

Shermans  (Arthur  M.)  Cavalry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops , 2d  Regiment. 

Shunk’s  (David)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops , 8 th  Regiment. 

Siber’s  (Edward)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  37 th  Regiment. 

Simpson’s  (Samuel  P. ) Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  31  st  Regiment. 
Slaughters  (J.  T. ) Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  56th  Regiment. 

Slemons’  (W.  F.)  Cavalry.  See  Arkansas  Troops,  Confederate,  2d  Regiment. 

Sloan’s  (Thomas  J.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  124 th  Regiment. 

Slocomb’s  (C.  H.)  Artillery.  See  Washington  Artillery.  5th  Battery. 

Small’s  (William  E.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  10 th  Regiment. 

Smith’s  (Ashbel)  Infantry.  .See  Texas  Troops,  2d  Regiment. 

Smith’s  (Charles  C.)  Infantry.  See  Union  Troops,  Regulars,  YMh  Regiment,  1st  Battalion. 
Smith’s  (Francis  M.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  11  th  Regiment. 

Smith  s (J.  F.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment  (State). 
Smith  s (John  H.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  1 6th  Regiment. 

Smiths  (Joseph  C.)  Cavalry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  5th  Regiment. 

Smith  s (Milo)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  26th  Regiment. 

Smith’s  (W.  Huntington)  Infantry.  See  Michigan  Troops,  20 th  Regiment. 

Smith  s (William)  Infantry.*  See  Illinois  Troops,  40 th  Regiment. 

Smyth’s  (J.  S.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate. 

Smyth  s (William ) Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  31st  Regiment. 

Snodgrass’  (John)  Infantry.  See  Alabama  Troops,  55ili  Regiment. 

Snyder  s (Samuel  A.  J.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  12d  Regiment. 

Sparks  (David  R.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  3 d Regiment. 

Sparrestrom  s (Frederick)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  2d  Regiment , Battery  G; 
also  1st  Regiment,  Battery  D.* 

Spear’s  (Edward,  jr.)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops,  15 th  Battery. 

Spicely’s  (William  T.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  24 th  Regiment. 

Spiegel’s  (Marcus  M.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  120 th  Regiment. 

Spooner’s  (Benjamin  J.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  83 d Regiment. 

Stansbury’s  (Marcus  L.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  95 th  Regiment. 

Starke’s  (P.  B.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  28 th  Regiment. 
Starring  s (Frederick  A.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  12d Regiment. 

Stephens’  (Thomas)  Cavalry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  2d  Regiment. 

Stevens’  (Giles)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  1 2th  Regiment. 

Stevens’  (J.  R.)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  6th  Regiment. 
Stillman’s  (George  L.)  Artillery.  See  Michigan  Troops,  7th  Battery. 

Stimming’s  (Theodore)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  31st  Regiment. 

Stocks’  (J.  G.)  Cavalry.  See  W.  H.  Jackson’s  Cavalry. 

Stone’s  (George  A.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  2 5th  Regiment. 

Stone’s  (William  M.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  2 2d  Regiment. 

Street’s  (Solomon  G.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate. 

Strong’s  (Joseph  G.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  28 th  Regiment. 

Stubbs’  (William)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  8th  Regiment. 

Sturgess’  (Robert  H.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  8th  Regiment. 

Sullivan’s  (Peter  J.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  48 th  Regiment. 

Swan’s  (Simeon  D.)  Cavalry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  4th  Regiment. 

Tannrath’s  (Benjamin)  Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  1. 
Taylor’s  (Ezra)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  B. 

Tennessee  (Confederate)' Nineteenth  Cavalry.  See  J.  B.  Biffle’s  Cavalry. 
Tennessee  (Confederate)  Seventh  Cavalry.  See  W.  H.  Jackson’s  Cavalry. 

Terrell’s  (V.  L.)  Cavalry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate. 

Theard’s  (J.  C.)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  23 d [22 d~\  Regiment. 
Thielemann’s  (Milo)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops. 


* Temporarily  commanding. 


Chap.  XXXYI.} 


ORGANIZATIONS  MENTIONED. 


713 


Thomas’  (Allen)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate , 29 tli  Regiment. 
Thomas’  (De  Witt  C.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  93 d Regiment. 

Thornton’s  (Joseph  H.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  49 th  Regiment. 

Titus’  (Herbert  B.)  Infantry.  See  New  Hampshire  Troops,  9tli  Regiment. 

Tobin’s  (Thomas  F.)  Artillery.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate. 

Torrence’s  (William  M.  G.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  30tli  Regiment. 
Tourtellotte’s  (John  E.)  Infantry.  See  Minnesota  Troops,  4 th  Regiment. 

Trantham’s  (Milton  H.)  Artillery.  See  Pettus  Flying  Artillery. 

Tripp’s  (Stephen  S.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  1 ltli  Regiment. 

Tupper’s  (Nathan  W.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  11  Oth  Regiment. 

Turner’s  (Charles)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  108M  Regiment. 

Tweeddale’s  (William)  Engineers.  See  Josiah  W.  BisselVs  Engineers. 

Twist’s  (Russell  P.)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops,  1 6th  Battery. 

Tyler’s  (A.)  Infantry.  See  Arkansas  Troops , Confederate,  21st  Regiment. 

Vaiden  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment , Battery  L. 

Van  Anda’s  (Salue  G.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  21  st  Regiment. 

Vance’s  (Joseph  W.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  96 th  Regiment. 

Vandyke’s  (R.  S.)  Cavalry.  See  J.  E.  Carter's  Cavalry. 

Vilas’  (William  F.)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  23d  Regiment. 

Voelkner’s  (Louis)  Artillery.  See  Clemens  Landgraeber's  Artillery. 

Voigt’s  (Robert)  Infantry.  See  T.  N.  Waul's  Legion. 

Waddell’s  (James  F.)  Artillery.  See  Alabama  Troops. 

Wade’s  (William)  Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Confederate. 

Walcutt’s  (Charles  C.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  4C th  Regiment. 

Walden’s  (John  F.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  17 th  Regiment. 

Walker’s  (William  A.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  13 th  Regiment. 

Wall’s  (J.  Q.)  Artillery.  See  Poinle  Coupee  Artillery. 

Wallace’s  (Martin  R.  M.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  4 th  Regiment. 

Walsh’s  (Richard  C.)  Artillery.  See  William  Wade's  Artillery. 

Wangelin’s  (Hugo)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  12 th  Regiment. 

Ward’s  (Lyman  M.)  Infantry.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  14 th  Regiment . 

Ward’s  (M.  S.)  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confide) ate,  14 th  Battalion. 
Washburn’s  (Frederick  S.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  9 tli  Regiment. 

Washburn’s  (Henry  O.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  18 th  Regiment. 

Washington  Artillery.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate. 

Washington’s  (Edward  C.)  Infantry.  See  Union  Troops,  Regulars,  13 th  Regiment, 
1st  Battalion. 

Waterhouse’s  (Allen  C.)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  E. 
Waterhouse’s  (Richard)  Infantry.  See  Texas  Troops,  19 th  Regiment. 

Waties’  (John)  Artillery.  See  Palmetto  Artillery,  Battery  B. 

Watkins’  (E.  P.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  56/7#.  Regiment. 

Waul’s  (T.  N.)  Legion.  See  Jexas  Troops. 

Webber  s (A.  Watson)  Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Union,  1st  Regiment  {Colored). 
Webers  (Andrew  J.)  Infantry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  Will  Regiment. 
Welfley’s  (Martin)  Artillery.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  B. 
Welsh’s  (Pinckney  J.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  5 6th  Regiment. 

Wever’s  (Clark  R.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  17 th  Regiment. 

White’s  (Hamilton  B.)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops  10 th  Battery. 

White’s  (Patrick  H. ) Artillery.  See  Charles  G.  Cooley's  Artillery. 

White’s  (R.  R.)  Cavalry.  S Q&  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment,  Partisan 
Rangers. 

Whitfield’s  (J.  W.)  Legion.  See  Texas  Troops,  27 th  Regiment,  Cavalry. 

Whiting’s  (John  E.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops , 87 ill  Regiment. 

Whittlesey’s  (Luther  H.)  Infantry.  Sec  Wisconsin  Troops,  11  th  Regiment. 

Wilds’  (John  Q. ) Infantry.  See  loiva  Troops,  24 th  Regiment. 


714 


[Chap.  XXXVI. 


MISSISSIPPI,  WEST  TENNESSEE,  ETC. 

Wiles’  (Greenberry  F.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops , 78th  Regiment. 

Williams’  (Jonathan  H. ) Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  18 th  Regiment. 

Williams’  (Reuben)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  12 th  Regiment. 

Williams’  (William  H.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  42 d Regiment. 

Williams’  (William  S.)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops,  3 d Battery. 

Williamson’s  (James  A.)  Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  4 th  Regiment. 

Wilshire’s  (William  W.)  Infantry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  126th  Regiment. 

Wilson’s  (A.  N.)  Cavalry.  See  Tennessee  Troops,  Confederate. 

Wilson’s  (James  G.)  Cavalry.  See  Illinois  Troops,  15 th  Regiment. 

Winans’  (W.  P.)  Infantry.  See  Louisiana  Troops,  Confederate,  19 th  Regiment. 
Winslow’s  (Edward  F.)  Cavalry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  4th  Regiment. 

Wintter7s  (D.)  Engineers.  See  Confederate  Troops,  Regulars. 

Withers’  (William  T.)  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate , 1st  Regiment. 
Witherspoon’s  (W.  W. ) Infantry.  See  Mississippi  Troops , Confederate,  36th  Regiment. 
Wofford’s  (Jeff.  L.)  Artillery.  See  Mississippi  Troops,  Confederate,  1st  Regiment,  Bat- 
tery D. 

Wood’s  (Edward  J.)  Infantry.  See  Indiana  Troops,  48tli  Regiment. 

Wood’s  (George  J.)  Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  D. 
Wood’s  (Oliver)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  2 2d  Regiment. 

Wood’s  (Peter  P. ) Artillery.  See  Illinois  Troops,  1st  Regiment,  Battery  A. 

Woods’  (Joseph  J. ) Infantry.  See  Iowa  Troops,  12 th  Regiment. 

Woods’  (M.  L.)  Infantry.  S ee  Alabama  Troops,  46th  Regiment. 

Woods’  (William  B.)  Infantry.  See  Ohio  Troops,  76th  Regiment. 

W right’.s  (Clark)  Cavalry.  See  Missouri  Troops,  Union,  6th  Regiment. 

Wright’s  (James  P.)  Artillery.  See  Botetourt' Artillery. 

Wrigley’s  (James)  Infantry.  See  T.N.  WauVs  Legion. 

Yoist's  (John)  Artillery.  See  Bointe  Coupee  Artillery,  Battery  A. 

Young’s  (R.  M.)  Infantry.  See  Georgia  Troops,  46th  Regiment. 

Zane’s  (Lanson)  Artillery.  See  Ohio  Troops,  10 th  Battery. 

Zickerick’s  (William)  Artillery.  See  Wisconsin  Troops,  12 th  Battery. 


INDEX 


. 


Brigades,  Divisions,  Corps,  Armies,  and  improvised  organizations  are  “ Mentioned  ” under  name  of  command- 
ing officer;  State  and  other  organizations  under  their  official  designation.  (See  Alternate  Designations, 
pp.  701-714.) 


Page. 

Aagessen,  N.  G.  Mentioned 272 

Abbott,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 152,165 


Abercrombie,  John  C.  Mentioned 156,301 

Abney,  Joel  P.  Mentioned 328 

Adaire,  T.  N.  Mentioned 399,404 

Adaire,  William  H.  Mentioned 329, 395 

Adams,  Daniel  W. 

Mentioned - 654,  657 

Report  of  operations,  July  12,  1863,  during  tlie  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign..  655 

Adams,  Edward.  Mentioned. 522 

Adams,  Frank.  Mentioned 610 

Adams,  John. 

Correspondence  with  S.  R.  Gist 426 

Mentioned 439, 440, 540 

Reports  of  expedition  from  Haynes’  Bluff  to  Mechaniesburg,  Miss.,  and 

skirmishes,  May  26- June  4,  1863 440-442 

Adams,  Wirt. 

Mentioned 87,103,122,441 

Report  of  expedition  to  Yazoo  City,  Miss.,  May  20-23, 1863  426 

Agar,  R.  Mentioned 340 

Adjutant- General's  Office,  U.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with  U.  S.  Grant 446 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A.  Correspondence  with 

Shoup,  Francis  A 405 

Smith,  E.  Kirby 457 

War  Department,  C.  S 465 

Ainsbury,  Michael.  Mentioned 272 

Alabama  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 


Artillery,  Light — Battalions : 2d  (Batteries),  C,  326,329,369,373,318.  Bat- 
teries: Fowler’s,  46;  Sengstak’s,  327,369.381;  Waddell’s,  63, 95, 96, 
99, 101, 105, 110,  111,  113, 326, 328, 350, 375, 376. 

Cavalry — Battalions:  15th,*  483.  Regiments:  Roddey’s,  674  ; 2d,  483. 

Infantry— Regiments  : 20th,  95, 101, 102, 326,  329,  345, 350, 351, 353, 357  ; 23d, 
95, 97, 101, 102,  326,  343,  350-354  ; 27th,  82;  30th,  95,101, 102, 326, 350,  354, 
357, 358 ; 31st,  64, 95, 101, 102,  326,  350, 351,  353, 354  ; 32d,  654-656  ; 35th, 
77,82-84,87,88;  37th,  327,  369,  381,382;  40th,  327,369,  381;  41st,  654; 
42d,  327,  329,  362,  369,  381,  382,385;  46th,  51,101,  102,  326,  329,350,354, 


355;  54th,  82,328;  55th,  82. 

Alban,  William  H.  Mentioned 166 

Alexander,  Jesse  I.  Mentioned 6, 146, 157 

Alexander,  G.  Judson.  Mentioned 551 


Also  called  1st  Battalion. 


(715) 


716 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Allen,  Benjamin.  Mentioned 156 

Allen,  R.  D.  Mentioned 46g 

Allen,  R.  T.  P.  Mentioned 448,467-469 

Allen,  W.  H.,  et  al.  Correspondence  with  William  T.  Sherman,  i 539 

Allen,  William.  Mentioned 354 

Amos,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 474 

Andel,  Christian.  Mentioned 166  252 

Anderson,  Christopher  H.  Mentioned 447 

Anderson,  David  M.  Mentioned 103 

Anderson,  Fulton.  Mentioned 539  549 

Anderson,  James.  Mentioned 311 

Anderson,  Joseph  W.  Mentioned 94,95,99,401 

Anderson,  Robert.  Mentioned 166 

Andrew,  William  A.  Mentioned 11 

Anglemire,  Henry.  Mentioned 500 

Antioch  Church,  Tenn.  Expedition  from  Bolivar  to.  See  Bolivar,  Term. 
Expedition  from , May  26-29,  1863. 

Apperson,  Thomas  A.  Mentioned 158 

Arcadia,  Steamer.  Mentioned 668 

Arizona,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 681 

Arkansas  Post,  Ark.  Engagement  at,  Jan.  10-11,  1863.  See  Vicksburg, 

Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19 -July  4,  1863.  Beports  of 
Carskaddon,  David.  Sullivan,  Peter  J. 


See  also  Vol.  XVII,  Part  I,  p.  698. 

Arkansas  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery,  Light— Batteries  : Appeal,  326,  329,  369,  372,  373,  376-378,410; 

McNally’s,  327,410;  Owens’,  481-483. 

Cavalry  Battalions : 1st,  116,  118,  327,  420.  Regiments:  1st  Rifles,  541, 
658;  2d  Rifles,  541,658,659;  2d,  431,490,501. 

Infantry  Battalions  : 4th,  541  ; 12th  ( Sharpshooters ),  327.  Regiments  : 
1st,  541;  4th,  541,658,659;  9th,  82,541;  10th,  541;  15th,  327;  19th, 
327,351,420;  20th,  327,420;  21st,  120,138,327;  25th,  32d,  541. 


Arkansas  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Union.) 

Infantry — Regiments : 1st  {Colored),  158,450;  2d  (Colored),  430. 

Arms,  Ammunition,  etc.  Supplies  of.  See  Munitions  of  War. 

Armstrong,  Fletcher  E.  Mentioned 157 

Armstrong,  John  P.  Mentioned 634 

Army  Corps,  9th. 

Parke,  John  G.,  resumes  command  of,  June  5,  1863 4 

Re-embarks  at  Haynes’  Bluff,  Miss.,  for  Kentucky,  Aug.  3-8,  1863  5 

Transfer  of,  from  Kentucky  to  vicinity  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  June  3-17, 1863.  4 

Army  Corps,  13th,  Army  of  the  Tennessee. 

Ord,  Edward  O.  C.,  supersedes  McClernand  in  command  of,  June  19,  1863..  4 

Ordered  to  Department  of  the  Gulf,  Aug.  7,  1863 5 

Army  Headquarters.  Correspondence  with  U.  S.  Grant 686 

Arnaux,  M.  Mentioned 329 

Arosenius,  Carl.  Mentioned 434 

Arrington,  T.  M.  Mentioned 95, 101, 326, 350, 352 

Asboth,  Alexander. 

Mentioned 487,488 

Reports  of 

Fort  Pillow,  Tenn.  Scout  from,  August  3, 1863 687 

Memphis,  Tenn.  Operations  on  the  Mississippi  River,  near,  June  17-18, 

1863 507 


INDEX. 


717 


Page. 

Ashmead,  Samuel.  Mentioned 187-189 

Atchison,  Alexander  C.  Mentioned 167 

Atherton,  Joseph  B. 

Mentioned...: 138,151 

Report  of  assault  on  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  22,  1863  242 

Audenreid,  J.  C.  Mentioned 524,527 

Augustin,  Jacob  M.  Mentioned 272 

Austin,  Miss.  Skirmishes  near. 

May  24,  1863.  Reports  of 

Chalmers,  James  R 431,432 

Ellet,  Alfred  W 431 

May  28,  1863*.. 4 

Avery,  William.  Mentioned 300 

Ayers,  David.  Mentioned 280 

Aylmer,  Edward  P.  Mentioned 230,585 

Babcock,  Amos  C.  Mentioned 636 

Bachman,  J.  W.  Mentioned 327 

Baggs,  James.  Mentioned* 278 

Bagwell,  T.  E.  Mentioned 389 

Bailey,  George  W.  K.  Mentioned 151 

Bains,  S.  C.  Mentioned . 328 

Baker,  Alpheus.  Mentioned 77,82,86 

Baker,  George  P.  Mentioned 565 

Baker,  Samuel  R.  Mentioned 153 

Baker’s  Creek,  Miss. 


Battle  of.  See  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863. 

Skirmish  near,  July  7,  1863.  See  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign , July  5-25,  1863. 
Beports  of 


Onl,  Edward  O.  C. 


Osterhaus,  Peter  J. 


Baldwin,  Elbert  D.  Mentioned 631 

Baldwin,  James  H.  Mentioned 11,54 

Baldwin,  William  E. 

Correspondence  with  Martin  L.  Smith 405 


Mentioned 72, 97, 324, 325, 327-329, 336, 343, 350, 394, 397-399, 405, 414 


Report  of  operations,  May  4-Jniy  4,  1863,  including  the  siege  of  Vicksburg, 


Miss 399 

Baldwin,  William  H.  Mentioned 594 

Ball,  Charles  P.  Correspondence  with  John  H.  Forney 370 

Ball,  Eustace  H.  Mentioned 640 

Ballinger,  Richard  H.  Mentioned 158 

Ballou,  Daniel  W.  Mentioned 153,256 

Banbury,  Jabez.  Mentioned 157 

Banks,  Nathaniel  P.  Mentioned . 461,681 

Barber,  Seth  M.  Mentioned 21 

Barclay,  James  W. 

Mentioned 421,422 

Report  of  operations,  May  31,  1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss 422 

Barefield,  Stephen.  Mentioned 306 

Barkuloo,  William.  Mentioned 94?  105, 326 

Burner,  H.  H.  Mentioned 678 

Barnes,  Joseph  H.  Mentioned 149 

Barnum,  William  L.  Mentioned 153 

Baron  De  Kalb,  IJ.  S.  S.  Mentioned 249, 667-671 


rNo  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


718 


INDEX, 


Tage. 

Barrett,  Samuel  E. 

Mentioned 153,  265-267, 270 

Report  of  operations,  May  7-25,  1863,  against  Vicksburg,  Miss 261 

Barrot,  C.  H.  Mentioned 3.^6 

Barrows,  D.  N.  Mentioned 539  549 

Barry,  William  S.  Correspondence  with  John  C.  Moore 333 

Barteau,  C.  R.  Mentioned 433 

Barter,  R.  F.  Mentioned 45  59  54  54 

Bartholomew,  John  B.  Mentioned 265 

Bartilson,  Matthias  H.  Mentioned 457 

Bartlett,  Frank  A.  Mentioned 449  457  499 

Barton,  Seth  M. 

Correspondence  with  Carter  L.  Stevenson 347 

Mentioned 71,94-96,99, 

102, 106, 108, 123,  124, 127,  324-326,  328,  336,  341,  342,  345,  346,  355,  413,  416 

Report  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16,  1863 99 

Bashore,  John  L.  Mentioned 545  952 

Bates,  J.  M.  Mentioned 99 

Bates,  John  T.  Mentioned 5gg 

Bates,  Samuel.  Mentioned 439  499  242 

Bates,  T.  Jeff.  Mentioned 375 

Batsell,  T.  H.  Mentioned 499 

Baylis,  V/.  T.  Mentioned 329, 392 

Bayou  Pierre,  Miss.  Skirmish  on.  See  South  Forlc  of  Bayou  Pierre , Miss. 
Skirmish  on,  May  2,  1863. 

Bayou  Tensas,  La.  Skirmish  at,  Aug.  10,  1863  * 5 

Beach,  Augustus.  Mentioned 151,210,240  602 

Beall,  E.  J.  Mentioned 479 

Beams,  George  W.  Mentioned 937 

Bear  Creek,  Miss. 

Action  near.  See  HilVs  Plantation,  near  Bear  Creek,  Miss.  Action  at,  June 
22,  1863. 

Skirmish  near  Canton,  at.  See  Canton,  Miss.  Skirmish  at  Bear  Creek,  near, 

July  17, 1863. 

Beaty,  O'.  R.  Mentioned 449 

Beaver,  Thomas.  Mentioned 469,470 

Beck,  F.  K.  Mentioned 95, 101-103, 326,  350, 351, 353 

Beck,  F.  P.  Mentioned 434 

Beckdoldt,  Frederick  C.  Mentioned 559 

Becker,  Francis.  Mentioned 459 

Beckwith,  Sylvester  G.  Mentioned 130 

Beebe,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 152 

Belden,  W.  Scott.  Mentioned 678 

Belknap,  William  W. 

Mentioned 156 

Report  of  operations,  April  26-July  4,  1863,  against  Vicksburg,  Miss 305,306 

Bell,  Captain.  Mentioned 434 

Bell,  John.  Mentioned 277 

Bell,  John  S.  Mentioned 327 

Bell,  Metcalf.  Mentioned 239 

Bellwood,  Milton.  Mentioned 272 

Belmont,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  June  18,  1863.  See  Mississippi,  Northwestern. 
Operations  in,  June  15-25,  1863.  Peportof  Hatch,  p.  495. 

* No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


INDEX. 


719 


Pago. 


Beltzhoover,  D. 

Mentioned 328,337 

Report  of  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  19-July  4,  1863  34  L 

Benjamin,  Samuel  N.  Mentioned 149 

Bennett,  Thomas  W.  Mentioned 13,21,150 

Benoit,  J.  W.  Mentioned 404 

Benteen,  F.  W.  Mentioned 663,665 

Benton,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 454 

Benton,  Benjamin  E.  Mentioned 470 

Benton,  William  P. 

Mentioned 24,  33, 34, 37, 129, 134-136, 151, 161, 236, 547, 574-576, 592, 597, 600 

Report  of  operations,  July  5-24,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign   608 

Berkey,  John  M.  Mentioned 640,642 

Bernard,  Edward  N.  Mentioned 160 

Berry,  John.  Mentioned 93 

Berry,  William  M.  Mentioned 614 

Bertram,  Henry. 

Mentioned 158, 668 


Report  of  operations,  June  15-July  4,  1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg, 


Miss - 322 

Bevier,  R.  S.  Mentioned 113 

Bierce,  John  B.  Mentioned 28 


Biffle,  Jacob  B.  Mentioned 474, 485,  486, 662,  666, 673,  674,  676, 682 

Big  Black  River,  Miss. 

Affair  at  Birdsong  Ferry,  on  the.  See  Birdsong  Ferry,  Miss.  Affair  on  Big 
Blade  River,  at,  June  18,  1863. 

Expedition  from.  See  Grenada,  Miss.  Expeditions  fro%m  Big  Black  River, 

Miss.,  and  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to,  Aug.  10-23,  1663. 

Skirmishes  at  Messinger’s  Ferry,  on  the. 

June  29,  1863.  See  Messinger’s  Ferry. 

June  30,  1863.  See  Messinger’s  Ferry. 

July  3,  1863.  See  Messinger’s  Ferry. 

July  4,  1863.  See  Messinger’s  Ferry. 

Skirmish  on,  June  22,  1863.  See  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19 -July  4, 

1863.  Report  of  Sherman,  p.245. 

Big  Black  River  Bridge,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  17,  1863. 


Casualties.  Returns  of.  Union  troops 27, 39, 128-130 

Ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  captured  at.  Statement  of 130, 131,  418 

Reports  of 

Dunlap,  Cornelius  W 142 

Lawler,  Michael  K 133 

Lee,  Albert  L 131 

Mather,  Thomas  S .• 131 

Sketch 72 


See  also  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863.  Reports  of 


Burbridge,  Stephen  G-.  Keigwin,  James.  Lucas,  John. 

Cockrell,  Francis  M.  Kimball,  Charles  B.  Osterhaus,  Peter  J. 

Gates,  Elijah.  Lindsey,  Daniel  W.  Taylor,  Thomas  H. 

Guppey,  Joshua  J.  Lockett,  Samuel  H. 

Also  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of , May  19-July  4,  1863.  Reports  of 

Blair,  Frank  P.,  jr.  Lee,  Charles  N.  Luc.is,  Thomas  J. 

Fonda,  John  G.  Lee,  Stephen  D.  Roberds,  A.  C. 

Lanphere,  Charles  H. 


Also  Dana  to  Stanton,  p.  47 ; Cockrell  to  Memminger,  p.  109.  Also  report 
of  Buehler,  Part  I,  p.  596. 


720 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Big  Sandy  Creek,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  May  5,  1863.  See  Champion’s  Hill, 

Miss.  Bailie  of,  May  16,  1863.  Report  of  Osterhaus,  p.  12. 

Big  Sunflower  River,  Miss.  Expedition  np  the.  See  Yazoo  and  Big  Sun- 
floiver  Hirers,  Miss.  Expedition  up  the,  May  24-31,  1863. 

Bingham,  James  A.  Mentioned 165 

Birdsong  Ferry,  Miss. 

Affair  on  Big  Black  River,  at,  June  18,  1863.  Report  of  John  H.  Ham- 
mond   508 

Skirmish  at,  June  12,  1863.  See  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19 -July  4, 

1863.  Report  of  Osterhaus,  pp.  221,222. 

Skirmishes  near. 

June  22,  1863.  See  Jones’  Plantation,  Miss.  Skirmish  near  Birdsong 
Ferry,  at,  June  22,  1863. 

July  5,  1863.  See  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign,  July  5-2f>,  1863.  Reports  of 
Cockerill,  Joseph  K.  Hicks,  Stephen  G.  Parke,  John  G. 

Dickerman,  Willard  A.  Jones,  Wells  Sk,  Smith,  William  Sooy. 

Fowler,  Alexander. 


Black,  John.C.  Mentioned 158 

Blair,  Frank  P.,jr. 

Mentioned 6, 9, 26, 31,  32, 143, 152, 162, 163, 170, 172, 192, 214, 217, 260-262, 

266, 268-270, 273, 285, 295, 297,  302, 307, 532, 533, 536, 539, 549, 557, 621, 689 

Reports  of 

Mechanicsburg,  Miss.  Expedition  from  Haynes’  Bluff  to,  and  skir- 
mishes, May  26-Juue  4,  1863  435 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations,  May  7-22,  1863,  against 254 

Blanden,  Leander.  Mentioned 156 

Blessing,  C.  H.  Mentioned 500 

Blessing,  P.  J.  Mentioned 330,334,335,373,377 

Blessingh,  Louis  von.  Mentioned 153,258,259,282-284 

Bliss,  Zenas  R. 

Mentioned . 149,570 

Report  of  operations,  June  4-July  24,  1863,  including  the  Jackson,  Miss., 

Campaign 570 

Blood,  James  H.  Mentioned 152 

Bloomfield,  Ira  J.  Mentioned 631 

Blount,  Ambrose  A.  Mentioned 150 

Blythe,  G.  L.  Mentioned 145, 429, 504, 505 

Boardman,  Elisha.  Mentioned 138,143 

Bodie,  Capers  W.  Mentioned 329 

Boggs,  William  R.  For  correspondence  as  Chief  of  Staff,  see  E.  Kirby  Smith. 

Boies,  Justus  A.  Mentioned 160 

Boley,  John  W.  Mentioned 260,283 

Bolivar,  Tenn. 

Expedition  from,  May  26-29,  1863.  Report  of  Adolph  Engelmann 432 

Skirmish  at,  July  10,  1863.  Reports  of 

Dodge,  Grenville  M 666 

Drish,  James  F 666 

Bolling,  Eugene  S.  Mentioned 326 

Bolton,  Isaac  M.  Mentioned 139 

Bolton,  N.  F.  Mentioned 54 

Bolton,  William  H.  Mentioned  156,292 

Bolton  Station,  Miss. 

Capture  of,  May  15,  1863.  See  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16, 

1863.  Report  of  Osterhaus,  p.  12.  See  also  report  of  McClernand, 

Part  I,  p.  148. 


INDEX. 


721 


rage. 

Bolton  Station,  Miss. — Continued. 

Skirmish  at,  July  10,  1863.  See  Jackson , Miss.,  Campaign , Juhj  5-25,  1863. 

Report  of  Sherman,  p.  520. 

Skirmish  near,  July  8,  1863.  See  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign,  July  5-25,  1863. 

Report  of  Lanphere,  p.  583. 

Bond,  R.  C.  Mentioned 339,340 

Boomer,  George  B.  Mentioned  10,44,47,50,60,64,67,68,157,165,160,316 

Boone,  John  W.  Mentioned 138 

Botsford,  Eli  W.  Mentioned 13, 150 

Botts,  Henry  T.  Mentioned 98 

Bouanchaud,  Alcide.  Mentioned 82,87 

Bouck,  Gabriel.  Mentioned 6, 146, 157 

Boutell,  Ira.  Mentioned 152,259,264,265 

Bowen,  John  S. 

Correspondence  with 

Green,  Martin  E 422 

Pemberton,  John  C 422 

Mentioned 70,  71, 73-77,  79,  83-85,  88, 90,  91, 95-98, 102, 110,112- 

114, 116-118, 120-127, 204, 324, 325, 327,  328, 360, 363, 381, 414, 418, 423, 424 

Reports  of  operations,  May  28-July  2,  1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg, 

Miss 411-413 

Bower,  E.  L.  Mentioned 355 

Bower,  John.  Mentioned 250 

Bowie,  M.  B.  Mentioned 512 

Bowman,  Henry. 

Mentioned 149, 542, 557, 558, 563, 565, 566 

Report  of  operations,  July  4-17,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign  560 

Bowman,  J.  H.  Mentioned 82 

Bo wyer,  Horace  L.  Mentioned 166 

Boyd,  James  P.  Mentioned 259,265 

Boyd,  J.  C.  Mentioned 109,329,356 

Boyd,  J.  H.  Mentioned 539,540 

Boyles,  William.  Mentioned 482 

Bradford,  William  M.  Mentioned 107, 109, 326 

Bradley,  Daniel.  Mentioned 155 

Bradley,  George  W.  Mentioned 167 

Bradley,  L.  D.  Mentioned 351,357,358 

Brady,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 151,610 

Bragg,  Braxton.  Mentioned 438,486,488,661,662 

Brandon,  Miss.  Action  at,  July  19,  1863.  See  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign,  July 
5-25,  1863.  Reports  of 

Edgington,  Samuel  It.  Sherman,  William  T.  Woods,  Joseph  J. 

Geddes,  James  L.  Snyder,  Samuel  A.  J. 


Branigan,  Patrick.  Mentioned 207 

Brayman,  Mason.  Mentioned 432 

Breckenridge,  William  K.  M. 

Mentioned 445,  679, 680 

Report  of  skirmish  at  Jackson,  Tenn.,  July  13,  1863 679 

Breckinridge,  John  C.  Mentioned 216,219, 


228,  438,  521, 534, 538,  540,  580,  654,  655,  657, 658 


Brenholtz,  Thomas  S.  Mentioned 149,569 

Bretts,  Surgeon.  Mentioned 423 


46  R R— VOL  XXIV?  PT  II 


722 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Brewer,  George  E. 

Mentioned 326, 350, 852,  355 

Eeport  of  operations,  May  18-July  4,  1863,  including  the  siege  of  Vicks- 
burg, Miss 354 

Bridgeport,  Miss.  Skirmish  near,  May  17,  1863.  Eeport  of  Clark  Wright..  143 

Bridger,  R.  D.  Mentioned 494 

Bridges,  H.  W.  Mentioned 441,442,555 

Bridges,  W.  M.  Mentioned 34 q 

Bringhurst,  Thomas  H.  Mentioned 42,45,49,51,151,601 

Brookhaven,  Miss. 

Skirmish  at,  July  18,1863.  See  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign,  July  5-25,  1863. 
Reports  of 

Carter,  R.  S.  Fullerton,  Hugh.  Sherman,  William  T. 

Fonda,  John  G.  Ord,  Edward  O.  C. 


Union  raid  on,  June  23-26,  1863. 

Communication  from  Cyrus  Bussey 545 

Eeports  of 

Carter,  E.  S 543 

Lovell,  W.  S 543 

Wilson,  W.  M 544 

Brookings,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 456 

Brooks,  Private.  Mentioned 3^7 

Brooks,  Emerson  P.  Mentioned 282 

Brooks,  Joseph.  Mentioned 260 

Brotherton,  J.  M.  Mentioned 99 

Brower,  George  C.  Mentioned 330,335 

Brown,  Aaron. 

Mentioned 454 , 603, 604 

Eeport  of  operations,  May  17-June  24,  1863,  against  Vicksburg,  Miss 290 

Brown,  Charles  F.  Mentioned 44 

Brown,  Elijah  B.  Mentioned 344 

Brown,  Isaac  H.  Mentioned 44 

Brown,  Isaac  N. 

Mentioned 668,  670,  672 

Eeports  of 

Greenwood,  Miss.  Attack  on  Union  gunboats  near,  May  27,,  1863...  443 

Yazoo  City,  Miss.  Expedition  from  Vicksburg  to,  July  12-21,  1863.  670,671 

Brown,  James.  Mentioned (399 

Brown,  Mathew  C.  Mentioned 438 

Brown,  William.  Mentioned 640 

Brown,  William  B. 

Mentioned 454 

Eeport  of  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign,  July  5-25,  1863 699 

Brown,  W.  N.  Mentioned 400,401 

Broyles,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 326 

Bruce,  John.  Mentioned 322 

Bruce,  R.  J.  Mentioned 340 

Brumback,  Jefferson. 

Mentioned 453 

Eeport  of  operations,  May  19,  1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss. ..  285 

Brunner,  H.  Mentioned 90 

Brunner,  John  F.  Mentioned 475,477 

Bruns,  H.  G.  Mentioned 664,  665 

Brush,  Daniel  H.  Mentioned 155 


INDEX. 


723 


Page. 

Brusle,  Charles  A.  Mentioned 371,377 

Bryan,  E.  H.  Statement  of.  Battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16, 1S63..  120 

Bryant,  George  E. 

Mentioned 154, 547, 598, 599, 606 

Report  of  operations,  July  5-20,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign  607 

Buchanan,  George  H.  Mentioned 305 

Buchanan,  John.  Mentioned 11,59 

Buchanan,  Robert.  Mentioned 156 

Buchanan,  Thomas.  Mentioned 166 

Buckland,  Ralph  P.  Mentioned r - - . 146, 153, 163, 188 

Buehler,  Theodore  E.  Mentioned 6, 35, 128, 146, 150, 594 

Buesart,  George  W.  Mentioned 699 

Buford,  Abraham. 

Mentioned..  .70, 71, 75-79, 81,  83,  87, 91-93, 96, 102, 116, 120, 121, 123, 126, 127, 400, 540 

Report  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16,  1863 82 

Buhrman,  Henry.  Mentioned 277,278 

Bull,  James  M.  Mentioned 38,39 

Bunn,  H.  G.  Report  of  operations,  July  11-12,  1863,  during  the  Jackson, 

Miss.,  Campaign C58 

Burbridge,  Stephen  G. 

Mentioned 8, 36-38, 62, 63, 128, 129, 132, 146, 150, 161, 236, 237 

Report  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16,  1863,  including  opera- 
tions April  13-May  24 30 

Burgin,  Thomas  A.  Mentioned 327 

Burke,  James.  Mentioned 500 

Burke,  P.  E.  Mentioned 479 

Burke,  T.  A.  Mentioned - 404 

Burnap,  Silas  A.  Mentioned 155,606 

Burnaugh,  W.  H.  Mentioned 272 

Burnet,  James.  Mentioned 11 

Burns,  John.  Mentioned 272 

Burnside,  Ambrose  E.  Mentioned 507 

Burnsville,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  June  11,  1863* 4 

Bursley,  A.  A.  Mentioned 79,83 

Burt,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 365 

Burton,  Anthony  B.  Mentioned 155 

Burton,  George.  Mentioned 152 

Busey,  Samuel  T.  Mentioned 154, 606 

Bush,  Daniel  B.,  jr.  Mentioned 150,209,226 

Bush,  Henry  H.  Mentioned 296 

Bussey,  Cyrus. 

Mentioned 158, 247, 248, 522, 524, 526, 527, 533-535,  544, 555, 618, 619, 668 

Report  of  operations,  July  7-19,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign  551 

Buswell,  Nicholas  C.  Mentioned 157 

Butler,  Frederick  T.  Mentioned 54 

Butler,  George.  Mentioned 601 

Butler,  James.  Mentioned 321 

Byam,  Eber  C.  Mentioned 42, 44, 55, 151 

Bye,  Edward  P.  Mentioned 305 

Cain,  David.  Mentioned 665 

Cain,  Jesse  L.  Mentioned 11,45,54 

Caldwell,  Daniel  M.  Mentioned 497 


* No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


724 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Caldwell,  James  T.  Mentioned 11 

Callahan,  C.  M.  Mentioned 598 

Callahan,  John  M.  Mentioned 602 

Calvert,  Metellus.  Mentioned - 160 

Cam,  William.  Mentioned 154, 195, 289 

Cameron,  Allen.  Mentioned - 329,358 

Cameron,  Charles  S.  Mentioned  494 

Cameron,  Robert  A.  Mentioned 45,51,151,601 

Camp,  Raleigh  S.  Mentioned 100 

Campbell,  Franklin.  Mentioned 6, 146, 156 

Campbell,  James  W.  Mentioned 158 

Campbell,  John.  Mentioned 630 

Campbell,  John  L. 

Mentioned 13,14,21,150,578,579 

Report  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16,  1863 28 

Campbell,  Leonidas  C.  Mentioned 507,508 

Campbell,  R.  B.  Mentioned 329 

Campbell,  R.  W.  Mentioned 410 

Canton,  Miss. 

Skirmish  at  Bear  Creek,  near,  July  17,  1863.  See  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign, July  5-25,  1863.  Reports  of 
Bussey,  Cyrus.  Sherman,  William  T.  Woods,  Charles  It. 

Skirmish  near,  July  12,  1863.  See  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign,  July  5-25, 

1863.  Reports  of 


Bussey,  Cyrus.  Leasure,  Daniel. 


Capers,  W.  C.  Mentioned  338-340 

Captured  Property.  See  Private  Property.  Action  touching. 

Carbee,  William.  Mentioned 11,45 

Carey,  James  L.  Mentioned 41,151 

Carmichael,  E.  Mentioned 665 

Carmin,  Isaac  H.  Mentioned 239 

Carpenter,  Don.  A.  Mentioned 152 

Carr,  Eugene  A.  Mentioned 9, 12, 13, 15-17, 20, 23, 25, 26, 34,  37, 

41, 67, 68, 128-130, 132, 134, 135, 146, 151, 161, 171, 174, 182-186, 244, 255,316 

Carr,  J.  D.  Mentioned 483 

Carrington,  W.  C.  P.  Mentioned 112 

Carruth,  Sumner.  Mentioned 149 

Garskaddon,  David. 

Mentioned 152 


Report  of  operations,  Dec.  29, 1862-J uly  3, 1863,  against  Vicksburg,  Miss. . . 253 


Carter,  A.  Leroy.  Mentioned 

Carter,  George  W.  Mentioned 

Carter,  R.  S.  Reports  of 

Brookhaven,  Miss.  Union  raid  on,  June  23-26, 1863 

Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  Operations,  July  18-25, 1863,  during  the 

Carter,  Samuel.  Mentioned 

Carter,  Thomas  M.  Mentioned 

Caruthers,  J.  B.  Mentioned 

Case,  Charles.  Mentioned 

Case,  John  M.  Mentioned 

Casey,  Levi  B.  Mentioned 

Cassell,  Washington  C.  Mentioned 

Castles,  J.  Mentioned 

Casto,  Jonathan.  Mentioned 


554 

517 

513 

661 

...  329,358 

113,  327,  417 

328 

498 

639 

168 

629 

30 

......  160 


INDEX. 


725 


Page., 

Catron,  Thomas  B.  Mentioned  327 

Catterson,  Robert  F. 

Mentioned 154,  C28,  629,  639,  640,  648,  652 

Report  of  operations,  July  5-17,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  640 

Catterson,  W.  S.  Mentioned 118 

Caven,  John  F.  Mentioned 53,001 

Cavins,  A.  G.  Mentioned 640,642 

Chaffee,  C.  C.  Mentioned 52,  172, 178, 188 

Chalmers,  James  R. 

Mentioned 145, 

427, 429, 434,  472,  474, 484, 486, 487, 489-493, 503-506, 508, 541, 672,  684, 685 
Reports  of 

Austin,  Miss.  Skirmish  near,  May  24,  1863 431,  432 

Mississippi,  Northwestern.  Operations  in,  June  14-25,  1863 501 

Chamberlain,  Edwin  W.  Mentioned 158,  448 

Chambers,  Alexander.  Mentioned 156,  302, 304,  305,  307,  308, 310,  535,  653,  654 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863. 

Casualties.  Returns  of. 

Confederate  troops 82,99,112 

Union  troops 7-11,24,26,39,51,57,66 

Communications  from 

Cockrell,  Francis  M 109 

Dana,  Charles  A ,.  47 

Hovey,  Alvin  P 46 

McClernand,  John  A 48 

Pemberton,  John  C 121 

Ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  captured.  Statement  of 52, 99, 418 

Reports  of 

Barton,  Seth  M 99 

Buford,  Abraham 82 

Burbridge,  Stephen  G 30 

Campbell,  John  L 28 

Cockrell,  Francis  M 109, 114 

Cumming,  Alfred 103 

Dockery,  Thomas  P , 115 

Featherston,  Wintield  S 90 

Gates,  Elijah 118, 120 

Goodwin,  Edward 87 

Guppey,  Joshua  J 38 

Hillis,  David  B 63 

Hovey,  Alvin  P 40,  46 

Keigwin,  James 22 

Kimball,  Charles  B 29 

Lee,  Stephen  D 101 

Lindsey,  Daniei  W 24 

Lockett,  Samuel  H 69 

- Loring,  William  W 73, 74 

Lucas,  John 23 

McGinnis,  George  F 48,52 

McLaughlin,  John  A 57 

Moore,  Frederick  W: 36 

Osterhaus,  Peter  J 12 

Putnam,  Holden 64 

Quinby,  Isaac  F 59 


726 


INDEX. 


Champion  s Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863 — Continued. 

Reports  of 

Reynolds,  A.  E 

Reynolds,  A.  W 

Rutherford,  Friend  S 

Scott,  Thomas  M 

Slack,  James  R 

Spicely,  William  T 

Stevenson,  Carter  L 

Strong,  Joseph  G 

Tourtellotte,  John  E 

Sketches 

Statements  of  Confederate  staff  officers.  ■*- 

Bryan,  E.  H 

Selph,  C.  McRae 

Taylor,  J.  C 

Taylor,  T.  H* ” 

Thompson,  Jacob 

Tup  per,  H.  C 


See  also  Big  Black  Elver  Bridge,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  Mag  17,  1863.  Eeport 
of  Lawler , p.  133. 

Also  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19 -July  4,  1863.  Reports  of 


Barrett,  Samuel  E. 
Blair,  Frank  P.,  jr. 
Brewer,  George  E. 
Fislier,  Cyrus  W. 
Fonda,  John  G. 


Forney,  John  H. 
Hickenlooper,  Andrew. 
Lee,  Charles  N. 

Mott,  Samuel  B. 


Sampson,  Ezekiel  S. 
Smith,  Giles  A. 

Smith,  Thomas  Kilby. 
Sullivan,  Peter  J. 


Page. 


79 

107 

40 

89 

54 

53 

93 

58 

60 

43,71 

120 

121 

122 

123 

124 
127 


Also  Dana  to  Stanton,  p.  47 ; Cockrell  to  Memminger,  p.  109.  Also  report  of 


McClernand,  Part  I,  p.  148. 

Chandler,  Theodore  C.  Mentioned 270 

Chandler,  T.  W.  Mentioned 275 

Chapman,  Willard  D.  Mentioned 166 

Cheatham,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned 687 

Cheeseman,  J.  W.,  Steamer.  Mentioned 321 

Cheney,  John  T.  Mentioned 154 

Chickasaw  Bluffs,  Miss.  Assault  on,  Dec.  29,  1862.  See  Vicksburg,  Miss. 

Siege  of , May  19-July  4, 1863.  Eeport  of  Carskaddon,  p.  253.  Also 
Vol.  XVII,  Part  I. 

Childs,  George  H.,  jr.  Mentioned 139,143,242 

Choctaw,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 44.7  44$  453 

Chrisman,  T.  J.  Mentioned 329,371 

Christ,  Benjamin  C.  Mentioned 149,543,557,567-570,572 

Christian,  William.  Mentioned 387,393 

Chrystie,  Alexander.  Mentioned 139 

Chust,  Alexander.  Mentioned 326 

Chute,  Augustus  S.  Mentioned 11,45 

Cincinnati,  U.  S.  S. 

Destruction  of,  May  30,  1863.  Communications  from 

Bowen,  John  S 422 

Green,  Martin  E 422 

Pemberton.  John  C 422  423 


Engagement  with  Vicksburg  batteries.  See  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Engagement 
between  U.  S.  S.  Cincinnati  and  batteries  at,  May  27,  1863. 


Mentioned 

Claiborne,  F.  O.  Mentioned 


253,  331,  337,  338,  340,  395,  422,  423,  695 
! 107,109,329,345,355,356 


INDEX. 


727 


Page. 

Claiborne,  W.  H.  Mentioned 356 

Clark,  Alonzo.  Mentioned 249 

Clark,  Charles  J.  Mentioned 138 

Clark,  George  W. 

Mentioned 158 

Report  of  operations,  June  14-July  4,  1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg, 

Miss 320 

Clark,  J.  Mentioned 481 

Clark,  J.  M.  Mentioned 404 

Clark,  John  B.,  jr.  Mentioned 517 

Clark,  John  G Mentioned 158 

Clark,  John  J.  Mentioned 327 

Clark,  M.  R.  Mentioned 514 

Clark,  Samuel  F.  Mentioned 157 

Clark,  W.  H.  Mentioned 404 

Clark,  William.  Mentioned 321 

Clark,  William  H.  Mentioned 668 

Clarke,  George  R.  Mentioned 2c9,265 

Clarke,  G.  W.  Mentioned 410 

Clayton,  William  Z.  Mentioned 157 

Clendenin.  Francis  M.  Mentioned 260, 283 

Clepper,  Wilson.  Mentioned 329 

Cleveland,  S.B.  Mentioned 512 

Cleveland,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 326 

Clinton,  Ky.  Expedition  from,  in  pursuit  of  Biffle’s,  Forrest’s,  and  Newsom’s 

Cavalry,  July  22-27,  1863  * 5 

Clinton,  Miss. 

Skirmish  at,  July  16,  1803.  See  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign,  July  5-25,  1863. 
Reports  of 

Mattliies,  Charles  L.  Wiles,  GreenberryF. 

Skirmishes  near. 

July  8,  1863.  See  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign,  July  5-25,  1863.  Reports  of 
Bussey,  Cyrus.  Fullerton,  Hugh.  Sherman,  William  T. 

July  9,  1863.  See  Jackson , Miss.,  Campaign,  July  5-25,  1863.  Reports  of 
Keigwiu,  James.  Nutting,  Oscar  F.  Osterhaus,  Peter  J. 

Clothing,  Camp  and  Garrison  Equipage.  Supplies  of.  See  Munitions  of  irar. 

Clune,  William  H.  Mentioned 629,647 

Coates,  James  H.  Mentioned 156 

Coats,  J.  M.  Mentioned 539,540 

Cobb,  M.  A.  Mentioned 353 

Cocke,  Dr.  Mentioned 469 

Cocke,  William  J.  Mentioned 470 

Cockerill,  Joseph  R. 

Mentioned 154, 544, 629, 635, 644 

Report  of  operations,  July  4-17,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign  639 

Cockrell,  Francis  M. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 109 

Mentioned 95-97, 109, 118, 128,  324, 325, 327-329, 368, 372, 402, 412-414 

Reports  of 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863,  including  operations, 

May  15-17 109,114 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19-July  4,  1863 414 


' For  report,  see  Series  I,  Vol.  XXIII,  Part  1,  p.  827. 


728 


INDEX. 


Coddington,  Thomas.  Mentioned 273 

Cody,  J.  H.  Mentioned 329 

Cogswell,  William.  Mentioned 154 

Colbert,  W.  B. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Moore 333 

Mentioned 327 

Colby,  William  M.  Mentioned 165 

Coldwater  Bridge,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  June  18, 1863.  See  Mississippi,  North- 
western. Operations  in,  June  15-25,  1863.  Report  of  Moyers,  p.496. 
Coldwater  River,  Miss.  Skirmishes,  etc.,  on.  See  Mississippi,  Northwestern. 
Operations  in,  June  15-25,  1863. 

Cole,  Eli.  Mentioned 90 

Cole,  George  W.  Mentioned 11 

Cole,  John  D.  For  report  of  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign,  see  Samuel  R.  Edging- 
ton. 

Cole,  Nelson.  Mentioned 158 

Cole,  W.  N.  Mentioned 334 

Coleman,  David  C.  Mentioned 152,259,264,265 

Collierville,  Tenn.  Skirmish  at,  May  20,  1863.  Reports  of 

Loomis,  John  Mason 425 

McCulloch,  Robert 425 

Collins,  Elbert  M.  Mentioned 350,352 

Collins,  John  M.  Mentioned 498 

Collins,  Moses  N.  Mentioned 149 

Collins,  William  B.  Mentioned 156 

Commerce,  Miss.  Attack  on  transports  in  Mississippi  River,  near,  June 
17,  1863.  See  Mississippi,  Northwestern.  Operations  in,  June 
15-25,  1863.  • Report  of  Chalmers,  p.  501. 

Commercial,  Steamer.  Mentioned 501 

Compton,  H.  M.  Mentioned 98 

Comstock,  Cyrus  B. 

Mentioned 168,  178, 289, 319 

Report  of  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  19-July  4,  1863  168, 178 

Conduct  of  the  War.  See  reports  of  Sherman,  pp.  530,531,537,539. 

Confederate  Troops. 

Abstract  from  morning  report  of  sick  and  wounded  at  surrender  of  Vicks- 
burg, July  4,  1863 424 

Casualties.  Returns  of. 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863 82,99,112 

Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign,  July  5-25,  1863  654 

Milliken’s  Bend,  La.  Attack  on,  June  7,  1863 470 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19-July  4, 1863.  328, 369, 373, 378, 394, 411, 417 

Estimate  of  forces.  Spencer 540 

Mentioned. 

Engineers—  Companies  : Wintter’s,  330. 

Organization,  strength,  etc.,  of  troops  employed  in  the  defense  of  Vicks- 
burg   326-328 

For  Volunteers,  see  respective  States. 

Connell,  John.  Mentioned 44,55,151,602 

Conover,  Robert.  Mentioned 32, 35 

Conrad,  C.  A.  Mentioned 338, 340 

Conway,  J.  J.  Mentioned 329, 335, 352 

Cook,  Edward  J.  Mentioned 166, 300 


INDEX. 


729 


Page. 

Cook,  John.  Mentioned H 

Coon,  Datus E.  Report  of  expedition  to  Jackson,  Tenn.,  Jnly  12-15,  1863  ...  677 

Cooper,  B.  Mentioned 699 

Cooper,  Samuel.  Mentioned 384 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Adjutant  and  Inspector  General's  Office,  C.  S.  A. 

Cooper,  Stephen.  Mentioned 113,327,417 

Coopwood,  S.  R.  Mentioned 329 

Corby,  Joseph.  Mentioned 2'2 

Core,  . Mentioned 433 

Corinth,  Miss. 

Expedition  from.  See  Florence , Ala.  Expedition  from  Corinth , Miss.,  to, 

May  26-31,  1863. 

Skirmish  at  Smith’s  Bridge,  near.  See  Smith's  Bridge,  near  Corinth,  Miss. 
Skirmish  at,  June  11, 1863. 

Corkery,  William.  Mentioned HI 

Cornealy,  Christopher.  Mentioned 350 

Cornman,  Augustus  H.  Mentioned 

Cornwell,  Gabriel  E.  Mentioned 165,300 

Cornyn,  Florence  M. 

Mentioned 485, 486,488, 661, 662 

Report  of  action  at  Inka,Miss.,  July  7,  1863  663 

Cornyn,  J.  W.  Mentioned 260, 283 

Corput,  Max  Van  Den.  Mentioned 96, 100, 326,  355 

Corse,  John  M. 

Mentioned 154, 555, 627-629, 632, 639, 641, 644-647 

Reports  of  operations,  July  4-16,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign   648, 650 

Cosby,  George  B. 

Mentioned — - 526, 540, 555, 671, 6/2 

Reports  of  operations,  July  16-23,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign  660,661 

Cotten,  R.  N.  Mentioned 326 

Cotton,  J.  K.  P.  Mentioned 329 

Couper,  James  M.  Mentioned 69,70,330,335 

Couzens,  W.  H.  Mentioned 425 

Cowan,  John.  Mentioned 150,596 

Cowan  J.  J.  Mentioned 81,381 

Cowen,  Luther  H.  Mentioned 165 

Cox,  Robert  M.  Mentioned 272 

Cox,  W.  S.  Mentioned 699 

Cradlebaugh,  John.  Mentioned 13,21,150 

Cramer,  John  F.  Mentioned 132 

Crandall,  Frederick  M.  Mentioned 138 

Crane,  George  P.  Mentioned 355 

Crawford,  A.  F.  Mentioned 449 

Crawford,  Henry  P.  Mentioned - 300 

Creasman,  William  B. 

Mentioned 668,671 

Report  of  expedition  from  Vicksburg  to  Yazoo  City,  Miss.,  Jnly  12-21, 

1863  671 

Crebs,  John  M.  Mentioned 602 

Credit,  Charles.  Mentioned 498 

Crenshaw,  John  T.  Mentioned 329,416 

Crescent  City,  Steamer.  Mentioned  ... 290,306 


730 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Cresswell,  John  M.  Mentioned 160 

Crocker,  Marcellus  M.  Mentioned 6, 10, 42, 47, 60 

Crockett,  Le  Roy.  Mentioned 153 

Crooke,  William  D.  Mentioned 138,143,242 

Crooks,  Samuel.  Mentioned 277 

Groom,  S.  Mentioned 360 

Crosley,  George  W. 

Mentioned 291 

Report  of  operations,  July  12,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  604 

Crossland,  Ed.  Mentioned 82 

Crow,  William  C.  Mentioned 327,407,410 

Crozier,  R.  H.  Mentioned 93 

Crumit,  Charles  K.  Mentioned 640 

Culbeitson,  Jacob.  Mentioned 81 

Cumming,  Alfred. 

Correspondence  with  Carter  L.  Stevenson 348 

Mentioned  71, 

94, 96, 99, 101, 102, 104, 110, 123, 124, 324-326, 328, 329, 336, 342-346, 355, 412 

Report  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16,  1863  103 

Cummins,  John.  Mentioned 498 

Cummins,  William  B.  Mentioned 155 

Curell,  J.  R.  Mentioned 103,352 

Curly,  Thomas.  Mentioned 152 

Curran,  Jesse.  Mentioned 275 

Curry,  James  W.  Mentioned 272 

Curtin,  John  I.  Mentioned 149,557 

Curtis,  Samuel  R.  Mentioned _ 665 

Curtiss,  Frank  S.  Mentioned 270 

Curtiss,  William  E.  Mentioned 95,100,326,345 

Cutler.  H.  D.  B.  Mentioned  554 

Dana,  Charles  A.  Correspondence  with  War  Department,  U.  S i 47 

D’Antigue,  O.  Mentioned 329 

Danville,  Miss.  Scouts  from,  July  19,  1863.  Report  of  Grenville  M.  Dodge..  084 

Darling,  Jerome.  Mentioned 11 

Darnall,  William  W.  Mentioned 51,151,601 

Darrough,  William  M.  Mentioned 168 

Davidson,  Max.  T.  Mentioned 327 

Davidson,  Peter.  Mentioned 151 

Davidson,  William  A.  Mentioned 327 

Davis,  Caleb.  Mentioned 327 

Davis,  Guyon  I.  Mentioned 298 

Davis,  Hiram  J.  Mentioned - 166,282 

Davis,  James  P.  Mentioned 631 

Davis,  Jefferson. 

Correspondence  with  War  Department,  C.S „ 457, 465 

Mentioned 531 

Davis,  Lewis.  Mentioned 260 

Davis,  Oliver  S.  Mentioned 634 

Davis,  William  P.  Mentioned 6, 146, 155 

Dawes,  Ephraim  C.  Mentioned 640 

Dawson,  Mathew  M.  Mentioned 149,562,564 

Dawson,  William  E.  Mentioned 327 

Day,  David.  Mentioned 280 

Dayton,  James  H.  Mentioned 153,259,281,282 


INDEX. 


731 


Page. 

Deal,  George  W.  Mentioned 64 

Dean,  Benjamin  D.  Mentioned 157 

Dean,  Zachariah.  Mentioned ' 640, 642 

Debord,  R.  Mentioned 39.5 

De  Costa,  George  W.  Mentioned 430 

Dedrick, . Mentioned 30 

De  Golyer,  Samuel.  Mentioned 156, 168, 292 

De  Graw,  F.  M.  Mentioned 643 

De  Gress,  Jacob  C.  Mentioned 35 

DeHart,  R.  P.  Mentioned 640,643 

Deimling,  Francis  C.  Mentioned 6, 146, 157 

De  Kalb,  Baron,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 249,667-671 

Dengler,  Adolph.  Mentioned 155 

Denmark,  Term.  Skirmish  near.  See  Fort  Pillow,  Tenn.  Scout  from , August 
3,  1863. 

Denney,  Edward  D.  Mentioned 481 

Dennis,  Elias  S. 

Mentioned 158, 446, 509 

Report  of  operations  in  Northern  Louisiana,  June  3-July  10, 1863 446-448 

Denny,  Charles.  Mentioned 160,252 

Denver,  James  W.  Mentioned 433 

De  Saulles,  A.  B.  Mentioned 484 

Devereux,  J.  G.  Mentioned 399 

De  Veuve,  Henry.  Mentioned 79 

Diamond,  W.  W.  Mentioned 468, 469 

Dickerman,  G.  A.  Mentioned .. 469 

Dickerman,  Willard  A. 

Mentioned 154 

Report  of  operations,  July  4-18,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  637 

Dickinson,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 139 

Dickey,  Cyrus  E.  Mentioned...,,  298 

Dillon,  Henry.  Mentioned 157 

Dingley,  Fuller.  Mentioned 571 

Dismukes,  William  H.  Mentioned 117 

Doane,  George  S.  Mentioned 298 

Dobyns,  T.  J.  Mentioned 112 

Dockery,  Thomas  P. 

Mentioned 324, 325, 327-329 

Reports  of 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863  : 115 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations,  May  17-July  4, 1863,  including  the  siege  of  420 

Dodds,  D.  A.  Mentioned 699 

Dodge,  Grenville  M. 

Correspondence  with  August  Mersy 475 

Mentioned 474, 479, 486, 488 

Reports  of 

Bolivar,  Tenn.  Skirmish  at,  July  10,  1863 666 

Danville,  Miss.  Scouts  from,  July  19,  1863 684 

Iuka,  Miss.  Action  at,  July  7,  1863  662 

Dolan,  Michael.  Mentioned 62 

Dollins,  James  J.  Mentioned 156,165 

Dolson,  John.  Mentioned 139,143 

Donehue,  James.  Mentioned 272 

Donelson,  Fort.  See  Port  Donelson. 


732 


INDEX. 


Pago. 

Donnellan,  George.  Mentioned 69,73,329-331,335 

Dorchester,  William  H.  Mentioned 071 

Dornblaser,  Benjamin. 

Mentioned 154,606 

Report  of  operations,  May  25,  1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss. ..  291 

Dot,  Steamer.  Mentioned 69 

Douglass,  Ora  B.  Mentioned 275 

Dowdell,  J.  F. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Moore 383 

Mentioned ' 327 

Downey,  F.  M.  Mentioned 54 

Dozier,  A.  M.  Mentioned 326 

Draughon,  James  W.  Mentioned 327,404 

Drennin,  James.  Mentioned 699 

Driscoll,  Daniel.  Mentioned 157 

Drish,  James  F.  Report  of  skirmish  at  Bolivar,  Tenn.,  July  10, 1863 666 

Dugan,  William  M.  Mentioned 623,627 

Dugger,  James  A.  Mentioned 550,630,632,648 

Dulin,  R.  S.  Mentioned 7 657 

Duncan,  John.  Mentioned 623 

Duncan,  N.  E.  Mentioned 624 

Duncan,  W.  J.  Mentioned 350,352 

Dunican,  Patrick.  Mentioned 481 

Dunlap,  Cornelius  W. 

Mentioned 141, 151, 165, 241 

Report  of  engagement  at  Big  Black  River  Bridge,  Miss.,  May  17,  1863 142 

Dunlop,  I.  L.  Mentioned 82 

Dunning,  S.  W.  Mentioned 208 

Dunton,  W.  W.  Mentioned 540 

Durbin,  Greene.  Mentioned 211 

Durell,  George  W.  Mentioued 149 

Dye,  William  McE.  Mentioned 158 

Dyckman,  Barney  H.  Mentioned 673,675 

Dyer,  C.  H.  Mentioned 610 

Dyson,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 99 

Eakin,  William  L.  Mentioned 107, 326 

Earl,  Seth  C.  Mentioned 154, 523, 550, 603, 604 

Earle,  J.  H.  Mentioned 470 

Earle,  R.  G.  Mentioned 483 

Easterling,  W.  K.  Mentioned 404 

Eaton,  Charles  G.  Mentioned 153 

Eaton,  William  W.  Mentioned 677 

Ector,  M.  D.  Mentioned 540 

Eddy,  Henry  G.  Mentioned 154 

Eddy,  Norman.  Mentioned 157,311 

Eder,  Daniel.  Mentioned 39 

Edgar,  W.  P.  Mentioned 664 

Edgington,  Samuel  R. 

Mentioned 153, 624 

Report  of  operations,  July  4-25,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign  625 

Edwards,  John.  Report  of  operations,  July  11-14,  1863,  during  the  Jackson, 

Miss.,  Campaign 559 

Edwards,  Nelson  W.  Mentioned 306 


INDEX 


733 


Page. 

Edwards,  W.  T.  Mentioned 672 

Edwards  Station,  Miss. 

Skirmish  at. 

June  10,  1863* 4 

July  1,  1863.  See  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  Mag  19 -July  4,  1863.  Re- 
port of  Osterhaus,  p.-227. 

Skirmishes  near. 

May  15,  1863.  See  Champion's  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of , May  16,  1863.  Re- 
port of  Osterhaus,  p.  12. 

May  31,  1863.  See  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  Id- July  4,  1863. 

Report  of  Osterhaus,  p.  214. 

June  6,  1863.  See  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19-July  4,  1863.  Re- 
port of  Osterhaus,  p.  215. 

Eggart,  George.  Mentioned 166,252 

Eglin,  John  F.  Mentioned 55 

E.  J.  Gay,  Steamer.  Mentioned 668 

Eldridge,  Hamilton  N. 

Mentioned 152, 257, 265, 270 

Report  of  operations,  May  17-28,  1863,  against  Vicksburg,  Miss 274 

Ellet,  Alfred  W. 

Mentioned 432, 445, 450, 451, 454, 507, 517 

Report  of  skirmish  near  Austin,  Miss.,  May  24,  1863 431 

Elliott,  Isaac  H.  Mentioned 390,612,613 

Elliott,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 35 

Elliott,  William.  Mentioned 103,352 

Ellis,  E.  Mentioned 99 

Ellis,  Jesse.  Mentioned 239 

Ellis,  Powhatan,  jr.  Mentioned 80,81 

Ellison,  James  C.  Mentioned 498 

Ellisville,  Miss.  Skirmish  at  Rocky  Creek,  near,  June  25,  1863.  See  Brook- 
haven,  Miss.  Union  raid  on,  June  23-26,  1863.  Report  of  Wilson , 
p.  514. 

Emanuel,  T.  K.  Mentioned 329 

Engelmann,  Adolph. 

Mentioned 155 

Report  of  expedition  from  Bolivar,  Tenn.,  May  26-29,  1863 432 

Ennis,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 645,651,652 

Enoch,  John.  Mentioned 270 

Era,  Golden,  Steamer.  Mentioned 507 

Erwin,  Eugene.  Mentioned 329,368,372,373,376,413-415 

Erwin,  Hugh.  Mentioned 54 

Estee,  Stephen.  Mentioned 166 

Evans,  H.  Mentioned 98 

Evans,  Morgan  V.  Mentioned 166 

Evans,  N.  G.  Mentioned  ..  657,658 

Everett,  William  B.  Mentioned 627 

Every,  William.  Mentioned 634 

Ewing,  Charles.  Mentioned 152,256,260,263,264 

Ewing,  Hugh. 

Mentioned 153, 163, 187-189, 191, 192, 255, 257-260, 264, 268, 269, 273, 532, 549 

Report  of  operations,  May  9-27, 1863,  against  Vicksburg,  Miss 281 

Ewing,  John  D.  Mentioned 130 

Falkner,  W.  C.  Mentioned 482,684 


* No  circumstantial  reports  on  file, 


734 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Fardin,  Joseph.  Mentioned 634 

Fargo,  J.  F. . Steamer.  Mentioned 668 

Farmer,  William  L.  Mentioned 165 

Far  nail,  J ames.  Mentioned 516, 517, 552, 553 

Farrar,  Bernard  G.  Mentioned 152, 548 

Faulkner,  W.  W.  Mentioned 434 

Fearn,  T.  C.  Mentioned 399 

Featherston,  Winfield  S. 

Mentioned - 71,75-79,81,84,85,93,102,121,540 


Report  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16,  1863. 


90 

Fenton,  Frank  B.  Mentioned 135, 139, 151 

Ferguson,  S.  W.  Mentioned 366,441,443 

Ferguson,  Willis  C'.  Mentioned 166 

Feriner,  Peter.  Mentioned 329 

Ferrero,  Edward. 

Mentioned 149, 543, 556,  567-570, 572, 573, 586 

Report  of  operations,  July  16-17,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign  572 

Ferris,  Joel.  Mentioned 11,45 

Fifer,  George  H.  Mentioned 610 

Finch,  Absalom.  Mentioned 212 

Finley,  David.  Mentioned 320 

Finley,  John  H.  Mentioned 21,166 

Fisher,  Cyrus  W. 

Mentioned 6,152,265,270,271 

Report  of  operations,  May  6-24,  1863,  against  Vicksburg,  Miss 275 

Fisher,  Frank.  Mentioned 272 

Fisher,  William  A.  Mentioned 421 

Fisk,  Archie  C.  Mentioned 258,260,278,283 

Fisk,  Leander  B.  Mentioned 167 

Flanagan,  J.  M.  Mentioned . 113 

Fleitas,  J.  B.  Mentioned 359 

Fletcher,  Thomas  C.  Mentioned 152 

Florence,  Ala.  Expedition  from  Corinth,  Miss.,  to,  May  26-31,  1863  * 4 

Florence,  Louis.  Mentioned 329,406 

Florida  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 1st,  3d,  654. 

Flory,  Aaron  M.  Mentioned 51 

Floyd,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 503 

Fly,  G.  W.  L.  Mentioned 387, 389, 393 

Flynn,  William  O.  Mentioned 330,334,335,340 

Fonda,  J ohn  G. 

Mentioned 6, 13, 21, 128, 150, 545, 573, 576, 579, 586 

Reports  of 

Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  Operations,  July  17-23, 1863,  during  the..  588 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations,  May  16-23,  1863,  against 233 

Forbes,  Henry  C.  Mentioned 154 

Force,  Manning  F. 

Mentioned 165 

Report  of  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  19-July  4,  1863.. 295 

Ford,  Martin.  Mentioned 277 

Ford,  William.  Mentioned ’. 665 

Forest  Queen,  Steamer.  Mentioned 279 


* No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


INDEX. 


735 

Pago. 


Forked  Deer  River,  Tenn.  Skirmishes  on. 

July  13,  1863.  See  Jackson,  Tenn.  Skirmish  at,  July  13,  1863. 

July  15,  1863.  Report  of  Fielding  Hurst 682 

Forney,  John  H. 

Correspondence  with 

Ball,  Charles  P 370 

Hubert,  Louis 374 

Moore,  John  C 360,383 

Pemberton,  John  C 371,373,374,381 

Mentioned 324-326, 

328-330,  336, 338,  357,  36(J,  370,  378, 383,  394, 397,  398, 400,  412,  420,  424 
Reports  of  operations,  May  4-July  4,  1863,  including  the  siege  of  Vicks- 
burg, Miss 359-365 

Forrest,  J.  A.  Mentioned 666,678,682 

Forrest,  Nathan  B.  Mentioned 222,223 

Fort  Donelson,  Tenn.  Skirmish  near,  July  29,  1863  * 5 

Fort  Heiman,  Ky.  Scout  from,  into  Tennessee,  May  26-June  1,  1863 1 4 

Fort  Hindman,  Ark.  See  Arkansas  Post,  Ark. 

Fort  Pillow,  Tenn.  Scout  from,  August  3,  1863.  Reports  of 

Asboth,  Alexander 687 

Wo.fe,  E.  H 687 

Foster,  Dr.  Mentioned 410 

Foster,  Lieutenaut.  Mentioned 215, 216 

Foster,  Charles.  Reports  of 

Messinger’s  Ferry,  Big  Black  River,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  June  29,  1863 304 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19-July  4,  1863 304 

Foster,  C.  J.  Mentioned 410 

Foster,  H.  C.  Mentioned 294 

Foster,  Jacob  T.  Mentioned 16, 29, 30, 150 

Foster,  John  S.  Mentioned 9, 155 

Foster,  Watson.  Mentioned 699 

Fourteen-Mile  Creek,  Miss.  Skirmishes  at. 


May  12,  1863.  See  Black  River  Bridge,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  17,  1863. 

Report  of  Trawler,  p.  133.  See  also  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle 
of,  May  16,  1863.  Reports  of 

Dockery,  Thomas  P.  Hovey,  Alvin  P.  Osterbaus,  Peter  J. 

Gates,  Elijah.  Moore,  Frederick  W. 


Also  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19-July  4,  1863.  Report  of  Woods,  p. 

250.  Also  report  of  McClernand,  Part  I,  p.  160. 

May  13,  1863.  See  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863.  Report 
of  Hovey,  p.  40. 

Foust,  Joseph.  Mentioned 158 

Fowler,  Alexander. 

Mentioned 154, 640 

Report  of  operations,  July  4-17,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign   642 

Fox,  Dorus  M.  Mentioned 149 

Fox,  Jacob  Mentioned • 481 

Francis,  John  C.  Mentioned 326,352 

Fraude,  Max.  Mentioned 192 


* For  report,  see  Vol.  XXIII,  Part  I,  p.  841. 
tXo  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


736 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Freeman,  Henry  C. 

Mentioned 174, 176, 178, 289 

Report  of  operations,  May  26-July  4,  1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg, 

Miss 193 

Freeman,  William  L.  Mentioned 139 

French,  A.  H.  Mentioned 483 

French,  Celestien  M.  Mentioned 160 

French,  Samuel  G.  Mentioned 534,540 

Friedley,  George  W.  Mentioned 35 

Froman,  A.  Mentioned 259,265 

Frost,  G.  H.  Mentioned 399 

Fullerton,  Hugh. 

Mentioned 534, 545, 576, 580, 581, 583, 588, 589, 661 

Reports  of  operations,  July  6-25,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign  577,578 

Fullyard,  James.  Mentioned 588 

Fulton,  Robert  A.  Mentioned 640 

Funke,  Otto.  Mentioned 498,667 

Gabriel,  Peter  N.  Mentioned 280 

Gaddis,  B.  F.  Mentioned 329 

Gaines,  R.  H.  G.  Mentioned 116,117 

Gaines’  Landing,  Ark.  Skirmish  near,  June  28,  1863.  See  Greenville , Miss.  ' 
Expedition  from  Snyder’s  Bluff  to,  June  25-July  1,  1863. 

Galbraith,  Ashley  T.  Mentioned 645, 648 

Gallagher,  Andrew  P.  Mentioned l.r,0 

Gammell,  A.  F.  Mentioned 329,393 

Gant,  A.  F.  Mentioned 434 

Gapin,  Michael.  Mentioned 550 

Garber,  Michael  C.  Mentioned 211 

Gardner,  John.  Mentioned 277 

Gardner,  Joshua.  Mentioned 167 

Garland,  Hugh  A.  Mentioned 113,417 

Garrard,  Theophilus  T.  Mentioned 7, 13-16, 23-25, 29, 129, 132 

Garrard,  W.  W.  Mentioned 103 

Garrett,  John  A.  Mentioned 155 

Garrott,  Isham  W.  Mentioned 95,101,103,329,345,350,351,355 

Garver,  Martin  C.  Mentioned 498 

Gates,  Elijah. 

Mentioned - 114, 115, 128 

Reports  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16,  1863 118,120 

Gates,  Erastus.  Mentioned 56 

Gause,  W.  R.  Mentioned 11^3,  414,  415 

Gay,  E.  J,,  Steamer.  Mentioned 668 

Gay.  J ames.  Mentioned 272 

Geddes,  Alexander  W.  Mentioned — H 

Geddes,  James  L. 

Mentioned 153,621-623 

Reports  of 

Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  Operations,  July  18-20,  1863,  during  the..  624 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations,  May  6-23,  1863,  against 288 

General  Price,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 31, 235 

George,  J.  Z. 

Mentioned - 489-491,501,502 

Report  of  operations  in  Northwestern  Mississippi,  June  15-25,  1863 503 


INDEX. 


737 


. Tage. 

Georgia  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light— Batteries : Cherokee,  95,  100,  326,  355. 

Infantry — Regiments : 25th,  27th,  541;  34th,  95,  102,104-106,  326;  36th, 

94, 104, 105, 326 ; 39th,  95, 104-106, 326,  329  ; 40th,  95, 100, 326, 342;  41st, 

95, 100, 326 ; 42d,  95, 96, 99,  100, 326, 342 ; 43d,  95, 100, 326 ; 47th,  654  ; 

52d,  95, 100,  326,  342;  56th,  94, 105-107,  120, 326 ; 57th,  94, 105, 106, 120, 


326, 345. 

Gerhardt,  Joseph.  Mentioned . 149,558,573 

Germantown,  Tenn. 

Capture  of  Union  pickets  near,  July  18,  1853.  Report  of  Phineas  Pease. ..  684 

Scouts  from. 

July  8,  1863.  Report  of  La  Fayette  McCrillis 666 

July  16-20,  1863.  Report  of  La  Fayette  McCrillis 682 

Geschwind,  Nicholas.  Mentioned „ 260,264,265 

Gholson,  S.  J.  Mentioned 541 

Giesy,  Henry  H.  Mentioned 651 

Gifford,  Ira  R.  Mentioned 493,494 

Gilbert,  F.  T.  Mentioned 663,665 

Gill,  Charles  R.  Mentioned 42, 44, 51, 151 

Gillespie,  G.  L.  Mentioned 346 

Gillespie,  James  W.  Mentioned 107,109,326,356 

Gillett,  Almerin.  Mentioned 322 

Gillette,  Frank  C.  Mentioned 270 

Gillmore,  Robert  A.  Report  of  operations,  July  4-16,  1863,  during  the  Jack- 

son,  Miss.,  Campaign 631 

Gillooly,  F.  Mentioned 330,335 

Gilmore,  James  Mentioned 565 

Ginder,  H.  Mentioned 329  -332,335 

Girault,  J.  F.  Mentioned 399 

Gist,  S.  R. 

Correspondence  with 

Adams,  John 426 

Johnston,  Joseph  E ' 426 

Mentioned 540,541 

Glasgow,  Samuel  L.  Mentioned 137, 138, 151, 448 

Glass,  John  C.  Mentioned... 272 

Glenn,  Jesse  A.  Mentioned 95,105 

Gloster,  A.  W.  Mentioned 329  335 

Goeble,  William  R.  Mentioned 334 

Golden  Era,  Steamer.  Mentioned 507 

Gomez,  F.  Mentioned 329,371 

Goodman.  W.  A.  Mentioned 501 

Goodrich’s  Landing,  La.  Attack  on,  June  30,  1863.  See  Louisiana , Northern. 
Operations  in,  June  3-July  10,  1863.  Report  of  Reid,  p.  450. 

Goodspeed,  Arza  M.  Mentioned 160 

Goodwin,  Edward. 

Mentioned 77, 82, 86 

Report  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16,  1863 87 

Goodwin,  L.  H.  Mentioned 45,  56 

Gorgas,  Adam  B.  Mentioned 152 

Gorman  [?].  Mentioned 517 

Gorsuch,  Joseph  B.  Mentioned 577 

Graham  [?].  Mentioned 517 

Graham,  Harvey.  Men tioned 142, 151, 243 

47  R 11— VOL  XXIY}  PT  II 


738 


INDEX. 


Grand  Gulf,  Miss.  Page> 

* Bombardment  of,  and  passage  of  the  batteries,  April  29,  18G3.  See  Cham- 
pion’s Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863.  Report  of  Burlridge, 
p.  30.  See  also  Part  I,  p.  573. 

Statement  of  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  captured  at 418 

Grand  Junction,  Tenn.  Skirmish  at,  July  30,  1863“ 5 

Grandpre,  P . Mentioned . ^ 34Q 

Grant,  U.  S. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant-GeneraFs  Office,  U.  S.  A 446 

Army  Headquarters ggg 

Hurlbut,  Stephen  A g63 

McClernand,  John  A 4g  439 

Ord,  Edward  O.  C „ ’^09 

Sherman,  William  T 251  574 

Mentioned 6, 12,  42, 41, 47, 62, 66, 118, 128, 139, 146, 148, 165, 168, *170, 192,197, 

199, 210-212, 226, 236, 239, 244, 245, 247,  255, 256, 261, 268, 324, 310,  343, 346, 
<9  352, 446,  451,  460, 461,  466,  502, 518,  527, 533, 534, 537,  557, 562,  667, 669,  681 

Grantham,  M.  M.  Mentioned 32g 

Grant’s  Ferry,  Miss.  Skirmish  on  Pearl  River,  at,  July  16,  1863.  See  Jack- 
son,  Miss..  Campaign,  July  5-25,  1863.  Reports  of 
Bussey,  Cyrus.  Cosby,  George  B.  Woods,  Charles  B. 

Graves,  Amos  L.  Mentioned 288 

Graves,  Frank.  Mentioned 449  5^ 

Graves,  L.  M.  Mentioned 329  362 

Graves,  Rice  E.  Mentioned 655  658 

Graves,  William  H.  Mentioned ,455 

Gray,  William.  Mentioned 4gg 

Grayson,  J.  B.  Mentioned • 344  345 

Greathouse,  Lucien. 

Mentioned 154,645,650 

Report  of  operations,  July  4-16,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign  646 

Greaves,  D.  Mentioned 242 

Green,  J ames  U.  Mentioned g87 

Green,  Martin  E. 

Correspondence  with 

Bowen,  John  S 422 

Pemberton,  John  C 423 


Mentioned 


72, 76, 83, 


88,  89, 95-97, 113, 116-119,  329, 332, 334, 336,  360,  367,  389, 411-413,  420,  421 
Report  of  operations,  May  30-June  5,  1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg, 

Miss 449 

Green,  Thomas  B.  Mentioned 42i 

Greene,  Colton.  Report  of  operations  on  the  Mississippi  River,  near  Mem- 
phis, Tenn.,  June  17-18,  1863  507 

Greene,  James  H.  Report  of  expedition  from  Haynes’  Bluff  to  Mechanics- 

burg,  Miss.,  and  skirmishes,  May  26- June  4,  1863  438 

Greene,  Joseph  E.  Mentioned . 38 

Greene,  William  A.  Mentioned 51}  I5ij  g01 

Greenville,  Miss. 

Expedition  from  Snyder’s  Bluff  to,  June  25-July  1,  1863.  Report  of  Samuel 

J.  Nasmith 546 

Skirmish  near  Island  No.  82,  above.  See  Island  No.  82,  alcove  Greenville, 

Miss.  Skirmish  near,  May  18,  1863. 


*No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


INDEX. 


739 


Page. 

Greenwood,  Miss.  Attack  on  Union  gunboats,  near,  May  27,  1863.  Report  of 

Isaac  N.  Brown 443 

Gregg,  E.  P.  Mentioned 467-469 

Gregg,  John.  Mentioned  540 

Gregg,  N.  Mentioned 32 

Gregory,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 665 

Grenada,  Miss.  Expeditions  from  Big  Black  River,  Miss.,  and  La  Grange, 

Tenn.,  to,  Aug.  10-23,  1863  * 5 

Gresham,  Walter  Q.  Mentioned 154, 289, 522, 523, 607, 608 

Grier,  David  P.  Mentioned i 150,596 

Grierson,  Benjamin  H.  Mentioned 523,524,529 

Griffin,  F.  M.  Mentioned 683 

Griffin,  S.  H.  Mentioned 329,399,404 

Griffin,  Simon  G. 

Mentioned 149, 543, 567, 568 

Report  of  operations,  July  4-14,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign  569 

Griffith,  Joseph  E.  Mentioned 142,243 

Griffiths,  Henry  H.  Mentioned 152 

Griggs,  Chauncey  W.  Mentioned 155 

Grill,  John  F.  Mentioned 600,601 

Groce,  John  H.  Mentioned 257,260,282 

Guion,  Louis.  Mentioned 410 

Gumbart,  George  C.  Mentioned 155 

Gunsaullus,  Daniel.  Mentioned 238 

Guppey,  Joshua  J. 

Mentioned 35, 128, 146, 150 

Report  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16,  1863,  including  opera- 
tions May  1-22 38 

Guyton,  C.  S.  Mentioned 107,345 

Hackett,  Ephraim  L.  Mentioned 21,29,585 

Hains,  Peter  C. 

Mentioned , 173-176, 178, 180 

Report  of  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  19- July  4,  1863  180 

Hairston,  Sergeant.  Mentioned 355 

Hall, . Mentioned 212 

Hall,  Cyrus. 

Mentioned 154, 547, 598, 599, 608 

Report  of  operations,  July  5-16,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign  606 

Hall,  Edward  W.  Mentioned 550 

Hall,  Hiram  W. 

Mentioned 154 

Report  of  operations,  July  4-12,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign   636 

Hall,  William. 

Mentioned 156, 164, 292 

Report  of  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  19-July  4,  1863  301 

Hall,  Winchester.  Mentioned 398,406 

Halleck,  Henry  W.  Mentioned 446,488 

For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  Army  Headquarters. 

Halsey,  Isaac  B.  Mentioned .* 260,265 

Hamer,  R.  A.  Mentioned 272 


*No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


740 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Hamilton,  P.  Mentioned 404 

Hammack,  Zebedee.  Mentioned 165 

Hammond,  J.  H. 

Mentioned 237, 551, 552, 554 

Report  of  affair  on  Big  Black  River,  at  Birdsong  Ferry,  Miss.,  June  18, 

1863  508 

Hampton,  B.  W.  Mentioned 469,  470 

Hancock,  Bradford.  Mentioned 45,51 

Handley,  James  M.  Mentioned 102, 103 

Haney,  Richard.  Mentioned 272,273 

Hankinson’s  Ferry,  Big  Black  River,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  May  3, 1863.  See 
Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863.  Report  of  Tour- 
tellotte,  p.  60.  See  also  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19 -July 
4,  1863.  Report  of  Tresilian,  p.  203.  Also  report  of  Grant,  Part 
I,  p.  49. 

Hanks,  Romulus  L.  Report  of  skirmish  at  Messinger’s  Ferry,  Big  Black 

River,  Miss.,  July  3,  1863  308 

Harden,  Edward  L.  Statement  of  skirmish  at  Jackson,  Tenn.,  July  13,  1863.  680 

Hardy,  Gusten  F.  Mentioned 166 

Hardy,  J.  Mentioned 334 

Hare,  M.  de  L.  Mentioned 699 

Hargrave,  W.  B.  Mentioned 29 

Harper,  James  R.  Mentioned 373 

Harper,  Joseph  W.  Mentioned 494 

Harper,  William  H.  Mentioned 602 

Harris,  . Mentioned 510 

Harris,  Charles  L.  Mentioned 133,136-138,140,141,151 

Harris,  George.  Mentioned 329 

Harris,  John  B.  Mentioned 154 

Harris,  John  V.  Mentioned 327, 365, 366, 397, 402 

Harris,  S.  D.  Mentioned  404 

Harris,  Skidmore.  Mentioned 95,98-100 

Harris,  Thomas.  Mentioned 288 

Harrison,  Isaac  F.  Mentioned 457, 458, 460, 686 

Harrison,  Jesse  M.  Mentioned 138,143,242 

Harrison,  Richard.  Mentioned 326 

Harrison,  Thomas.  Mentioned 404 

Harrod,  B.  M.  Mentioned 387, 399 

Hart,  George.  Mentioned 637 

Hart,  Henry.  Mentioned 272 

Hart,  Levi  W.  Mentioned 153 

Hartranft,  John  F.  Mentioned 149 

Hartsook,  Joseph.  Mentioned 272 

Harvey, . Mentioned 92 

Haseltine,  A.  E.  Mentioned 480 

Hassendeubel,  Francis.  Mentioned 152, 168 

Kassler,  Sebaldus.  Mentioned 160 

Hatch,  Edward. 

Mentioned 429, 432, 488, 491-494, 497, 676, 678-680 

Reports  of 

Jackson,  Tenn.  Expedition  to,  July  12-15,  1863  673 

La  Grange,  Tenn.  Scouts  from,  May  19,  1863 145 

Northwestern  Mississippi.  Operations  in,  June  15-25,  1863  495 

Salem,  Tenn.  Skirmish  at,  May  20,  1863  424 


INDEX. 


741 


Pa<*o 

Hatch,  Edward— Continued. 

Reports  of 

Senatobia,  Miss. 

Expedition  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to,  May  21-26,  1863  427 

Skirmish  near,  May  23,  1863 427 

Hatch,  Joseph  T.  Mentioned 327,410 

Hatchie  River,  Tenn.  Scout  from  Memphis  to  the,  June  16,  1863* 4 

Hawes,  J.  M. 

Mentioned 448, 459, 460, 462, 464, 465 

Report  of  operations  in  Northern  Louisiana,  June  3-July  10,  1863  471 

Hawhe,  Arthur  J.  Mentioned 21, 23, 150, 586, 588 

Hayes,  Thomas.  Mentioned 106  282 

Haynes’  Bluff,  Miss. 

Capture  of,  May  18,  1863* 3 

Expedition  from,  to  Satartia  and  Mechanicsburg,  Miss.,  June  2-8,  1863  *..  4 

Skirmish  at,  May  23,  1863  * 3 

Haynes,  L.  B.  Mentioned * 352 

Hayward,  G.  A.  Mentioned 98 

Head,  William  P.  Mentioned 470 

Headington,  Emmett.  Mentioned 172, 260, 283 

Jleath,  Albert. 

Mentioned 154 

Report  of  operations,  July  4-16,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign  633 

Heaton,  Townsend.  Mentioned 699 

Hebert,  Louis. 

Correspondence  with  John  H.  Forney 374 

Mentioned 324-326, 328, 329, 336, 359-367, 369, 370, 373, 406, 407, 414, 415 

Reports  of  operations,  May  17-July  4,  1863,  including  the  siege  of  Ticks-- 

burg,  Miss 370, 371, 373, 374, 378 

Hebert,  Paul  O.  Mentioned 461  462 

Hedges,  Charles  A Mentioned 481 

Hedrick,  John  M. 

Mentioned 395 

Report  of  operations,  July  3-4,  1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss..  307 

Heffernan,  Cornelius.  Mentioned... 327 

Heffernan,  James  J.  Mentioned 270  272 

Heiman,  Fort.  See  Fort  Heiman. 

Helena,  Ark.  Expedition  from.  See  Napoleon,  Ark.  Expedition  from  Helena 
to,  Map  23  to  — , 1863. 

Helena  Road,  Miss.  Skirmish  on  the,  June  21,  1863.  See  Mississippi , North- 
western. Operations  in,  June  15-25,  1863.  lleports  of 
Hatch,  Edward.  Moyers,  Gilbert, 

Helm,  B.  H.  Mentioned 654 

Hemler,  James  H.  Mentioned 645  648 

Hemstreet,  George  W.  Mentioned 551 

Hencke,  Theodore  W.  Mentioned 687 

Henderson,  R.  J.  Mentioned 95, 96, 100, 326 

Henderson,  S.  R.  Mentioned 54 

Henderson,  Thomas.  Mentioned 504 

Hennet,  Steamer.  Mentioned 668 

Henry,  John.  Mentioned 485-487,499-501 

Henry,  Robert  S.  Mentioned 329,393 


No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


742 


INDEX. 


Hernando,  Miss. 

Action  on  the  Cold  water,  near,  June  19, 1863.  See  Mississippi,  Northwestern. 
Operations  in,  June  15-25,  1863.  Beports  of 
Chalmers,  James  li.  Hurlbut,  Stephen  A.  Moore,  Francis  T. 

Expedition  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  to,  May  23-24,  1863.  Report  of  Thomas 

Stephens 429 

Expedition  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  toward,  May  26, 1863.  Report  of  George 

N.  Richmond . 432 

Scout  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  toward. 

May  27,  1863.  Report  of  John  T.  Price 443 

May  28,  1863.  Report  of  John  J.  Joslyn 444 

Herren,  Gadi.  Mentioned 660 

Herrick,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 329,377 

Herrick,  John  E.  Mentioned 497 

Herrick,  T.  P.  Mentioned . 663,665 

Herron,  Francis  J. 

Mentioned 158, 168, 169, 174-176, 178, 209, 320, 322,  324, 325, 527, 529, 670 

Reports  of 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations,  June  22-July  4,  1863,  during  the  siege 

of 317,318 

Yazoo  City,  Miss.  Expedition  from  Vicksburg  to,  July  12-21,  1863. ..  667 

Hewitt,  Thomas  L.  Mentioned 499 

Hickenlooper,  Andrew. 

Mentioned 173,204,205,207,293 

Report  of  operations,  April  17-July  4,  1863,  against  Vicksburg,  Miss 197 

Hicks,  Stephen  G. 

Mentioned 154, 544, 63Q 

Report  of  operations,  July  4-17,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign  635 

Higgins,  Edward. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Pemberton 340 

Mentioned 327, 328, 330, 341, 365 

Report  of  operations,  May  18-July  4,  1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg, 

Miss 336 

Higgins,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned... 613 

Higley,  John  H. 

Correspondence  with  John  C.  Moore 383 

Mentioned 327 

Hildt,  George  H.  Mentioned 153,259,282 

Hill,  Courier.  Mentioned 352 

Hill,  Edgar  P.  Mentioned 39 

Hill,  Eugene.  Mentioned 410 

Hill,  Levi.  Mentioned 160,272 

Hill,  Sylvester  G. 

Mentioned 153,624' 

Report  of  operations,  July  4-25,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign   627 

Hillis,  David  B. 

Mentioned 6,146,157 

Report  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16,  1863. 63 

Hillman,  W.  Mentioned 540 

Hill’s  Plantation,  near  Bear  Creek,  Miss.  Action  at,  June  22, 1863* 4 

Hilton,  Amos  E.  Mentioned 260,265 

Hinchey,  Patrick.  Mentioned 481 


* No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


INDEX. 


743 

Tago. 


i 

Hindman,  Port.  See  Fort  Hindman. 

Hipp,  Charles. 

Mentioned 153,260,232-284 

Report  of  operations,  May  19-22. 1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.  283 

Hipsher,  Ezra.  Mentioned 230 

Hoadley,  F.  W.  Mentioned 337, 339 

Hobart,  Edward.  Mentioned 399 

Hobbs,  Washington.  Mentioned... 99 

Hodo,  M.  D.  L.  Mentioned 329 

Hoeppner,  Arnold.  Mentioned . 174,178,319 

Hoering,  George  H.  Mentioned 434 

Hoey,  JohnE.  Mentioned  672 

Hoffmann,  Louis.  Mentioned 152 

Hogane,  James  T.  Mentioned 330,335 

Koge,  George  B.  Mentioned 152,259,264 

Hogg,  W.  N.  Mentioned 329 

Hogue,  J.  Mentioned  357, 358 

Holcroft,  James  K.  Mentioned . 587 

Holland,  O.  S.  Mentioned 326 

Holly  Springs,  Miss.  Skirmishes  near,  June  16-17,  1863.  See  Mississippi, 
Northwestern.  Operations  in,  June  15-25, 1863.  Reports  of 
George,  J.  Z.  Mizner,  John  K.  Moyers,  Gilbert. 

Hatch,  Edward. 


Holmes,  George  W.  Mentioned * 628, 629, 615, 652 

Holmes,  Samuel  A.  Mentioned 6, 10,  44, 47, 50, 60, 146, 157, 165 

Holmes,  Theophilus  H.  Mentioned 523 

Holt,  H.  C.  Mentioned 483 

Hooker,  C.B.  Mentioned . 400 

Hoover,  John  S.  Mentioned 208 

Hopkins,  Edward  R.  Mentioned 178 

Horney,  Leonidas.  Mentioned 11 

Horn  Lake  Creek,  Tenn.  Skirmish  on,  May  18,  1863.  Report  of  Arthur  M. 

Sherman 144 

Horton,  Charles  C.  Mentioned 678 

Hough,  Daniel  E.  Mentioned 130, 139 

House,  J.  T.  Mentioned 329 

Houston,  Adjutant.  Mentioned * 103 

Houston,  Leonard  B. 

Mentioned . . 138,617 

Report  of  operations,  July  5-24,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign  615 

Hovey,  Alvin  P. 

Mentioned 8, 12-15, 

31, 43,  47-50, 52,  54-56,  58, 61,  65, 66, 134, 151,  168, 169, 174, 181-186, 193, 
208,  211,  215,  255,  256,  535,  546,  547,  574-576, 535, 600-603, 606, 608, 610 


Reports  of 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863,  including  operations, 


May  2-20  40, 46 

Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  Operations,  July  5-23,  1863,  during  the  ...  597 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations,  May20-July  5,  1863,  during  the  siege  of  240 

Howard,  Henry  H.  Mentioned 130, 138, 143 

Hubbard,  George  C.  Mentioned .. 86,88 

Hubbard,  James  M.  Mentioned 431,516 

Hubbard,  Lucius  F. 

Mentioned .„ 146,153 

Report  of  operations  in  Northern  Louisiana,  June  3~July  10, 1863...  ......  452 


744 


INDEX. 


Hubbell,  F.  L.  Mentioned 110^U2 

Hudson,  J ames  E.  Mentioned * 551 

Hudson,  J.  G.  Mentioned ' 4y5  4y? 

Hudsonviile,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  J .me  21,  1833.  See  Mississippi,  Northwestern. 

Operations  in,  June  15-25,  1863.  Reports  of 
Chalmers,  James  R.  George,  J.  Z.  Meek,  Bazil  D. 

Huff,  Sanford  W.  Mentioned 024 

Hughes,  Henry.  Mentioned 

Hughes,  Samuel  T.  Mentioned 47g  ^ 

Hulsey,  William  H.  Mention  ed ***..*.'.*.*.* * ’ 100 

Humphrey,  Daniel.  Mentioned ..*."."****  149 

Humphrey,  John  K.  Mentioned ” ’ 675  678 

Humphrey,  Thomas  W. 

Correspondence  with  Thomas  E.  G.  Ransom 300 

Mentioned 156,  w 29g  30Q 

Report  of  operations,  May  19-Juno  12,  1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburo- 

OOQ 

Humphrey,  William. 

Mentioned «Q  rro 

Report ,of  operations,  J uly  11,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign  566 

Humphreys,  Richard.  Mentioned 550  562 

Hunt,  F.S.  Mentioned 539’ 540 

Hunter,  William.  Mentioned . ^ 

Hurlbut,  Stephen  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Grant,  U.  S . 663  ^ 

Oglesby,  Richard  J 475  \/ 

“of : 

Inka,  Miss.  Action  at,  July  7,  1863 6G1/: 

Mississippi,  Northwestern.  Operations  in,  June  15-25,  1863.. 48.5-488 

Hurst,  Fielding. 

^entioned 433,673,680 

Report  of  skirmish  on  Forked  Deer  River,  Tenn.,  July  15,  1863 682 

Hurt,  John  M.  Mentioned ’ _ 155 

Hurter,  Henry.  Mentioned.... ^ 

Hutchens,  John  B.  Mentioned 54 

Hutchins,  Thomas  L.  Mentioned ’ 26  27 

Huyett,  D.  H.  Mentioned 33rj 

Illinois  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries : Cogsvyell’s,  154,544;  Cooley’s,  8, 32,  34,40,130, 
150,546,592,  596;  5th[?],586.  Regiments:  1st,  427;  1st  ( Batteries ),  A,’ 

153,  256,260,263,264,267,  549;  B,  153,  159,  163,  260-262,  265-267,  270,  277, 

279,  280,  439,  451,  549 ; D,  10,  156,  203,  207,  293 ; E,  153,  163,  550,  621,  622,’ 

624;  F,  154,  544;  H,  153,  260,  277,  549;  1,154,544;  L,207;  2d  (Batteries), 

A,  130,135-137,139,  140,  151,547,617;  D,  427;  E,  155,  290,  548,  600,  601; 

F,  157;  G,  156,  204  ; K,  155,  548,  606;  L,  10,  156,  292,  293. 

Cavalry— Battalions : Thielemann’s,  153,  260,  549.  Companies:  Kane 
County,  152, 549.  Regiments : 2d,  9, 12, 150, 155, 221,  223, 224,  499-501, 545, 

578-582, 588, 687 ; 3d,  7, 13, 14, 18, 23,  28, 29, 128,  129, 149-152, 214,  221, 488, 

493-495, 506, 545, 549, 578-580, 588, 589 ; 4th,  148,  488, 493, 495, 506,  683 ; 5th’ 
158,439,513,515,516,544,551-553  ; 6th,  427  ; 7th,  145,  154,  427;  9th,  488’ 
492-494,506,682;  10th,  158, 447, 451, 458 ; 11th,  156, 303-305, 488,  491 ’ 497^ 

506,666;  15th,  155,548,663,664. 


INDEX. 


745 

Page. 


Illinois  Troops.  Mentioned — Continued. 

Infantry — Regiments : 7th,  105 ; 8th,  9, 135, 150, 1G4  ; 9th,  472, 473, 475-479, 
483,673-677;  11th,  105, 156,  159, 1G4,  297-300;  13th,  152,162,  548;  14th, 
154,289,547,606;  15th,  154, 547, 606 ; 17th,  156, 164  ; 18th,  155;  20th,  9, 

155,  163,207,  293-295;  26th,  154,  544,630-632,  645,647;  28th,  154, 547, 600, 
603-605, 607, 608;  30th,  9, 155, 197, 295;  31st,  9,  155, 163, 293-295, 313 ; 32d, 

154, 547, 606-608 ; 33d,  9,  129, 151,  161, 547,  612, 613  ; 37th,  158, 318  ; 40th, 
154,544,  635-637,641,643,  648,649;  41st,  154,  195,  547,  603,604;  43d,  155, 
432-434  ; 45th,  9, 155, 164, 207, 293-295 ; 46th,  154, 291, 292, 547, 606  ; 47th, 

153, 163, 438 ; 48th,  154, 544, 644-648, 650, 651 ; 53d,  154, 547, 603-605  ; 54th 
155;  55th,  152,  159,162,  259,265,267,269,271-273,277,280,549;  56th,  10, 
157,165,294,312,313;  61st,  155;  63d,  158, 291, 451 ; 72d,  156, 159, 164, 299, 

300  ; 76th,  154,  195,  547, 606 ; 77th,  8, 32, 141, 150, 161,546, 596, 597  ; 81st, 

9, 156, 164  ; 87th,  151, 546,  602, 603  ; 90th,  154, 544, 629, 630, 632, 633  ; 93d, 

10, 63,  65-68, 157, 159, 165, 315, 316 ; 94th,  158,  318, 320, 321 ; 95th,  156, 159, 

164,  297-301;  97th,  8,  40.  140,  141,  150,  159,  161,  546,592,596,697;  99th, 

129, 151, 161, 547, 613, 614  ; 103d,  154, 544, 635,  637, 638 ; 106th,  155 ; 108th, 

8, 158 ; 113th,  152, 159, 162, 264, 265, 549 ; 114th,  153, 159, 163, 285, 307, 550, 

621, 622, 624 ; 116th,  152, 159,' 162, 257, 264, 265, 549 ; 118th,  7, 13, 14, 20, 129, 

150, 159, 160, 231-234, 545, 577, 579, 580, 586-590  ; 120th,  158  ; 124th,  9, 155, 

164,  293-295;  126th,  155;  127th,  152,159,  162,257,  265,  267-269,273-278, 
280,549;  130th,  8, 141, 150, 159, 161, 546, 592, 596, 597 ; 131st,  158. 

Indiana  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light— Batteries : 1st,  130,  151,  161,  547,  610,  611 ; 6th.  154,  544. 

Cavalry — Regiments  : 1st,  8,  41,  48,  151,  221,  430,  546  ; 4th,  8,  150,  545,  578- 
580. 

Infantry — Regiments : 8th,  129,  151,  161,  547,  614;  11th,  8,  42,  44,  45,  49, 

51,  54,  57,  63,  151,  546,  600 ; 12th,  154,  544.  633 ; 16th,  8,  30,  33,  34,  36, 
129,150,159,161,  234-236,  545,  594;  18th,  37,  129,  151,161,  547,  614; 

22d,  234;  23d,  9,  155,  164,  293-295;  24th,  8,  44-46,  48-51,  53,  54,  151, 

546,  600;  26th,  158,  318;  34th,  8,  45,  49-51,  151,  546,  600;  46th,  8,  42, 

45,  48,  49,  51,  57,  151,  546,  600;  47th,  8,  41,  45,  54,  55,  57,  58,  151,  546,  602, 

603;  48th,  10,  62,  157,  164,  311;  49lh,  7,  12-15,  20,22,  23,  27,  129,  137, 

150,  159,  160,  231,232,  545,  580,  585-587;  53d,  154,  547,  575,  606-608; 

54th,  12,  150,  210,  545,  580,  583,  590;  59th,  10,  157,  164;  60th,  150,  545, 
593-595;  67tli,  8,  30,  33,  34,  39,  129,  150,  159,  161,  545,  594,  595 ; 69th,  7, 

12-14,  20,  27,  129,  137,  150,  159,  160,  231-233,  545,  580,  586 ; 83d,  152,  159, 

162,  188,  257,  265-269,  273,  274,  279,  280,  549 ; 33d,  153,  159,  163,  286,  287, 

550,  621,  622;  97th,  154,  544,  635,  636,  639-643,  648,  649;  99th,  154,  544, 

634,  636,  642,  643;  100th,  154,  544,  633-635,  641,  643. 

Inge.W.  M.  Mentioned 474,484,486 

Iowa  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries  : 1st,  133, 152,  549  ; 2d,  153, 163, 284, 285, 506, 550, 

623. 

Cavalry — Regiments  : 2d,  145,  424,  427,  428,  486,  488,  495-497,  506,  667,  673- 
678, 680 ; 3d,  158,-544, 551-553 ; 4th,  153, 225-227, 246, 249, 250, 302, 439, 509- 
511,  533, 544, 552, 553.  * 

Infantry — Regiments  : 3d,  144, 154,  290, 291,  547, 603-605 ; 4th,  152, 159, 548 ; 

5th,  10,  65-68,  157,  165,  314-317  ; 6th,  154, 424, 427, 428,  544, 635,  636,  644- 
652;  8th,  153, 163, 288, 550, 622-624, 626 ; 9th,  152, 159, 162, 253, 254, 4C8, 548 ; 

10th,  10,  65-68,157,  165,314;  11th,  156, 164, 301-304  ; 12th,  153, 159, 550, 
623-626;  13th,  156,  301-305;  15th,  156,  301-303,  305-308;  16th,  156, 164, 
301-303, 308-311 ; 17th,  10, 44, 59, 61, 63, 64, 66, 157, 165, 294, 312,  313 ; 19th, 
158,318,321,322;  20th,  158, 318  ; 21st,  130, 133, 135-138,  140-143,151,161, 


746 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Iowa  Troops.  Mentioned— Continued. 

Infantry — Regiments : 21st  (continued),  241,  242,  547,  G17 ; 22d,  130,  133, 
135-138,  140-142, 151, 161, 241-245, 547, 617 ; 23d,  119, 130,  133  135-139, 142, 

151,  447,448,  547,  615-617;  24th,  8,  42,44,55,  57,  151,546,  602,603;  25th, 

152,  162, 251-253,  548, 553,  618-620 ; 26th,  152, 159, 162, 548 ; 28th,  8,  41, 44, 

55, 57-59,  151, 546, 602, 603 ; 29th,  454  ; 30th,  152, 159, 162, 548  ; 31st,  152, 

162,  250,548,618;  34th,  158,318,320;  35th,  153,550,623,  627;  36th,  430; 

38th,  158,  318 ; 40th,  155. 

Irwin,  William  R.  Mentioned 610 

Isbell,  W.  A.  Mentioned 85, 86 

Island  No.  65.  Skirmish  near,  May  — , 1863.  See  Napoleon,  Ark.  Expedition 
from  Helena  to,  May  23  to  — , 1863. 

Island  No.  82,  above  Greenville,  Miss.  Skirmish  near,  May  18,  1863.  Re- 
port of  Jacob  G.  Lauman 143 

See  also  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19  -July  A,  1863.  Report  of  Brown,  p.  290. 
luka,  Miss.  ( 

Action  at,  July  7,  1863. 

Communication  from  Stephen  A.  Hurlbut 663 

Reports  of 

Cornyn,  Florence  M . „ 663 

Dodge,  Grenville  M 662 

Hurlbut,  Stephen  A 661 

Skirmish  near,  J uly  14,  1863  * 5 

Ivy,  Edward.  Mentioned 399 

J ackson,  Andrew,  jr.  Mentioned 328, 337, 339, 685 

Jackson,  George  W.  Mentioned 46,182 

Jackson,  James.  Mentioned 82 

Jackson,  J.  F.  B.  Mentioned 104,326 

Jackson,  Riel  E.  Mentioned 139,143 

Jackson,  William  H. 

Mentioned 526, 530, 534-536, 540, 554, 581, 651, 653 

Reports  of 

Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  Operations,  July  19-20,  1863,  during  the..  659 
Mechauicsburg,  Miss.  Expedition  from  Haynes’  Bluff  to,  and  skir- 
mishes, May  26-June  4,  1863 440 

Jackson,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  14,  1863.  See  Champion's  Bill,  Miss. 

Battle  of,  May  16,  1863.  Reports  of 
Putnam,  Holden.  Tourtellotte,  Jolin  E. 

See  also  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  Hay  1 9-July  4,  1863.  Reports  of 


Geddes,  James  L. 


Sampson,  Ezekiel  S. 


Peed,  Joseph  It. 

Also  Part  I,  p.  749. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign,  July  5-25,  1863. 

Assault  on  Jackson,  July  12,  1863.  See  reports  of 
Adams,  Daniel  W. 

Benton,  William  P. 

•Bryant,  George  E. 

Bunn,  H.  G. 

Crusley,  George  W. 

Heath,  Albert. 

Hovey,  Alvin  P. 

<kimhell,  John  C. 

Casualties.  Returns  of. 

Confederate  troops 654 

Union  troops 542-551 


Lindsey,  Daniel  W. 
Moore,  Ira. 

Myers,  Charles  D. 
Ord,  Edward  O.  C. 
Osterhans,  Peter  J. 
Pugh,  Isaac  C. 
Sherman,  William  T. 
Slocomb,  C.  H. 


Smith,  Andrew  J. 
Smith,  William  Sooy. 
Spicely,  William  T. 
Walcutt,  Charles  C. 
Whittlesey,  Luther  H. 
Williams,  Jonathan  H. 
Winans,  W.  P. 

Woods,  Charles  It. 


* Ho  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


INDEX. 


747 


Pago. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign,  July  5-25,  1863— Continued. 


Communications  from 

French,  Samuel  G 658 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 538,539 

Sherman,  William  T 538,574 


Investment  and  capture  of  Jackson,  July  10-17,  1863.  See  reports  of 


Benton,  William  P. 
Bowman,  Henry. 
Catterson,  Robert  F. 
Cockerill,  Joseph  R. 
Fowler,  Alexander. 
Hill,  Sylvester  G. 
Hovey,  Alvin  P. 
Jones,  Wells  S. 


Keigwin,  James. 
Leasure,  Daniel. 
Loomis,  John  Mason. 
Moore,  Ira. 

Myers,  Charles  D. 
Honweilor,  Philip. 
Ord,  Edward  O.  C. 
Osterhaus,  Peter  J. 


Owen,  Richard. 
Sanford,  William  W. 
Shunk,  David. 

Slack,  James  R. 
Smith,  Andrew  J. 
Spicely,  William  T. 
Welsh,  Thomas. 


Occupation  of  Jackson  by  Union  troops.  See  report  of  Sherman,  p.  528. 

Also  Sherman  to  Yerger  et  al.,  p.  539. 

Ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  captured  at  Jackson.  Taylor 541 


Reports  of 

Adams,  Daniel  W 

Benton,  William  P 

Bliss,  Zenas  R 

Bowman,  Henry 

Brown,  William  B 

Bryant,  George  E 

Bunn,  H.  G 

Bussey,  Cyrus 

Carter,  R.  S 

Catterson,  Robert  F... 
Cockerill,  Joseph  R ... 

Corse,  John  M 

Cosby,  George  B 

Crosley,  George  W 

Dickerman,  Willard  A 
Edgington,  Samuel  R . . 

Edwards,  John 

Ferrero,  Edward 

Fonda,  John  G 

Fowler,  Alexander 

Fullerton,  Hugh 

Geddes,  James  L 

Gillmore,  Robert  A 

Greathouse,  Lucien  ... 

Griffin,  Simon  G 

Hall,  Cyrus 

Hall,  Hiram  W 

Heath,  Albert 

Hicks,  Stephen  G 

Hill,  Sylvester  G ...... . 

Houston,  Leonard  B.. 

Hovey,  Alvin  P 

Humphrey,  William . . 

Jackson,  W.  H 

Jones,  Wells  S 

Keigwin,  James 

Kimbell,  John  C 


655 

. 608 
..  570 

..  560 

..  699 

..  G07 

658 
. . 551 

. 6C1 

..  640 

. G39 

648, 650 
GG0, GG1 
..  G04 

..  637 

..  625 

..  559 

..  572 

..  588 

..  642 

577, 578 
..  624 

..  631 

..  646 

..  569 

..  606 
..  63  6 

..  633 

..  635 

..  627 

..  615 

..  597 

..  566 

..  659 

..  643 

..  585 

656 


748 


INDEX. 


Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign,  July  5-25,  1863— Continued. 

Reports  of 

Landram,  William  J 

Lanpliere,  Charles  H 

Leasure,  Daniel 

Lindsey,  Daniel  W 

Loomis,  John  Mason 

McMillen,  William  L .’”[**[*'’** 

Matthies,  Charles  L 

Moore,  Ira 

Myers,  Charles  D 

Nonweiler,  Philip 

Nutting,  Oscar  F 

O’Meara,  Timothy 

Ord,  Edward  O.  C 

Osterhaus,  Peter  J 

Owen,  Richard 

Parke,  John  G 

Parke,  Lemuel 

Potter,  Robert  B 

Pugh,  Isaac  C 

Sanford,  William  W 

Sherman,  William  T 

Shunk,  David 

Slack,  James  R 

Slocomb,  C.  H 

Smith,  Andrew  J 

Smith,  William  Sooy 

Snyder,  Samuel  A.  J 

Spicely,  William  T 

Stone,  William  M 

Travers,  George  W 

Tuttle,  James  M 

Walcutt,  Charles  C 

Welsh,  Thomas 

Whittlesey,  Luther  II 

Wiles,  Greenberry  F 

Williams,  Jonathan  H 

Williams,  Reuben 

Winans,  W.  P 

Woods,  Charles  R 

Woods,  Joseph  J 

Skirmishes  near  Jackson. 

J uly  9,  1863.  See  reports  of 


Page. 


596 

583 

562 

589 

630 

621 

654 

612 

657 

610 

584 

632 

573,574 

579 

593 

554,555 

613 

567,568 

603 

644 

520-525, 527-532 

611 

601 

654 

591 

627,628 

622 

599 

615 

572 

620 

638 

557 

616 

653 

614 

633 

656 

618,620 

623 


Bussey,  Cyrus.  O’Meara,  Timothy.  Slack,  James  R. 

Fullerton,  Hugh.  Sherman,  William  T.  Smith,  Andrew  J. 

Hicks,  Stephen  G. 

J uly  22,  1863.  See  report  of  Cosl  ij , p.  660. 

Supplies  furnished  to  citizens  of  Jackson,  July  21,  1863.  Communications 
from 


Manship,  C.  H wo 

Sherman,  William  T 

Yerger,  William,  et  al 

INDEX. 


749 


Page. 

Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign,  July  5-25,  1863 — Continued. 

See  also  * 

July  6,  1863.  Jones’  Ferry , Miss.  Skirmish  at. 

Messing er’ s Ferry , Miss.  Skirmish  at. 

7,  1863.  Baker's  Creek,  Miss.  Skirmish  near. 

Queen’s  Hill,  Miss.  Skirmish  at. 

8,  1863.  Bolton  Depot,  Miss.  Skirmish  near. 

Clinton,  Miss.  Skirmish  near. 

9,  1863.  Clinton,  Miss.  Skirmish  near. 

12,  1863.  Canton,  Miss.  Skirmish  near. 

16,  1863.  Bolton  Depot,  Miss.  Skirmish  at. 

Clinton,  Miss.  Skirmish  at. 

Grant’s  Ferry,  Pearl  Hirer,  Miss.  Skirmish  at. 

17,  1863.  Bear  Creek,  near  Canton,  Miss.  Skirmish  at. 

18,  1863.  Brookhaven,  Miss.  Skirmish  at. 

19,  1863.  Brandon,  Miss.  Action  at. 

Also  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19 -July  4,  1863.  Deports  of 

Lee,  Charles  1ST.  Sullivan,  Peter  J. 

Jackson,  Tenn. 

Expedition  across  Tennessee  River  from,  June — to  7,  1863.  Report  of 

Rickard  J.  Oglesby >. 445 

Skirmish  at,  July  13,  1863.  « 

Communication  from  John  K.  Mizner 675 

Reports  of 

Breckenridge,  William  K.  M 679 

Coon,  Datus  E 677 

Hatch,  Edward 673 

Phillips,  Jesse  J 676 

Statements  of 

Harden,  Edward  L 680 

Lewis,  Samuel 679 

Skirmish  near,  July  15,  1863* 5 

Jaeger,  Frederick.  Mentioned 699 

Jaensch,  Frederick.  Mentioned 152 

James,  Captain.  Mentioned * 466 

Jardine,  James.  Mentioned 277 

Jehl,  Christian.  Mentioned 250 

Jenkins,  Charles  S.  Mentioned 54 

Jenkins,  William  S.  Mentioned , 664,665 

Jenks,  John  C.  Mentioned 166 

Jenney,  William  L.  B. 

Mentioned 178, 534 

Report  of  operations.  May  9-July5,  1863,  including  the  siege  of  Vicksburg, 

Miss 187 

Jennings,  H.  G.  P.  Mentioned 56 

Jennings,  Z.  D.  Mentioned 425 

Jerauld,  William  F.  Mentioned 551 

Jessup,  Robert  B.  Mentioned 46 

J.  F.  Fargo,  Steamer.  Mentioned 668 

Joel,  Benjamin.  Mentioned . 153 

Joel,  B.  M.  Mentioned 256,436 

John  Raines,  Steamer.  Mentioned 516 

Johnson,  Lieutenant.  Mentioned 671,672 

Johnson,  Abda.  Mentioned 95,100 


No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


750 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Johnson,  Abiram.  Mentioned (353 

Johnson,  Amory  K.  Mentioned.. * 154,214,435,607 

Johnson,  Charles.  Mentioned 699 

Johnson,  James  A.  W.  Mentioned 95}  102, 105, 326 

Johnson,  J.  E.  Mentioned 329 

Johnson,  Ruel  M.  Mentioned (331 

Johnson,  Silas  D.  Mentioned 11,45 

Johnson,  W.  B.  Mentioned 329 

Johnson,  W.  H.  Mentioned . 352 

Johnston,  Joseph  E. 

Co-operation  with  Richard  Taylor 457, 462 

Correspondence  with 

Gist,  S.  R 426 

Sherman.  William  T 538,539 

Mentioned 21, 70, 74, 75, 78, 94, 97, 98, 101, 125, 146, 168, 177, 

213, 214, 216, 219, 221-224, 227, 228, 239, 241, 245,246, 248, 249, 295, 296, 303, 
307,  309, 340,  346, 352, 435-438,  440, 442, 445, 457, 461,  462, 486, 488, 506, 518, 
521-525,  527, 528, 531, 533, 534, 536, 540, 541, 555, 608, 621,  628, 632, 657,  669 

J ohnston,  J.  W.  Mentioned . 96, 100, 103, 106, 344, 346 

J ohnston,  T.  N.  Mentioned 328, 338, 340 

Jones,  Alfred  R.  Mentioned 138,242 

Jones,  David.  Mentioned 277 

Jones,  b.  E.  Mentioned 554 

Jones,  D.  W.  Mentioned 327 

Jones,  H.  E.  Mentioned.. 56 

Jones,  Isaac  W.  Mentioned 636 

Jones,  Jacob.  Mentioned 165 

Jones,  John  J.  Mentioned 291, 606 

Jones,  Robert  B.  Mentioned 51, 151,601 

Jones,  Samuel.  Mentioned 328 

Jones,  Theodore.  Mentioned 153 

Jones,  Tom.  Mentioned 214 

Jones,  Wells  S. 

Mentioned 154}  640 

Report  of  operations,  July  4-16,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign   : j 643 

Jones’  and  Messinger’s  Ferries,  Miss.  Skirmishes  at,  July  6,  1863.  See 
Jaclcson,  Miss.,  Campaign , July  5-25,  1863.  Reports  of 
Brown,  William  B.  McMillen,  William  L.  Tuttle,  James  M. 

Corse,  John  M.  Sanford,  William  W. 

Jones'  Ferry,  Big  Black  River,  Miss.  Skirmishes  at. 

June  28,  1863.  See  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of , May  \9-July  4,  1863.  Re- 
ports of 


Sanders,  Addison  H.  Smith,  John  H. 

July  6,  1863.  See  Jones’  and  Messinger’s  Ferries,  Miss.  Skmnishes  at,  July 
6,  1863. 

Jones’  Plantation,  near  Birdsong  Ferry,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  June  22, 1863. 


Communication  from  Clark  Wright 225 

Reports  of 

Parkell,  Alonzo  B 510 

Swan,  Simeon  D 509 

Wood,  Robert  C.,  jr 511 

Wright,  Clark 511 


See  also  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19 -July  4,  1863.  Report  of  Oster- 
haus,  p.  225. 


INDEX. 


751 


T-Ca 

Jordan,  C.  R.  Mentioned 327 

Joslyn,  John  J.  Report  of  scout  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  toward  Hernando, 

Miss.,  May  28,  1863  414 

Joyce,  Peter.  Mentioned 664 

Judy,  James  W.  Mentioned 153,285,307,529 

J.  W.  Cheeseman,  Steamer.  Mentioned 321 

Kansas  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Cavalry — Regiments  : 7th,  433, 663, 664. 

Infantry — Regiments : 1st,  156,  448-450. 

Kasten,  Charles  L.  Mentioned - 166,252 

Kausler,  J.  A.  Mentioned 539,540 

Keane,  Mary,  Steamer.  Mentioned 668 

Keigwin,  A.  N.  Mentioned 32,35 

Keigwin,  James. 

Mentioned 1 3, 19, 21, 27, 28, 128, 150,  ICO,  209, 231, 236, 545, 580, 582, 590, 595 

Reports  of 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863,  including  engage- 
ment at  Big  Black  River  Bridge,  May  17, 1863 22 

Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  Operations,  July  6-17,  1863,  during  the..  585 
Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations,  May  19-23,  1863,  during  the  siege  of...  231 

Kellogg,  Henry  M.  Mentioned 167 

Kelly,  Captain.  Mentioned 208 

Kelly,  John  H.  Mentioned 150 

Kelsey,  FlorilloM.  Mentioned 166 

Kendall,  William  Wesley.  Mentioned 23 

Keneipp,  George  M.  Mentioned 645,  648 

Kennedy,  Reuben.  Mentioned 130 

Kensler,  John.  Mentioned - 35 

Kent,  Daniel. 

Mentioned - - 158 

Report  of  operations,  June  11-July  4,  1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg, 

Miss 321 

Kent,  L.  Mentioned 446 

Kentucky  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries:  Cobb’s,  654-656. 

Cavalry — Regiments  : Faulkner’s,  501. 

Infantry — Regiments:  2d,  654;  3d,  82,541;  4th,  541,654;  5th,  6th,  541; 

7th,  82,  541 ; 8th,  82, 210, 212-219, 224, 541 ; 9th,  654. 

Kentucky  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Union.) 

Engineers — Companies : Patterson’s,  9,  132,  149,  181,  548. 

Infantry — Regiments : 7th,  7,  13,  14,  20,  22-24,  27,  129,  150,  159,  160,  231-234, 

545,  580,  586;  16th  [?],  135;  19th,  8,  32,  141,  150,  161,  546,  596;  22d,  7, 

13,  15,  16,  20,  25-28,  129,  150,  159,  161,  225,  226,  545,  580,  590. 

Kenwood,  Steamer.  Mentioned 669 

Kepler,  Charles  W.  Mentioned 304 

Kershner,  Jonathan.  Mentioned 152 

Keyes,  Addison  A.  Mentioned 274 

Kili,  George  F.  Mentioned 267 

Kimball,  Charles  B. 

Mentioned 128 

Report  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16, 1863,  including  engage- 
ment at  Big  Black  River  Bridge,  May  17,  1863  29 

Kimball,  Nathan. 

Mentioned f 155, 157 , 439, 440 


752 


'INDEX. 


, * Page. 

Kimball,  Nathan — Continued. 

Report  of  expedition  from  Haynes’  Bluff  to  Mechauicsburg,  Miss.,  and  skir- 
mishes, May26-Juno4,  1863 436-438 

Kimbell,  John  C.  Report  of  operations,  July  12,  1863,  during  the  Jackson, 

Misg.,  Campaign g56 

King,  C.  A.  Mentioned 3^g 

King,  John  F.  Mentioned 624 

King,  W.  G.  Mentioned 479 

Kinman,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 165 

Kinney,  John.  Mentioned 329 

Kinsley,  William.  Mentioned . . 277 

Kinsman,  William  H.  Mentioned 130, 136, 137, 139 

Kirby,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned H 45  59 

Kirby,  Dennis  T.  Mentioned 256,259,263,265 

Kirk,  William  F.  Mentioned 329 

Kirkbride,  Andrew  B.  Mentioned 493 

Kittridge,  A.  B.  Mentioned 359 

Klauss,  Martin.  Mentioned 151 

Klostermann,  Herman.  Mentioned 172  igg 

Knight,  B.  G.  Mentioned 349 

Knoll,  H.  Mentioned 158 

Kossak,  William. 

Mentioned 172,178,188 

Report  of  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  19-July  4,  1863 189 

Kostmann,  Carl.  Mentioned I94  197 

Krepp,  John  W.  Mentioned 699 

Krez,  Conrad.  Mentioned I55 

Kueffner,  William  C. 

Mentioned 475,477,677 

Report  of  operations  in  Northeastern  Mississippi,  June  13-22,  1863 477 

Kuhl,  Alexander.  Mentioned 278 

Kyle,  O.  Mentioned 102  103 

Lagow,  Clark  B.  Mentioned 66 

La  Grange,  Tenn. 

Expeditions  from. 

May  21-26,  1863.  See  Senatobia,  Miss.  Expedition  from  La  Grange, 

Tenn.,  to. 

Aug.  10-23,  1863.  See  Grenada,  Miss.  Expeditions  from  Big  Black  River, 

Miss.,  and  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to. 

Expedition  to.  See  Panola,  Miss.  Expedition  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to, 

June  16-24,  1863. 

Scouts  from. 

May  17,  1863* 3 

May  19,  1863.  Report  of  Edward  Hatch 145 

Lake  Providence,  La. 

Action  near,  June  9,  1863.  See  Louisiana,  Northern.  Operations  in,  June  3- 

July  10,  1863.  Reports  of  Dennis',  p.  448;  Reid,  p.  449.  * 

Skirmishes  near. 

May  24,  1863.  See  Mound  Plantation,  near  Lake  Providence,  La.  Skir- 
mishes at. 

May  27,  1863.  * 

June  24,  1863.  See  Mound  Plantation,  near  Lake  Providence,  La.  Skir- 
mishes at. 


No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


INDEX. 


753 


Lake  Saint  Joseph,  La.  Affair  at/ Juno  4,1863.  See  Louisiana,  Northern. 

Operations  in,  June  3 -July  10,  1863.  Report  of  Taylor,  p.  457. 


Landers,  James  B.  Mentioned 657 

Landgraeber,  Clemens.  Mentioned 152 

Landram,  William  J. 


Mentioned 8,  31,  140,  141, 150,  161,  236,  237,  546,  592-594,  596,  597 

Report  of  operations,  July  5-17, 1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  596 


Lanehart,  H.  Mentioned 32<j 

Langan,  John  M.  Mentioned 110,  111,327,414 

Langley,  Isaac.  Mentioned 614 

Lanier,  Thomas  C.  Correspondence  with  John  C.  Moore 383 

Lanphere,  Charles  H. 


Mentioned 19,  21,  128, 150,  545,  580, 590 

Reports  of 


Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  Operations,  July  5-24,  1863,  during  the. ..  583 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations  against,  May  16-23, 1863  229 

Lansing,  William  1ST.  Mentioned 154 

Larabee,  J.  W.  Mentioned 272 

Latimer,  Mulfora  M.  Mentioned 495  674 

Lauman,  Jacob  G-. 


Mentioned 154,  i68,  169,  174,  176.  178, 


Reports  of 


193,  208,  222,  302,  303,  522,  523, 525, 535, 547, 548, 574-576, 597-599, 603-608 


Island  No.  82,  above  Greenville,  Miss.  Skirmish  near,  May  18,  1863. ..  143 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations,  May  23-27, 1863,  during  the  siege  of..  288, 289 


Lavigne,  James  W.  Mentioned 167 

Law,  George  W.  Mentioned 119 

Law,  James.  Mentioned 166 

Lawler,  Michael  K, 


Mentioned  6, 15, 23,  47, 130, 134, 140, 151,  161,  209,  244,  433,  547, 609,  615, 617 

Report  of  engagement  at  Big  Black  River  Bridge,  Miss.,  May  17,  1863,  in- 


cluding operations  May  2-22 133 

Lawrence,  Chauncey.  Mentioned H 45 

Lay,  Benjamin  D.  Report  of  operations,  June  10, 1863,  during  the  siege  of 

Vicksburg,  Miss 423 

Lazarus,  William.  Mentioned 294 

Leahy,  Michael.  Mentioned 550 

Leasure,  Daniel. 

Mentioned 149,  543,  557,  558,  56O,  561,  566 

Report  of  operations,  July  4-16,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign . 562 

Lecompt,  B.  W.  Mentioned 393 

Ledbetter,  J.  A.  Mentioned 329,358 

Lee,  Albert  L. 

Mentioned 16-19,  21,  26,  128,  129, 150,  231,  232 

Reports  of 


Big  Black  River  Bridge,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  17,  1863 131 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Assault  on,  May  19,  1863 230 

Lee,  Charles  N, 

Mentioned 128  151 

Report  of  operations,  May  1-July  5,  1863,  including  the  siege  of  Vicks- 
burg, Miss 243 

Lee,  Daniel  A.  Mentioned 316 

Lee,  Robert  E.  Mentioned 216,527 

48  R R — VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


754 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Lee,  Stephen  D. 

Correspondence  with  Carter  L.  Stevenson 348,  352 

Mentioned 76,  83,  91,  92,  94-100, 102,  104-108, 110, 

123, 127, 324-326, 328-333, 336, 343, 344, 346, 356-358, 360,  361,  367,  401, 420 

Reports  of 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16, 1863 101 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations,  May  17 -July  4,  1863,  including  the  siege 

of 349,  350 

Lee,  Thomas  M.  Mentioned  . . 11 

Legan,  John  J.  Mentioned ...... 11,45,59 

Le  Gendre,  Charles  W.  Mentioned , 149 

Leggett,  Mortimer  D. 

Mentioned 9, 62, 155, 164, 200, 295 

Report  of  operations,  June  4-July  4,  1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg, 

Miss .. 293 

Lehman,  R.  E.  Mentioned . — ......  329,362 

Leibrandt,  Henry.  Mentioned . 271 

Leibungarth,  Christian.  Mentioned .......  272 

Letner,  David.  Mentioned 166 

Lewis,  Judson  A.  Mentioned 39 

Lewis,  Samuel.  Statement  of  skirmish  at  Jackson,  Tenu.,  July  13,  1863 679 

Lewis,  T.  C.  Mentioned 410 

Lexington,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 448, 453 

Lexington,  Tenn.  Skirmish  near,  June  29, 1863* 5 

L’Hommedieu,  S.  S.,jr.  Mentioned •- 593 

Lieb,  Herman.  Mentioned 158,447,448 

Lightburn,  Joseph  A.  J.  Mentioned 152, 188, 286, 536, 549 

Lightfoot,  Gustavus.  Mentioned 166,252 

Lillard,  N.  J.  Mentioned 107,109,326 

Lincoln,  Abraham.  Mentioned 261 

Lindersmith,  Orlando.  Mentioned 312 

Lindsay,  Samuel  B.  Mentioned 11 

Lindsey,  Daniel  W. 

Mentioned  ....  7, 13-18, 21, 128, 129, 132, 146, 150, 1G1, 215, 226, 232, 240, 241, 545, 580 

Reports  of 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1853,  including  operations 

May  16-23 24 

Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  Operations,  July  6-23,  1863,  during  the...  589 

Lindsey,  Joseph  W.  Mentioned  237-239 

Lippincott,  Abraham  L.  Mentioned 166 

Lippincott,  Charles  E.  Mentioned  151,612 

Lipscomb,  W.  S.  Mentioned 373 

Little,  E.  C.  Mentioned 481 

Liverpool  Landing,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  May  23, 1863.  See  Yazoo  City,  Miss. 
Expedition  to,  May  20-23,  1863. 

Livsey,  Joseph  H.  Mentioned 601 

Lloyde,  David.  Mentioned 11 

Lochbililer,  C.  Mentioned 172,178,189,192 

Lockett,  Samuel  H. 

Mentioned 71, 72,  74, 80, 329 

Reports  of 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863,  including  operations 

April  30-May  17 69 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations,  May  17-July  3,  1863,  during  the  siege  of  329 

*I'or  reports,  see  Series  I,  Vol.  XXIII,  Part  I,  p.  628. 


INDEX. 


755 


Tago. 

Lockwood,  Theodore  W.  Mentioned 150 

Lofland,  Gordon.  Mentioned 200,283 

Logan,  John.  Mentioned 154,607,008 

Logan,  J ohn  A.  Mentioned 6, 9, 10, 47,  GO-62, 67, 

155, 163, 164, 108, 197, 198, 204,  206,  209,  292,  294, 29G,  298, 312, 313, 316, 589 

Logan,  John  L.  Mentioned 661,685,686 

Logan,  Newton  A.  Mentioned 518 

Long,  Francis  M.  Mentioned 550 

Loomis,  John  Mason. 

Mentioned 154,  544  f 629, 635, 639 

Reports  of 

Collierville,  Tenu.  Skirmish  at,  May  20,  1863  425 


Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  Operations,  July  4-16,  1863,  during  the 630 

Loring,  William  W. 

Correspondence  withW.  H.  T.  Walker 439 

Mentioned  69-71, 80, 81, 87, 88, 90-93, 96-98, 102, 

111,  112, 114-127, 204, 211, 213, 216, 281,  397, 402, 439, 534, 538, 540, 694, 697 


Reports  of 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863 73,74 

Mechanicsburg,  Miss.  Expedition  from  Haynes’  Bluff  to,  and  skir- 
mishes, May  26-June  4,  1863  439 

Lotspeich,  Felix.  Mentioned 327 

Loudon,  T.  J.  Mentioned 629 

Loughborough,  James  M.  Mentioned 384 

Louisiana,  Northern.  Operations  in,  June  3- July  10,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 465 

Davis,  Jefferson 457  45^ 

Smith,  E.  Kirby 457,462 

Taylor,  Richard 462,465 

War  Department,  C.  S 465 

Reports  of 

Dennis,  Elias  S 446-448 

Hawes,  J.  M 474 

Hubbard,  Lucius  F 452 

McCulloch,  Henry  E 467 

Mower,  Joseph  A 454 

Porter,  David  D 453  454 

Reid,  Hugh  T 449,  450 

Strickle,  Abraham  E 455 

Taylor,  Richard 457,461,462 

Walker,  John  G 462  466 

Louisana  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 


Artillery,  Heavy  -Battalions : 8 th,  328,  337.  Regiments:  1st,  328,  337-339, 
350, 355. 

Artillery,  Light— Battalions : Washington  Artillery  (Batteries),  5th,  654- 
657  ; Fenner’s,  657 ; Pointe  Coupee  Artillery,*  326,  329,  357,  369,  378, 381, 
410.  (Batteries),  A,  82,  84, 85, 92,  326  ; B,  327,  381 ; C,  82,  84,  85,  326. 

Cavalry — Battalions : 13th,  448,  449;  15th,  457,  458,  460,  461,471.  Com- 
panies : Nutt’s,  460. 

Infantry — Battalions : 4th,  541 ; 14th,  654  ; Dupeire’s  Zouaves,  357,  359. 
Regiments  : 3d,  326,  329,  332,333,  365,367,  369,  372,  373,  375-378,  385,  415, 
416 ; 4th,  541,  659 ; 12th,  77, 82, 84, 85, 88-90, 97, 112, 117 ; 13th,  16th,  654  ; 


xBatteries  designated  when  practicable. 


756 


INDEX* 


Page. 

Louisiana  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate) — Continued. 

Infantry— Regiments  : 17th,  327,  361,  363, 381,  394,  397,  399-402,  404,  419,  690; 

19th,  654-657;  20th,  654;  21st,  326,  329,  369,  373,  375,  376,  378;  23d 
[22d],  328,329,337,369,373,375,378;  25th,  654  ; 26th,  327,  329,  397,  398, 

406,  408-411;  27th,  327,  329,397-399,  406,  408-411,  414,  415;  29th,*  327, 

329, 361, 394,  397-399,  402,  406, 407, 411 ; 31st,  327, 329,  397-400, 402, 403. 
Louisiana  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Union.) 

Infantry — Regiments:  8th  ( Colored ),  158,448,  449;  9th  (Co ZomZ),  158,  447, 

448  ; 10th  {Colored),  158;  11th  {Colored),  158,  447  ; 13th  {Colored),  158. 

Louisville,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 276, 301 

Love,  Louis.  Mentioned 699 

Lovell,  Frederick  S.  Mentioned 195,197 

Lovell,  W.  S. 

Mentioned 514 

.Report  of  Union  raid  on  Brookhaven,  Miss.,  June  23-26,  1863 513 

Lowell,  John  W.  Mentioned 156 

Lower,  Robert  A.  Mentioned 272 

Lowes,  John  L.  Mentioned 166 

Lowry,  R.  Mentioned 80 

Lucas,  John. 

Mentioned 13, 21, 128, 150, 588 

Report  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16,  1863,  including  engage- 
ment at  Big  Black  River  Bridge 23 

Lucas,  Thomas  J. 

Mentioned 6, 35, 150 

Report  of  operations,  April  13-May  22,  1863,  against  Vicksburg,  Miss 234 

Luce,  Constant.  Mentioned 149 

Luckett,  William  F.  Mentioned 415 

Luminary,  Steamer.  Mentioned 682 

Luther,  Charles.  Mentioned 167 

Lyford,  Stephen  C.  Mentioned 175,180 

Lynch,  James  R.  Mentioned 239 

Lynch,  John.  Mentioned , 25 

Lynch,  J.  P.  Mentioned j 328,338,340 

Lynch,  Thomas.  Mentioned 340 

Lyon,  A.  M.  Mentioned - 139 

Lyon,  H.  B.  Mentioned 212,214,221,224,401 

Lyons,  T.  B.  Mentioned 100 

McAlester,  Miles  D.  Mentioned 178,180 

McArthur,  John.  Mentioned 155, 156, 164, 

168, 197, 198, 210, 227, 245,  295-297, 301, 305, 523, 526, 533, 535, 555, 627, 653 

Macauley,  Daniel.  Mentioned 42,45,46,51 

McBee,  J.  T.  Mentioned j 512 

McBride,  Daniel  W.  Mentioned 167 

McCafferty,  Presley.  Mentioned 11 

McCall,  Captain.  Mentioned 457 

McCalla,  Nathaniel.  Mentioned 65,68 

McCardle,  W.  H.  For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  John  C.  Pemberton. 

McCauley,  Patrick  H.  Mentioned 298 

McClernand,  John  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Grant,  U.  S 48, 130 

Osterhaus,  Peter  J 219 


rAlso  called  28th. 


INDEX. 


757 


Page. 

McClernand,  John  A. — Continued. 

Mentioned 6,7,9,12,15,17,19,23, 

26,  31,  34,  36,41,  47,  67, 128, 130-132, 146, 149, 159-161, 165, 168-171, 174, 178, 
180,  181,  184,  187,193,199,204,208,210,211,215,235,238,240,255,256,310 

Superseded  by  Ord  in  command  of  13th  Army  Corps 4 

McClintock,  Hiram.  Mentioned 160,275 

McCloud,  George.  Mentioned 223 

McClure,  John  D.  Mentioned 287 

McConahay,  James  C.  Mentioned 23 

McConnell,  J.  T.  Mentioned , 95 

McConnell,  W.  K.  Mentioned 103,105 

McCown,  James.  Mentioned Ill,  113, 327, 372,  414, 416, 417 

Me Cown,  Joseph  B.  Mentioned 158,292 

McCoy,  James  C.  Mentioned 575 

McCray,  Richard  L.  Mentioned 130 

McCrillis,  La  Fayette. 

Mentioned 427,428,490-493,495 

Reports  of 

Germantown,  Tenn.  Scouts  from. 

July  8,  1863 666 

July  16-20,  1863 682 

Mississippi,  Northwestern.  Operations  in,  June  15-25,  1863 493 

Senatobia,  Miss.  Skirmish  near,  May  23,  1863  429 

McCrory,  T.  N.  Mentioned 340 

McCrossen,  John.  Mentioned 93 

McCulloch,  Henry  E. 

Mentioned 448, 459, 462-465, 470-472 

Report  of  operations  in  Northern  Louisiana,  June  3-July  lu,  1863  467 

McCulloch,  R.  A.  Mentioned 505 

McCulloch,  Robert. 

Mentioned 429, 501-506 

Report  of  skirmish  at  Collierville,  Tenn.,  May  20,  1863  425 

McDonald,  Andrew  G.  Mentioned 139 

McDonald,  M.  Mentioned 399, 666 

McDowell,  J.  K.  Mentioned 113,327,417 

McDowell,  S.  J.  P.  Mentioned  * 469 

McElrath,  J.  E.  Mentioned 346 

McFarland,  John  D.  Mentioned 535,541 

McFarland,  William.  Mentioned 79,80 

McFarlane,  Andrew  J.  Mentioned 39, 167 

McGill,  R.  C.  Mentioned 238,239 

McGinn,  Edward.  Mentioned 277,278 

McGinnis,  Arthur.  Mentioned 334 

McGinnis,  George  F. 

Mentioned 8, 41-47,  49, 50,  53, 151 , 240 

Reports  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16,  1863 48,52 

McGlasson,  Robert  B.  M.  Mentioned 665 

McGorie,  John.  Mentioned 550 

Me  Grew,  John  S.  Mentioned 593 

McGuirk,  John.  Mentioned . 502,504,505 

Mcllvane,  William  P.  Mentioned 112 

McIntyre,  Henry.  Mentioned 260,283 

McKeaig,  George  W.  Mentioned 158 

McKee,  George  C.  Mentioned 298 

McKee,  R.  Mentioned «... 699 


758 


INDEX. 


Page. 

McKeith,  William.  Mentioned 30 

McKibbin,  William  R.  Mentioned 278 

McKinley,  John  H.  Mentioned 280 

McKinney,  H.  G.  Mentioned 113 

McKnight,  George.  Mentioned 577 

McKnight,  R.  P.  Mentioned 606 

McLaughlin,  John  A. 

Mentioned 45, 55, 151, 602 

Report  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  Maj  16,  1863  57 

McLaurin,  L.  L.  Mentioned 329, 398, 407, 409 

McLean,  Captain.  Mentioned.. 457 

McMahon,  E.  Mentioned 330, 334, 335, 410 

McMahon,  Thomas.  Mentioned 156, 298-300 

McMillen,  William  L. 

Mentioned . 153, 550, 620, 623 


Report  of  operations,  July  4-25,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 


paign   621 

MacMurray,  Junius  W.  Mentioned 157,206 

McMurtrie,  Abner  H.  Mentioned 551 

McNair,  Evander.  Mentioned 540,541,657,658 

McNulta,  John. 

Mentioned 158 


Report  of  operations,  June  3-July  4,  1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg, 

Miss 320 

McPhail,  Enos.  Mentioned 151,167 

McPherson,  J ames  B.  Mentioned 6, 9, 10, 42, 43, 47, 48, 58, 61,  62, 65, 68, 155, 


159,  163,  165,  168-173, 175, 186, 198, 206, 267, 268, 277, 297-300, 307, 534, 690 


McQuiddy,  J.  T.  Mentioned 45 

Maas,  Louis.  Mentioned 611 


Macon  Ford,  Big  Black  River,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  June  9,  1863.  See  Vicks- 
burg, Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19 -July  4,  1863.  Report  of  OsterJiaus, 

p.  220. 


Magenta,  Steamer.  Mentioned 668 

Magnolia,  Steamer.  Mentioned 668 

Magnolia  Hills,  Miss.  See  Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  1,  1863. 

Malloy,  Adam  G.  Mentioned 156 

Malmborg,  Oscar.  * 

Mentioned 152, 189, 192, 265, 269-271, 273 


Report  of  operations,  May  5-25,  1863,  against  Vicksburg,  Miss 271 

Malone,  Francis  M.  Mentioned 665 

Maloney,  Maurice.  Mentioned 151,181 

Maltby,  Jasper  A.  Mentioned 155,207 

Mann,  Calvin  A.  Mentioned 515 

Mann,  Charles.  Mentioned 157 

Mann,  G.  H.  Mentioned 329 

Mann,  Josiah  J.  Mentioned 150 

Mann,  William  H.  Mentioned 321 

Manning,  T.  P.  Mentioned 429 

Manning,  V.  C.  Mentioned 99 

Manring,  George  W.  Mentioned 11, 45 

Manring,  Maschil.  Mentioned 55 

Mansfield,  Fielding.  Mentioned 150 

Manship,  C.  H.  Correspondence  with  William  T.  Sherman 539 

Manter,  Francis  H.  Mentioned 152,162,171,251 

Manzer,  Jason  B.  Mentioned 165,300 

Marks,  L.  D.  Mentioned 329,398,399,407,410 


INDEX, 


759 


?£*20. 

Marlatt,  William  C.  Mentioned 699 

Marmaduke,  J.  S.  Mentioned 517 

Marold,  G.  T.  Mentioned 468 

Marrett,  Samuel  S.  Mentioned 151 

Marsh,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned 223, 578, 581, 583 

Marshall,  William  A.  Mentioned 316 

Marshall,  W.  S.  Mentioned 601 

Martin,  E.  B.  Mentioned 328 

Martin,  H.  N.  Mentioned 103, 350, 352 

Martin,  Leonard  L.  Mentioned 166 

Martin,  Lewis  D.  Mentioned 140,150,596 

Martin,  W.  W.  Mentioned 329,398,407,  409 

Mary  Keane,  Steamer.  Mentioned 668 

Maryland  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery,  Light— Batteries : 3d,  107, 326, 329, 355, 356. 

Mason,  Harvey  L.  Mentioned 275 

Massachusetts  Troops.  Mentioned. 


Infantry — Regiments : 29th,  149,  543,  571,  572;  35th,  149,543,568,  571-573; 


36th,  149,  542,  560,  561,  573. 

Mather,  Thomas  S. 

Mentioned 130,210 

Report  of  engagement  at  Big  Black  River  Bridge,  Miss.,  May  17,  1863 131 

Mathews,  J.  W.  Mentioned 98 

Mathews,  H.  M.  Mentioned 98 

Mathieson,  George  W. 

Mentioned 352 

Report  of  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  18-July  4,  1863  353 

Matthews,  Beverly.  Mentioned 484 

Matthews,  James  E.  Mentioned  .1 506 

Matthews’  Ferry,  Miss.  Skirmish  on  the  Coldwater,  at,  June  20,  1863.  See 
Mississippi,  Northwestern.  Operations  in,  June  15-25,  1863.  Re- 
ports of 

Hatch,  Edward.  Moyers,  Gilbert. 

Matthies,  Charles  L. 

Mentioned 146, 153, 157, 163,  535, 690 

Report  of  operations,  July  16,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign..  654 

Matticks,  S.  J.  Mentioned 699 

Maupin,  R.  L.  Mentioned 110, 113, 417 

Maurice,  Thomas  D.  Mentioned 157 

Maury,  Henry.  Mentioned 655,  656 

Maxey,  S.  B.  Mentioned 657 

Maxwell,  James  C.  Mentioned 288 

May,  Reuben.  Mentioned 150, 586, 588 

Mechanicsburg,  Miss. 

Expedition  from  Haynes’  Bluff  to,  and  skirmishes,  May  26-June  4,  1863. 

Communication  from  W.  H.  T.  Walker 439 

Reports  of 

Adams,  John 440-442 

Blair,  Frank  P.,  jr 435 

Kimball,  Nathan 436-438 

Greene,  James  H 438 

Jackson,  William  H 440 

Loring,  William  W 439 

Expedition  from  Haynes’  Bluff,  Miss.,  to,  Juno  2-8,  1863  * 4 


* No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


760 


INDEX. 


Mechanicsburg,  Miss.— Continued. 

Skirmishes  at. 

May  24.  1863* „ 

May  29,  1863.  See  Mechanicsburg,  Miss . Expedition  from  Baynes’  Bluff 
to,  May  26- June  4,  1663.  Report  of  Adams,  p.  440. 

June  4,  1863.  See  Mechanicsburg , Miss.  Expedition  from  Baynes’  Bluff 


to,  May  26-June  4,  1863.  Report  of  Adams,  pp.  441,442. 

Meek,  Bazil  D. 

Mentioned 490-494 

Report  of  operations  in  Northwestern  Mississippi,  June  15-25,  1863 498 

Meily,  George  E.  Mentioned H 


Memminger,  R.  W.  For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  John  C.  Pemberton. 
Memphis,  Term. 

Attack  on  Union  transports  near,  June  17,  1863.  See  Memphis,  Tenn.  Oper- 
ations on  the  Mississippi  River,  near,  June  17-18,  1863. 

Expeditions  from. 

May  23-24,  1863.  See  Bernando,  Miss. 

May  26,  1863.  See  Bernando,  Miss. 

July  19-23,  1863.  See  Raleigh , Tenn. 


Operations  on  the  Mississippi  River,  near,  June  17-18,  1863. 

Asboth,  Alexander 

Greene,  Colton _ 

Scouts  from. 

May  27,  1863.  See  Bernando,  Miss. 

May  28,  1863.  See  Bernando,  Miss. 

June  16,  1863.  See  Batcliie  River,  Tenn. 

J uly  3,  1863.  Report  of  David  Moore 

July  20-21,  1863.  Report  of  David  Moore 

Skirmish  near,  July  18,  1863* 

Mercer,  Pembroke.  Mentioned 

Merrill,  Samuel.  Mentioned 

Merrin,  F.  W.  Mentioned 

Merritt,  Adiroiidam  J.  Mentioned 

Mersy,  August. 


Reports  of 


507 

507 


518 

685 


....  645,648 
136-138, 142 

81 

173, 200, 202 


Correspondence  with  Grenville  M.  Dodge 475 

Mentioned (576 

Messinger,  George.  Mentioned 306 

Messinger’s  Ferry,  Big  Black  River,  Miss. 

Skirmishes  at. 


June  26,  1863.  See  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19 -July  4,  1863. 
Report  of  Sherman,  p.  246. 

June  29,  1863.  See  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19 -July  4,  1863. 
Reports  of 

Foster,  Charles.  Osterhaus,  Peter  J. 


June  30,  1863.  See  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19- July  4,  1863. 
Reports  of 


Foster,  Charles.  Herron,  Francis  J.  Walker,  William  A. 

July  3,  1863.  See  Vicksburg , Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19 -July  4,  1863. 
Report  of  Banks,  p.  308. 

July  4,  1863.  See  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19 -July  4,  1863. 
Reports  of 

Hall,  William.  Sanders,  Addison  n. 


July  6,  1863.  See  Jones’  and  Messinger' s Ferries,  Miss.  Skirmishes  at, 
July  6,  1863. 


* No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


INDEX 


761 


u 


Tage. 

Metham,  Pren.  Mentioned 157 

Meumann,  Theodore.  Mentioned 152,250,619 

Meyers,  Ernest  J.  Mentioned 667 

Miars,  Henry.  Mentioned 168 

Michigan  Troops.  Mentioned. 


Artillery,  Light — Batteries : 7th,  7,  13,  14,  18-20,  23,  25,  27,  129,  134,  150, 
229,  233,  240,  545,  580,  582-584,  586-588,  590 ; 8th,  10,  67,  156,  207,  292,  293. 
Cavalry — Regiments : 3d,  486, 488, 492, 495-498, 506, 673-677, 680. 

Infantry — Regiments : 2d,  149,543, 558, 562-566 ; 8th,  149, 543, 562, 565 ; 12th, 
155;  15th,  154,544,635,636;  17th,  149,542,560,561;  20th,  149,543,562; 


27th,  149,542,560,561. 

Mickle,  Belton.  Mentioned 79 

Midway  Hill,  Miss.  See  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863. 

Miller,  Alexander  J.  Mentioned 645, 647, 652 

Miller,  Colin.  Mentioned 166 

Miller,  Edgar  T.  Mentioned 305 

Miller,  J.  W.  Mentioned 294 

Miller,  Madison.  Mentioned 475 

Miller,  Samuel  J.  Mentioned 588 

Miller,  William.  Mentioned ., 651 

Millert,  Frederick  A.  Mentioned 214 

Millett,  B.  F.  Mentioned 329 

Milligan,  James  G.  Mentioned,, 591 

Milliken,  James  P.  Mentioned 165 

Milliken’s  Bend,  La. 

Attack  on,  June  7,  1863. 

Casualties.  Returns  of.  Confederate  troops 470 

Communication  from  U.  S.  Grant 446: 

Sketch 463. 

See  also  Louisiana,  Northern.  Operations  in,  June  3- July  10,  1863.  lie- 
ports  of 

Dennis,  Elias  S.  Porter,  David  D.  Taylor,  Richard. 

McCulloch,  Henry  E.  Strickle,  Abraham  E.  Walker,  John  G. 

Skirmish  at,  June  25,  1863* 4 

Mills,  Madison.  Mentioned 52 

Mills,  Milton.  Mentioned 150 

Minnehaha,  Steamer.  Mentioned 321 

Minnesota  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries : 1st,  157. 


Infantry — Regiments  : 3d,  155 ; 4th,  10,60-63,157,164,311,  312;  5th,  153, 


163, 451-453. 

Minroe,  Charles  A.  Mentioned 634 

Minton,  Calvin.  Mentioned 628,629,645,652 

Mississippi.  (See  Vicksburg.) 

Mississippi,  Citizens  of.  Distribution  of  supplies  to d39, 540 

Mississippi,  Northeastern.  Operations  in,  Juno  13-22,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Mersy,  August 475 

Mizner,  John  K 492 

Oglesby,  Richard  J 475 

Reports  of 

Kueffner,  William  C 477 

Oglesby,  Richard  J 473,474 

Phillips,  Jesse  J 474,475 


No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


762 


INDEX. 


Mississippi,  Northeastern.  Operations  in,  June  13-22, 1863— Continued. 

Reports  of 

Ruggles,  Daniel 481 

•Sheldon,  Charles  S 479 

Smith,  Joseph  C 479 

Mississippi,  Northwestern.  Operations  in,  June  15-25,  1863.  Reports  of 

Chalmers,  James  R 501 

George,  J.  Z 503 

Hatch,  Edward 495 

Hurlbut,  Stephen  A 485-488 

McCrillis,  La  Fayette 493 

Meek,  Bazil  D « 498 

Mizner,  John  K 489,  490 

Moore,  David 499 

Moore,  Francis  T 499 

Moyers,  Gilbert 496 

Oglesby,  Richard  J 489 

Mississippi  River.  See  Memphis,  Term.  Operations  on  the  Mississippi  River, 


Mississippi  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery,  Light — Battalions:  14th,*  327,  401,  694,  696,  698.  ( Batteries ),  C, 

79,  81,82.  Batteries:  Brookhaven,  672;  Pettus  Flying,  326, 350;  Quit- 
man,  502.  Regiments:  1st,  327,  410;  ( Batteries ),  A,  95,  99,  327,  365, 
369,  378,  381,  400  ; B,  C,  327;  D,  327,  402;  E,  327,  350;  F,  327,  515;  G, 
79-82, 85, 327 ; I,  327, 355 ; K,  327 ; L,  327, 328,  337, 350. 

Cavalry — Companies  : Henderson’s  Scouts,  426, 502, 503 ; Mitchell’s  Par- 
tisans,! 145, 424  ; Smyth’s,  327 ; Terrell’s,  515.  Regiments:  1st  Parti- 
san Rangers,  472,677;  1st,  555,660;  2d  Partisan  Rangers,  431;  4th, 
541, 555 ; 28th,  509, 510,  512, 541, 555;  Wirt  Adams’,  114, 121, 246, 509, 510, 


512, 


State.  Battalions:  Blythe’s,  429, 432, 490, 505, 684  ; George’s, 


684;  Ham’s, 481.  Companies:  Street’s,  424.  Regiments:  1st,  481;  3d, 
505, 684. 

Infantry — Battalions  : 7th,  326, 329, 369,  373,  375, 376,  378.  Regiments  : 3d, 
222, 224  ; 4th,  327, 329, 397, 399-401 ; 6th,  80, 82,  402,  691,  692  ; 14th,  541 ; 
16th,  222, 224 ; 20th,  128, 210, 214,  217-219, 221, 224, 400,  401,  641 ; 22d,  87, 
88,218,219,224;  23d,  82;  26th,  82,  698;  27th,  541;  35th,  327,  329,  369, 
381;  36th,  326,329,  369,  373,  375,  376,  378,  415  ; 37th,  326,  329,  369,  373, 
375, 378;  38th,  326,  329, 365, 369, 373,  375,  376, 378  ; 40th,  327,  329, 359, 369, 
381 ; 43d,  326,  329,  368,  369,  372, 373, 375, 376, 378;  46th,  327,  397, 399,  40Q. 
State.  Battalions  : 3d,  327, 402,  691-694,  697.  Regiments : 5tli,  327,  401, 
402. 


Mississippi  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Union.) 

Infantry — Regiments:  1st,  3d  ( Colored ),  158. 

Missouri  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries:  Bledsoe’s,  88;  Guibor’s,  110-113,327,402, 
414,  417,418;  Landis’,  110-113,  327,381,414,417,  418;  Lowe’s,  327,378, 
418  ; Saint  Louis,  327, 410, 418  ; Wade’s,  110-113, 327, 414, 417, 418. 

Cavalry — Regiments : 1st,  115,  327, 420,  422, 501 ; 2d,  493 ; 3d,  117, 327,  420, 
422. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 1st,  110-112, 327, 398,  411,413-417;  2d,  110, 112,  114, 
327,329,  413-417;  3d,  110-112,  327,407,  413-415,  417;  4th,  110, 414  ; 5th, 
36,110-112,327,372,373,  411,413-417;  6th,  110,  112,327,329,  365,368,  372, 
373, 376, 377, 412-417. 


*Batteries  designated  when  practicable. 

t Subsequently  Company  A,  18th  Mississippi  Battalion,  Cavalry 


INDEX. 


7G3 


’ago. 


Missouri  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Union.) 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries:  Joyce’s,*  004  ; Landgraeber’s,t  152,  1G2,250, 

251, 253,  526, 535, 549,  618.  Regiments : 1st  ( Batteries ),  A,  8, 44, 55-57, 151, 
241,546,598,  602;  B,  158,  319,  323;  C,  157,302;  E,  158,318;  F,  158,318, 

321;  1,473,475,477;  M,  10,  60, 157, 206. 

Cavalry — Battalions:  1st  ( Mississippi  Marine  Brigade),  431.  Regiments: 

1st,  429,  432, 444, 500 ; 4th,  9, 157, 213  ; 6th,  9, 143,  150, 199, 209, 211, 212, 
214,217-221,226,511,545,578-582,588;  10th,  153,  260,  483,  549,  663-665; 

11th,  483. 

Engineers— Regiments  : Bissell’s,  148,187,188. 

Infantry — Regiments : 3d,  152, 162, 250, 548,  619, 620, 665 ; 6th,  152, 159, 162, 

264, 265, 273, 549  ; 7th,  9, 156, 164, 198, 199, 205;,-  3th,  152, 159, 162, 264, 265, 
269,270,273,549;  10th,  10,44,64,  157,165,312;  11th,  153,163,273,438; 

12th,  152, 159,  162,  250-252,  548,  618,  619  ; 17tli,  152,  250,  548,  619 ; 18th, 

475,  476,  479;  24th,  10,  157;  26th,  10,  65-68,  157,  159,  165,  315,  316; 

27th,  29th,  152,  548  ; 30th,  31st,  152, 159, 162, 548;  32d,  152,  548 ; 35th, 

172,  178, 189,  192. 

Mitchell,  Greenville  M.  Mentioned 155 

Mitchell,  James  A.  Mentioned 11,42,50 

Mitchell,  Joseph.  Mentioned 280 

Mitchell,  R.  Carlton.  Mentioned 568 

Mitchell,  W.  D.  Mentioned 470 

Mitchell,  W.  R.  Mentioned 145 

Mizner,  John  K. 

Mentioned 474,  475,  485-490,  495, 496, 673 

Reports  of  operations  in  Northwestern  Mississippi,  June  15-25,  1863 489,490 

Moats,  Virgil  H.  Mentioned 166, 238 

Monroe,  George  W.  Mentioned 13,  21,  25,  150,  590 

Montgomery,  Bacon.  Mentioned 35,578,579,581,583 

Montgomery,  L.  M.  Mentioned 122 

Montgomery,  Milton.  Mentioned 155 

Montgomery,  Samuel.  Mentioned 217,218,220,221 

Moody,  G.  Mentioned 329 

Moody,  Joseph  D.  Mentioned 21 

Moore,  Colonel.  Mentioned . 598 

Moore,  B.  L.  Mentioned 407,  410 

Moore,  Columbus.  Mentioned 594 

Moore,  David. 

Mentioned 144,321 

Reports  of 

Memphis,  Tenn.  Scouts  from. 

July  3,  1863 518 

J uly  20-21,  1863 685 

Mississippi,  Northwestern.  Operations  in,  June  15-25,  1863  499 

Moore,  Davidson  C.  Mentioned 204,208 

Moore,  Francis  T.  Report  of  operations  in  Northwestern  Mississippi,  June 

15-25,1863 499 

Moore,  Frederick  W. 

Mentioned... 150 

Report  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16,  1863,  including  opera- 
tions April  14-May  22 36 

Moore,  Ira.  Report  of  operations,  July  5-21,  18C3,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss., 

Campaign 612 

* Howitzer  battery  attached  to  10th  Missouri  Cavalry. 

t Also  called  1st  Horse.  Became  Battery  F,  2d  Artillery,  in  September,  1863. 


764 


INDEX. 


Moore,  Israel  T.  Mentioned Pa|!L 

Moore,  Janies  M.  Mentioned jGg 

Moore,  J.  B.  Mentioned 4G4 

Moore,  John  C. 

Correspondence  with 

Barry,  William  S og.> 

Colbert,  W.  B ' 

Dowdell,  J.  F 383 

Forney,  John  H .7"  .'.'77  .77 77  777360,  383 

Higley,  John  H 3g3 

Lanier,  Thomas  C * 3g3 

Smith,  Ashbel 3g3 

Mentioned : 324, 325, 327, 331-333,  336, 360-367, 369,'370,'3fei,'384,  385,*415,  420 

Reports  of  operations,  May  17- July  4,  1863,  including  the  siege  of  Vicks- 
burg, Miss . . . . . ......  380  381 

Moore,  John  Jay.  Mentioned ’32g 

Moore,  Jonathan  B.  Mentioned 154*195  603 

Moore,  S.  T.  Mentioned ’ 99 

Morford,  Jerome.  Mentioned ^ 

Morgan, . Mentioned 211 

Morgan,  J.  H.  Mentioned * * 443 

Morgan,  William  H.  Mentioned 44g 

Morrill,  I.  N.  Mentioned **[’[* 312 

Morris,  Edward  M. 

Correspondence  with  Peter  J.  Osterhaus 221 

Mentioned 221  ^ 

Morrison,  David.  Mentioned ’557,562!  563 

Morse,  William  A.  Mentioned 624 

Morton,  Charles  A.  Mentioned *'**  '[  “’ 2gl 

Mott,  Samuel  R. 

Mentioned 152,270,271 

Report  of  operations,  May  4-24,  1863,  against  Vicksburg,  Miss 279 

Mound  Plantation,  near  Lake  Providence,  La.  Skirmishes  at 

May  24,  1863* ' . 

June  24,  1863* 

— • - • — - 4 

Mount  Pleasant,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  Aug.  5,  1863  * 5 

Mouton,  Alfred.  Mentioned 4gj 

Mower,  Joseph  A. 

Mentioned 153, 163, 259, 282, 284, 285, 436, 437, 439, 440, 452, 533, 621 

Report  of  operations  in  Northern  Louisiana,  June  3-July  10,  1863 451 

Mowry,  Henry  C.  Mentioned ’ 1G5 

Moyers,  Gilbert. 

Mentioned 491,493,495,674 

Report  of  operations  in  Northwestern  Mississippi,  June  15-25, 1863 496 

Mud  Creek,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  June  20, 1863.  See  Mississippi,  Northeastern. 
Operations  in,  Jane  13-22,  1863. 

Kueffner,  William  C.  Phillips,  Jesse  J.  Sheldon,  Charles  S. 

Oglesby,  Richard  J.  Ruggles,  Daniel.  Smith,  Joseph  C. 

Mueller,  Alexander.  Mentioned 

Mueller,  Michael.  Mentioned 154 

Mumford,  W.  T.  Mentioned 340 

Munitions  of  War.  Supplies  of,  etc.  See  reports  of  Tourtellotie,  p.  60  : Gates, 
p.  118,*  Haws,  p.  180;  Osterliaus,  p.  209 Herron,  p.  317 ; Carter, 
p.  513 ; Sherman,  p.  522. 


* No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


INDEX. 


765 


Page. 

Munson,  Gilbert  D.  Mentioned 653 

Murdock,  George.  Mentioned 42,44 

Murphy,  L.  B.  Mentioned 1152 

Murray,  Charles  H.  Mentioned 481 

Murrell,  A.  T.  Mentioned a 329, 362 

Myers,  Benjamin  H.  Mentioned 270 

Myers,  Charles  D. 

Mentioned 657,658 

Report  of  operations,  July  7-17,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign   657 

Myrick}  John  D.  Mentioned 79 

Nale,  John  H.  Mentioned 154,603,604 

Nall,  M.  S.  Mentioned 100 

Napoleon,  Ark.  Expedition  from  Helena  to,  May  23  to  — , 1863.  Report  of 

Walter  B.  Scates 430 

Nash,  Jesse.  Mentioned 594 

Nasmith,  Samuel  J. 

Mentioned 155 

Report  of  expedition  from  Snyder’s  Bluff  to  Greenville,  Miss.,  June  25-Julv 

1,  1863 516 

Natchez,  Miss. 

Expedition  from,  July  26-30,  1863.  Report  of  Thomas  E.  G.  Ransom 685 

Occupation  of,  by  Union  troops,  July  13,  1863.  Report  of  Thomas  E.  G. 

Ransom 680 

Skirmish  near.  See  Saint  Catharine's  Creek,  Miss.  Skirmish  near  Natchez, 
at,  July  31,  1863. 

National,  New,  Steamer.  Mentioned  669 

Naughton,  Patrick.  Mentioned 665 

Navy,  U.  S.  Co-operation  with  the  Army 31,48,337, 

426, 437, 443,  445, 448, 450,  453-455, 459, 464, 469, 471, 488, 507, 516, 669-672 

Neal,  J.  H.  Mentioned - 421 

Neeley,  George  W.  Mentioned - 158 

Neely,  J.  J.  Mentioned 433 

Neet,  Frederick  R.  Mentioned 665 

Negroes.  See  Slaves  and  Slave  Property. 

Neil,  John  B.  Mentioned 630 

Nelson,  John  C.  Mentioned 640 

Nelson,  Noel  L.  Mentioned 90 

Nelson,  Thomas  P.  Mentioned 327,404 

Nelson,  William.  Mentioned 522 

Nevins,  Garrett.  Mentioned 156,165,298 

New  Albany,  Miss. 

Expedition  from  Pocahontas,  Tenn.,  to.  See  Pocahontas,  Tenn.  Expedition 
from,  to  New  Albany  and  Ripley,  Miss.,  June  12-14,  1863. 

Skirmish  at,  June  19,  1863.  See  Mississippi,  Northeastern.  Operations  in, 

June  13-22,  1863.  Reports  of 

Kueffner,  William  C.  Ruggles,  Daniel.  Smith,  Joseph  C. 

Phillips,  Jesse  J. 

Newby,  Henry.  Mentioned 275 

Newcomb,  William  L.  Mentioned 157, 304 

New  Hampshire  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 6th,  149,  543, 571 ; 9th,  149, 543 ; 11th,  149, 543, 566. 
Newman,  F.  Mentioned 329 


766 


INDEX. 


New  National,  Steamer.  Mentioned PS 

Newsom,  J.  F.  Mentioned „ bbJ 

Newton,  Henry.  Mentioned . 66 

New  York  Troops.  Mentioned.  166 

Artillery,  Light—  Regiments  : 2d  ( Batteries ),  L,  149,543,568  569 
Infantry  Regiments : 46th,  149, 543, 558,  572, 573;  51st.  149, 543, 568;  79th 
149,  543,  557,  558,  562,  563, 565.  ' 

Niles,  Nathaniel.  Mentioned rQf. 

Nispel,  George  L.  Mentioned J?? 

Noble,  John  W.  Mentioned ’ ' ! ! 1 ‘ ! * ’ ™ \ 

Nonweiler,  Philip.  Eeport  of  operations,  July  5-24,  1863,  during  the  Jadc- 

son,  Miss.,  Campaign 

Norcom,  W.  Mentioned 

Norris,  D.  E.  Mentioned go 

North  Carolina  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry  Regiments : 29th,  668,  671,672;  38th,  541 ; 60th,  654. 

Northeastern  Mississippi.  See  Mississippi,  Northeastern. 

Northern  Louisiana.  See  Louisiana,  Northern. 

Northwestern  Mississippi.  See  Mississippi,  Northwestern. 

Norton,  John  B.  Mentioned 

Norwood,  Alexander  S.  Mentioned **.*!’"  399*407 *409  410 

Norwood,  James  K.  Mentioned ’ ’ ’ J? 

Notestine,  William.  Mentioned ” ” 

Nugent,  Edward  B.  Mentioned * 

Nutting,  Oscar  F.  4 

21,150,830,580,584,585 

Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  Operations,  July  5-23,  1863,  during 
the ® 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations,  May  19-23,  1863,  during  the  siege  ^ 

229 

Obion  River,  Miss.  Skirmish  on  the,  June  17,  1863.  See  Memphis',  Term. 

Operations  on  the  Mississippi  River,  near,  June  17-18,  1863.  Re- 
port of  Asboth,  p.  507. 

O Daniel,  Andrew.  Mentioned. 

Odell,  James  H.  Mentioned ’ ” ' oun  osq 

Offley,  Robert  H.  Mentioned 90^  907 

Ogden,  ph  Mentioned 

Oglesby,  Richard  J.  ’ * 

Correspondence  with  Stephen  A.  Hurlbut  * 47c 

“en“ 49o 

Eeports  of 

Jackson,  Tenn.  Expedition  across  Tennessee  Ei  ver,  from,  June  — to  7 

. . 1863 ; 445 

Mississippi,  Northeastern.  Operations  in,  June  13-22,1863 473,474 

Mississippi,  Northwestern.  Operations  in,  June  15-25,  1863  ...  ?489 

Ohio  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light— Batteries  : 2d,  8, 51, 151, 209, 210, 240, 546,  602 : 3d,  10, 156 
207,  292, 293 ; 4th,  152, 516,  549  ; 5th,  155,  290,  548,  604,  605,  608,  655  ; 7th 
155, 548, 606  ; 8th,  153, 260, 549  ; 10th,  157,  303,  304,  308 ; 11th,  10, 60, 157  • 
iSth,  155,548,  607,  608;  16th,  8,  42,  44,  50,  51,151,  240,546,  597,  60o’  601* 

17th,  8, 30-33, 35, 36, 150, 161, 546, 594.  ’ 

Cavalry  Companies  : 4th,  9, 155.  Regiments : 5th,  429, 432, 444, 475-481  483 
500,  501,  ’ ’ 


INDEX, 


767 


Tage. 

Ohio  Troops.  Mentioned — Continued. 

Infantry — Regiments : 16th,  7, 13, 15,  1C,  20, 25-28,  129,  150, 159, 161, 545,  580, 

590,  591;  20th,  9,  155,  198,  204,  295;  22d,  155;  30th,  153,  159,  163,  257, 

' 258,  281,  282,  549;  32d,  9,  156,  164;  37th,  153,  159,  163,  257,  258,  281-284, 

549;  42d,  7,  13,  15,  20,  22,  25-28,  129,  150,  159,  161,  225,  226,  545,  580,  590, 

591 ; 46th,  154,  544,  635,  636,  638,  639,  647,  648,  650 ; 47th,  153, 159, 163,  257, 
258,281,283,  549;  48th,  8,  150,  161,  236-240,  546,  596;  53d,  154,  544,  642, 

643 ; 54th,  152,  159, 162,  265-267,  269,  271,  273,  275-280,  549,  591 ; 56th,  8, 

41,  45,  55,  57,  59, 151,  546, 602, 603 ; 57th,  152, 159, 162,  265, 267, 269-271,  273, 
275,277,279-281,549;  68th,  9,  155,164,198,295;  70th,  154,  544,  642,  699; 

7!2d,  153,159,163,286-288,550,621-624  ; 76th,  152,  162,  251,  548,  553,  618, 

619 ; 78th,  9, 155, 198, 295, 296,  653 ; 80th,  10,  157,  312 ; 83d,  8,  30,  33,  34, 

36-39, 129, 150,  159,  161,  545,  594  ; 95th,  153,  159, 163, 286-288, 550, 621, 622; 

96th,  150,545,594,595;  114th,  7,13,15,20,  25-28,  129,  150,  159,  161,  225; 


120th,  12, 20, 150, 159,  ICO,  210, 231-233, 545,  580,  586. 

Ohr,  Simon  P.  Mentioned . „ 155 

Oliver,  John’M.  Mentioned 154 

O’Meara,  Timothy. 

Mentioned 154,629 

Report  of  operations,  July  4-14,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  632 

O’Neal,  George  E.  Mentioned 260,282 

O’Neil,  Michael.  Mentioned 515 

Ong,  Finley  D.  Mentioned ICO 

Ord,  Edward  O.  C. 

Correspondence  with  U.  S.  Grant 209 


Mentioned. . . 149, 169, 171, 174, 175, 178, 184, 236, 241, 249, 306,  318,  521-523, 525, 526, 
528, 530,  533-537, 545, 547, 550, 556,  574,  575,  581,  583,  588,  597,  598,  608,  610 


Reports  of 

Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  Operations,  July  5-21,  1863,  during  the.  573,574 
Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations,  June  23-July  1,  1863,  during  the  siege 


of 208,209 

Supersedes  McCiernand  in  command  of  13tli  Army  Corps 4 

Ordnance  and  Ordnance  Stores.  Captures  of,  at 

Big  Black  River  Bridge,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  17,  1863 130, 131, 418 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863 52, 99, 418 

Grand  Gulf,  Miss.,  May  3,  1863  -- - 418 

Jackson,  Miss 641 

Snyder’s  Mill,  Miss.,  May  17,  1863  380 


Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19-July  4,  1863....  178,  336,  341,  370,  405, 411,  418 
See  also  reports  of  Hains,  p.  180 ; Stevenson  ( inclosure ),  p.  349 ; Hebert , p.  378 ; 


Herron,  p.  667. 

Organization,  Strength,  etc. 

Confederate  troops... 326-328 

Union  troops 148,  158,  580 

Orme,  R.  Mentioned 98 

Orme,  William  W.  Mentioned 158,  319,  668,669 

Osband,  Embury  D.  Mentioned 148 

Osterhaus,  Peter  J. 

Correspondence  with 

McCiernand,  John  A 219 

Morris,  Edward  M 221 

Wright,  Clark 225, 228 

Mentioned 7,  22,  23,  25,  26,  30,  32,  41, 

42, 128, 132, 134, 135,  137, 146,  150,  160, 161,  169,  225, 233,  240,  245,  246,248, 
255, 256, 263, 312,  545, 574-576, 584, 585, 592-595, 610, 614, 621-623,  626,  627 


768 


INDEX. 


Osterhaus,  Peter  J.— Continued.  Page' 

Reports  of 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of.  May  16, 1863,  including  operations 

May  2-23 j0 

Edwards  Station,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  July  1, 1863 227 

Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  Operations,  July  6-24, 1863,  during  the 5.  y 

Macon  Ford,  Big  Black  River,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  June  9, 1863 2*20 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations,  May  24- July  4,  1863,  during  the  siege 

of 209,228 

Overturf,  Joseph  E.  Mentioned 477  439  43^ 

Owen,  Private.  Mentioned ’ ’ 304 

Owen,  E.  K.  Mentioned 449 

Owen,  Erastus  N.  Mentioned ^ 

Owen,  H.  P.  Mentioned 

Owen,  Richard. 

Mentioned 150, 545>  592>  593>  596>  597 

Report  of  operations,  J uly  7-23, 1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  593 

Paddock,  John  W.  Mentioned 152 

Paine,  Charles  J.  Mentioned 153 

Palmer,  Henry  B.  Mentioned 493 

Panola,  Miss. 

Expedition  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to,  June  16-24, 1863.* 4 

Skirmishes  near,  June  19-20,  1863.  S ee  Mississippi,  Northwestern.  Opera - 
tions  in,  June  15-25, 1863.  Reports  of 
Hatch,  Edward.  Miznor,  John  K.  Moyers,  Gilbert. 

Pardee,  Don  A.  Mentioned 21  26  150 

Parke,  John  G. 

Mentioned 149, 168, 245, 246, 249, 521, 522, 525, 528-530, 533, 

534, 537, 542, 544,  550, 552, 557, 558, 562, 567, 570, 571, 578, 629, 645, 648,  652 
Reports  of  operations,  July  4-23,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign  554,555 

Resumes  command  of  9th  Army  Corps,  June  5,  1863 4 

Parke,  Lemuel. 

Mentioned 151 

Report  of  operations,  July  10-24,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign  613 

Parkell,  Alonzo  B. 

Mentioned 509,510,533 

Report  of  skirmish  near  Birdsong  Ferry,  at  Jones’  Plantation,  Miss.,  June 

22,  1863 510 

Parker,  J.  H.  Mentioned 173 

Parker,  Job  R.  Mentioned 150  236-238 

Parker,  William  C.  Mentioned 118  327 

Parrett,  Robert.  Mentioned 534 

Parry,  Augustus  C.  Mentioned 153,259,281,282 

Parsons,  John  D.  Mentioned 373 

Parsons,  W.  H.  Mentioned 450,466 

Patterson,  J.  Mentioned 662 

Patterson,  R.  B.  Mentioned 677 

Patterson,  R.  F.  Mentioned 100 

Patterson,  Thomas  H.  Mentioned 103 

Patterson,  William  F Mentioned 132, 149, 181,  186,  204 

Patton,  Isaac  W.  Mentioned 366,  370,  375,  379 


*No  Qirc.uinstantial  reports  on  file. 


INDEX. 


769 


See  Jackson , Miss.,  Campaign , July  5-25, 


Tagc. 

Patton,  William  A.  M.  Mentioned 109,355 

Paxson,  Elihu.  Mentioned 480 

Pearl  River,  Miss. 

Reconnaissance  to,  July  15,  1863. 

1863.  Reports  of 

Hall,  Cyrus  Hovey,  Alvin  P. 

Reconnaissance  toward,  July  11,  1863.  See  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign , July 
5-25,  1863.  Report  of  Landr am,  p.  596. 

Skirmish  on.  See  Grant’s  Ferry , Miss.  Skirmish  on  Pearl  River,  at,  July  16, 

1863. 

Pearson,  Henry  H.  Mentioned 149 

Pearson,  Robert  N.  Mentioned 155 

Pearson,  S.  C.  Mentioned 329 

Pease,  Phineas.  Report  of  capture  of  Union  pickets,  near  Germantown, 

Tenn.,  July  18,  1863 684 

Peaslee,  Alfred  J.  Mentioned 166 

Peckham,  James.  Mentioned 152 

Peckinpaugh,  William  H.  Mentioned 588 

Pemberton,  John  C. 

Correspondence  with 

Bowen,  John  S 422 

Cockrell,  Francis  M 109 

Forney,  John  H 371,  373,  374,  381 

Green,  Martin  E 423 

Higgins,  Edward 340 

Smith,  Aslibel 384 

Stevenson,  Carter  L 345,  347,350 

Mentioned 6, 47, 48, 69, 70, 73-77 , 79, 

80, 83, 84, 89, 91-93, 96, 101, 102, 107, 108, 110, 118, 121-123, 126, 128, 146, 213, 
223,  239,  244,  249,  324-326,  328,  343, 346-348, 350, 357, 374, 399, 405, 523, 524 

Pender,  Thomas.  Mentioned 322 

Pennock,  A.  M.  Mentioned 488 

Pennsylvania  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light — Batteries : D,  149,  543,  568,  569. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 45th,  149,  542,  557, 558, 560, 561 ; 50th,  149, 543, 558, 
572,573;  51st,  149,543;  100th,  149, 543, 562, 564. 

Perry,  James  P.  Mentioned 11,45 

Perry,  Oran.  Mentioned 150,586,588 

Peters,  J.  H.  Mentioned 249',  250 

Peterson,  Samuel  G.  W.  Mentioned 237 

Pettus,  Edmund  W.  Mentioned  ...  — ...... .103, 326, 344, 345, 350, 351, 35o, 35/, 358 

Pettus,  John  J.  Mentioned 1 481 

Petty,  E.  P.  Mentioned 469 

Peutonia,  Steamer.  Mentioned 668 

Phifer,  C.  W.  Mentioned 356 

Phillips,  C.  D.  Mentioned 95,100 

Phillips,  George.  Mentioned 56 

Phillips,  H.  L.  Mentioned 640 

Phillips,  Jesse  J. 

Mentioned 473-475, 478, 483, 486, 488, 674, 675 

Reports  of 

Jackson,  Tenn.  Expedition  to,  July  12-15,  1863  676 

Mississippi,  Northeastern.  Operations  in,  June  13-22,  1863 474,475 

4:9  R R — YGL  XXIV?  PT  II 


770 


INDEX. 


Phillips,  Jesse  J.— Continued.  PaSe- 

Reports  of 

Pocahontas,  Tenn.  Expedition  from,  to  New  Albany  and  Ripley 

Miss.,  and  skirmishes,  June  12-14,  1863  ’ 473 

. Ripley>  Miss*  ExPedition  from  Pocahontas,  Tenn.,  to,  June  8-9, I8G3I  479 
Phillips,  John.  Mentioned 

Phillips,  John  E.  Mentioned ^ 

Pickerell,  William  T.  Mentioned 1 1!  1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 ! ! " ” ” i ^ 

Pierce,  Allen.  Mentioned 

Pierce,  Converse.  Mentioned... ??? 

Pierson,  David.  Mentioned ’ * " * * 

Pike,  Steamer.  Mentioned ’ 

Pittman,  W.  B.  Mentioned.  ””  '111*117491 

Platner,  William  H.  Mentioned 11! "*  ” *'  ] ' Ioa 

Platt,  Arthur.  Mentioned 

Platte  Valley,  Steamer.  Mentioned ’ ’ - jL 

Plattsmier,  J.  T.  Mentioned „„„ 

td  cs*.  i ,,  . 326,37o,379 

Poage,  Stephen  W.  Mentioned 

Pocahontas,  Tenn. 

Expedition  from,  to  New  Albany  and  Ripley,  Miss.,  and  skirmishes,  Juno 

12-14,  1863.  Report  of  Jesse  J.  Phillips  473 

Expedition  from,  to  Ripley,  Miss.  See  Bipley,  Miss.  Expedition  "from  Po- 
cahontas,  Tenn.,  io,  June  8-9,  1863. 

Expedition  from,  toward  Pontotoc,  Miss.  See  Pontotoc,  Miss.  Expedition 
from  Pocahontas , Tenn.,  toivard,  June  17-22,  1863 

Poindexter,  W.  Q.  Mentioned 530,531,539,510 

Polmg,  Jefferson.  Mentioned 

Pollard,  H.  M.  Mentioned lllllllll*  *111  . " ’ 

Pomerene,  Joel.  Mentioned 

Pontotoc,  Miss.  Expedition  from  Pocahontas,  Tenn.,  toward,  June  17-22 

1863  \ ’ > 

Poole,  De  Witt  C.  Mentioned ^4 

Pope,  Henry  H.  Mentioned 

Pope,  J.  P . Mentioned * 45 

Pope,  William  S.  Mentioned 

Popendieck,  Louis.  Mentioned * 3r? 

Porter,  David  D. 

Mentioned 101  . 

Reports  of  ’ 446, 447 

Louisiana,  Northern.  Operations  in,  June  3-July  10,  1863  453,454 

Yazoo  City,  Miss.  Operations,  July  12-14,  1863,  during  expedition 

from  Vicksburg  to r.pq 

Porter,  William  C. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  assault  on  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  22,  1863 272 

Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  1,  1863.  Casualties'."  Returns  of’ " Union 
troops 

See  also  Champion's  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863.  Reports  of  " 

Burbridge.  Stephen  G.  Moore,  Frederick  W.  Strong,  Joseph  G. 

Guppey,  Joshua  J. 

Also,  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19 -July  4,  1863.  Reports  of 

Hickenlooper,  Andrew.  Lucas,  Thomas  J.  Tresilian,  Stewart  K. 

Lee,  Charles  1ST.  Sullivan,  Peter  J. 

Also  report  of  Burbridge,  p.  30.  Also  Part  I,  p.  581. 


No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


INDEX 


771 


Pago. 

Portis,  John  W.  Mentioned 327 

Potter,  Joseph  B.  Mentioned.... 283 

Potter,  Leander  H.  Mentioned  612 

Potter,  Robert  B. 

Mentioned 149, 536, 543, 555-558,  564 , 565, 572 

Report  of  operations,  July  4-17,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign   567, 568 

Potts,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned 156 

Powell,  Albert  M.  Mentioned 172, 199, 200 

Powell,  John  W.  Mentioned 157 

Powers,  Frank  P.  Mentioned 686 

Pratt,  Julius  A.  Mentioned 167 

Prentiss,  Benjamin  M.  Mentioned 430,508 

President,  C.  S.  See  Jefferson  Davis. 

President,  U.  S.  See  Abraham  Lincoln. 

Price,  General,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 31,235 

Price,  John  T.  Report  of  scout  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  toward  Hernando,  Miss., 

May  27,  1863 443 

Price,  Sterling.  Mentioned * 450,455,488,517,665 

Pride,  David  S.  Mentioned 606 

Prime,  Frederick  E. 

Mentioned 168, 177, 178, 180, 193 

Report  of  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  19-July  4,  1863 168 

Prince  of  Wales,  Steamer.  Mentioned 668 

Prisoners  of  War.  Capture,  treatment,  exchange  of,  etc..  52,210,324,325,466,507 

Private  Property.  Action  touching — 211,- 

212, 450, 466, 492, 496-498, 503, 508, 517, 526, 576, 679, 680, 685 

Proudfit,  James  K.  Mentioned 607 

Pudic,  Private.  Mentioned 117 

Pugh,  Isaac  C. 

Mentioned 154, 290, 291, 547, 575, 598, 599, 607, 656 

Report  of  operations,  July  5-12,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  603 

Purcell,  William.  Mentioned 302, 310 

Purcell,  Thomas.  Mentioned 310 

Purvis,  J oseph  L . Mentioned 158 

Puryear,  Thomas.  Mentioned 482,483 

Putnam,  Holden. 

Mentioned 63,67,146,157,165 

Report  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16,  1863,  including  opera- 
tions May  9-22 64 

Putnam,  James  F.  Mentioned 153 

Queen’s  Hill,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  July  7,  1863.  See  Jackson , Miss.,  Campaign , ^ 

July  5-25,  1863.  Reports  of 

Corse,  JohnM.  Sanford,  William  W. 

Quinby,  Isaac  F. 

Mentioned 34, 42, 44, 46, 61, 157, 164, 165, 197, 199, 200, 202, 204, 205, 236 

Report  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16,  1863,  including  opera- 
tions April  20-May  20 59 

Quinn’s  Mills,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  June  16,  1863.  See  Mississippi,  Northwest- 
ern. Operations  in,  June  15-25,  1863.  Reports  of 
Hatch,  Edward.  McCrillis,  La  Fayette.  Moyers,  Gilbert. 

Rader,  George  H.  Mentioned 444 

Radtke,  William.  Mentioned 277,278 

Raines,  John,  Steamer.  Mentioned 516 


772 


INDEX. 


Raleigh,  Tenn.  Expedition  from  Memphis  to,  July  19-23,  1863* 5 

Ralston,  J.  H.  Mentioned 282 

Ralston,  Thomas  A.  Mentioned g07 

Randal,  Horace.  Mentioned 459j  464j  471>  4?2 

Randolph,  A..  S.  Mentioned  ...... ...... ...... .... .... .... ..  _ . 329  362 

Rankin,  R.  S.  Mentioned ’113 

Ransom,  Thomas  E.  G. 

Correspondence  with  Thomas  W.  Humphrey 300 

Mentioned jgg 

164,  168,  172  199  200  202,206,258,259,264,269,299,300,303,309,324,325 

Reports  of 

Natchez,  Miss. 

Expedition  from,  July  26-30,  1863  685 

Occupation  of,  by  Union  troops,  July  13,  1863  680 

Saint  Catharine’s  Creek,  Miss.  Skirmish  near  Natchez,  at,  July  31, 

1863  686 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations,  April  26-May  22,  18&3,  against 296 

Rany,  James.  Mentioned ggg 

Raum,  Green  B. 

Mentioned 

Report  of  operations,  May  20-July  4,  1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg, 

Miss 312 

Rawlings,  Washington.  Mentioned 138 

Rawlins,  John  A.  Mentioned 198  249  446 

For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  U.  S.  Grant. 

Raymond,  Miss. 

Capture  of,  May  24,  1863.  See  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19 -July  4, 

1863.  Report  of  Osterhaus,  p.  209. 

Engagement  at,  May  12, 1863.  See  Champion's  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May 
16,  1863.  Reports  of 

Putnam,  Holden.  Tourtellotte,  John  E. 

See  also  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19- July  4,  1863.  Reports  of 
* Hickenlooper,  Andrew.  Tresilian,  Stewart  E. 

Also  Part  I,  p.  704. 

Skirmish  near,  May  13,  1863.  See  Champion's  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May 
16, 1863.  Report  of  Putnam , p.  64. 

Raynor,  William  H.  Mentioned 45,55,151  602 

Redburn,  Francis  M.  Mentioned 54 

Redditt,  W.  A.  Mentioned 4q4 

Redfield,  James  H.  Mentioned 33  35  159 

Redmond,  J.  R.  Mentioned ’339 

Reed,  Charles  F.  Mentioned 285 

Reed,  David  W.  Mentioned 624 

Reed,  J.  Frank.  Mentioned 319 

Reed,  Joseph  R. 

Mentioned 153,678 

Report  of  operations,  May  2-July  4,  1863,  including  the  siege  of  Vicks- 
burg, Miss 284 

Rees,  John  D.  Mentioned I55  168 

Reese,  Theodore.  Mentioned 496  497  674 

Reeve,  John  J.  Mentioned 98  352 

Reeves,  George.  Mentioned 433 

Reid,  A.  C.  Mentioned 433,434 

*No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


INDEX. 


773 


Page. 

Reid,  H.  J.  Mentioned 87,88 

Reid,  Hugh  T. 

Mentioned 156,305,448,449 

Reports  of  operations  in  Northern  Louisiana,  June  3-July  10, 1863 449, 450 

Reid,  William  M.  Mentioned 606 

Remick,  Otis.  Mentioned 617 

Ren  wick,  W.  P.  Mentioned 373 

Rex,  Oliver  P.  Mentioned 610 

Reynolds,  A.  E. 

Mentioned 71, 78, 82, 83 

Report  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16,  1863 79 

Reynolds,  A.  W. 

Correspondence  with  Carter  L.  Stevenson 348 

Mentioned 94, 97-99, 101, 126, 143, 324-326, 328, 329, 336, 342-346 

Reports  of 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863  107 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations,  May  18-July  4,  1863,  during  the  siege  of. . 355 

Reynolds,  D.  H.  Mentioned 658,659 

Rhode  Island  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 7th,  149, 543, 570, 571. 

Rhodes,  Hinman.  Mentioned 154,603,607,608 


Rice,  Charles  S.  Mentioned 150 

Rice,  John  W.  Mentioned 666 

Richardson,  George  W.  Mentioned 35, 596 

Richardson,  Harper  S.  Mentioned 551 

Richardson,  Robert.  Mentioned 327, 399, 402, 404 

Richardson,  R.  V.  Mentioned 666, 667, 674, 683, 687 

Richmond,  George  N.  Report  of  expedition  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  toward 

Hernando,  Miss.,  May  26,  1863 432 

Richmond,  Jonathan.  Mentioned 155 

Richmond,  La. 

Action  near,  June  15,  1863.  See  Louisiana,  Northern.  Operations  in,  JuneS- 
July  10,  1863.  Reports  of 
Hubbard,  Lucius  F.  Mower,  Joseph  A. 

Skirmish  near,  June  6, 1863.  See  Louisiana,  Northern. 

July  10,  1863.  Reports  of 


Porter,  David  D. 
Operations  in,  June  3- 


Dennis,  Elias  S. 


Taylor,  Richard. 


Riddle,  George  W.  Mentioned 23 

Riddle,  John  S.  Mentioned 160,275 

Ridley,  S.  J.  Mentioned 95 

Rienzi,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  Aug.  8,  1863.* 5 

Riley,  A.  C.  Mentioned 111,113,327,406,414,417 

Ripley,  Miss. 

Expeditions  from  Pocahontas,  Tenn,  to. 

June  8-9,  1863.  Report  of  Jesse  J.  Phillips 472 


June  12-14,  1863.  See  Pocahontas,  Tenn.  Expedition  from,  to  New  Al- 
bany and  Ripley,  Miss.,  June  12-14,  1863. 

Skirmishes  at. 

July  7,  1863.* 5 

Aug.  3,  1863* 5 

Risdon,  O.  C.  Mentioned 26-28 


No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


774 


INDEX. 


Robb,  Hamilton.  Mentioned 

Robb,  Matthew  A.  Mentioned 255  243 

Robbins,  Frank  M.  Mentioned " ’ ’54 

Robbins,  George  W.  Mentioned 253 

Roberds,  A.  C.  Deport  of  operations,  May  17-July  4,  1863,  including  the  siege 

of  Vicksburg,  Miss & 35^ 

Roberts,  William  A.  Mentioned 139  143  K3(j  242 

Roberts,  William  Y.  Mentioned ’ 255 

Robertson,  E.  W.  Mentioned 410 

Robertson,  H.  G.  Mentioned 227 

Robertson,  James.  Mentioned *255  243 

Robinson,  B.  V.  Mentioned ’322 

Robinson,  H.  C.  Mentioned 32^ 

Robinson,  Henry.  Mentioned * 79  439 

Robinson,  Powhatan.  Mentioned 59  ^ 329^  332,  334  335*  345 

Robinson,  Theodore  B.  Mentioned 221 

Robinson,  William.  Mentioned 266 

Rocket,  Steamer.  Mentioned 502 

Rocky  Creek,  Miss.  Skirmish  near  Ellisville,  at,  June  25,  1863.  See  Broolc- 
Jiaven,  Miss.  Union  raid  on,  June  23-26,  1863.  Report  of  Wilson , 
p.  514. 

Roddey,  P.  D.  Mentioned 474  486 

Rodgers,  Benjamin  F.  Mentioned 155,  606 

Rodgers,  Henry  A.  Mentioned ’293 

Roemer,  Jacob.  Mentioned 149 

Rogers,  George  C.  Mentioned 154 

Rogers,  Henry  A.  Mentioned 256  167 

Rogers,  J.  W.  Mentioned ’ g3 

Rogers,  Madison.  Mentioned 404 

Rogers,  Newton  J.  Mentioned 395 

Rollmann,  Oscar.  Mentioned. 47g 

Romer,  Francis.  Mentioned... 250  619 

Root,  Edward  E.  Mentioned 270 

Rorer,  W.  A.  Mentioned 214,  217>  218j  401 

Rose,  James  G.  Mentioned 327 

Roseberry,  John.  Mentioned.... 329  416 

Rosecrans,  William  S.  Mentioned 486-489,662 

Ross,  L.  S.  Mentioned 449  555 

Ross,  William.  Mentioned 204  206 

Routh,  S.  M.  Mentioned 458,  459 

Rowan,  John  A.  Mentioned 327 

Rowan,  J ohn  B.  Mentioned- 109.  326 

Ruckman,  John  L.  Mentioned  552 

Ruckman,  Joseph.  Mentioned.. 551 

Ruggles,  Daniel. 

Mentioned  474, 480, 486, 541, 684 

Report  of  operations  in  Northeastern  Mississippi,  June  13-22,  1863 481 

Ruggles,  M.  B.  Mentioned 484 

Rumsey,  Israel  P.  Mentioned 153 

Russell,  Captain.  Mentioned 79 

Russell,  D.R.  Mentioned 441 

Russell,  S.D.  Mentioned 364,371 

Russell,  Thomas.  Mentioned 202, 207 

Ruth,  Steamer.  Mentioned 508 


INDEX. 


775 

Pago. 


Rutherford,  Friend  S. 

Mentioned 150 

Report  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16,  1863  40 

Ryan,  D.  C.  Mentioned 334 

Ryan,  J.  Mentioned 329, 361 

Saint  Catherine’s  Creek,  near  Natchez,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  July  31, 1863. 

Communication  from  U.  S.  Grant 686 

Report  of  Thomas  E.  G.  Ransom 686 

Saint  Mary,  Steamer.  Mentioned 668,672 

St.  Vigne,  Pascal.  Mentioned 334,335 

Salem,  Tenn.  Skirmish  at,  May  20,  1863.  Report  of  Edward  Hatch 424 

Sample,  James.  Mentioned 228 

Sampson,  Ezekiel  S. 

Mentioned 6, 66, 157 

Report  of  operations,  April  25-May  25,  1863,  against  Vicksburg,  Miss 314 


Sanborn,  John  B. 

Mentioned - - 6,10,60,62,146,157,164 

Report  of  operations,  May  23-July  4,  1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg, 

Miss 689 

Sanders,  Captain.  Mentioned 672 

Sanders,  Addison  H. 

Mentioned 166 

Report  of  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  19-July  4,  1863  308 

Sandidge,  John  M.  Mentioned 482,484 

Sandidge,  L.  D.  Mentioned 484 

Sands,  Frank  C.  Mentioned 157, 199 

Sanford,  Amos.  Mentioned - - 272 

Sanford,  Jacob.  Mentioned 272 

Sanford,  William  W. 

Mentioned 154,544,628,629,639,646,647,650-652 

Report  of  operations,  July  4-16, 1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign-  644 
Satartia,  Miss.  Expedition  from  Haynes’  Bluff,  Miss.,  to,  June  2-8,  1863*  ...  4 

Saunders,  B.  H.  Mentioned 330 

Saxton,  Luther  W.  Mentioned 277,278 

Scales,  Alexander.  Mentioned 206 

Scates,  Walter  B.  Report  of  expedition  from  Helena  to  Napoleon,  Ark., 

May  23  to  — , 1863  - 430 

For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  John  A.  McClernand. 


Schadt,  Otto.  Mentioned 152 

Schlagel,  Frederick.  Mentioned 321 

Schofield,  George  W.  Mentioned 44,55,56,151,241 

Schofield,  John  M.  Mentioned 318 

Sclater,  John  R.  Mentioned 326 

Scofield,  Hiram.  Mentioned 158,448,449 

Scott,  A.  G.  Mentioned 404 

Scott,  C.  C.  Mentioned 372,373 

Scott,  Isaac.  Mentioned 239 

Scott,  Jesse  E.  Mentioned 610 

Scott,  Oliver  H.  P.  Mentioned 158, 551 

Scott,  Robert  K.  Mentioned 155 

Scott,  Thomas  M. 

Mentioned 77,82,86,96,97,112,121 

Report  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16,  1863  89 


* Xo  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


776 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Seal,  D.  S.  Mentioned - 326 

Sears,  C.  W.  Mentioned 327, 399, 404 

Sears,  Cyrus.  Mentioned 158 

Seay,  Abraham  J.  Mentioned 152 

Sebastian,  Louis.  Mentioned 258 

Seddon,  James  A.  For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  C.  S. 

Seley,  Abel  H.  Mentioned 552 

Self,  D . W.  Mentioned 404 

Selph,  C.  McRae.  Statement  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16, 1863.  121 

Selph,  W.  A.  Mentioned 329 

Senatobia,  Miss. 

Expedition  from  La  Grange,  Tenn.,  to,  May  21-26,  1863.  Reports  of 

Hatch,  Edward 427 

McCrillis,  La  Fayette 429 

Skirmishes  near. 

May  23,  1863.  Report  of  Edward  Hatch 427 

June  20, 1863.  See  Mississippi , Northwestern.  Operations  in,  June  15-25, 

1863.  Report  of  Mizner,  p.  490. 

Sengstak,  H.  H.  Mentioned 327 

Senteny,  Pembroke  S.  Mentioned 113, 329, 413, 414, 416, 417 

Serviere,  Alphonse.  Mentioned 573 

Sewell,  Thomas.  Mentioned 275 

Shaeffer,  Theodore.  Mentioned 56 

Shaklee,  Francis  M.  Mentioned 155 

Shane,  John.  Mentioned 156 

Sharkey,  A.  M.  Mentioned 100 

Sharkey,  W.  L.  Mentioned 530,531,539,540 

Shaw,  Elvis  P.  Mentioned 158,451 

Shaw,  Francis  H.  Mentioned 272 

Shedd,  Warren.  Mentioned..1 155 

Sheeks,  George.  Mentioned 45 

Sheldon,  Charles  S. 

Mentioned 475-477,684 

Report  of  operations  in  Northeastern  Mississippi,  June  13-22,  1863 479 

Sheldon,  Lionel  A.  Mentioned «...  38,150 

Shelley,  Charles  M.  Mentioned 95, 101-103, 350, 351, 357 

Shemmerhorn,  F.  S.  Mentioned 275 

Shepard,  Isaac  F.  Mentioned 158,447,448,456 

Sherbrooke,  George  G.  Mentioned 166 

Sherer,  James  L.  Mentioned 1 271 

Sherfy,  W.  H.  Mentioned 45 

Sherman,  Arthur  M.  Report  of  skirmish  on  Horn  Lake  Creek,  Tenn.,  May 

18,  1863 144 

Sherman,  William.  Mentioned 639 

Sherman,  William  T. 

Correspondence  with 

Allen,  W.  H.,  et  al 539 

Grant,  U.  S 261,574 

Johnston,  Joseph  E 538,539 

Manship,  C.  H 539 

Yerger,  William,  etal 539 

Mentioned 9,  41, 143, 146, 152, 159, 162, 163, 165, 168- 

172,  178,187-189,226,236,237,  239,  245,  250,  262,266-268,281,296,324,325, 
511,521,529,531,  532,  540,  542,  551,  555,  564,585,589,593,610,620,627,653 


index.  777 

Page. 

Sherman,  William  T. — Continued. 

Reports  of 

Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  Operations,  June  22- July  *25, 1863,  includ- 
ing the 520-525, 527-532 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations,  May  22-July  3,  1863,  during  the  siege 

of 245,246,248,249 

Shipman,  J.  T.  Mentioned 138 

Shoup,  Francis  A. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 405 

Smith,  Martin  L 411 

Mentioned 324, 

325,  327-329,  334,  336,  360,  366,  367,  394,  397,  398,  401,  402,  411,  413-415 
Report  of  operations,  May  18-July  4,  1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg, 

Miss 405 

Showalter,  John.  Mentioned 144 

Shultz,  A.  Mentioned 468,469 

Shumard,  Albert  N.  Mentioned 239 

Shunk,  David. 

Mentioned 151, 547,  609, 610, 615 

Report  of  operations,  July  5-24,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign  611 

Shute,  J.  Ds  Mentioned 404 

Shutts,  James  H.  Mentioned 59 

Siber,  Edward.  Mentioned 153 

Signal,  Steamer.  Mentioned 669 

Simmons,  John  Neville.  Mentioned 357 

Simmons,  John  T.  Mentioned 46 

Simmons,  Moses.  Mentioned 614 

Simpson,  J.  M.  Mentioned 352 

Simpson,  Samuel  P.  Mentioned 152 

Sims,  J.  G.  Mentioned 329 

Simsport,  La.  Engagement  near,  June  3,  1863.  Report  of  Henry  Walke  ...  445 

Sinclair,  William.  Mentioned 559 

Sitton,  William  B.  Mentioned 613 

Sketches. 

Big  Black  River  Bridge,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  17,  1863  72 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863 43,71 

Milliken’s  Bend,  La.  Attack  on,  June  7,  1863  463 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19-July  4,  1863 191,201 

Slack,  James  R. 

Mentioned 8,  41-47,  58, 151,  209, 240, 546,  597-599 

Reports  of 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863 54 

Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  Operations,  July  5-17,  1863,  during  the. ..  601 

Slaughter,.  J.  E.  Mentioned 384 

Slaughter,  J.  T.  Mentioned 106,  326 

Slaves  and  Slave  Property. 

Action  touching 210,  306,  430,  436,  446,  447,  453,  456,  458,  459,  466-468,  517,  681 


Slemons,  W.  F.  Mentioned 43^  432 

Sloan,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned 155 

Slocomb,  C.  H. 

Mentioned 655 

Report  of  operations,  July  12,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  654 


778 


INDEX. 


Slocum,  Willard.  Mentioned t-gg 

Small,  William  E.  Mentioned. 457 

Smith,  Dr.  Mentioned 507 

Smith,  Major.  Mentioned 534 

Smith,  Absalom  S.  Mentioned 298 

Smith,  Andrew  J. 

Mentioned 8,  12-20,  26,  32, 34,  37,  40,  41, 129,  132,  134,  135, 140,  150,  161,  171, 

174, 182-186,  236,  237,  255,  256,  262,  263,  266,  276,  545,  546,  587,  592-596,609,  614 
Report  of  operations,  J uly  5-23,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 

PaiSn 591 

Smith,  Ashbel. 

Correspondence  with 

Moore,  John  C 3g3 

Pemberton,  John  C 334 

Mentioned 327,' 360,361 

Report  of  operations,  April  — to  July  4,  1863,  including  tlie  siege  of  Vicks- 

burg,  Miss 334 

Smith,  Charles  C.  Mentioned 152 

Smith,  Daniel.  Mentioned _ 54 

Smith,  E.  Condit.  Mentioned 256 

Smith,  E.  Kirby. 

Correspondence  with 

Adjutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 457 

Taylor,  Richard 462,465 

War  Department,  C.S 462 

Mentioned 384,  465;  4G6j  6gl 

Smith,  E.  R.  Mentioned 93 

Smith,  Eli  R.  Mentioned 466 

Smith,  Francis  M.  Mentioned  156 

Smith,  Giles  A. 

Mentioned. . . 128, 152,  162, 188, 192,  255-261, 266,  267,  269, 270,  273, 278,  297,  529,  549 

Report  of  operations,  May  16-22,  1863,  against  Vicksburg,  Miss * 262 

Smith,  Hiram  E.  Mentioned 166 

Smith,  James  J.  Mentioned 679 

Smith,  James  M.  Mentioned 54 

Smith,  J.  B.  Mentioned  493  352 

Smith,  J.  Condit.  Mentioned 249  281 

Smith,  John.  Mentioned *272 


Smith,  John  H. 

Mentioned 301,310 

Report  of  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  19- July  4,  1863  310 

Smith,  Joseph  C. 

Mentioned 474,  475j  477j  4g0 

Report  of  operations  in  Northern  Mississippi,  June  13-22,  1863 5 479 

Smith,  Joseph  I.  Mentioned 280 

Smith,  Martin  L. 

Correspondence  with 

Baldwin,  William  E 405 

Shoup,  Francis  A 444 

Mentioned 324 

325, 327-331,  336, 338, 357, 360, 361, 365-367, 376, 401, 402,  405,  414, 420, 424 
Report  of  operations,  May  18-July  4,  1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg, 

Miss *. 394,397 

Smith,  Melanctlion.  Mentioned 168 


INDEX. 


779 


Page. 

Smith,  Milo.  Mentioned . . 1^2, 548 

Smith,  Nathan  J.  Mentioned 31 1 

Smith,  Otis  H.  Mentioned 

Smith,  Thomas  K.  Mentioned 637 

Smith,  Thomas  Kilby 

Mentioned 6,  162,  162,255-261,275-279 

Eeport  of  operations,  May  6-24,  18G3,  against  Vicksburg,  Miss 265 

Smith,  W.  Huntington.  Mentioned 149,562 

Smith,  William.  Mentioned 636,641,649 

Smith,  William  Sooy. 

Mentioned  . . . 154, 245, 427, 528, 532, 544, 555-558, 561 , 567, 570, 573, 575, 576, 635, 651 
Reports  of  operations,  July  4-16,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign   627, 628 

Smith’s  Bridge,  near  Corinth,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  June  11,  1863  " 4 

Smyth,  J.  S.  Mentioned 327 

Smyth,  William.  Mentioned 162, 250 

Snodgrass,  John.  Mentioned 

Snook,  John  S Mentioned * I1 

Snyder,  Samuel  A.  J. 

Mentioned 286, 287, 624 

Eeport  of  operations,  July  19-20,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign   622 

Snyder’s  Mill,  Yazoo  River,  Miss. 

Affair  at,  Dec.  27,  1862.  See  Vicksburg , Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19 -July  4, 

1863.  Reports  of  Sullivan,  p.  236  ; Smith,  p.  384.  See  also  Ball  to 
Forney,  p.  870.  Also  Vol.  XVII,  Part  I,  reports  of  Pemberton,  p. 

665;  Lee,  p.  680;  Higgins,  p.  694. 

Ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  captured  at,  May  17,  1863 380 

Somerville,  Tenn.  Expedition  from  Bolivar  to.  See  Bolivar,  Term.  Expe- 
dition from,  May  26-29, 1863. 

Southard,  R.  R Mentioned 329,335 

South  Carolina  Troops  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light — Battalions:  Palmetto  ( Batteries ),  B,  658;  C,  657.  Bat- 


teries : Macbeth,  657. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 24th,  29th,  541. 

Miscellaneous — Holcombe  Legion,  657. 

South  Fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  Miss.  Skirmish  on  the,  May  2,  1863.  See 


Champion1  s Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863.  Report  of  Bur- 
bridge,  p.  30.  See  also  Part  I,  p.  683. 

Spangler,  Norval.  Mentioned 112 

Sparks,  David  D.  Mentioned - - 149 

Sparrestrom,  Frederick.  Mentioned 166 

Spear,  Edward,  jr.  Mentioned 155,608 

Spearman,  Cornelius  F.  Mentioned - 608 

Spence,  William  T.  Mentioned - 389 

Spencer,  C.  Estimate  of  Confederate  forces 640 

Spencer,  George  E.  Mentioned 474,  663 

For  correspondence  as  A.  A.  G.,  see  Grenville  M.  Dodge. 

Spencer,  J.  F.  Mentioned „ 329 

Spicely,  William  T. 

Mentioned 45,  50,  51, 151,  240,  546,  597-599,  601,  602 

Reports  of 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863 53 


Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  Operations,  July  5-17,  1863,  during  the..  599 


No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


780 


INDEX. 


Spiegel,  Marcus  M.  Mentioned 21,  150, 586^588 

Sponable,  James  E.  Mentioned 4gg  3qq 

Spooner,  Benjamin  J.  Mentioned 152,  257, 265, 267, 269,  270 

Spoor,  Nelson  T.  Mentioned 153 

Springfield,  B . Men tioned ' ’ 433 

Staley,  John  A.  Mentioned gg 

Standifer,  Thomas  C.  Mentioned qq 

Stansbury,  Marcus  L.  Mentioned 286 

Stanton,  Edwin  M.  For  correspondence,  etc.,  see  War  Department,  U.  S. 

Starks,  John.  Mentioned 3g 

Starring,  Frederick  A.  Mentioned 15G 

Steele,  Frederick.  Mentioned 152, 162, 170, 188, 253, 257, 266,  281, 283, 284 

521, 522, 525, 528-534,  536, 548,  550, 556, 569,  574,  580, 582, 620, 621 , 625,659! 

Steele,  O.  Mentioned 351  357  359 

Stein,  George  W.  Mentioned no  rqi 

Stephens,  Thomas.  ’ 

Mentioned . 158,509,553' 

Keport  of  expedition  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,  to  Hernando,  Miss.  May  23-24 

is63; : ; ; 429 

Stephenson,  William  J.  Mentioned 551, 628, 629, 645, 647, 650 

Sterling,  Robert.  Mentioned 340 

Stevens,  Giles.  Mentioned ar\a 

Stevens,  J.  R.  Mentioned gg  ^ 

Stevens,  Miriam.  Mentioned * * ’637 

Stevenson,  Carter  L. 

Correspondence  with 

Barton,  Seth  M 3 ^ 

Cumming,  Alfred " * 34g 

Lee,  Stephen  D ...... ...... .... .... ..... .... . 348  352 

Pemberton,  John  C 345,347,350 

Reynolds,  A.  W 34g 

Mentioned 70, 71, 74, 83, 85, 89-91, 99, 101-104,' 109*  112, 114- 

116,118,  120-123, 125-127,324-326,328,  329,  336,355,357,365,367,400  424 
Reports  of 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863 93 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations,  May  17-Jnly  4,  1863,  including  the 

siege  of 341-343 

Stevenson,  John  D.  Mentioned 6, 9, 146, 156, 164, 206, 207 

Stewart,  Archibald  W.  Mentioned 653 

Stewart,  Harris  H.  Mentioned 599 

Stewart,  J.  A.  Mentioned 3g9 

Stewart,  William.  Mentioned 438 

Stewart,  W.  R.  Mentioned 699 

Stickel,  Isaiah.  Mentioned ^ 

Stillman,  George  L.  Mentioned 5g0  ggg 

Stimming,  Theodore.  Mentioned 152  618 

Stith,  D.  C.  Mentioned  .... ...... ...... .... ....  102  103  577 

Stockman,  George  H.  Mentioned 260  264  265 

Stocks,  J.  G.  Mentioned SOlisW 

Stockton,  Joseph.  Mentioned 29g 

Stoddard,  Edward  H.  Mentioned ""’***’  6g 

Stoddard,  Frank  L.  Mentioned 678 

Stolbrand,  Charles  J. 

^enti“uf 10,156,206 

Report  of  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss,  May  19-Jnly  4, 1863 292 


INDEX. 


781 


Tage. 

Stone,  George  A.  Mentioned 152,252,253,619 

Stone,  William  M. 

Mentioned 133, 135-138, 140, 142, 151, 243, 617 

Report  of  operations,  July  17-26, 1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign . 615 

Stovall,  M.  A.  Mentioned 65 J 

Stratton,  Henry.  Mentioned 

Street,  Solomon  G.  Mentioned 

Strickle,  Abraham  E.  Report  of  operations  in  Northern  Louisiana,  June  3- 

July  10,  1863 

Strong,  Joseph  G.  Report  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill.,  Miss.,  May  16, 1863. 

Stubbs,  William.  Mentioned 

Sturgess,  Robert  H.  Mentioned 

Subsistence  Stores.  Supplies  of.  See  Munitions  of  War. 

Sullivan,  A.  T.  Mentioned 

Sullivan,  David  A.  Mentioned 

Sullivan,  Jeremiah  C.  Mentioned 

Sullivan,  John.  Mentioned 

Sullivan,  Peter  J. 


Mentioned 150, 518, 596 

Report  of  operations,  Dec.  20,  1862- July  16,  1863,  against  Vicksburg,  Miss.  236 

Summers,  Benjamin  J.  Mentioned 54 

Summers,  James  F.  Mentioned - 640,699 

Surget,  E.  Mentioned 461 

Swaim,  William.  Mentioned 11,45,51 

Swan,  Simeon  D. 

Mentioned 153,221,246 

Reports  of 

Jones’  Plantation,  Miss.  Skirmish  near  Birdsong  Ferry,  at,  June  22, 

1863  509 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations,  May  19, 1863,  during  the  siege  of 249 

Swearngin,  Evan  E.  Mentioned 64 

Sweiheimer,  Jacob.  Mentioned 277 

Swigert,  Jacob,  jr.  Mentioned 25,28,591 

Switzerland,  U.  S.  S.  Mentioned 445 

Swivel,  Jacob.  Mentioned 138,143 

Sykes,  T.  B.  Mentioned 81 

Sykes,  William.  Mentioned 79 

Taggart,  Grantham  I.  Mentioned 211 

Tait,  John  H.  Mentioned 315 

Tanner,  M.  Mentioned 540 

Tappan,  J.  C.  Mentioned 457  460, 461, 466 

Tate,  Marion  D.  Mentioned 280 

Tate,  W.  J.  Mentioned 502 

Tatom,  J.  S.  Mentioned 329,371 

Taylor,  Ezra. 

Mentioned 152,267,285 

Report  of  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  captured  at  Jackson,  Miss 541 

Taylor,  Henry.  Mentioned - 79 

Taylor,  J.  C. 

Mentioned  121 

Statement  of.  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863.  122 

Taylor,  L.  B.  Mentioned 365 

Taylor,  Richard. 

Co-operation  with  Joseph  E.  Johnston 457,462 

Correspondence  with  E.  Kirby  Smith 462,465 


166 

472 

455 

58 

624 

156 

98 

272 

187 

571 


782 


INDEX. 


86 


Taylor,  Richard— Continued.  Pase‘ 

“enti™e<! 446, 457, 462, 464-466, 469, 471 

Keports  of  operations  in  Northern  Louisiana,  June  3-July  10,  1863  457  461  462 

Taylor,  Thomas  H. 

Mentioned 121  126 

Statement  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16,  1863  123 

Taylor,  T.  S.  Mentioned _ 

Tennessee,  Army  of  the.  (Union.) 

Orders,  General  Field,  series  1863 : Corps : 16th  ( Hurlbut ),  No.  1, 402. 

Orders,  Special,  series  1863 : No.  134, 267.  Corps  : 15th  ( Blair),  No.  — , 260  • 

16th  (Hurlbut),  No.  3,  515. 

Organization,  strength,  etc.  May  18-July  4,  1863 148-158 

Tennessee  River.  Expedition  from  Jackson,  Tenn.,  across  the.  See  Jaclcson, 

Tenn.  Expedition  across  * the  Tennessee  Hirer,  from,  June  — to  7 
1863. 

Tennessee  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Confederate.) 

Artillery.  Heavy— Batteries:  Caruthers’,  328 ; Johnston’s,  328  ; Lynch’s, 

328, 338, 402.  Regiments  : 1st,  328, 337, 330. 

Artillery,  Light— Batteries : Tobin’s,  327, 360, 381, 382, 386. 

Cavalry  Regiments : Barteau’s,  482,483;  Biffle’s,  674, 676, 678 ; Carter’s, 

326;  Cox’s,  674;  Jackson’s,  400,  501 ; Neely’s,  433  ; Newscm’s,  674 ; 
Richardson’s,  667, 683 ; Wilson’s,*  674, 678. 

Infantry  Regiments : 3d,  541;  3d  (Provisional  Army),  107,  326,320,355; 

10th,  18th,  30th,  541;  31st, t 107,  326,  355;  40th,  541;  43d,  107,  326, 
320,345,  355,356;  50th,  541;  59th,  107, 326, 355  ; 60th,  32,  37,  30, 327, 307, 

541,  601,  602,  604, 605 ; 61st,  138, 327,  307,  603-606, 608  ; 62d,  327,  307, 600, 

602,  694-606,  608. 

Tennessee  Troops.  Mentioned.  (Union.) 

Cavalry— Regiments : 6th, * 506, 673,  674, 679, 680, 682 ; 7th,  $ 506. 

Terry,  James  H.  Mentioned H 

Texas  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Cavalry  Regiments : 3d,  226, 541, 555 ; 6th,  226, 541, 555, 651 ; 9th,  226, 541, 

555;  13th,  448, 449  ; 15th,  541 ; 16th,  467, 470 ; 27th,||  226, 541,  555. 

Infantry  Battalions  : Burnet’s  (Sharpshooters),  657.  Regiments:  2d,  327, 

329,  361,  362, 367, 369,  381, 382, 384-394, 420 ; 7th,  541 ; 8th,  471  ; 16th,  463, 

468, 470 ; 17th,  467,  460, 470 ; 18th,  471 ; 19th,  467, 470 ; 22d,  471. 
Miscellaneous—' Wauls  Legion,  324-326, 328,  329,  344, 350,  351, 357-359, 365- 
367,400, 671,672. 

Thayer,  John  M.  Mentioned 152, 162, 188, 251-254, 286, 548, 549 

Thielemann,  Milo.  Mentioned , 

Thom,  A.  C.  Mentioned jqq 

Thomas,  Allen.  Mentioned 327  402  410 

Thomas,  De  Witt  C.  Mentioned 146,153,518  621 

Thomas,  Evan  D.  Mentioned ’ 26 

Thomas,  J.  Hanson.  Mentioned 79 

Thomas,  Lorenzo.  For  correspondence,  see  Adjutant-General’ s Office,  U.  £.  A. 

Thompson,  C.  L.  Mentioned 100 

Thompson,  Jacob. 

Mentioned 77,124,384,401 

Statement  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  May  16,  1863 124 

Thompson,  John  M.  Mentioned 62 

Thompson,  Shubial  P.  Mentioned 450 


* Organization  completed  Feb.  4,  1864. 
i Designation  changed  to  39th  Begiment  June,  1863. 
1 Called  also  1st  West  Tennessee  Cavalry. 


§ Called  also  2d  West  Tennessee  Cavalry. 
|[  Called  also  1st  Texas  Legion. 


INDEX. 


783 


Page. 

Thompson’s  Hill,  Miss.  See  rort  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  1,  1863. 

Thornton,  Edward.  Mentioned 665 

Thornton,  Joseph  H.  Mentioned 150 

Thurmond,  W.  W.  Mentioned 483 

Tilghman,  Lloyd.  Mentioned  ....  32, 70, 71, 75, 77, 79, 80, 85, 91, 115, 121, 125, 127, 400 

Timmons,  B.  Mentioned 352 

Titus,  Herbert  B.  Mentioned 149 

Tobin,  Thomas  F.  Mentioned 327 

Tolbert,  J.  H.  Mentioned 469 

Tolford,  Joshua  W.  Mentioned 35 

Tonkin,  John.  Mentioned 513 

Torrence,  William  M.  G.  Mentioned 152 

Totten,  Hiram  E.  Mentioned 551,588 

Tourtellotte,  John  E. 

Mentioned 167 

Reports  of 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863,  including  operations 

April  23-May  22 60 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations,  May  26-July  4, 1863,  during  the  siege  of.  311 

Tower,  Daniel  W.  Mentioned 64 

Trantham,  Milton  H.  Mentioned 326, 350 

Travers,  George  W. 

Mentioned 573 

Report  of  operations,  July  13-17,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Cam- 
paign  572 

Trenton,  Tenn. 

Affair  near,  June  15,  1863* 4 

Operations  in  the  vicinity  of,  July  19-29,  1863* 5 

Tresilian,  Stewart  R. 

Mentioned - 173, 179, 198, 203 

Reports  of  operations,  April  25-July  4,  1863,  against  Vicksburg,  Miss.. . 203,206 

Tripp,  Marcus  B.  C.  Mentioned 165 

Tripp,  Stephen  S.  Mentioned 156,305 

Trogden,  Howell  G.  Mentioned ' 257,260,265,282 

Trussel,  Albert  G.  Mentioned 64 

Trussed,  J.  F.  H.  Mentioned 329 

Tucker,  James  M.  Mentioned 469 

Tunica,  Francis.  Mentioned 21 

Tupper,  H.  C.  Statement  of.  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16, 1863.  127 

Tupper,  Nathan  W.  Mentioned 152,257,259,264,265,529 

Turner,  Charles.  Mentioned 158 

Turner,  Clark.  Mentioned - 166 

Turner,  Sterling  T.  Mentioned 329 

Tuttle,  James  M. 

Mentioned 146, 153,  163,  245,  248,  285,  532,  533,  550,  583,  591,  627 

Report  of  operations,  June  22-July  25,  1863,  including  the  Jackson,  Miss., 

Campaign 620 

Tweeddale,  William.  Mentioned 148,187,188 

Twist,  Russell  P.  Mentioned - 151,240,601 

Tyler,  A.  Mentioned 327 

Tyler,  H.  A.  Mentioned 502 

Tyrrell,  Edward.  Mentioned 165 

Underhill,  S.  M.  Mentioned - 103,352 


No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


784 


INDEX. 


Page. 

Underwood,  Sherman.  Mentioned 605 

Union  City,  Tenn.  Capture  of  outpost  at,  July  10  1863* . 5 

Union  Troops. 

Casualties.  Eeturns  of. 

Big  Black  River  Bridge,  Miss.  Engagement  at,  May  17, 1863. . 27, 39, 128-130 

Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16, 1863  7-11, 24, 26, 39, 51, 57, 66 

Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign,  July  5-25,  1863 542-551 

Port  Gibson,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  1, 1863  39 

Vicksburg,  Miss. 

Assaults  on. 

May  19,  1863 159,  160,260,283 

May  22, 1863  68, 160-166, 260, 273, 283 

Operations  against,  May  1-July  4, 1863 167 

Siege  of,  May  19-July  4, 1863  27, 28, 39, 260, 295, 299 

Mentioned. 


Artillery,  Light— Regiments  : 2d  ( Batteries ),  E,  149,  543,  568,  572,  573 ; 

3d  ( Batteries ),  L and  M,t  543,559,560,564,565,568,573. 

Infantry— Regiments  : 1st,  129, 151, 161, 203, 206, 294 ; 13th  (Battalions),  . 


1st,  152, 159, 257, 264, 266, 268, 549. 

For  Volunteers,  see  respective  States. 

Organization,  strength,  etc. 

9th  Division,  13th  Army  Corps .• 580 

Tennessee,  Army  of  the 148-158 

Urban,  A.  Mentioned 699 

Van  Anda,  Salue  G. 

Mentioned 137, 138, 140, 143, 151 

Report  of  assault  on  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  22, 1863  241 

Vance,  Joseph  W.  Mentioned 150,594,595 

Vance,  William.  For  report  of  battle  of  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.,  see  John 
A.  McLaughlin. 

Vande vender,  Hiram  T.  Mentioned 165 

Vandever,  William.  Mentioned 158,318,319,669 

Vandyke,  R.  S.  Mentioned 326 

Van  Vliet,  Frederick.  Mentioned 593 

Vaughan,  Andrew  J.  Mentioned 78 

Vaughn,  John  C. 

Mentioned 72, 73, 112, 113, 119, 324, 325, 327-329, 336, 397, 399, 400, 402,  414, 419 

Reports  of  operations,  May  29- July  2, 1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg, 

Miss 690-698 

Vaughn,  Thomas  B.  Mentioned 28,29 

Veatch,  James  C.  Mentioned 499 

Vernon,  S.  McD.  Mentioned 69,70,329,330,335 

Vest,  J.  W.  H.  Mentioned , . 46 

Vicksburg,  Miss. 

Assaults  on. 

May  19,  1863. 

Casualties.  Returns  of.  Union  troops 159, 160, 260, 283 

Communications  from 

Blair,  Frank  P.,  jr 269 

Grant,  U.  S 267 

Ransom,  Thomas  E.  G 300 

Sherman,  William  T 261 


* For  reporta,  see  Series  I,  Yol.  XXIII,  Parti,  p,822. 
t Consolidated. 


INDEX. 


785 

Page. 


Vicksburg,  Miss.— Continued. 

Assaults  on.  , 

MaSee9aiSo8Ctomj,io«’8  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16, 1863.  Reports  of 


Burbridge,  Stephen  G. 

Lindsey,  Daniel  W. 

Also  Vicksburg,  Miss. 

Baldwin,  William  E. 

Barrett,  Samuel  E. 

Blair,  Frank  P.,  jr. 

Brumback,  Jefferson. 

Cockrell,  Francis  M. 

Comstock,  Cyrus  B. 

Eldridge,  Hamilton  N. 

Ewing,  Hugh. 

Fisher,  Cyrus  W . 

Fonda,  J ohn  G. 

Forney,  John  H. 

Hebert,  Louis. 

Also  Sherman  to  Grant,  p.  261. 
May  22,  1863. 

Casualties.  Returns  of. 
Communications  from 
Moore,  John  C 


Moore,  Frederick  W.  Putnam,  Holden. 

Osterhaus,  Peter  J . 

Siege  of,  May  19 -July  4,  1863.  Reports  of 


Hickenlooper,  Andrew. 
Higgins,  Edward. 

Hipp,  Charles. 
Humphrey,  Thomas  W. 
Keigwin,  James. 
Lanphere,  Charles  H. 
Lee,  Albert  L. 

Lee,  Charles  N. 

Lucas,  Thomas  J . 
Malmborg,  Oscar. 
Mathieson,  George  W. 


Also  Part  I. 


Moore,  John  C. 

Mott,  Samuel  R. 
Nutting,  Oscar  F. 
Ransom,  Thomas  E.  G. 
Shoup,  Francis  A. 
Smith,  Ashbel. 

Smith,  Giles  A. 

Smith,  Martin  L. 
Smith,  Thomas  Kilby. 
Stolbrand,  Charles  J . 
Sullivan,  Peter  J . 


Union  troops 68, 160-166, 260, 273, 283 


360 


1VX UUlCj  U oun  v ••••■*  Ofil 

Sherman,  William  


Engagement  at,  May  17,  1863. 


Stevenson,  Carter  L 

See  -also  Big  Black  River  Bridge,  Miss 
Report  of  Lawler,  p.  133. 

Also  Champion’s  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of,  May  16,  1863.  Reports  of 


350 


Burbridge,  Stephen  G. 
Guppey,  Joshua  J . 
Lindsey,  Daniel  W . 

Also  Vicksburg,  Miss. 

Atherton,  Joseph  B. 
Baldwin,  William  E. 
Barrett,  Samuel  E. 
Bertram,  Henry. 

Blair,  Frank  P.,  jr. 
Brewer,  George  E. 
Carskaddon,  David. 
Cockrell,  Francis  M. 
Comstock,  Cyrus  B. 
Dockery,  Thomas  P . 
Eldridge,  Hamilton  N. 
Ewing,  Hugh. 

Fisher,  Cyrus  W. 
Fonda,  John  G. 

Force,  Manning  F. 
Forney,  John  H. 
Geddes,  James  L. 
Hains,  Peter  C. 


Moore,  Frederick  W. 
Osterhaus,  Peter  J . 


Putnam,  Holden. 
Tourtellotte,  John  E. 


Siege  of,  May  19 -July  4,  1863. 

Hall,  William. 

H6bert,  Louis. 
Hickenlooper,  Andrew. 
Higgins,  Edward. 

Hipp,  Charles. 

Hovey,  Alvin  P. 
Humphrey,  Thomas  W 
Keigwin,  James. 

Lanphere,  Charles  H. 

Lee,  Charles  N. 

Lee,  Stephen  D. 

Lockett,  Samuel  H. 

Lucas,  Thomas  J. 
Malmborg,  Oscar. 
Mathieson,  George  W. 
Moore,  JohnC. 

Mott,  Samuel  R. 

Nutting,  Oscar  F. 


Reports  of 

Porter,  William  C. 
Ransom,  Thomas  E.  G. 
Raum,  Green  B. 

Reed,  Joseph  R. 
Sampson,  Ezekiel  S. 
Sanders,  Addison  H. 
Shoup,  Francis  A. 
Smith,  Ashbel. 

Smith.  Giles  A. 

Smith,  Martin  L. 
Smith,  Thomas  Kilby. 
Stevenson,  Carter  L. 
Sullivan,  Peter  J. 
Tresilian,  Stewart  R. 
Van  Anda,  Salue  G. 
Waul,  T.  N. 

Woods,  Charles  R. 


Also  Sherman  to  Grant,  p.  261.  Also  Part  I. 

Engagement  between  U.  S.  S.  Cincinnati  and  batteries  at,  May  27,  1863. 

Communication  from  John  C.  Pemberton 

Expedition  from,  to  Yazoo  City,  Miss.  See  Yazoo  City,  Miss.  Expedition 
from  Vicksburg  to,  July  12-21,  1863. 

Operations  against,  May  1-July  4,  1863. 

Casualties.  Returns  of.  Union  troops 

50  R R— VOL  XXIV,  PT  II 


340 


167 


786 


INDEX. 


Vicksburg,  Miss.— Continued.  Pa£e- 

Operations  against,  May  1-July  4,  1863. 

See  also 

May  1,  1863.  Port  Gibson , Miss.  Battle  of. 

2,  1863.  South  Fork  of  Bayou  Pierre,  Miss.  Skirmish  on  the. 

3,  1863.  Hankinson's  Ferry,  Miss.  Skirmish  at. 

12,  1863.  Fourteen-Mile  Creek,  Miss.  Skirmish  on. 

Raymond,  Miss.  Engagement  at. 

14,  1863.  Jackson , Miss.  Engagement  at. 

16,1863.  Champion's  Hill,  Miss.  Battle  of 

17,  1863.  Big  Black  River  Bridge,  Miss.  Engagement  at. 

19,  1863.  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Assault  on. 

19-July  4,  1863.  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of. 

22,  1863.  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Assault  on. 

See  also  Part  I. 

Siege  of,  May  19-July  4,  1863. 

Casualties.  Returns  of. 


Confederate  troops 

Union  troops 

Communications  from 

Ball,  Charles  P 

Forney,  John  H 

Grant,  U.  S 

Morris,  Edward  M 

Shoup,  Francis  A 

Smith,  Ashbel 

Wright,  Clark 

Ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  captured  at. 

Organization  of 


328, 369, 373, 378, 394,  411, 417 
27,28,39,260,295,299 


370 

371,373,381 

209 

221 

405 

384 


228 

Statement  of 178, 

336,  341,370, 405,411,418 


Confederate  troops  engaged  in  the  defense  of. 

Union  troops  operating  against 

Reports  of 

Atherton,  Joseph  B 

Baldwin,  William  E 

Barclay,  James  W 

Barrett,  Samuel  E 

Belknap,  William  W 

Beltzhoover,  D 

Bertram,  Henry 

Blair,  Frank  P.,  jr 

Bowen,  John  S 

Brewer,  George  E 

Brown,  Aaron  

Brumback,  Jefferson 

Carskaddon,  David 

Clark,  George  W 

Cockrell,  Francis  M 

Comstock,  Cyrus  B 

Dockery,  Thomas  P 

Dornblaser,  Benjamin 

Eldridge,  Hamilton  N 

Ewing,  Hugh 

Fisher,  Cyrus  W 

Fonda,  John  G 


..  326 

..  148 

..  242 

..  399 

..  422 

..  261 
305, 306 
..  341 

..  322 

..  254 

4 L l,  413 
..  354 

..  290 

..  285 

..  253 

..  320 

. 414 

168, 178 
. 420 

. 291 

. 274 

. 281 
. 275 

. 233 


INDEX. 


787 


Vicksburg,  Miss. — Continued. 

Siege  of,  May  19-July  4,  1863. 

Reports  of 

Force,  Manning  F 

Forney,  Jolin  H 

Foster,  Charles 

Freemau,  Henry  C 

Geddes,  James  L 

Green,  Martin  E 

Hains,  Peter  C 

Hall,  William 

Hubert,  Louis 

Hedrick,  John  M 

Herron,  Francis  J 

Hickenlooper,  Andrew 

Higgins,  Edward 

Hipp,  Charles 

Hovey,  Alvin  P 

Humphrey,  Thomas  W 
Jenney,  William  L.  B . . 

Keigwin,  James 

Kent,  Daniel 

Kossak,  William 

Lanphere,  Charles  H . . 

Lauman,  Jacob  G 

Lay,  Benjamin  D 

Lee,  Albert  L 

Lee,  Charles  N 

Lee,  Stephen  D 

Leggett,  Mortimer  D . . 

Lockett,  Samuel  H 

Lucas,  Thomas  J 

McNulta,  John 

Malmborg,  Oscar 

Mathieson,  George  W . 

Moore,  John  C 

Mott,  Samuel  R 

Nutting,  Oscar  F 

Ord,  Edward  O.  C 

Osterhaus,  Peter  J 

Porter,  William  C 

Prime,  Frederick  E . . . 
Ransom,  Thomas  E.  G 

Raum,  Green  B 

Reed,  Joseph  R 

Reynolds,  A.  W 

Roberds,  A.  C 

Sampson,  Ezekiel  S . . . 

Sanborn,  John  B 

Sanders,  Addison  H - 
Sherman,  William  T . 

• Shoup,  Francis  A 

Smith.  Ashbel 

Smith,  Giles  A 


Page. 


295 

359-365 

304 

193 

288 

419 

180 

301 

370,371,373,374,378 

307 

317,318 

197 

336 

283 

240 

299 

187 

231 

321 

189 

229 

288,289 

423 

230 

243 

349,350 

293 

329 

234 

320 

271 

353 

380,381 

279 

229 

208,209 

209-228 

272 

168 

296 

312 

284 

355 

352 

314 

689 

308 

....  245,246,248,249 

405 

384 

262 


788 


INDEX. 


Vicksburg,  Miss.— Continued. 
Siege  of,  May  19-July  4,  1863. 
Reports  of 

Smith,  John  H 

Smith,  Martin  L 

Smith,  Thomas  Kilby 
Stevenson,  Carter  L. 
Stolbrand,  Charles  J 

Sullivan,  Peter  J 

Swan,  Simeon  D 

Tourtellotte,  John  E 
Tresilian,  Stewart  R . 
Van  Anda,  Salue  G. . . 

Vaughn,  John  C 

Walden,  John  F 

Walker,  William  A... 

Waul,  T.N 

Welfley,  Martin 

Withers,  William  T.. 

Wood,  Edward  J 

Woods,  Charles  R 

Sketches  


Page. 


..  310 

394-397 
..  265 

341-343 
..  292 

..  236 

..  249 

..  311 

203, 206 
..  241 

690-698 
..  313 

..  304 

..  357 

..  323 

..  336 

..  311 

250,252 
191,201 


See  also  Big  Black  Biver  Bridge , Miss.  Engagement  at,  Mag  17,  1863.  Re- 
port of  Lawler,  p.  133.  Also  Champion's  Mill,  Miss.  Battle  of, 
May  16,  1863.  Reports  of 


Burbridge,  Stephen  G.  Lindsey,  Daniel  W.  Osterhaus,  Peter  J. 

Gates,  Elijah.  Moore,  Frederick  W.  Tourtellotte,  John  E. 

Guppey,  Joshua  J. 

Also  Part  I. 


Sorties  of  garrison. 

May  23-25,  1863.  See  report  of  Lauman,  p.  288. 

June  1,  1863.  See  report  of  Brown,  p.  290. 

June  23,  1863.  See  report  of  Ord,  p.  208. 

June  24,  1863.  See  report  of  Brown,  j).  290. 

Surrender  of,  July  4,  1863. 

Abstract  from  morning  report  of  sick  and  wounded  Confederate 


troops 

Communications  from 
Baldwin,  William  E 

Barry,  William  S 

Barton,  Seth  M 

Colbert,  W.  B 

Cumming,  Alfred  ... 

Dowdell,  J.  F 

Hubert,  Louis 

Higgins,  Edward  ... 

Higley,  John  H 

Lanier,  Thomas  C... 

Lee,  Stephen  D 

Moore,  John  C 

Pemberton,  John  C . . 

Reynolds,  A.  W 

Smith,  Ashbel 

Stevenson,  Carter  L . 


..  424 

..  405 

..  383 

..  347 

..  383 

..  348 

..  383 

..  374 

..  340 

..  383 

. 383 

348, 352 
..  383 

347, 374 
..  *348 
..  383 

..  345 


INDEX. 


789 

Page. 


Vicksburg,  Miss. — Continued. 

Surrender  of,  July  4,  1863.  _ . , 

See  also  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19 -July  4,  1863.  Reports  of 
Cockrell,  Francis  M.  Higgins,  Edward  Mathieson,  George  W. 

Dockery,  Thomas  P.  Hovey,  Alvin  P.  Shoup,  Francis  A. 

Forney  John  H.  Jenney,  William  L.  B.  Smith,  Ashbel. 

Hains'  Peter  C Kossak,  William.  Stevenson,  Carter  L. 

H6bert,  Louis.  Lee,  Charles  N.  Sullivan,  Peter  J. 

Herron,  Francis  J.  Lee,  Stephen  D.  Waul,  T.  is . 

Hickenlooper,  Andrew.  Leggett,  Mortimer  D. 

Also  Part  I. 

Vilas,  William  F.  Mentioned 39’ 150’ 594 

Virginia  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Artillery,  Light— Batteries  : Botetourt,  95, 101, 105, 106, 326.  ^ ^ 

Voelkner,  Louis.  Mentioned 672 

Voigt,  Robert.  Mentioned ’ 

Voges,  Theodore.  Mentioned ’ 

Vontrees,  William.  Mentioned * 

Voorhees,  Alexander.  Mentioned ’ ^ 

Vore  David  L.  Mentioned 

Waddell,  James  F.  Mentioned 96, 101 , 103, 326, 344, 346, 350, 3o2 

Waddell,  L.  D.  Mentioned j 

Waddell,  O.  A.  Mentioned ’ 

Waddiil,  D.  M.  Mentioned 

Walbright,  Andrew  E.  Mentioned 

Walcutt,  Charles  C.  ^ 65Q 

Mentioned .* * * ’ „OQ 

Report  of  operations,  July  4-16,  1563,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  638 

Walden,  John  F. 

Men  tioned * " ; * * * ' • a i o 

Report  of  operations,  June  25, 1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss  ...  313 

Wales,  Prince  of,  Steamer.  Mentioned - * 

Walke,  Henry.  Report  of  engagement  near  Simsport,  La.,  June  3,  1863 

Walker, . Mentioned 

449,450,457-462 

Reports  of  operations  in  Northern  Louisiana,  June  3-July  10,1863......  462,466 

Walker,  John  G.  (U.  S.  N.)  Mentioned 455,667,668,67^ 

Walker,  R.  S.  Mentioned ' g 

Walker,  Thomas  J.  Mentioned b4b’ 

Walker,  W.  H.  T. 

Correspondence  with  William  W.  Loring 

Mentioned 214, 426, 437-439,  o34, 540 

Walker,  William  A.  Reports  of 

Messinger’s  Ferry,  Big  Black  River,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  June  30, 1863 304 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege  of,  May  19-July  4, 1863  394 

Wall,  J.  Q.  Mentioned ~ 

Wallace,  Martin  R.  M.  Mentioned 4 f 

Wallar,  Avery  L.  Mentioned 

Walsh,  H.  M.  Mentioned '"WTo^ 

Walsh,  Richard  C.  Mentioned Iro  oin 

Wangelin,  Hugo.  Mentioned L>2,250,252, 6 

War  Department,  C.  B.  Correspondence  with 

Adiutant  and  Inspector  General’s  Office,  C.  S.  A 4b5 

^ 457, 465 

Davis,  Jefferson 

Smith,  E.  Kirby 


790 


INDEX 


Page. 

War  Department,  U.  S.  Correspondence  with  Charles  A.  Dana 47 

Ward,  Cornelius  S.  Mentioned 166 

Ward,  Lyman  M.  Mentioned 156,298 

Ward,  M.  S.  Mentioned 327 

Warden,  Ernest.  Mentioned 37 

Warden,  John.  Mentioned 272 

Warnock,  Hugh.  Mentioned 165 

Warren,  I.  G.  Mentioned 484 

Washburn,  Cadwallader  C.  Mentioned 154,444,515 

Washburn,  Frederick  S.  Mentioned 152,166 

Washburn,  Henry  D.  Mentioned 151 

Washington,  Edward  C.  Mentioned 152,160,257,260,264 

Waterhouse,  Allen  C.  Mentioned 153 

Waterhouse,  Richard.  Mentioned 467 

Waters,  Benjamin  J.  Mentioned 430 

Watkins,  E.  P.  Mentioned 94, 105 

Watson,  Joseph  M.  Mentioned 138,143 

Waul,  T.  N. 

Mentioned 326, 328,  346, 350, 351, 400 

Report  of  operations,  May  17-July  4,  1863,  including  the  siege  of  Vicks- 
burg, Miss 357 

Webb,  Howell.  Mentioned 94,98,127,128 

Webber,  A.  Watson.  Mentioned 158 

Weber,  Andrew  J.  Mentioned 153,168 

Webster,  John  S.  Mentioned 515 

Welborn,  J.  C.  C.  Mentioned 329 

Welfley,  Martin. 

Mentioned 158 

Report  of  operations,  June  14-July  4, 1863,  during  the  siege  of  Vicksburg, 

Miss 323 

Welker,  John.  Mentioned 11 

Weller,  Theodore.  Mentioned 167 

Wells,  D.  J.  Mentioned 601 

Welman,  Felix  G.  Mentioned 11,45,50,54 

Welsh,  Edward.  Mentioned 277 

Welsh,  Pinckney  J.  Mentioned 157 

Welsh,  Thomas. 

Mentioned 149, 542, 543, 555, 564, 568, 569, 572 

Report  of  operations,  July  4-19, 1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  557 

Wemple,  Mindret.  Mentioned 683 

Wesley  Camp,  Tenn.  Expedition  from  Bolivar  to.  See  Bolivar , Tenn.  Ex- 
pedition from,  May  26-29, 1863. 

West, . Mentioned 352 

Weston,  Joseph.  Mentioned 637 

West  Virginia  Troops.  Mentioned. 

Infantry—  Regiments : 4th,  153, 159, 163, 192, 257, 258, 281, 2S3, 284, 549. 

Wever,  Clark  R.  Mentioned 64, 157, 312,  313 

Wheeler,  Nathan  W.  Mentioned 165 

Wheeler,  R.  A.  Mentioned 312 

White,  Captain.  Mentioned 425 

White,  E.  G.  Mentioned 139 

White,  G.  M.  Mentioned 270 

White,  Hamilton  B.  Mentioned 157 

White,  Patrick  H.  Mentioned 150, 596 

White,  Thomas  B.  Mentioned 11 


INDEX. 


791 


Page. 

Whitfield,  Surgeon.  Mentioned 399 

Whitfield,  H.  B.  Mentioned 404 

Whitfield,  J.  W.  Mentioned 2*20, 228, 526,540,  541, 552, 555 

Whiting,  John  E.  Mentioned 151 

Whittle,  Daniel  W.  Mentioned 298, 6e2 

Whittlesey,  Luther  H. 

Mentioned 515 

Report  of  operations,  July  5-24, 1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  616 

Wickeland,  H.  Mentioned 359 

Wiggins,  Joseph  P.  Mentioned 610,612 

Wiggs,  James  C.  Mentioned 410 

Wilcox,  Charles  E.  Mentioned 613 

Wilds,  John  Q.  Mentioned 151,602 

Wiles,  Christian  H.  Mentioned 239 

Wiles,  Greenberry  F. 

Mentioned 155, 205, 206, 296 

Report  of  operations,  July  15-16, 1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  653 

Wilhelm,  George.  Mentioned 56 

Wilkerson,  Harris.  Mentioned 421-4*23 

Wilkins,  Charles.  Mentioned 168 

Williams,  Alfred  D.  Mentioned 498 

Williams,  Frederick  A.  Mentioned 13,  590 

Williams,  Jonathan  H. 

Mentioned...* 151 

Report  of  operations,  July  5-24,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss. , Campaign . 614 

Williams,  M.  H.  Mentioned 665 

Williams,  Peter  J.  Mentioned 168 

Williams,  Reuben. 

Mentioned 154 

Report  of  operations,  July  4-14, 1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign. . 633 

Williams,  William  S.  Mentioned 156,292 

Williamson,  James  A.  Mentioned 152 

Williamson,  T.  W.  C.  Mentioned  11,46,54 

Williamson,  W.  B.  Mentioned 78,79,85,92 

Willis,  Captain.  Mentioned - 306 

Willis,  Plyn  A.  Mentioned 238,239 

Willison,  Asias.  Mentioned 637,638 

Willow  Springs,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  May  3, 1863.  S ee  Vicksburg,  Miss.  Siege 
of,  May  19- July  4, 1863.  Report  of  Sampson,  p.  314. 

Wilsey,  David.  Mentioned 49 

Wilshire,  William  W.  Mentioned 155 

Wilson,  Bluford.  Mentioned 139,143 

Wilson,  C.  C.  Mentioned 540 

Wilson,  Isaac.  Mentioned 675 

Wilson,  James.  Mentioned 198 

Wilson,  James  G.  Mentioned 155,209,318 

Wilson,  James  R.  Mentioned 11 

Wilson,  T.  B.  Mentioned 114 

Wilson,  Thomas.  Mentioned „ 11 

Wilson,  Thomas  P.  Mentioned 653 

Wilson,  William  E.  C.  Mentioned 99 

Wilson,  W.  M.  Report  of  Union  raid  on  Brookhaveu,  Miss.,  June  23-26, 1863.  514 

Wiltman,  Jacob.  Mentioned 481 

Winans,  W.  P.  Report  of  operations,  July  12;  1863,  during  the  Jackson, 

Miss.,  Campaign  656 


792 


INDEX. 


Pago. 

Winder,  Felix  G.  Mentioned 329 

Winslow,  Edward  F.  Mentioned 55*2,553,619 

Wintter,  D.  Mentioned 69, 329,  330, 332, 334,  335 

Wintzer,  Gustav  A.  Mentioned 160 

Wisconsin  Troops.  Mentioned. 


Artillery,  Light — Batteries:  1st,  7,  13,  14,16-19,25,29,30,38,129,132,134, 
137, 150, 229,  230,  240,  545, 580,  582, 584,  585,  587, 590,  598  ; 6th,  10, 44, 48, 60, 
157;  12th,  10,60,157. 

C a v al ry — Regimen ts : 2d,  144, 145, 158,  429, 430, 432, 444, 544, 667. 

Infantry — Regiments  : 8th,  153,  163,  438,  439 ; 11th,  130,  133,  134,  136-141, 
151, 161, 547, 616, 617  ; 12th,  154, 547, 607, 608 ; 14th,  156, 159, 164, 297-300 ; 
16th,  156, 449 ; 17th,  156, 159, 164, 298-300 ; 18th,  10, 157, 164  ; 20th,  158, 
318, 321, 322, 668  ; 23d,  8,  30, 33,  34,  37-39, 129, 150, 161, 545, 594, 595  ; 25th, 
155, 516 ; 27th,  155  ; 29th,  8, 42,  44,  49, 51, 151, 546, 600 ; 33d,  154, 289, 290, 


547,598,606;  52d  [?],  506. 

Wise,  George  D.  Mentioned 96,98,346,347 

Withers,  C.  A.  Mentioned 404 

Withee,  Charles.  Mentioned 30 

Withers,  T.  C.  Mentioned 45 

Withers,  William  T. 

Mentioned * 76, 84, 96, 123, 124, 327 

Report  of  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  May  19-July  4,  1863 336 

Witherspoon,  W.  W.  Mentioned 326 

Wofford,  J.  L.  Mentioned •. 402,404 

Wolf,  James  D.  Mentioned 239 

Wolfe,  E.  H. 

Mentioned 687 

Report  of  scout  from  Fort  Pillow,  Tenn.,  Aug.  3,  1863  687 

Wood,  Edward  J.  Report  of  operations,  May  22-July  4,  1863,  during  the 

siege  of  Vicksburg,  Miss 311 

Wood,  George  J.  Mentioned 156 

Wood,  Myron  W.  Mentioned 444 

Wood,  Oliver.  Mentioned 155 

Wood,  Peter  P.  Mentioned 153,263,264 

Wood,  Robert  C.,  jr. 

Mentioned 441 

Report  of  skirmish  at  Jones’  Plantation,  near  Birdsong  Ferry,  Mbs.,  June 

22,  1863 511 

Wood,  William  F.  Mentioned 158 

Woodard,  William  M.  Mentioned 497 

Woodlief,  E.  D.  Mentioned 340 

Woodrow,  C.  W.  Mentioned 64 

Woods,  Charles  R. 

Mentioned 152, 162, 171 , 176,  524, 526, 527, 529, 548, 552-554 

Reports  of 

Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  Operations,  July  5-25, 1863,  during  the. . 618, 620 

Vicksburg,  Miss.  Operations,  May  2-June  14, 1863,  against 250,252 

Woods,  J.  D.  Mentioned 568 

Woods,  Joseph  J. 

Mentioned  153, 535, 550 

Report  of  operations,  July  4-26,  1863,  during  the  Jackson,  Miss.,  Campaign.  623 

Woods,  M.  L.  Mentioned 51,101-103 

Woods,  William  B.  Mentioned 152,251,618 

Woolsey,  Fletcher.  Mentioned 64 


INDEX. 


793 


Page. 

Worden,  Asa.  Mentioned 298,685,686 

Wright,  Clark. 

Correspondence  with  Peter  J.  Osterhaus 225,228 

Mentioned 209-211, 218, 225, 227, 228 

Reports  of 

Bridgeport,  Miss.  Skirmish  near,  May  17,  1863  143 

Jones’  Plantation,  Miss.  Skirmish  at,  near  Birdsong  Ferry,  June  22, 


1863 


511 


671 

667 

669 


Wright,  Edward.  Mentioned 45.55,  56 

Wright,  George  W.  Mentioned 

Wright,  James  P.  Mentioned 326 

Wright,  Joseph  C.  Mentioned 166,298 

Wrigley,  James.  Mentioned 326,358 

Wyckoff,  John  S.  Mentioned - 638 

Wysong,  Frederick  S.  Mentioned 165 

Yates,  Alexander.  Mentioned 329,361 

Yazoo  and  Big  Sunflower  Rivera,  Mias.  Expedition  up  the,  May  24-31, 

1863  * 4 

Yazoo  City,  Miss. 

Expedition  from  Vicksburg  to,  July  12-21,  1863.  Reports  of 

Brown,  Isaac  670,671 

Creasman,  William  B 

Herron,  Francis  J 

Porter,  David  

Expedition  to,  May  20-23,  1863. 

Communications  from 

Adams,  John 423 

Gist,  S.  426 

Report  of  Wirt  Adams  - 426 

Yerger,  W.  Mentioned 340 

Yerger,  William.  Mentioned 530,  531, 539,  540 

Yerger,  William,  et  al.  Correspondence  with  William  T.  Sherman 539 

Yerger,  W.  S.  Mentioned 512 

Yoist,  John.  Mentioned 326 

Young,  J.  F.  Mentioned 

Young,  Robert  M.  Mentioned 100> 326 

Young,  Upton  M.  Mentioned 113 

Young,  William  C.  Mentioned - 188> 621 

Young’s  Point,  La.  Attack  on,  June  7, 1863.  S ee  Louisiana,  Northern.  Opera- 
tions in,  June  3- July  10,  1863.  j Reports  of 
Hawes,  J.  M.  Taylor,  Richard.  Walker,  J ohn  G. 

Zane,  Lanson.  Mentioned 304 

Zickerick,  William.  Mentioned - 4 57 

Zimmerman,  John.  Mentioned 28,580 

Zulauf,  Christian  G.  Mentioned 165 

* No  circumstantial  reports  on  file. 


o 


J 


‘ 


vuN0*? 


