# Wiley Britton, The Civil War on the Border, vol. I (1891): Dry Wood, Lexington and Springfield passages, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of a Brigham Young University (Internet Archive civilwaronborder00brit) scan; not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, soft-hyphen marks, running headers, page numbers and footnotes. Local headings are editorial. Bounded passages only; reports and letters quoted or summarized by the author are not separately inspected originals.

## title-and-preface

THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER A NARRATIVE OF OPERATIONS IN MISSOURI, KANSAS, ARKANSAS AND THE INDIAN TERRITORY DURING THE YEARS, 1861-62 BASED UPON THE OFFICIAL REPORTS OF THE FEDERAL COMMANDERS LYON, SIGEL, STURGIS, FREMONT HALLECK, CURTIS, SCHOFIELD, BLUNT, HERRON AND TOTTEN, AND OF THE CONFEDERATE COMMANDERS McCULLOCH, PRICE VAN DORN, HINDMAN, MARMA- DUKE, AND SHELBY BY WILEY BRITTON WAR DEPARTMENT 1861-62 SECOND EDITION, REVISED G.P.PUTNAM'S SONS NEW YORK LONDON 27 WEST TWENTY-THIRD STREET 27 KING WILLIAM STREET, STRAND Ube TKmcfterbocfcer press ]89i COPYRIGHT BY WILEY BRITTON 1890 Ube Iknfclierbocfccr fl>ress, Iftew ©orTj Electrotyped, Printed, and Bound by G. P. Putnam's Sons PREFACE. In the following pages I have endeavored to give an account of the most important military operations and events in Missouri, Arkansas, Kan- sas, and the Indian Territory during the years 1861 and 1862. I have called the work " The Civil War on the Border," because during the period men- tioned the most important military operations in Missouri and Arkansas were in the western parts of those States, and also because the Federal army operating in that section after the summer of 1862 was known as the Army of the Frontier. This designation of the army was quite appropriate, be- cause until Kansas was admitted into the Union as a State in 1861, Western Missouri and Western Arkansas bordered on Kansas and the Indian Ter- ritories. Having served with the Federal army in that section during the entire war, and having par- ticipated in the operations and witnessed most of the events described, I have been able to write largely from observation. But that the work might in IV PA^FACE. be historically accurate, I have compared my data with the official reports published by the Govern- ment, and eliminated every thing that conflicts with official data. In such of the events described as are not covered by official data, I have drawn my ac- counts of them from the statements of eye-witnesses and participants, or from personal observation. The official reports are very meagre, except as to the larger operations, and give a very incomplete ac- count of the war in that section. As a rule, the officers were so much occupied with the pressing duties of the hour that they gave little thought to the importance of preparing careful reports of their operations. But it has been possible by combining official data with personal observations and state- ments of participants in the operations and events described, to give a tolerably complete account of the conflict in that section during the period cov- ered. In giving numbers engaged in actions and casualties on each side, I have almost invariably taken the official reports as a guide. Any one who has read the accounts of both sides of any given conflict will doubtless have noticed that there is a strong tendency for each side to magnify its own achievements and to belittle the achievements of its adversary. And probably there was scarcely an action in that section that the officers and troops on each side did not magnify their own achievements PREFACE, V and exaggerate the strength and casualties of their opponents. A Confederate officer sometimes, for example, reported that he killed more of the enemy than the Federal commander reported that he had men in action. Instead, therefore, of ac- cepting such exaggerated accounts, the command- ing officers on each side have been permitted to state, as far as practicable, the strength of their respective forces engaged in the different actions and the casualties they sustained. While much has been written on the late war, no one that I am aware of has hitherto undertaken to give an account of the operations extending over that section during the period covered by this volume. WILEY BRITTON. Washington, 1890.

## dry-wood

Finding that General McCulloch would not join forces with him, General Price determined to accomplish such results as were possible with his own army, — the State Guard. He left Springfield about two weeks after the battle of Wilson Creek with some ten thousand men, with the intention of taking Fort Scott, Kansas, and then marching through Kansas to the Missouri River, striking it at Kansas City. He knew that the secession element was much stronger in North and in Central Missouri, than in all the region south of the Missouri River, and he was constantly in receipt of information that if he could march to the river in the neighborhood of Lexington, he would be joined by General Martin Green from North Missouri with some four thousand men. He knew that there were no Federal troops between Springfield and Lexington ; that there was only a small force of about two thousand men, composed of Missouri Home Guards and a regiment of Illinois volunteers under Colonel Mulli- gan, at the latter place, and that he could march directly there without opposition. The Union Home Guard or- ganizations that had come into existence in many of the counties south of the river, under authority of General Lyon, were disbanded after the battle of Wilson Creek, so that after the retreat of the Federal army from Spring- field, the western half of Missouri south of the river was completely in possession of the secessionists. After the defeat of the Union army at Wilson Creek, the prominent men of Kansas expected that Generals Price and McCulloch would lead their victorious legions to the invasion of the newly admitted free State. The Territory had suffered the year before from an unprece- dented drought, and the people had become greatly impoverished, yet it was thought that as many of Price's army were men who had belonged to the Border Ruffian bands, who had invaded the Territory in behalf of the Proslavery party and had committed many outrages 122 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER, upon the Free-State people, they would again eagerly engage in an enterprise that promised them an opportu- nity of further satiating their revenge upon their old oppo- nents, the Free-State men of Kansas. General James H. Lane, the recently elected Senator from Kansas, saw, the moment hostilities commenced, that his State would very soon require a considerable force of troops stationed along her eastern border to protect his people against the depredations of the Missouri secessionists. The State had already put into the field two regiments, who had gallantly maintained her honor on the bloody field of Wilson Creek. These two regiments were ordered out of the State directly after they were organized, thus leaving the people of the border counties of Kansas at the mercy of the companies of secessionists that were organized in all the border counties of Missouri. On the earnest solicitation of General Lane, authority was obtained from the War Department for raising five additional regiments from Kansas. But when the battle of Wilson Creek was fought, scarcely a battalion had been recruited for each, the Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh Regiments. The defeat of the Union army at Bull Run, followed closely by the defeat of General Lyon's army at Wilson Creek, aroused the people to a realization of the situation that war flamed at their very doors. In almost every locality there were a few men who had had some experience in war on a small scale during the Kansas troubles between the Proslavery and Free-State men, but men familiar with regular military organization and discipline were not easily found. Fathers with their sons visited their nearest towns to hear the latest news of the movements of the armies, and the war excitement increased. Those who aspired to military honors and had obtained authority to raise companies were zealous in drumming up recruits. Every day of the week, at inter- vals of an hour or so, at the different recruiting stations in ACTION AT DRY WOOD. 1 23 the border counties of Kansas, the fife and drum might have been heard calling the citizens to arms. Those just in from the country to hear the latest news of army operations were soon attracted in groups around the fife and drum corps. Here the situation was discussed, and here the patriotism and martial pride of the young men were aroused, and they accompanied the recruiting officer to his office, where each signed an agreement to serve the United States three years or during the war to put down the rebellion, and were then sworn into the service. Companies were rapidly recruited, but in many cases the officers were totally unacquainted with military instruc- tion. Very few of them, perhaps, had ever seen Scott's or Hardee's Tactics, or witnessed a soldier go through the manual of arms. Good drill-masters were much in demand. Companies organized in the neighborhood of Forts Scott, Leavenworth, or Riley, were generally fortunate enough to have some one to instruct them in their respective arms of the service. Around each of these military posts a number of sergeants, corporals and intelligent private soldiers, who had served one or more terms in the Regular Army and who had been honorably discharged therefrom, had settled, and finding their knowledge of military in- struction much in demand, joined some of the companies being raised in their midst. In most cases they were soon promoted to commissioned officers. In nearly every town too, there were perhaps several men who had served in the Mexican War and who knew something of military discipline. Hence raw as the people were in the art of war, they were not slow in finding instructors in discipline and organization. The companies organized in Southern Kansas were ordered to Fort Scott to rendezvous and to receive their clothing, arms, and equipments, and most of the com- panies organized in the northern part of the States re- ceived their outfits at Fort Leavenworth. Many a rustic 124 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. youth after leaving aside his citizen garb and putting on the bright new Federal uniform surprised his friends by his improved appearance. Each recruit thus taken into the service was rapidly put through the course of instruc- tion prescribed for soldiers of the Regular Army when it was practicable. In nearly every infantry company there were one or two soldiers more awkward than the rest, and noted for their slowness in learning how to catch and keep the step. But a few weeks daily drilling in the squad, company, and battalion improved these most awk- ward men in soldierly bearing in a wonderful degree. Most of the officers were as green in regard to making out requisitions for the necessary supplies for their com- panies as they were in regard to the school of the soldier, for the Army Regulations had been a sealed book to them. But at Fort Scott there were several volunteer officers of fine business qualifications, who had had some experience in Government matters, and among them was Major W. C. Ransom, who, with much labor and patience instructed and assisted many of the officers in making out their requisitions for supplies in proper form. Fort Leavenworth was the depot from which supplies of the various kinds were drawn, and the chiefs of the several departments there were Regular Army officers, and each promptly filled all proper requisitions made upon his de- partment, if the supplies were on hand. The demand for arms had been so great all over the country that the ordnance officers could not furnish all the troops raised in Kansas with the newest and most improved models of muskets and carbines. Some companies, however, were furnished with Springfield muskets and Sharp's carbines, the best infantry and cavalry arms then in use. A week or so after the battle of Wilson Creek the rumor became current that General Price was preparing to invade Kansas. General Lane and other prominent men addressed the people, appealing to them to rally to A CTION AT DRY WOOD. 1 2 5 the defence of their homes and firesides. Every effort was made to raise as large a force of Kansas volunteers to meet and check the invader as possible. In Southwest Missouri the people were nearly equally divided on the issues of the war ; but after the withdrawal of the Federal troops from that section, the outspoken Union men either followed Lyon's army to Rolla, fled to Kansas, or concealed themselves in the woods and hills, for they were hunted down, and when found, captured and sometimes shot by mounted parties of secessionists, who rode over the country, appropriating the property of Union people, and committing other lawless acts with- out any restraint except such as they voluntarily im- posed upon themselves. Under these circumstances hun- dreds of Union men living in the border counties of Missouri fled to Kansas. Many of them suffered great hardships to escape from the rebels, often travelling on foot at night on dim roads, guided only by the light of the stars. The country south of Fort Scott, for a dis- tance of seventy miles, is almost continuous prairie, and was covered with wild grass, in some places high as a man's head, and in travelling upon the dim paths over that section the Union refugees were generally drenched from head to feet by the dew on the grass, so that when they reached Fort Scott they were so exhausted from fatigue and hunger that they were almost helpless for several days. In many instances the men before leaving their homes arranged for their families to join them at a given place in Kansas in a short time, with their horses and cattle and such household effects as could be brought along. But in nearly every case in which a family started to Kansas with their live-stock they were obliged to turn back with the loss of most of their property. Those who expressed themselves in regard to going to Kansas as an asylum were looked upon with greater dis- favor than if they were simply Union men. 126 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. The Unionists might, and many of them did, oppose the freedom of the slaves, but a man desiring to go to Kansas was supposed to be in sympathy with the abolitionists, and was therefore regarded by the hot-headed secession- ist with much bitterness. The Union men of Southwest Missouri, being unable to organize companies for their own protection at home, enlisted into Kansas regiments soon after their arrival in that State. In a good many of the companies of the Kansas regiments raised during this exciting time, probably two thirds of the men were from Missouri. Fort Scott, Mound City, Paola, and Olathe were the principal points along the Kansas border at which the newly organized companies and battalions were stationed. Detachments of cavalry were sent out from these points every few days into Missouri to ascertain the movements of the secessionists in the border counties of that State. Reports of intended attacks upon the troops at these stations, and of depredations upon Unionists in Missouri, were almost daily brought in by Union refugees. Many a night, upon the strength of a report of some excited citi- zen or scout, were the troops aroused by the long roll, or call to arms, beat upon the snare-drum. In at least one instance the alarm arose from the excited person seeing a herd of cattle so far off upon the distant prairie that he could not distinguish them from men. At first the recruit thus aroused felt sure that a battle was imminent, and his heart beat almost audibly, but after a few weeks the beat- ing of the long roll at night had a less exciting effect upon the recruits. By the middle of August the five new regiments which General Lane had been authorized to raise, could muster an effective force of twenty-five hundred men. Having received information that General Price was preparing to invade Kansas, General Lane at once commenced collect- ing all the available troops in the State at Fort Scott, the ACTION AT DRY WOOD. \2J point which would likely be the first attacked. Colonel William Weer, Fourth Kansas Volunteers, was placed in the immediate command of the troops at that post on his arrival there about the 20th of August. General Lane had not yet arrived from Fort Leavenworth, where he was detained looking after the organization of the troops and the forwarding of supplies for them. Having made arrangements for obtaining and transporting the neces- sary supplies for his command, he proceeded to Fort Scott, arriving there on the last of August. In the meantime General Price, who left Springfield on the 26th at the head of his army, arrived at Dry Wood, a point twelve miles east of Fort Scott, on the night of the 1st of September. General Rains' division, which was made up of troops from Southwest Missouri, was given the advance. Arriving at Dry Wood, the General sent forward some three hundred mounted men under Captain Rector Johnson to make a reconnoissance. Captain John- son moved forward on the Greenfield and Fort Scott road until he came in sight of Fort Scott on Sunday evening, September 1st. About a mile and a half east of Fort Scott he came upon, captured, and drove off eighty Gov- ernment mules, that had been sent out to graze upon the prairie. Several herders and the picket stationed near the point where the stock were captured, came into the post as quickly as possible and reported what had taken place. The troops were at once called to arms and several com- panies of cavalry sent out to skirmish with the enemy. But after capturing the mules and several prisoners, the rebel force returned to their main command at Dry Wood, being closely pursued by the cavalry companies of Cap- tains L. R. Jewell and H. S. Greeno of the Sixth Kansas Volunteers as far as the State line. Not knowing the strength of the enemy and night having fallen, Captains Jewell and Greeno posted a strong picket near the State line and then returned to Fort Scott. They ascertained 128 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. that the rebel detachment, after crossing the line into Kansas, had taken off as prisoners all the able-bodied men found at home. These citizen prisoners, however, were subsequently released or escaped. General Lane, who had just arrived from Fort Leaven- worth, assumed command of all the troops at the post and in Southern Kansas. He had received information which satisfied him that Price's main army was in the neighbor- hood of Dry Wood, and he thought it likely that the rebel general might endeavor to move up during the night so as to be in readiness to attack the next morning. To guard against a possible surprise, he ordered pickets posted out two to three miles on all the roads leading into Fort Scott from the south, east, and north. He also despatched a courier to Colonel C. R. Jennison, commanding the Seventh Kansas Volunteer Cavalry, then encamped near Barnesville, twelve miles north on the Little Osage, to bring forward his regiment on a forced march. The Colonel moved promptly and reached Fort Scott about three o'clock the next morning. Colonel James Mont- gomery's battalion Third Kansas Infantry and Colonel Hamilton P. Johnson's battalion, Fifth Kansas Volunteer Cavalry, also arrived during the night and the next morn- ing. On the morning of the 2d, General Lane ordered Colonels Johnson and Jennison to take the available mounted force of their regiments, together with two or three cavalry companies of the Sixth Kansas Volunteers, in all about twelve hundred men, and move out in the direction of Dry Wood, and reconnoitre the position of the enemy, ascertain something of his strength, and, if possible, develop his intentions. These troops left Fort Scott about ten o'clock and encountered the enemy in force at Dry Wood about two o'clock in the afternoon. A lively skirmish ensued in which several men were killed and wounded on each side. General Rains declined to be drawn out of the timber, where he had his troops post- ACTION AT DRY WOOD. 129 ed to good advantage for receiving an attack, and the Fed- eral officers were too cautious to attack a masked force which they believed to be superior in numbers to their own. Though the opposing forces were unable to join in close combat, they continued to fight at long range until about five o'clock, when the Federal officers withdrew their forces from the field and fell back to Fort Scott. Just at sundown two or three ambulances returned to Fort Scott from Dry Wood with the Federal wounded, and in a short time afterward the head of the cavalry column appeared in sight. About this time a report came to General Lane that the enemy in strong force were pur- suing his cavalry, and that the rebel generals intended to attack Fort Scott that night. The Kansas Commander at once ordered out all his infantry, about one thousand men, and marched them out on the road nearly two miles east of town, and formed them in line in the open prairie, and waited an hour or so for the enemy to advance. In the meantime a violent thunder-storm was gathering in the northwest, and being unable to ascertain any thing concerning the movements of the enemy, since his cavalry had left the field, General Lane returned to Fort Scott with his infantry about ten o'clock in the midst of a ter- rific rain and thunder-storm. He was satisfied that the rebel forces would advance early the next morning and attack the post, and believing that his force was insuffi- cient to meet them, he ordered all his troops to withdraw from Fort Scott that night and fall back to the north side of the Little Osage, fourteen miles northwest. A rumor was current that the town was to be burned as soon as the enemy came in sight. The soldiers therefore packed their knapsacks to the utmost capacity, and no doubt in many cases with useless articles that they had brought with them into the service. At eleven o'clock General Lane's infantry filed out of town and took up the line of march for the Little Osage. 130 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. They had all scarcely crossed the Marmiton River just north of the town, when the storm burst again and the rain poured down in torrents. The vivid flashes of lightning and the loud peals of thunder impressed the soldiers with the fact that they were obliged to expose themselves to the fierce rage of the elements as well as to man's inventions of destruction. As soon as it was known that General Lane had ordered his troops to fall back from Fort Scott, most of the citi- zens commenced getting ready to leave with the army. When the next morning dawned the town was almost deserted by the male citizens. Some four hundred of Jennison's cavalry, however, stayed all night, having been ordered to remain until the enemy appeared in sight, and they destroyed and damaged the' property of the citizens in a disgraceful manner. Early on the morning of the 3d, all General Lane's trains and troops, except the outpost left at Fort Scott, arrived on the north side of the Little Osage, where it was decided to make a stand should General Price determine to follow up and give battle. Large details were at once made from the troops and set to work throwing up fortifications to command the approaches to the position. The troops worked industri- ously, and by the evening of the 4th had constructed perhaps a quarter of a mile of breastworks. General Lane named the place Fort Lincoln in honor of the Presi- dent. On account of the steep banks on each side of the Marmiton and Osage rivers, there were very few good crossings over them. The recent heavy rains had slightly raised these streams so that they were rendered impassa- ble for trains and artillery for several days. To guard against a flank movement, General Lane ordered three hundred cavalry to guard the Barnesville ford of the Osage, one and a half miles west of the State line, and five miles east of Fort Lincoln. He also kept his cavalry scouting the country between the Marmiton and Osage A CTION AT DRY WOOD. 1 3 1 rivers, as far east as the State line, and officers command- ing detachments were instructed to give immediate notice of the advance of the enemy. The presence of a large rebel army encamped within four or five miles of the Kansas line created great excite- ment among the people of the border counties. It was generally believed that if not checked in their progress the country they marched over would be laid waste. At any rate the situation was such that General Lane called out all the able-bodied men of Bourbon and adjoining coun- ties, to serve for a period of fourteen days in defending Kansas against the rebel invasion. In this emergency call he got out in two or three days upward of one thousand men. Though such an irregular force would not be very effective against well-organized troops, they would be of some service in keeping up a bold front. After despatching a courier to Major Prince, the commanding officer at Fort Leavenworth, to send forward all the rein- forcements he could spare with as little delay as possible, and after making all possible preparations for resisting the further advance of the enemy, General Lane received information that General Price had broken up his camp at Dry Wood, and had taken up the line of march for Lexington. The rebel general saw that if he invaded Kansas his advance would be contested at every point, and that his progress would likely be so much delayed that by the time he arrived at the Missouri River General Fremont would probably have thrown forward from St. Louis and North Missouri a large force to meet him. The Federal troops thus collected for opposing the rebel invasion of Kansas were subsequently known as " Lane's Brigade." As soon as General Lane received de- finite information through his scouts and escaped Union prisoners that the enemy had abandoned the plan, tem- porarily at least, of invading Kansas, and were marching 132 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. toward Lexington, he at once commenced moving most of his troops north along the State line, where they could watch the movements of the rebel forces. The battalion of the Sixth Kansas Volunteers under Colonel W. R. Judson was ordered to return to Fort Scott to garrison the post and to scout the country south of that post. General Lane's little army was isolated from any other Federal force, and serious apprehensions were felt lest the enemy should attempt to enter the State at some point north of Fort Scott. In several despatches General Lane laid before General Fremont the condition of affairs along the Kansas border and urgently appealed for reinforce- ments. In a few days, however, the danger of invasion was felt to be passed, and the attention of General Fre- mont and his brigadiers was directed to Lexington, to the reinforcing of Colonels Mulligan and Peabody, who were holding that place with about three thousand men. The officials reports showed that the casualties on the Federal side in the action at Dry Wood were five killed and twelve wounded, and on the Confederate side four killed and sixteen wounded.

## lexington

CHAPTER XI. THE SIEGE AND FALL OF LEXINGTON. The secessionists magnified the action at Dry Wood on the 2d, claimed that they had gained an important victory over General Lane's forces, and boldly declared that General Price would march to the Missouri River, and take possession of all the towns on that river west of Boonville. To the Union men in Southern Missouri the situation looked gloomy in the extreme. The rebel army marched northward without resistance, and the Union- ists could not hear of success crowning the Union arms in any quarter. On the contrary, slight reverses on the Federal side they heard of through secession sources as great disasters. The numbers of Federal killed and wounded in any given action were magnified ten to twenty times, and the rebel losses were stated as insignificant. That the Federal officers highest in command in Mis- souri displayed an utter lack of aggressiveness and con- cert of action after the death of General Lyon was apparent to the intelligent men of both sides. General Pope, with an army of nearly five thousand men, was employed in North Missouri in chasing bands of rebel guerillas, while Colonel Mulligan, with a regiment of Illinois volunteers, and Colonel Peabody, with frag- ments of three or four regiments of Missouri Home Guards, was stationed at Lexington and Warrensburg, 133 134 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. south of the Missouri River, to confront the rebel army under Price. A large Federal force of perhaps ten thou- sand men was also encamped around Jefferson City. A few days after the action at Dry Wood reports reached Colonels Peabody and Mulligan that Price was advancing upon Lexington with a large army. These Federal officers at once notified General Fremont, and appealed to him for reinforcements. In the meantime detachments of secessionists from Central and Western Missouri were daily joining Price and giving him accurate information of the numbers and position of the Federal troops at Warrensburg and Lexington. The rebel gen- eral also ascertained that the Government had large quantities of quartermasters' and commissary supplies stored at Lexington, and that the Federal troops had a battery of light artillery and several mortars, — all of which would make a prize worth making a zealous effort to seize. Colonels Peabody and Mulligan, hearing of the advance of the rebel forces, at once commenced fortifying Lexington, with the view of holding out until reinforcements arrived. Colonel Everett Peabody had under his command Majors Van Horn's and Berry's bat- talions of Missouri cavalry the Thirteenth and Four- teenth Regiments Missouri Home Guards, and the Twenty-fifth and Twenty-seventh Regiments Missouri Mounted Infantry. Part of this force was posted at Warrensburg, thirty miles south of Lexington, to look after the secession organizations in that section, and to give notice of any advance of the rebel army from the South. On the ioth of September the cavalry advance of Gen- eral Price's army arrived at Warrensburg, but the Federal commander, not deeming his force strong enough to check the enemy more than a few hours, evacuated the place about midnight, and fell back to Lexington, burn- ing several bridges behind him to retard the movements of the rebels. THE SIEGE AND FALL OF LEXINGTON. 1 35 In the meantime General Parsons, with a division of three thousand secessionists, had marched north parallel with the columns of Price and Rains, but about twenty- five miles east of their line of march, and taken possession of Georgetown, some four miles northwest of Sedalia, the terminus of the Missouri Pacific Railroad. General Fremont was promptly advised of these movements of the enemy. He saw now that the troops of Peabody and Mulligan were isolated, and he knew that they could not hold out long against the converging columns of the com- bined rebel forces. He therefore immediately telegraphed orders to Colonel Jeff. C. Davis, commanding the Federal forces around Jefferson City, to move forward with rein- forcements to the relief of Lexington at once. The troops could be transported over the Pacific Railroad to Sedalia, within fifty miles of Lexington, in a few hours. It would then have taken only two days' easy marching to have reached the besieged troops, or to have come up with and attacked the enemy in the rear. But Colonel Davis found abundant excuses for not complying with his instructions to move forward until it was too late. He first complained that he had not sufficient wagon trans- portation to convey his supplies when his troops were transported to the end of the railroad. In the next place, two days' supplies would not be sufficient to start out with to attack the enemy. Instead of putting himself at the head of a strong column and marching to the relief of the Federal garrison at Lexington, he frittered away a whole week in preparing to meet imaginary contingencies. His troops were perhaps better equipped with the neces- sary appointments of an army taking the field than most of the rebel forces. The country between Sedalia and Lexington was the richest agricultural section of the State, and would have afforded ample supplies for subsist- ing his troops and animals. He knew that the rebel gen- erals improvised means of transportation by impressing teams from citizens of the country through which they 136 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER, marched. The emergency was great, and he could have adopted a similar course without casting an unfavorable reflection upon the Government. Then again, the river was open, and Lexington could have been reinforced by sending up troops by steamboats. But while General Fremont and his lieutenants were thus wasting precious time, General Price was daily draw- ing his lines tighter around the beleaguered garrison at Lexington. He was also being steadily reinforced by the State Guard forces from the different districts of North Missouri. The divisions of Generals Thomas A. Harris and Martin E. Green and Colonel J. P. Saunders crossed the Missouri River from North Missouri, and joined him in time to participate in the siege of Lexington. From Warrensburg he resumed the march toward Lexington as soon as his infantry and artillery came up. He also despatched orders to General Parsons, at Georgetown, to join him near Lexington. On leaving Warrensburg, General Price, at the head of a large cavalry force, again pushed forward to overtake the retreating Federal detachment, but he was unable to do it. He continued the pursuit to within two and a half miles of the Federal fortifications, when he again halted, bivouacked for the night, and waited for his infantry and artillery. At daybreak, on the morning of the 13th, a skirmish took place between his pickets and the Federal outposts. He ordered his main force at hand to the sup- port of his pickets, and Colonels Mulligan and Peabody reinforced their outpost. The Federal troops at once opened a brisk fire upon the rebels, when General Price, not wishing to be drawn into a general engagement, fell back two or three miles, until he met his infantry and ar- tillery. He then moved forward again with his army, and driving in the Federal outposts, found the Federal troops drawn up in line near the city. A sharp skirmish ensued, but the Federal commanders were not willing to hazard THE SIEGE AND FALL OF LEXINGTON. 1 37 a battle, and withdrew their forces to the intrenchments. General Price at once moved up his forces, and took posi- tions within artillery range of the Federal fortifications, and opened fire upon them with shot and shell from Bled- soe's and Guibor's batteries. The Federal battery re- sponded with much energy, and Federal sharpshooters were posted so as to annoy the rebels as much as possible. Thus the booming of artillery, from early in the after- noon until the shades of night had fallen, announced to the citizens of the city and the surrounding country that the opposing forces had commenced the struggle for the possession of that important place. General Price became satisfied that the Federal garrison were determined to resist his attacks to the last extremity, and, feeling that his force was not strong enough to make a successful assault, and being short of ammunition, withdrew his army to the Fair Grounds, near the city, and encamped there until the 18th. Colonels Peabody and Mulligan daily looked for rein- forcements, under Colonel Davis, from Jefferson City, and under General Sturgis, from Mexico, Missouri. During the respite allowed them by General Price, waiting for his ammunition train, the Federal commanders at Lexington were busy in strengthening their position. They were advised of the intentions of the enemy of renewing the attack in a day or so, with augmented forces and more extensive preparations. In the meantime, his ammunition train having arrived from Springfield, and having also received large reinforce- ments, General Price again moved his army into the city, and surrounded the Federal troops in their fortified posi- tion. He ordered General Rains to occupy, with his division of upward of three thousand men and two three- gun batteries, a strong position north and east of the Masonic College, around which the Federal troops had thrown up intrenchments. General Parsons was directed 138 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. to occupy with his division a position southwest of the Federal works, and to open upon them with Captain Guibor's battery. The Confederate divisions of General Steele and Colonel Jackson were posted near the divisions of Generals Rains and Parsons as reserves, but as the Federal force was not strong enough to fight in the open field to advantage, the rebel general was not obliged to bring his reserves into action. Colonel Rives, who com- manded General Price's fourth division in the absence of General Slack, was ordered to lead it along the river bank to a point immediately beneath and west of the Federal fortifications. He was soon reinforced by portions of the divisions of Generals McBride and Harris. The different divisions of the rebel army having taken the positions assigned to them, General Price, at ten o'clock on the morning of the 18th, ordered his batteries to open fire upon the besieged Federal garrison, and in a short time thereafter pushed forward his skirmish lines within range of the Federal small-arms. A few moments after this, the conflict with small-arms also became quite animated on both sides, but without either side gaining any decided advantage. The Confederate officers were anxious to gain protected positions for post- ing part of their men to fire upon the Federal troops when they exposed themselves above their works. But the moment the rebels showed any intention of making an assault by exposing themselves in unprotected posi- tions within range, Colonel Mulligan ordered his battery to use grape and canister generously. The Federal sharp- shooters, too, with unerring aim brought down promptly many a Southron while peering around at a distance deemed safe yet not beyond rifle range. Gradually General Price's forces secured protected positions, from which sharpshooters and skirmishers were thrown out to annoy the Federal troops. Colonel Mulligan made several sorties during the day to dislodge the rebels from the positions thus gained, and THE SIEGE AND FALL OF LEXINGTON. 1 39 was, in a measure, successful. A Federal force of three or four hundred men occupied a strong position around Anderson's house, on the summit of a bluff overlook- ing the Missouri River, and about one hundred and twenty-five yards from the Federal intrenchments. This position General Price determined to carry by assault, and ordered up for the purpose the divisions of Generals Harris and McBride and Colonel Rives. In a short time the rebel forces were on the ground, and under the eyes of their leaders moved forward, and, after a short struggle, captured the position. Knowing its importance as a part of his defences, Colonel Mulligan ordered out a strong force to retake it, which he did in the evening, after mak- ing a gallant charge. But as he was pressed at other points, the Federal commander could not spare a suffi- cient number of troops to hold this important position. He had reoccupied it but a short time when the rebel generals rallied their forces in overwhelming numbers and, after a severe conflict, retook it, and held it during the remainder of the siege. At the end of the struggle the ground was strewn over with the dead and wounded of both sides, and the pools of blood here and there attested with what earnestness men will fight for fancied wrongs, as well as for a Government that guarantees the freedom of all, limited only by the like liberty of each. While this conflict for the possession of the heights near Anderson's house was going on, part of the rebel force, under Colonel Rives, moved down the bank of the river and captured a steamboat partly freighted with Gov- ernment supplies. The possession of the heights near Anderson's house was of great advantage to the rebel forces, for, besides being a position from which they could more effectually use their artillery against the Federal works, it also enabled them to command the river and to obstruct Colonel Mulligan's water supply. When the sun descended and darkness covered all, the soldiers of the opposing forces rejoiced, for they had suf- 140 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. fered much from fatigue, thirst, and excessive heat during the day's operations. From morning until the dusk of evening the roar of artillery was almost incessant, while with small-arms the skirmish and volley firing were well-nigh continuous. General Price's forces occupied during the night the positions they had gained during the day. Strong guards were posted in front of his several divisions, with instructions to give instant notice should they discover the Federal forces preparing to make a night assault upon the Confederate lines. But the night passed without general alarm, and when the morning of the 19th dawned, General Price's forces had strengthened their positions at different points by temporary field-works, and were prepared to draw their lines tighter around the Federal garrison. The day was consumed in skirmishing and desultory firing on both sides. General Price could not advance his lines beyond the field-works constructed, without exposing his men to a sweeping fire of the Federal artillery. He was extremely anxious to bring his opera- tions to a successful conclusion as speedily as possible, lest he should also have to fight Federal reinforcements which were reported to be marching to Lexington. The situation with the Federal garrison was also becom- ing serious, for their water supply had been cut off by General Price's army. In constructing the fortifications, the Federal officers had not made ample provision for supplying the troops with water in the event of a siege. By holding certain defensive positions the supply of water could have been maintained, but if these should be taken no provision was made for supplying the troops with water after they fell back behind their second line of defences. Several hundred bales of hemp found in the warehouses of Lexington suggested to the Confederate leaders a new plan of constructing defensive works for approaching the Federal fortifications. In making a reconnoissance of the hospital position on the bluff, General Harris came to the THE SIEGE AND FALL OF LEXINGTON. 141 conclusion that his operations would be much facilitated and attended with less loss of life by the construction of flank defences, and for this purpose requested of General Price permission to take about one hundred and fifty bales of the hemp thus found. The request was granted and the morning of the 20th dawned with brighter hopes for the success of the Confederate arms. Colonels Marshall and Mulligan could have escaped with their troops and with the public property to the north side of the Missouri River any time between the 13th and 1 8th, for two steamboats were lying at the wharf subject to their orders. But having received in- structions from General Fremont to hold the place to the last extremity, they did so, and then it was too late to re- treat. General Harris having obtained the bales of hemp required, had them transported to the points designated and saturated with water to prevent them from taking fire from the exploding shells of the Federal guns or from the discharge of small-arms in the hands of the rebel infantry posted behind them. They were then arranged in a line and pushed forward by the rebel soldiers toward the Federal position in parallel approaches. This new move- ment was vigorously met by the Federal commander. Under his direction the captain of the Federal battery turned his guns upon the movable works of the enemy, and in a short time was throwing shot and shell and grape and canister against and around them with such tremen- dous energy that the rebels were temporarily checked in their advance. The earth trembled from the shock of the thundering artillery and from exploding shells, and nearly every pane of glass in the windows of the nearest build- ings was broken to pieces. Finding that his movable breastworks were going to afford such satisfactory pro- tection to his troops in approaching the Federal works, General Price renewed the attack with the utmost vehe- 142 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. mence from every quarter. His four batteries, under Cap- tains McDonald, Clark, Guibor, and Kelley, were posted so as to cross-fire the Federal position, and the shot and shell from them were very destructive among Colonel Mulligan's horses and mules. A few of the Federal soldiers were also killed and wounded by pieces of ex- ploding shells. In spite of every effort of the Federal commander, the enemy continued to advance under cover of their movable breastworks. From early in the morning until two o'clock in the afternoon the roar of battle was continuous. The cross-fire of the rebel batteries was beginning to tell with considerable effect upon the Federal troops, and they were much exhausted and suffering from intolerable thirst for want of water. Colonel Mulligan and his principal officers met in council, and the situation was briefly dis- cussed. Even should they hold out another day there was no prospect of the arrival of reinforcements, and they were not strong enough to cut their way through the rebel lines and escape. They were deeply sensible that through the blunder or incompetency of the Depart- ment commander or his subordinates, they had been placed in a most humiliating position. Seeing no way by which they could escape, they resolved to open negotia- tions with General Price with a proposition to surrender the Federal forces under their command upon certain terms. A white flag was displayed from the Federal works, and the firing soon ceased on both sides. General Price sent forward one of his staff to ascertain the object of the flag. After some discussion it was agreed by the Federal officers that the Federal forces should lay down their arms and surrender themselves prisoners of war. To the soldiers of Colonel Peabody's command, who had re- cently left their homes in different parts of Missouri to defend the honor and integrity of the Government, it was a moment of grief and anguish almost insupportable, THE SIEGE AND FALL OF LEXINGTON. I43 when they saw the Stars and Stripes, the emblem of national unity and of equal rights among men, hauled down and replaced by the rebel flag. They knew that they would soon hear the bitter taunts and insulting remarks of their secession neighbors who had espoused the Southern cause and joined the rebel army. When the Federal troops stacked their arms and sur- rendered, General Price at once took possession of the Federal fortifications and public property captured. In his official report he stated that his entire loss during the siege was 25 killed and 72 wounded. The casualties on the Federal side were 39 killed and 120 wounded, and 3,000 prisoners. Among the prisoners were Colonels Mulligan, Marshall, Peabody, White, Grover, Major Van Horn, and 118 other Commissioned Officers. The Gov- ernment also lost upwards of 1,000 head of horses and mules, about 100 wagons, large quantities of quarter- master's and commissary supplies, together with 5 pieces of artillery, 2 mortars, and 3,000 stands of arms. Lieutenant- Colonel B. W. Grover, Twenty-seventh Missouri Volun- teers, was mortally wounded. The fall of Lexington was a severe blow to the Union cause in Missouri. It was a disaster that was due to a series of unpardonable blunders and want of concert of action among subordinate Federal commanders, and came near producing a panic of such magnitude as would have left Kansas at the mercy of the rebel armies of Generals Price and McCulloch. Had General Fremont shown an aptitude for coordinating the movements of troops to accomplish a given purpose, he could have thrown forward to Lexington, in four or five days, not less than 25,000 men, and this, too, without withdrawing troops from threatened points in Southeast Missouri. The fall of Lexington was not only felt in Missouri, but it startled the loyal section of the country, and President Lincoln, becoming impatient of the barren results of General Fre- 144 THE CIVIL WAR ON THE BORDER. mont's operations, directed General Scott to telegraph him : " The President is glad you are hastening to the scene of action. His words are : ' He expects you to repair the disaster at Lexington without loss of time.' " General Fremont had fully ten days' notice of the advance of Price upon Lexington, and in which to either withdraw the troops from that point or to reinforce them. On the 5th of September, General Lane sent a dispatch from Fort Lincoln by special courier to Major Prince, the command- ing officer at Fort Leavenworth, that Generals Price and Rains had the day before broken up camp at Dry Wood, near Fort Scott, and were reported to be marching on Lexington with ten thousand men and seven pieces of artillery. Major Prince received this dispatch on the 7th, and immediately telegraphed it to General Fremont in St. Louis, which was then the headquarters of the Western Department. General Fremont ordered Generals Pope and Sturgis to reinforce Mulligan at Lexington with the troops of their respective commands operating in North Missouri. General Sturgis marched from Mexico with four thousand men, and arrived on the north bank of the Missouri River, opposite Lexington, shortly after the rebels captured the ferryboat, and, having no means of crossing the river, was obliged to become an idle spectator to the unequal conflict.

## springfield

After a brief halt near Cornersville, about twenty-five miles south of Warsaw on the west side of the Pomme de Terre River, to allow the several divisions of his army to cross the Osage and take their proper positions in the general advance, General Fremont resumed the march towards Springfield via Bolivar with the advance division under General Sigel. Shortly after dark, on the evening of the 24th, he sent forward Major Chas. Zagoni with 150 men of his body-guard, and Major F. J. White with 180 mounted men detailed from the First Missouri cavalry to make a reconnoissance in the direction of Springfield. Majors Zagoni and White marched all that night, and the next day about twelve o'clock captured five men of the rebel picket guard and of a foraging party, eight miles north of Springfield, from whom information was obtained that a force of at least 1,500 Confederate troops were in town that day. One of the rebel pickets not captured hastened to camp and gave the alarm of the Federal advance, so that the Confederate officers imme- diately got their men out in line ready to receive an attack. It was decided by the Federal officers after some delib- eration to move forward and attack the enemy, even though it appeared from reports that they outnumbered the Federal detachments five to one. Feeling sure that SPRINGFIELD RETAKEN AND ABANDONED. 1 55 the secessionists would be informed of their approach in time to make some preparations to receive them, Majors Zagoni and White determined to make a detour of five miles to the southward and to approach the Confederate camp from the west on the Mount Vernon road. Emer- ging from the woods near this road, just west of Springfield, the Federal cavalry came unexpectedly upon the seces- sionists drawn up in line of battle. On first coming in full view of the enemy, Major Zagoni did not find the ground suitable for forming his men in line. He was therefore obliged to march several hundred yards through a lane, and at the end of it take down a rail fence and form in full view of the Confederate camp. In a moment his troops were in line, and he ordered them to charge the enemy. His men dashed forward in gallant style, and in a few moments broke the line of Confederate infantry and cavalry in several places, dispersing their cavalry and compelling their infantry to retire to the woods. Part of the Confederate cavalry fled through town. Major Zagoni rallied his men and pursued them, and charging through the streets in every direction soon cleared the town of armed secessionists. He then returned to the court-house and raised the Union flag over it, and liber- ated the Union prisoners who had been confined by the secessionists. It was now getting dark, and having suf- fered a heavy loss of men and horses, he decided to retire until he met the advance of the army. His men were exposed to a hot fire from the time they entered the lane until they passed through it and formed in line. The casualties on the Federal side were sixteen men killed and twenty-six wounded. Major Zagoni reported that his men buried twenty-three Confederate dead on the field.
