Wc\t  ^library 

of  % 

Pmtarstty  of  Toronto 

H 

Library  of  the  late 

R.  M.  Greer 


Brunswa,  ""J""" 


The  Fight  for  Missouri 


FROM    THE  ELECTION  OF  LINCOLN 
TO    THE  DEATH  OF  LYON 


BY   ^ 
0 
THOMAS    L.   SNEAD 

A.  D.  C.  OF  THE    GOVERNOR  ;    ACTING   ADJUTANT-GENERAL  OF  THE   MISSOURI 

STATE  GUARD  ;    CHIEF   OF  STAFF   OF  THE  ARMY   OF  THE   WEST 

MEMBER    OF    THE    CONFEDERATE    CONGRESS 


WITH    MAPS 


NEW   YORK 

CHARLES    SCRIBNER'S    SONS 

1886 


Copyright,  1886, 
By  CHARLES  SCRIBNER'S  SONS. 


S/7 

SC7 


LIBRARY 

730035 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TOR- 


Press  of  J.   J.  Little  &  Co. 
Astor  Place,  New  York. 


PREFACE. 


I  HAVE  written  this  book  because  it  was  my  duty 
to  write  it  ;  because,  too,  I  fancy  that  I  know  more 
about  the  events  that  are  narrated  in  it,  than  does 
any  one  who  will  ever  take  the  trouble  to  write 
about  them ;  and  because  I  am  the  only  living 
witness  to  many  facts  the  remembrance  of  which 
ought  to  be  preserved. 

That  the  reader  may  know  whereon  I  ground 
these  assertions,  and  that  he  may,  before  reading 
my  testimony,  be  able  to  decide  whether  it  be 
worth  his  attention,  I  will  tell  him  frankly  how  I 
happen  to  know  about  these  things. 

In  the  elections  of  i860 — for  Governor  of  Missouri, 
and  for  President  of  the  United  States — I  took 
an  active,  though  inconspicuous  part,  chiefly  in  the 
political  management  of  the  St.  Louis  Bulletin, 
which  was  owned  and  edited  by  one  of  my  friends, 
Mr.  Longuemare.  In  its  columns  and  elsewhere  I 
advocated  earnestly  the  election  of  Breckinridge  to 
the  Presidency,  and  of  Claiborne  F.  Jackson  to  the 
Governorship.  But  when  the  latter,  in  obedience  to 
the  manifest  will  of  a  majority  of  the  Democratic 


iv  Preface. 

Party  of  Missouri  whose  candidate  he  was,  an- 
nounced his  determination  to  support  Mr.  Douglas 
for  the  Presidency,  we  Breckinridge  Democrats  re- 
fused to  support  him  any  longer,  and  nominated  a 
candidate  of  our  own,  Hancock  Jackson.  We  did 
this  because  we  believed  that  the  slave-holding 
States  could  not  remain  in  the  Union,  with  either 
safety  or  honor  unless  the  North  should  consent  to 
give  them  Constitutional  guarantees  that  their 
rights  as  coequal  States  of  the  Union  should  be 
both  respected  and  protected  by  the  Federal  Gov- 
ernment, and  because  we  thought  that  this  ques- 
tion should  be  plainly  submitted  to  the  North  in 
the  then  pending  Presidential  election,  and  a  posi- 
tive answer  demanded.  As  Mr.  Douglas'  candi- 
dacy, with  his  policy  of  equivocation,  prevented  this 
question  from  being  put  fairly  to  the  North,  we  op- 
posed him  and  every  body  who  supported  him. 
Claiborne  F.  Jackson  was,  nevertheless,  elected 
Governor,  in  August,  and  Missouri,  alone  of  all  the 
States,  cast  her  electoral  vote  in  November  for 
Douglas. 

On  assuming  the  office  of  Governor  just  after  the 
formal  secession  of  South  Carolina,  Governor  Jackson 
declared  in  his  Inaugural  Address  that,  in  his  opinion, 
it  was  both  the  interest  and  the  duty  of  Missouri 
to  make  common  cause  with  the  other  slave-holding 
States  in   the    impending   conflict.      This   declara- 


Preface.  v 

tion  brought  the  Bulletin,  which  had  meanwhile 
fallen  under  my  absolute  control,  to  his  zealous  sup- 
port. The  great  interest  which  I  felt  in  the  matter 
caused  me  to  spend  most  of  the  time  at  Jefferson 
City,  where  measures  looking  to  the  secession  of 
Missouri,  and  to  arming  her  militia,  and  getting  the 
State  ready  otherwise  for  the  emergency,  were 
pending  before  the  General  Assembly ;  and  finally, 
toward  the  middle  of  February,  I  disposed  of  the 
Bulletin,  and  took  up  my  abode  at  Jefferson  City, 
and  remained  there  as  the  guest  of  the  Governor 
till  we  were  all  driven  thence  by  Blair  and  Lyon,  in 
June.  During  this  time  I  assisted  Governor  Jack- 
son in  conducting  his  correspondence  and  in  other 
confidential  matters,  and  upon  the  enactment  of  the 
military  law  in  May  was  commissioned  as  one  of  his 
aides-de-camp.  General  Price  had  asked  me  to  ac- 
cept the  position  of  adjutant-general  of  the  State 
forces,  to  the  command  of  which  he  had  just  been 
appointed,  but  I  introduced  to  him,  and  got  him  to 
appoint  instead,  Captain  Henry  Little  who  had  just 
resigned  his  commission  in  the  United  States  Army 
and  was  a  thousand  times  better  fitted  than  myself 
to  discharge  the  duties  of  the  place. 

I  therefore  remained  with  the  Governor ;  followed 
him  when  he  left  Jefferson  City  ;  was  with  him  at 
Booneville,  and  Carthage ;  and  went  with  him  to 
Cowskin  Prairie,  in  the  south-western  corner  of  the 


vi  Preface. 

State.  When,  however,  on  arriving  there,  he  relin- 
quished the  command  of  all  the  State  forces  to 
General  Price,  and  was  about  to  go  East,  I  got  his 
permission  to  remain  with  the  army,  and  was  the 
next  day  assigned  to  duty  by  General  Price  as  his 
chief  of  ordnance.  A  few  days  later  Colonel  Little 
left  for  Richmond  in  order  to  secure  his  commission 
in  the  regular  army  of  the  Confederate  States,  and 
I  was  then  assigned  to  duty  as  Acting  Adjutant- 
General  of  the  State  Guard.  This  position  I  held 
during  all  of  the  eventful  campaign,  in  which  were 
won  the  Battles  of  Wilson's  Creek,  Fort  Scott,  and 
Lexington. 

During  this  time — from  the  election  of  Lincoln  in 
November  i860,  to  the  death  of  Lyon  at  Wilson's 
Creek  on  the  10th  of  August  1861 — occurred  all  the 
events  that  I  have  narrated  in  this  volume  ;  but  I 
remained  with  General  Price  till  the  last  year  of  the 
war,  as  adjutant-general  and  sometimes  as  chief  of 
staff,  of  the  commands  that  he  held,  except  that  for 
brief  periods  I  was  entrusted  with  special  duties.  I 
left  him  in  the  summer  of  1864,  in  order  to  attend  a 
meeting  of  the  Confederate  Congress,  of  which  I 
was  a  member,  and  did  not  return  to  the  army. 

When  the  war  ended  General  Price  took  to 
Mexico  the  records  of  the  several  commands  which 
he  had  held,  and  also  other  important  papers  relat- 
ing to  the  war.     On  returning  to  this  country  he 


Preface.  vii 

brought  these  records  and  papers  with  him  and 
gave  them  to  me,  with  the  understanding  that  I 
would  one  day  write  the  story  of  his  campaigns.  I 
turned  over  most  of  them  to  the  War  Department 
several  years  ago,  and  many  of  them  have  been, 
and  the  rest  will  be,  published  in  the  Official  Records 
of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion. 

In  preparing  the  political  part  of  this  volume,  I 
have  relied  chiefly  upon  the  Journals  of  the  General 
Assembly  of  Missouri,  and  of  the  State  Convention, 
and  on  the  official  reports  of  their  debates,  and 
upon  contemporaneous  publications,  particularly 
the  Missouri  Republican;  and  upon  the  original 
documents  published  in  Peckham's  Life  of  Lyon — a 
book  whose  glaring  faults  are  more  than  compen- 
sated by  the  important  facts  the  remembrance 
whereof  it  has  preserved. 

For  military  details  I  am  indebted  above  all  to 
the  Official  Records^  which  the  Government  is  pub- 
lishing. The  zeal,  the  fairness,  the  intelligence,  the 
care,  and  the  ability  with  which  they  have  been  col- 
lected, compiled,  arranged,  and  edited  by  Lieuten- 
ant-Colonel Robert  N.  Scott,  U.  S.  A.,  entitle  that 
gentleman  to  the  gratitude  of  every  one  who  took 
an  honorable  part  in  the  war,  and  of  all  who  shall 
ever  desire  to  learn  its  true  history.  Valuable  as 
these  Records  are  to  the  student,  they  need  neverthe- 
less the  elucidation  of  those,  who,  by  reason  of  their 


viii  Preface. 

personal  knowledge  of  the  men,  and  in  other  ways, 
are  competent  to  sift  the  statements  of  those  wit- 
nesses— most  of  them  now  silent  forever — whose 
testimony  they  perpetuate.  As  it  was  my  fortune 
to  know  personally  most  of  the  men  who  took  a 
prominent  part  in  the  struggle  for  Missouri,  and 
something  about  the  character  and  credibility  of 
every  one  of  them,  I  feel  sure  that  my  little  book 
will  for  that  reason  be  a  useful  guide  to  those  who 
may  wish  to  comprehend  that  struggle  aright. 

I  have  been  greatly  assisted  in  my  search  after 
the  truth  by  many  of  the  survivors  of  the  war, 
who  have  furnished  me  important  documents  and 
valuable  reminiscences,  all  which  I  have  freely  used. 
I  would,  perhaps,  win  favor  for  this  volume  if  I  were 
to  mention  their  names,  but  higher  considerations 
induce  me  to  be  silent.  I  must,  however,  express 
my  great  obligations  to  Mr.  R.  I.  Holcombe,  author 
of  An  Account  of  the  Battle  of  Wilson's  Creeky  for 
much  valuable  information. 

I  have  doubtless  made  many  trifling  mistakes  and 
may  have  made  some  that  are  important,  but  no 
man  ever  labored  more  earnestly  to  ascertain  the 
truth  and  to  tell  it  plainly  and  impartially,  than  I 
have  done,  in  preparing  to  write,  and  in  writing, 
this  account  of  the  fight  that  was  made  for  Mis- 
souri in  1861. 

New  York,  fanuaryy  18S6. 


I.  POLITICAL. 


THE  FIGHT  FOR  MISSOURI 


CHAPTER    I. 

THE   GOVERNOR. 

Election  of  Lincoln — Meeting  of  Congress — Buchanan's  Message — 
He  Denies  the  Right  of  Congress  to  Prevent  Secession  by  Force, 
and  Urges  Concessions  to  the  South — The  North  Objects — The 
Crittenden  Proposition — Tacit  Agreement  between  the  President 
and  South  Carolina  as  to  Reinforcing  Sumter — South  Carolina 
Secedes — Major  Anderson  retires  to  Fort  Sumter — South  Carolina 
sends  Commissioners  to  Washington — Failure  of  Negotiations — 
Meeting  of  the  General  Assembly  of  Missouri — Message  of  Gov- 
ernor Stewart — Claiborne  F.  Jackson — His  Inaugural. 

The  enactment  in  1850  of  a  Fugitive  Slave 
Law,  some  of  whose  provisions  were  not  only- 
inconsistent  with  the  civilization  of  the  age,  but 
required  citizens  of  Massachusetts,  New  York,  and 
Ohio  to  do  what  no  self-respecting  Virginian  could 
have  been  forced  to  do  ;  together  with  the  repeal, 
in  1854,  of  the  Missouri  Compromise,  brought  about, 
in  i860,  the  election  of  Abraham  Lincoln  to  the 
Presidency,  and  the  transfer  of  the  Federal  Govern- 
ment to  a  party  which  was  pledged  to  prevent  the 
extension  of  slavery  beyond  the  limits  of  the 
States  in  which  it  was  then  established  by  law,  and 


4  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

whose  ablest  and  most  influential  leaders  were 
known  to  be  in  favor  of  using  all  lawful  means  to 
abolish  it  even  within  those  States. 

Thoroughly  frightened  by  this  fact,  for  they 
firmly  believed  that  their  well-being,  and  indeed 
their  safety,  were  involved  in  the  continued  ex- 
istence of  slavery,  all  of  the  Cotton  States,  except 
Texas  (whose  action  was  hindered  by  her  governor, 
Gen.  Houston),  took  instant  steps  to  secede  from 
the  Union,  and  to  establish  a  slave-holding  Con- 
federacy ;  and  when  Congress  met  on  the  3d  of 
December,  it  had  become  certain  that  one,  at  least, 
of  these  States  would  secede  before  the  end  of  the 
year. 

President  Buchanan,  in  calling  the  attention  of 
Congress  to  this  fact,  in  his  annual  message,  im- 
plored it  to  consider  carefully  what  the  Government 
must  do ;  to  consider  whether  it  had  the  power  by 
force  of  arms  to  compel  a  State  to  remain  within 
the  Union ;  and  whether,  if  it  had  the  power,  it 
would  be  expedient  to  exercise  it.  For  his  own 
part  he  did  not  believe  that  the  Constitution  dele- 
gated any  such  power  to  Congress,  or  to  any  other 
department  of  the  Government  ;  but,  on  the  con- 
trary, that  to  make  war  against  a  State  was  at  vari- 
ance with  the  whole  spirit  and  intent  of  the  Consti- 
tution. "  Congress,"  said  he,  "  possesses  many 
means  of  preserving  the  Union  by  conciliation,  but 


The    Governor.  5 

the  sword  was  not  placed  in  its  hand  to  preserve  it 
by  force."  The  best  way  to  preserve  it  was,  in  his 
opinion,  to  satisfy  the  just  demands  of  the  South 
by  adopting  a  Constitutional  amendment  which 
should  not  only  protect  slavery  in  the  States  where 
it  was  already  established,  but  in  all  of  the  Terri- 
tories, so  long  as  they  remained  Territories  ;  and 
which  should  also  compel  the  Northern  States  to 
restore  fugitive  slaves  to  their  owners.  He  prom- 
ised that  while  Congress  was  considering  this  all- 
important  matter  he  would,  to  the  extent  of  his 
ability,  defend  the  public  property,  and  take  care 
that  the  Federal  laws  should  be  enforced,  in  all  the 
States. 

The  President's  recommendations  were  referred 
in  both  Senate  and  House  to  special  committees, 
but  it  soon  became  manifest  that  the  North  would 
not  give  heed  to  them.  Mr.  Crittenden,  therefore, 
submitted  what  became  known  as  the  Crittenden 
Proposition.  It  differed  from  the  President's 
chiefly  in  this,  that,  while  requiring  Congress  to  en- 
force the  rendition  of  fugitive  slaves,  and  to  protect 
slavery  in  the  States  where  it  then  existed,  it  de- 
clared that  slavery  should  never  exist  north  of  the 
Missouri  Compromise  line,  but  should  be  protected 
in  all  the  territory  south  of  that  line  (36°3o'  north 
latitude). 

As  the  South  claimed  that  it  had  the  right  to  de- 


6  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

mand  protection  for  its  slave  property  in  all  of  the 
common  territory  of  the  Union,  it  felt  that  it  would 
be  yielding  a  great  deal  for  the  sake  of  peace,  and 
the  preservation  of  the  Union,  if  it  consented  to 
accept  Mr.  Crittenden's  proposition.  But  every 
Southern  State,  with  the  exception  of  South  Caro- 
lina, manifested  its  willingness  to  accept  it.  Most 
Northern  Democrats  quickly  showed  their  willing- 
ness to  sustain  it,  and  the  President,  abandoning  his 
own  proposition,  urged  the  country  to  adopt  Mr. 
Crittenden's. 

Many  Republicans,  too,  averse  to  strife  and 
bloodshed,  consented  to  it,  while  others,  like  Hor- 
ace Greeley,  were  ready  to  let  the  Cotton  States  go 
in  peace,  if  they  thought  that  they  could  do  better 
out  of  the  Union  than  in  it.  But  the  great  majority 
of  Republicans  were  not  willing  either  to  concede 
to  the  South  the  right  to  establish  slavery  in  the 
Territories,  or  to  let  any  State  secede.  They  would 
not  abandon,  in  the  hour  of  victory,  the  principles 
for  which  they  had  manfully  contended  through 
forty  years  of  defeat  and  disaster ;  nor  would  they 
let  those,  whom  they  had  just  vanquished,  destroy 
the  Union  in  the  very  hour  that  it  was  about  to 
be  dedicated,  as  they  believed,  to  a  wider  freedom 
and  a  higher  humanity.  They  were  content  to  await 
the  fast-coming  4th  of  March. 

Meanwhile  the  Cotton  States  were  all  hastening 


The   Governor,  y 

towards  secession.  This  brought  the  President  to 
the  consideration  of  the  most  important  question 
that  had  ever  been  submitted  to  any  President : 
Whether  he  should  attempt  to  reinforce  the  Fed- 
eral forts  in  those  States  which  were  preparing  to 
secede. 

While  denying  his  own  right,  and  the  right  of  Con- 
gress, to  make  war  upon  a  State,  he  had  expressly 
said  in  his  message  that  it  was  his  duty  and  his 
determination  to  protect  the  public  property,  and 
to  enforce  the  laws,  in  all  the  States.  On  the  other 
hand,  he  knew  that,  if  he  attempted  to  reinforce  the 
forts  at  Charleston,  the  attempt  would  be  regarded 
by  the  South  Carolinians  as  a  threat  of  subjuga- 
tion, and  would  be  resented  by  them  as  an  act  of 
war. 

Happily  the  Representatives  of  South  Carolina  in 
Congress  came  to  his  assistance  by  giving  him  the 
strongest  assurances  that  South  Carolina  would 
neither  attack  nor  molest  the  forts,  until  her  State 
Convention  had  met  and  decided  to  withdraw  the 
State  from  the  Union ;  nor  until  she  had  sent  com- 
missioners to  treat  with  the  Federal  Government 
as  to  the  forts  and  other  matters;  provided  the 
Government  of  the  United  States  would  not,  mean- 
while, send  any  reinforcements  to  the  forts,  or 
change  the  military  status  in  Charleston  harbor. 

The  President,  while  accepting  these  assurances 


8  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

"  as  a  happy  omen  that  peace  might  still  be  pre- 
served, and  time  be  thus  gained  for  reflection," 
replied  that,  whilst  he  could  not  promise  not  to  rein- 
force the  forts,  it  was  his  then  determination  not  to 
reinforce  them  until  they  should  be  actually  at- 
tacked, or  until  he  had  certain  evidence  that  they 
were  about  to  be  attacked. 

Upon  this  tacit  understanding  both  the  President 
and  the  State  continued  to  act  in  good  faith  until 
after  the  State  had  seceded. 

General  Scott,  who  had  been  detained  in  New 
York  by  sickness,  came  to  Washington  on  the  12th 
of  December,  and,  being  ignorant  of  the  assurances 
which  had  been  given  to  the  President  by  the 
South  Carolina  representatives,  urged  him,  at  an 
interview  on  the  15th,  to  send  a  reinforcement  of 
300  men  to  Major  Anderson,  at  Charleston.  The 
President,  knowing  that  Major  Anderson  was  in 
no  danger  of  attack,  and  that  an  attempt  to  reinforce 
him  would  needlessly  "  impair  the  hope  of  compro- 
mise, provoke  collision,  and  disappoint  the  country," 
refused  to  send  the  reinforcements.  General  Cass, 
who  had  insisted  upon  the  President's  compliance 
with  General  Scott's  advice,  thereupon  resigned  the 
Secretaryship  of  State  (December  15th).  The  res- 
ignation was  rather  gladly  accepted,  and  Judge 
Black  became  Secretary  of  State,  while  Edwin  M. 
Stanton    succeeded     Black     as     Attorney-General. 


The   Governor.  g 

Howell  Cobb  had  already  resigned  the  Secretary- 
ship of  the  Treasury  (December  8th)  and  returned 
to  Georgia. 

On  the  20th  of  December  the  South  Carolina 
Convention  adopted  an  ordinance  of  secession,  and 
sent  commissioners  to  Washington  to  treat  with  the 
United  States  Government  as  to  the  forts  within 
her  limits,  and  as  to  other  matters. 

These  commissioners  reached  Washington  on  the 
26th  of  December;  but  the  very  next  morning — be- 
fore they  had  had  time  to  present  their  credentials 
to  the  Secretary  of  State — they  were  themselves 
startled,  and  the  whole  country  electrified,  by  the 
news  that,  during  the  preceding  night,  Major  Ander- 
son had  secretly  dismantled  Fort  Moultrie,  spiked 
its  guns,  burnt  the  gun-carriages,  and  removed  his 
command  to  Fort  Sumter,  which  occupied  a  more 
tenable,  and  a  more  commanding,  position  in  the 
harbor. 

The  Secretary  of  War,  Governor  Floyd,  of  Vir- 
ginia, protested  against  Major  Anderson's  conduct 
in  a  paper  which  he  read,  on  the  27th  of  December, 
to  the  President,  in  presence  of  the  Cabinet.  In 
this  paper  he  insisted  that  Major  Anderson  had,  by 
removing  his  command  to  Fort  Sumter,  changed 
the  military  status  at  Charleston,  and  had  thereby 
violated  a  solemn  pledge  of  the  Government  ;  that 
there  was  now  but  one  way  to  vindicate  the  honor 


io  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

of  the  Administration  and  to  prevent  civil  war ; 
and  that  was  to  withdraw  the  garrison  from  the 
harbor  of  Charleston  altogether.  He  accordingly- 
asked  the  President  to  authorize  him  to  make  that 
order  at  once.  The  President  refused  to  do  this, 
and  on  the  29th  of  December  the  Secretary  of  War 
tendered  his  resignation,  saying  that  he  could  no 
longer  hold  the  office  "  under  his  convictions  of 
patriotism,  nor  with  honor ;  subjected  as  he  was  to 
the  violation  of  solemn  pledges  and  plighted  faith." 
His  resignation  was  instantly  accepted,  and  Post- 
master-General Holt  was  transferred  to  the  War 
Department. 

The  South  Carolina  commissioners  had  presented 
their  credentials  to  the  President  on  the  28th.  He 
said  at  once  that  he  "  could  only  recognize  them  as 
private  gentlemen,  and  not  as  commissioners  from 
a  sovereign  State,"  but  would  communicate  to  Con- 
gress— "  the  only  competent  tribunal  "  to  which 
they  could  appeal — any  proposition  which  they 
might  have  to  offer. 

To  this  the  commissioners  replied  that  they  could 
not  offer  any  proposition,  nor  even  enter  upon  the 
negotiations  with  which  they  had  been  entrusted, 
until  Major  Anderson's  conduct  had  been  satisfac- 
torily explained,  nor  until  the  United  States  troops 
had  been  removed  not  only  from  Fort  Sumter,  but 
away  from  the  harbor  of  Charleston.      These  de- 


The   Governor.  1 1 

mands  were  formally  repeated  in  a  written  com- 
munication which  they  sent  to  the  President  the 
next  day. 

While  considering  the  reply  which  he  should 
make  to  this  communication  the  President  learned 
that  the  authorities  of  South  Carolina  had,  on  the 
day  after  Major  Anderson's  removal  to  Sumter, 
seized  Fort  Moultrie,  Castle  Pinckney,  the  Custom- 
House,  and  the  Post-Office,  and  had  raised  the 
Palmetto  flag  over  them  all ;  that  every  officer  of 
the  Customs — collector,  naval  officer,  surveyor,  and 
appraiser — together  with  the  postmaster,  had  re- 
signed their  appointments;  and  that,  on  Sunday, 
the  30th  of  December,  the  State  had  seized  the 
Arsenal  of  the  United  States,  containing  $500,000 
worth  of  munitions  of  war,  and  had  expelled  the 
United  States  Government  from  all  its  property 
except  Fort  Sumter. 

Distressed  and  angered  by  these  facts,  the  Presi- 
dent replied  to  the  South  Carolina  commissioners 
that  he  would  not  withdraw  the  Federal  troops 
from  Fort  Sumter;  but  would,  on  the  contrary, 
defend  that  fort  by  all  the  means  in  his  power, 
against  all  attacks  from  whatever  quarter  they  might 
proceed.  This  reply  was  delivered  to  the  commis- 
sioners on  the  31st  of  December. 

On  that  day  the  Senate  Committee  of  Thirteen 
reported  that  they  could  not  agree  upon  any  settle- 


12  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

ment  of  the  questions  at  issue  between  the  North 
and  the  South. 

In  the  midst  of  the  great  excitement  that  was 
caused  by  these  momentous  events,  the  General 
Assembly  of  Missouri  met  at  Jefferson  City  on  the 
last  day  of  December,  i860. 

At  the  presidential  election  Lincoln  had  received 
in  the  entire  State  barely  seventeen  thousand  of  the 
one  hundred  and  sixty-five  thousand  votes  which 
were  cast,  and  most  of  these  were  given  to  him  by 
the  German  inhabitants  of  the  State.  Fifty-eight 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  one  had  been  given  to 
Douglas ;  fifty-eight  thousand  three  hundred  and 
seventy-two  to  Bell,  and  thirty-one  thousand  three 
hundred  and  seventeen  to  Breckinridge. 

The  General  Assembly  reflected  the  sentiment  of 
the  people  as  expressed  in  the  presidential  election. 
In  the  Senate  there  was  only  one  Republican  ;  in 
the  House  there  were  twelve  Republicans,  thirty- 
seven  Bell  men,  and  eighty-three  Democrats. 

The  outgoing  Governor,  Robert  M.  Stewart,  trans- 
mitted his  message  to  the  two  Houses  on  the  3d  of 
January. 

Stewart  was  a  typical  Northern  Democrat.  He 
believed  that  the  Southern  people  had  the  constitu- 
tional right  to  take  their  slaves  into  all  the  Territo- 
ries and  to  hold  them  there,  under  the  protection 
of  the  territorial  and  Federal   laws,  and   that   this 


The   Governor.  1 3 

right  ought  to  be  assured  to  them.  Not  that  he 
loved  slavery,  for  he  did  not ;  but  because  he  loved 
the  Union  and  revered  the  Constitution. 

Himself  a  native  of  New  York,  though  long  time 
a  resident  of  Missouri,  he  felt  none  of  that  humilia- 
tion which  most  Southern  men  felt  in  view  of  the 
fact  that  the  long  political  struggle  between  the 
North  and  the  South  had  at  last  ended  in  the  defeat 
of  the  South,  and  in  the  triumph  of  the  abolitionized 
North ;  none  of  that  blended  anger  and  apprehen- 
sion, which  they  felt,  in  contemplation  of  the  fact 
that  the  South  was  thenceforth  to  be  ruled  by  a 
party  hostile  to  their  institutions  and  unfriendly  to 
their  people. 

The  right  of  secession  he  not  only  denied,  but  he 
denied  it  utterly  ;  and  believed  too  that  South  Caro- 
lina was  acting  with  consummate  folly  in  attempt- 
ing to  destroy  a  Union,  which  was  the  source  of  all 
her  prosperity,  and  her  surest  bulwark  and  defence. 

As  to  Missouri,  she  certainly  had  no  right  to 
secede.  For  she  belonged  to  the  United  States  by 
right  of  purchase— had  been  bought  by  the  Federal 
Government,  and  paid  for  out  of  its  treasury.  What- 
ever other  States  might  do,  it  was  her  plain  duty, 
and  her  interest,  too,  to  remain  within  the  Union. 

His  message  set  forth  clearly  and  strongly  his  own 
feelings  and  opinions  at  the  beginning  of  the  New 
Year,  and  it  expressed  in  great  measure  the  senti- 


14  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

ments  of  a  majority  of  the  people  of  Missouri,  at 
that  time. 

"  Missouri  occupies  a  position  in  regard  to  these 
troubles  that  should  make  her  voice  potent  in  the 
councils  of  the  nation.  With  scarcely  a  disunionist 
per  se  to  be  found  in  her  borders,  she  is  still  deter- 
mined to  demand,  and  to  maintain,  her  rights  at  every 
hazard.  She  loves  the  Union  while  it  is  the  pro- 
tector of  equal  rights,  but  will  despise  it  as  the  in- 
strument of  wrong.  She  came  into  the  Union  upon 
a  compromise,  and  is  willing  to  abide  by  a  fair  com- 
promise still;  not  such  ephemeral  contracts  as  are 
enacted  by  Congress  to-day,  and  repealed  to-morrow; 
but  a  compromise,  assuring  all  the  just  rights  of  the 
States,  and  agreed  to  in  solemn  Convention  of  all 
the  parties  interested. 

11  Missouri  has  a  right  to  speak  on  this  subject, 
because  she  has  suffered.  Bounded  on  three  sides 
by  free  territory,  her  border  counties  have  been  the 
frequent  scenes  of  kidnapping  and  violence,  and  this 
State  has  probably  lost  as  much,  in  the  last  two 
years,  in  the  abduction  of  slaves,  as  all  the  rest  of 
the  Southern  States.  At  this  moment  several  of  the 
western  counties  are  desolated,  and  almost  depopu- 
lated, from  fear  of  a  bandit  horde,  who  have  been 
committing  depredations  —  arson,  theft,  and  foul 
murder — upon  the  adjacent  border. 

"  Missouri  has  a  right,  too,  to  be  heard  by  reason 


The   Governor,  1 5 

of  her  present  position  and  power,  as  well  as  from 
the  great  calamities  which  a  hasty  dissolution  of  the 
Union  would  bring  upon  her.  She  has  already  a 
larger  voting  population  than  any  of  the  slave  States, 
with  prospective  power  and  wealth  far  beyond  any 
of  her  sister  States.    .     .     . 

"Indeed,  Missouri  and  the  other  border  Slave 
States  should  be  the  first  instead  of  the  LAST,  to 
speak  on  a  subject  of  this  kind.  They  have  suf- 
fered the  evil  and  the  wrong,  and  they  should  be 
the  first  to  demand  redress.     .     .     . 

"  As  matters  are  at  present  Missouri  will  stand  by 
her  lot,  and  hold  to  the  Union  as  long  as  it  is  worth 
an  effort  to  preserve  it.  So  long  as  there  is  hope 
of  success  she  will  seek  for  justice  within  the 
Union.  She  cannot  be  frightened  from  her  pro- 
priety by  the  past  unfriendly  legislation  of  the 
North,  nor  be  dragooned  into  secession  by  the 
extreme  South.  If  those,  who  should  be  our 
friends  and  allies,  undertake  to  render  our  property 
worthless  by  a  system  of  prohibitory  laws,  or  by  re- 
opening the  slave  trade  in  opposition  to  the  moral 
sense  of  the  civilized  world,  and  at  the  same  time 
reduce  us  to  the  position  of  an  humble  sentinel  to 
watch  over  and  protect  their  interests,  receiving  all 
of  the  blows  and  none  of  the  benefits,  Missouri  will 
hesitate  long  before  sanctioning  such  an  arrange- 
ment.    She  will  rather  take  the  high  position  of 


1 6  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

armed  neutrality.  She  is  able  to  take  care  of  her- 
self, and  will  be  neither  forced  nor  flattered,  driven 
nor  coaxed,  into  a  course  of  action  that  must  end  in 
her  own  destruction. 

"  If  South  Carolina  and  other  Cotton  States  persist 
in  secession  she  will  desire  to  see  them  go  in  peace, 
with  the  hope  that  a  short  experience  at  separate 
government,  and  an  honorable  readjustment  of  the 
Federal  compact,  will  induce  them  to  return  to 
their  former  position.  In  the  mean  time  Missouri 
will  hold  herself  in  readiness,  at  any  moment,  to 
defend  her  soil  from  pollution  and  her  property 
from  plunder  by  fanatics  and  marauders,  come 
from  what  quarter  they  may.  The  people  of 
Missouri  will  choose  this  deliberate,  conservative 
course,  both  on  account  of  the  blessings  they  have 
derived  from  the  Union,  and  the  untold  and  un- 
imagined  evils  that  will  come  with  its  dissolution. 

"...  Whilst  I  would  recommend  the  adop- 
tion of  all  proper  measures  and  influences  to  secure 
the  just  acknowledgment  and  protection  of  our 
rights,  and  in  the  final  failure  of  this,  a  resort  to 
the  last  painful  remedy  of  separation  ;  yet,  regard- 
ing, as  I  do,  the  American  Confederacy  as  the 
source  of  a  thousand  blessings,  pecuniary,  social, 
and  moral,  and  its  destruction  as  fraught  with  in- 
calculable loss,  suffering,  and  crime,  I  would  here, 
in  my  last  public  official  act  as  Governor  of  Mis- 


The    Governor.  1 7 

souri,  record  my  solemn  protest  against  unwise  and 
hasty  action,  and  my  unalterable  devotion  to  the 
Union  so  long  as  it  can  be  made  the  protector  of 
equal  rights." 

In  the  evening  Claiborne  F.  Jackson  took  the 
oath  of  office  as  Governor,  in  the  presence  of  both 
Houses. 

Born  in  Kentucky,  of  Virginia  parents,  he  had 
come  to  Missouri  in  his  boyhood  and  found  em- 
ployment in  a  country  store  in  Howard  County. 
By  the  time  that  he  was  thirty  he  had  acquired  a 
sufficient  fortune  to  retire  from  business  and  to  de- 
vote himself  to  politics,  for  which  he  had  a  natural 
aptitude  and  great  fondness.  Saline  County  sent 
him  to  the  Legislature  in  1836.  He  was  one  of 
the  delegates  from  Howard  County  to  the  State 
Convention  of  1845,  and  one  of  its  representatives 
in  the  Legislature  in  1846.  He  was  a  member  of 
the  State  Senate  in  1848-9,  and,  as  Chairman  of 
the  Committee  on  Federal  Affairs,  reported  the 
Resolutions  which  bear  his  name.  These  resolutions 
took  high  Southern  ground  on  the  matter  of  slavery 
in  the  territory  then  just  acquired  from  Mexico,  and 
instructed  Colonel  Benton  and  his  colleague  in  the 
United  States  Senate  to  conform  their  action  to  the 
doctrines  therein  laid  down.  Benton  refused  to  obey, 
and  appealed  from  the  Legislature  to  the  people  of 
Missouri.     In  the  angry  contest  which  ensued  Jack- 


iS  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

son  bore  a  conspicuous  part,  and  was  ever  after  rec- 
ognized as  one  of  the  ablest  leaders  of  the  anti- 
Benton,  or  Southern  Rights'  Democrats. 

His  election  as  Governor  had  devolved  upon  him 
the  gravest  responsibilities.  He  now  assumed  the 
office  with  becoming  modesty,  but  with  an  unshak- 
able determination  to  defend  the  honor  and  the  in- 
terests of  Missouri  against  all  assailants  whatever. 

He  was  fifty-five  years  of  age  ;  tall,  erect,  and 
dignified;  a  vigorous  thinker,  and  a  fluent  and 
forcible  speaker,  always  interesting,  and  often  elo- 
quent ;  a  well-informed  man,  thoroughly  conversant 
with  the  politics  of  Missouri  and  of  the  Union ; 
with  positive  opinions  on  all  public  questions,  and 
the  courage  to  express  and  uphold  them ;  courteous 
in  his  bearing  towards  all  men,  for  he  was  kind- 
hearted,  and  by  nature  a  democrat ;  and  a  truthful, 
honest,  and  honorable  gentleman.  He  loved  the 
Union,  but  not  with  the  love  with  which  he  loved 
Missouri,  which  had  been  his  home  for  forty  years, 
nor  as  he  loved  the  South,  where  he  was  born,  and 
where  his  kindred  lived. 

In  his  inaugural  address  to  the  General  Assembly, 
he  said,  after  rapidly  commenting  upon  the  growth 
of  the  antislavery  party  : 

"  The  prominent  characteristic  of  this  party  .  .  . 
is  that  it  is  purely  sectional  in  its  locality  and  its 
principles.     The  only  principle   inscribed  upon  its 


The   Governor.  19 

banner  is  Hostility  to  Slavery;  ...  its  object, 
not  merely  to  confine  slavery  within  its  present 
limits ;  not  merely  to  exclude  it  from  the  Terri- 
tories, and  prevent  the  formation  and  admission  of 
any  slave-holding  States ;  not  merely  to  abolish  it  in 
the  District  of  Columbia,  and  interdict  its  passage 
from  one  State  to  another ;  but  to  strike  down  its 
existence  everywhere  ;  to  sap  its  foundation  in  pub- 
lic sentiment  ;  to  annoy  and  harass,  and  gradually 
destroy  its  vitality,  by  every  means,  direct  or  indi- 
rect, physical  and  moral,  which  human  ingenuity 
can  devise.  The  triumph  of  such  an  organization  is 
not  the  victory  of  a  political  party,  but  the  domina- 
tion of  a  Section.  It  proclaims  in  significant  tones 
the  destruction  of  that  equality  among  the  States 
which  is  the  vital  cement  of  our  Federal  Union.  It 
places  fifteen  of  the  thirty-three  States  in  the  posi- 
tion of  humble  recipients  of  the  bounty,  or  sullen 
submissionists  to  the  power,  of  a  government,  which 
they  had  no  voice  in  creating,  and  in  whose  coun- 
cils they  do  not  participate. 

14  It  cannot,  then,  be  a  matter  of  surprise  to  any 
— victors  or  vanquished — that  these  fifteen  States, 
with  a  pecuniary  interest  at  stake  reaching  the 
enormous  sum  of  $3,500,000,000  should  be  aroused 
and  excited  at  the  advent  of  such  a  party  to  power. 
.  .  .  Would  it  not  rather  be  an  instance  of  un- 
precedented blindness  and  fatuity,  if  the  people  and 


20  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

governments  of  these  fifteen  slave-holding  States 
were,  under  such  circumstances,  to  manifest  quiet 
indifference,  and  to  make  no  effort  to  avoid  the  de- 
struction which  awaited  them  ?     .     .     . 

"  Accordingly,  we  find  the  result  of  the  recent 
Presidential  election  has  already  produced  its  nat- 
ural effects.  From  Florida  to  Missouri  a  feeling  of 
discontent  and  alarm  has  manifested  itself,  more  or 
less  violent,  according  to  the  imminence  of  the  dan- 
ger, and  the  extent  of  the  interest  at  stake.  The 
cotton-growing  States,  having  a  larger  and  more 
vital  interest  in  jeopardy  than  the  Border  States, 
are  the  first  to  awaken  to  a  sense  of  insecurity. 
The  sagacious  Southern  statesman  is  fully  aware 
that  his  section,  although  necessarily  the  last  vic- 
tim, will  be  the  greatest  sufferer ;  that  when  the  out- 
posts yield,  the  citadel  will  not  long  afford  safety. 
With  them  the  alternative  is  the  maintenance  of 
that  institution  which  Great  Britain  forced  upon 
their  ancestors,  or  the  conversion  of  their  homes 
into  desert  wastes.  With  them  it  is  not  a  mere 
question  of  property,  but,  what  is  to  them  dearer 
than  property  or  life,  a  question  of  duty  and  of 
honor. 

"  It  has  been  said  to  be  quite  easy  to  bear  the 
calamities  of  our  neighbors  with  philosophical 
equanimity.  Let  us  not  illustrate  this  maxim  by 
criticising  the  precipitancy  of  the  South.     They  are 


The   Governor.  2 1 

not  the  aggressors.  They  only  ask  to  be  let  alone. 
If  some  have  regarded  their  action  as  hasty,  has  not 
the  occasion  been  extraordinary  ?  I  do  not  stand 
here  to  justify  or  to  condemn  the  action  of  South 
Carolina  in  withdrawing  her  allegiance  to  the  Fed- 
eral Government.  She  is  a  gallant  State,  and  will 
not  forfeit  that  renown  which  a  long  list  of  distin- 
guished dead  has  conferred  on  her  history.  When 
she  unrolls  that  list — when  she  points  to  her  Mar- 
ions and  Sumters,  and  Jaspers  and  Moultries,  and 
Laurenses  and  McDonalds,  to  her  Pinckneys,  and 
Rutledges,  and  Middletons,  to  her  Lowndeses  and 
Chevises,  and  McDuffies  and  Hamiltons,  to  her 
Haynes  and  Legares,  to  her  Prestons  and  her  But- 
lers, and  to  that  pre-eminent  statesman  who  divided 
the  public  esteem  with  Webster  and  Clay — her  sis- 
ter States,  blessed  with  larger  and  more  fertile  terri- 
tory, may  well  covet  the  glory  of  having  given  birth 
to  such  citizens,  and  may  at  least  safely  leave  the 
honor  of  the  State  in  the  hands  of  their  descend- 
ants. If  South  Carolina  has  acted  hastily,  let  not 
her  error  lead  to  the  more  fatal  one — an  attempt  at 
coercion. 

"  The  destiny  of  the  slave-holding  States  of  this 
Union  is  one  and  the  same.  .  .  .  The  identity, 
rather  than  the  similarity,  of  their  domestic  institu- 
tions ;  their  political  principles  and  party  usages ; 
their  common   origin,  pursuits,  tastes,  manners,  and 


22  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

customs ;  their  territorial  contiguity  and  commer- 
cial relations — all  contribute  to  bind  them  together 
in  one  sisterhood.  And  Missouri  will  in  my  opinion 
best  consult  her  own  interests,  and  the  interests  of 
the  whole  country,  by  a  timely  declaration  of  her 
determination  to  stand  by  her  sister  slave-holding 
States,  in  whose  wrongs  she  participates,  and  with 
whose  institutions  and  people  she  sympathizes. 

"  These  views  are  advanced,  gentlemen,  not  upon 
a  belief  that  all  hope  of  the  present  Union  is  lost, 
but  upon  a  conviction  that  the  time  has  arrived 
when  a  further  postponement  of  their  consideration 
would  be  unwise  and  unsafe.  The  issue  of  present 
embarrassments  depends  entirely  upon  the  senti- 
ments and  action  of  the  North.  I  trust  that  there 
is  patriotism  enough  left  in  our  common  country  to 
harmonize  the  conflicting  views  now  in  agitation, 
and  to  place  the  Union  on  a  basis  consistent  with 
the  honor  and  safety  of  its  constituent  members. 
So  far  as  Missouri  is  concerned,  her  citizens  have 
ever  been  devoted  to  the  Union,  and  she  will  remain 
in  it  so  long  as  there  is  any  hope  that  it  will  main- 
tain the  spirit  and  guarantees  of  the  Constitution. 

"  But  if  the  Northern  States  have  determined  to 
put  the  slave-holding  States  on  a  footing  of  inequal- 
ity, by  interdicting  them  from  all  share  in  the  Ter- 
ritories acquired  by  the  common  blood  and  treasure 
of  all ;  if  they  have  resolved  to  admit  no  more  slave- 


The   Governor,  23 

holding  States  into  the  Union  ;  and  if  they  mean  to 
persist  in  nullifying  that  provision  of  the  Constitu- 
tion, which  secures  to  the  slave-holder  his  property 
when  found  within  the  limits  of  States  which  do 
not  recognize  it,  or  have  abolished  it ;  then  they 
have  themselves  practically  abandoned  the  Union, 
and  will  not  expect  our  submission  to  a  government 
on  terms  of  inequality  and  subordination. 

"  We  hear  it  suggested  in  some  quarters  that  the 
Union  is  to  be  maintained  by  the  sword.  Such 
suggestions,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  have  sprung  from 
momentary  impulse,  and  not  from  cool  reflection. 
The  project  of  maintaining  the  Federal  Government 
by  force  may  lead  to  consolidation  or  despotism, 
but  not  to  Union.  .  .  .  That  stands  upon  the 
basis  of  justice  and  equality,  and  its  existence  can- 
not be  prolonged  by  coercion.  .  .  .  The  first 
drop  of  blood  shed  in  a  war  of  aggression  upon  a 
sovereign  State  will  arouse  a  spirit  which  must 
result  in  the  overthrow  of  our  entire  Federal  sys- 
tem, and  which  this  generation  will  never  see 
quelled. 

"  As  the  ultimate  fate  of  all  the  slave-holding 
States  is  necessarily  the  same,  their  determination 
and  action  in  the  present  crisis  should  be  the  result 
of  a  general  consultation.  To  produce  united  ac- 
tion there  must  be  united  counsel ;  and  as  the 
wrong  is  common  to  all,  the  redress  for  the  wrong 


24  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

should  be  submitted  to  the  consideration  and  judg- 
ment of  all.  It  may  not  become  me,  therefore,  to 
suggest  what  ought  to  be  the  ultimatum  to  be  in- 
sisted upon  by  the  slave-holding  States.  Candor 
compels  me  to  say,  however,  that  a  mere  Congres- 
sional compromise  is  not  to  be  thought  of.  .  .  . 
Experience  shows  that  such  compromises  only  lay 
the  foundation  for  additional  agitation.  They  are 
but  laws,  and  like  all  other  laws,  liable  to  be  re- 
pealed ;  and  their  duration  depends  altogether  upon 
the  fluctuations  of  public  opinion,  operating  through 
the  representatives  of  that  opinion  at  Washington. 
The  object  of  Constitutional  guarantees  is  to  protect 
the  rights  of  minorities,  and  it  is  to  such  guarantees, 
and  not  to  Legislative  compromises,  that  the  South 
must  look  for  protection  and  security. 
If  the  Northern  States  are  willing  to  remain  with 
the  South  under  a  general  government,  where  do- 
mestic slavery  is  entitled  to  the  protection  of  that 
government,  instead  of  being  the  object  of  its  hos- 
tility, they  can  have  no  reasonable  objection  so  to 
declare  in  terms,  and  in  a  form  which  will  leave  no 
ground  for  cavil  or  misunderstanding.  If  they  are 
not  content  with  such  an  association,  it  is  due  to 
their  own  character,  as  well  as  to  the  rights  of  their 
associate  States,  that  their  determination  should  be 
made  known. 

"  I   am   not   without   hope    that    an   adjustment 


The    Governor.  25 

alike  honorable  to  both  sections  may  be  effected, 
.  .  .  but  in  the  present  unfavorable  aspect  of 
public  affairs  it  is  our  duty  to  prepare  for  the 
worst.  We  cannot  avoid  danger  by  closing  our 
eyes  to  it.  The  magnitude  of  the  interests  now  in 
jeopardy  demands  a  prompt  but  deliberate  consider- 
ation ;  and  in  order  that  the  will  of  the  people  may 
be  ascertained  and  effectuated,  a  State  Convention 
should,  in  my  view,  be  immediately  called.  .  .  . 
In  this  way  the  whole  subject  will  be  brought  di- 
rectly before  the  people  at  large,  who  will  determine 
for  themselves  what  is  to  be  the  ultimate  action  of 
the  State.     .     .     . 

"  In  view  of  the  marauding  forays  which  continue 
to  harass  our  borders,  as  well  as  of  the  general  un- 
settled condition  of  our  political  relations,  a  due  re- 
gard to  our  honor  and  safety  requires  a  thorough 
organization  of  our  militia." 

Both  Stewart  and  Jackson  held  the  North  solely 
responsible  for  the  deplorable  condition  of  the 
country  ;  both  of  them  maintained  that  the  only 
way  to  prevent  the  dissolution  of  the  Union  was  for 
the  North  to  give  to  the  South  Constitutional  guar- 
antees against  the  threatened  aggressions  of  the 
Abolitionists;  and  both  insisted  that  if  the  North 
should  refuse  to  give  these  guarantees,  and  the 
Southern  States  should  thereupon  attempt  to  with- 


26  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

draw  from  the  Union,  the  Federal  Government 
ought  not  to  undertake  to  coerce  them  to  remain 
within  it,  but  should  let  them  go  in  peace. 

Thus  far  they  agreed,  and  thus  far  nine-tenths  of 
all  the  people  of  Missouri  agreed  with  them. 

But  when  they  came  to  consider  what  Missouri 
ought  to  do,  in  case  the  Federal  Government 
should  undertake  to  maintain  the  Union  by  force 
of  arms,  Governor  Stewart,  true  to  his  Northern 
birth  and  Northern  associations,  insisted  that  Mis- 
souri must  adhere  to  the  Union ;  while  Governor 
Jackson,  true  to  his  Southern  birth  and  sympathy 
with  the  South,  insisted  with  equal  earnestness  that 
she  should  stand  by  her  sister  slave-holding  States, 
and  share  their  destiny. 

But  most  men — nearly  all  men — still  believed 
that  a  compromise  would  be  agreed  upon ;  that 
secession  would  be  stayed ;  that  even  South  Caro- 
lina would  resume  her  place  in  the  Union  ;  and  that 
Missouri  would  never  be  called  upon  to  choose 
between  the  North  and  the  South ! 


CHAPTER   II. 

THE   GENERAL  ASSEMBLY. 

The  President  breaks  off  Negotiations  with  South  Carolina,  and  Or- 
ders Fort  Sumter  to  be  Secretly  Reinforced — Southern  Senators 
advise  their  States  to  Secede — Lieutenant-Governor  Reynolds — 
His  Advice  to  Missouri — The  General  Assembly  takes  the  First 
Steps  towards  Secession — The  Cotton  States  Seize  Federal  Forts, 
Arsenals,  etc. — The  President's  Special  Message — He  Promises  to 
Enforce  the  Laws  Everywhere — The  Star  of  the  West  off  Charles- 
ton— The  First  Gun  of  the  War — Mississippi,  Florida,  and  Ala- 
bama Secede — The  North  offers  Men  and  Money  to  the  President 
— Union  Meetings  in  Northern  Cities— The  Border  Slave-holding 
States  Declare  that  they  will  Resist  the  Invasion  of  the  South — 
Great  Union  Meeting  in  St.  Louis — It  Denounces  Coercion — The 
General  Assembly  Calls  a  Convention  ;  Receives  a  Commissioner 
from  Mississippi ;  and  Pledges  the  State  to  Resist  Coercion. 

The  President's  declaration  to  the  South  Caro- 
lina commissioners,  that  he  not  only  would  not 
withdraw  the  United  States  troops  from  Fort  Sum- 
ter, but  would,  on  the  contrary,  defend  that  strong- 
hold to  the  best  of  his  ability,  elicited  from  the 
commissioners,  on  the  2d  of  January,  a  reply  which 
was,  in  the  opinion  of  the  President  and  his  Cabi- 
net, "  so  violent,  unfounded,  and  disrespectful,"  that 
he  could  not  receive  it.  He  therefore  sent  it  back 
to  the  commissioners,  and,  the  negotiations  having 


28  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

been  thus  angrily  terminated,  they  returned  to 
South  Carolina. 

This  incident  left  no  doubt  in  the  minds  of  those 
who  were  made  acquainted  with  its  details,  that  the 
President  would  take  prompt  measures  to  repossess 
those  forts  which  had  been  seized,  and  to  reinforce 
and  hold  those  over  which  the  flag  of  the  Union 
still  floated. 

He  had,  in  fact,  already  acted.  For  while  negoti- 
ations with  South  Carolina  were  still  pending — 
on  the  very  Sunday,  indeed,  that  he  prepared  the 
communication  in  which  he  announced  to  the  com- 
missioners his  purpose  to  hold  Fort  Sumter — he 
had  concerted  with  General  Scott  and  the  Secre- 
tary of  War  plans  for  reinforcing  and  provision- 
ing Fort  Sumter,  and  had  that  day  ordered  them 
and  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy  to  secretly  de- 
spatch to  Sumter  a  fast-sailing  steamer  laden 
with  men  and  supplies  for  the  fort.  General  Scott 
insisted  at  first  upon  the  immediate  execution  of 
this  order,  but  finally  assented  to  the  President's 
suggestion  that  it  would  not  be  "  gentlemanly  and 
proper"  to  reinforce  the  fort  till  after  the  negotia- 
tions had  been  terminated.  The  order  was  ac- 
cordingly withheld  from  execution  until  the  com- 
missioners had  left  Washington. 

Friday,  the  4th  of  January,  had  been  set  apart  by 
the  President,  and  by  the  Governors  of  most  of  the 


The    General  Assembly.  29 

States  which  had  not  seceded,  as  a  "  Day  of  Na- 
tional Humiliation,  Fasting,  and  Prayer."  In  no 
part  of  the  Union  was  it  more  devoutly  observed 
than  in  Missouri. 

Hardly,  however,  had  the  people  risen  from  their 
supplications,  when,  with  the  coming  of  the  next 
day's  sun,  salvos  of  artillery,  reverberating  from  the 
Atlantic  to  the  Pacific,  proclaimed  the  grim  ap- 
proval with  which  the  loyal  North  regarded  Major 
Anderson's  warlike  act. 

On  the  same  day  the  Star  of  the  West,  by  order 
of  the  President,  crept  stealthily  out  of  the  harbor 
of  New  York,  bearing  men  and  munitions  of  war 
southward  towards  Sumter. 

On  the  same  fateful  day  the  Senators  of  Georgia, 
Florida,  Alabama,  Mississippi,  Louisiana,  Texas,  and 
Arkansas,  satisfied  that  the  Federal  Government  was 
making  ready  to  coerce  their  States  by  force  of 
arms  to  remain  within  the  Union,  and  that  the 
President  was  even  then  sending  troops  to  overawe 
them  into  submission,  met  at  Washington  and  sol- 
emnly advised  their  respective  States  to  secede  at 
once  and  organize  a  slave-holding  Confederacy. 

Missouri,  awakened  from  her  dreams  of  peace  by 
the  swelling  din  of  the  approaching  conflict,  seemed 
for  a  moment  about  to  respond  to  the  wise  counsels 
of  her  chief  magistrate,  and  to  arm  herself  for  in- 
evitable war. 


30  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

Among  those  who  most  urgently  besought  her 
people  to  follow  these  counsels,  was  the  Lieutenant- 
Governor  of  the  State,  Thomas  Caute  Reynolds. 
He  was  then  nearly  forty  years  of  age,  a  man  of 
medium  height  and  compact  mould,  with  regular 
features,  that  were  at  once  refined  and  strong — a 
rather  handsome  man.  His  jet-black  hair  and  beard 
were  always  closely  cut,  and  his  dark  eyes  always 
shaded  by  gold-rimmed  glasses,  which  served  a  two- 
fold purpose.  A  South  Carolinian  by  birth,  he  was 
a  Virginian  by  race,  and  in  full  sympathy  with  the 
conciliatory  disposition  of  the  Virginia  people.  He 
was  a  man  of  many  accomplishments  and  of  grace- 
ful manners,  for  he  had  been  accustomed  from  child- 
hood to  the  usages  and  refinements  of  good  society, 
and  his  active  intellect  had  been  highly  cultivated 
both  at  home  and  abroad.  Latin  and  Greek  were 
almost  as  familiar  to  him  as  his  own  tongue,  and  he 
spoke  French  and  German  and  Spanish  fluently 
and  gracefully.  He  was  well  taught  in  all  the 
learning  of  the  Schools,  and  an  adept  in  the  myste- 
rious ways  of  diplomacy,  for  which  he  had  a  strong, 
natural  predilection,  that  had  been  strengthened 
by  some  service  as  Secretary  of  Legation  and 
Charge"  d'Affaires  ad  interim,  near  the  Court  of 
Madrid.  Though  he  was  a  good  speaker,  it  was 
in  counsel  and  in  action  that  he  excelled ;  for  his 
busy  intellect  delighted  to  devise  schemes,  which  it 


The    General  Assembly.  31 

pleased  his  tireless  energy  to  carry  out ;  and  the 
more  difficult  and  the  more  intricate  the  pathway 
to  success,  the  more  did  it  fascinate  his  diplomatic 
brain,  and  the  more  command  his  unwearied  efforts 
to  thread  its  mazes  and  overcome  all  its  difficulties. 

He  was  a  man  of  tried  courage,  and  had  borne 
his  part  in  several  "  affairs,"  in  one  of  which  he  had 
wounded  Gratz  Brown.  No  one  ever  doubted  his 
integrity,  and  he  had  always  discharged  with  scru- 
pulous fidelity  the  duties  of  the  various  public 
offices  which  he  had  held.  A  somewhat  diligent 
letter-writer,  his  letters  were  alike  remarkable  for 
their  admirable  style  and  chirography,  and  generally 
for  their  substantial  good  sense.  He  was  wont  to 
number  them  after  the  manner  of  diplomatists,  and 
to  keep  a  careful  record  of  their  contents.  He 
sometimes  wrote  what  he  had  better  have  left  un- 
written, but  his  prudence  and  reticence,  and  a  pas- 
sionless judgment,  generally  controlled  his  pen,  as 
they  always  controlled  his  tongue. 

He  had  sought  the  nomination  for  Lieutenant- 
Governor,  because  of  the  actualities  and  the  possi- 
bilities of  that  position  in  the  troublous  times, 
whose  rapid  approach  he  clearly  foresaw.  Prefer- 
ring Breckinridge  to  Douglas,  he  had,  nevertheless, 
like  Jackson,  prudently — and  fortunately,  too,  for 
the  glory  of  Missouri — supported  the  candidacy  of 
the  gifted  Illinoisan,  and  had  thereby  made  his  own 


32  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

election  sure.  Chosen  Lieutenant-Governor  in 
August,  he  began  at  once  to  prepare  himself  for  the 
role  which  he  proposed  to  enact.  Diligent  and 
painstaking  at  all  times,  he  was  doubly  so  now  ;  for 
he  comprehended  the  vastness  of  the  stage  on  which 
he  was  to  appear,  and  the  grandeur  of  the  tragedy 
in  which  he  proposed  to  play  a  conspicuous  part. 
When  Congress  met  in  December,  he  hurried  to 
Washington,  and  put  himself  in  accord  with  the 
most  thoughtful  Southern  leaders.  Returning  to 
Missouri,  he  anticipated  both  the  message  of  Gov- 
ernor Stewart,  and  the  inaugural  of  Governor  Jack- 
son, by  publishing,  on  the  day  that  the  Legislature 
met,  a  letter  in  which  he  expounded  his  own  views, 
and  advised  Missouri  what  course  to  pursue  in  the 
grave  crisis  that  was  already  at  hand. 

In  this  letter  he  urged  the  General  Assembly  to 
forthwith  declare  the  determination  of  Missouri  to 
resist  all  attempts  on  the  part  of  the  Federal  Gov- 
ernment to  coerce  any  State  to  remain  in  the  Union 
against  her  will,  whether  such  coercion  were  at- 
tempted by  the  exhibition  and  use  of  force,  or  by 
peaceful  efforts  to  collect  the  Federal  revenues  and 
enforce  the  Federal  laws  within  her  limits  after  she 
had  seceded ;  and  pointed  out  very  clearly  "  the 
transparent  sophistry  "  of  drawing  a  distinction,  as 
President  Buchanan  had  done,  between  "  coercing  a 
State,"  and  "  compelling   the  citizens  of  a  seceded 


The    General  Assembly.  33 

State  to  obey  the  laws  of  the  Uhited  States."  "  In 
our  system,"  he  said,  "  a  State  is  its  people,  citizens 
compose  that  people,  and  to  use  force  against  cit- 
izens acting  by  State  authority  is  to  coerce  the 
State  and  to  wage  war  against  it.  To  levy  tribute, 
molest  commerce,  or  hold  fortresses,  are  as  much 
acts  of  war  as  to  bombard  a  city.' 

He  also  advised  the  State  that  to  make  her  de- 
termination to  oppose  coercion  effective,  she  must 
without  delay  organize  her  militia  thoroughly,  and 
make  other  preparations  for  whatever  contingency 
might  happen.  While  this  was  being  done  she 
ought  to  call  a  convention  of  all  the  States,  to 
devise,  if  possible,  some  final  adjustment  of  all  con- 
troversies. If  she  should  fail  to  secure  such  adjust- 
ment before  the  4th  of  March,  she  "  should  not 
permit  Mr.  Lincoln  to  exercise  any  act  of  govern- 
ment "  within  her  borders. 

In  appointing  the  Senate  committees,  the  Lieu- 
tenant-Governor, who  was  ex-officio  President  of  the 
Senate,  took  good  care  to  so  constitute  them  that 
they  should  be  favorable  to  the  policy  which  he  had 
thus  proposed. 

Bills  were  immediately  introduced  (January  5)  to 
provide  for  calling  a  State  Convention ;  to  arm  and 
equip  the  militia ;  and  one  which  was  intended  to 
take  away  from  the  Republican  Mayor  of  St.  Louis 
the  power  to  call  out  the  Wide-Awakes  of  that  city 
3 


34  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

in  the  event  of  political  disturbances  there.  These 
Wide-Awakes  were  a  semi-military  organization, 
composed  almost  exclusively  of  anti-slavery  Ger- 
mans, and  it  was  feared  that  the  Mayor  would,  if  an 
opportunity  occurred,  invest  them  with  the  panoply 
of  the  law,  and  use  them  to  subdue  the  Southern 
sympathizers  and  to  hold  the  city  for  Lincoln. 

The  prompt  and  almost  unanimous  favor  with 
which  the  General  Assembly  received  these  meas- 
ures shows  the  strength  of  the  feeling  which  was 
then  forcing  Missouri  onward  towards  secession. 
To  the  casual  observer  it  seemed  to  be  irresistible, 
and  the  Southern  Rights  people  were  exultant  and 
even  defiant. 

Nor  was  fuel  to  feed  the  flames  of  passion  want- 
ing in  those  early  days  of  1861.  The  Governors  of 
all  the  Gulf  States,  except  Texas,  taught  by  the 
experience  of  South  Carolina  and  warned  by  the 
President's  declaration  that  he  was  determined  to 
reinforce  and  hold  all  the  Southern  forts,  resolved 
to  forthwith  seize  and  occupy  the  forts  within  their 
several  States,  without  waiting,  as  South  Carolina 
had  unwisely  done,  for  their  own  formal  secession. 

The  vigilant  Governor  of  Georgia,  Joseph  E. 
Brown,  with  that  courage  and  common  sense  which 
have  distinguished  his  whole  career,  disdaining  those 
forms  which  are  useful  in  peace  but  mischievous  in 
war,  sent  a  detachment  of  State  troops  under  Colo- 


The   General  Assembly.  35 

nel  Alexander  R.  Lawton  to  seize  and  occupy  Fort 
Pulaski,  which  commands  the  approach  to  Savannah 
from  the  ocean ;  and  this  order  was  executed  on  the 
3d  of  January. 

On  the  4th,  Governor  Moore,  of  Alabama,  seized 
the  United  States  Arsenal  at  Mt.  Vernon,  and  on 
the  5th  occupied  Forts  Morgan  and  Gaines,  which 
guard  the  approach  to  Mobile.  In  announcing  the 
fact  to  the  President,  he  said  that  he  had  seized 
these  forts  because  "  it  would  have  been  an  unwise 
policy,  suicidal  in  its  character,  to  have  permitted 
the  Government  of  the  United  States  to  make, 
undisturbed,  preparations  within  the  State  to  en- 
force by  war  and  bloodshed  an  authority  which  it 
was  the  fixed  purpose  of  the  people  of  Alabama  to 
resist  to  the  uttermost  of  their  power." 

Florida  for  like  reasons  seized  the  United  States 
Arsenal  at  Apalachicola  on  the  6th,  and  Fort  Mar- 
ion at  St.  Augustine  on  the  7th. 

On  the  9th  of  January  the  President  laid  before 
Congress  the  correspondence  which  had  taken  place 
between  himself  and  the  South  Carolina  commis- 
sioners. He  also  informed  that  body  that  forts, 
arsenals,  and  magazines  of  the  United  States  had 
been  seized  by  several  of  the  States  which  had  not 
yet  seceded,  and  declared  that  the  fact  could  no 
longer  be  disguised  that  the  country  was  "  in  the 
midst  of  a  great  revolution/' 


36  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

The  responsibility  for  this  condition  of  affairs 
rested,  he  said,  upon  Congress  alone,  and  it  was  for 
Congress  to  adopt  such  measures  as  would  secure 
peace  and  union  to  a  distracted  country.  He  there- 
fore implored  them,  in  heaven's  name,  to  submit  the 
Crittenden  Compromise  to  a  vote  of  the  people,  so 
'that  the  people  might,  as  they  surely  would,  "  redress 
the  serious  grievances  which  the  South  have  suffered," 
and  bring  back  peace  and  harmony  to  the  country. 

While  reiterating  the  opinion  which  he  had  ex- 
pressed in  his  annual  message,  that  neither  he  nor 
Congress  had  any  right  to  make  aggressive  war 
upon  any  State,  he  now  asserted  the  "  clear  and 
undeniable  right "  of  the  Federal  Government  "  to 
use  military  force  defensively  against  those  who  re- 
sist the  Federal  officers  in  the  execution  of  their 
legal  functions,  and  against  those  who  assail  the 
property  of  the  Government." 

But  while  admitting  that  it  was  his  duty,  and  de- 
claring that  it  was  his  purpose,  to  collect  the  public 
revenues  and  to  protect  the  public  property  every- 
where, so  far  as  might  be  practicable,  he  said  that 
it  was  for  Congress  to  enact  the  laws  which  would 
give  him  the  power  to  execute  this  duty ;  and  that 
it  should  do  this  promptly. 

He  would  take  care  meanwhile  that  the  peace 
of  the  District  of  Columbia  should  not  be  disturbed 
during  the  remainder  of  his  term  of  office. 


The   General  Assembly.  $y 

Neither  Congress  nor  the  country  paid  any  atten- 
tion to  the  peaceful  recommendations  of  the  Presi- 
dent ;  for  on  that  very  day  the  first  gun  of  the  war 
was  fired,  and  the  Star  of  the  West,  which  had  been 
sent  to  the  relief  of  Sumter,  was  driven  back  to  sea 
by  the  batteries  which  South  Carolina  had  erected 
for  the  defence  of  the  harbor  of  Charleston. 

The  news  sped  over  the  land  with  the  rapidity  of 
thought.  The  President's  message  was  read  by  the 
light  of  the  lurid  glare  of  that  Southern  cannonade. 
Northern  men  thought,  not  of  conciliation,  but  of 
resenting  the  insult  to  the  flag  of  the  Union. 
Southern  men  were  enraged  by  what  they  believed 
to  be  the  President's  duplicity,  and  his  attempt  to 
overawe  them.  Both  read  the  message  to  see  what 
the  President  would  do.  Both  saw  in  it  his  fixed 
purpose  to  make  war  upon  the  South,  reluctantly, 
sadly,  and  almost  in  despair,  but  to  make  war,  nev- 
ertheless, because  he  believed  that  it  was  his  duty 
to  execute  the  laws  and  to  protect  the  property  of 
the  Federal  Government. 

Louisiana,  warned  by  her  senators  at  Washington 
that  reinforcements  were  on  the  way  to  Fort  St. 
Philip  and  Fort  Jackson,  which  guard  the  entrance 
to  the  Mississippi  and  are  the  only  defences  of 
New  Orleans  in  that  direction,  took  possession  of 
the  arsenal  at  Baton  Rouge  on  the  ioth  of  January 
and  occupied  the  forts  the  next  day. 


38  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

Mississippi  had  seceded  on  the  9th.  Florida  se- 
ceded on  the  10th,  and  as  her  troops  were  already 
gathering  at  Pensacola,  Lieutenant  Slemmer,  com- 
manding the  forts  in  that  harbor,  transferred  his 
forces  from  the  mainland  to  Fort  Pickens.  Florida 
immediately  occupied  the  abandoned  barracks,  forts, 
and  navy-yard. 

On  the  nth  (January)  Alabama  seceded  and  in- 
vited all  of  the  slave-holding  States  to  meet  the 
people  of  Alabama  by  their  delegates  in  convention 
on  the  4th  of  February  at  the  city  of  Montgomery, 
for  the  purpose  of  consulting  with  each  other  as  to 
the  most  effectual  mode  of  securing  concerted  and 
harmonious  action  in  whatever  measures  might  be 
deemed  most  desirable  for  their  common  peace  and 
security. 

Such  was  the  reply  of  the  Cotton  States  to  the 
President's  attempt  to  reinforce  Fort  Sumter,  and 
to  his  threat  to  coerce  the  South  into  obedience  to 
the  Federal  laws. 

The  North  was  just  as  prompt  and  decisive  in  re- 
senting the  insult  to  the  flag  of  the  Union,  and  in  de- 
claring its  determination  to  sustain  the  Government. 
On  the  nth  of  January  the  Legislature  of  New  York 
adopted  the  following  preamble  and  resolutions: 

**  Whereas,  treason,  as  defined  by  the  Constitution 
of  the  United  States,  exists  in  one  or  more  of  the 
States  of  this  Confederacy;  and  whereas,  the  insur- 


The    General  Assembly.  39 

gent  State  of  South  Carolina,  after  seizing  the  post- 
offices,  custom  house,  moneys,  and  fortifications 
of  the  Federal  Government,  has,  by  firing  into  a 
Government  vessel,  ordered  by  the  Government  to 
convey  troops  and  provisions  to  Fort  Sumter,  virtu- 
ally declared  war ;  and  whereas,  the  forts  and  prop- 
erty of  the  United  States  Government  in  Georgia, 
Alabama,  and  Louisiana  have  been  unlawfully  seized 
with  hostile  intention;  and  whereas,  further,  Sena- 
tors in  Congress  avow  and  maintain  these  treason- 
able acts ;  therefore, 

"Resolved,  That  the  Legislature  of  New  York,  pro- 
foundly impressed  with  the  value  of  the  Union,  and 
determined  to  preserve  it  unimpaired,  hail  with  joy 
the  recent  firm,  dignified,  special  message  of  the 
President  of  the  United  States ;  and  that  we  tender 
to  him  through  the  Chief  Magistrate  of  our  own 
State  whatever  aid  in  men  and  money  he  may  re- 
quire to  enable  him  to  enforce  the  laws  and  uphold 
the  authority  of  the  Federal  Government ;  and  that 
in  defence  of  '  the  more  perfect  Union,' which  has 
conferred  prosperity  and  happiness  on  the  American 
people,  renewing  the  pledge  given  and  redeemed  by 
our  fathers,  we  are  ready  to  devote  '  our  fortunes, 
our  lives,  and  our  sacred  honor '  to  upholding  the 
Union  and  the  Constitution." 

The  Legislatures  of  Ohio,  Pennsylvania,  Minne- 
sota, Wisconsin,  and  Illinois   spoke   out  in   similar 


40  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

tones,  and  made  it  plain  that  every  Northern  State 
would  exert  its  whole  power  to  maintain  the  Union 
by  force. 

There  were,  however,  in  every  Northern  State 
many  men  who  shrank  from  the  thought  of  a  bloody 
war,  and  who  believed  that  the  Union  could  not  be 
preserved  by  violence. 

On  the  31st  of  January  a  great  meeting  was  held 
in  the  city  of  New  York  to  consider  the  condition 
of  the  country.  At  this  meeting  James  S.  Thayer, 
an  old  line  Whig,  made  a  speech,  in  which  he  said  : 

"  We  can,  at  least,  in  an  authoritative  way  and  in 
a  practical  manner,  arrive  at  the  basis  of  a  peaceable 
separation  (cheers).  We  can,  at  least,  by  discussion, 
enlighten,  settle,  and  concentrate  the  public  senti- 
ment of  the  State  of  New  York  upon  the  question, 
and  save  it  from  that  fearful  current  which,  circui- 
tously  but  certainly,  sweeps  madly  on  through  the 
narrow  gauge  of  '  the  enforcement  of  the  laws '  to 
the  shoreless  ocean  of  civil  war  !  (Cheers.)  Against, 
this  under  all  circumstances  and  in  every  place  and 
form  we  must  now,  and  at  all  times,  oppose  a  reso- 
lute and  unfaltering  resistance.     .     .     . 

"  It  is  announced  that  the  Republican  Adminis- 
tration will  enforce  the  laws  against,  and  in,  all  the 
seceding  States.     .     .     . 

"  You  remember  the  story  of  William  Tell.  .  .  . 
Let  an  arrow  winged  by  the  Federal  power  strike 


The   General  Assembly.  41 

the  heart  of  an  American  citizen,  and  who  can 
number  the  avenging  darts  that  will  cloud  the 
heavens  in  the  conflict  that  will  ensue  ?  (Prolonged 
applause.)  What  then  is  the  duty  of  the  State  of 
New  York?  What  shall  we  say  to  our  people 
when  we  come  to  meet  this  state  of  facts?  That 
the  Union  must  be  preserved !  But  if  that  cannot 
be,  what  then  ?     Peaceable  separation.     (Applause.)" 

Ex-Chancellor  Walworth  said : 

"  It  would  be  as  brutal,  in  my  opinion,  to  send 
men  to  butcher  our  own  brothers  of  the  Southern 
States,  as  it  would  be  to  massacre  them  in  the 
Northern  States.  We  are  told,  however,  that  it  is 
our  duty  to  enforce,  and  that  we  must  enforce,  the 
laws.  But  why  ?  And  what  laws  are  to  be  enforced  ? 
There  were  laws  that  were  to  be  enforced  in  the 
time  of  the  American  Revolution.  Did  Lord  Chat- 
ham go  for  enforcing  those  laws?  No!  he  gloried 
in  the  defence  of  the  liberties  of  America.  He 
made  that  remarkable  declaration  in  the  British  Par- 
liament:  '  If  I  were  an  American  citizen,  instead  of 
being,  as  I  am,  an  Englishman,  I  never  would  sub- 
mit to  such  laws,  never,  never,  NEVER! '" 

Edward  Everett,  speaking  at  Faneuil  Hall  on 
February  2d,  said : 

"To  expect  to  hold  fifteen  States  in  the  Union 
by  force  is  preposterous.  The  idea  of  a  civil  war 
accompanied,  as  it  would  be,  by  a  servile  insurrec- 


42  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

tion,  is  too  monstrous  to  be  entertained  for  a  mo- 
ment. If  our  sister  States  must  leave  us,  in  the 
name  of  Heaven  let  them  go  in  peace  !  " 

The  border  slave-holding  States  were  outspoken 
against  coercion. 

On  the  6th  of  January,  Governor  Hicks,  in  an 
address  to  the  people  of  Maryland,  assigning  his 
reasons  for  refusing  to  convene  the  Legislature, 
said :  "  Maryland  is  with  the  South  in  sympathy  and 
feeling.  She  demands  from  the  North  the  repeal  of 
its  offensive  unconstitutional  statutes,  and  appeals 
to  it  for  new  guarantees.  She  will  wait  a  reason- 
able time  for  the  North  to  purge. her  Statute  Book, 
so  as  to  do  justice  to  her  Southern  brethren,  and  if 
her  appeals  are  vain,  she  will  make  common  cause 
with  her  sister  States  in  resistance  to  tyranny,  if 
need  be." 

The  Virginia  Legislature  met  on  the  7th.  Gov- 
ernor Letcher,  while  condemning  the  action  of 
South  Carolina,  insisted  that  the  North  had  brought 
about  the  present  condition  of  affairs,  and  that  it 
was  for  it  to  end  the  rising  strife.  He  declared 
that  he  would  regard  any  attempt  of  Federal  troops 
to  pass  across  Virginia  for  the  purpose  of  coercing  a 
Southern  State  as  an  act  of  invasion  to  be  repelled 
by  force.  On  the  19th  the  Legislature  resolved : 
That  if  all  efforts  to  reconcile  the  differences  be- 
tween the  two  sections  of  the  country  should  prove 


The    General  Assembly.  43 

abortive,  then,  every  consideration  of  honor  and  in- 
terest demanded  that  Virginia  should  unite  her  des- 
tinies with  those  of  her  sister  slave-holding  States." 
This  resolution  was  unanimously  adopted,  and 
$1,000,000  were  appropriated  for  arming  and  equip- 
ping the  militia. 

The  Legislature  of  Tennessee  called  a  State  Con- 
vention on  the  12th  of  January,  and  on  the  18th 
adopted  these  resolutions : 

"  That  this  General  Assembly  has  heard  with  pro- 
found regret  of  the  resolutions  recently  adopted  by 
the  State  of  New  York,  tendering  men  and  money 
to  the  President  of  the  United  States,  to  be  used  in 
coercing  certain  sovereign  States  of  the  South  into 
obedience  to  the  Federal  Government. 

"  That  this  General  Assembly  receives  the  action 
of  the  Legislature  of  New  York  as  the  indication 
of  a  purpose  on  the  part  of  the  people  of  that  State 
to  further  complicate  existing  difficulties  by  forcing 
the  people  of  the  South  to  the  extremity  of  submis- 
sion or  resistance ;  and  so  regarding  it,  the  Governor 
of  the  State  of  Tennessee  is  hereby  requested  to 
inform  the  Executive  of  the  State  of  New  York, 
that  it  is  the  opinion  of  this  General  Assembly  that 
whenever  the  authorities  of  that  State  shall  send 
armed  forces  to  the  South  for  the  purpose  indicated 
in  said  resolutions,  the  people  of  Tennessee,  unit- 
ing with  their  brethren  of  the  South,  will,  as  one 


44  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

man,  resist  such  invasion  of  the  soil  of  the  South  at 
all  hazards  and  to  the  last  extremity." 

On  the  17th,  Governor  Magoffin  said  to  the  Gen- 
eral Assembly  of  Kentucky  that  though  Kentucky 
disapproved  of  the  hasty  and  inconsiderate  action  of 
the  seceding  States,  Kentuckians  would  never  stand 
by  with  folded  arms  while  those  States  were  strug- 
gling for  their  Constitutional  rights,  and  were  being 
subjugated  by  an  antislavery  Government.  On  the 
2 1st,  the  Legislature  adopted  the  Tennessee  Reso- 
lutions. 

Missouri  seemed  to  be  on  the  very  verge  of  se- 
cession. Even  St.  Louis  denounced  the  coercion  of 
the  South.  At  a  great  Union  meeting  held  there 
on  the  12th  of  January,  a  meeting  composed  of 
men  who  "  believed  that  the  rights  and  property  of 
all  sections  of  the  country  could  be  better  protected 
within  the  American  Union  than  by  destroying  the 
Government  " — a  meeting  called  and  controlled  by 
such  staunch  loyalists  as  Nathaniel  Paschall,  Hamil- 
ton R.  Gamble,  James  E.  Yeatman,  and  Robert 
Campbell — resolutions  were  unanimously  adopted 
declaring  that 

"  6.  The  possession  of  slave  property  is  a  Consti- 
tutional right,  and,  as  such,  ought  to  be  recognized 


The   General  Assembly.  45 

by  the  Federal  Government.  And  if  the  Federal 
Government  shall  fail  and  refuse  to  secure  this 
right,  the  Southern  States  should  be  found  united 
in  its  defence,  in  which  event  Missouri  will  share 
the  common  duties  and  common  dangers  of  the 
South. 

"8.  .  .  .  We  cordially  approve  of  the  prin- 
ciples of  adjustment  contained  in  what  are  known  as 
the  Crittenden  Propositions.     .     .     . 

"  10.  In  the  opinion  of  this  meeting,  the  employ- 
ment of  the  military  forces  of  the  Government  to 
enforce  submission  from  the  citizens  of  the  seceding 
States  will  inevitably  plunge  the  country  in  civil 
war.  .  .  .  We  therefore  earnestly  entreat,  as  well 
the  Federal  Government  as  the  seceding  States,  to 
withhold  and  stay  the  arm  of  military  power,  and 
on  no  pretext  whatever  to  bring  on  the  nation  the 
horrors  of  civil  war  until  the  people  themselves  can 
take  such  action  as  our  troubles  demand. 

"  11.  The  people  of  Missouri  should  meet  in  con- 
vention for  the  purpose  of  taking  action  in  the 
present  state  of  the  nation's  affairs,  at  the  same 
time  to  protect  the  Union  of  the  States  and  the 
rights  and  authority  of  this  State  under  the  Consti- 
tution." 

On  the  14th  The  Republican,  the  great  conserva- 
tive journal  of  the  State,  the  mouth-piece  of  her 
rich  men  and  merchants,  in  a  leader  addressed  to 


46  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

Abraham  Lincoln,  urging  him  to  save  the  Union  by- 
advising  his  followers  to  assent  to  the  re-enactment 
of  the  Missouri  Compromise,  said  : 

"  Six  States  have  already  gone  out  of  the  Union 
so  far  as  their  own  action  is  concerned,  hastily,  and 
without  sufficient  cause,  as  we  believe,  but  still  they 
have  assumed  an  attitude  of  independence  of  the 
Government  of  the  United  States,  and  what  is  to 
be  done  ?  To  attempt  to  coerce  them  back  by  mili- 
tary force  will  bring  ruin  upon  every  State  in  this 
Union.  One-half  of  your  own  State  will  resist  any 
attempt  to  organize  or  march  an  army  for  the  sub- 
jugation of  Missouri  or  any  of  the  revolting  States; 
and  Kentucky  and  Tennessee,  when  the  worse 
comes  to  the  worst,  will  again  become  '  the  dark  and 
bloody  ground/  before  they  will  suffer  their  soil  to 
be  polluted  by  the  tread  of  armed  hosts  marching 
to  the  slaughter  of  their  neighbors  and  friends  and 
kinsmen  in  the  Southern  States." 

The  General  Assembly  was  not  slow  to  respond 
to  the  feeling  of  the  people. 

The  bill  to  call  a  Convention  to  consider  whether 
Missouri  should  secede,  and  to  adopt  measures  for 
vindicating  the  sovereignty  of  the  State,  and  the 
protection  of  her  institutions,  was  reported  back  to 
both  Houses  on  the  9th  of  January,  and  passed  both 
Houses  on  the  18th.  In  the  Senate  only  two  votes 
were  recorded .  against  its  passage.     In   the  House 


The   General  Assembly.  47 

105  members  voted  for  it  and  only  eighteen  against 
it.     Of  these  latter,  eleven  were  from  St.  Louis. 

The  passage  of  the  bill  by  such  a  majority  was  a 
great  triumph  for  the  Southern  Rights  men,  and 
they,  in  order  to  emphasize  the  fact,  now  determined 
to  proclaim  the  sympathy  of  the  State  with  the 
South,  by  a  bold  act,  which  should  intensify  the  en- 
thusiasm of  their  own  adherents,  and  rally  to  their 
support  the  timid  and  irresolute,  of  whom  there  were 
not  a  few  in  every  county.  The  opportunity  to  do 
this  in  a  marked  way  had  been  afforded  them  by  the 
arrival  at  the  capital  of  a  commissioner,  whom  the 
State  of  Mississippi  had  sent  to  ask  the  co-opera- 
tion of  Missouri  in  the  adoption  of  "  measures  for 
the  common  defence  and  safety  of  the  slave-holding 
States."  Accordingly,  Governor  Jackson,  immedi- 
ately upon  the  passage  of  the  bill,  notified  the  Legis- 
lature that  this  commissioner,  Mr.  Russell,  would  be 
pleased  to  confer  with  them  as  to  the  objects  of  his 
mission.  A  joint  committee  was  at  once  appointed 
to  wait  upon  him,  and  invite  him  to  address  the 
General  Assembly ;  and  the  ceremony  was  arranged 
for  that  very  evening. 

At  the  appointed  hour  the  Senate,  preceded  by 
its  officers,  entered  the  hall  of  the  House  of  Repre- 
sentatives, and  took  the  seats  which  had  been  as- 
signed to  them.  And  then  the  Governor  and  other 
chief  officers  of  the  State,  and  the  Judges  of  the 


48  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

Supreme  Court  were  announced,  and  took  their 
seats  within  the  bar. 

And  now  a  little  scene  was  enacted,  which,  trifling 
in  itself,  illustrates  the  temper  of  the  time,  and  the 
then  disposition  of  the  Legislature  and  the  people. 

The  committee  being  about  to  bring  in  the  com- 
missioner, the  President  of  the  Joint  Convention 
(Lieutenant-Governor  Reynolds)  said : 

"  When  the  Commissioner  from  the  State  of  Mis- 
sissippi is  announced,  the  members  of  the  General 
Assembly  will  rise  to  receive  him." 

John  D.  Stevenson,  a  Republican  representative 
from  St.  Louis,  sprang  to  his  feet. 

"Are  we  here,  Mr.  President,  to  do  homage  to  the 
ambassador  of  some  foreign  potentate  ?  " 

President. — "  I  understand,  sir,  that  this  is  a  joint 
session  of  the  General  Assembly,  to  listen  to  an  ad- 
dress from  the  Commissioner  of  the  State  of  Missis- 
sippi, and  I  hope,  for  the  honor  of  all  parties,  that 
the  member  from  St.  Louis  will  take  his  seat." 

Stevenson. — "  Shall  I  have  a  chance  ?  " 

President. — "  Take  your  seat." 

A  voice. — "  Good !  " 

Stevenson. — "  I  desire  to  have  a  chance." 

President. — "Take  your  seat." 

A  voice.—"  Better  !  " 

Stevenson. — "  Mr.  President,  I  can  read,  sir,  the 
rules  that  govern  this  body,  and  I  suppose,  if  I  am 


The   General  Assembly.  49 

well  informed,  that  when  the  President  rules  me  out 
of  order,  it  is  his  duty  to  state  why  he  so  rules." 

President. — "  The  business  of  this  session  is  to 
hear  a  speech  from  the  Commissioner  from  Missis- 
sippi, and  all  other  business  is  out  of  order." 

Stevenson. — "  I  understand  that  the  President 
commands  the  members  to  rise." 

President. — "  I  will  change  it  to  a  request,  and  I 
hope  that  no  member  of  this  General  Assembly 
will  have  the  indecency  to  refuse  to  rise." 

Stevenson. — "  Oh  !  that  will  do,  sir." 

The  commissioner  was  thereupon  introduced,  the 
members  rising  from  their  seats  to  receive  him. 

He  made  a  long  address,  the  substance  of  which 
was  that  he  had  been  charged  by  the  General 
Assembly  of  Mississippi  to  inform  the  people  of 
Missouri  that  Mississippi  had  formally  dissolved 
her  connection  with  the  United  States,  and,  in  con- 
junction with  other  slave-holding  States,  was  about 
to  organize  a  Southern  Confederacy ;  that  the  old 
Union  had  even  now  ceased  to  exist,  and  could 
never  be  reconstructed;  that  war  between  the 
North  and  the  South  was  inevitable,  and  would  be 
begun  within  ninety  days  ;  that  the  guns  which  had 
driven  back  the  Star  of  the  West  from  the  harbor 
of  Charleston  had  already  given  the  signal  for  the 
strife ;  and  that  in  view  of  all  these  facts  the  people 
4 


50  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

of  Mississippi  earnestly  invited  the  people  of  Mis- 
souri to  unite  with  their  Southern  kindred  for  their 
common  defence  and  their  common  safety. 

This  address  was  listened  to  with  the  greatest 
attention,  and  received  with  every  manifestation  of 
approval  and  sympathy.  At  its  conclusion  the 
joint  session  was  dissolved ;  but  the  demonstration 
in  favor  of  an  alliance  with  the  South  was  noisily 
kept  up  till  almost  dawn. 

Mr.  Halliburton  had  already  (16th  January) 
offered  in  the  Senate  a  resolution  against  coercion, 
similar  to  that  which  Virginia  had  adopted.  But 
the  matter  was  brought  more  formally  before  the 
General  Assembly,  on  the  28th,  by  Mr.  Vest  (the 
Patrick  Henry  of  resistance  in  Missouri),  who  then 
reported  from  the  Committee  on  Federal  Relations 
a  preamble  and  resolutions,  which,  while  following 
for  the  most  part  those  of  the  Tennessee  Legislat- 
ure, differ  from  them  in  some  important  particu- 
lars. 

"  Whereas  we  have  learned  with  profound  regret 
that  the  States  of  New  York  and  Ohio  have  recently 
tendered  men  and  money  to  the  President  of  the 
United  States  for  the  avowed  purpose  of  coercing 
certain  sovereign  States  of  the  South  into  obedi- 
ence to  the  Federal  Government, 

"  Therefore,  Resolved,  That  we  regard  with  the 
utmost  abhorrence  the  doctrine  of  coercion,  as  in- 


The   General  Assembly.  51 

dicated  by  the  action  of  the  States  aforesaid,  believ- 
ing that  the  same  would  end  in  civil  war,  and 
forever  destroy  any  hope  of  reconstructing  the  Fed- 
eral Union.  So  believing,  we  deem  it  our  duty  to 
declare  that,  if  there  is  any  invasion  of  the  slave 
States  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  such  doctrine 
into  effect,  it  is  the  opinion  of  this  General  As- 
sembly, that  the  people  of  Missouri  will  instantly 
rally  on  the  side  of  their  Southern  brethren  to  re- 
sist the  invaders  at  all  hazards,  and  to  the  last  ex- 
tremity. 

"  Resolved,  That  the  Governor  of  this  State  be 
requested  to  transmit  to  the  Governors  of  New 
York  and  Ohio  the  above  resolutions." 

These  resolutions  were  ably  supported  by  Vest, 
Harris,  and  Cunningham,  and  opposed  vigorously 
by  Partridge  and  Peckham.  They  were  adopted  on 
the  29th,  eighty-nine  members  voting  for  them  and 
fourteen  against  them. 

The  Senate,  having  been  notified  of  the  passage 
of  these  resolutions  by  the  House,  accepted  them  as 
a  substitute  for  the  less  vigorous  resolutions  of  Sen- 
ator Halliburton,  and  finally  took  them  up  and 
concurred  in  them  (February  15th),  only  one  Sen- 
ator (Dr.  Morris  of  St.  Louis)  voting  against  them. 

By  this  action  of  her  General  Assembly,  Missouri 
was  solemnly  pledged,  so  far  as  her  Representatives 
could   pledge   her,  to    resist    the   coercion   of    the 


52  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

seceding  States,  at  all  hazards,  and  to  the  last  ex- 
tremity. 

But  behind  all  this  remained  the  yet  unanswered 
question,  whether  the  General  Assembly  expressed 
the  feelings  and  pronounced  the  purpose  of  the 
people  of  Missouri. 


CHAPTER   III. 

THE   PEOPLE. 

Canvass  for  the  Convention — Secessionists,  Union  Men,  Uncondi- 
tional Union  Men — Georgia,  Louisiana,  and  Texas  Secede — Organ- 
ization of  the  Confederate  Government — Peace  Conventions  :  They 
Distract  the  Border  States,  and  Divide  the  Southern  Men  of  Mis- 
souri— Rollins — Hall — Blair  and  the  Wide  Awakes — The  Union 
Men  and  Submissionists  carry  the  State — The  Secession  Majority 
in  the  Legislature  gives  way — Postponement  of  the  Bill  to  arm  the 
State — The  Convention  meets  ;  Sterling  Price  its  President — Gov- 
ernor Jackson,  Parsons,  and  Vest  still  Defiant — The  Commissioner 
from  Georgia — Vest's  Speech — The  North  and  the  South  prepare 
for  War — The  General  Assembly  Submits — Failure  of  the  Military 
Bill — The  Debate  in  the  House. 

The  Act  calling  a  State  Convention  provided 
that  the  delegates  should  be  chosen  on  the  18th  of 
February,  and  that  they  should  convene  at  Jeffer- 
son City  on  the  last  day  of  that  month. 

The  canvass  was  straightway  opened  by  each  of 
the  three  parties  into  which  the  people  of  the 
State  were  divided — Secessionists,  Conditional 
Union  men,  and  Unconditional  Union  men. 

Conspicuous  among  the  Secessionists  were  the 
Governor  and  Lieutenant-Governor  of  the  State,  a 
majority  of  the  Members  of  the  General  Assembly, 
both  United  States  Senators  (James  S.  Green  and 
Trusten    Polk),    and   General   David    R.    Atchison. 


54  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

They  were  earnestly  supported  by  the  Jefferson 
City  Examiner,  the  St.  Louis  Bulletin,  and  other 
journals.  They  did  not  desire  the  disruption  of 
the  Union.  Few  of  them  believed  in  the  right  of 
secession.  All  of  them  deplored  the  precipitate 
action  of  South  Carolina,  and  the  now  apparent  de- 
termination of  the  other  Cotton  States  to  follow 
in  her  footsteps.  But  believing  that  the  withdrawal 
of  all  those  States  from  the  Union  would  soon  be 
an  accomplished  fact ;  that  they  would  establish 
a  Southern  Confederacy ;  that  all  of  the  other 
slave-holding  States  would  eventually  be  forced  to 
enter  this  Confederacy  ;  and  that  war  between  it 
and  the  Government  of  the  United  States  would 
necessarily  follow ;  they  thought  that  it  was  the 
duty  of  Missouri  to  declare  emphatically  that  in 
that  event  she  would  take  her  stand  with  the  South, 
to  which  she  was  bound  by  every  tie  that  holds  a 
people  together — race,  sympathy  traditions  in  com- 
mon, a  common  history,  like  institutions,  and  like 
interests — and  with  it  fight  against  the  North. 

The  only  formidable  opponents  of  the  Secession- 
ists were  the  Conditional  Union  men.  These  grad- 
ually fell  under  the  leadership  of  Hamilton  R. 
Gamble,  Alexander  W.  Doniphan,  James  S.  Rollins, 
William  A.  Hall,  John  S.  Phelps,  ex-Governor 
Stewart,  Sterling  Price  and  the  St.  Louis  Republican, 
then   conducted   by  Nathaniel    Paschall,  a  man  of 


The   People.  55 

mature  age,  great  experience,  strong  intellect,  and 
consummate  common  sense.  Under  the  guidance 
of  these  astute  managers  the  Conditional  Union 
men  assumed  a  position  which,  from  the  moment 
of  its  adoption,  began  to  divide  the  Secessionists. 
Few  of  these,  as  has  been  said,  were  primarily  in 
favor  of  secession.  All  of  them  regarded  the  disso- 
lution of  the  Union  with  sorrow  and  apprehension. 
They  would  have  gladly  persuaded  the  seceding 
States  to  return  into  the  Union,  and  to  trust  to 
peaceful  methods  for  the  protection  of  their  rights 
and  the  maintenance  of  their  honor.  They  were  not 
particularly  devoted  to  the  institution  of  slavery, 
nor  were  they  deeply  interested  in  the  maintenance 
of  that  system.  They  were  Secessionists,  only  be- 
cause they  believed  that  the  Union  had  been  dis- 
solved, that  its  reconstruction  was  impossible,  that 
war  was  inevitable,  and  that  in  war  the  place  of  Mis- 
souri was  by  the  side  of  the  Southern  States,  of 
which  she  was  one.  But  all  around  them  were 
Southern-born  men  and  many  Northern-born  citi- 
zens, who,  while  ready  to  declare  that  Missouri 
would  resist  every  attempt  on  the  part  of  the 
United  States  Government  to  coerce  the  seced- 
ing States  back  into  the  Union,  believed  that  the 
North,  rather  than  involve  the  country  in  a  dis- 
astrous war,  would  concede  to  the  South  her  clear 
Constitutional    rights,    and    thus    re-establish    the 


56  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

Union  upon  a  firmer  basis  than  it  had  ever  rested 
upon. 

This  belief,  or  rather  this  hope,  was  the  foundation 
on  which  Gamble  and  Hall  and  Paschall  builded 
their  party.  In  their  resolutions,  and  speeches 
and  addresses,  they  declared  that  Missouri  was 
firmly  attached  to  the  Union,  and  would  adhere  to 
it  so  long  as  there  was  reason  to  hope  that  the 
North  would  adopt  the  Crittenden  Proposition,  or 
give  other  Constitutional  guarantees  to  the  South 
that  the  United  States  would  protect  slavery  wher- 
ever it  lawfully  existed  ;  but  that  if  the  North  re- 
fused to  give  such  guarantees  within  a  reasonable 
time,  it  would  be  the  duty  of  Missouri  to  secede 
from  the  Union  and  to  unite  with  the  South  for 
the  protection  of  Slavery  and  the  defence  of  their 
common  interests.  They  also  declared  that  if  the 
North,  pending  attempts  to  adjust  matters  peace- 
ably, should  make  war  upon  any  Southern  State, 
Missouri  would  at  once  take  up  arms  in  defence  of 
such  State.  By  this  wise  action  the  Conditional 
Union  men  won  the  sympathy  of  the  slave-holders 
of  Missouri,  and  of  her  mercantile  and  manufactur- 
ing classes,  and  rich  land  owners,  all  of  whom  re- 
garded war  as  the  greatest  of  evils.  The  zeal,  the 
earnestness,  and  the  ability  with  which  they  con- 
ducted the  canvass,  together  with  the  course  of 
events  outside  of  the  State,  soon  brought  into  their 


The  People.  57 

ranks  many  Secessionists,  who  had  taken  hope 
again. 

The  Unconditional  Union  men,  still  calling  them- 
selves Republicans,  took  the  ground  that  they  would 
support  the  Government  in  whatever  measures  it 
might  adopt  to  maintain  the  Union  and  to  force  the 
Southern  States  to  obey  its  laws.  The  one  leader 
of  this  party  was  Francis  P.  Blair,  Jr.  Up  to  this 
time  it  had  been  composed  almost  exclusively  of 
Germans,  a  few  antislavery  men  of  New  England 
origin,  and  the  personal  followers  of  Blair,  Bates,  and 
Brown.  The  Presidential  election  had  shown  that 
they  numbered  only  one-tenth  of  the  voters  of  the 
State.  Blair  saw  in  the  action  of  the  Conditional 
Union  men  an  opportunity  to  greatly  increase  his 
own  following,  by  drawing  to  it  those  supporters  of 
Bell,  Douglas,  and  Breckinridge  who  were  unwilling 
to  vote  for  the  secession  of  Missouri,  even  if  the 
North  should  refuse  to  adopt  the  Crittenden  Com- 
promise. There  were  many  such  men  ;  but  they 
looked  upon  the  Republicans  as  the  cause  of  all  the 
troubles  in  which  the  country  was  involved,  and 
felt  an  unconquerable  repugnance  to  joining  that 
party.  They  were  Union  men,  but  they  would  not 
be  Republicans. 

Blair  determined  to  make  their  co-operation  with 
the  Republicans  easy,  by  organizing  both  as  the 
Unconditional  Union  party.     In  this  he  was  violently 


58  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

opposed  by  the  less  intelligent  of  the  Republicans, 
but,  with  the  support  of  Broadhead,  Glover,  Filley, 
and  How,  he  carried  his  point,  and  when  the  time 
for  selecting  candidates  for  the  Convention  came, 
the  call  for  the  meetings  which  were  to  choose 
members  of  the  nominating  conventions  was  ad- 
dressed to  " all  Unconditional  Union  men."  In 
these  meetings  a  great  many  anti-Republicans  took 
part,  and  united  in  the  selection  of  delegates  to  the 
nominating  conventions. 

When  the  St.  Louis  convention  met,  "  the  Irrec- 
oncilables  "  renewed  their  opposition  to  Blair's  wise 
course,  and  contended  that  no  one  should  be  nomi- 
nated as  a  candidate  for  the  State  Convention  who 
had  not  voted  for  Lincoln.  Blair  said  in  reply 
that  he  cared  little  to  what  party  men  had  be- 
longed. What  he  wanted  was  men  who  were  now, 
and  who  would  hereafter,  under  all  circumstances, 
and  in  every  emergency,  be  for  the  Union  ;  that 
he  himself  intended  to  stand  by  it  to  the  end ; 
to  oppose  in  every  way  the  secession  of  Missouri ; 
and  if  Missouri  should  secede,  to  still  try  to  hold  St. 
Louis  fast  to  the  Union,  and  that  he  desired  the 
help  of  every  man  who  was  resolved  to  do  likewise ; 
that  this  was  no  time  to  struggle  for  a  party  ;  but 
it  was  now  the  first  and  chief  duty  of  every  man 
to  struggle  for  the  Union.  His  counsels  prevailed, 
and    a    composite    ticket    was    nominated  —  seven 


The   People.  59 

Douglas  Democrats,  three  Union  men  who  had 
voted  for  Bell,  and  four  that  had  voted  for  Lincoln. 

The  canvass,  being  thus  opened,  was  conducted 
with  great  zeal,  and  in  the  midst  of  ever-increasing 
excitement,  for  during  its  progress  events  of  the 
gravest  importance  were  occurring  every  day  both 
within  and  without  the  State. 

Georgia  seceded  on  the  18th  of  January,  Louisi- 
ana on  the  26th,  and  Texas  on  the  1st  of  February; 
and  on  the  4th  of  February,  delegates  from  these 
three  States,  and  from  Florida,  Alabama,  Mississippi 
and  South  Carolina  met  in  Convention  at  Mont- 
gomery and  began  to  create  the  Government  of  the 
Confederate  States. 

Sane  men  had  long  foreseen  that  war  between  the 
North  and  the  South  was  inevitable  unless  some 
plan  of  conciliation  acceptable  to  both  sections  could 
be  devised  and  agreed  upon  before  the  4th  of  March, 
on  which  day  Lincoln  would  become  President,  with 
a  Republican  Congress  to  sustain  him  in  whatever 
measures  he  might  adopt  to  preserve  the  Union. 
The  scheme  which  had  met  with  the  most  favor  in  the 
border  slave-holding  States  was  that  these  should 
hold  a  convention  at  Nashville  on  the  4th  of  Feb- 
ruary to  formulate  the  conditions  upon  which  they 
would  themselves  remain  in  the  Union  and  try  to 
bring  the  seceded  States  back  into  it  ;  and  that  these 
conditions  should  then  be  submitted  to  a  Convention 


60  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

of  all  the  States,  to  meet  at  Wheeling  on  the  nth 
of  February. 

This  scheme  was  abandoned,  however,  in  favor  of 
a  proposition  made  by  Virginia.  The  General  As- 
sembly of  that  State  (January  19)  invited  all  the 
other  States  to  send  commissioners  to  a  convention 
which  was  to  meet  in  Washington  on  the  4th  of 
February,  in  order  "  to  consider,  and,  if  practicable, 
to  agree  upon  some  suitable  adjustment  "  of  the 
difficulties  between  the  slave-holding  and  the  non- 
slave-holding  States,  and  to  report  the  same  to  Con- 
gress. The  Legislature  at  the  same  time  sent 
ex-President  Tyler  to  Washington,  and  Judge  John 
Robertson  to  South  Carolina  to  procure  from  the 
United  States  Government  and  from  that  of  South 
Carolina  a  mutual  agreement  to  abstain,  pending 
the  deliberations  of  the  Convention,  from  the  doing 
of  any  act  which  would  produce  a  collision  of 
arms. 

South  Carolina  readily  acceded  to  this  request  of 
Virginia ;  but  the  President,  conceiving  that  he  had 
no  power  to  make  such  an  agreement,  submitted 
the  matter  to  Congress.  That  body  treated  it  with 
the  utmost  indifference.  Nevertheless,  all  the  bor- 
der slave-holding  States,  and  most  of  the  Northern 
States,  appointed  commissioners  to  the  convention. 
Missouri  sent  Alexander  W.  Doniphan,  Waldo  P. 
Johnson,  Harrison  Hough,  John  D.  Coalter,  and  A. 


The  People.  61 

H.  Buckner.  It  met  at  Washington  on  the  4th  of 
February. 

The  Conditional  Union  men  of  Missouri  made  the 
most  of  this  convention,  and  of  the  hopes  that  it 
held  out  to  those  who  were  in  favor  of  "peace  at 
any  price." 

James  S.  Rollins  used  his  persuasive  eloquence 
and  great  popularity  to  bring  the  wavering  to  the 
side  of  the  Union.  He  appealed  to  them  in  speeches 
and  in  letters  to  stand  by  it  as  long  as  there  was 
any  hope  of  preserving  it.  "  There  was  every  rea- 
son," he  said,  "  to  believe  that  the  Peace  Conven- 
tion would  bring  about  a  settlement,  and  even  if  it 
failed  to  do  this,  it  would  still  be  the  duty  of  the 
Border  States  to  stick  together  till  every  other  hope 
of  adjustment  had  failed."  To  win  their  confidence, 
and  hold  them  fast,  he  told  them  again  and  again 
that  whilst  he  was  himself  always  "  in  favor  of  the 
Union,  the  Constitution,  and  the  enforcement  of  the 
Laws,"  he  was  unalterably  opposed  to  the  doctrine 
of  coercion,  and  would  to  his  very  utmost  resist  the 
sending  of  Federal  troops  into  any  State  that  had 
seceded,  with  the  purpose  to  force  it  back  into  the 
Union.  He  was  the  more  willingly  listened  to  be- 
cause he  was  known  to  be  one  of  the  greatest  slave- 
holders in  Missouri,  and  had  always  been  faithful  to 
her  institutions. 

Listening  to  the  honied  words  of  Rollins  made 


62  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

those  who  heard  him  more  willing  to  listen  to  the 
stern  logic  of  a  man  of  stronger  intellect  and  more 
earnest  convictions  than  he — William  A.  Hall — one 
of  those  honest,  hard-headed,  plain-speaking  men 
whom  New  England  had  sent  to  Missouri.  He  told 
them  in  his  earnest,  sensible  way  that  the  question 
which  they  had  to  decide  was  "  not  one  of  senti- 
ment, but  of  sense.  We  hold  our  power,"  said  he,  "  as 
a  trust  for  others.  We  hold  it  for  the  benefit  of  our 
wives  and  our  children ;  for  the  protection  of  the 
aged,  the  infirm,  and  the  helpless.  We  have  no  right 
to  consult  our  feelings  when  the  interests  of  others 
are  in  our  keeping,  and  when  their  happiness  is  de- 
pendent on  our  action.     .     .     . 

"  What  are  we  to  gain  by  dissolving  the  Union  ? 
The  Fugitive  Slave  Law  is  a  law  of  the  United 
States.  To  destroy  the  Union  is  to  annul  the  Fugi- 
tive Slave  Law,  bring  Canada  to  our  borders,  and 
make  our  slave  property  valueless.  But  this  is  not 
the  worst  of  it.  While  sacrificing  our  property  by 
an  attempt  to  save  it,  we  will  bring  upon  ourselves 
war,  which,  if  it  come,  will  destroy  all  our  property 
and  expose  us  and  our  families  to  miseries  such  as, 
happily,  we  have  never  known,  but  of  which  the 
pages  of  history  are  full.  .  .  .  The  geographical 
position  of  Missouri  makes  her  essential  to  the 
North,  and  even  if  the  North  should  consent  to  the 
secession  of  every  other  slave-holding  State,  it  will 


The  People.  63 

never  consent  to  the  secession  of  Missouri.  She  lies 
in  its  pathway  to  the  West.  She  commands  the 
navigation  of  the  Missouri  and  all  its  tributaries,  of 
the  Upper  Mississippi,  the  Illinois,  the  Ohio,  the 
Tennessee,  and  the  Cumberland.  .  .  .  Never  will 
the  North  and  the  North-west  permit  the  naviga- 
tion of  these  great  rivers  to  be  controlled  by  a  pow- 
erful foreign  nation,  for  their  free  navigation  is 
essential  to  the  prosperity  of  those  regions.  They 
might  let  the  mouths  of  the  Mississippi  be  held  by 
a  weak  Confederacy  of  Cotton  States,  but  never  by  a 
powerful  people  of  which  Missouri  would  form 
part. 

"  Our  feelings  and  our  sympathies  strongly  in- 
cline us  to  go  with  the  South  in  the  event  of  a  sep- 
aration ;  but  passion  and  feeling  are  temporary,  in- 
terest is  permanent.  The  influence  of  geographical 
position  will  continue  so  long  as  the  face  of  the 
Earth  remains  as  it  is,  and  the  position  of  Missouri 
and  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi  will  be  great 
and  important  interests  long  ages  after  the  feelings 
and  passions  which  now  dominate  the  country  shall 
have  passed  away  and  been  forgotten." 

The  Conditional  Union  men  had  already  lowered 
their  tone.  They  no  longer  threatened  war  against 
the  United  States  if  the  Government  should  refuse 
to  protect  slavery,  or  even  if  it  should  dare  to  lead 
its  armies  into  the  seceding  States  in  order  to  co- 


64  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

erce  them  into  obedience  to  the  laws  of  the  Union. 
Their  entreaties  grew  stronger  every  day ;  their 
threats  grew  weaker.  Many  of  them — most  of  the 
rich  land  owners,  and  of  the  great  slave-holders — 
were  fast  learning  the  duty  of  submission.  It  is  an 
old  saying  that  "  Nothing  is  so  timid  as  wealth." 
The  war  demonstrated  that  of  all  wealth,  property 
in  slaves  was  the  most  timid  and  the  most  cow- 
ardly. Nor  was  it  only  the  rich  Union  man  who  now 
began  to  cower  in  the  horrid  presence  of  war ;  but 
many  a  blatant  Secessionist,  who  owned  neither 
land  nor  negroes,  many  a  one  who  had  for  years 
been  stirring  up  strife  between  the  North  and 
South,  and  boasting  that  "  One  southern  man  could 
whip  half  a  dozen  Yankees,"  now  saw  that  to  stand 
in  the  way  of  those  "  Yankees  "  meant  danger  to  the 
limbs  and  to  the  life  of  him  who  should  be  brave 
enough  to  dare  to  do  it ;  and  they  put  up  their  bowie- 
knives  and  bridled  their  tongues  till  the  war  was 
ended,  and  they  could  again  safely  loosen  the  one 
and  brandish  the  other. 

The  changed  tone  of  the  Conditional  Union 
party,  and  its  ever-increasing  tendency  toward  sub- 
mission, kept  within  its  ranks  thousands  of  voters 
who  would  otherwise  have  gone  over  to  the  Uncon- 
ditional Union  men.  Blair  saw  this,  but  it  did  not 
disturb  him,  for  he  knew  that  sooner  or  later  they 
would  come  to  him.     He  went  on  busily  organizing 


The  People,  65 

and  consolidating  his  forces,  preparing  systemati- 
cally, earnestly,  and  intelligently  for  war,  and  doing 
everything  that  a  statesman  and  soldier  could  do  to 
hold  Missouri  loyal  to  the  Union,  which  he  believed 
to  be  the  source  of  all  her  prosperity. 

The  Germans  were  the  nucleus  of  his  power. 
They  were — every  one — unconditionally  for  the 
Union.  Knowing  nothing  of  the  peculiar  relations 
of  the  States  to  the  Federal  Government,  nothing 
of  the  circumstances  of  its  formation,  nothing 
about  the  Constitution,  they  could  not  comprehend 
that  South  Carolina  had  any  more  right  to  secede 
from  the  Union  than  St.  Louis  had  to  secede  from 
Missouri.  Knowing  nothing  of  the  causes  which 
endeared  Virginia  to  her  sons ;  feeling  none  of  that 
State  pride  which  a  New  Englander  or  a  South 
Carolinian  felt ;  owing  his  own  citizenship  to  the 
United  States  and  not  to  any  State,  he  could  not 
comprehend  that  to  a  Virginian  loyalty  and  patriot- 
ism meant  devotion  to  Virginia,  and  not  to  the 
Union.  Hating  slavery,  he  was  anxious  to  destroy 
it  rather  than  to  protect  it ;  and  having  neither 
kindred  nor  friends  in  the  South,  he  could  not  sym- 
pathize with  its  people  in  their  unequal  contest 
with  the  Union,  nor  feel  that  it  was  his  duty  to 
stand  by  them  in  the  hour  of  danger. 

During  the  Presidential  election  they  had  been 
organized  as  Wide-Awakes.  Blair  had  since  been 
5 


66  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

converting  them  into  semi-military  companies  of 
Home  Guards.  He  now  redoubled  his  exertions  in 
this  direction,  drilled  and  disciplined  the  men,  and 
armed  them  as  fast  as  his  means  permitted.  In  ob- 
taining funds  for  this  purpose  he  was  greatly  helped 
by  Isaac  Sherman  of  New  York,  and  other  Eastern 
men.  These  companies  had,  before  the  day  of 
election  (February  18),  become  so  numerous  and 
arrogant  as  to  arouse  the  fear  that  they  might,  by 
interfering  with  the  election,  provoke  a  riot  that 
day.  Governor  Jackson  was  appealed  to  by  many 
prominent  citizens  for  protection.  Having  no  au- 
thority to  call  out  the  militia  during  the  session  of 
the  General  Assembly,  he  submitted  the  matter  to 
that  body.  The  Senate  at  once,  by  a  vote  of  18 
to  4,  authorized  him  to  call  out  the  militia,  but  the 
proposition  was  vigorously  opposed  in  the  House 
by  John  D.  Stevenson,  the  leader  there  of  the  Un- 
conditional Union  men,  himself  a  Virginian,  and  it 
was,  despite  the  fervid  appeals  of  Vest,  defeated. 

The  election  passed  off  quietly.  Not  a  single 
avowed  Secessionist  was  chosen.  In  St.  Louis  the 
Unconditional  Union  candidates  were  elected  by 
over  5,000  majority,  and  the  State  declared  against 
secession  by  a  majority  of  80,000. 

The  result  was  a  surprise  to  every  one,  and  a  bit- 
ter disappointment  to  the  South. 

The  immediate  and  all-important  effect  which  the 


The  People.  67 

election  had  upon  the  course  of  affairs  in  Missouri, 
was  the  overthrow  of  the  Secession  majority  in  the 
House  of  Representatives,  and  the  consequent  de- 
feat of  all  measures  for  organizing,  arming,  and 
equipping  the  militia,  and  for  getting  the  State 
ready  for  war.  Bills  having  those  objects  in  view 
had  been  reported  to  both  Houses  early  in  Febru- 
ary, and  were  under  discussion  on  the  day  that  the 
election  took  place.  When  they  were  taken  up  the 
next  day,  Senators  and  Representatives,  who  had 
up  to  that  time  been  clamorous  for  arming  the 
State,  announced  that  they  interpreted  the  late 
vote  as  declaring  that  the  people  of  Missouri  were 
overwhelmingly  opposed  to  the  enactment  of  any 
warlike  measures,  and  that  consequently  they  would 
themselves  vote  against  these  bills. 

It  was  in  vain  that  the  Governor  and  his  adherents 
urged  that  war  was  inevitable,  and  that  the  first  duty 
of  the  General  Assembly  to  the  people  of  the  State 
was  to  prepare  her  for  it ;  that  if  they  were  them- 
selves willing  to  falsify  their  repeated  pledge  to  re- 
sist the  coercion  of  the  seceding  States,  they  should 
at  least  arm  the  State  for  her  own  defence,  for  the 
maintenance  of  peace  within  her  own  borders,  and 
for  the  safety  of  her  own  people ;  in  vain  it  was  that 
Churchill,  and  Parsons,  and  Rains  in  the  Senate,  and 
Vest,  Freeman,  and  Claiborne  in  the  House,  taunted 
them  with  cowardly  "  submission  to  a  Black  Repub- 


68  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

lican  potentate;"  in  vain  that  Harris,  still  a  Union 
man,  begged  them  to  at  least  discuss  his  carefully 
prepared  bill,  so  as  to  understand  its  provisions  and 
to  see  that  it  contained  nothing  for  which  the  most 
loyal  of  Union  men  ought  not  to  vote — nothing 
could  overcome  the  terror  that  had  taken  posses- 
sion of  their  souls.  Panic-stricken,  they  sought 
safety  in  the  ranks  of  the  Submissionists,  and 
turned  Missouri  over,  unarmed  and  defenceless,  to 
Frank  Blair  and  his  Home  Guards. 

In  spite  of  all  this,  Governor  Jackson  maintained 
the  same  bold  attitude  which  he  had  taken  on  the 
day  of  his  inauguration,  and  was  sustained  in  it  by 
Parsons  and  a  majority  of  the  Senators,  and  by 
Vest  and  nearly  one-half  of  the  Representatives. 
They  could  do  nothing,  but  they  lost  no  opportunity 
to  revive  the  courage  of  their  followers,  and  to  hold 
them  in  readiness  for  the  conflict  that  was  sure  to 
begin  sooner  or  later. 

The  convention  met  at  Jefferson  City  on  the  28th 
of  February. 

The  next  day  (March  1st)  an  opportunity  was 
offered  to  the  Secessionists  to  make  a  demonstra- 
tion, and  they  took  advantage  of  it.  The  State  of 
Georgia  had  sent  a  commissioner — Luther  J.  Glenn 
— to  Missouri  to  ask  her  to  secede  and  become  one 
of  the  Confederate  States.  Arriving  at  Jefferson 
City  on  the  1st  of  March,  he  presented  his  creden- 


The  People.  69 

tials  to  the  Governor  the  same  afternoon.  The  city 
was  crowded  with  Unionists,  all  of  them  exulting 
over  their  great  victory  at  the  polls  and  the  meet- 
ing of  a  Convention  to  which  not  a  single  Secession- 
ist had  been  elected.  Nearly  every  distinguished 
Union  man  in  the  State  was  there,  either  as  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Convention  or  to  witness  its  delibera- 
tions, and  to  hold  the  vacillating  firm  in  their 
loyalty  to  the  Union.  To  all  appearance,  Missouri 
was  about  to  commit  herself  irrevocably  to  the 
maintenance  of  the  Union,  and  to  assume  a  position 
which  would  eventually  force  her  to  make  war  upon 
the  Southern  people.  Had  Governor  Jackson  now 
wavered  in  his  devotion  to  the  South,  had  he  in  that 
hour  of  great  trial  proved  recreant  to  the  principles 
which  had  always  controlled  his  actions,  that  posi- 
tion would  have  been  surely  taken.  But,  with  a 
courage  as  great  as  was  ever  shown  upon  any  battle- 
field, Jackson  raised  aloft  the  banner  of  the  State, 
and  called  upon  the  Southern  men  of  Missouri  to 
rally  under  its  folds,  fearless  of  the  gathering  forces 
of  those  who  were  rebelling  against  her,  and  careless 
of  the  deserters  that  were  flocking  to  their  camp. 

The  Secessionists  determined  to  serenade  the 
Commissioner  from  Georgia.  When  he  stepped 
upon  the  balcony  to  thank  them  for  their  sym- 
pathy, the  Governor  of  the  State  stood  beside  him, 
and   presented    him    to    the    people    in    a   defiant 


jo  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

speech,  in  which  he  reiterated  that  the  honor  and 
the  interests  of  Missouri  both  required  her  to  stand 
firmly  with  the  Confederate  States  "  in  resistance  to 
the  abolitionized  North,"  and  to  instantly  secede  and 
entei  the  Confederacy  if  Lincoln  should  undertake, 
as  he  surely  would,  to  make  war  upon  the  South. 

The  next  day,  Saturday,  March  the  2d,  the  Gov- 
ernor notified  the  General  Assembly  that  the  commis- 
sioner desired  to  confer  with  that  body  upon  the  sub- 
ject of  his  mission.  Some  opposition  being  made  in 
the  House  to  the  adoption  of  a  resolution  which  the 
Senate  had  passed  inviting  him  to  address  both 
Houses  that  evening  in  joint  session,  Harris  and  Vest 
supported  the  resolution  warmly.     The  latter  said : 

"  I  stand  here  to-day,  come  weal,  come  woe,  sink 
or  swim,  survive  or  perish,  to  cast  my  political  for- 
tunes for  all  time,  to  give  all  that  I  have,  and  all  that 
I  am,  to  that  people  which  is  mine  by  lineage,  by 
birth,  and  by  institutions — the  people  of  the  South; 
and  should  the  time  come  for  battle,  for  storm,  or 
for  wreck,  I  will  be  with  that  Southern  people. 
Coerce  them  back?  Representatives  of  Missouri! 
let  me  tell  you  now,  sneer  at  them  as  you  may !  let 
me  tell  you  now,  that  the  God  who  protected  our 
forefathers,  will  protect  that  Southern  people. 

"  Thrice  have  we  to  Clan  Alpine  come  in  friendship's  guise, 
When  next  we  come  'twill  be  with  banner,  brand  and  bow, 
As  clansman  meets  his  mortal  foe." 


The  People.  71 

"  Sirs !  we  have  appealed  to  the  North,  begged  it, 
and  besought  it.  We  might  as  well  have  prayed  to 
the  winds.  You  talk  of  peace.  There  is  no  peace. 
The  Republican  party  must  cease  its  eternal  and 
everlasting  warfare  upon  our  property,  or  in  the  red 
glare  of  battle,  and  in  the  shock  of  contending 
armies,  we  will  appeal  to  the  God  of  Battles,  and 
ask  Him  to  protect  us. 

"  I  say  here  to-day  in  face  of  a  dominant  majority 
of  80,000  Submissionists,  I  say  to  you  and  I  say  to 
these  Submissionists,  that  if  they  intend  to  justify 
the  coercion  of  the  seceded  States,  I  shall  myself 
be  in  favor  of  the  instant  separation  of  Missouri 
from  the  North,  and  will  stake  my  life  on  the  result. 

"We,  who  live  on  the  broad  prairies  of  Missouri, 
with  but  few  slaves  around  us,  cannot  appreciate  the 
dangers  that  environ  the  men  of  the  South,  their 
wives  and  their  children ;  the  horrors  of  a  servile 
insurrection ;  their  fear,  and  their  hatred  of  a  party 
which  has  elected  to  power  a  man  who  declares 
that  slavery  must  be  confined  to  the  slave  States, 
so  that  it  may,  like  a  scorpion,  sting  itself  to  death. 
How?  In  the  blood  and  carnage  of  African  lust 
and  African  rage.  And  yet  we  are  told  that  these 
people  must  stand  still  and  allow  all  these  terrors  to 
be  brought  upon  them !  .  .  .  I  would  rather — 
a  hundred  times  rather — settle  this  question  now, 
upon  the  battle-field.     If  I  were  a  citizen  of  one  of 


j  2  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

those  Southern  States,  I  would  do  as  they  have 
done,  and  as  a  Missourian,  I  am  willing  and  ready- 
to  follow  Old  Virginia,  wherever  she  may  lead,  and 
no  one  can  doubt  that  she  will  go  with  the  South." 
The  resolution  was  adopted,  and  that  evening  the 
Commissioner  for  Georgia  addressed  the  General 
Assembly,  explaining  the  causes  which  had  im- 
pelled Georgia  to  secede,  and  urging  Missouri  to 
unite  with  her  and  the  other  slave-holding  States  in 
the  formation  of  a  Southern  Confederacy. 

While  matters  were  thus  drifting  towards  civil 
strife  in  Missouri,  the  only  State  in  which  the  con- 
test did,  during  the  first  year  or  two,  or  at  any  time, 
assume  that  character,  the  North  and  the  South 
were  both  getting  ready  for  war. 

Jefferson  Davis  had  been  inaugurated  President 
of  the  Confederate  States  on  the  18th  of  February; 
measures  to  organize  an  army  were  adopted  on  the 
28th  of  February,  and  provision  was  made  for  the 
transfer  to  the  Confederate  Government  of  the 
troops  that  had  been  raised  by  the  several  States, 
for  their  own  defence.  South  Carolina  had  already 
occupied  all  the  forts  in  Charleston  Harbor,  except 
Sumter,  and  was  erecting  powerful  batteries  to 
command  and  reduce  that  fortress  when  the  time 
should  come,  and  was  enlisting,  organizing  and  drill- 
ing men  in  every  county  and  in  every  neighborhood. 
General     McCulloch    had,  with    an    overwhelming 


The  People.  73 

force,  surrounded  the  United  States  troops  at  San 
Antonio,  and  by  authority  of  the  State  of  Texas 
compelled  General  Twiggs,  the  commander  of  the 
United   States  forces   in  that  department,  to   sur- 
render to  the  State  all  the  United  States  property 
within  her  limits,  and  to  agree  to  withdraw  every 
Federal   soldier   from    her   territory.     Georgia  had 
called  her  militia  into  active  service  under  the  com- 
mand   of    those    veterans,    Twiggs,     Hardee    and 
Walker.     Bragg   and    Beauregard   were    mustering 
an  army  in  Louisiana,  and   the  streets  of  New  Or- 
leans were    crowded  with    enthusiastic   volunteers. 
Van  Dorn  had  succeeded  Jefferson  Davis  in  com- 
mand of  the  army  that  Mississippi  was  raising,  and 
its  ranks  were  rapidly  swelling.     Florida  had  been 
in  arms  since  the  beginning  of  the  year,  and  was 
still  strengthening  her  forces  in  all  directions,  while 
throughout    Alabama    there    was    not    a    Federal 
soldier,  and  everywhere  the  enlistment  of  volunteers 
was  hurrying.     Even  Arkansas  had  risen  in  over- 
whelming  force,  and  driving  Captain  Totten   and 
his  command  out  of  the   State,  had  taken  posses- 
sion of  the  United  States  Arsenal  at  Little  Rock. 
The  Northern  States  were  no  less  active.     Massa- 
chusetts  had    already   tendered    to    the    President 
twenty-six  regiments  for  the  defence  of   the  capi- 
tal, and  nearly  every  other   loyal  State   was  emu- 
lating her  example.     Even  Congress  had  begun  to 


74  The   Fight  for   Missouri. 

discuss  the  employment  of  force  in  order  to  compel 
the  seceding  States  to  restore  the  property  which 
they  had  captured  and  to  obey  the  laws  of  the 
United  States. 

And  most  important  of  all,  the  whole  power  of 
the  Government  of  the  United  States,  its  army 
and  navy,  together  with  its  treasury  and  all  its 
great  resources,  had  passed  out  of  the  unwilling 
hands  of  Buchanan,  into  the  firm  grasp  of  Abraham 
Lincoln  ;  out  of  the  control  of  the  South  and  its 
Northern  friends  into  that  of  the  anti-slavery  North, 
and  was  thenceforth  to  be  wielded  for  the  preser- 
vation of  the  Union  and  the  enforcement  of  its  laws 
and  the  conquest  of  all  its  enemies. 

Encouraged  by  the  brave  attitude  of  Jackson, 
and  incited  by  the  preparations  for  war  that  were 
making  all  around  them,  the  Southern  Rights' 
members  of  the  Missouri  Legislature  made  a  su- 
preme effort  to  pass  the  bill  for  arming  the  State. 
It  was  taken  up  on  the  5th  of  March. 

L.  M.  Lawson,  of  Platte,  the  youngest  member  of 
the  House,  and  a  native  of  the  State,  spoke  against 
the  bill.  It  was  unnecessary,  he  said,  because  no 
one  was  proposing  to  attack  Missouri,  or  to  assail 
her  honor,  or  to  do  any  injury  to  the  persons  or 
property  of  her  people ;  it  was  oppressive,  because 
it  would  burden  the  State  with  enormous  taxation 


The   People.  75 

at  a  time  when  the  troubled  condition  of  the  coun- 
try and  the  fear  of  war  was  bankrupting  every  one ; 
it  was  dangerous,  because  it  would  place  in  the 
hands  of  the  Governor  the  power  and  the  means  to 
involve  the  State  in  war  and  to  bring  upon  her  in- 
habitants the  unspeakable  horrors  of  fratricidal  strife. 
Missouri  had  no  cause  to  secede  from  the  Union,  no 
ground  upon  which  to  arm  herself  against  the  Fed- 
eral Government ;  no  reason  to  apprehend  war  un- 
less she  should,  by  her  own  folly,  bring  it  upon  her- 
self and  her  people.  Let  her  be  loyal  to  the  Union, 
and  the  Union  would  still  protect  her,  as  it  had  al- 
ways done. 

Conrow,  replying  to  Lawson,  said  that  Lincoln's 
inaugural  had  removed  from  his  mind  the  last  hope 
for  the  safety  of  the  Union.  If  he  carried  out  his 
threat  to  coerce  the  South  into  obedience  to  the 
laws  of  the  Federal  Government,  the  country  would 
soon  blaze  with  the  flames  of  civil  war.  Missouri 
would  not  submit  to  Lincoln's  domination.  If  she 
did,  he  would  never  again  call  himself  a  Missou- 
rian. 

N.  C.  Claiborne  said :  "  The  gentleman  from  Platte 
(Lawson)  thinks  that  we  are  appealing  to  the  fears 
of  members.  There  are  times  when  the  brave  fear. 
The  universal  gloom,  which  hangs  like  mourning 
drapery  around  our  once  happy  country,  deepened 
by  Lincoln's  inaugural,  which  plainly  sets  forth  the 


j6  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

plan  of  coercion,  will  cause  every  patriot  heart  to 
quail  with  fear.  His  determination  to  hold,  occupy, 
and  possess  the  Southern  forts  strangles  the  hopes 
of  all  those  who  have  prayed  for  the  preservation 
and  reconstruction  of  the  Union.  He  means  war. 
Long  before  the  echo  of  the  first  cannon  fired  by 
his  minions  against  a  Southern  city  shall  have  died 
away,  those  who  have  been  seeking  to  compromise 
our  difficulties  on  just  and  honorable  terms,  will 
have  buckled  on  their  armor  and  planted  themselves 
upon  the  ramparts  of  the  Constitution,  in  defence 
of  Southern  rights.  ...  It  has  been  said  that 
Missouri  will  submit,  that  her  Convention  will  sub- 
mit. He  who  says  so  slanders  the  members  of  that 
Convention,  and  outrages  the  people  of  Missouri. 
Tell  me  not  that  this  State  will  tolerate  the  odious 
doctrine  of  coercion.  Never,  NEVER  will  she  toler- 
ate it.  Seventeen  thousand  Republicans,  nine- 
tenths  of  them  foreigners  living  in  the  city  of  St. 
Louis,  cannot  warp  the  judgment  of  150,000  free- 
men and  control  the  destinies  of  this  State.  The 
thing  is  absurd.  Missouri  will  share  the  destinies 
of  the  South.  For  my  own  part,  I  will  never  aban- 
don the  home  of  my  adoption,  I  will  remain  upon 
the  western  border  of  Missouri,  and  will  battle  there 
for  her  honor  and  her  rights." 

Harris  again  urged  the  House  to  pass  the  bill.    It 
was  no  longer  a  question  of  policy,  but  of  duty,  and 


The  People.  JJ 

a  necessity  to  put  the  State  in  condition  to  protect 
her  people  and  their  possessions ;  and  to  secure  to 
her  that  influence  among  the  other  States  to  which 
she  was  entitled  by  reason  of  her  greatness  and  her 
position,  so  that  she  might  use  this  influence  to 
stay  the  hand  of  violence  and  war,  and  to  preserve 
the  peace  and  maintain  the  Union.  "If  she  failed 
to  do  this,  humiliating  disaster  and  dire  ruin  would 
come  upon  her,  and  she  ought  therefore  to  set 
about  it  at  once."  His  anxiety  was  not  inspired, 
he  said,  "  by  sympathy  with  the  seceded  States. 
They  had  withdrawn  from  the  Union  without  ade- 
quate preparation  to  maintain  their  independence, 
and  in  doing  this  had  shown  more  temper  than 
statesmanship.  What  he  desired  was  not  so  much 
to  defend  them  against  the  consequences  of  their 
own  rashness  and  folly  as  to  maintain  the  dignity 
of  Missouri,  and  to  protect  the  persons  and  prop- 
erty of  her  citizens." 

The  House  refused  to  pass  the  bill.  In  this  the 
South  sustained  a  defeat  more  disastrous  to  its 
independence  than  any  which  thereafter  befell  its 
arms,  down  to  the  fall  of  Vicksburg. 


CHAPTER    IV. 

THE   CONVENTION. 

The  State  Convention — Gamble's  Report  and  Resolutions — Amend- 
ments Proposed — Debates — William  A.  Hall — John  B.  Hender- 
son— Prince  L.  Hudgins — John  T.  Redd — James  O.  Broadhead — 
Adoption  of  the  Report  and  Resolutions — The  General  Assembly 
— Election  of  a  United  States  Senator — Defeat  of  James  S.  Green 
— Blaine's  Opinion  of  Him — The  Metropolitan  Police  Bill — Vest's 
Adverse  Report  on  the  Action  of  the  Convention — His  Speech — 
The  Legislature  Rejects  the  Recommendations  of  the  Convention 
and  Adjourns — The  Revival  of  Secessionism — Defeat  of  the  Co- 
ercionists  in  St.  Louis — Election  of  a  Conservative  Mayor. 

The  State  Convention  met  at  Jefferson  City  on 
the  last  day  of  February.  Ex-Governor  Sterling 
Price,  a  Union  man,  was  chosen  President,  receiving 
the  votes  of  seventy-five  Union  men,  while  the  votes 
of  fifteen  Southern  Rights'  men  were  given  to 
Nathaniel  W.  Watkins,  a  half-brother  of  Henry 
Clay.  As  soon  as  the  Convention  completed  its 
organization  it  adjourned  its  session  to  St.  Louis, 
whose  loyal  atmosphere  it  preferred  to  that  of  the 
capital. 

Of  its  ninety-nine  members  fifty-three  were  na- 
tives of  either  Virginia  or  Kentucky  ;  and  all  but 
seventeen  had  been  born  in  the  slave-holding  States. 


The   Convention.  79 

Only  thirteen  were  natives  of  the  North.  Three 
were  Germans,  and  there  was  one  Irishman.  The 
President  of  the  Convention,  the  Chairman  of  the 
Committee  on  Federal  Relations  Judge  Gamble,  the 
leader  of  the  Unconditional  Union  men  on  the  floor 
James  O.  Broadhead,  and  the  most  conspicuous  op- 
ponent of  Secession  John  B.  Henderson,  were  all 
Virginians. 

The  Convention  reassembled  at  St.  Louis  on  the 
4th  of  March,  the  day  of  Lincoln's  inauguration, 
and  went  straight  to  work.  On  the  9th  the  Com- 
mittee on  Federal  Relations  made  a  long  report 
through  its  chairman,  Judge  Gamble.  In  this  re- 
port, after  reviewing  the  condition  of  the  country, 
they  said : 

"To  involve  Missouri  in  revolution,  under  the 
present  circumstances,  is  certainly  not  demanded  by 
the  magnitude  of  the  grievances  of  which  we  com- 
plain ;  nor  by  the  certainty  that  they  cannot  be 
otherwise  and  more  peacefully  remedied,  nor  by  the 
hope  that  they  would  be  remedied,  or  even  dimin- 
ished by  such  revolution. 

"  The  position  of  Missouri  in  relation  to  the  ad- 
jacent States,  which  would  continue  in  the  Union, 
would  necessarily  expose  her,  if  she  became  a  mem- 
ber of  a  new  Confederacy,  to  utter  destruction 
whenever  any  rupture  might  take  place  between 
the  different  republics.     In  a  military  aspect  seces- 


80  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

sion  and  connection  with  a  Southern  Confederacy- 
is  annihilation  for  Missouri. 

"The  true  position  for  Missouri  to  assume  is  that 
of  a  State  whose  interests  are  bound  up  in  the  main- 
tenance of  the  Union,  and  whose  kind  feelings  and 
strong  sympathies  are  with  the  people  of  the 
Southern  States,  with  whom  we  are  connected  by 
the  ties  of  friendship  and  blood.  .  .  .  To  go 
with  those  States — to  leave  the  government  our 
fathers  builded — to  blot  out  the  star  of  Missouri 
from  the  constellation  of  the  Union  is  to  ruin  our- 
selves without  doing  them  any  good.  We  cannot 
follow  them,  we  cannot  give  up  the  Union,  but  we 
will  do  all  in  our  power  to  induce  them  to  again  take 
their  places  with  us  in  the  family  from  which  they 
have  attempted  to  separate  themselves.  For  this 
purpose  we  will  not  only  recommend  a  compromise 
with  which  they  ought  to  be  satisfied,  but  we  will 
endeavor  to  procure  an  assemblage  of  the  whole 
family  of  States  in  order  that  in  a  General  Conven- 
tion such  amendments  to  the  Constitution  may  be 
agreed  upon  as  shall  permanently  restore  harmony 
to  the  whole  nation." 

The  committee  also  submitted  to  the  Conven- 
tion resolutions  conformable  to  these  opinions,  and 
which  in  substance  were, 

I.  That  there  was  no  adequate  cause  for  the  with- 
drawal of  Missouri  from  the  Union. 


The    Convention.  8 1 

2.  That  believing  that  the  seceded  States  would 
return  to  the  Union  if  the  Crittenden  Proposition 
were  adopted,  the  Convention  would  request  the 
General  Assembly  to  call  a  Convention  of  all  the 
States  to  consider  that  proposition. 

3.  That  they  would  entreat  the  Federal  Gov- 
ernment not  to  employ  force  against  the  seceding 
States,  and  the  latter  not  to  assail  the  Government, 
while  this  proposition  was  under  consideration. 

Mr.  Bast  moved  that  the  Convention  should 
further  declare  that  if  the  Northern  States  should 
refuse  to  assent  to  the  Crittenden  Compromise,  and 
the  other  border  slave  States  should  thereupon  se- 
cede, Missouri  would  not  then  hesitate  to  take  a  firm 
and  decided  stand  in  favor  of  her  sister  States  of  the 
South. 

For  this  proposition  only  twenty-three  members 
voted.  Among  them  were  Sterling  Price,  Robert 
A.  Hatcher,  Harrison  Hough,  Prince  L.  Hudgins, 
John  T.  Redd,  and  Nathaniel  W.  Watkins.  Among 
the  seventy  who  voted  against  it  were  General 
Doniphan,  Judge  Gamble,  James  H.  Moss,  William 
A.  Hall,  John  B.  Henderson,  and  James  O.  Broad- 
head. 

While  Mr.  Moss,  who  was,  by  the  way,  a  man  of 

ability  and  character,  would  not  vote  to  declare  that 

Missouri  would,  under  any  circumstances,  secede,  he 

was   opposed  to   coercion,  and  therefore  offered  a 

6 


82  The   Fight  for   Missouri. 

resolution  declaring  that  Missouri  would  "  never 
furnish  men  or  money  for  the  purpose  of  aiding  the 
General  Government  in  any  attempts  to  coerce  a 
seceding  State." 

In  advocating  this  resolution  he  said : 
"  I  submit  to  every  man  of  common  sense  in  this 
Assembly  to  tell  me  whether  Missouri  will  ever  fur- 
nish a  regiment  to  invade  a  Southern  State  for  the 
purpose  of  coercion.  Never  !  Never  !  And,  gentle- 
men !  Missouri  expects  this  Convention  to  say  so. 
.  .  .  I  believe  it  to  be  the  duty  of  Missouri  to 
stand  by  the  gallant  men  of  southern  Illinois,  who 
have  declared  that  they  will  never  suffer  a  Northern 
army  to  pass  the  southern  boundary  of  Illinois  for 
the  purpose  of  invading  a  Southern  State." 

To  this  William  A.  Hall  replied  with  unanswer- 
able argument  that  if  Missouri  remained  in  the 
Union  it  would  be  her  duty  to  furnish  both  men  and 
money  to  the  General  Government  when  properly 
called  upon  for  them,  whether  to  coerce  a  State  into 
submission,  or  for  any  other  purpose.  To  say  that 
she  would  not  do  this,  would  be  an  idle  threat  at 
best,  and  a  mischievous  one.  Threats  on  the  part 
of  Northern  men  or  communities  might  have  a  good 
effect  by  showing  the  willingness  of  some  men  at  the 
North  to  be  just  to  the  South.  But  such  threats 
coming  from  a  Southern  State  would  only  encour- 
age the  seceding  States  and  enrage  the  North. 


The    Convention.  83 

The  Convention  voted  down  the  proposition  of 
Mr.  Moss  ;  and  "  the  pitiless  logic  of  facts  "  forced 
him  afterwards  to  raise  and  command  a  regiment 
for  the  subjugation  of  the  South  ! 

While  acting  consistently  with  their  new-born  de- 
termination to  stand  by  the  Union,  the  Conditional 
Union  men  still  talked  as  they  had  been  wont  to 
talk  when  they  were  soliciting  the  votes  of  the 
Southern  people  of  Missouri.  Even  John  B.  Hen- 
derson, daring  and  reckless  as  he  had  become  in  his 
newly  awakened  zeal  and  loyalty,  opposed  Moss's 
resolution  only  because  it  was  useless. 

"  Does  any  man  suppose,"  said  he,  "  that  the 
President  of  the  United  States  will  so  far  disre- 
gard his  duties  under  the  Constitution,  or  forget 
the  obligation  of  his  oath,  as  to  undertake  the  subju- 
gation of  the  Southern  States  by  force  ?  Will  the 
abstract  principle  of  the  enforcement  of  the  laws 
ever  be  carried  by  the  President  to  the  extent  of 
military  subjugation?  If  so,  this  Government  is  at 
an  end.  Will  you  tell  me  that  Mr.  Lincoln  will  send 
Don  Quixotes  into  the  Southern  States  with  military 
force  to  subjugate  those  States?  Certainly  not. 
.  .  .  He  who  dreams  that  this  Government  was 
made  or  intended  to  subjugate  any  one  of  the  States 
dreams  certainly  against  the  spirit,  against  the  in- 
tent, and  against  the  whole  scope  of  our  institutions. 
.     .     .     The  President  has  no  more  power  to   use 


84  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

force  than  you  or  I.  Why,  then,  should  Missouri 
declare  that  she  will  under  no  circumstances  lend 
means  or  money  to  the  enforcement  of  the  laws  by 
the  Federal  Government  ?  " 

There  were  a  few  who  still  dared  to  speak  as 
Southern  men  in  a  Missouri  Convention,  and  to  ex- 
press in  the  presence  of  Blair's  Home  Guards  and  of 
United  States  troops  and  in  the  centre  of  the  loyal 
city  of  St.  Louis,  the  opinions  which  they  had  ex- 
pressed during  the  canvass  to  their  Southern-born 
constituents.  Among  these  were  Prince  L.  Hudgins 
and  John  T.  Redd.  The  former,  in  the  course  of  an 
able  and  impassioned  argument  in  support  of  Moss' 
proposition,  said : 

"  I  do  not  believe  that  a  State  has  a  constitutional 
right  to  secede  ;  but  seven  States  claim  to  have  se- 
ceded, and  I,  for  one,  am  anxious  to  bring  them 
back.  You  cannot  do  this  by  threats,tnor  by  force, 
nor  by  abuse.  They  have  done  what  they  thought 
best  for  themselves,  for  their  children,  and  for  their 
children's  children.  They  have  done  it  deliberately 
and  after  great  consideration.  ...  If  Missouri 
wishes  to  bring  them  back,  she  must  remember  that 
they  are  our  brethren ;  that  they  must  be  treated 
not  as  traitors,  but  as  patriots;  and  that  they  can 
only  be  brought  back  upon  fair  and  honorable 
terms.  .  .  .  The  Federal  Government  has  no 
right    to    force    them  back;   and    if    it    had   such   a 


The    Convention.  85 

right,  this  Convention  should  say  that  it  ought  not 
to  be,  and  in  the  language  of  Virginia  and  Ken- 
tucky, must  not  be,  used.  It  has  been  settled  be- 
yond the  power  of  refutation  that  the  Government 
has  no  right  to  march  an  armed  force  into  a  State  in 
order  to  subjugate  it.  If  this  be  so,  cannot  Mis- 
souri have  the  courage  to  say  that,  if  Abraham 
Lincoln,  in  violation  of  the  Constitution,  and  in 
violation  of  his  oath,  march  an  army  into  the  South, 
she  will  not  aid  him  with  men  and  money  ? 

"  It  is  strange  that  any  man  who  lives  in  Missouri, 
and  believes  in  her  institutions,  should  hesitate  to 
declare  that  she  will  not  engage  in  such  a  war.  It 
would  be  a  dreadful  thing  to  do,  even  if  the  Con- 
stitution, and  the  flag  of  our  country,  and  our 
own  honor  required  us  to  do  it — to  make  war 
upon  the  land  in  which  we  were  born,  and  whose 
churchyards  are  filled  with  the  graves  of  our  an- 
cestors ;  to  desolate  the  homes  and  to  shed  the 
blood  of  our  kindred.  It  is  too  horrible  to  con- 
template.    Missouri  never  will  do  it.     .     .     . 

"  Nor  can  I  believe  for  one  moment  that  Mis- 
souri intends,  or  that  this  Convention  will  say  that 
is  her  duty,  to  submit  to  Northern  aggression,  to 
give  up  her  institutions,  and  to  sacrifice  her  honor. 
Let  our  slaves  go  if  they  must,  let  all  our  property 
be  sacrificed,  but  let  us  maintain  our  honor — the 
honor  of  freemen.     If  ever  the  President  command 


86  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

Missourians  to  shed  the  blood  of  their  Southern 
brothers,  they  should  take  the  halter  in  one  hand 
and  the  sword  in  the  other  and  tell  him  that 
when  he  had  taken  the  one  he  might  use  the 
other.  I  have  no  submission  blood  in  my  veins. 
If  I  had  I  would  let  it  out  with  a  knife." 

John  T.  Redd,  of  Marion,  was  even  more  em- 
phatic than  Hudgins.  They  were  both  men  of 
ability,  and  of  high  standing,  and  their  words  had 
weight  with  the  people  of  Missouri.  It  is  a  pity 
to  offer  the  reader  only  a  dry  summary  of  their 
speeches.  They  ought  to  be  read  in  full  by  every 
one  who  wishes  to  comprehend  the  motives  which 
governed  the  conduct  of  the  men  who  took  up 
arms  against  the  Federal  Government. 

"  If  the  General  Government  send  troops  upon 
Southern  soil  to  retake  the  forts  now  in  the  hands 
of  those  States,  to  retake  the  custom-houses  for 
the  purpose  of  collecting  the  revenue,  or  for  any 
other  purpose,  the  Union  is  gone.  If  it  be  once 
dissolved  it  can  never  be  reconstructed,  because  be- 
tween the  sundered  sections  there  will  be  a  gulf  of 
blood. 

"  It  is  my  opinion  that  if  the  General  Government 
will  not  wait  till  the  country  can,  by  conciliation  and 
compromise,  save  the  Union,  Missouri  should  and 
will  take  the  stand  with  her  Southern  sisters ;  and 


The   Convention.  87 

that,  having  failed  to  obtain  their  rights,  having 
failed  to  obtain  any  guarantee  from  that  great  anti- 
slavery  party  which  has  so  long  trampled  the  Con- 
stitution under  foot,  she  and  they  should  take  their 
stand  outside  of  the  Union,  taking  with  them  the 
Constitution,  and  that  glorious  banner  which  they 
have  baptized  in  the  blood  of  a  hundred  battle- 
fields, and  fight,  if  need  be,  for  their  rights  and  insti- 
tutions, as  their  fathers  fought,  and  until  the  last  drop 
of  blood  be  spilled.  ...  If  she  is  to  remain  in 
the  Union  at  the  sacrifice  of  her  institutions  and  her 
rights,  she  should  change  the  device  of  her  coat-of- 
arms,  remove  from  it  the  grizzly  bears,  whose  rug- 
ged nature  was  never  animated  by  a  craven  spirit, 
and  substitute  in  their  place  a  fawning  spaniel,  cowing 
at  the  feet  of  its  master,  and  licking  the  hand  that 
smites  it. 

Even  Broadhead,  an  Unconditional  Union  mem- 
ber from  St.  Louis,  did  not  believe  that  the  Federal 
Government  had  a  right  to  coerce  a  State ;  but  he 
found  in  the  power  which  it  had  to  call  out  the 
militia  in  order  to  execute  the  laws,  to  suppress  in- 
surrection, and  to  repel  invasion,  abundant  authority 
to  use  force  for  the  preservation  of  the  Union. 

Argument  and  declamation  had,  however,  little 
to  do  with  the  settlement  of  the  question,  and  with 
determining  the  action  of  the  Convention.  It  was 
dcfact  which  decided  the  matter  and  persuaded  that 


88  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

body  to  declare  that  Missouri  would  adhere  loyally 
to  the  Union.  This  fact  was  bluntly  announced 
to  the  Convention  and  to  the  people  of  the  State 
by  Broadhead,  who  was  not  only  a  delegate  to  the 
Convention  but  a  member  of  the  Union  Safety 
Committee  of  St.  Louis  and  a  trusted  counsellor  of 
Mr.  Lincoln,  at  the  conclusion  of  his  speech,  in 
these  words :  "  Missouri  cannot  go  out  of  the 
Union  if  she  would.  I  think  I  know  what  I  say 
when  I  speak  it,  Missouri  has  not  the  power  to  go  out 
of  the  Union  if  she  would!'  What  he  meant  will 
appear  in  the  sequel.  He  did  know  what  he  was 
saying. 

The  Convention  adopted  Gamble's  report  and 
resolutions,  and  a  few  days  afterwards  (March  21) 
adjourned  subject  to  the  call  of  a  committee,  which 
it  named. 

Early  in  the  session,  the  General  Assembly 
had  refused  to  elect  a  United  States  Senator  in 
place  of  James  S.  Green,  whose  term  was  to  ex- 
pire on  the  3d  of  March.  It  had  done  this  upon 
the  ground  that  it  was  better  to  learn  first  whether 
Missouri  would  remain  in  the  Union  or  not.  It 
being  now  obvious  that  the  State  would  not  secede, 
the  General  Assembly  proceeded  to  the  election 
of  a  Senator  (March  12th).  The  Democrats  nom- 
inated Green  for  the  place,  but  found  it  impossible, 
after  several  days'  balloting,  to  elect  so  pronounced 


The   Convention.  89 

a  Secessionist  as  he.  Waldo  P.  Johnson  was  there- 
upon elected.  It  is  a  noteworthy  fact  that  Green, 
who  was  relegated  to  private  life  because  he  was  a 
Secessionist,  did  not  raise  his  hand  or  his  voice  in 
behalf  of  the  South  during  the  war,  while  Johnson, 
who  had  been  elected  because  he  was  a  good  Union 
man,  quickly  resigned  his  seat  in  the  Senate,  en- 
tered the  army,  and  fought  for  the  Confederacy  till 
the  end  of  the  war. 

Of  Green,  Mr.  Blaine,  who  rarely  permits  himself 
to  write  justly  or  fairly  about  any  Southern  man 
says:  "No  man  among  his  contemporaries  had 
made  so  profound  an  impression  in  so  short  a  time. 
He  was  a  very  strong  debater.  He  had  peers,  but  no 
master,  in  the  Senate.  Mr.  Green  on  the  one  side, 
and  Mr.  Fessenden  on  the  other,  were  the  Senators 
whom  Douglas  most  disliked  to  meet,  and  who  were 
best  fitted  in  readiness,  in  accuracy,  and  in  logic  to 
meet  him.  Douglas  rarely  had  a  debate  with  either 
in  which  he  did  not  lose  his  temper,  and  to  lose  one's 
temper  in  debate  is  generally  to  lose  one's  cause. 
Green  had  done  more  than  any  other  man  in  Mis- 
souri to  break  down  the  power  of  Thomas  H.  Ben- 
ton as  a  leader  of  the  Democracy.  His  arraignment 
of  Benton  before  the  people  of  Missouri  in  1849, 
when  he  was  but  thirty-two  years  of  age,  was  one  of 
the  most  aggressive  and  most  successful  warfares  in 
our  political  annals." 


90  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

After  serving  several  years  in  the  House  of  Rep- 
resentatives, he  had  been  elected  to  the  United 
States  Senate  in  January  1859,  anc*  became  the 
leader  of  the  pro-slavery  men  in  the  Congressional 
contest  for  the  possession  of  Kansas.  He  bore 
himself  there  with  so  much  dignity  and  courtesy, 
and  was  so  able  in  argument  and  brilliant  in  debate, 
that  he  won  the  admiration  of  every  one  and  de- 
served even  higher  praise  than  that  which  Mr. 
Blaine  accords  to  him. 

Although  the  Secessionists  had,  through  defec- 
tion of  some  of  their  number,  lost  control  of  the 
House  of  Representatives,  and  could  not  conse- 
quently enact  any  measure  looking  toward  the  se- 
cession of  the  State,  they  could,  nevertheless,  bring 
to  their  support  a  majority  of  the  House,  whenever 
they  attacked  the  Republican  party  and  not  the 
Union;  for  many  men  who  were  devoted  to  the 
Union  were  bitterly  hostile  to  the  Republicans,  and 
especially  hostile  to  that  party  as  it  was  constituted 
in  St.  Louis.  In  that  city,  it  consisted  almost 
wholly  of  Germans,  though  their  leaders  were  chiefly 
Kentuckians  and  Virginians.  They  were  in  posses- 
sion of  the  City  Government,  and  their  Mayor  was 
a  stern  and  uncompromising  partisan,  a  member 
of  the  Union  Safety  Committee,  and  a  man  who 
would  not  hesitate  to  use  the  police  force  and  all 
the  power  and  resources  of  the  city  to  repress  any 


The   Convention.  91 

movements  on  the  part  of  the  Secessionists.  He 
was  sustained  also  by  the  powerful  semi-military  or- 
ganization of  Home  Guards,  and  could,  in  the  mo- 
ment of  need,  call  them  to  his  aid  as  special  consta- 
bles and,  by  investing  them  with  the  panoply  of  the 
law,  thrice  arm  them  for  the  fight.  These  compa- 
nies, as  has  already  been  told,  had,  previous  to  the 
election  of  the  18th  of  February,  become  so  turbulent 
and  aggressive  as  to  alarm  the  peaceful  residents  of 
the  city,  and  recent  events  had  made  them  more  ar- 
rogant and  more  dangerous  still.  It  had  therefore  be- 
come a  matter  of  supreme  importance  to  the  Seces- 
sionists to  take  these  great  powers  from  the  Mayor, 
and  accordingly  a  law  was  now  enacted  for  creating 
a  Board  of  Police  Commissioners  and  authorizing  a 
police  force  for  the  city  of  St.  Louis.  This  bill,  which 
passed  the  Senate  on  the  2d  of  March,  and  the  House 
on  the  23d,  authorized  the  Governor,  with  the  con- 
sent of  the  Senate,  to  appoint  four  commissioners, 
who,  along  with  the  Mayor  of  the  city,  should  have 
absolute  control  of  the  police,  of  the  Volunteer  Mili- 
tia of  St.  Louis,  and  of  the  sheriff  and  all  other  con- 
servators of  the  peace.  This  act  summarily  took 
away  from  the  Republican  Mayor  and  transferred 
to  the  Governor  through  his  appointees,  the  whole 
police  power  of  the  city  of  St.  Louis.  This  was  its 
expressed  intention.  It  had  other  and  more  impor- 
tant purposes  which  were  carefully  concealed. 


92  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

On  the  22d  of  March,  the  President  of  the  Con- 
vention transmitted  to  the  General  Assembly  the 
resolution  requesting  that  body  to  take  the  proper 
steps  for  calling  a  Convention  of  all  the  States  to 
propose  amendments  to  the  Constitution. 

Mr.  Vest  reported  (March  27th)  from  the  com- 
mittee to  whom  the  resolution  was  referred,  that 
"  Going  into  council  with  our  oppressors  before  we 
have  agreed  among  ourselves,  can  never  result  in 
good.  It  is  not  the  North  that  has  been  wronged, 
but  the  South,  and  the  South  can  alone  determine 
what  securities  in  the  future  will  be  sufficient.  The 
interests  of  Missouri,  all  her  sympathies  and  the  af- 
fections of  her  people  render  her  destiny  the  same 
with  that  of  the  Border  Slave  States.  Mediation 
by  one  State  alone  will  amount  to  nothing.  Let  us 
first  agree  with  those  whom  God  and  Nature  have 
made  our  associates  in  council,  and  then,  in  a  tem- 
perate but  firm  manner,  make  known  our  united  de- 
cision to  the  people  of  the  North.  If  such  a  de- 
mand, coming  from  the  people  of  eight  sister  States, 
swelling  in  a  tone  of  grandeur  and  power  which 
should  sway  the  destinies  of  the  universe,  shall 
be  disregarded,  then,  indeed,  all  hopes  of  reconstruc- 
tion would  be  ended,  and  appealing  to  the  civilized 
world  a  united  South,  with  common  lineage,  com- 
mon feelings  and  common  institutions,  would  take 
their  place  among  the  nations  of  the  earth.     With 


The   Convention,  93 

these  opinions  the  committee  beg  leave  to  report 
that  it  is  inexpedient  for  the  General  Assembly  to 
take  any  step  towards  calling  a  National  Conven- 
tion." 

In  the  course  of  the  debate  upon  this  report,  Vest 
said:  "The  Convention  has  been  guilty  of  falsehood 
and  deceit.  It  says  that  there  is  no  cause  for  sep- 
aration. If  this  be  so,  why  call  a  Convention  ?  In 
declaring  that  if  the  other  Border  Slave  States  se- 
ceded Missouri  would  still  remain  within  the  Union, 
these  wiseacres  have  perpetrated  a  libel  upon  Mis- 
souri. So  help  me  God  !  if  the  day  ever  comes 
when  Missouri  shall  prove  so  recreant  to  herself,  so 
recreant  to  the  memories  of  the  past  and  to  the 
hopes  of  the  future,  as  to  submit  tamely  to  these 
Northern  Philistines,  I  will  take  up  my  household 
gods  and  leave  the  State.  Make  another  Constitu- 
tion and  these  Northern  Vandals  will  trample  it 
under  foot.  ...  I  appeal  to  the  people  of  Mis- 
souri to  maintain  their  rights.  I  defy  the  Conven- 
tion. They  are  political  cheats,  jugglers,  and  char- 
latans, who  foisted  themselves  upon  the  people  by 
ditties  and  music  and  striped  flags.  They  do  not 
represent  Missouri.  They  have  crooked  the  pliant 
hinges  of  the  knee  that  thrift  might  follow  fawning. 
As  for  myself,  two  grandfathers  who  fought  for  our 
liberties  rest  in  the  soil  of  Virginia,  and  two  uncles 
who  fought  in  the  Revolution,  sleep  in  the  land  of 


94  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

the  Dark  and  Bloody  Ground.  With  such  blood  in 
my  veins,  I  will  never,  never,  NEVER  submit  to 
Northern  rule  and  dictation,  I  will  risk  all  to  be  with 
the  Southern  people,  and,  if  defeated,  I  can  with  a 
patriot  of  old  exclaim, 

'  More  true  joy  an  exile  feels, 
Than  Caesar  with  a  Senate  at  his  heels.' " 

The  Legislature,  having  adopted  the  report,  ad- 
journed the  next  day,  March  the  28th. 

The  Secessionists  now  began  to  gather  strength 
again.  The  Governor  had  never  wavered  in  his  de- 
termination to  hold  the  State  firm  to  her  pledge  to 
resist  the  coercion  of  the  South.  And  now  many  of 
those  who  had  in  January  and  February  and  in  the 
early  days  of  March  been  deluded  into  the  belief 
that  it  was  still  possible  to  prevent  war  had  at  last 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  war  was  inevitable,  that 
a  collision  would  sooner  or  later  take  place  between 
the  Federal  Government  and  the  South,  and  that 
Missouri  would  have  to  take  part  in  the  conflict ; 
and  they  were  now  taking  sides  with  the  Governor. 
In  St.  Louis,  particularly,  a  strong  revulsion  of  feel- 
ing had  set  in  against  Blair  and  his  followers. 
Their  open  preparation  for  war  alarmed  the  great 
land  owners  and  rich  merchants  of  St.  Louis,  who 
preferred  peace  to  everything  else,  and  it  fright- 
ened   thousands    of    others    whose   prosperity    de- 


The   Convention.  95 

pended  on  the  continuance  of  Southern  trade, 
which  would  be  instantly  stopped  by  war.  It  was 
plain  now  that  the  South  was  for  peace,  and  the 
North  for  war.  The  Secessionists  had  thus  be- 
come the  party  of  peace,  and  they  were  joined  by 
every  man  who  wanted  that  above  all  things.  It 
was  useless  for  Mr.  Lincoln  to  say  that  he  was 
averse  to  war.  All  men  knew  that,  but  they  also 
knew  that  it  was  only  by  war  that  he  could  main- 
tain the  Union.  The  common  sense  of  the  people 
recognized  this  fact,  and  that  they  acted  upon  it 
was  abundantly  proven  when  the  Municipal  Elec- 
tion took  place  in  St.  Louis  on  the  1st  of  April, 
and  the  Unconditional  Union  men,  who  had  carried 
the  city  in  February  by  a  majority  of  5,000,  were 
defeated  by  a  majority  of  2,600. 

This  was  a  declaration  in  favor,  not  of  secession,  but 
of  peace,  and  against  making  war  upon  the  South ; 
and  there  were  still  men — thousands  of  men — in  St. 
Louis,  and  throughout  Missouri — who  continued  to 
believe  that  war  might  yet  be  averted ;  and  there 
were  others  who  foolishly  fancied  that,  even  if  war 
raged  from  the  Lakes  to  the  Gulf  and  from  the 
Atlantic  to  the  Pacific,  Missouri  could,  in  the  midst 
of  the  bloody  strife,  remain  neutral  and  enjoy  un- 
broken peace. 

There  were,  however,  two  classes  of  men  in  Mis- 
souri  who   had   never   indulged    in    these    baseless 


g5  The   Fight  for   Missouri. 

hopes;  who  had  seen  at  the  outset  that  war  was 
inevitable,  and  had  then  begun  to  prepare  for  war. 
At  the  head  of  the  one  stood  the  Governor  of  the 
State,  Claiborne  F.  Jackson ;  at  the  head  of  the 
other  Francis  P.  Blair,  Jr.  Never  did  either  of  them 
quail  in  the  presence  of  any  danger,  nor  shrink  from 
the  performance  of  any  duty,  however  difficult  or 
perilous,  which  he  was  called  upon  to  encounter,  or 
to  undertake,  in  defense,  or  in  maintenance,  of  the 
principles  to  which  he  had  devoted  his  life.  Under 
the  banner  of  the  State  upheld  by  the  one  or 
under  the  flag  of  the  Union  uplifted  by  the  other, 
all  earnest  men  had  at  last  begun  to  rally.  What 
these  men  did  is  what  must  now  be  told. 


II.   MILITARY. 


CHAPTER  V. 

FRANK   BLAIR   REBELS   AGAINST  THE   STATE. 

The  Department  of  the  West — General  William  S.  Harney — The  St. 
Louis  Arsenal — Major  William  H.  Bell — Isaac  H.  Sturgeon — 
Federal  Troops  brought  to  St.  Louis — Frank  Blair  organizes  Re- 
bellion against  the  State — The  Home  Guards — The  Minute  Men 
— Basil  W.  Duke — Frost's  Brigade — Daniel  M.  Frost — His  Nego- 
tiations with  Major  Bell — General  Scott  removes  Bell — Major 
Hagner  in  Command. 

At  the  beginning  of  1861  that  part  of  the  United 
States  west  of  the  Mississippi  was  divided  into  five 
Military  Departments — The  West,  Texas,  New  Mex- 
ico, Utah,  and  The  Pacific. 

The  most  important  of  these,  The  Department  of 
the  West,  embraced  all  the  country  lying  between 
the  Mississippi  River  and  the  Rocky  Mountains, 
except  Texas,  New  Mexico,  and  Utah.  It  was 
under  the  command  of  Brigadier-General  William 
S.  Harney,  and  its  head-quarters  were  at  St.  Louis. 

Harney  was  an  officer  of  large  experience  and 
great  gallantry.  Appointed  to  the  army  from  civil 
life  in  18 18,  he  had  done  hard  and  conspicuous  ser- 
vice in  the  Florida  War,  and  had  fought  under  Scott 
in  Mexico,  and  won  distinction  on  many  fields ;  had 
been  brevetted  brigadier-general  for  his  conduct  at 


ioo  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

Cerro  Gordo,  and  had  been  promoted  to  that  full 
rank  in  1858.  Though  more  than  sixty  years  old 
he  was  still  in  the  vigor  of  his  robust  manhood, 
very  tall,  broad-shouldered,  and  as  straight  as  an 
arrow,  and  his  bronzed  features  were  flushed  with 
the  glow  of  an  exuberant  vitality.  He  had  mar- 
ried long  before  in  St.  Louis,  and  was  living  there 
in  luxury ;  for  he  was  a  man  of  wealth,  fond  of  so- 
ciety and  addicted  to  its  pleasures.  Possessed  of  no 
great  intellect,  he  had,  nevertheless,  what  often  sup- 
plies its  place  among  soldiers,  energy,  courage,  and  a 
high  sense  of  honor.  He  was,  moreover,  devoted  to 
the  service,  adventurous  and  fearless — was,  in  fact, 
an  ideal  dragoon.  Though  a  Louisianian  by  birth, 
and  himself  a  slave  holder,  though  his  family  and 
intimates  were  Southern  people  and  slave  holders, 
and  though  he  himself  sympathized  with  the  South 
in  its  struggle  against  the  North,  he  loved  the 
Union,  and  knew  no  other  country,  and  was  abso- 
lutely loyal  to  the  flag  under  which  he  had  served 
so  many  years  and  so  gallantly. 

In  the  southern  part  of  the  city,  on  the  shore  of 
the  Mississippi,  was  the  St.  Louis  Arsenal.  It  con- 
tained about  sixty  thousand  stand  of  arms  and  a 
large  supply  of  other  munitions  of  war,  and  the 
workshops  were  extensive  and  well  equipped.  In 
addition  to  the  artisans  employed  in  these  shops 
there   were   at   the   post   several   ordnance  officers 


Frank  Blair  Rebels  Against   the   State,    ioi 

and  a  few  men  detailed  from  the  troops  at  Jef- 
ferson Barracks.  These  barracks  were  ten  miles 
farther  down  the  river,  and  were  occupied  by  a 
small  force,  mostly  recruits,  commanded  by  Major 
Macrae. 

The  commandant  of  the  arsenal  was  Major  Wil- 
liam H.  Bell,  a  North  Carolinian.  On  graduating 
at  West  Point  in  1820,  he  had  been  assigned  to 
ordnance  duty,  and  had  ever  since  belonged  to 
that  branch  of  the  service.  St.  Louis  was  virtu- 
ally his  home ;  for,  in  the  course  of  his  long  service 
in  the  army,  he  had  been  stationed  there  many 
years,  and  by  prudent  investments  had  amassed  a 
considerable  fortune  in  town  lots  and  suburban 
property ;  and  there,  too,  he  had  formed  the  chief 
friendships  of  his  life.  He  was  a  capable  officer, 
and  bore  a  high  character  both  in  the  army  and 
among  his  friends  in  civil  life. 

The  seizure  by  the  seceding  States  of  the  Fed- 
eral forts  and  other  public  property  within  their 
limits  during  the  last  days  of  December,  and  in  the 
early  days  of  January,  had  naturally  turned  the 
thoughts  of  every  man  in  Missouri  to  this  arsenal, 
whose  great  stores  of  arms  and  ammunition  were  of 
incalculable  value  at  that  juncture.  There  was  also 
gold  to  the  amount  of  $400,000  in  the  vaults  of  the 
Assistant  Treasurer  at  St.  Louis.  That  official, 
Isaac   H.  Sturgeon,  a  Kentuckian,  had  lived  many 


102  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

years  in  St.  Louis,  and  was  well  known  there  as  an 
active,  shrewd,  and  cunning  politician,  of  no  mean 
ability.  He  had  always  been  identified  with  the 
Southern  Rights  wing  of  the  Missouri  Democracy; 
had  resisted  the  mild  free-soilism  of  Colonel  Benton  ; 
had  vigorously  opposed  the  squatter  sovereignty 
theories  of  Stephen  A.  Douglas ;  was  a  follower  of 
President  Buchanan,  who  had  appointed  him  to 
office  ;  and  had  earnestly  supported  Breckinridge 
during  the  late  canvass.  He  generally  consorted 
with  Southerners,  and  was  believed  by  the  semi-se- 
cessionists of  the  city  and  State  to  be  one  of  them- 
selves. From  them  he  learned  what  were  the 
plans,  or  rather  the  talk,  of  the  more  reckless  mem- 
bers of  that  party,  and  fancied  that  an  attack  was 
about  to  be  made  by  them  not  only  upon  the  ar- 
senal, but  upon  the  Government  funds  in  his  own 
custody. 

He  accordingly  wrote  on  the  5th  of  January  a 
guarded  letter  to  the  President  (of  whose  senti- 
ments he  was  not  quite  sure),  and  in  it  said  that  he 
was  greatly  concerned  for  the  safety,  not  only  of 
the  public  funds  in  his  own  hands,  but  of  the  muni- 
tions of  war  at  the  arsenal,  as  it  was  plain  that 
"  both  parties  had  their  eyes  fixed  upon  those  two 
points;"  and  that  he  would,  therefore,  "  venture  to 
suggest  "  to  the  President  the  propriety  of  concen- 
trating troops  at  the  arsenal,  for  the  protection  of 


Frank  Blair  Rebels  Against   the   State.     103 

the  property  there,  and  of  the  "  treasure "  in  his 
own  custody. 

This  letter  having  been  referred  by  the  President 
to  General  Scott,  the  latter  forthwith  sent  Lieuten- 
ant Robinson  with  a  detachment  of  forty  men,  from 
Newport  Barracks  to  St.  Louis,  "  to  be  placed  by 
the  department  commander  at  the  disposal  of  the 
Assistant  Treasurer."  This  detachment  reached 
St.  Louis  on  the  morning  of  the  nth  of  January, 
and  was  quartered  in  the  Government  Building, 
wherein  were  the  custom  house,  the  post  office, 
the  Federal  courts  and  the  Assistant  Treasury. 

This  absurd  display  of  force  by  the  Government 
provoked  the  intensest  excitement  throughout  the 
city.  Extras  were  issued  by  the  papers;  great 
crowds  began  to  gather  around  the  post  office ; 
and  an  outbreak  would  have  followed,  had  not 
General  Harney  wisely  ordered  the  troops  to  the 
arsenal,  and  thereby  quieted  the  people.  No  one 
seemed  to  be  able  to  explain  the  coming  of  these 
Federal  soldiers.  The  Assistant  Treasurer  kept 
himself  prudently  out  of  view. 

As  soon  as  the  fact  had  been  telegraphed  to  Jef- 
ferson City,  the  Governor  called  the  attention  of 
the  General  Assembly  to  it,  and  Senator  Parsons 
offered  these  resolutions : 

"  Resolved,  That  we  view  this  act  of  the  adminis- 
tration as  insulting  to  the  dignity  and  patriotism 


104  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

of  this  State,  and  calculated  to  arouse  suspicion  and 
distrust  on  the  part  of  her  people  towards  the  Fed- 
eral Government. 

"Resolved,  That  the  Governor  be  requested  to  in- 
quire of  the  President  what  has  induced  him  to 
place  the  property  of  the  United  States  within  this 
State  in  charge  of  an  armed  Federal  force." 

The  removal  of  the  troops  from  the  post  office  to 
the  arsenal  caused  the  General  Assembly  to  drop 
the  matter.  But  the  incident  had  important  conse- 
quences nevertheless,  the  very  reverse,  however,  of 
what  had  been  intended  by  Mr.  Sturgeon ;  for  it  set 
both  Union  men  and  Secessionists  to  making  seri- 
ous and  diligent  preparation  to  get  possession  of 
the  arms  in  the  arsenal. 

It  was  now  that  Blair  first  began  to  convert  the 
Wide-Awakes  into  Home  Guards,  and  to  drill,  dis- 
cipline, and  arm  them.  He  saw  that  the  time  for 
action  had  come.  The  State  Government  had, 
with  the  new  year,  passed  into  the  hands  of  a 
Governor,  who  was  an  avowed  sympathizer  with  the 
seceding  States,  and  was  pledged  to  resist  all  at- 
tempts of  the  Federal  Government  to  enforce  its 
laws  within  those  States,  and  he  was  supported  by  a 
General  Assembly,  one  House  of  which  was  almost 
unanimously,  and  the  other  very  decidedly,  in 
accord  with  him.  A  law  had  already  passed  the 
Senate,  and   was   pending   in   the   House,  to   take 


Frank  Blair  Rebels  Against  the   State.     105 

away  from  the  Republican  Mayor  of  St.  Louis  all 
authority  over  the  Volunteer  Militia  of  that  city, 
and  to  confer  that  power  upon  the  Governor  in- 
stead ;  and  Blair  knew  that  the  object  of  this  law 
was  not  only  to  deprive  the  Mayor  of  the  means 
with  which  to  help  the  Federal  Government,  in 
case  of  disturbances  in  St.  Louis,  but  also  to  range 
the  military  companies  of  the  city  on  the  side  of 
the  Secessionists,  if  the  latter  should  undertake  to 
seize  the  arsenal,  or  if  any  conflict  should  take 
place  between  them  and  the  Union  men. 

Blair  did  not  hesitate.  He  never  did.  But,  avail- 
ing himself  of  the  excitement  produced  by  the 
bringing  of  Federal  troops  to  St.  Louis,  he  began 
the  formation  of  companies  of  Home  Guards,  that 
self-same  night.  The  work,  once  begun,  was  carried 
on  actively  by  him,  with  the  assistance  of  a  commit- 
tee of  safety  of  which  Oliver  D.  Filley,  Mayor  of 
the  city,  was  chairman,  and  James  O.  Broadhead, 
secretary.  Its  other  members  were  Samuel  T. 
Glover,  a  Kentuckian,  John  How,  a  Pennsylvanian, 
and  Julius  J.  Witzig,  a  German.  Filley  was  a  New 
Englander  and  Broadhead  a  Virginian. 

The  first  company  which  they  enrolled  was  com- 
posed of  both  Germans  and  Americans,  and  Frank 
Blair  was  elected  captain.  Eleven  companies,  ag- 
gregating about  seven^hundred  and  fifty  officers  and 
men,  nearly  all  of  them  Germans,  were  soon  drilling 


106  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

and  getting  ready  for  active  service.  Some  of  them 
were  armed  (partly  by  Governor  Yates  of  Illinois, 
and  partly  by  private  contributions),  but  most  of 
them  were  still  unarmed,  at  the  time  that  the  elec- 
tion of  delegates  to  the  State  Convention  took 
place. 

The  Governor  and  other  Southern  Rights  men 
viewed  these  Home  Guards  with  just  apprehension ; 
and  consequently  they  put  into  the  military  bill, 
then  before  the  Legislature,  a  clause  which  was 
intended  to  disband  them.  This  clause  required  the 
commanding  officer  of  each  of  the  several  military 
districts  into  which  the  State  was  divided  to  dis- 
arm every  organization  within  his  district,  which 
had  not  been  "regularly  organized  and  mustered 
into  the  service  of  the  State ; "  and  to  confiscate  the 
arms  of  such  organizations  to  the  use  of  the  State. 
Had  this  bill  become  a  law  in  February,  the  course 
of  events  in  Missouri  might  have  been  essentially 
changed. 

The  St.  Louis  Secessionists  were  no  less  active  than 
the  Union  men.  They  were  few  in  number;  but 
most  of  them  were  young,  ardent,  and  full  of  zeal. 
They  regretted  the  determination  of  the  Cotton 
States  to  secede.  They  would  rather  have  had 
them  remain  within  the  Union,  and  fight  within  it 
for  their  constitutional  rights.  But  they  believed 
nevertheless  that  these  States  had  the  right  to  se- 


Frank  Blair  Rebels  Against  the  State,     ioj 

cede  and  to  establish  a  separate  Government  if  they 
chose  to  do  so.  Whether  this  was  a  constitutional 
right,  or  a  revolutionary  right  they  did  not  care ; 
nor  ought  they  to  have  cared.  For  the  God-given 
right  of  revolution  is  a  higher  and  a  more  sacred 
right  than  any  which  is  based  upon  the  mere  bar- 
gainings and  concessions  of  men.  The  people  who 
abandon  it  or  fear  to  assert  it  always  lose  their  free- 
dom sooner  or  later  and  sink  surely  to  the  condition 
of  serfs  or  slaves.  To  the  exercise  of  this  natural 
right  in  1776  the  Republic  owes  its  existence.  To 
the  assertion  of  it  by  the  South  in  1861  the  Repub- 
lic owes  its  present  grandeur,  and  its  perfect  unity. 

When  South  Carolina  seceded  these  young  St. 
Louisians  no  longer  doubted  that  all  the  Cotton 
States  would  secede  and  form  a  Southern  Con- 
federacy, that  between  this  Confederacy  and  the 
Union  war  would  ensue,  and  that  in  this  war 
the  whole  country  would  take  part.  For  them- 
selves they  were  resolved  to  fight  with  and  for  the 
South,  among  whose  people  and  upon  whose  soil 
most  of  them  had  been  born. 

Throwing  aside  all  vain  regrets  and  bravely  ac- 
cepting the  inevitable,  they  began  at  once  to  fit 
themselves  for  war;  began  to  learn  the  rudiments 
of  the  art  in  the  school  of  the  soldier.  They  were 
very  few,  however,  till  Sturgeon's  folly  set  fire  to 
the  passions  of  men  and  lit  the  flames  of  civil  war 


108  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

on  the  soil  of  Missouri.  Many  then  joined  their 
ranks — many  who  had  hitherto  held  aloof  for  love 
of  the  Union  or  for  the  sake  of  peace,  but  who  now 
despaired  of  both. 

Among  these  was  Basil  Wilson  Duke,  a  young 
lawyer  from  Kentucky.  He  was  about  twenty-five 
years  of  age,  able,  enterprising,  and  bold  ;  giving 
promise,  even  then,  of  those  soldierly  qualities 
which  eventually  made  him  John  Morgan's  most 
trusted  lieutenant  and  the  brilliant  commander  of 
a  Confederate  cavalry  brigade.  In  the  presidential 
election  he  had  supported  Douglas  with  great  zeal 
and  some  eloquence,  and  since  then  had  earnestly 
deprecated  disunion  and  striven  to  stay  the  current 
that  was  setting  toward  secession  in  Missouri.  Now 
he  awoke  suddenly  to  the  conviction  that  the  North 
was  going  to  make  war  upon  the  South.  That  was 
enough  for  him.  To  go  with  his  people  when  they 
were  attacked  ;  to  stand  by  them  when  they  were  in 
danger,  uncaring  whether  they  were  right  or  wrong ; 
to  share  their  perils,  and  to  fight  with  them  against 
their  foes,  was  with  him  an  instinct  and  a  duty.  He 
at  once  joined  the  small  band  of  secessionists  and 
became  their  most  conspicuous  leader.  Among 
them  he  found  men  as  brave  and  as  earnest  as  he ; 
some  of  them  with  ability  equal  to  his  own,  and 
talents  as  useful,  perhaps,  though  not  so  brilliant 
and  attractive. 


Frank  Blair  Rebels  Against   the   State.     109 

One  of  these,  Colton  Greene,  was  a  prosperous 
young  merchant,  hardly  as  old  as  Duke.  A  South 
Carolinian  by  birth,  he  sympathized  earnestly  with 
the  people  of  that  State  and  justified  their  conduct 
in  seceding.  With  a  rather  delicate  physical  organ- 
ization, and  of  a  retiring  disposition,  he  possessed 
fine  sensibilities,  a  cultivated  intellect  which  was 
both  sharp  and  strong,  courage,  and  determination. 
He  was,  withal,  painstaking,  laborious  and  earnest, 
upright  and  honorable. 

These  two,  with  Rock  Champion  a  great-hearted 
young  Irishman,  and  a  few  others  as  daring,  were  as 
quick  to  organize  the  Secessionists  into  Minute  Men 
as  Blair  had  been  to  organize  his  Wide-Awakes  into 
Home  Guards ;  and  they  did  it  boldly  and  openly, 
beginning  it  the  very  day  that  the  Federal  troops 
arrived  at  St.  Louis. 

Never  was  there  a  finer  body  of  young  fellows 
than  these  Minute  Men.  Some  were  Missourians ; 
some  from  the  North  ;  some  from  the  South ;  and 
others  were  Irishmen.  Among  them  all  there  was 
hardly  a  man  who  was  not  intelligent,  educated,  and 
recklessly  brave.  Some  who  had  the  least  education 
were  as  brave  as  the  bravest,  and  as  true  as  the  truest. 
Most  of  them  fought  afterwards  on  many  a  bloody 
field.  Many  of  them  died  in  battle.  Some  of  them 
rose  to  high  commands.  Not  one  of  them  proved 
false  to  the  cause  to  which  he  then  pledged  his  faith. 


no  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

They  established  their  head-quarters  at  the  old 
Berthold  mansion,  in  the  very  heart  of  the  city,  at 
the  corner  of  Fifth  and  Pine  Streets,  and  also  formed 
and  drilled  companies  in  other  parts  of  the  city, 
against  the  time  that  they  could  arm  and  equip 
themselves.  They  were  hardly  three  hundred  in 
all,  but  they  were  so  bold  and  active,  so  daring  and 
ubiquitous,  that  every  one  accounted  them  ten 
times  as  numerous. 

Like  Blair  and  the  Home  Guards,  they  had  their 
eyes  fixed  upon  the  arsenal,  and  expected  out  of  its 
abundant  stores  to  arm  and  equip  themselves  for  the 
coming  fight.  In  that  arsenal  were  sixty  thousand 
good  muskets,  while  in  all  the  Confederate  States 
there  were  not  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand 
more.  They  were  barely  three  hundred  men,  and 
more  than  ten  thousand  stood  ready  to  resist  them ; 
but  for  love  of  the  South,  and  for  love  of  the  right, 
and  for  the  honor  of  Missouri,  they  were  willing  to 
peril  their  lives  any  day  to  get  those  muskets.  And 
they  would  have  gotten  them  or  perished  in  the  at- 
tempt but  for  the  advice  of  their  leaders  at  Jeffer- 
son City. 

These  counseled  delay.  They  believed  that  it 
was  better  to  wait  till  the  people  should,  in  their 
election  of  delegates  to  the  Convention,  declare 
their  purpose  to  side  with  the  South.  They  never 
doubted    that    the    people   would   do    this ;    never 


Frank  Blair  Rebels  Against   the   State,     in 

doubted  that  they  would  elect  a  Convention  which 
would  pledge  Missouri  to  resist  the  subjugation  of 
the  South,  and  would  put  her  in  position  to  do  it. 
Sustained  by  the  voice  of  the  people,  and  instructed 
by  their  votes,  the  Governor  would  then  order  Gen- 
eral Frost  to  seize  the  arsenal  in  the  name  of  the 
State,  and  he,  with  his  brigade  and  the  Minute  Men, 
and  the  thousands  that  would  flock  to  their  aid, 
could  easily  do  it. 

In  anticipation  of  all  this  and  of  the  passage  of 
the  military  bill,  one  of  whose  provisions  required, 
as  has  been  told,  the  disbandment  of  all  unauthor- 
ized military  companies,  the  Minute  Men  were  now 
organized,  according  to  law,  and  five  companies  duly 
mustered  into  the  State  service  by  General  Frost  on 
the  13th  of  February. 

These  companies — Captains  Barret,  Duke,  Shaler, 
Greene  and  Hubbard — were  then  formed  into  a  bat- 
talion, of  which  Captain  James  R.  Shaler  was  elected 
major,  and  were  assigned  to  Frost's  Brigade.  They 
afterwards  formed  part  of  Bowen's  Regiment. 

Daniel  M.  Frost  was  a  native  of  New  York. 
Graduating  at  West  Point,  in  1844,  he  had  served 
creditably  in  the  Mexican  War,  and  afterwards  on 
the  frontier.  Marrying  in  St.  Louis,  in  185 1,  he 
soon  afterwards  resigned  his  commission  in  the 
army  and  engaged  in  business  in  that  city.  Turn- 
ing his  attention  to  politics,  he  was  elected  to  the 


112  The   Fight  for   Missouri. 

State  Senate,  and,  as  a  member  of  that  body,  pro- 
cured the  enactment  of  the  law  under  which  the 
militia  of  the  State  was  now  organized.  Under  the 
provisions  of  that  law  he  enlisted  in  1858-9  the 
troops  which  constituted  the  First  Brigade  of  Mis- 
souri Volunteer  Militia,  and,  having  been  appointed 
brigadier-general,  was  assigned  to  the  command  of 
it.  This  brigade  consisted  of  a  regiment  of  infan- 
try and  some  separate  companies,  and  aggregated 
about  five  hundred  and  eighty  officers  and  men. 

It  had  recently  returned  from  the  western  border 
of  the  State,  whither  it  had  been  sent  in  November 
to  repel  the  incursions  of  a  band  of  Kansas  despera- 
does, who,  under  lead  of  a  Captain  Montgomery, 
were  ravaging  the  frontier  counties  of  Missouri. 
On  this  expedition  the  men  had  learned  something 
of  the  duties  of  an  army  in  the  field,  and,  unevent- 
ful as  the  campaign  was,  had  acquired  much  of  the 
spirit  and  bearing  of  regular  troops,  and  looked 
upon  themselves  and  were  regarded  by  others  as 
veterans,  which,  indeed,  many  of  them  in  fact  were. 

Frost,  in  view  of  the  threatening  aspect  of  affairs, 
took  every  means  to  foster  and  strengthen  this 
soldierly  spirit  of  his  men,  and  to  prepare  them 
thoroughly  for  war.  In  all  this,  he  was  zealously 
aided  by  both  officers  and  men ;  and  towards  the 
1st  of  February,  his  little  brigade — a  complete 
army    in    itself,   with    infantry,    artillery   and    dra- 


Frank  Blair   Rebels  Against   the   State.     1 1 3 

goons — was  fully  equipped,  well  drilled  and  dis- 
ciplined, and  ready  to  take  the  field. 

Neither  he  nor  his  men  had  any  very  precise  idea 
of  the  part  which  they  would  be  called  upon  to 
take  in  the  event  of  war  between  the  North  and  the 
South.  Like  himself,  they  were,  for  the  most  part, 
Union  men,  but  opposed  to  the  subjugation  of  the 
South.  Few  of  them  expected  to  use  their  arms 
against  the  United  States ;  fewer  still  to  use  them 
against  the  South.  They  were  citizens  and  soldiers 
of  Missouri  and  were  ready  to  fight  for  her.  Fur- 
ther than  that  they  did  not  then  look,  or  care  to 
look. 

The  Governor  trusted  Frost  fully,  and  he 
trusted  him  rightly.  For  Frost  was  not  only  an  ac- 
complished soldier,  well  instructed  in  the  art  of  war 
and  experienced  in  all  of  its  lesser  duties,  and  one 
of  the  best  of  organizers  and  disciplinarians,  but  he 
was  also  perfectly  true  to  the  State,  whose  officer 
he  was,  and  ready  to  defend  her  against  all  assail- 
ants, whoever  they  might  be,  and  under  whatever 
guise  they  might  appear.  It  was  for  her  to  decide, 
in  Convention,  what  position  she  would  take  if  war 
should  happen.  Till  then,  it  was  his  duty  to  obey 
the  orders  of  his  commander-in-chief,  her  Gov- 
ernor. One  thing,  however,  he  would  not  do.  He 
would  not  make  war  upon  the  South.  Virginians 
like  Gamble  and  Bates  and    Broadhead,  and  Ken- 


1 14  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

tuckians  like  Blair  and  Brown  and  Glover,  might, 
under  the  influence  of  a  sublime  patriotism,  and 
a  Brutus-like  devotion  to  the  Union,  send  down 
armies  to  lay  waste  their  native  land,  and  slay  their 
brothers,  and  widow  their  sisters,  and  drive  them  far 
away  from  their  ruined  homes,  but  he,  Northern- 
born  though  he  was,  would  not  help  them  to  do  it. 

Whatever  judgment  history  shall,  in  the  distant 
future,  pass  upon  the  conduct  of  those  Northern 
men,  who,  living  in  the  South,  like  Frost,  stood  by 
the  South  in  her  hour  of  great  peril,  and  bared 
their  swords  in  her  defence,  fighting  for  the  weak 
against  the  strong,  the  people  for  whom  these  men 
fought  should  always  hold  them  in  honor,  and  in 
the  most  grateful  remembrance. 

No  one  comprehended  more  clearly  than  General 
Frost  the  necessity  which  compelled  Missouri  to 
keep  the  arsenal  and  its  stores  within  her  grasp,  if 
she  would  arm  and  equip  her  people ;  as  arm  them 
she  must,  sooner  or  later,  whether  to  fight  for  the 
Union,  or  against  it,  or  to  maintain  her  own  neutral- 
ity. This  necessity  he  made  manifest  to  the  Gov- 
ernor, and  was  by  him  authorized  to  seize  the  ar- 
senal, whenever  the  occasion  might  require  such 
decisive  action. 

In  the  performance  of  the  duty  thus  entrusted  to 
him,  Frost  came  to  an  understanding  with  Major 
Bell,    the   commandant    of   the   arsenal.      In   com- 


Frank  Blair  Rebels  Against   the   State.     115 

municating  this  fact  to  the  Governor  the  General 
wrote  on  the  24th  of  January : 

"  I  have  just  returned  from  the  arsenal. 
I  found  the  Major  everything  that  you  or  I  could 
desire.  He  assured  me  that  he  considered  that 
Missouri  had,  whenever  the  time  came,  a  right  to 
claim  it  as  being  on  her  soil.  He  asserted  his 
determination  to  defend  it  against  any,  and  all  ir- 
responsible mobs,  come  from  whence  they  might, 
but  at  the  same  time  gave  me  to  understand  that 
he  would  not  attempt  any  defence  against  the 
proper  State  authorities. 

"  He  promised  me,  upon  the  honor  of  an  officer 
and  a  gentleman,  that  he  would  not  suffer  any  arms 
to  be  removed  from  the  place  without  first  giving 
me  timely  information  ;  and  I  promised  him,  in  re- 
turn, that  I  would  use  all  the  force  at  my  command  to 
prevent  him  being  annoyed  by  irresponsible  persons. 

"I,  at  the  same  time,  gave  him  notice  that,  if 
affairs  assumed  so  threatening  a  character  as  to 
render  it  unsafe  to  leave  the  place  in  its  compara- 
tively unprotected  condition,  I  might  come  down 
and  quarter  a  proper  force  there  to  protect  it  from 
the  assaults  of  any  persons  whatsoever,  to  which  he 
assented.  In  a  word  the  Major  is  with  us,  where  he 
ought  to  be,  for  all  his  worldly  wealth  lies  here  in 
St.  Louis  (and  it  is  very  large),  and  then  again,  his 
sympathies  are  with  us.     .     .     . 


n6  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

" 1  shall  be  thoroughly  prepared  with  the  proper 
force  to  act  as  the  emergency  may  require,  but  the 
use  of  force  will  only  be  resorted  to  when  nothing 
else  will  avail  to  prevent  the  shipment  or  removal  of 
the  arms. 

"...  The  arsenal,  if  properly  looked  after, 
will  be  everything  to  our  State,  and  I  intend  to 
look  after  it ;  very  quietly,  however.  I  have  every 
confidence  in  the  word  of  honor  pledged  to  me  by 
the  Major,  and  would  as  soon  think  of  doubting  the 
oath  of  the  best  man  in  the  community.  ...  Of 
course  I  did  not  show  him  your  order,  but  I  in- 
formed him  that  you  had  authorized  me  to  act  as  I 
might  think  proper  to  protect  the  public  property." 

It  must  be  remembered  that  though  Missouri  was 
at  that  time  within  the  Union,  the  right  of  the 
several  States  to  the  Federal  property  within  their 
limits  had  not  then  been  as  clearly  defined  as  it  has 
since  been  by  the  high  court  of  war,  the  supremest 
of  all  earthly  tribunals. 

But  the  United  States  Government  was  now  get- 
ting ready  to  defend  the  arsenal  against  Home 
Guards,  Minute  Men,  and  the  State. 

Sturgeon,  elated  by  the  success  of  his  first  at- 
tempt to  direct  the  movements  of  the  United 
States  army,  and  encouraged  by  the  less  pacific 
attitude  which  the  President  had  latterly  assumed 
toward  the  South,  wrote  again,  and  less  guardedly, 


Frank  Blair   Rebels  Against   the   State,     nj 

to  the  President,  on  the  day  after  Lieutenant  Rob- 
inson's arrival  at  St.  Louis  (January  12). 

"  The  secession  paper  of  the  city,"  said  he,  "  and 
those  who  follow  it  seemed  to  think  it  highly  im- 
proper that  the  Government  should  send  troops 
here  to  guard  its  public  property  from  seizure.  All 
Union  men,  however,  are  gratified  that  the  Govern- 
ment has  taken  this  precautionary  measure.  I  wish 
it  was  about  two  hundred  instead  of  forty  men." 

To  General  Scott  he  wrote  the  same  day,  and,  as 
was  becoming,  wrote  somewhat  as  one  soldier  might 
write  to  another: 

"About  two  hundred  (200)  men,  well  officered 
and  well  armed,  should  be  kept  in  the  arsenal  to 
furnish  a  nucleus  around  which  the  Union-loving, 
law-abiding,  and  conservative  elements  of  the  city 
might  rally  to  prevent  any  unlawful  proceeding." 

These  letters  from  Sturgeon,  and  perhaps  others 
from  other  people,  turned  General  Scott's  attention 
to  St.  Louis,  and  a  few  days  later  Major  Peter  V. 
Hagner  was  ordered  to  relieve  Major  Bell  as  com- 
mandant of  the  arsenal,  and  the  latter  was  ordered 
to  New  York.  Instead  of  obeying  this  order,  Major 
Bell  resigned  his  commission  in  the  army  and  retired 
to  his  farm  in  St.  Charles  County,  Missouri.  Major 
Hagner  assumed  command  of  the  post  on  the  24th 
of  January. 

Hagner  was  a  native  of  Washington  city.      He 


n8  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

graduated  at  West  Point  in  1836,  and  during  the 
Florida  War  served  in  the  artillery.  He  was  trans- 
ferred to  the  ordnance  department  in  1838.  In  the 
war  with  Mexico  he  was  brevetted  captain  for  gal- 
lant and  meritorious  conduct  at  Cerro  Gordo.  For 
his  conduct  at  Chapultepec  he  was  brevetted  major. 
At  the  St.  Cosme  gate  he  was  wounded  while  gal- 
lantly fighting.  His  commission  as  captain  of  ord- 
nance was  dated  July  10,  185 1.  His  brevet  rank  of 
major  dated  from  September  13,  1847.  The  signifi- 
cance of  these  dates  will  appear  in  the  course  of 
this  story.  He  was  now  about  forty-eight  years  of 
age,  and  was  recognized  by  every  one  as  an  officer 
of  ability,  experience,  integrity,  and  honor,  and 
worthy  of  all  confidence. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

NATHANIEL    LYON. 

Nathaniel  Lyon — A  Sketch  of  the  Man  and  of  his  Career — He  is  or- 
dered to  the  St.  Louis  Arsenal — Asserts  his  Right  to  the  Command 
there — The  President  Sustains  Hagner — Lyon  wins  Blair's  Confi- 
dence— Drills  and  Disciplines  the  Home  Guards — Renews  his 
Contest  with  Hagner — Reinforcement  of  the  Arsenal — The  State 
Election — Overwhelming  defeat  of  the  Secessionists — Their  Mo- 
mentary Submission — Lyon  and  Blair  again  urge  Hagner's  Dis- 
placement— Lyon  denounces  Hagner's  "  Imbecility  or  Damned 
Villany,"  and  General  Scott's  "Sordid  Partisanship  and  Fondness 
for  Toadies" — What  He  would  do — The  Minute  Men  try  to  Pro- 
voke a  Riot  in  St.  Louis — Lyon  Assigned  to  Command  of  all  the 
Troops  at  the  Arsenal,  but  not  over  Hagner  and  the  Arsenal — The 
St.  Louis  Election — Defeat  of  the  Union  Men — Their  Alarm — 
Lyon  in  Command  at  St.  Louis — He  distrusts  Lincoln,  but  has 
faith  in  "  Almighty  Truth." 

Nathaniel  Lyon  was  born  in  Ashford,  Con- 
necticut, on  the  14th  of  July,  1818.  He  entered 
West  Point  in  1837,  and  graduating  in  1841  was  as- 
signed to  the  Second  Infantry.  With  that  regiment 
he  served  in  Florida  till  1842,  and  with  it  he  took 
part  in  the  war  with  Mexico.  On  the  march  from 
Vera  Cruz  to  the  city  of  Mexico  he  was  promoted 
to  the  first  lieutenancy  of  his  company  and  as  such 
commanded  it  during  that  campaign.  At  Cerro 
Gordo  he  was  with  Harney.     For  his  gallant  con- 


120  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

duct  in  the  battles  of  Churubusco  and  Contreras,  he 
was,  with  three  other  officers,  commended  to  the 
"  special  notice  "  of  his  brigade  commander,  and  was 
brevetted  captain  on  the  20th  of  August,  1847.  On 
entering  the  city  he  was  slightly  wounded. 

From  1849  to  !^53  ne  was  on  duty  in  California, 
and  while  there  made  a  successful  campaign  against 
the  Clear  Lake  Indians  of  Northern  California. 
General  Persifor  F.  Smith,  in  his  report  to  the  War 
Department,  says,  "  That  all  the  officers  in  the  ex- 
pedition united  in  awarding  the  highest  praise  to 
Captain  Lyon  for  his  untiring  energy,  zeal,  and 
skill,  and  attribute  his  success  to  the  rapidity  and 
secrecy  of  his  marches,  and  to  his  skilful  disposi- 
tions on  the  ground." 

Many  stories  are  told  of  his  adventures  in  this 
wild  region.  On  one  occasion  when  all  alone, 
he  was  attacked  suddenly  by  three  mounted  In- 
dians. His  presence  of  mind  and  quickness  of 
movement  saved  him.  With  a  bullet  he  emptied 
the  saddle  of  the  foremost.  Turning  upon  the  next 
with  his  sabre,  he  buried  its  blade  in  the  Indian's 
body.  The  third  savage  was  glad  to  get  away  un- 
harmed. 

Returning  to  Benicia  toward  the  end  of  Septem- 
ber, 1 85 1,  Captain  Lyon  enjoyed  a  much-needed  rest. 
He  pictures  himself,  at  this  time,  as  continuing  in 
his   "  usual    and    long   established    customs,   grow- 


Nathaniel  Lyon.  12 1 

ing  old,  indeed,  but  not  ashamed  to  own  it ;  proud, 
perhaps,  but  not  haughty ;  prudent,  it  may  be,  in 
worldly  affairs,  yet  not  crafty  for  wealth ;  desirous 
enough  of  fame,  but  not  infatuated  with  blind  ambi- 
tion ;  and,  in  general,  taking  the  world  as  it  comes, 
enjoying  richly  its  many  blessings,  ^sympathizing 
with  the  unfortunate,  and  laughing  with  the  indif- 
ference of  cool  philosophy  at  the  sore  disappoint- 
ments with  which  selfishness  and  cupidity  are  ever 
torturing  their  victims." 

During  the  greater  part  of  1852  he  was  on  leave 
of  absence  in  the  Eastern  States,  and  took  great 
interest  in  the  then  pending  presidential  election. 
He  was  at  that  time  a  staunch  Democrat,  and  so 
enthusiastic  an  admirer  of  Franklin  Pierce,  that  on 
his  way  back  to  California  he  made  a  speech  in  his 
favor  to  his  fellow-passengers  on  the  steam-ship. 

The  next  year  he  returned  to  the  East  with  his 
regiment  and  spent  a  part  of  the  winter  at  Washing- 
ton. While  there  he  listened  eagerly  to  the  debates 
in  Congress  on  the  question  of  slavery  in  the  Terri- 
tories, for  the  Kansas-Nebraska  bill  was  then  under 
consideration.  His  earnest  nature  was  deeply  im- 
pressed by  what  he  heard,  and  his  sympathies  were 
aroused  in  behalf  of  the  negro. 

The  next  year  (1854)  he  was  sent  with  his  com- 
pany to  Fort  Riley,  some  120  miles  west  of  Kansas 
City,  and  there  he  got  into  the  very  midst  of  that 


122  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

bitter  contention  and  savage  warfare,  with  which 
North  and  South  were  then  struggling  for  the  pos- 
session of  Kansas — for  supremacy  in  the  Union,  and 
for  freedom  or  slavery. 

Lyon  was  not  slow  to  espouse  the  cause  of  the 
slave,  and  to  'maintain  it  with  all  the  earnestness  of 
his  Puritan  disposition  ;  and  he  did  all  that  an  officer 
of  the  army  dared  do  for  the  success  of  the  party  of 
freedom,  and  for  the  triumph  of  the  Free-State  men. 

Extracts  from  letters  which  he  wrote  about  this 
time  show  how  he  was  being  educated  for  the  work 
that  he  was  to  do  in  Missouri. 

In  March,  1855,  he  writes  that  "preparations  are 
now  in  progress  to  resist  the  arrogant  and  insolent 
imposition  of  Missourians.  Whether  they  will  prove 
effective  may  be  seen  in  the  result.  Indeed  it  is 
fully  apprehended  that  the  aggressions  of  the  pro- 
slavery  men  will  not  be  checked  till  a  lesson  has 
been  taught  them  in  letters  of  fire  and  blood." 

In  December,  "  I  have  seen  so  much  of  the  over- 
bearing domination  of  the  pro-slavery  people  in 
Kansas  toward  the  Free-State  men  that  I  am  per- 
suaded that  the  latter  have  either  to  fight  in  self- 
defence  or  submit  ignobly  to  the  demands  of  their 
aggressors.  ...  I  despair  of  living  peaceably 
with  our  Southern  brethren  without  making  dis- 
graceful concessions,  but  rest  assured  that  this  will 
not  always  be,  and  in  this  view  I  foresee  ultimate 


Nathaniel,  Lyon.  123 

sectional  strife,  which  I  do  not  care  to  delay."  And 
about  the  same  time  he  speaks  of  the  then  Secretary 
of  War,  as  "that  heartless  villain,  Jefferson  Davis." 

In  1856,  he  seriously  considered  whether  it  were 
not  better  to  resign  his  commission,  and  quit  the 
army,  than,  as  one  of  its  officers,  aid  in  enforcing 
the  laws  of  the  United  States  in  Kansas.  He 
looked  upon  "  the  course  of  the  General  Govern- 
ment as  selfish,  partial  and  corrupt,"  and  "  could  not 
submit  to  the  self-debasement  and  humiliation  of 
being  employed  as  a  tool  in  the  hands  of  evil  rulers 
for  the  accomplishment  of  evil  ends."  From  the 
necessity  of  resigning  he  was  saved  by  being  or- 
dered out  of  Kansas. 

But  he  was  in  Kansas  again  in  1859,  an<^  taking 
as  active  an  interest  as  ever  in  the  contest  between 
slavery  and  freedom ;  was  with  General  Harney,  in 
December  i860,  when  Frost's  Brigade  was  sent  by 
the  Governor  of  Missouri  to  co-operate  with  Har- 
ney in  arresting  Montgomery,  and  protecting  the 
country  adjacent  to  Fort  Scott  ;  and  was  left  by 
Harney  at  Fort  Scott,  after  Montgomery  and  his 
band  had  dispersed  and  escaped. 

From  that  post  he  wrote,  January  27,  1861  : 

"  I  do  not  consider  troops  at  all  necessary  here, 
and  should  much  prefer  to  be  employed  in  the 
legitimate  and  appropriate  service  of  contributing 
to  stay  the  idiotic  fratricidal  hands  now  at  work  to 


124  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

destroy  our  Government.  .  .  .  It  is  no  longer 
useful  to  appeal  to  reason,  but  to  the  sword,  and 
trifle  no  longer  in  senseless  wrangling.  I  shall  not 
hesitate  to  rejoice  at  the  triumph  of  my  principles, 
though  this  triumph  may  involve  an  issue,  in  which 
I  certainly  expect  to  expose,  and  very  likely  shall 
lose,  my  life.  I  would  a  thousand  times  rather  incur 
this,  than  recall  the  result  of  our  presidential  elec- 
tion. We  shall  rejoice,  though,  in  martyrdom  if 
need  be." 

Four  days  later  he  was  ordered  to  St.  Louis,  with 
his  company. 

He  was  now  in  the  forty-third  year  of  his  age  ; 
of  less  than  medium  height ;  slender  and  angular ; 
with  abundant  hair  of  a  sandy  color,  and  a  coarse 
reddish-brown  beard.  He  had  deep-set  blue  eyes ; 
features  that  were  rough  and  homely ;  and  the 
weather-beaten  aspect  of  a  man  who  had  seen 
much  hard  service  on  the  frontier.  What  manner 
of  soldier  he  was  will  soon  be  seen. 

His  first  act  on  reaching  the  arsenal  was  charac- 
teristic of  the  man,  of  his  contentious  spirit,  and 
aggressive  disposition,  of  his  resolute  purpose  to 
have  his  own  way,  of  his  distrust  of  all  conservative 
men,  like  Major  Hagner.  Though  the  latter  was 
five  years  his  senior  in  the  service,  his  commission 
as  captain  was  twenty  days  junior  to  Lyon's;  for 
promotion  in  the  ordnance  was  slower  than  in  the 


Nathaniel  Lyon.  125 

infantry,  to  which  Lyon  belonged.  But  he  had 
been  assigned  to  duty  at  the  arsenal  according  to 
his  brevet  rank  of  major,  and  that  made  him 
senior  to  Lyon. 

No  regard  for  Hagner's  greater  age,  or  longer  ser- 
vice ;  no  feeling  of  courtesy  towards  an  older 
brother  in  arms,  weighed  with  Lyon  for  a  moment 
against  the  fact  that  Hagner  was  not  an  Aboli- 
tionist, that  his  wife  was  the  daughter  of  a  slave- 
holder, and  himself  the  friend  and  associate  of 
Southern  sympathizers.  Such  a  man  was  not,  in 
his  opinion,  to  be  trusted  with  so  important  a  com- 
mand as  the  St.  Louis  arsenal ;  such  a  man  was 
not  fit  to  have  authority  over  a  true  and  loyal 
soldier  like  himself.  He  at  once  asserted  his  own 
right  to  the  command,  by  virtue  of  his  senior  com- 
mission as  captain.  The  question  was  submitted 
to  General  Harney.  He  sustained  Hagner,  and 
Lyon  thereupon  appealed  to  the  President.  He, 
too,  sustained  Hagner,  and  Lyon  had  to  submit  for 
the  time. 

This  struggle  with  Hagner  had  not  diverted  his 
attention  from  what  was  happening  around  him,  nor 
had  it  kept  him  out  of  the  greater  struggle  to  which 
it  was  merely  subsidiary.  He  at  once  established 
the  closest  relations  with  Blair,  and  the  other  influ- 
ential Union  men  of  St.  Louis,  and  by  his  zeal,  in- 
telligence and  boldness  won  their  instant  and  per- 


126  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

feet  confidence.  They  saw  that  he  was  the  very- 
man  that  they  needed ;  that  he  had  been  sent  to 
them,  as  it  were,  by  Providence  or  by  Fate  to  save 
Missouri  to  the  Union. 

Practical  always,  he  went  straight  to  work  to  or- 
ganize, drill  and  discipline  the  Home  Guards,  and  to 
convert  them  into  soldiers  upon  whom  he  could  rely 
to  defend  the  arsenal  and  to  fight  the  Secession- 
ists. He  frequented  their  drill-rooms  and  armories; 
instructed  the  officers  and  men  ;  inspired  them  with 
confidence  in  himself ;  taught  them  too  to  have  faith 
in  themselves  and  in  the  cause  for  which  they  were 
going  to  battle;  fired  their  enthusiasm  ;  and  inflamed 
their  patriotism. 

The  election  of  delegates  to  the  State  Conven- 
tion was  to  take  place  on  the  18th  of  February. 
The  whole  Commonwealth  was  profoundly  agitated. 
In  St.  Louis  the  wildest  excitement  prevailed.  The 
Secessionists  were  confident  of  success,  and  openly 
boasted  that  if  they  carried  the  State  they  would 
seize  the  arsenal,  and  out  of  its  stores  arm  equip 
and  supply  the  State  Guard,  which  the  General 
Assembly  would  then  authorize  to  be  enlisted,  and 
called  into  active  service. 

Blair  and  Lyon  appreciated  the  danger,  and  re- 
doubled their  efforts  to  meet  it.  They  believed 
that  if  they  could  get  absolute  control  of  the 
arsenal  and  its  stores,  they  need  not  fear  any  force 


Nathaniel  Lyon.  127 

which  the  State  or  the  Secessionists  could  bring 
against  it ;  for  they  could  then  arm  and  equip 
the  Home  Guards  and  their  other  adherents,  with 
these  stores,  and  send  what  was  left  to  Illinois  where 
they  would  be  safe. 

Under  no  circumstances  would  Hagner  distribute 
the  arms  to  the  Home  Guards.  He  could  not  do  it 
without  violating  the  laws  of  his  country  and  his 
oath  as  an  officer ;  and  these  were  things  that  he 
could  not  do.  He  had  not  yet  learned  that  war 
silences  law  and  burns  up  in  its  flames  all  formal 
oaths. 

Lyon  had  learned  this,  and  he  knew  that  the 
country  was  on  the  verge  of  war;  that  armed  men  were 
gathering  at  the  North  and  at  the  South  to  begin 
the  deadly  conflict;  and  he  had  made  up  his  mind 
to  issue  the  arms  to  the  Home  Guards  in  case  of 
need,  despite  both  Hagner  and  Harney.  He  would 
not  let  a  law,  which  was  intended  for  the  safety  of 
the  Union,  be  used  for  the  destruction  of  the 
Union ;  he  would  not  stand  idly  by  and  let  the  arms 
which  belonged  to  the  Union  be  turned  against  the 
Union  by  its  worst  enemy.  But  he  did  not  wish  to 
be  forced  into  an  unlawful  course,  if  it  could  be 
avoided ;  not  that  he  cared  much  about  it  himself, 
but  there  were  a  great  many  law-abiding  Union  men 
in  Missouri,  whom  it  would  be  unwise  to  offend  or 
to  alarm.     Their  feelings  and  their  prejudices  must 


128  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

be  consulted,  or  they  might  take  part  with  the  State 
and  against  the  Federal  Government.  He  and  Blair 
resolved,  accordingly,  to  try  again  to  have  himself 
placed  in  command  of  the  arsenal.  This  would 
be  accomplished  if  the  President  would  order  Hag- 
ner  to  be  assigned  to  duty,  without  reference  to 
his  brevet  rank. 

"I  should  care  nothing,"  said  Lyon,"  for  the  deci- 
sion against  me,  as  I  have  told  Major  Hagner,  if  he 
would  take  proper  precautions  for  defence.  The 
place  is  in  imminent  danger  of  attack,  and  the  Gov- 
ernor of  Missouri  will  no  doubt  demand  its  sur- 
render if  the  State  shall  pass  an  ordinance  of  seces- 
sion. The  prospect  is  gloomy  and  forebodes  an  un- 
necessary sacrifice  of  life,  in-case  of  hostile  demon- 
strations. But  I  do  not  despair  of  an  effective  de- 
fence, and  I  hope  to  administer  a  lasting  rebuke  to 
the  traitors  who  have  thus  far  had  their  own  way." 

As  the  Buchanan  administration  would  not  listen 
to  Blair  and  himself,  they  got  Sturgeon  to  write 
again,  on  the  9th  of  February,  to  General  Scott,  and 
to  advise  him  to  reinforce  the  arsenal  with  all  the 
troops  that  were  at  Jefferson  Barracks,  and  to  place 
Lyon  in  command  of  both  them  and  the  arsenal. 

Scott  ordered  the  troops  to  the  arsenal,  but  he 
left  Hagner  in  command;  and  on  the  16th  of  Feb- 
ruary— two  days  before  the  election — 203  officers 
and  men  were,  in  obedience  to  this  order,  brought  to 


Nathaniel  Lyon.  129 

the  arsenal,  which  was  further  reinforced  a  few 
days  later,  by  102  officers  and  men.  These  rein- 
forcements increased  the  troops  at  the  post  to  nine 
officers  and  484  men.  General  Harney  now  informed 
the  War  Department  in  a  report  made  on  the  19th 
of  February  that  there  never  had  been  any  danger 
of  an  attack  upon  the  arsenal,  and  that  if  one  should 
be  made  "  the  garrison  would  be  promptly  rescued 
"' by  an  overwhelming  force  from  the  city." 

Whatever  danger  may  have  existed  had  in  fact 
passed.  For  the  State  had,  in  the  election  of  dele- 
gates to  the  Convention,  declared  against  secession 
by  an  overwhelming  majority,  and  had  affirmed  the 
loyalty  of  her  citizens  to  the  Union.  The  Secession- 
ists were  for  the  moment  utterly  disheartened.  The 
General  Assembly  sullenly  submitted  to  the  will  of 
the  people,  and  postponed  the  consideration  of 
every  measure  looking  to  the  preparation  of  the 
State  for  war,  or  for  the  maintenance  even  of  her 
own  neutrality. 

Lyon  and  Blair  were  not  deceived  by  these  delu- 
sive signs  of  peace,  nor  did  they  relax  their  efforts 
to  get  ready  for  war.  They  knew  that  it  would 
break  out  sooner  or  later* and  that  whoever  then 
held  the  arsenal  would  hold  St.  Louis,  and  that 
whoever  held  St.  Louis  and  the  arsenal  would  in 
the  end  hold  Missouri. 

They  did  not  even  wait  for  the  inauguration  of 
9 


130  The  Fight  for  Missouri, 

Lincoln,  now  only  a  few  days  off,  but  Blair  himself 
hastened  to  Washington  in  order  to  beg  Mr. 
Buchanan  to  immediately  assign  Lyon  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  arsenal ;  stopping,  however,  at  Spring- 
field to  explain  the  condition  of  affairs  to  Mr.  Lin- 
coln, and  to  prepare  him  to  act  promptly  on  assum- 
ing office.  But  neither  Mr.  Buchanan  nor  General 
Scott  would  give  heed  to  Blair's  entreaties.  For  they 
distrusted  both  him  and  Lyon,  and  would  not  give 
them  the  power  to  inaugurate  civil  war  in  Missouri. 
Moreover,  they  had  implicit  confidence  in  both 
Harney  and  Hagner,  and  felt  sure  that  they  would 
do  all  that  could  be  done  for  the  safety  of  the 
arsenal,  and  for  the  maintenance  of  the  Federal 
authority  in  Missouri. 

Lyon  meanwhile  kept  urging  Hagner  to  strengthen 
the  defences  of  the  arsenal,  and  suggested  many 
ways  in  which  this  could  be  done.  Hagner  paid  no 
attention  to  his  suggestions.  Lyon,  losing  all  pa- 
tience, wrote  to  Blair  on  the  25th  of  February: 

"  Major  Hagner  refuses  to  do  any  of  these 
things  and  has  given  his  orders  not  to  fly  to  the 
walls  to  repel  an  approach,  but  to  let  the  enemy 
have  all  the  advantages  of  the  wall  to  lodge  himself 
behind  it,  and  get  possession  of  all  outside  buildings 
overlooking  us,  and  to  get  inside,  and  under  shelter 
of  our  outbuildings,  which  we  are  not  to  occupy  be- 
fore we  make  resistance.     This  is  either  imbecility  or 


Nathaniel  Lyon.  131 

damned  villany ;  and  in  contemplating  the  risks  we 
run,  and  the  sacrifices  that  we  must  make  in  case  of 
an  attack,  in  contrast  to  the  vigorous  and  effective 
defence  we  are  capable  of,  and  which  (in  view  of  the 
cause  of  our  country  and  humanity,  and  the  disgrace 
and  degradation  to  which  the  Government  has  been 
subjected  by  pusillanimity  and  treachery)  we  are 
now  called  upcn  to  make,  I  get  myself  into  a  most 
unhappy  state  of  solicitude  and  irritability.  With 
even  less  force  and  proper  dispositions  I  am  confi- 
dent we  can  resist  any  force  that  can  be  brought 
against  us ;  by  which  I  mean  such  force  as  would 
not  be  overcome  by  our  sympathizing  friends  out- 
side. These  needful  dispositions,  can,  with  proper 
industry,  be  made  within  twenty-four  hours.  There 
cannot  be,  as  you  know,  a  more  important  occasion, 
or  a  better  opportunity  to  strike  an  effective  blow 
at  this  arrogant  infatuation  of  secessionism  than 
here  ;  and  must  all  this  be  lost  by  either  false  no- 
tions of  duty,  or  covert  disloyalty  ? 

4<  As  I  have  said,  Major  Hagner  has  no  right  to 
the  command,  and,  under  the  Sixty-second  Article  of 
War,  can  only  have  it  by  a  special  assignment  of  the 
President,  which  I  do  not  believe  has  been  made ; 
but  that  the  announcement  of  General  Scott  that  the 
command  belongs  to  Major  Hagner  is  his  own  decision 
and  done  in  his  usual  sordid  spirit  of  partisanship, 
and  favoritism  to  pets,   and  personal  associates,  and 


132  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

toadies ;  nor  can  he,  even  in  the  present  straits  of 
the  country,  rise  above  this  in  earnest  devotion  to 
justice  and  the  wants  of  his  country.  If  Mr.  Lin- 
coln chooses  to  be  deceived  in  this  respect,  as  I  fear 
he  will  be,  he  will  repent  it  in  misfortune  and  sorrow  ; 
for  neither  supercilious  conceit  nor  unscrupulous 
tyranny  was  ever  a  veil  for  patriotism  or  ability. 
Major  Hagner  is  not  accustomed  to  troops,  and 
manages  them  here  awkwardly,  but  this  is  nothing 
compared  to  the  great  matter  on  hand,  and  this,  as 
I  have  plainly  told  him,  is  of  much  more  importance 
than  that  either  he,  or  I,  should  conduct  it.  A 
simple  order,  countermanding  that  assigning  him  to 
duty  according  to  brevet  rank,  would  give  me  com- 
mand. With  a  view  to  defence  here,  it  would,  how- 
ever, be  well  to  add  that  I  should  assume  control, 
and  avail  myself  of  all  means  available  for  the  pur- 
pose. ...  If  I  should  have  command  I  would 
have  no  trouble  to  arm  any  assisting  party,  and 
perhaps,  by  becoming  responsible  for  the  arms,  etc., 
I  might  fit  out  the  regiment  we  saw  at  the  Garden 
the  other  day." 

An  event  which  happened  on  the  day  that  Lincoln 
was  inaugurated,  and  on  which  the  State  Convention 
began  its  sessions  at  St.  Louis  (March  4th),  came  very 
near  precipitating  the  conflict  in  Missouri,  and  gave 
Blair  and  Lyon  good  cause  to  press  their  demands 
upon  the  Government. 


Nathaniel  Lyon.  133 

During  the  preceding  night  some  of  the  Minute 
Men  (Duke,  Greene,  Quinlan,  Champion,  and  McCoy) 
raised  the  flag  of  Missouri  over  the  dome  of  the 
Court-house,  and  hoisted  above  their  own  head- 
quarters a  nondescript  banner,  which  was  intended 
to  represent  the  flag  of  the  Confederate  States. 
The  custodian  of  the  Court-house  removed  the 
State  flag  from  that  building  early  in  the  morning ; 
but  the  secession  flag  still  floated  audaciously  and 
defiantly  above  the  Minute  Men's  head-quarters,  in 
the  very  face  of  the  Submissionists'  Convention,  of 
the  Republican  Mayor,  and  his  German  police,  of 
the  department  commander,  and  of  Lyon  and  his 
Home  Guards  ;  and  under  its  folds  there  was  gath- 
ered as  daring  a  set  of  young  fellows  as  ever  did  a 
bold,  or  a  reckless  deed.  They  were  about  a  score 
at  first,  but  when  an  excited  crowd  began  to 
threaten  their  quarters,  and  the  rumor  to  fly  that 
the  Home  Guards  were  coming  to  tear  down  their 
flag,  the  number  of  its  defenders  grew  to  about  one 
hundred.  They  all  had  muskets  of  the  latest  and 
very  best  pattern.  On  the  floors  of  the  upper 
rooms  were  heaps  of  hand  grenades.  In  the  wide 
hall  was  a  swivel,  double-shotted,  and  so  planted  as 
to  rake  the  main  entrance  if  any  one  should  be 
brave  enough  to  try  to  force  it.  At  every  window 
there  were  determined  men,  with  loaded  muskets, 
and  fixed  bayonets ;  behind  them  were  others,  ready 


134    *  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

to  take  the  place  of  any  that  might  fall ;  and  in  all 
the  building  there  was  not  a  man  who  was  not 
ready  to  fight  to  the  death,  rather  than  submit  to 
the  rule  of  Abraham  Lincoln ;  nor  one  who  would 
have  quailed  in  the  presence  of  a  thousand  foes, 
nor  one  of  them  that  survives  to-day,  who  would  not 
fight  just  as  willingly  and  just  as  bravely  for  the  flag 
of  the  Union.  Outside,  too,  throughout  the  ever- 
growing crowd,  other  Minute  Men  were  stationed, 
to  act  as  the  emergency  might  require. 

Before  the  hour  of  noon  had  come  all  the  streets 
in  the  vicinity  were  thronged  with  excited  men, 
some  drawn  thither  by  mere  curiosity  and  by 
that  strange  magnetism  which  mobs  always  exert ; 
some  to  take  part  with  the  Minute  Men,  if  "  the 
Dutch"  should  attack  them;  some  to  tear  down 
"  the  rebel  flag,"  and  to  hang  "  the  traitors,"  who 
had  dared  to  raise  it  on  the  day  of  Lincoln's  inau- 
guration. 

Everything  betokened  a  terrible  riot  and  a  bloody 
fight.  The  civil  authorities  were  powerless.  It  was 
to  no  purpose  that  they  implored  the  crowd  to  dis- 
perse ;  in  vain  that  they  begged  the  Minute  Men  to 
haul  down  their  flag.  The  police  could  do  nothing. 
The  Home  Guards  did  not  dare  to  attack,  for  their 
leaders  knew  that  the  first  shot  that  was  fired  would 
bring  Frost's  Brigade,  which  was  largely  composed 
of  Minute  Men,  to  the  aid  of  their  friends,  and  that 


Nathaniel  Lyon.  135 

they  would  also  be  reinforced  by  the  Irish,  between 
whom  and  the  German  Home  Guards  there  was  the 
antipathy  of  both  race  and  religion.  Only  once  did 
any  one  venture  to  approach  the  well-guarded  portals 
of  the  strong-hold.  The  rash  fools  that  did  it  were 
hurled  back  into  the  street,  amid  the  jeers  and 
laughter  of  the  crowd.  Blair  and  the  Republican 
leaders,  unwilling  to  provoke  a  conflict,  kept  their 
followers  quiet,  and  finally  towards  midnight  the 
crowd  dispersed.  The  next  day's  sun  shone  upon 
the  rebel  flag  still  flying  above  the  roof  of  the  Min- 
ute Men's  quarters.  But  Duke  and  Greene  were 
unhappy,  for  they  had  hoped  to  bring  on  a  fight,  in 
which  they  would  have  been  reinforced  by  Frost's 
Brigade,  and  the  Irish  and  many  Americans,  and  in 
the  confusion  to  seize  the  arsenal,  and  hold  it  till 
the  Secessionists  of  the  State  could  come  to  their 
aid.  They  were,  nevertheless,  greatly  elated  because 
the  people  believed  more  than  ever  that  there  were 
thousands  of  Minute  Men,  instead  of  hundreds. 

Blair  used  the  incident  with  effect  at  the  War 
Department,  and  a  few  days  later  (March  13) 
Lyon  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  all  the 
troops  at  the  arsenal  and  of  its  defences.  General 
Harney,  however,  still  thwarted  the  desires  of  Blair 
and  Lyon,  by  instructing  the  latter  that  the  order 
of  the  War  Department  did  not  confer  upon  him 
any  authority  over  Major  Hagner,  or  any  control 


136  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

over  the  arms  and  other  material  of  war  in  the 
arsenal,  which  was  the  very  thing  that  Blair  and 
Lyon  needed  in  order  to  issue  arms  to  the  Home 
Guards.  For  the  full  consummation  of  their  desires 
they  had  still  to  wait. 

Various  causes  which  have  been  set  out  in  a  pre- 
vious chapter,  and  among  these  the  enactment  of 
the  law  which  placed  the  police,  and  all  other  con- 
servators of  the  peace,  and  also  the  volunteer  mili- 
tia of  St.  Louis,  under  the  orders  of  commissioners 
appointed  by  and  in  sympathy  with  the  Governor, 
wrought  a  complete  change  in  the  political  status 
of  that  city  ;  and  at  the  Municipal  Election,  which 
was  held  on  the  1st  of  April,  Daniel  G.  Taylor,  the 
candidate  of  those  who  were  opposed  to  Lincoln's 
administration  and  to  war  against  the  South,  was 
chosen  mayor  by  a  majority  of  2,658  votes,  over 
John  How,  the  candidate  of  the  Unconditional 
Union  men. 

As  Mr.  How  was  an  exceptionally  popular  man,  a 
leading  member  of  the  Union  Safety  Committee, 
and  a  devoted  supporter  of  Blair  and  Lyon,  his 
defeat  by  so  large  a  majority  was  in  itself  enough  to 
alarm  the  Union  men.  But  the  matter  was  made 
worse  for  them  by  the  fact  that  through  this  elec- 
tion the  whole  organized  power  of  the  city  was 
taken  from  the  Union  men,  and  given  to  their 
enemies.     The  Governor  had  already  put  the  police 


Nathaniel  Lyon.  137 

under  the  control  of  Duke,  the  leader  of  the  Minute 
Men,  James  H.  Carlisle  and  Charles  McLaren,  two 
avowed  Secessionists,  and  John  A.  Brownlee,  who, 
though  a  Northern  man,  was  strongly  opposed  to 
the  subjugation  of  the  South. 

This  new  danger  only  caused  Lyon,  who  fully 
realized  its  magnitude,  to  become  more  resolute, 
and  to  work  more  earnestly.  To  some  Union  men, 
who  expressed  to  him  their  fears  that  the  Southern 
men  would  now  try  to  seize  the  arsenal,  he  said 
that  in  that  event  he  would  issue  arms  to  the  Home 
Guards  and  Union  men,  law  or  no  law  ;  and  that  if 
Major  Hagner  interfered  he  would  "  pitch  him  into 
the  river."  To  Blair,  who  was  again  in  Washington, 
he  wrote  on  the  6th  of  April  that  the  Government 
should  forthwith  give  him  entire  control  of  every- 
thing at  the  arsenal  without  exception  of  men  or 
means.  His  desire  had  been  already  realized  and  in 
a  way  which  was  unexpected,  for  General  Harney, 
who  seems  to  have  at  last  begun  to  recognize  the 
fact  that  there  was  at  least  a  possibility  of  war,  had 
that  very  day  made  an  order  which  virtually  placed 
Hagner  and  the  arsenal  and  everything  in  it  under 
his  command. 

Lyon  was  now  master  of  St.  Louis.  But,  far  from 
being  content  with  the  vantage  that  he  had  gained, 
he  was  only  anxious  to  use  it  for  the  accomplish- 
ment   of  greater   things.     Impatient,    earnest,   and 


138  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

eager  to  get  at  the  throats  of  "  the  traitorous  slave- 
holders," he  ill-brooked  the  slowness  with  which 
Lincoln  seemed  to  be  moving.  He  feared  "  that 
the  President  lacked  the  resolution  to  grapple  with 
treason  and  to  put  it  down  forever;  "  that  "he  was 
not  the  man  for  the  hour,"  and  that  "  our  political 
triumph  had  been  in  vain.  If  matters  go  on  as  they 
do,  we  shall  soon  have  "  (so  he  wrote)  "  a  formidable 
array  of  hostile  troops  upon  us.  When  this  comes, 
it  will,  I  trust,  arouse  the  supine  and  timid  North  to 
a  patriotic  resolution,  which  shall,  in  spite  of  Execu- 
tive tamperings,  do  something  to  retrieve  her  pres- 
ent degradation.  If  Mr.  Lincoln  does  one  tithe  of 
his  duty,  as  he  has  promised,  we  must  have  hostili- 
ties with  the  South.  ...  I  do  not  see  how  war 
is  to  be  avoided.  Under  quack  management  it  may 
be  long  and  bloody,  yet  I  have  no  apprehensions 
about  the  final  triumph  of  Almighty  Truth,  though 
at  the  cost  of  many  unnecessary  sacrifices.  But  let 
them  come !  I  would  rather  see  the  country 
lighted  up  with  flames  from  its  centre  to  its  re- 
motest borders,  than  that  the  great  rights  and  hopes 
of  the  human  race  should  expire  before  the  arro- 
gance of  Secessionists.  Of  this,  however,  there  is 
no  danger.  They  are  at  war  with  nature  and  the 
human  heart,  and  cannot  succeed." 


CHAPTER   VII. 

THE  ARSENAL. 

Bombardment  of  Fort  Sumter — The  President  calls  for  Seventy-five 
Thousand  Troops — The  Reponse  of  the  North — Its  effect  at  the 
South  and  in  the  Border  States — The  Missouri  Republican — 
Governor  Jackson's  Reply — Frosts  Advice — The  Legislature  Con- 
vened— A  plan  to  Capture  the  .Arsenal — Commissioners  sent  South 
for  Siege  Guns — Frost's  Brigade  Ordered  into  Encampment — The 
Plan  Divulged  to  Harney  and  Lyon — Lyon  Calls  on  the  Governor 
of  Illinois  for  Troops,  and  occupies  the  Hills  around  the  Arsenal — 
Bowen  ordered  to  Report  with  his  Command  to  Frost — Lyon 
authorized  to  Arm  the  Home  Guards — Harney  Countermands 
the  Order — Seizure  of  Liberty  Arsenal  by  Secessionists — Harney 
ordered  to  Washington  City — Lyon  arms  the  Home  Guards,  and 
sends  the  Surplus  Arms  to  Alton. 

While  these  things  were  being  done  in  Missouri, 
delegates  from  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  Florida, 
Alabama,  Louisiana,  and  Texas,  had  met  at  Mont- 
gomery Alabama,  on  the  4th  of  February ;  had 
adopted  a  Provisional  Constitution  for  "  the  Con- 
federate States  of  America  "  on  the  8th ;  and  had 
elected  Jefferson  Davis  to  be  President  and  Alexan- 
der H.  Stephens  Vice-President  of  this  Provisional 
Government  on  the  9th. 

Mr.  Davis,  who  was  at  that  time  in  command  of 
the  army  which  Mississippi  was  raising  for  her  de- 


140  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

fence,  seems  to  have  been  reluctant  to  accept  the 
Presidency.  For  he  had  at  last  come  to  believe, 
contrary  to  the  common  opinion  of  the  Southern 
people,  that  war  was  at  least  likely  to  ensue ;  and, 
fancying  himself  better  fitted  for  the  field  than  for 
the  Cabinet,  preferred  the  command  of  an  army  to 
the  Presidency.  He  and  Mr.  Stephens  were,  never- 
theless, inaugurated  on  the  18th  of  February. 

The  Provisional  Congress  had  already  (February 
12)  taken  under  its  charge  the  questions  and  diffi- 
culties then  existing  between  the  several  Confeder- 
ate States  and  the  Government  of  the  United 
States,  relating  to  the  occupation  of  forts,  arsenals, 
navy  yards,  and  other  public  establishments ;  and 
had  also  (February  15)  requested  the  President  elect 
to  send  three  commissioners  to  Washington  city  to 
treat  with  the  Federal  Government  as  to  those  mat- 
ters, and  to  establish  friendly  relations  with  the 
United  States. 

These  commissioners  opened  informal  negotia- 
tions with  the  Administration  on  the  12th  of  March, 
with  relation  chiefly  to  the  evacuation  of  Fort 
Sumter),  and  succeeded  at  last  in  getting  from  the 
Government  an  assurance  that  it  would  not  un- 
dertake to  supply  that  fort  without  first  giving 
notice  to  the  Confederates.  On  the  8th  of  April 
this  notice  was  given  to  General  Beauregard,  who 
had  been  assigned  (March  1)  to  the  command  of  all 


The  Arsenal.  141 

the  troops  near  Charleston.  The  fact  having  been 
communicated  to  his  Government  by  Beauregard,  he 
was  ordered  (April  10)  by  the  Secretary  of  War  to 
demand  the  evacuation  of  the  fort.  This  demand 
was  made  the  next  day.  The  negotiations  which 
followed  were,  at  3.30  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the 
1 2th,  terminated  by  a  notice  from  General  Beaure- 
gard that  unless  the  fort  were  surrendered  within  an 
hour,  he  would  open  fire  upon  it.  At  4.30  A.M.  a 
signal  shell  was  accordingly  thrown  into  Sumter, 
and  a  few  moments  later  fire  was  opened  from  all  the 
Confederate  batteries.  Major  Anderson  returned 
the  fire  about  7  A.M.  It  was  then  kept  up  contin- 
uously by  both  sides  for  nearly  thirty-four  hours 
until,  at  about  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  of  the 
13th,  the  fort  was  surrendered. 

"  The  effect  of  the  assault  on  Fort  Sumter,"  says 
Mr.  Blaine,  "  and  the  lowering  of  the  national  flag 
to  the  forces  of  the  Confederacy  acted  upon  the 
North  as  an  inspiration,  consolidating  public  senti- 
ment, dissipating  all  differences,  bringing  the  whole 
people  to  an  instant  and  unanimous  determination 
to  avenge  the  insult,  and  to  re-establish  the  author- 
ity of  the  Union.  Yesterday  there  had  been  divi- 
sion.    To-day  there  was  unity." 

The  President  issued  a  proclamation  on  the  15th, 
calling  on  the  militia  of  the  several  States  to  the 
number    of     seventy-five    thousand,    to    "  suppress 


142  The   Fight  for  Missouri. 

combinations  in  South  Carolina,  Georgia,  Florida, 
Alabama,  Mississippi,  Louisiana,  and  Texas,  too 
powerful  to  be  suppressed  by  the  ordinary  course 
of  judicial  proceedings;  ...  to  maintain  the 
honor,  the  integrity,  and  the  existence  of  our  Na- 
tional Union,  and  the  perpetuity  of  popular  govern- 
ment ;  .  .  .  and  to  repossess  the  forts,  places, 
and  property  which  have  been  seized  from  the 
Union." 

On  the  same  day  the  Secretary  of  War  tele- 
graphed to  the  governors  of  all  the  States  which 
had  not  seceded,  requesting  them  to  detail  from  the 
militia  of  their  several  States  enough  men  to  make 
up  the  total  of  seventy-five  thousand  troops  called 
for  by  the  President,  "  to  serve  as  infantry,  or  rifle- 
men, for  a  period  of  three  months."  The  quota  to 
be  furnished  by  each  State  was  set  forth  in  these 
telegrams. 

"The  proclamation,"  to  use  once  more  the  pic- 
turesque words  of  Mr.  Blaine,  "  was  responded  to  in 
the  loyal  States  with  an  unparalleled  burst  of  enthu- 
siasm. On  the  day  of  its  issue  hundreds  of  public 
meetings  were  held  from  the  eastern  border  of 
Maine  to  the  extreme  western  frontier.  Work  was 
suspended  on  farm  and  in  factory,  and  the  whole 
people  were  aroused  to  patriotic  ardor,  and  to  a  de- 
termination to  subdue  the  Rebellion  and  restore  the 
Union,  whatever  might  be  the  expenditure  of  treas- 


The  Arsenal.  143 

ure  or  the  sacrifice  of  life.  Telegrams  and  congratula- 
tions of  sympathy  fell  upon  the  White  House  like 
snow  flakes  in  a  storm." 

Northern  Democrats  talked  no  more  of  "  resisting 
the  march  of  a  Black  Republican  army  to  the 
South,"  nor  of  "  offering  their  dead  bodies  as  an 
obstruction  to  its  progress."  They  became  instantly 
and  earnestly  "  loyal,"  and  their  great  leader,  Stephen 
A.  Douglas,  promptly  waited  on  Mr.  Lincoln,  and 
expressing  his  deepest  sympathy,  tendered  his  ac- 
tive co-operation. 

The  effect  upon  the  South  was  no  less  instanta- 
neous and  decisive. 

Throughout  the  seceded  States  the  wildest  en- 
thusiasm took  possession  of  every  one.  They  had 
fought  the  United  States,  and  had  won  the  fight. 
They  had,  after  a  bombardment  the  like  of  which 
few  living  men  had  ever  seen,  taken  the  strongest 
Federal  fortress  in  all  the  Confederacy.  They  sud- 
denly awoke  "  to  a  sense  of  power  and  became  wild 
with  confidence  in  their  ability  to  defy  the  authority 
of  the  United  States." 

In  the  border  slave-holding  States,  which  till 
now  had  remained  steadfast  in  their  allegiance  to 
the  Union,  the  sympathy  of  the  people  with  their 
Southern  kindred  was  carried  to  the  highest  pitch, 
and  their  Governors,  in  responding  to  Mr.  Lincoln's 
call  for  troops  to  invade  the  South,  gave  utterance 


144  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

to  this  universal  feeling :  Virginia  would  furnish  no 
militia  "  to  the  powers  at  Washington  for  the  sub- 
jugation of  the  Southern  States."  North  Carolina 
"  would  be  no  party  to  the  wicked  violation  of 
the  laws  of  the  country,  and  to  the  war  upon  the 
liberties  of  a  free  people."  "  Tennessee  would  not 
furnish  a  single  man  for  coercion,  but  would  raise 
fifty  thousand  men  for  the  defence  of  her  rights  and 
those  of  her  Southern  brethren."  "  The  people  of 
Arkansas  would  defend  to  the  last  extremity  their 
honor  and  their  property  against  Northern  men- 
dacity and  usurpation."  Kentucky  "  would  furnish 
no  troops  for  the  wicked  purpose  of  subduing  her 
sister  States  of  the  South." 

Missouri  was  intensely  excited.  The  Secession- 
ists were  exultant,  and  even  the  Submissionists  took 
heart  again  and  became  defiant.  The  St.  Louis  Re- 
publican, whose  columns  reflected  with  wonderful 
fidelity  the  ever-varying  phases  of  public  opinion, 
the  wishes,  the  fears  and  the  hopes  of  the  rich  men 
of  Missouri,  of  her  slave-holders,  of  the  owners  of 
her  great  landed  estates,  of  the  proprietors  and 
managers  of  her  banks  and  railways  and  other  great 
corporations,  of  her  merchants  and  of  her  manufac- 
turers, said  the  day  after  the  surrender  of  Sumter 
and  before  the  President  had  called  out  the  militia : 

"  No  matter  what  may  be  the  expenditure  of  life 
and  money,  the  seceding  States  never  can  be  con- 


The  Arsenal.  145 

quered.  A  more  unrighteous  and  unpopular  war 
was  never  inaugurated.  And  we  look  to  the  people 
of  the  free  States,  now,  on  the  instant,  to  put  forth 
their  solemn  protest  against  the  prosecution  of  this 
unnatural  war.  ...  If  the  Union  is  to  be  riven 
asunder  by  the  mad  policy  of  Mr.  Lincoln,  all  they 
have  to  do  is  to  encourage  him  in  the  war  which  he 
has  commenced.  No  one  doubts,  we  apprehend, 
the  ability  of  the  Confederate  States  to  defend  them- 
selves against  any  force  which  Mr.  Lincoln  may  send 
to  attack  them.  But  this  calamity  should  be  averted 
before  it  spreads  and  takes  in,  as  it  will,  the  border 
free  States,  as  well  as  the  slave  States." 

The  Columbia  Statesman,  edited  by  another  emi- 
nent conservative,  William  F.  Switzler,  was  equally 
outspoken.     It  said  on  the  15th  of  April : 

"  Let  them  (the  border  States)  stand  as  a  wall  of 
fire  between  the  belligerent  extremes,  and  with  their 
strong  arms  and  potential  counsel  keep  them  apart. 
Let  them  stand  pledged,  as  they  now  are,  to  resist 
any  attempt  at  coercion,  plighting  their  faith,  as  we 
do  not  hesitate  to  plight  the  faith  of  Missouri,  that 
if  the  impending  war  of  the  Northern  States  against 
the  Southern  shall,  in  defiance  of  our  solemn  protest 
and  warning  actually  occur  (which  God  in  his  mercy 
forefend !)  we  shall  stand  by  Virginia  and  Kentucky 
and  our  Southern  sisters — sharing  their  dangers,  and 
abiding  their  fortunes  and  destiny — in  driving  back 


146  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

from  their  borders  the  hostile  feet  of  Northern  in- 
vaders.    Of  the  South,  we  are  for  the  South/' 

The  Republican,  commenting  the  next  day  (April 
16)  on  the  President's  proclamation,  said  : 

"  We  make  no  doubt  that  there  are  fanatics,  and 
fools,  and  vagabonds  enough  in  the  North,  who  if 
collected  together,  might  make  a  good-sized  army  in 
point  of  numbers ;  but  how  far  they  will  be  ready  to 
encounter  the  dangers  of  a  march  through  any  of 
the  border  slave  States  of  the  Union  is  a  question 
which  admits  of  easy  solution.  Not  one  of  those 
States,  whether  in  or  out  of  the  Union,  will  ever 
permit  an  army,  mustered  in  the  free  States,  to  pass 
over  its  territory  with  the  design  of  invading  either 
of  the  States  now  in  rebellion  against  the  Federal 
Government.  If  Governor  Curtin  of  Pennsylvania 
wishes  to  test  it,  let  him  put  himself  at  the  head  of 
his  troops  and  attempt  to  march  through  Virginia. 

"And  so,  Mr.  Lincoln  may  as  well  understand  at 
once,  will  it  be  with  all  the  hordes  that  he  may  send 
into  the  field  for  this  purpose.  Their  track  will  be 
marked  with  their  own  blood,  shed  by  the  people  of 
the  slave  States,  in  defence  of  their  own  territory, 
and  of  what  they  conceive  to  be  the  rights  of  the 
South,  and  in  anticipation  that  the  same  fate  is  in- 
tended for  themselves,  if  this  war  shall  be  successful. 

"  We  need  not  wait  for  the  answer  of  the  Governor 
of  Missouri  to  this  demand  upon  the  State  for  her 


The  Arsenal.  147 

quota  of  troops.  The  people  are  ready  to  respond 
now,  that  they  will  not  contribute  one  regiment,  nor 
one  company  for  any  such  purpose.  They  will  not 
make  war  upon  the  South,  nor  aid  in  the  attempt  to 
retake  Fort  Sumter,  or  any  other  fort  in  the  posses- 
sion of  any  one  of  the  States,  which  have  asserted 
their  independence.  ' 

Governor  Jackson  had  never  wavered  in  his  deter- 
mination to  place  Missouri  on  the  side  of  the  South 
in  the  impending  war,  and  had  done  and  was  still 
doing  all  that  could  possibly  be  done  with  the  in- 
significant means  at  his  command  to  prepare  the 
State  for  hostilities.  As  soon  after  the  adjourn- 
ment of  the  General  Assembly  as  his  duties  at  the 
capital  would  permit,  he  had  gone  to  St.  Louis  to 
confer  with  General  Frost  and  others  as  to  what  was 
best  to  be  done.  At  the  conferences  which  they 
held  some  of  the  most  active  Secessionists  of  the 
city  were  present.  Among  them  were  John  A. 
Brownlee,  President  of  the  Police  Board,  Judge  Wil- 
liam M.  Cooke,  and  Captains  Greene  and  Duke. 
They  all  agreed  that  the  most  important  and  the 
first  thing  to  be  done  was  to  seize  the  arsenal,  so  as 
to  obtain  the  means  for  at  once  arming  and  equip- 
ping the  State  Militia.  How  this  could  be  done 
was  to  be  shown  by  General  Frost  in  a  memorial 
which  he  promised  to  draw  up  forthwith  and  pre- 
sent to  the  Governor. 


148  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

Events  moved  more  rapidly  than  any  one  antici- 
pated, and  General  Frost  had  not  yet  completed  his 
memorial,  when  the  fall  of  Fort  Sumter  changed  the 
aspect  of  affairs,  and  compelled  him  to  consider  other 
matters  in  connection  with  the  seizure  of  the  ar- 
senal. Consequently  on  the  15th  of  April  he  sub- 
mitted to  the  Governor,  with  the  indorsement  of 
Mr.  Brownlee,  a  written  memorandum,  in  which  he 
pointed  out  the  strategic  importance  of  St.  Louis, 
and  the  fact  that  Lyon  had  not  only  greatly 
strengthened  the  defences  of  the  arsenal,  but  was 
erecting  batteries  and  mounting  heavy  siege  guns 
and  mortars  with  which  to  command  the  river  ap- 
proaches to  the  city,  and  the  city  itself,  and  would 
soon  have  St.  Louis  at  his  mercy,  and  be  able  to 
dictate  the  course  of  the  State. 

"  I  fully  appreciate,"  he  went  on  to  say, "  the  very 
delicate  position  occupied  by  your  Excellency,  and 
do  not  expect  you  to  take  any  action,  or  to  do  any- 
thing that  is  not  legal  and  proper  to  be  done,  under 
the  circumstances,  but  I  would  nevertheless  suggest 
the  following  as  both  legal  and  proper." 

1.  Convene  the  General  Assembly  at  once. 

2.  Send  an  agent  to  the  South  to  procure  mortars 
and  siege  guns. 

3.  Prevent  the  garrisoning  of  the  United  States 
arsenal  at  Liberty. 

4.  Warn  the  people  of  Missouri  "  that  the  Presi- 


The  Arsenal.  149 

dent  has  acted  illegally  in  calling  out  troops,  thus 
arrogating  to  himself  the  war-making  power,  and 
that  they  are,  therefore,  by  no  means  bound  to 
give  him  aid  or  comfort  in  his  attempt  to  subjugate 
by  force  of  arms  a  people  who  are  still  free,  but,  on 
the  contrary,  should  prepare  themselves  to  maintain 
all  their  rights  as  citizens  of  Missouri. " 

5.  Order  him  (Frost)  "to  form  a  military  camp 
of  instruction  at  or  near  the  city  of  St.  Louis;  to 
muster  military  companies  into  the  service  of  the 
State  ;  and  to  erect  batteries  and  do  all  things  neces- 
sary and  proper  to  be  done  in  order  to  maintain  the 
peace,  dignity,  and  sovereignty  of  the  State." 

6.  Order  Colonel  Bowen  to  report  with  his  com- 
mand to  him  (Frost)  for  duty. 

It  was  intended  that  the  camp  of  instruction 
should  be  established  on  the  river  bluffs  below  the 
arsenal  in  such  position  that,  with  the  aid  of  the 
siege  guns  and  mortars  which  were  to  be  brought 
from  the  South,  Frost,  and  his  brigade  reinforced 
by  Bowen's  command  and  by  volunteers  would  be 
able  to  force  Lyon  to  surrender  the  arsenal  and  all 
its  stores  to  the  State. 

While  considering  these  matters  the  Governor  re- 
ceived (April  16)  the  requisition  of  the  Secretary  of 
War  for  four  regiments  of  infantry — Missouri's  quota 
of  the  seventy-five  thousand  men  called  for  by  the 
President.    To  this  requisition  he  replied  (April  17): 


150  The   Fight  for   Missouri, 

"Your  dispatch  of  the  13th  instant  making  a  call 
upon  Missouri  for  four  regiments  of  men  for  imme- 
diate service,  has  been  received.  There  can  be,  I 
apprehend,  no  doubt  but  these  men  are  intended 
to  form  a  part  of  the  President's  army  to  make  war 
upon  the  people  of  the  seceded  States.  Your  requi- 
sition, in  my  judgment,  is  illegal,  unconstitutional, 
and  revolutionary  in  its  objects,  inhuman  and  dia- 
bolical, and  cannot  be  complied  with.  Not  one  man 
will  the  State  of  Missouri  furnish  to  carry  on  such 
an  unholy  crusade." 

Commenting  upon  this  reply  the  next  day  the 
Republican  said  :  "  Nobody  expected  any  other  re- 
sponse from  him,  and  the  people  of  Missouri  will  in- 
dorse it.  They  may  not  approve  the  early  course  of 
the  Southern  States,  but  they  denounce  and  defy  the 
action  of  Mr.  Lincoln  in  proposing  to  call  out  seventy- 
five  thousand  men  for  the  purpose  of  coercing  the 
seceding  States.  Whatever  else  may  happen,  he 
gets  no  men  from  the  Border  States  to  carry  on 
such  a  war." 

On  the  same  day  that  the  Governor  refused  to 
comply  with  the  requisition  for  troops,  he  sent  Cap- 
tains Greene  and  Duke  to  Montgomery,  with  an 
autograph  letter  to  the  President  of  the  Confede- 
rate States,  requesting  him  to  furnish  those  officers 
with  the  siege  guns  and  mortars  which  General 
Frost  wanted  for  the  proposed  attack  upon  the  ar- 


The  Arsenal.  151 

senal;  and  Judge  William  M.  Cooke  was  sent  to 
Virginia  upon  a  similar  errand. 

He  also  summoned  the  General  Assembly  to 
meet  at  Jefferson  City,  on  the  2d  of  May,  "  for 
the  purpose  of  enacting  such  measures  as  might  be 
deemed  necessary  and  proper  for  the  more  perfect 
organization  and  equipment  of  the  militia,  and  to 
raise  the  money,  and  provide  such  other  means  as 
might  be  required  to  place  the  State  in  a  proper 
attitude  of  defence." 

To  have  ordered  General  Frost  to  establish  a 
military  camp  of  instruction  at  St.  Louis,  and 
given  him  the  extraordinary  powers  which  he  asked 
for,  would  have  been  too  open  a  defiance  of  the 
United  States  Government,  and  would  have  also 
disclosed  prematurely  the  purpose  of  the  encamp- 
ment, and  justified  Lyon  in  taking  whatever  meas- 
ures he  pleased  to  prevent  the  accomplishment  of 
that  purpose.  The  Governor,  therefore,  adopted 
the  more  prudent  and  strictly  legal  expedient  of 
ordering  the  commanding  officers  of  the  several 
militia  districts  of  the  State  to  assemble  their 
respective  commands,  in  obedience  to  a  law  enacted 
in  1858,  at  some  convenient  place,  each  within  his 
own  district,  on  the  3d  of  May,  and  to  go  with  them 
into  encampment  for  six  days,  to  the  end  that  the 
officers  and  men  might  attain  a  greater  degree  of 
efficiency    in    drill    and    discipline.     This   order    of 


152  The   Fight  for   Missouri. 

course  authorized  General  Frost  to  establish  his 
camp  wherever  he  pleased  within  the  city  or  county 
of  St.  Louis. 

Lieutenant-Colonel  Bowen  was  then  ordered  to 
disband  the  South-west  Battalion  (which  was  still 
guarding  the  western  counties  of  the  State  against 
marauders  from  Kansas),  with  the  exception  of  a 
light  battery  and  one  company  of  mounted  rifle- 
men, and  to  report  with  these  and  all  officers  and 
men  belonging  to  the  St.  Louis  Militia  District,  to 
General  Frost,  at  his  encampment  in  St.  Louis. 

The  United  States  arsenal  at  Liberty,  in  the 
western  part  of  the  State,  had  already  been  taken 
(April  20)  by  the  Secessionists,  and  its  munitions  of 
war,  among  which  were  four  brass  guns,  had  been 
appropriated  to  their  own  use. 

The  plans  of  Governor  Jackson  and  General  Frost 
for  the  capture  of  the  arsenal  came  to  the  knowl- 
edge of  General  Harney  almost  as  soon  as  they  were 
formed,  and  on  the  16th  of  April  he  wrote  to  Gen- 
eral Scott : 

"  The  arsenal  buildings  and  grounds  are  com- 
pletely commanded  by  the  hills  immediately  in 
their  rear,  and  within  easy  range,  and  I  learn  from 
sources  which  I  consider  reliable  that  it  is  the  in- 
tention of  the  Executive  of  this  State  to  cause 
batteries  to  be  erected  on  these  hills,  and  also  upon 
the  island  opposite  to  the  arsenal.     I  am  further  in- 


The  Arsenal.  153 

formed  that  should  such  batteries  be  erected,  it  is 
contemplated  by  the  State  authorities,  in  the  event 
of  the  secession  of  the  State  from  the  Union,  to  de- 
mand the  surrender  of  the  arsenal. 

"  The  command  at  the  arsenal  at  present  consists 
of  nine  officers  and  about  four  hundred  and  thirty 
enlisted  men.  .  .  .  While  this  force  would  prob- 
ably be  able  to  resist  successfully  an  assaulting  party 
greatly  superior  to  itself  in  numbers,  it  could  not 
withstand  the  fire  of  batteries  situated  as  above  in- 
dicated. Under  these  circumstances,  I  respectfully 
ask  instructions  for  my  guidance." 

Lyon  did  not  ask,  or  wait  for,  instructions.  He 
wrote  that  very  day  (April  16)  by  a  trustworthy  mes- 
senger to  Governor  Yates  of  Illinois  and  asked 
him  to  obtain  authority  from  Washington  to  hold 
in  ^readiness  for  service  at  St.  Louis  the  six  regi- 
ments which  Illinois  had  been  called  upon  to  furnish. 
There  were,  he  said,  quarters  for  3,000  men  at  Jef- 
ferson Barracks,  and  1,000  or  2,000  could  be  quar- 
tered at  the  arsenal.  He  also  suggested  to  Gov- 
ernor Yates  that,  as  the  arms  at  the  arsenal  were 
the  main  object  of  the  threatened  attack  upon  that 
post,  it  might  be  well  for  him  to  make  requisition 
for  a  large  supply  of  arms,  and  get  them  shipped 
thence  to  Springfield.  Governor  Yates  submitted 
the  matter  immediately  to  the   President,  and  was 


154  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

on  the  20th  of  April  instructed  to  send  two  or 
three  regiments  of  the  Illinois  quota  "  to  support 
the  garrison  of  the  St.  Louis  arsenal."  Lyon  was, 
at  the  same  time,  ordered  to  equip  these  troops 
with  arms,  accoutrements,  and  ammunition,  "and 
moreover  to  issue  ten  thousand  additional  stands 
of  arms  and  accoutrements  to  the  agent  of  the 
Governor  of  Illinois,  together  with  a  corresponding 
amount  of  ammunition." 

Blair  returned  from  Washington  to  St.  Louis  on 
the  17th  of  April.  He  comprehended  the  situation 
clearly,  and  acted  with  his  accustomed  wisdom, 
boldness,  and  decision.  By  his  advice  Colonel 
Pritchard  and  other  anti-secession  officers  of  Frost's 
Brigade  resigned  their  commissions,  and  were  fol- 
lowed out  of  that  organization  by  all  the  positive 
Union  men.  On  the  19th  he  telegraphed  to  the 
Secretary  of  War :  "  Send  order  by  telegraph  at 
once  for  mustering  men  into  service  to  Captain  N. 
Lyon.  It  will  then  be  surely  executed,  and  we  will 
fill  your  requisition"  (that  which  had  been  made 
upon  Missouri  for  four  regiments)  "  in  two  days. 
Relieve  Hagner.     Answer  immediately." 

He  had  already  procured  from  the  War  Depart- 
ment an  order  placing  five  thousand  stand  of  arms  at 
the  disposal  of  Lyon  for  arming  "  loyal  citizens  " — 
that  is  to  say  the  Home  Guards — in  case  of  necessity, 
and  now  hastened,  by  his  counsels  and  encourage- 


The  Arsenal.  155 

ment,  the  recruitment  of  the  four  regiments  which 
he  had  tendered  to  the  Government,  and  which  he 
was  resolved  to  have  ready  by  the  time  that  the 
order  for  mustering  them  into  the  service  could  be 
received.  An  incident  which  occurred  at  this  time 
came  opportunely  to  his  aid. 

Lyon,  with  that  utter  disregard  of  the  mere  letter 
of  the  law,  which  was  one  of  his  most  marked  char- 
acteristics, had  for  the  better  security  of  the  arsenal 
and  also  for  the  convenience  of  the  men,  occupied 
with  his  patrols  the  streets  adjacent  to  the  arsenal. 
This  was  a  clear  violation  of  the  city  ordinances, 
and  a  direct  interference  with  the  duties  of  the 
Board  of  Police  Commissioners.  The  Board  com- 
plained of  it  to  Captain  Lyon,  and  demanded  that 
he  should  obey  the  laws.  He  refused  to  comply. 
As  the  Board  could  not  enforce  his  obedience,  the 
matter  was  referred  to  General  Harney.  The 
Commissioners  at  the  same  time  protested  against 
the  issue  of  United  States  arms  by  Lyon  to  men 
not  in  the  military  service,  as  these  men  might 
thereby  be  made  dangerous  to  the  peace  of  the 
city,  which  it  was  the  duty  of  the  Board  to  main- 
tain. 

Harney  immediately  (April  18th)  ordered  Lyon  to 
withdraw  his  patrols  into  the  limits  of  the  arsenal, 
and  forbade  him  to  issue  arms  to  any  one  without 
his  own   (Harney's)    previously  obtained    sanction. 


156  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

This  determined  Blair  to  demand  the  removal  of 
Harney  from  the  command  of  the  Department  of 
the  West,  and  he  accordingly  wrote  the  following 
letter  (April  19th)  to  his  brother,  Judge  Montgomery 
Blair,  Postmaster-general,  and  forwarded  it  by  a 
special  messenger : 

"  Dr.  Hazlitt  will  hand  you  this  letter.  He  goes 
to  Washington  for  the  purpose  of  urging  the  re- 
moval of  General  Harney  from  this  post,  and  giving 
us  some  one  to  command  who  will  not  obstruct  or- 
ders of  the  Government  intended  for  our  assistance. 
Harney  has  issued  orders,  at  the  instance  of  the 
Secessionists,  refusing  to  allow  us  to  have  the  guns 
which  the  Government  had  ordered  to  be  given 
to  us.  We  also  want  an  order  to  Captain  Lyon 
to  swear  in  the  four  regiments  assigned  to  Missouri. 
If  you  will  send  General  Wool,  or  some  one  who 
is  not  to  be  doubted,  to  take  command  of  this  dis- 
trict, and  designate  an  officer  to  swear  in  our  volun- 
teers ;  and  arm  the  rest  of  our  people  who  are  will- 
ing to  act  as  a  civic  or  home  guard,  I  think  that  we 
shall  be  able  to  hold  our  ground  here.  I  consider 
these  matters  of  vital  importance,  .  .  .  and  ask 
you  to  see  Cameron  (Secretary  of  War),  immedi- 
ately, in  regard  to  the  business." 

The  seizure  of  the  United  States  arsenal  at  Lib- 
erty hastened  the  action  of  the  Secretary  of  War 
upon  Blair's  requests.     Harney  was  (April  21)  re- 


The  Arsenal.  157 

lieved  of  the  command  of  the  Department  of  the 
West  and  ordered  to  repair  to  Washington  city  and 
report  to  the  General-in-chief.  On  the  same  day 
Lyon  was  instructed  to  "  immediately  execute  the 
order  previously  given  to  arm  loyal  citizens,  to  pro- 
tect the  public  property,  and  execute  the  laws," 
and  was  also  ordered  to  "  muster  into  the  service 
the  four  regiments  which  the  Governor  had  refused 
to  furnish." 

These  orders  were  received  at  St.  Louis  on  the 
23d  of  April.  Harney  relinquished  the  command 
of  the  department  the  same  day,  and  left  the  next 
for  Washington  city.  The  command  was  to  devolve 
upon  the  senior  officer  in  the  department ;  but  Cap- 
tain Lyon,  strange  to  say,  acted  and  was  recog- 
nized by  the  Government  as  commanding  the  de- 
partment. 

He  proceeded  quickly  to  organize  the  four  regi- 
ments, and,  while  doing  this,  sent  away  from  St. 
Louis  all  the  surplus  munitions  of  war  which  were 
still  there.  This  last  was  done  on  the  night  of  the 
26th  of  April,  when  the  steamer  City  of  Alton,  drop- 
ping unnoticed  down  to  the  arsenal,  took  the  arms 
and  other  munitions  aboard,  and  transferred  them 
to  Illinois.     This  ended  the  contest  for  the  arsenal. 


CHAPTER   VIII. 

CAMP  JACKSON. 

Douglas  and  the  Northern  Democrats  Declare  for  the  Union — The 
North  Unanimous — Missouri  Threatened  on  Three  Sides  by  Fed- 
eral Armies,  and  St.  Louis  full  of  Federal  Soldiers — The  Border 
States  Hesitate — The  Confederacy  Does  Nothing — Missouri  Help- 
less and  Submissive — The  Governor  still  Resolute — He  Pur- 
chases Arms  and  Powder — Camp  Jackson — Lyon  Authorized  to 
Enlist  Ten  Thousand  Men  and  to  Proclaim  Martial  Law  in  St. 
Louis — Elected  Brigadier-General  of  the  Home  Guards — Arms 
from  the  Confederacy  taken  to  Camp  Jackson — Lyon  Visits  the 
Camp  in  Disguise — Capture  of  Camp  Jackson  and  the  State 
Troops — Rioting  and  Bloodshed — The  General  Assembly  Enacts 
the  Military  Bill  and  Confers  Dictatorial  Powers  on  the  Governor — 
A  Panic  in  St.  Louis — Harney  Resumes  Command  and  Estab- 
lishes Order  in  the  City — Missourians  See  the  Danger  of  Seceding 
and  Begin  to  Submit. 

The  enthusiasm  of  the  Southern  Rights'  people 
of  Missouri  quickly  subsided  in  view  of  the  una- 
nimity with  which  the  North  was  responding  to  the 
President's  call  for  troops,  and  in  contemplation  of 
the  dangers  which  they  would  have  to  encounter 
who  should  dare  to  take  up  arms  against  the  Federal 
Government. 

The  North  had  become  united,  while  the  South 
was  still  divided.  For  more  than  a  generation  the 
Democrats  of  the  North  had  stood  by  the  South 


Camp  Jackson.  159 

with  a  constancy  and  a  courage  that  deserve  all 
praise.  In  obedience  to  the  Constitution,  which 
they  revered,  and  for  the  sake  of  the  Union  which 
they  loved,  they  had  maintained  the  rights  of 
slave-holders  under  the  Constitution  long  after  the 
enjoyment  of  those  rights  had  come  into  conflict  with 
the  humane  spirit  of  the  age  and  with  the  civiliza- 
tion of  the  North  ;  they  had  maintained  those  rights 
even  when  they  led  to  the  enactment  of  a  law  whose 
requirements  were  abhorrent  to  their  feelings ;  and 
they  had  continued  to  maintain  them  even  when 
the  South,  appealing  to  those  rights,  broke  the 
compact  whereby  a  part  of  the  national  domain  had 
been  consecrated  to  freedom  forever.  They  had 
stood  by  the  South  even  then ;  and  throughout  all 
the  savage  struggle  for  Kansas,  and  during  the 
Presidential  election  of  i860,  and  until  they  had 
themselves  been  swept  out  of  power  in  every  non- 
slave-holding  State  because  of  their  obedience  to 
the  Constitution,  and  their  friendship  for  the  South. 
And  even  after  South  Carolina  and  other  States 
had  seceded,  they  still  felt  kindly  towards  them, 
and  sought  to  bring  them  back  into  the  Union,  not 
by  force,  but  by  assuring  to  their  people  the  enjoy- 
ment of  every  right  to  which  they  could  justly  lay 
claim  under  the  Constitution.  But  when  the  South, 
in  the  exercise  of  the  right  of  secession  or  of  revo- 
lution or  whatever  else  one  may  choose  to  call  it, 


160  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

established  a  separate  government  and  took  up 
arms  against  the  Union,  they  could  no  longer  stand 
by  it,  but  rallied,  as  they  ought  to  have  done,  under 
the  flag  of  their  own  country. 

That  the  North  was  thoroughly  united,  Missouri- 
ans  did  not  have  to  look  far  to  see.  Just  across  the 
river,  that  State  with  which  their  own  was  most 
closely  bound,  not  only  by  geographical  contiguity, 
but  by  community  of  origin,  by  common  interests, 
by  daily  intercourse,  and  by  every  tie  which  holds 
two  States  together,  was  rushing  to  arms  in  re- 
sponse to  the  appeals  of  her  Douglas,  no  less  than 
to  the  call  of  her  Lincoln,  and  was  assembling  armies 
all  along  the  eastern  boundary  of  Missouri ;  while 
on  her  northern  border  Iowa  was  gathering  her 
volunteers  to  attack  her,  if  she  should  venture  to 
rebel  against  the  Government ;  and  on  her  western 
frontier  the  free-State  men  of  Kansas  were  mus- 
tering under  the  leadership  of  desperadoes  like 
Montgomery,  and  of  soldiers  like  Dietzler,  to  renew 
on  the  soil  of  Missouri  their  bitter  war  against  the 
"  border  ruffians  "  of  the  South.  The  Government 
was  also  concentrating  its  regulars  at  Fort  Leaven- 
worth under  Sturgis  and  Steele,  within  sight  of  the 
richest  and  most  populous  counties  of  the  State : 
and  Blair  and  Lyon  had  at  St.  Louis  more  than 
five  hundred  regulars,  and  five  thousand  well  armed 
volunteers,  many  of  them  veterans.     Worse  than  alt, 


Camp  Jackson,  161 

the  State  was  divided  against  herself,  and  one-fourth 
of  her  own  people  were  ready  to  take  up  arms 
against  their  Governor ;  who,  to  resist  all  these 
gathering  armies,  had  no  troops  but  Frost's  frac- 
tional brigade,  many  of  whose  officers  and  men 
would  throw  down  their  arms  rather  than  use  them 
against  the  Union ;  and  a  few  widely  scattered  com- 
panies of  militia,  some  of  which  were  composed 
chiefly  of  "  loyal  "  men. 

The  Southern  Rights'  men  of  Missouri  saw  all 
this,  and  that  there  was  no  one  to  help  them  if  they 
should  resist  the  Government.  Their  own  State 
seemed  to  be  powerless.  The  Confederacy  had 
shown  no  disposition  to  aid  them.  Virginia  had 
seceded,  but  North  Carolina  and  Tennessee  were 
hesitating;  Arkansas  still  clung  to  the  Union,  Mary- 
land had  been  subjugated,  and  Kentucky  was  about 
to  submit  without  striking  a  blow,  without  even 
raising  her  arm  to  strike.  To  resist,  thus  circum- 
stanced, the  Federal  Government,  was  to  provoke 
its  wrath  ;  to  involve  their  State  in  civil  war ;  to 
ruin  their  own  fortunes ;  to  impoverish  their  families  ; 
and  to  expose  themselves  to  all  the  hazards  of  war. 
What  could  they  do  ?  The  Republican  which  felt 
as  they  felt,  advised  them  to  do  that  which  they 
wanted  to  do.  Like  them,  it  had  been  defiant  on 
the  1 8th  of  April;  like  them  it  was  submissive  on 
the    22d.     Missouri,    it    now   said,    must    take    her 


1 62  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

stand,  not  with  South,  but  with  Kentucky  :  "  Let 
us  take  the  same  position  that  Kentucky  has 
taken — that  of  armed  neutrality.  Let  us  declare 
that  no  military  force  levied  in  other  States,  shall 
be  allowed  to  pass  through  our  State,  or  camp 
upon  our  soil.  Let  us  demand  of  the  opposing  sec- 
tions to  stop  further  hostile  operations  until  reason 
can  be  appealed  to  in  Congress,  and  before  the 
people  ;  and  when  that  fails  it  will  be  time  enough 
for  us  to  take  up  arms.  Why  should  we,  all  unpre- 
pared, rush  out  of  the  Union,  to  find  a  doubt- 
ful and  reluctant  reception  in  the  Confederate 
States?" 

As  soon  as  the  Governor  learned  that  the  arms 
with  which  he  had  been  hoping  to  equip  the  State 
troops  had  been  removed  from  the  arsenal,  he  di- 
rected General  Harding,  the  Quarter-master  Gen- 
eral, to  proceed  to  St.  Louis,  and  procure  for  the 
State  all  the  arms  and  ammunition  that  he  could 
find  in  that  city.  That  officer  had  in  February 
reported  to  the  Governor  that  the  only  munitions 
of  war  which  the  State  owned,  except  a  few  muskets 
in  the  hands  of  the  militia,  were  two  6-pounder 
guns,  without  limbers  or  caissons  ;  about  one  thou- 
sand muskets  ;  forty  sabres ;  and  fifty-eight  swords. 
The  latter  were,  he  said,  of  an  antique  Roman 
pattern  and  "  would  not  be  as  useful  in  war  as  so 
many  bars  of   soap."     In  St.    Louis   he   now   pur- 


Camp  Jackson.  163 

chased,  partly  by  force,  several  hundred  hunting 
rifles,  some  camp  and  garrison  equipage,  and  about 
seventy  tons  of  gunpowder ;  all  which  were  shipped 
to  Jefferson  City  on  the  7th  of  May  under  guard  of 
Captain  Kelly's  company,  detailed  for  that  duty  by 
General  Frost. 

Though  the  removal  of  the  arms  from  the  arsenal 
had  taken  away  the  motive  which  caused  the  Gov- 
ernor to  order  the  militia  into  camp  at  St.  Louis, 
it  was  determined  to  hold  that  encapment,  never- 
theless. The  intention  of  holding  it  on  the  hills 
near  the  arsenal,  was,  however,  abandoned.  For  to 
camp  there  now  would  be  an  idle  threat  at  best, 
and  besides,  and  this  was  a  still  more  potent  reason, 
those  very  hills  had  been  quietly  occupied  by  Lyon 
with  both  infantry  and  artillery.  Frost,  therefore, 
selected  a  camp  in  a  wooded  valley,  known  as  Lindell 
Grove,  near  the  intersection  of  Olive  Street  and 
Grand  Avenue,  in  the  western  part  of  the  city,  and 
called  it  Camp  Jackson,  in  honor  of  the  Governor. 
And  there  his  brigade,  aggregating  a  little  more 
than  seven  hundred  men,  went  into  encampment  on 
Monday,  the  6th  of  May. 

Besides  the  officers  and  the  men  of  the  brigade, 
there  were  a  number  of  young  men  in  the  camp,  who 
had  come  from  all  quarters  of  the  State  to  learn 
something  of  the  art  of  war,  and  to  take  part  in  any 
hostile   movement   which   Frost    might   undertake. 


164  The  Fight  for  Missouri, 

From  this  little  force  one  company,  Captain  Kelly's, 
was  detached  on  the  7th  and  ordered  to  Jefferson 
City,  leaving  Frost  about  six  hundred  and  thirty 
men. 

Blair  and  Lyon,  who  had  been  kept  well  informed 
as  to  everything  that  the  Governor  and  Frost  were 
doing,  had  been  meanwhile  quietly  getting  ready  to 
capture  the  camp,  together  with  Frost  and  all  his 
command.  No  longer  obstructed  by  Harney,  they 
had,  by  the  30th  of  April,  mustered  into  the  service 
five  regiments  of  infantry,  all  of  them  well  armed 
and  fully  equipped.  On  that  day  (April  30)  Lyon 
wrote  to  the  Secretary  of  War :  "  The  State  is 
doubtless  getting  ready  to  attack  the  Government 
troops  with  artillery.  I  have  sent  three  volunteer 
companies  with  Captain  Totten's  battery  to  occupy 
buildings  outside  of  the  arsenal,  hired  for  this  pur- 
pose both  to  give  them  shelter  and  to  occupy  com- 
manding positions  which  the  Secessionists  had  in- 
tended to  occupy  themselves,  and  upon  which  they 
openly  avowed  that  they  would  plant  siege  bat- 
teries to  reduce  this  place,  the  arsenal.  This  exas- 
perates them  and  has  given  rise  to  a  singular  corre- 
spondence which,  when  convenient,  I  will  lay  before 
the  War  Department." 

On  the  same  day  (April  30)  the  following  extra- 
ordinary paper  was  transmitted  to  St.  Louis,  ad- 
dressed by  "  Simon  Cameron,  Secretary  of  War,"  to 


Camp  Jackson.  165 

"  Captain  Nathaniel  Lyon,  commanding  Depart- 
ment of  the  West." 

"  The  President  of  the  United  States  directs  that 
you  enroll  in  the  military  service  of  the  United 
States  loyal  citizens  of  St.  Louis  and  vicinity,  not 
exceeding,  with  those  heretofore  enlisted,  ten  thou- 
sand in  number,  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  the 
authority  of  the  United  States  and  for  the  the  pro- 
tection of  the  peaceable  inhabitants  of  Missouri, 
and  you  will,  if  deemed  necessary  for  that  purpose 
by  yourself  and  Messrs.  Oliver  D.  Filley,  John  How, 
James  O.  Broadhead,  Samuel  T.  Glover,  J.  J. 
Witzig,  and  Francis  P.  Blair,  Jr.,  proclaim  martial 
law  in  the  city  of  St.  Louis." 

This  remarkable  document  was  indorsed,  "  It  is 
revolutionary  times,  and  therefore  I  do  not  object 
to  the  irregularity  of  this.  W.  S."  (Winfield  Scott.) 
It  bore  this  indorsement  besides,  "  Approved  April 
30,  1861.     A.  Lincoln." 

Upon  receiving  this  authority  Lyon  mustered  into 
the  service  on  the  7th  and  8th  of  May  four  more 
regiments  of  infantry,  which,  with  a  fifth  that  was 
mustered  in  on  the  nth,  constituted  what  became 
known  as  the  United  States  Reserve  Corps,  or  Home 
Guards.  The  five  regiments  that  had  been  organ- 
ized in  April  were  known  as  Missouri  Volunteers. 
The  First  Regiment  of  Missouri  Volunteers  was 
composed   largely   of   natives  of   this  country   and 


1 66  The   Fight  for   Missouri. 

Irishmen.  Francis  P.  Blair,  Jr.,  was  its  colonel, 
George  L.  Andrews,  its  lieutenant-colonel ;  and  John 
M.  Schofield  (now  major-general),  its  major.  The 
other  nine  regiments  were  composed  almost  exclu- 
sively of  Germans.  The  officers  of  the  five  regi- 
ments of  Missouri  Volunteers  urged  Blair  to  accept 
the  command  of  that  brigade,  but  he  insisted  upon 
their  electing  Lyon  instead,  and  of  course,  his 
wishes  were  obeyed.  Lyon  was  thenceforth  known 
as  Brigadier-general  Lyon,  though  he  was  not  com- 
missioned as  such  till  the  17th  of  May,  to  rank  from 
the  1 8th.  Chester  Harding  was  made  adjutant-gen- 
eral of  the  brigade.  Captain  Thomas  W.  Sweeny 
of  the  Second  Infantry  was  chosen  brigadier-gen- 
eral of  the  brigade  composed  of  the  five  regiments 
of  Home  Guards,  and  was  commissioned  as  such  on 
the  20th  of  May.  He  had  served  in  the  Mexican 
War  as  captain  of  a  company  of  New  York  volun- 
teers, and  at  the  close  of  that  war  had  entered  the 
regular  army. 

Blair  and  Lyon  were  now  ready  to  strike.  They 
had  more  than  7,000  well  armed  men,  and  within 
two  miles  of  them  lay  encamped  nearly  all  the 
militia  of  the  State — less  than  700  men.  Capture 
these  men,  and  take  away  their  arms,  and  the  Gov- 
ernor would  have  no  organized  force,  no  arms,  noth- 
ing with  which  to  resist  the  occupation  of  the  State 
by  Federal   troops,  and  within  a  week  they  would 


Camp  Jackson.  167 

hang  u  the  traitor,"  or  drive  him  out  of  the  State. 
There  was  no  time  to  waste,  for  not  only  would 
the  militia  disperse  to  their  homes  on  the  last  day 
of  the  week,  but  by  that  time  Harney  would  be 
back  in  St.  Louis,  and  again  in  command  of  the  de- 
partment, and  nothing  would  then  be  done  to  harm 
the  Secessionists.  It  was  therefore  agreed  on  the 
7th  of  May  between  Blair,  Lyon,  Harding,  and 
Franklin  A.  Dick,  to  take  the  camp  at  once. 

A  thing  now  happened  which  gave  them  a  good 
pretext  to  do  what  they  wanted.  Such  things  are 
always  happening  to  those  who  know  how  to  take 
advantage  of  them. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  Governor  Jackson 
had  sent  Captains  Duke  and  Greene  to  Mont- 
gomery for  siege  guns  and  mortars,  with  which 
Frost  was  to  take  the  arsenal.  On  reaching  the 
Confederate  capital  they  laid  their  requests  before 
the  President  and  his  Cabinet,  and  explained  to 
them  the  purpose  for  which  they  wanted  the  guns 
and  mortars.  Mr.  Davis,  who  had,  at  one  time, 
been  stationed  at  St.  Louis,  and  was  familiar  with 
the  ground,  approved  the  plan,  and  ordered  the 
commandant  of  the  Baton  Rouge  Arsenal  to  sup- 
ply the  requisition.  He  also  wrote  to  the  Governor 
of  Louisiana,  and  asked  him  to  render  such  assist- 
ance as  he  could  to  the  Missouri  officers. 

To  Governor  Jackson  he  wrote  (April  23) : 


1 68  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

" .  .  .  After  learning,  as  well  as  I  could,  from 
the  gentlemen  accredited  to  me,  what  was  most 
needful  for  the  attack  on  the  arsenal,  I  have  di- 
rected that  Captains  Greene  and  Duke  should  be 
furnished  with  two  12-pounder  howitzers  and  two 
32-pounder  guns,  with  the  proper  ammunition  for 
each.  These,  from  the  commanding  hills,  will  be 
effective  against  the  garrison,  and  to  break  the  en- 
closing walls  of  the  place.  I  concur  with  you  as  to 
the  great  importance  of  capturing  the  arsenal  and 
securing  its  supplies,  rendered  doubly  important  by 
the  means  taken  to  obstruct  your  commerce  and 
render  you  unarmed  victims  of  a  hostile  invasion. 

"  We  look  anxiously  and  hopefully  for  the  day 
when  the  star  of  Missouri  shall  be  added  to  the 
constellation  of  the  Confederate  States  of  America. 

"  With  the  best  wishes,  I  am, 

"  Very  respectfully  yours, 

"  Jefferson  Davis." 

The  arms  and  ammunition  were  procured  at 
Baton  Rouge  and  shipped  to  St.  Louis  as  merchan- 
dise, and  consigned  to  well-known  Union  men.  At 
St.  Louis  they  were  turned  over  (May  8)  to  Major 
Shaler,  of  Frost's  Brigade,  and  taken  to  Camp  Jack- 
son. The  fact  was  made  known  to  Blair  and  Lyon 
as  soon  as  the  thing  was  done,  and  they  determined 
to  act  at  once.  The  next  day  Lyon,  disguised  as 
an    old    woman,    drove    through    the    camp,    and 


Camp  Jackson.  169 

satisfied  himself,  by  personal  inspection,  that  the 
men  had  in  their  possession  arms  and  ammunition 
which  had  been  taken  from  the  United  States 
Arsenal  at  Baton  Rouge,  and  which,  therefore,  right- 
fully belonged,  in  his  opinion,  to  the  Federal  Gov- 
ernment. Returning  to  the  arsenal,  he  summoned 
the  Committee  of  Safety  to  meet  him  there  at 
once,  and  told  them  that  it  was  "  necessary  to  seize 
the  camp,  and  every  man  in  it,  and  to  hold  them  as 
prisoners  of  war."  Blair,  Broadhead,  Filley,  and 
Witzig,  concurred  with  him ;  but  Glover  and  How 
objected  that  the  camp  had  a  legal  existence  for 
six  days,  and  should  not  be  attacked  during  that 
time ;  that  those  in  command  of  it  recognized  the 
authority  of  the  United  States  Government  and 
kept  the  national  flag  flying  over  the  encampment, 
and  had  not  committed  any  breach  of  the  peace  ; 
and  that,  if  there  was  any  property  there  of  the 
United  States,  the  proper  way  to  reach  it  was 
through  a  writ  of  replevin,  which  the  United  States 
Marshal  could  enforce,  if  necessary,  by  calling  on 
General  Lyon  for  troops. 

Lyon  replied  that  he  knew  the  camp  to  be  a  nest 
of  traitors ;  that  the  Legislature  was  in  secret 
session,  and  might  have  already  put  a  new  military 
law  in  operation,  or  certainly  would  do  so  in  a  day 
or  two  ;  that  advices  from  all  parts  of  the  State 
were  discouraging   to   the    Union    men ;    that   the 


170  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

rebels  were  gathering  strength  ;  that  Harney  would 
arrive  on  Sunday,  and  no  one  could  tell  what  he 
would  do  ;  and  that  Camp  Jackson  must,  therefore, 
be  taken  forthwith.  Glover  and  How  yielded  at 
last,  with  the  understanding  that  the  United  States 
Marshal  should  head  the  column  which  was  to 
march  against  the  camp.  Lyon  had,  nevertheless, 
made  up  his  own  mind  to  use  no  subterfuge.  He 
meant  "to  capture  the  camp  and  the  men  in  it, 
both  the  officers  and  the  enlisted  men,  with  all  its 
material  of  war ;  to  demand  a  surrender,  with  his 
men  in  line  of  battle  and  his  cannon  in  position,  and 
if  the  demand  were  not  complied  with  at  once  to 
fight  for  it."  And  he  got  ready  to  do  this  the  next 
morning  Friday  the  10th  of  May. 

Frost,  who  had  during  the  last  day  or  two  heard 
frequent  rumors  that  Lyon  was  going  to  capture 
the  camp,  received  positive  information  Friday 
morning  that  the  attack  was  to  be  made  that  day. 
He  thereupon  addressed  to  Lyon  a  letter  in  which 
he  positively  denied  that  either  he,  or  any  part  of 
his  command,  had  any  hostile  intentions  towards 
the  United  States  Government,  or  its  property,  or 
representatives.  "  I  trust,"  said  he,  "  after  this  ex- 
plicit statement,  we  may  be  able  by  fully  under- 
standing each  other  to  keep  far  from  our  borders 
the  misfortunes  which  unhappily  afflict  our  common 
country."     This  communication  was  sent  to  Lyon 


Camp  Jackson.  171 

through  Colonel  Bowen.  Lyon  refused  to  receive 
it,  and  immediately  put  his  column  in  motion.  After 
surrounding  the  camp  he  sent  one  of  his  staff  to  Frost 
with  a  demand  for  the  immediate  and  unconditional 
surrender  of  his  whole  command.  As  his  force  was 
more  than  ten  times  as  great  as  Frost's,  the  latter 
had  to  surrender.  Both  Grant  and  Sherman  saw  all 
these  things. 

The  militia  having  stacked  their  arms,  were  formed 
into  line,  and  conducted  out  of  the  camp  on  their 
way  to  the  arsenal.  They  had  moved  but  a  short 
distance  when  they  were  halted,  and  kept  standing 
in  a  line  parallel  with  and  a  few  yards  from  Olive 
Street,  which  was  occupied  by  Lyon's  troops.  Dur- 
ing the  halt,  which  lasted  several  hours,  great 
numbers  of  men,  women,  and  children  gathered 
around  the  prisoners  and  their  captors.  They  were, 
of  course,  intensely  agitated  and,  as  the  excitement 
grew,  began  to  jeer  at  and  abuse  "  the  Dutch  Black- 
guards" (so  called  in  derision  because  one  of  the 
German  companies  called  itself  die  Schzvartze  Garde). 
Suddenly  a  few  shots  were  fired,  and  were  followed 
almost  immediately  by  volley  after  volley,  extending 
in  regular  succession  down  the  line  of  troops,  until 
apparently  a  full  regiment  had  thus  fired  by  com- 
pany. Twenty-eight  people  lay  dead  or  mortally 
wounded.  Among  them  were  three  prisoners  and 
an  infant  in  the  arms  of  its  mother.    The  march  was 


172  The  Fight  for  Missouri, 

quickly  resumed,  and  the  prisoners  were  safely  se- 
cured within  the  grounds  of  the  arsenal.  The  next 
night  (May  11)  all  of  them  except  Captain  Emmett 
Macdonald  were  released  on  their  parole  not  to  bear 
arms  against  the  United  States.  Macdonald  refused 
to  give  his  parole,  but  was,  after  many  adventures, 
released  through  the  intervention  of  the  courts. 

The  General  Assembly  had  met  on  the  2d  of 
May.  The  Governor,  after  calling  its  attention  to 
the  state  of  the  country,  repeated,  what  he  had 
often  said,  that  the  interests  and  sympathies  of  Mis- 
souri were  identical  with  those  of  the  other  slave- 
holding  States,  and  that  she  must  therefore  unite 
her  destiny  with  theirs ;  that  while  she  had  no  war 
to  prosecute,  she  would  be  faithless  to  her  honor, 
and  recreant  to  her  duty,  if  she  hesitated  a  moment 
to  make  the  amplest  preparation  for  the  protection 
of  her  people  against  all  assailants ;  and  that,  there- 
fore, the  General  Assembly  should  "  place  the  State 
at  the  earliest  practicable  moment  in  a  complete 
state  of  defence." 

Both  Houses  went  into  secret  session,  and  began 
to  consider  bills  to  carry  out  these  recommenda- 
tions. They  had,  however,  made  but  little  prog- 
ress, when,  during  the  afternoon  of  the  10th  of 
May,  the  Governor,  entering  hastily  the  Hall  of 
Representatives,  informed  some  of  the  members 
that  Lyon  had   captured  Camp  Jackson,  and  was 


Camp  Jackson.  173 

holding  the  State  troops  as  prisoners  of  war.  The 
Military  Bill  was  under  discussion  at  the  mo- 
ment, its  passage  resisted  at  every  step  by  the  op- 
ponents of  secession.  In  an  instant  all  resistance 
gave  way  and  within  less  than  fifteen  minutes  the 
bill  had  passed  both  Houses  and  was  awaiting  the 
Governor's  signature. 

Towards  midnight  all  Jefferson  City  was  aroused 
by  the  ringing  of  the  church  bells.  The  Legisla- 
ture met  and  was  notified  by  the  Governor  that 
he  had  been  informed  that  "  two  of  Mr.  Blair's 
regiments  were  on  the  way  to  the  capital."  In  the 
midst  of  the  wildest  excitement  an  act  was  rushed 
through  both  Houses  authorizing  "the  Governor  to 
take  such  measures  as  he  might  deem  necessary  or 
proper  to  repel  invasion  or  put  down  rebellion,"  and 
$30,000  were  appropriated  to  enable  him  to  execute 
the  dictatorial  powers  thus  conferred  upon  him. 
Other  acts  intended  to  prepare  the  State  for  war 
were  also  introduced. 

The  Governor  meanwhile  sent  detachments  of 
men  in  all  haste  to  hold  the  railroad  bridges  over 
the  Gasconade  and  the  Osage,  over  which  "  Mr. 
Blair's  two  regiments  "  would  have  to  pass  on  their 
way  from  St.  Louis.  In  the  excitement  of  the  hour 
the  detachment  which  was  sent  to  guard  the  Osage 
Bridge  set  it  on  fire  and  partially  destroyed  it. 

The  powder  which  the  Governor  had  purchased 


174  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

in  St.  Louis  and  stored  at  Jefferson  City  was  hur- 
riedly removed  to  various  hiding  places,  more  or  less 
remote  ;  and  the  funds  in  the  State  treasury  were 
secreted.  Every  man  armed  himself  as  best  he 
could  with  shot-guns,  rifles,  sabres,  and  ancient 
swords,  and  there  was  much  talk  of  "  resisting  the 
invaders."  The  story  is  told  of  one  ardent  patriot, 
a  "  cockade  man  "  (a  cockade  on  the  hat  of  a  Seces- 
sionist meant,  in  those  days,  what  a  chip  on  the 
shoulder  of  an  Irishman  is  supposed  to  mean  when 
his  blood  is  up),  who  declared  that  he  was  going  to 
the  Moreau,  all  alone  if  no  one  would  go  with  him, 
and  would  fight  Lyon  and  his  "  Dutch  cut-throats  " 
there,  all  by  himself.  It  is  said,  however,  that  he 
did  not  go  to  the  Moreau  either  then  or  the  next 
day,  and,  what  is  more,  that  he  never  left  home 
during  all  the  war. 

While  these  things  were  going  on  at  Jefferson 
City,  the  excitement  at  St.  Louis  grew  apace.  Dur- 
ing the  afternoon  of  the  ioth  and  the  evening  of 
that  day  the  streets  were  crowded  with  anxious 
and  angry  people.  The  capture  of  Camp  Jackson  ; 
the  detention  of  Frost  and  his  men  as  prisoners  of 
war ;  the  cruel  shooting  down  of  unoffending  wo- 
men and  children  by  Lyon  and  his  German  Home 
Guards,  had  aroused  Americans  and  Irish  to  a  state 
of  frenzy.  Towards  morning  the  crowds  grew 
denser  and  more  dangerous,  particularly  in  the  cen- 


Camp  Jackson.  175 

tral  part  of  the  city,  where  the  people  of  native  birth 
chiefly  resided,  and,  as  the  day  advanced,  evinced 
a  determination  to  put  an  end  to  the  domination 
of  the  Germans. 

Late  in  the  afternoon  as  a  regiment  of  Home 
Guards  was  returning  from  the  arsenal  to  its  barracks 
in  the  northern  part  of  the  city,  it  encountered  near 
Walnut  Street  a  crowd,  which  had  gathered  there  to 
see  it  pass.  Halting  for  a  moment  as  if  to  resent 
the  hooting  of  the  multitude,  it  had  resumed  its 
march,  when  some  one  fired  a  shot  into  its  ranks. 
The  head  of  the  column  turned  and  poured  a  volley 
into  the  crowd,  and  into  its  own  rear  ranks.  Eight 
men  were  killed,  two  of  them  soldiers,  and  many 
were  wounded.  The  people  fled,  and  the  regiment 
continued  on  its  way.  This  occurrence  inflamed 
the  Germans  to  such  a  degree  of  fury,  that  they 
now  made  open  threats  to  exterminate  the  Seces- 
sionists, and  on  Sunday,  the  12th  of  May,  these 
threats  became  so  loud  as  to  alarm  the  American 
population,  whose  only  organized  defenders,  the 
Volunteer  Militia,  had  been  disarmed,  and  were 
prisoners  of  war.  What  could  unarmed  men  do 
against  Lyon  and  his  ten  thousand  German  soldiers 
thoroughly  armed  and  equipped? 

The  Mayor  and  the  Police  Commissioners  were 
powerless.  In  their  fright  the  people  begged  General 
Harney,  who  had  resumed  command  at  St.  Louis, 


iy6  The   Fight  for  Missouri. 

to  send  the  Home  Guards  out  of  the  city.  This  he 
promised  to  do  ;  but  Blair  soon  convinced  him  that  as 
these  regiments  had  been  enlisted  to  serve  within 
St.  Louis,  they  could  not  be  sent  away. 

When  the  people  learned  that  Harney  could  not 
send  the  Home  Guards  away,  they  inferred  that  it 
was  because  these  regiments  had  revolted  against 
him,  and  were  going  to  carry  out  their  threats  to  ex- 
terminate the  "  Secesh."  A  panic  took  possession 
of  the  city.  Thousands  of  women  and  children  were 
sent  across  the  Mississippi,  and  other  thousands  were 
getting  ready  to  follow,  when  Harney  brought  two 
companies  of  United  States  Artillery,  and  two  com- 
panies of  Regular  Infantry  into  the  city,  and  issued 
a  proclamation  wherein  he  pledged  his  "  faith  as  a 
soldier,"  to  preserve  the  public  peace,  and  to  protect 
the  lives  and  property  of  the  people.  This  wise  and 
timely  proceeding  quieted  the  apprehensions  of 
every  one,  and  most  of  the  fugitives  returned  to 
their  homes. 


CHAPTER   IX. 

BOTH   SIDES   PREPARE  FOR  WAR. 

Harney  approves  tht  Capture  of  Camp  Jackson— Occupies  St.  Louis 
—Asks  for  troops  from  Iowa  and  Minnesota  * '  for  Operations  in 
Missouri."— Adjournment  of  the  Legislature— Sterling  Price  offers 
his  services  to  the  State— Is  appointed  Major-General— Appoint- 
ment of  Brigadier-Generals— Volunteers  at  Jefferson  City— Mar- 
maduke— McCulloch,  and  Mclntyre— Organization  of  the  State 
Guard  Begun— The  Price-Harney  Agreement— Dissatisfaction  of 
Blair  and  Lyon— They  procure  Harney's  Removal— Lyon  in  Com- 
mand of  Missouri. 

Harney  soon  made  it  plain  to  every  one  that, 
while  he  was  anxious  to  maintain  peace  within  the 
State,  and  to  abstain  from  all  acts  of  violence,  he 
was  resolved  to  hold  her  faithful  to  the  Union,  and 
to  compel  her  people  to  obey  the  laws  of  the  United 
States. 

On  the  13th  of  May  he  wrote  to  General  Scott 
that  "  Captain  Lyon's  conduct  in  capturing  the 
State  troops "  met  with  his  own  entire  approval ; 
and  the  next  day  he  published  a  Proclamation  to  the 
People  of  Missouri,  in  which  he  denounced  the  Mili- 
tary Bill,  which  had  just  been  enacted  by  the 
General  Assembly,  as  "  an  indirect  secession  ordi- 
nance ignoring  even  the  forms  resorted  to  by  other 


178  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

States,"  and  declared  that,  inasmuch  as  "  its  most 
material  provisions  were  in  conflict  with  the  Con- 
stitution and  laws  of  the  United  States,  the  act  was 
itself  a  nullity,  and  not  by  any  means  to  be  obeyed 
by  the  people  of  Missouri,"  and  that  "  in  any  event 
the  whole  power  of  the  United  States  would,  if 
necessary,  be  exerted  to  maintain  the  State  in  her 
present  position  in  the  Union." 

As  to  Camp  Jackson,  he  said  that  its  "  main  avenue 
had  the  name  of  Davis,  and  a  principal  street  the 
name  of  Beauregard ;  that  a  body  of  men "  (the 
Minute  Men)  "  had  been  received  into  the  camp  by 
its  commander,  which  had  been  notoriously  organ- 
ized in  the  interests  of  the  Secessionists,  the  men 
openly  wearing  the  dress  and  the  badge  distinguish- 
ing the  army  of  the  so-called  Southern  Confederacy;  " 
and  that  a  quantity  of  arms  "  unlawfully  taken  from 
the  United  States  Arsenal  at  Baton  Rouge,"  had 
also  been  taken  there  ;  that  there  could  therefore  be 
no  doubt  "  as  to  the  character  and  ultimate  purpose 
of  that  encampment ; "  and  that  "  no  government  in 
the  world  would  be  entitled  to  respect  that  would 
tolerate  for  a  moment  such  openly  treasonable  prep- 
arations." 

The  proclamation  closed  with  this  remarkable  dec- 
laration : 

"  Disclaiming,  as  I  do,  all  desire  or  intention  to 
interfere  in  any  way  with  the  prerogatives  of  the 


Both   Sides  Prepare  for    War.  179 

State  of  Missouri  or  with  the  functions  of  its  Execu- 
tive, or  other  authorities,  yet  I  regard  it  as  my  plain 
duty  to  express  to  the  people  in  respectful  but  at 
the  same  time  decided  language  that  within  the  field 
and  scope  of  my  command  and  authority  the  su- 
preme law  of  the  land  must  and  shall  be  maintained, 
and  that  no  subterfuges,  whether  in  the  form  of 
legislative  acts  "  (the  Military  Bill) "  or  otherwise,  can 
be  permitted  to  harass  or  oppress  the  good  and  law- 
abiding  people  of  Missouri "  (that  is  to  say  the  Union 
men  and  Submissionists).  "  I  shall  exert  my  au- 
thority to  protect  their  persons  and  property  from 
violations  of  every  kind,  and  I  shall  deem  it  my  duty 
to  suppress  all  unlawful  combinations  of  men" 
(the  State  Guard),  "  whether  formed  under  pretext 
of  military  organization  or  otherwise." 

He  had  already  taken  military  possession  of  the 
city  of  St.  Louis,  by  stationing  troops  at  all  impor- 
tant points. 

The  Republican,  commenting  the  next  day  on  this 
Pronunciamento,  and  on  the  occupation  of  the  city 
by  Federal  troops,  had  the  courage  to  say,  with  the 
last  free  breath  that  it  drew  in  four  long  years : 
"  We  are  bound  hand  and  foot ;  chained  down  by 
a  merciless  tyranny  ;  are  subjugated  and  shackled." 

Having  made  up  his  mind  to  subjugate  the  State 
of  which  he  was  a  citizen  and  to  fight  against  the 
people  among  whom  he  was  born,  and  of  whom  he 


180  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

was  one,  General  Harney  did  not  content  himself 
with  publishing  proclamations,  but  began  to  get 
ready,  like  the  true  soldier  that  he  was,  to  compel 
obedience  to  them.  On  the  17th  of  May  he  tele- 
graphed to  General  Scott  for  ten  thousand  stand  of 
arms,  "  for  issue  to  reliable  Union  men"  in  other 
counties  than  St.  Louis,  and  asked  that  the  Govern- 
ors of  Iowa  and  Minnesota  (which  States  were  within 
the  Department  of  the  West)  should  be  called  upon 
to  furnish  him  nine  thousand  men  "  for  operations  in 
Missouri."  He  wanted,  besides,  authority  to  enlist  in 
St.  Louis  a  regiment  consisting  exclusively  of  Irish- 
men. The  scent  of  the  blood  with  which  the  streets 
of  the  city  were  reeking,  had  aroused  the  spirit  of 
"  the  bold  dragoon,"  and,  as  in  the  days  of  his  youth, 
he  was  eager  to  fight,  and  ready  to  strike  whomever 
he  was  ordered  to  strike,  whether  it  were  Indian  or 
Mexican,  Northman  or  Southman,  stranger  or  kins- 
man. 

The  General  Assembly  had  adjourned  on  the  15th 
of  May  after  creating  a  military  fund  into  which 
the  school  fund  and  all  other  available  moneys  of 
the  State  were  ordered  to  be  paid,  together  with 
a  loan  of  $1,000,000,  which  the  banks  were  expected 
to  subscribe,  and  also  the  proceeds  of  $1,000,000 
State  bonds,  which  the  Governor  was  authorized  to 
sell. 

It   had    also  passed    unanimously   resolutions  de- 


Both   Sides  Prepare  for    War.  181 

nouncing  bitterly  the  conduct  of  Blair  and  Lyon  ; 
requesting  the  Governor  to  instantly  call  out  the 
militia ;  and  declaring  that  "  the  people  of  Missouri 
would  rally  as  one  man,  to  perish,  if  necessary,  in  de- 
fending their  Constitutional  rights." 

The  unanimity  with  which  these  resolutions  were 
adopted  attests  the  almost  universal  indignation  and 
anger  with  which  the  capture  of  the  State  troops 
and  the  shooting  down  of  unoffending  men, 
women,  and  children  had  filled  the  hearts  of  the 
people  of  Missouri.  Many  who  till  now  had  never 
wavered  in  their  fidelity  to  the  Union,  now  deter- 
mined to  stand  with  their  State,  and  to  resist  the 
government  of  Abraham  Lincoln.  Conspicuous 
among  these  were  ex-Governor  Sterling  Price, 
President  of  the  State  Convention,  and  John  B. 
Clark.  They  both  hastened  to  Jefferson  City,  and 
tendered  their  services  to  the  Governor.  Their  ac- 
cession was  hailed  with  unbounded  delight  by  the 
Secessionists  and  it  helped  in  a  great  degree  to  check 
the  tendency  to  submit,  which  was  spreading  from 
St.  Louis  all  over  the  State. 

Sterling  Price  was  born  of  a  good  family  in 
Prince  Edward  County,  Virginia,  in  1809.  He  was 
carefully  educated  in  the  schools  near  by,  and  at 
Hampden  Sidney  College,  and  afterwards  attended 
the  law  school  of  one  of  the  most  eminent  of  Vir- 
ginia's jurists,  her  venerable  chancellor,  Creed  Taylor. 


1 82  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

Moving  with  his  father's  family  to  Missouri  in  1831, 
he  had  resided  ever  since  on  the  same  farm  in  Chari- 
ton County.  Elected  to  the  Legislature  in  1840,  he 
was  at  once  chosen  Speaker  of  the  House,  a  dis- 
tinction rarely  conferred  upon  a  man  so  young  and 
wholly  unused  to  deliberative  assemblies.  But  he 
was  a  born  leader  of  men.  Tall,  handsome,  well 
educated  and  accomplished ;  a  gentleman  of  com- 
manding presence  and  dignified  manners  ;  a  man  of 
character  and  worth,  and  richly  endowed  with  that 
best  of  all  mental  gifts — common  sense — he  was  also 
instinctively  a  parliamentarian,  comprehended  as  by 
intuition  the  rules  that  govern  legislative  bodies, 
and  enforced  them  with  promptness  and  vigor. 
After  serving  four  years  as  Speaker,  he  was 
elected  to  Congress.  But  hardly  had  he  taken  his 
seat  when  in  the  spring  of  1846  war  was  declared 
against  Mexico.  Resigning  his  place  in  Congress 
he  returned  instantly  to  Missouri,  raised  a  mounted 
regiment,  and  led  it  to  New  Mexico,  to  the  com- 
mand of  which  he  had  been  assigned.  The  next 
year,  the  President,  in  recognition  of  his  services  and 
of  his  civic  and  military  ability,  promoted  him  to 
brigadier-general.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  re- 
turned to  Missouri,  and  in  1852  was  elected  Gov- 
ernor of  the  State,  and  occupied  that  office  till  the 
beginning  of  1857. 

In  i860,  he  had  supported  Douglas  for  the  Presi- 


Both   Sides  Prepare  for    War.  183 

dency,  because  he  was  himself  devoted  to  the 
Union,  and  did  not  like  the  threat  of  secession, 
which  was  involved  in  the  candidacy  of  Breckin- 
ridge. In  the  late  election  of  delegates  to  the  State 
Convention  he  had  taken  ground  against  the  seces- 
sion of  Missouri,  and  had  been  elected  with  great 
unanimity,  as  he  would  have  been,  had  he  taken  the 
contrary  position,  for  his  neighbors  had  unbounded 
confidence  in  his  patriotism  and  good  sense.  He 
was  made  President  of  the  Convention,  and  had 
throughout  its  entire  session  borne  himself  as  a  sin- 
cere friend  of  the  Union,  opposed  under  all  circum- 
stances to  its  dissolution,  and  just  as  earnestly  op- 
posed to  making  war  upon  the  South.  To  this 
position  he  had  continued  to  adhere  even  after 
the  President's  call  for  seventy-five  thousand  men 
to  invade  the  South.  But  the  attack  of  Blair  and 
Lyon  upon  Camp  Jackson,  their  capture  of  the 
State  troops,  and  their  killing  of  helpless  women 
and  children,  aroused  within  him  the  deepest  indig- 
nation, and  determined  him  to  draw  his  sword 
against  the  men  who  had  dared  to  do  such  things, 
and  against  the  Government  which  sustained  them. 
He  was  unquestionably  the  most  popular  man  in 
Missouri.  With  none  of  Doniphan's  splendid  tal- 
ents and  brilliant  wit ;  with  none  of  Gamble's  pas- 
sionless logic  ;  with  none  of  Green's  power  in  de- 
bate, and  none  of  Rollins'  persuasive  speech ;  with 


1 84  The  Fight  for  Missouri, 

none  of  that  rare  blending  of  Christian  graces  with 
stalwart  strength  of  mind,  which  gave  Trusten  Polk 
the  victory  over  Benton  in  1856  ;  with  none  of  Ed- 
ward Bates'  bland  eloquence,  and  with  little  of  Gover- 
nor Jackson's  devotion  to  abstract  principles,  and  still 
less  of  his  fiery  zeal ;  he  was  more  trusted  by  Mis- 
sourians  than  any  of  them,  more  than  all  of  them 
now,  when  Missouri  wanted  a  warlike  leader. 

The  recently  enacted  Military  Bill  provided  for 
the  enlistment  of  the  Missouri  State  Guard,  and  au- 
thorized the  Governor  to  appoint  eight  brigadier- 
generals  to  command  the  military  districts  into 
which  it  divided  the  State.  The  Legislature  also 
empowered  the  Governor  to  appoint  a  major-gen- 
eral, who  should  have  command  of  this  entire  force 
when  called  into  active  service.  To  this  office  Gen- 
eral Price  was,  as  the  Legislature  intended,  ap- 
pointed on  the  18th  of  May. 

On  the  2 1st  the  Governor  announced  the  appoint- 
ment of  the  following  brigadier-generals,  Alexander 
W.  Doniphan,  Monroe  M.  Parsons,  James  S.  Rains, 
John  B.  Clark,  Merriwether  Lewis  Clark,  Nathaniel 
W.  Watkins,  Beverly  Randolph,  William  Y.  Slack, 
and  James  H.  McBride,  all  of  them  men  of  high 
character  and  known  ability  and  devoted  to  Missouri. 
Doniphan,  Parsons,  M.  L.  Clark,  and  Slack  had  all 
distinguished  themselves  in  the  war  with  Mexico. 
Their   commissions  were   forthwith  transmitted  to 


Both   Sides  Prepare  for    War.  185 

all,  with  orders  to  enroll  at  once  the  men  within 
their  respective  districts,  and  get  them  ready  for 
active  service. 

In  all  that  part  of  the  State  west  of  Jefferson 
City,  and  particularly  in  the  counties  bordering  on 
the  Missouri  (whose  population  was  composed  al- 
most entirely  of  Southern  people),  the  work  of  en- 
rolment was  pushed  vigorously.  Volunteers  had 
indeed  begun  to  flock  to  the  capital  as  soon  as  it 
was  seen  that  the  Governor  and  the  General  Assem- 
bly intended  to  resent  "  the  outrages  "  that  had  been 
perpetrated  at  St.  Louis,  and  that  men  like  Sterling 
Price  and  John  B.  Clark  were  drawing  their  swords 
in  defence  of  the  State. 

By  the  18th  of  May  more  than  a  thousand  of 
these  volunteers  had  gathered  at  Jefferson  City,  and 
were  impatiently  waiting  to  be  mustered  into  the 
State  Guard,  and  to  take  the  field  under  the  com- 
mand of  Price.  Among  them  were  some  com- 
panies from  Cooper  brought  thither  by  Captain  Rob- 
ert McCulloch,  and  some  from  Callaway  brought  by 
Captain  D.  H.  Mclntyre.  The  Independence  Grays 
came  from  Jackson,  with  full  ranks,  bringing  with 
them  the  four  brass  6-pounders,  which  had  been  taken 
from  the  United  States  Arsenal  at  Liberty ;  guns, 
which,  after  many  strange  adventures,  were  gallantly 
fought  against  the  Government  to  which  they  be- 
longed.    Kelly's  St.  Louis  company  was  still  there. 


1 86  The   Fight  for  Missouri. 

The  regiment  first  organized  was  composed  of  eight 
companies  from  Parsons'  district,  which  embraced 
the  counties  adjacent  to  Jefferson  City.  It  was 
known  as  the  First  Regiment  of  Rifles,  and  John 
S.  Marmaduke  was  its  colonel. 

Marmaduke  was  a  native  of  Missouri,  a  son  of  one 
of  her  former  Governors,  and  a  nephew  of  Governor 
Jackson.  He  had  graduated  at  West  Point  in  1857, 
and  was  a  lieutenant  of  infantry  when  the  President 
called  for  troops.  Resigning  his  commission  at  once, 
he  began  to  enlist  the  regiment  which  he  now  of- 
fered to  the  State.  He  was  a  young  man  of  very 
decided  ability  and  a  fine  soldier.  It  is  a  noteworthy 
fact  that  he  is  now  Governor  of  the  State,  that  Mc- 
Culloch  is  Treasurer,  that  McGrath  who  was  a  pri- 
vate in  Kelly's  company  is  Secretary  of  State,  and 
that  Mclntyre  was  recently  Attorney-General  of  the 
Commonwealth. 

The  active  preparations  for  war  which  General 
Harney  was  making  at  St.  Louis,  and  which  the 
Governor  and  General  Price  were  making  at  Jeffer- 
son City  and  throughout  the  State,  alarmed  some 
very  conservative  citizens,  who  still  believed  that 
the  neutrality  of  Missouri  might  be  maintained  if 
General  Price  and  General  Harney  would  consent 
to  it.  They  accordingly  induced  General  Harney 
to  invite  Price,  in  whom  he  and  they  justly  had 
great  confidence,  to  meet  him  at  St.  Louis,  in  order 


Both   Sides  Prepare  for    War.  187 

to  ascertain  whether  they  could  not  agree  upon  some 
plan  for  preventing  a  conflict.  As  the  State  was 
wholly  unprepared  for  war,  General  Price,  with  the 
Governor's  approval,  readily  accepted  General  Har- 
ney's invitation,  and  on  the  21st  of  May  these  two 
officers  made  what  is  known  as  the  Price-Harney 
Agreement,  wherein,  avowing  that  the  object  of 
each  was  "  to  restore  peace  and  good  order  to  the 
people  of  the  State  in  subordination  to  the  laws  of 
the  General  and  State  governments,"  General  Price, 
as  Major-General  of  the  Missouri  State  Guard,  un- 
dertook, with  the  Governor's  express  sanction,  "  to 
maintain  order  within  the  State,  among  the  people 
thereof ; "  and  General  Harney  declared  that  if  this 
were  done  he  could  have  no  occasion  (as  he  had  no 
wish)  to  make  any  military  movements  within  the 
State. 

While  General  Price  was  still  in  St.  Louis,  Gen- 
eral Harney  said  to  him  through  a  friend,  that  as 
the  State  Guard  might  come  within  the  meaning  of 
the  President's  proclamation  requiring  officers  of 
the  United  States  Army  to  disperse  all  armed 
bodies  hostile  to  the  supreme  law  of  the  land,  he 
hoped  that  General  Price  would  discover  some  way 
to  suspend  the  organization  of  the  State  Guard 
until  the  constitutionality  of  the  act  creating  it  could 
be  passed  upon  by  some  competent  authority. 

General  Price  replied   that  he  had  no  right  to  nul- 


1 88  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

lify  or  to  disobey  a  law  of  the  State,  and  could  not, 
of  course,  suspend  the  organization  of  the  State 
Guard.  But  upon  returning  to  Jefferson  City  he  or- 
dered (May  24)  all  of  the  troops  which  had  come 
thither  from  other  military  districts  to  return  to 
their  homes,  there  to  be  organized  by  their  respec- 
tive district  commanders  into  companies  and  regi- 
ments as  required  by  law.  Captain  Kelly's  com- 
pany alone  was  excepted  from  the  operation  of  this 
order. 

The  action  of  General  Harney  in  this  matter 
gave  great  offence  to  Blair  and  Lyon.  His  inter- 
ference with  their  plan  for  overrunning  the  State 
immediately  after  the  capture  of  Frost's  Brigade, 
had  already  decided  them  to  insist  upon  his  re- 
moval from  the  command  of  the  Federal  forces  in 
Missouri,  and  Blair  had  sent  his  brother-in-law 
Franklin  A.  Dick,  and  Lyon  had  sent  Dr.  Bernays, 
the  editor  of  the  Anzeiger  des  Westens,  to  Wash- 
ington city  to  urge  the  matter  upon  the  President. 

In  a  written  memorandum  which  he  gave  to  Dr. 
Bernays  for  his  guidance  Lyon  said :  "  Tell  him 
all  about  our  situation  here.  I  have  no  confidence 
whatever  in  Harney,  or  in  Major  McKinstry " 
(quarter-master  of  the  department).  "  I  feel  that 
they  are  against  us,  and  that  they  will  throw  all 
kinds  of  difficulties  in  our  way.  They  already  do 
so.     I  never  can  obtain  in  time  what  I  need  from 


Both   Sides  Prepare  for    War.  189 

the  quarter-master's  department,  and  all  the  pre- 
cautions that  I  take  against  the  rebels  are  frustrated 
by  the  proceedings  of  General  Harney.  Tell  the 
President  to  get  my  hands  untied,  and  I  will  war- 
rant to  keep  this  State  in  the  Union." 

Dick  reached  Washington  city  on  the  16th  of  May, 
and  obtained,  that  very  day,  an  order  for  the  ap- 
pointment of  Lyon  as  brigadier-general  of  volun- 
teers; and  also  persuaded  the  President,  against  the 
advice  of  Attorney-General  Bates,  Judge  Gamble, 
and  other  influential  citizens  of  St.  Louis,  to  make 
an  order  relieving  General  Harney  of  the  command 
of  the  Department  of  the  West.  Not  wishing, 
however,  to  offend  his  attorney-general,  who  was  a 
St.  Louisian,  the  President  directed  Postmaster- 
General  Montgomery  Blair,  a  brother  of  Frank,  to 
inclose  the  order  to  the  latter  with  instructions  that 
it  was  to  be  delivered,  at  his  discretion,  to  General 
Harney ;  adding,  however,  that  it  was  "  better  to 
mortify  Harney  than  endanger  the  lives  of  many 
men,  and  the  position  of  Missouri  in  the  present  con- 
flict." The  President  also  wrote  a  private  letter  to 
Colonel  Blair  (May  18)  saying  that  he  was  doubtful 
of  the  propriety  of  the  order,  and  therefore  wished 
him  to  withhold  it,  unless,  in  his  judgment,  the 
necessity  to  the  contrary  was  very  urgent.  "  But," 
said  he,  "  if  in  your  judgment  it  is  indispensable,  let 
it  be  so."    Blair,  after  consulting  with  Lyon,  decided 


1 90  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

to  let  Harney  retain  command  until  he  could  satisfy 
the  President  that  he  ought  to  be  removed  ;  and 
straightway  went  to  work  to  accomplish  that  result. 
Inspired  by  him,  the  Safety  Committee  forwarded 
to  Washington  city  a  vigorous  protest  (written  by 
James  O.  Broadhead),  against  the  continuance  of 
the  Price-Harney  agreement  (May  22). 

"  It  seems,"  they  say,  "  to  leave  the  Union  men 
in  the  hands  of  the  very  power  which  imperils  their 
safety ; "  it  does  not  repudiate  secession :  it  im- 
pliedly recognizes  the  right  of  the  State  authorities 
to  arm  the  State  under  the  provisions  of  the  mili- 
tary law,  which  law  sets  at  defiance  the  Constitution 
of  the  United  States,  and  the  authority  of  the  Gen- 
eral Government :  it  does  not  require  the  disband- 
ment  of  the  military  companies  which  have  been 
organized  under  that  law  :  and  it  only  "  puts  off  the 
evil  day  until  such  time  as  the  enemy  shall  be  better 
prepared  to  make  resistance."  It  would  be  better, 
they  said,  that  the  General  Government  should 
maintain  its  authority  by  the  stern  enforcement  of 
military  rule.  For  its  enforcement  the  Government 
had  sufficient  troops  in  the  State,  if  it  would  only 
instruct  the  commanding  general  to  distribute  them 
at  various  points,  where  they  could  be  used  to  pro- 
tect loyal  citizens,  and  to  prevent  the  organization 
of  the  State  Guard. 

Two  days  later  (May  24)  Blair  wrote  to  the  Sec- 


Both   Sides  Prepare  for    War.  191 

retary  of  War  denouncing  Governor  Jackson  as  a 
"  traitor ; "  and  declaring  that  the  agreement  be- 
tween Price  and  Harney  had  disgusted  himself,  and 
was  giving  great  dissatisfaction  to  all  Union  men. 
The  newspapers  were  flooded  with  letters  and 
telegrams  from  all  parts  of  the  State,  giving  accounts 
of  "  outrages  "  that  were  pretended  to  have  been 
committed  by  the  Secessionists,  with  the  counte- 
nance of  Governor  Jackson  and  General  Price, 
upon  the  "  loyal  "  inhabitants  of  the  State.  These 
accounts  were  all  sedulously  collected,  embellished, 
and  multiplied,  and  then  laid  with  the  indorse- 
ment of  "  strong  "  men  before  the  President ;  who, 
believing  them,  wrote  to  Harney  (May  27)  through 
the  adjutant-general  that  it  was  "  his  duty  sum- 
marily to  stop,  with  the  force  under  his  command, 
and  such  troops  as  he  might  require  from  Kansas, 
Iowa,  and  Illinois,  the  outrages  which  were  being 
perpetrated  on  loyal  citzens.  The  professions  of 
loyalty  to  the  Union  by  the  State  authorities  of 
Missouri  are  not  to  be  relied  upon.  They  have 
already  falsified  their  professions  too  often,  and  are 
too  far  committed  to  secession  to  be  entitled  to 
your  confidence :  and  you  can  only  be  sure  of 
their  desisting  from  their  wicked  purposes,  when 
it  is  out  of  their  power  to  prosecute  them. 
The  authority  of  the  United  States  is  paramount, 
and  whenever  it  is  apparent  that  a  movement,  whether 


192  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

by  color  of  State  authority  or  not,  is  hostile ,  you  will 
not  hesitate  to  put  it  down." 

Before  these  instructions  reached  St.  Louis,  Blair 
had  already  delivered  to  General  Harney  the  order 
relieving  him  of  the  command  of  the  Department  of 
the  West.  In  explaining  his  action  to  the  President 
he  wrote  on  the  30th  of  May,  that  he  had  become 
satisfied  that  unless  the  Government  occupied  the 
State  in  force  without  further  delay,  the  Union  men 
would  be  crushed,  or  driven  out,  entirely,  "  and  the 
State  itself  be  completely  given  over  to  the  hands 
of  the  rebels ; "  that  Harney,  by  reason  of  his  agree- 
ment with  Price,  could  do  nothing ;  and  that  it  had, 
consequently,  become  indispensable  to  remove  him. 

Harney,  upon  receiving  the  order,  relinquished 
command  of  the  Department  (May  30),  and  it  was 
the  next  day  assumed  by  Brigadier-General  Lyon. 


CHAPTER   X. 

LYON  DECLARES   WAR. 

Blair  and  Lyon  outline  their  plan  of  Campaign — Federal  Forces  in 
and  around  Missouri — Defenceless  Condition  of  the  State — The 
Governor  and  Price  prepare  for  War — Attempts  to  preserve  the 
Neutrality  of  the  State — The  Planters'  House  Conference — Lyon 
Declares  War  against  the  State — The  Governor's  Proclamation — 
He  calls  out  the  Militia — Determines  to  make  a  stand  at  Booneville 
and  to  hold  the  Missouri — Abandons  Jefferson  City  and  retires  to 
Booneville — General  Price  goes  to  Lexington. 

There  was  nothing  now  to  prevent  Blair  and 
Lyon  from  executing  the  plan  of  campaign  upon 
upon  which  they  had  agreed  before  the  capture  of 
Camp  Jackson. 

Blair  outlined  this  plan  to  the  President  in  the 
letter  which  he  addressed  to  him  on  the  30th  of 
May.  He  said  therein  that  the  blow  struck  at  Camp 
Jackson,  had  "  greatly  intimidated  the  leaders  of  the 
rebellion,"  and  that  if  it  had  been  followed  up  then, 
as  he  and  Lyon  had  intended,  by  blows  struck  in 
other  parts  of  the  State,  the  rebellion  would  have 
been  speedily  and  effectually  crushed  in  Missouri,  at 
small  cost  of  life  and  treasure ;  but  that  under  Har- 
ney's policy  the  Government  had  been  losing  ground 
so  rapidly,  and  its  enemies  becoming  so  active  and 
13 


194  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

formidable,  that  the  Union  men  were  now  in  danger 
of  being  driven  out  of  the  State ;  that  to  prevent 
this  and  to  meet  the  force  with  which  the  Confeder- 
ates were  preparing  to  invade  the  State  from  Arkan- 
sas and  the  Indian  Territory,  the  President  ought 
to  authorize  the  enlistment  in  Missouri  of  a  suf- 
ficient number  of  troops  to  hold  Jefferson  City, 
Lexington,  St.  Joseph,  Hannibal,  Macon  City, 
Springfield,  and  other  points,  and  should  at  the 
same  time  order  the  United  States  troops  at  Fort 
Leavenworth  and  the  regiments  that  were  being 
raised  in  Kansas  to  co-operate  with  General  Lyon 
in  resisting  any  invasion  of  the  State  from  the  South- 
west. "  We  are  well  able,"  he  said, "  to  take  care  of 
this  State  without  assistance  from  elsewhere,  if  au- 
thorized to  raise  a  sufficient  force  within  the  State ; 
and  after  that  work  is  done  we  can  take  care  of  the 
Secessionists  from  the  Arkansas  line  to  the  Gulf, 
along  the  west  shore  of  the  Mississippi." 

Lyon,  less  confident  than  Blair  that  the  Union 
men  of  Missouri  could  hold  the  State  without  the 
aid  of  a  force  from  other  States,  urged  the  Secre- 
tary of  War  also  to  direct  the  Governors  of  Illinois 
and  Iowa  to  furnish  him  the  troops  which  they  had 
been  instructed  to  send  to  Harney,  and  said  that  if 
this  were  done_  and  the  Government  would  look 
after  Cairo,  he  would  himself  move  into  the  South- 
west to  meet   McCulloch,  who  was  said  to  be  ad- 


Lyon  Declares    War.  195 

vancing  into  Missouri  from  Arkansas  with  a  large 
army.  Orders  conformable  to  these  suggestions  were 
instantly  made  by  the  President,  and  Lyon  found 
himself  early  in  June  at  the  head  of  a  considerable 
force,  thoroughly  organized,  well  armed,  and  equip- 
ped for  active  service. 

At  St.  Louis  besides  about  five  hundred  Regulars, 
including  Totten's  Battery,  he  had  of  Missouri 
Volunteers,  ten  regiments  of  infantry,  a  battalion  of 
artillery,  one  company  of  sappers  and  miners,  and 
one  company  of  rifles,  aggregating  about  ten  thou- 
sand officers  and  men.  He  had  also  several  thousand 
Home  Guards  in  different  parts  of  the  State,  where 
the  Germans  were  numerous  and  the  Union  senti- 
ment predominant,  and  they  were  generally  well 
armed  and  equipped.  At  Fort  Leavenworth  there 
were  four  companies  of  infantry,  four  of  cavalry,  two 
of  dragoons,  and  a  number  of  recruits,  the  whole 
aggregating  about  one  thousand  men,  all  belonging 
to  the  United  States  Army.  There  were  also  in  the 
same  vicinity  two  regiments  of  Kansas  Infantry, 
Dietzler's  and  Mitchell's,  nearly  two  thousand  strong. 
Two  Iowa  regiments  (Bates'  and  Curtis')  were  on  the 
northern  border  of  the  State  and  ready  to  invade  it 
at  a  moment's  notice  ;  and  Illinois  was  concentrat- 
ing troops  at  Quincy,  Alton  and  Cairo,  whence  they 
could  enter  Missouri  in  an  hour. 

To  oppose  this  formidable  force  the  State  had 


196  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

scarcely  one  thousand  partially  organized  troops, 
and  most  of  these  were  armed  with  shot  guns  and 
rifles.  Except  a  few  muskets  and  half  a  dozen  field- 
pieces  and  some  powder,  it  had  no  munitions  of 
war,  nor  any  supply  of  food,  nor  any  transporta- 
tion, nor  any  military  stores  of  any  kind,  nor  any 
money. 

But  all  this  did  not  dismay  either  the  Governor  or 
General  Price.  On  the  contrary,  as  soon  as  they 
learned  that  Harney  had  been  removed  and  that 
Lyon  was  in  command,  General  Price  published  an 
order  to  the  brigadier-generals  of  the  several 
military  districts,  in  which  he  said  that,  while  it  was 
still  the  desire  of  the  Governor  and  himself  to 
maintain  the  neutrality  of  Missouri  and  keep  the 
peace  until  her  Convention  should  decide  what 
position  the  State  would  take  in  the  impending 
conflict,  and  were  themselves  still  carrying  out  in 
good  faith  the  agreement  made  with  General 
Harney,  the  removal  of  that  officer  from  the  com- 
mand of  the  Federal  forces  in  Missouri  and  the 
manifest  intention  of  his  successor,  General  Lyon,  to 
arm  the  Union  men  of  the  State,  which  was  itself  a 
palpable  violation  of  the  Price-Harney  agreement 
and  one  that  ought  to  be  resisted  to  the  last  ex- 
tremity, had  aroused  grave  fears  that  the  people 
were  to  be  forced  by  the  terrors  of  a  military  in- 
vasion to  take  a  position  not  of  their  free  choice ; 


Lyon   Declares    War.  197 

that  it  was  his  own  intention  to  prevent  the  con- 
summation of  such  an  outrage ;  and  that  they  need 
have  no  fear  that  a  million  such  people  as  the 
citizens  of  Missouri  could  be  subjugated. 

Secret  orders  were  at  the  same  time  sent  to  them 
to  hasten  the  organization  of  the  troops  in  their  re- 
spective districts,  and  to  get  them  ready  for  active 
service.  Each  regiment  was  instructed  to  adopt  the 
State  flag,  which  was  to  be  "  made  of  blue  merino 
with  the  arms  of  the  State  emblazoned  in  gold  gilt 
on  each  side." 

The  imminence  of  the  danger  led  those  who  still 
hoped  to  save  Missouri  from  the  horrors  of  war  to 
make  one  more  effort  to  prevent  a  conflict  between 
the  Federal  troops  and  the  State.  William  A.  Hall, 
David  H.  Armstrong,  and  J.  Richard  Barret  accord- 
ingly persuaded  Governor  Jackson  and  General 
Price  to  ask  for  an  interview  with  Lyon.  The 
latter,  upon  the  request  of  Mr.  Hall  and  Colonel 
Thomas  T.  Gantt,  consented  to  the  interview  upon 
condition  that  the  Governor  and  General  Price 
would  come  to  St.  Louis  and  hold  it  there,  and  he 
also  stipulated  in  writing  that  if  the  Governor  and 
the  General,  or  either  of  them  "  should  visit  St. 
Louis  on  or  before  the  12th  of  June,  in  order  to 
hold  an  interview  with  him  for  the  purpose  of 
effecting,  if  possible,  a  pacific  solution  of  the  troub- 
les of  Missouri,  they  should  be  free  from  molesta- 


198  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

tion  or  arrest  during  their  journey  to  St.  Louis,  and 
their  return  from  St.  Louis  to  Jefferson  City." 

With  this  safe  conduct  Governor  Jackson  and 
General  Price  left  Jefferson  City  on  the  afternoon 
of  the  10th,  accompanied  by  one  of  the  Governor's 
aides-de-camp,  the  writer  of  this  narrative. 

The  Governor  notified  General  Lyon  the  next 
morning  that  he  was  at  the  Planters'  House, 
and  would  be  pleased  to  confer  with  him  there. 
Lyon  replied  that  he  would  meet  him  and  General 
Price  at  the  arsenal  instead.  The  Governor,  rightly 
considering  this  reply  as  impertinent,  informed 
General  Lyon  that  he  would  confer  with  him  at 
the  Planters'  House,  and  at  no  other  place.  Lyon 
accordingly  came  to  the  Planters'  House,  accom- 
panied by  Blair  and  Major  Conant,  his  aide-de- 
camp, and  the  conference  took  place  there. 

Lyon  opened  it  by  saying  that  the  discussion  on 
the  part  of  his  Government  "  would  be  conducted 
by  Colonel  Blair,  who  enjoyed  its  confidence  in  the 
very  highest  degree,  and  was  authorized  to  speak 
for  it."  Blair  was,  in  fact,  better  fitted  than  any 
man  in  the  Union  to  discuss  with  Jackson  and  Price 
the  grave  questions  then  at  issue  between  the  United 
States  and  the  State  of  Missouri,  and  in  all  her 
borders  there  were  no  men  better  fitted  than  they 
to  speak  for  Missouri  on  that  momentous  occasion. 

But,  despite  the  modesty  of  his  opening,  Lyon 


Lyon   Declares  War.  199 

was  too  much  in  earnest,  too  zealous,  too  well  in- 
formed on  the  subject,  too  aggressive,  and  too  fond 
of  disputation  to  let  Blair  conduct  the  discussion  on 
the  part  of  his  Government.  In  half  an  hour  it 
was  he  that  was  conducting  it,  holding  his  own  at 
every  point  against  Jackson  and  Price,  masters 
though  they  were  of  Missouri  politics  whose  course 
they  had  been  directing  and  controlling  for  years 
while  he  was  only  captain  of  an  infantry  regiment 
on  the  Plains.  He  had  not,  however,  been  a  mere 
soldier  in  those  days,  but  had  been  an  earnest 
student  of  the  very  questions  that  he  was  now  dis- 
cussing, and  he  comprehended  the  matter  as  well 
as  any  man,  and  handled  it  in  the  soldierly  way  to 
which  he  had  been  bred,  using  the  sword  to  cut 
knots  that  he  could  not  untie. 

It  was  to  no  purpose  that  they  all  sought,  or  pre- 
tended to  seek,  the  basis  of  a  new  agreement  for 
maintaining  the  peace  of  Missouri.  If  they  really 
sought  to  find  one,  they  did  not.  Finally,  when 
the  conference  had  lasted  four  or  five  hours,  Lyon 
closed  it,  as  he  had  opened  it.  "  Rather,"  said  he, 
(he  was  still  seated,  and  spoke  deliberately,  slowly, 
and  with  a  peculiar  emphasis)  "  rather  than  con- 
cede to  the  State  of  Missouri  the  right  to  demand 
that  my  Government  shall  not  enlist  troops  within 
her  limits,  or  bring  troops  into  the  State  whenever 
it  pleases,  or  move  its  troops  at  its  own  will  into, 


2C0  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

out  of,  or  through  the  State ;  rather  than  concede 
to  the  State  of  Missouri  for  one  single  instant  the 
right  to  dictate  to  my  Government  in  any  matter 
however  unimportant,  I  would  "  (rising  as  he  said 
this,  and  pointing  in  turn  to  every  one  in  the  room) 
"  see  you,  and  you,  and  you,  and  you,  and  you,  and 
every  man,  woman,  and  child  in  the  State,  dead  and 
buried. "  Then  turning  to  the  Governor,  he  said : 
"  This  means  war.  In  an  hour  one  of  my  officers  will 
call  for  you  and  conduct  you  out  of  my  lines." 
And  then,  without  another  word,  without  an  inclina- 
tion of  the  head,  without  even  a  look,  he  turned 
upon  his  heel  and  strode  out  of  the  room,  rattling 
his  spurs  and  clanking  his  sabre,  while  we,  whom  he 
left,  and  who  had  known  each  other  for  years,  bade 
farewell  to  each  other  courteously  and  kindly,  and 
separated — Blair  and  Conant  to  fight  for  the  Union, 
we  for  the  land  of  our  birth. 

On  the  way  to  Jefferson  City  it  was  decided  that 
the  Governor  would  forthwith  issue  a  proclamation 
calling  the  people  to  arms;  that  General  Price 
should  take  field  at  the  head  of  whatever  force  he 
could  muster,  and  make  such  resistance  as  he  might 
to  the  advance  of  Lyon;  and  that  the  Confederate 
Government  should  be  asked  to  send  a  co-operating 
army  into  the  State  as  quickly  as  possible. 

It  was  past  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  (June  12) 
when  we  reached  Jefferson  City.     But  there  was  no 


Lyon   Declares    War.  201 

thought  of  sleep,  for  every  one  was  sure  that  Lyon 
would  hasten  to  follow.  By  daybreak  the  Gov- 
ernor's proclamation,  which  I  had  prepared  in  ac- 
cordance with  his  instructions,  was  passing  through 
the  press ;  the  State  officers  had  packed  the  public 
records  and  papers,  which  they  wished  to  take 
away ;  and  everything  betokened  the  speedy  evacu- 
ation of  the  capital. 

The  Proclamation  was  published  during  the  day 
(June  12),  and  was  sent  to  all  parts  of  the  State. 
As  it  sets  out  fairly  the  matters  which  were  then  in 
dispute  between  the  State  and  the  United  States, 
and  the  grounds  upon  which  the  Governor  called 
the  people  to  arms,  it  may  be  quoted  in  full : 

"A  series  of  unprovoked  and  unparalleled  out- 
rages have  been  inflicted  upon  the  peace  and  dig- 
nity of  this  Commonwealth  and  upon  the  rights 
and  liberties  of  its  people  by  wicked  and  unprin- 
cipled men,  professing  to  act  under  the  authority  of 
the  United  States  Government.  The  solemn  enact- 
ments of  your  Legislature  have  been  nullified  ;  your 
volunteer  soldiers  have  been  taken  prisoners ;  your 
commerce  with  your  sister  States  has  been  sus- 
pended ;  your  trade  with  your  own  fellow-citizens 
has  been,  and  is,  subjected  to  the  harassing  control 
of  an  armed  soldiery ;  peaceful  citizens  have  been 
imprisoned   without    warrant    of    law ;    unoffending 


202  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

and  defenceless  men,  women,  and  children  have  been 
ruthlessly  shot  down  and  murdered ;  and  other  un- 
bearable indignities  have  been  heaped  upon  your 
State  and  yourselves. 

"  To  all  these  outrages  and  indignities  you  have 
submitted  with  a  patriotic  forbearance  which  has 
only  encouraged  the  perpetrators  of  these  grievous 
wrongs  to  attempt  still  bolder  and  more  daring 
usurpations.  It  has  been  my  earnest  endeavor,  un- 
der all  these  embarrassing  circumstances,  to  maintain 
the  peace  of  the  State,  and  to  avert,  if  possible,  from 
our  borders,  the  desolating  effects  of  a  civil  war. 
With  that  object  in  view  I  authorized  Major-Gen- 
eral Price,  several  weeks  ago,  to  arrange  with  Gen- 
eral Harney  commanding  the  Federal  forces  in  this 
State,  the  terms  of  an  agreement  by  which  the 
peace  of  the  State  might  be  preserved.  They  came, 
on  the  2  ist  of  May,  to  an  understanding,  which  was 
made  public.  The  State  authorities  have  labored 
faithfully  to  carry  out  that  agreement.  The  Fed- 
eral Government,  on  the  other  hand,  not  only  mani- 
fested its  strong  opposition  to  it  by  the  instant 
dismissal  of  the  distinguished  officer  who,  on  its 
part,  entered  into  it,  but  it  at  once  began,  and  has 
uninterruptedly  carried  out,  a  system  of  hostile  oper- 
ations in  utter  contempt  of  that  agreement,  and 
in  reckless  disregard  of  its  own  plighted  faith. 
These  acts  latterly  portended  revolution  and  civil 


Lyon   Declares    War.  203 

war  so  unmistakably,  that  I  resolved  to  make  one 
further  effort  to  avert  these  dangers  and  sufferings 
from  you.  I  therefore  solicited  an  interview  with 
Brigadier-General  Lyon,  commanding  the  Federal 
army  in  Missouri.  It  was  granted  on  the  10th  inst., 
and,  waiving  all  questions  personal  and  official,  I  went 
to  St.  Louis  accompanied  by  Major-General  Price. 

"  We  had  an  interview  on  the  nth  inst.  with  Gen- 
eral Lyon  and  Colonel  F.  P.  Blair,  jr.,  at  which  I  sub- 
mitted to  them  this  proposition  :  That  I  would  dis- 
band the  State  Guard  and  break  up  its  organization  ; 
that  I  would  disarm  all  the  companies  which  had  been 
armed  by  the  State;  that  I  would  pledge  myself  not 
to  attempt  to  organize  the  militia  under  the  Military 
Bill ;  that  no  arms  or  other  munitions  of  war  should 
be  brought  into  the  State ;  that  I  would  protect  all 
citizens  equally  in  all  their  rights,  regardless  of  their 
political  opinions ;  that  I  would  suppress  all  insur- 
rectionary movements  within  the  State ;  that  I  would 
repel  all  attempts  to  invade  it  from  whatever  quar- 
ter and  by  whomsoever  made  ;  and  that  I  would 
thus  maintain  a  strict  neutrality  in  the  present  un- 
happy contest,  and  preserve  the  peace  of  the  State. 
And  I  further  proposed  that  I  would,  if  necessary, 
invoke  the  assistance  of  the  United  States  troops 
to  carry  out  these  pledges.  All  this  I  proposed  to 
do  upon  condition  that  the  Federal  Government 
would  undertake  to  disarm  the  Home  Guards,  which 


204  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

it  has  illegally  organized  and  armed  throughout  the 
State,  and  pledge  itself  not  to  occupy  with  its  troops 
any  locality  not  occupied  by  them  at  this  time. 

"  Nothing  but  the  most  earnest  desire  to  avert  the 
horrors  of  civil  war  from  our  State,  could  have 
tempted  me  to  propose  these  humiliating  terms. 
They  were  rejected  by  the  Federal  officers. 

"  They  demanded  not  only  the  disorganization 
and  disarming  of  the  State  militia  and  the  nullifica- 
tion of  the  Military  Bill ;  but  they  refused  to  disarm 
their  own  Home  Guards,  and  insisted  that  the  Fed- 
eral Government  should  enjoy  an  unrestricted  right 
to  move  and  station  its  troops  throughout  the  State, 
whenever  and  wherever  that  might,  in  the  opinion 
of  its  officers,  be  necessary  for  the  protection  of  the 
1  loyal  subjects '  of  the  Federal  Government,  or  for 
the  repelling  of  invasion ;  and  they  plainly  announced 
that  it  was  the  intention  of  the  Administration  to 
take  military  occupation,  under  these  pretexts,  of  the 
whole  State,  and  to  reduce  it,  as  avowed  by  General 
Lyon  himself,  to  '  the  exact  condition  of  Maryland.' 

"  The  acceptance  by  me  of  these  degrading  terms 
would  not  only  have  sullied  the  honor  of  Missouri, 
but  would  have  aroused  the  indignation  of  every 
brave  citizen,  and  would  have  precipitated  the  very 
conflict  which  it  has  been  my  aim  to  prevent.  We 
refused  to  accede  to  them  and  the  conference  was 
broken  up. 


Lyon   Declares    War.  205 

"  Fellow-citizens  !  all  our  efforts  toward  concilia- 
tion have  failed.  We  can  hope  nothing  from  the 
moderation  or  justice  of  the  agents  of  the  Federal 
Government  in  this  State.  They  are  energetically 
hastening  the  execution  of  their  bloody  and  revolu- 
tionary schemes  for  the  inauguration  of  civil  war  in 
your  midst ;  for  the  military  occupation  of  your 
State  by  armed  bands  of  lawless  invaders ;  for  the 
overthrow  of  your  State  Government,  and  the  sub- 
version of  those  liberties  which  that  Government 
has  always  sought  to  protect ;  and  they  intend  to 
exert  their  whole  power  to  subjugate  you,  if  pos- 
sible, to  the  military  despotism  which  has  usurped 
the  powers  of  the  Federal  Government. 

"  Now,  therefore,  I,  Claiborne  F.  Jackson,  Gover- 
nor of  the  State  of  Missouri,  do,  in  view  of  the  fore- 
going facts  and  by  virtue  of  the  powers  vested  in 
me  by  the  Constitution  and  laws  of  this  Common- 
wealth, issue  this  my  proclamation,  calling  the 
militia  of  the  State  to  the  number  of  fifty  thousand 
into  the  active  service  of  the  State,  for  the  purpose 
of  repelling  said  invasion,  and  for  the  protection 
of  the  lives,  liberties,  and  property  of  the  citizens 
of  this  State.  And  I  earnestly  exhort  all  good 
citizens  of  Missouri  to  rally  under  the  flag  of  their 
State,  for  the  protection  of  their  homes  and  fire- 
sides, and  for  the  defence  of  their  most  sacred  rights 
and  dearest  privileges. 


206  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

"  In  issuing  this  proclamation  I  hold  it  to  be  my 
solemn  duty  to  remind  you  that  Missouri  is  still  one 
of  the  United  States  ;  that  the  executive  department 
of  the  State  Government  does  not  arrogate  to  itself 
the  power  to  disturb  that  relation  ;  that  that  power 
has  been  wisely  vested  in  a  convention,  which  will, 
at  the  proper  time,  express  your  sovereign  will ;  and 
that  meanwhile  it  is  your  duty  to  obey  all  constitu- 
tional requirements  of  the  Federal  Government. 

"  But  it  is  equally  my  duty  to  advise  you  that 
your  first  allegiance  is  due  to  your  own  State,  and 
that  you  are  under  no  obligation  whatever  to  obey 
the  unconstitutional  edicts  of  the  military  despotism 
which  has  enthroned  itself  at  Washington,  or  to 
submit  to  the  infamous  and  degrading  sway  of  its 
minions  in  this  State.  No  brave  and  true-hearted 
Missourian  will  obey  the  one  or  submit  to  the  other. 
Rise  then  and  drive  out  ignominiously  the  invaders, 
who  have  dared  to  desecrate  the  soil  which  your 
labors  have  made  fruitful,  and  which  is  consecrated 
by  your  homes." 

Immediately  upon  the  removal  of  General  Harney 
from  the  command  of  the  Federal  forces  in  Mis- 
souri, the  Governor  had,  in  anticipation  of  the 
speedy  opening  of  hostilities,  directed  the  quarter- 
master-general of  the  State  to  remove  the  armory 
and  workshop,  which  had  been  established  at  Jef- 
ferson City,  to  the  town  of    Booneville,  as  General 


Lyon   Declares    War.  207 

Price  was  of  opinion  that  it  was  better  to  make  a 
stand  at  the  latter  place,  which  was  in  the  midst  of 
a  friendly  population,  and  contiguous  to  the  coun- 
ties from  which  he  expected  the  strongest  support, 
than  at  the  Capital,  whose  population,  consisting 
largely  of  Germans,  was  unfriendly  and  hostile ; 
and  had  decided  that  when  the  State  forces  should 
be  compelled  to  retire  from  Jefferson  City  they 
would  hold  Booneville  and  the  Missouri  River 
above  that  point  long  enough  to  give  the  people  of 
North  Missouri  an  opportunity  to  come  to  his  help. 
Both  the  Governor  and  General  Price  believed  that, 
if  this  were  done,  they  could  within  a  week  or  two 
concentrate  near  Lexington  an  army  strong  enough 
to  hold  the  western  counties  of  Missouri  until  the 
Confederate  States  could  send  an  army  to  their 
support,  and  arms  and  equipments  for  the  State 
Guard. 

Orders  were  accordingly  issued  on  the  12th  of 
June  to  the  commanding  officers  of  the  several  mili- 
tary districts  to  immediately  assemble  all  of  their 
available  men,  each  (except  General  John  B.  Clark) 
at  some  convenient  place  within  his  own  district, 
and  to  get  them  ready  for  instant  service  in  the 
field.  General  Clark,  whose  district  was  north  of 
the  Missouri,  was  ordered  to  rendezvous  his  men  at 
Booneville,  and  to  organize  them  there  as  speedily 
as  possible. 


208  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

On  Thursday  th'e  13th  the  Governor  learned 
that  Lyon  was  embarking  his  troops  at  St.  Louis, 
with  the  evident  purpose  to  move  against  Jefferson 
City.  General  Price,  who  had  already  caused  the 
railroad  bridges  across  the  Qsage  and  the  Gasconade 
to  be  destroyed  so  as  to  prevent  Lyon's  approach 
by  rail,  now  ordered  General  Parsons,  who  had  col- 
lected a  small  force  at  Jefferson  City,  to  retire  with 
it  along  the  Pacific  Railroad  to  a  point  south  of 
Booneville,  and  there  to  await  orders.  He,  together 
with  the  Governor,  and  their  staff  officers,  and 
some  of  the  State  officials,  and  Captain  Kelly's  com- 
pany, embarked  the  same  afternoon  on  the  steamer 
White  Cloud,  and  reached  Booneville  during  the 
night. 

General  John  B.  Clark  was  already  there  with 
several  hundred  men,  who  had  eagerly  answered  the 
Governor's  call.  They  continued  to  arrive  during 
the  next  two  days,  Friday  and  Saturday,  singly  and 
in  squads,  bringing  with  them  their  shot  guns  and 
rifles.  Most  of  them  belonged  to  Colonel  Marma- 
duke's  regiment,  which  had  been  hastily  organized 
at  Jefferson  City  in  May,  but  sent  back  to  their 
homes  before  they  could  be  taught  either  drill  or 
discipline. 

Rumors  which  greatly  exaggerated  the  real  facts 
reached  Booneville  on  Saturday  (June  15)  that  a 
skirmish  had  taken  place  on  the  13th  near  Independ- 


Lyon   Declares    War.  209 

ence  between  some  State  troops  under  Colonel 
Edmunds  B.  Holloway,  and  a  detachment  of  Federal 
dragoons  from  Fort  Leavenworth;  that  Colonel 
Holloway  had  been  killed ;  and  that  some  State 
troops,  which  were  rendezvousing  at  Lexington, 
were  threatened  by  a  large  body  of  United  States 
cavalry,  and  several  regiments  of  Kansas  volun- 
teers. Genera]  Price  determined,  in  consequence  of 
these  rumors,  to  proceed  forthwith  to  Lexington 
and  assume  personal  command  of  the  State  forces 
in  that  vicinity.  He  accordingly  left  the  next 
morning  (Sunday)  for  Lexington,  after  ordering 
General  Clark,  upon  whom  the  command  of  the 
men  at  Booneville  devolved,  to  hold  that  place  as 
long  as  practicable,  and  then  to  effect  a  junction 
with  General  Parsons.  He  was  already  satisfied 
that,  having  no  artillery  with  which  to  obstruct  the 
navigation  of  the  Missouri,  he  would  have  to  aban- 
don the  line  of  that  river,  and  to  withdraw  his  force 
southward  to  some  place  where  he  could  organize, 

arm  and  equip  it. 
14 


CHAPTER   XI. 

BOONEVILLE   AND   CARTHAGE. 

Lyon  sends  Sweeny  and  Sigel  to  the  South-west — Pursues  the  Gover- 
nor—Occupies Jefferson  City — Advances  on  Booneville— The  En- 
gagement at  Booneville — Important  Consequences — General  Price 
at  Lexington — Orders  Rains  to  retreat  southward  towards  Lamar 
— Hastens  to  meet  McCulloch — Governor  Jackson  retreats  towards 
Warsaw — The  Cole  Camp  Affair — Guibor  and  Barlow — Burbridge 
— The  Governor  reaches  Lamar — Is  joined  by  Rains  and  Slack — 
Temporary  Organization  of  the  State  Guard — Lyon  gets  ready  to 
pursue — Sturgis  ordered  to  co-operate — Lyon  and  Sturgis  move 
towards  Clinton  — Sigel  tries  to  intercept  the  Governor — The  Battle 
of  Carthage — Defeat  of  Sigel.  • 

Hardly  had  Lyon  left  the  Planters'  House  on 
the  afternoon  of  the  nth  of  June  when  he  tele- 
graphed to  the  War  Department  for  five  thousand 
additional  stand  of  arms,  and  for  authority  to  enlist 
more  troops  in  Missouri.  His  requests  were  in- 
stantly complied  with. 

He  issued  orders  the  same  night  for  the  move- 
ment of  his  troops. 

Sigel,  Salomon,  and  B.  Gratz  Brown  were  ordered 
towards  Springfield  with  their  regiments.  They  be- 
gan moving  on  the  13th,  and  had  all  left  St.  Louis 
on   the    15th,  accompanied  by  two  batteries  (eight 


Booneville   and  Carthage.  211 


<v 


guns)  under  Major  Backoff.  The  command  of  this 
expedition  was  given  to  Captain  Thomas  W. 
Sweeny  acting  as  brigadier-general  by  election,  and 
by  assignment  of  General  Harney.  Its  objects 
were  to  occupy  the  south-western  part  of  the  State ; 
to  oppose  the  apprehended  advance  of  a  Confeder- 
ate army  under  Ben.  McCulloch  ;  and  to  cut  off  the 
retreat  of  Governor  Jackson,  General  Price,  and  the 
State  troops,  all  of  whom  Lyon  proposed  himself  to 
drive  in  that  direction. 

In  execution  of  this  purpose  he  embarked  on  the 
13th  of  June  at  St.  Louis,  with  Totten's  Light  Bat- 
tery, Company  F,  Second  United  States  Artillery ; 
Company  B  of  the  Second  United  States  Infantry ; 
two  companies  of  United  States  Recruits  ;  Blair's 
regiment  of  Missouri  Volunteers ;  and  nine  compa- 
nies of  Boernstein's  regiment ;  aggregating  about 
two  thousand  men,  and  advanced  by  way  of  the 
Missouri  River  to  Jefferson  City.  Arriving  there  on 
Saturday  the  15th,  about  two  P.M.,  he  took  quiet 
possession  of  the  city,  the  State  forces  having 
evacuated  it  on  Thursday. 

Leaving  Colonel  Boernstein  and  three  companies 
of  his  regiment  at  Jefferson  City,  Lyon  himself 
proceeded  the  next  day  (Sunday,  June  16),  with  the 
rest  of  his  command — about  seventeen  hundred 
men — towards  Booneville.  When  within  fifteen 
miles  of  that  city,  the  transports  were  ordered  to 


212  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

lay  by  till  daybreak ;  about  which  time  they  moved 
on  to  a  point  about  eight  miles  below  Booneville. 
There  Lyon  debarked  all  of  his  men,  except  one 
company  of  Blair's  regiment,  and  a  detachment  of 
artillery  with  one  howitzer.  These  he  ordered  to 
proceed  up  the  river  on  the  transports,  in  order  to 
deceive  the  State  troops  and  to  create  a  diversion 
in  favor  of  his  real  movement.  Lyon  himself  ad- 
vanced with  his  main  body  along  the  river  road  to- 
wards Booneville,  moving  very  cautiously,  as  he  had 
been  led  to  believe  that  he  would  have  to  encounter 
at  least  "  three  or  four  thousand  rebels." 

Governor  Jackson  learned  Sunday  night  that 
Lyon  was  approaching  Booneville  by  way  of  the 
river.  He  at  once  ordered  General  Parsons  who 
was  at  Tipton,  some  twenty  miles  to  the  south,  to 
bring  his  whole  command  to  Booneville  forthwith. 
As  soon  as  it  was  known  on  Monday  morning  that 
Lyon  had  debarked  his  force,  and  was  advancing 
upon  the  city  by  land,  the  Governor  ordered  Mar- 
maduke  to  take  his  own  regiment,  and  all  other 
armed  men  in  the  city,  except  Kelly's  company, 
and  to  move  out  against  Lyon,  and  impede  his  ad- 
vance as  much  as  possible.  This  was  done  in  order 
to  give  Parsons  time  to  come  up,  and  also  to  give 
to  such  citizens  as  might  want  to  escape,  the  oppor- 
tunity to  arrange  their  affairs  and  leave  ;  and  also 
to  enable  General  Harding  to  destroy  his  ordnance 


Booneville   and  Carthage.  213 

shops,  and  the  material  which  he  had  collected. 
Colonel  Marmaduke,  who  had  already  protested 
against  making  any  resistance  at  Booneville  and 
had  advised  the  Governor  to  concentrate  his  forces 
behind  the  Osage  in  the  neighborhood  of  Warsaw, 
again  represented  to  him  that  to  meet  Lyon  now 
could  only  result  in  disaster  to  the  State  troops. 
The  Governor,  nevertheless  repeated  his  order,  and 
Marmaduke  went  out  with  between  400  and  500 
men  to  confront  the  enemy. 

Lyon  had  advanced  about  two  miles  when  his 
skirmishers  encountered  Marmaduke,  who  at  once 
opened  such  a  brisk  fire  as  to  compel  Lyon  to  bring 
up  his  artillery  and  deploy  a  part  of  his  infantry. 
Having  accomplished  this,  Marmaduke  withdrew 
his  men  to  a  stronger  position  about  a  mile  nearer 
to  the  city.  There,  under  cover  of  some  buildings 
and  a  dense  wood,  he  made  a  stand,  which  appeared 
so  formidable  to  Lyon,  who  greatly  overestimated 
Marmaduke's  strength,  that  he  deployed  his  whole 
force  in  line  of  battle.  A  sharp  engagement  now 
took  place,  in  the  midst  of  which  Colonel  Marma- 
duke received  orders  from  the  Governor  to  fall  back 
to  the  city,  in  order  to  form  a  junction  with  Gen- 
eral Parsons,  who  was  rapidly  approaching. 

It  was  no  easy  matter,  however,  to  withdraw 
four  or  five  hundred  raw  troops  from  a  field,  on 
which  they  were  engaged  with  four  times  their  own 


214  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

number  of  well  armed  and  well  disciplined  soldiers 
commanded  by  a  man  like  Lyon.  They  neverthe- 
less fell  back  in  some  order  at  first,  taking  ad- 
vantage of  every  good  point  to  deliver  their  fire  at 
the  Federals;  but  they  were  in  the  end  pretty 
thoroughly  dispersed. 

Such  was  the  trifling  engagement  which  has  been 
called  "  the  Battle  of  Booneville."  The  Federal  loss 
was  two  men  killed,  and  nine  wounded.  Of  the 
State  troops  two  were  killed,  and  five  or  six  were 
slightly  wounded. 

Insignificant  as  was  this  engagement  in  a  military 
aspect,  it  was  in  fact  a  stunning  blow  to  the  South- 
ern Rights'  people  of  the  State,  and  one  which  did 
incalculable  and  unending  injury  to  the  Confederates. 
It  was  indeed  the  consummation  of  Blair's  states- 
manlike scheme  to  make  it  impossible  for  Missouri  to 
secede,  or  out  of  her  great  resources  to  contribute 
abundantly  of  men  and  material  to  the  Southern 
cause  as  she  would  surely  have  done  had  her  people 
been  left  free  to  do  as  they  pleased. 

It  was  also  the  crowning  achievement  of  Lyon's 
well-conceived  campaign.  The  capture  of  Camp 
Jackson  had  disarmed  the  State,  and  compelled  the 
loyalty  of  St.  Louis  and  all  the  adjacent  counties. 
The  advance  upon  Jefferson  City  had  put  the  State 
Government  to  flight,  and  taken  away  from  it  that 
prestige  which  gives  force  to  established  authority. 


Booneville  and  Carthage.  215 

The  dispersion  of  the  volunteers  who  had  rushed  to 
Booneville  to  fight  under  Price  for  Missouri  and  the 
South,  extended  Lyon's  conquest  over  all  the  coun- 
try lying  between  the  Missouri  and  the  State  of 
Iowa  ;  closed  all  the  avenues  by  which  the  Southern 
men  of  that  part  of  Missouri  could  make  their  way 
to  Price ;  made  the  Missouri  an  unobstructed  Fed- 
eral highway  from  its  source  to  its  mouth ;  and  ren- 
dered it  impossible  for  Price  to  hold  the  rich,  popu- 
lous, and  friendly  counties  in  the  vicinity  of  Lexing- 
ton. Price  had  indeed  no  alternative  now  but  to 
retreat  in  all  haste  to  the  south-western  corner  of 
the  State,  there  to  organize  his  army  under  the  pro- 
tection of  the  force  which  the  Confederate  Govern- 
ment was  mustering  in  north-western  Arkansas 
under  General  McCulloch,  for  the  protection  of  that 
State  and  the  Indian  Territory. 

When  Price  reached  Lexington  on  the  18th  of 
June,  he  found  several  thousand  volunteers  assem- 
bled there  and  in  the  adjoining  county  of  Jackson 
under  Brigadier-Generals  Rains  and  Slack.  His 
first  care  was  to  organize  them.  But  hardly  had  he 
begun  this  work  when  news  was  brought  of  the  dis- 
aster at  Booneville,  and  of  the  retreat  of  the  Gov- 
ernor, with  Generals  Parsons  and  Clark,  towards 
Warsaw.  Knowing  that  the  unorganized  force  at 
Lexington  was  now  threatened  not  only  by  the 
Federal  troops  at   Fort   Leavenworth  and   Kansas 


216  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

City,  2,500  strong,  but  by  Lyon  and  his  army  also, 
Price  ordered  Rains  to  assume  command  of  all  the 
State  troops  near  Lexington  and  to  move  them  as 
expeditiously  as  possible  towards  Lamar  in  Barton 
County.  He,  accompanied  by  his  staff  and  a  small 
mounted  escort,  made  his  way  in  all  haste  to  Ar- 
kansas, in  order  to  bring  McCulloch  to  the  rescue  of 
both  the  Governor  and  Rains. 

The  Governor  was,  meanwhile,  hurrying  towards 
Warsaw,  feeling  that  he  would  not  be  safe  from 
Lyon's  pursuit  till  he  had  gotten  behind  the  Osage. 
He  was  met  on  the  way  by  rumors  that  a  well- 
armed  regiment  of  Home  Guards  under  Colonel 
Cook  was  at  Cole  Camp,  on  his  line  of  march.  On 
approaching  the  place,  however,  he  learned,  to  his 
great  relief,  that  the  Home  Guards  had  been  sur- 
prised and  badly  whipped  on  the  morning  of  the 
19th  by  a  battalion  of  State  troops  raised  near 
Warsaw  and  led  by  two  very  dashing  young  sol- 
diers, Lieutenant-Colonel  Walter  S.  O'Kane  and 
Major  Thomas  H.  Murray.  The  news  was  quickly 
confirmed  by  the  arrival  of  the  battalion  at  the  Gov- 
ernor's camp,  with  three  hundred  and  sixty-two 
new  muskets  which  they  had  taken  from  the  Home 
Guards.  Thus  reinforced,  the  Governor  continued 
his  retreat  to  Warsaw,  and  across  the  Osage. 

There  he  halted  in  order  to  ascertain  the  move- 


Booneville  and  Carthage.  217 

ments  of  General  Price.  During  this  time,  two 
men,  who  had  been  arrested  as  spies,  were  brought 
before  the  Governor.  They  turned  out  to  be 
Henry  Guibor  and  William  P.  Barlow,  lieuten- 
ants of  the  light  battery  which  had  been  serving 
in  the  south-west  under  Bowen.  They  had  been 
captured  with  the  rest  of  the  State  troops  at  Camp 
Jackson  and  paroled.  Holding  that  their  capture 
was  unlawful,  and  that  their  paroles  were  therefore 
not  obligatory  (as  the  courts  subsequently  decided), 
they  had  made  their  way  to  the  army,  and  were 
eager  to  be  placed  on  duty.  They  came  very  oppor- 
tunely; for  Parsons  was  still  dragging  along  the  four 
brass  6-pounders  which  had  been  captured  at  Lib- 
erty Arsenal,  but  he  had  no  men  that  knew  how  to 
handle  them.  They  were  turned  over  to  Guibor 
and  Barlow.  But  having  been  brought  along  with- 
out equipments  and  without  any  fixed  ammunition, 
they  would  still  have  been  of  very  little  present  use 
but  for  the  inventive  genius  and  energy  of  the  two 
young  officers,  who,  surmounting  every  difficulty, 
enlisted  a  company,  equipped  the  guns,  prepared 
ammunition,  and  got  the  battery  ready  for  instant 
service. 

Another  notable  accession  to  the  Governor's  force 
at  this  time  was  John  Q.  Burbridge  and  ten  other 
men  from  Pike  County  who  came  into  camp,  bring- 
ing with  them  from  that  remote  county  about  one 


21 8  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

hundred  and  fifty  muskets,  which  they  had  taken 
by  guile  from  a  company  of  State  militia  mostly 
loyal  Germans,  and  had  brought  by  force  to  the 
Governor.  Within  thirty-six  hours  Burbridge  had 
enlisted  and  was  in  command  of  a  well-armed  com- 
pany. 

Having  ascertained  that  General  Price  had  gone 
to  McCulloch's  head-quarters,  and  that  Rains  was 
retreating  southward,  the  Governor  put  his  own  col- 
umn in  motion,  and  a  few  days  thereafter  reached 
Montevallo,  in  Vernon  County,  and  thence  moved 
to  Camp  Lamar,  on  the  right  bank  of  Spring  River, 
some  three  miles  north  of  the  village  of  Lamar. 

There  he  was  joined  by  Rains  and  Slack  on  the 
3d  of  July.  The  march  of  their  column  had  been 
greatly  impeded  and  made  laborious  and  fatiguing 
by  the  high  waters  of  the  streams  across  which  they 
had  to  ferry  their  long-drawn,  motley  train  of 
vehicles  of  every  description  laden  not  only  with 
supplies  for  an  army,  but  chiefly  with  household 
goods  and  utensils  of  every  sort,  conspicuous 
among  which  were  feather-beds  and  frying-pans. 
The  Governor,  therefore,  determined  to  halt  at 
Camp  Lamar  for  a  few  days  in  order  to  rest  the 
men ;  and  meanwhile  to  distribute  them  to  the 
commands  to  which  they  properly  belonged. 

Rains  was  found  to  have  nearly  three  thousand 
men,  but  many  of  them  were  unarmed.     His  efifec- 


Booneville  and  Carthage.  219 

tive  strength  was  about  twelve  hundred  infantry 
under  Weightman,  about  six  hundred  mounted  men 
under  Cawthon,  and  a  three-gun  battery  under 
Bledsoe.  Parsons  had  about  six  hundred  and  fifty 
armed  men.  His  infantry  were  commanded  by 
Colonel  Kelly,  his  mounted  men  by  Colonel  Brown, 
and  his  four-gun  battery  by  Guibor.  Clark  had 
Burbridge's  regiment  of  infantry,  whose  effective 
strength  was  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  officers 
and  men.  Slack's  brigade  consisted  of  about  five 
hundred  mounted  men  under  Colonel  Rives,  and 
about  seven  hundred  infantry  under  Colonel 
Hughes,  and  Major  Thornton.  Parsons,  Clark,  and 
Slack  had  also  about  eight  hundred  unarmed  men. 

Lyon  was  notified  the  day  after  the  affair  at  Boone- 
ville (June  1 8th),  that  Missouri  had  been  detached 
from  the  Department  of  the  West,  and  attached 
to  the  Department  of  the  Ohio,  commanded  by 
Major-General  George  B.  McClellan.  This  had  been 
done  by  the  advice  of  General  Scott,  and  through 
the  solicitation  of  Attorney-General  Bates,  Judge 
Gamble  and  other  St.  Louisians,  who  did  not  like 
Blair,  and  had  no  great  confidence  in  "  Captain " 
Lyon.  Fearing  that  this  would  interfere  with 
their  campaign,  Blair  hurried  to  Washington  City 
to  obtain  a  revocation  of  the  order,  and  the 
assigment  of   Lyon   to   the   command   of  military 


220  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

operations  in  Missouri.  This  he  could  not  accom- 
plish, but  he  finally  persuaded  the  Administration 
on  the  3d  of  July  to  organize  Illinois  together  with 
Missouri  and  all  the  other  States  and  Territories 
lying  between  the  Mississippi  River  and  the  Rocky 
Mountains  into  a  separate  military  command  to  be 
known  as  the  The  Western  Department,  under 
Major-General  Fremont,  with  head-quarters  at  St. 
Louis. 

McClellan  did  not  interfere  with  Lyon  during  the 
short  time  that  his  command  extended  over  Mis- 
souri, and  the  latter  went  on  to  execute  the  plans 
which  Blair  and  he  had  devised  for  the  conquest  of 
the  State,  though  he  was  severely  crippled  by  the 
loss  of  Blair,  whose  presence  and  counsels  were  of 
inestimable  importance  to  him.  While  procuring 
transportation  and  supplies,  and  reinforcing  and  re- 
organizing his  army  at  Booneville,  Lyon  published 
a  proclamation  to  the  people  of  Missouri,  promising 
not  to  molest  any  man  who  had  taken  up  arms 
against  the  Government,  if  he  would  return  to  his 
home  and  remain  there  quietly.  This  wise  measure 
had  the  effect  which  he  anticipated,  and  kept  thou- 
sands of  men  out  of  the  ranks  of  the  State  Guard. 

He  next  assigned  Colonel  John  D.  Stevenson  to 
the  command  of  the  Missouri  River  from  Kansas 
City  to  its  mouth,  and  gave  him  a  sufficient  force  to 
garrison  Jefferson  City,  Booneville  and  Lexington, 


Booneville  and  Carthage.  221 

and  ordered  him  also  to  protect  the  loyal  inhabit- 
ants of  the  adjacent  counties ;  to  disperse  all  gath- 
erings of  men  hostile  to  the  Federal  Government ; 
and  to  prevent  reinforcements  from  crossing  the 
river  to  Price.  All  that  part  of  the  State  north  of 
the  Missouri  was  entrusted  temporarily  to  the  com-' 
mand  of  Colonel  Samuel  R.  Curtis,  who  had  already 
occupied  parts  of  it  with  the  Second  Iowa  Infantry. 
South-eastern  Missouri  was  left  to  the  care  of 
McClellan,  who  was  for  that  purpose  concentrating 
at  Cairo  an  ample  force,  under  Brigadier-General 
Prentiss.  St.  Louis  and  all  the  country  within  a 
hundred  and  fifty  miles  of  it,  had  been  thoroughly 
subjugated,  and  was  occupied  by  sufficient  garri- 
sons. 

Major  Sturgis  was  already  following  Rains  with 
about  nine  hundred  regulars  from  Fort  Leav- 
enworth, and  two  regiments  of  Kansas  Volun- 
teers about  sixteen  hundred  strong.  Lyon  himself 
moved  from  Booneville  on  the  3d  of  July  with 
about  two  thousand  three  hundred  and  fifty  men, 
of  whom  two  hundred  and  fifty  were  regulars. 
The  two  columns  had  an  effective  strength  of 
about  four  thousand  eight  hundred  and  fifty  men. 
They  were  all  well  armed  and  equipped,  and  fully 
supplied  with  everything  that  an  army  in  the  field 
required.  They  were  also  officered  by  educated 
soldiers,  many  of  whom  afterwards  rose  to  distinc- 


222  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

tion.  But  Lyon  had  lost  fifteen  days  of  priceless 
time  at  Booneville,  and  the  State  troops  were  more 
than  a  week  in  advance  of  his  own  column,  near 
Lamar. 

In  front  of  the  Governor,  though  he  did  not  him- 
self know  it,  was  the  force  which  Lyon,  before  leav- 
ing St.  Louis,  had  sent  under  Sweeney  and  Sigel  to 
the  south-west  to  cut  off  the  retreat  of  the  State 
troops,  and  to  prevent  McCulloch  from  succoring 
them.  Sweeny,  who  reached  Springfield  on  the 
1st  of  July,  found  at  and  near  that  post  and  on  the 
way  thither  from  Rolla,  about  four  thousand  men, 
including  one  thousand  Home  Guards.  Sigel,  who 
had  preceded  him,  had  moved  westward  with  his 
own  regiment  and  Salomon's,  and  taken  position  at 
Neosho  and  Sarcoxie  in  order  to  intercept  General 
Price.  Finding  that  Price  and  his  escort  had 
already  passed  on  to  McCulloch's  camp,  he  decided 
to  throw  himself  in  front  of  Governor  Jackson,  and 
to  hold  him  north  of  Spring  River  till  Lyon  could 
come  up  with  his  own  and  Sturgis'  columns  and 
attack  him  in  rear.  In  this  determination  he  was 
confirmed  by  an  order  from  Sweeny,  who  directed 
him  to  concentrate  his  force,  and  move  toward 
Carthage,  which  was  in  the  direct  line  of  the  Gov- 
ernor's retreat.  Leaving  one  company  of  his  own 
regiment  and  some  detailed  men  at  Neosho  under 


Booneville  and  Carthage.  223 

command  of  Captain  Conrad,  he  moved  northward 
with  the  rest  of  his  force,  except  Captain  Indest's 
company,  and  encamped  on  the  evening  of  the 
4th  of  July  on  Spring  River  a  little  south-east  of 
Carthage. 

Just  after  the  sun  had  gone  down  on  the  4th  of 
July,  and  while  the  State  troops  were  still  encamped 
near  Lamar,  resting  from  their  fatigues,  and  getting 
themselves  into  some  semblance  of  an  army,  a  man 
rode  hastily  to  General  Parsons'  quarters  and  told 
the  general  that  Colonel  Monroe  (his  quarter- 
master) who  had  gone  to  Carthage  with  a  detach- 
ment of  ninety-five  men  to  collect  forage  and  sub- 
sistence, was  threatened  there  by  a  large  force  of 
the  enemy,  and  wanted  reinforcements.  Parsons 
instantly  ordered  his  whole  command  to  get  ready 
to  march  toward  Carthage  at  ten  o'clock  that 
night,  and  then  communicated  the  facts  to  the 
Governor. 

This  was  the  first  intimation  that  the  State  troops 
had  that  an  enemy  was  in  their  front  with  intent 
to  cut  off  their  retreat.  But  before  the  hour  fixed 
by  Parsons  for  the  movement  of  his  command  had 
arrived,  other  couriers  had  come  from  Monroe  say- 
ing that  the  Federals  were  approaching  Carthage  in 
great  force.  Governor  Jackson  thereupon  assumed 
command  in  person  of  all  his  troops,  and,  counter- 


224  The  Fight  for  Missouri, 

manding  Parsons'  order  for  the  movement  of  his 
own  force,  ordered  the  whole  army  to  take  up 
the  march  at  day  break  (July  5),  with  Rains  in 
front,  and  Captain  Shelby's  company  in  advance. 
The  Governor,  accompanied  by  General  David  R. 
Atchison  and  other  volunteer  aids  and  by  some  of 
his  own  staff,  rode  at  the  head  of  the  column  with 
General  Rains.  They  had  marched  about  five  miles 
beyond  Lamar  when  they  were  met  by  Colonel 
Monroe  and  informed  by  him  that  Sigel  had  al- 
ready passed  through  Carthage,  and  was  on  the 
way  to  meet  them  and  give  battle.  The  col- 
umn was  quickly  halted  on  the  ridge  of  a  prairie, 
which  sloped  gently  down  toward  Cocn  Creek,  an 
affluent  of  Spring  River.  This  creek,  which  was 
heavily  bordered  on  both  sides  by  "timber"  and 
"brush,"  was  about  two  miles  in  front  of  the  State 
troops.  Hardly  had  they  been  halted  when  the 
bayonets  of  the  Federals  were  seen  gleaming  in  the 
sunshine  as  they  descended  the  opposite  declivity 
in  perfect  order,  before  disappearing  in  "  the  timber" 
on  that  side  of  the  creek. 

The  Governor  at  once  deployed  his  men  in  line  of 
battle,  with  Weightman's  brigade  on  the  right,  and 
on  its  left  Slack's  Infantry.  Between  these  two 
Bledsoe's  three  guns  were  thrown  into  battery. 
Guibor  took  position  with  his  four  guns  on  the  left 
of  Slack,  and  next  to  him  came  Parsons'  Infantry, 


Booneville  and  Carthage.  225 

under  Colonel  Kelly.  Clark's  Infantry  under  Bur- 
bridge  occupied  the  left.  The  right  flank  of  the 
State  troops  was  covered  by  Rains  with  the  mounted 
men  of  his  division,  and  their  left  flank  by  mount- 
ed men  under  Brown  and  Rives.  The  line  thus 
formed  consisted  of  twenty-six  hundred  infantry 
and  artillery  most  of  the  former  armed  with  shot 
guns  and  rifles,  and  about  fifteen  hundred  mounted 
men  similarly  armed.  The  unarmed  men,  of  whom 
there  were  about  two  thousand,  all  mounted,  were 
sent  to  the  rear  with  the  wagons. 

Every  one,  officers  and  men,  now  looked  on  with 
intense  curiosity,  as  the  Federals,  with  the  precision 
of  veterans  which  most  of  them  were,  emerged  from 
"the  brush"  on  the  north  side  of  the  creek,  and  de- 
ployed into  line  on  the  prairie  some  twelve  hundred 
yards  away.  They  consisted  of  nine  companies  of 
Sigel's  Regiment  and  seven  companies  of  Salomon's, 
with  an  effective  strength  of  nine  hundred  and  fifty 
men,  and  seven  pieces  of  artillery  (one  hundred  and 
twenty-five  men)  under  Major  Backoff. 

Sigel  began  the  fight.  Advancing  his  line  about 
three  hundred  yards,  he  opened  upon  the  State  troops 
with  all  his  guns,  delivering  a  steady  fire  of  round 
shot,  shell  and  grape.  Guibor  replied  with  his  four 
guns  and  was  followed  on  the  instant  by  Bledsoe. 
The  ineffective  artillery  practice  thus  begun  had 
been  kept  up  nearly  an  hour,  when  the  Governor 
15 


226  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

ordered  Rains  to  advance  on  the  right  with  his 
mounted  men,  and  Rives  and  Brown  on  the  left. 
The  unarmed  men  on  horseback  (about  two  thou- 
sand) were  at  the  same  time  ordered  to  seek  shelter 
in  the  heavy  timber  on  the  right  of  the  State  troops. 

Sigel,  seeing  these  movements,  and  that  he  was 
about  to  be  attacked  on  both  flanks,  and  fancying 
also  that  he  was  about  to  be  taken  in  rear  by  the 
heavy  mounted  force  which  was  taking  shelter  in  the 
woods  (for  he  did  not  know  that  they  were  not 
armed)  withdrew  his  men  in  good  order  first  to  the 
timber,  and  then  beyond  the  creek.  Posting  Essig's 
Battery,  with  a  support  of  five  companies  of  infantry 
on  the  high  ground  south  of  the  creek  in  such  way 
as  to  command  the  approach  to  the  ford,  he  retired 
with  the  rest  of  his  men  to  the  defence  of  his  train, 
then  threatened  by  some  mounted  Missourians  who 
had  crossed  the  creek  higher  up. 

The  State  troops  following  in  some  disorder  were 
brought  to  a  halt  within  four  hundred  yards  of 
the  ford  by  the  well-directed  fire  of  Essig's  Battery. 
But  Weightman  rapidly  reforming  his  line,  opened 
fire  with  Bledsoe's  guns,  and  under  their  cover  and 
that  of  "  the  timber,"  advanced  his  own  brigade 
along  with  Slack's  toward  the  creek.  It  was  now 
and  here  that  the  serious  fighting  of  the  day  took 
place;  for  Essig  continued  to  hold  the  ford  with 
great  obstinacy.     But   General  Clark   and  General 


Booneville  and  Carthage.  227 

Parsons  managed  at  last  to  cross  the  creek  at  an- 
other ford  and  were  endangering  his  retreat.  Essig 
thereupon  gave  the  order  to  retire,  and  fell  back  to 
the  main  body. 

Sigel  continued  his  retreat  in  good  order,  closely 
followed  by  a  rabble  of  State  troops  and  harassed 
on  all  sides  by  their  mounted  men,  who  did  not, 
however,  dare  to  attack  his  compact  ranks.  Cross- 
ing Spring  River  without  opposition  he  held  Car- 
thage under  cover  of  its  houses  and  fences  till  his 
train  was  well  on  the  road  to  Springfield.  He  then 
continued  his  retreat  to  Sarcoxie,  fifteen  miles  away. 
Reaching  that  place  at  three  o'clock  in  the  morning, 
he  rested  his  men  there  till  daybreak,  and  then  hast- 
ened along  to  Mount  Vernon.  Finding  that  he  was 
no  longer  pursued,  he  halted  there.  As  the  engage- 
ment took  place  about  nine  miles  north  of  Carthage, 
Sigel  had  on  the  5th  of  July  marched  under  a  blazing 
sun  more  than  ten  miles,  had  met  and  fought  on 
the  same  day  an  army  four  times  as  numerous  as 
his  own,  and  had  then  withdrawn  his  men  in  good 
order,  first  to  Carthage  nine  miles  from  the  field,  and 
then  to  Sarcoxie  fifteen  miles  further,  without  halting 
either  to  eat  or  to  sleep. 

The  Federal  loss  in  this  "  engagement  near  Carth- 
age," generally  called  The  Battle  of  Carthage,  was 
thirteen  killed  and  thirty-one  wounded.  The  State 
troops  lost  ten  killed  and  sixty-four  wounded.     The 


228  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

Federal  commander  estimated  Governor  Jackson's 
losses  at  "  not  less  than  from  three  hundred  and 
fifty  to  four  hundred,"  and  Confederate  historians 
have  estimated  Sigel's  loss  "  at  from  one  hundred 
and  fifty  to  two  hundred  killed,  and  from  three  hun- 
dred to  four  hundred  wounded  !  " 

The  State  troops  occupied  on  the  night  of  the 
battle  the  ground  on  which  Sigel  had  camped  the 
preceding  night,  and  the  next  day  (July  6)  they 
marched  leisurely  and  in  great  good  spirits  toward 
Granby. 


CHAPTER   XII. 

THE   CONFEDERATES   ENTER   MISSOURI. 

Ben  McCulloch  assigned  to  defence  of  the  Indian  Territory— Con- 
centrates his  force,  including  Pearce's  Brigade,  near  Fort  Smith — 
Governor  Jackson,  before  leaving  Jefferson  City,  asks  him  to  enter 
Missouri — McCulloch  asks  the  President's  consent — Advances  to 
Maysville — Joins  Price — Marches  with  him  to  rescue  the  Gover- 
nor and  the  Missouri  troops — Meets  them — Price  Assumes  Com- 
mand of  the  State  Guard — Cowskin  Prairie — Reorganization  of 
the  State  Guard — Price's  Difficulties — He  surmounts  them — Gover- 
nor Jackson,  Price,  and  McCulloch  try  to  secure  the  co-operation 
of  Polk  and  Hardee — Polk  sends  Pillow  to  New  Madrid,  but  Har- 
dee refuses  to  co-operate — Price,  McCulloch,  and  Pearce  move 
against  Springfield — They  concentrate  their  armies  at  Cassville. 

Ben.  McCulloch,  the  well-known  Texan  ranger, 
had  been  appointed  on  the  13th  of  May,  brigadier- 
general  of  the  Provisional  Army  of  the  Confederate 
States,  and  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  Indian 
Territory  with  orders  to  guard  it  against  invasion 
from  Kansas  or  elsewhere.  A  regiment  of  infantry 
from  Louisiana,  a  mounted  regiment  from  Arkansas, 
and  another  from  Texas  were  ordered  to  report  to 
him,  and  he  was  also  authorized  to  raise  two  regi- 
ments of  Indians.  On  the  25th  of  May  he  reached 
Fort  Smith  and  went  a  few  days  later  into  the  In- 
dian Territory  to  select  a  position  for  his  command. 


230  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

He  found  a  suitable  one  in  the  Cherokee  country, 
but  discovered  that  John  Ross,  the  Cherokee  chief, 
and  a  majority  of  that  nation  were  opposed  to  the 
occupation  of  their  lands  by  any  armed  force.  He, 
therefore,  decided  not  to  occupy  the  Territory,  but 
to  take  a  position  at  Fort  Smith  in  western  Arkansas 
instead.  This  change  of  plan  led  him  to  ask  the 
Confederate  Government  to  add  north-western 
Arkansas  to  his  command.  This  request  was  not 
granted.  By  the  12th  of  June  he  had,  at  and  near 
Fort  Smith,  the  Third  Louisiana  Infantry  Colonel 
Louis  Hubert,  and  seven  companies  of  Churchill's 
Regiment  of  Mounted  Riflemen  (Arkansas).  There 
was  also  in  the  same  vicinity  a  brigade  of  Arkansas 
Militia,  about  one  thousand  five  hundred  strong, 
under  command  of  Brigadier-General  N.  B.  Pearce,  a 
graduate  of  West  Point. 

This  was  the  force  which  had  excited  the  ap- 
prehensions of  Blair  and  Lyon,  and  aroused  the 
hopes  of  Governor  Jackson  and  the  Missouri  Seces- 
sionists. 

When  the  Governor,  early  in  June,  learned  that 
McCulloch  was  at  Fort  Smith,  he  sent  Captain 
Colton  Greene  to  him  with  an  urgent  request  that 
he  would  advance  into  the  State  with  his  army, 
in  order  to  encourage  the  Southern  Rights'  people, 
and  give  General  Price  time  to  enlist  and  organize 
the  State  Guard.     Greene  reached  Fort  Smith  on 


The   Confederates  Enter  Missouri,         231 

the  13th  of  June — the  day  that  the  Governor  and 
General  Price  left  Jefferson  City — and  at  once  laid 
the  Governor's  request  before  McCulloch,  who 
listened  attentively  though  with  that  cautious  reserve 
which  was  one  of  his  most  noticeable  characteristics. 
But  the  adjutant-general  of  his  brigade  Captain  Mc- 
intosh, a  very  enterprising  and  intelligent  young 
officer  who  had  just  resigned  from  the  United  States 
Army  and  been  sent  by  Mr.  Davis  to  Arkansas  to 
help  McCulloch  organize  and  handle  his  troops,  ap- 
preciated the  importance  of  the  movement  which 
Governor  Jackson  suggested,  and  advocated  it  so 
earnestly  that  McCulloch  promised  to  ask  the  Presi- 
dent's permission  to  execute  it.  And  he  did,  on  the 
next  day,  the  14th  of  June,  write  to  the  Secretary  of 
War  as  follows : 

"  I  think  the  proposition  made  by  the  Governor 
is  one  of  great  importance  to  the  Confederate 
Government,  and  I  hope  it  may  meet  with  your 
favorable  consideration.  I  will  briefly  lay  before  you 
a  plan  of  operations.  The  Chief  of  the  Cherokees 
is  not  willing  to  have  a  force  marched  into  his 
country,  and  he  desires  to  remain  neutral.  The  only 
way  to  force  his  country  into  the  Confederacy  is  to 
throw  a  force  into  the  north-western  portion  of  this 
State,  take  possession  of.  Fort  Scott  on  the  Missouri 
line,  and  subjugate  that  portion  of  Kansas.  I  am 
satisfied  that  Lane  has  no  force  yet  of  any  impor- 


232  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

tance,  and  the  occupation  of  Fort  Scott  would  not 
only  place  Kansas  in  my  power,  but  would  give  heart 
and  countenance  to  our  friends  in  Missouri,  and 
accomplish  the  very  object  for  which  I  was  sent  here 
— preventing  a  force  from  the  North  invading  the 
Indian  Territory. 

"All  the  border  counties  on  the  western  line  of 
Missouri  are  with  us.  We  would  therefore  be  able 
to  draw  our  supplies  from  them.  After  strengthen- 
ing myself  at  Fort  Scott,  I  could,  by  co-operating 
with  Missouri,  take  such  a  position  on  the  Kansas 
River  as  I  might  desire.  In  order  to  carry  out  this 
plan  I  would  again  respectfully  ask  to  have  the 
Western  Military  Division  of  Arkansas  put  under 
my  orders,  with  authority  to  muster  the  troops  now 
in  it  (about  sixteen  hundred)  into  the  provisional 
forces,  and  to  accept  such  other  regiments  and  bat- 
talions until  my  force  is  at  least  seven  thousand 
strong." 

He  was  opposed  to  employing  Indians  in  Kansas, 
or  elsewhere  outside  of  their  own  territory. 

This  plan  of  campaign  was  both  wise  and  feasible, 
and  upon  being  outlined  to  the  Governor  of  Arkan- 
sas, a  few  days  later,  was  so  heartily  approved  by 
him,  that  he  telegraphed  (June  21)  to  the  Secretary 
of  War  that  Arkansas  had  eight  thousand  armed 
men  in  the  field,  whom  it  would  turn  over  to  the 
Confederate  Government   for  the   proposed  move- 


The   Confederates  Enter  Missouri.         233 

ment,  and  suggested  that  "  an  active  campaign  in 
Missouri  would  aid  Virginia."  But  the  policy  of  the 
Confederate  Government,  which,  acting  strictly  on 
the  defensive,  did  not  then  contemplate  the  invasion 
of  any  "  loyal  "  State,  and  least  of  all  Missouri,  which 
it  believed  to  be  hopelessly  subjugated !  And  this 
policy  it  observed  so  strictly  that  it  would  not  now 
manifest  any  disposition  to  help  the  Governor  array 
the  State  on  the  side  of  the  South,  or  evince  even  a 
desire  to  utilize  her  great  resources  for  the  good  of 
the  Confederacy.  But,  on  the  contrary,  under  the 
influence  of  unwise  counsellors  and  through  its  own 
unpardonable  ignorance  of  the  true  condition  of  the 
State,  it  declined  to  make  any  effort  to  prevent  the 
Federal  Government  from  occupying  her  territory 
and  using  her  power  to  crush  the  South. 

To  McCulloch's  proposition  to  assist  the  Missour- 
ians  the  Secretary  of  War  therefore  replied  coldly 
that  he  might,  if  he  thought  proper,  take  position 
at  Fort  Scott,  and  give  such  assistance  to  Mis- 
souri as  would  subserve  the  main  purpose  of  his 
command,  which  was  "  to  conciliate  the  Indian 
Nations,  and  to  obtain  their  active  co-operation  in 
prosecuting  the  war." 

Missouri,  with  her  hundred  thousand  men  and 
resources  greater  than  those  of  all  the  Cotton  States 
together,  was  worth  nothing  to  the  Confederacy  in 
comparison   with  two  or  three  regiments   of  semi- 


234  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

civilized  Indians,  who  ought  never  to  have  been 
allowed  to  cross  the  frontiers  of  their  own  terri- 
tory ! 

The  Secretary  did  not  even*  notice  McCulloch's 
request  for  the  addition  of  north-western  Arkansas 
to  his  command.  To  have  granted  that  request 
might  have  inflamed  McCulloch's  ambition,  and 
would  have  given  him  the  opportunity,  and  along 
with  it  the  power,  to  make  an  active  campaign  in 
Missouri.  Fearing  that  he  might  do  this  any  way, 
the  Secretary  further  admonished  him,  on  the  4th 
of  July,  that  "  the  position  of  Missouri,  as  a  South- 
ern State  still  in  the  Union,  requires,  as  you  will 
readily  perceive,  much  prudence  and  circumspec- 
tion, and  it  should  only  be  when  necessity  and  pro- 
priety unite  that  active  and  direct  assistance  should 
be  afforded  by  crossing  the  boundary  and  entering 
the  State." 

Such  was  the  military  status  in  western  Arkansas 
when  McCulloch  learned  that  Governor  Jackson  and 
General  Price  were  retreating  toward  Arkansas, 
closely  pursued  by  Lyon  and  Sturgis,  with  a  large 
force  of  Federal  troops.  He  "determined  to  march 
against  this  force,  to  hold  it  in  check,  and  if  an 
opportunity  occurred,  to  strike  it  a  blow  in  Mis- 
souri," and  set  out  at  once  for  Maysville,  in  the 
north-western  corner  of  the  State,  ordering  Hebert 


The   Confederates  Enter  Missouri.  235 

and  Churchill  to  follow  immediately  with  their 
regiments.  Pearce  had  already  moved  thither  with 
his  brigade  of  Arkansas  militia,  for  the  protection 
of  his  own  State.  McCulloch  had  not  yet  learned 
that  the  Confederate  Government  did  not  approve 
his  proposed  invasion  of  Missouri. 

General  Price,  as  has  been  told,  left  Lexington 
with  a  small  escort  immediately  after  the  affair  at 
Booneville,  and  hastened  toward  Fort  Smith,  in 
order  to  persuade  McCulloch  to  come  to  the  rescue 
of  Missouri.  On  the  way  he  was  joined  by  a  fine 
mounted  company,  the  Windsor  Guards,  from 
Henry  County,  and  by  other  companies,  and  men 
in  squads,  until,  when  he  reached  Cowskin  Prairie 
in  the  extreme  south-western  corner  of  the  State, 
about  twelve  miles  from  Maysville,  his  force 
amounted  to  nearly  twelve  hundred  men,  though 
many  of  them  had  no  arms  at  all.  He  there 
learned/ July  the  1st,  that  General  Pearce  was  near 
Maysville  with  his  Arkansas  brigade.  As  soon, 
therefore,  as  he  got  his  men  into  camp  he  pushed 
on  to  Pearce,  who  told  him  that  McCulloch  was  on 
the  march  from  Fort  Smith,  and  would  reach  Mays- 
ville the  next  day. 

Pearce  also  loaned  him  six  hundred  and  fifteen 
muskets  with  which  to  arm  his  men.  Returning  to 
Cowskin  Prairie  Price  hastily  organized  his  force, 


236  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

placing  such  as  were  well  mounted  and  well  armed 
and  fit  for  active  service,  under  the  immediate  com- 
mand of  Alexander  E.  Steen,  a  promising  young 
Missourian  who  had  resigned  his  commission  in  the 
United  States  Army  in  order  to  serve  his  native 
State. 

The  next  day,  McCulloch,  who  had  reached 
Maysville  in  advance  of  his  men,  rode  over  to 
General  Price's  head-quarters.  While  he  was  there 
they  learned  that  the  Governor  and  General  Rains 
were  trying  to  effect  a  junction  of  their  forces  north 
of  Carthage,  but  were  closely  pressed  by  Lyon  and 
Sturgis.  McCulloch  at  once  agreed  to  move  to  the 
assistance  of  the  Missourians,  and  to  persuade 
Pearce  to  unite  in  the  movement.  This  Pearce 
gladly  consented  to  do,  and  Churchill  having 
reached  Maysville  the  next  morning  by  a  forced 
march,  McCulloch  and  Pearce  entered  Missouri  the 
4th  of  July,  with  Churchill's  Regiment,  Gratiot's 
Arkansas  Infantry,  Carroll's  Mounted  Regiment, 
and  Woodruff's  Battery.  Reaching  Price's  camp 
the  same  day,  they  were  there  joined  by  him  and 
continued  their  march  northward.  Hearing,  the 
next  day,  that  the  Governor  was  not  only  pressed 
in  rear  by  Lyon  and  Sturgis,  but  that  Sigel  had 
thrown  himself  in  his  front,  McCulloch  left  his  in- 
fantry behind,  and  he  and  Price  then  pushed  for- 
ward with  their  mounted  men. 


The    Confederates   Enter   Missouri.         237 

On  approaching  Neosho  (July  5),  McCulloch  sent 
forward  two  detachments  of  Churchill's  Regiment — 
one  under  command  of  that  officer,  and  the  other 
under  Captain  Mcintosh — to  capture  the  company 
which  Sigel  had  left  there.  Making  a  forced  march 
they  accomplished  this  without  firing  a  shot,  and 
found  themselves  in  the  unexpected  possession  of 
one  hundred  and  thirty-seven  prisoners,  and,  what 
they  valued  more  highly,  one  hundred  and  fifty 
stand  of  arms  and  seven  wagons  laden  with  sup- 
plies. 

During  the  night  Price  and  McCulloch  came  up 
with  the  rest  of  their  mounted  force.  Resuming 
the  march  at  break  of  day  on  the  6th,  they  were 
well  on  their  way  to  Carthage  when  the  glad 
tidings  came  that  the  Governor,  having  effected  a 
junction  of  all  the  State  forces,  had  fallen  upon 
Sigel  and  defeated  him,  and  was  marching  toward 
them,  his  men  rejoicing  in  their  victory,  and  confi- 
dent in  their  prowess. 

Jackson  and  his  troops  did,  indeed,  have  abun- 
dant cause  to  rejoice ;  for,  though  we  had  not  won 
a  great  victory  as  we  foolishly  fancied,  or  estab- 
lished the  independence  of  the  Confederacy  as 
some  believed,  we  had  escaped  a  very  great  danger. 
For  Lyon  had  been  close  behind  with  an  over- 
whelming force,  and,  had  he  overtaken,  would  have 
routed  and  dispersed,  us.     Now  we  were  not  only 


238  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

safe  from  pursuit  and  no  enemy  in  our  front,  but  we 
would,  within  an  hour,  be  under  the  protecting 
folds  of  the  Confederate  flag,  and  side  by  side  with 
that  Confederate  Army,  for  whose  coming  we  had 
been  so  anxiously  waiting.  No  wonder  that  we 
burst  into  loud  huzzas  when  the  redoubtable 
McCulloch  came  into  sight,  surrounded  by  his 
gaily-dressed  staff,  and  when  accompanied  by  Gov- 
ernor Jackson,  General  Price,  and  General  Pearce, 
he  rode  down  our  dust-stained  ranks  to  greet  the 
men  that  had  fought  with  Sigel  and  put  him  to 
flight. 

We  were  all  young  then,  and  full  of  hope,  and 
looked  with  delighted  eyes  on  the  first  Confederate 
soldiers  that  we  had  ever  seen,  the  men  all  dressed 
in  sober  gray,  and  their  officers  resplendent  with 
gilded  buttons,  and  golden  braid  and  stars  of  gold. 
To  look  like  these  gallant  soldiers  ;  to  be  of  them ; 
to  fight  beside  them  for  their  homes  and  for  our 
own,  was  the  one  desire  of  all  the  Missourians,  who, 
on  that  summer  day,  stood  on  one  of  their  own 
verdant  prairies,  gazing  southward. 

In  all  their  motley  array  there  was  hardly  a  uni- 
form to  be  seen,  and  then,  and  throughout  all  the 
brilliant  campaign  on  which  they  were  about  to 
enter  ther^  was  nothing  to  distinguish  their  offi- 
cers, even  a  general,  from  the  men  in  the  ranks, 
save  a  bit  of  red  flannel,  or  a  piece  of  cotton  cloth, 


The    Confederates  Enter  Missouri.         239 

fastened  to  the  shoulder,  or  to  the  arm,  of  the  former. 
But  for  all  that  they  were  the  truest  and  best  of 
soldiers.  Many  of  them,  when  just  emerging  from 
boyhood,  had  fought  under  Price  or  Doniphan  in 
Mexico  ;  many  had  been  across  the  great  plains,  and 
were  enured  to  the  dangers  and  privations  of  the 
wilderness ;  and  many  had  engaged  in  the  hot  strife 
which  had  ensanguined  the  prairies  of  Kansas. 
Among  them  there  was  hardly  a  man  who  could 
not  read  and  write,  and  who  was  not  more  intelli- 
gent than  the  great  mass  of  American  citizens ;  not 
one  who  had  not  voluntarily  abandoned  his  home 
with  all  its  tender  ties,  and  thrown  away  all  his 
possessions,  and  left  father  and  mother,  or  wife  and 
children,  within  the  enemy's  lines,  that  he  might 
himself  stand  by  the  South  in  her  hour  of  great 
peril,  and  help  her  to  defend  her  fields  and  her  fire- 
sides. And  among  them  all  there  was  not  a  man 
who  had  come  forth  to  fight  for  slavery. 

McCulloch  and  Pearce  now  returned  with  their 
troops  to  Maysville,  and  General  Price,  assuming 
command  of  the  Missourians,  led  them  by  easy 
marches  to  Cowskin  Prairie,  which  they  reached  on 
the  9th  of  July.  Up  to  this  time  few  of  them  had 
been  formed  into  regiments,  or  even  into  companies. 
To  organize,  arm,  and  fit  them  somewhat  for  the 
field,  was  the  first  care  of  General  Price.  The  diffi- 
culty of  this  task  was  greatly  enhanced  by  the  fact 


240  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

that  he  had  no  arms,  no  military  supplies  of  any  kind, 
and  no  money  with  which  to  procure  any,  even  if  any 
had  been  procurable.  It  mattered  not  at  all  that 
he  had  no  money  to  pay  the  men.  There  was  not 
one  of  them  who  expected  or  who  wanted  to  be 
paid  for  his  services,  or  who  ever  was  paid.  But 
men  and  horses  must  be  fed ;  and  on  Cowskin 
Prairie  there  was  for  the  men  little  but  lean  beef, 
and  for  their  horses  nothing  but  the  grass  of  the 
prairie.  To  supply  their  more  pressing  wants 
Quarter-master  General  Harding,  and  Colonel  John 
Reid,  the  chief  commissary  of  the  army,  went  first  to 
Fort  Smith,  and  thence  to  Little  Rock,  and  after- 
wards to  Memphis,  but  procured  nothing  in  time  for 
use  in  the  impending  campaign,  though  they  ob- 
tained supplies  which  contributed  greatly  to  the 
efficiency  and  comfort  of  the  army  during  the  en- 
suing fall  and  winter. 

Another  great  difficulty  which  General  Price  had 
to  overcome  was  the  want  of  experienced  soldiers, 
who  could  help  him  to  organize  his  army  aright 
and  equip  it  for  the  field.  He  had,  it  is  true,  an 
abundance  of  officers  fully  competent  to  command 
a  regiment  or  a  brigade,  and  many  excellent  com- 
pany officers,  but  for  the  important  duties  of  the 
staff  he  had  to  rely  upon  men  who  had  not  been 
trained  to  a  military  life,  and  who  had  everything 
to  learn.     For  instance,  the  chief  of  ordnance  of  his 


The   Confederates  Enter  Missouri.         241 

army  was  one  of  the  Governor's  aides  who  did  not 
know  the  difference  between  a  siege  gun  and  a 
howitzer,  and  had  never  seen  a  musket  cartridge  in 
all  the  days  of  his  life.  Fortunately  he  had  some 
administrative  ability,  and  all  around  him  were  men 
who  had  from  boyhood  been  handling  shot  guns 
and  rifles,  and  were  used  to  improvising  just  such 
ammunition  as  was  most  needed  then,  and  who 
could  act  in  an  emergency.  One  of  these,  Major 
Thomas  H.  Price,  a  man  admirably  fitted  for  the 
work  that  had  to  be  done,  was  put  in  charge  of  it. 
Lead,  thanks  to  the  proximity  of  the  Granby  mines, 
was  abundant  ;  powder,  too,  thanks  to  the  wise  fore- 
sight of  Governor  Jackson  ;  and  the  neighboring 
forests  were  full  of  trees,  which  the  major  knew  how 
to  convert  into  monster  moulds  for  making  buck- 
shot and  bullets.  He  went  zealously  to  work  with 
a  corps  of  assistants,  and  in  a  few  days  his  ordnance 
shops  were  turning  out  heaps  of  bullets,  and  buck- 
and-ball  cartridges — enough  for  the  immediate  wants 
of  the  State  Guard.  No  educated  soldier,  no  officer 
of  the  Ordnance  Department,  could  have  done  what 
Major  Price  did.  They  are  not  educated  for  such 
emergencies,  nor  could  they  have  found  precedents 
or  authority  for  anything  that  he  did. 

How  the  artillery  was  supplied  with  ammunition 
has  been  well  told  by  Lieutenant  Barlow  of  Gui- 

bor's   Battery.     "  One  of   Sigel's   captured  wagons 
16 


242  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

furnished  a  few  loose,  round  shot.  With  these  for 
a  beginning,  Guibor  established  an  "  arsenal  of  con- 
struction." A  turning-lathe  in  Carthage  supplied 
sabots ;  the  owner  of  a  tin-shop  contributed  straps 
and  canisters  ;  iron  rods  which  a  blacksmith  gave  and 
cut  into  small  pieces  made  good  slugs  for  the  canis- 
ters ;  and  a  bolt  of  flannel,  with  needles  and  thread, 
freely  donated  by  a  dry-goods  man,  provided  us 
with  material  for  our  cartridge  bags.  A  bayonet 
made  a  good  candle-stick ;  and  at  night,  .  .  .  the 
men  went  to  work  making  cartridges;  strapping 
shot  to  the  sabots,  and  filling  the  bags  from  a 
barrel  of  powder  placed  some  distance  ffbm  the 
candle.  .  .  .  My  first  cartridge  resembled  a 
turnip,  rather  than  the  trim  cylinders  from  the  Fed- 
eral arsenals,  and  would  not  take  a  gun  on  any 
terms.  But  we  soon  learned  the  trick  and,  at  the 
close  range  at  which  our  next  battle  was  fought, 
our  home-made  ammunition  proved  as  effective  as 
the  best." 

General  Price's  perplexities  were  greatly  aug- 
mented a  few  days  later  (July  19)  by  the  departure 
for  Richmond  of  his  able  and  accomplished  adju- 
tant-general, Colonel  Little ;  for  it  involved  the 
necessity  of  assigning  to  that  position  an  officer 
utterly  without  experience,  his  chief  of  ordnance, 
the  writer  of  this  book.  In  spite  of  all  these 
embarrassments  the  work  of  organizing,  equipping, 


The    Confederates  Enter   Missouri.         243 

and  disciplining  the  State  Guard  progressed  well, 
for  never  had  man  seen  better  material  for  an  army, 
and  every  one  did  his  best,  under  the  wise  guidance 
of  the  able  soldier  who,  unconsciously  to  himself, 
was  with  a  master's  hand  fashioning  an  army,  which 
was  destined  to  win  many  a  victory  and  never  to 
sustain  a  defeat. 

Before  the  end  of  July  it  was  ready  to  take  the 
field  with  an  effective  strength  of  nearly  five  thou- 
and,  while  two  thousand  unarmed  men  were  wait- 
ing to  pick  up  and  use  the  arms  of  those  who 
might  sicken  in  camp  or  on  the  march,  or  who 
might  fall  in  battle. 

A  few  days  after  the  troops  had  gone  into  camp 
on  Cowskin  Prairie,  Governor  Jackson  left  (July  12) 
for  Memphis,  in  order  to  persuade  General  Polk,  to 
whose  command  all  the  country  west  of  the  Missis- 
sippi was  attached,  to  send  into  Missouri  a  sufficient 
force  to  repossess  that  State.  For  political,  as 
well  as  for  military  reasons,  this  was  a  thing 
important  to  be  done ;  for  the  State  Convention 
had  been  summoned  to  meet  at  Jefferson  City 
on  the  22d  of  July,  and  it  was  known  that  one  of 
its  first  acts  would  be  to  depose  Governor  Jackson, 
and  that  it  would  then  organize  a  State  Govern- 
ment which  would  wield  the  power  of  the  State 
against   the  South.     To  prevent   this  great   misfor- 


244  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

tune,  Governor  Jackson,  General  Price,  and  the 
State  Guard  were  ready  to  risk  their  lives.  If  the 
Confederate  Government  had  comprehended  the 
situation  it  might,  perhaps,  have  assisted  them. 

General  Polk  did  appreciate  the  importance  of 
the  movement,  and,  on  the  23d  of  July,  ordered 
General  Pillow  to  take  six  thousand  men  of  various 
arms  from  the  Western  District  of  Tennessee  and 
move  with  them  into  Missouri  by  way  of  New  Mad- 
rid. There  he  was  to  be  joined  by  a  force  of  Mis- 
sourians  under  Jeff.  Thompson,  and  would  be  fur- 
ther reinforced  till  he  should  have  an  effective  army 
of  eleven  thousand  men.  Taking  these  he  would 
effect  a  junction  with  General  Hardee,  who  was 
to  meet  him  with  seven  thousand  men,  whom  he 
was  concentrating  at  Pocahontas  in  Arkansas.  The 
combined  forces  would  then  either  take  Lyon  in 
rear  while  Price  and  McCulloch  were  attacking 
him  in  front,  or  would  march  upon  St.  Louis,  cap- 
ture that  city  and  thence  sweep  up  the  Missouri ! 
"  Having  driven  the  enemy  from  the  State,  I  will 
then  enter  Illinois,"  wrote  the  brave  old  soldier, 
"  and  take  Cairo  in  rear  on  my  return."  The  army 
which  was  to  execute  this  magnificent  plan  of  cam- 
paign was  aptly  called  "The  Army  of  Liberation." 
Its  advance  under  General  Pillow  entered  Missouri 
on  the  28th  of  July,  and  occupied  New  Madrid. 
The  Battle  of  Bull  Run  had  just  been  fought,  and 


The    Confederates  Enter   Missouri.  245 

the  South  believed  itself  to  be  invincible  and  irre- 
sistible. 

Having  learned  that  General  Hardee  had  been 
assigned  to  the  command  of  North  Arkansas,  and 
that  he  was  concentrating  an  army  at  Pocahontas 
on  the  White  River,  McCulloch  and  Price  sent  spe- 
cial messengers  to  him,  on  the  19th  of  July,  begging 
him  to  co-operate  with  them  in  a  movement  against 
Lyon,  who  was  then  at  Springfield.  These  messen- 
gers found  Hardee  at  Pittman's  Ferry,  within  four 
hundred  yards  of  the  Missouri  line,  whence  he 
might  have  easily  co-operated  in  the  movement 
against  Lyon,  either  by  advancing  on  Springfield, 
or  by  threatening  to  interrupt  his  communication 
with  Rolla.  But  Hardee,  who  had  not  yet  out- 
grown the  "  little  learning "  of  the  schools,  nor 
emancipated  himself  from  the  tyranny  of  axioms 
which  did  not  apply  in  the  circumstances  wherein 
he  was  called  upon  to  act,  replied:  ".  .  .  I  have 
actually  under  my  command  less  than  2,300  men. 
When  all  the  forces  in  this  part  of  the  State  are 
transferred,  I  shall  have  less  than  5,000  men,  badly 
organized,  badly  equipped,  and  wanting  in  discipline 
and  instruction.  One  of  my  batteries  has  no  har- 
ness and  no  horses,  and  not  one  of  the  regiments 
has  transportation  enough  for  active  field  service. 
.  .  .  I  am  doing  all  in  my  power  to  remedy 
these  deficiencies,  but  it  takes  time  to  get  harness 


246  The  Fight  for  Missouri, 

and  transportation.  I  do  not  wish  to  march  to 
your  assistance  with  less  than  5,000  men,  well-ap- 
pointed, and  a  full  complement  of  artillery.  With 
every  desire  to  aid  and  co-operate  with  the  forces  in 
the  West,  I  am  compelled  at  this  time  to  forego 
that  gratification."  There  was  then  with  these 
troops  a  man  not  bred  to  arms,  but  endowed  with 
great  good  sense  and  enterprise,  one  who  was  quick 
to  see  and  prompt  to  act,  and  who  would  have  taken 
those  men  into  Missouri,  and,  uniting  with  Price  and 
McCulloch,  would  have  utterly  destroyed  Lyon's 
army.  But  unfortunately  for  the  Confederacy 
Hindman  was  not  in   command. 

Before  Hardee's  letter  reached  Price,  the  latter, 
McCulloch  and  Pearce,  were  already  on  the  march  to 
Springfield.  Price  left  Cowskin  Prairie  on  the  25th 
of  July,  and  reached  Cassville  on  the  28th,  Sunday. 
There  he  was  joined  by  Brigadier-General  McBride 
with  two  regiments  of  State  troops  and  a  company  of 
mounted  men.  This,  reinforcement,  about  650  men, 
made  Price's  armed  force  over  5,000  men.  McCul- 
loch reached  Cassville  the  next  day  with  his  brigade, 
"amounting  to  about  3,200  men,  nearly  all  well 
armed."  Pearce  was  within  ten  miles  of  Cassville 
with  his  brigade  of  2,500  Arkansas  troops.  With 
these  were  two  fine  batteries,  Woodruff's  and  Reid's. 
The  entire  force  amounted   to  nearly  eleven  thou- 


The    Confederates   Eriter  Missouri.  247 

sand    men.      Beside    these    there   were    nearly  two 
thousand  unarmed  Missourians. 

As  Price,  McCulloch,  and  Pearce  had  each  an  en- 
tirely independent  command,  they  agreed  upon  an 
order  of  march,  in  conformity  to  which  the  com- 
bined forces  began  their  movement  towards  Spring- 
field, fifty-two  miles  distant,  on  the  31st  of  July. 
The  advance  guard  consisting  of  ten  companies 
of  mounted  Missourians  under  command  of  Briga- 
dier-General Rains,  and  the  First  Division  of  the 
forces  consisting  of  infantry  and  artillery  under  the 
immediate  command  of  McCulloch,  left  Cassville 
that  day.  The  other  divisions,  commanded  by 
Pearce  and  Steen,  left  the  two  following  days. 
General  Price  accompanied  the  Second  Division 
without,  however,  taking  immediate  command  of 
any  force. 


CHAPTER   XIII. 

LYON   MOVES   OUT  TO   ATTACK. 

Junction  of  Lyon  and  Sturgis  near  Clinton — They  pursue  the  Gover- 
nor— Lyon  learns  of  Sigel's  Defeat — Hurries  to  Springfield — Begs 
for  Reinforcements — Denounces  General  Scott — Fremont  assumes 
Command  of  the  Western  Department — Fails  to  reinforce  Lyon — 
Lyon  marches  out  to  prevent  the  Junction  of  Price  and  McCulloch 
— The  Skirmish  at  Dug  Springs — Lyon  Retires  to  Springfield — 
Price  induces  McCulloch  to  Advance  by  relinquishing  the  Com- 
mand to  him — The  Confederates  Camp  on  Wilson's  Creek — Mc- 
Culloch hesitates  to  Advance — Price's  Urgency — A  Council  of 
War — A  Night  March  Ordered,  and  Countermanded — Lyon's  Per- 
plexity and  Despair — He  cannot  Retreat — He  orders  an  Attack — 
His  Last  Letter  to  his  Government. 

LYON  leaving  Booneville  on  the  3d  of  July 
marched  rapidly  toward  Clinton,  some  eighty  miles 
to  the  south-west.  On  the  evening  of  the  7th  he 
reached  Grand  River,  at  a  point  a  few  miles  south 
of  Clinton.  There  he  was  joined  by  Sturgis,  who 
had  been  waiting  for  him  three  or  four  days.  Cross- 
ing Grand  River  with  some  difficulty,  for  it  was 
greatly  swollen  by  constant  rains,  Lyon  pushed 
forward  with  his  entire  force  in  pursuit  of  the  State 
troops,  not  knowing  that  they  had  swept  Sigel  out 
of  their  path  and  effected  a  junction  with  Price  and 
McCulloch. 


Lyon   Moves   Out   to  Attack.  249 

These  facts  he  learned  on  reaching  the  Osage  at 
a  crossing  nine  miles  above  Osceola,  on  the  after- 
noon of  the  9th.  Fearing  that  Price  and  McCulloch 
were  pursuing  Sigel,  he  ferried  his  army  and  his 
trains  across  the  river  during  the  next  day  and  night, 
and,  early  on  the  morning  of  the  nth,  made  in  all 
haste  for  Springfield,  which  lay  eighty  miles  to  the 
south-east.  After  marching  under  a  blazing  July 
sun  twenty-seven  miles  without  a  stop,  he  halted 
his  column  in  the  afternoon,  that  the  men  and  horses 
might  get  much-needed  rest,  and  something  to  eat. 
At  sunset  they  were  all  again  in  motion,  and  be- 
fore three  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  July  the  12th 
were  within  thirty  miles  of  Springfield.  They  had 
marched  nearly  fifty  miles  in  one  day !  Here  he 
learned  that  Price  and  McCulloch  had  gone  toward 
Arkansas,  and  that  Sigel  was  safe.  Moving  more 
leisurely  now,  he  encamped  that  night  within  twelve 
miles  of  Springfield,  and,  early  the  next  morning, 
went  thither  himself,  leaving  his  army  behind. 

The  chroniclers  of  the  city  still  delight  to  tell  of 
the  brave  appearance  that  he  made  that  day,  as  he 
dashed  through  their  streets  "  on  his  iron-gray 
horse,  under  escort  of  a  body-guard  of  ten  stalwart 
troopers  enlisted  from  among  the  German  butchers 
of  St.  Louis  for  that  especial  duty,"  and  how  "  the 
fearless  horsemanship  and  defiant  bearing  of  these 
bearded   warriors,   mounted    on    powerful    chargers 


250  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

and  armed  to  the  teeth  with  great  revolvers  and 
massive  swords,  their  heroic  size  and  ferocious  as- 
pect," gave  lustre  to  the  entry  into  the  chief  city  of 
the  South-west  of  the  grim  soldier  who  had  cap- 
tured the  State  troops  at  St.  Louis,  had  driven  the 
Governor  from  his  capital,  had  dispersed  the  army 
that  was  gathering  at  Booneville,  and  had  forced 
Jackson  and  Price  and  all  their  men  to  fly  for  safety 
into  the  uttermost  corner  of  the  State. 

The  force  which  Lyon  now  had  at  and  near 
Springfield  amounted  to  between  7,000  and  8,000 
men.  But  the  term  of  service  of  some  3,000  of  them, 
who  had  been  enlisted  for  ninety  days,  would  expire 
before  the  middle  of  August.  The  force  that  was 
confronting  him,  was,  as  we  know,  about  11,000,  but 
he  estimated  it  at  30,000.  Consequently,  on  the 
day  that  he  reached  Springfield,  he  telegraphed  to 
Colonel  Harding,  whom  he  had  left  at  St.  Louis,  in 
charge  of  matters  at  department  head-quarters : 
"  Governor  Jackson  will  soon  have  in  this  vicinity 
not  less  than  30,000  men.  I  must  have  at  once  an 
additional  force  of  10,000  men,  or  abandon  my  posi- 
tion." Two  days  later  Major  Schofield,  his  adjutant- 
general,  wrote  to  Harding,  insisting  that  all  the 
disposable  troops  at  St.  Louis  should  be  sent  to 
Springfield.  The  defence  of  St.  Louis,  he  very  justly 
observed,  might  be  left  to  the  Home  Guards  and  to 
the  troops  which  could  in  a  few  hours  be  brought 


Lyon   Moves    Out   to  Attack.  251 

from  Illinois  and  Indiana,  as  there  was  no  danger 
that  any  force  would  move  up  the  Mississippi  or 
through  south-eastern  Missouri  so  long  as  a  Federal 
army  held  Cairo. 

Instead  of  getting  reinforcements,  Lyon  received 
an  order  (July  16)  from  General  Scott,  directing  him 
to  send  eastward  two  of  the  companies  of  regular 
infantry  which  he  had  with  him,  and  three  companies 
that  were  at  Fort  Leavenworth.  To  this  order 
he  replied  that  the  moral  effect  of  the  few  regulars 
in  his  command  was  doubtless  the  main  considera- 
tion which  held  the  enemy  in  check ;  that  to  with- 
draw them  would  make  his  position  imminently 
hazardous ;  and  that  therefore  he  would  hold  on  to 
them  until  further  instructed.  In  the  same  letter 
he  complained  that  the  volunteers  with  him  had  not 
been  paid  ;  that  their  clothing  was  dilapidated,  and 
that  they  were  "  as  a  body,  dispirited,"  and  would 
not  re-enlist. 

To  Harding  he  wrote :  "  If  the  Regulars  leave 
me  I  can  do  nothing,  and  must  retire,  in  the  absence 
of  other  troops  to  supply  their  places.  In  fact,  I 
am  badly  enough  off  at  the  best,  and  must  utterly 
fail  if  my  regulars  all  go.  At  Washington,  troops 
from  all  the  Northern,  Middle,  and  Eastern  States 
are  available  for  the  support  of  the  Army  of  Vir- 
ginia, and  more  are  understood  to  be  already  there 
than  are  wanted.     It  seems  strange  to  me  that  so 


252  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

many  troops  must  go  on  from  the  West,  and  strip 
us  of  the  means  of  defence.  But  if  it  is  the  intention 
to  give  up  the  West,  let  it  be  so.  It  can  only  be  the  victim 
of  imbecility  or  malice.  Scott  will  cripple  us  if  he  can. 
.  .  .  Everything  seems  to  combine  against  me  at 
this  point.     Stir  up  Blair." 

Blair  laid  Lyon's  entreaties  before  Fremont  who 
was  at  New  York,  and  the  latter  feebly  telegraphed 
to  the  War  Department  that  "  General  Lyon  calls 
for  reinforcements."  Blair  then  appealed  to  the 
Cabinet,  whereupon  General  Scott  ordered  Fre- 
mont (July  18)  to  proceed  straight  to  his  command. 
On  the  25th  Fremont  reached  St.  Louis,  and  as- 
sumed command  of  The  Western  Department. 

Lyon  had  already  sent  Major  Farrar,  Captain  Cav- 
ender,  Colonel  John  S.  Phelps,  and  others  to  meet 
him  there  and  explain  to  him  the  state  of  affairs 
in  the  South-west,  and  to  impress  upon  him  the 
vital  importance  of  forthwith  reinforcing  the  army 
at  Springfield.  He  assured  them  that  five  thou- 
sand men  would  be  sent  thither  as  soon  as  the 
orders  could  reach  them.  But  an  expedition  to 
Cairo  now  occupied  Fremont's  attention  to  the 
exclusion  of  everything  else,  and  it  was  not  until 
the  4th  of  August  that  two  regiments  (Stevenson's, 
at  Booneville,  and  Montgomery's  at  Leavenworth), 
were  ordered  to  Springfield.  Other  messengers  had 
meanwhile  come  from  Lyon  with  yet  more  urgent 


Lyon   Moves   Out  to  Attack.  253 

entreaties  "  for  soldiers,  soldiers,  soldiers,"  as  Kelton 
telegraphed  to  Fremont,  who  was  still  at  Cairo. 
One  of  these  messengers  told  him,  when  he  got 
back  to  St.  Louis,  that  Lyon  would  fight  at  Spring- 
field anyway.  "  If  he  fights,"  replied  Fremont,  "  he 
will  do  it  upon  his  own  responsibility." 

Lyon  learned  on  the  1st  of  August  that  Price, 
McCulloch,  and  Pearce  were  advancing  upon  Spring- 
field. As  they  had  converged  toward  Cassville  by 
three  different  roads,  he  was  deceived  into  believing 
that  they  were  marching  upon  Springfield  by  three 
different  roads.  He  determined  therefore  to  attack 
them  in  detail,  and  started  the  same  day  to  meet  the 
column  which  was  advancing  upon  the  road  from 
Cassville.  His  force  consisted  of  over  five  thou- 
sand men — infantry,  cavalry,  and  artillery.  That 
night  he  encamped  on  Tyrel's  Creek  about  twelve 
miles  from  Springfield  ;  and  had  moved  some  six 
miles  further  the  next  day,  Friday,  when  being 
informed  that  the  Confederates  were  strongly 
posted  some  four  or  five  miles  farther  on,  he  went 
into  camp  for  the  night. 

It  was  McCulloch's  advance  guard,  under  Rains, 
that  was  in  front  of  Lyon.  McCulloch  was  him- 
self encamped  with  the  rest  of  his  division  on 
Crane  Creek,  about  twelve  miles  south  of  the  spot 
where  Lyon  was  going  into  camp. 


254  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

When  he  learned,  Friday  morning  August  the  2d, 
that  a  Federal  force  was  in  his  front  he  requested 
Price  and  Pearce  to  move  up  to  his  own  position  on 
Crane  Creek.  Pearce's  divison  came  up  during  the 
forenoon.  Rains  had  meanwhile  become  slightly  en- 
gaged with  the  Federal  advance  consisting  of  Steele's 
battalion  of  regulars,  Stanley's  troop  of  cavalry  and 
a  section  of  Totten's  Battery.  As  soon  as  McCul- 
loch  was  informed  of  this,  he  sent  Colonel  Mcintosh, 
with  one  hundred  and  fifty  men  to  ascertain  the  po- 
sition and  strength  of  the  enemy.  Mcintosh,  after 
reconnoitring  the  ground  with  Rains,  concluded  that 
the  Federals  were  not  in  force  and  started  back  to 
camp  with  his  men,  ordering  Rains  at  the  same  time 
not  to  bring  on  an  engagement.  Hardly  had  he 
left,  however,  when  Steele  attacked  Rains  vigor- 
ously, opening  upon  him  with  two  of  Totten's  guns, 
and  put  the  Missourians  to  flight  in  the  utmost  con- 
fusion. The  loss  on  either  side  was  trifling,  in  this 
skirmish  at  Dug  Springs,  but  the  conduct  of  Rains' 
command  on  this  occasion  caused  McCulloch  and 
Mcintosh  to  lose  all  confidence  in  the  Missouri 
troops,  and  laid  the  foundation  for  that  distrust  and 
ill-feeling,  which  eventually  separated  the  combined 
armies,  and  frustrated  all  their  hopes. 

The  next  day,  August  the  3d,  Lyon  advanced  to 
McCulla's  store,  twenty-four  miles  from  Springfield, 
and  within  six  miles  of  the  Confederate  position  ;  but 


Lyon  Moves    Out   to  Attack.  255 

being  unable,  after  lying  there  twenty-four  hours,  to 
learn  anything  definite  about  the  army  in  front  of 
him,  and  fearful  that  the  Confederates  might  with 
their  superior  force  of  mounted  men  flank  him  and 
cut  off  his  communication  with  Springfield,  he  de- 
termined to  return  thither,  and  setting  out  on  Sun- 
day reached  that  place  Monday  evening. 

Saturday  the  Confederates  were  all  concentrated 
on  Crane  Creek,  and  were  reinforced  that  night  by 
Greer's  South-Kansas-Texas  Regiment. 

While  the  two  armies  lay  facing  each  other, 
General  Price  begged  McCulloch  to  attack,  but 
McCulloch,  who  had  now  made  up  his  mind  not  to 
co-operate  with  the  Missourians  any  longer  unless 
Price  would  yield  to  him  the  command  of  the  com- 
bined armies,  refused  to  advance  any  further,  alleg- 
ing as  an  excuse  that  the  Confederate  Government 
had  declined  to  give  him  leave  to  move  into  Mis- 
souri except  for  the  defence  of  the  Indian  Territory; 
and  that  to  advance  further  into  the  State  might 
endanger  the  safety  of  that  Territory  and  subject 
himself  to  the  censure  of  his  Government.  While 
this  was  a  very  good  excuse,  it  was  not  McCul- 
loch's  real  reason  for  refusing  to  attack  Lyon.  He 
had  in  truth  no  confidence  in  the  Missouri  troops, 
and  none  in  General  Price,  or  in  any  of  his  officers, 
except  Colonel  Weightman.     Rains  he  had  disliked 


256  The  Fight  for  Missouri, 

from  the  beginning,  and  now  he  was  embittered 
against  him  by  an  open  quarrel  which  had  taken  place 
between  him  and  Mcintosh,  for  whose  opinions  and 
soldierly  accomplishments  McCulloch  had  a  venera- 
tion, which  made  him  distrustful  of  his  own  capacity 
and  which  often  hampered  his  action.  Neither  he  nor 
Mcintosh  comprehended  the  serene  wisdom  of  Price, 
his  unerring  common  sense,  his  magnificent  courage, 
and  those  great  qualities  which  endeared  him  to  his 
troops,  nor  could  they  believe  that  "  the  undisci- 
plined mob  "  which  Price  commanded  would  under 
his  eye  fight  as  well  as  the  veterans  of  Wellington 
or  Napoleon  ever  fought.  He  had,  therefore,  deter- 
mined not  to  advance  another  mile  except  in  chief 
command  of  the  entire  force. 

Price  who  saw  this  clearly  enough  did  not  hesitate, 
but  went  the  next  morning  (Sunday)  to  McCulloch's 
quarters,  taking  the  writer  with  him.  After  vainly 
trying  once  more  to  persuade  McCulloch  to  attack 
Lyon,  the  general  said :  "  I  am  an  older  man  than 
you,  General  McCulloch,  and  I  am  not  only  your 
senior  in  rank  now,  but  I  was  a  brigadier-general  in 
the  Mexican  War,  with  an  independent  command, 
when  you  were  only  a  captain  ;  I  have  fought  and 
won  more  battles  than  you  have  ever  witnessed  ;  my 
force  is  twice  as  great  as  yours ;  and  some  of  my 
officers  rank,  and  have  seen  more  service  than  you, 
and  we  are  also  upon  the  soil  of  our  own  State ; 


Lyon   Moves    Out  to  Attack.  257 

but,  General  McCulloch,  if  you  will  consent  to  help 
us  to  whip  Lyon  and  to  repossess  Missouri,  I  will 
put  myself  and  all  my  forces  under  your  command, 
and  we  will  obey  you  as  faithfully  as  the  humblest 
of  your  own  men.  We  can  whip  Lyon,  and  we  will 
whip  him  and  drive  the  enemy  out  of  Missouri,  and 
all  the  honor  and  all  the  glory  shall  be  yours.  All 
that  we  want  is  to  regain  our  homes  and  to  establish 
the  independence  of  Missouri  and  the  South.  If 
you  refuse  to  accept  this  offer,  I  will  move  with  the 
Missourians  alone,  against  Lyon.  For  it  is  better 
that  they  and  I  should  all  perish  than  Missouri  be 
abandoned  without  a  struggle.  You  must  either 
fight  beside  us,  or  look  on  at  a  safe  distance,  and  see 
us  fight  all  alone  the  army  which  you  dare  not  attack 
even  with  our  aid.  I  must  have  your  answer  before 
dark,  for  I  intend  to  attack  Lyon  to-morrow." 

McCulloch  replied  that  he  was  expecting  dis- 
patches from  the  East,  but  would,  in  any  event, 
make  known  his  determination  before  sundown. 
Toward  sunset,  accompanied  by  Mcintosh,  he 
came  to  Price's  quarters  and  informed  him  that  he 
had  just  received  dispatches  from  General  Polk 
saying  that  General  Pillow  was  advancing  into  Mis- 
souri from  New  Madrid  with  twelve  thousand 
men,  and  that  in  consequence  of  this  information 
he  had  concluded  to  accept  command  of  the  com- 
bined armies,  and  attack  Lyon.  General  Price  at 
17 


258  The   Fight  for  Missouri. 

once  published  an  order  announcing  to  his  troops 
that  he  had  turned  over  the  command  of  the  State 
Guard  to  General  McCulloch,  reserving  to  himself, 
however,  the  right  to  resume  command  at  his  own 
pleasure. 

Believing  that  Lyon  was  still  at  McCulla's  farm, 
McCulloch  marched  at  midnight,  expecting  to  sur- 
prise and  attack  him  at  daybreak.  He  was  already 
some  distance  on  the  way  when  he  learned  that 
Lyon  had  left  twenty  hours  previously  and  was 
retreating  to  Springfield.  Pushing  on  in  great 
haste,  though  the  weather  was  intensely  hot  and  the 
dust  almost  unendurable,  McCulloch  kept  up  the 
pursuit  to  Moody's  Spring  near  Tyrel's  Creek.  See- 
ing then  that  Lyon  had  escaped,  he  halted  there ; 
but  moved  the  next  morning  (August  6)  some  two 
miles  nearer  to  Springfield,  and  took  position  on 
Wilson's  Creek,  so  as  to  be  within  reach  of  some 
ripening  fields  of  corn,  which  was  to  be  the  only 
subsistence  of  his  army  for  the  next  day  or  two. 

Wilson's  Creek,  rising  in,  and  around,  Springfield, 
flows  westwardly  some  five  miles  and  then,  turning 
to  the  south,  flows  nine  or  ten  miles  in  that  direc- 
tion before  emptying  into  the  James,  an  affluent  of 
White  River.  A  mile  or  so  above  its  mouth  it  re- 
ceives the  waters  of  Tyrel's  Creek,  flowing  into  it 
from  the  west :  and  a  mile  and  a  half  further  north 


Lyon   Moves   Out  to  Attack.  259 

a  smaller  stream,  Skegg's  branch,  flowing  likewise 
from  the  west,  empties  into  it.  The  road  from  Cass- 
ville,  on  which  McCulloch  was  advancing  toward 
Springfield  (known  also  as  the  Fayetteville,  or  Tele- 
graph Road)  crosses  both  Tyrel's  Creek  and  Skegg's 
Branch  just  above  their  mouths.  After  crossing  the 
latter,  it  runs  northward  along  the  western  bank  of 
Wilson's  Creek  nearly  a  mile,  and  then,  crossing  the 
creek  at  a  ford,  turns  north-eastward  toward  Spring- 
field, which  is  nine  or  ten  miles  beyond. 

Between  Tyrel's  Creek  and  Skegg's  Branch  there 
is  a  considerable  valley,  partly  wooded,  lying  be- 
tween the  Fayetteville  Road,  and  Wilson's  Creek. 
In  this  valley  the  mounted  regiments  of  Greer, 
and  Churchill,  and  about  seven  hundred  mounted 
Missourians,  under  Lieutenant  Colonel  Major  and 
Colonel  Brown,  went  into  camp. 

Between  Skegg's  Branch  and  the  ford  across  Wil- 
son's Creek,  the  valley  through  which  the  road 
passes  is  quite  narrow,  and  the  road  runs  within  a 
few  yards  of  the  stream.  Toward  the  west  a  hill, 
since  known  as  Bloody  Hill,  rises  gradually  from  the 
creek  to  the  height  of  nearly  a  hundred  feet,  its  sides 
deeply  seamed  with  ravines,  and  dinted  here  and 
there  with  sink-holes.  At  this  time  it  was  densely 
covered  with  undergrowth  through  which  was  inter- 
spersed a  species  of  scrub-oak  (black-jacks),  and  near 
its  summit  the  rock  cropped  out  in  many  places.     In 


260  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

the  narrow  valley  between  the  base  of  this  hill  and 
the  creek  were  bivouacked  all  the  infantry  of  Price's 
command,  except  Weightman's  Brigade.  Price's 
quarters  were  on  the  road,  and  about  five  hundred 
yards  south  of  the  ford.  McBride,  Slack,  Clark,  and 
Parsons  occupied  the  ground  between  his  quarters 
and  Skegg's  Branch: 

The  hill  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  creek  rises 
abruptly  to  the  height  of  about  seventy-five  feet. 
Upon  this  hill  the  infantry  and  artillery  of  Pearce's 
Arkansas  Brigade  were  encamped — Woodruff's  Bat- 
tery on  its  northern  face  near  the  ford,  and  Reid's 
Battery  on  its  southern  declivity,  opposite  to  Skegg's 
Branch,  and  the  infantry  between  them.  McCul- 
loch's  head-quarters  were  on  the  hill  near  Woodruff's 
Battery.  The  Third  Louisiana  and  McRae's  Bat- 
talion, both  belonging  to  McCulloch's  Brigade,  were 
camped  near  by,  and  Weightman's  Missouri  Brigade 
was  half  a  mile  away  to  the  south-east.  Mcintosh's 
Regiment  (for  Mcintosh  was  colonel  of  a  regiment, 
as  well  as  adjutant-general  of  the  brigade),  pitched  its 
tents  on  the  east  side  of  the  creek  just  above  the  ford. 

A  mile  further  up  the  creek,  on  the  northern 
slope  of  Bloody  Hill,  was  Rains,  with  Cawthon's 
Brigade  of  mounted  Missourians ;  his  camps  ex- 
tending northward  as  far  as  Gibson's  Mill.  Rains' 
quarters  were  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  creek,  and 
there  a  few  of  his  men  also  bivouacked. 


Lyon   Moves   Out   to  Attack.  261 

From  Rains,  on  the  extreme  left  of  the  Confeder- 
ates, to  Churchill  and  Greer,  on  their  extreme  right, 
the  distance  was  just  three  miles  up  and  down  the 
creek. 

While  the  army  lay  here  waiting  for  its  trains  to 
come  up,  McCulloch  would  every  day  sling  his  May- 
nard  rifle  across  his  shoulder  and  reconnoitre  towards 
Springfield,  sometimes  in  force,  and  sometimes  al- 
most alone.  But  adventurous,  daring,  and  skilful  as 
he  was,  he  could  learn  nothing  positive  as  to  either 
Lyon's  strength,  or  as  to  the  defences  of  Springfield. 
He  could  not  even  ascertain  whether  Lyon  had  for- 
tified his  position  at  all,  or  not.  To  all  the  entrea- 
ties of  Price  and  the  Missourians  that  he  would 
advance  he  only  replied  that  he  "  would  not  make  a 
blind  attack  upon  Springfield  ; "  and,  blaming  them 
for  his  own  want  of  success  in  reconnoitring,  told 
them,  at  last,  that  he  "  would  order  the  whole  army 
back  to  Cassville  rather  than  bring  on  an  engage- 
ment with  an  unknown  enemy. " 

On  Thursday,  the  8th,  Price  received  information 
that  Lyon  was  greatly  perplexed ;  that  he  was  in 
constant  expectation  of  being  attacked ;  that  he 
kept  his  men  under  arms  all  the  time ;  and  that  he 
was  getting  ready  to  abandon  Springfield.  Com- 
municating this  information  to  McCulloch,  and 
vouching  for  the  credibility  of  his  informants,  the 
general  again  urged  him,  with  great  earnestness,  to 


262  The   Fight  for  Missouri. 

move  straightway  upon  Springfield.  McCulloch 
having  promised  to  consider  the  matter  carefully, 
and  to  make  known  his  decision  that  evening,  rode 
once  more  to  the  front,  rifle  in  hand,  accompanied 
by  Mcintosh  and  a  considerable  force.  It  was  late 
when  he  returned  to  camp,  and  he  did  not  com- 
municate his  purpose  to  General  Price  that  night, 
as  he  had  promised  to  do. 

The  general,  waking  at  daybreak,  directed  the 
writer  to  see  McCulloch  instantly,  and  to  ask  what 
he  had  decided  to  do.  I  hastened  to  his  quarters, 
and  was  still  talking  with  him  when  the  general 
himself  rode  up,  his  impatience  no  longer  control- 
able,  and  insisted  with  great  vehemence  that  McCul- 
loch should  keep  the  promise  which  he  had  made  at 
Crane  Creek,  and  lead  the  army  out  against  Lyon. 

McCulloch  finally  consented  to  meet  all  the  gen- 
eral officers  of  the  command  in  council  at  Price's 
quarters  at  noon,  and  then  to  determine  upon  some 
plan  of  action.  At  this  council  McCulloch  ex- 
pressed great  unwillingness  to  attack  Lyon,  or  to 
enter  upon  any  aggressive  campaign.  But  Price 
declared  emphatically  that  if  orders  were  not  forth- 
with issued  for  a  forward  movement,  he  would  re- 
sume command  of  the  Missouri  troops,  and  himself 
give  battle  to  Lyon,  be  the  consequences  what  they 
might.  He  was  warmly  seconded  by  Generals 
Clark,    Parsons,    Rains,   Slack,   and    McBride    that 


Lyon   Moves    Out   to  Attack.  263 

McCulloch  yielded  at  last,  and  ordered  the  army  to 
be  in  readiness  to  move  that  night  (August  9),  at 
nine  o'clock.  Before  that  time  a  slight  rain  began 
to  fall,  and  the  order  to  march  was  countermanded, 
the  officers  being  instructed,  however,  to  hold  their 
men  in  readiness  to  move  at  any  moment.  This 
was  wisely  done,  for  most  of  the  Missourians,  hav- 
ing no  cartridge-boxes,  had  to  carry  their  ammu- 
nition in  their  pockets,  and  if  a  rain  had  fallen  upon 
them  during  the  march,  it  would  have  virtually  dis- 
armed three-fourths  of  them  all. 

The  Confederates,  therefore,  lay  upon  their  arms, 
waiting  for  the  order  to  march.  About  dawn  Gen- 
eral Price  sent  me  to  ask  McCulloch  what  he  pro- 
posed to  do.  He  and  Mcintosh  returned  with  me 
to  Price's  quarters  on  the  west  side  of  the  creek,  at 
the  foot  of  Bloody  Hill  which  sloped  down  toward 
us  from  the  north-west.  As  our  breakfast  of  corn- 
bread,  lean  beef,  and  coffee,  was  about  to  be 
served,  McCulloch  and  Mcintosh  were  invited  to 
share  it. 

When  Lyon  got  back  to  Springfield  on  Monday, 
the  5th  of  August,  he  was  more  embarrassed  than 
ever.  Not  a  man  had  come  to,  him  from  Fremont ; 
not  even  a  word.  Two  regiments — the  one  in  Kan- 
sas, and  the  other  on  the  Missouri — had  been  or- 
dered to   him  the  day  before,  but  they  could  not 


264  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

possibly  reach  him  in  less  than  a  fortnight ;  and 
before  that  time  the  enlistments  of  one  third  of  his 
men  would  have  expired,  and  they  would  have 
returned  to  their  homes. 

Though  he  was  convinced  that  he  could  not,  with 
the  force  at  his  command,  resist  the  armies  which 
were  gathering  to  attack  him  and  whose  strength  he 
constantly  overestimated,  he  was,  nevertheless,  loth 
to  abandon  Springfield  and  the  South-west  to  the 
Confederates.  For  he  fully  realized  the  great  ad- 
vantage which  Price  would  gain  by  occupying  that 
region,  which  would  not  only  feed  and  recruit  his 
army,  but  open  to  him  the  rich  counties  on  the  Mis- 
souri, with  their  teeming  resources  and  tens  of  thou- 
sands of  volunteers.  He  knew  too  that  it  would 
encourage  the  Secessionists  in  every  county,  and 
dishearten  all  loyal  men,  and  that  it  might  lose  to 
the  Union  every  part  of  the  State,  except  St. 
Louis. 

But  if  it  were  difficult  to  advance,  or  to  remain 
where  he  was,  it  was  even  more  difficult  to  retreat ; 
it  was  in  fact  impossible  to  retreat.  The  only  road 
open  to  him  was  that  which  led  to  Rolla,  from 
which  place  there  was  a  railway  to  St.  Louis. 
Between  Springfield^nd  Rolla,  lay  a  rough  coun- 
try, through  which  the  road  ran  for  one  hun- 
dred and  fifteen  miles  over  hills,  and  through 
ravines,  and  across  a  hundred  streams.     How  could 


Lyon   Moves    Out  to  Attack.  265 

an  army  of  six  or  seven  thousand  disheartened  men, 
encumbered  by  four  hundred  army  wagons,  and  im- 
peded by  crowds  of  refugees,  fleeing  with  their 
families  and  household  goods  before  the  wrath  of 
their  own  fellow-countrymen,  hope  to  retreat  over 
such  a  road,  for  such  a  distance,  pursued  by  more 
than  twice  their  own  number  of  men  under  Price 
and  McCulloch,  and  harassed  and  hindered  at  every 
step  by  an  overwhelming  force  of  mounted  troops? 

It  were  surely  better  to  fight  than  to  retreat. 

Accordingly  he  called  his  principal  officers  to- 
gether, on  the  evening  of  the  8th,  explained  the 
situation  to  them,  and  announced  that  it  was  his  de- 
termination to  move  down  the  Fayetteville  Road 
with  his  whole  force  at  night,  surprise  the  enemy  in 
their  camp  on  Wilson's  Creek  at  daybreak,  and 
trust  everything  to  the  hazard  of  a  battle.  The 
next  day  (Friday,  August  9),  after  consultation  with 
Colonel  Sigel,  he  changed  this  plan,  and,  instead  of 
advancing  in  a  single  column,  and  attacking  the 
Confederates  in  front,  ordered  Sigel  to  take  the 
Third  and  Fifth  Regiments  of  Missouri  Volun- 
teers, six  pieces  of  artillery,  and  two  companies  of 
regular  cavalry,  the  whole  aggregating  about  twelve 
hundred  officers  and  men,  and»with  them  turn  the 
right  flank  of  the  Confederates ;  while  he,  with  the 
remainder  of  his  force,  about  four  thousand  two 
hundred  men  in  all,  would  move  out  and  turn  their 


266  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

left  flank.  Sigel  was  to  make  the  attack  as  soon  as 
he  heard  Lyon's  guns.  Both  columns  were  to  leave 
Springfield  that  afternoon  about  sunset.  Before 
leaving,  Lyon  sent  the  following  letter  to  General 
Fremont, — his  last : 

"  I  retired  to  this  place,  as  I  before  informed  you, 
reaching  here  on  the  5th.  The  enemy  followed  to 
within  ten  miles  of  here.  He  has  taken  a  strong  po- 
sition and  is  recruiting  his  supply  of  horses,  mules, 
and  provisions,  by  forays  into  the  surrounding  coun- 
try ;  his  large  force  of  mounted  men  enabling  him 
to  do  this  without  much  annoyance  from  me.  I 
find  my  position  extremely  embarrassing,  and  am 
at  present  unable  to  determine  whether  I  shall  be 
able  to  maintain  my  ground,  or  be  forced  to  retire. 
I  can  resist  any  attack  from  the  front,  but,  if  the 
enemy  were  to  surround  me,  I  must  retire.  I  shall 
hold  my  ground  as  long  as  possible,  though  I  may, 
without  knowing  how  far,  endanger  the  safety  of 
my  entire  force,  with  its  valuable  material,  being 
induced,  by  the  important  considerations  involved, 
to  take  this  step.  The  enemy  showed  himself  in 
considerable  force  yesterday  five  miles  from  here, 
and  has  doubtless  a  full  purpose  of  attacking 
me." 

Not  one  word  about  the  desperate  battle  that  he 
was  to  fight  on  the  morrow  ;  not  one  fault-finding 
utterance ;  not  a  breath  of  complaint  ! 


Lyon   Moves   Out   to  Attack.  267 

But,  true  to  his  convictions;  true  to  his  flag;  true 
to  the  Union  men  of  Missouri  who  confided  in  and 
followed  him  ;  true  to  himself ;  and  true  to  duty,  he 
went  out  to  battle  against  a  force  twice  as  great  as 
his  own,  with  a  calmness  that  was  as  pathetic  as  his 
courage  was  sublime. 


CHAPTER   XIV. 

THE   BATTLE   OF   WILSON'S   CREEK. 

Lyon  marches  out  by  Night,  and  surprises  the  Confederates — The 
Fight  in  the  Cornfield— The  Rout  of  Sigel— The  Battle  on  Bloody 
Hill — The  Death  of  Lyon — His  Army  retreats — The  Dead  and 
the  Wounded. 

LEAVING  Springfield  about  five  o'clock  Friday- 
afternoon  August  the  9th,  Lyon  moved  out  about 
five  miles  on  the  road  to  Little  York,  and  then 
turning  southward  across  the  prairie  came,  about 
one  o'clock,  in  sight  of  Rains'  camp-fire%,  which 
extended  northward  as  far  as  Gibson's  Mill.  He 
had  completely  turned  the  Confederate  left,  and 
was  in  rear  of  them.  Halting  his  column  till 
dawn,  he  then  resumed  his  march  with  Plummer's 
battalion  of  regulars  in  advance,  followed  by  Oster- 
haus'  battalion  of  Missouri  volunteers  and  Totten's 
battery. 

The  Confederates  were  not  yet  aware  of  his 
approach,  as  they  had  withdrawn  all  their  pickets 
at  midnight.  About  this  time,  however,  Colonel 
Cawthon,  who  was  in  immediate  command  of 
Rains'  mounted  brigade,  sent  out  a  picket  in  the 
direction  from  which  Lyon  was  approaching. 


The  Battle  of   Wilson  s   Creek.  269 

This  picket  had  not  advanced  more  than  a  mile 
and  a  half  beyond  Gibson's  Mill,  when  they  discov- 
ered that  an  enemy  was  in  their  front.  This  fact 
being  made  known  to  Cawthon,  he  sent  Colonel 
Hunter  with  "  the  effectives"  of  his  regiment, 
some  three  hundred  men,  to  ascertain  whether 
this  enemy  was  advancing  in  force  or  not.  When 
Hunter  reached  the  picket,  about  five  A.M.,  the 
head  of  the  Federal  column  was  already  in  sight. 
His  first  intention  was  to  attack.  But  Lyon, 
seeing  that  his  approach  was  at  last  known  to 
the  Confederates  and  that  his  further  advance 
would  be  contested,  now  deployed  his  men  into 
line,  sending  Osterhaus'  battalion  to  the  right 
and  Plummer's  to  the  left  as  skirmishers,  and 
bringing  the  First  Missouri  up  to  the  support  of 
Totten's  battery.  Hunter  thereupon  retreated, 
and  Lyon  moved  forward  as  rapidly  as  the  ground 
would  permit. 

Cawthon  was  meanwhile  forming  the  rest  of 
his  brigade  on  the  northern  slope  of  Bloody  Hill. 
He  had  about  six  hundred  dismounted  men  in  line. 
When  Hunter,  falling  back  before  Lyon,  reached 
this  position,  Cawthon  ordered  him  to  retire  fur- 
ther down  the  creek  and  dismount  his  men,  and 
then  to  return  to  the  field  and  take  position  on 
his  right. 

But  before  this  was  done,  Lyon  appeared  on  the 


270  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

brow  of  the  opposite  hill  with  the  First  Missouri, 
the  First  Kansas,  and  Totten's  battery.  A  brisk 
skirmish  took  place,  and  Cawthon  was  driven  back 
over  the  brow  of  Bloody  Hill,  to  its  southern  slope, 
where  he  was  safe  for  the  time.  Hunter  and 
McCown,  who  had  been  separated  from  him,  did 
not  rejoin  him  again  till  late  in  the  day. 

While  Lyon  was  thus  getting  into  position, 
Sigel  had  perfectly  executed  his  part  of  the  plan. 
Leaving  Springfield  about  sunset  he  moved  down 
the  Fayetteville  road  about  four  miles,  and  then 
making  a  detour  to  the  left  came,  about  daybreak, 
within  a  few  hundred  yards  of  Wilson's  Creek,  just 
below  the  point  at  which  Tyrell's  Creek  empties 
into  it.  He  had  turned  the  Confederate  right 
just  as  completely  as  Lyon  had  turned  its  left ; 
and  at  dawn  of  Friday  August  the  10th  the  whole 
Confederate  force  lay  between  Lyon  and  Sigel,  and 
utterly  ignorant  of  their  proximity. 

Having  discovered  that  Greer,  Churchill,  and 
other  mounted  Confederates  were  encamped  just 
across  the  creek  from  his  position,  Sigel,  in  order  to 
keep  his  presence  from  their  knowledge,  so  disposed 
his  men  as  to  capture  all  stragglers  from  their 
camp  and  to  arrest  every  one  that  was  moving 
about.  He  then  posted  four  of  his  guns  on  a  hill 
east    of    the    creek   in    such  way  as   to   command 


The  Battle  of   Wilsons   Creek.  271 

Churchill's  camp,  which  was  hardly  five  hundred 
yards  away.  Leaving  with  these  guns  a  small 
infantry  support,  he  then  crossed  Wilson's  Creek, 
with  the  rest  of  his  command,  just  below  the  mouth 
of  Tyrell's  Creek ;  and  facing  northward  waited  for 
Lyon's  signal  gun. 

Churchill  and  Greer  had,  like  Rains,  drawn  in 
their  pickets  during  the  night. 

Rains,  whose  quarters  were  near  his  mounted 
brigade  (Cawthon's),  but  on  the  eastern  side  of  the 
creek,  and  some  distance  south  of  Gibson's  Mill, 
had  learned,  about  the  time  that  Hunter  went  to 
the  front,  that  some  sort  of  a  force  was  coming 
toward  him  from  the  northwest.  He  accordingly 
directed  Colonel  Snyder,  of  his  staff,  to  go  and 
"see  what  was  the  matter."  Snyder,  on  reaching 
the  prairie,  saw  the  Federals  approaching.  Hurry- 
ing back  to  Rains,  he  told  him  that  the  Federals 
were  advancing  in  great  force,  "  their  soldiers  and 
cannon  covering  the  whole  prairie."  Rains  ordered 
him  to  report  the  facts  instantly  to  General  Price. 

It  was  now  nearly  six  o'clock,  and  still  neither 
Price  nor  McCulloch,  who  was  then  at  Price's 
quarters,  had  any  cause  to  suspect  that  Lyon  had 
even  left  Springfield. 

Snyder,  coming  up  almost  breathless  with  haste 
and  excitement,  said   that   Lyon  was  approaching 


272  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

with  twenty  thousand  men  and  ioo  pieces  of  artil- 
lery, and  was  then  within  less  than  a  mile  of 
Rains'  camp.  McCulloch,  believing  that  this  was 
"  one  of  Rains'  scares,"  told  Snyder  to  say  to  that 
officer  that  he  would  himself  come  to  the  front 
directly.  In  two  or  three  minutes  another  officer 
came  dashing  up  and  said  that  Rains  was  falling 
back  before  overwhelming  numbers,  and  needed 
instant  and  heavy  reinforcements. 

Looking  up,  we  could,  ourselves,  see  a  great 
crowd  of  men  on  horseback,  some  armed,  and 
others  unarmed,  mixed  in  with  wagons  and  teams 
and  led  horses,  all  in  dreadful  confusion,  scamper- 
ing over  the  hill,  and  rushing  dov/n  toward  us — 
a  panic-stricken  drove.  In  another  instant,  we  saw 
the  flash  and  heard  the  report  of  Totten's  guns, 
which  had  gone  into  battery  on  the  top  of  the  hill, 
not  more  than  a  thousand  yards  away,  and  were 
throwing  shot  into  the  flying  crowd.  And  then,  in 
quick  response,  came  the  sound  of  Sigel's  guns, 
as  they  opened  upon  Churchill,  Greer,  Major,  and 
Brown,  and  drove  them  in  confusion  out  of  the 
valley  in  which  they  were  encamped  and  into  the 
thick  woods  that  fringed  the  banks  of  Skeggs' 
Branch  and  covered  the  hills  that  rose  on  either 
side  of  that  little  stream. 

In  a  moment  McCulloch,  followed  by  Mcintosh, 
was  in  the  saddle  and   on    his  way  to  take  com- 


1    V 


Jr 


,  \  \  \    was  ass 


*f 


*4 


■*  i 


j 


THE   BATTLE   FIELD    OF   WILSON'S   CREEK. 


Note. — Most  of  the  ground  was  covered  with  a  dense  undergrowth  which  is  not 
depicted  in  the  sketch. 


The   Battle   of   Wilsons   Creek.  273 

mand  of  the  troops  on  the  eastern  side  of  the 
creek;  and  Price,  having  ordered  his  infantry  and 
artillery  to  follow,  was  galloping  up  Bloody  Hill 
to  take  command  of  Cawthon's  brigade,  which  was 
still  falling  back  before  Lyon,  resisting  him  all  that 
it  could.  Price  hoped  with  it  to  hold  the  Federals 
in  check  till  the  rest  of  his  Missourians  could 
come  up. 

These  were  already  forming  along  the  Fayette- 
ville  road,  and  were,  within  a  few  minutes,  hasten- 
ing up  the  hill  at  double-quick.  Hardly  had  Price 
gotten  Cawthon's  men  into  line  under  the  brow  of 
the  hill,  where  they  were  out  of  range  of  Totten's 
guns,  and  under  cover  of  the  trees  and  dense  under- 
growth which  shade  that  part  of  the  field,  when 
Slack  came  up  with  Hughes'  regiment  and  Thorn- 
ton's battalion  and  formed  on  the  left  of  Cawthon. 
Clark  followed  immediately  with  Burbridge's  regi- 
ment, and  took  position  on  the  left  of  Slack.  Then 
came  Parsons,  with  Kelly's  regiment  and  Guibor's 
battery ;  while  on  the  extreme  left  of  Price's  line 
McBride  took  position  with  his  two  regiments. 
Slack's  command  was  soon  reinforced  by  Colonel 
Rives,  with  about  seventy  dismounted  men  of  his 
regiment ;  and  half  an  hour  later,  Weightman, 
whose  brigade  had  been  encamped  a  mile  or  more 
from  the  rest  of  Price's  infantry,  came  up  with 
Clarkson's  and  Hurst's  regiments,  about  seven  hun- 
18 


274  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

dred  strong,  and  fell  in  between  Slack  and  Caw- 
thon. 

The  line  thus  formed  by  Price  in  front  of  Lyon 
aggregated,  with  Weightman's  command,  over 
thirty-one  hundred  men,  with  four  pieces  of  artil- 
lery. He  was  greatly  assisted  from  the  beginning 
by  Woodruff,  who  had  with  true  soldierly  instinct 
thrown  his  pieces  into  battery  on  the  bluff  east  of 
the  ford,  at  the  first  sound  of  Totten's  guns,  and 
opened  upon  Lyon  a  fire,  which  checked  his  ad- 
vance and  gave  the  Missourians  time  to  reach  Caw- 
thon's  position  and  form  their  line  of  battle  there. 

To  Price's  force  Lyon  opposed  the  First  Missouri, 
the  First  Kansas,  Osterhaus'  battalion  of  Missouri 
volunteers,  Totten's  six-gun  battery  (regulars),  and 
Dubois'  four-gun  battery  (regulars),  aggregating 
nearly  nineteen  hundred  men.  The  rest  of  his  force, 
except  Plummer's  battalion,  he  held  in  reserve. 

The  two  lines  were  not  more  than  three  hundred 
yards  apart,  but  they  were  entirely  concealed  from 
each  other  by  the  intervening  foliage.  As  Price's 
men  were  armed  almost  exclusively  with  shot-guns 
and  common  rifles,  it  was  imperatively  necessary  for 
him,  near  as  the  two  forces  already  were  to  each 
other,  either  to  advance  more  closely  to  the  Union 
line,  or  to  wait  till  it  should  approach  his  own.  He 
chose  the  latter  alternative,  and  awaited  Lyon's 
advance. 


The  Battle   of    Wilsons    Creek.  275 

He  did,  not  have  to  wait  long,  for  in  a  few- 
minutes  the  word  "  Forward  !  "  was  plainly  heard, 
and  was  quickly  followed  by  the  tramp  of  men,  and 
by  the  crackling  of  the  brush  through  which  they 
were  coming.  When  Lyon's  Missourians  and  their 
allies  had  come  within  easy  range  of  Price's  Mis- 
sourians, out  of  the  ranks  of  the  latter  there  rang 
upon  the  air  the  sharp  click  of  a  thousand  rifles, 
the  report  of  a  thousand  shot-guns,  and  the  roar  of 
Guibor's  guns  ;  and  the  battle  of  Wilson's  Creek  had 
begun  in  earnest.  Missourians  now  fought  to  the 
death  against  Missourians,  on  the  leafy  hill-side ; 
while  from  opposing  heights,  Totten,  who  had  but 
lately  been  stationed  at  Little  Rock  where  his  fam- 
ily still  resided,  fought  furiously  against  Woodruff's 
Little  Rock  battery,  which  now  turned  against  him 
the  very  guns  which  they  had  taken  from  him  a  few 
months  before. 

The  battle  thus  joined  upon  the  hill-side  was  now 
waged  for  hours  with  intense  earnestness.  The  lines 
would  approach  again  and  again  within  less  than 
fifty  yards  of  each  other,  and  then,  after  delivering 
a  deadly  fire,  each  would  fall  back  a  few  paces  to 
reform  and  reload,  only  to  advance  again,  and  again 
renew  this  strange  battle  in  the  woods.  Peculiar  in 
all  its  aspects,  strange  in  all  its  surroundings,  unique 
in  every  way,  the  most  remarkable  of  all  its  char- 
acteristics was  the  deep  silence  which  now  and  then 


276  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

fell  upon  the  smoking  field — fell  upon  it,  and  rested 
there  undisturbed  for  many  minutes,  while  the  two 
armies,  unseen  of  each  other,  lay  but  a  few  yards 
apart,  gathering  strength  to  grapple  again  in  the 
death  struggle  for  Missouri. 

Meanwhile  McCulloch,  upon  leaving  Price,  had 
gone  with  Mcintosh  to  the  eastern  side  of  the  creek, 
where  the  infantry  of  his  own  brigade,  and  the  infan- 
try and  artillery  of  Pearce's  were  both  encamped. 
His  first  object  was  to  dispose  these  troops  in 
such  way  as  to  meet  Sigel's  attack,  the  strength  and 
meaning  of  which  were  not  yet  developed.  In 
order  to  do  this  he  posted  Reid's  battery  on  the 
bluff  opposite  to  the  mouth  of  Skegg's  Branch,  and 
ordered  Walker's  regiment  to  support  it.  He  then 
placed  Dockery's  and  Gratiot's  regiments  further 
north,  along  the  bluff  which  forms  the  eastern  bank 
of  Wilson's  Creek  from  Skegg's  Branch  northward, 
to  the  ford.  These  dispositions  gave  him  command 
of  the  crossing  of  Skegg's  Branch,  over  which  Sigel 
would  have  to  advance,  if  he  should  undertake 
to  attack  Price  in  rear.  He  then  posted  McRae's 
battalion,  the  Third  Louisiana,  and  Mcintosh's 
regiment,  of  his  own  brigade,  north  of  Gratiot,  and 
on  the  same  bluff.  It  was  upon  the  northern 
extremity  of  this  bluff  that  Woodruff  had  taken 
position  and  gone  into  action. 


The  Battle  of   Wilsons   Creek.  277 

While  McCulloch  was  still  making  these  disposi- 
tions Woodruff  perceived  that  a  part  of  Lyon's  col- 
umn, constituting  the  extreme  left  of  his  line,  had 
crossed  to  the  eastern  side  of  the  Creek,  and  was 
moving  down  its  left  bank  towards  the  position  oc- 
cupied by  his  battery.  As  soon  as  this  fact  was 
made  known  to  McCulloch  he  ordered  Gratiot  to 
the  support  of  Woodruff,  and  sent  Mcintosh  with 
his  regiment  dismounted,  the  Third  Louisiana,  and 
McRae's  battalion   to  meet  the  advancing  Federals. 

Mcintosh  moved  rapidly  to  the  front,  keeping  on 
the  eastern  side  of  the  creek.  Though  covered 
somewhat  by  Woodruff's  guns  he  was  greatly  har- 
rassed  by  Dubois,  who  hurled  grape-shot  and  shell 
against  him  from  the  eastern  brow  of  Bloody  Hill. 
Crossing  the  Fayetteville  road  he  led  his  men 
through  a  dense  thicket  to  a  large  cornfield  behind 
whose  fence  the  Federals  had  taken  position.  They 
turned  out  to  be  Plummer's  battalion  of  United 
States  Infantry,  supported  at  a  safe  distance  by 
Captain  Wright's  Squadron  of  Home  Guards.  A 
fierce  conflict  ensued,  the  Confederates  fighting 
under  cover  of  "the  brush,"  and  the  Federals  be- 
hind the  fence.  Mcintosh  finding  that  the  enemy's 
fire  was  playing  havoc  with  his  men  ordered  them 
to  charge,  and  leading  the  way  leaped  the  fence. 
The  greater  part  of  his  own  regiment,  and  of  the 
Third  Louisiana,  followed  him,  and  they  quickly  put 


278  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

Plummer  to  flight,  and  drove  him  back  to  and  across 
the  creek  to  Lyon's  main  body.  In  the  ardor  of 
pursuit  the  Confederates  came  within  close  range  of 
Dubois'  battery,  and  Osterhaus'  battalion,  and  were 
themselves  driven  back  in  some  confusion.  In  this 
engagement,  which  began  about  seven  o'clock  and 
lasted  nearly  an  hour,  Plummer,  who  had  about 
three  hundred  regulars,  lost  eighty  officers  and 
men,  and  was  himself  severely  wounded.  Mcintosh 
took  about  one  thousand  men  into  action.  His 
losses  aggregated  over  one  hundred. 

While  this  fight  was  going  on  Sigel  had  advanced 
leisurely  through  the  camps  out  of  which  he  had 
driven  the  Confederates  at  sunrise,  and  had  taken 
position  with  his  entire  force,  some  twelve  hundred 
men,  with  six  pieces  of  artillery,  near  Sharp's  house 
on  the  bluff  south  of  Skegg's  Branch.  His  battery 
occupied  a  high  plateau,  and  his  infantry  were 
drawn  up  on  both  sides  of  the  Fayetteville  road, 
with  a  company  of  United  States  cavalry  on  each 
flank.  It  was  his  purpose  to  hold  this  position  so 
as  to  cut  off  the  retreat  of  "  the  rebels  "  when  they 
had  been  put  to  flight  by  Lyon. 

McCulloch,  after  sending  Mcintosh  to  meet  Plum- 
mer, had  returned  towards  Skegg's  Branch  in  order 
to  look  after  Sigel.  Finding  that  the  further 
advance   of   the   latter   was   effectually   barred   by 


The  Battle  of   Wilsons   Creek,  279 

Pearce's  Brigade  and  by  a  considerable  force  which 
was  rallying  under  cover  of  the  woods  on  the  north 
side  of  the  branch,  he  hurried  back  toward  the  point 
where  Mcintosh  was  engaged  with  Plummer.  On 
getting  there  he  found  that  the  Confederates  had 
won  that  engagement,  and  that  there  was  no  longer 
any  danger  in  that  direction. 

Taking  two  companies  of  the  Third  Louisiana 
that  were  nearest  to  him,  and  ordering  Mcintosh  to 
bring  up  the  rest,  McCulloch  now  hastened  again 
towards  Skegg's  Branch,  determined  to  attack  Sigel. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Rosser  had  already  taken  posi- 
tion with  his  own  men,  O'Kane's  battalion,  and 
Bledsoe's  battery,  on  the  western  side  of  the  Fay- 
etteville  Road  and  north  of  the  branch  ;  Bledsoe's 
guns  being  so  posted  as  to  completely  command 
Sigel's  position. 

Sigel  and  his  men  were  in  blissful  ignorance  of  all 
that  was  happening  in  their  front.  For  between 
them  and  the  valley,  in  which  their  foes  were 
gathering,  stood  a  dense  wood  through  whose  lux- 
uriant undergrowth  no  eye  could  pierce.  Now  and 
then  a  skirmisher,  or  an  adventurous  officer,  would 
make  his  way  to  the  bluff  which  overhung  the  little 
stream,  and  catch  sight  of  the  smoke  that  darkened 
Bloody  Hill,  and  sometimes  one  more  daring  than 
the  rest  would  venture  far  enough  to  see  indis- 
tinctly what  was  going  on  in  the  upper  part  of  the 


280  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

valley,  towards  the  ford.  At  last  one  of  these  saw 
a  gray-coated  regiment  hurrying  down  the  road 
toward  Skegg's  Branch.  Knowing  that  the  First 
Iowa  wore  a  gray  uniform, Jie  at  once  concluded 
that  this  must  be  the  First  Iowa,  and  such  was  the 
report  that  he  bore  back  to  Sigel.  The  latter  com- 
municated the  glad  news  to  his  men,  and  warned 
them  not  to  fire  upon  their  approaching  "  friends." 
They  waved  their  flags  instead,  in  joyful  welcome. 

Just  at  this  moment  Reid  on  the  east  and  Bledsoe 
on  the  west  opened  fire  upon  them  at  point-blank 
range.  "It  is  impossible  for  me,"  says  Sigel,  "  to 
describe  the  consternation  and  frightful  confusion 
which  were  caused  by  this  unfortunate  event. 
'They  are  firing  against  us,'  spread  like  wild-fire 
through  our  ranks.  The  artillery  men  could  hardly 
be  brought  forward  to  serve  their  pieces.  The 
Infantry  would  not  level  their  arms  till  too  late." 
The  consternation  and  confusion  deepened  into  a 
panic  when  about  four  hundred  of  the  gray-coated 
Third  Louisiana  dashing  up  the  steep  bluff  with  Mc- 
Culloch  and  Mcintosh  at  their  head,  and  Rosser 
and  O'Kane's  battalion  following,  broke  through 
the  thick  "  brush,"  and  charged  right  upon  the 
Federal  Battery.  Sigel's  whole  force  took  to  in- 
stant flight,  abandoning  five  of  their  six  guns,  and 
throwing  themselves  for  safety  into  the  bushes 
which  lined  both    sides  of  the  Fayetteville   road. 


The  Battle  of   Wilsons   Creek,  281 

Here  they  got  separated.  Sigel  and  Salomon  with 
about  two  hundred  of  their  Germans  and  Carr's 
company  of  cavalry  tried  to  make  their  way  back 
to  Springfield  by  the  same  route  that  they  came, 
but  they  were  set  upon  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Ma- 
jor with  some  mounted  Missourians  and  Texans, 
and  the  Germans,  being  abandoned  by  Captain 
Carr  who  made  good  his  escape,  were  nearly  all 
either  killed,  wounded,  or  made  prisoners.  Sigel 
himself  got  to  Springfield  with  one  man  only.  An- 
other part  of  his  column  made  its  way  to  Little 
York  and  thence  to  Springfield. 

It  was  now  nearly  nine  o'clock.  Churchill,  who 
after  being  driven  out  of  his  camp  in  the  early  morn- 
ing by  Sigel  had  quickly  rallied  his  men  and  taken 
them  to  the  north  side  of  Skegg's  Branch  and  gone 
into  the  fight  on  Price's  extreme  left,  was  now 
moving  to  the  centre  of  Price's  line,  where  it  was 
hardest  pressed.  After  detailing  enough  men  to 
hold  the  horses  of  those  that  were  dismounted  for 
the  fight  he  had  about  five  hundred  "  effectives." 
Forming  these  in  line  on  the  Fayetteville  road, 
south  of  the  ford,  and  within  reach  of  the  enemy's 
shot,  he  led  them  gallantly  up  the  hill  and  went 
again  into  the  fight  on  the  left  of  Slack,  and  in  the 
very  front  of  Lyon's  attack. 

The  Missourians,  thus  strengthened  where  they 


282  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

most  needed  strengthening,  advanced  boldly,  Gui- 
bor's  guns  keeping  in  line  with  the  Infantry,  and 
Woodruff  throwing  his  shot  high  overhead  into  the 
midst  of  Lyon's  reserves. 

Lyon,  finding  that  his  men  were  giving  way, 
brought  forward  a  section  of  Totten's  battery  with 
a  strong  support  to  the  right  and  front  of  his  own 
line,  and  enfiladed  the  Confederates  at  two  hundred 
yards,  Totten  and  Gordon  Granger  both  helping  to 
work  the  guns. 

McCulloch,  who  had  gone  with  Churchill  up 
Bloody  Hill,  diverted  this  fire  by  returning  in  all 
haste  to  the  valley  and  sending  Carroll's  Arkansas 
cavalry  and  five  companies  of  Greer's  mounted 
Texans  to  turn  Lyon's  right  and  charge  these  guns 
in  rear.  The  ground  was  ill-adapted  to  the  opera- 
tions of  cavalry,  and  Greer  and  Carroll  were  finally 
driven  back.  But  this  movement  relieved  Price 
nevertheless,  and  at  the  same  time  so  increased 
Lyon's  anxiety  that  he  ordered  the  First  Iowa  to 
the  front  and  brought  Steele's  battalion  of  regulars 
to  the  further  support  of  Totten. 

Up  to  this  time  (ten  o'clock)  the  infantry  of 
Pearce's  brigade,  three  fine  regiments — Gratiot's, 
Dockery's,  and  Walker's — more  than  1,700  strong, 
had  not  fired  a  shot,  nor  had  Graves'  Missouri 
regiment,  about  three  hundred  strong,  that  ought 
to  have    followed   WTeightman  into  battle.      There 


The  Battle  of   Wilson  s    Creek.  283 

they  lay  just  across  the  creek,  not  half  a  mile  away, 
with  nothing  to  do  and  doing  nothing. 

Price,  seeing  the  absolute  necessity  of  instant 
and  decisive  action,  for  Lyon  was  now  bringing 
every  available  man  to  the  front  and  doing  prodi- 
gies of  valor,  galloped  over  to  Gratiot,  during  the 
pause  of  the  fight  which  occurred  in  his  own  front 
while  Greer  and  Carroll  were  attempting  to  flank 
Lyon's  right,  and  begged  him  to  bring  his  regiment 
to  the  help  of  the  Missourians  and  Churchill. 
Gratiot,  who  had  served  under  Price  in  Mexico  and 
loved  and  honored  him,  did  not  hesitate  an  instant, 
but,  ordered  his  regiment  to  follow  Price  who  was 
already  hastening  back  to  his  own  men,  and  sent  an 
officer  to  tell  General  Pearce  what  he  had  done. 
Pearce  came  forward  at  once  and  overtaking  Price 
and  Gratiot  rode  with  them  at  the  head  of  the  regi- 
ment as  it  ran  up  Bloody  Hill.  When  they  drew 
near  to  the  position  which  they  were  to  occupy, 
Price  said  to  the  men :  "  You  will  soon  be  in  a 
pretty  hot  place,  men  !  but  I  will  be  near  you,  and 
I  will  take  care  of  you  ;  keep  as  cool  as  the  inside 
of  a  cucumber  and  give  them  thunder."  Turning 
to  Gratiot  he  said  :  "  That's  your  position,  colonel ; 
take  it  and  hold  it  whatever  you  do.  I  will  see 
that  you  are  not  too  hard  pressed.  Don't  yield  an 
inch." 

Gratiot  moved,  on  the  instant,  towards  the  posi- 


284  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

tion  which  the  general  had  indicated.  As  he  did  so 
his  regiment  came  within  range  of  Totten's  guns. 
The  men  passed  safely,  but  the  rear  of  the  regiment 
was  swept  of  its  field  and  staff.  Gratiot's  horse 
was  killed  and  his  orderly's  too.  The  lieutenant- 
colonel  was  dismounted.  The  major's  arm  was 
broken.  The  quarter-master  was  killed  and  the 
regimental  commissary  severely  wounded.  But  the 
regiment  kept  on  and  took  the  position  that  it  had 
been  ordered  to  take — took  it,  and  held  it  under  a 
fire  so  furious  that  in  less  than  thirty  minutes  a 
hundred  of  its  men  were  either  dead  or  wounded — 
one  hundred  out  of  five  hundred. 

From  the  summit  of  Bloody  Hill  Lyon  could  see 
the  entire  field.  It  all  lay  before  him,  its  outmost 
limits  hardly  a  mile  away.  He  knew  now  that 
Sigel  had  been  defeated,  and  that  the  troops  which 
had  put  him  to  flight  would  soon  be  coming,  all 
flushed  with  victory,  to  join  the  force  which  Price 
was  getting  ready  to  hurl  again  against  his  own  dis- 
heartened men.  He  could  see  Gratiot  hurrying 
even  now  with  more  than  five  hundred  fresh  troops 
to  give  vigor  to  the  assault  that  was  about  to  be 
made  upon  his  own  weary  men,  broken  down  as 
these  were  by  a  long  night-march,  and  by  five  hours 
of  the  very  hardest  fighting ;  could  see  him  clamber- 
ing up  the  hill-side  now,  himself  and  his  men  eager 
to  fight  under  the  eye  of  the  brave  soldier  that  was 


The  Battle  of   Wilsons    Creek.  285 

leading  them  to  death  or  to  victory.  He  could  also 
see  the  rest  of  Pearce's  brigade  forming  on  the 
opposite  hill  and  about  to  bring  their  bright  muskets 
into  the  thickening  fight,  muskets  that  had  not 
yet  been  tarnished  by  the  smoke  of  battle.  And 
all  through  the  valley  that  lay  beneath  him  he 
could  see  Missourians,  and  Texans,  and  Arkansians 
— men  who  had  as  yet  taken  no  part  in  the  des- 
perate fight  that  had  been  raging  since  day-dawn, 
— thousands  of  men,  taking  heart  again  as  they  got 
used  to  the  din  of  war,  and  clutching  their  shot- 
guns and  rifles,  resolved  to  be  "  in  at  the  death." 
He  saw  all  this  and  more ;  and  there  was  no  hope 
left  within  him  but  to  dash  upon  Price  with  all 
his  might  and  crush  him  to  the  ground  before 
these  gathering  forces  could  come  to  his  help. 

He  now  brought  every  available  battalion  to  the 
front.  "  The  engagement  at  once  became  general, 
and  almost  inconceivably  fierce  along  the  entire  line, 
the  enemy  "  (these  are  the  words  of  Schofield  and 
Sturgis)  "  appearing  in  front,  often  in  three  or  four 
ranks,  lying  down,  kneeling,  and  standing,  and  the 
lines  often  approaching  to  within  thirty  or  forty 
yards  as  the  enemy  would  charge  upon  Totten's 
battery  and  be  driven  back." 

Neither  line  of  battle  was  more  than  a  thousand 
yards  in  length.  Price  guarded  carefully  every  part 
of  his  own.     Wherever  the  danger  was  greatest  and 


286  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

the  battle  most  doubtful,  thither  would  he  hasten 
and  there  would  he  stay  till  the  danger  was  all  past. 
In  the  intervals  of  the  fight  he  would  ride  far  to  the 
front  among  his  skirmishers,  and  peer  into  the  thick 
smoke  which  tangled  itself  among  the  trees  and  the 
bushes,  and  clung  to  the  ground  as  though  it  wanted 
to  hide  the  combatants  from  each  other;  would 
peer  wistfully  into  it  till  through  its  rifts  he  could 
discern  what  the  enemy  was  doing,  and  then  his 
voice  would  ring  down  the  whole  length  of  his  line, 
and  officers  and  men  would  quickly  spring  forward 
to  obey  it :  for  long  before  the  battle  was  over  they 
had  all  learned  that  they  were  fighting  under  one  of 
the  best  and  truest  of  soldiers,  under  one  who  knew 
how  to  fight  them  to  the  greatest  advantage,  one 
who  would  expose  them  to  no  useless  danger,  nor  to 
any  danger  which  he  would  not  himself  share.  Many 
a  time  did  they  cry  out  to  him  as  with  one  voice : 
"  Don't  lead  us,  General ;  don't  come  with  us  ;  take 
care  of  yourself  for  the  sake  of  us  all ;  we  will  go 
without  you."  Several  times  his  clothing  was 
pierced  by  bullets,  one  of  which  inflicted  a  painful 
wound  in  his  side.  Turning  with  a  smile  to  an 
officer  that  was  near  him  he  said  :  "  That  isn't  fair ; 
if  I  were  as  slim  as  Lyon  that  fellow  would  have 
missed  me  entirely."  No  one  else  knew  till  the  bat- 
tle was  ended,  that  he  had  been  struck.  One  of  his 
aids,  Colonel  Allen   of  Saline,  was  killed  while  re- 


The  Battle  of   Wilsons    Creek,  287 

ceiving  an  order ;  Weightman  was  borne  to  the  rear 
dying  ;  Cawthon  and  his  adjutant  were  both  mortally 
wounded  ;  Slack  was  fearfully  lacerated  by  a  mus- 
ket-ball, and  Clark  was  shot  in  the  leg.  Colonel 
Ben  Brown  was  killed,  Churchill  had  two  horses 
shot  under  him,  Gratiot  one.  Colonels  Burbridge, 
Foster  and  Kelly,  and  nearly  every  other  field 
officer,  were  disabled.  But  in  spite  of  all  these 
losses  Price  grew  stronger  all  the  time,  while  Lyon's 
strength  was  fast  wasting  away. 

Walking  along  his  line  from  left  to  right  en- 
couraging his  men  by  his  own  intrepid  bearing 
and  by  a  few  well-spoken  words ;  rallying  them 
where  they  were  beginning  to  give  way ;  steadying 
them  where  they  still  stood  to  their  duty ;  inspiring 
them  with  his  own  brave  purpose  to  make  one 
more  effort  to  win  the  day,  while  yet  there  was 
time  to  try,  Lyon  had  nearly  reached  the  advanced 
section  of  Totten's  battery  when  his  horse,  whose 
bridle  he  held  in  his  hand,  was  killed,  and  himself  was 
wounded  in  the  leg  and  in  the  head.  Stunned  and 
dazed  by  the  blow,  and  his  brave  soul  cast  down  by 
the  shock,  he  said  in  a  confused  sort  of  way  to 
those  that  were  nearest  that  he  feared  that  the  day 
was  lost.  But  he  came  quickly  to  his  senses,  and 
ordering  Sturgis  to  rally  the  First  Iowa,  which  was 
beginning  to  break  badly,  he  mounted  a  horse  that 
was  offered  to  him,  and  swinging  his  hat  in  the  air, 


288  The  Fight  for  Missouri, 

called  out  to  his  men  to  follow.  A  portion  of  Mitch- 
ell's Second  Kansas,  which  Lieutenant  Wherry- 
had  just  brought  again  to  the  front,  closed  quickly 
around  him  and  together  they  dashed  into  the  fight. 
The  next  minute  Mitchell  was  struck  down  se- 
verely wounded,  and  almost  instantly  thereafter  a 
fatal  ball  pierced  Lyon's  breast.  He  fell  from  his 
horse  into  the  arms  of  his  faithful  orderly,  who 
had  sprung  forward  to  catch  him,  and  in  another 
minute  he  was  dead. 

The  command  devolved  upon  Major  Sturgis. 
He  called  his  chief  officers  together.  Price  had  al- 
ready been  reinforced  by  Gratiot,  and  now  Dock- 
ery's  Arkansas  regiment  and  a  section  of  Reid's 
battery  were  getting  into  position,  and  with  them 
was  the  Third  Louisiana,  which,  for  the  first  time 
since  its  encounter  with  Plummer  in  the  early- 
morning,  had  been  gotten  together  under  its  colo- 
nel (Hebert)A  and  was  eager  to  add  to  the  laurels 
which  it  had  already  gathered  in  the  fields  on  which 
it  had  defeated  Plummer,  and  routed  Sigel. 

Sturgis  decided  to  retreat.  The  order  was  given, 
and  was  silently  obeyed,  Steele's  battalion  of  regu- 
lars covering  the  retreat,  and  marching  away  from 
the  field  in  perfect  order. 

It  was  now  half  past  eleven.  Silence  had  again 
fallen  upon  Bloody  Hill,  on  whose  rough  surface 
the  dead  of  both  armies  lay  in  great  heaps.     The 


The   Battle  of   Wilsons    Creek,  289 

Confederates,  stretched  out  among  the  bushes  in 
which  they  had  been  fighting  all  day,  were  waiting 
for  the  enemy's  next  onset,  or  for  Price's  order  to 
attack,  and  ready  for  either.  Suddenly  a  cry  rang 
along  their  ranks  that  the  Federals  were  retreat- 
ing ;  that  they  had  already  gotten  away,  and  were 
ascending  the  hill  from  which  they  had  begun  the 
attack  upon  Rains  at  dawn  of  day ;  that  they  had 
at  last  abandoned  the  field  for  which  they  had 
fought  so  bravely  and  so  well  against  unconquer- 
able odds.  Springing  to  their  feet  they  gave  utter- 
ance to  their  unspeakable  relief  and  to  their  un- 
bounded joy  with  that  exultant  cry  which  is  never 
heard  except  upon  a  battle-field  whereon  its  victors 
stand.  It  reached  the  ears  of  Weightman — true 
soldier  and  true  gentleman — whose  life  was  fast 
ebbing  away  in  the  midst  of  the  men  that  loved 
him.  "  What  is  it?  "  he  asked.  "  We  have  whipped 
them.  They  are  gone."  "  Thank  God  !  "  he  faintly 
whispered.  In  another  instant  he  was  dead.  Of 
him  General  Price  well  said,  in  his  report  that : 

"  Among  those  who  fell  mortally  wounded  upon 
the  battle-field  none  deserve  a  dearer  place  in 
the  memory  of  Missourians  than  Richard  Hanson 
Weightman,  Colonel  commanding  the  first  brigade 
of  the  second  division  of  this  army.  Taking  up 
arms  at  the  very  beginning  of  this  unhappy  contest, 
he  had  already  done  distinguished  service  at  the 
19 


290  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

battle  of  Rock  Creek,  where  he  commanded  the 
State  forces  after  the  death  of  the  lamented  Hol- 
loway,  and  at  Carthage,  where  he  won  unfading 
laurels  by  the  display  of  extraordinary  coolness, 
courage  and  skill.  He  fell  at  the  head  of  his  bri- 
gade, wounded  in  three  places,  and  died  just  as 
the  victorious  shouts  of  our  army  began  to  rise 
upon  the  air." 

Nothing  could  better  attest  the  constancy,  the 
courage,  and  the  devotion  with  which  both  armies 
fought  that  day  on  the  wooded  summit  of  the 
Ozark  hills,  than  do  the  losses  which  each  sus- 
tained. 

In  the  engagement  between  Mcintosh  and  Plum- 
mer,  in  the  cornfield  east  of  the  creek,  the  Federals 
lost  eighty  of  the  three  hundred  men  who  took  part 
in  the  fight ;  and  the  Confederates,  who  were  over 
one  thousand  strong,  lost  one  hundred  and  one. 

In  the  final  attack  upon  Sigel,  which  McCulloch 
and  Mcintosh  led,  the  Confederate  loss  was  trifling, 
but  Sigel,  whose  panic-stricken  men  were  pitilessly 
cut  down  by  the  Missourians  and  Texans  who  pur- 
sued, lost  two  hundred  and  ninety-three  men.  Of 
these,  one  hundred  and  sixty-seven  were  either 
killed  or  wounded,  and  one  hundred  and  twenty-six 
were  taken  prisoners.  These  losses  were  confined 
exclusively  to  Sigel's  Infantry  and  Artillery,  which 


The   Battle  of   Wilsons    Creek.  291 

aggregated  about  one  thousand  and  fifty  men.  Cap- 
tain Carr's  squadron  of  United  States  Cavalry  which 
formed  part  of  his  column  was  not  under  fire  and 
did  not  sustain  any  loss.  This  fact  did  not,  how- 
ever, prevent  Captain  Carr  from  being  brevetted  for 
gallant  and  meritorious  conduct  on  the  field. 

But  it  was  on  Bloody  Hill  that  the  main  battle 
was  fought,  and  the  heaviest  losses  were  suffered. 
There  Lyon  and  Price  confronted  each  other,  until, 
after  four  hours  of  desperate  fighting,  Lyon  was 
killed  ;  and  still  the  battle  raged  for  a  time,  till, 
overwhelmed  by  ever-increasing  odds,  Sturgis  aban- 
doned the  unequal  contest,  and  left  the  field. 
Here  the  Union  Army  lost  not  only  its  general,  and 
so  many  of  its  field  officers  as  to  come  out  of  the 
fight  under  command  of  a  major,  but  of  the  3500 
men  that  went  into  action  nearly  nine  hundred 
were  either  killed  or  wounded.  The  First  Missouri 
alone  lost  295  men  out  of  less  than  eight  hundred, 
the  First  Kansas  284,  and  Steele's  Battalion  of 
regulars  sixty-one  out  of  275  officers  and  men. 

The  Confederates  lost  in  almost  the  same  pro- 
portion. Of  the  4200  men  who  fought  there  under 
Price  988  were  either  killed  or  wounded.  Nearly 
every  one  of  his  higher  officers  was  disabled,  and  he 
was  himself  wounded.  Churchill  had  two  horses 
shot  under  him,  and  lost  197  of  his  500  men. 

The  total  losses  of  the  Federals  during  the  day 


292  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

amounted  to  1317  officers  and  men  killed,  wounded, 
and  missing;  that  of  the  Confederates  to  1230  killed 
and  wounded. 

Never  before — considering  the  numbers  engaged 
— had  so  bloody  a  battle  been  fought  upon  Ameri- 
can soil ;  seldom  has  a  bloodier  one  been  fought  on 
any  modern  field. 


CHAPTER   XV. 

MCCULLOCH,   PRICE,   AND   LYON. 

McCulloch  lets  the  Union  Army  Escape — Its  Flight  to  Rolla — The 
Confederate  Government  and  McCulloch — His  Mistaken  Estimate 
of  the  Missouri  Troops — Their  Condition  and  their  true  Charac- 
ter— Sterling  Price — Lyon  wins  the  Fight  for  Missouri. 

As  SOON  as  it  was  known  that  the  Union  Army- 
was  retreating  General  Price  urged  McCulloch  to 
pursue ;  but  urged  him  in  vain,  for  McCulloch  had 
made  up  his  mind  to  advance  no  further  into 
Missouri.  It  was  a  grave  mistake  that  McCulloch 
made,  for  the  Federals  had  barely  three  thousand 
weary  and  disheartened  men,  while  the  Confeder- 
ates had  nearly  twice  that  number  of  fresh  troops. 
Twenty-seven  hundred  of  their  mounted  men,  and 
two  thousand  of  their  infantry  had  hardly  fired  a 
shot,  and  Bledsoe's  and  Reid's  batteries  were  both 
intact.  Besides  these  there  was  the  Third  Louisi- 
ana, a  splendid  regiment,  which  could  still  muster 
five  hundred  men  flushed  with  their  victories  over 
both  Plummer  and  Sigel ;  and  there  were  McRae's 
battalion,  and  O'Kane's,  which,  though  they  had 
been  under  fire,  had  not  been  scathed.  And  in  ad- 
dition  to  all   these   there  were  two  thousand  un- 


294  Tke  Fight  for  Missouri. 

armed  Missourians,  who  could  have  been  equipped 
and  sent  in  pursuit  before  sunset,  for  now  there 
were  arms  for  all,  and  to  spare. 

Price  was  still  entreating  McCulloch  to  advance 
when  they  were  informed  that  Major  Sturgis  had 
sent  an  officer  under  a  flag  of  truce  to  ask  for  the 
body  of  Lyon.  They  were  still  on  that  part  of  the 
field,  where  the  two  armies  had  come  together  again 
and  again  in  the  shock  of  battle,  and  where  the 
dead  and  the  wounded  of  both  lay  thick  under  the 
festering  rays  of  an  August  sun.  Even  the  fact — 
now  first  made  known  to  them — that  the  enemy 
had  lost  their  valiant  leader  did  not  shake  McCul- 
loch's  fixed  purpose.  He  would  not  pursue ;  but  or- 
dered the  troops,  instead,  to  care  for  the  wounded 
and  bury  the  dead. 

General  Price  thereupon  directed  me  to  identify 
Lyon's  body,  and  to  deliver  it  to  the  bearer  of  the 
flag  of  truce.  It  had  been  borne  to  the  rear  of  the 
Federal  line  of  battle,  and  there  under  the  shade  of 
an  oak  it  lay,  still  clad  in  the  captain's  uniform 
which  he  had  worn  just  two  months  before,  when, 
relying  upon  the  strength  of  his  manhood,  on  the 
might  of  his  Government,  and  on  the  justice  of  his 
cause,  he  had  boldly  defied  the  Governor  of  the 
State  and  the  Major-General  of  her  forces,  and  in 
their  presence  had  declared  war  against  Missouri 
and  against  all  who  should  dare  to  take  up  arms  in 


McCulloch,   Price  and  Lyon.  295 

her  defence.  Since  that  fateful  day  he  had  done 
many  memorable  deeds,  and  had  well  deserved  the 
gratitude  of  all  those  who  think  that  the  union  of 
these  States  is  the  chiefest  of  political  blessings,  and 
that  they  who  gave  their  lives  to  perpetuate  it 
ought  to  be  forever  held  in  honor  by  those  who  live 
under  its  flag.  The  body  was  delivered  to  the  men 
who  had  come  for  it — delivered  to  them  with  all 
the  respect  and  courtesy  which  were  due  to  a  brave 
soldier  and  the  commander  of  an  army,  and  they 
bore  it  away  toward  Springfield,  whither  the  army 
which  he  had  led  out  to  battle  was  sadly  and  sul- 
lenly retreating. 

The  Confederates  remained  upon  the  field  which 
they  had  won,  and  ministered  to  the  wounded,  and 
buried  the  dead  of  both  armies.  Before  the  unpity- 
ing  sun  had  sunk  behind  the  western  hills,  all  those 
who  had  died  for  the  Union,  and  all  those  who  had 
died  for  the  South,  had  been  laid  to  rest,  uncoffined, 
in  the  ground  which  their  manhood  had  made  mem- 
orable and  which  their  blood  had  made  sacred 
forever. 

Sturgis,  on  reaching  Springfield  about  five  o'clock 
in  the  afternoon,  turned  over  the  command  of  the 
army  to  Colonel  Sigel,  who  was  believed  to  be  the 
senior  officer.  Sigel  assumed  command  at  once, 
and,  after  consulting  with  his  chief  subordinates,  de- 


296  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

cided  to  retreat  instantly  to  Rolla,  which  was  about 
one  hundred  and  twenty-five  miles  distant.  As 
there  was  a  depot  of  supplies  at  that  point,  and  a 
railway  thence  to  St.  Louis,  the  discomfited  army 
would  there  be  comparatively  safe.  The  enormous 
army  train,  consisting  of  over  four  hundred  heavily- 
laden  wagons,  among  whose  "spoils"  were  $250,000 
in  gold  coin  that  had  been  "  taken  "  from  the  State 
Bank  at  Springfield,  took  the  road  at  once  under  a 
strong  escort.  The  rest  of  the  troops  were  ordered 
to  march  at  two  o'clock  in  the  night,  but  did  not 
begin  to  move  till  toward  daybreak.  They  soon 
became  so  inextricably  mixed  up  with  the  multi- 
tude of  fugitives,  who,  with  their  wives  and  chil- 
dren, their  horses  and  cattle,  their  wagons  and  carts 
and  household  goods,  were  flying  before  Ben 
McCulloch,  whose  very  name  was  then  a  terror  to 
the  Union  men  of  Missouri,  that  they  "more  nearly 
resembled  a  crowd  of  refugees  than  an  army  of  or- 
ganized troops."  In  this  condition  they  scampered 
along  toward  Rolla,  and  arrived  there  during  the 
evening  of  the  17th  of  August,  seven  days  after  the 
battle.  Sturgis  had  meanwhile  resumed  command, 
it  having  been  ascertained  that  Sigel's  commission 
had  expired. 

All  this  time,  during  all  this  disorderly  retreat  of 
a  defeated  army  over  difficult  roads  and  through  a 


McCulloch,   Price,   and  Lyon.  297 

not  friendly  population,  more  than  twice  its  num- 
ber of  well  mounted,  and  willing,  Southern  soldiers 
lay  absolutely  idle  at  Springfield.  They  might 
have  easily  captured  the  entire  force,  and  its  richly 
loaded  train,  worth  more  than  $1,500,000,  and  with 
the  captured  stores  could  have  armed,  equipped, 
and  supplied  ten  thousand  Confederates.  But 
McCulloch  sulked  in  his  tent,  and  his  army  melted 
away. 

Nothing  excuses  that  brave  soldier's  conduct  on 
this  occasion  except  the  fact  that  the  Confederate 
Government  was  then  opposed  to  an  aggressive  war, 
and  therefore  objected  to  the  invasion  of  any  State 
which  had  not  seceded  and  joined  the  Confederacy. 
In  entering  Missouri  at  all  he  had  violated  both 
the  orders  under  which  he  was  acting,  and  the 
wishes  of  the  Confederate  Secretary  of  War,  who 
had  expressly  cautioned  him  to  remember  that  the 
main  purpose  of  his  command  was  to  protect  the 
Indian  Territory,  and  had  instructed  him  to  assist 
the  Missourians  only  when  such  assistance  would 
subserve  that  "  main  purpose."  But  even  these  in- 
structions hardly  justify  McCulloch's  refusal  to 
gather  the  fruits  of  a  victory  which  had  been  won  at 
the  cost  of  so  many  lives  and  so  much  suffering, 
fruits  which  would  have  have  been  so  valuable  to 
the  Confederacy,  and  which  he  could  have  gathered 
so  easily  and  so  abundantly. 


298  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

He  would,  perhaps,  have  pursued  even  at  the  risk 
of  displeasing  his  Government,  had  he  not  by  this 
time  become  so  prejudiced  against  the  Missourians 
as  to  be  wholly  unable  to  recognize  the  skill  with 
which  they  had  been  commanded,  and  the  courage 
and  constancy  with  which  they  had  fought  on 
Bloody  Hill,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the 
battle.  The  distrust  which  he  conceived  the  first 
moment  that  he  saw  their  unorganized  condition, 
and  which  had  been  increased  by  the  behavior  of  a 
few  of  them  at  Dug  Springs,  had  gone  on  increas- 
ing day  by  day  ever  since,  and  reached  its  height 
when,  through  his  own  fault,  his  army  was  com- 
pletely surprised  by  Lyon  and  Sigel  on  the  morning 
of  the  battle.  "The  fault  was  theirs;"  he  said  to 
the  Secretary  of  War,  "  the  two  extremes  of  the 
camp  were  composed  of  mounted  men  from  Mis- 
souri, and  it  was  their  duty  to  have  kept  pickets 
upon  the  roads  on  which  the  enemy  advanced." 
Though  he  ought  to  have  known  that  one  of  these 
two  extremes — the  right — was  composed  of  Texans 
and  Arkansians  of  his  own  brigade,  and  that  in  any 
case  it  was  his  own  duty  to  have  kept  his  camp 
properly  guarded,  he  unjustly  attributed  the  blun- 
der to  the  Missourians  alone,  and  distrusted  and  dis- 
liked them  more  than  ever.  Nor  could  he  keep  con- 
trasting their  condition  with  that  of  his  own  well- 
organized,  well-disciplined,  well-equipped,  and  finely 


McCulloch,   Price,   and  Lyon.  299 

uniformed  brigade,  with  its  full  complement  of 
quarter-masters,  commissaries  and  ordnance  officers, 
unlimited  supplies  of  all  kinds,  and  an  overflowing 
army-chest.  Many  of  them  had  not  even  enlisted, 
but  had  only  come  out  to  fight ;  thousands  of  them 
had  not  been  organized  into  regiments  ;  many  of 
them  were  unarmed  ;  none  of  them  were  uniformed  ; 
very  few  of  them  had  been  drilled.  Their  arms 
were  mostly  shot-guns  and  rifles,  and  they  had 
no  other  equipments  of  any  kind ;  no  tents  at  all ; 
no  supplies  of  any  sort,  and  no  depots  from  which 
to  draw  subsistence,  or  clothing,  or  ammunition,  or 
anything.  They  had  no  muster-rolls  and  they  made 
no  morning  reports.  They  bivouacked  in  the  open 
air,  they  subsisted  on  the  ripening  corn,  and  they 
foraged  their  horses  on  the  prairie-grass.  McCul- 
loch  was  not  wise  enough  to  see  that  they  were,  in 
despite  of  all  these  drawbacks,  true  soldiers,  as  brave 
as  the  bravest,  and  as  good  as  the  best,  and  he  still 
distrusted  them,  even  after  they  had  unflinchingly 
borne  the  brunt  of  the  battle  for  five  hours,  and 
with  the  aid  of  Churchill,  Gratiot,  and  Woodruff, 
had  won  the  main  fight  on  Bloody  Hill. 

Both  Schofield  and  Sturgis  say  in  their  reports  of 
the  battle  that  after  the  death  of  Lyon,  "  the 
fiercest  and  most  bloody  engagement  of  the  day 
took  place  ;  "  and  that  then  "  for  the  first  time  dur- 


300  The  Fight  for  Missouri. 

ing  the  day,  the  Union  line  maintained  its  position 
with  perfect  firmness,  till  finally  the  enemy  gave 
way  and  fled  from  the  field  ;  "  that  "  The  order  to 
retreat  was  then  given  by  Sturgis,"  and  the  whole 
column  moved  slowly  to  the  high,  open  prairie,  and 
thence  to  Springfield.  Though  these  statements 
were  doubtless  believed  at  the  time,  the  officers 
who  made  them  would  hardly  repeat  them  now.  If 
they  had  "  driven  the  enemy  precipitately  from  the 
field,"  they  themselves  would  not  have  fled  in  such 
trepidation  as  to  leave  behind  the  dead  body  of 
their  heroic  commander. 

The  Union  Army  did  leave  in  good  order,  but  it 
left  in  a  hurry ;  and  Price,  instead  of  being  driven 
from  the  field,  was  still  holding  the  line  that  he  had 
taken  at  the  beginning  of  the  battle,  nor  had  he 
been  driven  back  one  hundred  yards  from  this  line 
at  any  time  during  the  entire  day.  But  it  is  very 
easy  to  be  mistaken  as  to  what  your  enemy  is  doing 
on  a  battle-field,  as  any  one  can  see  who  will  take 
the  trouble  to  study  the  reports  of  any  hotly  con- 
tested fight.  Federals  and  Confederates  alike  made 
many  such  mistakes. 

It  is  a  noteworthy  fact  that  the  little  army  which 
fought  under  Lyon  against  Price  and  McCulloch  fur- 
nished at  least  seven  major-generals  and  thirteen 
brigadier-generals  to  the  Union.   Among  the  former 


McCullock,   Price,   and  Lyon.  301 

were  Schofield,  Stanley,  Steele,  Sigel,  Granger,  Os- 
terhaus,  and  Herron ;  and  among  the  latter  were 
Sturgis,  Carr,  Plummer,  Mitchell,  Sweeny,  Totten, 
Gilbert,  and  Powell  Clayton. 

Among  the  Confederates  who  became  General 
officers  in  their  service  were  McCulloch,  Mcintosh, 
Churchill,  Greer,  Gratiot,  Dockery,  Hebert,  and 
McRae.  Among  the  Missourians  who  rose  to  that 
grade  were  Price,  Parsons,  Slack,  Shelby,  John  B. 
Clark,  Jr.,  Colton  Greene,  and  Cockrell.  Clark, 
who  was  one  of  the  most  gallant  of  soldiers,  is  now 
Clerk  of  the  United  States  House  of  Representa- 
tives, and  Cockrell  is  a  Senator  from  Missouri. 

Out  of  the  dust  and  smoke  and  out  of  the  din 
and  carnage  of  the  battle  Sterling  Price  emerged 
the  leader  of  his  people.  Never  till  now  had  they 
known  him.  That  he  was  just  and  upright,  that  he 
had  been  a  successful  general  in  the  war  with  Mexi- 
co, that  he  had  governed  Missouri  wisely  and  well  for 
four  years,  and  was  a  man  to  be  trusted  at  all  times 
and  in  all  circumstances  they  knew ;  but  not  till  now 
had  they  seen  him  display  that  genius  for  war  which 
fitted  him  for  the  command  of  great  armies.  Calm, 
quiet  and  unimpassioned  in  the  affairs  of  every-day 
life,  and  somewhat  slow  of  thought  and  of  speech, 
the  storm  of  battle  aroused  all  the  faculties  of  his  soul, 
and  made  him  "  a  hero  in  the  strife."  When  friends 
and  foes  were  falling  fast  around  him,  and  Life  and 


302  The  Fight  for   Missouri. 

Death  waited  upon  his  words,  then  it  was  that  he  saw 
as  by  intuition  what  was  best  to  be  done,  and  did  it 
on  the  instant,  with  the  calmness  of  conscious 
strength,  and  with  all  a  soldier's  might.  Of  danger 
he  seemed  to  take  no  note,  but  he  had  none  of  that 
brilliant  dash,  of  that  fine  frenzy  of  the  fight,  which 
men  call  gallantry,  for  he  was  great  rather  than  bril- 
liant. He  was  wise,  too,  and  serenely  brave,  quick 
to  see,  prompt  to  act,  and  always  right.  From  this 
time  he  was  loved  and  trusted  by  his  soldiers,  as  no 
Missourian  had  ever  been  ;  and  never  thereafter  did 
he  lose  their  trust  and  devotion,  for  throughout  all 
the  long  years  of  war — years  crowded  with  victories 
and  with  defeats — the  virtues  which  he  displayed 
that  day  grew  more  conspicuous  all  the  time,  while 
around  them  clustered  others  which  increased  the 
splendor  of  these — unselfish  devotion  to  his  native 
land,  unending  care  for  the  men  who  fought  under 
his  flag,  constancy  under  defeat,  patience  under 
wrongs  that  were  grievous,  justice  toward  all  men, 
and  kindness  toward  every  one. 

In  its  flight  from  Springfield  the  Union  Army  had 
again  left  the  body  of  its  General  to  the  care  of  his 
foes.  These  caused  it  to  be  decently  buried  near 
the  home  of  one  of  his  friends. 

Lyon  had  not  fought  and  died  in  vain.  Through 
him  the  rebellion  which  Blair  had  organized,  and  to 


McCulloch,   Price,  and  Lyon.  303 

which  he  had  himself  given  force  and  strength,  had 
succeeded  at  last.  By  capturing  the  State  militia 
at  Camp  Jackson,  and  driving  the  Governor  from 
the  Capital,  and  all  his  troops  into  the  uttermost 
corner  of  the  State,  and  by  holding  Price  and 
McCulloch  at  bay,  he  had  given  the  Union  men  of 
Missouri  time,  opportunity,  and  courage  to  bring 
their  State  Convention  together  again ;  and  had 
given  the  Convention  an  excuse  and  the  power  to 
depose  Governor  Jackson  and  Lieutenant-Governor 
Reynolds,  to  vacate  the  seats  of  the  members  of  the 
General  Assembly,  and  to  establish  a  State  Govern- 
ment, which  was  loyal  to  the  Union,  and  which 
would  use  the  whole  organized  power  of  the  State, 
its  Treasury,  its  Credit,  its  Militia,  and  all  its  great 
resources,  to  sustain  the  Union  and  crush  the  South. 
All  this  had  been  done  while  Lyon  was  boldly  con- 
fronting the  overwhelming  strength  of  Price  and 
McCulloch.  Had  he  abandoned  Springfield  instead, 
and  opened  to  Price  a  pathway  to  the  Missouri;  had 
he  not  been  willing  to  die  for  the  freedom  of  the 
negro,  and  for  the  preservation  of  the  Union,  none 
of  these  things  would  have  then  been  done.  By 
wisely  planning,  by  boldly  doing,  and  by  bravely 
dying,  he  had  won  the  fight  for  Missouri. 


APPENDIX. 


THE  BATTLE  OF  WILSON'S  CREEK. 
THE   FORCES   ENGAGED. 


CONFEDERATES. 

No  one  will  ever  be  able  to  state  with  absolute  certainty  the 
exact  strength  of  the  Confederate  forces  which  were  at  Wilson's 
Creek  on  the  ioth  of  August,  1861,  inasmuch  as  the  records  of  both 
McCulloch's  and  Pearce's  Brigades  have  been  lost,  and  as  no  trust- 
worthy enumeration  of  the  Missouri  State  Guard  was  ever  made 
until  after  the  battle. 

The  following  tables  may,  however,  be  relied  upon  as  stating  with 
sufficient  accuracy  the  number  of  officers  and  men  who  were  "  pres- 
ent for  duty  "  on  that  day — that  is  to  say  the  number  that  might 
have  been  put  into  the  fight.  The  computation  excludes,  of  course, 
all  men  without  arms,  all  sick  men,  and  all  men  detailed  as  team- 
sters or  for  extra  duty  of  any  kind. 

• 

McCulloch's  Brigade. 

McCulloch  reported  on  the  30th  of  July  to  the  War  Department 
that  his  brigade  aggregated  about  thirty-two  hundred  men.  Whether 
this  included  Greer's  Regiment,  which  did  not  join  him  till  the  3d 
of  August,  I  cannot  discover  ;  but  it  probably  did,  as  the  brigade 
reported  only  twenty-five  hundred  men  "fit  for  duty"  a  few  days 
after  the  battle.     We  know  that  Churchill's  Regiment  aggregated 


306  Appendix. 

seven  hundred  and  sixty-eight  officers  and  men  "  present  and  ab- 
sent." Of  these,  nearly  two  hundred  were  either  absent,  sick,  or  on 
extra  duty,  and  more  than  seventy-five  were  detailed  to  hold  the 
horses  of  those  who  were  dismounted  for  the  battle.  This  reduced 
its  effective  strength  to  about  five  hundred  men,  at  the  time  that  it 
went  into  action  on  Bloody  Hill.  Colonel  Churchill  (since  then 
Brigadier-general  and  Governor),  informs  me  that  it  was  hardly  as 
strong  as  that.  The  Third  Louisiana  aggregated  eight  hundred  and 
sixty-eight  officers  and  men,  but  there  were  not  more  than  seven 
hundred  "  present  for  duty." 

Pearce's  Brigade. 

The  strength  of  this  brigade  was  greatly  weakened  by  the  preva- 
lence of  a  virulent  form  of  measles.  McCulloch  said  on  the  30th  of 
July  that  it  numbered  about  twenty-five  hundred  men.  This  is  the 
only  trustworthy  statement  that  I  have  seen  about  it,  except  that 
Gratiot's  Regiment  aggregated  six  hundred  and  twenty-nine  officers 
and  men.  He  tells  me  that  his  "  effective  strength  "  on  the  day  of 
the  battle  was  less  than  five  hundred. 

The  Missouri  State  Guard. 

Immediately  after  the  battle,  I  took  great  pains  to  ascertain  accur- 
ately how  many  officers  and  men  of  this  command  were  "  present  for 
duty  "  when  the  battle  was  fought.  The  results  are  stated  in  Gen- 
eral Price's  report,  and  in  other  contemporaneous  records,  and  there- 
fore I  am  sure  that  the  following  Tables  are  essentially  correct  so  far 
as  they  relate  to  the  strength  and  casualties  of  the  State  Guard. 
They  do  not  include  the  unarmed  men  of  whom  there  were  about 
two  thousand,  many  of  them  with  their  commands. 

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  in  the  Confederate  Records,  this 
battle  is  known  as  the  Battle  of  the  Oak  Hills,  which  was  the  name 
given  to  it  by  McCulloch.     In  Price's  report  it  was  called  the  Battle 

of  Springfield. 


Appendix.  307 


THE  UNION  FORCES. 

General  Lyon,  in  a  report  made  to  Major-General  Fremont  on  the 
4th  of  August,  estimated  his  own  forces  as  follows  : 

The  First  Missouri . goo 

Osterhaus'  Battalion 200 

The  First  Iowa goo 

The  First  Kansas 800 

The  Second  Kansas 600 

Steele's  Battalion 300 

Plummer's  Battalion 350 

Totten's  Battery 84 

Dubois'  Battery 64 

Four  Companies  United  States  Cavalry 250 

Third  Missouri 700 

Fifth  Missouri 600 

Second  Missouri  Artillery  (Sigel) 120 


5,868 
And  beside  these  there  were  of  Home  Guards  about     1,250 


7,138 


From  other  Official  Records  it  appears  that  the  force  with  which 
Lyon  left  Booneville  consisted  of 

Brigadier-General  and  Staff 4 

First  Missouri  Regiment 8g5 

Osterhaus'  Battalion 211 

First  Iowa  Regiment g26 

Regulars,  Infantry 243 

Regulars,  Artillery 75 

Aggregate 2,354 


308  Appendix. 

Aggregate  brought  forward 2,354 

And  that  Sturgis'  Column  consisted  of    Reg- 
ulars       943 

First  and  Second  Kansas  Regiments 1,600 

Aggregate 2,543 

In  addition  to  these  there  was   Sigel's   Brigade   as 

above 1,420 

Making  an  aggregate  of 6,317 

Home  Guards 1,250 

7,567 


Schofield,  who  was  then  Adjutant-General  of  Lyon's  Army, 
says  that  the  column  which  Lyon  moved  out  to  Wilson's  Creek 
11  amounted  to  about  four  thousand  men,  besides  about  two  hun- 
dred and  fifty  Home  Guards."  Sturgis  and  others  say  that  it 
consisted  of  thirty-seven  hundred  "  men  "  exclusive  of  the  Home 
Guards.  Schofield  knew  better  than  any  one  else  the  force  that 
Lyon  led  out  to  battle.  The  apparent  discrepancy  between  him 
and  Sturgis  is  reconciled  by  assuming  that  Schofield  gives  the 
"  aggregate "  of  officers  and  men,  while  Sturgis,  as  the  context 
shows,  gives  "  the  effective  total  "  of  the  force,  that  is  to  say  the 
men,  exclusive  of  officers. 

Sigel's  column  was  generally  estimated  by  the  other  Union  officers 
at  thirteen  hundred  men,  but  I  have  followed  his  own  report  in  the 
main,  and  put  his  strength  at  twelve  hundred  officers  and  men. 
The  "  effective  total "  of  his  two  infantry  regiments  was  nine  hun- 
dred and  eighteen  men.  These,  with  their  full  complement  of  offi- 
cers and  his  battalion  of  artillery,  would  aggregate  about  ten  hundred 
and  seventy-five  officers  and  men.  Carr's  squadron  of  cavalry  would 
raise  the  aggregate  to  twelve  hundred. 


Appendix.  309 


UNION  FORCES  AT  THE  BATTLE  OF  WILSON'S 
CREEK. 

I.  Lyon's  Column. 

First  Missouri  Volunteers,  Lieutenant-Colonel  George  L.  Andrews. 

Osterhaus'  Battalion  'vtwo  companies  Second  Missouri  Volunteers), 
Major  P.  J.  Osterhaus. 

First  Iowa  Infantry,  Lieutenant-Colonel  William  H.  Merritt. 

First  Kansas  Infantry,  Colonel  George  W.  Deitzler. 

Second  Kansas  Infantry,  Colonel  Robert  B.  Mitchell. 

Plummer's  Battalion  (Companies  B,  C,  and  D,  First  United  States 
Infantry  and  one  company  Recruits). 

Steele's  Battalion  (Companies  B  and  E,  Second  United  States  In- 
fantry, and  two  companies  Recruits). 

Company  F,  Second  United  States  Artillery,  six  guns,  Captain 
James  Totten. 

Light  Battery,  United  States  Artillery,  four  guns,  Lieutenant  John 
V.  Dubois. 

Company  D,  First  United  States  Cavalry,  Lieutenant  Charles  W. 
Canfield. 

Captain  Henry  C .  Wood's  Company  Kansas  Mounted  Rangers. 

Captain  Clark  Wright's  Squadron  of  Home  Guards. 


II.  Sigel's  Column. 

Third  Regiment  Missouri  Volunteers,  Colonel  Franz  Sigel. 
Fifth  Regiment  Missouri  Volunteers,  Colonel  C.  E.  Salomon. 
Light  Battery,  six  guns,  Lieutenants  Schaefer  and  Schuetzenbach. 
Company  I,  First  United  States  Cavalry,  Captain  Eugene  A.  Carr. 
Company  C,  Second  United  States  Dragoons,  Lieutenant  Charles  E. 
Farrand. 


3io 


Appendix. 


UNION  FORCES  AT  WILSON'S  CREEK— STRENGTH 
AND  CASUALTIES  OF  EACH  COMxMAND. 


LYON'S  COLUMN. 


/.  Main  Body  in  fight  on  Bloody  Hill. 

i  First  Missouri 

2  Osterhaus'  Battalion 

3  First   Iowa  Infantry 

4  First  Kansas  Infantry 

5  Second  Kansas  Infantry 

6  Steele's  Battalion 

7  Totten's  Battery,  6  guns 

8  Dubois'  Battery,  4  guns 

Total  on  Bloody  Hill 

II  Left  Wing,  East  of  Creek. 

Plummer's  Battalion 

III.  Mounted  Reserve. 

Comp'y  D,  1st  U.  S.  Cavalry) 

Kansas  Rangers  >• 

Home  Guards  ) 

Total — Lyon's  Column 


$1 

< 


775 
150 
800 
800 
600 
275 
84 
66 


3,550 


300 


35o 


4,200 


204 


19 


223 


208 

40 

138 

187 

59 

44 

7 

2 


685 


52 


74i 


44 


295 

55 

154 

284 

70 

61 

ii 

3 


933 


80 


56  1,020 


SIGEL'S  COLUMN. 

1,075 

65 
60 

35 

132 

126 
4 

293 
4 

Company  I,  First  U.  S.  Cavalry 

Company  C,  Second  U.  S.  Dragoons 

Total — Sigel's  Column 

1,200 

35 

132 

130 

297 

4,200 
1,200 

223 
35 

74i 
132 

56 
130 

186 

1,020 

297 

Total 

5,400 

258 

873 

1,317 

Appendix.  3 1 1 


CONFEDERATE  FORCES  AT  THE  BATTLE  OF  WIL- 
SON'S CREEK. 

I.  McCulloch's  Confederate  Brigade. 

1  Third  Louisiana  Infantry,  Colonel  Louis  Hebert. 

2  Battalion     Arkansas     Infantry,     Lieutenant-Colonel     Dandridge 

McRae. 

3  First  Regiment  Arkansas  Mounted  Riflemen,  Colonel  Thomas  J. 

Churchill. 

4  Second   Regiment   Arkansas    Mounted    Riflemen,  Colonel   James 

Mcintosh. 

5  South  Kansas-Texas  Regiment  (Mounted),  Colonel  E.  Greer. 

II.  Pearce's  Brigade,  Army  of  Arkansas. 

1  Third  Arkansas  Infantry,  Colonel  John  R.  Gratiot. 

2  Fourth  Arkansas  Infantry,  Colonel  J.  D.  Walker. 

3  Fifth  Arkansas  Infantry,  Colonel  Tom  P.  Dockery. 

4  First  Arkansas  Cavalry,  Colonel  DeRosey  Carroll. 

5  Company  Arkansas  Cavalry,  Captain  Charles  A.  Carroll. 

6  Light  Battery,  Captain  Wm.  E.  Woodruff,  4  guns. 

7  Light  Battery,  Captain  J.  G.  Reid,  4  guns. 

III.  The  Missouri  State  Guard,  Major-General  Sterling 
Price. 

1  Brigadier-General  James  S.  Rains'  command. 
Infantry  Brigade,  Colonel  Richard  H.  Weightman. 
Mounted  Brigade,  Colonel  Cawthon. 

2  Brigadier-General  Monroe  M.  Parsons'  command. 

3  Brigadier-General  John  B.  Clark's  command. 

4  Brigadier-General  William  Y.  Slack's  command. 

5  Brigadier- General  James  Ff.  McBride's  command. 

Note.— The  Missouri  commands  were  territorial,  each  brigadier-general 
having  command  of  the  troops  raised  within  his  military  district.  Parsons, 
Clark,  and  McBride  had  respectively  only  531,  552,  and  649  officers  and  men  on 
the  field,  and  Slack  only  940,  but  their  commands  were  called  divisions. 
Their  regiments  consisted  of  only  eight  companies  of  fifty  men  each,  present 
and  absent. 


312 


Appendix. 


STRENGTH  AND  CASUALTIES  OF  THE  CONFEDERATE 
FORCES  AT  WILSON'S  CREEK. 


I.  McCullocKs  Btigade 

Third  Louisiana  Infantry 

McRae's  Battalion 

Churchili's  Regiment 

Mcintosh's  Regiment 

Greer's  Regiment 

II.   Pearce's  Btigade. 

Gratiot's  Regiment 

Walker's   Regiment 

Dockery's  Regiment 

Carroll's  Regiment 

Carroll's  Company 

Woodruff's  Battery,  4  guns. .    . 
Reid's  Battery,  4  guns 


III.    The  Missouri  State  Guard. 

Rains'  Command 

Parsons'  Command     

Clark's  Command 

Slack's  Command 

M  cBride's  Command 

Resume. 

I.  McCulloch's   Brigade 

II.   Pearce's  Brigade 

III.   Missouri  State  Guard 

Total 


J?  at* 

SoPu  fc 
<      «2 


70O 
220 
600 
400 
800 


2,720 


500 
550 
650 
350 
40 
71 

73 


2,234 


68 


36 


48 

6 

155 

44 

23 


276 


118 


12 

1 

2 

2,537 

59 

186 

53i 

17 

5i 

552 

23 

86 

940 

43 

114 

649 

32 

118 

5,221 

175 

557 

2,720 
2,234 
5,221 

68 
36 

175 

276 
118 

557 

io,i75 

279 

95i 

Appendix. 


313 


THE  MISSOURI  STATE  GUARD  AT  WILSON'S  CREEK. 


facu  , 

13 
U 

g 

Major-General  Price  and  Staff. . 
I.  Rains'  Command 

Infty.  &  Art'y 
Mounted 

Infantry 
Mounted 
Artillery 

Infantry 
Mounted 

Infantry  ) 
Infantry  ) 
Mounted 

Infantry ) 
Infantry  \ 
Mounted 

12 
II 

I,3l6 

I,2IO 

8 

142 

320 

61 

9 

270 

273 

6 

650 

284 

4 

605 
40 

I 

40 

21 
II 

3 
3 

17 

6 

1 

36 
4 

32 

2 

I 

120 

66 

38 

2 

11 

2 

81 
5 

1 

106 

8 

114 

3 
i 

1  Weightman's  Brigade,  3  guns. 

160 

87 

49 
5 

14 
2 

98 
11 

II.  Parsons'  Command 

1  Kelly's  Regiment  (6  Cos.)  . . . 

2  Brown's  Regiment       ) 

and  3  Companies     ) 

3  Guibor's  Battery,  4  guns 

III.  Clark's  Command 

1  Burbidge's  Regiment    

2  Major's  Battalion 

IV.   Slack's  Command 

2 

2  Thornton's  Battalion 

142 

12 

V.  Mc Bride's    Com?nand.  . .  . 
1  Wingo's  Regiment 

146 

3  Campbell's  Company 

5,221 

175 

557 

732 

314 


Appendix. 


CONFEDERATE  TROOPS   ENGAGED  ON   BLOODY  HILL 


< 

*d 

5 

•6 

V 

•a 
0 

CO 

/.  Missouri  State  Guard. 
General  and  Staff 

12 
II 

720 
600 

8 

142 

61 

9 

270 

6 

650 

70 

4 

605 

1 

38 
19 

11 

3 

17 

1 

36 
3 

32 

2 

97 
60 

38 
11 

2 

81 

1 

106 
6 

114 

3 

Weightman's  Brigade  (2  Regim'ts). . 
Cawthon's  Brigade,  Dismounted. . .  . 

135 
79 

Guibor's  Battery,  4  guns 

id. 

2 

Burbidge's  Regiment 

98 
2 

Hughes'  Regiment  and ) 

142 
9 

Thornton's  Battalion ) 
Rives'  Regiment,  Dismounted 

Wingo's  and  Foster's  Regiments.  . .  . 

146 

II.  Arkansas  Troops. 

3,168 

161 

519 

680 

Churchill's  Regiment    

500 
571 

42 
26 

155 
85 

197 
in 

Gratiot's  Regiment      ) 

Woodruff's  Battery      J"  4  ^ns 

Total 

1,071 

68 

240 

308 

3,168 
1,071 

161 
68 

519 
240 

680 

Arkansians 

308 

4,239 
3.550 

229 
204 

759 
685 

988 
892 

Union  Force  on  Bloody  Hill 

Appendix. 


315 


FORCES  WHICH  FOUGHT  EAST  OF  THE  CREEK. 


0) 

tyoQL, 

*d 

19 

i 

•a 
c 

52 

hi 

c 

'55 
w 

co 

11 

UNION   FORCE. 

Plummets  Battalion 

30O 

9 

80 

CONFEDERATE   FORCE. 

700 
400 

9 
10 

48 
44 

57 
54 

Mcintosh's  Regiment 

I  TOO 

19 

92 

in 

CONFEDERATE  COMMANDS  WHICH  WERE  ONLY 
SLIGHTLY  ENGAGED. 


*2 

r*  co 


/.  Infantry. 

Graves'  Regiment,  Missourians. , 
Rosser's  Command,  Missourians 
McRae's  Battalion,  Arkansians  . 
Dockery's  Regiment,  Arkansians 
Walker's  Regiment,  Arkansians. 

II.  Mounted  Men. 

Missourians 

Texans 

Arkansians 

II L  Artillery. 

Reid's  Battery,  4  guns 

Bledsoe's  Battery,  3  guns 


0 

l\ 

bo" 
hfpH 

•d 

1 

T3 

C 

1 

271 

300 

2 

23 

220 

3 

6 

650 

3 

II 

550 

1,447 
800 

10 
4 

7 
23 

390 

5 

22 

73 

35 

4,736 

27 

92 

25 

9 
14 


Note.— Rosser's  Command,  which  formed  part  of  Weightman's  Brigade, 
consisted  of  fifty  men  of  his  own  regiment,  O' Kane's  Battalion  (Major 
Thomas  H.  Murray),  and  Bledsoe's  3-gun  Battery.  Bledsoe's  losses  are  in- 
cluded in  Rosser's. 


INDEX. 


Alabama,  35,  59,  73. 
Allen,  George  W.,  286. 
Anderson,  Robert,  8-11,  29,  141. 
Andrews,  George  L.,  166,  309. 
Arkansas,  73,  144,  161,  194,  195, 

229,  234.      See  Pearce's  Brigade 

and  McCulloch's  Brigade. 
Armstrong,  David  H.,  197. 
Arsenal,  St.  Louis,  100-118,  124- 

138,  147-157. 
Arsenal,   Liberty,   148,   152,   156, 

185. 
Atchison,  David  R.,  53,  224. 

Backoff,  Major,  211,  225. 
Barlow,  Wm.  P.,  217,  241. 
Barret,  J.  Richard,  197. 
Barret,  Overton  W.,  in. 
Bast,  G.  Y.,  81. 

Bates,  Edward,  57,  184,  189,  219. 
Battles,  etc.  : 

Booneville,  211-15. 

Carthage,  222-228. 

Cole  Camp,  216. 

Dug  Spring,  254,  298. 

Rock  Creek,  208,  209,  289. 

Wilson's  Creek,  268-315. 
Black,  J.  S.,  8. 
Blair,  Jr.,  Francis  P.,  57,  58,  64- 

66,   68,   96,   104-106,   126,  129, 

130,     131,     135-137,     154-157, 

160,    164-169,    176,    183,    188- 

194,    198-200,    203,    214,    219, 

220,  230,  252,  302. 
Blair's  Regiment,    165,   an,  269, 

274,  291,  307,  309,  310. 
Blair,  Montgomery,  156,  189. 
Blaine,  James  G.,  89,  141,  142. 
Bell,  John,  12. 


Bell,  Wm.  H.,  100,  114-117. 
Bernays,  Dr.,  189. 
Beauregard,  P.  G.  T.,  73. 
Benton,  Thomas  H.,  17,  89. 
Bledsoe,    Hiram,    219,  224,    279, 

280,  293,  313,  315. 
Bledsoe's  Battery.      See  Bledsoe. 
Breckinridge,    John   C,    12,    31, 

183. 
Boernstein,  Henry,  2. 
Boernstein's  Regiment,  211. 
Border   Slave    States,    20,  42-44, 

59,  70,  81,  92,  143. 
Bowen  John  S.,  149,  152,  171. 
Booneville,  206-215. 
Brown,  Joseph  E.,  34. 
Brown,  B.  Gratz,  210. 
Brown's    Regiment,    219,    225-6, 

259,  272,  313,  314. 
Brown,  Benjamin,  287. 
Brownlee,  John  A.,  137,  147,  148, 

155. 

Broadhead,  James  O.,  79,  81,  87, 
88,  105,  165,  169,  190. 

Buchanan,  James,  4-1 1,  27-29, 
35,  36,  70,  102,  116,  130. 

Buckner,  A.  H.,  61. 

Bulletin,  The,  54. 

Burbridge  John  Q.,217,  219,  225, 
273,  287,  313,  314. 

Burbridge's  Regiment.  See  Bur- 
bridge. 

Cairo,  194,  221,  252. 

Camp  Jackson,  149,  152,  163-172, 

178,  181,  214,  260,  262,  303. 
Cameron,   Simon,  142,   154,    156, 

164,  190,  191. 
Campbell,  Robert,  44. 


318 


Index. 


Carlisle,  James  H.,  137,  155. 

Carr,  Eugene  A.,  221,  281,  291, 
301,  308-310. 

Carroll's  Regiment  (De  Rosey), 
236,  282,  283,  311,  312,  315. 

Campbell's  Company,  313. 

Carroll's  (Charles  A.)  Company. 

Carthage.      See  Battles,  etc. 

Cass,  Lewis,  8. 

Cassville,  246. 

Cawthon,  Colonel,  219,  260,  268, 
274,  287,311,  313,  314. 

Cawthon's  Brigade.  See  Caw- 
thon. 

Champion,  Rock,  no,  133. 

Claiborne,  N.  C,  67,  75. 

Clark,  John  B.,  181,  184,  185, 
207-9,  2I5>  219,  225-6,  260, 
262,  273,  287,  311-14. 

Clark,  Jr.,  John  B.,  301 

Clark,  M.  Lewis,  184. 

Clayton,  Powell,  301. 

Clarkson's  (J.  J.)  Regiment,  273. 

Crane  Creek,  253,  254. 

Crittenden's  Compromise,  5,  6, 
45,  56,81. 

Coalter,  John  D.,  60. 

Cobb,  Howell,  8. 

Cockrell,  Francis  M.,  301. 

Coercion,  4,  7,  21,  26,  32,  33,  36, 
37,  40,  42-46,  50,  51,  55,  63,  64, 
70,  7f,  74,  76,  81-88,  178. 

Cotton  States,  4,  6,  16, 20,  29,  143. 

Cole  Camp,  216. 

Conant,  Horace  L.,  198,  200. 

Conditional  Union  Men,  53-56, 
61-64,  83. 

Confederate  Government,  59,  72, 
139-140,  161,  167,  168,  207, 
231-5,  244,  297-8. 

Congress,  U.  S. ,  4,  70,  73. 

Conrad,  Captain,  223,  237. 

Conrow,  A.  H.,  75. 

Conventions.  See  Missouri,  Nashr 
ville,  Wheeling,  and  Peace  Con- 
gress. 

Cook,  Colonel,  216. 

Cooke,  Wm.  M.,  147,  151. 

Cowskin  Prairie,   235,  239,  246. 

Cunningham,  J.  F.,  51. 

Curtis,  Samuel  R.,  195,  221. 


Churchill,  Samuel  B.,  67. 
Churchill,        Thomas     J.         See 

Churchill's  Regiment. 
Churchill's    Regiment,    229,  230, 

235-7»  259,   261,  270-2,  281-3, 

291,    298,    299,   301,  305,  306, 

311,  312,  314. 

Davis,  Jefferson,  72, 139-140,  150, 

167-8. 
Departments,  Military,  99. 

of  the  Ohio,  219. 

of  the  West,  99,  156, 

157,180,189-192, 

219. 

Western,  220,  252. 

Deitzler,  Geo.  W.,  160,  195,  309. 

Dick,  Franklin  A.,  167,  188,  189. 

Dockery's    (Tom    P.)    Regiment, 

276,  282,  288,   301,   311,    312, 

315- 
Doniphan,  Alexander  W.,  54,  60, 

81,  183,  184. 
Douglas,   Stephen  A.,  12,  31,  89, 

143,  160,  182. 
DuBois'  (John  V.)  Battery,   274, 

277,  278,  307,  309,  310. 
Dug  Spring,  254,  298. 

Duke,  Basil  Wilson,  108,  III,  133, 
136,  148,  150,  155,  167,  168. 

Essig's  (Christian)    Battery,    226, 

227. 
Everett,  Edward,  41. 
Examiner,  The,  54. 

Freeman,  Thomas  W. ,  67. 
Filley,  Oliver  D.,  33,  34,  90,  105, 

165,  169. 
Fremont,  John  C,  220,  252,  253, 

263,  266. 
Forts,  Leavenworth,  160, 194, 195, 
209,  221. 
Smith,  229. 
Scott,  231,  232. 
Sumter,  9-1 1,  28,  38,   140, 

141. 
Southern,  7-1 1,   27-29,  34, 
35-33. 
Foster,  Colonel,  287. 
Foster's  Regiment,  313-314. 


Index. 


319 


Florida,  35,  38,  59,  73- 
Floyd,  John  B.,  g,  10. 
Frost,   Daniel  M.,   111-116,  147- 

152,  163-4,  170,  171. 
Frost's    Brigade,     111-113,    134, 

149,  154,  161,  166,  170,  171. 
Fugitive  Slave  Law,  3,  62,  159. 

Gamble,  Hamilton  R.,  44,  54,  56, 

79.  81,  183,  189,  219. 
Gantt,  Thomas  T.,  197. 
Granger,  Gordon,  222,  282,  301. 
Gratiot,  John  R.,  236,   283,  287, 

301. 
GiAtiot's  Regiment,  236,  276,  277, 

282-4,  288,  299,  306,  311,  312, 

314- 
Graves'  (John  R.)  Regiment,  282, 

315- 
Georgia,  34,  59,  69,  73. 
Germans,  65,    105,  166,  171,  174, 

175,  207,  249. 
Glenn,  Luther  J.,  69-72. 
Greeley,  Horace,  6. 
Green,  James  S.,   53,  88-90,  183. 
Greene,  Colton,  109, 133-135,  148, 

150,  167,  168,  230,  301. 
Greer's  Regiment,  229,  255,  261, 

270,  272,  281-3,  290,  298,  301, 

305,  311,  312,  315. 
Gibson's  Mill,  260,  268,  269. 
Gilbert,  C.  C.,  301. 
Glover,  Samuel  T.,  105,  165,  169, 

170. 
Guibor,  Henry,  217,  242. 
Guibor's  Battery,  217,  219,  224-5, 

273,  275,  313,  314. 

Hagner,  Peter  V.,  117,  118,  124, 
125,  127,  128,  130-132,137, 154. 

Hall,  Wm.  A.,  54,  56,  62,  81,  82, 
197. 

Halliburton,  Wesley  D.,  50. 

Hardee,  Wm.  J.,  73,  244-6. 

Harding,  Chester,  166,  167,  212, 
250,  251. 

Harding,  James,  162,  206,  240. 

Harney, Wm.  S.,  99-100,  125,127, 
129,  130,  135,  137,  152,  155- 
157,  167,  17c,  175-180,  186- 
194,  196. 


Harris,  Thomas  A.,  51,  68,  70,  76, 
77- 

Hatcher,  Robert  A.,  81. 

Hazlitt,  Dr.,  156. 

Hebert,  Louis.    See  3d  Louisiana. 

Henderson,  John  B.,  79,  81,  83. 

Herron  Frank  J.,  301. 

Hindman,  Thomas  C.,  246. 

Holt,  Joseph,  10. 

Holloway,  Edmunds  B.,  209. 

Home  Guards,  68,  104-6,  126,127, 
133-7,  154-7,  165,  166,  174- 
176,195,  204,216,  222,  307-310. 

How,  John,  136,  165,  169,  170. 

Hough,  Harrison,  60,  81. 

Hudgins,  Prince  L.,  81,  84-86. 

Hughes'  Regiment  (John  T.),  219, 

273,  313,  314. 
Hunter's    Regiment    (D.  W.  C), 

269,  271. 
Hursts'  Regiment  (Edgar  V.), 273. 

Illinois,  39,  160,  191,  194,  195. 
Indian  Territory,  194,  229,  231. 
Iowa,  160,  180,  191,  194. 
Iowa  Infantry,  First  (Bates),  195, 

280,  282,  287,  307,  309,  310. 
Iowa  Infantry,    Second    (Curtis), 

195,  221. 

Jackson,  Claiborne  F.,  17-26,  31, 
53,  66-70,  74,  94,  96,  106,  113, 
147-153,  162, 163,  167,  168,172, 
173,  184,  186,  187,  191,  196- 
208,  212-19,  222-224,  230,  237, 
238,  243,  244,  303. 

Jefferson  City,   185,  211. 

Johnson,  Waldo  P.,  60,  89. 

Kansas,  160,  191,  194,  229,  231. 
Kansas  Infantry,  First,  195,  209, 

221,  270,  291,  307-10. 
Kansas  Infantry,  Second,  195,209, 

221,  288,  307-10. 
Kansas  Rangers,  309,  310. 
Kelly's  Company,   163,  164,  185, 

186,  188,  209,  212. 
Kelly's  Regiment,  219,  225,  273, 

287,  313,  314- 
Kentucky,  44,  144,  161 
Kelton,  John  C,  254. 


320 


Index. 


Lamar,  218. 

Lane,  James  H.,  231. 

Lawson,  L.  M.,  74,  75. 

Lawton,  Alex.  R.,  35. 

Letcher,  John,  42. 

Lexington,  207,  209,  215. 

Lincoln,  Abraham,  3,  12,  74,  137, 
141,  153,  154,  160,  165,  181, 
188-195. 

Little,  Henry,  242. 

Louisiana,  37,  59,  73. 

Louisiana  Infantry,  Third,  229, 
230,  234,  260,  276-80,  288,  293, 
301,  306,  311,  312,  315. 

Lyon,  Nathaniel,  1 19-138,  151, 
153-157.  160,  163-175,183,188- 
204,  210-15,  219-222,  236,  245, 
248-258,  261-7,  268-78,  281-8, 
291-5,  298-303,  307-310. 

Macdonald,  Emmet,  172. 
McBride,  James  H.,  184,  246,  260, 

262,  273,  311-14. 
McClellan,  Geo.  B.,  219-221. 
McCown,  James,  270. 
McCoy,  Arthur,  133-135. 
McCulla's  Store,  254,  258. 
McCulloch,    Ben.,    72,    194,  211, 

215,  216,   222,   229-39,   245-7, 

253-63,  271,  272,   276-80,  290, 

293-303. 
McCulloch's   Brigade,    305,   306, 

311-312,  314,  315. 
McCulloch,  Robert,  185,  186. 
McGrath,  M.,  186. 
Mcintosh,  James,   231,  237,  254, 

255,  260-3,  272,  276-280,   290, 

301,  311,  312,  315. 
Mclntyre,  D.  H.,  185,  186. 
McKinstry,  Justus,  188. 
McLaren,  Charles,  137,  155. 
McRae's   Battalion    (Dandridge), 

260,   276,  277,   293,    301,    311, 

312,  315. 
Magoffin,  Beriah,  44. 
Major's  Battalion,  James  P.,  259, 

272,  281,  290,  313. 
Marmaduke,   John  S.,   186,  208, 

212,  213. 
Maryland,  42,  161. 
Massachusetts,  73. 


Minute  Men,  109-111,  133-135, 

178. 
Missouri,  13-16,   22,  29,  32,  44, 
58,  62,  63,  69,  76,  79, 
144,  206,  297,  303. 
Compromise,  3,    5,  46, 

56,  57- 
Convention,   33,  46,  47, 
53,  66,  69,  78-98, 126, 

183,  196,  243,  302. 
General   Assembly,   12, 

46-52,  66-72,  74-77, 
88-94,  103,  129,  151, 
160-163,  172,  173, 
180,  303. 

Governor.   See  Jackson. 

Military  Bill,  33,  67,  74- 
77, 106,  173,  177,  179, 

184,  188,  203. 

State  Guard,  179,  184- 
188,  190,  195-7,  203, 
207,  209,  238-243, 
258,  298,  299,  305, 
306,  3II-3I5- 

Missouri  Volunteers  (Union),  165, 
166,  195. 

Minnesota,  39,  180. 

Mississippi,  38,  47,  59. 

Mitchell,  Robert,  195,  288,  301, 
309. 

Merritt,  Wm.  H.,  309. 

Monroe,  Thomas,  223,  224. 

Montgomery,  James,  160,  212. 

Morris,  Walter  B.,  51. 

Moss,  James  H.,  81,  82,  83. 

Murray,  Thomas  H.,  216,  315. 

Nashville  Convention,  59. 
Neosho,  222,  237. 
New  Madrid,  244,  257. 
New  York,  38,  39. 
Neutrality,  Armed,  16,  95. 
North  Carolina,  144,  161. 
Northern  Democrats,  6,  143,  158- 
160. 

Ohio,  39. 

O'Kane,  Walter  S.,  216. 

O' Kane's    Battalion,     279,     280, 

293.  315. 
Osterhaus,  P.  J.,  301. 


Index. 


321 


Osterhaus'  Battalion,  268,  274, 
278,  397,309,  310.  6V<?Boern- 
stein's  Regiment. 

Parsons,  M.  M.,  67,  68,  103,  184, 
208,  209,  212,  215,  219,  223-7, 
260,  262,  273,  301,  311-314. 

Partridge,  George,  51. 

Paschall,  Nathaniel,  44,  54,  56. 

Planter's  House  Conference,  197- 
200. 

Peace  Congress,  60. 

Pearce,  N.  B.,  230,  235-9,  254, 
284. 

Pearce's  Brigade,  230,  236,  246, 
247,  253,  260,  276,  282-288,  305, 
306,  311,  312,   314,  315. 

Peckham,  James,  51. 

Pennsylvania,  39. 

Phelps,  John  S.,  54. 

Prentiss,  B.  M.,  221. 

President.  See  Buchanan,  Davis, 
Lincoln. 

Price- Harney  Agreement,  186- 
192,  196,  202. 

Price,  Sterling,  54,  78,  81,  92, 
181-188,  196,  203,  207-9,  215- 
218,  222,  234-47,  252-7,  260-3. 

Price,  Thomas  H.,  241,  244,  257, 
271-6,  281-91,  293-4. 

Pillow,  Gideon  J.,  300,  303,  306, 

3IT-3I4. 
Pritchard,  Colonel,   154. 
Polk,  Leonidas,  243,  257. 
Polk,  Trusten,  53,  84. 
Proclamations. 

Harney's,  177-179. 

Jackson's,  200-206. 

Lyon's,  220. 

Lincoln's,  141,  142. 
Plummer's  Battalion  (Joseph  B.), 

268,  269,  277-9,  288,  290,  293, 

301,  307,  309,  310. 

Quinlan,  James,  133,  135. 

Rains,JamesS.,67,  184,  215,  216, 
218,  224-7,  253-5,  260-262, 
268,  271,  272,  289,  311-314. 

Randolph,  Beverly,  184. 

Rector,  Henry  M.,  232. 


Redd,  John  T.,  81,  86-7 

Reid,  John,  240. 

Reid's    Battery  (John.  G.),  246, 

260,    276,   280,  288,  293,  311, 

312,  315. 
Republican,  The,  45,  46,   54,  144, 

147,  149,   161,  162,  179. 
Reynolds,  Thomas  C,  30-33,  48, 

49,  53,  303. 
Rives'  (B.  A.)  Regiment,  219,  225- 

6,  273,  313,  314. 
Robertson,  John,  60. 
Robinson,  Lt. 
Rogers,  Charles  S.,  287. 
Rollins,  James  S.,  61,  183. 
Ross,  John,  230. 

Rosser,  Thomas  H.,279,  280,  315. 
Russell,  Dan.  R.,  47-50. 
Rolla,  264,  296. 

Salomon's  Regiment,  (C.E.),  210, 
225,  265,  281,  307-310. 

Shaler,  James,  R.,   Ill,  168. 

Slack,  Wm.  Y.,  215,  218,  219, 
224-6,  260,  262,  273,  281,  287, 
301,  311-14. 

Stanley,  David  S.,  221,  301. 

Stanton,  Edwin  M.,  8,  28. 

St.  Louis,  44,  90,  94,  95,   174-6, 

179.  195. 
Star  of  the  West,  The,  28. 
St.  Louis  Police,  90,  91,  136,  137. 
Secessionists,  53,   55,  69,  90,  94, 

95,  106,  129,  175,  181. 
Shelby,  Joseph  O.,  224,  301. 
Steele's  Battalion  (Frederick),i6o, 

222,  254,  301-307,  309,  3IO- 
Steen,  Alexander  E.,  236,  247. 
Stephens,  A.  H.,  139,  140. 
Stevenson,  Jno.  D.,  48,  49,    66, 

220,  252. 
Stewart,  Robert  M.,   12-17,   25, 

26. 
Sweeny,  Thomas  W.,   166,   211, 

222. 
Sigel,     Franz,    210,    222,    225-8, 

236,  248,  249,  265,  266,  270-2, 

276-81,  288,  290,  291,  293,  295, 

296,  298,  301,  307-310. 
Springfield,   210,   211,   249,    250, 

264. 


322 


Index. 


Switzler,  Wm.  F. ,  145,  146. 
South  Carolina,  4,  7-1 1,  21,  59, 

60. 
Schofield,  John  M.,  166,  221,  250, 

285,  299,  301,  308. 
Scott,  Winfield,  8,  28,  103,   117, 

128,  130,    131,    152,  165,    177, 

180,  219,  251,  252. 
Sturgeon,  Isaac  H.,  101-104, 

107,  116,  117,  128. 
Sturgis,  S.  D.,  160,  221,  222,  236, 

248,  285-288,  291,  294-6,  299- 

301,  308. 
Submissionists,  64,  67,  68,  161. 
Snyder,  John  F.,  271,  272. 

Taylor,  Dan.  G.,  136,  155. 

Thayer,  James  S.,  40. 

Tennessee,  43,  144,  161. 

Texas,  59,  72. 

Texas  Regiment.      See  Greer's. 

Twiggs,  David  E.,  73. 

Totten's  Battery  (James),  73,  164, 
195,  211,  222  254,  268-70, 
272-5,  282-4,285,  287,  301,  307, 
309,  310. 

Thornton's    Battalion   (J.  C.  C.), 

219.  273,  3i3>  314. 
Thompson,  M.  Jeff,  244. 
Tyler,  John,  60. 

Unconditional  Union  party,  53, 
57,  58. 


Union    Safety    Committee,    165, 

169,  190. 
Union  Troops  in  Missouri,  195. 

Van  Dorn,  Earl,  73. 

Vest,  George  G.,   50,  66-72,  92- 

94. 
Virginia,  42,  60,  143,  161. 
Walker,  L.  Pope,    231,   233,  297, 

298. 
Walker's     Regiment    (Jno.    D.), 

276,  282,  311,  312,  315. 
Walworth,  Chancellor,  41. 
Watkins,  N.  W.,  78,  81,  184. 
Wheeling  Convention,  59,  60. 
Weightman,     Richard    H.,    219, 

224-6,  255,  260,  273,  282,  287- 

90,  311,   313.  314.  315. 
Wherry,  Wm.  M.,  288. 
Wide  Awakes,  33,  34,  65,  66. 
Wilson's  Creek,  Description,  258. 
Windsor  Guards,  235. 
Wisconsin,  39. 

Witzig,  Julius  J.,  105,  165,  169. 
Wingo's  Regiment,  313-14. 
Wright,  Clark,  309. 
Woodruff's  Battery  (Wm.E.),236, 

246,  260,  274-7,  282,  299,  311, 

312,  314- 
Woods,  Henry  C,  309. 
Yates,  Richard,  106,  153. 
Yeatman,  James  E.,  44. 


[From  the  CINCINNATI  COMMERCIAL.] 
"  Scribner's  'Campaigns  of  the  Civil  War  >  are  probably  the 
ablest  and  most  striking  account  of  the  late  war  that  has  yet  been 
written.  Choosing  the  flower  of  military  authors,  the  publishers 
have  assigned  to  each  the  task  of  writing  the  history  of  the  events 
he  knew  most  about.  Titus,  both  accuracy  and  a  life-like  fresh- 
ness have  been  secured.' f 


THE  CAMPAIGNS 


OF 


THE  CIVIL  WAR 

13  VOLUMES,  CLOTH.   WITH  MAPS  AND  PLANS. 
Trice   per   Volume,    $1.00;    per    Set,    $12.50. 


A  series  of  volumes,  contributed  by  a  number 
of  leading  actors  in  and  students  of  the  great 
conflict  of  i86i-'65,  with  a  view  to  bringing 
together,  for  the  first  time,  a  full  and  authorita- 
tive military  history  of  the  suppression  of  the 
Rebellion. 

The  volumes  are  duodecimos  of  about  250 
pages  each,  illustrated  by  maps  and  plans  pre- 
pared under  the  direction  of  the  authors. 


l.—The  Outbreak  of  Rebellion.  By  John  G.  Nicolay, 
Esq.,  Private  Secretary  to  President  Lincoln;  late  Consul- 
General  to  France,  etc. 

A  preliminary  volume,  describing   the  opening  of  the  war,  and  covering  the 
period  from  the  election  of  Lincoln  to  the  end  of  the  first  battle  of  Bull  Run. 


KIv—From  Fort  Henry  to  Corinth.  By  the  Hon.  M. 
F.  Force,  Justice  of  the  Superior  Court,  Cincinnati!;  late 
Brigadier- General  and  Bvt.  Maj.  Gen'l,  U.S. V.,  commanding 
First  Division,  17th  Corps:  in  1862,  Lieut.  Colonel  of  the 
20th  Ohio,  commanding  the  regiment  at  Shiloh ;  Treasurer  of 
the  Society  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee. 

The  narrative  of  events  in  the  West  from  the  Summer  of  1861  to  May,  1862; 
covering  the  capture  of  Fts.  Henry  and  Donelson,  the  Battle  of  Shiloh,  etc.,  etc. 

Ill,— The  Peninsula,  By  Alexander  S.  Webb,  LL.D., 
President  of  the  College  of  the  City  of  New  York :  Assistant 
Chief  of  Artillery,  Army  of  the  Potomac,  i86i-'62  ;  Inspector 
General  Fifth  Army  Corps;  General  commanding  2d  Div., 
2d  Corps ;  Major  General  Assigned,  and  Chief  of  Staff,  Army 
of  the  Potomac. 

The  history  of  McClellan's  Peninsula  Campaign,  from  his  appointment  to  th« 
end  of  the  Seven  Days'  Fight. 

IV.— The  Army  under  Pope.  By  John  C.  Ropes,  Esq., 
of  the  Military  Historical  Society  of  Massachusetts,  the  Massa- 
chusetts Historical  Society,  etc. 

From  the  appointment  of  Pope  to  command  the  Army  of  Virginia,  to  the  appoint- 
ment of  McClellan  to  the  general  command  in  September,  1862 

V, — The  Antiefam  and  Fredericksburg.  By  Francis 
Winthrop  Palfrey,  Bvt.  Brigadier  Gen'l,  U.S.V.,  and  form- 
erly Colonel  20th  Mass.  Infantry  ;  Lieut.  Col.  of  the  20th 
Massachusetts  at  the  Battle  of  the  Antietam ;  Member  of 
the  Military  Historical  Society  of  Massachusetts,  of  the  Massa- 
chusetts Historical  Society,  etc. 

From  the  appointment  of  McClellan  to  the  general  command,  September,  1862,'to 
the  end  of  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg. 

VI. — Chancellorsville  and  Gettysburg.  By  Abner 
Doubled  ay,  Bvt.  Maj.  Gen'l,  U.S.A.,  and  Maj.  Gen'l, 
U.S.  V.  ;  commanding  the  First  Corps  at  Gettysburg,  etc. 

From  the  appointment  of  Hooker,  through  the  campaigns  of  Chancellorsville  and 
Gettysburg,  to  the  retreat  of  Lee  after  the  latter  battle. 

VII.— The  Army  of  the  Cumberland.  By  Henry  M. 
Cist,  Brevet  Brig.  Gen'l  U.S.V.  ;  A.A.G.  on  the  staff  of 
Major  Gen'l  Rosecrans,  and  afterwards  on  that  of  Major  Gen'l 
Thomas  ;  Corresponding  Secretary  of  the  Society  of  the  Army 
of  the  Cumberland. 

From  the  formation  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland  to  the  end  of  the  battles  at 
Chattanooga,  November,  1863. 


VIII*— The  Mississippi.  By  Francts  Vinton  Greene, 
Lieut,  of  Engineers,  U.  S.  Army  ;  late  Military  Attache  to  the 
U  S.  Legation  in  St.  Petersburg ;  Author  of  "  The  Russian 
Army  and  its  Campaigns  in  Turkey  in  1877-78,"  and  of 
"Army  Life  in  Russia." 

An  account  of  the  operations — especially  at  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hudson — by 
which  the  Mississippi  River  and  its  shores  were  restored  to  the  control  of  the  Union. 

IX, — Atlanta,  By  the  Hon.  Jacob  D.  Cox,  Ex- Governor  of 
Ohio ;  late  Secretary  of  the  Interior  of  the  United  States ; 
Major  General  U.  S.V.,  commanding  Twenty-third  Corps 
during  the  campaigns  of  Atlanta  and  the  Carolinas,  etc.,  etc. 

From  Sherman's  first  advance  into  Georgia  in  May,  1864,  to  the  beginning  of 
the  March  to  the  Sea. 

X  -TJie  March  to  the  Sea— Franklin  and  Nashville. 

By  the  Hon.  Jacob  D.  Cox. 

From  the  beginning  of  the  March  to  the  Sea  to  the  surrender  of  Johnston-  ■ 
Including  also  the  operations  of  Thomas  in  Tennessee, 

XI,— The  Shenandoah  Valley  in  1864.  The  Cam- 
paign of  Sheridan,  By  George  E.  Pond,  Esq.,  Asso- 
ciate Editor  of  the  Army  and  Navy  Journal. 

XII,— The  Virginia  Campaign  of  '64  and  '65,  TJie 
Army  of  the  Potomac  and  the  Army  of  the 
James,  By  Andrew  A.  Humphreys,  Brigadier  General 
and  Bvt.  Major  General,  U.  S.  A.  ;  late  Chief  of  Engineers; 
Chief  of  Staff,  Army  of  the  Potomac,  1863-64;  commanding 
Second  Corps,  i864~'65,  etc.,  etc. 

Statistical  Hecord  of  the  Armies  of  the  United 
States.     By  Frederick  Phisterer,  late  Captain  U.  S.  A. 

This  Record  includes  the  figures  of  the  quotas  and  men  actually  furnished  by 
all  States  ;  a  list  of  all  organizations  mustered  into  the  U.  S.  service;  the  strength 
of  the  army  at  various  periods  ;  its  organization  in  armies,  corps,  etc.;  the  divisions 
of  the  country  into  departments,  etc.;  chronological  list  of  all  engagements,  with  the 
losses  in  each  ;  tabulated  statements  of  all  losses  in  the  war,  with  the  causes  of 
death,  etc. ;  full  lists  of  all  general  officers,  and  an  immense  amount  of  other  valuable 
statistical  matter  relating  to  the  War. 


The  complete  Set,  thirteen  volumes,  in  a  box.     Price,  $12.50 
Single  volumes,       .  .  .  .  .  .1.00 


***   The  above  books  for  sale  by  all  booksellers,  or  will  be  sent,  post-paid, 
vfon  receipt  of  price,  by 

CHARLES  SCRIBNERS  SONS,  Publishers, 

743  and  745  Broadway,  New  York. 


THE 

Navy  in  the  Civil  War 

I.-THE  BLOCKADE  AND  THE  CRUISERS. 

By  Professor  J.  Russell  Soley,  U.  S.  Navy. 

"The  book  is  well  arranged,  written  clearly,  without  technical  terms, 
and  shows  great  familiarity  with  the  subject.  It  is  marked  by  thoroughness 
of  preparation,  sound  judgment,  and  admirable  impartiality.  It  is  a  promis- 
ing beginning  of  the  projected  series  ;  and  if  the  other  volumes  prove 
worthy  of  this,  they  will  make  a  valuable  addition  to  the  Army  series, 
which  has  proved  so  useful  and  popular." — The  Nation. 

II.-THE  ATLANTIC  COAST. 

By  Real-Admiral  Daniel  Ammen,  U.  S.  Navy. 

Admiral  Ammen's  history  of  the  naval  operations  on  the  Atlantic 
coast,  from  1861  to  the  close  of  the  war,  describes  the  active  work  of  the 
navy  in  attacking  the  defensive  strongholds  of  the  Confederacy  from 
Hampton  Roads  to  Florida  Keys.  It  includes  a  full  account  of  the  long 
siege  of  Charleston,  and  the  scarcely  less  arduous  operations  against 
Fort  Fisher,  the  capture  of  Hatteras  Inlet,  Roanoke  Island  and  Newbern, 
and  other  minor  movements  along  the  coast. 

Ill— THE  GULF  AND  INLAND  WATERS. 

By  Commander  A.  T.  Mahan,  U.  S.  Navy. 

The  achievements  of  the  Naval  force  on  the  Mississippi  and  its  tributaries, 
and  on  the  Gulf  and  the  Red  River,  either  independently  or  in  co-oper- 
ation with  the  Army,  form  one  of  the  most  thrilling  chapters  in  the  history 
of  the  Civil  War.  The  exploits  of  Farragut,  Foote  and  Porter,  with  their 
gallant  crews  and  improvised  vessels,  teem  with  acts  of  daring,  marvelous 
escapes,  and  terrific  encounters.  Commander  Mahan  has  done  full  justice 
to  this  side  of  his  narrative,  but  he  has  given  at  the  same  time  a  record  of 
this  part  of  the  war  that  has  greater  claims  to  historic  value  than  any  which 
have  preceded  it. 

Each  One  Volume,    1  2mo,  with    Maps  and    Plans. 

Price  per  Volume,   $I.OO. 


CHARLES   SCREBNER'S   SONS,  Publishers, 

743  &  745  Broadway,  New  York. 


Army  Life  in  Russia. 

By    F.    V.    GREENE, 

Lieutenant  of  Engineers,  United  States  Army, 

Late  Military  Attache"  to  the  U.  S.  Legation  in  St.  Petersburg,  and  author  o) 
"  The  Russian  Army  and  its  Campaigns  in  Turkey  in  1877-78." 


New  Edition,  One  Volume,  i2mo,     .     .     $1.00. 

Lieutenant  Greene's  opportunities  for  general  as  well  as  technical 
observation  while  with  the  Russian  army  in  Turkey  were  such  as  have 
perhaps  never  fallen  to  any  other  student  of  the  war.  The  story  of  this 
personal  experience  is  embodied  in  this  volume,  which  contains  most 
vigorous  and  vivid  descriptions  of  battle  scenes,  in  the  chapters  on  the 
Shipka  Pass,  Plevna,  and  in  the  very  strong  and  excellent  chapter  on  the 
winter  campaign  across  the  Balkans  with  Gourko.  The  chapters  on  the 
Tsar  and  the  Russian  generals,  and  the  sections  devoted  to  the  Russian 
soldier,  to  St.  Petersburg,  and  the  army  life  of  the  Russian  at  home,  are  of 
absorbing  interest. 


11  His  sketches  are  excellently  well  done,  graphic,  evidently  not  exaggerated,  and 
very  readable.  It  is  a  book  that  will  be  read  with  pleasure,  and  one  that  contains  a 
great  deal  of  information." — Hartford  Courant. 

"This  volume  is  in  every  way  an  admirable  picture  of  army  life  in  Russia.  It  is 
clear,  concise,  discriminating,  and  often  very  picturesque.  The  author,  besides  pos- 
sessing an  excellent  style,  is  extremely  modest,  and  there  are  very  few  books  of  travel 
in  which  the  first  person  is  kept  so  absolutely  in  the  background." — International 
Review. 

"  Lieutenant  Greene  writes  in  a  soldierly  way,  unaffected,  straightforward,  and 
graphic,  and,  though  he  has  a  keen  eye  for  the  picturesque,  never  sacrifices  to  rhetoric 
the  absolute  truthfulness  so  eminently  to  be  desired  in  a  narrative  of  this  sort. — New 
York  World. 

"  He  was  with  the  Russian  army  throughout  the  campaign,  enjoying  perfect  free- 
dom of  movement,  having  every  opportunity  to  visit  the  points  of  greatest  activity,  and 
to  see  the  operations  of  greatest  moment,  in  company  with  the  officers  who  conducted 
them.  His  book  is,  therefore,  for  all  the  purposes  of  ordinary  readers,  a  complete  and 
satisfactory  history  of  the  war,  founded  upon  intimate  personal  knowledge  of  its  events, 
and  of  its  spirit.  It  is  a  work  of  the  rarest  interest  and  of  unusual  merit." — New  York 
Evening  Post. 

"  It  is  most  fortunate  for  the  reputation  of  our  country  and  our  army  that  we  had 
such  an  officer  to  send  to  the  far-away  land  of  Turkey  in  Europe,  and  most  creditable  to 
our  War  Department  that  it  sent  such  a  man.  His  book  deseves  to  be  universally  read, 
and  we  are  sure  that  no  person  whom  these  lines  may  lead  to  purchase  it  will  fail  to 
rejoice  that  they  have  been  written.'" — The  Nation. 


*#*  For    sale  by    all   booksellers,  or    sent,  post-paid,  upon    receipt   oj 
frice,  by 

CHARLES   SCRIBNER'S   SONS,  Publishers, 

743  and  745  Broadway,  New  York. 


LIFE    OF 

Lord    Lawrence 

BY 

R.    BOSWORTH    SMITH,   M.A., 

LATE   FELLOW   OF   TRINITY   COLLEGE;   ASSISTANT   MASTER  AT   HARROW 


With  Maps  and  Portraits,  2  vols.,  8vo,  $5.00, 


"As  a  biography,  the  work  is  an  inthralling  one,  rich  in 
anecdotes  and  incidents  of  Lord  Lawrence's  tempestuous  nature 
and  beneficent  career  that  bring  into  bold  relief  his  strongly- 
marked  and  almost  colossal  individuality,  and  rich  also  in  in- 
stances of  his  courage,  his  fortitude,  his  perseverance,  his  self- 
control,  his  magnanimity,  and  in  the  details  of  the  splendid 
results  of  his  masterful  and  masterly  policy.  .  .  .  We  know 
of  no  work  on  India  to  which  the  reader  can  refer  with  so  great 
certainty  for  full  and  dispassionate  information  relative  to  the 
government  of  the  country,  the  characteristics  of  its  people,  and 
the  fateful  events  of  the  forty  eventful  years  of  Lord  Lawrence's 
Indian  career." — Harper's  Magazine. 

11  John  Lawrence,  the  name  by  which  the  late  Viceroy  of  India 
will  always  be  best  known,  has  been  fortunate  in  his  biographer, 
Mr.  Bosworth  Smith,  who  is  an  accomplished  writer  and  a  faith- 
ful, unflinching  admirer  of  his  hero.  He  has  produced  an  enter- 
taining as  well  as  a  valuable  book  ;  the  general  reader  will 
certainly  find  it  attractive  ;  the  student  of  recent  history  will 
discover  in  its  pages  matters  of  deep  interest  to  him." — London 
Daily  Telegraph. 

***  For  sale  by  all  booksellers,  or  sent,  post-paid,  upon  receipt  of  price,  by 

CHARLES  SCRIBNER'S  SONS,  Publishers, 

743  and  745  Broadway,  New  York, 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


E  Snean,  Thomas  Lowndes 

517  The  fight  for  Missouri 

S67 


