# Thomas L. Snead, The Fight for Missouri (1886): Booneville, Carthage and Wilson's Creek passages, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of a University of Toronto (Internet Archive fightformissour00snea) scan; not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, soft-hyphen marks, running headers, page numbers and footnotes. Local headings are editorial. Bounded passages only; reports and letters quoted or summarized by the author are not separately inspected originals.

## title-and-preface

The Fight for Missouri FROM THE ELECTION OF LINCOLN TO THE DEATH OF LYON BY ^ 0 THOMAS L. SNEAD A. D. C. OF THE GOVERNOR ; ACTING ADJUTANT-GENERAL OF THE MISSOURI STATE GUARD ; CHIEF OF STAFF OF THE ARMY OF THE WEST MEMBER OF THE CONFEDERATE CONGRESS WITH MAPS NEW YORK CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS 1886 Copyright, 1886, By CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS. S/7 SC7 LIBRARY 730035 UNIVERSITY OF TOR- Press of J. J. Little & Co. Astor Place, New York. PREFACE. I HAVE written this book because it was my duty to write it ; because, too, I fancy that I know more about the events that are narrated in it, than does any one who will ever take the trouble to write about them ; and because I am the only living witness to many facts the remembrance of which ought to be preserved. That the reader may know whereon I ground these assertions, and that he may, before reading my testimony, be able to decide whether it be worth his attention, I will tell him frankly how I happen to know about these things. In the elections of i860 — for Governor of Missouri, and for President of the United States — I took an active, though inconspicuous part, chiefly in the political management of the St. Louis Bulletin, which was owned and edited by one of my friends, Mr. Longuemare. In its columns and elsewhere I advocated earnestly the election of Breckinridge to the Presidency, and of Claiborne F. Jackson to the Governorship. But when the latter, in obedience to the manifest will of a majority of the Democratic iv Preface. Party of Missouri whose candidate he was, an- nounced his determination to support Mr. Douglas for the Presidency, we Breckinridge Democrats re- fused to support him any longer, and nominated a candidate of our own, Hancock Jackson. We did this because we believed that the slave-holding States could not remain in the Union, with either safety or honor unless the North should consent to give them Constitutional guarantees that their rights as coequal States of the Union should be both respected and protected by the Federal Gov- ernment, and because we thought that this ques- tion should be plainly submitted to the North in the then pending Presidential election, and a posi- tive answer demanded. As Mr. Douglas' candi- dacy, with his policy of equivocation, prevented this question from being put fairly to the North, we op- posed him and every body who supported him. Claiborne F. Jackson was, nevertheless, elected Governor, in August, and Missouri, alone of all the States, cast her electoral vote in November for Douglas. On assuming the office of Governor just after the formal secession of South Carolina, Governor Jackson declared in his Inaugural Address that, in his opinion, it was both the interest and the duty of Missouri to make common cause with the other slave-holding States in the impending conflict. This declara- Preface. v tion brought the Bulletin, which had meanwhile fallen under my absolute control, to his zealous sup- port. The great interest which I felt in the matter caused me to spend most of the time at Jefferson City, where measures looking to the secession of Missouri, and to arming her militia, and getting the State ready otherwise for the emergency, were pending before the General Assembly ; and finally, toward the middle of February, I disposed of the Bulletin, and took up my abode at Jefferson City, and remained there as the guest of the Governor till we were all driven thence by Blair and Lyon, in June. During this time I assisted Governor Jack- son in conducting his correspondence and in other confidential matters, and upon the enactment of the military law in May was commissioned as one of his aides-de-camp. General Price had asked me to ac- cept the position of adjutant-general of the State forces, to the command of which he had just been appointed, but I introduced to him, and got him to appoint instead, Captain Henry Little who had just resigned his commission in the United States Army and was a thousand times better fitted than myself to discharge the duties of the place. I therefore remained with the Governor ; followed him when he left Jefferson City ; was with him at Booneville, and Carthage ; and went with him to Cowskin Prairie, in the south-western corner of the vi Preface. State. When, however, on arriving there, he relin- quished the command of all the State forces to General Price, and was about to go East, I got his permission to remain with the army, and was the next day assigned to duty by General Price as his chief of ordnance. A few days later Colonel Little left for Richmond in order to secure his commission in the regular army of the Confederate States, and I was then assigned to duty as Acting Adjutant- General of the State Guard. This position I held during all of the eventful campaign, in which were won the Battles of Wilson's Creek, Fort Scott, and Lexington. During this time — from the election of Lincoln in November i860, to the death of Lyon at Wilson's Creek on the 10th of August 1861 — occurred all the events that I have narrated in this volume ; but I remained with General Price till the last year of the war, as adjutant-general and sometimes as chief of staff, of the commands that he held, except that for brief periods I was entrusted with special duties. I left him in the summer of 1864, in order to attend a meeting of the Confederate Congress, of which I was a member, and did not return to the army. When the war ended General Price took to Mexico the records of the several commands which he had held, and also other important papers relat- ing to the war. On returning to this country he Preface. vii brought these records and papers with him and gave them to me, with the understanding that I would one day write the story of his campaigns. I turned over most of them to the War Department several years ago, and many of them have been, and the rest will be, published in the Official Records of the War of the Rebellion. In preparing the political part of this volume, I have relied chiefly upon the Journals of the General Assembly of Missouri, and of the State Convention, and on the official reports of their debates, and upon contemporaneous publications, particularly the Missouri Republican; and upon the original documents published in Peckham's Life of Lyon — a book whose glaring faults are more than compen- sated by the important facts the remembrance whereof it has preserved. For military details I am indebted above all to the Official Records^ which the Government is pub- lishing. The zeal, the fairness, the intelligence, the care, and the ability with which they have been col- lected, compiled, arranged, and edited by Lieuten- ant-Colonel Robert N. Scott, U. S. A., entitle that gentleman to the gratitude of every one who took an honorable part in the war, and of all who shall ever desire to learn its true history. Valuable as these Records are to the student, they need neverthe- less the elucidation of those, who, by reason of their viii Preface. personal knowledge of the men, and in other ways, are competent to sift the statements of those wit- nesses— most of them now silent forever — whose testimony they perpetuate. As it was my fortune to know personally most of the men who took a prominent part in the struggle for Missouri, and something about the character and credibility of every one of them, I feel sure that my little book will for that reason be a useful guide to those who may wish to comprehend that struggle aright. I have been greatly assisted in my search after the truth by many of the survivors of the war, who have furnished me important documents and valuable reminiscences, all which I have freely used. I would, perhaps, win favor for this volume if I were to mention their names, but higher considerations induce me to be silent. I must, however, express my great obligations to Mr. R. I. Holcombe, author of An Account of the Battle of Wilson's Creeky for much valuable information. I have doubtless made many trifling mistakes and may have made some that are important, but no man ever labored more earnestly to ascertain the truth and to tell it plainly and impartially, than I have done, in preparing to write, and in writing, this account of the fight that was made for Mis- souri in 1861. New York, fanuaryy 18S6.

## booneville

Hardly had Lyon left the Planters' House on the afternoon of the nth of June when he tele- graphed to the War Department for five thousand additional stand of arms, and for authority to enlist more troops in Missouri. His requests were in- stantly complied with. He issued orders the same night for the move- ment of his troops. Sigel, Salomon, and B. Gratz Brown were ordered towards Springfield with their regiments. They be- gan moving on the 13th, and had all left St. Louis on the 15th, accompanied by two batteries (eight Booneville and Carthage. 211 <v guns) under Major Backoff. The command of this expedition was given to Captain Thomas W. Sweeny acting as brigadier-general by election, and by assignment of General Harney. Its objects were to occupy the south-western part of the State ; to oppose the apprehended advance of a Confeder- ate army under Ben. McCulloch ; and to cut off the retreat of Governor Jackson, General Price, and the State troops, all of whom Lyon proposed himself to drive in that direction. In execution of this purpose he embarked on the 13th of June at St. Louis, with Totten's Light Bat- tery, Company F, Second United States Artillery ; Company B of the Second United States Infantry ; two companies of United States Recruits ; Blair's regiment of Missouri Volunteers ; and nine compa- nies of Boernstein's regiment ; aggregating about two thousand men, and advanced by way of the Missouri River to Jefferson City. Arriving there on Saturday the 15th, about two P.M., he took quiet possession of the city, the State forces having evacuated it on Thursday. Leaving Colonel Boernstein and three companies of his regiment at Jefferson City, Lyon himself proceeded the next day (Sunday, June 16), with the rest of his command — about seventeen hundred men — towards Booneville. When within fifteen miles of that city, the transports were ordered to 212 The Fight for Missouri. lay by till daybreak ; about which time they moved on to a point about eight miles below Booneville. There Lyon debarked all of his men, except one company of Blair's regiment, and a detachment of artillery with one howitzer. These he ordered to proceed up the river on the transports, in order to deceive the State troops and to create a diversion in favor of his real movement. Lyon himself ad- vanced with his main body along the river road to- wards Booneville, moving very cautiously, as he had been led to believe that he would have to encounter at least " three or four thousand rebels." Governor Jackson learned Sunday night that Lyon was approaching Booneville by way of the river. He at once ordered General Parsons who was at Tipton, some twenty miles to the south, to bring his whole command to Booneville forthwith. As soon as it was known on Monday morning that Lyon had debarked his force, and was advancing upon the city by land, the Governor ordered Mar- maduke to take his own regiment, and all other armed men in the city, except Kelly's company, and to move out against Lyon, and impede his ad- vance as much as possible. This was done in order to give Parsons time to come up, and also to give to such citizens as might want to escape, the oppor- tunity to arrange their affairs and leave ; and also to enable General Harding to destroy his ordnance Booneville and Carthage. 213 shops, and the material which he had collected. Colonel Marmaduke, who had already protested against making any resistance at Booneville and had advised the Governor to concentrate his forces behind the Osage in the neighborhood of Warsaw, again represented to him that to meet Lyon now could only result in disaster to the State troops. The Governor, nevertheless repeated his order, and Marmaduke went out with between 400 and 500 men to confront the enemy. Lyon had advanced about two miles when his skirmishers encountered Marmaduke, who at once opened such a brisk fire as to compel Lyon to bring up his artillery and deploy a part of his infantry. Having accomplished this, Marmaduke withdrew his men to a stronger position about a mile nearer to the city. There, under cover of some buildings and a dense wood, he made a stand, which appeared so formidable to Lyon, who greatly overestimated Marmaduke's strength, that he deployed his whole force in line of battle. A sharp engagement now took place, in the midst of which Colonel Marma- duke received orders from the Governor to fall back to the city, in order to form a junction with Gen- eral Parsons, who was rapidly approaching. It was no easy matter, however, to withdraw four or five hundred raw troops from a field, on which they were engaged with four times their own 214 The Fight for Missouri. number of well armed and well disciplined soldiers commanded by a man like Lyon. They neverthe- less fell back in some order at first, taking ad- vantage of every good point to deliver their fire at the Federals; but they were in the end pretty thoroughly dispersed. Such was the trifling engagement which has been called " the Battle of Booneville." The Federal loss was two men killed, and nine wounded. Of the State troops two were killed, and five or six were slightly wounded. Insignificant as was this engagement in a military aspect, it was in fact a stunning blow to the South- ern Rights' people of the State, and one which did incalculable and unending injury to the Confederates. It was indeed the consummation of Blair's states- manlike scheme to make it impossible for Missouri to secede, or out of her great resources to contribute abundantly of men and material to the Southern cause as she would surely have done had her people been left free to do as they pleased. It was also the crowning achievement of Lyon's well-conceived campaign. The capture of Camp Jackson had disarmed the State, and compelled the loyalty of St. Louis and all the adjacent counties. The advance upon Jefferson City had put the State Government to flight, and taken away from it that prestige which gives force to established authority. Booneville and Carthage. 215 The dispersion of the volunteers who had rushed to Booneville to fight under Price for Missouri and the South, extended Lyon's conquest over all the coun- try lying between the Missouri and the State of Iowa ; closed all the avenues by which the Southern men of that part of Missouri could make their way to Price ; made the Missouri an unobstructed Fed- eral highway from its source to its mouth ; and ren- dered it impossible for Price to hold the rich, popu- lous, and friendly counties in the vicinity of Lexing- ton. Price had indeed no alternative now but to retreat in all haste to the south-western corner of the State, there to organize his army under the pro- tection of the force which the Confederate Govern- ment was mustering in north-western Arkansas under General McCulloch, for the protection of that State and the Indian Territory.

## carthage

Having ascertained that General Price had gone to McCulloch's head-quarters, and that Rains was retreating southward, the Governor put his own col- umn in motion, and a few days thereafter reached Montevallo, in Vernon County, and thence moved to Camp Lamar, on the right bank of Spring River, some three miles north of the village of Lamar. There he was joined by Rains and Slack on the 3d of July. The march of their column had been greatly impeded and made laborious and fatiguing by the high waters of the streams across which they had to ferry their long-drawn, motley train of vehicles of every description laden not only with supplies for an army, but chiefly with household goods and utensils of every sort, conspicuous among which were feather-beds and frying-pans. The Governor, therefore, determined to halt at Camp Lamar for a few days in order to rest the men ; and meanwhile to distribute them to the commands to which they properly belonged. Rains was found to have nearly three thousand men, but many of them were unarmed. His efifec- Booneville and Carthage. 219 tive strength was about twelve hundred infantry under Weightman, about six hundred mounted men under Cawthon, and a three-gun battery under Bledsoe. Parsons had about six hundred and fifty armed men. His infantry were commanded by Colonel Kelly, his mounted men by Colonel Brown, and his four-gun battery by Guibor. Clark had Burbridge's regiment of infantry, whose effective strength was three hundred and sixty-five officers and men. Slack's brigade consisted of about five hundred mounted men under Colonel Rives, and about seven hundred infantry under Colonel Hughes, and Major Thornton. Parsons, Clark, and Slack had also about eight hundred unarmed men. Lyon was notified the day after the affair at Boone- ville (June 1 8th), that Missouri had been detached from the Department of the West, and attached to the Department of the Ohio, commanded by Major-General George B. McClellan. This had been done by the advice of General Scott, and through the solicitation of Attorney-General Bates, Judge Gamble and other St. Louisians, who did not like Blair, and had no great confidence in " Captain " Lyon. Fearing that this would interfere with their campaign, Blair hurried to Washington City to obtain a revocation of the order, and the assigment of Lyon to the command of military 220 The Fight for Missouri. operations in Missouri. This he could not accom- plish, but he finally persuaded the Administration on the 3d of July to organize Illinois together with Missouri and all the other States and Territories lying between the Mississippi River and the Rocky Mountains into a separate military command to be known as the The Western Department, under Major-General Fremont, with head-quarters at St. Louis. McClellan did not interfere with Lyon during the short time that his command extended over Mis- souri, and the latter went on to execute the plans which Blair and he had devised for the conquest of the State, though he was severely crippled by the loss of Blair, whose presence and counsels were of inestimable importance to him. While procuring transportation and supplies, and reinforcing and re- organizing his army at Booneville, Lyon published a proclamation to the people of Missouri, promising not to molest any man who had taken up arms against the Government, if he would return to his home and remain there quietly. This wise measure had the effect which he anticipated, and kept thou- sands of men out of the ranks of the State Guard. He next assigned Colonel John D. Stevenson to the command of the Missouri River from Kansas City to its mouth, and gave him a sufficient force to garrison Jefferson City, Booneville and Lexington, Booneville and Carthage. 221 and ordered him also to protect the loyal inhabit- ants of the adjacent counties ; to disperse all gath- erings of men hostile to the Federal Government ; and to prevent reinforcements from crossing the river to Price. All that part of the State north of the Missouri was entrusted temporarily to the com-' mand of Colonel Samuel R. Curtis, who had already occupied parts of it with the Second Iowa Infantry. South-eastern Missouri was left to the care of McClellan, who was for that purpose concentrating at Cairo an ample force, under Brigadier-General Prentiss. St. Louis and all the country within a hundred and fifty miles of it, had been thoroughly subjugated, and was occupied by sufficient garri- sons. Major Sturgis was already following Rains with about nine hundred regulars from Fort Leav- enworth, and two regiments of Kansas Volun- teers about sixteen hundred strong. Lyon himself moved from Booneville on the 3d of July with about two thousand three hundred and fifty men, of whom two hundred and fifty were regulars. The two columns had an effective strength of about four thousand eight hundred and fifty men. They were all well armed and equipped, and fully supplied with everything that an army in the field required. They were also officered by educated soldiers, many of whom afterwards rose to distinc- 222 The Fight for Missouri. tion. But Lyon had lost fifteen days of priceless time at Booneville, and the State troops were more than a week in advance of his own column, near Lamar. In front of the Governor, though he did not him- self know it, was the force which Lyon, before leav- ing St. Louis, had sent under Sweeney and Sigel to the south-west to cut off the retreat of the State troops, and to prevent McCulloch from succoring them. Sweeny, who reached Springfield on the 1st of July, found at and near that post and on the way thither from Rolla, about four thousand men, including one thousand Home Guards. Sigel, who had preceded him, had moved westward with his own regiment and Salomon's, and taken position at Neosho and Sarcoxie in order to intercept General Price. Finding that Price and his escort had already passed on to McCulloch's camp, he decided to throw himself in front of Governor Jackson, and to hold him north of Spring River till Lyon could come up with his own and Sturgis' columns and attack him in rear. In this determination he was confirmed by an order from Sweeny, who directed him to concentrate his force, and move toward Carthage, which was in the direct line of the Gov- ernor's retreat. Leaving one company of his own regiment and some detailed men at Neosho under Booneville and Carthage. 223 command of Captain Conrad, he moved northward with the rest of his force, except Captain Indest's company, and encamped on the evening of the 4th of July on Spring River a little south-east of Carthage. Just after the sun had gone down on the 4th of July, and while the State troops were still encamped near Lamar, resting from their fatigues, and getting themselves into some semblance of an army, a man rode hastily to General Parsons' quarters and told the general that Colonel Monroe (his quarter- master) who had gone to Carthage with a detach- ment of ninety-five men to collect forage and sub- sistence, was threatened there by a large force of the enemy, and wanted reinforcements. Parsons instantly ordered his whole command to get ready to march toward Carthage at ten o'clock that night, and then communicated the facts to the Governor. This was the first intimation that the State troops had that an enemy was in their front with intent to cut off their retreat. But before the hour fixed by Parsons for the movement of his command had arrived, other couriers had come from Monroe say- ing that the Federals were approaching Carthage in great force. Governor Jackson thereupon assumed command in person of all his troops, and, counter- 224 The Fight for Missouri, manding Parsons' order for the movement of his own force, ordered the whole army to take up the march at day break (July 5), with Rains in front, and Captain Shelby's company in advance. The Governor, accompanied by General David R. Atchison and other volunteer aids and by some of his own staff, rode at the head of the column with General Rains. They had marched about five miles beyond Lamar when they were met by Colonel Monroe and informed by him that Sigel had al- ready passed through Carthage, and was on the way to meet them and give battle. The col- umn was quickly halted on the ridge of a prairie, which sloped gently down toward Cocn Creek, an affluent of Spring River. This creek, which was heavily bordered on both sides by "timber" and "brush," was about two miles in front of the State troops. Hardly had they been halted when the bayonets of the Federals were seen gleaming in the sunshine as they descended the opposite declivity in perfect order, before disappearing in " the timber" on that side of the creek. The Governor at once deployed his men in line of battle, with Weightman's brigade on the right, and on its left Slack's Infantry. Between these two Bledsoe's three guns were thrown into battery. Guibor took position with his four guns on the left of Slack, and next to him came Parsons' Infantry, Booneville and Carthage. 225 under Colonel Kelly. Clark's Infantry under Bur- bridge occupied the left. The right flank of the State troops was covered by Rains with the mounted men of his division, and their left flank by mount- ed men under Brown and Rives. The line thus formed consisted of twenty-six hundred infantry and artillery most of the former armed with shot guns and rifles, and about fifteen hundred mounted men similarly armed. The unarmed men, of whom there were about two thousand, all mounted, were sent to the rear with the wagons. Every one, officers and men, now looked on with intense curiosity, as the Federals, with the precision of veterans which most of them were, emerged from "the brush" on the north side of the creek, and de- ployed into line on the prairie some twelve hundred yards away. They consisted of nine companies of Sigel's Regiment and seven companies of Salomon's, with an effective strength of nine hundred and fifty men, and seven pieces of artillery (one hundred and twenty-five men) under Major Backoff. Sigel began the fight. Advancing his line about three hundred yards, he opened upon the State troops with all his guns, delivering a steady fire of round shot, shell and grape. Guibor replied with his four guns and was followed on the instant by Bledsoe. The ineffective artillery practice thus begun had been kept up nearly an hour, when the Governor 15 226 The Fight for Missouri. ordered Rains to advance on the right with his mounted men, and Rives and Brown on the left. The unarmed men on horseback (about two thou- sand) were at the same time ordered to seek shelter in the heavy timber on the right of the State troops. Sigel, seeing these movements, and that he was about to be attacked on both flanks, and fancying also that he was about to be taken in rear by the heavy mounted force which was taking shelter in the woods (for he did not know that they were not armed) withdrew his men in good order first to the timber, and then beyond the creek. Posting Essig's Battery, with a support of five companies of infantry on the high ground south of the creek in such way as to command the approach to the ford, he retired with the rest of his men to the defence of his train, then threatened by some mounted Missourians who had crossed the creek higher up. The State troops following in some disorder were brought to a halt within four hundred yards of the ford by the well-directed fire of Essig's Battery. But Weightman rapidly reforming his line, opened fire with Bledsoe's guns, and under their cover and that of " the timber," advanced his own brigade along with Slack's toward the creek. It was now and here that the serious fighting of the day took place; for Essig continued to hold the ford with great obstinacy. But General Clark and General Booneville and Carthage. 227 Parsons managed at last to cross the creek at an- other ford and were endangering his retreat. Essig thereupon gave the order to retire, and fell back to the main body. Sigel continued his retreat in good order, closely followed by a rabble of State troops and harassed on all sides by their mounted men, who did not, however, dare to attack his compact ranks. Cross- ing Spring River without opposition he held Car- thage under cover of its houses and fences till his train was well on the road to Springfield. He then continued his retreat to Sarcoxie, fifteen miles away. Reaching that place at three o'clock in the morning, he rested his men there till daybreak, and then hast- ened along to Mount Vernon. Finding that he was no longer pursued, he halted there. As the engage- ment took place about nine miles north of Carthage, Sigel had on the 5th of July marched under a blazing sun more than ten miles, had met and fought on the same day an army four times as numerous as his own, and had then withdrawn his men in good order, first to Carthage nine miles from the field, and then to Sarcoxie fifteen miles further, without halting either to eat or to sleep. The Federal loss in this " engagement near Carth- age," generally called The Battle of Carthage, was thirteen killed and thirty-one wounded. The State troops lost ten killed and sixty-four wounded. The 228 The Fight for Missouri. Federal commander estimated Governor Jackson's losses at " not less than from three hundred and fifty to four hundred," and Confederate historians have estimated Sigel's loss " at from one hundred and fifty to two hundred killed, and from three hun- dred to four hundred wounded ! " The State troops occupied on the night of the battle the ground on which Sigel had camped the preceding night, and the next day (July 6) they marched leisurely and in great good spirits toward Granby.

## wilsons-creek-approach

Toward sunset, accompanied by Mcintosh, he came to Price's quarters and informed him that he had just received dispatches from General Polk saying that General Pillow was advancing into Mis- souri from New Madrid with twelve thousand men, and that in consequence of this information he had concluded to accept command of the com- bined armies, and attack Lyon. General Price at 17 258 The Fight for Missouri. once published an order announcing to his troops that he had turned over the command of the State Guard to General McCulloch, reserving to himself, however, the right to resume command at his own pleasure. Believing that Lyon was still at McCulla's farm, McCulloch marched at midnight, expecting to sur- prise and attack him at daybreak. He was already some distance on the way when he learned that Lyon had left twenty hours previously and was retreating to Springfield. Pushing on in great haste, though the weather was intensely hot and the dust almost unendurable, McCulloch kept up the pursuit to Moody's Spring near Tyrel's Creek. See- ing then that Lyon had escaped, he halted there ; but moved the next morning (August 6) some two miles nearer to Springfield, and took position on Wilson's Creek, so as to be within reach of some ripening fields of corn, which was to be the only subsistence of his army for the next day or two. Wilson's Creek, rising in, and around, Springfield, flows westwardly some five miles and then, turning to the south, flows nine or ten miles in that direc- tion before emptying into the James, an affluent of White River. A mile or so above its mouth it re- ceives the waters of Tyrel's Creek, flowing into it from the west : and a mile and a half further north Lyon Moves Out to Attack. 259 a smaller stream, Skegg's branch, flowing likewise from the west, empties into it. The road from Cass- ville, on which McCulloch was advancing toward Springfield (known also as the Fayetteville, or Tele- graph Road) crosses both Tyrel's Creek and Skegg's Branch just above their mouths. After crossing the latter, it runs northward along the western bank of Wilson's Creek nearly a mile, and then, crossing the creek at a ford, turns north-eastward toward Spring- field, which is nine or ten miles beyond. Between Tyrel's Creek and Skegg's Branch there is a considerable valley, partly wooded, lying be- tween the Fayetteville Road, and Wilson's Creek. In this valley the mounted regiments of Greer, and Churchill, and about seven hundred mounted Missourians, under Lieutenant Colonel Major and Colonel Brown, went into camp. Between Skegg's Branch and the ford across Wil- son's Creek, the valley through which the road passes is quite narrow, and the road runs within a few yards of the stream. Toward the west a hill, since known as Bloody Hill, rises gradually from the creek to the height of nearly a hundred feet, its sides deeply seamed with ravines, and dinted here and there with sink-holes. At this time it was densely covered with undergrowth through which was inter- spersed a species of scrub-oak (black-jacks), and near its summit the rock cropped out in many places. In 260 The Fight for Missouri. the narrow valley between the base of this hill and the creek were bivouacked all the infantry of Price's command, except Weightman's Brigade. Price's quarters were on the road, and about five hundred yards south of the ford. McBride, Slack, Clark, and Parsons occupied the ground between his quarters and Skegg's Branch: The hill on the eastern side of the creek rises abruptly to the height of about seventy-five feet. Upon this hill the infantry and artillery of Pearce's Arkansas Brigade were encamped — Woodruff's Bat- tery on its northern face near the ford, and Reid's Battery on its southern declivity, opposite to Skegg's Branch, and the infantry between them. McCul- loch's head-quarters were on the hill near Woodruff's Battery. The Third Louisiana and McRae's Bat- talion, both belonging to McCulloch's Brigade, were camped near by, and Weightman's Missouri Brigade was half a mile away to the south-east. Mcintosh's Regiment (for Mcintosh was colonel of a regiment, as well as adjutant-general of the brigade), pitched its tents on the east side of the creek just above the ford. A mile further up the creek, on the northern slope of Bloody Hill, was Rains, with Cawthon's Brigade of mounted Missourians ; his camps ex- tending northward as far as Gibson's Mill. Rains' quarters were on the eastern side of the creek, and there a few of his men also bivouacked. Lyon Moves Out to Attack. 261 From Rains, on the extreme left of the Confeder- ates, to Churchill and Greer, on their extreme right, the distance was just three miles up and down the creek. While the army lay here waiting for its trains to come up, McCulloch would every day sling his May- nard rifle across his shoulder and reconnoitre towards Springfield, sometimes in force, and sometimes al- most alone. But adventurous, daring, and skilful as he was, he could learn nothing positive as to either Lyon's strength, or as to the defences of Springfield. He could not even ascertain whether Lyon had for- tified his position at all, or not. To all the entrea- ties of Price and the Missourians that he would advance he only replied that he " would not make a blind attack upon Springfield ; " and, blaming them for his own want of success in reconnoitring, told them, at last, that he " would order the whole army back to Cassville rather than bring on an engage- ment with an unknown enemy. " On Thursday, the 8th, Price received information that Lyon was greatly perplexed ; that he was in constant expectation of being attacked ; that he kept his men under arms all the time ; and that he was getting ready to abandon Springfield. Com- municating this information to McCulloch, and vouching for the credibility of his informants, the general again urged him, with great earnestness, to 262 The Fight for Missouri. move straightway upon Springfield. McCulloch having promised to consider the matter carefully, and to make known his decision that evening, rode once more to the front, rifle in hand, accompanied by Mcintosh and a considerable force. It was late when he returned to camp, and he did not com- municate his purpose to General Price that night, as he had promised to do. The general, waking at daybreak, directed the writer to see McCulloch instantly, and to ask what he had decided to do. I hastened to his quarters, and was still talking with him when the general himself rode up, his impatience no longer control- able, and insisted with great vehemence that McCul- loch should keep the promise which he had made at Crane Creek, and lead the army out against Lyon. McCulloch finally consented to meet all the gen- eral officers of the command in council at Price's quarters at noon, and then to determine upon some plan of action. At this council McCulloch ex- pressed great unwillingness to attack Lyon, or to enter upon any aggressive campaign. But Price declared emphatically that if orders were not forth- with issued for a forward movement, he would re- sume command of the Missouri troops, and himself give battle to Lyon, be the consequences what they might. He was warmly seconded by Generals Clark, Parsons, Rains, Slack, and McBride that Lyon Moves Out to Attack. 263 McCulloch yielded at last, and ordered the army to be in readiness to move that night (August 9), at nine o'clock. Before that time a slight rain began to fall, and the order to march was countermanded, the officers being instructed, however, to hold their men in readiness to move at any moment. This was wisely done, for most of the Missourians, hav- ing no cartridge-boxes, had to carry their ammu- nition in their pockets, and if a rain had fallen upon them during the march, it would have virtually dis- armed three-fourths of them all. The Confederates, therefore, lay upon their arms, waiting for the order to march. About dawn Gen- eral Price sent me to ask McCulloch what he pro- posed to do. He and Mcintosh returned with me to Price's quarters on the west side of the creek, at the foot of Bloody Hill which sloped down toward us from the north-west. As our breakfast of corn- bread, lean beef, and coffee, was about to be served, McCulloch and Mcintosh were invited to share it. When Lyon got back to Springfield on Monday, the 5th of August, he was more embarrassed than ever. Not a man had come to, him from Fremont ; not even a word. Two regiments — the one in Kan- sas, and the other on the Missouri — had been or- dered to him the day before, but they could not 264 The Fight for Missouri. possibly reach him in less than a fortnight ; and before that time the enlistments of one third of his men would have expired, and they would have returned to their homes. Though he was convinced that he could not, with the force at his command, resist the armies which were gathering to attack him and whose strength he constantly overestimated, he was, nevertheless, loth to abandon Springfield and the South-west to the Confederates. For he fully realized the great ad- vantage which Price would gain by occupying that region, which would not only feed and recruit his army, but open to him the rich counties on the Mis- souri, with their teeming resources and tens of thou- sands of volunteers. He knew too that it would encourage the Secessionists in every county, and dishearten all loyal men, and that it might lose to the Union every part of the State, except St. Louis. But if it were difficult to advance, or to remain where he was, it was even more difficult to retreat ; it was in fact impossible to retreat. The only road open to him was that which led to Rolla, from which place there was a railway to St. Louis. Between Springfield^nd Rolla, lay a rough coun- try, through which the road ran for one hun- dred and fifteen miles over hills, and through ravines, and across a hundred streams. How could Lyon Moves Out to Attack. 265 an army of six or seven thousand disheartened men, encumbered by four hundred army wagons, and im- peded by crowds of refugees, fleeing with their families and household goods before the wrath of their own fellow-countrymen, hope to retreat over such a road, for such a distance, pursued by more than twice their own number of men under Price and McCulloch, and harassed and hindered at every step by an overwhelming force of mounted troops? It were surely better to fight than to retreat. Accordingly he called his principal officers to- gether, on the evening of the 8th, explained the situation to them, and announced that it was his de- termination to move down the Fayetteville Road with his whole force at night, surprise the enemy in their camp on Wilson's Creek at daybreak, and trust everything to the hazard of a battle. The next day (Friday, August 9), after consultation with Colonel Sigel, he changed this plan, and, instead of advancing in a single column, and attacking the Confederates in front, ordered Sigel to take the Third and Fifth Regiments of Missouri Volun- teers, six pieces of artillery, and two companies of regular cavalry, the whole aggregating about twelve hundred officers and men, and»with them turn the right flank of the Confederates ; while he, with the remainder of his force, about four thousand two hundred men in all, would move out and turn their 266 The Fight for Missouri. left flank. Sigel was to make the attack as soon as he heard Lyon's guns. Both columns were to leave Springfield that afternoon about sunset. Before leaving, Lyon sent the following letter to General Fremont, — his last : " I retired to this place, as I before informed you, reaching here on the 5th. The enemy followed to within ten miles of here. He has taken a strong po- sition and is recruiting his supply of horses, mules, and provisions, by forays into the surrounding coun- try ; his large force of mounted men enabling him to do this without much annoyance from me. I find my position extremely embarrassing, and am at present unable to determine whether I shall be able to maintain my ground, or be forced to retire. I can resist any attack from the front, but, if the enemy were to surround me, I must retire. I shall hold my ground as long as possible, though I may, without knowing how far, endanger the safety of my entire force, with its valuable material, being induced, by the important considerations involved, to take this step. The enemy showed himself in considerable force yesterday five miles from here, and has doubtless a full purpose of attacking me." Not one word about the desperate battle that he was to fight on the morrow ; not one fault-finding utterance ; not a breath of complaint ! Lyon Moves Out to Attack. 267 But, true to his convictions; true to his flag; true to the Union men of Missouri who confided in and followed him ; true to himself ; and true to duty, he went out to battle against a force twice as great as his own, with a calmness that was as pathetic as his courage was sublime.

## wilsons-creek

LEAVING Springfield about five o'clock Friday- afternoon August the 9th, Lyon moved out about five miles on the road to Little York, and then turning southward across the prairie came, about one o'clock, in sight of Rains' camp-fire%, which extended northward as far as Gibson's Mill. He had completely turned the Confederate left, and was in rear of them. Halting his column till dawn, he then resumed his march with Plummer's battalion of regulars in advance, followed by Oster- haus' battalion of Missouri volunteers and Totten's battery. The Confederates were not yet aware of his approach, as they had withdrawn all their pickets at midnight. About this time, however, Colonel Cawthon, who was in immediate command of Rains' mounted brigade, sent out a picket in the direction from which Lyon was approaching. The Battle of Wilson s Creek. 269 This picket had not advanced more than a mile and a half beyond Gibson's Mill, when they discov- ered that an enemy was in their front. This fact being made known to Cawthon, he sent Colonel Hunter with " the effectives" of his regiment, some three hundred men, to ascertain whether this enemy was advancing in force or not. When Hunter reached the picket, about five A.M., the head of the Federal column was already in sight. His first intention was to attack. But Lyon, seeing that his approach was at last known to the Confederates and that his further advance would be contested, now deployed his men into line, sending Osterhaus' battalion to the right and Plummer's to the left as skirmishers, and bringing the First Missouri up to the support of Totten's battery. Hunter thereupon retreated, and Lyon moved forward as rapidly as the ground would permit. Cawthon was meanwhile forming the rest of his brigade on the northern slope of Bloody Hill. He had about six hundred dismounted men in line. When Hunter, falling back before Lyon, reached this position, Cawthon ordered him to retire fur- ther down the creek and dismount his men, and then to return to the field and take position on his right. But before this was done, Lyon appeared on the 270 The Fight for Missouri. brow of the opposite hill with the First Missouri, the First Kansas, and Totten's battery. A brisk skirmish took place, and Cawthon was driven back over the brow of Bloody Hill, to its southern slope, where he was safe for the time. Hunter and McCown, who had been separated from him, did not rejoin him again till late in the day. While Lyon was thus getting into position, Sigel had perfectly executed his part of the plan. Leaving Springfield about sunset he moved down the Fayetteville road about four miles, and then making a detour to the left came, about daybreak, within a few hundred yards of Wilson's Creek, just below the point at which Tyrell's Creek empties into it. He had turned the Confederate right just as completely as Lyon had turned its left ; and at dawn of Friday August the 10th the whole Confederate force lay between Lyon and Sigel, and utterly ignorant of their proximity. Having discovered that Greer, Churchill, and other mounted Confederates were encamped just across the creek from his position, Sigel, in order to keep his presence from their knowledge, so disposed his men as to capture all stragglers from their camp and to arrest every one that was moving about. He then posted four of his guns on a hill east of the creek in such way as to command The Battle of Wilsons Creek. 271 Churchill's camp, which was hardly five hundred yards away. Leaving with these guns a small infantry support, he then crossed Wilson's Creek, with the rest of his command, just below the mouth of Tyrell's Creek ; and facing northward waited for Lyon's signal gun. Churchill and Greer had, like Rains, drawn in their pickets during the night. Rains, whose quarters were near his mounted brigade (Cawthon's), but on the eastern side of the creek, and some distance south of Gibson's Mill, had learned, about the time that Hunter went to the front, that some sort of a force was coming toward him from the northwest. He accordingly directed Colonel Snyder, of his staff, to go and "see what was the matter." Snyder, on reaching the prairie, saw the Federals approaching. Hurry- ing back to Rains, he told him that the Federals were advancing in great force, " their soldiers and cannon covering the whole prairie." Rains ordered him to report the facts instantly to General Price. It was now nearly six o'clock, and still neither Price nor McCulloch, who was then at Price's quarters, had any cause to suspect that Lyon had even left Springfield. Snyder, coming up almost breathless with haste and excitement, said that Lyon was approaching 272 The Fight for Missouri. with twenty thousand men and ioo pieces of artil- lery, and was then within less than a mile of Rains' camp. McCulloch, believing that this was " one of Rains' scares," told Snyder to say to that officer that he would himself come to the front directly. In two or three minutes another officer came dashing up and said that Rains was falling back before overwhelming numbers, and needed instant and heavy reinforcements. Looking up, we could, ourselves, see a great crowd of men on horseback, some armed, and others unarmed, mixed in with wagons and teams and led horses, all in dreadful confusion, scamper- ing over the hill, and rushing dov/n toward us — a panic-stricken drove. In another instant, we saw the flash and heard the report of Totten's guns, which had gone into battery on the top of the hill, not more than a thousand yards away, and were throwing shot into the flying crowd. And then, in quick response, came the sound of Sigel's guns, as they opened upon Churchill, Greer, Major, and Brown, and drove them in confusion out of the valley in which they were encamped and into the thick woods that fringed the banks of Skeggs' Branch and covered the hills that rose on either side of that little stream. In a moment McCulloch, followed by Mcintosh, was in the saddle and on his way to take com- 1 V Jr , \ \ \ was ass *f *4 ■* i j THE BATTLE FIELD OF WILSON'S CREEK. Note. — Most of the ground was covered with a dense undergrowth which is not depicted in the sketch. The Battle of Wilsons Creek. 273 mand of the troops on the eastern side of the creek; and Price, having ordered his infantry and artillery to follow, was galloping up Bloody Hill to take command of Cawthon's brigade, which was still falling back before Lyon, resisting him all that it could. Price hoped with it to hold the Federals in check till the rest of his Missourians could come up. These were already forming along the Fayette- ville road, and were, within a few minutes, hasten- ing up the hill at double-quick. Hardly had Price gotten Cawthon's men into line under the brow of the hill, where they were out of range of Totten's guns, and under cover of the trees and dense under- growth which shade that part of the field, when Slack came up with Hughes' regiment and Thorn- ton's battalion and formed on the left of Cawthon. Clark followed immediately with Burbridge's regi- ment, and took position on the left of Slack. Then came Parsons, with Kelly's regiment and Guibor's battery ; while on the extreme left of Price's line McBride took position with his two regiments. Slack's command was soon reinforced by Colonel Rives, with about seventy dismounted men of his regiment ; and half an hour later, Weightman, whose brigade had been encamped a mile or more from the rest of Price's infantry, came up with Clarkson's and Hurst's regiments, about seven hun- 18 274 The Fight for Missouri. dred strong, and fell in between Slack and Caw- thon. The line thus formed by Price in front of Lyon aggregated, with Weightman's command, over thirty-one hundred men, with four pieces of artil- lery. He was greatly assisted from the beginning by Woodruff, who had with true soldierly instinct thrown his pieces into battery on the bluff east of the ford, at the first sound of Totten's guns, and opened upon Lyon a fire, which checked his ad- vance and gave the Missourians time to reach Caw- thon's position and form their line of battle there. To Price's force Lyon opposed the First Missouri, the First Kansas, Osterhaus' battalion of Missouri volunteers, Totten's six-gun battery (regulars), and Dubois' four-gun battery (regulars), aggregating nearly nineteen hundred men. The rest of his force, except Plummer's battalion, he held in reserve. The two lines were not more than three hundred yards apart, but they were entirely concealed from each other by the intervening foliage. As Price's men were armed almost exclusively with shot-guns and common rifles, it was imperatively necessary for him, near as the two forces already were to each other, either to advance more closely to the Union line, or to wait till it should approach his own. He chose the latter alternative, and awaited Lyon's advance. The Battle of Wilsons Creek. 275 He did, not have to wait long, for in a few- minutes the word " Forward ! " was plainly heard, and was quickly followed by the tramp of men, and by the crackling of the brush through which they were coming. When Lyon's Missourians and their allies had come within easy range of Price's Mis- sourians, out of the ranks of the latter there rang upon the air the sharp click of a thousand rifles, the report of a thousand shot-guns, and the roar of Guibor's guns ; and the battle of Wilson's Creek had begun in earnest. Missourians now fought to the death against Missourians, on the leafy hill-side ; while from opposing heights, Totten, who had but lately been stationed at Little Rock where his fam- ily still resided, fought furiously against Woodruff's Little Rock battery, which now turned against him the very guns which they had taken from him a few months before. The battle thus joined upon the hill-side was now waged for hours with intense earnestness. The lines would approach again and again within less than fifty yards of each other, and then, after delivering a deadly fire, each would fall back a few paces to reform and reload, only to advance again, and again renew this strange battle in the woods. Peculiar in all its aspects, strange in all its surroundings, unique in every way, the most remarkable of all its char- acteristics was the deep silence which now and then 276 The Fight for Missouri. fell upon the smoking field — fell upon it, and rested there undisturbed for many minutes, while the two armies, unseen of each other, lay but a few yards apart, gathering strength to grapple again in the death struggle for Missouri. Meanwhile McCulloch, upon leaving Price, had gone with Mcintosh to the eastern side of the creek, where the infantry of his own brigade, and the infan- try and artillery of Pearce's were both encamped. His first object was to dispose these troops in such way as to meet Sigel's attack, the strength and meaning of which were not yet developed. In order to do this he posted Reid's battery on the bluff opposite to the mouth of Skegg's Branch, and ordered Walker's regiment to support it. He then placed Dockery's and Gratiot's regiments further north, along the bluff which forms the eastern bank of Wilson's Creek from Skegg's Branch northward, to the ford. These dispositions gave him command of the crossing of Skegg's Branch, over which Sigel would have to advance, if he should undertake to attack Price in rear. He then posted McRae's battalion, the Third Louisiana, and Mcintosh's regiment, of his own brigade, north of Gratiot, and on the same bluff. It was upon the northern extremity of this bluff that Woodruff had taken position and gone into action. The Battle of Wilsons Creek. 277 While McCulloch was still making these disposi- tions Woodruff perceived that a part of Lyon's col- umn, constituting the extreme left of his line, had crossed to the eastern side of the Creek, and was moving down its left bank towards the position oc- cupied by his battery. As soon as this fact was made known to McCulloch he ordered Gratiot to the support of Woodruff, and sent Mcintosh with his regiment dismounted, the Third Louisiana, and McRae's battalion to meet the advancing Federals. Mcintosh moved rapidly to the front, keeping on the eastern side of the creek. Though covered somewhat by Woodruff's guns he was greatly har- rassed by Dubois, who hurled grape-shot and shell against him from the eastern brow of Bloody Hill. Crossing the Fayetteville road he led his men through a dense thicket to a large cornfield behind whose fence the Federals had taken position. They turned out to be Plummer's battalion of United States Infantry, supported at a safe distance by Captain Wright's Squadron of Home Guards. A fierce conflict ensued, the Confederates fighting under cover of "the brush," and the Federals be- hind the fence. Mcintosh finding that the enemy's fire was playing havoc with his men ordered them to charge, and leading the way leaped the fence. The greater part of his own regiment, and of the Third Louisiana, followed him, and they quickly put 278 The Fight for Missouri. Plummer to flight, and drove him back to and across the creek to Lyon's main body. In the ardor of pursuit the Confederates came within close range of Dubois' battery, and Osterhaus' battalion, and were themselves driven back in some confusion. In this engagement, which began about seven o'clock and lasted nearly an hour, Plummer, who had about three hundred regulars, lost eighty officers and men, and was himself severely wounded. Mcintosh took about one thousand men into action. His losses aggregated over one hundred. While this fight was going on Sigel had advanced leisurely through the camps out of which he had driven the Confederates at sunrise, and had taken position with his entire force, some twelve hundred men, with six pieces of artillery, near Sharp's house on the bluff south of Skegg's Branch. His battery occupied a high plateau, and his infantry were drawn up on both sides of the Fayetteville road, with a company of United States cavalry on each flank. It was his purpose to hold this position so as to cut off the retreat of " the rebels " when they had been put to flight by Lyon. McCulloch, after sending Mcintosh to meet Plum- mer, had returned towards Skegg's Branch in order to look after Sigel. Finding that the further advance of the latter was effectually barred by The Battle of Wilsons Creek, 279 Pearce's Brigade and by a considerable force which was rallying under cover of the woods on the north side of the branch, he hurried back toward the point where Mcintosh was engaged with Plummer. On getting there he found that the Confederates had won that engagement, and that there was no longer any danger in that direction. Taking two companies of the Third Louisiana that were nearest to him, and ordering Mcintosh to bring up the rest, McCulloch now hastened again towards Skegg's Branch, determined to attack Sigel. Lieutenant-Colonel Rosser had already taken posi- tion with his own men, O'Kane's battalion, and Bledsoe's battery, on the western side of the Fay- etteville Road and north of the branch ; Bledsoe's guns being so posted as to completely command Sigel's position. Sigel and his men were in blissful ignorance of all that was happening in their front. For between them and the valley, in which their foes were gathering, stood a dense wood through whose lux- uriant undergrowth no eye could pierce. Now and then a skirmisher, or an adventurous officer, would make his way to the bluff which overhung the little stream, and catch sight of the smoke that darkened Bloody Hill, and sometimes one more daring than the rest would venture far enough to see indis- tinctly what was going on in the upper part of the 280 The Fight for Missouri. valley, towards the ford. At last one of these saw a gray-coated regiment hurrying down the road toward Skegg's Branch. Knowing that the First Iowa wore a gray uniform, Jie at once concluded that this must be the First Iowa, and such was the report that he bore back to Sigel. The latter com- municated the glad news to his men, and warned them not to fire upon their approaching " friends." They waved their flags instead, in joyful welcome. Just at this moment Reid on the east and Bledsoe on the west opened fire upon them at point-blank range. "It is impossible for me," says Sigel, " to describe the consternation and frightful confusion which were caused by this unfortunate event. 'They are firing against us,' spread like wild-fire through our ranks. The artillery men could hardly be brought forward to serve their pieces. The Infantry would not level their arms till too late." The consternation and confusion deepened into a panic when about four hundred of the gray-coated Third Louisiana dashing up the steep bluff with Mc- Culloch and Mcintosh at their head, and Rosser and O'Kane's battalion following, broke through the thick " brush," and charged right upon the Federal Battery. Sigel's whole force took to in- stant flight, abandoning five of their six guns, and throwing themselves for safety into the bushes which lined both sides of the Fayetteville road. The Battle of Wilsons Creek, 281 Here they got separated. Sigel and Salomon with about two hundred of their Germans and Carr's company of cavalry tried to make their way back to Springfield by the same route that they came, but they were set upon by Lieutenant-Colonel Ma- jor with some mounted Missourians and Texans, and the Germans, being abandoned by Captain Carr who made good his escape, were nearly all either killed, wounded, or made prisoners. Sigel himself got to Springfield with one man only. An- other part of his column made its way to Little York and thence to Springfield. It was now nearly nine o'clock. Churchill, who after being driven out of his camp in the early morn- ing by Sigel had quickly rallied his men and taken them to the north side of Skegg's Branch and gone into the fight on Price's extreme left, was now moving to the centre of Price's line, where it was hardest pressed. After detailing enough men to hold the horses of those that were dismounted for the fight he had about five hundred " effectives." Forming these in line on the Fayetteville road, south of the ford, and within reach of the enemy's shot, he led them gallantly up the hill and went again into the fight on the left of Slack, and in the very front of Lyon's attack. The Missourians, thus strengthened where they 282 The Fight for Missouri. most needed strengthening, advanced boldly, Gui- bor's guns keeping in line with the Infantry, and Woodruff throwing his shot high overhead into the midst of Lyon's reserves. Lyon, finding that his men were giving way, brought forward a section of Totten's battery with a strong support to the right and front of his own line, and enfiladed the Confederates at two hundred yards, Totten and Gordon Granger both helping to work the guns. McCulloch, who had gone with Churchill up Bloody Hill, diverted this fire by returning in all haste to the valley and sending Carroll's Arkansas cavalry and five companies of Greer's mounted Texans to turn Lyon's right and charge these guns in rear. The ground was ill-adapted to the opera- tions of cavalry, and Greer and Carroll were finally driven back. But this movement relieved Price nevertheless, and at the same time so increased Lyon's anxiety that he ordered the First Iowa to the front and brought Steele's battalion of regulars to the further support of Totten. Up to this time (ten o'clock) the infantry of Pearce's brigade, three fine regiments — Gratiot's, Dockery's, and Walker's — more than 1,700 strong, had not fired a shot, nor had Graves' Missouri regiment, about three hundred strong, that ought to have followed WTeightman into battle. There The Battle of Wilson s Creek. 283 they lay just across the creek, not half a mile away, with nothing to do and doing nothing. Price, seeing the absolute necessity of instant and decisive action, for Lyon was now bringing every available man to the front and doing prodi- gies of valor, galloped over to Gratiot, during the pause of the fight which occurred in his own front while Greer and Carroll were attempting to flank Lyon's right, and begged him to bring his regiment to the help of the Missourians and Churchill. Gratiot, who had served under Price in Mexico and loved and honored him, did not hesitate an instant, but, ordered his regiment to follow Price who was already hastening back to his own men, and sent an officer to tell General Pearce what he had done. Pearce came forward at once and overtaking Price and Gratiot rode with them at the head of the regi- ment as it ran up Bloody Hill. When they drew near to the position which they were to occupy, Price said to the men : " You will soon be in a pretty hot place, men ! but I will be near you, and I will take care of you ; keep as cool as the inside of a cucumber and give them thunder." Turning to Gratiot he said : " That's your position, colonel ; take it and hold it whatever you do. I will see that you are not too hard pressed. Don't yield an inch." Gratiot moved, on the instant, towards the posi- 284 The Fight for Missouri. tion which the general had indicated. As he did so his regiment came within range of Totten's guns. The men passed safely, but the rear of the regiment was swept of its field and staff. Gratiot's horse was killed and his orderly's too. The lieutenant- colonel was dismounted. The major's arm was broken. The quarter-master was killed and the regimental commissary severely wounded. But the regiment kept on and took the position that it had been ordered to take — took it, and held it under a fire so furious that in less than thirty minutes a hundred of its men were either dead or wounded — one hundred out of five hundred. From the summit of Bloody Hill Lyon could see the entire field. It all lay before him, its outmost limits hardly a mile away. He knew now that Sigel had been defeated, and that the troops which had put him to flight would soon be coming, all flushed with victory, to join the force which Price was getting ready to hurl again against his own dis- heartened men. He could see Gratiot hurrying even now with more than five hundred fresh troops to give vigor to the assault that was about to be made upon his own weary men, broken down as these were by a long night-march, and by five hours of the very hardest fighting ; could see him clamber- ing up the hill-side now, himself and his men eager to fight under the eye of the brave soldier that was The Battle of Wilsons Creek. 285 leading them to death or to victory. He could also see the rest of Pearce's brigade forming on the opposite hill and about to bring their bright muskets into the thickening fight, muskets that had not yet been tarnished by the smoke of battle. And all through the valley that lay beneath him he could see Missourians, and Texans, and Arkansians — men who had as yet taken no part in the des- perate fight that had been raging since day-dawn, — thousands of men, taking heart again as they got used to the din of war, and clutching their shot- guns and rifles, resolved to be " in at the death." He saw all this and more ; and there was no hope left within him but to dash upon Price with all his might and crush him to the ground before these gathering forces could come to his help. He now brought every available battalion to the front. " The engagement at once became general, and almost inconceivably fierce along the entire line, the enemy " (these are the words of Schofield and Sturgis) " appearing in front, often in three or four ranks, lying down, kneeling, and standing, and the lines often approaching to within thirty or forty yards as the enemy would charge upon Totten's battery and be driven back." Neither line of battle was more than a thousand yards in length. Price guarded carefully every part of his own. Wherever the danger was greatest and 286 The Fight for Missouri. the battle most doubtful, thither would he hasten and there would he stay till the danger was all past. In the intervals of the fight he would ride far to the front among his skirmishers, and peer into the thick smoke which tangled itself among the trees and the bushes, and clung to the ground as though it wanted to hide the combatants from each other; would peer wistfully into it till through its rifts he could discern what the enemy was doing, and then his voice would ring down the whole length of his line, and officers and men would quickly spring forward to obey it : for long before the battle was over they had all learned that they were fighting under one of the best and truest of soldiers, under one who knew how to fight them to the greatest advantage, one who would expose them to no useless danger, nor to any danger which he would not himself share. Many a time did they cry out to him as with one voice : " Don't lead us, General ; don't come with us ; take care of yourself for the sake of us all ; we will go without you." Several times his clothing was pierced by bullets, one of which inflicted a painful wound in his side. Turning with a smile to an officer that was near him he said : " That isn't fair ; if I were as slim as Lyon that fellow would have missed me entirely." No one else knew till the bat- tle was ended, that he had been struck. One of his aids, Colonel Allen of Saline, was killed while re- The Battle of Wilsons Creek, 287 ceiving an order ; Weightman was borne to the rear dying ; Cawthon and his adjutant were both mortally wounded ; Slack was fearfully lacerated by a mus- ket-ball, and Clark was shot in the leg. Colonel Ben Brown was killed, Churchill had two horses shot under him, Gratiot one. Colonels Burbridge, Foster and Kelly, and nearly every other field officer, were disabled. But in spite of all these losses Price grew stronger all the time, while Lyon's strength was fast wasting away. Walking along his line from left to right en- couraging his men by his own intrepid bearing and by a few well-spoken words ; rallying them where they were beginning to give way ; steadying them where they still stood to their duty ; inspiring them with his own brave purpose to make one more effort to win the day, while yet there was time to try, Lyon had nearly reached the advanced section of Totten's battery when his horse, whose bridle he held in his hand, was killed, and himself was wounded in the leg and in the head. Stunned and dazed by the blow, and his brave soul cast down by the shock, he said in a confused sort of way to those that were nearest that he feared that the day was lost. But he came quickly to his senses, and ordering Sturgis to rally the First Iowa, which was beginning to break badly, he mounted a horse that was offered to him, and swinging his hat in the air, 288 The Fight for Missouri, called out to his men to follow. A portion of Mitch- ell's Second Kansas, which Lieutenant Wherry- had just brought again to the front, closed quickly around him and together they dashed into the fight. The next minute Mitchell was struck down se- verely wounded, and almost instantly thereafter a fatal ball pierced Lyon's breast. He fell from his horse into the arms of his faithful orderly, who had sprung forward to catch him, and in another minute he was dead. The command devolved upon Major Sturgis. He called his chief officers together. Price had al- ready been reinforced by Gratiot, and now Dock- ery's Arkansas regiment and a section of Reid's battery were getting into position, and with them was the Third Louisiana, which, for the first time since its encounter with Plummer in the early- morning, had been gotten together under its colo- nel (Hebert)A and was eager to add to the laurels which it had already gathered in the fields on which it had defeated Plummer, and routed Sigel. Sturgis decided to retreat. The order was given, and was silently obeyed, Steele's battalion of regu- lars covering the retreat, and marching away from the field in perfect order. It was now half past eleven. Silence had again fallen upon Bloody Hill, on whose rough surface the dead of both armies lay in great heaps. The The Battle of Wilsons Creek, 289 Confederates, stretched out among the bushes in which they had been fighting all day, were waiting for the enemy's next onset, or for Price's order to attack, and ready for either. Suddenly a cry rang along their ranks that the Federals were retreat- ing ; that they had already gotten away, and were ascending the hill from which they had begun the attack upon Rains at dawn of day ; that they had at last abandoned the field for which they had fought so bravely and so well against unconquer- able odds. Springing to their feet they gave utter- ance to their unspeakable relief and to their un- bounded joy with that exultant cry which is never heard except upon a battle-field whereon its victors stand. It reached the ears of Weightman — true soldier and true gentleman — whose life was fast ebbing away in the midst of the men that loved him. " What is it? " he asked. " We have whipped them. They are gone." " Thank God ! " he faintly whispered. In another instant he was dead. Of him General Price well said, in his report that : " Among those who fell mortally wounded upon the battle-field none deserve a dearer place in the memory of Missourians than Richard Hanson Weightman, Colonel commanding the first brigade of the second division of this army. Taking up arms at the very beginning of this unhappy contest, he had already done distinguished service at the 19 290 The Fight for Missouri. battle of Rock Creek, where he commanded the State forces after the death of the lamented Hol- loway, and at Carthage, where he won unfading laurels by the display of extraordinary coolness, courage and skill. He fell at the head of his bri- gade, wounded in three places, and died just as the victorious shouts of our army began to rise upon the air." Nothing could better attest the constancy, the courage, and the devotion with which both armies fought that day on the wooded summit of the Ozark hills, than do the losses which each sus- tained. In the engagement between Mcintosh and Plum- mer, in the cornfield east of the creek, the Federals lost eighty of the three hundred men who took part in the fight ; and the Confederates, who were over one thousand strong, lost one hundred and one. In the final attack upon Sigel, which McCulloch and Mcintosh led, the Confederate loss was trifling, but Sigel, whose panic-stricken men were pitilessly cut down by the Missourians and Texans who pur- sued, lost two hundred and ninety-three men. Of these, one hundred and sixty-seven were either killed or wounded, and one hundred and twenty-six were taken prisoners. These losses were confined exclusively to Sigel's Infantry and Artillery, which The Battle of Wilsons Creek. 291 aggregated about one thousand and fifty men. Cap- tain Carr's squadron of United States Cavalry which formed part of his column was not under fire and did not sustain any loss. This fact did not, how- ever, prevent Captain Carr from being brevetted for gallant and meritorious conduct on the field. But it was on Bloody Hill that the main battle was fought, and the heaviest losses were suffered. There Lyon and Price confronted each other, until, after four hours of desperate fighting, Lyon was killed ; and still the battle raged for a time, till, overwhelmed by ever-increasing odds, Sturgis aban- doned the unequal contest, and left the field. Here the Union Army lost not only its general, and so many of its field officers as to come out of the fight under command of a major, but of the 3500 men that went into action nearly nine hundred were either killed or wounded. The First Missouri alone lost 295 men out of less than eight hundred, the First Kansas 284, and Steele's Battalion of regulars sixty-one out of 275 officers and men. The Confederates lost in almost the same pro- portion. Of the 4200 men who fought there under Price 988 were either killed or wounded. Nearly every one of his higher officers was disabled, and he was himself wounded. Churchill had two horses shot under him, and lost 197 of his 500 men. The total losses of the Federals during the day 292 The Fight for Missouri. amounted to 1317 officers and men killed, wounded, and missing; that of the Confederates to 1230 killed and wounded. Never before — considering the numbers engaged — had so bloody a battle been fought upon Ameri- can soil ; seldom has a bloodier one been fought on any modern field.
