# C. C. Andrews, History of the Campaign of Mobile: Blakely passages, v1

## transcription-note

Digital OCR of a Library of Congress scan (Internet Archive historyofcampaig00andr); not verified against print. Whitespace collapsed; all other characters retained, including OCR errors, split words, running headers ('CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE' with page numbers), footnotes interleaved with the text. Local headings are editorial. Bounded passages: the title page and Chapters XV, XXIII and XXIV on Blakely.

## title-page

HISTOEY OF THE CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE: INCLUDING THE COOPEEATIVE OPEEATIONS OP GEN. WILSOJST'S CAVALRY IN ALABAMA. BY -^ / BREVET MAJOR-GENERAL C. C: ANDREWS, LATE COMMANDING THE SECOND DITISION, THIRTEENTH AKMY CORPS, U. S. VOLS. WITH MAPS AND ILLUSTRATIONS. NEW YORK: D. VAN NOSTRAND, 192 BROADWAY. LONDON : TEUBNEE & CO. 6/ 18Gt. V A ^1 Kutored aocordiug to Act of Cougress, iu tho year 1SC6, By p. van NOSTKANP, Tn tho Clork's ofRce of tUo District Oourt of tUo I'nUod States, for tho Southern Pisti-iot of New York.

## blakely-investment

CHAPTER XY. INVESTMENT AND SIEGE OF BLAKELT. Blakely is situated ten miles northeast from Mobile, on tlie east bank of tlie Appalacliee river, and opposite its confluence with the Tensas. The extent and depth of its adjacent waters make it a fine natiu'al port. On the old maps it appears as a place of importance, and forty years ago it had a population of three thousand ; but the landowners held their property at such high prices its growth was checked, and the people soon took down their buildings and moved with them to Mobile. At the time of the war, Blakely, although a county-seat, had a poj)ula- tion not exceeding a hundred. Its front of dry ground, on the river, is a mile and a half in extent, and this character of soil widens on going from the river ; but on each side of it is low, swampy ground, densely covered with hard-wood timber and a rank gTOwth of weeds and vines. The soil is sandy. Near the river are several large and ancient live-oaks bountifully festooned with moss. Approaching the place from the river, it seems nearly covered with a growth of natural forest, yet some old and culti- vated openings can be seen. Five hundred yards above the landing is a brick-yard, and near that a spur of gTOund fifty feet higher than the water approaches to the river, upon which a small stockade fort was first built. Then some half a mile from that, on a plateau of equal elevation, was an incomplete bastion-fort, of red earth. Two hundred yards from the landing, almost secluded by the drooping branches of live-oaks, is the court- house— a small two-story brick building, painted white, and 122 CAMPAIGN or i£OBILE. haying in its basement a room answering tlie pui'pose of a jail. In sight, also, are four or fire old wooden Tonildings. From the yicinitj of the landing two principal roads direrge, one bearing northeast to Stockton, the other southeast to Pensa- cola. For a mile they run about parallel. They are both grayeUy roads, much worn and washed. Pursuing the Stock- ton road, it was one mile from the landing to the line of con- federate fortifications. The Pensacola road winds around on high ground- On this road were the ruins of some cottages and a yariety of shrub- bery and eyergreens. For a mile back from the landing the ground has a general rise till it reaches the line of breastworks, where it is about sixty feet aboye the water leyel. The surface is uneyen, and there are many dells thickly wooded with magnolias, beeches, pines, and other trees, and abounding with clear spiings and streams. These are its attractiye features. The fortifications were constructed in a soil: of semicircle around Blakely ; resting on a bluff close to the riyer, at the extreme left, and terminating with the high groimd, a few rods from the riyer, on the right. The line was neaiiy three miles m length, and included nine well-built redoubts — or lunettes. The fortifications were thoroughly built, and were armed with about forty pieces of artillery. But the ditches were not more than four or fiye feet deep. From six to eight hundred yards all along the front the trees had been felled — opines on the high gi'ound and hard- wood trees in the rarines. Fifty yards out from the works was a line of abatis, and opposite some of the redoubts was an interior line. Then three hundred yards out to the fi-ont, parallel with the works, was another line of abatis, and behind the latter were detached rifle-pits. The gaiTison of Blakely consisted of French's diyision — ^then commanded by Gen. Cockrell — as the left wing, its right extend- CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. 123 ing a little below tlie redoubt sontb of tlie Stockton road. Tho troops of that division were veterans, mostly from Missom'i and Mississippi. Tlie right wing consisted of Gen. Thomas' di- vision of Alabama reserves. There were several artillery com- panies to man the guns. The whole garrison numbered about three thousand five hundi'ed, and was rmder the command of Gen. St. John Lidell. On the 1st of April, Lidell instracted Cockrell to make a dash on Steele, if he deemed it advisable, and cautioned him, if he did so, to use " a small but rehable force." Cockrell was also directed to fill the skirmish pits on the entn-e Hue with men from his division, for the reason, as it appears, they were con- sidered more experienced and reliable than the reserves. But, after consultation with Cockrell, this plan was abandoned, and Thomas was instructed to supply the advance pits in his fi-ont •^vdth his own men. INVESTMENT OF BLAKELT. The bivouac of the colored division was in plain hearing of the guns at Spanish fort, but to the most of those men the sound of artillery was not new. The men had lain down, each with his gun beside him, the night of the 1st, in a sober mood, and rose the next morning in similar spuits, for they were yet on slender rations of parched corn. Heavy firing on the picket line brought them into line of battle early on Sunday morning, the 2d. But before they had moved out, the quartermaster's wagons went round with com, and two ears and a " nubbin" were dealt out to each man as rations, producing much mer- riment. Drew's brigade was in the advance, and the picket from the Sixty-eighth regiment, under Lieut. Taisey, was down on the Stockton road, "\^^len morning broke, the lieutenant could see nothing of confederates in his front, and, after consulting the 124 CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. ofl&cer of the cavalry detacliment witli him, they concluded to venture out for a reconnoissance. They proceeded without in- terruption for some distance, and began to thiak they would find the way unimpeded into Blakely, when suddenly, from a clump of trees near the edge of the slashings, they were met with a handsome volley. The firing soon grew brisk, and the confede- rate artillery caused them to fall back. Then Hawkins moved his division out to close in on Blakely, marching obhquely to the right from the Stockton road, through a pine forest, with skirmishers deployed. The troops felt that they would encounter a veteran foe in his iutrenchments, but that reflection neithej lessened the firmness of their step, nor the ardor of their resolution. Not a man lagged, but with eager strides to the front, they kept the horses of the mounted officers on the trot. In the midst of shot, shell, and bullets, they had to cross an abrupt, deep, broken ravine, made doubly difficult, by a dense tangle of undergrowth. The regimental commanders feared that they would come out of it a confused throng. The company officers emerged, took their respective distances, still moving forward, and the line quickly filled up, and swept along as eagerly and collectedly as if no obstruction had been met. The first earnest resistance encountered was about a mile and a quarter ia front of the confederate left, at a stream which runs northwest, through a deep and narrow ravine, and near where it debouches into a wooded swamp. The skirmish line then consisted of six companies from each of the three brigades. Col. J. B. Jones of the Sixty-eighth regiment, was put in charge of it, and the maia line halted. A severely-contested skirmish combat then took place on gTound which became the extreme right of the Federal line of investment. The confederates hung along the brow and slopes of the bluff bordering on the swamp, and Col. Jones found it no easy matter to dislodge them. They were using their artillery vigorously from the redoubts, and a CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. 125 number of the colored division had fallen. Three more com- panies from each brigade were sent to reinforce the skii-mish line so that it finally comprised twenty-seven companies. In course of three hours the confederates were driven back about eight hundred yards. Col. Jones established his line in the slashings within one hundred and twenty yards of the confede- rates' outer liile-pits ; and it remained as the skirmish line on the right duriag the siege. Hawkins' loss was about forty killed and wounded. Among the mortally wounded was Lieut. Ed- ward E. Talbot, a gallant young officer belonging to the Sixty- eighth. In the Forty-eighth, four were kiUed and four wounded, including in the latter. Col. Crandall, struck by a shell. The major of the Ninety-seventh was shot in the foot. Col. Jones was conspicuous along the line for bravery and had two horses shot under him. At half-past eight o'clock, LideU. telegraphed to Maury at Mobile, that he thought the Federals were preparing for an assault, and that skirmishing was then occurring. He also asked for additional artillery.^ The Second division marched from Hall's soon after day- Hght, and were some distance on the road before sunrise. As the soldiers ascended the high ground and looked off to the left, over the wooded dells, they could see through the hazy atmosphere that the eastern sky was still crimson. It was not long before firing was heard at the front. This hastened their pace, and they arrived before Blakely at ten o'clock. Steele, Hawkins, Lucas, and several other officers, were sit- ting upon logs, by the Stockton road where it is crossed by 1 Gen. LideU to Gen. Ilaury : " Blakely, April 2, 8:30 a. m.— "The enemy camped apparently in large force, one mile above us, last night, on the Stockton road, and is now engaged skirmishing on the left flank, preparing, I think, for an assault or demonstration in force. I need additional artillery, temporarily, if it can be spared." 126 CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. the road from Sibley's, and about a mile from tlie Blakely breastworks ; and were discussing the information that had been brought from the front. The fii-ing in HawMns' front had abated somewhat, yet still continued. It had been Steele's intention to first strike Hollyoak, and wait orders. But the want of forage compelled him to go by the way of Stockton, which brought him close to Blakely. He therefore immediately wrote Canby what had abeady been accomphshed before Blakely ; and he was soon after- ward instructed to continue the investment. Hawkins' left then extended within two hundred yards of the Stockton road, but he had a strong picket in the bushes close to the road. The Second division was ordered to form on the left of Hawkins' division. It had been formed in the following order : The Third (Moore's) brigade in line of battle, it being in the advan<;e ; and the Second (Spiceley's) in the rear, in the shade — ^for the rays of the sun were beating down oppressively — in column of division closed in mass. The Sec- ond Connecticut light battery was in position on the left of the Stockton road, and the Fifteenth Massachusetts on the right. All the men in the division were resting. Then before advancing any of the troops the commanding officer of the division, with some other officers, went to the front to recon- noitre. They bore off to the left of the Stockton road in the woods, and got within eight hundred yards of the main con- federate works, and where they could weU survey the position. It was also seen that confederate sharpshooters were numer- ously stationed in advanced rifle-pits. The party got within two hundred yards of some of these, but by cover of the trees, and quick dodging, they escaped being hit. Keturning to the line, the One Hundred and Fourteenth Ohio, under Col. Kelly, and the Twentieth Iowa, under Lieut.-Col. Leake, were ad- vanced as skirmishers, and moved up on a line with the division CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. 127 on the riglit. The gi-ound they passed over sloped a little toward Blakely. It was covered with a thin and small gi-owth of pines where the One Hundred and Fourteenth Ohio passed, but where the Twentieth Iowa passed the timber was heavier. The movement could not be entirely concealed ; and the con- federates opened a warm fire of artillery, but it occasioned no loss to either regiment. The skirmishers of that regiment be- came engaged, and compelled the advanced line of confederates to take shelter in their regular line of rifle-]3its. About noon, Maj.-Gen. Osterhaus, chief of staff to Gen. Cauby, came up from Spanish fort, to take a view of the position. Later in the day, the Second division was directed to com- plete the line of investment to Bay Minette, a distance of two miles. Moore's brigade then took position on the left. The Twentieth Iowa and One Hundred and Fourteenth Ohio were withdrawn at five, P. M., and the line occupied by the Twenty- fourth Indiana, Lieut.-Col. Sears, in front of Spiceley's brigade, and the Thirty-fourth Iowa, Col. G. W. Clark, in fi-ont of Moore's brigade. These were large regiments— the Thirty- fourth numbering seven hundred and forty-seven effective, and the Twenty-fourth numbering seven hundred and twenty-nine effective. Their deployed line, dui'ing the night, occupied about two miles. While the Thirty-fourth Iowa was taking position, one of its men — Josiah Robinson— was severely wounded in the face by a musket-ball, which shattered both of his jaws and tore out nearly all of his teeth. During the evening, John Hudson, of the Twenty-fourth Indiana, was killed. The confederate commander observing troops moving south of the Stockton road, and even below the Pensacola road, was still more apprehensive of an assault.^ 1 Lidell to Maury : "April 2. — ^I believe the enemy are preparing to assault toy line to-day. Please spare me some light artillery temporarily, and, if pos- sible, send it over immediately." 128 CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. The same afternoon tlie ground was further reconnoitred by officers of the Second division, and also by Gen. Comstock, chief engineer on the staff of Gen. Ganby, who had come up from Spanish fort for that purpose. - That night both divisions commenced intrenching one thou- sand yards from the confederate works, but the spades were few for so long a line, and the progress was slow. At ten o'clock, the commanding officer of the Second division and Col. Spiceley were both on the skirmish line of the latter's brigade, and moved the skirmishers farther to the front, and pointed out where the pits should be dug. The musketry-firing seemed to be at close range. It was quite dark. There was a vehe- ment fire of artillery, searching the Stockton road and the ravine running parallel with, and a short distance south, of it. The frequent explosions of shells, like the flashes of lightning in a severe storm, tended to blind and bewilder one, if they did nothing worse. The confederate artillerists had been specially instructed to maintain such a fire as would compel the federals to commence their intrenchments a considerable distance off. Their gunboats, on their left, also threw shells of large cahbre. At eleven o'clock, the commanding officer of the Second division, with some of the staff and the Pioneer corps, the latter having spades, started to find the advanced line of the Third brigade, expecting to strike some part of the main line of that brigade on the way. The party crossed the brook, which runs over the Stockton road near the confederate works, at a point three quarters of a mile from those works, and near where the Second division headquarters afterward were fixed. They then passed down on the left of that brook, confident of at least striking the rear of the Third brigade skirmish line ; but having gone fully as far to the front as they expected that hue was, they halted. An aide then walked forward a few rods in the darkness, but was fired on sharply with musketry, the balls coming in the CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. 129 direction of the party, and from only a very short distance off. It seemed then that the fire must be from the confederates, and no explanation was sought for in that position ; but the party withdrew and made a new start, succeeding better the second time, yet finding the Thii'd brigade farther to the left than was expected. The aide contended that the firing was from the skirmishers of the Thii-d brigade, and that the party had got upon their flank. It may have been so, and undoubtedly the result would have been different but for the darkness, the rough- ness of the ground, and the thickness of the shrabbery with which it was covered. The occurrence is mentioned to show the difficulties of operations in the night on strange ground; how surprises and accidents will obstruct the best intentions, and how important it is that orders shall be specific, and lines kept well closed.

## blakely-assault

CHAPTER XXIII. SIEGE OF BLAKELY— EIGHTH AND LAST DAY OF THE SIEGE. The morning of Sunday, tlie 9tli of April, was calm, for the sldrmisli line was nnnsually quiet. At nine o'clock there was a shower of rain. Afterward the sun came out bright and warm, but toward evening dark clouds rolled up from the west. The fall of Spanish fort enabled Gen. Canby to send more ar- tillery to Blakely, and, in course of the day, sis or eight more guns opened on the side of the besiegers, but were faintly answered. The Fourth Massachusetts hght battery, Capt. Trull com- manding, arrived from Spanish fort, and opened with two guns from a battery in Scoiield's brigade front, of Hawkins' divis- ion ; and on the extreme right, two of the thirty-pounders of the First Indiana were turned on the garrison and fired over thick timber. These, with the two light giins of the Second Massachusetts, in Pile's brigade fi-ont, made sis guns engaged in Hawkins' front the last day of the siege, and they did good execution. Some of the men in Scofield's brigade were injured by shells fi'om a mortar in the garrison. When the thirty- pounder shells from the First Indiana guns were screeching over the heads of the colored troops, they cried, " Another through train to Mobile." In the Second division front two ten-pounders of the Second Connecticut, and four twelve-pounders of the Fifteenth Massa- chusetts, fired at intervals through tlie day and with much 190 CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. spirit, the latter sending some of tlieir sliots against tlie gar^ risou's left. In Veatcli's front two twelve-ponnders of tlie Seventh Massa- chiisetts, Oapt. Storer, were in position and engaged, in an untinislied battery. Bnt the largest proportion of the artillery the last day was in Garrju'd's front. Capt. Mack left Spanish fort at four, A. M., with his eighteen-poiinders, and at nine, a. m., reported to Gen. Steele. The battery went into camp for a -while, and at five, p. M., took position nine hnntli-ed yai'ds fi'om the garrison works, behind a trench on Gen. Garrard's right. On his left, and considerably to the jear, were, fom- thii-ty-ponnder Parrotts, of Cox's and Hemlrick's batteries, of the Fii-st Indiana, which had come up from Spanish fort. Along his second line of intrench- ments near his right were four ten-poiinder Parrotts, of Capt. Lowell's Second Illinois, and three of Capt. Eice's Seventeenth Ohio Napoleons. Late in the afternoon, foiu* ten-poimder Par- rotts, of Ginn's Thii'd Indiana, took position fai-ther to the left on open groimd masked by timber. The besiegers now had three lines of intrenchments or con- tinuous rifle-pits with approaches, the Thii'd being within about six bundled yards of the ganison's main works, and some portions of the line were nearer. The skii-mishei'S on Garrard's left were within thi'ee humli-ed yards of it, the ground there affording cover up to about that distance. On the right of Moore's brigade, of the Second division, an approach had been opened a hundred yards out from the advance parallel and within four hiindred yards of the main works of the ganison, and skii-mishers were posted within one himdi'ed and forty yards of the principal hue of confederate rifle-pits. On Spiceley's left, of the same division, the parallel was within about five hxmdred yards of tlie garrison's main works, but withdiew as it extended to the right, so tliat from the poiat where it crossed I CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. 191 tlie Stockton road tlie advance trench was five liundred and eighty yards from the main works in front ; but there were detached pits forty yards farther in advance. There was a safe approach to the left part of that trfench ; and the soldiers with characteristic humor had put up in it a sort of guide-board with the inscription ".)|@°^ To Blakely." Another approach was being started thence to the- front. An approach was also commenced to it from the right wing of the Twenty-fourth Indiana. In digging that advance trench two torpedoes had been excavated ; and others in Spiceley's front had been ex- ploded by stray musket-balls. In Hawkins' division Pile's skirmish-line had been advanced, during the night of the 8th, one hundred and forty yards, and rifle-pits dug in the new position. On the right of Scofield's brigade an approach was extended withiu two hundred and forty yards of the principal hne of confederate rifle-pits. Each division commander had daily reported to Steele tha progress of the works, and the casualties. Up to this time the casualties had been : in the Colored divis- ion, sixteen killed, and one himdred and seventy-six wounded ; in each of the other divisions the loss had been about four or five killed, and fi-om twenty to thirty wounded. In the forenoon, some boats had been seen from the tree- observatory in rear of the besiegers, to put out from Blakely loaded with troops. A report soon afterward flew through the trenches that the garrison was evacuating ; and this seemed to be confirmed by the imusual silence of both their artillery and sharpshooters. There was, therefore, a general desu-e all along the line to take the first opportunity to move forward to " feel the enemy." Garrard received instructions, iu the forenoon, from his corps commander, to assault the works in his front in the afternoon ; and was informed that the other two divisions of the corps 192 CAMPAIGN OP MOBILE. would be up to reinforce him, and that he should have all the artillery he wanted. Then, about three in the afternoon, Garrard had a consulta- tion with his brigade commanders, at his own headquarters, Gen. Yeatch also being present, and fixed upon half-past five o'clock, p. M., for an assault to be made in his front. Notice of the intended assault was immediately sent to the troops of that division by the respective brigade commanders. About three o'clock, Lieut. Pettibone, aide-de-camp, was sent from the headquarters of the Second division to obtain permis- sion from Gen. Steele for that division to move on the garrison works, " as far as it could go." Gen. Steele was, at the same time, actively engaged making arrangements for an advance, and was found in the saddle by the aide-de-camp, who returned, saying Gen, Steele desired the movement to be made, and fixed the time for it at half-past five, p. M. Then, not knowing that the movement was to be general, the same staff officer was sent to give notice to Gen. Hawkins of the proposed advance, that there might be concert of action. He returned with the information that Canby and Steele were both at Hawkins' headquarters, and that a general advance would be made at half-past five, p. M. Gen. Yeatch received official notice at five, P. M., through Capt. Lacy, of Gen. Steele's staff, that a general advance would be made at half-past five, p. m. ; and he was directed to " enter the enemy's works, if possible." Tlie Garrison. — All this while the besiegers were much de- ceived, in supposing that any part of the garrison had evacu- ated. The troops who had been seen to leave on steamers were a portion of the jaded force that, through mud and water, had made their way from Spanish fort ; and not all of them had left Blakely. Meantime, the garrison commander was informed, by signal CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. 193 telegraph from Battery Tracy, that the federal forces were moving from Spanish fort up to Blakely. As soon as he heard this he apprehended that the besiegers, with such reinforce- ments, would be pretty certain to assault ; and he sent out the intelHgence to the division and separate artillery commanders, with instructions for them to hold their commands "in readi- ness for an assault at any moment."^ A copy of the order was captured, containing the endorsements of some officers, expres- sive of their ardent determination to hold their position at all hazards — ^which, undoubtedly, was the universal sentiment of the garrison. They had suffered a severe artillery fire during the forenoon, having two guns dismounted, but their artillery were saving their ammunition to repel an assault, and abstained from re|)lying. ^ PreUminary Advance hy the Colored Troops. — Previous to the general assault which took place at about six o'clock, there was an advance and spirited combat in front of the Colored division. 1 Ccqjt. Lewis to Gen. CocJcrell and others : ^^ April 9. — Gen. Lidell directs me to inform you,- that Col. Patton signals the following from Battery ' Tracy' : ' Wagon trains and heavy columns of infantry have been crossing Bay Minette bridge all the morning.' " In view of the above, Gen. Lidell directs that you hold yovix command in readiness for an assault at any moment." 2 Lidell to Maury : "April 9 We have had the constant fire of five batteries on- us this morning, dismounting two guns, field pieces, including the only Blakely gun. Col. Patton has signalled Capt. Grayson (3:20 p. m.), that artillerj" accompanies the infantry. There is nearly one quarter of a mile, from the right of Gen. Thomas, through the swamp, and to the river, that is unoccu- pied by any troops ; and the track of the garrison from Spanish fort discloses to an enemy the means of approach to this place, on that side. I shall move my quarters to that locality, and make every disposition available. I am hav- ing the new place of landing prepared for the use of boats, small craft, and, possibly, steamboats." 13 194 CAMPAIGN OE MOBILE. In Gen. Pile's brigade, whicli was the left one of the Colored division, the Seventy-third regiment, Lieut.-Col. Merriam, and the Eighty-sixth, Major Mudget, were in the advance trench. A little after noon, Gen. Pile received word from each of those officers, that the confederate sharpshooters in their front had suddenly become quiet, and they asked permission to " feel the enemy." Pile then ordered one commissioned officer, and thirty select men from each regiment to be in readiness to advance. He also caused the two guns of the Fourth Massa- chusetts hght artillery to fire a few shots, to see what reply would be ehcit. No reply was made. He, then, at about three o'clock, was starting to the front to advance, when Maj.- Gen. Osterhaus, chief of staff, rode up, dismounted, and went for- ward with him. After examining the ground, Gen. Osterhaus, directed that half the men selected for the movement should get into a ravine immediately in front of the right regiment, then move up to a crest held by the skirmish-hne. At a given signal they, with the remainder of the party who were to spring out of the rifle-pits on the left, were to charge and, if possible, capture the confederate rifle-pits. This was undertaken in a resolute manner, Capt. Jenkins of the Eighty-sixth, and Capt. Brown, of the Seventy-third, assisted by the skirmish-line under Capt. Greenwood of the Eighty-sixth, leading the movement. A gall- ing fire was immediately opened on them, both from the sharp- shooters and artillery. They then grew more cautious and sought as they advanced what protection there was from stumps and logs. These, however, afforded but little cover; and to advance at all they had to jump over fallen trees and logs, and were consequently much exposed. The ground was exceed- ingly rough, and they had three hundred yards to go. The garrison sharpshooters had a strong line of abatis in their front, and felt cool and confident. They took advantage of the ex- posure of the assaulting party and shot down many. Capt. CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. 195 Brown of tlie Seventy-tliird was mortally woimded. Still, offi- cers and men kept moving forward witli self possession and courage, and though fighting at disadvantage, returned the fire with spu'it. Gen. Osterhaus declared that they fought as well as the best of troops. Perceiving, by the steady advance of the party, that they meditated a serious attack, the garrison sent out reinforcements to their skirmish-line, and the contest grew more obstiuate. Here and there a man of the colored troops would fall back a few yards for better shelter, for the artillery was playing on them with searching tire, but the general Hue held its ground and advanced rather than fell back. Pile reinforced them with five compa,nies, with instructions to hold the ground gained and '' intrench immediately in rear of the enemy's abatis." In about an hour they had advanced three hundred yards, got possession of the garrison's advanced rifle-pits, and inflicted some loss on the occupants of the latter as they fell back to their breast- works. The skirmish-Hne in front of Scofield's brigade and Drew's brigade was advanced at about four o'clock, and the confederate pits were also captured in their fronts, yet not without loss. In Drew's brigade, on the extreme right, the Sixty-eighth regiment, with Lieut.-Col. Densmore in command, and the Seventy-sixth, Major Nye, were at the front. The skirmish-line being doubled for the advance, there were four companies from each of the two regiments engaged. The movement was conducted by Col. J. B. Jones, of the Sixty-eighth by a left wheel. The men first took ofi^ their coats so as to move more readily through the brush, and charged in their shirt-sleeves. They had three hun- dred yards to pass over. The skirmishers who had been on duty and were in the front first rushed out of their pits and ^vere followed closely by the second line, aU moving on the double- quick and making a deafening clamor by their cheers. By the 196 CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. time tliey had gained a hundred yards the confederate skirmish- ers began to retreat from their advance pits. The assaulting party met an effective artillery and musketry fire from the garri- son and lost several of their number, yet they pushed on in a dauntless manner to the confederate pits, and then in obedi- ence to Col. Jones' orders, laid down behind the abatis. In the charge, Col. Jones was shot through his hand with a musket ball, but continued at his work. At this time Col. Drew's reserve regiment, the Forty-eighth, Col. F. M. Crandall commanding, was in camp nearly a mile in the rear ; yet Drew, being confident that the force there present could carry ihe main works in his front, or else, im- pelled by the enthusiasm of the moment, ordered the balance of the Sixty-eighth and Seventy-sixth to charge, giving the order — " Forward on the enemy's works," at the same time wa- ving his hat. This was only a few minutes after Jones' move- ment was completed. He passed along the trench, loudly giving the command, for there was now a great din, and com- pany officers and men, as fast as they heard it direct from him — for the best disciplined could hardly be expected to be formal when they heard an order to charge — broke off on the double-quick with shouts, and charged with the greatest enthu- siasm. Not starting in line, both regiments soon got mingled together, and they encountered a galling fire from every gun that could be brought to bear on them. Yet the officers were using their best endeavors to keep the men in line. The fatal track of the cannon-ball, of grape, canister, and shells, was soon apparent. Lieut. Manhardt, of the Sixty-eighth, was instantly killed by a grape-shot, while endeavoring to execute an order to close the men to the right. Capt. George Giger, of the Sixty-eighth, was mortally wounded while rallying the men to close up to the left. Many of the men had fallen. Col. Jones, in passing along, felt something pulling at his trowsers, and, CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. 197 looking down, a man, who was mortally wounded in the first charge, besought him to take his cartridges " to the boys." Jones himself soon after feU, stunned by the explosion of a shell. Col. Drew, and the two regiments with him, had moved along the ground on a level with the garrison's left redoubt, and had to face a deadly fire. At length he ordered that they should pass to the right and advance on the bluff side, where they would have some cover ; and in a few minutes aU, except a few who continued on the high ground, were skirting the brow of the bluff, intending to reach the left of the confederate works and go in if possible. The bluff side was steep and thickly covered with slashings. The ground also was springy and soft, and it was extremely difficult for the troops to get along. While a squad of men paused to fire over the brow of the bluff, others hurried along to take an advanced position, and then the former squad again would drop down, work their way along and take a position farther to the front. A storm of missiles was still sweeping over them, and they were losing some of their number from exhaustion as well as wounds. Finally, the last depression affording any protection was reached. From there to the main parapet was smooth ground of less than a hundred steps. Then they halted to take breath and wait the arrival of those who had fallen behind, preparatory to their last effort. A few of the men pushed on some yards below the hiU, but were soon either killed or driven back. It soon seemed clear to them that they were too few for the work in hand. Their numbers were counted over and found to be nineteen officers and sixty-five men ! Officers in too great proportion. "What was to be done ? There is reinforcement in a cheer. They cheered, fired volleys, and cheered again as if about to charge. They wondered why the reserve did not show itself, and why more of their own comrades were not up. Many 198 CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. of tlie latter, poor fellows, would never again be up. Then they listened but in vain to hear anj shots on their own side. They could see the garrison works teeming with men, and felt that they were in imminent danger of a sally. To go forward was folly, to go back was less to their notion. Col. Drew then went back, to hasten up the reserve, and the senior officer left with the party was Lieut.-Col. Densmore, of the Sixty-eighth. They kept firing volleys at the parapet and cheering. The garrison, suspecting the charging party were in trouble, attempted a sally, yet with diffidence. Capts. Holcomb, Nor- wood, Lieut, Kogers; and some other officers, with a few men who kept on the high ground, had got some cover near the main works, but they and the party over the bluff were ignorant of each other's whereabouts. When the former saw the sally party starting, they fired on it with all their might, and Densmore's men, hearing some of the shots go over, also put in a volley, with one of their cheers. This happy concurrence repulsed the sally. But Densmore's men did not know the result, and eontiaued to apprehend an attack ; and, while awaiting with absorbing anxiety the arrival of the reserve, they continued their volleys and cheers. Then three ominous-appearing vessels steamed out in sight, and the men, as if wiUing to catch at straws, exclaimed, " They are Union gunboats that have arrived just in season to help us !" and then they had a cheer for the "Union gunboats." Dens- more said nothing to them of the confederate flag he saw at the mast-head. Shortly, the garrison ran a howitzer outside of their works, and threw canister into the logs and brush, which compelled the colored troops to hug closer to the ground. After waiting some time, Lieut.-Col. Densmore had sent back a captain for the reserve. Afterward he sent a Heiitenant, charging him to let nothing but death prevent his bringing CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. 199 back men or orders. He began to think he woukl need to send a third messenger, when an officer showed himself suffi- ciently to get his attention. But the din of canister, bullets, and hand-grenades, prevented a word being heard. Then the officer took off his hat and beckoned the party back. Too indignant and sullen to hurry, they retreated in order bringing back theu' dead as far as possible, and taking all their wounded. They returned as they went, a part halting to fire while the rest retreated to the next cover. When they had got far enough away to render it safe for the gunboats to fire with- out endangering the garrison, those boats opened a raking fire along the side of the bluff. The party got back to their trenches in time to see the re- serve arrive from the rear. But the little detachment with Nor- wood and Holcomb still remained in their position, nearly up to the garrison works. As the movement commenced, this party had hastened for- ward through impediments of fallen tree-tops, in face of a sharp fire, and when within a hundred yards of the fort, a shower of musket-balls, thrown from cannon, beat around them. Out of eleven officers of the party, seven were there killed or wounded. They became apprehensive of a counter-charge, and of being flanked. If captured, they also apprehended that their rights as prisoners would not be respected. After a short consultation, they rightly concluded the best thing to be done was to fight it out. Then the men fixed bayonets, and some were heard, with clenched teeth, to say they would die sooner than surrender or retreat. AVitli fixed bayonets this gallant party charged down the line parallel with the fort, and, after a short but desperate resistance, drove the garrison sharp- shooters from the interior line of abatis into their main works, and gained a position whence they could silence the more de- structive g-uns. Here they remained till the final assault. 200 CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. THE ASSAULT. The skirmisli-line of Gen. Pile's brigade had been intrenching in their new position, under heavy fire, about forty minutes, when the cheering of the white troops was heard on their left. An officer then ran in that direction till he could see what was taking place, and quickly returning, signalled to Gen. Pile that the Second division were charging on the main works in their front. ^ Then Pile ordered forward his brigade, and the assault be- came general in Hawkins' entire front. The brigades of Pile, Scofield, and Drew, charged almost simultaneously, and carried the works in their respective fronts. Greater gallantry than was shown by officers and men could hardly be desired. The latter were burning with an impulse to do honor to then- race, and rushed forward with intense enthusiasm, in face of a ter- rible file. As they got close to the works some of the con- federates, di'eading to fall into their hands, ran off to surrender to the white troops. In Drew's front, several of the co2ifed- erates, with muskets, remained outside of the works, refused to surrender, and maintained a cool and desperate struggle till they fell. In Scofield's line, the explosion of a single torpedo killed and wounded thirteen of the Fifty-first regiment. As his men were advancing, they heard a confederate officer behind the works exclaim, " Lay low and mow the ground — ^the d d 1 " This movement on vaj part was followed up by the Second brigade on my right, and the work of intrenching had been progressing, under heavy fire, forty minutes, when cheering on my left notified me that Gen. Andrews' division was moving forward. Still ignorant whether this was an assault on the enemy's main works, or merely a following up of the movement already made by me, I sent a staff officer to my left to report if their advance continued beyond the first line of abatis, and parallel with my advance, who immediately signalled that Gen. Andrews' division was already advancing to assault the main works." — Gen, Pile's Official Eeport, CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. 201 niggei's are corQing !" which became a byword in camp. The colored troops captured nine guns, twenty-two commissioned officers, and two hundred and one enhsted men. The Seventy- third colored regiment — New Orleans troops — was the first of Pile's brigade to plant its colors on the parapet ; and Sergt. Edward Simon, of Company I of that regiment, was mentioned for his signal bravery. The prisoners were generally treated with kindness. A col- ored soldier of the Fiftieth regiment found his former young master among the prisoners. They appeared happy to meet, and drank from the same canteen. Some of the Louisiana men, however, made an attack on the prisoners and were with difficulty restrained fi'om injuring them. The latter almost invited attack by manifesting an unreasonable dread of the colored soldiers ; huddling together in heaps, and acting as if their captors were wild beasts. Capt. Norwood and Lieut. Gleason of the Sixty-eighth were w.ounded, the latter mortally, in their effi)rts to save the prisoners. Afterward the prisoners w^ere taken to the camp of the Col- ored division, and some of them endeavored to lead the way so as to avoid torpedoes ; yet one of the guards had his leg blown off by the explosion of a torpedo near Scofield's trenches, but nothing Hke ]-etaliation was manifested. Hawkins' loss in the assault was thii'ty-two killed and one hundred and forty-seven wounded. Of these a pretty large pro- portion were officers. Several of the latter have been named. Among those who fell in the assault were Maj. Mudget of the Eighty-second, and Capt. S. E. "Wilson of the Seventy- sixth, acting assistant adjutant-general on Col. Drew's staff. The total loss in kihed and wounded in that division before Blakely was three hundred and seventy-one — namely : lolled, five com- missioned officers and forty-three men ; w^ounded, twenty-two commissioned officers and three hundred and one men. The 202 CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. confederate loss in their front in killed and wounded was about a tidrd as large. Second Division. — Cols. Spiceley and Moore, brigade com- manders, were at division headquarters about four o'clock, when the order of assault, or advance — ^for it was not then thought there would be much resistance — was agreed upon. It was arranged that a regiment, deployed as skirmishers, should advance in front of each brigade ; and after it had gained the distance of one hundred and fifty yards, that the remainder of the brigades should foUow, deployed in line of battle. The movement was to commence with the Second brigade, and the cheer of the skirmish-line, as it started, was to be the signal for the skdrmish-line to start in front of the Third brigade. The commander of the latter brigade, CoL Moore, selected the Eighty-third Ohio as the skirmish regi- ment in his front, and the Mnety-seventh Illinois, at the re- quest of its commanding officer, was designated for the skir- mishers of the Second brigade. Both brigades were in the two front trenches at about half- past five ; and the first notice most of the men had of the assault was the order to fall in. Of the men in camp that Sunday afternoon, some had been writing home that they were soon to march — ^for they were under marching orders. Others were washing their clothes ; and so from the humblest duties, they hastened to take part in. the grandest. Lieut.-Col. Yifquain had the Ninety-seventh deployed, and had passed along the trench once or twice to see that every- thing was in readiness, when an explosion of a torpedo occurred on the rear edge of the trench, tearing off the leg of Capt. "Wisner, of the Ninety-seventh Illinois, who was endeavoring tc pass to his company, and injuring, to all appearances, fatally, One or two men. It was no happy augury ; and as the wounded were borne along the trench and approach to the rear, the 1 CAMPAIGN OP MOBILE. 203 spirits of tlie beliolders seemed depressed. Such is the terror of concealed dangers. This occurrence caused a few moments' delay, and it was quarter to six when the movement commenced. Precisely at that time, Lieut.-Col. Yifquain, in a clear, insphing tone, and with his sword drawn,' and elevated, gave the command, " For- ward, Ninety-seventh !" Then he and his gallant regiment sprang upon the parapet, and with loud cheers, which were taken up by all the troops left behind, they dashed forward on the run. Instantly they were greeted with a shower of bullets, and before they had got twenty yards a few men fell. In less than half a minute the Eighty-third Oliio, led by Lieut.- Col. Baldwin, swept over the parapet in theii" front, and, with thrilling shouts, moved, on the run, for the redoubt in then* front. Three or four pieces of artillery, from the garrison, quickly opened on these regiments, firing with great rapidity, and they also encountered a bitter musketry fire. The confed- erate sharpshooters at first were disposed to hold theu" position ; and the men of the Ninety-seventh commenced firing when they had got eighty yards. The skii-mish grew more and more bitter, the Ninety-seventh every minute gaining ground and the confed- erates giving way. While the skhmish was occurring, Lieut.-Col. Vifquain ran back with a prisoner to the trench from which he had started, then hastened to his regiment and resumed the charge, following the course of the Stockton road. The prisoner stated that the whole garrison still remained at Blakely. Every one could, by that time, see that such was the fact, for the con- federates were getting out of then* rifle-pits and falling back to their main works in literal swarms. Over a hundred of these were seen, in a straggling crowd, to ascend the hill on which was Eedoubt No. 4, just south of the Stockton road. At the same time the breastworks appeared numerously manned. It was apparent there was to be a much severer straggle than had been expected. 204 CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. The Ninety-seventh EHnois had got but a short distance when the Seventy-sixth IlUnois, Col. S. T. Busey, sprang forward. About the same time, the Sixty-ninth Indiana, Lieut.-Col. O. Perry, also rushed forward ; and, afterward, the Twenty-fourth Indiana, Lieut.-Col. Sears, charged from the right. These regiments advanced on the run with great enthusiasm and gallantry. The Sixty-ninth Indiana took the Stockton road, and entered the confederate works a Httle south of that road. Lieut.-Col. Perry was severely wounded before he had got two hundred yards. The Seventy-sixth Illinois charged directly on the redoubt in their front, the one north of the Stockton road, and preserved its alHgnment well till it got to the second line of abatis. One man of that regiment was killed at the first line of abatis and rifle-pits ; then, at the second line, the battle became fierce and bloody. The confederates maintained a bold front from behind their breastworks, and when the Seventy-sixth was within fifty yards of the redoubt, they suffered severely from the confederate musketry and artillery. While a part of the regiment maintained a spirited fire, the rest crossed the abatis. Lieut. Wm. F. Kenaga was shot through a leg at the second abatis, and nearer the works was hit in the ankle-joint of his other leg ; then, unable to walk, he kept upright on his knees and ralHed and cheered the men. The color-sergeant, Hussey, was killed within twenty feet of the works ; then the colors were taken by the noble and brave Corporal Goldwood, who, as he was planting them on the parapet, received the contents of three muskets so close that the discharge burnt his clothes, and he fell dead inside the works with the colors in his arms. The Seventy-sixth and the confederates were now fighting across the works, and those of the regiment in the rear were coming up as fast as they could pass the obstructions. Col.. Busey ran along close to the parapet, and, with his revolver, disabled the gunner of a howitzer about to be fired, and which CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. 205 aitorward proved to liave a double charge of grape and can- ister ; tlien turning to the right, he exchanged shots with two at short range. Afterward, he ordered Lieut.-Col. Jones, with Capts. Hughes and Ingerson, and Lieut. Warner, with from twenty to fifty men, to charge the right flank of the redoubt, while he, with another squad, charged the fi'ont. They charged with bayonets, and drove the confederates from the works. Fifty yards in rear of the redoubt the ground began to slope considerably. It had been cleared of thick underbrush, and the latter had been piled in a row along the crest. Behind that cover the confederates formed again, and gave another volley, wounding, among others. Col. Busey and Capt. Hughes. Then the Seventh-sixth charged them again, and they threw down their arms, and ran into the woods and toward the landing. Col. Busey sent detachments in pursuit of them. Upward of four hundred prisoners fell into the possession of the Seventy- sixth. It had five men killed inside the works. Its whole niim- ber of killed was sixteen, of whom, besides those already men- tioned, were Sergeant Perkins and Corporals Hopkins and Tremain. There were eighty wounded, some mortally ; so that its entire casualties were about one hundi-ed. Among the wounded were Lieuts. Martin and Warner. The Seventy-sixth Illinoig entered the works over the south sahent of the redoubt, and over the breastworks extending south. Its national colors were planted on the breastwork. It was claimed by his com- rades that Private Eldrick Bromillet, of Company D, was the first one of the regiment over the works. He was killed fifty yards inside the works by a confederate captain, and the latter was killed by Bromillet's comrade. That regiment used the bayonet in the charge, and displayed throughout the highest degree of valor. No regiment on the field that day suffered so heavily, none exhibited more intrepid bravery. And higher praise than that cannot be awarded troops. 206 CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. Tlie Twenty-fourth. Indiana entered tlie works on the right of the Seventy-sixth Illinois, soon after the latter had pos- session. The right of the Twenty-fourth had to pass one or two deep ravines, in which was wet ground covered with fallen trees, and, when part way to the confederate works, the regi- ment was halted, and ordered to lie down. But such was the ardor of the men, that their commander found it difficult to -restrain them, and bade them go on. Such was their ardor they did not stop to capture the confederate skirmishers, nor even to disarm all they met. One of the latter raised his hands, to indicate his submission, and after the Twenty-fourth men iiad passed hi-m turned and fired on them, grazing the ear of a man named Messer. The latter then turned upon him, and shot him dead. A man named Walker, in Company C, had told his comrades where he would fall, and after they had passed the spot they looked back, and saw that he was indeed lying there. A shell burst right over the Twenty-fourth, enveloping the men in a cloud of smoke, yet doing no more serious injury than tearing to pieces the hat of one man, the cartridge-box of another, and the stock of another's musket. However, the confederates thought it had done more mischief, and raised a cheer. The loss of the Twenty-fourth was about twelve, killed and wounded. Not far from the works, fell the lamented Capt. George E. Merchant, commanding Company J). He lived only till the next day. He was an excellent officer, and dearly beloved by his company and comrades. The Ninety-seventh Illinois had pushed forward over the obstructions, against a dreadful fire, and, having started de- ployed as skirmishers, the men got much scattered ; but they well knew how to take care of themselves, and officers and men performed their duty with, unflinching valor. The colors of the regiment were planted on the works between the Stockton road and the redoubt south of it, almost simultaneously with the CAMPAIGN OP MOBILE. 207 Eiglity-tliii'd Ohio. They were carried by Sergeant Ed-s^in D. Lowe, and in the charge they were struck and torn by the fire of the artillery, but, unharmed himself, he kept them con- spicuously in the advance, and, undismayed by the thick dangers around him, planted them firmly on the works, then fell with a mortal wound. But the hand that struck him down was soon itseK laid cold, by an unerring shot from one of the color-guard. The Ninety-seventh Illinois lost nine killed and fifty-three wounded. Among the latter were five officers. Capt. Howard and Lieut. Orem were both struck down when near the main works. The loss in the Sixty-ninth Indiana battalion was ten, wounded. Col. Spiceley and staff entered the works about with the Twenty-fourth. The right of the Eighty-third Ohio had three ravines to pass, and the ravine nearest the garrison works was deep and long enough to include nearly the whole of the regiment. When it had advanced about two hundred yards, it had come to the principal line of confederate rifle-pits, still to some extent oc- cupied. The Eighty-third there paused a few moments for the right to get up out of the ravine ; the confederate sharp- shooters' guns were taken from those who surrendered, and broken. Then the colors of the Eighty-third moved on the line still advancing as fast as the nature of the ground and the obstacles of brush and logs would admit. It soon began to descend the ravine two hundred yards from the main works, and for two or tlu'ee long minutes was lost sight of. It was passing the ravine through which ran a rivulet, and in the bot- tom of which was a jungle of slashings almost defying the pas- sage of persons even at a time of leisure and unencumbered with weapons. Then it began to ascend the high ground in front of the redoubt where were some detached rifle-pits. A few steps farther and it was up to another line of abatis, breast- high, apparently impassable, and fifty yards from the works. 208 CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. Before this the foremost of the Eighty-third stooped down to avoid the destructive fire which was being poured upon them, to take breath, and to wait till the wings could close up. Fif- teen yards inside of the line of abatis just before them was another line, not readily seen at a distance, consisting of stakes firmly driven into the ground close together, and sharpened at the end. Then, thirty-five yards from that, was the ditch and the high parapet of the redoubt. The infantry troops which manned that redoubt and the adjacent breastworks, consisted of CockreU's Missouri brigade, comprising the First, Thkd, Fourth, and Fifth Missouri infantry, and the First and Third Missouri cavalry, dismounted ; one of the most famous fighting brigades of the confederate army. These troops stood up in a bold man- ner behind their breastworks, firing on their assailants as if they hoped to repulse them. There seemed to be a constant blaze of musketry along the breastworks. The artillery was served with the same desperate energy. The guns vomited forth grape and canister with a fury that made one shudder. But most of the shots went over the mark. ^Tiile the Eighty-third Ohio was in that position the Sixty- ninth Indiana and Ninety-seventh Illinois were on their right, on lower ground, near the Stockton road, and hotly engaged. Lieut. Col. Baldwin caused part of his regiment to return the fire of the garrison while the rest made an opening through the abatis. The colors of the regiment were flying conspicuously, and both flagstafis were shot in two and the colors riddled with bullets. WhUe this scene was occurring, a division staff-officer was sent to have the Twenty-fourth Indiana move down . to reinforce the Ninety-seventh Illinois, whose colors were seen not far from the main works ; but the Twenty-fourth was abeady on the way to the works farther to the right, and the officer found it inside of them. About the same time, another staff-officer was sent to CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. 209 hasten fonvard the main hne of the Third brigade in support of the Eighty-third Ohio ; but before he reached its commander, it was advancing on the double-quick, the colors flying, the men cheering, and the whole line looking splendidly. On the right, was the Thirty-fourth Iowa, Col. G. W. Clark ; next the One Hundred and Fourteenth Ohio, Col. J. H. Kelly ; the Thirty- seventh Illinois, Col. Chailes Black ; and the Twentieth Iowa, Lieut.-Col. J. B. Leake ; all superior regiments, with gallant and able commanders. Their appearance on the field, of course, began to excite dismay in those against whom the Eighty-third was contending. Lieut.-Col. Baldwin, as soon as a passage was opened through the abatis, gave the order for the regiment again to advance. This was done with a dauntless spirit. The men, with then* bayonets, pried an opening through the next line of abatis, then rushed forward, bearing their fljdng colors, and, though still encountering numerous obstructions, in the nature of wire lines, were soon upon the redoubt. Capt. Gany, of the Eighty-third, was among the first to moimt the parapet, but a private soldier is said to have been the first over them. Lieut.-Col. Baldwin was soon on the parapet ; and see- ing that the most of his regiment was ready to mount the works, he jumped down inside, and cried out, " Sm-render !" The com- manding officer inquired, " To whom do we surrender ?" Bald- win answered, " To i:]ie Eighty-thu'd Ohio." Then the officer said, " I believe we did that once before," — referring to a some- what similar occasion at Yicksburgh. It was about twenty minutes from the time the Eighty-tliird began the charge till it was in possession of the works ; but some contest was kept up for a few minutes in rear of the redoubt after the first had entered. Two volleys were fired inside the works, in the edge of the woods, five minutes after the Eighty-third was inside. The loss of the Eighty-thii-d Ohio was seven killed and twenty- 14 210 CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. one wounded. Among tlie killed were Corporal Hnglies, and Privates De Mar (on the works), Cook, Cox, Anderson, and Yan Amsdale. Among the wounded were Capt. Gary and Lieut. Snyder. The other regiments of Moore's brigade met with some resist- ance. The Thu-ty-fourth Iowa had three killed, and twelve wounded. The brigade commander advanced in the charge near that regiment. A man of Company H, of the Thirty- fourth, was shot at by a wounded confederate lying in a rifle- pit, having been passed by the skirmishers. Another man, of Company H, then dealt him a fatal blow with his clubbed musket. The loss in- the Thirty-seventh Illinois was one killed and three wounded. In the One Hundred and Fourteenth Ohio, two wounded. The Twentieth Iowa escaped loss in the assault^ and only had its flag shot through. That regiment entered the works at the two-gun battery, on the brow of the ravine, south of Bedoubt No. 4. About eight hundred prisoners were taken in front of Moore's brigade. The whole number of prisoners taken by the Second division was thirteen hundred, including a general commanding a division ; also ten or twelve guns and several stands of colors. The works carried, in its front, were three quarters of a mile in extent, and embraced two strong redoubts (Nos. 3 and 4) and a two-gun battery. After dark, while the men were picking up the dead and wounded, a few torpedoes were exploded. In this way a man of the Second Connecticut battery and one of the One Hundred and Fourteenth Ohio were killed, and one or two others wounded. The whole loss of the Second division in the assault was two hundred and thirty-three, namely : forty-one killed and one hundred and ninety-two wounded. The con- federate loss in killed and wounded, in front of that division was not fully ascertained. About twenty confederates were buried near the works. Campaign op mobile. 211 FeatcVs Division. — Next, on the left, in Veatcli's division, Dennis' brigade had the advance, the Third brigade, Lieut.-Col. Kinsey commanding, being held in reserve. Slack's brigade was not called out of camp, it having been on duty the preceding night in going to and retiuTiing from Spanish fort. Gen, Dennis' brigade was disposed as follows : The Eighth Illinois (Ogelsby's old regiment), a veteran and splendid regiment. Col. Sheetz commanding, was in the advance parallel. The Eleventh Illi- nois (veteran). Col. Coats commanding, was to follow in supj^ort in line of battle on the left, and the Forty-sixth Illinois, Col. Domblaser, on the right. Col. Sheetz was instnicted to advance, with the Eighth Illinois deployed as skirmishers, as soon as he saw the troops moving in the assault on his right and left. At the moment the Eighth HHnois advanced, the Eighty-^ third Ohio had got about halfway to the main works. The line of the Eighth Illinois, deployed in one rank, extended about four hundred yards. Thie regiment numbered seven hun- dred. The distance to the confederate works was six hundred yards. There was first a slight ravine to pass, and then the ground was moderately level ; but the course of the right of the line lay over the irregularly-scalloped side of a deep ravine. There were two or three lines of abatis to overcome, and the gi-ound was partly covered with fallen trees. There was also some obstruction by wires. Yet that, including a strip of ground adjoining on the left, was, perhaps, the smoothest part of the field of Blakely, and it was, perhaps, the most exposed. The Eighth Illinois took up the soldiers' war-cry, and rushed forward in the charge with all the compulsive force that a skirmish-line can have. They made but short pause at the confederate rifle-pits. Those of the occupants who did not fall back rapidly to their main works, were killed or captured. The abatis was passed, either by springing over it, or by pulling 212 CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. it one side and making passage ways tlirougli it. The nearer the Eighth got to the main works, the fiercer raged the tempest of bullets against them. Besides a constant volume of mus- ketry, they encountered the rapid fire of four pieces of artillery. They returned the fire to some extent. Meantime the besiegers' batteries in their rear were dropping shells on the garrison's works with excellent effect. "When within about a hundred yards of the main works, the contest seemed desperate, and it was apparent the Eighth was losing many. The Eleventh and Forty-sixth had got halfway over the field, moving in a gal- lant manner, when an order reached them to halt, the right of Garrard's division having been seen to pause. Then the orderly, Murray, who carried the order, went on with a similar one to the Eighth, but the latter, with victorious strides^ was already on the parapets of the redoubt, and the brave orderly entered the works close by Lieut.-Col. Wheaton, of the Eighth. The latter and Sergt. John Switzer, of Com- pany B, were the first of the regiment upon the works. A shot fi'om one of the besiegers' batteries struck the parapet while Wheaton was going over the works ; and while he was close to the parapet, two men of the Eighth were killed by the last artillery fire from the redoubt. Wheaton ordered Sergt. Switzer to shoot the gunner ; but before it could be done, Sergt. Henderson had struck him down with the butt of his musket. Ca]3t Miller entered several yards to the left of Wheaton, and Private James B. Garwood, of his company, was shot down by his side when on the top of the works. Capt. Miller there encountered an officer of the garrison, who attempted to shoot him with a revolver, and took him prisoner. Then seeing their flag, which was planted in the ground that the bearer might better assist in the defence, he tore it from the staff. The confederates fell back from their works, into the timber, CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. 213 and continued firing till the most of the Eighth were over the breastworks. As soon as the Eleventh and Forty-sixth had come up, the Eighth moved down toward the landing. Veatch's loss in the assault was thirteen killed and sixty-four wounded. Of these the Eighth Illinois lost ten killed and fifty-four wounded. Among the severely wounded of the Eighth were Capt. Coleman — who, after having been brought to the ground, continued to wave his sword and cheer his men — also Lieuts. Sanderson and Harrington. In Veatch's front were captured about three hundred prison- ers, one thirty-pounder Parrott, one ten-pounder Parrott, two twelve-pounder howitzers, and one Ylll-inch columbiad. The latter was in position, but the embrasure for it had not been finished. Garrard's Division. — The trench containing the right of the First brigade (Col. Rinaker's), and left of the Third brigade (Col, Harris'), of this division, being the nearest point to the confederate works, Gen. Garrard du-ected that the assault in his front should commence there, and be taken up on the right and left. His order of attack was two hues of skirmishers, to be supported by the main line of battle. When the first skirmish line had started, and appeared to be advancing with success, the second line was to follow, and when the first hue had reached the enemy's works, the main line was to charge. Tliis plan was adopted by him on account of the terrible obstructions in his front. His three brigades were in position at about the appouited hoiu". Col. Rinaker, assisted by his acting aide-de-camp, Lieut. McLain, of the Eighty-ninth Indiana, had been arrang- ing the position of his brigade, and was about ready to give the order to advance, when the commander of the Third Indiana light battery reported to him for orders. This caused him a little delay, and his brigade did not move precisely with Harris'. 21'4 CAMPAIGN OP MOBILE. Col. Harris' brigade was formed in two lines. In the first line, the Fifty-eighth Illinois, Capt. John Mnrphy commanding, was on the right ; the Eleventh Wisconsin, Maj. J. S. Miller, on the left ; the One Hundred and Seventy-eighth New York, Lieut.-Col. J. B, Gondalfo, in the centre. In the second hne, the Thnty-fourth New Jersey, Col. Lawrence, was on the right ; and the Fifty-second Indiana, Lieut.-Col. Main, on the left. Company A, Capt. Park, Company F, Lieut. McConnell, and Company D, Capt. Toms, of the Eleventh Wisconsin, were selected for the skirmish-line of that regiment, and they deployed and lay down in front of the trench previous to the movement. These troops had to charge six hundred yards (more than one third of a mile), over broken ground, covered with the usual amount of obstructions. At quarter to six o'clock. Col. Harris directed his acting assistant adjutant-gen- eral, Capt. R. E. Jackson, of the Eleventh Wisconsin, to order the charge to commence ; which order was soon given, and promptly obeyed. When the skirmish-line of the Eleventh had' gained one hundred yards, they received such a heavy fire from the confederates' well-fortified and numerously manned pits, that Maj. Miller, fearing they would be checked, took the responsibility of ordering forward the rest of his regiment, com- manding, " Forward, Eleventh !" Instantly the Eleventh Wis- consin sprang out of their trench, and, T^dth the ringing cheers of veterans, rushed onward, mth emulous ardor and high resolve, to victory or death. They followed so closely upon the retreating confederate skirmishers, as to save them- selves from a general fire from the main works till within about one hundred yards of them. Then they encountered a destructive fire of musketry, and grape, and canister. Though many were struck down, and the ranks of the leading groups were visibly thinned, the survivors moved on with imfaltering step to the main works, and there engaged i CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. 215 in a hand-to-liaiicl contest with the most imyielding spiiits of the garrison. Lieut. Angus R. McDonald, Sergeant Daniel B. Moore, and six others, were within thirt}'- yards of the works, and, by Lieut. McDonald's orders, they fixed bayo- nets, and charged them. When close to the parapet a vol- ley killed five of their number, and knocked the lock ojff of Moore's gun. Then McDonald ordered that they should wait till others came up ; but Sergeant Moore, in the din, not hearing the order, mounted the works. The gallant Corporal Joel Wheeler, of Company A, had preceded him and was shot dead on the parapet. McDonald quickly followed and demanded a suiTender. At that time the main part of the Eleventh was coming up within a few yards, but one or two volleys were afterward fired on them from behind the works. A portion of the garrison had already broke and was fleeing toward the landing. Where McDonald and Moore entered were eight who surrendered; but ten yards to their right was a squad of twelve under charge of an oflScer, who were still pouring a deadly fire into the right of the Eleventh. The officer exclaimed : " No quarter to the d d Yankees." Lieut. McDonald and Sergeant Moore feU into their hands, and then followed a desperate struggle. Five or six attacked McDonald with bayonets, but he fought them with his sword, knocking some down, and killed two. He received two bayonet thrusts in his breast and a musket ball m his thigh, when he fell. A confederate fell over him whom he used as a shield against a farther thrust by the bayonet. Then Sergeant Moore, who had also received a bayonet wound, picked up a confederate musket and shot McDonald's assailant dead. Other gallant men of the Eleventh were soon upon the works, closely followed by the regiment. Then came with eager step the rest of the brigade with its commander. Col. Harris ; and when the troops were in full possession of the works a shout of 216 CAMPAIGN OP MOBILE. triumpli went up tliat baffles description. The men flocked around their commander witli earnest and joyful greetings. But no single voice could be lieard. Col. Harris pointed up to the flag, no-;v proudly waving on the captured works. Then again the emotions of patriotism and of victory burst forth in tumultuous shouts. Near them the ground was thickly strewed with the wounded and the dead, and many of the latter were buried near the works. Among the killed in the Eleventh Wis- consin, were Lieut. Richard Coddell, Sergeant W. H. Phelps, and Corporals Wheeler, Allbaugh, Shea, and Ingamills. Its whole number of killed was fifteen, and it had two commissioned officers, including Lieut. Wm. Charlton, twelve non-commis- sioned officers, and thirty-two privates wounded. Total casual- ties in the Eleventh Wisconsin, sixty-one. In the Fifty-eighth HHnois, Lieut. Thomas Malloy was killed on the works, and Lieut. Atwater severely wounded ; and there were other casual- ties in that regiment. In the One Hundred and Seventy-eighth New York, there was one killed and four wounded ; in the Fifty- second Indiana two killed and eight wounded ; in the Thirty- fourth New Jersey, Corporal Hampton was killed and three were wounded. Soon after the works in Harris' front were taken, detachments of his brigade marched down to the landing for prisoners. The Fifty-second Indiana was placed as guard over the artillery and prisoners. Similar enthusiasm and gallantry characterized Gen. Gilbert's brigade, next on the right, which advanced soon after Harris'. It was formed in three lines. The Tenth Kansas, Lieut.-Col. Charles S. Hills commanding, and Company B, of the Twenty- seventh Iowa, deployed as skirmishers in the advanced trench, six hundred yards from the main works. The Twenty-seventh Iowa, Col. Lake ; the One Hundred and Seventeenth Illinois, Col. Moore, and Companies D, H, and K, of the Thirty-second CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. 217 Iowa, under Maj. Hufccliinson, in tlie second line. The Sixth Minnesota, Lieut.-Col. Grant, and the other seven companies of the Thirtj-second Iowa, Lieut.-Col. Eberhart, forming the reserve line, and posted eleven hundi-ed yards from the main works. The severest part of the charge fell upon the Tenth Kansas, and they breasted 'the storm that beat against them with a noble heroism. In their front, as elsewhere, the artillery uttered its last fierce thunders, pouring forth shell, grape, and canister; the musketry volleys roiled along the line in quick succession, and clouds of smoke rose up from the works. The Tenth Kansas directed their steps toward the Sixth redoubt ; yet such was the fire upon them, and not wishing to pause to return it, they turned for a moment down the side of a ravine. But an enfilading fire greeted them there ; and with hardly a pause, they soon gained the high ground again, crossed two hues of abatis, then the ditch, and mounted the parapets. The furious fire that had beset them, made them cluster in a group, and they entered the works more as a column in mass than in line. Then, vnth. fixed bayonets, they swept along the works to their right, mixing blue and gray to- gether ; and the latter, seeing their helpless condition, hud- dled into the angles of the fort, and making little resistance, suiTendered by scores. Yet there was some firing after the Tenth were inside the works, for a number of the confederates refused to surrender. One captain caught up a musket and fired at Capt, Wood, of the Tenth, while the latter was calling on him to surrender, and then another, and a tMrd musket, each time failing to hit Capt. Wood. Then Coi-poral Schultz, of the Tenth, sent a ball through the confederate's head, and he fell. Several other instances of the same kind occurred. Meantime, some of the leading confederate officers were approaching officers of the Tenth, handing them their swords, and beseeching them to stop the 218 CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. "butcliery," as they termed it. But it appears none were uitentionallj killed after they liad ceased fighting. The con- federate commanders Tvere not able to get all to surrender, even after resistance seemed utterly fruitless. A number of pieces of aiiillery and several hundred prison- ers -were captured in Gilbert's front. The Tenth Kansas had seven killed and twelve wounded, and of the latter, Lieut. John Bryan and Private Plummer died of their "wounds. Among the killed were Sergeant George Daller and Corporals Buxton and Thompson. There were four wounded ia the Twenty-seventh Iowa, including Lieut. Eisenhart ; one killed, and one wounded in the One Hundred and Seventeenth Illinois ; one wounded in the Sixth Minnesota, and one in the Thirty-second Iowa. The whole loss in Gilbert's brigade was eight killed and nineteen wounded. After the brigade was in possession of the works, large detachments hurried down to the landing, and through the woods, for prisoners. Maj. Hutchinson, of the Thirty-second Iowa, with a squad of eight men, held a large number of confederates in check, in range of their gunboats, in a manner to prevent the latter from firing on the Union troops. Rinaker's brigade had from three hundred to four hundred, yards of rough grotmd to charge over, before reaching the confederate works. The One Hundred and Nineteenth Illinois, Col. Thomas J. Kinney, deployed as skirmishers, commenced the charge in front of that brigade, advancing with cheers, on the run, at a signal by the bugle. The supporting line con- sisted of the Eighty-ninth Indiana on the right, the One Hun- dred and Twenty-second Illinois in the centre, and the Twenty- first ^Missouri on the left. Lieut.-Col. Craven, of the Eighty- ninth Indiana, had accompanied the regiment down to the front, although ill, but was not able to take part in the charge, and the command fell upon Major Winter. At the second CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. 219 signal on the bugle, these three regiments advanced with eager step. The most of the One Hundred and Nineteenth was then only thirty yards in front ; and the gTound was so irregular, and the obstacles so numerous, that both lines were soon merged together. Yet the latter regiment pushed forward as fast as men could go, stopping to fire but httle. The greater part of the confederates retreated fi'om theh rifle-pits to the main works, and it seemed to be a race between them and the assault- ing troops as to which should reach them first. A vehement and excited fire from the main works assailed the advancing troops, the artillery of two redoubts being turned upon them. Yet the gTins did less injury than was to have been apprehended. Each regiment sustahied some loss. Lieut.-Col. Drish, of the One Hundred and Twenty-second, fell struck by a piece of shell, and the command devolved on Major Chapman, Two of that regiment, named MiUer, were killed, and eleven wounded. In the Eighty-niath Indiana, one — Coi-poral Cowan — was killed, and five wounded, two of whom, Hutchinson and Coppock, died. The color-bearer of the Twenty-first Missouri was shot down when near the works, and they were seized by Cox of Company G, One Hundred and Twenty-second Illinois, and planted on the works. The loss in the One Hundred and Nineteenth was sixteen killed and wounded — and the most of those casualties occurred hi Capt. Hubbard's company, and his brother, Edward P. Hubbard, a private soldier, was among the mortally wounded. Some twenty of that company charged the works with fixed bayonets, and were among the first to enter them. As Kinaker's brigade got close to the works, the most of the infantry — ^Alabama reseiwes — retreated toward the river. The artillerists, however, held their positions, and, refusing to surrender, were shot. Uany of the artillerists were armed with rifles. After entering the works, the Twenty-first Missouri and Capt. Bostwick's company, of the One Hundi-ed and Twenty- 220 CAMPAIGN OP MOBILE. second Illinois, turned to tlie left and charged down in rear of tlie works to the last redoubt. Einaker's brigade took three or four battle-flags, the artillery in their front, and several hundred prisoners. The redoubts in Garrard's front had eighteen embrasures, and his division carried all the works in its front, capturing the artillery, and sixteen hundred prisoners, including two general of&cers. The loss in his division was : commissioned officers, two killed and seven wounded ; enlisted men, thirty-nine killed and one hundred and seventeen wounded ; total, one hundred and sixty-five. The total casualties' of the federals, engaged in the assault, was one hundred and twenty-seven killed and five hundred and twenty-seven wounded ; grand total, six hundred and fifty-four. Number of prisoners captured, three thousand four hundred and twenty-three, including three general officers. There were also captured, several battle-flags, upward of forty pieces of artillery, the small arms used by the infantry, and all the gar- rison stores. It is not easy to estimate the loss of the garrison in killed and wounded ; but it was probably a third as large as that of the besiegers. There were a few boats out in the stream, and some of the garrison attempted to swim to them, and it was reported a number were drowned. Wellington well said that a battle could not be painted. Neither can language fully describe so great and ever-chang- ing a scene. It has been seen what was the nature of the ground over which the assault was made ; that it was cut up by ravines, ^ rough, and covered with obstructions. It was known, also, to be mined with torpedoes in various places ; and there was reason to dread them. Thirty-five regiments — fully sixteen thousand troops — partici- I CAMPAIGN OF KOBILE. 221 pated in tlie assault. The lines were three miles in length, and the advance of the entire line was remarkably simultaneous. The scene was picturesque and grand. From different points of view the assaulting hues could be seen for a mile or two, as far even as the forms of men could be distinguished moving over the broken ground. The regimental colors, though not in perfect Hne, were steadily advancing, and the troops were dash- ing on over and through the obstructions like a stormy wave. It was at a moment when the shock of battle was the fiercest. In the clamor could be heard the voices of the assaulting troops. Nothing could exceed their enthusiasm. If then they could have known the great event that had occurred a few hours before — that Lee had surrendered — and that their contest would probably be the last important struggle of the war, they could hardly have experienced more exulting emotions, or pressed forward with more dauntless step. It seemed as if " all the joy, all the sensation of life, was in that one moment, that they cast themselves with the fierce gladness of mountain torrents, head- long on that brief revelry of glory." Gen. Steele, during the assault, was along the front of the Second division, and, with his staff, kept up with the main hne of Moore's brigade. "When he saw the advance line entering the works, he exclaimed : " I knew they would do it. I told you they would go over those works." He soon after sat down, and signed a despatch to Gen. Canby, which Capt. Lacy, his assistant adjutant-general, had written, in these words : " We have stormed the entire line of works, and our troops are now in full possession." A reply soon came, written by Col. Christensen, saying : " Gen Canby says : ' God bless you, and God bless your brave command.' " It was dark before the prisoners could be collected together and formed to march back with the different divisions to their camps ; and gTeat care had to be taken to avoid dangers from 222 CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. torpedoes. All the fore part of tliat night, there were occa- sional explosions of torpedoes, and a few men were killed by them while searching for the dead and wounded. It was a discordant and melancholy sound to hear.

## blakely-observations

CHAPTER XXIY. OBSERVATIONS ON THE SIEGE AND ASSAULT OF BLAKEI.Y. 1. The fall of Blakely, and caj)ture of its garrison, left the con- federates only four thousand five hundred troops for the imme- diate defence of Mobile, which being too small a force to hold the city, they marched, on the 11th, for Meridian. Gen. Maui-y followed at daylight of the 12th. Canby, by signals, learned of the evacuation of the city the evening of the 11th, and had troops immediately in motion for its occupation. Granger, with the First and Third divisions of his corps, embarked on transports at Stark's landing, at dayhght of the 12th, and, with a portion of the squadron, under Thatcher, crossed over the bay, landing two miles below the city, and entered it unopposed. The Third division marched on to "\Miist- ler's station, and overtook and skh'mished with the rear-guard of the confederate column. It was not Gen. Canby's purpose, under any circumstances, to besiege Mobile from the land side. If the city had held out longer, he would have moved across the head ' of the bay, by means of transports and pontoons, and established batteries on the islands in front of the city. And some steps toward such a movement had ah'eady been taken. 2. The conduct of the garrison of Blakely is, on the wliole, de- serving of commendation. The troops manifested much energy and sphit during the siege, often making bold salhes in the night, and disturbing the besiegers. They were expectiag an assault about the time it took place, and felt considerable confi- 224 CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. dence tliey could repulse it. Had an assault been made before the fall of Spanish fort, it would probably have been more bloody, though not repulsed ; for the garrison would have had more hope in resisting. But, after they knew that fifteen or twenty thousand more troops had come up from Spanish fort (these, however, were two miles in the rear in their camps), they had reason to feel that the odds against them were too great for successful resistance. The assaulting troops had the moral reinforcement of the Spanish fort troops. The garrison had a large number of sharpshooters or skir- mishers in pits three hundred yards in front of their main works. These had ,an opportunity to fire only one or two rounds, and then fell back ; but there being no covered way, and not being able, on account of the obstacles, to move rapidly, they were for a short time a sort of cover to the assaulting troops, embarrassing, if not preventing, the fire of those behind the main works. If, instead of being three hun- dred yards to the front, they had been in pits fifty yards in front, with approaches to the main works, a double line of musketry fire could then have been poured on the assaulting troops just as they were reaching the most difiicult abatis. The rules for defending fortifications requhe the garrison to mount the parapet when they find the assaulting troops are attacking closely. This does not appear to have been done anywhere on the line. 3. But it was a mistake to keep the garrison at Blakely an hour after the fall of Spanish fort. Every possible means shoidd have been used to remove it before an assault could be made. But Gen. Maury aEeges : " It woidd have been diiScult to do this after day dawned, and up to that time all of Span- ish fort garrison had not been transferred from Blakely to Mobile." 4. Gen. Maury, in an account which he wrote of the siege, CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. 225 makes tlie just remark, that "the marshes about Mobile, as marshes almost everywhere else, produced a gi-eater moral effect upon besiegers and besieged than facts justified." On account of the existence of a swamp on the left of the besiegers, the investment of Blakelj was not complete on that flank to within four or five hundred yards. The swamp was narrow, and could have been bridged, and there was no good excuse for the investment being incomplete. 5. Whether the time for the assault icas favorable, is an interesting question, and will doubtless be answered affirma- tively. The troops engaged in it had the moral support of the presence of the rest of the army which had come fi'om Spanish fort. When the garrison saw the assaulting lines advancing, they felt that the woods behind them were also full of troops ; for they had heard of heav;)^ columns moving over Minette bayou. Suppose the assault had taken place the day before? Is it not probable the resistance w^ould have been greater ? They certainly would have had more hope of effect- ing a repulse. As it was, the general assault was not repulsed at any point. It is probable Gen. Steele would not have ordered a general assault for two or three days longer had it not been for the fall of Spanish fort, such was the distance — from five to six hundred yards — to charge over. But it perhaps saved life that the assault was made fi"om the third parallel, and without waiting till a fourth was dug. The besiegers had come upon torpedoes in their digging, and doubtless many lives would have been lost by farther extending the approaches and trenches. After the assault, it was ascertained the advance trench, on the right of the Second di'sdsion, ran between tioo rows of torpedoes ! 6. The besiegers deserve commendation for the amount of vjorh they performed. And, it should be remarked, that not one of their number was captui'ed. Yet, unouestionably, more work 15 226 CAMPAIGN OF MOBILE. miglit have been performed ; for there are few operations in which the energy and industry of men are exhausted. Each division constructed its works according to its own plans, and with but httle, if any, outside professional assistance. Several miles of trenches and approaches were made, and they will long remain as proof of the labor that was done. Over the field of Blakely the bushes are beginning to grow up, and in a few years another forest will no doubt cover the ground. But many of the trenches wiU remain. The storms of centuries will not wear them away.
